MATHEMATICS
FOR ECONOMICS
AND BUSINESS
fifth edition
IAN JACQUES
Additional student support at
www.pearsoned.co.uk/jacques
www.ebook3000.com

MATHEMATICS
FOR ECONOMICS
AND BUSINESS
Visit the Mathematics for Economics and Business, fifth edition,
Companion Website at www.pearsoned.co.uk/jacques to find
valuable student learning material including:
 Multiple choice questions to test your understanding
www.ebook3000.com

We work with leading authors to develop the
strongest educational materials in mathematics 
and business, bringing cutting-edge thinking 
and best learning practice to a global market.
Under a range of well-known imprints, including
Financial Times Prentice Hall, we craft high quality 
print and electronic publications which help 
readers to understand and apply their content, 
whether studying or at work.
To find out more about the complete range of our
publishing, please visit us on the World Wide Web at:
www.pearsoned.co.uk
www.ebook3000.com

fifth edition
MATHEMATICS
FOR ECONOMICS
AND BUSINESS
IAN JACQUES
www.ebook3000.com

Pearson Education Limited
Edinburgh Gate
Harlow
Essex CM20 2JE
England
and Associated Companies throughout the world
Visit us on the World Wide Web at:
www.pearsoned.co.uk
First published 1991
Second edition 1994
Third edition 1999
Fourth edition 2003
Fifth edition published 2006
© Addison-Wesley Publishers Ltd, 1991, 1994
© Pearson Education Limited 1999, 2003, 2006
The right of Ian Jacques to be identified as author of this work has been asserted 
by him in accordance with the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a 
retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, 
photocopying, recording or otherwise, without either the prior written permission of 
the publisher or a licence permitting restricted copying in the United Kingdom issued 
by the Copyright Licensing Agency Ltd, 90 Tottenham Court Road, London W1T 4LP.
ISBN-10 0-273-70195-9
ISBN-13 978-0-273-70195-8
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
A catalog record for this book is available from the Library of Congress
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
10
09
08
07
06
Typeset in 10/12.5pt Minion Reg by 35
Printed and bound by Mateu-Cromo Artes Graficas, Spain
The publisher's policy is to use paper manufactured from sustainable forests.
www.ebook3000.com

To my mother, and in memory of my father
www.ebook3000.com

Supporting resources
Visit www.pearsoned.co.uk/jacques to find valuable online resources
Companion Website for students
 Multiple choice questions to test your understanding
For instructors
 Complete, downloadable Instructor’s Manual containing teaching hints
plus over a hundred additional problems with solutions and marking
schemes
 Downloadable PowerPoint slides of figures from the book
Also: The Companion Website provides the following features:
 Search tool to help locate specific items of content
 E-mail results and profile tools to send results of quizzes to instructors
 Online help and support to assist with website usage and troubleshooting
For more information please contact your local Pearson Education sales
representative or visit www.pearsoned.co.uk/jacques
www.ebook3000.com

Contents
Preface
ix
Introduction: Getting Started
1
Notes for students: how to use this book
1
Getting started with Excel
3
Getting started with Maple
9
1
Linear Equations
13
1.1
Graphs of linear equations
15
1.2
Algebraic solution of simultaneous linear equations
35
1.3
Supply and demand analysis
47
1.4
Algebra
66
1.5
Transposition of formulae
87
1.6
National income determination
96
2
Non-linear Equations
113
2.1
Quadratic functions
115
2.2
Revenue, cost and profit
129
2.3
Indices and logarithms
141
2.4
The exponential and natural logarithm functions
162
3
Mathematics of Finance
175
3.1
Percentages
177
3.2
Compound interest
194
3.3
Geometric series
209
3.4
Investment appraisal
220
www.ebook3000.com

Contents
viii
4
Differentiation
237
4.1
The derivative of a function
239
4.2
Rules of differentiation
251
4.3
Marginal functions
261
4.4
Further rules of differentiation
275
4.5
Elasticity
284
4.6
Optimization of economic functions
298
4.7
Further optimization of economic functions
320
4.8
The derivative of the exponential and natural logarithm functions
331
5
Partial Differentiation
341
5.1
Functions of several variables
343
5.2
Partial elasticity and marginal functions
356
5.3
Comparative statics
374
5.4
Unconstrained optimization
386
5.5
Constrained optimization
400
5.6
Lagrange multipliers
411
6
Integration
421
6.1
Indefinite integration
423
6.2
Definite integration
437
7
Matrices
451
7.1
Basic matrix operations
453
7.2
Matrix inversion
472
7.3
Cramer’s rule
492
7.4
Input–output analysis
502
8
Linear Programming
515
8.1
Graphical solution of linear programming problems
517
8.2
Applications of linear programming
535
9
Dynamics
551
9.1
Difference equations
553
9.2
Differential equations
569
Appendix 1
Differentiation from First Principles
587
Appendix 2
Implicit Differentiation
591
Appendix 3
Hessians
594
Solutions to Problems
598
Glossary
663
Index
673
www.ebook3000.com

Preface
This book is intended primarily for students on economics, business studies and management
courses. It assumes very little prerequisite knowledge, so it can be read by students who have
not undertaken a mathematics course for some time. The style is informal and the book con-
tains a large number of worked examples. Students are encouraged to tackle problems for
themselves as they read through each section. Detailed solutions are provided so that all
answers can be checked. Consequently, it should be possible to work through this book on 
a self-study basis. The material is wide ranging, and varies from elementary topics such as 
percentages and linear equations, to more sophisticated topics such as constrained optimiza-
tion of multivariate functions. The book should therefore be suitable for use on both low- and
high-level quantitative methods courses. Examples and exercises are included which make use
of the computer software packages Excel and Maple.
This book was ﬁrst published in 1991. The prime motivation for writing it then was to try
and produce a textbook that students could actually read and understand for themselves. This
remains the guiding principle and the most signiﬁcant change for this, the ﬁfth edition, is 
in the design, rather than content. I was brought up with the ﬁxed idea that mathematics 
textbooks were written in a small font with many equations crammed on to a page. However,
I fully accept that these days books need to look attractive and be easy to negotiate. I hope that
the new style will encourage more students to read it and will reduce the ‘fear factor’ of math-
ematics. In response to anonymous reviewers’ comments, I have included additional problems
for several exercises together with two new appendices on implicit differentiation and Hessian
matrices. Finally, I have also included the highlighted key terms at the end of each section and
in a glossary at the end of the book.
The book now has an accompanying website that is intended to be rather more than just a
gimmick. I hope that the commentary in the Instructor’s Manual will help tutors using the book
for the ﬁrst time. It also contains about a hundred new questions. Although a few of these problems
are similar to those in the main book, the majority of questions are genuinely different. There
are roughly two test exercises per chapter, which are graded to accommodate different levels of
student abilities. These are provided on the website so that they can easily be cut, pasted and
edited to suit. Fully worked solutions and marking schemes are included. Tutors can also 
control access. The website has a a section containing multiple-choice tests. These can be given
to students for further practice or used for assessment. The multiple choice questions can be
marked online with the results automatically transferred to the tutor’s markbook if desired.
Ian Jacques
www.ebook3000.com


Introduction
Getting Started
Notes for students: how to use this book
I am always amazed by the mix of students on first-year economics courses. Some
have not acquired any mathematical knowledge beyond elementary algebra (and
even that can be of a rather dubious nature), some have never studied economics
before in their lives, while others have passed preliminary courses in both. Whatever
category you are in, I hope that you will find this book of value. The chapters 
covering algebraic manipulation, simple calculus, finance and matrices should also
benefit students on business studies and accountancy courses.
The first few chapters are aimed at complete beginners and students who have not
taken mathematics courses for some time. I would like to think that these students
once enjoyed mathematics and had every intention of continuing their studies in 
this area, but somehow never found the time to fit it into an already overcrowded
academic timetable. However, I suspect that the reality is rather different. Possibly
they hated the subject, could not understand it and dropped it at the earliest oppor-
tunity. If you find yourself in this position, you are probably horrified to discover that
you must embark on a quantitative methods course with an examination looming
on the horizon. However, there is no need to worry. My experience is that every stu-
dent, no matter how innumerate, is capable of passing a mathematics examination.
All that is required is a commitment to study and a willingness to suspend any pre-
judices about the subject gained at school. The fact that you have bothered to buy
this book at all suggests that you are prepared to do both.
To help you get the most out of this book, let me compare the working practices 
of economics and engineering students. The former rarely read individual books 
in any great depth. They tend to visit college libraries (usually several days after 
an essay was due to be handed in) and to skim through a large number of books
picking out the relevant information. Indeed, the ability to read selectively and 

to compare various sources of information is an important skill that all arts and social
science students must acquire. Engineering students, on the other hand, are more
likely to read just a few books in any one year. They read each of these from cover
to cover and attempt virtually every problem en route. Even though you are most
definitely not an engineer, it is the engineering approach that you need to adopt
while studying mathematics. There are several reasons for this. Firstly, a mathematics
book can never be described, even by its most ardent admirers, as a good bedtime
read. It can take an hour or two of concentrated effort to understand just a few
pages of a mathematics text. You are therefore recommended to work through 
this book systematically in short bursts rather than to attempt to read whole 
chapters. Each section is designed to take between one and two hours to complete
and this is quite sufficient for a single session. Secondly, mathematics is a hier-
archical subject in which one topic follows on from the next. A construction firm 
building an office block is hardly likely to erect the fiftieth storey without making
sure that the intermediate floors and foundations are securely in place. Likewise, 
you cannot ‘dip’ into the middle of a mathematics book and expect to follow it
unless you have satisfied the prerequisites for that topic. Finally, you actually need
to do mathematics yourself before you can understand it. No matter how wonder-
ful your lecturer is, and no matter how many problems are discussed in class, it is
only by solving problems yourself that you are ever going to become confident 
in using and applying mathematical techniques. For this reason, several problems 
are interspersed within the text and you are encouraged to tackle these as you go
along. You will require writing paper, graph paper, pens and a calculator for this.
There is no need to buy an expensive calculator unless you are feeling particularly
wealthy at the moment. A bottom-of-the-range scientific calculator should be 
good enough. Detailed solutions are provided at the end of this book so that you
can check your answers. However, please avoid the temptation to look at them 
until you have made an honest attempt at each one. Remember that in the 
future you may well have to sit down in an uncomfortable chair, in front of a blank
sheet of paper, and be expected to produce solutions to examination questions of 
a similar type.
At the end of each section there are some further practice problems to try. You 
may prefer not to bother with these and to work through them later as part of your
revision. Ironically, it is those students who really ought to try more problems who
are most likely to miss them out. Human psychology is such that, if students do not
at first succeed in solving problems, they are then deterred from trying additional
problems. However, it is precisely these people who need more practice.
The chapter dependence is shown in Figure I.1. If you have studied some advanced
mathematics before then you will discover that parts of Chapters 1, 2 and 4 are
familiar. However, you may find that the sections on economics applications 
contain new material. You are best advised to test yourself by attempting a selection
of problems in each section to see if you need to read through it as part of a
refresher course. Economics students in a desperate hurry to experience the delights
of calculus can miss out Chapter 3 without any loss of continuity and move 
straight on to Chapter 4. The mathematics of finance is probably more relevant 
to business and accountancy students, although you can always read it later if it is
part of your economics syllabus.
Introduction: Getting Started
2

I hope that this book helps you to succeed in your mathematics course. You never
know, you might even enjoy it. Remember to wear your engineer’s hat while read-
ing the book. I have done my best to make the material as accessible as possible.
The rest is up to you!
Getting started with Excel
Excel is the Microsoft® spreadsheet package that we shall be using in some of our worked
examples. If you are already familiar with this product, you may be able to skip some, or all, of
this introductory section.
A spreadsheet is simply an array of boxes, or cells, into which tables of data can be inserted.
This can consist of normal text, numerical data or a formula, which instructs the spreadsheet
package to perform a calculation. The joy about getting the spreadsheet to perform the calcu-
lation is that it not only saves us some effort, but also detects any subsequent changes we make
to the table, and recalculates its values automatically without waiting to be asked.
To get the most out of this section, it is advisable to work through it on your own computer,
as there is no substitute for having a go. When you enter the Excel package, either by double-
clicking the icon on your desktop, or by selecting it from the list of programs, a blank work-
sheet will be displayed, as shown in Figure I.2 (overleaf).
Each cell is identiﬁed uniquely by its column and row label. The current cell is where the
cursor is positioned. In Figure I.2, the cursor is in the top left-hand corner: the cell is high-
lighted, and it can be identiﬁed as cell A1.
Introduction: Getting Started
3
Figure I.1

Introduction: Getting Started
4
Figure I.2
Example
A shop audits its toy department to see how much proﬁt it makes from sales of its ﬁve best-selling lines.
Table I.1 shows the wholesale price (which is the cost to the shop of buying the toy from the manufacturer),
the retail price (which is the price that customers pay for each toy), and sales (which is the total number of
toys of each type that are sold during the year).
(a) Enter the information in this table into a blank spreadsheet, with the title, Annual Proﬁt, in the ﬁrst row.
(b) In a ﬁfth column, calculate the annual proﬁt generated by each toy and hence ﬁnd the total proﬁt made
from all ﬁve toys.
(c) Format and print the completed spreadsheet.
EXCEL
Table I.1
Item
Wholesale price ($)
Retail price ($)
Sales
Badminton racket
28
58
236
Doll
36
85
785
Silly Putty
1
2
472
Paddling pool
56
220
208
Building bricks
8
26
582

Solution
(a) Entering the data
You can move between the different cells on the spreadsheet using the tab keys or arrow keys, or by posi-
tioning the cursor in the required cell and clicking the left mouse button. Have a go at this on your blank
sheet to get the feel of it before we begin to enter the data.
To give the spreadsheet a title, we position the cursor in cell A1, and type Annual Proﬁt. Don’t worry that
the text has run into the next cell. This does not matter, as we are not going to put anything more in this row.
Leaving the next row blank, we type in the column headings for the spreadsheet in row 3. To do this, we
position the cursor in cell A3 and type Item; we then move the cursor to cell B3, and type Wholesale price
($). At this stage, the spreadsheet looks like:
This text has also run into the next cell. Although it looks as if we are positioned in C3 now, we are actually
still in B3, as shown by the highlighting. The cursor can be positioned in cell C3 by using the tab, or right
arrow key to give:
Notice that the next cell is highlighted, even though it still contains our previous typing. We can ignore this,
and enter Retail price ($). As soon as you start entering this, the previous typing disappears. It is actually
still there, but hidden from view as its own cell is not large enough to show all of its contents:
There is no need to worry about the hidden typing. We will sort this out when we format our spreadsheet
in part (c). Finally, we position the cursor in cell D3 and type in the heading Sales.
We can now enter the names of the ﬁve items in cells A4 to A8, together with the prices and sales in
columns B, C and D to create the spreadsheet:
Introduction: Getting Started
5


If you subsequently return to modify the contents of any particular cell, you will ﬁnd that when you start
typing, the original contents of the cell are deleted, and replaced. If you simply want to amend, rather than
replace the text, highlight the relevant cell, and then position the cursor at the required position in the orig-
inal text, which is displayed on the edit bar. You can then edit the text as normal.
(b) Calculating proﬁt
In order to create a ﬁfth column containing the proﬁts, we ﬁrst type the heading Proﬁt in cell E3. Excel is
capable of performing calculations and entering the results in particular cells. This is achieved by typing
mathematical formulae into these cells. In this case, we need to enter an appropriate formula for proﬁt in
cells E4 to E8.
The proﬁt made on each item is the difference between the wholesale price and retail price. For example,
the shop buys a badminton racket from the manufacturer for $28 and sells it to the customers at $58. The
proﬁt made on the sale of a single racket is therefore
58 −28 = 30
During the year the shop sells 236 badminton rackets, so the annual proﬁt is
30 × 236 = 7080
In other words, the proﬁt on the sale of badminton rackets is worked out from
(58 −28) × 236
Looking carefully at the spreadsheet, notice that the numbers 58, 28 and 236 are contained in cells C4, B4
and D4, respectively. Hence annual proﬁt made from the sale of badminton rackets is given by the formula
(C4-B4)*D4
We would like the result of this calculation to appear underneath the heading Proﬁt, in column 5, so in 
cell E4 we type
=(C4-B4)*D4
If you move the cursor down to cell E5, you will notice that the formula has disappeared, and the answer,
7080, has appeared in its place. To get back to the formula, click on cell E4, and the formula is displayed in
the formula bar, where it can be edited if necessary.
We would like a similar formula to be entered into every cell in column E, to work out the proﬁt 
generated by each type of toy. To avoid having to re-enter a similar formula for every cell, it is possible to
replicate the one we just put into E4 down the whole column. The spreadsheet will automatically change the
cell identities as we go.
To do this, position the cursor in E4, and move the mouse very carefully towards the bottom right-hand
corner of the cell until the cursor changes from a ✚to a ✙. Hold down the left mouse button and drag the
cell down the column to E8. When the mouse button is released, the values of the proﬁt will appear in the
relevant cells.
To put the total proﬁt into cell E9, we need to sum up cells E4 to E8. This can be done by typing
=SUM(E4:E8)
into E9. Pressing the Enter key will then display the answer, 90 605, in this position.
The spreadsheet is displayed in Figure I.3.
Introduction: Getting Started
6

(c) Formatting and printing the spreadsheet
Before we can print the spreadsheet we need to format it, to make it look more attractive to read. In particu-
lar, we must alter the column widths to reveal the partially hidden headings. If necessary, we can also insert
or delete rows and columns. Perhaps the most useful function is the Undo, which reverses the previous
action. If you do something wrong and want to go back a stage, simply click on the  button, which is
located towards the middle of the toolbar.
Here is a list of four useful activities that we can easily perform to tidy up the spreadsheet.
Adjusting the column widths to fit the data
Excel can automatically adjust the width of each column to reveal the hidden typing. You can either select
an individual column by clicking on its label, or select all the columns at once by clicking the Select All but-
ton in the top left-hand corner (see Figure I.2 earlier). From the menu bar we then select Format: Column:
Autoﬁt Selection. The text that was obscured, because it was too long to ﬁt into the cells, will now be displayed.
Shading and borders
Although the spreadsheet appears to have gridlines around each of the cells, these will not appear on the
ﬁnal printout unless we explicitly instruct Excel to do so. This can be done by highlighting the cells A3 to
E8 by ﬁrst clicking on cell A3, and then with the left mouse button held down, dragging the cursor across
the table until all the cells are highlighted. We then release the mouse button, and select Format: Cells via
the menu bar. Click on the Border tab, choose a style, and click on the boxes so that each cell is surrounded
on all four sides by gridlines.
Sorting data into alphabetical order
It is sometimes desirable to list items in alphabetical order. To do this, highlight cells A4 to E8, by clicking
and dragging, and then click the A →Z button on the toolbar.
Printing the spreadsheet
Before printing a spreadsheet, it is a good idea to select File: Print Preview from the menu bar to give you
some idea of what it will look like. To change the orientation of the paper, select File: Page Setup. Additional
Introduction: Getting Started
7
Figure I.3


features can be introduced such as headers, footers, column headings repeated at the top of every page, and
so on. You might like to experiment with some of these to discover their effect. When you are happy, either
click on the Print button, or select File: Print from the menu bar.
The ﬁnal printout is shown in Figure I.4. As you can see, we have chosen to type in the text Total: in cell
D9 and have also put gridlines around cells D9 and E9, for clarity.
Introduction: Getting Started
8
Figure I.4
Practice Problem
1 An economics examination paper is in two sections. Section A is multiple choice and marked out of 40,
whereas Section B consists of essay questions and is marked out of 60. Table I.2 shows the marks
awarded in each section to six candidates.
EXCEL
Table I.2
Candidate
Section A mark
Section B mark
Fofaria
20
17
Bull
38
12
Eoin
34
38
Arefin
40
52
Cantor
29
34
Devaux
30
49
(a) Enter the information in this table into a blank spreadsheet, with the title, Economics Examination
Marks, in the first row.
(b) In a fourth column, calculate the total mark awarded to each candidate.
(c) Use Excel to calculate the average examination mark of these six candidates and give it an appro-
priate heading.
(d) Format and print the spreadsheet, putting the names of the candidates in alphabetical order.
(e) The second candidate, Bull, asks for a re-mark. Although the Section A mark is correct, the Section B
mark is raised to 42. Produce a new spreadsheet based on the correct results.

Getting started with Maple
The second computer package that will be used in this book is Maple. This is a symbolic alge-
bra system. It not only performs numerical calculations but also manipulates mathematical
symbols. In effect, it obligingly does the mathematics for you. There are other similar packages
available, such as Matlab, Derive and Mathcad, and most of the Maple examples and exercises
given in this book can be tackled just as easily using these packages instead. This is not the place
to show you the full power of Maple, but hopefully the examples given in this book will give
you a ﬂavour of what can be achieved, and why it is such a valuable tool in mathematical 
modelling.
It is not possible in this introductory section to use Maple to solve realistic problems 
because you need to learn some mathematics ﬁrst. However, we will show you how to use it as
a calculator, and how to type in mathematical formulae correctly. Figure I.5 shows a typical
worksheet which appears on the screen when you double-click on the Maple icon. If you ignore
the toolbar at the top of the screen, you can think of it as a blank sheet of paper on which to 
do some mathematics. You type this after the ‘>’ prompt and end each instruction with a 
semi-colon ‘;’. Pressing the Enter key will then make Maple perform your instruction and give
you an answer. For example, if you want Maple to work out 3 + 4 × 2 you type:
>3+4*2;
Introduction: Getting Started
9
Figure I.5
www.ebook3000.com

After pressing the Enter key, the package will respond with the answer of 11. Try it now.
Notice that to get this answer, Maple must have performed the multiplication ﬁrst (to get 8)
before adding on the 3. This is because, like the rest of the mathematical world, Maple follows
the BIDMAS convention:
B
(Brackets ﬁrst)
I
(Indices second)
then
D
(Division)
#
and
M
(Multiplication) $ (a tie for third place)
ﬁnally
A
(Addition)
#
and
S
(Subtraction)
$ (a tie for fourth place)
Since multiplication has a higher priority than addition, Maple works out 4 × 2 ﬁrst. If you
really want to work out 3 + 4 before multiplying by 2, you put in brackets:
>(3+4)*2;
which gives 14. Notice that in Maple (like Excel), it is necessary to use * rather than × as the
multiplication symbol. Similarly, Maple and Excel both use/(instead of ÷) for division, and ^ 
as the instruction to ‘raise to the power of’. So, to work out 
+ 52 you type:
>70/7+5^2;
which gives 35. Again, using BIDMAS, since indices have a higher priority than addition, 52 has
been evaluated ﬁrst as 25, before adding on 70/7 = 10, to give a ﬁnal answer of 35.
70
7
Introduction: Getting Started
10
Practice Problem
2 Use Maple to work out each of the following:
(a) 12 + 18 ÷ 9
(b) 33 −42
(c) (7 + 3) ÷ 2
MAPLE
Suppose now that you wish to work out all of the following sums:
3 × 52 −2 × 5
3 × 62 −2 × 6
3 × 72 −2 × 7
3 × 6.42 −2 × 6.4
3 × 92.52 −2 × 92.5
You could, of course, just type all five calculations, one after the other to get the answers.
However, there is a common pattern. They each take the form
3x2 −2x
for various values of x, and it makes sense to exploit this fact. As a first step, we shall give this
expression a name. We could call it Fred or Wilma, but in practice, we prefer to give it a name
that relates to the context in which it arises. A mathematical expression that contains a square
term like this is called a quadratic so let us name this particular one quad1. To do this, type:

>quad1:=3*x^2-2*x;
The symbol ‘:=’ tells Maple that you wish to define quad1 to be 3x2 −2x.
To work out 3 × 52 −2 × 5 we substitute x = 5 into this expression: that is, we replace the
symbol x by the number 5. In Maple, this is achieved by typing
>subs(x=5,quad1);
Maple responds with the answer 65. To perform the other four calculations, all we need do is
to edit the Maple instruction, change the 5 to a new value, move the cursor to the right of the
semi-colon, and press the Enter key. You might like to try this for yourself.
Hopefully, this brief introduction has given you some idea of how to use Maple to perform 
simple calculations. However, you may be wondering what all the fuss is about. Surely we could
have performed these calculations just as easily on an ordinary calculator? Well, the honest
answer is probably yes. The real advantage of using Maple is as a tool for solving complex
mathematical problems. We shall meet some examples in the second half of this book. The 
following problem gives a brief glimpse at the sort of things that it can do.
Introduction: Getting Started
11
Practice Problem
3 Type in the following after the ‘>’ prompt. Before doing so, you might like to guess what each 
instruction is likely to do.
(a) solve(2*x-8=0,x);
(b) plot(2*x-8,x=0..10);
(c) expand((x+2)^2);
(d) simplify(2*x+6+5*x-2);
(e) plot3d(x^3-3*x+x*y,x=-2..2,y=-2..2);
MAPLE
The key terms in each section are shown in colour in the text when they are ﬁrst used. Their
deﬁnitions are shown at the end of each section in a coloured box. In addition, all key terms
are repeated in the glossary at the end of the book.
Key Terms


chapter 1
Linear Equations
The main aim of this chapter is to introduce the mathematics of linear equations.
This is an obvious first choice in an introductory text, since it is an easy topic which
has many applications. There are six sections, which are intended to be read in the
order that they appear.
Sections 1.1, 1.2, 1.4 and 1.5 are devoted to mathematical methods. They serve to
revise the rules of arithmetic and algebra, which you probably met at school but may
have forgotten. In particular, the properties of negative numbers and fractions are
considered. A reminder is given on how to multiply out brackets and how to manip-
ulate mathematical expressions. You are also shown how to solve simultaneous lin-
ear equations. Systems of two equations in two unknowns can be solved using
graphs, which are described in Section 1.1. However, the preferred method uses
elimination, which is considered in Section 1.2. This algebraic approach has the
advantage that it always gives an exact solution and it extends readily to larger sys-
tems of equations.
The remaining two sections are reserved for applications in microeconomics and
macroeconomics. You may be pleasantly surprised by how much economic theory
you can analyse using just the basic mathematical tools considered here. Section 1.3
introduces the fundamental concept of an economic function and describes how to
calculate equilibrium prices and quantities in supply and demand theory. Section 1.6
deals with national income determination in simple macroeconomic models.
The first five sections underpin the rest of the book and are essential reading. The
final section is not quite as important and can be omitted if desired.


section  1.1
Graphs of linear equations
Consider the two straight lines shown in Figure 1.1. The horizontal line is referred to as the 
x axis and the vertical line is referred to as the y axis. The point where these lines intersect is
known as the origin and is denoted by the letter O. These lines enable us to identify uniquely
any point, P, in terms of its coordinates (x, y). The ﬁrst number, x, denotes the horizontal 
distance along the x axis and the second number, y, denotes the vertical distance along the 
y axis. The arrows on the axes indicate the positive direction in each case.
 
Figure 1.1
Objectives
At the end of this section you should be able to:
 Plot points on graph paper given their coordinates.
 Add, subtract, multiply and divide negative numbers.
 Sketch a line by ﬁnding the coordinates of two points on the line.
 Solve simultaneous linear equations graphically.
 Sketch a line by using its slope and intercept.

Linear Equations
16
Example
Plot the points A(2, 3), B(−1, 4), C(−3, −1), D(3, −2) and E(5, 0).
Solution
The point A with coordinates (2, 3) is obtained by starting at the origin, moving 2 units to the right and then
moving 3 units vertically upwards. Similarly, the point B with coordinates (−1, 4) is located 1 unit to the left
of O (because the x coordinate is negative) and 4 units up. These points, together with C(−3, −1), D(3, −2)
and E(5, 0) are plotted in Figure 1.2.
Note that the point C lies in the bottom left-hand quadrant since its x and y coordinates are both nega-
tive. It is also worth noticing that E actually lies on the x axis since its y coordinate is zero. Likewise, a point
with coordinates of the form (0, y) for some number y would lie somewhere on the y axis. Of course, the
point with coordinates (0, 0) is the origin, O.
Advice
The best way for you to understand mathematics is to practise the techniques yourself. For
this reason, problems are included within the text as well as at the end of every section.
Please stop reading the book, pick up a pencil and a ruler, and attempt these problems as
you go along. You should then check your answers honestly with those given at the back
of the book.

Practice Problem
1 Plot the following points on graph paper. What do you observe?
(2, 5), (1, 3), (0, 1), (−2, −3), (−3, −5)

Before we can continue the discussion of graphs it is worthwhile revising the properties of
negative numbers. The rules for the multiplication of negative numbers are
×
=
×
=
It does not matter in which order two numbers are multiplied, so
×
=
These rules produce
(−2) × (−3) = 6
(−4) × 5 = −20
7 × (−5) = −35
respectively. Also, because division is the same sort of operation as multiplication (it just
undoes the result of multiplication and takes you back to where you started), exactly the same
rules apply when one number is divided by another. For example,
(−15) ÷ (−3) = 5
(−16) ÷ 2 = −8
2 ÷ (−4) = −1/2
In general, to multiply or divide lots of numbers it is probably simplest to ignore the signs to
begin with and just to work the answer out. The ﬁnal result is negative if the total number of
minus signs is odd and positive if the total number is even.
negative
negative
positive
negative
positive
negative
positive
negative
negative
1.1 • Graphs of linear equations
17
Figure 1.2

Linear Equations
18
Example
Evaluate
(a) (−2) × (−4) × (−1) × 2 × (−1) × (−3)
(b)
Solution
(a) To evaluate
(−2) × (−4) × (−1) × (2) × (−1) × (−3)
we ignore the signs to get a preliminary value, 48. However, because there are an odd number of minus signs
altogether (in fact, ﬁve) the ﬁnal answer is −48.
(b) Ignoring the signs gives
=
= 5
There are an even number of minus signs (in fact, four) so the answer is 5.
60
12
5 × 4 × 1 × 3
6 × 2
5 × (−4) × (−1) × (−3)
(−6) × 2
Advice
Attempt the following problem yourself both with and without a calculator. On most
machines a negative number such as −6 is entered by pressing the button labelled 
followed by 6.
(−)
Practice Problem
2 (1) Without using a calculator evaluate
(a) 5 × (−6)
(b) (−1) × (−2)
(c) (−50) ÷ 10
(d) (−5) ÷ (−1)
(e) 2 × (−1) × (−3) × 6
(f)
(2) Confirm your answer to part (1) using a calculator.
2 × (−1) × (−3) × 6
(−2) × 3 × 6

To add or subtract negative numbers it helps to think in terms of a picture of the x axis:

If b is a positive number then
a −b
can be thought of as an instruction to start at a and to move b units to the left. For example,
1 −3 = −2
because if you start at 1 and move 3 units to the left, you end up at −2:
Similarly,
−2 −1 = −3
because 1 unit to the left of −2 is −3.
On the other hand,
a −(−b)
is taken to be a + b. This follows from the rule for multiplying two negative numbers, since
−(−b) = (−1) × (−b) = b
Consequently, to evaluate
a −(−b)
you start at a and move b units to the right (that is, in the positive direction). For example,
−2 −(−5) = −2 + 5 = 3
because if you start at −2 and move 5 units to the right you end up at 3.
1.1 • Graphs of linear equations
19
Example
Evaluate
(a) −32 − 4
(b) −68 −(−62)
Solution
(a) −32 −4 = −36 because 4 units to the left of −32 is −36.
(b) −68 −(−62) = −68 + 62 = −6 because 62 units to the right of −68 is −6.

We now return to the problem of graphs. In economics we need to do rather more than just
plot individual points on graph paper. We would like to be able to sketch curves represented
by equations and to deduce information from such a picture. Incidentally, it is sometimes 
more appropriate to label axes using letters other than x and y. For example, in the analysis 
of supply and demand, the variables involved are the quantity and price of a good. It is then
convenient to use Q and P instead of x and y. This helps us to remember which variable we have
used on which axis. However, in this section, only the letters x and y are used. Also, we restrict
our attention to those equations whose graphs are straight lines, deferring consideration of
more general curve sketching until Chapter 2.
In Practice Problem 1 you will have noticed that the ﬁve points (2, 5), (1, 3), (0, 1), (−2, −3)
and (−3, −5) all lie on a straight line. In fact, the equation of this line is
−2x + y = 1
Any point lies on this line if its x and y coordinates satisfy this equation. For example, (2, 5) lies
on the line because when the values x = 2 and y = 5 are substituted into the left-hand side of 
the equation we obtain
−2(2) + 5 = −4 + 5 = 1
which is the right-hand side of the equation. The other points can be checked similarly (Table 1.1).
Linear Equations
20
Practice Problem
3 (1) Without using a calculator evaluate
(a) 1 −2
(b) −3 − 4
(c) 1 −(−4)
(d) −1 −(−1)
(e) −72 −19
(f) −53 −(−48)
(2) Confirm your answer to part (1) using a calculator.

Table 1.1
Point
Check
(1, 3)
−2(1) + 3 = −2 + 3 = 1
✓
(0, 1)
−2(0) + 1 = 0 + 1 = 1
✓
(−2, −3)
−2(−2) −3 = 4 −3 = 1
✓
(−3, −5)
−2(−3) −5 = 6 −5 = 1
✓
Notice how the rules for manipulating negative numbers have been used in the calculations.
The general equation of a straight line takes the form
+
=
that is,
dx + ey = f
for some given numbers d, e and f. Consequently, such an equation is called a linear equation.
The numbers d and e are referred to as the coefﬁcients. The coefﬁcients of the linear equation,
a number
a multiple of y
a multiple of x

−2x + y = 1
are −2 and 1 (the coefﬁcient of y is 1 because y can be thought of as 1 × y).
1.1 • Graphs of linear equations
21
Advice
If you have forgotten about the order in which operations are performed, you should read
the section on BIDMAS on page 10.
Example
Decide which of the following points lie on the line 5x −2y = 6:
A(0, −3), B(2, 2), C(−10, −28) and D(4, 8)
Solution
5(0) −2(−3) = 0 −(−6) = 0 + 6 = 6
5(2) −2(2) = 10 −4 = 6
5(−10) −2(−28) = −50 −(−56) = −50 + 56 = 6
5(4) −2(8) = 20 −16 = 4 ≠6
Hence points A, B and C lie on the line, but D does not lie on the line.
Practice Problem
4 Check that the points
(−1, 2), (−4, 4), (5, −2), (2, 0)
all lie on the line
2x + 3y = 4
and hence sketch this line on graph paper. Does the point (3, −1) lie on this line?

In general, to sketch a line from its mathematical equation, it is sufﬁcient to calculate 
the coordinates of any two distinct points lying on it. These two points can be plotted on graph
paper and a ruler used to draw the line passing through them. One way of ﬁnding the co-
ordinates of a point on a line is simply to choose a numerical value for x and to substitute it
into the equation. The equation can then be used to deduce the corresponding value of y. The
whole process can be repeated to ﬁnd the coordinates of the second point by choosing another
value for x.

Linear Equations
22
Practice Problem
5 Find the coordinates of two points on the line
3x −2y = 4
by taking x = 2 for the first point and x = −2 for the second point. Hence sketch its graph.
Example
Sketch the line
4x + 3y = 11
Solution
For the ﬁrst point, let us choose x = 5. Substitution of this number into the equation gives
4(5) + 3y = 11
20 + 3y = 11
The problem now is to ﬁnd the value of y which satisﬁes this equation. A naïve approach might be to use
trial and error: that is, we could just keep guessing values of y until we ﬁnd the one that works. Can you
guess what y is in this case? However, a more reliable and systematic approach is actually to solve this equa-
tion using the rules of mathematics. In fact, the only rule that we need is this:
you can apply whatever mathematical operation you like to an equation, 
provided that you do the same thing to both sides
There is only one exception to this rule: you must never divide both sides by zero. This should be obvious
because a number such as 11/0 does not exist. (If you do not believe this, try dividing 11 by 0 on your calculator.)
The ﬁrst obstacle that prevents us from writing down the value of y immediately is the number 20, which
is added on to the left-hand side. This can be removed by subtracting 20 from the left-hand side. In order
for this to be legal, we must also subtract 20 from the right-hand side to get
3y = 11 −20
3y = −9
The second obstacle is the number 3, which is multiplying the y. This can be removed by dividing the left-
hand side by 3. Of course, we must also divide the right-hand side by 3 to get
y = −9/3 = −3
Consequently, the coordinates of one point on the line are (5, −3).
For the second point, let us choose x = −1. Substitution of this number into the equation gives
4(−1) + 3y = 11
−4 + 3y = 11
This can be solved for y as follows:
3y = 11 + 4 = 15
(add 4 to both sides)
y = 15/3 = 5
(divide both sides by 3)
Hence (−1, 5) lies on the line, which can now be sketched on graph paper as shown in Figure 1.3.

In this example we arbitrarily picked two values of x and used the linear equation to work
out the corresponding values of y. There is nothing particularly special about the variable x. We
could equally well have chosen values for y and solved the resulting equations for x. In fact, the
easiest thing to do (in terms of the amount of arithmetic involved) is to put x = 0 and ﬁnd y
and then to put y = 0 and ﬁnd x.
1.1 • Graphs of linear equations
23
Figure 1.3
Example
Sketch the line
2x + y = 5
Solution
Setting x = 0 gives
2(0) + y = 5
0 + y = 5
y = 5
Hence (0, 5) lies on the line.
Setting y = 0 gives
2x + 0 = 5
2x = 5
x = 5/2
(divide both sides by 2)
Hence (5/2, 0) lies on the line.


The line 2x + y = 5 is sketched in Figure 1.4. Notice how easy the algebra is using this approach. The 
two points themselves are also slightly more meaningful. They are the points where the line intersects the
coordinate axes.
Linear Equations
24
Practice Problem
6 Find the coordinates of the points where the line
x −2y = 2
intersects the axes. Hence sketch its graph.
In economics it is sometimes necessary to handle more than one equation at the same time.
For example, in supply and demand analysis we are interested in two equations, the supply
equation and the demand equation. Both involve the same variables Q and P, so it makes sense
to sketch them on the same diagram. This enables the market equilibrium quantity and price
to be determined by ﬁnding the point of intersection of the two lines. We shall return to the
analysis of supply and demand in Section 1.3. There are many other occasions in economics
and business studies when it is necessary to determine the coordinates of points of intersection.
The following is a straightforward example which illustrates the general principle.
Figure 1.4

1.1 • Graphs of linear equations
25

Figure 1.5
Example
Find the point of intersection of the two lines
4x + 3y = 11
2x + y = 5
Solution
We have already seen how to sketch these lines in the previous two examples. We discovered that
4x + 3y = 11
passes through (5, −3) and (−1, 5), and that
2x + y = 5
passes through (0, 5) and (5/2, 0).
These two lines are sketched on the same diagram in Figure 1.5, from which the point of intersection is
seen to be (2, 1).
It is easy to verify that we have not made any mistakes by checking that (2, 1) lies on both lines. It lies on
4x + 3y = 11 because 4(2) + 3(1) = 8 + 3 = 11
✓
and lies on 2x + y = 5 because 2(2) + 1 = 4 + 1 = 5
✓

Linear Equations
26
Quite often it is not necessary to produce an accurate plot of an equation. All that may be
required is an indication of the general shape together with a few key points or features. It can
be shown that, provided e is non-zero, any equation given by
dx + ey = f
can be rearranged into the special form
y = ax + b
An example showing you how to perform such a rearrangement will be considered in a
moment. The coefﬁcients a and b have particular signiﬁcance, which we now examine. To be
speciﬁc, consider
y = 2x −3
in which a = 2 and b = −3.
When x is taken to be zero, the value of y is
y = 2(0) −3 = −3
The line passes through (0, −3), so the y intercept is −3. This is just the value of b. In other
words, the constant term, b, represents the intercept on the y axis.
In the same way it is easy to see that a, the coefﬁcient of x, determines the slope of the line.
The slope of a straight line is simply the change in the value of y brought about by a 1 unit
increase in the value of x. For the equation
y = 2x −3
let us choose x = 5 and increase this by a single unit to get x = 6. The corresponding values of
y are then
y = 2(5) −3 = 10 −3 = 7
y = 2(6) −3 = 12 −3 = 9
Practice Problem
7 Find the point of intersection of
3x −2y = 4
x −2y = 2
[Hint: you might find your answers to Problems 5 and 6 useful.]
For this reason, we say that x = 2, y = 1, is the solution of the simultaneous linear equations
4x + 3y = 11
2x + y = 5

respectively. The value of y increases by 2 units when x rises by 1 unit. The slope of the line is
therefore 2, which is the value of a. The slope of a line is ﬁxed throughout its length, so it is
immaterial which two points are taken. The particular choice of x = 5 and x = 6 was entirely
arbitrary. You might like to convince yourself of this by choosing two other points, such as 
x = 20 and x = 21, and repeating the previous calculations.
A graph of the line
y = 2x −3
is sketched in Figure 1.6. This is sketched using the information that the intercept is −3 and that
for every 1 unit along we go 2 units up. In this example the coefﬁcient of x is positive. This does
not have to be the case. If a is negative then for every increase in x there is a corresponding
decrease in y, indicating that the line is downhill. If a is zero then the equation is just
y = b
indicating that y is ﬁxed at b and the line is horizontal. The three cases are illustrated in 
Figure 1.7 (overleaf).
It is important to appreciate that in order to use the slope–intercept approach it is necessary
for the equation to be written as
y = ax + b
If a linear equation does not have this form, it is usually possible to perform a preliminary 
rearrangement to isolate the variable y on the left-hand side, as the following example 
demonstrates.
1.1 • Graphs of linear equations
27
Figure 1.6

Linear Equations
28
Figure 1.7
Example
Use the slope–intercept approach to sketch the line
2x + 3y = 12
Solution
We can remove the x term on the left-hand side of
2x + 3y = 12
by subtracting 2x. As usual, to balance the equation we must also subtract 2x from the right-hand side to get
3y = 12 −2x
We now just divide through by 3 to get
y = 4 −2/3x
This is now in the required form with a = −2/3 and b = 4. The line is sketched in Figure 1.8. A slope of −2/3
means that, for every 1 unit along, we go 2/3 units down (or, equivalently, for every 3 units along, we go 
2 units down). An intercept of 4 means that it passes through (0, 4).
Practice Problem
8 Use the slope–intercept approach to sketch the lines
(a) y = x + 2
(b) 4x + 2y = 1

1.1 • Graphs of linear equations
29
Figure 1.8
Example
(a) Use Excel to draw the graphs of
y = 3x + 2
y = −2x + 2
y = 1/2x + 2
on the same set of axes, taking values of x between −3 and +3.
(b) On another set of axes, use Excel to draw the graphs of
y = 2x
y = 2x −3
y = 2x + 1
for −3 ≤x ≤3.
(c) What do you notice about the two sets of graphs?
Solution
(a) To draw graphs with Excel, we ﬁrst have to set up a table of values. By giving a title to each column, 
we will be able to label the graphs at a later stage, so we type the headings x, y = 3x + 2, y = −2x + 2 and
y = x/2 + 2 in cells A1, B1, C1 and D1 respectively.
The x values are now typed into the ﬁrst column, as shown in the diagram overleaf. In the next 
three columns, we generate the corresponding values for y by entering formulae for each of the three
lines.
EXCEL


The formula for the ﬁrst graph goes in cell B2. As the x value is in cell A2, we type
=3*A2+2
By clicking and dragging this formula down the second column (up to, and including, cell B8), the 
values of y are calculated.
Similarly, the formula for calculating the y coordinates for the second line is entered into cell 
C2 as
=−2*A2+2
and the formula for the third line is entered into cell D2 as
=A2/2+2
To plot these points on a graph, we highlight all the cells in the table, including the column titles, and
click on the Chart Wizard button on the toolbar. The Chart Wizard box will appear:
From the list of chart types, we choose XY (Scatter), and then choose an appropriate sub-type. As 
we are plotting straight lines, we have selected Scatter with data points connected by lines without 
markers.
Linear Equations
30

The Next screen shows you a preview of the graph, with the option to change the range of the cells
that have been plotted. If the graph looks wrong, it is usually because the wrong cells have been high-
lighted before going into Chart Wizard, so go back and check this, rather than altering the range.
The third screen allows you to label your graph, and alter its gridlines. You should always label your
axes, but you could, for example, delete the Legend if you feel it is inappropriate. Adding gridlines can
make it easier to read values off the graph.
Finally, we click Next and Finish, to transfer the graph on to the spreadsheet, as shown in Figure 1.9.
Notice that Excel provides a key showing which line is which.
1.1 • Graphs of linear equations
31
Figure 1.9


(b) Following the same procedure for the three lines
y = 2x
y = 2x −3
y = 2x + 1
produces a graph as shown in Figure 1.10.
(c) Notice that in part (a), all of the graphs cut the y axis at the point (0, 2). In part (b), the graphs are 
parallel, which means that they have the same gradient.
This illustrates the fact that every straight line has an equation of the form
y = mx + c
where m is the gradient, and c is the intercept on the y axis.
In (a), the value of c in each equation is equal to 2, so all of the lines cut the y axis at this point.
In (b), the value of m in each equation is equal to 2, so all of the lines have the same gradient and are
parallel.
It is very useful to be able to recognize these properties from the equations, as it means we have a
fairly good idea of what our graph should look like even before we draw it.
Linear Equations
32
Figure 1.10
Advice
This completes your first piece of mathematics. I hope that you have not found it quite 
as bad as you first thought. There now follow a few extra problems to give you more 
practice. If you have successfully tackled all of the problems given in the text so far, you
might prefer to move straight on to the next section. Problems 9–16 can be attempted
later as part of your revision. However, if you failed to obtain the correct answers to
Problems 1–8 then you should try the Practice Problems now. Not only will they help to
strengthen your mathematical skills, but also they should improve your overall confidence.

1.1 • Graphs of linear equations
33
Coefﬁcient
A numerical multiplier of the variables in an algebraic term, such as the 
numbers 4 and 7 in the expression, 4x + 7yz 2.
Coordinates
A set of numbers that determine the position of a point relative to a set of
axes.
Intercept
The point(s) where a graph crosses one of the coordinate axes.
Linear equation
An equation of the form y = ax + b.
Origin
The point where the coordinate axes intersect.
Simultaneous linear equations
A set of linear equations in which there are (usually) the
same number of equations and unknowns. The solution consists of values of the unknowns
which satisfy all of the equations at the same time.
Slope of a line
Also known as the gradient, it is the change in the value of y when x
increases by 1 unit.
x axis
The horizontal coordinate axis pointing from left to right.
y axis
The vertical coordinate axis pointing upwards.
Practice Problems
9 Plot the following points on graph paper:
P (4, 0), Q (−2, 9), R (5, 8), S (−1, −2)
Hence find the coordinates of the point of intersection of the line passing through P and Q, and the
line passing through R and S.
10 Without using a calculator evaluate
(a) 10 × (−2)
(b) (−1) × (−3)
(c) (−8) ÷ 2
(d) (−5) ÷ (−5)
(e) 5 −6
(f) −1 −2
(g) 7 −(−4)
(h) −9 −(−9)
(i)
11 If x = 2 and y = −3 evaluate
(a) 2x + y
(b) x −y
(c) 3x + 4y
(d) xy
(e) 5xy
(f) 4x −6xy
12 Solve the following equations:
(a) 2x = 1
(b) 2x + 5 = 13
(c) 3 −x = 7
(d) 3 −4x = 5
(e) 7x = 0
(f)
+ 7 = 10
13 If 4x + 3y = 24, complete the following table and hence sketch this line
x
y
0
0
3
3
x
(−3) × (−6) × (−1)
2 −3

Key Terms

14 Solve the following pairs of simultaneous linear equations graphically:
(a) −2x + y = 2
(b) 3x + 4y = 12
(c)
2x + y = 4
(d)
x + y = 1
2x + y = −6
x + 4y = 8
4x −3y = 3
6x + 5y = 15
15 Use the slope–intercept approach to sketch the lines
(a) y = −x
(b) x −2y = 6
16 (a) Without using a calculator, work out the value of (−4)2.
(b) Press the following key sequence on your calculator:
Explain carefully why this does not give the same result as part (a) and give an alternative key
sequence that does give the correct answer.
x2
4
(−)
Linear Equations
34

section 1.2
Algebraic solution of
simultaneous linear
equations
In Section 1.1 a graphical method was described for the solution of simultaneous linear equa-
tions. Both lines are sketched on the same piece of graph paper and the coordinates of the point
of intersection are then simply read off from the diagram. Unfortunately this approach has 
several drawbacks. It is not always easy to decide on a suitable scale for the axes. Even if the scale
allows all four points (two from each line) to ﬁt on the diagram, there is no guarantee that the
point of intersection itself also lies on it. You may have encountered this difﬁculty when solv-
ing Practice Problem 14(d) in the previous section. When this happens you have no alternative
but to throw away your graph paper and to start again, choosing a smaller scale in the hope that
the solution will now ﬁt. The second drawback concerns the accuracy of the graphical solution.
All of the problems in Section 1.1 were deliberately chosen so that the answers had nice numbers
in them; whole numbers such as −1, 2 and 5 or at worst simple fractions such as 1/2, 21/2 and 
−1/4. In practice, the coefﬁcients of the equations may well involve decimals and we might
expect a decimal solution. Indeed, even if the coefﬁcients are whole numbers the solution itself
Objectives
At the end of this section you should be able to:
 Solve a system of two simultaneous linear equations in two unknowns using
elimination.
 Detect when a system of equations does not have a solution.
 Detect when a system of equations has inﬁnitely many solutions.
 Solve a system of three simultaneous linear equations in three unknowns using
elimination.

could involve nasty fractions such as 7/8 or perhaps something like 231/571. A moment’s
thought should convince you that in these circumstances it is virtually impossible to obtain the
solution graphically, even if we use a really large scale and our sharpest HB pencil in the pro-
cess. The ﬁnal drawback concerns the nature of the problem itself. Quite frequently in eco-
nomics we need to solve three equations in three unknowns or maybe four equations in four
unknowns. Unfortunately, the graphical method of solution does not extend to these cases.
In this section an alternative method of solution is described which relies on algebra. It is
called the elimination method, since each stage of the process eliminates one (or more) of the
unknowns. This method always produces the exact solution and can be applied to systems of
equations larger than just two equations in two unknowns. In order to illustrate the method,
we return to the simple example considered in the previous section:
4x + 3y = 11
(1)
2x + y = 5
(2)
The coefﬁcient of x in equation (1) is 4 and the coefﬁcient of x in equation (2) is 2. If these
numbers had turned out to be exactly the same then we could have eliminated the variable x
by subtracting one equation from the other. However, we can arrange for this to be the case by
multiplying the left-hand side of the second equation by 2. Of course, we must also remember
to multiply the right-hand side of the second equation by 2 in order for this operation to be
valid. The second equation then becomes
4x + 2y = 10
(3)
We may now subtract equation (3) from (1) to get
y = 1
You may like to think of this in terms of the usual layout for the subtraction of two ordinary
numbers: that is,
4x + 3y = 11
4x + 2y = 10 −
y = 1
This number can now be substituted into one of the original equations to deduce x. From 
equation (1)
4x + 3(1) = 11
(substitute y = 1)
4x + 3 = 11
4x = 8
(subtract 3 from both sides)
x = 2
(divide both sides by 4)
Hence the solution is x = 2, y = 1. As a check, substitution of these values into the other ori-
ginal equation (2) gives
2(2) + 1 = 5
✓
The method of elimination can be summarized as follows.
Step 1
Add/subtract a multiple of one equation to/from a multiple of the other to eliminate x.
Linear Equations
36

Step 2
Solve the resulting equation for y.
Step 3
Substitute the value of y into one of the original equations to deduce x.
Step 4
Check that no mistakes have been made by substituting both x and y into the other original
equation.
1.2 • Algebraic solution of simultaneous linear equations
37
Advice
The following example involves fractions. If you have forgotten how to perform calcula-
tions with fractions, you might like to read through Section 1.4.3 (pp. 76–81) now, since
this section contains a review of their basic properties.
Example
Solve the system of equations
3x + 2y = 1
(1)
−2x + y = 2
(2)
Solution
Step 1
The coefﬁcients of x in equations (1) and (2) are 3 and −2 respectively. We can arrange for these to be the
same size (but of opposite sign) by multiplying equation (1) by 2 and multiplying (2) by 3. The new equa-
tions will then have x coefﬁcients of 6 and −6, so we can eliminate x this time by adding the equations
together. The details are as follows.
Doubling the ﬁrst equation produces
6x + 4y = 2
(3)
Tripling the second equation produces
−6x + 3y = 6
(4)
If equation (4) is added to equation (3) then
6x + 4y = 2
−6x + 3y = 6 +
7y = 8
(5)
Step 2
Equation (5) can be solved by dividing both sides by 7 to get
y = 8/7


Step 3
If 8/7 is substituted for y in equation (1) then
3x + 2
= 1
3x +
= 1
3x = 1 −
(subtract 16/7 from both sides)
3x =
(put over a common denominator)
3x = −
x =
×
−
(divide both sides by 3)
x = −
The solution is therefore x = −3/7, y = 8/7.
Step 4
As a check, equation (2) gives
−2 −
+
=
+
=
=
= 2
✓
14
7
6 + 8
7
8
7
6
7
8
7
D
F
3
7
A
C
3
7
D
F
9
7
A
C
1
3
9
7
7 −16 
7
16
7
16
7
D
F
8
7
A
C
Linear Equations
38
Advice
In the general description of the method, we suggested that the variable x is eliminated in
step 1. There is nothing special about x. We could equally well eliminate y at this stage and
then solve the resulting equation in step 2 for x.
You might like to solve the above example using this alternative strategy. You need to
double equation (2) and then subtract from (1).
Practice Problem
1 (a) Solve the equations
3x −2y = 4
x −2y = 2
by eliminating one of the variables.
(b) Solve the equations
3x + 5y = 19
−5x + 2y = −11
by eliminating one of the variables.

The following examples provide further practice in using the method and illustrate some
special cases which may occur.
1.2 • Algebraic solution of simultaneous linear equations
39
Example
Solve the system of equations
x −2y = 1
2x −4y = −3
Solution
Step 1
The variable x can be eliminated by doubling the ﬁrst equation and subtracting the second:
2x −4y =
2
2x −4y = −3 −
0 =
5
The statement ‘0 = 5’ is clearly nonsense and something has gone seriously wrong. To understand what is
going on here, let us try and solve this problem graphically.
The line x −2y = 1 passes through the points (0, −1/2) and (1, 0) (check this). The line 2x −4y = −3 passes
through the points (0, 3/4) and (−3/2, 0) (check this). Figure 1.11 shows that these lines are parallel and so
they do not intersect. It is therefore not surprising that we were unable to ﬁnd a solution using algebra,
because this system of equations does not have one. We could have deduced this before when subtracting
the equations. The equation that only involves y in step 2 can be written as
0y = 5
and the problem is to ﬁnd a value of y for which this equation is true. No such value exists, since
×
=
and so the original system of equations does not have a solution.
zero
any number
zero
Figure 1.11
www.ebook3000.com

Linear Equations
40
Example
Solve the equations
2x −4y = 1
5x −10y = 5/2
Solution
Step 1
The variable x can be eliminated by multiplying the ﬁrst equation by 5, multiplying the second equation 
by 2 and subtracting
10x −20y = 5
10x −20y = 5 −
0 = 0
Again, it is easy to explain this using graphs. The line 2x −4y = 1 passes through (0, −1/4) and (1/2, 0). 
The line 5x −10y = 5/2 passes through (0, −1/4) and (1/2, 0). Consequently, both equations represent the
same line. From Figure 1.12 the lines intersect along the whole of their length and any point on this line 
is a solution. This particular system of equations has inﬁnitely many solutions. This can also be deduced
algebraically. The equation involving y in step 2 is
0y = 0
which is true for any value of y.
Figure 1.12

These examples show that a system of equations can possess a unique solution, no solution
or inﬁnitely many solutions. Algebraically, this can be detected in step 2. If the equation result-
ing from the elimination of x looks like
×
=
then the equations have a unique solution, or if it looks like
×
=
then the equations have no solution, or if it looks like
×
=
then the equations have inﬁnitely many solutions.
It is interesting to notice how the graphical approach ‘saved the day’ in the previous two
examples. They show how useful pictures are as an aid to understanding in mathematics.
zero
y
zero
any non-zero number
y
zero
any number
y
any non-zero number
1.2 • Algebraic solution of simultaneous linear equations
41
Practice Problem
2 Attempt to solve the following systems of equations
(a)
3x −6y = −2
(b)
−5x + y = 4
−4x + 8y = −1
10x −2y = −8
Comment on the nature of the solution in each case.
We now show how the algebraic method can be used to solve three equations in three
unknowns. As you might expect, the details are more complicated than for just two equations,
but the principle is the same. We begin with a simple example to illustrate the general method.
Consider the system
x + 3y −z = 4
(1)
2x + y + 2z = 10
(2)
3x −y + z = 4
(3)
The objective is to ﬁnd three numbers x, y and z which satisfy these equations simultaneously.
Our previous work suggests that we should begin by eliminating x from all but one of the 
equations.
The variable x can be eliminated from the second equation by multiplying equation (1) 
by 2 and subtracting equation (2):
2x + 6y −2z = 8
2x + y + 2z = 10 −
5y −4z = −2
(4)
Similarly, we can eliminate x from the third equation by multiplying equation (1) by 3 and sub-
tracting equation (3):
3x + 9y −3z = 12
3x −y + z = 4 −
10y −4z = 8
(5)

At this stage the ﬁrst equation is unaltered but the second and third equations of the system
have changed to equations (4) and (5) respectively, so the current equations are
x + 3y −z = 4
(1)
5y −4z = −2
(4)
10y −4z = 8
(5)
Notice that the last two equations constitute a system of just two equations in two unknowns, y
and z. This, of course, is precisely the type of problem that we already know how to solve. Once
y and z have been calculated, the values can be substituted into equation (1) to deduce x.
We can eliminate y in the last equation by multiplying equation (4) by 2 and subtracting
equation (5):
10y −8z = −4
10y −4z =
8 −
−4z = −12
(6)
Collecting together the current equations gives
x + 3y −z = 4
(1)
5y −4z = −2
(4)
−4z = −12
(6)
From the last equation,
z =
= 3
(divide both sides by −4)
If this is substituted into equation (4) then
5y −4(3) = −2
5y −12 = −2
5y = 10
(add 12 to both sides)
y = 2
(divide both sides by 5)
Finally, substituting y = 2 and z = 3 into equation (1) produces
x + 3(2) −3 = 4
x + 3 = 4
x = 1
(subtract 3 from both sides)
Hence the solution is x = 1, y = 2, z = 3.
As usual, it is possible to check the answer by putting these numbers back into the original
equations (1), (2) and (3)
1 + 3(2) −3 = 4
✓
2(1) + 2 + 2(3) = 10
✓
3(1) −2 + 3 = 4
✓
The general strategy may be summarized as follows. Consider the system
?x + ?y + ?z = ?
?x + ?y + ?z = ?
?x + ?y + ?z = ?
where ? denotes some numerical coefﬁcient.
−12
−4
Linear Equations
42

Step 1
Add/subtract multiples of the ﬁrst equation to/from multiples of the second and third equa-
tions to eliminate x. This produces a new system of the form
?x + ?y + ?z = ?
?y + ?z = ?
?y + ?z = ?
Step 2
Add/subtract a multiple of the second equation to/from a multiple of the third to eliminate y.
This produces a new system of the form
?x + ?y + ?z = ?
?y + ?z = ?
?z = ?
Step 3
Solve the last equation for z. Substitute the value of z into the second equation to deduce y.
Finally, substitute the values of both y and z into the ﬁrst equation to deduce x.
Step 4
Check that no mistakes have been made by substituting the values of x, y and z into the original
equations.
It is possible to adopt different strategies from that suggested above. For example, it may be
more convenient to eliminate z from the last equation in step 2 rather than y. However, it is
important to notice that we use the second equation to do this, not the ﬁrst. Any attempt to use
the ﬁrst equation in step 2 would reintroduce the variable x into the equations, which is the last
thing we want to do at this stage.
1.2 • Algebraic solution of simultaneous linear equations
43
Example
Solve the equations
4x + y + 3z = 8
(1)
−2x + 5y + z = 4
(2)
3x + 2y + 4z = 9
(3)
Solution
Step 1
To eliminate x from the second equation we multiply it by 2 and add to equation (1):
4x +
y + 3z = 8
−4x + 10y + 2z = 8 +
11y + 5z = 16
(4)


To eliminate x from the third equation we multiply equation (1) by 3, multiply equation (3) by 4 and subtract:
12x + 3y + 9z = 24
12x + 8y + 16z = 36 −
−5y −7z = −12
(5)
This produces a new system:
4x + y + 3z = 8
(1)
11y + 5z = 16
(4)
−5y −7z = −12
(5)
Step 2
To eliminate y from the new third equation (that is, equation (5)) we multiply equation (4) by 5, multiply
equation (5) by 11 and add:
55y + 25z =
80
−55y −77z = −132 +
−52z = −52
(6)
This produces a new system
4x + y + 3z = 8
(1)
11y + 5z = 16
(4)
−52z = −52
(6)
Step 3
The last equation gives
z =
= 1
(divide both sides by −52)
If this is substituted into equation (4) then
11y + 5(1) = 16
11y + 5 = 16
11y = 11
(subtract 5 from both sides)
y = 1
(divide both sides by 11)
Finally, substituting y = 1 and z = 1 into equation (1) produces
4x + 1 + 3(1) = 8
4x + 4 = 8
4x = 4
(subtract 4 from both sides)
x = 1
(divide both sides by 4)
Hence the solution is x = 1, y = 1, z = 1.
Step 4
As a check the original equations (1), (2) and (3) give
−52
−52
Linear Equations
44

4(1) + 1 + 3(1) = 8
✓
−2(1) + 5(1) + 1 = 4
✓
3(1) + 2(1) + 4(1) = 9
✓
respectively.
1.2 • Algebraic solution of simultaneous linear equations
45
Practice Problem
3 Solve the following system of equations:
2x + 2y −5z = −5
(1)
x −y + z = 3
(2)
−3x + y + 2z = −2
(3)
As you might expect, it is possible for three simultaneous linear equations to have either no
solution or inﬁnitely many solutions. An illustration of this is given in Practice Problem 8. The
method described in this section has an obvious extension to larger systems of equations.
However, the calculations are extremely tedious to perform by hand. Fortunately there are
many computer packages available which are capable of solving large systems accurately and
efﬁciently (a matter of a few seconds to solve 10 000 equations in 10 000 unknowns).
Advice
We shall return to the solution of simultaneous linear equations in Chapter 7 when we
describe how matrix theory can be used to solve them. This does not depend on any sub-
sequent chapters in this book, so you might like to read through this material now. Two
techniques are suggested. A method based on inverse matrices is covered in Section 7.2
and an alternative using Cramer’s rule can be found in Section 7.3.
Elimination method
The method in which variables are removed from a system of simul-
taneous equations by adding (or subtracting) a multiple of one equation to (or from) a mul-
tiple of another.
Key Terms

Linear Equations
46
Practice Problems
4 Use the method of elimination to solve the systems of equations given in Section 1.1, Problem 14.
5 Sketch the following lines on the same diagram:
2x −3y = 6,
4x −6y = 18,
x −
y = 3
Hence comment on the nature of the solutions of the following systems of equations:
(a) 2x −3y = 6
(b) 4x −6y = 18
x −
y = 3
x −
y = 3
6 Use the elimination method to attempt to solve the following systems of equations. Comment on the
nature of the solution in each case.
(a) −3x + 5y =
4
(b)
6x −2y = 3
9x −15y = −12
15x −5y = 4
7 Solve the following systems of equations:
(a)
x −3y + 4z = 5
(1)
(b) 3x + 2y −2z = −5
(1)
2x + y + z = 3
(2)
4x + 3y + 3z = 17
(2)
4x + 3y + 5z = 1
(3)
2x −y + z = −1
(3)
8 Attempt to solve the following systems of equations. Comment on the nature of the solution in each
case.
(a)
x −2y + z = −2
(1)
(b) 2x + 3y −z = 13
(1)
x + y −2z = 4
(2)
x −2y + 2z = −3
(2)
−2x + y + z = 12
(3)
3x + y + z = 10
(3)
3
2
3
2
3
2

section 1.3
Supply and demand analysis
Microeconomics is concerned with the analysis of the economic theory and policy of indi-
vidual ﬁrms and markets. In this section we focus on one particular aspect known as market
equilibrium, in which the supply and demand balance. We describe how the mathematics
introduced in the previous two sections can be used to calculate the equilibrium price and
quantity. However, before we do this it is useful to explain the concept of a function. This idea
is central to nearly all applications of mathematics in economics.
A function, f, is a rule which assigns to each incoming number, x, a uniquely deﬁned 
outgoing number, y. A function may be thought of as a ‘black box’ that performs a dedicated
arithmetic calculation. As an example, consider the rule ‘double and add 3’. The effect of this
rule on two speciﬁc incoming numbers, 5 and −17, is illustrated in Figure 1.13 (overleaf).
Unfortunately, such a representation is rather cumbersome. There are, however, two alter-
native ways of expressing this rule which are more concise. We can write either
y = 2x + 3
or
f(x) = 2x + 3
Objectives
At the end of this section you should be able to:
 Use the function notation, y = f(x).
 Identify the endogenous and exogenous variables in an economic model.
 Identify and sketch a linear demand function.
 Identify and sketch a linear supply function.
 Determine the equilibrium price and quantity for a single-commodity market
both graphically and algebraically.
 Determine the equilibrium price and quantity for a multicommodity market by
solving simultaneous linear equations.

The ﬁrst of these is familiar to you from our previous work; corresponding to any incoming
number, x, the right-hand side tells you what to do with x to generate the outgoing number, y.
The second notation is also useful. It has the advantage that it involves the label f, which is used
to name the rule. If, in a piece of economic theory, there are two or more functions, we can use
different labels to refer to each one. For example, a second function might be
g(x) = −3x + 10
and we subsequently identify the respective functions simply by referring to them by name:
that is, as either f or g.
The new notation also enables the information conveyed in Figure 1.13 to be written
f(5) = 13
f(−17) = −31
The number inside the brackets is the incoming value, x, and the right-hand side is the cor-
responding outgoing value, y.
Linear Equations
48
Figure 1.13
Example
(a) If f(x) = 2x2 −3x ﬁnd the value of f(5).
(b) If g(Q) =
ﬁnd the value of g(2).
Solution
(a) Substituting x = 5 into 2x 2 −3x gives
f(5) = 2 × 52 −3 × 5 
= 2 × 25 −3 × 5 
= 50 −15 = 35
(b) Although the letter Q is used instead of x, the procedure is the same.
g(2) =
=
= 1
3
3
9
3
5 + 2 × 2
3
5 + 2Q

The incoming and outgoing variables are referred to as the independent and dependent vari-
ables respectively. The value of y clearly ‘depends’ on the actual value of x that is fed into the
function. For example, in microeconomics the quantity demanded, Q, of a good depends on
the market price, P. We might express this as
Q = f(P)
Such a function is called a demand function. Given any particular formula for f(P) it is then a
simple matter to produce a picture of the corresponding demand curve on graph paper. There
is, however, a difference of opinion between mathematicians and economists on how this
should be done. If your quantitative methods lecturer is a mathematician then he or she is likely
to plot Q on the vertical axis and P on the horizontal axis. Economists, on the other hand, norm-
ally plot them the other way round with Q on the horizontal axis. In doing so, we are merely
noting that since Q is related to P then, conversely, P must be related to Q, and so there is a
function of the form
P = g(Q)
The two functions, f and g, are said to be inverse functions: that is, f is the inverse of g and,
equivalently, g is the inverse of f. We adopt the economists’ approach in this book. In sub-
sequent chapters we shall investigate other microeconomic functions such as total revenue,
average cost, and proﬁt. It is conventional to plot each of these against Q (that is, with Q on the
horizontal axis), so it makes sense to be consistent and to do the same here.
Written in the form P = g(Q), the demand function tells us that P is a function of Q but it
gives us no information about the precise relationship between these two variables. To ﬁnd this
we need to know the form of the function which can be obtained either from economic theory
or from empirical evidence. For the moment we hypothesize that the function is linear so that
P = aQ + b
for some appropriate constants (called parameters), a and b. Of course, in reality, the relation-
ship between price and quantity is likely to be much more complicated than this. However, the
use of linear functions makes the mathematics nice and easy, and the result of any analysis at least
provides a ﬁrst approximation to the truth. The process of identifying the key features of the real
world and making appropriate simpliﬁcations and assumptions is known as modelling. Models
are based on economic laws and help to explain and predict the behaviour of real-world situ-
ations. Inevitably there is a conﬂict between mathematical ease and the model’s accuracy. 
The closer the model comes to reality, the more complicated the mathematics is likely to be.
A graph of a typical linear demand function is shown in Figure 1.14 (overleaf). Elementary
theory shows that demand usually falls as the price of a good rises and so the slope of the line
is negative. Mathematically, P is then said to be a decreasing function of Q.
1.3 • Supply and demand analysis
49
Practice Problem
1 Evaluate
(a) f(25)
(b) f(1)
(c) f(17)
(d) g(0)
(e) g(48)
(f) g(16)
for the two functions
f(x) = −2x + 50
g(x) = −1/2x + 25
Do you notice any connection between f and g?

In symbols we write
a < 0
It is also apparent from the graph that the intercept, b, is positive: that is,
b > 0
In fact, it is possible in theory for the demand curve to be horizontal with a = 0. This cor-
responds to perfect competition and we shall return to this special case in Chapter 4.
Linear Equations
50
Figure 1.14
Example
Sketch a graph of the demand function
P = −2Q + 50
Hence, or otherwise, determine the value of
(a) P when Q = 9
(b) Q when P = 10
Solution
For the demand function
P = −2Q + 50
a = −2, b = 50, so the line has a slope of −2 and an intercept of 50. For every 1 unit along, the line goes down
by 2 units, so it must cross the horizontal axis when Q = 25. (Alternatively, note that when P = 0 the 
equation reads 0 = −2Q + 50, with solution Q = 25.) The graph is sketched in Figure 1.15.
(a) Given any quantity, Q, it is straightforward to use the graph to ﬁnd the corresponding price, P. A line
is drawn vertically upwards until it intersects the demand curve and the value of P is read off from the
vertical axis. From Figure 1.15, when Q = 9 we see that P = 32. This can also be found by substituting 
Q = 9 directly into the demand function to get
P = −2(9) + 50 = 32

(b) Reversing this process enables us to calculate Q from a given value of P. A line is drawn horizontally
until it intersects the demand curve and the value of Q is read off from the horizontal axis. Figure 1.15
indicates that Q = 20 when P = 10. Again this can be found by calculation. If P = 10 then the equation reads
10 = −2Q + 50
−40 = −2Q
(subtract 50 from both sides)
20 = Q
(divide both sides by −2)
1.3 • Supply and demand analysis
51
Practice Problem
2 Sketch a graph of the demand function
P = −3Q + 75
Hence, or otherwise, determine the value of
(a) P when Q = 23
(b) Q when P = 18
The model of consumer demand given so far is fairly crude in that it assumes that quantity
depends solely on the price, P, of the good being considered. In practice, Q depends on other
factors as well. These include the incomes of consumers, Y, the price of substitutable goods, PS,
the price of complementary goods, PC, advertising expenditure, A, and consumers’ tastes, T. A
substitutable good is one that could be consumed instead of the good under consideration. For
example, in the transport industry, buses and taxis could obviously be substituted for each
other in urban areas. A complementary good is one that is used in conjunction with other
Figure 1.15

goods. For example, music CDs and hi-ﬁ systems are consumed together. Mathematically, we
say that Q is a function of P, Y, PS, PC, A and T. This is written
Q = f(P, Y, PS, PC, A, T)
where the variables inside the brackets are separated by commas. In terms of a ‘black box’ dia-
gram, this is represented with six incoming lines and one outgoing line as shown in Figure 1.16.
In our previous discussion it was implicitly assumed that the variables Y, PS, PC, A and T are
held ﬁxed. We describe this situation by calling Q and P endogenous variables, since they are
allowed to vary and are determined within the model. The remaining variables are called 
exogenous, since they are constant and are determined outside the model.
Let us return now to the standard demand curve shown in Figure 1.17 as the line EF. This is
constructed on the assumption that Y, PS, PC, A and T are all constant. Notice that when the
price is P* the quantity demanded is Q1. Now suppose that income, Y, increases. We would
normally expect the demand to rise because the extra income buys more goods at price P*. The
effect is to shift the demand curve to the right because at price P* consumers can afford the
larger number of goods, Q2. From Figure 1.17 we deduce that if the demand curve is
Linear Equations
52
Figure 1.16
Figure 1.17

P = aQ + b
then a rise in income causes the intercept, b, to increase.
We conclude that if one of the exogenous variables changes then the whole demand curve
moves, whereas if one of the endogenous variables changes, we simply move along the ﬁxed
curve.
Incidentally, it is possible that, for some goods, an increase in income actually causes the
demand curve to shift to the left. In the 1960s and 1970s, most western economies saw a decline
in the domestic consumption of coal as a result of an increase in income. In this case, higher
wealth meant that more people were able to install central heating systems which use alter-
native forms of energy. Under these circumstances the good is referred to as an inferior good.
On the other hand, a superior good is one whose demand rises as income rises. Cars and elec-
trical goods are obvious examples of superior goods. Currently, concern about global warming
is also reducing demand for coal. This factor can be incorporated as part of taste, although it is
difﬁcult to handle mathematically since it is virtually impossible to quantify taste and so to
deﬁne T numerically.
The supply function is the relation between the quantity, Q, of a good that producers 
plan to bring to the market and the price, P, of the good. A typical linear supply curve is 
indicated in Figure 1.18. Economic theory indicates that, as the price rises, so does the supply.
Mathematically, P is then said to be an increasing function of Q. A price increase encourages
existing producers to raise output and entices new ﬁrms to enter the market. The line shown
in Figure 1.18 has equation
P = aQ + b
with slope a > 0 and intercept b > 0. Note that when the market price is equal to b the supply
is zero. It is only when the price exceeds this threshold level that producers decide that it is
worth supplying any good whatsoever.
Again this is a simpliﬁcation of what happens in the real world. The supply function does
not have to be linear and the quantity supplied, Q, is inﬂuenced by things other than price.
These exogenous variables include the prices of factors of production (that is, land, capital,
labour and enterprise), the proﬁts obtainable on alternative goods, and technology.
1.3 • Supply and demand analysis
53

In microeconomics we are concerned with the interaction of supply and demand. Figure
1.19 shows typical supply and demand curves sketched on the same diagram. Of particular
signiﬁcance is the point of intersection. At this point the market is in equilibrium because the
quantity supplied exactly matches the quantity demanded. The corresponding price, P0, and
quantity, Q0, are called the equilibrium price and quantity.
In practice, it is often the deviation of the market price away from the equilibrium price that
is of most interest. Suppose that the market price, P*, exceeds the equilibrium price, P0. From
Figure 1.19 the quantity supplied, QS, is greater than the quantity demanded, QD, so there is
excess supply. There are stocks of unsold goods, which tend to depress prices and cause ﬁrms
to cut back production. The effect is for ‘market forces’ to shift the market back down towards
equilibrium. Likewise, if the market price falls below equilibrium price then demand exceeds
supply. This shortage pushes prices up and encourages ﬁrms to produce more goods, so the
market drifts back up towards equilibrium.
Linear Equations
54
Figure 1.18
Figure 1.19

1.3 • Supply and demand analysis
55
Example
The demand and supply functions of a good are given by
P = −2QD + 50
P = 1/2QS + 25
where P, QD and QS denote the price, quantity demanded and quantity supplied respectively.
(a) Determine the equilibrium price and quantity.
(b) Determine the effect on the market equilibrium if the government decides to impose a ﬁxed tax of $5
on each good.
Solution
(a) The demand curve has already been sketched in Figure 1.15. For the supply function
P = 1/2QS + 25
we have a = 1/2, b = 25, so the line has a slope of 1/2 and an intercept of 25. It therefore passes through 
(0, 25). For a second point, let us choose QS = 20, say. The corresponding value of P is
P = 1/2(20) + 25 = 35
so the line also passes through (20, 35). The points (0, 25) and (20, 35) can now be plotted and the 
supply curve sketched. Figure 1.20 shows both the demand and supply curves sketched on the same 
diagram. The point of intersection has coordinates (10, 30), so the equilibrium quantity is 10 and the
equilibrium price is 30.
It is possible to calculate these values using algebra. In equilibrium, QD = QS. If this common value
is denoted by Q then the demand and supply equations become
P = −2Q + 50
and
P = 1/2Q + 25

Figure 1.20

This represents a pair of simultaneous equations for the two unknowns P and Q, and so could be solved
using the elimination method described in the previous section. However, this is not strictly necessary
because it follows immediately from the above equations that
−2Q + 50 = 1/2Q + 25
since both sides are equal to P. This can be rearranged to calculate Q:
−21/2Q + 50 = 25
(subtract 1/2Q from both sides)
−21/2Q = −25
(subtract 50 from both sides)
Q = 10
(divide both sides by −21/2)
Finally, P can be found by substituting this value into either of the original equations.
The demand equation gives
P = −2(10) + 50 = 30
As a check, the supply equation gives
P = 1/2(10) + 25 = 30
✓
(b) If the government imposes a ﬁxed tax of $5 per good then the money that the ﬁrm actually receives 
from the sale of each good is the amount, P, that the consumer pays, less the tax, 5: that is, P −5.
Mathematically, this problem can be solved by replacing P by P −5 in the supply equation to get the
new supply equation
P −5 = 1/2QS + 25
that is,
P = 1/2QS + 30
The remaining calculations proceed as before. In equilibrium, QD = QS. Again setting this common
value to be Q gives
P = −2Q + 50
P = 1/2Q + 30
Hence
−2Q + 50 = 1/2Q + 30
which can be solved as before to give Q = 8. Substitution into either of the above equations gives P = 34.
(Check the details.)
Graphically, the introduction of tax shifts the supply curve upwards by 5 units. Obviously the
demand curve is unaltered. The dashed line in Figure 1.20 shows the new supply curve, from which 
the new equilibrium quantity is 8 and equilibrium price is 34. Note the effect that government taxation
has on the market equilibrium price. This has risen to $34 and so not all of the tax is passed on to the
consumer. The consumer pays an additional $4 per good. The remaining $1 of tax must, therefore, be
paid by the ﬁrm.
Linear Equations
56

1.3 • Supply and demand analysis
57
Practice Problem
3 The demand and supply functions of a good are given by
P = −4QD + 120
P = 1/3QS + 29
where P, QD and QS denote the price, quantity demanded and quantity supplied respectively.
(a) Calculate the equilibrium price and quantity.
(b) Calculate the new equilibrium price and quantity after the imposition of a fixed tax of $13 per
good. Who pays the tax?
Example
The demand and supply functions of a good are given by
P = −1/2Q D + 20
P = 1/3(QS + 10)
The government imposes a ﬁxed tax, $α, on each good. Determine the equilibrium price and quantity in
the case when
(a) α = 0
(b) α = 5
(c) α = 10
(d) α = 2.50
In each case, calculate the tax paid by the consumer and comment on these values.
Solution
(a) In the case when α = 0, there is no tax and the demand and supply functions are as given above. In equi-
librium, Q D = QS, so by writing this value as Q, we can ﬁnd the equilibrium position by solving the
simultaneous equations
P = −1/2Q + 20
P = 1/3(Q + 10)
In Excel, we ﬁrst set up a table of values for Q. In Figure 1.21 (overleaf), the label Q has been put in
cell A1, and values from 0 to 40 (going up in steps of 10) occupy cells A2 to A6. At this stage, we need
to enter a formula for calculating the corresponding values of P using each of the equations in turn. As
the ﬁrst value of Q is in cell A2, we type
=−A2/2 + 20
in cell B2 for the demand function, and
=1/3*(A2 + 10)
in cell C2 for the supply function. By clicking and dragging down the columns, Excel will generate cor-
responding values for demand and supply.
EXCEL


You will ﬁnd that the values in the third column look very unfriendly to start with, as they have lots
of ﬁgures after the decimal point. However, these can be removed by highlighting these numbers, and
clicking on the Decrease Decimal icon, which can be found on the toolbar:
This has the effect of reducing the number of decimal places by rounding. Each time you click the icon,
another decimal place is removed. As we are dealing with money, we round to 2 decimal places.
Finally, we highlight the contents of the ﬁrst three columns and use Chart Wizard to create a diagram
showing the demand and supply functions, as shown in Figure 1.21.
From the graph, it can be seen that the lines cross when Q = 20 and P = 10, which gives us the equi-
librium position. This can also be seen by looking at the fourth row of the table.
(b) If the government imposes a tax of $5 per item, the company producing the goods now receives $5 less
per item sold. The supply equation now becomes
P −5 = 1/3(QS + 10)
so that
P = 1/3(QS + 10) + 5 (add 5 to both sides)
The demand function remains unchanged. We can extend our spreadsheet from part (a) to include an
extra column for this amended supply function, and we can then plot this extra line on the same graph.
This can be done by typing
=1/3*(A2+10)+5
in cell D2, and dragging down to D6.
Linear Equations
58
Figure 1.21

It is possible to alter the type of line drawn by the Chart Wizard by clicking on the line you wish to
change. This should highlight the points that were plotted. Select Format from the menu bar, and then
click on Data Series, Patterns and ﬁnally scroll through the styles of lines available and select the one
required. Figure 1.22 shows the new spreadsheet.
Notice that the effect of the tax is to move the supply line up by 5, and the position of equilibrium
has moved to (14, 13). This means that the price has increased from $10 to $13, with the consumer pay-
ing an additional $3 in tax. The remaining $2 is therefore paid by the company.
(c) The calculations in (b) can obviously be repeated by editing the formula for the supply equation in cell
D2 to
=1/3*(A2+10)+10
The equilibrium quantity and price are now
Q = 8
and
P = 16
so the consumer pays $6 of this tax.
(d) Changing D2 to
=1/3*(A2+10)+2.5
gives equilibrium values
Q = 17
and
P = 11.5
so the consumer pays $1.50 of the tax.
Notice that, as expected, the consumer pays increasing amounts of tax as the value of α increases.
More signiﬁcantly, notice that the fraction of the tax paid by the consumer is the same in each case. For
example, in part (c), the consumer pays $6 of the $10 tax, which is 3/5 of the tax. You might like to check
that in cases (b) and (d) the tax is also split in the ratio of 3:2. We shall investigate this further in 
Practice Problem 16 at the end of this section.
1.3 • Supply and demand analysis
59
Figure 1.22

We conclude this section by considering a more realistic model of supply and demand, 
taking into account substitutable and complementary goods. Let us suppose that there are 
two goods in related markets, which we call good 1 and good 2. The demand for either good
depends on the prices of both good 1 and good 2. If the corresponding demand functions are
linear then
QD1 = a1 + b1P1 + c1P2
QD2 = a2 + b2P1 + c2P2
where Pi and QDi denote the price and demand for the ith good and ai, bi, ci are parameters. For
the ﬁrst equation, a1 > 0 because there is a positive demand when the prices of both goods are
zero. Also, b1 < 0 because the demand of a good falls as its price rises. The sign of c1 depends
on the nature of the goods. If the goods are substitutable then an increase in the price of good 2
would mean that consumers would switch from good 2 to good 1, causing QD1 to increase.
Substitutable goods are therefore characterized by a positive value of c1. On the other hand, 
if the goods are complementary then a rise in the price of either good would see the demand
fall, so c1 is negative. Similar results apply to the signs of a2, b2 and c2. The calculation of the 
equilibrium price and quantity in a two-commodity market model is demonstrated in the 
following example.
Linear Equations
60
Example
The demand and supply functions for two interdependent commodities are given by
QD1 = 10 −2P1 + P2
QD2 = 5 + 2P1 −2P2
QS1 = −3 + 2P1
QS2 = −2 + 3P2
where QDi, QSi and Pi denote the quantity demanded, quantity supplied and price of good i respectively.
Determine the equilibrium price and quantity for this two-commodity model.
Solution
In equilibrium, we know that the quantity supplied is equal to the quantity demanded for each good, so that
QD1 = QS1
and
QD2 = QS2
Let us write these respective common values as Q1 and Q2. The demand and supply equations for good 1
then become
Q1 = 10 −2P1 + P2
Q1 = −3 + 2P1
Hence
10 −2P1 + P2 = −3 + 2P1
since both sides are equal to Q1. It makes sense to tidy this equation up a bit by collecting all of the
unknowns on the left-hand side and putting the constant terms on to the right-hand side:
10 −4P1 + P2 = −3
(subtract 2P1 from both sides)
−4P1 + P2 = −13
(subtract 10 from both sides)

We can perform a similar process for good 2. The demand and supply equations become
Q2 =
5 + 2P1 −2P2
Q2 = −2 + 3P2
because QD2 = QS2 = Q2 in equilibrium. Hence
5 + 2P1 −2P2 = −2 + 3P2
5 + 2P1 −5P2 = −2
(subtract 3P2 from both sides)
2P1 −5P2 = −7
(subtract 5 from both sides)
We have therefore shown that the equilibrium prices, P1 and P2, satisfy the simultaneous linear equations
−4P1 + P2 = −13
(1)
2P1 −5P2 = −7
(2)
which can be solved by elimination. Following the steps described in Section 1.2 we proceed as follows.
Step 1
Double equation (2) and add to equation (1) to get
−4P1 +
P2 = −13
4P1 −10P2 = −14 +
−9P2 = −27
(3)
Step 2
Divide both sides of equation (3) by −9 to get P2 = 3.
Step 3
If this is substituted into equation (1) then
−4P1 + 3 = −13
−4P1
= −16
(subtract 3 from both sides)
P1
= 4
(divide both sides by −4)
Step 4
As a check, equation (2) gives
2(4) −5(3) = −7
✓
Hence P1 = 4 and P2 = 3.
Finally, the equilibrium quantities can be deduced by substituting these values back into the original sup-
ply equations. For good 1,
Q1 = −3 + 2P1 = −3 + 2(4) = 5
For good 2,
Q2 = −2 + 3P2 = −2 + 3(3) = 7
As a check, the demand equations also give
Q1 = 10 −2P1 + P2 = 10 −2(4) + 3 = 5
✓
Q2 = 5 + 2P1 −2P2 = 5 + 2(4) −2(3) = 7
✓
1.3 • Supply and demand analysis
61

For a two-commodity market the equilibrium prices and quantities can be found by solving
a system of two simultaneous equations. Exactly the same procedure can be applied to a three-
commodity market, which requires the solution of a system of three simultaneous equations.
Linear Equations
62
Practice Problem
4 The demand and supply functions for two interdependent commodities are given by
QD1 = 40 −5P1 −P2
QD2 = 50 −2P1 −4P2
QS1 = −3 + 4P1
QS2 = −7 + 3P2
where QDi, QSi and Pi denote the quantity demanded, quantity supplied and price of good i respec-
tively. Determine the equilibrium price and quantity for this two-commodity model. Are these goods
substitutable or complementary?
Complementary goods
A pair of goods consumed together. As the price of either goes up,
the demand for both goods goes down.
Decreasing function
A function, y = f(x), in which y decreases as x increases.
Demand function
A relationship between the quantity demanded and various factors that
affect demand, including price.
Dependent variable
A variable whose value is determined by that taken by the independ-
ent variables; in y = f(x), the dependent variable is y.
Endogenous variable
A variable whose value is determined within a model.
Equilibrium
This state occurs when quantity supplied and quantity demanded are equal.
Exogenous variable
A variable whose value is determined outside a model.
Function
A rule that assigns to each incoming number, x, a uniquely deﬁned outgoing
number, y.
Increasing function
A function, y = f(x), in which y increases as x increases.
Independent variable
A variable whose value determines that of the dependent variable;
in y = f(x), the independent variable is x.
Key Terms
Advice
An example of a three-commodity model can be found in Practice Problem 13. Alternative 
methods and further examples are described in Chapter 7. In general, with n goods it is
necessary to solve n equations in n unknowns and, as pointed out in Section 1.2, this is
best done using a computer package whenever n is large.

1.3 • Supply and demand analysis
63
Inferior good
A good whose demand decreases as income increases.
Inverse function
A function, written f −1, which reverses the effect of a given function, f, so
that x = f −1(y) when y = f(x).
Modelling
The creation of piece of mathematical theory which represents (a simpliﬁcation
of) some aspect of practical economics.
Parameter
A constant whose value affects the speciﬁc values but not the general form of a
mathematical expression such as the constants a, b and c in ax2 + bx + c.
Substitutable goods
A pair of goods that are alternatives to each other. As the price of one
of them goes up, the demand for the other rises.
Superior good
A good whose demand increases as income increases.
Supply function
A relationship between the quantity supplied and various factors that
affect supply, including price.
Practice Problems
5 If f(x) = 3x + 15 and g(x) = 1/3x −5, evaluate
(a) f(2)
(b) f(10)
(c) f(0)
(d) g(21)
(e) g(45)
(f) g(15)
What word describes the relationship between f and g?
6 Sketch a graph of the supply function
P = 1/3Q + 7
Hence, or otherwise, determine the value of
(a) P when Q = 12
(b) Q when P = 10
(c) Q when P = 4
7 Describe the effect on the demand curve due to an increase in
(a) the price of substitutable goods, PS
(b) the price of complementary goods, PC
(c) advertising expenditure, A
8 The demand function of a good is
Q = 100 −P + 2Y + 1/2A
where Q, P, Y and A denote quantity demanded, price, income and advertising expenditure 
respectively.
(a) Calculate the demand when P = 10, Y = 40 and A = 6. Assuming that price and income are fixed,
calculate the additional advertising expenditure needed to raise demand to 179 units.
(b) Is this good inferior or superior?


9 The demand, Q, for a certain good depends on its own price, P, and the price of an alternative good,
PA, according to
Q = 30 −3P + PA
(a) Find Q if P = 4 and PA = 5.
(b) Is the alternative good substitutable or complementary? Give a reason for your answer.
(c) Determine the value of P if Q = 23 and PA = 11.
10 The demand and supply functions of a good are given by
P = −5QD + 80
P = 2QS + 10
where P, QD and QS denote price, quantity demanded and quantity supplied respectively.
(1) Find the equilibrium price and quantity
(a) graphically
(b) algebraically
(2) If the government deducts, as tax, 15% of the market price of each good, determine the new
equilibrium price and quantity.
11 The supply and demand equations of a good are given by
P = QS + 8
P = −3QD + 80
where P, QS and QD denote price, quantity supplied and quantity demanded respectively.
(a) Find the equilibrium price and quantity if the government imposes a fixed tax of £36 on each
good.
(b) Find the corresponding value of the government’s tax revenue.
12 The demand and supply functions for two interdependent commodities are given by
QD1 = 100 −2P1 + P2
QD2 = 5 + 2P1 −3P2
QS1 = −10 + P1
QS2 = −5 + 6P2
where QDi, QSi and Pi denote the quantity demanded, quantity supplied and price of good i respec-
tively. Determine the equilibrium price and quantity for this two-commodity model.
13 The demand and supply functions for three interdependent commodities are
QD1 = 15 −P1 + 2P2 + P3
QD2 = 9 + P1 −P2 −P3
QD3 = 8 + 2P1 −P2 −4P3
QS1 = −7 + P1
QS2 = −4 + 4P2
QS3 = −5 + 2P3
where QDi, QSi and Pi denote the quantity demanded, quantity supplied and price of good i respec-
tively. Determine the equilibrium price and quantity for this three-commodity model.
Linear Equations
64

14 If the demand function of a good is
2P + 3QD = 60
where P and QD denote price and quantity demanded respectively, find the largest and smallest 
values of P for which this function is economically meaningful.
15 (Excel) The demand function of a good is given by
Q = 100 −2P + Y −3PA
where Q, P, Y and PA denote quantity, price, income and price of an alternative good, respectively.
For each of the following cases, tabulate values of Q, when P is 0, 20, 40, 60. Hence sketch all three
demand curves on the same diagram.
(a) Y = 20, PA = 10
(b) Y = 50, PA = 10
(c) Y = 20, PA = 16
Is the good inferior or superior?
Is the alternative good substitutable or complementary?
Give reasons for your answers.
16 (Excel) The supply and demand functions of a good are given by
P = −QD + 240
P = 60 + 2QS
where P, QD and QS denote price, quantity demanded and quantity supplied, respectively. Sketch
graphs of both functions on the same diagram, on the range 0 ≤Q ≤80 and hence find the equilib-
rium price. The government now imposes a fixed tax, $60, on each good. Draw the new supply equa-
tion on the same diagram and hence find the new equilibrium price. What fraction of the $60 tax is
paid by the consumer?
Consider replacing the demand function by the more general equation
P = −kQD + 240
By repeating the calculations above, find the fraction of the tax paid by the consumer for the case
when k is
(a) 2
(b) 3
(c) 4
State the connection between this fraction and the value of k. Use this connection to predict how
much tax is paid by the consumer when k = 6.
1.3 • Supply and demand analysis
65

section 1.4
Algebra
Objectives
At the end of this section you should be able to:
 Recognize the symbols <, >, ≤and ≥.
 Manipulate inequalities.
 Multiply out brackets.
 Add, subtract, multiply and divide numerical fractions.
 Add, subtract, multiply and divide algebraic fractions.
ALGEBRA IS BORING
There is no getting away from the fact that algebra is boring. Doubtless there are a few enthu-
siasts who get a kick out of algebraic manipulation, but economics students are rarely to 
be found in this category! Indeed, the mere mention of the word ‘algebra’ is enough to strike
fear into the heart of many a ﬁrst-year student. Unfortunately, you cannot get very far with
mathematics unless you have completely mastered this topic. An apposite analogy is the game
of chess. Before you can begin to play a game of chess it is necessary to go through the tedium
of learning the moves of individual pieces. In the same way it is essential that you learn the rules
of algebra before you can enjoy the ‘game’ of mathematics. Of course, just because you know
the rules does not mean that you are going to excel at the game and no one is expecting you to
become a grandmaster of mathematics. However, you should at least be able to follow the
mathematics presented in economics books and journals, as well as being able to solve simple
problems for yourself.

You might like to work through these subsections on separate occasions to enable the ideas 
to sink in. To rush this topic now is likely to give you only a half-baked understanding, which
will result in hours of frustration when you study the later chapters of this book.
1.4.1 Inequalities
So far we have repeatedly made use of a picture of the x axis:
Now, although only whole numbers are marked on this diagram, it is implicitly assumed that
it can also be used to indicate fractions and decimal numbers as well. To each point on the line
there corresponds a particular number. Conversely, every number can be represented by a 
particular point on the line. For this reason, the line is sometimes referred to as a number line.
For example, −21/2 lies exactly halfway between −3 and −2. Similarly, 47/8 lies 7/8ths of the way
between 4 and 5. In theory, we can even ﬁnd a point on the line corresponding to a number
such as √2, although it may be difﬁcult to sketch such a point accurately in practice. My calcu-
lator gives the value of √2 to be 1.414 213 56 to eight decimal places. This number therefore lies
just less than halfway between 1 and 2.
A number line can be used to decide whether or not one number is greater or less than
another number. We say that a number a is greater than a number b if a lies to the right of b
on the line and write this as
a > b
(In Section 1.3 the notation a > 0 was used to indicate that a is positive: that is, a is greater than
zero.) Likewise, we say that a is less than b if a lies to the left of b and write this as
a < b
From the diagram we see that
−2 > −4
1.4 • Algebra
67
Advice
In the introduction to this book you were advised to attempt all questions in the text. This
applies particularly to the material in this section. This section is likely to be heavy going if
you have not studied mathematics for some time. To make life easy for you it is split up
into four subsections:
●Inequalities
●Brackets
●Fractions
●Equations

because −2 lies to the right of −4. This is equivalent to the statement
−4 < −2
Similarly,
0
> −1
(or equivalently −1 < 0)
2
> −21/2
(or equivalently −21/2 < 2)
47/8 > √2
(or equivalently √2 < 47/8)
There are occasions when we would like the letters a and b to stand for mathematical expres-
sions rather than actual numbers. In this situation we sometimes use the symbols ≥and ≤to
mean ‘greater than or equal to’ and ‘less than or equal to’ respectively.
We have already seen that we can manipulate equations in any way we like, provided that
we do the same thing to both sides. An obvious question to ask is whether this rule extends to
inequalities. To investigate this, consider the following example.
Linear Equations
68
Example
Starting with the true statement
1 < 3
decide which of the following are valid operations when performed on both sides:
(a) add 4
(b) add −5
(c) multiply by 2
(d) multiply by −6
Solution
(a) If we add 4 to both sides of the inequality
1 < 3
(1)
then we obtain
5 < 7
which is a true statement.
(b) If we add −5 to both sides of inequality (1) then we obtain
−4 < −2
which is also true.
(c) If we multiply both sides of inequality (1) by 2 then we obtain
2 < 6
which is again true.
(d) So far so good, but if we now multiply both sides of inequality (1) by −6 then we obtain
−6 < −18
which is false. In fact, quite the reverse is true, since −6 lies to the right of −18 on the number line and
so −6 is actually greater than −18. This indicates that the rule needs modifying before we can extend it
to inequalities and that we need to be careful when manipulating such things.

1.4 • Algebra
69
Practice Problem
1 Starting with the true statement
6 > 3
decide which of the following are valid operations when performed on both sides:
(a) add 6
(b) multiply by 2
(c) subtract 3
(d) add −3
(e) divide by 3
(f) multiply by −4
(g) multiply by −1
(h) divide by −3
(i)
add −10
Example
Simplify the inequality
2x + 3 < 4x + 7
Solution
The ﬁrst problem is to decide what is meant by the word ‘simplify’. At the moment there are x’s on both
sides of the inequality sign and it would obviously look neater if these were collected together. We do this
by subtracting 4x from both sides to get
−2x + 3 < 7
We can also put all of the constant terms on to the right-hand side by subtracting 3 from both sides to get
−2x < 4
This is certainly an improvement, but we can go further to make the inequality even more meaningful. We
may divide both sides by −2 to get
x > −2
Notice that the sense has been reversed at this stage because we have divided by a negative number. We have
therefore shown that any number x satisﬁes the original inequality provided that it lies to the right of the
number −2 on the number line.
These examples show that the usual rule does apply to inequalities with the important 
proviso that
if both sides are multiplied or divided by a negative 
number then the sense of the inequality is reversed
By this we mean that ‘>’ changes to ‘<’, ‘≤’ changes to ‘≥’ and so on.
www.ebook3000.com

1.4.2 Brackets
Brackets are used to avoid any misunderstanding about the way an expression is to be evalu-
ated. Suppose that a group of students is asked to ﬁnd the value of
1 −3 + 5
One suspects that the majority of students would say that the answer is 3, which is found by
ﬁrst subtracting 3 from 1 and then adding 5. However, there is a fair chance that some might
produce −7, thinking that they should ﬁrst add 3 and 5 and then subtract the result from 1.
(There may be other students who obtain different values entirely, but we had better 
forget about them!) In a sense both answers are correct since, as it stands, the expression is
ambiguous. To overcome this, brackets are introduced, using the convention that things inside
brackets are evaluated ﬁrst. Hence we would either write
(1 −3) + 5
to indicate that subtraction is performed ﬁrst, or write
1 −(3 + 5)
to indicate that addition is performed ﬁrst. In fact, brackets have already been used in Section
1.1 in the context of multiplying negative numbers. For example, on page 18 we wrote
(−2) × (−4) × (−1) × 2 × (−1) × (−3)
which is much easier to interpret than its bracketless counterpart
−2 × −4 × −1 × 2 × −1 × −3
It is also conventional to suppress the multiplication sign when multiplying brackets together,
so the above product could be written as
(−2)(−4)(−1)(2)(−1)(−3)
Similarly, the multiplication sign is implied in
(5 −2)(7 + 1)
which is the product of 3 and 8.
Linear Equations
70
Advice
You should check your answer using a couple of test values. Substituting x = 1 (which lies to
the right of −2, so should work) into both sides of the original inequality 2x + 3 < 4x + 7
gives 5 < 11, which is true. On the other hand, substituting x = −3 (which lies to the left
of −2, so should fail) gives −3 < −5, which is false.
Of course, just checking a couple of numbers like this does not prove that the final
inequality is correct, but it should protect you against gross blunders.
Practice Problem
2 Simplify the inequalities
(a) 2x < 3x + 7
(b) 21x −19 ≥4x + 15

Incidentally, if you really are confronted with the calculation
1 −3 + 5
you should perform the subtraction ﬁrst. Of course, in BIDMAS (see page 10) the operations
of addition and subtraction have equal precedence. However, it is generally accepted that in
these circumstances you work from left to right, which in this case means working out 1 – 3
ﬁrst, before adding on the 5, to get the answer of 3.
1.4 • Algebra
71
Practice Problem
3 (1) Without using your calculator evaluate
(a) (1 −3) + 10
(b) 1 −(3 + 10)
(c) 2(3 + 4)
(d) 8 −7 + 3
(e) (15 −8)(2 + 6)
(f) ((2 −3) + 7) ÷ 6
(2) Confirm your answer to part (1) using a calculator.
Example
Evaluate
(a) (12 −8) −(6 −5)
(b) 12 −(8 −6) −5
(c) 12 −8 −6 −5
Solution
(a) (12 −8) −(6 −5) = 4 −1 = 3
(b) 12 −(8 −6) −5 = 12 −2 −5 = 10 −5 = 5
(c) 12 −8 −6 −5 = 4 −6 −5 = −2 −5 = −7
The following problem gives you an opportunity to try out these conventions for yourself
and to use the brackets facility on your calculator.
In mathematics it is necessary to handle expressions in which some of the terms involve let-
ters as well as numbers. It is useful to be able to take an expression containing brackets and to
rewrite it as an equivalent expression without brackets and vice versa. The process of removing
brackets is called ‘expanding the brackets’ or ‘multiplying out the brackets’. This is based on the
distributive law, which states that for any three numbers a, b and c
It is easy to verify this law in simple cases. For example, if a = 2, b = 3 and c = 4 then the left-
hand side is
2(3 + 4) = 2 × 7 = 14
a(b + c) = ab + ac

However,
ab = 2 × 3 = 6
and
ac = 2 × 4 = 8
and so the right-hand side is 6 + 8, which is also 14.
This law can be used when there are any number of terms inside the brackets. We have
a(b + c + d) = ab + ac + ad
a(b + c + d + e) = ab + ac + ad + ae
and so on.
It does not matter in which order two numbers are multiplied, so we also have
(b + c)a = ab + ac + ad
(b + c + d)a = ba + ca + da
(b + c + d + e)a = ba + ca + da + ea
Linear Equations
72
Example
Multiply out the brackets in
(a) x(x −2)
(b) 2(x + y −z) + 3(z + y)
(c) x + 3y −(2y + x)
Solution
(a) The use of the distributive law to multiply out x(x −2) is straightforward. This gives
x(x −2) = xx −x2
It is usual in mathematics to abbreviate xx to x2. It is also standard practice to put the numerical
coefﬁcient in front of the variable, so x2 is usually written 2x. Hence
x(x −2) = x2 −2x
(b) To expand
2(x + y −z) + 3(z + y)
we need to apply the distributive law twice. We have
2(x + y −z) = 2x + 2y −2z
3(z + y) 
= 3z + 3y
Adding together gives
2(x + y −z) + 3(z + y) = 2x + 2y −2z + 3z + 3y
We could stop at this point. Note, however, that some of the terms are similar. Towards the beginning
of the expression there is a term 2y, whereas at the end there is a like term 3y. Obviously these can be
collected together to make a total of 5y. A similar process can be applied to the terms involving z. The
expression simpliﬁes to
2x + 5y + z

(c) It may not be immediately apparent how to expand
x + 3y −(2y + x)
However, note that
−(2y + x)
is the same as
(−1)(2y + x)
which expands to give
(−1)(2y) + (−1)x = −2y −x
Hence
x + 3y −(2y + x) = x + 3y −2y −x = y
after collecting like terms.
1.4 • Algebra
73
Advice
In this example the solutions are written out in painstaking detail. This is done to show 
you precisely how the distributive law is applied. The solutions to all three parts could have
been written down in only one or two steps of working. You are, of course, at liberty to
compress the working in your own solutions, but please do not be tempted to overdo this.
You might want to check your answers at a later date and may find it difficult if you have
tried to be too clever.
Practice Problem
4 Multiply out the brackets, simplifying your answer as far as possible.
(a) (5 −2z)z
(b) 6(x −y) + 3(y −2x)
(c) x −y + z −(x2 + x −y)
We conclude our discussion of brackets by describing how to multiply two brackets
together. This is based on the result
(a + b)(c + d) = ac + ad + bc + bd
At ﬁrst sight this formula might appear to be totally unmemorable. In fact, all you have to do
is to multiply each term in the ﬁrst pair of brackets by each term in the second in all possible
combinations: that is,

This rule then extends to brackets with more than two terms. For example, to multiply out
(a + b)(c + d + e)
notice that the ﬁrst pair of brackets has two terms and the second has three terms. So, to form
each individual product, we can pick from one of two terms in the ﬁrst pair of brackets and
from one of three terms in the second. There are then six possibilities in total, giving
Linear Equations
74
Example
Multiply out the brackets
(a) (x + 1)(x + 2)
(b) (x + 5)(x −5)
(c) (2x −y)(x + y −6)
simplifying your answer as far as possible.
Solution
(a) (x + 1)(x + 2) = xx + x2 + 1x + (1)(2)
If we use the abbreviation x2 for xx and the convention that numerical coefﬁcients are placed in front
of the variable then this can be written as
x2 + 2x + x + 2
Finally, collecting like terms gives
x2 + 3x + 2
If you ﬁnd it difﬁcult to remember how to multiply out brackets, you might like to look at the ‘smiley face’
You get
left eyebrow = x × x = x2
right eyebrow = 1 × 2 = 2
nose = 1 × x = x
mouth = x × 2 = 2x
giving a total of x2 + 3x + 2.

(b)
More formally,
(x + 5)(x −5) = x2 −5x + 5x −25
= x2 −25
(c) (2x −y)(x + y −6) = 2xx + 2xy + 2x(−6) − yx −yy −y(−6)
= 2x2 + 2xy −12x −yx −y2 + 6y
It might seem that there are no like terms, but since it does not matter in which order two numbers are
multiplied, yx is the same as xy. The terms 2xy and −yx can therefore be combined to give
2xy −xy = xy
Hence the simpliﬁed expression is
2x2 + xy −12x −y2 + 6y
1.4 • Algebra
75
Practice Problem
5 Multiply out the brackets.
(a) (x + 3)(x −2)
(b) (x + y)(x −y)
(c) (x + y)(x + y)
(d) (5x + 2y)(x −y + 1)
Looking back at part (b) of the previous worked example, notice that
(x + 5)(x −5)
can be written as
x2 −52
Quite generally
(a + b)(a −b) = a2 −ab + ba −b2
= a2 −ab + ab −b2
= a2 −b2
The result
is called the difference of two squares formula. It provides a quick way of factorizing an
expression: that is, of producing an equivalent expression with brackets.
a2 −b2 = (a + b)(a −b)

Linear Equations
76
Example
Factorize the following expressions:
(a) x2 −16
(b) 9x2 −100
Solution
(a) Noting that
x2 −16 = x2 −42
we can use the difference of two squares formula to deduce that
x2 −16 = (x + 4)(x −4)
(b) Noting that
9x2 −100 = (3x)2 −(10)2
we can use the difference of two squares formula to deduce that
9x2 −100 = (3x + 10)(3x −10)
Practice Problem
6 Factorize the following expressions:
(a) x2 −64
(b) 4x2 −81
1.4.3 Fractions
For a numerical fraction such as
the number 7, on the top, is called the numerator and the number 8, on the bottom, is called the
denominator. In this book we are also interested in the case when the numerator and denom-
inator involve letters as well as numbers. These are referred to as algebraic fractions. For example,
and
are both algebraic fractions. The letters x, y and z are used to represent numbers, so the rules
for the manipulation of algebraic fractions are the same as those for ordinary numerical frac-
tions. The rules for multiplication and division are as follows.
to multiply fractions you multiply their 
corresponding numerators and denominators
2x2 −1
y + z
1
x2 −2
7
8

1.4 • Algebra
77
Example
Calculate
(a)
×
(b) 2 ×
(c)
÷
(d)
÷ 3
Solution
(a) The multiplication rule gives
×
=
=
We could leave the answer like this, although it can be simpliﬁed by dividing top and bottom by 2 to
get 5/6.
The two answers are equivalent. If a cake is cut into 6 pieces and you eat 5 of them then you eat just
as much as someone who cuts the cake into 12 pieces and eats 10 (although it might appear that you are
not such a glutton). It is also valid to ‘cancel’ by 2 at the very beginning: that is,
×
=
=
(b) The whole number 2 is equivalent to the fraction 2/1, so
2 ×
=
×
=
= 12
13
2 × 6
1 × 13
6
13
2
1
6
13
5
6
1 × 5
3 × 2
5
42
12
3
10
12
2 × 5
3 × 4
5
4
2
3
1
2
4
21
6
7
6
13
5
4
2
3

In symbols,
×
=
=
to divide by a fraction you turn it upside down and multiply
In symbols,
÷
=
×
= ad
bc
d
c
a
b
c
d
a
b
ac
bd
a × c
b × d
c
d
a
b

(c) To calculate
÷
the divisor is turned upside down to get 21/4 and then multiplied to get
÷
=
×
=
=
(d) We write 3 as 3/1, so
÷ 3 =
÷
=
×
= 1
6
1
3
1
2
3
1
1
2
1
2
9
2
3 × 3
1 × 2
213
42
36
17
4
21
6
7
4
21
6
7
Linear Equations
78
Example
Calculate
(a)
+
(b)
+
(c)
−
Solution
(a) The fractions 1/5 and 2/5 already have the same denominator, so to add them we just add their numer-
ators to get
+
=
=
(b) The fractions 1/4 and 2/5 have denominators 4 and 3. One number that is divisible by both 3 and 4 is 12,
so we choose this as the common denominator. Now 4 goes into 12 exactly 3 times, so
=
= 3
12
1 × 3
4 × 3
1
4
3
5
1 + 2
5
2
5
1
5
5
8
7
12
2
3
1
4
2
5
1
5
Practice Problem
7 (1) Without using a calculator evaluate
(a)
×
(b) 7 ×
(c)
÷
(d)
÷ 16
(2) Confirm your answer to part (1) using a calculator.
8
9
8
9
2
3
1
14
3
4
1
2
The rules for addition and subtraction are as follows:
to add (or subtract) two fractions you put them over a common 
denominator and add (or subtract) their numerators

and 3 goes into 12 exactly 4 times, so
=
=
Hence
+
=
+
=
=
(c) The fractions 7/12 and 5/8 have denominators 12 and 8. One number that is divisible by both 12 and 8 is
24, so we choose this as the common denominator. Now 12 goes into 24 exactly twice, so
=
=
and 8 goes into 24 exactly 3 times, so
=
=
Hence
−
=
−
= −
It is not essential that the lowest common denominator is used. Any number will do provided that it is
divisible by the two original denominators. If you are stuck then you could always multiply the original
two denominators together. In part (c) the denominators multiply to give 96, so this can be used
instead. Now
=
=
and
=
=
so
−
=
−
=
=
= −
as before.
1
24
−41
9624
56 −60
96
60
96
56
96
5
8
7
12
60
96
5 × 12
96
5
8
56
96
7 × 8
96
7
12
1
24
15
24
14
24
5
8
7
12
15
24
5 × 3
24
5
8
14
24
7 × 2
24
7
12
11
12
3 + 8
12
8
12
3
12
2
3
1
4
8
12
2 × 4
3 × 4
2
3
1.4 • Algebra
79
Practice Problem
8 (1) Without using a calculator evaluate
(a)
−
(b)
+
(c)
−
(2) Confirm your answer to part (1) using a calculator.
1
4
7
18
2
5
1
3
1
7
3
7
Provided that you can manipulate ordinary fractions, there is no reason why you should not
be able to manipulate algebraic fractions just as easily, since the rules are the same.

Linear Equations
80
Example
Find expressions for each of the following:
(a)
×
(b)
÷
(c)
+
(d)
−
Solution
(a) To multiply two fractions we multiply their corresponding numerators and denominators, so
×
=
=
(b) To divide by
we turn it upside down and multiply, so
÷
=
×
=
(c) The fractions
and
already have the same denominator, so to add them we just add their numerators to get
+
=
=
(d) The fractions
and
have denominators x + 2 and x + 1. An obvious common denominator is given by their product, 
(x + 2)(x + 1). Now x + 2 goes into (x + 2)(x + 1) exactly x + 1 times, so
=
x(x + 1)
(x + 2)(x + 1)
x
x + 2
1
x + 1
x
x + 2
2x −5
x2 + 2
x + 1 + x −6
x2 + 2
x −6
x2 + 2
x + 1
x2 + 2
x −6
x2 + 2
x + 1
x2 + 2
2
x
x −1
x
2
x −1
x
x −1
2
x −1
x
x −1
2
(x −1)(x + 4)
2x
(x −1)x(x + 4)
2
x(x + 4)
x
x −1
1
x + 1
x
x + 2
x −6
x2 + 2
x + 1
x2 + 2
x
x −1
2
x −1
2
x(x + 4)
x
x −1

Also x + 1 goes into (x + 2)(x + 1) exactly x + 2 times, so
=
Hence
−
=
−
=
It is worth multiplying out the brackets on the top to simplify: that is,
=
x2 −2
(x + 2)(x + 1)
x2 + x −x −2
(x + 2)(x + 1)
x(x + 1) −(x + 2)
(x + 2)(x + 1)
(x + 2)
(x + 2)(x + 1)
x(x + 1)
(x + 2)(x + 1)
1
x + 1
x
x + 2
x(x + 1)
(x + 2)(x + 1)
1
x + 1
1.4 • Algebra
81
Practice Problem
9 Find expressions for the following algebraic fractions, simplifying your answers as far as possible.
(a)
×
(b)
÷
(c)
+
(d)
−
1
x + 2
2
x + 1
1
x + 1
4
x + 1
x
x + 1
x2
x + 10
x −1
x + 2
5
x −1
1.4.4 Equations
In the course of working through the ﬁrst section of this chapter, you will have learnt how to
solve simple equations such as
3x + 1 = 13
Such problems are solved by ‘doing the same thing to both sides’. For this particular equation,
the steps would be
3x = 12
(subtract 1 from both sides)
x = 4
(divide both sides by 3)
We now show how to solve more complicated equations. The good news is that the basic
method is the same.
Example
Solve
(a) 6x + 1 = 10x −9
(b) 3(x −1) + 2(2x + 1) = 4
(c)
= 7
(d)
=
(e)
= 2
2x
x −6
7
2x + 1
9
x + 2
20
3x −1

Solution
(a) To solve
6x + 1 = 10x −9
the strategy is to collect terms involving x on one side of the equation, and to collect all of the number
terms on to the other side. It does not matter which way round this is done. In this particular case, 
there are more x’s on the right-hand side than there are on the left-hand side. Consequently, to 
avoid negative numbers, you may prefer to stack the x terms on the right-hand side. The details are as
follows:
1 = 4x −9
(subtract 6x from both sides)
10 = 4x
(add 9 to both sides)
= x
(divide both sides by 4)
Hence x = 5/2 = 21/2.
(b) The novel feature of the equation
3(x −1) + 2(2x + 1) = 4
is the presence of brackets. To solve it, we ﬁrst remove the brackets by multiplying out, and then collect
like terms:
3x −3 + 4x + 2 = 4
(multiply out the brackets)
7x −1 = 4
(collect like terms)
Note that this equation is now of the form that we know how to solve:
7x = 5
(add 1 to both sides)
x =
(divide both sides by 7)
(c) The novel feature of the equation
= 7
is the fact that it involves an algebraic fraction. This can easily be removed by multiplying both sides by
the bottom of the fraction:
× (3x −1) = 7(3x −1)
which cancels down to give
20 = 7(3x −1)
The remaining steps are similar to those in part (b):
20 = 21x −7
(multiply out the brackets)
27 = 21x
(add 7 to both sides)
= x (divide both sides by 21)
Hence x = 9/7 = 12/7.
27
21
20
3x −1
20
3x −1
5
7
10
4
Linear Equations
82

(d) The next equation,
=
looks particularly daunting since there are fractions on both sides. However, these are easily removed
by multiplying both sides by the denominators, in turn:
9 =
(multiply both sides by x + 2)
9(2x + 1) = 7(x + 2)
(multiply both sides by 2x + 1)
With practice you can do these two steps simultaneously and write this as the ﬁrst line of working. The
procedure of going straight from
=
to
9(2x + 1) = 7(x + 2)
is called ‘cross-multiplication’. In general, if
=
then
ad = bc
The remaining steps are similar to those used in the earlier parts of this example:
18x + 9 = 7x + 14
(multiply out the brackets)
11x + 9 = 14
(subtract 7x from both sides)
11x = 5
(subtract 9 from both sides)
x =
(divide both sides by 11)
(e) The left-hand side of the ﬁnal equation
= 2
is surrounded by a square root, which can easily be removed by squaring both sides to get
= 4
The remaining steps are ‘standard’:
2x = 4(x −6)
(multiply both sides by x −6)
2x = 4x −24
(multiply out the brackets)
−2x = −24
(subtract 4x from both sides)
x = 12
(divide both sides by −2)
2x
x −6
2x
x −6
5
11
c
d
a
b
7
2x + 1
9
x + 2
7(x + 2)
2x + 1
7
2x + 1
9
x + 2
1.4 • Algebra
83

Looking back over each part of the previous example, notice that there is a common strategy.
In each case, the aim is to convert the given equation into one of the form
ax + b = c
which is the sort of equation that we can easily solve. If the original equation contains brackets
then remove them by multiplying out. If the equation involves fractions then remove them by
cross-multiplying.
Linear Equations
84
Advice
If you have the time, it is always worth checking your answer by substituting your 
solution back into the original equation. For the last part of the above example, putting 
x = 12 into 
gives
=
= 4 = 2
✓
24
6
2 × 12
12 −6
2x
x −6
Practice Problem
10 Solve each of the following equations. Leave your answer as a fraction, if necessary.
(a) 4x + 5 = 5x −7
(b) 3(3 −2x) + 2(x −1) = 10
(c)
= 5
(d)
=
5
x −1
3
x
4
x −1
Algebraic fraction
Ratio of two expressions; p(x)/q(x) where p(x) and q(x) are algebraic
expressions such as ax2 + bx + c or dx + e.
Denominator
The number (or expression) on the bottom of a fraction.
Distributive law (for multiplication over addition)
The rule which states that 
a(b + c) = ab + ac, for any numbers, a, b and c.
Number line
An inﬁnite line on which the points represent real numbers by their (signed)
distance from the origin.
Numerator
The number (or expression) on the top of a fraction.
Key Terms
Practice Problems
11 Which of the following inequalities are true?
(a) −2 < 1
(b) −6 > −4
(c) 3 < 3
(d) 3 ≤3
(e) −21 ≥−22
(f) 4 < √25

12 Simplify the following inequalities:
(a) 2x > x + 1
(b) 7x + 3 ≤9 + 5x
(c) x −5 > 4x + 4
(d) x −1 < 2x −3
13 Without using a calculator work out
(a) (5 −2)2
(b) 52 −22
Is it true in general that (a −b)2 = a2 −b2?
14 Use your calculator to work out the following. Round your answer, if necessary, to 2 decimal places.
(a) 5.31 × 8.47 −1.012
(b) (8.34 + 2.27)/9.41
(c) 9.53 −3.21 + 4.02
(d) 2.41 × 0.09 −1.67 × 0.03
(e) 45.76 −(2.55 + 15.83)
(f) (3.45 −5.38)2
(g) 4.56(9.02 + 4.73)
(h) 6.85/(2.59 + 0.28)
15 Simplify the following expressions by collecting together like terms:
(a) 2x + 3y + 4x −y
(b) 2x2 −5x + 9x2 + 2x −3
(c) 5xy + 2x + 9yx
(d) 7xyz + 3yx −2zyx + yzx −xy
(e) 2(5a + b) −4b
(f) 5(x −4y) + 6(2x + 7y)
(g) 5 −3(p −2)
(h)
+
16 Multiply out the brackets.
(a) 7(x −y)
(b) (5x −2y)z
(c) y + 2z −2(x + 3y −z)
(d) (x −5)(x −2)
(e) x(x −y + 7)
(f) x(x + 1)(x + 2)
(g) (x −1)(x + 1 −y)
17 (1) Use the formula for the difference of two squares to factorize
(a) x2 −4
(b) x2 −y2
(c) 9x2 −100y2
(d) a2b2 −25
(2) Use the formula for the difference of two squares to evaluate the following without using a 
calculator:
(a) 50 5632 −49 4372
(b) 902 −89.992
(c) 7592 −5412
(d) 123 456 7892 −123 456 7882
18 (1) Without using your calculator evaluate
(a)
×
(b)
×
×
(c)
÷
(d)
×
÷
(e)
−
(f)
+
(g) 2
+ 1
(h) 5
−
+ 1
(i)
3
× 1
(j)
×
+
(k)
×
2
−1
(l)
3
÷ 2
÷
(2) Confirm your answer to part (1) using a calculator.
5
13
D
F
1
6
1
3
A
C
D
F
2
5
1
3
A
C
5
6
D
F
1
2
2
3
A
C
3
5
3
5
3
4
2
5
1
2
9
10
3
7
3
5
2
3
5
9
2
13
10
13
8
25
1
12
2
5
3
8
9
16
30
48
14
25
2
7
25
28
4
5
x −1
2
2x + 3
4
1.4 • Algebra
85


19 Find expressions for the following fractions:
(a)
×
(b)
÷
(c)
+
(d)
+
(e)
+
(f)
+
(g) x −
(h)
−
+
20 Solve the following equations:
(a) 5(2x + 1) = 3(x −2)
(b) 5(x + 2) + 4(2x −3) = 11
(c) 5(1 −x) = 4(10 + x)
(d) 3(3 −2x) −7(1 −x) = 10
(e) 9 −5(2x −1) = 6
(f)
= 2
(g)
=
(h)
+ 3 = 7
(i)
5 −
= 2
(j)
=
(k) √(2x −5) = 3
(l)
(x + 3)(x −1) = (x + 4)(x −3)
(m) (x + 2)2 + (2x −1)2 = 5x(x + 1)
(n)
=
+
(o)
= 3
(p)
−
= 1
4x
3
4
4
x
45
2x −1
1
2
x −4
6
2x + 7
3
2(x −1)
5
5(x −3)
2
x
3
x
2
3
5x + 4
2
x −1
3
2x + 1
3
x + 1
2
x
5
x(x + 1)
2
x + 1
5
x2
3
x
4
x + 1
3
x
x + 1
3
x
2
3
xy
2
xy
1
x + 1
1
x
x −2
x
x2 + 6x
x −2
Linear Equations
86

section 1.5
Transposition of formulae
Mathematical modelling involves the use of formulae to represent the relationship between
economic variables. In microeconomics we have already seen how useful supply and demand
formulae are. These provide a precise relationship between price and quantity. For example,
the connection between price, P, and quantity, Q, might be modelled by
P = −4Q + 100
Given any value of Q it is trivial to deduce the corresponding value of P by merely replacing the
symbol Q by a number. A value of Q = 2, say, gives
P = −4 × 2 + 100
= −8 + 100
= 92
On the other hand, given P, it is necessary to solve an equation to deduce Q. For example, when
P = 40, the equation is
−4Q + 100 = 40
which can be solved as follows:
−4Q = −60
(subtract 100 from both sides)
Q = 15
(divide both sides by −4)
Objectives
At the end of this section you should be able to:
 Manipulate formulae.
 Draw a ﬂow chart representing a formula.
 Use a reverse ﬂow chart to transpose a formula.
 Change the subject of a formula involving several letters.

This approach is reasonable when only one or two values of P are given. However, if we are
given many values of P, it is clearly tedious and inefﬁcient for us to solve the equation each time
to ﬁnd Q. The preferred approach is to transpose the formula for P. In other words, we re-
arrange the formula
P = an expression involving Q
into
Q = an expression involving P
Written this way round, the formula enables us to ﬁnd Q by replacing P by a number. For the
speciﬁc formula
−4Q + 100 = P
the steps are
−4Q = P −100
(subtract 100 from both sides)
Q =
(divide both sides by −4)
Notice that
=
−
= −1/4P + 25
so the rearranged formula simpliﬁes to
Q = −1/4P + 25
If we now wish to ﬁnd Q when P = 40, we immediately get
Q = −1/4 × 40 + 25
= −10 + 25
= 15
The important thing to notice about the algebra is that the individual steps are identical to
those used previously for solving the equation
−4Q + 100 = 40
i.e. the operations are again
‘subtract 100 from both sides’
followed by
‘divide both sides by −4’
100
−4
P
−4
P −100
−4
P −100
−4
Linear Equations
88
Example
Make x the subject of the formula
x −2 = y
1
7

Solution
If you needed to solve an equation such as x −2 = 4, say, you would ﬁrst add 2 to both sides and then 
multiply both sides by 7. Performing the same operations to the general equation
x −2 = y
gives
x = y + 2
(add 2 to both sides)
x = 7(y + 2)
(multiply both sides by 7)
If desired, you can multiply out the brackets to give the alternative version:
x = 7y + 14
1
7
1
7
1
7
1.5 • Transposition of formulae
89
Practice Problem
1 (a) Solve the equation
1/2Q + 13 = 17
State clearly exactly what operation you have performed to both sides at each stage of your 
solution.
(b) By performing the same operations as part (a), rearrange the formula
1/2Q + 13 = P
into the form
Q = an expression involving P
(c) By substituting P = 17 into the formula derived in part (b), check that this agrees with your answer
to part (a).
In general, there are two issues concerning formula transposition. Firstly, we need to decide
what to do to both sides of the given formula and the order in which they should be performed.
Secondly, we need to carry out these steps accurately. The ﬁrst of these is often the more
difﬁcult. However, there is a logical strategy that can be used to help. To illustrate this, consider
the task of making Q the subject of
P = 1/3Q + 5
that is, of rearranging this formula into the form
Q = an expression involving P
Imagine starting with a value of Q and using a calculator to work out P from
P = 1/3Q + 5
The diagram overleaf shows that two operations are required and indicates the order in which
they must be done. This diagram is called a ﬂow chart.

To go backwards from P to Q we need to undo these operations. Now the reverse of ‘divide by
3’ is ‘multiply by 3’ and the reverse of ‘add 5’ is ‘subtract 5’, so the operations needed to trans-
pose the formula are as follows:
This diagram is called a reverse ﬂow chart. The process is similar to that of unwrapping a 
parcel (or peeling an onion); you start by unwrapping the outer layer ﬁrst and work inwards.
If we now actually perform these steps in the order speciﬁed by the reverse ﬂow chart, we get
1/3Q + 5 = P
1/3Q
= P −5
(subtract 5 from both sides)
Q
= 3(P −5)
(multiply both sides by 3)
The rearranged formula can be simpliﬁed by multiplying out the brackets to give
Q = 3P −15
Incidentally, if you prefer, you can actually use the reverse ﬂow chart itself to perform the alge-
bra for you. All you have to do is to pass the letter P through the reverse ﬂow chart. Working
from right to left gives
Notice that by taking P as the input to the box ‘subtract 5’ gives the output P −5, and if the
whole of this is taken as the input to the box ‘multiply by 3’, the ﬁnal output is the answer, 
3(P −5). Hence
Q = 3(P −5)
Linear Equations
90
Example
Make x the subject of
(a) y =
(b) y =
Solution
(a) To go from x to y the operations are
so the steps needed to transpose the formula are
4
2x + 1
x
5

The algebraic details are as follows:
= y
= y2
(square both sides)
x = 5y2
(multiply both sides by 5)
Hence the transposed formula is
x = 5y2
Alternatively, if you prefer, the reverse ﬂow chart can be used directly to obtain
Hence
x = 5y2
(b) The forwards ﬂow chart is
so the reverse ﬂow chart is
The algebraic details are as follows:
= y
=
(divide both sides by 4)
2x + 1 =
(reciprocate both sides)
2x =
−1
(subtract 1 from both sides)
x =
−1
(divide both sides by 2)
which can be simpliﬁed, by multiplying out the brackets, to give
x =
−
Again, the reverse ﬂow chart can be used directly to obtain
1
2
2
y
D
F
4
y
A
C
1
2
4
y
4
y
y
4
1
2x + 1
4
2x + 1
x
5
x
5
1.5 • Transposition of formulae
91

The following example contains two difﬁcult instances of transposition. In both cases the
letter x appears more than once on the right-hand side. If this happens, the technique based on
ﬂow charts cannot be used. However, it may still be possible to perform the manipulation even
if some of the steps may not be immediately obvious.
Linear Equations
92
Example
Transpose the following equations to express x in terms of y:
(a) ax = bx + cy + d
(b) y =
Solution
(a) In the equation
ax = bx + cy + d
there are terms involving x on both sides and since we are hoping to rearrange this into the form
x = an expression involving y
it makes sense to collect the x’s on the left-hand side. To do this we subtract bx from both sides to get
ax −bx = cy + d
Notice that x is a common factor of the left-hand side, so the distributive law can be applied ‘in reverse’
to take the x outside the brackets: that is,
(a −b)x = cy + d
Finally, both sides are divided by a −b to get
x =
which is of the desired form.
(b) It is difﬁcult to see where to begin with the equation
y =
because there is an x in both the numerator and the denominator. Indeed, the thing that is preventing
us getting started is precisely the fact that the expression is a fraction. We can, however, remove the frac-
tion simply by multiplying both sides by the denominator to get
(x −2)y = x + 1
x + 1
x −2
cy + d
a −b
x + 1
x −2
Practice Problem
2 Use flow charts to make x the subject of the following formulae:
(a) y = 6x2
(b) y =
1
7x −1

and if we multiply out the brackets then
xy −2y = x + 1
We want to rearrange this into the form
x = an expression involving y
so we collect the x’s on the left-hand side and put everything else on to the right-hand side. To do this
we ﬁrst add 2y to both sides to get
xy = x + 1 + 2y
and then subtract x from both sides to get
xy −x = 1 + 2y
The distributive law can now be applied ‘in reverse’ to take out the common factor of x: that is,
(y −1)x = 1 + 2y
Finally, dividing through by y −1 gives
x = 1 + 2y
y −1
1.5 • Transposition of formulae
93
Advice
This example contains some of the hardest
algebraic manipulation seen so far in this
book. I hope that you managed to follow the
individual steps. However, it all might appear
as if we have ‘pulled rabbits out of hats’. 
You may feel that, if left on your own, you
are never going to be able to decide what 
to do at each stage. Unfortunately there is
no watertight strategy that always works,
although the following five-point plan is worth
considering if you get stuck. 
To transpose a given equation of the form
y = an expression involving x
into an equation of the form
x = an expression involving y
you proceed as follows:
Step 1
Remove fractions.
Step 2
Multiply out the brackets.
Step 3
Collect all of the x’s on to the left-hand side.
Step 4
Take out a factor of x.
Step 5
Divide by the coefficient of x.

Linear Equations
94
Example
Make x the subject of
y =
Solution
In this formula there is a square root symbol surrounding the right-hand side. This can be removed by
squaring both sides to get
y2 =
We now apply the ﬁve-step strategy:
Step 1
(cx + d)y2 = ax + b
Step 2
cxy2 + dy2 = ax + b
Step 3
cxy2 −ax = b −dy2
Step 4
(cy2 −a)x = b −dy2
Step 5
x = b −dy2
cy2 −a
ax + b
cx + d
ax + b
cx + d
Practice Problem
3 Transpose the following formulae to express x in terms of y:
(a) x −ay = cx + y
(b) y = x −2
x + 4
Flow chart
A diagram consisting of boxes of instructions indicating a sequence of 
operations and their order.
Reverse ﬂow chart
A ﬂow chart indicating the inverse of the original sequence of 
operations in reverse order.
Transpose a formula
The rearrangement of a formula to make one of the other letters the
subject.
Key Terms
You might find it helpful to look back at the previous example in the light of this strategy.
In part (b) it is easy to identify each of the five steps. Part (a) also used this strategy, 
starting with the third step.

1.5 • Transposition of formulae
95
Practice Problems
4 Make Q the subject of
P = 2Q + 8
Hence find the value of Q when P = 52.
5 Write down the formula representing each of the following flow charts
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
6 Draw flow charts for each of the following formulae:
(a) y = 5x + 3
(b) y = 5(x + 3)
(c) y = 4x2 −6
(d) y =
7 Make x the subject of each of the following formulae:
(a) y = 9x −6
(b) y = (x + 4)/3
(c) y =
(d) y =
+ 8
(e) y =
(f) y =
8 Transpose the formulae:
(a) Q = aP + b to express P in terms of Q
(b) Y = aY + b + I to express Y in terms of I
(c) Q =
to express P in terms of Q
(d) V =
to express t in terms of V
9 Make x the subject of the following formulae:
(a)
+ b =
(b) a −x =
(c) e +
x + f = g
(d) a
=
(e)
=
(f)
= b
a
x + a
x −b
1
m
x −m
n
a2
b
D
F
x −n
m
A
C
b + x
a
c
x
a
x
5t + 1
t −1
1
aP + b
4
3x −7
1
x + 2
x
5
x
2
4
x2 + 8

section 1.6
National income
determination
Macroeconomics is concerned with the analysis of economic theory and policy at a national
level. In this section we focus on one particular aspect known as national income deter-
mination. We describe how to set up simple models of the national economy which enable
equilibrium levels of income to be calculated. Initially we assume that the economy is divided
into two sectors, households and ﬁrms. Firms use resources such as land, capital, labour and raw
materials to produce goods and services. These resources are known as factors of production
and are taken to belong to households. National income represents the ﬂow of income from
ﬁrms to households given as payment for these factors. Households can then spend this money
in one of two ways. Income can be used for the consumption of goods produced by ﬁrms or 
it can be put into savings. Consumption, C, and savings, S, are therefore functions of income,
Y: that is,
C = f(Y)
S = g(Y)
Objectives
At the end of this section you should be able to:
 Identify and sketch linear consumption functions.
 Identify and sketch linear savings functions.
 Set up simple macroeconomic models.
 Calculate equilibrium national income.
 Analyse IS and LM schedules.

1.6 • National income determination
97
for some appropriate consumption function, f, and savings function, g. Moreover, C and S are
normally expected to increase as income rises, so f and g are both increasing functions.
We begin by analysing the consumption function. As usual we need to quantify the precise
relationship between C and Y. If this relationship is linear then a graph of a typical consump-
tion function is shown in Figure 1.23. It is clear from this graph that if
C = aY + b
then a > 0 and b > 0. The intercept b is the level of consumption when there is no income (that
is, when Y = 0) and is known as autonomous consumption. The slope, a, is the change in C
brought about by a 1 unit increase in Y and is known as the marginal propensity to consume
(MPC). As previously noted, income is used up in consumption and savings so that
Y = C + S
It follows that only a proportion of the 1 unit increase in income is consumed; the rest goes into
savings. Hence the slope, a, is generally smaller than 1: that is, a < 1. It is standard practice in
mathematics to collapse the two separate inequalities a > 0 and a < 1 into the single inequality
0 < a < 1
The relation
Y = C + S
enables the precise form of the savings function to be determined from any given consumption
function. This is illustrated in the following example.
Figure 1.23
Example
Sketch a graph of the consumption function
C = 0.6Y + 10
Determine the corresponding savings function and sketch its graph.
Solution
The graph of the consumption function
C = 0.6Y + 10


Linear Equations
98
has intercept 10 and slope 0.6. It passes through (0, 10). For a second point, let us choose Y = 40, which gives
C = 34. Hence the line also passes through (40, 34). The consumption function is sketched in Figure 1.24.
To ﬁnd the savings function we use the relation
Y = C + S
which gives
S = Y −C
(subtract C from both sides)
= Y −(0.6Y + 10)
(substitute C)
= Y −0.6Y −10
(multiply out the brackets)
= 0.4Y −10
(collect terms)
The savings function is also linear. Its graph has intercept −10 and slope 0.4. This is sketched in Figure 1.25
using the fact that it passes through (0, −10) and (25, 0).
Figure 1.24
Figure 1.25
Practice Problem
1 Determine the savings function that corresponds to the consumption function
C = 0.8Y + 25

1.6 • National income determination
99
For the general consumption function
C = aY + b
we have
S = Y −C
= Y −(aY + b)
(substitute C)
= Y −aY −b
(multiply out the brackets)
= (1 −a)Y −b
(take out a common factor of Y)
The slope of the savings function is called the marginal propensity to save (MPS) and is given
by 1 −a: that is,
MPS = 1 −a = 1 −MPC
Moreover, since a < 1 we see that the slope, 1 −a, is positive. Figure 1.26 shows the graph of
this savings function. One interesting feature, which contrasts with other economic functions
considered so far, is that it is allowed to take negative values. In particular, note that
autonomous savings (that is, the value of S when Y = 0) are equal to −b, which is negative
because b > 0. This is to be expected because whenever consumption exceeds income, house-
holds must ﬁnance the excess expenditure by withdrawing savings.
Figure 1.26
Advice
The result, MPC + MPS = 1, is always true, even if the consumption function is non-linear.
A proof of this generalization can be found on page 274.
The simplest model of the national economy is illustrated in Figure 1.27, which shows the
circular ﬂow of income and expenditure. This is fairly crude, since it fails to take into account
government activity or foreign trade. In this diagram investment, I, is an injection into the cir-
cular ﬂow in the form of spending on capital goods.

Linear Equations
100
Let us examine this more closely and represent the diagrammatic information in symbols.
Consider ﬁrst the box labelled ‘Households’. The ﬂow of money entering this box is Y and the
ﬂow leaving it is C + S. Hence we have the familiar relation
Y = C + S
For the box labelled ‘Firms’ the ﬂow entering it is C + I and the ﬂow leaving it is Y, so
Y = C + I
Suppose that the level of investment that ﬁrms plan to inject into the economy is known to be
some ﬁxed value, I*. If the economy is in equilibrium, the ﬂow of income and expenditure 
balance so that
Y = C + I*
From the assumption that the consumption function is
C = aY + b
for given values of a and b these two equations represent a pair of simultaneous equations for
the two unknowns Y and C. In these circumstances C and Y can be regarded as endogenous
variables, since their precise values are determined within the model, whereas I* is ﬁxed out-
side the model and is exogenous.
Figure 1.27

1.6 • National income determination
101
To make the model more realistic let us now include government expenditure, G, and 
taxation, T, in the model. The injections box in Figure 1.27 now includes government expendi-
ture in addition to investment, so
Example
Find the equilibrium level of income and consumption if the consumption function is
C = 0.6Y + 10
and planned investment I = 12.
Solution
We know that
Y = C + I
(from theory)
C = 0.6Y + 10
(given in problem)
I = 12
(given in problem)
If the value of I is substituted into the ﬁrst equation then
Y = C + 12
The expression for C can also be substituted to give
Y = 0.6Y + 10 + 12
Y = 0.6Y + 22
0.4Y = 22
(subtract 0.6Y from both sides)
Y = 55
(divide both sides by 0.4)
The corresponding value of C can be deduced by putting this level of income into the consumption func-
tion to get
C = 0.6(55) + 10 = 43
The equilibrium income can also be found graphically by plotting expenditure against income. In this
example the aggregate expenditure, C + I, is given by 0.6Y + 22. This is sketched in Figure 1.28 using the fact
that it passes through (0, 22) and (80, 70). Also sketched is the ‘45° line’, so called because it makes an angle
of 45° with the horizontal. This line passes through the points (0, 0), (1, 1), . . . , (50, 50) and so on. In other
words, at any point on this line expenditure and income are in balance. The equilibrium income can there-
fore be found by inspecting the point of intersection of this line and the aggregate expenditure line, C + I.
From Figure 1.28 this occurs when Y = 55, which is in agreement with the calculated value.
Practice Problem
2 Find the equilibrium level of income if the consumption function is
C = 0.8Y + 25
and planned investment I = 17. Calculate the new equilibrium income if planned investment rises by 
1 unit.

Linear Equations
102
Y = C + I + G
We assume that planned government expenditure and planned investment are autonomous
with ﬁxed values G* and I* respectively, so that in equilibrium
Y = C + I* + G*
The withdrawals box in Figure 1.27 now includes taxation. This means that the income that
households have to spend on consumer goods is no longer Y but rather Y −T (income less tax),
which is called disposable income, Yd. Hence
C = aYd + b
with
Yd = Y −T
In practice, the tax will either be autonomous (T = T* for some lump sum T*) or be a propor-
tion of national income (T = tY for some proportion t), or a combination of both (T = tY + T*).
Figure 1.28
Example
Given that
G = 20
I = 35
C = 0.9Yd + 70
T = 0.2Y + 25
calculate the equilibrium level of national income.

1.6 • National income determination
103
Solution
At ﬁrst sight this problem looks rather forbidding, particularly since there are so many variables. However,
all we have to do is to write down the relevant equations and to substitute systematically one equation into
another until only Y is left.
We know that
Y = C + I + G
(from theory)
(1)
G = 20
(given in problem)
(2)
I = 35
(given in problem)
(3)
C = 0.9Yd + 70
(given in problem)
(4)
T = 0.2Y + 25
(given in problem)
(5)
Yd = Y −T
(from theory)
(6)
This represents a system of six equations in six unknowns. The obvious thing to do is to put the ﬁxed 
values of G and I into equation (1) to get
Y = C + 35 + 20 = C + 55
(7)
This has at least removed G and I, so there are only three more variables (C, Yd and T) left to eliminate. We
can remove T by substituting equation (5) into (6) to get
Yd = Y −(0.2Y + 25)
= Y −0.2Y −25
= 0.8Y −25
(8)
and then remove Yd by substituting equation (8) into (4) to get
C = 0.9(0.8Y −25) + 70
= 0.72Y −22.5 + 70
= 0.72Y + 47.5
(9)
We can eliminate C by substituting equation (9) into (7) to get
Y = C + 55
= 0.72Y + 47.5 + 55
= 0.72Y + 102.5
Finally, solving for Y gives
0.28Y = 102.5
(subtract 0.72Y from both sides)
Y = 366
(divide both sides by 0.28)
Practice Problem
3 Given that
G = 40
I = 55
C = 0.8Yd + 25
T = 0.1Y + 10
calculate the equilibrium level of national income.

Linear Equations
104
To conclude this section we return to the simple two-sector model:
Y = C + I
C = aY + b
Previously, the investment, I, was taken to be constant. It is more realistic to assume that
planned investment depends on the rate of interest, r. As the interest rate rises, so investment
falls and we have a relationship
I = cr + d
where c < 0 and d > 0. Unfortunately, this model consists of three equations in the four
unknowns Y, C, I and r, so we cannot expect it to determine national income uniquely. The
best we can do is to eliminate C and I, say, and to set up an equation relating Y and r. This is
most easily understood by an example. Suppose that
C = 0.8Y + 100
I = −20r + 1000
We know that the commodity market is in equilibrium when
Y = C + I
Substitution of the given expressions for C and I into this equation gives
Y = (0.8Y + 100) + (−20r + 1000)
= 0.8Y −20r + 1100
which rearranges as
0.2Y + 20r = 1100
This equation, relating national income, Y, and interest rate, r, is called the IS schedule.
We obviously need some additional information before we can pin down the values of Y
and r. This can be done by investigating
the equilibrium of the money market. The
money market is said to be in equilibrium
when the supply of money, MS, matches
the demand for money, MD: that is, when
MS = MD
There are many ways of measuring the
money supply. In simple terms it can be
thought of as consisting of the notes and
coins in circulation, together with money
held in bank deposits. The level of MS is
assumed to be controlled by the central
bank and is taken to be autonomous, 
so that
MS = M*S
for some ﬁxed value M*S.
The demand for money comes from
three sources: transactions, precautions and
speculations. The transactions demand is
used for the daily exchange of goods and

1.6 • National income determination
105
services, whereas the precautionary demand is used to fund any emergencies requiring unfore-
seen expenditure. Both are assumed to be proportional to national income. Consequently, we
lump these together and write
L1 = k1Y
where L1 denotes the aggregate transaction–precautionary demand and k1 is a positive constant.
The speculative demand for money is used as a reserve fund in case individuals or ﬁrms decide
to invest in alternative assets such as government bonds. In Chapter 3 we show that, as inter-
est rates rise, speculative demand falls. We model this by writing
L2 = k2r + k3
where L2 denotes speculative demand, k2 is a negative constant and k3 is a positive constant. 
The total demand, MD, is the sum of the transaction–precautionary demand and speculative
demand: that is,
MD = L1 + L2
= k1Y + k2r + k3
If the money market is in equilibrium then
MS = MD
that is,
M*S = k1Y + k2r + k3
This equation, relating national income, Y, and interest rate, r, is called the LM schedule. If 
we assume that equilibrium exists in both the commodity and money markets then the IS and
LM schedules provide a system of two equations in two unknowns, Y and r. These can easily be
solved either by elimination or by graphical methods.
Example
Determine the equilibrium income and interest rate given the following information about the commodity
market
C = 0.8Y + 100
I = −20r + 1000
and the money market
MS = 2375
L1 = 0.1Y
L2 = −25r + 2000
What effect would a decrease in the money supply have on the equilibrium levels of Y and r?
Solution
The IS schedule for these particular consumption and investment functions has already been obtained in
the preceding text. It was shown that the commodity market is in equilibrium when
0.2Y + 20r = 1100
(1)


Linear Equations
106
For the money market we see that the money supply is
MS = 2375
and that the total demand for money (that is, the sum of the transaction–precautionary demand, L1, and the
speculative demand, L2) is
MD = L1 + L2 = 0.1Y −25r + 2000
The money market is in equilibrium when
MS = MD
that is,
2375 = 0.1Y −25r + 2000
The LM schedule is therefore given by
0.1Y −25r = 375
(2)
Equations (1) and (2) constitute a system of two equations for the two unknowns Y and r. The steps
described in Section 1.2 can be used to solve this system:
Step 1
Double equation (2) and subtract from equation (1) to get
0.2Y + 20r = 1100
0.2Y −50r = 750 −
70r = 350
(3)
Step 2
Divide both sides of equation (3) by 70 to get
r = 5
Step 3
Substitute r = 5 into equation (1) to get
0.2Y + 100 = 1100
0.2Y = 1000
(subtract 100 from both sides)
Y = 5000
(divide both sides by 0.2)
Step 4
As a check, equation (2) gives
0.1(5000) −25(5) = 375
✓
The equilibrium levels of Y and r are therefore 5000 and 5 respectively.
To investigate what happens to Y and r as the money supply falls, we could just take a smaller value of
MS such as 2300 and repeat the calculations. However, it is more instructive to perform the investigation
graphically. Figure 1.29 shows the IS and LM curves plotted on the same diagram with r on the horizontal
axis and Y on the vertical axis. These lines intersect at (5, 5000), conﬁrming the equilibrium levels of inter-
est rate and income obtained by calculation. Any change in the money supply will obviously have no effect
on the IS curve. On the other hand, a change in the money supply does affect the LM curve. To see this, let
us return to the general LM schedule

1.6 • National income determination
107
k1Y + k2r + k3 = M*S
and transpose it to express Y in terms of r:
k1Y = −k2r −k3 + M*S
(subtract k2r + k3 from both sides)
Y =
r +
(divide both sides by k1)
Expressed in this form, we see that the LM schedule has slope −k2/k1 and intercept (−k3 + M*S)/k1.
Any decrease in M*S therefore decreases the intercept (but not the slope) and the LM curve shifts down-
wards. This is indicated by the dashed line in Figure 1.29. The point of intersection shifts both downwards
and to the right. We deduce that, as the money supply falls, interest rates rise and national income decreases
(assuming that both the commodity and money markets remain in equilibrium).
−k3 + M*S
k1
D
F
−k2
k1
A
C
Advice
It is possible to produce general formulae for the equilibrium level of income in terms of
various parameters used to specify the model. As you might expect, the algebra is a little
harder but it does allow for a more general investigation into the effects of varying these
parameters. We will return to this in Section 5.3.
Figure 1.29

Linear Equations
108
Practice Problem
4 Determine the equilibrium income, Y, and interest rate, r, given the following information about the
commodity market
C = 0.7Y + 85
I = −50r + 1200
and the money market
MS = 500
L1 = 0.2Y
L2 = −40r + 230
Sketch the IS and LM curves on the same diagram. What effect would an increase in the value of
autonomous investment have on the equilibrium values of Y and r?
Example
(a) Given the consumption function
C = 800 + 0.9Y
and the investment function
I = 8000 −800r
ﬁnd an equation for the IS schedule.
(b) Given the money supply
MS = 28 500
and the demand for money
MD = 0.75Y −1500r
ﬁnd an equation for the LM schedule.
(c) By plotting the IS–LM diagram, ﬁnd the equilibrium values of national income, Y, and interest rate, r.
If the autonomous investment increases by 1000, what effect will this have on the equilibrium position?
Solution
(a) The IS schedule is given by an equation relating national income, Y, and interest rate, r.
In equilibrium, Y = C + I. By substituting the equations given in (a) into this equilibrium equation,
we eliminate C and I, giving
Y = 800 + 0.9Y + 8000 −800r
0.1Y = 8800 −800r
(subtract 0.9Y from both sides)
Y = 88 000 −8000r
(divide both sides by 0.1)
(b) The LM schedule is also given by an equation relating Y and r, but this time, it is derived from the equi-
librium of the money markets: that is, when MS = MD. Substituting the equations given in (b) into this
equilibrium equation gives
EXCEL

1.6 • National income determination
109
0.75Y −1500r = 28 500
0.75Y = 28 500 + 1500r
(add 1500r to both sides)
Y = 38 000 + 2000r
(divide both sides by 0.75)
(c) To ﬁnd the equilibrium position, we plot these two lines on a graph using Excel in the usual way. We
need to choose values for r and then work out corresponding values for Y. It is most likely that r will 
lie somewhere between 0 and 10, so values of r are tabulated between 0 and 10, going up in steps of 2.
We type the formula
=88000−8000*A2
in cell B2 and type
=38000+2000*A2
in cell C2. The values of Y are then generated by clicking and dragging down the columns. Figure 1.30
shows the completed Excel screen.
Placing the cursor at the point of intersection tells us that the lines cross when
r = 5%
and
Y = 48 000
If the autonomous investment increases by 1000, the equation for the IS schedule will change, as the
equation for investment now becomes
I = 9000 −800r
giving
Y = 98 000 −8000r
The new IS schedule can be plotted on the same graph by adding a column of ﬁgures into the spread-
sheet, as shown in Figure 1.31.
Notice that the point of intersection has shifted both upwards and to the right. The equilibrium posi-
tion has now changed, resulting in a rise in interest rates to 6% and an increase in income to 50 000.
Figure 1.30


Linear Equations
110
Figure 1.31
Autonomous consumption
The level of consumption when there is no income.
Autonomous savings
The withdrawals from savings when there is no income.
Consumption
The ﬂow of money from households to ﬁrms as payment for goods and 
services.
Consumption function
The relationship between national income and consumption.
Disposable income
Household income after the deduction of taxes and the addition of
beneﬁts.
Factors of production
The inputs to the production of goods and services: land, capital,
labour and raw materials.
Government expenditure
The total amount of money spent by government on defence,
education, health, police, etc.
Investment
The creation of output not for immediate consumption.
IS schedule
The equation relating national income and interest rate based on the assump-
tion of equilibrium in the goods market.
LM schedule
The equation relating national income and interest rate based on the
assumption of equilibrium in the money market.
Marginal propensity to consume
The fraction of a rise in national income which goes on
consumption. It is the slope of the consumption function.
Marginal propensity to save
The fraction of a rise in national income which goes into 
savings. It is the slope of the savings function.
Money supply
The notes and coins in circulation together with money held in bank deposits.
National income
The ﬂow of money from ﬁrms to households.
Key Terms

1.6 • National income determination
111
Practice Problems
5 If the consumption function is given by
C = 0.7Y + 40
state the values of
(a) autonomous consumption
(b) marginal propensity to consume
Transpose this formula to express Y in terms of C and hence find the value of Y when C = 110.
6 Write down expressions for the savings function given that the consumption function is
(a) C = 0.9Y + 72
(b) C =
7 For a closed economy with no government intervention the consumption function is
C = 0.6Y + 30
and planned investment is
I = 100
Calculate the equilibrium level of
(a) national income
(b) consumption
(c) savings
8 If
C = aY + b
Y = C + I
I = I*
show that
Y =
and obtain a similar expression for C in terms of a, b and I*.
9 An open economy is in equilibrium when
Y = C + I + G + X −M
b + I*
1 −a
Y 2 + 500
Y + 10

Precautionary demand for money
Money held in reserve by individuals or ﬁrms to fund
unforeseen future expenditure.
Speculative demand for money
Money held back by ﬁrms or individuals for the purpose
of investing in alternative assets, such as government bonds, at some future date.
Taxation
Money paid to government based on an individual’s income and wealth (direct
taxation) together with money paid by suppliers of goods or services based on expenditure
(indirect taxation).
Transactions demand for money
Money used for everyday transactions of goods and 
services.

Linear Equations
112
where
Y = national income
C = consumption
I = investment
G = government expenditure
X = exports
M = imports
Determine the equilibrium level of income given that
C = 0.8Y + 80
I = 70
G = 130
X = 100
M = 0.2Y + 50
10 Given that
consumption,
C = 0.8Y + 60
investment,
I
= −30r + 740
money supply,
MS = 4000
transaction–precautionary demand for money, MS = 0.15Y
speculative demand for money,
L2 = −20r + 3825
determine the values of national income, Y, and interest rate, r, on the assumption that both the com-
modity and the money markets are in equilibrium.
11 (Excel) Consider the consumption function
C = 120 + 0.8Yd
where Yd is disposable income.
Write down expressions for C, in terms of national income, Y, when there is
(a) no tax
(b) a lump sum tax of $100
(c) a proportional tax in which the proportion is 0.25
Sketch all three functions on the same diagram, over the range 0 ≤Y ≤800, and briefly describe any
differences or similarities between them.
Sketch the 45 degree line, C = Y, on the same diagram, and hence estimate equilibrium levels of
national income in each case.
12 (Excel) If the consumption function is
C = 0.9Y + 20
and planned investment I = 10, write down an expression for the aggregate expenditure, C + I, in
terms of Y.
Draw graphs of aggregate expenditure, and the 45 degree line, on the same diagram, over the
range 0 ≤Y ≤500. Deduce the equilibrium level of national income.
Describe what happens to the aggregate expenditure line in the case when
(a) the marginal propensity to consume falls to 0.8
(b) planned investment rises to 15
and find the new equilibrium income in each case.

chapter 2
Non-linear Equations
The main aim of this chapter is to describe the mathematics of non-linear equations.
The approach is similar to that of Chapter 1. There are four sections. Section 2.1
should be read before Section 2.2, and Section 2.3 should be read before 
Section 2.4.
The first section investigates the simplest non-linear equation, known as a quadratic.
A quadratic equation can easily be solved either by factorizing it as the product of
two linear factors or by using a special formula. You are also shown how to sketch
the graphs of quadratic functions. The techniques are illustrated by finding the 
equilibrium price and quantity for quadratic supply and demand functions.
Section 2.2 introduces additional functions in microeconomics, including revenue
and profit. There is very little new material in this section. It mainly consists of 
applying the ideas of Section 2.1 to sketch graphs of quadratic revenue and profit
functions and to find their maximum values.
Finally, the topic of algebra, which we started in Chapter 1, is completed by investi-
gating the rules of indices and logarithms. The basic concepts are covered in Section
2.3. The notation and rules of indices are extremely important and are used fre-
quently in subsequent chapters. Section 2.4 focuses on two specific functions,
namely the exponential and natural logarithm functions. If you run into difficulty, or
are short of time, then this section could be omitted, particularly if you do not intend
to study the next chapter on the mathematics of finance.


section 2.1
Quadratic functions
The ﬁrst chapter considered the topic of linear mathematics. In particular, we described how
to sketch the graph of a linear function and how to solve a linear equation (or system of simul-
taneous linear equations). It was also pointed out that not all economic functions are of this
simple form. In assuming that the demand and supply graphs are straight lines, we are certainly
making the mathematical analysis easy, but we may well be sacriﬁcing realism. It may be that
the demand and supply graphs are curved and, in these circumstances, it is essential to model
them using more complicated functions. The simplest non-linear function is known as a
quadratic and takes the form
f(x) = ax2 + bx + c
for some parameters a, b and c. (In fact, even if the demand function is linear, functions derived
from it, such as total revenue and proﬁt, turn out to be quadratic. We investigate these func-
tions in the next section.) For the moment we concentrate on the mathematics of quadratics
and show how to sketch graphs of quadratic functions and how to solve quadratic equations.
Consider the elementary equation
x2 −9 = 0
Objectives
At the end of this section you should be able to:
 Solve a quadratic equation using ‘the formula’.
 Solve a quadratic equation given its factorization.
 Sketch the graph of a quadratic function using a table of function values.
 Sketch the graph of a quadratic function by ﬁnding the coordinates of the 
intercepts.
 Determine equilibrium price and quantity given a pair of quadratic demand and
supply functions.

It is easy to see that the expression on the left-hand side is a special case of the above with 
a = 1, b = 0 and c = −9. To solve this equation we add 9 to both sides to get
x2 = 9
so we need to ﬁnd a number, x, which when multiplied by itself produces the value 9. A
moment’s thought should convince you that there are exactly two numbers that work, namely
3 and −3 because
3 × 3 = 9
and
(−3) × (−3) = 9
These two solutions are called the square roots of 9. The symbol √is reserved for the positive
square root, so in this notation the solutions are √9 and −√9. These are usually combined and
written ±√9. The equation
x2 −9 = 0
is trivial to solve because the number 9 has obvious square roots. In general, it is necessary to
use a calculator to evaluate square roots. For example, the equation
x2 −2 = 0
can be written as
x2 = 2
and so has solutions x = ±√2. My calculator gives 1.414 213 56 (correct to 8 decimal places) for
the square root of 2, so the above equation has solutions
1.414 213 56
and
−1.414 213 56
Non-linear Equations
116
Example
Solve the following quadratic equations:
(a) 5x2 −80 = 0
(b) x2 + 64 = 0
(c) (x + 4)2 = 81
Solution
(a) 5x2 −80 = 0
5x2 = 80
(add 80 to both sides)
x2 = 16
(divide both sides by 5)
x = ±4
(square root both sides)
(b) x2 + 64 = 0
x2 = −64
(subtract 64 from both sides)
This equation does not have a solution because you cannot square a real number and get a negative
answer.
(c) (x + 4)2 = 81
x + 4 = ±9
(square root both sides)

The two solutions are obtained by taking the + and −signs separately. Taking the + sign,
x + 4 = 9
so
x = 9 −4 = 5
Taking the −sign,
x + 4 = −9
so
x = −9 −4 = −13
The two solutions are 5 and −13.
2.1 • Quadratic functions
117
Example
Solve the quadratic equations
(a) 2x2 + 9x + 5 = 0
(b) x2 −4x + 4 = 0
(c) 3x2 −5x + 6 = 0
Solution
(a) For the equation
2x2 + 9x + 5 = 0
we have a = 2, b = 9 and c = 5. Substituting these values into the formula
x = −
±
−
b
b
ac
a
  (
  
)
2
4
2
Problem
1 Solve the following quadratic equations. (Round your solutions to 2 decimal places if necessary.)
(a) x2 −100 = 0
(b) 2x2 −8 = 0
(c) x2 −3 = 0
(d) x2 −5.72 = 0
(e) x2 + 1 = 0
(f) 3x2 + 6.21 = 0
(g) x2 = 0
All of the equations considered in Problem 1 are of the special form
ax2 + c = 0
in which the coefﬁcient of x is zero. To solve more general quadratic equations we use a for-
mula that enables the solutions to be calculated in a few lines of working. It can be shown that
ax2 + bx + c = 0
has solutions
x =
The following example describes how to use this formula. It also illustrates the fact (which 
you have already discovered in Practice Problem 1) that a quadratic equation can have two
solutions, one solution or no solutions.
−
±
−
b
b
ac
a
  (
  
)
2
4
2


gives
x =
=
=
The two solutions are obtained by taking the + and −signs separately: that is,
= −0.649
(correct to 3 decimal places)
= −3.851
(correct to 3 decimal places)
It is easy to check that these are solutions by substituting them into the original equation. For example,
putting x = −0.649 into
2x2 + 9x + 5
gives
2(−0.649)2 + 9(−0.649) + 5 = 0.001 402
which is close to zero, as required. We cannot expect to produce an exact value of zero because we
rounded √41 to 3 decimal places. You might like to check for yourself that −3.851 is also a solution.
(b) For the equation
x2 −4x + 4 = 0
we have a = 1, b = −4 and c = 4. Substituting these values into the formula
x =
gives
x =
=
=
=
Clearly we get the same answer irrespective of whether we take the + or the −sign here. In other words,
this equation has only one solution, x = 2. As a check, substitution of x = 2 into the original equation
gives
(2)2 −4(2) + 4 = 0
(c) For the equation
3x2 −5x + 6 = 0
4
0
2
  
±
4
0
2
  
±
4
16
16
2
  (
  
)
±
−
−−
±
−
−
(
)  ((
)  ( )( ))
( )
4
4
4 1 4
2 1
2
−
±
−
b
b
ac
a
  (
  
)
2
4
2
−
−
9
41
4
  
−
+
9
41
4
  
−
±
9
41
4
  
−
±
−
9
81
40
4
  (
  
)
−
±
−
9
9
4 2 5
2 2
2
  (
  ( )( ))
( )
Non-linear Equations
118

we have a = 3, b = −5 and c = 6. Substituting these values into the formula
x =
gives
x =
=
=
The number under the square root sign is negative and, as you discovered in Practice Problem 1, it is
impossible to ﬁnd the square root of a negative number. We conclude that the quadratic equation
3x2 −5x + 6 = 0
has no solutions.
5
47
6
  (
)
±
−
5
25
72
6
  (
  
)
±
−
−−
±
−
−
(
)  ((
)  ( )( ))
( )
5
5
4 3 6
2 3
2
−
±
−
b
b
ac
a
  (
  
)
2
4
2
2.1 • Quadratic functions
119
This example demonstrates the three cases that can occur when solving quadratic equations.
The precise number of solutions that an equation can have depends on whether the number under
the square root sign is positive, zero or negative. The number b2 −4ac is called the discriminant
because the sign of this number discriminates between the three cases that can occur.
 If b2 −4ac > 0 then there are two solutions
x =
and
x =
 If b2 −4ac = 0 then there is one solution
x =
 If b2 −4ac < 0 then there are no solutions because
does not exist.
(b2 −4ac)
−
±
= −
b
a
b
a
  
  
0
2
2
−
−
−
b
b
ac
a
  (
  
)
2
4
2
−
+
−
b
b
ac
a
  (
  
)
2
4
2
Practice Problem
2 Solve the following quadratic equations (where possible):
(a) 2x2 −19x −10 = 0
(b) 4x2 + 12x + 9 = 0
(c) x2 + x + 1 = 0
(d) x2 −3x + 10 = 2x + 4
You may be familiar with another method for solving quadratic equations. This is based on
the factorization of a quadratic into the product of two linear factors. Section 1.4 described how
to multiply out two brackets. One of the examples in that section showed that
(x + 1)(x + 2) = x2 + 3x + 2
Consequently, the solutions of the equation
x2 + 3x + 2 = 0

Non-linear Equations
120
Practice Problem
3 Write down the solutions to the following quadratic equations. (There is no need to multiply out the
brackets.)
(a) (x −4)(x + 3) = 0
(b) x(10 −2x) = 0
(c) (2x −6)2 = 0
Example
Write down the solutions to the following quadratic equations:
(a) x(3x −4) = 0
(b) (x −7)2 = 0
Solution
(a) If x(3x −4) = 0 then either x = 0 or 3x −4 = 0
The ﬁrst gives the solution x = 0 and the second gives x = 4/3.
(b) If (x −7)(x −7) = 0 then either x −7 = 0 or x −7 = 0
Both options lead to the same solution, x = 7.
are the same as those of
(x + 1)(x + 2) = 0
Now the only way that two numbers can be multiplied together to produce a value of zero is
when (at least) one of the numbers is zero.
if ab = 0 then either a = 0 or b = 0 (or both)
It follows that either
x + 1 = 0 with solution x = −1
or
x + 2 = 0 with solution x = −2
The quadratic equation
x2 + 3x + 2 = 0
therefore has two solutions, x = −1 and x = −2.
The difﬁculty with this approach is that it is impossible, except in very simple cases, to work
out the factorization from any given quadratic, so the preferred method is to use the formula.
However, if you are lucky enough to be given the factorization, or perhaps clever enough to
spot the factorization for yourself, then it does provide a viable alternative.

One important feature of linear functions is that their graphs are always straight lines.
Obviously the intercept and slope vary from function to function, but the shape is always the
same. It turns out that a similar property holds for quadratic functions. Now, whenever you are
asked to produce a graph of an unfamiliar function, it is often a good idea to tabulate the func-
tion, to plot these points on graph paper and to join them up with a smooth curve. The precise
number of points to be taken depends on the function but, as a general rule, between 5 and 
10 points usually produce a good picture.
2.1 • Quadratic functions
121
Example
Sketch a graph of the square function, f(x) = x2.
Solution
A table of values for the simple square function
f(x) = x2
is given by
x
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
f(x)
9
4
1
0
1
4
9
The ﬁrst row of the table gives a selection of ‘incoming’ numbers, x, while the second row shows the cor-
responding ‘outgoing’ numbers, y. Points with coordinates (x, y) are then plotted on graph paper to 
produce the curve shown in Figure 2.1. For convenience, different scales are used on the x and y axes.
Mathematicians call this curve a parabola, whereas economists refer to it as U-shaped. Notice that 
the graph is symmetric about the y axis with a minimum point at the origin; if a mirror is placed along the
y axis then the left-hand part is the image of the right-hand part.
Figure 2.1

The results of Practice Problem 4 suggest that the graph of a quadratic is always parabolic.
Furthermore, whenever the coefﬁcient of x2 is positive, the graph bends upwards and is a ‘happy’
parabola (U shape). A selection of U-shaped curves is shown in Figure 2.2. Similarly, when the
coefﬁcient of x2 is negative, the graph bends downwards and is a ‘sad’ parabola (inverted 
U shape). A selection of inverted U-shaped curves is shown in Figure 2.3.
The task of sketching graphs from a table of function values is extremely tedious, particu-
larly if only a rough sketch is required. It is usually more convenient just to determine a few 
key points on the curve. The obvious points to ﬁnd are the intercepts with the coordinate 
axes, since these enable us to ‘tether’ the parabola down in the various positions shown in
Figures 2.2 and 2.3. The curve crosses the y axis when x = 0. Evaluating the function
f(x) = ax2 + bx + c
Non-linear Equations
122
Advice
The following problem is designed to give you an opportunity to tabulate and sketch
graphs of more general quadratic functions. Please remember that when you substitute
numbers into a formula you must use BIDMAS to decide the order of the operations. For
example, in part (a) you need to substitute x = −1 into 4x2 −12x + 5. You get
4(−1)2 − 12(−1) + 5
= 4 + 12 + 5
= 21
Note also that when using a calculator you must use brackets when squaring negative
numbers. In this case a possible sequence of key presses might be
=
5
+
1
(−)
×
12
−
x2
)
1
(−)
(
4
Practice Problem
4 Complete the following tables of function values and hence sketch a graph of each quadratic function.
(a) f(x) = 4x2 −12x + 5
x
−1
0
1
2
3
4
f(x)
(b) f(x) = −x2 + 6x −9
x
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
f(x)
(c) f(x) = −2x2 + 4x −6
x
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
f(x)

at x = 0 gives
f(0) = a(0)2 + b(0) + c = c
so the constant term determines where the curve cuts the vertical axis (as it did for linear func-
tions). The curve crosses the x axis when y = 0 or, equivalently, when f(x) = 0, so we need to
solve the quadratic equation
ax2 + bx + c = 0
This can be done using ‘the formula’ and the solutions are the points where the graph cuts the
horizontal axis. In general, a quadratic equation can have two, one or no solutions and these
possibilities are illustrated in cases (a), (b) and (c) in Figures 2.2 and 2.3. In case (a) the curve
crosses the x axis at A, turns round and crosses it again at B, so there are two solutions. In case
(b) the curve turns round just as it touches the x axis, so there is only one solution. Finally, 
in case (c) the curve turns round before it has a chance to cross the x axis, so there are no 
solutions.
The strategy for sketching the graph of a quadratic function
f(x) = ax2 + bx + c
may now be stated.
2.1 • Quadratic functions
123
Figure 2.2
Figure 2.3

Step 1
Determine the basic shape. The graph has a U shape if a > 0, and an inverted U shape if a < 0.
Step 2
Determine the y intercept. This is obtained by substituting x = 0 into the function, which 
gives y = c.
Step 3
Determine the x intercepts (if any). These are obtained by solving the quadratic equation
ax2 + bx + c = 0
This three-step strategy is illustrated in the following example.
Non-linear Equations
124
Example
Give a rough sketch of the graph of the following quadratic function:
f(x) = −x2 + 8x −12
Solution
For the function
f(x) = −x2 + 8x −12
the strategy is as follows.
Step 1
The coefﬁcient of x2 is −1, which is negative, so the graph is a ‘sad’ parabola with an inverted U shape.
Step 2
The constant term is −12, so the graph crosses the vertical axis at y = −12.
Step 3
For the quadratic equation
−x2 + 8x −12 = 0
the formula gives
x =
=
=
=
so the graph crosses the horizontal axis at
x =
= 2
−
+
−
8
4
2
  
−
±
−
8
4
2
  
−
±
−
8
16
2
  
−
±
−
−
8
64
48
2
  (
  
)
−
±
−
−
−
−
8
8
4
1
12
2
1
2
  (
  (
)(
))
(
)

and
x =
= 6
The information obtained in steps 1–3 is sufﬁcient to produce the sketch shown in Figure 2.4.
In fact, we can go even further in this case and locate the coordinates of the turning point – that is, the
maximum point – on the curve. By symmetry, the x coordinate of this point occurs exactly halfway between
x = 2 and x = 6: that is, at
x = 1/2(2 + 6) = 4
The corresponding y coordinate is found by substituting x = 4 into the function to get
f(4) = −(4)2 + 8(4) −12 = 4
The maximum point on the curve therefore has coordinates (4, 4).
−
−
−
8
4
2
  
2.1 • Quadratic functions
125
Practice Problem
5 Use the three-step strategy to produce rough graphs of the following quadratic functions:
(a) f(x) = 2x2 −11x −6
(b) f(x) = x2 −6x + 9
We conclude this section by seeing how to solve a particular problem in microeconomics.
In Section 1.3 the concept of market equilibrium was introduced and in each of the problems
the supply and demand functions were always given to be linear. The following example shows
this to be an unnecessary restriction and indicates that it is almost as easy to manipulate
quadratic supply and demand functions.
Figure 5.2

Non-linear Equations
126
Example
Given the supply and demand functions
P =
Q2
S + 14QS + 22
P = −Q2
D −10QD + 150
calculate the equilibrium price and quantity.
Solution
In equilibrium, QS = QD, so if we denote this equilibrium quantity by Q, the supply and demand functions
become
P =
Q2 + 14Q + 22
P = −Q2 −10Q + 150
Hence
Q2 + 14Q + 22 = −Q2 −10Q + 150
since both sides are equal to P. Collecting like terms gives
2Q2 + 24Q −128 = 0
which is just a quadratic equation in the variable Q. Before using the formula to solve this it is a good idea
to divide both sides by 2 to avoid large numbers. This gives
Q2 + 12Q −64 = 0
and so
Q =
=
=
The quadratic equation has solutions Q = −16 and Q = 4. Now the solution Q = −16 can obviously 
be ignored because a negative quantity does not make sense. The equilibrium quantity is therefore 4. The
equilibrium price can be calculated by substituting this value into either the original supply or demand
equation.
From the supply equation,
P = 42 + 14(4) + 22 = 94
As a check, the demand equation gives
P = −(4)2 −10(4) + 150 = 94
✓
You might be puzzled by the fact that we actually obtain two possible solutions, one of which does not
make economic sense. The supply and demand curves are sketched in Figure 2.5. This shows that there are
indeed two points of intersection conﬁrming the mathematical solution. However, in economics the quan-
tity and price are both positive, so the functions are only deﬁned in the top right-hand (that is, positive)
quadrant. In this region there is just one point of intersection, at (4, 94).
−
±
12
20
2
  
−
±
12
400
2
  (
)
−
±
−
−
12
12
4 1
64
2 1
2
  ((
)  ( )(
))
( )

2.1 • Quadratic functions
127
Practice Problem
6 Given the supply and demand functions
P = 2Q2
S + 10QS + 10
P = −Q 2
D −5QD + 52
calculate the equilibrium price and quantity.
Discriminant
The number b2 −4ac which is used to indicate the number of solutions of
the quadratic equation ax2 + bx + c = 0.
Parabola
The shape of the graph of a quadratic function.
Quadratic function
A function of the form f(x) = ax2 + bx + c where a ≠0.
Square root
A number that when multiplied by itself equals a given number; the solutions
of the equation x 2 = c which are written ± c.
U-shaped curve
A term used by economists to describe a curve, such as a parabola, which
bends upwards, like the letter U.
Key Terms
Figure 2.5

Non-linear Equations
128
Practice Problems
7 Solve the following quadratic equations:
(a) x2 = 81
(b) x2 = 36
(c) 2x2 = 8
(d) (x −1)2 = 9
(e) (x + 5)2 = 16
(f) (2x −7)2 = 121
8 Write down the solutions of the following equations:
(a) (x −1)(x + 3) = 0
(b) (2x −1)(x + 10) = 0
(c) x(x + 5) = 0
(d) (3x + 5)(4x −9) = 0
(e) (5 −4x)(x −5) = 0
(f) (x −2)(x + 1)(4 −x) = 0
9 Use ‘the formula’ to solve the following quadratic equations. (Round your answers to 2 decimal
places.)
(a) x2 −5x + 2 = 0
(b) 2x2 + 5x + 1 = 0
(c) −3x2 + 7x + 2 = 0
(d) x2 = 3x + 1
(e) 2x2 + 8x + 8 = 0
(f) x2 −6x + 10 = 0
10 Solve the equation f(x) = 0 for each of the following quadratic functions:
(a) f(x) = x2 −16
(b) f(x) = x(100 −x)
(c) f(x) = −x2 + 22x −85
(d) f(x) = x2 −18x + 81
(e) f(x) = 2x2 + 4x + 3
11 Sketch the graphs of the quadratic functions given in Practice Problem 10.
12 One solution of the quadratic equation
x2 −8x + c = 0
is known to be x = 2. By substituting this into the equation, find the value of c and hence obtain the
second solution.
13 Given the quadratic supply and demand functions
P =
Q2
S + 2QS + 12
P = −Q 2
D −4QD + 68
determine the equilibrium price and quantity.
14 Given the supply and demand functions
P = Q2
S + 2QS + 7
P = −QD + 25
determine the equilibrium price and quantity.

section 2.2
Revenue, cost and profit
The main aim of this section is to investigate one particular function in economics, namely
proﬁt. By making reasonable simplifying assumptions, the proﬁt function is shown to be
quadratic and so the methods developed in Section 2.1 can be used to analyse its properties. We
describe how to ﬁnd the levels of output required for a ﬁrm to break even and to maximize
proﬁt. The proﬁt function is denoted by the Greek letter π (pi, pronounced ‘pie’) and is deﬁned
to be the difference between total revenue, TR, and total cost, TC: that is,
π = TR −TC
This deﬁnition is entirely sensible because TR is the amount of money received by the ﬁrm
from the sale of its goods and TC is the amount of money that the ﬁrm has to spend to pro-
duce these goods. We begin by considering the total revenue and total cost functions in turn.
The total revenue received from the sale of Q goods at price P is given by
TR = PQ
For example, if the price of each good is $70 and the ﬁrm sells 300 then the revenue is
$70 × 300 = $21 000
Given any particular demand function, expressing P in terms of Q, it is a simple matter to
obtain a formula for TR solely in terms of Q. A graph of TR against Q can then be sketched.
Objectives
At the end of this section you should be able to:
 Sketch the graphs of the total revenue, total cost, average cost and proﬁt 
functions.
 Find the level of output that maximizes total revenue.
 Find the level of output that maximizes proﬁt.
 Find the break-even levels of output.

Non-linear Equations
130
Example
Given the demand function
P = 100 −2Q
express TR as a function of Q and hence sketch its graph.
(a) For what values of Q is TR zero?
(b) What is the maximum value of TR?
Solution
Total revenue is deﬁned by
TR = PQ
and, since P = 100 −2Q, we have
TR = (100 −2Q)Q = 100Q −2Q2
This function is quadratic and so its graph can be sketched using the strategy described in Section 2.1.
Step 1
The coefﬁcient of Q2 is negative, so the graph has an inverted U shape.
Step 2
The constant term is zero, so the graph crosses the TR axis at the origin.
Step 3
To ﬁnd where the curve crosses the horizontal axis, we could use ‘the formula’. However, this is not neces-
sary, since it follows immediately from the factorization
TR = (100 −2Q)Q
that TR = 0 when either 100 −2Q = 0 or Q = 0. In other words, the quadratic equation has two solutions, 
Q = 0 and Q = 50.
The total revenue curve is shown in Figure 2.6.
 From Figure 2.6 the total revenue is zero when Q = 0 and Q = 50.
 By symmetry, the parabola reaches its maximum halfway between 0 and 50, that is at Q = 25. The 
corresponding total revenue is given by
TR = 100(25) −2(25)2 = 1250
Practice Problem
1 Given the demand function
P = 1000 −Q
express TR as a function of Q and hence sketch a graph of TR against Q. What value of Q maximizes
total revenue and what is the corresponding price?

In general, given the linear demand function
P = aQ + b (a < 0, b > 0)
the total revenue function is
TR = PQ
= (aQ + b)Q
= aQ2 + bQ
This function is quadratic in Q and, since a < 0, the TR curve has an inverted U shape.
Moreover, since the constant term is zero, the curve always intersects the vertical axis at the ori-
gin. This fact should come as no surprise to you; if no goods are sold, the revenue must be zero.
We now turn our attention to the total cost function, TC, which relates the production costs
to the level of output, Q. As the quantity produced rises, the corresponding cost also rises, so
the TC function is increasing. However, in the short run, some of these costs are ﬁxed. Fixed
costs, FC, include the cost of land, equipment, rent and possibly skilled labour. Obviously, in
the long run all costs are variable, but these particular costs take time to vary, so can be thought
of as ﬁxed in the short run. Variable costs, on the other hand, vary with output and include the
cost of raw materials, components, energy and unskilled labour. If VC denotes the variable cost
per unit of output then the total variable cost, TVC, in producing Q goods is given by
TVC = (VC)Q
The total cost is the sum of the contributions from the ﬁxed and variable costs, so is given by
TC = FC + (VC)Q
Now although this is an important economic function, it does not always convey the informa-
tion necessary to compare individual ﬁrms. For example, suppose that an international car
company operates two plants, one in the USA and one in Europe, and suppose that the total
annual costs are known to be $200 million and $45 million respectively. Which of these two
plants is regarded as the more efﬁcient? Unfortunately, unless we also know the total number
of cars produced it is impossible to make any judgement. The signiﬁcant function here is not
the total cost, but rather the average cost per car. If the plants in the USA and Europe manu-
facture 80 000 and 15 000 cars, respectively, their corresponding average costs are
= 2500
200 000 000
80 000
2.2 • Revenue, cost and profit
131
Figure 2.6

and
= 3000
On the basis of these ﬁgures, the plant in the USA appears to be the more efﬁcient. In practice,
other factors would need to be taken into account before deciding to increase or decrease the
scale of operation in either country.
In general, the average cost function, AC, is obtained by dividing the total cost by output, 
so that
AC =
=
=
+
=
+ VC
FC
Q
(VC)Q
Q
FC
Q
FC + (VC)Q
Q
TC
Q
45 000 000
15 000
Non-linear Equations
132
Example
Given that ﬁxed costs are 1000 and that variable costs are 4 per unit, express TC and AC as functions of Q.
Hence sketch their graphs.
Solution
We are given that FC = 1000 and VC = 4, so
TC = 1000 + 4Q
and
AC =
=
=
+ 4
The graph of the total cost function is easily sketched. It is a straight line with intercept 1000 and slope 4. It
is sketched in Figure 2.7. The average cost function is of a form that we have not met before, so we have no
prior knowledge about its basic shape. Under these circumstances it is useful to tabulate the function. The
tabulated values are then plotted on graph paper and a smooth curve obtained by joining the points
together. One particular table of function values is
Q
100
250
500
1000
2000
AC
14
8
6
5
4.5
These values are readily checked. For instance, when Q = 100
AC =
+ 4 = 10 + 4 = 14
A graph of the average cost function, based on this table, is sketched in Figure 2.8. This curve is known as a
rectangular hyperbola and is sometimes referred to by economists as being L-shaped.
1000
100
1000
Q
1000 + 4Q
Q
TC
Q

In general, whenever the variable cost, VC, is a constant the total cost function,
TC = FC + (VC)Q
is linear. The intercept is FC and the slope is VC. For the average cost function
AC =
+ VC
note that if Q is small, then FC/Q is large, so the graph bends sharply upwards as Q approaches
zero. As Q increases, FC/Q decreases and eventually tails off to zero for large values of Q. The
FC
Q
2.2 • Revenue, cost and profit
133
Practice Problem
2 Given that fixed costs are 100 and that variable costs are 2 per unit, express TC and AC as functions
of Q. Hence sketch their graphs.
Figure 2.8
Figure 2.7

AC curve therefore ﬂattens off and approaches VC as Q gets larger and larger. This phe-
nomenon is hardly surprising, since the ﬁxed costs are shared between more and more goods,
so have little effect on AC for large Q. The graph of AC therefore has the basic L shape shown
in Figure 2.9. This discussion assumes that VC is a constant. In practice, this may not be the
case and VC might depend on Q. The TC graph is then no longer linear and the AC graph
becomes U-shaped rather than L-shaped. An example of this can be found in Practice Problem 7
at the end of this section.
Figure 2.10 shows typical TR and TC graphs sketched on the same diagram. These are drawn
on the assumption that the demand function is linear (which leads to a quadratic total revenue
Non-linear Equations
134
Figure 2.9
Figure 2.10

function) and that the variable costs are constant (which leads to a linear total cost function).
The horizontal axis represents quantity, Q. Strictly speaking the label Q means different things
for the two functions. For the revenue function, Q denotes the quantity of goods actually sold,
whereas for the cost function it denotes the quantity produced. In sketching both graphs on the
same diagram we are implicitly assuming that these two values are the same and that the ﬁrm
sells all of the goods that it produces.
The two curves intersect at precisely two points, A and B, corresponding to output levels QA
and QB. At these points the cost and revenue are equal and the ﬁrm breaks even. If Q < QA or
Q > QB then the TC curve lies above that of TR, so cost exceeds revenue. For these levels of 
output the ﬁrm makes a loss. If QA < Q < QB then revenue exceeds cost and the ﬁrm makes 
a proﬁt that is equal to the vertical distance between the revenue and cost curves. The maximum
proﬁt occurs where the gap between them is largest. The easiest way of calculating maximum
proﬁt is to obtain a formula for proﬁt directly in terms of Q using the deﬁning equation
π = TR −TC
2.2 • Revenue, cost and profit
135
Example
If ﬁxed costs are 4, variable costs per unit are 1 and the demand function is
P = 10 −2Q
obtain an expression for π in terms of Q and hence sketch a graph of π against Q.
(a) For what values of Q does the ﬁrm break even?
(b) What is the maximum proﬁt?
Solution
We begin by obtaining expressions for the total cost and total revenue. For this problem, FC = 4 and 
VC = 1, so
TC = FC + (VC)Q = 4 + Q
The given demand function is
P = 10 −2Q
so
TR = PQ
= (10 −2Q)Q
= 10Q −2Q2
Hence the proﬁt is given by
π = TR −TC
= (10 −2Q2) −(4 + Q)
= 10Q −2Q2 −4 −Q
= −2Q2 + 9Q2 −4
To sketch a graph of the proﬁt function we follow the strategy described in Section 2.1.


Step 1
The coefﬁcient of Q2 is negative, so the graph has an inverted U shape.
Step 2
The constant term is −4, so the graph crosses the vertical axis when π = −4.
Step 3
The graph crosses the horizontal axis when π = 0, so we need to solve the quadratic equation
−2Q2 + 9Q −4 = 0
This can be done using ‘the formula’ to get
Q =
=
so Q = 0.5 and Q = 4.
The proﬁt curve is sketched in Figure 2.11.
(a) From Figure 2.11 we see that proﬁt is zero when Q = 0.5 and Q = 4.
(b) By symmetry, the parabola reaches its maximum halfway between 0.5 and 4: that is, at
Q = 1/2(0.5 + 4) = 2.25
The corresponding proﬁt is given by
π = −2(2.25)2 + 9(2.25) −4 = 6.125
−9 ± 7
−4
−
±
−
−
9
81
32
2
2
  (
  
)
(
)
Non-linear Equations
136
Figure 2.11

2.2 • Revenue, cost and profit
137
Advice
It is important to notice the use of brackets in the previous derivation of π. A common stu-
dent mistake is to forget to include the brackets and just to write down
π = TR −TC
= 10Q −2Q2 −4 + Q
= −2Q2 + 11Q −4
This cannot be right, since the whole of the total cost needs to be subtracted from the total
revenue, not just the fixed costs. You might be surprised to learn that many economics
students make this sort of blunder, particularly under examination conditions. I hope that
if you have carefully worked through Section 1.4 on algebraic manipulation then you will
not fall into this category!
Practice Problem
3 If fixed costs are 25, variable costs per unit are 2 and the demand function is
P = 20 −Q
obtain an expression for π in terms of Q and hence sketch its graph.
(a) Find the levels of output which give a profit of 31.
(b) Find the maximum profit and the value of Q at which it is achieved.
Example
A ﬁrm’s proﬁt function is given by
π = −Q3 + 21Q −18
Draw a graph of π against Q, over the range 0 ≤Q ≤5, and hence estimate
(a) the interval in which π ≥0
(b) the maximum proﬁt
Solution
Figure 2.12 (overleaf) shows the tabulated values of Q which have been entered in cells A4 to A8. In the 
second column, cell B4 contains the formula to work out the corresponding values of π:
=−(A4)^3+21*A4−18
This has been replicated down the proﬁt column by clicking and dragging in the usual way.
It can be seen that the maximum proﬁt occurs somewhere between 2 and 4, so it makes sense to add a
few extra entries in here so that the graph can be plotted more accurately in this region.
EXCEL


Initially, inserting extra rows for Q = 2.5 and 3.5 shows that the maximum occurs between 2.5 and 3.
Inserting a few more rows enables us to pinpoint the maximum proﬁt value more accurately, as shown in
Figure 2.13. At this stage, we can be conﬁdent that the maximum proﬁt occurs between Q = 2.6 and Q = 2.7.
The graph of the ﬁrm’s proﬁt function based on this table of values can now be drawn using Chart Wizard,
as shown in Figure 2.13.
This diagram shows that
(a) the ﬁrm makes a proﬁt for values of Q between 0.9 and 4.1
(b) the maximum proﬁt is about 19.
Non-linear Equations
138
Figure 2.12
Figure 2.13

2.2 • Revenue, cost and profit
139
Practice Problems
4 Given the following demand functions, express TR as a function of Q and hence sketch the graphs of
TR against Q.
(a) P = 4
(b) P = 7/Q
(c) P = 10 −4Q
5 Given the following total revenue functions, find the corresponding demand functions
(a) TR = 50Q −4Q2
(b) TR = 10
6 Given that fixed costs are 500 and that variable costs are 10 per unit, express TC and AC as functions
of Q. Hence sketch their graphs.
7 Given that fixed costs are 1 and that variable costs are Q + 1 per unit, express TC and AC as func-
tions of Q. Hence sketch their graphs.
8 Find an expression for the profit function given the demand function
2Q + P = 25
and the average cost function
AC =
+ 5
Find the values of Q for which the firm
(a) breaks even
(b) makes a loss of 432 units
(c) maximizes profit
9 Sketch, on the same diagram, graphs of the total revenue and total cost functions,
TR = −2Q2 + 14Q
TC = 2Q + 10
32
Q

Average cost
Total cost per unit of output: AC = TC/Q.
Fixed costs
Total costs that are independent of output.
L-shaped curve
A term used by economists to describe the graph of a function, such as 
f(x) = a +
, which bends roughly like the letter L.
Proﬁt
Total revenue minus total cost: π = TR −TC.
Rectangular hyperbola
A term used by mathematicians to describe the graph of a func-
tion, such as f(x) = a +
, which is a hyperbola with horizontal and vertical asymptotes.
Total cost
The sum of the total variable and ﬁxed costs: TC = TVC + FC.
Total revenue
A ﬁrm’s total earnings from the sales of a good: TR = PQ.
Variable costs
Total costs that change according to the amount of output produced.
b
x
b
x
Key Terms

(1) Use your graphs to estimate the values of Q for which the firm
(a) breaks even
(b) maximizes profit
(2) Confirm your answer to part (1) using algebra.
10 The profit function of a firm is of the form
π = aQ2 + bQ + c
If it is known that π = 9, 34 and 19 when Q = 1, 2 and 3 respectively, write down a set of three simul-
taneous equations for the three unknowns, a, b and c. Solve this system to find a, b and c. Hence find
the profit when Q = 4.
11 (Excel) Tabulate values of the total cost function
TC = 0.01Q3 + 0.5Q2 + Q + 1000
when Q is 0, 2, 4, . . . , 30 and hence plot a graph of this function on the range 0 ≤Q ≤30. Use this
graph to estimate the value of Q for which TC = 1400.
12 (Excel) A firm’s total revenue and total cost functions are given by
TR = −0.5Q2 + 24Q
TC = Q√Q + 100
Sketch these graphs on the same diagram on the range 0 ≤Q ≤48. Hence estimate the values of 
Q for which the firm
(a) breaks even
(b) maximizes profit
Non-linear Equations
140

section 2.3
Indices and logarithms
Objectives
At the end of this section you should be able to:
 Evaluate bn in the case when n is positive, negative, a whole number or fraction.
 Simplify algebraic expressions using the rules of indices.
 Investigate the returns to scale of a production function.
 Evaluate logarithms in simple cases.
 Use the rules of logarithms to solve equations in which the unknown occurs as a
power.
Advice
This section is quite long with some important ideas. If you are comfortable using the rules
of indices and already know what a logarithm is, you should be able to read through the
material in one sitting, concentrating on the applications. However, if your current under-
standing is hazy (or non-existent), you should consider studying this topic on separate
occasions. To help with this, the material in this section has been split into the following
convenient sub-sections:
 index notation
 rules of indices
 logarithms
 summary

2.3.1 Index notation
We have already used b2 as an abbreviation for b × b. In this section we extend the notation to
bn for any value of n, positive, negative, whole number or fraction. In general, if
M = bn
we say that bn is the exponential form of M to base b. The number n is then referred to as the
index, power or exponent. An obvious way of extending
b2 = b × b
to other positive whole-number powers, n, is to deﬁne
b3 = b × b × b
b4 = b × b × b × b
and, in general,
To include the case of negative powers, consider the following table of values of 2n.
2−3
2−2
2−1
20
21
22
23
24
?
?
?
?
2
4
8
16
To work from left to right along the completed part of the table, all you have to do is to 
multiply each number by 2. Equivalently, if you work from right to left, you simply divide 
by 2. It makes sense to continue this pattern beyond 21 = 2. Dividing this by 2 gives
20 = 2 ÷ 2 = 1
and dividing again by 2 gives
2−1 = 1 ÷ 2 = 1/2
and so on. The completed table is then
2−3
2−2
2−1
20
21
22
23
24
1/8
1/4
1/2
1
2
4
8
16
Notice that
2−1 =
=
2−2 =
=
2−3 =
=
In other words, negative powers are evaluated by taking the reciprocal of the corresponding
positive power. Motivated by this particular example, we deﬁne
1
23
1
8
1
22
1
4
1
21
1
2
bn = b × b × b × . . . b
Non-linear Equations
142

and
where n is any positive whole number.
b−n = 1
bn
b0 = 1
2.3 • Indices and logarithms
143
Example
Evaluate
(a) 32
(b) 43
(c) 70
(d) 51
(e) 5−1
(f) (−2)6
(g) 3−4
(h) (−2)−3
(i) (1.723)0
Solution
Using the deﬁnitions
bn = b × b × b × . . . × b
b0 = 1
b−n =
we obtain
(a) 32 = 3 × 3 = 9
(b) 43 = 4 × 4 × 4 = 64
(c) 70 = 1
(d) 51 = 5
(e) 5−1 =
=
(f) (−2)6 = (−2) × (−2) × (−2) × (−2) × (−2) × (−2) = 64
where the answer is positive because there are an even number of minus signs.
(g) 3−4 =
=
=
(h) (−2)−3 =
=
= −
where the answer is negative because there are an odd number of minus signs.
(i) (1.723)0 = 1
because any number raised to the power of zero equals 1.
1
8
1
(−2) × (−2) × (−2)
1
(−2)3
1
81
1
3 × 3 × 3 × 3
1
34
1
5
1
51
1
bn

We handle fractional powers in two stages. We begin by deﬁning bm where m is a reciprocal
such as 1/2 or 1/8 and then consider more general fractions such as 3/4 or 3/8 later. Assuming that
n is a positive whole number, we deﬁne
By this we mean that b1/n is a number which, when raised to the power n, produces b. In sym-
bols, if c = b1/n then cn = b. Using this deﬁnition,
91/2 = square root of 9
= 3
(because 32 = 9)
81/3 = cube root of 8
= 2
(because 23 = 8)
6251/4 = fourth root of 625 = 5
(because 54 = 625)
Of course, the nth root of a number may not exist. There is no number c satisfying c2 = −4, 
for example, and so (−4)1/2 is not deﬁned. It is also possible for some numbers to have more
than one nth root. For example, there are two values of c which satisfy c4 = 16, namely c = 2 and
c = −2. In these circumstances it is standard practice to take the positive root, so 161/4 = 2.
We now turn our attention to the case of bm, where m is a general fraction of the form p/q
for some whole numbers p and q. What interpretation are we going to put on a number such
as 163/4? To be consistent with our previous deﬁnitions, the numerator, 3, can be thought of as
an instruction for us to raise 16 to the power of 3, and the denominator tells us to take the
fourth root. In fact, it is immaterial in which order these two operations are carried out. If we
begin by cubing 16 we get
163 = 16 × 16 × 16 = 4096
and taking the fourth root of this gives
163/4 = (4096)1/4 = 8
(because 84 = 4096)
On the other hand, taking the fourth root ﬁrst gives
161/4 = 2
(because 24 = 16)
and cubing this gives
163/4 = 23 = 8
which is the same answer as before. We therefore see that
(163)1/4 = (161/4)3
This result holds for any base b and fraction p/q (provided that q is positive), so we deﬁne
bp/q = (bp)1/q = (b1/q) p
b1/n = nth root of b
Non-linear Equations
144
Practice Problem
1 (1) Without using a calculator evaluate
(a) 102
(b) 101
(c) 100
(d) 10−1
(e) 10−2
(f) (−1)100
(g) (−1)99
(h) 7−3
(i)
(−9)2
(j)
(72 101)1
(k) (2.718)0
(2) Confirm your answer to part (1) using a calculator.

2.3.2 Rules of indices
There are two reasons why the exponential form is useful. Firstly, it is a convenient shorthand
for what otherwise might be a very lengthy number. The exponential form
98
is much easier to write down than either of the equivalent forms
9 × 9 × 9 × 9 × 9 × 9 × 9 × 9
or
43 046 721
2.3 • Indices and logarithms
145
Advice
Given that we are allowed to perform these operations in any order, it is usually easier to
find the qth root first to avoid having to spot roots of large numbers.
Example
Evaluate
(a) 84/3
(b) 25−3/2
Solution
(a) To evaluate 84/3 we need both to raise the number to the power of 4 and to ﬁnd a cube root. Choosing
to ﬁnd the cube root ﬁrst,
84/3 = (81/3)4 = 24 = 16
(b) Again it is easy to ﬁnd the square root of 25 ﬁrst before raising the number to the power of −3, so
25−3/2 = (251/2)−3 = 5−3 =
=
For this particular exponential form we have actually carried out three distinct operations. The minus
sign tells us to reciprocate, the fraction 1/2 tells us to take the square root and the 3 tells us to cube. You
might like to check for yourself that you get the same answer irrespective of the order in which these
three operations are performed.
1
125
1
53
Practice Problem
2 (1) Without using your calculator, evaluate
(a) 161/2
(b) 271/3
(c) 45/2
(d) 8−2/3
(e) 1−17/25
(2) Confirm your answer to part (1) using a calculator.

Non-linear Equations
146
Secondly, there are four basic rules of indices which facilitate the manipulation of such 
numbers. The four rules may be stated as follows:
Rule 1
bm × bn = bm+n
Rule 2
bm / bn = bm−n
Rule 3
(bm)n = bmn
Rule 4
(ab) n = anbn
It is certainly not our intention to provide mathematical proofs in this book. However, it might
help you to remember these rules if we give you a justiﬁcation based on some simple examples.
We consider each rule in turn.
Rule 1
Suppose we want to multiply together 22 and 25. Now 22 = 2 × 2 and 25 = 2 × 2 × 2 × 2 × 2, so
22 × 25 = (2 × 2) × (2 × 2 × 2 × 2 × 2)
Notice that we are multiplying together a total of seven 2s and so by deﬁnition this is just 27:
that is,
22 × 25 = 27 = 22+5
This conﬁrms rule 1, which tells you that if you multiply two numbers, all you have to do is to
add the indices.
Rule 2
Suppose we want to divide 22 by 25. This gives
=
=
Now, by deﬁnition, reciprocals are denoted by negative indices, so this is just 2−3: that is,
22 ÷ 25 = 2−3 = 22−5
This conﬁrms rule 2, which tells you that if you divide two numbers, all you have to do is to
subtract the indices.
Rule 3
Suppose we want to raise 102 to the power 3. By deﬁnition, for any number b,
b3 = b × b × b
so replacing b by 102 we have
(102)3 = 102 × 102 × 102 = (10 × 10) × (10 × 10) × (10 × 10)  = 106
because there are six 10s multiplied together: that is,
(102)3 = 106 = 102×3
This conﬁrms rule 3, which tells you that if you take a ‘power of a power’, all you have to do is
to multiply the indices.
1
23
1
2 × 2 × 2
2 × 2
2 × 2 × 2 × 2 × 2

Rule 4
Suppose we want to raise 2 × 3 to the power 4. By deﬁnition,
b4 = b × b × b × b
so replacing b by 2 × 3 gives
(2 × 3)4 = (2 × 3) × (2 × 3) × (2 × 3) × (2 × 3)
and, because it does not matter in which order numbers are multiplied, this can be written as
(2 × 2 × 2 × 2) × (3 × 3 × 3 × 3)
that is,
(2 × 3)4 = 24 × 34
This conﬁrms rule 4, which tells you that if you take the power of a product of two numbers,
all you have to do is to take the power of each number separately and multiply.
A word of warning is in order regarding these laws. Notice that in rules 1 and 2 the bases of
the numbers involved are the same. These rules do not apply if the bases are different. For
example, rule 1 gives no information about
24 × 35
Similarly, please notice that in rule 4 the numbers a and b are multiplied together. For some
strange reason, some business and economics students seem to think that rule 4 also applies to
addition, so that
(a + b)n = an + bn
This statement is NOT TRUE.
It would make algebraic manipulation a whole lot easier if it were true, but I am afraid to say
that it is deﬁnitely false! If you need convincing of this, note, for example, that
(1 + 2)3 = 33 = 27
which is not the same as
13 + 23 = 1 + 8 = 9
One variation of rule 4 which is true is
n
=
(b ≠0)
This is all right because division (unlike addition or subtraction) is the same sort of operation
as multiplication. In fact,
n
can be thought of as
a ×
n
so applying rule 4 to this product gives
an × 
n
= 
as required.
an
bn
D
F
1
b
A
C
D
F
1
b
A
C
D
F
a
b
A
C
an
bn
D
F
a
b
A
C
2.3 • Indices and logarithms
147

The following example demonstrates how rules 1–4 are used to simplify algebraic 
expressions.
Non-linear Equations
148
Advice 
There might be occasions (such as in examinations!) when you only half remember a rule
or perhaps think that you have discovered a brand new rule for yourself. If you are ever
worried about whether some rule is legal or not, you should always check it out by trying
numbers, just as we did for (a + b)n. Obviously, one numerical example which actually
works does not prove that the rule will always work. However, one example which fails is
good enough to tell you that your supposed rule is rubbish.
Example
Simplify
(a) x1/4 × x3/4
(b)
(c) (x2y−1/3)3
Solution
(a) The expression
x1/4 × x3/4
represents the product of two numbers in exponential form with the same base. From rule 1 we may
add the indices to get
x1/4 × x3/4 = x1/4+3/4 = x1
which is just x.
(b) The expression
is more complicated than that in part (a) since it involves numbers in exponential form with two dif-
ferent bases, x and y. From rule 2,
may be simpliﬁed by subtracting indices to get
x2 ÷ x4 = x2−4 = x−2
Similarly,
= y3 ÷ y1 = y3−1 = y2
Hence
= x−2y2
x2y3
x4y
y3
y
x2
x4
x2y3
x4y
x2y3
x4y

It is not possible to simplify this any further, because x−2 and y 2 have different bases. However, if you
prefer, this can be written as
because negative powers denote reciprocals.
(c) An obvious ﬁrst step in the simpliﬁcation of
(x2y−1/3)3
is to apply rule 4, treating x 2 as the value of a and y−1/3 as b to get
(x2y−1/3)3 = (x2)3(y−1/3)3
Rule 3 then allows us to write
(x2)3 = x2×3 = x6
(y−1/3)3 = y(−1/3)×3 = y−1
Hence
(x2y−1/3)3 = x6y−1
As in part (b), if you think it looks neater, you can write this as
because negative powers denote reciprocals.
x6
y
y2
x2
2.3 • Indices and logarithms
149
Practice Problem
3 Simplify
(a) (x3/4)8
(b)
(c) (x2y4)3
(d) √x(x5/2 + y3)
[Hint: in part (d) note that √x = x1/2 and multiply out the brackets.]
x2
x3/2
There are occasions throughout this book when we use the rules of indices and deﬁnitions
of bn. For the moment, we concentrate on one speciﬁc application where we see these ideas 
in action. The output, Q, of any production process depends on a variety of inputs, known as
factors of production. These comprise land, capital, labour and enterprise. For simplicity 
we restrict our attention to capital and labour. Capital, K, denotes all man-made aids to pro-
duction such as buildings, tools and plant machinery. Labour, L, denotes all paid work in the
production process. The dependence of Q on K and L may be written
Q = f(K, L)
which is called a production function. Once this relationship is made explicit, in the form of a
formula, it is straightforward to calculate the level of production from any given combination
of inputs. For example, if
Q = 100K1/3L1/2

then the inputs K = 27 and L = 100 lead to an output
Q = 100(27)1/3(100)1/2
= 100(3)(10)
= 3000
Of particular interest is the effect on output when inputs are scaled in some way. If capital and
labour both double, does the production level also double, does it go up by more than double
or does it go up by less than double? For the particular production function,
Q = 100K1/3L1/2
we see that, when K and L are replaced by 2K and 2L, respectively,
Q = 100(2K)1/3(2L)1/2
Now, by rule 4,
(2K)1/3 = 21/3K1/3
and
(2L)1/2 = 21/2L1/2
so
Q = 100(21/3K1/3)(21/2L1/2)
= (21/321/2)(100K1/3L1/2)
The second term, 100K1/3L1/2, is just the original value of Q, so we see that the output is 
multiplied by
21/321/2
Using rule 1, this number may be simpliﬁed by adding the indices to get
21/321/2 = 25/6
Moreover, because 5/6 is less than 1, the scale factor is smaller than 2. In fact, my calculator gives
25/6 = 1.78
(to 2 decimal places)
so output goes up by just less than double.
Non-linear Equations
150

It is important to notice that the above argument does not depend on the particular value,
2, that is taken as the scale factor. Exactly the same procedure can be applied if the inputs, K
and L, are scaled by a general number λ (where λ is a Greek letter pronounced ‘lambda’).
Replacing K and L by λK and λL respectively in the formula
Q = 100K1/3L1/2
gives
Q = 100(λK)1/3(λL)1/2
= 100λ1/3K1/3λ1/2L1/2
(rule 4)
= (λ1/3λ1/2)(100K1/3L1/2)
= λ5/6(100K1/3L1/2)
(rule 1)
We see that the output gets scaled by λ5/6, which is smaller than λ since the power, 5/6, is less
than 1. We describe this by saying that the production function exhibits decreasing returns 
to scale.
In general, a function
Q = f(K, L)
is said to be homogeneous if
f(λK, λL) = λnf(K, L)
for some number, n. This means that when both variables K and L are multiplied by λ we can
pull out all of the λs as a common factor, λn. The power, n, is called the degree of homo-
geneity. In the previous example we showed that
f(λK, λL) = λ5/6f(K, L)
and so it is homogeneous of degree 5/6. In general, if the degree of homogeneity, n, satisﬁes:
 n < 1, the function is said to display decreasing returns to scale
 n = 1, the function is said to display constant returns to scale
 n > 1, the function is said to display increasing returns to scale.
2.3 • Indices and logarithms
151
Example
Show that the following production function is homogeneous and ﬁnd its degree of homogeneity:
Q = 2K1/2L3/2
Does this function exhibit decreasing returns to scale, constant returns to scale or increasing returns to
scale?
Solution
We are given that
f(K, L) = 2K1/2L3/2
so replacing K by λK and L by λL gives
f(λK, λL) = 2(λK)1/2(λL)3/2


We can pull out all of the λs by using rule 4 to get
2λ1/2K1/2λ3/2L3/2
and then using rule 1 to get
λ2(2K1/2L3/2)
We have therefore shown that
f(λK, λL) = λ2f(K, L)
and so the function is homogeneous of degree 2. Moreover, since 2 > 1 we deduce that it has increasing
returns to scale.
Non-linear Equations
152
Practice Problem
4 Show that the following production functions are homogeneous and comment on their returns to scale:
(a) Q = 7KL2
(b) Q = 50K1/4L3/4
You may well have noticed that all of the production functions considered so far are of the
form
Q = AK αLβ
for some positive constants, A, α and β. (The Greek letters α and β are pronounced ‘alpha’ and
‘beta’ respectively.) Such functions are called Cobb–Douglas production functions. It is easy 
to see that they are homogeneous of degree α + β because if
f(K, L) = AK αLβ
then
f(λK, λL) = A(λK)α(λL)β
= AλαKαλβLβ
(rule 4)
= λα+β (AK αLβ)
(rule 1)
= λα+βf(K, L)
Consequently, Cobb–Douglas production functions exhibit
 decreasing returns to scale, if α + β < 1
 constant returns to scale, if α + β = 1
 increasing returns to scale, if α + β > 1.
By the way, not all production functions are of this type. Indeed, it is not even necessary for 
a production function to be homogeneous. Some examples illustrating these cases are given 

2.3 • Indices and logarithms
153
Advice 
Students have been known to regard logarithms as something rather abstract and difficult
to understand. There is, however, no need to worry about logarithms, since they simply
provide an alternative way of thinking about numbers such as bn. Read through the fol-
lowing example and try Practice Problem 5 for yourself. You might discover that they are
easier than you expect!
Example
Evaluate
(a) log39
(b) log42
(c) log7
1/7
Solution
(a) To ﬁnd the value of log39 we convert the problem into one involving powers. From the deﬁnition of a
logarithm to base 3 we see that the statement

in Practice Problems 13 and 14 at the end of this section. We shall return to the topic of pro-
duction functions in Chapter 5.
2.3.3 Logarithms
At the beginning of this section we stated that if a number, M, is expressed as
M = bn
then bn is called the exponential form of M to base b. The approach taken so far has simply been
to evaluate M from any given values of b and n. In practice, it may be necessary to reverse this
process and to ﬁnd n from known values of M and b. To solve the equation
32 = 2n
we need to express 32 as a power of 2. In this case it is easy to work out n by inspection. Simple
trial and error easily gives n = 5 because
25 = 32
We describe this expression by saying that the logarithm of 32 to base 2 is 5. In symbols we write
log232 = 5
Quite generally,
if
M = bn
then
logbM = n
when n is called the logarithm of M to base b.

log39 = n
is equivalent to
9 = 3n
The problem of ﬁnding the logarithm of 9 to base 3 is exactly the same as that of writing 9 as a power
of 3. The solution of this equation is clearly n = 2 since
9 = 32
Hence log39 = 2.
(b) Again to evaluate log42 we merely rewrite
log42 = n
in exponential form as
2 = 4n
The problem of ﬁnding the logarithm of 2 to base 4 is exactly the same as that of writing 2 as a power
of 4. The value of 2 is obtained from 4 by taking the square root, which involves raising 4 to the power
of 1/2, so
2 = 41/2
Hence log24 = 1/2.
(c) If
log7
1/7 = n
then
1/7 = 7n
The value of 1/7 is found by taking the reciprocal of 7, which involves raising 7 to the power of −1: 
that is,
1/7 = 7−1
Hence log7
1/7 = −1.
Non-linear Equations
154
Practice Problem
5 (1) Write down the values of n which satisfy
(a) 1000 = 10n
(b) 100 = 10n
(c) 10 = 10n
(d) 1 = 10n
(e)
= 10n
(f)
= 10n
(2) Use your answer to part (1) to write down the values of
(a) log101000
(b) log10100
(c) log1010
(d) log101
(e) log10
1/10
(f) log10
1/100
(3) Confirm your answer to part (2) using a calculator.
1
100
1
10

2.3 • Indices and logarithms
155
Example
Use the rules of logarithms to express each of the following as a single logarithm:
(a) logbx + logby −logbz
(b) 2logbx −3logby
Solution
(a) The ﬁrst rule of logs shows that the sum of two logs can be written as the log of a product, so
logbx + logby −logbz = logb(xy) −logbz
Also, according to rule 2, the difference of two logs is the log of a quotient, so we can simplify further to
get
logb
(b) Given any combination of logs such as
2logbx −3logby
D
F
xy
z
A
C

Given the intimate relationship between exponentials and logarithms, you should not be too
surprised to learn that logarithms satisfy three rules that are comparable with those for indices.
The rules of logarithms are as follows.
Rule 1
logb(x × y) = logb x + logb y
Rule 2
logb(x / y) = logb x −logb y
Rule 3
logbxm = mlogb x
A long time ago, before the pocket calculator was invented, people used tables of logarithms
to perform complicated arithmetic calculations. It was generally assumed that everyone could
add or subtract numbers using pen and paper, but that people found it hard to multiply and
divide. The ﬁrst two rules gave a means of converting calculations involving multiplication and
division into easier calculations involving addition and subtraction. For example, to work out
1.765 12 × 25.329 71
we would ﬁrst look up the logarithms of 1.765 12 and 25.329 71 using tables and then add these
logarithms together on paper. According to rule 1, the value obtained is just the logarithm 
of the answer. Finally, using tables of antilogarithms (which in effect raised the base to 
an appropriate power), the result of the calculation was obtained. Fortunately for us, this is all
history and we can now perform arithmetic calculations in a fraction of the time it took our
predecessors to multiply or divide two numbers. This might suggest that logarithms are redund-
ant. However, the idea of a logarithm remains an important one. The logarithm function 
itself – that is,
f(x) = logb(x)
is of value and we shall investigate its properties later in the book. For the time being we ﬁrst
show how to use the laws of logarithms in algebra and then demonstrate how logarithms can
be used to solve algebraic equations in which the unknown appears as a power. This technique
will be of particular use in the next chapter when we solve compound interest problems.

the trick is to use the third rule to ‘get rid’ of the coefﬁcients. Since
2logbx = logbx2 and 3logby = logby3
we see that
2logbx −3logby = logbx2 −logby3
Only now can we use the second rule of logs, which allows us to write the expression as the single 
logarithm
logb
D
F
x2
y3
A
C
Non-linear Equations
156
Example
Find the value of x which satisﬁes
(a) 200(1.1)x = 20 000
(b) 5x = 2(3)x
Solution
(a) An obvious ﬁrst step in the solution of
200(1.1)x = 20 000
is to divide both sides by 200 to get
(1.1)x = 100
In Chapter 1 it was pointed out that we can do whatever we like to an equation, provided that we do
the same thing to both sides. In particular, we may take logarithms of both sides to get
log(1.1)x = log(100)
Now by rule 3 we have
log(1.1)x = xlog(1.1)
so the equation becomes
xlog(1.1) = log(100)
Notice the effect that rule 3 has on the equation. It brings the unknown down to the same level as the
rest of the expression. This is the whole point of taking logarithms, since it converts an equation in
which the unknown appears as a power into one which can be solved using familiar algebraic methods.
Dividing both sides of the equation
xlog(1.1) = log(100)
by log(1.1) gives
Practice Problem
6 Use the rules of logs to express each of the following as a single logarithm:
(a) logbx −logby + logbz
(b) 4logbx + 2logby

x =
So far no mention has been made of the base of the logarithm. The above equation for x is true no mat-
ter what base is used. It makes sense to use logarithms to base 10 because all scientiﬁc calculators have
this facility as one of their function keys. Using base 10, my calculator gives
x =
=
= 48.32
to 2 decimal places.
As a check, if this number is substituted back into the original equation, then
200(1.1)x = 200(1.1)48.32 = 20 004
✓
We cannot expect to obtain the exact answer, because we rounded x to only two decimal places.
(b) To solve
5x = 2(3)x
we take logarithms of both sides to get
log(5x) = log(2 × 3x)
The right-hand side is the logarithm of a product and, according to rule 1, can be written as the sum of
the logarithms, so the equation becomes
log(5x) = log(2) + log(3x)
As in part (a) the key step is to use rule 3 to ‘bring down the powers’. If rule 3 is applied to both log(5x)
and log(3x) then the equation becomes
xlog(5) = log(2) + xlog(3)
This is now the type of equation that we know how to solve. We collect x’s on the left-hand side to get
xlog(5) −xlog(3) = log(2)
and then pull out a common factor of x to get
x[log(5) −log(3)] = log(2)
Now, by rule 2, the difference of two logarithms is the same as the logarithm of their quotient, so
log(5) −log(3) = log(5 ÷ 3)
Hence the equation becomes
xlog
= log(2)
so
x =
Finally, taking logarithms to base 10 using a calculator gives
x =
= 1.36
to 2 decimal places.
0.301 029 996
0.221 848 750
log(2)
log(5/3)
D
F
5
3
A
C
2
0.041 392 685
log(100)
log(1.1)
log(100)
log(1.1)
2.3 • Indices and logarithms
157


As a check, the original equation
5x = 2(3)x
becomes
51.36 = 2(3)1.36
that is,
8.92 = 8.91
✓
Again the slight discrepancy is due to rounding errors in the value of x.
Non-linear Equations
158
Practice Problem
7 Solve the following equations for x:
(a) 3x = 7
(b) 5(2)x = 10x
Advice
In this section we have met a large number of definitions and rules concerning indices and
logarithms. For convenience, we have collected these together in the form of a summary.
The facts relating to indices are particularly important and you should make every effort
to memorize these before proceeding with the rest of this book.
2.3.4 Summary
Indices
If n is a positive whole number then
bn = b × b × . . . × b
b0 = 1
b−n = 1/bn
b1/n = nth root of b
Also, if p and q are whole numbers with q > 0 then
b p/q = (b p)1/q = (b1/q) p
The four rules of indices are:
Rule 1
bm × bn = bm+n
Rule 2
bm ÷ bn = bm−n
Rule 3
(bm)n = bmn
Rule 4
(ab)n = anbn

Logarithms
If M = bn then n = logbM. The three rules of logarithms are:
Rule 1
logb(x × y) = logbx + logby
Rule 2
logb(x ÷ y) = logbx −logby
Rule 3
logbxm = mlogbx
2.3 • Indices and logarithms
159
Capital
Man-made assets used in the production of goods and services.
Cobb–Douglas production function
A production function of the form: Q = AKαLβ.
Constant returns to scale
Exhibited by a production function when a given percentage
increase in input leads to the same percentage increase in output: f(λK, λL) = λf(K, L).
Decreasing returns to scale
Exhibited by a production function when a given percentage
increase in input leads to a smaller percentage increase in output: f(λK, λL) = λnf(K, L)
where 0 < n < 1.
Exponent
A superscript attached to a variable; the number 5 is the exponent in the 
expression, 2x5.
Exponential form
A representation of a number which is written using powers. For 
example, 25 is the exponential form of the number 32.
Factors of production
The inputs into the production of goods and services: labour, land,
capital and raw materials.
Homogeneous functions
A function with the property that when all of the inputs are multi-
plied by a constant, λ, the output is multiplied by λn where n is the degree of homogeneity.
Increasing returns to scale
Exhibited by a production function when a given percentage
increase in input leads to a larger percentage increase in output: f(λK, λL) = λnf(K, L) where
n > 1.
Index
Another word for exponent.
Labour
All forms of human input to the production process.
Logarithm
The power to which a base must be raised to yield a particular number.
Power
Another word for exponent. If this is a positive integer then it gives the number of
times a number is multiplied by itself.
Production function
The relationship between the output of a good and the inputs used
to produce it.
Key Terms
Practice Problems
8 (1) Without using your calculator evaluate
(a) 82
(b) 21
(c) 3−1
(d) 170
(e) 11/5
(f) 361/2
(g) 82/3
(h) 49−3/2
(2) Confirm your answer to part (1) using a calculator.
9 Evaluate the following without using a calculator
(a) 323/5
(b) 64−5/6
(c)
−4/3
(d)
3
2/3
(e)
2
−1/2
D
F
1
4
A
C
D
F
3
8
A
C
D
F
1
125
A
C


10 Use the rules of indices to simplify
(a) y3/2 × y1/2
(b)
(c) (xy1/2)4
(d) ( p2)1/3 ÷ ( p1/3)2
(e) (24q)1/3 ÷ (3q)1/3
(f) (25p2q4)1/2
11 Write the following expressions using index notation
(a)
(b) 5√x
(c)
(d) 2x√x
(e) 
12 For the production function, Q = 200K1/4L2/3 find the output when 
(a) K = 16, L = 27
(b) K = 10 000, L = 1000
13 Which of the following production functions are homogeneous? For those functions which are homo-
geneous write down their degrees of homogeneity and comment on their returns to scale.
(a) Q = 500K1/3L1/4
(b) Q = 3LK + L2
(c) Q = L + 5L2K3
14 Show that the production function
Q = A[bKα + (1 −b)Lα]1/α
is homogeneous and displays constant returns to scale.
15 Write down the values of x which satisfy each of the following equations:
(a) 5x = 25
(b) 3x =
(c) 2x =
(d) 2x = 64
(e) 100x = 10
(f) 8x = 16
16 Solve the following equations:
(a) 23x = 4
(b) 4 × 2x = 32
(c) 8x = 2 ×
x
17 Write down the value of
(a) logbb2
(b) logbb
(c) logb1
(d) logb√b
(e) logb(1/b)
18 Use the rules of logs to express each of the following as a single log:
(a) logb(xy) −logbx −logby
(b) 3logbx −2logby
(c) logby + 5logbx −2logbz
19 Express the following in terms of logbx, logby and logbz:
(a) logb(x2y3z4)
(b) logb
(c) logb
20 If logb2 = p, logb3 = q and logb10 = r, express the following in terms of p, q and r:
(a) logb
(b) logb12
(c) logb0.0003
(d) logb600
D
F
1
3
A
C
D
F
x
yz
A
C
D
F
x4
y2z5
A
C
D
F
1
2
A
C
1
8
1
3
8
x(3√x)
1
√x
1
x4
x2y
xy−1
Non-linear Equations
160

21 Solve the following equations:
(a) 10(1.07)x = 2000
(b) 10x−1 = 3
(c) 5x−2 = 5
(d) 2(7)−x = 3x
22 Solve the inequalities
(a) 32x+1 ≤7
(b) 0.8x < 0.04
23 Solve the equation
log10(x + 2) + log10x − 1 = log10
D
F
3
2
A
C
2.3 • Indices and logarithms
161

section 2.4
The exponential and natural
logarithm functions
In the previous section we described how to deﬁne numbers of the form bx, and discussed the
idea of a logarithm, logbx. It turns out that there is one base (the number e = 2.718 281 . . . )
that is particularly important in mathematics. The purpose of this present section is to intro-
duce you to this strange number and to consider a few simple applications.
Objectives
At the end of this section you should be able to:
 Sketch graphs of general exponential functions.
 Understand how the number e is deﬁned.
 Use the exponential function to model growth and decay.
 Use log graphs to ﬁnd unknown parameters in simple models.
 Use the natural logarithm function to solve equations.
Example
Sketch the graphs of the functions
(a) f(x) = 2x
(b) g(x) = 2−x
Comment on the relationship between these graphs.
Solution
(a) As we pointed out in Section 2.3, a number such as 2x is said to be in exponential form. The number 2 is
called the base and x is called the exponent. Values of this function are easily found either by pressing
the power key 
on a calculator or by using the deﬁnition of bn given in Section 2.3. A selection of
these are given in the following table:
x y

x
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
5
2x
0.125
0.25
0.5
1
2
4
8
16
32
A graph of f(x) based on this table is sketched in Figure 2.14. Notice that the graph approaches the 
x axis for large negative values of x and it rises rapidly as x increases.
(b) The negative exponential
g(x) = 2−x
has values
x
−5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
2−x
32
16
8
4
2
1
0.5
0.25
0.125
This function is sketched in Figure 2.15. It is worth noticing that the numbers appearing in the table 
of 2−x are the same as those of 2x but arranged in reverse order. Hence the graph of 2−x is obtained by
reﬂecting the graph of 2x in the y axis.
2.4 • The exponential and natural logarithm functions
163
Figure 2.14
Figure 2.15

Figure 2.14 displays the graph of a particular exponential function, 2x. Quite generally, the
graph of any exponential function
f(x) = bx
has the same basic shape provided b > 1. The only difference is that larger values of b produce
steeper curves. A similar comment applies to the negative exponential, b−x.
Non-linear Equations
164
Practice Problem
1 Complete the following table of function values of 3x and 3−x and hence sketch their graphs.
x
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
3x
3−x
Obviously there is a whole class of functions, each corresponding to a different base, b. Of
particular interest is the case when b takes the value
2.718 281 828 459 . . .
This number is written as e and the function
f(x) = ex
is referred to as the exponential function. In fact, it is not necessary for you to understand where
this number comes from. All scientiﬁc calculators have an ex button and you may simply wish
to accept the results of using it. However, it might help your conﬁdence if you have some
appreciation of how it is deﬁned. To this end consider the following example and sub-
sequent problem.
Example
Evaluate the expression
1 +
m
where m = 1, 10, 100 and 1000, and comment brieﬂy on the behaviour of this sequence.
Solution
Substituting the values m = 1, 10, 100 and 1000 into
1 +
m
gives
1 +
1
= 21 = 2
1 +
10
= (1.1)10 = 2.593 742 460
D
F
1
10
A
C
D
F
1
1
A
C
D
F
1
m
A
C
D
F
1
m
A
C

1 +
100
= (1.01)100 = 2.704 813 829
1 +
1000
= (1.001)1000 = 2.716 923 932
The numbers are clearly getting bigger as m increases. However, the rate of increase appears to be slowing
down, suggesting that numbers are converging to some ﬁxed value.
D
F
1
1000
A
C
D
F
1
100
A
C
2.4 • The exponential and natural logarithm functions
165
The following problem gives you an opportunity to continue the sequence and to discover
for yourself the limiting value.
Practice Problem
2 (a) Use the power key xy on your calculator to evaluate
1 +
m
where m = 10 000, 100 000 and 1 000 000.
(b) Use your calculator to evaluate e1 and compare with your answer to part (a).
D
F
1
m
A
C
Hopefully, the results of Practice Problem 2 should convince you that as m gets larger, the
value of
1 +
m
approaches a limiting value of 2.718 281 828 . . . , which we choose to denote by the letter e. In
symbols we write
e = lim
m→∞1 +
m
The signiﬁcance of this number can only be fully appreciated in the context of calculus,
which we study in Chapter 4. However, it is useful at this stage to consider some preliminary
examples. These will give you practice in using the ex button on your calculator and will give
you some idea how this function can be used in modelling.
D
F
1
m
A
C
D
F
1
m
A
C
Advice
The number e has a similar status in mathematics as the number π and is just as useful. It
arises in the mathematics of finance, which we discuss in the next chapter. You might like
to glance through Section 3.2 now if you need convincing of the usefulness of e.
Example
The percentage, y, of households possessing refrigerators, t years after they have been introduced in a 
developed country, is modelled by
y = 100 −95e−0.15t


(1) Find the percentage of households that have refrigerators
(a) at their launch
(b) after 1 year
(c) after 10 years
(d) after 20 years
(2) What is the market saturation level?
(3) Sketch a graph of y against t and hence give a qualitative description of the growth of refrigerator 
ownership over time.
Solution
(1) To calculate the percentage of households possessing refrigerators now and in 1, 10 and 20 years’ time,
we substitute t = 0, 1, 10 and 20 into the formula
y = 100 −95e−0.15t
to get
(a) y(0) = 100 −95e0 = 5%
(b) y(1) = 100 −95e−0.15 = 18% 
(c) y(10) = 100 −95e−1.5 = 79%
(d) y(20) = 100 −95e−3.0 = 95%
(2) To ﬁnd the saturation level we need to investigate what happens to y as t gets ever larger. We know that
the graph of a negative exponential function has the basic shape shown in Figure 2.15. Consequently,
the value of e−0.15t will eventually approach zero as t increases. The market saturation level is therefore
given by
y = 100 −95(0) = 100%
Non-linear Equations
166

(3) A graph of y against t, based on the information obtained in parts (1) and (2), is sketched in Figure 2.16.
This shows that y grows rapidly to begin with, but slows down as the market approaches satura-
tion level. A saturation level of 100% indicates that eventually all households are expected to possess
refrigerators, which is not surprising given the nature of the product.
2.4 • The exponential and natural logarithm functions
167
Practice Problem
3 The percentage, y, of households possessing camcorders t years after they have been launched is 
modelled by
y =
(1) Find the percentage of households that have camcorders
(a) at their launch
(b) after 10 years
(c) after 20 years
(d) after 30 years
(2) What is the market saturation level?
(3) Sketch a graph of y against t and hence give a qualitative description of the growth of camcorder
ownership over time.
55
1 + 800e−0.3t
In Section 2.3 we noted that if a number M can be expressed as bn then n is called the 
logarithm of M to base b. In particular, for base e,
if
M = en
then
n = logeM
Figure 2.16

Non-linear Equations
168
Example
Use the rules of logs to express
(a) ln 
in terms of ln x and ln y
(b) 3 ln p + ln q −2 ln r as a single logarithm
Solution
(a) In this part we need to ‘expand’, so we read the rules of logs from left to right:
ln 
= ln x −ln √y
(rule 2)
= ln x −ln y1/2
(fractional powers denote roots)
= ln x −
ln y
(rule 3)
(b) In this part we need to reverse this process and so read the rules from right to left:
3 ln p + ln q −2 ln r = ln p3 + ln q −ln r2
(rule 3)
= ln(p3q) −ln r2
(rule 1)
= ln
(rule 2)
D
F
p3q
r2
A
C
1
2
D
F
x
√y
A
C
D
F
x
√y
A
C
Practice Problem
4 Use the rules of logs to express
(a) ln (a2b3) in terms of ln a and ln b
(b)
1/2 ln x −3 ln y as a single logarithm
As we pointed out in Section 2.3, logs are particularly useful for solving equations in which
the unknown occurs as a power. If the base is the number e then the equation can be solved by
using natural logarithms.
We call logarithms to base e natural logarithms. These occur sufﬁciently frequently to warrant
their own notation. Rather than writing logeM we simply put ln M instead. The three rules of
logs can then be stated as
Rule 1
ln(x × y) = ln x + ln y
Rule 2
ln(x / y) = ln x −ln y
Rule 3
ln xm = m ln x

One important (but rather difﬁcult) problem in modelling is to extract a mathematical 
formula from a table of numbers. If this relationship is of the form of an exponential then it is
possible to estimate values for some of the parameters involved.
2.4 • The exponential and natural logarithm functions
169
Practice Problem
5 During a recession a firm’s revenue declines continuously so that the revenue, TR (measured in millions
of dollars), in t years’ time is modelled by
TR = 5e−0.15t
(a) Calculate the current revenue and also the revenue in 2 years’ time.
(b) After how many years will the revenue decline to $2.7 million?
Example
An economy is forecast to grow continuously so that the gross national product (GNP), measured in 
billions of dollars, after t years is given by
GNP = 80e0.02t
After how many years is GNP forecast to be $88 billion?
Solution
We need to solve
88 = 80e0.02t
for t. Dividing through by 80 gives
1.1 = e0.02t
Using the deﬁnition of natural logarithms we know that
if
M = en
then
n = ln M
If we apply this deﬁnition to the equation
1.1 = e0.02t
we deduce that
0.02t = ln 1.1 = 0.095 31 . . .
(check this using your own calculator)
so
t =
= 4.77
We therefore deduce that GNP reaches a level of $88 billion after 4.77 years.
0.095 31
0.02

Non-linear Equations
170
Advice 
The following example shows how to find such a formula from data points. This is an
important skill. However, it is not crucial to your understanding of subsequent material in
this book. You may wish to miss this out on first reading and move straight on to the
Practice Problems at the end of this chapter.
Example
The values of GNP, g, measured in billions of dollars, over a period of t years was observed to be
t (years)
2
5
10
20
g (billions of dollars)
12
16
27
74
Model the growth of GNP using a formula of the form
g = BeAt
for appropriate values of A and B. Hence estimate the value of GNP after 15 years.
Solution
Figure 2.17 shows the four points plotted with g on the vertical axis and t on the horizontal axis. The basic
shape of the curve joining these points certainly suggests that an exponential function is likely to provide a
reasonable model, but it gives no information about what values to use for the parameters A and B.
However, since one of the unknown parameters, A, occurs as a power in the relation
g = BeAt
it is a good idea to take natural logs of both sides to get
ln g = ln(BeAt)
Figure 2.17

The rules of logs enable us to expand the right-hand side to get
ln (BeAt) = ln B + ln(eAt) (rule 1)
= ln B + At
(deﬁnition of a log to base e)
Hence
ln g = At + ln B
Although this does not look like it at ﬁrst sight, this relation is actually the equation of a straight line! To see
this recall that the usual equation of a line is y = ax + b. The log equation is indeed of this form if we put
y = ln g and x = t
The equation then becomes
y = Ax + ln B
so a graph of ln g plotted on the vertical axis with t plotted on the horizontal axis should produce a straight
line with slope A and with an intercept on the vertical axis of ln B.
Figure 2.18 shows this graph based on the table of values
x = t
2
5
10
20
y = ln g
2.48
2.77
3.30
4.30
As one might expect, the points do not exactly lie on a straight line, since the formula is only a model.
However, the line sketched in Figure 2.18 is a remarkably good ﬁt. The slope can be calculated as
A =
= 0.09
and the vertical intercept can be read off the graph as 2.25. This is ln B and so
B = e2.25 = 9.49
4 −3
18.6 −7.6
2.4 • The exponential and natural logarithm functions
171
Figure 2.18


Hence the formula for the approximate relation between g and t is
g = 9.49e0.09t
Finally, an estimate of the GNP after 15 years can be obtained by substituting t = 15 into this formula to get
g = 36.6
(billion dollars)
Non-linear Equations
172
Practice Problem
6 Immediately after the launch of a new product, the monthly sales figures (in thousands) are as follows:
t (months)
1
3
6
12
s (sales)
1.8
2.7
5.0
16.5
(1) Complete the following table of values of ln s
t
1
3
6
12
ln s
0.59
1.61
(2) Plot these points on graph paper with the values of ln s on the vertical axis and t on the horizontal
axis. Draw a straight line passing close to these points. Write down the value of the vertical inter-
cept and calculate the slope.
(3) Use your answers to part (2) to estimate the values of A and B in the relation s = BeAt.
(4) Use the exponential model derived in part (3) to estimate the sales when
(a) t = 9
(b) t = 60
Which of these estimates would you expect to be the more reliable? Give a reason for your answer.
The exponential function
The function, f(x) = e x; an exponential function in which the
base is number, e = 2.718 28 . . .
Natural logarithm
A logarithm to base, e; if M = en then n is the natural logarithm of M
and we write, n = ln M
Key Terms
Practice Problems
7
The number of items, N, produced each day by an assembly-line worker, t days after an initial train-
ing period, is modelled by
N = 100 −100e−0.4t
(1) Calculate the number of items produced daily
(a) 1 day after the training period
(b) 2 days after the training period
(c) 10 days after the training period

(2) What is the worker’s daily production in the long run?
(3) Sketch a graph of N against t and explain why the general shape might have been expected.
8
Use the rules of logs to expand each of the following:
(a) ln xy
(b) ln xy4
(c) ln(xy)2
(d) ln 
(e) ln 
(f) ln 
9
Use the rules of logs to express each of the following as a single logarithm:
(a) ln x + 2 ln x
(b) 4 ln x −3 ln y + 5 ln z
10 Solve each of the following equations. (Round your answer to 2 decimal places.)
(a) ex = 5.9
(b) ex = 0.45
(c) ex = −2
(d) e3x = 13.68
(e) e−5x = 0.34
(f) 4e2x = 7.98
11 The value of a second-hand car reduces exponentially with age, so that its value $y after t years can
be modelled by the formula
y = Ae−ax
If the car was $50 000 when new and was worth $38 000 after 2 years, find the values of A and a,
correct to 3 decimal places.
Use this model to predict the value of the car
(a) when the car is 5 years old
(b) in the long run
12 A team of financial advisers guiding the launch of a national newspaper has modelled the future 
circulation of the newspaper by the equation
N = c(1 −e−kt)
where N is the daily circulation after t days of publication, and c and k are positive constants.
Transpose this formula to show that
t =
ln
When the paper is launched, audits show that
c = 700 000
and
k =
ln 2
(a) Calculate the daily circulation after 30 days of publication.
(b) After how many days will the daily circulation first reach 525 000?
(c) What advice can you give the newspaper proprietor if it is known that the paper will break even
only if the daily circulation exceeds 750 000?
13 A Cobb–Douglas production function is given by
Q = 3L1/2K1/3
By taking logs of both sides of this equation, show that
ln Q = ln 3 + 
ln L +
ln K
If a graph were to be sketched of ln Q against ln K (for varying values of Q and K but with L fixed),
explain briefly why the graph will be a straight line and state its slope and vertical intercept.
1
3
1
2
1
30
D
F
c
c −N
A
C
1
k
xy3
z
x
y
x5
y7
2.4 • The exponential and natural logarithm functions
173


14 The following table gives data relating a firm’s output, Q and labour, L.
L
1
2
3
4
5
Q
0.50
0.63
0.72
0.80
0.85
The firm’s short-run production function is believed to be of the form
Q = ALn
(a) Show that
ln Q = n ln L + ln A
(b) Using the data supplied, copy and complete the following table:
ln L
0.69
1.39
ln Q
−0.69
−0.33
−0.16
Plot these points with ln L on the horizontal axis and ln Q on the vertical axis. Draw a straight
line passing as close as possible to all five points.
(c) By finding the slope and vertical intercept of the line sketched in part (b), estimate the values of
the parameters n and A.
15 (Excel) Tabulate values of the following functions for x = 0, 0.2, 0.4, . . . , 2. Hence sketch graphs of
these functions, on the same diagram, over the range 0 ≤x ≤2. Discuss, in qualitative terms, any dif-
ferences or similarities between these functions.
(a) y = x
(b) y = x2
(c) y = x3
(d) y = √x
(e) y = ex
[In Excel, ex is typed EXP(x)]
16 (Excel) Tabulate values of the functions ln x, log10 x and log6 x for x = 0.2, 0.4, 0.6, 0.8, 1.0, 2, 3, 4,
. . . , 8. Hence sketch graphs of these functions on the same diagram, over the range 0.2 ≤x ≤8.
Briefly comment on any similarities and differences between them.
[In Excel, natural logs and logs to base 10 are typed as LN(x) and LOG(x) respectively. In general,
to find the logarithm of a number x to base n, type LOG(x, n)]
17 (Excel) The demand function of a good can be modelled approximately by
P = 100 −
Qn
(a) Show that if this relation is exact then a graph of ln(150 −1.5P) against ln Q will be a straight
line passing through the origin with slope n.
(b) For the data given below, tabulate the values of ln(150 −1.5P) and ln Q. Find the line of best fit
and hence estimate the value of n correct to 1 decimal place.
Q
10
50
60
100
200
400
P
95
85
80
70
50
20
2
3
Non-linear Equations
174

chapter 3
Mathematics of Finance
This chapter provides an understanding of the way in which financial calculations are
worked out. There are four sections, which should be read in the order that they
appear.
Section 3.1 revises work on percentages. In particular, a quick method of dealing
with percentage increase and decrease calculations is described. This enables an
overall percentage change to be deduced easily from a sequence of individual
changes. Percentages are used to calculate and interpret index numbers, and to
adjust value data for inflation.
Section 3.2 shows how to calculate the future value of a lump sum which is invested
to earn interest. This interest can be added to the investment annually, semi-annu-
ally, quarterly or even more frequently. The exponential function is used to solve
problems in which interest is compounded continuously.
A wide variety of applications are considered in Sections 3.3 and 3.4. In Section 3.3
a mathematical device known as a geometric progression, which is used to calculate
the future value of a savings plan and the monthly repayments of a loan, is intro-
duced. Section 3.4 describes the opposite problem of calculating the present value
given a future value. The process of working backwards is called discounting. It can
be used to decide how much money to invest today in order to achieve a specific
target sum in a few years’ time. Discounting can be used to appraise different invest-
ment projects. On the macroeconomic level, the relationship between interest rates
and speculative demand for money is investigated.
The material in this chapter will be of greatest benefit to students on business stud-
ies and accountancy courses. This chapter could be omitted without affecting your
understanding of the rest of this book.


section 3.1
Percentages
In order to be able to handle ﬁnancial calculations, it is necessary to use percentages proﬁci-
ently. The word ‘percentage’ literally means ‘per cent’, i.e. per hundredth, so that whenever we
speak of r% of something, we simply mean the fraction (r/100)ths of it.
Objectives
At the end of this section you should be able to:
 Understand what a percentage is.
 Solve problems involving a percentage increase or decrease.
 Write down scale factors associated with percentage changes.
 Work out overall percentage changes.
 Calculate and interpret index numbers.
 Adjust value data for inﬂation.
Advice
The first part of this section provides a leisurely revision of the idea of a percentage as 
well as reminding you about how to use scale factors to cope with percentage changes.
These ideas are crucial to any understanding of financial mathematics. However, if you are
already confident in using percentages, you may wish to miss this out and move straight
on to the applications covered in sub-sections 3.1.1 and 3.1.2.

For example,
25% is the same as
=
30% is the same as
=
50% is the same as
= 1
2
50
100
3
10
30
100
1
4
25
100
Mathematics of Finance
178
Example
Calculate
(a) 15% of 12
(b) 98% of 17
(c) 150% of 290
Solution
(a) 15% of 12 is the same as
× 12 = 0.15 × 12 = 1.8
(b) 98% of 17 is the same as
× 17 = 0.98 × 17 = 16.66
(c) 150% of 290 is the same as
× 290 = 1.5 × 290 = 435
150
100
98
100
15
100
Practice Problem
1 Calculate
(a) 10% of $2.90
(b) 75% of $1250
(c) 24% of $580
Whenever any numerical quantity increases or decreases, it is customary to refer to this
change in percentage terms. The following example serves to remind you how to perform cal-
culations involving percentage changes.
Example
(a) An investment rises from $2500 to $3375. Express the increase as a percentage of the original.
(b) At the beginning of a year, the population of a small village is 8400. If the annual rise in population is
12%, ﬁnd the population at the end of the year.
(c) In a sale, all prices are reduced by 20%. Find the sale price of a good originally costing $580.

Solution
(a) The rise in the value of the investment is
3375 −2500 = 875
As a fraction of the original this is
= 0.35
This is the same as 35 hundredths, so the percentage rise is 35%.
(b) As a fraction
12% is the same as 
= 0.12
so the rise in population is
0.12 × 8400 = 1008
Hence the ﬁnal population is
8400 + 1008 = 9408
(c) As a fraction
20% is the same as 
= 0.2
so the fall in price is
0.2 × 580 = 116
Hence the ﬁnal price is
580 −116 = $464
20
100
12
100
875
2500
3.1 • Percentages
179
Practice Problem
2 (a) A firm’s annual sales rise from 50 000 to 55 000 from one year to the next. Express the rise as a
percentage of the original.
(b) The government imposes a 15% tax on the price of a good. How much does the consumer pay
for a good priced by a firm at $1360?
(c) Investments fall during the course of a year by 7%. Find the value of an investment at the end of
the year if it was worth $9500 at the beginning of the year.
In the previous example and in Practice Problem 2, the calculations were performed in two
separate stages. The actual rise or fall was ﬁrst worked out, and these changes were then applied to
the original value to obtain the ﬁnal answer. It is possible to obtain this answer in a single calcula-
tion, and we now describe how this can be done. Not only is this new approach quicker, but it
also enables us to tackle more difﬁcult problems. To be speciﬁc, let us suppose that the price 
of good is set to rise by 9%, and that its current price is $78. The new price consists of the 

original (which can be thought of as 100% of the $78) plus the increase (which is 9% of $78).
The ﬁnal price is therefore
100% + 9% = 109% (of the $78)
which is the same as
= 1.09
In other words, in order to calculate the ﬁnal price all we have to do is to multiply by the scale
factor, 1.09. Hence the new price is
1.09 × 78 = $85.02
One advantage of this approach is that it is then just as easy to go backwards and work out
the original price from the new price. To go backwards in time we simply divide by the scale
factor. For example, if the ﬁnal price of a good is $1068.20 then before a 9% increase the price
would have been
1068.20 ÷ 1.09 = $980
In general, if the percentage rise is r% then the ﬁnal value consists of the original (100%)
together with the increase (r%), giving a total of
+
= 1 +
To go forwards in time we multiply by this scale factor, whereas to go backwards we divide.
r
100
r
100
100
100
109
100
Mathematics of Finance
180
Example
(a) If the annual rate of inﬂation is 4%, ﬁnd the price of a good at the end of a year if its price at the 
beginning of the year is $25.
(b) The cost of a good is $799 including 17.5% VAT (value added tax). What is the cost excluding VAT?
(c) Express the rise from 950 to 1007 as a percentage.
Solution
(a) The scale factor is
1 +
= 1.04
We are trying to ﬁnd the price after the increase, so we multiply to get
25 × 1.04 = $26
(b) The scale factor is
1 +
= 1.175
This time we are trying to ﬁnd the price before the increase, so we divide by the scale factor to get
799 ÷ 1.175 = $680
17.5
100
4
100

(c) The scale factor is
=
= 1.06
which can be thought of as
1 +
so the rise is 6%.
6
100
1007
950
new value 
old value
3.1 • Percentages
181
Example
(a) The value of a car depreciates by 25% in a year. What will a car, currently priced at $43 000, be worth
in a year’s time?
(b) After a 15% reduction in a sale, the price of a good is $39.95. What was the price before the sale began?
(c) The number of passengers using a rail link fell from 190 205 to 174 989. Find the percentage decrease.
Solution
(a) The scale factor is
1 −
= 0.75
25
100
It is possible to use scale factors to solve problems involving percentage decreases. To be
speciﬁc, suppose that an investment of $76 falls by 20%. The new value is the original (100%)
less the decrease (20%), so is 80% of the original. The scale factor is therefore 0.8, giving a new
value of
0.8 × 76 = $60.80
In general, the scale factor for an r% decrease is
−
= 1 −
Once again, you multiply by this scale factor when going forwards in time and divide when
going backwards.
r
100
r
100
100
100
Practice Problem
3 (a) The value of a good rises by 13% in a year. If it was worth $6.5 million at the beginning of the
year, find its value at the end of the year.
(b) The GNP of a country has increased by 63% over the past 5 years and is now $124 billion. What
was the GNP 5 years ago?
(c) Sales rise from 115 000 to 123 050 in a year. Find the annual percentage rise.


so the new price is
43 000 × 0.75 = $32 250
(b) The scale factor is
1 −
= 0.85
so the original price was
39.95 ÷ 0.85 = $47
(c) The scale factor is
=
= 0.92
which can be thought of as
1 −
so the fall is 8%.
8
100
174 989
190 205
new value 
old value
15
100
Mathematics of Finance
182
Practice Problem
4 (a) Current monthly output from a factory is 25 000. In a recession, this is expected to fall by 65%.
Estimate the new level of output.
(b) As a result of a modernization programme, a firm is able to reduce the size of its workforce by
24%. If it now employs 570 workers, how many people did it employ before restructuring?
(c) Shares originally worth $10.50 fall in a stock market crash to $2.10. Find the percentage decrease.
The ﬁnal application of scale factors that we consider is to the calculation of overall 
percentage changes. It is often the case that over various periods of time the price of a good is
subject to several individual percentage changes. It is useful to be able to replace these by an
equivalent single percentage change spanning the entire period. This can be done by simply
multiplying together successive scale factors.
Example
(a) Share prices rise by 32% during the ﬁrst half of the year and rise by a further 10% during the second
half. What is the overall percentage change?
(b) Find the overall percentage change in the price of a good if it rises by 5% in a year but is then reduced
by 30% in a sale.

Solution
(a) To ﬁnd the value of shares at the end of the ﬁrst 6 months we would multiply by
1 +
= 1.32
and at the end of the year we would multiply again by the scale factor
1 +
= 1.1
The net effect is to multiply by their product
1.32 × 1.1 = 1.452
which can be thought of as
1 +
so the overall change is 45.2%.
Notice that this is not the same as
32% + 10% = 42%
This is because during the second half of the year we not only get a 10% rise in the original value, but
we also get a 10% rise on the gain accrued during the ﬁrst 6 months.
(b) The individual scale factors are 1.05 and 0.7, so the overall scale factor is
1.05 × 0.7 = 0.735
The fact that this is less than 1 indicates that the overall change is a decrease. Writing
0.735 = 1 −0.265 = 1 −
we see that this scale factor represents a 26.5% decrease.
26.5
100
45.2
100
10
100
32
100
3.1 • Percentages
183
Practice Problem
5 Find the single percentage increase or decrease equivalent to
(a) an increase of 30% followed by an increase of 40%
(b) a decrease of 30% followed by a decrease of 40%
(c) an increase of 10% followed by a decrease of 50%.
We conclude this section by describing two applications of percentages in macroeconomics:
 index numbers
 inﬂation.
We consider each of these in turn.

3.1.1 Index numbers
Economic data often take the form of a time series; values of economic indicators are available
on an annual, quarterly or monthly basis, and we are interested in analysing the rise and fall of
these numbers over time. Index numbers enable us to identify trends and relationships in the data.
The following example shows you how to calculate index numbers and how to interpret them.
Mathematics of Finance
184
Example
Table 3.1 shows the values of household spending (in billions of dollars) during a 5-year period. Calculate
the index numbers when 2000 is taken as the base year and give a brief interpretation.
Solution
When ﬁnding index numbers, a base year is chosen and the value of 100 is allocated to that year. In this
example, we are told to take 2000 as the base year, so the index number of 2000 is 100. To ﬁnd the index
number of the year 2001 we work out the scale factor associated with the change in household spending
from the base year, 2000 to 2001, and then multiply the answer by 100.
In this case, we get
× 100 = 103.8
This shows that the value of household spending in 2001 was 103.8% of its value in 2000. In other words,
household spending increased by 3.8% during 2001.
For the year 2002, the value of household spending was 716.6, giving an index number
× 100 = 102.8 
This shows that the value of household spending in 2002 was 102.8% of its value in 2000. In other words,
household spending increased by 2.8% between 2000 and 2002. Notice that this is less than that calculated
for 2001, reﬂecting the fact that spending actually fell slightly during 2002. The remaining two index num-
bers are calculated in a similar way and are shown in Table 3.2.
716.6
697.2
723.7
697.2
index number = scale factor from base year × 100
Table 3.1
Year
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
Household spending
686.9
697.2
723.7
716.6
734.5
Table 3.2
Year
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
Household spending
686.9
697.2
723.7
716.6
734.5
Index number
98.5
100
103.8
102.8
105.3

Index numbers themselves have no units. They merely express the value of some quantity as
a percentage of a base number. This is particularly useful, since it enables us to compare how
values of quantities, of varying magnitudes, change in relation to each other. The following
example shows the rise and fall of two share prices during an 8-month period. The prices (in
dollars) listed for each share are taken on the last day of each month. Share A is exceptionally
cheap. Investors often include this type of share in their portfolio, since they can occasionally
make spectacular gains. This was the case with many dot.com shares at the end of the 1990s.
The second share is more expensive and corresponds to a larger, more established ﬁrm.
3.1 • Percentages
185
Practice Problem
6 Calculate the index numbers for the data shown in Table 3.1, this time taking 1999 as the base year.
Example
Find the index numbers of each share price shown in Table 3.3, taking April as the base month. Hence 
compare the performances of these two share prices during this period.
Table 3.3
Month
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Share A
0.31
0.28
0.31
0.34
0.40
0.39
0.45
0.52
Share B
6.34
6.40
6.45
6.52
6.57
6.43
6.65
7.00
Table 3.4
Month
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Index of share price A (April = 100)
91.2
82.3
91.2
100
117.6
114.7
132.4
152.9
Index of share price B (April = 100)
97.2
98.2
98.9
100
100.8
98.6
102.0
107.4
Solution
The index numbers have been listed in Table 3.4. Notice that both shares are given the same index number
of 100 in April, which is the base month. This is despite the fact that the values of the two shares are very
different. This creates ‘a level playing-ﬁeld’, enabling us to monitor the relative performance of the two
shares. The index numbers show quite clearly that share A has outperformed share B during this period.
Indeed, if an investor had spent $1000 on shares of type A in January, they could have bought 3225 of them,
which would be worth $1677 in August, making a proﬁt of $677. The corresponding proﬁt for share B is
only $99.

The table shows that the base quarter is the ﬁrst quarter of 2005 because the index number is
100 in 05Q1. It is, of course, easy to ﬁnd the percentage change from this quarter to any sub-
sequent quarter. For example, the index number associated with the third quarter of 2005 is
110.2, so we know immediately that the percentage change in output from 05Q1 to 05Q3 is
10.2%. However, it is not immediately obvious what the percentage change is from, say, 04Q2
to 05Q2. To work this out, notice that the index number has increased by
106.3 −98.1 = 8.2
so the percentage increase is
× 100 = 8.4%
Alternatively, note that the scale factor of this change is
= 1.084
which corresponds to an 8.4% increase.
Similarly, the scale factor of the change from 04Q3 to 05Q1 is
= 0.952
This is less than 1, reﬂecting the fact that output has fallen. To ﬁnd the percentage change we
write the scale factor as
1 −0.048
which shows that the percentage decrease is 4.8%.
100
105
106.3
98.1
8.2
98.1
Mathematics of Finance
186
Incidentally, if the only information you have about the time series is the set of index 
numbers, then it is possible to work out the percentage changes between any pair of values.
Table 3.5 shows the index numbers of the output of a particular ﬁrm for the years 2004 
and 2005.
Table 3.5
Output
04Q1
04Q2
04Q3
04Q4
05Q1
05Q2
05Q3
05Q4
Index
89.3
98.1
105.0
99.3
100
106.3
110.2
105.7
Practice Problem
7 Use the index numbers listed in Table 3.5 to find the percentage change in output from
(a) 05Q1 to 05Q4
(b) 04Q1 to 05Q4
(c) 04Q1 to 05Q1

3.1 • Percentages
187
Example
Table 3.6 shows the unit costs of labour, energy, communications and raw materials during a 3-year 
period. In year 0, a ﬁrm used 70 units of labour, 25 units of energy, 10 units of communication and 140
units of raw materials. Taking year 0 as the base year, calculate an appropriate index number for years 1 
and 2.
EXCEL
Table 3.6
Year 0
Year 1
Year 2
Labour
16
23
28
Energy
7
10
9
Communications
12
14
10
Raw materials
5
9
12
Solution
We are told to take year 0 as the base year, so the index number for year 0 is 100. One way of calculating 
the index number for subsequent years would be to work out the totals of each column in Table 3.6 
and ﬁnd the associated scale factors of these. On this basis, the index number for year 1 would be cal-
culated as
× 100 = 140
However, this fails to take into account the fact, for example, that we use twice as many units of raw 
materals than labour. It is important that each item is weighted according to how many units of each type
are used. To do this, all we have to do is to multiply each of the unit costs by the associated quantities. The
appropriate index number is then worked out as
× 100 = 154.1
The fact that this number is greater than before is to be expected because the unit price of raw materials has
nearly doubled, and the ﬁrm uses a greater proportion of these in its total costs. Index numbers that are
weighted according to the quantity consumed in the base year are called Laspeyre indices. Spreadsheets 
provide an easy way of presenting the calculations. For each year, we simply include an extra column in the
table, for the products PnQ0 where Q0 denotes the quantities used in the base year, and Pn denotes the unit
prices in year n. The Laspeyre index for year n is then worked out as
× 100
Figure 3.1 (overleaf) shows the completed spreadsheet. The Laspeyre indices for years 1 and 2 are seen to
be 154.1 and 187.5, respectively. Notice that this index has increased rapidly over this period, in spite of the
fact that communication and energy costs have hardly changed. This is because expenditure is dominated
by labour and raw material costs, which have both increased substantially during this time.
total of column PnQ0
total of column P0Q0
23 × 70 + 10 × 25 + 14 × 10 + 9 × 140
16 × 70 + 7 × 25 + 12 × 10 + 5 × 140
23 + 10 + 14 + 9
16 + 7 + 12 + 5

3.1.2 Inﬂation
Over a period of time, the prices of many goods and services usually increase. The annual rate
of inﬂation is the average percentage change in a given selection of these goods and services,
over the previous year. Seasonal variations are taken into account, and the particular basket 
of goods and services is changed periodically to reﬂect changing patterns of household 
Mathematics of Finance
188
Advice
There are other methods for assessing the variation of a ‘basket’ of values over time. Index
numbers that are weighted according to the quantity consumed in the current year
(instead of the base year) are called Paasche indices. An example of this is given in Practice
Problem 22 at the end of this section.
Figure 3.1

Solution
The raw ﬁgures shown in Table 3.7 give the impression that houses increased steadily in value throughout
this period, with a quite substantial gain during the ﬁrst year. However, if inﬂation had been very high then
the gain in real terms would have been quite small. Indeed, if the rate of inﬂation were to exceed the per-
centage rise of this nominal data, then the price of a house would actually fall in real terms. To analyse this
situation we will use Table 3.8, which shows the rates of inﬂation during this period. Notice that since the
house prices listed in Table 3.8 are quoted at the end of each year, we are not interested in the rate of
inﬂation during 1990.
We are told in the question to choose 1991 as the base year and calculate the value of the house at ‘1991
prices’. The value of the house at the end of 1991 is obviously $89 000, since no adjustment need be made.
At the end of 1992, the house is worth $93 000. However, during that year inﬂation was 7.1%. To adjust this
price to ‘1991 prices’ we simply divide by the scale factor 1.071, since we are going backwards in time. We get
= 86 835
93 000
1.071
3.1 • Percentages
189
Example
Table 3.7 shows the price (in thousands of dollars) of an average house in a certain town during a 5-year
period. The price quoted is the value of the house at the end of each year. Use the annual rates of inﬂation
given in Table 3.8 to adjust the prices to those prevailing at the end of 1991. Compare the rise in both the
nominal and real values of house prices during this period.

Table 3.7
Year
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
Average house price
72
89
93
100
106
Table 3.8
Year
1991
1992
1993
1994
Annual rate of inﬂation
10.7%
7.1%
3.5%
2.3%
expenditure. The presence of inﬂation is particularly irritating when trying to interpret a time
series that involves a monetary value. It is inevitable that this will be inﬂuenced by inﬂation
during any year, and what is of interest is the ﬂuctuation of a time series ‘over and above’ inﬂation.
Economists deal with this by distinguishing between nominal and real data. Nominal data are
the original, raw data such as those listed in tables in the previous sub-section. These are based
on the prices that prevailed at the time. Real data are the values that have been adjusted to take
inﬂation into account. The standard way of doing this is to pick a year and then convert the
values for all other years to the level that they would have had in this base year. This may sound
rather complicated, but the idea and calculations involved are really quite simple as the fol-
lowing example demonstrates.

In real terms the house has fallen in value by over $2000.
To adjust the price of the house in 1993 we ﬁrst need to divide by 1.035 to backtrack to the year 1992,
and then divide again by 1.071 to reach 1991. We get
= 90 213
In real terms there has at least been some gain during 1993. However, this is less than impressive, and from
a purely ﬁnancial point of view, there would have been more lucrative ways of investing this capital.
For the 1994 price, the adjusted value is
= 93 476
and, for 1990, the adjusted value is
72 000 × 1.107 = 79 704
Table 3.9 lists both the nominal and the ‘constant 1991’ values of the house (rounded to the nearest thou-
sand) for comparison. It shows quite clearly that, apart from the gain during 1991, the increase in value has,
in fact, been quite modest.
106 000
1.023 × 1.035 × 1.071 
100 000
1.035 × 1.071 
Mathematics of Finance
190
Table 3.9
Year
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
Nominal house price
72
89
94
100
106
1991 house price
80
89
87
90
93
Practice Problem
8 Table 3.10 shows the average annual salary (in thousands of dollars) of employees in a small firm,
together with the annual rate of inflation for that year. Adjust these salaries to the prices prevailing at
the end of 1991 and so give the real values of the employees’ salaries at constant ‘1991 prices’.
Comment on the rise in earnings during this period.
Table 3.10
Year
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
Salary
17.3
18.1
19.8
23.5
26.0
Inﬂation
4.9
4.3
4.0
3.5

3.1 • Percentages
191
Annual rate of inﬂation
The percentage increase in the level of prices over a 12-month
period.
Index numbers
The scale factor of a variable measured from the base year multiplied 
by 100.
Laspeyre index
An index number for groups of data which are weighted by the quantities
used in the base year.
Nominal data
Monetary values prevailing at the time that they were measured.
Paasche index
An index number for groups of data which are weighted by the quantities
used in the current year.
Real data Monetary values adjusted to take inﬂation into account.
Scale factor
The multiplier that gives the ﬁnal value in percentage problems.
Time series
A sequence of numbers indicating the variation of data over time.
Key Terms
Practice Problems
9 Express the following percentages as fractions in their simplest form:
(a) 35%
(b) 88%
(c) 250%
(d) 171/2%
(e) 0.2%
10 Calculate each of the following:
(a) 5% of 24
(b) 8% of 88
(c) 48% of 4563
(d) 112% of 56
11 Write down the scale factors corresponding to
(a) an increase of 19%
(b) an increase of 250%
(c) a decrease of 2%
(d) a decrease of 43%
12 Find the new quantities when
(a) £16.25 is increased by 12%
(b) the population of a town, currently at 113 566, rises by 5%
(c) a good priced by a firm at £87.90 is subject to value added tax at 15%
(d) a good priced at £2300 is reduced by 30% in a sale
(e) a car, valued at £23 000, depreciates by 32%
13 A shop sells books at ‘20% below the recommended retail price (r.r.p.)’. If it sells a book for £12.40
find
(a) the r.r.p.
(b) the cost of the book after a further reduction of 15% in a sale
(c) the overall percentage discount obtained by buying the book from the shop in the sale compared
with the manufacturer’s r.r.p.


14 A TV costs £940 including 17.5% VAT. Find the new price if VAT is reduced to 8%.
15 An antiques dealer tries to sell a vase at 45% above the £18 000 which the dealer paid at auction.
(a) What is the new sale price?
(b) By what percentage can the dealer now reduce the price before making a loss?
16 Find the single percentage increase or decrease equivalent to
(a) a 10% increase followed by a 25% increase
(b) a 34% decrease followed by a 65% increase
(c) a 25% increase followed by a 25% decrease
Explain in words why the overall change in part (c) is not 0%.
17 Table 3.11 shows the index numbers associated with transport costs during a 20-year period. The
public transport costs reflect changes to bus and train fares, whereas private transport costs include
purchase, service, petrol, tax and insurance costs of cars.
(1) Which year is chosen as the base year?
(2) Find the percentage increases in the cost of public transport from
(a) 1985 to 1990
(b) 1990 to 1995
(c) 1995 to 2000
(d) 2000 to 2005
(3) Repeat part (2) for private transport.
(4) Comment briefly on the relative rise in public and private transport costs during this 20-year period.
Mathematics of Finance
192
Table 3.11
Year
1985
1990
1995
2000
2005
Public transport
100
130
198
224
245
Private transport
100
125
180
199
221
Table 3.12
Quarter
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Output
13.5
1.4
2.5
10.5
18 Table 3.12 shows the number of items (in thousands) produced from a factory production line dur-
ing the course of a year. Taking the second quarter as the base quarter, calculate the associated index
numbers. Suggest a possible reason for the fluctuations in output.
19 Table 3.13 shows government expenditure (in billions of dollars) on education for four consecutive
years, together with the rate of inflation for each year.
(a) Taking 1994 as the base year, work out the index numbers of the nominal data given in the 
second row of the table.
(b) Find the values of expenditure at constant 1994 prices and hence recalculate the index numbers
of real government expenditure.
(c) Give an interpretation of the index numbers calculated in part (b).

21 (Excel) Table 3.15 shows the annual salaries (in thousands of dollars) of four categories of employee
during a 3-year period. In year 0 the firm employed 24, 250, 109 and 7 people of types A, B, C and
D, respectively. Calculate the Laspeyre index of the total wage bill in years 1 and 2 taking year 0 as
the base year. Comment briefly on these values.
3.1 • Percentages
193
Table 3.13
Year
1994
1995
1996
1997
Spending
236
240
267
276
Inﬂation
4.7
4.2
3.4
Table 3.15
Year 0
Year 1
Year 2
Type A
12
13
13
Type B
26
28
29
Type C
56
56
64
Type D
240
340
560
Table 3.14
Year
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Index 1
100
95
105
110
119
127
Index 2
100
112
118
22 (Excel) In the Laspeyre index, the quantities used for the weights are those of the base year. If these
are replaced by quantities for the current year, then the index is called the Paasche index. In Problem
21, suppose that the numbers of employees of types A, B, C and D in year 1 are 30, 240, 115 and 8
respectively. For year 2 the corresponding figures are 28, 220, 125 and 20. By adding two extra
columns for the products P1Q1 and P2Q2 to the spreadsheet of Problem 21, calculate the Paasche
index for years 1 and 2. Compare with the Laspeyre index calculated in Problem 21.
State one advantage and one disadvantage of using the Laspeyre and Paasche methods for the 
calculation of combined index numbers.
20 Index numbers associated with the growth of unemployment during an 8-year period are shown in
Table 3.14.
(a) What are the base years for the two indices?
(b) If the government had not switched to index 2, what would be the values of index 1 in years 
7 and 8?
(c) What values would index 2 have been in years 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5?
(d) If unemployment was 1.2 million in year 4, how many people were unemployed in years 1 and 8?

section 3.2
Compound interest
Today, businesses and individuals are faced with a bewildering array of loan facilities and
investment opportunities. In this section we explain how these ﬁnancial calculations are car-
ried out to enable an informed choice to be made between the various possibilities available.
We begin by considering what happens when a single lump sum is invested and show how to
calculate the amount accumulated over a period of time.
Suppose that someone gives you the option of receiving $500 now or $500 in 3 years’ time.
Which of these alternatives would you accept? Most people would take the money now, partly
because they may have an immediate need for it, but also because they recognize that $500 is
worth more today than in 3 years’ time. Even if we ignore the effects of inﬂation, it is still 
better to take the money now, since it can be invested and will increase in value over the 3-year
period. In order to work out this value we need to know the rate of interest and the basis 
on which it is calculated. Let us begin by assuming that the $500 is invested for 3 years at 
10% interest compounded annually. What exactly do we mean by ‘10% interest compounded
annually’? Well, at the end of each year, the interest is calculated and is added on to the amount
currently invested. If the original amount is $500 then after 1 year the interest is 10% of $500,
which is
× $500 =
× $500 = $50
so the amount rises by $50 to $550.
1
10
10
100
Objectives
At the end of this section you should be able to:
 Understand the difference between simple and compound interest.
 Calculate the future value of a principal under annual compounding.
 Calculate the future value of a principal under continuous compounding.
 Determine the annual percentage rate of interest given a nominal rate of interest.

What happens to this amount at the end of the second year? Is the interest also $50? This
would actually be the case with simple interest, when the amount of interest received is the
same for all years. However, with compound interest, we get ‘interest on the interest’. Nearly 
all ﬁnancial investments use compound rather than simple interest, because investors need 
to be rewarded for not taking the interest payment out of the fund each year. Under annual
compounding the interest obtained at the end of the second year is 10% of the amount invested
at the start of that year. This not only consists of the original $500, but also the $50 already
received as interest on the ﬁrst year’s investment. Consequently, we get an additional
× $550 = $55
raising the sum to $605. Finally, at the end of the third year, the interest is
× $605 = $60.50
so the investment is $665.50. You are therefore $165.50 better off by taking the $500 now and
investing it for 3 years. The calculations are summarized in Table 3.16.
1
10
1
10
3.2 • Compound interest
195
Table 3.16
End of year
Interest ($)
Investment ($)
1
50
550
2
55
605
3
60.50
665.50
Example
Find the value, in 4 years’ time, of $10 000 invested at 5% interest compounded annually.
Solution
 At the end of year 1 the interest is 0.05 × 10 000 = 500, so the investment is 10 500.
 At the end of year 2 the interest is 0.05 × 10 500 = 525, so the investment is 11 025.
 At the end of year 3 the interest is 0.05 × 11 025 = 551.25, so the investment is 11 576.25.
 At the end of year 4 the interest is 0.05 × 11 576.25 = 578.81 rounded to 2 decimal places, so the ﬁnal
investment is $12 155.06 to the nearest cent.
Practice Problem
1 Find the value, in 10 years’ time, of $1000 invested at 8% interest compounded annually.
The previous calculations were performed by ﬁnding the interest earned each year and
adding it on to the amount accumulated at the beginning of the year. As you may have discovered
in Practice Problem 1, this can be rather laborious, particularly if the money is invested over a
long period of time. What is really needed is a method of calculating the investment after, say, 
10 years without having to determine the amount for the 9 intermediate years. This can be

done using the scale factor approach discussed in the previous section. To illustrate this, let us
return to the problem of investing $500 at 10% interest compounded annually. The original
sum of money is called the principal and is denoted by P, and the ﬁnal sum is called the future
value and is denoted by S. The scale factor associated with an increase of 10% is
1 +
= 1.1
so at the end of 1 year the total amount invested is P(1.1).
After 2 years we get
P(1.1) × (1.1) = P(1.1)2
and after 3 years the future value is
S = P(1.1)2 × (1.1) = P(1.1)3
Setting P = 500, we see that
S = 500(1.1)3 = $665.50
which is, of course, the same as the amount calculated previously.
In general, if the interest rate is r% compounded annually then the scale factor is
1 +
so, after n years,
S = P 1 +
n
Given the values of r, P and n it is trivial to evaluate S using the power key 
on a calculator.
To see this let us rework the previous example using this formula.
xy
D
F
r
100
A
C
r
100
10
100
Mathematics of Finance
196
Example
Find the value, in 4 years’ time, of $10 000 invested at 5% interest compounded annually.
Solution
In this problem, P = 10 000, r = 5 and n = 4, so the formula S = P 1 +
n
gives
S = 10 000 1 +
4
= 10 000(1.05)4 = 12 155.06
which is, of course, the same answer as before.
D
F
5
100
A
C
D
F
r
100
A
C
Practice Problem
2 Use the formula
S = P 1 +
n
to find the value, in 10 years’ time, of $1000 invested at 8% interest compounded annually. [You
might like to compare your answer with that obtained in Practice Problem 1.]
D
F
r
100
A
C

The compound interest formula derived above involves four variables, r, n, P and S.
Provided that we know any three of these, we can use the formula to determine the remaining
variable. This is illustrated in the following example.
3.2 • Compound interest
197
Example
A principal of $25 000 is invested at 12% interest compounded annually. After how many years will the
investment ﬁrst exceed $250 000?
Solution
We want to save a total of $250 000 starting with an initial investment of $25 000. The problem is to deter-
mine the number of years required for this on the assumption that the interest is ﬁxed at 12% throughout
this time. The formula for compound interest is
S = P 1 +
n
We are given that
P = 25 000, S = 250 000, r = 12
so we need to solve the equation
250 000 = 25 000 1 +
n
for n.
One way of doing this would just be to keep on guessing values of n until we ﬁnd the one that works.
However, a more mathematical approach is to use logarithms, because we are being asked to solve an equa-
tion in which the unknown occurs as a power. Following the method described in Section 2.3, we ﬁrst divide
both sides by 25 000 to get
10 = (1.12)n
Taking logarithms of both sides gives
log(10) = log(1.12)n
and if you apply rule 3 of logarithms you get
log(10) = n log(1.12)
Hence
n =
=
(taking logarithms to base 10)
= 20.3
(to 1 decimal place)
Now we know that n must be a whole number because interest is only added on at the end of each year. 
We assume that the ﬁrst interest payment occurs exactly 12 months after the initial investment and every 
1
0.049 218 023
log(10)
log(1.12)
D
F
12
100
A
C
D
F
r
100
A
C


12 months thereafter. The answer, 20.3, tells us that after only 20 years the amount is less than $250 000, so
we need to wait until 21 years have elapsed before it exceeds this amount. In fact, after 20 years
S = $25 000(1.12)20 = $241 157.33
and after 21 years
S = $25 000(1.12)21 = $270 096.21
Mathematics of Finance
198
Practice Problem
3 A firm estimates that its sales will rise by 3% each year and that it needs to sell at least 10 000 goods
each year in order to make a profit. Given that its current annual sales are only 9000, how many years
will it take before the firm breaks even?
You may have noticed that in all of the previous problems it is assumed that the interest is
compounded annually. It is possible for interest to be added to the investment more frequently
than this. For example, suppose that a principal of $500 is invested for 3 years at 10% interest
compounded quarterly. What do we mean by ‘10% interest compounded quarterly’? Well, it
does not mean that we get 10% interest every 3 months. Instead, the 10% is split into four equal
portions, one for each quarter. Every 3 months the interest accrued is
= 2.5%
so after the ﬁrst quarter the investment gets multiplied by 1.025 to give
500(1.025)
and after the second quarter it gets multiplied by another 1.025 to give
500(1.025)2
and so on. Moreover, since there are exactly 12 three-month periods in 3 years we deduce that
the future value is
500(1.025)12 = $672.44
10%
4
In this example we calculated the time taken for $25 000 to increase by a factor of 10. It can
be shown that this time depends only on the interest rate and not on the actual value of the
principal. To see this, note that if a general principal, P, increases tenfold then its future value
is 10P. If the interest rate is 12%, then we need to solve
10P = P 1 +
n
for n. The Ps cancel (indicating that the answer is independent of P) to produce the equation
10 = (1.12)n
This is identical to the equation obtained in the previous example and, as we have just seen, has
the solution n = 20.3.
D
F
12
100
A
C

Notice that this is greater than the sum obtained at the start of this section under annual com-
pounding. (Why is this?)
This example highlights the fact that the compound interest formula
S = P 1 +
n
derived earlier for annual compounding can also be used for other types of compounding. 
All that is needed is to reinterpret the symbols r and n. The variable r now represents the rate
of interest per time period and n represents the total number of periods.
D
F
r
100
A
C
3.2 • Compound interest
199
Example
A principal of $10 is invested at 12% interest for 1 year. Determine the future value if the interest is 
compounded
(a) annually
(b) semi-annually
(c) quarterly
(d) monthly
(e) weekly
Solution
The formula for compound interest gives
S = 10 1 +
n
(a) If the interest is compounded annually then r = 12, n = 1, so
S = $10(1.12)1 = $11.20
(b) If the interest is compounded semi-annually then an interest of 12/2 = 6% is added on every 6 months
and, since there are two 6-month periods in a year,
S = $10(1.06)2 = $11.24
(c) If the interest is compounded quarterly then an interest of 12/4 = 3% is added on every 3 months and,
since there are four 3-month periods in a year,
S = $10(1.03)4 = $11.26
(d) If the interest is compounded monthly then an interest of 12/12 = 1% is added on every month and,
since there are 12 months in a year,
S = $10(1.01)12 = $11.27
(e) If the interest is compounded weekly then an interest of 12/52 = 0.23% is added on every week and,
since there are 52 weeks in a year,
S = $10(1.0023)52 = $11.27
D
F
r
100
A
C
In the above example we see that the future value rises as the frequency of compounding
rises. This is to be expected because the basic feature of compound interest is that we get ‘inter-
est on the interest’. However, one important observation that you might not have expected is
that, although the future values increase, they appear to be approaching a ﬁxed value. It can be
shown that this always occurs. The type of compounding in which the interest is added on with
increasing frequency is called continuous compounding. In theory, we can ﬁnd the future 
value of a principal under continuous compounding using the approach taken in the previous

example. We work with smaller and smaller time periods until the numbers settle down to a
ﬁxed value. However, it turns out that there is a special formula that can be used to compute
this directly. The future value, S, of a principal, P, compounded continuously for t years at an
annual rate of r% is
where e is the number
2.718 281 828 459 045 235 36 (to 20 decimal places)
If r = 12, t = 1 and P = 10 then this formula gives
S = $10e12×1/100 = $10e0.12 = $11.27
which is in agreement with the limiting value obtained in the previous example.
S = Pert/100
Mathematics of Finance
200
Advice
The number e and the related natural logarithm function were first introduced in Section
2.4. If you missed this section out, you should go back and read through this work now
before proceeding. The link between the number e and the above formula for continuous
compounding is given in Practice Problem 23 at the end of this section. However, you may
prefer to accept it without justification and concentrate on the applications.
Example
A principal of $2000 is invested at 10% interest compounded continuously. After how many days will the
investment ﬁrst exceed $2100?
Solution
We want to save a total of $2100 starting with an initial investment of $2000. The problem is to determine
the number of days required for this on the assumption that the interest rate is 10% compounded con-
tinuously. The formula for continuous compounding is
S = Pert/100
We are given that
S = 2100, P = 2000, r = 10
so we need to solve the equation
2100 = 2000e10t/100
for t. Dividing through by 2000 gives
1.05 = e0.1t

As explained in Section 2.4, equations such as this can be solved using natural logarithms. Recall that
if
M = en
then
n = ln M
If we apply this deﬁnition to the equation
1.05 = e0.1t
with M = 1.05 and n = 0.1t then
0.1t = ln(1.05) 
= 0.048 790 2
and so t = 0.488 to three decimal places.
The variable t which appears in the formula for continuous compounding is measured in years, so to
convert it to days we multiply by 365 (assuming that there are 365 days in a year). Hence
t = 365 × 0.488 = 178.1 days
We deduce that the amount invested ﬁrst exceeds $2100 some time during the 179th day.
3.2 • Compound interest
201
Practice Problems
4 (1) A principal, $30, is invested at 6% interest for 2 years. Determine the future value if the interest is
compounded
(a) annually
(b) semi-annually
(c) quarterly
(d) monthly
(e) weekly
(f) daily
(2) Use the formula
S = Pert/100
to determine the future value of $30 invested at 6% interest compounded continuously for 
2 years. Confirm that it is in agreement with the results of part (1).
5 Determine the rate of interest required for a principal of $1000 to produce a future value of $4000
after 10 years compounded continuously.
Example
A principal of $10 000 is invested at one of the following banks:
(a) Bank A offers 4.75% interest, compounded annually.
(b) Bank B offers 4.70% interest, compounded semi-annually.
(c) Bank C offers 4.65% interest, compounded quarterly.
(d) Bank D offers 4.6% interest, compounded continuously.
For each bank, tabulate the value of the investment at the end of every year, for the next 10 years. Which of
these banks would you recommend?
EXCEL


Solution
In Figure 3.2 the numbers 0 to 10 have been entered in the ﬁrst column, together with appropriate head-
ings. The initial investment is the same for each bank, so the value 10 000 is typed into cells B4 to E4.
For banks A, B and C, the future values can be worked out using the formula
10 000 1 +
n
for appropriate values of r and n.
(a) In Bank A, the interest rate is 4.75% compounded annually, so at the end of year 1, the investment is
10 000(1 + 0.0475)1
The reason for writing it to the power of 1 is so that when we enter it into Excel, and copy down the
ﬁrst column, the power will automatically increase in accordance with the changing years. We type
=10000*(1+0.0475)^A5
in cell B5, and then click and drag down to cell B14.
(b) Bank B offers a return of 4.7% compounded semi-annually, so that at the end of year 1, the investment is
10 000(1 + 0.047/2)2×1
In general, after t years, the investment is
10 000(1 + 0.0475/2)2×t
so in Excel, we type
=10000*(1+0.0475/2)^(2*A5)
in cell C5, and copy down this column in the usual way.
D
F
r
100
A
C
Mathematics of Finance
202
Figure 3.2

(c) Bank C offers a return of 4.65% compounded quarterly, so we type
=10000*(1+0.0465/4)^(4*A5)
in cell D5, and copy down the column.
(d) Bank D offers a return of 4.6% compounded continuously, so after t years the future value is given by
10 000e4.6t/100 = 10 000e0.046t
The corresponding values are calculated in column E by typing
=10000*EXP(0.046*A5) in cell E5 and copying down the column.
The completed spreadsheet is shown in Figure 3.3. The amounts have been rounded to 2 decimal places
by highlighting cells B5 through to E14, and using the Decrease Decimal icon on the toolbar.
Figure 3.3 shows that there is very little to choose between these banks and that, in practice, other issues
(such as any conditions or penalties attached to future withdrawals from the account) may well inﬂuence
our recommendation. However, from a purely monetary point of view, we should advise the investor to put
the money into Bank B, as this offers the greatest return. Notice that Bank B is not the one with the highest
rate of interest. This example highlights the importance of taking into account the frequency of com-
pounding, as well as the actual rate of interest.
3.2 • Compound interest
203
Figure 3.3
Given that there are so many ways of calculating compound interest, people often ﬁnd it
difﬁcult to appraise different investment opportunities. What is needed is a standard ‘bench-
mark’ that enables an individual to compare different forms of savings or credit schemes on an
equal basis. The one that is commonly used is annual compounding. All ﬁrms offering invest-
ment or loan facilities are required to provide the effective annual rate. This is often referred to
as the annual percentage rate, which is abbreviated to APR. The APR is the rate of interest
which, when compounded annually, produces the same yield as the nominal (that is, the
stated) rate of interest. The phrase ‘annual equivalent rate’ (AER) is frequently used when
applied to savings. However, in this book we shall use APR for both savings and loans.

Although the aim of this chapter is to investigate the mathematics of ﬁnance, the mathem-
atical techniques themselves are more widely applicable. We conclude this section with two
examples to illustrate this.
Mathematics of Finance
204
Example
Determine the annual percentage rate of interest of a deposit account that has a nominal rate of 8% com-
pounded monthly.
Solution
The APR is the overall rate of interest, which can be calculated using scale factors. If the account offers a
return of 8% compounded monthly then each month the interest is
=
= 0.67%
of the amount invested at the beginning of that month. The monthly scale factor is
1 +
= 1.0067
so in a whole year the principal gets multiplied by
(1.0067)12 = 1.0834
which can be written as
1 +
so the APR is 8.34%.
8.34
100
0.67
100
2
3
8
12
Practice Problem
6 Determine the annual percentage rate of interest if the nominal rate is 12% compounded quarterly.
Example
A country’s annual GNP (gross national product), currently at $25 000 million, is predicted to grow by 3.5%
each year. The population is expected to increase by 2% a year from its current level of 40 million. After how
many years will GNP per capita (that is, GNP per head of population) reach $700?
Solution
The per capita value of GNP is worked out by dividing GNP by the size of the population. Initially, this is
= $625
During the next few years, GNP is forecast to grow at a faster rate than the population so this value will
increase.
25 000 000 000
40 000 000

The scale factor associated with a 3.5% increase is 1.035, so after n years GNP (in millions of dollars) will be
GNP = 25 000 × (1.035)n
Similarly, the population (also in millions) will be
population = 40 × (1.02)n
Hence GNP per capita is
=
×
= 625 ×
n
We want to ﬁnd the number of years required for this to reach 700, so we need to solve the equation
625 ×
n
= 700
for n. Dividing both sides by 625 gives
n
= 1.12
and after taking logs of both sides we get
log
n
= log(1.12)
n log
= log(1.12)
(rule 3 of logs)
so that
n =
= 7.76
We deduce that the target ﬁgure of $700 per capita will be achieved after 8 years.
log(1.12)
log(1.035/1.02)
D
F
1.035
1.02
A
C
D
F
1.035
1.02
A
C
D
F
1.035
1.02
A
C
D
F
1.035
1.02
A
C
D
F
1.035
1.02
A
C
(1.035)n
(1.02)n
25 000
40
25 000 × (1.035)n
40 × (1.02)n
3.2 • Compound interest
205
Example
A ﬁrm decides to increase output at a constant rate from its current level of 50 000 to 60 000 during the next
5 years. Calculate the annual rate of increase required to achieve this growth.
Solution
If the rate of increase is r% then the scale factor is 1 +
so after 5 years, output will be
50 000 1 +
5
To achieve a ﬁnal output of 60 000, the value of r is chosen to satisfy the equation
50 000 1 +
5
= 60 000
Dividing both sides by 50 000 gives
1 +
5
= 1.2
D
F
r
100
A
C
D
F
r
100
A
C
D
F
r
100
A
C
r
100


The difﬁculty in solving this equation is that the unknown, r, is trapped inside the brackets, which are raised
to the power of 5. This is analogous to the problem of solving an equation such as
x2 = 5.23
which we would solve by taking square roots of both sides to ﬁnd x. This suggests that we can ﬁnd r by 
taking ﬁfth roots of both sides of
1 +
5
= 1.2
to get
1 +
= (1.2)1/ 5 = 1.037
Hence r = 3.7%.
r
100
D
F
r
100
A
C
Mathematics of Finance
206
Practice Problem
7 The turnover of a leading supermarket chain, A, is currently $560 million and is expected to increase
at a constant rate of 1.5% a year. Its nearest rival, supermarket B, has a current turnover of $480 mil-
lion and plans to increase this at a constant rate of 3.4% a year. After how many years will supermar-
ket B overtake supermarket A?
Annual percentage rate
The equivalent annual interest paid for a loan, taking into
account the compounding over a variety of time periods.
Compound interest
The interest which is added on to the initial investment, so that this 
will itself gain interest in subsequent time periods.
Continuous compounding
The limiting value when interest is compounded with ever-
increasing frequency.
Future value
The ﬁnal value of an investment after one or more time periods.
Principal
The value of the original sum invested.
Simple interest
The interest which is paid direct to the investor instead of being added to
the original amount.
Key Terms
Practice Problems
8 A bank offers a return of 7% interest compounded annually. Find the future value of a principal of
$4500 after 6 years. What is the overall percentage rise over this period?
9 Find the future value of $20 000 in 2 years’ time if compounded quarterly at 8% interest.
10 Midwest Bank offers a return of 5% compounded annually for each and every year. The rival BFB
offers a return of 3% for the first year and 7% in the second and subsequent years (both compounded
annually). Which bank would you choose to invest in if you decided to invest a principal for (a) 2 years;
(b) 3 years?

11 The value of an asset, currently priced at $100 000, is expected to increase by 20% a year.
(a) Find its value in 10 years’ time.
(b) After how many years will it be worth $1 million?
12 How long will it take for a sum of money to double if it is invested at 5% interest compounded 
annually?
13 A piece of machinery depreciates in value by 5% a year. Determine its value in 3 years’ time if its 
current value is $50 000.
14 A principal, $7000, is invested at 9% interest for 8 years. Determine its future value if the interest is
compounded
(a) annually
(b) semi-annually
(c) monthly
(d) continuously
15 A car depreciates by 40% in the first year, 30% in the second year and 20% thereafter. I buy a car
for $14 700 when it is 2 years old.
(a) How much did it cost when new?
(b) After how many years will it be worth less than 25% of the amount that I paid for it?
16 Find the future value of $100 compounded continuously at an annual rate of 6% for 12 years.
17 How long will it take for a sum of money to triple in value if invested at an annual rate of 3% com-
pounded continuously?
18 If a piece of machinery depreciates continuously at an annual rate of 4%, how many years will it take
for the value of the machinery to halve?
19 A department store has its own credit card facilities, for which it charges interest at a rate of 2% each
month. Explain briefly why this is not the same as an annual rate of 24%. What is the annual 
percentage rate?
20 Determine the APR if the nominal rate is 7% compounded continuously.
21 Current annual consumption of energy is 78 billion units and this is expected to rise at a fixed rate of
5.8% each year. The capacity of the industry to supply energy is currently 104 billion units.
(a) Assuming that the supply remains steady, after how many years will demand exceed supply?
(b) What constant rate of growth of energy production would be needed to satisfy demand for the
next 50 years?
22 The population of a country is currently at 56 million and is forecast to rise by 3.7% each year. It is
capable of producing 2500 million units of food each year, and it is estimated that each member of
the population requires a minimum of 65 units of food each year. At the moment, the extra food
needed to satisfy this requirement is imported, but the government decides to increase food produc-
tion at a constant rate each year, with the aim of making the country self-sufficient after 10 years.
Find the annual rate of growth required to achieve this.
23 If a principal, P, is invested at r% interest compounded annually then its future value, S, after n years
is given by
S = P 1 +
n
(a) Use this formula to show that if an interest rate of r% is compounded k times a year then after 
t years
S = P 1 +
kt
D
F
r
100k
A
C
D
F
r
100
A
C
3.2 • Compound interest
207


(b) Show that if m = 100k/r then the formula in part (1) can be written as
S = P
1 +
m
rt /100
(c) Use the definition
e = lim
m→∞1 +
m
to deduce that if the interest is compounded with ever-increasing frequency (that is, continu-
ously) then
S = Pert/100
24 (Excel) The sum of $100 is invested at 12% interest for 20 years. Tabulate the value of the invest-
ment at the end of each year, if the interest is compounded
(a) annually
(b) quarterly
(c) monthly
(d) continuously
Draw graphs of these values on the same diagram. Comment briefly on any similarities and differ-
ences between these graphs.
25 (Excel) A department store charges interest on any outstanding debt at the end of each month. It
decides to produce a simple table of APRs for its customers, based on a variety of monthly rates. Use
a spreadsheet to produce such a table for monthly interest rates of 0.5%, 0.6%, 0.7%, . . . , 3%. Plot
a graph of APR against monthly rate and comment briefly on its basic shape.
D
F
1
m
A
C
D
F
D
F
1
m
A
C
A
C
Mathematics of Finance
208

section 3.3
Geometric series
Consider the following sequence of numbers:
2, 6, 18, 54, . . .
One obvious question, often asked in intelligence tests, is what is the next term in the sequence?
All that is required is for you to spot the pattern so that it can be used to generate the next term.
In this case, successive numbers are obtained by multiplying by 3, so the ﬁfth term is
54 × 3 = 162
the sixth term is
162 × 3 = 486
and so on. Any sequence in which terms are calculated by multiplying their predecessor by 
a ﬁxed number is called a geometric progression and the multiplicative factor itself is called a
geometric ratio. The sequence above is a geometric progression with geometric ratio 3. The 
reason for introducing these sequences is not to help you to answer intelligence tests, but rather
to analyse compound interest problems. You may well have noticed that all of the problems
given in the previous section produced such a sequence. For example, if a principal, $500, is
invested at 10% interest compounded annually, then the future values in successive years are
500(1.1), 500(1.1)2, 500(1.1)3, . . .
which we recognize as a geometric progression with geometric ratio 1.1.
Objectives
At the end of this section you should be able to:
 Recognize a geometric progression.
 Evaluate a geometric series.
 Calculate the total investment obtained from a regular savings plan.
 Calculate the instalments needed to repay a loan.

All of the problems considered in Section 3.2 involved a single lump-sum payment into an
investment account. The task was simply to determine its future value after a period of time
when it is subject to a certain type of compounding. In this section, we extend this to include
multiple payments. This situation occurs whenever individuals save regularly or when busi-
nesses take out a loan that is paid back using ﬁxed monthly or annual instalments. To tackle
these problems we need to be able to sum (that is, to add together) consecutive terms of a geo-
metric progression. Such an expression is called a geometric series. Suppose that we want to
sum the ﬁrst six terms of the geometric progression given by the sequence
2, 6, 18, 54, . . .
(*)
The easiest way of doing this is to write down these six numbers and add them together to get
2 + 6 + 18 + 54 + 162 + 486 = 728
There is, however, a special formula to sum a geometric series which is particularly useful
when there are lots of terms or when the individual terms are more complicated to evaluate. It
can be shown that the sum of the ﬁrst n terms of a geometric progression in which the ﬁrst term
is a, and the geometric ratio is r, is equal to
a
(r ≠1)
Use of the symbol r to denote both the interest rate and the geometric ratio is unfortunate but
fairly standard. In practice, it is usually clear from the context what this symbol represents, so
no confusion should arise.
D
F
r n −1
r −1
A
C
Mathematics of Finance
210
Example
Which of the following sequences are geometric progressions? For those sequences that are of this type,
write down their geometric ratios.
(a) 1000, −100, 10, −1, . . .
(b) 2, 4, 6, 8, . . .
(c) a, ar, ar2, ar3, . . .
Solution
(a) 1000, −100, 10, −1, . . . is a geometric progression with geometric ratio, −
.
(b) 2, 4, 6, 8, . . . is not a geometric progression because to go from one term to the next you add 2. Such a
sequence is called an arithmetic progression and is of little interest in business and economics.
(c) a, ar, ar2, ar3, . . . is a geometric progression with geometric ratio, r.
1
10
Practice Problem
1 Decide which of the following sequences are geometric progressions. For those sequences that are of
this type, write down their geometric ratios.
(a) 3, 6, 12, 24, . . .
(b) 5, 10, 15, 20, . . .
(c) 1, −3, 9, −27, . . .
(d) 8, 4, 2, 1, 1/2, . . .
(e) 500, 500(1.07), 500(1.07)2, . . .

A proof of this formula is given in Practice Problem 11 at the end of this section. As a check,
let us use it to determine the sum of the ﬁrst six terms of sequence (*) above. In this case the
ﬁrst term a = 2, the geometric ratio r = 3 and the number of terms n = 6, so the geometric series
is equal to
2
= 36 −1 = 728
which agrees with the previous value found by summing the terms longhand. In this case there
is no real beneﬁt in using the formula. However, in the following example, its use is almost
essential. You might like to convince yourself of the utility of the formula by evaluating this
series longhand and comparing the computational effort involved!
D
F
36 −1
3 −1
A
C
3.3 • Geometric series
211
Example
Evaluate the geometric series
500(1.1) + 500(1.1)2 + 500(1.1)3 + . . . + 500(1.1)25
Solution
We have a = 500(1.1), r = 1.1, n = 25, so the geometric series is equal to
500(1.1)
= 54 090.88
D
F
(1.1)25 −1
1.1 −1
A
C
Practice Problem
2 (a) Write down the next term in the sequence
1, 2, 4, 8, . . .
and hence find the sum of the first five terms. Check that this agrees with the value obtained using
a
(b) Evaluate the geometric series
100(1.07) + 100(1.07)2 + . . . + 100(1.07)20
D
F
r n −1
r −1
A
C
There are two particular applications of geometric series that we now consider, involving
savings and loans. We begin by analysing savings plans. In the simplest case, an individual
decides to invest a regular sum of money into a bank account. This is sometimes referred to 
as a sinking fund and is used to meet some future ﬁnancial commitment. It is assumed that 
he or she saves an equal amount and that the money is put into the account at the same time
each year (or month). We further assume that the interest rate does not change. The latter 
may not be an entirely realistic assumption, since it can ﬂuctuate wildly in volatile market 
conditions. Indeed, banks offer a variety of rates of interest depending on the notice required
for withdrawal and on the actual amount of money saved. Practice Problem 9 at the end of 
this section considers what happens when the interest rate rises as the investment goes above
certain threshold levels.

Mathematics of Finance
212
Example
A person saves $100 in a bank account at the beginning of each month. The bank offers a return of 12%
compounded monthly.
(a) Determine the total amount saved after 12 months.
(b) After how many months does the amount saved ﬁrst exceed $2000?
Solution
(a) During the year a total of 12 regular savings of $100 are made. Each $100 is put into an account that
gives a return of 12% compounded monthly, or equivalently, a return of 1% each month. However,
each payment is invested for a different period of time. For example, the ﬁrst payment is invested for
the full 12 months, whereas the ﬁnal payment is invested for 1 month only. We need to work out the
future value of each payment separately and add them together.
The ﬁrst payment is invested for 12 months, gaining a monthly interest of 1%, so its future value is
100(1.01)12
The second payment is invested for 11 months, so its future value is
100(1.01)11
Likewise, the third payment yields
100(1.01)10
and so on. The last payment is invested for 1 month, so its future value is
100(1.01)1
The total value of the savings at the end of 12 months is then
100(1.01)12 + 100(1.01)11 + . . . + 100(1.01)1
If we rewrite this series in the order of ascending powers, we then have the more familiar form
100(1.01)1 + . . . + 100(1.01)11 + 100(1.01)12
This is equal to the sum of the ﬁrst 12 terms of a geometric progression in which the ﬁrst term is
100(1.01) and the geometric ratio is 1.01. Its value can therefore be found by using
a
with a = 100(1.01), r = 1.01 and n = 12, which gives
$100(1.01)
= $1280.93
(b) In part (a) we showed that after 12 months the total amount saved is
100(1.01) + 100(1.01)2 + . . . + 100(1.01)12
Using exactly the same argument, it is easy to see that after n months the account contains
100(1.01) + 100(1.01)2 + . . . + 100(1.01)n
D
F
(1.01)12 −1
1.01 −1
A
C
D
F
r n −1
r −1
A
C

The formula for the sum of the ﬁrst n terms of a geometric progression shows that this is the same as
100(1.01)
= 10 100(1.01n −1)
The problem here is to ﬁnd the number of months needed for total savings to rise to $2000.
Mathematically, this is equivalent to solving the equation
10 100(1.01n −1) = 2000
for n. Following the strategy described in Section 2.3 gives
1.01n −1 = 0.198
1.01n = 1.198
log(1.01)n = log(1.198)
n log(1.01) = log(1.198)
n =
= 18.2
It follows that after 18 months savings are less than $2000, whereas after 19 months savings exceed this
amount. The target ﬁgure of $2000 is therefore reached at the end of the 19th month.
log(1.198)
log(1.01)
D
F
1.01n −1
1.01 −1
A
C
3.3 • Geometric series
213
Practice Problem
3 An individual saves $1000 in a bank account at the beginning of each year. The bank offers a return
of 8% compounded annually.
(a) Determine the amount saved after 10 years.
(b) After how many years does the amount saved first exceed $20 000?
We now turn our attention to loans. Many businesses ﬁnance their expansion by obtaining
loans from a bank or other ﬁnancial institution. Banks are keen to do this provided that they
receive interest as a reward for lending money. Businesses pay back loans by monthly or annual
repayments. The way in which this repayment is calculated is as follows. Let us suppose that
interest is calculated on a monthly basis and that the ﬁrm repays the debt by ﬁxed monthly
instalments at the end of each month. The bank calculates the interest charged during the ﬁrst
month based on the original loan. At the end of the month, this interest is added on to the ori-
ginal loan and the repayment is simultaneously deducted to determine the amount owed. The
bank then charges interest in the second month based on this new amount and the process is
repeated. Provided that the monthly repayment is greater than the interest charged each
month, the amount owed decreases and eventually the debt is cleared. In practice, the period
during which the loan is repaid is ﬁxed in advance and the monthly repayments are calculated
to achieve this end.

Mathematics of Finance
214
Example
Determine the monthly repayments needed to repay a $100 000 loan which is paid back over 25 years when
the interest rate is 8% compounded annually.
Solution
In this example the time interval between consecutive repayments is 1 month, whereas the period during
which interest is charged is 1 year. This type of ﬁnancial calculation typiﬁes the way in which certain types
of housing loan are worked out. The interest is compounded annually at 8%, so the amount of interest
charged during the ﬁrst year is 8% of the original loan: that is,
× 100 000 = 8000
This amount is added on to the outstanding debt at the end of the ﬁrst year. During this time, 12 monthly
repayments are made, so if each instalment is $x, the outstanding debt must decrease by 12x. Hence, at the
end of the ﬁrst year, the amount owed is
100 000 + 8000 −12x = 108 000 −12x
In order to be able to spot a pattern in the annual debt, let us write this as
100 000(1.08) −12x
where the ﬁrst part simply reﬂects the fact that 8% interest is added on to the original sum of $100 000. At
the end of the second year, a similar calculation is performed. The amount owed rises by 8% to become
[100 000(1.08) −12x](1.08) = 100 000(1.08)2 −12x(1.08)
and we deduct 12x for the repayments to get
100 000(1.08)2 −12x(1.08) −12x
This is the amount owed at the end of the second year. Each year we multiply by 1.08 and subtract 12x, so
at the end of the third year we owe
[100 000(1.08)2 −12x(1.08) −12x](1.08) −12x = 100 000(1.08)3 −12x(1.08)2 −12x(1.08) −12x
and so on. These results are summarized in Table 3.17. If we continue the pattern, we see that after 25 years
the amount owed is
100 000(1.08)25 −12x(1.08)24 −12x(1.08)23 −. . . −12x
= 100 000(1.08)25 −12x[1 + 1.08 + (1.08)2 + . . . + (1.08)24]
where we have taken out a common factor of 12x and rewritten the powers of 1.08 in ascending order. The
ﬁrst term is easily evaluated using a calculator to get
100 000(1.08)25 = 684 847.520
8
100
Table 3.17
End of year
Outstanding debt
1
100 000(1.08)1 −12x
2
100 000(1.08)2 −12x(1.08)1 −12x
3
100 000(1.08)3 −12x(1.08)2 −12x(1.08)1 −12x

The geometric series inside the square brackets can be worked out from the formula
a
The ﬁrst term a = 1, the geometric ratio r = 1.08, and we are summing the ﬁrst 25 terms, so n = 25. (Can
you see why there are actually 25 terms in this series rather than 24?) Hence
[1 + 1.08 + (1.08)2 + . . . + (1.08)24] =
= 73.106
The amount owed at the end of 25 years is therefore
684 847.520 −12x(73.106) = 684 847.520 −877.272x
In this expression, x denotes the monthly repayment, which is chosen so that the debt is completely cleared
after 25 years. This will be so if x is the solution of
684 847.520 −877.272x = 0
Hence
x =
= $780.66
The monthly repayment on a 25-year loan of $100 000 is $780.66, assuming that the interest rate remains
ﬁxed at 8% throughout this period.
It is interesting to substitute this value of x into the expressions for the outstanding debt given in Table
3.17. The results are listed in Table 3.18. What is so depressing about these ﬁgures is that the debt only falls
by about $1500 to begin with, in spite of the fact that over $9000 is being repaid each year!
684 847.520
877.272
1.0825 −1
1.08 −1
D
F
r n −1
r −1
A
C
3.3 • Geometric series
215
Table 3.18
End of year
Outstanding debt
1
$98 632.08
2
$97 154.73
3
$95 559.18
Practice Problem
4 A person requests an immediate bank overdraft of $2000. The bank generously agrees to this, but
insists that it should be repaid by 12 monthly instalments and charges 1% interest every month on the
outstanding debt. Determine the monthly repayment.
The mathematics used in this section for problems on savings and loans can be used for
other time series. Reserves of non-renewable commodities such as minerals, oil and gas con-
tinue to decline, and geometric series can be used to estimate the year in which these stocks are
likely to run out.

Mathematics of Finance
216
Practice Problem
5 It is estimated that world reserves of oil currently stand at 2625 billion units. Oil is currently extracted
at an annual rate of 45.5 billion units and this is set to increase by 2.6% a year. After how many years
will oil reserves run out?
Example
Total reserves of a non-renewable resource are 250 million tonnes. Annual consumption, currently at 
20 million tonnes per year, is expected to rise by 2% a year. After how many years will stocks be exhausted?
Solution
In the ﬁrst year, consumption will be 20 million tonnes. In the second year, this will rise by 2%, so con-
sumption will be 20(1.02) million tonnes. In the third year, this will again rise by 2% to become 20(1.02)2
million tonnes. The total consumption (in millions of tonnes) during the next n years will be
20 + 20(1.02) + 20(1.02)2 + . . . + 20(1.02)n−1
This represents the sum of n terms of a geometric series with ﬁrst term a = 20 and geometric ratio r = 1.02,
so is equal to
20
= 1000(1.02n −1)
Reserves will run out when this exceeds 250 million, so we need to solve the equation
1000(1.02n −1) = 250
for n. This is easily solved using logarithms:
1.02n −1 = 0.25
(divide both sides by 1000)
1.02n = 1.25
(add 1 to both sides)
log(1.02n) = log(1.25)
(take logs of both sides)
n log(1.02) = log(1.25)
(rule 3 of logs)
n =
(divide both sides by log(1.02))
= 11.27
so the reserves will be completely exhausted after 12 years.
log(1.25)
log(1.02)
D
F
1.02n −1
1.02 −1
A
C
Example
Current annual extraction of a non-renewable resource is 40 billion units and this is expected to fall at a rate
of 5% each year. Estimate the current minimum level of reserves if this resource is to last in perpetuity 
(that is, for ever).

Solution
In the ﬁrst year 40 billion units are extracted. In the second year this falls by 5% to 40(0.95) billion units. In
the third year this goes down by a further 5% to 40(0.95)2. After n years the total amount extracted will be
40 + 40(0.95) + 40(0.95)2 + . . . + 40(0.95)n−1
Using the formula for the sum of a geometric progression gives
40
= 40
= 800(1 −0.95n)
To see what happens in perpetuity we need to investigate the behaviour 0.95n as n tends to inﬁnity. Now
since the magnitude of 0.95 is less than unity, it is easy to see that 0.95n converges to zero and so the total
amount will be 800 billion units.
D
F
0.95n −1
−0.05
A
C
D
F
0.95n −1
0.95 −1
A
C
3.3 • Geometric series
217
Arithmetic progression
A sequence of numbers with a constant difference between con-
secutive terms; the nth term takes the form, a + bn.
Geometric progression
A sequence of numbers with a constant ratio between consecutive
terms; the nth term takes the form, arn−1.
Geometric ratio
The constant multiplier in a geometric series.
Geometric series
A sum of the consecutive terms of a geometric progression.
Sinking fund
A ﬁxed sum of money saved at regular intervals which is used to fund some
future ﬁnancial commitment.
Key Terms
Practice Problems
6 Find the value of the geometric series
1000 + 1000(1.03) + 1000(1.03)2 + . . . + 1000(1.03)9
7 A regular saving of $500 is made into a sinking fund at the start of each year for 10 years. Determine
the value of the fund at the end of the tenth year on the assumption that the rate of interest is
(a) 11% compounded annually
(b) 10% compounded continuously
8 Monthly sales figures for January are 5600. This is expected to fall for the following 9 months at a rate
of 2% each month. Thereafter sales are predicted to rise at a constant rate of 4% each month. Estimate
total sales for the next 2 years (including the first January).
9 A bank has three different types of account in which the interest rate depends on the amount invested.
The ‘ordinary’ account offers a return of 6% and is available to every customer. The ‘extra’ account
offers 7% and is available only to customers with $5000 or more to invest. The ‘superextra’ account


offers 8% and is available only to customers with $20 000 or more to invest. In each case, interest is
compounded annually and is added to the investment at the end of the year.
A person saves $4000 at the beginning of each year for 25 years. Calculate the total amount saved
on the assumption that the money is transferred to a higher-interest account at the earliest opportunity.
10 Determine the monthly repayments needed to repay a $50 000 loan that is paid back over 25 years
when the interest rate is 9% compounded annually. Calculate the increased monthly repayments
needed in the case when
(a) the interest rate rises to 10%
(b) the period of repayment is reduced to 20 years
11 If
Sn = a + ar + ar2 + . . . + arn−1
write down an expression for rSn and deduce that
rSn −Sn = arn −a
Hence show that the sum of the first n terms of a geometric progression with first term a and geo-
metric ratio r is given by
a
provided that r ≠1.
12 A prize fund is set up with a single investment of $5000 to provide an annual prize of $500. The fund
is invested to earn interest at a rate of 7% compounded annually. If the first prize is awarded 1 year
after the initial investment, find the number of years for which the prize can be awarded before the
fund falls below $500.
13 The current extraction of a certain mineral is 12 million tonnes a year and this is expected to fall at a
constant rate of 6% each year. Estimate the current minimum level of world reserves if the extraction
is to last in perpetuity.
14 At the beginning of a month, a customer owes a credit card company $8480. In the middle of the
month, the customer repays $A, where A < $8480, and at the end of the month the company adds
interest at a rate of 6% of the outstanding debt. This process is repeated with the customer continu-
ing to pay off the same amount, $A, each month.
(a) Find the value of A for which the customer still owes $8480 at the start of each month.
(b) If A = 1000, calculate the amount owing at the end of the eighth month.
(c) Show that the value of A for which the whole amount owing is exactly paid off after the nth pay-
ment is given by
A = 
where
R = 1.06
(d) Find the value of A if the debt is to be paid off exactly after 2 years.
15 (Excel) A bank decides to produce a simple table for its customers, indicating the monthly repayments
of a $5000 loan that is paid back over different periods of time. Produce such a table, with 13 rows
corresponding to monthly interest rates of 0.5%, 0.525%, 0.55%, 0.575%, . . . , 0.8%, and 
9 columns corresponding to a repayment period of 12, 18, 24, . . . , 60 months.
16 (Excel) Determine the monthly repayments needed to repay a $500 000 loan that is paid back over
25 years when the interest rate is 7.25% compounded annually. Use a spreadsheet to tabulate the
outstanding debt at the end of 1, 2, . . . , 25 years.
8480Rn−1(R −1)
Rn −1
D
F
r n −1
r −1
A
C
Mathematics of Finance
218

17 (Excel) Estimates of reserves of an oil field are 60 billion barrels. Current annual production of 4 bil-
lion barrels is set to rise at a constant rate of r% a year. Show that the value of r required to exhaust
this oil over 10 years (including the current year) satisfies the equation
1 +
10
− 0.15r −1 = 0
By tabulating values of the left-hand side for r = 8.00, 8.05, 8.10, 8.15, . . . calculate the value of 
r correct to 1 decimal place.
D
F
r
100
A
C
3.3 • Geometric series
219

section 3.4
Investment appraisal
In Section 3.2 the following two formulas were used to solve compound interest problems
S = P 1 +
t
(1)
S = Pert/100
(2)
The ﬁrst of these can be applied to any type of compounding in which the interest is added on
to the investment at the end of discrete time intervals. The second formula is used when the
interest is added on continuously. Both formulas involve the variables
P = principal
S = future value
r = interest rate
t = time
In the case of discrete compounding, the letter t represents the number of time periods. (In
Section 3.2 this was denoted by n.) For continuous compounding, t is measured in years. Given
D
F
r
100
A
C
Objectives
At the end of this section you should be able to:
 Calculate present values under discrete and continuous compounding.
 Use net present values to appraise investment projects.
 Calculate the internal rate of return.
 Calculate the present value of an annuity.
 Use discounting to compare investment projects.
 Calculate the present value of government securities.

any three of these variables it is possible to work out the value of the remaining variable.
Various examples were considered in Section 3.2. Of particular interest is the case where S, r
and t are given, and P is the unknown to be determined. In this situation we know the future
value, and we want to work backwards to calculate the original principal. This process is called
discounting and the principal, P, is called the present value. The rate of interest is sometimes
referred to as the discount rate. Equations (1) and (2) are easily rearranged to produce explicit
formulas for the present value under discrete and continuous compounding:
P =
= S 1 +
−t
P =
= Se−rt/100
S
ert/100
D
F
r
100
A
C
S
(1 + r/100)t
3.4 • Investment appraisal
221
Example
Find the present value of $1000 in 4 years’ time if the discount rate is 10% compounded
(a) semi-annually
(b) continuously
Solution
(a) The discount formula for discrete compounding is
P = S 1 +
−t
If compounding occurs semi-annually then r = 5 since the interest rate per 6 months is 10/2 = 5, and 
t = 8 since there are eight 6-month periods in 4 years. We are given that the future value is $1000, so
P = $1000(1.05)−8 = $676.84
(b) The discount formula for continuous compounding is
P = Se−rt/ 100
In this formula, r is the annual discount rate, which is 10, and t is measured in years, so is 4. Hence the
present value is
P = $1000e−0.4 = $670.32
Notice that the present value in part (b) is smaller than that in part (a). This is to be expected because con-
tinuous compounding always produces a higher yield. Consequently, we need to invest a smaller amount
under continuous compounding to produce the future value of $1000 after 4 years.
D
F
r
100
A
C
Practice Problem
1 Find the present value of $100 000 in 10 years’ time if the discount rate is 6% compounded
(a) annually
(b) continuously

Present values are a useful way of appraising investment projects. Suppose that you are
invited to invest $600 today in a business venture that is certain to produce a return of $1000
in 5 years’ time. If the discount rate is 10% compounded semi-annually then part (a) of the 
previous example shows that the present value of this return is $676.84. This exceeds the initial
outlay of $600, so the venture is regarded as proﬁtable. We quantify this proﬁt by calculating
the difference between the present value of the revenue and the present value of the costs,
which is known as the net present value (NPV). In this example, the net present value is
$676.84 −$600 = $76.84
Quite generally, a project is considered worthwhile when the NPV is positive. Moreover, if a
decision is to be made between two different projects then the one with the higher NPV is the
preferred choice.
An alternative way of assessing individual projects is based on the internal rate of return
(IRR). This is the annual rate which, when applied to the initial outlay, yields the same return
as the project after the same number of years. The investment is considered worthwhile pro-
vided the IRR exceeds the market rate. Obviously, in practice, other factors such as risk need to
be considered before a decision is made.
The following example illustrates both NPV and IRR methods and shows how a value of the
IRR itself can be calculated.
Mathematics of Finance
222
Example
A project requiring an initial outlay of $15 000 is guaranteed to produce a return of $20 000 in 3 years’ time.
Use the
(a) net present value
(b) internal rate of return
methods to decide whether this investment is worthwhile if the prevailing market rate is 5% compounded
annually. Would your decision be affected if the interest rate were 12%?
Solution
(a) The present value of $20 000 in 3 years’ time, based on a discount rate of 5%, is found by setting 
S = 20 000, t = 3 and r = 5 in the formula
P = S 1 +
−t
This gives
P = $20 000(1.05)−3 = $17 276.75
The NPV is therefore
$17 276.75 −$15 000 = $2276.75
The project is to be recommended because this value is positive.
(b) To calculate the IRR we use the formula
S = P 1 +
t
We are given S = 20 000, P = 15 000 and t = 3, so we need to solve
20 000 = 15 000 1 +
3
D
F
r
100
A
C
D
F
r
100
A
C
D
F
r
100
A
C

for r. An obvious ﬁrst step is to divide both sides of this equation by 15 000 to get
=
1 +
3
We can extract r by taking cube roots of both sides of
1 +
3
=
to get
1 +
=
1/ 3
= 1.1
Hence
= 1.1 −1 = 0.1
and so the IRR is 10%. The project is therefore to be recommended because this value exceeds the mar-
ket rate of 5%.
For the last part of the problem we are invited to consider whether our advice would be different if the
market rate were 12%. Using the NPV method, we need to repeat the calculations, replacing 5 by 12. The
corresponding net present value is then
$20 000(1.12)−3 −$15 000 = −$764.40
This time the NPV is negative, so the project leads to an effective loss and is not to be recommended. The
same conclusion can be reached more easily using the IRR method. We have already seen that the internal
rate of return is 10% and can deduce immediately that you would be better off investing the $15 000 at the
market rate of 12%, since this gives the higher yield.
r
100
D
F
4
3
A
C
r
100
4
3
D
F
r
100
A
C
D
F
r
100
A
C
4
3
3.4 • Investment appraisal
223
Practice Problem
2 An investment project requires an initial outlay of $8000 and will produce a return of $17 000 at the
end of 5 years. Use the
(a) net present value
(b) internal rate of return
methods to decide whether this is worthwhile if the capital could be invested elsewhere at 15% com-
pounded annually.
Advice
This problem illustrates the use of two different methods for investment appraisal. It may
appear at first sight that the method based on the IRR is the preferred approach, particu-
larly if you wish to consider more than one interest rate. However, this is not usually the
case. The IRR method can give wholly misleading advice when comparing two or more
projects, and you must be careful when interpreting the results of this method. The fol-
lowing example highlights the difficulty.

Mathematics of Finance
224
Example
Suppose that it is possible to invest in only one of two different projects. Project A requires an initial outlay of
$1000 and yields $1200 in 4 years’ time. Project B requires an outlay of $30 000 and yields $35 000 after 4 years.
Which of these projects would you choose to invest in when the market rate is 3% compounded annually?
Solution
Let us ﬁrst solve this problem using net present values.
For Project A
NPV = $1200(1.03)−4 −$1000 = $66.18
For Project B
NPV = $35 000(1.03)−4 −$30 000 = $1097.05
Both projects are viable as they produce positive net present values. Moreover, the second project is preferred,
since it has the higher value. You can see that this recommendation is correct by considering how you might
invest $30 000. If you opt for Project A then the best you can do is to invest $1000 of this amount to give a
return of $1200 in 4 years’ time. The remaining $29 000 could be invested at the market rate of 3% to yield
$29 000(1.03)4 = $32 639.76
The total return is then
$1200 + $32 639.76 = $33 839.76
On the other hand, if you opt for Project B then the whole of the $30 000 can be invested to yield $35 000.
In other words, in 4 years’ time you would be
$35 000 −$33 639.76 = $1160.24
better off by choosing Project B, which conﬁrms the advice given by the NPV method.
However, this is contrary to the advice given by the IRR method. For Project A, the internal rate of return,
rA, satisﬁes
1200 = 1000 1 +
4
Dividing by 1000 gives
1 +
4
= 1.2
and if we take fourth roots we get
1 +
= (1.2)1/ 4 = 1.047
so rA = 4.7%.
For Project B the internal rate of return, rB, satisﬁes
35 000 = 30 000 1 +
4
This can be solved as before to get rB = 3.9%.
Project A gives the higher internal rate of return even though, as we have seen, Project B is the preferred
choice.
D
F
rB
100
A
C
rA
100
D
F
rA
100
A
C
D
F
rA
100
A
C

The results of this example show that the IRR method is an unreliable way of comparing
investment opportunities when there are signiﬁcant differences between the amounts involved.
This is because the IRR method compares percentages, and obviously a large percentage of a
small sum could give a smaller proﬁt than a small percentage of a larger sum.
3.4 • Investment appraisal
225
Practice Problem
3 A firm needs to choose between two projects, A and B. Project A involves an initial outlay of $13 500
and yields $18 000 in 2 years’ time. Project B requires an outlay of $9000 and yields $13 000 after 
2 years. Which of these projects would you advise the firm to invest in if the annual market rate of
interest is 7%?
So far in this section we have calculated the present value of a single future value. We now
consider the case of a sequence of payments over time. The simplest cash ﬂow of this type is an
annuity, which is a sequence of regular equal payments. It can be thought of as the opposite of
a sinking fund. This time a lump sum is invested and, subsequently, equal amounts of money
are withdrawn at ﬁxed time intervals. Provided that the payments themselves exceed the
amount of interest gained during the time interval between payments, the fund will decrease
and eventually become zero. At this point the payments cease. In practice, we are interested in
the value of the original lump sum needed to secure a regular income over a known period of
time. This can be done by summing the present values of the individual payments.
Example
Find the present value of an annuity that yields an income of $10 000 at the end of each year for 10 years,
assuming that the interest rate is 7% compounded annually.
What would the present value be if the annuity yields this income in perpetuity?
Solution
The ﬁrst payment of $10 000 is made at the end of the ﬁrst year. Its present value is calculated using the 
formula
P = S 1 +
−t
with S = 10 000, r = 7 and t = 1, so
P = $10 000(1.07)−1 = $9345.79
This means that if we want to take out $10 000 from the fund in 1 year’s time then we need to invest
$9345.79 today. The second payment of $10 000 is made at the end of the second year, so its present value
is
$10 000(1.07)−2 = $8734.39
This is the amount of money that needs to be invested now to cover the second payment from the fund. In
general, the present value of $10 000 in t years’ time is
10 000(1.07)−t
D
F
r
100
A
C


so the total present value is
10 000(1.07)−1 + 10 000(1.07)−2 + . . . + 10 000(1.07)−10
This is a geometric series, so we may use the formula
a
In this case, a = 10 000(1.07)−1, r = 1.07−1 and n = 10, so the present value of the annuity is
$10 000(1.07)−1
= $70 235.82
This represents the amount of money that needs to be invested now so that a regular annual income of 
$10 000 can be withdrawn from the fund for the next 10 years.
If the income stream is to continue for ever then we need to investigate what happens to the formula
a
as n gets bigger and bigger. In this case r = 1.07−1 < 1, so as n increases, rndecreases and tends towards zero.
This behaviour can be seen clearly from the table:
n
1
10
100
1.07−n
0.9346
0.5083
0.0012
Setting rn = 0 in the formula for the sum of geometric series shows that if the series goes on for ever then
eventually the sum approaches
so that the present value of the annuity in perpetuity is
= $142 857.14
10 000(1.07)−1
1 −1.07−1
a
1 −r
D
F
r n −1
r −1
A
C
D
F
1.07−10 −1
1.07−1 −1
A
C
D
F
r n −1
r −1
A
C
Mathematics of Finance
226
Practice Problem
4 Find the present value of an annuity that yields an income of $2000 at the end of each month for 
10 years, assuming that the interest rate is 6% compounded monthly.
The argument used in the previous example can be used to calculate the net present value.
For instance, suppose that a business requires an initial investment of $60 000, which is guar-
anteed to return a regular payment of $10 000 at the end of each year for the next 10 years. If
the discount rate is 7% compounded annually then the previous example shows that the pre-
sent value is $70 235.82. The net present value of the investment is therefore
$70 235.82 −$60 000 = $10 235.82
A similar procedure can be used when the payments are irregular, although it is no longer
possible to use the formula for the sum of a geometric progression. Instead the present value
of each individual payment is calculated and the values are then summed longhand.

3.4 • Investment appraisal
227
Table 3.19
Revenue ($)
End of year
Project A
Project B
1
6 000
10 000
2
3 000
6 000
3
10 000
9 000
4
8 000
1 000
Total
27 000
26 000
Table 3.20
Discounted revenue ($)
End of year
Project A
Project B
1
5 405.41
9 000.01
2
2 434.87
4 869.73
3
7 311.91
6 580.72
4
5 269.85
658.73
Total
20 422.04
21 109.19
Example
A small business has a choice of investing $20 000 in one of two projects. The revenue ﬂows from the two
projects during the next 4 years are listed in Table 3.19. If the interest rate is 11% compounded annually,
which of these two projects would you advise the company to invest in?

Solution
If we simply add together all of the individual receipts, it appears that Project A is to be preferred, since the
total revenue generated from Project A is $1000 greater than that from Project B. However, this naïve
approach fails to take into account the time distribution.
From Table 3.19 we see that both projects yield a single receipt of $10 000. For Project A this occurs at
the end of year 3, whereas for Project B this occurs at the end of year 1. This $10 000 is worth more in Project
B because it occurs earlier in the revenue stream and, once received, could be invested for longer at the pre-
vailing rate of interest. To compare these projects we need to discount the revenue stream to the present
value. The present values obtained depend on the discount rate. Table 3.20 shows the present values based
on the given rate of 11% compounded annually. These values are calculated using the formula
P = S(1.11)−t
For example, the present value of the $10 000 revenue in Project A is given by
$10 000(1.11)−3 = $7311.91
The net present values for Project A and Project B are given by
$20 422.67 −$20 000 = $422.67

It is sometimes useful to ﬁnd the internal rate of return of a project yielding a sequence of payments over
time. However, as the following example demonstrates, this can be difﬁcult to calculate, particularly when
there are more than two payments.
Mathematics of Finance
228
Practice Problem
5 A firm has a choice of spending $10 000 today on one of two projects. The revenue obtained from
these projects is listed in Table 3.21. Assuming that the discount rate is 15% compounded annually,
which of these two projects would you advise the company to invest in?
and
$21 109.19 −$20 000 = $1109.19
respectively. Consequently, if it is possible to invest in only one of these projects, the preferred choice is
Project B.
Table 3.21
Revenue ($)
End of year
Project 1
Project 2
1
2000
1000
2
2000
1000
3
3000
2000
4
3000
6000
5
3000
4000
Example
(a) Calculate the IRR of a project which requires an initial outlay of $20 000 and produces a return of $8000
at the end of year 1 and $15 000 at the end of year 2.
(b) Calculate the IRR of a project which requires an initial outlay of $5000 and produces returns of $1000,
$2000 and $3000 at the end of years 1, 2 and 3, respectively.
Solution
(a) In the case of a single payment, the IRR is the annual rate of interest, r, which, when applied to the 
initial outlay, P, yields a known future payment, S. If this payment is made after t years then
S = P 1 +
t
or, equivalently
P = S 1 +
−t
D
F
r
100
A
C
D
F
r
100
A
C

Note that the right-hand side of this last equation is just the present value of S. Consequently, the IRR
can be thought of as the rate of interest at which the present value of S equals the initial outlay P.
The present value of $8000 in 1 year’s time is
8000 1 +
−1
where r is the annual rate of interest. Similarly, the present value of $15 000 in 2 years’ time is
15 000 1 +
−2
If r is to be the IRR then the sum of these present values must equal the initial investment of $20 000.
In other words, the IRR is the value of r that satisﬁes the equation
20 000 = 8000 1 +
−1
+ 15 000 1 +
−2
The simplest way of solving this equation is to multiply both sides by (1 + r/100)2 to remove all 
negative indices. This gives
20 000 1 +
2
= 8000 1 +
+ 15 000
Now
1 +
2
=
1 +
1 +
= 1 +
+
so if we multiply out the brackets, we obtain
20 000 + 400r + 2r2 = 8000 + 80r + 15 000
Collecting like terms gives
2r2 + 320r −3000 = 0
This is a quadratic in r, so can be solved using the formula described in Section 2.1 to get
r =
=
= 8.9% or −168.9%
We can obviously ignore the negative solution, so can conclude that the IRR is 8.9%.
(b) If an initial outlay of $5000 yields $1000, $2000 and $3000 at the end of years 1, 2 and 3, respectively,
then the internal rate of return, r, satisﬁes the equation
5000 = 1000 1 +
−1
+ 2000 1 +
−2
+ 3000 1 +
−3
A sensible thing to do here might be to multiply through by (1 + (r/100))−3. However, this produces an
equation involving r3 (and lower powers of r), which is no easier to solve than the original. Indeed, a
moment’s thought should convince you that in general, when dealing with a sequence of payments over
n years, the IRR will satisfy an equation involving r n (and lower powers of r). Under these circumstances
D
F
r
100
A
C
D
F
r
100
A
C
D
F
r
100
A
C
−320 ± 355.5
4
−
±
−
−
320
320
4 2
3000
2 2
2
  ((
)   ( )(
))
( )
r2
10 000
r
50
D
F
r
100
A
C
D
F
r
100
A
C
D
F
r
100
A
C
D
F
r
100
A
C
D
F
r
100
A
C
D
F
r
100
A
C
D
F
r
100
A
C
D
F
r
100
A
C
D
F
r
100
A
C
3.4 • Investment appraisal
229


it is virtually impossible to obtain the exact solution. The best way of proceeding would be to use a non-
linear equation-solver routine on a computer, particularly if it is important that an accurate value of r
is obtained. However, if all that is needed is a rough approximation then this can be done by systematic
trial and error. We merely substitute likely solutions into the right-hand side of the equation until we
ﬁnd the one that works. For example, putting r = 5 gives
+
+
= 5358
Other values of the expression
1000 1 +
−1
+ 2000 1 +
−2
+ 3000 1 +
−3
corresponding to r = 6, 7, . . . , 10 are listed in the following table:
r
6
7
8
9
10
value
5242
5130
5022
4917
4816
Given that we are trying to ﬁnd r so that this value is 5000, this table indicates that r is some-
where between 8% (which produces a value greater than 5000) and 9% (which produces a value less
than 5000).
If a more accurate estimate of IRR is required then we simply try further values between 8% and 9%.
For example, it is easy to check that putting r = 81/2 gives 4969, indicating that the exact value of r is
between 8% and 81/2%. We conclude that the IRR is 8% to the nearest percentage.
D
F
r
100
A
C
D
F
r
100
A
C
D
F
r
100
A
C
3000
(1.05)3
2000
(1.05)2
1000
1.05
Mathematics of Finance
230
Practice Problem
6 A project requires an initial investment of $12 000. It has a guaranteed return of $8000 at the end of
year 1 and a return of $2000 each year at the end of years 2, 3 and 4.
Estimate the IRR to the nearest percentage. Would you recommend that someone invests in this
project if the prevailing market rate is 8% compounded annually?
Problem 6 should have convinced you how tedious it is to calculate the internal rate of
return ‘by hand’ when there are more than two payments in a revenue ﬂow. A computer
spreadsheet provides the ideal tool for dealing with this. Chart Wizard can be used to sketch a
graph from which a rough estimate of IRR can be found. A more accurate value can be found
using a ‘ﬁner’ tabulation in the vicinity of this estimate.
Example
A proposed investment project costs $11 600 today. The expected revenue ﬂow (in thousands of dollars) for
the next 4 years is
Year
1
2
3
4
Revenue ﬂow
2
3.7
3.8
4.5
Use a graphical method to determine the IRR to the nearest whole number. By tabulating further values,
estimate the IRR correct to 1 decimal place.
EXCEL

Solution
Before we tackle this particular example, it will be useful to review the deﬁnition of the internal rate of
return. So far, we have taken it to be the rate of interest at which the total present values of the revenue
stream equal the initial outlay. Of course, this is the same as saying that the difference between present 
values and the initial outlay is zero. In other words, the internal rate of return is the interest rate which gives
a net present value (NPV) of zero. We shall exploit this fact by plotting a graph of net present values against
interest rate (r). The IRR is the value of r at which the graph crosses the horizontal axis.
We begin by typing suitable headings together with values of the years and revenue ﬂows for this project
into a spreadsheet, as shown in Figure 3.4.
Notice that the initial investment in the project has been input as a negative number, since this represents
an outﬂow of funds. The present value of this is also −11 600, since this occurs in year 0. The columns 
represent interest rates of 2%, 4%, . . . , 10%. The values in the body of the table will be the present values
of the revenue ﬂows, calculated at each of these rates of interest. For example, the entry in cell C7 will be the
present value of the $2000 received at the end of year 1 when the interest rate is 2%. From the formula
P = S 1 +
−t
this is
2000 1 +
−1
Notice that the numbers 2000 and 1 appear in cells B7 and A7, respectively, so the formula that we need for
cell C7 is
=B7*(1.02)^(-A7)
By clicking and dragging this formula down to C10, we complete the present values for the 2% interest rate.
For the next column, we simply change the scale factor 1.02 to 1.04, so we type
=B7*(1.04)^(-A7)
in cell D7 and repeat the process. We can obviously continue in this way along the rest of the table. Finally,
we calculate the net present values by summing the entries for the present values in each column. For 
example, to ﬁnd the NPV for the 2% interest rate we type
D
F
2
100
A
C
D
F
r
100
A
C
3.4 • Investment appraisal
231

Figure 3.4

=SUM(C6:C10)
in cell C11. (A quicker way of doing this is just to highlight cells C6 to C11 and click on the ∑icon on the
toolbar. This is the Greek letter sigma, which mathematicians use as an abbreviation for SUM. Excel will
then sum these ﬁve cells and put the answer in C11.) Figure 3.5 shows the completed spreadsheet. The 
values have been rounded to 2 decimal places using the Decrease Decimal button on the toolbar.
Mathematics of Finance
232
Figure 3.5
Figure 3.6
A graph of NPV against r is shown in Figure 3.5. This is plotted by highlighting the cells in rows 5 and
11, and using Chart Wizard. (Click and drag from C5 to G5 then, holding down the Ctrl key, click and drag
from C11 to G11.) The graph shows that to the nearest whole number, the internal rate of return is 7%.
To obtain a more accurate estimate of IRR, we return to the spreadsheet and add more columns for inter-
est rates near 7%. By looking at the bottom row of the table in Figure 3.6 we see that, to 1 decimal place, the
IRR is 7.1%.

We conclude this section by using the theory of discounting to explain the relationship
between interest rates and the speculative demand for money. This was ﬁrst introduced in
Section 1.6 in the analysis of LM schedules. Speculative demand consists of money held in
reserve to take advantage of changes in the value of alternative ﬁnancial assets, such as govern-
ment bonds. As their name suggests, these issues can be bought from the government at a cer-
tain price. In return, the government pays out interest on an annual basis for a prescribed
number of years. At the end of this period the bond is redeemed and the purchaser is repaid
the original sum. Now these bonds can be bought and sold at any point in their lifetime. The
person who chooses to buy one of these bonds part-way through this period is entitled to all of
the future interest payments, together with the ﬁnal redemption payment. The value of exist-
ing securities clearly depends on the number of years remaining before redemption, together
with the prevailing rate of interest.
3.4 • Investment appraisal
233
Example
A 10-year bond is originally offered by the government at $5000 with an annual return of 9%. Assuming
that the bond has 4 years left before redemption, calculate its present value assuming that the prevailing
interest rate is
(a) 5%
(b) 7%
(c) 9%
(d) 11%
(e) 13%
Solution
The government pays annual interest of 9% on the $5000 bond, so agrees to pay the holder $450 every year
for 10 years. At the end of the 10 years, the bond is redeemed by the government and $5000 is paid back to
the purchaser. If there are just 4 years left between now and the date of redemption, the future cash ﬂow
that is paid on the bond is summarized in the second column of Table 3.22. This is similar to that of an
annuity except that in the ﬁnal year an extra payment of $5000 is received when the government pays back
the original investment. The present value of this income stream is calculated in Table 3.22 using the given
discount rates of 5%, 7%, 9%, 11% and 13% compounded annually. The total present value in each case is
given in the last row of this table and varies from $5710 when the interest rate is 5% to $4405 when it is 13%.
Notice from the table in the previous example that the value of a bond falls as interest rates rise. This is
entirely to be expected, since the formula we use to calculate individual present values is
P =
and larger values of r produce smaller values of P.
S
(1 + r/100)t

Table 3.22
Present values
End of year
Cash ﬂow
5%
7%
9%
11%
13%
1
450
429
421
413
405
398
2
450
408
393
379
365
352
3
450
389
367
347
329
312
4
5450
4484
4158
3861
3590
3343
Total present value
5710
5339
5000
4689
4405

The effect of this relationship on ﬁnancial markets can now be analysed. Let us suppose that the interest
rate is high at, say, 13%. As you can see from Table 3.22, the price of the bond is relatively low. Moreover,
one might reasonably expect that, in the future, interest rates are likely to fall, thereby increasing the 
present value of the bond. In this situation an investor would be encouraged to buy this bond in the 
expectation of not only receiving the cash ﬂow from holding the bond but also receiving a capital gain on
its present value. Speculative balances therefore decrease as a result of high interest rates because money 
is converted into securities. Exactly the opposite happens when interest rates are low. The corresponding
present value is relatively high, and, with an expectation of a rise in interest rates and a possible capital loss,
investors are reluctant to invest in securities, so speculative balances are high.
Mathematics of Finance
234
Practice Problem
7 A 10-year bond is originally offered by the government at $1000 with an annual return of 7%.
Assuming that the bond currently has 3 years left before redemption and that the prevailing interest
rate is 8% compounded annually, calculate its present value.
Annuity
A lump sum investment designed to produce a sequence of equal regular pay-
ments over time.
Discount rate
The interest rate that is used when going backwards in time to calculate the
present value from a future value.
Discounting
The process of working backwards in time to ﬁnd the present values from a
future value.
Internal rate of return
The interest rate for which the net present value is zero.
Net present value
The present value of a revenue ﬂow minus the original cost.
Present value
The amount that is invested initially to produce a speciﬁed future value after
a given period of time.
Key Terms
Practice Problems
8 Determine the present value of $7000 in 2 years’ time if the discount rate is 8% compounded
(a) quarterly
(b) continuously
9 A small business promises a profit of $8000 on an initial investment of $20 000 after 5 years.
(a) Calculate the internal rate of return.
(b) Would you advise someone to invest in this business if the market rate is 6% compounded 
annually?
10 You are given the opportunity of investing in one of three projects. Projects A, B and C require 
initial outlays of $20 000, $30 000 and $100 000 and are guaranteed to return $25 000, $37 000 and
$117 000, respectively, in 3 years’ time. Which of these projects would you invest in if the market
rate is 5% compounded annually?

11 Determine the present value of an annuity that pays out $100 at the end of each year
(a) for 5 years
(b) in perpetuity
if the interest rate is 10% compounded annually.
12 A firm decides to invest in a new piece of machinery which is expected to produce an additional rev-
enue of $8000 at the end of every year for 10 years. At the end of this period the firm plans to sell
the machinery for scrap, for which it expects to receive $5000. What is the maximum amount that
the firm should pay for the machine if it is not to suffer a net loss as a result of this investment? You
may assume that the discount rate is 6% compounded annually.
13 During the next 3 years a business decides to invest $10 000 at the beginning of each year. The cor-
responding revenue that it can expect to receive at the end of each year is given in Table 3.23.
Calculate the net present value if the discount rate is 4% compounded annually.
3.4 • Investment appraisal
235

14 A project requires an initial investment of $50 000. It produces a return of $40 000 at the end of year
1 and $30 000 at the end of year 2. Find the exact value of the internal rate of return.
15 A government bond that originally cost $500 with a yield of 6% has 5 years left before redemption.
Determine its present value if the prevailing rate of interest is 15%.
16 An annuity pays out $20 000 per year in perpetuity. If the interest rate is 5% compounded annually,
find
(a) the present value of the whole annuity
(b) the present value of the annuity for payments received, starting from the end of the thirtieth year
(c) the present value of the annuity of the first 30 years
17 An engineering company needs to decide whether or not to build a new factory. The costs of build-
ing the factory are $150 million initially, together with a further $100 million at the end of the 
next 2 years. Annual operating costs are $5 million commencing at the end of the third year. Annual
revenue is predicted to be $50 million commencing at the end of the third year. If the interest rate 
is 6% compounded annually, find
(a) the present value of the building costs
(b) the present value of the operating costs at the end of n years (n > 2)
(c) the present value of the revenue after n years (n > 2)
(d) the minimum value of n for which the net present value is positive
18 An annuity pays out $a per year in perpetuity. If the interest rate is r% compounded annually, show
that the present value of the whole annuity is 100a/r.
19 (Excel) A proposed investment project costs $970 000 today, and is expected to generate revenues
(in thousands of dollars) at the end of each of the following four years of 280, 450, 300, 220 
Table 3.23
End of year
Revenue ($)
1
5 000
2
20 000
3
50 000

respectively. Sketch a graph of net present values against interest rates, r, over the range 0 ≤r ≤14.
Use this graph to estimate the internal rate of return, to the nearest whole number. Use a spreadsheet
to perform more calculations in order to calculate the value of the IRR, correct to 1 decimal place.
20 (Excel) A civil engineering company needs to buy a new excavator. Model A is expected to make 
a loss of $60 000 at the end of the first year, but is expected to produce revenues of $24 000 and
$72 000 for the second and third years of operation. The corresponding figures for model B are 
$96 000, $12 000 and $120 000, respectively. Use a spreadsheet to tabulate the revenue flows (using
negative numbers for the losses in the first year), together with the corresponding present values
based on a discount rate of 8% compounded annually. Find the net present value for each model.
Which excavator, if any, would you recommend buying?
What difference does it make if the discount rate is 8% compounded continuously?
Mathematics of Finance
236

chapter 4
Differentiation
This chapter provides a simple introduction to the general topic of calculus. In fact,
‘calculus’ is a Latin word and a literal translation of it is ‘stone’. Unfortunately, all 
too many students interpret this as meaning a heavy millstone that they have 
to carry around with them! However, as we shall see, the techniques of calculus
actually provide us with a quick way of performing calculations. (The process of
counting was originally performed using stones a long time ago.)
There are eight sections, which should be read in the order that they appear. It
should be possible to omit Sections 4.5 and 4.7 at a first reading and Section 4.6 can
be read any time after Section 4.3.
Section 4.1 provides a leisurely introduction to the basic idea of differentiation. The
material is explained using pictures, which will help you to understand the con-
nection between the underlying mathematics and the economic applications in later
sections.
There are six rules of differentiation, which are evenly split between Sections 4.2 and
4.4. Section 4.2 considers the easy rules that all students will need to know.
However, if you are on a business studies or accountancy course, or are on a 
low-level economics route, then the more advanced rules in Section 4.4 may not be
of relevance and could be ignored. As far as possible, examples given in later sections
and chapters are based on the easy rules only so that such students are not dis-
advantaged. However, the more advanced rules are essential to any proper study of
mathematical economics and their use in deriving general results is unavoidable.
Sections 4.3 and 4.5 describe standard economic applications. Marginal functions
associated with revenue, cost, production, consumption and savings functions are all

discussed in Section 4.3. The important topic of elasticity is described in Section 4.5.
The distinction is made between price elasticity along an arc and price elasticity at a
point. Familiar results involving general linear demand functions and the relationship
between price elasticity of demand and revenue are derived.
Sections 4.6 and 4.7 are devoted to the topic of optimization, which is used to find
the maximum and minimum values of economic functions. In the first half of Section
4.6 we concentrate on the mathematical technique. The second half contains four
examination-type problems, all taken from economics, which are solved in detail. In
Section 4.7, mathematics is used to derive general results relating to the optimiza-
tion of profit and production functions.
The final section revises two important mathematical functions, namely the expon-
ential and natural logarithm functions. We describe how to differentiate these 
functions and illustrate their use in economics.
Differentiation is probably the most important topic in the whole book, and one that
we shall continue in Chapters 5 and 6, since it provides the necessary background
theory for much of mathematical economics. You are therefore advised to make
every effort to attempt the problems given in each section. The prerequisites include
an understanding of the concept of a function together with the ability to manipu-
late algebraic expressions. These are covered in Chapters 1 and 2, and if you have
worked successfully through this material, you should find that you are in good
shape to begin calculus.

section 4.1
The derivative of a function
This introductory section is designed to get you started with differential calculus in a fairly pain-
less way. There are really only three things that we are going to do. We discuss the basic idea of
something called a derived function, give you two equivalent pieces of notation to describe it
and ﬁnally show you how to write down a formula for the derived function in simple cases.
In Chapter 1 the slope of a straight line was deﬁned to be the change in the value of y brought
about by a 1 unit increase in x. In fact, it is not necessary to restrict the change in x to a 1 unit
increase. More generally, the slope, or gradient, of a line is taken to be the change in y divided
by the corresponding change in x as you move between any two points on the line. It is cus-
tomary to denote the change in y by ∆y, where ∆is the Greek letter ‘delta’.
Likewise, the change in x is written ∆x. In this notation we have
slope = ∆y
∆x
Objectives
At the end of this section you should be able to:
 Find the slope of a straight line given any two points on the line.
 Detect whether a line is uphill, downhill or horizontal using the sign of the slope.
 Recognize the notation f′(x) and dy/dx for the derivative of a function.
 Estimate the derivative of a function by measuring the slope of a tangent.
 Differentiate power functions.
Example
Find the slope of the straight line passing through
(a) A (1, 2) and B (3, 4)
(b) A (1, 2) and C (4, 1)
(c) A (1, 2) and D (5, 2)


(b) Points A and C are sketched in Figure 4.2. As we move from A to C, the y coordinate changes from 2 to
1, which is a decrease of 1 unit, and the x coordinate changes from 1 to 4, which is an increase of 3 units.
Hence
slope =
=
= −1
3
1 −2
4 −1
∆y
∆x
Differentiation
240
Figure 4.1
Figure 4.2
(c) Points A and D are sketched in Figure 4.3. As we move from A to D, the y coordinate remains ﬁxed at
2, and the x coordinate changes from 1 to 5, which is an increase of 4 units. Hence
Solution
(a) Points A and B are sketched in Figure 4.1. As we move from A to B, the y coordinate changes from 2 to
4, which is an increase of 2 units, and the x coordinate changes from 1 to 3, which is also an increase of
2 units. Hence
slope =
=
=
= 1
2
2
4 −2
3 −1
∆y
∆x

slope =
=
=
= 0
0
4
2 −2
5 −1
∆y
∆x
4.1 • The derivative of a function
241
Figure 4.3
Practice Problem
1 Find the slope of the straight line passing through
(a) E (−1, 3) and F (3, 11)
(b) E (−1, 3) and G (4, −2)
(c) E (−1, 3) and H (49, 3)
From these examples we see that the gradient is positive if the line is uphill, negative if the
line is downhill and zero if the line is horizontal.
Unfortunately, not all functions in economics are linear, so it is necessary to extend the
deﬁnition of slope to include more general curves. To do this we need the idea of a tangent,
which is illustrated in Figure 4.4.
A straight line which passes through a point on a curve and which just touches the curve at
this point is called a tangent. The slope, or gradient, of a curve at x = a is then deﬁned to be that
of the tangent at x = a. Since we have already seen how to ﬁnd the slope of a straight line, this
Figure 4.4

gives us a precise way of measuring the slope of a curve. A simple curve together with a selec-
tion of tangents at various points is shown in Figure 4.5. Notice how each tangent passes
through exactly one point on the curve and strikes a glancing blow. In this case, the slopes of
the tangents increase as we move from left to right along the curve. This reﬂects the fact that
the curve is ﬂat at x = 0 but becomes progressively steeper further away.
This highlights an important difference between the slope of a straight line and the slope 
of a curve. In the case of a straight line, the gradient is ﬁxed throughout its length and it is
immaterial which two points on a line are used to ﬁnd it. For example, in Figure 4.6 all of the
ratios ∆y/∆x have the value 1/2. However, as we have just seen, the slope of a curve varies as we
move along it. In mathematics we use the symbol
f ′(a)
Differentiation
242
Figure 4.5
Figure 4.6

to represent the slope of the graph of a function f at x = a. This notation conveys the maximum
amount of information with the minimum of fuss. As usual, we need the label f to denote
which function we are considering. We certainly need the a to tell us at which point on the
curve the gradient is being measured. Finally, the ‘prime’ symbol ′ is used to distinguish the
gradient from the function value. The notation f(a) gives the height of the curve above the x
axis at x = a, whereas f ′(a) gives the gradient of the curve at this point.
The slope of the graph of a function is called the derivative of the function. It is interesting
to notice that corresponding to each value of x there is a uniquely deﬁned derivative f ′(x). 
In other words, the rule ‘ﬁnd the slope of the graph of f at x’ deﬁnes a function. This slope 
function is usually referred to as the derived function. An alternative notation for the derived
function is
Historically, this symbol arose from the corresponding notation ∆y/∆x for the gradient of 
a straight line; the letter ‘d’ is the English equivalent of the Greek letter ∆. However, it is 
important to realize that
does not mean ‘dy divided by dx’. It should be thought of as a single symbol representing the
derivative of y with respect to x. It is immaterial which notation is used, although the context
may well suggest which is more appropriate. For example, if we use
y = x 2
to identify the square function then it is natural to use
for the derived function. On the other hand, if we use
f(x) = x 2
then f ′(x) seems more appropriate.
dy
dx
dy
dx
dy
dx
4.1 • The derivative of a function
243
Example
Complete the following table of function values and hence sketch an accurate graph of f(x) = x2.
x
−2.0
−1.5
−1.0
−0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
f(x)
Draw the tangents to the graph at x = −1.5, −0.5, 0, 0.5 and 1.5. Hence estimate the values of f ′(−1.5), 
f ′(−0.5), f ′(0), f ′(0.5) and f ′(1.5).
Solution
Using a calculator we obtain
x
−2.0
−1.5
−1.0
−0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
f(x)
4
2.25
1
0.25
0
0.25
1
2.25
4


The corresponding graph of the square function is sketched in Figure 4.7. From the graph we see that the
slopes of the tangents are
f ′(−1.5) =
= −3
f ′(−0.5) =
= −1
f ′(0) = 0
f ′(0.5) =
= 1
f ′(1.5) =
= 3
The value of f ′(0) is zero because the tangent is horizontal at x = 0. Notice that
f ′(−1.5) = −f ′(1.5)
and
f ′(−0.5) = −f ′(0.5)
This is to be expected because the graph is symmetric about the y axis. The slopes of the tangents to the left
of the y axis have the same size as those of the corresponding tangents to the right. However, they have
opposite signs since the curve slopes downhill on one side and uphill on the other.
1.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
−1.5
0.5
−1.5
0.5
Differentiation
244
Figure 4.7

Problem 2 should convince you how hard it is in practice to calculate f ′(a) exactly using
graphs. It is impossible to sketch a perfectly smooth curve using graph paper and pencil, and 
it is equally difﬁcult to judge, by eye, precisely where the tangent should be. There is also 
the problem of measuring the vertical and horizontal distances required for the slope of 
the tangent. These inherent errors may compound to produce quite inaccurate values for f ′(a).
Fortunately, there is a really simple formula that can be used to ﬁnd f ′(a) when f is a power
function. It can be proved that
or, equivalently,
if
y = x n
then
= nx n−1
The process of ﬁnding the derived function symbolically (rather than using graphs) is
known as differentiation. In order to differentiate x n all that needs to be done is to bring the
power down to the front and then to subtract 1 from the power:
dy
dx
if
f(x) = x n
then
f ′(x) = nx n−1
4.1 • The derivative of a function
245
Practice Problem
2 Complete the following table of function values and hence sketch an accurate graph of f(x) = x3.
x
−1.50
−1.25
−1.00
−0.75
−0.50
−0.25
0.00
f(x)
−1.95
−0.13
x
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
1.25
1.50
f(x)
0.13
1.95
Draw the tangents to the graph at x = −1, 0 and 1. Hence estimate the values of f′(−1), f′(0) and f′(1).
xn
differentiates to
nx n−1
To differentiate the square function we set n = 2 in this formula to deduce that
that is,
f ′(x) = 2x1 = 2x
Using this result we see that
f(x) = x2
differentiates to
f ′(x) = 2x2−1

f ′(−1.5) = 2 × (−1.5) = −3
f ′(−0.5) = 2 × (−0.5) = −1
f ′(0) = 2 × (0) = 0
f ′(0.5) = 2 × (0.5) = 1
f ′(1.5) = 2 × (1.5) = 3
which are in agreement with the results obtained graphically in the preceding example.
Differentiation
246
Practice Problem
3 If f(x) = x 3 write down a formula for f′(x). Calculate f′(−1), f′(0) and f′(1). Confirm that these are in
agreement with your rough estimates obtained in Problem 2.
Example
Differentiate
(a) y = x4
(b) y = x10
(c) y = x
(d) y = 1
(e) y = 1/x4
(f) y = √x
Solution
(a) To differentiate y = x4 we bring down the power (that is, 4) to the front and then subtract 1 from the
power (that is, 4 −1 = 3) to deduce that
= 4x3
(b) Similarly, 
if
y = x10
then
= 10x9
(c) To use the general formula to differentiate x we ﬁrst need to express y = x in the form y = xn for some
number n. In this case n = 1 because x1 = x, so
= 1x0 = 1
since
x0 = 1
This result is also obvious from the graph of y = x sketched in Figure 4.8.
(d) Again, to differentiate 1 we need to express y = 1 in the form y = xn. In this case n = 0 because x0 = 1, so
= 0x−1 = 0
This result is also obvious from the graph of y = 1 sketched in Figure 4.9.
(e) Noting that 1/x 4 = x−4 it follows that 
if
y =
then
= −4x−5 = −
The power has decreased to −5 because −4 −1 = −5.
4
x 5
dy
dx
1
x4
dy
dx
dy
dx
dy
dx
dy
dx

(f) Noting that √x = x1/2 it follows that if
y = √x
then
=
x−1/2
=
=
The power has decreased to −1/2 because 1/2 −1 = −1/2.
1
2 x
1
2x1/2
1
2
dy
dx
4.1 • The derivative of a function
247
Figure 4.8
Figure 4.9

In more advanced books on mathematics the derivative is deﬁned via the concept of a limit
and is usually written in symbols as
= lim
∆x→0 
We have deliberately not introduced the derivative to you in this way because the notation can
appear frightening to non-mathematics specialists. Look at Figure 4.10. Points A and B both lie
on the curve y = f(x) and their x and y coordinates differ by ∆x and ∆y respectively. A line AB
which joins two points on the curve is known as a chord and it has slope ∆y/∆x.
Now look at Figure 4.11, which shows a variety of chords, AB1, AB2, AB3, . . . , correspond-
ing to smaller and smaller ‘widths’ ∆x. As the right-hand end points, B1, B2, B3, . . . , get closer
to A, the ‘width’, ∆x, tends to zero. More signiﬁcantly, the slope of the chord gets closer to that
of the tangent at A. We describe this by saying that in the limit, as ∆x tends to zero, the slope
of the chord, ∆y/∆x, is equal to that of the tangent. This limit is written
lim
∆x→0 
We deduce that the formal deﬁnition
= lim
∆x→0 
coincides with the idea that dy/dx represents the slope of the tangent, which is the approach
adopted in this book.
∆y
∆x
dy
dx
∆y
∆x
∆y
∆x
dy
dx
Differentiation
248
Practice Problem
4 Differentiate
(a) y = x5
(b) y = x6
(c) y = x100
(d) y = 1/x
(e) y = 1/x2
[Hint: in parts (d) and (e) note that 1/x = x −1 and 1/x2 = x −2.]
Figure 4.10

4.1 • The derivative of a function
249
Figure 4.11
Advice
If you have met differentiation before, you might be interested in using this definition to
prove results. You are advised to consult Appendix 1 at the end of this book.
Chord
A line joining two points on a curve.
Derivative
The gradient of the tangent to a curve at a point. The derivative at x = a is 
written f ′(a).
Derived function
The rule, f ′, which gives the gradient of a function, f, at a general point.
Differentiation
The process or operation of determining the ﬁrst derivative of a function.
Gradient
The gradient of a line measures steepness and is the vertical change divided by
the horizontal change between any two points on the line. The gradient of a curve at a point
is that of the tangent at that point.
Slope
An alternative word for gradient.
Tangent
A line that just touches a curve at a point.
Key Terms
Practice Problems
5 Find the slope of the straight line passing through
(a) (2, 5) and (4, 9)
(b) (3, −1) and (7, −5)
(c) (7, 19) and (4, 19)
6 Verify that the points (0, 2) and (3, 0) lie on the line
2x + 3y = 6
Hence find the slope of this line. Is the line uphill, downhill or horizontal?


7 Verify that the points (0, b) and (1, a + b) lie on the line
y = ax + b
Hence show that this line has slope a.
8 Sketch the graph of the function
f(x) = 5
Explain why it follows from this that
f ′(x) = 0
9 Differentiate the function
f(x) = x7
Hence calculate the slope of the graph of
y = x7
at the point x = 2.
10 Differentiate
(a) y = x8
(b) y = x50
(c) y = x19
(d) y = x999
11 Differentiate the following functions, giving your answer in a similar form, without negative or frac-
tional indices.
(a) f(x) =
(b) f(x) = 3 x
(c) f(x) =
(d) y = x x
12 Complete the following table of function values for the function, f(x) = x2 −2x:
x
−1
−0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
x2 −2x
Sketch the graph of this function and, by measuring the slope of this graph, estimate
(a) f ′(−0.5)
(b) f ′(1)
(c) f ′(1.5)
13 For each of the graphs 
(a) y =
x
(b) y = x x
(c) y =
A is the point where x = 4, and B is the point where x = 4.1. In each case find
(i)
the y coordinates of A and B.
(ii) the gradient of the chord AB
(iii) the value of 
at A.
Compare your answers to parts (ii) and (iii).
14 Find the coordinates of the point(s) at which the curve has the specified gradient.
(a) y = x2/3, gradient = 1/3
(b) y = x5, gradient = 405
(c) y =
, gradient = 16
(d) y =
, gradient = −3
64
1
x x
1
x2
dy
dx
1
x
1
4 x
1
x3
Differentiation
250

section 4.2
Rules of differentiation
Objectives
At the end of this section you should be able to:
 Use the constant rule to differentiate a function of the form cf(x).
 Use the sum rule to differentiate a function of the form f(x) + g(x).
 Use the difference rule to differentiate a function of the form f(x) −g(x).
 Evaluate and interpret second-order derivatives.
Advice 
In this section we consider three elementary rules of differentiation. Subsequent sections
of this chapter describe various applications to economics. However, before you can tackle
these successfully, you must have a thorough grasp of the basic techniques involved. 
The problems in this section are repetitive in nature. This is deliberate. Although the rules
themselves are straightforward, it is necessary for you to practise them over and over again
before you can become proficient in using them. In fact, you will not be able to get much
further with the rest of this book until you have mastered the rules of this section.
Rule 1 The constant rule
If
h(x) = cf(x) then
h′(x) = cf ′(x)
for any constant c.
This rule tells you how to ﬁnd the derivative of a constant multiple of a function:
differentiate the function and multiply by the constant

Differentiation
252
Example
Differentiate
(a) y = 2x4
(b) y = 10x
Solution
(a) To differentiate 2x4 we ﬁrst differentiate x4 to get 4x3 and then multiply by 2. Hence 
if
y = 2x4
then
= 2(4x3) = 8x3
(b) To differentiate 10x we ﬁrst differentiate x to get 1 and then multiply by 10. Hence 
if
y = 10x
then
= 10(1) = 10
dy
dx
dy
dx
Practice Problem
1 Differentiate
(a) y = 4x3
(b) y = 2/x
The constant rule can be used to show that
constants differentiate to zero
To see this, note that the equation
y = c
is the same as
y = cx0
because x 0 = 1. By the constant rule we ﬁrst differentiate x0 to get 0x−1 and then multiply by c.
Hence
if
y = c
then
= c(0x−1) = 0
This result is also apparent from the graph of y = c, sketched in Figure 4.12, which is a 
horizontal line c units away from the x axis. It is an important result and explains why lone 
constants lurking in mathematical expressions disappear when differentiated.
Rule 2 The sum rule
If
h(x) = f(x) + g(x)
then
h′(x) = f ′(x) + g′(x)
This rule tells you how to ﬁnd the derivative of the sum of two functions:
differentiate each function separately and add
dy
dx

4.2 • Rules of differentiation
253
Figure 4.12
Example
Differentiate
(a) y = x2 + x50
(b) y = x3 + 3
Solution
(a) To differentiate x2 + x50 we need to differentiate x2 and x50 separately and to add. Now
x2
differentiates to
2x
and
x50
differentiates to
50x49
so 
if
y = x2 + x50
then
= 2x + 50x49
(b) To differentiate x3 + 3 we need to differentiate x3 and 3 separately and to add. Now
x3
differentiates to
3x2
and
3
differentiates to
0 
so 
if
y = x3 + 3
then
= 3x2 + 0 = 3x2
dy
dx
dy
dx
Practice Problem
2 Differentiate
(a) y = x5 + x
(b) y = x2 + 5

Differentiation
254
Practice Problem
3 Differentiate
(a) y = x2 −x3
(b) y = 50 −1
x3
Example
Differentiate
(a) y = x5 −x2
(b) y = x − 
Solution
(a) To differentiate x5 −x2 we need to differentiate x5 and x2 separately and to subtract. Now
x5
differentiates to
5x4
and
x2
differentiates to
2x
so 
if
y = x5 −x2
then
= 5x4 −2x
(b) To differentiate x −
we need to differentiate x and 
separately and subtract. Now
x
differentiates to
1
and
differentiates to
−
so 
if
y = x −
then
= 1 −
−
= 1 + 2
x3
D
F
2
x3
A
C
dy
dx
1
x2
2
x3
1
x2
1
x2
1
x2
dy
dx
1
x2
It is possible to combine these three rules and so to ﬁnd the derivative of more involved
functions, as the following example demonstrates.
Rule 3 The difference rule
If
h(x) = f(x) −g(x)
then
h′(x) = f ′(x) −g′(x)
This rule tells you how to ﬁnd the derivative of the difference of two functions:
differentiate each function separately and subtract

4.2 • Rules of differentiation
255
Example
Differentiate
(a) y = 3x5 + 2x3
(b) y = x3 + 7x2 −2x + 10
(c) y = 2 x +
Solution
(a) The sum rule shows that to differentiate 3x5 + 2x3 we need to differentiate 3x5 and 2x3 separately and 
to add. By the constant rule
3x5
differentiates to
3(5x4) = 15x4
and
2x3
differentiates to
2(3x2) = 6x2
so 
if
y = 3x5 + 2x3
then
= 15x4 + 6x2
With practice you will soon ﬁnd that you can just write the derivative down in a single line of work-
ing by differentiating term by term. For the function
y = 3x5 + 2x3
we could just write
= 3(5x4) + 2(3x2) = 15x4 + 6x2
(b) So far we have only considered expressions comprising at most two terms. However, the sum and dif-
ference rules still apply to lengthier expressions, so we can differentiate term by term as before. For the
function
y = x3 + 7x2 −2x + 10
we get
= 3x2 + 7(2x) −2(1) + 0 = 3x2 + 14x −2
(c) To differentiate
y = 2 x +
we ﬁrst rewrite it using the notation of indices as
y = 2x1/ 2 + 3x−1
Differentiating term by term then gives
= 2
x−1/2 + 3(−1)x−2 = x−1/2 −3x−2
which can be written in the more familiar form
=
−3
x2
1
x
D
F
1
2
A
C
dy
dx
3
x
dy
dx
dy
dx
dy
dx
3
x

Whenever a function is differentiated, the thing that you end up with is itself a function. This
suggests the possibility of differentiating a second time to get the ‘slope of the slope function’.
This is written as
f ″(x)
or
For example, if
f(x) = 5x2 −7x + 12
then differentiating once gives
f ′(x) = 10x −7
and if we now differentiate f ′(x) we get
f ″(x) = 10
The function f ′(x) is called the ﬁrst-order derivative and f ″(x) is called the second-order 
derivative.
d2y
dx2
Differentiation
256
Practice Problem
4 Differentiate
(a) y = 9x5 + 2x2
(b) y = 5x8 −
(c) y = x2 + 6x + 3
(d) y = 2x4 + 12x3 −4x2 + 7x −400
3
x
Example
Evaluate f ″(1) where
f(x) = x7 +
Solution
To ﬁnd f ″(1) we need to differentiate
f(x) = x7 + x−1
twice and to put x = 1 into the end result. Differentiating once gives
f ′(x) = 7x6 + (−1)x−2 = 7x6 −x−2
and differentiating a second time gives
f ″(x) = 7(6x5) −(−2)x−3 = 42x5 + 2x−3
1
x

Finally, substituting x = 1 into
f ″(x) = 42x5 +
gives
f ″(1) = 42 + 2 = 44
2
x3
4.2 • Rules of differentiation
257
Practice Problem
5 Evaluate f″(6) where
f(x) = 4x3 −5x2
It is possible to give a graphical interpretation of the sign of the second-order derivative.
Remember that the ﬁrst-order derivative, f ′(x), measures the gradient of a curve. If the deriva-
tive of f ′(x) is positive (that is, if f ″(x) > 0) then f ′(x) is increasing. This means that the graph
gets steeper as you move from left to right and so the curve bends upwards. On the other hand,
if f ″(x) < 0, the gradient, f ′(x) must be decreasing, so the curve bends downwards. These 
two cases are illustrated in Figure 4.13. For this function, f ″(x) < 0 to the left of x = a, and 
f ″(x) > 0 to the right of x = a. At x = a itself, the curve changes from bending downwards to
bending upwards and at this point, f ″(a) = 0.
Figure 4.13
Example
Use the second-order derivative to show that the graph of the quadratic
y = ax2 + bx + c
bends upwards when a > 0 and bends downwards when a < 0.


Throughout this section the functions have all been of the form y = f(x), where the letters 
x and y denote the variables involved. In economic functions, different symbols are used. It
should be obvious, however, that we can still differentiate such functions by applying the rules
of this section. For example, if a supply function is given by
Q = P2 + 3P + 1
and we need to ﬁnd the derivative of Q with respect to P then we can apply the sum and dif-
ference rules to obtain
= 2P + 3
dQ
dP
Differentiation
258
Advice
Differentiation is a purely mechanical process that depends on the layout of the function
and not on the labels used to identify the variables. Problem 14 contains some additional
examples involving a variety of symbols. It is designed to boost your confidence before
you work through the applications described in the next section.
First-order derivative
The rate of change of a function with respect to its independent
variable. It is the same as the ‘derivative’ of a function, y = f(x), and is written as f ′(x) or
dy/dx.
Second-order derivative
The derivative of the ﬁrst-order derivative. The expression
obtained when the original function, y = f(x), is differentiated twice in succession and is
written as f ″(x) or d2y/dx2.
Key Terms
Solution
If y = ax2 + bx + c then 
= 2ax + b and 
= 2a
If a > 0 then 
= 2a > 0 so the parabola bends upwards
If a < 0 then 
= 2a < 0 so the parabola bends downwards
Of course, if a = 0, the equation reduces to y = bx + c, which is the equation of a straight line, so the graph
bends neither upwards nor downwards.
d2y
dx2
d2y
dx2
d2y
dx2
dy
dx

4.2 • Rules of differentiation
259
Practice Problems
6 Differentiate
(a) y = 5x2
(b) y =
(c) y = 2x + 3
(d) y = x2 + x + 1
(e) y = x2 −3x + 2
(f) y = 3x −
(g) y = 2x3 −6x2 + 49x −54
(h) y = ax + b
(i) y = ax2 + bx + c
(j)
y = 4 x −
+
7 Evaluate f′(x) for each of the following functions at the given point
(a) f(x) = 3x9 at x = 1
(b) f(x) = x2 −2x at x = 3
(c) f(x) = x3 −4x2 + 2x −8 at x = 0
(d) f(x) = 5x4 −
at x = −1
(e) f(x) =
x −
at x = 4
8 By writing x2 x2 + 2x −
= x4 + 2x3 −5 differentiate x2 x2 + 2x −
Use a similar approach to differentiate
(a) x2(3x −4)
(b) x(3x3 −2x2 + 6x −7)
(c) (x + 1)(x −6)
(d)
(e)
(f)
9 Find expressions for d2y/dx2 in the case when
(a) y = 7x2 −x
(b) y =
(c) y = ax + b
10 Evaluate f ″(2) for the function 
f(x) = x3 −4x2 + 10x −7
11 Use the second-order derivative to show that the graph of the cubic,
f(x) = ax3 + bx2 + cx + d
(a > 0)
bends upwards when x > −b/3a and bends downwards when x < −b/3a.
12 If f(x) = x2 −6x + 8, evaluate f′(3). What information does this provide about the graph of y = f(x) at
x = 3?
13 By writing 4x =
4 ×
x = 2 x, differentiate 4x.
Use a similar approach to differentiate
(a)
25x
(b) 3 27x
(c)
4 16x3
(d)
25
x
1
x2
x2 −3x + 5
x2
x −4x2
x3
x2 −3
x
D
F
5
x2
A
C
D
F
5
x2
A
C
2
x
4
x4
7
x2
3
x
7
x
3
x


14 Find expressions for
(a)
for the supply function Q = P2 + P + 1
(b)
for the total revenue function TR = 50Q −3Q2
(c)
for the average cost function AC =
+ 10
(d)
for the consumption function C = 3Y + 7
(e)
for the production function Q = 10 L
(f)
for the proﬁt function π = −2Q3 + 15Q2 −24Q −3
dπ
dQ
dQ
dL
dC
dY
30
Q
d(AC)
dQ
d(TR)
dQ
dQ
dP
Differentiation
260

section 4.3
Marginal functions
At this stage you may be wondering what on earth differentiation has got to do with economics.
In fact, we cannot get very far with economic theory without making use of calculus. In this
section we concentrate on three main areas that illustrate its applicability:
 revenue and cost
 production
 consumption and savings.
We consider each of these in turn.
4.3.1 Revenue and cost
In Chapter 2 we investigated the basic properties of the revenue function, TR. It is deﬁned to
be PQ, where P denotes the price of a good and Q denotes the quantity demanded. In practice,
we usually know the demand equation, which provides a relationship between P and Q. This
enables a formula for TR to be written down solely in terms of Q. For example, if
P = 100 −2Q
Objectives
At the end of this section you should be able to:
 Calculate marginal revenue and marginal cost.
 Derive the relationship between marginal and average revenue for both a
monopoly and perfect competition.
 Calculate marginal product of labour.
 State the law of diminishing marginal productivity using the notation of calculus.
 Calculate marginal propensity to consume and marginal propensity to save.

Differentiation
262
then
TR = PQ
= (100 −2Q)Q
= 100Q −2Q2
The formula can be used to calculate the value of TR corresponding to any value of Q. Not 
content with this, we are also interested in the effect on TR of a change in the value of Q from
some existing level. To do this we introduce the concept of marginal revenue. The marginal
revenue, MR, of a good is deﬁned by
MR =
marginal revenue is the derivative of total revenue with respect to demand
For example, the marginal revenue function corresponding to
TR = 100Q −2Q2
is given by
= 100 −4Q
If the current demand is 15, say, then
MR = 100 −4(15) = 40
You may be familiar with an alternative deﬁnition often quoted in elementary economics 
textbooks. Marginal revenue is sometimes taken to be the change in TR brought about by a 
1 unit increase in Q. It is easy to check that this gives an acceptable approximation to MR,
although it is not quite the same as the exact value obtained by differentiation. For example,
substituting Q = 15 into the total revenue function considered previously gives
TR = 100(15) −2(15)2 = 1050
An increase of 1 unit in the value of Q produces a total revenue
TR = 100(16) −2(16)2 = 1088
This is an increase of 38, which, according to the non-calculus deﬁnition, is the value of MR
when Q is 15. This compares with the exact value of 40 obtained by differentiation.
It is instructive to give a graphical interpretation of these two approaches. In Figure 4.14 the
point A lies on the TR curve corresponding to a quantity Q0. The exact value of MR at this point
is equal to the derivative
and so is given by the slope of the tangent at A. The point B also lies on the curve but cor-
responds to a 1 unit increase in Q. The vertical distance from A to B therefore equals the change
in TR when Q increases by 1 unit. The slope of the chord joining A and B is
=
= ∆(TR)
∆(TR)
1
∆(TR)
∆Q
d(TR)
dQ
d(TR)
dQ
d(TR)
dQ

In other words, the slope of the chord is equal to the value of MR obtained from the non-
calculus deﬁnition. Inspection of the diagram reveals that the slope of the tangent is approxi-
mately the same as that of the chord joining A and B. In this case the slope of the tangent is
slightly the larger of the two, but there is not much in it. We therefore see that the 1 unit
increase approach produces a reasonable approximation to the exact value of MR given by
d(TR)
dQ
4.3 • Marginal functions
263
Figure 4.14
Example
If the demand function is
P = 120 −3Q
ﬁnd an expression for TR in terms of Q.
Find the value of MR at Q = 10 using
(a) differentiation
(b) the 1 unit increase approach
Solution
TR = PQ = (120 −3Q)Q = 120Q −3Q2
(a) The general expression for MR is given by
= 120 −6Q
so at Q = 10,
MR = 120 −6 × 10 = 60
d(TR)
dQ


(b) From the non-calculus deﬁnition we need to ﬁnd the change in TR as Q increases from 10 to 11.
Putting Q = 10 gives TR = 120 × 10 −3 × 102 = 900
Putting Q = 11 gives TR = 120 × 11 −3 × 112 = 957
and so MR  57
Differentiation
264
Practice Problem
1 If the demand function is
P = 60 −Q
find an expression for TR in terms of Q.
(1) Differentiate TR with respect to Q to find a general expression for MR in terms of Q. Hence write
down the exact value of MR at Q = 50.
(2) Calculate the value of TR when
(a) Q = 50
(b) Q = 51
and hence confirm that the 1 unit increase approach gives a reasonable approximation to the exact
value of MR obtained in part (1).
The approximation indicated by Figure 4.14 holds for any value of ∆Q. The slope of the 
tangent at A is the marginal revenue, MR. The slope of the chord joining A and B is ∆(TR)/∆Q.
It follows that
MR 
This equation can be transposed to give
∆(TR)  MR × ∆Q
that is,

×
Moreover, Figure 4.14 shows that the smaller the value of ∆Q, the better the approximation
becomes. This, of course, is similar to the argument used at the end of Section 4.1 when we 
discussed the formal deﬁnition of a derivative as a limit.
change in
demand
marginal
revenue
change in
total revenue
∆(TR)
∆Q
Example
If the total revenue function of a good is given by
100Q −Q2
write down an expression for the marginal revenue function. If the current demand is 60, estimate the
change in the value of TR due to a 2 unit increase in Q.

Solution
If
TR = 100Q −Q2
then
MR =
= 100 −2Q
When Q = 60
MR = 100 −2(60) = −20
If Q increases by 2 units, ∆Q = 2 and the formula
∆(TR)  MR × ∆Q
shows that the change in total revenue is approximately
(−20) × 2 = −40
A 2 unit increase in Q therefore leads to a decrease in TR of about 40.
d(TR)
dQ
4.3 • Marginal functions
265
Practice Problem
2 If the total revenue function of a good is given by
1000Q −4Q2
write down an expression for the marginal revenue function. If the current demand is 30, find the
approximate change in the value of TR due to a
(a) 3 unit increase in Q
(b) 2 unit decrease in Q
The simple model of demand, originally introduced in Section 1.3, assumed that price, P,
and quantity, Q, are linearly related according to an equation
P = aQ + b
where the slope, a, is negative and the intercept, b, is positive. A downward-sloping demand
curve such as this corresponds to the case of a monopolist. A single ﬁrm, or possibly a group of
ﬁrms forming a cartel, is assumed to be the only supplier of a particular product and so has
control over the market price. As the ﬁrm raises the price, so demand falls. The associated total
revenue function is given by
TR = PQ
= (aQ + b)Q
= aQ2 + bQ
An expression for marginal revenue is obtained by differentiating TR with respect to Q to get
MR = 2aQ + b

It is interesting to notice that, on the assumption of a linear demand equation, the marginal
revenue is also linear with the same intercept, b, but with slope 2a. The marginal revenue curve
slopes downhill exactly twice as fast as the demand curve. This is illustrated in Figure 4.15(a).
The average revenue, AR, is deﬁned by
AR =
and, since TR = PQ, we have
AR =
= P
For this reason the demand curve is labelled average revenue in Figure 4.15(a). The above
derivation of the result AR = P is independent of the particular demand function. Con-
sequently, the terms ‘average revenue curve’ and ‘demand curve’ are synonymous.
Figure 4.15(a) shows that the marginal revenue takes both positive and negative values. This
is to be expected. The total revenue function is a quadratic and its graph has the familiar
parabolic shape indicated in Figure 4.15(b). To the left of −b/2a the graph is uphill, corres-
ponding to a positive value of marginal revenue, whereas to the right of this point it is down-
hill, giving a negative value of marginal revenue. More signiﬁcantly, at the maximum point of
the TR curve, the tangent is horizontal with zero slope and so MR is zero.
At the other extreme from a monopolist is the case of perfect competition. For this model we
assume that there are a large number of ﬁrms all selling an identical product and that there are
no barriers to entry into the industry. Since any individual ﬁrm produces a tiny proportion of
the total output, it has no control over price. The ﬁrm can sell only at the prevailing market
price and, because the ﬁrm is relatively small, it can sell any number of goods at this price. 
If the ﬁxed price is denoted by b then the demand function is
P = b
and the associated total revenue function is
TR = PQ = bQ
An expression for marginal revenue is obtained by differentiating TR with respect to Q and,
since b is just a constant, we see that
MR = b
In the case of perfect competition, the average and marginal revenue curves are the same. They
are horizontal straight lines, b units above the Q axis as shown in Figure 4.16.
PQ
Q
TR
Q
Differentiation
266
Figure 4.15

4.3 • Marginal functions
267
Figure 4.16
Example
If the average cost function of a good is
AC = 2Q + 6 +
ﬁnd an expression for MC. If the current output is 15, estimate the effect on TC of a 3 unit decrease in Q.
Solution
We ﬁrst need to ﬁnd an expression for TC using the given formula for AC. Now we know that the average
cost is just the total cost divided by Q: that is,
AC = TC
Q
13
Q
So far we have concentrated on the total revenue function. Exactly the same principle can be
used for other economic functions. For instance, we deﬁne the marginal cost, MC, by
MC =
marginal cost is the derivative of total cost with respect to output
Again, using a simple geometrical argument, it is easy to see that if Q changes by a small
amount ∆Q then the corresponding change in TC is given by
∆(TC)  MC × ∆Q

×
In particular, putting ∆Q = 1 gives
∆(TC)  MC
so that MC gives the approximate change in TC when Q increases by 1 unit.
change in
output
marginal
cost
change in
total cost
d(TC)
dQ

Hence
TC = (AC)Q
=
2Q + 6 +
Q
and, after multiplying out the brackets, we get
TC = 2Q2 + 6Q + 13
In this formula the last term, 13, is independent of Q so must denote the ﬁxed costs. The
remaining part, 2Q2 + 6Q, depends on Q so represents the total variable costs. Differentiating
gives
MC =
= 4Q + 6
Notice that because the ﬁxed costs are constant they differentiate to zero and so have no effect
on the marginal cost. When Q = 15,
MC = 4(15) + 6 = 66
Also, if Q decreases by 3 units then ∆Q = −3. Hence the change in TC is given by
∆(TC)  MC × ∆Q
= 66 × (−3)
= −198
so TC decreases by 198 units approximately.
d(TC)
dQ
D
F
13
Q
A
C
Differentiation
268
Practice Problem
3 Find the marginal cost given the average cost function
AC =
+ 2
Deduce that a 1 unit increase in Q will always result in a 2 unit increase in TC, irrespective of the 
current level of output.
100
Q
4.3.2 Production
Production functions were introduced in Section 2.3. In the simplest case output, Q, is
assumed to be a function of labour, L, and capital, K. Moreover, in the short run the input K
can be assumed to be ﬁxed, so Q is then only a function of one input L. (This is not a valid
assumption in the long run and in general Q must be regarded as a function of at least two
inputs. Methods for handling this situation are considered in the next chapter.) The variable L
is usually measured in terms of the number of workers or possibly in terms of the number 
of worker hours. Motivated by our previous work, we deﬁne the marginal product of labour,
MPL, by
MPL = dQ
dL

4.3 • Marginal functions
269
Example
If the production function is
Q = 300 L −4L
where Q denotes output and L denotes the size of the workforce, calculate the value of MPL when
(a) L = 1
(b) L = 9
(c) L = 100
(d) L = 2500
and discuss the implications of these results.
Solution
If
Q = 300 L −4L = 300L1/ 2 −4L
then
MPL =
= 300(1/2L−1/ 2) −4
= 150L−1/ 2 −4
=
−4
(a) When L = 1
MPL =
−4 = 146
(b) When L = 9
MPL =
−4 = 46
(c) When L = 100
MPL =
−4 = 11
(d) When L = 2500
MPL =
−4 = −1
150
2500
150
100
150
9
150
1
150
L
dQ
dL

marginal product of labour is the derivative of output with respect to labour
As before, this gives the approximate change in Q that results from using 1 more unit of L.

Notice that the values of MPL decline with increasing L. Part (a) shows that if the workforce consists of only
one person then to employ two people would increase output by approximately 146. In part (b) we see 
that to increase the number of workers from 9 to 10 would result in about 46 additional units of output. In
part (c) we see that a 1 unit increase in labour from a level of 100 increases output by only 11. In part (d)
the situation is even worse. This indicates that to increase staff actually reduces output! The latter is a rather
surprising result, but it is borne out by what occurs in real production processes. This may be due to prob-
lems of overcrowding on the shopﬂoor or to the need to create an elaborate administration to organize the
larger workforce.
Differentiation
270
This example illustrates the law of diminishing marginal productivity (sometimes called the
law of diminishing returns). It states that the increase in output due to a 1 unit increase in
labour will eventually decline. In other words, once the size of the workforce has reached a cer-
tain threshold level, the marginal product of labour will get smaller. In the previous example,
the value of MPL continually goes down with rising L. This is not always so. It is possible for the
marginal product of labour to remain constant or to go up to begin with for small values of L.
However, if it is to satisfy the law of diminishing marginal productivity then there must be
some value of L above which MPL decreases.
A typical product curve is sketched in Figure 4.17, which has slope
= MPL
Between 0 and L0 the curve bends upwards, becoming progressively steeper, and so the slope
function, MPL, increases. Mathematically, this means that the slope of MPL is positive: that is,
> 0
Now MPL is itself the derivative of Q with respect to L, so we can use the notation for the sec-
ond derivative and write this as
> 0
d2Q
dL2
d(MPL)
dQ
dQ
dL

Similarly, if L exceeds the threshold value of L0, then Figure 4.17 shows that the product curve
bends downwards and the slope decreases. In this region, the slope of the slope function is neg-
ative, so that
< 0
The law of diminishing returns states that this must happen eventually: that is,
< 0
for sufﬁciently large L.
d2Q
dL2
d2Q
dL2
4.3 • Marginal functions
271
Figure 4.17
Practice Problem
4 A Cobb–Douglas production function is given by
Q = 5L1/ 2K1/ 2
Assuming that capital, K, is fixed at 100, write down a formula for Q in terms of L only. Calculate the
marginal product of labour when
(a) L = 1
(b) L = 9
(c) L = 10 000
Verify that the law of diminishing marginal productivity holds in this case.
4.3.3 Consumption and savings
In Chapter 1 the relationship between consumption, C, savings, S, and national income, Y, was
investigated. If we assume that national income is only used up in consumption and savings
then
Y = C + S

Differentiation
272
Example
If the consumption function is
C = 0.01Y 2 + 0.2Y + 50
calculate MPC and MPS when Y = 30.
Solution
In this example the consumption function is given, so we begin by ﬁnding MPC. To do this we differenti-
ate C with respect to Y. If
Of particular interest is the effect on C and S due to variations in Y. Expressed simply, if national
income rises by a certain amount, are people more likely to go out and spend their extra income
on consumer goods or will they save it? To analyse this behaviour we use the concepts marginal
propensity to consume, MPC, and marginal propensity to save, MPS, which are deﬁned by
MPC =
and
MPS =
marginal propensity to consume is the derivative of 
consumption with respect to income
marginal propensity to save is the derivative of savings with respect to income
These deﬁnitions are consistent with those given in Section 1.6, where MPC and MPS were
taken to be the slopes of the linear consumption and savings curves, respectively. At ﬁrst sight
it appears that, in general, we need to work out two derivatives in order to evaluate MPC 
and MPS. However, this is not strictly necessary. Recall that we can do whatever we like to 
an equation provided we do the same thing to both sides. Consequently, we can differentiate
both sides of the equation
Y = C + S
with respect to Y to deduce that
=
+
= MPC + MPS
Now we are already familiar with the result that when we differentiate x with respect to x the
answer is 1. In this case Y plays the role of x, so
= 1
Hence
1 = MPC + MPS
This formula is identical to the result given in Section 1.6 for simple linear functions. In 
practice, it means that we need only work out one of the derivatives. The remaining derivative
can then be calculated directly from this equation.
dY
dY
dS
dY
dC
dY
dY
dY
dS
dY
dC
dY

C = 0.01Y2 + 0.2Y + 50
then
= 0.02Y + 0.2
so, when Y = 30,
MPC = 0.02(30) + 0.2 = 0.8
To ﬁnd the corresponding value of MPS we use the formula
MPC + MPS = 1
which gives
MPS = 1 −MPC = 1 −0.8 = 0.2
This indicates that when national income increases by 1 unit (from its current level of 30) consumption
rises by approximately 0.8 units, whereas savings rise by only about 0.2 units. At this level of income the
nation has a greater propensity to consume than it has to save.
dC
dY
4.3 • Marginal functions
273
Practice Problem
5 If the savings function is given by
S = 0.02Y 2 −Y + 100
calculate the values of MPS and MPC when Y = 40. Give a brief interpretation of these results.
Average revenue
Total revenue per unit of output: AR = TR/Q = P.
Law of diminishing marginal productivity or law of diminishing returns
Once the size of
the workforce exceeds a particular value, the increase in output due to a 1 unit increase in
labour will decline: d2Q/dL2 < 0 for sufﬁciently large L.
Marginal cost
The cost of producing 1 more unit of output: MC = d(TC)/dQ.
Marginal product of labour
The extra output produced by 1 more unit of labour: 
MPL = dQ/dL.
Marginal propensity to consume
The fraction of a rise in national income which goes on
consumption: MPC = dC/dY.
Marginal propensity to save
The fraction of a rise in national income which goes into 
savings: MPS = dS/dY.
Marginal revenue
The extra revenue gained by selling 1 more unit of a good: 
MR = d(TR)/dQ.
Monopolist
The only ﬁrm in the industry.
Perfect competition
A situation in which there are no barriers to entry in an industry
where there are many ﬁrms selling an identical product at the market price.
Key Terms

Differentiation
274
Practice Problems
6 If the demand function is
P = 100 −4Q
find expressions for TR and MR in terms of Q. Hence estimate the change in TR brought about by a
0.3 unit increase in output from a current level of 12 units.
7 If the demand function is
P = 80 −3Q
show that
MR = 2P −80
8 A monopolist’s demand function is given by
P + Q = 100
Write down expressions for TR and MR in terms of Q and sketch their graphs. Find the value of Q
which gives a marginal revenue of zero and comment on the significance of this value.
9 The fixed costs of producing a good are 100 and the variable costs are 2 + Q/10 per unit.
(a) Find expressions for TC and MC.
(b) Evaluate MC at Q = 30 and hence estimate the change in TC brought about by a 2 unit increase
in output from a current level of 30 units.
(c) At what level of output does MC = 22?
10 If the average cost function of a good is
AC =
+ 2Q + 9
find an expression for TC. What are the fixed costs in this case? Write down an expression for the
marginal cost function.
11 A firm’s production function is
Q = 50L −0.01L2
where L denotes the size of the workforce. Find the value of MPL in the case when
(a) L = 1
(b) L = 10
(c) L = 100
(d) L = 1000
Does the law of diminishing marginal productivity apply to this particular function?
12 Show that the law of diminishing marginal productivity holds for the production function
Q = 6L2 −0.2L3
13 If the consumption function is
C = 50 + 2 Y
calculate MPC and MPS when Y = 36 and give an interpretation of these results.
14 The consumption function is
C = 0.01Y 2 + 0.8Y + 100
(a) Calculate the values of MPC and MPS when Y = 8.
(b) Use the fact that C + S = Y to obtain a formula for S in terms of Y. By differentiating this expres-
sion find the value of MPS at Y = 8 and verify that this agrees with your answer to part (a).
15
Q

section 4.4
Further rules of
differentiation
Section 4.2 introduced you to the basic rules of differentiation. Unfortunately, not all functions
can be differentiated using these rules alone. For example, we are unable to differentiate the
functions
x√(2x −3)
and
using just the constant, sum or difference rules. The aim of the present section is to describe
three further rules which allow you to ﬁnd the derivative of more complicated expressions.
Indeed, the totality of all six rules will enable you to differentiate any mathematical function.
Although you may ﬁnd that the rules described in this section take you slightly longer to grasp
than before, they are vital to any understanding of economic theory.
The ﬁrst rule that we investigate is called the chain rule and it can be used to differentiate
functions such as
y = (2x + 3)10
and
y = √(1 + x2)
The distinguishing feature of these expressions is that they represent a ‘function of a function’.
To understand what we mean by this, consider how you might evaluate
y = (2x + 3)10
x
x2 + 1
Objectives
At the end of this section you should be able to:
 Use the chain rule to differentiate a function of a function.
 Use the product rule to differentiate the product of two functions.
 Use the quotient rule to differentiate the quotient of two functions.
 Differentiate complicated functions using a combination of rules.

Differentiation
276
Figure 4.18
on a calculator. You would ﬁrst work out an intermediate number u, say, given by
u = 2x + 3
and then raise it to the power of 10 to get
y = u10
This process is illustrated using the ﬂow chart in Figure 4.18. Note how the incoming number
x is ﬁrst processed by the inner function, ‘double and add 3’. The output u from this is 
then passed on to the outer function, ‘raise to the power of 10’, to produce the ﬁnal outgoing
number y.
The function
y = √(1 + x2)
can be viewed in the same way. To calculate y you perform the inner function, ‘square and add
1’, followed by the outer function, ‘take square roots’.
The chain rule for differentiating a function of a function may now be stated.
Rule 4 The chain rule
If y is a function of u, which is itself a function of x, then
=
×
differentiate the outer function and multiply by the derivative of the inner function
To illustrate this rule, let us return to the function
y = (2x + 3)10
in which
y = u10
and
u = 2x + 3
Now
= 10u9 = 10(2x + 3)9
= 2
The chain rule then gives
=
×
= 10(2x + 3)9(2) = 20(2x + 3)9
du
dx
dy
du
dy
dx
du
dx
dy
du
du
dx
dy
du
dy
dx

With practice it is possible to perform the differentiation without explicitly introducing the
variable u. To differentiate
y = (2x + 3)10
we ﬁrst differentiate the outer power function to get
10(2x + 3)9
and then multiply by the derivative of the inner function, 2x + 3, which is 2, so
= 20(2x + 3)9
dy
dx
4.4 • Further rules of differentiation
277
Example
Differentiate
(a) y = (3x2 −5x + 2)4
(b) y =
(c) y = √(1 + x2)
Solution
(a) The chain rule shows that to differentiate (3x2 −5x + 2)4 we ﬁrst differentiate the outer power function
to get
4(3x2 −5x + 2)3
and then multiply by the derivative of the inner function, 3x2 −5x + 2, which is 6x −5. Hence if
y = (3x2 −5x + 2)4
then
= 4(3x2 −5x + 2)3(6x −5)
(b) To use the chain rule to differentiate
y =
recall that reciprocals are denoted by negative powers, so that
y = (3x + 7)−1
The outer power function differentiates to get
−(3x + 7)−2
and the inner function, 3x + 7, differentiates to get 3. By the chain rule we just multiply these together
to deduce that 
if
y =
then
= −(3x + 7)−2(3) =
(c) To use the chain rule to differentiate
y = √(1 + x2)
recall that roots are denoted by fractional powers, so that
y = (1 + x2)1/ 2
−3
(3x + 7)2
dy
dx
1
3x + 7
1
3x + 7
dy
dx
1
3x + 7


The outer power function differentiates to get
(1 + x 2)−1/ 2
and the inner function, 1 + x2, differentiates to get 2x. By the chain rule we just multiply these together
to deduce that 
if
y = √(1 + x2)
then
=
(1 + x2)−1/ 2(2x) =
x
(1 + x2)
1
2
dy
dx
1
2
Differentiation
278
Example
Differentiate
(a) y = x2(2x + 1)3
(b) x√(6x + 1)
(c) y =
Solution
(a) The function x2(2x + 1)3 involves the product of two simpler functions, namely x2 and (2x + 1)3, which we
denote by u and v respectively. (It does not matter which function we label u and which we label v. The
same answer is obtained if u is (2x + 1)3 and v is x2. You might like to check this for yourself later.) Now if
u = x2
and
v = (2x + 1)3
then
= 2x
and
= 6(2x + 1)2
dv
dx
du
dx
x
1 + x
Practice Problem
1 Differentiate
(a) y = (3x −4)5
(b) y = (x2 + 3x + 5)3
(c) y =
(d) y = √(4x −3)
1
2x −3
The next rule is used to differentiate the product of two functions, f(x)g(x). In order to give
a clear statement of this rule, we write
u = f(x)
and
v = g(x)
Rule 5 The product rule
If
y = uv
then
= u
× v
This rule tells you how to differentiate the product of two functions:
multiply each function by the derivative of the other and add
du
dx
dv
dx
dy
dx

where we have used the chain rule to ﬁnd dv/dx. By the product rule,
= u
+ v
= x2[6(2x + 1)2] + (2x + 1)3(2x)
The ﬁrst term is obtained by leaving u alone and multiplying it by the derivative of v. Similarly, the 
second term is obtained by leaving v alone and multiplying it by the derivative of u.
If desired, the ﬁnal answer may be simpliﬁed by taking out a common factor of 2x(2x + 1)2. This 
factor goes into the ﬁrst term 3x times and into the second 2x + 1 times. Hence
= 2x(2x + 1)2[3x + (2x + 1)]
= 2x(2x + 1)2(5x + 1)
(b) The function x√(6x + 1) involves the product of the simpler functions
u = x
and
v = √(6x + 1) = (6x + 1)1/ 2
for which
= 1
and
=
(6x + 1)−1/ 2 × 6 = 3(6x + 1)−1/ 2
where we have used the chain rule to ﬁnd dv/dx. By the product rule,
= u
+ v
= x[3(6x + 1)−1/ 2] + (6x + 1)1/ 2(1)
=
+ √(6x + 1)
If desired, this can be simpliﬁed by putting the second term over a common denominator
√(6x + 1)
To do this we multiply the top and bottom of the second term by √(6x + 1) to get
Hence
=
=
(c) At ﬁrst sight it is hard to see how we can use the product rule to differentiate
since it appears to be the quotient and not the product of two functions. However, if we recall that
reciprocals are equivalent to negative powers, we may rewrite it as
x(1 + x)−1
It follows that we can put
u = x
and
v = (1 + x)−1
x
1 + x
9x + 1
(6x + 1)
3x + (6x + 1)
(6x + 1)
dy
dx
6x + 1
(6x + 1)
3x
(6x + 1)
du
dx
dv
dx
dy
dx
1
2
dv
dx
du
dx
dy
dx
du
dx
dv
dx
dy
dx
4.4 • Further rules of differentiation
279


which gives
= 1
and
= −(1 + x)−2
where we have used the chain rule to ﬁnd dv/dx. By the product rule
= u
+ v
= x[−(1 + x)−2] + (1 + x)−1(1)
=
+ 
If desired, this can be simpliﬁed by putting the second term over a common denominator
(1 + x)2
To do this we multiply the top and bottom of the second term by 1 + x to get
Hence
=
+ 
=
=
1
(1 + x)2
−x + (1 + x)
(1 + x)2
1 + x
(1 + x)2
−x
(1 + x)2
dy
dx
1 + x
(1 + x)2
1
1 + x
−x
(1 + x)2
dy
dx
du
dx
dv
dx
dy
dx
dv
dx
du
dx
Differentiation
280
Practice Problem
2 Differentiate
(a) y = x(3x −1)6
(b) y = x3√(2x + 3)
(c) y =
x
x −2
Advice
You may have found the product rule the hardest of the rules so far. This may have been
due to the algebraic manipulation that is required to simplify the final expression. If this is
the case, do not worry about it at this stage. The important thing is that you can use 
the product rule to obtain some sort of an answer even if you cannot tidy it up at the end.
This is not to say that the simplification of an expression is pointless. If the result of dif-
ferentiation is to be used in a subsequent piece of theory, it may well save time in the long
run if it is simplified first.
One of the most difﬁcult parts of Practice Problem 2 is part (c), since this involves algebraic
fractions. For this function, it is necessary to manipulate negative indices and to put two indi-
vidual fractions over a common denominator. You may feel that you are unable to do either of
these processes with conﬁdence. For this reason we conclude this section with a rule that is
speciﬁcally designed to differentiate this type of function. The rule itself is quite complicated.
However, as will become apparent, it does the algebra for you, so you may prefer to use it rather
than the product rule when differentiating algebraic fractions.

4.4 • Further rules of differentiation
281
Example
Differentiate
(a) y =
(b) y =
Solution
(a) In the quotient rule, u is used as the label for the numerator and v is used for the denominator, so to
differentiate
we must take
u = x
and
v = 1 + x
for which
= 1
and
= 1
By the quotient rule
=
=
=
=
Notice how the quotient rule automatically puts the ﬁnal expression over a common denominator.
Compare this with the algebra required to obtain the same answer using the product rule in part (c) of
the previous example.
(b) The numerator of the algebraic fraction
1 + x2
2 −x3
1
(1 + x)2
1 + x −x
(1 + x)2
(1 + x)(1) −x(1)
(1 + x2)
vdu/dx −udv/dx
v 2
dy
dx
dv
dx
du
dx
x
1 + x
1 + x2
2 −x3
x
1 + x

Rule 6 The quotient rule
If
y =
then
=
This rule tells you how to differentiate the quotient of two functions:
bottom times derivative of top, minus top times derivative 
of bottom, all over bottom squared
vdu/dx −udv/dx
v 2
dy
dx
u
v

is 1 + x2 and the denominator is 2 −x3, so we take
u = 1 + x2
and
v = 2 −x3
for which
= 2x
and
= −3x2
By the quotient rule
=
=
=
= x4 + 3x2 + 4x
(2 −x3)2
4x −2x4 + 3x2 + 3x4
(2 −x 3)2
(2 −x3)(2x) −(1 + x2)(−3x2)
(2 −x3)2
vdu/dx −udv/dx
v 2
dy
dx
dv
dx
du
dx
Differentiation
282
Practice Problem
3 Differentiate
(a) y =
(b) y =
[You might like to check that your answer to part (a) is the same as that obtained in Practice 
Problem 2(c).]
x −1
x + 1
x
x −2
Advice
The product and quotient rules give alternative methods for the differentiation of algebraic
fractions. It does not matter which rule you go for; use whichever rule is easiest for you.
Practice Problems 4, 5, 6 and 7 at the end of this section should give you further practice
at ‘technique bashing’ if you feel you need it.
Practice Problems
4 Use the chain rule to differentiate
(a) y = (2x + 1)10
(b) y = (x2 + 3x −5)3
(c) y =
(d) y = 
(e) y = √(8x −1)
5 Use the product rule to differentiate
(a) y = x2(x + 5)3
(b) y = x5(4x + 5)2
(c) y = x4√(x + 1)
1
x 2 + 1
1
7x −3

6 Use the quotient rule to differentiate
(a) y =
(b) y =
(c) y =
7 Differentiate
(a) y = x(x −3)4
(b) y = x√(2x −3)
(c) y = 
(d) y =
8 Differentiate
y = (5x + 7)2
(a) by using the chain rule
(b) by first multiplying out the brackets and then differentiating term by term.
9 Differentiate
y = x5(x + 2)2
(a) by using the product rule
(b) by first multiplying out the brackets and then differentiating term by term.
10 Find expressions for marginal revenue in the case when the demand equation is given by
(a) P = √(100 −2Q)
(b) P =
11 If the consumption function is
C =
calculate MPC and MPS when Y = 36 and give an interpretation of these results.
300 + 2Y 2
1 + Y
1000
(2 + Q)
x
x 2 + 1
x
x + 5
x3
(x −1)
2x −1
x + 1
x 2
x + 4
4.4 • Further rules of differentiation
283

section 4.5
Elasticity
One important problem in business is to determine the effect on revenue of a change in the
price of a good. Let us suppose that a ﬁrm’s demand curve is downward-sloping. If the ﬁrm
lowers the price then it will receive less for each item, but the number of items sold increases.
The formula for total revenue, TR, is
TR = PQ
and it is not immediately obvious what the net effect on TR will be as P decreases and Q
increases. The crucial factor here is not the absolute changes in P and Q but rather the propor-
tional or percentage changes. Intuitively, we expect that if the percentage rise in Q is greater
than the percentage fall in P then the ﬁrm experiences an increase in revenue. Under these 
circumstances we say that demand is elastic, since the demand is relatively sensitive to changes
in price. Similarly, demand is said to be inelastic if demand is relatively insensitive to price
changes. In this case, the percentage change in quantity is less than the percentage change in
price. A ﬁrm can then increase revenue by raising the price of the good. Although demand falls
as a result, the increase in price more than compensates for the reduced volume of sales and
revenue rises. Of course, it could happen that the percentage changes in price and quantity are
equal, leaving revenue unchanged. We use the term unit elastic to describe this situation.
We quantify the responsiveness of demand to price change by deﬁning the price elasticity of
demand to be
Objectives
At the end of this section you should be able to:
 Calculate price elasticity averaged along an arc.
 Calculate price elasticity evaluated at a point.
 Decide whether supply and demand are inelastic, unit elastic or elastic.
 Understand the relationship between price elasticity of demand and revenue.
 Determine the price elasticity for general linear demand functions.

4.5 • Elasticity
285
Advice
You should note that not all economists adopt the convention of ignoring the sign to make
E positive. If the negative sign is left in, the demand will be inelastic if E > −1, unit elastic
if E = −1 and elastic if E < −1. You should check with your lecturer the particular conven-
tion that you need to adopt.
As usual, we denote the changes in P and Q by ∆P and ∆Q respectively, and seek a formula
for E in terms of these symbols. To motivate this, suppose that the price of a good is $12 and
that it rises to $18. A moment’s thought should convince you that the percentage change in
price is then 50%. You can probably work this out in your head without thinking too hard.
However, it is worthwhile identifying the mathematical process involved. To obtain this ﬁgure
we ﬁrst express the change
18 −12 = 6
as a fraction of the original to get
= 0.5
and then multiply by 100 to express it as a percentage. This simple example gives us a clue as
to how we might ﬁnd a formula for E. In general, the percentage change in price is
6
12
Similarly, the percentage change in quantity is
× 100
∆Q
Q
× 100
∆P
P
E =
Notice that because the demand curve slopes downwards, a positive change in price leads to a
negative change in quantity and vice versa. Consequently, the value of E is always negative. It
is conventional to avoid this by deliberately changing the sign and taking
E = −
which makes E positive. The previous classiﬁcation of demand functions can now be restated
more succinctly in terms of E.
Demand is said to be

inelastic if E < 1

unit elastic if E = 1

elastic if E > 1.
percentage change in demand
percentage change in price
percentage change in demand
percentage change in price

Hence
E = −
× 100 ÷
× 100
Now, when we divide two fractions we turn the denominator upside down and multiply, so
E = −
× 100 ×
= −
×
A typical demand curve is illustrated in Figure 4.19, in which a price fall from P1 to P2 causes
an increase in demand from Q1 to Q2.
∆Q
∆P
P
Q
D
F
P
100× ∆P
A
C
D
F
∆Q
Q
A
C
D
F
∆P
P
A
C
D
F
∆Q
Q
A
C
Differentiation
286
Figure 4.19
Example
Determine the elasticity of demand when the price falls from 136 to 119, given the demand function
P = 200 −Q2
Solution
In the notation of Figure 4.19 we are given that
P1 = 136
and
P2 = 119
The corresponding values of Q1 and Q2 are obtained from the demand equation
P = 200 −Q2
by substituting P = 136 and 119 respectively and solving for Q. For example, if P = 136 then
136 = 200 −Q2

which rearranges to give
Q2 = 200 −136 = 64
This has solution Q = ±8 and, since we can obviously ignore the negative quantity, we have Q1 = 8. Similarly,
setting P = 119 gives Q2 = 9. The elasticity formula is
E = −
×
and the values of ∆P and ∆Q are easily worked out to be
∆P = 119 −136 = −17
∆Q = 9 −8 = 1
However, it is not at all clear what to take for P and Q. Do we take P to be 136 or 119? Clearly we are going
to get two different answers depending on our choice. A sensible compromise is to use their average and
take
P = 1/2(136 + 119) = 127.5
Similarly, averaging the Q values gives
Q = 1/2(8 + 9) = 8.5
Hence
E = −
×
= 0.88
D
F
1
−17
A
C
127.5
8.5
∆Q
∆P
P
Q
4.5 • Elasticity
287
The particular application of the general formula considered in the previous example pro-
vides an estimate of elasticity averaged over a section of the demand curve between (Q1, P1) and
(Q2, P2). For this reason it is called arc elasticity and is obtained by replacing P by 1/2(P1 + P2)
and Q by 1/2(Q1 + Q2) in the general formula.
Practice Problem
1 Given the demand function
P = 1000 −2Q
calculate the arc elasticity as P falls from 210 to 200.
A disappointing feature of the previous example is the need to compromise and calculate the
elasticity averaged along an arc rather than calculate the exact value at a point. A formula for
the latter can easily be deduced from
E = −
×
by considering the limit as ∆Q and ∆P tend to zero in Figure 4.19. All that happens is that the
arc shrinks to a point and the ratio ∆Q/∆P tends to dQ/dP. The price elasticity at a point may
therefore be found from
E = −
× dQ
dP
P
Q
∆Q
∆P
P
Q

Differentiation
288
Practice Problem
2 Given the demand function
P = 100 −Q
calculate the price elasticity of demand when the price is
(a) 10
(b) 50
(c) 90
Is the demand inelastic, unit elastic or elastic at these prices?
Example
Given the demand function
P = 50 −2Q
ﬁnd the elasticity when the price is 30. Is demand inelastic, unit elastic or elastic at this price?
Solution
To ﬁnd dQ/dP we need to differentiate Q with respect to P. However, we are actually given a formula for P
in terms of Q, so we need to transpose
P = 50 −2Q
for Q. Adding 2Q to both sides gives
P + 2Q = 50
and if we subtract P then
2Q = 50 −P
Finally, dividing through by 2 gives
Q = 25 −1/2P
Hence
= −1/2
We are given that P = 30 so, at this price, demand is
Q = 25 −1/2(30) = 10
These values can now be substituted into
E = −
×
to get
E = −
×
−
= 1.5
Moreover, since 1.5 > 1, demand is elastic at this price.
D
F
1
2
A
C
30
10
dQ
dP
P
Q
dQ
dP

It is quite common in economics to be given the demand function in the form
P = f(Q)
where P is a function of Q. In order to evaluate elasticity it is necessary to ﬁnd
which assumes that Q is actually given as a function of P. Consequently, we may have to trans-
pose the demand equation and ﬁnd an expression for Q in terms of P before we perform the
differentiation. This was the approach taken in the previous example. Unfortunately, if f(Q) is
a complicated expression, it may be difﬁcult, if not impossible, to carry out the initial re-
arrangement to extract Q. An alternative approach is based on the fact that
=
A proof of this can be obtained via the chain rule, although we omit the details. This result
shows that we can ﬁnd dQ/dP by just differentiating the original demand function to get dP/dQ
and reciprocating.
1
dP/dQ
dQ
dP
dQ
dP
4.5 • Elasticity
289
Example
Given the demand function
P = −Q2 −4Q + 96
ﬁnd the price elasticity of demand when P = 51. If this price rises by 2%, calculate the corresponding 
percentage change in demand.
Solution
We are given that P = 51, so to ﬁnd the corresponding demand we need to solve the quadratic equation
−Q2 −4Q + 96 = 51
that is,
−Q2 −4Q + 45 = 0
To do this we use the standard formula
discussed in Section 2.1, which gives
Q =
=
=
The two solutions are −9 and 5. As usual, the negative value can be ignored, since it does not make sense to
have a negative quantity, so Q = 5.
4 ± 14
−2
4
196
2
  
±
−
−−
±
−
−
−
−
(
)  ((
)   (
)(
))
(
)
4
4
4
1 45
2
1
2
−
±
−
b
b
ac
a
  (
  
)
2
4
2


To ﬁnd the value of E we also need to calculate
from the demand equation, P = −Q2 −4Q + 96. It is not at all easy to transpose this for Q. Indeed, we would
have to use the formula for solving a quadratic, as above, replacing the number 51 by the letter P.
Unfortunately this expression involves square roots and the subsequent differentiation is quite messy. (You
might like to have a go at this yourself!) However, it is easy to differentiate the given expression with respect
to Q to get
= −2Q −4
and so
=
=
Finally, putting Q = 5 gives
= −
The price elasticity of demand is given by
E = −
×
and if we substitute P = 51, Q = 5 and dQ/dP = −1/14 we get
E = −
×
−
= 0.73
To discover the effect on Q due to a 2% rise in P we return to the original deﬁnition
E = −
We know that E = 0.73 and that the percentage change in price is 2, so
0.73 = −
which shows that demand changes by
−0.73 × 2 = −1.46%
A 2% rise in price therefore leads to a fall in demand of 1.46%.
percentage change in demand
2
percentage change in demand
percentage change in price
D
F
1
14
A
C
51
5
dQ
dP
P
Q
1
14
dQ
dP
1
−2Q −4
1
dP/dQ
dQ
dP
dP
dQ
dQ
dP
Differentiation
290
Practice Problem
3 Given the demand equation
P = −Q2 −10Q + 150
find the price elasticity of demand when Q = 4. Estimate the percentage change in price needed to
increase demand by 10%.

The price elasticity of supply is deﬁned in an analogous way to that of demand. We deﬁne
E =
This time, however, there is no need to ﬁddle the sign. An increase in price leads to an increase
in supply, so E is automatically positive. In symbols,
E =
×
If (Q1, P1) and (Q2, P2) denote two points on the supply curve then arc elasticity is obtained, as
before, by setting
∆P = P2 −P1
∆Q = Q2 −Q1
P = 1/2(P1 + P2)
Q = 1/2(Q1 + Q2)
The corresponding formula for point elasticity is
E =
× dQ
dP
P
Q
∆Q
∆P
P
Q
percentage change in supply
percentage change in price
4.5 • Elasticity
291
Example
Given the supply function
P = 10 +
Q
ﬁnd the price elasticity of supply
(a) averaged along an arc between Q = 100 and Q = 105
(b) at the point Q = 100
Solution
(a) We are given that
Q1 = 100, Q2 = 105
so that
P1 = 10 + 100 = 20
and
P2 = 10 + 105 = 20.247
Hence
∆P = 20.247 −20 = 0.247,
∆Q = 105 −100 = 5
P =
(20 + 20.247) = 20.123,
Q =
(100 + 105) = 102.5
The formula for arc elasticity gives
E =
×
=
×
= 3.97
5
0.247
20.123
102.5
∆Q
∆P
P
Q
1
2
1
2


(b) To evaluate the elasticity at the point Q = 100, we need to ﬁnd the derivative, 
. The supply equation
P = 10 + Q1/ 2
differentiates to give 
=
Q−1/ 2 =
so that
= 2 Q
At the point Q = 100, we get 
= 2 100 = 20
The formula for point elasticity gives
E =
×
=
× 20 = 4
Notice that, as expected, the answers to parts (a) and (b) are nearly the same.
20
100
dQ
dP
P
Q
dQ
dP
dQ
dP
1
2 Q
1
2
dP
dQ
dQ
dP
Differentiation
292
Advice
The concept of elasticity can be applied to more general functions and we consider some
of these in the next chapter. For the moment we investigate the theoretical properties of
demand elasticity. The following material is more difficult to understand than the fore-
going, so you may prefer just to concentrate on the conclusions and skip the intermediate
derivations.
Practice Problem
4 If the supply equation is
Q = 150 + 5P + 0.1P2
calculate the price elasticity of supply
(a) averaged along an arc between P = 9 and P = 11
(b) at the point P = 10
We begin by analysing the relationship between elasticity and marginal revenue. Marginal
revenue, MR, is given by
MR = d(TR)
dQ

Now TR is equal to the product PQ, so we can apply the product rule to differentiate it. If
u = P
and
v = Q
then
=
and
=
= 1
By the product rule
MR = u
+ v
= P + Q ×
= P 1 +
×
Now
−
×
= E
so
×
= −
This can be substituted into the expression for MR to get
MR = P 1 −
The connection between marginal revenue and demand elasticity is now complete, and this
formula can be used to justify the intuitive argument that we gave at the beginning of this 
section concerning revenue and elasticity. Observe that if E < 1 then 1/E > 1, so MR is negative
for any value of P. It follows that the revenue function is decreasing in regions where demand
is inelastic, because MR determines the slope of the revenue curve. Similarly, if E > 1 then 
1/E < 1, so MR is positive for any price, P, and the revenue curve is uphill. In other words, 
the revenue function is increasing in regions where demand is elastic. Finally, if E = 1 then 
MR is 0, and so the slope of the revenue curve is horizontal at points where demand is unit 
elastic.
Throughout this section we have taken speciﬁc functions and evaluated the elasticity at 
particular points. It is more instructive to consider general functions and to deduce general
expressions for elasticity. Consider the standard linear downward-sloping demand function
P = aQ + b
when a < 0 and b > 0. As noted in Section 4.3, this typiﬁes the demand function faced by a
monopolist. To transpose this equation for Q, we subtract b from both sides to get
aQ = P −b
and then divide through by a to get
Q =
(P −b) 
1
a
D
F
1
E
A
C
1
E
dP
dQ
Q
P
dQ
dP
P
Q
D
F
dP
dQ
Q
P
A
C
dP
dQ
du
dQ
dv
dQ
dQ
dQ
dv
dQ
dP
dQ
du
dQ
4.5 • Elasticity
293

Hence
=
The formula for elasticity of demand is
E = −
×
so replacing Q by (1/a)(P −b) and dQ/dP by 1/a gives
E =
×
=
=
Notice that this formula involves P and b but not a. Elasticity is therefore independent of the
slope of linear demand curves. In particular, this shows that, corresponding to any price P, the
elasticities of the two demand functions sketched in Figure 4.20 are identical. This is perhaps a
rather surprising result. We might have expected demand to be more elastic at point A than at
point B, since A is on the steeper curve. However, the mathematics shows that this is not the
case. (Can you explain, in economic terms, why this is so?)
Another interesting feature of the result
E =
is the fact that b occurs in the denominator of this fraction, so that corresponding to any price,
P, the larger the value of the intercept, b, the smaller the elasticity. In Figure 4.21, elasticity at
C is smaller than that at D because C lies on the curve with the larger intercept.
The dependence of E on P is also worthy of note. It shows that elasticity varies along a 
linear demand curve. This is illustrated in Figure 4.22. At the left-hand end, P = b, so
P
b −P
P
b −P
−P
P −b
1
a
−P
(1/a)(P −b)
dQ
dP
P
Q
1
a
dQ
dP
Differentiation
294
Figure 4.20

E =
=
= ∞
At the right-hand end, P = 0, so
E =
=
= 0
As you move down the demand curve, the elasticity decreases from ∞to 0, taking all pos-
sible values. Demand is unit elastic when E = 1 and the price at which this occurs can be found
by solving
= 1 for P
P
b −P
0
b
0
b −0
b
0
b
b −b
4.5 • Elasticity
295
Figure 4.21
Figure 4.22

P = b −P
(multiply both sides by b −P)
2P = b
(add P to both sides)
P =
(divide both sides by 2)
The corresponding quantity can be found by substituting P = b/2 into the transposed demand
equation to get
Q =
−b
= −
Demand is unit elastic exactly halfway along the demand curve. To the left of this point E > 1
and demand is elastic, whereas to the right E < 1 and demand is inelastic.
In our discussion of general demand functions, we have concentrated on those which are
represented by straight lines since these are commonly used in simple economic models. There
are other possibilities and Practice Problem 11 investigates a class of functions that have con-
stant elasticity.
b
2a
D
F
b
2
A
C
1
a
b
2
Differentiation
296
Practice Problems
5 Given the demand function
P = 500 −4Q2
calculate the price elasticity of demand averaged along an arc joining Q = 8 and Q = 10.
6 Find the price elasticity of demand at the point Q = 9 for the demand function
P = 500 −4Q2
and compare your answer with that of Practice Problem 5.
7 Find the price elasticity of demand at P = 6 for each of the following demand functions:
(a) P = 30 −2Q
(b) P = 30 −12Q
(c) P = √(100 −2Q)
Arc elasticity
Elasticity measured between two points on a curve.
Elastic demand
Where the percentage change in demand is more than the corresponding
percentage change in price: E > 1.
Inelastic demand
Where the percentage change in demand is less than the corresponding
percentage change in price: E < 1.
Price elasticity of demand
A measure of the responsiveness of the change in demand due
to a change in price: −(percentage change in demand) ÷ (percentage change in price).
Price elasticity of supply
A measure of the responsiveness of the change in supply due to
a change in price: (percentage change in supply) ÷ (percentage change in price).
Unit elastic demand
Where the percentage change in demand is the same as the percent-
age change in price: E = 1.
Key Terms

8 If the demand equation is
Q + 4P = 60
find a general expression for the price elasticity of demand in terms of P. For what value of P is
demand unit elastic?
9 Consider the supply equation
Q = 4 + 0.1P2
(a) Write down an expression for dQ/dP.
(b) Show that the supply equation can be rearranged as
P = √(10Q −40)
Differentiate this to find an expression for dP/dQ.
(c) Use your answers to parts (a) and (b) to verify that
=
(d) Calculate the elasticity of supply at the point Q = 14.
10 If the supply equation is
Q = 7 + 0.1P + 0.004P2
find the price elasticity of supply if the current price is 80.
(a) Is supply elastic, inelastic or unit elastic at this price?
(b) Estimate the percentage change in supply if the price rises by 5%.
11 Show that the price elasticity of demand is constant for the demand functions
P =
where A and n are positive constants.
12 Find a general expression for the point elasticity of supply for the function,
Q = aP + b
(a > 0)
Deduce that the supply function is
(a) unit elastic when b = 0
(b) inelastic when b > 0
Give a brief geometrical interpretation of these results.
A
Qn
1
dP/dQ
dQ
dP
4.5 • Elasticity
297

section 4.6
Optimization of 
economic functions
In Section 2.1 a simple three-step strategy was described for sketching graphs of quadratic func-
tions of the form
f(x) = ax 2 + bx + c
The basic idea is to solve the corresponding equation
ax2 + bx + c = 0
to ﬁnd where the graph crosses the x axis. Provided that the quadratic equation has at least one
solution, it is then possible to deduce the coordinates of the maximum or minimum point of
the parabola. For example, if there are two solutions, then by symmetry the graph turns round
at the point exactly halfway between these solutions. Unfortunately, if the quadratic equation
has no solution then only a limited sketch can be obtained using this approach.
In this section we show how the techniques of calculus can be used to ﬁnd the coordinates
of the turning point of a parabola. The beauty of this approach is that it can be used to locate
the maximum and minimum points of any economic function, not just those represented by
quadratics. Look at the graph in Figure 4.23 (overleaf). Points B, C, D, E, F and G are referred
to as the stationary points (sometimes called critical points, turning points or extrema) of the
function. At a stationary point the tangent to the graph is horizontal and so has zero slope. 
Objectives
At the end of this section you should be able to:
 Use the ﬁrst-order derivative to ﬁnd the stationary points of a function.
 Use the second-order derivative to classify the stationary points of a function.
 Find the maximum and minimum points of an economic function.
 Use stationary points to sketch graphs of economic functions.

Consequently, at a stationary point of a function f(x),
f ′(x) = 0
The reason for using the word ‘stationary’ is historical. Calculus was originally used by
astronomers to predict planetary motion. If a graph of the distance travelled by an object is
sketched against time then the speed of the object is given by the slope, since this represents the
rate of change of distance with respect to time. It follows that if the graph is horizontal at some
point then the speed is zero and the object is instantaneously at rest: that is, stationary.
Stationary points are classiﬁed into one of three types: local maxima, local minima and 
stationary points of inﬂection.
At a local maximum (sometimes called a relative maximum) the graph falls away on both
sides. Points B and E are the local maxima for the function sketched in Figure 4.23. The word
‘local’ is used to highlight the fact that, although these are the maximum points relative to their
locality or neighbourhood, they may not be the overall or global maximum. In Figure 4.23 the
highest point on the graph actually occurs at the right-hand end, H, which is not a stationary
point, since the slope is not zero at H.
At a local minimum (sometimes called a relative minimum) the graph rises on both sides.
Points C and G are the local minima in Figure 4.23. Again, it is not necessary for the global
minimum to be one of the local minima. In Figure 4.23 the lowest point on the graph occurs
at the left-hand end, A, which is not a stationary point.
At a stationary point of inﬂection the graph rises on one side and falls on the other. The sta-
tionary points of inﬂection in Figure 4.23 are labelled D and F. These points are of little value
in economics, although they do sometimes assist in sketching graphs of economic functions.
Maxima and minima, on the other hand, are important. The calculation of the maximum
points of the revenue and proﬁt functions is clearly worthwhile. Likewise, it is useful to be able
to ﬁnd the minimum points of average cost functions.
For most examples in economics, the local maximum and minimum points coincide 
with the global maximum and minimum. For this reason we shall drop the word ‘local’ when
describing stationary points. However, it should always be borne in mind that the global 
maximum and minimum could actually be attained at an end point and this possibility may
need to be checked. This can be done by comparing the function values at the end points 
with those of the stationary points and then deciding which of them gives rise to the largest or
smallest values.
4.6 • Optimization of economic functions
299
Figure 4.23

Two obvious questions remain. How do we ﬁnd the stationary points of any given function
and how do we classify them? The ﬁrst question is easily answered. As we mentioned earlier,
stationary points satisfy the equation
f ′(x) = 0
so all we need do is to differentiate the function, to equate to zero and to solve the resulting
algebraic equation. The classiﬁcation is equally straightforward. It can be shown that if a func-
tion has a stationary point at x = a then 
 if f ″(a) > 0 then f(x) has a minimum at x = a
 if f ″(a) < 0 then f(x) has a maximum at x = a
Therefore, all we need do is to differentiate the function a second time and to evaluate this second-
order derivative at each point. A point is a minimum if this value is positive and a maximum
if this value is negative. These facts are consistent with our interpretation of the second-order
derivative in Section 4.2. If f ″(a) > 0 the graph bends upwards at x = a (points C and G in Figure
4.23). If f ″(a) < 0 the graph bends downwards at x = a (points B and E in Figure 4.23). There is,
of course, a third possibility, namely f ″(a) = 0. Sadly, when this happens it provides no informa-
tion whatsoever about the stationary point. The point x = a could be a maximum, minimum
or inﬂection. This situation is illustrated in Practice Problem 7 at the end of this section.
Differentiation
300
Advice
If you are unlucky enough to encounter this case, you can always classify the point by 
tabulating the function values in the vicinity and use these to produce a local sketch.
To summarize, the method for ﬁnding and classifying stationary points of a function, f(x),
is as follows:
Step 1
Solve the equation f ′(x) = 0 to ﬁnd the stationary points, x = a.
Step 2
If
 f ″(a) > 0 then the function has a minimum at x = a
 f ″(a) < 0 then the function has a maximum at x = a
 f ″(a) = 0 then the point cannot be classiﬁed using the available information
Example
Find and classify the stationary points of the following functions. Hence sketch their graphs.
(a) f(x) = x2 −4x + 5
(b) f(x) = 2x3 + 3x2 −12x + 4
Solution
(a) In order to use steps 1 and 2 we need to ﬁnd the ﬁrst- and second-order derivatives of the function
f(x) = x2 −4x + 5

Differentiating once gives
f ′(x) = 2x −4
and differentiating a second time gives
f ″(x) = 2
Step 1
The stationary points are the solutions of the equation
f ′(x) = 0
so we need to solve
2x −4 = 0
This is a linear equation so has just one solution. Adding 4 to both sides gives
2x = 4
and dividing through by 2 shows that the stationary point occurs at
x = 2
Step 2
To classify this point we need to evaluate
f ″(2)
In this case
f ″(x) = 2
for all values of x, so in particular
f ″(2) = 2
This number is positive, so the function has a minimum at x = 2.
We have shown that the minimum point occurs at x = 2. The corresponding value of y is easily found
by substituting this number into the function to get
y = (2)2 −4(2) + 5 = 1
so the minimum point has coordinates (2, 1). A graph of f(x) is shown in Figure 4.24 (overleaf).
(b) In order to use steps 1 and 2 we need to ﬁnd the ﬁrst- and second-order derivatives of the function
f(x) = 2x3 + 3x2 −12x + 4
Differentiating once gives
f ′(x) = 6x2 + 6x −12
and differentiating a second time gives
f ″(x) = 12x + 6
Step 1
The stationary points are the solutions of the equation
f ′(x) = 0
4.6 • Optimization of economic functions
301


so we need to solve
6x2 + 6x −12 = 0
This is a quadratic equation and so can be solved using ‘the formula’. However, before doing so, it is a
good idea to divide both sides by 6 to avoid large numbers. The resulting equation
x2 + x −2 = 0
has solution
x =
=
=
= −2, 1
In general, whenever f(x) is a cubic function the stationary points are the solutions of a quadratic 
equation, f ′(x) = 0. Moreover, we know from Section 2.1 that such an equation can have two, one or no
solutions. It follows that a cubic equation can have two, one or no stationary points. In this particular
example we have seen that there are two stationary points, at x = −2 and x = 1.
Step 2
To classify these points we need to evaluate f ″(−2) and f ″(1). Now
f ″(−2) = 12(−2) + 6 = −18
This is negative, so there is a maximum at x = −2. When x = −2,
y = 2(−2)3 + 3(−2)2 −12(−2) + 4 = 24
so the maximum point has coordinates (−2, 24). Now
f ″(1) = 12(1) + 6 = 18
This is positive, so there is a minimum at x = 1. When x = 1,
y = 2(1)3 + 3(1)2 −12(1) + 4 = −3
so the minimum point has coordinates (1, −3).
This information enables a partial sketch to be drawn as shown in Figure 4.25. Before we can be
conﬁdent about the complete picture it is useful to plot a few more points such as those below.
x
−10
0
10
y
−1816
4
2184
−1 ± 3
2
−±
1
9
2
  
−±
−
−
1
1
4 1
2
2 1
2
  (   ( )(
))
( )
Differentiation
302
Figure 4.24

This table indicates that when x is positive the graph falls steeply downwards from a great height.
Similarly, when x is negative the graph quickly disappears off the bottom of the page. The curve cannot
wiggle and turn round except at the two stationary points already plotted (otherwise it would have more
stationary points, which we know is not the case). We now have enough information to join up the
pieces and so sketch a complete picture as shown in Figure 4.26.
In an ideal world it would be nice to calculate the three points at which the graph crosses the x axis.
These are the solutions of
2x3 + 3x2 −12x + 4 = 0
There is a formula for solving cubic equations, just as there is for quadratic equations, but it is extremely
complicated and is beyond the scope of this book.
4.6 • Optimization of economic functions
303
Figure 4.25
Figure 4.26

The task of ﬁnding the maximum and minimum values of a function is referred to as 
optimization. This is an important topic in mathematical economics. It provides a rich source
of examination questions and we devote the remaining part of this section and the whole of 
the next to applications of it. In this section we demonstrate the use of stationary points by
working through four ‘examination-type’ problems in detail. These problems involve the 
optimization of speciﬁc revenue, cost, proﬁt and production functions. They are not intended
to exhaust all possibilities, although they are fairly typical. The next section describes how the
mathematics of optimization can be used to derive general theoretical results.
Differentiation
304
Practice Problem
1 Find and classify the stationary points of the following functions. Hence sketch their graphs.
(a) y = 3x2 + 12x −35
(b) y = −2x3 + 15x2 −36x + 27
Example
A ﬁrm’s short-run production function is given by
Q = 6L2 −0.2L3
where L denotes the number of workers.
(a) Find the size of the workforce that maximizes output and hence sketch a graph of this production 
function.
(b) Find the size of the workforce that maximizes the average product of labour. Calculate MPL and APL at
this value of L. What do you observe?
Solution
(a) In the ﬁrst part of this example we want to ﬁnd the value of L which maximizes
Q = 6L2 −0.2L3
Step 1
At a stationary point
= 12L −0.6L2 = 0
This is a quadratic equation and so we could use ‘the formula’ to ﬁnd L. However, this is not really neces-
sary in this case because both terms have a common factor of L and the equation may be written as
L(12 −0.6L) = 0
It follows that either
L = 0
or
12 −0.6L = 0
that is, the equation has solutions
L = 0
and
L = 12/0.6 = 20
dQ
dL

Step 2
It is obvious on economic grounds that L = 0 is a minimum and presumably L = 20 is the maximum.
We can, of course, check this by differentiating a second time to get
= 12 −1.2L
When L = 0,
= 12 > 0
which conﬁrms that L = 0 is a minimum. The corresponding output is given by
Q = 6(0)2 −0.2(0)3 = 0
as expected. When L = 20,
= −12 < 0
which conﬁrms that L = 20 is a maximum.
The ﬁrm should therefore employ 20 workers to achieve a maximum output
Q = 6(20)2 −0.2(20)3 = 800
We have shown that the minimum point on the graph has coordinates (0, 0) and the maximum point
has coordinates (20, 800). There are no further turning points, so the graph of the production function
has the shape sketched in Figure 4.27.
It is possible to ﬁnd the precise values of L at which the graph crosses the horizontal axis. The 
production function is given by
Q = 6L2 −0.2L3
so we need to solve
6L2 −0.2L3 = 0
d2Q
dL2
d2Q
dL2
d2Q
dL2
4.6 • Optimization of economic functions
305

Figure 4.27

We can take out a factor of L2 to get
L2(6 −0.2L) = 0
Hence, either
L2 = 0
or
6 −0.2L = 0
The ﬁrst of these merely conﬁrms the fact that the curve passes through the origin, whereas the second
shows that the curve intersects the L axis at L = 6/0.2 = 30.
(b) In the second part of this example we want to ﬁnd the value of L which maximizes the average product
of labour. This is a concept that we have not met before in this book, although it is not difﬁcult to guess
how it might be deﬁned.
The average product of labour, APL, is taken to be total output divided by labour, so that in symbols
APL =
This is sometimes called labour productivity, since it measures the average output per worker.
In this example,
APL =
= 6L −0.2L2
Step 1
At a stationary point
= 0
so
6 −0.4L = 0
which has solution L = 6/0.4 = 15.
Step 2
To classify this stationary point we differentiate a second time to get
= −0.4 < 0
which shows that it is a maximum.
The labour productivity is therefore greatest when the ﬁrm employs 15 workers. In fact, the corres-
ponding labour productivity, APL, is
6(15) −0.2(15)2 = 45
In other words, the largest number of goods produced per worker is 45.
Finally, we are invited to calculate the value of MPL at this point. To ﬁnd an expression for MPL we
need to differentiate Q with respect to L to get
MPL = 12L −0.6L2
When L = 15,
MPL = 12(15) −0.6(15)2 = 45
We observe that at L = 15 the values of MPL and APL are equal.
d2(APL)
dL2
d(APL)
dL
6L2 −0.2L3
L
Q
L
Differentiation
306

In this particular example we discovered that at the point of maximum average product of
labour
=
There is nothing special about this example and in the next section we show that this result
holds for any production function.
average product
of labour
marginal product
of labour
4.6 • Optimization of economic functions
307
Practice Problem
2 A firm’s short-run production function is given by
Q = 300L2 −L4
where L denotes the number of workers. Find the size of the workforce that maximizes the average
product of labour and verify that at this value of L
MPL = APL
Example
The demand equation of a good is
P + Q = 30
and the total cost function is
TC = 1/2Q2 + 6Q + 7
(a) Find the level of output that maximizes total revenue.
(b) Find the level of output that maximizes proﬁt. Calculate MR and MC at this value of Q. What do you
observe?
Solution
(a) In the ﬁrst part of this example we want to ﬁnd the value of Q which maximizes total revenue. To do
this we use the given demand equation to ﬁnd an expression for TR and then apply the theory of sta-
tionary points in the usual way.
The total revenue is deﬁned by
TR = PQ
We seek the value of Q which maximizes TR, so we express TR in terms of the variable Q only. The
demand equation
P + Q = 30
can be rearranged to get
P = 30 −Q
Hence
TR = (30 −Q)Q
= 30Q −Q2


Step 1
At a stationary point
= 0
so
30 −2Q = 0
which has solution Q = 30/2 = 15.
Step 2
To classify this point we differentiate a second time to get
= −2
This is negative, so TR has a maximum at Q = 15.
(b) In the second part of this example we want to ﬁnd the value of Q which maximizes proﬁt. To do this
we begin by determining an expression for proﬁt in terms of Q. Once this has been done, it is then 
a simple matter to work out the ﬁrst- and second-order derivatives and so to ﬁnd and classify the 
stationary points of the proﬁt function.
The proﬁt function is deﬁned by
π = TR −TC
From part (a)
TR = 30Q −Q2
We are given the total cost function
TC = 1/2Q2 + 6Q + 7
Hence
π = (30Q −Q2) −(1/2Q2 + 6Q + 7)
= 30Q −Q2 −1/2Q2 −6Q −7
= −3/2Q2 + 24Q −7
Step 1
At a stationary point
= 0
so
−3Q + 24 = 0
which has solution Q = 24/3 = 8.
Step 2
To classify this point we differentiate a second time to get
= −3
d2π
dQ2
dπ
dQ
d2(TR)
dQ2
d(TR)
dQ
Differentiation
308

This is negative, so π has a maximum at Q = 8. In fact, the corresponding maximum proﬁt is
π = −3/2(8)2 + 24(8) −7 = 89
Finally, we are invited to calculate the marginal revenue and marginal cost at this particular value of Q.
To ﬁnd expressions for MR and MC we need only differentiate TR and TC, respectively. If
TR = 30Q −Q2
then
MR =
= 30 −2Q
so when Q = 8
MR = 30 −2(8) = 14
If
TC = 1/2Q2 + 6Q + 7
then
MC =
= Q + 6
so when Q = 8
MC = 8 + 6 = 14
We observe that at Q = 8, the values of MR and MC are equal.
d(TC)
dQ
d(TR)
dQ
4.6 • Optimization of economic functions
309
In this particular example we discovered that at the point of maximum proﬁt,
=
There is nothing special about this example and in the next section we show that this result
holds for any proﬁt function.
marginal
cost
marginal
revenue
Practice Problem
3 The demand equation of a good is given by
P + 2Q = 20
and the total cost function is
Q3 −8Q2 + 20Q + 2
(a) Find the level of output that maximizes total revenue.
(b) Find the maximum profit and the value of Q at which it is achieved. Verify that, at this value of Q,
MR = MC.

Differentiation
310
Example
The cost of building an ofﬁce block, x ﬂoors high, is made up of three components:
(1) $10 million for the land
(2) $1/4 million per ﬂoor
(3) specialized costs of $10 000x per ﬂoor.
How many ﬂoors should the block contain if the average cost per ﬂoor is to be minimized?
Solution
The $10 million for the land is a ﬁxed cost because it is independent of the number of ﬂoors. Each ﬂoor costs
$1/4 million, so if the building has x ﬂoors altogether then the cost will be 250 000x.
In addition there are specialized costs of 10 000x per ﬂoor, so if there are x ﬂoors this will be
(10 000x)x = 10 000x2
Notice the square term here, which means that the specialized costs rise dramatically with increasing x. This
is to be expected, since a tall building requires a more complicated design. It may also be necessary to use
more expensive materials.

The total cost, TC, is the sum of the three components: that is,
TC = 10 000 000 + 250 000x + 10 000x2
The average cost per ﬂoor, AC, is found by dividing the total cost by the number of ﬂoors: that is,
AC =
=
=
+ 250 000 + 10 000x
= 10 000 000x−1 + 250 000 + 10 000x
Step 1
At a stationary point
= 0
In this case
= −10 000 000x−2 + 10 000 =
+ 10 000
so we need to solve
10 000 =
or equivalently 10 000x2 = 10 000 000
Hence
x2 =
= 1000
This has solution
x = ±√1000 = ±31.6
We can obviously ignore the negative value because it does not make sense to build an ofﬁce block with a
negative number of ﬂoors, so we can deduce that x = 31.6.
Step 2
To conﬁrm that this is a minimum we need to differentiate a second time. Now
= −10 000 000x−2 + 10 000
so
= −2(−10 000 000)x−3 =
When x = 31.6 we see that
=
= 633.8
It follows that x = 31.6 is indeed a minimum because the second-order derivative is a positive number.
20 000 000
(31.6)3
d2(AC)
dx2
20 000 000
x3
d2(AC)
dx2
d(AC)
dx
10 000 000
10 000
10 000 000
x 2
−10 000 000
x 2
d(AC)
dx
d(AC)
dx
10 000 000
x
10 000 000 + 250 000x + 10 000x2
x
TC
x
4.6 • Optimization of economic functions
311


At this stage it is tempting to state that the answer is 31.6. This is mathematically correct but is a physical
impossibility since x must be a whole number. To decide whether to take x to be 31 or 32 we simply evalu-
ate AC for these two values of x and choose the one that produces the lower average cost.
When x = 31,
AC =
+ 250 000 + 10 000(31) = $882 581
When x = 32,
AC =
+ 250 000 + 10 000(32) = $882 500
Therefore an ofﬁce block 32 ﬂoors high produces the lowest average cost per ﬂoor.
10 000 000
32
10 000 000
31
Differentiation
312
Practice Problem
4 The total cost function of a good is given by
TC = Q2 + 3Q + 36
Calculate the level of output that minimizes average cost. Find AC and MC at this value of Q. What
do you observe?
Example
The supply and demand equations of a good are given by
P = QS + 8
and
P = −3QD + 80
respectively.
The government decides to impose a tax, t, per unit. Find the value of t which maximizes the govern-
ment’s total tax revenue on the assumption that equilibrium conditions prevail in the market.
Solution
The idea of taxation was ﬁrst introduced in Chapter 1. In Section 1.3 the equilibrium price and quantity
were calculated from a given value of t. In this example t is unknown but the analysis is exactly the same. All
we need to do is to carry the letter t through the usual calculations and then to choose t at the end so as to
maximize the total tax revenue.
To take account of the tax we replace P by P −t in the supply equation. This is because the price that the
supplier actually receives is the price, P, that the consumer pays less the tax, t, deducted by the government.
The new supply equation is then
P −t = QS + 8

so that
P = QS + 8 + t
In equilibrium
QS = QD
If this common value is denoted by Q then the supply and demand equations become
P = Q + 8 + t
P = −3Q + 80
Hence
Q + 8 + t = −3Q + 80
since both sides are equal to P. This can be rearranged to give
Q = −3Q + 72 −t
(subtract 8 + t from both sides)
4Q = 72 −t
(add 3Q to both sides)
Q = 18 −1/4t
(divide both sides by 4)
Now, if the number of goods sold is Q and the government raises t per good then the total tax revenue, T,
is given by
T = tQ
= t(18 −1/4t)
= 18t −1/4t2
This then is the expression that we wish to maximize.
Step 1
At a stationary point
= 0
so
18 −1/2t = 0
which has solution
t = 36
Step 2
To classify this point we differentiate a second time to get
= 1/2 < 0
which conﬁrms that it is a maximum.
Hence the government should impose a tax of $36 on each good.
d2T
dt2
dT
dt
4.6 • Optimization of economic functions
313

We conclude this section by describing the use of a computer package to solve optimization
problems. Although a spreadsheet could be used to do this, by tabulating the values of a func-
tion, it cannot handle the associated mathematics. A symbolic computation system such as
Maple, Matlab, Mathcad or Derive can not only sketch the graphs of functions, but also differ-
entiate and solve algebraic equations. Consequently, it is possible to obtain the exact solution
using one of these packages. In this book we have chosen to use Maple.
Differentiation
314
Practice Problem
5 The supply and demand equations of a good are given by
P = 1/2QS + 25
and
P = −2QD + 50
respectively.
The government decides to impose a tax, t, per unit. Find the value of t which maximizes the gov-
ernment’s total tax revenue on the assumption that equilibrium conditions prevail in the market.
Example
The price, P, of a good varies over time, t, during a 15-year period according to
P = 0.064t 3 −1.44t 2 + 9.6t + 10
(0 ≤t ≤15)
(a) Sketch a graph of this function and use it to estimate the local maximum and minimum points.
(b) Find the exact coordinates of these points using calculus.
Solution
It is convenient to give the cubic expression the name price, and to do this in Maple, we type
>price:=0.064*t^3–1.44*t^2+9.6*t+10;
MAPLE
Advice
A simple introduction to this package is described in the Getting Started section at the very
beginning of this book. If you have not used Maple before, go back and read through this
section now.
The following example makes use of three basic Maple instructions: plot, diff and
solve. As the name suggests, plot produces a graph of a function by joining together points
which are accurately plotted over a speciﬁed range of values. The instruction diff, not sur-
prisingly, differentiates a given expression with respect to any stated variable, and solve ﬁnds
the exact solution of an equation.

(a) To plot a graph of this function for values of t between 0 and 15 we type
>plot(price,t=0..15);
Maple responds by producing a graph of price over the speciﬁed range (see Figure 4.28). The graph
shows that there is one local maximum and one local minimum. (It also shows very clearly that the
overall, or global, minimum and maximum occur at the ends, 0 and 15 respectively.) If you now move
the cursor to some point on the plot and click, you will discover that two things happen. You will ﬁrst
notice that the graph is now surrounded by a box. More signiﬁcantly, if you look carefully at the top of
the screen, you will see that a graphics toolbar has appeared. In the left-hand corner of this is a small
window containing the coordinates of the position of the cursor. To estimate the local maximum and
minimum all you need do is to move the cursor to the relevant points, click, and read off the answer
from the screen. Looking carefully at Figure 4.28, in which the cursor is positioned over the local max-
imum, we see that the coordinates of this point are approximately (5.02, 30.01). A similar estimate
could be found for the local minimum point.
(b) To ﬁnd the exact coordinates we need to use calculus. The simple instruction
>diff(price,t);
will produce the ﬁrst derivative of price with respect to t. However, since we want to equate this to zero
and solve the associated equation, it makes sense to give this a name. You can use whatever combina-
tion of symbols you like for a name in Maple, provided it does not begin with a number and it has 
not already been reserved by Maple. So, you are not allowed to use 1deriv, say (because it starts with
the digit 1), or subs (which Maple recognizes as one of its own in-house instructions for substituting
numbers for letters in an expression). If we choose to call it deriv1 we type:
>deriv1:=diff(price,t);
and Maple responds with
deriv1:= .192t2–2.88t+9.6
To ﬁnd the stationary points, we need to equate this to zero and solve for t. This is achieved in Maple
by typing:
>solve(deriv1=0,t);
and Maple responds with:
5. , 10.
These are the values of t at the stationary points. It is clear from the graph in Figure 4.28 that t = 5 is a
local maximum and t = 10 is a local minimum. To ﬁnd the price at the maximum we substitute t = 5
into the expression for price, so we type:
>subs(t=5,price);
and Maple responds with
30.000
To ﬁnd the price at the local minimum we edit the instruction to create
>subs(t=10,price);
and Maple responds with
26.000
The local maximum and minimum have coordinates (5, 30) and (10, 26) respectively.
4.6 • Optimization of economic functions
315


Differentiation
316
Average product of labour (or labour productivity)
Output per worker: APL = Q/L.
Local (or relative) maximum
A point on a curve which has the highest function value in
comparison with other values in its neighbourhood; at such a point the ﬁrst-order derivative
is zero and the second-order derivative is either zero or negative.
Local (or relative) minimum
A point on a curve which has the lowest function value in
comparison with other values in its neighbourhood; at such a point the ﬁrst-order derivative
is zero and the second-order derivative is either zero or positive.
Optimization
The determination of the optimal (usually stationary) points of a function.
Stationary points (critical points, turning points, extrema)
Points on a graph at which
the tangent is horizontal; at a stationary point the ﬁrst-order derivative is zero.
Stationary point of inﬂection
A stationary point that is neither a maximum nor a minimum;
at such a point both the ﬁrst- and second-order derivatives are zero.
Key Terms
Figure 4.28

4.6 • Optimization of economic functions
317
Practice Problems
6 Find and classify the stationary points of the following functions. Hence give a rough sketch of their
graphs.
(a) y = −x2 + x + 1
(b) y = x2 −4x + 4
(c) y = x2 −20x + 105
(d) y = −x3 + 3x
7 Show that all of the following functions have a stationary point at x = 0. Verify in each case that 
f″(0) = 0. Classify these points by producing a rough sketch of each function.
(a) f(x) = x3
(b) f(x) = x4
(c) f(x) = −x6
8 If the demand equation of a good is
P = 40 −2Q
find the level of output that maximizes total revenue.
9 If fixed costs are 15 and the variable costs are 2Q per unit, write down expressions for TC, AC and
MC. Find the value of Q which minimizes AC and verify that AC = MC at this point.
10 A firm’s short-run production function is given by
Q = 30L2 −0.5L3
Find the value of L which maximizes APL and verify that MPL = APL at this point.
11 If the fixed costs are 13 and the variable costs are Q + 2 per unit, show that the average cost func-
tion is
AC =
+ Q + 2
(a) Calculate the values of AC when Q = 1, 2, 3, . . . , 6. Plot these points on graph paper and hence
produce an accurate graph of AC against Q.
(b) Use your graph to estimate the minimum average cost.
(c) Use differentiation to confirm your estimate obtained in part (b).
12 An electronic components firm launches a new product on 1 January. During the following year a
rough estimate of the number of orders, S, received t days after the launch is given by
S = t2 −0.002t 3
(a) What is the maximum number of orders received on any one day of the year?
(b) After how many days does the firm experience the greatest increase in orders?
13 If the demand equation of a good is
P = √(1000 −4Q)
find the value of Q which maximizes total revenue.
14 The demand and total cost functions of a good are
4P + Q −16 = 0
and
TC = 4 + 2Q −
+
respectively.
Q3
20
3Q2
10
13
Q


(a) Find expressions for TR, π, MR and MC in terms of Q.
(b) Solve the equation
= 0
and hence determine the value of Q which maximizes profit.
(c) Verify that, at the point of maximum profit,
MR = MC
15 The supply and demand equations of a good are given by
3P −QS = 3
and
2P + QD = 14
respectively.
The government decides to impose a tax, t, per unit. Find the value of t (in dollars) which maxi-
mizes the government’s total tax revenue on the assumption that equilibrium conditions prevail in the
market.
16 (Maple) Plot a graph of each of the following functions over the specified range of values and use
these graphs to estimate the coordinates of all of the stationary points. Use calculus to find the exact
coordinates of these points.
(a) y = 3x4 −28x3 + 84x2 −96x + 30
(0 ≤x ≤5)
(b) y = x4 −8x3 + 18x2 −10
(−1 ≤x ≤4)
(c) y =
(−4 ≤x ≤4)
17 (Maple)
(a) Attempt to use Maple to plot a graph of the function y = 1/x over the range −4 ≤x ≤4. What
difficulty do you encounter? Explain briefly why this has occurred for this particular function.
(b) One way of avoiding the difficulty in part (a) is to restrict the range of the y values. Produce a
plot by typing
plot(1/x,x=–4..4,y=–3..3);
(c) Use the approach suggested in part (b) to plot a graph of the curve
y =
on the interval −2 ≤x ≤6. Use calculus to find all of the stationary points.
18 (Maple) The total cost, TC, and total revenue, TR, functions of a good are given by
TC = 80Q −
Q2 +
Q3
and
TR = 50Q −Q2
Obtain Maple expressions for π, MC and MR, naming them profit, MC and MR respectively. Plot all
three functions on the same diagram using the instruction:
plot({profit,MC,MR},Q=0..14);
1
3
15
2
x −3
(x + 1)(x −2)
x
x2 + 1
dπ
dQ
Differentiation
318

Use this diagram to show that
(a) when the profit is a minimum, MR = MC and the MC curve cuts the MR curve from above
(b) when the profit is a maximum, MR = MC and the MC curve cuts the MR curve from below.
19 (Maple) A firm’s short-run production function is given by
Q = 300L0.8(240 −5L)0.5
(0 ≤L ≤48)
where L is the size of the workforce. Plot a graph of this function and hence estimate the level of
employment needed to maximize output. Confirm this by using differentiation.
4.6 • Optimization of economic functions
319

section 4.7
Further optimization of
economic functions
The previous section demonstrated how mathematics can be used to optimize particular eco-
nomic functions. Those examples suggested two important results:
(a) If a ﬁrm maximizes proﬁt then MR = MC.
(b) If a ﬁrm maximizes average product of labour then APL = MPL.
Although these results were found to hold for all of the examples considered in Section 4.6, it
does not necessarily follow that the results are always true. The aim of this section is to prove
these assertions without reference to speciﬁc functions and hence to demonstrate their generality.
Objectives
At the end of this section you should be able to:
 Show that, at the point of maximum proﬁt, marginal revenue equals marginal cost.
 Show that, at the point of maximum proﬁt, the slope of the marginal revenue
curve is less than that of marginal cost.
 Maximize proﬁts of a ﬁrm with and without price discrimination in different
markets.
 Show that, at the point of maximum average product of labour, average product
of labour equals marginal product of labour.
Advice
You may prefer to skip these proofs at a first reading and just concentrate on the worked
example (and Practice Problems 1 and 8) on price discrimination.

Justiﬁcation of result (a) turns out to be really quite easy. Proﬁt, π, is deﬁned to be the dif-
ference between total revenue, TR, and total cost, TC: that is,
π = TR −TC
To ﬁnd the stationary points of π we differentiate with respect to Q and equate to zero: that is,
=
−
= 0
where we have used the difference rule to differentiate the right-hand side. In Section 4.3 we
deﬁned
MR =
and
MC =
so the above equation is equivalent to
MR −MC = 0
and so MR = MC as required.
The stationary points of the proﬁt function can therefore be found by sketching the MR and
MC curves on the same diagram and inspecting the points of intersection. Figure 4.29 shows
typical marginal revenue and marginal cost curves. The result
MR = MC
holds for any stationary point. Consequently, if this equation has more than one solution then
we need some further information before we can decide on the proﬁt-maximizing level of 
output. In Figure 4.29 there are two points of intersection, Q1 and Q2, and it turns out (as you
discovered in Practice Problems 3 and 14 in the previous section) that one of these is a maximum
while the other is a minimum. Obviously, in any actual example, we can classify these points
by evaluating second-order derivatives. However, it would be nice to make this decision just 
by inspecting the graphs of marginal revenue and marginal cost. To see how this can be done
let us return to the equation
d(TC)
dQ
d(TR)
dQ
d(TC)
dQ
d(TR)
dQ
dπ
dQ
4.7 • Further optimization of economic functions
321
Figure 4.29

= MR −MC
and differentiate again with respect to Q to get
=
−
Now if d2π/dQ2 < 0 then the proﬁt is a maximum. This will be so when
<
that is, when the slope of the marginal revenue curve is less than the slope of the marginal cost
curve.
Looking at Figure 4.29, we deduce that this criterion is true at Q2, so this must be the desired
level of output needed to maximize proﬁt. Note also from Figure 4.29 that the statement ‘the
slope of the marginal revenue curve is less than the slope of the marginal cost curve’ is equi-
valent to saying that ‘the marginal cost curve cuts the marginal revenue curve from below’. It is
this latter form that is often quoted in economics textbooks. A similar argument shows that, at
a minimum point, the marginal cost curve cuts the marginal revenue curve from above and so
we can deduce that proﬁt is a minimum at Q1 in Figure 4.29. In practice, the task of sketching
the graphs of MR and MC and reading off the coordinates of the points of intersection is not
an attractive one, particularly if MR and MC are complicated functions. However, it might turn
out that MR and MC are both linear, in which case a graphical approach is feasible.
d(MC)
dQ
d(MR)
dQ
d(MC)
dQ
d(MR)
dQ
d2π
dQ2
dπ
dQ
Differentiation
322
Practice Problem
1 A monopolist’s demand function is
P = 25 −0.5Q
The fixed costs of production are 7 and the variable costs are Q + 1 per unit.
(a) Show that
TR = 25Q −0.5Q2
and
TC = Q2 + Q + 7
and deduce the corresponding expressions for MR and MC.
(b) Sketch the graphs of MR and MC on the same diagram and hence find the value of Q which max-
imizes profit.
Quite often a ﬁrm identiﬁes more than one market in which it wishes to sell its goods. For
example, a ﬁrm might decide to export goods to several countries and demand conditions are
likely to be different in each one. The ﬁrm may be able to take advantage of this and increase
overall proﬁt by charging different prices in each country. The theoretical result ‘marginal 
revenue equals marginal cost’ can be applied in each market separately to ﬁnd the optimal 
pricing policy.
Example
A ﬁrm is allowed to charge different prices for its domestic and industrial customers. If P1 and Q1 denote
the price and demand for the domestic market then the demand equation is
P1 + Q1 = 500

If P2 and Q2 denote the price and demand for the industrial market then the demand equation is
2P2 + 3Q2 = 720
The total cost function is
TC = 50 000 + 20Q
where Q = Q1 + Q2. Determine the prices (in dollars) that the ﬁrm should charge to maximize proﬁts
(a) with price discrimination
(b) without price discrimination.
Compare the proﬁts obtained in parts (a) and (b).
Solution
(a) The important thing to notice is that the total cost function is independent of the market and so
marginal costs are the same in each case. In fact, since
TC = 50 000 + 20Q
we have MC = 20. All we have to do to maximize proﬁts is to ﬁnd an expression for the marginal 
revenue for each market and to equate this to the constant value of marginal cost.
Domestic market
The demand equation
P1 + Q1 = 500
rearranges to give
P1 = 500 −Q1
so the total revenue function for this market is
TR1 = (500 −Q1)Q1 = 500Q1 −Q2
1
Hence
MR1 =
= 500 −2Q1
For maximum proﬁt
MR1 = MC
so
500 −2Q1 = 20
which has solution Q1 = 240. The corresponding price is found by substituting this value into the
demand equation to get
P1 = 500 −240 = $260
To maximize proﬁt the ﬁrm should charge its domestic customers $260 per good.
Industrial market
The demand equation
2P2 + 3Q2 = 720
rearranges to give
P2 = 360 −3/2Q2
d(TR1)
dQ1
4.7 • Further optimization of economic functions
323


so the total revenue function for this market is
TR2 = (360 −3/2Q2)Q2 = 360Q2 −3/2Q2
2
Hence
MR2 =
= 360 −3Q2
For maximum proﬁt
MR2 = MC
so
360 −3Q2 = 20
which has solution Q2 = 340/3. The corresponding price is obtained by substituting this value into the
demand equation to get
P2 = 360 −
= $190
To maximize proﬁts the ﬁrm should charge its industrial customers $190 per good, which is lower than
the price charged to its domestic customers.
(b) If there is no price discrimination then P1 = P2 = P, say, and the demand functions for the domestic and
industrial markets become
P + Q1 = 500
and
2P + 3Q2 = 720
respectively. We can use these to deduce a single demand equation for the combined market. We need
to relate the price, P, of each good to the total demand, Q = Q1 + Q2.
This can be done by rearranging the given demand equations for Q1 and Q2 and then adding. For the
domestic market
Q1 = 500 −P
and for the industrial market
Q2 = 240 −2/3P
Hence
Q = Q1 + Q2 = 740 −5/3P
The demand equation for the combined market is therefore
Q + 5/3P = 740
The usual procedure for proﬁt maximization can now be applied. This demand equation rearranges 
to give
P = 444 −3/5Q
enabling the total revenue function to be written down as
TR =
444 −
Q Q = 444Q −3Q2
5
D
F
3
5
A
C
D
F
340
3
A
C
3
2
d(TR2)
dQ2
Differentiation
324

Hence
MR =
= 444 −
Q
For maximum proﬁt
MR = MC
so
444 −6/5Q = 20
which has solution Q = 1060/3. The corresponding price is found by substituting this value into the
demand equation to get
P = 444 −
= $232
To maximize proﬁt without discrimination the ﬁrm needs to charge a uniform price of $232 for each
good. Notice that this price lies between the prices charged to its domestic and industrial customers
with discrimination.
To evaluate the proﬁt under each policy we need to work out the total revenue and subtract the total cost.
In part (a) the ﬁrm sells 240 goods at $260 each in the domestic market and sells 340/3 goods at $190 each
in the industrial market, so the total revenue received is
240 × 260 +
× 190 = $83 933.33
The total number of goods produced is
240 +
=
so the total cost is
50 000 + 20 ×
= $57 066.67
Therefore the proﬁt with price discrimination is
83 933.33 −57 066.67 = $26 866.67
In part (b) the ﬁrm sells 1060/3 goods at $232 each, so total revenue is
× 232 = $81 973.33
Now the total number of goods produced under both pricing policies is the same: that is, 1060/3.
Consequently, the total cost of production in part (b) must be the same as part (a): that is,
TC = $57 066.67
The proﬁt without price discrimination is
81 973.33 −57 066.67 = $24 906.66
As expected, the proﬁts are higher with discrimination than without.
1060
3
1060
3
1060
3
340
3
340
3
D
F
1060
3
A
C
3
5
6
5
d(TR)
dQ
4.7 • Further optimization of economic functions
325

In the previous example and in Practice Problem 2 we assumed that the marginal costs were
the same in each market. The level of output that maximizes proﬁt with price discrimination
was found by equating marginal revenue to this common value of marginal cost. It follows that
the marginal revenue must be the same in each market. In symbols
MR1 = MC
and
MR2 = MC
so
MR1 = MR2
This fact is obvious on economic grounds. If it were not true then the ﬁrm’s policy would be
to increase sales in the market where marginal revenue is higher and to decrease sales by the
same amount in the market where the marginal revenue is lower. The effect would be to
increase revenue while keeping costs ﬁxed, thereby raising proﬁt. This property leads to an
interesting result connecting price, P, with elasticity of demand, E. In Section 4.5 we derived
the formula
MR = P 1 −
If we let the price elasticity of demand in two markets be denoted by E1 and E2 corresponding
to prices P1 and P2 then the equation
MR1 = MR2
becomes
P1 1 −
= P2 1 −
This equation holds whenever a ﬁrm chooses its prices P1 and P2 to maximize proﬁts in each
market. Note that if E1 < E2 then this equation can only be true if P1 > P2. In other words, the
ﬁrm charges the higher price in the market with the lower elasticity of demand.
D
F
1
E2
A
C
D
F
1
E1
A
C
D
F
1
E
A
C
Differentiation
326
Practice Problem
2 A firm has the possibility of charging different prices in its domestic and foreign markets. The corres-
ponding demand equations are given by
Q1 = 300 −P1
Q2 = 400 −2P2
The total cost function is
TC = 5000 + 100Q
where Q = Q1 + Q2.
Determine the prices (in dollars) that the firm should charge to maximize profits
(a) with price discrimination
(b) without price discrimination
Compare the profits obtained in parts (a) and (b).

The previous discussion concentrated on proﬁt. We now turn our attention to average product
of labour and prove result (2) stated at the beginning of this section. This concept is deﬁned by
APL =
where Q is output and L is labour. The maximization of APL is a little more complicated than
before, since it is necessary to use the quotient rule to differentiate this function. In the nota-
tion of Section 4.4 we write
u = Q
and
v = L
so
=
= MPL
and
=
= 1
where we have used the fact that the derivative of output with respect to labour is the marginal
product of labour.
The quotient rule gives
=
=
=
=
At a stationary point
= 0
so
= 0
Hence
MPL = APL
as required.
This analysis shows that, at a stationary point of the average product of labour function, the
marginal product of labour equals the average product of labour. The above argument provides
MPL −APL
L
d(APL)
dL
MPL −APL
L
MPL −Q/L
L
L(MPL) −Q(1)
L2
v du/dL −u dv/dL
v 2
d(APL)
dL
dL
dL
dv
dL
dQ
dL
du
dL
Q
L
4.7 • Further optimization of economic functions
327
Practice Problem
3 Calculate the price elasticity of demand at the point of maximum profit for each of the demand func-
tions given in Practice Problem 2 with price discrimination. Verify that the firm charges the higher price
in the market with the lower elasticity of demand.

a formal proof that this result is true for any average product of labour function. Figure 4.30
shows typical average and marginal product functions. Note that the two curves intersect at the
peak of the APL curve. To the left of this point the APL function is increasing, so that
> 0
Now we have just seen that
=
so we deduce that, to the left of the maximum, MPL > APL. In other words, in this region the
graph of marginal product of labour lies above that of average product of labour. Similarly, to
the right of the maximum, APL is decreasing, so that
< 0
and hence MPL < APL. The graph of marginal product of labour therefore lies below that of
average product of labour in this region.
We deduce that if the stationary point is a maximum then the MPL curve cuts the APL curve
from above. A similar argument can be used for any average function. The particular case of
the average cost function is investigated in Practice Problem 9.
d(APL)
dL
MPL −APL
L
d(APL)
dL
d(APL)
dL
Differentiation
328
Figure 4.30
Practice Problems
4 Show that if the marginal cost curve cuts the marginal revenue curve from above then profit is a 
minimum.
5 A firm’s demand function is
P = aQ + b
(a < 0, b > 0)
Fixed costs are c and variable costs per unit are d.
(a) Write down general expressions for TR and TC.
(b) By differentiating the expressions in part (a), deduce MR and MC.

(c) Use your answers to (b) to show that profit, π, is maximized when
Q =
6 (a) In Section 4.5 the following relationship between marginal revenue, MR, and price elasticity of
demand, E, was derived:
MR = P 1 −
Use this result to show that at the point of maximum total revenue, E = 1.
(b) Verify the result of part (a) for the demand function
2P + 3Q = 60
7 The economic order quantity, EOQ, is used in cost accounting to minimize the total cost, TC, to order
and carry a firm’s stock over the period of a year.
The annual cost of placing orders, ACO, is given by
ACO =
where
ARU = annual required units
CO = cost per order
The annual carrying cost, ACC, is given by
ACC = (CU)(CC)
where
CU = cost per unit
CC = carrying cost
and (EOQ)/2 provides an estimate of the average number of units in stock at any given time of the
year. Assuming that ARU, CO, CU and CC are all constant, show that the total cost
TC = ACO + ACC
is minimized when
EOQ =
8 The demand functions for a firm’s domestic and foreign markets are
P1 = 50 −5Q1
P2 = 30 −4Q2
and the total cost function is
TC = 10 + 10Q
where Q = Q1 + Q2. Determine the prices needed to maximize profit
(a) with price discrimination
(b) without price discrimination
Compare the profits obtained in parts (a) and (b).
2(ARU)(CO)
(CU)(CC)
(EOQ)
2
(ARU)(CO)
EOQ
D
F
1
E
A
C
d −b
2a
4.7 • Further optimization of economic functions
329


9 (a) Show that, at a stationary point of an average cost function, average cost equals marginal cost.
(b) Show that if the marginal cost curve cuts the average cost curve from below then average cost is
a minimum.
10 In a competitive market the equilibrium price, P, and quantity, Q, are found by setting QS = QD = Q
in the supply and demand equations
P = aQS + b
(a > 0, b > 0)
P = −cQD + d
(c > 0, d > 0)
If the government levies an excise tax, t, per unit, show that
Q =
Deduce that the government’s tax revenue, T = tQ, is maximized by taking
t = d −b
2
d −b −t
a + c
Differentiation
330

section 4.8
The derivative of the
exponential and natural
logarithm functions
In this section we investigate the derived functions associated with the exponential and 
natural logarithm functions, ex and ln x. The approach that we adopt is similar to that used 
in Section 4.1. The derivative of a function determines the slope of the graph of a function.
Consequently, to discover how to differentiate an unfamiliar function we ﬁrst produce an 
accurate sketch and then measure the slopes of the tangents at selected points.
Objectives
At the end of this section you should be able to:
 Differentiate the exponential function.
 Differentiate the natural logarithm function.
 Use the chain, product and quotient rules to differentiate combinations of these
functions.
 Appreciate the use of the exponential function in economic modelling.
Advice
The functions, ex and ln x were first introduced in Section 2.4. You might find it useful to
remind yourself how these functions are defined before working through the rest of the
current section.

Differentiation
332
Example
Complete the following table of function values and hence sketch a graph of f(x) = ex.
x
−2.0
−1.5
−1.0
−0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
f(x)
Draw tangents to the graph at x = −1, 0 and 1. Hence estimate the values of f ′(−1), f ′(0) and f ′(1). Suggest
a general formula for the derived function f ′(x).
Solution
Using a calculator we obtain
x
−2.0
−1.5
−1.0
−0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
f(x)
0.14
0.22
0.37
0.61
1.00
1.65
2.72
4.48
The corresponding graph of the exponential function is sketched in Figure 4.31. From the graph we see 
that the slopes of the tangents are
Figure 4.31

f ′(−1) =
= 0.4
f ′(0) =
= 1.0
f ′(1) =
= 2.7
These results are obtained by measurement and so are quoted to only 1 decimal place. We cannot really
expect to achieve any greater accuracy using this approach.
The values of x, f(x) and f ′(x) are summarized in the following table. The values of f(x) are rounded to
1 decimal place in order to compare with the graphical estimates of f ′(x).
x
−1
0
1
f(x)
0.4
1.0
2.7
f ′(x)
0.4
1.0
2.7
Notice that the values of f(x) and f ′(x) are identical to within the accuracy quoted.
These results suggest that the slope of the graph at each point is the same as the function value at that
point: that is, ex differentiates to itself. Symbolically,
if
f(x) = ex
then
f ′(x) = ex
or, equivalently,
if
y = ex
then
= ex
dy
dx
1.35
0.50
0.50
0.50
0.20
0.50
4.8 • The derivative of the exponential and natural logarithm functions
333
Practice Problem
1 Use your calculator to complete the following table of function values and hence sketch an accurate
graph of f(x) = ln x.
x
0.50
1.00
1.50
2.00
2.50
3.00
3.50
4.00
f(x)
0.41
1.25
Draw the tangents to the graph at x = 1, 2 and 3. Hence estimate the values of f′(1), f′(2) and f′(3).
Suggest a general formula for the derived function f′(x).
[Hint: for the last part you may find it helpful to rewrite your estimates of f′(x) as simple fractions.]
In fact, it is possible to prove that, for any value of the constant m,
if
y = emx
then
= memx
and
if
y = ln mx
then
=
In particular, we see by setting m = 1 that
ex
differentiates to
ex
1
x
dy
dx
dy
dx

and that
ln x
differentiates to
which agree with our practical investigations.
1
x
Differentiation
334
Example
Differentiate
(a) y = e2x
(b) y = e−7x
(c) y = ln 5x
(x > 0)
(d) y = ln 559x
(x > 0)
Solution
(a) Setting m = 2 in the general formula shows that 
if
y = e2x
then
= 2e2x
Notice that when exponential functions are differentiated the power itself does not change. All that
happens is that the coefﬁcient of x comes down to the front.
(b) Setting m = −7 in the general formula shows that 
if
y = e−7x
then
= −7e−7x
(c) Setting m = 5 in the general formula shows that 
if
y = ln 5x
then
=
Notice the restriction x > 0 stated in the question. This is needed to ensure that we do not attempt to
take the logarithm of a negative number, which is impossible.
(d) Setting m = 559 in the general formula shows that 
if
y = ln 559x
then
=
Notice that we get the same answer as part (c). The derivative of the natural logarithm function does not
depend on the coefﬁcient of x. This fact may seem rather strange but it is easily accounted for. The third rule
of logarithms shows that ln 559x is the same as
ln 559 + ln x
The ﬁrst term is merely a constant, so differentiates to zero, and the second term differentiates to 1/x.
1
x
dy
dx
1
x
dy
dx
dy
dx
dy
dx
Practice Problem
2 Differentiate
(a) y = e3x
(b) y = e−x
(c) y = ln 3x (x > 0)
(d) y = ln 51 234x (x > 0)

The chain rule can be used to explain what happens to the m when differentiating emx. The
outer function is the exponential, which differentiates to itself, and the inner function is mx,
which differentiates to m. Hence, by the chain rule,
if
y = emx
then
= emx × m = memx
Similarly, noting that the natural logarithm function differentiates to the reciprocal function,
if
y = ln mx
then
=
× m =
The chain, product and quotient rules can be used to differentiate more complicated func-
tions involving ex and ln x.
1
x
1
mx
dy
dx
dy
dx
4.8 • The derivative of the exponential and natural logarithm functions
335
Example
Differentiate
(a) y = x3e2x
(b) y = ln(x2 + 2x + 1)
(c) y =
Solution
(a) The function x3e2x involves the product of two simpler functions, x3 and e2x, so we need to use the pro-
duct rule to differentiate it. Putting
u = x3
and
v = e2x
gives
= 3x2
and
= 2e2x
By the product rule
= u
+ v
= x3[2e2x] + e2x[3x2]
= 2x3e2x + 3x2e2x
There is a common factor of x2e2x, which goes into the ﬁrst term 2x times and into the second term 
3 times. Hence
= x2e2x(2x + 3)
(b) The expression ln(x2 + 2x + 1) can be regarded as a function of a function, so we can use the chain rule
to differentiate it. We ﬁrst differentiate the outer log function to get
and then multiply by the derivative of the inner function, x2 + 2x + 1, which is 2x + 2. Hence
=
2x + 2
x2 + 2x + 1
dy
dx
1
x2 + 2x + 1
dy
dx
du
dx
dv
dx
dy
dx
dv
dx
du
dx
e3x
x2 + 2


(c) The function
is the quotient of the simpler functions
u = e3x
and
v = x2 + 2
for which
= 3e3x
and
= 2x
By the quotient rule
=
=
=
= e3x(3x2 −2x + 6)
(x2 + 2)2
e3x[3(x2 + 2) −2x]
(x2 + 2)2
(x2 + 2)(3e3x) −e3x(2x)
(x2 + 2)2
vdu −udv
dx
dx
v2
dy
dx
dv
dx
du
dx
e3x
x2 + 2
Differentiation
336
Practice Problem
3 Differentiate
(a) y = x4 ln x
(b) y = ex2
(c) y = ln x
x + 2
Advice
If you ever need to differentiate a function of the form:
ln(an inner function involving products, quotients or powers of x)
then it is usually quicker to use the rules of logs to expand the expression before you
begin. The three rules are
Rule 1
ln(x × y) = ln x + ln y
Rule 2
ln(x ÷ y) = ln x −ln y
Rule 3
ln xm = m ln x
The following example shows how to apply this ‘trick’ in practice.

Exponential and natural logarithm functions provide good mathematical models in many
areas of economics and we conclude this chapter with some illustrative examples.
4.8 • The derivative of the exponential and natural logarithm functions
337
Example
Differentiate
(a) y = ln(x(x + l)4)
(b) y = ln
Solution
(a) From rule 1
ln(x(x + 1)4) = ln x + ln(x + 1)4
which can be simpliﬁed further using rule 3 to give
y = ln x + 4 ln(x + 1)
Differentiation of this new expression is trivial. We see immediately that
=
+
If desired the ﬁnal answer can be put over a common denominator
+
=
=
(b) The quickest way to differentiate
y = ln
is to expand ﬁrst to get
y = ln x −ln(x + 5)1/ 2 (rule 2)
= ln x −1/2ln(x + 5)
(rule 3)
Again this expression is easy to differentiate:
=
−
If desired, this can be written as a single fraction:
−
=
=
x + 10
2x(x + 5)
2(x + 5) −x
2x(x + 5)
1
2(x + 5)
1
x
1
2(x + 5)
1
x
dy
dx
D
F
x
(x + 5)
A
C
5x + 1
x(x + 1)
(x + 1) + 4x
x(x + 1)
4
x + 1
1
x
4
x + 1
1
x
dy
dx
D
F
x
(x + 5)
A
C
Practice Problem
4 Differentiate the following functions by first expanding each expression using the rules of logs:
(a) y = ln(x3(x + 2)4)
(b) y = ln
D
F
x 2
2x + 3
A
C

Differentiation
338
Example
A ﬁrm’s short-run production function is given by
Q = L2e−0.01L
Find the value of L which maximizes the average product of labour.
Solution
The average product of labour is given by
APL =
=
= Le−0.01L
To maximize this function we adopt the strategy described in Section 4.6.
Step 1
At a stationary point
= 0
To differentiate Le−0.01L, we use the product rule. If
u = L
and
v = e−0.01L
then
= 1
and
= −0.01e−0.01L
By the product rule
= u
+ v
= L(−0.01e−0.01L) + e−0.01L
= (1 −0.01L)e−0.01L
We know that a negative exponential is never equal to zero. (Although e−0.01L gets ever closer to zero as L
increases, it never actually reaches it for ﬁnite values of L.) Hence the only way that
(1 −0.01L)e−0.01L
can equal zero is when
1 −0.01L = 0
which has solution L = 100.
Step 2
To show that this is a maximum we need to differentiate a second time. To do this we apply the product
rule to
(1 −0.01L)e−0.01L
taking
u = 1 −0.01L
and
v = e−0.01L
du
dL
dv
dL
d(APL)
dL
dv
dL
du
dL
d(APL)
dL
L2e−0.01L
L
Q
L

for which
= −0.01
and
= −0.01e−0.01L
Hence
= u
+ v
= (1 −0.01L)(−0.01e−0.01L) + e−0.01L(−0.01) = (−0.02 + 0.0001L)e−0.01L
Finally, putting L = 100 into this gives
= −0.0037
The fact that this is negative shows that the stationary point, L = 100, is indeed a maximum.
d2(APL)
dL2
du
dL
dv
dL
d2(APL)
dL2
dv
dL
du
dL
4.8 • The derivative of the exponential and natural logarithm functions
339
Practice Problem
5 The demand function of a good is given by
Q = 1000e−0.2P
If fixed costs are 100 and the variable costs are 2 per unit, show that the profit function is given by
π = 1000Pe−0.2P −2000e−0.2P −100
Find the price needed to maximize profit.
Example
A ﬁrm estimates that the total revenue received from the sale of Q goods is given by
TR = ln(1 + 1000Q2)
Calculate the marginal revenue when Q = 10.
Solution
The marginal revenue function is obtained by differentiating the total revenue function. To differentiate
ln(1 + 1000Q2) we use the chain rule. We ﬁrst differentiate the outer log function to get
and then multiply by the derivative of the inner function, 1 + 1000Q2, to get 2000Q. Hence
MR =
=
At Q = 10,
MR =
= 0.2
2000(10)
1 + 1000(10)2
2000Q
1 + 1000Q2
d(TR)
dQ
1
1 + 1000Q2

Differentiation
340
Practice Problem
6 If the demand equation is
P = 200 −40 ln(Q + 1)
calculate the price elasticity of demand when Q = 20.
Practice Problems
7 Write down the derivative of
(a) y = e6x
(b) y = e−342x
(c) y = 2e−x + 4ex
(d) y = 10e4x −2x2 + 7
8 Write down the derivative of
(a) y = ln(3x)
(x > 0)
(b) y = ln(−13x)
(x < 0)
9 Use the chain rule to differentiate
(a) y = ex3
(b) y = ln(x4 + 3x2)
10 Use the product rule to differentiate
(a) y = x4e2x
(b) y = x ln x
11 Use the quotient rule to differentiate
(a) y =
(b) y =
12 Use the rules of logarithms to expand each of the following functions. Hence write their derivatives.
(a) y = ln
(b) y = ln(x√(3x −1))
(c) y = ln
13 Find and classify the stationary points of
(a) y = xe−x
(b) y = ln x −x
Hence sketch their graphs.
14 Find the output needed to maximize profit given that the total cost and total revenue functions are
TC = 2Q
and
TR = 100 ln(Q + 1)
respectively.
15 If a firm’s production function is given by
Q = 700Le−0.02L
find the value of L which maximizes output.
16 The demand function of a good is given by
P = 100e−0.1Q
Show that demand is unit elastic when Q = 10.
17 The growth rate of an economic variable, y, is defined to be 
÷ y.
Use this definition to find the growth rate of the variable, y = Aekt.
dy
dt
x + 1
x −1
D
F
x
x −1
A
C
ex
ln x
e4x
x2 + 2

chapter 5
Partial Differentiation
This chapter continues the topic of calculus by describing how to differentiate func-
tions of more than one variable. In many ways this chapter can be regarded as the
climax of the whole book. It is the summit of the mathematical mountain that we
have been merrily climbing. Not only are the associated mathematical ideas and
techniques quite sophisticated, but also partial differentiation provides a rich source
of applications. In one sense there is no new material presented here. If you know
how to differentiate a function of one variable then you also know how to partially
differentiate a function of several variables because the rules are the same. Similarly,
if you can optimize a function of one variable then you need have no fear of uncon-
strained and constrained optimization. Of course, if you cannot use the elementary
rules of differentiation or cannot find the maximum and minimum values of a 
function as described in Chapter 4 then you really are fighting a lost cause. Under
these circumstances you are best advised to omit this chapter entirely. There is 
no harm in doing this, because it does not form the prerequisite for any of the later
topics. However, you will miss out on one of the most elegant and useful branches
of mathematics.
There are six sections to this chapter. It is important that Sections 5.1 and 5.2 are
read first, but the remaining sections can be studied in any order. Sections 5.1 and
5.2 follow the familiar pattern. We begin by looking at the mathematical techniques
and then use them to determine marginal functions and elasticities. Section 5.3
describes the multiplier concept and completes the topic of statics which you stud-
ied in Chapter 1.
The final three sections are devoted to optimization. For functions of several vari-
ables, optimization problems are split into two groups, unconstrained and constrained.

Unconstrained problems, tackled in Section 5.4, involve the maximization and min-
imization of functions in which the variables are free to take any values whatsoever.
In a constrained problem only certain combinations of the variables are examined.
For example, a firm might wish to minimize costs but is constrained by the need to
satisfy production quotas, or an individual might want to maximize utility but is sub-
ject to a budgetary constraint, and so on. There are two ways of solving constrained
problems: the method of substitution and the method of Lagrange multipliers,
described in Sections 5.5 and 5.6 respectively.

section 5.1
Functions of several
variables
Most relationships in economics involve more than two variables. The demand for a good
depends not only on its own price but also on the price of substitutable and complementary
goods, incomes of consumers, advertising expenditure and so on. Likewise, the output from 
a production process depends on a variety of inputs, including land, capital and labour. To
analyse general economic behaviour we must extend the concept of a function, and particularly
the differential calculus, to functions of several variables.
A function, f, of two variables is a rule that assigns to each incoming pair of numbers, 
(x, y), a uniquely deﬁned outgoing number, z. This is illustrated in Figure 5.1. The ‘black box’
Objectives
At the end of this section you should be able to:
 Use the function notation, z = f(x, y).
 Determine the ﬁrst-order partial derivatives, fx and fy.
 Determine the second-order partial derivatives, fxx, fxy, fyx and fyy.
 Appreciate that, for most functions, fxy = fyx.
 Use the small increments formula.
 Perform implicit differentiation.
Figure 5.1

f performs some arithmetic operation on x and y to produce z. For example, the rule might be
‘multiply the two numbers together and add twice the second number’. In symbols we write
this either as
f(x, y) = xy + 2y
or as
z = xy + 2y
In order to be able to evaluate the function we have to specify the numerical values of both x
and y.
Partial Differentiation
344
Example
If f(x, y) = xy + 2y evaluate
(a) f(3, 4)
(b) f(4, 3)
Solution
(a) Substituting x = 3 and y = 4 gives
f(3, 4) = 3(4) + 2(4) = 20
(b) Substituting x = 4 and y = 3 gives
f(4, 3) = 4(3) + 2(3) = 18
Note that, for this function, f(3, 4) is not the same as f(4, 3), so in general we must be careful to write down
the correct ordering of the variables.
Practice Problem
1 If
f(x, y) = 5x + xy2 −10
and
g(x1, x2, x3) = x1 + x2 + x3
evaluate
(a) f(0, 0)
(b) f(1, 2)
(c) f(2, 1)
(d) g(5, 6, 10)
(e) g(0, 0, 0)
(f) g(10, 5, 6)
We have used the labels x and y for the two incoming numbers (called the independent
variables) and z for the outgoing number (called the dependent variable). We could equally 
well have written the above function as
y = x1x2 + 2x2
say, using x1 and x2 to denote the independent variables and using y this time to denote the
dependent variable. The use of subscripts may seem rather cumbersome, but it does provide an
obvious extension to functions of more than two variables. In general, a function of n variables
can be written
y = f(x1, x2, . . . , xn)

A function of one variable can be given a pictorial description using graphs, which help to
give an intuitive feel for its behaviour. Figure 5.2 shows the graph of a typical function
y = f(x)
in which the horizontal axis determines the incoming number, x, and the vertical axis deter-
mines the corresponding outgoing number, y. The height of the curve directly above any point
on the x axis represents the value of the function at this point.
An obvious question to ask is whether there is a pictorial representation of functions of 
several variables. The answer is yes in the case of functions of two variables, although it is not
particularly easy to construct. A function
z = f(x, y)
can be thought of as a surface, rather like a mountain range, in three-dimensional space as
shown in Figure 5.3. If you visualize the incoming point with coordinates (x, y) as lying in a
horizontal plane then the height of the surface, z, directly above it represents the value of the
function at this point. As you can probably imagine, it is not an easy task to sketch the surface
by hand from an equation such as
f(x, y) = xy3 + 4x
5.1 • Functions of several variables
345
Figure 5.2
Figure 5.3

although three-dimensional graphics packages are available for most computers which can
produce such a plot.
Partial Differentiation
346
Advice
There is an example which describes how to use Maple to produce a three-dimensional
plot at the end of the next section. If you are interested, you might like to read the 
example now and see if you can produce graphs of some of the functions considered here.
It is impossible to provide any sort of graphical interpretation for functions of more than
two variables. For example, a function of, say, four variables would require ﬁve dimensions,
one for each of the incoming variables and a further one for the outgoing variable! In spite of
this setback we can still perform the task of differentiating functions of several variables and, 
as we shall see in the remaining sections of this chapter, such derivatives play a vital role in
analysing economic behaviour.
Given a function of two variables,
z = f(x, y)
we can determine two ﬁrst-order derivatives. The partial derivative of f with respect to x is 
written as
or
or
fx
and is found by differentiating f with respect to x, with y held constant. Similarly, the partial
derivative of f with respect to y is written as
or
or
fy
and is found by differentiating f with respect to y, with x held constant. We use curly dees in
the notation
to distinguish partial differentiation of functions of several variables from ordinary differenti-
ation of functions of one variable. The alternative notation, fx, is analogous to the f ′ notation
for ordinary differentiation.
∂f
∂x
∂f
∂y
∂z
∂y
∂f
∂x
∂z
∂x
Example
Find the ﬁrst-order partial derivatives of the functions
(a) f(x, y) = x2 + y3
(b) f(x, y) = x2y
Solution
(a) To differentiate the function
f(x, y) = x2 + y3

with respect to x we work as follows. By the sum rule we know that we can differentiate each part sep-
arately and add. Now, when we differentiate x2 with respect to x we get 2x. However, when we differ-
entiate y3 with respect to x we get 0. To see this, note from the deﬁnition of partial differentiation with
respect to x that the variable y is held constant. Of course, if y is a constant then so is y3 and, as we dis-
covered in Chapter 4, constants differentiate to zero. Hence
= 2x + 0 = 2x
In the same way
= 0 + 3y2 = 3y2
This time x is held constant, so x2 goes to zero, and when we differentiate y3 with respect to y we get 3y2.
(b) To differentiate the function
f(x, y) = x2y
with respect to x, we differentiate in the normal way, taking x as the variable while pretending that y is
a constant. Now, when we differentiate a constant multiple of x2 we differentiate x2 to get 2x and then
multiply by the constant. For example,
7x2
differentiates to
7(2x) = 14x
−100x2
differentiates to
−100(2x) = −200x
and
cx2
differentiates to
c(2x) = 2cx
for any constant c. In our case, y, plays the role of a constant, so
x2y
differentiates to
(2x)y = 2xy
Hence
fx = 2xy
Similarly, to ﬁnd fy we treat y as the variable and x as a constant in the expression
f(x, y) = x2y
Now, when we differentiate a constant multiple of y we just get the constant, so cy differentiates to c. In
our case, x 2 plays the role of c, so x2y differentiates to x 2. Hence
fy = x2
∂f
∂y
∂f
∂x
5.1 • Functions of several variables
347
Practice Problem
2 Find expressions for the first-order partial derivatives for the functions
(a) f(x, y) = 5x4 −y2
(b) f(x, y) = x2y3 −10x
In general, when we differentiate a function of two variables, the thing we end up with is
itself a function of two variables. This suggests the possibility of differentiating a second time.
In fact there are four second-order partial derivatives. We write

or
or
fxx
for the function obtained by differentiating twice with respect to x,
or
or
fyy
for the function obtained by differentiating twice with respect to y,
or
or
fyx
for the function obtained by differentiating ﬁrst with respect to x and then with respect to y, and
or
or
fxy
for the function obtained by differentiating ﬁrst with respect to y and then with respect to x.
∂2f
∂x∂y
∂2z
∂x∂y
∂2f
∂y∂x
∂2z
∂y∂x
∂2f
∂y2
∂2z
∂y2
∂2f
∂x2
∂2z
∂x2
Partial Differentiation
348
Example
Find expressions for the second-order partial derivatives fxx, fyy, fyx and fxy for the functions
(a) f(x, y) = x2 + y3
(b) f(x, y) = x2y
Solution
(a) The ﬁrst-order partial derivatives of the function
f(x, y) = x2 + y3
have already been found and are given by
fx = 2x, fy = 3y2
To ﬁnd fxx we differentiate fx with respect to x to get
fxx = 2
To ﬁnd fyy we differentiate fy with respect to y to get
fyy = 6y
To ﬁnd fyx we differentiate fx with respect to y to get
fyx = 0
Note how fyx is obtained. Starting with the original function
f(x, y) = x2 + y3
we ﬁrst differentiate with respect to x to get 2x and when we differentiate this with respect to y we keep
x constant, so it goes to zero. Finally, to ﬁnd fxy we differentiate fy with respect to x to get
fxy = 0
Note how fxy is obtained. Starting with the original function
f(x, y) = x2 + y3
we ﬁrst differentiate with respect to y to get 3y2 and when we differentiate this with respect to x we keep
y constant, so it goes to zero.

(b) The ﬁrst-order partial derivatives of the function
f(x, y) = x2y
have already been found and are given by
fx = 2xy,
fy = x2
Hence
fxx = 2y,
fyy = 0,
fyx = 2x,
fxy = 2x
5.1 • Functions of several variables
349
Practice Problem
3 Find expressions for the second-order partial derivatives of the functions
(a) f(x, y) = 5x4 −y2
(b) f(x, y) = x2y3 −10x
[Hint: you might find your answer to Practice Problem 2 useful.]
Looking back at the expressions obtained in the previous example and Practice Problem 3,
notice that in all cases
=
It can be shown that this result holds for all functions that arise in economics. It is immaterial
in which order the partial differentiation is performed. Differentiating with respect to x then 
y gives the same expression as differentiating with respect to y then x. (In fact, there are 
some weird mathematical functions for which this result is not true, although they need not
concern us.)
Although we have concentrated exclusively on functions of two variables, it should be 
obvious how to work out partial derivatives of functions of more than two variables. For the
general function
y = f(x1, x2, . . . , xn)
there are n ﬁrst-order partial derivatives, written as
or
fi
(i = 1, 2, . . . , n)
which are found by differentiating with respect to one variable at a time, keeping the remain-
ing n −1 variables ﬁxed. The second-order partial derivatives are determined in an analogous
way.
∂f
∂xi
∂2f
∂x∂y
∂2f
∂y∂x
Example
Find the derivative, f31, for the function
f(x1, x2, x3) = x1
3 + x1x2
3 + 5x2
4


Solution
We need to ﬁnd
f31 =
which denotes the function obtained by differentiating ﬁrst with respect to x1 and then with respect to x3.
Differentiating with respect to x1 gives
f1 =
= 3x1
2 + x2
3
and if we further differentiate this with respect to x3 we get
f31 =
= 2x3
In fact, as we have just noted for functions of two variables, we get the same answer if we differentiate in
reverse order. You might like to check this for yourself.
∂2f
∂x3∂x1
∂f
∂x1
∂2f
∂x3∂x1
Partial Differentiation
350
Practice Problem
4 Find expressions for the partial derivatives f1, f11 and f21 in the case when
f(x1, x2, x3) = x1x2 + x1
5 −x2
2x3
We have seen how to work out partial derivatives but have yet to give any meaning to them.
To provide an interpretation of a partial derivative, let us take one step back for a moment and
recall the corresponding situation for functions of one variable of the form
y = f(x)
The derivative, dy/dx, gives the rate of change of y with respect to x. In other words, if x changes
by a small amount ∆x then the corresponding change in y satisﬁes
∆y 
∆x
Moreover, the accuracy of the approximation improves as ∆x becomes smaller and smaller.
dy
dx
Advice
You might like to remind yourself of the reasoning behind this approximation, which was
explained graphically in Section 4.3.1.
Given the way in which a partial derivative is found, we can deduce that for a function of
two variables
z = f(x, y)
if x changes by a small amount ∆x and y is held ﬁxed then the corresponding change in z
satisﬁes
∆z 
∆x
∂z
∂x

Similarly, if y changes by ∆y and x is ﬁxed then z changes by
∆z 
∆y
In practice, of course, x and y may both change simultaneously. If this is the case then the net
change in z will be the sum of the individual changes brought about by changes in x and y
separately, so that
∆z 
∆x +
∆y
This is referred to as the small increments formula. Although this is only an approximation, 
it can be shown that for most functions the corresponding error tends to zero as ∆x and ∆y
both tend to zero. For this reason the formula is sometimes quoted with an equality sign and
written as
dz =
dx + −
dy
where the symbols dx, dy and dz are called differentials and represent limiting values of ∆x, 
∆y and ∆z, respectively.
∂z
∂y
∂z
∂x
∂z
∂y
∂z
∂x
∂z
∂y
5.1 • Functions of several variables
351
Example
If
z = x3y −y3x
evaluate
and
at the point (1, 3). Hence estimate the change in z when x increases from 1 to 1.1 and y decreases from 3 
to 2.8 simultaneously.
Solution
If
z = x3y −y3x
then
∂z/∂x = 3x2y −y3
and
∂z/∂y = x3 −3y2x
so at the point (1, 3)
= 3(1)2(3) −33 = −18
= 13 −3(3)2(1) = −26
Now, since x increases from 1 to 1.1, the change in x is
∆x = 0.1
∂z
∂y
∂z
∂x
∂z
∂y
∂z
∂x


and, since y decreases from 3 to 2.8, the change in y is
∆y = −0.2
The small increments formula states that
∆z 
∆x +
∆y
The change in z is therefore
∆z  (−18)(0.1) + (−26)(−0.2) = 3.4
so z increases by approximately 3.4.
∂z
∂y
∂z
∂x
Partial Differentiation
352
Practice Problem
5 If
z = xy −5x + 2y
evaluate
and
at the point (2, 6).
(a) Use the small increments formula to estimate the change in z as x decreases from 2 to 1.9 and y
increases from 6 to 6.1.
(b) Confirm your estimate of part (a) by evaluating z at (2, 6) and (1.9, 6.1).
∂z
∂y
∂z
∂x
One important application of the small increments formula is to implicit differentiation. We
hope by now that you are entirely happy differentiating functions of one variable such as
y = x3 + 2x2 + 5
Suppose, however, that you are asked to ﬁnd dy/dx given the equation
y3 + 2xy2 −x = 5
This is much more difﬁcult. The reason for the difference is that in the ﬁrst case y is given
explicitly in terms of x whereas in the second case the functional dependence of y on x is only
given implicitly. You would need to somehow rearrange this equation and to write y in terms
of x before you could differentiate it. Unfortunately, this is an impossible task because of the
presence of the y3 term. The trick here is to regard the expression on the left-hand side of the
equation as a function of the two variables x and y, so that
f(x, y) = y3 + 2xy2 −x
or equivalently
z = y3 + 2xy2 −x

The equation
y3 + 2xy2 −x = 5
then reads
z = 5
In general, the differential form of the small increments formula states that
dz =
dx +
dy
In our particular case, z takes the constant value of 5, so does not change. Hence dz = 0 and the
formula reduces to
0 =
dx +
dy
which rearranges as
dy = −
dx
that is,
= −
This formula can be used to ﬁnd dy/dx given any implicit function
f(x, y) = constant
that is,
if
f(x, y) = constant
then
= −
The technique of ﬁnding dy/dx from −fx/fy is called implicit differentiation and can be used
whenever it is difﬁcult or impossible to obtain an explicit representation for y in terms of x.
fx
fy
dy
dx
∂z/∂x
∂z/∂y
dy
dx
∂z
∂x
∂z
∂y
∂z
∂y
∂z
∂x
∂z
∂y
∂z
∂x
5.1 • Functions of several variables
353
Example
Use implicit differentiation to ﬁnd an expression for dy/dx given that
y3 + 2xy2 −x = 5
Solution
For the function
f(x, y) = y3 + 2xy2 −x
we have
fx = 2y2 −1
and
fy = 3y2 + 4xy
so that
= −
= −
= −2y2 + 1
3y2 + 4xy
D
F
2y2 −1
3y2 + 4xy
A
C
fx
fy
dy
dx

Partial Differentiation
354
Practice Problem
6 Use implicit differentiation to find expressions for dy/dx given that
(a) xy −y3 + y = 0
(b) y5 −xy2 = 10
Advice
There is an alternative way of thinking about implicit differentiation which is based on the
chain rule and does not depend on partial differentiation at all. This is described in
Appendix 2. You might find it easier to use than the method described above.
Dependent variable
A variable whose value is determined by that taken by the inde-
pendent variables; in z = f(x, y), the dependent variable is z.
Differentials
Limiting values of incremental changes. In the limit, the approximation 
∆z 
× ∆x becomes dz 
× dx where dz and dx are the differentials.
Function of two variables
A rule that assigns to each pair of incoming numbers, x and y,
a uniquely deﬁned outgoing number, z.
Implicit differentiation
The process of obtaining dy/dx where the function is not given
explicitly as an expression for y in terms of x.
Independent variable
Variables whose values determine that of the dependent variable; in
z = f(x, y), the independent variables are x and y.
Partial derivative
The derivative of a function of two or more variables with respect to
one of these variables, the others being regarded as constant.
Second-order partial derivative
The partial derivative of a ﬁrst-order partial derivative.
For example, fxy is the second-order partial derivative when f is differentiated ﬁrst with
respect to y and then with respect to x.
Small increments formula
The result ∆z 
∆x +
∆y
Symmetric function
A function of two or more variables which is unchanged by any per-
mutation of the variables. A function of two variables is symmetric when f(x, y) = f(y, x)
∂z
∂y
∂z
∂x
∂z
∂x
∂z
∂x
Key Terms
Practice Problems
7 If
f(x, y) = 3x2y3
evaluate f(2, 3), f(5, 1) and f(0, 7).
8 If
f(x, y) = 2xy + 3x
verify that f(5, 7) ≠f(7, 5). Are there any pairs of numbers, (x, y) for which f(x, y) = f(y, x)?

9 Write down expressions for the first-order partial derivatives, 
and 
for
(a) z = x2 + 4y5
(b) z = 3x3 −2ey
(c) z = xy + 6y
(d) z = x6y2 + 5y3
10 If
f(x, y) = x4y5 −x2 + y2
write down expressions for the first-order partial derivatives, fx and fy. Hence evaluate fx(1, 0) and
fy(1, 1).
11 Find expressions for all first- and second-order partial derivatives of the following functions. In each
case verify that
=
(a) z = xy
(b) z = exy
(c) z = x2 + 2x + y
(d) z = 16x1/4y3/4
(e) z =
+
12 Use the small increments formula to estimate the change in
z = x2y4 −x6 + 4y
when
(a) x increases from 1 to 1.1 and y remains fixed at 0
(b) x remains fixed at 1 and y decreases from 0 to −0.5
(c) x increases from 1 to 1.1 and y decreases from 0 to −0.5
13 If
z = x2y3 −10xy + y2
evaluate zx and zy at the point (2, 3). Hence estimate the change in z as x increases by 0.2 and y
decreases by 0.1.
14 (a) If
f(x, y) = y −x3 + 2x
write down expressions for fx and fy. Hence use implicit differentiation to find dy/dx given that
y −x3 + 2x = 1
(b) Confirm your answer to part (a) by rearranging the equation
y −x3 + 2x = 1
to give y explicitly in terms of x and using ordinary differentiation.
15 Verify that x = 1, y = −1 satisfy the equation x2 −2y3 = 3. Use implicit differentiation to find the value
of dy/dx at this point.
16 A function of three variables is given by
f(x1, x2, x3) =
+ ln(x2x3)
Find all of the first- and second-order derivatives of this function and verify that
f12 = f21,
f13 = f31
and
f23 = f32
x1x2
3
x2
x
y
y
x2
∂2z
∂x∂y
∂2z
∂y∂x
∂z
∂y
∂z
∂x
5.1 • Functions of several variables
355

section 5.2
Partial elasticity and
marginal functions
The ﬁrst section of this chapter described the technique of partial differentiation. Hopefully,
you have discovered that partial differentiation is no more difﬁcult than ordinary differenti-
ation. The only difference is that for functions of several variables you have to be clear at the
outset which letter in a mathematical expression is to be the variable, and to bear in mind that
all remaining letters are then just constants in disguise! Once you have done this, the actual 
differentiation itself obeys the usual rules. In Sections 4.3 and 4.5 we considered various
microeconomic applications. Given the intimate relationship between ordinary and partial 
differentiation, you should not be too surprised to learn that we can extend these applications
to functions of several variables. We concentrate on three main areas:
 elasticity of demand
 utility
 production.
We consider each of these in turn.
Objectives
At the end of this section you should be able to:
 Calculate partial elasticities.
 Calculate marginal utilities.
 Calculate the marginal rate of commodity substitution along an indifference curve.
 Calculate marginal products.
 Calculate the marginal rate of technical substitution along an isoquant.
 State Euler’s theorem for homogeneous production functions.

5.2.1 Elasticity of demand
Suppose that the demand, Q, for a certain good depends on its price, P, the price of an alter-
native good, PA, and the income of consumers, Y, so that
Q = f(P, PA, Y )
for some demand function, f.
Of particular interest is the responsiveness of demand to changes in any one of these three
variables. This can be measured quantitatively using elasticity. The (own) price elasticity of
demand is deﬁned to be
EP = −
with PA and Y held constant. This deﬁnition is identical to the one given in Section 4.5, so 
following the same mathematical argument presented there we deduce that
EP = −
×
The partial derivative notation is used here because Q is now a function of several variables, and
PA and Y are held constant.
∂Q
∂P
P
Q
percentage change in Q
percentage change in P
5.2 • Partial elasticity and marginal functions
357
Advice
You may recall that the introduction of the minus sign is an artificial device designed 
to make EP positive. This policy is not universal and you are advised to check which con-
vention your own tutor uses.
In an analogous way we can measure the responsiveness of demand to changes in the price
of the alternative good. The cross-price elasticity of demand is deﬁned to be
EPA =
with P and Y held constant. Again, the usual mathematical argument shows that
EPA =
×
The sign of EPA could turn out to be positive or negative depending on the nature of the alter-
native good. If the alternative good is substitutable then Q increases as PA rises, because con-
sumers buy more of the given good as it becomes relatively less expensive. Consequently,
> 0
and so EPA > 0. If the alternative good is complementary then Q decreases as PA rises, because
the bundle of goods as a whole becomes more expensive. Consequently,
< 0
and so EPA < 0.
∂Q
∂PA
∂Q
∂PA
∂Q
∂PA
PA
Q
percentage change in Q
percentage change in PA

Finally, the income elasticity of demand is deﬁned to be
EY =
and can be found from
EY =
×
Again, EY can be positive or negative. If the good is superior then demand rises as income rises
and EY is positive. However, if the good is inferior then demand falls as income rises and EY is
negative.
∂Q
∂Y
Y
Q
percentage change in Q
percentage change in Y
Partial Differentiation
358
Example
Given the demand function
Q = 100 −2P + PA + 0.1Y
where P = 10, PA = 12 and Y = 1000, ﬁnd the
(a) price elasticity of demand
(b) cross-price elasticity of demand
(c) income elasticity of demand
Is the alternative good substitutable or complementary?
Solution
We begin by calculating the value of Q when P = 10, PA = 12 and Y = 1000. The demand equation gives
Q = 100 −2(10) + 12 + 0.1(1000) = 192
(a) To ﬁnd the price elasticity of demand we partially differentiate
Q = 100 −2P + PA + 0.1Y
with respect to P to get
= −2
Hence
EP = −
×
= −
× (−2) = 0.10
(b) To ﬁnd the cross-price elasticity of demand we partially differentiate
Q = 100 −2P + PA + 0.1Y
with respect to PA to get
= 1
∂Q
∂PA
10
192
∂Q
∂P
P
Q
∂Q
∂Y

Hence
EPA =
×
=
× 1 = 0.06
The fact that this is positive shows that the two goods are substitutable.
(c) To ﬁnd the income elasticity of demand we partially differentiate
Q = 100 −2P + PA + 0.1Y
with respect to Y to get
= 0.1
Hence
EY =
×
=
× 0.1 = 0.52
1000
192
∂Q
∂Y
Y
Q
∂Q
∂Y
12
192
∂Q
∂PA
PA
Q
5.2 • Partial elasticity and marginal functions
359
Practice Problem
1 Given the demand function
Q = 500 −3P −2PA + 0.01Y
where P = 20, PA = 30 and Y = 5000, find
(a) the price elasticity of demand
(b) the cross-price elasticity of demand
(c) the income elasticity of demand
If income rises by 5%, calculate the corresponding percentage change in demand. Is the good inferior
or superior?
5.2.2 Utility
So far in this book we have concentrated almost
exclusively on the behaviour of producers. In this
case it is straightforward to identify the primary
objective, which is to maximize proﬁt. We now
turn our attention to consumers. Unfortunately, it
is not so easy to identify the motivation for their
behaviour. One tentative suggestion is that con-
sumers try to maximize earned income. However,
if this were the case then individuals would try to
work 24 hours a day for 7 days a week, which is
not so. In practice, people like to allocate a rea-
sonable proportion of time to leisure activities. 

Consumers are faced with a choice of how many hours each week to spend working and how
many to devote to leisure. In the same way, a consumer needs to decide how many items of vari-
ous goods to buy and has a preference between the options available. To analyse the behaviour
of consumers quantitatively we associate with each set of options a number, U, called utility,
which indicates the level of satisfaction. Suppose that there are two goods, G1 and G2, and that
the consumer buys x1 items of G1 and x2 items of G2. The variable U is then a function of x1
and x2, which we write as
U = U(x1, x2)
If
U(3, 7) = 20
and
U(4, 5) = 25
for example, then the consumer derives greater satisfaction from buying 4 items of G1 and 
5 items of G2 than from buying 3 items of G1 and 7 items of G2.
Utility is a function of two variables, so we can work out two ﬁrst-order partial derivatives,
and
The derivative
gives the rate of change of U with respect to xi and is called the marginal utility of xi. If xi
changes by a small amount ∆xi and the other variable is held ﬁxed then the change in U satisﬁes
∆U 
∆xi
If x1 and x2 both change then the net change in U can be found from the small increments 
formula
∆U 
∆x1 +
∆x2
∂U
∂x2
∂U
∂x1
∂U
∂xi
∂U
∂x1
∂U
∂x2
∂U
∂x1
Partial Differentiation
360
Example
Given the utility function
U = x1
1/4x2
3/4
determine the value of the marginal utilities
and
when x1 = 100 and x2 = 200. Hence estimate the change in utility when x1 decreases from 100 to 99 and x2
increases from 200 to 201.
Solution
If
U = x1
1/4x2
3/4
∂U
∂x2
∂U
∂x1

Note that for the particular utility function
U = x1
1/4x2
3/4
given in the above example, the second-order derivatives
=
x1
−7/4x2
3/4
and
=
x1
1/4x2
−5/4
are both negative. Now ∂2U/∂x1
2 is the partial derivative of marginal utility ∂U/∂x1 with respect
to x1. The fact that this is negative means that marginal utility of x1 decreases as x1 rises. In other
words, as the consumption of good G1 increases, each additional item of G1 bought confers
less utility than the previous item. A similar property holds for G2. This is known as the law of
diminishing marginal utility.
−3
16
∂2U
∂x2
2
−3
16
∂2U
∂x1
2
5.2 • Partial elasticity and marginal functions
361
then
= 1/4x1
−3/4x2
3/4
and
= 3/4x1
1/4x2
−1/4
so when x1 = 100 and x2 = 200
= 1/4(100)−3/4(200)3/4 = 0.42
= 3/4(100)1/4(200)−1/4 = 0.63
Now x1 decreases by 1 unit, so
∆x1 = −1
and x2 increases by 1 unit, so
∆x2 = 1
The small increments formula states that
∆U 
∆x1 +
∆x2
The change in utility is therefore
∆U  (0.42)(−1) + (0.63)(1) = 0.21
∂U
∂x2
∂U
∂x1
∂U
∂x2
∂U
∂x1
∂U
∂x2
∂U
∂x1
Advice
You might like to compare this with the law of diminishing marginal productivity discussed
in Section 4.3.2.

Partial Differentiation
362
Practice Problem
2 An individual’s utility function is given by
U = 1000x1 + 450x2 + 5x1x2 −2x1
2 −x2
2
where x1 is the amount of leisure measured in hours per week and x2 is earned income measured in
dollars per week.
Determine the value of the marginal utilities
and
when x1 = 138 and x2 = 500.
Hence estimate the change in U if the individual works for an extra hour, which increases earned
income by $15 per week.
Does the law of diminishing marginal utility hold for this function?
∂U
∂x2
∂U
∂x1
It was pointed out in Section 5.1 that functions of two variables could be represented by sur-
faces in three dimensions. This is all very well in theory, but in practice the task of sketching
such a surface by hand is virtually impossible. This difﬁculty has been faced by geographers for
years and the way they circumvent the problem is to produce a two-dimensional contour map.
A contour is a curve joining all points at the same height above sea level. Exactly the same
device can be used for utility functions. Rather than attempt to sketch the surface, we draw an
indifference map. This consists of indifference curves joining points (x1, x2) which give the same
value of utility. Mathematically, an indifference curve is deﬁned by an equation
U(x1, x2) = U0
for some ﬁxed value of U0. A typical indifference map is sketched in Figure 5.4.
Points A and B both lie on the lower indifference curve, U0 = 20. Point A corresponds to the
case when the consumer buys a1 units of G1 and a2 units of G2. Likewise, point B corresponds
Figure 5.4

to the case when the consumer buys b1 units of G1 and b2 units of G2. Both of these combina-
tions yield the same level of satisfaction and the consumer is indifferent to choosing between
them. In symbols we have
U(a1, a2) = 20
and
U(b1, b2) = 20
Points C and D lie on indifference curves that are further away from the origin. The combina-
tions of goods that these points represent yield higher levels of utility and so are ranked above
those of A and B.
Indifference curves are usually downward-sloping. If fewer purchases are made of G1 then
the consumer has to compensate for this by buying more of type G2 to maintain the same level
of satisfaction. Note also from Figure 5.4 that the slope of an indifference curve varies along its
length, taking large negative values close to the vertical axis and becoming almost zero as the
curve approaches the horizontal axis. Again this is to be expected for any function that obeys
the law of diminishing marginal utility. A consumer who currently owns a large number of
items of G2 and relatively few of G1 is likely to value G1 more highly. Consequently, he or she
might be satisﬁed in sacriﬁcing a large number of items of G2 to gain just one or two extra
items of G1. In this region the marginal utility of x1 is much greater than that of x2, which
accounts for the steepness of the curve close to the vertical axis. Similarly, as the curve
approaches the horizontal axis, the situation is reversed and the curve ﬂattens off. We quantify
this exchange of goods by introducing the marginal rate of commodity substitution, MRCS.
This is deﬁned to be the increase in x2 necessary to maintain a constant value of utility when x1
decreases by 1 unit. This is illustrated in Figure 5.5.
Starting at point E, we move 1 unit to the left. The value of MRCS is then the vertical dis-
tance that we need to travel if we are to remain on the indifference curve passing through E.
Now this sort of ‘1 unit change’ deﬁnition is precisely the approach that we took in Section 4.3
when discussing marginal functions. In that section we actually deﬁned the marginal function
to be the derived function and we showed that the ‘1 unit change’ deﬁnition gave a good
approximation to it. If we do the same here then we can deﬁne
MRCS = −dx2
dx1
5.2 • Partial elasticity and marginal functions
363
Figure 5.5

Partial Differentiation
364
Example
Given the utility function
U = x1
1/2x2
1/2
ﬁnd a general expression for MRCS in terms of x1 and x2.
Calculate the particular value of MRCS for the indifference curve that passes through (300, 500). Hence
estimate the increase in x2 required to maintain the current level of utility when x1 decreases by 3 units.
Solution
If
U = x1
1/2x2
1/2
then
= 1/2x1
−1/2x2
1/2
and
= 1/2x1
1/2x2
−1/2
Using the result
MRCS = ∂U/∂x1
∂U/∂x2
∂U
∂x2
∂U
∂x1
The derivative, dx2/dx1, determines the slope of an indifference curve when x1 is plotted on the
horizontal axis and x2 is plotted on the vertical axis. This is negative, so we deliberately put a
minus sign in front to make MRCS positive. This deﬁnition is useful only if we can ﬁnd the
equation of an indifference curve with x2 given explicitly in terms of x1. However, we may only
know the utility function
U(x1, x2)
so that the indifference curve is determined implicitly from an equation
U(x1, x2) = U0
This is precisely the situation that we discussed at the end of Section 5.1. The formula for
implicit differentiation gives
= −
Hence
MRCS = −
=
marginal rate of commodity substitution is the marginal 
utility of x1 divided by the marginal utility of x2
∂U/∂x1
∂U/∂x2
dx2
dx1
∂U/∂x1
∂U/∂x2
dx2
dx1

we see that
MRCS =
= x1
−1x2
1
=
At the point (300, 500)
MRCS =
=
Now MRCS approximates the increase in x2 required to maintain a constant level of utility when x1 decreases
by 1 unit. In this example x1 decreases by 3 units, so we multiply MRCS by 3. The approximate increase 
in x2 is
× 3 = 5
We can check the accuracy of this approximation by evaluating U at the old point (300, 500) and the new
point (297, 505). We get
U(300, 500) = (300)1/2(500)1/2 = 387.30
U(297, 505) = (297)1/2(505)1/2 = 387.28
This shows that, to all intents and purposes, the two points do indeed lie on the same indifference curve.
5
3
5
3
500
300
x2
x1
1/2x1
−1/2x2
1/2
1/2x1
1/2x2
−1/2
5.2 • Partial elasticity and marginal functions
365
Practice Problem
3 Calculate the value of MRCS for the utility function given in Practice Problem 2 at the point (138, 500).
Hence estimate the increase in earned income required to maintain the current level of utility if leisure
time falls by 2 hours per week.
5.2.3 Production
Production functions were ﬁrst introduced in Section 2.3. We assume that output, Q, depends
on capital, K, and labour, L, so we can write
Q = f(K, L)
Such functions can be analysed in a similar way to utility functions. The partial derivative
∂Q
∂K

gives the rate of change of output with respect to capital and is called the marginal product of
capital, MPK. If capital changes by a small amount ∆K, with labour held constant, then the 
corresponding change in Q is given by
∆Q 
∆K
Similarly,
gives the rate of change of output with respect to labour and is called the marginal product of
labour, MPL. If labour changes by a small amount ∆L, with capital held constant, then the cor-
responding change in Q is given by
∆Q 
∆L
If K and L both change simultaneously, then the net change in Q can be found from the small
increments formula
∆Q 
∆K +
∆L
The contours of a production function are called isoquants. In Greek ‘iso’ means ‘equal’, so 
the word ‘isoquant’ literally translates as ‘equal quantity’. Points on an isoquant represent all
possible combinations of inputs (K, L) which produce a constant level of output, Q0. A typical
isoquant map is sketched in Figure 5.6. Notice that we have adopted the standard convention
of plotting labour on the horizontal axis and capital on the vertical axis.
The lower curve determines the input pairs needed to output 100 units. Higher levels of 
output correspond to isoquants further away from the origin. Again, the general shape of the
curves is to be expected. For example, as capital is reduced it is necessary to increase labour to
compensate and so maintain production levels. Moreover, if capital continues to decrease, the
rate of substitution of labour for capital goes up. We quantify this exchange of inputs by
deﬁning the marginal rate of technical substitution, MRTS, to be
−dK
dL
∂Q
∂L
∂Q
∂K
∂Q
∂L
∂Q
∂L
∂Q
∂K
Partial Differentiation
366
Figure 5.6

5.2 • Partial elasticity and marginal functions
367
Practice Problem
4 Given the production function
Q = K2 + 2L2
write down expressions for the marginal products
and
Hence show that
(a) MRTS =
(b) K
+ L
= 2Q
∂Q
∂L
∂Q
∂K
2L
K
∂Q
∂L
∂Q
∂K
Example
Find an expression for MRTS for the general Cobb–Douglas production function
Q = AK αLβ
where A, α and β are positive constants.
Solution
We begin by ﬁnding the marginal products. Partial differentiation of
Q = AK αLβ
with respect to K and L gives
MPK = αAK α−1Lβ
and
MPL = βAK αLβ−1
Hence
MRTS =
=
= βK
αL
βAK αLβ−1
αAK α−1Lβ
MPL
MPK
so that MRTS is the positive value of the slope of an isoquant. As in the case of a utility func-
tion, the formula for implicit differentiation shows that
MRTS =
=
marginal rate of technical substitution is the marginal product 
of labour divided by the marginal product of capital
MPL
MPK
∂Q/∂L
∂Q/∂K

Recall that a production function is described as being homogeneous of degree n if, for any
number λ,
f(λK, λL) = λnf(K, L)
A production function is then said to display decreasing returns to scale, constant returns to
scale or increasing returns to scale, depending on whether n < 1, n = 1 or n > 1, respectively.
One useful result concerning homogeneous functions is known as Euler’s theorem, which 
states that
K
+ L
= nf(K, L)
In fact, you have already veriﬁed this in Practice Problem 4(b) for the particular production
function
Q = K2 + 2L2
which is easily shown to be homogeneous of degree 2. We have no intention of proving this
theorem, although you are invited to conﬁrm its validity for general Cobb–Douglas production
functions in Practice Problem 10 at the end of this section.
The special case n = 1 is worthy of note because the right-hand side is then simply f(K, L),
which is equal to the output, Q. Euler’s theorem for homogeneous production functions of
degree 1 states that
+
=
If each input factor is paid an amount equal to its marginal product then each term on 
the left-hand side gives the total bill for that factor. For example, if each unit of labour is 
paid MPL then the cost of L units of labour is L(MPL). Provided that the production function
displays constant returns to scale, Euler’s theorem shows that the sum of the factor payments
is equal to the total output.
We conclude this section with an example that shows how the computer package Maple can
be used to handle functions of two variables.
total output
labour times
marginal product
of labour
capital times
marginal product
of capital
∂f
∂L
∂f
∂K
Partial Differentiation
368
Advice
Production functions and the concept of homogeneity were covered in Section 2.3. You
might find it useful to revise this before reading the next paragraph.
Example
Consider the production function
Q = 2K0.2L0.8
(0 ≤K ≤1000, 0 ≤L ≤1000)
(a) Draw a three-dimensional plot of this function together with its isoquant map.
(b) Use the instruction diff to ﬁnd an expression for MRTS.
MAPLE

Solution
(a) Let us name this function prod. To do this, we type
>prod:=2*K^0.2*L^0.8;
The instruction for a three-dimensional plot is plot3d. This is used in the same way as ordinary 
plot. The only difference is that we must specify the range of both K and L, so we type
>plot3d(prod,K=0..1000,L=0..1000);
If you do this, you get a most uninspiring picture of the surface. Most of the surface is ‘coming straight
towards you’, so you cannot see it properly. Maple does, however, allow you to rotate the surface to get
a better perspective. To do this, click on the surface to make the graphics toolbar appear. This is shown
in Figure 5.7.
5.2 • Partial elasticity and marginal functions
369
Advice
It is well worth playing around with some of the buttons on the toolbar to investigate
some of the useful features of the package. For example, click on the first indicated but-
ton. This creates a cuboid on the screen. To rotate the axes, simply hold the mouse but-
ton down and drag the cursor around. Figure 5.8 (overleaf) shows one such perspective
with the origin at the front. It shows clearly how the output rises with increasing capital
and labour and that this effect is more pronounced with increasing values of L than K.

Figure 5.7
To obtain an isoquant map we need to call up the more sophisticated plotting routines, from which
we select the one called contourplot. You type
>with(plots):
followed by
>contourplot(prod,K=0..1000,L=0..1000);
The response from Maple is the isoquant map shown in Figure 5.9 (overleaf).
(b) Partial differentiation is performed, as usual, via the instruction diff.
Typing
>diff(output,K);
performs the differentiation with respect to K and shows that MPK is given by
0.4L0.8
K 0.8

Partial Differentiation
370
Figure 5.8
Figure 5.9

5.2 • Partial elasticity and marginal functions
371
Typing
>diff(output,L);
performs the differentiation with respect to L and shows that MPL is given by
The MRTS is found by dividing one by the other. In fact, this can be done in a single line:
>MRTS:=diff(output,L)/diff(output,K);
which gives
MRTS = 4K
L
1.6K 0.2
L0.2
Cross-price elasticity of demand
The responsiveness of demand for one good to a change
in the price of another: (percentage change in quantity) ÷ (percentage change in the price of
the alternative good).
Euler’s theorem
If each input is paid the value of its marginal product, the total costs of
these inputs is equal to total output, provided there are constant returns to scale.
Income elasticity of demand
The responsiveness of demand for one good to a change in
income: (percentage change in quantity) ÷ (percentage change in income).
Indifference curves
A curve indicating all combinations of two goods which give the same
level of utility.
Indifference map
A diagram showing the graphs of a set of indifference curves. The further
the curve is from the origin, the greater the level of utility.
Isoquant
A curve indicating all combinations of two factors which give the same level of
output.
Law of diminishing marginal utility
The law which states that the increase in utility due
to the consumption of an additional good will eventually decline: ∂2U/∂x i
2 < 0 for sufﬁciently
large xi.
Marginal product of capital
The additional output produced by a 1 unit increase in 
capital: MPK = ∂Q/∂K.
Marginal product of labour
The additional output produced by a 1 unit increase in labour:
MPL = ∂Q/∂L.
Marginal rate of commodity substitution
The amount by which one input needs to
increase to maintain a constant value of utility when the other input decreases by 1 unit:
MRTS = ∂U/∂x1 ÷ ∂U/∂x2.
Marginal rate of technical substitution
The amount by which capital needs to rise to
maintain a constant level of output when labour decreases by 1 unit: MRTS = MPL/MPK.
Marginal utility
The extra satisfaction gained by consuming 1 extra unit of a good: ∂U/∂xi.
Price elasticity of demand
The responsiveness of demand for one good to a change in its
own price: −(percentage change in quantity) ÷ (percentage change in the price).
Utility
The satisfaction gained from the consumption of a good.
Key Terms

Partial Differentiation
372
Practice Problems
5 Given the demand function
Q = 200 −2P −PA + 0.1Y 2
where P = 10, PA = 15 and Y = 100, find
(a) the price elasticity of demand
(b) the cross-price elasticity of demand
(c) the income elasticity of demand
Estimate the percentage change in demand if PA rises by 3%. Is the alternative good substitutable or
complementary?
6 Given the demand function
Q =
where PA = 10, Y = 2 and P = 4, find the income elasticity of demand. If PA and P are fixed, estimate
the percentage change in Y needed to raise Q by 2%.
7 Given the utility function
U = x1
1/2x2
1/3
determine the value of the marginal utilities
and
at the point (25, 8). Hence
(a) estimate the change in utility when x1 and x2 both increase by 1 unit
(b) find the marginal rate of commodity substitution at this point
8 Evaluate MPK and MPL for the production function
Q = 2LK +
L
given that the current levels of K and L are 7 and 4, respectively. Hence
(a) write down the value of MRTS
(b) estimate the increase in capital needed to maintain the current level of output given a 1 unit
decrease in labour
9 If Q = 2K3 + 3L2K show that K(MPK) + L(MPL) = 3Q.
10 Verify Euler’s theorem for the Cobb–Douglas production function
Q = AKαLβ
[Hint: this function was shown to be homogeneous of degree α + β in Section 2.3.]
11 If a firm’s production function is given by
Q = 5L + 7K
sketch the isoquant corresponding an output level, Q = 700. Use your graph to find the value of
MRTS and confirm this using partial differentiation.
∂U
∂x2
∂U
∂x1
PAY 2
P

12 (Maple) Consider the production function
Q = L(5 K +
L)
(0 ≤K ≤3, 0 ≤L ≤5)
(a) Draw a three-dimensional plot of this function. Rotate the axes to give a clear view of the sur-
face. Draw the corresponding isoquant map.
(b) Find an expression for MRTS.
(c) Given that L = 4, find the value of K for which MRTS = 2.
13 (Maple) Consider the production function
Q = (0.3K−3 + 0.7L−3)−1/3
(1 ≤K ≤10, 1 ≤L ≤10)
(a) Draw a three-dimensional plot of this function. Rotate the axes to give a clear view of the surface.
(b) Draw the corresponding isoquant map. Deduce that the marginal rate of technical substitution
diminishes with increasing L.
(c) Find an expression for MRTS.
(d) Find the slope of the isoquant Q = 4 at the point L = 8.
5.2 • Partial elasticity and marginal functions
373

section 5.3
Comparative statics
The simplest macroeconomic model, discussed in Section 1.6, assumes that there are two sec-
tors, households and ﬁrms, and that household consumption, C, is modelled by a linear rela-
tionship of the form
C = aY + b
(1)
In this equation Y denotes national income and a and b are parameters. The parameter a is the
marginal propensity to consume and lies in the range 0 < a < 1. The parameter b is the
autonomous consumption and satisﬁes b > 0. In equilibrium
Y = C + I
(2)
Objectives
At the end of this section you should be able to:
 Use structural equations to derive the reduced form of macroeconomic models.
 Calculate national income multipliers.
 Use multipliers to give a qualitative description of economic models.
 Use multipliers to give a quantitative description of economic models.
 Calculate multipliers for the linear one-commodity market model.
Advice
The content of this section is quite difficult since it depends on ideas covered earlier in this
book. You might find it helpful to read quickly through Section 1.6 now before tackling
the new material.

5.3 • Comparative statics
375
where I denotes investment, which is assumed to be given by
I = I*
(3)
for some constant I*. Equations (1), (2) and (3) describe the structure of the model and as such
are called structural equations. Substituting equations (1) and (3) into equation (2) gives
Y = aY + b + I*
Y −aY = b + I*
(subtract aY from both sides)
(1 −a)Y = b + I*
(take out a common factor of Y )
Y =
(divide both sides by 1 −a)
This is known as the reduced form because it compresses the model into a single equation 
in which the endogenous variable, Y, is expressed in terms of the exogenous variable, I*, and
parameters, a and b. The process of analysing the equilibrium level of income in this way is
referred to as statics because it assumes that the equilibrium state is attained instantaneously.
The branch of mathematical economics which investigates time dependence is known as
dynamics and is considered in Chapter 9.
We should like to do rather more than just to calculate the equilibrium values here. In par-
ticular, we are interested in the effect on the endogenous variables in a model brought about
by changes in the exogenous variables and parameters. This is known as comparative statics,
since we seek to compare the effects obtained by varying each variable and parameter in turn.
The actual mechanism for change will be ignored and it will be assumed that the system returns
to equilibrium instantaneously. The equation
Y =
shows that Y is a function of three variables, a, b and I*, so we can write down three partial
derivatives
,
,
The only hard one to work out is the ﬁrst, and this is found using the chain rule by writing
Y = (b + I*)(1 −a)−1
which gives
= (b + I*)(−1)(1 −a)−2(−1) =
To interpret this derivative let us suppose that the marginal propensity to consume, a, changes
by ∆a with b and I* held constant. The corresponding change in Y is given by
∆Y =
∆a
Strictly speaking, the ‘=’ sign should really be ‘’. However, as we have seen in the previous two
sections, provided that ∆a is small the approximation is reasonably accurate. In any case we
could argue that the model itself is only a ﬁrst approximation to what is really happening in the
economy and so any further small inaccuracies that are introduced are unlikely to have any
signiﬁcant effect on our conclusions. The above equation shows that the change in national
income is found by multiplying the change in the marginal propensity to consume by the par-
tial derivative ∂Y/∂a. For this reason the partial derivative is called the marginal propensity to
consume multiplier for Y. In the same way, ∂Y/∂b and ∂Y/∂I* are called the autonomous con-
sumption multiplier and the investment multiplier, respectively.
∂Y
∂a
b + I*
(1 −a)2
∂Y
∂a
∂Y
∂I*
∂Y
∂b
∂Y
∂a
b + I*
1 −a
b + I*
1 −a

Partial Differentiation
376
Multipliers enable us to explain the behaviour of the model both qualitatively and quantita-
tively. The qualitative behaviour can be described simply by inspecting the multipliers as they
stand, before any numerical values are assigned to the variables and parameters. It is usually
possible to state whether the multipliers are positive or negative and hence whether an increase
in an exogenous variable or parameter leads to an increase or decrease in the corresponding
endogenous variable. In the present model it is apparent that the marginal propensity to con-
sume multiplier for Y is positive because it is known that b and I* are both positive, and the
denominator (1 −a)2 is clearly positive. Therefore, national income rises whenever a rises.
Once the exogenous variables and parameters have been assigned speciﬁc numerical values,
the behaviour of the model can be explained quantitatively. For example, if b = 10, I* = 30 and
a = 0.5 then the marginal propensity to consume multiplier is
=
= 160
This means that when the marginal propensity to consume rises by, say, 0.02 units the change
in national income is
160 × 0.02 = 3.2
Of course, if a, b and I* change by amounts ∆a, ∆b and ∆I* simultaneously then the small
increments formula shows that the change in Y can be found from
∆Y =
∆a +
∆b +
∆I*
∂Y
∂I*
∂Y
∂b
∂Y
∂a
10 + 30
(1 −0.5)2
b + I*
(1 −a)2
Example
Use the equation
Y =
to ﬁnd the investment multiplier.
Deduce that an increase in investment always leads to an increase in national income.
Calculate the change in national income when investment rises by 4 units and the marginal propensity
to consume is 0.6.
Solution
Writing
Y =
+
we see that
=
which is positive because a < 1. Therefore national income rises whenever I* rises.
When a = 0.6 the investment multiplier is
=
=
= 2.5
so that when investment rises by 4 units the change in national income is
2.5 × 4 = 10
1
0.4
1
1 −0.6
1
1 −a
1
1 −a
∂Y
∂I*
I*
1 −a
b
1 −a
b + I*
1 −a

5.3 • Comparative statics
377
The following example is more difﬁcult because it involves three sectors: households, ﬁrms
and government. However, the basic strategy for analysing the model is the same. We ﬁrst
obtain the reduced form, which is differentiated to determine the relevant multipliers. 
These can then be used to discuss the behaviour of national income both qualitatively and
quantitatively.
Practice Problem
1 By substituting
Y =
into
C = aY + b
write down the reduced equation for C in terms of a, b and I*. Hence show that the investment mul-
tiplier for C is
Deduce that an increase in investment always leads to an increase in consumption. Calculate the
change in consumption when investment rises by 2 units if the marginal propensity to consume is 1/2.
a
1 −a
b + I*
1 −a
Example
Consider the three-sector model
Y = C + I + G
(1)
C = aYd + b
(0 < a < 1, b > 0)
(2)
Yd = Y −T
(3)
T = tY + T*
(0 < t < 1, T* > 0)
(4)
I = I*
(I* > 0)
(5)
G = G*
(G* > 0)
(6)
where G denotes government expenditure and T denotes taxation.
(a) Show that
Y =
(b) Write down the government expenditure multiplier and autonomous taxation multiplier. Deduce the
direction of change in Y due to increases in G* and T*.
(c) If it is government policy to ﬁnance any increase in expenditure, ∆G*, by an increase in autonomous
taxation, ∆T*, so that
∆G* = ∆T*
show that national income rises by an amount that is less than the rise in expenditure.
(d) If a = 0.7, b = 50, T* = 200, t = 0.2, I* = 100 and G* = 300, calculate the equilibrium level of national
income, Y, and the change in Y due to a 10 unit increase in government expenditure.
−aT* + b + I* + G*
1 −a + at


Partial Differentiation
378
Solution
(a) We need to ‘solve’ equations (1)–(6) for Y. An obvious ﬁrst move is to substitute equations (2), (5) and
(6) into equation (1) to get
Y = aYd + b + I* + G*
(7)
Now from equations (3) and (4)
Yd = Y −T
= Y −(tY + T*)
= Y −tY −T*
so this can be put into equation (7) to get
Y = a(Y −tY −T*) + b + I* + G*
= aY −atY −aT* + b + I* + G*
Collecting terms in Y on the left-hand side gives
(1 −a + at)Y = −aT* + b + I* + G*
which produces the desired equation
Y =
(b) The government expenditure multiplier is
=
and the autonomous taxation multiplier is
=
We are given that a < 1, so 1 −a > 0. Also, we know that a and t are both positive, so their product, at,
must be positive. The expression (1 −a) + at is therefore positive, being the sum of two positive terms.
The government expenditure multiplier is therefore positive, which shows that any increase in G* leads
to an increase in Y. The autonomous taxation multiplier is negative because its numerator is negative
and its denominator is positive. This shows that any increase in T* leads to a decrease in Y.
(c) Government policy is to ﬁnance a rise in expenditure out of autonomous taxation, so that
∆G* = ∆T*
From the small increments formula
∆Y =
∆G* +
∆T*
we deduce that
∆Y =
+
∆G* =
+
∆G* =
∆G*
The multiplier
1 −a
1 −a + at
D
F
1 −a
1 −a + at
A
C
D
F
−a
1 −a + at
1
1 −a + at
A
C
D
F
∂Y
∂T*
∂Y
∂G*
A
C
∂Y
∂T*
∂Y
∂G*
−a
1 −a + at
∂Y
∂T*
1
1 −a + at
∂Y
∂G*
−aT* + b + I* + G*
1 −a + at

5.3 • Comparative statics
379
is called the balanced budget multiplier and is positive because the numerator and denominator are
both positive. An increase in government expenditure leads to an increase in national income. How-
ever, the denominator is greater than the numerator by an amount at, so that
< 1
and ∆Y < ∆G*, showing that the rise in national income is less than the rise in expenditure.
(d) To solve this part of the problem we simply substitute the numerical values a = 0.7, b = 50, T* = 200, 
t = 0.2, I* = 100 and G* = 300 into the results of parts (a) and (b). From part (a)
Y =
=
= 704.5
From part (b) the government expenditure multiplier is
=
= 2.27
and we are given that ∆G* = 10, so the change in national income is
2.27 × 10 = 22.7
1
0.44
1
1 −a + at
−0.7(200) + 50 + 100 + 300
1 −0.7 + 0.7(0.2)
−aT* + b + I* + G*
1 −a + at
1 −a
1 −a + at
Practice Problem
2 Consider the four-sector model
Y = C + I + G + X −M
C = aY + b
(0 < a < 1, b > 0)
I = I*
(I* > 0)
G = G*
(G* > 0)
X = X*
(X* > 0)
M = mY + M*
(0 < m < 1, M* > 0)
where X and M denote exports and imports respectively and m is the marginal propensity to import.


So far, all of the examples of comparative statics that we have considered have been taken
from macroeconomics. The same approach can be used in microeconomics. For example, let
us analyse the equilibrium price and quantity in supply and demand theory.
Figure 5.10 illustrates the simple linear one-commodity market model described in Section
1.3. The equilibrium values of price and quantity are determined from the point of intersection
of the supply and demand curves. The supply curve is a straight line with a positive slope and
intercept, so its equation may be written as
P = aQS + b
(a > 0, b > 0)
The demand equation is also linear but has a negative slope and a positive intercept, so its equa-
tion may be written as
P = −cQD + d
(c > 0, d > 0)
It is apparent from Figure 5.10 that in order for these two lines to intersect in the positive quad-
rant, it is necessary for the intercept on the demand curve to lie above that on the supply curve,
so we require
Partial Differentiation
380
Figure 5.10
(a) Show that
Y =
(b) Write down the autonomous export multiplier
and the marginal propensity to import multiplier
Deduce the direction of change in Y due to increases in X* and m.
(c) If a = 0.8, b = 120, I* = 100, G* = 300, X* = 150, m = 0.1 and M* = 40, calculate the equilibrium
level of national income, Y, and the change in Y due to a 10 unit increase in autonomous exports.
∂Y
∂m
∂Y
∂X*
b + I* + G* + X* −M*
1 −a + m

d > b
or equivalently
d −b > 0
In equilibrium QS and QD are equal. If we let their common value be denoted by Q then the
supply and demand equations become
P = aQ + b
P = −cQ + d
and so
aQ + b = −cQ + d
since both sides are equal to P.
To solve for Q we ﬁrst collect like terms together, which gives
(a + c)Q = d −b
and then divide by the coefﬁcient of Q to get
Q =
(Incidentally, this conﬁrms the restriction d −b > 0. If this were not true then Q would be either
zero or negative, which does not make economic sense.)
Equilibrium quantity is a function of the four parameters a, b, c and d, so there are four 
multipliers
= −
= −
= −
=
where the chain rule is used to ﬁnd ∂Q/∂a and ∂Q/∂c.
We noted previously that all of the parameters are positive and that d −b > 0, so
< 0, 
< 0, 
< 0
and
> 0
This shows that an increase in a, b or c causes a decrease in Q, whereas an increase in d causes
an increase in Q.
∂Q
∂d
∂Q
∂c
∂Q
∂b
∂Q
∂a
1
a + c
∂Q
∂d
d −b
(a + c)2
∂Q
∂c
1
a + c
∂Q
∂b
d −b
(a + c)2
∂Q
∂a
d −b
a + c
5.3 • Comparative statics
381
Example
Give a graphical conﬁrmation of the sign of the multiplier
∂Q
∂a


Solution
From the supply equation
P = aQS + b
we see that a small increase in the value of the parameter a causes the supply curve to become slightly
steeper, as indicated by the dashed line in Figure 5.11. The effect is to shift the point of intersection to the
left and so the equilibrium quantity decreases from Q1 to Q2 which is consistent with a negative value of the
multiplier, ∂Q/∂a.
Partial Differentiation
382
Figure 5.11
Given any pair of supply and demand equations, we can easily calculate the effect on the
equilibrium quantity. For example, consider the equations
P = QS + 1
P = −2QD + 5
and let us suppose that we need to calculate the change in equilibrium quantity when the
coefﬁcient of QS increases from 1 to 1.1. In this case we have
a = 1, b = 1, c = 2, d = 5
To ﬁnd ∆Q we ﬁrst evaluate the multiplier
= −
= −
= −0.44
and then multiply by 0.1 to get
∆Q = (−0.44) × 0.1 = −0.044
An increase of 0.1 in the slope of the supply curve therefore produces a decrease of 0.044 in the
equilibrium quantity.
5 −1
(1 + 2)2
d −b
(a + c)2
∂Q
∂a

Throughout this section all of the relations in each model have been assumed to be linear. It
is possible to analyse non-linear relations in a similar way, although this is beyond the scope of
this book.
5.3 • Comparative statics
383
Practice Problem
3 Give a graphical confirmation of the sign of the multiplier
for the linear one-commodity market model
P = aQS + b
(a > 0, b > 0)
P = −cQD + d
(c > 0, d > 0)
∂Q
∂d
Advice
We shall return to this topic again in Chapter 7 when we use Cramer’s rule to solve the
structural equations of a linear model.
Autonomous consumption multiplier
The number by which you multiply the change in
autonomous consumption to deduce the corresponding change in, say, national income:
∂Y/∂b.
Balanced budget multiplier
The number by which you multiply the change in govern-
ment expenditure to deduce the corresponding change in, say, national income: ∂Y/∂G*,
assuming that this change is ﬁnanced entirely by a change in taxation.
Comparative statics
Examination of the effect on equilibrium values due to changes in the
parameters of an economic model.
Dynamics
Analysis of how equilibrium values vary over time.
Investment multiplier
The number by which you multiply the change in investment to
deduce the corresponding change in, say, national income: ∂Y/∂I*.
Marginal propensity to consume multiplier
The number by which you multiply the
change in MPC to deduce the corresponding change in, say, national income: ∂Y/∂a.
Reduced form
The ﬁnal equation obtained when exogenous variables are eliminated in the
course of solving a set of structural equations in a macroeconomic model.
Statics
The determination of the equilibrium values of variables in an economic model
which do not change over time.
Structural equations
A collection of equations that describe the equilibrium conditions of
a macroeconomic model.
Key Terms

Partial Differentiation
384
Practice Problems
4 Consider the three-sector model
Y = C + I + G
(1)
C = aYd + b
(0 < a < 1, b > 0)
(2)
Yd = Y −T
(3)
T = T*
(T* > 0)
(4)
I
= I*
(I* > 0)
(5)
G = G*
(G* > 0)
(6)
(a) Show that
C =
(b) Write down the investment multiplier for C. Decide the direction of change in C due to an increase
in I*.
(c) If a = 0.9, b = 80, I* = 60, G* = 40, T* = 20, calculate the equilibrium level of consumption, C, and
also the change in C due to a 2 unit change in investment.
5 Consider the four-sector macroeconomic model
Y = C + I + G + X −M
C = aYd + b
(0 < a < 1, b > 0)
Yd = Y −T
T = tY + T*
(0 < t < 1, T* > 0)
I
= I*
(I* > 0)
G = G*
(G* > 0)
X = X*
(X* > 0)
M = mYd + M*
(0 < m < 1, M* > 0)
(1) Show that
Y =
(2) (a) Write down the autonomous taxation multiplier. Deduce that an increase in T* causes a
decrease in Y on the assumption that a country’s marginal propensity to import, m, is less than
its marginal propensity to consume, a.
(b) Write down the government expenditure multiplier. Deduce that an increase in G* causes an
increase in Y.
(3) Let a = 0.7, b = 150, t = 0.25, m = 0.1, T* = 100, I* = 100, G* = 500, M* = 300 and X* = 160.
(a) Calculate the equilibrium level of national income.
(b) Calculate the change in Y due to an 11 unit increase in G*.
(c) Find the increase in autonomous taxation required to restore Y to its level calculated in part (a).
b + (m −a)T* + I* + G* + X* −M*
1 −a + at + m −mt
aI* + aG* −aT* + b
1 −a

6 Show that the equilibrium price for a linear one-commodity market model
P = aQS + b
(a > 0, b > 0)
P = −cQD + d
(c > 0, d > 0)
where d −b > 0, is given by
P =
Find expressions for the multipliers
,
,
,
and deduce the direction of change in P due to an increase in a, b, c or d.
7 (1) For the commodity market
Y = C + I
C = aY + b
(0 < a < 1, b > 0)
I = cr + d
(c < 0, d > 0)
where r is the interest rate.
Show that, when the commodity market is in equilibrium,
(1 −a)Y −cr = b + d
(2) For the money market
(money supply)
MS = M*S
(M*S > 0)
(total demand for money)
MD = k1Y + k2r + k3
(k1 > 0, k2 < 0, k3 > 0)
(equilibrium)
MD = MS
Show that when the money market is in equilibrium
k1Y + k2r = M*S −k3
(3) (a) By solving the simultaneous equations derived in parts (1) and (2) show that when the com-
modity and money markets are both in equilibrium
Y =
(b) Write down the money supply multiplier, ∂Y/∂MS* and deduce that an increase in MS* causes
an increase in Y.
k2(b + d) + c(M*S −k3)
(1 −a)k2 + ck1
∂P
∂d
∂P
∂c
∂P
∂b
∂P
∂a
ad + bc
a + c
5.3 • Comparative statics
385

section 5.4
Unconstrained optimization
As you might expect, methods for ﬁnding the maximum and minimum points of a function of
two variables are similar to those used for functions of one variable. However, the nature of
economic functions of several variables forces us to subdivide optimization problems into 
two types, unconstrained and constrained. To understand the distinction, consider the utility
function
U(x1, x2) = x1
1/4x2
3/4
The value of U measures the satisfaction gained from buying x1 items of a good G1 and x2 items
of a good G2. The natural thing to do here is to try to pick x1 and x2 to make U as large as 
possible, thereby maximizing utility. However, a moment’s thought should convince you that,
as it stands, this problem does not have a ﬁnite solution. The factor x1
1/4 can be made as large as
we please by taking ever-increasing values of x1 and likewise for the factor x 2
3/4. In other words,
utility increases without bound as more and more items of goods G1 and G2 are bought. 
In practice, of course, this does not occur, since there is a limit to the amount of money that 
an individual has to spend on these goods. For example, suppose that the cost of each item of
G1 and G2 is $2 and $3, respectively, and that we allocate $100 for the purchase of these goods.
The total cost of buying x1 items of G1 and x2 items of G2 is
Objectives
At the end of this section you should be able to:
 Use the ﬁrst-order partial derivatives to ﬁnd the stationary points of a function
of two variables.
 Use the second-order partial derivatives to classify the stationary points of a
function of two variables.
 Find the maximum proﬁt of a ﬁrm that produces two goods.
 Find the maximum proﬁt of a ﬁrm that sells a single good in different markets
with price discrimination.

2x1 + 3x2
so we require
2x1 + 3x2 = 100
The problem now is to maximize the utility function
U = x1
1/4x2
3/4
subject to the budgetary constraint
2x1 + 3x2 = 100
The constraint prevents us from taking ever-increasing values of x1 and x2 and leads to a ﬁnite
solution.
We describe how to solve constrained optimization problems in the following two sections.
For the moment we concentrate on the simple case of optimizing functions
z = f(x, y)
without any constraints. This is typiﬁed by the problem of proﬁt maximization, which usually
has a ﬁnite solution without the need to impose constraints. In a sense the constraints are built
into the proﬁt function, which is deﬁned by
π = TR −TC
because there is a conﬂict between trying to make total revenue, TR, as large as possible while
trying to make total cost, TC, as small as possible.
Let us begin by recalling how to ﬁnd and classify stationary points of functions of one variable
y = f(x)
In Section 4.6 we used the following strategy:
Step 1
Solve the equation
f ′(x) = 0
to ﬁnd the stationary points, x = a.
Step 2
If
 f ″(a) > 0 then the function has a minimum at x = a
 f ″(a) < 0 then the function has a maximum at x = a
 f ″(a) = 0 then the point cannot be classiﬁed using the available information
For functions of two variables
z = f(x, y)
the stationary points are found by solving the simultaneous equations
= 0
= 0
∂z
∂y
∂z
∂x
5.4 • Unconstrained optimization
387

that is,
fx(x, y) = 0
fy(x, y) = 0
This is a natural extension of the one-variable case. We ﬁrst write down expressions for the
ﬁrst-order partial derivatives and then equate to zero. This represents a system of two equations
for the two unknowns x and y, which we hope can be solved. Stationary points obtained in this
way can be classiﬁed into one of three types: minimum, maximum and saddle point.
Figure 5.12(a) shows the shape of a surface in the neighbourhood of a minimum. It can be
thought of as the bottom of a bowl-shaped valley. If you stand at the minimum point and walk
in any direction then you are certain to start moving upwards. Mathematically, we can classify
a stationary point (a, b) as a minimum provided that all three of the following conditions hold:
> 0,
> 0,
−
2
> 0
when x = a and y = b: that is,
fxx(a, b) > 0,
fyy(a, b) > 0,
fxx(a, b)fyy(a, b) −[ fxy(a, b)]2 > 0
This triple requirement is obviously more complicated than the single condition needed in the
case of a function of one variable. However, once the second-order partial derivatives have
been evaluated at the stationary point, the three conditions are easily checked.
Figure 5.12(b) shows the shape of a surface in the neighbourhood of a maximum. It can be
thought of as the summit of a mountain. If you stand at the maximum point and walk in any
direction then you are certain to start moving downwards. Mathematically, we can classify a
stationary point (a, b) as a maximum provided that all three of the following conditions hold:
< 0,
< 0,
−
2
> 0
when x = a and y = b: that is,
fxx(a, b) < 0,
fyy(a, b) < 0,
fxx(a, b) fyy(a, b) −[ fxy(a, b)]2 > 0
Of course, any particular mountain range may well have lots of valleys and summits. Likewise,
a function of two variables can have more than one minimum or maximum.
Figure 5.12(c) shows the shape of a surface in the neighbourhood of a saddle point. As its
name suggests, it can be thought of as the middle of a horse’s saddle. If you sit at this point and
edge towards the head or tail then you start moving upwards. On the other hand, if you edge
sideways then you start moving downwards (and will probably fall off!). Mathematically, 
we can classify a stationary point (a, b) as a saddle point provided that the following single 
condition holds:
−
2
< 0
D
F
∂2z
∂x∂y
A
C
D
F
∂2z
∂y2
A
C
D
F
∂2z
∂x2
A
C
D
F
∂2z
∂x∂y
A
C
D
F
∂2z
∂y2
A
C
D
F
∂2z
∂x2
A
C
∂2z
∂y2
∂2z
∂x2
D
F
∂2z
∂x∂y
A
C
D
F
∂2z
∂y2
A
C
D
F
∂2z
∂x2
A
C
∂2z
∂y2
∂2z
∂x2
Partial Differentiation
388
Figure 5.12

when x = a and y = b: that is,
fxx(a, b)fyy(a, b) −[ fxy(a, b)]2 < 0
To summarize, the method for ﬁnding and classifying stationary points of a function f(x, y) is
as follows:
Step 1
Solve the simultaneous equations
fx(x, y) = 0
fy(x, y) = 0
to ﬁnd the stationary points, (a, b).
Step 2
If
 fxx > 0, fyy > 0 and fxxfyy −f 2
xy > 0 at (a, b) then the function has a minimum at (a, b)
 fxx < 0, fyy < 0 and fxxfyy −f 2
xy > 0 at (a, b) then the function has a maximum at (a, b)
 fxxfyy −f 2
xy < 0 at (a, b) then the function has a saddle point at (a, b)
5.4 • Unconstrained optimization
389
Advice
The second-order conditions needed to classify a stationary point can be expressed more
succinctly using Hessians. Details are given in Appendix 3 at the end of this book, although
you will need to be familiar with determinants of 2 × 2 matrices, which are covered later
in Section 7.2.
Example
Find and classify the stationary points of the function
f(x, y) = x3 −3x + xy2
Solution
In order to use steps 1 and 2 we need to ﬁnd all ﬁrst- and second-order partial derivatives of the function
f(x, y) = x3 −3x + xy2
These are easily worked out as
fx = 3x2 −3 + y2
fy = 2xy
fxx = 6x
fxy = 2y
fyy = 2x


Step 1
The stationary points are the solutions of the simultaneous equations
fx(x, y) = 0
fy(x, y) = 0
so we need to solve
3x2 −3 + y2 = 0
2xy = 0
There have been many occasions throughout this book when we have solved simultaneous equations. So far
these have been linear. This time, however, we need to solve a pair of non-linear equations. Unfortunately,
there is no standard method for solving such systems. We have to rely on our wits in any particular instance.
The trick here is to begin with the second equation
2xy = 0
The only way that the product of three numbers can be equal to zero is when one or more of the individual
numbers forming the product are zero. We know that 2 ≠0, so either x = 0 or y = 0. We investigate these
two possibilities separately.
 Case 1: x = 0. Substituting x = 0 into the ﬁrst equation
3x2 −3 + y2 = 0
gives
−3 + y2 = 0
that is,
y2 = 3
There are therefore two possibilities for y to go with x = 0, namely y = −√3 and y = √3. Hence (0, −√3)
and (0, √3) are stationary points.
 Case 2: y = 0. Substituting y = 0 into the ﬁrst equation
3x2 −3 + y2 = 0
gives
3x2 −3 = 0
that is,
x2 = 1
There are therefore two possibilities for x to go with y = 0, namely x = −1 and x = 1. Hence (−1, 0) and
(1, 0) are stationary points.
These two cases indicate that there are precisely four stationary points, (0, −√3), (0, √3), (−1, 0), (1, 0).
Step 2
To classify these points we need to evaluate the second-order partial derivatives
fxx = 6x,
fyy = 2x,
fxy = 2y
at each point and check the signs of
fxx,
fyy,
fxx fyy −f 2
xy
Partial Differentiation
390

 Point (0, −√3)
fxx = 6(0) = 0,
fyy = 2(0) = 0,
fxy = −2√3
Hence
fxx fyy −f 2
xy = 0(0) −(−2√3)2 = −12 < 0
and so (0, −√3) is a saddle point.
 Point (0, √3)
fxx = 6(0) = 0,
fyy = 2(0) = 0,
fxy = 2√3
Hence
fxx fyy −f 2
xy = 0(0) −(2√3)2 = −12 < 0
and so (0, √3) is a saddle point.
 Point (−1, 0)
fxx = 6(−1) = −6, fyy = 2(−1) = −2, fxy = 2(0) = 0
Hence
fxx fyy −f 2
xy = (−6)(−2) −02 = 12 > 0
and so (−1, 0) is not a saddle point. Moreover, since
fxx < 0
and
fyy < 0
we deduce that (−1, 0) is a maximum.
 Point (1, 0)
fxx = 6(1) = 6,
fyy = 2(1) = 2,
fxy = 2(0) = 0
Hence
fxx fyy −f 2
xy = 6(2) −02 = 12 > 0
and so (1, 0) is not a saddle point. Moreover, since
fxx > 0
and
fyy > 0
we deduce that (1, 0) is a minimum.
5.4 • Unconstrained optimization
391
Practice Problem
1 Find and classify the stationary points of the function
f(x, y) = x2 + 6y −3y2 + 10
We now consider two examples from economics, both involving the maximization of proﬁt.
The ﬁrst considers the case of a ﬁrm producing two different goods, whereas the second
involves a single good sold in two different markets.

Partial Differentiation
392
Example
A ﬁrm is a perfectly competitive producer and sells two goods G1 and G2 at $1000 and $800, respectively,
each. The total cost of producing these goods is given by
TC = 2Q 1
2 + 2Q1Q2 + Q 2
2
where Q1 and Q2 denote the output levels of G1 and G2, respectively. Find the maximum proﬁt and the 
values of Q1 and Q2 at which this is achieved.
Solution
The fact that the ﬁrm is perfectly competitive tells us that the price of each good is ﬁxed by the market and
does not depend on Q1 and Q2. The actual prices are stated in the question as $1000 and $800. If the ﬁrm
sells Q1 items of G1 priced at $1000 then the revenue is
TR1 = 1000Q1
Similarly, if the ﬁrm sells Q2 items of G2 priced at $800 then the revenue is
TR2 = 800Q2
The total revenue from the sale of both goods is then
TR = TR1 + TR2 = 1000Q1 + 800Q2
We are given that the total cost is
TC = 2Q 2
1 + 2Q1Q2 + Q2
2
so the proﬁt function is
π = TR −TC
= (1000Q1 + 800Q2) −(2Q2
1 + 2Q1Q2 + Q2
2)
= 1000Q1 + 800Q2 −2Q2
1 −2Q1Q2 −Q2
2
This is a function of the two variables, Q1 and Q2, that we wish to optimize. The ﬁrst- and second-order par-
tial derivatives are
= 1000 −4Q1 −2Q2
= 800 −2Q1 −2Q2
= −4
= −2
= −2
The two-step strategy then gives the following:
Step 1
At a stationary point
∂2π
∂Q2
2
∂2π
∂Q1∂Q2
∂2π
∂Q1
2
∂π
∂Q2
∂π
∂Q1

= 0
= 0
so we need to solve the simultaneous equations
1000 −4Q1 −2Q2 = 0
800 −2Q1 −2Q2 = 0
that is,
4Q1 + 2Q2 = 1000
(1)
2Q1 + 2Q2 = 800
(2)
The variable Q 2 can be eliminated by subtracting equation (2) from (1) to get
2Q1 = 200
and so Q1 = 100. Substituting this into either equation (1) or (2) gives Q2 = 300. The proﬁt function there-
fore has one stationary point at (100, 300).
Step 2
To show that the point really is a maximum we need to check that
< 0,
< 0,
−
2
> 0
at this point. In this example the second-order partial derivatives are all constant. We have
= −4 < 0
✓
= −2 < 0
✓
−
2
= (−4)(−2) −(−2)2 = 4 > 0
✓
conﬁrming that the ﬁrm’s proﬁt is maximized by producing 100 items of G1 and 300 items of G2.
The actual value of this proﬁt is obtained by substituting Q1 = 100 and Q2 = 300 into the expression
π = 1000Q1 + 800Q2 −2Q1
2 −2Q1Q2 −Q2
2
to get
π = 1000(100) + 800(300) −2(100)2 −2(100)(300) −(300)2 = $170 000
D
F
∂2π
∂Q1∂Q2
A
C
D
F
∂2π
∂Q2
2
A
C
D
F
∂2π
∂Q1
2
A
C
∂2π
∂Q2
2
∂2π
∂Q1
2
D
F
∂2π
∂Q1∂Q2
A
C
D
F
∂2π
∂Q2
2
A
C
D
F
∂2π
∂Q1
2
A
C
∂2π
∂Q2
2
∂2π
∂Q1
2
∂π
∂Q2
∂π
∂Q1
5.4 • Unconstrained optimization
393
Practice Problem
2 A firm is a monopolistic producer of two goods G1 and G2. The prices are related to quantities Q1 and
Q2 according to the demand equations
P1 = 50 −Q1
P2 = 95 −3Q2


If the total cost function is
TC = Q1
2 + 3Q1Q2 + Q2
2
show that the firm’s profit function is
π = 50Q1 −2Q1
2 + 95Q2 −4Q2
2 −3Q1Q2
Hence find the values of Q1 and Q2 which maximize π and deduce the corresponding prices.
Partial Differentiation
394
Example
A ﬁrm is allowed to charge different prices for its domestic and industrial customers. If P1 and Q1 denote
the price and demand for the domestic market then the demand equation is
P1 + Q1 = 500
If P2 and Q2 denote the price and demand for the industrial market then the demand equation is
2P2 + 3Q2 = 720
The total cost function is
TC = 50 000 + 20Q
where Q = Q1 + Q2. Determine the ﬁrm’s pricing policy that maximizes proﬁt with price discrimination and
calculate the value of the maximum proﬁt.
Solution
The topic of price discrimination has already been discussed in Section 4.7. This particular problem is iden-
tical to the worked example solved in that section using ordinary differentiation. You might like to compare
the details of the two approaches.
Our current aim is to ﬁnd an expression for proﬁt in terms of Q1 and Q2 which can then be optimized
using partial differentiation. For the domestic market the demand equation is
P1 + Q1 = 500
which rearranges as
P1 = 500 −Q1
The total revenue function for this market is then
TR1 = P1Q1 = (500 −Q1)Q1 = 500Q1 −Q1
2
For the industrial market the demand equation is
2P2 + 3Q2 = 720
which rearranges as
P2 = 360 −3/2Q2
The total revenue function for this market is then
TR2 = P2Q2 = (360 −3/2Q2)Q2 = 360Q2 −3/2Q2
2
The total revenue received from sales in both markets is
TR = TR1 + TR2 = 500Q1 −Q2
1 + 360Q2 −3/2Q2
2

The total cost of producing these goods is given by
TC = 50 000 + 20Q
and, since Q = Q1 + Q2, we can write this as
TC = 50 000 + 20(Q1 + Q2)
= 50 000 + 20Q1 + 20Q2
The ﬁrm’s proﬁt function is therefore
π = TR −TC
= (500Q1 −Q2
1 + 360Q2 −3/2Q2
2) −(50 000 + 20Q1 + 20Q2)
= 480Q1 −Q2
1 + 340Q2 −3/2Q2
2 −50 000
This is a function of the two variables, Q1 and Q2, that we wish to optimize. The ﬁrst- and second-order par-
tial derivatives are
= 480 −2Q1
= 340 −3Q2
= −2
= 0
= −3
The two-step strategy gives the following:
Step 1
At a stationary point
= 0
= 0
so we need to solve the simultaneous equations
480 −2Q1 = 0
340 −3Q2 = 0
These are easily solved because they are ‘uncoupled’. The ﬁrst equation immediately gives
Q1 =
= 240
while the second gives
Q2 = 340
3
480
2
∂π
∂Q2
∂π
∂Q1
∂2π
∂Q2
2
∂2π
∂Q1∂Q2
∂2π
∂Q1
2
∂π
∂Q2
∂π
∂Q1
5.4 • Unconstrained optimization
395


Step 2
It is easy to check that the conditions for a maximum are satisﬁed:
= −2 < 0
= −3 < 0
−
2
= (−2)(−3) −02 = 6 > 0
The question actually asks for the optimum prices rather than the quantities. These are found by substituting
Q1 = 240
and
Q2 =
into the corresponding demand equations. For the domestic market
P1 = 500 −Q1 = 500 −240 = $260
For the industrial market
P2 = 360 −
Q1 = 360 −
= $190
Finally, we substitute the values of Q1 and Q2 into the proﬁt function
π = 480Q1 −Q2
1 + 340Q2 −3/2Q2
2 −50 000
to deduce that the maximum proﬁt is $26 866.67.
D
F
340
3
A
C
3
2
3
2
340
3
D
F
∂2π
∂Q1∂Q2
A
C
D
F
∂2π
∂Q2
2
A
C
D
F
∂2π
∂Q1
2
A
C
∂2π
∂Q2
2
∂2π
∂Q1
2
Partial Differentiation
396
Practice Problem
3 A firm has the possibility of charging different prices in its domestic and foreign markets. The corres-
ponding demand equations are given by
Q1 = 300 −P1
Q2 = 400 −2P2
The total cost function is
TC = 5000 + 100Q
where Q = Q1 + Q2. Determine the prices that the firm should charge to maximize profit with price dis-
crimination and calculate the value of this profit.
[You have already solved this particular example in Practice Problem 2(a) of Section 4.7.]
Example
A utility function is given by
U = 4x1 + 2x2 −x1
2 −x1
2 + x1x2
(0 ≤x1 ≤5, 0 ≤x2 ≤5)
where x1 and x2 denote the number of units of goods 1 and 2 that are consumed.
MAPLE

(a) Draw a three-dimensional plot of this function and hence estimate the values of x1 and x2 at the 
stationary point. Is this a maximum, minimum or saddle point?
(b) Find the exact values of x1 and x2 at the stationary point using calculus.
Solution
(a) We can name this function utility by typing
>utility:=4*x1+2*x2-x1^2-x2^2+x1*x2;
and then plot the surface by typing
>plot3d(utility,x1=0..5,x2=0..5);
This surface, rotated so that the origin is to the front of the picture, is drawn in Figure 5.13, which shows
that there is just one stationary point. This is clearly a maximum with approximate coordinates (3, 3).
(b) The partial derivatives are worked out by typing
>derivx1:=diff(utility,x1);
which gives
derivx1:=4–2x1+x2
and then typing
>derivx2:=diff(utility,x2);
which gives
derivx1:=2–2x2+x1
5.4 • Unconstrained optimization
397
Figure 5.13


The stationary point is then found by setting each of these derivatives to zero and solving the resulting
simultaneous equations. This is achieved by typing
>solve({derivx1=0,derivx2=0},{x1,x2});
which generates the response
x2 =
, x1 =
so we conclude that the utility function has a maximum point when
x1 =
and
x2 = 8
3
10
3
#
$
10
3
8
3
!
@
Partial Differentiation
398
Maximum point
A point on a surface which has the highest function value in comparison
with other values in its neighbourhood; at such a point the surface looks like the top of a
mountain.
Minimum point
A point on a surface which has the lowest function value in comparison
with other values in its neighbourhood; at such a point the surface looks like the bottom of
a valley or bowl.
Saddle point
A stationary point which is neither a maximum or minimum and at which
the surface looks like the middle of a horse’s saddle.
Key Terms
Advice
As usual we conclude this section with some additional problems for you to try. Practice
Problems 4, 5 and 6 are similar to those given in the text. Practice Problems 7, 8 and 9 are
slightly different, so you may prefer to concentrate on these if you find that you do not have
the time to attempt all of them. Practice Problems 10 and 11 provide practice in using Maple.
Practice Problems
4 Find and classify the stationary points of the following functions:
(a) f(x, y) = x3 + y3 −3x −3y
(b) f(x, y) = x3 + 3xy2 −3x2 −3y2 + 10
5 A firm is a perfectly competitive producer and sells two goods G1 and G2 at $70 and $50, respec-
tively, each. The total cost of producing these goods is given by
TC = Q1
2 + Q1Q2 + Q2
2
where Q1 and Q2 denote the output levels of G1 and G2. Find the maximum profit and the values of
Q1 and Q2 at which this is achieved.
6 The demand functions for a firm’s domestic and foreign markets are
P1 = 50 −5Q1
P2 = 30 −4Q2
and the total cost function is

TC = 10 + 10Q
where Q = Q1 + Q2. Determine the prices needed to maximize profit with price discrimination and
calculate the value of the maximum profit.
[You have already solved this particular example in Practice Problem 8(a) of Section 4.7.]
7 A firm’s production function is given by
Q = 2L1/2 + 3K1/2
where Q, L and K denote the number of units of output, labour and capital. Labour costs are $2 per
unit, capital costs are $1 per unit and output sells at $8 per unit. Show that the profit function is
π = 16L1/2 + 24K1/2 −2L −K
and hence find the maximum profit and the values of L and K at which it is achieved.
8 An individual’s utility function is given by
U = 260x1 + 310x2 + 5x1x2 −10x1
2 −x2
2
where x1 is the amount of leisure measured in hours per week and x2 is earned income measured in
dollars per week. Find the values of x1 and x2 which maximize U. What is the corresponding hourly
rate of pay?
9 A monopolist produces the same product at two factories. The cost functions for each factory are as
follows
TC1 = 8Q1
and
TC2 = Q2
2
The demand function for the good is
P = 100 −2Q
where Q = Q1 + Q2. Find the values of Q1 and Q2 which maximize profit.
10 (Maple) Draw the surface representing each of the following functions. By rotating the surface, 
estimate the x and y values of the stationary points and state whether they are maxima, minima or
saddle points. Use calculus to find the exact location of these points.
(a) z = x2 + y2−2x −4y + 15
(0 ≤x ≤4, 0 ≤y ≤4)
(b) z = 39 −x2 −y2 + 2y
(−2 ≤x ≤2, −2 ≤y ≤2)
(c) z = x2 −y2 −4x + 4y
(0 ≤x ≤4, 0 ≤y ≤4)
11 (Maple) A monopolistic producer charges different prices at home and abroad. The demand functions
of the domestic and foreign markets are given by
P1 + Q1 = 100
and
P2 + 2Q2 = 80
respectively. The firm’s total cost function is
TC = (Q1 + Q2)2
(a) Show that the firm’s profit function is given by
π = 100Q1 + 80Q2 −2Q2
1 −3Q2
2 −2Q1Q2
Use calculus to show that profit is maximized when Q1 = 22 and Q2 = 6, and find the cor-
responding prices.
(b) The foreign country believes that the firm is guilty of dumping because the good sells at a higher
price in the home market, so decides to restrict the sales to a maximum of 2, so that Q2 ≤2. 
By plotting π in the region 0 ≤Q1 ≤30, 0 ≤Q2 ≤2, explain why the profit is maximized when 
Q2 = 2. Use calculus to find value of Q1, and compare the corresponding profit with that of the
free market in part (a).
5.4 • Unconstrained optimization
399

section 5.5
Constrained optimization
In Section 5.4 we described how to ﬁnd the optimum (that is, maximum or minimum) of a
function of two variables
z = f(x, y)
where the variables x and y are free to take any values. As we pointed out at the beginning of
that section, this assumption is unrealistic in many economic situations. An individual wishing
to maximize utility is subject to an income constraint and a ﬁrm wishing to maximize output
is subject to a cost constraint.
Objectives
At the end of this section you should be able to:
 Give a graphical interpretation of constrained optimization.
 Show that when a ﬁrm maximizes output subject to a cost constraint, the ratio
of marginal product to price is the same for all inputs.
 Show that when a consumer maximizes utility subject to a budgetary constraint,
the ratio of marginal utility to price is the same for all goods.
 Use the method of substitution to solve constrained optimization problems in
economics.
Advice
In this section we begin by proving some theoretical results before describing the method
of substitution. You might prefer to skip the theory at a first reading, and begin with the
two worked examples.

In general, we want to optimize a function,
z = f(x, y)
called the objective function subject to a constraint
ϕ(x, y) = M
Here ϕ, the Greek letter phi, is a known function of two variables and M is a known constant.
The problem is to pick the pair of numbers (x, y) which maximizes or minimizes f(x, y) as
before. This time, however, we limit the choice of pairs to those which satisfy
ϕ(x, y) = M
A graphical interpretation should make this clear. To be speciﬁc, let us suppose that a ﬁrm
wants to maximize output and that the production function is of the form
Q = f(K, L)
Let the costs of each unit of capital and labour be PK and PL respectively. The cost to the ﬁrm
of using as input K units of capital and L units of labour is
PKK + PLL
so if the ﬁrm has a ﬁxed amount, M, to spend on these inputs then
PKK + PLL = M
The problem is one of trying to maximize the objective function
Q = f(K, L)
subject to the cost constraint
PKK + PLL = M
Sketched in Figure 5.14 (overleaf) is a typical isoquant map. As usual, points on any one isoquant
yield the same level of output and as output rises the isoquants themselves move further away
from the origin. Also sketched in Figure 5.14 is the cost constraint. This is called an isocost
curve because it gives all combinations of K and L which can be bought for a ﬁxed cost, M.
The fact that
PKK + PLL = M
is represented by a straight line should come as no surprise to you by now. We can even rewrite
it in the more familiar ‘y = ax + b’ form and so identify its slope and intercept. In Figure 5.14,
L is plotted on the horizontal axis and K is plotted on the vertical axis, so we need to rearrange
PKK + PLL = M
to express K in terms of L. Subtracting PLL from both sides and dividing through by PK gives
K =
−
L +
The isocost curve is therefore a straight line with slope −PL/PK and intercept M/PK. Graphically,
our constrained problem is to choose that point on the isocost line which maximizes output.
This is given by the point labelled A in Figure 5.14. Point A certainly lies on the isocost line and
it maximizes output because it also lies on the highest isoquant. Other points, such as B and C,
also satisfy the constraint but they lie on lower isoquants and so yield smaller levels of output
than A. Point A is characterized by the fact that the isocost line is tangential to an isoquant. In
other words, the slope of the isocost line is the same as that of the isoquant at A.
M
PK
D
F
PL
PK
A
C
5.5 • Constrained optimization
401

Partial Differentiation
402
Figure 5.14
Now we have already shown that the isocost line has slope −PL/PK. In Section 5.2 we deﬁned
the marginal rate of technical substitution, MRTS, to be minus the slope of an isoquant, so at
point A we must have
= MRTS
We also showed that
MRTS =
so
=
the ratio of the input prices is equal to the ratio of their marginal products
This relationship can be rearranged as
=
so when output is maximized subject to a cost constraint
the ratio of marginal product to price is the same for all inputs
The marginal product determines the change in output due to a 1 unit increase in input. This
optimization condition therefore states that the last dollar spent on labour yields the same
addition to output as the last dollar spent on capital.
The above discussion has concentrated on production functions. An analogous situation
arises when we maximize utility functions
MPK
PK
MPL
PL
MPL
MPK
PL
PK
MPL
MPK
PL
PK

5.5 • Constrained optimization
403
U = U(x1, x2)
where x1, x2 denote the number of items of goods G1, G2 that an individual buys. If the prices
of these goods are denoted by P1 and P2 and the individual has a ﬁxed budget, M, to spend on
these goods then the corresponding constraint is
P1x1 + P2x2 = M
This budgetary constraint plays the role of the cost constraint, and indifference curves are ana-
logous to isoquants. Consequently, we analyse the problem by superimposing the budget line
on an indifference map. The corresponding diagram is virtually indistinguishable from that of
Figure 5.14. The only change is that the axes would be labelled x1 and x2 rather than L and K.
Once again, the maximum point of the constrained problem occurs at the point of tangency,
so that at this point the slope of the budget line is that of an indifference curve. Hence
= MRCS
In Section 5.2 we derived the result
MRCS =
Writing the partial derivatives ∂U/∂xi more concisely as Ui we can deduce that
=
that is,
the ratio of the prices of the goods is equal to the ratio of their marginal utilities
Again, this relationship can be rearranged into the more familiar form
=
so when utility is maximized subject to a budgetary constraint,
the ratio of marginal utility to price is the same for all goods consumed
If individuals allocate their budgets between goods in this way then utility is maximized when
the last dollar spent on each good yields the same addition to total utility. Under these cir-
cumstances, the consumer has achieved maximum satisfaction within the constraint of a ﬁxed
budget, so there is no tendency to reallocate income between these goods. Obviously, the con-
sumer’s equilibrium will be affected if there is a change in external conditions such as income
or the price of any good. For example, suppose that P1 suddenly increases, while P2 and M
remain ﬁxed. If this happens then the equation
=
turns into an inequality
< U2
P2
U1
P1
U2
P2
U1
P1
U2
P2
U1
P1
U1
U2
P1
P2
∂U/∂x1
∂U/∂x2
P1
P2

so equilibrium no longer holds. Given that P1 has increased, consumers ﬁnd that the last dol-
lar spent no longer buys as many items of G1, so utility can be increased by purchasing more
of G2 and less of G1. By the law of diminishing marginal utility, the effect is to increase U1 and
to decrease U2. The process of reallocation continues until the ratio of marginal utilities to
prices is again equal and equilibrium is again established.
The graphical approach provides a useful interpretation of constrained optimization. It has
also enabled us to justify some familiar results in microeconomics. However, it does not give
us a practical way of actually solving such problems. It is very difﬁcult to produce an accurate
isoquant or indifference map from any given production or utility function. We now describe
an alternative approach, known as the method of substitution. To illustrate the method we
begin with an easy example.
Partial Differentiation
404
Example
Find the minimum value of the objective function
z = −2x2 + y2
subject to the constraint y = 2x −1.
Solution
In this example we need to optimize the function
z = −2x2 + y2
given that x and y are related by
y = 2x −1
The obvious thing to do is to substitute the expression for y given by the constraint directly into the func-
tion that we are trying to optimize to get
z = −2x2 + (2x −1)2
= −2x2 + 4x2 −4x + 1
= 2x2 −4x + 1
Note the wonderful effect that this has on z. Instead of z being a function of two variables, x and y, it is now
just a function of the one variable, x. Consequently, the minimum value of z can be found using the theory
of stationary points discussed in Chapter 4.
At a stationary point
= 0
that is,
4x −4 = 0
which has solution x = 1. Differentiating a second time we see that
= 4 > 0
conﬁrming that the stationary point is a minimum. The value of z can be found by substituting x = 1 into
z = 2x2 −4x + 1
d2z
dx2
dz
dx

to get
z = 2(1)2 −4(1) + 1 = −1
It is also possible to ﬁnd the value of y at the minimum. To do this we substitute x = 1 into the constraint
y = 2x −1
to get
y = 2(1) −1 = 1
The constrained function therefore has a minimum value of −1 at the point (1, 1).
5.5 • Constrained optimization
405
Practice Problem
1 Find the maximum value of the objective function
z = 2x2 −3xy + 2y + 10
subject to the constraint y = x.
The method of substitution for optimizing
z = f(x, y)
subject to
ϕ(x, y) = M
may be summarized as follows.
Step 1
Use the constraint
ϕ(x, y) = M
to express y in terms of x.
Step 2
Substitute this expression for y into the objective function
z = f(x, y)
to write z as a function of x only.
Step 3
Use the theory of stationary points of functions of one variable to optimize z.

To illustrate this we now use the method of substitution to solve two economic problems
that both involve production functions. In the ﬁrst example output is maximized subject to
cost constraint and in the second example cost is minimized subject to an output constraint.
Partial Differentiation
406
Advice
The most difficult part of the three-step strategy is step 1, where we rearrange the given
constraint to write y in terms of x. In the previous example and in Practice Problem 1 this step
was exceptionally easy because the constraint was linear. In both cases the constraint was
even presented in the appropriate form to begin with, so no extra work was required. In
general, if the constraint is non-linear, it may be difficult or impossible to perform the initial
rearrangement. If this happens then you could try working the other way round and
expressing x in terms of y, although there is no guarantee that this will be possible either.
However, when step 1 can be tackled successfully, the method does provide a really quick
way of solving constrained optimization problems.
Example
A ﬁrm’s unit capital and labour costs are $1 and $2 respectively. If the production function is given by
Q = 4LK + L2
ﬁnd the maximum output and the levels of K and L at which it is achieved when the total input costs are
ﬁxed at $105. Verify that the ratio of marginal product to price is the same for both inputs at the optimum.
Solution
We are told that 1 unit of capital costs $1 and that 1 unit of labour costs $2. If the ﬁrm uses K units of 
capital and L units of labour then the total input costs are
K + 2L
This is ﬁxed at $105, so
K + 2L = 105
The mathematical problem is to maximize the objective function
Q = 4LK + L2
subject to the constraint
K + 2L = 105
The three-step strategy is as follows:
Step 1
Rearranging the constraint to express K in terms of L gives
K = 105 −2L
Step 2
Substituting this into the objective function
Q = 4LK + L2
gives
Q = 4L(105 −2L) + L2 = 420L −7L2
and so output is now a function of the one variable, L.

Step 3
At a stationary point
= 0
that is,
420 −14L = 0
which has solution L = 30. Differentiating a second time gives
= −14 < 0
conﬁrming that the stationary point is a maximum.
The maximum output is found by substituting L = 30 into the objective function
Q = 420L −7L2
to get
Q = 420(30) −7(30)2 = 6300
The corresponding level of capital is found by substituting L = 30 into the constraint
K = 105 −2L
to get
K = 105 −2(30) = 45
The ﬁrm should therefore use 30 units of labour and 45 units of capital to produce a maximum output 
of 6300.
Finally, we are asked to check that the ratio of marginal product to price is the same for both inputs. From
the formula
Q = 4LK + L2
we see that the marginal products are given by
MPL =
= 4K + 2L
and
MPK =
= 4L
so at the optimum
MPL = 4(45) + 2(30) = 240
and
MPK = 4(30) = 120
The ratios of marginal products to prices are then
=
= 120
and
=
= 120
which are seen to be the same.
120
1
MPK
PK
240
2
MPL
PL
∂Q
∂K
∂Q
∂L
d2Q
dL2
dQ
dL
5.5 • Constrained optimization
407

Partial Differentiation
408
Practice Problem
2 An individual’s utility function is given by
U = x1x2
where x1 and x2 denote the number of items of two goods, G1 and G2. The prices of the goods are $2
and $10 respectively. Assuming that the individual has $400 available to spend on these goods, find
the utility-maximizing values of x1 and x2. Verify that the ratio of marginal utility to price is the same
for both goods at the optimum.
Example
A ﬁrm’s production function is given by
Q = 2K1/2L1/2
Unit capital and labour costs are $4 and $3 respectively. Find the values of K and L which minimize total
input costs if the ﬁrm is contracted to provide 160 units of output.
Solution
Given that capital and labour costs are $4 and $3 per unit, the total cost of using K units of capital and L
units of labour is
TC = 4K + 3L
The ﬁrm’s production quota is 160, so
2K1/2L1/2 = 160
The mathematical problem is to minimize the objective function
TC = 4K + 3L
subject to the constraint
2K1/2L1/2 = 160
Step 1
Rearranging the constraint to express L in terms of K gives
L1/2 =
(divide both sides by 2K1/2)
L =
(square both sides)
Step 2
Substituting this into the objective function
TC = 4K + 3L
gives
6400
K
80
K 1/2

TC = 4K + 
and so total cost is now a function of the one variable, K.
Step 3
At a stationary point
= 0
that is,
4 − 
= 0
This can be written as
4 =
so that
K2 = 
= 4800
Hence
K = √4800 = 69.28
Differentiating a second time gives
=
> 0
because
K > 0
conﬁrming that the stationary point is a minimum.
Finally, the value of L can be found by substituting K = 69.28 into the constraint
L =
to get
L =
= 92.38
We are not asked for the minimum cost, although this could easily be found by substituting the values of K
and L into the objective function.
6400
69.28
6400
K
38 400
K 3
d2(TC)
dK 2
19 200
4
19 200
K 2
19 200
K 2
d(TC)
dK
19 200
K
5.5 • Constrained optimization
409
Practice Problem
3 A firm’s total cost function is given by
TC = 3x1
2 + 2x1x2 + 7x2
2
where x1 and x2 denote the number of items of goods G1 and G2, respectively, that are produced. Find
the values of x1 and x2 which minimize costs if the firm is committed to providing 40 goods of either
type in total.

Partial Differentiation
410
Isocost curve
A line showing all combinations of two factors which can be bought for a
ﬁxed cost.
Method of substitution
The method of solving constrained optimization problems
whereby the constraint is used to eliminate one of the variables in the objective function.
Objective function
A function that one seeks to optimize (usually) subject to constraints.
Key Terms
Practice Problems
4 Find the maximum value of
z = 6x −3x2 + 2y
subject to the constraint
y −x2 = 2
5 Find the maximum value of
z = 80x −0.1x2 + 100y −0.2y2
subject to the constraint
x + y = 500
6 A firm’s production function is given by
Q = 10K1/2L1/4
Unit capital and labour costs are $4 and $5 respectively and the firm spends a total of $60 on these
inputs. Find the values of K and L which maximize output.
7 A firm’s production function is given by
Q = 50KL
Unit capital and labour costs are $2 and $3 respectively. Find the values of K and L which minimize
total input costs if the production quota is 1200.
8 A firm’s production function is given by
Q = 2L1/2 + 3K1/2
where Q, L and K denote the number of units of output, labour and capital respectively. Labour costs
are $2 per unit, capital costs are $1 per unit and output sells at $8 per unit. If the firm is prepared to
spend $99 on input costs, find the maximum profit and the values of K and L at which it is achieved.
[You might like to compare your answer with the corresponding unconstrained problem that you
solved in Practice Problem 7 of Section 5.4.]
9 A consumer’s utility function is
U = ln x1 + 2 ln x2
Find the values of x1 and x2 which maximize U subject to the budgetary constraint
2x1 + 3x2 = 18

section 5.6
Lagrange multipliers
We now describe the method of Lagrange multipliers for solving constrained optimization
problems. This is the preferred method, since it handles non-linear constraints and problems
involving more than two variables with ease. It also provides some additional information that
is useful when solving economic problems.
To optimize an objective function
f(x, y)
subject to a constraint
ϕ(x, y) = M
we work as follows.
Step 1
Deﬁne a new function
g(x, y, λ) = f(x, y) + λ[M −ϕ(x, y)]
Objectives
At the end of this section you should be able to:
 Use the method of Lagrange multipliers to solve constrained optimization 
problems.
 Give an economic interpretation of Lagrange multipliers.
 Use Lagrange multipliers to maximize a Cobb–Douglas production function
subject to a cost constraint.
 Use Lagrange multipliers to show that when a ﬁrm maximizes output subject to
a cost constraint, the ratio of marginal product to price is the same for all inputs.

Step 2
Solve the simultaneous equations
= 0
= 0
= 0
for the three unknowns, x, y and λ.
The basic steps of the method are straightforward. In step 1 we combine the objective func-
tion and constraint into a single function. To do this we ﬁrst rearrange the constraint as
M −ϕ(x, y)
and multiply by the scalar (i.e. number) λ (the Greek letter ‘lambda’). This scalar is called the
Lagrange multiplier. Finally, we add on the objective function to produce the new function
g(x, y, λ) = f(x, y) + λ[M −ϕ(x, y)]
This is called the Lagrangian function. The right-hand side involves the three letters x, y and λ,
so g is a function of three variables.
In step 2 we work out the three ﬁrst-order partial derivatives
,
,
and equate these to zero to produce a system of three simultaneous equations for the three
unknowns x, y and λ. The point (x, y) is then the optimal solution of the constrained problem.
The number λ can also be given a meaning and we consider this later. For the moment we con-
sider a simple example to get us started.
∂g
∂λ
∂g
∂y
∂g
∂x
∂g
∂λ
∂g
∂y
∂g
∂x
Partial Differentiation
412
Example
Use Lagrange multipliers to ﬁnd the optimal value of
x2 −3xy + 12x
subject to the constraint
2x + 3y = 6
Solution
Step 1
In this example
f(x, y) = x2 −3xy + 12x
ϕ(x, y) = 2x + 3y
M = 6
so the Lagrangian function is given by
g(x, y, λ) = x2 −3xy + 12x + λ(6 −2x −3y)

Step 2
Working out the three partial derivatives of g gives
= 2x −3y + 12 −2λ
= −3x −3λ
= 6 −2x −3y
so we need to solve the simultaneous equations
2x −3y + 12 −2λ = 0
−3x −3λ = 0
6 −2x −3y = 0
that is,
2x −3y −2λ = −12
(1)
−3x −3λ = 0
(2)
2x + 3y = 6
(3)
We can eliminate x from equation (2) by multiplying equation (1) by 3, multiplying equation (2) by 2 and
adding. Similarly, x can be eliminated from equation (3) by subtracting equation (3) from (1). These opera-
tions give
−9y −12λ = −36
(4)
−6y −2λ = −18
(5)
The variable y can be eliminated by multiplying equation (4) by 6 and equation (5) by 9, and subtracting to
get
−54λ = −54
(6)
so λ = 1. Substituting this into equations (5) and (2) gives y = 8/3 and x = −1 respectively.
The optimal solution is therefore (−1, 8/3) and the corresponding value of the objective function
x2 −3xy + 12x
is
(−1)2 −3(−1)(8/3) + 12(−1) = −3
∂g
∂λ
∂g
∂y
∂g
∂x
5.6 • Lagrange multipliers
413
Practice Problem
1 Use Lagrange multipliers to optimize
2x2 −xy
subject to
x + y = 12

Looking back at the worked example and your own solution to Practice Problem 1, notice
that the third equation in step 2 is just a restatement of the original constraint. It is easy to see
that this is always the case because if
g(x, y, λ) = f(x, y) + λ[M −ϕ(x, y)]
then
= M −ϕ(x,y)
The equation
= 0
then implies the constraint
ϕ(x, y) = M
It is possible to make use of second-order partial derivatives to classify the optimal point.
Unfortunately, these conditions are quite complicated and are considered in Appendix 3. In all
problems that we consider there is only a single optimum and it is usually obvious on economic
grounds whether it is a maximum or a minimum.
∂g
∂λ
∂g
∂λ
Partial Differentiation
414
Example
A monopolistic producer of two goods, G1 and G2, has a joint total cost function
TC = 10Q1 + Q1Q2 + 10Q2
where Q1 and Q2 denote the quantities of G1 and G2 respectively. If P1 and P2 denote the corresponding
prices then the demand equations are
P1 = 50 −Q1 + Q2
P2 = 30 + 2Q1 −Q2
Find the maximum proﬁt if the ﬁrm is contracted to produce a total of 15 goods of either type. Estimate the
new optimal proﬁt if the production quota rises by 1 unit.
Solution
The ﬁrst thing that we need to do is to write down expressions for the objective function and constraint. The
objective function is proﬁt and is given by
π = TR −TC
The total cost function is given to be
TC = 10Q1 + Q1Q2 + 10Q2
However, we need to use the demand equations to obtain an expression for TR. Total revenue from the sale
of G1 is
TR1 = P1Q1 = (50 −Q1 + Q2)Q1 = 50Q1 −Q1
2 + Q2Q1
and total revenue from the sale of G2 is
TR2 = P2Q2 = (30 + 2Q1 −Q2)Q2 = 30Q2 + 2Q1Q2 −Q2
2
so

TR = TR1 + TR2
= 50Q1 −Q1
2 + Q2Q1 + 30Q2 + 2Q1Q2 −Q2
2
= 50Q1 −Q1
2 + 3Q1Q2 + 30Q2 −Q2
2
Hence
π = TR −TC
= (50Q1 −Q1
2 + 3Q1Q2 + 30Q2 −Q2
2) −(10Q1 + Q1Q2 + 10Q2)
= 40Q1 −Q1
2 + 2Q1Q2 + 20Q2 −Q2
2
The constraint is more easily determined. We are told that the ﬁrm produces 15 goods in total, so
Q1 + Q2 = 15
The mathematical problem is to maximize the objective function
π = 40Q1 −Q1
2 + 2Q1Q2 + 20Q2 −Q2
2
subject to the constraint
Q1 + Q2 = 15
Step 1
The Lagrangian function is
g(Q1, Q2, λ) = 40Q1 −Q1
2 + 2Q1Q2 + 20Q2 −Q2
2 + λ(15 −Q1 −Q2)
Step 2
The simultaneous equations
= 0,
= 0,
= 0
are
40 −2Q1 + 2Q2 −λ = 0
2Q1 + 20 −2Q2 −λ = 0
15 −Q1 −Q2 = 0
that is,
−2Q1 + 2Q2 −λ = −40
(1)
2Q1 −2Q2 −λ = −20
(2)
Q1 + Q2 = 15
(3)
The obvious way of solving this system is to add equations (1) and (2) to get
−2λ = −60
so λ = 30. Putting this into equation (1) gives
−2Q1 + 2Q2 = −10
(4)
Equations (3) and (4) constitute a system of two equations for the two unknowns Q1 and Q2. We can 
eliminate Q1 by multiplying equation (3) by 2 and adding equation (4) to get
4Q2 = 20
∂g
∂λ
∂g
∂Q2
∂g
∂Q1
5.6 • Lagrange multipliers
415


so Q2 = 5. Substituting this into equation (3) gives
Q1 = 15 −5 = 10
The maximum proﬁt is found by substituting Q1 = 10 and Q2 = 5 into the formula for π to get
π = 40(10) −(10)2 + 2(10)(5) + 20(5) −52 = 475
The ﬁnal part of this example wants us to ﬁnd the new optimal proﬁt when the production quota rises
by 1 unit. One way of doing this is just to repeat the calculations replacing the previous quota of 15 by 16,
although this is extremely tedious and not strictly necessary. There is a convenient shortcut based on the
value of the Lagrange multiplier λ. To understand this, let us replace the production quota, 15, by the vari-
able M, so that the Lagrangian function is
g(Q1, Q2, λ, M) = 40Q1 −Q1
2 + 2Q1Q2 + 20Q2 −Q2
2 + λ(M −Q1 −Q2)
The expression on the right-hand side involves Q1, Q2, λ and M, so g is now a function of four variables. If
we partially differentiate with respect to M then
= λ
We see that λ is a multiplier not only in the mathematical but also in the economic sense. It represents the
(approximate) change in g due to a 1 unit increase in M. Moreover, if the constraint is satisﬁed, then
Q1 + Q2 = M
and the expression for g reduces to
40Q1 −Q1
2 + 2Q1Q2 + 20Q2 −Q2
2
which is equal to proﬁt. The value of the Lagrange multiplier represents the change in optimal proﬁt
brought about by a 1 unit increase in the production quota. In this case, λ = 30, so proﬁt rises by 30 to
become 505.
∂g
∂M
Partial Differentiation
416
The interpretation placed on the value of λ in this example applies quite generally. Given an
objective function
f(x, y)
and constraint
ϕ(x, y) = M
the value of λ gives the approximate change in the optimal value of f due to a 1 unit increase 
in M.
Practice Problem
2 A consumer’s utility function is given by
U(x1, x2) = 2x1x2 + 3x1
where x1 and x2 denote the number of items of two goods G1 and G2 that are bought. Each item costs
$1 for G1 and $2 for G2. Use Lagrange multipliers to find the maximum value of U if the consumer’s
income is $83. Estimate the new optimal utility if the consumer’s income rises by $1.

5.6 • Lagrange multipliers
417
Example
Use Lagrange multipliers to ﬁnd expressions for K and L which maximize output given by a Cobb–Douglas
production function
Q = AK αLβ
(A, α and β are positive constants)
subject to a cost constraint
PKK + PLL = M
Solution
This example appears very hard at ﬁrst sight because it does not involve speciﬁc numbers. However, it is easy
to handle such generalized problems provided that we do not panic.
Step 1
The Lagrangian function is
g(K, L, λ) = AK αLβ + λ(M −PKK −PLL)
Step 2
The simultaneous equations
= 0,
= 0,
= 0
are
AαK α−1Lβ −λPK = 0
(1)
AβK αLβ−1 −λPL = 0
(2)
M −PKK −PLL = 0
(3)
These equations look rather forbidding. Before we begin to solve them it pays to simplify equations (1) and
(2) slightly by introducing Q = AK αLβ. Notice that
AαK α−1Lβ =
=
AβK αLβ−1 =
=
so equations (1), (2) and (3) can be written
−λPK = 0
(4)
−λPL = 0
(5)
PKK + PLL = M
(6)
Equations (4) and (5) can be rearranged to give
λ =
and
λ = βQ
PLL
αQ
PKK
βQ
L
αQ
K
βQ
L
β(AK αLβ)
L
αQ
K
α(AK αLβ)
K
∂g
∂λ
∂g
∂L
∂g
∂K


so that
=
and hence
=
(divide both sides by Q and turn both sides upside down)
that is,
PKK =
PLL
(multiply through by α)
(7)
Substituting this into equation (6) gives
PLL + PLL = M
αL + βL =
(multiply through by β/PL)
(α + β)L =
(factorize)
L =
(divide through by α + β)
Finally, we can put this into equation (7) to get
PKK =
so
K =
The values of K and L which optimize Q are therefore
and
βM
(α + β)PL
αM
(α + β)PK
αM
(α + β)PK
αM
α + β
βM
(α + β)PL
βM
PL
βM
PL
α
β
α
β
PLL
β
PKK
α
βQ
PLL
αQ
PKK
Partial Differentiation
418
Practice Problem
3 Use Lagrange multipliers to find expressions for x1 and x2 which maximize the utility function
U = x 1
1/2 + x2
1/2
subject to the general budgetary constraint
P1x1 + P2x2 = M
The previous example illustrates the power of mathematics when solving economics prob-
lems. The main advantage of using algebra and calculus rather than just graphs and tables of
numbers is their generality. In future, if we need to maximize any particular Cobb–Douglas
production function subject to any particular cost constraint, then all we have to do is to quote
the result of the previous example. By substituting speciﬁc values of M, α, β, PK and PL into the
general formulas for K and L, we can write down the solution in a matter of seconds. In fact,

we can use mathematics to generalize still further. Rather than work with production functions
of a prescribed form such as
Q = AK αLβ
we can obtain results pertaining to any production function
Q = f(K, L)
For instance, we can use Lagrange multipliers to justify a result that we derived graphically in
Section 5.5. At the beginning of that section we showed that when output is maximized subject
to a cost constraint, the ratio of marginal product to price is the same for all inputs. To obtain
this result using Lagrange multipliers we simply write down the Lagrangian function
g(K, L, λ) = f(K, L) + λ(M −PKK −PLL)
which corresponds to a production function
f(K, L)
and cost constraint
PKK + PLL = M
The simultaneous equations
= 0,
= 0,
= 0
are
MPK −λPK = 0
(1)
MPL −λPL = 0
(2)
M −PKK −PLL = 0
(3)
because
= MPK
and
= MPL
Equations (1) and (2) can be rearranged to give
λ =
and
λ =
so
=
as required.
MPL
PL
MPK
PK
MPL
PL
MPK
PK
∂f
∂L
∂f
∂K
∂g
∂λ
∂g
∂L
∂g
∂K
5.6 • Lagrange multipliers
419
Lagrange multiplier
The number λ which is used in the Lagrangian function. In eco-
nomics this gives the change in the value of the objective function when the value of the con-
straint is increased by 1 unit.
Lagrangian
The function f(x, y) + λ[M −ϕ(x, y)], where f(x, y) is the objective function
and φ(x, y) = M is the constraint. The stationary point of this function is the solution of the
associated constrained optimization problem.
Key Terms

Partial Differentiation
420
Practice Problems
4 Use Lagrange multipliers to maximize
z = x + 2xy
subject to the constraint
x + 2y = 5
5 A firm that manufactures speciality bicycles has a profit function
π = 5x2 −10xy + 3y2 + 240x
where x denotes the number of frames and y denotes the number of wheels. Find the maximum profit
assuming that the firm does not want any spare frames or wheels left over at the end of the produc-
tion run.
6 A monopolistic producer of two goods, G1 and G2, has a total cost function
TC = 5Q1 + 10Q2
where Q1 and Q2 denote the quantities of G1 and G2 respectively. If P1 and P2 denote the corres-
ponding prices then the demand equations are
P1 = 50 −Q1 −Q2
P2 = 100 −Q1 −4Q2
Find the maximum profit if the firm’s total costs are fixed at $100. Estimate the new optimal profit if
total costs rise to $101.
7 Find the maximum value of
Q = 10√(KL)
subject to the cost constraint
K + 4L = 16
Estimate the change in the optimal value of Q if the cost constraint is changed to
K + 4L = 17
8 A consumer’s utility function is given by
U = α ln x1 + β ln x2
Find the values of x1 and x2 which maximize U subject to the budgetary constraint
P1x1 + P2x2 = M
Advice
There now follow five new Practice Problems for you to attempt. If you feel that you need
even more practice then you are advised to rework the nine Practice Problems given in
Section 5.5 using Lagrange multipliers.

chapter 6
Integration
This chapter concludes the topic of calculus by considering the integration of func-
tions of one variable. It is in two sections, which should be read in the order that
they appear.
Section 6.1 introduces the idea of integration as the opposite process to that of dif-
ferentiation. It enables you to recover an expression for the total revenue function
from any given marginal revenue function, to recover the total cost function from
any marginal cost function and so on. You will no doubt be pleased to discover that
no new mathematical techniques are needed for this. All that is required is for you
to put your brain into reverse gear. Of course, driving backwards is a little harder to
master than going forwards. However, with practice you should ﬁnd integration
almost as easy as differentiation.
Section 6.2 shows how integration can be used to ﬁnd the area under the graph of
a function. This process is called deﬁnite integration. We can apply the technique to
supply and demand curves and so calculate producer’s and consumer’s surpluses.
Deﬁnite integration can also be used to determine capital stock and to discount a
continuous revenue stream.


section 6.1
Indefinite integration
Throughout mathematics there are many pairs of operations which cancel each other out and
take you back to where you started. Perhaps the most obvious pair is multiplication and divi-
sion. If you multiply a number by a non-zero constant, k, and then divide by k you end up with
the number you ﬁrst thought of. This situation is described by saying that the two operations
are inverses of each other. In calculus, the inverse of differentiation is called integration.
Suppose that you are required to ﬁnd a function, F(x), which differentiates to
f(x) = 3x2
Can you guess what F(x) is in this case? Given such a simple function it is straightforward to
write down the answer by inspection. It is
F(x) = x3
because
F′(x) = 3x2 = f(x)
✓
as required.
Objectives
At the end of this section you should be able to:
 Recognize the notation for indeﬁnite integration.
 Write down the integrals of simple power and exponential functions.
 Integrate functions of the form af(x) + bg(x).
 Find the total cost function given any marginal cost function.
 Find the total revenue function given any marginal revenue function.
 Find the consumption and savings functions given either the marginal propen-
sity to consume or the marginal propensity to save.

As a second example, consider
f(x) = x7
Can you think of a function, F(x), which differentiates to this? Recall that when power 
functions are differentiated the power decreases by 1, so it makes sense to do the opposite here
and to try
F(x) = x8
Unfortunately, this does not quite work out, because it differentiates to
8x7
which is eight times too big. This suggests that we try
F(x) = 1/8x8
which does work because
F′(x) = 8/8x7 = x7 = f(x)
✓
In general, if F′(x) = f(x) then F(x) is said to be the integral (sometimes called the anti-
derivative or primitive) of f(x) and is written
F(x) = f(x)dx
In this notation
3x2dx = x3
and
x7dx = 1/8x8
Integration
424
Example
Find

dx
Solution
Writing 
in the form x−4 suggests that we try
F(x) = x−3
which gives
F′(x) = −3x−4.
This is (−3) times too big, so

dx = −
x−3 = −1
3x3
1
3
1
x4
1
x4
1
x4

Here is a problem for you to try. Do not let the notation
dx
put you off. It is merely an instruction for you to think of a function that differentiates to what-
ever is squashed between the integral sign ‘∫’ and dx. If you get stuck, try adding 1 on to the
power. Differentiate your guess and if it does not quite work out then go back and try again,
adjusting the coefﬁcient accordingly.
6.1 • Indefinite integration
425
In Problem 1(a) you probably wrote
2xdx = x2
However, there are other possibilities. For example, both of the functions
x2 + 6
and
x2 −59
differentiate to 2x, because constants differentiate to zero. In fact, we can add any constant, c,
to x2 to obtain a function that differentiates to 2x. Hence
2xdx = x2 + c
The arbitrary constant, c, is called the constant of integration. In general, if F(x) is any function
that differentiates to f(x) then so does
F(x) + c
Hence
 f(x)dx = F(x) + c
In Problem 1 you used guesswork to ﬁnd various integrals. In theory most integrals can be
worked out in this way. However, considerable ingenuity (and luck!) may be required when
integrating complicated functions. It is possible to develop various rules similar to those of dif-
ferentiation, which we discussed in Chapter 4, although even then we sometimes have to resort
to sheer trickery. It is not our intention to plod through each rule as we did in Chapter 4, for
the simple reason that they are rarely needed in economics. However, it is worthwhile showing
you a direct way of integrating simple functions such as
2x −3x2 + 10x3
and
x −e2x + 5
We begin by ﬁnding general formulae for
xndx
and emxdx
Practice Problem
1 Find
(a) 2xdx
(b) 4x3dx
(c) 100x99dx
(d) x3dx
(e) x18dx

To integrate f(x) = x n an obvious ﬁrst guess is
F(x) = x n +1
This gives
F′(x) = (n + 1)x n
which is n + 1 times too big. This suggests that we try again with
F(x) =
xn+1
which checks out because
F′(x) =
x n = x n = f(x)
✓
Hence
xndx =
xn+1 + c
To integrate a power function you simply add 1 to the power and divide by the number you
get. This formula holds whenever n is positive, negative, a whole number or a fraction. There
is just one exception to the rule, when n = −1. The formula cannot be used to integrate
because it is impossible to divide by zero. An alternative result is therefore required in this case.
We know from Chapter 4 that the natural logarithm function
ln x
differentiates to give
and so

dx = ln x + c
The last basic integral that we wish to determine is
emxdx
In Section 4.8 we showed that to differentiate an exponential function all we need to do is to
multiply by the coefﬁcient of x. To integrate we do exactly the opposite and divide by the
coefﬁcient of x, so
emxdx =
emx + c
It is easy to check that this is correct, because if
F(x) =
emx
then
F′(x) =
emx = emx
✓
m
m
1
m
1
m
1
x
1
x
1
x
1
n + 1
n + 1
n + 1
1
n + 1
Integration
426

6.1 • Indefinite integration
427
Example
Find
(a) x6dx
(b) 
dx
(c)  x dx
(d)  e2xdx
Solution
The formula
xndx =
x n+1 + c
can be used to ﬁnd the ﬁrst three integrals by substituting particular values for n.
(a) Putting n = 6 gives
x6dx =
x7 + c
(b) Putting n = −2 gives

dx =x−2dx =
x−1 + c = −
+ c
(c) Putting n = 1/2 gives
 x dx =x1/ 2dx =
x3/2 + c =
x3/2 + c
(d) To ﬁnd
e2xdx
we put m = 2 into the formula
emxdx =
emx + c
to get
e2xdx =
e2x + c
1
2
1
m
2
3
1
3/2
1
x
1
−1
1
x2
1
7
1
n + 1
1
x2
Practice Problem
2 Find
(a) x4dx
(b) 
dx
(c) x1/3dx
(d) e3xdx
(e) 1dx
(f) xdx
(g)  dx
[Hint: in parts (b), (e) and (f) note that 1/x3 = x −3, 1 = x0 and x = x1 respectively.]
1
x
1
x3
In Section 4.2 we described three rules of differentiation known as the constant, sum and
difference rules. Given that integration is the inverse operation, these three rules also apply

whenever we integrate a function. The integral of a constant multiple of a function is obtained
by integrating the function and multiplying by the constant. The integral of the sum (or dif-
ference) of two functions is obtained by integrating the functions separately and adding (or
subtracting). These three rules can be combined into the single rule:
[af(x) + bg(x)]dx = a f(x)dx + bg(x)dx
This enables us to integrate an expression ‘term by term’, as the following example 
demonstrates.
Integration
428
Example
Find
(a) (2x 2 −4x6)dx
(b)  7e−x +
dx
(c) (5x2 + 3x + 2)dx
Solution
(a) (2x2 −4x6)dx = 2x2dx −4x6dx
Putting n = 2 and n = 6 into
xndx =
xn+1
gives
x2dx =
x3
and x6dx =
x7
Hence
(2x2 −4x6)dx =
x3 −
x7
Finally, we add an arbitrary constant to get
(2x2 −4x6)dx =
x3 −
x7 + c
As a check:
if
F(x) =
x3 −
x7 + c
then
F′(x) = 2x2 −4x6
✓
(b)  7e−x +
dx = 7e−xdx + 2 dx
Now
emxdx =
emx
so putting m = −1 gives
e−xdx =
e−x = −e−x
1
−1
1
m
1
x
D
F
2
x
A
C
4
7
2
3
4
7
2
3
4
7
2
3
1
7
1
3
1
n + 1
D
F
2
x
A
C

Also, we know that the reciprocal function integrates to the natural logarithm function, so
 dx = ln x
Hence
 7e−x +
dx = −7e−x + 2 ln x
Finally, we add an arbitrary constant to get
 7e−x +
dx = −7e−x + 2 ln x + c
As a check:
if
F(x) = −7e−x + 2 ln x + c
then
F′(x) = 7e−x +
✓
(c) (5x2 + 3x + 2)dx = 5x2dx + 3xdx + 21dx
Putting n = 2, 1 and 0 into
xndx =
xn+1
gives
x2dx =
x3, xdx =
x2,  1dx = x
Hence
(5x2 + 3x + 2)dx =
x3 +
x2 + 2x
Finally, we add an arbitrary constant to get
(5x2 + 3x + 2)dx =
x3 +
x2 + 2x + c
As a check:
if
F(x) =
x3 +
x2 + 2x + c
then
F′(x) = 5x2 + 3x + 2
✓
3
2
5
3
3
2
5
3
3
2
5
3
1
2
1
3
1
n + 1
2
x
D
F
2
x
A
C
D
F
2
x
A
C
1
x
6.1 • Indefinite integration
429
Advice
We have written out the solution to this example in detail to show you exactly how 
integration is performed. With practice you will probably find that you can just write 
the answer down in a single line of working, although it is always a good idea to check (at
least in your head, if not on paper), by differentiating your answer, that you have not
made any mistakes.
The technique of integration that we have investigated produces a function of x. In the next
section a different type of integration is discussed which produces a single number as the end
result. For this reason we use the word indeﬁnite to describe the type of integration considered
here to distinguish it from the deﬁnite integration in Section 6.2.

In Section 4.3 we described several applications of differentiation to economics. Starting
with any basic economic function, we can differentiate to obtain the corresponding marginal
function. Integration allows us to work backwards and to recover the original function from
any marginal function. For example, by integrating a marginal cost function the total cost func-
tion is found. Likewise, given a marginal revenue function, integration enables us to determine
the total revenue function, which in turn can be used to ﬁnd the demand function. These ideas
are illustrated in the following example, which also shows how the constant of integration can
be given a speciﬁc numerical value in economic problems.
Integration
430
Practice Problem
3 Find the indefinite integrals
(a) (2x −4x3)dx
(b)  10x4 +
dx
(c) (7x2 −3x + 2)dx
D
F
5
x2
A
C
Example
(a) A ﬁrm’s marginal cost function is
MC = Q2 + 2Q + 4
Find the total cost function if the ﬁxed costs are 100.
(b) The marginal revenue function of a monopolistic producer is
MR = 10 −4Q
Find the total revenue function and deduce the corresponding demand equation.
(c) Find an expression for the consumption function if the marginal propensity to consume is given by
MPC = 0.5 +
and consumption is 85 when income is 100.
Solution
(a) We need to ﬁnd the total cost from the marginal cost function
MC = Q2 + 2Q + 4
Now
MC =
so
TC =MCdQ
=(Q2 + 2Q + 4)dQ
=
+ Q2 + 4Q + c
Q3
3
d(TC)
dQ
0.1
Y

The ﬁxed costs are given to be 100. These are independent of the number of goods produced and repre-
sent the costs incurred when the ﬁrm does not produce any goods whatsoever. Putting Q = 0 into the
TC function gives
TC =
+ 02 + 4(0) + c = c
The constant of integration is therefore equal to the ﬁxed costs of production, so c = 100. Hence
TC =
+ Q2 + 4Q + 100
(b) We need to ﬁnd the total revenue from the marginal revenue function
MR = 10 −4Q
Now
MR =
so
TR =MRdQ
=(10 −4Q)dQ
= 10 −2Q2 + c
Unlike in part (a) of this example we have not been given any additional information to help us to pin
down the value of c. We do know, however, that when the ﬁrm produces no goods the revenue is zero,
so that TR = 0 when Q = 0. Putting this condition into
TR = 10Q −2Q2 + c
gives
0 = 10(0) −2(0)2 + c = c
The constant of integration is therefore equal to zero. Hence
TR = 10Q −2Q2
Finally, we can deduce the demand equation from this. To ﬁnd an expression for total revenue from any
given demand equation we normally multiply by Q, because TR = PQ. This time we work backwards,
so we divide by Q to get
P =
=
= 10 −2Q
so the demand equation is
P = 10 −2Q
(c) We need to ﬁnd consumption given that the marginal propensity to consume is
MPC = 0.5 +
Now
MPC = dC
dY
0.1
Y
10Q −2Q2
Q
TR
Q
d(TR)
dQ
Q3
3
03
3
6.1 • Indefinite integration
431


so
C =MRCdY
= 0.5 +
dY
= 0.5Y + 0.2 Y + c
where the second term is found from

dY = 0.1Y −1/ 2dY = 0.1
Y 1/ 2
= 0.2 Y
The constant of integration can be calculated from the additional information that C = 85 when Y = 100.
Putting Y = 100 into the expression for C gives
85 = 0.5(100) + 0.2 100 + c = 52 + c
and so
c = 85 −52 = 33
Hence
C = 0.5Y + 0.2 Y + 33
D
F
1
1/2
A
C
0.1
Y
D
F
0.1
Y
A
C
Integration
432
Practice Problem
4 (a) A firm’s marginal cost function is
MC = 2
Find an expression for the total cost function if the fixed costs are 500. Hence find the total cost
of producing 40 goods.
(b) The marginal revenue function of a monopolistic producer is
MR = 100 −6Q
Find the total revenue function and deduce the corresponding demand equation.
(c) Find an expression for the savings function if the marginal propensity to save is given by
MPS = 0.4 −0.1Y −1/ 2
and savings are zero when income is 100.
Example
A ﬁrm’s marginal revenue and marginal cost functions are given by
MR = 500 −0.5Q2
and
MC = 140 + 0.4Q2
Given that total ﬁxed costs are 1000, plot a graph of the proﬁt function. Find the range of values of Q for
which the ﬁrm makes a proﬁt and ﬁnd its maximum value.
MAPLE

Solution
Let us begin by naming these two expressions as MR and MC by typing
>MR:=500-0.5*Q^2;
and
>MC:=140+0.4*Q^2;
Total revenue is the integral of marginal revenue and this is achieved by typing
>TR:=int(MR,Q);
which gives
TR:=500.Q-0.1666666667Q3
Notice that Maple forgets to include the constant of integration! As it happens, the constant of integration
is zero in this case because TR = 0 when Q = 0. However, when we integrate MC we need to add on the ﬁxed
costs of 1000. We type
>TC:=int(MC,Q)+1000;
which gives
TC:=140.Q+0.1333333333Q2+1000
Proﬁt is then found by subtracting TC from TR so we type:
>profit:=TR-TC;
which gives
profit:=360.Q-.3000000000Q3–1000
In order to sketch a graph of the proﬁt function we need to specify the range of values of Q. Now total rev-
enue is deﬁned as PQ, so the demand equation can be found by dividing TR by Q to get
P = 500 −
Q2
This equation is valid only when P ≥0, i.e. when
500 −
Q2 ≥0
This will be so provided
Q2 ≤500 × 6 = 3000
so we require Q ≤3000 = 54.8.
If we now choose to sketch the graph between 0 and 50, we type
>plot(profit,Q=0..50);
which produces the diagram shown in Figure 6.1 (overleaf).
The ﬁrm makes a proﬁt when the graph lies above the horizontal axis. Figure 6.1 shows that this happens
between Q = 3 and Q = 33 approximately. The diagram also shows that the maximum proﬁt is roughly
$4000, which occurs when Q = 20.
If more precise values are required then these can easily be obtained by typing
>solve(profit=0,Q);
1
6
1
6
6.1 • Indefinite integration
433


which gives
–35.95428113, 2.795992680, 33.15828845
Only the positive solutions are relevant, so we deduce that the ﬁrm makes a proﬁt provided 2.8 ≤Q ≤33.2.
Maximum proﬁt is achieved when MR = MC, so we type
solve(MR=MC,Q);
which gives
20., –20.
Again, the negative solution can be disregarded. The proﬁt itself is found by substituting Q = 20 into the
proﬁt function
>subs(Q=20,profit);
which gives $3800.
Integration
434
Anti-derivative
A function whose derivative is a given function.
Constant of integration
The arbitrary constant that appears in an expression when ﬁnding
an indeﬁnite integral.
Deﬁnite integration
The process of ﬁnding the area under a graph by subtracting the 
values obtained when the limits are substituted into the anti-derivative.
Indeﬁnite integration
The process of obtaining an anti-derivative.
Integral
The number ∫b
af(x)dx (deﬁnite integral) or the function ∫f(x)dx (indeﬁnite 
integral).
Integration
The generic name for the evaluation of deﬁnite or indeﬁnite integrals.
Inverse
The operation that reverses the effect of a given operation and takes you back to
the original. For example, the inverse of halving is doubling.
Primitive
An alternative word for an anti-derivative.
Key Terms
Figure 6.1

6.1 • Indefinite integration
435
Practice Problems
5 Find
(a) 6x5dx
(b) x4dx
(c) 10e10xdx
(d)  dx
(e) x3/2dx
(f) (2x3 −6x)dx
(g) (x2 −8x + 3)dx
(h) (ax + b)dx
(i)  7x3 + 4e−2x −
dx
6 (1) Differentiate
F(x) = (2x + 1)5
Hence find
(2x + 1)4dx
(2) Use the approach suggested in part (1) to find
(a) (3x −2)7dx
(b) (2 −4x)9dx
(c) (ax + b)ndx (n ≠−1)
(d) 
dx
7 (a) Find the total cost if the marginal cost is
MC = Q + 5
and fixed costs are 20.
(b) Find the total cost if the marginal cost is
MC = 3e0.5Q
and fixed costs are 10.
8 Find the total revenue and demand functions corresponding to each of the following marginal 
revenue functions:
(a) MR = 20 −2Q
(b) MR =
9 Find the consumption function if the marginal propensity to consume is 0.6 and consumption is 10
when income is 5. Deduce the corresponding savings function.
10 Find the short-run production functions corresponding to each of the following marginal product of
labour functions:
(a) 1000 −3L2
(b)
−0.01
11 (a) Show that
x( x + x2) = x + x5/2
Hence find
 x ( x + x2)dx
6
L
6
Q
1
7x + 3
D
F
3
x2
A
C
1
x


(b) Use the approach suggested in part (a) to integrate each of the following functions:
x4 x6 +
,
e2x(e3x + e−x + 3),
x3/2
x −
12 (a) Show that
= x3 −x + x−1/ 2
Hence find

dx
(b) Use the approach suggested in part (a) to integrate each of the following functions:
,
,
13 (Maple) If the marginal propensity to consume is given by
MPC =
+
and C = 19/3 when Y = 4, find an expression for the consumption function. Plot both the consump-
tion function and the line C = Y on the same diagram. Use your graph to show that consumption
exceeds income for all values of Y in the range 0 < Y < k for some number k which should be stated.
14 (Maple)
(a) Find an expression for a firm’s short-run production function given that
MPL = 10e−0.02L(50 −L)
(b) Find an expression for the total revenue function given that
MR =
100Q
1 + 50Q2
1
2 Y
1
3
x
x x
x
x x
  
  
−
+
2
ex −e−x
e2x
x2 −x
x3
x4 −x2 + x
x
x4 −x2 + x
x
D
F
1
x
A
C
D
F
1
x2
A
C
Integration
436

section 6.2
Definite integration
One rather tedious task that you may remember from school is that of ﬁnding areas. Sketched 
in Figure 6.2 (overleaf) is a region bounded by the curve y = x2, the lines x = 1, x = 2, and the
x axis. At school you may well have been asked to ﬁnd the area of this region by ‘counting’
squares on graph paper. A much quicker and more accurate way of calculating this area is to
use integration. We begin by integrating the function
f(x) = x 2
to get
F(x) =
x3
In our case we want to ﬁnd the area under the curve between x = 1 and x = 2, so we evaluate
F(1) =
(1)3 =
F(2) =
(2)3 = 8
3
1
3
1
3
1
3
1
3
Objectives
At the end of this section you should be able to:
 Recognize the notation for deﬁnite integration.
 Evaluate deﬁnite integrals in simple cases.
 Calculate the consumer’s surplus.
 Calculate the producer’s surplus.
 Calculate the capital stock formation.
 Calculate the present value of a continuous revenue stream.

Finally, we subtract F(1) from F(2) to get
F(2) −F(1) =
−
=
This number is the exact value of the area of the region sketched in Figure 6.2. Given the con-
nection with integration, we write this area as

2
1
x2dx
In general, the deﬁnite integral

b
a
f(x)dx
denotes the area under the graph of f(x) between x = a and x = b as shown in Figure 6.3. The
numbers a and b are called the limits of integration, and it is assumed throughout this section
that a < b and that f(x) ≥0 as indicated in Figure 6.3.
The technique of evaluating deﬁnite integrals is as follows. A function F(x) is found which
differentiates to f(x). Methods of obtaining F(x) have already been described in Section 6.1.
The new function, F(x), is then evaluated at the limits x = a and x = b to get F(a) and F(b).
Finally, the second number is subtracted from the ﬁrst to get the answer
F(b) −F(a)
In symbols,

b
a
f(x)dx = F(b) −F(a)
7
3
1
3
8
3
Integration
438
Figure 6.2

The process of evaluating a function at two distinct values of x and subtracting one from the
other occurs sufﬁciently frequently in mathematics to warrant a special notation. We write
[F(x)]b
a
as an abbreviation for F(b) −F(a), so that deﬁnite integrals are evaluated as

b
a
f(x)dx = [F(x)]b
a = F(b) −F(a)
where F(x) is the indeﬁnite integral of f(x). Using this notation, the evaluation of

2
1
x2dx
would be written as

2
1
x2dx =
x3
2
1
=
(2)3 −
(1)3 =
Note that it is not necessary to include the constant of integration, because it cancels out when
we subtract F(a) from F(b).
7
3
1
3
1
3
J
L
1
3
G
I
6.2 • Definite integration
439
Figure 6.3
Example
Evaluate the deﬁnite integrals
(a) 
6
2
3dx
(b) 
2
0
(x + 1)dx
Solution
(a) 
6
2
3dx = [3x]
6
2 = 3(6) −3(2) = 12
This value can be conﬁrmed graphically. Figure 6.4 (overleaf) shows the region under the graph of 
y = 3 between x = 2 and x = 6. This is a rectangle, so its area can be found from the formula
area = base × height


which gives
area = 4 × 3 = 12
✓
(b) 
2
0
(x + 1)dx =
+ x
2
0
=
+ 2
−
+ 0
= 4
Again this value can be conﬁrmed graphically. Figure 6.5(a) shows the region under the graph of 
y = x + 1 between x = 0 and x = 2. This can also be regarded as one-half of the rectangle illustrated in 
Figure 6.5(b). This rectangle has a base of 2 units and a height of 4 units, so has area
2 × 4 = 8
The area of the region shown in Figure 6.5(a) is therefore
1/2 × 8 = 4
✓
D
F
02
2
A
C
D
F
22
2
A
C
J
L
x2
2
G
I
Integration
440
Figure 6.5
Figure 6.4
In this example we deliberately chose two very simple functions so that we could demon-
strate the fact that deﬁnite integrals really do give the areas under graphs. The beauty of the
integration technique, however, is that it can be used to calculate areas under quite complicated
functions for which alternative methods would fail to produce the exact value.

To illustrate the applicability of deﬁnite integration we concentrate on four topics:
 consumer’s surplus
 producer’s surplus
 investment ﬂow
 discounting.
We consider each of these in turn.
6.2.1 Consumer’s surplus
The demand function, P = f(Q), sketched in Figure 6.6, gives the different prices that con-
sumers are prepared to pay for various quantities of a good. At Q = Q0 the price P = P0. The
total amount of money spent on Q0 goods is then Q0P0, which is given by the area of the rect-
angle OABC. Now, P0 is the price that consumers are prepared to pay for the last unit that they
buy, which is the Q0th good. For quantities up to Q0 they would actually be willing to pay the
higher price given by the demand curve. The shaded area BCD therefore represents the beneﬁt
to the consumer of paying the ﬁxed price of P0 and is called the consumer’s surplus, CS. The
value of CS can be found by observing that
area BCD = area OABD −area OABC
6.2 • Definite integration
441
Figure 6.6
Practice Problem
1 Evaluate the following definite integrals:
(a) 
1
0
x3dx
(b) 
5
2
(2x −1)dx
(c) 
4
1
(x2 −x + 1)dx
(d) 
1
0
exdx

The area OABD is the area under the demand curve P = f(Q), between Q = 0 and Q = Q0, and
so is equal to

0
Q0
f(Q)dQ
The region OABC is a rectangle with base Q0 and height P0 so
area OABC = Q0P0
Hence
CS =
0
Q0
f(Q)dQ −Q0P0
Integration
442
Practice Problem
2 Find the consumer’s surplus at Q = 8 for the demand function
P = 100 −Q2
Example
Find the consumer’s surplus at Q = 5 for the demand function
P = 30 −4Q
Solution
In this case
f(Q) = 30 −4Q
and Q0 = 5. The price is easily found by substituting Q = 5 into
P = 30 −4Q
to get
P0 = 30 −4(5) = 10
The formula for consumer’s surplus
CS =
0
Q0
f(Q)dQ −Q0P0
gives
CS =
5
0
(30 −4Q)dQ −5(10)
= [30Q −2Q2]
5
0 −50
= [30(5) −2(5)2] −[30(0) −2(0)2] −50
= 50

6.2.2 Producer’s surplus
The supply function, P = g(Q), sketched in Figure 6.7 gives the different prices at which pro-
ducers are prepared to supply various quantities of a good. At Q = Q0 the price P = P0. Assuming
that all goods are sold, the total amount of money received is then Q0P0, which is given by the
area of the rectangle OABC.
Now, P0 is the price at which the producer is prepared to supply the last unit, which is the
Q0th good. For quantities up to Q0 they would actually be willing to accept the lower price given
by the supply curve. The shaded area BCD therefore represents the beneﬁt to the producer of
selling at the ﬁxed price of P0 and is called the producer’s surplus, PS. The value of PS is found
by observing that
area BCD = area OABC −area OABD
The region OABC is a rectangle with base Q0 and height P0, so
area OABC = Q0P0
The area OABD is the area under the supply curve P = g(Q), between Q = 0 and Q = Q0, and so
is equal to

0
Q0
g(Q)dQ
Hence
PS = Q0P0 −
0
Q0
g(Q)dQ
6.2 • Definite integration
443
Figure 6.7
Example
Given the demand function
P = 35 −Q2
D
and supply function
P = 3 + Q2
S
ﬁnd the producer’s surplus assuming pure competition.


Solution
On the assumption of pure competition, the price is determined by the market. Before we can calculate the
producer’s surplus we therefore need to ﬁnd the market equilibrium price and quantity. Denoting the com-
mon value of QD and QS by Q, the demand and supply functions are
P = 35 −Q2
and
P = 3 + Q2
so that
35 −Q2 = 3 + Q2
(both sides are equal to P)
35 −2Q2 = 3
(subtract Q2 from both sides)
−2Q2 = −32
(subtract 35 from both sides)
Q2 = 16
(divide both sides by −2)
which has solution Q = ±4. We can obviously ignore the negative solution because it does not make 
economic sense. The equilibrium quantity is therefore equal to 4. The corresponding price can be found by
substituting this into either the demand or the supply equation. From the demand equation we have
P0 = 35 −(4)2 = 19
The formula for the producer’s surplus,
PS = Q0P0 −
0
Q0
g(Q)dQ
gives
PS = 4(19) −
4
0
(3 + Q2)dQ
= 76 −
3Q +
4
0
= 76 −{[3(4) + 1/3(4)3] −[3(0) −1/3(0)3]}
= 422/3
J
L
Q3
3
G
I
Integration
444
Practice Problem
3 Given the demand equation
P = 50 −2QD
and supply equation
P = 10 + 2QS
calculate
(a) the consumer’s surplus
(b) the producer’s surplus
assuming pure competition.

6.2.3 Investment ﬂow
Net investment, I, is deﬁned to be the rate of change of capital stock, K, so that
I =
Here I(t) denotes the ﬂow of money, measured in dollars per year, and K(t) is the amount of
capital accumulated at time t as a result of this investment ﬂow and is measured in dollars.
Given a formula for capital stock in terms of time, we simply differentiate to ﬁnd net invest-
ment. Conversely, if we know the net investment function then we integrate to ﬁnd the capital
stock. In particular, to calculate the capital formation during the time period from t = t1 to 
t = t2 we evaluate the deﬁnite integral

t2
t1
I(t)dt
dK
dt
6.2 • Definite integration
445
Example
If the investment ﬂow is
I(t) = 9000 t
calculate
(a) the capital formation from the end of the ﬁrst year to the end of the fourth year
(b) the number of years required before the capital stock exceeds $100 000.
Solution
(a) In this part we need to calculate the capital formation from t = 1 to t = 4, so we evaluate the deﬁnite
integral

4
1
9000 tdt= 9000
4
1
t1/2dt
= 9000
t 3/2
4
1
= 9000
(4)3/2 −
(1)3/2
= 9000
−
= $42 000
(b) In this part we need to calculate the number of years required to accumulate a total of $100 000. After
T years the capital stock is

T
0
9000 tdt = 9000
T
0
t1/2dt
We want to ﬁnd the value of T so that
9000
T
0
t1/2dt = 100 000
D
F
2
3
16
3
A
C
J
L
2
3
2
3
G
I
J
L
2
3
G
I


The integral is easily evaluated as
9000
t3/2
T
0
= 9000
T 3/2 −
(0)3/2
= 6000T 3/2
so T satisﬁes
6000T 3/2 = 100 000
This non-linear equation can be solved by dividing both sides by 6000 to get
T 3/2 = 16.67
and then raising both sides to the power of 2/3, which gives
T = 6.5
The capital stock reaches the $100 000 level about halfway through the seventh year.
D
F
2
3
2
3
A
C
J
L
2
3
G
I
Integration
446
Practice Problem
4 If the net investment function is given by
I(t) = 800t1/3
calculate
(a) the capital formation from the end of the first year to the end of the eighth year
(b) the number of years required before the capital stock exceeds $48 600.
Example
During the next year, a ﬁrm’s revenue and cost ﬂows, measured in thousands of dollars per month, are to
be modelled by
r(t) = 0.5t3 −6t 2 + 18t + 30
and
c(t) = 6.5t + 12
respectively.
(1) Evaluate the deﬁnite integrals
(a) 
4
0
(r −c)dt
(b) 
9
4
(r −c)dt
(2) Plot a graph of r(t) and c(t) on the same diagram and hence interpret the values obtained in part (1).
Solution
(1) We begin by naming these expressions r and c by typing
>r:=0.5*t^3–6*t^2+18*t+30;
and
>c:=6.5*t+12;
MAPLE

(a) To evaluate the deﬁnite integral ∫
4
0(r −c)dt, we use the instruction int as before, except that we
now specify the limits, 0 and 4. We type
>int(r-c,t=0..4);
which gives the answer
68
(b) Similarly, the second integral is evaluated by editing the instruction as:
>int(r-c,t=4..9);
which gives
–78.125
(2) To plot both r and c on the same diagram, type
>plot({r,c},t=0..12);
The result is sketched in Figure 6.8.
Now, r(t) represents the rate of change of revenue with respect to time, so the revenue itself is the area
under the graph of r(t). Similarly, the area under the graph of c(t) determines the total cost. Hence the
area between the two curves gives the predicted proﬁt during that time period. Figure 6.8 shows that
between t = 0 and t = 4 revenue exceeds costs, so the ﬁrm is likely to make a positive proﬁt of $68 000.
On the other hand, between t = 4 and t = 9 the graph of c(t) lies above that of r(t), which explains why
the value of the integral is negative. During this period the ﬁrm is expected to make a loss of $78 125.
6.2 • Definite integration
447
6.2.4 Discounting
In Chapter 3 the formula
P = Se−rt / 100
was used to calculate the present value, P, when a single future value, S, is discounted at r%
interest continuously for t years. We also discussed the idea of an annuity. This is a fund that
provides a series of discrete regular payments and we showed how to calculate the original
lump sum needed to secure these payments for a prescribed number of years. This amount is
Figure 6.8

called the present value of the annuity. If the fund is to provide a continuous revenue stream
for n years at an annual rate of S dollars per year then the present value can be found by eval-
uating the deﬁnite integral
P =
n
0
Se−rt / 100dt
Integration
448
Practice Problem
5 Calculate the present value of a continuous revenue stream for 10 years at a constant rate of $5000
per year if the discount rate is 6%.
Example
Calculate the present value of a continuous revenue stream for 5 years at a constant rate of $1000 per year
if the discount rate is 9%.
Solution
The present value is found from the formula
P =
n
0
Se−rt/100dt
with S = 1000, r = 9 and n = 5, so
P =
5
0
1000e−0.09tdt
= 1000
5
0
e−0.09tdt
= 1000 −
e−0.09t
5
0
= −
[e−0.09t]5
0
= −
(e−0.45 −1)
= $4026.35
1000
0.09
1000
0.09
J
L
1
0.09
G
I

6.2 • Definite integration
449
Consumer’s surplus
The excess cost that a person would have been prepared to pay for
goods over and above what is actually paid.
Deﬁnite integral
The number ∫
b
a f(x)dx which represents the area under the graph of f(x)
between x = a and x = b.
Limits of integration
The numbers a and b which appear in the deﬁnite integral, ∫
b
a f(x)dx.
Net investment
Rate of change of capital stock over time: I = dK/dt.
Producer’s surplus
The excess revenue that a producer has actually received over and
above the lower revenue that it was prepared to accept for the supply of its goods.
Key Terms
Practice Problems
6 Find the area under the graph of
f(x) = 4x3 −3x2 + 4x + 2
between x = 1 and x = 2.
7 Evaluate each of the following definite integrals:
(a) 
2
0
x3dx
(b) 
2
−2
x3dx
By sketching a rough graph of the cube function between and x = −2 and 2, suggest a reason for your
answer to part (b). What is the actual area between the x axis and the graph of y = x3 over this range?
8 (Maple)
(a) Plot a graph of y =
on 1 ≤x ≤30.
Evaluate 
N
1
dx in the cases when N is 2, 20 and 200.
What do these results suggest about the value of 
∞
1
dx?
(b) Repeat part (a) for the function y =
.
9 (Maple)
(a) Plot a graph of y =
on 0.01 ≤x ≤1.
Evaluate 
1
N
dx in the cases when N is 0.1, 0.01 and 0.001.
What do these results suggest about the value of 
1
0
dx?
(b) Repeat part (a) for the function y =
.
1
x2
1
x
1
x
1
x
1
x
1
x2
1
x2
1
x2


10 Find the consumer’s surplus at P = 5 for the following demand functions:
(a) P = 25 −2Q
(b) P =
11 Find the producer’s surplus at Q = 9 for the following supply functions:
(a) P = 12 + 2Q
(b) P = 20 Q + 15
12 Given the demand function
P = −Q2
D −4QD + 68
and the supply function
P = Q2
S −2QS + 12
find
(a) the consumer’s surplus
(b) the producer’s surplus
assuming pure competition.
13 If the net investment function is given by
I(t) = 100e0.1t
calculate
(a) the capital formation from the end of the second year to the end of the fifth year
(b) the number of years required before the capital stock exceeds $100 000.
14 Find the expression for capital formation between t = 0 and t = T for the following net investment
functions:
(a) I(t) = At α
(b) I(t) = Aeαt
where A and α are positive constants.
15 Calculate the present value of a continuous revenue stream of $1000 per year if the discount rate is
5% and the money is paid
(a) for 3 years
(b) for 10 years
(c) for 100 years
(d) in perpetuity
16 The present value of a continuous revenue stream of $5000 per year with a discount rate of 10%
over n years is $25 000. Find the value of n correct to 1 decimal place.
10
Q
Integration
450

chapter 7
Matrices
The impression that you may have gained from reading this book is that mathematics
consists of one main topic, calculus, and that every other topic is just a variation on
this theme. This is far from the truth and in this chapter and the next we look at 
two refreshingly different branches of mathematics. It would be useful for you to
have studied Chapter 1, although even this is not essential. There are four sections.
It is essential that Sections 7.1 and 7.2 are read first, but the remaining sections can
be read in either order.
Section 7.1 introduces the concept of a matrix, which is a convenient mathematical
way of representing information displayed in a table. By deﬁning the matrix opera-
tions of addition, subtraction and multiplication it is possible to develop an algebra
of matrices. Simple economic examples are used to illustrate these deﬁnitions and 
it is shown that the rules of matrix manipulation are almost identical to those of 
ordinary arithmetic. In Section 7.2 you are shown how to calculate the inverse of a
matrix. This is analogous to the reciprocal of a number and enables matrix equations
to be solved. In particular, inverses provide an alternative way of solving systems of
simultaneous linear equations and so can be used to solve problems in statics.
Section 7.3 describes Cramer’s rule for solving systems of linear equations. This
method is a particularly useful way of solving economic models where only a 
selection of endogenous variables need to be determined.
In Section 7.4 we discuss a new economic topic known as input–output analysis and
show how the matrix operations described in the first two sections can be used to
determine the flow of money between firms.


section 7.1
Basic matrix operations
Suppose that a ﬁrm produces three types of good, G1, G2 and G3, which it sells to two cus-
tomers, C1 and C2. The monthly sales for these goods are given in Table 7.1. During the month
the ﬁrm sells 3 items of G2 to customer C1, 6 items of G3 to customer C2, and so on. It may well
be obvious from the context exactly what these numbers represent. Under these circumstances
it makes sense to ignore the table headings and to write this information more concisely as
A =
JKL
7
3
4
1
5
6
GHI
Objectives
At the end of this section you should be able to:
 Understand the notation and terminology of matrix algebra.
 Find the transpose of a matrix.
 Add and subtract matrices.
 Multiply a matrix by a scalar.
 Multiply matrices together.
 Represent a system of linear equations in matrix notation.
Table 7.1
Monthly sales for goods
G1
G2
G3
Sold to
C1
7
3
4
customer
C2
1
5
6

Matrices
454
Practice Problem
1 Let
A =
B = [1
−1
0
6
2]
C =
D = [6]
(a) State the orders of the matrices A, B, C and D.
(b) Write down the values of
a11,
a22,
b14,
c25,
c33,
c43,
d11
J
K
K
L
1
0
2
3
1
5
7
9
0
2
3
4
6
7
8
G
H
H
I
JKL
1
2
3
4
GHI
which is an example of a matrix. Quite generally, any rectangular array of numbers surrounded
by a pair of brackets is called a matrix (plural matrices) and the individual numbers constitut-
ing the array are called entries or elements. In this book we use square brackets, although it is
equally correct to use parentheses (that is, round brackets) instead. It helps to think of a matrix
as being made up of rows and columns. The matrix A has two rows and three columns and is
said to have order 2 × 3. In general, a matrix of order m × n has m rows and n columns.
We denote matrices by capital letters in bold type (that is, A, B, C, . . .) and their elements
by the corresponding lower-case letter in ordinary type. In fact, we use a rather clever double
subscript notation so that aij stands for the element of A which occurs in row i and column j.
Referring to the matrix A above, we see that
a12 = 3
(row 1 and column 2 of A)
A general matrix D of order 3 × 2 would be written
Similarly, a 3 × 3 matrix labelled E would be written
J
K
K
L
e11
e12
e13
e21
e22
e23
e31
e32
e33
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
d11
d12
d21
d22
d31
d32
G
H
H
I
Example
Let
B =
C =
(a) State the orders of the matrices B and C.
(b) Write down the values of b22 and c34.
Solution
(a) Matrices B and C have orders 2 × 2 and 3 × 4 respectively.
(b) b22 = 6
(row 2 and column 2 of B)
c34 = 7
(row 3 and column 4 of C)
J
K
K
L
1
3
4
0
1
2
1
1
1
4
5
7
G
H
H
I
JKL
2
1
−1
6
GHI

All we have done so far is to explain what matrices are and to provide some notation for 
handling them. A matrix certainly gives us a convenient shorthand to describe information
presented in a table. However, we would like to go further than this and to use matrices to solve
problems in economics. To do this we describe several mathematical operations that can be
performed on matrices, namely
 transposition
 addition and subtraction
 scalar multiplication
 matrix multiplication.
One obvious omission from the list is matrix division. Strictly speaking, it is impossible to
divide one matrix by another, although we can get fairly close to the idea of division by deﬁning
something called an inverse, which we consider in Section 7.2.
7.1 • Basic matrix operations
455
Advice
If you have not met matrices before, you might like to split this section into two separate
parts. You are advised to work through the material as far as 7.1.4 now, leaving matrix
multiplication for another session.
7.1.1 Transposition
In Table 7.1 the rows correspond to the two customers and the columns correspond to the
three goods. The matrix representation of the table is then
A =
The same information about monthly sales could easily have been presented the other way
round, as shown in Table 7.2. The matrix representation would then be
B =
We describe this situation by saying that A and B are transposes of each other and write
AT = B
J
K
K
L
7
1
3
5
4
6
G
H
H
I
JKL
7
3
4
1
5
6
GHI
Table 7.2
Sold to customer
C1
C2
Monthly
G1
7
1
sales for
G2
3
5
goods
G3
4
6

or equivalently
BT = A
The transpose of a matrix is found by replacing rows by columns, so that the ﬁrst row becomes
the ﬁrst column, the second row becomes the second column, and so on. The number of rows
of A is then the same as the number of columns of AT and vice versa. Consequently, if A has
order m × n then AT has order n × m.
Matrices
456
Example
Write down the transpose of the matrices
D =
E =
Solution
The transpose of the 3 × 4 matrix D is the 4 × 3 matrix
DT =
The transpose of the 2 × 1 matrix E is the 1 × 2 matrix
ET = [−6
3]
J
K
K
K
K
L
1
2
5
7
4
1
0
6
9
3
0
2
G
H
H
H
H
I
JKL
−6
3
GHI
J
K
K
L
1
7
0
3
2
4
6
0
5
1
9
2
G
H
H
I
Practice Problem
2 Write down the transpose of the following matrices:
A =
B = [ 1
5
7
9 ]
C =
J
K
K
L
1
2
3
2
4
5
3
5
6
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
K
K
L
1
4
0
1
2
3
7
6
1
4
2
1
3
5
−1
2
−5
1
8
0
G
H
H
H
H
I
There are two particular shapes of matrices which are given special names. A matrix that has
only one row, such as
c = [5
2
1
−4]

is called a row vector, and a matrix that has only one column, such as
d =
is called a column vector. It is standard practice to identify vectors using lower-case rather than
upper-case letters. In books they are set in bold type. If you are writing them down by hand
then you should underline the letters and put
c (or possibly y)
and
d (or possibly z)
This is a useful convention since it helps to distinguish scalar quantities such as x, y, a, b, which
denote single numbers, from vector quantities such as x, y, a, b, which denote matrices with
one row or column. Incidentally, it is actually quite expensive to print column vectors in books
and journals since it is wasteful on space, particularly if the number of elements is large. It is
then more convenient to use the transpose notation and write the vector horizontally. For
example, the 7 × 1 matrix d given above would be printed as
d = [ −3
10
6
−7
1
9
2]T
where the superscript T tells us that it is the column vector that is intended.
7.1.2 Addition and subtraction
Let us suppose that, for the two-customer three-product example, the matrix
A =
gives the sales for the month of January. Similarly, the monthly sales for February might be
given by
B =
This means, for example, that customer C1 buys 7 items of G1 in January and 6 items of G1 in
February. Customer C1 therefore buys a total of
7 + 6 = 13
items of G1 during the two months. A similar process can be applied to the remaining goods
and customers, so that the matrix giving the sales for the two months is
C =
=
We describe this by saying that C is the sum of the two matrices A and B and we write
C = A + B
JKL
13
5
5
1
9
10
GHI
JKL
7 + 6
3 + 2
4 + 1
1 + 0
5 + 4
6 + 4
GHI
JKL
6
2
1
0
4
4
GHI
JKL
7
3
4
1
5
6
GHI
J
K
K
K
K
K
K
K
K
K
L
−3
10
6
−7
1
9
2
G
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
I
7.1 • Basic matrix operations
457

In general, to add (or subtract) two matrices of the same size, we simply add (or subtract) their
corresponding elements. It is obvious from this deﬁnition that, for any two m × n matrices, 
A and B,
A + B = B + A
because it is immaterial which way round two numbers are added. Note that in order to com-
bine matrices in this way it is necessary for them to have the same order. For example, it is
impossible to add the matrices
D =
and
E =
because D has order 2 × 2 and E has order 3 × 2.
J
K
K
L
1
2
1
1
3
5
G
H
H
I
JKL
1
−7
1
3
GHI
Matrices
458
Example
Let
A =
and
B =
Find
(a) A + B
(b) A −B
(c) A −A
Solution
(a) A + B =
+
=
(b) A −B =
−
=
(c) A −A =
−
=
J
K
K
L
0
0
0
0
0
0
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
9
−3
4
1
2
0
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
9
−3
4
1
2
0
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
4
−5
5
−5
−1
−4
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
5
2
−1
6
3
4
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
9
−3
4
1
2
0
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
14
−1
3
7
5
4
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
5
2
−1
6
3
4
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
9
−3
4
1
2
0
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
5
2
−1
6
3
4
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
9
−3
4
1
2
0
G
H
H
I
The result of part (c) of this example is a 3 × 2 matrix in which every entry is zero. Such a
matrix is called a zero matrix and is written 0. In fact, there are lots of zero matrices, each cor-
responding to a particular order. For example,
[0]
are the 1 × 1, 2 × 2, 4 × 1 and 4 × 6 zero matrices respectively. However, despite this, we shall
use the single symbol 0 for all of these since it is usually clear in any actual example what the
J
K
K
K
K
L
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
G
H
H
H
H
I
J
K
K
K
K
L
0
0
0
0
G
H
H
H
H
I
JKL
0
0
0
0
GHI

order is and hence which particular zero matrix is being used. It follows from the deﬁnition of
addition and subtraction that, for any matrix A,
A −A = 0
A + 0 = A
The role played by the matrix 0 in matrix algebra is therefore similar to that of the number 0
in ordinary arithmetic.
7.1 • Basic matrix operations
459
Practice Problem
3 Let
A =
B =
C =
D =
0 =
Find (where possible)
(a) A + D
(b) A + C
(c) B −C
(d) C −0
(e) D −D
JKL
0
0
GHI
JKL
−6
2
1
−9
GHI
JKL
2
2
GHI
JKL
5
4
GHI
JKL
7
5
2
1
GHI
7.1.3 Scalar multiplication
Returning to the two-customer three-product example, let us suppose that the sales are the
same each month and are given by
A =
This means, for example, that customer C1 buys 7 items of G1 every month, so in a whole year
C1 buys
12 × 7 = 84
items of G1. A similar process applies to the remaining goods and customers, and the matrix
giving the annual sales is
B =
=
Matrix B is found by scaling each element in A by 12 and we write
B = 12A
In general, to multiply a matrix A by a scalar k we simply multiply each element of A by k.
JKL
84
36
48
12
60
72
GHI
JKL
12 × 7
12 × 3
12 × 4
12 × 1
12 × 5
12 × 6
GHI
JKL
7
3
4
1
5
6
GHI
Example
If
A =
ﬁnd
(a) 2A
(b) −A
(c) 0A
J
K
K
L
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
G
H
H
I


Solution
(a)
2A =
(b) −A = (−1)A =
(c)
0A =
= 0
J
K
K
L
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
−1
−2
−3
−4
−5
−6
−7
−8
−9
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
G
H
H
I
Matrices
460
In ordinary arithmetic we know that
a(b + c) = ab + ac
for any three numbers a, b and c. It follows from our deﬁnitions of matrix addition and scalar
multiplication that
k(A + B) = kA + kB
for any m × n matrices A and B, and scalar k.
Another property of matrices is
k(lA) = (kl)A
for scalars k and l. Again this follows from the comparable property
a(bc) = (ab)c
for ordinary numbers.
You are invited to check these two matrix properties for yourself in the following problem.
Practice Problem
4 Let
A =
and
B =
(1) Find
(a) 2A
(b) 2B
(c) A + B
(d) 2(A + B)
Hence verify that
2(A + B) = 2A + 2B
(2) Find
(a) 3A
(b) −6A
Hence verify that
−2(3A) = −6A
J
K
K
L
0
−1
2
7
1
6
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
1
−2
3
5
0
4
G
H
H
I

7.1.4 Matrix multiplication
7.1 • Basic matrix operations
461
Advice
Hopefully, you have found the matrix operations considered so far in this section easy 
to understand. We now turn our attention to matrix multiplication. If you have never 
multiplied matrices before, you may find that it requires a bit more effort to grasp and 
you should allow yourself extra time to work through the problems. There is no need to
worry. Once you have performed a dozen or so matrix multiplications, you will find that
the technique becomes second nature, although the process may appear rather strange
and complicated at first sight.
We begin by showing you how to multiply a row vector by a column vector. To illustrate 
this let us suppose that goods G1, G2 and G3 sell at $50, $30 and $20, respectively, and let us
introduce the row vector
p = [50
30
20]
If the ﬁrm sells a total of 100, 200 and 175 goods of type G1, G2 and G3, respectively, then we
can write this information as the column vector
q =
The total revenue received from the sale of G1 is found by multiplying the price, $50, by the
quantity, 100, to get
$50 × 100 = $5000
Similarly, the revenue from G2 and G3 is
$30 × 200 = $6000
and
20 × 175 = $3500
respectively. The total revenue of the ﬁrm is therefore
TR = $5000 + $6000 + $3500 = $14 500
The value of TR is a single number and can be regarded as a 1 × 1 matrix: that is,
[14 500]
This 1 × 1 matrix is obtained by multiplying together the price vector, p, and the quantity 
vector, q, to get
[50
30
20] 
= [14 500]
The value 14 500 is found by multiplying the corresponding elements of p and q and then
adding together: that is,
J
K
K
L
100
200
175
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
100
200
175
G
H
H
I

In general, if a is the row vector
[a11
a12
a13
. . .
a1s]
and b is the column vector
then we deﬁne the matrix product
ab = [a11
a12
a13
. . .
a1s]
to be the 1 × 1 matrix
[a11b11 + a12b21 + a13b31 + . . . + a1sbs1]
It is important to notice that the single element in the 1 × 1 matrix ab is found by multiplying
each element of a by the corresponding element of b. Consequently, it is essential that both 
vectors have the same number of elements. In other words, if a has order 1 × s and b has order
t × 1 then it is only possible to form the product ab when s = t.
J
K
K
K
K
K
K
L
b11
b21
b31...
bs1
G
H
H
H
H
H
H
I
J
K
K
K
K
K
K
L
b11
b21
b31...
bs1
G
H
H
H
H
H
H
I
Matrices
462
Example
If
a = [1
2
3
4],
b =
and
c =
ﬁnd ab and ac.
Solution
Using the deﬁnition of the multiplication of a row vector, by a column vector, we have
ab = [1
2
3
4]
= [1(2) + 2(5) + 3(−1) + 4(0)] = [9]
J
K
K
K
K
L
2
5
−1
0
G
H
H
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
6
9
2
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
K
K
L
2
5
−1
0
G
H
H
H
H
I

We have set out the calculations in this way so that you can see how the value, 9, is obtained. There is no
need for you to indicate this in your own answers and you may simply write
[1
2
3
4]
= [9]
without bothering to insert any intermediate steps.
It is impossible to multiply a and c because a has four elements and c has only three elements. You can
see the problem if you actually try to perform the calculations, since there is no entry in c with which to mul-
tiply the 4 in a.
[1
2
3
4]
= [1(6) + 2(9) + 3(2) + 4(?)]
J
K
K
L
6
9
2
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
K
K
L
2
5
−1
0
G
H
H
H
H
I
7.1 • Basic matrix operations
463
Example
Find AB in the case when
A =
and
B =
J
K
K
L
3
1
2
1
1
0
1
2
5
4
1
1
G
H
H
I
JKL
2
1
0
1
0
4
GHI

Practice Problem
5 Let
a = [1
−1
0
3
2],
b = [1
2
9],
c =
and
d =
Find (where possible)
(a) ac
(b) bd
(c) ad
J
K
K
K
K
K
K
L
0
−1
1
1
2
G
H
H
H
H
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
−2
1
0
G
H
H
I
We now turn our attention to general matrix multiplication, which is deﬁned as follows. If
A is an m × s matrix and B is an s × n matrix then
C = AB
is an m × n matrix and cij is found by multiplying the ith row of A into the jth column of B.
There are three things to notice about this deﬁnition. Firstly, the number of columns of A is
the same as the number of rows of B. Unless this condition is satisﬁed it is impossible to form the
product AB. Secondly, the matrix C has order m × n, where m is the number of rows of A and
n is the number of columns of B. Finally, the elements of C are found by multiplying row vectors
by column vectors. The best way of understanding this deﬁnition is to consider an example.

Solution
It is a good idea to check before you begin any detailed calculations that it is possible to multiply these 
matrices and also to identify the order of the resulting matrix. In this case
A is a 2 × 3 matrix
and
B is a 3 × 4 matrix
Matrix A has three columns and B has the same number of rows, so it is possible to ﬁnd AB. Moreover, AB
must have order 2 × 4 because A has two rows and B has four columns. Hence
= 
All that remains for us to do is to calculate the eight numbers cij.
The number c11 in the top left-hand corner lies in the ﬁrst row and ﬁrst column, so to ﬁnd its value we
multiply the ﬁrst row of A into the ﬁrst column of B to get
= 
because 2(3) + 1(1) + 0(5) = 7.
The number c12 lies in the ﬁrst row and second column, so to ﬁnd its value we multiply the ﬁrst row of
A into the second column of B to get
= 
because 2(1) + 1(0) + 0(4) = 2.
The values of c13 and c14 are then found in a similar way by multiplying the ﬁrst row of A into the third
and fourth columns of B, respectively, to get
= 
because 2(2) + 1(1) + 0(1) = 5 and 2(1) + 1(2) + 0(1) = 4.
Finally, we repeat the whole procedure along the second row of C. The elements c21, c22, c23 and c24 are 
calculated by multiplying the second row of A into the four columns of B in succession to get
= 
because
1(3) + 0(1) + 4(5) = 23
1(1) + 0(0) + 4(4) = 17
1(2) + 0(1) + 4(1) = 6
1(1) + 0(2) + 4(1) = 5
JKL
7
2
5
4
23
17
6
5
GHI
J
K
K
L
3
1
2
1
1
0
1
2
5
4
1
1
G
H
H
I
JKL
2
1
0
1
0
4
GHI
JKL
7
2
5
4
c21
c22
c23
c24
GHI
J
K
K
L
3
1
2
1
1
0
1
2
5
4
1
1
G
H
H
I
JKL
2
1
0
1
0
4
GHI
JKL
7
2
c13
c14
c21
c22
c23
c24
GHI
J
K
K
L
3
1
2
1
1
0
1
2
5
4
1
1
G
H
H
I
JKL
2
1
0
1
0
4
GHI
JKL
7
c12
c13
c14
c21
c22
c23
c24
GHI
J
K
K
L
3
1
2
1
1
0
1
2
5
4
1
1
G
H
H
I
JKL
2
1
0
1
0
4
GHI
JKL
c11
c12
c13
c14
c21
c22
c23
c24
GHI
J
K
K
L
3
1
2
1
1
0
1
2
5
4
1
1
G
H
H
I
JKL
2
1
0
1
0
4
GHI
Matrices
464

In this example we have indicated how to build up the matrix C in a step-by-step manner
and have used boxes to show you how the calculations are performed. This approach has been
adopted merely as a teaching device. There is no need for you to set your calculations out in
this way and you are encouraged to write down your answer in a single line of working.
7.1 • Basic matrix operations
465
Advice
Take the trouble to check before you begin that it is possible to form the matrix product
and to anticipate the order of the end result. This can be done by jotting down the orders
of the original matrices side by side. The product exists if the inner numbers are the same
and the order of the answer is given by the outer numbers: that is,
For example, if A, B and C have orders 3 × 5, 5 × 2 and 3 × 4 respectively, then AB exists
and has order 3 × 2 because
but it is impossible to form AC because
Practice Problem
6 Write down the order of the matrices
A =
and
B =
Hence verify that it is possible to form the matrix product
C = AB
and write down the order of C. Calculate all of the elements of C.
JKL
1
2
3
4
GHI
J
K
K
L
1
2
0
1
3
1
G
H
H
I

We have already noted that matrix operations have similar properties to those of ordinary
arithmetic. Some particular rules of arithmetic are:
a(b + c) = ab + ac
(distributive law)
(a + b)c = ac + bc
(distributive law)
a(bc) = (ab)c
(associative law)
ab = ba
(commutative law)
An obvious question to ask is whether they have a counterpart in matrix algebra. It turns out
that provided the matrices A, B and C have the correct orders for the appropriate sums and
products to exist then
A(B + C) = AB + AC
(A + B)C = AC + BC
A(BC) = (AB)C
However, although it is true that
ab = ba
for numbers, this result does not extend to matrices. Even if AB and BA both exist it is not 
necessarily true that
AB = BA
This is illustrated in the following example.
Matrices
466
Example
If
A =
and 
B =
evaluate AB and BA.
Solution
It is easy to check that it is possible to form both products AB and BA and that they both have order 2 × 2.
In fact
AB =
=
BA =
=
so AB ≠BA.
JKL
7
2
5
1
GHI
JKL
1
−1
2
1
GHI
JKL
1
3
1
2
GHI
JKL
0
1
3
8
GHI
JKL
1
3
1
2
GHI
JKL
1
−1
2
1
GHI
JKL
1
3
1
2
GHI
JKL
1
−1
2
1
GHI
There are certain pairs of matrices which do commute (that is, for which AB = BA) and we
shall investigate some of these in the next section. However, these are very much the exception.
We therefore have the ‘non-property’ that, in general,
AB ≠BA

We conclude this section by showing you how to express a familiar problem in matrix nota-
tion. Section 1.2 described the method of elimination for solving systems of simultaneous lin-
ear equations. For example, we might want to ﬁnd values of x and y which satisfy
2x −5y = 6
7x + 8y = −1
Motivated by the result of Problem 8 we write this as
Ax = b
where
A =
x =
b =
It is easy to check that this is correct simply by multiplying out Ax to get
=
and so the matrix equation Ax = b reads
=
JKL
6
−1
GHI
JKL
2x −5y
7x + 8y
GHI
JKL
2x −5y
7x + 8y
GHI
JKL
x
y
GHI
JKL
2
−5
7
8
GHI
JKL
6
−1
GHI
JKL
x
y
GHI
JKL
2
−5
7
8
GHI
7.1 • Basic matrix operations
467
Practice Problems
7 Let
A =
B =
C =
D =
and
E =
Find (where possible)
(a) AB
(b) BA
(c) CD
(d) DC
(e) AE
(f) EA
(g) DE
(h) ED
8 Evaluate the matrix product Ax, where
A =
and
x =
Hence show that the system of linear equations
x + 4y + 7z = −3
2x + 6y + 5z = 10
8x + 9y + 5z = 1
can be written as Ax = b where
b =
J
K
K
L
−3
10
1
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
x
y
z
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
1
4
7
2
6
5
8
9
5
G
H
H
I
JKL
1
2
3
4
5
6
GHI
J
K
K
L
1
1
−1
1
2
1
G
H
H
I
JKL
1
2
3
1
GHI
J
K
K
L
1
2
1
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
2
1
1
5
1
0
−1
1
4
G
H
H
I

that is,
2x −5y = 6
7x + 8y = −1
Quite generally, any system of n linear equations in n unknowns can be written as
Ax = b
where A, x and b are n × n, n × 1 and n × 1 matrices respectively. The matrix A consists of the
coefﬁcients, the vector x consists of the unknowns and the vector b consists of the right-hand
sides. The deﬁnition of matrix multiplication allows us to write a linear system in terms of
matrices, although it is not immediately obvious that there is any advantage in doing so. In the
next section we introduce the concept of a matrix inverse and show you how to use this to solve
systems of equations expressed in matrix form.
Throughout this section we have noted various properties that matrices satisfy. For conveni-
ence these are summarized in the next subsection.
7.1.5 Summary
Provided that the indicated sums and products make sense,
A + B = B + A
A −A = 0
A + 0 = A
k(A + B) = kA + kB
k(lA) = (kl)A
A(B + C) = AB + AC
(A + B)C = AC + BC
A(BC) = (AB)C
We also have the non-property that, in general,
AB ≠BA
Matrices
468
Column vector
A matrix with one column.
Elements
The individual numbers inside a matrix. (Also called entries.)
Matrix
A rectangular array of numbers, set out in rows and columns, surrounded by a pair
of brackets. (Plural matrices.)
Order
The dimensions of a matrix. A matrix with m rows and n columns has order m × n.
Row vector
A matrix with one row.
Transpose of a matrix
The matrix obtained from a given matrix by interchanging rows
and columns. The transpose of a matrix A is written AT.
Zero matrix
A matrix in which every element is zero.
Key Terms

7.1 • Basic matrix operations
469
Practice Problems
9 The monthly sales (in thousands) of burgers (B1) and bites (B2) in three fast-food restaurants 
(R1, R2, R3) are as follows:
R1
R2
R3
B1
35
27
13
B2
42
39
24
January
R1
R2
R3
B1
31
17
3
B2
25
29
16
February
(a) Write down two 2 × 3 matrices J and F
representing sales in January and February 
respectively.
(b) By finding J + F, write down the matrix for the 
total sales over the two months.
(c) By finding J −F, write down the matrix for the 
difference in sales for the two months.
10 If
A =
B =
work out
(a) 2A
(b) 2B
(c) 2A + 2B
(d) 2(A + B)
Do you notice any connection between your answers to parts (c) and (d)?
11 A firm manufactures three products, P1, P2 and P3, which it sells to two customers, C1 and C2. The
number of items of each product that are sold to these customers is given by
P1 P2 P3
A = C1
C2
JKL
6
7
9
2
1
2
GHI
J
K
K
L
1
7
9
6
2
1
0
5
6
4
5
3
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
2
3
1
9
1
0
5
0
6
7
8
4
G
H
H
I
Advice
There now follow some Practice Problems. If you find that you do not have time to do all
of them, you should at least attempt Practice Problem 15 because the result of this prob-
lem will be used in the next section.


The firm charges both customers the same price for each product according to
P1
P2
P3
B = [100
500
200]T
To make each item of type P1, P2 and P3, the firm uses four raw materials, R1, R2, R3 and R4. The
number of tonnes required per item is given by
R1 R2 R3 R4
C = P1
P2
P3
The cost per tonne of raw materials is
R1
R2
R3
R4
D = [20
10
15
15]T
In addition, let
E = [1 1]
Find the following matrix products and give an interpretation of each one.
(a) AB
(b) AC
(c) CD
(d) ACD
(e) EAB
(f) EACD
(g) EAB −EACD
12 (1) Let
A =
and
B =
Find
(a) AT
(b) BT
(c) A + B
(d) (A + B)T
Do you notice any connection between (A + B)T, AT and BT?
(2) Let
C =
and
D =
Find
(a) CT
(b) DT
(c) CD
(d) (CD)T
Do you notice any connection between (CD)T, CT and DT?
13 Verify the equations
(a) A(B + C) = AB + AC
(b) (AB)C = A(BC)
in the case when
A =
,
B =
and
C =
JKL
−1
1
1
2
GHI
JKL
1
5
4
0
GHI
JKL
5
−3
2
1
GHI
JKL
2
1
0
−1
0
1
GHI
JKL
1
4
5
9
GHI
J
K
K
L
1
−1
2
1
−3
4
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
1
2
3
4
5
6
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
1
0
0
1
1
1
2
1
0
0
1
1
G
H
H
I
Matrices
470

14 If
A = [1
2
−4
3]
and
B =
find AB and BA.
15 Let
A =
,
A−1 =
(ad −bc ≠0)
I =
and
x =
Show that
(a) AI = A and IA = A
(b) A−1A = I and AA−1 = I
(c) Ix = x
16 (a) Evaluate the matrix product, Ax, where
A =
and
x =
Hence show that the system of linear equations
7x + 5y = 3
x + 3y = 2
can be written as Ax = b where b =
.
(b) The system of equations
2x + 3y −2z = 6
x −y + 2z = 3
4x + 2y + 5z = 1
can be expressed in the form Ax = b. Write down the matrices A, x and b.
JKL
3
2
GHI
JKL
x
y
GHI
JKL
7
5
1
3
GHI
JKL
x
y
GHI
JKL
1
0
0
1
GHI
JKL
d
−b
−c
a
GHI
1
ad −bc
JKL
a
b
c
d
GHI
J
K
K
K
K
L
1
7
3
−2
G
H
H
H
H
I
7.1 • Basic matrix operations
471

section 7.2
Matrix inversion
In this and the following section we consider square matrices, in which the number of rows and
columns are equal. For simplicity we concentrate on 2 × 2 and 3 × 3 matrices, although the
ideas and techniques apply more generally to n × n matrices of any size. We have already seen
that, with one notable exception, the algebra of matrices is virtually the same as the algebra 
of numbers. There are, however, two important properties of numbers which we have yet to
consider. The ﬁrst is the existence of a number, 1, which satisﬁes
a1 = a
and
1a = a
for any number, a. The second is the fact that corresponding to any non-zero number, a, we
can ﬁnd another number, a−1, with the property that
a−1a = 1
and
aa−1 = 1
If you have worked through Practice Problem 15 of Section 7.1 you will know how to extend
these to 2 × 2 matrices. In part (a) you showed that, for any 2 × 2 matrix, A,
AI = A
and
IA = A
Objectives
At the end of this section you should be able to:
 Write down the 2 × 2 and 3 × 3 identity matrices.
 Detect whether a matrix is singular or non-singular.
 Calculate the determinant and inverse of a 2 × 2 matrix.
 Calculate the cofactors of a 3 × 3 matrix.
 Use cofactors to ﬁnd the determinant and inverse of a 3 × 3 matrix.
 Use matrix inverses to solve systems of linear equations arising in economics.

where
I =
The matrix I is called the identity matrix and is analogous to the number 1 in ordinary arith-
metic. You also showed in part (b) of Practice Problem 15 that corresponding to the 2 × 2 matrix
A =
there is another matrix
A−1 =
with the property that
A−1A = I
and
AA−1 = I
The matrix A−1 is said to be the inverse of A and is analogous to the reciprocal of a number. 
The formula for A−1 looks rather complicated but the construction of A−1 is in fact very easy.
Starting with some matrix
A =
we ﬁrst swap the two numbers on the leading diagonal (that is, the elements along the line join-
ing the top left-hand corner to the bottom right-hand corner of A) to get
Secondly, we change the sign of the ‘off-diagonal’ elements to get
Finally, we multiply the matrix by the scalar
to get
The number ad −bc is called the determinant of A and is written as
det(A)
or
|A|
or
Notice that the last step in the calculation is impossible if
|A| = 0
because we cannot divide by zero. We deduce that the inverse of a matrix exists only if the
matrix has a non-zero determinant. This is comparable to the situation in arithmetic where a
reciprocal of a number exists provided the number is non-zero. If the matrix has a non-zero
determinant, it is said to be non-singular; otherwise it is said to be singular.
a
b
c
d
JKL
d
−b
−c
a
GHI
1
ad −bc
1
ad −bc
JKL
d
−b
−c
a
GHI
JKL
d
b
c
a
GHI
JKL
a
b
c
d
GHI
JKL
d
−b
−c
a
GHI
1
ad −bc
JKL
a
b
c
d
GHI
JKL
1
0
0
1
GHI
7.2 • Matrix inversion
473

Matrices
474
Example
Find the inverse of the following matrices. Are these matrices singular or non-singular?
A =
and
B =
Solution
We begin by calculating the determinant of
A =
to see whether or not the inverse exists.
det(A) =
= 1(4) −2(3) = 4 −6 = −2
We see that det(A) ≠0, so the matrix is non-singular and the inverse exists. To ﬁnd A−1 we swap the diag-
onal elements, 1 and 4, change the sign of the off-diagonal elements, 2 and 3, and divide by the determinant,
−2. Hence
A−1 = −
=
Of course, if A−1 really is the inverse of A, then A−1A and AA−1 should multiply out to give I. As a check:
A−1A =
=
✓
AA−1 =
=
✓
To discover whether or not the matrix
B =
has an inverse we need to ﬁnd its determinant.
det(B) =
= 2(10) −5(4) = 20 −20 = 0
We see that det(B) = 0, so this matrix is singular and the inverse does not exist.
JKL
2
5
4
10
GHI
JKL
2
5
4
10
GHI
JKL
1
0
0
1
GHI
JKL
−2
1
3/2
−1/2
GHI
JKL
1
2
3
4
GHI
JKL
1
0
0
1
GHI
JKL
1
2
3
4
GHI
JKL
−2
1
3/2
−1/2
GHI
JKL
−2
1
3/2
−1/2
GHI
JKL
4
−2
−3
1
GHI
1
2
1
2
3
4
JKL
1
2
3
4
GHI
JKL
2
5
4
10
GHI
JKL
1
2
3
4
GHI
Practice Problem
1 Find (where possible) the inverse of the following matrices. Are these matrices singular or non-
singular?
A =
B =
JKL
6
4
3
2
GHI
JKL
6
4
1
2
GHI

7.2 • Matrix inversion
475
One reason for calculating the inverse of a matrix is that it helps us to solve matrix equations
in the same way that the reciprocal of a number is used to solve algebraic equations. We have
already seen in Section 7.1 how to express a system of linear equations in matrix form. Any 
2 × 2 system
ax + by = e
cx + dy = f
can be written as
Ax = b
where
A =
x =
b =
The coefﬁcient matrix, A, and right-hand-side vector, b, are assumed to be given and the prob-
lem is to determine the vector of unknowns, x. Multiplying both sides of
Ax = b
by A−1 gives
A−1(Ax) = A−1b
(A−1A)x = A−1b
(associative property)
Ix = A−1b
(deﬁnition of an inverse)
x = A−1b
(Practice Problem 15(c) in Section 7.1)
The solution vector x can therefore be found simply by multiplying A−1 by b. We are assuming
here that A−1 exists. If the coefﬁcient matrix is singular then the inverse cannot be found and
the system of linear equations does not possess a unique solution; there are either inﬁnitely
many solutions or no solution.
JKL
e
f
GHI
JKL
x
y
GHI
JKL
a
b
c
d
GHI
Advice
These special cases are dealt with using the elimination method described in Section 1.2.
You might find it instructive to revise both Sections 1.2 and 1.3.
The following two examples illustrate the use of inverses to solve systems of linear equations.
The ﬁrst is taken from microeconomics and the second from macroeconomics.
Example
The equilibrium prices P1 and P2 for two goods satisfy the equations
−4P1 + P2 = −13
2P1 −5P2 = −7
Express this system in matrix form and hence ﬁnd the values of P1 and P2.


Matrices
476
Solution
Using the notation of matrices, the simultaneous equations
−4P1 + P2 = −13
2P1 −5P2 = −7
can be written as
=
that is, as
Ax = b
where
A =
x =
b =
The matrix A has determinant
= (−4)(−5) −(1)(2) = 20 −2 = 18
To ﬁnd A−1 we swap the diagonal elements, −4 and −5, change the sign of the off-diagonal elements, 1 and
2, and divide by the determinant, 18, to get
A−1 =
Finally, to calculate x we multiply A−1 by b to get
x = A−1b
=
=
=
Hence P1 = 4 and P2 = 3.
JKL
4
3
GHI
JKL
72
54
GHI
1
18
JKL
−13
−7
GHI
JKL
−5
−1
−2
−4
GHI
1
18
JKL
−5
−1
−2
−4
GHI
1
18
−4
1
2
−5
JKL
−13
−7
GHI
JKL
P1
P2
GHI
JKL
−4
1
2
−5
GHI
JKL
−13
−7
GHI
JKL
P1
P2
GHI
JKL
−4
1
2
−5
GHI
Practice Problem
2 The equilibrium prices P1 and P2 for two goods satisfy the equations
9P1 +
P2 = 43
2P1 + 7P2 = 57
Express this system in matrix form and hence find the values of P1 and P2.
[You have already solved this particular system in Practice Problem 4 of Section 1.3. You might like
to compare the work involved in solving this system using the method of elimination described in
Chapter 1 and the method based on matrix inverses considered here.]

7.2 • Matrix inversion
477
Example
The equilibrium levels of consumption, C, and income, Y, for the simple two-sector macro-economic model
satisfy the structural equations
Y = C + I*
C = aY + b
where a and b are parameters in the range 0 < a < 1 and b > 0, and I* denotes investment. Express this sys-
tem in matrix form and hence express Y and C in terms of a, b and I*. Give an economic interpretation of
the inverse matrix.
Solution
The reduced form of the structural equations for this simple model has already been found in Section 5.3.
It is instructive to reconsider this problem using matrices. The objective is to express the endogenous vari-
ables, Y and C, in terms of the exogenous variable I* and parameters a and b. The ‘unknowns’ of this prob-
lem are therefore Y and C, and we begin by rearranging the structural equations so that these variables
appear on the left-hand sides. Subtracting C from both sides of
Y = C + I*
gives
Y −C = I*
(1)
and if we subtract aY from both sides of
C = aY + b
we get
−aY + C = b
(2)
(It is convenient to put the term involving Y ﬁrst so that the variables align with those of equation (1).)
In matrix form, equations (1) and (2) become
=
that is,
Ax = b
where
A =
x =
b =
The matrix A has determinant
= 1(1) −(−1)(−a) = 1 −a
which is non-zero because a < 1.
To ﬁnd A−1, we swap the diagonal elements, 1 and 1, change the sign of the off-diagonal elements, −1 and
−a, and divide by the determinant, 1 −a, to get
A−1 =
JKL
1
1
a
1
GHI
1
1 −a
1
−1
−a
1
JKL
I*
b
GHI
JKL
Y
C
GHI
JKL
1
−1
−a
1
GHI
JKL
I*
b
GHI
JKL
Y
C
GHI
JKL
1
−1
−a
1
GHI


Matrices
478
Finally, to determine x we multiply A−1 by b to get
x = A−1b
=
=
Hence
Y =
and
C =
The inverse matrix obviously provides a useful way of solving the structural equations of a macroeconomic
model. In addition, the elements of the inverse matrix can be given an important economic interpretation.
To see this, let us suppose that the investment I* changes by an amount ∆I* to become I* + ∆I*, with the
parameter b held ﬁxed. The new values of Y and C are obtained by replacing I* by I* + ∆I* in the expres-
sions for Y and C, and are given by
and
respectively. The change in the value of Y is therefore
∆Y =
−
=
∆I*
and the change in the value of C is
∆C =
−
=
∆I*
In other words, the changes to Y and C are found by multiplying the change in I* by
and
respectively. For this reason we call
the investment multiplier for Y and
the investment multiplier for C.
Now the inverse matrix is
A−1 =
and we see that these multipliers are precisely the elements that appear in the ﬁrst column. It is easy to show,
using a similar argument, that the second column contains the multipliers for Y and C due to changes in the
autonomous consumption, b. The four elements in the inverse matrix can thus be interpreted as follows:
I*
b
Y
C
JKL
investment multiplier for Y
autonomous consumption multiplier for Y
investment multiplier for C
autonomous consumption multiplier for C
GHI
JKKKKL
1
1
1 −a
1 −a
a
1
1 −a
1 −a
GHHHHI
a
1 −a
1
1 −a
a
1 −a
1
1 −a
D
F
a
1 −a
A
C
aI* + b
1 −a
a(I* + ∆I*) + b
1 −a
D
F
1
1 −a
A
C
I* + b
1 −a
I* + ∆I* + b
1 −a
a(I* + ∆I*) + b
1 −a
I* + ∆I* + b
1 −a
aI* + b
1 −a
I* + b
1 −a
JKL
I* + b
aI* + b
GHI
1
1 −a
JKL
I*
b
GHI
JKL
1
1
a
1
GHI
1
1 −a

7.2 • Matrix inversion
479
The concepts of determinant, inverse and identity matrices apply equally well to 3 × 3 matrices.
The identity matrix is easily dealt with. It can be shown that the 3 × 3 identity matrix is
I =
You are invited to check that, for any 3 × 3 matrix A,
AI = A
and
IA = A
Before we can discuss the determinant and inverse of a 3 × 3 matrix we need to introduce an
additional concept known as a cofactor. Corresponding to each element aij of a matrix A, there
is a cofactor, Aij. A 3 × 3 matrix has nine elements, so there are nine cofactors to be computed.
The cofactor, Aij, is deﬁned to be the determinant of the 2 × 2 matrix obtained by deleting row
i and column j of A, preﬁxed by a ‘+’ or ‘−’ sign according to the following pattern
For example, suppose we wish to calculate A23, which is the cofactor associated with a23 in the matrix
A =
The element a23 lies in the second row and third column. Consequently, we delete the second
row and third column to produce the 2 × 2 matrix
The cofactor, A23, is the determinant of this 2 × 2 matrix preﬁxed by a ‘−’ sign because from the
pattern
J
K
K
L
+
−
+
−
+
−
+
−
+
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
a11
a12
a13
a21
a22
a23
a31
a32
a33
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
a11
a12
a13
a21
a22
a23
a31
a32
a33
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
+
−
+
−
+
−
+
−
+
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
G
H
H
I
Practice Problem
3 The general linear supply and demand equations for a one-commodity market model are given by
P = aQS + b
(a > 0, b > 0)
P = −cQD + d
(c > 0, d > 0)
Show that in matrix notation the equilibrium price, P, and quantity, Q, satisfy
=
Solve this system to express P and Q in terms of a, b, c and d. Write down the multiplier for Q due to
changes in b and deduce that an increase in b leads to a decrease in Q.
JKL
b
d
GHI
JKL
P
Q
GHI
JKL
1
−a
1
c
GHI

Matrices
480
we see that a23 is in a minus position. In other words,
A23 = −
= −(a11a32 −a12a31)
= −a11a32 + a12a31
a11
a12
a31
a32
Example
Find all the cofactors of the matrix
A =
Solution
Let us start in the top left-hand corner and work row by row. For cofactor A11, the element a11 = 2 lies in the
ﬁrst row and ﬁrst column, so we delete this row and column to produce the 2 × 2 matrix
Cofactor A11 is the determinant of this 2 × 2 matrix, preﬁxed by a ‘+’ sign because from the pattern
we see that a11 is in a plus position. Hence
A11 = +
= +(3(3) −7(1))
= 9 −7
= 2
For cofactor A12, the element a12 = 4 lies in the ﬁrst row and second column, so we delete this row and col-
umn to produce the 2 × 2 matrix
Cofactor A12 is the determinant of this 2 × 2 matrix, preﬁxed by a ‘−’ sign because from the pattern
we see that a12 is in a minus position. Hence
J
K
K
L
+
−
+
−
+
−
+
−
+
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
2
4
1
4
3
7
2
1
3
G
H
H
I
3
7
1
3
J
K
K
L
+
−
+
−
+
−
+
−
+
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
2
4
1
4
3
7
2
1
3
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
2
4
1
4
3
7
2
1
3
G
H
H
I

7.2 • Matrix inversion
481
A12 = +
= −(4(3) −7(2))
= −(12 −14)
= 2
We can continue in this way to ﬁnd the remaining cofactors
A13 = +
= −2
A21 = −
= −11
A22 = +
= 4
A23 = −
= 6
A31 = +
= 25
A32 = −
= −10
A33 = +
= −10
2
4
4
3
2
1
4
7
4
1
3
7
2
4
2
1
2
1
2
3
4
1
1
3
4
3
2
1
4
7
2
3
Practice Problem
4 Find all the cofactors of the matrix
A =
J
K
K
L
1
3
3
1
4
3
1
3
4
G
H
H
I
We are now in a position to describe how to calculate the determinant and inverse of a 
3 × 3 matrix. The determinant is found by multiplying the elements in any one row or column
by their corresponding cofactors and adding together. It does not matter which row or column
is chosen; exactly the same answer is obtained in each case. If we expand along the ﬁrst row of
the matrix
A =
we get
det(A) = a11A11 + a12A12 + a13A13
J
K
K
L
a11
a12
a13
a21
a22
a23
a31
a32
a33
G
H
H
I

Matrices
482
Similarly, if we expand down the second column, we get
det(A) = a12A12 + a22A22 + a32A32
The fact that we get the same answer irrespective of the row and column that we use for expan-
sion is an extremely useful property. It provides us with an obvious check on our calculations.
Also, there are occasions when it is more convenient to expand along certain rows or columns
than others.
Example
Find the determinants of the following matrices:
A =
and
B =
Solution
We have already calculated all nine cofactors of the matrix
A =
in the previous example. It is immaterial which row or column we use. Let us choose the second row. The
cofactors corresponding to the three elements 4, 3, 7 in the second row were found to be −11, 4, 6, respec-
tively. Consequently, if we expand along this row, we get
= 4(−11) + 3(4) + 7(6) = 10
As a check, let us also expand down the third column. The elements in this column are 1, 7, 3 with co-
factors −2, 6, −10, respectively. Hence, if we multiply each element by its cofactor and add, we get
1(−2) + 7(6) + 3(−10) = 10
which is the same as before. If you are interested, you might like to conﬁrm for yourself that the value of 10
is also obtained when expanding along rows 1 and 3, and down columns 1 and 2.
The matrix
B =
is entirely new to us, so we have no prior knowledge about its cofactors. In general, we need to evaluate all
three cofactors in any one row or column to ﬁnd the determinant of a 3 × 3 matrix. In this case, however,
we can be much lazier. Observe that all but one of the elements in the second row are zero, so when we
expand along this row we get
det(B) = b21B21 + b22B22 + b23B23
= 0B21 + 2B22 + 0B23
= 2B22
J
K
K
L
10
7
5
0
2
0
2
7
3
G
H
H
I
2
4
1
4
3
7
2
1
3
J
K
K
L
2
4
1
4
3
7
2
1
3
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
10
7
5
0
2
0
2
7
3
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
2
4
1
4
3
7
2
1
3
G
H
H
I

7.2 • Matrix inversion
483
Hence B22 is the only cofactor that we need to ﬁnd. This corresponds to the element in the second row and
second column, so we delete this row and column to produce the 2 × 2 matrix
The element b22 is in a plus position, so
B22 = +
= 20
Hence,
det(B) = 2B22 = 2 × 20 = 40
10
5
2
3
J
K
K
L
10
7
5
0
2
0
2
7
3
G
H
H
I
Practice Problem
5 Find the determinants of
A =
and
B =
[Hint: you might find your answer to Practice Problem 4 useful when calculating the determinant of A.]
J
K
K
L
270
−372
0
552
201
0
999
413
0
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
1
3
3
1
4
3
1
3
4
G
H
H
I
The inverse of the 3 × 3 matrix
A =
is given by
A−1 =
Once the cofactors of A have been found, it is easy to construct A−1. We ﬁrst stack the cofactors
in their natural positions
Secondly, we take the transpose to get
J
K
K
L
A11
A21
A31
A12
A22
A32
A13
A23
A33
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
A11
A12
A13
A21
A22
A23
A31
A32
A33
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
A11
A21
A31
A12
A22
A32
A13
A23
A33
G
H
H
I
1
|A|
J
K
K
L
a11
a12
a13
a21
a22
a23
a31
a32
a33
G
H
H
I

Matrices
484
Finally, we multiply by the scalar
to get
A−1 =
The last step is impossible if
|A| = 0
because we cannot divide by zero. Under these circumstances the inverse does not exist and the
matrix is singular.
J
K
K
L
A11
A21
A31
A12
A22
A32
A13
A23
A33
G
H
H
I
1
|A|
1
|A|
Advice
It is a good idea to check that no mistakes have been made by verifying that
A−1A = I
and
AA−1 = I
Example
Find the inverse of
A =
Solution
The cofactors of this particular matrix have already been calculated as
A11 = 2,
A12 = 2,
A13 = −2
A21 = −11,
A22 = 4,
A23 = 6
A31 = 25,
A32 = −10,
A33 = −10
Stacking these numbers in their natural positions gives the adjugate matrix
The adjoint matrix is found by transposing this to get
J
K
K
L
2
−11
25
2
4
−10
−2
6
−10
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
2
2
−2
−11
4
6
25
−10
−10
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
2
4
1
4
3
7
2
1
3
G
H
H
I

7.2 • Matrix inversion
485
In the previous example the determinant was found to be 10, so
A−1 =
=
As a check
A−1A =
=
= I
✓
AA−1 =
=
= I
✓
J
K
K
L
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
1/5
−11/10
5/2
1/5
2/5
−1
−1/5
3/5
−1
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
2
4
1
4
3
7
2
1
3
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
2
4
1
4
3
7
2
1
3
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
1/5
−11/10
5/2
1/5
2/5
−1
−1/5
3/5
−1
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
1/5
−11/10
5/2
1/5
2/5
−1
−1/5
3/5
−1
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
2
−11
25
2
4
−10
−2
6
−10
G
H
H
I
1
10
Practice Problem
6 Find (where possible) the inverses of
A =
and
B =
[Hint: you might find your answers to Practice Problems 4 and 5 useful.]
J
K
K
L
270
−372
0
552
201
0
999
413
0
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
1
3
3
1
4
3
1
3
4
G
H
H
I
Inverses of 3 × 3 matrices can be used to solve systems of three linear equations in three
unknowns. The general system
a11x + a12y + a13z = b1
a21x + a22y + a23z = b2
a31x + a32y + a33z = b3
can be written as
Ax = b
where
A =
x =
b =
The vector of unknowns, x, can be found by inverting the coefﬁcient matrix, A, and multiply-
ing by the right-hand-side vector, b, to get
x = A−1b
J
K
K
L
b1
b2
b3
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
x
y
z
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
a11
a12
a13
a21
a22
a23
a31
a32
a33
G
H
H
I

Matrices
486
Throughout this section, we have concentrated on 2 × 2 and 3 × 3 matrices. The method
described can be extended to larger matrices of order n × n. However, the cofactor approach is
very inefﬁcient. The amount of working rises dramatically as n increases, making this method
inappropriate for large matrices. The preferred method for solving simultaneous equations is
Practice Problem
7 Determine the equilibrium prices of three interdependent commodities that satisfy
P1 + 3P2 + 3P3 = 32
P1 + 4P2 + 3P3 = 37
P1 + 3P2 + 4P3 = 35
[Hint: you might find your answer to Practice Problem 6 useful.]
Example
Determine the equilibrium prices of three interdependent commodities that satisfy
2P1 + 4P2 + P3 = 77
4P1 + 3P2 + 7P3 = 114
2P1 + P2 + 3P3 = 48
Solution
In matrix notation this system of equations can be written as
Ax = b
where
A =
x =
b =
The inverse of the coefﬁcient matrix has already been found in the previous example and is
A−1 =
so
=
=
The equilibrium prices are therefore given by
P1 = 10,
P2 = 13,
P3 = 5
J
K
K
L
10
13
5
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
77
114
48
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
1/5
−11/10
5/2
1/5
2/5
−1
−1/5
3/5
−1
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
P1
P2
P3
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
1/5
−11/10
5/2
1/5
2/5
−1
−1/5
3/5
−1
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
77
114
48
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
P1
P2
P3
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
2
4
1
4
3
7
2
1
3
G
H
H
I

7.2 • Matrix inversion
487
based on the elimination idea that we described in Section 1.2. This is easily programmed, and
a computer can solve large systems of equations in a matter of seconds. We shall not pursue
this approach any further, since the practical implementation of this method requires an
understanding of the build-up of rounding errors on a computer. (The interested reader is
referred to any textbook on numerical analysis.) Instead, we describe how to use Maple to get
results, and we illustrate this with a simple 4 × 4 example.
Example
Solve the equations
2x1 −x2 + 4x3 + 5x4 = −17
x1 + 6x2 + 2x3 −4x4 =
24
5x1 + 2x2 −x3 −7x4 =
40
3x1 + 2x2 + 2x3 + 6x4 = −16
Solution
Before you can use Maple to solve problems involving matrices, it is necessary ﬁrst to load the specialist lin-
ear algebra routines. You do this by typing:
with(linalg):
In matrix notation, the system can be written as
Ax = b
where
A =
x =
b =
To input the matrix A, you type
J
K
K
K
K
L
−17
24
40
−16
G
H
H
H
H
I
J
K
K
K
K
L
x1
x2
x3
x4
G
H
H
H
H
I
J
K
K
K
K
L
2
−1
4
5
1
6
2
−4
5
2
−1
−7
3
2
2
6
G
H
H
H
H
I
MAPLE
>A:=array(1..4,1..4,[[2,–1,4,5],[1,6,2,–4],[5,2,–1,–7],[3,2,2,6]]);
To solve the linear equations all you have to do is to type
>linsolve(A,[–17,24,40,–16]);


Matrices
488
Maple responds with the solution
[2,1,0,–4]
so x1 = 2, x2 = 1, x3 = 0, x4 = −4.
Notice that Maple has solved the equations without explicitly showing the inverse on the screen. If you
need to see this, then just type
>C:=inverse(A);
which gives
The solution can also be found from this by working out A−1b. This is achieved by ﬁrst creating the 4 × 1
right-hand side column matrix b by typing:
>b:=array(1..4,1..1,[[–17],[24],[40],[–16]]);
In Maple, the symbol for matrix multiplication is &* so we can ﬁnd x by typing
>x:=C&*b;
Unfortunately, Maple rather unimaginatively responds with
x:=C&*b
To actually perform the calculation you need to evaluate this matrix product by typing
>evalm(x);
which produces the desired effect and yields the solution
J
K
K
K
K
L
2
1
0
−4
G
H
H
H
H
I
11
82
−2
41
−1
26
−32
533
−15
82
−1
41
3
26
148
533
11
82
−2
41
3
26
−73
533
4
41
6
41
−1
13
14
533
G
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
I
J
K
K
K
K
K
K
K
K
L
Cofactor (of an element)
The cofactor of the element, aij, is the determinant of the matrix
left when row i and column j are deleted, multiplied by +1 or −1, depending on whether 
i + j is even or odd, respectively.
Determinant
A determinant can be expanded as the sum of the products of the elements
in any one row or column and their respective cofactors.
Key Terms

7.2 • Matrix inversion
489
Identity matrix
An n × n matrix, I, in which every element on the main diagonal is 1 and
the other elements are all 0. If A is any n × n matrix then AI = I = IA.
Inverse matrix
A matrix, A−1 with the property that A−1A = I = AA−1.
Non-singular matrix
A square matrix with a non-zero determinant.
Singular matrix
A square matrix with a zero determinant. A singular matrix fails to 
possess an inverse.
Square matrix
A matrix with the same number of rows as columns.
Practice Problems
8 Let
A =
and
B =
(1) Find
(a) |A|
(b) |B|
(c) |AB|
Do you notice any connection between |A|, |B| and |AB|?
(2) Find
(a) A−1
(b) B−1
(c) (AB)−1
Do you notice any connection between A−1, B−1 and (AB)−1?
9 If the matrices
and
are singular, find the values of a and b.
10 Use matrices to solve the following pairs of simultaneous equations:
(a) 3x + 4y = −1
(b)
x + 3y = 8
5x −y = 6
4x −y = 6
11 Calculate the inverse of
Hence find the equilibrium prices in the two-commodity market model given in Practice Problem 12
of Section 1.3.
12 For the commodity market
C = aY + b
(0 < a < 1, b > 0)
I = cr + d
(c < 0, d > 0)
JKL
−3
1
2
−9
GHI
JKL
2
b
3
−4
GHI
JKL
2
−1
3
a
GHI
JKL
1
0
2
4
GHI
JKL
2
1
5
1
GHI


Matrices
490
For the money market
MS = M S*
MD = k1Y + k2r + k3
(k1, k3 > 0, k2 < 0)
Show that when the commodity and money markets are both in equilibrium, the income, Y, and 
interest rate, r, satisfy the matrix equation
=
and solve this system for Y and r. Write down the multiplier for r due to changes in M*S and deduce
that interest rates fall as the money supply grows.
13 Find (where possible) the inverse of the matrices
A =
B =
Are these matrices singular or non-singular?
14 Find the determinant of the matrix
A =
in terms of a. Deduce that this matrix is non-singular provided a ≠1 and find A−1 in this case.
15 Find the inverse of
Hence find the equilibrium prices of the three-commodity market model given in Practice Problem 13
of Section 1.3.
16 (Maple) Use the Maple instruction det(A)to find the determinant of the 4 × 4 matrix
For what value of a does this matrix fail to possess an inverse? [Do not forget to load the linear 
algebra package before you begin. You do this by typing with(linalg):]
17 (Maple)
(a) Find the determinant of the general 3 × 3 matrix, A
Deduce that this matrix is singular whenever the second row is a multiple of the first row.
(b) Find the inverse, A−1, of the general 3 × 3 matrix given in part (a) and verify that AA−1 = I.
J
K
K
L
a
b
c
d
e
f
g
h
i
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
K
K
L
a
2
1
−1
2
3
4
1
0
−1
5
6
1
2
4
−3
G
H
H
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
−2
2
1
1
−5
−1
2
−1
−6
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
2
1
3
1
0
a
3
1
4
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
1
4
5
2
1
3
−1
3
2
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
2
1
−1
1
3
2
−1
2
1
G
H
H
I
JKL
b + d
M*S −k3
GHI
JKL
Y
r
GHI
JKL
1 −a
−c
k1
k2
GHI

18 (Maple) The equilibrium levels of income, Y, consumption, C, and taxation, T, satisfy the equations
Y = C + I* + G*
C = a(Y −T) + b
T = tY
Show that this system can be written in the form Ax = b where
A =
x =
b =
(a) Find A−1 and give an interpretation of the element in the first row and second column of A−1.
(b) By using A−1, or otherwise, solve this system of equations.
J
K
K
L
I* + G*
b
0
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
Y
C
T
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
1
−1
0
−a
1
a
t
0
−1
G
H
H
I
7.2 • Matrix inversion
491

section 7.3
Cramer’s rule
In Section 7.2 we described the mechanics of calculating the determinant and inverse of 2 × 2
and 3 × 3 matrices. These concepts can be extended to larger systems in an obvious way,
although the amount of effort needed rises dramatically as the size of the matrix increases. For
example, consider the work involved in solving the system
=
using the method of matrix inversion. In this case the coefﬁcient matrix has order 4 × 4 and so
has 16 elements. Corresponding to each of these elements there is a cofactor. This is deﬁned to
be the 3 × 3 determinant obtained by deleting the row and column containing the element,
preﬁxed by a ‘+’ or ‘−’ according to the following pattern:
Determinants are found by expanding along any one row or column and inverses are found by
stacking cofactors as before. However, given that there are 16 cofactors to be calculated, even
J
K
K
K
K
L
+
−
+
−
−
+
−
+
+
−
+
−
−
+
−
+
G
H
H
H
H
I
J
K
K
K
K
L
−1
1
−24
15
G
H
H
H
H
I
J
K
K
K
K
L
x1
x2
x3
x4
G
H
H
H
H
I
J
K
K
K
K
L
1
0
2
3
−1
5
4
1
0
7
−3
6
2
4
5
1
G
H
H
H
H
I
Objectives
At the end of this section you should be able to:
 Appreciate the limitations of using inverses to solve systems of linear equations.
 Use Cramer’s rule to solve systems of linear equations.
 Apply Cramer’s rule to analyse static macroeconomic models.
 Apply Cramer’s rule to solve two-country trading models.

7.3 • Cramer’s rule
493
the most enthusiastic student is likely to view the prospect with some trepidation. To make
matters worse, it frequently happens in economics that only a few of the variables xi are actu-
ally needed. For instance, it could be that the variable x3 is the only one of interest. Under these
circumstances it is clearly wasteful expending a large amount of effort calculating the inverse
matrix, particularly since the values of the remaining variables, x1, x2 and x4, are not required.
In this section we describe an alternative method that ﬁnds the value of one variable at a
time. This new method requires less effort if only a selection of the variables is required. It is
known as Cramer’s rule and makes use of matrix determinants. Cramer’s rule for solving any
n × n system, Ax = b, states that the ith variable, xi, can be found from
xi =
where Ai is the n × n matrix found by replacing the ith column of A by the right-hand-side 
vector b. To understand this, consider the simple 2 × 2 system
=
and suppose that we need to ﬁnd the value of the second variable, x2, say. According to
Cramer’s rule, this is given by
x2 =
where
A =
and
A2 =
Notice that x2 is given by the quotient of two determinants. The one on the bottom is that 
of the original coefﬁcient matrix A. The one on the top is that of the matrix found from A
by replacing the second column (since we are trying to ﬁnd the second variable) by the right-
hand-side vector
In this case the determinants are easily worked out to get
det(A2) =
= 7(12) −(−6)(4) = 108
det(A) =
= 7(5) −2(4) = 27
Hence
x2 =
= 4
108
27
7
2
4
5
7
−6
4
12
JKL
−6
12
GHI
JKL
7
−6
4
12
GHI
JKL
7
2
4
5
GHI
det(A2)
det(A)
JKL
−6
12
GHI
JKL
x1
x2
GHI
JKL
7
2
4
5
GHI
det(Ai)
det(A)
Example
Solve the system of equations
=
using Cramer’s rule to ﬁnd x1.
J
K
K
L
9
−9
13
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
x1
x2
x3
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
1
2
3
−4
1
6
2
7
5
G
H
H
I


Matrices
494
Solution
Cramer’s rule gives
x1 =
where A is the coefﬁcient matrix
and A1 is constructed by replacing the ﬁrst column of A by the right-hand-side vector
which gives
A1 =
If we expand each of these determinants along the top row, we get
det(A1) =
= 9
− 2
+ 3
= 9(−37) −2(−123) + 3(−76)
= −315
and
det(A) =
= 1
− 2
+ 3
= 1(−37) −2(−32) + 3(−30)
= −63
Hence
x1 =
=
= 5
−315
−63
det(A1)
det(A)
−4
1
2
7
−4
6
2
5
1
6
7
5
1
2
3
−4
1
6
2
7
5
−9
1
13
7
−9
6
13
5
1
6
7
5
9
2
3
−9
1
6
13
7
5
J
K
K
L
9
2
3
−9
1
6
13
7
5
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
9
−9
13
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
1
2
3
−4
1
6
2
7
5
G
H
H
I
det(A1)
det(A)

7.3 • Cramer’s rule
495
We now illustrate the use of Cramer’s rule to analyse economic models. We begin by con-
sidering the three-sector macroeconomic model involving government activity.
Example
The equilibrium levels of income, Y, disposable income, Yd, and taxation, T, for a three-sector macro-
economic model satisfy the structural equations
Y = C + I* + G*
C = aYd + b
(0 < a < 1, b > 0)
Yd = Y −T
T = tY + T*
(0 < t < 1, T* > 0)
Show that this system can be written as Ax = b, where
A =
x =
b =
Use Cramer’s rule to solve this system for Y.
Solution
In this model the endogenous variables are Y, C, Yd and T, so we begin by manipulating the equations so that
these variables appear on the left-hand sides. Moreover, since the vector of ‘unknowns’, x, is given to be
J
K
K
K
K
L
I* + G*
b
0
T*
G
H
H
H
H
I
J
K
K
K
K
L
Y
C
Yd
T
G
H
H
H
H
I
J
K
K
K
K
L
1
−1
0
0
0
1
−a
0
−1
0
1
1
−t
0
0
1
G
H
H
H
H
I
Practice Problem
1 (a) Solve the system of equations
2x1 + 4x2 = 16
3x1 −5x2 = −9
using Cramer’s rule to find x2.
(b) Solve the system of equations
4x1 + x2 + 3x3 = 8
−2x1 + 5x2 + x3 = 4
3x1 + 2x2 + 4x3 = 9
using Cramer’s rule to find x3.
Advice
The incorporation of government expenditure and taxation into the model has already
been considered in Section 5.3, and you might like to compare the working involved in the
two approaches.


Matrices
496
we need to arrange the equations so that the variables appear in the order Y, C, Yd, T. For example, in the
case of the third equation
Yd = Y −T
we ﬁrst subtract Y and add T to both sides to get
Yd −Y + T = 0
but then reorder the terms to obtain
−Y + Yd + T = 0
Performing a similar process with the remaining equations gives
Y −C = I* + G*
C −aYd = b
−Y + Yd + T = 0
−tY + T = T*
so that in matrix form they become
=
The variable Y is the ﬁrst, so Cramer’s rule gives
Y =
where
A1 =
and
A =
The calculations are fairly easy to perform, in spite of the fact that both matrices are 4 × 4, because they con-
tain a high proportion of zeros. Expanding A1 along the ﬁrst row gives
det(A1) = (I* + G*)
−(−1)
b
−a
0
0
1
1
T*
0
1
1
−a
0
0
1
1
0
0
1
J
K
K
K
K
L
1
−1
0
0
0
1
−a
0
−1
0
1
1
−t
0
0
1
G
H
H
H
H
I
J
K
K
K
K
L
I* + G*
−1
0
0
b
1
−a
0
0
0
1
1
T*
0
0
1
G
H
H
H
H
I
det(A1)
det(A)
J
K
K
K
K
L
I* + G*
b
0
T*
G
H
H
H
H
I
J
K
K
K
K
L
Y
C
Yd
T
G
H
H
H
H
I
J
K
K
K
K
L
1
−1
0
0
0
1
−a
0
−1
0
1
1
−t
0
0
1
G
H
H
H
H
I
J
K
K
K
K
L
Y
C
Yd
T
G
H
H
H
H
I

7.3 • Cramer’s rule
497
Notice that there is no point in evaluating the last two cofactors in the ﬁrst row, since the corresponding ele-
ments are both zero.
For the ﬁrst of these 3 × 3 determinants we choose to expand down the ﬁrst column, since this column
has only one non-zero element. This gives
= (1)
= 1
It is immaterial which row or column we choose for the second 3 × 3 determinant, since they all contain two
non-zero elements. Working along the ﬁrst row gives
= b
− (−a)
= b −aT*
Hence
det(A1) = (I* + G*)(1) −(−1)(b −aT*) = I* + G* + b −aT*
A similar process can be applied to matrix A. Expanding along the top row gives
det(A) = (1)
− (−1)
The ﬁrst of these 3 × 3 determinants has already been found to be 1 in our previous calculations. The sec-
ond 3 × 3 determinant is new and if we expand this along the ﬁrst row we get
= −(−a)
= a(−1 + t)
Hence
det(A) = (1)(1) −(−1)a(−1 + t) = 1 −a + at
Finally we use Cramer’s rule to deduce that
Y = I* + G* + b −aT*
1 −a + at
−1
1
−t
1
0
−a
0
−1
1
1
−t
0
1
0
−a
0
−1
1
1
−t
0
1
1
−a
0
0
1
1
0
0
1
0
1
T*
1
1
1
0
1
b
−a
0
0
1
1
T*
0
1
1
1
0
1
1
−a
0
0
1
1
0
0
1
Practice Problem
2 Use Cramer’s rule to solve the following system of equations for Yd.
=
[Hint: the determinant of the coefficient matrix has already been evaluated in the previous worked
example.]
J
K
K
K
K
L
I* + G*
b
0
T*
G
H
H
H
H
I
J
K
K
K
K
L
Y
C
Yd
T
G
H
H
H
H
I
J
K
K
K
K
L
1
−1
0
0
0
1
−a
0
−1
0
1
1
−t
0
0
1
G
H
H
H
H
I

Matrices
498
We conclude this section by introducing foreign trade into our model. In all of our previous
macroeconomic models we have implicitly assumed that the behaviour of different countries
has no effect on the national income of the other countries. In reality this is clearly not the case
and we now investigate how the economies of trading nations interact. To simplify the situ-
ation we shall ignore all government activity and suppose that there are just two countries,
labelled 1 and 2, trading with each other but not with any other country. We shall use an obvi-
ous subscript notation so that Y1 denotes the national income of country 1, C2 denotes the con-
sumption of country 2 and so on. In the absence of government activity the equation deﬁning
equilibrium in country i is
Yi = Ci + Ii + Xi −Mi
where Ii is the investment of country i, Xi is the exports of country i and Mi is the imports 
of country i. As usual, we shall assume that Ii is determined exogenously and takes a known
value I*i.
Given that there are only two countries, which trade between themselves, the exports of one
country must be the same as the imports of the other. In symbols we write
X1 = M2
and
X2 = M1
We shall assume that imports are a fraction of national income, so that
Mi = miYi
where the marginal propensity to import, mi, satisﬁes 0 < mi < 1.
Once expressions for Ci and Mi are given, we can derive a system of two simultaneous 
equations for the two unknowns, Y1 and Y2, which can be solved either by using Cramer’s rule
or by using matrix inverses.
Example
The equations deﬁning a model of two trading nations are given by
Y1 = C1 + I*1 + X1 −M1
Y2 = C2 + I*2 + X2 −M2
C1 = 0.8Y1 + 200
C2 = 0.9Y2 + 100
M1 = 0.2Y1
M2 = 0.1Y2
Express this system in matrix form and hence write Y1 in terms of I*1 and I*2.
Write down the multiplier for Y1 due to changes in I*2 and hence describe the effect on the national
income of country 1 due to changes in the investment in country 2.
Solution
In this problem there are six equations for six endogenous variables, Y1, C1, M1 and Y2, C2, M2. However,
rather than working with a 6 × 6 matrix, we perform some preliminary algebra to reduce it to only two equa-
tions in two unknowns. To do this we substitute the expressions for C1 and M1 into the ﬁrst equation to get
Y1 = 0.8Y1 + 200 + I*1 + X1 −0.2Y1
Also, since X1 = M2 = 0.1Y2, this becomes
Y1 = 0.8Y1 + 200 + I*1 + 0.1Y2 −0.2Y1
which rearranges as
0.4Y1 −0.1Y2 = 200 + I*1

7.3 • Cramer’s rule
499
A similar procedure applied to the second set of equations for country 2 gives
−0.2Y1 + 0.2Y2 = 100 + I*2
In matrix form this pair of equations can be written as
=
Cramer’s rule gives
Y1 =
=
To ﬁnd the multiplier for Y1 due to changes in I*2 we consider what happens to Y1 when I*2 changes by an
amount ∆I*2. The new value of Y1 is obtained by replacing I*2 by I*2 + ∆I*2 to get
so the corresponding change in Y1 is
∆Y1 =
−
=
∆I*2 =
∆I*2
We deduce that any increase in investment in country 2 leads to an increase in the national income in coun-
try 1. Moreover, because 5/3 > 1, the increase in national income is greater than the increase in investment.
5
3
0.1
0.06
50 + 0.2I*1 + 0.1I*2
0.06
50 + 0.2I*1 + 0.1(I*2 + ∆I*2)
0.06
50 + 0.2I*1 + 0.1(I*2 + ∆I*2)
0.06
50 + 0.2I*1 + 0.1I*2
0.06
i200 + I*1
−0.1i
i200 + I*2
0.2i
i 0.4
−0.1i
i−0.2
0.2i
JKL
200 + I*1
100 + I*2
GHI
JKL
Y1
Y2
GHI
JKL
0.4
−0.1
−0.2
0.2
GHI
Practice Problem
3 The equations defining a model of two trading nations are given by
Y1 = C1 + I*1 + X1 −M1
Y2 = C2 + I*2 + X2 −M2
C1 = 0.7Y1 + 50
C2 = 0.8Y2 + 100
I*1 = 200
I*2 = 300
M1 = 0.3Y1
M2 = 0.1Y2
Express this system in matrix form and hence ﬁnd the values of Y1 and Y2. Calculate the balance of pay-
ments between these countries.
Cramer’s rule
A method of solving simultaneous equations, Ax = b, by the use of 
determinants. The ith variable xi can be computed using det(Ai)/det(A) where Ai is the
determinant of the matrix obtained from A by replacing the ith column by b.
Key Terms

Matrices
500
Practice Problems
4 Use Cramer’s rule to solve
(a)
=
for x1
(b)
=
for x2
(c)
=
for x4
5 Consider the macroeconomic model defined by
Y = C + I* + G* + X* −M
C = aY + b
(0 < a < 1, b > 0)
M = mY + M*
(0 < m < 1, M* > 0)
Show that this system can be written as Ax = b, where
A =
x =
b =
Use Cramer’s rule to show that
Y =
Write down the autonomous investment multiplier for Y and deduce that Y increases as as I* increases.
6 Consider the macroeconomic model defined by
national income:
Y = C + I + G*
(G* > 0)
consumption:
C = aY + b
(0 < a < 1, b > 0)
investment:
I = cr + d
(c < 0, d > 0)
money supply:
M*S = k1Y + k2r
(k1 > 0, k2 < 0, M*S > 0)
Show that this system can be written as Ax = b, where
A =
x =
b =
J
K
K
K
K
L
G*
b
d
M*S
G
H
H
H
H
I
J
K
K
K
K
L
Y
C
I
r
G
H
H
H
H
I
J
K
K
K
K
L
1
−1
−1
0
−a
1
0
0
0
0
1
−c
k1
0
0
k2
G
H
H
H
H
I
b + I* + G* + X* −M*
1 −a + m
J
K
K
L
I* + G* + X*
b
M*
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
Y
C
M
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
1
−1
1
−a
1
0
−m
0
1
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
K
K
L
−1
1
−24
15
G
H
H
H
H
I
J
K
K
K
K
L
x1
x2
x3
x4
G
H
H
H
H
I
J
K
K
K
K
L
1
0
2
3
−1
5
4
1
0
7
−3
6
2
4
5
1
G
H
H
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
−15
17
−1
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
x1
x2
x3
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
3
2
−2
4
3
3
2
−1
1
G
H
H
I
JKL
13
7
GHI
JKL
x1
x2
GHI
JKL
4
−1
−2
5
GHI

Use Cramer’s rule to show that
r =
Write down the government expenditure multiplier for r and deduce that the interest rate, r, increases
as government expenditure, G*, increases.
7 The equations defining a model of two trading nations are given by
Y1 = C1 + I*1 + X1 −M1
Y2 = C2 + I*2 + X2 −M2
C1 = 0.6Y1 + 50
C2 = 0.8Y2 + 80
M1 = 0.2Y1
M2 = 0.1Y2
If I*2 = 70, find the value of I*1 if the balance of payments is zero.
[Hint: construct a system of three equations for the three unknowns, Y1, Y2 and I*1.]
8 The equations defining a general model of two trading countries are given by
Y1 = C1 + I*1 + X1 −M1
Y2 = C2 + I*2 + X2 −M2
C1 = a1Y1 + b1
C2 = a2Y2 + b2
M1 = m1Y1
M2 = m2Y2
where 0 < ai < 1, bi > 0 and 0 < mi < 1 (i = 1, 2). Express this system in matrix form and use Cramer’s
rule to solve this system for Y1. Write down the multiplier for Y1 due to changes in I*2 and hence give
a general description of the effect on the national income of one country due to a change in invest-
ment in the other.
M*S(1 −a) −k1(b + d + G*)
k2(1 −a) + ck1
7.3 • Cramer’s rule
501

section 7.4
Input–output analysis
The simplest model of the macroeconomy assumes that there are only two sectors: households
and ﬁrms. The ﬂow of money between these sectors is illustrated in Figure 7.1.
The ‘black box’ labelled ‘ﬁrms’ belies a considerable amount of economic activity. Firms
exchange goods and services between themselves as well as providing them for external con-
sumption by households. For example, the steel industry uses raw materials such as iron ore
and coal to produce steel. This, in turn, is bought by mechanical engineering ﬁrms to produce
machine tools. These tools are then used by other ﬁrms, including those in the steel industry.
It is even possible for some businesses to use as input some of their own output. For example,
in the agricultural sector, a farm might use arable land to produce grain, some of which is 
Objectives
At the end of this section you should be able to:
 Understand what is meant by a matrix of technical coefﬁcients.
 Calculate the ﬁnal demand vector given the total output vector.
 Calculate the total output vector given the ﬁnal demand vector.
 Calculate the multipliers in simple input–output models.
Figure 7.1

7.4 • Input–output analysis
503
recycled as animal foodstuffs. Output destined for households is called ﬁnal (or external)
demand. Output that is used as input by another (or the same) ﬁrm is called intermediate out-
put. The problem of identifying individual ﬁrms and goods, and of tracking down the ﬂow of
money between ﬁrms for these goods, is known as input–output analysis.
Suppose that there are just two industries, I1 and I2, and that $1 worth of output of I1
requires as input 10 cents worth of I1 and 30 cents worth of I2. The corresponding ﬁgures for
I2 are 50 cents and 20 cents respectively. This information can be displayed in tabular form as
shown in Table 7.3.
The matrix obtained by stripping away the headings in Table 7.3 is
A =
and is called the matrix of technical coefﬁcients (sometimes called the technology matrix). The
columns of A give the inputs needed to produce $1 worth of output. In general, if there are n
industries then the matrix of technical coefﬁcients has order n × n. Element aij gives the input
needed from the ith industry to produces $1 worth of output for the jth industry.
We shall make the important assumption that the production functions for each industry in
the model exhibit constant returns to scale. This means that the technical coefﬁcients can be
thought of as proportions that are independent of the level of output. For example, suppose
that we wish to produce 500 monetary units of output of I1 instead of just 1 unit. The ﬁrst 
column of A shows that the input requirements are
0.1 × 500 = 50 units of I1
0.3 × 500 = 150 units of I2
Similarly, if we produce 400 units of I2 then the second column of A shows that we use
0.5 × 400 = 200 units of I1
0.2 × 400 = 80 units of I2
In this situation, of the 500 units of I1 that are produced, 50 go back into I1 and 200 are used
in I2. This means that there are 250 units left which are available for external demand.
Similarly, of the 400 units of I2 that are produced, 230 are used as intermediate output, leaving
170 units to satisfy external demand. The ﬂow of money for this simple input–output model is
illustrated in Figure 7.2.
For the general case of n industries we would like to be able to use the matrix of technical
coefﬁcients to provide answers to the following questions.
Question 1
How much output is available for ﬁnal demand given the total output level?
JKL
0.1
0.5
0.3
0.2
GHI
Table 7.3
Output
I1
I2
Input
I1
0.1
0.5
I2
0.3
0.2

Matrices
504
Question 2
How much total output is required to satisfy a given level of ﬁnal demand?
Question 3
What changes need to be made to total output when ﬁnal demand changes by a given amount?
It turns out that all three questions can be answered using one basic matrix equation, which
we now derive. We begin by returning to the simple two-industry model with matrix of tech-
nical coefﬁcients
A =
Let us denote the ﬁnal demand for I1 and I2 by d1 and d2 respectively, and denote the total out-
puts by x1 and x2. Total output from I1 gets used up in three different ways. Firstly, some of the
output from I1 gets used up as input to I1. The precise proportion is given by the element
a11 = 0.1
so I1 uses 0.1x1 units of its own output. Secondly, some of the output from I1 gets used as input
to I2. The element
a12 = 0.5
gives the amount of I1 that is used to make 1 unit of I2. We make a total of x2 units of I2, so we
use up 0.5x2 units of I1 in this way. Finally, some of the output of I1 satisﬁes ﬁnal demand,
which we denote by d1. The total amount of I1 that is used is therefore
0.1x1 + 0.5x2 + d1
If we assume that the total output from I1 is just sufﬁcient to meet these requirements then
x1 = 0.1x1 + 0.5x2 + d1
Similarly, if I2 produces output to satisfy the input requirements of the two industries as well
as ﬁnal demand then
x2 = 0.3x1 + 0.2x2 + d2
In matrix notation these two equations can be written as
=
+
JKL
d1
d2
GHI
JKL
x1
x2
GHI
JKL
0.1
0.5
0.3
0.2
GHI
JKL
x1
x2
GHI
JKL
0.1
0.5
0.3
0.2
GHI
Figure 7.2

7.4 • Input–output analysis
505
that is, x = Ax + d
where x is the total output vector
and d is the ﬁnal demand vector
For the general case of n industries, we write xi and di for the total output and ﬁnal demand for
the ith industry. Of the xi units of output of industry i that are produced,
ai1x1
is used as input for industry 1
ai2x1
is used as input for industry 2
...
ainxn
is used as input for industry n
and
di
is used for external demand
Hence
xi = ai1x1 + ai2x2 + . . . + ainxn + di
In matrix form, the totality of equations obtained by setting i = 1, 2, . . . , n, in turn, can be 
written as
=
=
that is, as
x = Ax + d
where A is the n × n matrix of technical coefﬁcients, x is the n × 1 total output vector and d is
the n × 1 ﬁnal demand vector.
The three questions posed can now be answered.
Question 1
How much output is available for ﬁnal demand given the total output level?
Answer 1
In this case the vector x is assumed to be known and we need to calculate the unknown vector
d. The matrix equation
x = Ax + d
immediately gives d = x −Ax
and the right-hand side is easily evaluated to get d.
J
K
K
K
K
L
d1
d2...
dn
G
H
H
H
H
I
J
K
K
K
K
L
x1
x2...
xn
G
H
H
H
H
I
J
K
K
K
K
L
a11
a12
. . .
a1n
a21
a22
. . .
a2n
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
an1
an2
. . .
ann
G
H
H
H
H
I
J
K
K
K
K
L
x1
x2...
xn
G
H
H
H
H
I
JKL
d1
d2
GHI
JKL
x1
x2
GHI

Matrices
506
Example
The output levels of machinery, electricity and oil of a small country are 3000, 5000 and 2000 respectively.
 Each unit of machinery requires inputs of 0.3 units of electricity and 0.3 units of oil.
 Each unit of electricity requires inputs of 0.1 units of machinery and 0.2 units of oil.
 Each unit of oil requires inputs of 0.2 units of machinery and 0.1 units of electricity.
Determine the machinery, electricity and oil available for export.
Solution
Let us denote the total output for machinery, electricity and oil by x1, x2 and x3 respectively, so that
x1 = 3000,
x2 = 5000,
x3 = 2000
The ﬁrst bullet point of the problem statement provides details of the input requirements for machinery. To
produce 1 unit of machinery we use 0 units of machinery, 0.3 units of electricity and 0.3 units of oil. The
ﬁrst column of the matrix of technical coefﬁcients is therefore
Likewise, the third and fourth sentences give the input requirements for electricity and oil, so the complete
matrix is
A =
From the equation
d = x −Ax
we see that the ﬁnal demand vector is
=
−
=
−
=
The country therefore has 2100, 3900 and 100 units 
of machinery, electricity and oil, respectively, 
available for export.
J
K
K
L
2100
3900
100
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
900
1100
1900
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
3000
5000
2000
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
3000
5000
2000
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0
0.1
0.3
0.2
0
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
3000
5000
2000
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
d1
d2
d3
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0
0.1
0.3
0.2
0
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
0
0.3
0.3
G
H
H
I

Question 2
How much total output is required to satisfy a given level of ﬁnal demand?
Answer 2
In this case the vector d is assumed to be known and we need to calculate the unknown vector
x. The matrix equation
x = Ax + d
rearranges to give
x −Ax = d
or equivalently
(I −A)x = d
because
(I −A)x = Ix −Ax = x −Ax
This represents a system of linear equations in which the coefﬁcient matrix is I −A and the
right-hand-side vector is d. From Section 7.2 we know that we can solve this by multiplying the
inverse of the coefﬁcient matrix by the right-hand-side vector to get
x = (I −A)−1 d
In the context of input–output analysis the matrix (I −A)−1 is called the Leontief inverse.
7.4 • Input–output analysis
507
Practice Problem
1 Determine the final demand vector for three firms given the matrix of technical coefficients
A =
and the total output vector
x =
J
K
K
L
1000
300
700
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
0.2
0.4
0.2
0.1
0.2
0.1
0.1
0.1
0
G
H
H
I
Example
Given the matrix of technical coefﬁcients
A =
for three industries, I1, I2 and I3, determine the total outputs required to satisfy ﬁnal demands of 49, 106
and 17 respectively.
J
K
K
L
0.3
0.1
0.1
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.4
0.2
0.3
G
H
H
I


Solution
To solve this problem we need to ﬁnd the inverse of I −A and then to multiply by the ﬁnal demand vector.
The matrix I −A is
−
=
The inverse of this matrix is then found by calculating its cofactors. If we call this matrix B then the co-
factors, Bij, corresponding to elements bij are given by
B11 = 0.52,
B12 = 0.22,
B13 = 0.36
B21 = 0.09,
B22 = 0.45,
B23 = 0.18
B31 = 0.10,
B32 = 0.16,
B33 = 0.54
By expanding along the ﬁrst row we see that
|B| = 0.7(0.52) + (−0.1)(0.22) + (−0.1)(0.36) = 0.306
Hence
B−1 = (I −A)−1 =
We are given that
d =
so the equation
x = (I −A)−1d
gives
=
=
J
K
K
L
120
200
150
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
49
106
17
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
0.52
0.09
0.10
0.22
0.45
0.16
0.36
0.18
0.54
G
H
H
I
1
0.306
J
K
K
L
x1
x2
x3
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
49
106
17
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
0.52
0.09
0.10
0.22
0.45
0.16
0.36
0.18
0.54
G
H
H
I
1
0.306
J
K
K
L
0.7
−0.1
−0.1
−0.2
0.8
−0.2
−0.4
−0.2
0.7
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
0.3
0.1
0.1
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.4
0.2
0.3
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
G
H
H
I
Matrices
508
Practice Problem
2 Each unit of engineering output requires as input 0.2 units of engineering and 0.4 units of transport.
Each unit of transport output requires as input 0.2 units of engineering and 0.1 units of transport.
Determine the level of total output needed to satisfy a final demand of 760 units of engineering and
420 units of transport.
Question 3
What changes need to be made to total output when ﬁnal demand changes by a given amount?

Answer 3
In this case we assume that the current total output vector, x, is chosen to satisfy some existing
ﬁnal demand vector, d, so that
x = Ax + d
or equivalently
x = (I −A)−1d
(1)
Suppose that the ﬁnal demand vector changes by an amount ∆d, so that the new ﬁnal demand
vector is d + ∆d. In order to satisfy the new requirements, the total output vector, x + ∆x, is
then given by
x + ∆x = (I −A)−1(d + ∆d)
= (I −A)−1d + (I −A)−1∆d
(2)
where we have used the distributive law to multiply out the brackets. However, from equation
(1) we know that
(I −A)−1d = x
so equation (2) becomes
x + ∆x = x + (I −A)−1∆d
and if x is subtracted from both sides then
∆x = (I −A)−1∆d
Notice that this equation does not have d or x in it. This shows that the change in output, ∆x,
does not depend on the existing ﬁnal demand or existing total output. It depends only on the
change, ∆d. It is also interesting to observe that the mathematics needed to solve this is the
same as that for Question 2. Both require the calculation of the Leontief inverse followed by a
simple matrix multiplication.
7.4 • Input–output analysis
509
Example
Consider the following inter-industrial ﬂow table for two industries, I1 and I2.
Assuming that the total output is just sufﬁcient to meet the input and ﬁnal demand requirements, write
down
(a) the total output vector
(b) the matrix of technical coefﬁcients
Hence calculate the new total output vector needed when the ﬁnal demand for I1 rises by 100 units. 
Output
I1
I2
Final demand
Input
I1
200
300
500
I2
100
100
300

Solution
(a) To calculate the current total outputs for I1 and I2 all we have to do is to add together the numbers
along each row of the table. The ﬁrst row shows that I1 uses 200 units of I1 as input, I2 uses 300 units
of I1 as input and 500 units of I1 are used in ﬁnal demand. The total number of units of I1 is then
200 + 300 + 500 = 1000
Assuming that the total output of I1 exactly matches these requirements, we can deduce that
x1 = 1000
Similarly, from the second row of the table,
x2 = 100 + 100 + 300 = 500
Hence the total output vector is
x =
(b) The ﬁrst column of the matrix of technical coefﬁcients represents the inputs needed to produce 1 unit
of I1. The ﬁrst column of the inter-industrial ﬂow table gives the inputs needed to produce the current
total output of I1, which we found in part (a) to be 1000. In all input–output models we assume that
production is subject to constant returns to scale, so we divide the ﬁrst column of the inter-industrial
ﬂow table by 1000 to ﬁnd the inputs needed to produce just 1 unit of output. In part (a) the total out-
put for I2 was found to be 500, so the second column of the matrix of technical coefﬁcients is calculated
by dividing the second column of the inter-industrial ﬂow table by 500. Hence
A =
=
If the demand for I1 rises by 100 units and the demand for I2 remains constant, the vector giving the
change in ﬁnal demand is
∆d =
To determine the corresponding change in output we use the equation
∆x = (I −A)−1∆d
Subtracting A from the identity matrix gives
I −A =
−
=
which has determinant
|I −A| = (0.8)(0.8) −(−0.6)(−0.1) = 0.58
The inverse of I −A is then
(I −A)−1 =
JKL
0.8
0.6
0.1
0.8
GHI
1
0.58
JKL
0.8
−0.6
−0.1
0.8
GHI
JKL
0.2
0.6
0.1
0.2
GHI
JKL
1
0
0
1
GHI
JKL
100
0
GHI
JKL
0.2
0.6
0.1
0.2
GHI
JKKKKL
200
300
1000
500
100
100
1000
500
GHHHHI
JKL
1000
500
GHI
Matrices
510

so
∆x =
=
to the nearest unit. There is an increase in total output of I2 despite the fact that the ﬁnal demand for
I2 remains unchanged. This is to be expected because in order to meet the increase in ﬁnal demand for
I1 it is necessary to raise output of I1, which in turn requires more inputs of both I1 and I2. Any change
to just one industry has a knock-on effect throughout all of the industries in the model.
From part (a) the current total output vector is
x =
so the new total output vector is
x + ∆x =
+
=
JKL
1138
517
GHI
JKL
138
17
GHI
JKL
1000
500
GHI
JKL
1000
500
GHI
JKL
138
17
GHI
JKL
100
0
GHI
JKL
0.8
0.6
0.1
0.8
GHI
1
0.58
7.4 • Input–output analysis
511
Practice Problems
3 Write down the 4 × 4 matrix of technical coefficients using the information provided in the following
inter-industrial flow table. You may assume that the total outputs are just sufficient to satisfy the input
requirements and final demands.
4 Given the matrix of technical coefficients
I1
I2
I3
A =
determine the changes in total output for the three industries when the final demand for I1 rises by
1000 units and the final demand for I3 falls by 800 units simultaneously.
J
K
K
L
0.1
0.2
0.2
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.3
0.1
G
H
H
I
I1
I2
I3
Output
I1
I2
I3
I4
Final demand
Input
I1
0
300
100
100
500
I2
100
0
200
100
100
I3
200
100
0
400
1300
I4
300
0
100
0
600
We conclude this section with a postscript highlighting again the connection between the
multiplier concept and the matrix inverse. Suppose that we have a three-industry model and
that the Leontief inverse, (I −A)−1, is given by

The equation
x = (I −A)−1d
is then
=
so that
x1 = b11d1 + b12d2 + b13d3
x2 = b21d1 + b22d2 + b23d3
x3 = b31d1 + b32d2 + b33d3
The ﬁrst equation shows that x1 is a function of the three variables d1, d2 and d3. Consequently,
we can write down three partial derivatives
= b11,
= b12,
= b13
In the same way, the second and third equations give
= b21,
= b22,
= b23
= b31,
= b32,
= b33
Recall from Chapter 5 that partial derivatives determine the multipliers in economic models.
These nine partial derivatives show that if we regard the ﬁnal demands as exogenous variables
and the total outputs as endogenous variables then the multipliers are the elements in the
matrix (I −A)−1. More precisely, the multiplier of the variable xi due to changes in dj is the 
element bij, which lies in the ith row and jth column of (I −A)−1. This result can also be seen
more directly from the equation
∆x = (I −A)−1∆d
If we put ∆x = [∆x1
∆x2
∆x3]T and ∆d = [∆d1
∆d2
∆d3]T then this matrix equation 
leads to
∆x1 = b11∆d1 + b12∆d2 + b13∆d3
∆x2 = b21∆d1 + b22∆d2 + b23∆d3
∆x3 = b31∆d1 + b32∆d2 + b33∆d3
We see from the ith equation that the contribution to the change ∆xi due to the change ∆dj is
bij∆dj. In other words, if dj changes by ∆dj and all other ﬁnal demands are ﬁxed, then we can
calculate the corresponding change in xi by multiplying ∆dj by bij.
∂x3
∂d3
∂x3
∂d2
∂x3
∂d1
∂x2
∂d3
∂x2
∂d2
∂x2
∂d1
∂x1
∂d3
∂x1
∂d2
∂x1
∂d1
J
K
K
L
d1
d2
d3
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
b11
b12
b13
b21
b22
b23
b31
b32
b33
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
x1
x2
x3
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
b11
b12
b13
b21
b22
b23
b31
b32
b33
G
H
H
I
Matrices
512

7.4 • Input–output analysis
513
External demand
Output that is used by households.
Final demand
An alternative to ‘external demand’.
Input–output analysis
Examination of how inputs and outputs from various sectors of
the economy are matched to the total resources available.
Intermediate output
Output from one sector which is used as input by another (or the
same) sector.
Leontief inverse
The inverse of I −A, where A is the matrix of technical coefﬁcients.
Matrix of technical coefﬁcients (or technology matrix)
A square matrix in which element
aij is the input required from the ith sector to produce 1 unit of output for the jth sector.
Key Terms
Practice Problems
5 Calculate the available final demand for five firms if the matrix of technical coefficients is
F1
F2
F3
F4
F5
and the total output vector is
[1000
1500
2000
5000
1000]T
6 Each unit of water output requires inputs of 0.1 units of steel and 0.2 units of electricity.
Each unit of steel output requires inputs of 0.1 units of water and 0.2 units of electricity.
Each unit of electricity output requires inputs of 0.2 units of water and 0.1 units of steel.
(a) Determine the level of total output needed to satisfy a final demand of 750 units of water, 300
units of steel and 700 units of electricity.
(b) Write down the multiplier for water output due to changes in final demand for electricity. Hence
calculate the change in water output due to a 100 unit increase in final demand for electricity.
7 Consider the following inter-industrial flow table for two industries I1 and I2.
J
K
K
K
K
K
L
0
0.1
0.1
0
0.2
0.1
0
0.2
0
0.1
0
0
0
0.3
0.1
0.2
0.1
0.1
0
0.1
0
0.3
0
0.1
0
G
H
H
H
H
H
I
F1
F2
F3
F4
F5

Output
I1
I2
Final demand
Input
I1
100
100
300
I2
200
500
300

Assuming that the total output is just sufficient to meet the input and final demand requirements, find
(a) the current total output vector, x
(b) the matrix of technical coefficients, A
(c) the matrix of multipliers, (I −A)−1
(d) the future total output vector, x + ∆x, if final demand for I1 rises by 150 units and final demand
for I2 falls by 50 units simultaneously
8 An economy consists of three industries: agriculture, mining and manufacturing.
One unit of agricultural output requires 0.2 units of its own output, 0.3 units of mining output and 
0.4 units of manufacturing output.
One unit of mining output requires 0.2 units of agricultural output, 0.4 units of its own output and 
0.2 units of manufacturing output.
One unit of manufacturing output requires 0.3 units of agricultural output, 0.3 units of mining output
and 0.1 units of its own output.
(a) Write down the matrix of technical coefficients and find the Leontief inverse.
(b) Determine the levels of total output needed to satisfy a final demand of 10 000 units of agricultural
output, 30 000 units of mining output and 40 000 units of manufacturing output.
(c) If the final demand for agricultural output rises by 1000 units and the final demand for manufac-
turing output falls by 1000 units, calculate the change in mining output.
Matrices
514

chapter 8
Linear Programming
Several methods were described in Chapter 5 for optimizing functions of two 
variables subject to constraints. In economics not all relationships between variables
are represented by equations and we now consider the case when the constraints
are given by inequalities. Provided the function to be optimized is linear and the
inequalities are all linear, the problem is said to be one of linear programming. For
simplicity we concentrate on problems involving just two unknowns and describe a
graphical method of solution.
There are two sections, which should be read in the order that they appear. Section
8.1 describes the basic mathematical techniques and considers special cases when
problems have either no solution or infinitely many solutions. Section 8.2 shows 
how an economic problem, initially given in words, can be expressed as a linear 
programming problem and hence solved.
The material in this chapter can be read at any stage, since it requires only an under-
standing of how to sketch a straight line on graph paper.


section 8.1
Graphical solution of linear
programming problems
In this and the following section we show you how to set up and solve linear programming
problems. This process falls naturally into two separate phases. The ﬁrst phase concerns prob-
lem formulation; a problem, initially given in words, is expressed in mathematical symbols.
The second phase involves the actual solution of such a problem. Experience indicates that stu-
dents usually ﬁnd the ﬁrst phase the more difﬁcult. For this reason, we postpone consideration
of problem formulation until Section 8.2 and begin by investigating techniques for their math-
ematical solution.
Objectives
At the end of this section you should be able to:
 Identify the region deﬁned by a linear inequality.
 Sketch the feasible region deﬁned by simultaneous linear inequalities.
 Solve linear programming problems graphically.
 Appreciate that a linear programming problem may have inﬁnitely many solutions.
 Appreciate that a linear programming problem may have no ﬁnite solution.
Advice
You may like to glance at one or two of the examples given in Section 8.2 now to get a
feel for the type of problem that can be solved using these techniques.
Before you can consider linear programming it is essential that you know how to sketch 
linear inequalities. In Section 1.1 we discovered that a linear equation of the form
dx + ey = f

can be represented by a straight line on graph paper. We can give a similar graphical interpreta-
tion for linear inequalities involving two variables when the equals sign is replaced by one of
<
(less than)
≤
(less than or equal to)
>
(greater than)
≥
(greater than or equal to)
To illustrate this consider the simple inequality
y ≥x
We would like to identify those points with coordinates (x, y) for which this inequality is true.
Clearly this has something to do with the straight line
y = x
sketched in Figure 8.1.
If a point P lies above the line then the y coordinate is greater than the x coordinate, so that
y > x
Similarly, if a point Q lies below the line then the y coordinate is less than the x coordinate, 
so that
y < x
Of course, the coordinates of a point R which actually lies on the line satisfy
y = x
Hence we see that the inequality
y ≥x
holds for any point that lies on or above the line y = x.
It is useful to be able to indicate this region pictorially. We do this by shading one half of the
coordinate plane. There are actually two schools of thought here. Some people like to shade the
region containing the points for which the inequality is true. Others prefer to shade the region
Linear Programming
518
Figure 8.1

for which it is false. In this book we adopt the latter approach and always shade the region that
we are not interested in, as shown in Figure 8.2. This may seem a strange choice, but the 
reason for making it will soon become apparent.
In general, to sketch an inequality of the form
dx + ey < f
dx + ey ≤f
dx + ey > f
dx + ey ≥f
we ﬁrst sketch the corresponding line
dx + ey = f
and then decide which side of the line to deal with. An easy way of doing this is to pick a ‘test
point’, (x, y). It does not matter what point is chosen, provided it does not actually lie on the
line itself. The numbers x and y are then substituted into the original inequality. If the inequal-
ity is satisﬁed then the side containing the test point is the region of interest. If not, then we go
for the region on the other side of the line.
8.1 • Graphical solution of linear programming problems
519
Figure 8.2
Example
Sketch the region
2x + y < 4
Solution
We ﬁrst sketch the line
2x + y = 4
When x = 0 we get
y = 4


When y = 0 we get
2x = 4
and so x = 4/2 = 2.
The line passes through (0, 4) and (2, 0) and is shown in Figure 8.3. For a test point let us take (3, 2),
which lies above the line. Substituting x = 3 and y = 2 into the expression 2x + y gives
2(3) + 2 = 8
This is not less than 4, so the test point does not satisfy the inequality. It follows that the region of interest
lies below the line. This is illustrated in Figure 8.4. In this example the symbol < is used rather than ≤. Hence
the points on the line itself are not included in the region of interest. We have chosen to indicate this by
using a broken line for the boundary.
Linear Programming
520
Figure 8.3
Figure 8.4

We now consider the region deﬁned by simultaneous linear inequalities. This is known as a
feasible region. It consists of those points (x, y) which satisfy several inequalities at the same
time. We ﬁnd it by sketching the regions deﬁned by each inequality in turn. The feasible region
is then the unshaded part of the plane corresponding to the intersection of all of the individual
regions.
8.1 • Graphical solution of linear programming problems
521
Practice Problem
1 Sketch the straight line
−x + 3y = 6
on graph paper. By considering the test point (1, 4) indicate the region
−x + 3y > 6
Example
Sketch the feasible region
x + 2y ≤ 12
−x + y ≤3
x ≥0
y ≥0
Solution
In this problem the easiest inequalities to handle are the last two. These merely indicate that x and y are non-
negative and so we need only consider points in the top right-hand quadrant of the plane, as shown in
Figure 8.5.

Figure 8.5

For the inequality
x + 2y ≤12
we need to sketch the line
x + 2y = 12
When x = 0 we get
2y = 12
and so y = 12/2 = 6.
When y = 0 we get
x = 12
The line passes through (0, 6) and (12, 0).
For a test point let us take (0, 0), since such a choice minimizes the amount of arithmetic that we have to
do. Substituting x = 0 and y = 0 into the inequality gives
0 + 2(0) ≤12
which is obviously true. Now the region containing the origin lies below the line, so we shade the region that
lies above it. This is indicated in Figure 8.6.
For the inequality
−x + y ≤3
we need to sketch the line
−x + y = 3
When x = 0 we get
y = 3
When y = 0 we get
−x = 3
and so x = 3/(−1) = −3.
Linear Programming
522
Figure 8.6

The line passes through (0, 3) and (−3, 0). Unfortunately, the second point does not lie on the diagram
as we have drawn it. At this stage we can either redraw the x axis to include −3 or we can try ﬁnding another
point on the line which does ﬁt on the graph. For example, putting x = 5 gives
−5 + y = 3
so y = 3 + 5 = 8. Hence the line passes through (5, 8), which can now be plotted along with (0, 3) to sketch
the line. At the test point (0, 0) the inequality reads
−0 + 0 ≤3
which is obviously true. We are therefore interested in the region below the line, since this contains the ori-
gin. As usual we indicate this by shading the region on the other side. The complete picture is shown in
Figure 8.7.
Points (x, y) which satisfy all four inequalities must lie in the unshaded ‘hole’ in the middle. Incidentally,
this explains why we did not adopt the convention of shading the region of interest. Had we done so, our
task would have been to identify the most heavily shaded part of the diagram, which is not so easy.
8.1 • Graphical solution of linear programming problems
523
Practice Problem
2 Sketch the feasible region
x + 2y ≤10
−3x + y ≤10
x ≥0
y ≥0
Figure 8.7
We are now in a position to explain exactly what we mean by a linear programming prob-
lem and how such a problem can be solved graphically. We actually intend to describe two
slightly different methods of solution. One of these is fairly sophisticated and difﬁcult to use,
while the other is more straightforward. The justiﬁcation for bothering with the ‘harder’

method is that it provides the motivation for the ‘easier’ method. It also helps us to handle one
or two trickier problems that sometimes arise. We shall introduce both methods by concen-
trating on a speciﬁc example.
Linear Programming
524
Example
Solve the linear programming problem:
Minimize
−2x + y
subject to the constraints
x + 2y ≤12
−x + y ≤3
x ≥0
y ≥0
Solution
In general, there are three ingredients making up a linear programming problem. Firstly, there are several
unknowns to be determined. In this example there are just two unknowns, x and y. Secondly, there is a
mathematical expression of the form
ax + by
which we want to either maximize or minimize. Such an expression is called an objective function. In this
example, a = −2, b = 1 and the problem is one of minimization. Finally, the unknowns x and y are subject
to a collection of linear inequalities. Quite often (but not always) two of the inequalities are x ≥0 and y ≥0.
These are referred to as non-negativity constraints. In this example there are a total of four constraints
including the non-negativity constraints.
Geometrically, points (x, y) which satisfy simultaneous linear inequalities deﬁne a feasible region in the co-
ordinate plane. In fact, for this particular problem, the feasible region has already been sketched in Figure 8.7.
The problem now is to try to identify that point inside the feasible region which minimizes the value 
of the objective function. One naïve way of doing this might be to use trial and error: that is, we could 
evaluate the objective function at every point within the region and choose the point which produces the
smallest value. For instance, (1, 1) lies in the region and when the values x = 1 and y = 1 are substituted into
−2x + y
we get
−2(1) + 1 = −1
Similarly we might try (3.4, 2.1), which produces
−2(3.4) + 2.1 = −4.7
which is an improvement, since −4.7 < −1.
The drawback of this approach is that there are inﬁnitely many points inside the region, so it is going to
take a very long time before we can be certain of the solution! A more systematic approach is to superim-
pose, on top of the feasible region, the family of straight lines,
−2x + y = c

for various values of the constant c. Looking back at the objective function, you will notice that the number
c is precisely the thing that we want to minimize. That such an equation represents a straight line should
come as no surprise to you by now. Indeed, we know from the rearrangement
y = 2x + c
that the line has a slope of 2 with a y intercept of c. Consequently, all of these lines are parallel to each other,
their precise location being determined from the number c.
Now when y = 0 the equation reads
0 = 2x + c
and so has solution x = −c/2. Hence the line passes through the point (−c/2, 0). A selection of lines is
sketched in Figure 8.8 for values of c in the range 0 to −24. These have been sketched using the information
that they pass through (−c/2, 0) and have a slope of 2. Note that as c decreases from 0 to −24, the lines sweep
across the feasible region from left to right. Also, once c goes below −24 the lines no longer intersect this
region. The minimum value of c (which, you may remember, is just the value of the objective function) is
therefore −24. Moreover, when c = −24, the line
−2x + y = c
intersects the feasible region in exactly one point, namely (12, 0). This then must be the solution of our
problem. The point (12, 0) lies in the feasible region as required and because it also lies on the line
−2x + y = −24
we know that the corresponding value of the objective function is −24, which is the minimum value. Other
points in the feasible region also lie on lines
−2x + y = c
but with larger values of c.
8.1 • Graphical solution of linear programming problems
525
Figure 8.8

In the previous example, and in Practice Problem 3, the optimal value of the objective func-
tion is attained at one of the corners of the feasible region. This is not simply a coincidence. It
can be shown that the solution of any linear programming problem always occurs at one of the
corners. Consequently, the trial-and-error approach suggested earlier is not so naïve after all.
The only possible candidates for the answer are the corners and so only a ﬁnite number of
points need ever be examined. This method may be summarized:
Step 1
Sketch the feasible region.
Step 2
Identify the corners of the feasible region and ﬁnd their coordinates.
Step 3
Evaluate the objective function at the corners and choose the one which has the maximum or
minimum value.
Returning to the previous example, we work as follows:
Step 1
The feasible region has already been sketched in Figure 8.7.
Step 2
There are four corners with coordinates (0, 0), (0, 3), (2, 5) and (12, 0).
Linear Programming
526
Practice Problem
3 Consider the linear programming problem
Maximize
−x + y
subject to the constraints
3x + 4y ≤12
x ≥0
y ≥0
(a) Sketch the feasible region.
(b) Sketch, on the same diagram, the five lines
y = x + c
for c = −4, −2, 0, 1 and 3.
[Hint: lines of the form y = x + c have a slope of 1 and pass through the points (0, c) and (−c, 0).]
(c) Use your answers to part (b) to solve the given linear programming problem.

From this we see that the minimum occurs at (12, 0), at which the objective function is −24.
Incidentally, if we also require the maximum then this can be deduced without further effort.
From the table the maximum is 3, which occurs at (0, 3).
8.1 • Graphical solution of linear programming problems
527
Corner
Objective function
(0, 0)
5(0) + 3(0) = 0
(0, 2)
5(0) + 3(2) = 6
(4, 0)
5(4) + 3(0) = 20
Step 3
Corner
Objective function
(0, 0)
−2(0) + 0 =
0
(0, 3)
−2(0) + 3 =
3
(2, 5)
−2(2) + 5 =
1
(12, 0)
−2(12) + 0 = −24
The maximum value of the objective function is 20, which occurs when x = 4 and y = 0.

Example
Solve the linear programming problem
Maximize
5x + 3y
subject to
2x + 4y ≤8
x ≥0
y ≥0
Solution
Step 1
The non-negativity constraints x ≥0 and y ≥0 indicate that the region is bounded by the coordinate axes in
the positive quadrant.
The line 2x + 4y = 8 passes through (0, 2) and (4, 0). Also, at the test point (0, 0) the inequality
2x + 4y ≤8
reads
0 ≤8
which is true. We are therefore interested in the region below the line, since this region contains the test
point, (0, 0). The feasible region is sketched in Figure 8.9 (overleaf).
Step 2
The feasible region is a triangle with three corners, (0, 0), (0, 2) and (4, 0).
Step 3

In Section 1.2 we showed you how to solve a system of simultaneous linear equations. 
We discovered that such a system does not always have a unique solution. It is possible for a
problem to have either no solution or inﬁnitely many solutions. An analogous situation arises
in linear programming. We conclude this section by considering two examples that illustrate
these special cases.
Linear Programming
528
Figure 8.9
Practice Problems
4 Solve the linear programming problem
Minimize
x −y
subject to
2x + y ≤2
x ≥0
y ≥0
5 Solve the linear programming problem
Maximize
3x + 5y
subject to
x + 2y ≤10
3x + y ≤10
x ≥0
y ≥0
[Hint: you might find your answer to Practice Problem 2 useful.]

This time, however, the maximum value is 4, which actually occurs at two corners, (0, 2) and (4, 0). This
shows that the problem does not have a unique solution. To explain what is going on here we return to the
method introduced at the beginning of this section. We superimpose the family of lines obtained by setting
the objective function equal to some constant, c. The parallel lines
x + 2y = c
pass through the points (0, c/2) and (c, 0).
A selection of lines is sketched in Figure 8.10 (overleaf) for values of c between 0 and 4. These particular
values are chosen since they produce lines that cross the feasible region. As c increases, the lines sweep across
the region from left to right. Moreover, when c goes above 4 the lines no longer intersect the region. The
maximum value that c (that is, the objective function) can take is therefore 4. However, instead of the line
x + 2y = 4
intersecting the region at only one point, it intersects along a whole line segment of points. Any point on
the line joining the two corners (0, 2) and (4, 0) will be a solution. This follows because any point on this
line segment lies in the feasible region and the corresponding value of the objective function on this line 
is 4, which is the maximum value.
8.1 • Graphical solution of linear programming problems
529
Corner
Objective function
(0, 0)
0 + 2(0) = 0
(0, 2)
0 + 2(2) = 4
(4, 0)
4 + 2(0) = 4
Example
Solve the linear programming problem
Maximize
x + 2y
subject to
2x + 4y ≤8
x ≥0
y ≥0
Solution
Step 1
The feasible region is identical to the one sketched in Figure 8.9 for the previous worked example.
Step 2
As before, the feasible region has three corners, (0, 0), (0, 2) and (4, 0).
Step 3

This example suggests the general result. If, in step 3, the maximum (or minimum) occurs
at two corners then the problem has inﬁnitely many solutions. Any point on the line segment
joining these corners, including the two corners themselves, is also a solution.
Linear Programming
530
Figure 8.10
Example
Solve the linear programming problem
Maximize
3x + 2y
subject to
x + 4y ≥8
x + y ≥5
2x + y ≥6
x ≥0
y ≥0
What can you say about the solution if this problem is one of minimization rather than maximization?
Solution
Step 1
As usual the non-negativity constraints indicate that we need only consider the positive quadrant.
The line x + 4y = 8 passes through (0, 2) and (8, 0).
The line x + y = 5 passes through (0, 5) and (5, 0).
The line 2x + y = 6 passes through (0, 6) and (3, 0).
Also, the test point (0, 0) does not satisfy any of the corresponding constraints because the three inequality
signs are all ‘≥’. We are therefore interested in the region above all of these lines, as shown in Figure 8.11.

Step 2
The feasible region has four corners, (0, 6), (1, 4), (4, 1) and (8, 0).
Step 3
8.1 • Graphical solution of linear programming problems
531
Figure 8.11
Corner
Objective function
(0, 6)
3(0) + 2(6) = 12
(1, 4)
3(1) + 2(4) = 11
(4, 1)
3(4) + 2(1) = 14
(8, 0)
3(8) + 2(0) = 24
From the table, the minimum and maximum values of the objective function are 11 and 24, which occur at
(1, 4) and (8, 0) respectively. However, we do have a slightly unusual situation in that the feasible region is
not enclosed on all sides. We describe this by saying that the feasible region is unbounded. It is open at the
top and, strictly speaking, it does not make sense to talk about the corners of such a region. Are we there-
fore justiﬁed in applying the ‘easy’ method in this case? To answer this question we superimpose the family
of lines
3x + 2y = c
representing the objective function, as shown in Figure 8.12 (overleaf).
When c = 11 the line intersects the region at only one point (1, 4). However, as c increases from this value,
the lines sweep across the feasible region and never leave it, no matter how large c becomes. Consequently,
if the problem is one of maximization we conclude that it does not have a ﬁnite solution. We can substitute
huge values of x and y into 3x + 2y and get an ever-increasing result. On the other hand, if the problem is
one of minimization then it does have a solution at the corner (1, 4). This, of course, is the answer obtained
previously using the ‘easy’ method.


This example shows that a linear programming problem may not have a ﬁnite solution 
when the feasible region is unbounded. However, when a solution does exist, it may be found
simply by inspecting the corners in the normal way. In practice, linear programming problems
arise from realistic economic situations. We would therefore expect the problem to possess a
sensible (that is, ﬁnite) answer and so the difﬁculty of the non-existence of a solution rarely
occurs.
Linear Programming
532
Figure 8.12
Practice Problems
6 Sketch the feasible regions defined by the following sets of inequalities:
(a) 5x + 3y ≤30
(b) 2x + 5y ≤20
(c) x −2y ≤3
7x + 2y ≤28
x + y ≤5
x −y ≤4
x ≥0
x ≥0
x ≥1
y ≥0
y ≥0
y ≥0
Feasible region
The set of points that satisfy all of the constraints in a linear programming
problem.
Non-negativity constraints
The constraints, x ≥0, y ≥0, etc.
Objective function
The function that is optimized in a linear programming problem.
Unbounded region
A feasible region that is not completely enclosed by a polygon. The
associated linear programming problem may not have a ﬁnite solution.
Key Terms

7 Use your answers to Practice Problem 6 to solve the following linear programming problems.
(a) Maximize
4x + 9y
subject to
5x + 3y ≤30
7x + 2y ≤28
x ≥0
y ≥0
(b) Maximize
3x + 6y
subject to
2x + 5y ≤20
x + y ≤5
x ≥0
y ≥0
(c) Maximize
x + y
subject to
x −2y ≤3
x −y ≤4
x ≥1
y ≥0
8 What can you say about the solution to Practice Problem 7(c) if the problem is one of maximization
rather than minimization? Explain your answer by superimposing the family of lines
x + y = c
on the feasible region.
9 Solve the following linear programming problems.
(a) Maximize
2x + 3y
(b) Maximize
−8x + 4y
subject to
subject to
2x + y ≤8
x −y ≤2
x + y ≤6
2x −y ≥−3
x + 2y ≤10
x −y ≥−4
x ≥0
x ≥0
y ≥0
y ≥0
10 Explain why each of the following problems fails to possess a solution.
(a) Maximize
x + y
(b) Maximize
x + y
subject to
subject to
y ≥2
2x −y ≥−1
x ≤2
x −2y ≤2
x −y ≤1
x ≥0
x ≥0
y ≥0
y ≥0
8.1 • Graphical solution of linear programming problems
533


11 Solve the linear programming problem
Maximize
6x + 2y
subject to
x −y ≥0
3x + y ≥8
x ≥0
y ≥0
12 Show that the linear programming problem given in Practice Problem 7(a) can be expressed in matrix 
notation as
Maximize
cTx
subject to
Ax ≤b
x ≥0
where c, x, b and 0 are 2 × 1 matrices and A is a 2 × 2 matrix, which should be stated.
Linear Programming
534

section 8.2
Applications of linear
programming
The impression possibly given so far is that linear programming is a mathematical technique
designed to solve rather abstract problems. This is misleading since linear programming 
problems do arise from concrete situations. We now put the record straight by considering
three realistic examples that lead naturally to such problems. In doing so we shall develop an
important skill that can loosely be called problem formulation. Here we start with information,
perhaps only vaguely given in words, and try to express it using the more precise language 
of mathematics. Once this has been done, it is a simple matter of applying mathematical 
techniques to produce the solution.
Objectives
At the end of this section you should be able to:
 Identify the unknowns in a linear programming problem.
 Find an expression for the objective function and decide whether it should be
maximized or minimized.
 Write down all of the constraints, including any obvious ones not mentioned
explicitly in the problem speciﬁcation.
 Solve linear programming problems expressed in words, remembering to check
that the answer makes sense.

Linear Programming
536
Example
A small manufacturer produces two kinds of good, A and B, for which demand exceeds capacity. The pro-
duction costs for A and B are $6 and $3, respectively, each, and the corresponding selling prices are $7 and $4.
In addition, the transport costs are 20 cents and 30 cents for each good of type A and B, respectively. The con-
ditions of a bank loan limit the manufacturer to maximum weekly production costs of $2700 and maximum
weekly transport costs of $120. How should the manufacturer arrange production to maximize proﬁt?
Solution
As mentioned in Section 8.1, there are three things constituting a linear programming problem: a pair of
unknowns x and y, an objective function that needs maximizing or minimizing, and some constraints. We
consider each of these in turn.
The manufacturer has to decide exactly how many goods of types A and B to produce each week. These
are therefore the unknowns of this problem and we denote these unknowns by the letters x and y: that is,
we let
x = number of goods of type A to be made each week
y = number of goods of type B to be made each week
The ﬁnal sentence of the problem states that the manufacturer should choose these quantities to maximize
proﬁt. Hence we need to ﬁnd a formula for proﬁt in terms of x and y. Now for each good of type A the 
production costs are $6 and the transport costs are 20 cents. The total cost is therefore $6.20. If the selling
price is $7, it follows that the proﬁt made on a single item is 80 cents. Consequently, when x goods of type
A are made the total proﬁt is x times this amount, $0.8x. Notice that the question states that ‘demand
exceeds capacity’, so all goods are guaranteed to be sold. Exactly the same reasoning can be applied to B. 
The proﬁt is 70 cents each, so when y goods of type B are made the total proﬁt is $0.7y. Hence the proﬁt
resulting from the production of both A and B is
0.8x + 0.7y
This then is the objective function that we want to maximize.
The next thing to do is to read through the original speciﬁcation to see what restrictions are to be
imposed on the production levels. We see that the total weekly production costs must not exceed $2700. The
production costs are $6 for A and $3 for B. Hence if x goods are made of type A and y goods are made of
type B the total cost is
6x + 3y
so we require
6x + 3y ≤2700
Similarly, the total cost of transporting the goods is
0.2x + 0.3y
and since this must not exceed $120 we need
0.2x + 0.3y ≤120
On the face of it there appear to be no further constraints given in the problem. However, a moment’s
thought should convince you that we are missing two important constraints, namely
x ≥0
and
y ≥0
Although these are not mentioned explicitly, it is obvious that it is impossible to manufacture a negative
number of goods.

Collecting all of the ingredients together, the linear programming problem may be stated:
Maximize
0.8x + 0.7y
subject to
6x + 3y ≤2700
0.2x + 0.3y ≤120
x ≥0
y ≥0
The problem can now be solved using the method described in Section 8.1.
Step 1
As usual the non-negativity constraints indicate that we need only consider points in the positive quadrant.
The line 6x + 3y = 2700 passes through (0, 900) and (450, 0).
The line 0.2x + 0.3y = 120 passes through (0, 400) and (600, 0).
Also, using the origin as the test point reveals that the region of interest lies below both lines. It is sketched
in Figure 8.13.
Step 2
The feasible region has four corners altogether, three of which have obvious coordinates (0, 0), (0, 400) 
and (450, 0). Unfortunately it is not at all easy to read off from the diagram the exact coordinates of the
remaining corner. This is formed by the intersection of the two lines
6x +
3y = 2700
(1)
0.2x + 0.3y = 120
(2)
8.2 • Applications of linear programming
537

Figure 8.13

You may have encountered this difﬁculty when solving Practice Problem 8 in Section 8.1. If desired, we can
always ﬁnd the exact coordinates by treating the corresponding equations as a pair of simultaneous equa-
tions and solving them algebraically. The variable x can be eliminated by multiplying equation (2) by 30 and
subtracting from (1) to get
6x + 3y = 2700
6x + 9y = 3600
−6y = −900
(3)
Equation (3) gives y = 150 and if this value is substituted into either of the original equations, it is easy to
see that x = 375. The fourth corner therefore has coordinates (375, 150).
Step 3
Linear Programming
538
Corner
Objective function
(0, 0)
0
(0, 400)
280
(450, 0)
360
(375, 150)
405
The maximum weekly proﬁt is $405, which occurs when 375 goods of type A and 150 goods of type B are
manufactured.
Advice
It is impossible to give a precise description of problem formulation. Each case has to be
considered on its own merits. However, the previous example does suggest the following
general strategy, which might be helpful:
(1) Identify the unknowns and label them x and y.
(2) Write down an expression for the objective function in terms of x and y, and decide
whether it needs maximizing or minimizing.
(3) Write down all constraints on the variables x and y.
Practice Problem
1 An electronics firm decides to launch two new models of computer, COM1 and COM2. The cost of
producing each machine of type COM1 is $1200 and the cost for COM2 is $1600. The firm recog-
nizes that it is a risky venture and decides to limit the total weekly production costs to $40 000. Also,
due to a shortage of skilled labour, the total number of computers that the firm can produce in a week
is at most 30. The profit made on each machine is $600 for COM1 and $700 for COM2. How should
the firm arrange production to maximize profit?

8.2 • Applications of linear programming
539
Example
A food producer uses two processing plants, P1 and P2 that operates 7 days a week. After processing, beef
is graded into high-, medium- and low-quality foodstuffs. High-quality beef is sold to butchers, medium-
quality beef is used in super-market ready-meals and the low-quality beef is used in dog food. The producer
has contracted to provide 120 kg of high-, 80 kg of medium- and 240 kg of low-quality beef each week. It
costs $4000 per day to run plant P1 and $3200 per day to run plant P2. Each day P1 processes 60 kg of high-
quality beef, 20 kg of medium-quality beef and 40 kg of low-quality beef. The corresponding quantities for
P2 are 20 kg, 20 kg and 120 kg, respectively. How many days each week should the plants be operated to
fulﬁl the beef contract most economically?
Solution
The clue to the unknowns of this problem can be found in the ﬁnal sentence ‘How many days each week 
. . .’. We let
x = number of days each week that plant P1 is operated
y = number of days each week that plant P2 is operated
The objective function is harder to ascertain. The phrase ‘to fulﬁl the contract most economically’ is rather
vague. It could mean that we want to maximize proﬁt, as in the previous example. Unfortunately,
insufﬁcient information is given in the problem to determine proﬁt, since we do not know the selling prices
of the three grades of meat. We are, however, given the operating cost, so we take this to be the objective
function, which then needs to be minimized. The daily costs for plants P1 and P2 are $4000 and $3200,
respectively. Consequently, if plant P1 is operated for x days and plant P2 for y days then the total weekly
cost is
4000x + 3200y
The remaining information is used to determine the constraints. The producer has contracted to provide
120 kg of high-quality beef each week. This means that at least this amount must be processed to fulﬁl 


the contract. High-quality beef comes from two sources. Plant P1 processes 60 kg per day, whereas plant P2
processes 20 kg per day. Hence the total weekly output of high-quality beef is
60x + 20y
The contract is therefore satisﬁed provided
60x + 20y ≥120
A similar argument holds for both medium- and low-quality beef. The corresponding constraints are
20x + 20y ≥80
40x + 120y ≥240
Looking back, it is easy to check that every piece of numerical information has been used in the formula-
tion so far. However, there are still four further constraints to write down! These are based on common
sense, but they do need to be built into the statement of the linear programming problem. The number of
days in a week is 7, so the values of x and y must range between 0 and 7. Thus we have
x ≥0
and
y ≥0
x ≤7
and
y ≤7
The complete problem may now be stated:
Minimize
4000x + 3200y
subject to
60x + 20y ≥120
20x + 20y ≥80
40x + 120y ≥240
x ≤7
y ≤7
x ≥0
y ≥0
It can now be solved by applying the method described in Section 8.1.
Step 1
The feasible region can be sketched in the usual way. Note that the last four constraints merely indicate that
the region is boxed in by the vertical and horizontal lines x = 0, x = 7, y = 0 and y = 7.
The line 60x + 20y = 120 passes through (0, 6) and (2, 0).
The line 20x + 20y = 80 passes through (0, 4) and (4, 0).
The line 40x + 120y = 240 passes through (0, 2) and (6, 0).
Also the test point (0, 0) does not satisfy any of the ﬁrst three constraints, so the feasible region lies above
these lines, as shown in Figure 8.14.
Step 2
The feasible region has corners (7, 0), (7, 7), (0, 7), (1, 3), (3, 1), (0, 6) and (6, 0).
Linear Programming
540

Step 3
8.2 • Applications of linear programming
541
Figure 8.14
Corner
Objective function
(7, 0)
28 000
(7, 7)
50 400
(0, 7)
22 400
(0, 6)
19 200
(3, 1)
15 200
(1, 3)
13 600
(6, 0)
24 000
The minimum cost is $13 600 and is obtained by operating plant P1 for 1 day a week and plant P2 for 3 days
a week.
Advice
Perhaps one of the more difficult aspects of formulating linear programming problems is
remembering to include the obvious constraints arising from common sense. In the previ-
ous example, the last four constraints are so obvious that it is all too easy to omit them,
particularly because they are not mentioned explicitly in the original specification. We
might therefore include the following point in our general strategy:
(4) Write down any obvious constraints, such as the non-negativity constraints, that you
may have forgotten about in (3).

Linear Programming
542
Practice Problem
2 A small publishing company decides to use one section of its plant to produce two textbooks called
Microeconomics and Macroeconomics. The profit made on each copy is $12 for Microeconomics
and $18 for Macroeconomics. Each copy of Microeconomics requires 12 minutes for printing and 
18 minutes for binding. The corresponding figures for Macroeconomics are 15 and 9 minutes respec-
tively. There are 10 hours available for printing and 101/2 hours available for binding. How many of
each should be produced to maximize profit?
Example
An insurance company employs full- and part-time staff, who work 40 and 20 hours per week respectively.
Full-time staff are paid $800 per week and part-time staff $320. In addition, it is company policy that the
number of part-time staff should not exceed one-third of the number of full-time staff.
If the number of worker-hours per week required to deal with the company’s work is 900, how many
workers of each type should be employed in order to complete the workload at minimum cost?
Solution
If the company employs x full-time staff and y part-time staff then the company would like to choose x
and y to minimize its weekly salary costs. Also, since full- and part-time staff are paid $800 and $320 per
week, respectively, the total wage bill is then
800x + 320y
which is the objective function that needs to be minimized.
Full- and part-time staff work 40 and 20 hours per week, respectively, so the total number of worker-
hours available is
40x + 20y
It is required that this is at least 900, so we obtain the constraint
40x + 20y ≥900
A further constraint on the company arises from the fact that the number of part-time staff cannot exceed
one-third of the number of full-time staff. This means, for example, that if the company employs 30 full-
time staff then it is not allowed to employ more than 10 part-time staff because
1/3 × 30 = 10
In general, if x denotes the number of full-time staff then the number of part-time staff, y, cannot exceed
x/3: that is,
y ≤x/3
In addition, we have the obvious non-negativity constraints
x ≥0
and
y ≥0
The complete problem may now be stated:
Minimize
800x + 320y
subject to

40x + 20y ≥900
y ≤x/3
x ≥0
y ≥0
It can now be solved by applying the method described in Section 8.1.
Step 1
The feasible region can be sketched in the usual way. The line y = x/3 passes through (0, 0), (3, 1), (6, 2) and
so on. Unfortunately, because the origin actually lies on the line, it is necessary to use some other point as a
test point. For example, substituting x = 30, y = 5 into the inequality
y ≤x/3
gives
5 ≤(30)/3
This inequality is clearly true, indicating that (30, 5), which lies below the line, is in the region of interest.
The constraint
40x + 20y ≥900
is easier to handle. The corresponding line passes through (0, 45) and (221/2, 0), and using the origin as a test
point shows that we need to shade the region below the line. The feasible region is sketched in Figure 8.15.
Step 2
The feasible region has two corners. One of these is obviously (221/2, 0). However, it is not possible to write
down directly from the diagram the coordinates of the other corner. This is formed by the intersection of
the two lines
8.2 • Applications of linear programming
543

Figure 8.15

y = x/3
(1)
40x + 20y = 900
(2)
and so we must solve this system algebraically. In this case the easiest thing to do is to substitute equation
(1) into equation (2) to eliminate y immediately. This gives
40x +
x = 900
that is,
x = 900
which has solution
x =
=
= 192/7
Finally, from equation (1),
y =
x =
×
=
= 63/7
The feasible region therefore has coordinates (19 2/7, 63/7) and (221/2, 0).
Step 3
45
7
135
7
1
3
1
3
135
7
2700
140
140
3
20
3
Linear Programming
544
The minimum cost is $17 485.71, which occurs when x = 192/7 and y = 63/7.
It might appear that this is the solution to our original problem. This is certainly mathematically correct,
but it cannot possibly be the solution that we are looking for, since it does not make sense, for example, to
employ 2/7 of a worker. We are only interested in points whose coordinates are whole numbers. A problem
such as this is referred to as an integer programming problem. We need to ﬁnd that point (x, y) inside the
feasible region where both x and y are whole numbers which minimizes the objective function. A ‘blow-up’
picture of the feasible region near the minimum cost corner is shown in Figure 8.16, and the following table
indicates that the optimal solution is (20, 5).
Other points in the neighbourhood with whole-number coordinates are (20, 6), (20, 7), (21, 5) and so on.
However, all of these have either a larger value of x or a larger value of y (or both) and so must produce 
a larger total cost. The company should therefore employ 20 full- and 5 part-time staff to minimize its 
salary bill.
Corner
Objective function
(19 2/7, 6 3/7)
17 485 5/7
(22 1/2, 0)
18 000
Corner
Objective function
(20, 5)
17 600
(20, 6)
17 920
(21, 5)
18 400
(21, 6)
18 720

In this section we have described how to formulate linear programming problems. The 
general strategy may be summarized:
(1) Identify the unknowns and label them x and y.
(2) Write down an expression for the objective function in terms of x and y, and decide
whether it needs maximizing or minimizing.
8.2 • Applications of linear programming
545
Figure 8.16
Advice
This example highlights the need to look back at the original problem to make sure that
the final answer makes sense. It is very tempting when solving linear programming prob-
lems just to write down the solution without thinking, neatly underline it and then go on
to another problem. Unfortunately, it is all to easy to make mistakes, both in the problem
formulation and in sketching the feasible region. Spending a few moments checking the
validity of your solution may well help you to discover any blunders that you have made,
as well as suggesting possible modifications to the solution procedure, as in the previous
example. We might, therefore, conclude the general strategy with the following step:
(5) Check that the final answer makes sense as a solution to the original problem.
Practice Problem
3 An individual spends 95% of earned income on essential goods and services, leaving only 5% to be
spent on luxury goods, which is subdivided between trendy clothes and visits to the theatre. The 
cost of each item of clothing is $150 and a trip to the theatre costs $70. The corresponding utility 
function is
U = 3x + 7y
where x and y denote the number of trendy clothes and theatre visits per year, respectively. In order
to maintain a reasonable appearance throughout the year, it is vital that at least nine new items of
clothing are purchased each year. Given that annual earned income is $42 000, find the values of 
x and y which maximize utility.

(3) Write down all constraints on the variables x and y.
(4) Write down any obvious constraints, such as the non-negativity constraints, that you may
have forgotten about in (3).
(5) Check that the ﬁnal answer makes sense as a solution to the original problem.
Obviously it is not essential that you follow this approach, although you may wish to refer to it
if you get stuck.
We conclude this section by showing how Maple can be used to solve linear programming
problems. This uses the simplex algorithm and can cope with problems involving more than
two unknowns. It is not necessary for you to understand what the simplex algorithm is to use
Maple. However, if you are interested, you might like to consult an academic textbook on
Discrete (sometimes called Decision) Mathematics.
Linear Programming
546
Example
A manufacturer produces three types of camera, X, Y and Z. Camera X requires 4 hours of staff time, 5 units
of raw materials and 1 machine-hour to produce. The corresponding ﬁgures for camera Y are 3, 9 and 1,
respectively. For Z, the ﬁgures are 3, 6 and 4, respectively. The proﬁts earned from the sale of each camera
of type X, Y and Z are $400, $300 and $250, respectively. The total number of staff-hours available is 800,
the number of units of raw materials available is 1100, and the number of machine-hours available is 400.
In addition, because of limited demand, it is decided that no more than 100 cameras of any one type should
be produced. How should the manufacturer arrange production to maximize proﬁt?
Solution
In this problem a decision needs to be made about the number of each type of camera to produce. We shall
denote these unknowns by x, y and z. The objective is to maximize proﬁt, so we type
>profit:=400*x+300*y+250*z;
The next thing to do is to input the constraints. Production levels are limited by staff-hours, raw materials,
machine-hours and demand. We consider each of these in turn and label the constraints c1, c2, c3 and 
so on:
>c1:=4*x+3*y+3*z<=800;
>c2:=5*x+9*y+6*z<=1100;
>c3:=x+y+4*z<=400;
>c4:=x<=100;
>c5:=y<=100;
>c6:=z<=100;
Maple has many routines based on the simplex method, which we load by typing
>with(simplex):
We are ﬁnally in a position to solve the problem, which we do by typing:
MAPLE

8.2 • Applications of linear programming
547
which gives
{x=52, y=100, z=62}
Proﬁt is maximized by making 52 cameras of type X, 100 of type Y and 62 of type Z. The value of the proﬁt
itself can be found by typing
>subs({x=52,y=100,z=62},profit);
which gives $66 300.
>maximize(profit,{c1,c2,c3,c4,c5,c6},NONNEGATIVE);
Integer programming
A linear programming problem in which the search for solution is
restricted to points in the feasible region with whole-number coordinates.
Key Terms
Practice Problems
4 A manufacturer produces two models of racing bike, B and C, each of which must be processed
through two machine shops. Machine shop 1 is available for 120 hours per month and machine shop
2 for 180 hours per month. The manufacture of each bike of type B takes 6 hours in shop 1 and 
3 hours in shop 2. The corresponding times for C are 4 and 10 hours, respectively. If the profit is 
$180 and $220 per bike of type B and C respectively, how should the manufacturer arrange produc-
tion to maximize total profit?
5 A small firm manufactures and sells litre cartons of non-alcoholic cocktails, ‘The Caribbean’ and ‘Mr
Fruity’, which sell for $1 and $1.25, respectively. Each is made by mixing fresh orange, pineapple 
and apple juices in different proportions. The Caribbean consists of 1 part orange, 6 parts pineapple
and 1 part apple. Mr Fruity consists of 2 parts orange, 3 parts pineapple and 1 part apple. The firm
can buy up to 300 litres of orange juice, up to 1125 litres of pineapple juice and up to 195 litres of
apple juice each week at a cost of $0.72, $0.64 and $0.48 per litre, respectively.
Find the number of cartons of ‘The Caribbean’ and ‘Mr Fruity’ that the firm should produce to max-
imize profits. You may assume that non-alcoholic cocktails are so popular that the firm can sell all that
it produces.
6 In a student’s diet a meal consists of beefburgers and chips. Beefburgers have 1 unit of nutrient N1,
4 units of N2 and 125 calories per ounce. The figures for chips are 1/2 unit of N1, 1 unit of N2 and 
60 calories per ounce. In the interests of the student’s health it is essential for the meal to contain at
least 7 units of N1 and 22 units of N2.


What should the student ask for on the next visit to the refectory to satisfy the nutrient require-
ments and minimize the number of calories?
7 A manufacturer of outdoor clothing makes wax jackets and trousers. Each jacket requires 1 hour to
make, whereas each pair of trousers takes 40 minutes. The materials for a jacket cost $32 and those
for a pair of trousers cost $40. The company can devote only 34 hours per week to the production
of jackets and trousers, and the firm’s total weekly cost for materials must not exceed $1200. The
company sells the jackets at a profit of $12 each and the trousers at a profit of $14 per pair. Market
research indicates that the firm can sell all of the jackets that are produced, but that it can sell at most
half as many pairs of trousers as jackets.
(a) How many jackets and trousers should the firm produce each week to maximize profit?
(b) Due to the changes in demand, the company has to change its profit margin on a pair of trousers.
Assuming that the profit margin on a jacket remains at $12 and the manufacturing constraints
are unchanged, find the minimum and maximum profit margins on a pair of trousers which the
company can allow before it should change its strategy for optimum output.
8 A farmer wishes to feed pigs with minimum cost but needs to ensure that each receives at least 
1.6 kg of protein, at least 0.3 kg of amino acid and no more than 0.3 kg of calcium per day. Foods
available are fish meal and meat scraps, which contain protein, calcium and amino acid according to
the following table:
Linear Programming
548
Kg protein
Kg calcium
Kg amino acid
per kg feed
per kg feed
per kg feed
Fish meal
0.60
0.05
0.18
Meat scraps
0.50
0.11
0.05
Fish meal costs $0.65 per kg, whereas meat scraps cost $0.52 per kg. Determine a minimum-cost
feeding programme.
9 (Maple) A firm allocates resources L, K and R to the production of three goods X, Y and Z. The 
following table gives the amount of each input required to produce 1 unit of the given output:
The value of each unit of output is $10, $5 and $8 for X, Y and Z.
The resources available are 480, 300 and 180 for L, K and R.
Find the optimal resource allocation that maximizes the value of the total output.
10 (Maple) A farmer has two fields, the more fertile of which is 1400 hectares, the area of the other
being 800 hectares. She grazes cattle and grows barley by fencing off areas in both fields. Some of
the barley is kept for feed in the winter months. The profit per hectare is given by this table:
Output
X
Y
Z
L
2
3
4
Input
K
1
5
2
R
2
1
1

For winter feed alone she must allocate 1 hectare to barley for every 2 hectares allocated to cattle.
Also the farmer finds that she cannot increase the area allocated to cattle by more than 20% from
one year to the next.
Show that this can be formulated as a linear programming problem involving 8 unknowns and 
15 constraints. Use the simplex method to solve this problem.
8.2 • Applications of linear programming
549
Year 1
Large field
Small field
Barley
$400
$220
Cattle
$350
$200
Year 2
Large field
Small field
Barley
$420
$240
Cattle
$540
$320


chapter 9
Dynamics
This chapter provides a simple introduction to the dynamics of economic systems. So
far, all of our models have been static. We have implicitly assumed that equilibrium
prices and incomes are somehow attained instantaneously, as if by magic. In 
practice, economic variables take time to vary. The incorporation of time into eco-
nomic models is known as dynamics and it enables us to decide whether equilibrium
values are actually achieved and, if so, exactly how individual variables approach
these values. There are two sections that can be read in either order.
In Section 9.1 we consider the case when time, t, is a discrete variable taking whole-
number values. This describes the situation in which variables change only after fixed
periods. For example, the prices of certain agricultural products change from one
season to the next but are fixed throughout each season. We express this time
dependence using an obvious subscript notation. The price during the first period 
is denoted by P1, the price during the second period is P2, and so on. Equations 
that relate the price in one period, Pt, to that of the previous period, Pt−1, are called
difference equations and a method is described for the solution of such equations.
In Section 9.2 we consider the case when time is a continuous variable taking all pos-
sible values in a certain interval. This describes the situation in which variables
change from one moment to the next. For example, the prices of certain commodi-
ties, such as oil, effectively change instantaneously and are not fixed on a seasonal
basis. We express this time dependence using the usual function notation, P(t). It is
appropriate to model the rate of change of P with respect to t using the derivative,
P′(t). Equations that involve the derivatives of an unknown function are called dif-
ferential equations and a method is described for solving such equations.

It is not possible in an introductory book such as this to give you more than a flavour
of the mathematics of dynamics. However, in spite of this, we show you how to
solve dynamic systems in both macroeconomics and microeconomics. Also, we hope
that this chapter will encourage you to read other books that describe more
advanced methods and models.

section 9.1
Difference equations
A difference equation (sometimes called a recurrence relation) is an equation that relates con-
secutive terms of a sequence of numbers. For example, the equation
Yt = 2Yt−1
describes sequences in which one number is twice its predecessor. There are obviously many
sequences that satisfy this requirement, including
2, 4, 8, 16, . . .
5, 10, 20, 40, . . .
−1, −2, −4, −8, . . .
In order to determine the sequence uniquely, we need to be given some additional information,
such as the ﬁrst term. It is conventional to write the ﬁrst term as Y0, and once this is given a
speciﬁc value all remaining terms are known.
Objectives
At the end of this section you should be able to:
 Find the complementary function of a difference equation.
 Find the particular solution of a difference equation.
 Analyse the stability of economic systems.
 Solve lagged national income determination models.
 Solve single-commodity-market models with lagged supply.

The following problem gives you an opportunity to solve difference equations for yourself.
Dynamics
554
Example
Write down the ﬁrst four terms of the sequence deﬁned by
Y0 = 3
and
Yt = 2Yt−1
and obtain a formula for the general term Yt in terms of t.
Solution
If Y0 = 3 then
Y1 = 2Y0 = 2 × 3 = 6
Y2 = 2Y1 = 2 × 6 = 12
Y3 = 2Y2 = 2 × 12 = 24
In order to produce a formula for the general term, we write these as
Y1 = 2Y0 = 21 × 3
Y2 = 2Y1 = 22 × 3
Y3 = 2Y2 = 23 × 3
It is now obvious from this pattern that the general term, given by
Yt = 3(2t)
is the solution of the difference equation
Yt = 2Yt−1
with initial condition
Y0 = 3
Practice Problem
1 Starting with the given initial conditions, write down the first four terms of each of the following
sequences. By expressing these as an appropriate power, write down a formula for the general term,
Yt in terms of t.
(1) (a) Yt = 3Yt−1; Y0 = 1
(b) Yt = 3Yt−1; Y0 = 7
(c) Yt = 3Yt−1; Y0 = A
(2) (a) Yt =
Yt−1; Y0 = 1
(b) Yt =
Yt−1; Y0 = 7
(c) Yt =
Yt−1; Y0 = A
(3) Yt = bYt−1; Y0 = A
1
2
1
2
1
2
The result of the last part of Practice Problem 1 shows that the solution of the general equation
Yt = bYt−1
(1)
with initial condition

Y0 = A
is given by
Yt = A(bt)
Before we can consider the use of difference equations in economic models, we must exam-
ine the solution of more general equations of the form
Yt = bYt−1 + c
(2)
where the right-hand side now includes a non-zero constant, c. We begin by deﬁning some 
terminology. The general solution of equation (2) can be written as the sum of two separate
expressions known as the complementary function (CF) and the particular solution (PS). The
complementary function is the name that we give to the solution of equation (2) when the con-
stant, c, is zero. In this case, equation (2) reduces to equation (1), and so
CF = A(bt)
The particular solution is the name that we give to any solution of equation (2) that we are
clever enough to ‘spot’. This turns out to be rather easier to do than might at ﬁrst appear and
we will see how this can be done in a moment. Finally, once CF and PS have been found, we
can write down the general solution of equation (2) as
Yt = CF + PS = A(bt) + PS
A proof of this result can be found in Practice Problem 8 at the end of this section. The letter
A is no longer equal to the ﬁrst term, Y0, although it can easily be calculated, as the following
example demonstrates.
9.1 • Difference equations
555
Example
Solve the following difference equations with the speciﬁed initial conditions. Comment on the qualitative
behaviour of the solution in each case.
(a) Yt = 4Yt−1 + 21; Y0 = 1
(b) Yt =
Yt−1 + 8; Y0 = 2
Solution
(a) The difference equation
Yt = 4Yt−1 + 21
is of the standard form
Yt = bYt−1 + c
and so can be solved using the complementary function and particular solution. The complementary
function is the general solution of the equation when the constant term on the right-hand side is
replaced by zero: that is, it is the solution of
Yt = 4Yt−1
which is A(4t).
The particular solution is any solution of the original equation
1
3


Yt = 4Yt−1 + 21
that we are able to ﬁnd. In effect, we need to think of a sequence of numbers, Yt, such that when this is
substituted into
Yt −4Yt−1
we obtain the constant value of 21. One obvious sequence likely to work is a constant sequence,
Yt = D
for some number, D. If this is substituted into
Yt = 4Yt−1 + 21
we obtain
D = 4D + 21
(Note that Yt = D whatever the value of t so Yt−1 is also equal to D.) This algebraic equation can be re-
arranged to get
−3D = 21
and so D = −7.
We have therefore shown that the complementary function is given by
CF = A(4t)
and that the particular solution is
PS = −7
Hence
Yt = CF + PS = A(4t) −7
which is the general solution of the difference equation
Yt = 4Yt−1 + 21
To ﬁnd the speciﬁc solution that satisﬁes the initial condition
Y0 = 1
we simply put t = 0 in the general solution to get
Y0 = A(40) −7 = 1
that is,
A −7 = 1
which gives
A = 8
The solution is
Yt = 8(4t) −7
A graphical interpretation of this solution is shown in Figure 9.1 where Yt is plotted against t. It is
tempting to join the points up with a smooth curve. However, this does not make sense because t is
allowed to take only whole-number values. Consequently, we join up the points with horizontal lines
to create the ‘staircase’ which more properly reﬂects the fact that t is discrete. Figure 9.1 shows that the
values of Yt increase without bound as t increases. This is also apparent from the formula for Yt because
Dynamics
556

the numbers 4t get ever larger as t increases. We describe this by saying that the time path diverges uni-
formly or explodes. This sort of behaviour can be expected to occur for any solution
Yt = A(bt) + PS
where b > 1.
(b) The difference equation
Yt =
Yt−1 + 8
can be solved in a similar way to that of part (a). The complementary function is given by
CF = A
t
and for a particular solution we try
Yt = D
for some constant D. Substituting this into the difference equation gives
D =
D + 8
which has solution D = 12, so
PS = 12
The general solution is therefore
Yt = CF + PS = A
t
+ 12
D
F
1
3
A
C
1
3
D
F
1
3
A
C
1
3
9.1 • Difference equations
557
Figure 9.1


Finally, the speciﬁc value of A can be found from the initial condition
Y0 = 2
Setting t = 0 in the general solution gives
2 = A
0
+ 12 = A + 12
and so A is −10. The solution is
Yt = −10
t
+ 12
This solution is sketched in Figure 9.2, which shows that the values of Yt increase but eventually settle
down at 12. We describe this by saying that the time path converges uniformly to the value of 12, which
is referred to as the equilibrium value. This behaviour is also apparent from the formula for Yt because
the number (1/3)t gets ever smaller as t increases. In effect, the complementary function disappears,
leaving just the particular solution. The particular solution is the equilibrium value of Yt whereas the
complementary function measures the deviation from the equilibrium which, in this case, converges to
zero as t increases. This sort of behaviour can be expected to occur for any solution
Yt = A(bt) + PS
when 0 < b < 1.
D
F
1
3
A
C
D
F
1
3
A
C
Dynamics
558
Figure 9.2

9.1 • Difference equations
559
Practice Problem
2 Solve the following difference equations with the specified initial conditions:
(a) Yt = −1/2Yt−1 + 6; Y0 = 0
(b) Yt = −2Yt + 9; Y0 = 4
In each case, sketch the corresponding ‘staircase’ diagram and comment on the qualitative behaviour
of the solution as t increases.
The results of the previous example and Practice Problem 2 can be summarized:
If b > 1 then Yt displays uniform divergence.
If 0 < b < 1 then Yt displays uniform convergence.
If −1 < b < 0 then Yt displays oscillatory convergence.
If b < −1 then Yt displays oscillatory divergence.
The remaining possibilities, b = 1, b = −1 and b = 0, are considered in Practice Problem 6 at the
end of this section, which shows that Yt converges when b is 0 but diverges when b is 1 or −1.
We conclude that the solution of the difference equation eventually settles down to an equilib-
rium state only when b lies in the range −1 < b < 1.
If convergence does occur in an economic model, the model is said to be stable. If the vari-
ables diverge, it is said to be unstable.
We now investigate two applications of difference equations taken from macroeconomics
and microeconomics, respectively:
 national income determination
 supply and demand analysis.
We consider each of these in turn.
9.1.1 National income determination
In Section 1.6 we introduced a simple two-sector model with structural equations
Y = C + I
C = aY + b
I = I*
where b and I* denote autonomous consumption and investment, and a is the marginal
propensity to consume, which lies in the range 0 < a < 1. In writing down the equations in this
form, we are implicitly assuming that only one time period is involved, that consumption
depends on national income within this time period and that equilibrium values are attained
instantaneously. In practice, there is a time lag between consumption and national income.
Consumption, Ct, in period t depends on national income, Yt−1, in the previous period, t −1.
The corresponding consumption function is given by
Ct = aYt−1 + b

If we assume that investment is the same in all time periods then
It = I*
for some constant, I*. Finally, if the ﬂow of money is in balance in each time period, we also
have
Yt = Ct + It
Substituting the expressions for Ct and It into this gives
Yt = aYt−1 + b + I*
which we recognize as a difference equation of the standard form given in this section. This
equation can therefore be solved and the time path analysed.
Dynamics
560
Example
Consider a two-sector model:
Yt = Ct + It
Ct = 0.8Yt−1 + 100
It = 200
Find an expression for Yt when Y0 = 1700. Is this system stable or unstable?
Solution
Substituting the expressions for Ct and It into
Yt = Ct + It
gives
Yt = (0.8Yt−1 + 100) + 200
= 0.8Yt−1 + 300
The complementary function is given by
CF = A(0.8)t
and for a particular solution we try
Yt = D
for some constant D. Substituting this into the difference equation gives
D = 0.8D + 300
which has solution D = 1500. The general solution is therefore
Yt = A(0.8)t + 1500
The initial condition,
Y0 = 1700
gives
1700 = A(0.8)0 + 1500 = A + 1500

and so A is 200. The solution is
Yt = 200(0.8)t + 1500
As t increases, (0.8)t converges to zero and so Yt eventually settles down at the equilibrium level of 1500. The
system is therefore stable. Note also that because 0.8 lies between 0 and 1, the time path displays uniform
convergence.
9.1 • Difference equations
561
Practice Problem
3 Consider the two-sector model:
Yt = Ct + It
Ct = 0.9Yt−1 + 250
It = 350
Find an expression for Yt when Y0 = 6500. Is this system stable or unstable?
In the previous example, and again in Practice Problem 3, we noted that the model is stable
and that it displays uniform convergence. If we return to the general equation
Yt = aYt−1 + b + I*
it is easy to see that this is always the case for the simple two-sector model because the coefﬁci-
ent of Yt−1 is the marginal propensity to consume, which is known to lie between 0 and 1.
9.1.2 Supply and demand analysis
In Section 1.3 we introduced a simple model of supply and demand for a single good in an iso-
lated market. If we assume that the supply and demand functions are both linear then we have
the relations
QS = aP −b
QD = −cP + d
for some positive constants, a, b, c and d. (Previously, we have written P in terms of Q and have
sketched the supply and demand curves with Q on the horizontal axis and P on the vertical axis.
It turns out that it is more convenient in the present context to work the other way round and
to write Q as a function of P.) In writing down these equations, we are implicitly assuming that
only one time period is involved, that supply and demand are dependent only on the price in
this time period, and that equilibrium values are attained instantaneously. However, for cer-
tain goods, there is a time lag between supply and price. For example, a farmer needs to decide
precisely how much of any crop to sow well in advance of the time of sale. This decision is made
on the basis of the price at the time of planting and not on the price prevailing at harvest time,
which is unknown. In other words, the supply, QSt, in period t depends on the price, Pt−1, in the
preceding period t −1. The corresponding time-dependent supply and demand equations are
QSt = aPt−1 −b
QDt = −cPt + d

If we assume that, within each time period, demand and supply are equal, so that all goods are
sold, then
QDt = QSt
that is,
−cPt + d = aPt−1 −b
This equation can be rearranged as
−cPt = aPt−1 −b −d
(subtract d from both sides)
Pt =
−
Pt−1 +
(divide both sides by −c)
which is a difference equation of the standard form. The equation can therefore be solved in
the usual way and the time path analysed. Once a formula for Pt is obtained, we can use the
demand equation
Qt = −cPt + d
to deduce a corresponding formula for Qt by substituting the expression for Pt into the right-
hand side.
b + d
c
D
F
a
c
A
C
Dynamics
562
Example
Consider the supply and demand equations
QSt = 4Pt−1 −10
QDt = −5Pt + 35
Assuming that the market is in equilibrium, ﬁnd expressions for Pt and Qt when P0 = 6. Is the system stable
or unstable?
Solution
If
QDt = QSt
then
−5Pt + 35 = 4Pt−1 −10
which rearranges to give
−5Pt = 4Pt−1 −45
(subtract 35 from both sides)
Pt = −0.8Pt−1 + 9
(divide both sides by −5)
The complementary function is given by
CF = A(−0.8)t
and for a particular solution we try
Pt = D
for some constant D. Substituting this into the difference equation gives

D = −0.8D + 9
which has solution D = 5. The general solution is therefore
Pt = A(−0.8)t + 5
The initial condition, P0 = 6, gives
6 = A(−0.8)0 + 5 = A + 5
and so A is 1. The solution is
Pt = (−0.8)t + 5
An expression for Qt can be found by substituting this into the demand equation
Qt = −5Pt + 35
to get
Qt = −5[(−0.8)t + 5] + 35
= −5(−0.8)t + 10
As t increases, (−0.8)t converges to zero and so Pt and Qt eventually settle down at the equilibrium levels 
of 5 and 10 respectively. The system is therefore stable. Note also that because −0.8 lies between −1 and 0,
the time paths display oscillatory convergence.
9.1 • Difference equations
563
Practice Problems
4 Consider the supply and demand equations
QSt = Pt−1 −8
QDt = −2Pt + 22
Assuming equilibrium, find expressions for Pt and Qt when P0 = 11. Is the system stable or unstable?
5 Consider the supply and demand equations
QSt = 3Pt−1 −20
QDt = −2Pt + 80
Assuming equilibrium, find expressions for Pt and Qt when P0 = 8. Is the system stable or unstable?
Two features emerge from the previous example and Practice Problems 4 and 5. Firstly, 
the time paths are always oscillatory. Secondly, the system is not necessarily stable and so equi-
librium might not be attained. These properties can be explained if we return to the general
equation
Pt =
−
Pt−1 +
The coefﬁcient of Pt−1 is −a/c. Given that a and c are both positive, it follows that −a/c is 
negative and so oscillations will always be present. Moreover,
 if a > c then −a/c < −1 and Pt diverges
 if a < c then −1 < −a/c < 0 and Pt converges.
b + d
c
D
F
a
c
A
C

We conclude that stability depends on the relative sizes of a and c, which govern the slopes of
the supply and demand curves. Bearing in mind that we have chosen to consider supply and
demand equations in which Q is expressed in terms of P, namely
QS = aP −b
QD = −cP + d
we deduce that the system is stable whenever the supply curve is ﬂatter than the demand curve
when P is plotted on the horizontal axis.
Throughout this section we have concentrated on linear models. An obvious question to ask
is whether we can extend these to cover the case of non-linear relationships. Unfortunately, the
associated mathematics gets hard very quickly, even for mildly non-linear problems. It is usu-
ally impossible to ﬁnd an explicit formula for the solution of such difference equations. Under
these circumstances, we fall back on the tried and trusted approach of actually calculating the
ﬁrst few values until we can identify its behaviour. A spreadsheet provides an ideal way of doing
this, since the parameters in the model can be easily changed.
Dynamics
564
Example
Consider the supply and demand equations
QSt = P0.8
t−1
QDt = 12 −Pt
(a) Assuming that the market is in equilibrium, write down a difference equation for price.
(b) Given that P0 = 1, ﬁnd the values of the price, Pt for t = 1, 2, . . . , 10 and plot a graph of Pt against t.
Describe the qualitative behaviour of the time path.
Solution
(a) If
QDt = QSt
then
12 −Pt = P0.8
t−1
which rearranges to give
Pt = 12 −P0.8
t−1
Notice that this difference equation is not of the form considered in this section, so we cannot obtain
an explicit formula for Pt in terms of t.
(b) We are given that P0 = 1, so we can compute the values of P1, P2, . . . in turn. Setting t = 1 in the differ-
ence equation gives
P1 = 12 −P0
0.8
= 12 −10.8
= 11
This number can now be substituted into the difference equation, with t = 2, to get
P2 = 12 −P1
0.8 = 12 −110.8 = 5.190 52
and so on.
EXCEL

Excel provides an easy way to perform the calculations. We type in the values, 0, 1, 2, . . . , 10 for each
time period down the ﬁrst column, type in the value of the initial price, P0, in the second column, and then
copy the relevant formula down the second column to generate successive values of Pt. Once this has been
done, Chart Wizard can be used to draw the time path.
The most appropriate way of representing the results graphically is to use a bar chart. We would like the
numbers in the ﬁrst column of the spreadsheet to act as labels for the bars on the horizontal axis.
Unfortunately, unless we tell Excel that we want to do this, it will actually produce two sets of bars on the
same diagram, using the numbers in column A as heights for the ﬁrst set of bars, and the numbers in col-
umn B as heights for the second set. This can be avoided by entering the values down the ﬁrst column as
text. This is done by ﬁrst highlighting column A and then selecting Format: Cells from the menu bar. We
choose the Number tab, and click on Text and OK. We can now ﬁnally enter the values of 0, 1, 2, . . . , 10 in
the ﬁrst column, together with the headings and numerical value of P0 in column 2 as shown in Figure 9.3.
The remaining entries in column B are worked out using the difference equation
Pt = 12 −P0.8
t−1
For example, the entry in cell B6 is P1 which is calculated from
P1 = 12 −P0
0.8
The value of P0 is located in cell B5, so we need to type the formula
=12−B5^0.8
into B6. Subsequent values are worked out in the same way, so all we need do is drag the formula down to
B15 to complete the table.
Chart Wizard can now be used to plot this time path. We ﬁrst highlight both columns and then click on
Chart Wizard. The bar chart that we want is the one that is automatically displayed, so we just press the
Finish button. To close the gaps between the bars, click on any one bar. A square dot will appear on each
bar to indicate that all bars have been selected. We then choose Format: Selected data series for the menu
bar. Finally, click on the Options tab, reduce the Gap Width to zero and click OK. The ﬁnal spreadsheet is
shown in Figure 9.4. It illustrates the oscillatory convergence and shows that the price eventually settles
down to a value just greater than 7.
9.1 • Difference equations
565

Figure 9.3

Dynamics
566
Complementary function of a difference equation
The solution of the difference equa-
tion, Yt = bYt−1 + c when the constant c is replaced by zero.
Difference equation
An equation that relates consecutive terms of a sequence of numbers.
Dynamics
Analysis of how equilibrium values vary over time.
Equilibrium value of a difference equation
A solution of a difference equation that does
not vary over time; it is the limiting value of Yn as n tends to inﬁnity.
General solution of a difference equation
The solution of a difference equation that 
contains an arbitary constant. It is the sum of the complementary function and particular
solution.
Initial condition
The value of Y0 that needs to be speciﬁed to obtain a unique solution of
a difference equation.
Particular solution of a difference equation
Any one solution of a difference equation
such as Yt = bYt−1 + c.
Recurrence relation
An alternative phrase for a difference equation. It is an expression for
Yn in terms of Yn−1 (and possibly Yn−2, Yn−3 etc).
Stable (unstable) equilibrium
An economic model in which the solution of the associated
difference equation converges (diverges).
Uniformly convergent sequence
A sequence of numbers which progressively increases (or
decreases) to a ﬁnite limit.
Uniformly divergent sequence
A sequence of numbers which progressively increases (or
decreases) without a ﬁnite limit.
Key Terms
Figure 9.4

9.1 • Difference equations
567
Practice Problems
6 Calculate the first four terms of the sequences defined by the following difference equations. Hence
write down a formula for Yt in terms of t. Comment on the qualitative behaviour of the solution in
each case.
(a) Yt = Yt−1 + 2; Y0 = 0
(b) Yt = −Yt−1 + 6; Y0 = 4
(c) Yt = 0Yt−1 + 3; Y0 = 3
7 Solve the following difference equations with the specified initial conditions:
(a) Yt =
Yt−1 + 6; Y0 = 1
(b) Yt = −4Yt−1 + 5; Y0 = 2
Comment on the qualitative behaviour of the solution as t increases.
8 Show, by substituting into the difference equation, that
Yt = A(bt) + D
where
D =
is a solution of
Yt = bYt−1 + c
(b ≠1)
9 Consider the two-sector model:
Yt = Ct + It
Ct = 0.7Yt−1 + 400
It = 0.1Yt−1 + 100
Given that Y0 = 3000, find an expression for Yt. Is this system stable or unstable?
10 Consider the supply and demand equations
QSt = 0.4Pt−1 −12
QDt = −0.8Pt + 60
Assuming that equilibrium conditions prevail, find an expression for Pt when P0 = 70. Is the system
stable or unstable?
11 The Harrod–Domar model of the growth of an economy is based on three assumptions.
(1) Savings, St, in any time period are proportional to income, Yt, in that period, so that
St = αYt
(α > 0)
(2) Investment, It, in any time period is proportional to the change in income from the previous
period to the current period so that
It = β(Yt −Yt−1)
(β > 0)
(3) Investment and savings are equal in any period so that
It = St
Use these assumptions to show that
Yt =
Yt−1
and hence write down a formula for Yt in terms of Y0. Comment on the stability of the system in the
case when α = 0.1 and β = 1.4, and write down expressions for St and It in terms of Y0.
D
F
β
β −α
A
C
c
1 −b
1
4


12 Consider the difference equation
Yt = 0.1Yt−1 + 5(0.6)t
(a) Write down the complementary function.
(b) By substituting Yt = D(0.6)t into this equation, find a particular solution.
(c) Use your answers to parts (a) and (b) to write down the general solution and hence find the spe-
cific solution that satisfies the initial condition, Y0 = 9.
(d) Is the solution in part (c) stable or unstable?
13 Consider the difference equation
Yt = 0.2Yt−1 + 0.8t + 5
(a) Write down the complementary function.
(b) By substituting Yt = Dt + E into this equation, find a particular solution.
(c) Use your answers to parts (a) and (b) to write down the general solution and hence find the spe-
cific solution that satisfies the initial condition, Y0 = 10.
(d) Is the solution in part (c) stable or unstable?
14 (Excel) Consider the two-sector model
Ct = 100 + 0.6Y 0.8
t−1
Yt = Ct + 60
(a) Write down a difference equation for Yt.
(b) Given that Y0 = 10, calculate the values of Yt for t = 1, 2, . . . 8 and plot these values on a dia-
gram. Is this system stable or unstable?
(c) Does the qualitative behaviour of the system depend on the initial value of Y0?
15 (Excel) An economic growth model is based on three assumptions:
(1) Aggregate output, yt, in time period t depends on capital stock, kt, according to
yt = kt
0.6
(2) Capital stock in time period t + 1 is given by
kt+1 = 0.99kt + st
where the first term reflects the fact that capital stock has depreciated by 1%, and the second
term denotes the output that is saved during period t.
(3) Savings during period t are one-fifth of income so that
st = 0.2yt
(a) Use these assumptions to write down a difference equation for kt.
(b) Given that k0 = 7000, find the equilibrium level of capital stock and state whether kt displays 
uniform or oscillatory convergence. Do you get the same behaviour for other initial values of 
capital stock?
Dynamics
568

section 9.2
Differential equations
A differential equation is an equation that involves the derivative of an unknown function.
Several examples have already been considered in Chapter 6. For instance, in Section 6.2 we
noted the relationship
= I
where K and I denote capital stock and net investment, respectively. Given any expression for
I(t), this represents a differential equation for the unknown function, K(t). In such a simple
case as this, we can solve the differential equation by integrating both sides with respect to t.
For example, if I(t) = t the equation becomes
= t
and so
K(t) =tdt =
+ c
where c is a constant of integration. The function K(t) is said to be the general solution of the
differential equation and c is referred to as an arbitrary constant. Some additional information
t2
2
dK
dt
dK
dt
Objectives
At the end of this section you should be able to:
 Find the complementary function of a differential equation.
 Find the particular solution of a differential equation.
 Analyse the stability of economic systems.
 Solve continuous time national income determination models.
 Solve continuous time supply and demand models.

is needed if the solution is to be pinned down uniquely. This is usually provided in the form of
an initial condition in which we specify the value of K at t = 0. For example, the capital stock
may be known to be 500 initially. Substituting t = 0 into the general solution
K(t) =
+ c
gives
K(0) =
+ c = 500
and so c is 500. Hence the solution is
K(t) =
+ 500
In this section we investigate more complicated differential equations such as
= 5y
and
= −y + 3
The right-hand sides of these equations are given in terms of y rather than t and cannot be
solved by direct integration. It turns out that the solution of such equations involves the expon-
ential function, et which was ﬁrst introduced in Section 2.4. The letter e denotes the number
2.718 28 . . .
and so et simply means 2.718 28 . . . raised to the power of t. A graph of et against t is sketched
in Figure 9.5, which shows that et grows rapidly with rising t. In fact, the basic shape is the same
for all exponential functions of the form
y = emt
when m is a positive constant. Figure 9.6 shows the graph of the negative exponential function,
e−t. The general behaviour of this function is to be expected because
e−t = 1
et
dy
dt
dy
dt
t2
2
02
2
t2
2
Dynamics
570
Figure 9.5

and, as t increases, the denominator increases, causing e−t to converge to zero. The basic shape
illustrated in Figure 9.6 is the same for all exponential functions of the form
y = emt
when m is a negative constant.
The most important property of the exponential function is that it differentiates to itself:
that is,
if
y = et
then
= et
dy
dt
9.2 • Differential equations
571
Figure 9.6
Example
Write down expressions for 
in the case when
(a) y = e3t
(b) y = 7e−4t −9
Solution
In Section 4.8 we showed that:
if y = emt
then
= memt
so that emt differentiates to m times itself.
Applying this result to
(a) y = e3t
gives
= 3e3t
(b) y = 7e−4t −9
gives
= −28e−4t
dy
dt
dy
dt
dy
dt
dy
dt

Dynamics
572
Practice Problem
1 Write down expressions for 
in the case when
(a) y = e5t
(b) y = 2e−3t
(c) y = Aemt
dy
dt
Example
Find the solution of the differential equation
= 3y
which satisﬁes the initial condition, y(0) = 5.
Solution
The solution of the equation
= 3y
is any function, y(t), which differentiates to three times itself. We have noted that emt differentiates to m
times itself, so an obvious candidate for the solution is
y = e3t
However, there are many functions with the same property, including
y = 2e3t, y = 5e3t
and
y = −7.52e3t
Indeed, any function of the form
y = Ae3t
satisﬁes this differential equation because
= 3(Ae3t) = 3y
The precise value of the constant A is determined from the initial condition
y(0) = 5
If we substitute t = 0 into the general solution
y(t) = Ae3t
we get
y(0) = Ae0 = A
and so A is 5. The solution is
y(t) = 5e3t
dy
dt
dy
dt
dy
dt

Consider the differential equation
= my + c
(1)
where m and c are constants. The general solution of equation (1) is the sum of two separate
functions, known as the complementary function (CF) and particular solution (PS). These 
are deﬁned in much the same way as their counterparts for difference equations discussed in
the previous section. The complementary function is the solution of equation (1) when the 
constant term on the right-hand side is replaced by zero. In other words, the complementary
function is the solution of
= my
The results of Practice Problem 2 show that this is given by
CF = Aemt
The particular solution is any solution that we are able to ﬁnd of the original equation (1). This
can be done by ‘guesswork’, just as we did in Section 9.1. Finally, once CF and PS have been
determined, the general solution of equation (1) can be written down as
y = CF + PS = Aemt + PS
As usual, the speciﬁc value of A can be worked out at the very end of the calculations via an 
initial condition.
dy
dt
dy
dt
9.2 • Differential equations
573
Practice Problem
2 (a) Find the solution of the differential equation
= 4y
which satisfies the initial condition, y(0) = 6.
(b) Find the solution of the differential equation
= −5y
which satisfies the initial condition, y(0) = 2.
dy
dt
dy
dt
Example
Solve the differential equation
= −2y + 100
in the case when the initial condition is
(a) y(0) = 10
(b) y(0) = 90
(c) y(0) = 50
Comment on the qualitative behaviour of the solution in each case.
dy
dt


Solution
The differential equation
= −2y + 100
is of the standard form
= my + c
and so can be solved using the complementary function and particular solution.
The complementary function is the general solution of the equation when the constant term is taken to
be zero: that is, it is the solution of
= −2y
which is Ae−2t. The particular solution is any solution of the original equation
= −2y + 100
that we are able to ﬁnd. In effect, we need to think of a function, y(t), such that when it is substituted into
+ 2y
we obtain the constant value of 100. One obvious function likely to work is a constant function,
y(t) = D
for some constant D. If this is substituted into
= −2y + 100
we obtain
0 = −2D + 100
(Note that dy/dt = 0 because constants differentiate to zero.) This algebraic equation can be rearranged 
to get
2D = 100
and so D = 50.
We have therefore shown that the complementary function is given by
CF = Ae−2t
and that the particular solution is
PS = 50
Hence
y(t) = CF + PS = Ae−2t + 50
This is the general solution of the differential equation
= −2y + 100
dy
dt
dy
dt
dy
dt
dy
dt
dy
dt
dy
dt
dy
dt
Dynamics
574

(a) To ﬁnd the speciﬁc solution that satisﬁes the initial condition
y(0) = 10
we simply put t = 0 into the general solution to get
y(0) = Ae0 + 50 = 10
that is
A + 50 = 10
which gives
A = −40
The solution is
y(t) = −40e−2t + 50
A graph of y against t is sketched as the bottom graph in Figure 9.7. This shows that y(t) increases from
its initial value of 10 and settles down at the value of 50 for sufﬁciently large t. As usual, this limit is
called the equilibrium value and is equal to the particular solution. The complementary function mea-
sures the deviation from the equilibrium.
(b) If the initial condition is
y(0) = 90
then we can substitute t = 0 into the general solution
y(t) = Ae−2t + 50
to get
y(0) = Ae0 + 50 = 90
which has solution A = 40. Hence
y(t) = 40e−2t + 50
9.2 • Differential equations
575
Figure 9.7


A graph of y against t is sketched as the top curve in Figure 9.7. In this case y(t) decreases from its 
initial value of 90 but again settles down at the equilibrium level of 50.
(c) If the initial condition is
y(0) = 50
then we can substitute t = 0 into the general solution
y(t) = Ae−2t + 50
to get
y(0) = Ae0 + 50 = 50
which has solution A = 0. Hence
y(t) = 50
A graph of y against t is sketched as the horizontal line in Figure 9.7. In this case y is initially equal to
the equilibrium value and y remains at this constant value for all time.
Notice that the solution y(t) eventually settles down at the equilibrium value irrespective of the 
initial conditions. This is because the coefﬁcient of t in the expression
CF = Ae−2t
is negative, causing CF to converge to zero as t increases. We would expect convergence to occur for any
solution
y(t) = Aemt + D
when m < 0.
Dynamics
576
Practice Problem
3 Solve the following differential equation subject to the given initial condition. Comment on the qualita-
tive behaviour of the solution as t increases.
= 3y −60;
y(0) = 30
dy
dt
The results of the previous example and Practice Problem 3 can be summarized as:
 if m < 0 then y(t) converges
 if m > 0 then y(t) diverges.
We say that an economic model is stable whenever the variables converge as t increases. 
The above results indicate that an economic system represented by
= my + c
is stable if the coefﬁcient of y is negative and unstable if it is positive. Of course, it could 
happen that m is zero. The differential equation then becomes
dy
dt

= c
which can be integrated directly to get
y(t) =cdt = ct + d
for some arbitrary constant d. The corresponding model is therefore unstable unless c is also
zero, in which case y(t) takes the constant value of d for all t.
We now investigate two applications of differential equations taken from macroeconomics
and microeconomics respectively:
 national income determination
 supply and demand analysis.
We consider each of these in turn.
9.2.1 National income determination
The deﬁning equations of the usual two-sector model are
Y = C + I
(1)
C = aY + b
(2)
I = I*
(3)
The ﬁrst of these is simply a statement that the economy is already in balance. The left-hand
side of equation (1) is the ﬂow of money from ﬁrms to households given as payment for the
factors of production. The right-hand side is the total ﬂow of money received by ﬁrms, either
in the form of investment, or as payment for goods bought by households. In practice, the
equilibrium values are not immediately attained and we need to make an alternative assump-
tion about how national income varies with time. It seems reasonable to suppose that the rate
of change of Y is proportional to the excess expenditure, C + I −Y: that is,
= α(C + I −Y)
(1′)
for some positive adjustment coefﬁcient, α. This makes sense because
 if C + I > Y, it gives dY/dt > 0 and so Y rises in order to achieve a balance between expendi-
ture and income
 if C + I = Y, it gives dY/dt = 0 and so Y is held constant at the equilibrium level
 if C + I < Y, it gives dY/dt < 0 and so Y falls in order to achieve a balance between expendi-
ture and income.
The usual relations (2) and (3) can be substituted into the new equation (1′) to obtain
= α(aY + b + I* −Y)
= α(a −1)Y + α(b + I*)
which we recognize as a differential equation of the standard form given in this section.
dY
dt
dY
dt
dy
dt
9.2 • Differential equations
577

Dynamics
578
Example
Consider the two-sector model
= 0.5(C + I −Y)
C = 0.8Y + 400
I = 600
Find an expression for Y(t) when Y(0) = 7000. Is this system stable or unstable?
Solution
Substituting the expressions for C and I into
= 0.5(C + I −Y)
gives
= 0.5(0.8Y + 400 + 600 −Y)
= −0.1Y + 500
The complementary function is given by
CF = Ae−0.1t
and for a particular solution we try
Y(t) = D
for some constant, D. Substituting this into the differential equation gives
0 = −0.1D + 500
which has solution D = 5000. The general solution is therefore
Y(t) = Ae−0.1t + 5000
The initial condition
Y(0) = 7000
gives
A + 5000 = 7000
and so A is 2000. The solution is
Y(t) = 2000e−0.1t + 5000
The ﬁrst term is a negative exponential, so it converges to zero as t increases. Consequently, Y(t) eventually
settles down to an equilibrium value of 5000 and the system is stable.
dY
dt
dY
dt
dY
dt

In the previous example and again in Practice Problem 4 we noted that the macroeconomic
system is stable. If we return to the general equation
= α(a −1)Y + α(b + I*)
it is easy to see that this is always the case for the simple two-sector model, since the coefﬁcient
of Y is negative. This follows because, as previously stated, α > 0 and because the marginal
propensity to consume, a, is less than 1.
9.2.2 Supply and demand analysis
The equations deﬁning the usual linear single-commodity market model are
QS = aP −b
(1)
QD = −cP + d
(2)
for some positive constants a, b, c and d. As in Section 9.1, we have written Q in terms of P for
convenience. Previously, we have calculated the equilibrium price and quantity simply by
equating supply and demand: that is, by putting
QS = QD
In writing down this relation, we are implicitly assuming that equilibrium is immediately
attained and, in doing so, we fail to take into account the way in which this is achieved. A 
reasonable assumption to make is that the rate of change of price is proportional to excess
demand, QD −QS: that is,
= α(QD −QS)
(3)
for some positive adjustment coefﬁcient, α. This makes sense because
 if QD > QS it gives dP/dt > 0 and so P increases in order to achieve a balance between supply
and demand
 if QS = QD it gives dP/dt = 0 and so P is held constant at the equilibrium level
 if QD < QS it gives dP/dt < 0 and so P decreases in order to achieve a balance between supply
and demand.
Substituting equations (1) and (2) into equation (3) gives
= α[(−cP + d) −(aP −b)] = −α(a + c)P + α(d + b)
which is a differential equation of the standard form.
dP
dt
dP
dt
dY
dt
9.2 • Differential equations
579
Practice Problem
4 Consider the two-sector model
= 0.1(C + I −Y)
C = 0.9Y + 100
I = 300
Find an expression for Y(t) when Y(0) = 2000. Is this system stable or unstable?
dY
dt

Dynamics
580
Example
Consider the market model
QS = 3P −4
QD = −5P + 20
= 0.2(QD −QS)
Find expressions for P(t), QS(t) and QD(t) when P(0) = 2. Is this system stable or unstable?
Solution
Substituting the expressions for QD and QS into
= 0.2(QD −QS)
gives
= 0.2[(−5P + 20) −(3P −4)] = −1.6P + 4.8
The complementary function is given by
CF = Ae−1.6t
and for a particular solution we try
P(t) = D
for some constant D. Substituting this into the differential equation gives
0 = −1.6D + 4.8
which has solution D = 3. The general solution is therefore
P(t) = Ae−1.6t + 3
The initial condition
P(0) = 2
gives
A + 3 = 2
and so A is −1. The solution is
P(t) = −e−1.6t + 3
Corresponding expressions for QS(t) and QD(t) can be found from the supply and demand equations, 
which give
QS(t) = 3P −4 = 3(−e−1.6t + 3) −4 = −3e−1.6t + 5
QD(t) = −5P + 20 = −5(−e−1.6t + 3) + 20 = 5e−1.6t + 5
Note that all three expressions involve a negative exponential that converges to zero as t increases, so the
system is stable. The price P(t) eventually settles down to the equilibrium price, 3, and QS(t) and QD(t) both
approach the equilibrium quantity, 5.
dP
dt
dP
dt
dP
dt

In the previous example and again in Practice Problem 5 we noted that the single-
commodity market model is stable. If we return again to the general equation
= −α(a + c)P + α(d + b)
it is easy to see that this is always the case, since the coefﬁcient of P is negative. This follows
because, as previously stated, α, a and c are all positive.
Maple offers a range of facilities for investigating the behaviour of differential equations. The
basic instruction is dsolve which can be used either with or without an initial condition. Let
us suppose that we wish to solve a differential equation involving dy/dt, that is, we want to ﬁnd
a solution in which y is expressed as a function of t. If the equation itself is typed into Maple
and named eq1, say, and the initial condition is named as init, the solution y(t) is generated
by typing
>dsolve({eq1,init},{y(t)});
We illustrate this in the following example.
dP
dt
9.2 • Differential equations
581
Practice Problem
5 Consider the market model
QS = 2P −2
QD = −P + 4
=
(QD −QS)
Find expressions for P(t), QS(t) and QD(t) when P(0) = 1. Is this system stable or unstable?
1
3
dP
dt

Dynamics
582
Example
The value of an investment portfolio, y(t), varies over an 8-year period according to
= y(1 −y)
(0 ≤t ≤8)
where y is measured in millions of dollars and t is measured in years. Find expressions for the solution of
this equation in the case when the initial investment is
(a) $100 000
(b) $2 million
Plot the graphs of these solutions on the same diagram and comment on the stability of the system.
Solution
Before we solve this equation using Maple, there are two special cases worthy of note. If, at some time, t, the
value of the portfolio drops to zero, so that y = 0, then the right-hand side of the differential equation will
also be zero. The differential equation then reads
= 0
It follows that y is constant for all subsequent times. In other words, once the investment falls to zero, it
remains at this level.
The other special case is when y(t) = 1. Again the right-hand side, y(1 −y), reduces to zero and again the
differential equation becomes just
= 0
We deduce that once the value of the investment reaches 1 million, it remains at this level from that moment
onwards.
(a) To obtain the general solution using Maple we need to type in, and name, both the differential equation
and the initial condition. Unfortunately you cannot just write dy/dt and hope that Maple will recognize
this as a derivative. Instead we make use of the command diff which we used in Chapters 4 and 5. The
ﬁrst-order derivative of y with respect to t is written as diff(y(t),t) and the differential equation
itself is speciﬁed by typing
>eq:=diff(y(t),t)=y(t)*(1-y(t));
Maple displays this as
eq:=
y(t) = y(t)(1 −y(t))
The initial condition, y(0) = 0.1, is entered, and named init by typing
>init:=y(0)=0.1;
We are now in a position to obtain the solution using
>dsolve({eq,init},{y(t)});
which gives
y(t) =
(b) The initial condition, y(0) = 2, is easily input by editing the line deﬁning init to give
>init:=y(0)=2;
The problem can then be re-solved by moving the cursor to the end of each line of instructions and
pressing the Enter key. The new solution is
1
1 + 9e(−t)
∂
∂t
dy
dt
dy
dt
dy
dt
MAPLE

y(t) =
Figure 9.8 shows the graphs of both solutions, which is produced by typing
>plot({(1+9*exp(-t))^(–1),(1-0.5*exp(-t))^(–1)},t=0..8);
The graphs show that the system is stable with an equilibrium value of $1 million. The lower curve in
Figure 9.8 shows approximate exponential growth to begin with. Between years 2 and 4, the value of the
investment increases linearly before ﬁnally converging to its equilibrium value. The upper curve in
Figure 9.8 shows that if the initial value exceeds the equilibrium value, then y decays exponentially to
reach its equilibrium value.
1
1 −1e(−t)
2
9.2 • Differential equations
583
Figure 9.8
Adjustment coefﬁcient
The constant of proportionality in the simple macroeconomic
model, in which the rate of change of national income is assumed to be proportional to
excess expenditure.
Arbitrary constant
A letter representing an unspeciﬁed constant in the general solution of
a differential equation.
Complementary function of a differential equation
The solution of the differential equa-
tion, 
= my + c when the constant c is replaced by zero.
Differential equation
An equation connecting derivatives of an unknown function.
Equilibrium value
A solution of a differential equation that does not vary over time; it is
the limiting value of y(t) as t tends to inﬁnity.
General solution of a differential equation
The solution of a differential equation that con-
tains an arbitary constant. It is the sum of the complementary function and particular solution.
Initial condition
The value of y(0) that needs to be speciﬁed to obtain a unique solution
of a differential equation.
Particular solution of a differential equation
Any one solution of a differential equation 
such as 
= my + c.
Stable equilibrium
An economic model in which the solution of the associated differential
equation converges.
dy
dt
dy
dt
Key Terms

Dynamics
584
Practice Problems
6 Use integration to solve each of the following differential equations subject to the given initial 
conditions.
(a)
= 2t; y(0) = 7
(b)
= e−3t; y(0) = 0
(c)
= t2 + 3t −5; y(0) = 1
7 Solve the differential equation
= −3y + 180
in the case when the initial condition is
(a) y(0) = 40
(b) y(0) = 80
(c) y(0) = 60
Comment on the qualitative behaviour of the solution in each case.
8 Consider the two-sector model
= 0.5(C + I −Y)
C = 0.7Y + 500
I = 0.2Y + 500
Find an expression for Y(t) when Y(0) = 15 000. Is the system stable or unstable?
9 Consider the two-sector model
= 0.3(C + I −Y)
C = 0.8Y + 300
I = 0.7Y + 600
Find an expression for Y(t) when Y(0) = 200. Is this system stable or unstable?
10 Consider the market model
QS = 3P −1
QD = −2P + 9
= 0.5(QD −QS)
Find expressions for P(t), QS(t) and QD(t) when P(0) = 1. Is this system stable or unstable?
11 A simple model of the growth of an economy is based on three assumptions.
(1) Savings, S, are proportional to income, Y, so that
S = αY
(α > 0)
(2) Investment, I, is proportional to the rate of change of Y so that
I = β
(β > 0)
(3) Investment and savings are equal so that
I = S
dY
dt
dP
dt
dY
dt
dY
dt
dy
dt
dy
dt
dy
dt
dy
dt

Use these assumptions to show that
=
Y
and hence write down a formula for Y(t) in terms of Y(0). Is this system stable or unstable?
12 Show, by substituting into the differential equation, that
y(t) = Aemt −
is a solution of
= my + c
13 Consider the differential equation
= −2y + 5e3t
(a) Find the complementary function.
(b) By substituting y = De3t into this equation, find a particular solution.
(c) Use your answers to parts (a) and (b) to write down the general solution and hence find the 
specific solution that satisfies the initial condition, y(0) = 7.
(d) Is the solution in part (c) stable or unstable?
14 Consider the differential equation
= −y + 4t −3
(a) Find the complementary function.
(b) By substituting y = Dt + E into this equation, find a particular solution.
(c) Use your answers to parts (a) and (b) to write down the general solution and hence find the 
specific solution that satisfies the initial condition, y(0) = 1.
(d) Is the solution in part (c) stable or unstable?
15 (Maple) Solve the differential equation
=
with initial condition y(0) = 1. Plot a graph of this solution on the range 0 ≤t ≤5. Hence, or other-
wise, write down a simple expression for the approximate solution when t is large.
16 (Maple) In the absence of any withdrawals, the value of an investment fund, y(t), varies according to
= y(1 −y)
where y is measured in millions of dollars and t is measured in years. Money is taken out of the fund
at a constant rate of $250 000 per year so that
= y(1 −y) −0.25
(a) Find the solution of this differential equation when the initial value of the fund is $1 million. Plot
a graph of this solution over the range 0 ≤t ≤20.
dy
dt
dy
dt
ty
t 2 + 1
dy
dt
dy
dt
dy
dt
dy
dt
c
m
α
β
dY
dt
9.2 • Differential equations
585


(b) Find the solution of this differential equation when the initial value of the fund is $250 000. Plot
a graph of this solution over the range 0 ≤t ≤2.
(c) Compare the solutions obtained in parts (a) and (b).
17 (Maple) The output, Q, of an Internet firm depends in the short term on capital, K, and time, t. The
production and savings functions are given by
Q = atK
and
S = Q −bt
respectively, where a and b are positive constants. Assuming that capital accumulation is equal to 
savings, show that
= t(aK −b)
If the initial capital is c, solve this equation to obtain an expression for K in terms of t and the 
constants, a, b and c. Write down the corresponding expression for Q. Comment on the qualitative
behaviour of this solution in the case when
(a) c = b/a
(b) c > b/a
(c) c < b/a
dK
dt
Dynamics
586

Appendix 1
Differentiation
from First
Principles
We hinted in Section 4.1 that there was a formal way of actually proving the formulae for
derivatives. This is known as ‘differentiation from ﬁrst principles’ and we begin by illustrating
the basic idea using a simple example. Figure A1.1 shows the graph of the square function 
f(x) = x2 near x = 3.
The slope of the chord joining points A and B is
=
=
=
= 6 + ∆x
6∆x + (∆x)2
∆x
9 + 6∆x + (∆x)2 −9
∆x
(3 + ∆x)2 −32
∆x
∆y
∆x
Figure A1.1

The argument given above for the particular point, x = 3, can be extended quite easily to a
general point, x. The details are are follows:
=
=
=
= 2x + ∆x
Hence
f ′(x) = lim
∆x→0(2x + ∆x) = 2x
In other words, we have proved that x2 differentiates to 2x.
2x∆x + (∆x)2
∆x
x2 + 2x∆x + (∆x)2 −x2
∆x
(x + ∆x)2 −x2
∆x
∆y
∆x
Appendix 1 • Differentiation from First Principles
588
Practice Problem
1 Use differentiation from first principles to find the derivative of f(x) = x2 at x = 5.
Now, as we pointed out in Section 4.1, the slope of the tangent at x = 3 is the limit of the slope
of the chords as the width, ∆x, gets smaller and smaller. In this case
slope of tangent = lim
∆x→0(6 + ∆x) = 6
In other words, the derivative of f(x) = x2 at x = 3 is 6 (which agrees with f ′(x) = 2x evaluated
at x = 3). Notice that this proof is not restricted to positive values of ∆x. The chords in 
Figure A1.1 could equally well have been drawn to the left of x = 3. In both cases the slope of
the chords approaches that of the tangent at x = 3 as the width of the interval shrinks.
Figure A1.2

For a general function, f(x), Figure A1.2 shows that we ﬁrst ﬁnd the slope of the chord 
joining A and B, i.e.
and then investigate what happens to this expression as ∆x →0.
f(x + ∆x) −f(x)
∆x
Appendix 1 • Differentiation from First Principles
589
Example
Differentiate the following functions from ﬁrst principles:
(a) f(x) = 3x2 + 5x −6
(b) f(x) =
Solution
(a) The slope of the chord is
=
=
=
= 6x + 5 + 3∆x
Hence the slope of the tangent is
f ′(x) = lim
∆x→0(6x + 5 + 3∆x) = 6x + 5
(b) The algebra is a little more complicated this time since we need to manipulate fractions. We begin by
simplifying the numerator in the fraction
Given that f(x) =
, we see that
f(x + ∆x) −f(x) =
−
=
=
Hence
=
Finally, letting ∆x →0 gives
f ′(x) =
= −1
x2
−1
(x + 0)x
−1
(x + ∆x)x
f(x + ∆x) −f(x)
∆x
−∆x
(x + ∆x)x
x −(x + ∆x)
(x + ∆x)x
1
x
1
x + ∆x
1
x
f(x + ∆x) −f(x)
∆x
6x∆x + 5∆x + 3(∆x)2
∆x
3x2 + 6x∆x + 3(∆x)2 + 5x + 5∆x −6 −3x2 −5x + 6
∆x
[3(x + ∆x)2 + 5(x + ∆x) −6] −[3x2 + 5x −6]
∆x
f(x + ∆x) −f(x)
∆x
1
x

Appendix 1 • Differentiation from First Principles
590
Practice Problems
2 Use ﬁrst principles to differentiate each of the following functions
(a) y = 4x2 −9x + 1
(b) y =
3 (a) By writing (a + b)3 = (a + b)(a + b)2 show that
(a + b)3 = a3 + 3a2b + 3ab2 + b3
(b) Use the result of part (a) to prove that the cube function, x3, differentiates to 3x2.
1
x2

The idea of implicit differentiation was ﬁrst introduced in Section 5.1 (page 354) in the context
of partial differentiation. It is possible to approach this topic via ordinary differentiation.
Indeed, it can be regarded as nothing more than a simple application of the chain rule.
Appendix 2
Implicit
Differentiation
Example
Use implicit differentiation to ﬁnd the value of
on the curve
(a) y2 −2x3 = 25 at the point (−2,3)
(b) ln y + 3y −x2 = 2 at the point (1,1)
Solution
(a) The ﬁrst thing to do is to differentiate both sides of y2 −2x3 = 25 with respect to x.
To differentiate the term (y)2 with respect to x, you ﬁrst differentiate the outer ‘square’ function to get
2y and then multiply by the derivative of inner function, y, with respect to x, which is dy/dx. Hence
(y2) = 2y
The remaining terms are more easily dealt with:
(2x3) = 6x2
and
(25) = 0
Collecting these results together gives
2y
−6x2 = 0
so that
= 3x2
y
dy
dx
dy
dx
d
dx
d
dx
dy
dx
d
dx
dy
dx


Finally, substituting x = −2, y = 3, gives
=
= 4
(b) To differentiate the term ln(y) with respect to x we use the chain rule. The outer log function goes to 
and the inner ‘y’ function differentiates to 
. Hence
(ln(y)) =
×
Again the other terms are more straightforward:
(3y) = 3
,
(x2) = 2x
and
(2) = 0
Differentiating both sides of ln y + 3y −x2 = 2 with respect to x gives:
+ 3
−2x = 0
To make dy/dx the subject of this equation, ﬁrst multiply both sides by y to get
+ 3y
−2xy = 0
(1 + 3y)
= 2xy
(add 2xy to both sides and then factorize the left-hand side)
=
(divide both sides by 1 + 3y)
Finally, substituting, x = 1, y = 1 gives
=
= 1
2
2(1)(1)
1 + 3(1)
dy
dx
2xy
1 + 3y
dy
dx
dy
dx
dy
dx
dy
dx
dy
dx
dy
dx
1
y
d
dx
d
dx
dy
dx
d
dx
dy
dx
1
y
d
dx
dy
dx
1
y
3(−2)2
3
dy
dx
Appendix 2 • Implicit Differentiation
592
Practice Problem
1 (a) Verify that the point (1, 2) lies on the curve 2x2 + 3y2 = 14.
(b) By differentiating both sides of 2x2 + 3y2 = 14 with respect to x, show that
= −
and hence ﬁnd the gradient of the curve at (1,2).
2x
3y
dy
dx
In the previous example each of the terms involves just one of the letters x or y. It is pos-
sible to handle more complicated terms that involve both letters. For example, to differentiate
the term ‘xy’ with respect to x, we use the product rule, which gives
(xy) = x
+ 1 × y = x
+ y
This is illustrated in the following example.
dy
dx
dy
dx
d
dx

Appendix 2 • Implicit Differentiation
593
Practice Problem
2 By differentiating both sides of the following with respect to x, ﬁnd expressions for 
in terms of 
x and y.
(a) x2 + y2 = 16
(b) 3y2 + 4x3 + 2x = 2
(c) e x + 2e y = 1
(d) yex = xy + y2
(e) x2 + 2xy 2 −3y = 10
(f) ln(x + y) = −x
dy
dx
Example
Find an expression for 
in terms of x and y for
x2 + 3y2 −xy = 11
Solution
Differentiating both sides with respect to x gives
2x + 6y
−
x
+ y
= 0
(chain and product rules)
2x + 6y
−x
−y = 0
(multiply out brackets)
2x −y + (6y −x)
= 0
(collect terms)
=
(make 
the subject)
dy
dx
y −2x
6y −x
dy
dx
dy
dx
dy
dx
dy
dx
D
F
dy
dx
A
C
dy
dx
dy
dx

In this appendix we describe what a Hessian is, and how it can be used to classify the station-
ary points of an unconstrained optimization problem. In Section 5.4 (page 391) the conditions
for a function f(x, y) to have a minimum were stated as:
fxx > 0, fyy > 0
and
fxx fyy −f 2
xy > 0
where all of the partial derivatives are evaluated at a stationary point, (a, b).
It turns out that the second condition, fyy > 0, is actually redundant. If the ﬁrst and third 
conditions are met then the second one is automatically true. To see this notice that
fxx fyy −f 2
xy > 0
is the same as fxx fyy > f 2
xy. The right-hand side is non-negative (being a square term) and so
fxx fyy > 0
The only way that the product of two numbers is positive is when they are either both positive
or both negative. Consequently, when fxx > 0, say, the other factor fyy will also be positive.
Similarly, for a maximum point fxx < 0, which forces the condition fyy < 0.
The two conditions for a minimum point, fxx > 0 and fxx fyy −f 2
xy > 0 can be expressed more
succinctly in matrix notation.
The 2 × 2 matrix, H =
(where fxy = fyx) made from second-order partial derivatives 
is called a Hessian matrix and has determinant
= fxx fyy − f 2
xy
so the conditions for a minimum are:
(1) the number in the top left-hand corner of H (called the ﬁrst principal minor) is positive
(2) the determinant of H (called the second principal minor) is positive.
For a maximum, the ﬁrst principal minor is negative and the second principal minor is 
positive.
fxx fxy
fyx fyy
JKL
fxx fxy
fyx fyy
GHI
Appendix 3
Hessians

Appendix 3 • Hessians
595
Example
Use Hessians to classify the stationary point of the function
π = 50Q1 −2Q2
1 + 95Q2 −4Q2
2 −3Q1Q2
Solution
This proﬁt function, considered in Practice Problem 2 in Section 5.4 (page 394), has a stationary point at 
Q1 = 5, Q2 = 10. The second-order partial derivatives are
= −4,
= −8
and
= −3
so the Hessian matrix is
H =
The ﬁrst principal minor −4 < 0.
The second principal minor (−4)(−8) −(−3)2 = 23 > 0.
Hence the stationary point is a maximum.
JKL
−4
−3
−3
−8
GHI
∂2π
∂Q1∂Q2
∂2π
∂Q2
2
∂2π
∂Q2
1
Practice Problems
1 The function
z = x2 + y2 −2x −4y + 15
has a stationary point at (1,2). Write down the associated Hessian matrix and hence determine the
nature of this point.
[This surface was previously sketched using Maple in Practice Problem 10(a) in Section 5.4 at page 399.]
2 The proﬁt function
π = 1000Q1 + 800Q2 −2Q2
1 −2Q1Q2 −Q2
2
has a stationary point at Q1 = 100, Q2 = 300.
Use Hessians to show that this is a maximum.
[This is the worked example on page 392 of Section 5.4.]
3 The proﬁt function
π = 16L1/ 2 + 24K1/ 2 −2L −K
has a stationary point at L = 16, K = 144.
Write down a general expression for the Hessian matrix in terms of L and K, and hence show that
the stationary point is a maximum.
[This is Practice Problem 7 on page 399 of Section 5.4.]

Matrices can also be used to classify the maximum and minimum points of constrained
optimization problems. In Section 5.6 the Lagrangian function was deﬁned as
g(x, y, λ) = f(x, y) + λ(M −φ(x, y))
Optimum points are found by applying the three ﬁrst-order conditions:
gx = 0,
gy = 0
and
gλ = 0
To classify as a maximum or minimum we consider the determinant of the 3 × 3 matrix of 
second-order derivatives:
H¯ =
If |H¯ | > 0 the optimum point is a maximum, whereas if |H¯ | < 0, the optimum point is a 
minimum.
Note that
= M −φ(x, y)
so that
= −φx,
= −φy
and
= 0
so H¯ is given by
This is called a bordered Hessian because it consists of the usual 2 × 2 Hessian
‘bordered’ by a row and column of ﬁrst-order derivatives, −φx, −φy and 0.
JKL
gxx
gxy
gxy
gyy
GHI
J
K
K
L
gxx
gxy
−φx
gxy
gyy
−φy
−φx
−φy
0
G
H
H
I
∂2g
∂λ2
∂2g
∂y∂λ
∂2g
∂x∂λ
∂g
∂λ
J
K
K
L
gxx
gxy
gxλ
gxy
gyy
gyλ
gx λ
gy λ
gλ λ
G
H
H
I
Appendix 3 • Hessians
596
Example
Use the bordered Hessian to classify the optimal point when the objective function
U = x1
1/ 2 + x 2
1/ 2
is subject to the budgetary constraint
P1x1 + P2x2 = M
Solution
The optimal point has already been found in Practice Problem 3 of Section 5.6 (page 418). The ﬁrst-order
conditions
=
x1
−1/ 2 −λP1 = 0,
=
x2
−1/2 −λP2 = 0,
= M −P1x1 −P2x2 = 0
were seen to have solution
∂g
∂λ
1
2
∂g
∂x2
1
2
∂g
∂x1

x1 =
and
x2 =
The bordered Hessian is
H¯ =
Expanding along the third row gives
|H¯ | = −P1
−(−P2)
=
P2
1x2
−3/ 2 +
P2
2x1
−3/ 2
This is positive so the point is a maximum.
1
4
1
4
−1x1
−3/ 2
−P1
4
0
−P2
0
−P1
−1x2
−3/ 2
−P2
4
P1M
P2(P1 + P2)
P2M
P1(P1 + P2)
Appendix 3 • Hessians
597
Practice Problems
4 Use the bordered Hessian to show that the optimal value of the Lagrangian function
g(Q1, Q2, λ) = 40Q1 −Q1
2 + 2Q1Q2 + 20Q2 −Q2
2 + λ(15 −Q1 −Q2)
is a maximum.
[This is the worked example on page 415 of Section 5.6.]
5 Use the bordered Hessian to classify the optimal value of the Lagrangian function
g(x, y, λ) = 2x2 −xy + λ(12 −x −y)
[This is Practice Problem 1 on page 413 of Section 5.6.]
Bordered Hessian matrix
A Hessian matrix augmented by an extra row and column 
containing partial derivatives formed from the constraint in the method of Lagrange 
multipliers.
First principal minor
The 1 × 1 determinant in the top left-hand corner of a matrix; the
element a11 of a matrix A.
Hessian matrix
A matrix whose elements are the second-order partial derivatives of a
given function.
Second principal minor
The 2 × 2 determinant in the top left-hand corner of a matrix.
Key Terms
−x1
−3/ 2
0
−P1
0
−x2
−3/ 2
−P2
−P1
−P2
0
1
4
1
4
G
H
H
H
H
I
J
K
K
K
K
L

Getting Started
1 (a) This is shown in Figure SI.1.
(e) Just put the cursor over cell C5 and type in the new
mark of 42. Pressing the Enter key causes cells D5
and D10 to be automatically updated. The new
spreadsheet is shown in Figure SI.3.
Solutions to
Problems
Figure SI.1
Figure SI.2
Figure SI.3
(b) Type the heading Total Mark in cell D3.
Type =B4+C4 into cell D4. Click and drag down 
to D9.
(c) Type the heading Average: in cell C10.
Type =(SUM(D4:D9))/6 in cell D10 and press Enter.
[Note: Excel has lots of built-in functions for
performing standard calculations such as this. 
To ﬁnd the average you could just type
=AVERAGE(D4:D9) in cell D10.]
(d) This is shown in Figure SI.2.

2 (a) 14
(b) 11
(c) 5
3 (a) 4; is the solution of the equation 2x −8 = 0.
(b) Figure SI.4 shows the graph of 2x −8 plotted
between x = 0 and 10.
2 (1) (a) −30;
(b) 2;
(c) −5;
(d) 5;
(e) 36;
(f) −1.
(2) The key sequences (working from left to right) are
(a)
5
×
±
6
=
(b)
±
1
×
±
2
=
(c)
±
5
0
÷
1
0
=
(d)
±
5
÷
±
1
=
(e)
2
×
±
1
×
±
3
×
6
=
(f) same as (e) followed by
÷ 
±
2 
÷ 
3
÷  6  =
3 (1) (a) −1;
(b) −7;
(c) 5;
(d) 0;
(e) −91;
(f) −5.
(2) The key sequences are
(a)
1
−
2
=
(b)
±
3
−
4
=
(c)
1
−
±
4
=
(d)
±
1
−
±
1
=
(e)
±
7
2
−
1
9
=
(f)
±
5
3
−
±
4
8
=
4
Solutions to Problems
599
Figure SI.4
Figure SI.5
Chapter 1
Section 1.1
1 From Figure S1.1 note that all ﬁve points lie on a
straight line.
(c) x2 + 4x + 4; the brackets have been ‘multiplied out’
in the expression (x + 2)2.
(d) 7x + 4; like terms in the expression 2x + 6 + 5x −2
have been collected together.
(e) Figure SI.5 shows the three-dimensional graph of
the surface x3 −3x + xy plotted between −2 and 2 in
both the x and y directions.
Figure S1.1
Point
Check
(−1, 2)
2(−1) + 3(2) = −2 + 6 = 4
✓
(−4, 4)
2(−4) + 3(4) = −8 + 12 = 4
✓
(5, −2)
2(5) + 3(−2) = 10 −6 = 4
✓
(2, 0)
2(2) + 3(0) = 4 + 0 = 4
✓
The graph is sketched in Figure S1.2 (overleaf).

The graph shows that (3, −1) does not lie on the line.
This can be veriﬁed algebraically:
2(3) + 3(−1) = 6 −3 = 3 ≠4
5
3x −2y = 4
3(2) −2y = 4
(substitute x = −2)
6 −2y = 4
−2y = −2
(subtract 6 from both sides)
y = 1
(divide both sides by −2)
Hence (2, 1) lies on the line.
3x −2y = 4
3(−2) −2y = 4
−6 −2y = 4
(substitute x = 2)
−2y = 10
(add 6 to both sides)
y = −5
(divide both sides by −2)
Hence (−2, −5) lies on the line.
The line is sketched in Figure S1.3.
6 x −2y = 2
0 −2y = 2
(substitute x = 0)
−2y = 2
y = −1
(divide both sides by −2)
Hence (0, −1) lies on the line.
x −2y = 2
x −2(0) = 2
(substitute y = 0)
x −0 = 2
x = 2
Hence (2, 0) lies on the line.
The graph is sketched in Figure S1.4.
Solutions to Problems
600
7 From Figure S1.5 the point of intersection is (1, −1/2).
Figure S1.4
Figure S1.5
Figure S1.3
Figure S1.2

(b) 4x + 2y = 1
2y = 1 −4x
(subtract 4x from both sides)
y = 1/2 −2x
(divide both sides by 2)
so a = −2, b = 1/2. The graph is sketched in 
Figure S1.7.
12 (a) 0.5;
(b) 4;
(c) −4;
(d) −0.5;
(e) 0;
(f) 9.
13 x
y
0
8
6
0
3
4
The graph is sketched in Figure S1.9.
Solutions to Problems
601
Figure S1.6
Figure S1.7
Figure S1.8
Figure S1.9
8 (a) a = 1, b = 2. The graph is sketched in Figure S1.6.
9 From Figure S1.8 the point of intersection is (2, 3).
10 (a) −20;
(b) 3;
(c) −4;
(d) 1;
(e) −1;
(f) −3;
(g) 11;
(h) 0;
(i) 18.
11 (a) 1;
(b) 5;
(c) −6;
(d) −6;
(e) −30;
(f) 44.
14 (a) (−2, −2);
(b) (2, 11/2);
(c) (11/2, 1);
(d) (10, −9).

(b) The graph is sketched in Figure S1.11.
3x −2y = 4
x −2y = 2 −
2x
= 2
Step 2
The equation 2x = 2 has solution x = 2/2 = 1.
Step 3
If this is substituted into the ﬁrst equation then
3(1) −2y = 4
3 −2y = 4
−2y = 1
(subtract 3 from both sides)
y = −1/2
(divide both sides by −2)
Step 4
As a check the second equation gives
x −2y = 1 −2(−1/2)
= 1 −(−1) = 2
✓
Hence the solution is x = 1, y = −1/2.
If you decide to eliminate x then the
corresponding steps are as follows:
Step 1
Triple the second equation and subtract from the
ﬁrst:
3x −2y =
4
3x −6y =
6 −
4y = −2
Step 2
The equation 4y = −2 has solution y = −2/4 = −1/2.
Step 3
If this is substituted into the ﬁrst equation then
3x −2(−1/2) = 4
3x + 1 = 4
3x = 3
(subtract 1 from both sides)
x = 1
(divide both sides by 3)
(b) Step 1
It is immaterial which variable is eliminated. 
To eliminate x multiply the ﬁrst equation by 5,
multiply the second by 3 and add:
Solutions to Problems
602
16 (a) 16.
(b) Presented with the calculation, −42, your calculator
uses BIDMAS, so squares ﬁrst to get 16 and then
subtracts from zero to give a ﬁnal answer, −16. 
To obtain the correct answer you need to use
brackets:
(
±
4
)
x2
=
Section 1.2
1 (a) Step 1
It is probably easiest to eliminate y. This can be
done by subtracting the second equation from 
the ﬁrst:
15 (a) The graph is sketched in Figure S1.10.
Figure S1.10
Figure S1.11

15x + 25y = 95
−15x + 6y = −33 +
31y = 62
Step 2
The equation 31y = 62 has solution y = 62/31 = 2.
Step 3
If this is substituted into the ﬁrst equation then
3x + 5(2) = 19
3x + 10 = 19
3x = 9
(subtract 10 from both sides)
x = 3
(divide both sides by 3)
Step 4
As a check the second equation gives
−5x + 2y = −5(3) + 2(2)
= −15 + 4 = −11
✓
Hence the solution is x = 3, y = 2.
2 (a) Step 1
To eliminate x multiply the ﬁrst equation by 4,
multiply the second equation by 3 and add:
12x −24y = −8
−12x + 24y = −3 +
0y = −11
Step 2
This is impossible, so there are no solutions.
(b) Step 1
To eliminate x multiply the ﬁrst equation by 2 and
add to the second:
−10x + 2y = 8
10x −2y = −8 +
0y = 0
Step 2
This is true for any value of y, so there are inﬁnitely
many solutions.
3 Step 1
To eliminate x from the second equation multiply
equation (2) by 2 and subtract from equation (1):
2x + 2y −5z = −5
2x −2y + 2z =
6 −
4y −7z = −11
(4)
To eliminate x from the third equation multiply
equation (1) by 3, multiply equation (3) by 2 and add:
6x + 6y −15z = −15
−6x + 2y + 4z = −4 +
8y −11z = −19
(5)
The new system is
2x + 2y −5z = −5
(1)
4y −7z = −11
(4)
8y −11z = −19
(5)
Step 2
To eliminate y from the third equation multiply
equation (4) by 2 and subtract equation (5):
8y −14z = −22
8y −11z = −19
−3z = −3
(6)
The new system is
2x + 2y −5z = −5
(1)
4y −7z = −11
(4)
−3z = −3
(6)
Step 3
Equation (6) gives z = −3/−3 = 1. If this is substituted
into equation (4) then
4y −7(1) = −11
4y −7 = −11
4y = −4
(add 7 to both sides)
y = −1
(divide both sides by 4)
Finally, substituting y = −1 and z = 1 into equation (1)
produces
2x + 2(−1) −5(1) = −5
2x −7 = −5
2x = 2
(add 7 to both sides)
x = 1
(divide both sides by 2)
Step 4
As a check the original equations (1), (2) and (3) give
2(1) + 2(−1) −5(1) = −5
✓
1 −(−1) + 1 = 3
✓
−3(1) + (−1) + 2(1) = −2
✓
Hence the solution is x = 1, y = −1, z = 1.
Solutions to Problems
603

(a) Inﬁnitely many.
(b) No solution.
6 (a) Inﬁnitely many.
(b) No solution.
7 (a) x = 3, y = −2, z = −1;
(b) x = −1, y = 3, z = 4.
8 (a) No solution.
(b) Inﬁnitely many solutions.
Section 1.3
1 (a) 0;
(b) 48;
(c) 16;
(d) 25;
(e) 1;
(f) 17.
The function g reverses the effect of f and takes you
back to where you started. For example, if 25 is put
into the function f, the outgoing number is 0; and
when 0 is put into g, the original number, 25, is
produced. We describe this by saying that g is the
inverse of f (and vice versa).
2 The demand curve that passes through (0, 75) and 
(25, 0) is sketched in Figure S1.13. From this diagram
we see that
(a) P = 6 when Q = 23
(b) Q = 19 when P = 18
Alternatively, using algebra:
(a) Substituting Q = 23 gives
P = −3(23) + 75 = 6
(b) Substituting P = 18 gives 18 = −3Q + 75 with
solution Q = 19
3 (a) In equilibrium, QS = QD = Q, so
P = −4Q + 120
P = 1/3Q + 29
Hence
−4Q + 120 = 1/3Q + 29
(since both sides equal P)
−41/3Q + 120 = 29
(subtract 1/3Q from both sides)
−41/3Q = −91
(subtract 120 from both sides)
Q = 21
(divide both sides by −41/3)
Substituting this value into either the demand or
supply equations gives P = 36.
(b) After the imposition of a $13 tax the supply
equation becomes
P −13 = 1/3QS + 29
P = 1/3QS + 42
(add 13 to both sides)
The demand equation remains unchanged, so, in
equilibrium,
P = −4Q + 120
P = 1/3Q + 42
Hence
−4Q + 120 = 1/3Q + 42
Solutions to Problems
604
Figure S1.12
Figure S1.13
4 (a) x = −2, y = −2;
(b) x = 2, y = 3/2;
(c) x = 3/2, y = 1;
(d) x = 10, y = −9.
5 The lines are sketched in Figure S1.12.

This equation can now be solved as before to get 
Q = 18 and the corresponding price is P = 48. The
equilibrium price rises from $36 to $48, so the
consumer pays an additional $12. The remaining
$1 of the tax is paid by the ﬁrm.
4 For good 1, QD1 = QS1 = Q1 in equilibrium, so the
demand and supply equations become
Q1 = 40 −5P1 −P2
Q1 = −3 + 4P1
Hence
40 −5P1 −P2 = −3 + 4P1
(since both sides equal Q1)
40 −9P1 −P2 = −3
(subtract 4P1 from both sides)
−9P1 −P2 = −43
(subtract 40 from both sides)
For good 2, QD2 = QS2 = Q2 in equilibrium, so the
demand and supply equations become
Q2 = 50 −2P1 −4P2
Q2 = −7 + 3P2
Hence
50 −2P1 −4P2 = −7 + 3P2
(since both sides equal Q2)
50 −2P1 −7P2 = −7
(subtract 3P2 from both sides)
−2P1 −7P2 = −57
(subtract 50 from both sides)
The equilibrium prices therefore satisfy the
simultaneous equations
−9P1 −P2 = −43
(1)
−2P1 −7P2 = −57
(2)
Step 1
Multiply equation (1) by 2 and (2) by 9 and subtract 
to get
61P2 = 427
(3)
Step 2
Divide both sides of equation (3) by 61 to get P2 = 7.
Step 3
Substitute P2 into equation (1) to get P1 = 4.
If these equilibrium prices are substituted into either
the demand or the supply equations then Q1 = 13 and
Q2 = 14.
(a) 11;
(b) 9;
(c) 0; once the price falls below 7 the ﬁrm does not
plan to produce any goods.
7 (a) As PS rises, consumers are likely to switch to the
good under consideration, so demand for this
good also rises: that is, the graph shifts to the 
right.
(b) As PC rises, demand for the bundle of goods as a
whole is likely to fall, so the graph shifts to the left.
(c) Assuming that advertising promotes the good and
is successful, demand rises and the graph shifts 
to the right. For some goods, such as drugs,
advertising campaigns are intended to discourage
consumption, so the graph shifts to the left.
8 (a) Demand is 173. Additional advertising expenditure
is 12.
(b) Superior.
9 (a) 53;
(b) Substitutable; a rise in PA leads to an increase in Q;
(c) 6.
10 (1) P = 30, Q = 10.
(2) New supply equation is 0.85P = 2QS + 10; P = 33.6,
Q = 9.28.
11 (a) 17, 9;
(b) $324.
Solutions to Problems
605
The goods are complementary because the
coefﬁcient of P2 in the demand equation for good 1 is
negative, and likewise for the coefﬁcient of P1 in the
demand equation for good 2.
5 (a) 21;
(b) 45;
(c) 15;
(d) 2;
(e) 10;
(f) 0; inverse.
6 The supply curve is sketched in Figure S1.14.
Figure S1.14

12 P1 = 40, P2 = 10; Q1 = 30, Q2 = 55.
13 P1 = 20, P2 = 5, P3 = 8; Q1 = 13, Q2 = 16, Q3 = 11.
14 0 and 30.
15 Superior; graph of (b) lies above that of (a).
Substitutable; graph of (c) lies below that of (a).
16 $180, $200, 1/3.
(a)
1/2
(b)
3/5
(c)
2/3;
fraction is 
.
When k = 6, the fraction is 3/4 so the consumer pays $45.
[In general if the supply and demand equations are
P = −aQD + b
P = cQS + d
the fraction of tax paid by the consumer is
.]
Section 1.4
1 (a) 12 > 9 (true);
(b) 12 > 6 (true);
(c) 3 > 0 (true);
(d) same as (c);
(e) 2 > 1 (true);
(f) −24 > −12 (false);
(g) −6 > −3 (false);
(h) −2 > −1 (false);
(i) −4 > −7 (true).
2 (a) 2x < 3x + 7
−x < 7
(subtract 3x from both sides)
x > −7
(divide both sides by −1 changing sense
because −1 < 0)
(b) 21x −19 ≥4x + 15
17x −19 ≥15
(subtract 4x from both sides)
17x ≥34
(add 19 to both sides)
x ≥2
(divide both sides by 17, leaving inequality
unchanged because 17 > 0)
3 (1) (a) 8;
(b) −12;
(c) 14;
(d) 4;
(e) 56;
(f) 1. In part (f) the innermost pair of brackets is
evaluated ﬁrst.
(2) All scientiﬁc calculators have a bracket facility.
There are two keys typically denoted by ( and )
for ‘opening’ and ‘closing’ brackets. It is usually
possible to have several levels (that is, brackets
within brackets) so part (f) should cause no
additional problem. Possible key sequences are 
as follows.
a
a + d
k
k + 2
(a)
( 
1   −
3   ) 
+
1   0   = . 
Notice that when  ) is pressed your
calculator automatically evaluates the
expression inside the brackets and displays 
the intermediate result.
(b) 1   −
(
3   +
1   0   )
= .
(c)
2   ×
(
3   +
4   )
= . Note that it is
essential to press the × key explicitly on most
calculators.
(d) 8   −
7   +
3   = .
(e)
(  1   5   −
8   ) 
×
(
2   +
6   )
= .
(f)
(  (  2   −  3   ) 
+  7   )
÷
6   ) .
Notice the effect of pressing the three )  keys.
There is no need to press the = key at the
end since the expression terminates with ) .
4 (a) 5z −2z2
(b) 6x −6y + 3y −6x = −3y
(c) x −y + z −x2 −x + y = z −x2
5 (a) x2 −2x + 3x −6 = x2 + x −6
(b) x2 −xy + yx −y2 = x2 −y2
(c) x2 + xy + yx + y2 = x2 + 2xy + y2
(d) 5x2 −5xy + 5x + 2yx −2y2 + 2y
= 5x2 −3xy + 5x −2y2 + 2y
6 (a) (x + 8) (x −8);
(b) (2x + 9) (2x −9).
7 (1) (a)
×
=
=
(b) 7 ×
=
(c)
÷
=
×
=
(d)
÷ 16 =
×
=
(2) Most scientiﬁc calculators have a fractions facility
typically labelled ab/c . To enter a number such 
as 3/4 you press 3    ab/c
4  . Try this for yourself.
The display should read something like 3 4. To
enter a number such as 35/8 you press 3    ab/c
5    ab/c
8  which then displays 3 5 8.
Possible key sequences for part (1) are
(a)
1
ab/c
2
×
3
ab/c
4
=
(b)
7
×
1
ab/c
1
4
=
(c)
2
ab/c
3
÷
8
ab/c
9
=
(d)
8
ab/c
9
÷
1
6
=
l
l
l
1
18
1
162
8
9
8
9
3
4
93
84
2
3
8
9
2
3
1
2
1
142
3
8
1 × 3
2 × 4
3
4
1
2
Solutions to Problems
606

8 (1) (a)
−
=
(b)
+
=
+
=
(c)
−
=
−
=
(2) The key sequences are
(a)
3
ab/c
7
−
1
ab/c
7
=
(b)
1
ab/c
3
+
2
ab/c
5
=
(c)
7
ab/c
1
8
−
1
ab/c
4
=
9 (a)
×
=
(b)
÷
=
×
=
(c)
+
=
=
(d)
−
=
−
=
=
10 (a) 4x + 5 = 5x −7
5 = x −7
(subtract 4x from both sides)
12 = x
(add 7 to both sides)
(b) 3(3 −2x) + 2(x −1) = 10
9 −6x + 2x −2 = 10
(multiply out brackets)
7 −4x = 10
(collect like terms)
−4x = 3
(subtract 7 from both sides)
x = −
(divide both sides by −4)
(c)
= 5
4 = 5(x −1)
(multiply both sides by x −1)
4 = 5x −5
(multiply out brackets)
9 = 5x
(add 5 to both sides)
= x
(divide both sides by 5)
9
5
4
x −1
3
4
x + 3
(x + 1)(x + 2)
(2x + 4) −(x + 1)
(x + 1)(x + 2)
(1)(x + 1)
(x + 1)(x + 2)
2(x + 2)
(x + 1)(x + 2)
1
x + 2
2
x + 1
5
x + 1
4 + 1
x + 1
1
x + 1
4
x + 1
x(x + 1)
x + 10
x + 1
x
xx2
x + 10
x
x + 1
x2
x + 10
5
x + 2
x −1
x + 2
5
x −1
5
36
9
36
14
36
1
4
7
18
11
15
6
15
5
15
2
5
1
3
2
7
1
7
3
7
(d)
=
3(x −1) = 5x
(cross-multiplication)
3x −3 = 5x
(multiply out brackets)
−3 = 2x
(subtract 3x from both sides)
−
= x
(divide both sides by 2)
11 (a), (d), (e), (f).
12 (a) x > 1;
(b) x ≤3;
(c) x ≤−3;
(d) x > 2.
13 (a) 9;
(b) 21; no.
14 (a) 43.96;
(b) 1.13;
(c) 10.34;
(d) 0.17;
(e) 27.38;
(f) 3.72;
(g) 62.70;
(h) 2.39.
15 (a) 6x + 2y;
(b) 11x2 −3x −3;
(c) 14xy + 2x;
(d) 6xyz + 2xy;
(e) 10a −2b;
(f) 17x + 22y;
(g) 11 −3p;
(h) x −1/4.
16 (a) 7x −7y;
(b) 5xz −2yz;
(c) −5y + 4z −2x;
(d) x2 −7x + 10;
(e) x2 −xy + 7x;
(f) x3 + 3x2 + 2x;
(g) x2 −xy −1 + y.
Note: in part (f), x3 is an abbreviation for xxx.
17 (1) (a) (x + 2) (x −2);
(b) (x + y) (x −y);
(c) (3x + 10y) (3x −10y);
(d) (ab + 5) (ab −5).
(2) (a) 112 600 000;
(b) 1.799 99;
(c) 283 400;
(d) 246 913 577.
18 (a)
;
(b)
;
(c)
;
(d)
;
(e)
;
(f)
;
(g)
;
(h)
;
(i) 6
(j)
(k)
(l) 4.
19 (a) x + 6
(b)
or equivalently 1 +
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
x + 3
x(x + 1)
x2 + x −2
x + 1
3x + 5
x2
7x + 3
x(x + 1)
5x + 2
6
5
xy
1
x
x + 1
x
7
9
7
10
34
5
141
35
11
9
8
13
5
48
3
2
1
10
5
7
3
2
5
x −1
3
x
Solutions to Problems
607

20 (a) −
;
(b) 1;
(c) −
;
(d) 8;
(e)
;
(f)
;
(g) −
;
(h) 8;
(i) 9;
(j)
;
(k) 7;
(l) −9;
(m) 1;
(n) −5;
(o) 3;
(p) 5.
Section 1.5
1 (a)
Q = 4
(subtract 13 from both sides)
Q = 8
(multiply both sides by 2)
(b)
Q = P −13
(subtract 13 from both sides)
Q = 2(P −13)
(multiply both sides by 2)
Q = 2P −26
(multiply out brackets)
(c) Q = 2 × 17 −26 = 8
2 (a)
6x2 = y
x2 =
(divide both sides by 6)
x =
(square root both sides)
(b)
= y
7x −1 =
(reciprocate both sides)
7x =
+ 1
(add 1 to both sides)
x =
+ 1
(divide both sides by 7)
3 (a)
x −ay = cx + y
x = cx + y + ay
(add ay to both sides)
x −cx = y + ay
(subtract cx from both sides)
(1 −c)x = (1 + a)y
(factorize both sides)
x =
y
(divide both sides by 1 −c)
D
F
1 + a
1 −c
A
C
D
F
1
y
A
C
1
7
1
y
1
y
1
7x −1
y
6
y
6
1
2
1
2
71
21
11
7
1
4
4
5
35
9
11
7
(b)
y =
(x + 4)y = x −2
(multiply both sides by x + 4)
xy + 4y = x −2
(multiply out the brackets)
xy = x −2 −4y
(subtract 4y from both sides)
xy −x = −2 −4y
(subtract x from both sides)
(y −1)x = −2 −4y
(factorize left-hand side)
x =
(divide both sides by y −1)
4 Q =
P −4; 22.
5 (a) y = 2x + 5;
(b) y = 2(x + 5);
(c) y =
;
(d) y = 2(x + 4)2 −3.
6 (a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
7 (a) x =
(y + 6);
(b) x = 3y −4;
(c) x = 2y;
(d) x = 5(y −8);
(e) x =
−2;
(f) x =
+ 7 .
8 (a) P =
−
;
(b) Y =
;
(c) P =
−
;
(d) t =
.
9 (a) x =
; (b) x =
; (c) x = (g −e)2 −f;
(d) x =
+ n; (e) x =
+ m; (f) x =
2
.
Section 1.6
1 S = Y −C
= Y −(0.8Y + 25)
(substitute expression for C)
= Y −0.8Y −25
(multiply out brackets)
= 0.2Y −25
(collect terms)
D
F
a2 + b2
b −a
A
C
n2
m2
ma2
b2
a2 −b
a + 1
c −a
b
V + 1
V −5
b
a
1
aQ
b + I
1 −a
b
a
Q
a
D
F
4
y
A
C
1
3
1
y
1
9
5
x2
1
2
−2 −4y
y −1
x −2
x + 4
Solutions to Problems
608

2 Y = C + I
(from theory)
C = 0.8Y + 25
(given in question)
I = 17
(given in question)
Substituting the given value of I into the ﬁrst equation
gives
Y = C + 17
and if the expression for C is substituted into this then
Y = 0.8Y + 42
0.2Y = 42
(subtract 0.8Y from both sides)
Y = 210
(divide both sides by 0.2)
Repeating the calculations with I = 18 gives Y = 215, 
so a 1 unit increase in investment leads to a 5 unit
increase in income. The scale factor, 5, is called the
investment multiplier. In general, the investment
multiplier is given by 1/(1 −a), where a is the marginal
propensity to consume. The foregoing is a special case
of this with a = 0.8.
3 Y = C + I + G
(1)
G = 40
(2)
I
= 55
(3)
C = 0.8Yd + 25
(4)
T = 0.1Y + 10
(5)
Yd = Y −T
(6)
Substituting equations (2) and (3) into equation (1)
gives
Y = C + 95
(7)
Substituting equation (5) into (6) gives
Yd = Y −(0.1Y + 10)
= 0.9Y −10
so from equation (4),
C = 0.8(0.9Y −10) + 25 
= 0.72Y + 17
(8)
Finally, substituting equation (8) into (7) gives
Y = 0.72Y + 112
which has solution Y = 400.
4 The commodity market is in equilibrium when
Y = C + I
so we can substitute the given expressions for
consumption (C = 0.7Y + 85) and investment 
(I = −50r + 1200) to deduce that
Y = 0.7Y −50r + 1285
which rearranges to give the IS schedule,
0.3Y + 50r = 1285
(1)
The money market is in equilibrium when
MS = MD
Now we are given that MS = 500 and that total demand,
MD = L1 + L2 = 0.2Y −40r + 230
so that
500 = 0.2Y −40r + 230
which rearranges to give the LM schedule,
0.2Y −40r = 270
(2)
We now solve equations (1) and (2) as a pair of
simultaneous equations.
Step 1
Multiply equation (1) by 0.2 and (2) by 0.3 and
subtract to get
22r = 176
Step 2
Divide through by 22 to get r = 8.
Step 3
Substitute r = 8 into equation (1) to give Y = 2950.
The IS and LM curves shown in Figure S1.15 conﬁrm
this, since the point of intersection has coordinates 
(8, 2950). A change in I does not affect the LM schedule.
However, if the autonomous level of investment
increases from its current level of 1200 then the right-
hand side of the IS schedule (1) will rise. The IS curve
moves upwards, causing both r and Y to increase.
Solutions to Problems
609
Figure S1.15

5 (a) 40;
(b) 0.7;
(C −40); 100.
6 (a) S = 0.1Y −72;
(b) S =
.
7 (a) 325;
(b) 225;
(c) 100.
8 C =
9 825.
10 Y = 2500, r = 10.
11 (a) C = 120 + 0.8Y;
(b) C = 40 + 0.8Y;
(c) C = 120 + 0.6Y.
With a lump sum tax, the graph has the same slope but
has been shifted downwards.
With a proportional tax, the graph has the same
intercept but is less steep.
(a) 600;
(b) 200;
(c) 300.
12 0.9Y + 30; 300.
(a) Slope decreases; 150.
(b) Shifts up 5 units; 350.
Chapter 2
Section 2.1
1 (a) x2 −100 = 0
x2 = 100
x = ±√100
x = ±10
(b) 2x2 −8 = 0
2x2 = 8
x2 = 4
x = ±√4
x = ±2
(c) x2 −3 = 0
x2 = 3
x = ±√3
x = ±1.73
(to 2 decimal places)
(d) x2 −5.72 = 0
x2 = 5.72
x = ±√5.72
x = ±2.39
(to 2 decimal places)
(e) x2 + 1 = 0
x2 = −1
This equation does not have a solution, because
the square of a number is always positive. Try
using your calculator to ﬁnd √(−1). An error
message should be displayed.
aI* + b
1 −a
10Y −500
Y + 10
10
7
(f) 3x2 + 6.21 = 0
3x2 = −6.21
x2 = −2.07
This equation does not have a solution, because it
is impossible to ﬁnd the square root of a negative
number.
(g) x2 = 0
This equation has exactly one solution, x = 0.
2 (a) a = 2, b = −19, c = −10.
x
= 
This equation has two solutions:
x =
= 10
x =
= −
(b) a = 4, b = 12, c = 9.
x
=
This equation has one solution, x = −3/2.
(c) a = 1, b = 1, c = 1.
x
This equation has no solutions, because (−3)
does not exist.
(d) We ﬁrst need to collect like terms to convert
x2 −3x + 10 = 2x + 4
into the standard form
ax2 + bx + c = 0
Subtracting 2x + 4 from both sides gives
x2 −5x + 6 = 0
a = 1, b = −5, c = 6.
= −±
−
 
  (
)
1
3
2
= −±
−
 
  (   )
1
1
4
2
= −±
−
 
  (( )   ( )( ))
( )
1
1
4 1 1
2 1
2
−12 ± 0
8
= −
±
−
 
  (
  
)
12
144
144
8
= −
±
−
 
  ((
)   ( )( ))
( )
12
12
4 4 9
2 4
2
1
2
19 −21
4
19 + 21
4
19 ± 21
4
=
±
 
  
19
441
4
=
±
+
 
  (
  
)
19
361
80
4
= −−
±
−
−
−
 (
)  ((
)   ( )(
))
( )
19
19
4 2
10
2 2
2
Solutions to Problems
610

x
=
This equation has two solutions:
x =
= 3
x =
= 2 
3 (a) If (x −4) (x + 3) = 0 then either
x −4 = 0 with solution x = 4
or
x + 3 = 0 with solution x = −3
This equation has two solutions, x = 4 and x = −3.
(b) If x(10 −2x) = 0 then either
x = 0
or
10 −2x = 0 with solution x = 5
This equation has two solutions, x = 0 and x = 5.
(c) If (2x −6)(2x −6) = 0 then
2x −6 = 0 with solution x = 3
This equation has one solution, x = 3.
4 (a) x
−1
0
1
2
3
4
f(x)
21
5
−3
−3
5
21
The graph is sketched in Figure S2.1.
5 −1
2
5 + 1
2
5 ± 1
2
=
±
   
5
1
2
=
±
−
   (
  
)
5
25
24
2
= −−
±
−
−
 (
)  ((
)   ( )( ))
( )
5
5
4 1 6
2 1
2
(c) x
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
f(x)
−22
−12
−6
−4
−6
−12
−22
The graph is sketched in Figure S2.3.
Solutions to Problems
611
(b) x
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
f(x)
−9
−4
−1
0
−1
−4
−9
The graph is sketched in Figure S2.2.
Figure S2.1
Figure S2.2
Figure S2.3
5 (a) Step 1
The coefﬁcient of x2 is 2, which is positive, so the
graph is U-shaped.
Step 2
The constant term is −6, so the graph crosses the
vertical axis at y = −6.

Step 3
The quadratic equation
2x2 −11x −6 = 0
has solution
x
=
so the graph crosses the horizontal axis at x = −1/2
and x = 6.
In fact, we can use symmetry to locate the
coordinates of the turning point on the curve. 
The x coordinate of the minimum occurs halfway
between x = −1/2 and x = 6 at
x =
−
+ 6
=
The corresponding y coordinate is
2
2
−11
−6 = −
The graph is sketched in Figure S2.4.
169
8
D
F
11
4
A
C
D
F
11
4
A
C
11
4
D
F
1
2
A
C
1
2
11 ± 13
4
=
±
 
  
11
169
4
=
±
+
 
  (
  
)
11
121
48
4
= −−
±
−
−
 (
)  ((
)   ( )( ))
( )
11
11
4 2 6
2 2
2
Step 3
The quadratic equation
x2 −6x + 9 = 0
has solution
x
so the graph crosses the x axis at x = 3.
The graph is sketched in Figure S2.5.
=
±
=
   
  
6
0
2
3
=
±
−
   (
  
)
6
36
36
2
= −−
±
−
−
 (
)  ((
)   ( )( ))
( )
6
6
4 1 9
2 1
2
Solutions to Problems
612
6 In equilibrium, QS = QD = Q, so the supply and
demand equations become
P = 2Q2 + 10Q + 10
P = −Q2 −5Q + 52
Hence
2Q2 + 10Q + 10 = −Q2 −5Q + 52
3Q2 + 15Q −42 = 0
(collecting like terms)
Q2 + 5Q −14 = 0
(dividing both sides by 3)
Q
= −5 ± 9
2
= −±
 
  
5
81
2
= −
±
−
−
 
  (( )   ( )(
))
( )
5
5
4 1
14
2 1
2
(b) Step 1
The coefﬁcient of x is 1, which is positive, so the
graph is U-shaped.
Step 2
The constant term is 9, so the graph crosses the
vertical axis at y = 9.
Figure S2.4
Figure S2.5

so Q = −7 and Q = 2. Ignoring the negative solution
gives Q = 2. From the supply equation, the
corresponding equilibrium price is
P = 2(2)2 + 10(2) + 10 = 38
As a check, the demand equation gives
P = −(2)2 −5(2) + 52 = 38
7 (a) ±9;
(b) ±6;
(c) ±2;
(d) −2, 4;
(e) −9, −1;
(f) −2, 9.
8 (a) 1, −3;
(b) 1/2, −10;
(c) 0, −5;
(d) −5/3, 9/4;
(e) 5/4, 5;
(f) 2, −1, 4.
9 (a) 0.44, 4.56;
(b) −2.28, 0.22;
(c) −0.26, 2.59;
(d) −0.30, 3.30;
(e) −2;
(f) no solutions.
10 (a) −4, 4;
(b) 0, 100;
(c) 5, 17;
(d) 9;
(e) no solution.
11 The graphs are sketched in Figure S2.6.
Step 2
The constant term is zero, so the graph crosses the
vertical axis at the origin.
Step 3
From the factorization
TR = (1000 −Q)Q
the graph crosses the horizontal axis at Q = 0 and 
Q = 1000.
Solutions to Problems
613
The graph is sketched in Figure S2.7. By symmetry the
parabola reaches its maximum halfway between 0 and
1000 at Q = 500. The corresponding value of TR is
TR = 1000(500) −(500)2 = 250 000
From the demand equation, when Q = 500,
P = 1000 −500 = 500
2 TC = 100 + 2Q
AC =
=
+ 2
The graph of the total cost function is sketched in
Figure S2.8.
100
Q
100 + 2Q
Q
12 c = 12; 6.
13 Q = 4, P = 36.
14 P = 22, Q = 3.
Section 2.2
1 TR = PQ = (1000 −Q)Q = 1000Q −Q2
Step 1
The coefﬁcient of Q2 is negative, so the graph has an
inverted U shape.
Figure S2.6
Figure S2.7
Figure S2.8

In fact, it is not necessary to plot the tabulated
values if all that is required is a rough sketch. It is
obvious that if a very small number is put into the 
AC function then a very large number is produced
because of the term 100/Q. For example, when 
Q = 0.1
AC =
+ 2 = 1002
It should also be apparent that if a very large number is
put into the average cost function then the term 100/Q
is insigniﬁcant, so AC is approximately 2. For example,
when Q = 10 000
AC =
+ 2 = 2.01
The graph of AC therefore ‘blows up’ near Q = 0 but
settles down to a value just greater than 2 for large Q.
Consequently, the general shape of the graph shown 
in Figure S2.9 is to be expected.
3 TC = 25 + 2Q
TR = PQ = (20 −Q)Q = 20Q −Q2
Hence
π = TR −TC
= (20Q −Q2) −(25 + 2Q)
= 20Q −Q2 −25 −2Q
= −Q2 + 18Q −25
100
10 000
100
0.1
Step 1
The coefﬁcient of Q2 is negative, so the graph has an
inverted U shape.
Step 2
The constant term is −25, so the graph crosses the
vertical axis at −25.
Step 3
The quadratic equation
−Q2 + 18Q −25 = 0
has solutions
Q =
=
so the graph crosses the horizontal axis at Q = 1.52 and
Q = 16.48.
The graph of the proﬁt function is sketched in
Figure S2.10.
(a) If π = 31 then we need to solve
−Q2 + 18Q −25 = 31
that is,
−Q2 + 18Q −56 = 0
Q =
= −
so Q = 4 and Q = 14.
These values can also be found by drawing a
horizontal line π = 31 and then reading off the
corresponding values of Q from the horizontal 
axis as shown on Figure S2.10.
18 ± 10
−2
−
±
−
−
18
324
224
2
  (
  
)
−18 ± 14.97
−2
−
±
−
−
18
324
100
2
  (
  
)
Solutions to Problems
614
One possible table of function values for the average
cost function is
Q
10
25
50
100
200
AC
12
6
4
3
2.5
The graph of the average cost function is sketched in
Figure S2.9.
Figure S2.9
Figure S2.10

(b) By symmetry the parabola reaches its maximum
halfway between 1.52 and 16.48: that is, at
Q = 1/2(1.52 + 16.48) = 9
The corresponding proﬁt is given by
π = −(9)2 + 18(9) −25 = 56
4 (a) 4Q;
(b) 7;
(c) 10Q −4Q2. 
The graphs are sketched in Figures S2.11, 
S2.12 and S2.13.
7 TC = Q2 + Q + 1;
AC = Q + 1 +
.
The graphs are sketched in Figures S2.16 and S2.17.
1
Q
Solutions to Problems
615
5 (a) P = 50 −4Q;
(b) P =
.
10
Q
Figure S2.11
Figure S2.12
Figure S2.14
Figure S2.15
Figure S2.16
Figure S2.13
6 TC = 500 + 10Q;
AC =
+ 10.
The graphs are sketched in Figures S2.14 and S2.15.
500
Q

8 π = −2Q2 + 20Q −32;
(a) 2, 8;
(b) 20;
(c) 5.
9 The graphs of TR and TC are sketched in Figure S2.18.
(a) 1, 5; (b) 3.
get the result. For example to calculate 102 the key
sequence is 1    0 
x y  
2 
= .
2 (1) (a) 4, because 42 = 16.
(b) 3, because 33 = 27.
(c) 32, because 45/2 = (41/2)5 = 25.
(d)
1/4, because 8−2/3 = (81/3)−2 = 2−2 = 1/22.
(e) 1, because 1n = 1 for any index, n.
(2) Some calculators have a function key (typically
labelled x1/y  ) which can be used to evaluate b1/n
directly. However, this does not result in any 
real reduction in the number of key presses. In
practice, it is just as easy to handle fractional
indices using the ordinary power key x y   . The
corresponding key sequences are
(a)
1
6
x y
1
ab/c
2
=
(b)
2
7
x y
1
ab/c
3
=
(c)
4
x y
5
ab/c
2
=
(d)
8
x y
2
ab/c
3
±
=
(e)
1
x y
1
7
ab/c
2
5
±
=
3 (a) (x3/4)8 = x(3/4)×8 = x6
(rule 3)
(b) x2 ÷ x3/2 = x2−(3/2) = x1/2
(rule 2)
(c) (x2y4)3 = (x2)3(y4)3
(rule 4)
= x2×3y4×3
(rule 3)
= x6y12
(d) √x(x5/2 + y3) = x1/2(x5/2 + y3)
(deﬁnition of b1/n)
= x1/2x5/2 + x1/2y3
(multiply out the brackets)
= x(1/2)+(5/2) + x1/2y3
(rule 1)
= x3 + x1/2y3
The term x1/2y3 cannot be simpliﬁed, because 
x1/2 and y3 have different bases.
4 (a)
f(K, L) = 7KL2
f(λK, λL) = 7(λK)(λL)2
= 7λK λ2L2
(rule 4)
= (λλ2)(7KL2)
= λ3f(K, L)
(rule 1)
Increasing returns to scale because 3 > 1.
(b)
f(K, L) = 50K1/4L3/4
f(λK, λL) = 50(λK)1/4( λL)3/4
= 50λ1/4K1/4λ3/4L3/4
(rule 4)
= (λ1/4λ3/4)(50K1/4L3/4)
= λ1f(K, L)
(rule 1)
Constant returns to scale.
Solutions to Problems
616
10 a + b + c = 9
4a + 2b + c = 34
9a + 3b + c = 19
a = −20, b = 85, c = −56; π = −36
11 1000, 1004.08, . . . , 1750; 22.8.
12 (a) 5, 30;
(b) 18.
Section 2.3
1 (1) (a) 100;
(b) 10;
(c) 1;
(d) 1/10;
(e) 1/100;
(f) 1;
(g) −1;
(h) 1/343;
(i) 81;
(j) 72 101;
(k) 1.
(2) To evaluate bn on a calculator you enter the base,
b, press the power key (typically denoted by x y   ),
enter the power, n, and ﬁnally press the = key to
Figure S2.17
Figure S2.18

5 (1) (a) 3;
(b) 2;
(c) 1;
(d) 0;
(e) −1;
(f) −2.
(2) Same as part (1), because if M = 10n then 
log10 M = n.
(3) On most calculators there are two logarithm
function keys, log10 (possibly labelled log or log10)
and ln (possibly labelled ln or loge). The latter is
known as the natural logarithm and we introduce
this function in the next section. This question
wants you to evaluate logarithms to base 10, so 
we use the key log .
Warning: there is no standard layout for the
keyboard of a calculator. It may be necessary for
you ﬁrst to use the shift key (sometimes called 
the inverse function or second function key) to
activate the log10 function.
6 (a) logb
+ logbz
(rule 2)
= logb
(rule 1)
(b) logbx4 + logby2
(rule 3)
= logb(x4y 2)
(rule 1)
7 (a)
3x = 7
log(3x) = log 7
(take logarithms of both sides)
x log 3 = log 7
(rule 3)
x =
(divide both sides by log 3)
x =
(using base 10 on a calculator)
x = 1.77
(to two decimal places)
(b)
5(2)x = 10x
log[5(2)x] = log(10)x
(take logarithms of both sides)
log 5 + log(2x) = log(10)x
(rule 1)
log 5 + x log 2 = x log 10
(rule 3)
x(log 10 −log 2) = log 5
(collect terms and factorize)
x log 5 = log 5
(rule 2)
x = 1
(divide both sides by log 5)
0.845 098 040
0.477 121 255
log 7
log 3
D
F
xz
y
A
C
D
F
x
y
A
C
which is, of course, the obvious solution to the
original equation! Did you manage to spot this 
for yourself before you started taking logs?
8 (a) 64;
(b) 2;
(c) 1/3;
(d) 1;
(e) 1;
(f) 6;
(g) 4;
(h) 1/343.
9 (a) 8;
(b) 1/32;
(c) 625;
(d) 9/4;
(e) 2/3.
10 (a) y 2;
(b) xy 2;
(c) x4y 2;
(d) 1;
(e) 2;
(f) 5pq2.
11 (a) x−4;
(b) 5x1/2;
(c) x−1/2;
(d) 2x3/2;
(e) 8x−4/3.
12 (a) 3600;
(b) 200 000.
13 The functions in parts (a) and (b) are homogeneous 
of degree 7/12 and 2 respectively, so (a) displays
decreasing returns to scale and (b) displays increasing
returns to scale. The function in part (c) is not
homogeneous.
14 A[b(λK)α + (1 −b)(λL)α]1/α
= A[bλαK α + (1 −b)λαLα]1/α
(rule 4)
= A[(λα)(bK α + (1 −b)Lα)]1/α
(factorize)
= A(λα)1/α[bK α + (1 −b)Lα]1/α
(rule 4)
= λA[bK α + (1 −b)Lα]1/α
(rule 3)
so f(λK, λL) = λ1f (K, L) as required. This is known as
the constant elasticity of substitution (CES) production
function.
15 (a) 2;
(b) −1;
(c) −3;
(d) 6;
(e)
1/2;
(f)
4/3.
16 (a) 2/3;
(b) 3;
(c)
1/4.
17 (a) 2;
(b) 1;
(c) 0;
(d)
1/2;
(e) −1.
18 (a) 0;
(b) logb
;
(c) logb
.
19 (a) 2 logbx + 3 logby + 4 logbz
(b) 4 logbx −2 logby −5 logbz
(c) logbx −
logby −
logbz
20 (a) −q;
(b) 2p + q;
(c) q −4r;
(d) p + q + 2r.
21 (a) 78.31;
(b) 1.48;
(c) 3;
(d) 0.23.
22 (a) x ≤0.386 (3 dp)
(b) x > 14.425 (Notice that the inequality is > here.)
23 x = 3 (Note that the second solution of your quadratic,
x = −5 is not valid.)
Section 2.4
1 x
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
3x
0.04
0.11
0.33
1
3
9
27
3−x
27
9
3
1
0.33
0.11
0.04
The graphs of 3x and 3−x are sketched in Figures S2.19
and S2.20 (overleaf) respectively.
1
2
1
2
D
F
x5y
z2
A
C
D
F
x3
y2
A
C
Solutions to Problems
617

2 (a) 2.718 145 927, 2.718 268 237, 2.718 280 469.
(b) 2.718 281 828 ; values in part (a) are getting closer
to that of part (b).
3 (1) Substituting t = 0, 10, 20 and 30 gives
(a) y(0) =
= 0.07%
(b) y(10) =
= 1.35%
(c) y(20) =
= 18.44%
(d) y(30) =
= 50.06%
(2) As t increases, e−0.3t goes to zero, so y approaches
= 55%
55
1 + 800(0)
55
1 + 800e−9
55
1 + 800e−6
55
1 + 800e−3
55
1 + 800e0
4 (a) ln a2 + ln b3
(rule 1)
= 2 ln a + 3 ln b
(rule 3)
(b) ln x1/2 −ln y3
(rule 3)
= ln
(rule 2)
5 (a) Putting t = 0 and 2 into the expression for TR gives
TR = 5e0 = $5 million
TR = 5e−0.3 = $3.7 million
(b) To solve 5e−0.15t = 2.7 we divide by 5 to get 
e−0.15t = 0.54 and then take natural logarithms,
which gives
−0.15t = ln(0.54) = −0.62
Hence t = 4 years.
6 (1) Missing numbers are 0.99 and 2.80.
(2) The graph is sketched in Figure S2.22.
Intercept, 0.41; slope, 0.20.
(3) A = 0.2, B = e0.41 = 1.5.
(4) (a) 9100; (b) 2.4 × 108; answer to part (b) is
unreliable since t = 60 is well outside the range 
of given data.
D
F
x1/2
y3
A
C
Solutions to Problems
618
Figure S2.19
Figure S2.21
Figure S2.20
(3) A graph of y against t, based on the information
obtained in parts (1) and (2), is sketched in 
Figure S2.21. This shows that, after a slow start,
camcorder ownership grows rapidly between 
t = 10 and 30. However, the rate of growth then
decreases as the market approaches its saturation
level of 55%.

7 (1) (a) 33;
(b) 55;
(c) 98.
(2) 100.
(3) The graph of N against t is sketched in Figure S2.23.
11 A = 50 000, a = 0.137;
(a) $25 205;
(b) $0.
12 The equation
N = c(1 −e−kt) = c −ce−kt
rearranges as
e−kt =
Taking logarithms gives
−kt = ln
t = −
ln
=
ln
−1
=
ln
(a) 350 000.
(b) 60 days.
(c) Market saturation level is 700 000, which is less
than the three-quarters of a million copies needed
to make a proﬁt, so the proprietor should sell.
13 Putting y = ln Q, x = ln K gives
y = 1/3x + (ln 3 + 1/2 ln L)
which is of the form ‘y = ax + b’.
Slope = 1/3, intercept = ln 3 + 1/2 ln L.
14 (a) ln Q = ln(ALn) = ln A + ln Ln = ln A + n ln L.
(b) ln L
0
0.69
1.10
1.39
1.61
ln Q
−0.69
−0.46
−0.33
−0.22
−0.16
(c) n = 0.34, A = 0.50.
15 All ﬁve graphs are increasing throughout.
Graphs of x2, x3 and ex bend upwards, i.e. the slope
increases with increasing x, whereas x has a constant
slope and √x has a decreasing slope.
With the exception of ex, all graphs pass through 
(0, 0) and (1, 1). On 0 < x < 1, x3 < x2 < x < √x whereas
on x > 1 the order is reversed.
16 All ﬁve graphs have the same basic shape and pass
through (1, 0).
On 0.2 < x < 1, ln x < log6x < log10x whereas on 
x > 1, the order is reversed.
17 (a)
P −100 = −2/3Q n
(subtract 100 from both sides)
−3/2 (P −100) = Q n
(divide both sides by −2/3)
150 −1.5P = Q n
(multiply out the brackets)
ln(150 −1.5P) = ln(Q n) = nln Q
(take logs and use rule 3)
which is of the form y = ax + b with a = n and b = 0.
D
F
c
c −N
A
C
1
k
D
F
c −N
c
A
C
1
k
D
F
c −N
c
A
C
1
k
D
F
c −N
c
A
C
c −N
c
Solutions to Problems
619
The graph sketched in Figure S2.23 is called a
learning curve. It shows that immediately after
training the worker can produce only a small
number of items. However, with practice, output
quickly increases and ﬁnally settles down at a daily
rate of 100 items.
8 (a) ln x + ln y;
(b) ln x + 4 ln y;
(c) 2 ln x + 2 ln y;
(d) 5 ln x −7 ln y;
(e)
1/2 ln x −1/2 ln y;
(f)
1/2 ln x + 3/2 ln y −1/2 ln z.
9 (a) ln x3;
(b) ln 
.
10 (a) 1.77;
(b) −0.80;
(c) no solution;
(d) 0.87;
(e) 0.22;
(f) 0.35.
D
F
x4z5
x3
A
C
Figure S2.22
Figure S2.23

(b) ln Q
2.30
3.91
4.09
ln(150–1.5P)
2.01
3.11
3.40
ln Q
4.61
5.29
5.99
ln(150–1.5P)
3.81
4.32
4.79
n = 0.8.
Chapter 3
Section 3.1
1 (a)
× 2.90 = 0.1 × 2.90 = $0.29
(b)
× 1250 = 0.75 × 1250 = $937.50
(c)
× 580 = 0.24 × 580 = $139.20
2 (a) The rise in annual sales is
55 000 −50 000 = 5000
As a fraction of the original this is
=
so the percentage rise is 10%.
(b) As a fraction
15% is the same as 
= 0.15
so the tax is
0.15 × 1360 = 204
Hence the consumer pays
1360 + 204 = $1564
(c) As a fraction
7% is the same as 
= 0.07
so the fall in value is
0.07 × 9500 = 665
Hence the ﬁnal value is
9500 −665 = $8835
3 (a) The scale factor is
1 +
= 1.13
We are going forwards in time, so we multiply to get
6.5 × 1.13 = $7.345 million
(b) The scale factor is
1 +
= 1.63
63
100
13
100
7
100
15
100
10
100
5000
50 000
24
100
75
100
10
100
We are going backwards in time, so we divide to get
1.24 ÷ 1.63 = $76 billion
(correct to the nearest billion)
(c) The scale factor is
= 1.07
which can be thought of as
1 +
so the rise is 7%.
4 (a) The scale factor is
1 −
= 0.35
so the new level of output is
25 000 × 0.35 = 8750
(b) The scale factor is
1 −
= 0.76
so before restructuring the number of employees was
570 ÷ 0.76 = 750
(c) The scale factor is
= 0.2
which can be thought of as
1 −
so the fall is 80% (not 20%!).
5 (a) 1.3 × 1.4 = 1.82, which corresponds to an 82%
increase.
(b) 0.7 × 0.6 = 0.42, which corresponds to a 58% decrease.
(c) 1.1 × 0.5 = 0.55, which corresponds to a 45% decrease.
6 100, 101.5, 105.4, 104.3, 106.9.
7 (a) 5.7% increase.
(b)
= 1.184 so 18.4% increase.
(c)
= 1.120 so 12.0% increase.
8 The 1990 adjusted salary is
17.3 × 1.049 = 18.1
The 1992 adjusted salary is
= 19.0
and so on. The complete set of ‘constant 1991 prices’ is
listed in Table S3.1.
19.8
1.043
100
89.3
105.7
89.3
80
100
2.10
10.50
24
100
65
100
7
100
123 050
115 000
Solutions to Problems
620

During 1990/91 salaries remain unchanged in real
terms. However, since 1991 salaries have outpaced
inﬂation with steady increases in real terms.
9 (a)
;
(b)
;
(c) 2 ;
(d)
;
(e)
.
10 (a) 1.2;
(b) 7.04;
(c) 2190.24;
(d) 62.72.
11 (a) 1.19;
(b) 3.5;
(c) 0.98;
(d) 0.57.
12 (a) $18.20;
(b) 119 244;
(c) $101.09;
(d) $1610;
(e) $15 640.
13 (a) $15.50;
(b) $10.54;
(c) 32%.
14 $864.
15 (a) $26 100;
(b) 31% (nearest percentage).
16 (a) 37.5% increase;
(b) 8.9% increase;
(c) 6.25% decrease.
17 (1) 1985.
(2) (a) 30%;
(b) 52.3%;
(c) 13.1%;
(d) 9.4%.
(3) (a) 25%;
(b) 44%;
(c) 10.6%;
(d) 11.1%.
(4) Public transport costs have risen at a faster rate
than private transport throughout the period
1985–2000. However, for the ﬁnal 5 years there
are signs that the trend has stopped and has
possibly reversed.
18 964, 100, 179, 750; e.g. seasonal variations.
19 (a) 100, 101.7, 113.1, 116.9.
(b) Real output: 236, 229.2, 244.7, 244.7.
Index: 100, 97.1, 103.7, 103.7.
(c) In real terms, spending on education fell by 2.9%
in 1995, increased by 6.8% in 1996 and remained
unchanged in 1997.
20 (a) 1 and 6 respectively.
(b) 142, 150.
(c) 94, 87, 83, 75, 79.
(d) 1.1 million and 1.6 million.
21 108.4, 119.5. These values reﬂect the rises given to the
bulk of employees who fall into categories B and C.
The generous rises given to senior management have
had little effect on the index because there are only 
7 (out of 390) employees in category D.
1
500
7
40
1
2
22
25
7
20
22 111.7, 173.6. These indices are higher than before.
Although the total number of employees has remained
almost unchanged, many of these have been promoted
to the senior management team, thereby increasing the
total wage bill.
Paasche index uses up-to-date information whereas
Laspeyre uses only quantities relating to the base year,
which become more irrelevant over time.
Laspeyre index is easier to calculate and interpret.
Also we can compare two or more Laspeyre indices
since they relate to the same basket of goods. It may be
impossible to calculate the Paasche index since data
about current performance may not be readily
available at the time.
Section 3.2
1
The calculations are summarized in Table S3.2.
Solutions to Problems
621
2 S = 1000(1.08)10 = $2158.92
The slight discrepancy between the two answers
obtained in Problems 1 and 2 arises because the
intermediate results in Problem 1 are rounded to 
2 decimal places.
3 9000(1.03)n = 10 000
(1.03)n = 1.11
log(1.03)n = log(1.11)
n log(1.03) = log(1.11)
n =
= 3.53
so the ﬁrm makes a proﬁt for the ﬁrst time after 4 years.
4 (1) (a) S = 30(1.06)2 = $33.71
(b) S = 30(1.03)4 = $33.77
(c) S = 30(1.015)8 = $33.79
(d) S = 30(1.005)24 = $33.81
(e) S = 30(1.001 15)104 = $33.82
(f) S = 30(1.000 164)730 = $33.82
log(1.11)
log(1.03)
Table S3.1
Year
90
91
92
93
94
Real salaries
18.1
18.1
19.0
21.7
23.2
Table S3.2
End of year
Interest ($)
Investment ($)
1
80
1080
2
86.40
1166.40
3
93.31
1259.71
4
100.78
1360.49
5
108.84
1469.33
6
117.55
1586.88
7
126.95
1713.83
8
137.11
1850.94
9
148.08
1999.02
10
159.92
2158.94

(2) S = 30e0.12 = $33.82
The results in part (1) are settling down at this value.
5 4000 = 1000e0.1r
4 = e0.1r
0.1r = ln4
= 1.386
r = 13.86%
6 The quarterly scale factor is 1.03, so the overall scale
factor for a year is
1.034 = 1.1255
which corresponds to a 12.55% increase.
7 After n years, the annual turnover of A will be
560(1.015)n and the corresponding expression for B is
480(1.034)n. To ﬁnd when supermarket B overtakes A
we need to solve the equation
480(1.034)n = 560(1.015)n
=
n
=
n log
= log
n =
= 8.31
so it will take 9 years.
8 $6753.29; 50%.
9 $23 433.19.
10 (a) Midwest;
(b) BFB.
11 (a) $619 173.64;
(b) 13.
12 15 years.
13 $50 000 (0.95)3 = $42 868.75.
14 (a) $13 947.94;
(b) $14 156.59;
(c) $14 342.45;
(d) $14 381.03.
15 (a) $35 000;
(b) 7 years.
16 $205.44.
17 36.6 years.
18 17.3 years.
19 We are charged interest on the interest; 26.82%.
20 7.25%.
21 (a) 6 years;
(b) 5.19%.
22 7.67%.
23 (a) Interest is (r/k)% per period and there are 
kt periods in t years, so
log(7/6)
log(1.034/1.015)
D
F
7
6
A
C
D
F
1.034
1.015
A
C
7
6
D
F
1.034
1.015
A
C
560
480
1.034n
1.015n
S = P 1 +
kt
(b) If m =
then 
=
and
kt =
so
S = P 1 +
rtm/100
= P
1 +
m rt/100
by rule 3 of indices.
(c) Now since m = 100k/r we see that if the frequency
increases (i.e. if k →∞) then m →∞, causing
1 +
m
to approach e. Substituting this into the result of 
part (b) gives
S = Pert/100
24 (a) 112, 125.44, . . . , 964.63.
(b) 112.55, 126.68, . . . , 1064.09.
(c) 112.68, 126.97, . . . , 1089.26.
(d) 112.75, 127.12, . . . , 1102.32.
All four graphs have the same basic shape, and pass
through (0, 100). As expected, as the frequency of
compounding increases the values approach that 
of continuous compounding in (d).
25 6.17%, 7.44%, . . . , 42.58%.
Almost a straight line, but with a slight upward
curvature.
Section 3.3
1 The geometric ratios of (a), (c), (d) and (e) are 2, −3,
1/2 and 1.07 respectively. The sequence in part (b) is an
arithmetic progression, not a geometric progression,
because to go from one number to the next we add
on the ﬁxed value of 5.
2 (a) The geometric ratio is 2, so the next term is 
8 × 2 = 16.
1 + 2 + 4 + 8 + 16 = 31
For this series, a = 1, r = 2 and n = 5, so its value is
(1)
= 32 −1 = 31
(b) For this series, a = 100(1.07), r = 1.07 and n = 20,
so its value is
100(1.07)
= 4386.52
D
F
1.0720 −1
1.07 −1
A
C
D
F
25 −1
2 −1
A
C
D
F
1
m
A
C
J
L
D
F
1
m
A
C
G
I
D
F
1
m
A
C
mrt
100k
1
m
r
100k
100k
r
D
F
r
100k
A
C
Solutions to Problems
622

3 (a) The ﬁrst $1000 payment is invested for the full 
10 years at 8% interest compounded annually, 
so its future value is
1000(1.08)10
The second $1000 payment is invested for 9 years,
so its future value is
1000(1.08)9
and so on.
The ﬁnal payment of $1000 is invested for just 
1 year, so its future value is
1000(1.08)1
Total savings
= 1000(1.08)10
+ 1000(1.08)9
+ . . . + 1000(1.08)
= 1000(1.08)
= $15 645.49
(b) After n years,
total savings = 1000(1.08)
= 13 500(1.08n −1)
so we need to solve
13 500(1.08n −1) = 20 000
This can be done by taking logarithms following
the strategy described in Section 2.3. The
corresponding value of n is 11.8, so it takes 
12 years.
4 If $x denotes the monthly repayment, the amount
owed at the end of the ﬁrst month is
2000(1.01) −x
After 2 months the amount owed is
[2000(1.01) −x](1.01) −x
= 2000(1.01)2 −x(1.01) −x
Each month we multiply by 1.01 to add on the interest
and subtract x to deduct the repayment, so after 
12 months the outstanding debt is
2000(1.01)12 −x[1.0111 + 1.0110 + . . . + 1]
= 2253.650 −x
= 2253.650 −12.683x
If the debt is to be cleared then
x =
= $177.69
2253.650
12.683
D
F
1.0112 −1
1.01 −1
A
C
D
F
1.08n −1
1.08 −1
A
C
D
F
1.0810 −1
1.08 −1
A
C
5 If the annual percentage rise is 2.6%, the scale factor is
1.026, so after n years the total amount of oil extracted
(in billions of units) will be
45.5 + 45.5(1.026) + 45.5(1.026)2 + . . . + 45.5(1.026)n−1
= 45.5
= 1750(1.026n −1)
Oil reserves are exhausted after n years where n satisﬁes
the equation
1750(1.026n −1) = 2625
1.026n −1 = 1.5
n log(1.026) = log(2.5)
n = 35.7
so oil will run out after 36 years.
6 11 463.88.
7 (a) $9280.71;
(b) $9028.14.
8 140 040.
9 $313 238.
10 $424.19;
(a) $459.03;
(b) $456.44.
11 rSn = r(a + ar + ar2 + . . . + arn−1)
= ar + ar2 + ar3 + . . . + arn
which is very similar to the given expression for Sn
except that the ﬁrst term, a, is missing and we have the
extra term, arn. Consequently, when Sn is subtracted
from rSn the rest of the terms cancel, leaving
rSn −Sn = arn −a
(r −1)Sn = a(rn −1)
(factorize both sides)
Sn = a
(divide through by r −1)
The expression for Sn denotes the sum of the ﬁrst n
terms of a geometric series because the powers of r run
from 0 to n −1, making n terms in total. Notice that
we are not allowed to divide by zero, so the last step 
is not valid for r = 1.
12 18 years.
13 200 million tonnes.
14 (a) $480.
(b) $3024.52.
(c) After n payments, debt is
((((8480 −A)R −A)R −A)R . . . −A)R
= 8480Rn −AR(1 + R + R2 + . . . + Rn−1)
= 8480Rn −AR
D
F
Rn −1
R −1
A
C
D
F
rn −1
r −1
A
C
D
F
1.026n −1
1.026 −1
A
C
Solutions to Problems
623

Finally, setting this expression equal to zero gives
the desired formula for A.
(d) $637.43.
15 First row: 430.33, 291.59, . . . , 96.66.
Thirteenth row: 438.65, 299.36, . . . , 105.25.
16 $3656.33; $492 374.04, $484 195.12, . . . , $0.
17 4 + 4 1 +
+ 4 1 +
2
+ . . . + 4 1 +
10
= 60
= 60
= 15
1 −1 +
10
= −0.15r
1 +
10
−0.15r −1 = 0
r = 8.8
Section 3.4
1
(a) P = 100 000(1.06)−10 = $55 839.48
(b) P = 100 000e−0.6 = $54 881.16
2
(a) NPV = $17 000(1.15)−5 −$8000 = $452
Worthwhile since this is positive.
(b) The IRR, r, is the solution of
8000 1 +
5
= 17 000
1 +
5
= 2.125
(divide by 8000)
1 +
= 1.16
(take ﬁfth roots)
r = 16%
Worthwhile since the IRR exceeds the market rate.
3 NPV of Project A is
NPVA = $18 000(1.07)−2 −$13 500 = $2221.90
NPV of Project B is
NPVB = $13 000(1.07)−2 −$9000 = $2354.70
r
100
D
F
r
100
A
C
D
F
r
100
A
C
D
F
r
100
A
C
D
F
r
100
A
C
1
1
100
100
10
  
  
−
+
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
−
r
r
4
1
1
100
1
1
100
10
  
  
  
  
−
+
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
−
+
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
r
r
D
F
r
100
A
C
D
F
r
100
A
C
D
F
r
100
A
C
Project B is to be preferred since
NPVB > NPVA
4 Rate of interest per month is 1/2%, so the present value,
P, of $S in t months’ time is
P = S(1.005)−t
The total present value is
2000(1.005)−1 + 2000(1.005)−2 + . . . + 2000(1.005)−120
because there are 120 months in 10 years. Using the
formula for a geometric series gives
2000(1.005)−1
= $180 146.91
5 The formula for discounting is
P = S(1.15)−t
The results are given in Table S3.3.
There is very little to choose between these two
projects. Both present values are considerably less than
the original expenditure of $10 000. Consequently,
neither project is to be recommended, since the net
present values are negative. The ﬁrm would be better
off just investing the $10 000 at 15% interest!
D
F
1.005−120 −1
1.005−1 −1
A
C
Solutions to Problems
624
6 The IRR satisﬁes the equation
12 000 = 8000 1 +
−1
+ 2000 1 +
−2
+ 2000 1 +
−3
+ 2000 1 +
−4
Values of the right-hand side of this equation
corresponding to r = 5, 6, . . . , 10 are listed in the 
table below:
D
F
r
100
A
C
D
F
r
100
A
C
D
F
r
100
A
C
D
F
r
100
A
C
Table S3.3
Discounted revenue
($)
End of year
Project 1
Project 2
1
1739.13
869.57
2
1512.29
756.14
3
1972.55
1315.03
4
1715.26
3430.52
5
1491.53
1988.71
Total
8430.76
8359.97

r
5
6
7
8
9
10
value 12 806 12 591 12 382 12 180 11 984 11 794
This shows that r is between 8 and 9. To decide which
of these to go for, we evaluate r = 81/2, which gives 
12 081, which is greater than 12 000, so r = 9% to the
nearest percentage. This exceeds the market rate, so 
the project is worthwhile.
7 If the yield is 7% then each year the income is $70 with
the exception of the last year, when it is $1070 because
the bond is redeemed for its original value.
The present values of this income stream are listed
in Table S3.4 and are calculated using the formula
P = S(1.08)−t
Now, as n gets larger and larger, the number 
(1 + r/100)−n tends to zero, leaving
=
=
=
19 12% to the nearest whole number and 11.6% to 
1 decimal place.
20 $22 177 and $16 659, so choose A.
$21 702 and $16 002, so very little difference in NPVs
and no difference in choice.
Chapter 4
Section 4.1
1 (a)
=
= 2
(b)
+
= −1
(c)
=
= 0
2 Using the power key x y on a calculator, the values of
the cube function, correct to 2 decimal places, are
x
−1.50
−1.25
−1.00
−0.75
f(x)
−3.38
−1.95
−1.00
−0.42
x
−0.50
−0.25
0.00
0.25
0.50
f(x)
−0.13
−0.02
0.00
0.02
0.13
x
0.75
1.00
1.25
1.50
f(x)
0.42
1.00
1.95
3.38
The graph of the cube function is sketched in 
Figure S4.1 (overleaf).
f ′(−1) =
= 3.0
f ′(0) = 0
(because the tangent is 
horizontal at x = 0)
f ′(1) =
= 3.0
[Note: f′(−1) = f′(1) because of the symmetry of the
graph.]
3 If n = 3 then the general formula gives
f ′(x) = 3x3−1 = 3x2
Hence
f ′(−1) = 3(−1)2 = 3
f ′(0) = 3(0)2 = 0
f ′(1) = 3(1)2 = 3
1.5
0.5
1.5
0.5
0
50
3 −3
49 −(−1)
−5
5
−2 −3
4 −(−1)
8
4
11 −3
3 −(−1)
100a
r
a
r/100
a
(1 + r/100) −1
D
F
1
1 −(1 + r/100)−1
A
C
a
1 + r/100
Solutions to Problems
625
8 (a) $5974.43;
(b) $5965.01.
9 (a) 7%;
(b) yes, provided there are no risks.
10 NPAA = $1595.94; NPVB = $1961.99;
NPVC = $1069.00, so Project B is best.
11 (a) $379.08;
(b) $1000.
12 $61 672.67.
13 $38 887.69.
14 27%.
15 $349.15.
16 (a) $400 000;
(b) $92 550.98;
(c) $307 449.02.
17 (a) $333 million;
(b) 5
;
(c) same expression as (b) but with 5 replaced by 50;
(d) 12.
18 For n years,
=
D
F
1 −(1 + r/100)−n
1 −(1 + r/100)−1
A
C
a
1 + r/100
a
r
a
r
a
r
n
1
100
1
100
1
100
2
  
  
  
  . . .   
  
+
+
+
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
+
+
+
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
D
F
1 −(1.06)1−n
1.062 −1.06
A
C
Table S3.4
End of year
Cash ﬂow
Present value
($)
($)
1
70
64.81
2
70
60.01
3
1070
849.40
Total present vlaue
974.22

4 (a) 5x4;
(b) 6x5;
(c) 100x99;
(d) −x−2 (that is, −1/x 2);
(e) −2x−3 (that is, −2/x3).
5 (a) 2;
(b) −1;
(c) 0.
6 −2/3; downhill.
7 When x = 0, y = a(0) + b = b
✓
When x = 1, y = a(1) + b = a + b
✓
Slope =
= a
8 The graph of f(x) = 5 is sketched in Figure S4.2. The
graph is horizontal, so has zero slope at all values of x.
(a + b) −b
1 −0
9 7x6; 448.
10 (a) 8x7;
(b) 50x49;
(c) 19x18;
(d) 999x998.
11 (a) −
;
(b)
;
(c) −
;
(d)
.
12 3, 1.25, 0, −0.75, −1, −0.75, 0, 1.25;
(a) −3;
(b) 0;
(c) 1.
13 (a) (i) 2, 2.0248 . . .
(ii) 0.24845 . . .
(iii) 0.25
(b) (i) 8, 8.3018 . . .
(ii) 3.01867 . . .
(iii) 3
(c) (i) 0.5, 0.4986 . . .
(ii) −0.06135 . . .
(iii) −0.0625
In all three cases the gradient of the chord gives a good
approximation to that of the tangent.
14 (a) 8;
(b) ±3;
(c) −;
(d) 4.
Section 4.2
1 (a) 4(3x2) = 12x2.
(b) −2/x3 because 1/x = x−1, which differentiates to −x−2.
2 (a) 5x4 + 1;
(b) 2x + 0 = 2x.
3 (a) 2x −3x2;
(b) 0 −(−3x−4) =
.
4 (a) 9(5x4) + 2(2x) = 45x4 + 4x
(b) 5(8x7) −3(−1)x−2 = 40x7 + 3/x2
(c) 2x + 6(1) + 0 = 2x + 6
(d) 2(4x3) + 12(3x 2) −4(2x) + 7(1) −0
= 8x3 + 36x 2 −8x + 7
5 f ′(x) = 4(3x2) −5(2x) = 12x2 −10x
f ″(x) = 12(2x) −10(1) = 24x −10
f ″(6) = 24(6) −10 = 134
6 (a) 10x;
(b) −3/x2;
(c) 2;
(d) 2x + 1;
(e) 2x −3;
(f) 3 + 7/x2;
(g) 6x2 −12x + 49;
(h) a;
(i) 2ax + b;
(j) 2/ x + 3/x2 −14/x3.
7 (a) 27;
(b) 4;
(c) 2;
(d) −36;
(e) 3/8.
8 4x 3 + 6x;
(a) 9x2 −8x;
(b) 12x3 −6x2 + 12x −7;
(c) 2x −5;
(d) 1 +
;
(e) −
+
;
(f)
−
.
9 (a) 14;
(b) 6/x4;
(c) 0.
10 4.
11 f ″(x) = 6ax + 2b > 0 gives x > −b/3a
f ″(x) = 6ax + 2b > 0 gives x < −b/3a
10
x 3
3
x2
4
x2
2
x3
3
x2
3
x4
1
2
3
2
x
1
4
4
5x
1
3
3
2
x
3
x4
Solutions to Problems
626
Figure S4.1
Figure S4.2

12 0; horizontal tangent, i.e. vertex of parabola must be 
at x = 3.
13
;
(a)
;
(b) x−2/3;
(c)
x−1/4;
(d) −x−3/2.
14 (a) 2P + 1;
(b) 50 −6Q;
(c) −30/Q2;
(d) 3;
(e) 5/√L;
(f) −6Q2 + 30Q −24.
Section 4.3
1 TR = PQ = (60 −Q)Q = 60Q −Q2
(1)
MR = 60 −2Q
When Q = 50
MR = 60 −2(50) = −40
(2) (a) TR = 60(50) −(50)2 = 500
(b) TR = 60(51) −(51)2 = 459
so TR changes by −41, which is approximately the
same as the exact value obtained in part (1).
2 MR = 1000 −8Q, so when Q = 30
MR = 1000 −8(30) = 760
(a) ∆(TR)  MR × ∆Q = 760 × 3 = 2280, so total
revenue rises by about 2280.
(b) ∆(TR)  MR × ∆Q = 760 × (−2)
= −1520
so total revenue falls by about 1520.
3 TC = (AC)Q =
+ 2 Q = 100 + 2Q
This function differentiates to give MC = 2, so a 
1 unit increase in Q always leads to a 2 unit increase 
in TC irrespective of the level of output.
4 If K = 100 then
Q = 5L1/2(100)1/2 = 50L1/2
because √100 = 10. Differentiating gives
MPL = 50(1/2L−1/2) = 
(a)
= 25
(b)
=
= 8.3;
(c)
=
= 0.25.
The fact that these values decrease as L increases
suggests that the law of diminishing marginal
productivity holds for this function. This can be
conﬁrmed by differentiating a second time to get
= 25(−1/2L−3/2) = 
which is negative for all values of L.
−25
2L3/2
d2Q
dL2
25
100
25
10 000
25
3
25
9
25
1
25
L
D
F
100
Q
A
C
5
2
3
2
5
2 x
1
x
5 The savings function is given, so we begin by ﬁnding
MPS. Differentiating S with respect to Y gives
MPS = 0.04Y −1
so when Y = 40,
MPS = 0.04(40) −1 = 0.6
To ﬁnd MPC we use the formula
MPC + MPS = 1
that is,
MPC = 1 −MPS = 1 −0.6 = 0.4
This indicates that, at the current level of income, a 
1 unit increase in national income causes a rise of about
0.6 units in savings and 0.4 units in consumption.
6 TR = 100Q −4Q2, MR = 100 −8Q; 1.2.
7 TR = 80Q −3Q2, so MR = 80 −6Q = 80 −6(80 −P)/3
= 2P −80.
8 TR = 100Q −Q2; MR = 100 −2Q. Graphs of TR and
MR are sketched in Figures S4.3 and S4.4 respectively.
MR = 0 when Q = 50. This is the value of Q at which
TR is a maximum.
Solutions to Problems
627
Figure S4.3
Figure S4.4

9 (a) TC = 100 + 2Q + Q2/10;
MC = 2 + Q/5.
(b) MC = 8; ∆(TC)  16.
(c) 100.
10 TC = 15 + 2Q2 + 9Q; 15; 4Q + 9.
11 (a) 49.98;
(b) 49.8;
(c) 48;
(d) 30. Yes, because d2Q/dL2 = −0.02 < 0.
12
= 12 −1.2L < 0 for all L > 10.
13 MPC = 1/6 and MPS = 5/6. If national income rises by
1 unit, the approximate increase in consumption and
savings is 1/6 and 5/6 respectively.
14 (a) MPC = 0.96, MPS = 0.04;
(b) S = 0.2Y −100 −0.01Y 2.
Section 4.4
1 (a) The outer power function differentiates to get 
5(3x −4)4 and the derivative of the inner function,
3x −4, is 3, so
= 5(3x −4)4(3) = 15(3x −4)4
(b) The outer power function differentiates to get 
3(x2 + 3x + 5)2 and the derivative of the inner
function, x2 + 3x + 5, is 2x + 3, so
= 3(x2 + 3x + 5)2(2x + 3)
(c) Note that y = (2x −3)−1. The outer power function
differentiates to get −(2x −3)−2 and the derivative
of the inner function, 2x −3, is 2, so
= −(2x −3)−2(2) =
(d) Note that y = (4x −3)1/2. The outer power function
differentiates to get 1/2(4x −3)−1/2 and the derivative
of the inner function, 4x −3, is 4, so
= 1/2(4x −3)−1/2(4) =
2 (a)
u = x
v = (3x −1)6
= 1
= 6(3x −1)5
(3)
So
= 18x(3x −1)5 + (3x −1)6
= (3x −1)5 [18x + (3x −1)]
= (3x −1)5(21x −1)
dy
dx
dv
dx
du
dx
2
(4x −3)
dy
dx
−2
(2x −3)2
dy
dx
dy
dx
dy
dx
d2Q
dL2
(b)
u = x3
v = (2x + 3)1/2
= 3x2
= 1/2(2x + 3)−1/2
(2)
=
So
=
+ 3x2 (2x + 3)
(c)
u = x
v = (x −2)−2
= 1
= −(x −2)−2
So
=
+
=
=
3 (a)
u = x
v = x −2
= 1
= 1
So
=
=
(b)
u = x −1
v = x + 2
= 1
= 1
So
=
=
4 (a) 20(2x + 1)9;
(b) 3(x2 + 3x −5)2(2x + 3);
(c) −7/(7x −3)2;
(d) −2x/(x2 + 1)2;
(e) 4/√(8x −1).
5 (a) 5x (x + 2)(x + 5)2;
(b) x4(4x + 5)(28x + 25);
(c)
.
6 (a)
;
(b)
;
(c)
.
x2(5x −6)
2(x −1)3/2
3
(x + 1)2
x2 + 8x 
(x + 4)2
x3(9x + 8)
2 (x + 1)
2
(x + 1)2
(x + 1) −(x −1)
(x + 1)2
dy
dx
dv
dx
du
dx
−2
(x −2)2
(x −2) −x
(x −2)2
dy
dx
dv
dx
du
dx
−2
(x −2)2
−x + (x −2)
(x −2)2
1
x −2
−x
(x −2)2
dy
dx
dv
dx
du
dx
x3
(2x + 3)
dy
dx
1
(2x + 3)
dv
dx
du
dx
Solutions to Problems
628

7 (a) 4x(x −3)3 + (x −3)4 = (x −3)3(5x −3);
(b)
(c)
;
(d)
.
8 10(5x + 7) = 50x + 70
9 5x4(x + 2)2 + 2x5(x + 2) = 7x6 + 24x5 + 20x4
10 (a)
(b)
=
11 MPC = 1.8, MPS = −0.8. If national income rises by 
1 unit, consumption rises by 1.8 units, whereas savings
actually fall by 0.8 units.
Section 4.5
1
We are given that P1 = 210 and P2 = 200. Substituting 
P = 210 into the demand equation gives
1000 −2Q1 = 210
−2Q1 = −790
Q1 = 395
Similarly, putting P = 200 gives Q2 = 400. Hence
∆P = 200 −210 = −10
∆Q = 400 −395 = 5
Averaging the P values gives
P = 1/2(210 + 200) = 205
Averaging the Q values gives
Q = 1/2(395 + 400) = 397.5
Hence, arc elasticity is
−
× 
= 0.26
2 The quickest way of solving this problem is to ﬁnd a
general expression for E in terms of P and then just 
to replace P by 10, 50 and 90 in turn. The equation
P = 100 −Q
rearranges as
Q = 100 −P
so
= −1
Hence
dQ
dP
D
F
5
−10
A
C
D
F
205
397.5
A
C
2000 + 500Q
(2 + Q)3/2
1000(2 + Q)1/2 −500Q(2 + Q)−1/2
(2 + Q)
100
3
100
2
  
(
  
)
−
−
Q
Q
1 −x2
(x2 + 1)2
5
(x + 5)2
x
x
x
x
x
(
  )
  (
  )  
  
  
;
2
3
2
3
3
3
2
3
−
+
−
=
−
−
E = −
× 
=
× (−1)
=
(a) If P = 10 then E = 1/9 < 1 so inelastic.
(b) If P = 50 then E = 1 so unit elastic.
(c) If P = 90 then E = 9 so elastic.
At the end of Section 4.5 it is shown quite generally
that the price elasticity of demand for a linear function
P = aQ + b
is given by
E =
The above is a special case of this with b = 100.
3 Substituting Q = 4 into the demand equation gives
P = −(4)2 −10(4) + 150 = 94
Differentiating the demand equation with respect to 
Q gives
= −2Q −10
so
=
When Q = 4
= −
The price elasticity of demand is then
−
× −
=
From the deﬁnition
E = −
we have
= −
Hence the percentage change in price is −10 × 36/47 
= −7.7%: that is, the ﬁrm must reduce prices by 7.7%
to achieve a 10% increase in demand.
4 (a) Putting P = 9 and 11 directly into the supply
equation gives Q = 203.1 and 217.1 respectively, so
∆P = 11 −9 = 2
∆Q = 217.1 −203.1 = 14
Averaging the P values gives
P = 1/2(9 + 11) = 10
10
percentage change in price
47
36
percentage change in demand
percentage change in price
47
36
D
F
1
18
A
C
D
F
94
4
A
C
1
18
dQ
dP
1
−2Q −10
dQ
dP
dP
dQ
P
b −P
P
100 −P
−P
100 −P
dQ
dP
P
Q
Solutions to Problems
629

Averaging the Q values gives
Q = 1/2(203.1 + 217.1) = 210.1
Arc elasticity is
× 
= 0.333 175
(b) Putting P = 10 directly into the supply equation,
we get Q = 210. Differentiating the supply
equation immediately gives
= 5 + 0.2P
so when P = 10, dQ/dP = 7. Hence
E =
× 7 =
Note that, as expected, the results in parts (a) and
(b) are similar. They are not identical, because 
in part (a) the elasticity is ‘averaged’ over the 
arc from P = 9 to P = 11, whereas in part (b) the
elasticity is evaluated exactly at the midpoint, 
P = 10.
5 43/162 = 0.27.
6 22/81 = 0.27; agree to 2 decimal places.
7 (a) 1/4;
(b) 1/4;
(c) 9/8.
8 4P/(60 −4P); 7.5.
9 (a) 0.2P.
(b) 0.1P2 = Q −4
(subtract 4 from both sides)
P2 = 10(Q −4) = 10Q −40
(multiply both sides by 10)
P = √(10Q −40)
(square root both sides)
=
(c)
=
= 
= 0.2P =
(d) E = 10/7.
10 1.46;
(a) elastic;
(b) 7.3%.
11 If P = AQ−n then
= −nAQ−(n+1)
so
=
1
−nAQ−(n+1)
dQ
dP
dP
dQ
dQ
dP
P
5
(10Q −40)
5
1
dP/dQ
5
(10Q −40)
dP
dQ
1
3
10
210
dQ
dP
14
2
10
210.1
Hence
E = −
×
= −
×
= −Q−n ×
=
which is a constant.
12 E =
×
=
× a =
=
(a) if
b = 0
then
E =
= 1
(b) if b > 0 then aP + b > aP so E =
< 1
Assuming that the line is sketched with quantity on the
horizontal axis and price on the vertical axis, supply is
unit elastic when the graph passes through the origin,
and inelastic when the vertical intercept is positive.
Section 4.6
1 (a) Step 1
= 6x + 12 = 0
has solution x = −2.
Step 2
= 6 > 0
so minimum.
Finally, note that when x = −2, y = −47, so the
minimum point has coordinates (−2, −47). A
graph is sketched in Figure S4.5.
d2y
dx2
dy
dx
aP
aP + b
Pa
Pa
aP
aP + b
Pa
Q
P
Q
dQ
dP
P
Q
1
n
D
F
1
−nQ−n
A
C
D
F
1
−nAQ−(n+1)
A
C
D
F
AQ−n
Q
A
C
dQ
dP
P
Q
Solutions to Problems
630
Figure S4.5

(b) Step 1
= −6x2 + 30x − 36 = 0
has solutions x = 2 and x = 3.
Step 2
= −12x + 30x
which takes the values 6 and −6 at x = 2 and x = 3
respectively. Hence minimum at x = 2 and
maximum at x = 3.
d2y
dx2
dy
dx
so at L = 10
MPL = 600(10) −4(10)3 = 2000
APL = 300(10) −(10)3 = 2000
that is, MPL = APL.
3 (a) TR = PQ = (20 −2Q)Q = 20Q −2Q2
Step 1
= 20 −4Q = 0
has solution Q = 5.
Step 2
= −2 < 0
so maximum.
(b) π = TR −TC
= (20Q −2Q2) −(Q3 −8Q2 + 20Q + 2)
= −Q3 + 6Q2 −2
Step 1
= −3Q2 + 12Q = 0
has solutions Q = 0 and Q = 4.
Step 2
= −6Q + 12
which takes the values 12 and −12 when Q = 0 and
Q = 4, respectively. Hence minimum at Q = 0 and
maximum at Q = 4.
Finally, evaluating π at Q = 4 gives the
maximum proﬁt, π = 30. Now
MR =
= 20 −4Q
so at Q = 4, MR = 4;
MC =
= 3Q2 −16Q + 20
so at Q = 4, MC = 4.
4 AC = Q + 3 +
Step 1
= 1 −
= 0
has solution Q = ±6. A negative value of Q does not
make sense, so we just take Q = 6.
36
Q2
d(AC)
dQ
36
Q
d(TC)
dQ
d(TR)
dQ
d2π
dQ2
dπ
dQ
d2(TR)
dQ2
d(TR)
dQ
Solutions to Problems
631
A graph is sketched in Figure S4.6 based on the
following table of function values:
x
−10
0
2
3
10
f(x)
3887
27
−1
0
−833
2 APL =
=
= 300L −L3
Step 1
= 300 −3L2 = 0
has solution L = ±10. We can ignore −10 because it
does not make sense to employ a negative number 
of workers.
Step 2
= −6L
which takes the value −60 < 0 at L = 10. Hence L = 10
is a maximum.
Now
MPL =
= 600L −4L3
dQ
dL
d2(APL)
dL2
d(APL)
dL
300L2 −L4
L
Q
L
Figure S4.6

Step 2
=
is positive when Q = 6, so it is a minimum.
Now when Q = 6, AC = 15. Also
MC =
= 2Q + 3
which takes the value 15 at Q = 6. We observe that the
values of AC and MC are the same: that is, at the point
of minimum average cost
=
There is nothing special about this example and in the
next section we show that this result is true for any
average cost function.
5 After tax the supply equation becomes
P = 1/2QS + 25 + t
In equilibrium, QS = QD = Q, so
P = 1/2Q + 25 + t
P = −2Q + 50
Hence
1/2Q + 25 + t = −2Q + 50
which rearranges to give
Q = 10 −2/5t
Hence the tax revenue, T, is
T = tQ = 10t −2/5t2
Step 1
= 10 −4/5t2 = 0
has solution t = 12.5.
Step 2
= 
< 0
so maximum. Government should therefore impose a
tax of $12.50 per good.
6 (a) Maximum at (1/2, 5/4); graph is sketched in
Figure S4.7.
−4
5
d2T
dt2
dT
dt
marginal cost
average cost
d(TC)
dQ
72
Q3
d2(AC)
dQ2
(d) Maximum at (1, 2), minimum at (−1, −2); graph is
sketched in Figure S4.10.
Solutions to Problems
632
(b) Minimum at (2, 0); graph is sketched in 
Figure S4.8.
(c) Minimum at (10, 5); graph is sketched in 
Figure S4.9.
Figure S4.7
Figure S4.8
Figure S4.9
Figure S4.10

8 10.
9 TC = 2Q2 + 15, AC = 2Q +
,
MC = 4Q; √7.5; AC = 11 = MC.
10 30; MPL = 450 = APL.
11 (a) TC = 13 + (Q + 2)Q
= 13 + Q2 + 2Q
AC =
=
+ Q + 2
Q
1
2
3
4
5
6
AC
16
10.5
9.3
9.3
9.6
10.2
The graph of AC is sketched in Figure S4.12.
(b) From Figure S4.12 minimum average cost  9.2.
(c) Minimum at Q = √13, which gives AC = 9.21.
12 (a) 37 037 after 333 days.
(b) 167.
13 167.
13
Q
TC
Q
15
Q
14 (a) TR = 4Q −
π =
+
+ 2Q −4
MR = 4 −
MC = 2 −
+
(b) 4.
(c)
MR = 2 = MC.
15 $3.
16 (a) Minimum at (1, 7) and (4, −34), maximum at (2, −2).
(b) Minimum at (0, −10), inﬂection at (3, 17).
(c) Minimum at (−1, −1/2), maximum at (1, 1/2).
17 (a) Maple chooses a poor range on the y axis so that
you can barely distinguish the graph from the axes.
This is because the graph is undeﬁned at x = 0,
resulting in very large (positive and negative)
values of y when x is close to 0.
(c) Minimum at (1, 1), maximum at (5, 1/9).
18
π = −30Q +
Q2 −
Q3
MC = 80 −15Q + Q2
MR = 50 −2Q
19 29.54.
Section 4.7
1 (a) TR = (25 −0.5Q)Q = 25Q −0.5Q2
TC = 7 + (Q + 1)Q = Q2 + Q + 7
MR = 25 −Q
MC = 2Q + 1
1
3
13
2
3Q2
20
3Q
5
Q
2
Q2
20
−Q3
20
Q2
4
Solutions to Problems
633
7 Graphs of the three functions are sketched in 
Figure S4.11, which shows that the stationary 
points in (a), (b) and (c) are a point of inﬂection,
minimum and maximum, respectively.
Figure S4.11
Figure S4.12

2 MC = 100.
(a) Domestic market
P1 = 300 −Q1
TR1 = 300Q1 −Q1
2
so
MR1 = 200 −2Q1
To maximize proﬁt, MR1 = MC: that is,
300 −2Q1 = 100
which has solution Q1 = 100.
Corresponding price is
P1 = 300 −100 = $200
Foreign market
P2 = 200 −1/2Q2
TR2 = 200Q2 −1/2Q2
2
so
MR2 = 200 −Q2
To maximize proﬁt, MR2 = MC: that is,
200 −Q2 = 100
which has solution Q2 = 100.
Corresponding price is
P2 = 200 −1/2(100) = $150
(b) Without discrimination, P1 = P2 = P, say, so
individual demand equations become
Q1 = 300 −P
Q2 = 400 −2P
Adding shows that the demand equation for
combined market is
Q = 700 −3P
where Q = Q1 + Q2.
TR =
Q −
so
MR =
−
To maximize proﬁt, MR = MC: that is,
−
= 100
which has solution Q = 200.
Corresponding price is
P = 700/3 −200/3 = $500/3
Total cost of producing 200 goods is
5000 + 100(200) = $25 000
With discrimination, total revenue is
100 × 200 + 100 × 150 = $35 000
so proﬁt is $35 000 −$25 000 = $10 000.
Without discrimination, total revenue is
200 ×
= $33 333
so proﬁt is $33 333 −$25 000 = $8333.
3 Domestic market
From Practice Problem 2, proﬁt 
is maximum when P1 = 200, Q1 = 100. Also, since 
Q1 = 300 −P1 we have dQ1/dP1 = −1. Hence
E1 = −
×
= −
× (−1) = 2
Foreign market
From Practice Problem 2, proﬁt 
is maximum when P2 = 150, Q2 = 100. Also, since 
Q2 = 400 −2P2 we have dQ2/dP2 = −2. Hence
E2 = −
×
= −
× (−2) = 3
We see that the ﬁrm charges the higher price in the
domestic market, which has the lower elasticity of
demand.
4 Argument is similar to that given in text but with 
< replaced by >.
5 (a) TR = aQ2 + bQ, TC = dQ + c;
(b) MR = 2aQ + b, MC = d.
(c) The equation 2aQ + b = d has solution
Q = d −b
2a
150
100
dQ2
dP2
P2
Q2
200
100
dQ1
dP1
P1
Q1
500
3
2Q
3
700
3
2Q
3
700
3
Q2
3
700
3
Solutions to Problems
634
Figure S4.13
(b) From Figure S4.13 the point of intersection of 
the MR and MC curves occurs at Q = 8. The MC
curve cuts the MR curve from below, so this 
must be a maximum point.

6 (a) At the point of maximum total revenue
MR =
= 0
so E = 1.
(b) Maximum occurs when Q = 10.
7 TC = ACO + ACC
=
+ (CU)(CC)
At a stationary point
= −
+
= 0
which has solution
EOQ =
Also
=
> 0
so minimum.
8 (a) P1 = $30, P2 = $20.
(b) P = $24.44.
The proﬁts in parts (a) and (b) are $95 and $83.89
respectively.
9 The argument is similar to that given in the text for APL.
10 The new supply equation is
P = aQS + b + t
In equilibrium
aQ + b + t = −cQ + d
which has solution
Q =
Hence
tQ =
which differentiates to give
This is zero when
t =
Also the second derivative is
< 0
(since a and c are both positive)
which conﬁrms that the stationary point is a
maximum.
−2
a + c
d −b
2
d −b −2t
a + c
(d −b)t −t 2
a + c
d −b −t
a + c
2(ARU)(CO) 
(EOQ)3
d2(TC) 
d(EOQ)2
2(ARU)(CO) 
(CU)(CC)
(CU)(CC)
2
(ARU)(CO) 
(EOQ)2
d(TC) 
d(EOQ)
(EOQ) 
2
(ARU)(CO) 
EOQ
d(TR) 
dQ
Section 4.8
1 x
0.50
1.00
1.50
2.00
f(x)
−0.69
0.00
0.41
0.69
x
2.50
3.00
3.50
4.00
f(x)
0.92
1.10
1.25
1.39
The graph of the natural logarithm function is
sketched in Figure S4.14.
Solutions to Problems
635
f ′(1) =
= 1.00  1
f ′(2) =
= 0.50 
f ′(3) =
= 0.30 
These results suggest that f′(x) = 1/x.
2 (a) 3e3x;
(b) −e−x;
(c) 1/x;
(d) 1/x.
3 (a) For the product rule we put
u = x4
and
v = ln x
for which
= 4x3
and
=
By the product rule
= x4 ×
+ lnx × 4x3
= x3 + 4x3 ln x
= x3(1 + 4 ln x)
(b) By the chain rule
= ex2 × 2x = 2xex2
(c) If
u = ln x
and
v = x + 2
dy
dx
1
x
dy
dx
1
x
dv
dx
du
dx
1
3
0.15
0.50
1
2
0.25
0.50
0.50
0.50
Figure S4.14

then
=
and
= 1
By the quotient rule
(multiply top and bottom by x)
4 (a) y = ln x3 + ln(x + 2)4
(rule 1)
= 3 ln x + 4 ln(x + 2)
(rule 3)
Hence
=
+
=
(b) y = ln x2 −ln(2x + 3)
(rule 2)
= 2 ln x −ln(2x + 3)
(rule 3)
Hence
=
−
(chain rule)
=
=
5 In terms of P the total revenue function is given by
TR = PQ = 1000Pe−0.2P
and the total cost function is
TC = 100 + 2Q = 100 + 2000e−0.2P
Hence
π = TR −TC
= 1000Pe−0.2P −2000e−0.2P −100
Step 1
At a stationary point
= 0
To differentiate the ﬁrst term, 1000Pe−0.2P, we use the
product rule with
u = 1000P
and
v = e−0.2P
for which
= 1000
and
= −0.2e−0.2P
dv
dP
du
dP
dπ
dP
2x + 6
x(2x + 3)
2(2x + 3) −2x
x(2x + 3)
2
2x + 3
2
x
dy
dx
7x + 6 
x(x + 2)
3(x + 2) + 4x
x(x + 2)
4
x + 2
3
x
dy
dx
x + 2 −x ln x
x(x + 2)2
d
d
y
x
x
x
x
x
  
(   )  
  (ln )  
(   )
=
+
×
−
×
+
2
1
1
2 2
dv
dx
1
x
du
dx
Hence the derivative of 1000Pe−0.2P is
u
+ v
= 1000P(−0.2e−0.2P) + e−0.2P(1000)
= e−0.2P(1000 −200P)
Now
π = 1000Pe−0.2P −2000e−0.2P −100
so
= e−0.2P(1000 −200P) −2000(−0.2e−0.2P)
= e−0.2P(1400 −200P)
This is zero when
1400 −200P = 0
because e−0.2P ≠0.
Hence P = 7.
Step 2
To ﬁnd 
we differentiate
= e−0.2P(1400 −200P)
using the product rule. Taking
u = e−0.2P
and
v = 1400 −200P
gives
= −0.2e−0.2P
and
= −200
Hence
= u
+ v
= e−0.2P(−200) + (1400 −200P)(−0.2e−0.2P)
= e−0.2P(10P −480)
Putting P = 7 gives
= −200e−1.4
This is negative, so the stationary point is a maximum.
6 To ﬁnd the price elasticity of demand we need to
calculate the values of P, Q and dQ/dP. We are 
given that Q = 20 and the demand equation gives
P = 200 −40 ln(20 + 1) = 78.22
The demand equation expresses P in terms of Q, 
so we ﬁrst evaluate dP/dQ and then use the result
=
1
dP/dQ
dQ
dP
d2π
dP2
du
dP
dv
dP
d2π
dP2
dv
dP
du
dP
dπ
dP
d2π
dP2
dπ
dP
du
dP
dv
dP
Solutions to Problems
636

To differentiate ln(Q + 1) by the chain rule we
differentiate the outer log function to get
and then multiply by the derivative of the inner
function, Q + 1, to get 1. Hence the derivative of 
ln(Q + 1) is
and so
=
Putting Q = 20 gives dP/dQ = −40/21, so that 
dQ/dP = −21/40. Finally, we use the formula
E = −
×
to calculate the price elasticity of demand as
E = −
×
= 2.05
7 (a) 6e6x;
(b) −342e−342x;
(c) −2e−x + 4ex;
(d) 40e4x −4x.
8 (a)
;
(b)
.
9 (a) 3x2ex3;
(b)
10 (a) (4x3 + 2x4)e2x;
(b) ln x + 1.
11 (a)
(b)
12 (a)
;
(b)
;
(c)
.
13 (a) Maximum at (1, e−1); the graph is sketched in
Figure S4.15.
1
1 −x2
9x −2
2x(3x −1)
1
x(1 −x)
ex(x ln x −1)
x(ln x)2
2e4x(2x2 −x + 4)
(x2 + 2)2
4x3 + 6x
x4 + 3x2
1
x
1
x
D
F
−21
40
A
C
78.22
20
dQ
dP
P
Q
−40
Q + 1
dP
dQ
1
Q + 1 
1
Q + 1 
14 49.
15 50.
16 E =
, which is 1 when Q = 10.
17
÷ y = Ake kt ÷ Ae kt = k
Chapter 5
Section 5.1
1 (a) −10;
(b) −1;
(c) 2;
(d) 21;
(e) 0;
(f) 21. The value of g is independent of the ordering
of the variables. Such a function is said to be
symmetric.
2 (a) Differentiating 5x4 with respect to x gives 20x3 and,
since y is held constant, y2 differentiates to zero. 
Hence
= 20x3 −0 = 20x3
Differentiating 5x4 with respect to y gives zero
because x is held ﬁxed. Also differentiating y2
with respect to y gives 2y, so
= 0 −2y = −2y
(b) To differentiate the ﬁrst term, x2y3, with respect to
x we regard it as a constant multiple of x2 (where
the constant is y3), so we get 2xy3. The second
term obviously gives −10, so
= 2xy3 −10
∂f
∂x
∂f
∂y
∂f
∂x
dy
dx
10
Q
Solutions to Problems
637
Figure S4.15
Figure S4.16
(b) Maximum at (1, −1); the graph is sketched in
Figure S4.16.

To differentiate the ﬁrst term, x2y3, with respect to
y we regard it as a constant multiple of y3 (where
the constant is x2), so we get 3x2y2. The second
term is a constant and goes to zero, so
= 3x2y2 −0 = 3x2y2
3 (a) fxx = 60x2
fyy = 2
fyx = fxy = 0
(b) fxx = 2y3
fyy = 6x2y
fyx = fxy = 6xy2
4 f1 =
= x2 + 5x4
1
f11 =
= 20x3
1
f21 =
= 1
5
= y −5, 
= x + 2, so, at (2, 6),
= 1, 
= 4
∂z
∂y
∂z
∂x
∂z
∂y
∂z
∂x
∂2f
∂x2∂x1
∂2f
∂x1
2
∂f
∂x1
∂f
∂y
(a) ∆x = −0.1, ∆y = 0.1;
z  1(−0.1) + 4(0.1) = 0.3, so z increases by
approximately 0.3.
(b) At (2, 6), z = 14, and at (1.9, 6.1), z = 14.29, so the
exact increase is 0.29.
6 (a)
=
(b)
=
7 324; 75; 0.
8 85 ≠91; (0, y) for any y.
9 (a) fx = 2x, fy = 20y4;
(b) fx = 9x2, fy = −2ey;
(c) fx = y, fy = x + 6;
(d) fx = 6x5y2, fy = 2x6y + 15y2.
10 fx = 4x3y5 −2x
fy = 5x4y4 + 2y
fx(1, 0) = −2
fy(1, 1) = 7
y2
5y4 −2xy
dy
dx
−y
x −3y2 + 1
dy
dx
Solutions to Problems
638
12 (a) −0.6;
(b) −2;
(c) −2.6.
13 78; 94; 6.2.
14 (a)
fx = −3x2 + 2, fy = 1
= −
= 3x2 −2
(b)
y = x3 −2x + 1, so
= 3x2 −2
✓
15 1/3.
16 f1 =
; f2 = −
+
; f3 =
+
;
f11 = 0; f22 =
−
; f33 =
−
;
1
x2
3
2x1
x2
1
x2
2
2x1x2
3
x3
2
1
x3
2x1x3
x2
1
x2
x1x2
3
x2
2
x2
3
x2
dy
dx
−3x2 + 2
1
dy
dx
f12 = −
= f21; f13 = −
= f31;
f23 =
= f32.
Section 5.2
1 Substituting the given values of P, PA and Y into the
demand equation gives
Q = 500 −3(20) −2(30) + 0.01(5000)
= 430
(a)
= −3, so
EP = −
× (−3) = 0.14
20
430
∂Q
∂P
−2x1x3
x2
2
2x3
x2
x2
3
x2
2
fx
fy
fxx
fyy
fyx
fxy
(a)
y
x
0
0
1
1
(b)
exy
ex
exy
0
ex
ex
(c)
2x + 2
1
2
0
0
0
(d)
4x−3/4y3/4
12x1/4y−1/4
−3x−7/4y3/4
−3x1/4y−5/4
3x−3/4y−1/4
3x−3/4y−1/4
(e)
+
−
−
−1
y2
−2
x3
1
y2
−2
x3
2x
y2
6y
x4
x
y2
1
x2
1
y
−2y
x3
11

(b)
= −2, so
EPA =
× (−2) = 0.14
(c)
= 0.01, so
EY =
× 0.01 = 0.12
By deﬁnition,
EY =
so demand rises by 0.12 × 5 = 0.6%. A rise in income
causes a rise in demand, so good is superior.
2
= 1000 + 5x2 −4x1
= 450 + 5x1 −2x2, so at (138, 500)
= 2948
and
= 140
If working time increases by 1 hour then leisure time
decreases by 1 hour, so ∆x1 = −1. Also ∆x2 = 15. By the
small increments formula
∆U  2948(−1) + 140(15) = −848
The law of diminishing marginal utility holds for both
x1 and x2 because
= −4 < 0
and
= −2 < 0
3 Using the numerical results in Practice Problem 2,
MRCS =
= 21.06
This represents the increase in x2 required to maintain
the current level of utility when x1 falls by 1 unit. Hence
if x1 falls by 2 units, the increase in x2 is approximately
21.06 × 2 = $42.12
4 MPK = 2K
and
MPL = 4L
(a) MRTS =
=
=
(b) K
+ L
= K(2K) + L(4L)
= 2(K2 + 2L2) = 2Q
✓
5 (a) 20/1165;
(b) −15/1165;
(c) 2000/1165; −0.04%; complementary.
∂Q
∂L
∂Q
∂K
2L
K
4L
2K
MPL
MPK
2948
140
∂2U
∂x2
2
∂2U
∂x1
2
∂U
∂x2
∂U
∂x1
∂U
∂x2
∂U
∂x1
percentage change in Q
percentage change in Y
5000
430
∂Q
∂Y
30
430
∂Q
∂PA
6 2; 1%.
7
=
and
=
(a) 37/60;
(b) 12/25.
8 MPK = 8, MPL = 141/4;
(a) 125/32;
(b) 125/32.
9 K(6K 2 + 3L2) + L(6LK ) = 6K 3 + 9L2K = 3(K 3 + 3L2K )
10
= αAKα−1Lβ
and
= βAKαLβ−1, so
K
+ L
= αAKαLβ + βAKαLβ
= (α + β)(AK αLβ)
= (α + β)Q
✓
11 The graph is sketched in Figure S5.1, which shows that
MRTS = −(−5/7) = 5/7.
∂Q
∂L
∂Q
∂K
∂Q
∂L
∂Q
∂K
5
12
∂U
∂x2
1
5
∂U
∂x1
Solutions to Problems
639
12 (b)
(c) 2.97.
13 (c)
;
(d) −0.033.
Section 5.3
1
C = a
+ b
=
> 0
because
0 < a <1
a
1 −a
∂C
∂I*
D
F
b + I*
1 −a
A
C
7K 4
3L4
0 4 5
1 5
. (
  .
)
K
L
K
L
+
Figure S5.1

Hence an increase in I* leads to an increase in C. If 
a = 1/2 then
=
= 1
Change in C is
1 × 2 = 2
2 (a) Substitute C, I, G, X and M into the Y equation to get
Y = aY + b + I* + G* + X* −(mY + M*)
Collecting like terms gives
(1 −a + m)Y = b + I* + G* + X* −M*
so
Y =
(b)
=
= −
Now a < 1 and m > 0, so 1 −a + m > 0. The
autonomous export multiplier is positive, so 
an increase in X* leads to an increase in Y. The
marginal propensity to import multiplier is
negative. To see this note from part (a) that 
∂Y/∂m can be written as
−
and Y > 0 and 1 −a + m > 0.
(c) Y =
= 2100
=
=
and
∆X* = 10
so
∆Y =
× 10 =
3 If d increases by a small amount then the intercept
increases and the demand curve shifts upwards slightly.
Figure S5.2 shows that the effect is to increase the
equilibrium quantity from Q1 to Q2, conﬁrming that
∂Q/∂d > 0.
4 (a) Substituting equations (3) and (4) into (2) gives
C = a(Y −T*) + b = aY −aT* + b
(7)
Substituting (5), (6) and (7) into (1) gives
Y = aY −aT* + b + I* + G*
100
3 
10
3 
10
3 
1
1 −0.8 + 0.1
∂Y
∂X*
120 + 100 + 300 + 150 −40
1 −0.8 + 0.1
Y
1 −a + m
b + I* + G* + X* −M*
(1 −a + m)2
∂Y
∂m
1
1 −a + m
∂Y
∂X*
b + I* + G* + X* −M*
1 −a + m
1/2
1 −1/2
∂C
∂I*
so that
Y =
Finally, from (7), we see that
C = a
−aT* + b
=
=
(b)
> 0; C increases.
(c) 1520; rise of 18.
5 (1) From the relations
C = aYd + b
Yd = Y −T
T = tY + T*
we see that
C = a(Y −tY −T*) + b
Similarly,
M = m(Y −tY −T*) + M*
Substitute these together with I, G and X into the Y
equation to get the desired result.
(2) (a)
=
Numerator is negative because m < a.
Denominator can be written as
(1 −a) + at + m(1 −t)
which represents the sum of three positive
numbers, so is positive. Hence the autonomous
taxation multiplier is negative.
m −a
1 −a + at + m −mt
∂Y
∂T*
a
1 −a
aI* + aG* −aT* + b
1 −a
a(−aT* + b + I* + G*) + (1 −a)(−aT* + b)
1 −a
D
F
−aT* + b + I* + G*
1 −a
A
C
−aT* + b + I* + G*
1 −a
Solutions to Problems
640
Figure S5.2

(b)
=
> 0
(3) (a) 1000;
(b) ∆Y = 20;
(c) ∆T* = 331/3.
6 From text, equilibrium quantity is
Substituting this into either the supply or demand
equation gives the desired result.
=
> 0,
=
> 0
= −
< 0,
=
> 0
where the quotient rule is used to obtain ∂P/∂a
and ∂P/∂c. An increase in a, b or d leads to an 
increase in P, whereas an increase in c leads to a
decrease in P.
7 (1) Substituting second and third equations into ﬁrst
gives
Y = aY + b + cr + d
so that
(1 −a)Y −cr = b + d
(1)
(2) Substituting ﬁrst and second equations into third
gives
k1Y + k2r + k3 = M*S
so that
k1Y + k2r = M*S −k3
(2)
(3) (a) Working out c × (2) + k2 × (1) eliminates r to
give
ck1Y + k2(1 −a)Y
= c(M*S −k3) + k2(b + d)
Dividing both sides by ck1 + k2(1 −a) gives
result.
(b)
, which is positive because the top 
and bottom of this fraction are both negative.
Section 5.4
1 fx = 2x,
fy = 6 −6y,
fxx = 2,
fyy = −6,
fxy = 0.
Step 1
At a stationary point
2x = 0
6 −6y = 0
which shows that there is just one stationary point 
at (0, 1).
c
(1 −a)k2 + ck1
a
a + c
∂P
∂d
a(d −b)
(a + c)2
∂P
∂c
c
a + c
∂P
∂b
c(d −b)
(a + c)2
∂P
∂a
d−b
a + c
1
1 −a + at + m −mt
∂Y
∂G*
Step 2
fxx fyy −f 2
xy = 2(−6) −02 = −12 < 0
so it is a saddle point.
2
Total revenue from the sale of G1 is
TR1 = P1Q1 = (50 −Q1)Q1 = 50Q1 −Q1
2
Total revenue from the sale of G2 is
TR2 = P2Q2 = (95 −3Q2)Q2
= 95Q2 −3Q2
2
Total revenue from the sale of both goods is
TR = TR1 + TR2
= 50Q1 −Q1
2 + 95Q2 −3Q2
2
Proﬁt is
π = TR −TC
= (50Q1 −Q 1
2 + 95Q2 −3Q2
2) −(Q1
2 + 3Q1Q2 + Q2
2)
= 50Q1 −2Q1
2 + 95Q2 −4Q2
2 −3Q1Q2
Now
= 50 −4Q1 −3Q2,
= 95 −8Q2 −3Q1
= −4,
= −3,
= −8
Step 1
At a stationary point
50 −4Q1 −3Q2 = 0
95 −3Q1 −8Q2 = 0
that is,
4Q1 + 3Q2 = 50
(1)
3Q1 + 8Q2 = 95
(2)
Multiply equation (1) by 3, and equation (2) by 4 and
subtract to get
23Q2 = 230
so Q2 = 10. Substituting this into either equation (1) or
equation (2) gives Q1 = 5.
Step 2
This is a maximum because
= −4 < 0,
= −8 < 0
and
∂2π
∂Q2
2
∂2π
∂Q 1
2
∂2π
∂Q2
2
∂2π
∂Q 1∂Q2
∂2π
∂Q 1
2
∂π
∂Q2
∂π
∂Q1
Solutions to Problems
641

−
2
= (−4)(−8) −(−3)2 = 23 > 0
Corresponding prices are found by substituting Q1 = 5
and Q2 = 10 into the original demand equations to
obtain P1 = 45 and P2 = 65.
3 For the domestic market, P1 = 300 −Q1, so
TR1 = P1Q1 = 300Q1 −Q1
2
For the foreign market, P2 = 200 −1/2Q2, so
TR2 = P2Q2 = 200Q2 −1/2Q2
2
Hence
TR = TR1 + TR2
= 300Q1 −Q1
2 + 200Q2 −1/2Q2
2
We are given that
TC = 5000 + 100(Q1 + Q2)
= 5000 + 100Q1 + 100Q2
so
π = TR −TC
= (300Q1 −Q1
2 + 200Q2 −1/2Q2
2) −(5000 
+ 100Q1 + 100Q2)
= 200Q1 −Q1
2 + 100Q2 −1/2Q2
2 − 5000
Now
= 200 −2Q1, 
= 100 −2Q2
= −2, 
= 0, 
= −1
Step 1
At a stationary point
200 −2Q1 = 0
100 −Q2 = 0
which have solution Q1 = 100, Q2 = 100.
Step 2
This is a maximum because
= −2 < 0,
= −1 < 0
and
−
2
= (−2)(−1) −02 = 2 > 0
D
F
∂2π
∂Q 1∂Q2
A
C
D
F
∂2π
∂Q2
2
A
C
D
F
∂2π
∂Q 1
2
A
C
∂2π
∂Q2
2
∂2π
∂Q 1
2
∂2π
∂Q2
2
∂2π
∂Q 2
1∂Q2
∂2π
∂Q 1
2
∂π
∂Q2
∂π
∂Q1
D
F
∂2π
∂Q 1∂Q2
A
C
D
F
∂2π
∂Q2
2
A
C
D
F
∂2π
∂Q 1
2
A
C
Substitute Q1 = 100, Q2 = 100, into the demand 
and proﬁt functions to get P1 = 200, P2 = 150 and 
π = 10 000.
4 (a) Minimum at (1, 1), maximum at (−1, −1), and
saddle points at (1, −1) and (−1, 1).
(b) Minimum at (2, 0), maximum at (0, 0), and saddle
points at (1, 1) and (1, −1).
5 Maximum proﬁt is $1300 when Q1 = 30 and Q2 = 10.
6 Maximum proﬁt is $95 when P1 = 30 and P2 = 20.
7 Maximum proﬁt is $176 when L = 16 and K = 144.
8 x1 = 138, x2 = 500; $16.67 per hour.
9 Q1 = 19, Q2 = 4.
10 (a) Minimum at (1, 2).
(b) Maximum at (0, 1).
(c) Saddle point at (2, 2).
11 (a) P1 = 78, P2 = 68.
(b) Rotate the box so that the Q1 axis comes straight
out of the screen. The graph increases steadily as
Q2 rises from 0 to 2.
Q1 = 24. Proﬁt in (a) and (b) is 1340 and 1300
respectively.
Section 5.5
1 Step 1
We are given that y = x, so no rearrangement is necessary.
Step 2
Substituting y = x into the objective function
z = 2x2 −3xy + 2y + 10
gives
z = 2x2 −3x2 + 2x + 10
= −x2 + 2x + 10
Step 3
At a stationary point
= 0
that is,
−2x + 2 = 0
which has solution x = 1. Differentiating a second time
gives
= −2
conﬁrming that the stationary point is a maximum.
d2z
dx2
dz
dx
Solutions to Problems
642

The value of z can be found by substituting x = 1 into
z = −2x2 + 2x + 10
to get z = 11. Finally, putting x = 1 into the constraint 
y = x gives y = 1. The constrained function therefore 
has a maximum value of 11 at the point (1, 1).
2 We want to maximize the objective function
U = x1x2
subject to the budgetary constraint
2x1 + 10x2 = 400
Step 1
x1 = 200 −5x2
Step 2
U = 200x2 −5x 2
2
Step 3
= 200 −10x2 = 0
has solution x2 = 20.
= −10 < 0
so maximum.
Putting x2 = 20 into constraint gives x1 = 100.
U1 =
= x2 = 20
and
U2 =
= x2 = 100
so the ratios of marginal utilities to prices are
=
= 10
and
=
= 10
which are the same.
3 We want to minimize the objective function
TC = 3x 2
1 + 2x1x2 + 7x 2
2
subject to the production constraint
x1 + x2 = 40
Step 1
x1 = 40 −x2
100
10
U2
P2
20
2
U1
P1
∂U
∂x2
∂U
∂x1
d2U
dx 2
2
dU
dx1
Step 2
TC = 3(40 −x2)2 + 2(40 −x2)x2 + 7x 2
2
= 4800 −160x2 + 8x 2
2
Step 3
= −160 + 16x2 = 0
has solution x2 = 10.
= 16 > 0
so minimum.
Finally, putting x2 = 10 into constraint gives x1 = 30.
4 Maximum value of z is 13, which occurs at (3, 11).
5 27 000.
6 K = 10 and L = 4.
7 K = 6 and L = 4.
8 Maximum proﬁt is $165, which is achieved when K = 81
and L = 9.
9 x1 = 3, x2 = 4.
Section 5.6
1 Step 1
g(x, y, λ) = 2x2 −xy + λ(12 −x −y)
Step 2
= 4x −y −λ = 0
= −x −λ = 0
= 12 −x −y = 0
that is,
4x −y −λ = 0
(1)
−x
−λ = 0
(2)
x + y
= 12
(3)
Multiply equation (2) by 4 and add equation (1), multiply
equation (3) by 4 and subtract from equation (1) to get
−y −5λ = 0
(4)
−5y −λ = −48
(5)
Multiply equation (4) by 5 and subtract equation (5) to
get
−24λ = 48
(6)
Equations (6), (5) and (1) can be solved in turn to get
λ = −2, y = 10, x = 2
∂g
∂λ
∂g
∂y
∂g
∂x
d2(TC)
dx 2
2
d(TC)
dx2
Solutions to Problems
643

so the optimal point has coordinates (2, 10). The
corresponding value of the objective function is
2(2)2 −2(10) = −12
2 Maximize
U = 2x1x2 + 3x1
subject to
x1 + 2x2 = 83
Step 1
g(x1, x2, λ) = 2x1x2 + 3x1 + λ(83 −x1 −2x2)
Step 2
= 2x2 + 3 −λ = 0
= 2x1 −2λ = 0
= 83 −x1 −2x2 = 0
that is,
2x2 −λ = −3
(1)
2x1 −2λ = 0
(2)
x1 + 2x2 = 83
(3)
The easiest way of solving this system is to use 
equations (1) and (2) to get
λ = 2x2 + 3
and
λ = x1
respectively. Hence
x1 = 2x2 + 3
Substituting this into equation (3) gives
4x2 + 3 = 83
which has solution x2 = 20 and so x1 = λ = 43.
The corresponding value of U is
2(43)(20) + 3(43) = 1849
The value of λ is 43, so when income rises by 1 unit,
utility increases by approximately 43 to 1892.
3 Step 1
g(x1, x2, λ) = x 1
1/2 + x 2
1/2 + λ(M −P1x1 −P2x2)
Step 2
=
x 1
−1/2 −λP1 = 0
(1)
=
x 2
−1/2 −λP2 = 0
(2)
= M −P1x1 −P2x2 = 0
(3)
∂g
∂λ
1
2
∂g
∂x2
1
2
∂g
∂x1
∂g
∂λ
∂g
∂x2
∂g
∂x1
From equations (1) and (2)
λ =
and
λ =
respectively. Hence
=
that is,
x1P 1
2 = x2P 2
2
so
x1 =
(4)
Substituting this into equation (3) gives
M −
−P2x2 = 0
which rearranges as
x2 =
Substitute this into equation (4) to get
x1 =
4 9.
5 There are two wheels per frame, so the constraint is 
y = 2x. Maximum proﬁt is $4800 at x = 40, y = 80.
6 Maximum proﬁt is $600 at Q1 = 10, Q2 = 5. Lagrange
multiplier is 4, so proﬁt rises to $604 when total cost
increases by 1 unit.
7 40; 2.5.
8 x1 =
and
x2 =
Chapter 6
Section 6.1
1 (a) x2;
(b) x4;
(c) x100;
(d)
x4;
(e)
x19.
2 (a)
x5 + c;
(b) −
+ c;
(c)
x 4/3 + c;
(d)
e3x + c;
(e) x + c;
(f)
+ c;
(g) ln x + c.
3 (a) x2 −x4 + c;
(b) 2x5 −
+ c;
(c)
x3 −
x2 + 2x + c.
3
2
7
3
5
x
x2
2
1
3
3
4
1
2x2
1
5
1
19
1
4
βM
(α + β)P2
αM
(α + β)P1
P2M
P1(P1 + P2)
P1M
P2(P1 + P2)
x2P 2
2
P1
x2P 2
2
P1
2
1
2x 2
1/2P2
1
2x 1
1/2P1
1
2x 2
1/2P2
1
2x 1
1/2P1
Solutions to Problems
644

4 (a) TC =2dQ = 2Q + c
Fixed costs are 500, so c = 500. Hence
TC = 2Q + 500
Put Q = 40 to get TC = 580.
(b) TR =(100 −6Q)dQ
= 100Q −3Q2 + c
Revenue is zero when Q = 0, so c = 0. Hence
TR = 100Q −3Q2
P =
=
= 100 −3Q
so demand equation is P = 100 −3Q.
(c) S =(0.4 −0.1Y −1/2)dY
= 0.4Y −0.2Y 1/2 + c
The condition S = 0 when Y = 100 gives
0 = 0.4(100) −0.2(100)1/2 + c
= 38 + c
so c = −38. Hence
S = 0.4Y −0.2Y 1/2 −38
5 (a) x6 + c;
(b)
x5 + c;
(c) e10x + c;
(d) ln x + c;
(e)
x5/2 + c;
(f)
x4 −3x2 + c;
(g)
x3 −4x2 + 3x + c;
(h)
+ bx + c;
(i)
x4 −2e−2x +
+ c.
6 (1) F′(x) = 10(2x + 1)4, which is 10 times too big, so
the integral is
(2x + 1)5 + c
(2) (a)
(3x −2)8 + c;
(b) −
(2 −4x)10 + c;
(c)
(ax + b)n+1 + c;
(d)
ln(7x + 3) + c.
7 (a) TC =
+ 5Q + 20
(b) TC = 6e0.5Q + 4
8 (a) TR = 20Q −Q2; P = 20 −Q
(b) TR = 12 Q; P = 12
Q
Q2
2
1
7
1
a(x + 1)
1
40
1
24
1
10
3
x
7
4
ax2
2
1
3
1
2
2
5
1
5
100Q −3Q2
Q
TR
Q
9 C = 0.6Y + 7, S = 0.4Y −7
10 (a) 1000L −L3
(b) 12√L −0.01L
11 (a)
x2 +
x7/2 + c
(b)
x11 +
x3; e5x + ex +
e2x + c; x3 −
x2 + c.
12 (a)
x4 −
x2 + 21/2x + c
(b) ln x +
+ c; −e−x +
e−3x + c; x −x +
x3/2 + c
13
+ √Y + 3; k = 9.
14 (a) 500Le−0.02L;
(b) ln(1 + 50Q2).
Section 6.2
1 (a) 
1
0
x3dx =
x4
1
0
=
(1)4 −
(0)4 =
(b) 
5
2
(2x −1)dx = [x2 −x]5
2 = (52 −5) −(22 −2) = 18
(c) 
4
1
(x2 −x + 1)dx
=
x3 −
x2 + x
4
1
=
(4)3 −
(4)2 + 4 −
(1)3 −
(1)2 + 1
= 16.5
(d) 
1
0
exdx = [ex]1
0 = e1 −e0 = e −1 = 1.718 28 . . .
2 Substitute Q = 8 to get
P = 100 −82 = 36
CS =
8
0
(100 −Q2)dQ −8(36)
= 100Q −
Q3
8
0
−288
= 100(8) −
(8)3 −100(0) −
(0)2 −288
= 341.33
3 In equilibrium, QS = QD = Q, so
P = 50 −2Q
P = 10 + 2Q
J
L
1
3
G
I
J
L
1
3
G
I
J
L
1
3
G
I
J
L
1
2
1
3
G
I
J
L
1
2
1
3
G
I
J
L
1
2
1
3
G
I
1
4
1
4
1
4
J
L
1
4
G
I
Y
3
2
3
1
3
1
x
1
2
1
4
1
2
1
3
3
2
1
5
1
3
1
11
2
7
1
2
Solutions to Problems
645

Hence
50 −2Q = 10 + 2Q
which has solution Q = 10. The demand equation gives
P = 50 −2(10) = 30
(a) CS =
0
10
(50 −2Q)dQ −10(30)
= [50Q −Q2]0
10 −300
= [50(10) −(10)2] −[50(0) −02] −300
= 100
(b) PS = 10(30) −
0
10
(10 + 2Q)dQ
= 300 −[10Q + Q2]0
10
= 300 −{[10(10) + (10)2] −[10(0) + 02]}
= 100
4 (a) 
8
1
800t 1/3dt = 800
t 4/3
8
1
= 800
(8)4/3 −
(1)4/3
= 9000
(b) 
T
1
800t 1/3dt = 800
t 4/3
T
0
= 800
T 4/3 −
(0)4/3
= 600T 4/3
We need to solve
600T 4/3 = 48 600
that is,
T 4/3 = 81
so
T = 813/4 = 27
5 P =
0
10
5000e−0.06tdt
= 5000
0
10
e−0.06tdt
= 5000 −
e−0.06t
0
10
= −
(e−0.6 −1)
= $37 599.03
6 Area is 16.
7 (a) 4; (b) 0. The graph is sketched in Figure S6.1.
Integration gives a positive value when the graph is
5000
0.06
J
L
1
0.06
G
I
J
L
3
4
3
4
G
I
J
L
3
4
G
I
J
L
3
4
3
4
G
I
J
L
3
4
G
I
8 (a)
, 
, 
; 1.
(b) 2√2 −2, 2√20 −2, 2√200 −2; integral does not
exist because these numbers are increasing 
without bound.
9 (a) 1.367 544 468, 1.8, 1.936 754 441; 2.
(b) 9, 99, 999; integral does not exist because these
numbers are increasing without bound.
10 (a) 100;
(b) 20.
11 (a) 81;
(b) 180.
12 (a) 74.67;
(b) 58.67.
13 (a) $427.32;
(b) During the 47th year.
14 (a)
;
(b)
(eαT −1)
15 (a) $2785.84;
(b) $7869.39;
(c) $19 865.24;
(d) $20 000.
16 6.9 years.
A
α
AT α+1
α + 1
199
200
19
20
1
2
Solutions to Problems
646
Figure S6.1
above the x axis and a negative value when it is below
the x axis. In this case there are equal amounts of
positive and negative area which cancel out. Actual
area is twice that between 0 and 2, so is 8.

Chapter 7
Section 7.1
1 (a) 2 × 2, 1 × 5, 3 × 5, 1 × 1.
(b) 1, 4, 6, 2, 6, ?, 6; the value of c43 does not exist,
because C has only three rows.
2 AT =
BT =
CT =
= C
Matrices with the property that CT = C are called
symmetric. Elements in the top right-hand corner 
are a mirror image of those in the bottom left-hand
corner.
3 (a)
;
(c)
;
(d)
;
(e)
.
Part (b) is impossible because A and C have different
orders.
4 (1) (a)
;
(b)
;
(c)
;
(d)
.
From (a) and (b)
2A + 2B =
+
=
which is the same as (d), so
2(A + B) = 2A + 2B
(2) (a)
;
(b)
.
J
K
K
L
−6
12
−18
−30
0
−24
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
3
−6
9
15
0
12
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
2
−6
10
24
2
20
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
0
−2
4
14
2
12
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
2
−4
6
10
0
8
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
2
−6
10
24
2
20
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
1
−3
5
12
1
10
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
2
−2
4
14
2
12
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
2
−4
6
10
0
8
G
H
H
I
JKL
0
0
0
0
GHI
JKL
2
2
GHI
JKL
3
2
GHI
JKL
1
7
3
−8
GHI
J
K
K
L
1
2
3
2
4
5
3
5
6
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
K
L
1
5
7
9
G
H
H
H
I
J
K
K
K
K
K
L
1
3
2
2
4
7
1
−5
0
6
3
1
1
1
5
8
2
4
−1
0
G
H
H
H
H
H
I
From (a),
−2(3A) = −2 
=
which is the same as (b), so
−2(3A) = −6A
5 (a) [8] because
1(0) + (−1)(−1)
+ 0(1) + 3(1) + 2(2) = 8
(b) [0] because 1(−2) + 2(1) + 9(0) = 0.
(c) This is impossible, because a and d have different
numbers of elements.
6
AB =
=
AB =
=
AB =
=
AB =
=
AB =
=
AB =
=
AB =
=
J
K
K
L
7
10
3
4
6
10
G
H
H
I
JKL
1
2
3
4
GHI
J
K
K
L
1
2
0
1
3
1
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
7
10
3
4
6
c32
G
H
H
I
JKL
1
2
3
4
GHI
J
K
K
L
1
2
0
1
3
1
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
7
10
3
4
c31
c32
G
H
H
I
JKL
1
2
3
4
GHI
J
K
K
L
1
2
0
1
3
1
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
7
10
3
c22
c31
c32
G
H
H
I
JKL
1
2
3
4
GHI
J
K
K
L
1
2
0
1
3
1
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
7
10
c21
c22
c31
c32
G
H
H
I
JKL
1
2
3
4
GHI
J
K
K
L
1
2
0
1
3
1
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
7
c12
c21
c22
c31
c32
G
H
H
I
JKL
1
2
3
4
GHI
J
K
K
L
1
2
0
1
3
1
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
c11
c12
c21
c22
c31
c32
G
H
H
I
JKL
1
2
3
4
GHI
J
K
K
L
1
2
0
1
3
1
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
−6
12
−18
−30
0
−24
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
3
−6
9
15
0
12
G
H
H
I
Solutions to Problems
647

7 (a)
;
(d)
;
(f)
;
(g)
;
(h)
.
Parts (b), (c) and (e) are impossible because, in each
case, the number of columns in the ﬁrst matrix is not
equal to the number of rows in the second.
8 Ax is the 3 × 1 matrix
However, x + 4y + 7z = −3, 2x + 6y + 5z = 10 and 
8x + 9y + 5z = 1, so this matrix is just
which is b. Hence Ax = b.
9 (a) J =
;
F =
.
(b)
(c)
10 (a)
(b)
(c)
(d) Same answer as (c).
11 (a)
Total cost charged to each customer.
(b)
JKL
13
7
23
22
3
1
4
5
GHI
JKL
5900
1100
GHI
J
K
K
L
4
20
20
30
6
2
10
10
24
22
26
14
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
2
14
18
12
4
2
0
10
12
8
10
6
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
4
6
2
18
2
0
10
0
12
14
16
8
G
H
H
I
JKL
4
10
10
17
10
8
GHI
JKL
66
44
16
67
68
40
GHI
JKL
31
17
3
25
29
16
GHI
JKL
35
27
13
42
39
24
GHI
J
K
K
L
−3
10
1
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
x + 4y + 7z
2z + 6y + 5z
8x + 9y + 5z
G
H
H
I
JKL
5
6
11
15
GHI
J
K
K
L
5
7
9
3
3
3
6
9
12
G
H
H
I
JKL
9
6
13
27
15
28
GHI
J
K
K
L
4
3
2
−1
5
5
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
5
7
5
G
H
H
I
Amount of raw materials used to manufacture
each customer’s goods.
(c)
Total raw material costs to manufacture one item
of each good.
(d)
Total raw material costs to manufacture requisite
number of goods for each customer.
(e) [7000]
Total revenue received from customers.
(f) [1210]
Total cost of raw materials.
(g) [5790]
Proﬁt before deduction of labour, capital and
overheads.
12 (1) (a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(A + B)T = AT + BT: that is, ‘transpose of the sum is the
sum of the transposes’.
(2) (a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(CD)T = DTCT: that is ‘transpose of a product is 
the product of the transposes multiplied in reverse
order’.
J
K
K
L
−2
1
1
5
4
9
G
H
H
I
JKL
−2
1
4
1
5
9
GHI
J
K
K
L
2
−1
1
0
0
1
G
H
H
I
JKL
1
5
4
9
GHI
JKL
2
5
2
1
5
10
GHI
J
K
K
L
2
1
5
5
2
10
G
H
H
I
JKL
1
2
−3
−1
1
4
GHI
JKL
1
3
5
2
4
6
GHI
JKL
1005
205
GHI
J
K
K
L
35
75
30
G
H
H
I
Solutions to Problems
648

13 (a) B + C =
so A(B + C) =
AB =
and
AC =
, so
AB + AC =
(b) AB =
, so
(AB)C =
BC =
, so
A(BC) =
14 AB = [−3];
BA =
15 (a) AI =
=
= A
Similarly, IA = A.
(b) A−1A
=
=
=
=
Similarly, AA−1 = I.
(c) Ix =
=
= x
16 (a) 7x + 5y
x + 3y
(b) A =
,
x =
,
b =
.
J
K
K
L
6
3
1
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
x
y
z
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
2
3
−2
1
−1
2
4
2
5
G
H
H
I
JKL
x
y
GHI
JKL
x
y
GHI
JKL
1
0
0
1
GHI
JKL
1
0
0
1
GHI
JKL
ad −bc
0
0
ad −bc
GHI
1
ad −bc
JKL
da −bc
db −bd
−ca + ac
−cb + ad
GHI
1
ad −bc
JKL
a
b
c
d
GHI
JKL
d
−b
−c
a
GHI
1
ad −bc
JKL
a
b
c
d
GHI
JKL
1
0
0
1
GHI
JKL
a
b
c
d
GHI
J
K
K
K
L
1
2
−4
0
7
14
−28
21
3
6
−12
9
−2
−4
8
−6
G
H
H
H
I
JKL
32
43
4
26
GHI
JKL
4
11
−4
4
GHI
JKL
32
43
4
26
GHI
JKL
−7
25
6
10
GHI
JKL
−15
24
5
14
GHI
JKL
−8
−1
−1
4
GHI
JKL
−7
25
6
10
GHI
JKL
−15
24
5
14
GHI
JKL
0
6
5
2
GHI
Section 7.2
1 | A| = 6(2) −4(1) = 8 ≠0
so A is non-singular and its inverse is given by
=
| B | = 6(2) −4(3) = 0
so B is singular and its inverse does not exist.
2 We need to solve Ax = b, where
A =
x =
b =
Now
A−1 =
so
=
=
3 In equilibrium, QS = QD = Q, say, so the supply
equation becomes
P = aQ + b
Subtracting aQ from both sides gives
P −aQ = b
(1)
Similarly, the demand equation leads to
P + cQ = d
(2)
In matrix notation equations (1) and (2) become
=
The coefﬁcient matrix has an inverse,
so that
=
that is,
P =
and
Q =
The multiplier for Q due to changes in b is given 
by the (2, 1) element of the inverse matrix so is
−1
c + a
−b + d
c + a
cb + ad
c + a
JKL
b
d
GHI
JKL
c
a
−1
1
GHI
1
c + a
JKL
P
Q
GHI
JKL
c
a
−1
1
GHI
1
c + a
JKL
b
d
GHI
JKL
P
Q
GHI
JKL
1
−a
1
c
GHI
JKL
4
7
GHI
JKL
43
57
GHI
JKL
7
−1
−2
9
GHI
1
61
JKL
P1
P2
GHI
JKL
7
−1
−2
9
GHI
1
61
JKL
43
57
GHI
JKL
P1
P2
GHI
JKL
9
1
2
7
GHI
JKL
1/4
−1/2
−1/8
3/4
GHI
JKL
2
−4
−1
−6
GHI
1
8
Solutions to Problems
649

Given that c and a are both positive it follows that 
the multiplier is negative. Consequently, an increase 
in b leads to a decrease in Q.
4 A11 = +
= 7
A12 = −
= −1
A13 = +
= −1
A21 = −
= −3
A22 = +
= 1
A23 = −
= 0
A31 = +
= −3
A32 = −
= 0
A33 = +
= 1
5 Expanding along the top row of A gives
|A| = a11A11 + a12A12 + a13A13
= 1(7) + 3(−1) + 3(−1) = 1
using the values of A11, A12 and A13 from Practice
Problem 4. Other rows and columns are treated
similarly. Expanding down the last column of B gives
|B| = b13B13 + b23B23 + b33B33
= 0(B13) + 0(B23) + 0(B33) = 0
6 The cofactors of A have already been found in Practice 
Problem 4. Stacking them in their natural positions
gives the adjugate matrix
Transposing gives the adjoint matrix
The determinant of A has already been found in Practice
Problem 5 to be 1, so the inverse matrix is the same 
as the adjoint matrix.
J
K
K
L
7
−3
−3
−1
1
0
−1
0
1
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
7
−1
−1
−3
1
0
−3
0
1
G
H
H
I
1
3
1
4
1
3
1
3
3
3
4
3
1
3
1
3
1
3
1
4
3
3
3
4
1
4
1
3
1
3
1
4
4
3
3
4
The determinant of B has already been found in
Practice Problem 5 to be 0, so B is singular and does
not have an inverse.
7 Using the inverse matrix in Practice Problem 6,
=
=
8 (1) (a) |A| = −3;
(b) |B| = 4;
(c) AB =
so |AB| = −12. These results give |AB| = |A| |B|:
that is, ‘determinant of a product is the product 
of the determinants’.
(2) (a) A−1 =
(b) B−1 =
(c) (AB)−1 =
These results give (AB)−1 = B−1A−1: that is, ‘inverse of 
a product is the product of the inverses multiplied in
reverse order’.
9 a = −3/2, b = −8/3.
10 (a) x = 1, y = −1;
(b) x = 2, y = 2.
11
; 
=
.
12 Commodity market is in equilibrium when Y = C + I,
so Y = aY + b + cr + d, which rearranges as
(1 −a)Y −cr = b + d
(1)
Money market is in equilibrium when MS = MD, so 
M*S = k1Y + k2r + k3, which rearranges as
k1Y + k2r = M*S −k3
(2)
In matrix notation, equations (1) and (2) become
=
Using the inverse of the coefﬁcient matrix,
=
×
Y = k2(b + d) + c(M*s −k3)
k2(1 −a) + ck1
JKL
b + d
M*s −k3
GHI
JKL
k2
c
−k1 1 −a
GHI
1
k2(1 −a) + ck1
JKL
Y
r
GHI
JKL
b + d
M*s −k3
GHI
JKL
Y
r
GHI
JKL
1 −a
−c
k1
k2
GHI
JKL
40
10
GHI
JKL
P1
P2
GHI
JKL
−9
−1
−2
−3
GHI
1
25
JKL
−1/3
1/3
7/12
−1/3
GHI
JKL
1
0
−1/2
−1/4
GHI
JKL
−1/3
1/3
5/3
−2/3
GHI
JKL
4
4
7
4
GHI
J
K
K
L
8
5
3
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
32
37
35
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
7
−3
−3
−1
1
0
−1
0
1
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
P1
P2
P3
G
H
H
I
Solutions to Problems
650

and
r =
The required multiplier is
= 
Now 1 −a > 0 since a < 1, so numerator is positive.
Also k2 < 0, 1 −a > 0, gives k2(1 −a) < 0 and c < 0, 
k1 > 0 gives ck1 < 0, so the denominator is negative.
13 The determinant of A is −10 ≠0, so matrix is non-
singular.
A−1 =
It is interesting to notice that because the original
matrix A is symmetric, so is A−1. The determinant 
of B is 0, so it is singular and does not have an inverse.
14 a −1, which is non-zero provided a ≠1
15 A−1 =
;
=
.
16 −95a + 110; a =
.
17 (a) aei −afh −dbi + dch + gbf −gce
Substituting d = ka, e = kb, f = kc into this gives
akbi −akch −kabi + kach + gbkc −gckb = 0
(b)
18 (a)
Autonomous consumption multiplier for Y.
(b) Y =
C = −
T = bt + I*t + G*t
1 −a + at
−I*a −aG* + I*ta + taG* −b
1 −a + at
b + I* + G*
1 −a + at
J
K
K
L
1
1
a
−a(−1 + t)
1
a
t
t
−1 + a
G
H
H
I
1
1 −a + at
J
K
K
L
ei −fh
−(bi −ch)
bf −ce
−(di −fg)
ai −cg
−(af −cd)
−(−dh + eg)
−(ah −bg)
ae −bd
G
H
H
I
1
det(A)
22
19
J
K
K
L
20
5
8
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
P1
P2
P3
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
29
11
3
4
10
−1
9
2
8
G
H
H
I
1
−41
J
K
K
L
−a
−1
a
3a −4
−1
3 −2a
1
1
−1
G
H
H
I
1
a −1
J
K
K
L
1/10
3/10
−1/2
3/10
−1/10
1/2
−1/2
1/2
−1/2
G
H
H
I
1 −a
k2(1 −a) + ck1
∂r
∂M*s
k1(b + d) + (1 −a)(M*s −k3)
k2(1 −a) + ck1
Section 7.3
1 (a) By Cramer’s rule
x2 =
where
det(A2) =
= −66
det(A) =
= −22
Hence
x2 =
= 3
(b) By Cramer’s rule
x3 =
where
det(A3) =
= 4
−1
+ 8
= 4(37) −1(−30) + 8(−19)
= 26
and
det(A) =
= 4
−1
+ 3
= 4(18) −1(−11) + 3(−19)
= 26
Hence
x3 =
= 1
2 The variable Yd is the third, so Cramer’s rule gives
Yd =
where
A3 =
J
K
K
K
L
1
−1
I* + G*
0
0
1
b
0
−1
0
0
1
−t
0
T*
1
G
H
H
H
I
det(A3)
det(A)
26
26
−2
5
3
2
−2
1
3
4
5
1
2
4
4
1
3
−2
5
1
3
2
4
−2
5
3
2
−2
4
3
9
5
4
2
9
4
1
8
−2
5
4
3
2
9
det(A3)
det(A)
−66
−22
2
4
3
−5
2
16
3
−9
det(A2)
det(A)
Solutions to Problems
651

Expanding along the second row gives
det(A3) = 1
−b
since along the second row the pattern is ‘−+ −+’.
Now
= 1
−(I* + G*)
= T* −(I* + G*)(−1 + t)
(expanding along the ﬁrst row) and
= −(−1)
= −1 + t
(expanding down the second column).
Hence
det(A3) = −T* −(I* + G*)(−1 + t) −b(−1 + t)
From the worked example given in the text,
det(A) = 1 −a + at
Hence
Yd =
3 Substituting C1, M1 and I*1 into the equation for Y1
gives
Y1 = 0.7Y1 + 50 + 200 + X1 −0.3Y1
Also, since X1 = M2 = 0.1Y2, we get
Y1 = 0.7Y1 + 50 + 200 + 0.1Y2 −0.3Y1
which rearranges as
0.6Y1 −0.1Y2 = 250
In the same way, the second set of equations leads to
−0.3Y1 + 0.3Y2 = 400
Hence
=
In this question both Y1 and Y2 are required, so it 
is easier to solve using matrix inverses rather than
Cramer’s rule, which gives
Y1 =
=
JKL
115
315
GHI
1
0.15
JKL
250
400
GHI
JKL
0.3
0.1
0.1
0.6
GHI
1
0.15
JKL
250
400
GHI
JKL
Y1
Y2
GHI
JKL
0.6
−0.1
−0.3
0.6
GHI
−T* −(I* + G*)(−1 + t) −b(−1 + t)
1 −a + at
−1
1
−t
1
1
−1
0
−1
0
1
−t
0
1
−1
1
−t
1
0
4
T*
1
1
I* + G*
0
−1
0
1
−t
T*
1
1
−1
0
−1
0
1
−t
0
0
1
I* + G*
0
−1
0
1
−t
T*
1
Hence Y1 = 766.67 and Y2 = 2100. The balance of
payments for country 1 is
X1 −M1 = M2 −M1
= 0.1Y2 −0.3Y1
= 0.1(2100) −0.3(766.67)
= −20
Moreover, since only two countries are involved, it
follows that country 2 will have a surplus of 20.
4 (a) x1 =
=
= 4
(b) x2 =
=
= 3
(c) x4 =
=
= −3
5 The equations can be rearranged as
Y −C + M = I* + G* + X*
−aY + C + 0M = b
−mY + 0C + M = M*
as required.
Autonomous investment multiplier, 
, is 
positive because 1 −a and m are both positive.
6 The multiplier is
which is positive since the top and bottom of this
fraction are both negative. To see that the bottom is
negative, note that k2(1 −a) < 0 because k2 < 0 and 
a < 1, and ck1 < 0 because c < 0 and k1 > 0.
7 The equations are
0.6Y1 −0.1Y2 −I*1 = 50
−0.2Y1 + 0.3Y2 = 150
0.2Y1 −0.1Y2 = 0
The third equation follows from the fact that if the
balance of payments is 0 then M 1 = X1, or equivalently,
M 1 = M2. Cramer’s rule gives
I*1 =
=
= 100
8
=
Y1 =
The multiplier is
m2
(1 −a1 + m1)(1 −a2 + m2) −m1m2
(b1 + I*1)(1 −a2 + m2) + m2(b2 + I*2)
(1 −a1 + m1)(1 −a2 + m2) −m1m2
JKL
b1 + I*1
b2 + I*2
GHI
JKL
Y1
Y2
GHI
JKL
1 −a1 + m1
−m2
−m1
1 −a2 + m2
GHI
4
0.04
det(A3)
det(A)
−k1
k2(1 −a) + ck1
1
1 −a + m
−1425
475
det(A4)
det(A)
126
42
det(A2)
det(A)
72
18
det(A1)
det(A)
Solutions to Problems
652

which is positive since the top and bottom of the
fraction are both positive. To see that the bottom is
positive, note that since a1 < 1, 1 −ai + mi > mi, so that
(1 −a1 + m1)(1 −a2 + m2) > m1m2. Hence the national
income of one country rises as the investment in the
other country rises.
Section 7.4
1 d =
−
=
2 The matrix of technical coefﬁcients is
A =
so
I −A =
which has inverse
(I −A)−1 =
Hence
x =
=
so total output is 1200 units for engineering and 
1000 units for transport.
3 Total outputs for I1, I2, I3 and I4 are found by
summing along each row to get 1000, 500, 2000 and
1000, respectively. Matrix of technical coefﬁcients is
obtained by dividing the columns of the inter-industrial
ﬂow table for these numbers to get
A =
4
I −A =
so
(I −A) −1 =
We are given that
∆d =
J
K
K
L
1000
0
−800
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
0.78
0.24
0.20
0.10
0.79
0.11
0.12
0.29
0.79
G
H
H
I
1
0.658
J
K
K
L
0.9
−0.2
−0.2
−0.1
0.9
−0.1
−0.1
−0.3
0.9
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
K
L
0
0.6
0.05 0.1
0.1
0
0.1
0.1
0.2
0.2
0
0.4
0.3
0
0.05 0
G
H
H
H
I
JKL
1200
1000
GHI
JKL
760
420
GHI
JKL
0.9
0.2
0.4
0.8
GHI
1
0.64
JKL
0.9
0.2
0.4
0.8
GHI
1
0.64
JKL
0.8
−0.2
−0.4
0.9
GHI
JKL
0.2
0.2
0.4
0.1
GHI
J
K
K
L
540
70
570
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
1000
300
700
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
0.2
0.4
0.2
0.1
0.2
0.1
0.1
0.1
0
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
1000
300
700
G
H
H
I
so
∆x =
×
=
Hence, total outputs for I1 and I2 rise by 942 and 
18 respectively, and total output for I3 falls by 778
(to the nearest whole number).
5 [450
900
400
4350
50]T
6 A =
(I −A) −1 =
(a) 1000 units of water, 500 units of steel and 
1000 units of electricity.
(b) The element in the ﬁrst row and third column 
of (I −A)−1 is
= 0.23
Change in water output is 0.23 × 100 = 23.
7 (a) [500
1000]T;
(b)
;
(c)
;
(d) [694
1056]T.
8 (a) A =
(I −A)−1 =
(b) 100 000, 162 500, 125 000.
(c) 278 (nearest unit).
Chapter 8
Section 8.1
1 The line −x + 3y = 6 passes through (0, 2) and (−6, 0).
Substituting x = 1, y = 4 into the equation gives
−1 + 3(4) = 11
This is greater than 6, so the test point satisﬁes the
inequality. The corresponding region is shown in
Figure S8.1 (overleaf).
J
K
K
L
0.48
0.24
0.24
0.39
0.60
0.33
0.30
0.24
0.42
G
H
H
I
1
0.216
J
K
K
L
0.2
0.2
0.3
0.3
0.4
0.3
0.4
0.2
0.1
G
H
H
I
JKL
0.5
0.1
0.4
0.8
GHI
1
36
JKL
0.2
0.1
0.4
0.5
GHI
0.21
0.924
J
K
K
L
0.98
0.14
0.21
0.12
0.96
0.12
0.22
0.22
0.99
G
H
H
I
1
0.924
J
K
K
L
0
0.1
0.2
0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.2
0
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
942
18
−778
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
1000
0
−800
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
0.78
0.24
0.20
0.10
0.79
0.11
0.12
0.29
0.79
G
H
H
I
1
0.658
Solutions to Problems
653

3 The answers to parts (a) and (b) are shown in 
Figure S8.3.
(c) Once c becomes greater than 3, the lines no longer
intersect the feasible region. The maximum value
of c (that is, the objective function) is therefore 3,
which occurs at the corner (0, 3), when x = 0, y = 3.
4 Step 1
The feasible region is sketched in Figure S8.4.
Step 2
Corners are (0, 0) (1, 0) and (0, 2).
Step 3
Solutions to Problems
654
Minimum is −2, which occurs at (0, 2).
Step 1
5 The feasible region is sketched in Figure S8.2.
Step 2
Corners are (0, 0), (0, 5), (2, 4) and (10/3, 0).
2 The non-negativity constraints indicate that we restrict
our attention to the positive quadrant.
The line x + 2y = 10 passes through (0, 5) and (10, 0).
The line 3x + y = 10 passes through (0, 10) and (10/3, 0).
Also the test point (0, 0) satisﬁes both of the
corresponding inequalities, so we are interested in the
region below both lines as shown in Figure S8.2.
Figure S8.1
Figure S8.2
Figure S8.3
Figure S8.4
Corner
Objective function
(0, 0)
0 −0 = 0
(1, 0)
1 −0 = 1
(0, 2)
0 −2 = −2

Maximum is 26, which occurs at (2, 4).
6 The feasible regions for parts (a), (b) and (c) are
sketched in Figures S8.5, S8.6 and S8.7, respectively.
7 (a) Maximum is 90, which occurs at (0, 10).
(b) Maximum is 25, which occurs at (5/3, 10/3). Note
that the exact coordinates can be found by solving
the simultaneous equations
2x + 5y = 20
x + y = 5
using an algebraic method.
(c) Minimum is 1, which occurs at (1, 0).
8 Figure S8.8 shows that the problem does not have a
ﬁnite solution. The lines x + y = c pass through (c, 0)
and (0, c). As c increases, the lines move across the
region to the right without bound.
Solutions to Problems
655
9 (a) Maximum is 16, which occurs at (2, 4).
(b) Maximum is 12, which occurs at any point on the
line joining (0, 3) and (1, 5).
Step 3
Figure S8.5
Figure S8.6
Figure S8.7
Figure S8.8
Corner
Objective function
(0, 0)
3(0) + 5(0) = 0
(0, 5)
3(0) + 5(5) = 25
(2, 4)
3(2) + 5(4) = 26
(10/3, 0)
3(10/3) + 5(0) = 25

10 (a) There is no feasible region, since the constraints
are contradictory.
(b) The feasible region is unbounded and there is no
limit to the values that the objective function can
take in this region.
11 Minimum is −16, which occurs at the two corners 
(2, 2) and (8/3, 0), so any point on the line segment
joining these two corners is also a solution.
12 c =
x =
b =
0 =
A =
Section 8.2
1 Let x = weekly output of model COM1,
y = weekly output of model COM2.
Maximize
600x + 700y
(proﬁt)
subject to
1200x + 1600y ≤40 000
(production costs)
x + y ≤30
(total output)
x ≥0, y ≥0
(non-negativity constraints)
The feasible region is sketched in Figure S8.9.
JKL
5
3
7
2
GHI
JKL
0
0
GHI
JKL
30
28
GHI
JKL
x
y
GHI
JKL
4
9
GHI
The publisher should produce 40 copies of
Macroeconomics and no copies of Microeconomics
to achieve a maximum proﬁt of $720.
3
Maximize
3x + 7y
(utility)
subject to
150x + 70y ≤2100
(cost)
x ≥9, y ≥0
The feasible region is sketched in Figure S8.11.
Solutions to Problems
656
Maximize
12x + 18y
(proﬁt)
subject to
12x + 15y ≤600
(printing time)
18x + 9y ≤630
(binding time)
x ≥0, y ≥0
(non-negativity constraints)
The feasible region is sketched in Figure S8.10.
The ﬁrm should produce 20 computers of model
COM1 and 10 of model COM2 to achieve a maximum
proﬁt of $19 000.
2 Let x = number of copies of Microeconomics,
y = number of copies of Macroeconomics.
Corner
Profit ($)
(0, 0)
0
(0, 25)
17 500
(20, 10)
19 000
(30, 0)
18 000
Figure S8.9
Figure S8.10
Corner
Profit ($)
(0, 0)
0
(0, 40)
720
(25, 20)
660
(35, 0)
420
Corner
Objective function
(9, 0)
27
(14, 0)
42
(9, 75/7)
102

The maximum value of U occurs at (9, 75/7). However,
it is impossible to visit the theatre 75/7 times. The point
in the feasible region with whole-number coordinates
which maximizes utility is (9, 10), so we need to buy 
9 items of clothing and visit the theatre 10 times 
per year.
4 The manufacturer should produce 10 bikes of type B
and 15 of type C each month to achieve a maximum
proﬁt of $5100.
5 The ﬁrm should produce 720 cartons of ‘The
Caribbean’ and 630 cartons of ‘Mr Fruity’ each 
week to give a maximum proﬁt of $650.70.
6 The student should order a quarterpounder served
with 6 oz chips to consume a minimum of 860 calories.
Note that the unbounded feasible region causes 
no difﬁculty here, because the problem is one of
minimization.
7 (a) The ﬁrm should make 30 jackets and 6 pairs of
trousers each week to achieve a maximum proﬁt 
of $444.
(b) The proﬁt margin on a pair of trousers should be
between $8 and $14.
8 The optimal diet consists of 1.167 kg of ﬁsh meal and
1.800 kg of meat scraps, which gives a minimum cost
of $1.69 per pig per day.
9 x = 40, y = 0, z = 100; don’t forget to type in the
command with(simplex):
10 x1 = number of hectares for barley in large ﬁeld in 
year 1
x2 = number of hectares for barley in small ﬁeld in
year 1
x3 = number of hectares for cattle in large ﬁeld in year 1
x4 = number of hectares for cattle in small ﬁeld in year 1
x5, x6, x7, x8 denote corresponding areas for year 2
Maximize
400x1 + 220x2 + 350x3 + 200x4 + 420x5
+ 240x6 + 540x7 + 320x8
subject to
x1 + x3 ≤1400
x2 + x4 ≤800
x5 + x7 ≤1400
x6 + x8 ≤800
2x1 + 2x2 −x3 −x4 ≥0
2x5 + 2x6 −x7 −x8 ≥0
6x3 + 6x4 −5x7 −5x8 ≥0
together with the eight non-negativity constraints, xi ≥0.
x1 =
, x2 = 0, x3 =
, x4 = 800, 
x5 = 0, x6 =
, x7 = 1400, x8 =
Chapter 9
Section 9.1
1 (1) (a) 1, 3, 9, 27; 3t;
(b) 7, 21, 63, 189; 7(3t);
(c) A, 3A, 9A, 27A; A(3t).
(2) (a) 1, , , ; 
t
(b) 7,7
, 7
, 7
; 7
t
(c) A, A
, A
, A
; A
t
(3) A, Ab, Ab2, Ab3; A(bt).
2 (a) The complementary function is the solution of
Yt = −Yt−1
so is given by
CF = A −
t
For a particular solution we try
Yt = D
Substituting this into
Yt = −Yt−1 + 6
1
2
D
F
1
2
A
C
1
2
D
F
1
2
A
C
D
F
1
8
A
C
D
F
1
4
A
C
D
F
1
2
A
C
D
F
1
2
A
C
D
F
1
8
A
C
D
F
1
4
A
C
D
F
1
2
A
C
D
F
1
2
A
C
1
8
1
4
1
2
200
3
2200
3
3800
9
8800
9
Solutions to Problems
657
Figure S8.11

gives
D = −D + 6
which has solution D = 4, so
PS = 4
The general solution is
Yt = A −
t
+ 4
The initial condition, Y0 = 0, gives
0 = A + 4
so A is −4. The solution is
Yt = −4 −
t
+ 4
From the staircase diagram shown in Figure S9.1
we see that Yt oscillates about Yt = 4. Moreover, as
t increases, these oscillations damp down and Yt
converges to 4. Oscillatory convergence can be
expected for any solution
D
F
1
2
A
C
D
F
1
2
A
C
1
2
3 Yt = Ct + It
= 0.9Yt−1 + 250 + 350
= 0.9Yt−1 + 600
This has solution
Yt = A(0.9)t + 6000
The initial condition, Y0 = 6500, gives A = 500, so
Yt = 500(0.9)t + 6000
The system is stable because −1 < 0.9 < 1. In fact, Yt
converges uniformly to the equilibrium value, 6000.
4 −2Pt + 22 = Pt−1 −8
rearranges to give
Pt = −Pt−1 + 15
so has solution
Pt = A −
t
+ 10
The initial condition, P0 = 11, gives A = 1, so
Pt =
−
t
+ 10
From the demand equation,
Qt = −2Pt + 22
we have
D
F
1
2
A
C
D
F
1
2
A
C
1
2
Solutions to Problems
658
Yt = A(bt) + PS
when −1 < b < 0.
(b) CF = A(−2)t and PS = 3 so Yt = A(−2)t + 3. Initial
condition gives A = 1, so Yt = (−2)t + 3. From
Figure S9.2 we see that Yt oscillates about 3 and
that these oscillations explode with increasing t.
Oscillatory divergence can be expected for any
solution
Yt = A(bt) + PS
when b < −1.
Figure S9.1
Figure S9.2

Qt = −2
−
t
+ 10 + 22 = −2 −
t
+ 2
The system is stable because −1 < −1/2 < 1. In fact, Pt
and Qt display oscillatory convergence and approach
the equilibrium values of 2 and 10 respectively as t
increases.
5 −2Pt + 80 = 3Pt−1 −20
rearranges to give
Pt = −1.5Pt−1 + 50
so has solution
Pt = A(−1.5)t + 20
The initial condition, P0 = 8, gives A = −12, so
Pt = −12(−1.5)t + 40
From the demand equation
Qt = −2Pt + 80
= −2[−12(−1.5)t + 20] + 80
= 24(−1.5)t + 40
The system is unstable because −1.5 < −1. In fact, Pt
and Qt display oscillatory divergence as t increases.
6 (a) Y0 = 0, Y1 = 2 = 2 × 1,
Y2 = 4 = 2 × 2, Y3 = 6 = 2 × 3, . . .
Hence Yt = 2t and displays uniform divergence as
shown in Figure S9.3.
D
F
1
2
A
C
JKL
D
F
1
2
A
C
GHI
(c) Y0 = 3, Y1 = 3, Y2 = 3, Y3 = 3, . . .
Hence Yt = 3 for all t and remains ﬁxed at this
value.
7 (a) Yt = −7
t
+ 8; uniform convergence to 8.
(b) Yt = (−4)t + 1; oscillatory divergence.
8 The right-hand side, bYt−1 + c, becomes
b A(bt−1) +
+ c
= A(bt) +
+ c
= A(bt) +
= A(bt) +
= A(bt) + D
= Yt
which is the left-hand side.
9 Yt = 500(0.8)t + 2500; stable.
10 Pt = 10(−0.5)t + 60; stable.
11 Substitute assumptions (1) and (2) into (3) to get
β(Yt −Yt−1) = αYt
which rearranges as
Yt =
Yt−1
D
F
β
β − α
A
C
c
1 −b
bc + c(1 −b)
1 −b
bc
1 −b
D
F
c
1 −b
A
C
D
F
1
4
A
C
Solutions to Problems
659
(b) Y0 = 4, Y1 = 2, Y2 = 4, Y3 = 2, . . .
So Yt is 4 when t is even and 2 when t is odd.
Hence Yt oscillates with equal oscillations as shown
in Figure S9.4.
Figure S9.3
Figure S9.4

with solution
Yt =
t
Y0
If α = 0.1 and β = 1.4 then Yt = (1.08)tY0.
As t increases, Yt diverges uniformly, so unstable.
12 (a) CF = A(0.1)t;
(b) PS = 6(0.6)t;
(c) Yt = A(0.1)t + 6(0.6)t,
Yt = 3(0.1)t + 6(0.6)t;
(d) stable.
13 (a) CF = A(0.2)t;
(b) PS = t + 6;
(c) Yt = A(0.2)t + t + 6,
Yt = 4(0.2)t + t + 6;
(d) unstable.
14 (a) Yt = 0.6Y 0.8
t−1 + 160
(b) 163.8, 195.4, 200.8, 201.7, 201.9, 201.9, 201.9,
201.9; stable.
(c) No.
15 (a) kt+1 = 0.99kt + 0.2k t
0.6.
(b) 1789; uniform; same behaviour.
Section 9.2
1 (a) 5e5t;
(b) −6e−3t;
(c) mAemt.
2 (a) The function that differentiates to 4 times itself is 
y = Ae4t. The condition
y(0) = 6 gives A = 6, so the solution is y = 6e4t.
(b) The function that differentiates to −5 times itself is
y = Ae−5t. The condition
y(0) = 2 gives A = 2, so the solution is y = 2e−5t.
3 The complementary function is the solution of
= 3y
and is given by
CF = Ae3t
For a particular solution we try a constant function
y(t) = D
Substituting this into the original equation,
= 3y −60
gives
0 = 3D −60
dy
dt
dy
dt
D
F
β
β − α
A
C
y(t) = Aemt + D
(A ≠0)
when m > 0.
4 Substituting the expressions for C and I into
= 0.1(C + I −Y)
gives
= 0.1(0.9Y + 100 + 300 −Y)
= −0.01Y + 40
The complementary function is given by
CF = Ae−0.01t
and for a particular solution we try a constant function
Y(t) = D
Substituting this into the differential equation gives
0 = −0.01D + 40
which has solution D = 4000. The general solution is
therefore
Y(t) = Ae−0.01t + 4000
dY
dt
dY
dt
Solutions to Problems
660
which has solution D = 20. The general solution is
therefore
y(t) = Ae3t + 20
Finally, substituting t = 0 gives
y(0) = A + 20 = 30
and so A is 10. Hence
y(t) = 10e3t + 20
A graph of y against t is sketched in Figure S9.5, which
indicates that y(t) rapidly diverges. We would expect
divergence to occur for any solution
Figure S9.5

The initial condition, Y(0) = 2000, gives
A + 4000 = 2000
and so A is −2000. Hence
Y(t) = −2000e−0.01t + 4000
This system is stable because the complementary
function is a negative exponential and so Y(t) converges
to its equilibrium value of 4000 as t increases.
5 Substituting the expressions for QS and QD into
= 1/3(QD −QS)
gives
= 1/3[(−P + 4) −(2P −2)] = −P + 2
The complementary function is given by
CF = Ae−t
and for a particular solution we try a constant function
P(t) = D
Substituting this into the differential equation gives
0 = −D + 2
which has solution D = 2. The general solution is
therefore
P(t) = Ae−t + 2
The initial condition, P(0) = 1, gives
A + 2 = 1
and so A is −1. Hence
P(t) = −e−t + 2
From the supply and demand equations
QS(t) = 2P −2 = 2(−e−t + 2) −2 = −2e−t + 2
QD(t) = −P + 4 = −(−e−t + 2) + 4 = e−t + 2
All three functions involve a negative exponential, so
the system is stable.
6 (a) t 2 + 7;
(b) −1/3e−3t + 1/3;
(c)
1/3t 3 + 3/2t 2 −5t + 1.
7 (a) −20e−3t + 60; starting at 40, y(t) increases
uniformly to 60.
(b) 20e−3t + 60; starting at 80, y(t) decreases uniformly
to 60.
(c) 60; y(t) remains at the equilibrium level of 60 for
all time.
8 Y(t) = 5000e−0.05t + 10 000; stable.
9 Y(t) = 2000e0.15t −1800; unstable.
10 P(t) = −e−2.5t + 2; QS(t) = −3e−2.5t + 5;
QD(t) = 2e−2.5t + 5; stable.
dP
dt
dP
dt
11 Substitute assumptions (1) and (3) into (2) to get
β
= αY
which rearranges as
=
Y
with solution
Y(t) = Y(0)e(α/β)t
This is unstable because α/β > 0.
12 The right-hand side is
my + c = m Aemt −
+ c
= Amemt −c + c = Amemt
which we recognize as the derivative of y(t).
13 (a) Ae−2t;
(b) e3t;
(c) Ae−2t + e3t; 6e−2t + e3t;
(d) unstable.
14 (a) Ae−t;
(b) 4t −7;
(c) y = Ae−t + 4t −7; y = 8e−t + 4t −7;
(d) unstable.
15 y(t) = √(t2 + 1). For large t, the solution is well
approximated by a straight line with equation 
y(t) = t.
16 (a) y(t) = 0.5
(b) y(t) = 0.5
(c) In (a) the fund decreases and approaches the
equilibrium value of $500 000; in (b) the fund
decreases and is completely exhausted after 
2 years.
17 K(t) =
(a) Capital remains constant, at the value c, for all
time.
(b) Capital grows without bound.
(c) Capital decreases to zero.
Appendix 1
1 Slope of chord =
=
= 10 + ∆x
Slope of tangent = lim
∆x →0 (10 + ∆x) = 10
25 + 10∆x + (∆x)2 −25
∆x
(5 + ∆x)2 −52
∆x
(ac −b)ea2/2 + b
a
D
F
t −2
t −4
A
C
D
F
t + 4
t + 2
A
C
D
F
c
m
A
C
α
β
dY
dt
dY
dt
Solutions to Problems
661

2 (a) Slope of chord
=
= 8x + 4∆x −9
Slope of tangent = lim
∆x →0(8x + 4∆x −9) = 8x −9
(b) f(x + ∆x) −f(x) =
−
=
=
Slope of chord =
Slope of tangent = lim
∆x →0
=
3 (a) (a + b)(a + b)2 = (a + b)(a2 + 2ab + b2)
= a3 + 3a2b + 3ab2 + b3
(b) Slope of chord =
= 3x2 + 3x(∆x) + (∆x)2
Slope of tangent
= lim
∆x →0 (3x2 + 3x∆x + (∆x)2)
= 3x2
Appendix 2
1 (a) 2 × 12 + 3 × 22 = 2 + 12 = 14
(b) 4x + 6y
= 0
6y
= −4x
=
= −2x
3y
−4x
6y
dy
dx
dy
dx
dy
dx
(x + ∆x)3 + x3
∆x
−2
x3
D
F
−2x −∆x
(x + ∆x)2x2
A
C
−2x −∆x
(x + ∆x)2x2
−2x∆x −(∆x)2
(x + ∆x)2x2
x2 −(x + ∆x)2
(x + ∆x)2x2
1
x2
1
(x + ∆x)2
4(x + ∆x)2 −9(x + ∆x) + 1] −(4x2 −9x + 1)
∆x
so when x = 1, y = 2,
= −
2 (a) −;
(b) −
;
(c) −
;
(d)
;
(e)
;
(f) −(1 + x + y).
Appendix 3
1 H =
The ﬁrst principal minor is 2 > 0.
The second principal minor is 2 × 2 −0 × 0 = 4 > 0.
Hence the stationary point is a minimum.
2 H =
Principal minors are −4 < 0 and 4 > 0, respectively, so
maximum.
3 H =
assuming that L is chosen as the ﬁrst variable.
At the stationary point,
H =
Principal minors are −1/16 < 0 and 1/4608 > 0,
respectively, so maximum.
4 H¯ =
has determinant 8 > 0, so maximum.
5 H¯ =
has determinant −6 < 0, so minimum.
J
K
K
L
4
−1
−1
−1
0
−1
−1
−1
0
G
H
H
I
J
K
K
L
−2
2
−1
2
−2
−1
−1
−1
0
G
H
H
I
JKL
−1/16
0
0
−1/288
GHI
JKL
−4L−3/2
0
0
−6K −3/2
GHI
JKL
−4
−2
−2
−2
GHI
JKL
2
0
0
2
GHI
2x + 2y 2
3 −4xy
(1 −ex)y
ex −x −2y
ex−y
2
1 + 6x2
3y
x
y
1
3
dy
dx
Solutions to Problems
662

Adjustment coefﬁcient
The constant of proportionality in the simple macroeconomic 
model in which the rate of change of national income is assumed to be proportional to excess
expenditure.
Algebraic fraction
Ratio of two expressions: p(x)/q(x) where p(x) and q(x) are algebraic
expressions such as ax2 + bx + c or dx + e.
Annual percentage rate (APR)
This is the equivalent annual interest paid for a loan, taking
into account the compounding over a variety of time periods.
Annual rate of inﬂation
The percentage increase in the level of prices over a 12-month
period.
Annuity A lump-sum investment designed to produce a sequence of equal regular payments
over time.
Anti-derivative
A function whose derivative is a given function.
Arbitrary constant
A letter representing an unspeciﬁed constant in the general solution of a
differential equation.
Arc elasticity
Elasticity measured between two points on a curve.
Arithmetic progression
A sequence of numbers with a constant difference between consec-
utive terms; the nth term takes the form a + bn.
Autonomous consumption and savings
The levels of consumption and savings when there
is no income.
Autonomous consumption multiplier
The number by which you multiply the change in
autonomous consumption to deduce the corresponding change in, say, national income.
Average cost
Total cost per unit of output: AC = TC/Q.
Average product of labour
Output per worker: APL = Q/L.
Average revenue
Total revenue divided by quantity: TR/Q = PQ/Q = P.
Balanced budget multiplier
The number by which you multiply the change in government
expenditure to deduce the corresponding change in, say, national income, assuming that this
change is ﬁnanced entirely by a change in taxation.
Bordered Hessian matrix
A Hessian matrix augmented by an extra row and column con-
taining partial derivatives formed from the constraint in the method of Lagrange multipliers.
Capital
Man-made assets used in the production of goods and services.
Glossary

Chord
A straight line joining two points on a curve.
Cobb–Douglas production function
A production function of the form Q = AKαLβ.
Coefﬁcient
A numerical multiplier of the variables in an algebraic term, such as the numbers
4 and 7 in the expression, 4x + 7yz 2.
Cofactor
The cofactor of the element aij is the determinant of the matrix left when row i
and column j are deleted, multiplied by +1 or −1, depending on whether i + j is even or odd,
respectively.
Column vector
A matrix with one column.
Comparative statics
Examination of the effect on equilibrium values due to changes in the
parameters of an economic model.
Complementary function of a difference equation
The solution of the difference equation 
Yt = bYt−1 + c when the constant c is replaced by zero.
Complementary function of a differential equation
The solution of the differential equation
= my + c when the constant c is replaced by zero.
Complementary goods
A pair of goods consumed together. As the price of either goes up,
the demand for both goods goes down.
Compound interest
The interest that is added on to the initial investment, so that this will
itself gain interest in subsequent time periods.
Constant of integration
The arbitrary constant that appears in an expression when ﬁnding
an indeﬁnite integral.
Constant returns to scale
Exhibited by a production function when a given percentage
increase in input leads to the same percentage increase in output: f(λK, λL) = λf(K, L).
Constrained optimisation
Maximisation (or mimimisation) of an objective function subject
to at least one constraint.
Constraint
A restriction on the values of an objective function.
Consumer’s surplus
The excess cost that a person would have been prepared to pay for
goods over and above what is actually paid.
Consumption
The ﬂow of money from households to ﬁrms as payment for goods and 
services.
Continuous compounding
The limiting value when interest is compounded with ever-
increasing frequency.
Coordinates
A set of numbers which determine the position of a point relative to a set of
axes.
Cramer’s rule
A method of solving simultaneous equations, Ax = b, by the use of determin-
ants. The ith variable xi can be computed using det(A i)/det(A) where Ai is the determinant of
the matrix obtained from A by replacing the ith column by b.
Cross-price elasticity of demand
The responsiveness of demand for one good to a change in
the price of another: (percentage change in quantity) ÷ (percentage change in the price of the
alternative good).
Decreasing function
A function, y = f(x), in which y decreases as x increases.
Decreasing returns to scale
Exhibited by a production function when a given percentage
increase in input leads to a smaller percentage increase in output: f(λK, λL) = λnf(K, L) where
0 < n < 1.
Deﬁnite integration
The process of ﬁnding the area under a graph by subtracting the values
obtained when the limits are substituted into the anti-derivative.
dy
dt
Glossary
664

Degree of homogeneity
The number n in the relation f(λK,λL) = λnf(K, L).
Demand function
A relationship between the quantity demanded and various factors that
affect demand, including price.
Denominator
The number (or expression) on the bottom of a fraction.
Dependent variable
A variable whose value is determined by that taken by the independent
variables; in y = f(x), the dependent variable is y.
Derivative
The gradient of the tangent to a curve at a point. The derivative at x = a is written
f′(a).
Derived function
The rule, f ′, which gives the gradient of a function, f, at a general point.
Determinant of a matrix
A determinant can be expanded as the sum of the products of the
elements in any one row or column and their respective cofactors.
Difference equation
An equation that relates consecutive terms of a sequence of numbers.
Differential equation
An equation connecting derivatives of an unknown function.
Differentials
Limiting values of incremental changes. In the limit the approximation 
∆z 
× ∆x becomes dz =
× dx where dz and dx are the differentials.
Differentiation
The process or operation of determining the ﬁrst derivative of a function.
Discount rate
The interest rate that is used when going backwards in time to calculate the
present value from a future value.
Discounting
The process of working backwards in time to ﬁnd the present values from a
future value.
Discriminant
The number, b2 −4ac, which is used to indicate the number of solutions of the
quadratic equation ax2 + bx + c = 0.
Disposable income
Household income after the deduction of taxes and the addition of
beneﬁts.
Distributive law
The rule which states that a(b + c) = ab + ac, for any numbers a, b and c.
Dynamics
Analysis of how equilibrium values vary over time.
Elastic demand
Where the percentage change in demand is more than the corresponding
change in price: E > 1.
Elements
The individual numbers inside a matrix. (Also called entries.)
Elimination method
The method in which variables are removed from a system of simultan-
eous equations by adding (or subtracting) a multiple of one equation to (or from) a multiple
of another.
Endogenous variable
A variable whose value is determined within a model.
Equilibrium (market)
This state occurs when quantity supplied and quantity demanded are
equal.
Equilibrium value of a difference equation
A solution of a difference equation that does not
vary over time; it is the limiting value of Yn as n tends to inﬁnity.
Equilibrium value of a differential equation
A solution of a differential equation that does
not vary over time; it is the limiting value of y(t) as t tends to inﬁnity.
Euler’s theorem
If each input is paid the value of its marginal product, the total cost of these
inputs is equal to total output, provided there are constant returns to scale.
Exogenous variable
A variable whose value is determined outside a model.
Exponent
A superscript attached to a variable; the number 5 is the exponent in the expres-
sion, 2x5.
∂z
∂x
∂z
∂x
Glossary
665

Exponential form
A representation of a number which is written using powers. For example,
25 is the exponential form of the number 32.
Exponential function
The function f(x) = ex; an exponential function in which the base is the
number e = 2.718 28 . . .
External demand
Output that is used by households.
Factors of production
The inputs to the production of goods and services: land, capital,
labour and raw materials.
Feasible region
The set of points which satisfy all of the constraints in a linear programming
problem.
Final demand
An alternative to ‘external demand’.
First-order derivative
The rate of change of a function with respect to its independent vari-
able. It is the same as the ‘derivative’ of a function, y = f(x), and is written as f ′(x)or dy/dx.
First principal minor
The 1 × 1 determinant in the top left-hand corner of a matrix; the 
element, a11 of a matrix, A.
Fixed costs
Total costs that are independent of output.
Flow chart
A diagram consisting of boxes of instructions indicating the sequence of opera-
tions and their order.
Function (of one variable)
A rule that assigns to each incoming number, x, a uniquely
deﬁned outgoing number, y.
Function of two variables
A rule which assigns to each pair of incoming numbers, x and y, 
a uniquely deﬁned outgoing number, z.
Future value
The ﬁnal value of an investment after one or more time periods.
General solution of a difference equation
The solution of a difference equation that contains
an arbitary constant. It is the sum of the complementary function and particular solution.
General solution of a differential equation
The solution of a differential equation that con-
tains an arbitary constant. It is the sum of the complementary function and particular solution.
Geometric progression
A sequence of numbers with a constant ratio between consecutive
terms; the nth term takes the form, ar n−1.
Geometric ratio
The constant multiplier in a geometric series.
Geometric series
A sum of the consecutive terms of a geometric progression.
Government expenditure
The total amount of money spent by government on defence, edu-
cation, health, police, etc.
Gradient
The gradient of a line measures steepness and is the vertical change divided by the
horizontal change between any two points on the line. The gradient of a curve at a point is that
of the tangent at that point.
Hessian
A matrix whose elements are the second-order partial derivatives of a given function.
Homogeneous function
A function with the property that when all of the inputs are multi-
plied by a constant, λ, the output is multiplied by λn where n is the degree of homogeneity.
Identity matrix
An n × n matrix, I, in which every element on the main diagonal is 1 and the
other elements are all 0. If A is any n × n matrix then AI = I = IA.
Implicit differentiation
The process of obtaining dy/dx where the function is not given
explicitly as an expression for y in terms of x.
Income elasticity of demand
The responsiveness of demand for one good to a change in
income: (percentage change in quantity) ÷ (percentage change in income).
Increasing function
A function, y = f(x), in which y increases as x increases.
Glossary
666

Increasing returns to scale
Exhibited by a production function when a given percentage
increase in input leads to a larger percentage increase in output: f(λK, λL) = λnf(K, L) where 
n > 1.
Indeﬁnite integration
The process of obtaining an anti-derivative.
Independent variable
A variable whose value determines that of the dependent variable; in 
y = f(x), the independent variable is x.
Index
Alternative word for exponent or power.
Index number
The scale factor of a variable measured from the base year multiplied by 100.
Indifference curve
A curve indicating all combinations of two goods which give the same
level of utility.
Indifference map
A diagram showing the graphs of a set of indifference curves. The further
the curve is from the origin, the greater the level of utility.
Inelastic demand
Where the percentage change in demand is less than the corresponding
change in price: E < 1.
Inferior good
A good whose demand decreases as income increases.
Inﬂation
The percentage increase in the level of prices over a 12-month period.
Initial condition
The value of Y0 (or y(0)) which needs to be speciﬁed to obtain a unique
solution of a difference (or differential) equation.
Input–output analysis
Examination of how inputs and outputs from various sectors of the
economy are matched to the total resources available.
Integer programming
A linear programming problem in which the search for solution is
restricted to points in the feasible region with whole-number coordinates.
Integral
The number 
b
a
f(x)dx (deﬁnite integral) or the function f(x)dx (indeﬁnite integral).
Integration
The generic name for the evaluation of deﬁnite or indeﬁnite integrals.
Intercept Points where a graph crosses one of the coordinate axes.
Intermediate output
Output from one sector which is used as input by another (or the same)
sector.
Internal rate of return (IRR)
The interest rate for which the net present value is zero.
Inverse function
A function, written f −1, which reverses the effect of a given function, f, so
that x = f −1(y) when y = f(x).
Inverse matrix
A matrix A−1 with the property that A−1A = I = AA−1.
Inverse (operation)
The operation that reverses the effect of a given operation and takes you
back to the original. For example, the inverse of halving is doubling.
Investment
The creation of output not for immediate consumption.
Investment multiplier
The number by which you multiply the change in investment to
deduce the corresponding change in, say, national income
Isocost curve
A line showing all combinations of two factors that can be bought for a ﬁxed
cost.
IS schedule
The equation relating national income and interest rate based on the assumption
of equilibrium in the goods market.
Isoquant
A curve indicating all combinations of two factors that give the same level of output.
L-shaped curve
A term used by economists to describe the graph of a function, such as 
f(x) = a +
, which bends roughly like the letter L.
b
x
Glossary
667

Labour
All forms of human input to the production process.
Labour productivity
Output per worker: APL = Q/L.
Lagrange multiplier
The number λ which is used in the Lagrangian function. In economics
this gives the change in the value of the objective function when the value of the constraint is
increased by 1 unit.
Lagrangian
The function f(x, y) + λ[M −ϕ(x, y)] , where f(x, y) is the objective function and
φ(x, y) = M is the constraint. The stationary point of this function is the solution of the associ-
ated constrained optimization problem.
Laspeyre index
An index number for groups of data that are weighted by the quantities used
in the base year.
Law of diminishing marginal productivity (law of diminishing returns)
Once the size of
the workforce exceeds a particular value, the increase in output due to a 1 unit increase in
labour will decline: d2Q/dL2 < 0 for sufﬁciently large L.
Leontief inverse
The inverse of I −A, where A is the matrix of technical coefﬁcients.
Limits of integration
The numbers a and b which appear in the deﬁnite integral,

b
a
f(x)dx.
Linear equation
An equation of the form y = ax + b.
Linear programming
Optimization of a linear objective function subject to linear 
constraints.
LM schedule
The equation relating national income and interest rate based on the assump-
tion of equilibrium in the money market.
Logarithm
The power to which a base must be raised to yield a particular number.
Marginal cost
The cost of producing 1 more unit of output: MC = d(TC)/dQ.
Marginal product of capital
The extra output produced by 1 more unit of capital: 
MPK = ∂Q/∂K.
Marginal product of labour
The extra output produced by 1 more unit of labour: 
MPL = ∂Q/∂L.
Marginal propensity to consume
The fraction of a rise in national income which goes on
consumption. It is the slope of the consumption function: MPC = dC/dY.
Marginal propensity to consume multiplier
The number by which you multiply the change
in MPC to deduce the corresponding change in, say, national income.
Marginal propensity to save
The fraction of a rise in national income which goes into sav-
ings. It is the slope of the savings function: MPS = dS/dY.
Marginal rate of commodity substitution (MRCS)
The amount by which one input needs 
to increase to maintain a constant value of utility when the other input decreases by 1 unit:
MRTS = ∂U/∂x1 ÷ ∂U/∂x2.
Marginal rate of technical substitution (MRTS)
The amount by which capital needs to rise to
maintain a constant level of output when labour decreases by 1 unit: MRTS = MPL/MPK.
Marginal revenue
The extra revenue gained by selling 1 more unit of a good: 
MR = d(TR)/dQ.
Marginal utility
The extra satisfaction gained by consuming 1 extra unit of a good: ∂U/∂xi.
Matrix
A rectangular array of numbers, set out in rows and columns, surrounded by a pair
of brackets. (Plural matrices.)
Matrix of technical coefﬁcients
A square matrix in which element aij is the input required
from the ith sector to produce 1 unit of output for the jth sector.
Glossary
668

Maximum (local) point
A point on a curve which has the highest function value in com-
parison with other values in its neighbourhood; at such a point the ﬁrst-order derivative is zero
and the second-order derivative is either zero or negative.
Maximum point (of a function of two variables)
A point on a surface which has the highest
function value in comparison with other values in its neighbourhood; at such a point the sur-
face looks like the top of a mountain.
Method of substitution (for constrained optimization problems)
The method of solving
constrained optimization problems whereby the constraint is used to eliminate one of the vari-
ables in the objective function.
Minimum (local) point
A point on a curve which has the lowest function value in com-
parison with other values in its neighbourhood; at such a point the ﬁrst-order derivative is zero
and the second-order derivative is either zero or positive
Minimum point (of a function of two variables)
A point on a surface which has the lowest
function value in comparison with other values in its neighbourhood; at such a point the sur-
face looks like the bottom of a valley or bowl.
Modelling
The creation of a piece of mathematical theory which represents (a simpliﬁcation
of) some aspect of practical economics.
Money supply
The notes and coins in circulation together with money held in bank deposits.
Monopolist
The only ﬁrm in the industry.
Multiplier
The number by which you multiply the change in an independent variable to ﬁnd
the change in the dependent variable.
National income
The ﬂow of money from ﬁrms to households.
Natural logarithm
A logarithm to base e; if M = en then n is the natural logarithm of M.
Net investment
Rate of change of capital stock over time: I = dK/dt.
Net present value (NPV)
The present value of a revenue ﬂow minus the original cost.
Nominal data
Monetary values prevailing at the time that they were measured.
Non-negativity constraints
The constraints x ≥0, y ≥0, etc.
Non-singular matrix
A square matrix with a non-zero determinant.
Number line
An inﬁnite line on which the points represent real numbers by their (signed)
distance from the origin.
Numerator
The number (or expression) on the top of a fraction.
Objective function
A function that one seeks to optimize (usually) subject to constraints.
Optimization
The determination of the optimal (usually stationary) points of a function.
Order of a matrix
The dimensions of a matrix. A matrix with m rows and n columns has
order m × n.
Origin
The point where the coordinate axes intersect.
Paasche index
An index number for groups of data which are weighted by the quantities
used in the current year.
Parabola
The shape of the graph of a quadratic function.
Parameter
A constant whose value affects the speciﬁc values but not the general form of a
mathematical expression, such as the constants a, b and c in ax2 + bx + c.
Partial derivative
The derivative of a function of two or more variables with respect to one
of these variables, the others being regarded as constant.
Particular solution of a difference equation
Any one solution of a difference equation such
as Yt = bYt−1 + c.
Glossary
669

Particular solution of a differential equation
Any one solution of a difference equation
such as 
= my + c.
Perfect competition
A situation in which there are no barriers to entry in the industry and
where there are many ﬁrms selling an identical product at the market price.
Point elasticity
Elasticity measured at a particular point on a curve, e.g. for a supply curve,
E =
×
.
Point of inﬂection
A stationary point that is not a maximum or minimum.
Precautionary demand for money
Money held in reserve by individuals or ﬁrms to fund
unforeseen future expenditure.
Present value
The amount that is invested initially to produce a speciﬁed future value after a
given period of time.
Price elasticity of demand
A measure of the responsiveness of the change in demand due to
a change in price: −(percentage change in demand) ÷ (percentage change in price).
Price elasticity of supply
A measure of the responsiveness of the change in supply due to a
change in price: (percentage change in supply) ÷ (percentage change in price).
Primitive
An alternative word for an anti-derivative.
Principal
The value of the original sum invested.
Producer’s surplus
The excess revenue that a producer has actually received over and above
the lower revenue that it was prepared to accept for the supply of its goods.
Production function
The relationship between the output of a good and the inputs used to
produce it.
Power
Another word for exponent. If this is a positive integer then it gives the number of
times a number is multiplied by itself.
Proﬁt
Total revenue minus total cost: π = TR −TC.
Quadratic function
A function of the form f(x) = ax 2 + bx + c where a ≠0.
Real data
Monetary values adjusted to take inﬂation into account.
Rectangular hyperbola
A term used by mathematicians to describe the graph of a function,
such as f(x) = a +
, which is a hyperbola with horizontal and vertical asymptotes.
Recurrence relation
An alternative term for a difference equation. It is an expression for Yn
in terms of Yn−1 (and possibly Yn−2, Yn−3, etc).
Reduced form
The ﬁnal equation obtained when exogenous variables are eliminated in the
course of solving a set of structural equations in a macroeconomic model.
Reverse ﬂow chart
A ﬂow chart indicating the inverse of the original sequence of operations
in reverse order.
Row vector
A matrix with one row.
Saddle point
A stationary point which is neither a maximum nor a minimum and at which
the surface looks like the middle of a horse’s saddle.
Scale factor
The multiplier that gives the ﬁnal value in percentage problems.
Second-order derivative
The derivative of the ﬁrst-order derivative. The expression obtained
when the original function, y = f(x), is differentiated twice in succession and is written as f ″(x)
or d2y/dx2.
b
x
dQ
dP
P
Q
dy
dt
Glossary
670

Second-order partial derivative
The partial derivative of a ﬁrst-order partial derivative. For
example, fxy is the second-order partial derivative when f is differentiated ﬁrst with respect to y
and then with respect to x.
Second principal minor
The 2 × 2 determinant in the top left-hand corner of a matrix.
Simple interest
The interest that is paid direct to the investor instead of being added to the
original amount.
Simultaneous equations
A set of linear equations in which there are (usually) the same num-
ber of equations and unknowns. The solution consists of values of the unknowns which satisfy
all of the equations at the same time.
Singular matrix
A square matrix with a zero determinant. A singular matrix fails to possess
an inverse.
Sinking fund
A ﬁxed sum of money saved at regular intervals which is used to fund some
future ﬁnancial commitment.
Slope of a line
Also known as the gradient, it is the change in the value of y when x increases
by 1 unit.
Small increments formula
The result ∆z 
∆x ×
∆y.
Speculative demand for money
Money held by back by ﬁrms or individuals for the purpose
of investing in alternative assets, such as government bonds, at some future date.
Square matrix
A matrix with the same number of rows as columns.
Square root
A number which when multiplied by itself equals a given number; the solutions
of the equation x2 = c, which are written ± x.
Stable (unstable) equilibrium
An economic model in which the solution of the associated
difference (or differential) equation converges (diverges).
Statics
The determination of the equilibrium values of variables in an economic model which
do not change over time.
Stationary points (of a function of one variable)
Points on a graph at which the tangent is
horizontal; at a stationary point the ﬁrst-order derivative is zero.
Structural equations
A collection of equations that describe the equilibrium conditions of a
macroeconomic model.
Substitutable goods
A pair of goods that are alternatives to each other. As the price of one of
them goes up, the demand for the other rises.
Superior good
A good whose demand increases as income increases.
Supply function
A relationship between the quantity supplied and various factors that affect
demand, including price.
Symmetric function
A function of two or more variables which is unchanged by any per-
mutation of the variables. A function of two variables is symmetric when f(x, y) = f(y, x).
Tangent
A line that just touches a curve at a point.
Taxation
Money paid to government based on an individual’s income and wealth (direct 
taxation) together with money paid by suppliers of goods or services based on expenditure
(indirect taxation).
Technology matrix
A square matrix in which element aij is the input required from the ith
sector to produce 1 unit of output for the jth sector.
Time series
A sequence of numbers indicating the variation of data over time.
Total cost
The sum of the total variable and ﬁxed costs: TC = TVC + FC.
∂z
∂y
∂z
∂x
Glossary
671

Total revenue
A ﬁrm’s total earnings from the sales of a good: TR = PQ.
Transactions demand for money
Money used for everyday transactions of goods and 
services.
Transpose formula
The rearrangement of a formula to make one of the other letters the 
subject.
Transpose matrix
The matrix obtained from a given matrix by interchanging rows and
columns. The transpose of a matrix A is written AT.
U-shaped curve
A term used by economists to describe a curve, such as a parabola, which
bends upwards, like the letter U.
Unbounded region
A feasible region that is not completely enclosed by a polygon. The 
associated linear programming problem may not have a ﬁnite solution.
Unconstrained optimisation
Maximisation (or mimimisation) of an objective function
without any constraints.
Uniformly convergent sequence
A sequence of numbers that progressively increases (or
decreases) to a ﬁnite limit.
Uniformly divergent sequence
A sequence of numbers that progressively increases (or
decreases) without a ﬁnite limit.
Unit elasticity of demand
Where the percentage change in demand is the same as the 
percentage change in price: E = 1.
Unstable equilibrium
An economic model in which the solution of the associated difference
(or differential) equation diverges.
Utility
The satisfaction gained from the consumption of a good.
Variable costs
Total costs that change according to the amount of output produced.
x axis
The horizontal coordinate axis pointing from left to right.
y axis
The vertical coordinate axis pointing upwards.
Zero matrix
A matrix in which every element is zero.
Glossary
672

autonomous export multiplier 380
autonomous savings 99, 110, 663
autonomous taxation multiplier 378
average costs 132–4, 139, 663
graphs 132–4
optimization of 310–12, 320, 327–8, 338–9
average product of labour 306, 316, 338–9, 663
optimization of 306–7, 327–8
average revenue 266, 273, 663
axes of graph 15, 20, 26, 33, 672
balanced budget multiplier 378–9, 383, 663
bar charts 565–6
base 142, 153
see also logarithms; powers
BIDMAS convention 10
applications 71, 122
bonds, government 233–4
bordered Hessian matrices 596–7, 663
brackets 70–6
budgets
balanced budget multiplier 378–9, 383
constraints 403–5
calculus 237
differentiation see differentiation
integration see integration
partial differentiation see partial differentiation
capital 149, 159, 268, 663
formation of 445–6
marginal product of 366, 367, 371, 668
cartels 265
CF see complementary functions
chain rule of differentiation 275, 276–8, 335, 339, 593
chords 248, 249, 262–3, 264, 664
addition
fractions 78–9, 80
matrices 457–8
negative numbers 18–19
adjoint matrices 483, 484
adjugate matrices 483, 484
adjustment coefﬁcients, differential equations 577, 583,
663
algebra 66–86
brackets 70–6
equations 81–6
fractions 76–81, 84, 663
inequalities 67–70
matrices 468, 472
simultaneous linear equations, solving 35–46
transposition of formulae 87–95
algebraic fractions 76–81, 84, 663
differentiation of 279–82
annual compounding of interest 196–8
annual equivalent rate (AER) 203
annual percentage rate (APR) 203–4, 206, 663
annual rate of inﬂation 188–90, 191, 663
annuities 225–6, 234, 447–8, 663
anti-derivatives see integrals
APR see annual percentage rate
arbitrary constants
differential equations 569, 583, 663
integration see constants of integration
arc elasticity 287, 291, 296, 663
areas, ﬁnding by integration 437–43
arithmetic progression 210, 217, 663
associative law 466, 475
autonomous consumption 97, 110, 559, 663
autonomous consumption multiplier 375, 383, 478,
663
Index

Cobb–Douglas production functions 152, 159, 271,
367, 417–19, 664
coefﬁcients, algebraic equations 20–1, 26, 33, 664
cofactors (matrices) 479–85, 486, 488, 664
column vectors in matrices 457, 461–5, 468, 664
columns, matrix 454
commodity substitution, marginal rate of 363–5, 371,
668
commutative law 466
comparative statics 374–85, 664
competition, perfect 50, 266, 273, 392, 443–4, 670
complementary functions (CF)
difference equations 555, 556, 557, 558, 560, 562,
566, 664
differential equations 573, 574, 576, 578, 580, 583,
664
complementary goods 51–2, 60, 62, 664
compound interest 194–208, 664
annual compounding of 196–8
annual percentage rates 203–4, 206
continuous compounding of 199–203, 206, 220–1,
664
discrete compounding of 197–9, 220, 221
exponential functions 200–1
future values 196, 200
geometric series 209–15
simple interest compared with 195
various compounding periods 198–9
constant returns to scale 151, 152, 159, 503, 664
constant rule of differentiation 251–2
constant rule of integration 427–8
constants of integration 425, 431, 434, 439, 569, 664
constrained optimization 400–10, 664
Hessian matrices 596–7
Lagrange multipliers 411–20
linear programming 524–32
method of substitution 404–9, 410, 669
objective functions 404–9, 415–16
constraints 400, 664
consumer’s surplus 441–3, 664
consumption 96, 110, 664
autonomous see autonomous consumption
differentiation and 271–3
equilibrium 477–8
marginal propensity see marginal propensity to
consume
consumption function 97, 110, 559
continuous compounding of interest 199–203, 206,
220–1, 664
discount formula for 221
continuous revenue streams 448
contour maps 362
converging time paths 558, 559, 566, 576, 672
coordinates 15, 33, 664
cost(s)
average see average costs
constraints 401–2, 406–7
differentiation 267–8
ﬁxed 131, 139, 431, 666
marginal see marginal costs
optimization of 539–41
total see total costs
variable 131, 139, 672
Cramer’s rule 492–501, 664
critical points see stationary points
cross-multiplication 83
cross-price elasticity of demand 357, 358–9, 371, 
664
cube function (x3), differentiation of 590
cubic equations 302–3
curves
slopes 241–5
see also graphs
data, nominal and real 189, 191, 669, 670
decreasing functions 49–50, 62, 664
decreasing returns to scale 151, 152, 159, 664
deﬁnite integrals 438, 667
deﬁnite integration 429, 434, 437–50, 664
degree of homogeneity 151–2, 665
demand
analysis see supply and demand analysis
elastic 284, 285, 296, 665
elasticity see elasticity of demand
ﬁnal (external) 503–11, 513, 666
inelastic 284, 285, 296, 667
for money 104–5
precautionary 105, 111
price elasticity of 284–90
speculative 105, 111
interest rates and 233–4
total 105
transactions 104–5, 111
unit elastic 284, 285, 296
demand functions 49, 62, 665
consumer’s surplus 441–3
exponential functions 339
monopolies 322
natural logarithms 339
producer’s surplus 443–4
quadratic 125–7
denominators 76, 84, 665
dependent variables 49, 62, 344, 354, 665
derivatives 243–50, 665
exponential functions 331–40
ﬁrst-order 256, 258, 300–1, 346–7, 392, 395, 666
Index
674

derivatives (continued)
natural logarithms 331–40
partial 346–50, 354, 392, 395, 414, 512, 594, 669
second-order 256–8, 300–1, 347–50, 354, 392, 395,
414, 594, 671
see also differential equations; differentiation;
marginal functions
derived functions 243, 249, 665
determinants of matrices 473, 474, 480, 481–3, 488,
665
simultaneous equations solved using 492–501, 664
difference equations 553–68, 665
complementary functions 555, 556, 557, 558, 560,
562, 566, 664
equilibrium values 558, 566, 665
exploding time paths 557
general solutions 555, 557–8, 563, 566, 666
graphical interpretations 556–9
initial conditions 554, 560, 563, 566, 667
linear 553–64
national income determination 559–61
non-linear 564–6
oscillatory time paths 559, 563
particular solutions 555, 556, 557, 558, 560, 562,
566, 669
stable models 559, 566, 671
supply and demand analysis 561–6
uniformly converging time paths 558, 559, 566
uniformly diverging time paths 557, 559, 566
unstable models 559, 566, 671, 672
difference rule of differentiation 254–5
difference rule of integration 427–8
difference of two squares formula 75–6
differential equations 569–86, 665
adjustment coefﬁcients 577, 583, 663
arbitrary constants 569, 583, 663
complementary functions 573, 574, 576, 578, 580,
583, 664
equilibrium values 575, 576, 580, 583, 665
exponential functions 570–2
general solutions 569, 579, 583, 666
graphical interpretations 575
initial conditions 570, 572, 573, 575, 576, 578, 580,
581, 582, 583, 667
national income determination 577–9
particular solutions 573, 574, 575, 580, 583, 670
stable models 576, 578, 579, 583, 671
supply and demand analysis 579–83
unstable models 576–7, 671, 672
differentials 351, 354, 665
differentiation 237–340, 665
chain rule 275, 276–8, 335, 339, 593
constant rule 251–2
consumption 271–3
costs 267–8
deﬁnition 245, 249
difference rule 254–5
elasticity 284–97
exponential functions 331–40, 571
from ﬁrst principles 587–90
implicit 352–4, 364–5, 367, 591–3, 666
marginal functions 261–74
natural logarithms 331–40
optimization 304–30
partial see partial differentiation
product rule 278–80, 335, 592, 593
production functions 268–73
quotient rule 281–2, 327, 335
revenue 262–6
savings 271–3
stationary points 298–304
sum rule 252–3, 347
see also derivatives; partial differentiation
diminishing marginal productivity, law of 270–1, 273,
668
diminishing marginal utility, law of 361, 371, 404
diminishing returns, law of 270–1, 273, 668
discount rates 221, 234, 665
discounting 221, 234, 665
integration and 447–8
discrete compounding of interest 197–9, 220
discount formula for 221
discriminants 119, 127, 665
discrimination, price 322–6, 394–6
disposable income 102, 110, 665
distributive law 71–3, 84, 466, 665
applied in reverse 93
diverging time paths 557, 559, 566, 576, 672
division
algebraic fractions 77, 78, 80
fractions 77, 78, 80
matrices 455
negative numbers 17
by scale factors 180, 181
by zero 22, 426
dynamics 375, 383, 551–86, 665
difference equations 553–68
differential equations 569–86
e 164–5, 200, 570
continuous compounding of interest 200–1
differential equations 570
logarithms to base e see natural logarithms
economic functions, optimization of 298–319
economic order quantity (EOQ) 329
elastic demand 284, 285, 296, 665
Index
675

elasticity
arc elasticity 287, 291, 296, 663
differentiation of 284–97
marginal revenue and, relationship between 292–6
point elasticity 285–6, 670
elasticity of demand 284–97
cross-price 357, 358–9, 371, 664
income 358, 359, 371, 666
marginal revenue and, relationship between 292–6,
329
partial differentiation of 357–9
price 284–90, 296, 329, 357, 358, 371, 670
quadratic equations 289–90
unit 284, 285, 296, 672
elasticity of supply, price 291–2, 296, 670
elements of matrices 454, 468, 665
elimination method 36–46, 487
meaning of term 36, 45, 665
endogenous variables 52, 62, 665
entries, matrix 454
equations
algebraic 81–6
cubic 302–3
mathematical operations applied to 22
solving 81–6
structural 375, 383, 477, 495
see also difference equations; differential equations;
linear equations; non-linear equations;
quadratic equations; simultaneous linear
equations
equilibrium 47, 62, 665
consumption 477–8
income 100–2, 374–5, 477–8
market see market equilibrium
money market 104–7
price 47, 380–3, 475–6, 486
quantity 47, 380–3
equilibrium values
difference equations 558, 566, 665
differential equations 575, 576, 580, 583, 665
Euler’s theorem 368, 371, 665
Excel 3–8
bar charts 565–6
compound interest 201–3
difference equations 564–6
graphs, drawing 29–32
index numbers 187–8
investment appraisal 230–2
national income determination 108–10
non-linear equations 137–8
supply and demand analysis 57–9, 564–6
exogenous variables 52, 53, 63, 665
expanding the brackets 71–6
exploding time paths 557
exponential forms 142, 153, 159, 666
see also powers
exponential functions 162–72, 666
compound interest 200–1
derivatives 331–40
differential equations 570–2
differentiation of 331–40, 571
graphical representation 162–4, 332
integration of 426, 427
exponents see powers
external demand 503–11, 513, 666
extrema see stationary points
factorization 75–6
of quadratics 119–20
factors of production 53, 96, 110, 149, 159, 666
feasible regions 521–32, 537, 541, 543, 666
unbounded 531–2, 672
ﬁnal (external) demand 503–11, 513, 666
ﬁnance 175–236
compound interest 194–208
geometric series 209–19
investment appraisal 220–36
percentages 177–93
ﬁrms 100, 374, 377
ﬁrst-order derivatives 256, 258, 300–1, 346–7, 392,
395, 666
ﬁrst principal minors in matrices 594, 595, 597, 666
ﬁxed costs 131, 139, 431, 666
ﬂow charts 89–92, 94, 666
foreign trade 498–9
formulae
extraction from tables of numbers 169–72
transposition of 87–95, 672
four-sector model 379–80
fractional indices/powers 144–5, 158, 247
fractions
addition of 78–9, 80
algebraic 76–81, 84, 663
differentiation of 279–82
division of 77, 78, 80
multiplication of 76–7, 80
in simultaneous linear equations 37–8
subtraction of 78–9, 80–1
functions
complementary see complementary functions
constant returns to scale 151, 152, 159
consumption 97, 110
decreasing 49–50, 62, 664
decreasing returns to scale 151, 152, 159, 664
demand see demand functions
derived 243, 249
Index
676

functions (continued)
economic, optimization of 198–330
exponential see exponential functions
of functions 275
homogeneous 151, 159, 666
increasing 53, 62, 666
increasing returns to scale 151, 152, 159, 668
inverse 49, 63, 667
Lagrangian 412, 419, 596, 668
marginal see marginal functions
meaning of term 47, 63, 666
objective see objective functions
power see power functions
production see production functions
quadratic 115–28
savings 97
of several variables 343–4, 354
partial differentiation of 343–55
supply see supply functions
symmetric 354, 671
of two variables 368, 666
future values, compound interest 196, 200–3, 206, 666
geometric progression 209, 217, 666
geometric ratio 209, 217, 666
geometric series 209–19, 666
compound interest problems 209–15
loan repayments 213–15
non-renewable resources 215–17
savings plans 211–13
glossary 663–72
GNP see gross national product
goods
complementary 51–2, 60, 62, 664
inferior 53, 63, 667
substitutable 51, 60, 63, 671
superior 53, 63, 671
government bonds 233–4
government expenditure 101–2, 110, 377–9, 495–7, 666
government expenditure multiplier 378
gradients see slopes
graphs
average costs 132–4
bar charts 565–6
constrained optimization 401–4
difference equations 556–9
differential equations 575
drawing with Excel 29–32
exponential functions 162–4, 332, 570–1
feasible regions 521–32, 537, 541, 543, 666
functions of several variables 345
indifference curves 362–5, 371, 403, 667
inequalities 517–23
integration and 438–43
intercepts 24, 26, 27, 33
intersection points of two lines 24–6
isocost curves 401–2, 410, 667
isoquants 366, 370, 371, 401, 667
L-shaped curves 132–3, 139, 667
linear equations 15–34, 121
linear programming 523–34
quadratic functions 121–7, 298–9, 302
sketching curves from tables of values 122, 243–5
sketching lines from equations 21–9
slope–intercept approach 26–7
slopes 26–7, 33
stationary points 298–304
tangents to 241–5
three-dimensional 345–6, 370, 397
total costs 133, 134–5
total revenue 129–31, 134–5
U-shaped curves 121–7, 244, 672
gross national product (GNP), annual growth 204–5
Hessian matrices 594–7, 666
bordered 596–7, 663
ﬁrst principal minors in 594, 595, 597, 666
second principal minors in 594, 595, 597, 671
homogeneity, degree of 151–2, 368, 665
homogeneous functions 151–2, 159, 666
partial differentiation of 368
households 100, 374, 377, 502, 503
hyperbolas, rectangular 132–3, 139, 670
identity matrices 473, 479, 489, 666
implicit differentiation 352–4, 364–5, 367, 591–3, 666
import see marginal propensity to import multiplier
income 96
disposable 102, 110, 665
equilibrium 100–2, 374–5, 477–8
see also national income
income elasticity of demand 358, 359, 371, 666
increasing functions 53, 62, 666
increasing returns to scale 151, 152, 159
indeﬁnite integrals 667
indeﬁnite integration 423–36, 667
independent variables 49, 62, 344, 354
index notation 142–5
index numbers 184–8, 191, 667
indices see powers
indifference curves 362–5, 371, 403, 667
indifference maps 362, 371, 403, 667
inelasticity of demand 284, 285, 296, 667
inequalities 67–70
linear 517–20
see also linear programming
Index
677

inferior goods 53, 63, 667
inﬂation 188–90, 667
inﬂection, points of 299, 316, 670
initial conditions
difference equations 554, 560, 563, 566, 667
differential equations 570, 572, 573, 575, 576, 578,
580, 581, 582, 583, 667
input–output analysis 503, 513, 667
matrix operations 502–14
inputs see production
integer programming 544–5, 547, 667
integrals 424, 434, 667
deﬁnite 438, 667
integration 421–50
constant rule 427–8
constants of 425, 431, 434, 439, 569, 664
deﬁnite 429, 434, 437–50, 664
difference rule 427–8
direct way for simple functions 425–7
exponential functions 426, 427
indeﬁnite 423–36, 667
limits 438
power functions 426, 427
sum rule 427–8
intercepts 24, 26, 27, 33, 667
interest
compound see compound interest
interest on see compound interest
simple 195, 206, 671
interest rates
national income determination 104–7
speculative demand for money and, relationship
between 233–4
intermediate output 503–11, 513, 667
internal rate of return (IRR) 222–5, 228–30, 234, 667
limitations 223–4
intersection points of two lines 24–6
inverse functions 49, 63, 667
inverses
mathematical operations 423, 434, 667
matrices 455, 473, 483–6, 487, 488, 489, 667
inversion of matrices see matrices
investment 99–100, 110, 559, 667
net 445, 669
investment appraisal 220–36
annuities 225–6, 234, 447–8, 663
government bonds 233–4
internal rate of return (IRR) 222–5, 228–30, 234
net present value (NPV) 222–3, 226–8, 234
present values 221–30
investment ﬂow 445–7
investment multipliers 375, 376–7, 383, 478, 667
IRR see internal rate of return
IS schedule 104, 108–10, 667
isocost curves 401–2, 410, 667
isoquants 366, 369, 370, 371, 401, 667
L-shaped curves 132–3, 139, 667
labour 149, 159, 268, 668
average product of 306–7, 316, 327–8, 338–9, 663
marginal product of 268–70, 273, 306–7, 327,
366–71, 668
labour productivity 306–7, 316, 668
Lagrange multipliers 411–20, 668
Lagrangian function 412, 419, 596, 668
Laspeyre indices 187–8, 191, 193, 668
law of diminishing marginal productivity 270–1, 273,
668
law of diminishing marginal utility 361, 371, 404
law of diminishing returns 270–1, 273, 668
law(s)
associative 466
commutative 466
diminishing marginal productivity 270–1, 273
diminishing marginal utility 361, 371, 404
diminishing returns 270–1, 273
distributive see distributive law
Leontief inverse 507–9, 511–12, 513, 668
limits
exponential 165
of integration 438, 668
of slopes 248, 588
linear difference equations 553–64
linear equations 13–112, 668
algebra 35–46, 66–86
coefﬁcients 20–1, 26, 33
graphs representing 15–34, 121
mathematical operations applied to 22
matrix-based solutions 467–8, 475–8, 485–8
meaning of term 20, 33
national income determination using 96–112
sketching lines from 21–9
supply and demand analysis 47–65
transposition of formulae 87–95
see also simultaneous linear equations
linear inequalities, graphical representation 517–20
linear programming 515–49, 668
applications 535–49
graphical solutions 523–34
LM schedule 105, 108–10, 668
loan repayments, geometric series 213–15
local maxima and minima 299, 316, 669
logarithms 153–8, 159, 167–8, 668
compound interest calculations 197
natural see natural logarithms
rules 155–8, 159, 168, 336–7
Index
678

macroeconomics 96–112
comparative statics 374–80
difference equations 559–61
differential equations 577–9
input–output analysis 502–14
matrices 477–8
Cramer’s rule 495–9
percentages, application of 183–93
see also national income, determination
Maple 9–11
differential equations 581–3
functions of two variables 368–71
integration 432–4, 436
linear programming 546–7
matrices 487–8
optimization problems 314–16, 396–8
stationary points 396–8
three-dimensional graphs 370, 397
marginal costs 267–8, 273, 668
integration of 430–1, 432–4
optimization of economic functions 308–9, 
321–6
marginal functions
differentiation of 261–74
integration of 430–4
marginal product 402
marginal product of capital 366, 367, 371, 668
marginal product of labour 268–70, 273, 306–7,
327–8, 366–71, 668
marginal productivity, diminishing, law of 270–1, 
273, 668
marginal propensity to consume (MPC) 97, 99, 110,
272–3, 668
in dynamic conditions 559, 561, 579
integration of 431–2
marginal propensity to consume multiplier 375, 383,
668
marginal propensity to import multiplier 380
marginal propensity to save (MPS) 99, 110, 272–3, 
668
integration of 432
marginal rate of commodity substitution (MRCS)
363–5, 371, 668
marginal rate of technical substitution (MRTS)
366–71, 402, 668
marginal revenue 262, 668
differentiation of total revenue 262–7, 273, 339
elasticity and, relationship between 292–6, 329
integration of 431, 432–4
optimization of economic functions 308–9, 
321–6
marginal utility 360–1, 371, 403–4, 668
diminishing, law of 361, 371, 404
market equilibrium 47, 54, 665
producer’s surplus and 444
quadratic functions 125–7
‘market forces’ 54
market saturation levels 166–7
mathematical operations
applying to equations 22
inverses 423, 434, 667
matrices 451–514, 668
addition of 457–8
adjoint 483, 484
adjugate 483, 484
algebra of 468, 472
basic operations 453–71
cofactors 479–85, 486, 488, 664
column vectors 457, 461–5, 468, 664
columns 454
determinants 473, 474, 480, 481–3, 488, 665
Cramer’s rule using 492–501, 664
division of 455
elements (entries) 454, 468, 665
ﬁrst principal minors 594, 595, 597, 666
Hessian 594–7, 666
identity 473, 479, 489, 666
input–output analysis 502–14
inverse 455, 473, 483–6, 487, 488, 489, 667
inversion of 472–91
equation solving 475–9, 485–8
Leontief inverse 507–9, 511–12, 513, 668
linear equations solved using 467–8, 475–8, 485–8
multiplication of 459–68, 475
general 463–8
row vectors by column vectors 461–5
scalar 459–60
non-property 466, 468
non-singular 473, 474, 489, 669
notation 454
orders 454, 468
row vectors 456–7, 461–5, 468, 670
rows 454
second principal minors 594, 595, 597, 671
simultaneous linear equations solved using 467–8,
475–8
singular 473, 474, 489, 671
square 472, 489, 671
subtraction of 458
of technical coefﬁcients 503–11, 513, 668
transposition of 455–7, 468, 672
zero 458–9, 468
maxima 121, 125, 299, 316, 388, 398, 669
maximization see optimization
maximum proﬁt 136, 138
method of substitution 404–9, 410, 669
Index
679

microeconomics
comparative statics 380–3
difference equations 561–6
differential equations 579–83
matrices 475–6
non-linear equations 125–7
see also supply and demand analysis
minima 299, 316, 388, 398, 669
minimization see optimization
modelling 49, 63, 669
money
demand and supply 104–5, 110, 233–4, 669
precautionary demand for 105, 111, 670
speculative demand for 105, 111, 671
transactions demand for 104–5, 111, 672
money market equilibrium 104–7
monopolies 265–6, 273, 322, 669
constrained optimization 414–16
unconstrained optimization 393–4
MPC see marginal propensity to consume
MPS see marginal propensity to save
MRCS see marginal rate of commodity substitution
MRTS see marginal rate of technical substitution
multiplication
algebraic fractions 76–7, 80
brackets 71–6
cross-multiplication 83
fractions 76–7, 80
matrices see matrices
negative numbers 17
scalar 459–60
by scale factors 180, 181
of successive scale factors 182
multipliers 669
autonomous consumption 375, 383, 478
autonomous export 380
autonomous taxation 378
balanced budget 378–9, 383, 663
government expenditure 378
in input–output analysis 511–12
investment 375, 376–7, 383, 478
Lagrange 411–20, 668
marginal propensity to consume 375, 383
marginal propensity to import 380
national economy models 99–112, 502
national income 96, 110, 271, 374, 669
determination
difference equations 559–61
differential equations 577–9
linear equations 96–112
natural logarithms 168–9, 172, 669
continuous compounding of interest 200–1
derivatives 331–40
differentiation of 331–40, 426
integration and 426
negative indices/powers 142–3, 146, 158, 163, 221, 247,
570
negative numbers
addition of 18–19
division of 17
multiplication of 17
square roots 119
subtraction of 18–19
net investment 445, 669
net present value (NPV) 222–3, 226–8, 234, 669
nominal data 189, 191, 669
non-linear equations 113–74
difference equations 564–6
quadratic equations 115–28
revenue, cost and proﬁt 129–40
simultaneous 390–1
non-negativity constraints 524, 527, 530, 532, 537, 541,
669
non-renewable resources 215–17
non-singular matrices 473, 474, 489, 669
NPV see net present value
number line 67, 84, 669
numbers
index 184–8, 191, 667
negative see negative numbers
tables of, extraction of formulae from 169–72
numerators 76, 84, 669
objective functions 401, 410, 669
constrained optimization of 401–2, 404–9, 410,
415–16
linear programming 524–8, 532, 539–41, 542–5
operations see mathematical operations
optimization
average costs 310–12
average product of labour 306–7, 320, 327–8, 338–9
constrained see constrained optimization
economic functions 298–319
meaning of term 304, 316, 669
production functions 304–7
proﬁts see proﬁt(s)
tax revenue 312–14, 330
total revenue 307–8
unconstrained 386–99, 672
orders of matrices 454, 468, 669
origin of graph 15, 33, 669
oscillatory time paths 559, 563
output see production
output constraint 408–9
own price elasticity of demand 357, 359
Index
680

Paasche indices 188, 191, 193, 669
parabolas 121–7, 669
parameters 49, 63, 669
partial derivatives 346–50, 354, 392, 395, 414, 512,
594, 669
partial differentiation 341–420
comparative statics 374–85
constrained optimization 400–10
elasticity of demand 357–9
functions of several variables 343–55
Lagrange multipliers 411–20
production functions 365–71
unconstrained optimization 386–99
utility functions 359–65
particular solutions (PS)
difference equations 555, 556, 557, 558, 560, 562,
566, 669
differential equations 573, 574, 575, 580, 583, 670
percentages 177–93
index numbers 184–8
inﬂation 188–90, 191, 663
interest 203–4, 206, 663
scale factors 180–3
perfect competition 50, 266, 273, 392, 443–4, 670
point elasticity 285–6, 670
points of inﬂection 299, 316, 670
power functions
differentiation of 245, 587–8
integration of 426, 427
power(s) 142–5, 158, 159, 670
fractional 144–5, 158, 247
negative 142–3, 146, 158, 163, 221, 247, 570
rules of 145–53, 158
of zero 142, 143, 158
precautionary demand for money 105, 111, 670
present value 221–30, 234, 447–8, 670
see also net present value (NPV)
price discrimination 322–6, 394–5
price elasticity of demand 284–90, 296, 357, 358, 371,
670
marginal revenue and, relationship between 292–6,
329
price elasticity of supply 291–2, 296, 670
price equilibrium 47, 380–3, 475–6, 486
primitives see integrals
principal (simple or compound interest) 196, 206, 
670
see also present value
problem formulation 535–8
producer’s surplus 443–4, 670
product rule of differentiation 278–80, 335, 592, 
593
production, factors of 53, 96, 110, 149, 159, 666
production functions 149–52, 159, 268–73, 670
Cobb–Douglas see Cobb–Douglas production
functions
constrained optimization of 401–2, 406–9, 417–19
differentiation of 268–73
exponential functions 338–9
homogeneous 151–2
input–output analysis 503
isoquants 366, 369, 370
natural logarithms 339
optimization of 304–7
partial differentiation of 365–71
productivity, labour 306–7, 316
proﬁt
deﬁnition 129, 139, 670
maximum 136, 138
optimization of 308–9, 320, 321–6, 339
linear programming 536–8
unconstrained 387, 391–6
PS see particular solutions
pure competition see perfect competition
quadratic equations 115–28, 302, 304–6
demand elasticity 290–1
quadratic functions 115, 670
demand functions 125–7
factorization of 119–20
graphs representing 121–7, 298–9, 302
supply functions 125–7
quantity equilibrium 47
quotient rule of differentiation 281–2, 327, 335
real data 189, 191, 670
reciprocals 146, 221, 570
differentiation of natural logs 335, 339, 426, 429
integration of 426, 429
rectangular hyperbolas 132–3, 139, 670
recurrence relations see difference equations
reduced form (macroeconomic model) 375, 383, 477,
670
relative maxima and minima 299, 316
revenue
average 266, 273, 663
continuous streams 448
differentiation of 262–6
marginal see marginal revenue
total see total revenue
reverse ﬂow charts 90–1, 94, 670
roots
fractional powers as 144–5, 158, 247
see also square roots
row vectors in matrices 456–7, 462, 468, 670
rows, matrix 454
Index
681

rules
Cramer’s rule 492–501, 664
differentiation see differentiation
indices 145–53, 158
integration 427–8
logarithms 155–8, 159, 168, 336–7
powers 145–53, 158
saddle points 388–9, 398, 670
saturation levels 166–7
savings 96
autonomous 99, 110, 663
differentiation and 271–3
marginal propensity see marginal propensity to save
savings function 97, 99
integration and 432
savings plans, geometric series 211–13
scalar multiplication of matrices 459–60
scalar quantities, distinguished from vector quantities
457
scale factors 180–3, 191, 196, 670
multiplication by 180, 181
multiplication of successive 182
second-order derivatives 256–8, 300–1, 347–50, 392,
395, 414, 594, 671
second principal minors in matrices 594, 595, 597, 671
simple interest 195, 206, 671
compared with compound interest 195
simplex algorithm 546
simultaneous linear equations 26, 33, 671
algebraic solutions 35–46
graphical solutions 24–34
inﬁnitely many solutions 40
matrix-based solutions 467–8, 475–8
no solution 39
with three unknowns 41–5
simultaneous linear inequalities 521–32
simultaneous non-linear equations 390–1
singular matrices 473, 474, 489, 671
sinking fund 211, 217, 671
slopes
of curves 241–5, 249
slopes of 256
of straight lines 26–7, 33, 239–41, 242, 249, 
671
small increments formula 351–3, 354, 378, 671
speculative demand for money 105, 111, 671
interest rates and, relationship between 233–4
spreadsheets
difference equations 564–6
Laspeyre indices 187
see also Excel
square function (x2)
curve 121, 244, 587
differentiation of 245, 587–8
values 121, 243
square matrices 472, 489, 671
square roots 116, 127, 671
of negative numbers 119
stable models
difference equations 559, 566, 671
differential equations 576, 578, 579, 583, 671
statics 375, 383, 671
stationary points 298–304, 316, 671
constrained optimization 404–9
Hessian matrices 595
of inﬂection 299, 316
proﬁts 321
unconstrained optimization 387–91
stock holding problems 329
straight lines
slopes 26–7, 33, 239–41, 242, 671
see also graphs
structural equations 375, 383, 477, 495, 671
substitutable goods 51, 60, 63, 671
substitution, method of 404–9, 410, 669
subtraction
fractions 78–9, 80
matrices 458
negative numbers 18–19
sum rule of differentiation 252–3, 347
sum rule of integration 427–8
superior good(s) 53, 63, 671
supply
analysis see supply and demand analysis
money 104, 110, 233–4, 669
price elasticity of 291–2, 296
supply and demand analysis
difference equations 561–6
differential equations 579–83
linear equations 47–65
two-commodity market model 60–1
supply functions 53, 63, 671
producer’s surplus 443–4
quadratic 125–7
surplus
consumer’s 441–3, 664
producer’s 443–4, 670
symmetric functions 354, 671
tables of numbers
extraction of formulae from 169–72
sketching curves from 122
tangents 241–5, 249, 264, 671
Index
682

taxation 101–2, 111, 377–9, 495–7, 671
autonomous taxation multiplier 378
optimization of 312–14, 330
supply and demand analysis affected by 56
technical coefﬁcients, matrices of 503–11, 513, 668
technical substitution, marginal rate of 366–71, 402,
668
technology matrices 503–11, 513, 671
three-dimensional graphs 345–6, 370, 397
three-sector model 377–9
time, in economic models see difference equations;
differential equations
time paths
exploding 557
oscillatory 559, 563
uniformly converging 558, 559
uniformly diverging 557, 559
time series 184, 191, 671
total costs 131, 139, 671
graphs 133, 134–5
integration of marginal costs 430–4
non-linear equations 131–3, 145
optimization of economic functions 323–6
total demand (for money) 105
total output 504–11
total revenue 129, 139, 284, 672
differentiation of 262–7, 273, 339
graphs 129–31, 134–5
integration of marginal revenue 430 –4
non-linear equations 129–31, 134–5
optimization of 307–8
trading nations 498–9
transactions demand for money 104–5, 111, 672
transposition
of formulae 87–95, 672
of matrices 455–7, 468, 672
turning points see stationary points
two-commodity market model, supply and demand
analysis 60–1
U-shaped curves 121–7, 672
sketching from function formula 123–4, 243–4
unbounded feasible regions 531–2, 672
unconstrained optimization 386–99, 672
uniformly converging time paths 558, 559, 566, 672
uniformly diverging time paths 557, 559, 566, 672
unit elasticity of demand 284, 285, 296, 672
unstable models
difference equations 559, 566, 671, 672
differential equations 576–7, 671, 672
utility 360, 371, 672
utility functions
constrained optimization of 386–7, 403–4
partial differentiation of 359–65
unconstrained optimization of 396–8
variable costs 131, 139, 672
variables
dependent 49, 62, 344, 354, 665
endogenous 52, 62, 665
exogenous 52, 53, 62, 665
functions of several 343–4, 354
partial differentiation of 343–55
functions of two variables 368, 666
independent 49, 62, 344, 354, 667
vectors
distinguished from scalar quantities 457
see also column vectors; row vectors
wages optimization, linear programming 542–5
x axis of graph 15, 20, 26, 33, 672
y axis of graph 15, 20, 26, 33, 672
zero
division by 22, 426
power of 142, 143, 158
zero matrices 458–9, 468, 672
Index
683

