 
1
 
Parish-Morris J., Golinkoff, R. M., & Hirsh-Pasek, K. (2013). From coo to code: Language 
acquisition in early childhood.  In P. Zelazo (Ed.), The Oxford handbook of developmental 
psychology, Vol. 1 (pp. 867-908). NY: Oxford University Press 
 
 
 
 
From Coo to Code: A Brief Story of Language Development 
 
 
Julia Parish-Morris  
 
 Roberta Michnick Golinkoff  
Kathryn Hirsh-Pasek 
University of Pennsylvania 
     
University of Delaware 
          Temple University 
 
 
 
January 11, 2012 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*The production of this chapter was supported by grants to the second and third authors from the 
National Science Foundation (SBR9601306 and SBR9615391) and from NIH (RO1HD050199). 

 
2
1.   100-150 word abstract  
Infants begin the process of language acquisition before birth, and their brains appear specially 
prepared to acquire complex systems of communication. This chapter charts the child’s journey 
from coo to code, discussing how children find their first words in a cacophony of sound, how 
they determine what words mean, and what happens when children have variable input or learn 
more than one language at the same time. The journey is exciting, enlightening, and filled with 
surprises as we explore the myriad abilities of a child’s developing mind. 
2.   5-10 keywords for indexing etc.  
language, language development, language acquisition, word learning, child development  
3.   List of 5 questions for future research  
 What is the relationship between children’s early phonological and segmentation abilities 
and subsequent language acquisition? 
 Given that we now know many of the factors associated with language development, can 
parents be trained to provide the kind of input that will facilitate language development if 
they do not do so naturally? 
 In what ways will the advent of new neurological measures of language functioning 
shape the questions the field will begin to ask?  
 Do children benefit from learning more than one language or are they hindered? 
 What is the relationship between infants’ abilities to form nonlinguistic concepts such as 
path and manner and figure and ground and their subsequent ability to express these in 
language? 
 
4.   Bulleted list of 10 key points to take away from the chapter 

 
3
 Language is an intricate system of sounds or gestured symbols that people use to 
communicate with one another. 
 Theories of language development are diverse. Five major branches of thought include 
behaviorist, innatist, cognitive, interactionist (social), and most recently, Bayesian. 
 The Emergentist Coalition Model (ECM; Hollich et al., 2000), takes a hybrid approach 
emphasizing how word learning starts out as an associative process and gradually 
becomes a process reliant on social and linguistic information. 
 Language development starts before birth and is evident shortly thereafter (e.g., attention 
to prosody) 
 At the inception of language acquisition, infants must discriminate between individual 
sounds (e.g., “pot” vs. “dot”); find larger units such as individual syllables and words 
through the process of segmentation; and find the meaning these units contain.  
 Infant-directed speech is not bad for infants; rather it contributes to their early language 
learning. 
 Infants initially appear specially equipped to learn any language of the world, as 
demonstrated by their ability to discriminate between speech sounds from a variety of 
languages 
 Infants easily learn more than one language and bilingualism is the norm rather than the 
exception. 
 Infants have been shown to compute “transitional probabilities” between syllables to find 
those that co-occur frequently in the stream of speech.  This contributes to infants’ ability 
to segment the language stream. 
 Verbs are generally more difficult for children to learn than nouns. 

 
4
 By combining words and sounds in a grammatical way, speakers can progress beyond 
simplistic telegraphic speech (e.g., “apple”) and begin talking about relations between 
referents (e.g., “She ate the apple”). 

 
5
“How Ann Salisbury can claim that Pam Dawber's anger at not receiving her fair share of 
acclaim for Mork and Mindy's success derives from a fragile ego escapes me” (cited in 
Gleitman, 1981). 
I. 
Introduction 
Our human language ability is impressive, as evidenced by the reader’s ease in 
understanding the sentence above.  How do infants come to understand sentences like these and 
numerous others they have never seen before? In this chapter, we explore the complex process of 
language development, starting with the assertion that the task is more difficult than it first 
appears. We review evidence demonstrating that infants begin the journey toward language 
before birth, and then discuss the various tools used as they begin to break up the speech stream. 
The sections that follow describe word learning, grammatical development, and the pragmatics 
of language. The penultimate portion of this chapter addresses such topics as bilingualism, 
language in children with autism and the hearing impaired, and the creation of new languages. 
We propose a theory of language acquisition that unifies evidence from perceptual, social, and 
linguistic research: The Emergentist Coalition Model (Hollich, Hirsh-Pasek, & Golinkoff, 2000), 
and discuss future directions in the field of language acquisition research. 
The field of language development is rich and varied; although this chapter will give a 
broad overview of child language, and introduce both classic and new methods and theories in 
child language research, we unfortunately lack the space to describe each and every landmark 
study that has been conducted.  Elsewhere, however, we have discussed how the advent of 
various methods changed the field of language acquisition dramatically (Golinkoff & Hirsh-
Pasek, 2011). In addition, our examples are often drawn from contemporary, rather than classic 

 
6
research. This approach allows the reader to delve into the reference sections of recent articles 
and hone in on classic research as desired. 
II. 
First, what is language? 
 
Language is an intricate system of sounds or gestured symbols that people use to 
communicate with one another. Children typically begin to use either a spoken or signed system 
in their first year or shortly thereafter, and begin to understand individual symbols even earlier. 
Although language learning seems to come quite naturally to most children, it is not a simple 
task. To become competent speakers of their ambient language, children must master the 
phonemes (basic sounds in spoken language or basic gestures in a signed language), semantics 
(meaning), grammar (language structure; e.g., the way gerunds and particles are combined into 
sentences), and pragmatics (how language is used in social contexts) of that language. To 
complicate the task, the world’s languages are diverse, using different components of sound to 
signal meaning. For example, the Chinese word /bai/ can mean “split,” “white,” “swing,” or 
“defeat,” depending upon how the voice pitch in vowels is varied (Howie, 1976; Luo et al., 
2006). Yet other languages are highly inflected, building up meaning by adding inflections 
(morphology) to a single word rather than using separate words for separate semantic 
components (Aksu-Koç & Slobin, 1985; MacWhinney & Pléh, 1997). In an agglutinative 
language like Turkish, for instance, word structure is formed by adding morphemes (suffixes) to 
root words. To express “The things that are on the bookcase,” four inflections are added to the 
root kitap (book) to generate a single word kitaplıktakiler (kitap-lık-ta-ki-ler; Tilbe Göksun, 
personal communication). Other languages using less morphology, such as English, may rely 
more on word order to convey meaning: Brutus killed Caesar preserves history while Caesar 
killed Brutus destroys it. 

 
7
 
Given this diversity of language structure, how do infants find units (like phonemes, 
morphemes and words) and how do they figure out how these units combine in the rules of their 
native language? Over the years, at least five types of language acquisition models have been 
proposed to explain how children accomplish this task: Behaviorist, innate, cognitive, 
interactionist (social), and most recently, Bayesian. We can think of these theories as five large 
branches of a tree, with families of related theories springing from each branch. Although 
moderate forms of these different theories are not mutually exclusive, and many contemporary 
theorists draw upon various aspects of each when explaining the course of child language 
development (e.g., Hollich et al., 2000), there are some fundamental differences in how language 
acquisition is conceptualized across theories.  
According to a behaviorist theory of language acquisition, children start from scratch. 
They hear language in the world, and acquire language (both words and grammar) based on 
imitation and experience alone (via positive and negative reinforcement; Skinner, 1957). It has 
been argued, however, that the input children receive is insufficient to explain how they develop 
fully generative and grammatical language in such a short period of time (the poverty of the 
stimulus argument; Chomsky, 1957). There are few adherents of pure behaviorist theories of 
language acquisition, although an emphasis on frequency and reliance on general purpose 
learning mechanisms like association can be seen in a number of contemporary connectionist 
models of language acquisition (e.g., Colunga & Smith, 2005; Elman, 2006, 2008; Elman et al., 
1996; Smith, 2000).  
The second primary theory of language development is equally extreme, anchored in the 
ideas of Noam Chomsky (1957), who argued that children must have an innate faculty for 
language acquisition. This innateness was captured in a metaphorical “Language Acquisition 

 
8
Device” that children possess at birth, providing them with a set of universal principles of 
language that are triggered by minimal language experience (for an in-depth discussion of 
Universal Grammar, see Roeper, 2007). Slobin later modified this position arguing that rather 
than possessing substantive rules of language at birth, children are born with a set of procedures 
and inferences that allow them to learn any language in the world (Slobin, 1970).  
The cognitive theory of language acquisition was proposed by Jean Piaget, who held that 
language develops in concert with general cognitive development (Piaget, 1926) and is but 
another manifestation of the symbolic function children construct in the second and third year of 
life. On this view, children’s use of language is part and parcel of how they think about the 
world. For example, if children have not learned the concept “seriation,” their use of comparative 
words such as bigger or smaller will reveal only partial understanding.  
Some, known as interactionist or social theorists, suggest that language exists for the 
purpose of communication and can therefore be learned only in the context of interpersonal 
interaction (Levy & Nelson, 1994; Nelson, 2007; Ratner & Bruner, 1978; Tomasello, 2000, 
2003). According to this theoretical viewpoint, the language behaviors of adults (e.g., infant 
directed speech, or IDS, discussed later in this chapter), and the exchange games that children 
and adults play are specially adapted to support the acquisition process.   
Tenenbaum, Xu, and colleagues have recently proposed a Bayesian model of word 
learning (Frank, Goodman, & Tenenbaum, 2009; Perfors, Tenenbaum, Griffiths, & Xu, 2011). 
On this theory, children infer the meaning of a word based not on a process of elimination 
(deductive reasoning) or by association, but rather by a system that rates each possible meaning 
of a word according to its statistical probability of being correct. Bayesian theory purports to 
account for a number of conundrums in word learning, including children’s ability to learn a 

 
9
word based on very few positive exemplars (e.g., a house cat, a toy cat, a cat on TV) without the 
necessity of negative exemplars (e.g., “That animal (a turtle) is not a cat”; Xu & Tenenbaum, 
2007a, 2007b).  
This chapter will review the language development literature from all standpoints, 
examining evidence for how infants and toddlers decipher what was once called “a blooming, 
buzzing confusion” (James, 1890, p. 492) of sounds and experiences to acquire the richness and 
intricacies present in all the languages of the world. 
III. 
In the beginning… 
By the third trimester, fetuses attend to prelinguistic fundamentals like consonant-vowel 
patterns and tonality (Lecanuet et al., 1988, 1989), and remarkably, demonstrate experience-
related preferences – that is, they show evidence of learning about auditory stimuli. After 
hearing the muffled sound of their mother’s voice through amniotic fluid near the end of 
gestation, fetuses react differently to a recording of a stranger’s voice than to a recording of their 
own mother’s voice. In 2003, Kisilevsky and colleagues explored fetal voice recognition by 
exposing 60 full-term fetuses (average gestational age: 38.4 weeks) to a 2-minute recording of 
either their mother’s voice or a stranger’s voice reading a poem. By measuring fetal heart rate 
before, during, and after the reading, researchers could determine whether infants responded 
differently to each type of stimuli. Results revealed that infants’ heart rates reliably increased 
when hearing a recording of their mother’s voice read a poem and reliably decreased when 
hearing a stranger read the same poem. Thus, infants learn something about human voices prior 
to birth (Kisilevsky et al., 2003, 2009; see also Smith, Dmochowski, Muir, & Kisilevsky, 2007). 
Recently, researchers found a similar effect using musical melodies, which may be analogous to 
the prosody of human voices. Women in their third trimester of pregnancy played a recording of 

 
10
a descending piano contour to their fetuses for 3 weeks. After the infants were born, researchers 
found greater heart rate deceleration in response to the familiar contour than to a matched 
ascending melody (Granier-Deferre, Bassereau, Ribeiro, Jacquet, & DeCasper, 2011). This 
finding is noteworthy because it suggests that fetuses are not only sensitive to aspects of 
language prior to birth (such as prosodic contour), but that they retain memories of prenatal 
experiences up to a month after they are born. 
What about the “language” abilities of neonates? Directly after birth, infant behavior 
suggests that they remember the voices and auditory stimuli heard during gestation. Not only do 
newborns prefer to hear their mother’s voice over a stranger’s voice immediately after birth 
(DeCasper & Fifer, 1980), infants also recall particular auditory stimuli heard during gestation. 
In a classic study of infant memory, researchers measured sucking behavior in response to a 
speech passage heard in utero (familiar stimuli) versus a novel passage (DeCasper & Spence, 
1986). Results revealed that infants preferred listening to the familiar stimuli, although they were 
not yet born when the speech was heard.  
IV. 
Phoneme discrimination and segmentation of the speech stream 
At the inception of language acquisition proper, infants must accomplish at least three 
tasks. First, they must discriminate individual sounds, such as the sounds that distinguish the 
words “pot” and “dot”. These sounds are called phonemes. Second, they must use these sounds 
as the basis for discriminating and segmenting individual syllables and words. Finally, after 
working on finding the smaller units of their language, children begin to use words to assemble 
phrases and clauses.  
When and how do infants segment floods of sounds into individual units (e.g., phonemes, 
syllables, words, clauses, phrases), and how do they decide where one unit ends and another unit 

 
11
begins? Take the case of phonemes. Research suggests that the same phoneme sounds different 
when couched in different words. This effect, known as coarticulation, belies the naive belief 
that speech sounds are organized “like beads on a string”. Instead, speech sounds run together 
during fluent discourse, causing the same phoneme to sound differently depending upon the 
sounds that come before or after it in a word or phrase. In addition to these issues with 
coarticulation, there is much variation in how a single phoneme is produced by the same speaker 
in different contexts (think of your speech when speaking to a baby versus hollering at a ball 
game), and the same phoneme sounds very different when produced by Dolly Parton versus 
James Earl Jones (Kuhl, 1979). On top of this, languages do not all employ the same set of 
phonemes – some phonemes typical of the Tlingit and Hindi languages simply do not exist in 
English. Variety in the sound of a single phoneme (depending on phoneme location, speaker, rate 
of speech, etc.) combined with the need to acquire language-specific phoneme repertoires forces 
infants to rely on multiple cues to discriminate and segment the auditory building blocks of their 
native language.  
What types of information are available to infants to help them discriminate and segment 
the speech stream? Infants have multiple tools at their disposal: They hear language in a special 
speech register produced by caregivers around the world when speaking to infants (infant 
directed speech or IDS), they are born with language-friendly perceptual abilities, they naturally 
attend to prosodic variability, they are capable of sophisticated statistical analyses, and they 
harness their knowledge of familiar words like Mommy to learn new words.  
Baby talk is good: Infant-directed speech as a scaffold 
Infants are born with a preference for listening to language over other auditory stimuli, as 
demonstrated by the finding that newborns prefer listening to human language over an artificial 

 
12
“language” that mimics some of its properties (Vouloumanos & Werker, 2007) and 3-month-olds 
prefer human speech over other naturally occurring sounds like macaque vocalizations (Shultz & 
Vouloumanos, 2010). The same is true in the visual realm: hearing 6-month-olds prefer to watch 
sign language rather than non-linguistic gesture (Krentz & Corina, 2008). This may suggest that 
infants are primed, “ready and willing” to learn language in the verbal or gestural modalities – 
and caregivers typically encourage acquisition by modifying their interactions with infants to 
facilitate language learning. Originally termed “motherese” (Newport, 1975), this type of 
modification is now often referred to as child-directed speech (CDS) or infant-directed speech 
(IDS; for a discussion of infant-directed gesture or “motionese”, see Brand, Baldwin, & 
Ashburn, 2002; Brand & Shallcross, 2008; Brand, Shallcross, Sabatos, & Massie, 2007). IDS is 
found in language communities throughout the world, and is used by mothers, fathers, 
grandparents, aunts and uncles, brothers and sisters, unrelated caregivers, interested bystanders – 
and even 4-year-olds when they are speaking to 2-year-olds (Shatz & Gelman, 1973). IDS is 
attractive to children – infants as young as newborn to 4 months of age demonstrate a robust 
preference for listening to IDS over adult-directed speech (Cooper & Aslin, 1990; Fernald, 
1985).  
What are the characteristics of IDS? When speaking with children, speakers often modify 
word order (Narasimhan & Dimroth, 2008), exaggerate semantically meaningful tones (Liu, 
Tsao, & Kuhl, 2007), speak slowly in shorter phrases, use simpler words with fewer syllables per 
phrase, speak in higher than average registers, and exaggerate intonation contours by stretching 
vowels (Fernald, 1992; Fernald & Mazzie, 1991; Fernald & Simon, 1984; Gleitman, Newport, & 
Gleitman, 1984; Grieser & Kuhl, 1988). 

 
13
Hearing IDS has been linked to a number of positive outcomes for children, including a 
larger vocabulary (Gleitman et al., 1984; Huttenlocher, Haight, Bryk, Seltzer, & Lyons, 1991; 
Masur, 1982; Rowe, 2008; Tomasello, 1988), which may be due to increased brain activity in 
response to IDS (Zangl & Mills, 2007), better word memory and categorization skills when 
hearing novel words in IDS (Singh, 2008), improved word segmentation (Thiessen, Hill, & 
Saffran, 2005), and better speech perception – especially in the area of phonology (Liu, Kuhl, & 
Tsao, 2003; Tsao, Liu, & Kuhl, 2004; Werker et al., 2007). A recent study of Korean-speaking 
mothers interacting with adults and infants found that mothers speaking to their infants changed 
their speech in a number of ways that helped children learn the phonological regularities of their 
language. When speaking with infants, mothers were more likely to use sounds that infants were 
able to produce themselves and to highlight perceptually salient phonemes and sound patterns 
(Lee, Davis, & MacNeilage, 2008). Similar results have been found in English, Japanese 
(Werker et al., 2007), Russian, and Swedish (Kuhl et al., 1997). This type of modification offers 
children a foothold into the world of words and grammar (Fisher & Tokura, 1996a, 1996b).  
In addition to correlations with vocabulary outcome, a recent experimental word-learning 
study conducted by Ma and colleagues directly compared word learning in IDS and adult-
directed speech (ADS; Ma, Golinkoff, Houston, & Hirsh-Pasek, 2011). Results revealed that 21-
month-olds with small vocabularies relative to their peers did not learn novel words when they 
were presented in ADS, but did learn them when they words were taught using IDS. Twenty-
one-month-olds with larger vocabularies, on the other hand, were equally likely to learn a word 
in ADS or IDS. Testing 27-month-old children in the same paradigm, the researchers found that 
they could learn words in both the IDS and ADS conditions. These findings suggest that IDS 
supports early word learning – especially in toddlers with smaller vocabularies.  Ma et al. is one 

 
14
of the first studies to explore the effect of IDS on vocabulary development within an 
experimental (rather than correlational) paradigm. 
Hardware included: Infants have language-friendly perceptual abilities 
Child-directed speech helps infants begin to understand language, but is only one 
component of a complex process that allows children to break up the stream of sounds in their 
environment. Infants are not blank slates at the inception of language learning and are 
undoubtedly influenced by eavesdropping on maternal language while in the womb. However, 
they also appear to possess hardwired perceptual abilities that facilitate phoneme discrimination. 
For example, infants show evidence of differential responding to categories of consonant sounds 
at birth (e.g., they react differently to the syllables “ba” and “ga”; Bertoncini, Bijeljac-Babic, 
Blumstein, & Mehler, 1987), and show categorical responding to different vowel sounds by 6 
months of age (Kuhl, 1979). This suggests that infants’ ability to discriminate between sounds 
emerges concurrently with turning their attention to the problem of segmentation (Bortfeld, 
Morgan, Golinkoff, & Rathbun, 2005).  
The sounds of the world’s languages (from clicking in Khoisan languages to tonal 
variation in Mandarin Chinese) are remarkably diverse, but infants learn them all. How? Are 
infants born in Spain inherently prepared to perceive and produce the rolled rrr, whereas the 
infants of Namibia are ready to produce the click consonants of the Khoisian languages? 
A large body of research suggests that infants are born sensitive to all of the phonemes in 
the world’s verbal and sign languages (such as ASL, Tlingit, Swahili, Mandarin, and German; 
Baker, Golinkoff, & Petitto, 2006; Eimas, Siqueland, Jusczyk, & Vigorito, 1971; Jusczyk, 1997; 
Kuhl, 1993; Streeter, 1976). With increased exposure to a primary language, however, their 
ability to discriminate non-native phonemes is reduced (Best, McRoberts, Lafleur, & Silver-

 
15
Isenstadt, 1995; Kuhl, 2009; Werker, Gilbert, Humphrey, & Tees, 1981; Werker & Tees, 2005) 
while they simultaneously improve their discrimination of sounds in their native language (Kuhl, 
2009; Kuhl, Tsao, Liu, Zang, & De Boer, 2001). This process happens fairly quickly; evidence 
suggests that infants narrow in on the phonemic distinctions relevant to their ambient language(s) 
by approximately 10-12 months (Newman et al., 2006; Tsao, Liu, & Kuhl, 2004) – whether they 
are learning oral language or sign language (Palmer, Fais, Golinkoff, & Werker, in press). 
However, not all infants attend to phonemic distinctions in the same way. For example, better 
discrimination of the phonemes present in one’s native language at 7 months of age is associated 
with improved language outcomes (Kuhl, Conboy, Padden, Nelson, & Pruitt, 2005), but better 
non-native phonemic discrimination at 7 months is associated with reduced later language 
abilities (Kuhl et al., 2005). This suggests that honing in on the correct phonemes for the ambient 
language and reducing attention to non-native phoneme distinctions results in better language 
over time (see also Kuhl et al., 2008). 
This ability to discriminate non-native phonemes is not completely lost in the first few 
months of life, however (Best et al., 2001). If 9-month-old infants are exposed to a non-ambient 
language in a social context for even a brief period of time (e.g., 12 laboratory sessions), the 
declines that are typically observed can be resuscitated (Kuhl, Tsao, & Liu, 2003). The native-
language specialization that occurs over time continues through toddlerhood, as children begin to 
interpret sounds according to the dictates of their native language by the middle of the second 
year. For example, toddlers reared in Dutch-speaking environments treat elongated vowels as 
lexically contrastive (consistent with Dutch) but English-reared children do not (consistent with 
English; Dietrich, Swingley, & Werker, 2007). Similiarly, children learning Mandarin Chinese 
correctly interpret tonal changes as semantically meaningful whereas English-learning children 

 
16
do not. Early perception and later language ability in bi- and multilingual children is discussed 
later in this chapter. 
 
Semantically meaningful tones 
 
In addition to the attention-getting prosodic contours of IDS, infants use other types of 
auditory input to break into the world of language. Infants attend to music and tonality (Saffran, 
2003; Saffran, Loman & Robertson, 2000) which is especially important given that many 
languages of the world use variations in tone to express meaning (Han & Kim, 1974; Gandour, 
Potisuk, & Dechongkit, 1994; Laniran & Clements, 2003). In Somali, for example, pitch or pitch 
contour is used to distinguish the meanings of two words that are otherwise phonologically 
identical. Other languages that use meaningful tones are Mandarin, Navajo, Yoruba, Vietnamese, 
and Yucatec. 
 
Semantically meaningful tones are produced in different ways by different speakers 
(Zemlin, 1988), and multiple tones overlap during fluent speech (Xu, 1997). How do infants 
organize the range of tones they hear and manage to group them into categories? One way to 
explore this question is through the use of computational modeling, exposing simulated neural 
networks to a range of stimuli and observing the results of self-organization based on patterns of 
hierarchical similarities (Chater & Christiansen, 2008). Gauthier and colleagues (2007) used this 
method to explore how the infant brain captures and categorizes tones. A self-organizing neural 
network program was given multiple examples of four semantically meaningful tones that are 
present in Mandarin (Xu, 1997). The tones were produced by speakers with varying fundamental 
frequencies (i.e., a higher or lower vocal register) and varying pitch contour extrema. At test, it 
was revealed that the program had organized the input into categories of sound, and that those 

 
17
categories corresponded to the four semantically meaningful tonal categories of spoken 
Mandarin (Gauthier, Shi, & Xu, 2007).  
What goes together: Audio-visual synchrony, speech and perceptual-motor activity 
Infants know how to use their eyes and their ears at the same time, and are able to 
demonstrate this ability in language-learning contexts by 8 weeks of age (Kuhl & Meltzoff, 
1982, 1984; Patterson & Werker, 2003). For example, Patterson and Werker (2003) found that 2-
month-olds can match auditory vowel sounds to visual face information. By tracking correlations 
between what they see and what they hear, infants pick up cues that help them to segment the 
speech stream – even in noisy situations such as when the TV is on or siblings are playing 
nearby. Research by Hollich and colleagues (2005) revealed that 7.5-month-olds were able to 
pick out target words from one of two simultaneous (and equally loud) speech streams if, and 
only if, the target audio was accompanied by a correlated visual display (e.g., a person speaking 
or an oscillation synchronized to the speech stream). The authors argued that audio-visual 
correlation (not limited to faces) serves to direct the attention of very young infants to certain 
sounds, which helps them to segment the speech stream in a noisy context (Hollich, Newman, & 
Jusczyk, 2005). 
The importance of audio-visual correlations to the acquisition of language has likewise 
been found using neuroimaging methods. For example, a recent study of brain activation in 
response to speech and non-speech sounds revealed a link between speech perception and motor 
representations in infancy. Using magnetoencephalography (MEG) to measure responses in 
different areas of the brain, Imada and colleagues (2006) found a developmental pattern wherein 
initially, the newborn brain demonstrated an all-purpose activation to any and all sounds, 
regardless of whether they were syllables, pseudo-speech, or non-speech sounds like music. Six 

 
18
to 12 months later, however, speech sounds activated an area specially used for perceptual-motor 
processing (Imada, Zhang, Cheour, Taulu, Ahonen, & Kuhl, 2006). This finding supports a link 
between speech and perceptual-motor representations in the brain that may be related to the 
behavioral finding that infants use audio-visual synchrony to segment words from the speech 
stream. 
All stressed out: Using stress patterns to segment 
Infants are attuned to stress patterns (like the difference between TRICK-y and re-
SERVE). By 7.5 and 13.5 months respectively, English-learning infants can use the predominant 
strong-weak pattern of stress in English to pick nouns (Jusczyk, Houston, & Newsome, 1999) as 
well as verbs (Nazzi, Dilley, Jusczyk, Shattuck-Hufnagel, & Jusczyk, 2005) out of a fluent 
speech stream (this is called the trochaic bias). In a language that is not characterized by a 
predominant strong-weak pattern of stress (for example, Canadian French has an iambic (weak-
strong) structure), infants segment only those words consistent with the most common stress 
pattern of their ambient language (Polka, Sundara, & Blue, 2002). Thus, by approximately 9 
months of age, infants develop language-specific rhythmic biases that facilitate word 
segmentation.   
 
Baby statisticians and rule learners 
Infants demonstrate more than language-friendly perceptual abilities and heightened 
attention to speech. In fact, infants are remarkable statisticians, and appear to learn rules quite 
well (Johnson, Fernandes, & Frank, 2009; Marcus, Vijayan, Rao, & Vishton, 1999). The 
structure of language is conducive to statistical analyses (Christiansen, Onnis, & Hockema, 
2009; Mintz, 2006; Onnis & Christiansen, 2008; Soderstrom, Conwell, Feldman, & Morgan, 
2009), and significant research suggests that infants exploit these structural regularities when 

 
19
decoding the speech stream. One groundbreaking study of infant statistical abilities revealed that 
infants are able to decipher the speech stream by recognizing that sound combinations occurring 
within words occur more frequently than sound combinations between words (Saffran, Aslin, & 
Newport, 1996). Using a familiarization-preference procedure (developed by Jusczyk & Aslin, 
1995), Saffran and colleagues (1996) familiarized eight-month-old infants with 2 minutes of 
monotone female speech. The speech stream was a simplified artificial language containing 
consonant-vowel syllables (e.g., bubidakupadotitabidakubupati), some of which co-occurred 
100% of the time (e.g., bida – analogous to a combination of sounds within a word in normal 
speech, and part of the nonsense word bidaku), and some that occurred together less frequently – 
around 30% of the time (e.g., kupa – analogous to the sounds that occasionally occur together 
during the transition between words). For example, in “silly puppy”, the sounds “si” and “ly” 
have a higher transitional probability than the sounds “ly” and “pu”. A stringent second phase of 
the study challenged infants by presenting them with nonsense words and nonsense part words 
from the familiarization stream. Part words were formed by including the last syllable of one 
word with the first two syllables of another. In this difficult task, infants demonstrated that they 
had learned the nonsense words by increasing their attention to the part words – indicating that 
the part words were novel and the words were expected (Saffran et al., 1996). In sum, by 
capitalizing on the transitional probabilities of phonemes in a speech stream and segmenting 
those syllable combinations that have a high probability of co-occurring, infants are able to 
hypothesize which phonemes combine to form words and which do not.  
Is the ability to track transitional probabilities specific to language learning? A powerful 
series of studies suggests that the ability to track transitional probabilities is domain-general (i.e., 
not limited to linguistic stimuli). In one study, 7.5-month-olds were exposed to the same 

 
20
statistical learning task used by Saffran et al. (1996) with one difference: consonant-vowel 
syllables were replaced with musical tones. Results revealed that infants were able to track “tone 
words” as effectively as they track syllable-words (Saffran, Johnson, Aslin, & Newport, 1999). 
Evidence from visual modality likewise suggests that infants’ statistical learning abilities are 
domain-general. For example, one study familiarized 5- and 8-month-olds to a series of colored 
shapes in a manner analogous to the original Saffran et al. (1996) statistical learning task. At test, 
infants differentially responded to trials wherein the statistical probability that certain shapes 
would follow other shapes had changed from what they had seen during training (Kirkham, 
Slemmer, & Johnson, 2002). Recently, evidence of statistical learning to isolate events (distinct 
hand motions) has been shown in 7- to 9-month-old infants (Roseberry, Richie, Hirsh-Pasek, 
Golinkoff, & Shipley, 2011).  
In addition to being a domain-general skill, statistical learning ability does not appear to 
be unique to humans. Hauser and colleagues replicated the results obtained by Saffran et al. 
(1996) in the cotton-top tamarin, a non-human primate (Hauser, Newport, & Aslin, 2001), 
although a more difficult test of grammatical structure learning was accomplished only by 
infants (Saffran et al., 2008). Furthermore, experiments using natural language (rather than a 
simplified artificial language consisting of nonsense words as in Saffran et al., 1996) have thus 
far been conducted only with baby humans (Pelucchi, Hay, & Saffran, 2009).  
The ability to track transitional probabilities helps infants segment the sound stream into 
words, with the outcome of this process feeding into word learning in both artificial and natural 
languages (Graf Estes, Evans, Alibali, & Saffran, 2007; Hay, Pelucchi, Graf Estes, & Saffran, 
2011). In one recent study, 17-month-old English-reared infants were exposed to a novel natural 
language speech stream (Italian) consisting of words with high or low internal transitional 

 
21
probabilities. When infants were given the opportunity to then map those words onto referents, 
they were more likely to map words with high transitional probabilities – suggesting that 
experience with statistical regularity of sounds in a given language plays a role in acquiring word 
meaning (Hay et al., 2011).  
Infants segment the sound stream into words using statistical probabilities, and use those 
probabilities to map words to individual referents in the world, but what happens when infants 
need to learn rules that dictate how to put words together? Learning rules for how to properly 
order words and segment word sequences is a critical step toward language mastery and the use 
of grammar. However, the task of learning rules is different from tracking transitional 
probabilities because the latter does not require children to extend their knowledge to new 
exemplars. That is, in statistical learning procedures, there is a one-to-one mapping between 
sounds heard (or pictures seen) during familiarization and sounds heard (or pictures seen) at test. 
In contrast, when infants learn rules for “how things go together” they must be able to generalize 
an abstract pattern (rule) from one set of exemplars and apply it to another. 
The apparently more difficult task of abstracting and extending grammatical rules is 
accomplished by 7-month-olds in the same way that they accomplish the (relatively) simple task 
of tracking transitional probabilities between syllables, sounds, or shapes. In 1999, Marcus and 
colleagues familiarized infants to a sequence of words that followed the rules of an artificial 
“grammar”. In one condition, syllables appeared in ABA order (e.g., ga ti ga or li na li). In 
another, they appeared in ABB order (e.g., ga ti ti or li na na). At test, infants heard novel 
syllables organized in a way that was either consistent or inconsistent with the “grammar” they 
heard during familiarization (e.g., wo fe fe or wo fe wo). Results revealed that infants preferred to 
listen to the audio featuring unfamiliar grammar. Thus, infants abstracted a grammatical rule 

 
22
during familiarization (such as ABA) and were subsequently more interested in hearing syllables 
organized according to a new rule (such as ABB) at test (Marcus et al., 1999).  
Is this algebraic rule-learning specific to language, or is it a domain-general ability like 
statistical learning? Early studies suggested that infants were only able to learn artificial 
“grammars” when presented as language (Marcus, Johnson, & Fernandes, 2004). However, 
subsequent research using category-matched stimuli revealed that 7-month-olds can learn 
“picture grammar” in the visual domain (Saffran, Pollak, Seibel, & Shkolnik, 2007) and can 
generalize grammatical rules learned in a speech task to tones, timbres, and animal sounds 
(Marcus, Fernandes, & Johnson, 2007). 
Familiar words facilitate segmentation 
Children possess a number of perceptual processing tools available to help them segment 
the speech stream into individual phonemes and words from the bottom up (such as tracking 
statistical probabilities), but there is also evidence to suggest that they can use top-down lexical 
information. In fact, lexical knowledge as simple as a child’s own name might provide a useful 
“wedge” into word segmentation. By 4.5 months of age, infants are attuned to the sound pattern 
of their own name. Six weeks later, they are able to pick their name out of fluent speech 
(Mandel, Jusczyk, & Pisoni, 1995). Bortfeld and colleagues (2005) demonstrated that 6-month-
olds use knowledge of their own name to take a top-down approach to speech segmentation by 
showing that infants can segment a novel word from a fluent speech stream when the word is 
presented after a familiar name (e.g., Mommy, or baby’s name), but not after an unfamiliar name 
(Bortfeld, Morgan, Golinkoff, & Rathbun, 2005). In addition to the child’s own name or the 
word Mommy, infants can use their knowledge of familiar, frequently occurring function words 
such as the, her, and its to help define the boundaries between words (see later section on closed-

 
23
class words; Shi, Cutler, Werker & Cruickshank, 2006; Shi & LePage, 2008; Shi, Werker, & 
Cutler, 2006). This indicates that infants have many tools (top-down and bottom-up) at their 
disposal when cracking the language code. In fact, recent research by Mersad and Nazzi (in 
press) suggests that infants can use both top-down and bottom-up cues in combination by 8 
months of age. When exposed to an artificial language containing words with non-uniform 
lengths, infants were able to segment artificial words as long as they heard the familiar word 
“mama” as part of the sound stream (Mersad & Nazzi, in press).   
Which words go together? 
To become competent speakers, infants must not only learn which parts of fluent speech 
streams form words, but also which words combine to form larger units of analysis: phrases 
(e.g., the blue bunny), and clauses (e.g., the blue bunny ate rice). Phrases and clauses are 
grammatical chunks composed of multiple individual words that are dependent upon one another 
to express complex meaning.  
A number of studies suggest that infants as young as 7 months of age are attuned to 
natural clause and phrase boundaries. For example, Hirsh-Pasek and colleagues (1987) used a 
head-turn preference procedure to study whether young infants preferred listening to mothers 
speaking with pauses inserted either mid-clause (interruption) or post-clause (natural end of the 
grammatical unit). Results revealed that infants were sensitive to pause placement and preferred 
listening to pauses that occurred after grammatical units, rather than the middle of those units 
(Hirsh-Pasek, Kemler Nelson, Jusczyk, Wright-Cassidy, Druss, & Kennedy, 1987). A 
subsequent study revealed that IDS helps 7- to 9.5-month-olds identify clause boundaries within 
fluent speech. Using the same paradigm employed by Hirsh-Pasek et al. (1987), infants heard 
pauses inserted either at the beginning or the middle of a clause spoken in IDS or adult-directed 

 
24
speech. Only when the audio was heard in IDS did infants show evidence of segmenting fluent 
speech according to clausal boundaries. The authors concluded, “prosodic qualities of motherese 
provided Ss with cues to units of speech that corresponded to grammatical units of language” 
(Kemler-Nelson, Hirsh-Pasek, Jusczyk, & Cassidy, 1989; for a review, see Jusczyk, Hirsh-Pasek, 
Kemler-Nelson, Kennedy, Woodward, & Piwoz, 1992). 
The ability to determine where grammatical units begin and end, coupled with a 
preference for listening to grammatically intact clauses appears to lead to recognition and 
segmentation of word sequences – but only when they are heard in the context of grammatically 
intact clauses (Soderstrom, Nelson, & Jusczyk, 2005). Thus, prosodic consistency and 
grammatical correctness help children segment multi-word sequences while those same words 
heard in the context of interrupted clauses are not learned (see Soderstrom & Morgan, 2007, for 
why this might be the case).  
Multi-word word sequences like verb phrases (e.g., she ate) and noun phrases (e.g., the 
carrot) can be combined to form clauses (e.g., she ate the carrot). What cues do infants use to 
segment clauses into these smaller grammatical units? One study found that 6- and 9-month-olds 
familiarized with word sequences preferred listening to those sequences only when they formed 
a grammatical unit (i.e, a noun phrase) but not when they were presented as a syntactic non-unit 
(Nazzi, Kemler Nelson, Juczyk, & Juczyk, 2000). A second study demonstrated that 6-month-
olds preferred listening to word sequences presented as a phrase and accompanied by a number 
of prosodic cues to phrase boundaries (Soderstrom, Seidl, Kemler Nelson, & Jusczyk, 2003). 
These results suggest that infants are sensitive to smaller grammatical units than clauses (i.e., 
phrases) and that a confluence of cues, such as prosody, facilitate segmentation. 
V. 
Words found: But what do they mean? 

 
25
 
The ability to segment words, phrases, and clauses from a speech stream doesn’t buy 
infants much in terms of communication unless they know what the words and combinations of 
words mean – i.e., unless they have a semantic system in place. Semantics is the study of 
meaning in language – both of individual units and of larger groupings of units. A semantic unit 
can be a word such as “dog” or the “s” that turns the word for one dog into the word for two 
dogs. It can also be a noun phrase like “the dog” or a sentence like “the dog slept peacefully.” 
 
When and how do infants build up a semantic system? First, they demonstrate word 
comprehension. Experimental studies using the head-turn preference procedure and the 
Intermodal Preferential Looking paradigm (Golinkoff, & Hirsh-Pasek, Gordon, & Cauley, 1987; 
Hirsh-Pasek & Golinkoff, 1996), revealed that one of the first words infants differentially 
respond to is their own name. At five months, infants prefer to listen to a voice saying their name 
rather than a stress-matched word (Mandel et al., 1995) and are able to identify the referents of 
frequent words like “Mommy” (Tincoff & Jusczyk, 1999). By 8 months, infants demonstrate 
some understanding of phrases such as “don’t touch” or “give kisses.” However, there are 
significant differences between an infant’s ability to comprehend words and the ability to 
produce them. For example, the average 10-month-old’s receptive vocabulary ranges from 11 
and 154 words and their expressive vocabulary is nonexistent. This and similar production-
comprehension data from 16-month-olds suggests that early word comprehension far exceeds 
early word production (Fenson, 1994). By around 18 months of age, when children have 
laboriously acquired approximately 50 words used in a mostly telegraphic way (that is, without 
grammar; Braine, 1963, Brown, 1973; Grégoire, 1937), some argue that they experience a “word 
spurt” and begin learning words very rapidly – averaging 8-37 new words per month (Benedict, 
1979; Gopnik & Meltzoff, 1987; but see Bloom, P., 2000; Goldfield & Reznick, 1996).  

 
26
The Emergentist Coalition Model of Language Acquisition 
 
How shall we think about word learning from a theoretical point of view? One theory, the 
Emergentist Coalition Model (ECM; Hollich et al., 2000), takes a hybrid approach emphasizing 
how word learning starts out as an associative process (Pruden, Hirsh-Pasek, Golinkoff, & 
Hennon, 2006) and gradually becomes a process reliant on social and linguistic information 
(Golinkoff & Hirsh-Pasek, 2006).  
The ECM posits that children employ a confluence of perceptual, social, and linguistic 
cues to determine the referent of a novel word, and that they weight those cues differentially over 
developmental time (Hollich et al., 2000; see also Lavin, Hall, & Waxman, 2006). According to 
this theory, infants begin the word learning task with a heavy perceptual bias; their word learning 
is contextually bound regardless of word type (e.g., noun, verb, etc.; Behrend & Scofield, 2006; 
Forbes & Farrar, 1993, Forbes & Poulin-DuBois, 1997; Smiley & Huttenlocher, 1995). By the 
second year of life, however, they begin to use social and linguistic cues to word meaning, such 
as eye gaze direction, information about the goals and intentions of others (Baldwin & Moses, 
2001; Brooks & Meltzoff, 2008; Hollich et al., 2000), tense agreement and morphology (e.g., a 
word ending with -ing is probably a verb and therefore labeling an action or event; for a review, 
see Fisher & Song, 2006).  
Long-debated questions about the mechanisms behind early word acquisition, the reasons 
why children acquire the words they do, and why some words are learned earlier than others are 
addressed by the ECM. For example, the ECM holds that nouns are easier for children to acquire 
because the majority of words in that class are more perceptually accessible than the majority of 
verbs, even in a language like Mandarin, where the noun-verb discrepancy is less pronounced 
than in English (Ma, Golinkoff, Hirsh-Pasek, McDonough & Tardif, 2009). Further, basic 

 
27
perceptual processes such as statistical tracking of cross-situational regularities seem to help 
infants link nouns to their likely referents (Smith & Yu; 2008), which may also contribute to 
verb learning (Scott & Fisher, 2011). Later in developmental time, infant word-learners 
incorporate an understanding of social and linguistic cues into these basic perceptual learning 
strategies. 
What are children’s first words?  
To answer this question, it is important to note that within the context of language-
learning, all words are not created equal. Large studies of early vocabulary composition suggest 
that certain types of words are more prevalent than others in the productive lexicons of infants 
and toddlers. One cross-linguistic analysis of vocabulary development revealed that open class 
words such as nouns, verbs, and adjectives are produced much more frequently than closed class 
words like prepositions, determiners, and pronouns – and that this relationship holds for children 
learning Spanish, Dutch, French, Hebrew, Italian, Korean, and American English (Bornstein et 
al., 2004). Despite the paucity of closed class words in productive vocabulary, however, 
laboratory research suggests that children are sensitive to closed class words from an early age 
(Gerken, 1996; Gerken, Landau, & Remez, 1990; Shi et al., 2006; Shipley, Smith, & Gleitman, 
1969). The following sections review research on how children come to understand the meaning 
of open class words (specifically nouns, verbs, and adjectives) as well as closed class words. 
Open class words 
 
Nouns. Nouns refer to people, places, things or ideas. Proper nouns refer to specific 
entities (e.g., Martha or Philadelphia), and other nouns refer to classes or categories of objects 
(e.g., people or city). While it is fairly easy for a child to associate the word “cup” with a single 
familiar sippy-cup and use the word as a proper name, the ability to attach one word to one 

 
28
object is insufficient for developing full language. Forming categories of objects that can be 
labeled by a single word is necessary for parsimony; if each and every “cup” had a unique name, 
language would be hopelessly cluttered. On its face, learning words for categories of objects is 
deceptively simple; after all, how complex could it be to form a category of “cow” that includes 
all different cows? Closer examination, however, reveals that the process is far from 
straightforward. The problem begins with how to determine which entity is being referred to by a 
given word.  
Picture this: a child rides along with her father in the car, passes a farm, and suddenly 
hears, “Look at the cow!” What might her father be referring to? The barn? The tree near the 
barn? The large spotty thing eating grass? The spot on the large spotty thing eating grass? The 
question of which part of an object or scene is being labeled when one hears a novel word is 
called the indeterminacy of translation problem (Quine, 1960), and represents a first stumbling 
block on the path to categorization. If, however, we assume that the child is able to pinpoint the 
cow in the field as the object being referred to, we still cannot conclude that she has formed the 
category “cow”. She has simply seen one example of a live black-and-white “cow” and may not 
generalize the word to cows that are brown or cows that are on television. Later that night, 
however, mother reads a book to the same child and says, “Look at the baby cow. Isn’t he cute?” 
Five minutes later, the child’s older brother gets scolded and mumbles to mom, “Don’t have a 
cow.” 
 
The above examples of “cow” make clear that perceptual correlates of the word “cow” 
are variable (the child may hear “cow” when seeing cows on television, in pictures, or as toys, in 
addition to live animals). Despite this relatively wide perceptual variability, however, children 

 
29
somehow manage to form the category “cow” and use the word referentially within the first few 
years of life. How do they accomplish this task?  
 
Cues to noun meaning are plentiful, and infants capitalize fully on every available hint. 
For example, syntax, social context, perceptual salience, and comparison provide a number of 
well-researched cues that infants use to discover meaning and categorize words (Brown, 1957; 
Fisher, 1994; Gleitman, 1990; Gentner, Loewenstein, & Hung, 2007; Naigles, 1996; Pruden et 
al., 2006). Theorists have also posited and explored a number of lexical and pragmatic 
assumptions made by language-learners to guide their hypotheses about the potential meaning of 
words (Clark, 1995; Golinkoff, Mervis, & Hirsh-Pasek, 1994; Hollich, Golinkoff, & Hirsh-
Pasek, 2007; Markman, 1991; Mervis & Bertrand, 1994; Waxman & Markow, 1995).  
 
A classic example of infants employing their knowledge of syntax to determine word 
meaning comes from Roger Brown’s study of preschool children (1957). Three- to five-year-old 
children were shown a picture of an action, a substance, and an object (e.g., person kneading 
dough in a bowl) and given a novel word (sib) in one of three syntactic contexts: object (a sib) 
action (sibbing) or material (some sib). Depending upon the syntactic context in which children 
heard the novel word, they interpreted it to mean either the bowl (noun), the process of kneading 
(verb), or the dough (substance/material). In this case, preschoolers were able to make inferences 
about the meaning of a novel word simply by attending to the syntactic context in which it was 
heard (Berko, 1958; Brown, 1957; Subrahmanyam, Landau, & Gelman, 1999). 
 
Social-pragmatic cues are an undeniably powerful cue to word meaning (Nelson, 2007; 
Tomasello, 2008). A significant body of research on communicative intentions suggests that 
children figure out the referent of a word by attending to what a person means to convey by word 
or action (Baldwin & Moses, 2001; Birch, Vauthier, & Bloom, 2008; Diesendruck, Markson, 

 
30
Akhtar, & Reudor, 2004; Liszkowski, Carpenter, & Tomasello, 2008; Tomasello, Carpenter, 
Call, Behne & Moll, 2005) and that attention to social cues like eye gaze direction predicts 
language outcome (Brooks & Meltzoff, 2008).  
 
Building on an extensive literature of joint attention research (Adamson & Bakeman, 
1991; Adamson, Bakeman, & Deckner, 2005; Adamson & MacArthur, 1995; Tomasello, 1995; 
Tomasello & Farrar, 1986), recent longitudinal findings illustrate the importance of attention to 
social-pragmatic cues to infants’ rate of vocabulary development. At age 10-11 months, Brooks 
and Meltzoff (2008) recorded how well 36 infants followed a person’s eye gaze and attended to 
an object with that person. Infant vocabulary was measured at 10-11, 14, 18, and 24 months. 
Growth curve modeling was used to determine the rate at which the children acquired 
vocabulary. Results revealed that infants who followed a speaker’s eye gaze and fixated on the 
same object for longer when they were younger had significantly larger vocabularies and a faster 
rate of vocabulary growth than infants who fixated for less time (Brooks & Meltzoff, 2008).  
 
Infants have access to various social-pragmatic cues to word meaning, including 
emotional expression (Bloom, L., 1998, 2000; Moses, Baldwin, & Rosicky, 2001). In one study, 
18-month-old infants heard an experimenter announce her intention to find a “toma” and 
observed her searching. An object was found along the way, but the experimenter’s expression of 
disappointment made it clear that it was not the desired object. A second object was found and 
the experimenter showed delight. At test, infants were able to identify the target object when 
asked for it by name, despite having heard the label at the beginning of the search and seeing a 
different novel object in the meantime. This suggests that 18-month-olds are able to learn a label 
for a novel object by discerning a speaker’s intention to find a particular object and recognizing 
the ensuing emotional reactions to success and failure (Tomasello, Strosberg, & Akhtar, 1996). 

 
31
 
Some argue, however, that an appeal to social cues is unnecessary to explain children’s 
word learning, and that a more parsimonious account relies on the presence of general cognitive 
processes like attention, memory, learning, perception, and action (Christiansen & Dale, 2001; 
Colunga & Smith, 2008). This attentional learning account of language acquisition posits a 
correlational (connectionist) learning system with online attentional processes that work together 
with historical experience to determine word reference. According to Smith and colleagues, this 
process results in systematic biases of a computational nature that are used to guide subsequent 
word learning (Landau, Smith & Jones, 1988; Imai & Gentner, 1997; Jones & Smith, 2002; 
Smith, 2003; Soja, Carey & Spelke, 1991; Yoshida & Smith, 2003).  
 
Pragmatic principled accounts of word learning, on the other hand, suggest that children 
hold certain pragmatic assumptions about the meaning of words they are learning. Eve Clark 
(1993, 1995, 2007) proposed the principle of contrast, which states that word-learners assume 
that new words refer to different (contrasting) forms than words that are already known. This 
principle is not the same as the principle of mutual exclusivity (discussed below) because 
according to the principle of contrast, the words dog and daschund can refer to the exact same 
animal. According to Clark, language-learners assume that if a single animal is referred to both 
as a dog and a daschund, the words must have different (non-competing) meanings. In this case, 
dog refers to the larger category in which daschund is a subcategory and Charlie is the individual 
exemplar. Clark further proposed the principle of conventionality, which states that word 
meaning is consistent and agreed upon by members of a language community (Diesendruck & 
Markson, 2001). This principle, in combination with the principle of contrast, prevents 
redundancy and helps early learners determine word meaning (Clark, 2007; Diesendruck, 2005). 

 
32
 
Lexical principles that steer children’s word learning have likewise been proposed, two 
of which are the whole-object assumption (Behrend, 1990) and the assumption of mutual 
exclusivity, (Markman, 1991, 1994). When presented with a new label, lexically unprincipled 
word learners would be faced with an unmanageable plethora of hypotheses for word reference. 
However, when children approach the problem armed with constraints on possible word 
meaning, the task is simplified. In the cow example above, for instance, children operating under 
the whole-object assumption will not attach the label cow to a portion of the animal such as the 
horn or the hoof – rather, they will automatically assume that the word refers to the animal in its 
entirety. This assumption reduces the number of hypotheses for word meaning that children must 
consider, and has been shown to be robust. Although a majority of prior work on children’s use 
of the whole-object assumption focused on infants 18 months of age and older (Kersten & Smith, 
2002; Saylor, Sabbagh, & Baldwin, 2002), a recent study revealed that 12-month-olds effectively 
utilize the whole-object assumption to guide word learning, even when faced with objects 
composed of salient, detachable parts (Hollich et al., 2007).  
The assumption of mutual exclusivity states that children approach word learning with the 
expectation that different words mean different things. For example, young word-learners asked 
for a blicket will almost always attach the label to a novel object when it is presented alongside a 
familiar object that the children already have a name for, such as a shoe (Markman & Wachtel, 
1988). The stability of this assumption was demonstrated in a recent study pitting social cues 
against the assumption of mutual exclusivity. Twenty-four 3- to 4-year-old children saw an 
experimenter point to (study 1) or look at (study 2) a familiar object that the child already had a 
label for (such as a crayon) while simultaneously asking for the blicket. Even when provided 
very obvious cues to a speaker’s intention that the child give the familiar object (conveyed by 

 
33
such cues as looking at/pointing to the object while requesting the blicket), children nonetheless 
reached for a novel object and handed it to the experimenter (Jaswal & Hansen, 2006). This 
suggests that when given a new word, children are reticent to attach the new word to a familiar 
object when a novel referent is available. How does this work in the case of bilingual 
development, when children are necessarily given two names for a single object (e.g., dog and 
perro)? We explore this interesting question later in the chapter during our discussion of word 
learning in bilingual children.  
 
Verbs. Children use many of the same cues described above to determine verb meaning. 
As with nouns, linguistic cues (Fisher, 2002; Fisher & Song, 2006; Golinkoff & Hirsh-Pasek, 
1996; Naigles, 1996), social cues (Akhtar & Tomasello, 1996; Childers & Tomasello, 2006; 
Tomasello & Akhtar, 1995), perceptual cues (Brandone, Pence, Golinkoff, & Hirsh-Pasek, 2007; 
Maguire, 2004; Naigles & Kako, 1993), and various combinations of these cues differentially 
weighted over time (Hollich et al., 2000) are used to determine the referent of a verb (for a 
review, see Golinkoff & Hirsh-Pasek, 2008). The principles of contrast/conventionality, mutual 
exclusivity and whole-object reference have likewise been applied to learning words for actions 
(Clark, 2003, 2007; Golinkoff, Hirsh-Pasek, Mervis, Frawley, & Parrillo, 1995; Golinkoff, 
Jacquet, Hirsh-Pasek, & Nandakumar, 1996; Merriman, Evey-Burkey, Marazita, & Jarvis, 1996; 
Merriman, Marazita, & Jarvis, 1993).  
 
However, the task of verb learning differs from noun learning in significant ways. Unlike 
nouns, which are mastered relatively quickly by toddlers (Markson & Bloom, 1997; Woodward, 
Markman, & Fitzsimmons, 1994), verbs are harder to learn (Gentner, 1982; Gillette, Gleitman, 
Gleitman, & Lederer, 1999; Golinkoff & Hirsh-Pasek, 2008) and are less often produced (even 
when they are comprehended; Goldfield, 2000). Infants across many languages have fewer verbs 

 
34
than nouns in their early vocabularies (Bornstein et al., 2004), and although word-action 
associations have been found in infants as young as 18 months of age (Casasola & Cohen, 2000), 
many fail to demonstrate novel verb learning in laboratory tasks until much later (Imai et al., 
2008). It has been argued that verbs are harder to learn than nouns because the typical referent of 
a verb is less concrete, imageable, individuable, and/or clearly shaped than the typical referent of 
a noun, which makes it more difficult to map (Gentner & Boroditsky, 2001; Maguire, Hirsh-
Pasek, & Golinkoff, 2006; Parish-Morris, Pruden, Ma, Hirsh-Pasek, & Golinkoff, 2010). Indeed, 
Ma and colleagues (2009) found that a word’s imageability, or the capacity of a word to call up a 
mental image, is related to the age of acquisition of nouns and verbs in English and Chinese. As 
expected, nouns had higher imageability ratings than verbs across both languages, which may 
explain the predominance of nouns in young children’s vocabularies and is consistent with the 
predictions of the ECM (i.e., that early word learning is driven by perceptual salience; Ma et al., 
2009; McDonough, Song, Hirsh-Pasek, Golinkoff, & Lannon, 2011).  
Given the challenges of learning a word that has a potentially ephemeral and dynamic 
referent (Genter, 1982), children must fully utilize all available cues to verb meaning – and may 
lean especially heavily on linguistic cues. The use of these cues in the service of word learning is 
referred to as syntactic bootstrapping (Gleitman, 1990; Naigles, 1996; Naigles, Gleitman & 
Gleitman, 1993). Syntactic bootstrapping occurs when children use their knowledge of abstract 
linguistic structure (such as agent-patient relationships and argument number; Fisher & 
Snedeker, 2002; Hirsh-Pasek & Golinkoff, 1996) to guide their interpretation of a novel verb, 
and is employed by children learning diverse languages like Mandarin, Kannada, and French 
(Lee & Naigles, 2005, 2008; Lidz, Gleitman, & Gleitman, 2003; Naigles & Lehrer, 2002).  

 
35
A recent study of syntactic bootstrapping replicated and extended Golinkoff et al., 
(1996), and Naigles (1990) by exploring children’s use of word order as a cue to verb meaning 
(Gertner, Fisher, & Eisengart, 2006). Two-year-olds were shown a split screen with a bunny 
performing a novel action on a duck on one side and a duck performing a novel action on a 
bunny on the other side (see Figure 1).  
Figure 1. Example of study stimuli (used with permission from Gertner et al., 2006). 
 
 
Children heard audio containing a novel transitive verb (e.g., look, the bunny is gorping 
the duck!). Gaze duration data revealed that toddlers looked longer to the side of the screen 

 
36
depicting a scene consistent with the word order of the audio (e.g., the screen where the bunny 
was acting on the duck), revealing that they were able to use syntactic information to determine 
verb meaning. This finding has been replicated in subsequent research, and the effect remains 
when the first label (e.g., bunny) is replaced with a pronoun (e.g., he’s gorping the duck!), and 
when the subject and object are people rather than animals (Gertner & Fisher, 2006). In fact, 
recent research suggests that toddlers as young as 19 months of age can use syntactic cues (such 
as word order) to determine the meaning of a novel verb (Yuan, Fisher, & Snedeker, in press). 
Children’s use of social cues in determining the meaning of a novel verb has frequently 
been studied in terms of understanding the goals, intentions, desires, and perceptions of their 
communicative partners (Meltzoff, Gopnick, & Repacholi, 1999). For example, a looking-time 
study by Poulin-Dubois and Forbes (2002) revealed that 27-month-olds are able to use their 
understanding of intentions to differentially label actions that an actor produced purposefully 
versus accidentally (e.g., topple versus knock over). A subsequent live-action study revealed that 
27-month-olds, but not 21-month-olds, were able to learn names for similar looking actions that 
differed only in the nature of the actor’s intention (Poulin-Dubois & Forbes, 2006). Thus, 
children are sensitive to the intentions of others by 2 years of age, and are able to map words 
based on those intentions in the face of perceptually similar referents.  
A recent series of studies exploring the role of perceptual versus social cues to verb 
meaning sheds light on the relative importance of social and attentional information to the 
learning process (Brandone et al., 2007). Thirty-two 22-month-olds were taught a label for one 
of two available actions. Either the labeled or the unlabeled action produced a result (e.g., a light 
or a sound). At test, infants saw a video depicting the labeled action on one side of a split screen, 
and the unlabeled action on the other side. Results of a looking-time analysis revealed that 22-

 
37
month-olds could only learn a word for an action when the speaker was naming the action and 
the action produced a result. When the speaker named an action that did not produce a result, 
children disregarded the social cues to reference and failed to learn a word. A second study 
revealed that 22-month-olds could not learn the label for an action when both possible actions 
had equally salient results. Finally, 34-month-olds in a third study managed to overcome the lure 
of a perceptually salient result and follow speaker cues to attach a word to the result-less action 
(Brandone et al., 2007). Object-related perceptual cues can also make it difficult for children to 
attend to an action, as demonstrated by the finding that 3.5- to 4-year-olds are more likely attend 
to the object in a verb-learning task when the object in the scene is novel. When the objects are 
familiar, however, children correctly direct their attention to the action (Kersten & Smith, 2002). 
Adjectives. Children begin to produce words referring to object properties (e.g., color, 
material, size) early in development (for example, toddlers might say big dog; Fenson et al., 
1994). Although children aged three and younger typically prefer to map novel words to an 
object’s basic-level kind (Markman, 1989) rather than a property (Hall, Waxman, & Hurwitz, 
1993), infants can be compelled to attend to object properties under certain conditions. In a test 
of adjective learning, 21-month-olds were shown three objects, two of which shared a property 
(color or texture; Waxman & Markow, 1998). In one condition, all of the available objects 
belonged to the same basic level category (e.g., 3 different horses). In another, the object that 
was described belonged to a different basic level category than the two other objects (e.g., 1 
green horse (training object) and 2 keys – one green (target) and one yellow). Half the subjects 
heard one object described with an adjective (e.g., this is a citron one), and were asked at test, 
“Can you find another citron one?” The other half heard, “Look at this one,” and were asked at 
test, “Can you find another one?” Results revealed that 21-month-olds were able to select an 

 
38
object based on property when all of the objects belonged to the same basic level category, but 
not when they belonged to different basic level categories (Waxman & Markow, 1998; Klibanoff 
& Waxman, 2000). Importantly, infants saw only one exemplar of an object possessing a 
particular property before they were asked to select an object based on that property. 
What is the role of object familiarity in adjective learning? As with verbs (Kersten & 
Smith, 2002), there is evidence to suggest that familiarity with the object whose property is being 
labeled facilitates mapping (Hall, Waxman, & Hurwitz, 1993; Mintz, 2005). One way to explain 
this “familiarity effect” is to remember that infants have a default preference to attach novel 
labels to novel objects (assumption of mutual exclusivity; Gelman & Markman, 1985). If the 
object already has a name (e.g., cup), infants operating under the assumption of mutual 
exclusivity will search for another aspect of the object to attach the label to – such as a property 
(Gelman & Markman, 1985; Waxman, 1990).  
In a study that encouraged object property categorization by providing multiple 
exemplars, Waxman (1999) found that infants as young as 12-13 months of age differentially 
responded when an object was referred to using a noun versus an adjective. In a novelty-
preference paradigm, infants were familiarized to four different toys that had one common 
property: either texture or color. In one familiarization condition, infants heard the experimenter 
refer to each object using an adjective (e.g., this one is blick-ish); in the other, they heard the 
experimenter refer to the four objects using a noun (e.g., this one is a blick). At test, infants were 
given the opportunity to interact with two objects, neither of which had been seen during 
familiarization. One object had a novel shape and a novel color (new property), while the other 
had a novel shape and the same color (old property). Results revealed a significant preference for 
the object with the new property, but only when children heard an adjective during 

 
39
familiarization. This suggests that 1-year-olds attend more to property differences when they 
hear an adjective than when they hear a noun during familiarization with objects, which is 
consistent with research suggesting that infants are sensitive to linguistic cues to grammatical 
category from a very early age (Morgan & Demuth, 1996).  
Waxman’s (1999) study of the role of adjectives in directing infants’ attention to the 
properties of an object did not directly assess adjective learning per se, because the dependent 
variable in that study was increased attention rather than proactive response to questions by an 
experimenter. To address this issue, Waxman and colleagues conducted a live-action study 
wherein children were familiarized with four same-colored objects each described as “blickish”. 
Children were given an opportunity to compare “blickish” to “not blickish” (Waxman & 
Klibanoff, 2000) and then explicitly asked to retrieve “the blickish one” from two novel objects 
at test. Results revealed that 14-month-olds were able to select a new object based on certain 
property information (color) but were unable to do so when texture was the common property, 
demonstrating the fragility of adjective learning at 14 months (Booth & Waxman, 2003). 
Mintz and Gleitman (2002) examined the effects of multiple exemplars and lexical 
specificity on 2- to 3-year-olds’ ability to learn a novel adjective. Children saw three different 
objects that shared a single property. A puppet described each of the three objects using a novel 
adjective (e.g., “See this? This is a stoof horse.”) or neutral audio (e.g., “See this? Look at this!”). 
At test, children were asked to give the puppet one of two test objects. The first test object 
matched the training exemplars in object kind but not property. The second matched the training 
exemplars in property but not kind. Results revealed that when children heard the puppet 
describe the three training objects using an adjective (but not with neutral audio), they were able 
to abstract the common property and select the property-matched target at test. Interestingly, 

 
40
children did not abstract the common property if object familiarity was not highlighted lexically, 
or if they saw only one exemplar (Klibanoff & Waxman, 2000). That is, when children heard 
audio like “See this? This is a stoof one,” during training, they no longer reliably selected the 
property-matched object at test. Thus, 2- to 3-year-olds appear to need both lexical specificity 
and multiple exemplars to learn a novel adjective (Mintz & Gleitman, 2002). Adjective learning 
and extension is challenging even for older children. In fact, Song and colleagues (2010) 
illustrated that 3- and 4-year-olds were not yet at ceiling in learning and extending new 
adjectives on a forced choice match-to-sample task in both English and French, where the 
adjective appears after the noun.    
Social and linguistic context also contribute to children’s adjective acquisition 
(Diesendruck, Hall, & Graham, 2006). In 2002, Akhtar described a novel object using a novel 
word (e.g., daxy) to 2.5- and 3.5-year-olds. In one condition, she set up a conversational context 
wherein an object’s shape was the relevant feature of interest by describing two other objects 
using shape words (such as round and square) before describing the novel object as daxy. In a 
second condition, she set up a context wherein an object’s texture was the conversationally 
relevant feature by describing two other objects as smooth and fuzzy before using the word daxy. 
Children were asked to extend the adjective daxy to a new object. Results revealed that children 
who learned daxy in a shape-relevant context extended daxy in terms of shape, where as children 
who learned daxy in a texture-relevant context extended the word as if it referred to an object’s 
texture (Akhtar, 2002). This suggests an important role for conversational relevance to children’s 
mapping and extension of novel adjectives in the real world. 
In sum, adjective learning appears to benefit most when multiple cues to word meaning 
are available – perceptual, social, and linguistic. Children are more likely to learn a novel 

 
41
adjective when it labels a perceptually salient feature seen across multiple exemplars (Klibanoff 
& Waxman, 2000), when social information such as conversational relevance is available 
(Akhtar, 2002), and when they hear lexical/grammatical information that narrows the range of 
possible referents for the novel word (such as a familiar object’s name or morphological 
inflection; Behrend, Harris, & Cartwright, 1995; Mintz & Gleitman, 2002).  
Closed class words 
At the earliest stages of language acquisition, closed class words such as prepositions 
(e.g., in, on, to, for), determiners (e.g., a, an, the, this, that), conjunctions (e.g., and, but, or), 
classifiers (used to modify nouns in languages like Japanese and ASL), pronouns (he, she, you, I, 
they), and morphological inflections are generally not present in children’s productive 
vocabularies (Braine, 1963; Brown, 1973). However, a significant body of research suggests that 
infants are sensitive to various closed-class words before they are produced, and that sensitivity 
to those words facilitates segmentation and categorization of open-class words. 
Closed class words occur frequently in spoken language, but the set of closed class words 
is small and stable (i.e., new closed class words are rarely added to the set, whereas new open 
class words like the verbs google or blog are regularly added to the lexicon; Kucera & Francis, 
1967). In almost all languages, grammatical words differ predictably from content words in 
length, acoustics, and phonology (Shi, Morgan & Allopenna, 1998). These acoustical and 
phonological differences are so pronounced that newborns show evidence of perceiving open 
(lexical) versus closed (grammatical) class words categorically (Gerken, Landau, & Remez, 
1990; Shipley, Smith, & Gleitman, 1969). Using a habituation paradigm, Shi and colleagues 
(1999) exposed 1- to 3-day-old infants to a list of words that were either grammatical or lexical. 
Once infants had habituated, an experimental group heard a list of words of the other type (i.e., if 

 
42
they heard grammatical words during habituation, they heard lexical words at test, and vice 
versa). A control group heard a new list of words of the same type (i.e., if they heard 
grammatical words during habituation then they heard new grammatical words at test, or lexical 
words during habituation and new lexical words at test). Results revealed that infants reliably 
increased their attention when the type of word (grammatical or lexical) changed, but not when 
the list of words changed but word type remained the same (Shi, Werker, & Morgan, 1999). The 
authors concluded that newborns use a multiplicity of perceptual cues to reliably distinguish 
grammatical from lexical words, and that this ability may give them a foothold into developing 
syntactic categories. 
Infants may be able to discriminate between open and closed class words at birth by 
using perceptual cues, but when and how do they begin to use closed class words as tools to aid 
in language acquisition? To determine when infants start to recognize functors in a phonetically 
specific way, researchers presented infants with nonsense functors and actual functors and asked 
which type infants preferred listening to (Shady, 1996; Shafer, Shucard, Shucard, & Gerken, 
1998). By matching real and nonsense functors on perceptual elements such as prosody and 
vowel shape, Shi, Werker, and Cutler (2006) conducted a particularly stringent test of functor 
recognition. Eight-month-olds, 11-month-olds, and 13-month-olds heard a nonsense functor 
(such as ris) paired with a pseudo content word (such as breek), and an actual functor (such as 
the) paired with a pseudo content word in a habituation paradigm. Results revealed that 13-
month-olds reliably preferred listening to real functors, 11-month-olds showed a trend toward 
preferring real functors, and 8-month-olds had no preference. This suggests that infants possess a 
phonologically precise grasp on functors after the first year, and that functor knowledge develops 
gradually between 8 and 13 months of age.  

 
43
Functors are specifically segmented by English-learning infants at 13 months, but year-
old children have already had extensive exposure to closed class words like his and her. What 
role do such frequent functors play in segmenting content words from fluent speech? Recent 
research suggests that English-reared infants as young as 13 months of age use frequently heard 
functors (such as the) but not infrequent ones, to segment nouns from a speech stream (Shi, 
Cutler, Werker & Cruickshank, 2006). This finding is not specific to English. In fact, when a 
language has more distinct functors, as in French, infants as young as 8 months of age are able to 
use frequent functors, but not nonsense or infrequent functors, to segment content words (Hallé, 
Durand, & Boysson-Bardies, 2008; Polka & Sundara, 2003; Shi & LePage, 2008). A similar 
ability to use functors to segment and categorize new open class words has been found in infants 
learning German (Höhle & Weissenborn, 2003; Höhle, Weissenborn, Kiefer, Schulz, & Schmitz, 
2004) and French (Van Heugten & Shi, 2009). In a cross-linguistic demonstration of functor use 
in word learning, Lew-Williams and Fernald (2007) showed that Spanish-reared children can use 
articles in Spanish (distinguished by gender) to quickly find referents for words, a skill that 
undoubtedly contributes to the rapidity of sentence comprehension. 
By 18 months of age, infants respond more quickly to objects when their labels follow a 
determiner (e.g., “Look at the dog!”) than when they do not (e.g., “Look. Dog!”) (Fernald & 
Hurtado, 2006). In a recent exploration of determiner sensitivity in 18-month-olds, Kedar and 
colleagues showed pictures of familiar objects presented in various linguistic contexts (Kedar, 
Casasola, & Lust, 2006). Infants heard audio asking for the objects using an actual determiner 
(e.g., Can you see the book?), a nonsense determiner (Can you see el book?), a conjunction (Can 
you see and book), or no closed-class word at all (Can you see _ book?). Results revealed that 
18-month-olds distinguish between different types of function words (determiners versus 

 
44
conjunctions) and have expectations for how those words work in sentences. Children were 
quicker to look at the correct object when the label was preceded by the correct function word 
(i.e., the) than when it was preceded by a conjunction, nonsense determiner, or no word at all 
(Kedar et al., 2006).  
How sensitive is children’s sentence comprehension to grammatical articles, and when 
does comprehension become robust to errors? Zangl and Fernald (2007) found that 18-month-
olds’ sentence comprehension was compromised when they heard a familiar noun preceded by a 
nonsense article, but that 34-month-olds’ comprehension was unaffected. The sentence 
comprehension of 34-month-olds worsened, however, when the noun was unfamiliar to the 
children and preceded by a nonsense article (Zangl & Fernald, 2007). This suggests that 
children’s ability to disregard nonsense functors improves over time, and is robust to the extent 
that the noun in the sentence is familiar. In the case of novel nouns, however, 3-year-olds 
become confused and less able to comprehend the sentence – their processing is disrupted by the 
presence of a nonsense functor.  
 
Classifiers are a type of closed-class lexeme whose purpose is to classify nouns 
according to meaning (e.g., person + animate classifier = animate person). English happens to be 
an inflected language  (discussed below) rather than a classifier language, but many languages of 
the world use classifiers to modify the animacy status, size, shape, structure, numeracy, 
possession, relation, and/or location of noun referents (Aikhenvald, 2003). Examples of such 
classifier languages include the American, Arabic, Australian, Austrian, British, Brazilian, 
Croatian, German, Hong Kong, Irish, Korean, Mexican, South African, Swedish, Swiss German, 
Turkish, and Taiwan Sign Languages (Milkovic, Bradaric-Joncic, & Wilbur, 2007; Morgan & 
Woll, 2007; Perniss, 2007), Chinese (Li & Thompson, 1981; Wei & Lee, 2001), Cantonese 

 
45
(Erbaugh, 2001, 2002; Tse, Li, & Leung, 2007), Japanese (Uchida & Imai, 1999; Yamamoto & 
Keil, 2000), Mayan languages like Jakaltek and Akatek (Zavala, 2000), Austronesian languages 
such as Fijian (Lichtenberk, 1983), and Papuan languages such as Waris (Brown, 1981).  
 
Although the features of the world that are classified appear to be common across 
languages (e.g., animacy, shape, size, numeracy), systems of classification are not universal. That 
is, different languages carve up the world in different ways, and emphasize certain features over 
others. For example, in Japanese, the same classifier is never used for both animate and 
inanimate objects. In Mandarin, on the other hand, it is possible to use one classifier for a set that 
includes both animate and inanimate objects (Uchida & Imai, 1999). Given the cross-linguistic 
variability of classifier systems and internal exceptions to the rules of classification, how do 
children begin to understand and acquire classifiers? The answer is: with difficulty. In fact, the 
majority of published research suggests that 4- to 6-year-old Thai learning (Carpenter, 1991), 
Chinese learning, and Japanese learning children have trouble comprehending – much less 
producing – classifiers (Uchida & Imai, 1999; but see Szeto, 1998 and Tse et al., 2007 for 
evidence that Cantonese-speaking children produce general-purpose classifiers at younger ages). 
Nonetheless, when compared to the young age at which children are able to fast-map nouns to 
objects (Golinkoff, Hirsh-Pasek, Bailey, & Wenger, 1992), classifiers are acquired relatively late 
in development.  
In addition to closed class words and/or classifiers, many languages contain a set of units 
called morphological inflections (examples from English are the plural -s, the gerund -ing, and 
the past tense -ed). These units alter the meaning of the open class words to which they are 
bound by changing tense, number, aspect, etc., and, like function words, are often omitted by 
very young children (Armon-Lotem & Berman, 2003; Berko, 1958; Brown, 1973; Matthews & 

 
46
Theakston, 2006; Valian & Aubry, 2005). Although children do not evidence explicit semantic 
understanding of some inflections (such as the impact of the plural -s) until the late preschool or 
early elementary years (Johnson, de Villiers, & Seymour, 2005; de Villiers & Johnson, 2007), 
many researchers have shown that infants (some as young as 16 months old) are able to 
distinguish correct from incorrect applications of the plural -s (Fenson et al., 1994; Mervis & 
Johnson, 1991; Soderstrom, 2008; Tomasello, 1992), especially when the root word is familiar 
(Soderstrom, White, Conwell, & Morgan, 2007). Furthermore, children can use grammatical 
plurality to guide their search patterns (Wood, Kouider, & Carey, 2009), spontaneously produce 
the plural -s by 23 months (Tomasello & Olguin, 1993), and use it to distinguish between generic 
and specific meaning by 2 years of age (Gelman & Raman, 2003). Likewise, the progressive -ing 
is used relatively early in development (Brown, 1973; DeVilliers & DeVilliers, 1973). Infants 
show a preference for sentences that contain the correct usage of -ing as an aspectual inflection 
by 18 months in the Head Turn Preference Procedure (Santelmann & Jusczyk, 1998) and the 
Intermodal Preferential Looking Paradigm (Golinkoff, Hirsh-Pasek, Schweisguth, 1998; Hirsh-
Pasek, 2000; Hirsh-Pasek & Golinkoff, 1996). Productively, 2-year-old toddlers use verbs 
inflected with -ing (Akhtar & Tomasello, 1997; for further discussion of the progressive verb 
form in English, see Wagner, 2001; Weist, 1991; Weist, Lyytinen, Wysocka & Atanassova, 
1997; Weist, Atanassova, Wysocka & Pawlak, 1999). The past tense -ed is another common 
morphological inflection that is often treated appropriately by 2-year-olds (Hohenstein & Akhtar, 
2007) but which may also be over-regularized by children learning the rule (e.g., the past tense 
of run may be called runned by a child instead of ran; Cazden, 1969; Marchman, 1997; 
Marchman, Plunkett, & Goodman, 1997; Marcus, 1996; Mervis & Johnson, 1991; Plunkett & 
Marchman, 1993).  

 
47
Statistical regularities in morphological marking have the potential to contribute to early 
word categorization (e.g., a word ending with -ing is probably a verb; Bedore & Leonard, 2000; 
Marcus, Brinkmann, Clahsen, Wiese, & Pinker, 1995). In fact, a recent study by Soderstrom and 
colleagues (2007) revealed that 16-month-olds use regularities in morphological information 
(along with word order) to distinguish different grammatical classes, such as noun versus verb 
(Soderstrom, White, Conwell, & Morgan, 2007). This use of morphological marking to 
distinguish word classes has been found cross-linguistically, as in the case of distinguishing 
male- and female-gendered nouns in Russian (Gerken, Wilson, & Lewis, 2005).  
 
Children use morphology as a cue to word class membership, but can they use 
morphosyntactic information to “bootstrap” them into word meaning (e.g., morphological 
bootstrapping; Behrend et al., 1995)? Significant research across multiple languages suggests 
that the answer is yes; children use such cues to infer information about the meaning of novel 
words (e.g., gender cues in Spanish; Lew-Williams & Fernald, 2007). A study of English-
learning children found that the presence or absence of the morphological inflections -ing and -
ed strongly influenced preschooler’s extension of the verbs to new instances (e.g., verbs learned 
with the -ing ending were preferentially extended to ongoing actions with similar manner, 
whereas verbs learned with the -ed ending were more often extended to actions with a similar 
end-point or result; Behrend et al., 1995; Carr & Johnston, 2001). Similarly, Göksun and 
colleagues found that Turkish-reared children enact sentences in a more causal way when one of 
the noun phrases is accompanied by an accusative morpheme (explicitly designating it as the 
patient of an action). Two- to 5-year-old children were asked to use toy animals to act out 
sentences containing words like pig dog push. In one condition, the second noun phrase was 
accompanied by an accusative morpheme (pig dog-ACC push – meaning “the pig pushed the 

 
48
dog”). In the other condition, both nouns were bare. Results revealed that subjects enacted the 
actions in a more causative way (e.g., making one animal physically push the other) when the 
verb was accompanied by an accusative marker than when it was not, suggesting that the 
presence of a morphological inflection influenced their interpretation of verb meaning (a process 
the authors term morphosyntactic bootstrapping; Göksun, Küntay, & Naigles, 2008).  
Noun learning is also facilitated by the presence of morphological cues, as demonstrated 
by a recent exploration of the plural -s using a preferential looking paradigm. Thirty-month-olds 
were shown two pictures. One picture depicted a novel object A, and the other depicted a group 
of novel objects B (all novel objects B were identical, but different than the picture of the single 
object A). Rather than providing rich syntactic information as well as morphological information 
(as in some other studies of morphological cues to word meaning; Booth & Waxman, 2003; 
Kouider, Halberda, Wood, & Carey, 2006; Waxman & Booth, 2001, 2003), the authors provided 
only information about word class while manipulating the presence or absence of a plural 
inflection. Results revealed that infants reliably increased their looking to the correct referent at 
test when they were trained in the plural condition but not the singular condition, suggesting that 
the presence of an inflection helped them to infer the meaning of the novel word (a process the 
authors term inflectional bootstrapping; Jolly & Plunkett, 2008).  
Further evidence of the relation between understanding morphological marking and 
improved word learning has been shown cross-linguistically in both correlational and 
longitudinal studies. For example, children’s understanding of morphological inflections like -ed 
and -ing at 2.5 and 3 years of age predicts language ability two years later (Lyytinen & Lyytinen, 
2004), and even after controlling for a number of factors (such as phonological awareness), 
morphological awareness predicts a significant amount of variance in children’s long-term 

 
49
vocabulary size in English, Korean, Cantonese, Japanese and Mandarin (McBride-Chang et al., 
2005; McBride-Chang, Cheung, Chow, Chow, & Choi, 2006; McBride-Chang et. al, 2008; 
McBride-Chang, Wagner, Muse, Chow, & Shu, 2005).  
VI. How do words go together? Grammatical development 
After infants segment words and use a variety of cues to discover which part of speech 
they are and what they mean, the next step is to figure out how to combine those words to 
express complex ideas.  
Why is grammar important? 
Grammar allows language-users to create phrases and sentences out of lexical items. By 
combining words and sounds in a grammatical way, speakers can progress beyond simplistic 
telegraphic speech (e.g., “apple”) and begin talking about relations between referents (e.g., “She 
ate the apple”). Syntax is critical because it enables a speaker to do more than describe objects, 
actions, and events; it allows them to offer a point of view, or perspective, on those events. In 
addition, certain lexical items can modify or modulate other items when combined with one 
another (e.g., “very tiny” or “ridiculously big”).  
Syntactic rules dictate the way words or gestures can be combined to form a well-
constructed phrase. Diversity in language structure includes variation in morphology, word, 
order, classifiers, etc. to express meaning. For example, Japanese has an extensive classifier 
system for modifying nouns, whereas English does not. Likewise, pronouns are typically used 
when communicating in English (e.g., in order to convey that a female went to the store, a person 
often says, “She is going to the store,” but in Spanish, the she is often dropped and a person 
would simply say, “Va a la tienda” which roughly translates to “___is going (or goes) to the 
store.” Information about the subject of the sentence is typically drawn from the context in which 

 
50
the sentence is uttered. However, even in Spanish, information about the subject is available 
through the verb conjugation. To say, she, he, or it is going to the store, the verb is conjugated as 
“va.” To say they are going to the store, the verb is “van.” To say we are going to the store, the 
verb is “vamos.” In this way, Spanish does not require that listeners infer every bit of 
information about the subject from pragmatics alone, even though Spanish is generally 
considered a “pro-drop” language (i.e., a language that permits the dropping of the noun 
arguments that accompany a verb, as in ‘John kissed Mary’ where John and Mary are arguments 
of the verb “kiss”). Japanese is an even more dramatic example of a pro-drop language, in that 
pronouns are almost never used – to use them is not grammatically incorrect per se, but sounds 
very odd to a native speaker. 
Word order is another component of grammar that differs across languages. In English, 
for example, sentences typically take the subject-verb-object (SVO) form [e.g., “The frog 
(subject) ate (verb) the fly (object)]. To say, “Ate the frog the fly” is incorrect because English 
does not support the VSO form. Other permutations of the more common SVO and VSO forms 
exist in other languages, but orders such as OVS are rare (although it was used in the artificial 
language Klingon, courtesy of Star Trek). Word order knowledge is fairly robust, as young 
children exposed to one type of word order in the ambient language will not accept as 
grammatical sentences with different word orders (Akhtar, 1999; Matthews, Lieven, Theakston 
& Tomasello, 2005; Matthews, Lieven, Theakston, & Tomasello, 2007).  
In an early exploration of children’s ability to use syntactic information (in this case, 
word order) to determine reference, 17.5-month-old infants were shown two scenes. In one 
scene, Big Bird was tickling Cookie Monster. In the other, Cookie Monster was tickling Big 
Bird. Toddlers were asked to look at where Cookie Monster was tickling Big Bird. Results of a 

 
51
looking time analysis revealed that young toddlers used word order information to correctly infer 
which scene was the “correct” scene (i.e., which scene matched the sentence). This ability 
suggests that infants used an abstract grammatical rule (SVO order in English) to determine 
which character was the subject (or agent) and which was the object (or patient) of a transitive 
action (Hirsh-Pasek & Golinkoff, 1996; Naigles, 1996). A more recent study tested the ability of 
slightly older toddlers to use word order to determine the referent of a novel word embedded in a 
transitive sentence. Results of a looking-time study revealed that 21- and 25-month-olds looked 
significantly longer at a transitive scene in which the subject of the target sentence was the agent 
and the object was the patient (Gertner, Fisher, & Eisengart, 2006; see also Dittmar, Abbot-
Smith, Lieven, & Tomasello, 2008; Fisher, 2002). This suggests the ability to use word order 
information to determine the referent of a novel verb, and that 1.5-year-olds have some 
understanding of “agent” and “patient” (Golinkoff, 1975; see Brandone et al., 2005, and 
Fernandes, Marcus, Di Nubila, & Vouloumanos, 2006, for a discussion of abstract syntactic 
knowledge of intransitive structure). 
 
In 2003, Seidl, Hollich, and Jusczyk demonstrated that infants as young as 15 months of 
age show some understanding of a deep syntactic structure long believed to be acquired only 
after age three (Ervin-Tripp, 1970; Tyack & Ingram, 1977). The case of Wh-questions (e.g., 
What did Sally do to Jim? or Who did Sally say Jim hugged?; Chomsky, 1981) has been difficult 
to assess using standard production methods, but was successfully explored using a preferential 
looking paradigm. Fifteen- and 17-month-old infants were shown scenes of familiar objects 
knocking into one another, and then heard audio asking them to look at one of the two objects. 
The test question was formed as either a subject-question (e.g., What hit the keys?) or an object-
question (e.g., What did the keys hit?). Results revealed that 15-month-olds correctly looked to 

 
52
the subject in the subject-question condition but not to the object in the object-question 
condition, whereas 20-month-olds looked correctly in both the subject and the object conditions. 
This suggests that infants are able to understand syntactic structure much earlier than suspected 
(i.e., 20-month-olds demonstrated a reliance on Wh-movement rather than simply word order 
information), and that this ability develops over time (Seidl, Hollich, & Jusczyk, 2003).  
Evidence that children may have some innate knowledge of grammatical structure (or, 
minimally, are equipped to learn grammar with relative ease) comes in part from research 
showing that the extent of children’s early grammatical understanding cannot be deduced from 
the input they receive (Chomsky, 1957). However, other researchers argue for a computational 
model of grammar acquisition (Elman, 2006; Elman et al., 1996) and still others argue that 
training studies demonstrate an effect of learning and social experience on the acquisition of 
syntactic structure (Abbot-Smith & Tomasello, 2006; Childers & Tomasello, 2001; McClure, 
Pine, & Lieven, 2006; Tomasello, 2003). 
VII. Social cues, enter stage right: The role of pragmatic development 
In addition to perceptual and syntactic cues to word reference, children have access to a 
plethora of social cues. However, despite the use of infant-directed speech, the language heard 
by infants tends to be incomplete and referentially ambiguous. For example, an infant might hear 
an older sibling say, “I’m hot and sweaty,” to which a parent could gesture toward the kitchen 
and respond with, “There’s a juice box in the refrigerator.” In this case, understanding what the 
child means by “I’m hot and sweaty” and what the parent is trying to convey by “There’s a juice 
box in the refrigerator” requires young children to take into account a number of cues that can be 
gleaned neither from a strict semantic interpretation of each sentence individually nor by an 
analysis of the syntactic structure of the interchange. Rather, understanding the communicative 

 
53
nature of the question and answer depends upon children’s ability to access social-
pragmatic/contextual cues to meaning, such as where the mother gestured when she offered the 
juice box, and that a person tends to feel thirsty when they are hot and sweaty. As children 
acquire language, they will implicitly act in accordance with a set of communicative principles 
and maxims (such as being relevant, being cooperative, telling the truth, speaking 
parsimoniously and completely) that ordinarily dictate verbal interaction (Grice, 1957, 1975; 
Kasher, 1977; Sperber & Wilson, 1986).  
What extra-linguistic social cues do children exploit to determine reference in an 
ambiguous situation, and when do they begin to use them to learn language? A preponderance of 
evidence suggests that children are sensitive to cues like a speaker’s goals and intentions 
(Baldwin, Baird, Saylor, & Clark, 2001; Behne, Carpenter, Call, & Tomasello, 2005; Buresh & 
Woodward, 2007; Carpenter, Akhtar, & Tomasello, 1998; Csibra, Bíró, Koós, & Gergely, 2003; 
Gergely, Nádasdy, Csibra, & Bíró, 1995; Johnson, Booth, & O’Hearn, 2001; Luo & Baillargeon, 
2005; Meltzoff, 1995; Parish-Morris, Hirsh-Pasek, Hennon, Golinkoff, & Tager-Flusberg, 2007; 
Saylor, Baldwin, Baird, & LaBounty, 2007); a speaker’s true and false beliefs (Csibra & 
Southgate, 2006; Southgate, Senju, & Csibra, 2007); a listener’s knowledge and perceived 
speaker knowledge (Birch et al., 2008; Bowler, Briskman, & Grice, 1999; Moll & Tomasello, 
2006, 2007; Nurmsoo & Robinson, 2009; Onishi & Baillargeon, 2005; Sabbagh & Baldwin, 
2001; Sabbagh, Wdowiak, & Ottaway, 2003; Scofield & Behrend, 2008); joint and triadic 
attention (Adamson, Bakeman, Deckner, & Romski, 2009; Baldwin, 1995; Carpenter, Nagell, & 
Tomasello, 1998; Cleveland & Striano, 2007; Morales et al., 2000a; Mundy et al., 2007; Mundy 
& Newell, 2007; Striano, Chen, Cleveland, & Bradshaw, 2006; Striano, Stahl, Cleveland, & 
Hoehl, 2007; Tomasello, 1995); gestures (such as pointing or touching; Brand et al., 2002; 

 
54
Hollich et al., 2000; Moore, Angelopoulos, & Bennett, 1999; Woodward & Guajardo, 2002); eye 
gaze (Bloom, L., 2000; Booth, McGregor, & Rohlfing, 2008; Brooks & Meltzoff, 2005; Farroni, 
Massaccessi, Pividori, & Johnson, 2004; Morales et al., 2000b; Phillips, Wellman, & Spelke, 
2002; Reid & Striano, 2005; Reid, Striano, Kaufman, & Johnson, 2004; Woodward, 2003) and 
whether the speaker is reliable or trustworthy (for a review, see Koenig & Harris, 2007). 
The direction of a speaker’s gaze provides important information about word meaning. In 
fact, infants are able to learn some words based on eye gaze direction alone (Baldwin, 1991, 
1993; Hollich et al., 2000; Houston-Price, Plunkett, & Duffy, 2006). In addition to helping 
children learn words in the moment, the ability to follow eye gaze has been linked to productive 
vocabulary over time. In one particularly striking study, Brooks and Meltzoff (2008) found that 
10- and 11-month-olds’ ability to follow an adult’s gaze to an object predicted the speed of their 
productive vocabulary growth through age 2. 
Despite evidence suggesting heavy reliance on eye gaze direction for word learning, data 
also support the notion that children use this cue prudently. For example, Nurmsoo and Bloom 
(2008) found that 3- to 4-year-olds rely on eye gaze as a cue to word reference only when it is 
relevant to the context as a whole. Rather than simply using eye gaze as an invincible cue to 
word reference, children are able to take into consideration linguistic and intentional information 
as well, and ignore eye gaze information when necessary (Nurmsoo & Bloom, 2008). Similarly, 
children will ignore information about word reference when it is presented by an ignorant 
speaker, but learn a word from a knowledgeable speaker (Birch et al., 2008; Sabbagh & Baldwin, 
2001; Sabbagh et al., 2003; Scofield & Behrend, 2008). This suggests that by the preschool 
years, children flexibly and wisely exploit a wealth of pragmatic cues in their quest to determine 
word meaning. 

 
55
Thanks to other types of pragmatic acuity such as the ability to determine a person’s 
goals and intentions, young children can learn words in ambiguous situations where eye gaze 
may not be a sufficient cue to word meaning. For example, children learn names for objects that 
are hidden from view at the time of labeling (Baldwin, 1993), have never been explicitly labeled 
(Akhtar & Tomasello, 1996; Tomasello & Barton, 1994), or that are labeled based on the false 
belief of a speaker (Carpenter, Call, & Tomasello, 2002; Happé & Loth, 2002). One study of 
false-belief tracking revealed that that 3- to 5-year-olds are better at tracking the false beliefs and 
intentions of a speaker in the context of word learning than in a typical false belief task that does 
not have a word learning component (Happé & Loth, 2002). This result implies that there may be 
special significance associated with taking another person’s perspective (i.e., having a “theory of 
mind”; Baron-Cohen, 1995) in word learning (Parish-Morris et al., 2007; Patael & Diesendruck, 
2008).  
Importantly, recent research suggests that word learning – at least in the earliest years – 
requires a social, interactive and contingent environment. It is not enough, for example, to just 
hear language or words spewing forth from a television. In fact, findings by Kuhl, Tsao, and Liu 
(2003) and Roseberry, Hirsh-Pasek, Parish-Morris and Golinkoff (2009) suggest that children 
under the age of three are unlikely to learn words from mere exposure on television.  
Surprisingly, however, children presented with novel verbs on video chat did learn new words. 
In a video chat format, contingent language was delivered where the input was responsive to the 
child and 2-year olds were able to master the new words just as they had in a live, face-to-face 
condition (Roseberry, Hirsh-Pasek & Golinkoff, in preparation). Thus, language learning 
requires sensitive and responsive conversations with children where language input is tailored to 
the interest and timing of the child’s attention.  

 
56
VIII. Topics of special interest 
Word learning and thinking: Is cognition affected by language or vice versa? 
 
Do differences between languages (such as linguistic representations of space and time 
that highlight different aspects of the world, or the presence/absence of a classifier system) 
influence the way speakers think? The Sapir-Whorf hypothesis (Whorf, 1939) or theory of 
linguistic relativity holds that language shapes thought; an idea that has drawn both support 
(Bloom, 1981; Bloom & Wynn, 1997; Boroditsky, 2001; Casasanto, 2008; Casasanto & 
Boroditsky, 2008; Cifuentes-Férez & Gentner, 2006; Dessalegn & Landau, 2008; Feist & 
Gentner, 2007; Gentner & Christie, 2008; Lakusta, Wagner, O’Hearn, & Landau, 2005;) and 
opposition (Bloom & Keil, 2001; Heider, 1972; Heider & Oliver, 1972; January & Kako, 2007; 
Papfragou, Li, Choi, & Han, 2007; Tse & Altarriba, 2008; Pinker, 1994). Some theorists have 
argued for the existence of “culturally specific” cognitive styles, and indeed, support for this 
position has been found (e.g., Choi, Nisbett, & Smith, 1997; Nisbett, 2003; Nisbett, Peng, Choi, 
& Norenzayan, 2001; Saalbach & Imai, 2007; Varnum, Grossmann, Katunar, Nisbett, & 
Kitayama, 2008). Others argue that the truth lies somewhere in the middle (Gleitman & 
Papafragou, 2005). 
 
The connection between cognition and spatial language has been extensively researched 
(Li & Gleitman, 2002; Majid, Bowerman, Kita, Haun, & Levinson, 2004). For example, a large 
body of evidence suggests that relational language facilitates relational thinking (Feist & 
Gentner, 2007; Loewenstein & Gentner, 2005), and that there are language-specific ways of 
thinking about color (Gilbert, Regier, Kay, & Ivry, 2006; Kay & Kempton, 1984; Kay & Regier, 
2007; Roberson, Davidoff, Davies, & Shapiro, 2004; Roberson, Davies, & Davidoff, 2000, 2001; 
Winawer et al., 2007; Witthoft et al., 2003), time (Boroditsky, 2001; Casasanto & Boroditsky, 

 
57
2008; January & Kako, 2007; Núñez & Sweetser, 2006), animacy (Anggoro, Waxman, & Medin, 
2008) and number (Bloom & Wynn 1997; Dehaene, Izard, Spelke, & Pica, 2008; Gelman & 
Gallistel, 2004; Ji, Zhang, & Nisbett, 2004; Miller, Major, Shu, & Zhang, 2000; Pica, Lemer, 
Izard, & Dehaene, 2004; Spelke & Tsivkin, 2001). Recent research with Turkish-reared infants 
and Spanish- or English-speaking adults confirmed that the peculiarities of one’s native language 
direct attention to aspects of a scene that are linguistically relevant (Cifuentes-Férez & Gentner, 
2006; Göksun, Hirsh-Pasek, & Golinkoff, 2010).  
 
What about language-specific spatial concepts? Analogous to the initial ability of 
prelinguistic infants to distinguish sounds from all of the world’s languages (Eimas, Siqueland, 
Jusczyk, & Vigorito, 1971; Jusczyk, 1997; Kuhl, 1993; Streeter, 1976), it appears that pre-
linguistic infants are capable of distinguishing conceptual categories like “a tight-fitting 
relationship between two objects, one of which is contained by the other” that are used in 
languages other than their ambient language (Hespos & Spelke, 2004; Göksun et al., 2010). 
Furthermore, in the same way that infants gradually specialize and “zoom in” on the phonemes 
used in the ambient language (Best, McRoberts, Lafleur, & Silver-Isenstadt, 1995; Werker et al., 
1981), some suggest that all infants start with the same conceptual bases – e.g., a pool of 
conceptual options from which a few are highlighted as relevant an individual child’s linguistic 
environment (McDonough, Choi, & Mandler, 2003). Over time, the highlighted conceptual 
distinctions are retained and strengthened, whereas irrelevant or unlexicalized distinctions are 
disregarded and ultimately not attended to by adults (Hespos & Spelke, 2004).  
  
In 2004, Hespos and Spelke explored this hypothesis by looking at the conceptual 
distinctions made by Korean- and English-reared infants and adults. In Korean, a lexical 
distinction is made between tight-fitting containment relations (such as a cylinder fitting tightly 

 
58
into a similar-sized cylindrical container) and loose-fitting relations (e.g., a cylinder fitting into a 
container with a significantly larger diameter) that is not made in English. In English, tight-
fitting and loose-fitting instances of containment are both described by a single word: in. Hespos 
and Spelke demonstrated that 5-month-olds in both languages distinguish the Korean categories 
tight-fit/loose-fit (suggesting a universal conceptual base) whereas adults categorize the same 
relation in language-specific ways (Korean-speaking adults categorize according to tight-fit and 
loose-fit whereas English-speaking adults do not). These results support the hypothesis that while 
infants may attack the issue of language learning with the same initial stock of conceptual 
distinctions, their default concepts are gradually shaped by the lexical peculiarities of their native 
language (Hespos & Spelke, 2004). Göksun, Hirsh-Pasek, and Golinkoff (2010) developed this 
thesis further and extended it to a wide range of language-relevant concepts. They suggested that 
infants start with language-general nonlinguistic constructs that are gradually refined and tuned 
to the requirements of their native language. In effect, maintaining their sensitivity to some 
relational distinctions while dampening other distinctions, depending on how their native 
language expresses these constructs (Göksun et al., 2010).   
 
The case of bi- or multi-lingual language acquisition 
 
What happens when children are exposed to more than one language from birth, or when 
they begin learning a new language at the start of elementary school? Do they learn the 
languages at the same time, and are they aware that they are learning more than one? Do they 
make mistakes and mix languages together? Do they think in both languages? Does learning two 
or more languages slow down their acquisition of all of them? Is competence in a “native 
language” compromised if children learn a new language later in the toddler years? What are the 

 
59
effects of bilingual language acquisition on other areas of cognition? These questions and many 
others have been extensively researched, and answers are beginning to emerge. 
 
In the past, some believed that raising a child in a bilingual environment would result in a 
slow learner not competent in any language. According to this line of thought, children younger 
than age three would not recognize that they were hearing two different languages, and would be 
confused and delayed while trying to sort out the input (Redlinger & Park, 1980; Vihman, 1985; 
Volterra & Taeschner, 1978). However, children raised bilingually do appear to understand that 
they are learning more than one language (Genesee, 1989; Genesee, Nicoladis & Paradis, 1995; 
Lanza, 1992; Meisel, 2001), and brain activity during linguistic tasks shows that non-identical 
systems process the different languages of bilingual toddlers (Conboy & Mills, 2006). Learning 
two languages simultaneously does not appear cause a delay in acquisition per se. Evidence 
suggests that children exposed to two languages from birth master both languages in the same 
order and with the same timing as their monolingual peers (Holowka, Brosseau-Lapré & Petitto, 
2002; Oller et al., 1997; Pearson, Fernandez, & Oller, 1993; Petitto, Katerelos, et al., 2001; 
Petitto & Kovelman, 2003; but see Fennell, Byers-Heinlein, & Werker, 2007) and may 
demonstrate a “bilingual advantage” in the area of phonetic processing (Bialystok, Majumder, & 
Martin, 2003, Norton, Baker & Petitto, 2003; but see Bosch, Costa, & Sebastián-Gallés, 2000; 
Sebastián-Gallés & Bosch, 2005). Does a child have to produce words in the second language to 
benefit from early experience with two languages? Research suggests that simply overhearing 
another language regularly during the early years can have a significantly positive effect on an 
adult’s ability to produce phonemes correctly when learning to speak the overheard language 
later in life (Au, Knightly, Jun, & Oh, 2002). 

 
60
 
What are the larger effects of bilingualism on children’s development? According to the 
literature, bilingualism has both positive and not-so-positive effects on language and cognitive 
outcomes (Petitto & Dunbar, 2004; Werker & Byers-Heinlein, 2008). These effects are 
modulated by language experience and the age at which each language was acquired (Petitto & 
Dunbar, 2004). Although bilingualism can be achieved by older learners, acquiring a second 
language after age 5 is difficult if the child is exposed to the second language in a classroom 
only; optimal outcomes occur when children hear a new language in multiple contexts (e.g., at 
home, in school, at the playground, at the store; Kovelman & Petitto, 2003; Petitto, Kovelman & 
Harasymowicz, 2003). Adult bilinguals tend to retrieve words in their dominant language more 
slowly than monolinguals (Gollan, Montoya, Fennema-Notestine, & Morris, 2005; 
Kaushanskaya & Marian, 2007), and bilingual children tend to have smaller vocabularies in each 
language than their monolingual peers (Bialystok & Feng, 2010; Mahon & Crutchley, 2006; 
Oller & Eilers, 2002), although this gap narrows over time. Consistent with this finding, recent 
research by Hoff, Core, Place, Rumiche, Senor and Parra (2011) suggests that for a matched 
sample of high-SES bilingual and monolingual children aged 1 to 2-and-a-half years, the total 
vocabulary of the children is equivalent. That is, whereas monolingual children have all of their 
vocabulary in one language, bilingual children merely distribute vocabulary across two 
languages.  
 
Further, many studies show that children learning two languages do just as well or better 
than children learning only one language. When the methods used to test bilingual children are 
appropriate and not merely the same as those used with monolingual sample, some of the 
advantages of learning two languages are unveiled (Sebastian-Galles, 2010). For example, 
children and adults raised with two languages have certain cognitive advantages over the 

 
61
monolingual population (Bialystok, Craik, Klein, & Viswanathan, 2004; Bialystok, Craik, & 
Luk, 2008; Bialystok, Craik, & Ruocco, 2006; Bialystok, Craik, & Ryan, 2006; Craik & 
Bialystok, 2005; Emmorey, Luk, Pyers, & Bialystok, 2008). Bilingual children demonstrate 
advanced inhibitory functioning and can control their attention to misleading cues in laboratory 
tasks (Martin-Rhee & Bialystok, 2008). Bilingual children are more likely to be able to ignore 
obvious perceptual cues (such as the figure of a duck) to see the alternate figure of a bunny in the 
same picture (Bialystok & Shapero, 2005). They are more likely to correctly draw the line in 
Piaget’s water level task by ignoring the perceptually salient slant of the container and attending 
to the effect of gravity on the surface of the water (Bialystok & Majumder, 1998; see Figure 2). 
All of these tasks require executive control; an area in which bilingual children and adults have 
been shown to excel (Costa, Hernández & Sebastian-Galles, 2008; Martin-Rhee & Bialystok, 
2008) in certain aspects more than others (Carlson & Meltzoff, 2008), although the effect may 
disappear once SES and ethnicity are tightly controlled (Morton & Harper, 2007). Older 
bilingual children show flexibility in the area of purportedly universal word-learning principles 
like mutual exclusivity (Baldwin, 1992; Markman & Hutchinson, 1984; Markman & Wachtel, 
1988), which allows them to entertain the possibility that one object is labeled by more than one 
word (as in different languages; Davidson & Tell, 2005). Early-bilingual children (defined as 
having learned two languages prior to age three) demonstrate reading abilities comparable to 
monolingual children, and perform significantly better on phonemic awareness tasks (Kovelman, 
Baker, & Petitto, 2008). In sum, learning two languages has pros and cons, but does not damage 
a child’s outcome overall – bilingualism may even improve certain aspects of cognitive 
functioning.  
 
The predictive power of early sounds and behaviors 

 
62
Can tests administered during the first months of life measure a child’s ultimate language 
outcome? Is it possible that a baby’s first noises and behaviors are a window into vocabulary 
development and reading ability years later? According to numerous researchers, the answer to 
these questions is a very qualified yes. Studies of early production (i.e., babbling), perception 
(e.g., distinguishing bottle from bobble), and social skills (e.g., eye gaze following) suggest that 
there are, indeed, links between early and later development. 
The noises infants make when they begin to experiment with language-like sounds are 
referred to as “babble” and represent a universally important communicative milestone (Oller, 
2000). Because babbling is pervasive and relatively consistently found in the typical population, 
much of the research connecting babble quality to language outcome has been conducted in the 
context of language disorders or delay (Davis & Velleman, 2000; Fasolo, Majorano, & 
D'Odorico, 2008; Hall, 2003; Locke, 1989; Maassen, 2002; Oller, Eilers, Neal, & Cobo-Lewis, 
1998; Oller, Eilers, Neal, & Schwartz, 1999; Stoel-Gammon & Otomo, 1986; Whitehurst et al., 
1991). For example, a retrospective correlational study based on parent report revealed that 
children later diagnosed with suspected apraxia of speech also babbled less as infants (Highman, 
Hennessey, Sherwood, & Leitão, 2008). An analysis of home videos demonstrated that children 
diagnosed later with Selective Language Impairment (SLI) engaged in less canonical babbling 
than undiagnosed age-mates (Magaldi, 2008). Although the mere presence of babbling is 
predictive of language outcome, the quality of babbling is predictive as well. For example, 
phonetically complex babbling is positively associated with better global language outcomes in 
toddlers implanted with cochlear hearing devices (Walker & Bass-Ringdahl, 2007). If children 
are “poor babblers,” they can be encouraged to engage in more babbling practice. Social cues 
affect babbling in typically developing infants, such that the quality and quantity of babbling 

 
63
improves in the context of contingent social interactions (Gros-Louis, West, Goldstein, & King, 
2006). 
Certain perceptual skills measured in infancy are also predictive of language outcome. 
For example, the electrophysiological activity of 71 newborn brains in response to speech stimuli 
discriminated those same children 5 years later on the verbal subtest of the Stanford-Binet 
(Molfese & Molfese, 1997), and brain activity in toddlers can be used to predict reading and 
language outcome in the elementary years (Molfese et al., 2008; Molfese, Molfese, & Molfese, 
2007). Other research has shown that speech segmentation ability measured in children younger 
than one year of age is related to language ability and cognitive abilities 3 to 5 years later 
(Newman, Bernstein, Ratner, Jusczyk, Jusczyk & Dow, 2006). In addition to the predictive 
power of segmentation skills, infants’ ability to discriminate the sounds of their native languages 
has been linked to later linguistic skills (Höhle, van de Vijver, & Weissenborn, 2006; Tsao, Liu, 
& Kuhl, 2004). Kuhl and colleagues found that 6-month-olds who were better at discriminating 
native-language vowel sounds (such as ee and oo) also had superior receptive/productive 
vocabulary skills and improved phrase understanding over the next 18 months. Interestingly, the 
ability to detect phonemes present in one’s native language at 7.5 months of age is predictive of 
later language abilities, but the ability to detect phonemes from other languages is negatively 
correlated with language outcome (Kuhl et al., 2005; Tsao, Liu, & Kuhl, 2004; for a review, see 
Kuhl, 2009). This suggests that infants whose natural perceptual tendencies are compatible with 
the characteristics their native language may have an easier time acquiring words at the outset.  
Vocabulary size and speed of reaction time in infancy (e.g., quickly looking at the cup 
when asked “Where’s the cup?”) are also strongly predictive of language outcome (Bernhardt, 
Kemp, & Werker, 2007; Marchman & Fernald, 2008). In a longitudinal study, Fernald and 

 
64
colleagues (2006) found that measures of grammar and vocabulary from 12 to 25 months were 
correlated with vocabulary size at age two years (Fernald, Perfors, & Marchman, 2006). The 
original longitudinal study was extended in a 6-year follow-up, wherein measures of vocabulary 
were collected from the same children at age eight. Results revealed a strong relation between 
performance on a vocabulary task in toddlerhood and later language and cognitive ability 
(Marchman & Fernald, 2008).  
Early social behaviors are tightly linked to language development (Brooks & Meltzoff, 
2008), and come in a variety of forms (e.g., eye gaze following, pointing, joint attention, 
understanding intentions/goals; Carpenter, Nagell, & Tomasello, 1998). Evidence from both 
typical and atypical populations suggests that early access to and experience with social cues is 
crucial to long-term language outcome, and that certain measurable social behaviors in the first 
year of life are predictive of later language ability (Markus et al., 2000; Morales, Mundy, & 
Rojas, 1998). For example, Morales and colleagues (1998) found that 6-month-olds’ ability to 
follow a person’s gaze to an object (considered an early indicator of joint attentional skills) 
correlated positively with receptive/expressive vocabulary size at 12, 18, 21, and 24 months 
(Morales, Mundy, & Rojas, 1998). Further studies revealed that infants’ responding to various 
parental and experimenter bids for joint attention (e.g., pointing, looking, touching) is related to 
later language ability (Morales, 2000a, 2000b). Brooks and Meltzoff also found that a 
combination of infant behaviors (eye gaze following in conjunction with infant vocalization; 
length of gaze duration) at 10-11 months old predicted vocabulary comprehension at 24 months 
(Brooks & Meltzoff, 2005, 2008).  
What happens to language outcome when children have reduced access to social cues? 
The case of children with autism is instructive, as these children are characterized in part by 

 
65
impaired social functioning (e.g., difficulty with eye gaze, pointing, understanding others’ 
intentions, attention to faces, responding to bids for joint attention; Adamson, Bakeman, 
Deckner, & Romski, 2009; Baron-Cohen, 1995; American Psychiatric Association, 2000; Dube, 
MacDonald, & Mansfield, 2004; Grice et al., 2005; Parish-Morris et al., 2007). Although 
language outcomes in children with autism are heterogeneous and range from non-verbal to 
above average, even very high functioning children with autism nonetheless experience difficulty 
with the pragmatic (social and practical) aspects of language (Kjelgaard & Tager-Flusberg, 2001; 
Lord & Paul, 1997; Rapin & Dunn, 2003; Tager-Flusberg, 1996; Volden, Coolican, & Garon, 
2009). What are the characteristics of those children who do acquire a vocabulary? Research 
suggests that the presence and quality of various social abilities (e.g., intentional understanding, 
responding to bids for joint attention) are key predictors of language outcome in children with 
autism, above and beyond the effects of IQ, mental age, or initial language ability (Adamson et 
al., 2009; Parish-Morris et al., 2007; Siller & Sigman, 2008). These results support the 
hypothesis that the capacity to access social cues is fundamentally important to successful 
language acquisition. 
Children can create a language: Natural experiments in language invention 
 
Language is such a resilient aspect of human nature that children, when faced with a 
situation in which language is not provided, will produce their own (Goldin-Meadow, Mylander, 
& Franklin, 2007). For example, deaf children born to hearing parents do not have access to 
auditory language input, and instead invent a “homesign” system of gestures to communicate 
with family members (Goldin-Meadow, 2007; Tervoort, 1961). These homesign systems become 
more complex with individual usage, but they never develop the characteristics of a full language 
(e.g., complex syntax, morphology, generativity; Tervoort, 1961). There are situations, however, 

 
66
in which a full and independent language develops in a community of deaf people. Two recent 
examples come from a small Bedouin community in Israel and a school for the deaf in Nicaragua 
(Aronoff, Meir, Padden, & Sandler, 2008; Sandler, Meir, Padden, & Aronoff, 2005; Senghas, 
2003, 2005; Senghas & Coppola, 2001; Senghas, Kita, & Özyürek, 2004; Senghas, Senghas, & 
Pyers, 2005). 
 
Historically, the deaf population in Nicaragua was isolated and each individual 
communicated almost exclusively with hearing family members. In the 1970’s, however, deaf 
people from all over Nicaragua were pooled together in a newly established school for the deaf. 
At this school, they spontaneously began to create their own sign language (Senghas, 1995). 
Senghas and colleagues followed different cohorts of children as they entered the school over a 
number of years, and observed the evolution of Nicaraguan Sign Language (NSL) as it was 
passed from cohort to cohort. Interestingly, as NSL developed key features of language (such as 
syntax, spatial morphology, discrete and recombinable parts), those features were only learned 
and expanded upon by subsequent cohorts, and did not “filter up” to the first signers (who 
communicated via less evolved versions of NSL; Senghas & Coppola, 2001; Senghas, 2003; 
Senghas et al., 2004). Thus, language evolution was sparked by each new group of children 
entering the school, who took the existing form of NSL and developed it to another level; each 
time attaining more and more properties of an established language. These results are especially 
intriguing because they provide evidence to suggest that in a span of 20-30 years, children are 
capable of naturally creating well-formed languages whose basic foundations correspond to 
those of languages that developed over centuries. Over a slightly longer period of time in Israel, 
Al-Sayyid Bedouin Sign Language (ABSL) developed within a smaller deaf population (Aronoff 
et al., 2008; Sandler et al., 2005). Although ABSL exhibits some characteristics of a fully 

 
67
developed language (e.g., word-order grammar; Sandler et al., 2005), it lacks others (e.g., spatial 
morphology; Aronoff et al., 2008). The reason for the apparently slower development of ABSL 
(70 years) versus NSL (30 years) has been hypothesized to be because new languages evolve 
most quickly when the language community is large (NSL has more speakers), when exposure to 
the sign language begins early, and when the language is transmitted to many subsequent 
generations or cohorts (Senghas, 2005).  
 
Better late than never? When language input is delayed 
 
Is there a “critical period” in development during which children must learn language? If 
this window of opportunity is missed, will the child ever acquire language? A large natural study 
of the critical period hypothesis recently resulted from advances in cochlear implant technology 
(see also Maurer & Lewis, this volume, for a discussion of critical periods). 
It used to be that children born deaf remained so for the rest of their lives, or received 
some variable assistance from a hearing aid. Now, however, the technology of cochlear implants 
(CIs) drastically improves the hearing of many infants within the first few years of life. Recent 
research suggests that when children are implanted with CIs at or before 12 months of age, they 
catch up to their hearing peers by age two years (Tait, De Raeve, & Nikolopoulos, 2007). 
Another study of 76 children implanted with CIs showed that the language scores of children 
implanted before 24 months of age were to equal to the scores of hearing age-mates by the time 
they were 4.5 years old, which indicates a steep growth curve for children using CIs (Nicholas & 
Geers, 2007). Numerous studies demonstrate that as the age of implantation goes down, language 
proficiency goes up (Holt et al., 2004; Kirk et al., 2002; Miyamoto et al., 2003; Miyamoto et al., 
2008; Svirsky, Teoh, & Neuburger, 2004). What does this evidence suggest about the existence 
of a critical period after which language cannot be acquired? As with bilingual development, 

 
68
research on children using CIs suggests that although language can be learned after the toddler 
years, that earlier is better.  
X. Conclusion 
 
The roots of language development are in place before birth, and the journey from “coo 
to code” is multi-faceted. Children are born with a preference for listening to language, and are 
equipped with language-friendly perceptual abilities and statistical processing skills. They are 
attuned to social cues such as eye gaze, pointing, goal-orientation, and referential intent. They 
acquire linguistic rules in the absence of explicit instruction, and are able to learn more than one 
language simultaneously. When placed in a situation where fully developed speech input is 
unavailable, they even create their own language. The field of language development has made 
enormous progress in understanding the processes involved in language acquisition despite the 
fact that many of the children we study have yet to say a single word. The advent of new 
methodologies such as the non-nutritive sucking paradigm, the head turn preference procedure, 
and the intermodal preferential looking paradigm have offered us a window into how hard 
infants are working at discovering the units and meaning of their language even in the first year 
of life. The future is promising as newer methods such as near infrared spectroscopy (NIRS) are 
coming on line (Chen, Vaid, Bortfeld, & Boas, 2008) and we are beginning to ask important 
longitudinal questions about the relation between early behavior and later language ability. 
Language acquisition is an area of human development that inspires awe as infants continue to 
surprise us with their remarkable ability to learn. 

 
69
References 
Abbot-Smith, K., & Tomasello, M. (2006). Exemplar-learning and schematization in a usage-
based account of syntactic acquisition. Linguistic Review, Special issue: Exemplar-based 
models in linguistics, 23, 275-290. 
Adamson, L. B., & Bakeman, R. (1991). The development of shared attention during infancy. In 
R. Vasta (Ed.), Annals of child development (Vol. 8, pp. 1-41). London: Kingsley. 
Adamson, L., Bakeman, R. D., & Deckner, D. (2005). Infusing symbols into joint engagement: 
Developmental themes and variations. In L. Namy (Ed.), Symbol development and 
symbol use (pp. **-**). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. 
Adamson, L. B., Bakeman, R., Deckner, D. F., & Romski, M. (2009). Joint engagement and the 
emergence of language in children with autism and Down syndrome. Journal of Autism 
and Developmental Disorders, 39, 84-96. 
Adamson, L.  B., & McArthur, D. (1995). Joint attention, affect, and culture. In C. Moore & P. J. 
Dunham (Eds.), •Joint attention:  Its origins and role in development (pp. 203-222). 
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Aikhenvald, A. Y. (2003). Classifiers: a typology of noun categorization devices. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press. 
Akhtar, N. (1999). Acquiring basic word order: Evidence for data-driven learning of syntactic 
structure. Journal of Child Language, 26, 339-56. 
Akhtar, N. (2002). Relevance and early word learning. Journal of Child Language, 29, 677-686. 
Akhtar, N., & Tomasello, M. (1996). Twenty-four-month-old children learn words for absent 
objects and actions. British Journal of Developmental Psychology, 14, 79-93. 

 
70
Akhtar, N. & Tomasello, M. (1997). Young children's productivity with word order and verb 
morphology. Developmental Psychology, 33, 952-965. 
Aksu-Koç, A. & Slobin, D. (1985). The data; Vol. 2: Theoretical issues. (pp. 839-878) In D. I. 
Slobin (Ed.), The crosslinguistic study of language acquisition, Vol. 1: Hillsdale, NJ: 
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc. 
American Psychiatric Association. (2000). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders, 
(4th ed., text revision). Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Association.  
Anggoro, F.K., Waxman, S.R., & Medin, D.L. (2008). Naming practices and the acquisition of 
key biological concepts: Evidence from English and Indonesian. Psychological Science, 
19, 314-319. 
Armon-Lotem, S. & Berman, R.A. (2003). The emergence of grammar: Early verbs and beyond. 
Journal of Child Language, 30, 845-877. 
Aronoff, M., Meir, I., Padden, C.A., & Sandler, W. (2008). The roots of linguistic organization 
in a new language. Interaction Studies: Social Behaviour and Communication in 
Biological and Artificial Systems, Special issue: Holophrasis vs compositionality in the 
emergence of protolanguage, 9, 133-153. 
Au, T. K., Knightly, L., Jun, S. A., & Oh, J. S. (2002). Overhearing a language during childhood. 
Psychological Science, 13, 238-244. 
Baker, S. A., Golinkoff, R., & Petitto L. A. (2006). New insights into old puzzles from infants' 
categorical discrimination of soundless phonetic units. Language Learning and 
Development, 2, 147-162. 
Baldwin, D. A. (1991). Infants' contribution to the achievement of joint reference. Child 
Development, 62, 875-890. 

 
71
Baldwin, D. A. (1992). Clarifying the role of shape in children's taxonomic assumption. Journal 
of Experimental Child Psychology, 54, 392-416. 
Baldwin, D. A. (1993a). Early referential understanding: Infants' ability to recognize referential 
acts for what they are. Developmental Psychology, 29, 832-843. 
Baldwin, D. A. (1993b). Infants' ability to consult the speaker for clues to word reference. 
Journal of Child Language, 20, 394-419. 
Baldwin, D. A. (1995). Understanding the link between joint attention and language. In C. 
Moore & P. J. Dunham (Eds.), Joint attention: Its origins and role in development (pp. 
131-158). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. 
Baldwin, D., Baird, J., Saylor, M. M., & Clark, A. (2001). Infants parse dynamic action. Child 
Development, 72, 708-718. 
Baldwin, D.A. & Moses, L.J. (2001). Links between social understanding and early word 
learning: Challenges to current accounts. Social Development, 10, 309-29. 
Baron-Cohen, S. (1995). Mindblindness: An essay on autism and theory of mind. Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press. 
Bedore, L. M., & Leonard, L. B. (2000). The effects of inflectional variation on fast mapping of 
verbs in English and Spanish. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 43, 
21-33. 
Behne, T., Carpenter, M., Call, J., & Tomasello, M. (2005). Unwilling versus unable: Infants' 
understanding of intentional action. Developmental Psychology, 41, 328-338. 
Behrend, D.A. (1990). Constraints and development: A reply to Nelson (1988). Cognitive 
Development, 5, 313-330. 

 
72
Behrend, D.A., Harris, L.L., & Cartwright, K.B. (1995). Morphological cues to verb meaning: 
Verb inflections and the initial mapping of verb meanings. Journal of Child Language, 
22, 89-106. 
Behrend, D.A. & Scofield, J. (2006). Verbs, actions, and intentions. In K. Hirsh-Pasek & R.M. 
Golinkoff, (Eds.), Action meets word: How children learn verbs (pp. 286-307). New 
York, NY: Oxford University Press. 
Benedict, H. (1979). Early lexical development:  Comprehension and production. Journal of 
Child Language, 6, 183-200. 
Berko, J. (1958). The child's learning of English morphology. Word, 14, 150-177. 
Bernhardt, B.M., Kemp, N., & Werker, J.F. (2007). Early word-object associations and later 
language development. First Language, 27, 315-328. 
Bertoncini, J., Bijeljac-Babic, R., Blumstein, S., & Mehler, J. (1987). Discrimination of very 
short CV syllables by neonates. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 82, 31-37. 
Best, C. T., McRoberts, G. W., Lafleur, R. & Silver-Isenstadt, J. (1995). Title Infant Behavior 
and Development, 18, 339–350. 
Bialystok, E., Craik, F.I.M., Klein, R., & Viswanathan, M. (2004). Bilingualism, aging, and 
cognitive control: Evidence from the Simon task. Psychology and Aging, 19, 290-303. 
Bialystok, E., Craik, F.I.M., & Luk, G. (2008). Lexical access in bilinguals: Effects of 
vocabulary size and executive control. Journal of Neurolinguistics, 21, 522-538. 
Bialystok, E., Craik, F.I.M, & Ruocco, A.C. (2006). Dual-modality monitoring in a classification 
task: The effects of bilingualism and ageing. The Quarterly Journal of Experimental 
Psychology, 59, 1968-1983. 

 
73
Bialystok, E., Craik, F.I.M, & Ryan, J. (2006). Executive control in a modified anti-saccade task: 
Effects of aging and bilingualism. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, 
Memory, and Cognition, 32, 1341-1354. 
Bialystok, E. & Feng, X. (2010). Language proficiency and its implications for monolingual and 
bilingual children. In: A. Durgunoglu and C. Goldenberg (Eds.), Language and literacy 
in bilingual settings. New York: Guilford Press. 
Bialystok, E. & Majumder, S. (1998). The relationship between bilingualism and the 
development of cognitive processes in problem solving. Applied Psycholinguistics, 19, 
69-85. 
Bialystok, E., Majumder, S., & Martin, M.M. (2003). Developing phonological awareness: Is 
there a bilingual advantage? Applied Psycholinguistics, 24, 27-44. 
Bialystok, E. & Shapero, D. (2005). Ambiguous benefits: The effect of bilingualism on reversing 
ambiguous figures. Developmental Science, 8, 595-604. 
Birch, S.A.J. Vauthier, S.A., & Bloom, P. (2008). Three- and four-year-olds spontaneously use 
others' past performance to guide their learning. Cognition, 107, 1018-1034. 
Bloom, L. (1981). Language development in relation to cognition. In R. Stark (Ed.), Language 
behavior in infancy and early childhood (pp. 395-398). New York: Elsevier/North 
Holland. 
Bloom, L. (1998). Language development and emotional expression. Pediatrics, 102, No. 5, 
Supplement.  In J. Warhol (Ed.), New perspectives in early emotional development (pp. 
119-132).  Johnson & Johnson Pediatric Institute. 
Bloom, L. (2000). The intentionality model of word learning: How to learn a word, any word.  In 
Golinkoff, R., Hirsh-Pasek, K., Bloom. L., Smith, L., Woodward, A., Akhtar, N., 

 
74
Tomasello, M., & Hollich, G. (2000), Becoming a word learner: A debate on lexical 
acquisition (pp. 19-50). NY: Oxford University Press. 
Bloom, P. (2000). How children learn the meanings of words. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Bloom, P. & Keil, F.C. (2001). Thinking through language. Mind & Language, 16, 351-367. 
Bloom, P. & Wynn, K. (1997). Linguistic cues in the acquisition of number words. Journal of 
Child Language, 24, 511-33. 
Booth, A.E., McGregor, K.K., & Rohlfing, K.J. (2008). Socio-pragmatics and attention: 
Contributions to gesturally guided word learning in toddlers. Language Learning and 
Development, 4, 179-202. 
Booth, A.E. & Waxman, S.R. (2003). Mapping words to the world in infancy: Infants' 
expectations for count nouns and adjectives. Journal of Cognition and Development, 4, 
357-381. 
Bornstein, M.H., Cote, L.R., Maital, S., Painter, K., Sung-Yun, P., Pascual, L., Pêcheux, M., 
Ruel, J., Venuti, P., & Vyt, A. (2004). Cross-linguistic analysis of vocabulary in young 
children: Spanish, Dutch, French, Hebrew, Italian, Korean, and American English.  Child 
Development, 75, 1115-1139. 
Boroditsky, L. (2001). Does language shape thought? Mandarin and English speakers' 
conceptions of time. Cognitive Psychology, 43, 1-22. 
Bortfeld, H., Morgan, J.L., Golinkoff, R.M., & Rathbun, K. (2005). Mommy and me: Familiar 
names help launch babies into speech-stream segmentation. Psychological Science, 16, 
298-304. 
Bosch, L., Costa, A., & Sebastián-Gallés, N. (2000). First and second language vowel perception 
in early bilinguals. European Journal of Cognitive Psychology, 12, 189-221.  

 
75
Bosch, L. & Sebastián-Gallés, N. (2001) Early language differentiation in bilingual infants. In J. 
Cenoz & F. Genesee (Eds.), Trends in bilingual acquisition (pp. 71–93).  NY: John 
Benjamins Publishing. 
Bowler, D.M., Briskman, J.A., & Grice, S. (1999). Experimenter effects on children's 
understanding of false drawings and false beliefs. Journal of Genetic Psychology, 160, 
443-460. 
Braine, M.D.S. (1963). The ontogeny of English phrase structure: The first phase. Language 39, 
1-13. 
Brand, R.J., Baldwin, D.A., & Ashburn, L.A. (2002). Evidence for 'motionese': Modifications in 
mothers' infant-directed action. Developmental Science, 5, 72-83.  
Brand, R.J. & Shallcross, W.L. (2008). Infants prefer motionese to adult-directed action. 
Developmental Science, 11, 853-861. 
Brand, R.J., Shallcross, W.L., Sabatos, M.G. & Massie, K.P. (2007). Fine-grained analysis of 
motionese: Eye gaze, object exchanges, and action units in infant-versus adult-directed 
action. Infancy, 11, 203-214. 
Brandone, A.C., Pence, K.L., Golinkoff, R.M., & Hirsh-Pasek, K. (2007). Action speaks louder 
than words: Young children differentially weight perceptual, social, and linguistic cues to 
learn verbs. Child Development, 78, 1322-1342. 
Brandone, A. et al. (2005) One-for-one and two-for-two: anticipating parallel structure between 
events and language. In D. Bamman et al. (Eds.) Proceedings of the 30th Boston 
University conference on language development (pp. 36–47). Ithaca, NY: Cascadilla 
Press. 

 
76
Brooks, R. & Meltzoff, A.N. (2005). The development of gaze following and its relation to 
language. Developmental Science, 8, 535-543.  
Brooks, R. & Meltzoff, A.N. (2008). Infant gaze following and pointing predict accelerated 
vocabulary growth through two years of age: A longitudinal, growth curve modeling 
study. Journal of Child Language, 35, 207-220.  
Brown, R.W. (1957). Linguistic determinism and the part of speech. The Journal of Abnormal 
and Social Psychology, 55, 1-5. 
Brown, R. (1973). A first language. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
Brown, R. (1981). An experimental study of the relative importance of acoustic parameters for 
auditory speaker recognition. Language and Speech, 24, 295-310. 
Buresh, J.S. & Woodward, A.L. (2007). Infants track action goals within and across agents. 
Cognition, 104, 287-314.  
Burnham, D., Kitamura, C., & Vollmer-Conner, U. (2002). What’s new pussycat? On talking to 
babies and animals. Science, 296, 1435–1435. 
Carlson, S.M. & Meltzoff, A.N. (2008). Bilingual experience and executive functioning in young 
children. Developmental Science, 1(2), 282-298. 
Carpenter, K. (1991). Later rather than sooner: Extralinguistic categories in the acquisition of 
Thai classifiers. Journal of Child Language, 18, 93-113. 
Carpenter, M., Akhtar, N., & Tomasello, M. (2002). Fourteen- through 18-month-old infants 
differentially imitate intentional and accidental actions. Infant Behavior & Development, 
21, 315-330. 
Carpenter, M., Call, J., & Tomasello, M. (2002). Understanding "prior intentions" enables two-
year-olds to imitatively learn a complex task. Child Development, 73, 1431-1441. 

 
77
Carpenter, M., Nagell, K., & Tomasello, T. (1998). Social cognition, joint attention, and 
communicative competence from 9 to 15 months of age. Monographs of the Society for 
Research in Child Development, (Serial No. 255). 
Carr, L. & Johnston, J. (2001). Morphological cues to verb meaning. Applied Psycholinguistics, 
22, 601-18. 
Casasanto, D. (2008). Who's afraid of the big bad whorf? Crosslinguistic differences in temporal 
language and thought. Language Learning, 58, 63-79. 
Casasanto, D. & Boroditsky, L. (2008). Time in the mind: Using space to think about time. 
Cognition, 106, 579-593. 
Casasola, M. & Cohen, L.B. (2000). Infants' association of linguistic labels with causal actions. 
Developmental Psychology, 36, 155-168.  
Cazden, C.B. (1969). Suggestions from studies of early language acquisition. Childhood 
Education, 46, 127-31. 
Chater, N. & Christiansen, M.H. (2008). Computational models of psycholinguistics. In R. Sun 
(Ed.), The Cambridge handbook of computational psychology (477-504).  NY: 
Cambridge University Press.  
Chen, H., Vaid, J., Bortfeld, H., & Boas, D.A. (2008). Experimental optical imaging of 
phonological processing in two distinct orthographies.  Brain Research, 184, 427-433. 
Childers, J., & Tomasello, M. (2001). The role of pronouns in young children's acquisition of the 
English transitive construction. Developmental Psychology, 37(6), 739-748. 
Childers, J.B. & Tomasello, M. (2006). Are Nouns Easier to Learn Than Verbs? Three 
Experimental Studies. In: Action meets word: How children learn verbs. Hirsh-Pasek, 

 
78
Kathy; Golinkoff, Roberta Michnick; New York, NY, US: Oxford University Press, 311-
335. 
Choi, I., Nisbett, R.E., Smith, E.E. (1997). Culture, category salience, and inductive reasoning. 
Cognition, 65(1), 15-32. 
Chomsky, N. (1957). Syntactic Structures. The Hague: Mouton. 
Chomsky, N. (1965). Aspects of the Theory of Syntax. MIT Press. 
Chomsky, N. (1981). Lectures in government and binding. Dordrecht: Forris. 
Christianson, M., & Dale, R. (2001). Integrating Distributional, Prosodic and Phonological 
Information in a Connectionist Model of Language Acquisition. Southern Illinois 
University, Carbondale, Il. 
Christiansen, M.H., Onnis, L., & Hockema, S.A. (2009). The secret is in the sound: From 
unsegmented speech to lexical categories. Developmental Science, 12(3), 388-395. 
Cifuentes-Férez, P. & Gentner, D. (2006). Naming motion events in Spanish and English. 
Cognitive Linguistics, 17(4), 443-462 
Clark, E.V. (1993). The lexicon in acquisition. Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press. 
Clark, E.V. (1995). Language acquisition: The lexicon and syntax. In V. nd ed (Ed.), Speech, 
language, and communication. Handbook of perception and cognition (pp. 303-337): 
Academic Press, Inc, San Diego, CA, US. 
Clarke, E.V. (2003). Language acquisition. New York: Cambridge University Press. 
Clark, E.V. (2007). Conventionality and Contrast in Language and Language Acquisition. New 
Directions for Child and Adolescent Development, 115, 11-23. 
Cleveland, A. & Striano, T. (2007). The effects of joint attention on object processing in 4- and 
9-month-old infants. Infant Behavior & Development, 30(3), 499-504. 

 
79
Colunga, E., & Smith, L. B. (2005). From the lexicon to expectations about kinds: A role for 
associative learning. Psychological Review, 112, 347-382.  
Conboy, B.T. & Mills, D.L. (2006). Two languages, one developing brain: Event-related 
potentials to words in bilingual toddlers. Developmental Science, 9(1), F1-F12. 
Cooper, R.P. & Aslin, R.N. (1990). Preference for infant-directed speech in the first month after 
birth. Child Development, 61(5), 1584-1595. 
Costa, A., Hernandez, M., & Sebastian-Galles, N. (2008). Bilingualism Aids Conflict 
Resolution: Evidence from the ANT Task. Cognition, 106(1), 59-86. 
Craik, F. & Bialystok, E. (2005). Intelligence and Executive Control: Evidence from Aging and 
Bilingualism. Cortex, 41(2), 222-224. 
 Csibra, G. & Southgate, V. (2006). Evidence for infants' understanding of false beliefs should 
not be dismissed. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 10(1), 4-5. 
Csibra, G., Biro, S., Koos, O., & Gergely, G. (2003). One-year-old infants use teleological 
representations of actions productively. Cognitive Science, 27, 111–133. 
Davidson, D. & Tell, D. Monolingual and Bilingual Children's Use of Mutual Exclusivity in the 
Naming of Whole Objects. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 92(1), 25-45.  
Davis, B.L. & Velleman, S.L. (2000). Differential Diagnosis and Treatment of Developmental 
Apraxia of Speech in Infants and Toddlers. Infant-Toddler Intervention: The 
Transdisciplinary Journal, 10(3) 177-92.  
DeCasper, A.J. & Fifer, W.P. (1980). Of human bonding: Newborns prefer their mothers' voices. 
Science, 208(4448), 1174-1176. 
DeCasper, A.J. & Spence, M.J. (1986). Prenatal maternal speech influences newborns’ 
perception of speech sounds. Infant Behavior and Development, 9(2), 133-150. 

 
80
Dehaene, S., Izard, V., Spelke, E., & Pica, P. (2008). Log or linear? Distinct intuitions of the 
number scale in Western and Amazonian Indigene cultures. Science, 320(5880), 1217-
1220. 
Dessalegn, B. & Landau, B. (2008). More than meets the eye: The role of language in binding 
and maintaining feature conjunctions. Psychological Science, 19(2), 189-195.  
de Villiers, J., & de Villiers, P. (1973). A cross-sectional study of the acquisition of grammatical 
morphemesin child speech. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 2, 267-278. 
de Villiers, J.G. Johnson, V.E. (2007). The Information in Third-Person /s/: Acquisition across 
Dialects of American English. Journal of Child Language, 34(1), 133-158. 
Diesendruck, G. (2005). The Principles of Conventionality and Contrast in Word Learning: An 
Empirical Examination. Developmental Psychology, 41(3), 451-463. 
Diesendruck, G., Hall, D., & Graham, S. (2006). Children's use of syntactic and pragmatic 
knowledge in the interpretation of novel adjectives. Child Development, 77(1), 16-30. 
Diesendruck, G. & Markson, L. (2001). Children's avoidance of lexical overlap: A pragmatic 
account. Developmental Psychology, Vol 37(5), Sep 2001. pp. 630-641. 
Diesendruck, G., Markson, L., Akhtar, N., Reudor, A. (2004). Two-year-olds' sensitivity to 
speakers' intent: An alternative account of Samuelson and Smith. Developmental Science, 
7(1), 33-41. 
Dietrich, C., Swingley, D., & Werker, J.F. (2007). Native language governs interpretation of 
salient speech sound differences at 18 months. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the USA, 104, 454-464. 

 
81
Dittmar, M., Abbot-Smith, K., Lieven, E., Tomasello, M. (2008). Young German children's early 
syntactic competence: A preferential looking study. Developmental Science, 11(4), 575-
582. 
Dube, W.V., MacDonald, R.P.F. & Mansfield, R.C. (2004). Toward a Behavioral Analysis of 
Joint Attention. Behavior Analyst, 27(2), 197-207. 
Eimas, P. D., Siqueland, E. R., Jusczyk, P., & Vigorito, J. (1971). Speech perception in infants. 
Science, 171(968), 303-306. 
Elman, J. (2006). Computational Approaches to Language Acquisition. In: Keith Brown, (Editor-
in-Chief) Encyclopedia of Language & Linguistics, Second Edition, volume 2, pp. 726-
732. Oxford: Elsevier. 
Elman, J.L., Bates, E.A., Johnson, M.H., Karmiloff-Smith, A., Parisi, D., Plunkett, K. (1996).  
Rethinking Innateness: A Connectionist Perspective on Development. Cambridge, MA: 
MIT Press.  
Emmorey, K., Luk, G., Pyers, J. E., & Bialystok, E. (2008). The source of enhanced cognitive 
control in bilinguals. Psychological Science, 19(12), 1201-1206. 
Erbaugh, M.S. (2001). Why classifiers are hard: A connectionist model from Cantonese child 
narrative. Paper presented at the Workshop on Chinese Psycholinguistics, University of 
California, Santa Barbara. 
Erbaugh, M.S. (2002). Classifiers are for specification: Complementary functions for sortal and 
general classifiers in Cantonese and Mandarin. Cahiers de Linguistique - Asie Orientale, 
31(1).  
Ervin-Tripp, S. (1970) Discourse Agreement: How Children Answer Questions. In: Cognition 
and the Development of Language, ed. John R. Hayes, 79-106. Wiley: New York.  

 
82
Farroni, T., Massaccessi, S., Pividori, D., & Johnson, M. (2004). Gaze following in newborns. 
Infancy, 5, 39–60.  
Fasolo, M., Majorano, M., & D'Odorico, L. (2008). Babbling and First Words in Children with 
Slow Expressive Development. Clinical Linguistics & Phonetics, 22(2) 83-94. 
Feist, M.I. & Gentner, D. (2007). Spatial language influences memory for spatial scenes. 
Memory & Cognition, 35(2), 283-296. 
Fennell, C.T., Byers-Heinlein, K. & Werker, J.F. (2007). Using Speech Sounds to Guide Word 
Learning: The Case of Bilingual Infants. Child Development, 78(5), 1510-1525. 
Fenson, L., Dale, P.S., Reznick, J.S., & Bates, E. (1994). Variability in early communicative 
development. Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development, 59 (5, 
Serial No. 242). 
Fernald, A. (1992). Maternal vocalisations to infants as biologically relevant signals: An 
evolutionary perspective. In J.H. Barkow, L. Cosmides, & J. Tooby (Eds.), The adapted 
mind: Evolutionary psychology and the generation of culture. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press. 
Fernald, A. (1985). Four-month-old infants prefer to listen to motherese. Infant Behavior and 
Development, 8, 181-195. 
Fernald, A. (1992). Meaningful melodies in mothers' speech to infants. In: Nonverbal vocal 
communication: Comparative and developmental approaches. Papoušek, Hanuš; Jürgens, 
Uwe; Papoušek, Mechthild; New York, NY, US: Cambridge University Press, 262-282. 
Fernald, A. & Hurtado, N. (2006). Names in frames: Infants interpret words in sentence frames 
faster than words in isolation. Developmental Science, 9(3), F33-F40.  

 
83
Fernald, A. & Mazzie, C. (1991). Prosody and focus in speech to infants and adults. 
Developmental Psychology, 27(2), 209-221 
Fernald, A., Perfors, A., & Marchman, V. (2006). Picking up speed in understanding: Speech 
processing efficiency and vocabulary growth across the 2nd year. Developmental 
Psychology, 42(1), 98-116. 
Fernald, A., & Simon, T. (1984). Expanded intonation contours in mothers’ speech to newborns. 
Developmental Psychology, 20, 104–113. 
Fernandes, K.J., Marcus, G.F., & Di Nubila, J.A. (2006). From Semantics to Syntax and Back 
Again: Argument Structure in the Third Year of Life. Cognition, 100(2), B10-B20. 
Fisher, C. (1994). Structure and meaning in the verb lexicon: Input for a syntax-aided verb 
learning procedure. Language and Cognitive Processes, 9(4), 473-517 
Fisher, C. (2002). Structural limits on verb mapping: The role of abstract structure in 2.5-year-
olds' interpretations of novel verbs. Developmental Science, 5(1), 55-64. 
Fisher, C., & Snedeker, J. (2002). Counting the nouns: Simple sentence-structure cues guide verb 
learning in 21-month-olds. Paper presented at the Twenty-seventh Boston University 
Conference on Language Development, Boston, MA, November 2002. 
Fisher, C. & Song, H. (2006). Who's the Subject? Sentence Structure and Verb Meaning. In: 
Action meets word: How children learn verbs. Hirsh-Pasek, Kathy; Golinkoff, Roberta 
Michnick; New York, NY, US: Oxford University Press, 2006. pp. 392-425. 
Fisher, C. & Tokura, H. (1996a). Acoustic Cues to Grammatical Structure in Infant-Directed 
Speech: Cross-Linguistic Evidence. Child Development, 67(6), 3192-3218. 
Fisher, C. & Tokura, H. (1996b). Prosody in speech to infants: Direct and indirect acoustic cues 
to syntactic structure. In: Signal to syntax: Bootstrapping from speech to grammar in 

 
84
early acquisition. Morgan, James L.; Demuth, Katherine; Hillsdale, NJ, England: 
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc, 343-363. 
Forbes, J.N. & Farrar, M.J. (1993). Children's Initial Assumptions about the Meaning of Novel 
Motion Verbs: Biased and Conservative? Cognitive Development, 8(3), 273-90. 
Forbes, J.N. & Poulin-Dubois, D. (1997). Representational Change in Young Children's 
Understanding of Familiar Verb Meaning. Journal of Child Language, 24(2), 389-406.  
Frank, M.C., Goodman, N.D., & Tenenbaum, J.B. (2009). Using Speakers' Referential Intentions 
to Model Early Cross-Situational Word Learning. Psychological Science, 20(5), 578-585 
Gandour, J., Potisuk, S., & Dechongkit, S. (1994). Tonal coarticulation in Thai. Journal of 
Phonetics, 22, 477–492. 
Gauthier, B., Shi, R., & Xu, Y. (2007). Learning Phonetic Categories by Tracking Movements. 
Cognition, 103(1), 80-106.  
Gelman, R. & Gallistel, C.R. (2004). Language and the Origin of Numerical Concepts. Science, 
Special issue: Cognition and Behavior, 306(5695), 441-443.  
Gelman, S.A. & Markman, E.M. (1985). Implicit contrast in adjectives vs. nouns: Implications 
for word-learning in preschoolers. Journal of Child Language, 12(1), 125-143. 
Gelman, S.A. & Raman, L. (2003). Preschool Children Use Linguistic Form Class and Pragmatic 
Cues To Interpret Generics. Child Development, 74(1), 308-25. 
Genesee, F. (1989) Early bilingual development: one language or two? J. Child Lang. 16, 161-
179. 
Genesee, F., Nicoladis, E., & Paradis, J. (1995). Language differentiation in early bilingual 
development. Journal of Child Language, 22(3), 611-631. 

 
85
Gentner, D. (1982). Why nouns are learned before verbs: Linguistic relativity versus natural 
partitioning. In S.A. Kuczaj, II (Ed.), Language development Vol. 2: Language, thought, 
and culture (pp. 301-334). Hillside, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 
Gentner, D., & Boroditsky, L. (2001). Individuation, relativity, and early word learning. In M. 
Bowerman & S.C. Levinson (Eds.), Language acquisition and conceptual development 
(pp. 215-256). New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.  
Gentner, D. & Christie, S. (2008). Relational language supports relational cognition in humans 
and apes. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 31(2), 136-137. 
Gentner, D., Loewenstein, J., & Hung, B. (2007). Comparison facilitates children's learning of 
names for parts. Journal of Cognition and Development, 8, 285-307. 
Gergely, G., Nádasdy, Z., Csibra, G., & Bíró, S. (1995). Taking the intentional stance at 12 
months of age. Cognition, 56(2), 165-193.  
Gerken, L. (1996). Phonological and distributional information in syntax acquisition. In J. M. K. 
Demuth (Ed.), Signal to Syntax (pp. 411-427). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Gerken, L., Landau, B., & Remez, R.E. (1990). Function morphemes in young children's speech 
perception and production. Developmental Psychology, 26(2), 204-216. 
Gerken, L., Wilson, R., & Lewis, W. (2005). Infants Can Use Distributional Cues to Form 
Syntactic Categories. Journal of Child Language, 32(2), 249-268. 
Gertner, Y., Fisher, C., & Eisengart, J. (2006). Learning Words and Rules: Abstract Knowledge 
of Word Order in Early Sentence Comprehension. Psychological Science, 17(8), 684-
691. 

 
86
Gilbert, A.L., Regier, T., Kay, P., & Ivry, R.B. (2006). Whorf hypothesis is supported in the right 
visual field but not the left. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the 
United States of America, 103(2), 489-494. 
Gillette, J., Gleitman, H., Gleitman, L., & Lederer, A. (1999). Human simulations of vocabulary 
learning. Cognition, 73, 135-176. 
Gleitman, L.R. (1981). Maturational determinants of language growth. Cognition, 10(1-3), 103-
114. 
Gleitman, L.R. (1990). Structural sources of verb meaning. Language Acquisition, 1, 3-55. 
Gleitman. L. R., Newport, E. L., & Gleitman, H. (1984). The current status of the motherese 
hypothesis. Journal of Child Language, 11, 43–79. 
Gleitman, L. & Papafragou, A. (2005). Language and Thought. In: The Cambridge handbook of 
thinking and reasoning. Holyoak, Keith J.; Morrison, Robert G.; New York, NY, US: 
Cambridge University Press, 633-661. 
Gogate, L.J. & Bahrick, L.E. (2001). Intesensory redundancy and 7-month-old infants' memory 
for arbitary syllable-object relations. Infancy, 2(2), 219-231. 
Göksun, T. Personal communication, May 1, 2009. 
Göksun, T., Hirsh-Pasek, K, & Golinkoff, R.M. (2010). Trading spaces: Carving up events for 
learning language. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 5, 33-42. 
Göksun, T., Küntay, A.C., & Naigles, L.R. (2008). Turkish children use morphosyntactic 
bootstrapping in interpreting verb meaning. Journal of Child Language, 35(2), 291-323. 
Göksun, T., Roeper, T., Hirsh-Pasek, K, & Golinkoff, R.M. (in press). From noun phrase ellipsis 
to verb phrase ellipsis: The acquisition path from context to abstract reconstruction. In J. 

 
87
Harris and M. Grant, (Eds.) University of Massaschusetts Occasional Working Paper in 
Linguistics 38: Recent Work on Ellipsis. Amherst, MA: GLSA. 
Goldfield, B.A. (2000). Nouns before verbs in comprehension vs. production: The view from 
pragmatics. Journal of Child Language, 27(3), 501-520. 
Goldfield, B.A. & Reznick, J.S. (1996). Measuring the vocabulary spurt: A reply to Mervis & 
Bertrand. Journal of Child Language, 23(1), 241-246. 
Goldin-Meadow, S. (2007). The challenge: Some properties of language can be learned without 
linguistic input. Linguistic Review, 24(4), 417-421. 
Goldin-Meadow, S., Mylander, C., & Franklin, A. (2007). How children make language out of 
gesture: Morphological structure in gesture systems developed by American and Chinese 
deaf children. Cognitive Psychology, 55(2), 87-135. 
Golinkoff, R.M. (1975). Semantic development in infants: The concepts of agent and recipient. 
Merrill-Palmer Quarterly, 21, 181-193. 
Golinkoff, R.M & Hirsh-Pasek, K. (2006). Baby wordsmith: From associationist to social 
sophisticate. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 15, 30-33. 
Golinkoff, R., & Hirsh-Pasek, K. (2008). How toddlers learn verbs. Trends in Cognitive 
Science,12, 397-403. 
Golinkoff, R.M. & Hirsh-Pasek, K. (2011). Methods for studying language in infants: Back to 
the future. In E. Hoff (Ed.), Research methods in child language: A practical guide (pp. 
60-75). NY: Wiley-Blackwell. 
Golinkoff, R.M., Hirsh-Pasek, K., Mervis, C.B., Frawley, W.B., & Parrillo, M. (1995). Lexical 
principles can be extended to the acquisition of verbs. In M. Tomasello & W. Merriman 

 
88
(Eds.), Beyond names for things: Young children's acquisition of verbs. (pp. 185-222). 
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. 
Golinkoff, R., Hirsh-Pasek, K. Gordon, L. & Cauley, K. (1987).  The eyes have it: Lexical and 
word order comprehension in a new context.  Journal of Child Language, 14, 1, 23-45. 
Golinkoff, R. M., Hirsh-Pasek, K., Bailey, L., & Wenger, N. (1992). Young children and adults 
use lexical principles to learn new nouns. Developmental Psychology, 28, 99-108. 
Golinkoff, R., Hirsh-Pasek, K., Schweisguth, M.A. (1998). A reappraisal of young children’s 
knowledge of grammatical morphemes. In J. Weissenborn & B. Hohle (Eds.), 
Approaches to bootstrapping: Phonological, syntactic, and neurophysiological aspects of 
early language acquisition (pp. 176-188). Amsterdam: John Benjamin. 
Golinkoff, R.M., Jacquet, R., Hirsh-Pasek, K., & Nandakumar, R. (1996). Lexical principles may 
underlie the learning of verbs. Child Development, 67, 3101-3119. 
Golinkoff, R.M., Mervis, C., & Hirsh-Pasek, K. (1994). Early object labels:  The case for a 
developmental lexical principles framework. Journal of Child Language, 21, 125-155. 
Gollan, T.H., Montoya, R.I., Fennema-Notestine, C., & Morris, S.K. (2005). Bilingualism affects 
picture naming but not picture classification. Memory & Cognition, 33, 1220-1234. 
Gopnik, A. & Meltzoff, A.N. (1987). The development of categorization in the second year and 
its relation to other cognitive and linguistic developments. Child Development, 58, 1523-
1531. 
Graf Estes, K., Evans, J.L., Alibali, M.W., & Saffran, J.R. (2007). Can Infants Map Meaning to 
Newly Segmented Words?: Statistical Segmentation and Word Learning. Psychological 
Science,18(3), 254-260. 

 
89
Granier-Deferre, C., Bassereau,S., Ribeiro, A., Jacquet, A., & DeCasper, A.J. A Melodic 
Contour Repeatedly Experienced by Human Near-Term Fetuses Elicits a Profound 
Cardiac Reaction One Month after Birth. PLoS One, 6(2), e17304.  
Gregoire, A. (1937). L’apprentissage du langage [Language apprenticeship]. Paris: E. Droz. 
Grice, H.P. (1957). Meaning. The Philosophical Review, 66, 377–388.  
Grice, H.P. (1975). Logic and conversation. In P. Cole & J. L. Morgan (Eds.), Syntax and 
semantics (Vol. 3):  Speech acts. New York: Academic Press. 
Grice, S.J., Halit, H., Farroni, T., Baron-Cohen, S., Bolton, P., & Johnson, M.H. (2005). Neural 
Correlates Of Eye-Gaze Detection In Young Children With Autism. Cortex, Special 
issue: The Neurobiology of Developmental Disorders, 41, 342-353.  
Grieser, D. L., & Kuhl, P. K. (1988). Maternal speech to infants in a tonal language:  Support for 
universal prosodic features in motherese. Developmental Psychology, 24, 14-20. 
Gros-Louis, J., West, M.J., Goldstein, M.H., & King, A.P. (2006). Mothers provide differential 
feedback to infants' prelinguistic sounds. International Journal of Behavioral 
Development, 30(6), 509-516. 
Hall, P. K. 2003 A letter to the parent(s) of a child with developmental apraxia of speech: Part I: 
Speech characteristics of the disorder. Language, Speech and Hearing Services in 
Schools 31, 169–72. 
Hall, D. G., Waxman, S. R., & Hurwitz, W. M. (1993). How 2- and 4-year-old children interpret 
adjectives and count nouns. Child Development, 64(6), 1651-1664. 
Hallé, P.A., Durand, C., & de Boysson-Bardies, B. (2008). Do 11-month-old French infants 
process articles? Language and Speech, Special issue: Phonological, lexical, and 
syntactic components of language development, 51(1-2), 23-44. 

 
90
Han, M. S., & Kim, K.-O. (1974). Phonetic variation of Vietnamese tones in disyllabic 
utterances. Journal of Phonetics, 2, 223–232. 
Happé, F. & Loth, E. (2002). 'Theory of mind' and tracking speakers' intentions. Mind & 
Language, Special issue: Pragmatics and cognitive science, 17(1-2), 24-36. 
Hauser, M.D., Newport, E.L. & Aslin, R.N. (2001). Segmentation of the speech stream in a non-
human primate: Statistical learning in cotton-top tamarins. Cognition, 78(3), B53-B64. 
Hay, J.F., Pelucchi, B., Graf Estes, K., & Saffran, J.R. (2011). Linking sounds to meanings: 
Infant statistical learning in a natural language. Cognitive Psychology, 63(2), 93-106. 
Heider, E.R. (1972). Universals in color naming and memory. Journal of Experimental 
Psychology, 93(1), 10-20. 
Heider, E.R. & Oliver, D.C. (1972). The structure of the color space in naming and memory for 
two languages. Cognitive Psychology, 3(2), 337-354.  
Hespos, S.J., & Spelke, E.S. (2004). Conceptual precursors to language. Nature, 430(6998), 453-
456. 
Highman, C., Hennessey, N., Sherwood, M., & Leitão, S. (2008). Retrospective parent report of 
early vocal behaviours in children with suspected Childhood Apraxia of Speech (sCAS). 
Child Language Teaching & Therapy, 24(3), 285-306. 
Hirsh-Pasek, K. (2000) Beyond Shipley, Smith & Gleitman: Young children’s comprehension of 
bound morphemes.  In B. Landau & J. Sabini, J. Jonides & E. Newport (Eds.) Perception, 
Cognition and Language : Essays in honor of Henry and Lila Gleitman.  Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press, 191-201. 

 
91
Hirsh-Pasek, K., & Golinkoff, R. M. (1996). The preferential looking paradigm reveals emerging 
language comprehension. In D. McDaniel, C. McKee, & H. Cairns (Eds.), Methods for 
assessing children's syntax (pp. 105-124). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Hirsh-Pasek, K., Kemler-Nelson, D. G., Jusczyk, P. W., Wright-Cassidy, K., Druss, B., & 
Kennedy, L. (1987). Clauses are perceptual units for young infants. Cognition, 26, 269-
286. 
Hoff, E., Core, C., Place, S., Rumiche, R., Senor, M. & Parra, M. (2011). Dual language 
exposure and early bilingual development. Journal of Child Language, 108, 113-125. 
Hohenstein, J. & Akhtar, N. (2007). Two-Year-Olds' Productivity with Verbal Inflections. 
Journal of Child Language, 34(4), 861-873.  
Höhle, B., van de Vijver, R., & Weissenborn, J. (2006). Word processing at 19 months and its 
relation to language performance at 30 months: A retrospective analysis of data from 
German learning children. Advances in Speech Language Pathology, 8(4), 356-363. 
Höhle, B., & Weissenborn, J. (2003). German learning infants’ ability to detect unstressed closed 
class elements in continuous speech. Developmental Science, 6, 122–127. 
Höhle, B., Weissenborn, J., Kiefer, D., Schulz, A., & Schmitz, M. (2004). Functional Elements 
in Infants' Speech Processing: The Role of Determiners in the Syntactic Categorization of 
Lexical Elements. Infancy, 5(3), 341-353. 
Hollich, G., Hirsh-Pasek, K., & Golinkoff, R. M. (With Hennon, E., Chung, H. L., Rocroi, C., 
Brand, R. J., & Brown, E.). (2000). Breaking the language barrier: An emergentist 
coalition model for the origins of word learning. Monographs of the Society for Research 
in Child Development, 65, (3, Serial No. 262). 

 
92
Hollich, G., Newman, R.S., & Jusczyk, P.W. (2005). Infants' Use of Synchronized Visual 
Information to Separate Streams of Speech. Child Development, 76(3), 598-613. 
Hollich, G., Golinkoff, R., & Hirsh-Pasek, K. (2007). Young children associate novel words with 
complex objects rather than salient parts. Developmental Psychology, 43, 1051-1062. 
Holowka, S., Brosseau-Lapre, F., & Pettio, L. A. (2002). Semantic and conceptual knowledge 
underlying bilingual babies' first signs and words. Language learning, 52(2), 205-262. 
Holt, R.F., Svirsky, M.A., Neuburger, H., Miyamoto, R.T. (2004). Age at implantation and 
communicative outcome in pediatric cochlear implant users: Is younger always better? 
International Congress Series, 1273, 368-371. 
Houston-Price, C., Plunkett, K., & Duffy, H. (2006). The Use of Social and Salience Cues in 
Early Word Learning. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 95(1), 27-55. 
Howie, J. (1976) Acoustical Studies of Mandarin Vowels and Tones. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 
Huttenlocher, J., Haight, W., Bryk, A., Seltzer, M., & Lyons, T. (1991). Early Vocabulary 
Growth: Relation to Language Input and Gender. Developmental Psychology, 27, 236-
248. 
Imada, T., Zhang, Y., Cheour, M., Taulu, S., Ahonen, A., & Kuhl, P. (2006). Infant speech 
perception activates Broca's area: A developmental magnetoencephalography study. 
NeuroReport, 17, 957-962. 
Imai, M. & Gentner, D. (1997). A Cross-Linguistic Study of Early Word Meaning: Universal 
Ontology and Linguistic Influence. Cognition, 62(2), 169-200. 

 
93
Imai, M., Li, L., Haryu, E., Okada, H., Hirsh-Pasek, K., Golinkoff, R.M., & Shigematsu, Jun. 
(2008). Novel Noun and Verb Learning in Chinese-, English-, and Japanese-Speaking 
Children. Child Development, 79(4), 979-1000. 
James, W. (1890). The Principles of Psychology, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 
1981.  
January, D. & Kako, E. (2007). Re-Evaluating Evidence for Linguistic Relativity: Reply to 
Boroditsky (2001). Cognition, 104(2), 417-426. 
Jaswal, V.K. & Hansen, M.B. (2006). Learning words: Children disregard some pragmatic 
information that conflicts with mutual exclusivity. Developmental Science, 9(2), 158-165 
Ji, L., Zhang, Z., & Nisbett, R.E. (2004). Is It Culture or Is It Language? Examination of 
Language Effects in Cross-Cultural Research on Categorization. Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology, 87(1), 57-65. 
Johnson, S.C., Booth, A., & O'Hearn, K. (2001). Inferring the goals of a nonhuman agent. 
Cognitive Development, 16(1), 637-656. 
Johnson, S.P. Fernandes, K.J., & Frank, M.C. (2009). Abstract Rule Learning for Visual 
Sequences in 8- and 11-Month-Olds. Infancy, 14(1), 2-18. 
Johnson, V. E., de Villiers, J. G. & Seymour, H. N. (2005). Agreement without understanding? 
The case of third person singular /s/. First Language 25(3), 317–30. 
Jolly, H.R. & Plunkett, K. (2008). Inflectional bootstrapping in 2-year-olds. Language and 
Speech, Special issue: Phonological, lexical, and syntactic components of language 
development, 51(1-2), 45-59.  
Jones, S.S. & Smith, L.B. (2002). How children know the relevant properties for generalizing 
object names. Developmental Science, 5(2), 219-232. 

 
94
Jusczyk, P.W. (1997). The Discovery of Spoken Language. MIT, Cambridge Massachusetts. 
Jusczyk, P. W., & Aslin, R. N. (1995). Infants' detection of the sound patterns of words in fluent 
speech. Cognitive Psychology, 29, 1-23. 
Jusczyk, P. W., Hirsh-Pasek, K., Kemler-Nelson, D. G., Kennedy, L., Woodward, A., & Piwoz, 
J. (1992). Perception of acoustic correlates of major phrasal units by young infants. 
Cognitive Psychology, 24(2), 252-293. 
Jusczyk, P.W., Houston, D.M., & Newsome, M. (1999). The beginnings of word segmentation in 
English-learning infants. Cognitive Psychology, 39(3-4), 159-207.  
Kasher, A. (1977). 'What is a theory of use?' Journal of Pragmatics, 1, 105-120. 
Kaushanskaya, M. & Marian, V. (2007). Bilingual Language Processing and Interference in 
Bilinguals: Evidence from Eye Tracking and Picture Naming. Language Learning, 57(1), 
119-163.  
Kay, P. & Kempton, W. (1984). What is the Sapir-Whorf hypothesis? American Anthropologist, 
86(1), 65-79. 
Kay, P. & Regier, T. (2007). Color Naming Universals: The Case of Berinmo. Cognition, 102(2), 
289-298. 
Kedar, Y., Casasola, M., & Lust, B. (2006). Getting there faster: 18- and 24-month old infants' 
use of function words to determine reference. Child Development, 77(2), 325-339. 
Kemler Nelson, D. G., Hirsh-Pasek, K., Jusczyk, P. W., & Cassidy, K. W. (1989). How the 
prosodic cues in motherese might assist language learning. Journal of Child Language, 
16 (1), 53-68. 
Kersten, A., & Smith, L. (2002). Attention to novel objects during verb learning. Child 
Development, 73, 93-110. 

 
95
Kirk, K.I., Ying, E., Miyamoto, R.T., O'Neill, T., Lento, C.L., & Fears, B. (2002). Effects of age 
at implantation in young children. Annals of Otology, Rhinology & Laryngology, 111, 69. 
Kirkham, N.Z., Slemmer, J.A., & Johnson, S.P. (2002). Visual Statistical Learning in Infancy: 
Evidence for a Domain General Learning Mechanism. Cognition, 83(2), B35-B42. 
Kisilevsky, B.S., Hains, S.M.J., Lee, K., Xie, X., Huang, H., Ye, H.H., Zhang, K., & Wang, Z. 
(2003). Effects of experience on fetal voice recognition. Psychological Science, 14(3), 
220-224. 
Kisilevsky, B. S., Hains, S. M. J., Brown, C. A., Lee, C. T., Cowperthwaite, B., Stutzman, S. S., 
Swansburg, M. L., Lee, K., Xie, X., Huang, H., Ye, H.-H., Zhang, K., & Wang, Z. 
(2009). Fetal sensitivity to properties of maternal speech and language. Infant Behavior & 
Development, 32(1), 59-71. 
Kjelgaard, M.M. & Tager-Flusberg, H. (2001). An Investigation of Language Impairment in 
Autism: Implications for Genetic Subgroups. Language and Cognitive Processes, 16(2-
3), 287-308. 
Klibanoff, R. S., & Waxman, S. R. (2000). Basic level object categories support the acquisition 
of novel adjectives: Evidence from preschoolaged children. Child Development, 71, 649-
659. 
Koenig, M.A. & Harris, P.L. (2007). The basis of epistemic trust: Reliable testimony or reliable 
sources? Episteme, 4(3), 264-284. 
Kouider, S., Halberda, J., Wood, J., & Carey, S. (2006). Acquisition of English number marking: 
The singular-plural distinction. Language Learning and Development, 2(1), 1-25.  

 
96
Kovelman, I., Baker, S.A., & Petitto, L. (2008). Age of First Bilingual Language Exposure as a 
New Window into Bilingual Reading Development. Bilingualism: Language and 
Cognition, 11(2), 203-223. 
Krentz, U.C. & Corina, D.P. (2008). Preference for language in early infancy: The human 
language bias is not speech specific. Developmental Science, 11(1), 1-9. 
Kucera, H., & Francis, W.N. (1967). Computational analysis of present-day American English. 
Providence, RI: Brown University Press. 
Kuhl, P.K. (1993). Early linguistic experience and phonetic perception: Implications for theories 
of developmental speech perception. J. Phonetics 21, 125–139. 
Kuhl, P.K. (1979). Speech perception in early infancy: Perceptual constancy for spectrally 
dissimilar vowel categories. J. Acoust. Soc. Am., 66(6), 1668-1679. 
Kuhl, P.K. (2009). Linking infant speech perception to language acquisition: Phonetic learning 
predicts language growth. In: Infant pathways to language: Methods, models, and 
research disorders. Colombo, John; McCardle, Peggy; Freund, Lisa; New York, NY, US: 
Psychology Press, 213-244. 
Kuhl, P.K., Andruski, J.E., Chistovich, I.A., Chistovich, L.A., Kozhevnikova, E.V., Ryskina, 
V.L., Stolyarova, E.I., Sundberg, U., & Lacerda, F. (1997). Cross-language analysis of 
phonetic units in language addressed to infants. Science, 277(5326), 684–686. 
Kuhl, P.K., Conboy, B.T., Coffey-Corina, S., Padden, D., Rivera-Gaxiola, M. & Nelson, T. 
(2008). Early phonetic perception as a gateway to language: New data and Native 
Language Magnet Theory, expanded (NLM-e). Philosophical Transactions of the Royal 
Society B, 363, 979-1000. 

 
97
Kuhl, P.K., Conboy, B.T., Padden, D., Nelson, T., & Pruitt, J. (2005). Early speech perception 
and later language development: Implications for the 'critical period.' Language Learning 
and Development, 1(3-4), 237-264.  
Kuhl, P.K. & Meltzoff, A.N. (1982). The bimodal perception of speech in infancy. Science, 218 
(4577), 1138-1141. 
Kuhl, P.K. & Meltzoff, A.N. (1984). The intermodal representation of speech in infants. Infant 
Behavior and Development, 7, 361-381. 
Kuhl, P. K., Tsao. F.-M., & Liu, H.-M. (2003). Foreign-language experience in infancy: Effects 
of short-term exposure and social interaction on phonetic learning. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences, 100, 9096-9101. 
Kuhl, P. K., Tsao, F.-M., Liu, H.-M., Zang, Y. & De Boer, B. (2001) Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 935, 
136–174. 
Landau, B., Smith, L., & Jones, S. (1998). Object shape, object function, and object name. 
Journal of Memory and Language, 38(1), 1-27.  
Laniran, Y.O. & Clements, G.N. (2003). Downstep and high raising: interacting factors in 
Yoruba tone production. Journal of Phonetics, 31, 203–250. 
Lanza, E. (1992). Can Bilingual Two-Year-Olds Code Switch? Journal of Child Language, 
19(3), 633-58.  
Lakusta, L., Wagner, L., O’Hearn, K., & Landau, B. (2007). Conceptual foundations of spatial 
language: Evidence for a goal bias in infants. Language Learning and Development, 3(3), 
179-197. 

 
98
Lavin, T.A., Hall, D.G., & Waxman, S.R. (2006). East and west: A role for culture in the 
acquisition of nouns and verbs. In K. Hirsh-Pasek & R.M. Golinkoff (Eds.), Action Meets 
Word: How Children Learn Verbs, Oxford Press. 
Lecanuet, J.-P., Granier-Deferre, C., Cohen, H., & le Houezec, R. (1986). Fetal responses to 
acoustic stimulation depend on heart rate variability pattern, stimulus intensity and 
repetition. Early Human Development, 13(3), 269-283.  
Lecanuet, J. P., Granier-Deferre, C., & Busnel, M. C. (1989). Differential fetal auditory 
reactiveness as a function of stimulus characteristics and state•. Seminars in 
Perinatology, 13, 421-429. 
Lee, S., Davis, B.L., & MacNeilage, P.F. (2008). Segmental properties of input to infants: A 
study of Korean. Journal of Child Language, 35(3), 591-617. 
Lee, J., & Naigles, L. (2005). The input to verb learning in mandarin Chinese: A Role for 
syntactic bootstrapping. Developmental Psychology, 41(3), 529-541. 
Lee, J.N. & Naigles, L.R. (2008). Mandarin Learners Use Syntactic Bootstrapping in Verb 
Acquisition. Cognition, 106(2), 1028-1037. 
Levy, E. & Nelson, K. (1994). Words in discourse: A dialectical approach to the acquisition of 
meaning and use. Journal of Child Language, 21(2), 367-389. 
Lew-Williams, C. & Fernald, A. (2007). Young children learning Spanish make rapid use of 
grammatical gender in spoken word recognition. Psychological Science, 18(3), 193-198. 
Li, P. & Gleitman, L. (2002). Turning the tables: Language and spatial reasoning. Cognition, 
83(3), 265-294. 
Li, C. N. & Thompson, S. A. 1981. Mandarin Chinese: A functional reference grammar. 
University of California Press.  

 
99
Lichtenberk, F. (1983). Relational classifiers. Lingua (60), 147-176.  
Lidz, J., Gleitman, H. & Gleitman, L. (2003). Understanding how input matters: Verb learning 
and the footprint of universal grammar. Cognition, 87(3), 151-178.  
Liszkowski, U., Carpenter, M., & Tomasello, Michael. (2008). Twelve-Month-Olds 
Communicate Helpfully and Appropriately for Knowledgeable and Ignorant Partners. 
Cognition, 108(3), 732-739.  
Liu, H-M., Kuhl, P.K., & Tsao, F-M. (2003). An association between mothers’ speech clarity 
and infants’ speech discrimination skills. Developmental Science, 6, F1–F10. 
Liu, H-M., Tsao, F-M., & Kuhl, P.K. (2007). Acoustic analysis of lexical tone in Mandarin 
infant-directed speech. Developmental Psychology, 43(4), 912-917. 
Liszkowski, U., Carpenter, M., & Tomasello, M. (2008). Twelve-Month-Olds Communicate 
Helpfully and Appropriately for Knowledgeable and Ignorant Partners. Cognition, 
108(3), 732-739.  
Loewenstein, J. & Gentner, D. Relational Language and the Development of Relational 
Mapping. Cognitive Psychology, 50(4), 315-353.  
Lord, C. & Paul, R. (1997). Language and communication in autism. In D. J. Cohen & P.R. 
Volkmar (Eds.), Handbook of autism and pervasive developmental disorders (2nd ed., pp. 
195-225). New York: John Wiley & Sons.  
Luo, Y., & Baillargeon, R. (2005). Can a self-propelled box have a goal? Psychological Science, 
16(6), 601-608. 
Luo, H., Ni, J., Li, Z., Li, X., Zhang, D., Zeng, F., & Chen, L. (2006). Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences for the United States of America, 103(51), 19558-19563.  

 
100 
Lyytinen, P., & Lyytinen, H. (2004). Growth and predictive relations of vocabulary and 
inflectional morphology in children with and without familial risk for dyslexia. Applied 
Psycholinguistics, 25, 397–411. 
Ma, W., Golinkoff, R.M., Hirsh-Pasek, K., McDonough, C., & Tardiff, T. (2009) Imagine that!: 
Imageability predicts verb learning in Chinese children. Journal of Child Language, 36,2, 
405-425. 
Ma, W., Golinkoff, R.M., Houston, D. & Hirsh-Pasek, K. (2011). Word learning in infant- and 
adult-directed speech. Language Learning and Development, 7, 209-225. 
Ma, W. Golinkoff, R. M., Song, L., Hirsh-Pasek, K. (Under review). Chinese children’s 
comprehension of extensions of familiar verbs.  
Maassen, B. (2002). Issues contrasting adult acquired versus developmental apraxia of speech. 
Seminars in Speech and Language 23, 257–266. 
MacWhinney, B. & Pléh, C. (1997). Double Agreement: Role Identification in Hungarian. 
Language and Cognitive Processes, 12(1), 67-102. 
Magaldi, N.M. (2008). Prelinguistic behaviors of children with Specific Language Impairment: 
An analysis of home videos made in infancy. Dissertation Abstracts International: 
Section B: The Sciences and Engineering, 68(9-B), 5902  
Maguire, M.J. (2004). Children’s use of universal and language-specific cues in verb learning. 
Unpublished dissertation. Temple University, Philadelphia, PA. 
Maguire, M.J, Hirsh-Pasek, K., Golinkoff, R. (2006). A unified theory of word learning: Putting 
verb acquisition in context. In K. Hirsh-Pasek & R.M. Golinkoff (Eds.), Action meets 
word: How children learn verbs. New York: Oxford University Press.  

 
101 
Mahon, M. & Crutchley, A. (2006). Performance of typically-developing school-age children 
with English as an additional language on the British Picture Vocabulary Scales II. Child 
Language Teaching & Therapy, 22(3), 333-351. 
Majid, A., Bowerman, M., Kita, S., Haun, D.B.M., & Levinson, S.C. (2004). Can language 
restructure cognition? The case for space. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 8(3), 108-114.  
Mandel, D. R., Jusczyk, P. W., & Pisoni, D. B. (1995). Infants' recognition of the sound patterns 
of their own names. Psychological Science, 6, 314-317. 
Marchman, V.A. (1997). Children's productivity in the English past tense: The role of frequency, 
phonology, and neighborhood structure. Cognitive Science: A Multidisciplinary Journal, 
21(3), 283-304. 
Marchman, V.A., Plunkett, K., & Goodman, J. (1997). Overregularization in English plural and 
past tense inflectional morphology: A response to Marcus (1995). Journal of Child 
Language, 24(3), 767-779. 
Marchman, V.A. & Fernald, A. (2008). Speed of word recognition and vocabulary knowledge in 
infancy predict cognitive and language outcomes in later childhood. Developmental 
Science, 11(3), F9-F16. 
Marchman, V.A., Plunkett, K., & Goodman, J. (1997). Overregularization in English Plural and 
Past Tense Inflectional Morphology: A Response to Marcus (1995). Journal of Child 
Language, 24(3), 767-79. 
Marcus, G.F. (1996). Why do children say 'breaked'? Current Directions in Psychological 
Science, 5(3), 81-85. 
Marcus, G.F., Brinkmann, U., Clahsen, H., Wiese, R., & Pinker, S. (1995). German inflection: 
The exception that proves the rule. Cognitive Psychology, 29(3), 189-256. 

 
102 
Marcus, G.F., Fernandes, K.J., & Johnson, S.P. (2007). Infant rule learning facilitated by speech. 
Psychological Science, 18(5), 387-391. 
Marcus, G.F., Johnson, S.P., & Fernandes, K. (2004, November). What’s special about speech?  
Evidence from a contrast between rules and statistics. Paper presented at the 29th Annual 
Boston University Conference on Language Development.  
Marcus, G. F., Vijayan, S., Rao, S. B., & Vishton, P. M. (1999). Rule learning by seven-month-
old infants. Science, 283, 77–80. 
Markman, E.M. (1991). The whole-object, taxonomic, and mutual exclusivity assumptions as 
initial constraints on word meanings. In Perspectives on language and thought: 
Interrelations in development, Gelman, S.A. & Byrnes, J.P. (Eds.). Cambridge University 
Press, New York, NY, pp. 72-106. 
Markman, E.M. (1989). Categorization and naming in children: Problems of induction. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Markman, E.M. (1991). In: The whole-object, taxonomic, and mutual exclusivity assumptions as 
initial constraints on word meanings. Perspectives on language and thought: 
Interrelations in development. Gelman, S.A. and Byrnes, J.P. (Eds); New York, NY, US: 
Cambridge University Press, 72-106.  
Markman, E. M., & Hutchinson, J. E. (1984). Children's sensitivity to constraints on word 
meaning:  Taxonomic vs. thematic relations. Cognitive Psychology, 16, 1-27. 
Markman, E.M., & Wachtel, G.F. (1988). Children’s use of mutual exclusivity to constrain the 
meanings of words. Cognitive Psychology, 20, 121-157. 

 
103 
Markson, L. & Bloom, P. (2001). Evidence against a dedicated system for word learning in 
children. In: Language development: The essential readings. Tomasello, M. & Bates, E. 
Malden, MA, US: Blackwell Publishing, 129-133. 
Markus, J., Mundy, P., Morales, M., Delgado, C.E.F., & Yale, M. (2000). Individual differences 
in infant skills as predictors of child-caregiver joint attention and language. Social 
Development, 9(3), 302-315. 
Martin-Rhee, M.M., & Bialystok, E. (2008). The Development of Two Types of Inhibitory 
Control in Monolingual and Bilingual Children. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 
11(1), 81-93. 
Masur, E.F. (1982). Mothers’ responses to infants’ object-related gestures: Influences on lexical 
development. Journal of Child Language, 9, 23-30.  
Matthews, D., Lieven, E., Theakston, A., & Tomasello, M. (2005). The Role of Frequency in the 
Acquisition of English Word Order. Cognitive Development, 20(1), 121-136. 
Matthews, D., Lieven, E., Theakston, A., & Tomasello, M. (2007). French Children's Use and 
Correction of Weird Word Orders: A Constructivist Account. Journal of Child Language, 
34(2), 381-409. 
Matthews, D.E. & Theakston, A.L. (2006). Errors of Omission in English-Speaking Children's 
Production of Plurals and the Past Tense: The Effects of Frequency, Phonology, and 
Competition. Cognitive Science: A Multidisciplinary Journal, 30(6), 1027-1052.  
McBride-Chang, C., Cheung, H., Chow, B. W.-Y., Chow, C. S.-L., & Choi, L. (2006). 
Metalinguistic skills and vocabulary knowledge in Chinese (L1) and English (L2). 
Reading and Writing, 19, 695-716. 

 
104 
McBride-Chang, C., Cho, J.-R., Liu, H., Wagner, R. K., Shu, H., Zhou, A., et al. (2005). 
Changing models across cultures: Associations of phonological and morphological 
awareness to reading in Beijing, Hong Kong, Korea, and America. Journal of 
Experimental Child Psychology, 92, 140–160. 
McBride-Chang, C., Wagner, R. K., Muse, A., Chow, B. W.-Y., & Shu, H. (2005). The role of 
morphological awareness in children’s English reading and vocabulary acquisition. 
Applied Psycholinguistics, 26, 415–435. 
McBride-Chang, C., Tardif, T., Cho, J., Shu, H., Fletcher, P., Stokes, S.F., Wong, A., & Leung, 
K. (2008). What's in a word? Morphological awareness and vocabulary knowledge in 
three languages. Applied Psycholinguistics, 29(3), Jul 2008. pp. 437-462 
McClure, K., Pine, J.M., & Lieven, E.V.M. (2006). Investigating the Abstractness of Children's 
Early Knowledge of Argument Structure. Journal of Child Language, 33(4), 693-720. 
McDonough, C., Song, L., Hirsh-Pasek, K., Golinkoff, R.M., & Lannon, R. (2011). An image is 
worth a thousand words: Why nouns tend to dominate verbs in word learning. 
Developmental Science, 14, 181-189. 
McDonough, L., Choi, S., & Mandler, J. M. (2003). Understanding spatial relations: flexible 
infants, lexical adults. Cognitive Psychology, 46(3), 229-259. 
Meisel, J.M. (2001) The simultaneous acquisition of two first languages: early differentiation 
and subsequent development of grammars. In Trends in Bilingual Acquisition (Cenoz, J. 
and Genesee, F., eds), pp. 11–41, John Benjamins Publishing Company 
Meltzoff, A. N. (1995). Understanding the intentions of others: Re-enactment of intended acts by 
18-month-old children. Developmental Psychology, 31, 838-850. 

 
105 
Meltzoff, A. N., Gopnik, A., & Repacholi, B. M. (1999). Toddlers' understanding of intentions, 
desires, and emotions: Explorations of the dark ages. In P. D. Zelazo, J. W. Astington, & 
D. R. Olson (Eds.), Developing theories of intention: Social understanding and self-
control (pp. 17-41). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. 
Merriman, W.E. Evey-Burkey, J.A. Marazita, J.M., & Jarvis, L.H. (1996). Young two-year-olds' 
tendency to map novel verbs onto novel actions. Journal of Experimental Child 
Psychology, Vol 63(3), Dec 1996. pp. 466-498. 
Merriman, W.E., Marazita, J., & Jarvis, L.H. (1993). Four-year-olds' disambiguation of action 
and object word reference. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 56(3), 412-430. 
Mersad, K. & Nazzi, T. (in press). When Mommy comes to the rescue of statistics: Infants 
combine top-down and bottom-up cues to segment speech. Language Learning & 
Development. 
Mervis, C. B., & Bertrand, J. (1994). Acquisition of the novel name-nameless category (N3C) 
principle. Child Development, 65, 1646-1663. 
Mervis, C.B. & Johnson, K.E. (1991). Acquisition of the plural morpheme: A case study. (1991). 
Developmental Psychology, 27(2), 222-235.  
Milkovic, M., Bradaric-Joncic, S., & Wilbur, R.B. (2007). Information status and word order in 
Croatian sign language. Clinical Linguistics & Phonetics, 21(11-12), 1007-1017.  
Miller, K., Major, S.M., Shu, H., & Zhang, H. (2000). Ordinal knowledge: Number names and 
number concepts in Chinese and English. Canadian Journal of Experimental Psychology, 
54(2), 129-140. 

 
106 
Mintz, T.H. (2006). Finding the Verbs: Distributional Cues to Categories Available to Young 
Learners. In: Action meets word: How children learn verbs. Hirsh-Pasek, Kathy; 
Golinkoff, Roberta Michnick; New York, NY, US: Oxford University Press, 31-63. 
Mintz, T. (2005). Linguistic and conceptual influences on adjective acquisition in 24-and 36-
month- olds. Developmental Psychology, 41(1), 17-30. 
Mintz, T.H. & Gleitman, L.R. (2002). Adjectives really do modify nouns: The incremental and 
restricted nature of early adjective acquisition. Cognition, 84(3), 267-293. 
Miyamoto, R.T., Houston, D.M., Kirk, K.I., Perdew, A.E., & Svirsky, M.A. (2003). Language 
Development in Deaf Infants Following Cochlear Implantation. Acta Oto-Laryngologica, 
123(2), 241-244. 
Miyamoto, R.T., Hay-Mccutcheon, M.J., Kirk, K.I., Houston, D.M., & Bergeson-Dana, T. 
(2008). Language skills of profoundly deaf children who received cochlear implants 
under 12 months of age: a preliminary study. Acta Oto-Laryngologica, 128(4), 373-377. 
Molfese, D.L. (2000). Predicting dyslexia at 8 years of age using neonatal brain responses. Brain 
and Language, 72, 238-245. 
Molfese, D., & Molfese, V. (1985). Electrophysiological indices of auditory discrimination in 
newborn infants: The bases for predicting later language development. Infant Behavior 
and Development, 8,197-211. 
Molfese, D., & Molfese, V. (1997). Discrimination of language skills at five years of age using 
event related potentials recorded at birth. Developmental Neuropsychology, 13,133-156. 
Molfese, V., Molfese, D., Beswick, J., Jacobi-Vessels, J., Molfese, P., Molnar, A., Wagner, M., 
Haines, B. (2008). Event Related Potentials To Identify Language and Reading Skills. 
Topics in Language Disorders, 28, 28-45.  

 
107 
Molfese, D., Molfese, V. & Molfese, P. (2007).  Relation Between Early Measures Of Brain 
Responses To Language Stimuli and Childhood Performance On Behavioral Language 
Tasks. In D. Coch, G. Dawson, & K. Fischer (Eds). Human Behavior and the Developing 
Brain, Second Edition: Atypical Development (pp 191-211). New York: Guilford 
Publications, Inc.  
Moll, H., & Tomasello, M. (2007). How 14- and 18-month-olds know what others have 
experienced. Developmental Psychology, 43, 309-317. 
Moll, H., & Tomasello, M. (2006). Level 1 perspective-taking at 24 months of age. British 
Journal of Developmental Psychology, 24, 603-613. 
Moore, C., Angelopoulos, M., & Bennett, P. (1999). Word learning in the context of referential 
and salience cues. Developmental Psychology, 35, 60-68. 
Morales, M., Mundy, P., Delgado, C., Yale, M., Messinger, D., Neal, R., & Schwartz, H. 
(2000a). Responding to joint attention across the 6- through 24-month age period and 
early language acquisition. Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology, 21, 283–298. 
Morales M., Mundy, P., Delgado, C., Yale, M., Neal, R., & Schwartz, H. (2000b). Gaze 
following, temperament, and language development in 6-months olds: A replication and 
extension. Infant Behavior & Development, 23(2), 231-236. 
Morales, M., Mundy, P., & Rojas, J. (1998). Following the direction of gaze and language 
development in 6-month-olds. Infant Behavior and Development, 21, 373–377. 
Morgan, J., & Demuth, K. (1996). Signal to syntax:  Bootstrapping from speech to grammar in 
early acquisition. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. 
Morgan, G., & Woll, B. (2007). Understanding sign language classifiers through a 
polycomponential approach. Lingua 117(7), 1159-1168.  

 
108 
Morton, J.B. & Harper, S.N. (2007). What did Simon say? Revisiting the bilingual advantage. 
Developmental Science, 10(6), 719-726. 
Moses, L.J., Baldwin, D.A., & Rosicky, J.G. (2001). Evidence for Referential Understanding in 
the Emotions Domain at Twelve and Eighteen Months. Child Development, 72(3), 718-
35. 
Mundy, P., Block, J., Vaughan Van Hecke, A., Delgado, C., Parlade, M., & Pomeras, Y. (2007). 
Individual differences in the development of joint attention in infancy. Child 
Development, 78, 938–954. 
Mundy, P. & Newell, L. (2007). Attention, joint attention and social cognition. Current 
Directions in Psychological Science, 16, 269-274. 
Naigles, L. (1990). Children use syntax to learn verb meanings. Journal of Child Language, 17, 
357-374. 
Naigles, L. (1996). The use of multiple frames in verb learning via syntactic bootstrapping. 
Cognition, 58, 221-251. 
Naigles, L., Gleitman, H., & Gleitman, L. (1993). Syntactic Bootstrapping and Verb Acquisition. 
In E. Dromi (ed), Language and Cognition: A Developmental Perspective, Ablex: NJ.  
Naigles, L. & Kako, E. (1993). First contact in verb acquisition: defining a role for syntax. Child 
Development, 64(6), 1665-1687.  
Naigles, L.R. & Lehrer, N. (2002). Language-general and language-specific influences on 
chidren's acquisition of argument structure: A comparison of French and English. Journal 
of Child Language, 29(3), 545-566. 
Narasimhan, B. & Dimroth, C. (2008). Word order and information status in child language. 
Cognition, 107(1), 317-329. 

 
109 
Nazzi, T., Dilley, L.C., Jusczyk, A.M., Shattuck-Hufnagel, S., & Jusczyk, P.W. (2005). English-
learning infants' segmentation of verbs from fluent speech. Language and Speech, 48(3), 
279-298. 
Nazzi, T., Kemler Nelson, D.G., Jusczyk, P.W., & Jusczyk, A.M. (2000). Six-month-olds’ 
detection of clauses embedded in continuous speech: Effects of prosodic well-
formedness. Infancy, 1, 123-147. 
Nelson, K. (2007). Becoming a language user: Entering a symbolic world. In: Socioemotional 
development in the toddler years: Transitions and transformations. Brownell, Celia A.; 
Kopp, Claire B.; New York, NY, US: Guilford Press, 221-240. 
Newman, R., Ratner, N.B., Jusczyk, A.M., Jusczyk, P.W., & Dow, K.A. (2006). Infants' early 
ability to segment the conversational speech signal predicts later language development: 
A retrospective analysis. Developmental Psychology, 42(4), 643-655. 
Newport, E.L. (1975). Motherese: The speech of mothers to young children. Unpublished 
doctoral dissertation, University of Pennsylvania. 
Nicholas, J.G. & Geers, A.E. (2007). Will they catch up? The role of age at cochlear 
implantation in the spoken language development of children with severe to profound 
hearing loss. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 50(4), 1048-1062.  
Nisbett, R.E. (2003). The geography of thought: How Asians and Westerners think differently ... 
and why. New York, NY, US: Free Press, 2003. xxiii, 263 pp. 
Nisbett, R.E., Peng, K., Choi, I., & Norenzayan, A. (2001). Culture and systems of thought: 
Holistic versus analytic cognition. Psychological Review, 108(2), 291-310. 
Norton, E., Baker, S., & Petitto, L. A. (2003, July). Bilingual infants’ perception of handshapes 
in American Sign Language. Poster presented at the University of Pennsylvania Institute 

 
110 
for Research in Cognitive Science summer workshop, Philadelphia, PA. 
Núñez, R.E. & Sweetser, E. (2006). With the Future Behind Them: Convergent Evidence From 
Aymara Language and Gesture in the Crosslinguistic Comparison of Spatial Construals 
of Time. Cognitive Science: A Multidisciplinary Journal, 30(3), 401-450.  
Nurmsoo, E., & Bloom, P. (2008). Preschool perspective taking in word learning: Do they 
blindly follow eye gaze? Psychological Science, 19(8), 211-216. 
Nurmsoo, E., & Robinson, E.J. (2009). Identifying unreliable informants: Do children excuse 
past inaccuracy? Developmental Science, 12(1), 41-47. 
Oller, D.K. (2000). The Emergence of the Speech Capacity. Lawrence Erlbaum and Associates, 
Inc. 
Oller, D.K. & Eilers, R. E. (2002). Language and Literacy in Bilingual Children. Multilingual 
Matters, Ltd. 
Oller, D.K., Eilers, R.E., Neal, A.R., & Cobo-Lewis, A.B. (1998). Late onset canonical babbling: 
A possible early marker of abnormal development. American Association on Mental 
Retardation, 103, 249-263. 
Oller, D. K., Eilers, R. E., Neal, A. R., & Schwartz, H. K. (1999). Precursors to speech in 
infancy: The prediction of speech and language disorders. Journal of Communication 
Disorders, 32, 223-245.  
Oller, D.K., Eilers, R.E., Urbano, R., Cobo-Lewis, A.B. (1997). Development of precursors to 
speech in infants exposed to two languages. Journal of Child Language, 24(2), 407-425. 
Onishi, K.H. & Baillargeon, R. (2005). Do 15-month-old infants understand false beliefs? 
Science, 308, 255-258.   

 
111 
Onnis, L. & Christiansen, M.H. (2008). Lexical categories at the edge of the word. Cognitive 
Science: A Multidisciplinary Journal, 32(1), 184-221. 
Palmer, S.B., Fais, L., Golinkoff, R.M., & Werker, J.F. (In press). Perceptual narrowing of 
linguistic sign occurs in the first year of life. Child Development. 
Papfragou, A., Li, P., Choi, Y. & Han, C. (2007). Evidentiality in language and cognition.  
Cognition, 103, 253-299.  
Parish-Morris, J., Hennon, E., Hirsh-Pasek, K., Golinkoff, R. M., & Tager-Flusberg, H. (2007). 
Children with autism illuminate the role of social intention in word learning. Child 
Development, 78, 1265-1288. 
Parish-Morris, J., Pruden, S., Ma, W., Hirsh-Pasek, K., & Golinkoff, R.M. (2010). A world of 
relations: Relational words. In B. Malt and P. Wolf (Eds.), Words and the mind: How 
words capture human experience (pp. 219- 242). New York, NY: Oxford University 
Press. 
Patael, S. & Diesendruck, G. (2008). Intentions help children learn meaningful rules. Journal of 
Child Language, 35, 221-235. 
Patterson, M.L., & Werker, J.F. (2003). Two-month-old infants match phonetic information in 
lips and voice. Developmental Science, 6, 191-196. 
Pearson, B.Z., Fernandez, S., & Oller, D.K. (1993). Lexical development in bilingual infants and 
toddlers: Comparison to monolingual norms. Language Learning, 43, 93-120. 
Pelucchi, B., Hay, J.F., Saffran, J.R. (2009). Statistical learning in a natural language by 8-
month-old infants. Child Development, 80, 674-685. 
Perfors, A., Tenenbaum, J.B., Griffiths, T.L., & Xu, F. (2011). A tutorial introduction to 
Bayesian models of cognitive development. Cognition, 120(3), 302-321. 

 
112 
Perniss, P. (2007). Achieving spatial coherence in German Sign Language narratives: The use of 
classifiers and perspective. Lingua, 117, 1315-1338. 
Petitto, L.A. and Dunbar, K.N. (2004). New findings from educational neuroscience on bilingual 
brains, scientific brains, and the educated mind. Chapter in K. Fischer & T. Katzir 
(Editors), Building Usable Knowledge in Mind, Brain & Education. Cambridge 
University Press. 
Petitto, L. A., Katerelos, M., Levy, B., Gauna, K., Tétrault, K., & Ferraro, V. (2001). Bilingual 
signed and spoken language acquisition from birth: Implications for mechanisms 
underlying bilingual language acquisition. Journal of Child Language, 28, 1-44.  
Petitto, L.A. & Kovelman, I. (2003). The Bilingual Paradox: How signing-speaking bilingual 
children help us to resolve it and teach us about the brain’s mechanisms underlying all 
language acquisition. Learning Languages, 8, 5-18. 
Petitto, L. A., Kovelman, I., & Harasymowycz, U. (2003). Bilingual language development: 
Does learning the new damage the old? Abstracts of the Society for Research in Child 
Development, Tampa, FL.  
Phillips, A., Wellman, H., & Spelke, E. (2002). Infants’ ability to connect gaze and emotional 
expression to intentional action. Cognition, 85, 53 – 78.  
Piaget, J. (1926). The language and thought of the child. Oxford, England: Harcourt, Brace, 
xxiii,  
Pica, P., Lemer, C., Izard, V., & Dehane, S. (2004). Exact and approximate arithmetic in an 
Amazonian indigene group. Science, 306, 499-503. 
Pinker, S. (1989). Learnability and cognition: The acquisition of argument structure. Cambridge, 
Mass.: MIT Press. 

 
113 
Pinker, S. (1994). The language instinct:  How the mind creates language (1st ed.). New York: 
William Morrow. 
Plunkett, K., & Marchman, V. (1993). From rote learning to system building: Acquiring verb 
morphology in children and connectionist nets. Cognition, 48, 21-69. 
Polka, L., & Sundara, M. (2003). Word segmentation in monolingual and bilingual infant 
learners of English and French. In Proceedings of the 15th International Congress of 
Phonetic Sciences (pp. 1021–1024). Barcelona, Spain. 
Polka, L., Sundara, M., & Blue, S. (2002). The role of language experience in word 
segmentation: A comparison of English, French, and bilingual infants. The 143rd 
Meeting of the Acoustical Society of America: Special Session in Memory of Peter 
Jusczyk, Pittsburgh, PA. 
Poulin-Dubois, D. & Forbes, J. (2002). Toddlers' attention to intentions-in-action in learning 
novel action words. Developmental Psychology, 38, 104-114. 
Poulin-Dubois, D. Forbes, J.N. (2006). Word, intention, and action: A two-tiered model of action 
word learning. In K. Hirsh-Pasek and R. M. Golinkoff (Eds.), Action meets word: How 
children learn verbs (pp. 262-285). NY: Oxford University Press,  
Pruden, S.M., Hirsh-Pasek, K., Golinkoff, R.M., Hennon, E.A. (2006). The birth of words: Ten-
month-olds learn words through perceptual salience. Child Development, 77, 266-280. 
Quine, W.V.O. (1960). Word and object. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press. 
Rapin, I., & Dunn, M. (2003). Update on the language disorders of individuals on the autistic 
spectrum. Brain & Development, 25, 166-172. 
Ratner, N. & Bruner, J. (1978). Games, social exchange and the acquisition of language. Journal 
of Child Language, 5, 391-401. 

 
114 
Redlinger, W.E. & Park, T. (1980). Language mixing in young bilinguals. Journal of Child 
Language, 7, 337-352. 
Reid, V. M., & Striano, T. (2005). Adult gaze inXuences infant attention and object processing: 
implications for cognitive neuroscience. European Journal of Neuroscience, 21, 1763–
1766. 
Reid, V. M., Striano, T., Kaufman, J., & Johnson, M. H. (2004). Eye gaze cueing facilitates 
neural processing of objects in 4-month-old infants. NeuroReport, 15, 2553–2555. 
Roberson, D., Davidoff, J., Davies, I.R.L., & Shapiro, L.R. (2004). Color categories: Evidence 
for the cultural relativity hypothesis. Cognitive Psychology, 50, 378-411.  
Roberson, D., Davies, I.R.L. & Davidoff, J. (2002). Colour categories are not universal: 
Replications & new evidence. In B. Saunders & J. van Brakel (Eds.) Theories, 
technologies, instrumentalities of color: Anthropological & historical perspectives. 
Lanham, Maryland: University Press of America, Inc.  
Roberson, D., Davies, I.R.L. & Davidoff, J. (2000). Color categories are not universal: 
Replications & new evidence from a Stone-age culture. Journal of Experimental 
Psychology: General, 129, 369-398. 
Roeper, T. (2007). The prism of grammar: How child language illuminates humanism. 
Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press. 

 
115 
Roseberry, S., Hirsh-Pasek, K., Parish-Morris, J. & Golinkoff, R.M. (2009). Live action: Can young 
children learn verbs from video? Child Development, 80, 1360-1375. 
Roseberry, S., Richie, R., Hirsh-Pasek, K., Golinkoff, R.M., & Shipley, T.F. (2011). Babies Catch a 
Break: 7- to 9-Month-Olds Track Statistical Probabilities in Continuous Dynamic Events. 
Psychological Science, 22(11), 1422-1424.  
Rowe, Meredith L. (2008). Child-directed speech: Relation to socioeconomic status, knowledge 
of child development and child vocabulary skill. Journal of Child Language, 35, 185-205 
Saalbach, H., & Imai, M. (2007). The scope of linguistic influence: Does a classifier system alter 
object concepts? Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 136, 485-501. 
Sabbagh, M., & Baldwin, D. (2001). Learning words from knowledgeable versus ignorant 
speakers: Links between preschoolers' theory of mind and semantic development. Child 
Development, 72, 1054-1070. 
Sabbagh, M. A., Wdowiak, S. & Ottaway, J. M. (2003). Do word learners ignore ignorant 
speakers? Journal of Child Language, 30, 905-924. 
Saffran, J.R. (2003). Absolute pitch in infancy and adulthood: The role of tonal structure. 
Developmental Science, 6(1), 35-43. 
Saffran, J.R., Aslin, R.N., & Newport, E.L. (1996). Statistical learning by 8-month-old infants. 
Science, 274, 1926-1928. 
Saffran, J., Hauser, M., Seibel, R., Kapfhamer, J., Tsao, F., & Cushman, F. (2008). Grammatical 
pattern learning by human infants and cotton-top tamarin monkeys. Cognition, 107, 479-
500. 
Saffran, J.R., Johnson, E.K., Aslin, R.N., & Newport, E.L. (1999). Statistical learning of tone 
sequences by human infants and adults. Cognition, 70, 27-52. 

 
116 
Saffran, J.R., Loman, M.M., & Robertson, R.W. (2000) Infant memory for musical experiences. 
Cognition, 77, B15-B23. 
Saffran, J.R., Pollak, S.D., Seibel, R.L., & Shkolnik, A. (2007). Dog is a dog is a dog: Infant rule 
learning is not specific to language. Cognition, 105, 669-680. 
Sandler, W., Meir, I., Padden, C., & Arnoff, M. (2005). The emergence of grammar: Syntactic 
sructure in a new language. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 102, 2661-
2665. 
Santelmann, L.M. & Jusczyk, P.W. (1998). Sensitivity to discontinuous dependencies in 
language learners: Evidence for limitations in processing dpace. Cognition, 69, 105-34. 
Saylor, M.M., Baldwin, D.A., Baird, J.A., & LaBounty, J. (2007). Infants' on-line segmentation 
of dynamic human action. Journal of Cognition and Development, 8, 113-128. 
Saylor, M.M., Sabbagh, M.A., & Baldwin, D.A. (2002). Children use whole-part juxtaposition as 
a pragmatic cue to word meaning. Developmental Psychology, 38, 993-1003.   
Scofield, J. & Behrend, D.A. (2008) Learning words from reliable and unreliable speakers. 
Cognitive Development, 23, 278-290. 
Scott, R.M. & Fisher, C. (2012). 2.5-Year-olds use cross-situational consistency to learn verbs 
under referential uncertainty. Cognition, 122(2), 163-180. 
Sebastián-Gallés, N. & Bosch, L. (2005). Phonology and bilingualism. In: Kroll, Judith & Anette 
M. B. de Groot (Eds.), Handbook of Bilingualism: Psycholinguistic Approaches (pp.  68-
87). NY: Oxford University Press. 
Sebastian-Galles, N. (2010). Bilingual language acquision: Where dies the difference lie? Human 
Development, 53, 245-255. 

 
117 
Seidl, A., Hollich, G., & Jusczyk, P. (2003). Infants and toddlers comprehension of subject and 
object wh-questions. Infancy, 4, 423-436. 
Senghas, A. (1995). Children’s contribution to the birth of Nicaraguan Sign Language. 
Unpublished dissertation, Massachusetts Institute of Technology. 
Senghas, A. (2003). Intergenerational influence and ontogenetic development in the emergence 
of spatial grammar in Nicaraguan Sign Language Cognitive Development, 18, 511-531. 
Senghas, A. (2005). Language emergence: Clues from a new Bedouin sign language. Current 
Biology, 15, 463-465. 
Senghas, A., & Coppola, M. (2001). Children creating language: How Nicaraguan sign language 
acquired a spatial grammar. Psychological Science, 12, 323-329. 
Senghas, A., S. Kita, and A. Özyürek (2004). Children creating core properties of language: 
evidence from an emerging sign language in Nicaragua. Science, 305, 1779-1782. 
Senghas, R.J., Senghas, A., & Pyers, J.E. (2005). The emergence of Nicaraguan Sign Language: 
Questions of development, acquisition, and evolution. In J. Langer, S. T. Parker, & C. 
Milbrath (Eds.), Biology and knowledge revisited: From neurogenesis to psychogenesis. 
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 
Shady, M. (1996). Infants’ sensitivity to function morphemes. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, 
State University of New York at Buffalo. 
Shafer, V., Shucard, J., Shucard, D., & Gerken, L. (1998). An electrophysiological study of 
infants’ sensitivity to the sound patterns of English speech. Journal of Speech and 
Hearing Research, 41, 874–886. 

 
118 
Shatz, M. & Gelman, R. (1973). The development of communication skills: Modifications in the 
speech of young children as a function of listener. Monographs of the Society for 
Research in Child Development, 38(5), Serial No 152, 1-37. 
Shi, R. Cutler, A., Werker, J. F., & Cruickshank, M. (2006). Frequency and form as determinants 
of functor sensitivity in English-acquiring infants. Journal of the Acoustical Society of 
America,119, EL61–EL67. 
Shi, R., & Lepage, M. (2008). The effect of functional morphemes on word segmentation in 
preverbal infants. Developmental Science, 11, 407-413 
Shi, R., Morgan, J., & Allopenna, P. (1998). Phonological and acoustic bases for earliest 
grammatical category assignment: A cross‑linguistic perspective. Journal of Child 
Language, 25, 169-201. 
Shi, R., Werker, J., & Cutler, A. (2006). Recognition and representation of function words in 
English-learning infants. Infancy, 10, 187-198. 
Shi, R., Werker, J.F.; Morgan, J.L. (1999). Newborn infants' sensitivity to perceptual cues to 
lexical and grammatical words. Cognition, 72, B11-B21. 
Shipley, E., Smith, C.S., & Gleitman, L. (1969). A study in the acquisition of language: Free 
responses to commands. Language, 45, 322-343. 
Shultz, S. & Vouloumanos, A. (2010). Three-month olds prefer speech to other naturally 
occurring signals. Language Learning and Development, 6, 241-257. 
Siller M. & Sigman M. (2008). Modeling longitudinal change in the language abilities of 
children with autism: Parent behaviors and child characteristics as predictors of change. 
Developmental Psychology, 44, 1691-704. 

 
119 
Singh, L. (2008). Influences of high and low variability on infant word recognition. Cognition, 
106, 833-870. 
Skinner, B. F. (1957). Verbal behavior. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall. 
Slobin, D.I. (1970). Suggested universals in the ontogenesis of grammar. 20 pp. (ED043001) 
Smiley, P., & Huttenlocher, J. (1995). Conceptual development and the child's early words for 
events, objects, and persons. In M. Tomasello, & W. E. Merriman (Eds.), Beyond names 
for things: Young children's acquisition of verbs. (pp. 21-61). Lawrence Erlbaum 
Associates, Inc, Hillsdale, NJ: England.  
Smith, L.B. (2000). Avoiding associations when it’s behaviorism you really hate. In R. M. 
Golinkoff, K. Hirsh-Pasek, (Eds.), Becoming a word learner: A debate on lexical 
acquisition (pp. 169 –174). Oxford, England: Oxford University Press. 
Smith, L. (2003). Learning to recognize objects. Psychological Science, 14, 244-250. 
Smith, L.S., Dmochowski, P.A., Muir, D.W., & Kisilevsky, B.S. (2007). Estimated cardiac vagal 
tone predicts fetal response to mother’s and stranger’s voices. Developmental 
Psychobiology, 49, 543-547. 
Soderstrom, M. (2008). Early perception--Late comprehension of grammar? The case of verbal -
s: A response to de Villiers & Johnson (2007). Journal of Child Language, 35, 671-676. 
Soderstrom, M., Conwell, E., Feldman, N., Morgan, J. (2009). The learner as statistician: Three 
principles of computational success in language acquisition. Developmental Science, 12, 
409-411. 
Soderstrom, M. & Morgan, J.L. (2007). Twenty-two-month-olds discriminate fluent from 
disfluent adult-directed speech. Developmental Science, 10, 641-653. 

 
120 
Soderstrom, M., Kemler Nelson, D.G., & Jusczyk, P.W. (2005). Six-month-olds recognize 
clauses embedded in different passages of fluent speech. Infant Behavior and 
Development, 28, 87-94. 
Soderstrom, M., Seidl, A., Kemler Nelson, D.G., & Jusczyk, P.W. (2003). The prosodic 
bootstrapping of phrases: Evidence from prelinguistic infants. Journal of Memory and 
Language, 49, 249-267. 
Soderstrom, M., White, K., Conwell, E., & Morgan, J. (2007). Receptive grammatical 
knowledge of familiar content words and inflection in 16 month olds. Infancy, 12, 1-29. 
Soja, N., Carey, S., & Spelke, E. (1991). Ontological categories guide young children's 
inductions of word meaning: Object terms and substance terms. Cognition, 38, 179-211. 
Song, L., Nazzi, T., Moukawane, S., Golinkoff, R.M., Stahl, A., Ma, W., Hirsh-Pasek, K., 
Connell, M. (2010). Sleepy vs. sleeping: Preschoolers’ sensitivity to morphological cues 
for adjectives and verbs in English and French. In K. Franich, K.M. Iserman, & L. Keil 
(Eds.), Proceedings of the 34th Annual Boston University Conference on Language 
Development (pp. 409-420). Somerville, MA: Cascadilla Press. 
Southgate, V., Senju, A., & Csibra, G. (2007). Action anticipation through attribution of false 
belief by two-year-olds. Psychological Science, 18, 587-592. 
Spelke, E.S., & Tsivkin, S. (2001). Language and number: A bilingual training study. Cognition, 
78, 45-88.  
Sperber D., & Wilson, D. (1986). Relevance: communication and cognition. Oxford: Blackwell. 
Streeter, L.A. (1976) Nature, 259, 39–41. 
Striano, T., Chen, X., Cleveland, A., Bradshaw, S. (2006). Joint attention social cues influence 
infant learning. European Journal of Developmental Psychology, 3, 289-299. 

 
121 
Striano, T., Stahl, D., Cleveland, A., Hoehl, S. (2007). Sensitivity to triadic attention between 6 
weeks and 3 months of age. Infant Behavior & Development, 30, 529-534. 
Stoel-Gammon, C. & Otomo, K. (1986). Babbling development of hearing-impaired and 
normally hearing subjects. Journal of Speech & Hearing Disorders, 51, 33-41. 
Subrahmanyam, K., Landau, B., & Gelman, R. (1999). Shape, material, and syntax: Interacting 
forces in children's learning in novel words for objects and substances. Language and 
Cognitive Processes, 14, 249-281. 
Svirsky, M.A., Teoh, S.W., & Neuburger H. (2004). Development of language and speech 
perception in congenitally, profoundly deaf children as a function of age at cochlear 
implantation. Audiology & Neuro-Otology, 9, 224-33. 
Szeto, K.K.S. (1998). The acquisition of Cantonese classifiers. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, 
University of Hong Kong.  
Tager-Flusberg, H. (1996). Current theory and research on language and communication in 
autism. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 26, 169-172. 
Tait, M., De Raeve, L., & Nikolopoulos, T.P. (2007). Deaf children with cochlear implants 
before the age of 1 year: comparison of preverbal communication with normally hearing 
children. International Journal of Pediatric Otolaryngology, 71, 1605-1611. 
Tervoort, B.T. (1961). Esoteric symbolism in the communication behavior of young deaf 
children, American Annals of the Deaf,106, 436–480. 
Thiessen, E.D., Hill, E.A., Saffran, J.R. (2005). Infant-directed speech facilitates word 
segmentation. Infancy, 7, 53-71. 
Tincoff, R. & Jusczyk, P.W. (1999) Some beginnings of word comprehension in 6-month-olds. 
Psychological Science, 10, 172–175. 

 
122 
Tomasello, M. (2008). Origins of human communication. Cambridge, MA, US: MIT Press. 
Tomasello, M. (1988). The role of joint attentional process in early language development. 
Language Sciences, 10, 69-88.  
Tomasello, M. (1992). First verbs: A case study of early grammatical development. NY: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Tomasello, M. (1995). Joint attention as social cognition. In C. Moore & P. J. Dunham (Eds.), 
Joint attention: Its origins and role in development (pp. 103-130). Hillsdale, NJ: 
Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Tomasello, M. (2000). First steps toward a usage-based theory of language acquisition. Cognitive 
Linguistics, Special issue: Language acquisition, 11, 61-82. 
Tomasello, M. (2003). Constructing a language: A usage-based theory of language acquisition. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
Tomasello, M., & Akhtar, N. (1995). Two-year-olds use pragmatic cues to differentiate reference 
to objects and actions. Cognitive Development, 10, 201-224. 
Tomasello, M. & Barton, M.E. (1994). Learning words in nonostensive contexts. Developmental 
Psychology, 30, 639-650. 
Tomasello, M., Carpenter, M., Call, J., Behne, T., & Moll, H. (2005). Understanding and sharing 
intentions: The origins of cultural cognition, Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 28, 675–
691. 
Tomasello, M. & Farrar, M.J. (1986). Joint attention and early language. Child Development, 57, 
1454-1463 
Tomasello, M. & Olguin, R. (1993). Twenty-three-month-old children have a grammatical 
category of noun. Cognitive Development, 8, 451-64. 

 
123 
Tomasello, M., Strosberg, R., & Akhtar, N. (1996). Eighteen-month-old children learn words in 
non-ostensive contexts. Journal of Child Language, 23, 157-176. 
Tse, Chi-Shing; Altarriba, Jeanette; (2008). Evidence against linguistic relativity in Chinese and 
English: A case study of spatial and temporal metaphors. Journal of Cognition and 
Culture, 8, 335-357. 
Tse, S. K., Li, H., & Leung, S. O. (2007). The acquisition of Cantonese classifiers by preschool 
children in Hong Kong. Journal of Child Language, 34, 495-517. 
Tsao, F.-M., Liu, H.-M., & Kuhl, P. (2004). Speech perception in infancy predicts language 
development in the second year of life: A longitudinal study. Child Development, 75, 
987-1297. 
Tyack, Dorothy and David Ingram (1977). Children’s Production and Comprehension of 
Questions. Journal of Child Language, 4, 211-224. Cambridge, Massachusetts.   
Uchida, N. & Imai, M. (1999). Heuristics in learning classifiers: The implications from the 
acquisition of the classifier system on the nature of lexical acquisition. Japanese 
Psychological Research, 41, 50-69. 
Valian, V., & Aubry, S. (2005). When opportunity knocks twice: two-year-olds' repetition of 
sentence subjects. Journal of Child Language, 32, 617-641. 
Van Heugten, M. & Shi, R. (2009). French-learning toddlers use gender information on 
determiners during word recognition. Developmental Science, 12, 419-425. 
Varnum, M.E.W., Grossmann, I., Katunar, D., Nisbett, R.E., & Kitayama, S. (2008). Holism in a 
European cultural context: Differences in cognitive style between Central and East 
Europeans and Westerners. Journal of Cognition and Culture, 8, 321-333. 

 
124 
Vihman, M.M. (1985). Language differentiation by the bilingual infant. Journal of Child 
Language, 12, 297-324.  
Volterra, V. & Taeschner, T. (1978). The acquisition and development of language by bilingual 
children. Journal of Child Language, 5, 311-326.  
Volden, J., Coolican, J., & Garon, N. (2009). Brief Report: Pragmatic Language in Autism 
Spectrum Disorder--Relationships to Measures of Ability and Disability. Journal of 
Autism and Developmental Disorders, 39, 388-393. 
Vouloumanos, A. & Werker, J.F. (2007). Listening to language at birth: Evidence for a bias for 
speech in neonates. Developmental Science, 10, 159-164. 
Wagner, L. (2001) Aspectual Influences on Early Tense Interpretation. Journal of Child 
Language, 28, 661-681. 
Walker, E.A. & Bass-Ringdahl, S. (2007). Babbling Complexity and Its Relationship to Speech 
and Language Outcomes in Children With Cochlear Implants. Otology & Neurotology, 
29, 225-229. 
Waxman, S.R. (1990). Linguistic biases and the establishment of conceptual  hierarchies: 
Evidence from preschool children. Cognitive Development, 5, 123-150.   
Waxman, S.R. (1999). Specifying the scope of 13-month-olds’ expectations for novel words. 
Cognition, 70, B35-B50. 
Waxman, S.R., & Booth, A.E. (2001). Seeing pink elephants: Fourteen-month-olds’ 
interpretations of novel nouns and adjectives. Cognitive Psychology, 43, 217-242. 
Waxman, S.R., & Booth, A.E. (2003). The origins and evolution of links between word learning 
and conceptual organization: New evidence from 11-month-olds. Developmental Science, 
6, 130-137. 

 
125 
Waxman, S.R., & Klibanoff, R.S. (2000). The role of comparison in the extension of novel 
adjectives. Developmental Psychology, 36, 571-581. 
Waxman, S.R., & Markow, D.B. (1995). Words as invitations to form categories: Evidence from 
12-month-old infants. Cognitive Psychology, 29, 257-302. 
Waxman, S., & Markow, D. (1998). Object properties and object kind: twenty-one-month-old 
infant's extension of novel adjectives. Child Development, 69, 1313-1330. 
Wei & Lee. (2001). L1 Development in an L2 Environment: The Use of Cantonese Classifiers 
and Quantifiers by Young British-Born Chinese in Tyneside. International Journal of 
Bilingual Education and Bilingualism, 4, 359-82.  
Weist, R.M. (1991). Spatial and temporal location in child language. First Language, 11, 253-
267. 
Weist, R.M., Lyytinen, P., Wysocka, J. & Atanassova M. (1997). The interaction of language 
and thought in children's language acquisition: a crosslinguistic study. Journal of Child 
Language, 24, 81-121. 
Weist, R.M., Atanassova, M., Wysocka, H., & Pawlak, A. (1999). Spatial and temporal systems 
in child language and thought: A cross-linguistic study. First Language, 19, 267-312. 
Werker, J.F., & Byers-Heinlein, K. (2008). Bilingualism in infancy: First steps in perception and 
comprehension. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 12, 144-151. 
Werker, J.F., Gilbert, J.H.V., Humphrey, K., & Tees, R.C. (1981). Developmental aspects of 
cross-language speech perception. Child Development, 52, 349-355.  
Werker, J.F., Pons, F., Dietrich, C., Kajikawa, S., Fais, L., & Amano, S. (2007). Infant-directed 
speech supports phonetic category learning in English and Japanese. Cognition, 103, 147-
162. 

 
126 
Werker, J.F., & Tees, R.C. (1984). Cross-language speech perception:  Evidence for perceptual 
reorganization during the first year of life. Infant Behavior and Development, 7, 49-63. 
Werker, J.F. & Tees, R.C. (2005). Speech Perception as a Window for Understanding Plasticity 
and Commitment in Language Systems of the Brain. Developmental Psychobiology, 
Special issue: Critical Periods Re-examined: Evidence from Human Sensory 
Development, 46, 233-234. 
Wexler, K. (1999). Maturation and growth of grammar. In W.C. Ritchie & T. K. Bhatia (Eds), 
Handbook of child language acquisition (pp. 55-109). San Diego, CA: Academic Press,  
Whitehurst, G.J., Smith, M., Fischel, J.E., Arnold, D.S., et al. (1991). The continuity of babble 
and speech in children with specific expressive language delay. Journal of Speech & 
Hearing Research, 34, 1121-1129. 
Whorf, B. (1939). The Relation of Habitual Thought and Behavior to Language. Language, 
Thought & Reality. J.B. Carroll. Cambridge, MA, MIT Press.  
Winawer, J., Witthoft, N., Frank, M., Wu, L., Wade, A., & Boroditsky, L. (2007). The Russian 
Blues reveal effects of language on color discrimination. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Science, 104, 7780-7785. 
Witthoft, N, Winawer, J, Wu, L, Frank, M, Wade, A, & Boroditsky, L. (2003) Effects of 
language on color discriminability. Proceedings of the 25th Annual Meeting of the 
Cognitive Science Society.  
Wood, J.N., Kouider, S., & Carey, S. (2009). Acquisition of singular-plural morphology. 
Developmental Psychology, 45, 202-206. 
Woodward, A.L. (2003). Infants' developing understanding of the link between looker and 
object. Developmental Science, 6, 297-311.  

 
127 
Woodward, A.L., & Guajardo, J.J. (2002). Infants' understanding of the point gesture as an 
object-directed action. Cognitive Development, 17, 1061-1084.  
Woodward, A., Markman, E., & Fitzsimmons, C.M. (1994). Rapid word learning in 13- and 18-
month-olds. Developmental Psychology, 30, 553-556. 
Xu, Y. (1997). Contextual tonal variations in Mandarin. Journal of Phonetics, 25, 61-83.  
Xu, F. & Tenenbaum, J. (2007a). Word learning as Bayesian inference. Psychological Review, 
114, 245-272. 
Xu, F. & Tenenbaum, J. (2007b). Sensitivity to sampling in Bayesian word learning.  
Developmental Science, 10, 288-297. 
Yamamoto, K. & Keil, F.C. (2000). The acquisition of Japanese numerical classifiers - Linkages 
between grammatical forms and conceptual categories. Journal of East Asian Linguistics, 
9, 379-409. 
Yoshida, H. & Smith, L.B. (2003). Shifting ontological boundaries: how Japanese- and English-
speaking children generalize names for animals and artifacts. Developmental Science, 6, 
1-36. 
Yuan, S., Fisher, C., & Snedeker, J. (in press). Counting the nouns: Simple structural cues to 
verb meaning. Child Development. 
Zangl, R. & Fernald, A. (2007). Increasing flexibility in children's online processing of 
grammatical and nonce determiners in fluent speech. Language Learning and 
Development, 3, 199-231.  
Zangl, R. & Mills, D.L. (2007). Increased Brain Activity to Infant-Directed Speech in 6-and 13-
Month-Old Infants. Infancy, 11, 31-62. 

 
128 
Zavala, R. (2000). Multiple classifier systems in Akatek (Mayan), In G. Senft (Ed.), Systems of 
nominal classification. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 114-146.  
Zemlin, W.R. (1988). Speech and hearing science -- anatomy and physiology. Englewood Cliffs, 
New Jersey: Prentice Hall. 
 

 
129 
Figure 2. Piaget’s water level task. It is correct to draw the water level as horizontal (parallel to 
the table). Bilingual children perform significantly better on this task than monolingual 
children (Bialystok & Majumder, 1998). 
 
 
 

