Philosophy of mathematics: Making a fresh start
Carlo Cellucci
La Sapienza University of Rome, Via Carlo Fea 2, 00161 Rome, Italy
a r t i c l e
i n f o
Article history:
Received 5 January 2012
Received in revised form 21 August 2012
Available online 27 November 2012
Keywords:
Natural/artiﬁcial mathematics
Analytic method
Mathematical objects
Mathematical deﬁnition
Diagrams
Effectiveness of mathematics
a b s t r a c t
The paper distinguishes between two kinds of mathematics, natural mathematics which is a result of bio-
logical evolution and artiﬁcial mathematics which is a result of cultural evolution. On this basis, it out-
lines an approach to the philosophy of mathematics which involves a new treatment of the method of
mathematics, the notion of demonstration, the questions of discovery and justiﬁcation, the nature of
mathematical objects, the character of mathematical deﬁnition, the role of intuition, the role of diagrams
in mathematics, and the effectiveness of mathematics in natural science.
 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
When citing this paper, please use the full journal title Studies in History and Philosophy of Science
1. Premise
About three decades ago, Putnam stated that in the philosophy
of mathematics ‘‘nothing works’’ (Putnam, 1979, p. 386). Mac Lane
claimed that the philosophy of mathematics was ‘‘a subject
dormant since about 1931’’ (Mac Lane, 1981, p. 462). Kitcher com-
plained that it was ‘‘a subject noted’’ for ‘‘its irrelevance’’ (Kitcher,
1988, p. 293). Crowe lamented that it was based on assumptions
which were ‘‘seriously wrong’’ (Crowe, 1988, p. 260). Hersh
asserted that it needed ‘‘a new beginning’’ (Hersh, 1979, p. 31).
Davis and Hersh maintained that, to that aim, it had to give an
account of ‘‘what we do when we use, teach, invent or discover
mathematics’’ (Davis & Hersh, 1981, p. 406).
This task is still with us. The philosophy of mathematics still
needs a new beginning because it has two basic limitations.
(1) It assumes that the question of the nature of mathematics
can be adequately approached locally, that is, in isolation
from everything else, rather than globally, within the gen-
eral context of knowledge. For example, George and Vell-
eman state that ‘‘mathematics is the purest product of
conceptual thought,’’ which ‘‘sets it apart from all else’’
(George & Velleman, 2002, p. 1).
(2) It assumes that the question of the nature of mathematics
can be approached taking no account of what cognitive
architecture makes mathematical thought possible. For
example, George and Velleman state that questions such as
‘‘what brain, or neural activity, or cognitive architecture
makes mathematical thought possible’’ focus on phenomena
‘‘that are really extraneous to the nature of mathematical
thought itself’’ (George & Velleman, 2002, p. 2).
Assumption (1) is a reﬂection of Carnap’s theory of division of
philosophical labor, according to which each philosopher should
be employed at ‘‘a partial task,’’ since only so is it possible to erect
‘‘a safe building’’ at which ‘‘each following generation can continue
to work’’ (Carnap, 2003, p. xvii). But the division of philosophical
labor has the effect that the individual philosopher has no overall
plan and focuses on smaller and smaller tasks. As a result, today’s
philosophy of mathematics is ‘‘a thing unto itself, hardly connected
either to living mathematics or to general philosophy’’ (Hersh,
2011, p. 319). To avoid perpetuating this condition, a global ap-
proach to the philosophy of mathematics is necessary.
Assumption (2) overlooks that mathematics is wholly human, it
is one of the tools by which humans categorize the world, thus
making it comprehensible to themselves. The only mathematics
0039-3681/$ - see front matter  2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.shpsa.2012.09.002
E-mail addresses: carlo.cellucci@uniroma1.it, carlo.cellucci.u60e@alice.it
Studies in History and Philosophy of Science 44 (2013) 32–42
Contents lists available at SciVerse ScienceDirect
Studies in History and Philosophy of Science
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/shpsa

which exists is the one humans make, and this depends on their
cognitive architecture. As computers can only run the software
their hardware permits them to run, humans can only think the
thoughts their cognitive architecture permits them to think. Thus
the nature of mathematical thoughts essentially depends on their
biological makeup. Even Russell who, for several decades, held that
mathematics takes us ‘‘further from what is human,’’ ﬁnally admit-
ted that mathematics had ceased to seem to him ‘‘non-human in
its subject-matter’’ (Russell, 1995b, pp. 156–157).
This paper outlines a new approach to the philosophy of math-
ematics, hopefully not subject to the above two limitations. It con-
siders mathematics not as an isolated faculty of the human mind,
but rather as a capacity which is common to all humans since it
is essential for survival. Such a capacity, on the one hand, is a result
of biological evolution, which has provided all humans with sys-
tems of core knowledge that are the basis for ‘natural mathemat-
ics.’ On the other hand, it is a result of cultural evolution, which
is at the origin of ‘artiﬁcial mathematics,’ or mathematics as a dis-
cipline. On this basis, the paper outlines a new approach to basic
aspects of mathematics: the method of mathematics, the notion
of demonstration, the questions of discovery and justiﬁcation, the
nature of mathematical objects, the character of mathematical def-
inition, the role of intuition, the role of diagrams in mathematics,
and the effectiveness of mathematics in natural science.
2. Natural and artiﬁcial mathematics
Current research in cognitive science shows that, as a result of
biological evolution, humans have ‘‘systems of core knowledge’’
that are ‘‘phylogenetically ancient, innate, and universal across hu-
mans’’ and capture ‘‘the primary information in the system of po-
sitive integers’’ and ‘‘in the system of Euclidean plane geometry’’
(Spelke, 2011, p. 287). There is by now a vast evidence for the exis-
tence of such systems of core knowledge, which may be called ‘nat-
ural mathematics’ to stress that they are a result of biological
evolution. (The literature on the subject is very extensive; for ref-
erences see, for example, De Cruz, 2006; De Cruz & De Smedt,
2010; Dehaene & Brannon, 2011).
On the other hand, the development of pictures, models, maps,
and symbol systems permitted humans to go beyond the systems
of core knowledge, giving rise to mathematics as a discipline. Un-
like natural mathematics, which is innate, mathematics as a disci-
pline is acquired. It may be called ‘artiﬁcial mathematics’ to stress
that it is made by humans rather than being a result of biological
evolution.
Cooper claims that artiﬁcial ‘‘mathematics must itself be evolu-
tionarily reducible’’ (Cooper, 2001, p. 135). But this is unjustiﬁed
because artiﬁcial mathematics has arisen too recently to be a direct
product of biological evolution. It must have been a product of cul-
tural evolution. In fact, it arose after the inception of the sedentary
revolution of some 10,000 years ago—the transition from nomadic
to permanent, year-round settlement which ensued from the end
of the last ice age. (See, for example, Renfrew, 2008, ch. 7; Renfrew,
Frith, & Malafouris, 2008). This changed the way of life of very
many humans, setting them new challenging problems. Coping
with them required new abilities. Humans could acquire them by
an ever more extensive use of processes external to the body, from
material to symbolic ones, that formed an integrated whole with
those internal to the body. This essentially changed the nature of
the human mind, which spread out across the body-world bound-
ary thus becoming an ‘extended mind.’
The concept of ‘extended mind’ goes back at least to Dewey,
who states that ‘‘thinking, or knowledge-getting,’’ is ‘‘not an event
going on exclusively within the cortex’’ but ‘‘hands and feet, appa-
ratus and appliances of all kinds are as much a part of it as changes
in the brain’’ (Dewey, 1916, pp. 13–14). Thus ‘‘thinking is mental,
not because of a peculiar stuff which enters into it or of the pecu-
liar non-natural activities which constitute it, but because of what
physical acts and appliances do’’ (Dewey, 1916, pp. 14). (For a rep-
resentative sample of the current literature on the extended mind,
see Menary, 2010).
Artiﬁcial mathematics is a product of the extended mind. It goes
beyond the systems of core knowledge because it makes use of cul-
tural artifacts, such as pictures, models, maps, and symbol systems.
Therefore, natural and artiﬁcial mathematics are distinct. That arti-
ﬁcial mathematics goes beyond the systems of core knowledge is
made possible by brain plasticity, the ability of the human brain
to partially reorganize itself, which permits a reconversion of cere-
bral circuits originally selected for a different use. Dehaene and Co-
hen express this by saying that the the inventions of artiﬁcial
mathematics ‘‘invade evolutionary older brain circuits’’ (Dehaene
& Cohen, 2007, p. 384). Such reconversion, however, is possible
only if it remains within a certain variability range, so artiﬁcial
mathematics reﬂects the intrinsic constraints of the brain circuits.
Then, although natural and artiﬁcial mathematics are distinct, they
are not opposed. Between them there is continuity, because artiﬁ-
cial mathematics is the product of brains which are a result of bio-
logical evolution, and depends on them.
In fact, the procedure by which mathematicians solve problems
is not different in kind from that by which our hunter-gatherer
ancestors solved their survival problem. Both such procedures con-
sist in the analytic method (to be described below).
3. The axiomatic method and its limitations
That the procedure by which mathematicians solve problems
consists in the analytic method contrasts with the current prevail-
ing view, according to which such procedure consists in the axiom-
atic method. For example, Gowers states that the solution of a
mathematical problem ultimately consists in ‘‘a deduction from
basic axioms, using only the most utterly obvious and easily
checked steps,’’ even if ‘‘no mathematician would ever bother to
write out a proof in complete detail’’ (Gowers, 2002, p. 41). This
leads to the axiomatic notion of demonstration, according to which
a demonstration consists in a deduction of a statement from basic
axioms which are supposed to be consistent. Since a deduction is
ﬁnite, demonstration is a ﬁnite process. The goal of demonstration
is to give a justiﬁcation for a statement. Thus demonstration has a
validation role.
The current prevailing view, however, is untenable by Gödel’s
incompleteness theorems and for other reasons.
(1) Gödel’s ﬁrst incompleteness theorem refutes the view that
the solution of a mathematical problem of a given ﬁeld con-
sists in a deduction from basic axioms for that ﬁeld, and
hence that the method of mathematics is the axiomatic
method. For any consistent, sufﬁciently strong, axiom sys-
tem, there are true statements of that ﬁeld which cannot
be deduced from the axioms.
(2) Gödel’s second incompleteness theorem implies that gener-
ally we cannot know whether the basic axioms for a given
ﬁeld are consistent. For any consistent, sufﬁciently strong
axiom system, the statement which canonically expresses
the consistency of the axioms cannot be demonstrated by
absolutely reliable means.
(3) A corollary of Gödel’s ﬁrst incompleteness theorem refutes
the view that, if the basic axioms for a given ﬁeld are
consistent, the axiomatic method provides a justiﬁcation
for the solution of a mathematical problem of that ﬁeld.
For any consistent, sufﬁciently strong axiom system, there
C. Cellucci / Studies in History and Philosophy of Science 44 (2013) 32–42
33

is a consistent extension of the system from which a false
statement can be deduced. Thus consistency is no guarantee
against falsity.
(4) The current prevailing view does not account for the fact
that a demonstration yields something new. Since deduction
is non-ampliative, it produces nothing essentially new with
respect to the axioms from which it starts.
(5) The current prevailing view does not account for the fact
that, once a mathematician has found a solution of a math-
ematical problem, other mathematicians look for other solu-
tions. For example, ‘‘there are well over four hundred such
demonstrations of the Pythagorean Theorem published to
date and many more will likely be discovered in years to
come’’ (Posamentier 2010, p. 74). If the purpose of demon-
stration were to provide a justiﬁcation for the solution of a
mathematical problem, once a solution has been found there
would be no point in looking for other ones, let alone for
hundreds of them.
(6) The current prevailing view does not account for how math-
ematical problems are actually solved. As Hersh states, ‘‘in
developing and understanding a subject, axioms come late’’
and ‘‘problems, and solutions come ﬁrst,’’ so ‘‘the view that
mathematics is in essence derivations from axioms is back-
ward. In fact, it’s wrong’’ (Hersh, 1997, p. 6).
(7) The current prevailing view does not account for the fact
that different mathematicians, with no contact with each
other, independently solve the same problem. If the solution
of a problem consists in a deduction from arbitrarily chosen
basic axioms, subject only to the condition of consistency,
how does it come about that two distinct mathematicians
choose the same basic axioms and deduce a solution of the
same problem from them?
4. The analytic method
An alternative to the axiomatic method is the analytic method,
originally used by Hippocrates of Chios and ﬁrst stated by Plato,
especially in Meno, Phaedo and the Republic. Although this is not
generally recognized, since antiquity the analytic method has been
the basis for problem solving, not only in mathematics but also in
natural science and medicine, since Hippocrates of Cos’s method
was an instance of it. It is even ‘‘the method which Sherlock
Holmes referred to’’ (Franchella, 2011, p. 233).
Plato states that, to solve a problem, you ‘‘should take refuge in
certain hypotheses, and consider the truth of matters in them’’
(Plato, Phaedo, 99 e 5–6). Then, ‘‘if anyone attacked the hypothesis,
you would not dismiss him and would not avoid answering to him
until you had examined its consequences, to see whether they are
in accord, or are not in accord, with each other’’ (Plato, Phaedo, 101
d 3–5). Even if the consequences were in accord with each other,
this would not mean that the hypothesis is conclusively founded
but only that it does not lead to contradiction. Therefore you would
‘‘give an account [didonai logon] of the hypothesis itself,’’ and ‘‘you
would give such an account in the same way, positing another
hypothesis, whichever should seem best of the higher ones, and
so on until you came to something adequate’’ (Plato, Phaedo, 101
d 5–e 1). Nevertheless, the hypothesis thus reached will always
be a problem that eventually will have to be solved by positing a
new hypothesis. And so on, ad inﬁnitum. Thus solving a problem
is ‘‘an endless task’’ (Plato, Parmenides, 136 c 7).
Plato gives no indication as to how to ﬁnd hypotheses to solve
problems, and only asks that the consequences of hypotheses agree
with each other, which does not guarantee that they agree with
experience. His statement of the analytic method, however, can be
enhanced(1)specifyingthathypothesesare foundbynon-deductive
rules—such as induction, analogy, and so on—and (2) asking that
they are plausible, in a sense to be explained below.
Then the analytic method is the method according to which, to
solve a problem, one looks for some hypothesis that is a sufﬁcient
condition for its solution. The hypothesis is obtained from the
problem, and possibly other data, by some non-deductive rule,
and must be plausible. But the hypothesis is in its turn a problem
that must be solved, and is solved in the same way. That is, one
looks for another hypothesis that is a sufﬁcient condition for the
solution of the problem posed by the previous hypothesis, it is ob-
tained from the latter, and possibly other data, by some non-
deductive rule, and must be plausible. And so on, ad inﬁnitum. Thus
the solution of a problem is a potentially inﬁnite process. (For this
version of the analytic method, see Cellucci, 2005, pp. 148–157).
5. The notion of plausibility
That, in the analytic method, a hypothesis must be plausible,
means that the arguments for the hypothesis must be stronger
than those against it on the basis of experience, so, for the moment,
the hypothesis can be approved. Indeed, ‘plausible’ comes from the
Latin plausibilis, which derives from plaudere that means ‘to ap-
plaud’, ‘to approve.’ Plausible hypotheses are essentially what Aris-
totle calls ‘accepted opinions’ [endoxa]. For Aristotle states that, in
order to see whether an opinion can be accepted, one must ‘‘exam-
ine the arguments for and the arguments against’’ (Aristotle, Topics,
H 14, 163a37–b1).
The plausibility of a hypothesis obtained by some non-deduc-
tive rule is not guaranteed by that rule but only by experience,
since non-deductive rules are not plausibility preserving. In fact,
even the plausibility of a hypothesis obtained by some deductive
rule is not guaranteed by that rule but only by experience because,
contrary to widespread opinion, deductive rules too are not plausi-
bility preserving. (See Cellucci, 2011, p. 134).
6. Analytic method and inﬁnite regress
A common objection against the analytic method is that it in-
volves an inﬁnite regress. For example, Tarski states that, in the
analytic method, ‘‘in order to establish the validity of a statement,
it is necessary to refer back to other statements,’’ and this leads ‘‘to
an inﬁnite regress’’ (Tarski, 1994, p. 110).
This objection, however, is unwarranted because, that in the
analytic method no hypothesis is absolutely justiﬁed, does not
mean that such method cannot yield knowledge. It can yield
knowledge, albeit fallible knowledge. The analytic method would
not yield knowledge only if hypotheses were arbitrary. But they
are not arbitrary since they must be plausible, therefore the ana-
lytic method can yield knowledge. On the other hand, the knowl-
edge it yields is fallible, in the sense that it cannot be ruled out
that it may lead to error. New data may always emerge with which
the hypotheses on which knowledge is based may turn out to be
incompatible.
Lewis claims that ‘‘to speak of fallible knowledge, of knowledge
despite uneliminated possibility of error, just sounds contradictory’’
(Lewis, 1996, p. 549). But, by Gödel’s second incompleteness theo-
rem, mathematics cannot be known, and hence cannot be said, to
be absolutely certain. Then mathematical knowledge is fallible, in
the sense that it cannot be ruled out that it might lead to error. Thus,
if Lewis were right, there would be no mathematical knowledge.
7. The analytic notion of demonstration
The analytic method leads to the analyticnotion of demonstration,
according to which a demonstration consists, ﬁrst, in a non-deductive
34
C. Cellucci / Studies in History and Philosophy of Science 44 (2013) 32–42

derivation of a hypothesis from a problem, and possibly other data,
where the hypothesis is a sufﬁcient condition for the solution of the
problem and is plausible; then, in a non-deductive derivation of an-
other hypothesis from this hypothesis, andpossibly other data, where
this other hypothesis is a sufﬁcient condition for the solution of the
problem posed by the former hypothesis and is plausible; and so
on, ad inﬁnitum. The goal of demonstration is to discover hypotheses
that are sufﬁcient conditions for the solution of a problem and are
plausible. Thus demonstration has a heuristic role.
A basic difference between the analytic and the axiomatic no-
tion of demonstration is that, according to the analytic notion, a
demonstration is the basic tool for acquiring mathematical knowl-
edge, while, according to the axiomatic notion, a demonstration is
only a sort of super spell checker that is intended to validate a
mathematical statement relative to basic axioms—and, by Gödel’s
incompleteness theorems, fails even to do that. The point of the
analytic notion of demonstration, with respect to the axiomatic
one, is vividly expressed by Hamming’s statement: ‘‘If the Pythag-
orean theorem were found to not follow from postulates, we would
again search for a way to alter the postulates until it was true. Eu-
clid’s postulates came from the Pythagorean theorem, not the
other way’’ (Hamming, 1980, p. 87). The idea that in mathematics
we simply lay down some arbitrary postulates and then make
deductions from them ‘‘does not correspond to simple observa-
tion’’ (Hamming, 1980, p. 87).
8. The provisional character of problem solution
Since, in the analytic method, no hypothesis is absolutely justi-
ﬁed, no solution of a problem is deﬁnitive. There is nothing odd in
this. As Davis states, ‘‘problems, questions, and solutions are not
static entities,’’ they ‘‘change throughout history, throughout our
own lifetimes,’’ thus ‘‘there is no ﬁnality in the creation, formula-
tion and solutions of problems’’ (Davis, 2006, p. 164). This also ap-
plies to mathematical problems, because even in mathematics ‘‘a
solved problem is still not completely solved but leads to new
and profound challenges,’’ and ‘‘discovering a sense in which’’ this
is the case ‘‘is one important direction that mathematical research
takes’’ (Davis, 2006, p. 177).
The analytic method suggests such a sense. A solved problem is
still not completely solved since no hypothesis is absolutely justi-
ﬁed. Any hypothesis which provides a solution to the problem,
being only plausible, is liable to be replaced with another hypothe-
sis when new data emerge, so every solution is always provisional.
9. Strong points of the analytic method
The analytic method is not subject to the limitations of the axi-
omatic method.
(1) It is not affected by Gödel’s ﬁrst incompleteness theorem,
because the hypotheses for the solution of a problem need
not belong to the same ﬁeld as the problem, but can belong
to any ﬁeld.
(2) It is not affected by Gödel’s second incompleteness theorem,
because it does not require that the consistency of the
hypotheses be demonstrated by absolutely reliable means.
It only requires that the hypotheses be plausible.
(3) It isnot affected bythe corollary of Gödel’s ﬁrstincompleteness
theorem which entails that consistency is no guarantee against
falsity. For the hypotheses for the solution of a problem are not
required to be deﬁnitive, true and certain but only plausible.
(4) It accounts for the fact that a demonstration yields some-
thing new. Being obtained from the problem, and possibly
other data, by non-deductive rules, the hypotheses for the
solution of a problem are not implicit in the problem or in
the other data, but contain something essentially new with
respect to them. For non-deductive rules are ampliative.
(5) It accounts for the fact that, once a mathematician has found
a solution of a problem, other mathematicians look for other
solutions. A mathematical problem has several sides, so you
can look at it from different directions, each of which may
suggest different hypotheses, which may lead to different
solutions. Such hypotheses may establish new relations
between the problem and problems of other ﬁelds, thus
showing the problem in a new light. As Atiyah says, ‘‘any
good theorem should have several proofs, the more the bet-
ter,’’ because ‘‘they all shed light on the area. If you cannot
look at a problem from different directions, it is probably
not very interesting; the more perspectives, the better!’’
(Raussen & Skau, 2004, p. 24).
(6) It accounts for how problems are solved. For example, to
solve Fermat’s problem, Ribet (1990) used the Taniyama-
Shimura hypothesis. Then, to solve the problem posed by
the latter, Wiles (1995) used hypotheses from various math-
ematics ﬁelds. And so on.
(7) It accounts for the fact that different mathematicians, with
no contact with each other, independently solve the same
problem. Mathematicians are not monads but rather mem-
bers of a community. They work on certain particular prob-
lems, rather than on others, because the community has
built up enough background knowledge to let members with
somewhat similar backgrounds consider these as interesting
problems to work on. Moreover, the solution of a problem
does not consist in a deduction from arbitrarily chosen basic
axioms, subject only to the condition of consistency. It con-
sists rather in a derivation of hypotheses from the problem,
and from the background knowledge of the community, by
means of non-deductive rules.
10. Discovery and justiﬁcation
The analytic method helps dispel the prejudice that mathemat-
ical discovery is an irrational process. This is the current prevailing
view. It is generally held that the processes involved in discovery
are purely subjective and psychological, only those involved in jus-
tiﬁcation are objective. Therefore, there is no logic of discovery, but
only a logic of justiﬁcation based on deductive logic.
This view goes back at least to Frege, who states that logic must
concern itself ‘‘not with the way in which’’ mathematical proposi-
tions ‘‘are discovered but with the kind of ground on which their’’
justiﬁcation ‘‘rests’’ (Frege, 1959, p. 23). Since Frege, this has been
reasserted innumerable times. For example, Dieudonné states that
‘‘what goes on in a creative mind never has a rational ‘explanation,’
in mathematics any more than elsewhere’’ (Dieudonné, 1998, p.
27). Feferman states that ‘‘the creative and intuitive aspects of
mathematical
work
evade
logical
encapsulation’’
(Feferman,
1998, p. 178). Byers states that ‘‘mathematics transcends logic’’
(Byers, 2007, p. 26). It is the product ‘‘of the creative insights of
the mathematician’’ which yield ‘‘sudden certainty’’ (Byers, 2007,
p. 340).
The analytic method is a counterexample to this view because,
on the one hand, it provides a basis for a logic of discovery, and, on
the other hand, has nothing subjective or psychological about it,
being based on non-deductive rules which are as objective as
deductive rules. Such method cancels the separation between dis-
covery and justiﬁcation because, according to it, the solution of a
problem is both a process of discovery and a process of justiﬁca-
tion. It is a process of discovery, because it involves ﬁnding hypoth-
eses by non-deductive rules. It is a process of justiﬁcation, because
it involves comparing the arguments for and the arguments against
C. Cellucci / Studies in History and Philosophy of Science 44 (2013) 32–42
35

the hypotheses thus found on the basis of the existing data, in or-
der to check its plausibility.
11. Mathematical objects as hypotheses
It has been argued above that between natural and artiﬁcial
mathematics there is continuity. Against this it might be objected
that natural and artiﬁcial mathematics are essentially different be-
cause, on the one hand, as Ye argues, natural mathematics deals
only with ‘‘neural activities inside the brain and their physical
interactions with the environment’’ and ‘‘will not mention what
abstract objects the brain refers to’’ (Ye, 2010, p. 144). On the other
hand, as Gödel argues, artiﬁcial mathematics deals with abstract
objects that ‘‘exist objectively and independently of our mental
acts and decisions’’ (Gödel, 1986–2002, vol. 3, p. 311). This objec-
tion, however, mistakes a methodological question—what hypoth-
eses permit to solve a mathematical problem—for an ontological
one. There is no scientiﬁc evidence to support the claim that math-
ematical objects exist objectively and independently of our mental
acts and decisions. Therefore, to speak of their objective and inde-
pendent existence is unjustiﬁed. Contrary to Gödel’s claim, mathe-
matical objects are simply hypotheses humans tentatively make to
solve problems. In the analytic method there are, then, two kinds
of hypotheses: objects and judgments. For example, prime num-
bers are hypotheses of the ﬁrst kind, ‘There are inﬁnitely many
primes’ is a hypothesis of the second kind.
If mathematical objects are simply hypotheses humans tenta-
tively make to solve problems, then they exist only in the brains
of the mathematicians who hypothesize them, and in those of other
people who make use of them. This must not be confused with
Brouwer’s view that mathematical objects are constructions of an
idealized mathematician, ‘‘the creating subject’’ (Brouwer, 1975,
p. 511). Our brains can think of the concept of abstract set and ﬁnd
some of its properties, while Brouwer’s creating subject cannot.
In the last century, the existence of mathematical objects has
been a main issue in the philosophy of mathematics. Indeed,
according to the current prevailing view, there are ‘‘two main ques-
tions in the philosophy of mathematics, the ﬁrst being its ontology
(what kind of objects is it about?) and the second its epistemology
(how do we know it?)’’ (Bostock, 2009, p. 261). This contrasts with
the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, when Descartes, Locke,
Hume and Kant considered the question of the existence of mathe-
matical objects to be irrelevant to mathematics. For example, Des-
cartes stated that ‘‘arithmetic, geometry and other subjects of this
kind’’ really ‘‘little care whether’’ the things with which they deal
‘‘exist in nature or not’’ (Descartes, 1996, vol. 7, p. 20). This state-
ment is all the more signiﬁcant as Descartes is not only one of the
most important philosophers, but also one of the most important
mathematicians. Even the question of the existence of inﬁnitesi-
mals was irrelevant to the actual development of the calculus. Al-
ready Leibniz stated that one can refuse to admit ‘‘inﬁnite and
inﬁnitesimal lines in a rigorous metaphysical sense and as real
things’’ and ‘‘still use them with conﬁdence as ideal notions which
shorten reasoning’’ (Leibniz, 1971, vol. 4, p. 92). The replacement of
inﬁnitesimals with the epsilon-delta method of Cauchy and Wei-
erstrass was not due to metaphysical questions but rather to the
fact that it seemed impossible to give consistent rules for inﬁnites-
imals. It was only in the following century that Robinson would be
able to give such rules, incidentally, on the basis of a view of the
inﬁnitesimals ‘‘close to Leibniz’’’ (Robinson, 1966, p. 281).
Seventeenth and eighteenth century philosophers were right:
the question of an independent existence of mathematical objects
is irrelevant to mathematics. There is no more to the existence of
mathematical objects than that they are hypotheses humans tenta-
tively make to solve problems by the analytic method. Of course,
when stating a hypothesis which introduces certain mathematical
objects, one must show that the hypothesis is plausible. Then one
may say that such mathematical objects ‘exist.’ But this does not
mean that they exist literally—in the world or in an alleged hyperu-
ranium. It was their literal existence that Descartes, Locke, Hume
and Kant objected to. That they exist only means that one can show
that the hypotheses which introduce them are compatible with the
existing data. Being hypotheses humans tentatively make to solve
problems by the analytic method, mathematical objects are a con-
stituent part of that method and ﬁnd their motivation and justiﬁ-
cation in it.
12. Characters of mathematical objects as hypotheses
That there is no more to the existence of mathematical objects
than they are hypotheses humans tentatively make to solve prob-
lems by the analytic method, has the following implications.
(1) Fixing properties of mathematical objects, hypotheses char-
acterize their identity but say nothing about their existence.
Characterizing the identity of mathematical objects does not
entail assuming that they exist—any more than characteriz-
ing the hippogriffs as animals having the foreparts of a grif-
ﬁn and the body of a horse entails assuming that hippogriffs
exist. Identity does not imply existence.
(2) That the hypotheses which characterize the identity of
mathematical objects are made by humans does not mean
that humans know all their properties. Gödel claims that
‘‘the creator necessarily knows all properties of his creatures,
because they can’t have any others except those he has given
to them’’ (Gödel, 1986–2002, vol. 3, p. 311). But it is not so.
Once mathematical objects have been introduced, they are
open to interactions with other objects and facts, from
which new properties may emerge, not included among
those which the creator has given to them. That the hypoth-
eses which characterize the identity of mathematical objects
are made by humans does not mean that humans know all of
their properties—any more than the fact that a painting is
made by a painter means that the painter knows all of its
properties. Otherwise, there would be no need for art critics.
(3) Since, from the interactions of mathematical objects with
other objects and facts, new properties may emerge, hypoth-
eses characterize the identity of mathematical objects only
partially.
(4) Although mathematical objects are hypotheses that can
always be modiﬁed or even completely replaced, some of
them acquire a certain stability. This occurs when they turn
out to be useful for solving problems other than those for
which they were originally introduced. This makes such
objects seem independent of their origin, and gives the
impression that they have an autonomous existence. As Ein-
stein says, objects and ‘‘concepts that have proven useful in
ordering things easily achieve such an authority over us that
we forget their earthly origins and accept them as unalter-
able givens. Thus they come to be stamped as ‘necessities
of thought,’ ‘a priori givens,’ etc.’’ (Einstein, 1987–, vol. 6,
doc. 29). But this is only an illusion, due to the familiarity
we acquire with them. On the other hand, other mathemat-
ical objects do not acquire stability and, after a more or less
long time period, disappear from mainstream mathematics.
13. Mathematical deﬁnitions
It has been argued above that mathematical objects are
hypotheses. Since they are normally introduced by mathematical
36
C. Cellucci / Studies in History and Philosophy of Science 44 (2013) 32–42

deﬁnitions, this means that mathematical deﬁnitions are hypothe-
ses, and are a constituent part of the analytic method. This con-
trasts with the current prevailing view, according to which
mathematical deﬁnitions are arbitrary stipulations that serve as
abbreviations and hence give no knowledge.
This view goes back to Pascal, who states that, ‘‘in geometry
only those deﬁnitions are recognized which logicians call deﬁni-
tions of name, that is, only the impositions of names to things
which have been clearly designated in perfectly known terms (Pas-
cal, 1904–14, vol. 9, pp. 242–3). Their only ‘‘usefulness and use is to
clarify and abbreviate discourse, expressing by the single name
that has been imposed what could otherwise be only expressed
by several terms’’ (Pascal, 1904–14, vol. 9, p. 243). Pascal’s view
is the current prevailing one. For example, Frege states that ‘‘a def-
inition is an arbitrary stipulation by which a new sign’’ is ‘‘intro-
duced to take the place of a complex expression whose sense we
know’’ (Frege, 1979, p. 211). Its only purpose ‘‘is to bring about
an extrinsic simpliﬁcation by stipulating an abbreviation’’ (Frege,
1967, p. 55). Therefore, no deﬁnition ‘‘extends our knowledge’’
(Frege, 1984, p. 274). Hilbert and Bernays state that a deﬁnition
is ‘‘the introduction of an abbreviating symbol for a complex
expression’’ (Hilbert & Bernays, 1968–1970, vol. 1, p. 292). Popper
states that ‘‘in science, only nominalist deﬁnitions occur, that is to
say, shorthand symbols or labels are introduced in order to cut a
long story short’’ (Popper, 1945, vol. 2, p. 13).
The current prevailing view, however, cannot explain why
mathematicians often spend so much time in ﬁnding suitable def-
initions to account for statements that have already been found
plausible. This would be incomprehensible if deﬁnitions were arbi-
trary stipulations and did not extend our knowledge. For example,
‘‘the derivative was ﬁrst used; it was then discovered; it was then
explored and developed; and it was ﬁnally deﬁned’’ (Grabiner
1983, p. 195). This is ‘‘a complete reversal of the usual order of
textbook exposition in mathematics, where one starts with a deﬁ-
nition, then explores some results, and only then suggests applica-
tions’’ (Grabiner 1983, p. 205).
When mathematicians give a deﬁnition of a concept that had
previously been used without a precise deﬁnition, the deﬁnition
generally contains an analysis of the concept and may therefore ex-
tend our knowledge. This is clear as regards Greek mathematics,
where the role of deﬁnition was to clarify the nature of the object
being deﬁned. For example, Euclid’s deﬁnition of a sphere—‘‘the
ﬁgure comprehended when, the diameter of a semicircle remain-
ing ﬁxed, the semicircle is rotated and restored again to the same
position from which it began to be moved’’ (Euclid, Elements, XI,
deﬁnition 14)—is by no means an arbitrary stipulation. But even
the so-called ‘implicit deﬁnitions’ of modern mathematics are not
arbitrary stipulations. For example, there are different implicit def-
initions—axiom systems—for set theory. That they describe the
same concept of set would hardly be comprehensible if deﬁnitions
were arbitrary stipulations. This can be explained only on the sup-
position that the formulation of the various axiom systems was
guided by some pre-axiomatic comprehension of the concept of
set. As any other mathematical concept, such concept is not fully
given by any particular axiom system, it admits an open series of
presentations through new hypotheses, each of which provides a
new perspective on the concept, which brings to light new aspects
of it. As another example, Eilenberg and Mac Lane characterize the
concept of ‘category’ through an analysis of ‘‘the common formal
properties of’’ certain ‘‘aggregates’’ (Eilenberg & MacLane, 1945,
p. 237).
Then, rather than arbitrary stipulations, deﬁnitions are hypoth-
eses and, like all hypotheses, are means of discovery. This explains
why mathematicians often spend so much time ﬁnding suitable
deﬁnitions to account for statements that have already been found
plausible. It also explains why two extensionally equivalent
deﬁnitions of the same concept are not really equivalent. They of-
fer different perspectives on the concept, and hence are not neces-
sarily equally adequate as means of discovery. An example of this
is provided by two extensionally equivalent deﬁnitions of the
sphere, which are not equally adequate to discover Archimedes’s
hypothesis that the surface of a sphere is equal to quadruple the
area of a great circle of this sphere. (See Cellucci, 2003, pp. 281–
284). Since deﬁnitions are means of discovery, ﬁnding an adequate
deﬁnition may require a long work of analysis, therefore a deﬁni-
tion is not the result of an arbitrary stipulation but rather of an
investigation. Thus ‘‘deﬁnition is often the end, rather than the
beginning, of a subject’’ (Grabiner 1983, p. 206).
It is often said that between deﬁnitions and theorems there is a
hidden circularity: ‘‘A good deﬁnition is ‘justiﬁed’ by the theorem
that can be proved with it, just as the proof of the theorem is ‘justi-
ﬁed’ by appealing to a previously given deﬁnition’’ (Rota, 1997, p.
97). This, however, only applies to deﬁnitions in the axiomatic meth-
od, not to deﬁnitions in the analytic method. If deﬁnitions are
hypotheses, then there is no circularity between deﬁnitions and the-
orems, because a deﬁnition is not justiﬁed by the theorem that can
be proved with it. Like any other hypothesis, it is justiﬁed by its plau-
sibility, thus by facts distinct from the theorem in question.
14. Mathematics and intuition
That mathematical deﬁnitions are hypotheses, and generally
mathematical knowledge is based on hypotheses—together with
the fact that in the analytic method hypotheses are obtained by
non-deductive rules—implies that intuition plays no role in math-
ematics. This contrasts with the belief of several mathematicians
and philosophers that mathematical objects are grasped by intui-
tion, which guarantee that mathematical axioms are true. For
example, Gödel states that ‘‘we do have something like a percep-
tion also of the objects of set theory, as is seen from the fact that
the axioms force themselves upon us as being true,’’ and there is
no ‘‘reason why we should have any less conﬁdence in this kind
of perception, i.e., in mathematical intuition, than in sense percep-
tion’’ (Gödel, 1986–2002, vol. 2, p. 268). Mathematical intuition is a
superior faculty, not ‘‘derived from subconscious induction or Dar-
winian adaptation’’ (Gödel, 1986–2002, vol. 3, p. 354).
This belief, however, is faced with a number of problems. Intui-
tion is traditionally held to be direct, immediate. For example, Kant
states that the way through which a cognition ‘‘relates immediately’’
to objects ‘‘is intuition’’ (Kant, 1998, A 19/B 33). Then it is unjustiﬁed
to say that we have ‘‘an intuition which is sufﬁciently clear to pro-
duce the axioms of set theory’’ (Gödel, 1986–2002, vol. 2, p. 268).
We do not have a direct, immediate knowledge even of large inte-
gers, let alone of inﬁnite sets. Moreover, intuition is traditionally
held to be singular, in the sense that it refers to a single object. For
example, Kant states that ‘‘all intuition is singular’’ (Kant, 1992, p.
349). Then intuition cannot be the source of mathematical axioms,
most of which are universal, that is, universally quantiﬁed, and
hence refer to many, possibly inﬁnitely many, objects. For example,
the axiom of power-set states that, for every set x there is a set y
which consists of all subsets of x. Furthermore, as Frege states, ‘‘we
are all too ready to invoke inner intuition, whenever we cannot pro-
duce any other ground of knowledge’’ (Frege, 1959, p. 19).
Admittedly, Dehaene states that ‘‘cognitive neuroscience re-
search shows that mathematical intuition is a valid concept’’ which
‘‘relates to the availability of ‘core knowledge’ associated with evo-
lutionarily ancient and specialized cerebral subsystems’’ (Dehaene,
2009, p. 232). Similarly, Spelke states that the systems of core
mathematical knowledge ‘‘are sources of our numerical and geo-
metrical intuitions’’ (Spelke, 2011, p. 288). But this is faced with
the problem that a great deal of natural mathematics is embodied
in our perceptual system. Now, according to some accredited
C. Cellucci / Studies in History and Philosophy of Science 44 (2013) 32–42
37

theories, perception is the result of inference. For example, Jaynes
and Bretthorst state that ‘‘seeing is not a direct apprehension of
reality,’’ quite ‘‘the contrary: seeing is inference from incomplete
information’’ (Jaynes & Bretthorst, 2003, p. 133). Then intuition,
being direct, immediate, and hence non-inferential, cannot relate
to the availability of ‘core knowledge.’
Conversely, as it has been stated above, from the viewpoint of
the analytic method, intuition plays no role in mathematics. It
plays no role in the discovery of hypotheses, because they are ob-
tained from the problem, and possibly other data, by non-deduc-
tive rules, so not by intuition but by argument. It plays no role in
the justiﬁcation of hypotheses, because their plausibility is estab-
lished by comparing the arguments for and the arguments against
them on the basis of experience, so not by intuition but by argu-
ment. Admittedly, often mathematicians stress the importance of
intuition for them. But by ‘intuition’ they simply mean their feeling
of ‘almost knowing’ or ‘being almost sure’ or ‘nearly convinced’ of
some hypothesis, without having consciously gone through a step-
by-step reasoning process to get there. This feeling can be easily
explained in terms of the fact that they arrived at the hypothesis
through some unconscious non-deductive inference, which led
them to trust that the hypothesis might be plausible.
15. Diagrams
The question of the role of intuition in mathematics is linked to
that of the role of diagrams in mathematics, because diagrams are
traditionally associated with intuition. For example, Kant says that,
when the geometer has to ﬁnd out how the sum of the angles of a
triangle might be related to a right angle, he draws a diagram and,
on that basis, ‘‘through a chain of inferences that is always guided
by intuition, he arrives at a fully illuminating and at the same time
general solution of the question’’ (Kant, 1998, A 717/B 745). Be-
cause of the limitations of the appeals to intuition which have been
considered above, the fact that diagrams are traditionally associ-
ated with intuition has led several mathematicians and philoso-
phers to object to the use of diagrams in mathematics. The main
objections are the following.
(1) Diagrams do not yield genuine demonstrations because they are
based on intuition, while demonstration must exclusively con-
sist of logical inferences. For example, Hilbert states that ‘‘geo-
metrical ﬁgures are signs or mnemonic symbols of space
intuition’’ (Hilbert, 1996, p. 1100). On the other hand, ‘‘no
statement within the realm’’ of a given mathematical theory
‘‘is held to be correct unless it can be derived from’’ the axi-
oms of the theory ‘‘by means of a ﬁnite number of logical
steps’’ (Hilbert, 1996, p. 1104). Therefore, ‘‘a theorem is only
demonstrated when the demonstration is completely inde-
pendent of the ﬁgure’’ (Hilbert, 2004, p. 75). Thus, although
using ﬁgures can be helpful, ‘‘we will never rely on them’’
(Hilbert, 2004, p. 541).
This is unjustiﬁed, because geometrical ﬁgures are not signs
or mnemonic symbols of space intuition. As it will be argued
below, use of diagrams involves making hypotheses by non-
deductive rules, on the basis of data gathered from the dia-
gram, thus it is based on inference rather than on intuition.
Moreover, it is simply false that Hilbert never relies on ﬁg-
ures. In many demonstrations of his Foundations of Geometry,
including the ﬁrst one, he makes an essential use of dia-
grams. They ‘‘allowed Hilbert to make many implicit
assumptions’’ (Meikle & Fleuriot, 2003, p. 325).
(2) Diagrams are unreliable because, when incorrectly drawn, they
can lead to errors. For example, Klein states that ‘‘there is real
danger that a pupil of Euclid may, because of a falsely drawn
ﬁgure, come to a false conclusion’’ (Klein, 2004, p. 201).
This is unjustiﬁed, because errors of this kind arise from a
misuse of diagrams, and can be avoided by taking care that
the diagrams involved are carefully drawn and properly ana-
lyzed. Similarly, errors such as Russell’s paradox arise from a
misuse of discursive reasoning, and can be avoided by taking
care that the concepts involved are carefully expressed and
properly analyzed. Then, if one says that diagrams, being
unreliable, do not yield genuine demonstrations, one must
also be prepared to say that discursive reasoning, being
unreliable,
does
not
yield
genuine
demonstrations—an
absurd conclusion.
(3) Diagrams can be unreliable even when correctly drawn, in par-
ticular when used to deal with limits of inﬁnite processes. For
example, Giaquinto considers the following diagram, which
shows a sequence of curves. The ﬁrst curve is a semicircle
on a diameter; dividing the diameter into equal halves, the
second curve is formed from the semicircle over the left half
and the semicircle under the right half; and so on ad inﬁni-
tum.
Then ‘‘obviously the curves get closer and closer to the diam-
eter’’ and become ‘‘barely distinguishable from the diameter.
The curve lengths too seem to approach that of the diameter,
so that the limit of the curve lengths will be the length of the
diameter. But this is wrong. The length of all curves in the
sequence is the same’’ (Giaquinto, 2007, p. 174). Indeed, if
the diameter has length d, then the length of the ﬁrst curve,
that is the semicircle, is pd/2, the length of the second curve
is 2(pd/4) = pd/2, the length of the third curve is 4(pd/
8) = pd/2, and so on. From this Giaquinto concludes that
‘‘visualizing is never reliable when used to discover the nat-
ure of the limit of an inﬁnite process’’ (Giaquinto, 2007, p.
174).
This is unjustiﬁed because, as Bråting and Pejlare point out,
the diagram does not tell us ‘‘to look for the limit of the
lengths of the curves’’ (Bråting & Pejlare, 2008, p. 354).
Admittedly, ‘‘if we look at the lengths of the curves and take
the limit we get the result pd/2. But if we instead consider
the length of the limit function, then the result is the length
of the diameter, that is, the result is d’’ (Bråting & Pejlare,
2008, p. 354). With experience we may learn to interpret a
diagram in different ways and choose the appropriate one,
just as with experience we may learn to interpret a concept
in different ways and choose the appropriate one.
(4) Diagrams do not permit to establish general propositions since
they are particular ﬁgures. For example, Tennant states that
diagrams have ‘‘no proper place in the proof as such’’
because when, to prove some theorem about triangles, one
draws a triangle and makes further constructions, there
can be ‘‘an important misuse of that drawn triangle: the
1
2
2
3
3
3
3
38
C. Cellucci / Studies in History and Philosophy of Science 44 (2013) 32–42

mistake of assuming as given information that is true only of
the triangle that one has happened to draw, but which could
well be false of other triangles that one equally well might
have drawn in its stead’’ (Tennant, 1986, p. 304).
This is unjustiﬁed. As it will be explained below, in the ana-
lytic method, when using diagrams, one must check that the
hypothesis is a sufﬁcient condition for the solution of the prob-
lem, not only with respect to the particular ﬁgure that has been
drawn, but also with respect to any other ﬁgure similar to it. This
guarantees that the demonstration is repeatable since it holds,
without any structural change, for any other ﬁgure similar to
the drawn one.
Despite the above objections, diagrams are widely used in arti-
ﬁcial mathematics. It is therefore understandable if, in the last two
decades, there has been a revival of philosophical interest in them.
(See, for example, Allwein & Barwise, 1996; Giaquinto, 2007; Man-
cosu, 2008; Mancosu, Jørgensen, & Pedersen, 2005; Miller, 2007;
Mumma & Panza, 2012; Norman, 2006).
Nevertheless, the current philosophical literature on diagrams
is characterized by the attempt to ﬁt diagrams into the axiomatic
method. For example, Barwise and Etchemendy state that ‘‘dia-
grams and other forms of visual representation can be essential
and legitimate components in valid deductive reasoning’’ (Bar-
wise & Etchemendy, 1996, p. 12). Norman states that inferences
based on diagrams are ‘‘truth-preserving’’ because they are ‘‘sub-
ject-matter valid,’’ where we ‘‘think of an inference from P to Q as
subject-matter valid if and only if there is some known truth X of
the given subject such that {P, X} together logically entail Q’’
(Norman, 2006, p. 155). Miller gives a formal system of diagram
construction rules which is sound in the sense that if we can
get from A to B using diagram construction rules, then B is a geo-
metric consequence of A. This ‘‘shows once and for all that geo-
metric proofs that use diagrams are in no way inherently less
rigorous than sentential proofs’’ (Miller, 2007, p. 85). That the
current philosophical literature on diagrams is characterized by
the attempt to ﬁt diagrams into the axiomatic method is also
clear from Mancosu (2008), a sort of manifesto for the attempt
to ﬁt not only diagrams, but all mathematical practice into an axi-
omatic framework. (For a criticism of such manifesto, see Cellucci,
2012, section 2).
Now, the attempt to ﬁt diagrams into the axiomatic method
conﬂicts with at least two facts. First, according to many contem-
porary mathematicians, in the axiomatic method demonstrations
must be completely independent of diagrams. We have already
seen Hilbert’s position in (1) above. Another example is provided
by Dieudonné, who states that ‘‘a strict adherence to axiomatic
methods’’ involves ‘‘abstaining from introducing any diagram’’
(Dieudonné, 1969, p. ix). Hence Dieudonné’s famous cry, ‘A bas Eu-
clide! Mort aux triangles!’ [‘Down with Euclid! Death to Trian-
gles!’], which became the slogan of Bourbaki. Secondly, the
attempt to ﬁt diagrams into the axiomatic method contrasts with
the fact that, as it has been stated above, Gödel’s ﬁrst incomplete-
ness theorem refutes the view that the method of mathematics is
the axiomatic method.
Rather than in the axiomatic method, diagrams naturally ﬁt in
the analytic method, where their use can be described as follows.
To solve a problem, one draws a diagram and, from it, one gathers
data about the objects involved. Then one looks for some hypoth-
esis that is a sufﬁcient condition for the solution of the problem.
The hypothesis is obtained from the data gathered from the
diagram, and possibly other ones, by some non-deductive rule.
Then one checks that the hypothesis is a sufﬁcient condition for
the solution of the problem, with respect not only to the particular
ﬁgure that has been drawn, but also to any other ﬁgure similar to
it. (The necessity of checking this was already pointed out by
Proclus; see Cellucci, 2009, pp. 16–19). Moreover, one checks that
the hypothesis is plausible. But the hypothesis is in turn a problem
that must be solved, and will be solved in the same way. And so on,
ad inﬁnitum.
16. The effectiveness of mathematics in natural science
In the Premise it has been stated that mathematics is one of the
tools by which humans categorize the world, thus making it
comprehensible to themselves. This raises the question: Why is
mathematics effective in categorizing the world?
As regards natural mathematics, the answer is clear. Natural
mathematics is effective in categorizing the world because the
systems of core knowledge upon which it is based, being a result
of biological evolution, ﬁt in certain mathematical properties of
the world. They ﬁt in them in a way similar to the way the
movements of the ﬁshes and the shape of their ﬁns ﬁt in certain
hydrodynamic properties of water, or the eyes ﬁt in certain phys-
ical properties of light. If the systems of core knowledge did not
ﬁt in certain mathematical properties of the world, humans could
not survive. Already Poincaré pointed out that ‘‘we could con-
ceive of thinking beings, living in our world,’’ whose natural
geometry ‘‘would have four dimensions, who would, conse-
quently, think in hyperspace,’’ but it is not certain that such
beings ‘‘would be able to live and defend themselves against
the thousand dangers by which they would be assailed’’ (Poin-
caré, 1914, p. 114).
As regards artiﬁcial mathematics, while many physicists, such
as Hertz, Einstein, Wigner, Weinberg and Feynman, have expressed
amazement that mathematics should be effective in natural sci-
ence, ‘‘these sentiments have been either ignored or dismissed by
contemporary philosophers’’ (Steiner, 1998, p. 14). Admittedly,
there is a certain amount of literature on the subject, such as Field
(1980), Resnik (1997), Steiner (1998), Tegmark (2008), but the
solutions proposed therein for the problem of the effectiveness of
mathematics in natural science are not very satisfactory. Field
claims that the question of the effectiveness of artiﬁcial mathemat-
ics in categorizing the world is irrelevant, because the conclusions
we arrive at by adding mathematical axioms S to the postulates of
a physical theory N ‘‘are already derivable in a more long-winded
fashion’’ from N ‘‘without recourse to the mathematical entities’’
(Field, 1980, p. 11). This is inadequate because, as Shapiro points
out, there are statements A of N which are provable in N plus set
theory S but not in N, ‘‘even more ‘long-windedly’’’ (Shapiro,
1983, p. 526). Resnik claims that ‘‘in stating its laws and conduct-
ing its derivations, science assumes’’ the ‘‘truth of much mathe-
matics,’’ and this assumption is ‘‘indispensable to the pursuit of
science,’’ so ‘‘we are justiﬁed in taking the mathematics used in sci-
ence to be true’’ (Resnik, 1997, pp. 46–47). Its being true explains
why much mathematics is effective in categorizing the world, be-
cause physical ‘‘models will not have the properties they are sup-
posed to have unless the background mathematic holds’’ (Resnik,
1997, p. 44). This is inadequate because it depends on the assump-
tion that the truth of much mathematics is indispensable to the
pursuit of science, but Resnik provides no justiﬁcation for such
an assumption. Steiner claims that artiﬁcial mathematics is effec-
tive in categorizing the world because of the ‘‘relation between
Mind and the Cosmos’’ (Steiner, 1998, p. 45). The Cosmos is the
product of a Mind, which is ‘‘consistent with natural theology’’
(Steiner, 1998, p. 10). This is inadequate because it depends on
the unproven assumption that the Cosmos is the product of a Mind.
Tegmark
claims
that
artiﬁcial
mathematics
is
effective
in
categorizing the world because the world ‘‘is mathematics (more
speciﬁcally, a mathematical structure)’’ (Tegmark, 2008, p. 107).
This is inadequate because only some properties of the world are
C. Cellucci / Studies in History and Philosophy of Science 44 (2013) 32–42
39

mathematical in character, so the world is not a mathematical
structure.
An alternative answer to the question of the effectiveness of
artiﬁcial mathematics in categorizing the world can be given as
follows.
(1) Artiﬁcial mathematics cannot handle all properties of the world,
but only properties which are mathematical in character.
Indeed, as it has been stated above, only some properties
of the world are mathematical in character. This was the
basis for Galileo’s philosophical revolution which gave rise
to modern science. Contrary to Aristotle’s assumption that
science should ‘‘penetrate the true and intrinsic essence of
natural substances,’’ Galileo claimed that science can only
‘‘know some of their phenomenal properties [affezioni]’’
which are mathematical in character, ‘‘such as location,
motion, shape, size’’ (Galilei Opere, 1968, V, pp. 187–188).
Therefore, science should be conﬁned to them. This made
possible a mathematical treatment of nature, which was
impossible with Aristotle’s science because essence is not
mathematical in character. It also led Kant to state that ‘‘in
any special doctrine of nature there can be only as much
proper science as there is mathematics therein’’ (Kant,
2002, p. 185). But, on the other hand, it limited the scope
of science, which led Russell to state that ‘‘physics is math-
ematical, not because we know so much about the physical
world, but because we know so little: it is only its mathe-
matical properties that we can discover’’ (Russell, 1995a, p.
125).
(2) Artiﬁcial mathematics cannot handle all properties of the world
which are mathematical in character, but only the simplest
ones. As Schwartz states, artiﬁcial mathematics ‘‘is able to
deal successfully only with the simplest of situations, more
precisely, with a complex situation only to the extent that
rare good fortune makes this complex situation hinge upon
a few dominant simple factors’’ (Schwartz, 1992, pp. 21–
22). Some people believe that this is inconsequential
because the world is intrinsically simple, otherwise intelli-
gent creatures could not emerge. Thus Rescher states that,
if ‘‘intelligent creatures are to emerge in the world by evolu-
tionary processes, then the world must be mathematics-
amenable,’’ so ‘‘the nature’s modus operandi has to be simple
enough to admit of elegant mathematical representation’’
(Rescher, 1988, p. 185). But this is unjustiﬁed. The emer-
gence of intelligent creatures by evolutionary processes does
not require the world to be simple. It only requires that the
aspects of the world which are essential for the survival of
such creatures be simple enough to admit of mathematical
treatment. In order to survive, intelligent creatures need
not be able to deal with all aspects of the world, but only
with those which are strictly necessary to that purpose.
The claim that the world is intrinsically simple is based on
the assumption that natural matters accommodate them-
selves to our comprehension. But, as Galileo pointed out,
natural matters do not ‘‘accommodate themselves to our
comprehension,’’ rather, nature ‘‘ﬁrst made things in her
own way, and then made human reason skillful enough to
be able to understand (but only by great labor) some of
her secrets’’ (Galilei, 1968, vol. 7, p. 289).
(3) Only a part of artiﬁcial mathematics can handle properties of
the world which are mathematical in character. In particular,
vast parts of contemporary artiﬁcial mathematics are useless
to that aim. Dieudonné even claims that, ‘‘of all the striking
progress’’ in recent mathematics, almost ‘‘not a single one’’
has ‘‘anything to do with physical applications; and even
in the theory of partial differential equations, the emphasis
is now much more on ‘internal’ and structural problems than
on questions having a direct physical signiﬁcance’’ (Die-
udonné, 1964, p. 248).
This, however, seems to be peculiar to contemporary math-
ematics. From antiquity to the nineteenth century, artiﬁcial
mathematics was developed with an intended domain of
application. As regards antiquity, this is not in conﬂict with
the claim in (1) above, that a mathematical treatment of nat-
ure was impossible with Aristotle’s science. That claim does
not mean that arithmetic and geometry did not come from
the very beginning with intended domains of applications.
Aristotle himself ﬁxed such domains by stating that mathe-
matics studies quantity, where ‘‘of quantities some are dis-
crete, others continuous’’ (Aristotle, Categories, 6, 4b 20). In
particular, arithmetic studies number, ‘‘which is one of the
discrete quantities’’ (Aristotle, Categories, 6, 4b 31). Geome-
try studies ‘‘lines, surfaces, solids’’ which are some of the
‘‘continuous quantities’’ (Aristotle, Categories, 6, 4b 23–24).
(4) Through artiﬁcial mathematics we do not deal with the world,
but only with our conceptualizations of it. No one observes
the laws of nature as such, but only certain data—not
directly but through experiments. Sometimes one is able to
conceptualize regularities in the observation data. This is
not straightforward, because often the same observation
data can be conceptualized in different ways. Sometimes
one is also able to express the regularities, conceptualized
in the observation data, in the form of laws formulated in
mathematical terms—the laws of nature. This fact is often
misinterpreted as meaning that the artiﬁcial mathematics
used in formulating the laws of nature exists in the world.
For example, it is assumed that, since the orbits of the plan-
ets are ellipses, ellipses exist in the world. But it is not so,
ellipses are only concepts in terms of which humans concep-
tualize the observational data about the positions of planets.
That artiﬁcial mathematics does not exist in the world is a
fact that is often overlooked. This may lead to odd conclu-
sions. For example, Russell states that ‘‘there is no transition
from place to place, no consecutive moment or consecutive
position, no such thing as velocity except in the sense of a
real number which is the limit of a certain set of quotients;’’
therefore ‘‘we must entirely reject the notion of a state of
motion’’ (Russell, 1979, p. 473). Thus Russell interprets what
is simply a mathematical model—Weierstrass’s discretiza-
tion of continuity—as something existing in the world. This
leads him to the odd conclusion that there are no such things
as motion or velocity, but only sequences of pairs of real
numbers and limits of such sequences. To claim that artiﬁ-
cial mathematics exists in the world is to confuse the tools
by which humans categorize the world with the world itself.
As Thurston says, artiﬁcial mathematics only develops
‘‘enhanced ways for humans to see and think about the
world’’ (Thurston, 2011, p. xi). Therefore, artiﬁcial mathe-
matics is not the essence of the world, but only a wholly
human way of seeing and thinking about it.
(5) Artiﬁcial mathematics is effective in categorizing the world
when, among the mathematical models cultural evolution has
made available to humans, they ﬁnd one which sufﬁciently
approximates one of their conceptualizations of the world. A
simple example is Kepler’s discovery of his laws. First Kepler
investigates whether the traditional model of the circle, that
Copernicus adopted for planets’ orbits, sufﬁciently approxi-
mates his conceptualization of the regularities in the obser-
vational data concerning Mars’s positions. After ﬁve years of
unsuccessful attempts, he abandons the model of the circle
and, as an alternative, tries the model of the conic sections.
After painstaking calculations, he ﬁnds that an ellipse with
40
C. Cellucci / Studies in History and Philosophy of Science 44 (2013) 32–42

the Sun at one focus sufﬁciently approximates his conceptu-
alization of the regularities in the observation data. In the
case of Mars’s orbit, a suitable mathematical apparatus
was already available, since conic sections had been studied
by Apollonius of Perga in antiquity. This, however, is not
always the case. When no suitable mathematical apparatus
is available, one tries to develop it by inventing new mathe-
matics. If one is unable to do that, one cannot express a law
of nature in mathematical terms and must content oneself
with expressing it in ordinary language. Both artiﬁcial math-
ematics and the human conceptualizations of the world
exist only in human brains and are a result of cultural evolu-
tion. When humans succeed in stating laws of nature using
artiﬁcial mathematics, it is because, among the mathemati-
cal models already available, they ﬁnd one which sufﬁciently
approximates their conceptualizations of certain regularities
in the observation data, conceptualizations which are also a
result of cultural evolution. At any rate, what they ﬁnd is
only an approximation to their conceptualizations, which
is adequate for certain purposes but not generally. Thus, in
Kepler’s example, the orbits of the planets are only roughly
elliptical, and are not easily calculated due to the confusing
inﬂuence of Keplerian, Newtonian, Einsteinian, thermody-
namic, and chaotic factors. Even when they can be calcu-
lated, the calculations permit accurate predictions only
over a comparatively short period of time. This is sufﬁcient
for certain purposes, but the calculations do not permit
accurate predictions over time scales of millions of years.
That what humans ﬁnd are only an approximation to their
conceptualizations means that one must be careful not to
confuse the human mathematical modeling of the world
for the world itself. This is in line with Einstein’s statement,
‘‘I concede that the natural sciences concern the ‘real,’ but I
am still not a realist’’ (Einstein, 1987–, vol. 8, doc. 624). This
statement was motivated by Hertz’s remark that ‘‘the
images which we may form of things are not determined
without ambiguity’’ by them, so various different ‘‘images
of the same objects are possible’’ (Hertz, 2007, p. 2).
From the points (1–5) above it is clear that the effectiveness
of artiﬁcial mathematics in categorizing the world has two
explanations, a proximate and an ultimate one. The proximate
explanation is Galileo’s philosophical revolution which gave rise
to modern science—the restriction of the latter to phenomenal
properties which are mathematical in character. The ultimate
explanation is that, as a result of both biological and cultural
evolution, humans are able, on the one hand, to conceptualize
regularities in the observational data, and, on the other hand,
to formulate a variety of mathematical models, some of which
may sufﬁciently approximate their conceptualizations of regular-
ities in the observational data.
17. Conclusion
Mathematics is not an isolated faculty of the human mind. It be-
longs to all humans because it is essential for survival. This faculty,
on the one hand, is a result of biological evolution, which is at the
origin of natural mathematics, and, on the other hand, is a result of
cultural evolution, which is at the origin of artiﬁcial mathematics.
Both natural and artiﬁcial mathematics are tools for solving prob-
lems, and are based on the analytic method. Every philosophy of
mathematics intended to overcome the limitations denounced by
Putnam, Mac Lane, Kitcher, Crowe, Hersh and Davis, should start
from here.
Acknowledgments
I wish to thank Anjan Chakravartty, Donald Gillies, Reuben
Hersh, Hourya Sinaceur and Robert Thomas and two anonymous
referees for their comments and suggestions.
References
Allwein, G., & Barwise, K. J. (1996). Logical reasoning with diagrams. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Barwise, K. J., & Etchemendy, J. (1996). Visual information and valid reasoning. In
Allwein & Barwise (Eds.). Logical reasoning with diagrams (pp. 3-25). Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Bostock, D. (2009). Philosophy of mathematics. An introduction. Oxford: Wiley-
Blackwell.
Bråting, K., & Pejlare, J. (2008). Visualization in mathematics. Erkenntnis, 68,
345–358.
Brouwer, L. E. J. (1975). Historical background, principles and methods of
intuitionism. In A. Heyting
(Ed.). Collected works (Vol. 1, pp. 508–514).
Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Byers, W. (2007). How mathematicians think. Using ambiguity, contradiction, and
paradox to create mathematics. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Carnap, R. (2003). The logical structure of the world and pseudoproblems in philosophy.
La Salle: Open Court.
Cellucci, C. (2003). Filosoﬁa e matematica. Bari: Laterza.
Cellucci, C. (2005). Mathematical discourse vs. mathematical intuition. In C. Cellucci
& D. Gillies (Eds.), Mathematical reasoning and heuristics (pp. 137–165). London:
College Publications.
Cellucci, C. (2009). The universal generalization problem. Logique & Analyse, 52,
3–20.
Cellucci, C. (2011). Classifying and justifying inference rules. In Cellucci, Grosholz, &
Ippoliti (Eds.). Logic and knowledge (pp. 93–106). Newcastle upon Tyne:
Cambridge Scholars Publishing.
Cellucci,
C.
(2012).
Top-down
and
bottom-up
philosophy
of
mathematics.
Foundations of Science. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10699-012-9287-6.
Cooper, W. S. (2001). The evolution of reason. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Crowe, M. J. (1988). Ten misconceptions about mathematics and its history. In
Aspray & Kitcher (Eds.). History and philosophy of modern mathematics (pp. 260–
277). Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Davis, P. J. (2006). Mathematics and common sense. Natick: A K Peters.
Davis, P. J., & Hersh, R. (1981). The mathematical experience. Boston: Birkhäuser.
De Cruz, H. (2006). Towards a Darwinian approach to mathematics. Foundations of
Science, 11, 157–196.
De Cruz, H., & De Smedt, J. (2010). The innateness hypothesis and mathematical
concepts. Topoi, 29, 3–13.
Dehaene, S. (2009). Origins of mathematical intuitions. The case of arithmetic.
Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 1156, 232–259.
Dehaene, S., & Brannon, E. M. (Eds.). (2011). Space, time and number in the brain.
London: Academic Press.
Dehaene, S., & Cohen, L. (2007). Cultural recycling of cortical maps. Neuron, 56,
384–398.
Descartes, R. (1996). Oeuvres. In C. Adam & P. Tannery (Eds.). Paris: Vrin.
Dewey, J. (1916). Essays in experimental logic. Chicago: The University of Chicago
Press.
Dieudonné,
J.
(1964).
Recent
developments
in
mathematics.
The
American
Mathematical Monthly, 71, 239–248.
Dieudonné, J. (1969). Foundations of modern analysis. New York: Academic Press.
Dieudonné, J. (1998). Mathematics – The music of reason. Berlin: Springer.
Eilenberg, S., & MacLane, S. (1945). General theory of natural equivalences.
Transactions of the American Mathematical Society, 58, 231–294.
Einstein, A. (1987). Collected papers. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Feferman, S. (1998). In the light of logic. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Field, H. (1980). Science without numbers. Oxford: Blackwell.
Franchella, M. (2011). Where the Most Logical Mind May Be at Fault. In J. Steiff (Ed.),
Sherlock Holmes and philosophy (pp. 229–236). Chicago: Open Court.
Frege, G. (1959). The foundations of arithmetic. A logico-mathematical enquiry into the
concept of number. Oxford: Blackwell.
Frege, G. (1967). Begriffsschrift, a formula language, modeled upon that of
arithmetic, for pure thought. In J. VanHeijenoort (Ed.), From Frege to Gödel. A
source book in mathematical logic, 1879–1931 (pp. 5–82). Cambridge: Harvard
University Press.
Frege, G. (1979). Posthumous writings. In H. Hermes, F. Kambartel, & F. Kaulbach
(Eds.). Oxford: Blackwell.
Frege, G. (1984). Collected papers on mathematics, logic, and philosophy. In B.
McGuinness (Ed.). Oxford: Blackwell.
Galilei, G. (1968). Opere. In A. Favaro (Ed.). Florence: Barbera.
George, A., & Velleman, D. J. (2002). Philosophies of mathematics. Oxford: Blackwell.
Giaquinto, M. (2007). Visual thinking in mathematics. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Gödel, K. (1986). Collected works. In S. Feferman et al. (Eds.). Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Gowers, T. (2002). Mathematics. A very short introduction. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
C. Cellucci / Studies in History and Philosophy of Science 44 (2013) 32–42
41

Grabiner, J. V. (1983). The changing concept of change: The derivative from Fermat
to Weierstrass. Mathematics Magazine, 56, 195–206.
Hamming, R. W. (1980). The unreasonable effectiveness of mathematics. The
American Mathematical Monthly, 87, 81–90.
Hersh, R. (1979). Some proposals for reviving the philosophy of mathematics.
Advances in Mathematics, 31, 31–50.
Hersh, R. (1997). What is mathematics, really? Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hersh, R. (2011). Mathematical Intuition: Poincaré, Polya, Dewey. In Cellucci,
Grosholz, & Ippoliti (Eds.). Logic and knowledge (pp. 297–323). Newcastle upon
Tyne: Cambridge Scholars Publishing.
Hertz, H. (2007). The principles of mechanics presented in a new form. New York:
Cosimo.
Hilbert, D. (2004). Lectures on the foundations of geometry. In M. Hallett & U. Majer
(Eds.). Berlin: Springer.
Hilbert, D., & Bernays, P. (1968). Grundlagen der Mathematik. Berlin: Springer.
Hilbert, D. (1996). From mathematical problems. In W. Ewald (Ed.), From Kant to
Hilbert (pp. 1096–1105). Oxford: Oxford University Press. Vol. 2.
Jaynes, E. T., & Bretthorst, G. L. (2003). Probability theory. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Kant, I. (1992). Lectures on logic. In J. M. Young (Ed.). Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Kant, I. (1998). Critique of pure reason. In P. Guyer & A. W. Wood (Eds.). Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Kant, I. (2002). Theoretical philosophy after 1781. In H. Allison & P. Heath (Eds.).
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kitcher, P. (1988). Mathematical naturalism. In Aspray & Kitcher (Eds.). History and
philosophy of modern mathematics (pp. 293–325). Minneapolis: University of
Minnesota Press.
Klein, C. F. (2004). Elementary mathematics from an advanced standpoint: Geometry.
Mineola: Dover.
Leibniz, G. W. (1971). Mathematische Schriften. In C. I. Gerhardt (Ed.). Hildesheim:
Georg Olms.
Lewis, D. K. (1996). Elusive knowledge. Australasian Journal of Philosophy, 74,
549–567.
Mac Lane, S. (1981). Mathematical models. A sketch for the philosophy of
mathematics. The American Mathematical Monthly, 88, 462–472.
Mancosu, P. (Ed.). (2008). The Philosophy of mathematical practice. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Mancosu, P., Jørgensen, K. F., & Pedersen, S. A. (Eds.). (2005). Visualization,
explanation and reasoning styles in mathematics. Berlin: Springer.
Meikle, L. I., & Fleuriot, J. D. (2003). Formalizing Hilbert’s Grundlagen in Isabelle/Isar.
In
D.
Basin
&
B.
Wolff
(Eds.),
Theorem
proving
in
higher
order
logics
(pp. 319–334). Berlin: Springer.
Menary, R. (Ed.). (2010). The extended mind. Cambridge: The MIT Press.
Miller, N. (2007). Euclid and his twentieth century rivals. Stanford: CSLI.
Mumma, J., and Panza, M. (Eds.) (2012). Diagrams in Mathematics: History and
Philosophy. Special issue of, Synthese, 186, No. 1.
Norman, J. (2006). After Euclid. Visual reasoning and the epistemology of diagrams.
Stanford: CSLI.
Pascal, B. (1904). Oeuvres. In L. Brunschvicg & P. Boutroux (Eds.). Paris: Hachette.
Poincaré, H. (1914). Science and method. London: Nelson.
Popper, K. R. (1945). The open society and its enemies. London: Routledge.
Posamentier, A. S. (2010). The pythagorean theorem. The story of its power and beauty.
Amherst: Prometheus Books.
Putnam, H. (1979). Philosophy of mathematics: A report. In P. D. Asquith & H. E.
Kyburg (Eds.), Current research in philosophy of science (pp. 386–398). East
Lansing: Philosophy of Science Association.
Raussen, M., & Skau, C. (2004). Interview with Michael Atiyah and Isadore Singer.
European Mathematical Society Newsletter, 53, 24–30.
Renfrew, C. (2008). Prehistory. The making of the human mind. New York: The
Modern Library.
Renfrew, C., Frith, C., and Malafouris, L. (Eds.) (2008). The Sapient Mind. Archaeology
Meeets Neuroscience. Special issue of Philosophical Transaction of the Royal Society
B, 363, No. 1499.
Rescher, N. (1988). Rationality. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Resnik, M. D. (1997). Mathematics as a science of patterns. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Ribet, K. A. (1990). From the Taniyama-Shimura conjecture to Fermat’s last
theorem. Annales de la Faculté des Sciences de Toulouse – Mathématiques, 11,
116–139.
Robinson, A. (1966). Non-standard analysis. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Rota, G.-C. (1997). Indiscrete thoughts. Boston: Birkhäuser.
Russell, B. (1979). The principles of mathematics. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Russell, B. (1995a). An outline of philosophy. London: Routledge.
Russell, B. (1995b). My philosophical development. London: Routledge.
Schwartz, J. Y. (1992). The pernicious inﬂuence of mathematics on science. In M.
Kac, G.-C. Rota, & J. T. Schwartz (Eds.), Discrete thoughts (pp. 19–25). Boston:
Birkhäuser.
Shapiro, S. (1983). Conservativeness and incompleteness. The Journal of Philosophy,
80, 521–531.
Spelke, E. (2011). Natural number and natural geometry. In S. Dehaene & E. M.
Brannon (Eds.), Space, time and number in the brain (pp. 287–317). London:
Academic Press.
Steiner, M. (1998). The applicability of mathematics as a philosophical problem.
Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Tarski, A. (1994). Introduction to logic and to the methodology of deductive sciences.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Tegmark, M. (2008). The mathematical universe. Foundations of Physics, 38,
101–150.
Tennant, N. (1986). The withering away of formal semantics? Mind and Language, 1,
302–318.
Thurston, W. P. (2011). Foreword. In M. Pitici (Ed.), The best writings on mathematics
2010 (pp. xi–xiii). Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Wiles, A. (1995). Modular elliptic curves and fermat’s last theorem. Annals of
Mathematics, 141, 443–551.
Ye, F. (2010). The applicability of mathematics as a scientiﬁc and a logical problem.
Philosophia Mathematica, 18, 144–165.
42
C. Cellucci / Studies in History and Philosophy of Science 44 (2013) 32–42

