Stud. Hist. Phil. Sci. 34 (2003) 467–489
www.elsevier.com/locate/shpsa
Conventionalism in Reid’s ‘geometry of
visibles’
Edward Slowik
Winona State University, Winona, MN 55987-5838, USA
Received 18 December 2001; received in revised form 6 July 2002
Abstract
The subject of this investigation is the role of conventions in the formulation of Thomas
Reid’s theory of the geometry of vision, which he calls the ‘geometry of visibles’. In particular,
we will examine the work of N. Daniels and R. Angell who have alleged that, respectively,
Reid’s ‘geometry of visibles’ and the geometry of the visual ﬁeld are non-Euclidean. As will
be demonstrated, however, the construction of any geometry of vision is subject to a choice
of conventions regarding the construction and assignment of its various properties, especially
metric properties, and this fact undermines the claim for a unique non-Euclidean status for
the geometry of vision. Finally, a suggestion is offered for trying to reconcile Reid’s direct
realist theory of perception with his geometry of visibles.
2003 Published by Elsevier Ltd.
While Thomas Reid is well-known as the leading exponent of the Scottish ‘com-
mon-sense’ school of philosophy, his role in the history of geometry has only recently
been drawing the attention of the scholarly community. In particular, several inﬂuen-
tial works, by N. Daniels and R. B. Angell, have claimed Reid as the discoverer of
non-Euclidean geometry; an achievement, moreover, that pre-dates the geometries
of Lobachevsky, Bolyai, and Gauss by over a half century. Reid’s alleged discovery
appears within the context of his analysis of the geometry of the visual ﬁeld, which
he dubs the ‘geometry of visibles’. In summarizing the importance of Reid’s philo-
sophy in this area, Daniels is led to conclude that ‘there can remain little doubt that
Reid intends the geometry of visibles to be an alternative to Euclidean geometry’;1
E-mail address: eslowik@winona.edu (E. Slowik).
1 Daniels (1989), p.13.
0039-3681/$ - see front matter 2003 Published by Elsevier Ltd.
doi:10.1016/S0039-3681(03)00051-7

468
E. Slowik / Stud. Hist. Phil. Sci. 34 (2003) 467–489
while Angell, similarly inspired by Reid, draws a much stronger inference: ‘The
geometry which precisely and naturally ﬁts the actual conﬁgurations of the visual
ﬁeld is a non-Euclidean, two-dimensional, elliptical geometry. In substance, this the-
sis was advanced by Thomas Reid in 1764 . . .’2 The signiﬁcance of these ﬁndings
has not gone unnoticed in mathematical and scientiﬁc circles, moreover, for Reid’s
name is beginning to appear more frequently in historical surveys of the development
of geometry and the theories of space.3
Implicit in the recent work on Reid’s ‘geometry of visibles’, or GOV, one can
discern two closely related but distinct arguments: ﬁrst, that Reid did in fact formu-
late a non-Euclidean geometry, and second, that the GOV is non-Euclidean. This
essay will investigate mainly the latter claim, although a lengthy discussion will be
accorded to the ﬁrst. Overall, in contrast to the optimistic reports of a non-Euclidean
GOV, it will be argued that there is a great deal of conceptual freedom in the con-
struction of any geometry pertaining to the visual ﬁeld. Rather than single out a
non-Euclidean structure as the only geometry consistent with visual phenomena, an
examination of Reid, Daniels, and Angell will reveal the crucial role of geometric
‘conventions’, especially of the metric sort, in the formulation of the GOV (where
a ‘metric’ can be simply deﬁned as a system for determining distances, the measures
of angles, etc.). Consequently, while a non-Euclidean geometry is consistent with
Reid’s GOV, it is only one of many different geometrical structures that a GOV can
possess. Angell’s theory that the GOV can only be construed as non-Euclidean, is
thus incorrect. After an exploration of Reid’s theory and the alleged non-Euclidean
nature of the GOV, in Sections 1 and 2 respectively, the focus will turn to the tacit
role of conventionalism in Daniels’ reconstruction of Reid’s GOV argument, and in
the contemporary treatment of a non-Euclidean visual geometry offered by Angell
(Sects. 3 & 4). Finally, in the conclusion, a suggestion will be offered for a possible
reconstruction of Reid’s GOV that does not violate his avowed ‘direct realist’ theory
of perception, since this epistemological thesis largely prompted his formulation of
the GOV.
1. The ‘geometry of visibles’
In the Inquiry into the human mind, Reid’s ﬁrst major work (from 1764), the GOV
is put forward as the geometry of the visual ﬁeld. The structure of Reid’s argument
can be brieﬂy summarized: since human vision lacks the ability to determine the
depth of all our ‘visible ﬁgures’ (i.e., the ﬁgure of a body/thing as experienced
visually), it follows that all visible ﬁgures appear to be equally distant. Based on
this equality of our experience of distance, Reid infers that every visible ﬁgure has
geometrical properties that are indistinguishable from a ﬁgure drawn on a sphere,
2 Angell (1974), p. 87.
3 For example, Gray (1989), p. 71. One of the earliest references can be found in the Presidential
Address of J. Cockle at the London Mathematical Society in 1888.

469
E. Slowik / Stud. Hist. Phil. Sci. 34 (2003) 467–489
or ‘spherical ﬁgure’, thus singling out the representation of visual ﬁgures by means
of spherical ﬁgures. Reid then demonstrates that the properties of spherical ﬁgures
differ from the properties associated with Euclidean geometry: e.g., the sum of the
angles of a spherical triangle exceeds 180 degrees. Consequently, the geometry of
visible ﬁgure, or GOV, is non-Euclidean spherical geometry.
As for the speciﬁc details of the GOV, Reid begins his exposition by ﬁrst noting
that the deﬁnitions of point, line, angle, and circle in his new geometry ‘are the same
as in common geometry’ (Inq. 6.9),4 where ‘common geometry’ presumably denotes
Euclidean (although he does not actually provide any of these deﬁnitions). He then
argues, in principles 1 and 2, for the construction of a visible spatial geometry mod-
eled on a sphere (doubly-elliptical, using the modern terminology) with the eye
placed at its center:
Supposing the eye placed in the centre of a sphere, every great circle of the sphere
will have the same appearance to the eye as if it was a straight line; for the
curvature of the circle being turned directly toward the eye, is not perceived by
it. And, for the same reason, any line which is drawn in the plane of a great circle
of the sphere, whether it be in reality straight or curve, will appear straight to
the eye.
Every visible right line will appear to coincide with some great circle of the
sphere, and the circumference of that great circle, even when it is produced until
it returns into itself, will appear to be a continuation of the same visible right line
. . . For the eye, perceiving only the position of objects with regard to itself, and
not their distance, will see those points in the same visible place which have the
same position with regard to the eye, how different soever their distances from
it may be. (Inq., 6.9)
For Reid, since every visible right line ‘appears’ to coincide with a great circle
(which is a circle of greatest diameter on the sphere), he concludes, in principles 4
and 5, that the properties of visible angles and triangles are the same as the properties
of spherical angles and triangles:
Since the visible [right] lines appear to coincide with the great circles, the visible
angle comprehended under the former must be equal to the visible angle compre-
hended under the latter. But the visible angle comprehended under the two great
circles, when seen from the centre, is of the same magnitude with the spherical
angle which they really comprehended, as mathematicians know . . .
4 I will follow the standard convention and signify the Inquiry into the human mind by ‘Inq.’ and the
Essays on the intellectual powers, by ‘Essays’.

470
E. Slowik / Stud. Hist. Phil. Sci. 34 (2003) 467–489
The properties, therefore, of visible right-lined triangles are not the same with the
properties of plain triangles, but are the same with those of spherical triangles
(Inq., 6.9).
After procuring a list of propositions for the GOV, that spell out in more detail
some of its speciﬁc features, he concludes his presentation by drawing a sharp dis-
tinction between the GOV and Euclidean geometry:
Those ﬁgures and that extension which are the immediate objects of sight, are
not the ﬁgures and the extension about which common geometry is employed;
that the geometrician, while he looks at his diagram, and demonstrates a prop-
osition, hath a ﬁgure presented to his eye, which is only a sign and representative
of a tangible ﬁgure . . . and that these two ﬁgures have different properties, so
that what he demonstrates of the one, is not true of the other. (Inq., 6.9)
This passage also reveals Reid’s thoughts on the geometry of the sense of touch,
which he dubs ‘tangible’ ﬁgure; a view, moreover, that is obviously derived from
Berkeley’s New theory of vision.5 In contrast to the two-dimensional non-Euclidean
GOV, tangible ﬁgure is governed by ordinary three-dimensional Euclidean geometry.
In fact, Reid does appear to hold that Euclidean geometry is the geometry of the
external, material world (considered apart from vision), while it is only the GOV
that is non-Euclidean. In Essays, 2.14, for instance, he repeatedly afﬁrms (Berkeley’s
thesis) that a three-dimensional Euclidean structure is an intrinsic feature of physical
objects: it is the ‘real’ magnitude of a body, as opposed to the ‘apparent’ magnitude
discerned through vision: ‘The real magnitude of a line is measured by some known
measure of length . . . This magnitude is an object of touch only, and not of sight
. . .’ We will return to this issue below.
2. Reid and Non-Euclidean geometry
Before beginning our examination of the use of conventions in the formulation
of the GOV, a discussion of Reid’s alleged ‘discovery’ of non-Euclidean geometry
is in order. Daniels insists that the GOV is a full-ﬂedged non-Euclidean geometry,
and not merely a spherical Euclidean geometry, since ‘[Reid] did think that the
[GOV] is a fully consistent alternative to Euclidean geometry, if only for two-dimen-
sional visual space’ (Daniels, p. 128). Although not explicitly stated, Daniels may
believe that the similar geometrical work of many of Reid’s predecessors, most
notably, G. Saccheri and J. Lambert, does not fall under a non-Euclidean classi-
ﬁcation due to the simple fact that these mathematicians did not accept their alterna-
5 Much of Reid’s overall theory of vision stems directly from, and is a response to, Berkeley’s inﬂuen-
tial work. However, the GOV is Reid’s original conception. See Berkeley (1957), pp. 159–238.

471
E. Slowik / Stud. Hist. Phil. Sci. 34 (2003) 467–489
tive geometries as ‘real’.6 Saccheri, for instance, had seriously investigated the
‘obtuse angle hypothesis’, which allows the angles of an quadrilateral to exceed 90
degrees, as a means of proving the parallel postulate of Euclidean geometry (i.e.,
by deriving an inconsistency from the obtuse angle hypothesis, which is incompatible
with Euclidean geometry, he hoped to establish the truth of the parallel postulate).
Saccheri did not believe that his non-Euclidean constructions were ‘real’, in the
mathematical sense, although he did obtain non-Euclidean geometrical results that
far exceed the modest philosophically-based conclusion of Reid’s GOV. Conse-
quently, are Saccheri’s results, which are so similar to Reid’s, to be demoted to the
status of ‘spherical Euclidean’, rather than ‘non-Euclidean’, simply because he
thought that such geometries were (or would ultimately prove) inconsistent? If this
is Daniels’ main rationale for granting Reid an exclusive right to the non-Euclidean
crown, then it is tantamount to claiming that a mathematician’s beliefs about her
work is itself sufﬁcient to secure a mathematical classiﬁcation of its content; in this
case, either Euclidean or non-Euclidean. But how can a mathematician’s beliefs about
a mathematical theory, an external feature of that theory, determine its classiﬁcation?
More plausibly, any judgment concerning a theory’s overall characteristics should
depend on its internal mathematical properties, and not on the author’s mere inten-
tions (an external property).
Overall, Daniels, and the other proponents of a non-Euclidean GOV assume that
there exists a straightforward and unproblematic deﬁnition of what constitutes a non-
Euclidean geometry. Yet, the development of modern mathematics reveals a much
more complex and intricate story, as the ‘evolving’ classiﬁcation of spherical
geometry clearly demonstrates. In Reid’s day, the failure of the parallel postulate on
the surface of a sphere was not seen as heralding a new brand of geometry, since
the peculiar properties of great circles on spheres had long been a part of the Eucli-
dean tradition (and, indeed, extended back to Euclid himself);7 but, as J. Gray points
out: ‘this geometry [i.e., spherical] is now given almost immediately in modern text-
books as an example of a non-Euclidean geometry’ (Gray, 1989, p. 169). A part of
this classiﬁcation problem resides in an over-dependence on Euclidean insights and
deﬁnitions: that is, spherical Euclidean geometries, which admit the obtuse angle
hypothesis, mark an advance on the path to the modern non-Euclidean notion, but
6 See Daniels (1989), pp. 22–23, 141 n. 43, where he states that ‘[Lambert] was inclined to reject the
possibility of this new [non-Euclidean] geometry’. On the whole, it is difﬁcult to determine from these
passages whether or not Daniels really does dismiss the work of early geometers on the grounds that
they either attempted to disprove the possibility of a non-Euclidean geometry, or, as in the case of Lambert,
never openly stated that a non-Euclidean geometry was consistent (although Lambert’s work seemed to
imply that such geometries were, in fact, consistent).
7 Kline (1972), pp. 119–121. Kline’s opinion on the discovery non-Euclidean geometry likewise echoes
our concerns over the difﬁculty of choosing the appropriate criteria for deciding this debate: ‘If one means
by the creation of a non-Euclidean geometry the recognition that there can be geometries alternative to
Euclid’s then Klugel and Lambert deserve the credit. If non-Euclidean geometry means the technical
development of the consequences of a system of axioms containing an alternative to Euclid’s parallel
axiom then most credit must be accorded to Saccheri and even he beneﬁted by the work of many men
who tried to ﬁnd a more acceptable substitute axiom for Euclid’s’ (p. 869).

472
E. Slowik / Stud. Hist. Phil. Sci. 34 (2003) 467–489
such geometries still lean heavily on Euclidean deﬁnitions and metrical intuitions
(as will be examined in the case of Reid below). The two most important conceptual
breakthroughs on the road to a full-ﬂedged non-Euclidean geometry had to await
the nineteenth century, when the analytic approach to geometrical concepts was
launched by the work of Taurinus and Gauss, and the investigation of the intrinsic
structure of manifolds (differential geometry) was begun by Beltrami and Riemann.
Analytic techniques allowed geometers to move away from the Euclidean under-
standing of geometrical objects, such as ‘surface’ or ‘line’, by deﬁning these objects
purely by means of algebraic equations, and not via their often Euclidean-biased
geometrical representations (since algebraic equations are essentially neutral and
uninterpreted as regards their geometric meaning, they do not uniquely favor a Eucli-
dean interpretation). Differential geometry, which is largely based on the analytic
achievement, introduced the characterization of surfaces in terms of their intrinsic,
as opposed to extrinsic, curvature; where ‘intrinsic’ refers to the determination of a
surface’s curvature from a perspective conﬁned entirely to that surface, and ‘extrin-
sic’ pertains to its calculation from outside (or off) the surface. As a result of Riem-
ann’s pioneering work, curvature could now be characterized intrinsically for each
point on a surface (or, more precisely, for the inﬁnitesimal neighborhood surrounding
each point on a manifold) without having to embed that surface in a larger, Euclidean
space. Using these procedures, geometry was freed from the necessity, or ‘tyranny’,
of a Euclidean backdrop for making measurements of curvature. (Determining the
‘radius of curvature’ of a point on a curve by ﬁnding the circle that best approximates
the curvature at that point is an example of an extrinsic approach, since the circle’s
radius lies outside the curve).
Returning to Reid, there can be little doubt as to which geometrical category the
GOV falls under: despite the pleas of Daniels and other commentators, Reid’s theory
clearly presupposes the non-analytic, global (i.e., non-local or non-inﬁnitesimal), and
extrinsic scaffolding of the older Euclidean classical tradition—and this conclusion
would seem to place Reid’s GOV in the ‘spherical Euclidean’ tradition, rather than
in the more modern ‘non-Euclidean’. Like Lambert and Saccheri, for example, his
investigation proceeds from an intractable Euclidean intuition concerning the deﬁ-
nition of a ‘line’, which in the Inquiry is taken to be ‘the same as in common
geometry [i.e., Euclidean]’ (Inq., 6.9); and, in his manuscripts, his ﬁnal version pro-
poses that ‘a right line is said to be parallel to a right line when being in the same
plane it is in every point equally distant from it’.8 This last deﬁnition, moreover,
betrays the inﬂuence of Euclidean metrical notions in Reid’s overall approach, an
inﬂuence that even extends to the handling of his most basic geometrical concepts.
In fact, proposition 8 in the exposition of the GOV is based on this understanding
of parallel lines: ‘a circle may be parallel to a right line—that is, may be equally
distant from it in all its parts’ (Inq., 6.9). In the modern theory, where the distance
8 Quoted in Wood (1998), p. 35. This passage comes from the Aberdeen University Library manu-
scripts (AUL MS 3061/11, pp. 11, 16, 18, 23). Similarly, Wood also questions the alleged discovery of
a non-Euclidean geometry on the grounds that Reid was devoted to upholding Euclid’s geometry, and
the parallel postulate, throughout his (fairly substantial) work on geometry (pp. 40–41).

473
E. Slowik / Stud. Hist. Phil. Sci. 34 (2003) 467–489
function takes on a local (inﬁnitesimal), algebraic form, there are many lines which
can be classiﬁed as ‘equally distant’ to a given line, since there are many metrics
(different algebraic functions) that can be employed. Reid, on the other hand, follows
his Euclidean predecessors in conﬁdently assuming that a unique global determi-
nation of ‘same distance from’ can be applied to the entire surface of the sphere,
thus picking out a privileged class of lines. Reid’s metric, furthermore, is not based
on any inﬁnitesimal procedure (of which Reid was suspicious),9 but is merely an
extension of the common Euclidean understanding of length on a plane surface to
measurements on a spherical surface. Just as the lines in plane geometry are projected
onto the sphere, it would appear that the concepts of Euclidean distance are included
in the transfer as well.
In addition, the description of the GOV places the observer, or eye, at the center
of the sphere, and it is from this position that measurements of position, length,
and angle are conducted. Since the eye is not on the spherical surface, the GOV
correspondingly fails to count as an intrinsic theory of geometrical curvature—in
fact, the center position of the eye constitutes (somewhat ironically) the origin of a
spherical polar coordinate system, which is appropriately deemed a spherical
geometry in most text books, and thus not necessarily a non-Euclidean geometry (as
noted above).10 Various claims of Reid tacitly expose this extrinsic characterization
of the GOV, as: ‘I require no more knowledge in a blind man, in order to his being
able to determine the visible ﬁgure of bodies, than that he can project the outline
of a given body, upon the surface of a hollow sphere, whose centre is in the eye’
(Inq., 6.7). Despite Daniels’ appeals, such descriptions make would seem to suggest
that the GOV is best interpreted as a sphere embedded in a larger Euclidean space,
such that the ﬁgures of plane Euclidean geometry can be projected onto the
sphere’s surface.
As a possible rejoinder to this line of criticism, one might try to enlist Reid’s
many claims concerning the spherical ‘representation’ of the visible ﬁgures, since a
representation need not be interpreted as an actual spatial projection. Reid asserts,
for example, that ‘visible ﬁgure will be represented by that part of the surface of
the sphere, on which it might be projected, the eye being in the center’ (Inq., 6.9).
If one also includes Reid’s denial of three-dimensional curvature for his visibles (as
will be explored further below), then the extrinsic characterization of the GOV can
be seen as merely a property of the particular model—namely, spherical geometry—
that Reid employed to demonstrate the consistency of his alternative geometry. In
other words, Reid used spherical Euclidean geometry to provide an intuitively com-
prehensible instantiation (model) of his bare geometric deﬁnitions and principles,
and thus one should not impute an extrinsic classiﬁcation to the entire GOV based
on a simple confusion between the theory and its model. This response may go a
long way towards clearing Reid of the charge of inconsistency in developing his
account of visible ﬁgure (although not necessarily Daniels’ reconstruction, as will
9 AUL MS 2131/5/II/47, f. 4r. Wood refers to this comment (p. 33), as does Weldon (1978), p. 181.
10 See, for instance, Brannan et al. (1999), pp. 327–328.

474
E. Slowik / Stud. Hist. Phil. Sci. 34 (2003) 467–489
be seen in the next section), but it raises a further issue that needs to be addressed
if the GOV is to qualify as a genuine or valid geometry: Does Reid ﬁrst provide a
set of axioms/postulates for his geometry, and then proceed to construct a model?
Or, has Reid simply reversed the process, and assembled a set of postulates that
hold true of a model that he had picked out beforehand? Daniels regards the latter
case as a more accurate portrayal of Reid’s actual construction of the GOV:
Reid begins with an interpretation or model, visible space [i.e., spherical
geometry], and develops a geometry for it, which turns out to be non-Euclidean.
Starting with a model may be what leads Reid to think of his geometry as speciﬁ-
cally tied to this particular model. (Daniels, 1989, p. 22)
Indeed, the GOV’s eight basic principles (see Sect. 1) directly refer to spherical
geometry almost out of necessity, since they largely function as set of auxiliary or
correspondence deﬁnitions that connect the more basic elements (lines, points, etc.)
to Reid’s theory of visible space. This realization does not necessarily restrict the
GOV from a non-Euclidean classiﬁcation, but it does raise serious doubts over its
status as an ‘axiomatic’ system, and thus in what sense it can stand comparison with
the more geometrically formal and comprehensive results produced in the nineteenth
(and eighteenth) century. (It should be noted, moreover, that Daniels never claims
that the GOV is a complete and consistent axiomatic formulation of a non-Euclidean
geometry.) Consequently, although some of Reid’s claims would seem to downplay
the importance of projections on a spherical model, the very construction of the
GOV (as well as many of Reid’s own explanations, as above) puts the spherical
Euclidean model, extrinsically considered, on the very ground ﬂoor of the GOV’s
construction, if not ultimate meaning.11
In conclusion, Reid’s conception of the GOV—global, non-analytic, extrinsic, and
heavily indebted to Euclidean ideas—falls naturally within the spherical Euclidean
tradition in geometry, and this realization seriously weakens the GOV’s claim to be
regarded as the ﬁrst non-Euclidean geometry (but, see n. 11). Of course, if the distinc-
tion between Euclidean and non-Euclidean is not precise, and allows for a continuum
of values ranging from, say, ‘clearly Euclidean’ to ‘clearly non-Euclidean’, then one
could simply declare that all crude geometrical forays into the obtuse angle hypoth-
esis qualify as non-Euclidean. If Daniels and company were to adopt this strategy,
however, then nearly all previous work on the geometry of the sphere would have
11 It may be possible to reformulate Reid’s GOV into an axiomatic pattern, however: the propositions
that Reid offers, after his eight basic principles, could be re-arranged as his basic axioms or postulates
(since they contain the important non-Euclidean results), with the eight principles regarded as a particular
instantiation of the propositions on a spherical surface (i.e., the model). If one rejects the arguments
concerning the ‘Euclidean tradition’ (as presented above), and places instead the right to a non-Euclidean
status solely on a consistent axiomatic structure that rejects the parallel postulate, then it could be claimed
that the GOV’s rough outline of an axiomatic system comprises a non-Euclidean geometry, since the
GOV also provides a consistent model and does openly reject the Euclidean parallel postulate—but, of
course, this axiomatization is more philosophical than geometrical, and thus may not be deemed suf-
ﬁciently rigorous.

475
E. Slowik / Stud. Hist. Phil. Sci. 34 (2003) 467–489
to be classiﬁed as ‘non-Euclidean’. Yet, I wholeheartedly agree with Van Cleve’s
comment on this kind of geometric classiﬁcation: ‘No one credits the ancient Greek
astronomers who worked out the geometry of ﬁgures on the celestial sphere with
being the ﬁrst discoverers of non-Euclidean geometry’.12
3. Daniels’ reconstruction of the GOV
The presuppositions involved in the act of measurement, especially determinations
of spatial distance, received their ﬁrst important philosophical treatment by Poincare
at the turn of the twentieth century. Poincare’s views became the central doctrine
of the ‘conventionalist’ faction within the logical positivist program for the philo-
sophy of science, as defended most persuasively by Reichenbach and Gru¨nbaum. In
brief, conventionalism as it pertains to the measurement of spatial distance, dubbed
‘metrical conventionalism’, holds that the determination of distance, and thus spatial
geometry, is always dependent upon certain stipulations concerning the properties
of our measuring instruments and procedures. Stipulations about the behavior of a
standard meter stick, for example, directly determine the type of geometry we ascribe
to a space, since we can always retain a particular geometry if we adopt an appropri-
ate ‘convention’ for the measurements carried out with the meter stick: if one desires
a ﬂat space-time, in the modern setting of general relativity, then one must posit the
existence of ‘forces’ in the space-time that distort the meter sticks (in order to account
for their failure to obtain the standard Euclidean measures); but if one simply stipu-
lates that the meter sticks retain an invariant magnitude throughout all space and
time, then the measurements of distance will produce a non-Euclidean result, thus
vindicating a curved space-time view. In either case, the properties we assign to our
measuring apparatus, which are conventional, determine the geometry we assign to
a given space.13
Although it need not affect our examination of the GOV, many of the criticisms
aimed at the metric conventionalist school centered upon their implicit anti-realist
conception of magnitude and distance: e.g., one might reasonably wonder if conven-
tionalism allows any objective, non-conventional features of congruence or length.
Because metric conventionalism in the realm of physical geometry raises these troub-
ling realist/anti-realist worries, it is interesting to note that a better case for metric
conventionalism could be made with respect to the geometry of vision, where the
relevant geometry is purely conceptual, and not physical. That is, in a conceptual
geometry constructed from our ‘visible ﬁgures’, the realist difﬁculties are rendered
12 Van Cleve (forthcoming), p. 30.
13 The classic texts on the conventionalist thesis of space and time are: Reichenbach (1958); Gru¨nbaum
(1963); Poincare (1952). Additionally, there is a sense in which even the measurements of abstract
geometry are conventional, since we must make assumptions on the straightness or regularity of our rulers
and compasses when measuring geometric ﬁgures (and, indeed, it is often the case that our instruments
are irregular).

476
E. Slowik / Stud. Hist. Phil. Sci. 34 (2003) 467–489
largely irrelevant. With this in mind, we shall now proceed to explore the extent of
conventionalist metrical doctrine in Daniels’ and Angell’s version of the GOV.
Daniels’ exposition of a doubly-elliptical GOV closely follows Reid’s theory,
mainly for the reason that Daniels seems intent on merely laying out Reid’s argu-
ments for the GOV, rather than attempting to conclusively prove, as does Angell,
that the geometry of vision is spherical. Accordingly, the starting point of Daniels’
reconstruction is the placement of the eye at center of a sphere, along with the
restriction that ‘the eye is capable of 360 degree rotation, but not translation’ (point
(e), p. 6). The case for a spherical GOV follows naturally, if not inevitably, from
this stipulation, as revealed in Reid’s characterization of ‘right-line’ (see Sect. 1).
Yet what justiﬁes the choice of a spherical model for vision? Is it due to the fact
that the eye is, albeit roughly, a sphere? Daniels admits that ‘the anatomy of the
human eye seems to have been one motivating consideration’ (p. 10). And, in more
detail, he comments:
Since the material impression on the retina is what ‘suggests’ visible ﬁgure, Reid
seems to feel we can preserve the properties of visible ﬁgure if we preserve the
properties of the material impression. But the retina is treated by Reid as just a
portion of the surface of a hollow sphere. To preserve properties of a material
impression on such a surface, Reid projects the impression back through the center
(focal point) of The Eye and out onto an arbitrary sphere. (pp. 10–11)
In this context, ‘material impression’ refers to the physical effects (or event) of a
ray of light striking the retina, where an impression ‘suggests two things to the
mind—namely, the colour and position of some external object’ (Inq. 6.8, but an
impression is not a sensation). While Daniels’ view may retain a degree of plausi-
bility, he also claims that ‘visible surfaces are neither curved nor plane’ (p. 8), a
judgment that closely follows Reid’s own presentation. In the analysis of the hypo-
thetical Idomenians, who only possess the two-dimensional sense of sight (and not
three-dimensional tactile sense organs), Reid explains:
The beings we have supposed, having no conception of a third dimension, his
visible ﬁgures have length and breadth indeed; but thickness is neither included
nor excluded, being a thing of which he has no conception. And, therefore, visible
ﬁgures, although they have length and breadth, as surfaces have, yet they are
neither plain surfaces nor curve surfaces. For a curve surface implies curvature
in a third dimension, and a plain surface implies the want of curvature in a third
dimension; and such a being can conceive neither of these, because he has no
conception of a third dimension. (Inq., 6.9)
Unfortunately, the conjunction of these various claims brings to light an internal
inconsistency in Daniels’ reconstruction: (1) the eye projects the ‘material
impressions’ through the eye onto a sphere, but (2) the visible ﬁgures, which are
‘suggested’ by these material impressions, do not possess any curvature—indeed,
‘visible surfaces are neither curved nor plane’ (Daniels, p. 8). Yet, what point is

477
E. Slowik / Stud. Hist. Phil. Sci. 34 (2003) 467–489
there in singling out a spherical surface, or any surface possessing a determinate
curvature, for that matter, if the eye cannot discern that surface’s curvature? Daniels
may simply have transferred the ‘sphericality’ of the projection of the material
impressions to their corresponding visible ﬁgures, but, once again, this move is
unwarranted if the ﬁgures ‘suggested’ by the impressions are only two-dimensional
(i.e., not curved, which requires a third-dimension). Moreover, even if Daniels’
division between material impression and visible ﬁgure is rejected, for it apparently
constitutes a separate metaphysical problem of its own in need of substantial argu-
ment, one is still left with a projection onto a curved surface (the sphere) of a ﬁgure
that does not possess curvature. (Daniels’ attempt to meet this difﬁculty will be
addressed below.)
If visible ﬁgure does not possess curvature, can visible ﬁgure be projected onto a
different surface, such as a plane or cube? In response to this question, Daniels states:
Anatomical considerations and Reid’s theory of perception, as well as the special
properties of The Eye make the sphere the ‘natural’ representation of visible space.
Projection onto no other surface preserves the properties of visible ﬁgure. Projec-
tion onto a cube with The Eye at its center would violate the symmetry consider-
ations based on the anatomy of the eye (a sphere, in Reid’s idealization). Similarly,
it would seem arbitrary in view of property (g), the claim that The Eye sees all
points as [if they are] equidistant. (p. 11)
There are numerous objections that can be raised against this argument (and some
we will have to postpone until the discussion of Angell), but we will focus on a few
points. First, even granting the hemispherical shape of the retina, the choice of the
sphere remains problematic since the retina does not span the entire 360 degrees of
the eye (as mandated in Daniels’ construction, point (e)—but more on this later).
Second, Daniels reasons that the equidistant position of all points from the eye (point
(g)) naturally favors a spherical GOV, which is based on his further contention that
the eye cannot make depth discriminations among visible ﬁgures or points (point
(b), Daniels, p. 6; and Reid, Inq. 6.9). Now, it is not all that clear that one can
legitimately move from the claim that ‘the relative distances among visible ﬁgures
cannot be distinguished’ to the conclusion that ‘all visible ﬁgures have the same
distance from the eye’. Analogous instances of this argument quickly leads to absurd
results: for example, from the fact that ‘I cannot determine the relative colors among
dogs’ it does not necessarily follow that ‘I judge that all dogs have the same color’:
that is, I may not be able to discern a color difference between dog x and dog x,
and between dog x and dog x, etc., but this does not entail that I judge that x, x,
x, etc., all possess an identical color (since transitivity may fail—I may judge xx,
although x=x, and x=x). What Daniels (and Reid) need to make their case are the
further stipulations that, while depth discrimination fails between (or among) visible
ﬁgures, (i) a depth discrimination can be discerned between the eye and each visible
ﬁgure, and (ii) that the distance between the eye and each visible ﬁgure in (i) is ident-
ical.
Quite possibly, a vague awareness of this dilemma may have prompted Daniels’

478
E. Slowik / Stud. Hist. Phil. Sci. 34 (2003) 467–489
thesis that visible ﬁgures are formed out of an equivalence class of real objects:
‘Visible points, lines, and ﬁgures can be thought of as the objects that result when
Reid’s equivalence-relation, same position with regard to The Eye, is treated as an
identity relation (for The Eye in the construction)’ (pp. 17–18). In other words, a
visible point is created when all the real (i.e., physical) points that lie on the same
(radial) line drawn from the center of the eye are regarded (by the mind?) as an
identical point. Returning to our discussion from section 1, Daniels would appear to
be offering a quasi-analytic interpretation of visible ﬁgure, since it eschews direct
reference to geometric elements: i.e., it is just a class of real objects grouped under
the property, ‘same position with respect to the eye’. Daniels then infers that the
GOV is a mathematical (geometric) description of these equivalence classes when
so grouped, much like a geometric line is a model for an algebraic equation (in
analytic geometry):
Seeing through The Eye forces us to collapse the equivalence relation into an
identity relation . . . This now gives us a way of restating the sense in which the
notions of point, line, ﬁgure, and surface are ‘less determined’ for a being that
(having vision for its only sense) cannot conceive of three dimensions: the equiv-
alence relation collapses into an identity relation.
We might say that the visible point is an ‘hypostatized’ object. The Eye converts
the equivalence class into an object, a visible point, which is the object we see
when we see a visible point by means of The Eye. It is these objects, and not
their projections onto a sphere, which are the visibles. Reid’s geometry of visibles
is developed in order to give a mathematical description of the properties of these
special objects. (pp. 17–18)
Construed in this analytical fashion, Daniels aims to free the GOV of any Euclidean
connotations (of a projection onto a sphere), as well as accommodate Reid’s demand
that visible ﬁgures do not possess any three-dimensional characteristics: the GOV,
rather, is simply a model of Reid’s special equivalence class of points. Nevertheless,
the property that collapses the equivalence class into an identity claim, i.e., ‘same
position with respect to the eye’, is itself a geometric, three-dimensional property—
and thus Daniels’ analytic proposal is seriously compromised, if not outright falsiﬁed.
This property makes reference to the eye as the center of (Daniels’) unit sphere,
thereby favoring the interpretation of the GOV as a Euclidean projection of the
visible ﬁgures radially outward in the third dimension to the sphere’s surface. Yet,
even if we put aside this major obstacle, and straightforwardly accept Daniels’ ana-
lytic thesis, there would still appear to be no special reason for adopting a non-
Euclidean reading of the GOV over a spherical Euclidean interpretation. The equival-
ence class construction, since it is presumably analytic, can admit any geometric
model that captures the GOV’s collected principles and ‘same position’ clause—but
spherical Euclidean geometry clearly meets these criteria, as so many of Reid’s and
Daniel’s ‘projective’ descriptions of the GOV reveal. Why then is the non-Euclidean
model singled out as the only viable candidate?

479
E. Slowik / Stud. Hist. Phil. Sci. 34 (2003) 467–489
If Daniels is to be faulted for an unjustiﬁed choice of a non-Euclidean GOV, much
of the blame, however, should rightly be placed on Reid’s own lack of clarity in his
analysis of material impressions. Unlike Berkeley, who is rather clear in denying
that any metrical (distance) information can be derived or obtained from our visual
experience alone (prior to experience), Reid’s development of the GOV leaves open
the possibility that he might allow a certain degree of spatial information to be
directly derived from material impressions. This spatial information would take the
form of Daniel’s point (g), of course, i.e., that all visibles are the same distance from
the eye, thereby leading to the natural choice of a sphere for a geometric model of
the GOV. The imaginary two-dimensional Idomenians would appear to support this
inference, since Reid stipulates that the visual geometry of the Idomenians is, in
fact, the (alleged) non-Euclidean spherical geometry of the GOV. In contrast to Reid,
Berkeley clearly denies that one can move from the inability of the eye to make
depth discriminations (Daniel’s point (b)), to the further contention that all visibles
are ‘seen’ as having the same distance from the eye. This distinction, of mere depth
(or ‘outness’) from distance, arises within the context of a discussion of Molyneux’s
problem, which concerns the spatial and geometrical judgments that a previously
blind person would make on ﬁrst obtaining sight. Berkeley concludes that a person
given sight would deem that all of his perceived visible ﬁgures were ‘in his eye, or
rather in his mind’, which, in our terms, amounts to a lack of depth discrimination
(‘outness’) for visibles.14 Nevertheless, Berkeley also contends that we do not per-
ceive visible ﬁgures as either ﬂat or curved; in other words, they are two-dimensional,
rather than three-dimensional (New theory of vision, pp. 158–159; compare with
Reid, Inq. 6.9, as above). The absence of a third-dimensional component means that
the only spatial information that the visible ﬁgures can impart to the perceiver will
involve the relative positions of contiguity and non-contiguity in two dimensions
(i.e., the chair is next to, or three feet to the left of, the table), whereas the visible
ﬁgures cannot provide any information on the differences in depth among the ﬁgures
(i.e., the chair is also two feet behind the table). Accordingly, Daniels’ point (g) is
absent from Berkeley’s account of vision despite the fact that he, Berkeley, denies
14 Berkeley (1957), Sect. 41. Here, I am indebted to the work of Atherton (1990), pp. 72–76, 90–95.
See also Armstrong (1960), pp. 2–8. For Berkeley, as for Reid, the ability to discern depth differences
among physical objects is acquired by experience through various means: e.g., the muscular tensions
involved in focusing the eye on distant objects become automatically and unconsciously connected with
the various distances of the objects (Berkeley, 1957, Sect. 16–28; Inq. 6.22.). It is only after many experi-
ences of this sort become associated, often unconsciously, with visible ﬁgures that we begin to make
judgements of depth discrimination, and distance, among bodies. There is a serious problem lurking in
the background here: what are the muscular tensions associated with, or causally correlated to, in Reid’s
theory? If material impressions, and visible ﬁgures, provide no distance information on the external objects
that are their cause, why are there muscular tensions at all? That is, what accounts for the different
muscular tensions associated with different visible ﬁgures? If they all equally fail to provide distance
information, it would seem that the muscle tensions should be the same for all ﬁgures (in fact, there
should probably be no muscle tensions). On the other hand, if the muscular tensions are keyed to the
distance of the external objects, then this is tantamount to linking the perception of distance to our muscles
(and not our visible ﬁgures)—but how can our muscles obtain distance information?!

480
E. Slowik / Stud. Hist. Phil. Sci. 34 (2003) 467–489
that the eye can perceive differences in depth.15 Reid’s failure to sufﬁciently separate
the notion of the depth of visible ﬁgures, which provide no information on their
distance relative to the eye, from the concept of the actual outward distance of the
ﬁgures as judged by the eye, might thus constitute the basis of the problems plaguing
both Reid’s case for the GOV, as well as Daniels’ reconstruction of that theory.16
Overall, if Reid and Daniels’ move from a lack of depth discrimination to spherical
distance is not a justiﬁed maneuver, then one must inevitably judge that the corner-
stone of the GOV is a conventional stipulation—a stipulation, moreover, whose
plausible rejection undermines the non-Euclidean status of the GOV. In the next
section, further aspects of the conventionalist approach, especially of the metric var-
iety, will be discussed with respect to Angell’s (and Daniels’) theory.
4. Angell’s case for the GOV
Angell’s theory of the geometry of vision closely parallels Reid’s, although the
construction of his system generally proceeds along independent lines. In order to
establish a spherical non-Euclidean GOV, Angell puts forth a number of speciﬁc
examples (of which we need only consider a few). First, if a person stands between
a set of railroad tracks and looks forward in the direction of the tracks, they will
see the tracks converge at some point on the horizon, and thus form an angle of a
determinate number of degrees (greater than zero). Yet, if the person gazes down at
their feet, the wooden ties (that lie underneath the tracks) will form two 90 degree
angles at the juncture where the wooden ties and railroad track meet, thus forming
a large triangle possessing a non-Euclidean measure of more than 180 degrees (90
15 Oddly enough, Reid does comment on Molyneux’s problem (in the context of Porterﬁeld’s work),
in Sect. 18, Ch. 6, of the Inquiry: ‘Our having a natural and original perception of the distance of objects
from the eye, appears contrary to a well-attested fact: for the young gentleman couched by Mr. Cheselden
imagined, at ﬁrst, that whatever he saw touched his eye, as what he felt touched his hand’. But, one may
reasonably ask, how can Reid make this assertion without undermining, or contradicting, his own construc-
tion of the GOV (which relies so heavily on the ‘equal distance from the eye’ spherical geometry)?
Equally problematically, Reid later goes on, in the same section, to speciﬁcally deny that we judge all
of the objects that we visually perceive to be the same distance away from our eyes (although here Reid
may be referring to the judgments of distance after the tactile experience of real object distances has
been conjoined to our more basic experience of visual ﬁgures, thereby eliminating any inconsistencies
with the GOV—see n. 15). See, also, Porterﬁeld (1759), p. 372. Porterﬁeld’s work was clearly inﬂuential
in shaping Reid’s views, and may have led to Reid’s hypothesis of the equi-distant position of all visible
ﬁgures (from the eye): See Daniels (1989), pp. 40–46.
16 William Hamilton’s footnote to Inq. 6.18, in his edition of the complete works, nicely draws this
distinction: ‘We must be careful not, like Reid and philosophers in general, to confound the perceptions
of mere externality or outness, and the knowledge we have of distance, through the eyes . . . The patient,
though he had little or no perception of distance: i.e., of the degree of externality, had still a perception
of that externality absolutely’ (Philosophical works, p. 177; original italics). Hamilton fails to relate this
point to the construction of the GOV, however, and thereby misses a perfect opportunity to raise serious
criticisms for Reid (which Hamilton clearly loved to do). Besides Berkeley, Malebranche was another
predecessor of Reid’s who also acknowledged the distinction between mere ‘outness’ and distance. See
Malebranche (1997), pp. 40–47.

481
E. Slowik / Stud. Hist. Phil. Sci. 34 (2003) 467–489
+ 90 + a value greater than 0 = a value greater than 180; Angell, p. 95). Second,
consider a person measuring the angles formed by three stars: one situated due north
on the horizon, another due east on the horizon, and the third directly overhead. As
with the previous example, the combined measure of the angles will exceed 180
degrees (Angell, p. 95). Finally, if one simply examines the four corners of a square
ceiling, where two walls meet the ceiling, the combined total of the four angles will
exceed 360 degrees, once again violating Euclidean geometric doctrine (Angell, pp.
95–96, although this example is adapted from J. R. Lucas).
As a means of measuring the angles in these (and other) examples, Angell develops
a procedure that utilizes a ruler, protractor, and a stick, all held rigidly under the eye:
Take a stick 14.35 inches long, attach a six-inch metal strip marked off in quarter
inches to one end of it, and bend the metal strip so that each point on it is equidis-
tant from the free end of the stick. When the free end is placed just below the
eye, the quarter-inch marks on the metal strip at the other end each mark off just
one degree . . . of visual distance.
For objective measurements of seen angles among visibles . . . it sufﬁces to attach
a protractor perpendicularly to the same stick, with its center at the end where
the metal strip is attached. When this device is held to the eye and the angles in
the protractor are aligned with the angles in the visible, an accurate, objective
measure of the angles in the visible is provided. (Angell, p. 93)
Employing this device, Angell believes an unambiguous determination of the GOV
can be provided, and that the results will favor a non-Euclidean geometric structure.
What is initially puzzling about Angell’s theory is the inordinately central role
that Euclidean measurements assume in the construction of his GOV. He begins by
setting up a convention for the measurements of angle and distance using a set of
devices that are presumed to retain Euclidean characteristics. Second, the examples
afforded by Angell do not exhibit a non-Euclidean GOV from a single perspective,
or ‘single view’ (to borrow Van Cleve’s term, p. 37); rather, as in the railroad track
example, one needs ﬁrst to look along the horizon, and then look down at one’s feet
(or at each successive star, or individual corner of the ceiling). There is no single
view, in short, from which all the angles of the rail track (stars, ceiling corners) can
be surveyed.17 Now, combining these two observations, the classic conventionalist
argument would focus on the arbitrary nature of Angell’s measuring techniques with
respect to their ‘global’ veracity, for lack of a better term: that is, do the measuring
devices retain an invariant measure of angle and distance as they are moved around
17 Angell does admit this point, moreover, noting that ‘we shall want to speak of a given person’s
visual ﬁeld as more extended spatially than any momentary visual ﬁelds [which are limited in spatial
extent to a small portion of the face]’ (Angell, 1974, p. 91). Unfortunately, he immediately plunges into
conventionalist waters by reasoning that ‘in following a line with the eye (e.g., scanning the horizon),
we take portions of the line previously scanned but no longer in the momentary visual ﬁeld to be continu-
ous with the portions later scanned’ (p. 91). But why make this assumption rather than another?

482
E. Slowik / Stud. Hist. Phil. Sci. 34 (2003) 467–489
in the visual ﬁeld among different view points? Just as Poincare’s meter sticks can
possess different expansion properties, and thereby provide measurements favoring
many alternative geometries, it would seem that Angell’s ruler and protractor could
equally undergo different expansion or contraction rates. A non-Euclidean determi-
nation of, say, the ceiling corners, could then be judged to be the result of a ‘funny’
force in various parts of physical space that contracts the protractor (i.e., shrinks the
distance between its calibrated angles) as it moves from measuring one visible ﬁgure
to another—one could then conclude that the protractor provided a false non-Eucli-
dean measurement of a ‘real’ Euclidean visual space. It must be admitted, however,
that this conventionalist strategy does not seem to work as successfully in the context
of visual space as with physical space. It does not seem plausible to posit a real
force in space that could change with the perspective of an observer alone, since
this would quickly lead to contradictory ascriptions of the value of the force to the
same visual object at the same time. For example, an observer A may judge that a
force shrunk his protractor as he turned to look at an object X, but another observer
B who maintained an unaltered perspective in observing X, would judge that no
force interfered with her protractor measurements—so, how can the existence of a
real force in space, which really distorts the physical apparatus, depend entirely on
the relative measurements (conducted by different observers) with respect to the
same object at the same time?18
Conventionalism does play a crucial role in the measurements of visual geometry,
nevertheless, despite its somewhat different character. The ﬁrst problem relates to
Angell’s aforementioned dependence on Euclidean measuring devices: in short, how
does one guarantee that the stick and protractor system maintains, or even initially
determines, a Euclidean measure? Even if the existence of external forces is dismis-
sed, there appears to be no means of guaranteeing that the measuring stick is consist-
ently and identically employed to all visible ﬁgures. For instance, if the measuring
stick is tilted slightly left or right in measuring a particular angle, then a veritable host
of diverse results could be obtained that will directly decide the overall geometry: a
protractor that is tilted away from the eye might ﬁnd more degrees in an angle than
one slanted toward the eye, and the cumulative effect of such changing and variable
uses of the system could make the difference between a Euclidean or non-Euclidean
determination of the overall geometry of vision. Similar metric conventions are at
work in Reid’s and Daniels’ version of the GOV, moreover. Daniels explains that
the distances between visible points can be determined by ﬁxing radial lines, or rays,
from the points to the center of his non-rotating eye, and then calculating the angle
of rotation between the rays: ‘In order to measure distance between the positions of
18 We are leaving aside, in this discussion, the relativity of various properties in the special and general
theories of relativity. Although temporal coordinates are relative to the observer, the time-like and space-
like separation among events is not relative, of course, nor is the space-time interval. In addition, in the
conventionalist model of spatiotemporal (intrinsic) measurements, it is assumed that all inhabitants on a
given surface will agree as to the results of the measurement (but may disagree as to their interpretation),
which is not the case as described above (since there would be no agreement on the results of a hypotheti-
cal measurement).

483
E. Slowik / Stud. Hist. Phil. Sci. 34 (2003) 467–489
[visible] points, the eye must keep track of (1) angles formed by rays projected from
points to the center of the stable (non-rotating) eye and (2) angle of rotation’ (Daniels,
p. 7). But, Daniels must assume, as a convention, that the ﬁnal ray remains ﬁxed as
the angle is measured off from the initial ray to the ﬁnal ray. If the ﬁnal ray changes
it position relative to the ﬁrst as the measurement is conducted, then nearly any
length, and thus any geometry, can be attributed to the system.19
Returning to Angell’s version of the GOV, one might guard against the potential
for varying applications of the measuring apparatus by claiming that there is a single
viewpoint, and thus a unique visible ﬁgure, that reveals the Euclidean characteristics
of the stick and protractor setup. This unique viewpoint would thereby ensure an
invariant visible ﬁgure for all subsequent measurements with the system (i.e., the
unique visible provides a method for checking the apparatus to guarantee its correct
application in all measurements). Yet, what visual conﬁguration could reveal an
intrinsic Euclidean property if the GOV is, as Angell concludes, non-Euclidean? If
the three-dimensional Euclidean geometry of Angell’s measuring stick, a physical
object, is different from the geometry of the corresponding visible ﬁgure (the visible
stick and protractor), then there would appear to be no objective, non-conventional
way of picking out a preferred visible ﬁgure to represent the physical object. Since
the two geometries are not identical, any visible ﬁgure, even one provided by the
variably-slanting stick perspectives, would appear to have as much claim to represent
a Euclidean physical object as any other. Alternatively, if there is only one viewpoint
that correctly represents the real three-dimensional stick and protractor, then this
admission is tantamount to basing a non-Euclidean geometry on a Euclidean visible
ﬁgure. Since the unique visible measuring stick is now deemed to accurately rep-
resent the real Euclidean physical object, and this visible ﬁgure (stick and protractor)
occupies a large portion of any possible single visual experience (i.e., the measuring
stick can accompany all single views), it would seem that the most natural interpret-
ation of the GOV’s geometry should now favor a Euclidean structure. In essence,
Angell is admitting that (i) some visible ﬁgures are Euclidean, (ii) these Euclidean
19 Reid does state (Inq. 6.7.) that two visible ﬁgures are the same size (‘congruent’) if they subtend an
identical angle with the eye. Yet, as Daniels openly admits (1989, pp. 55–56), this does not equip the
GOV with a metric (although Daniels believes that Reid must have intended his comments to function
as a metric). For example, a conformal space can determine if two distinct angles on a given surface
possess an identical angle size, yet this information is not sufﬁcient to determine the quantitative magni-
tude of these angles (i.e., the exact numerical value of the angle’s size —see, e.g., Kreyszig, 1963, p.
193). Accordingly, Reid’s brief mention of the congruence of angle size for identical visibles falls far
short of specifying a distance function for measuring the angle subtended at the eye by any single visible
ﬁgure. In addition, Reid never discusses the difﬁculties associated with estimating the size of visible
ﬁgures, a subject that Berkeley treats at length in the New theory of vision (Sects. 54–78). Berkeley was
aware that the judgment of the size of bodies (visible ﬁgures) was subject to illusions and errors, as the
‘moon illusion’ nicely demonstrates: i.e. the moon on the horizon appears bigger than the moon high
overhead, although the visible ﬁgure is the same size. The measurement of non-adjacent, spatially separ-
ated visible ﬁgures is thus potentially prone to error; and this realization seriously threatens any system
of measurement (of visible ﬁgure) that relies exclusively on ﬁxing rays and gauging angles that subtend
the eye. In short, how can we be certain that are estimates of the rays and angles are not subject to the
same class of visual illusions and misperceptions?

484
E. Slowik / Stud. Hist. Phil. Sci. 34 (2003) 467–489
ﬁgures take up the majority of any single view (‘momentary visual ﬁeld’), but (iii)
the geometry of vision is non-Euclidean—is this a coherent position? Furthermore,
relying on the concept of an ‘approximate’ Euclidean visible ﬁgure, as opposed to
a real Euclidean visible ﬁgure, fails to avoid the dilemma just described: if visible
ﬁgures are non-Euclidean approximations to Euclidean visible ﬁgures, then this
assumes that one has knowledge of what constitutes a Euclidean visible ﬁgure; (a)
either by conventional stipulation (which raises the same conventionalist worries as
above—the ﬁrst horn of the dilemma); or (b) by some visible ﬁgure that is virtually
identical to a Euclidean visible ﬁgure (which implies that we have some independent,
and mysterious, knowledge of what constitutes a Euclidean visible outside of our
experience of only non-Euclidean visibles—the second horn of the dilemma). So,
approximation runs afoul of the same difﬁculties, once more raising concerns over
the consistency of Angell’s GOV.20
Angell would likely contest the preceding judgment, insisting that the GOV is
founded on the geometry of large visible ﬁgures, such as ceilings and stellar triangles,
and not on the geometry of small visible ﬁgures that can be encompassed in an
individual viewpoint (or what we labeled above, a ‘single view’). Large visible ﬁg-
ures, in contrast to the visible ﬁgure of the measuring stick, cannot be included in
a single view, but require several individual views that are pieced together ‘geometri-
cally’, thus revealing their overall non-Euclidean character. Reid argued a similar
point, recognizing that small visible ﬁgures closely approximated Euclidean ﬁgures
(Inq. 6.9). By declaring that the domain of visibles is exclusively devoted to large
20 Interestingly, Angell’s attempt to supply the GOV with an invariant, non-conventional measuring
apparatus is reminiscent of a similar maneuver by Reichenbach and Gru¨nbaum as regards the measurement
of physical geometry. Reichenbach, for example, put forward the notion that the metric of physical space
could be unambiguously determined once the existence/non-existence of universal distorting forces had
been stipulated (i.e., forces that distort all measuring apparatus to the same degree regardless of their
material composition). Therefore, an empirical aspect of the measurement process—the overall behavior
of the rigid measuring rods—was taken as ﬁxed, and thus non-conventional (after the conventional choice
of universal forces had been made). Yet, as Einstein later argued, the ‘rigidity’ of the measuring rods
also depends on the ability to detect, and correct for, the local forces of thermal expansion, mechanical
stress, etc., that likewise distort the measuring rods (but the distortion effects vary for different materials).
Thus, the physical laws that largely determine which rods are ‘rigid’ presuppose metrical concepts (i.e.
how heat changes the length of the rod). Even the local rigidity of the measuring rods now appears
conventional, since any geometry can be utilized in the local distortion laws—and the different geometries
chosen for these laws can determine the overall spatial geometry. In a similar fashion, Angell believes
that he can regard the visible ﬁgure of the measuring stick as an empirically unproblematic feature of
his theory, and then proceed to ascertain the overall geometry of vision by direct measurement. The
visible ﬁgures of the measuring apparatus thus play the same role as the local rigidity correction laws
for physical geometry. Just as one must stipulate a metric for the local distortion of the measuring rods,
one faces an equally conventional dilemma in choosing among a host of different visible ﬁgures to
represent the physical measuring stick and protractor. And, like the physical case, the overall geometry
of vision (or large visible ﬁgures) is underdetermined as a direct consequence of this local conventionalist
choice: i.e., a different choices of visible ﬁgure to represent the measuring stick, such as a variably
slanting or non-slanting visible ﬁgure, can result in a different overall geometry of vision. Einstein’s
comments appear in Schilpp (1949), pp. 663–688. See, also, Carrier (1994), pp. 191–194, for a nice
discussion of these issues.

485
E. Slowik / Stud. Hist. Phil. Sci. 34 (2003) 467–489
ﬁgures, however, Angell is moving the GOV inexorably away from the actual, single
viewpoints that comprise our visual phenomena to a more hypothetical, generalized
realm of visual ‘ﬁgure’. In other words, these large-scale visual ﬁgures are not poss-
ible ﬁgures of visual experience since they cannot be included in a single view: they
are largely hypothetical constructs formed from several distinct single views (along
with their accompanying small scale visible ﬁgures).
It is in this move from the small scale to the large scale visibles that conven-
tionalist worries of a different sort begin to creep in, for there are no non-conven-
tional methods for constructing a large scale visible ﬁgure from the small scale vis-
ibles contained in several single views. Angell and Daniels, as well as Reid, seem
content to construct these large visible ﬁgures by a process that only allows a ﬁxed
spatial position and the rotations about that ﬁxed point. From a ﬁxed position in the
center of a room, it is indeed true that rotations about that point will disclose four
obtuse ceiling corners, thereby sanctioning a non-Euclidean GOV. Yet, this is only
one of many processes or formulas for constructing a large-scale visible ﬁgure. If
one admits both rotations about a spatial point and translations (motions) of that
point in space, then an entirely different species of large scale visible ﬁgure can be
assembled from the small scale visibles: since the eye can now move to a perspective
directly underneath each corner, a 90 degree measurement can be obtained as man-
dated by a Euclidean version of the GOV. Given that there are numerous potential
candidates for constructing a GOV, what other grounds, besides convention, can
Angell appeal to in justifying his choice of ﬁxed spatial position and rotations?
At this point, Angell could invoke the general shape of the eye, which is spherical,
along with the contention that a ﬁxed point (plus rotation) enjoys a simplicity over
any other design for the GOV (which is similar to Daniels’ conclusions, as mentioned
in Sect. 3). More precisely, rotation about a ﬁxed point is the easiest means of
scanning the angles and distances contained in large visible ﬁgures. Unfortunately,
there are numerous problems with this line of argument: not only does the portion
of the eye actually responsible for vision, the retina, lack a completely spherical
shape, but it is also physically impossible for an eye to rotate 360 degrees about a
ﬁxed point. A movement of the head is also required to view Angell’s large visible
ﬁgures—that is, for the eye to measure all of the angles that comprise the ceiling,
a translation of the eye must occur (as the head moves up and down). Yet, once a
translation is shown to be an integral component of any measurements involving
large-scale ﬁgures (e.g., in the track example, ﬁrst looking at the horizon, and then
moving your head down to gaze at your feet), the rationale for Angell’s (Daniels’,
Reid’s) ‘ﬁxed spatial position’ construction is seriously weakened, if not outright
repudiated. In short, why not admit measuring conventions that incorporate trans-
lations if Angell’s own method is shown to rely upon them?
In addition, once the necessity of the eye’s translation is acknowledged, another
conventional component of Angell’s system comes to the forefront: namely, the
assumption that, once an angle is measured, it retains the same value as the eye is
moved to a new position (to measure a new angle). When a translation of the eye
to a new spatial position occurs, the visible angle of the object that is subtended at
the eye will change, resulting in a change of value for the previously measured

486
E. Slowik / Stud. Hist. Phil. Sci. 34 (2003) 467–489
angles.21 Hence, if Angell needs to stipulate that all of the previously measured
angles maintain an identical value across the many translations that comprise the
measurement process, not only is this a conventional assumption, but the rules of
projective geometry would declare that it is false, as well.
5. Final assessment of the GOV
Once the role of conventional assumptions in the construction of the GOV is taken
fully into account, the claims for its unique non-Euclidean structure appear greatly
exaggerated, and quite possibly untenable. This is not to say that a non-Euclidean
interpretation of visible phenomena is necessarily false; rather, as mentioned at the
outset, a non-Euclidean GOV is just one of the many different geometries that can
be constructed from visible ﬁgures. Given a particular set of measuring conventions,
the visible ﬁgures will favor a speciﬁc geometrical interpretation—yet, once a new
set of conventions is adopted, a new geometric structure will likely prevail. The
reason for this liberal tolerance of alternative geometries probably resides in the
idiosyncratic, foundational role allotted to large-scale visible ﬁgures. Since these
large visibles cannot be encompassed in a single view, the diversity of methods for
stitching together several such views, to form a large-scale picture, inevitably leads
to their metrically ‘amorphous’ character. Reid, along with Daniels and Angell, have
demonstrated one procedure for obtaining these large-scale visible ﬁgures, but it is
only one of many such procedures.
Before concluding, it would useful to brieﬂy examine the underlying intent or
goal of Reid’s GOV, since our preceding discussion may shed light on some of the
interpretational difﬁculties associated with Reid’s project.
Reid’s GOV appears within the context of his overall analysis of vision, a philo-
sophical (or natural philosophical) problem that largely prompted his ‘direct realist’
theory of perception. Contrary to Locke, Hume, and nearly all of his Early Modern
predecessors, Reid believes that sense experience does not consist in a three-part
relationship between a perceiver, a perceived object, and a mental item that represents
that perceived object (a theory often dubbed ‘representational realism’). In contrast,
Reid holds that perception is a direct, two-part relation between the observer and
21 See, for example, the discussion of lateral motion on perceived size and angle in Hershenson (1999),
pp. 145–155. Here, it should also be mentioned that once the translations of the eye (or of the objects
in the visual ﬁeld) are allowed into the calculations of the visual geometry, the behavior of the visible
ﬁgures will not be consistent with a spherical non-Euclidean geometry. Rather, the rapid increase and
decrease in the size of bodies, as they move forward or backward respectively, will favor a hyperbolic
non-Euclidean geometry. R. Luneburg’s important work on the geometry of vision was largely based on
this fact: ‘Luneburg argued . . . in favor of a hyperbolic space because only in a hyperbolic space would
the visual size of a distant object (as measured by its projection on a nearby transparent screen) decrease
. . . with the object’s distance from the observer’ (Heelan, 1983, p. 328 n. 29). It should be noted, however,
that if one conﬁnes their investigation of visual geometry to the non-translation case, then the visual data
that Luneburg refers to is different from Reid’s (and Angell’s) data, so the GOV (and Angell’s theory)
need not conﬂict with Luneburg’s theory.

487
E. Slowik / Stud. Hist. Phil. Sci. 34 (2003) 467–489
observed object. As mentioned in Section 1, he also accepts (following Berkeley)
that the geometry of the external world is three-dimensional Euclidean, and that
tactile experiences provide direct information in this format. Moreover, tactile experi-
ence discloses the ‘real’, as opposed to ‘apparent’, magnitude of bodies. Given this
unpromising background, can a direct realist embrace Reid’s GOV?
Luckily for the direct realist, there are several passages that suggest a somewhat
different interpretation of the GOV: ‘the visible ﬁgure of bodies is a real and external
object to the eye, as their tangible ﬁgure is to the touch . . .’ (Inq. 6.8). As explained
in this context, the ‘reality’ of the objects or ﬁgures of visible experience are equal
to the ‘reality’ of the corresponding ﬁgures of tangible experience. In a later work,
he states:
When I use the names of tangible and visible space [i.e., the space of tangible
and visible ﬁgure], I do not mean to adopt Bishop Berkeley’s opinion, so far as
to think that they are really different things, and altogether unlike. I take them to
be different conceptions of the same thing; the one very partial, and the other
more complete; but both distinct and just, as far as they reach. (Essays, 2.29)
On the whole, the cumulative effect of these explanations would seem to raise
doubts about the lower epistemological status accorded to visible experience. Reid
is conferring a certain degree of independence to visible ﬁgures, as contained in his
reference to their ‘distinct and just’ conception. However, Reid is careful not to
imply that these two experiences of spatial ﬁgure, ‘are really different things, and
altogether unlike’. What does this last assertion mean? To answer this question, it
is important to observe that he qualiﬁes his claim in the next sentence, concluding
that they are ‘different conceptions of the same thing’. The best way to understand
these two claims, I believe, is to conjoin them so as to read: ‘the two ﬁgures (of
spatial experience) are not different in that they are two different conceptions of two
different things, rather they are two different conceptions of the same thing’. The
advantages of this translation of the passage will become apparent below. Next, it
is important to resist the temptation to interpret Reid’s mention of ‘partial’ and ‘com-
plete’ conceptions, corresponding to visible and tangible ﬁgures respectively, as
invoking some form of dependence of the visibles on the tangibles. Understood in
this manner, inconsistencies soon arise, as Van Cleve has carefully argued (Van
Cleve, p. 70): for example, if a non-Euclidean visible triangle (with angles totaling
over 180 degrees) is part of a Euclidean tangible triangle (with angles totaling 180
degrees exactly), then the corresponding object in the external world possesses a
contrary pair or predicates (180 degrees and not 180 degrees). Yet, by heeding Reid’s
advice, that the visible and tangible ﬁgures are ‘distinct’ and ‘different conceptions’,
this interpretational option is excluded.
Returning to our previous discussion, if visible and tangible ﬁgures are ‘distinct
and just’, and ‘different conceptions of the same thing’, then one can construe both
ﬁgures as two different perspectives (or constructions, frameworks) of the same

488
E. Slowik / Stud. Hist. Phil. Sci. 34 (2003) 467–489
external, material object.22 In other words, material objects are geometrically
‘amorphous’ or non-unique (much like large scale visible ﬁgures), since they only
manifest a particular geometric structure from within a perceptual perspective. The
perspectives that bring about these individual geometric forms are the human tactile
and visual sensory processes—and these sensory frameworks only allow speciﬁc
geometric formulations of the same external object: they are, in effect, the ‘different
conceptions of the same thing’ (i.e., a two-dimensional non-Euclidean perspective
for visibles, and a three-dimensional Euclidean perspective for tangibles). Therefore,
both the non-Euclidean GOV and the Euclidean tangibles can be viewed as comp-
lementary, but not competing, conceptions of an underlying ‘object’ (and the percep-
tual ‘space’ dependent on those ﬁgures). These external objects only divulge their
information within a chosen, and probably conventional, perspective, but neither
framework is the ‘correct’ framework (although Reid does state that tangible experi-
ence is more complete than the visible). More precisely, the conventional construc-
tion of the alternative GOVs parallels the conventional sensory representation of
external objects, for an evolutionist would likely claim that a different development
of the human species might have endowed our sensory organs with a different form
of geometry.
Nevertheless, this rendition of Reid’s theory suffers at the hands of the numerous
passages that seem to equate external objects exclusively with tangible ﬁgure, and
not with both tangible and visible ﬁgure; e.g., in the quote from section 1, where
he asserts: ‘The real magnitude of a line is measured by some known measure of
length . . . This magnitude is an object of touch only, and not of sight; . . .’ (Essays,
2.14). These types of descriptions make it difﬁcult to accept a direct realist rendering
of the GOV, needless to say, for the visible ﬁgures are once more being grouped
under the seemingly non-realist category of ‘apparent’ magnitudes. Accordingly,
even granting the value of this interpretation, the nature of Reid’s visible ﬁgures,
and GOV, must remain a continuing source of scholarly investigation and debate.
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank James Van Cleve, Gideon Yaffe, and an anonymous reviewer
from Studies in History and Philosophy of Science for their helpful comments and
suggestions in the writing of this paper. I would also like to thank the National
Endowment for the Humanities (Summer Seminar, 2000) for the support that allowed
for the research of this topic.
References
Angell, R. B. (1974). The geometry of visibles. Nous, 8, 87–117.
Armstrong, D. M. (1960). Berkeley’s theory of vision. Melbourne: Melbourne University Press.
22 ‘Perspectives’ is not ideally the best choice of term, however, since it harbors visual connotations
that would tend to downplay the potential for gathering information from the other sense organs.

489
E. Slowik / Stud. Hist. Phil. Sci. 34 (2003) 467–489
Atherton, M. (1990). Berkeley’s revolution in vision. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
Berkeley, G. (1957). An essay towards a new theory of vision. In A. Luce, & T. Jessop (Eds.), The works
of George Berkeley (Vol. 1, pp. 159–238). Edinburgh: Nelson.
Brannan, D., Esplen, M., & Gray, J. (1999). Geometry. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Carrier, M. (1994). The completeness of scientiﬁc theories. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Cockle, J. (1888). On the conﬂuences and bifurcations of certain theories. London Mathematical Society,
Presidential Address, Nov. 8.
Daniels, N. (1989). Thomas Reid’s ‘Inquiry’: The geometry of visibles and the case for realism. Stanford:
Stanford University Press.
Einstein, A. (1949). Remarks on the essays. In P. Schilpp (Ed.), Albert Einstein, philosopher-scientist
(pp. 663–688). La Salle, IL: Open Court.
Gray, J. (1989). Ideas of space: Euclidean, non-Euclidean, and relativistic (2nd ed.). Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Gru¨nbaum, A. (1963). Philosophical problems of space and time. New York: Alfred A. Knopf.
Heelan, P. (1983). Space-perception and the philosophy of science. Berkeley: University of California
Press.
Hershenson, M. (1999). Visual space perception. Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press.
Kline, M. (1972). Mathematical thought from ancient to modern times. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Kreyszig, E. (1963). Differential geometry. New York: Dover.
Malebranche, N. (1997). The search after truth (T. Lennon & P. Olscamp, Trans. & Eds.). Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Poincare, H. (1952). Science and hypothesis. New York: Dover.
Porterﬁeld, W. (1759). Treatise on the eye: The manner and phenomena of vision. Edinburgh.
Reichenbach, H. (1958). The philosophy of space and time. New York: Dover.
Reid, T. (1983). Essays on the intellectual powers. In W. Hamilton (Ed.), Philosophical works (8th ed.)
(Vols. 1 & 2). Hildesheim: Georg Olms. First published 1895.
Reid, T. (1996). Inquiry into the human mind (D. Brookes, Ed.). Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
Schilpp, P. (Ed.). (1949). Albert Einstein, philosopher-scientist. La Salle, IL: Open Court.
Van Cleve, J. (2002) Thomas Reid’s geometry of visibles. Unpublished manuscript, forthcoming in Philo-
sophical Review.
Weldon, S. (1978). Thomas Reid’s theory of vision. Ph.D. dissertation, McGill University.
Wood, P. (1998). Reid, Parallel Lines, and the Geometry of Visibles. Reid Studies, 2, 27–41.

