Riemann's and Helmholtz-Lie's problems of space from Weyl's
relativistic perspective
Julien Bernard
Aix Marseille Univ, CNRS UMR 7304, CEPERC, Aix-en-Provence, France
a r t i c l e i n f o
Article history:
Received 22 February 2016
Accepted 8 May 2017
Available online 19 July 2017
Keywords:
Problem of space
Philosophy of space
Foundations of geometry
Helmholtz-Lie's problem of space
Riemann's inaugural lecture
Hermann Weyl
Foundations of relativity theories
Finsler geometry
Orthogonal group
Lie groups
a b s t r a c t
I reconstruct Riemann's and Helmholtz-Lie's problems of space, from some perspectives that allow for a
fruitful comparison with Weyl.
In Part II. of his inaugural lecture, Riemann justiﬁes that the inﬁnitesimal metric is the square root of a
quadratic form. Thanks to Finsler geometry, I clarify both the implicit and explicit hypotheses used for
this justiﬁcation. I explain that Riemann-Finsler's kind of method is also appropriate to deal with in-
deﬁnite metrics. Nevertheless, Weyl shares with Helmholtz a strong commitment to the idea that the
notion of group should be at the center of the foundations of geometry. Riemann missed this point, and
that is why, according to Weyl, he dealt with the problem of space in a “too formal” way. As a conse-
quence, to solve the problem of space, Weyl abandoned Riemann-Finsler's methods for group-theoretical
ones.
However, from a philosophical point of view, I show that Weyl and Helmholtz are in strong opposition.
The meditation on Riemann's inaugural lecture, and its clear methodological separation between the
inﬁnitesimal and the ﬁnite parts of the problem of space, must have been crucial for Weyl, while
searching for strong epistemological foundations for the group-theoretical methods, avoiding Helm-
holtz's unjustiﬁed transition from the ﬁnite to the inﬁnitesimal.
© 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
1. Introduction
The emergence of the two theories of relativity called for a
reconstruction of the problem of space (abbreviated as p.o.s. in the
following text). The p.o.s. consists in searching to justify the choice of
the geometrical axioms that are adopted in order to describe phys-
ical space(-time). In the relativistic context, it is a matter of justifying
the use of differential geometry, in particular of Riemannian and
pseudo-Riemannian metrics. The best known relativistic construc-
tions of the p.o.s. are those of Weyl and Cartan, but there are other
constructions, like Becker-Blaschke's p.o.s., which seem tohave been
insufﬁciently emphasised by historians and philosophers.1
Not only did Weyl furnish us with one of the ﬁrst relativistic
solutions to the p.o.s., he also played an important role in making
known the previous (non relativistic) positions regarding it, more
speciﬁcally those of Riemann and Helmholtz-Lie. Indeed, while he
was in the middle of his period of intensive work on space, Weyl
was requested to prepare a commented edition of Riemann's
habilitation conference. This resulted in three editions from 1919 to
1923,2 which contributed to the view of Riemann as the founding
father of the mathematical p.o.s. ein the precise sense of the search
for a justiﬁcation to the quadratic nature of the metrice, and as
such the initiator of a new philosophical era in the p.o.s. Weyl used
his knowledge about inﬁnitesimal geometry in order to provide a
better understanding of Helmholtz's solution to the p.o.s., which
was interpreted as a requirement of maximal isotropy (or ﬂag-
isotropy, to use the current terminology) thanks to the recon-
struction by Sophus Lie.3 Weyl's opinions on the place of Riemann
and of Helmholtz-Lie in the history of the p.o.s. are also included in
the ﬁrst conferences of Mathematische Analyse des Raumproblems.4
E-mail address: ju_bernard@yahoo.fr.
1 Cf. Bernard (2015a).
2 Riemann (1919, 1921, 1923), the ﬁrst edition being Riemann (1867).
3 Weyl explains this reconstruction for example in (Weyl, 1949, p. 81).
4 Using the new framework of purely inﬁnitesimal geometry, (Weyl, 1923a, pp.
29e32) characterises Euclidean space by the integrability of the parallel transports
of vectors, apparently suggested by (Riemann, 1898, p. 294). (Weyl, 1923a, pp.
32e39) then proves the Riemannian proposition according to which the possibility
to move ﬁnite ﬁgures rigidly in space implies that space is either Euclidean, or a
sphere, or a pseudo-sphere. (Weyl, 1923a, pp. 39e40) exposes Riemann's argument
that provides justiﬁcation for the fact that the metric is a positive deﬁnite quadratic
form. Finally (Weyl, 1923a, pp. 40e58), deals with Helmholtz-Lie's p.o.s. See also
Audureau and Bernard, 2015; Bernard, 2015b.
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/shpsb
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.shpsb.2017.05.010
1355-2198/© 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics 61 (2018) 41e56

Therefore, Weyl is not only the author of one of the main rela-
tivistic reconstructions of the p.o.s., but also an important “histo-
rian” of the p.o.s. What is meant here by “history”? Weyl did not
care about historical ﬁdelity in his presentation of Riemann's and
Helmholtz-Lie's opinions. He rephrased both, mathematics and
epistemological outlook of the authors he talked about, in order to
use them within the construction of his new relativistic position.
These past positions furnish technical tools (concepts, theorems,
mathematical frameworks) that are partly rehabilitated in the
relativistic p.o.s. in reinterpreted forms. They are also important in
so far as Weyl criticizes them, in order to precise his own philo-
sophical position on space.
In the present article, I aim at reconstructing Riemann's and
Helmholtz-Lie's p.o.s. from some perspectives that allow for a
fruitful comparison with Weyl's p.o.s. Because Riemann's and
Helmholtz's texts are not of the same nature, and because Weyl's
relationship to them is different, I will adopt different perspectives
and methodologies in both parts of the article. As a general back-
ground, in reconstructing these p.o.s., I will always have in mind
Weyl's comments on the p.o.s.
The ﬁrst section (numbered 2.), concerning Riemann's p.o.s., will
use more recent mathematics (Finsler geometry) in order to clarify
some technical problems. Riemann's habilitation memoir is full of
such problems esome of which are still puzzling us todaye, and
contains only a few explicit philosophical theses. Even if these
theses were very sketchy in Riemann (1898), Weyl's epistemolog-
ical position on space was deeply inﬂuenced by them. However,
when Weyl turned to his relativistic p.o.s., he abandoned Riemann's
and Finsler's types of method, and expressed his problem in terms
of continuous groups of transformations. Concerning Weyl's
problem of space and the role of the notion of group within it, the
reader can also have a look at: Weyl, 1922; Weyl, 1923c; Eckes,
2011; Scheibe, 1957; Scheibe, 2001; Scholz, 1994; Scholz, 1995;
Scholz, 1999, Scholz, 2012. My reconstruction of Riemann's p.o.s.
will contribute to clarifying the reasons for this abandoning of
Riemann-Finsler's methods.5
There is also another reason, from a Weylian point of view, to
deal with the technical problems of the ﬁrst part of Riemann's
memoir. This regards the fact that a lot of commentators insisted
that Riemann did not give a complete proof that the metric is the
square root of a positive deﬁnite quadratic form. Instead, they claim
that Riemann's text is obscure, and that he only gave some argu-
ments to show that such a metric is a good possible choice from
among others. The arguments given by Riemann are, in this sense,
incomplete. Maybe, as I am inclined to believe, Riemann did not
intend even to give such completely selective arguments. Never-
theless, this incompleteness is problematic from a Weylian point of
view. Indeed, Weyl wanted to interpret this part of Riemann's
memoir as a very attempt to give a priori foundations to the notion
of metric. For Weyl, “a priori” has a strong philosophical meaning,
referring to apodictic (i.e. universal and necessary) requirements.
Through my work on the implicit hypotheses of Riemann, I try to
complete Riemann's deduction in order to select uniquely the
Riemannian class of metrics. At the end of section 2.3, I will effec-
tively sketch a way to complete Riemann's selection of such a class.
In contrast with Riemann's text, Helmholtz's texts included less
technical difﬁculties, at least after the clariﬁcation brought about by
Lie in the 1870s and the subsequent developments of Lie groups
and algebras. The philosophical parts of Helmholtz's texts from the
period 1866e1870 are much more developed than in Riemann's
text, and are mainly in opposition to Weyl's philosophy of space in
the period 1916e1923, when it was a kind of transcendental
idealism applied to the domain of the inﬁnitesimal.6 In his own
texts, Weyl recognizes the importance of Helmholtz's construction
for the pre-relativistic p.o.s. By adopting the framework of the
continuous groups of transformations, Weyl's relativistic p.o.s. uses
methods that are closer to Helmholtz-Lie than Riemann. However,
the speciﬁc axioms used by Helmholtz, expressing isotropy and
monodromy of space, must be abandoned in the relativistic context,
even at the inﬁnitesimal scale. Strangely enough, Weyl gives only
technical reasons for abandoning them (relative to the anisotropy of
Lorentzian metrics), but he does not comment at all on Helmholtz's
philosophical construction.
The second section (numbered 3.) will thus avoid technicalities
and get directly to the clariﬁcation of the philosophical Helmholt-
zian claims, and the reasons why Weyl was silent about them.
2. Riemann's p.o.s.
2.1. The “pluralisation” of geometry
The new era in the p.o.s., which began with Riemann, is the
result of a gradual discovery (in the early decades of XIXth century)
of
the existence of many
eeven inﬁnitely manye possible
geometrical systems for geometry.7 It was no longer possible, at
least from a purely logical point of view, to speak about geometry in
the singular. It was once and for all recognised as plural. Bolyai and
Lobachevsky revealed to us the possibility of a new synthetic ge-
ometry, through a special way of denying Euclid's ﬁfth postulate.
Moreover, the geometrical study of curved lines and surfaces had
ﬂourished in the century that preceded Riemann's work. One can
mention Euler and Gauss as two great ﬁgures of this early work on
curved lines and surfaces. Unlike lines, surfaces are subject to a
study of their intrinsic metric properties that allow us to discover
an inﬁnite number of possible forms. Nevertheless, Euler, Gauss
(Gauss 1827), and their respective contemporaries, studied the
intrinsic metrical properties of surfaces only through the assump-
tion of a Euclidean ambient space in which the surfaces were
embedded. In this sense, these early mathematics of curvature did
not provide a theory of curved space, but rather a theory of the
embedding of curved surfaces in ordinary ﬂat space; even if it was
then often a matter of focusing on the properties that were inde-
pendent of the chosen embedding.
2.2. The epistemological structure of Riemann's memoir
Riemann brought intrinsic geometry to a new stage in its his-
tory, by breaking totally free of the supposition of an ambient space.
Weyl published his conference as a three-part memoir, this plan
proving to be decisive in the epistemological structure of the p.o.s.8
Indeed, inparts I.þII., Riemannwants to characterise the “general
concept of magnitudes of several dimensions”, and the different
“metrical relations” one can attach to these magnitudes. It is there-
fore solely a pure analysis, independent of any empirical consider-
ation. More precisely, in part I., Riemann introduced what became
the concept of differential manifold. This concept was developed in
the following decades, notably with the emergence of set-topology
and the major contributions of Poincare in algebraic topology.9
5 For other points of view on the same question ewhy did Weyl abandon
Riemann-Finsler methods?e, see also Coleman and Korte (2001), Scholz (2004b,
2001).
6 See Bernard (2013).
7 Within the extensive literature on this point, we can ﬁrst refer to Bonola (1912)
and Riemann (1898).
8 (Weyl, 1923a, pp. 8e9), Riemann (1919), etc.
9 (Riemann, 1919, note 1), Scholz (1980).
J. Bernard / Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics 61 (2018) 41e56
42

Then, in Part II., he shows the possibility of an intrinsic deﬁnition of
analytical metrical spaces (today: “Riemannian manifolds”), by
attaching to the differential manifold a positive deﬁnite differential
quadratic form, whose values depend on position. Finally, he shows
how the metric can be determinedfromthe variation of the sectional
curvature along nðn1Þ
2
independent surface directions.
It then becomes manifest that the notion of metric alone does not
contain a single possible structure, as was still believable in Kant's
time, when Euclidean geometry was hegemonic. Instead, it contains
inﬁnitely many structures. Consequently, the philosophical p.o.s. is
moving. It is no longer purely a matter of understanding the meta-
physical or epistemological status of space, whose structure would,
in any case, be the only logically possible one. Rather, from now on, it
is also a matter of justifying the choice of the metrical structure from
the inﬁnite number of possible ones10. Riemann concludes:
From this, one necessarily concludes that the propositions of
geometry cannot be deduced from the general concepts of
magnitude, but that the properties which distinguish space
from the other imaginable 3e dimensional magnitudes are only
to be deduced from experience […] These facts, as all possible
facts, are not necessary; they only have an empirical certainty.
They are only hypotheses.11
Part III. is therefore totally different from parts I. and II., from an
epistemological point of view. Riemann seeks to show how
Euclidean space can be distinguished from the inﬁnite number of
other possible metrical manifolds. He proposed several ways to
make this selection, through simple mathematical assumptions.
This selection is explicitly motivated by the assumption that “real”
space, that of physics, would be Euclidean. Thus, the mathematical
characterisations are to be transformed into very physical hypoth-
eses, to be conﬁrmed experimentally.12 Riemann afﬁrms that these
Euclidean hypotheses are actually known to be true on our scale, at
his time, with great precision.13
Finally, the memoir ﬁnishes with a bold hypothesis or, in
Weyl's words, a prophecy. Riemann indeed speculated that phys-
ics, in a future state, would be able to reject the Euclideanity of
space. This bold hypothesis is also physical in nature, although it is
of a new type. For Euclidean space, one had to check, for example,
that curvature vanishes everywhere. This is a global hypothesis,
expressing a structural law that is independent of any material
context. By contrast, Riemann's bold hypothesis at the end of the
memoir deals with a metric whose coefﬁcients would be deter-
mined by the special local distribution of matter and forces in a
given context. More precisely, Riemann refers to the fact that,
even if the curvature seems very close to vanishing on our scale, it
could be that, at the microscopic level, it ﬂuctuates so that the
vanishing at our scale is an effect of statistical smoothing. This
ﬂuctuation would be due to a coupling between the metric and
the forces generated by matter. Weyl is right to stress that Rie-
mann was ahead of his time in considering the idea of a dynamical
metric, sixty years before the discovery of the relativistic coupling
expressed by Einstein's equations. In doing so, Riemann appears
to be one of the ﬁrst14 to have thought about the possibility of a
metric whose coefﬁcients would only be ﬁxed a posteriori, a pos-
teriori having here the strong sense of a relationship to the
contingent distribution of matter and forces. On the other hand,
Weyl is exaggerating in presenting Riemann as a prophet of
general relativity. He forgets to remark that one aspect of Rie-
mann's reﬂection is far from general relativity and its known
applications: Riemann indeed had in mind a physical theory that
could only have a meaning at a microscopic scale, not at an as-
tronomical or even cosmological one.15
By contrast with this empirical inquiry, the analysis of the
notion of metrical manifold, in parts I.þII., had a totally different
epistemological status. This status is difﬁcult to clearly specify,
since Riemann did not thematise it. It is however obvious that it
was an a priori analysis, in the wider sense of the word, namely an
analysis that is prior to any link with empirical knowledge. This
study must be in the service of physics, but it cannot be a physical
inquiry itself. It is a matter of a priori giving the most general
notion of metric to the physicists, to avoid hindering the subse-
quent empirical work that will select the “true ” metric of space,
inside this ﬁeld of possibilities.16 As a reviewer of this article
noticed, Riemann himself probably thought about the two
different parts of his memoir according to the nineteenth-century
10 Cf. below ein section 3.6e Helmholtz's and Poincare’s protests against the
uniqueness of the geometrical structure of space, in a conventionalist or an
empiricist way.
11 (Riemann, 1898, p. 281).
12 Riemann's chosen properties can be summarised as follows. Let ðM; gÞ be a
Riemannian space of dimension 3. Then the following hypotheses are equivalent:
 The sectional curvatures of ðM; gPÞ are independent from the position and from 3
independent surface directions.
 A ﬁnite size rigid body can be moved anywhere in space, and can be oriented
along any possible direction.
If a Riemannian space has those properties, one says it has a “constant curvature”.
Riemann then gives the general expression of the metric of such a space. He dis-
cusses the three qualitatively different cases: vanishing curvature, positive curva-
ture, negative curvature. In particular, a Riemannian space will be Euclidean if and
only if it has one of the following equivalent properties:
 It has a vanishing constant curvature.
 The sum of the angles of any triangle in it holds p radians.
 The direction of linear elements has a meaning that is independent of the po-
sition (Riemann, 1898, p. 294). In modern terms, it is the integrability of the
transport of vectors, as expressed in (Weyl, 1923a, Fourth conference).
13 Weyl reports in (Weyl, 1919, p. 83), as do many authors, that Gauss had tested
the Euclideanity of space by comparing with p radian the sum of the angles of the
triangle formed by the cities Brocken, Hohenhagen, and Inselsberg. Historians
disagree whether this is a correct interpretation of Gauss's measurements or if it is
a myth. Cf. Miller (1972), Gor, Waerden (van der), and Miller (1974) and Scholz
(unpublished, 2004a, 2005). In any case, measurements were actually done dur-
ing the XIXth century to test Euclideanity of space, at least at an astronomical scale,
as is reported for example by (Poincare, 1902, Chap. 5.).
14 A reviewer of this article taught me that Lobachevsky also considered the
possibility of a dynamical metrics in the 1820s.
15 Curiously, Helmholtz makes a mistake similar to Weyl's, when relating Rie-
mann's point of view. He says that, for Riemann, we could discover a non-vanishing
curvature only at astronomical scales (Helmholtz, 1977, p. 18).
16 In the last lines of his memoir, Riemann says that the determination of the
metrical relationships in space is a question for physics, but that the
Researches starting from general notions, like the investigation we have just
made, can only be useful in preventing this [the physical] work from being
hindered by too narrow views, and preventing traditional prejudices from being
obstacles to progress in the knowledge of the interdependence of things.
Therefore, there is no confusion in Riemann between the empirical status of the
hypotheses that have to be tested at the end of the p.o.s. (for example, that the sum
of the angles of any triangle is equal to p radians), and the a priori status of the
general hypotheses that are the foundations of the general notion of metrical
manifold in parts I. and II. of the memoir. In particular, it is absurd to consider the
hypotheses we are going to develop in section 2.3 as having an empirical status.
According to Riemann, these a priori considerations are in some sense a “prepa-
ration” for the empirical part of the process that follows. Let us remark however
that Riemann, unlike Weyl, does not use the term “a priori” to qualify this part of
the process of determining the metric. We are nevertheless justiﬁed in using the
word, as Weyl did, in so far as Riemann opposes this moment of the p.o.s. to the
empirical process that follows.
J. Bernard / Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics 61 (2018) 41e56
43

distinction between pure and applied mathematics. Nevertheless,
there seems to be a shift in meaning when it comes to Weyl's
notion of a priori, which is reminiscent of the Kantian conception
of the (synthetic) a priori as both independent of and fundamental
for experience.
Be this as it may, the main inﬂuence of Riemann on Weyl is
certainly in this epistemological organisation of the p.o.s. Weyl
interprets the epistemological difference between the a priori
hypotheses of parts I.þII. of Riemann's memoir, and the to-be-
empirically-tested hypotheses of part III., as being linked to the
distinction between two realms of determinations of metric: the
inﬁnitesimal and the ﬁnite. By nature, the inﬁnitesimal structures
of space cannot be the subject of an empirical enquiry but rather
are based on a priori considerations. They are then the bases for
the deﬁnition of ﬁnite structures (by a process of integration),
which are the only subject of empirical inquiry. Weyl introduces17
a technical philosophical terminology (probably inspired by
Husserl18) in order to crystallize this distinction. On one side, we
have the inﬁnitesimal metrical structure, which is everywhere
similar
and
a
priori
ﬁxed;
it
is
called
the
nature
of
the
metric <Natur der Metrik>, in which is expressed the essence of
space <Wesen des Raumes>. On the other side, we have the
contingent quantitative arrangement <zuf€alligen […] quantitativen
Ausgestaltung> of the metric, which has to be determined by a
physical theory. In the Riemannian framework, this amounts to
distinguishing between the variation of the coefﬁcients of the
metric, determined by the empirically tested hypotheses of part
III., and the notion of positive deﬁnite quadratic form itself, which
is a priori determined by the hypotheses of part II. This episte-
mological distinction, which makes sense inside Riemann's
framework, will be adapted by Weyl in the framework of gener-
alised metrical spaces, expressed in terms of continuous groups of
transformations.
Riemann does not comment on the nature of the a priori con-
siderations of his memoir, only naming Herbart as his main source
of philosophical inspiration.19 He does not even use the term “a
priori”. On the contrary, Weyl explicitly formulates the structure of
Riemann's memoir in the philosophical terms of a priori and a
posteriori; and he ﬁlls the Riemannian a priori with resolutely
idealistic content, inspired by both Husserlian phenomenology and
a neo-kantianism20. The result is the origin, within Weyl's philos-
ophy of space, of what I have called the “idealism in the
inﬁnitesimal”.21
2.3. “Deduction” that the inﬁnitesimal metric is quadratic and
positive deﬁnite
Starting from a differential manifold M, we can ask ourselves
what the most general notion of metric is that we can attach to it. To
answer this question, Riemann successively posits some re-
quirements in order to obtain an adequate notion of metric. He then
shows that the simplest form of metric that fulﬁls all the re-
quirements is given inﬁnitesimally by the square root of a differ-
ential positive deﬁnite quadratic form. Nevertheless, Riemann also
suggests that there are other forms of metric, more complex, which
also fulﬁl all the requirements. That is why one has to admit that
the deduction is incomplete, if one interprets Riemann's text as an
attempt to deduce (from correctly chosen hypotheses) that the
metric is (the square root of) a differential positive deﬁnite
quadratic form. For this reason I used brackets around “deduction”,
in the title of this section. Riemann merely gives some (apparently
not entirely decisive) arguments in order to chose a deﬁnite
quadratic form. This is the common view on Riemann's text. At the
end of this section, on page 13, I will, however, give another
possible interpretation of Riemann's text, which allows us to
complete the deduction.
The a priori requirements used for this “deduction” are not given
by Riemann as “axioms” or “hypotheses”. Instead, Riemann speaks
in an informal way, introducing requirements without numbering
them or giving them a very precise mathematical formulation.
Undoubtedly, this informal aspect of Riemann's text is partly due to
the fact that the text is the transcription of a conference. This is the
reason why so many commentators disagree about its interpreta-
tion. Finally, I have to warn the reader that not all of the hypotheses
developed below are explicitly given in Riemann's text. I will
number E1, E2, … the hypotheses that are explicitly given by Rie-
mann and I1, I2, … the implicit hypotheses that we need to adopt, in
order to make Riemann's construction coherent. Of course, the last
kind of hypotheses depend on my personal interpretation of the
text. The titles of the explicit hypotheses are also mine. Finally, I
warn the reader that collectively, the hypotheses below are not
independent of each other.
Here are the ﬁrst hypotheses22:
E1.
Integrable transport of measures: The length of lines is in-
dependent from their positions, and every line can subsequently be
measured by any other.
E2.
Decomposition into differential measures: A line can be
decomposed into differential elements; its measure is the integral
sum of the measures of its composing differential elements.
According to this last hypothesis, when I talk about a path, a line
or a curve, I will always implicitly claim that it is piecewise of class
C 1.
I1.
Positivity: The measure of a linear element eand subsequently
that of a linee is a positive real number.
According to these ﬁrst three hypotheses, the metric is given by
a
positive
real
function
ds ¼ fXð dx
!Þ
of
the
linear
element
dx
! : ðdx1; …; dxnÞ that depends on the location X : ðx1; …; xnÞ. This
function will be indifferently denoted as fXð dx
!Þ or f ðX; dx
!Þ. This
kind of metric (Finsler metric) is usually represented today by a
positive function f, whose argument ðX; dx
!Þ belongs to the tangent
bundle TM of the manifold, and which is sufﬁciently regular. Rie-
mann, as usual, talks simply about “ continuity”.23 Now the length L
of a curve
g : ½a; b/M;
according to E1 and E2, will be:
LðgÞ ¼
Zb
a
fgðtÞðg0ðtÞÞdt
17 (Weyl, 1923a, p. 46).
18 Becker, referring to Husserl's theories on space published later as Ideen II, also
speaks about the essence of space <Wesen des Raumes>, as the object of geometry
(Becker, 1923, p. 5).
19 Scholz (1982).
20 Cf. Ryckman (2005), Mancosu and Ryckman (2005, 2002), Sieroka (2009) and
Bernard (2013).
21 Bernard (2013) and Bernard, 2010.
22 (Riemann, 1898, p. 286).
23 Riemann often does not make the precise regularity assumptions explicit.
However, it is clear, from their use, that the involved functions must be several
times differentiable or even smooth or analytical.
J. Bernard / Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics 61 (2018) 41e56
44

Riemann then posits an hypothesis24 within a rather obscure25
sentence, whose (explicit) consequence (together with E1, E2, and
I1) is:
E3.
Homogeneity in norm
fX

a dx
!
¼
a
:fX

dx
!
for all a2ℝ:
This hypothesis implies that the length L of a curve is inde-
pendent of its parametrisation and of its orientation.26
Riemann's last assumption below deals with a certain notion of
sphere. For every r2ℝþ, and for every point O of the manifold, we
will call F-sphere (F for Finsler) of centre O and of radius r, the set
SðO; rÞ of the points that are at a distance r of O. Riemann simply
uses the expression “sphere”.
This deﬁnition only has a direct meaning if r represents an
inﬁnitesimal distance. Then the inﬁnitesimal F-sphere is a “beam”
of vectors:
SinfðO; rÞ¼def:
n
dx
!2TO
fO

dx
!
¼ r
o
If r represents a ﬁnite distance, one then has to characterise the
F-sphere as a set of points of the manifold, instead of points of the
tangent space. By using E1 and E2, one deﬁnes the notion of
geodesic distance between two points as the inﬁmum of the set of
the lengths of the curves that join them:
dðO; PÞ
¼def:
inffLðgÞ j g : ½0; 1/M; gð0Þ ¼ O; gð1Þ ¼ Pg
SðO; rÞ
¼def:
fP2M j dðO; PÞ ¼ rg
A path whose length is minimal in that sense is called a minimal
geodesic between those two points. We will make the following
assumption, which gives good properties to ﬁnite F-spheres:
I2.
Local existence and uniqueness of minimal geodesics.
To each point O of the manifold M, one can associate a neigh-
bourhood U so that, for every P2U, there is one and only one curve
joining O and P, and having a minimal length.
This property assumed, then the geodesic distance between two
sufﬁciently near points becomes simply the measure of the minimal
geodesic that joins them. A more precise discussion of this point is
left for section 2.4. With regard to Riemann, let us remember that
he does not make this kind of assumption explicit, although it
seems to be necessary in order to interpret his last assumption (cf.
below) correctly.27
Are the F-spheres necessarily radially complete? I mean: starting
from a point O in the direction of a vector , x!28 do we necessarily
meet the sphere SðO; rÞ (resp. the sphere SinfðO; rÞ) in one point? If
this is the case, is the point unique? For inﬁnitesimal spheres, the
answers are yes and yes, as soon as one reinforces the hypothesis I1,
by positing that the metric is positive deﬁnite29:
I3.
Deﬁniteness f ðX; dx
!Þ ¼ 0 if and only if dx
! ¼ 0!.
Then the ﬁnite F-spheres are also radially complete, at least
locally, thanks to hypothesis I2,30.
Now let us consider the set of the ﬁnite F-spheres that surround
a point O of the manifold. Riemann's last hypothesis is31:
E4.
Regularity of the family of F-spheres
In a neighbourhood U of any point O of the manifold M, there
exists a regular function UOðXÞ, from U to ℝ, such that the F-spheres
of centre O are characterised as level hypersurfaces for this func-
tion. All the F-spheres around O are then characterised by an
equation of the kind UO ¼ a.
From now on, we will simply write U instead of UO. The function
UðXÞ, and the function sðXÞ ¼ dðO; XÞ, which expresses the geodesic
distance from the ﬁxed point O to the point of coordinates X, are then
both constant over the spheres SðO; rÞ, and they must give different
values to points that are situated on different spheres. One con-
cludes from this that U can be considered a monotonic real function
of s. I will consider it a regular and increasing function a of s:
U ¼ a+s: It is crucial to recognise that one cannot simply take U ¼ s,
since s, because of Riemann's hypothesis E3, cannot be derivable at
the origin. It cannot a fortiori be of class C 2 or analytical as needed.32
With Riemann, we continue by remarking that U, as s, must have
a minimum in O. The most simple case of an analytical function that
has a minimum is a function with a vanishing ﬁrst derivative, and a
positive deﬁnite second derivative. Then, in a system of coordinates
in which O is the origin, and positing by convention that U ¼ 0, the
Taylor expansion of U begins with:
UðXÞ ¼ D2UðOÞ:ðX; XÞ þ /
namely by a quadratic form. From here on, Riemann's argument is
very condensed. He deals with “points” dx
! that are inﬁnitely close
to the origin, instead of points at a ﬁnite distance X. Then the
geodesic distance s is identiﬁed with ds ¼ f ðO; dx
!Þ, and the func-
tion U is identiﬁed with its ﬁrst term:
24 I shall suppose, secondly, that the length of the linear element, to the ﬁrst order,
is unaltered when all the points of this element undergo the same inﬁnitesimal
displacement, which implies at the same time that if all the quantities dx are
increased in the same ratio, the linear element will increase also in the same ratio.
(Riemann, 1898, pp. 286e287).
25 Thus, Merker (Merker, 2010, p. 39) considers the sentence to be ”enigmatic”,
and is compelled to attribute to Riemann a petitio principii, by interpreting the
movement involved in the text as a Euclidean one. Spivak also does not deal with
the problem (Spivak, 1975, Tome 2, p.166).
26 (Caratheodory, 1935, pp. 212e213), cited in (Rund, 1959, p. 3).
27 Lie also denounces this lack in Riemann (Merker, 2010, p. 277).
28 To go in the direction of a vector x!, from a point O, in the tangent space, means
following the half vector line fl x!l2ℝþg that is spanned by this vector. On the
manifold, it means following the half geodesic that is the image of the half line by
the exponential map expO.
29 Riemann does not express himself very clearly regarding the positivity or
positive-deﬁniteness of the metric function. However, we can perhaps gain an idea
of his position from his hypothesis E4 below. Indeed, this hypothesis seems to imply
that the topology of the manifold is compatible with the metric function, in the
sense that a series of points of the manifold P1; P2; / converges toward a point P (in
the sense of the topology of the manifold) if and only if dðPi; PÞ/0. It then implies
the deﬁniteness of the metric.
30 More precisely, let us consider a neighbourhood U of the kind that is involved in
hypothesis I2. The exponential map being an homeomorphism (cf. section 2.4.),
there is an inﬁnitesimal sphere Sinf ð0; εÞ in TO that is included in exp1
O ðUÞ, and
Sð0; εÞ ¼ expOðSinfð0; εÞÞ is then radially complete, as well as any other sphere of
smaller radius.
31 (Riemann, 1898, p. 286) Riemann does not give any name to the function that
we call UO. Moreover he speaks only of ”continuity”. Nevertheless, his use of the
function clearly shows that one has to assume that it is analytical, or at least of class
C 2. The notation U is borrowed from (Merker, 2010, p. 38).
32 Let us indeed test the derivability of s at the origin in an arbitrary direction
x!2TO. Let us take the curve gðtÞ ¼ expOðt: x!Þ as a canonical curve in M satisfying
gð0Þ ¼ O, g0ð0Þ ¼ x!. One then gets:
DþsðOÞ: x!
¼
lim
t/0
t > 0
sðexpOðt: x!ÞÞ
t
¼
fOð x!Þ
DsðOÞ: x!
¼
lim
t/0
t < 0
sðexpOðt: x!ÞÞ
t
¼

lim
t/0
t > 0
sðexpðt:  x!ÞÞ
t
¼
fOð x!Þ ¼ fOð x!Þ:
Therefore, there is a singularity at the origin.
J. Bernard / Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics 61 (2018) 41e56
45

U

dx
!
¼ D2UðOÞ$

dx
!; dx
!
:
Riemann ﬁnishes his “deduction”, by remarking that U, by
deﬁnition, must be constant when ds is constant. Now U appears to
be a function that depends on dx
! in a quadratic way; it is then
multiplied by l2 when ds is multiplied by l. He then deduces that
UðdxÞ is proportional to ds2 ¼ f 2ðO; dx
!Þ. As a consequence, we have
obtained that the metric is, inﬁnitesimally, the square root of a
positive deﬁnite quadratic form.
Nevertheless, the transition from the ﬁnite to the inﬁnitesimal is
rather obscure here, and is often simply given like this in the
literature.33 It seems to me that one can make this succinct Rie-
mannian thinking more precise as follows. Let us remember that
we have posited:
8
<
:
U ¼ a+s
a0 > 0
að0Þ ¼ 0
Outside the origin, the partial derivatives of the ﬁrst order are
given by:
DUðXÞ$ dx
! ¼ a0ðsðXÞÞ$DsðXÞ$ dx
! 34
In O, s has half partial derivatives in the sense given in the note
32. U, as being a+s, will then have partial derivatives if and only if
a0ð0Þ ¼ 0; then its partial derivatives vanish.
Now let us calculate the second derivative in its quadratic form.
Outside O, one has:
D2UðXÞ$

dx
!; dx
!
¼ a
00ðsðXÞÞ$

DsðXÞ$ dx
!2
þ a0ðsðXÞÞ$D2sðXÞ

dx
!; dx
!
:
In O, s has vanishing half partial derivatives of the second order
in any direction dx
!, in the sense that:
Using these two equations, and U ¼ a+s, we ﬁnally get:
D2UðOÞ

dx
!; dx
!
¼ a
00ð0Þ$

DsþðOÞ$ dx
!2
¼ a
00ð0Þ$f 2
O; dx
!
:
The simplest case corresponds to a
00ð0Þ > 0 (for ex. by taking for a
the square function x/x2). One can then prove (cf. section 2.4.) that
the function U ¼ s2 is everywhere of class C ∞on a neighbourhood
of O, in agreement with the standard interpretation of Riemann's
hypothesis E4.
The cases with higher orders that are indicated by Riemann can
be obtained by taking a function U that has an always positive
derivative of the order 2m, the 2m  1 previous derivatives van-
ishing. This suggests identifying a with the function x/x2m. The
Finsler metric fOð x!Þ is then the 2mth root of an always positive
homogeneous polynomial of degree 2m of the components of x!. It
is then obvious that f 2m, being a polynomial, is of class C ∞.
Nevertheless, in contrast with the strictly Riemannian case, one
cannot infer from this that the function s2m is therefore necessarily
of class C ∞itself. We currently know counterexamples; that is we
can ﬁnd a Finsler space whose norm, raised to the fourth power, is a
smooth convex quartic form, but in such a way that the fourth
power of the geodesic distance from a point P is not itself of class
C 6 in P (a fortiori it is not C ∞).35 It is difﬁcult to know if Riemann
had a proof for this kind of result, or even a vague intuition about it.
In any case, the point is very important in evaluating Riemann's
“deduction”. Indeed, if we interpret E4 as requiring the smoothness
of the 2nth power of the geodesic function, then only the quadratic
form generally satisﬁes the requirement (generally means here: for
all possible variations of the coefﬁcients). The other possibilities
vaguely mentioned by Riemann would then be dismissed. As a
result, Riemann's “deduction” that the metric should be a deﬁnite
quadratic form (under the assumption of the four explicit hypoth-
eses) could be entirely completed, by adding the implicit hypoth-
eses and by interpreting hypothesis E4 as above.
2.4. Complements on geodesics, on the exponential map, and on
hypotheses of convexity
2.4.1. The exponential map
In order to deeply understand Riemann's hypotheses, one has to
get some information on the geodesic distance from hypotheses on
the Finsler metric f ðX; dx
!Þ, which is supposed to be given.
D2þsðOÞ

dx
!; dx
!
¼
lim
t/0
t > 0
Ds

expO

t$ dx
!
dx
!
 DþsðOÞ

dx
!
t
¼ 0
D2sðOÞ

dx
!; dx
!
¼
lim
t/0
t < 0
Ds

expO

t$ dx
!
dx
!
 DsðOÞ

dx
!
t
¼ 0
33 This is the case for (Merker, 2010, pp. 38e41). (Spivak, 1975, pp. 166e167)
evades the difﬁculty. Weyl seemed to be unsatisﬁed with Riemann's way of elim-
inating the higher orders in the Taylor expansion, as can be seen in (Weyl, 1923a, p.
30) and Riemann (1923).
34 The justiﬁcation for this application of the chain rule is the following: in a
Finsler space, the geodesic distance s to a ﬁxed point O is a function that is of class
C ∞except in O. For the calculus of the ﬁrst derivative, involving Jacobi ﬁelds, cf.
(Rund, 1959, pp. 118e124).
35 The argument involving the exponential map that I will develop in the next
section, in the Riemannian case, cannot apply here. Indeed, in a general Finsler
space, the exponential map is no longer of class C ∞at the origin but only of class
C 1. Cf. section 2.4.The mathematician Robert L. Bryant (Duke University, North
Carolina, USA) gave me the following counterexample within a technical discussion.
Let M be the upper half-plane y > 0 in the xy-plane, and let
ds4 ¼ dx4 þ 2Adx2dy2 þ dy4
y4
;
where A is a constant satisfying 0 < A < 1. This deﬁnes a strictly convex Finsler metric
on M that is, in fact, complete. Moreover, it can also be shown that the geodesic
distance sp : M/½0; ∞Þ from any given point p ¼ ðx0; y0Þ2M has the property that
ðspÞ4 is C 5, but not C 6, at p. Bryant (2015) gave a proof online. This counterexample
is not an exceptional case. Bryant asserts that if a quartic Finsler metric has the
property that the fourth power of its distance function is smooth, then it is either
actually a Riemannian metric or else it has constant coefﬁcients in some (local)
coordinates system.
J. Bernard / Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics 61 (2018) 41e56
46

If we are, from the beginning, within the framework of a Rie-
mannian manifold, then the local relationships between the
inﬁnitesimal metric fOð dx
!Þ ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
P
a;b
gabðOÞdxadxb
r
and the geodesic
distance sO (to the ﬁxed point O) are given through the exponential
map:
expO : TO/M;
which is a local diffeomorphism of class C ∞and which is radially
isometric in the sense of
c dx
!2TO;
fO

dx
!
¼ s

expO

dx
!
:
That is why the functions sO and s2
O have the same differentia-
tion properties locally as
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
gO
p
and gO respectively.36
Now, at the beginning of Riemann's p.o.s., we are supposed to be
within a general Finsler space, where the exponential map is al-
ways locally deﬁnable. This map is still of class C ∞outside the
origin, but in general it is only of class C 1 at the origin.37 Conse-
quently, the relationships between the inﬁnitesimal metric and the
ﬁnite geodesic distance become more difﬁcult to study. This difﬁ-
culty could partly explain why Riemann deals with both the ﬁnite
scale and the inﬁnitesimal scale at the same time.
2.4.2. Local existence and uniqueness of geodesics
In section 2.3, I showed that Riemann's hypothesis E4 can be
easily understood, as soon as one assumes the local existence and
uniqueness of geodesics. What do the studies on Finsler spaces
teach us on this topic?
We search for the local existence and uniqueness of a geodesic,
namely a curve gO; x!ðsÞ, of initial point O, of initial tangent vector
x!2TO, which is parametrised by its length s, and which makes the
following functional stationary:
LðgÞ ¼
Z
f ðgðsÞ; g0ðsÞÞds:
If one has the following hypothesis:
I4.
Regularity of the variational problem
The bilinear form
gmnðx; dxÞ ¼
v2f 2
v dx
!; v dy
!

X; dx
!
;
which is called “the generalised quadratic form”, is everywhere non
degenerate,then our curve will be unambiguously determined as
the solution of the differential equation38:
x
00 i þ Gi
jkðx; dxÞdxjdxk ¼ 0
where the “generalised Christoffel symbols” Gi
jkðx; dxÞ are obtained
from the generalised quadratic form by the same functional rela-
tionship as for usual Christoffel symbols. However, the generalised
quadratic form and the Christoffel symbols have no more meaning
for dx
! ¼ 0!. As a result, the differential equation of geodesics loses
its meaning for dx
! ¼ 0! and the exponential map in dx
! ¼ 0! is no
longer of class C 2 in general.39
Let us take a Finsler space that satisﬁes I4, and a point P within it.
In this case one can prove40 the existence of a neighbourhood U of P
in which, for every Q2U, the geodesic joining P to Q exists and is
unique.
Nevertheless, such a curve, even if it makes the functional L
stationary, is not in general a minimal geodesic. To obtain this, one
still has to reinforce hypothesis I4; the more classical way to do this
being the following41:
I5.
Strong convexity.
The bilinear form
v2f 2
v dx
!; v dy
!

X; dx
!
is everywhere positive deﬁnite.
This kind of hypothesis seems to be natural in so far as it ex-
presses, within the Finslerian framework, the Legendre condition of
the calculus of variations, which allows one to prove that all geo-
desics are locally minimal. Moreover, this hypothesis generalizes
the (weak) hypothesis of convexity, namely
I6.
Convexity.
The metric fX is subadditive, i.e.
fX

dx
! þ dy
!
 fX

dx
!
þ fX

dy
!
:
It seems impossible to mathematically reconstruct Riemann's
arguments without this last hypothesis, even if it is not explicit in
the text. Indeed, by deﬁnition, the geodesic distance between two
points is a function that veriﬁes the triangular identity. Now, in
Riemann's use of his hypothesis E4, he considers the geodesic
distance to a ﬁxed point O, for very small distances, to be equal to
the local metric fO, up to the ﬁrst order. This seems to be possible
only with an hypothesis of convexity. Consequently, by bringing
together hypotheses I1, E3, and I6, the Finsler metric fX appears to
be a norm in the usual sense.
Despite the ease provided by the strong convexity I5, it is useful
for historical, physical and philosophical reasons, to propose an
interpretation of Riemann's ideas which manages to avoid hy-
pothesis I5, and just assume I4 or I6. Firstly, from an historical point
of view, Riemann's text refers to some metrics as acceptable and
obtained as the 2mth root of an homogeneous polynomial of degree
2m. Let us take the simple example:
f

X; dy
!
¼
4
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
X
1in
dyi4
s
:
36 This analysis, by now classical, has been indicated to me by Sergei Ivanov. The
reader can refer, within handbooks of Riemannian geometry, to the so called
”Gauss' lemma” and its consequence for the smoothness of the squared geodesic
distance (the difﬁculty being along the diagonal).
37 (Rund, 1959, pp. 88e89) and Busemann (1955). Cf. the following paragraph.
38 This is the Euler-Lagrange equation for our variational problem (Rund, 1959, p.
82).
39 Indeed, in the Riemannian case, one obtains an exponential map of class C ∞by
applying Cauchy-Lipschitz theorem to the equation of geodesics, with a variation of
the initial conditions. One then uses the assumption that the Christoffel symbols
are of class C ∞. See for example (Spivak, 1975, p. 334, vol. I.).
40 Whitehead (1935) deduces from I4 that the normal coordinates exist on a
neighbourhood of any point, the derivative at the origin being the identity. As a
consequence, on a sufﬁciently small neighbourhood U of a point P, the geodesics
emerging from P simply cover U.
41 In a Finsler space with strongly convex metric, there exists a neighbourhood of
any point in which two points are linked by one, and only one, minimal geodesic. Cf.
for ex.(Busemann, 1955, p. 418).
J. Bernard / Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics 61 (2018) 41e56
47

One shows that hypothesis I4 (and therefore I5) is only
approximately true, that is with the exception of a discrete number
of directions. Nevertheless, hypothesis I6 is valid. Rund42 has
shown that this type of Finsler space has good properties however,
particularly with regard to geodesics. Secondly, from a philosoph-
ical and physical point of view, it is important to know if Riemann-
Finsler's methods can be generalised to deal with indeﬁnite enot
strictly convexe metrics, for a possible application to relativity
theories. In the next section, we are going to see that, when Weyl
turned to the p.o.s. within the relativistic context, he completely
left these techniques aside, and adopted the framework of the
theory of continuous groups (Lie groups). Was this a necessary
turnaround from a mathematical point of view?
Certainly, Riemann-Finsler's methods were ﬁrst developed by
their authors with regard to positive and convex metrical functions.
Nevertheless, the developments of Finsler geometry, particularly
since the middle of the twentieth century, have shown that it was
an historical contingency. Indeed, in the Handbook of Finsler Ge-
ometry,43 Matsumoto deﬁnes a Finsler space simply assuming I4
instead of I5. He then posits the existence of a positively conic
subdomain of TX, the origin being excluded, where fX is smooth and
strictly positive (one thinks of the interior of the light cone in
Minkowski space). In other words, the Finsler metric is to be
deﬁned on a subset of the tangent bundle: a bundle whose ﬁbres
are conic subspaces of tangent spaces. In the best case, as in the
interior of the light cone in relativity theory, fX is still convex or
concave in this restricted domain, i.e. it satisﬁes either the trian-
gular inequality (subadditivity) or the reverse triangular inequality:
fXð x! þ y!Þ  fXð x!Þ þ fXð y!Þ:
Now if we deﬁne geodesics to be curves whose tangent vectors do
not leave the corresponding conic domain, then they are actually
extremal. Thus, in order to apply Riemann-Finsler's methods to rela-
tivity theory, one has to consider timelike geodesics and spacelike
geodesics,but one mustavoid giving any meaning tothe curves whose
tangentlinecrossesthelightcone.Ultimately,thispartitioningenables
thedevelopmentof techniquesof calculusofvariationsfor spaceswith
indeﬁnite metric.44 Therefore, the fact that Riemann's p.o.s. was
originally developed within the framework of a positive deﬁnite
metric seems not to be essential. Weyl could certainly have had some
presentiment about this possibility, even if Finsler geometry with in-
deﬁnite metric was not very well developed at that time. Be this as it
may, I think that Weyl'schoice to abandon Riemann-Finsler's methods
was the result of a sincere commitment to philosophical positions,
rather than a necessity resulting from the mathematical inadequacy of
Riemann-Finsler's methods for indeﬁnite metrics.45 It remains to be
seen what that philosophical commitment may have been.
2.5. Conclusions on the relationship between Weyl's and Riemann-
Finsler's methods
Since the works of Laugwitz and Scholz,46 we have known that
Weyl formulated two different p.o.s., in the mathematical sense of a
proposition allowing the characterisation of a peculiar kind of
metric among an inﬁnite class of possibilities. Weyl ﬁrst conjec-
tured how to characterise the Riemannian manifolds among Finsler
manifolds in his notes to Riemann's memoir. He claimed that the
adequate selective property could be that of a unique determina-
tion of an afﬁne connection. This idea was equally to be at the
centre of Weyl's relativistic p.o.s.47 However, when he turned to the
relativistic p.o.s., he abandoned Finsler-Riemann's methods and
constructed a new framework, consisting of a manifold everywhere
endowed with a group of linear transformations acting on the
tangent spacee“groups of rotations”e and with afﬁne and length
connections. The new p.o.s. consisted in characterizing Weylian
manifolds,48 among those generalised metrical spaces.
Why did Weyl choose to abandon Finsler-Riemann's methods,
when he turned toward the relativistic problem of space?
The reasons given by Weyl are philosophical rather than strictly
mathematical. Firstly, he justiﬁes his choice negatively by saying
that Riemann's way of introducing Finsler's metrics is “too
formal”.49 It is difﬁcult to interpret what formality means here.
Perhaps he meant that Riemann did not sufﬁciently secure the
formal properties he chose (integrability of measures, derivability,
regularity of spheres, etc.) with a search for their clear and solid
philosophical justiﬁcations. Secondly, Weyl positively justiﬁes his
choice to adopt the framework of the theory of continuous groups
of transformations (Lie groups), with an adhesion to the idea that
the fundamental notion of geometry must be the group of con-
gruences. This general idea is shared with the defenders of the
Erlangen Program50.
This adhesion to the primacy of the notion of group of congru-
ences might also furnish another interpretation of what Weyl meant
by qualifying Finsler manifolds as “too formal”. Indeed, Coleman
and Korte remarked51 that most Finsler metrics do not allow the
construction of a continuous group of rotations, in the sense given
by Weyl. They concluded that Weyl was not justiﬁed in following the
guidelines of the Erlangen Program, and in considering the group of
rotations as really ontologically prior to the metric function. Ac-
cording to them, Weyl could still have had in mind a Riemann-
Finsler's framework, even when he adopted the language of
continuous groups in Mathematische Analyse des Raumproblems. I
think that this interpretation is very improbable, both for historical
and philosophical reasons. Starting from Coleman and Korte’s
mathematical observation, we should completely reverse their
philosophical conclusion. Weyl would have abandoned Riemann-
Finsler's kind of metric, precisely because they did not allow the
introduction of a continuous group of rotations. If this kind of group
is the essence of geometry, in the strict sense of a doctrine of space, it
42 (Rund, 1959, p. 17; 25).
43 (Antonelli, 2003, p. 570-sq.).
44 Following this way, one would have to slightly rephrase hypothesis I2.
45 Actually, neither in Weyl (1923a), in Riemann (1919) nor in (Weyl, 1923b, x18),
did Weyl write that one must abandon Riemann-Finsler's kind of method within
the relativistic context, since it would have been unworkable for indeﬁnite metrics.
46 Laugwitz (1958) and (Scholz, 2001, pp. 85e95).
47 Weyl never proved the ﬁrst conjecture, within Riemann-Finsler's framework.
However, Freudenthal observed that the answer to Weyl's own p.o.s., in terms of
groups of rotations, could furnish as a corollary an answer to the other problem. It is
reported in Scholz (2015).
48 A Weylian manifold is a conformal class of pseudo-Riemannian manifolds
together with a non integrable length connection. Cf. (Weyl, 2010, x16).
49 (Weyl, 1923a, p. 30):
[…] Moreover, it seems to me that these higher [degrees] cases [non-
Riemannian Finsler metrics] are constructed according to a too formal
principle <allzu formalen Prinzip>.
50 Weyl repeats in many texts his adhesion to the idea that the group of con-
gruences is the fundamental notion of geometry. For example: (Weyl, 1919, p. 5). In
(Weyl, 1939, p. 14-sq.), Weyl admits the pertinence of the Erlangen Program, in so
far as it put forward that the notion of group is the “third pillar on which [the
ediﬁce of geometry] is to be erected”, together with the notions of vector and of the
ﬁeld of numbers. However, as Christophe Eckes remarked within a discussion, Weyl
is only interested in homogeneous (Klein) geometries in this text. In the texts
where Weyl is focussed on differential geometry, he does not (explicitly) rely on the
Erlangen Program.
51 Coleman and Korte (2001).
J. Bernard / Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics 61 (2018) 41e56
48

means that most Finsler metrics are, from the beginning, deprived
of any possible geometrical meaning. That would be why Weyl
judged Riemann's constructions “too formal”.
I will come back to that question in the ﬁnal discussion.
3. Helmholtz-Lie's p.o.s.
3.1. Helmholtz's position with regard to Riemann
In 1867, Riemann's 1854 inaugural conference was ﬁrst pub-
lished by R. Dedekind as a memoir.52 During the same year,
Helmholtz decided to publish an article, “On the facts on which
geometry relies”,53 in order to make his own results on the p.o.s.
known, in so far as they went partly in the same direction as Rie-
mann. In the introduction, Helmholtz remarks that Riemann star-
ted
from
a
reﬂection
that
is
purely
internal
to
analytical
mathematics, whereas his own approach is born from concrete
problems, namely the characterisation of the space of colours,54
and of the space of the visual estimates of magnitudes. However,
there is a deeper difference between the two approaches. Helm-
holtz stresses that Riemann's solution to the p.o.s. is in two steps.
Firstly, Riemann must obtain that the metric is given, at inﬁnites-
imal distance, by a positive deﬁnite quadratic form. Riemann is then
able to describe the rich universe of Riemannian manifolds. Sec-
ondly, he selects at ﬁnite distance the Euclidean metric (or more
generally the metric of a constant curvature space) by adding hy-
potheses that are peculiar to this (those) space(s).
In opposition to this approach, Helmholtz proposed using the
same fundamental principles during the two moments of the p.o.s.
Because of this unitary approach, Helmholtz did not develop all the
possible Riemannian manifolds, of variable curvatures, in a
comprehensive study. Nevertheless, this lack is not a problem when
one aims to prove that “real” space has a constant curvature. What
is important for Helmholtz is the economy of principles that is
peculiar to his approach.
3.2. Helmholtz's principles and his solution to the p.o.s.
Having roughly given the idea of a differentiable manifold of
dimension 3, the principles that Helmholtz proposed are:
FREE MOBILITY OF RIGID BODIES It must be possible to freely move rigid
bodies in space. The idea of rigid body is presented as a condition of
possibility of the act of measurement, any measure being estab-
lished by the movement of such a rigid body, which is used as a
standard.55 Helmholtz mathematically expresses this idea by
assuming, for any couple of points P; Q on this body, the existence
of a mathematical equation between their coordinates. The nature
of this equation is not known from the beginning. We only know
that it must remain valid when the body is moved in space.
The maximal freedom56 is expressed by assuming that: When
some points of the body are understood as ﬁxed, then any other
point of the body can move to any other place, as soon as one re-
spects the equations that express the rigidity of the distances be-
tween the moved point and the ﬁxed points. Helmholtz concludes
from all this that the movements that are allowed for such a free
rigid body constitute a manifold of nðnþ1Þ
2
dimensions, (¼ 6 in our
case).
Axiom of monodromy A body that rotates on itself must come
back to its initial position (complete turn) after a sufﬁciently long
time.57 This last hypothesis is known to enable the avoidance of
some exotic geometries.58 Unfortunately efor a relativistic philos-
ophere, it also eliminates the case of Minkowski geometry. In order
to test the validity of Helmholtz's axioms for Minkowski space, one
must of course replace the idea of rigid spatial segments, by the
idea of a rigid spacetime segment. See more details below within ou
section “4. Discussion”.
Lie, reported by Weyl,59 has shown that one can rephrase the
two last Helmholtz axioms, replacing them with a single axiom,
according to which the group of congruences must be maximally
transitive (in current terminology: ﬂag transitivity). This reinter-
pretation is mostly harmless as far as the philosophical issues we
have to deal with are concerned. A maximally isotropic space is an
homogeneous space which is isotropic in relation to its linear
directional elements, isotropic in relation to its surface directional
elements, / and isotropic in relation to its directional elements of
n  1 dimensions. Moreover, only the identity actually ﬁxes a given
system of n  1 nested directional elements60.
If one admits that the metric is (the square root of) a positive
deﬁnite quadratic form and then applies Helmholtz's principles
at the ﬁnite scale, then one selects the constant curvature spaces.
On this point, Helmholtz simply asks the reader to refer to Rie-
mann's memoir.61 Helmholtz then is focusing on what is proper
to his own approach: the use of these same principles at the
inﬁnitesimal scale; in other words he wants to use them to prove
that the metric is the square root of a positive deﬁnite quadratic
form.
The reinterpretation of the axioms for the inﬁnitesimal scale
was achieved by Helmholtz himself, but it gained clarity with Lie's
development of
the notion of
groups of
continuous trans-
formations. The “inﬁnitesimalisation” includes two moments.
Firstly, the movements are now considered to be inﬁnitesimal.
Secondly, the rigid bodies are now considered to be of inﬁnitesimal
size. The ﬁrst moment leads us from the Lie group of congruences
to its Lie algebra. The second moment consists in eliminating the
52 Riemann (1867).
53 The philosophical part of the paper is published in Helmholtz (1866). In
Helmholtz (1868), he added some philosophical remarks and published the asso-
ciated mathematical demonstration.
54 A reviewer of this article remarked that Riemann mentioned the possibility of
using the concept of manifold to characterise the space of colours. Nevertheless, I
think that Riemann mentions this only to stress that the concept of metrical
manifold can have a lot of different applications. On the contrary, the characteri-
sation of the space of colours is more than a mere example for Helmholtz. This is
essential for his works on physiology and, according to him, this is the origin of his
encounter with the concept of manifold.
55 Curiously, as noted by Hertz, Helmholtz prefers to use the word “ﬁxed” 〈fest〉,
instead of “rigid” 〈starr〉. Usually, he does not use the term “standard” 〈Eichung〉,
but prefers to use circumlocution, speaking about the ﬁxed (¼rigid) but never-
theless
mobile
bodies,
which
make
the
measurements
possible,
through
congruence.
56 In Helmholtz (1870), Helmholtz brings together in one single axiom what was
presented in the article of 1868 as two moments: 1) the existence of the rigid body,
2) the freedom of its movement. From the perspective of a Helmholtz study, it
would be important to discuss in detail here the importance, from an epistemo-
logical point of view, of keeping the distinction between these two moments.
Unfortunately, it is common in the literature to neglect this distinction. However, it
would take several pages and is not appropriate here, where our aim is to speak
about the relationships between Helmholtz's and Weyl's points of view.
57 The concept of rotation has a precise technical meaning here. Lightly reworded,
it is a Lie subgroup of one parameter of the group of congruences, composed of
applications that ﬁx ðn  1Þ independent points. Time is here identiﬁed with the
parameter of the Lie group involved.
58 (Weyl, 1923a, pp. 37e38).
59 (Weyl, 1923a, pp. 30e31) and (Merker, 2010, p. 270).
60 More concisely, this is a space endowed with a group that acts freely and
transitively on the complete ﬂags. In a ﬁrst approximation, transitivity replaces
Helmholtz's free mobility, whereas freedom replaces monodromy.
61 Cf. also our note 12 and (Weyl, 1923a, pp. 24e29 and appendices 5e7).
J. Bernard / Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics 61 (2018) 41e56
49

second order terms (or higher) with regard to the difference of
coordinates between points. The members of the group of con-
gruences are then afﬁne transformations.
Let us now posit the Helmholtzian axioms for this twice inﬁn-
itesimalised group of movements. As a ﬁrst consequence of free
mobility, the group of translations is included in our group. The
p.o.s. in then reduced to the study of the transformations that ﬁx a
point and therefore to linear transformations. One concludes by
proving that a maximally transitive group of linear transformations
is identiﬁed, after a change of linear system of coordinates, with the
special orthogonal group SOðnÞ. For the proof itself, the reader can
directly read Helmholtz (with Hertz's notes), Weyl, or more modern
reconstructions.62
3.3. The philosophical consequences of the problem of transition to
the inﬁnitesimal
As is well known, Helmholtz's original proof in the article of
1868 includes several mistakes, on the mathematical level, which
were later corrected by Lie.63 We are going to consider the error
which, according to mathematicians, is the most important.64 Our
interest will be focused on the philosophical consequences of this
mistake, with regard to the strategy used by Helmholtz in order
to
defend
his
philosophical
position.65
Helmholtz
wrongly
thought that if his axioms were true at the ﬁnite scale, for a
certain group of movements, then they would be true in the
inﬁnitesimal. Lie proved this inference to be false. The second
moment of the inﬁnitesimalisation (cf. previous section) can
make us lose some degrees of freedom. A group of ﬁnite move-
ments responding to the axiom of free mobility can therefore lead
to an inﬁnitesimalised group that does not respond to the same
axiom.66 The inference is not valid for the axiom of monodromy
either.67
From the point of view of the mathematical architecture of
Helmholtz's
proof,
this
mistake
is
rather
harmless.
As
Lie
remarked, rather than claiming that one can deduce the inﬁni-
tesimal versions of the axioms from the assumption of the corre-
sponding axioms for the ﬁnite realm, one can directly reafﬁrm the
inﬁnitesimal version of the axioms by a new act of assumption.68
However, from a philosophical point of view, if one accepts the
independence of the validity of axioms in the inﬁnitesimal realm
from their validity in the ﬁnite realm, then the entire (conven-
tionalist-69)empiricist strategy of Helmholtz seems to collapse, as
we are going to see.
3.4. Helmholtz's rejection of transcendental idealism
The mathematical solution of Helmholtz's p.o.s. is based on a
critical stance towards the Kantian position70. In the introduction
to Helmholtz (1870), he says that we are indebted to Kant
regarding the philosophical position of the p.o.s., but he adds
that we must however reject the kind of solution that Kant
proposes.
Helmholtz summarizes transcendental idealism as follows.
Geometry has a problematic status. On one side, it is a deductive
and therefore indisputable knowledge; on the other side, it ap-
plies to the real world, just as empirical sciences usually do. This
leads Kant to consider the propositions of geometry as synthetic a
priori judgements.71 These are judgments that have a ﬂawless
necessity, as they occur in a pure way, i.e. without any need of
access to experience. Yet they are synthetic, in so far as they bring
new content of knowledge. These judgments are not simple
logical consequences of the deﬁnitions of the related subject and
predicate. This supply of new a priori knowledge is allowed, ac-
cording to Kant, by space, conceived as an a priori form of our
sensibility, more precisely the form of our external intuitions. As
such, space provides us with a pure intuition on which our
geometrical judgements are based. Nevertheless, in light of the
efforts
of
his
time
to
ﬁll
all
the
logical
gaps
in
the
demonstrations of geometry, Helmholtz moves the Kantian
concept of synthetic a priori judgement to the axioms. He won-
ders: must we solve the epistemological problem of the possi-
bility of geometry by considering the axioms as a priori synthetic
judgements, based on an a priori form of our sensibility called
“space ”72?
According to Helmholtz, the answer is no. The discoveryon non
Euclidean geometries compel us to admit the existence of many
possible systems of geometrical axioms, as coherent as the
Euclidean one. But it is not enough to refute transcendental
idealism. Indeed, the holders of this position could still defend
themselves by saying that, even if Euclidean geometry is not the
only possible one, from the point of view of logical necessity,
however it is the only one which can receive an intuitive content,
making it a true geometry (a doctrine of space), and not only a mere
formal coherent framework.73
The
following
of
Helmholtz's
argument
will
consist
in
showing that geometries other than Euclid's, in particular the
elliptic and the hyperbolic geometries, are true geometries in
that sense, being able to receive an intuitive content in order to
organize our perceptive experiences and to also be a framework
for physics. The argument will be based on Helmholtz's personal
interpretation of the meaning of “intuition” in this geometrical
context.
62 Helmholtz (1866), Merker (2010), (Weyl, 1923a, pp. 29e43 and appendices
9e10).
63 Lie (1890) and Lie and Engel (2012). The main mistakes or lacks are reported by
Hertz in his notes on Helmholtz (1977).
64 This is the opinion of Lie, and of Merker (Merker, 2010; Paragraph I.2.6).
65 Torretti refers to this problem in only a few lines in (Torretti, 1978, p. 151).
66 Cf. Lie's texts or (Helmholtz, 1977, pp. 65, 66. Note 15).
67 Lie summarizes the situation:
Thus one sees that, during the transition from the ﬁnitely distant points to the
inﬁnitesimally close neighbours, an important jump can occur in such a way that
the inﬁnitesimally close points satisfy totally new laws compared to the laws
satisﬁed by ﬁnitely distant points.
(Merker, 2010, p. 247) (my translation).
68 The remainder of Helmholtz's proof is then valid, notwithstanding minor
mistakes or deﬁcits, which can be corrected. The corrected version is presented by
Lie in (Merker, 2010, p. 260-sq.).
69 In literature, the term ”conventionalism” is often conﬁned to Poincare, whereas
Helmholtz is instead called an ”empiricist”. I will explain below in which sense
conventionalism is presented as a possibility in Helmholtz's text.
70 Here, I only consider Helmholtz's position in his articles of 1868 and 1870,
which are the most important in connection with Helmholtz's p.o.s. In other texts,
Helmholtz is less polemical regarding Kant's position.
71 In applying the notion of ”synthetic a priori” speciﬁcally to geometry, Helmholtz
is already betraying Kant. For Kant, even arithmetical judgements are ”synthetic a
priori”.
72 The shift of the concept of a priori synthetic judgements to axioms was classic
in the interpretations of the XIXth century, cf. for ex. (Poincare, 1902, Chap. I. and
III.). Even a phenomenologist like Becker thinks approximately this way: geometry
is a material eidetic science concerning the position of axioms and a logical-formal
eideitic science concerning the connection of axioms to theorems (Becker, 1923, p.
7).
73 Cf. (Helmholtz, 1868, pp. 17e18) for the necessity to go beyond the mere logical
coherence of non Euclidean geometries.
J. Bernard / Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics 61 (2018) 41e56
50

3.5. Role of intuition and imagination in Helmholtz's argument
In Helmholtz's 1870 article, intuition 〈Anschauung〉is presented
with two faces; one positive and one negative. Concerning pure
mathematics, that is, not applied to the knowledge of nature,
Helmholtz presents intuition as a danger. It can have an heuristic
role, guiding the mathematician for a while. Nevertheless, a
mathematical theory reaches its ideal of certainty only when one is
able to eliminate every appeal to intuition in its proofs. At that point
every step of demonstration is exclusively based on logical in-
ferences from the axioms of the theory. This is the hypothetico-
deductive model of mathematics, in which intuition appears as
an imperfect transitional mode of knowledge, which must give way
to the logical rigour of demonstrations.
Helmholtz claims therefore that Euclid's methods in geome-
try, the so called “synthetic geometry”, were not perfect because
they still included appeals to intuition.74 By referring to con-
structions, Euclid's geometry, according to Helmholtz, was al-
ways liable to mix, in an inadequate and unconscious way, logical
adequate inferences with empirical facts suggested by our
perceptive relationships with bodies. In other words, intuitions
in mathematics impose unjustiﬁed restrictions, because they lead
to look at frequent associations as if they were evident truths.
This is why in 1870 Helmholtz defended his previous psycho-
logical account of spatial intuitions as empirically induced rather
than necessary.75
Rather than this dangerous method, Helmholtz prefers the
analytical method, exempliﬁed by Riemann, which he interprets as
a way to avoid every appeal to intuition through the systematic use
of numbers (coordinates) and of mathematical analysis. For
Helmholtz, mathematical analysis is developed in a purely logical
way, and is therefore analytical in the philosophical sense.76 Thus
we see how Helmholtz projects an epistemological opposition on
the methodological opposition between synthetic and analytic ge-
ometry, in the sense of geometry by ﬁgures/by coordinates. This
projection must be considered very carefully because, as remarked
in note 71, it betrays Kant's proper distinction between analytical
and synthetic judgements.
By contrast, intuition has a positive role in Helmholtz's article,
when one enters in the domain of practical geometry, namely ge-
ometry as it really gives us a space. In order to constitute a space
from a formal hypothetico-deductive system, one has to ﬁll it with
an intuition, which enables us to imagine the involved structures.
Helmholtz precisely deﬁnes the word “imagine”:
By the expression “to imagine”, or “to be able to think of how
such something happens”, I understand that one could depict
the series of sense impressions which one would have if such a
thing happened in a particular case.77
To show that the spaces with non vanishing curvature can be
imagined, Helmholtz proposes a series of ﬁctions and realizable
experiences, with convex mirrors and lenses. In those ﬁctions
and experiences, beings, which are constituted approximately
like us, are put in relation with a world that leads them to adopt a
different geometry than ours. In particular, Helmholtz varies the
dimension of space (without however allowing dimensions su-
perior to 3), the variability or constancy of the curvature, and the
precise value(s) of the curvature. In particular, the ﬁction that
gives its intuitive content to hyperbolic geometry is based on
Beltrami's models.78
From a purely geometrical point of view, the three constant
curvature geometries are thus equally possible. Nevertheless, it
might be possible to believe, from a dynamical point of view, taking
forces into consideration, that only Euclidean space would be
possible, because it would be the only framework within which the
dynamical laws of motion can be expressed. That's not the case.
Helmholtz refers to an article by Lipschitz, where the latter shows
that we can modify the usual laws of motion in order to transfer
them into the non-euclidean worlds.79 This passage of Helmholtz's
text allows us to interpret his philosophy of space as including a hint
of conventionalism within his more generally empiricist framework.
This will be developed in the next section.
3.6. Helmholtz's conclusions on the epistemological status of
axioms
Helmholtz concluded that the axioms of geometry are neither
logical necessities, since several coherent systems are possible, nor
synthetic a priori judgements, since all the possible systems are
equally imaginable. What, then, could be their epistemological
status?
Helmholtz's answer to this question is complex and assumes an
important role in the elaboration of Poincare’s conventionalist
position in Science and Hypothesis. Poincare’s position on geome-
try is mostly a reﬁnement of Helmholtz's position in his 1870
article. Poincare adds philosophically important elements, in
particular the clear distinctions between: physical hypotheses,
conventions, deﬁnitions, etc. Nevertheless, he keeps the same
general philosophical architecture.
If we stay in pure geometry, without any application to physical
measurements, axioms only furnish a formal framework. One can,
at will, choose one system of axioms or another to play the
hypothetico-deductive game. Coherence is then the only pertinent
criterion. Nevertheless, if we get into practical geometry, then we
want to give to the axioms an intuitive meaning in order for them to
really give us a space for perceptive experiences or a space for
physics. In order to do that, one has to select a class of objects from
the world which are considered to be standards, allowing the
attribution of a measure to any material distance in the world.
However, we risk falling into a vicious circle concerning the se-
lection of the standards. This is well expressed by Helmholtz at the
beginning of his 1866 conference:
[…]in geometry we deal constantly with ideal structures, whose
corporeal portrayal in the actual world is always only an
approximation to what the concept demands, and we only
decide whether a body is ﬁxed [rigid], its sides ﬂat and its edges
straight, by means of the very propositions whose factual cor-
rectness the examination is supposed to show80.
Indeed, on one side, it seems that one has to deﬁne congruences,
i.e. the movements that are the objects of geometry, as those which
74 Helmholtz calls Euclid's method ”synthetic” <synthetischen Method>, as in
(Helmholtz, 1868, p. 10), and sometimes ” intuitive”, as in (Helmholtz, 1868, p. 4)
<Methode der Anschauung>. It seems clear, in the text, that the two are closely
related for Helmholtz.
75 These two last sentences were proposed by a reviewer of this article.
76 (Helmholtz, 1868, p. 5).
77 (Helmholtz, 1868, p. 5).
78 As is well known, cf. for ex. Scholz (2015), Helmholtz became aware of the
possibility of Lobachevsky geometry through a letter of Beltrami. Helmholtz (1866,
1868)) makes an incorrect mathematical statement, by forgetting this possibility. It
is corrected in Helmholtz (1870).
79 See (Helmholtz, 1870, p. 16, p. 16).
80 (Helmholtz, 1866, p. 39).
J. Bernard / Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics 61 (2018) 41e56
51

are performed by the standards (rigid bodies). On the other side,
reciprocally, in order to know if a certain class of bodies in the world
really have the property of rigidity, and then if they can be used as
standards, it seems that one has to compare their movements with
those that are expected from the axioms of geometry. Finally, the
axioms of geometry only make sense in the physical world by the
addition of some mechanical laws, which are equivalent to the ﬁx-
ation of the class of standards.81 The conclusion is that one can never
test the axioms of geometry alone, but always the complex: axioms
of geometryþmechanical law.82
From here, two solutions are possible. Helmholtz does not give
any epistemologically decisive argument to select one of these two
solutions. He simply expresses a personal preference for the ﬁrst
choice below, by contrast with Poincare83:
1. Either we conventionally84 ﬁx the laws of mechanics; for ex. one
decides that the bodies of a certain physical category, in a certain
speciﬁed condition, are rigid ones. In this case, the axioms of
geometry are effectively synthetic, but more precisely synthetic
a posteriori. They become hypotheses that can be tested by
experience.
2. Or we conventionally85 ﬁx the axioms of geometry. Then, the
propositions of geometry certainly become a priori judgements,
but more precisely analytical judgements. They are then just
deﬁnitions for the bodies that we decided to call “rigid”, ac-
cording to the laws of their movements. In that case, experience
can tell us if certain kinds of physical entities (for example: the
bodies made of solid matter, in a situation of thermic equilib-
rium, and at a distance from any interacting force) are rigid or
not.
We are in front of a system (geometryþmechanic), and we have
to chose to ﬁx, as a matter of convention, one of the two elements,
geometry or mechanic. At that point, the other element becomes a
possible subject of empirical inquiry. In accordance with our choice,
the axioms of geometry are either analytical or synthetic a poste-
riori, but never synthetic a priori. Helmholtz's refutation of tran-
scendental idealism is here ﬁnished.
I am conscious that the idea of “conventionalism” in geometry
is usually used only for Poincare, while we often prefer to keep the
word “empiricism” for Helmholtz's position. Certainly, there is a
good reason for that. Among the two positions described just
above, Helmholtz preferred position 1. while Poincare argued in
favour of 2. Nevertheless, it is important to remark that, in spite of
his
own
preference,
Helmholtz
had
already
indicated
the
epistemological
possibility
of
position
2
(without,
for
sure, explicitly using the term “convention”). Robert Disalle efor
examplee
acknowledges
this
fact,
even when
he
tries
to
contrast
Helmholtz's
supposed
empiricism
with
Poincare’s
conventionalism.86
3.7. Are all geometrical axioms on the same epistemological level?
One can underline that Helmholtz, in the developing of his
refutation
of
transcendental
idealism,
did
not
make
any
distinction between several kinds of geometrical axioms. In
considering more closely the ﬁctions and experiences he uses,
one can see however that he is thinking, above all, about the
axioms that ﬁx the constancy and then the value of curvature.
These are the axioms by which one can select the Euclidean
space from among other possible geometries. In his article, “On
the facts underlying geometry”, these axioms were: 1) free
mobility, 2) monodromy and then 3) a property characterizing
the vanishing of curvature.
Concerning the axiom of monodromy, or the axiom deter-
mining the value of the curvature, Helmholtz's argument is
convincing when applied to ﬁnite distances. Let us choose the ﬁrst
possibility from the two above: that is let us suppose that one has
chosen a class of physical objects and has decided to consider
them as rigid (standards). Then, the axioms of geometry become
physically testable hypotheses. There is nothing to oppose this
position. For example, it is possible to test if such a standard body
can turn around itself and come back to its initial position without
alteration (monodromy).
Concerning the axiom of existence of a rigid body, its status is
different, even if Helmholtz does not thematise this difference. He
only states that this axiom is, in a way, a condition of possibility of
any measure, and therefore the condition of possibility of any
81 The canonical examples are:
 the law according to which light moves along a linear trajectory.
 the law according to which a solid body, in the usual sense of matter theory,
isolated from certain exterior inﬂuences like thermic exchanges, etc., moves like
a rigid body.
These two canonical mechanical rules, respectively, allow light and solid bodies to
be considered as standards for geometrical measurements. Strictly speaking, by
only considering light paths as straight lines, we cannot have access to all
geometrical properties but only to the projective part.
82 (Helmholtz, 1868, p. 24):
Thus the axioms of geometry certainly do not speak of spatial relationships
alone, but also, at the same time, of the mechanical behaviour of our most ﬁxed
bodies during motions.
83 Poincare’s preference, like Helmholtz's, varies. (Poincare, 1902, Chap. V) ex-
plains that, if astronomical observations showed that the inferior limit of parallaxes
was not null, we could either choose to adopt Lobatcheksi geometry, or choose to
change the law of propagation of light. He then adds:
Inutile d'ajouter que tout le monde regarderait cette solution [la derniere]
comme plus avantageuse.
By contrast, within the framework of the measurement of time (Poincare, 1905, p.
44), defends the fact that the convention about the standards must be guided by
the simplicity of the mechanical laws thus obtained. Perhaps the only reasonible
criterion would be the simplicity of the global system: geometryþ mechanics. Cf.
also Schlick's note 31 in Helmholtz (1977).
84 The word “convention” in this context is not Helmholtz's but Poincare’s. We use
it to highlight the ﬁliation between both authors. Helmholtz instead speaks about
the possibility of adding propositions concerning the mechanical properties of
natural bodies to the axioms of geometry (Helmholtz, 1868, p. 25). However, he is
clear about the fact that there are several possibilities in choosing the standards,
without any possible empirical decision between them. It is clearly a convention in
the sense given by Poincare.
85 The word “convention” here is also Poincare’s. Helmholtz instead speaks here
about the possibility of positing a given system of geometrical axioms as a deﬁ-
nition of the word “rigid body”. In this case, geometrical theorems become
analytical, according to Helmholtz, because they are logical conclusions of mere
deﬁnitions. However, also here, it is clear in Helmholtz's text that there are
several possible alternative deﬁnitions for the geometrical behaviour of the
standards. Each system of axioms (Euclidean, elliptic, hyperbolic) furnishes a
possible choice of deﬁnition. It is clearly also a convention in the sense given by
Poincare.
86 See (DiSalle, 2006, p. 79-sq.), in particular on page 84:
[Speaking about Helmholtz] Either the principles of geometry, or the deﬁnition
of the fundamental geometrical quantities, must be set down a priori. If the
former, then which bodies are truly rigid or which paths straight becomes a
matter for empirical investigation e for the truly rigid bodies and the truly
straight lines will be those that accord with the chosen geometry. If the latter,
then the comportment of bodies and straight lines will reveal the geometry of
themselves.
J. Bernard / Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics 61 (2018) 41e56
52

practical geometry. Consequently, it is not an axiom having a role in
which it selects particular geometries from among all possible
ones.87
3.8. Problem of the philosophical status of the axioms, when
applied to the inﬁnitesimal
What about Helmholtz's axiom stating that space is a differen-
tial manifold88? It seems obvious, as a principle, that this axiom
cannot be considered an experimentally testable property.89 Ac-
cording to Helmholtz's construction it is indispensable in giving a
foundation to geometry, without being able to receive the peculiar
epistemological status that Helmholtz attributes to the axioms of
geometry. One could perhaps defend the idea that the number of
dimensions is an experimental fact. But what could it mean to test if
space is a manifold or if it is differentiable?
In fact, Helmholtz's position is even more unsteady if one notes
that this axiom is not the only one which is problematic. The other
axioms, speaking about congruent moves, whose geometrical
meaning is more evident, lead to insuperable difﬁculties for
Helmholtz's thesis, as soon as one interprets them for inﬁnitesimal
movements, as it is necessary for Helmholtz's p.o.s. What could it
mean to test their validity empirically in the inﬁnitesimal? One
can certainly use very small standards, “inﬁnitesimal” in the
metaphorical sense, meaning “microscopic”. This is precisely how
the microscopic beings of one of Helmholtz's ﬁctions, living on an
egg-shape, must proceed. They have very small standards, small
enough for the variation of the curvature to imperceptibly act on
them. As a result, they become adequate standards to measure the
curvature of space and its variability. Of course, the more precision
we want, the smaller standard we need; the process being open to
inﬁnity. However, this is all we need. The described process of
smaller and smaller standards can actually be used by any prac-
tical geometer, using triangulation from the measurement of small
segments, to reconstruct the global shape of a big object or
geographical region.
In contrast, to manipulate an inﬁnitesimal standard, in the
strict mathematical sense of inﬁnitesimal, is absurd. Helmholtz
escapes this issue in his articles of 1868 and 1870 by suggesting,
rightly, that the axioms of monodromy and free mobility can be
experimentally tested in the ﬁnite (through mechanical conven-
tions), and by inferring, wrongly, that they are therefore valid in
the
inﬁnitesimal.
Helmholtz
ultimately
bases
his
empiricist
method to solve the p.o.s. on this mistaken transition to the
inﬁnitesimal. However, as Lie has shown, it is only legitimate to
posit the validity of the axioms of free mobility and monodromy in
the inﬁnitesimal with a new act of assumption independent of the
validity of the same axioms in the ﬁnite, though it then seems
impossible to understand how such an assumption could still have
empirical support90.
4. Discussion
In the present article, I have inquired into the relationship be-
tween Weyl's relativistic solution to the problem of space, and
Riemann's and Helmholtz's solutions.
In the ﬁrst section (numbered 2.), we saw how Riemann used his
analytical method to express some hypotheses on which the choice
of a deﬁnite quadratic form for the metric can be based. The Rie-
mannian metric was selected from what were to be called “Finsler
metrics” in the following decades. It is known91 that Weyl gave up
Riemann-Finsler's methods for group-theoretical ones, when he
turned toward the relativistic problem of space. What were the
reasons for this change?
Firstly, we might think that the problem stems from the deﬁ-
niteness of the Riemannian metric. In the context of relativistic
physics, this deﬁniteness is unacceptable. However, as I explained
in the last part of the ﬁrst section, we today know that this problem
is not insuperable from a mathematical point of view. By slightly
generalizing the original Riemann-Finsler methods, we can extend
them to indeﬁnite metrics. With or without an intuition about this,
Weyl does not identify the indeﬁniteness of the relativistic metric
as a major problem for Riemann-Finsler's methods.
Secondly, we might think that the problem stems from the
incompleteness of Riemann's “deduction”. Indeed, most of the
commentators of Riemann's habilitation text remarked that the
(square root of) the quadratic form is not the only kind of metric
considered by the author. We saw that he also mentioned, for
example, the fourth root of a quartic form. Is this a sign that Rie-
mann's method is unable to select a unique kind of metric? I don't
think so. Indeed, in the last page of section 2.3, I showed how we
could clarify Riemann's hypothesis E4, in order to select only the
quadratic form. As a consequence, I agree with most commentators
that Riemann's “deduction” that the metric is “Riemannian” is
rather obscure, and incomplete as it is given in the text (other
metrics, given for example by quartic forms, being seemingly
acceptable). Nevertheless, I showed that this incompleteness can be
overcome by adding other hypotheses (some of which are certainly
implicit in Riemann's text), by being more precise on some hy-
potheses, and by using modern results about Finsler metrics.
Thus Riemann-Finsler's methods appear to be more effective
than it seems at ﬁrst sight. That is why it is more reasonable to think
87 (Helmholtz, 1870, p. 42). Some commentators, like Torretti, think that all
Helmholtz's axioms that determine the geometry to be of constant curvature have
this special epistemological status. In other words, the constancy of curvature, in
the precise sense given by Riemann-Helmholtz, would be a necessary condition of
any physical measurement (Torretti, 1978, p. 154). We can ﬁnd in Helmholtz pas-
sages for and against this. This interpretation implies that, among Helmholtz's
axioms, only the measure of curvature would be really subject to a possible
empirical inquiry. All the others would be necessary conditions for the possibility of
measurements. Such an interpretation allows an aprioristic reading of Helmholtz's
work, even if it is an apriori in a different sense from Kant, as shown by (Torretti,
1978, p. 163; 168). According to me, this interpretation of Helmholtz seems
incompatible with Helmholtz's insistence on the fact that geometry can be
considered (through the adoption of mechanical conventions) as based on empir-
ical facts. How could this be possible if only the measure of curvature was accessible
to empirical inquiry, and none of the other axioms? My interpretation is that only
the existence of standards (rigid bodies) is a necessary condition for measur-
ement,enot all the other axioms that characterise the movement of the standard to
be maximally free (ﬂag-isotropy in modern reinterpretation). This other interpre-
tation is allowed by Helmholtz's distinction, in his 1868 article, between the axiom
of existence of rigid bodies, and the axiom of free mobility. Only the ﬁrst would be
an a priori condition of possibility of physical measurement. In order to defend this
interpretation convincingly, an entire article would be necessary.
88 (Helmholtz, 1870, pp. 41e42, Axiom I.).
89 (Torretti, 1978, p. 156) defends that only the fact that space is a manifold is an a
priori hypothesis in Riemann, and that all other hypotheses, even the continuity of
space are of empirical content. I don't know how to make this kind of position
meaningful. We will see in conclusion that Torretti's interpretation of Riemann, like
Helmholtz's, almost ignores the peculiar epistemological status of parts I.þII. of
Riemann's memoir.
90 Nevertheless, in (Merker, 2010, p. 289-sq.), Lie proposes a new way of solving
Helmholtz's p.o.s. He uses a method which is inspired by Helmholtz but which uses
the classiﬁcation of all Lie groups of ﬁnite dimension acting on the 3-dimensional
space. In doing so, he avoids Helmholtz's unjustiﬁed inference, and can select the
constant curvature spaces using an axiom of free mobility directly interpreted in
the ﬁnite. The axiom of monodromy in that reconstruction becomes dispensable
(Merker, 2010, p. 220; 257). However, as Lie notes, the demonstration is then based
on a new hypothesis, whose empiricist interpretation is equally problematic: that
space is a 3-dimensional manifold endowed with a (differentiable) Lie group of
transformations.
91 See for example Scholz (2001).
J. Bernard / Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics 61 (2018) 41e56
53

that Weyl's reasons for giving them up depend on his philosophy of
space. De facto, Weyl thought that Riemann-Finsler's methods were
irrelevant to tackling the problem of space, because they fail to put
the notion of groups of transformations at the centre of the prob-
lem. That is why, in order to enunciate his problem of space and to
prove the associated theorem, Weyl chose the same type of group-
theoretical methods that was heralded by Helmholtz, and elabo-
rated by Lie and Klein.
Consequently, with regard to the techniques involved, Weyl's
p.o.s. is closer to Helmholtz's construction than to Riemann's.
However, in the second section (numbered 3.), I showed that,
where the philosophy of space is concerned, Weyl's thinking was
strongly opposed to that of Helmholtz. In that section, I charac-
terised Helmholtz's position as an empiricism with an hint of
conventionalism. In doing so, I simply wanted to counterbalance
the epistemological difference between Helmholtz's and Poincare’s
positions, by remembering their common origin. Weyl's philosophy
of space (at least concerning the inﬁnitesimal realm) was conceived
against conventionalism as well as against empiricism. Weyl
wanted to show that there is, in geometry, a place for authentically
synthetic a priori judgements, and for aprioristic considerations
that cannot be reduced to mere conventions. Empiricism and
conventionalism were two concurrent positions to Weyl's approach
in the early 1920s. In that respect, it was important to stress the
ﬁliation between the ﬁrst two positions.
The whole empiricist philosophy of Helmholtz was based on
axioms (free mobility, monodromy) that apply at the inﬁnitesimal
scale as well as at the ﬁnite scale. This economy of principles is
unacceptable, from a Weylian perspective, because it leads to a
confusion between the epistemological statuses of both scales of
determination of the metric. The techniques that Weyl borrowed
(often indirectly) from Helmholtz are not marred by the initial
defect anymore. Indeed, Weyl systematizes the radical epistemo-
logical frontier between the inﬁnitesimal and the ﬁnite de-
terminations of the metric, which could be guessed at through the
architecture of Riemann's p.o.s. Finally, Weyl's group-theoretical
methods ﬁnd a different scope than Helmholtz's. The spatial
transformations occurring in his foundations of geometry (in Weyl
(1923a)) cannot be indifferently construed as ﬁnite or inﬁnitesimal
ones, as for Helmholtz. Rather, Weyl's Lie-groups of rotation [Dre-
hungsgruppe] are only deﬁned as acting inﬁnitesimally on the
tangent space. Weyl does not adhere to Helmholtz's naive
transition from properties of the metric in the ﬁnite to the analo-
gous properties in the inﬁnitesimal.
In this regard, it is striking that Helmholtz, even if he often
referred to Riemann's memoir, never said anything about the Rie-
mannian a priori arguments justifying the Pythagorean nature of
metric (in the inﬁnitesimal). Helmholtz even wrongly repeats that
Riemann directly posited the Pythagorean nature of the metric, as
an initial hypothesis.92 Helmholtz ignores or pretends to ignore
Riemann's arguments for the inﬁnitesimal quadratic nature of the
metric, perhaps because they are aprioristic arguments lacking any
possible interpretation inside a strictly empiricist framework.
Helmholtz wants us to focus only on the second, empirical part of
Riemann's memoir, and this wish is already expressed in Helm-
holtz's title, replacing Riemann's “Über die Hypothesen, welche der
Geometrie zu Grunde liegen” with “Über die Tatsachlichen Grund-
lagen der Geometrie” (my emphasis). Even a century later, Torretti
seems elike Helmholtze to ignore the particular epistemological a
priori status of Riemann's assumptions in part I.þII., when he af-
ﬁrms that all Riemann's axioms, except the number of dimensions,
are only hypotheses which are never entirely certain and always
submitted to physical test.93
Therefore, even if Helmholtz's solution to the p.o.s. is parsimo-
nious (in its number of principles), it contains a philosophical
weakness: it does not acknowledge the peculiar epistemological
status of Riemannian inﬁnitesimal assumptions. In his historical
account of the philosophical opinions on the p.o.s., Weyl criticises
Poincare but he does not directly criticise Helmholtz. In the rela-
tivistic context, Weyl considers Helmholtz-Lie's p.o.s. to be obso-
lete, only from a mathematical and physical point of view, because
of the anisotropy of Minkowski space. Indeed, let us adopt Weyl-
Lie's interpretation of Helmholtz's axioms, in terms of maximal
isotropy (ﬂag isotropy). Poincare group is excluded, in so far as
timelike and spacelike directions are distinguished. If we keep the
original formulation of Helmholtz's axioms, we can see that the
axiom of monodromy (cf. illustration below), as well as the axiom
of free mobility,94 are not fulﬁlled.
Under the action of a one parameter subgroup of the Lorentz
group, spanned by a relativistic boost, the unit vector lying on the
92 (Helmholtz, 1977, p. 15; 40; 41).
93 Cf. also our note 89.
94 Cf. (Merker, 2010, p. 255).
J. Bernard / Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics 61 (2018) 41e56
54

time axis moves throughout a hyperbola; but it cannot cross the
light cone. Helmholtz's axiom of monodromy is not fulﬁlled.
While criticizing Helmholtz's mathematical construction, as
ineffective for relativistic space, Weyl is silent about Helmholtz's
empirico-conventionalist opinion. Why? Perhaps Weyl was not
familiar with Helmholtz's philosophical text of 1870, but only with
his technical articles of 1866 and 1868.95 In any case Weyl was
indulgent also because the version he presents in Mathematische
Analyse des Raumproblems is not the precise historical position of
Helmholtz. He does not present Helmholtz's polemical position
against the possibility of synthetic a priori judgements. Instead,
Weyl presents the reformed version, following Sophus Lie's who
expressed the idea of free mobility directly in the inﬁnitesimal, as a
rational requirement, within a framework that is closer to his own
inﬁnitesimal geometry and his epistemology.
Weyl's effort to apply group-theoretical methods, together with
a cautious attention to the frontier between inﬁnitesimal and ﬁnite,
had important mathematical and physical consequences. Indeed, it
permitted him to unequivocally determine the nature of the metric,
and at the same time keep the variation of the coefﬁcients of the
metric free. Thanks to this, the curved geometries, which the
modern physics needed, could enter Weyl's ambitious foundational
program.96
However, the epistemological debate concerning the relation-
ship between the inﬁnitesimal and ﬁnite realms did not ﬁnish with
Riemann, Helmholtz and Lie. It is a recurrent issue that emerges,
again and again, in new geometrical and historical contexts. Oskar
Becker, in his habilitation thesis, and in his correspondence with
Weyl, proposes a reinterpretation of the p.o.s. I think, in a way, that
Becker had to rehabilitate the possibility of a transition from the
ﬁnite to the inﬁnitesimal, in order to allow a phenomenal access to
the inﬁnitesimal structural properties of space, from the phenom-
enology of lower perceptive layers of spatiality. The fundamental
opposition between Helmholtz and Riemann, concerning the
articulation of the ﬁnite and the inﬁnitesimal, and the existence of
an epistemological gap between them, was to be opened anew in
this relativistic and phenomenological context, with the opposition
of Weyl and Becker. That, however, is another story.97
References
Antonelli, P. (2003). Handbook of Finsler geometry, 2 tomes. Kluwer Academic.
Audureau, E., & Bernard, J. (2015). L'Analyse mathematique du probleme de l’espace
(in press). In French-German annotated version of H. Weyl's Mathematische
Analyse des Raumproblems (p. 220). Presses Universitaires de Provence.
Becker, O. (1923). Beitr€age zur ph€anomenologischen Begründung der Geometrie
und ihrer physikalischen Anwendung. In Jahrbuch für Philosophie und ph€ano-
menologische Forschung, IV. New edition as monograph by Niemeyer (1973).
Bernard, J. (2010). Les fondements epistemologiques de la Nahegeometrie d’Hermann
Weyl. Ph.D. thesis. Universite de Provence http://tel.archives-ouvertes.fr/tel-
00651772.
Bernard, J. (2013). L’idealisme dans l’inﬁnitesimal. In Prix Paul Ricœur 2012. Presses
Universitaires de Paris Ouest.
Bernard, J. (2015a). Becker-blaschke problem of space. Studies in History and Phi-
losophy of Modern Physics, 52(Part B), 251e266.
Bernard, J. (2015b). Les tapuscrits barcelonais sur le probleme de l’espace de Weyl
[The Typescripts from Barcelona on Weyl's Problem of Space]. Revue d’Histoire
des Mathematiques, 21, 147e167.
Bonola, R. (1912). In Non-euclidean geometry. COSIMO CLASSICS. Reedition: 2007.
Bryant, R. L. (2015). Answer to the question “Smoothness of the fourth power of the
geodesic distance in a Finsler geometry”. In Within the forum “Mathoverﬂow”.
http://mathoverﬂow.net/questions/220887/smoothness-of-the-fourth-
powerof-the-geodesic-distance-in-a-ﬁnsler-geometry
(Accessed
23
August
2016).
Busemann, H. (1955). On normal coordinates in ﬁnsler spaces. Mathematics Annalen,
129.
Caratheodory, C. (1935). In Von Constantin Caratheodory (Ed.), Variationsrechnung
und Partielle Differentialgleichungen Erset Ordung. B.G. Teubner.
Coleman, R., & Korte, H. (2001). Hermann Weyl: Mathematician, physicist, philoso-
pher. Hermann Weyl's Raum Zeit Materie and a general introduction to his sci-
entiﬁc work (pp. 215e250). Paragraphs II. 4.5 to 4.7.
DiSalle, R. (2006). Understanding Space-Time: The Philosophical Development of
Physics from Newton to Einstein. Cambridge University Press.
Eckes, C. (2011). Groupes, invariants et geometries dans l’œuvre de Weyl. Ph.D. thesis.
Universite Jean Moulin Lyon 3.
Gauss, C. (1827). Recherches generales sur les surfaces courbes. Prudhomme. Edition
of 1870.
Gor, G., Waerden (van der), B., & Miller, A. I. (1974). Comments on Miller's “the Myth
of Gauss' experiment on the euclidean nature of physical space”. Isis, 65, 83e87.
Helmholtz, H. (1866). Über die Tatsachlichen Grundlagen der Geometrie. Ver-
handlungen des naturhistorisch-medicinischen Vereins zu Heildelberg, 5(4 Sup-
plements), 31e32, 30.4.1869.
Helmholtz, H. (1868). Über die Tatsachen, die der Geometrie zum Grunde liegen.
Nachrichten von der K€onigl. In Mathematisch-physikalische Klasse. Gesellschaft
der Wissenschaften und der Georg-Augusts-Universit€at zu G€ottingen, 9. We
quoted this article from the Hertz-Schlick book.
Helmholtz, H. (1870). Über den Ursprung und die Bedeutung der geometrischen
Axiome. In Vortr€age und Reden von Hermann von Helmholtz, II, 1e35. Conference
at Heidelberg in 1870, edited in 1896.
Helmholtz, H. (1977). In Epistemological Writings: The Paul Hertz/Moritz Schlick
Centenary Edition of 1921, With Notes and Commentary by the Editors. Boston
Studies in the Philosophy and History of Science. D. Reidel Publishing Company.
With notes from Hertz and Schlick.
Laugwitz, D. (1958). Über eine Vermutung von Hermann Weyl zum Raumproblem.
Archiv der Mathematik, 9, 128e133.
Lie, S. (1890). Über die Grundlagen der Geometrie. Verhandlungen der Kgl.
S€achsischen Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften zu Leipzig, 42, 284e321, 355e418.
Two parts.
Lie, S., & Engel, F. (2012). Theorie der transformationsgruppen. BiblioBazaar. From
their work of 1888e1893.
Mancosu, P., & Ryckman, T. (2002). Mathematics and phenomenology: The corre-
spondence between O. Becker and H. Weyl. Philosophia Mathematica, 10(2),
130e202.
Mancosu, P., & Ryckman, T. (2005). Geometry, Physics and Phenomenology: the Cor-
respondence between O. Becker and H. Weyl. Die Philosophie und die Mathematik:
Oskar Becker in der mathematischen Grundlagendiskussion (pp. 152e228).
Merker, J. (2010). In Le probleme de l’espace: Sophus Lie, Friedrich Engel et le probleme
de Riemann-Helmholtz. Editions Hermann.
Miller, A. I. (1972). The Myth of Gauss' experiment on the euclidean nature of
physical space. Isis, 63, 345e348.
Nabonnand, P. (2009). La notion d’holonomie chez Elie Cartan. Revue d’histoire des
sciences, 62, 221e245.
Poincare, H. (1902). New edition: 2000. In E. Flammarion (Ed.), La science et
l’hypothese. Bibliotheque de philosophie scientiﬁque.
Poincare, H. (1905). In E. Flammarion (Ed.), La Valeur de la science. Bibliotheque de
philosophie scientiﬁque.
Riemann, B. (1867). In R. Dedekind (Ed.), Über die Hypothesen, welche der Geometrie
zu Grunde liegen. Abhandlungen der K€oniglichen Gesellschaft der Wissenscahften,
13 (1866-1867), 133e152. From Riemann's inaugural lecture (1854) at the Uni-
versity of G€ottingen.
Riemann, B. (1898). Sur les hypotheses qui servent de fondement a la geometrie.
Œuvres mathematiques de Riemann.
Riemann, B. (1919). In Über die Hypothesen, welche der Geometrie zu Grunde liegen
(1st ed.). Springer. Edited by H. Weyl with critical notes.
Riemann, B. (1921). In Über die Hypothesen, welche der Geometrie zu Grunde liegen
(2nd ed.). Springer. Edited by H. Weyl with critical notes.
Riemann, B. (1923). In Über die Hypothesen, welche der Geometrie zu Grunde liegen
(3rd ed.). Springer. Edited by H. Weyl with critical notes.
Rund, H. (1959). The differential geometry of ﬁnsler spaces. In Grundlehren Der
Mathematischen Wissenschaften. Springer.
Ryckman, T. (2005). The Reign of relativity. Oxford University Press.
Scheibe, E. (1957). Über das Weylsche Raumproblem. Journal für Mathematik, 197(3/
4), 162e207. From his dissertation in G€ottingen (1955).
Scheibe, E. (2001). Hermann Weyl and the nature of spacetime. In Between ratio-
nalism and Empiricism: Selected papers in the philosophy of physics (pp.
475e489). Springer.
Scholz, E. (1980). Geschichte des Mannigfaltigkeitsbegriffs von Riemann bis Poincare.
Birkh€auser.
Scholz, E. (1982). Herbart's inﬂuence on bernhard Riemann. Historia Mathematica, 9,
413e440.
Scholz, E. (1994). Hermann Weyl's contribution to geometry, 1917-1923. In The
intersection of history and mathematics (pp. 203e230).
Scholz, E. (1995). Hermann Weyl's purely inﬁnitesimal geometry. In Proceedings of
the
international
congress
of
mathematicians,
Zürich
Switzerland
(pp.
1592e1603).
Scholz, E. (1999). Weyl and the theory of connections. In The symbolic Universe:
Geometry and physics 1890-1930 (pp. 260e284).
95 In (Weyl, 2010, p. 319, biog. note 2 to chapter I.) and (Weyl, 1923a, p. 30), Weyl
makes reference only to Helmholtz's technical paper.
96 Weyl shared with Cartan (Cf. for ex. Nabonnand (2009)) and Klein, the aim for
reconciling differential geometry with the primacy of the notion of group.
97 See Bernard (2015a).
J. Bernard / Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics 61 (2018) 41e56
55

Scholz, E. (2001). Weyl's inﬁnitesimalgeometrie (1917-1925). In Hermann Weyl's
Raum Zeit Materie and a general introduction to his scientiﬁc work (pp.
48e104).
Scholz, E. (2004a). C.F.Gauss' Pr€azisionsmessungen terrestrischer Dreiecke und
seine Überlegungen zur empirischen Fundierung der Geometrie in den 1820er
Jahren. In M. Folkerts, U. Hashagen, R. Seising, et al. (Eds.), Form, Zahl, Ordnung.
Studien
zur
Wissenschafts-
und
Technikgeschichte. Ivo
Schneider
zum
65.
Geburtstag (p. 355380). Stuttgart: Franz Steiner Verlag.
Scholz, E. (2004b). Hermann Weyl's analysis of the “problem of space” and the
origin of gauge. Structures. Science in Context, 165e197.
Scholz, E. (2005). Carl F. Gauss, el gran triangulo y los fundamentos de la geometría.
Gaceta de la Real Sociedad Matematica Espa~nola, 8, 683e712. Translation of the
article of 2004. Reprint Ciencia al Viento, Bogota, 12.06.2015.
Scholz, E. (2012). H. Weyl's and E. Cartan's proposals for inﬁnitesimal geometry in
the early 1920s. Newsletter European Mathematical Society, 84, 22e30.
Scholz, E. (2015). The problem of space in the light of relativity, the view of H. Weyl and
E. Cartan. Submitted.
Scholz, E. (2017). Another look at Miller's Myth. 01. 09. 2005 (unpublished). In
Luminy conference on history of geometry.
Sieroka, N. (2009). Husserlian and ﬁchtean leanings: Weyl on logicism, intui-
tionism, and formalism. Philosophia Scientiae, 13, 85e96.
Spivak, M. (1975). A comprehensive introduction to differential geometry. In
A comprehensive introduction to differential geometry (Vol. 3). Publish or Perish,
Incorporated.
Torretti, R. (1978). Philosophy of geometry from Riemann to Poincare. Episteme
(Dordrecht): Springer.
Weyl, H. (1919). Raum, Zeit, Materie (3rd ed.). Berlin: Julius Springer.
Weyl, H. (1922). Das Raumproblem. In Jahresbericht der Deutschen Mathematiker-
Vereinigung (Vol. 31, pp. 205e221).
Weyl, H. (1923a). Mathematische Analyse des Raumproblems. Berlin: Julius Springer.
Weyl, H. (1923b). Raum-Zeit-materie (Cinquieme edition). Berlin: Julius Springer.
Weyl, H. (1923c). Zur Charakterisierung der Drehungsgruppe. Mathematische
Zeitschrift, 17, 293e320.
Weyl, H. (1939). The classical Groups: Their invariants and representations. Princeton
mathematical series. Princeton University Press.
Weyl, H. (1949). Philosophy of mathematics and natural science. Princeton University
Press. From an article of 1927.
Weyl, H. (2010). Space, time, matter. Cosimo Classics.
Whitehead, J. (1935). On the covering of a complete space by the geodesics through
a point. Annals of Mathematics, 36(3).
J. Bernard / Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics 61 (2018) 41e56
56

