Semantic similarity estimation in the biomedical domain: An ontology-based
information-theoretic perspective
David Sánchez ⇑, Montserrat Batet
Departament d’Enginyeria Informàtica i Matemàtiques, Universitat Rovira i Virgili, Av. Països Catalans, 26, 43007 Tarragona, Catalonia, Spain
a r t i c l e
i n f o
Article history:
Received 17 November 2010
Available online 2 April 2011
Keywords:
Information theory
Information Content
Semantic similarity
Biomedical ontologies
a b s t r a c t
Semantic similarity estimation is an important component of analysing natural language resources like
clinical records. Proper understanding of concept semantics allows for improved use and integration of
heterogeneous clinical sources as well as higher information retrieval accuracy. Semantic similarity
has been the focus of much research, which has led to the deﬁnition of heterogeneous measures using
different theoretical principles and knowledge resources in a variety of contexts and application domains.
In this paper, we study several of these measures, in addition to other similarity coefﬁcients (not neces-
sarily framed in a semantic context) that may be useful in determining the similarity of sets of terms. In
order to make them easier to interpret and improve their applicability and accuracy, we propose a frame-
work grounded in information theory that allows the measures studied to be uniformly redeﬁned. Our
framework is based on approximating concept semantics in terms of Information Content (IC). We also
propose computing IC in a scalable and efﬁcient manner from the taxonomical knowledge modelled in
biomedical ontologies. As a result, new semantic similarity measures expressed in terms of concept Infor-
mation Content are presented. These measures are evaluated and compared to related works using a
benchmark of medical terms and a standard biomedical ontology. We found that an information-theoret-
ical redeﬁnition of well-known semantic measures and similarity coefﬁcients, and an intrinsic estimation
of concept IC result in noticeable improvements in their accuracy.
 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1. Introduction
The estimation of semantic similarity between concepts is an
important component of analysing natural language resources.
Proper assessment of concept alikeness improves the understand-
ing of textual resources and increases the accuracy of knowledge-
based applications. Semantic similarity estimation has many direct
applications. Word sense disambiguation [1,2], for example, can be
tackled by assessing how semantically similar the context words of
an ambiguous term is with respect to each of its senses (each one
described by a textual gloss in a thesaurus). The evaluation of the
similarity between the context of a term and its senses also enables
automatic spelling error detection and correction systems [3]. They
assume that potentially erroneous terms are those semantically
unrelated to any of their senses; these errors are corrected by dis-
covering lexical variations of problematic terms that appear to be
semantically related to the context. Semantic similarity can also
assist the detection of different formulations of the same concept
[4], such as synonyms, lexicalizations or even acronyms. Language
translation [5] relies on similar strategies because, in fact, the
detection of terms pairs expressed in different languages but refer-
ring to the same concept can be seen as a synonym discovery task.
Semantic similarity assessments can also assist information extrac-
tion [6] and knowledge acquisition tasks, such as semantic annota-
tion [7] and ontology learning [8,9]. They parse textual resources to
extract or detect terms that can be semantically related to already
acquired ones. Finally, categorisation or clustering [5,10] algo-
rithms analysing individuals described by textual features rely on
semantic similarity measures to detect and group the most similar
subjects.
The biomedical domain is an especially relevant context due to
the proliferation of textual resources and the importance of termi-
nology. As stated above, semantic similarity measures are needed
to classify textual data [11,12] such as clinical records. For exam-
ple, patient’s records (expressed in unstructured or semi-struc-
tured textual forms) can be semantically analysed by means of
similarity measures to identify subjects with similar conditions
or pathologies. As a result, classical data-mining techniques can
be applied to textual medical data to extract useful information
about previous care processes, evolution of certain diseases, social
trends, etc. Semantic technologies can also assist the integration of
heterogeneous clinical data [13] (such as clinical records expressed
in different formats), in which a semantic interpretation of their
1532-0464/$ - see front matter  2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.jbi.2011.03.013
⇑Corresponding author. Fax: +34 977559710.
E-mail address: david.sanchez@urv.cat (D. Sánchez).
Journal of Biomedical Informatics 44 (2011) 749–759
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Journal of Biomedical Informatics
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/yjbin

content is needed to coherently manage them. This can improve
the interoperability between medical sources, which are com-
monly dispersed and stand-alone. Medical information retrieval
(IR) and literature mining [14] are also a relevant areas in this do-
main, in which a large amount of electronic information is avail-
able (e.g., clinical histories, digital libraries like PubMed, etc.).
Due to the strictness of keyword-based search engines, IR recall
can be improved by extending user’s queries to conceptually
equivalent formulations using semantically similar terms [15]. Fi-
nally, IR from digital libraries can also beneﬁt from a conceptual
indexing of stored documents, structured according the semantic
similarity between the most salient topics [16,17].
Because of the importance of accurate semantic similarity esti-
mation, it has been extensively studied in the past, leading to the
deﬁnition of a variety of measures. Many works have proposed
general-purpose similarity measures [18–21], while other authors
have deﬁned ad hoc solutions or applied/adapted general ap-
proaches in a particular domain [22–24]. It is important to note
that two different paradigms can be found in the literature [24].
On one hand, semantic similarity, which is the focus of this paper,
states the taxonomic proximity between terms. For example, bron-
chitis and ﬂu are similar because both are disorders of the respira-
tory system (i.e., they share some aspects of their meaning). On the
other hand, the more general concept of semantic relatedness con-
siders taxonomic and non-taxonomic relations (e.g., meronymy,
functionality, cause-effect, etc.) between terms. For example, we
can say that diuretics and hypertension are related (because the for-
mer is used to treat the later) even though they are not taxonom-
ically similar.
Similarity (i.e., taxonomy-based) measures can be classiﬁed
according to their theoretical principles and the knowledge sources
used. In the former case, different measures have been deﬁned based
on the analysis of the geometric structure of subsumption hierar-
chies, the estimation of the concept’s Information Content (IC), the
evaluation of semantic features, etc. (see Section 2). In the latter
case, different knowledge resources have been considered, such as
ontologies/taxonomies, domain corpora, thesauri, etc. Most works
make use of general-purpose resources (such as domain-indepen-
dent tagged corpora or WordNet [25], a thesaurus that ontologically
describes and organises more than 100,000 concepts). However,
these sources offer limited coverage of biomedical terms [15]. Fortu-
nately, the ﬁeld of biomedicine has been very proliﬁc in creating and
deﬁning structured knowledge sources, such as medical ontologies
or structured vocabularies that model and organise concepts in a
comprehensive and non-ambiguous manner. Some well-known
examples include Medical Subject Headings (MeSH), International
Classiﬁcation of Diseases (the ICD taxonomy) and Systematised
Nomenclature of Medicine, Clinical Terms (SNOMED CT). Because of
the availability of these resources, there has been growing interest
in recent years in using biomedical knowledge structures for
semantic
similarity
assessments
[15,22,24].
Some
relatedness
measures (which are mainly based on the distribution of terms in
a corpus [26] or on the degree of overlapping between context word
vectors [27]) have been also applied to biomedicine by using
semi-structured medical corpora as knowledge sources [15].
Despite differing approaches to semantic similarity, a formal
study of some of them [28] reveals that similarity estimations
are based on evaluating commonalities and/or differences between
compared terms. This basic principle is shared with other similar-
ity functions, which are not framed in a semantic context. Set the-
ory, for example, which aims to evaluate the alikeness between
sets according to their overlapping and differential elements, de-
ﬁnes numerous similarity coefﬁcients [29]. In fact, as other studies
have shown in the past [28] and as we will show in this paper,
some widely used semantic similarity measures are equivalent to
classical set-based coefﬁcients.
Our work aims to contribute to the body of research concerning
this topic. We propose a common framework for semantic similarity
estimation (i.e., focused on the taxonomic aspect) based on infor-
mation theory, in which concepts are semantically characterised
by the amount of information (i.e., Information Content (IC)) they
provide. As opposed to classical approaches that base IC computa-
tion on term appearance probabilities in corpora [20], our approach
will use the taxonomic structure of biomedical sources like the
above-mentioned ontologies/vocabularies to compute IC. We then
apply the framework to redeﬁne well-known semantic similarity
measures and classic similarity coefﬁcients, resulting in new mea-
sures framed in information theory. Because the new measures
are uniformly expressed and use the same principles, a clearer com-
parison of measures (originally deﬁned in different contexts and
with different aims) is possible. Moreover, it enables the use of
well-known similarity coefﬁcients [29–31] (with robust theoretical
foundations and properties [32,33]) in a semantic context.
To summarise, in this paper we study and compare several
commonly referenced similarity computation paradigms, regard-
less of whether or not they are framed in a semantic context or
in the speciﬁc ﬁeld of biomedicine. We propose a framework for
each of them based on information theory which allows heteroge-
neous measures to be rewritten in a uniform manner, obtaining
new semantic similarity functions. Finally, we evaluate the accu-
racy of these new approaches in the ﬁeld of biomedicine, compar-
ing them to related works by means of a widely used benchmark of
medical terms using SNOMED CT as a knowledge source. Our re-
sults show that an information-theoretical redeﬁnition of well-
known semantic measures and similarity coefﬁcients leads to a
noticeable improvement in accuracy in comparison to other simi-
larity-focused ontology-based related works.
The remainder of this paper is organised as follows. Section 2
analyses the possibilities of information theory in describing con-
cept semantics and studies the primary approaches used in com-
puting the IC of a concept focusing on ontology-based paradigms.
Next we describe previous proposals for IC-based measures for
semantic similarity estimation. We then study several set-based
similarity coefﬁcients and ontology-based semantic measures not
framed in information theory. Finally, we present a general frame-
work for redeﬁning these measures in terms of the IC of concepts.
Section 3 evaluates the redeﬁned measures and compares them to
related works when applied to biomedical terms. Section 4 analy-
ses and discusses the results. The ﬁnal section presents our conclu-
sions and lines of future research.
2. Methods
2.1. Estimating the IC of a concept
In the context of information theory and semantics, concepts
are evaluated according to their Information Content (IC). IC quan-
tiﬁes the amount of information provided by a given term when
appearing in a discourse. This is a powerful statement that summa-
rises concept semantics. It can be used to compute the similarity
between concepts according to the amount of information they
share (see Section 2.2).
Our framework for similarity estimation relies closely on the
accurate estimation of the IC of concepts. In this section we survey
the most common ways to compute IC.
In Resnik’s seminal work [20], IC is computed as (1):
ICðcÞ ¼  log pðcÞ
ð1Þ
where p(c) is the probability the concept c appearing in a corpus.
Ideally, if the corpus is large and heterogeneous enough to accu-
rately represent concept usage at a social scale, p(c) will enable an
750
D. Sánchez, M. Batet / Journal of Biomedical Informatics 44 (2011) 749–759

accurate computation of the IC of c. However, textual ambiguity
and data sparseness severely hamper p(c) estimation. On the one
hand, because textual corpora contain words rather than concepts,
it is necessary to disambiguate concept appearances, identifying
word senses by means of manual tagging. On the other hand, it
is unlikely to have such large and representative tagged corpora,
especially in speciﬁc domains such as biomedicine.
In a general context, related works [18,20] estimated concept
appearance frequencies from SemCor [34], a semantically tagged
text consisting of 100 passages extracted from the Brown Corpus.
Due to the manual tagging based on the ﬁne grained structure of
word senses covered by WordNet, p(c) calculation was accurate,
but limited to the coverage of corpora (which represented less than
13% of the word senses available in the latest version of WordNet
[35]).
It is important to note that to compute coherent values of p(c)
from a semantic point of view, one must consider all the explicit
appearances of c in addition to the appearances of concepts that
are semantically subsumed by c (i.e., all its taxonomical specialisa-
tions and instances). For example, to estimate the IC of the concept
‘disease’, all its explicit appearances should be counted along with
the appearances of all its specialisations such as ‘ﬂu’, ‘measles’, and
‘mumps’. Formally, Resnik proposed calculating p(c) as (2):
pðcÞ ¼
P
w2WðcÞcountðwÞ
N
ð2Þ
where W(c) is the set of terms in the corpus whose senses are sub-
sumed by c and N is the total number of corpus terms.
To do this, related works [4,18,20] obtained concept specialisa-
tions from general-purpose ontological resources such as Word-
Net. If either the taxonomical structure or the corpus changes,
re-computations of the affected branches are needed, hampering
the scalability of the solution. Moreover, the background taxonomy
must be as complete as possible (i.e., it should include most of the
specialisations of a speciﬁc concept) in order to provide reliable re-
sults. Partial taxonomies with a limited scope may not be suitable
for this purpose.
In addition to ambiguity and scalability problems, in the bio-
medical context the sparseness of data from general-purpose
sources is even more evident, due to limited coverage of biomedi-
cal terms [15]. For this reason, some authors [15,22,24] have made
use of domain-speciﬁc resources such as the SNOMED CT taxon-
omy of medical concepts, and textual corpora of structured clinical
notes. Unfortunately, large corpora are not typically available for
many domains due to the cost of compiling, structuring and pro-
cessing such a large quantity of information and, in particular for
the biomedical domain, due to the private nature of clinical data.
To overcome the scalability problems caused by the need for
manual tagging for word sense disambiguation, and the depen-
dency on the availability of suitable corpora, some authors have
proposed computing IC only from the knowledge modelled in an
ontology [36–39]. Purely ontology-based or intrinsic IC computa-
tion models assume that the taxonomic structure of ontologies is
organised in a meaningful way, according to the principles of cog-
nitive saliency [40]: concepts are specialised when they must be
differentiated from other existing concepts. As a result, concepts
located at a higher level in the taxonomy that present many hyp-
onyms or leaves (i.e., specialisations) under their taxonomic
branches would have less IC than highly specialised concepts (with
many hypernyms or subsumers) located on the leaves of the hier-
archy. In terms of concept appearance probabilities, related works
[36,41] assumed that the abstract concepts of the ontology are
more likely to appear in a corpus because they are implicitly re-
ferred to in texts by means of all their subsumed concepts. Appear-
ance probabilities are approximated in these approaches in
accordance with the number of the concept’s hyponyms and/or
subsumers.
Several approaches published in recent years have proposed
intrinsic IC computation models [36,37]. These have been progres-
sively reﬁned by incorporating additional semantic evidence ex-
tracted from the input ontology into the assessment: number of
hyponyms, leaves or relative depth of concepts in the taxonomy,
concept subsumers, etc. In a recent work, we [38] proposed esti-
mating p(c) intrinsically as the ratio between the number of leaves
of c (as a measure of its generality) compared to the number of
taxonomical
subsumers
(as
a
measure
of
its
concreteness).
Formally:
ICðcÞ ¼  log pðcÞ ﬃ log
jleavesðcÞj
jsubsumersðcÞj þ 1
max leaves þ 1
 
!
ð3Þ
where leaves(c) is the set of concepts found at the end of the taxo-
nomical tree under concept c and subsumers(c) is the complete set
of taxonomical ancestors of c including itself. It is important to note
that in case of multiple inheritance all the ancestors are considered.
The ratio is normalised by the least informative concept (i.e., the
root of the taxonomy), for which the number of leaves is the total
amount of leaves in the taxonomy (max_leaves) and the number
of subsumers including itself is 1. To produce values in the range
0. . .1 (i.e., in the same range as the original probability) and avoid
log(0) values, 1 is added to both expressions.
As shown in Table 1, this approach represents an improvement
to previous ones [36,37] in that it can differentiate concepts with
the same number of hyponyms/leaves but different degrees of con-
creteness (expressed by the number of subsumers), and consider
the explicit knowledge modelled by means of multiple inheritance
relationships [38]. It also prevents dependence on the granularity
and detail of the inner taxonomical structure by relying on taxo-
nomical leaves rather than the complete set of hyponyms.
Due to the scarcity of tagged medical data and thanks to the
availability
of
structured
biomedical
ontologies/thesauri
like
SNOMED CT, in our information-theoretical framework, IC will be
computed intrinsically using the approach described above (Eq.
(3)).
2.2. IC-based semantic similarity measures
The IC of a concept (estimated from its usage in textual corpora
or, in the case of intrinsic approaches, from the knowledge explic-
itly modelled in ontologies) summarises and quantiﬁes the seman-
tic content of the concept. As a result, it allows semantic similarity
measures to be developed based on the assessment of the IC of the
compared terms, which is the focus of our work. Although in this
paper we present several new IC-based measures, some related
works have already proposed similarity functions based on this
paradigm.
As stated in the introduction, most measures base assessment
on the evaluation of the quantity of semantic commonalties and
differences of the compared concepts. In terms of IC, Resnik [20]
proposed estimating semantic commonalties among concepts
based on the amount of information they share. In a taxonomy, this
information is represented by the least common subsumer of both
concepts (LCS(c1,c2)), which is the most speciﬁc taxonomical ances-
tor common to c1 and c2. The more speciﬁc the subsumer is (higher
IC), the more similar the concepts are.
Based on this premise, Resnik proposed a similarity measure
that directly estimates similarity as the IC of the LCS (4).
simresðc1; c2Þ ¼ ICðLCSðc1; c2ÞÞ
ð4Þ
One of the problems of Resnik’s metric is that any pair of concepts
with the same LCS will result in exactly the same similarity value.
D. Sánchez, M. Batet / Journal of Biomedical Informatics 44 (2011) 749–759
751

To tackle this problem, both Lin [4] and Jiang and Conrath [18] ex-
tended Resnik’s work by considering the differential features of
each
concept
(introducing
their
corresponding
ICs
into
the
equations).
Lin proposed measuring similarity as the ratio between the
common information between concepts (i.e., IC(LCS)) and the infor-
mation needed to fully describe them (i.e., the IC of each concept
alone) (2).
simlinðc1; c2Þ ¼ 2  ICðLCSðc1; c2ÞÞ
ðICðc1Þ þ ICðc2ÞÞ
ð5Þ
Jiang and Conrath applied a similar principle, but proposed calculat-
ing the concept distance (the opposite of similarity) as the differ-
ence between the IC of each concept and the IC of their LCS (6).
disj&cðc1; c2Þ ¼ ðICðc1Þ þ ICðc2ÞÞ  2  ICðLCSðc1; c2ÞÞ
ð6Þ
Pedersen et al. [15] applied these measures to the biomedical
domain using SNOMED CT taxonomy and computing the IC of con-
cepts from their appearance probabilities in the Mayo Clinic Cor-
pus of Clinical Notes (more details in Section 3.1). Considering
that the creation and structuring of this corpus required a consid-
erable human effort [15], it would be interesting to evaluate how
the efﬁcient intrinsic IC calculation detailed in Section 2.1 com-
pares to its corpora-based counterpart when applied to the mea-
sures described above. Because our work is based on intrinsic IC
computation, its accuracy is a fundamental component for testing
the suitability of the proposed framework.
2.3. Set-based similarity: an information-theoretical approach
Many similarity coefﬁcients have been published, not necessar-
ily framed in a semantic context, which have been designed for a
variety of applications. Set theory has extensively studied the sim-
ilarity paradigm to evaluate set representations. As a result, a vari-
ety of similarity coefﬁcients can be deﬁned in terms of set
operators. To our knowledge, very few of them have been directly
applied in the semantic context, and rarely in the biomedical ﬁeld.
In this section, we summarise some of the most common simi-
larity coefﬁcients found in the set-theory ﬁeld using a common
notation. We then propose an information-theoretical framework
for rewriting these coefﬁcients in terms of the IC of the concepts,
computed as in Eq. (3). Finally, we propose new IC-based similarity
measures that can be directly applied in the semantic context.
In terms of set-theory, we denote S as a ﬁnite set of elements,
with C1 and C2 being subsets of S. The similarity between these
subsets can be calculated in accordance with the number of com-
mon and differential elements of both sets. Classic set operators
(C1 \ C2; C1 [ C2; C1  C2, etc., see a summary in the ﬁrst column
of Table 2) can be used to deﬁne common and differential subsets,
whose evaluation conﬁgures different similarity functions.
Using a common notation of set operators we summarise in the
ﬁrst two columns of Table 3 some of the most common similarity
coefﬁcients, many of which were originally deﬁned in ecological
studies [30,31,42–44]. Their theoretical properties are well-known
and have been extensively studied in the past [32,33].
We used the basis of information theory introduced in Sec-
tion 2.1 to rewrite these coefﬁcients in terms of concept semantics.
Let us assume that C1 and C2 represent the semantics of concepts c1
and c2 and that, consequently, |C1| and |C2| quantify the amount of
these semantics. In terms of semantic similarity, we can assess the
amount of concept semantics as a function of their IC (IC(c1),
IC(c2)). Therefore, we can deﬁne approximations framed in infor-
mation theory for the set operations used in those coefﬁcients.
These approximations (summarised in the second column of Ta-
ble 2) are based on two basic principles:
 As stated in Section 2.2, the shared information between two
concepts can be estimated by the IC of their LCS. In our case,
we approximate the cardinality of the intersection of C1 and
C2 (which represent their commonalty) as the IC of the LCS of
concepts c1 and c2 (i.e., IC(LCS(c1,c2))).
 Differences between sets can be quantiﬁed as the number of
elements in a set that are not in the intersection with another
set (e.g., jC1  C2j ¼ jC1j  jC1 \ C2j). In terms of IC, this is
achieved by subtracting the IC of their LCS (which represents
the intersection) from the IC of each concept alone (e.g.,
IC(c1)  IC(LCS(c1,c2))).
Note also that the cardinality of the union between two sets
ðjC1 [ C2jÞ includes their differential features and their intersection.
This is different to the addition of set cardinalities, in which their
common
elements
are
counted
twice.
In
consequence,
jC1 [ C2j ¼ jC1j þ jC2j  jC1 \ C2j, which, within information theory,
results in IC(c1) + IC(c2)  IC(LCS(c1,c2)).
As a result of this process, similarity coefﬁcients can be directly
rewritten in terms of IC as shown in the last column of Table 3. The
new semantic measures obtained can be easily applied in the
semantic context and in the biomedical domain by relying on the
Table 1
Comparison of IC computation approaches.
Approach
Source
Relies on
Advantages(+)/Drawbacks()
Resnik [20]
Corpora
Concept appearance frequencies
Requires manually tagged corpora
Problems of data sparseness
Seco et al. [36]
Ontology
Number of concept hyponyms
+No corpora dependency
Zhou et al. [37]
Ontology
Number of concept hyponyms
+No corpora dependency
Taxonomic depth
+Differentiates concepts with different levels of generality
Sánchez et al. [38]
Ontology
Number of concept leaves
+No corpora dependency
Number of concept subsumers
+Differentiates concepts with different levels of generality
+Considers multiple inheritance
+Less dependency on taxonomy design
Table 2
Set-based operators and their approximations in terms of IC of concepts.
Expressions found in set-based similarity
coefﬁcients
Approximation in terms of IC
|C1|
IC(c1)
|C2|
IC(c2)
jC1 \ C2j
IC(LCS(c1,c2))
jC1  C2j ¼ jC1j  jC1j \ jC2j
IC(c1)  IC(LCS(c1,c2))
jC2  C1j ¼ jC2j  jC1j \ jC2j
IC(c2)  IC(LCS(c1,c2))
jC1 [ C2j ¼ jC1j þ jC2j  jC1 \ C2j
IC(c1) + IC(c2)  IC(LCS(c1,c2))
|C1| + |C2|
IC(c1) + IC(c2)
752
D. Sánchez, M. Batet / Journal of Biomedical Informatics 44 (2011) 749–759

IC calculation detailed in Section 2. It is interesting to note that
Lin’s well-known IC-based measure (see Eq. (5) in Section 2.2) is
equivalent to Dice’s coefﬁcient (14). As shown in the next section,
other equivalences can also be found between similarity measures
and classic coefﬁcients when rewriting them in terms of IC.
2.4. Redeﬁning ontology-based edge-counting measures in terms of IC
In addition to the IC-based measures presented in Section 2.2,
there are other paradigms for similarity estimation in the semantic
context (see an overview in Table 4). The most basic of these con-
sider ontologies as directed graphs in which concepts are interre-
lated by means of taxonomic links. Rada et al. [21] calculates the
distance between concepts according to the length of the mini-
mum path connecting them (19).
disradðc1; c2Þ ¼ jmin pathðc1; c2Þj
ð19Þ
Several variations and improvements of this edge-counting ap-
proach have been proposed. For example, Wu and Palmer [19] also
considered the relative depth of both concepts in the taxonomy,
which is represented as the depth of their LCS (20). This is based
on the assumption that concepts lower down in the taxonomy are
less differentiated than those higher up.
simw&pðc1;c2Þ ¼
2  depthðLCSðc1; c2ÞÞ
jmin pathðc1; c2Þj þ 2  depthðLCSðc1; c2ÞÞ
ð20Þ
Leacock and Chodorow [47] also proposed a measure that con-
siders, in a non-linear fashion, the number of nodes between both
concepts including themselves (i.e., minimum path plus one) and
the maximum depth of the taxonomy in which they occur (21).
siml&cðc1; c2Þ ¼  log
jmin pathðc1; c2Þj þ 1
2  max depth


ð21Þ
Other approaches not covered in this study also use path length in
addition to other structural characteristics of a taxonomy, such as
relative depths of concepts, and local densities of taxonomical
branches [22,48]. Because several heterogeneous features must be
evaluated, these approaches assign weights to balance the contribu-
tion of each feature in the ﬁnal similarity value. These measures,
also considered as hybrid approaches [49], depend on the empirical
tuning of weights according to background ontology and input
terms, resulting in ad hoc solutions that are hardly generalisable.
The main advantage of edge-counting measures is their simplic-
ity. They rely solely on the geometrical model of an input ontology
whose evaluation requires a low computational cost (in compari-
son to approaches dealing with text corpora). However, several
limitations hamper their accuracy, such as the fact that only the
minimum path is considered (omitting other paths that may have
been explicitly modelled in the ontology). Although some ap-
proaches also consider the depth of concepts in the taxonomy, this
does not necessarily represent all taxonomical knowledge avail-
able, especially when dealing with taxonomies with multiple
inheritance. Fig. 1 shows this situation for the term pair ‘‘congestive
heart failure’’ – ‘‘pulmonary oedema’’. For this example, in which
their LCS is ‘‘disorder of thorax’’, edge-counting approaches evaluate
only the number of links between the term pair (i.e., those tagged
as A plus those tagged as B:|A| + |B|) and, in some cases, their tax-
onomic depth (i.e., |C| + |A| for ‘‘congestive heart failure’’ and
|C| + |B| for ‘‘pulmonary oedema’’). A large amount of taxonomic
relations associated to the term pairs (schematically shown in grey
in Fig. 1) are not considered.
From a domain-independent point of view, some authors ap-
plied edge-counting measures to general-purpose ontologies such
as WordNet [25]. In the biomedical domain, other works [15,22]
have proposed using SNOMED CT (more details in Section 3.1).
Trying to overcome some of the limitations imposed by the reli-
ance of edge-counting measures on the minimum path, we pro-
pose redeﬁning these measures in terms of the IC of concepts. As
stated in Section 2.1, intrinsic IC calculation (which can be directly
computed from an ontological structure like SNOMED CT) incorpo-
rates taxonomical evidence explicitly modelled in ontologies (such
as the number of leaves/hyponyms and subsumers), which are not
captured by the minimum path (see a comparison in Table 5). Fig. 1
shows this additional knowledge (in grey), consisting on sets of
taxonomic leaves found at the end of the hierarchical tree (i.e.,
those below the compared terms inside the dashed ellipsis) and
complete sets of taxonomic subsumers (i.e., all those above the
terms).
As stated above, the length of the minimum path separating
two concepts (min_path(c1,c2)) quantiﬁes their semantic distance.
This path evaluates the differential semantic features of both con-
cepts as a function of the amount of non-common ancestors found
through the shortest link connecting them (i.e., |A| + |B| in Fig. 1). In
terms of IC, we propose approximating the minimum path length
as the sum of the amount of differential information between
two concepts ((IC(c1)  IC(c2)) + (IC(c2)  IC(c1))). As stated in Sec-
tion 2.2, the differential information of one concept compared to
another can be quantiﬁed by subtracting their common informa-
tion (i.e., the IC of the LCS of both concepts) from the IC of the con-
cept alone. Formally:
jmin pathðc1; c2Þj ﬃðICðc1Þ  ICðc2ÞÞ þ ðICðc2Þ  ICðc1ÞÞ
¼ ðICðc1Þ  ICðLCSðc1; c2ÞÞÞ þ ðICðc2Þ
 ICðLCSðc1; c2ÞÞÞ
¼ ICðc1Þ þ ICðc2Þ  2  ICðLCSðc1; c2ÞÞ
ð22Þ
In the example shown in Fig. 1, the path deﬁned by those links
tagged with an A (i.e., the minimum path between ‘‘congestive heart
failure’’ and the LCS, ‘‘disorder of thorax’’) is approximated as:
IC(‘‘congestive heart failure’’)  IC(‘‘disorder of thorax’’). In the same
manner, the path deﬁned by links tagged as B (i.e., the minimum
Table 3
Similarity coefﬁcients deﬁned by means of set-based operators and their approxi-
mations in terms of IC.
Coefﬁcient
Equation
Approximation in terms of IC
Jaccard [30]
jC1\C2j
jC1[C2j
(7)
ICðLCSðc1;c2ÞÞ
ICðc1ÞþICðc2ÞICðLCSðc1;c2ÞÞ
(13)
Dice [31]
2jC1\C2j
jC1jþjC2j
(8)
2ICðLCSðc1;c2ÞÞ
ICðc1ÞþICðc2Þ
(14)
Ochiaï [43]
jC1\C2j
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
jC1jjC2j
p
(9)
ICðLCSðc1;c2ÞÞ
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
ICðc1ÞICðc2Þ
p
(15)
Simpson [45]
jC1\C2j
MinðjC1j;jC2jÞ
(10)
ICðLCSðc1;c2ÞÞ
MinðICðc1Þ;ICðc2ÞÞ
(16)
Braun-
Blanquet
[42]
jC1\C2j
MaxðjC1j;jC2jÞ
(11)
ICðLCSðc1;c2ÞÞ
MaxðICðc1Þ;ICðc2ÞÞ
(17)
Sokal and
Sneath [46]
jC1\C2j
2ðjC1jþjC2jÞ3jC1\C2j
(12)
ICðLCSðc1;c2ÞÞ
2ðICðc1ÞþICðc2ÞÞ3ICðLCSðc1;c2ÞÞ
(18)
Table 4
Comparison of semantic similarity measures.
Approach
Type
Comparison
Resnik [20]
IC
Relies on the IC of the LCS
Jiang and Conrath [18]
IC
Evaluates IC of the LCS vs. IC of each
concept
Lin [4]
IC
Evaluates IC of the LCS vs. IC of each
concept
Rada [21]
Edge-
counting
Absolute path length
Wu and Palmer [19]
Edge-
counting
Path scaled by concept depth
Leacock and Chorodow
[47]
Edge-
counting
Path scaled by taxonomy depth
D. Sánchez, M. Batet / Journal of Biomedical Informatics 44 (2011) 749–759
753

path between ‘‘pulmonary oedema’’ and the LCS) is approximated as:
IC(‘‘pulmonary oedema’’)  IC(‘‘disorder of thorax’’). Consequently, as
stated in Eq. (22), the path length between the term pair (|A| + |B|) is
approximated
as:
IC(‘‘congestive
heart
failure’’) + IC(‘‘pulmonary
oedema’’)  2  IC(‘‘disorder of thorax’’).
The relative depth of concepts or of their LCS that some edge-
counting measures use [19,47] corresponds in fact to the length
of the minimum path between the concept/LCS and the root node
of the taxonomy (i.e.,. depth(c) = |min_path(c, root)|). In Fig. 1, the
depth of ‘‘congestive heart failure’’ is |C| + |A|, the depth of ‘‘pulmon-
ary oedema’’ is |C| + |B| and the depth of their LCS, ‘‘disorder of tho-
rax’’, is |C|. Following the same idea as above, the depth of a
concept c can be approximated as (23):
depthðcÞ ¼ min pathðc; rootÞ
ﬃICðcÞ þ ICðrootÞ  2  ICðLCSðc; rootÞÞ
ð23Þ
Considering that the LCS between any concept and the root
node of the taxonomy is this root node (SNOMED CT Concept, in
Fig. 1), the expression can be simpliﬁed as (24):
depthðcÞ ﬃICðcÞ þ ICðrootÞ  2  ICðLCSðc; rootÞÞ
¼ ICðcÞ þ ICðrootÞ  2  ICðrootÞ ¼ ICðcÞ  ICðrootÞ
ð24Þ
Note that, in many situations, the root node is general enough to
consider that its IC is zero because it can potentially subsume any
other concepts. For example, in WordNet the root node is ‘‘entity’’
and in SNOMED CT it is ‘‘concept’’. IC(root) = 0 is fulﬁlled when IC
is computed intrinsically because the number of subsumers of the
root node is zero (or one counting itself) and the number of leaves
or hyponyms is maximum. Therefore, the depth of a concept c can
be approximated as (25):
depthðcÞ ﬃICðcÞ  ICðrootÞ ¼ ICðcÞ
ð25Þ
Fig. 1. Partial view of the SNOMED CT taxonomy for the pair: ‘‘congestive heart failure’’ – ‘‘pulmonary oedema’’. Dashed lines represent taxonomic branches omitted in the
schema for simplicity. In black: knowledge considered by edge-counting approaches. In grey: additional knowledge evaluated by our approach.
754
D. Sánchez, M. Batet / Journal of Biomedical Informatics 44 (2011) 749–759

For the example shown in Fig. 1, the depth of ‘‘congestive heart
failure’’ (i.e., |C| + |A|) is approximated as IC(‘‘congestive heart fail-
ure’’)  IC(‘‘SNOMED CT concept’’) = IC(‘‘congestive heart failure’’),
because IC(‘‘SNOMED CT concept’’) = 0 according to Eq. (3). The
same is done for ‘‘pulmonary oedema’’ and the LCS.
Following this idea, the maximum depth of a given ontology
(max_depth constant used by Leacock and Chodorow (Eq. (21))
can be deﬁned as the maximum IC of any concept (max_IC). Intrin-
sically, this concept would correspond to the taxonomical leaf with
the largest number of subsumers (a constant in a given ontology).
Applying the approximations to the edge-counting measures
presented above, we propose redeﬁning Rada’s measure [21] as
(26):
disradðc1; c2Þ ¼ jmin pathðc1; c2Þj
ﬃICðc1Þ þ ICðc2Þ  2  ICðLCSðc1; c2ÞÞ
ð26Þ
Wu and Palmer’s measure [19] can be redeﬁned as (27):
simw&pðc1;c2Þ ¼
2  depthðLCSðc1; c2ÞÞ
jmin pathðc1; c2Þj þ 2  depthðLCSðc1; c2ÞÞ
ﬃ
2  ICðLCSðc1; c2ÞÞ
ICðc1Þ þ ICðc2Þ  2  ICðLCSðc1; c2ÞÞ þ 2  ICðLCSðc1; c2ÞÞ
¼ 2  ICðLCSðc1; c2ÞÞ
ICðc1Þ þ ICðc2Þ
ð27Þ
Finally, Leacock and Chodorow’s measure [47] can be redeﬁned
as (28):
siml&cðc1; c2Þ ¼  log
jmin pathðc1; c2Þj þ 1
2  max depth


ﬃ log
ICðc1Þ þ ICðc2Þ  2  ICðLCSðc1; c2ÞÞ þ 1
2  max IC


ð28Þ
By redeﬁning edge-based measures in terms of IC, we expect to
improve their accuracy in the biomedical domain (i.e., using bio-
medical ontologies like SNOMED CT) because, as stated above,
intrinsic IC calculation captures more semantic evidence of con-
cepts than the minimum path approach (as shown in Fig. 1). This
will be evaluated in the next section.
Again, there are equivalences between the new functions and
classic coefﬁcients and IC-based similarity measures. For example,
the redeﬁned measure of Wu and Palmer (Eq. (27)) is identical to
Dice’s coefﬁcient (Eq. (14) in Section 2.3) when both are approxi-
mated in terms of IC, and Rada’s redeﬁned measure (Eq. (26)) is
identical to Jiang and Conrath’s IC-based measure (Eq. (6) in Sec-
tion 2.2). As a result, Leacock and Chodorow’s IC counterpart (Eq.
(28)) is identical to the inverted logarithm of Jiang and Conrath’s
distance divided by a constant value (2  max_IC).
3. Results
Semantic similarity is often referred to as a fundamental princi-
ple by which humans organise and classify objects [50]. As a result,
computerised approaches to similarity assessment are typically
evaluated based on the extent to which their similarity ratings
for a given set of concepts approximate (i.e., correlate) human
judgments. The quantiﬁcation of the correlation obtained for a
computerised measure against human ratings provides an objec-
tive evaluation and comparison of the accuracy of a measure. In
a general setting, several authors have proposed evaluation bench-
marks consisting of general word pairs whose similarity has been
assessed by human experts (e.g., Miller and Charles’ [51] and
Rubenstein and Goodenough’s [52] benchmarks).
For the biomedical domain, the most relevant evaluation bench-
mark was created by Pedersen et al. [15]. In collaboration with
Mayo Clinic experts they created a benchmark referring to medical
disorders. Similarity between terms was assessed by a set of nine
medical coders who were aware of the notion of semantic similar-
ity and the taxonomical organisation of concepts, and a group of
three physicians who were experts in the area of rheumatology.
After a normalisation process, a ﬁnal set of 30 term pairs were
rated with the average of the similarity values provided by the ex-
perts on a scale between 1 and 4 (see Table 6).
Several related works have used this benchmark in recent years
to evaluate semantic similarity assessments in the biomedical do-
main. Speciﬁcally, Perdersen et al. [15] and Al-Mubaid and Nguyen
[22] evaluated edge-counting measures (presented in Section 2.4)
and IC-based measures (presented in Section 2.2) using SNOMED
CT as the domain ontology1 (see details in Section 3.1). IC-based
measures were evaluated by estimating the IC of concepts based
on their appearance frequencies in the Mayo Clinical Corpus (see de-
tails in Section 3.1). In Al-Mubaid and Nguyen’s tests, results were
only compared against the coders’ ratings because they considered
them to be more reliable than the physicians’ judgments.
3.1. Biomedical sources
In this section, the above-mentioned biomedical sources used
by the semantic similarity approaches considered in this paper
are described in more detail.
Systematised Nomenclature of Medicine, Clinical Terms (SNOMED
CT) [53] is a systematically organised computer readable collection
of medical terminology covering most areas of clinical information.
It is an internationally accepted standard included in the UMLS
repository. It contains more than 300,000 active concepts with un-
ique meanings and formal logic-based deﬁnitions organised into
18 overlapping hierarchies: clinical ﬁndings, procedures, observa-
ble entities, body structures, organisms, substances, pharmaceuti-
cal products, specimens, physical forces, physical objects, events,
geographical environments, social contexts, linkage concepts, qual-
iﬁer values, special concepts, record artifacts, and staging and
scales. Each concept may belong to one or more of these hierar-
chies by multiple inheritance (e.g., euthanasia is an event and a pro-
cedure). The taxonomic structure of concepts offered by SNOMED
CT has been evaluated by related works (and in our approach) to
compute term similarity.
As detailed in [15], the Mayo Clinic Corpus consists of 1,000,000
clinical notes collected over the year 2003 that cover a variety of
major medical specialties at the Mayo Clinic. They contain the re-
cord of the patient–physician encounter. Notes are typically dic-
tated, representing
quasi-spontaneous
discourses.
They were
Table 5
Comparison between edge-counting and intrinsic IC computation models.
Approach
Relies on
Advantages(+)/Drawbacks(-)
Edge-
counting
Minimum path
+Simplicity
Depth
-Omits explicitly modelled knowledge
Intrinsic
IC (eq.3)
Number of concept
leaves
+Simplicity
Number of concept
subsumers
+Considers multiple inheritance
Differences between
concept’s IC
+Less dependency on inner
taxonomy design
+Evaluates concept’s generality
1 Note that the pair ‘‘chronic obstructive pulmonary disease’’ – ‘‘lung inﬁltrates’’ was
excluded from the test because the latter term is not found in the SNOMED CT
terminology.
D. Sánchez, M. Batet / Journal of Biomedical Informatics 44 (2011) 749–759
755

transcribed by trained personnel and structured according to rea-
sons, history, diagnosis, medications and other administrative
information. By analysing section contents and assessing which
of them could be more suitable to state term associations, Pedersen
et al. [15] decided to use patient’s history, reason for visit and diag-
nostic related notes as the domain-speciﬁc sources from which
corpora-based measures (such as Resnik-based IC models) can be
computed.
3.2. Comparison
For an objective comparison between related works and the IC-
based measures proposed in this paper, we have used Pedersen
et al.’s benchmark and SNOMED CT as an ontology. The fact that
the benchmark and SNOMED CT have become almost de facto eval-
uation standards in recent works allows a fair evaluation and a
clear comparison of the expected accuracy of our results against
those reported by other authors (when available). Note that, in
our case, IC was intrinsically computed from SNOMED CT. This en-
ables an interesting comparison between the accuracy of an intrin-
sic IC computation model and the classical corpora-based model in
a biomedical context. Furthermore, it ensures that the efﬁciency
and scalability of purely ontology-based approaches are main-
tained when classical similarity coefﬁcients and edge-counting
measures are redeﬁned in terms of IC. Note that to evaluate all
the approaches in equal conditions, all measures were expressed
as similarity coefﬁcients. In those cases in which they referred to
distances, a linear transformation – which does not affect correla-
tion values – was performed by changing the sign of the result.
Correlation results foralltests aresummarisedin Table 7. Theﬁrst
three rows show the correlation values reported by related works for
the IC-based measures presented in Section 2.2 when IC is computed
fromconceptappearancesin corpora. Rows 4–6 show the correlation
values we obtained for the same measures when applying the intrin-
sic IC computation paradigm described in Section 2.1 (Eq. (3)). Rows
7–12 detail the correlation values we obtained with the IC-based
redeﬁnitions of classic similarity coefﬁcients (Section 2.3). Rows
13–15 compile correlations reported in related works for the edge-
counting measures described in Section 2.4, whereas rows 16–18
contain the correlations we obtained from their IC-based counter-
parts. For sake of completeness, we have also included the evaluation
results of a state-of-the-art relatedness measure (last four rows). The
measure, named Context Vector, was proposed by Pedersen et al.
[15] andestimates semanticrelatedness by relyingon thehypothesis
that words are related if their contexts are similar. Authors con-
structed word vectors that represent the contextual proﬁle of
SNOMED CT concepts by analysing the above-mentioned Mayo
Clinic Corpus of Clinical Notes and the Mayo Clinic Thesaurus [15].
The latter provides a large set of clinical term descriptions. Semantic
relatedness between terms is computed as the cosine of the angle be-
tween their context vectors. The ﬁnal value states term relatedness
(instead of similarity) due to word vectors capture term association
types not restricted to the taxonomic aspect. Varying the size and
type of analysed corpora, four resultsarepresented(see thestructure
of Mayo Clinical Notes in Section 3.1).
4. Discussion
The results presented in Table 7 can be analysed from different
points of view. IC-based measures based on intrinsic IC calculation
obtain higher accuracy rates than those based on corpora (0.68–
0.71 vs. 0.45–0.6 for physicians and 0.76–0.79 vs. 0.62–0.75 for
coders). This behaviour is very desirable because ontology-based
IC computation models avoid dependence upon the availability of
domain corpora (which must be properly structured and tagged
in order to compute accurate probabilities). In fact, intrinsic IC
models are efﬁcient, scalable and easily applicable to different do-
mains in which ontologies or structured thesauri are available. Be-
cause they only rely on taxonomical knowledge (which is common
to any ontology, and the most structure-building component
[21,54]), their generality is ensured. Corpora-based IC calculation
is hampered by data sparseness and ambiguity because, on the
one hand, it is unlikely that the corpora used (i.e., Mayo Clinical
Medical Notes) accurately cover all the medical knowledge mod-
elled in SNOMED CT and, on the other hand, even if it is structured,
medical notes have not been manually tagged for word sense dis-
ambiguation (unlike general-purpose resources such as SemCor
[34]). Both aspects affect the accuracy of the IC assessment when
computed from concept appearance probabilities.
Comparing IC-based measures, we observe that for both para-
digms Lin’s approach can improve Resnik’s and Jiang and Conrath’s
approaches. Lin’s approach can differentiate concept pairs with
identical LCS but different taxonomical depths. Furthermore, Lin’s
ratio corresponds to Dice’s coefﬁcient (as mentioned in Section 2.3)
and, as discussed below, classic similarity coefﬁcients tend to im-
prove measures with ad hoc designs (such as Jiang and Conrath’s).
Similar conclusions can be drawn from the results obtained by
means of edge-counting measures. First, measures based on the
minimum path length offer very limited accuracy ranging between
0.35 and 0.36 for physicians and 0.30–0.51 for coders. As hypothe-
sised in Section 2.4, this indicates that the minim path length
Table 6
Set of 30 medical term pairs with averaged similarity scores of experts (extracted
from [15]).
Term 1
Term 2
Physician
ratings
(averaged)
Coder ratings
(averaged)
Renal failure
Kidney failure
4.0
4.0
Heart
Myocardium
3.3
3.0
Stroke
Infarct
3.0
2.8
Abortion
Miscarriage
3.0
3.3
Delusion
Schizophrenia
3.0
2.2
Congestive heart
failure
Pulmonary
oedema
3.0
1.4
Metastasis
Adenocarcinoma
2.7
1.8
Calciﬁcation
Stenosis
2.7
2.0
Diarrhoea
Stomach cramps
2.3
1.3
Mitral stenosis
Atrial ﬁbrillation
2.3
1.3
Chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease
Lung inﬁltrates
2.3
1.9
Rheumatoid arthritis
Lupus
2.0
1.1
Brain tumour
Intracranial
haemorrhage
2.0
1.3
Carpal tunnel
syndrome
Osteoarthritis
2.0
1.1
Diabetes mellitus
Hypertension
2.0
1.0
Acne
Syringe
2.0
1.0
Antibiotic
Allergy
1.7
1.2
Cortisone
Total knee
replacement
1.7
1.0
Pulmonary embolus
Myocardial
infarction
1.7
1.2
Pulmonary ﬁbrosis
Lung cancer
1.7
1.4
Cholangiocarcinoma
Colonoscopy
1.3
1.0
Lymphoid hyperplasia
Laryngeal cancer
1.3
1.0
Multiple sclerosis
Psychosis
1.0
1.0
Appendicitis
Osteoporosis
1.0
1.0
Rectal polyp
Aorta
1.0
1.0
Xerostomia
Alcoholic
cirrhosis
1.0
1.0
Peptic ulcer disease
Myopia
1.0
1.0
Depression
Cellulitis
1.0
1.0
Varicose vein
Entire knee
meniscus
1.0
1.0
Hyperlipidaemia
Metastasis
1.0
1.0
756
D. Sánchez, M. Batet / Journal of Biomedical Informatics 44 (2011) 749–759

between concepts in SNOMED CT poorly captures the semantics
explicitly modelled in the taxonomies. In fact, in complex ontolo-
gies such as SNOMED CT, several paths may exist (due to multiple
taxonomical inheritances), a fact that is ignored by edge-counting
approaches. When these measures are redeﬁned in terms of IC and
IC is intrinsically computed, we observe a very signiﬁcant improve-
ment (from 0.35–36 to 0.68–73 for physicians, and from 0.30–51 to
0.77–89 for coders). This improvement quantiﬁes the beneﬁts pro-
vided by the approximations in terms of IC of the minimum path
and taxonomical depth features proposed in Eqs. (22) and (25)
respectively. Although the intrinsic IC computation model only ex-
ploits taxonomical knowledge (in the same manner as edge-count-
ing approaches) as stated in Section 2.1, it is able to capture more
semantic evidence (such as multiple taxonomical ancestors) as a
measure of concept concreteness; it also evaluates the taxonomical
detail under each concept (i.e., number of leaves) as an indication
of its generality. As a result, while maintaining the calculus efﬁ-
ciency and scalability that characterise edge-counting approaches,
their intrinsic IC-based counterparts offer a higher accuracy with-
out additional compromises.
Results are also promising regarding the evaluation of the IC-
based versions of classic similarity coefﬁcients. Reported correla-
tions for physicians range from 0.7 to 0.74 whereas coders range
from 0.79 to 0.9. These values are among the highest reported for
this benchmark, regardless of the similarity computation paradigm
[15]. We found that Dice’s, Ochiaï’s, Simpson’s and Braun-Blan-
quet’s coefﬁcients behave in a very similar way (0.7 for physicians
and 0.79 for coders). This is expected because the only difference
between them is the way in which the denominator is averaged.
Dice proposes the arithmetic mean of the IC of both concepts, Ochi-
aï proposes the geometric mean, and Simpson and Braun-Blanquet
opt for the minimum and maximum value respectively. The differ-
ent averaging criteria hardly inﬂuenced the results in the context
of semantics and information theory. Jaccard’s and Sokal and
Sneath’s coefﬁcients, provide higher but very similar correlations
(0.74 for coders and 0.87–0.9 for physicians). Again, both coefﬁ-
cients share the same structure (i.e., common information in the
numerator and the sum of all information of both concepts in the
denominator). The only difference is the weight given to the com-
mon information.
The commonalties between these coefﬁcients have already
been studied. In Caillez and Kuntz [32], the authors unify the ﬁrst
group of coefﬁcients (Dice’s, Ochiaï’s, Simpson’s and Braun-Blan-
quet’s) under the common expression (29):
jC1 \ C2j
laðjC1j; jC2jÞ
ð29Þ
where la is the Cauchy’s mean [55] of each term.
In terms of IC, Eq. (29) corresponds to (30):
ICðLCSðc1; c2ÞÞ
laðICðc1Þ; ICðc2ÞÞ
ð30Þ
The second group of coefﬁcients (Jaccard’s and Sokal and
Sneath’s) was studied in Gower and Legendre [33], who proposed
writing them under the common expression (31):
b  jC1 \ C2j
jC1j þ jC2j þ ðb  2Þ  jC1 \ C2j
ð31Þ
where b = 1 corresponds to Jaccard’s and b = 1/2 corresponds to So-
kal and Sneath’s coefﬁcient.
In terms of IC, Eq. (31) corresponds to (32):
b  ICðLCSðc1; c2ÞÞ
ICðc1Þ þ ICðc2Þ þ ðb  2Þ  ICðLCSðc1; c2ÞÞ
ð32Þ
As expected, the results obtained by Dice’s coefﬁcient are equal
to Lin’s and Wu and Palmer’s measures when all of them are com-
puted in terms of intrinsic IC, because they present identical equa-
tions. Jiang and Conrath’s measure, meanwhile, is identical to
Rada’s approach in terms of IC, resulting in equal correlation
values.
The correlation values obtained for these coefﬁcients endorse
their feasibility as semantic similarity measures that can be ap-
plied in the biomedical domain. This is especially interesting for
the second group of coefﬁcients (Eq. (32)), which provided the
highest accuracy rates and whose expressions are not equivalent
or similar to other semantic measures. This opens the door to the
use of new similarity measures in a semantic context.
Comparing the differences between the correlation values ob-
tained for physicians and coders, it is clear that all similarity mea-
sures correlate better with latter. The Context Vector relatedness
measure behaves in the inverse manner. In the most favourable
case, the latter one is able to improve all related works and even
the similarity measures proposed in this paper when comparing
Table 7
Correlation values obtained for each measure against ratings of physicians, coders and the average of both.
Measure
Equation
Evaluated in
Physicians
Coders
Both
Resnik (corpora-based IC)
(4)
[15]
0.45
0.62
0.55
Lin (corpora-based IC)
(5)
[15]
0.60
0.75
0.69
Jiang and Conrath (corpora-based IC)
(6)
[15]
0.45
0.62
0.55
Resnik (intrinsic IC)
(4)
This work
0.6912
0.7643
0.7614
Lin (intrinsic IC)
(5)
This work
0.7093
0.7956
0.7863
Jiang and Conrath (intrinsic IC)
(6)
This work
0.6841
0.7777
0.7641
IC-based Jaccard (intrinsic IC)
(13)
This work
0.7454
0.8710
0.8435
IC-based Dice (intrinsic IC)
(14)
This work
0.7093
0.7956
0.7863
IC-based Ochiaï (intrinsic IC)
(15)
This work
0.7091
0.7955
0.7861
IC-based Simpson (intrinsic IC)
(16)
This work
0.7060
0.7948
0.7838
IC-based Braun-Blanquet (intrinsic IC)
(17)
This work
0.7098
0.7940
0.7860
IC-based Sokal and Sneath (intrinsic IC)
(18)
This work
0.7419
0.9044
0.8584
Rada
(19)
[15]
0.36
0.51
0.48
Wu and Palmer
(20)
[22]
N/A
0.30
N/A
Leacock and Chodorow
(21)
[15]
0.35
0.50
0.47
IC-based Rada (intrinsic IC)
(26)
This work
0.6841
0.7777
0.7641
IC-based Wu and Palmer (intrinsic IC)
(27)
This work
0.7093
0.7956
0.7863
IC-based Leacock and Chodorow (intrinsic IC)
(28)
This work
0.7368
0.8909
0.8489
Context vector (1 million notes, diagnostic section)
[15]
[15]
0.84
0.75
0.76
Context vector (1 million notes, all sections)
[15]
[15]
0.62
0.68
0.69
Context vector (100,000 notes, diagnostic section)
[15]
[15]
0.56
0.59
0.60
Context vector (100,000 notes, all sections)
[15]
[15]
0.41
0.53
0.51
D. Sánchez, M. Batet / Journal of Biomedical Informatics 44 (2011) 749–759
757

it against physician’s ratings. On the contrary, correlations against
coders are lower than most of the coefﬁcients proposed in this
work. These differences can be caused by the way in which human
experts interpreted concept alikeness. As shown in Table 6,
medical coders provided ratings that seem to better reproduce
the
concept
of
taxonomic
similarity.
Physician’s
ratings,
however, represent a more general concept of taxonomic and
non-taxonomic relatedness [56]. For example, physicians rated
the similarity between substances and procedures (e.g., cortisone
and total knee replacement) or between ﬁndings and objects (e.g.,
acne and syringe) signiﬁcantly higher than coders (1.7 vs. 1.0 and
2.0 vs. 1.0, respectively), even though they are taxonomically
unrelated. This intuition is coherent with the fact that Context
Vector measure estimates relatedness, whereas the other ones rely
on taxonomic knowledge to estimate similarity.
It is also important to note that the correlation for the Context
Vector measure strongly depends on the amount and quality of
corpora (with values between 0.41 and 0.84 for physicians and
among 0.51–0.75 for coders). The best accuracy is achieved under
carefully tuned circumstances: 1 million notes involving only the
diagnostic section of the Mayo Clinical Notes. In this case, due to
the fact that word vectors are constructed from very suitable and
ﬁltered corpora and because of the enormous size of the informa-
tion source, relatedness estimations are accurate. In the worst case,
correlation values fall below other corpora-based IC measures. This
shows the dependency on corpora availability and manual data
pre-processing of the measure (similarly to Resnik-based IC func-
tions discussed in Section 2.1).
5. Conclusions and future work
The ﬁnal goal of computerised similarity measures is to accu-
rately mimic human judgements about semantic similarity. Be-
cause
semantic
similarity
plays
an
important
role
in
the
understanding of textual resources [57], many language-related
applications and knowledge-based systems (like those listed in
the introduction) can beneﬁt from an accurate estimation of simi-
larity. The biomedical ﬁeld is especially relevant due to the prolif-
eration of textual clinical data and the importance of knowledge
representation and terminology.
Although many approaches have been developed in the past,
there is still room to better capture the knowledge implicitly or
explicitly modelled in structured resources such as ontologies. As
shown in this paper, purely ontology-based similarity approaches
like edge-counting measures are desirable due to their lack of
dependency on corpora availability and human pre-processing of
data, but they present several limitations that hamper their accu-
racy. The study conducted in this paper shows that it is possible
to increase this accuracy by considering the principles of informa-
tion theory and properly estimating the IC of concepts. In fact,
intrinsic IC computation is a relatively recent trend that, as de-
scribed in the evaluation, has shown promising results. Moreover,
it overcomes the limitations of corpora-based IC computation
models and retains the efﬁciency and scalability of purely ontol-
ogy-based models.
The principles of information theory can also be applied to con-
sider a broader sense of concept semantics that, as shown in this
paper, enable the deﬁnition of a common framework by which
classic similarity coefﬁcients and semantic measures can be rede-
ﬁned. On the one hand, this leads to a clearer comparison of mea-
sures and coefﬁcients deﬁned in different contexts and for different
purposes. On the other hand, it makes possible to propose new IC-
based measures that have not yet been considered. As our evalua-
tion shows, these new measures provide a high degree of accuracy
that rivals and even surpasses related works.
Ontology-based approaches, however, present some limita-
tions. First, the ﬁnal accuracy will depend on the detail, complete-
ness and coherency of taxonomical knowledge. If some of the
evaluated terms are not contained in the input ontology, the sim-
ilarity cannot be measured. A strategy to minimise the strict
dependency of a unique input ontology with regards to term cov-
erage consists on considering several ontologies. Recall can be im-
proved if several ontologies offer complementary models of a
domain of knowledge. In the ﬁeld of biomedicine, several large
and detailed knowledge sources exist, including the above-men-
tioned SNOMED CT, but also Medical Subject Heading Terms
(MeSH) [58]. An approach able to exploit, in an integrated way,
multiple ontologies for similarity assessment will likely improve
its applicability (due to the increase in term recall) and even the
similarity estimation (due to the larger semantic evidence consid-
ered) [59]. We are currently investigating this possibility, which
has the added difﬁculty of knowledge integration from heteroge-
neous sources and normalisation of similarity values computed
from different ontologies [60].
We also plan to analyse other knowledge-based similarity com-
putation paradigms such as feature-based or hybrid approaches
[49] from an information theory point of view. A careful study of
intrinsic IC calculation can also incorporate the notion of semantic
relatedness considering, for example, non-taxonomical features
explicitly modelled in ontologies (as stated in Section 4). Finally,
a wider evaluation will be desirable, considering larger sets of term
pairs as benchmark data both from a general point of view [61] and
focused in concrete application tasks.
Acknowledgments
This work has been partially supported by Rovira i Virgili Uni-
versity (2009AIRE-04), the Spanish Ministry of Science and Innova-
tion (DAMASK project, Data mining algorithms with semantic
knowledge, TIN2009-11005) and the Spanish Government (PlanE,
Spanish Economy and Employment Stimulation Plan). Montserrat
Batet is also supported by a research grant provided by Rovira i Vir-
gili University.
References
[1] Patwardhan S, Banerjee S, Pedersen T. Using measures of semantic relatedness
for word sense disambiguation. In: Gelbukh AF, editor. 4th International
conference on computational linguistics and intelligent text processing and
computational linguistics, CICLing 2003. Berlin/Heidelberg (Mexico City,
Mexico): Springer; 2003. p. 241–57.
[2] Leroy G, Rindﬂesch TC. Effects of information and machine learning algorithms
on word sense disambiguation with small datasets. Int J Med Inform
2005;74:573–85.
[3] Budanitsky A, Hirst G. Semantic distance in WordNet: an experimental,
application-oriented evaluation of ﬁve measures. In: Workshop on WordNet
and Other Lexical Resources, Second meeting of the North American Chapter of
the Association for Computational Linguistics, Pittsburgh, USA; 2001, p. 10–5.
[4] Lin D. An information-theoretic deﬁnition of similarity. In: Shavlik J, editor.
Fifteenth International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 1998. Madison
(Wisconsin, USA): Morgan Kaufmann; 1998. p. 296–304.
[5] Cilibrasi
RL,
Vitányi
PMB.
The
Google
similarity
distance.
IEEE
Trans
Knowledge Data Eng 2006;19:370–83.
[6] Stevenson M, Greenwood MA. A semantic approach to IE pattern induction. In:
Knight K, editor. 43rd Annual meeting on association for computational
linguistics, COLING-ACL 2005. Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA: Association for
Computational Linguistics; 2005. p. 379–86.
[7] Sánchez D, Isern D, Millán M. Content annotation for the semantic Web: an
automatic Web-based approach, knowledge and information systems, in press,
doi:10.1007/s10115-010-0302-3.
[8] Sánchez D, Moreno A. Learning non-taxonomic relationships from web
documents
for
domain
ontology
construction.
Data
Knowledge
Eng
2008;63:600–23.
[9] Sánchez D. A methodology to learn ontological attributes from the Web. Data
Knowledge Eng 2010;69:573–97.
[10] Aseervatham S, Bennani Y. Semi-structured document categorization with a
semantic kernel. Pattern Recogn 2009;42:2067–76.
758
D. Sánchez, M. Batet / Journal of Biomedical Informatics 44 (2011) 749–759

[11] Lu H-M, Chen H, Zeng D, King C-C, Shih F-Y, Wu T-S, et al. Multilingual chief
complaint classiﬁcation for syndromic surveillance: an experiment with
Chinese chief complaints. Int J Med Inform 2009;78:308–20.
[12] Papachristoudis G, Diplaris S, Mitkas PA. SoFoCles: feature ﬁltering for
microarray
classiﬁcation
based
on
Gene
Ontology.
J
Biomed
Inform
2010;43:1–14.
[13] Sugumaran V, Storey VC. Ontologies for conceptual modeling: their creation,
use, and management. Data Knowledge Eng 2002;42:251–71.
[14] Nenadi G, Mima H, Spasi I, Ananiadou S, Tsujii J-i. Terminology-driven
literature mining and knowledge acquisition in biomedicine. Int J Med Inform
2002;67:33–48.
[15] Pedersen T, Pakhomov S, Patwardhan S, Chute C. Measures of semantic
similarity and relatedness in the biomedical domain. J Biomed Inform
2007;40:288–99.
[16] Bichindaritz I, Akkineni S. Concept mining for indexing medical literature. Eng
Appl Artif Intell 2006;19:411–7.
[17] Sánchez D, Moreno A. Bringing taxonomic structure to large digital libraries.
Int J Metadata, Semantics Ontologies 2007;2:112–22.
[18] Jiang JJ, Conrath DW. Semantic similarity based on corpus statistics and lexical
taxonomy.
In:
International
Conference
on
Research
in
Computational
Linguistics, ROCLING X, Taipei, Taiwan; 1997. p. 19–33.
[19] Wu Z, Palmer M. Verb semantics and lexical selection. In: 32nd Annual
meeting of the association for computational linguistics. Las Cruces (New
Mexico): Association for Computational Linguistics; 1994, p. 133–38.
[20] Resnik P. Using information content to evaluate semantic similarity in a
taxonomy. In: Mellish CS, editor. 14th International joint conference on
artiﬁcial
intelligence,
IJCAI
1995.
Montreal,
Quebec,
Canada:
Morgan
Kaufmann Publishers Inc.; 1995. p. 448–53.
[21] Rada R, Mili H, Bichnell E, Blettner M. Development and application of a metric
on semantic nets. IEEE Trans Syst, Man, Cybern 1989;9:17–30.
[22] Al-Mubaid H, Nguyen HA. A cluster-based approach for semantic similarity in
the biomedical domain. In: 28th Annual international conference of the ieee
engineering in medicine and biology society. New York (USA): EMBS 2006 IEEE
Computer Society; 2006, p. 2713–7.
[23] Caviedes JE, Cimino JJ. Towards the development of a conceptual distance
metric for the UMLS. J Biomed Inform 2004;37:77–85.
[24] Batet M, Sánchez D, Valls A. An ontology-based measure to compute semantic
similarity in biomedicine. J Biomed Inform 2010;44:118–25.
[25] Fellbaum
C.
WordNet:
An
Electronic
Lexical
Database.
Cambridge,
Massachusetts: MIT Press; 1998.
[26] Sánchez D, Batet M, Valls A. Web-based semantic similarity: an evaluation in
the biomedical domain. Int J Softw Inform 2010;4:39–52.
[27] Patwardhan S, Pedersen T. Using WordNet-based context vectors to estimate
the semantic relatedness of concepts. In: EACL 2006 Workshop on making
sense of sense: bringing computational linguistics and psycholinguistics
together, Trento, Italy; 2006. p. 1–8.
[28] Blanchard E, Harzallah M, Kuntz P. A generic framework for comparing
semantic similarities on a subsumption hierarchy. In: Proceedings of 18th
European conference on artiﬁcial intelligence (ECAI). Patras, Greece: IOS Press;
2008. p. 20–4.
[29] Hubalek Z. Coefﬁcient of association and similarity based on binary (presence,
absence) data: an evaluation. Biol Rev 1982;57:669–89.
[30] Jaccard P. Distribution de la ﬂore alpine dans le bassin des dranses et dans
quelques régions voisines. Bull Soc Vaudoise Sci Nat 1901;34:241–72.
[31] Dice LR. Measures of the amount of ecologic association between species.
Ecology 1945;26:297–302.
[32] Caillez F, Kuntz P. A contribution to the study of the metric and euclidean
structures of dissimilarities. Psychometrika 1996;61:241–53.
[33] Gower JC, Legendre P. Metric and euclidean properties of dissimilarity
coefﬁcients. J Classif 1986;3:5–48.
[34] Miller G, Leacock C, Tengi R, Bunker RT. A semantic concordance, workshop on
human language technology, HLT 1993, Association for Computational
Linguistics, Princeton, New Jersey; 1993, p. 303–8.
[35] Sánchez D, Batet M, Valls A, Gibert K. Ontology-driven web-based semantic
similarity. J Intell Inform Syst 2009;35:383–413.
[36] Seco N, Veale T, Hayes J. An intrinsic information content metric for semantic
similarity in WordNet. In: López de Mántaras R, Saitta L, editors. 16th
European conference on artiﬁcial intelligence, ECAI 2004, including prestigious
applicants of intelligent systems, PAIS 2004. Valencia, Spain: IOS Press; 2004.
p. 1089–90.
[37] Zhou Z, Wang Y, Gu J. A new model of information content for semantic
similarity in WordNet. In: Yau SS, Lee C, Chung Y-C, editors. Second
international
conference
on
future
generation
communication
and
networking symposia, FGCNS 2008. Sanya, Hainan Island, China: IEEE
Computer Society; 2008. p. 85–9.
[38] Sánchez
D,
Batet
M,
Isern
D.
Ontology-based
information
content
computation. Knowl-based Syst 2011;24:297–303.
[39] Buggenhout CV, Ceusters W. A novel view on information content of concepts
in a large ontology and a view on the structure and the quality of the ontology.
Int J Med Inform 2005;74:125–32.
[40] Blank
A.
Words
and
concepts
in
time:
towards
diachronic
cognitive
onomasiology. In: Eckardt R, von Heusinger K, Schwarze C, editors. Words
and concepts in time: towards diachronic cognitive onomasiology. Berlin,
Germany: Mouton de Gruyter; 2003. p. 37–66.
[41] Pirró G, Seco N. Design, implementation and evaluation of a new semantic
similarity metric combining features and intrinsic information content. In:
Meersman R, Tari Z, editors. OTM 2008 Confederated international conferences
CoopIS, DOA, GADA, IS, and ODBASE 2008. Berlin/Heidelberg (Monterrey,
Mexico): Springer; 2008. p. 1271–88.
[42] Braun-Blanquet J. Plant sociology: the study of plants communities. London:
Oxford University Press; 1932.
[43] Ochiai A. Zoogeographic studies on the solenoid ﬁshes found in Japan and its
neighbouring regions. Bull Jpn Soc Fish Sci 1957;22:526–30.
[44] Kulcynski S. Classe des sciences mathématiques et naturelles. Bull Int Acad
Polonaise Sci Lett Sér B 1927:57–203.
[45] Simpson GG. Notes on the measurement of faunal resemblance. Am J Sci
1960;258-A:300–11.
[46] Sokal RR, Sneath PHA. Principles of numerical taxonomy. San Francisco: W. H.
Freeman and Company; 1963. 359p.
[47] Leacock C, Chodorow M. Combining local context and WordNet similarity for
word sense identiﬁcation. WordNet: an electronic lexical database. MIT Press;
1998. p. 265–83.
[48] Li Y, Bandar Z, McLean D. An approach for measuring semantic similarity
between words using multiple information sources. IEEE Trans Knowledge
Data Eng 2003;15:871–82.
[49] Pirró G. A semantic similarity metric combining features and intrinsic
information content. Data Knowledge Eng 2009;68:1289–308.
[50] Landauer T, Dumais S, Solution A. A solution to Plato’s problem: the latent
semantic analysis theory of the acquisition, induction, and representation of
knowledge. Psychol Rev 1997;104:211–40.
[51] Miller GA, Charles WG. Contextual correlates of semantic similarity. Lang Cogn
Process 1991;6:1–28.
[52] Rubenstein H, Goodenough J. Contextual correlates of synonymy. Commun
ACM 1965;8:627–33.
[53] Spackman K. SNOMED CT milestones: endorsements are added to already-
impressive standards credentials. Healthcare Inform 2004;21:54–6.
[54] Ding L, Finin T, Joshi A, Pan R, Cost RS, Peng Y, et al. Swoogle: A Search and
Metadata Engine for the Semantic Web. In: Thirteenth ACM international
conference
on
Information
and
knowledge
management,
CIKM
2004.
Washington (DC, USA): ACM Press; 2004, p. 652–9.
[55] Bullen PS, Mitrinovic DS, Vasics PM. Means and their inequalities. Reidel; 1988.
[56] Batet M, Valls A, Gibert K. Improving classical clustering with ontologies. In:
4th World conference of the IASC and 6th conference of the Asian regional
section of the IASC on computational statistics and data analysis, IASC 2008.
Yokohama (Japan): International Association for Statistical Computing; 2008.
p. 137–46.
[57] Tversky A. Features of similarity. Psycol Rev 1977;84:327–52.
[58] Nelson SJ, Johnston D, Humphreys BL. Relationships in medical subject
headings, relationships in the organization of knowledge. K.A. Publishers;
2001. pp. 171–184.
[59] Al-Mubaid H, Nguyen HA. Measuring semantic similarity between biomedical
concepts within multiple ontologies. IEEE Trans Syst, Man, Cybern, Part C: Appl
Rev 2009;39:389–98.
[60] Batet M, Valls A, Gibert K, Sánchez D. Semantic clustering using multiple
ontologies. In: 13th International conference on the catalan association for
artiﬁcial intelligence; 2010. p. 207–16.
[61] Hliaoutakis A. Semantic similarity measures in the MESH ontology and their
application to information retrieval on medline. Diploma Thesis, Technical
Univ. of Crete (TUC), Dept. of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Crete,
Greece; 2005.
D. Sánchez, M. Batet / Journal of Biomedical Informatics 44 (2011) 749–759
759

