A Riemannian geometry theory of human movement:
The geodesic synergy hypothesis
Peter D. Neilson a,⇑, Megan D. Neilson a, Robin T. Bye b
a School of Electrical Engineering and Telecommunications, University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia
b Faculty of Engineering and Natural Sciences, Aalesund University College, Ålesund, Norway
a r t i c l e
i n f o
Article history:
Received 23 December 2014
Revised 9 August 2015
Accepted 11 August 2015
Available online 25 August 2015
Keywords:
Multi-joint movement
Trajectory planning
Minimal effort
Geometric control
Nonlinear dynamics
a b s t r a c t
Mass-inertia loads on muscles change with posture and with changing mechanical interac-
tions between the body and the environment. The nervous system must anticipate chang-
ing
mass-inertia
loads, especially during
fast
multi-joint coordinated
movements.
Riemannian geometry provides a mathematical framework for movement planning that
takes these inertial interactions into account. To demonstrate this we introduce the con-
trolled (vs. biomechanical) degrees of freedom of the body as the coordinate system for
a conﬁguration space with movements represented as trajectories. This space is not
Euclidean. It is endowed at each point with a metric equal to the mass-inertia matrix of
the body in that conﬁguration. This warps the space to become Riemannian with curvature
at each point determined by the differentials of the mass-inertia at that point. This curva-
ture takes nonlinear mass-inertia interactions into account with lengths, velocities, accel-
erations and directions of movement trajectories all differing from those in Euclidean
space. For newcomers to Riemannian geometry we develop the intuitive groundwork for
a Riemannian ﬁeld theory of human movement encompassing the entire body moving in
gravity and in mechanical interaction with the environment. In particular we present a
geodesic synergy hypothesis concerning planning of multi-joint coordinated movements
to achieve goals with minimal muscular effort.
 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
1. Introduction
Many studies of human movement have focused on kinematic properties but fewer studies have dealt with dynamics due
to the lack of mathematical tools for analyzing the complex nonlinear dynamical interactions between the biomechanical
degrees of freedom (DOFs) of the human body (Sekimoto, Arimoto, Kawamura, & Bae, 2008). Gravitational and mass-
inertia loads on muscles change with posture and with mechanical interactions between the body and the environment.
These changes greatly complicate the dynamical relationships between forces generated by muscles and resulting body
movements. Even rotation about a single joint requires a coordinated activation of many muscles throughout the body to
compensate for these dynamical interactions and to prevent movement about other DOFs. Inertial, centrifugal, and coriolis
reaction forces have to be anticipated by the nervous system, especially during fast multi-joint movements.
Further complicating the picture is the fact that most functional multi-joint movements require the changing joint-angles
to be appropriately coordinated to achieve performance goal(s). To produce this coordination the nervous system has to
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.humov.2015.08.010
0167-9457/ 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
⇑Corresponding author at: School of Electrical Engineering and Telecommunications, University of New South Wales, Sydney 2052, Australia.
E-mail address: p.neilson@unsw.edu.au (P.D. Neilson).
Human Movement Science 44 (2015) 42–72
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Human Movement Science
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/humov

couple changing joint-angles together by introducing nonlinear dynamical constraining relationships between them. We
refer to such a set of constraining relationships as a movement synergy. Because there are many more joint-angles than per-
formance variables, many different combinations of joint-angles and different coordination of those joint-angles can be
employed to achieve the same performance goal(s).
How does the nervous system determine which particular coordination of joint-angles to use? One possibility is that it
selects the coordination (i.e., movement synergy) that achieves performance goal(s) with minimum demand for muscular
effort. It makes sense from an evolutionary point of view that the nervous system might have evolved strategies to achieve
goals, such as catching prey and escaping predators, with minimum demand for muscular effort (O’Dwyer & Neilson, 2000).
Moreover, everyday movements appear to be constrained by the imperative to optimize metabolic economy (see Sparrow &
Newell, 1998 for review). Any computational theory of motor control that seeks to explain how such a movement synergy
might be implemented must take into account the multi-linked nonlinear dynamics of the human body in interaction with
the environment. As indicated earlier, this raises the question of what mathematical tools and computational techniques are
required to handle such nonlinear dynamics.
We contend that Riemannian geometry provides the most appropriate mathematical framework for developing compu-
tational models of multi-joint human movement. Riemannian geometry represents motion in a nonlinear (curved) space
known as a Riemannian manifold. The geometry of this curved space differs considerably from the intuitively well-
understood geometry of linear Euclidean space. For example, the notion that parallel lines never meet is a Euclidean idea
that does not hold in curved Riemannian space. Concepts concerning distances, areas, volumes, straight lines, angles
between lines, velocities, and accelerations derived from Euclidean geometry all have to be modiﬁed. As has been shown
already (Biess, Flash, & Liebermann, 2011; Biess, Liebermann, & Flash, 2007), some of the paradoxes and contradictions in
existing computational theories of human movement (Hermens & Gielen, 2004) based on linear Euclidean notions can be
resolved when reformulated in Riemannian space. Furthermore, as pointed out by Biess (2013), an investigator’s choice of
coordinates can be problematic in models of human movement. No consistent inferences can be drawn because concepts
such as anisotropy and orthogonality of covariance matrices, for example, are coordinate dependent. A Riemannian geometry
framework allows theories of human movement to be expressed in a coordinate independent manner because tensor equa-
tions are invariant under coordinate transformations; that is, if a tensor equation equals zero in one coordinate system then
it will equal zero in all coordinate systems.
Once a Riemannian framework for human movement is established, the theorems and propositions of that geometry offer
the possibility of obtaining new insights into motor behaviour. In this paper we lay the groundwork for a Riemannian model
of the entire human body moving in a gravitational ﬁeld in mechanical interaction with the environment. In particular, we
will use Riemannian geometry to show theoretically how the nervous system can coordinate movements to achieve goals
with minimum demand by muscles for metabolic energy.1 We call this the geodesic synergy hypothesis.
2. Background
2.1. The human body as a multi-linked mechanical system
From a biomechanical point of view the human body is a multi-linked mechanical system with multiple biome-
chanical DOFs. Sekimoto et al. (2008) demonstrated that the inertia-induced movement of a multi-linked mechanical
system is characterized by geodesic curves in a Riemannian manifold. Similarly, Bullo and Lewis (2005) showed that
motion of multi-linked mechanical systems can be treated using Riemannian geometry and that motion in the absence
of an external force corresponds to geodesic trajectories in the Riemannian manifold. Arimoto (2010) showed that the
space spanned by the DOFs of multi-joint robots can be regarded as a Riemannian manifold with a Riemannian metric
equal to the robot’s mass-inertia matrix. As will be developed in Section 3, the curvature of a Riemannian manifold for
a multi-linked mechanical system is attributable to the changing Riemannian metric (i.e., changing mass-inertia
matrix).
2.2. Previous applications of Riemannian geometry in studies of human movement
Handzel and Flash (1999) were early to present the case for using geometric methods in the study of human motor con-
trol. They pointed out that the spaces of motor DOFs had not so far been dealt with in a satisfactory way. All too often, they
argued, motor DOFs were treated as a collection of a priori unrelated variables represented as a linear Euclidean space with
the nonlinear geometric structure inherent in multi-linked systems ignored. Consequently, measurements and computations
of lengths of paths were distorted leading to erroneous conclusions. These limitations are overcome, they explained, by
employing spaces that do not have a linear structure. In general, these nonlinear spaces are represented by curved differen-
tiable (smooth) manifolds, the basic objects of Riemannian geometry.
1 We consider minimizing muscular effort and minimizing demand by muscles for metabolic energy to be the same as minimizing the net tensions
developed by muscles. This is distinct from sense of muscular effort (an aspect of kinesthesia) which correlates with the amount of neural drive to the muscles
(Gandevia, 1987; McCloskey, 1981; O’Dwyer & Neilson, 2000).
P.D. Neilson et al. / Human Movement Science 44 (2015) 42–72
43

Handzel and Flash (1996, 1997) initially applied Riemannian geometry to consideration of the well-known constrained
rotations of the eyes. With similar geometric constraints applying equally well to joint rotations (Gielen, Vrijenhoek,
Flash, & Neggers, 1997) they then introduced the same approach to hand and limb movements (Handzel & Flash, 1999).
Subsequent work applying Riemannian geometry to the eye and/or head-eye system includes that of Ghosh and colleagues
(Ghosh, Meegaskumbura, & Ekanayake, 2009; Ghosh & Wijayasinghe, 2010; Polpitiya, Dayawansa, Martin, & Ghosh, 2007;
Polpitiya, Ghosh, Martin, & Dayawansa, 2004). Likewise, Biess (2013), Biess et al. (2007, 2011), and Arimoto and colleagues
(Arimoto, 2010; Arimoto, Yoshida, Sekimoto, & Tahara, 2009; Sekimoto et al., 2008; Sekimoto, Arimoto, Prilutsky, Isaka, &
Kawamura, 2009) have used Riemannian methods to study the motion of multi-linked robot systems and/or human
multi-joint arm movements, and/or the swing phase of human walking. Ivancevic (2009) and Ivancevic and Ivancevic
(2007, 2010, 2011) developed a Riemannian geometrical model of the human musculoskeletal system that included trans-
lations and rotations at all the main synovial joints of the body including the spine modelled as a chain of ﬂexibly coupled
rigid bodies. Their model has 270 active DOFs. Similarly, Datas, Chiron, and Fourquet (2010) and Datas, Fourquet, and Chiron
(2011) used a virtual human kinematic structure with 24 DOFs including rotations of the head, clavicles, shoulders, elbows,
wrists, and bending of the vertebral column to simulate reaching movements to compare with human data.
All the above studies used Riemannian geometry to compute minimum length pathways on Riemannian manifolds and/or
submanifolds. In each case these correspond to the geodesic trajectories of a Riemannian manifold deﬁned by a coordinate
system based on DOFs. Some studies obtained the geodesics by ﬁrst computing the moment of inertia matrices (or mass-
inertia matrices) of the system to deﬁne the Riemannian metric on the manifold whereas others used the special orthogonal
group of rotations SO(3) to deﬁne the manifold and obtain the geodesics. In all cases comparisons between the computed
geodesic pathways and actual human movements show a close match leading to the conclusion that humans use inertial
properties of the body efﬁciently when planning and executing smooth movements.
Biess et al. (2007) used Riemannian geometry to show both theoretically and experimentally that existing incompatible
computational theories of pointing movements (e.g., minimum-jerk change, minimum-torque change, minimum peak
kinetic energy) are reconciled by regarding joint-angle space as a Riemannian manifold with an inertia-matrix metric and
by using the methods of Riemannian geometry to compute geodesic trajectories. Subsequently they extended the
minimum-jerk change and minimum-torque change models from Euclidean to Riemannian spaces and claimed that these
are mathematically equivalent when formulated in a Riemannian manifold with a kinetic energy (mass-inertia matrix) met-
ric (Biess et al., 2011).
Importantly, Biess et al. (2007) showed that geodesic trajectories minimize demand for muscular effort. Also, importantly,
they drew a distinction between the spatial and the temporal planning of a response. Using a model of the arm in a four-
dimensional manifold with coordinates corresponding to three rotations at the shoulder and one rotation at the elbow, they
computed the unique geodesic pathway for a pointing movement connecting required initial and ﬁnal conﬁgurations. They
referred to this as planning the spatial part of the task. They then introduced an ingenious idea. They used minimization of
jerk-change to compute accelerations and decelerations along the geodesic pathway and referred to this as planning the tem-
poral part of the task. Separating spatial and temporal planning in this way greatly simpliﬁes the computational task of
movement planning. The technique has since been employed in robotics by Sekimoto et al. (2009).
2.3. Elemental movements versus biomechanical DOFs
All the studies mentioned in the previous section deﬁned DOFs in terms of rotations of the eye, head and/or individual
synovial joints. Ivancevic and Ivancevic (2007, 2010, 2011) argued that every synovial joint involves not only rotations
but also micro-translations. They claimed consequently that human motion is rigorously deﬁned in terms of the rotations
and translations of all the main human joints. True, these rotations and translations deﬁne the DOFs of the biomechanical
part of the human motor system, hence we refer to them here as biomechanical DOFs. However, if we consider only move-
ments that can be made voluntarily, these individual joint rotations and translations no longer qualify as DOFs. The anatom-
ical arrangements of muscles and fundamental cross-couplings within the nervous system prevent voluntary control of
certain biomechanical rotations and translations independently of each other. For example, in the neural control of eye
movement smooth pursuit and saccadic systems involve coupling that produces conjugate movements of the eyes. In con-
trast, the vergence system produces disconjugate movements of the eyes. Nor is it possible to control the rotations and trans-
lations of joints in the vertebral column independently, or likewise particular joints of the ﬁngers. In other words, with
respect to voluntary control of movement, anatomical and neurophysiological constraints prevent many biomechanical
DOFs from operating independently of each other. Moreover, many movements of the body do not involve synovial joints,
for example, those of the face, eyes, tongue, larynx, translations and rotations of the scapula, sphincter contractions, and so
forth.
In light of the above, we deﬁne the coordinate system spanning the space of voluntary movements to be based not on
biomechanical DOFs but on elemental movements, the simplest movements that can be made voluntarily independently of
each other one at a time (Neilson & Neilson, 2005a, 2005b, 2010). Some elemental movements involve rotation about a single
axis at a single joint (e.g., ﬂexion/extension of the ﬁrst joint of the index ﬁnger). Others involve translations of body parts
(e.g., raising and lowering the larynx and translations of the scapula). Again, others involve correlated (coupled) combina-
tions of rotations and translations (e.g., movements of the face, bending of the vertebral column, mechanically coupled
rotations of the second and third joints of the index ﬁnger, and rotations of synovial joints where the centre of rotation
44
P.D. Neilson et al. / Human Movement Science 44 (2015) 42–72

changes with joint angle). When an elemental movement is constrained in isometric tasks, the net tension about that ele-
mental movement remains under voluntary control. This gives rise to the notion of elemental tensions. Elemental movements
and elemental tensions can be thought of as the (long-term) independent components of voluntary body movements
averaged over long time windows to remove short-term response-dependent correlations.
2.4. Adaptive Model Theory and movement synergies
In Adaptive Model Theory (AMT) (Neilson & Neilson, 2005a, 2005b, 2010) we estimate that there are some 110 elemental
movements in the human body. Although the order of this number is important the exact count is not crucial, so for sim-
plicity in what follows we assume 110 to be correct. While, by deﬁnition, there are no anatomical or neurophysiological con-
straints preventing elemental movements from being performed voluntarily independently of each other, the central
nervous system appears to have insufﬁcient central processing resources to control all 110 elemental movements indepen-
dently in parallel. We have argued that the nervous system overcomes this problem of limited central processing resources
(and simultaneously solves the problem of redundancy in the musculoskeletal system) by forming response-dependent
movement synergies (Neilson & Neilson, 2010). For each response, groups of elemental movements are constrained by
the nervous system to move together in nonlinearly dynamically related ways. Each group is then controlled as a unit, form-
ing a short-term independent component of the total response-dependent movement synergy and corresponding to a single
response-dependent control degree of freedom (CDOF) of that short-duration movement. This greatly reduces the workload
for central processes. Rather than planning and controlling 110 elemental movements, the central nervous system has only
to plan and control a small number of CDOFs in parallel. The price for this simpliﬁed strategy of motor control is that
response-dependent movement synergies have to be predetermined and switched from one response to another. This raises
the question of the selection of an appropriate movement synergy for a response.
Examining the question of how the nervous system might select an appropriate response-dependent movement synergy
leads quickly to the realization that the problem of redundancy has simply been shifted. An inﬁnite number of different
movement synergies are able to achieve a speciﬁed set of perceptual task goals (performance variables). One way to solve
this version of the redundancy problem is to select the movement synergy that achieves the perceptual goals with minimum
demand by muscles for metabolic energy. However, the question of how the nervous system can form and store in memory a
repertoire of movement synergies able to achieve perceptual goals with minimum demand for muscular effort poses a com-
putational challenge of considerable complexity. Not only must all possible synergistic voluntary movements of the entire
body be allowed for but the inﬂuence of gravity and of mechanical interactions between the body and the environment must
also be taken into account. Moreover, from response to response the nervous system must have the ﬂexibility to change the
performance variables (CDOFs) and the number of these required.
To overcome any uncertainty as to what we mean by ‘response-dependent movement synergy’ we have deﬁned the
notion of a synergeme (Neilson & Neilson, 2004). Motor behaviours, such as drinking from a glass, are comprised of a
sequence of synergemes, such as reach, grasp, pick-up, transport, place against lips, tilt and swallow, tilt, transport, release
grip, and so on. Synergemes are similar to but not the same as Gilbreth’s so-called therbligs (Ferguson, 2000). Both are useful
from an experimental point of view because transitions between both synergemes and therbligs are easy to recognize. We
deﬁne a synergeme to be a movement performed within a given movement synergy with particular sets of elemental move-
ments constrained to move together by particular sets of nonlinear dynamical constraining relationships between them. The
duration of a synergeme can be as short as a single submovement (100 ms) or it can consist of a long sequence of submove-
ments (such as when steering a car with a ﬁxed grip on the steering wheel). Synergemes may have only one CDOF or they
may involve multiple CDOFs. As in the ‘drinking from a glass’ example above, behaviours can be comprised of sequences of
synergemes with the movement synergy being switched from one synergeme to the next but, theoretically at least,
sequences of short-duration synergemes each with a small number of CDOFs can be traded for a longer-duration synergeme
with a larger number of CDOFs, coarticulation during speech motor control being an example.
Most skilled motor behaviours are comprised of sequences of concatenated synergemes. Each synergeme in the concate-
nated sequence corresponds to a different movement synergy. The nervous system has to be able to switch quickly and
smoothly from one movement synergy to the next. This involves (i) selecting a movement synergy appropriate for the task
(i.e., compatible with the task space) and (ii) generating the required set of constraining dynamical relationships between
elemental movements (i.e., the required coordination) to achieve the task goals with minimum muscular effort taking non-
linear inertial dynamics into account. In this paper we focus only on the latter challenge. The selection problem requires geo-
metric analysis of kinesthetic-visuospatial maps and reinforcement learning. This builds on the work set out here and will be
the subject of a further paper.
2.5. Aims and hypothesis
In what follows we amplify the link between AMT and the notion of spatial and temporal planning introduced by Biess
et al. (2007). We do so by developing the idea that the constraining relationships associated with response-dependent geo-
desic pathways in a Riemannian manifold correspond to the constraining relationships between elemental movements that
deﬁne response-dependent geodesic movement synergies.
P.D. Neilson et al. / Human Movement Science 44 (2015) 42–72
45

We generalize the model of Biess et al. (2007, 2011) in three ways and in so doing we introduce a number of novel con-
cepts of relevance to movement control. Firstly, rather than describing subsystems of motor control, like eye/head dynamics
and arm dynamics, we describe control of the entire human body. Only under contrived conditions is it possible to isolate
subsystems from mechanical and neurophysiological interactions with the rest of the body and with the environment.
Secondly, we expand the number of CDOFs from a single one for the pointing movements studied by Biess et al. (2007)
to several, as required by most everyday multi-joint movements. This involves the introduction of the novel notion of a
totally geodesic submanifold with dimension equal to the number of CDOFs. We show that selecting such a submanifold
is geometrically equivalent to selecting a minimum muscular effort geodesic movement synergy for tasks with two or more
CDOFs such as two-dimensional visual tracking. Thirdly, we take into account the inﬂuence of gravity as well as all mechan-
ical interactions within the body and between the body and support surfaces in the environment.2 These extensions provide
the theoretical basis for the geodesic synergy hypothesis:
The conﬁguration manifold (C, J) represents all the possible conﬁgurations of the human body moving in a local environ-
ment. Spatial response-planning processes generate geodesic movement synergies (coordinations) that are the most efﬁcient
movement synergies for achieving performance goals with minimum demand for muscular effort. Geometrically, each such
synergy corresponds to a totally geodesic submanifold with dimension equal to the number of control degrees of freedom
(CDOFs) of the required response. These submanifolds are spanned by a coordinate system of geodesic grid lines embedded
in the Riemannian conﬁguration manifold (C, J). Temporal response-planning processes generate goal-oriented minimum
metric-acceleration movement trajectories conﬁned to the selected totally geodesic submanifold. The resulting movement
trajectories within selected geodesic synergies achieve goals with minimum muscular effort while accounting for gravitational
and mechanical interactions within and between the body and its environment.
2.6. The Riemannian framework
In the two sections that follow we set out information that is key to understanding the geometrical concepts involved in
the above proposal. In doing so we seek to give an intuitive appreciation of the terminology and structure of Riemannian
geometry rather than a mathematically rigorous one. Detailed mathematical descriptions can be found in texts such as
Abraham and Marsden (1978), Arnold (1989), Bullo and Lewis (2005), Darling (1994), Isidori (1995), Ivancevic and
Ivancevic (2007, 2010, 2011), Jurdjevic (1997), Lang (1999), Lee (1997, 2011, 2013), Marsden and Ratiu, (1999), Ortega
and Ratiu (2004), and Szekeres (2004). In a nutshell we can say that the Riemannian framework consists of multiple inter-
connected spaces or ‘manifolds’ and the relationships between them. At the heart of the framework there exists a smooth
base conﬁguration manifold (endowed with a metric) to which there are attached further vector and tensor spaces. The vec-
tors and tensors across these spaces form ﬁelds over the base manifold analogous to electric or magnetic ﬁelds over three-
dimensional space. Thus what follows can be taken as the development of a ﬁeld theory of human movement.
3. The Riemannian conﬁguration manifold
3.1. The conﬁguration manifold requires a metric
Consider any mechanical system with n DOFs. The conﬁguration of the mechanical system at any point ti in time t can be
thought of geometrically as a point c in a smooth n-dimensional conﬁguration space C (i.e., c 2 C) with coordinates c1, . . . , cn
corresponding to the positions of the n DOFs of the system. Any smooth change in conﬁguration from one point c 2 C to
another deﬁnes a movement of the system and is represented geometrically by c(t), a smooth trajectory parametrized by
time t in the conﬁguration space C.
Thus far we have made no speciﬁcation about the size and shape of C. We know only that it is an n-dimensional space that
is smooth (i.e., inﬁnitely differentiable). In order to have a deﬁned size and shape, C requires a metric. If the metric were
constant (i.e., the same at every c 2 C) then C would be a ﬂat Euclidean space, the c1, . . . , cn would be Cartesian (rectilinear),
and movement c(t) of the mechanical system would be speciﬁed linearly. In order to account for nonlinear inertial interac-
tions between the n DOFs the metric must vary, taking differing values at each c 2 C and thus ‘warping’ the conﬁguration
space from its Euclidean counterpart.
We show below that the required metric is the Riemannian-metric tensor j(c) that can be represented as an n  n matrix
J(c) where each element of the matrix J(c) corresponds to a component of the tensor. Every point c 2 C is ‘endowed’ by J(c)
and thus, for a nonlinear Riemannian account of the system, the conﬁguration space is denoted by (C, J). It will be seen that
the Riemannian metric is the kinetic-energy metric and equivalently that the matrix J(c) is the mass-inertia matrix of the
mechanical system. But to establish this, we must ﬁrst set out how the base conﬁguration space C that speciﬁes position
can be extended to include spaces that specify velocity and acceleration.
2 The Biess model includes the effect of gravity on arm movement but this is in isolation from a whole-body context where interactive and other external
forces also play a role. It does not include the inﬂuence of support forces and movement constraints imposed by support forces.
46
P.D. Neilson et al. / Human Movement Science 44 (2015) 42–72

3.2. Velocity and acceleration spaces as tangent ﬁbres and tangent bundles
The differential of a curve c(t) in C passing through c 2 C is dc=dt, a velocity. At the point c 2 C all possible velocities asso-
ciated with all possible curves passing through that point can be represented by velocity vectors v in an n-dimensional tan-
gent velocity space TcC. Each such tangent space TcC can be thought of as a ﬁbre at its point c 2 C. In turn, the union of all the
disjoint TcC ﬁbres can be thought of as the ﬁbres being ‘glued together’ to form another smooth manifold TC known as the
tangent bundle. Points in TC are speciﬁed by both position and velocity (c, v). A vector v that varies smoothly with position
c 2 C from one ﬁbre TcC to another gives rise to a velocity vector ﬁeld in bundle TC over the conﬁguration space C.
Since TC is itself a smooth space we can repeat the above reasoning and deﬁne a double tangent vector space TvTcC as a
ﬁbre at its point ðc; vÞ 2 TC. The differential of a curve (c(t), v(t)) in TC passing through point ðc; vÞ 2 TC is ðdc=dt; dv=dtÞ.
Thus a vector in the ﬁbre TvTcC has two parts corresponding to velocity and acceleration. Since the velocity part is redundant
(in the sense that it is isomorphic with velocity v in TC), we focus only on the acceleration part (known as the principal part)
of the vector in the ﬁbre TvTcC.
The union of all the disjoint double tangent spaces TvTcC over all points ðc; vÞ 2 TC forms another smooth space known as
the double tangent bundle TTC. Points in TTC are speciﬁed by position, velocity, velocity, and acceleration (c, v, v, a). The prin-
cipal part of a vector that varies smoothly with position and velocity ðc; vÞ 2 TC from one ﬁbre TvTcC to another gives rise to
an acceleration vector ﬁeld a(c, v) in double bundle TTC over bundle TC.
3.3. The Riemannian-metric tensor space and the Riemannian metric
We now introduce the Riemannian-metric tensor space. Like the velocity vector space TcC, this space can be thought of as
a ﬁbre at each point c 2 C. It contains a vector-like tensor known as the Riemannian-metric tensor j(c). By deﬁnition j(c) is a
symmetric, positive deﬁnite, non-singular, bilinear map that acts at the point c 2 C on any two vectors v and z in the tangent
space TcC and transforms them into a real number equal to the Riemannian-metric inner product of the two vectors, i.e.,
jðcÞðv; zÞ ¼ hv; zi. As mentioned above, the Riemannian-metric tensor j(c) can be represented at each point c 2 C by an
n  n symmetric, positive deﬁnite, invertible matrix J(c) where each element of the matrix J(c) corresponds to a component
of the vector-like tensor j(c). Hence the Riemannian-metric inner product hv; zi depends on the Riemannian-metric matrix
J(c) and consequently we now write it as hv; ziJðcÞ
jðcÞðv; zÞ ¼ hv; zi ¼ real number ¼ hv; ziJðcÞ ¼ hJðcÞv; zi:
ð1Þ
The tensor j(c), and hence the matrix J(c), varies smoothly from point to point in the conﬁguration space C thereby form-
ing a smooth Riemannian-metric tensor ﬁeld j, or equivalently, a smooth Riemannian-metric matrix ﬁeld J, over the space C.
The space C together with its Riemannian-metric matrix ﬁeld J deﬁnes a Riemannian conﬁguration manifold denoted by (C, J).
When the Riemannian-metric matrix J(c) operates on a vector v it transforms it into another vector JðcÞv with a different
length and direction. This transformation depends on both the matrix J(c) and the direction of the vector v in TcC. The
Riemannian-metric norm kvkJðcÞ of a vector v in TcC (i.e., the length of the vector) is equal to the square root of the
Riemannian-metric inner product, i.e., hv; vi1=2
JðcÞ, and consequently, the Riemannian-metric norm of a velocity vector v
depends not only on the position c 2 ðC; JÞ in the Riemannian conﬁguration manifold but also on the direction of v in each
ﬁbre TcC. The angle h between two vectors v and z in the ﬁbre TcC is deﬁned using Riemannian-metric inner products as
cos h ¼
hv; ziJðcÞ
hv;vi1=2
JðcÞhz; zi1=2
JðcÞ
:
ð2Þ
Vectors in TcC that have unit Riemannian-metric norms and are mutually orthogonal (i.e., at right angles to each other)
will be referred to as J-orthonormal vectors (and become important in Section 5). Meanwhile, in light of the above properties,
we can now establish that J(c) equates to a kinetic-energy metric.
3.4. The Riemannian metric is the kinetic-energy metric
For a mechanical system with n DOFs moving with velocity v at conﬁguration c 2 C the kinetic energy at c 2 C is given
by the expression ½mv2 = ½m(c)(v, v), where mðcÞ is the mass-inertia tensor of the system in conﬁguration c 2 C. From
Section 3.3 we can see that for a Riemannian conﬁguration manifold the kinetic energy of the system moving with veloc-
ity v through conﬁguration c 2 ðC; JÞ can be expressed in terms of the Riemannian-metric inner product as ½j(c)(v, v)
= ½hv, viJ(c) = ½hJ(c)v, vi where the Riemannian-metric tensor j(c) at every c 2 ðC; JÞ is equal to the mass-inertia tensor
m(c) of the system in every conﬁguration c 2 ðC; JÞ, or equivalently, where the Riemannian-metric matrix J(c) in every
conﬁguration c 2 ðC; JÞ is equal to the mass-inertia matrix of the system in every conﬁguration c 2 ðC; JÞ. When the
Riemannian-metric matrix J(c) is set equal to the mass-inertia matrix of the system it is known as the kinetic-energy metric
(for an in-depth description of the relationship between kinetic energy and the Riemannian metric see Bullo and
Lewis (2005)).
P.D. Neilson et al. / Human Movement Science 44 (2015) 42–72
47

The Riemannian-metric matrix J(c) is fundamental to Riemannian geometry because it is this that deﬁnes the metric
structure of the Riemannian conﬁguration manifold (C, J). Because J(c) varies with c 2 ðC; JÞ it warps (C, J) by changing dis-
tances between points as a function of position in the manifold. For this reason Riemannian geometry can be thought of as
the geometry of an elastic space that can be stretched or compressed by any amount in any direction by the Riemannian
metric J(c). An alternative (and more usual) way of thinking about warping is to regard (C, J) as a curved space. The curvature
of (C, J) at each point depends on the ﬁrst and second derivatives of the metric J(c) at each point. This curvature changes dis-
tances, velocities and accelerations of trajectories in (C, J) compared with their counterparts in Euclidean C.
As we have seen, for a mechanical system with n DOFs, J(c) is given by the mass-inertia matrix of the system at each point
c in the n-dimensional manifold (C, J). A trajectory c(t) in (C, J) still represents a movement of the system as in Section 3.1 but
it is now endowed with a kinetic-energy metric J(c) that allows path lengths and directions, as well as magnitudes and direc-
tions of velocities and accelerations, to be computed taking inertial nonlinear interactions between the n DOFs into account.
In other words, the Riemannian (or kinetic-energy) metric in conjunction with the n-dimensional conﬁguration manifold
(C, J) deﬁnes the inertial nonlinear dynamics of the mechanical system.
3.5. The conﬁguration manifold has a predetermined acceleration ﬁeld
Conservation of kinetic energy (K = ½mv2, m = mass, v = velocity) is a basic principle of mechanics that can be used to
compute the motion of any simple mechanical system in the absence of an external force (Bullo & Lewis, 2005). If the mass
m is constant then conservation of kinetic energy is equivalent to Newton’s ﬁrst law of motion: ‘a body remains in a state of
rest or uniform motion in a straight line unless acted on by an external force’. If the mass changes, however, then to conserve
kinetic energy, the velocity has to change to compensate for the changing mass. In other words, the mechanical system will
accelerate or decelerate to conserve kinetic energy despite the absence of an external force.
This natural positively or negatively accelerating motion of the mechanical system in the absence of external force is
taken into account in Riemannian geometry within the structure of the conﬁguration manifold (C, J). It is known as the prin-
cipal part or acceleration part of the geodesic spray ﬁeld (Lang, 1999) stored in TTC. Since it is the second (principal) part of the
geodesic spray ﬁeld and it depends on both position and velocity we denote it by f2(c, v). If the mass-inertia matrix J(c) is
known for every conﬁguration, the kinetic energy K for every position and velocity (c, v) can be computed using the metric
inner product K =½hv, viJ(c) where the mass-inertia matrix J(c) equals the Riemannian metric at the point c 2 ðC; JÞ. The spray
acceleration vector f2(c, v) can then be predetermined for every position and velocity (c, v) using Eq. (3) (derived from the
Euler-Lagrange equation of motion in Marsden and Ratiu (1999)) and stored in the double tangent bundle TTC:
f 2ðc;vÞ ¼ €c ¼ _v ¼
@2K
@v2
"
#1
@K
@c  @2K
@c@v v
 
!
:
ð3Þ
These predetermined values of the spray acceleration ﬁeld f2(c, v) can be regarded as an inherent part of the Riemannian
conﬁguration manifold (C, J) equal to an acceleration vector ﬁeld over the tangent bundle TC. This is taken up later with
respect to the generation of geodesic trajectories.
3.6. Naïve measures of acceleration
When it comes to computing the acceleration €aðtÞ along a trajectory aðtÞ in a Riemannian conﬁguration manifold (C, J) a
problem occurs that does not occur in Euclidean space. In essence, computing acceleration along a trajectory involves com-
puting the change in velocity _aðt1Þ  _aðt2Þ between two points aðt1Þ and aðt2Þ along the curve. But because a Riemannian
manifold is curved the velocity vector _aðt1Þ is located in the tangent space Taðt1ÞC while the velocity vector _aðt2Þ is located
in a completely different tangent space Taðt2ÞC. Consequently, the velocity vectors cannot be subtracted (or at least they
can only be subtracted in a naïve way).
Imagine using a tape measure to measure distance. Suppose the tape measure itself expands or contracts from place to
place. Measuring distances without taking the changing length of the tape measure into account would be a naïve measure of
distance. A similar thing can happen when measuring acceleration €aðtÞ along a trajectory aðtÞ in a Riemannian manifold. If
the velocity vectors _aðt1Þ and _aðt2Þ are measured relative to the basis vectors @1;    ; @n spanning the tangent vector spaces
Taðt1ÞC and Taðt2ÞC without taking into account the fact that the tangent vector spaces and their spanning basis vectors rotate
relative to each other along the trajectory because of the curvature of the manifold, then the computed €aðtÞ will be a naïve
(Euclidean) measure of acceleration.
Einstein’s theory of gravity provides a nice illustration of naïve acceleration. If we drop a stone in a gravitational ﬁeld we
see it accelerate. However, according to Einstein, no force of gravity has to be hypothesized because what we see is a
Euclidean acceleration attributable to the curvature of the spacetime manifold. The stone appears to accelerate because
we have failed to take the curvature of the spacetime manifold into account. Similar misinterpretations occur with respect
to mechanical systems if we fail to take the curvature of the conﬁguration manifold (C, J) into account. In other words, theory
of the movement of such systems, the human body included, is inadequate unless it addresses the nonlinear inertial inter-
action forces within and between the system and the environment.
48
P.D. Neilson et al. / Human Movement Science 44 (2015) 42–72

3.7. The connection and the covariant derivative on a Riemannian manifold
Computing the acceleration €aðtÞ along a trajectory aðtÞ requires velocity vectors in disjoint tangent spaces TaðtiÞC to be
differenced. To compute the difference between velocity vectors in two such disjoint spaces, even at inﬁnitesimally close
points along the curve, some sort of connection between the tangent spaces is required. A connection r (del) is a map that
transforms two vector ﬁelds in the tangent bundle TC into a third vector ﬁeld in the tangent bundle. The connection r on a
Riemannian manifold is uniquely determined by the Riemannian-metric matrix J(c) and its ﬁrst and second differentials from
point to point on the manifold. This stems from the deﬁning requirement for the connection r to be compatible with the
Riemannian metric J(c). The connection r is said to be compatible with J(c) if it satisﬁes the following product rule for all
vector ﬁelds X, Y, and Z:
rXhY; ZiJ ¼ hrXY; ZiJ þ hY; rXZiJ:
ð4Þ
This is equivalent to the requirement for rj to be equal to zero at every point on the manifold. We return to Eq. (4) in
Section 5. The connection r maps any two vectors v and z in TcC at any point c 2 ðC; JÞ into a third vector rvz in TcC
known as the covariant derivative of z in the direction v. In other words, rvz at any point c 2 ðC; JÞ is a vector in TcC equal
to the directional derivative of the velocity vector z (i.e., the acceleration) in the direction v. The problem is that the
apparent (Euclidean) directional derivative _zv of the vector z in the direction v includes a naïve acceleration caused
by the relative rotation of the basis vectors spanning TcC associated with movement in the direction v. To obtain the
‘true’ directional derivative (i.e., rvz) the naïve acceleration due to the curvature of (C, J) has to be computed and sub-
tracted out. In other words, obtaining rvz at each point c 2 ðC; JÞ requires a measure of the naïve acceleration of z in the
direction v at each point c 2 ðC; JÞ attributable to the curvature of the manifold at that point. There exists a symmetrical
bilinear map B(c; v, z) that gives the directional derivative of the vector z in the direction of the vector v in the tangent
space TcC at every point c 2 ðC; JÞ caused by relative rotation of the basis vectors spanning TcC (i.e., due to the curvature
of the manifold). This symmetrical bilinear map B(c; v, z) is given by the components of the connection (known as
Christoffel symbols Ci
j;k) that can be derived uniquely from the ﬁrst and second differentials of the Riemannian-metric
matrix J(c) (Lang, 1999). Thus the covariant derivative rvz is obtained by subtracting B(c; v, z) from the apparent
(Euclidean) directional derivative _zv, as in Eq. (5):
rvz ¼ _zv  Bðc;v; zÞ:
ð5Þ
From this it can be seen that the covariant derivative r _aðtÞ _aðtÞ along a trajectory aðtÞ is given by Eq. (6)
r _aðtÞ _aðtÞ ¼ €aðtÞ  BðaðtÞ; _aðtÞ; _aðtÞÞ;
ð6Þ
where €aðtÞ is the naïve (Euclidean) acceleration along the trajectory, _aðtÞ is the Euclidean velocity vector tangent to the tra-
jectory, and BðaðtÞ; _aðtÞ; _aðtÞÞ is the acceleration attributable to rotation of basis vectors of TcC along the trajectory aðtÞ. It is
equal to the predetermined spray acceleration f 2ðaðtÞ; _aðtÞÞ at the point (aðtÞ, _aðtÞ) in the tangent bundle TC. The point is that
the naïve acceleration BðaðtÞ; _aðtÞ; _aðtÞÞ ¼ f 2ðaðtÞ; _aðtÞÞ is an inherent property of the manifold (C, J) predetermined by the
ﬁrst and second differentials of the metric J(c) on the manifold, or equivalently from the differentials of kinetic energy as
in Eq. (3).
3.8. Geodesic trajectories
A trajectory aðtÞ is deﬁned to be a geodesic trajectory when it has a covariant derivative r _aðtÞ _aðtÞ at every point along
the trajectory equal to zero. In other words, for a geodesic trajectory aðtÞ, the Euclidean acceleration equals the naïve
acceleration €aðtÞ ¼ BðaðtÞ; _aðtÞ; _aðtÞÞ ¼ f 2ðaðtÞ; _aðtÞÞ. To distinguish between the Euclidean acceleration €aðtÞ along the tra-
jectory and the ‘true’ acceleration r _aðtÞ _aðtÞ we refer to the covariant derivative r _aðtÞ _aðtÞ as the metric-acceleration. Zero
metric-acceleration r _aðtÞ _aðtÞ along a geodesic trajectory aðtÞ implies that the metric-speed k _aðtÞkJðaðtÞÞ along the geodesic
trajectory aðtÞ is constant and consequently, geodesic trajectories are to Riemannian manifolds what straight lines are to
Euclidean spaces. They can pass through every point in (C, J) in every possible direction, and distances along geodesic
trajectories in (C, J) are the shortest distances between points taking curvature into account. The distance s(t) along
aðtÞ in (C, J) is computed by integrating the metric-speed k _aðtÞkJðaðtÞÞ along the trajectory. This takes curvature of (C, J)
into account so both the speed and the distance in (C, J) differ from the Euclidean speed k _aðtiÞk and the Euclidean dis-
tance respectively, at each point aðtiÞ along the trajectory. We use the terms metric-speed and metric-distance to empha-
size this difference.
Geodesic trajectories are a cornerstone of the geodesic synergy hypothesis. Having set out their properties in relation to a
general multi-linked mechanical system moving in a Riemannian conﬁguration manifold (C, J) we are now ready to apply
this to movement of the entire human body moving in a local environment.
P.D. Neilson et al. / Human Movement Science 44 (2015) 42–72
49

4. A Riemannian formulation of the entire human body moving in a local environment
4.1. The conﬁguration manifold
Three smooth manifolds are required to specify uniquely the conﬁguration of the entire human body in a local environ-
ment: (i) A 110-dimensional elemental movement manifold H, a point in H corresponding to body posture in terms of the
positions of the 110 elemental movements (Section 2.3). (ii) A three-dimensional place manifold (place map) P, a point in P
giving the position of the head in the extrinsic three-dimensional environment relative to an external reference frame X, Y, Z.
(iii) A three-dimensional orientation manifold O, a point in O giving the orientation (rotation) of the head relative to the
external reference frame. The location and orientation of the head in the local environment can be controlled voluntarily
via changes in the positions of elemental movements, for example, by walking or lying down. It is possible, therefore, to form
dynamic synergistic maps between the H, P, and O spaces. It is also possible, however, for the location and orientation of the
head to be varied independently of body posture; consider for example, the changing location and orientation of the head of
a ballerina as she is carried about the stage by her partner.
The Cartesian product C = H  P  O of these three smooth manifolds deﬁnes a 116-dimensional space C. A point c 2 C
has coordinates c1, . . . , c116 that uniquely specify body posture, head position, and head orientation relative to the X, Y, Z
frame of the local environment. C thus deﬁnes a smooth base manifold of the human body. Any change in the conﬁguration
of the body means a change from one point c 2 C to another. This, of course, deﬁnes a body movement that is represented by
c(t), a trajectory in the manifold C parametrized by time t.
In light of the principles established in Section 3 we can now make the 116-dimensional manifold C Riemannian. By
endowing C with J(c), where J(c) is the mass-inertia matrix of the human body, C becomes the 116-dimensional
Riemannian manifold (C, J). J(c) changes with conﬁguration but, once it is known, the kinetic energy for every position
and velocity ðc; vÞ 2 TC can be computed as in Section 3.5. This in turn predetermines the spray acceleration vector ﬁeld
f2(c, v) on TC. Indeed, the predetermined spray acceleration vector ﬁeld f2(c, v) equals the predetermined bilinear map
Bðc;v; vÞ described in Sections 3.7 and 3.8. In the absence of all external forces (gravity, support forces, muscle forces, elastic
forces, frictional forces, aerodynamic forces, etc.), the apparent free (natural) motion of the human body is to accelerate or
decelerate, as determined by the naïve acceleration vector ﬁeld f2(c, v). Acceleration-deceleration of a spinning ice-skater
according to arm position nicely illustrates the principle. But our interest is in human movement in a gravitational ﬁeld with
the body supported by objects in the local environment; e.g., standing on the ﬂoor, leaning against a wall, sitting in a chair,
lying on a bed, and so forth. In these circumstances there are external forces acting on the body, so how can f2(c, v) be
relevant?
4.2. Gravitational and support forces inﬂuence the mass-inertia matrix
The dominant external forces acting on the body are gravitational forces, support forces, and muscle forces.3 For the body
in a gravitational ﬁeld in interaction with support surfaces to be held in a ﬁxed (equilibrium) conﬁguration, muscle forces are
required to compensate for the gravitational and support forces. In other words, to maintain an equilibrium conﬁguration the
net external force acting on the body must be zero. We contend that so long as the gravitational, support, muscle and all other
external forces acting on the body sum to zero at every point along the geodesic trajectory (i.e., the net external force is held at
zero throughout the movement), the free motion of the body will follow the geodesic trajectory determined by the geodesic
spray accelerations f2(c, v). We discuss this generalized equilibrium point hypothesis in more detail in Section 9.2. The impor-
tant point here is the assertion that in the presence of external forces but with those external forces summing to zero (i.e., zero
net external force at every point along the movement trajectory), the free motion of the body equals a geodesic trajectory in
(C, J). However, as explained below, the presence of gravitational and support forces effectively changes the mass-inertia matrix
J(c) and consequently geodesic motions in the presence of gravitational, support, and muscle forces (summing to zero) differ
from the geodesic motions in the absence of external forces.
It is important to note that in the presence of a gravitational ﬁeld, the distribution of support forces on the body con-
strains movement. For example, when standing on one leg it is not possible to make a kicking movement with that leg.
To make such a kicking movement it is necessary ﬁrst to change the conﬁguration of the body, say by shifting weight to
the other leg, so that support forces no longer constrain movement of the ﬁrst leg. For a rolling wheel, the point of contact
between the wheel and the ground (i.e., the support point on the wheel) is constrained to have zero velocity relative to the
ground, assuming the wheel is not skidding. Similarly, if the body is not sliding on support surfaces, the support points on the
body are constrained to have zero velocity relative to the support surfaces.
Fixed support surfaces act like inﬁnite mass-inertia loads. No matter how much force muscles generate they are unable to
accelerate support points on the body through the ﬁxed support surfaces. This inﬁnite resistance to movement offered by
support surfaces is ‘reﬂected’ through the body as changes in the mass-inertia loads on muscles, e.g., consider the difference
in mass-inertia load encountered by muscles acting about the ankle during the swing phase of a walking cycle compared
3 It might be thought intuitively that muscle forces, being generated internally in the body, are internal forces. But, from a physical point of view, muscle
forces act on the mass-inertia of the body causing it to accelerate or decelerate and thus are considered external.
50
P.D. Neilson et al. / Human Movement Science 44 (2015) 42–72

with that during the stance phase. The moment of inertia of the foot about the ankle with the position of the leg ﬁxed (swing
phase) is smaller than the moment of inertia of the body about the ankle with the position of the foot ﬁxed (stance phase).
The moment of inertia of the body about the ankle with the foot ﬁxed has been modelled by many as an inverted pendulum
(e.g., Fitzpatrick, Gorman, Burke, & Gandevia, 1992; Fitzpatrick & McCloskey, 1994; Winter, Patla, Prince, Ishac, & Gielo-
Perczak, 1998). It is equal to the product of the relatively large mass of the body and the relatively large moment arm
between the centre of mass of the body and the axis of rotation at the ankle. This moment arm changes, and hence the
moment of inertia of the body about the ankle changes, with rotations at the knee, hip or other joints. This nicely illustrates
the general principle, taken into account in the geodesic synergy hypothesis, that moments of inertia encountered by mus-
cles acting about joints depend not only on the posture of the body but also on the distribution of support forces and reaction
forces acting on the body. As the body moves, thereby changing its conﬁguration, the distribution of its support forces and
support points changes, thereby changing the effective mass-inertia loads on muscles, e.g., consider the changing distribu-
tion of support forces and support points across the body and the way this changes the mass-inertia loads on muscles asso-
ciated with rolling over in bed.
These complications to the dynamics of human movement are dealt with in the Riemannian formulation. The mass-
inertia matrix J(c) includes the inﬂuences of constraints on movement imposed by the changing distribution of support
forces and support points across the body. Despite the requirement for the net external force to be zero, gravitational and
support forces modify the mass-inertia matrix J(c) and the way it changes with position in the conﬁguration manifold
and therefore contribute to the predetermined geodesic spray acceleration ﬁeld f2(c, v) that resides in the double tangent
bundle TTC.
Similarly, holding a weight in the hand, or on any other part of the body, changes the mass-inertia matrix of the body and
modiﬁes the geodesic spray acceleration ﬁeld. But if the body plus weight can be held in a ﬁxed conﬁguration then the net
external force must be zero. Thus despite mechanical interactions with support surfaces and objects in the local environ-
ment, if the resulting changes in the mass-inertia matrix of the body are incorporated in the principal part of the geodesic
spray ﬁeld f2(c, v), with muscle forces tuned to maintain zero net external force, then the free motion of the body corresponds
to a geodesic trajectory in the Riemannian conﬁguration manifold (C, J).
4.3. Vector ﬁelds in TC and TTC provide a geometric picture of nonlinear differential equations and their solutions
Suppose cðtÞ is a smooth curve in (C, J) parametrized by time t. For each point along cðtÞ the velocity vector _cðtÞ is obtained
by differentiating along the curve. It is a vector tangent to the curve in the tangent space TcðtÞC at each point cðtÞ along the
curve. It is possible to think of this in the reverse direction: given a vector at each point in the tangent bundle TC (i.e., a veloc-
ity vector ﬁeld on (C, J)), and given an initial position cð0Þ (i.e., point in the conﬁguration manifold), there is a unique curve
cðtÞ in (C, J) whose velocity at each point along the curve is equal to the given velocity vector ﬁeld _cðtÞ at that point. Since
going from C to TC involves differentiation, going in the reverse direction from TC to C involves integration. Consequently, the
curve cðtÞ is referred to as an integral curve of the vector ﬁeld _c. A family of initial positions in (C, J) gives a family of integral
curves in (C, J) known as the integral ﬂow of the vector ﬁeld. Thus, a vector ﬁeld in TC provides a geometrical representation
of a ﬁrst-order nonlinear differential equation, and its associated integral ﬂow provides a geometrical representation of its
solution set. Specifying an initial position cð0Þ selects a unique (particular) integral curve from the solution set.
A similar geometrical picture holds for smooth vector ﬁelds in TTC. The principal part of such a vector ﬁeld can be thought
of as an acceleration vector ﬁeld. Integrating once gives an integral ﬂow of velocities in TC, and integrating twice (double
integration) gives an integral ﬂow of position in (C, J). Thus the principal part of a vector ﬁeld in TTC provides a geometrical
representation of a second-order nonlinear differential equation and its associated integral ﬂows in TC and (C, J) provide a
geometrical representation of its solution set. Obtaining a particular solution requires speciﬁcation of both an initial position
c in (C, J) and an initial velocity v in TcC. In Section 4.4 we take advantage of this geometric picture to describe a relatively
simple way to generate solutions of the nonlinear second-order dynamical equations of motion (Euler–Lagrange equations)
of the human body taking the nonlinear inertial interactions within and between elemental movements and the environ-
ment into account.4
4.4. Geodesic trajectory generator
Ability to generate geodesic trajectories aðtÞ in the Riemannian conﬁguration manifold (C, J) plays a key role in the geo-
desic synergy hypothesis. Given an initial conﬁguration and velocity ðað0Þ; _að0ÞÞ, and taking advantage of the fact that the
acceleration-deceleration vector ﬁeld f2(c, v) is predetermined and stored in TTC as an inherent part of the conﬁguration
manifold, the geodesic trajectory ðaðtÞ; _aðtÞÞ of the human body in the absence of a net external force is easily computed.
As described in Section 4.3, this is achieved by double integrating the available acceleration-deceleration vector ﬁeld
f 2ðaðtÞ; _aðtÞÞ along the trajectory aðtÞ. As illustrated schematically in Fig. 1, given initial values ðað0Þ; _að0ÞÞ, the geodesic tra-
jectory can be generated quickly by a circuit corresponding to an array of double integrators with access to f 2ðaðtÞ; _aðtÞÞ
stored in memory.
4 Initial value versus two-point boundary value geodesics are discussed in Section 9.3.
P.D. Neilson et al. / Human Movement Science 44 (2015) 42–72
51

The geodesic trajectory aðtÞ that results from this computation corresponds to an accelerating-decelerating trajectory in
Euclidean space but, when curvature is taken into account, it appears as a constant metric-speed geodesic trajectory with
zero metric-acceleration in the Riemannian conﬁguration manifold (C, J). Almost all the computational workload involved
in computing the geodesic trajectory aðtÞ is contained in the predetermined principal part of the geodesic spray ﬁeld
f2(c, v) stored in the double tangent bundle TTC. Both the temporal and spatial parts of the geodesic trajectory are determined
by double integrating the acceleration ﬁeld f2(c, v). We refer to the double integrating circuit of Fig. 1 as a geodesic trajectory
generator (GTG).5 Simulation of a GTG is described in Section 8 below.
4.5. Spatial and temporal independence along a geodesic pathway
We established in Section 3.7 that the covariant derivative (metric-acceleration) r _aðtÞ _aðtÞ along a geodesic trajectory aðtÞ
is zero and consequently, as indicated above, the metric-speed k _aðtÞkJðaðtÞÞ is constant along the trajectory. Importantly,
Fig. 1. A schematic illustration of a geodesic trajectory generator (GTG). The block diagram shows how an array of 116 double integrators with feedback of
the geodesic spray acceleration vector f 2ðaðkÞ; _aðkÞÞ retrieved from the double tangent bundle TTC can be used to generate a geodesic trajectory (aðkÞ; _aðkÞ)
in the Riemannian conﬁguration manifold (C, J). The initial position að0Þ ¼ ða1ð0Þ; . . . ;a116ð0ÞÞ and the initial velocity _að0Þ ¼ ð _a1ð0Þ; . . . ; _a116ð0Þ) are set,
component by component, as initial values on the outputs of the integrators. The outputs of the integrators are sampled with sample time-interval Dt by
zero-order-hold sampling devices represented by the boxes labelled ZOH. Rectangular pulses (with pulse widths Dt) equal to ða1ðkÞ; . . . ;a116ðkÞÞ and
ð _a1ðkÞ; . . . ; _a116ðkÞÞ at the sampled outputs of the ZOH boxes are the components of the sampled position aðkÞ and sampled velocity _aðkÞ at sample number k.
The sampled position aðkÞ ¼ ða1ðkÞ; . . . ;a116ðkÞÞ and sampled velocity _aðkÞ ¼ ð _a1ðkÞ; . . . ; _a116ðkÞÞ at sample number k are connected to the double tangent
bundle (association memory) TTC to access the components of the geodesic spray acceleration vector f2 = f2
1(k), . . . , f2
116(k) associated with the position and
velocity (aðkÞ; _aðkÞ). The sampled component signals f2
1(k), . . . , f2
116(k) are connected, component by component, to the inputs of the double integrators.
Operating in continuous-time, the integrators integrate their inputs over the sample-time interval Dt. At the next sample number (k + 1) the outputs of the
integrators are sampled again by the ZOH sampling devices and the cycle repeats. Over time the outputs from the integrators generate a geodesic trajectory
(aðtÞ, _aðtÞ) that is stored, component by component, in working memory. The time required for the GTG to generate a geodesic trajectory can be reduced by
any amount simply by increasing the gains of the integrators and reducing the sample-time interval Dt. Allowing for the ability of recursively connected
neural circuits to integrate their synaptic inputs, for the bursting activity of cortical columns that resemble (approximately) rectangular pulses, and for the
existence of association memory networks in the cerebral cortex, it does not seem unreasonable to suggest that the GTG described can be implemented by
neural circuits within the brain.
5 The GTG provides a rapidly implementable solution of an initial value problem. In Section 9.3 this is contrasted with the two-point boundary value
approach of Biess et al. (2011).
52
P.D. Neilson et al. / Human Movement Science 44 (2015) 42–72

however, the path of the trajectory and the speed at which it is traversed, are independent. The constant metric-speed can be
set higher or lower, depending simply on the initial velocity vector _að0Þ, yet the geodesic path remains the same. Of course, if
the metric-speed along the path is varied, this requires application of a tangential metric-acceleration-deceleration, in which
case the trajectory is no longer geodesic, yet the pathway remains unchanged. We can therefore refer to the geodesic pathway
aðsÞ as distinct from the geodesic trajectory aðtÞ. And since s measures the metric-distance along geodesic trajectory aðtÞ
(i.e., arc length) we can denote the temporal ﬂow along aðsÞ by s(t).
As recognized by Biess et al. (2007) in their movement study, the fact that the geodesic pathway is independent of the
temporal ﬂow along it is of key importance in the geodesic synergy hypothesis. It is this that allows separation of the spatial
and temporal aspects of response planning.6 We are now ready to develop the geodesic synergy hypothesis presenting spatial
and temporal formulations in Sections 5 and 6, respectively.
5. Spatial aspects of response planning
5.1. Equivalence of spatial planning and synergy selection
To achieve a pointing movement goal, Biess et al. (2007) computed a geodesic pathway to connect speciﬁed initial and
ﬁnal postures of the arm in a four-dimensional Riemannian manifold spanned by three rotations at the shoulder and one
rotation at the elbow. They referred to this as planning the spatial aspect of the task. Specifying a geodesic pathway is equiv-
alent to specifying a set of nonlinear dynamical constraining relationships between the four joint angles. Imagine a point
moving back and forth along the geodesic pathway in the four-dimensional joint-angle space. The moving point projects
on to each of the four joint-angle coordinates generating four temporal joint-angle signals. Because the point is constrained
to move along the one-dimensional geodesic pathway it follows that the four joint-angle signals have to be perfectly related
in a nonlinear dynamical way. According to our deﬁnition of ‘movement synergy’ (Section 2.4) such a set of nonlinear
dynamical constraining relationships deﬁnes a movement synergy for the arm. Thus the spatial aspect of response planning
described by Biess et al. (i.e., generating an appropriate geodesic pathway to connect two points in joint-angle space) can be
seen as equivalent to selection of an appropriate one-CDOF geodesic movement synergy to generate the reaching response
from the initial joint-angle position.
This equivalence between spatial planning and selection of a geodesic movement synergy can be generalized to move-
ments of the entire human body and to tasks requiring more than one CDOF. Flow along a geodesic pathway in the 116-
dimensional conﬁguration manifold (C, J) projects on to the coordinate axes c1, . . . , c116 generating a set of 116 coordinate
temporal signals c1ðtÞ; . . . ; c116ðtÞ. Because the geodesic pathway is one-dimensional it follows that the changing coordinate
signals have to be perfectly related to each other in a nonlinear dynamical way. As described in Section 2.4, such a set of
nonlinear dynamical constraining relationships between coordinate temporal signals deﬁnes a one-CDOF geodesic move-
ment synergy involving the entire body.
Importantly, it is not the temporal waveforms of the coordinate signals per se that determine the synergy but rather the
constraining relationships between them. For example, suppose a point s(t) moves back and forth along a geodesic pathway
aðsÞ in (C, J) parametrized by metric-distance s along the pathway. It makes no difference whether the point s(t) moves in an
irregular stochastic fashion or in a simple sinusoidal manner (or in any other temporal fashion) along the geodesic pathway,
the constraining relationships between the coordinate signals remain the same. It is the pathway aðsÞ that determines the
constraining relationships and not the temporal signal s(t). On the other hand, changing the geodesic pathway changes the
constraining relationships and consequently changes the movement synergy.
Using the concepts developed in Sections 3 and 4 we now consider generation of geodesic synergies for one-CDOF, two-
CDOF, and ﬁnally N-CDOF responses. We then discuss the notion that geodesic synergies minimize demand for muscular
effort.
5.2. Generating a one-CDOF geodesic movement synergy
Given an initial position c ¼ að0Þ in (C, J) and an initial velocity e ¼ _að0Þ equal to a unit metric-length tangent velocity
vector e at time t = 0, it is simple, using the GTG described in Section 4.4, to generate a unit metric-speed geodesic trajectory
aðtÞ. See Section 8 for simulation of the GTG. Recall from Section 4.4 that both the temporal and spatial parts of this geodesic
trajectory are determined by the GTG. Also recall from Section 3.8 that the metric-speed along the geodesic trajectory is con-
stant even though the apparent (naïve) velocity changes in both magnitude and direction. In the case given, where the initial
velocity vector e was chosen to have unit metric-length, the geodesic trajectory has a constant unit metric-speed. But since
for unit metric-speed t = s, the unit metric-speed geodesic trajectory is parametrized by metric-distance (arc length) s along
the geodesic pathway. Remember, it is the geodesic pathway aðsÞ that determines the one-CDOF geodesic movement syn-
ergy, not the temporal ﬂow s(t) along the pathway. Thus, within the Riemannian framework, using the predetermined spray
6 Biess et al. (2011) have further shown that separation of planning into spatial and temporal features is a general outcome of the minimization of mean
squared-derivative costs (such as minimum metric-acceleration, minimum metric-jerk and so forth) in Riemannian space and therefore is not an additional
assumption.
P.D. Neilson et al. / Human Movement Science 44 (2015) 42–72
53

acceleration-deceleration vector ﬁeld f2(c, v) stored in TTC in conjunction with initial conditions (c, e) mentioned above and
the GTG of Fig. 1, it is straightforward to generate a geodesic pathway aðsÞ, i.e., to generate a one-CDOF geodesic movement
synergy.
As established in Section 4.4, initial conditions c ¼ að0Þ and e ¼ _að0Þ uniquely determine the geodesic trajectory aðtÞ and
hence in this case the geodesic pathway aðsÞ. In other words, a particular one-CDOF geodesic movement synergy is uniquely
speciﬁed by the particular initial values assigned to c and e. But for a one-CDOF movement to fulﬁll its required purpose in a
task, c and e must be chosen such that the pathway aðsÞ consists of points corresponding to conﬁgurations of the body that
are compatible with the execution of that task. For example, if the task is to move a ﬁnger tip in a direct path between two
marks on a sheet of paper, or to point at a target moving continuously in a stochastic fashion in one dimension on a display
screen, the body must be positioned so that the ﬁnger can be in contact with the paper or the display screen throughout the
required traverse. We therefore use the notation ðc; eÞ to specify a one-CDOF geodesic movement synergy with the proviso
that, for a movement within that synergy, the chosen values of c and e must be compatible with the required task space.
5.3. Generating a two-CDOF geodesic movement synergy
Many functional movements require the simultaneous control of two CDOFs, for example, moving a ﬁnger tip to trace the
character 3 drawn on a sheet of paper, or to track a target moving stochastically in two dimensions on a display screen. A
two-CDOF geodesic movement synergy for a two-DOF arm is simulated in Section 8 below.
A two-CDOF movement synergy requires the elemental movements of the body to be coordinated in such a way that two
(short-term) independent components of the resulting movement (say, the x and y movements of the ﬁnger on the paper or
display screen) can be controlled simultaneously and independently. This is equivalent to the generation of a set of nonlinear
dynamical constraining relationships between the coordinate temporal signals c1(t), . . . , c116(t) that constrain movement tra-
jectories to remain within a two-dimensional submanifold embedded in (C, J) and spanned by two coordinate axes corre-
sponding to the two CDOFs of the movement. The two independent components of the movement can then be generated
by independent movement trajectories along each of the coordinate axes, establishing a two-CDOF movement synergy.
But there is more to it than this.
To minimize muscular effort the synergy has to be a geodesic movement synergy, a sort of two-dimensional equivalent of
a geodesic pathway. The two-dimensional submanifold must be such that any two arbitrarily chosen points in the subman-
ifold can be connected by a geodesic trajectory contained entirely within the submanifold. Evidently, generating a two-CDOF
geodesic movement synergy is equivalent, geometrically, to generating a geodesic coordinate system for a two-dimensional
submanifold centred about a speciﬁed point c 2 ðC; JÞ embedded in the conﬁguration manifold (C, J) such that not only the
coordinate axes but also all of the coordinate grid lines are geodesic pathways. Any submanifold with these required prop-
erties is known as a totally geodesic submanifold. The detail of generating such a submanifold requires consideration of some
additional properties of Riemannian geometry. To preserve continuity of the main exposition these are set out in Appendix A.
With reference to that Appendix we set out here only the basic principles involved.
Construction of a two-dimensional totally geodesic submanifold about a conﬁguration c 2 ðC; JÞ requires the speciﬁcation
of two J-orthonormal vectors e1 and e2 in the tangent space TcC (satisfying conditions given in Appendix A). The position and
velocity (c, e1) are used as initial conditions in the GTG (Fig. 1) to generate a local unit metric-speed geodesic pathway aðx1Þ
parametrized by metric-distance (arc length) x1 along the pathway measured from c 2 ðC; JÞ. Similarly, the position and
velocity (c, e2) are used as initial conditions in the GTG to generate a second unit metric-speed geodesic pathway bðx2Þ ema-
nating from point c 2 ðC; JÞ in a direction orthogonal to e1 parametrized by x2 along the pathway measured from c 2 ðC; JÞ.
Locally, at least, the geodesic pathways aðx1Þ and bðx2Þ form geodesic coordinate axes spanning the two-dimensional totally
geodesic submanifold SII (Appendix A).
The J-orthonormal vectors e1 and e2 can be parallel translated (Appendix A) along both the geodesic coordinate axes aðx1Þ
and bðx2Þ. At every point x2 along bðx2Þ the parallel translated vector Pe2 remains tangent to bðx2Þ and the parallel translated
vector Pe1 remains J-orthonormal to Pe2. Of course, each point x2 along bðx2Þ corresponds to a point c2 2 ðC; JÞ. The position
and velocity (c2, Pe1) at each x2 along bðx2Þ can be used as initial conditions in the GTG to generate a family of horizontal
geodesic coordinate grid lines on the submanifold SII. Similarly, by parallel translating the J-orthonormal vectors e1 and e2
along the geodesic coordinate axis aðx1Þ, initial conditions (c1, Pe2) at each x1 along aðx1Þ can be used in the GTG to generate
a family of vertical geodesic coordinate grid lines on the submanifold SII, as illustrated in Fig. A3 and in Section 8. The sub-
manifold SII can be deﬁned only locally about c 2 ðC; JÞ to avoid neighbouring geodesics crossing each other. Using these hor-
izontal and vertical geodesic coordinate grid lines on the two-dimensional totally geodesic submanifold SII, any point
p ¼ ðx1; x2Þ and velocity vector v tangent to SII at the point p can be projected (i.e., v is parallel translated) along the geodesic
coordinate grid lines on to the geodesic coordinate axes aðx1Þ and bðx2Þ. Consequently, any movement trajectory conﬁned to
SII can be decomposed into its two CDOFs by projection on to the two geodesic coordinate axes aðx1Þ and bðx2Þ and con-
versely, any movement trajectory with two CDOFs contained in SII can be constructed by independently generating trajec-
tories along the two geodesic coordinate axes bðx2Þ and aðx1Þ and then combining them by projecting back along the
horizontal and vertical geodesic coordinate grid lines respectively (the procedure is illustrated in Section 7.2). Notice that
the entire 116-dimensional Riemannian conﬁguration manifold (C, J) with its inherent geodesic spray acceleration ﬁeld
54
P.D. Neilson et al. / Human Movement Science 44 (2015) 42–72

f2(c, v) is required to generate geodesic pathways using the GTG. However, once an appropriate geodesic movement synergy
(c, e1, e2) compatible with the task has been selected and the associated totally geodesic submanifold generated, all subse-
quent central planning and central execution processes take place within the two-dimensional submanifold thereby greatly
reducing the workload on central processes.
In Appendix A we establish that initial conditions (c, e1) and (c, e2) uniquely determine a local submanifold SII that is
totally geodesic if and only if vectors e1 and e2 remain tangent to SII when parallel translated along any of the radial geodesic
trajectories fcrig emanating from c 2 ðC; JÞ (including aðx1Þ and bðx2Þ). In other words, a particular two-CDOF geodesic move-
ment synergy is uniquely speciﬁed by the particular values chosen for c, e1 and e2 with the above constraint imposed. But, as
in the previous section, for a two-CDOF movement to fulﬁll its required purpose in a task, c, e1 and e2 must additionally be
such that the submanifold SII contains points corresponding to conﬁgurations of the body that are compatible with the task
space as described in Section 5.2. We therefore use the notation (c, e1, e2) to specify a two-CDOF geodesic movement synergy,
with the proviso that for a movement within that synergy, (i) the values of c, e1 and e2 must be compatible with the required
task space and (ii) the values of e1 and e2 must satisfy the necessary and sufﬁcient conditions for SII to be a totally geodesic
submanifold.
5.4. Generating an N-CDOF geodesic movement synergy
The number of CDOFs that can be controlled simultaneously is small, limited by the availability of neural processing
resources within the central nervous system (Neilson & Neilson, 2005a, 2005b). While the maximum number of CDOFs is
not established, thinking of a one-man band suggests it is greater than two (Oytam, Neilson, & O’Dwyer, 2005).
Furthermore, in many tasks the number of CDOFs under simultaneous control will change from one synergeme
(Section 2.4) to the next. The nervous system therefore has to be able to generate geodesic movement synergies with a small
but variable number N of CDOFs and be able to switch quickly and smoothly between them.
Geometrically, geodesic movement synergies with N CDOFs are equivalent to N-dimensional totally geodesic submani-
folds SN embedded in the conﬁguration manifold (C, J). Movement trajectories conﬁned to such an N-dimensional subman-
ifold correspond to movements with a set of nonlinear dynamical constraining relationships between the temporal
coordinate signals c1(t), . . . , c116(t) that allow N independent components of movement to be controlled (short-term) inde-
pendently simultaneously. The procedures of Section 5.3 and Appendix A for constructing a local two-dimensional totally
geodesic submanifold extend readily to the construction of a local N-dimensional totally geodesic submanifold as follows.
Initial conditions (c, e1), . . . , (c, eN) uniquely determine a local N-dimensional submanifold SN that is totally geodesic if
and only if the J-orthonormal vectors e1, . . . , eN remain tangent to SN when parallel translated along any of the radial geodesic
trajectories fcrig as described in Appendix A. In other words, a particular N-CDOF geodesic movement synergy is uniquely
speciﬁed by the particular values chosen for c, e1, . . . , eN with the above constraint imposed. But, as in the previous sections,
for an N-CDOF movement to fulﬁll its required purpose in a task, c, e1, . . . , eN must additionally be such that the local sub-
manifold SN contains points corresponding to conﬁgurations of the body that are compatible with the task space as described
in Sections 5.2 and 5.3. We therefore use the notation (c, e1, . . . , eN) to specify an N-CDOF geodesic movement synergy, with
the proviso that for a movement within that synergy, (i) the values of c, e1, . . . , eN must be compatible with the required task
space and (ii) the values of e1, . . . , eN must satisfy the necessary and sufﬁcient conditions for SN to be a totally geodesic
submanifold.
5.5. Geodesic synergies minimize muscular effort
We have seen that geodesic synergies are represented geometrically by totally geodesic submanifolds embedded in the
conﬁguration manifold (C, J). We have also seen that it is possible to move between any two points in a totally geodesic sub-
manifold along a geodesic trajectory contained entirely within the submanifold. Because geodesic trajectories correspond to
the free motion of the human body in the absence of an external force, it would seem that no muscle force is needed to move
at constant metric-speed between any two points in a totally geodesic submanifold. This is not the case for any other type of
movement synergy. For any other submanifold that is not totally geodesic, the free-motion trajectory will leave the subman-
ifold and muscle force will be needed to prevent the trajectory from leaving the submanifold. It is tempting to conclude from
this that demand for muscular effort is minimal for geodesic movement synergies corresponding to totally geodesic subman-
ifolds embedded in the conﬁguration manifold (C, J). There are, however, two complications standing in the way of reaching
this conclusion. The ﬁrst is the fact that everyday movements take place in a gravitational ﬁeld with its associated support
forces, and the second is the requirement for most functional movements to accelerate and decelerate. Let us discuss each of
these in turn.
Gravity acts on every segment of the human body generating translational forces and/or rotational torques about the ele-
mental movements and requiring support forces to prevent the body from falling. To follow a preplanned trajectory (even a
geodesic one) in a gravitational ﬁeld muscles have to generate forces to overcome gravity. This demands metabolic energy!
The only way for a movement to follow a geodesic pathway when gravitational and support forces are acting on the body is
for the muscles to generate forces equal and opposite to the vector sum of the gravitational and support forces so that the net
external force is zero. Computing gravitational and support forces and torques about every elemental movement as a
P.D. Neilson et al. / Human Movement Science 44 (2015) 42–72
55

function of conﬁguration is difﬁcult. Nevertheless, it is not unreasonable that the nervous system can store in memory the
efference copy and/or muscle tensions needed to maintain equilibrium conﬁgurations. In other words, through experience, a
memory of net muscle forces required to compensate for gravitational and support forces able to hold the body stationary in
equilibrium conﬁgurations in (C, J) is acquired. The net tensions about elemental movements required to hold the body in
equilibrium conﬁgurations are represented by a vector ﬁeld over the conﬁguration manifold (C, J) that can be stored in
the tangent bundle TC. Using this memory any preplanned geodesic pathway can be followed. At each point along the path-
way the net muscle tensions (or central motor commands) needed to maintain equilibrium in that conﬁguration are
retrieved from memory and applied to the muscles. This leads to a generalized equilibrium hypothesis discussed in
Section 9.2.
Since the gravitational and support forces change with conﬁguration it follows that the muscle tensions needed to com-
pensate for them also have to change from point to point along the pathway. These gravity-compensating muscle tensions
demand metabolic energy so how can movement along a geodesic pathway in the presence of gravitational and support
forces minimize demand for muscular effort? The answer is that gravitational and support forces are conservative forces.
The total amount of work done (i.e., energy expended) against gravity in moving an inertial load along a path between
two speciﬁed points in the conﬁguration manifold is independent of the path. Consequently, muscle forces needed to cancel
gravitational and support forces play no role in determining the minimum energy pathway connecting any two speciﬁed
points in the manifold. Movement at constant metric-speed along the unique geodesic pathway connecting speciﬁed points
in (C, J) minimizes net demand by muscles for metabolic energy despite the fact that muscle tensions must compensate for
gravitational and support forces along the pathway.7 (Of course, this is not to say that other factors, such as desire to minimize
demand for peak energy along the pathway, cannot come into play.)
The second complication is the fact that most functional movements are not constant metric-speed movements. They
need to be metric-accelerated and/or metric-decelerated. Such accelerations and decelerations require muscle force. Thus,
while a geodesic movement synergy is necessary for minimization of muscular effort, it is not sufﬁcient. The metric-
accelerations and metric-decelerations of trajectories within the totally geodesic submanifold must also be minimized.
This involves temporal planning processes described in the next section.
6. Temporal aspects of response planning
6.1. Planning the temporal ﬂow of a minimum energy movement
As noted above, most purposeful human movements are not executed at constant speed. Experimental studies have long
demonstrated that the temporal course of movement trajectories usually involves acceleration-deceleration. Particularly
where accuracy is concerned, an apparent single movement may consist of multiple submovements, revealing an underlying
intermittency in response planning. As part of AMT we have addressed this in the form of the BUMP model, where BUMP is
an acronym for Basic Unit of Motor Production. A complete account of that model and of the evidence supporting it is available
in previous work (Bye & Neilson, 2008, 2010; Neilson & Neilson, 2010; Neilson, Neilson, & O’Dwyer, 1995). Here we give only
a brief outline, sufﬁcient to make clear its extension to the Riemannian framework where it provides the basis for minimiza-
tion of metric acceleration-deceleration in the temporal ﬂow along geodesic pathways.
The essentials of the BUMP formulation are: (i) Movement is planned and executed in a concatenated sequence of sub-
movements (BUMPs). (ii) Planning and execution processes occur in a ﬁxed temporal interval and run in parallel such that
while one BUMP is being executed, the next is being planned in advance. (iii) Planning of each BUMP speciﬁes an initial posi-
tion x(ti) and initial velocity v(ti) at time ti and a required ﬁnal position x(tf) and ﬁnal velocity v(tf) predicted ahead by a vari-
able interval of time tf  ti. (iv) BUMPs are planned so that the predicted position and velocity at the end of one becomes the
initial position and velocity for the next (unless sensory feedback negates the prediction), thus providing smooth trajectories
in expected circumstances. (v) The prediction interval tf  ti is at least the length of each BUMP, but may be much longer, the
exact length varying with response strategy. (vi) The temporal course from ti to tf is determined by an optimal trajectory gen-
erator (OTG) that minimizes acceleration and deceleration within that planned course. (vii) There is OTG circuitry available
to each CDOF of a required response and these run independently and in parallel in real-time, meaning that an N-CDOF
response proceeds with no greater central time delay than does a one-CDOF response.
Experimental testing and simulation of the BUMP model, using a ﬁxed processing interval of 100 ms, has shown that it is
consistent with a variety of discrete-time and continuous-time movement phenomena including the psychological refrac-
tory period, speed-accuracy tradeoff, skilled tracking behaviour, adaptive learning of movement synergies and physiological
tremor (Bye & Neilson, 2008, 2010; Oytam et al., 2005).
7 This does not take into account effort associated with co-contraction and stretch reﬂex activation of muscles involved in stiffening the body and controlling
visco-elastic properties. Visco-elastic forces play an important role in determining the stability and damping of body postures and movements and clearly this
has an energy cost. In this paper, however, we concentrate on the dominant mass-inertia forces and leave analysis of the energy demands of postural stability
and damping for a subsequent study. Nevertheless, it can be said that the gradient of gravitational forces about each elemental movement determines a type of
‘gravitational stiffness’ that changes with posture and orientation of the body. This stiffness can be represented by a vector ﬁeld over the conﬁguration manifold
and consequently, stiffness control also can be dealt with within the Riemannian geometry framework.
56
P.D. Neilson et al. / Human Movement Science 44 (2015) 42–72

6.2. Minimum energy temporal ﬂow for a one-CDOF geodesic movement
A one-CDOF movement along a geodesic pathway aðsÞ has temporal ﬂow designated by metric-position s(t) and metric-
velocity _sðtÞ along the geodesic pathway. We have seen (Section 5) that pathway aðsÞ is provided by the GTG of Fig. 1. This
minimizes muscular effort from the spatial aspect in that it speciﬁes the minimum energy synergy of all the possible syn-
ergies relevant to the task. Likewise the temporal trajectory s(t), _sðtÞ is provided by the Riemannian extension of the OTG that
speciﬁes the minimum energy time course of the movement along the geodesic pathway. This is achieved by minimizing the
metric-acceleration-deceleration in each of the BUMPs that constitute s(t), _sðtÞ along the geodesic pathway. In other words,
given the inherent intermittency of movement planning and execution, the optimal movement from the temporal aspect is
the concatenation of the minimum energy trajectories for the constituent BUMPs along the selected geodesic pathway.
In the Riemannian framework the OTG that provides those trajectories is structurally the same as in the Euclidean
description (full details given in Bye & Neilson, 2008, 2010; Neilson et al., 1995). Computationally, the Riemannian OTG sim-
ply replaces acceleration with metric-acceleration (i.e., covariant derivative r _aðtÞ _aðtÞ (Section 3.7)) and similarly distances
and velocities become their metric equivalents (Section 3.8). In accord with our previous simulations, the geodesic synergy
hypothesis assigns a ﬁxed processing time interval of 100 ms to the Riemannian OTG. In that time the OTG reads-in, from
higher levels in a response-planning hierarchy, the initial position and velocity (s(ti), _sðtiÞ) and the ﬁnal position and velocity
(s(tf), _sðtf Þ) along the geodesic pathway for a BUMP, generates an optimal trajectory (s(t), _sðtÞÞ with minimum metric-
acceleration to connect (s(ti), _sðtiÞ) with (s(tf), _sðtf Þ) along the geodesic pathway, and holds it ready for execution. While
one BUMP is being executed in real-time, the next is being generated in parallel. Because of distributed processing within
the OTG the trajectory s(t), _sðtÞ can have a duration much longer than the 100 ms required by the OTG to generate it.
Consequently, after only the ﬁrst 100 ms of the trajectory has been executed the OTG has had sufﬁcient time to generate
a completely new required response trajectory with a new prediction horizon tf  ti if required. Thus movement along the
geodesic pathway aðsÞ is comprised of a concatenated sequence of 100 ms duration, minimum metric-acceleration submove-
ments with each submovement able to correct for execution errors detected during the previous 100–200 ms. Strategic
choice of prediction horizon tf  ti, its effect on the smoothness of the total concatenated trajectory, and other issues con-
cerning error correction have all been examined in detail in previous work (Bye & Neilson, 2008, 2010; Neilson & Neilson,
2005a; Neilson et al., 1995; Oytam et al., 2005). Those matters are not affected by the substitution of metric equivalents
for their Euclidean counterparts and so are not further addressed here.
6.3. Minimum energy temporal ﬂow for a multiple-CDOF geodesic movement
For a task requiring movement with two or more CDOFs the geodesic synergy hypothesis holds that the temporal trajec-
tories for each CDOF are generated independently and in parallel. This requires the parallel operation of OTG circuitry ded-
icated to each CDOF, a proposal that is a key part of the BUMP formulation (Section 6.1, point vii). As such, the rationale for
this proposal is already available (see Bye & Neilson, 2008; Neilson & Neilson, 2005a; Oytam et al., 2005). As set out in
Sections 5.3 and 5.4, a multiple-CDOF geodesic movement synergy is conﬁned spatially to a totally geodesic submanifold
of equivalent dimension embedded in the conﬁguration manifold (C, J). Using geodesic coordinate grid lines, the initial
and ﬁnal positions and velocities in the submanifold can be projected on to the N geodesic coordinate axes that span the
submanifold. N OTGs working independently and in parallel can then generate minimum metric-acceleration trajectories
along each of the geodesic coordinate axes to connect the projected initial and ﬁnal positions and velocities in the speciﬁed
time tf  ti. This is possible because temporal ﬂow along a geodesic pathway can be scaled independently of the pathway. In
other words, a minimum metric-acceleration trajectory is planned independently for each of the N CDOFs.
Essentially, for generating a minimum muscular effort temporal ﬂow to connect an initial position and velocity (x(ti), _xðtiÞ)
and a ﬁnal position and velocity (x(tf), _xðtf Þ) within an N-dimensional submanifold, what we have is an N-fold version of the
problem already solved for optimizing s(t) and _sðtÞ in the one-CDOF case. The required initial and ﬁnal positions and veloc-
ities (x(ti), _xðtiÞ) and (x(tf), _xðtf Þ) can be projected on to each of the geodesic coordinate axes spanning the submanifold. With
N OTGs working independently in parallel the constituent minimum metric-acceleration BUMPs for each CDOF along each of
the geodesic coordinate axes can be generated independently and in parallel and held ready for execution. When the N BUMP
trajectories are executed together by the multivariable feedforward–feedback movement control system described in AMT
(for detail see Neilson & Neilson, 2005a) the resulting movement follows a minimum metric-acceleration trajectory conﬁned
within the N-dimensional totally geodesic submanifold. (A simpliﬁed illustration of this temporal planning process is given
in Section 7.2.)
7. The geometry of minimum energy response planning
The concepts of minimum energy spatial response planning (Section 5) and minimum energy temporal response planning
(Section 6) provide the basis for the geodesic synergy hypothesis. To obtain a picture of the processes involved in temporal
response planning we now examine their application to the simpliﬁed tasks of generating geodesic trajectories and
minimum metric-acceleration trajectories on a sphere. Note that the sphere is used here only to provide a simple example
of temporal planning on a curved manifold. In no way is it meant to imply that the Riemannian metric on a sphere equals the
P.D. Neilson et al. / Human Movement Science 44 (2015) 42–72
57

mass-inertia matrix of the human body or any part of the human body for that matter. Also note that we are using the term
‘sphere’ according to its mathematical deﬁnition as the two-dimensional surface of a three-dimensional ball. Moreover, the
two-dimensional sphere is regarded as an abstract two-dimensional manifold in its own right (i.e., not as a submanifold
embedded in a three-dimensional Euclidean space or indeed in any other higher dimensional manifold). This sphere can
be endowed with a metric that allows the construction of geodesic pathways known as ‘great circles’. These include
horizontal and vertical geodesic coordinate grid lines. The procedure for generating minimum metric-acceleration pathways
to connect speciﬁed initial and ﬁnal positions and velocities on the sphere is the same as for any two-dimensional totally
geodesic submanifold on which horizontal and vertical geodesic coordinate grid lines can be constructed. Thus we can
use the sphere with its great circle geodesics to provide a simple illustration of the processes involved in temporal response
planning on any such totally geodesic submanifold.
7.1. Minimum energy spatial response planning on a sphere
A picture of the geometry involved in planning geodesic movement trajectories on curved totally geodesic submanifolds
can be obtained by considering the analogous but simpler problem of ﬁnding the minimum distance pathway to navigate
from point A to point B on a sphere. Planning a minimum kinetic energy pathway to connect conﬁgurations A and B on a
sphere is equivalent to ﬁnding the minimum distance pathway on the sphere between the two points. Both involve ﬁnding
the unique geodesic on the sphere that passes through A and B. It is well known that the geodesic (shortest distance) path-
way between any two points on a sphere is equal to the ‘great circle’ route connecting the two points. Suppose points A and B
have different longitudes but the same latitude, as in Fig. 2.
Lines of longitude are great circles on the sphere but lines of latitude (apart from the equator) are not. Moving along the
latitude line connecting A and B is, therefore, not the shortest pathway between the two points. We can use the equator and
one of the longitude lines as geodesic coordinate axes aðx1Þ and bðx2Þ respectively (using the same notation as used in
Figs. A1, A2, and A3 in Appendix A), and then we can construct a system of geodesic (great circle) horizontal and vertical
coordinate grid lines, as illustrated in Fig. 2. These geodesic coordinate grid lines are a property of the sphere and its metric
and can be determined in advance. Using these great circle grid lines, project the points A and B on to the geodesic coordinate
axes aðx1Þ and bðx2Þ. Now plan two constant speed trajectories (i.e., constant metric-speed across the surface of the sphere)
to move from ðx1ÞA to ðx1ÞB along aðx1Þ and from ðx2ÞA to ðx2ÞB along bðx2Þ in the same interval of time Dt. In other words, the
constant metric-speeds along aðx1Þ and bðx2Þ are set equal to ððx1ÞB  ðx1ÞAÞ=Dt and ððx2ÞB  ðx2ÞAÞ=Dt, respectively. When
these two constant metric-speed trajectories are projected back along the great circle grid lines they form the required con-
stant metric-speed great circle (geodesic) trajectory connecting A to B (Fig. 2). This procedure can be used to compute geo-
desic pathways from any point A to any point B on the sphere or any other totally geodesic submanifold on which horizontal
and vertical geodesic coordinate grid lines can be constructed.
7.2. Minimum energy temporal response planning on a sphere
Most functional movements require accelerations and/or decelerations. Moving a ﬁnger from A to B, for example, requires
the limb ﬁrst to accelerate and then to decelerate. In making such a movement it is possible to utilize the accelerations and
decelerations caused by gravity, support forces and the changing mass-inertia characteristics of the body to minimize
demand for muscular effort. An intuitive understanding of the geometry involved in planning a minimum energy temporal
trajectory between a speciﬁed initial position and velocity and a speciﬁed ﬁnal position and velocity for each submovement
(BUMP) in a totally geodesic submanifold (selected by spatial planning) can be obtained by extending the sphere analogy
from the previous section. We wish to ﬁnd a minimum metric-acceleration trajectory to move between an initial point A
and initial velocity vA (=0 on the sphere illustrated in Fig. 3) to a ﬁnal point B and ﬁnal velocity vB on the sphere.
Project these initial and ﬁnal positions and velocities on to the geodesic coordinate axes aðx1Þ and bðx2Þ using the great
circle geodesic coordinate grid lines as in Fig. 2 giving ððx1ÞA; ð_x1ÞAÞ and ððx1ÞB; ð_x1ÞBÞ on aðx1Þ; and ððx2ÞA; ð_x2ÞAÞ and
ððx2ÞB; ð_x2ÞBÞ on bðx2Þ (Fig. 3). Now plan a minimum metric-acceleration trajectory to move between ððx1ÞA; ð_x1ÞAÞ and
ððx1ÞB; ð_x1ÞBÞ on aðx1Þ in a speciﬁed interval of time Dt, and a minimum metric-acceleration trajectory to move between
ððx2ÞA; ð_x2ÞAÞ and ððx2ÞB; ð_x2ÞBÞ on bðx2Þ in the same interval of time Dt. Providing metric-distances, metric-velocities, and
metric-accelerations are employed, these are exactly the trajectories generated by the optimum trajectory generator
(OTG) described previously in the BUMP model of response planning (Bye & Neilson, 2008, 2010; Neilson et al., 1995).
Two OTGs working independently and in parallel generate the two trajectories along coordinate axes aðx1Þ and bðx2Þ in
no more time than required to generate one trajectory. When the two trajectories are projected back along the great circle
grid lines they form the required minimum metric-acceleration trajectory connecting the initial point A and initial velocity vA
(zero in Fig. 3) to the ﬁnal point B and ﬁnal velocity vB on the sphere, as illustrated in Fig. 3. To meet the endpoint velocity
requirements the two component trajectories have to accelerate and/or decelerate so they are no longer constant metric-
velocity trajectories and therefore are no longer geodesic trajectories. Likewise the resulting trajectory is no longer a great
circle geodesic pathway but nevertheless, it is conﬁned to the surface of the sphere and it is the smooth trajectory connecting
speciﬁed initial and ﬁnal positions and velocities on the sphere that minimizes metric-acceleration. Remember, the mini-
mum metric-acceleration temporal planning procedure illustrated here on a sphere applies to each BUMP in a smoothly
58
P.D. Neilson et al. / Human Movement Science 44 (2015) 42–72

connected concatenated sequence of BUMPs. The position and velocity at the end of one BUMP is set equal to the position
and velocity at the beginning of the next and correction of execution errors detected by sensory feedback during the execu-
tion of one BUMP can be incorporated into the planning of a subsequent BUMP.
Fig. 2. Generating a great circle geodesic pathway to connect arbitrary points A and B on a sphere. The equator and a longitude line form geodesic
coordinates aðx1Þ and bðx2Þ, respectively. The coordinate grid lines are all predetermined geodesic pathways on the sphere. x1 is metric-distance along aðx1Þ
and x2 is metric-distance along bðx2Þ. Point A is projected along geodesic coordinate grid lines to point ðx1ÞA on coordinate axis aðx1Þ and to point ðx2ÞA on
coordinate axis bðx2Þ. Similarly, point B is projected along geodesic coordinate grid lines to point ðx1ÞB on aðx1Þ and ðx2ÞB on bðx2Þ. Constant metric-speed
trajectories are generated to move from ðx1ÞA to ðx1ÞB along aðx1Þ in a speciﬁed interval of time Dt and from ðx2ÞA to ðx2ÞB along bðx2Þ in the same interval of
time Dt. When these two trajectories are projected back along geodesic coordinate grid lines they generate the unique geodesic pathway on the sphere
connecting point A to point B. See text for details.
Fig. 3. Planning a minimum metric-acceleration trajectory to connect an initial point A with initial velocity vA to a ﬁnal point B with ﬁnal velocity vB on a
sphere. The geodesic coordinate axes and geodesic coordinate grid lines are the same as in Fig. 5. Point A is projected along geodesic coordinate grid lines to
the point ðx1ÞA on aðx1Þ and ðx2ÞA on bðx2Þ. Point B and ﬁnal velocity vB are projected along geodesic coordinate grid lines to position and velocity ððx1ÞB; ð_x1ÞBÞ
on aðx1Þ and to position and velocity ððx2ÞB; ð_x2ÞBÞ on bðx2Þ. Two optimum trajectory generators (OTGs) working independently and in parallel generate
minimum metric-acceleration trajectories to connect ðx1ÞA to ððx1ÞB; ð_x1ÞBÞ along aðx1Þ and ðx2ÞA to ððx2ÞB; ð_x2ÞBÞ along bðx2Þ in the same interval of time Dt. To
achieve the ﬁnal velocities ð_x1ÞB and ð_x2ÞB the trajectories have to overshoot the positions ðx1ÞB and ðx2ÞB, slow down, reverse, and approach the ﬁnal
positions ðx1ÞB and ðx2ÞB from the opposite directions. When these trajectories are projected back along geodesic coordinate grid lines they generate the
minimum metric-acceleration trajectory on the sphere connecting point A with initial velocity vA = 0 to point B with ﬁnal velocity vB. See text for details.
P.D. Neilson et al. / Human Movement Science 44 (2015) 42–72
59

As mentioned above and in Section 6, this temporal planning procedure generalizes to planning of minimum metric-
acceleration trajectories on any totally geodesic N-dimensional submanifold embedded in the curved Riemannian conﬁgu-
ration manifold (C, J) on which geodesic coordinate grid lines can be constructed.
8. GTG simulator
The geodesic synergy hypothesis is illustrated using a MATLAB/Simulink simulation of the GTG to generate two-
dimensional totally geodesic coordinate systems for a two-DOF arm moving in the horizontal plane. We use the same
two-DOF arm described by Biess et al. (2011), the details of which are as follows:
The two-dimensional conﬁguration manifold (C, J) for the arm is spanned by the shoulder angle h1 and the elbow angle h2.
The velocity vector v at conﬁguration c = (h1, h2) is v ¼ ð_h1; _h2Þ. The mass-inertia matrix (i.e., kinetic-energy metric) is:
Jðh2Þ ¼
J11ðh2Þ
J12ðh2Þ
J12ðh2Þ
J22ðh2Þ


¼
I1 þ I3 þ 2I5 cos h2
I3 þ I5 cos h2
I3 þ I5 cos h2
I3


;
ð7Þ
where constants are: I1 ¼ I1;x þ m1a2
1 þ m2l2
1; I3 ¼ I2;x þ m2a2
2; I5 ¼ m2l1a2; I1;x = moment of inertia of upper arm;
I2;x = moment of inertia of forearm; l1 = length of upper arm; l2 = length of forearm; m1 = mass of upper arm; m2 = mass of
forearm; a1 = distance to centre of mass of upper arm; a2 = distance to centre of mass of forearm. In the simulation these
parameters are set to the same values used by Biess et al.: l1 = 0.30 m, l2 = 0.345 m, m1 = 2.52 kg, m2 = 2.07 kg,
a1 = 0.142 m, a2 ¼ 0:225 m, I1;x = 0.019 kg m2, and I2;x = 0.021 kg m2. The inertial constants in Eq. (7) are derived assuming
the arm to be rigidly supported at the shoulder girdle. The mass-inertia matrix J(c) changes as a function of elbow angle
h2 and consequently the conﬁguration manifold (C, J) = ((h1, h2), Jðh2Þ) is a curved Riemannian manifold with Jðh2Þ equal
to the kinetic-energy metric tensor. Taking the limited range of joint-angle change into account, the conﬁguration manifold
(C, J) corresponds to a patch on the surface of a two-torus.
The GTG simulator (Fig. 5) can generate constant metric-speed geodesic trajectories in the curved Riemannian conﬁgu-
ration manifold (C, J) = ((h1, h2), Jðh2Þ) starting from any initial position c(0) = (h1(0), h2(0)) and any initial velocity
_cð0Þ ¼ ð_h1ð0Þ; _h2ð0ÞÞ at t = 0. These are set as initial values h1(0), h2(0), _h1ð0Þ, _h2ð0Þ on the integrators in Fig. 5. (Note that
in the MATLAB/Simulink notation of the ﬁgure these are written as theta1_init, theta2_init, theta1dot_init, and theta2-
dot_init respectively.) The outputs h1(t), h2(t), _h1ðtÞ, and _h2ðtÞ of the integrators are sampled at T = 50 ms sample intervals
(i.e., 20/s) by zero-order hold (ZOH) samplers as shown in Fig. 5 and the sampled signals h1(k), h2(k), _h1ðkÞ, and _h2ðkÞ, where
k = sample number, are applied to the input of an association memory network labelled TTC in Fig. 5 where TTC stands for
double tangent bundle of the conﬁguration manifold. The zero-order hold samplers are included in the simulator to approx-
imate a 20 Hz bursting code of cortical columns in the brain but this bursting frequency can be easily changed. Pre-computed
values ½ f 1
2
f 2
2 
T of the acceleration geodesic spray vector f 2ðc; vÞ are retrieved from the association memory TTC and applied
to the inputs of the double integrators, as shown in Fig. 5, where they are held constant for one sample interval T = 50 ms
until the next sample is taken by the ZOHs. The acceleration geodesic spray vector f 2ðc;vÞ ¼ ½ f 1
2
f 2
2 
T equals the natural
free-motion acceleration of the arm in the absence of an external force. It is caused by conservation of kinetic energy and
the changing mass-inertia Jðh2Þ of the arm. It can be pre-computed for each conﬁguration c = (h1, h2) and velocity
_c ¼ v ¼ ð_h2; _h2) as shown below and stored in TTC. The kinetic energy K is given by the metric inner product
K ¼ 1
2 hJðcÞv;vi. Substituting for K into Eq. (3) and rearranging gives
hJðcÞf 2; wi ¼ 1
2 hJ0ðcÞwv;vi  hJ0ðcÞvv; wi;
ð8Þ
where w is an arbitrary ﬁxed vector. Solving Eq. (8) for the unkown f 2ðc;vÞ with w ¼ ½1; 0T and again with w ¼ ½0; 1T gives
f
1
2ðh2; _h1; _h2Þ ¼
J12
det½J m2l1a2 sinðh2Þð_h1Þ
2 þ
J22
det½J 2m2l1a2 sinðh2Þð_h1 _h2Þ
þ J22
det½J m2l1a2 sinðh2Þð_h2Þ
2;
f
2
2ðh2; _h1; _h2Þ ¼  J11
det½J m2l1a2 sinðh2Þð_h1Þ
2 
J12
det½J 2m2l1a2 sinðh2Þð_h1 _h2Þ
 J12
det½J m2l1a2 sinðh2Þð_h2Þ
2;
9
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
=
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
;
ð9Þ
where det½J ¼ J11J22  J12J12.
The GTG simulator generates constant metric-speed geodesic trajectories in the curved Riemannian conﬁguration man-
ifold (C, J) = ((h1, h2), Jðh2Þ) and these appear as accelerating or decelerating curves in joint-angle space. But we are also inter-
ested in the corresponding geodesic trajectories of hand position in the (x–y)-plane. Therefore we have included in the
simulator the following two-way transformations between the (h1, h2, _h1, _h2) and the ðx; y; _x; _yÞ coordinates:
x ¼ l1 cos h1 þ l2 cosðh1 þ h2Þ
y ¼ l1 sin h1 þ l2 sinðh1 þ h2Þ
ð10Þ
60
P.D. Neilson et al. / Human Movement Science 44 (2015) 42–72

_x
_y


¼
l1 sinðh1Þ  l2 sinðh1 þ h2Þ
l2 sinðh1 þ h2Þ
l1 cosðh1Þ þ l2 cosðh1 þ h2Þ
l2 cosðh1 þ h2Þ


_h1
_h2
"
#
ð11Þ
h1 ¼ atan2ðy; xÞ  acos
d
2 þ l
2
1  l
2
2
2l1d
 
!
h2 ¼ p  acos
l
2
1 þ l
2
2  d
2
2l1l2
 
!
ð12Þ
where d ¼ ðx2 þ y2Þ
1
2.
_h1
_h2
"
#
¼
l1 sinðh1Þ  l2 sinðh1 þ h2Þ
l2 sinðh1 þ h2Þ
l1 cosðh1Þ þ l2 cosðh1 þ h2Þ
l2 cosðh1 þ h2Þ

1
_x
_y


ð13Þ
Fig. 4. Drawing of the two-DOF arm moving in the horizontal (x–y)-plane. The x and y coordinates measure the position of the hand in metres in the (x–y)-
plane. The shoulder is located at (x, y) = (0, 0) m. Constants are deﬁned in the text.
Fig. 5. The MATLAB/Simulink GTG simulator for the two-DOF arm moving in the horizontal plane. Description given in the text.
P.D. Neilson et al. / Human Movement Science 44 (2015) 42–72
61

Using these coordinate transformations the simulator generates corresponding geodesic trajectories in both the two-
dimensional joint-angle space (h1–h2) and the two-dimensional (x–y)-plane of hand position, as in Fig. 6.
Fig. 6(a) shows a two-dimensional totally geodesic coordinate system spanning the two-dimensional task space for the
hand moving in the horizontal (x–y)-plane. The coordinate system is centred about the point (x, y) = (0 m, 0.33 m) with initial
velocities set to ð_x; _yÞ ¼ ð0:2 m=s; 0 m=sÞ for the horizontal (a) geodesic coordinate axis and ð_x; _yÞ ¼ ð0 m=s; 0:2 m=sÞ for the
vertical (b) geodesic coordinate axis. The a and b geodesic coordinate axes (i.e., geodesic pathways) in the (x–y)-plane are
similar to those described by Biess et al. (2011). The initial positions and velocities for the horizontal and vertical geodesic
coordinate grid lines are obtained by parallel translating the initial positions and velocities along the b geodesic coordinate
axis and the a geodesic coordinate axis, respectively. Fig. 6(b) shows the corresponding geodesic coordinate axes and geo-
desic coordinate grid lines plotted in joint-angle space (h1–h2). Movement of the hand to the right in the (x–y)-plane corre-
sponds to movement to the left in joint-angle space and upward movement of the hand in the (x–y)-plane corresponds to
downward movement in joint-angle space. This is because of the way the shoulder and elbow angles are deﬁned (see
Fig. 4). While the geodesics follow curved pathways in joint-angle space the corresponding geodesic hand paths are more
or less straight in the (x–y)-plane. The totally geodesic coordinate system corresponds to a two-CDOF minimum-effort geo-
desic movement synergy that can be used for planning minimum-effort movements of the hand in two-dimensional tasks
such as two-dimensional tracking and handwriting, as well as for point-to-point reaching movements like those described
by Biess et al. (2011).
Fig. 6(c) and (d) mirrors Fig. 6(a) and (b). Fig. 6(c) shows a two-dimensional totally geodesic coordinate system spanning
the two-dimensional joint-angle space. The coordinate system is centred about the point (h1, h2) = (0.4152 rad, 2.0757 rad) in
joint-angle space with initial velocities set to ð_h1; _h2Þ ¼ ð0:5 rad=s; 0 rad=sÞ for the horizontal (a) geodesic coordinate axis
and ð_h1; _h2Þ ¼ ð0 rad=s; 0:5 rad=sÞ for the vertical (b) geodesic coordinate axis. The initial positions and velocities for the hor-
izontal and vertical geodesic coordinate grid lines are obtained by parallel translating the initial positions and velocities
along the b geodesic coordinate axis and the a geodesic coordinate axis, respectively, in joint-angle space. Fig. 6(d) shows
the corresponding geodesic coordinate axes and geodesic coordinate grid lines plotted in the two-dimensional(x-y)-space
for hand movement. While the geodesic coordinates in Fig. 6(d) are skewed relative to those in Fig. 6(a) because of the dif-
ferent initial positions and velocities used to generate them they are still more or less straight geodesic hand paths and both
geodesic coordinate systems span the same two-dimensional (x–y)-space. The relative spacing of the geodesic coordinate
grid lines for geodesic hand paths in Fig. 6(a) and (d) shows that some warping of the (x–y)-space for geodesic hand paths
occurs, particularly towards the boundary of the task space. This warping is caused by the changing mass-inertia metric Jðh2Þ
and the resulting nonlinear inertial, centrifugal and coriolis reaction forces at work in the two-DOF arm. All geodesic path-
ways in joint-angle space are curved and the relative spacing between the geodesic coordinate grid lines provides a measure
of the warping of joint-angle space caused by the kinetic-energy metric Jðh2Þ. The joint-angle geodesic coordinates in Fig. 6(b)
are skewed relative to those in Fig. 6(c) because of the different initial joint-angle positions and velocities used to generate
them. Nevertheless, both geodesic coordinate systems span the same joint-angle task space, just as the hand-path geodesics
in Fig. 6(a) and (d) span the same two-dimensional (x–y)-plane deﬁning the task space for hand position.
9. Discussion
9.1. Moving in the absence of muscle force?
Anyone who recalls a certain old give-away toy in the cereal pack will know it is possible to build simple mechanical
devices that can walk without force generators (other than gravity) or movement control systems. Yet it would be absurd
to conclude from this that the body does not need muscles or a movement control system. Nevertheless, we have seen that
in the absence of all external forces, including visco-elastic and muscle forces, the mass-inertia of the body causes it to follow
a free-motion trajectory that conserves kinetic energy. Indeed, given an appropriate initial velocity, it is possible theoreti-
cally to ‘glide’ from any conﬁguration of the body to any other conﬁguration without needing muscle force (i.e., assuming
visco-elastic forces, gravitational forces, support forces, and all other external forces are zero). It seems reasonable, therefore,
that free-motion trajectories determined by the mass-inertia properties of the body provide a road map for the most efﬁcient
pathways for moving about in conﬁguration space with minimal demand for muscular effort.
In this paper we have shown that Riemannian geometry provides a suitable mathematical framework for computing min-
imum effort (free-motion) trajectories to move about in a local environment taking the inﬂuence of gravity and mechanical
interactions with objects in the environment into account. Movement is conceptualized as a trajectory in a 116-dimensional
curved Riemannian conﬁguration manifold representing body posture plus the position and orientation (rotation) of the
head in the environment. The conﬁguration manifold is endowed with two predetermined vector (tensor) ﬁelds: (i) A
Riemannian-metric tensor ﬁeld or matrix ﬁeld equal to the mass-inertia matrix of the body in each conﬁguration. (ii) An
acceleration vector ﬁeld known as the geodesic spray at each position and velocity on the tangent bundle. The curvature
of the conﬁguration manifold at each point is deﬁned by the ﬁrst and second derivatives of the metric tensor (i.e., mass-
inertia matrix) at each point. Given the Riemannian conﬁguration manifold with its geodesic spray ﬁeld, and using methods
of Riemannian geometry, we have shown how to compute multi-joint coordinations (movement synergies) and minimum
metric-acceleration movement trajectories within those movement synergies to achieve movement goals with minimum
62
P.D. Neilson et al. / Human Movement Science 44 (2015) 42–72

demand for muscular effort. Over time, through trial and error, imitation, and coaching, people ﬁnd the most energy efﬁcient
way of achieving task goals; for example, walking up stairs or reaching across a table. The coordination (or movement syn-
ergy) that achieves the task goal(s) with minimum muscular effort corresponds to a submanifold in the conﬁguration man-
ifold of the body. It is a special submanifold known as a ‘totally geodesic submanifold’. It is possible, however, (but by no
means proven given that a person can search all body conﬁgurations to ﬁnd the most energy efﬁcient way of performing
a task), that a totally geodesic submanifold compatible with a nominated task space might not exist. In this case the most
energy efﬁcient movement synergy compatible with the task space corresponds to the submanifold that deviates minimally
from a totally geodesic one.
9.2. Controlled falling
9.2.1. A generalized equilibrium hypothesis
With initial position and velocity speciﬁed, double integration of the predetermined geodesic spray acceleration ﬁeld
gives a curve in the conﬁguration manifold corresponding to the natural free motion of the body. This curve is known as
a geodesic of the Riemannian connection. We saw in Section 5.5 that a geodesic pathway connecting speciﬁed initial and
ﬁnal points in the manifold corresponds to the minimal muscular effort pathway connecting the two points. However, for
movements within a gravitational ﬁeld, muscles have to generate changing force at every point along the curve to cancel
the changing gravity and the support forces acting on the body. Only under these conditions when the net external force
is zero does the free motion of the body follow a geodesic trajectory. This leads to the contention that movement is planned
as the ﬂow of an equilibrium point along geodesic pathways in the conﬁguration manifold. This can be seen as a generalization of
Feldman’s equilibrium point hypothesis (Feldman, 1986, 2009; Feldman & Levin, 1995; Feldman, Ostry, Levin, Gribble, &
Mitnitski, 1998).
Fig. 6. Plots of geodesic coordinate axes and geodesic coordinate grid lines in the (x–y)-plane and joint-angle space for two-CDOF geodesic movement
synergies generated by the GTG simulator. Spacing of geodesic grid lines in all plots equals distance travelled in 100 ms. Details are given in the text. The
two-dimensional totally geodesic coordinate systems can be used for planning minimum-effort movements of the arm and hand anywhere in the two-
dimensional task space of the two-DOF arm. (a) shows a totally geodesic coordinate system for the hand in the (x–y)-plane centred at (x, y) = (0 m, 0.33 m)
with initial velocity for the horizontal (alpha) geodesic coordinate axis set to ð_x; _yÞ ¼ ð0:2 m=s; 0 m=sÞ and initial velocity for the vertical (beta) geodesic
coordinate axis set to ð_x; _yÞ ¼ ð0 m=s; 0:2 m=sÞ, that is, the initial velocities are orthogonal in the (x–y)-plane. (b) shows the corresponding geodesic
coordinate axes and coordinate grid lines in joint-angle space. (c) shows a totally geodesic coordinate system for the arm in joint-angle space centred at the
point (h1, h2) = (0.4152 rad, 2.0757 rad) with initial velocities for the horizontal (alpha) geodesic coordinate axis set to ð_h1; _h2Þ ¼ ð0:5 rad=s; 0 rad=sÞ and
initial velocity for the vertical (beta) geodesic coordinate axis set to ð_h1; _h2Þ ¼ ð0 rad=s; 0:5 rad=sÞ, that is, initial velocities are orthogonal in joint-angle
space. (d) shows the corresponding geodesic coordinate axes and geodesic coordinate grid lines in the (x–y)-plane.
P.D. Neilson et al. / Human Movement Science 44 (2015) 42–72
63

A generalized equilibrium point hypothesis greatly simpliﬁes generation of movement trajectories and allows them to be
time-scaled, but it implies that the body can be held in a state of equilibrium at every point along every geodesic curve in the
manifold. This is unrealistic! Many conﬁgurations of the body cannot be maintained in a state of equilibrium and many pur-
posive movements deliberately include non-equilibrium conﬁgurations. For example, during walking the centre of pressure
is deliberately moved outside the support base allowing the body to fall forward and hence deviate away from equilibrium.
The fact that not all points in the conﬁguration manifold are equilibrium points presents a challenge to a generalized equi-
librium point hypothesis that requires further consideration.
9.2.2. Impossible postures and no-go places
In usual circumstances the nervous system does not plan movements that might damage joints and ligaments by
attempting to move at high speed beyond the anatomical limits of the body’s range of movement. This range of movement
varies with conﬁguration in a complicated way because in many conﬁgurations it is limited not by the range of each elemen-
tal movement per se, but by one part of the body colliding with another. Similarly, possible conﬁgurations of the body are
limited by collisions with objects in the environment and by ‘no-go’ places in the environment. It is not possible, for example,
to walk through a brick wall, or to ﬂoat up into the air. Such impossible postures and no-go places impose a boundary,
@ðC; JÞ, on the conﬁguration manifold (C, J). A 116-dimensional manifold with boundary can be thought of as the union
of two disjoint (nonintersecting) submanifolds (Lee, 2013); a 116-dimensional interior submanifold Int(C, J) and a 115-
dimensional boundary submanifold, @ðC; JÞ.8
To prevent falling, the body has to be supported against gravity. This requires mechanical interaction between the body
and support surfaces in the environment. In other words, most but not all functional movements involve mechanical inter-
actions with objects in the environment and are contained, therefore, within the 115-dimensional boundary submanifold
@ðC; JÞ. Conﬁgurations within the interior submanifold Int(C, J) are unsupported and consequently, the body must be falling
and cannot be in a state of equilibrium. It follows that for an equilibrium point to ﬂow along a geodesic pathway, the path-
way must be contained within the boundary @ðC; JÞ of the manifold.
To elaborate the above distinction, collisions between parts of the body and with objects in the environment (e.g., support
surfaces) impose a boundary in the conﬁguration manifold that separates it into conﬁgurations that can be reached and
those that cannot. Whenever the body is prevented from falling by a support surface (e.g., standing on the ﬂoor) it has to
be in contact with that surface. Therefore the conﬁguration of the body has to be contained within the 115-dimensional
boundary submanifold @ðC; JÞ and not in the 116-dimensional interior submanifold Int(C, J). For analogy, think of the
two-dimensional boundary (i.e., a sphere) of a closed ball in three-dimensional space. The ball has an open three-
dimensional interior. While many different conﬁgurations can be assumed by the body while being supported by the surface
it is not possible for the body to move through the support surface; this reduces the dimension of the boundary submanifold
by one to 115. Most (but not all) movements take place with the body supported against gravity and so involve conﬁgura-
tions of the body contained within the 115-dimensional boundary submanifold. For example, consider a pointing movement
executed by a four-DOF model of the arm similar to that described by Biess et al. (2011). The arm is assumed to be rigidly
supported at the shoulder with no movement of the clavicle or scapula. Actually, stabilization of the shoulder and the rest of
the body requires synergistic activation of many muscles throughout the body in a chain reaction until reaction forces and
torques are encountered between the body and a support surface. This nicely illustrates why whole-body movement syn-
ergies have to be taken into account. During the pointing movement of the arm the body is supported against gravity by
the support surface and so the conﬁgurations of the body associated with the pointing movement are contained within
the 115-dimensional boundary submanifold @ðC; JÞ.
9.2.3. Purposive falling
The contention that movements are planned as the ﬂow of an equilibrium point along a geodesic pathway simpliﬁes the
task of generating minimum-effort movement trajectories. However, as mentioned above, many functional movements (e.g.,
walking, running, and jumping that include falling as part of the movement) pass through conﬁgurations that are not equi-
librium points. Indeed, whenever the body is in the interior Int(C, J) of the conﬁguration manifold it is not in contact with a
support surface and so cannot be in equilibrium. This challenges the hypothesis because all inertial free-motion pathways (i.
e., geodesic pathways) have to be conﬁned to conﬁgurations where the external forces acting on the body sum to zero. A non-
zero net force pushes the body away from equilibrium and hence away from geodesic pathways. Does this mean that the
geodesic synergy hypothesis cannot be applied to purposive movements that include falling under the action of an external
force ﬁeld? This seems unlikely since deliberately allowing the body to fall as part of a purposive movement is a strategy for
reducing muscular effort and that, after all, is the objective of the hypothesis. How then can it be reconciled with the exis-
tence of purposive movements that deliberately include falling?
Movements of an astronaut in a state of weightlessness in an orbiting space station provide a possible answer. The space
station is in free fall. The astronaut senses his/her place and orientation relative to an external reference frame attached to
the space station and plans movements within that space, thereby cancelling the free-fall motion of the space station.
8 A boundary on the place map P can lead to confusion as to whether the place map is three-dimensional or two-dimensional because the boundary usually
constrains vertical movement more than horizontal movement.
64
P.D. Neilson et al. / Human Movement Science 44 (2015) 42–72

A similar thing happens when moving about within a moving vehicle such as a plane, train, or bus. The person senses place
and orientation relative to the vehicle. The outside world is seen as moving past the window. People are able to reset the
location of their external reference frame to suit the conditions and the task at hand. This is consistent with the resetting
of grid cell coordinate maps observed in rats as they move from one compartment to another in a multi-compartmental envi-
ronment (Derdikman & Moser, 2010; Derdikman et al., 2009). A high diver, for example, can employ geodesic synergies to
plan and execute minimum effort twisting and somersaulting movements during the dive by utilizing an external reference
frame that is centred on his/her body. In general, deviations from equilibrium associated with being transported about by a
vehicle (e.g., a ballerina being carried by her partner) or by including falling movements in responses can be handled within
the geodesic synergy hypothesis if the location of the origin of the external reference frame can be appropriately reset.
This raises the question of how the nervous system senses its place and orientation in the environment and what causes
orientation maps to reset from one environmental compartment to another? This is an important area of research (Fyhn,
Molden, Witter, Moser, & Moser, 2004; Hafting, Fyhn, Molden, Moser, & Moser, 2005; O’Keefe & Dostrovsky, 1971;
O’Keefe, 1976; Sargolini et al., 2006) and much is already known about the neuroscience of this spatial sense. It does not
seem unreasonable that in a gravitational ﬁeld a sense of vertical and horizontal can be obtained from the labyrinthine sys-
tem. However, this leaves the sense of direction (compass) unexplained and it does not account for the resetting of spatial
maps from one local environment to another. Positions of objects in the local environment as perceived visually and the way
objects appear to change position relative to each other with movement of the head in the environment are likely to play a
role. See Section 9.5 for discussion of this.
9.3. Comparisons with Riemannian geometry model of Biess
We now contrast our approach with that of Biess (Biess et al., 2011; Biess, 2013) having shown in Section 8 a correspon-
dence between results for a two-DOF arm movement. Biess et al. (2011) solved a two-point boundary value problem to gen-
erate the unique geodesic trajectory for the kinetic-energy metric to move between two points in the four-DOF arm
conﬁguration space with minimum muscular effort. Subsequently, Biess (2013) has considered arm movements in which
the hand is constrained to move between two points on a surface (e.g., a sphere) or along a curve (e.g., an ellipse). Such con-
strained arm movements no longer correspond to geodesic trajectories for the kinetic-energy metric for the arm. Biess solves
this problem by computing a new metric for the arm conﬁguration space that incorporates the metric of the particular con-
straining surface or curve. He refers to this as shaping the arm conﬁguration space by prescription of non-Euclidean metrics.
He then computes the geodesic trajectory for the new metric to move between the speciﬁed initial and ﬁnal points. This
solution requires a different metric to be calculated for each type of constrained arm movement and the resulting movement
no longer corresponds to a minimum muscular effort trajectory. The constrained arm movement problem is solved, there-
fore, by a one-parameter geodesic movement trajectory but with multiple arm conﬁguration space metrics, one for each type
of movement. Biess (2013) went on to show that his metrically adjusted conﬁguration space of the arm produces constrained
movement that conforms to the one-third power law. Supported by much experimental evidence, this holds that the tangen-
tial speed of movement conﬁned to a curve (or a curved surface) relates to the curvature at each point by a one-third power
law (Lacquaniti, Terzuolo, & Viviani, 1983).
Our approach differs. While Biess (2013) solves path constraint using a one-dimensional trajectory with multiple metrics,
we use multiple-dimensional trajectories (synergies) with a single metric. In the case of movement between two points with
no path constraint, a minimum muscular effort path is determined by selecting a one-CDOF geodesic movement synergy
compatible with the task space (Section 5.1) and generating a concatenated sequence of smoothly connected minimum
metric-acceleration submovements (BUMPs) planned and executed within the selected synergy (Section 6). The single con-
straint of reaching the ﬁnal point is replaced by having all the points, including the ﬁnal point, imposed by the correctly
selected one-CDOF synergy. This solution generalizes immediately to circumstances of constrained movements on surfaces
or along curves. There will exist a multiple-CDOF geodesic synergy that spans the task space of the required constrained
movement within which multiple-CDOF minimum metric-acceleration submovements can be planned and executed.
Again, the selection of the appropriate movement synergy imposes the necessary constraints while keeping the same min-
imum muscular effort kinetic-energy metric. We have shown previously (Neilson et al., 1995) that the method for planning
and executing a sequence of constrained tracing submovements within a multi-CDOF movement synergy likewise repro-
duces the speed-curvature relationship. Using the example of tracing a handwritten letter ‘b’ we modelled a smoothly con-
nected sequence of short duration submovements each planned with minimum acceleration and executed on a two-
dimensional surface. We compared the simulated movement trajectories with actual tracing movements of human subjects
tracing the handwritten letter ‘b’ measured using an electronic pen on a bit-pad (digitizing tablet). The match between the
simulated movement trajectories and the actual trajectories was so good they could be superimposed one on top of the
other. The speed-curvature proﬁles matched even around the sharpest corner in the handwritten character ‘b’. Applying a
bound on the accuracy of the tracing for each submovement not only determined the average tangential speed of the tracing
(the slower the average tangential speed the more accurate the tracing), but scaled the relationship between the tangential
speed and the curvature to ‘slow down around sharp corners’. This earlier work effectively demonstrates that a sequence of
minimum effort submovements constrained within a two-CDOF movement synergy accords very satisfactorily with the
speed-curvature relationship.
P.D. Neilson et al. / Human Movement Science 44 (2015) 42–72
65

In the context of whole-body movement to which the geodesic synergy hypothesis applies, the constraint for the hand to
move on a particular surface or to trace a particular curve is no different from the constraint of remaining seated while exe-
cuting a task or of not colliding with objects in the environment. The hypothesis effectively absorbs the two-point boundary
problem and the problem of constraint into the selection of the geodesic synergy appropriate for the task space. Because this
preserves the kinetic-energy metric throughout, movement proceeds with minimum muscular effort for whatever task is
required, plus it is executed as a sequence of submovements which is characteristic of human behaviour in other than specif-
ically ballistic tasks.
9.4. Neural plausibility
We have sought to present a conceptualization of synergistic movement of the entire human body that takes nonlinear
dynamics into account and brings with it a viable set of computational procedures to effect that movement. Inevitably it
must be asked: is this what the brain does and if so how? In the spirit of David Marr’s (Marr, 1982/2010) ‘three levels of
understanding information processing systems’ we have an abstract computational theory of what the brain must do if it
is to generate whole-body minimum effort coordinated movements taking nonlinear dynamics and interactions with the
environment into account. What we do not have is a description of how the computations might be realized within the brain.
Our suggestion is that smooth Riemannian manifolds (in particular the conﬁguration manifold (C, J)) can be seen as a geo-
metric representation of the neural cognitive memory networks distributed throughout the neocortex and subcortical struc-
tures as described by Fuster (2008). We suggest that much of the ﬂexibility and speed of the nervous system in planning and
initiating coordinated, goal-oriented, multi-joint movements derives from its ability to store large amounts of information in
distributed cognitive memory networks and to retrieve and reconstruct information quickly using parallel processing in
these distributed networks.
A point c 2 ðC; JÞ in the conﬁguration manifold (C, J) corresponds to the posture of the whole body as well as the place and
orientation of the head in the local environment. This is represented in the brain by a temporospatial pattern of neural activ-
ity distributed through parts of the somatosensory cortex, hippocampus and parahippocampal regions of the brain. This tem-
porospatial pattern of neural activity, we suggest, is associated via synaptic modiﬁcation over time with other
temporospatial patterns of neural activity in other cortical networks distributed through other regions of the brain. The cor-
tical association memory networks allow the distributed temporospatial pattern of neural activity encoding the conﬁgura-
tion of the body to act as type of memory access code that points to and retrieves associated temporospatial patterns of
neural activity in other cortical networks in the brain, just as a library catalogue points to the accession number that
retrieves the right book. This picture of distributed cortical association memory networks is consistent with the place
map and orientation map in the hippocampus and parahippocampus playing a role in the storage and retrieval of memories
at sites distributed throughout the neocortex (O’Keefe, 2007; Stark, 2007). It is also consistent with Fuster’s (2008) descrip-
tion of cognitive cortical memory networks as being interactive and widely distributed throughout the cortex and subcortex
with memory networks being formed by associative synaptic modulation through life experience.
In summary, our suggestion is that temporospatial patterns of neural activity retrieved from memory associated with
neural activity representing body-conﬁguration correspond to an encoding of the vectors and tensors at each c 2 ðC; JÞ.
These include the Riemannian-metric tensor ﬁeld J(c) and the geodesic acceleration spray ﬁeld f2(c, v). It does not seem
unreasonable to suggest that the nervous system can learn the mass and moment of inertia about elemental movements
for various conﬁgurations of the body experienced through life and store this information in distributed cortical cognitive
memory networks that update as the body changes via growth, decline, etc. Computing the geodesic spray ﬁeld f2(c, v) from
Eq. (3) appears to require solving a set of 116 simultaneous, nonlinear, second-order differential equations. This might seem
a daunting task and one may wonder whether it is possible to ﬁnd a solution at all. However, when the computation is bro-
ken down into ﬁbre-preserving calculations at each point (c, v) on the tangent bundle TC it reduces to a relatively simple set
of matrix operations (see Lang, 1999) and see computation of ½ f 1
2
f 2
2 
T in Section 8. In other words, in Riemannian geometry,
the distributed nature of the computation of f2(c, v) greatly simpliﬁes it but at a cost of having to perform a large number of
simple calculations at each point on the manifold. Thus we see Riemannian geometry and the conﬁguration manifold (C, J) as
providing a geometrical framework in which computational models of the neural functions attributed by Fuster (2008) to
cortical cognitive networks can be formulated. Executive functions of those cognitive networks include working memory,
preparatory set, and planning. These are exactly the functions described here in terms of Riemannian geometry and the con-
ﬁguration manifold (C, J).
9.5. Visuospatial maps and synergy selection
For the nervous system to implement the Riemannian geometry model proposed by Biess (2013) to account for arm
movements constrained to surfaces or curves, a new metric has to be computed for each constraining surface or curve
and a set of eight nonlinear ordinary differential equations has to be solved for each point-to-point movement. Such equa-
tions require estimates of lengths, masses, centres of mass and moments of inertia of the upper arm and forearm and these
are parameters not sensed directly by the nervous system. It seems unlikely the nervous system actually performs such a
complicated computation to plan each pointing movement, especially when the brevity of the reaction time interval
66
P.D. Neilson et al. / Human Movement Science 44 (2015) 42–72

required to plan and initiate such a point-to-point movement is taken into consideration. Biess (2013) suggested that visual
or proprioceptive input streams may play a role since their effect is to straighten hand paths, but how the nervous system
might do this is not discussed. Indeed, he raises a number of questions: can sensorimotor representations be metric, does
every motor task induce a different metric structure, and how can geometric information be extracted from sensorimotor
input streams?
Our proposal is that through experience the nervous system builds up a repertoire of geodesic movement synergies and
can switch quickly and smoothly from one previously learned movement synergy to another. If a task requires a movement
synergy that has not been learned previously then initially the person is unable to perform the task with accuracy. Attempts
at the movement are clumsy, slow and stiff. The person has to go through a learning process to acquire the new motor skill.
Our formulation takes advantage of the fact that most of the computational workload involved in generating geodesic move-
ment synergies can be carried out in advance and stored in distributed memory so only a small amount of computation
(implemented by GTG and OTG trajectory generators) is required to plan and initiate each synergistic movement. This pro-
vides answers to Biess’s questions but raises new questions relating to sensory and cognitive processes that could realisti-
cally underpin the selection of a geodesic movement synergy compatible with task space. While we have made proposals
about these processes previously (Neilson & Neilson, 2010), a detailed analysis of how the nervous system might achieve
synergy selection in the context of nonlinear dynamics and Riemannian geometry requires consideration of sensory and cog-
nitive processes beyond the present scope. Nevertheless, we can provide here a brief description of a ﬁbre bundle conceptu-
alization that provides a plausible means of synergy selection, to be elaborated fully in a subsequent paper.
Task space is usually speciﬁed in terms of visual and/or other sensory modalities. Selection of a geodesic synergy com-
patible with a task space requires, therefore, use of sensory-spatial maps. Let us consider visuospatial maps. Such maps
can be represented in the Riemannian framework as a ﬁbre bundle over the conﬁguration manifold (C, J). A ﬁbre bundle
is a straightforward extension of the conﬁguration manifold (C, J). At each point c 2 ðC; JÞ there exists a ﬁbre containing,
not a vector/tensor space, but a three-dimensional manifold G representing the visual space perceived when the body is
in that conﬁguration. The visual scene of the environment and of the body in that environment as seen from that conﬁgu-
ration is represented by a vector ﬁeld of visual features extracted by the visual system over the G-manifold. The fact that
objects appear to shrink in size in proportion to depth is taken into account by endowing each G-manifold with a
Riemannian metric equal to 1=r2I, where r = depth and I is the identity matrix. Thus, at each c 2 ðC; JÞ there exists a mem-
orized image of the environment and of the body in that environment as seen from that conﬁguration, an image that is
updated through experience. The street-view feature of Google maps provides an analogy. The point on the map resembles
c 2 ðC; JÞ in the conﬁguration manifold and all the street-view images at that point on the map resemble the visual ﬁeld
stored over the three-dimensional G-manifold at the point c 2 ðC; JÞ. In this way the ﬁbre bundle over (C, J) forms a cognitive
visuospatial map of the local environment and of the body moving in that environment. As above, the temporospatial pattern
of neural activity encoding the conﬁguration of the body acts as a memory access code that activates the appropriate visu-
ospatial memory. Just as with Google street-view, feasibility of accomplishing this in the nervous system depends on the
ability to store large amounts of readily accessible information in distributed memory networks.
The nervous system can build through experience memory associations between visual representations of task spaces
and the symbols (c, e1, . . . , eN) representing the geodesic movement synergy appropriate for the task. Using the geometric
methods described the geodesic coordinate system spanning the totally geodesic N-dimensional submanifold corresponding
to the selected synergy (c, e1, . . . , eN) can be generated and stored. Then, via the ﬁbre-bundle visuospatial map, the memo-
rized visual images of the environment and of the body in that environment as seen from every conﬁguration c within the
submanifold (i.e., reachable from within the selected geodesic movement synergy) can be compared with the visual repre-
sentation of the task space. The comparison can reinforce or suppress selection of the synergy symbol (c, e1, . . . , eN). This
provides a recursive reinforcement-learning procedure. Over time, through trial and error, imitation and coaching, the ner-
vous system forms associations between visual representations of task space and the appropriate geodesic movement syn-
ergy compatible with that task space.
But what happens if a totally geodesic submanifold compatible with the nominated task space does not exist? Using the
Riemannian manifold theory of ‘variations through geodesics and Jacobi vector ﬁelds’ (Lang, 1999; Lee, 1997) it can be shown
that a smooth submanifold partly spanned by geodesic coordinate grid lines compatible with the nominated task space can
always be constructed using the method given in Section 5.3 and Appendix A up to the point where vertical geodesic coor-
dinate grid lines are generated. Vertical coordinate grid lines are then constructed by connecting points at equal metric dis-
tances x1 along the horizontal geodesic coordinate grid lines. Submanifolds compatible with the task that are not totally
geodesic but are partly spanned by free-motion horizontal geodesic coordinate grid lines can always be generated in this
way. If a totally geodesic submanifold compatible with the task space does not exist then the submanifold that deviates min-
imally from a totally geodesic one is the one that minimizes demand for muscular effort.
Such a mechanism for selecting movement synergies gives an important extension to our computational theory (AMT) of
movement planning and control. The selected symbol (c, e1, . . . , eN) not only uniquely speciﬁes the required geodesic move-
ment synergy but it also uniquely speciﬁes all of the other sensory–sensory and sensorimotor transformations held by AMT
to be required within the nervous system to plan and execute movement trajectories within the selected movement synergy.
This greatly increases the importance of the symbol (c, e1, . . . , eN). Selecting (c, e1, . . . , eN) becomes the lynch pin so to speak
P.D. Neilson et al. / Human Movement Science 44 (2015) 42–72
67

for switching quickly and smoothly from one movement synergeme to another and for presetting sensory and motor sys-
tems in readiness to execute planned movement trajectories within each synergeme.
9.6. Riemannian ﬁeld theory of human movement
Apart from providing an account of brain function, the Riemannian geometry theory of geodesic movement synergies
developed here provides a mathematical framework that can be used to develop a whole-body coordinated movement
simulator. The main barrier to implementation of a whole-body simulator is the need to include the mass-inertia matrix
of the human body as a metric tensor ﬁeld J(c) over the conﬁguration manifold (C, J). This requires development of a
database that speciﬁes the mass-inertia about every elemental movement in every possible conﬁguration of the body,
including jumping, standing, leaning, sitting, lying, etc. Much like a genome project in extent, the development of
such a database would enable identiﬁcation and simulation of the most energy efﬁcient whole-body coordinated
movements to achieve arbitrarily nominated task goals, a matter of importance in many applications in human move-
ment science.
The conﬁguration manifold and its various vector and tensor spaces proposed in this paper provide the groundwork for a
Riemannian ﬁeld theory of human movement. The vectors, tensors and visuospatial memories are seen as being stored in
distributed memory networks with the conﬁguration of the body acting as an access code for those memories. Thus the large
amount of information that the nervous system requires to plan purposive, goal-oriented, minimum-effort, coordinated
movements taking nonlinear dynamics and interactions with the environment into account is represented geometrically
by vector and tensor ﬁelds over conﬁguration and perceived visual space manifolds. Resolution of paradoxes in existing
explanations of experimental observations and new insights into human motor behaviour become possible. For example,
movements that include the inﬂuences of potential energy ﬁelds, external force ﬁelds, dissipative systems, time-
dependent systems, stability and balance can be analyzed using methods of Riemannian geometry (see for example Bullo
& Lewis, 2005). And with respect to the psychological and neurophysiological notions of sensory-spatial maps as well as cog-
nitive models for phenomena such as visual perspective, optical ﬂow, three-dimensional mental imagery, localization of
sounds, speech motor control, haptic exploration, and navigation, in each case the geometric theory of mappings between
Riemannian manifolds offers the opportunity for exploration and development.
Appendix A. Two-CDOF geodesic movement synergies
Unlike the one-dimensional case, constructing a totally geodesic two-dimensional submanifold is not straightforward.
Integral ﬂows of two arbitrarily chosen linearly independent vector ﬁelds on a Riemannian manifold are usually not commu-
tative. That is, integral ﬂow along one vector ﬁeld followed by integral ﬂow along another usually does not end up at the
same point in the manifold as does integral ﬂow along the same vector ﬁelds in the reverse order. Typically the integral ﬂows
do not even intersect, so they do not join up in an appropriate way to form a coordinate system for a two-dimensional sub-
manifold. Particular linearly-independent vector ﬁelds with integral ﬂows that commute and do form a coordinate system
have to be found. We now describe one way in which this can be done.
We seek to construct a coordinate system for a two-dimensional totally geodesic submanifold in (C, J) centred about a
speciﬁed point c 2 ðC; JÞ. Suppose we have selected two J-orthonormal vectors e1 and e2 in the tangent space TcC to provide
initial conditions (c, e1) and (c, e2). We can then deploy these in the GTG (Fig. 1) along with the predetermined spray
acceleration-deceleration ﬁeld f2(c, v) stored in TTC, to generate two unit metric-speed geodesic trajectories aðx1Þ and
bðx2Þ in (C, J) parametrized by metric-distances x1 and x2 measured from the point c 2 ðC; JÞ. The aðx1Þ and bðx2Þ so obtained
form geodesic coordinate axes for the two-dimensional totally geodesic submanifold speciﬁed by (c, e1) and (c, e2). Let us call
this submanifold SII.
While we have geodesic coordinate axes aðx1Þ and bðx2Þ for SII we do not yet have geodesic coordinate grid lines. As
described by Lee (1997), for any embedded submanifold like SII there exist coordinates ðx1; . . . ; x116Þ for (C, J) centred about
c 2 ðC; JÞ known as slice coordinates such that ðx1; x2Þ form local coordinates for the submanifold. The slice coordinates x1 and
x2 correspond to the metric-distances along the unit metric-speed geodesic trajectories aðx1Þ and bðx2Þ that provide the geo-
desic coordinate axes, as illustrated in Fig. A1, however, the slice coordinate grid lines are not geodesic pathways. The dif-
feomorphic map W : SII ! R2 in Fig. A2 forms a slice coordinate chart for the two-dimensional local submanifold SII
embedded in (C, J) shown in Fig. A1. At each point p 2 SII the two-dimensional vector space TpSII tangent to SII can be iden-
tiﬁed as the subspace of TpC spanned by slice coordinate vectors ð@x1; @x2Þ. To illustrate with a simple example, think of a loaf
of bread. There exist slice coordinates ðx1; x2; x3Þ on the loaf of bread such that there is a particular slice with local slice coor-
dinates ðx1; x2Þ and slice coordinate vectors ð@x1; @x2Þ. This geometry provides us with a coordinate system.
We now describe exactly how the subset of points in (C, J) spanned by the geodesic coordinate axes aðx1Þ and bðx2Þ and
forming the two-dimensional submanifold SII is determined. The selected J-orthonormal vectors e1 and e2 span a two-
dimensional vector subspace (plane) II in TcC (as in Fig. A1). This plane II deﬁnes a family of unit metric-norm vectors
f@=@rig i = 1, 2, . . . (including e1 and e2) in the plane II pointing in every direction in II. Use this family of unit metric-
norm vectors f@=@rig as initial conditions (c, f@=@rig) in the GTG to generate a family of unit metric-speed radial geodesic
68
P.D. Neilson et al. / Human Movement Science 44 (2015) 42–72

trajectories fcrig (including aðx1Þ and bðx2Þ) emanating from c 2 ðC; JÞ and parametrized by radial metric-distances frig, as
illustrated in Figs. A1 and A2. If (C, J) is locally positively curved (like a sphere) it is possible for the radial geodesics fcrig
to converge back on each other and cross, just as longitude lines emanating from the north pole of a sphere converge
back on each other and cross at the south pole. If this happens, it destroys the smooth, one-to-one, onto, invertible (i.e.,
diffeomorphic) map (known as the exponential map) between initial conditions (i.e., points in TcC corresponding to the family
of unit metric-norm vectors f@=@rig scaled by time t) and points in (C, J) (SII in Fig. A1) reached by the family of radial
geodesics fcrig in time t. Crossings of the radial geodesics prevent the formation of a coordinate chart. To stop this from hap-
pening, the maximum metric-distances friðmaxÞg along the radial geodesic trajectories fcrig have to be limited (by limiting
time of ﬂow t or metric distance r along each radial trajectory) so that no radial geodesic trajectory crossings occur. This
deﬁnes a local diffeomorphic exponential map between a neighbourhood of points centred about the origin in TcC (plane
II in Fig. A1) and a neighbourhood of points in (C, J) (SII in Fig. A1) centred about the point c 2 ðC; JÞ. The family of radial
geodesic trajectories fcrig with limited maximal metric-distances friðmaxÞg sweep out a local two-dimensional submanifold
SII centred about c 2 ðC; JÞ embedded in (C, J) called the plane section determined by II. This is analogous to the family of
longitude lines emanating from the north pole on a sphere sweeping out the two-dimensional surface of the sphere
(as illustrated in Fig. A1). Consequently, the set of points in (C, J) reached by the non-crossing radial geodesics fcrig deﬁne
the submanifold SII.
Next we need to address the necessary and sufﬁcient conditions that must be satisﬁed by the initial conditions (c, e1) and
(c, e2) for the resulting submanifold to be totally geodesic. In order to do so we ﬁrst describe some important properties pos-
sessed by all two-dimensional submanifolds constructed as above by means of radial geodesic trajectories fcrig emanating
from a point c 2 ðC; JÞ. The intrinsic (Gaussian) curvature K(e1, e2) of SII at c 2 ðC; JÞ equals the sectional curvature bK (e1, e2) of
the ambient manifold (C, J) associated with II at the point c 2 ðC; JÞ. The sum of all the sectional curvatures bK (ei, ej) associ-
ated with all combinations of pairs of J-orthonormal vectors (e1, e2, . . . , e116) spanning TcC completely determines the cur-
vature of (C, J) at the point c 2 ðC; JÞ.
If the above procedure for constructing SII is extended to geodesic trajectories generated by all of the J-orthonormal
vectors (e1, e2, . . . , e116) spanning TcC then the open set of points in (C, J) reached by all the non-crossing radial geodesics
is called a normal neighbourhood of the point c 2 ðC; JÞ and the metric-distances ðx1; x2; . . . ; x116Þ along the geodesic
trajectories deﬁne normal coordinates about the point c 2 ðC; JÞ. Normal neighbourhoods and normal coordinates play
an important role in Riemannian geometry. The submanifold SII can be thought of as a two-dimensional slice of a normal
neighbourhood.
The procedure for constructing SII described so far only partly satisﬁes the requirements for SII to be totally geodesic.
While coordinate axes aðx1Þ and bðx2Þ are geodesic trajectories in (C, J) and while every local radial geodesic trajectory
fcrig in (C, J) emanating from c 2 ðC; JÞ is, by construction, totally contained within SII as required, this does not hold for other
points p 2 SII. It is only at c 2 SII that, by construction, all geodesic trajectories starting tangent to SII remain in SII. For SII to be
totally geodesic all geodesic trajectories in (C, J) starting tangent to SII at any point p 2 SII have to be contained totally within
SII and the intrinsic curvature K of SII at every point of SII has to equal the sectional curvature bK of the ambient manifold (C, J)
at every point of SII, not just at c 2 SII. In other words, the submanifold SII must not be curved relative to the ambient manifold
Fig. A1. Construction of a local two-dimensional submanifold SII swept out by a family of unit metric-speed radial geodesic trajectories fcðrÞg emanating
from the point c in (C, J). II is the plane in the tangent velocity vector space TcC at the point c in (C, J) spanned by the selected J-orthonormal vectors e1 and e2
as described in the text. The radial geodesic trajectories aðx1Þ and bðx2Þ are generated by the GTG using initial conditions (c, e1) and (c, e2) respectively. x1
and x2 are metric-distances measured from c = (0, 0) along aðx1Þ and bðx2Þ respectively. The other radial geodesic trajectories fcðrÞg (grey) emanating from
the point c in (C, J) are generated by the GTG using all the other unit metric-length vectors f@=@rg pointing in every direction in the plane II. The metric-
distances along the radial geodesic trajectories deﬁning SII are limited so that no geodesic crossings occur. See text for detail.
P.D. Neilson et al. / Human Movement Science 44 (2015) 42–72
69

(C, J), it must be a simple two-dimensional patch of (C, J) with the same curvature as the sectional curvature of (C, J) at every
point p 2 SII. For this to be so the J-orthonormal vectors e1 and e2 have to be chosen so that when they are parallel translated9
along any of the radial geodesic trajectories fcrig (including aðx1Þ and bðx2Þ) they remain tangent to SII. This can be tested by
checking that the parallel translated vectors Pe1 and Pe2 (illustrated in Fig. A3) can be expressed as a linear combination of
the slice coordinate vectors ð@x1; @x2Þ described above at each p 2 SII and that the covariant derivative ruv of any two vectors
u and v tangent to SII at any p 2 SII is also tangent to SII at p 2 SII. Equivalently, the so-called second fundamental form (i.e.,
the component of the covariant derivative ruv normal to the submanifold SII) must vanish at every p 2 SII. Only when these
conditions are satisﬁed for every p 2 SII can it be concluded that SII is a totally geodesic submanifold.
Fig. A2. Illustration of slice coordinates (x1; x2Þ on a two-dimensional submanifold (plane section) SII embedded about the point c in the conﬁguration
manifold (C, J). The diffeomorphic map W : SII ! R2 between the two-dimensional submanifold SII and the two-dimensional Euclidean space R2 deﬁnes a
slice coordinate chart for SII. The radial geodesic trajectories aðx1Þ and bðx2Þ parametrized by metric-distances x1 and x2 respectively, form geodesic
coordinate axes for SII. The coordinate grid lines are not necessarily geodesic curves.
Fig. A3. Illustration of geodesic coordinate grid lines constructed on SII. The J-orthonormal vectors e1 and e2 at the point c in (C, J) are parallel translated
along the geodesic coordinate axes aðx1Þ and bðx2Þ. If the submanifold SII is totally geodesic, the parallel translated vectors Pe1 and Pe2 remain tangent to SII
at all points x1 and x2 along aðx1Þ and bðx2Þ. At each point x2 along bðx2Þ initial conditions (x2, Pe1) are used in the GTG to generate a family of horizontal
geodesic trajectories fax2 g. Similarly, at each point x1 along aðx1Þ initial conditions (x1, Pe2) are used in the GTG to generate a family of vertical geodesic
trajectories fbx1 g. If SII is totally geodesic the two families of horizontal and vertical geodesic trajectories fax2 g and fbx1 g respectively are contained in SII and
therefore they intersect forming a system of geodesic coordinate grid lines on SII. The diffeomorphic map C : SII ! R2 forms a geodesic coordinate chart on
SII. As described in the text, a velocity vector v at any point in SII can be projected via parallel translation along geodesic coordinate grid lines on to the
geodesic coordinate axes aðx1Þ and bðx2Þ.
9 A vector Y is said to be parallel translated along a trajectory a when the covariant derivative r _aY equals zero at every point along a. Furthermore, from Eq.
(4), r _ahY; ZiJ ¼ hr _aY; ZiJ þ hY; r _aZiJ, it can be deduced that the metric inner product of any two vectors Y and Z parallel translated along a trajectory a remains
constant at every point along a and consequently, the metric norms and relative angles between vectors parallel translated along a trajectory a remain
unchanged along a.
70
P.D. Neilson et al. / Human Movement Science 44 (2015) 42–72

Finally we show that geodesic coordinate grid lines exist on SII. When SII is totally geodesic, the vectors Pe1and Pe2 parallel
translated along the geodesic coordinate axes bðx2Þ and aðx1Þ respectively, can be used as initial conditions for the GTG to
generate horizontal and vertical geodesic coordinate grid lines on SII, as illustrated in Fig. A3. Using these geodesic coordinate
grid lines, any point p ¼ ðx1; x2Þ 2 SII can be projected on to the geodesic coordinate axes aðx1Þ and bðx2Þ at (x1; 0) and (0, x2),
respectively. Similarly, any vector v with metric norm jjvjjJðx1;x2Þ tangent to SII at the point p ¼ ðx1; x2Þ 2 SII at an angle h rel-
ative to the horizontal geodesic coordinate grid line passing through the point p 2 SII (illustrated in Fig. A3) can be projected
as jjvjjJð0;x2Þ sin h and jjvjjJðx1;0Þ cos h on to the geodesic coordinate axes bðx2Þ and aðx1Þ, respectively.
Ability to project positions and velocities in the submanifold on to geodesic coordinate axes spanning the submanifold
along geodesic coordinate grid lines in this way is a special property of totally geodesic submanifolds constructed as
described above. Consequently, any movement trajectory in SII can be decomposed into its two CDOFs by projection on to
the two geodesic coordinate axes aðx1Þ and bðx2Þ and conversely, any movement trajectory with two CDOFs contained in
SII can be constructed by independently generating trajectories along the two geodesic coordinate axes aðx1Þ and bðx2Þ
and then combining them by projecting back along geodesic coordinate grid lines. This is illustrated in Section 7.2.
References
Abraham, R., & Marsden, J. E. (1978). Foundations of mechanics (2nd ed.). Reading, MA: Benjamin/Cummings. Reprinted by the American Mathematical
Society, 2008.
Arimoto, S. (2010). Modeling and control of multi-body mechanical systems: Part I. A Riemannian geometry approach. In J. Lévine & P. Müllhaupt (Eds.),
Advances in the theory of control, signals and systems with physical modeling (LNCIS 407) (pp. 3–16). Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
Arimoto, S., Yoshida, M., Sekimoto, M., & Tahara, K. (2009). A Riemannian-geometry approach for control of robotic systems under constraints. SICE Journal
of Control, Measurement, and System Integration, 2, 107–116.
Arnold, V. I. (1989). Mathematical methods of classical mechanics (2nd ed.). New York: Springer.
Biess, A. (2013). Shaping of arm conﬁguration space by prescription of non-Euclidean metrics with application to human motor control. Physical Review, E,
87, 012729.
Biess, A., Flash, T., & Liebermann, D. G. (2011). Riemannian geometric approach to human arm dynamics, movement optimization, and invariance. Physical
Review, E, 83, 031927.
Biess, A., Liebermann, D. G., & Flash, T. (2007). A computational model for redundant human three-dimensional pointing movements: Integration of
independent spatial and temporal motor plans simpliﬁes movement dynamics. The Journal of Neuroscience, 27, 13045–13064.
Bullo, F., & Lewis, A. D. (2005). Geometric control of mechanical systems. New York: Springer.
Bye, R. T., & Neilson, P. D. (2008). The BUMP model of response planning: Variable horizon predictive control accounts for the speed-accuracy tradeoffs and
velocity proﬁles of aimed movement. Human Movement Science, 27, 771–798.
Bye, R. T., & Neilson, P. D. (2010). The BUMP model of response planning: Intermittent predictive control accounts for 10 Hz physiological tremor. Human
Movement Science, 29, 713–736.
Darling, R. W. R. (1994). Differential forms and connections. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Datas, A., Chiron, P., & Fourquet, J.-Y. (2010). On geodesic paths and least-cost motions for human-like tasks. In IEEE international conference on robotics and
biomimetics (ROBIO), Tianjin, China (pp. 1025–1031). doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ROBIO.2010.5723467.
Datas, A., Fourquet, J.-Y., & Chiron, P. (2011). On least-cost path for realistic simulation of human motion. First International Symposium on Digital Human
Modeling (DHM 2011), Lyon, France. Retrieved from OATAO: http://oatao.univ-toulouse.fr/5368/.
Derdikman, D., & Moser, E. I. (2010). A manifold of spatial maps in the brain. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 14, 561–569.
Derdikman, D., Whitlock, J. R., Tsao, A., Fyhn, M., Hafting, T., Moser, M., & Moser, E. I. (2009). Fragmentation of grid cell maps in a multicompartment
environment. Nature Neuroscience, 12, 1325–1332.
Feldman, A. G. (1986). Once more on the equilibrium-point hypothesis (k-model) for motor control. Journal of Motor Behavior, 18, 17–54.
Feldman, A. G. (2009). New insights into action–perception coupling. Experimental Brain Research, 194, 39–58.
Feldman, A. G., & Levin, M. F. (1995). The origin and use of positional frames of reference in motor control. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 18, 723–806.
Feldman, A. G., Ostry, D. J., Levin, M. F., Gribble, P. L., & Mitnitski, A. B. (1998). Recent tests of the equilibrium point hypothesis (k model). Motor Control, 2,
189–205.
Ferguson, D. (2000). Therbligs: The keys to simplifying work. Retrieved from The Gilbreth Network: http://gilbrethnetwork.tripod.com/therbligs.html.
Fitzpatrick, R. C., Gorman, R. B., Burke, D., & Gandevia, S. (1992). Postural proprioceptive reﬂexes in standing human subjects. Bandwidth of response and
transmission characteristics. Journal of Physiology, 458, 69–83.
Fitzpatrick, R. C., & McCloskey, D. I. (1994). Proprioceptive, visual and vestibular thresholds for the perception of sway during standing in humans. Journal of
Physiology, 478, 173–186.
Fuster, J. M. (2008). The prefrontal cortex (4th ed.). London: Academic Press.
Fyhn, M., Molden, S., Witter, M. P., Moser, E. I., & Moser, M. B. (2004). Spatial representation in the entorhinal cortex. Science, 305, 1258–1264.
Gandevia, S. C. (1987). Roles of perceived voluntary motor commands in motor control. Trends in Neuroscience, 10, 81–85.
Ghosh, B. K., Meegaskumbura, R., & Ekanayake, M. P. B. (2009). Human eye movement with and without the Listings constraint. American Control Conference
(ACC 2009), St. Louis, MO (pp. 1015–1020). Retrieved from http://www.nt.ntnu.no/users/skoge/prost/proceedings/acc09/data/papers/1339.pdf.
Ghosh, B. K., & Wijayasinghe, I. (2010). Application of potent potential functions in eye/head movement control. In 2010 49th IEEE conference on decision and
control (CDC), Atlanta, GA (pp. 1699–1704). doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/CDC.2010.5717713.
Gielen, C. C. A. M., Vrijenhoek, E. J., Flash, T., & Neggers, S. F. W. (1997). Arm position constraints during pointing and reaching in 3-D space. Journal of
Neurophysiology, 78, 660–673.
Hafting, T., Fyhn, M., Molden, S., Moser, M. B., & Moser, E. I. (2005). Microstructure of a spatial map in the entorhinal cortex. Nature, 436, 801–806.
Handzel, A. A., & Flash, T. (1996). The geometry of eye rotations and Listing’s law. In D. S. Touretzky, M. C. Mozer, & M. E. Hasselmo (Eds.). Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems (Vol. 8, pp. 117–123). Cambridge MA: MIT Press.
Handzel, A. A., & Flash, T. (1997). The coordinates of the binocular motor system. Abstracts of the Society for Neuroscience, 23(609), 2.
Handzel, A. A., & Flash, T. (1999). Geometric methods in the study of human motor control. Cognitive Studies, 6, 309–321.
Hermens, F., & Gielen, S. (2004). Posture-based or trajectory-based movement planning: a comparison of direct and indirect pointing movements.
Experimental Brain Research, 159, 340–348.
Isidori, A. (1995). Nonlinear control systems (3rd ed.). London: Springer.
Ivancevic, T. T. (2009). Time-dependent Lagrangian biomechanics. arXiv:0907.1209v1 [physics.bio-ph]. Retrieved from arXiv at Cornell University Library:
http://arxiv.org/pdf/0907.1209.pdf.
Ivancevic, V. G., & Ivancevic, T. T. (2007). Applied differential geometry: A modern introduction. Singapore: World Scientiﬁc.
Ivancevic, V. G., & Ivancevic, T. T. (2010). Human-like biomechanics. A uniﬁed mathematical approach to human biomechanics and humanoid robotics.
Dordrecht: Springer.
P.D. Neilson et al. / Human Movement Science 44 (2015) 42–72
71

Ivancevic, V. G., & Ivancevic, T. T. (2011). Dynamics and control of humanoid robots: A geometrical approach. arXiv:1105.2951v1 [nlin.AO]. Retrieved from
arXiv at Cornell University Library: http://arxiv.org/pdf/1105.2951v1.pdf.
Jurdjevic, V. (1997). Geometric control theory. Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press.
Lacquaniti, F., Terzuolo, C., & Viviani, P. (1983). The law relating the kinematic and ﬁgural aspects of drawing movements. Acta Psychologica, 54, 115–130.
Lang, S. (1999). Fundamentals of differential geometry. New York: Springer-Verlag.
Lee, J. M. (1997). Riemannian manifolds: An introduction to curvature. New York: Springer-Verlag.
Lee, J. M. (2011). Introduction to topological manifolds (2nd ed.). New York: Springer.
Lee, J. M. (2013). Introduction to smooth manifolds (2nd ed.). New York: Springer.
Marr, D. (2010). Vision. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press. Originally published by W. H. Freeman and Company, 1982.
Marsden, J. E., & Ratiu, T. S. (1999). Introduction to mechanics and symmetry (2nd ed.). New York: Springer.
McCloskey, D. I. (1981). Corollary discharges: Motor commands and perception. In V. B. Brooks (Ed.), Handbook of Physiology: Sec. I. The Nervous System: Vol II.
Motor Control, Part 2 (pp. 1415–1447). Bethesda, MD: American Physiological Society.
Neilson, P. D., & Neilson, M. D. (2004). A new view on visuomotor channels: The case of the disappearing dynamics. Human Movement Science, 23, 257–283.
Neilson, P. D., & Neilson, M. D. (2005a). An overview of adaptive model theory: Solving the problems of redundancy, resources, and nonlinear interactions in
human movement control. Journal of Neural Engineering, 2, S279–S312.
Neilson, P. D., & Neilson, M. D. (2005b). Motor maps and synergies. Human Movement Science, 24, 774–797.
Neilson, P. D., & Neilson, M. D. (2010). On theory of motor synergies. Human Movement Science, 29, 655–683.
Neilson, P. D., Neilson, M. D., & O’Dwyer, N. J. (1995). Adaptive optimal control of human tracking. In D. J. Glencross & J. P. Piek (Eds.), Motor control and
sensory-motor integration: Issues and directions (pp. 97–140). Amsterdam: North-Holland.
O’Dwyer, N. J., & Neilson, P. D. (2000). Metabolic energy expenditure and accuracy in movement: Relation to levels of muscle and cardiorespiratory
activation and sense of effort. In W. A. Sparrow (Ed.), Energetics of human activity (pp. 1–42). Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics.
O’Keefe, J. (1976). Place units in the hippocampus of the freely moving rat. Experimental Neurology, 51, 78–109.
O’Keefe, J. (2007). Hippocampal neurophysiology in the behaving animal. In P. Andersen, R. Morris, D. Amaral, T. Bliss, & J. O’Keefe (Eds.), The hippocampus
book (pp. 475–548). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
O’Keefe, J., & Dostrovsky, J. (1971). The hippocampus as a spatial map. Preliminary evidence from unit activity in the freely-moving rat. Brain Research, 34,
171–175.
Ortega, J.-P., & Ratiu, T. S. (2004). Momentum maps and Hamiltonian reduction. Boston: BirkHӓuser.
Oytam, Y., Neilson, P. D., & O’Dwyer, N. (2005). Degrees of freedom and motor planning in purposive movement. Human Movement Science, 24, 710–730.
Polpitiya, A. D., Dayawansa, W. P., Martin, C., & Ghosh, B. K. (2007). IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, 52, 170–180.
Polpitiya, A. D., Ghosh, B. K., Martin, C. F., & Dayawansa, W. P. (2004). Mechanics of the eye movement: geometry of the Listing space. American Control
Conference (ACC 2004), Boston, MA (pp. 323–328). Retrieved from http://www.nt.ntnu.no/users/skoge/prost/proceedings/acc04/Papers/0057_WeA10.
6.pdf.
Sargolini, F., Fyhn, M., Hafting, T., McNaughton, B. L., Witter, M. P., Moser, M. B., & Moser, E. I. (2006). Conjunctive representation of position, direction, and
velocity in the entorhinal cortex. Science, 312, 758–762.
Sekimoto, M., Arimoto, S., Kawamura, S., & Bae, J.-H. (2008). Skilled-motion plannings of multi-body systems based upon Riemannian distance. In 2008 IEEE
international conference on robotics and automation (ICRA 2008), Pasadena, CA (pp. 1233–1238). doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ROBOT.2008.4543372.
Sekimoto, M., Arimoto, S., Prilutsky, B. I., Isaka, T., & Kawamura, S. (2009). Observation of human multi-joint arm movement from the viewpoint of Riemannian
distance. ICCAS-SICE International Joint Conference 2009, Fukuoka, Japan (pp. 2664–2669). Retrieved from http://rtc.nagoya.riken.jp/control/pdf/2009/
2009_106272.pdf.
Sparrow, W. K., & Newell, K. M. (1998). Metabolic energy expenditure and regulation of movement economy. Psychonomic Bulletin and Review, 5, 173–196.
Stark, C. (2007). Functional role of the human hippocampus. In P. Andersen, R. Morris, D. Amaral, T. Bliss, & J. O’Keefe (Eds.), The hippocampus book
(pp. 549–579). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Szekeres, P. (2004). A course in modern mathematical physics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Winter, D. A., Patla, A. E., Prince, F., Ishac, M., & Gielo-Perczak, K. (1998). Stiffness control of balance in quiet standing. Journal of Neurophysiology, 80,
1211–1221.
72
P.D. Neilson et al. / Human Movement Science 44 (2015) 42–72

