Biomaterials 298 (2023) 122142
Available online 2 May 2023
0142-9612/© 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-
nc-nd/4.0/).
Affordable oral proinsulin bioencapsulated in plant cells regulates blood 
sugar levels similar to natural insulin 
Henry Daniell *, Rahul Singh, Venkata Mangu, Smruti K. Nair, Geetanjali Wakade, 
Nataliya Balashova 
Department of Basic and Translational Sciences, School of Dental Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA   
A R T I C L E  I N F O   
Keywords: 
C-peptide 
Cold-chain free 
Oral delivery 
Proinsulin 
Plant cell bioencapsulation 
A B S T R A C T   
Diabetes Mellitus is a silent epidemic affecting >500 million, which claimed 6.7 million lives in 2021, a projected 
increase of >670% in <20 years old in the next two decades but insulin is unaffordable for the large majority of 
the globe. Therefore, we engineered proinsulin in plant cells to facilitate oral delivery. Stability of the proinsulin 
gene and expression in subsequent generations, after removal of the antibiotic-resistance gene, was confirmed 
using PCR, Southern and western blots. Proinsulin expression was high (up to 12 mg/g DW or 47.5% of total leaf 
protein), stable up to one year after storage of freeze-dried plant cells at ambient temperature and met FDA 
regulatory requirements of uniformity, moisture content and bioburden. GM1 receptor binding, required for 
uptake via gut epithelial cells was confirmed by pentameric assembly of CTB-Proinsulin. IP insulin injections 
(without C peptide) in STZ mice rapidly decreased blood glucose level leading to transient hypoglycemia, fol­
lowed by hepatic glucose compensation. On the other hand, other than the 15-min lag period of oral proinsulin 
(transit time required to reach the gut), the kinetics of blood sugar regulation of oral CTB-Proinsulin in STZ mice 
was very similar to naturally secreted insulin in healthy mice (both contain C-peptide), without rapid decrease or 
hypoglycemia. Elimination of expensive fermentation, purification and cold storage/transportation should 
reduce cost and increase other health benefits of plant fibers. The recent approval of plant cell delivery of 
therapeutic proteins by FDA and approval of CTB-ACE2 for phase I/II human clinical studies augur well for 
advancing oral proinsulin to the clinic.   
1. Introduction 
Diabetes Mellitus is a silent epidemic, which claimed 6.7 million 
lives in 2021, exceeding number of deaths caused by the COVID-19 
pandemic [1–3]. It has affected 536.6 million people and is expected 
to afflict 783.2 million by 2045 [4]. Diabetes exacerbates cardiovascular 
events in more than 40% of the hospitalized patients in the U. S [5]. 
There were 30% diabetes related deaths in 2021 compared to 
pre-pandemic levels in 2019, resulting in a higher mortality rate [6,7]. 
Type 1 Diabetes is more prevalent amongst children <10yrs accounting 
for 98% and 87% of young adults between 10 and 19 years of age [8]. 
Type II diabetes has an overall prevalence of 21.2% among coronary 
heart disease patients and 32.2% of microvascular complications [9]. 
Projections among <20 are alarming with 65% increase of Type 1 and 
673% increase of Type 2 in 2060, with the highest prevalence among 
non-Hispanic black youth in the U. S [10]. It is estimated that 75–90% of 
pregnancy induced hyperglycemia cases are diagnosed as gestational 
diabetes [11] and has a global prevalence of 14% [4]. In addition to 
systemic health, diabetes worsens periodontal health [12], oral candi­
diasis (85% of diabetics) [13], precancerous lesions like leukoplakia 
(2.72% higher prevalence) [14] in hyperglycemic conditions. Taken 
together, these statistics underpin magnitude of diabetes and the urgent 
need for developing affordable treatment options. 
The global insulin market size was estimated at USD 20.35 billion in 
2021 and is expected to grow by 1.5% from 2022 to 2030 [15]. The cost 
of all types of insulins is 5–10-fold higher in the United States as 
compared to the rest of the world [16,17]. Insulin pump costs ~ US 
$6500 and annual supplies costing $3000–6000 for the infusion set 
replacement every 3 days [18,19]. FDA Approved the First Inter­
changeable Biosimilar Insulin Product - Semglee for Lantus in July 2021, 
with projected cost saving of 15–35% [20]. However, the list price of 
Semglee was <5% of Lantus, with no significant cost relief to diabetes 
* Corresponding author., Department of Basic and Translational Sciences, School of Dental Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, 240 South 40th Street, 547 Levy 
Building, Philadelphia, PA, 19104-6030, USA. 
E-mail address: hdaniell@upenn.edu (H. Daniell).  
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 
Biomaterials 
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/biomaterials 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biomaterials.2023.122142 
Received 7 January 2023; Received in revised form 30 April 2023; Accepted 1 May 2023   

Biomaterials 298 (2023) 122142
2
patients [21]. These sky-rocketing prices for insulin treatment un­
derscores the need for affordable drug delivery approaches in the 
treatment of this endocrine disorder. 
Commercially insulin or insulin analogues are produced either in 
bacteria, or in yeast. Insulin produced in bacteria requires renaturation 
and proper folding, which results in significant loss of recombinant in­
sulin, thereby further increasing cost [22]. Moreover, fermentation 
process is very expensive, with complex sterile air exchanges to meet 
regulatory requirements [23]. Because humans are allergic to bacterial 
or yeast proteins, FDA requires removal of host cell proteins (>99%), 
which is the most expensive step. After purification, insulin is unstable 
and requires lower temperature for storage and transportation, further 
adding to the cost and limited shelf life. 
Besides limitations in insulin production, there are challenges asso­
ciated with the mode of delivery because of the need to deliver precise 
dose to protect patients from consequences of hypoglycemia. As illus­
trated in Fig. 1, significant progress has been made in insulin delivery 
methods including syringes, pumps, pens, artificial pancreas, dermal 
patches, and inhalers [24–27]. Although there is a worldwide surge in 
usage of insulin pens [28,29], syringes are predominantly used in 
low-income countries (83.1% Syringes and 16.7% Pens) [30]. However, 
these injectables have limitations including local pain, infection at the 
injection site, dexterity in elderly people, hypoglycemia, discomfort, 
irritation, and affordability [23,26]. To overcome these challenges, oral 
delivery of insulin has been evaluated using different approaches like 
bioencapsulation in plant cells or polymeric lipid nanoparticles to pro­
tect it from digestive acids/enzymes [31–33]. 
All clinical insulin products are incomplete, lacking the C-peptide 
present in human insulin (Fig. 1). C-peptide has several important 
functions in diabetes related neuropathy and nephropathy, benefits in 
diabetes therapy for treatment of diseases of the retina, kidneys, and 
cardiovascular systems [34–39]. Increased serum C-peptide level ex­
hibits the lower dose requirement of insulin, higher glycemic control 
rate and less incidence of diabetic keto-acidosis [6,40]. Therefore, 
human proinsulin including C-peptide has been evaluated in previous 
studies [35,39]. Several CTB-fusion therapeutic proteins have been 
developed recently for oral delivery to alleviate metabolic and cardio­
vascular conditions [41,42]. Bioencapsulated protein drugs are stable in 
freeze-dried plant cells during long-term storage at ambient temperature 
[41,43–46] and eliminates the need for expensive fermentation or pu­
rification (Fig. 1). 
In this study we evaluate efficacy and kinetics of blood glucose 
regulation of clinical insulin that lacks C-peptide, natural human insulin 
containing C-peptide and recombinant oral CTB-Proinsulin bio­
encapsulated in plant cells in healthy and STZ diabetic mice. In addition, 
we optimized the drug substance – CTB-Proinsulin to meet regulatory 
approval by evaluation of potency, stability, dosage, moisture content 
and bioburden. 
2. Material and methods 
2.1. CTB-Fx3Pris-gene cloning into pLsLF-marker-free chloroplast 
transformation vector and suitability of the expression cassette for protein 
expression in heterologous host 
The pLsLF-marker-free (pLsLF-MF) chloroplast transformation vec­
tor developed in Daniell lab [47] was used to design of 
pLsLF-MF-CTB-Fx3Pris construct. The source of CTB-Fx3Pris-gene for 
the cloning was pLsLF-CTB-Fx3Pris construct previously designed by 
Boyhan and Daniell [35]. The proinsulin (Pris)-gene sequence in the 
expression cassette was modified to replace native cleavage site PC2 and 
PC3 present at the junction of B-chain/C-chain and C-chain/A-chain, 
respectively with furin enzyme cleavage sites (RRKR). The CTB-Fx3Pris 
with 3′ UTR and TpsbA region was excised from the pLsLF-CTB-Fx3Pris 
expression cassette using NdeI and NotI restriction sites at 5′ and 3’ re­
gion, respectively and ligated into the pLsLF-MF vector backbone at 
same set of restriction sites generated. After ligation the construct 
pLsLF-MF-CTB-Fx3Pris was transformed into Top-10 competent cells 
and screened. Two different sets of restriction enzymes were used for 
screening of the clones. In one set the same restriction site used for 
cloning was utilized i.e., NdeI and NotI, while PvuII enzyme used as 
another set whose restriction site present inside the Pris-gene and vector 
Fig. 1. Graphical Abstract: Current and future insulin drug delivery methods and percentage global usage: (A) Subcutaneous insulin injections: Syringes and vials - 
9.6%. (B) Transdermal Insulin Pen - 85.6%. (C) Implantable insulin pump - < 5% (D) Insulin Inhalers - <5% (E) Transdermal insulin Patches <5% people. (F) Oral 
Delivery using micro or nano particles – in development. (G) Oral delivery of insulin with C-peptide bioencapsulated in plant cells – this study. Except proinsulin, all 
other clinical products lack C-peptide. 
H. Daniell et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Biomaterials 298 (2023) 122142
3
backbone as well. The positive clones determined by restriction diges­
tion analysis were sequenced at inhouse facility of University of Penn­
sylvania, Philadelphia, USA to confirm correct reading frame and 
nucleotide sequence cloned into the pLsLF-MF-CTB-Fx3Pris construct. 
The construct checked for the expression of target protein in E. coli Top 
10 cells before using it to develop transplastomic plants. 
The positive clones and untransformed E. coli cells were cultured 
overnight in 5 mL LB medium having ampicillin (100 mg/L) and spec­
tinomycin (50 mg/L) antibiotics. The 1 mL overnight grown culture of 1 
O.D. was spun and pellet was suspended in Laemmli buffer, heat dena­
tured and resolved on 12% SDS-PAGE. The resolved protein was trans­
ferred onto nitrocellulose membrane (Bio-rad Laboratories, Hercules, 
CA) and probed by anti-CTB antibody raised in rabbit (1:10,000) (Gen 
Way Biotech, San Diego, CA) and goat anti-rabbit IgG-HRP (1:10,000) 
(Southern Biotechnology, Birmingham, AL) as primary and secondary 
antibody, respectively. The precision plus protein standard was used as a 
molecular weight standard (Bio-rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA). Puri­
fied CTB (Sigma, St Louis, MO) and untransformed E. coli Top 10 cells 
used as positive and negative control, respectively. The proteins were 
detected by SuperSignalTM West Pico PLUS Chemiluminescent Sub­
strate (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) using iBright Imaging 
System (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). 
2.2. Bombardment of lettuce leaf to develop CTB-Proinsulin 
transplastomic lettucelines 
In the process of biolistic bombardment, the pLsLF-MF-Fx3Pris 
construct was coated onto the 0.6 μm gold particles (Bio-Rad) and 
delivered to the adaxial side of lettuce leaf cells using 1100 psi rupture 
discs with the target distance of 6 cm as described previously [48]. 
Following the bombardment the leaves were incubated for 48 h in dark 
at 25 ◦C, cut into 2 cm2 pieces, and placed adaxial side down onto the 
regeneration medium (MS salts (Caisson, Smithfield, UT), Gamborg vi­
tamins (PhytoTechnology Laboratory, Lenexa KS), BAP 0.2 mg/L 
(Sigma, St Louis, MO), NAA 0.1 mg/L (Sigma, St Louis, MO), Myoino­
sitol 100 mg/L (Sigma, St Louis, MO), PVP 500 mg/L (Sigma, St Louis, 
MO), sucrose 30 g/L (Sigma, St Louis, MO), phytoblend 5 g/L) prepared 
with spectinomycin dihydrochloride 50 mg/L (Sigma, St Louis, MO). 
The in vitro grown primary shoots after 6–8 weeks were examined by 
PCR for site specific integration of the construct into the chloroplast 
genome and eventually excision of the marker-gene (aadA). Two 
different sets of primers, i. e, 16S–F (5-CAGCAGCCGCGGTAA 
TACAGAGGATGCAAGC-3) 
and 
atpB-R 
(5′-GAATTAACC 
GATC­
GACGTGCTAGC 
GGACATT) 
and 
3′UTR-F 
(5-AGGAGCAA­
TAACGCCCTCTTGATAAAA 
C) 
and 
23s-R 
(5-TGCACCCCTACCT 
CCTTTATCACTGAGC) used to assure the integration of the construct 
into the chloroplast genome, while another set of primers 16S–F 
(5-CAGCAGCCGCGGTAATA 
CAGAGGATGCAAGC-3) 
and 
aadA-R 
(5-CCGCGTTGTTTCATC AAGCCTTACGGTCACC) was used to investi­
gate excision/presence of the marker gene from the chloroplast genome. 
Transplastomic shoots confirmed positive by PCR were cut into 2 cm2 
pieces and incubated on the regeneration medium having spectino­
mycin, for second time selection. At this stage, any emerging shoots 
bleached then shifted onto selection free medium (regeneration medium 
without spectinomycin). The in vitro grown shoots grown after second 
selection analyzed again for the integration of chloroplast vector and/or 
excision of marker-gene by same sets of primers as described above. PCR 
confirmed transplastomic shoots then shifted into the rooting medium 
(1/2 MSO + 0.5 mg/L IBA). 
After rooting, shoots were investigated for heteroplasmy or homo­
plasmy status and the excision/presence of the marker gene by southern 
blotting as described previously [41]. In brief, 1 μg of leaf genomic DNA 
digested with high fidelity HindIII restriction enzyme (New England 
Biolabs, Ipswich, MA), resolved in 0.8% agarose gel and transferred onto 
the nylon membrane (GE Healthcare life Sciences, Marlborough, MA). 
The transferred DNA probed with labelled chloroplast flanking region 
(as described in Fig. 2A) using DIG-High Prime labeling kit (Roche, 
Penzberg, Germany). The hybridized probe onto the membrane was 
detected using CSPD ready-to-use kit (Roche, Penzberg, Germany) as 
recommended by the manufacturer. The southern positive plants at 3–5 
leaf stage acclimatized by growing in mini-hydroponics set-up (Aero­
Garden, Boulder, CO) for two weeks and then shifted to pot filled with 
soil in greenhouse as described previously [49]. Fresh leaves were har­
vested from the plants maintained at green house for protein expression 
analysis. Fresh leaves of weight 500 mg homogenized in mortar and 
pestle in presence of liquid nitrogen and suspended in 1 mL of PEB (100 
mM NaCl, 10 mM EDTA, 200 mM Tris-Cl pH 8.0, 0.05% (v/v) Tween-20, 
0.1% SDS, 14 mM b-ME; 400 mM sucrose; 2 mM PMSF, and 1x mini 
protease inhibitor cocktail tablet). The suspension was incubated at 4 ◦C 
for 1 h on vortex mixer and sonicated (3 cycles, 10 s on 15 s off, 80% 
amplitude). Total protein of the homogenate was quantified by Bradford 
assay and 1 μg of total protein of each plant extract was loaded on 12% 
reducing gel. Resolved protein followed for the western blotting against 
CTB as described in earlier section and CTB-Proinsulin protein was 
detected. 
2.3. Screening of CTB-Proinsulin expressing marker-free transplastomic 
lines in the next generation 
Seeds from self-pollinated flowers of three independent trans­
plastomic lines (T0) were collected separately, and 25 seeds of each line 
germinated aseptically on ½ MSO basal medium with 50 mg/L specti­
nomycin. After 1–2 weeks, resistant seedlings showing green cotyledons 
and bleached yellow cotyledons were scored. The seedlings showing 
bleached yellow phenotype shifted to the ½ MSO medium without 
spectinomycin to recover. The recovered plants initially screened for site 
specific integration of the expression cassette with CTB-Fx3Pris gene and 
excision of the marker-gene, by PCR using same sets of primers as 
described in previous section. The PCR positive seedlings without 
selection-marker gene were further analyzed by southern blotting. The 
extracted genomic DNA was digested with high fidelity HindIII restric­
tion enzyme and followed for southern blotting as described in previous 
section. Seedlings confirmed for homoplasmy and excision of marker 
gene by southern blotting were acclimatized and grown into the green 
house. Expression of CTB-Proinsulin protein in the fresh leaves of 
marker-free lines was evaluated on Western blot as described in earlier 
section. 
2.4. Leaf biomass production of MF-CTB-Proinsulin lettuce lines and 
lyophilization 
Seeds collected from T0 generation of MF-CTB-Proinsulin plants 
were germinated on ½ MSO medium without antibiotics, acclimatized 
using mini-hydroponics system and transferred into the greenhouse for 
maturation and seed setting as described previously [49]. Fully 
expanded dark green leaves were harvested in the evening (after 4 p.m.). 
During this time protein expression of psbA driven promoter is optimum. 
Harvested leaves were rinsed in double deionized water, washed for 
approximately 5 min in a 200 parts per million chlorine solution pre­
pared using food-grade calcium hypochlorite, after that rinsed three 
consecutive times in double deionized water (rinsed 5 min each time). 
Washed leaves dried on tissue towel and stored at −80 ◦C freezer. Then 
the frozen lettuce leaves were freeze dried in a lyophilizer (Genesis 
35XL, SP Scientific, Stone Ridge, NY) at −40 ◦C, −30 ◦C, −20 ◦C, 
−15 ◦C, −10 ◦C, −5 ◦C and 25 ◦C for a total of 72 h under a vacuum of 
400 mTorr as described previously [50]. Lyophilized leaf materials were 
ground in a coffee mill (Hamilton Beach, Southern Pines, North Car­
olina) three times at full speed (10s on and 30 s off). The fine powder was 
stored with silica gel in FDA approved black U-line containers at 
ambient temperature. 
H. Daniell et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Biomaterials 298 (2023) 122142
4
2.5. Stability of expression cassette in CTB-Proinsulin marker-free 
transplastomic lines in T1 generation 
Stable inheritance of integrated expression cassette in the chloroplast 
genome of marker-free transplastomic lines in next generation was 
evaluated by PCR and Southern blotting. Harvested seeds of T0 gener­
ation marker-free lettuce line were germinated on medium with and 
without antibiotics. Seeds germinated on antibiotics free medium indi­
cated marker-free status, that further evaluated by PCR and Southern 
blotting. For PCR all three sets of primers described previously used for 
the amplification of desired fragments from extracted DNA of six seed­
lings. In southern blotting extracted genomic DNA was digested with 
HindIII enzyme, resolved on 0.8% agarose gel and probed as described 
previously to detect the desired hybridizing fragment of size 10.6 kb. 
Expression of CTB-Proinsulin fusion protein in lyophilized leaf powder 
of T1 generation marker-free lettuce line was evaluated by western 
blotting as described in earlier section. 
2.6. Production of FDA compliant drug substance 
Production of FDA compliant drug substance includes aseptic 
grinding of the lyophilized drug substance followed by bioburden 
assessment, drug dose quantitation, moisture content determination and 
stability studies. Grinding of the lyophilized drug substance was per­
formed aseptically in the clean room using a pre-disinfected steel grinder 
(BioloMix-700×g) for 3 s using Traceable Nano Timer (Fisher Scientific). 
The milled powder was sieved through a 25-mesh (ASTME11-710 μm) 
into an FDA approved Uline black container protected from light at USP 
controlled temperature. Aseptically, 100 mg of sample was removed 
from each container to assess for bioburden as per USP <61> and <62>, 
moisture content and CTB-Proinsulin expression as per procedure for 
drug dose quantitation. 
2.7. Drug dose quantitation of CTB-proinsulin protein expressed in each 
generation of transplastomic plants 
CTB-Proinsulin fusion protein expression-level in each generation of 
transplastomic lettuce leaf was evaluated by densitometry after western 
blotting using anti-CTB antibody. Commercial purified CTB protein was 
used as standard. The ground lyophilized leaf powder of 10 mg was 
suspended in 500 μL of PEB (100 mM NaCl, 10 mM EDTA, 200 mM Tris- 
Cl pH 8.0, 0.05% (v/v) Tween-20, 0.1% SDS, 14 mM b-ME; 400 mM 
sucrose; 2 mM PMSF, and 1x mini protease inhibitor cocktail tablet), 
homogenized at 4 ◦C for 1 h, sonicated and extracted total leaf protein 
(TLP) was quantified by the Bradford assay (Bio-Rad Laboratories, 
Hercules, CA). TLP of known concentration resolved on 12% reducing 
gel and followed for the western blotting as described in earlier section. 
The intensity of detected CTB-Proinsulin was quantified by comparing 
known concentration of CTB standards, and percent expression level of 
CTB-Proinsulin in each generation was calculated. Similarly, stability of 
CTB-Proinsulin in lyophilized plant powder stored at ambient temper­
ature for different time-periods (0–12 months) was evaluated by deter­
mining the protein expression in stored plant powder at different time- 
periods. 
2.8. Moisture content assessment 
Empty glass vial was used for performing the titration. A 50.0 ± 2.0 
Fig. 2. Development of lettuce lines expressing CTB-Proinsulin fusion protein without the antibiotic resistance gene. (A) Expression cassette of pLsLF-MF-CTB- 
Fx3Pris for the development of lettuce lines and removal of the antibiotic resistance aadA gene after integration of the proinsulin expression cassette into the 
chloroplast genome. (B) Screening of T0 transplastomic lines by three different sets of primers. Amplification of PCR products from all three primer sets (shown in 
arrowhead) confirm integration of both CTB-Fx3Pris and the marker (aadA) expression cassettes into the chloroplast genome. (C) Confirmation of CTB-Fx3Pris gene 
integration into the chloroplast genome and partial excision of the (aadA) gene cassette by Southern blotting. Detection of two hybridizing fragments of size ~10.7 
and ~12.7 (shown as bottom and top arrowhead, respectively) confirms presence of CTB-Fx3Pris and the aadA gene in developed transplastomic lines in the first (T0) 
generation. (D) Expression of recombinant CTB-Proinsulin protein in six-independent lines in T0 generation confirmed by western blotting. Detection of ~22.4 
(monomeric) and ~45 kDa (dimeric) protein (shown as bottom and top arrowhead, respectively) in transplastomic lines but not in untransformed plant (WT) 
confirms expression of recombinant CTB-Proinsulin fusion protein in developed transplastomic lines. 
H. Daniell et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Biomaterials 298 (2023) 122142
5
mg of Standard HYDRANAL-Water Standard – KF Oven 150–160 ◦C 
(Cat. Code 34,693, Honeywell Specialty Chemicals Seelze GmbH) 
powder was weighed and sample mass was recorded in the KF machine. 
The vials were capped with aluminum seals. The instrument (Titrando 
860 KF Thermoprep and Titrando 851) was turned ON. The temperature 
was allowed to come up to 150 ◦C and the pump flow to 50 mL/min on 
the Titrando 860 KF Thermoprep. The constant drift in the range of 10.0 
± 5.0 μg/min was attained. Three empty vials for blank calibration were 
run followed by 2 standard repeat injections to obtain the moisture 
content in the acceptable range (5.0% ± 0.04%). A sample of 50 mg of 
CTB-Proinsulin drug substance was weighed in triplicates and assessed 
on KF coulometer for moisture content. 
2.9. Bioburden assessment 
Biosafety Cabinet (BSC) was pre-run and kept ready for use as per 
digital indicator after disinfection with 70% IPA. Sterile trypticase Soy 
Agar plates (TSA - Becton Dickinson) and sterile Sabouraud’s Dextrose 
agar plates (SDA - Oxoid) were used for enumeration of aerobic bacteria 
and yeasts/molds respectively. Sample concentration of 1% was pre­
pared aseptically by suspending 100 mg ground plant powder in 10 mL 
of sterile diluent saline 0.85% sodium chloride followed by serial di­
lutions (10–1, 10–2, 10–3, 10–4 and 10–5) for enumeration of microbial 
load. Samples were vortexed to ensure homogeneity of the suspension. 
Each dilution was spread inoculated aseptically onto TSA and SDA agar 
plates in duplicates and kept face up for 5 min in BSC. All the plates were 
sealed with parafilm and placed face down in the respective incubators 
(TSA - 37 ◦C and SDS 25 ◦C) for 5 days. Uninoculated sterile plates and 
plates inoculated with sterile saline only were incubated as negative 
controls. Plates were monitored daily, and results were recorded on the 
5th day of incubation. Similarly, enrichment of the specific microor­
ganism E. coli and Salmonella spp. were performed as described in 
USP<62> and the enriched samples were inoculated onto MacConkey’s 
agar and Xylose lysine decarboxylate agar respectively in duplicates. 
Plates were incubated at 37 ◦C for 48h along with negative control 
plates. 
2.10. GM1-ganglioside receptor-binding assay 
CTB-Proinsulin ability to form pentamer was evaluated by GM1- 
ganglioside receptor binding assay. Total protein from the lyophilized 
plant powder was extracted by suspending 10 mg plant powder in 500 
μL in extraction buffer (100 mM NaCl, 10 mM EDTA (pH 8.0), 200 mM 
Tris (pH 8.0), 400 mM Sucrose, 2 mM PMSF and 0.5x protease inhibitor 
cocktail), and sonication for 3 cycles (10 s on 15 s off, 80% amplitude). 
The obtained homogenate spun at 10,000 rpm for 15 min at 4 ◦C and 
soluble protein processed for GM1-ganglioside receptor binding assay in 
ninety-six-well plates as previously reported [51]. In brief, 
monosialoganglioside-GM1 (Sigma) (3.0 μg/mL in bicarbonate buffer) 
and bovine serum albumin (BSA) as a control, were incubated in 
ninety-six-well plates, overnight at 4 ◦C. Following washing, the plate 
was blocked with 1x PBST (0.1% Tween 20) with 3% dry non-fat milk 
for 1 h at 37 ◦C. After washing, CTB standards (Sigma), different con­
centration of soluble protein extracts of CTB-Proinsulin, protein extract 
of untransformed plant (WT) leaves and BSA was added in duplicate 
wells and incubated for overnight at 4 ◦C. Rabbit anti-CTB primary 
antibody (1:10,000; Gen Way Biotech, San Diego, CA) and 
HRP-conjugated goat anti-rabbit secondary antibody (1:4000; Southern 
Biotechnology, Birmingham, AL) were used to detect the binding of CTB 
or CTB-Proinsulin to the GM1 receptor. The plate was washed thrice 
with PBST, and 100 μL of tetramethyl benzidine (TMB) soluble solution 
substrate (American Qualex) was added to the wells and incubated in 
the dark for 15 min. The reaction was stopped with 50 μL of 2 M H2SO4, 
and absorbance at 450 was measured on a microplate reader (Synergy 
H1, BioTek). 
2.11. Animal studies to assess functionality of CTB-proinsulin protein in 
STZ induced diabetic murine model 
C57BL/6 mice were purchased from Jackson laboratories (Bat Har­
bor, ME) and housed under pathogen-free and regulated humidity and 
temperature conditions in the animal facility at the University of 
Pennsylvania. Diabetes was induced in 18 animals by administering 
intraperitoneal (IP) injection of Streptozotocin (STZ) daily (50 μg/g 
body weight in citrate buffer) [42] for 5 days in 12-week-old animals 
after overnight fasting. Blood glucose levels were tested (OneTouch 
Ultra 2 Meter kit) two weeks after the last STZ injection and animals 
with blood glucose levels ≥300 mg/dL were included in the study 
(Fig. 6A). The mice were randomly assigned to 3 groups – PBS (negative 
control), CTB-Proinsulin (T0) and Commercial Insulin (positive control) 
(Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO). Each group had 6 animals including 3 
males and 3 females). All animals underwent overnight fasting before 
the experiment. The lyophilized plant powder (20 mg) containing 171.6 
μg CTB-Proinsulin protein was rehydrated in PBS (pH 7.4) to a final 
volume of 200 μL per gavage dose and administered using a 20-gauge 
gastric gavage needle. The plant powder suspension in PBS was vor­
texed gently and homogenized 30 min prior to gavage. The control 
groups were injected peritoneally with 100 μL of commercial Insulin 
(0.04 U/kg body weight) [35] or orally gavaged with sterile PBS. For 
glucose spike, 100 μL glucose IP (2 g/kg body weight) was administered 
in a group of healthy mice (n = 6) at 60 min. Blood glucose levels were 
examined by tail vein bleed at 0, 15, 30, 60, 90, 120, 150 and 210 min. 
Glucose measurements were made 3 times for each animal for a total of 
432 evaluations of blood glucose level in mouse sera. 
2.12. Statistical analyses 
Quantification and stability analysis of drug products performed in 
triplicates and data presented as mean and standard deviation. The data 
from the animal studies with CTB-Proinsulin are presented by means ±
SD and analyzed by One-way ANOVA test. Graphs and statistical tests 
were conducted in GraphPad Prism 6.0. 
3. Results 
3.1. CTB-Fx3Pris-gene cloning in pLsLF-marker-free chloroplast 
transformation vector and the protein expression in E. coli 
The CTB-Fx3Pris nucleotide sequence (912 bp) previously cloned 
[35] into the pLsLF-CTB-Fx3Pris chloroplast transformation vector 
(Fig. S1A) was excised and ligated into the pLsLF-Marker-free 
(pLsLF-MF) vector digested with the same set of restriction enzymes 
(Fig. S1B). The pLsLF-MF vector is designed to facilitate removal of 
antibiotic resistance gene aadA by flanking both ends with 649 bp 
nucleotide sequence of atpB and 5′ UTR. Homologous recombination 
among atpB and 5′ UTR results in excision of aadA gene expression 
cassette and one atpB and 5′ UTR once pLsLF-MF construct integrates 
into the chloroplast genome (Fig. 2A). In the ligated construct, excision 
of 912 bp and 1.4 kb restriction digested fragment from the vector 
backbone by digesting with NdeI and NotI and PvuII enzyme, respec­
tively confirmed insertion of the CTB-Fx3Pris gene into the 
pLsLF-MF-CTB-Fx3Pris plasmid (Figs. S1C and D). The proinsulin gene 
(Pris) present at the downstream of the cholera toxin-B (CTB) subunit in 
the construct was modified (Fig. S2) from the native human proinsulin 
gene by replacing the native protein cleavage site at the junction of 
subunit b/c and c/a by furin cleavage sites (RRKR). The ubiquitous 
presence of furin protease in all human cell types [52] eliminates de­
pendency of proinsulin maturation only in pancreatic cells. Other 
modifications include presence of hinge region (GPGP) and additional 
furin cleavage site between CTB and Pris to facilitate proper folding and 
excision of Pris after CTB mediated internalization into gut epithelium 
cells, respectively (Fig. S2). A total of three furin cleavage sites are 
H. Daniell et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Biomaterials 298 (2023) 122142
6
present in the modified proinsulin protein, so designated as Fx3Pris. The 
similarity of the transcriptional and translational machinery of bacteria 
and chloroplast facilitates evaluation of the expression cassette in bac­
teria before proceeding with chloroplast transformation. Detection of 
~22.5 and ~45 kDa protein in all tested clones but not in untransformed 
cells in western blots probed with anti-CTB antibody confirmed 
expression of the CTB-Proinsulin fusion protein as monomer and dimer, 
respectively (Fig. S1E). 
3.2. Generation of lettuce transplastomic lines expressing CTB-Proinsulin 
fusion protein and seedlings screening for marker-free status 
The pLsLF-MF-CTB-Fx3Pris plasmid bombardment into lettuce leaf 
resulted in regeneration of six independent shoots on spectinomycin 
selection medium. All shoots on PCR screening produced ~2.4, ~3.3 
and ~2.4 kb amplified fragments with primer sets 16S–F/atpB-R, 
16S–F/aadA-R and 3′UTR-F/23S-R, respectively (Fig. 2B), indicated 
site-specific integration of the expression cassette with the marker-gene. 
Southern blotting by digesting the plant genomic DNA by the HindIII 
enzyme detected ~10.7 and ~12.7 kb hybridized fragments. These re­
sults confirm site-specific integration of the expression cassette into the 
chloroplast genome and presence of the antibiotic resistant gene (aadA) 
(Fig. 2C). Absence of the ~9.1 kb hybridizing fragment in all six re­
generated shoots observed in untransformed WT confirms homoplasmy 
(although there is partial digestion in some lanes). On Western blot 
detection of ~22.5 kDa protein in all six transplastomic lines confirms 
expression of target protein as monomer in each transplastomic lines 
(Fig. 2D). An additional ~45 kDa protein detected in five out of six 
transplastomic lines, revealed that CTB-Proinsulin is also expressed as a 
dimer. 
Seeds harvested from three independent transplastomic lines P-1, P-2 
and P-3 were germinated on spectinomycin selection medium for 
propagation in next generation (Fig. S3). Among 25 germinated seeds, 8, 
5 and 9 seedlings of P-1, P-2 and P-3 lines, respectively showed bleached 
phenotype. These bleached seedlings recovered to green phenotype 
when transferred to antibiotic free medium. PCR screening showed 
amplified fragment of ~2.4 kb by the primer sets 16S–F/atpB-R and 
3′UTR-F/23S-R and absence of ~3.3 kb amplification fragment by 
16S–F/aadA-R primer set. This indicates inheritance of expression 
cassette and excision of antibiotic resistant gene in chloroplast genome 
of five seedlings P-12, P-25, P-33, P-34 and P-38 (Fig. S3). Eventually, 
green seedlings transferred to greenhouse for maturation of plants and 
biomass production (Fig. S4). All transferred plants showed normal 
phenotype at each developmental stage i.e., 60 days old plants at 
vegetative stage (Fig. S4A), 110 days old plants at flowering stage 
(Fig. S4B) and 130 days old plants at seed setting stage (Fig. S4C). PCR 
analysis was repeated as above, which again confirmed the integration 
of the expression cassette and excision of the antibiotic resistance gene 
(Fig. 3A) in T0 mature plants. Detection of only one 10.7 kb hybridizing 
fragment in southern blotting confirmed the homoplasmic marker-free 
status of all 5 transplastomic lines (Fig. 3B). Detection of ~22.5 and 
~45 kDa protein on Western blot confirmed expression of CTB- 
Proinsulin as monomer and dimer, respectively in all 5 transplastomic 
lines (Fig. 3C). 
3.3. Stability of CTB-Proinsulin marker-free lettuce transplastomic lines 
in next generation 
After excision of marker-gene, stable inheritance of integrated 
expression cassette in the chloroplast genome of marker-free pLsLF-MF- 
CTB-Fx3Pris lettuce grown in greenhouse was evaluated in T1 genera­
tion. Seeds of marker-free T0 plants were germinated separately with or 
without antibiotic containing medium. The bleached phenotype of 
seedlings in antibiotic medium confirmed marker free status of the T1 
Fig. 3. Selection of CTB-Proinsulin transplastomic lines free of the antibiotic resistance gene. (A) Seeds harvested from three independent transplastomic lines 
screened for marker-free lines on antibiotics plate (spectinomycin 50 mg/L) in the second generation. Pale or yellow seedlings transferred to antibiotic free medium 
and screened for CTB-Fx3Pris gene integration and removal of the antibiotic resistance gene using three different sets of primers. PCR amplification of integrated 
construct (left and right gel) but not the aadA gene (middle gel) confirms marker removal in 5 lines. (B) Confirmation of CTB-Fx3Pris integration and aadA gene 
excision in 5 lines by Southern botting. Detection of single hybridized fragment of size 10.7 (shown in red arrowhead) confirms marker-free and homoplasmic status 
of all 5 lines. (C) Expression of CTB-Proinsulin protein evaluated by western blotting, detection of ~22.4 kDa (monomeric) and ~45 kDa (dimeric) bands (shown in 
red arrowhead) in all 5 transplastomic lines but not in untransformed (WT) plants confirms CTB-Proinsulin expression. (D) Harvested seeds germinated on antibiotics 
and without antibiotics plates to evaluate marker-free status. Healthy plants on antibiotic free medium but bleached on antibiotic medium confirms marker-free 
status. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article.) 
H. Daniell et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Biomaterials 298 (2023) 122142
7
generation (Fig. 3D). Green seedlings germinated on selection free me­
dium were evaluated by PCR and Southern blotting. The amplified 
fragment of ~2.4 kb by the both primer sets 16S–F/atpB-R and 3′UTR-F/ 
23S-R and absence of ~3.3 kb fragment by 16S–F/aadA-R primer set, in 
PCR indicated excision of the aadA gene from the chloroplast genome of 
all six transplastomic lines (Fig. 4A). Southern botting of four trans­
plastomic lines, detected a single ~10.7 kb hybridizing fragment con­
firming integration of expression cassette, absence of the antibiotics 
resistant gene (aadA), and homoplasmic status (Fig. 4B). 
3.4. Drug dose quantitation of CTB-Proinsulin 
The CTB-Proinsulin protein expression level in transplastomic plants 
with marker T0, marker free T0 and T1 generations were 4.79 ± 0.53, 
8.58 ± 2.71 and 12.07 ± 0.89 mg/g DW, corresponding to the total leaf 
protein of 30.13 ± 1.49, 41.96 ± 12.56 and 47.5 ± 19.66% respectively 
(Fig. 4C and D). Thus, the yield of CTB-Proinsulin increased with each 
successive generation, with maximum seen in the marker free T1 gen­
eration transplastomic plants. 
3.5. Moisture content and bioburden testing for drug substance 
Moisture content for the placebo and drug substance was 5.9% and 
6.3% respectively. Consistency in different batches were achieved by 
controlled lyophilization cycles in 21 CFR complaint Ultra50 lyophi­
lizer, followed by storage of the dried biomass at USP controlled tem­
perature in airtight containers using silica absorbent packs [44,45]. 
Bioburden tests were performed for specific pathogens in addition to 
bacteria/yeast-mold for 2 days and 5 days incubation periods respec­
tively that revealed no growth. Proper disinfection of the drug substance 
[44] helped achieve final microbial limits as per USP<61> and <62>
these results indicate that the drug substance and placebo (untrans­
formed lettuce) were unaffected after 48-week storage at USP controlled 
temperature and protected from light (Fig. 5B). 
3.6. Stability Testing of drug substance 
Following FDA guidelines, a stability test was performed to evaluate 
any physical or chemical changes that could affect the dose, and uni­
formity of the drug substance-CTB-Proinsulin. The assessment per­
formed after 6, 9 and 12 months of storage at USP controlled 
temperature and protected from light in FDA approved airtight con­
tainers showed 8.18 ± 0.65, 7.87 ± 0.01, 7.92 ± 0.15 and 8.08 ± 0.08 
mg/g dry weight, respectively indicating <5% loss of the drug protein 
content over 12 months (Fig. 5A). 
3.7. GM1-ganglioside receptor-binding of CTB-proinsulin fusion protein 
To evaluate pentameric structure formation, GM1-receptor binding 
assay (ELISA) was performed with lyophilized CTB-Proinsulin plant 
cells. The absorbance of the drug substance almost matched that of the 
positive controls (CTB) with no signal from negative controls at 450 nm 
(Fig. 5C). These results show that CTB-Proinsulin effectively formed 
pentameric structure capable of binding to GM1 receptor which is un­
affected by the lyophilization process. 
3.8. Functional evaluation of orally delivered CTB-Proinsulin 
Animal studies were performed in accordance with the ethical 
standards and protocols approved by the Penn Animal Welfare - 
Fig. 4. Characterization of stable CTB-Proinsulin transplastomic lines of the second (T1) generation. (A) Integrated CTB-Fx3Pris gene and removal of the aadA 
marker gene in subsequent generation (T1) is confirmed in six different lines by PCR. Amplified PCR products for integrated cassette (left and right gel) except aadA 
(middle gel) confirms CTB-Fx3Pris gene integration and absence of the marker (aadA) gene. (B) Stable integration of CTB-Fx3Pris gene in the T0 generation of 
marker-free plants is confirmed by Southern blotting. Detection of single hybridized fragment of 10.8 kb in all four tested marker-free lines but not in WT confirmed 
stable integration of the target gene in transplastomic lines. For expressed CTB-Proinsulin protein characterization, the transplastomic plant (grown in green house) 
biomass of different generations harvested and freeze-dried. (C) The freeze-dried plant biomass ground into fine powder expressed CTB-Proinsulin protein and was 
quantified by densitometry on western blots using purified CTB as standard. The CTB-Proinsulin expressed in all three generations of transplastomic lines is observed 
as monomeric (~22.5 kDa) and dimeric (~45 kDa) forms in western blots. (D) Expression level of the CTB-Proinsulin increased in successive generations: T0, 
Marker-free T0 and T1 generation was 4.79 ± 0.53, 8.58 ± 2.71 and 12.07 ± 0.89 mg/g DW, respectively. Data are represented as the mean ± SD. (For inter­
pretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article.) 
H. Daniell et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Biomaterials 298 (2023) 122142
8
Institutional animal Care Use Committee (IACUC – # 805,419). To 
characterize the effect of CTB-Proinsulin in vivo, we orally delivered T0 
generation of CTB-Proinsulin (8.58 mg/g DW), which was available at 
the time of this initial animal study. The lyophilized plant cells (T0) were 
resuspended in the ratio of 200 mg to 2 mL of sterile PBS. A maximum 
oral gavage volume of 200 μL as per protocol, containing 20 mg (171.6 
μg CTB-Proinsulin) of plant material was administered per mouse. 
Following overnight fasting, blood glucose was measured at 0, 15, 30, 
60, 90, 120, 150 and 210 min (Fig. 6B) by obtaining blood from the tail 
vein. The data for blood glucose is from a total of 432 measurements, 
from three biological replicates, with standard deviation (Mean ± SD). 
In healthy mice, the baseline blood glucose level of 102.8 ± 4.5 mg/ 
dL increases to 366.8 ± 5.7 mg/dL following a glucose spike given at 60 
min. This state of hyperglycemia stimulates insulin which is a key 
regulator of hepatic glucose uptake [53] and restores the glucose levels 
to baseline at the end of 210 min as seen in Fig. 6C. Due to the reduced 
insulin production, in the STZ induced diabetic mice, the hyperglycemic 
state continues to maintain high levels as seen with the PBS group. We 
see a steep decrease of 67.2% in blood glucose levels with insulin 
(IP-0.04 U/kg) within 30 min in STZ-induced diabetic mice. The 
reduction of blood glucose continues to 29.2–40 mg/dL at 60 and 90 min 
(86–87% reduction) causing hypoglycemia in these animals. As a 
counterregulatory mechanism the low glucose level stimulates hepatic 
glucose production by both gluconeogenesis and glycogenolysis [54], 
mobilizing the liver glycogen reserves which increase the blood glucose 
levels to 114.3 ± 4.8 mg/dL at 120 min, and continues to 251.3 ± 9.8 
mg/dL (minimum reduction of 47.5%) at 210 min. 
The rate and extent of drug absorption is higher in intraperitoneal 
followed by subcutaneous and oral routes [55]. Hence, unlike insulin IP 
the orally delivered CTB-Proinsulin showed a reduction in blood glucose 
levels after 15 min to 12.4% reduction in 30 min and to 67.7% at 210 
min. This gradual reduction in blood glucose levels is due to the time 
taken for the bioencapsulated protein drug to travel through the GI tract 
and processed by the commensal microbes in the gut [56]. Both oral and 
natural insulin contain C-peptides and reduce high glucose levels 
gradually almost reaching similar values (192 ± 4.5 and 187.9 ± 5.2 
mg/dL respectively) at 120 min which further reduces until the end of 
the study time. At no point did the blood glucose levels drop below the 
Fig. 5. Evaluation of FDA regulatory requirements for CTB-Proinsulin (A) Stability Testing of CTB-Proinsulin drug substance stored at USP controlled temperature 
protected from light for 6, 9 and 12 months. (B) Moisture content by Karl Fisher Coulometry and Bioburden testing as per USP <61>, <62> were performed (C) 
Ganglioside (GM1) receptor binding assay performed to confirm proper folding and pentamerization of expressed protein in two different lines of T1 generation of 
marker-free transplastomic plants. BSA (1%), only GM1 and WT used as negative control while purified CTB was used as positive control in the GM1 binding assay, 
data presented as mean and standard deviation of triplicates and shown as the mean ± SD. 
Fig. 6. Oral delivery of CTB-Proinsulin in STZ induced diabetic mice. (A) Diabetes was induced in 12-week-old C57BL/6 mice by IP administration of Streptozotocin 
(STZ) (50 μg/g body weight) for 5 days. Bodyweights were assessed on a weekly basis. After 28 days, blood glucose levels were measured by tail vein bleed and 
animals with ≥300 mg/dL were considered diabetic and included in the study. (B) Individual animal blood glucose data post-oral delivery of CTB-Proinsulin, Insulin 
IP, and PBS in STZ induced diabetic mice. Data analyzed by One-way ANOVA test (****p-value <0.0001) (C) Diabetic mice were randomly assigned to four groups (n 
= 6 each, 3 M, 3F): PBS (negative control), Oral CTB-Proinsulin (20 mg plant powder containing 171.6 μg CTB-Proinsulin), IP commercial Insulin (0.04 U/kg body 
weight). Healthy mice were given glucose spike (2 g/kg body weight) at t = 60 min. Blood glucose levels were measured at 15, 30, 60, 90, 120, 150 and 210 min. 
Data represented as Mean ± SEM. 
H. Daniell et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Biomaterials 298 (2023) 122142
9
fasting nondiabetic range of 80–100 mg/dL [57] causing hypoglycemia 
in these animals. The blood glucose level in the CTB-Proinsulin group at 
the end of the study was 140 ± 5.6 mg/dL, almost reaching 125 mg/dL 
which is within the non-diabetic range under non-fasting conditions 
(Fig. 6C) [58,59]. Since the IACUC protocol permits a maximum gavage 
volume of 200 μL (20 mg plant material) a dose escalation study could 
not be performed in the animals. Subsequent T1 generation of 
CTB-Proinsulin (12.07 mg/g DW) is now available and future studies 
with this higher protein expressing drug substance could be conducted, 
especially in canine diabetes studies, in which much higher plant ma­
terial could be fed orally. Taken together, these findings demonstrate 
that oral CTB-Proinsulin can effectively restore blood glucose levels 
without the risk of hypoglycemia in diabetes. 
4. Discussion 
Current insulin production and delivery methods have several limi­
tations, including high cost and limited shelf life despite cold storage 
and transportation requirements. Most importantly, all clinical insulin 
lacks C-peptide that is naturally present in native human insulin. 
Increased serum C-peptide level is reported to decrease dose require­
ment of insulin, higher glycemic control rate and less incidence of dia­
betic keto-acidosis [6,40]. Diabetes-related nephropathy including 
albuminuria, glomerular hyperfiltration have improved with short-term 
infusions of C-peptide in humans [60,61]. Overall improvement in 
autonomic nerve function and peripheral neuropathy symptoms has 
been reported [62–64]. Therefore, in this study, we engineered proin­
sulin in edible plant cells to facilitate oral delivery, affordability and 
increase patient compliance. 
Although GM plants (soybean, corn) containing antibiotic resistance 
genes have been consumed around the globe for several decades, we 
removed the aadA gene in plants producing proinsulin as a precau­
tionary step and reduce unnecessary metabolic burden to produce a 
foreign protein beyond its role in early screening of transformants 
[41–43,47,48]. A higher level of CTB-Proinsulin facilitates oral delivery 
of adequate dose of insulin. This was achieved through codon optimi­
zation by removal of rare codons in the human gene not ideal for 
chloroplast expression and replacing them with optimal codons [49,65]. 
In addition, regulatory sequences from the most highly expressed 
chloroplast psbA gene were utilized for optimal expression [66]. Incor­
poration of three furin cleavage sites in CTB-Proinsulin facilitate its 
maturation into insulin and C-peptide in the gut epithelium. Thus, let­
tuce produced proinsulin does not need any prohormone convertases 2 
and 3 enzymes for maturation into insulin and c-peptide. Most impor­
tantly, CTB-Proinsulin was stable up to one year when freeze-dried plant 
cells were stored at ambient temperature. This offers, for the first-time, 
the ability to transport insulin to remote villages in the globe that lack 
cold storage and transportation facilities. Although data is not available 
for insulin storage in low- and middle-income countries, inadequacy of 
cold storage/transportation infrastructure was evident recently when 
African countries administered <50% of all COVID-19 vaccines they 
received, ultimately leading to the loss of >20 million doses [67,68]. 
Gut microbiome plays a crucial role in delivery of protein drugs 
encapsulated within plant cell walls. Contrary to gastric enzymes that 
are incapable of digesting the plant cell wall made up of cellulose, pectin 
and lignin, the commensal microbes in the small intestine can digest 
plant cell wall and release protein drugs into the gut lumen [69]. Bac­
terial species known to produce a broad spectrum of enzymes involved 
in degradation of plant cell wall components are present, in the duo­
denum. These were highly distinct from populations of cell wall 
degrading bacteria found in the large intestine. Therefore, the small 
intestine relies on activity of a distinct microbiome that can potentially 
be augmented for oral drug delivery of protein drugs bioencapsulated in 
plant cells [70]. Observed increase in oral delivery of IGF1 in plasma 
with a group of cell wall degrading enzymes expressed in chloroplasts, 
bioencapsulated within plant cells further validates these concepts [42]. 
CTB consists of five identical 11.6-kDa polypeptide monomers that 
assemble into a stable pentamer ring structure that binds to the GM1 
ganglioside receptor present abundantly in gut epithelial cells. In addi­
tion, presence of the ubiquitous furin cleavage site ensures retention of 
CTB within the epithelial cells and release of the protein of interest - 
insulin into the systemic circulation. 
Content uniformity and stability of the drug substance (lot-to-lot and 
within lot) are crucial parameters to ensure uniform drug dose admin­
istration during the clinical applications [71]. The CTB-Proinsulin 
exhibited <10% variability over the period of 12 months storage at 
USP controlled temperature and protected from light. The moisture 
content of the drug substance affects the stability of the protein drug by 
activating proteolytic enzymes and making it prone to microbial 
contamination. The moisture content was <10% in different lots of 
CTB-Proinsulin that were analyzed. Colonization of microbes by way of 
soil (bacteria ~108 per gram of fresh weight) [72,73], improper 
handling during production can alter the stability, safety and shelf life of 
the protein drug expressed in plants [71,74]. The drug substance passed 
the bioburden test for bacteria, yeasts/molds, pathogenic bacteria 
(Escherichia coli and Salmonella spp.) complying USP guidelines of mi­
crobial limits for an orally delivered, non-aqueous drug product [71]. 
We tested the functionality of CTB-Proinsulin in an in vivo STZ 
induced diabetic mouse model. While we observe a steep drop in the 
blood glucose level in the insulin IP group, there is a 15 min lag before 
the effect of oral CTB-Proinsulin is observed (therefore insulin capsules 
should be taken 15 min before meal). This initial lag is due to the time 
taken by the bioencapsulated oral insulin to pass through the GI tract 
while remaining resistant to the gastric enzymes and finally delivered to 
the circulation after proper cleavage/processing in the gut [69]. 
Insulin delivery by injections to the peripheral circulation is a key 
contributor to hypoglycemia and negative consequences are severe 
when there is diminished glucagon response [75]. Indeed, recent human 
clinical trials report Automated Insulin Delivery (AID) of precise insulin 
dose based on blood glucose levels using modern devices helps to 
minimize hypoglycemia in Type 1 diabetes and endogenous glucose 
production in response to hypoglycemia induced by insulin remained 
defective [76]. Another recent study reported the link between cardiac 
autonomic neuropathy (CAN) and severe hypoglycemia in type 2 dia­
betes. After evaluation of CAN with severe hypoglycemia among 7421 
adults with type 2 diabetes from the Action to Control Cardiovascular 
Risk in Diabetes study [77]. Recurrent hypoglycemia among adults with 
type 2 diabetes, with the highest risk was observed among those who 
received standard glycemic control using injections but not AIDs. Un­
fortunately, AIDs are not affordable for a large majority of the global 
population, as they cost >$6000 per device and additional cost of 
medical supervision and monitoring [18,19]. 
However, there are several studies that show that targeting insulin to 
the liver corrects defects in glucose metabolism caused by peripheral 
insulin delivery [78–80]. Plant cell delivery is ideally suited for this 
purpose because proteins released in the gut lumen from plant cells 
reach the liver directly through the gut liver axis, and liver receives most 
of the orally delivered proteins [69,81] Therefore, one of the explana­
tions for lack of hypoglycemia in oral insulin is delivery to the liver. 
Indeed, this is very well illustrated in human clinical studies on oral 
enteric insulin in which no significant increase in plasma insulin levels is 
observed, even after oral administration of 50, 100 or 200 units of in­
sulin but effective glucose regulation was evident [82]. While this is a 
challenge for conducting pharmacokinetic studies, it is highly advan­
tageous to avoid hypoglycemia. Assessing PK/PD issues for orally 
delivered proteins is not unique to oral insulin but is a major challenge 
that requires further investigations [78]. However, human oral insulin 
studies didn’t advance further to the clinic because of low bioavailability 
and 50-100-fold higher insulin dose requirement but this concern is 
addressed by the low cost of insulin produced in plant cells. Another 
explanation is that both oral and natural insulin contain C-peptide 
(lacking in clinical insulin), which is known for higher glycemic control 
H. Daniell et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Biomaterials 298 (2023) 122142
10
and less incidence of diabetic keto-acidosis [6,40]. 
With the T0 generation plant material, an initial effective single dose 
of 8.58 mg/kg in mice would translate to a human effective dose (HED) 
of 41.7 mg in 4.8 g plant material for an average 60 kg body weight 
person [83,84]. The HED with T1 generation material (12.07 mg/g DW) 
would be 3.4 g/60 kg (~58 mg/kg body weight). While 2 g fiber cap­
sules are commonly consumed and this may not pose any problems, we 
anticipate further enhancement of expression in subsequent generations 
and under optimal growth conditions, as recently demonstrated for 
CTB-ACE2 [85]. It is known in the literature that fiber capsules (2–7 g) 
reduced postprandial glycaemia [86,87]. Recent identification of 
strawberry red pigment pelargonidin as potent enhancer of intestinal 
permeability and oral delivery of insulin offers yet another example of 
utilizing plant-based products in protein drug delivery [88]. Therefore, 
using plant cells to deliver proinsulin may have additional advantages of 
health, nutrition, and non-invasive drug delivery, in addition to 
moderately regulating blood sugar levels. 
The FDA approved peanut flour as an oral immunotherapy drug 
product [89–91] and the recent IND approval (154,897) of CTB-ACE2 
chewing gum which paved the way for Phase I/II placebo-controlled, 
randomized double blind clinical trial (NCT05433181) augur well for 
advancing CTB proinsulin to the clinic and develop affordable oral in­
sulin to increase patient compliance. In addition, proinsulin delivery 
through the gut has the potential to induce immune tolerance in Type 1 
Diabetes, which is not feasible through injections [49–51],56,70, 
89–93]. 
Credit author statement 
All authors made experimental and/or intellectual contributions as 
described below. HD conceived this project, designed experiments, 
interpreted data, and wrote/edited several versions of this manuscript. 
VM created chloroplast transformation construct, developed, and char­
acterized CTB-Proinsulin transplastomic lines. Screened marker-free 
lines (T0) by PCR and Southern blotting. RS evaluated expression of 
CTB-Proinsulin in marker-free lines (T0), stability of integrated expres­
sion cassette in marker-free lettuce line in T1 generation. RS participated 
in leaf biomass production, lyophilization, quantification and stability 
analysis of drug product, GM1 binding assay and wrote these sections. 
NB performed animal studies with SKN. SKN interpreted data and wrote 
corresponding sections. GW performed bioburden assessment of CTB- 
Proinsulin and wrote corresponding sections. GW and SKN performed 
moisture content analysis, interpreted data, and wrote corresponding 
sections. 
Funding 
Funding from National Institutes of Health, United States grant R01 
HL 107904 and Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Department of Com­
munity and Economic Development grant to HD on “COVID-19 Penn­
sylvania Discoveries: Responding to SARS-COV-2 Through Innovation & 
Commercialization” to purchase of freeze dryers used in this project are 
acknowledged. 
Declaration of competing interest 
The authors declare the following financial interests/personal re­
lationships which may be considered as potential competing interests: 
Henry Daniell has patent #USA patent 11,332,754 issued to University 
of Pennsylvania. Henry Daniell has patent #USA patent 10,865,419 is­
sued to University of Pennsylvania. However, there is no specific 
financial conflict of interest to disclose at this time. 
Data availability 
Data will be made available on request. 
Appendix A. Supplementary data 
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.biomaterials.2023.122142. 
References 
[1] International diabetes federation, IDF diabetes atlas. www.diabetesatlas.org tenth 
ed. 
[2] M. Li, H. Wang, L. Tian, Z. Pang, Q. Yang, T. Huang, J. Fan, L. Song, Y. Tong, 
H. Fan, COVID-19 vaccine development: milestones, lessons and prospects, Signal 
Transduct. Targeted Ther. 7 (2022) 1–32, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41392-022- 
00996-y. 
[3] D. Kim, O. Alshuwaykh, K.K. Sandhu, B.B. Dennis, G. Cholankeril, A. Ahmed, 
Trends in all-cause and cause-specific mortality among individuals with diabetes 
before and during the COVID-19 pandemic in the US, Diabetes Care 45 (6) (2022) 
e107–e109, https://doi.org/10.2337/dc22-0348. 
[4] H. Sun, P. Saeedi, S. Karuranga, M. Pinkepank, K. Ogurtsova, B.B. Duncan, C. Stein, 
Abdul Basit, J.C.N. Chan, J.C. Mbanya, et al., IDF Diabetes Atlas: global, regional 
and country-level diabetes prevalence estimates for 2021 and projections for 2045, 
Diabetes Res. Clin. Pract. 183 (2022), 109119, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
diabres.2021.109119. 
[5] E. Braunwald, Diabetes, heart failure, and renal dysfunction: the vicious circles, 
Prog. Cardiovasc. Dis. 62 (4) (2019) 298–302. 
[6] F. Lv, X. Gao, A.H. Huang, J. Zu, X. He, X. Sun, J. Liu, N. Gao, Y. Jiao, M.G. Keane, 
et al., Excess diabetes mellitus-related deaths during the COVID-19 pandemic in the 
United States, Eclinicalmedicine 54 (2022), 101671, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
eclinm.2022.101671. 
[7] P. Saeedi, P. Salpea, S. Karuranga, I. Petersohn, B. Malanda, E.W. Gregg, N. Unwin, 
S.H. Wild, R. Williams, Mortality attributable to diabetes in 20–79 years old adults, 
2019 estimates: results from the international diabetes federation diabetes atlas, 
Diabetes Res. Clin. Pract. 162 (2020), 108086, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
diabres.2020.108086. 
[8] D.J. Pettitt, J. Talton, D. Dabelea, J. Divers, G. Imperatore, J.M. Lawrence, A. 
D. Liese, B. Linder, E.J. Mayer-Davis, C. Pihoker, et al., Prevalence of diabetes in US 
youth in 2009: the SEARCH for diabetes in youth study, Diabetes Care 37 (2) 
(2014) 402–408. 
[9] E.D. Canto, A. Ceriello, L. Ryd´en, M. Ferrini, T.B. Hansen, O. Schnell, E. Standl, J. 
W.J. Beulens, Diabetes as a cardiovascular risk factor: an overview of global trends 
of macro and micro vascular complications, Eur. J. Prev. Cardiol 26 (2) (2019) 
25–32, https://doi.org/10.1177/2047487319878371. 
[10] T. T¨onnies, R. Brinks, S. Isom, D. Dabelea, J. Divers, E.J. Mayer-Davis, J. 
M. Lawrence, C. Pihoker, L. Dolan, A.D. Liese, Projections of type 1 and type 2 
diabetes burden in the US population Aged< 20 Years through 2060: the SEARCH 
for diabetes in youth study, Diabetes Care (2022) dc220945, https://doi.org/ 
10.2337/dc22-0945. 
[11] American Diabetes Association, Diagnosis and classification of diabetes mellitus, 
Diabetes Care 37 (Supplement_1) (2014) S81–S90, https://doi.org/10.2337/dc14- 
S081. 
[12] E. Battancs, D. Gheorghita, S. Nyiraty, C. Lengyel, G. E¨ordegh, Z. Bar´ath, 
T. V´arkonyi, M. Antal, Periodontal disease in diabetes mellitus: a case–control 
study in smokers and non-smokers, Diabetes Ther 11 (11) (2020) 2715–2728. 
[13] C.F. Rodrigues, M.E. Rodrigues, M. Henriques, Candida sp. infections in patients 
with diabetes mellitus, J. Clin. Med. 8 (2019) 76, https://doi.org/10.3390/ 
jcm8010076. 
[14] P. Ramos-Garcia, M.D.M. Roca-Rodriguez, M. Aguilar-Diosdado, M.A. Gonzalez- 
Moles, Diabetes mellitus and oral cancer/oral potentially malignant disorders: a 
systematic review and meta-analysis, Oral Dis. 27 (3) (2021) 404–421. 
[15] Insulin market size, share & trends analysis by product type (Rapid-Acting insulin, 
long-acting insulin, combination insulin, biosimilar), by application, by type (type 
1, type 2), by distribution channel, by region, and segment forecasts, 2022–2030.. 
https://www.grandviewresearch.com/industry-analysis/insulin-market-report/seg 
mentation. 
[16] A.W. Mulcahy, D. Schwam, N. Edenfield, Comparing Insulin Prices in the United 
States to Other Countries, Rand Corporation, 2020. Retrieved October 2021, from, 
https://www.rand.org/content/dam/rand/pubs/research_reports/RRA700/RRA7 
88-1/RAND_RRA788-1.pdf. 
[17] https://www.3axisadvisors.com/projects/2021/11/3/insulin-price-comparison 
-report. 
[18] B.H. McAdams, A.A. Rizvi, An overview of insulin pumps and glucose sensors for 
the generalist, J. Clin. Med. (5) (2016) 5, https://doi.org/10.3390/jcm5010005. 
[19] M. Payne, F. Pooke, L. Holder-Pearson, J.G. Chase, M.D. Bock, J. Campbell, 
J. Knopp, Bench-side dose accuracy of an open-source ultra-low-cost insulin-pump, 
with testing conducted to IEC 60601-2-24, J. Diabetes Sci. Technol. (2022), 
https://doi.org/10.1177/19322968221142316. 
[20] FDA (US Food and Drug Administration), News and events [Accessed on November 
25th, https://www.fda.gov/news-events/press-announcements/fda-approves-first 
-interchangeable-biosimilar-insulin-product-treatment-diabetes, 2022. 
[21] L.S. Dafny, A radical treatment for insulin pricing, N. Engl. J. Med. 386 (2022) 
2157–2159, https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMp2203001. 
[22] Y.Y. Siew, W. Zhang, Downstream processing of recombinant human insulin and its 
analogues production from E. coli inclusion bodies, Bioresour. Bioprocess. 8 (2021) 
1–27, https://doi.org/10.1186/s40643-021-00419-w. 
H. Daniell et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Biomaterials 298 (2023) 122142
11
[23] S. Bhoria, J. Yadav, H. Yadav, D. Chaudhary, R. Jaiwal, P.K. Jaiwal, Current 
advances and future prospects in production of recombinant insulin and other 
proteins to treat diabetes mellitus, Biotechnol. Lett. (2022) 1–27, https://doi.org/ 
10.1007/s10529-022-03247-w. 
[24] R.B. Shah, M. Patel, D.M. Maahs, V.N. Shah, Insulin delivery methods: past, present 
and future, Int. J. Pharm. Investig. 6 (2016) 1, https://doi.org/10.4103/2230- 
973X.176456. 
[25] J. Chamberlain, K. Doyle-Delgado, L. Peterson, N. Skolnik, Diabetes technology: 
review of the 2019 American Diabetes Association standards of medical care in 
diabetes, Ann. Intern. Med. 171 (6) (2019) 415–420. 
[26] J. Kesavadev, B. Saboo, M.B. Krishna, Gopika Krishnan, Evolution of insulin 
delivery devices: from syringes, pens, and pumps to DIY artificial pancreas, 
Diabetes Ther 11 (6) (2020) 1251–1269. 
[27] D.A. Domingo-Lopez, G. Lattanzi, L.H.J. Schreiber, E.J. Wallace, R. Wylie, 
J. O’Sullivan, E.B. Dolan, G.P. Duffy, Medical devices, smart drug delivery, 
wearables and technology for the treatment of diabetes mellitus, Adv. Drug Deliv. 
Rev. (2022), 114280, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.addr.2022.114280. 
[28] M. Perez-Nieves, D. Jiang, E. Eby, Incidence, prevalence, and trend analysis of the 
use of insulin delivery systems in the United States (2005 to 2011), Curr. Med. Res. 
Opin. 31 (5) (2015) 891–899. 
[29] A.H. Frid, L.J. Hirsch, A.R. Menchior, D.R. Morel, K.W. Strauss, Worldwide 
injection technique questionnaire study: population parameters and injection 
practices, Mayo Clin. Proc. 91 (9) (2016) 1212–1223. 
[30] E.L. Klatman, G.D. Ogle, Access to insulin delivery devices and glycated 
haemoglobin in lower-income countries, World J. Diabetes 11 (8) (2020) 358. htt 
ps://www.wjgnet.com/1948-9358/full/v11/i8/358.htm. 
[31] G. Iyer, S. Dyawanapelly, R. Jain, Prajakta Dandekar, An overview of oral insulin 
delivery strategies (OIDS), Int. J. Biol. Macromol. (2022), https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2022.03.144. 
[32] A. Abdel-Moneim, H. Ramadan, Novel strategies to oral delivery of insulin: Current 
progress of nanocarriers for diabetes management, Drug Dev. Res. 83 (2) (2022) 
301–316. 
[33] G. Chen, W. Kang, W. Li, S. Chen, Y. Gao, Oral delivery of protein and peptide 
drugs: from non-specific formulation approaches to intestinal cell targeting 
strategies, Theranostics 12 (2022) 1419. https://www.thno.org/v12p1419.htm. 
[34] J. Wahren, K. Ekberg, J. Johansson, M. Henriksson, A. Pramanik, B.L. Johansson, 
R. Rigler, H. J¨ornvall, Role of C-peptide in human physiology, Am. J. Physiol. 
Endocrinol. Metab. 278 (2000) E759–E768, https://doi.org/10.1152/ 
ajpendo.2000.278.5.E759. 
[35] D. Boyhan, H. Daniell, Low-cost production of proinsulin in tobacco and lettuce 
chloroplasts for injectable or oral delivery of functional insulin and C-peptide, 
Plant Biotechnol. J. 9 (5) (2011) 585–598. 
[36] A. Ghorbani, R. Shafiee-Nick, Pathological consequences of C-peptide deficiency in 
insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus, World J. Diabetes 6 (2015) 145, https://doi. 
org/10.4239/wjd.v6.i1.145. 
[37] M.N. Baeshen, T.A.F. Bouback, M.A. Alzubaidi, R.S. Bora, M.A.T. Alotaibi, O.T. 
O. Alabbas, S.M. Alshahrani, A.A.M. Aljohani, R.A.A. Munshi, A. Al-Hejin, 
Expression and purification of C-peptide containing insulin using Pichia pastoris 
expression system, BioMed Res. Int. (2016), https://doi.org/10.1155/2016/ 
3423685. 
[38] M. Crisman, L. Lucchetta, N. Luethi, L. Cioccari, Q. Lam, G.M. Eastwood, 
R. Bellomo, J. Mårtensson, The effect of insulin administration on c-peptide in 
critically ill patients with type 2 diabetes, Ann. Intensive Care 7 (2017) 1–8, 
https://doi.org/10.1186/s13613-017-0274-5. 
[39] A. Ryk, A. Łosiewicz, A. Michalak, W. Fendler, Biological activity of c-peptide in 
microvascular complications of type 1 diabetes—time for translational studies or 
back to the basics? Int. J. Mol. Sci. 21 (24) (2020) 9723, https://doi.org/10.3390/ 
ijms21249723. 
[40] J. Suh, H.I. Lee, M. Lee, K. Song, H.S. Choi, A. Kwon, H.S. Kim, H.W. Chae, Insulin 
requirement and complications associated with serum C-peptide decline in patients 
with type 1 diabetes mellitus during 15 Years after diagnosis, Front. Endocrinol. 13 
(2022). https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fendo.2022.869204/full. 
[41] H. Daniell, V. Mangu, B. Yakubov, J. Park, P. Habibi, Y. Shi, P.A. Gonnella, 
A. Fisher, T. Cook, L. Zeng, et al., Investigational new drug enabling angiotensin 
oral-delivery studies to attenuate pulmonary hypertension, Biomaterials 233 
(2020), 119750, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biomaterials.2019.119750. 
[42] J. Park, G. Yan, K.-C. Kwon, M. Liu, P.A. Gonnella, S. Yang, H. Daniell, Oral 
delivery of novel human IGF-1 bioencapsulated in lettuce cells promotes 
musculoskeletal cell proliferation, differentiation and diabetic fracture healing, 
Biomaterials 233 (2020), 119591, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
biomaterials.2019.119591. 
[43] A. Srinivasan, R.W. Herzog, I. Khan, A. Sherman, T. Bertolini, T. Wynn, H. Daniell, 
Preclinical development of plant-based oral immune modulatory therapy for 
haemophilia B, Plant Biotechnol. J. 19 (10) (2021) 1952–1966, https://doi.org/ 
10.1111/pbi.13608. 
[44] H. Daniell, S.K. Nair, N. Esmaeili, G. Wakade, N. Shahid, P.K. Ganesan, MdR. Islam, 
A. Shepley-Mctaggart, S. Feng, E.N. Gary, et al., Debulking SARS-CoV-2 in saliva 
using angiotensin converting enzyme 2 in chewing gum to decrease oral virus 
transmission and infection, Mol. Ther. 30 (2022) 1966–1978. 
[45] H. Daniell, S.K. Nair, H. Guan, Y. Guo, R.J. Kulchar, M.D.T. Torres, Md Shahed-Al- 
Mahmud, G. Wakade, Yo-Min Liu, A.D. Marques, et al., Debulking different Corona 
(SARS-CoV-2 delta, omicron, OC43) and Influenza (H1N1, H3N2) virus strains by 
plant viral trap proteins in chewing gums to decrease infection and transmission, 
Biomaterials 288 (2022), 121671, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
biomaterials.2022.121671. 
[46] G. Wakade, S. Lin, P. Saha, U. Kumari, H. Daniell, Abatement of microfibre 
pollution and detoxification of textile dye–Indigo by engineered plant enzymes, 
Plant Biotechnol. J. (2022), https://doi.org/10.1111/pbi.13942. 
[47] H. Daniell, T. Ribeiro, S. Lin, P. Saha, C. Mc Michael, R. Chowdhary, A. Agarwal, 
Validation of leaf and microbial pectinases: commercial launching of a new 
platform technology, Plant Biotechnol. J. 17 (6) (2019) 1154–1166. 
[48] U. Kumari, R. Singh, T. Ray, S. Rana, P. Saha, K. Malhotra, H. Daniell, Validation of 
leaf enzymes in the detergent and textile industries: launching of a new platform 
technology, Plant Biotechnol. J. 17 (6) (2019) 1167–1182. 
[49] K.-C. Kwon, A. Sherman, W.-J. Chang, A. Kamesh, M. Biswas, R.W. Herzog, 
H. Daniell, Expression and assembly of largest foreign protein in chloroplasts: oral 
delivery of human FVIII made in lettuce chloroplasts robustly suppresses inhibitor 
formation in haemophilia A mice, Plant Biotechnol. J. 16 (6) (2018) 1148–1160. 
[50] J. Su, L. Zhu, A. Sherman, X. Wang, S. Lin, A. Kamesh, J.H. Norikane, S. 
J. Streatfield, R.W. Herzog, H. Daniell, Low cost industrial production of 
coagulation factor IX bioencapsulated in lettuce cells for oral tolerance induction in 
hemophilia B, Biomaterials 70 (2015) 84–93. 
[51] T. Ruhlman, R. Ahangari, A. Devine, M. Samsam, H. Daniell, Expression of cholera 
toxin B–proinsulin fusion protein in lettuce and tobacco chloroplasts–oral 
administration protects against development of insulitis in non-obese diabetic 
mice, Plant Biotechnol. J. 5 (4) (2007) 495–510. 
[52] K.-C. Kwon, R. Nityanandam, J.S. New, H. Daniell, Oral delivery of 
bioencapsulated exendin-4 expressed in chloroplasts lowers blood glucose level in 
mice and stimulates insulin secretion in beta-TC 6 cells, Plant Biotechnol. J. 11 
(2013) 77–86. 
[53] G. Kraft, K.C. Coate, M. Smith, B. Farmer, M. Scott, A.D. Cherrington, D. 
S. Edgerton, The importance of the mechanisms by which insulin regulates meal- 
associated liver glucose uptake in the dog, Diabetes 70 (6) (2021) 1292–1302. 
[54] S.O. Warner, A.M. Wadian, M. Smith, B. Farmer, Y. Dai, N. Sheanon, D.S. Edgerton, 
J.J. Winnick, Liver glycogen-induced enhancements in hypoglycemic 
counterregulation require neuroglucopenia, Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab. 
320 (5) (2021) E914–E924. 
[55] A. Al-Shoyaib, S.R. Archie, V.T. Karamyan, Intraperitoneal route of drug 
administration: should it be used in experimental animal studies? Pharm. Res. (N. 
Y.) 37 (2020) 1–17, https://doi.org/10.1007/s11095-019-2745-x. 
[56] H. Daniell, M. Kulis, R.W. Herzog, Plant cell-made protein antigens for induction of 
Oral tolerance, Biotechnol. Adv. 37 (7) (2019), 107413, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
biotechadv.2019.06.012. 
[57] C. Wuyts, C. Simoens, S. Pinto, K. Philippaert, R. Vennekens, Continuous glucose 
monitoring during pregnancy in healthy mice, Sci. Rep. 11 (2021) 1–14. 
[58] A.R. S¸akul, E. Kurtul, H. ¨Ozbek, N.I. Kirmizi, B.C. Bahtiyar, H. Saltan, ¨O.B. Acikara, 
Evaluation of antidiabetic activities of scorzonera species on alloxan induced 
diabetic mice, Clin. Exp. Health Sci. 11 (2021) 74–80. 
[59] H. Sun, P. Saeedi, S. Karuranga, M. Pinkepank, K. Ogurtsova, B.B. Duncan, C. Stein, 
A. Basit, J.C.N. Chan, J.C. Mbanya, IDF Diabetes Atlas: global, regional and 
country-level diabetes prevalence estimates for 2021 and projections for 2045, 
Diabetes Res. Clin. Pract. 183 (2022), 109119, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
diabres.2021.109119. 
[60] R.L. Washburn, K. Mueller, G. Kaur, T. Moreno, N. Moustaid-Moussa, 
L. Ramalingam, J.M. Dufour, C-peptide as a therapy for type 1 diabetes mellitus, 
Biomedicines 9 (3) (2021) 270, https://doi.org/10.3390/biomedicines9030270. 
[61] C.E. Hills, N.J. Brunskill, P.E. Squires, C-peptide as a therapeutic tool in diabetic 
nephropathy, Am. J. Nephrol. 31 (5) (2010) 389–397. 
[62] K. Ekberg, T. Brismar, B.-L. Johansson, P. Lindstrom, L. Juntti-Berggren, A. Norrby, 
C. Berne, H.J. Arnqvist, J. Bolinder, J. Wahren, C-Peptide replacement therapy and 
sensory nerve function in type 1 diabetic neuropathy, Diabetes Care 30 (2007) 
71–76. 
[63] B.L. Johansson, K. Borg, E. Fernqvist-Forbes, A. Kernell, T. Odergren, J. Wahren, 
Beneficial effects of C-peptide on incipient nephropathy and neuropathy in patients 
with Type 1 diabetes mellitus, Diabet. Med. 17 (3) (2000) 181–189. 
[64] K. Ekberg, T. Brismar, B.-L. Johansson, B. Jonsson, P. Lindstrom, J. Wahren, 
Amelioration of sensory nerve dysfunction by C-peptide in patients with type 1 
diabetes, Diabetes52 (2) (2003) 536–541. 
[65] K.-C. Kwon, H.-T. Chan, I.R. Le´on, R. Williams-Carrier, A. Barkan, H. Daniell, 
Codon optimization to enhance expression yields insights into chloroplast 
translation, Plant Physiol. 172 (2016) 62–77. 
[66] S.-L. Shi, Y.-Q. Liu, R.-X. Xia, Li Qin, Comprehensive analysis of codon usage in 
quercus chloroplast genome and focus on psbA gene, Genes 13 (2022) 2156, 
https://doi.org/10.3390/genes13112156. 
[67] M. M Loemb´e, A. Tshangela, S.J. Salyer, J.K. Varma, A.E.O. Ouma, J. 
N. Nkengasong, COVID-19 in Africa: the spread and response, Nat. Med. 26 (7) 
(2020) 999–1003. 
[68] M.M. Loemb´e, J.N. Nkengasong, COVID-19 vaccine access in Africa: global 
distribution, vaccine platforms, and challenges ahead, Immunity 54 (7) (2021) 
1353–1362. 
[69] K.-C. Kwon, H. Daniell, Oral delivery of protein drugs bioencapsulated in plant 
cells, Mol. Ther. 24 (8) (2016) 1342–1350. 
[70] S.R.P. Kumar, X. Wang, N. Avuthu, T.B. Bertolini, C. Terhorst, C. Guda, H. Daniell, 
R.W. Herzog, Role of small intestine and gut microbiome in plant-based oral 
tolerance for hemophilia, Front. Immunol. 11 (2020) 844. https://www.frontiersi 
n.org/articles/10.3389/fimmu.2020.00844/full. 
[71] J. P Berglund, N. Szczepanski, A. Penumarti, A. Beavers, J. Kesselring, K. Orgel, 
B. Burnett, A.W. Burks, M. Kulis, Preparation and analysis of peanut flour used in 
oral immunotherapy clinical trials, J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. Pract. 5 (4) (2017) 
1098–1104. 
H. Daniell et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Biomaterials 298 (2023) 122142
12
[72] M.N.P. Remus-Emsermann, S. Lücker, D.B. Müller, E. Potthoff, H. Daims, J. 
A. Vorholt, Spatial distribution analyses of natural phyllosphere-colonizing 
bacteria on Arabidopsis thaliana revealed by fluorescence in situ hybridization, 
Environ. Microbiol. 16 (7) (2014) 2329–2340. 
[73] R. Tecon, Life on a Leaf, eLife, vol. 8, 2019, https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.52123. 
[74] H. Daniell, H.-T. Chan, E.K. Pasoreck, Vaccination via chloroplast genetics: 
affordable protein drugs for the prevention and treatment of inherited or infectious 
human diseases, Annu. Rev. Genet. 50 (2016) 595, https://doi.org/10.1146/ 
annurev-genet-120215-035349. 
[75] J.M. Gregory, G. Kraft, M.F. Scott, D.W. Neal, B. Farmer, M.S. Smith, J.R. Hastings, 
E.J. Allen, E.P. Donahue, N. Rivera, et al., Insulin delivery into the peripheral 
circulation: a key contributor to hypoglycemia in type 1 diabetes, Diabetes 64 (10) 
(2015) 3439–3451. 
[76] A.J. Flatt, A.J. Peleckis, C. Dalton-Bakes, H.-L. Nguyen, S. Ilany, A. Matus, S. 
K. Malone, N. Goel, S. Jang, J. Weimer, et al., Automated insulin delivery for 
hypoglycemia avoidance and glucose counterregulation in long-standing type 1 
diabetes with hypoglycemia unawareness, Diabetes Technol. Therapeut. (2023), 
https://doi.org/10.1089/dia.2022.0506. 
[77] A.D. Kaze, M.F. Yuyun, R.S. Ahima, M.R. Rickels, J.B. Echouffo-Tcheugui, 
Autonomic dysfunction and risk of severe hypoglycemia among individuals with 
type 2 diabetes, JCI insight 7 (22) (2022). 
[78] R.J. Mrsny, T.A. Mahmood, Re-assessing PK/PD issues for oral protein and peptide 
delivery, Pharmaceutics 13 (7) (2021) 1006, https://doi.org/10.3390/ 
pharmaceutics13071006. 
[79] D.S. Edgerton, M. Scott, B. Farmer, P.E. Williams, P. Madsen, T. Kjeldsen, C. 
L. Brand, C. Fledelius, E. Nishimura, A.D. Cherrington, Targeting insulin to the 
liver corrects defects in glucose metabolism caused by peripheral insulin delivery, 
JCI Insight 4 (7) (2019), https://doi.org/10.1172/jci.insight.126974. 
[80] D.S. Edgerton, M.C. Moore, J.M. Gregory, G. Kraft, A.D. Cherrington, Importance 
of the route of insulin delivery to its control of glucose metabolism, Am. J. Physiol. 
Endocrinol. Metab. 320 (5) (2021) E891–E897. 
[81] Y. Xiao, K.-C. Kwon, B.E. Hoffman, A. Kamesh, N.T. Jones, R.W. Herzog, H. Daniell, 
Low cost delivery of proteins bioencapsulated in plant cells to human non-immune 
or immune modulatory cells, Biomaterials 80 (2016) 68–79. 
[82] J. Li, Y. Wang, L. Han, X. Sun, H. Yu, Y. Yu, Time–action profile of an oral enteric 
insulin formulation in healthy Chinese volunteers, Clin. Therapeut. 34 (12) (2012) 
2333–2338. 
[83] B.A. Nair, S. Jacob, A simple practice guide for dose conversion between animals 
and human, J. Basic Clin. Pharm. 7 (2) (2016) 27, https://doi.org/10.4103/0976- 
0105.177703. 
[84] S. Reagan-Shaw, M. Nihal, N. Ahmad, Dose translation from animal to human 
studies revisited, Faseb. J. 22 (3) (2008) 659–661, https://doi.org/10.1096/fj.07- 
9574LSF. 
[85] P.K. Ganesan, R.J. Kulchar, P. Kaznica, R. Montoya-Lopez, B.J. Green, S. 
J. Streatfield, H. Daniell, Optimization of biomass and target protein yield for 
Phase III clinical trial to evaluate Angiotensin Converting Enzyme 2 expressed in 
lettuce chloroplasts to reduce SARS-CoV-2 infection and transmission, Plant 
Biotechnol. J. (2022) 1–3, https://doi.org/10.1111/pbi.13954. 
[86] J.C. Brand-Miller, F.S. Atkinson, R.J. Gahler, V. Kacinik, M.R. Lyon, S. Wood, 
Effects of PGX, a novel functional fibre, on acute and delayed postprandial 
glycaemia, Eur. J. Clin. Nutr. 64 (12) (2010) 1488–1493. 
[87] A. L Jenkins, L.M. Morgan, J. Bishop, E. Jovanovski, V. Vuksan, Randomized 
clinical trial in healthy individuals on the effect of viscous fiber blend on glucose 
tolerance when incorporated in capsules or into the carbohydrate or fat component 
of the meal, J. Am. Coll. Nutr. 33 (5) (2014) 400–405. 
[88] N.G. Lamson, K.C. Fein, J.P. Gleeson, A.N. Newby, S. Xian, K. Cochran, 
N. Chaudhary, J.R. Melameda, R.L. Balla, K. Suria, et al., The strawberry-derived 
permeation enhancer pelargonidin enables oral protein delivery, Proc. Natl. Acad. 
Sci. U.S.A. 119 (33) (2022), e2207829119, https://doi.org/10.1073/ 
pnas.2207829119. 
[89] G.D. Toit, G.G. Roberts, P.H. Sayre, H.T. Bahnson, S. Radulovic, A.F. Santos, H. 
A. Brough, D. Phippard, M. Basting, M. Feeney, et al., Randomized trial of peanut 
consumption in infants at risk for peanut allergy, N. Engl. J. Med. 372 (2015) 
803–813, https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1414850. 
[90] B.P. Vickery, A. Vereda, T.B. Casale, K. Beyer, G. du Toit, J. O’B Hourihane, S. 
M. Jones, W.G. Shreffler, A. Marcantonio, R. Zawadzki, et al., AR101 oral 
immunotherapy for peanut allergy, N. Engl. J. Med. 379 (21) (2018) 1991–2001, 
https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1812856. 
[91] S.A. Tilles, D. Petroni, FDA-approved peanut allergy treatment: the first wave is 
about to crest, Ann. Allergy Asthma Immunol. 121 (2) (2018) 145–149, 
on10.1016/j.anai.2018.06.005. 
[92] H. Daniell, S. Jin, X.G. Zhu, M.A. Gitzendanner, D.E. Soltis, P.S. Soltis, Green giant- 
a tiny chloroplast genome with mighty power to produce high-value proteins: 
history and phylogeny, Plant Biotechnol. J. 19 (2021) 430–447. 
[93] W. He, C. Baysal, M. Lobato Gomez, X. Huang, D. Alvarez, C. Zhu, V. Armario- 
Najera, A.B. Perera, P.C. Bennaser, A. Saba-Mayoral, et al., Contributions of the 
international plant science community to the fight against infectious diseases in 
humans–part 2: affordable drugs in edible plants for endemic and re-emerging 
diseases, Plant Biotechnol. J. 19 (2021) 1921–1936. 
H. Daniell et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

