
The Mystery of the Mind 

Books by Wilder Penfield 
Scientific Studies: 
Cytology and Cellular Pathology of the Nervous System, 
Editor, 1932. 
The Cerebral Cortex of Man (with T. B. Rasmussen), 
1950. 
Epileptic Seizure Patterns (with K. Kristiansen), 1950. 
Epilepsy and the Functional Anatomy of the Human Brain 
(with H. Jasper), 1954. 
The Excitable Cortex in Conscious Man, 1958. 
Speech and Brain Mechanisms (with L. Roberts), 1959. 
Historical Novels: 
No Other Gods, a story of Abraham, 1954. 
The Torch, a story of Hippocrates, 1960. 
Biography: 
The Difficult Art of Giving, The Epic of Alan Gregg, 1967. 
Essays: 
The Second Career, 1963. 
Science, the Arts and the Spirit, 1970. 

The Mystery of the Mind 
A Critical Study of 
Consciousness and the Human Brain 
by Wilder Penfield, O.M., LITT.B., M.D., F.R.S. 
Foreword by Charles W. Hendel 
Introduction by William Feindel 
Reflections by Sir Charles Symonds 
PRINCETON UNIVERSITY PRESS 
PRINCETON, NEW JERSEY 

Copyright © 1975 by Princeton University Press 
Published by Princeton University Press, Princeton, New Jersey 
In the United Kingdom: Princeton University Press, Guildford, Surrey 
All Rights Reserved 
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data will 
be found on the last printed page of this book 
This book has been composed in Linotype Times Roman 
Printed in the United States of America 
by Princeton University Press, Princeton, New Jersey 
First Princeton Paperback printing, 1978 

Dedicated to 
Sir Charles Sherrington, O.M., F.R.S. 
physiologist and pioneer-explorer 
of the nervous system 


Contents 
Preface 
ix 
Foreword by Charles W. Hendel, philosopher 
xvii 
Introduction by William Feindel, neuro­
surgeon 
xxiv 
1 · Sherringtonian Alternatives—Two Funda­
mental Elements or Only One? 
3 
2 · To Consciousness the Brain Is Messenger 
7 
3 · Neuronal Action within the Brain 
11 
4 · Sensory and Voluntary-Motor Organization 
14 
5 · The Indispensable Substratum of 
Consciousness 
18 
6 · The Stream of Consciousness Electrically 
Reactivated 
21 
7 · Physiological Interpretation of an Epileptic 
Seizure 
28 
8 · An Early Conception of Memory Mechanisms 
—And a Late Conclusion 
31 
9 * The Interpretive Cortex 
34 
10 · An Automatic Sensory-Motor Mechanism 
37 
11 · Centrencephalic Integration and Coordination 
44 
12 · The Highest Brain-Mechanism 
46 
13 · The Stream of Consciousness 
49 
14 · Introspection by Patient and Surgeon 
51 
15 • Doubling of Awareness 
55 
16 · Brain as Computer, Mind as Programmer 
57 

viii • Contents 
17 • What the Automatic Mechanism Can Do 
18 • Recapitulation 
19 • Relationship of Mind to Brain—A Case 
Example 
20 • Man's Being—A Choice Between Two 
Explanations 
21 • Comprehensibility 
60 
62 
67 
73 
83 
Reflections by Sir Charles Symonds, 
neurologist 
Afterthoughts by the Author 
Bibliography 
Index 
91 
102 
116 
119 

Preface 
I began this writing when I was called upon to prepare 
an address for the annual general meeting of the Ameri­
can Philosophical Society held in Philadelphia, April 21, 
1973, under the chairmanship of Francis Schmitt. It was 
subsequently elaborated a month later for the Hans Ber-
ger Centennial Symposium on Brain-Mind Relationships 
at the Montreal Neurological Institute. 
When I reviewed the functional mechanisms of the 
human brain that could now be clearly recognized, I 
realized that the time had come to apply this knowledge 
in a modern reconsideration of the nature of the mind. 
I could not myself refuse to accept this exciting challenge, 
and so I turned away from other writing to the prepara­
tion of this monograph. 
A PILGRIMAGE 
Since I became a neurosurgeon, I have always been con­
cerned primarily, of course, with the problem of one pa­
tient after another, and patients prompted many an in­
quiry. The patient continued to be in the foreground of 
my concern, but in the background there was an urge to 
exploration. It had been awakened in me first, I suppose, 
by the Professor of Biology at Princeton, E. G. Conklin. 
A Uttle later, while listening to the lectures of Sir Charles 
Sherrington, as a medical student in Oxford, I realized 
that there was a thrilling undiscovered country to be 
explored in the mechanisms of the mammalian nervous 
system. Through it, one might approach the mystery of 
the mind, if only one could deal with the human brain as 
Sherrington had analyzed the reflexes of the animal brain. 

χ · Preface 
And so, after my initial university training, I returned 
to Oxford for graduate work in laboratory neurophysiol­
ogy and then went on blindly toward the human brain 
through neurology and neurosurgery. Thus, there was al­
ways a restless wondering within me about the working 
of the brain and its relation to mind. In time then I tried 
being an explorer, too, and stumbled, perhaps by acci­
dent, on much good gold. 
If, in making this final report of my experience, I fail 
to describe adequately the excellent contributions of oth­
er explorers in the field, I can only apologize. We are 
joined in a common cause, and the primary duty of each 
of us is to give an account of his own intriguing expedi­
tions into this undiscovered country and to pass on his 
own record accurately and hopefully to others who follow 
on these explorations that have now become a fateful pil­
grimage. 
PRESENTATION TO THE PUBLIC 
Philosophers of a certain school would, no doubt, silence 
me before I began to discuss the mind and the brain, if 
they could. They declare that since the mind cannot, by 
its very nature, have a position in space, there is only one 
phenomenon to be considered, namely, the brain. Such a 
declaration, which is contrary to the thinking of most 
men today as it was in ages past, is an unproven hypothe­
sis. Like all such hypotheses, one should undertake to 
prove, or to disprove it, without initial prejudice. 
A scientist examines the evidence before he presumes 
to draw a conclusion. This is particularly important when 
facing such an ancient (and such an important) question! 
Is the mind merely a function of the brain? Or is it a 
separate but closely related element? A physiologist can 

Preface · xi 
examine the brain. He has, as yet, no direct approach to 
the mind. That there is the closest relationship, however, 
is self-evident. Must the physiologist with facts at hand 
forever stand apart from the philosopher? 
In the presentation of this book to a public of widely 
varied backgrounds, I have asked three distinguished 
friends from three different disciplines to join me in the 
publication: William Feindel, a neurosurgeon; Charles 
Hendel, a philosopher; and Sir Charles Symonds, a 
neurologist. Since I turned to Hendel as to a philosopher 
for assistance in the composition of the manuscript, let 
me explain our relationship: He and I graduated from 
Princeton University together in the Class of 1913. In­
deed, I myself struggled with the philosophy of Kant sit­
ting beside Hendel in the same weekly "preceptorial." In 
1934 he and I, following very different routes, had come 
to live in Montreal. The Montreal Neurological Institute 
of McGill University opened its doors that year and as 
its director and a neurosurgeon, I looked forward to a 
continuing life of practice and of study of the function 
of the human brain. In that same year, Hendel, who had 
become Professor of Moral Philosophy at McGill, pub­
lished a significant discussion, "The Status of Mind in 
Reality," in The Journal of Philosophy (XXXI, 9, 225-
235, 1934). 
In September 1973, when I had finished the first draft 
of The Mystery of the Mind, I sent it to him for criticism. 
In the meantime, he had returned to the United States, to 
become Chairman of the Department of Philosophy at 
Yale University, and later he had retired from that post 
to live in Brandon, Vermont, where he is at present en­
gaged in the preparation for publication of his Gifford 
Lectures delivered at Glasgow in 1962 and 1963. 
On receiving my manuscript, he replied immediately 

xii · Preface 
in a long handwritten letter in which this understanding 
paragraph appeared: 
"As I read it [the manuscript] again and again, 
your story is one of your starting with the physical 
hypothesis (accepted by all scientists as a belief in 
order to gain knowledge): that the physical attributes 
of man and energy alone are what they can deal with. 
You start here and cannot do otherwise, and ought not 
to do so. But there are discoveries made which made 
you wonder about something that does not fit into 
the scientific picture, and you wonder again and again. 
It is the testimony of living, conscious patients. This is 
an objective item in your scientific evidence. How can 
it be fitted into the assumed hypothesis of an entirely 
physical nature of man?" 
His letter led me to rewrite the monograph, making it 
more frankly a personal account of work and experience, 
a sort of pilgrim's progress. In January 1974, I sent him 
the final draft. I begged him then to write the Foreword 
to my book and hoped that he would use some of his 
original letter in it verbatim. In the end, what he has 
written will certainly make it easier for readers who are 
not scientists to understand my presentation, and easier 
to use the facts and the arguments to their own purposes. 
THE SEARCH FOR A MECHANISM OF THE MIND 
In the past fifty years we have come to recognize an ever 
increasing number of semi-separable mechanisms within 
the human brain. They are sensory and motor. There are 
also mechanisms that may be called psychical, such as 
those of speech and of the memory of the past stream of 

Preface · xiii 
consciousness, and mechanisms capable of automatic in­
terpretation of present experience. There is in the brain 
an amazing automatic sensory and motor computer that 
utilizes the conditioned reflexes, and there is a highest 
brain-mechanism that is most closely related to that ac­
tivity that men have long referred to as consciousness, or 
the mind, or the spirit. 
Throughout my own scientific career I, like other scien­
tists, have struggled to prove that the brain accounts for 
the mind. But now, perhaps, the time has come when we 
may profitably consider the evidence as it stands, and ask 
the question: Do brain-mechanisms account for the 
mind? Can the mind be explained by what is now known 
about the brain? If not, which is the more reasonable of 
the two possible hypotheses: that man's being is based on 
one element, or on two? 
On the basis of either hypothesis the nature of the 
mind remains, still, a mystery that science has not solved. 
But it is, I believe, a mystery that science will solve some 
day. In that day of understanding, I predict that true 
prophets will rejoice, for they will discover in the scien­
tist a long-awaited ally in the search for Truth. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
Since this book is written in simple style for those in 
various walks of life who may be interested in an under­
standing of the brain and the mind of man, I have asked 
many whose opinion I have learned to value to read it, 
and I have accepted their criticisms and questions grate­
fully. The background of these critics varies all the way 
from that of my grandson, Wilder Penfield, III, who is at 
present a music critic, and a nephew, Mark Williamson, 

xiv · Preface 
who is a physician skilled in computerized medicine, all 
the way to my contemporary in neurology, Sir Charles 
Symonds. 
My wife, who has been the most enthusiastic and crea­
tive critic of my writing all through life, has read each 
portion to me, or listened to me read, and given me cour­
age to go on in this late attempt to present the evidence 
so that each reader may be able to draw his or her own 
conclusion as to which of the two possible hypotheses 
about the nature of the mind seems to be the more rea­
sonable. 
The letter that came to me from Charles Symonds, 
(after I had sent him the manuscript) entitled Reflec­
tions, is published following the main text, as a critical 
epilogue, without alteration. It is a statement of his "own 
views on this subject" rather than an analysis of my 
presentation. Yet it supplements my writing admirably 
and gives the reader an insight into the best neurological 
thinking of the past century. Furthermore, his reflections 
give me the welcome opportunity of adding my own ex­
planatory discussion that I have called Afterthoughts. 
This will, I hope, clarify the overall presentation of my 
thesis. 
I am profoundly grateful to my son Wilder for criti­
cism, also to my daughter, Ruth Mary Lewis, who typed 
the manuscript as my secretary and added many thought-
provoking comments; I am grateful also to my former 
secretary, Anne Dawson, who edited the manuscript and 
to my latest secretary, Kate Esdaile, who scrutinized and 
marshalled the material despite my frequent changes of 
mind. 
In conclusion, my former colleagues, Theodore Ras-
mussen and William Feindel have criticized this writing 

Preface · xv 
from the start. More than that, in their earlier years, they 
helped me at work and often kept me from heedless 
blunders. 
WILDER PENFIELD 
Sussex House 
Austin, P. Que., Canada 
August 1974 


Foreword 
by Charles W. Hendel, LITT.B., PH.D. 
In his Preface Dr. Penfield tells how I became associated 
with this piece of writing. I would like here to add some­
thing, in order to explain why, as he says, he was led "to 
rewrite the monograph, making it more frankly a per­
sonal account of work and experience." Earlier in my 
original letter I had written: 
"As I finish a second reading of your manuscript, I 
find the last pages are an eloquent, convincing justifica­
tion of your hypothesis and belief that mind has a 
being distinct from body, though intimately related to 
and dependent on body. The final statement is you 
yourself, speaking to the reader. The careful, modest, 
thoughtful assertion of belief and questions alike are 
the marks of the philosopher. And I salute you as a 
master." 
At the end of that letter I said: 
"For myself, reading this has been far more than in­
structive: it is something of an inspiration to find 
reasons for believing, what I have always held from 
the beginning of my own life and work as a philosopher: 
reasons for 'a persistent view in modern thought that 
mind is a very distinctive reality.' " 
After the opening paragraph, which I have quoted 
above, came the fateful words. "Now I shall try to assist, 
* Professor of Moral Philosophy and Metaphysics, Emeritus, 
Yale University. 

xviii · Foreword 
in any way I can, to have other readers appreciate your 
thought and work as I do." I had in view only persuading 
the author to change his mode of writing, which was too 
much that of an address to a scientific audience, so it 
would reach a wider public. For it was a thrilling story to 
me which seemed, however, somewhat obscured by his 
telling how it had been designed for the meeting of the 
American Philosophical Society at Philadelphia, in April 
1973, and then developed as a paper for the Hans Berger 
Centennial Symposium on the Brain-Mind Relationship 
in May 1973, etc. It was enlightening to read that a "sus­
picion about the purely physical view of mind existed in 
your mind quite early (Thayer Lectures in 1950 at Johns 
Hopkins). It was in the background. But electrical stimu­
lation and its results made the notion develop into a sug­
gestion or indeed even an hypothesis as you proceeded." 
So what the story told was this: 
"How Wilder Penfieid, operating on patients in order 
to cure them, if possible, found out things about the 
cerebral cortex and the mechanisms of the higher brain 
stem that turned a suspicion or mere notion into a 
vital hypothesis, and this further led to practical results 
in the lives of patients. 
"You became more and more convinced that the 
mind is something in its own right, that it did things 
with the mechanisms at hand in its own way, that it 
had an 'energy' of its own. You offer only suggestions. 
You discuss fairly the questions however that arise if 
they are taken as hypotheses. You end aligning your­
self with the prophets, the poets, and the philosophers 
who have emphasized the spiritual element in man." 
Having such opinions about the piece, I was moved to 
make the suggestion to the author himself 

Foreword · xix 
"that you make it plainer to the reader that this piece 
of writing gives the autobiographical sequence of your 
development. Yours is a story of 'how I came to take 
seriously, even to believe, that the consciousness of 
man, the mind, is something not to be reduced to 
brain-mechanism.' 
". . . In this development, what carries weight with 
the reader is the fact that in brain operations you hold 
a supreme position in the memory of living men and 
women: but you must only introduce the facts and 
experience you have recorded that disclose the ground 
for your belief. 
"Your autobiographical material is powerful, the 
testimony of your patients is convincing, and your 
development toward the mystery of the mind is con­
vincing beyond any philosopher's argument. Think it 
over." 
The author accepted that suggestion and rewrote his 
monograph for the larger public than appeared intended 
in the original document. All that I had in mind when I 
spoke of a willingness "to assist" was persuading Dr. 
Penfield himself to take precisely that step in publication. 
Then I found myself unexpectedly promoted from be­
ing a friendly critic to "philosopher" who would write a 
special Foreword. It seems to me that little more need be 
done here except to recite, as I have done, what I wrote 
to the author himself in the original letter. This is already 
accomplished in the above cited quotations, including 
what Dr. Penfield himself has told in the Preface. 
It is possible, however, that a general public would ap­
preciate a few remarks in addition that the author himself 
would not need or want. 
"By the way [my letter continued] you use 'argument' 
here as Shakespeare does in a play. The 'argument' 

xx · Foreword 
of the play is the plot. One should beware of the logi­
cians who, when they see the term 'argument,' get 
off into challenges of your reasoning according to their 
very precise standards. Say how you mean 'argument' 
when you employ the term. 
"I have the same trouble with your use of 'proven' 
fact. Fact to us is established by a theoretical con­
sideration of evidence and confirmation. Proof is not 
simply given with fact. The fact, as you so well know, 
has to be interpreted within a system of factual knowl­
edge to be accepted as such. But don't bother about 
these things." 
At the end of my letter was this observation that re­
calls our common past experience in college. 
"Your mention of James' Psychology touches me 
closely. I have never forgotten James' Principles and 
the role of the mind in purpose, attention, interest 
and decision. Again and again in my own experience, 
and study of others I have found these ideas fruitful, and 
indeed quite 'proven,' to my own satisfaction. They 
have been confirmed as being as nearly true as any­
thing can be in regard to the nature of the mind." 
Those today who have "a little philosophy" may ques­
tion the author's meaning when he asks the following 
questions in his Preface: "Do brain-mechanisms account 
for the mind? Can the mind be explained by what is 
known about the brain?" One tends to wonder about ex­
planation in this connection. What would be the complete 
explanation of the mind in terms of brain? Does it mean 
a "reduction" of everything mental to physical brain 
processes? What is an "explanation" of anything by ref­
erence to anything else? 
However one answers that philosophical question it is 

Foreword · xxi 
clear that Dr. Penfield himself is saying that the activities 
in which he finds evidence of mind cannot possibly be 
reduced to brain mechanisms—at present. 
In Chapter 19 of the text, Dr. Penfield treats of the 
"Relationship of Mind to Brain: A Case Example." He 
asks himself at the end, "Has the brain explained the 
mind?" The question remains. One must choose, he de­
cides, between "two explanations," which is the subject 
of the following chapter's discussion. 
In the choice Dr. Penfield opts for a distinct element 
in "Man's Being," mind as well as physical brain. The 
reader who is familiar with the history of philosophy may 
call the choice that of a dualism like that of Descartes. 
This would be a mistake. Descartes took a position that 
is called "dualistic" because he discerned distinct es­
sences, thought and extension, and found himself com­
pelled by logic to assert both to be real and absolute, 
neither reducible to the other. He designated them as 
"substances," mind and body. But Dr. Penfield does not 
start with a conviction about the irreducible integrity of 
mind and body by themselves. This he has made clear in 
his Afterthoughts. 
"1 do not begin with a conclusion and I do not end by 
making a final and unalterable one. Instead, I reconsider 
the present-day neurophysiological evidence on the 
basis of two hypotheses: (a) that man's being consists 
of one fundamental element, and (b) that it consists 
of two. . . . I conclude that there is no good evidence 
. . . that the brain alone can carry out the work that the 
mind does [and] that it is easier to rationalize man's 
being on the basis of two elements than on the basis 
of one." 
Of these two basic elements of man's nature Dr. Pen-
field does say in Chapter 20 that "the mind must be 

xxii · Foreword 
viewed as a basic element in itself. One might call it a 
medium, an essence, a soma. That is to say, it has a con­
tinuing existence." This is the experienced character of 
both mind and body in the Cartesian philosophy, and it 
happens to be one of the features where Dr. Penfield 
agrees with Descartes. This is what a "substance" means 
in that earlier philosophy. 
But this present work is not a definitive philosophy. It 
has emerged in a very different way, too, than did the 
philosophy of Descartes. Dr. Penfield welcomed the in­
troduction to the monograph offered by his colleague Dr. 
Wilham Feindel, which tells about the circumstances of 
the present and indicates where the work of Penfield has 
been heading. "Perhaps at no previous time in the history 
of science has there been such widespread interest, as is 
now evident, in the brain and its function, and how that 
function relates to human behavior." Dr. Feindel cites the 
present-day attraction of the study of the brain for "scien­
tists trained in anatomy, physiology, pathology and other 
biological disciplines" as well as for "neurologists, neuro­
surgeons and psychiatrists," and further for those who 
hail from "mathematics, physics, chemistry, and elec­
tronics and computer sciences." This is the milieu in 
which the present study emerges. 
The philosophy of the day must concern itself about 
the actual facts of the day's experience or it becomes ir­
relevant and useless. There is Uttle profit in trying to 
formulate "the problem of mind and body" and then to 
relate the present "wonder" about the mind to the answer 
to that old question. The philosophers now must reckon 
with the evidence and the experiments of today and find 
their position accordingly. 
Dr. Penfield has been "wondering" about the relation­
ship of brain and mind: that is what we are invited to 

Foreword · xxiii 
participate in here. It was Aristotle who said that philos­
ophy begins with "wonder." We are, therefore, at the 
tentatives of beginning, not the conclusive ending of a 
philosophy. 
What of the word "mystery"? Einstein is quoted: "The 
mystery of the world is its comprehensibility." So with the 
mind—we can comprehend the fact of the mystery for 
us. Or, since my old friend and companion of college 
days has referred to our working in the same class study­
ing Immanuel Kant, I recall now what Kant said about 
the reality of human freedom and the reality of moral 
obligation in a world of scientific fact, that this is some­
thing whose very incomprehensibility in scientific terms 
we can, today at least, understand. 

Introduction 
by William Feindel, M.D., D.PHIL., F.R.C.S.(C.) 
Perhaps at no previous time in the history of science has 
there been such widespread interest, as is now evident, in 
the brain and its function, and how that function relates 
to human behavior. For compelling and obvious reasons, 
this topic has always been foremost in the attention of 
neurologists, neurosurgeons, and psychiatrists. Over 
many years, as well, the study of the brain has attracted 
the talents of scientists trained in anatomy, physiology, 
pathology, and other biological disciplines. Increasing 
numbers of intellectual emigres, coming from such fields 
as mathematics, physics, chemistry, electronics, and com­
puter sciences, have recently added fresh impetus to our 
exciting researches in the neurosciences. 
It is almost a scientific cliche to say that the human 
brain is the most highly organized and complex structure 
in the universe. Made up of a dozen billion microscopic 
nerve-cell units interconnected by millions upon millions 
of conducting nerve-threads weaving incredibly intricate 
patterns, the brain, as an object of research, presents a 
defiant challenge to its own ingenuity. We have managed 
to work out some principles of how the brain works from 
careful studies of certain disorders that affect the nervous 
system in man. Among the most dramatic of these is 
epilepsy. The epileptic fit can produce movement, sensa­
tions, or changes in behavior, all quite uncontrollable by 
the patient: in so doing, it provides a caricature of how 
* Director, Montreal Neurological Institute; William Cone 
Professor of Neurosurgery, McGill University. 

Introduction ·χχν 
these local nerve-cell groups might operate normally. 
Thus, though we still seek the exact cause of epilepsy 
and the reason why certain nerve cells are suddenly 
thrown into this violent discharge, examination and treat­
ment of patients have led to a better understanding of 
the localization of function within the brain. 
But there is much to consider beyond the extensive 
experimental work on the brain and the study at the bed­
side of patients with disorders of the nervous system. To­
day, thoughtful men continue to debate the question, as 
they have over the centuries, "How is brain related to 
mind?" Every reader will know that loss of brain pro­
duces loss of mind. But, as Sir Charles Sherrington noted, 
"Mind, meaning by that thoughts, memory, feelings, 
reasoning, and so on, is difficult to bring into a class of 
physical things." 
Among the various groups of research workers and 
physicians concerned with the enormous task of exploring 
the "nerve-cell jungle" of the human brain, neurosur­
geons alone have the unusual opportunity and privilege 
of being able to observe directly the living brain, and to 
map out its responses to stimulation, in the course of 
bringing therapeutic relief to their patients. And for many 
reasons, Dr. Wilder Penfield's distinguished contributions 
to this special field have been recognized as unique by 
his neurosurgical and scientific colleagues. During his 
lifelong devotion to the care of patients with focal epi­
lepsy, he has catalogued a great body of information that 
has provided further insight for us into "the physiology 
of the mind."* He was able to do this from a substantial 
background of scientific preparation. As a student in the 
* This phrase, Dr. Penfield notes, was used in 1872 by John 
Hughlings Jackson, the British neurologist who introduced the 
concept of increasingly complex levels of function in the brain. 

xxvi · Introduction 
laboratory of Sir Charles Sherrington at Oxford, he had 
the chance to develop meticulous surgical technique and 
systematic recording of observations, which he further 
refined for use in the operating room and clinic. Sherring­
ton emphasized, on the one hand, the unity of the nerve 
cell and its individual processes and, on the other, the 
remarkable integration of these billions of units to give 
patterns of coordinated activity, such as the movements 
involved in balance, or gait, or gaze. Later, in his erudite 
Gifford Lectures, Sherrington brought together his physi­
ological and historical reflections on brain and mind, to 
which Dr. Penfield now refers. 
In another stage of scientific study, Dr. Penfield visited 
the Spanish histological school of Ramon y Cajal in Ma­
drid. Cajal was then the acknowledged "maestro" of the 
microscopic study of the brain. He also viewed the ner­
vous system, as did Sherrington, with the philosophic 
background of an expert neuroscientist. "As long as the 
brain is a mystery," Cajal once wrote, "the universe, the 
reflection of the structure of the brain, will also be a 
mystery." 
From Cajal and his brilliant pupil del Rio-Hortega, 
Dr. Penfield learned techniques to examine the micro­
scopic nature of brain scars, which are sometimes asso­
ciated with epilepsy. He further pursued this problem 
with Professor Otfried Foerster in Breslau, a neurologist 
turned neurosurgeon, and one of the few at that time who 
had persevered in the treatment of epilepsy by surgical 
removal of the brain scar. 
Then in 1934, Dr. Penfield and his associates at Mc-
Gill University established the Montreal Neurological In­
stitute. This combined the facilities of a special hospital 
for nervous diseases, with the resources of brain research 
laboratories. Here, over a period of some thirty or more 

Introduction -xxvii 
years of intense work, he directed scientific and surgical 
teams toward solutions of many unanswered questions 
about the brain, such as the mechanism of epilepsy, the 
learning of language, and how the brain remembers. 
One example of these investigations might be given 
here, since it is a key point in any discussion of mind and 
brain. In 1952, Dr. Penfield and I were working side by 
side in the operating room observing the responses of pa­
tients to gentle electrical current applied to the temporal 
lobe. We became aware that in some patients, it was pos­
sible to produce, artificially, a curious state of automa­
tism. During this, the patient became unaware, mouthed 
inappropriate comments—one patient was heard to say 
"time and space seem occupied"—made semi-purposeful 
movements, and, strangest of all, later had no memory of 
all this. We had come earlier to recognize, as did Hugh-
lings Jackson years before, that similar behavior was a 
hallmark of a particular kind of epileptic seizure. We 
were now able to identify that this could be initiated from 
a deep part of the temporal lobe, from an amazingly lo­
cal region, a small almond-shaped island of nerve cells, 
called the amygdala (from the Greek word for almond). 
It was evident that the nerve-cell discharge, set off by the 
stimulation, produced a train of complex events in the 
brain that seemed to isolate the patient's awareness and 
memory-recording from his motor and sensory activities. 
In fact, it seemed apparent that the patient had "lost his 
mind," in the real sense of the meaning of this ancient 
word.* 
It was something of a minor revelation to realize that 
applying so slight an electrical stimulus to such a local 
part of the brain, could result in this profound change in 
* In the English of Baeda and Chaucer, "mynd" had already 
taken on the sense of memory or remembering. 

xxviii · Introduction 
the patient's mental action. The immediate upshot was to 
indicate to us the importance of including in the surgical 
excision this small area affected by scar tissue, in order 
to eliminate the patient's seizures. This type of operation 
has now been done at the Institute in over 700 patients. 
Three out of four of these have returned to useful and 
happy lives, no longer under the threat of unpredictable 
epileptic attacks. And yet, removal of this trigger-area 
has not affected their minds—on the contrary, some pa­
tients, because their seizures stopped and their medicines 
could be reduced or eliminated, were found to function 
at a higher intellectual level as judged by detailed psycho­
logical tests. 
This present book brings to us a distillation of the sci­
entific writings of Dr. Penfield and his gradually evolving 
views of functional localization and interaction within 
the human brain. In addition, he has now moved on to a 
much deeper discussion of the brain-mind question. Phi­
losophers and, I have no doubt, neurosurgeons, will ad­
mire his intellectual courage in tackling this project. John 
Locke, after mulling over his essay concerning human 
understanding for several years shied away from this 
problem, writing in his introduction, "I shall not at 
present meddle with the physical considerations of the 
mind; or trouble myself to examine wherein its essence 
consists. . . ." The great psychologist, William James, in 
whose writings Dr. Penfield found considerable inspira­
tion, looked upon this difficulty of stating the connection 
between mind and brain as "the ultimate of ultimate 
problems." 
Dr. Penfield's present analysis derives from his accu­
mulation of direct observations on the human brain in 
conscious patients. In that important sense, it transcends 
significantly all earlier studies; either those of physiolo-

Introduction ·χχΐχ 
gists, who argued from a basis of experimental animal 
findings, or those of neurologists, psychologists, or psy­
chiatrists, whose views were related to interpretations of 
the external motor and emotional behavior of patients 
with focal brain disorders. Many readers will recognize 
that the research findings summarized here by Dr. Pen-
field are fundamental to our understanding of memory, 
learning, language, and behavior. As one of his final con­
clusions, Dr. Penfield supports the proposition that there 
is something that characterizes mind as distinct from 
physical brain. 
Many unsolved questions of the relation of brain and 
mind remain to be answered. As John Locke queried 300 
years ago—"How do we separate imagination and mad­
ness?" We ask it even more today. What is the brain ac­
tion that makes the distinction possible between these 
two aspects of mental behavior? What is the reason and 
the mechanism for the convincing kaleidoscopic activities 
of our dreams, which make nocturnal fools of all of us? 
How do we explain hypnosis, or the pain relief that some­
times comes with oriental acupuncture? What is the re­
lation of mind to our many varieties of religious experi­
ence? And what becomes, ultimately, of that vast array 
of experiences, thoughts, and ideas that are entombed in 
our brain's memory? 


The Mystery of the Mind 


1 · Sherringtonian Alternatives—Two 
Fundamental Elements or Only One? 
My professional career was shaped, I suppose, in the 
neurophysiological laboratory of Professor Sherrington at 
Oxford. Eventually it was continued in the wards and op­
erating rooms of the Montreal Neurological Institute. 
Other preoccupations were many and varied, but beneath 
them all was the sense of wonder and a profound curi­
osity about the mind. My planned objective, as I turned 
from studying the animal brain to that of man, was to 
come to understand the mechanisms of the human brain 
and to discover whether, and perhaps how, these mecha­
nisms account for what the mind does. 
My teacher, Sir Charles Sherrington, received the No­
bel Prize for his studies of reflexes and his analysis of the 
integrative action of the nervous system. His interest had 
been focused largely on the inborn reflexes, but, on retir­
ing from the Chair of Physiology at Oxford in 1935, at 
the age of seventy-eight, he turned from animal experi­
mentation to a scholarly and philosophical consideration 
of the brain and the mind of man.* 
In the end, he could only say that "we have to regard 
the relation of mind to brain as still not merely unsolved, 
but still devoid of a basis for its very beginning." In June 
1947, he wrote a foreword to his book, The Integrative 
Action of the Nervous System, which was then being re­
published in his honor by the Physiological Society.32 The 
* In 1937-1938, he delivered the Scottish Giflford Lectures, 
and published them in 1940 under the title Man—Ort His Na­
ture.31 (Thoughout the book, these superscript numerals refer 
to the numbered entries in the Bibliography, which follows the 
Afterthoughts.) 

4 · The Mystery of the Mind 
last paragraph of his foreword expresses his conclusion 
of it all: 
That our being should consist of two fundamental 
elements offers, I suppose, no greater inherent im­
probability than that it should rest on one only. 
It is a quarter of a century since Sherrington wrote 
these words. We have learned a good deal about man 
since then, and it is exciting to feel, as I do, that the time 
has come to look at his two hypotheses, his two "improb­
abilities." Either brain action explains the mind, or we 
must deal with two elements.* 
Perhaps we may take a step toward understanding, if 
we strive to fit each of the two hypotheses in turn to the 
physiological evidence that presents itself today. A good 
scientist is neither a monist nor a dualist while conducting 
his research. His chosen task is to explain everything he 
can by critical examination of nature and of the brain, 
and by planned experimentation. He will account, thus, 
for what he can about the universe and about man him­
self, having put his preconceptions out of mind. But he 
must stop to reconsider, too, and to rationalize from time 
to time. 
Lord Adrian, who shared the Nobel Prize with Sher­
rington, spoke as a neurophysiologist in 1966 when he 
said: "As soon as we let ourselves contemplate our own 
place in the picture, we seem to be stepping outside of the 
boundaries of natural science." I agree with him; never­
theless, we must step across that boundary from time to 
* Sherrington did not consider the third hypothesis, proposed 
by Bishop Berkley, that there was only one element, the mind, 
which explained all. The Berklian explanation assumed that 
matter had no existence except for its place in the mind. 

Sherringtonian Alternatives · 5 
time, and there is no reason to assume that critical judg­
ment does not go with us. 
Writing this book presents the author with a very ex­
citing challenge. Accepting this, I can only give an ac­
count of my own experience, describing it simply for the 
clinician, the physiologist, the philosopher, and the in­
terested layman, with apologies to each for the fact that 
I have not written for him separately. 
A remarkable body of material has come into my 
hands and I have stumbled on exciting discoveries. I did 
summarize the material and I recorded it during and at 
the close of my professional career. But I turned then with 
great enthusiasm to authorship of another sort, perhaps 
unwisely. Perhaps it is one's duty to do more than make 
a record. In answer, I may plead that I can see it all in 
more mature perspective after an interval, even in the 
seventh and eighth decades. Is it an eifort, if I may para­
phrase Hamlet, to lay a "flattering unction to my soul"? 
However that may be, as I turn back now to the ma­
terial and reconsider a life's experience, I seem to see 
more clearly and understand a little better. So, I shall give 
the reader a brief account of this pilgrim's progress. It is 
a story of stumbling upon unexpected revelations, of con­
sequent puzzlement and misconception, and of reaching 
higher ground to look out on thrilling new vistas of un­
derstanding. In the end I shall draw conclusions that are 
scientific, and present hypotheses that are obvious. After 
that, because these data are important in other disciplines 
of thought, I shall pass on to rationalization and a con­
sideration of man's being from the point of view of a 
layman, and, as far as I can understand it, the point of 
view of philosopher and even theologian. 
Can the brain explain the man? Can the brain achieve 
by neuronal action all that the mind accomplishes? The 

6 · The Mystery of the Mind 
evidence that a clinical physiologist can gather should 
help to answer these questions in the end. 
To see the problem of the nature of the mind more 
clearly, consider with me this universe of ours in long 
perspective. It was only after the middle millennia that 
life appeared—first in unicellular organisms, then gradu­
ally in more and more complicated forms, first in the sea 
and then on the land. It was a very recent event, as seen 
in this long perspective, when evidence appeared of the 
individual's self-awareness and purpose. Today man, with 
his amazing mind and his vastly complicated brain, seeks 
to understand the universe about him, and even the nature 
of life and of consciousness. 
Physiologists have thrown what light they could on 
these things from their study of mechanisms within the 
body and the brain in higher and lower living organisms. 
They have studied sensation and movement, reflex action, 
and memory and behavior. Karl Lashley7 spent thirty 
years of his industrious life striving to discover the nature 
of the "memory trace" in the animal brain, beginning 
with experimental investigations of the rat's brain and 
ending with the chimpanzee. He was hunting for the en-
gram, the record; that is to say: "the structural impres­
sion that psychical experience leaves on protoplasm." He 
failed to find it and ended by laughing cynically at his 
own effort and by pretending to question whether, after 
all, it was possible for animals or even man to learn at 
all. 
But consciousness and the relationship of mind to brain 
are problems difficult to study in animals. Clinical physi­
cians, on the other hand, in their approach to man, may 
hope with reason to push on toward an understanding of 
the physiology of memory and the physical basis of the 
mind and of consciousness. 

2 · To Consciousness the Brain Is Messenger 
Hippocrates, the Father of Scientific Medicine, began to 
teach in the fifth century B.C. on the little Greek island 
of Cos. In that time, philosophers such as Empedocles 
and Democritus were proclaiming each his own explana­
tion of the universe and the nature of man. Hippocrates 
defied what he called the "unproven hypotheses" of the 
philosophers, and declared that only the study and ob­
servation of nature and of man would point the way to 
truth. 
He studied man in health and in disease, making of 
medicine a science and an art. But he saw in man some­
thing beyond any discovery that can be made elsewhere 
in nature, and thus added a moral code, a religion of 
medical service. In the oath that he required of his dis­
ciples there were such phrases as this: "I will use treat­
ment to help the sick according to my ability and judg­
ment, but never with a view to injury or wrongdoing. . . . 
I will keep pure and holy both my life and my art." Thus, 
he recognized the moral and the spiritual as well as the 
physical and the material.6 
Hippocrates left behind him only a single discussion 
of the function of the brain and the nature of conscious­
ness. It was included in a lecture delivered to an audience 
of medical men on epilepsia, the affliction that we still 
call epilepsy. Here is an excerpt from this lecture, this 
amazing flash of understanding: "Some people say that 
the heart is the organ with which we think and that it 
feels pain and anxiety. But it is not so. Men ought to 
know that from the brain and from the brain only arise 
our pleasures, joys, laughter and tears. Through it, in par-

8 · The Mystery of the Mind 
ticular, we think, see, hear and distinguish the ugly from 
the beautiful, the bad from the good, the pleasant from 
the unpleasant. . . . To consciousness the brain is messen­
ger." And again, he said: "The brain is the interpreter of 
consciousness." In another part of his discussion he re­
marked, simply and accurately, that epilepsy comes from 
the brain "when it is not normal." 
Actually, his discussion constitutes the finest treatise 
on the brain and the mind that was to appear in medical 
literature until well after the discovery of electricity. It 
was the evidence of conduction of the brain's energy 
along the nerves of animals that led to the discovery of 
electricity itself. 
In retrospect, it is abundantly clear that Hippocrates 
came to his- conclusions by listening to epileptic patients 
when they told him their stories, and by watching them 
during epileptic seizures. The reader will come to under­
stand, in the pages that follow, that epilepsia still has se­
crets to reveal. She has much to teach us if we will only 
listen. 
Some of the notes that Hippocrates made after examin­
ing his patients were copied and recopied through the 
centuries. They are models of brevity and insight. Epilep­
tic patients of a certain type, not infrequently, re-live 
some previous experience in which they see, perhaps, and 
hear what they have seen and heard at an earlier time in 
their lives. Realizing, as Hippocrates did, that "epilepsy 
comes from the brain 'when it is not normal,' " he must 
have guessed the truth—that the engram of experience 
is a structured record within the brain.* 
* Although Hippocrates, because of his teaching, is to be con­
sidered the founder of biological science, his life and personality 
have been almost completely lost in the course of time. This led 
me, during the last five years of my career as an operating neuro-

To Consciousness the Brain Is Messenger·9 
It was the common understanding in those days that 
the soul, or consciousness, was located in the heart. For ex­
ample, four hundred years later, these familiar words ap­
peared in the Christian Gospel according to Luke: "Mary 
kept all these things and pondered them in her heart." 
When men did finally abandon the idea that thinking was 
carried out in the heart, and realized that the brain was 
the master organ, the words of Hippocrates had long been 
forgotten. Men thought that the brain acted somehow as 
a mysterious whole, sending out and receiving spirit mes­
sengers in accordance with the teaching of the physician 
Galen (A.D. 131-201). Long after Galen, came the dis­
covery of animal electricity by Galvani (A.D. 1791), 
which banished the spirit messengers forever. 
We know now that the brain does not act mysteriously, 
as a simple and uncomplicated whole. It has within it 
many partly separable mechanisms, each of them acti­
vated by the passage of electric currents along insulated 
surgeon, to devote many of the days or weeks or months, when 
I could be spared from clinical responsibility, to the writing of a 
historical novel about the man as he must have been. It grew into 
a fictional presentation. I hoped, thus, that I might bring to light 
the real hero. (The Torch, Little, Brown and Co., Boston, 1960; 
also George Harrap & Co., London, 1961.) It was translated into 
some other languages, and Mr. Guram Kveladze, Chief Editor 
of Sabchota Sakartvelo Publishing House, who translated it into 
Georgian, and published it in Georgia, wrote the following to me 
on April 5, 1968: "The interest of Georgian readers was greater 
because of the fact that Hippocrates had visited Georgia and 
given a description of Kolhidian tribes. So the Georgian reader 
met in this book a highly respected and widely known person­
age!" Since I have had no time to follow up this interesting ob­
servation and shall not have, perhaps some Georgian scholar, 
seeing my note, will inform his fellow physicians in the West, 
how it was that Hippocrates came to cross the Black Sea, and 
more about his visit to Georgia. 

10 · The Mystery of the Mind 
nerve fibers. I shall point out presently that there is a 
specific mechanism that must be active to make con­
sciousness and thought possible. 
Can I discuss this mechanism understandably if I leave 
behind the technical phrase and speak the language of 
the unspecialized but educated man? I dare say Benjamin 
Franklin, founder of the American Philosophical Society, 
explained in easily understood excitement to the first 
members of that society how it is that electricity passes 
down the wet string of a kite. I wish I had been there. 
Perhaps I would have understood the nature of this all-
important wonder called electricity. It seems to me that, 
somehow, it is like the mind in the sense that one cannot 
assign to the mind a position in space and yet it is easy 
to see what it does and where it does it.* 
* Hans Berger, the discoverer of electroencephalography, when 
he hoped (vainly) to record the activity of the mind electrically, 
may have had in mind this similarity. 

3 · Neuronal Action within the Brain 
Definitions are useful at the beginning of an essay—al­
though the text, in this case, will certainly show them to 
be inadequate. The mind (or spirit) is, to quote from 
Webster's Dictionary: "the element . . . in an individual 
that feels, perceives, thinks, wills, and especially reasons." 
The brain is the vastly complicated master organ with­
in the body that makes thought and consciousness pos­
sible. In its integrative and coordinating action, it re­
sembles in many ways an electrical computer. An 
individual brain-mechanism is a functional unit that plays 
a somewhat specialized role in the total integrative action 
of the brain. 
Each nerve cell, or neurone, is capable of developing 
its own electrical charge. Each has one branch called the 
axone, among its many branches. The axone carries a 
current of neuronal impulses outward, away from the cell, 
to other cells. The arriving impulses stimulate each target 
cell to flash the message onward, or they check activity 
in the target cell producing inhibition of cell activity. 
The cell bodies are collected together, forming islands, 
or blankets of gray matter. The branching connections 
form the white matter. This whole system vibrates, one 
might say, with an energy that is normally held in disci­
plined control, like that of a vast symphony orchestra, 
while millions of messages flash back and forth, to as 
many functional targets. 
However, when some abnormality presents itself within 
the skull, and becomes a chronic abnormality that irri­
tates the gray matter, it forms a focus of irritation and 
may cause a recurring disorderly explosion of energy in-

12 · The Mystery of the Mind 
volving many cells at once, like lightning from a minia­
ture thunder cloud. Each time this happens, an epileptic 
fit comes to some unfortunate victim. The attack varies 
in outward character according to the function of the 
gray matter in which the discharge takes place. If it oc­
curs in the cells of the gray matter that forms a part of 
one of the sensory circuits, a sensation is felt; if it occurs 
in cells of the motor system, movement follows. Epilepsy, 
which is the name for the tendency to these attacks, is as 
old as the history of man. Indeed, it is probably much 
older, since it attacks animals far more primitive than 
man. 
When the Montreal Neurological Institute opened its 
doors in 1934, we had available, at last, facilities for 
studying the human brain as well as for treating its disa­
bilities. I had learned to operate on epileptic patients like 
those who taught Hippocrates so much. In some cases, 
we could remove the cause or remove the altered portion 
of brain in which the epilepsy-producing discharge be­
gan. 
Our purpose, of course, was always to cure. And the 
patient, who remained awake and alert through long op­
erations, carried out in the hope of cure, did guide the 
surgeon's hand. More than that, the patient taught us 
much in the process.* 
* These operations could be done safely, and with a reason­
able chance of cure, only when the surface of one hemisphere 
of the brain was exposed widely for careful study and possible 
excision. There was less danger to life and a better chance to 
understand each patient's problem if consciousness could be 
preserved throughout the procedure. Local analgesic was there­
fore injected into the scalp to prevent pain, and no sedative or 
anesthetic was given. To be successful, as well as humane, it was 

Neuronal Action within the Brain · 13 
Since a gentle electric current interferes with the pa­
tient's use of a convolution of the brain and sometimes 
produces involuntary expression of its function, a stimu­
lating electrode could be used to map out the cortex and 
to identify the convolutions as the patient described his 
sensations and thoughts. Also, the electrode, if used with 
discretion, would sometimes reproduce the beginning of 
the patient's epileptic seizure and, thus, disclose the site 
of brain irritation. By talking to the patient and by listen­
ing to what came into his mind each time the electrode 
was applied to the cortex, we stumbled upon new knowl­
edge. If we removed convolutions as treatment for the 
fits, we learned about brain function in another way as 
soon as the nature of the patient's loss was determined 
after the operation. 
The observations to be presented in the following dis­
cussions, Chapters 4 through 9, have been published 
from time to time with the help of a succession of able 
associates in the Montreal Neurological Institute, not all 
of whom are named in the bibliography. 
essential for the surgeon to explain each step. Indeed, he must 
take time for talk before and during the operation. He must, in 
fact, be the patient's trusted friend. 

4 · Sensory and Voluntary-Motor Organization 
Here, then, is a brief outline of the sensory and motor 
mechanisms and of some of the inborn reflexes that play 
roles in the integrative action of the brain of man and 
other mammals. I hope it may serve as a preparation for 
some readers and a review or revision for others, before 
I pass on to the discussion of brain-mechanisms that are 
more closely related to the action of the mind. 
The brain-stem and the spinal cord provide man with 
inborn reflexes, as they do the other mammals. They 
regulate such things as muscle tone, maintenance of pos­
ture, mechanics of walking, temperature control and 
sleep-rhythm, breathing, and coughing (see Figure 1). 
The cerebral hemispheres that make up the telencepha­
lon, or new brain, grow out of the diencephalon, which 
may be called the higher brain-stem or old brain. The 
hemispheres increase in proportional size from the lower 
vertebrates on up to man. The inflow of nerve impulses 
carrying pain sensation, for example, passes inwards and 
upwards through the spinal cord and lower brain-stem to 
a nucleus of gray matter within the diencephalon. This is 
the target-gray matter for pain. Pain differs from other 
forms of sensation since it makes no detour to the cere­
bral cortex. But the other bundles of fibers carrying sen­
sory impulses that will be converted into discriminatory 
sensation make important detours. These streams provide 
information for appreciation of touch, position, vision, 
hearing, taste, and smell. Each stream comes to a first 
cellular interruption in the gray matter within the higher 
brain-stem, but continues on (with the possible excep­
tion of smell) in a detour out to a second cellular inter-

Sensory and Voluntary-Motor Organization · 15 
CEREBRAL 
CORTEX . 
Q-I 
HIGHER 
BRAIN < 
STEM ν 
INTER­
PRETIVE 
CORTEX 
LOWER 
BRAIN 
STEM ' 
FIGURE 1. Some Brain-Mechanisms. 
The cortex of the left hemisphere of the human brain is shown in 
stippled black, the brain-stem and spinal cord are shown in out­
line within. The principal direction of flow of electrical potentials 
to and from subdivisions of the cortical gray matter is indicated 
by the arrows in certain mechanisms as follows: Motor—from 
higher brain-stem to motor cortex and on down to motor cells in 
the lower brain-stem or spinal cord, producing voluntary move­
ment; Somatic Sensory—from eye, ear, body, and limbs upward 
to higher brain-stem, then in a detour out to somatic sensory 
convolution and back to higher brain-stem; Visual Sensory— 
from retina through brain-stem (optic thalamus) to visual sen­
sory convolutions of the cortex and back to brain-stem; Audi­
tory—from inner ear through brain-stem (medial geniculate 
body) to Heschl's auditory convolutions and back to the higher 
brain-stem; Speech—from higher brain-stem to speech cortex 
and back again; Prefrontal—from higher brain-stem to prefrontal 
cortex and back; Interpretive—the arrow indicates one part of a 
circuit yet to be fully demonstrated. This part, as proven by 
electrode stimulation of interpretive cortex, activates gray matter 
apparently located in the higher brain-stem. The result is a "flash­
back" from the record of past experience. 
In general, the cerebral cortex seems to play a role in the 
elaboration of function in each mechanism. The higher brain­
stem initiates activity in the mechanism or receives the flow of 
electrical potentials for further integrative action. 

16 · The Mystery of the Mind 
ruption in the gray matter of the cerebral cortex. From 
there it returns directly to the target-nucleus of cells with­
in the gray matter of the higher brain-stem. 
Man's auditory cortex (Heschl's gyrus within the fis­
sure of Sylvius, as shown in Figures 1 and 8) is com­
mitted to serve the purposes of auditory sensation. The 
stream of neuronal information from the ear comes to 
the higher brain-stem and detours out to Heschl's gyrus. 
After a cellular junction in the gray matter of that con­
volution, it flows back into the higher brain-stem. The 
same is true of the visual sensory cortex, as can be seen 
in Figure 1. It is a way station between the eye and higher 
brain-stem. 
In this brief outline of the afferent sensory circuits, I 
have made no reference to the reticular formation de­
scribed in the brain-stem by Moruzzi and Magoun. Time 
will doubtless show the functional importance of this 
system during centrencephalic integration.8·9 
Recent studies show that each sensory input, whether 
auditory or visual, or from the great somatic sensory 
systems of the body, gives off collateral branches on its 
way to the thalamus, the uppermost nucleus in the brain­
stem. These collaterals feed into the reticular formation 
of the brain-stem. This may well give the reticular forma­
tion a means of inhibiting or reinforcing incoming sen­
sory messages in relation to the thalamic or cortical re­
ception of those messages. 
This is all part of the centrencephalic system of func­
tional integration that makes possible sensory-motor re­
action, as well as conscious reaction and planned action. 
In general, it is clear that all sensory data that could 
inform the individual about his environment are con­
ducted by afferent streams of electrical potentials to gray 
matter of the higher brain-stem, directly or indirectly. 

Sensory and Voluntary-Motor Organization · 17 
The word afferent means a carrying toward an objective. 
Efferent is to carry away from a source. When consider­
ing the functional organization of the brain, afferent sug­
gests movement toward gray matter in the higher brain­
stem. 
On the other hand, the stream of nerve impulses that 
controls voluntary activity is efferent. It passes from gray 
matter in the higher brain-stem outward, making its own 
detour out to the motor convolutions of the cerebral cor­
tex. After a cellular break there, it passes directly back 
to the lower brain-stem and spinal cord for a final cellular 
break before it reaches the muscles. This motor outflow 
directs activity that may be planned or voluntary. 
The sensory and the motor convolutions in man and 
other mammals are committed as to function at birth. 
The hippocampal zone (see Figure 8), on the undersur-
face of each temporal lobe, is likewise committed to its 
function. It plays a certain role in scanning the record of 
past experience and in memory recall. On the other hand, 
some of the convolutions that are used eventually for 
what may be called psychical functions are uncommitted 
to their exact function at the time of birth as well, as will 
be explained presently. 

5 · The Indispensable Substratum of 
Consciousness 
Gradually it became quite clear in neurosurgical experi­
ence, that even large removals of the cerebral cortex 
could be carried out without abolishing consciousness. 
On the other hand, injury or interference with function 
in the higher brain-stem, even in small areas, would 
abolish consciousness completely. 
An invitation to give the Harvey Lecture at the New 
York Academy of Medicine caused me to review and re­
consider functional localization in 1938.14 In summary, 
this was the conclusion: 
There is much evidence of a level of integration 
within the central nervous system that is (functionally) 
higher than that to be found in the cerebral cortex, 
evidence of a regional localization of the neuronal 
mechanism involved in integration, i suggest that this 
region lies not in the new brain (the cortex) but in the 
old (the brain-stem). 
And again this: "The indispensable substratum of con­
sciousness lies outside the cerebral cortex, probably in the 
diencephalon (the higher brain-stem)." The realization 
that the cerebral cortex, instead of being the "top," the 
"highest level" of integration, was an elaboration level, 
divided sharply into areas for distinct functions (sensory, 
motor, or psychical), came to me like a bracing wind. It 
blew the clouds away and I saw certain brain-mecha­
nisms begin to emerge more clearly, and they included 
those of the mind.15·16 

The Substratum of Consciousness · 19 
Somewhat later I realized that man has convolutions 
that are new from the point of view of evolution, and not 
committed to motor or sensory function. They are to be 
programmed as to function after birth. As compared with 
other mammals, man has a very considerable enlargement 
of the cerebral hemispheres in two major areas: a) pre­
frontal, and b) temporal, as shown in Figure 2. Both ad­
ditions have to do with what one may call the transac­
tions of the mind. 
a) One may surmise something about the function of 
the first-mentioned addition if it is stated that a major re­
moval of the anterior portion of the frontal lobe results 
in a defect in the patient's "capacity for planned initia­
tive" (Penfield and Evans,23 1940). 
b) The second addition enlarges man's temporal 
lobes. New convolutions appear there between the audi­
tory sensory-cortex and the visual sensory-cortex, crowd­
ing those two sensory areas right off the surface in each 
hemisphere and into the depth of the fissures, and form­
ing a temporal pole in front and below. 
When a child is born, the new convolutions of the 
temporal lobe are uncommitted and unconditioned as 
far as function is concerned. During the initial learn­
ing period of childhood, some of these convolutions will 
be programmed for speech on one side or the other, usu­
ally the left side in right-handed individuals. The rest of 
them will be devoted to interpretation of present experi­
ence in the light of past experience. This we have labeled 
the interpretive cortex. These new areas of cerebral cor­
tex, both frontal and temporal, are employed in the 
mechanisms of mind-action after the early period of what 
may be called conditioning or programming. This is ex­
plained in the next chapters. 

20 · The Mystery of the Mind 
SB 
E. Chimpanzee 
B. Ground shrew 
C. Tree shrew 
F. Man 
1¾¾) Motor 
|TT| Auditory 
Somotic Sensory 
FIGURE 2. Uncommitted Cortex. 
Olfoctory 
J Visual 
I 
I Uncommited Cortex 
Functional diagrams of the cerebral cortex of some mammals. 
The blank areas suggest the approximate extent of gray matter 
that is not committed to motor or sensory function at birth. In 
man, for example, the auditory sensory-cortex has really been 
crowded off the external surface of the brain into the fissure of 
Sylvius. For this figure, I am indebted to the late Stanley Cobb. 
D. Tarsius 

6 · The Stream of Consciousness Electrically 
Reactivated 
In the course of surgical treatment of patients suffering 
from temporal lobe seizures (epileptic seizures that are 
caused by a discharge that originates in that lobe), we 
stumbled upon the fact that electrical stimulation of the 
interpretive areas of the cortex occasionally produces 
what Hughlings Jackson had called "dreamy states," or 
"psychical seizures" (Jackson3·4). Sometimes the patient 
informed us that we had produced one of his "dreamy 
states" and we accepted this as evidence that we were 
close to the cause of his seizures.* It was evident at once 
that these were not dreams. They were electrical activa­
tions of the sequential record of consciousness, a record 
that had been laid down during the patient's earlier ex­
perience. The patient "re-lived" all that he had been 
aware of in that earlier period of time as in a moving-
picture "flashback." 
On the first occasion, when one of these "flashbacks" 
was reported to me by a conscious patient (1933), I was 
incredulous. On each subsequent occasion, I marvelled. 
For example, when a mother told me she was suddenly 
aware, as my electrode touched the cortex, of being in 
her kitchen listening to the voice of her little boy who 
* Electrical exploration was a particularly helpful guide to our 
surgical procedures before the development of electroenceph­
alography and electrocorticography. Herbert Jasper came to the 
Montreal Neurological Institute in 1935, bringing with him this 
new electrographic technique and his invaluable neurophysio-
logical collaboration. This constructive cooperation was to result 
in a book, Epilepsy and the Functional Anatomy of the Human 
Brain, in 1954.25 

22 · The Mystery of the Mind 
was playing outside in the yard. She was aware of the 
neighborhood noises, such as passing motor cars, that 
might mean danger to him. 
A young man stated he was sitting at a baseball game 
in a small town and watching a little boy crawl under the 
fence to join the audience. Another was in a concert hall 
listening to music. "An orchestration," he explained. He 
could hear the different instruments. All these were un­
important events, but recalled with complete detail. 
D.F. could hear instruments playing a melody. I re-
stimulated the same point thirty times (!) trying to mis­
lead her, and dictated each response to a stenographer. 
Each time I re-stimulated, she heard the melody again. 
It began at the same place and went on from chorus to 
verse. When she hummed an accompaniment to the mu­
sic, the tempo was what would have been expected. 
In other cases, different "flashbacks" might be pro­
duced from successive stimulations of the same point. 
Perhaps it may add realism if I describe here one illus­
trative case briefly, although it has been published al­
ready.18 For the sake of those who are not clinicians, I 
shall even include a photograph of the patient in position 
for operation. 
M.M., a young woman of twenty-six (Figure 3), had 
minor attacks that began with a sense of familiarity fol­
lowed by a sense of fear and then by "a little dream" of 
some previous experience. When the right hemisphere 
was exposed at operation, as shown in Figure 4, I ex­
plored the cerebral cortex with an electrode, placing 
numbered squares of paper on the surface of the brain 
to show the position each time a positive response was 
obtained. At point 2 she felt a tingling in the left thumb; 
at point 3, tingling in the left side of the tongue; at 7 
there was movement of the tongue. It was clear then that 

Reactivation of Consciousness · 23 
FIGURE 3. Case MM. 
The patient is lying on the operating table. A local analgesic has 
been injected into the scalp and the incision has been marked out 
by scratches on the skin. See Bibliography.19 
This photograph is introduced to remind the reader that al­
though surgeon and patient are hidden from each other by a 
sterile sheet during operation, they are near each other. Sympa­
thy and mutual understanding have helped these patients to dis­
cuss their thoughts and feelings freely during electrical stimula­
tion of the brain and removal of scarred convolutions. Although 
the brain is not sensitive in itself, and cannot give rise to pain, 
the operations are sometimes long and dangerous and very tiring. 
The intelligent interest and accurate reporting of these invariably 
gallant friends has contributed greatly to this study of the physi­
ology of the mind. 

24 · The Mystery of the Mind 
FIGURE 4. Case MM. 
Right hemisphere exposed. The numbered tickets mark points 
where there were responses to the surgeon's stimulating electrode. 
3 had been placed on the somatic sensory convolution 
and 7 on the motor convolution (Figure 5). It is now 
obvious that 11 marks the first temporal convolution be­
low the fissure of Sylvius. My postoperative sketch, seen 
in Figure 5, shows the position of all the stimulation 
points that gave rise to positive responses. The stimulating 
current was increased from two to three volts. The suc­
ceeding responses from the temporal lobe were "psychi­
cal" instead of sensory or motor. They were activations 
of the stream of consciousness from the past as follows: 
11—"I heard something, I do not know what it was." 
11—(repeated without warning) "Yes, Sir, I think I 
heard a mother calling her little boy somewhere. It 
seemed to be something that happened years ago." 
When asked to explain, she said, "It was somebody in 

Reactivation of Consciousness · 25 
Case. HM. 
FIGURE 5. Case MM. 
Diagram of the operative field and the points of positive response. 
The broken line shows the extent of removal of the temporal lobe 
in treatment of the focal epilepsy. Shading indicates the area of 
sclerosis and atrophy due, in all probability, to pressure upon the 
brain at the time of birth. 
the neighborhood where I live." Then she added that 
she herself "was somewhere close enough to hear," 
12—"Yes. I heard voices down along the river 
somewhere—a man's voice and a woman's voice 
calling . . . I think I saw the river." 
15—"Just a tiny flash of a feeling of familiarity and 
a feeling that I knew everything that was going to 
happen in the near future." 
17c—(a needle insulated except at the tip was 

26 · The Mystery of the Mind 
From 
somatic motor cortex-
distant-activation of 
\ \ 
RIGHT HAND MOVEMENT W 
From 
somatic sensory cortex— 
distant-activation of 
RIGHT HAND SENSATION 
From 
interpretative cortex-
distant-activation of 
STREAM 
of 
CONSCIOUSNESS 
speech cortex 
interference & 
APHASIA 
Temporal lobe 
Spinal cord 
From 
visual sensory cortex-
distant-activation of 
LIGHT SENSATION 
FIGURE 6. Activation of the Brain's Record of Consciousness and 
Some Other Results of Stimulation. 
The left hemisphere of the brain is outlined, with the brain-stem 
and spinal cord shown beneath, to illustrate the results of elec­
trode stimulation of the cortex in motor, sensory, and what may 
be called psychical areas for the recall of past experience. The 
dotted zone about each stimulating electrode tip (unipolar) 
suggests the area of interference in which local cortical elabora-
tive action is arrested by electrical interference. In addition to 
this interference, a positive response is described from each of 
these electrodes, except the one on the area where speech is lo­
calized. Stimulation of the speech cortex produces only inter­
ference aphasia. The positive responses, on the other hand, are 
caused by normal axonal conduction from cells near the electrode 
to a distant but functionally related area of gray matter. Thus, 
the active response is a physiological activation of that distant 
gray matter. In the case of stimulation of the interpretive cortex, 
it is the sequential record of successive conscious states from the 
past that is activated. In the case of motor cortex the target of 
activation is gray matter in lower brain-stem or spinal cord. In 
the case of sensory areas the target is in the higher brain-stem. 

Reactivation of Consciousness · 27 
inserted to the superior surface of the temporal lobe, 
deep in the fissure of Sylvius, and the current was 
switched on) "Oh! I had the same very, very familiar 
memory, in an office somewhere. I could see the desks. 
I was there and someone was calling to me, a man 
leaning on a desk with a pencil in his hand." 
I warned her I was going to stimulate, but I did not 
do so. "Nothing." 
18a—(stimulation without warning) "I had a little 
memory—a scene in a play—they were talking and 
I could see it—I was just seeing it in my memory." 
I was more astonished, each time my electrode brought 
forth such a response. How could it be? This had to do 
with the mind! I called such responses "experiential" 
and waited for more evidence. Meanwhile, through the 
early years, we were very busy charting out the sensory, 
the motor, and the speech areas of the human cortex.29·30* 
* The first of the books referred to, The Cerebral Cortex of 
Man,29 published in 1950, was the result of a collaborative re­
view of all our evidence in the Montreal Neurological Institute 
up to that date drawn, for the most part, from mapping studies 
of the cortex with a stimulating electrode. The evidence was 
amplified by careful excisions of convolutions in the treatment 
of epilepsy. Theodore Rasmussen, as Director of the Montreal 
Neurological Institute, continued these studies of the sensory and 
motor cortex and continues to do so now that he has- retired 
as Director in favor of William Feindel. 
In the production of the book Speech and Brain-Mechanisms30 
in 1959, my collaboration with Lamar Roberts continued over a 
ten-year period. It showed that in the adult the speech mechanism 
consists in three cortical areas (temporal, inferior frontal and 
mid-frontal), coordinated by one gray matter center in a thalamic 
nucleus of the higher brain-stem. Integration of this amazingly 
well-localized speech mechanism, with the highest brain-mecha­
nism and the automatic sensory and motor mechanism, as will be 
shown in subsequent chapters, is carried out by a centrencephalic 
coordinating system. 

7 · Physiological Interpretation of an Epileptic 
Seizure 
In 1958, after I had accumulated considerable clinical 
experience, I reconsidered critically the physiology in­
volved in the electrical exploration of the human brain. 
This was reported in the Sherrington Lecture.181 realized 
that when an electrode passes a current into the cerebral 
cortex, the current interferes completely with the patient's 
normal use of that area of gray matter. In some areas, 
there is no evidence of any further effect. For example, as 
shown in Figure 6, an electrode on one of the three 
areas of speech cortex causes aphasia. But, in other areas, 
as explained in Table I, stimulation gives a positive re-
POSITIVE RESPONSES to EPILEPTIC DISCHARGE or ELECTRICAL STIMULATION of CEREBRAL CORTEX 
Electrode 
AUTOMATIC 
RECALL 
PERCEPTION 
MOVEMENT 
SENSATION 
MEDULLA or 
SPINAL CORD 
MOTOR 
AREAS 
SENSORY AREAS 
(somatic, visual, 
auditory, etc.) 
Higher 
BRAIN STEM 
SECONDARY 
; 
GANGLIONIC ,4 
STATION 
CEREBRAL 
< 
CORTEX 
MECHANISM of 
INTERPRETATION 
either 
INTERPRETIVE AREAS 
MECHANISM Of 
RECALL 
TABLE I. Positive Responses. 
Electrical stimulation (or epileptic discharge) interferes with 
function of gray matter locally. It produces an active response 
only when the electrode is applied to an area of cerebral cortex 
from which axonal conduction along a functional tract normally 
activates some distant ganglionic station. Cortical responses are 
of four types: muscular movement, sensation, interpretive per­
ception, and recall of conscious experience. 

Interpretation of an Epileptic Seizure ·29 
sponse as well. Such positive responses are produced not 
by activation of the local gray matter near the electrode, 
but by neuronal conduction along insulated axones to a 
distant area of gray matter that is beyond the interfering 
influence of the electrode's current. 
Let me repeat: The activation is of the distant gray 
matter. See in Figure 6 stimulations of motor cortex, also, 
somatic sensory-cortex and visual sensory-cortex. There 
is always interference in the normal use of the local gray 
matter. If there is also a positive response, it is due to 
functional activation of distant gray matter. Consequent­
ly, when the electrode is applied to the hand area of the 
motor cortex, the delicate movements of the hand, which 
the cortex makes possible, are paralyzed, but the second­
ary station of gray matter in the spinal cord is activated, 
and crude movements, such as clutching, movements of 
which an infant is capable, are carried out. 
In clinical epilepsy, the spontaneous discharge occurs, 
in the great majority of cases, either in the gray matter of 
the cortex or in the gray nuclei of the higher brain-stem. 
It never occurs in white matter. If it occurs in a so-called 
silent area of the cortex, there may be no manifestation 
of it unless an electroencephalogram is being taken. 
In any fit, focal discharge begins in some local region 
of gray matter. If a positive manifestation occurs, it is 
produced, as in the case of electrical stimulation (see 
Table I), by axone-conduction to a distance. It is due, 
then, to neuronal activation of some distant secondary 
ganglionic station (see Figure 6). An epileptic discharge 
continues until the discharging local neurones are ex­
hausted. The secondary distant response, which it pro­
duced, also stops then, but the local paralytic interference 
in the primary area of discharge continues after the dis­
charge is over until there is recovery from the cell ex-

30 · The Mystery of the Mind 
haustion. The distant response, if any, is a physiological 
phenomenon and stops, as I have said, as soon as axonal 
conduction to it stops. 
There is always a danger, in electrical exploration, that 
stimulation by the electrode may bring to the cortex a 
current that is too strong. The local gray matter then goes 
into epileptic discharge. When the electrode is withdrawn 
there is an after-discharge and a local seizure. There is 
also added danger then that axonal conduction from the 
local gray to some distant gray matter may have increased 
enough to become a bombardment, and so produce a 
secondary epileptic explosion. 
Spread of the local discharge in any fit may occur in 
one of two ways: (1) by a "Jacksonian march" into con­
tiguous gray matter, or (2) at a distance (as just ex­
plained) by neuronal conduction to a functionally related 
area of gray matter. Spread of discharge, and, thus, of 
the epileptic fit, occurs when that conduction turns into 
a too violent bombardment. The physiological activation 
of the distant gray matter is then replaced by discharge in 
that distant area. That causes a new local functional in­
terference at a distance instead of activation.* 
* If this is a true statement of the physiological principles in­
volved in epileptic seizures, and I believe it is, it calls for the 
thoughtful attention of clinicians and electroencephalographers. 

8 · An Early Conception of Memory 
Mechanisms — And a Late Conclusion 
This late understanding of the physiology of electrical 
stimulation, and of the pattern of neuronal discharge in 
an epileptic seizure, led at once to a clearer understand­
ing of what is taking place in each experiential response 
to electrical stimulation. It called for a reconsideration of 
the "flashbacks." Consequently, after the close of my own 
career as an operating neurosurgeon in 1960, we recon­
sidered and published every detail of the experiential re­
sponses so others might judge their meaning for them­
selves. These were presented by Penfield in the Lister 
Oration, Royal College of Surgeons, in 1961, and pub­
lished in full with Phanor Perot in 1963.28 
There were 1,132 patients for us to reconsider. The 
brain of each had been explored under local anesthesia 
in the course of an operation for radical treatment of 
epilepsy. In 520, the temporal lobe was exposed and ex­
plored. The experiential responses came only from the 
temporal lobe, never from any other part of the brain. Of 
the temporal explorations 40, or 7.7 percent, gave ex­
periential responses; 53 patients, or 10 percent, had com­
plained of dreamlike attacks, in which past memories 
eame to mind, before operation. 
In 1951,16 I had proposed that certain parts of the 
temporal cortex should be called "memory cortex," and 
suggested that the neuronal record was located there in 
the cortex near the points at which the stimulating elec­
trode may call forth an experiential response. This was 
a mistake, as shown clearly in 1958 during my Sherring­
ton Lecture.18 The record is not in the cortex. Neverthe-

32 · The Mystery of the Mind 
less, the initial hypothesis proposed at that time is still 
tenable: "It is tempting to believe," I wrote, "that a 
synaptic facilitation is established by each original ex­
perience." If so, that permanent facilitation could guide 
a subsequent stream of neuronal impulses activated by 
the electric current of the electrode even years later. 
Since then, as I have already pointed out, we have 
come to call the "memory cortex" by another name—the 
"interpretive cortex." Its boundaries and those of the 
major speech area may be seen in Figures 7 and 8. And 
today, we realize that stimulation of the interpretive cor­
tex activates a record located at a distance from that 
FRol. 
Auditory 
y^^T\/sensory 
' O/("Ν· / 
/ \ 
F caic. 
LEFT 
• £# \ 
RIGHT 
FIGURE 7. Interpretive Cortex and Speech Cortex (see also Figure 8). 
Lateral surfaces of the posterior parts of both hemispheres of a 
human adult. On the dominant, or speech side, interference 
aphasia is produced by stimulating in the area marked speech. 
Both experiential and interpretive responses are produced by 
stimulating in the interpretive cortex. The area marked space 
orientation on the non-dominant side (right) was outlined by 
study of the results of cortical excision. Complete removal of this 
area produced permanent spatial disorientation without aphasia.* 
* This figure is from Penfield.22 For evidence in regard to the 
frontiers of the temporal speech area (Wernicke), and also for 
that on space orientation, see Penfield and Roberts.30 For the 
localization of the interpretive cortex, see Penfield.19 

Memory Mechanisms • 33 
cortex, in a secondary center of gray matter. Putting this 
together with other evidence makes it altogether likely 
that the activated gray matter is in the diencephalon 
(higher brain-stem), as I shall describe below. 
Central fissure (Rolando) 
^Sensory 
Voluntary motoi 
Choroid 
' plexus 
•Hippocampal gyrus 
•Fimbria 
TEMPORAL LOBE SUPERIOR and MESIAL SURFACES 
Amygdaloid 
nucleus 
Brain stem-
Left cerebral hemisphere. The temporal lobe was dissected free 
at autopsy by opening the fissure of Sylvius. It was then cut across 
and turned down. Note that the hidden audiosensory gyrus of 
Heschl is seen to be bounded by speech cortex posteriorly and 
interpretive cortex anteriorly. (This drawing, like most of the 
preceding ones, was made by Miss Eleanor Sweezey.) 

9 · The Interpretive Cortex 
Let me marshal and reconsider the evidence now pre­
sented to us by epilepsy and the electrode, after which 
we may go on to a consideration of the relationship of 
mind to brain, in Chapters 10 to 16.* 
Two related mechanisms are revealed by stimulation 
of the interpretive cortex (Figures 7 and 8). Each of 
them was activated in Case M.M. above: 
(a) There is a brain mechanism, the function of which 
is to send neuronal signals that interpret the relationship 
of the individual to his immediate environment. The ac­
tion is automatic and subconscious, but the signal ap­
pears in consciousness. Such signals as this: these things 
are "familiar" or "frightening." They are "coming near­
er" or "going away," and so on.10·19 
(b) Secondly, there is another, related, brain mecha­
nism that is revealed in experiential responses like those 
described in the case of M.M. (Chapter 6) and the oth­
ers. The mechanism is capable of bringing back a strip 
of past experience in complete detail without any of the 
fanciful elaborations that occur in a man's dreaming.19·28 
In ordinary life, the automatic signal that informs one 
that present experience is familiar comes to all of us, I 
suppose. If it is accurate, and it usually is, one must be 
* I began to do this in a chapter of the book entitled Basic 
Mechanisms of the Epilepsies (edited by my former associates, 
Herbert Jasper, Arthur Ward, and Alfred Pope).22 It led me to 
a discussion of a specific mechanism for the mind. I shall now 
push the argument through to a conclusion. 

The Interpretive Cortex ·35 
using an automatic mechanism that can scan a record of 
the past, a record that has not faded but seems to remain 
as vivid as when the record was made.* 
The gray matter of the interpretive-cortex is part of a 
mechanism that presents interpretations of present ex­
perience to consciousness. In a sense, it would seem that 
the interpretive-cortex does for perception of non-verbal 
concepts what the speech-cortex and the speech-mecha-
nism do for speech. The localization of areas devoted to 
speech is reasonably clear. Although much work has yet 
to be done on the recognition of non-verbal concepts, I 
shall refer to the mechanism now as the non-verbal con­
cept mechanism. These mechanisms, the one verbal and 
the other non-verbal, form a remarkable memory file to 
be opened either by a conscious call or by an automatic 
one.18'19'20 
There is much more to be said about the temporal 
lobes and memory when time permits. That mysterious 
doubled structure, the hippocampus, may well have much 
to do with memory of smell in some lower mammals, but 
in man, it is concerned with memory of other things. It 
can be removed on one side with impunity when the re­
maining hippocampus is functioning normally. But, if it 
is removed on both sides, the ability to reactivate the 
record of the stream of consciousness, voluntarily or 
* Although the great majority of experiences thus recalled 
has been strongly visual or strongly auditory, or both, the per­
ception of familiarity is not limited to auditory or visual experi­
ence at all, but apparently applies to all that enters consciousness. 
A person seen may be labeled as "seen before" (deja vu), a bar 
of music as "heard before," a sequence of events as "happened 
before." 

36 · The Mystery of the Mind 
automatically, is lost. The hippocampi seem to store 
keys-of-access to the record of the stream of conscious­
ness. With the interpretive cortex, they make possible the 
scanning and the recall of experiential memory. See Pen-
field and Mathieson.27 

10 · An Automatic Sensory-Motor Mechanism 
And now there opens before us an exciting vista in 
which the automatic mechanisms of the brain interact 
with, and may be separated from, the brain's machinery-
for-the-mind. 
As I have pointed out, epileptic discharge may, and 
frequently does, confine itself selectively to one function­
al system, one functional mechanism within the brain. 
When it does so, it paralyzes that mechanism for any 
normal function. If the function of gray matter is highly 
complicated and only partially automatic, such as in the 
speech area of the human cerebral cortex, the epileptic 
discharge in it produces nothing more than paralytic 
silence, e.g., aphasia. 
And so it is that the mechanism in the higher brain­
stem, whose action is indispensable to the very existence 
of consciousness, can be put out of action selectively! 
This converts the individual into a mindless automaton. 
It happens when epileptic discharge occurs in gray matter 
that forms an integral part of that mechanism. The tenta­
tive localization of that gray matter is shown in Figure 9. 
If the discharge occurs there, primarily, the patient's at­
tack is called petit mal automatism. But as I have already 
pointed out, the temporal cortex and the prefrontal cor­
tex have much to do with the transactions of the mind, 
and a seizure discharge, which begins locally in tem­
poral cortex or in the anterior frontal cortex, may spread 
by violent distant bombardment to this gray matter in the 
higher brain-stem and, thus, produce an attack of autom-

CENTRAL GRAY MATTER 
of 
HIGHEST BRAIN-MECHANISM 
Midbrain 
PONS 
Acoustic n. 
Medulla ^ 
oblongata 
Thalamus & 
basal ganglia 
HIGHER 
BRAIN < 
STEM 
Lateral & medial 
geniculate bodies 
Pulvinar 
> 
LOWER 
BRAIN < 
STEM 
Superior & inferior 
colliculi 
Brachium pontis 
Spinal cord 
FIGURE 9. The Highest Brain-Mechanism. 
The site of the central gray matter of this brain-mechanism, the 
normal action of which constitutes the physical basis of the mind, 
is shown by the dotted lines. The question marks indicate only 
that the detailed anatomical circuits involved are yet to be es­
tablished, not that there is any doubt about the general position 
of this area in which cellular inactivation produces unconscious­
ness. Such inactivation may be brought about variously by pres­
sure, trauma, hemorrhage, and local epileptic discharge; it oc­
curs normally in sleep. (Drawing by Eleanor Sweezey.) 
atism that differs little in character from that of petit 
mal* 
These attacks of epileptic automatism show clearly 
* The direct connections of the higher brain-stem with these 
two areas of cerebral cortex (prefrontal and interpretive cortex) 
are indicated in Figure 1. This direct connection is with the gray 
matter of the mind's mechanism, not with the automatic sensory-
motor mechanism, as will be pointed out. Anatomical verification 
of this important direct relationship is to be found in the recent 
studies of WalLe Nauta.12 

An Automatic Sensory-Motor Mechanism ·39 
the automatic, complex performance of which man's 
computer is capable. In an attack of automatism the pa­
tient becomes suddenly unconscious, but, since other 
mechanisms in the brain continue to function, he changes 
into an automaton. He may wander about, confused and 
aimless. Or he may continue to carry out whatever 
purpose his mind was in the act of handing on to his 
automatic sensory-motor mechanism when the highest 
brain-mechanism went out of action. Or he follows a 
stereotyped, habitual pattern of behavior. In every case, 
however, the automaton can make few, if any, decisions 
for which there has been no precedent. He makes no 
record of a stream of consciousness. Thus, he will have 
complete amnesia for the period of epileptic discharge 
and during the period of cellular exhaustion that follows. 
Patients are quite unable to predict when these ab­
sences of the mind will come. I shall cite a few examples. 
One patient, whom I shall call A., was a serious student 
of the piano and subject to automatisms of the type called 
petit mal. He was apt to make a slight interruption in his 
practicing, which his mother recognized as the beginning 
of an "absence." Then he would continue to play for a 
time with considerable dexterity. Patient B. was subject 
to epileptic automatism that began with discharge in the 
temporal lobe. Sometimes the attack came on him while 
walking home from work. He would continue to walk 
and to thread his way through busy streets on his way 
home. He might realize later that he had had an attack be­
cause there was a blank in his memory for a part of the 
journey, as from Avenue X to Street Y. If Patient c. was 
driving a car, he would continue to drive, although he 
might discover later that he had driven through one or 
more red lights. 
In general, if new decisions are to be made, the autom-

40 · The Mystery of the Mind 
aton cannot make them. In such a circumstance, he 
may become completely unreasonable and uncontrollable 
and even dangerous. 
The behavior of these temporary automatons throws a 
brilliant light then, on a second mechanism, clearly dis­
tinguishable from the one that serves the mind. It is the 
automatic sensory-motor mechanism. It, too, has cen­
trally placed gray matter in the higher brain-stem where 
it must have a close functional interrelationship with the 
mechanism for the mind. The sensory-motor mechanism 
has its primary localization in the higher brain-stem (see 
Figure 10), but the mechanism has, quite obviously, a 
direct relationship to the sensory and motor portions of 
the cerebral cortex in both hemispheres. Thus, there are 
two brain mechanisms that have strategically placed 
gray matter in the diencephalon or brain-stem, viz.: (a) 
the mind's mechanism (or highest brain-mechanism); 
and (b) the computer (or automatic sensory-motor mech­
anism) . 
When an epileptic discharge occurs in the cerebral 
cortex in any of the sensory or motor areas, and if it 
spreads by bombardment to the higher brain-stem, the 
result is invariably a major convulsive attack, never, in 
our experience, an attack of automatism. On the other 
hand, as mentioned above, a local discharge in prefrontal 
or temporal cortex may develop into automatism.* This 
is a matter of considerable functional significance, and 
one that has been largely overlooked. We were first aware 
of the differences in the manner of spread of epileptic 
discharge from cerebral cortex to diencephalon when 
* Herbert Jasper and I showed that local epileptic discharge in 
the prefrontal cortex, occurring either spontaneously or when we 
had set it off by the electrode, might spread to the diencephalon 
and cause an attack of automatism that was very like the autom­
atism of petit mal.25 

An Automatic Sensory-Motor Mechanism · 41 
M 7a\/1p A 
/ / HYPOTHETICAL \\ 
i 
/ / STREAM OF 
\ 
\ / /IMPULSES (VOLUNTARY)» 
I 
ι FROM HIGHER BRAIN ι 
\ I ι 
STEM TO CEREBRAL 
5 
\ M 
I 
\ CORTEX 
I 
I 
CORTiCO-BULBAR V 
CORTICO-SPINAL TRACT 
GRAY MATTER 
FOR 
HYPOTHETICAL BILATERAL 
MOTOR CONTROL 
FIGURE 10. The Automatic Sensory-Motor Mechanism. 
This much-simplified diagram outlines only the direction of the 
executive, or motor, messages of the mechanism that takes bi­
lateral control of the body either under direction of the mind or 
automatically. It makes use of the motor cell-stations in the pre-
central gyrus of both sides, as shown here from leg down to face 
and mouth. The entire mechanism is a portion of the centren-
cephalic integration and coordination that makes effective mind-
action possible. One may call it "man's computer." It makes 
available the many skills (including that of speech) that have 
been learned and recorded in the individual's past. It controls the 
behavior of the "human automaton" while the mind is otherwise 
occupied, or when the highest brain-mechanism is selectively in­
activated, as in epileptic automatism. On the other hand, epilep­
tic discharge within its central gray matter produces interference 
with its function, and calls forth active responses from the motor 
centers in the cortex of both hemispheres, thus producing a gen­
eralized convulsion (grand mal). (Drawing by Eleanor Sweezey.) 

42 · The Mystery of the Mind 
Kristian Kristiansen made his study in 1951. After ex­
amining ninety-five cases in our clinic, he pointed out 
that there were twenty-nine examples of seizures that be­
gan with local epileptic discharge in a motor convolution, 
fifty-five somatic sensory, and eleven visual sensory sei­
zures. None developed automatism during the evolution 
of their attacks. Many, however, went occasionally from 
localized sensory or motor manifestations directly to gen­
eralized seizures.26 
William Feindel showed that automatism is frequent 
(78 percent) among patients who are subject to epilep­
tic discharges in the temporal lobe.2 He and I showed 
that automatism could be produced by stimulation if the 
electrode was passed into the temporal lobe and on into 
or near the amygdaloid nucleus (see Figure 8). But this 
occurred only when one continued to stimulate until local 
epileptic discharge was produced. We assumed that this 
caused interference in the hippocampus on both sides and 
perhaps neuronal bombardment of gray matter in the 
higher brain-stem that went on to epileptic discharge. 
Thus, from a practical point of view, a clinician may 
find it useful to remember that local epileptic discharge 
in motor or sensory gray matter areas of the cortex may 
spread by bombardment and so cause epileptic discharge 
in gray matter of the automatic sensory-motor mechanism 
in the higher brain-stem. This produces a major convul­
sion because of its activation of all the motor areas of 
the cortex. The cortex of one side, being pitted against 
the other, causes the patient to stiffen the body and limbs 
rather than to turn. The sensory-motor mechanism exerts 
activating control from its gray matter in the higher brain­
stem. This acts upon the secondary gray matter in the 
cerebral cortex of each hemisphere, and on the tertiary 
gray matter in the lower brain-stem and the spinal cord. 
The major functional outflow of axone conducted energy 

An Automatic Sensory-Motor Mechanism · 43 
is carried to the muscles in one efferent stream. During 
any generalized grand mal seizure only the automatic 
control of breathing, which is located in the lower brain­
stem, escapes and continues its function. 
When a local discharge occurs in prefrontal or tempo­
ral areas of the cortex, it may spread directly to the high­
est brain-mechanism by bombardment (the mind's mech­
anism). When it does this, it produces automatism. On 
the other hand, the sensory and motor convolutions of the 
cortex, when overcharged electrically, bombard the auto­
matic sensory-motor mechanism (the computer's mech­
anism) in the higher brain-stem. One may surmise then 
that there must be a mind's mechanism that has direct 
access to prefrontal and temporal cortex but has only 
indirect access to sensory and motor mechanisms of the 
cerebral cortex. 
Thus, when bombardment from the motor or sensory 
convolutions of the cortex becomes excessive, it may pro­
duce secondary discharge in the computer and thus a 
major convulsive seizure, but not an attack of automa­
tism. When bombardment from the prefrontal or tempo­
ral areas of the cortex becomes excessive, it may produce 
interference in the highest brain-mechanism (the mind's 
mechanism) and thus cause an attack of automatism. Or 
it may produce a major convulsive seizure because of an 
additional direct connection with the computer. 
No functional conclusions should be drawn from these 
facts except perhaps to suggest that 
(1) the highest brain mechanism has direct connec­
tion with the newer temporal and prefrontal areas of 
cerebral cortex, and 
(2) its functional connection with the older motor 
and sensory areas of the cortex must be an indirect one, 
perhaps interrupted in the computer. 

11 · Centrencephalic Integration and 
Coordination 
These two units: (1) the mechanism, the action of which 
is essential to the existence of consciousness; and (2) the 
mechanism of sensory-motor coordination, may be said 
to constitute the central integrating system. In their com­
bined action they make sensory input available and mo­
tor output purposeful. They constitute a centrencephalic 
integrating system that unites functionally the diencepha-
Ion (higher brain-stem) with the cortex of both hemi­
spheres. To this integrating system, sensory impressions 
come, and in its action, thought, and behavior find ex­
pression. 
But what a difference there is between the outward 
evidence of epileptic discharge within the mind-mecha­
nism and that in the automatic mechanism! Discharge in 
the gray matter of the mind-mechanism, Uke discharge 
in the gray matter of the speech area, results, as I have 
said, only in silence. There is complete interference with 
its function. Yet when discharge does occur in the cen­
tral gray matter of the automatic sensory-motor mecha­
nism, there is a positive response—a sudden activation 
of the outlying motor stations that the automaton would 
normally control. The result is frightening: the subject 
stiffens, falls, shakes, cries out, salivating and soiling 
himself. There is general muscular contraction. Con­
sciousness vanishes. Only breathing, which is normally 
controlled by the reflex action or circuits located in the 
lower brain-stem, is spared. It was because of these 
paroxysms that the early Greeks described epilepsia as 
the curse of the gods, the divine disease. 

Integration and Coordination ·45 
Today, epilepsy continues to come as a curse to mil­
lions of men and women. Happily, modern treatment with 
medicines lessens the curse, protecting many and bring­
ing them back to normal, productive living. And Epi­
lepsy, though she wears the frightening mask of tragedy 
in her approach to each patient, takes off the mask at 
times before the physician who has the wit to stop and 
ponder her riddles. It is within her power to guide the 
thinking of Hippocratic disciples as she guided the mas­
ter's so long ago. 
The behavior of the automaton during an attack of 
epileptic automatism reveals what the brain without the 
mind and without the mind-mechanism can still do. It 
reveals what the moment-to-moment function of the 
normally active mind must be. If, as I have said, an attack 
of automatism falls upon a patient while he is in the act 
of planning a project, the automaton (which he becomes) 
may discharge that purpose in remarkable detail. 

12 - The Highest Brain-Mechanism 
What has been said about epileptic automatism throws 
much light on what must be happening in the normal 
routine of our lives. By taking thought, the mind con­
siders the future and gives short-term direction to the 
sensory-motor automatic mechanism. But the mind, I 
surmise, can give direction only through the mind's brain-
mechanism. It is all very much like programming a pri­
vate computer. The program comes to an electrical com­
puter from without. The same is true of each biological 
computer. Purpose comes to it from outside its own mech­
anism. This suggests that the mind must have a supply of 
energy available to it for independent action. 
Short-term programming of the automatic mechanism 
seems to serve a useful purpose in ordinary life. When I 
get into my car in the morning with a plan of going 
somewhere other than to the Montreal Neurological In­
stitute, I have learned that I must decide in advance the 
streets to be followed. Otherwise, while I am thinking of 
something else, the automaton delivers me to the Insti­
tute. 
We may assume then, that if the mind can give direc­
tions minutes in advance, it must also give directions 
split-seconds in advance. I assume that the mind directs, 
and the mind-mechanism executes. It carries the message. 
As Hippocrates expressed it so long ago, "the brain is 
messenger" to consciousness. Or, as one might express it 
now, the brain's highest mechanism is "messenger" be­
tween the mind and the other mechanisms of the brain. 
Consider, if you will, the various functional mecha­
nisms that operate within the brain. There is one mech-

The Highest Brain-Mechanism ·47 
anism that wakens the mind and serves it each time it 
comes into action after sleep. Whether one adopts a 
dualist or a monist hypothesis, the mechanism is essential 
to consciousness. It comes between the mind and the 
final integration that takes place automatically in the 
sensory-motor mechanism and it plays an essential role 
in that mechanism. This recalls the thinking of Hughlings 
Jackson in regard to the word "highest" as applied to 
levels of function within the brain.3,4 That this highest 
mechanism, most closely related to the mind, is truly a 
functional unit is proven by the fact that epileptic dis­
charge in gray matter that forms a part of its circuits 
interferes with its action selectively. During epileptic in­
terference with the function of this gray matter, localized 
tentatively in Figure 9, consciousness vanishes and, with 
it, goes the direction and planning of behavior. That is 
to say, the mind goes out of action and comes into action 
with the normal functioning of this mechanism. 
The human automaton, which replaces the man when 
the highest brain-mechanism is inactivated, is a thing 
without the capacity to make completely new decisions. 
It is a thing without the capacity to form new memory 
records and a thing without that indefinable attribute, a 
sense of humor. The automaton is incapable of thrilling 
to the beauty of a sunset or of experiencing contentment, 
happiness, love, compassion. These, like all awarenesses, 
are functions of the mind. The automaton is a thing that 
makes use of the reflexes and the skills, inborn and ac­
quired, that are housed in the computer. At times it may 
have a plan that will serve it in place of a purpose for a 
few minutes. This automatic coordinator that is ever ac­
tive within each of us, seems to be the most amazing of 
all biological computers. 
By listening to patients as they describe an experiential 

48 · The Mystery of the Mind 
flashback, one can understand the complexity and effi­
ciency of the reflex coordinating and integrative action 
of the brain. In it, the automatic computer and the high­
est brain-mechanism play interactive roles, selectively in­
hibitory and purposeful. 
Does this explain the action of the mind? Can reflex 
action in the end, account for it? After years of studying 
the emerging mechanisms within the human brain, my 
own answer is "no." Mind comes into action and goes 
out of action with the highest brain-mechanism, it is 
true. But the mind has energy. The form of that energy 
is different from that of neuronal potentials that travel 
the axone pathways. There I must leave it. 

13 · The Stream of Consciousness 
The material used by William James in his reasoning was 
psychological or philosophical, rather than neurophysio-
logical. The "stream of consciousness," he said, "is a 
river, forever flowing through a man's conscious waking 
hours."* This metaphor may be confusing. A river of 
water cannot be altered by the man on the bank. But 
thought and reason and curiosity do cause the stream of 
consciousness to alter its course and even change its con­
tent completely. The biological stream that is hidden 
away in each of us follows the command of the observer 
on the bank. A stream it is, and it flows inexorably on­
ward toward the hazy sea that waits for us all at the end 
of life. But there the similarity between a river and the 
stream of consciousness breaks down. 
The contents of the stream, as described in Chapter 6, 
are recorded in the brain, including everything to which 
the man on the bank paid attention, but none of the things 
that he ignored. His thoughts are recorded with the sen­
sory material that he accepted. His fears are there, and 
his interpretations are there as well—all recorded by 
this extraordinary mechanism within the brain. 
It is the mind (not the brain) that watches and at the 
same time directs. Has the mind, then, a memory of its 
own? No. There is no evidence to suggest it. If it has, 
there exists a memory mechanism of an entirely different 
* As an undergraduate, majoring in philosophy at Princeton, I 
was much impressed by my reading of William James's The Prin­
ciples of Psychology.5 That was, I suppose, the beginning of my 
curiosity about the brain and the mind of man. 

50 · The Mystery of the Mind 
and unsuspected order. The mind has no practical need 
for other memory since, through the highest brain-mecha­
nism, it can open the files of remembrance in a flash.* 
* If the mind had any separate awareness while the highest 
brain-mechanism is inactive, it could make some use of a memory 
mechanism of its own. But the engram for mind-memory would 
have to be redefined. Instead of being the "lasting trace" left in 
an organism by "psychic experience," it would be the lasting 
trace left on psychic structure by neuronal action! 
The ghost of Hamlet's father would need such a memory to 
converse with his own son. But certainly, no neurophysiologist 
is in a position to rationalize that dramatic interview born in 
William Shakespeare's amazing brain, and fathered by his bril­
liant mind. 

14 · Introspection by Patient and Surgeon 
In my approach to this argument I have made no ref­
erence to introspection. Instead, I have depended on 
neurophysiological evidence and have made special use 
of the evidence available after a long experience with 
epileptic seizures. Trying to be objective, a scientist 
should not trust his own introspection too far. But it 
might give the reader another point of view, to listen to 
the introspective thinking of a highly intelligent patient 
as it came to me while I was "tinkering" with one of his 
brain mechanisms. I have published the case of the pa­
tient C.H. elsewhere,* but I shall refer to it again now. 
On the day of operation, I had exposed a large part of 
the left side of the brain under local anesthesia and had 
decided what should be done in the hope of freeing him 
from his epileptic attacks. But the focus of brain-irrita­
tion in the temporal lobe that seemed to be producing his 
fits was alarmingly close to where the major speech area 
should be, unless speech was located in the other hemi­
sphere. So, in order to avoid the danger of producing 
permanent aphasia, I undertook to map out the exact 
position of his speech area. We have found that a gentle 
electrical current interferes with the function of the 
speech mechanism. One touches the cortex with a stimu­
lating electrode and, since the brain is not sensitive, the 
patient does not realize that this has made him aphasic 
until he tries to speak, or to understand speech, and is 
unable to do so. 
* Modem Perspectives in World Psychiatry, John G. Howells, 
ed. Vol. 2, p. 340. Oliver & Boyd, Edinburgh, 1968. 

52 · The Mystery of the Mind 
One of my associates began to show the patient a series 
of pictures on the other side of the sterile screen, C.H. 
named each picture accurately at first. Then, before the 
picture of a butterfly was shown to him, I applied the 
electrode where I supposed the speech cortex to be. He 
remained silent for a time. Then he snapped his fingers 
as though in exasperation. I withdrew the electrode and 
he spoke at once: 
"Now I can talk," he said. "Butterfly. I couldn't get 
that word 'butterfly,' so I tried to get the word 'moth!' " 
It is clear that while the speech mechanism was tempo­
rarily blocked he could perceive the meaning of the pic­
ture of a butterfly. He made a conscious effort to "get" the 
corresponding word. Then, not understanding why he 
could not do so, he turned back for a second time to the 
interpretive mechanism, which was well away from the 
interfering effect of the electric current, and found a sec­
ond concept that he considered the closest thing to a 
butterfly. He must then have presented that to the speech 
mechanism, only to draw another blank. 
The patient's simple statement startled me. He was 
calling on two brain-mechanisms alternately and at will. 
He had focused his attention on the cards and set himself 
the purpose of recognizing and naming each picture as it 
came along. At first each picture was inspected in the 
stream of consciousness. It was identified, named, and 
recorded. He was using areas of cerebral cortex that, at 
birth, had been uncommitted as to function. Evidently, 
the highest brain-mechanism, impelled by mind-decision, 
can carry out these transactions, calling upon previously 
established, conditioned reflexes one by one. When I 
paralyzed his speech mechanism, he was puzzled. Then 
he decided what to do. He reconsidered the concept 
"butterfly" and summoned the nearest thing to butterfly 

Introspection by Patient and Surgeon · 53 
that was stored away in his concept mechanism. When 
the concept "moth" was selected and presented in the 
stream of consciousness, the mind approved and the 
highest mechanism flashed this non-verbal concept of 
moth to the speech mechanism. But the word for "moth" 
did not present itself in the stream of consciousness as he 
expected. He remained silent, then expressed his exas­
peration by snapping the fingers and thumb of his right 
hand. That he could do without making use of the special 
speech mechanism. Finally, when I removed my interfer­
ing electrode from the cortex, he explained the whole ex­
perience with a feeling of relief, using words that were ap­
propriate to his thought. He got the words from the 
speech mechanism when he presented concepts to it. For 
the word "he," in this introspection, one may substitute 
the word mind. Its action is not automatic. 
As I visualize it, a reasonable, explanatory hypothesis 
can be constructed as follows: because I had asked the 
patient to do so, he turned his attention to the naming 
of cards, programming the brain to that end through the 
highest brain-mechanism. I can say only that the decision 
came from his mind. Neuronal action began in the high­
est brain-mechanism. Here is the meeting of mind and 
brain. The psychico-physical frontier is here. The frontier 
is being crossed from mind to brain. The frontier is also 
being crossed from brain to mind since the mind is con­
scious of the meaning of the neuronal succession that de­
termines the content of the stream of consciousness. The 
neuronal action is automatic as it is in any computer. 
In conformity with the mind's decision, the highest 
mechanism sends neuronal messages to the other mecha­
nisms in the brain. The messages go, I suppose, in the 
form of neuronal potentials arranged in a meaningful 
pattern and they are sent, in each case, to the appropriate 

54 · The Mystery of the Mind 
target-gray matter. They cause the individual to turn his 
gaze and focus his eyes on the matter in question. They 
cause him to interpret what he sees, to select words that 
will express a meaning. 
These are things that the mechanisms can do. At the 
same time, some brain-mechanism is admitting to con­
sciousness the information that is relevant to the matter. 
It is also inhibiting all other streams of unrelated infor­
mation that are flowing into the centrencephalic integrat­
ing system, so that unrelated data do not flash up in the 
stream of consciousness. Thus, one can conclude what 
must have been eliminated and therefore excluded from 
the patient's attention in that time and place. 
This is hypothetical thinking, of course. It is clear that 
much is accomplished by automatic and reflex mecha­
nisms. But what the mind does is different. It is not to be 
accounted for by any neuronal mechanism that I can dis­
cover. 

15 · Doubling of Awareness 
Consider the point of view of the patient when the sur­
geon's electrode, placed on the interpretive cortex, sum­
mons the replay of past experience. The stream of con­
sciousness is suddenly doubled for him. He is aware of 
what is going on in the operating room as well as the 
"flashback" from the past. He can discuss with the sur­
geon the meaning of both streams. 
The patient's mind, which is considering the situation 
in such an aloof and critical manner, can only be some­
thing quite apart from neuronal reflex action. It is note­
worthy that two streams of consciousness are flowing, the 
one driven by input from environment, the other by an 
electrode delivering sixty pulses per second to the cortex. 
The fact that there should be no confusion in the con­
scious state suggests that, although the content of con­
sciousness depends in large measure on neuronal activity, 
awareness itself does not. 
A young South African patient lying on the operating 
table exclaimed, when he realized what was happening, 
that it was astonishing to realize that he was laughing 
with his cousins on a farm in South Africa, while he was 
also fully conscious of being in the operating room in 
Montreal. This illustrates what I mean. The mind of the 
patient was as independent of the reflex action as was the 
mind of the surgeon who listened and strove to under­
stand. Thus, my argument favors independence of mind-
action. 
If, to the contrary, the truth is that the highest brain-
mechanism is busy creating the mind by its own action, 
one might expect mental confusion when the neuronal 

56 · The Mystery of the Mind 
record is activated by an electrode so that a stream of 
past consciousness is presented to the mind along with the 
presentation of the contemporary stream of conscious­
ness. 
One may ask this question: does the highest brain-
mechanism provide the mind with its energy, an energy 
in such a changed form that it no longer needs to be con­
ducted along neuraxones? To ask such a question is, I 
fear, to run the risk of hollow laughter from the physi­
cists. But, nonetheless, this is my question, and the sug­
gestion I feel myself compelled to make. 

16 · Brain as Computer, Mind as Programmer 
Now let me climb down from the dizzy height of the 
hypothetical scaffolding that has been built about the 
brain. Consider with me the beginning of life, leaving 
aside, for the moment, the question of the essential nature 
of the mind. 
A baby brings with him into the world an active ner­
vous system. He (or she) is already endowed with inborn 
reflexes that cause him to gasp and to cry aloud, and 
presently to search for the nipple, and to suck and swal­
low, and so set off a complicated succession of events 
within the body that will serve the purpose of nourishing 
it. 
In the very first month you can see him—if you will 
take time to observe this wonder of wonders—stubbornly 
turning his attention to what interests him, ignoring ev­
erything else, even the desire for food or the discomfort 
of a wet diaper. It is evident that, already, he has a mind 
capable of focusing attention and evidently capable of 
curiosity and interest. Within a few months he recognizes 
concepts such as those of a flower, a dog, and a butterfly; 
he hears his mother speaking words, and shortly he is 
busy programming a large area of the uncommitted 
temporal cortex to serve the purposes of speech. If he is 
going to be right-handed, he is probably setting up the 
speech mechanism in the left hemisphere. He is program­
ming, too, much of the rest of man's newly acquired tem­
poral cortex as interpretive cortex for the recognition of 
non-verbal concepts.* 
* This programming must, I suppose, begin as early as percep­
tions begin to be classified and as soon as attention is focused on 

58 · The Mystery of the Mind 
In doing all this, a normal, happy youngster is evident­
ly driven by an excited curiosity to pay attention and to 
explore. Whatever enters the spotlight of his attention, 
he stores in the brain. Some of it he will be able to "re­
member." More of it is available when called upon by 
automatic mechanisms. But I dare say he stores nothing 
that did not first come within his focus of attention. 
He makes progressive additions to, or changes in, the 
various concepts he is forming, choosing from what he 
sees and hears. The first dog to which he paid attention 
may have been yellow and short-haired, the next black 
and hairy. He modifies his concept of a dog each time he 
pays attention to "one. 
The beginning of speech is important. The first time he 
hears the word and imitates it, the sound will be far from 
his eventual pronunciation of "dog." A parrot can imi­
tate, too. But it is not long before the infant takes an­
other step. A dog appears in the stream of consciousness, 
whereupon the highest brain-mechanism carries a pat­
terned neuronal message to the non-verbal concept-mech­
anism. The past record is scanned and a similar appear­
ance recalled through the hippocampal system. The mind 
compares the two images that have thus appeared in the 
stream of consciousness, and sees similarity. There is a 
sense of familiarity or recognition. While all this is still 
words. That this goes on progressively during the early years of 
childhood is proven by the fact that, should a completely de­
structive lesion come, by accident, to the major speech area in 
the temporal lobe, the aphasia would last no longer than a year. 
At the end of that period the child would begin to speak again, 
and before long he would speak normally, having set up a new 
speech area in the opposite temporal lobe. If the speech area 
should be destroyed after twelve years of age, the aphasia might 
well be permanent. 

Mind as Programmer · 59 
in the stream of consciousness, another patterned neu­
ronal message is formed, made up of the remembered 
concept modified by the present experience. This mes­
sage is sent to the speech mechanism and the word "dog" 
flashes up into consciousness. 
Then he acts. A message is sent to the gray matter in 
the articulation area of the motor cortex. He speaks the 
word "dog" aloud—and laughs, perhaps, in conscious 
triumph.* I imagine that the parts in this sequence that 
have not become automatic are carried out by the highest 
brain-mechanism under the direction of the mind. I want 
to point out only that every learned-reaction that be­
comes automatic was first carried out within the light of 
conscious attention and in accordance with the under­
standing of the mind. 
* However blundering my description of the neuronal and the 
mental action may be, it was really a magnificent performance! 
No puppy or dog will ever be capable of this, and certainly no 
parrot. Perhaps that is because each is endowed with so little un­
committed cortex. Puppy and infant may have been friends. Up 
to the age of six months in the learning game, the puppy had 
seemed to be ahead, but from now on, it was to be otherwise. 

17 · What the Automatic Mechanism Can Do 
Inasmuch as the brain is a place for newly acquired auto­
matic mechanisms, it is a computer. To be useful, any 
computer must be programmed and operated by an ex­
ternal agent. Suppose an individual decides to turn his 
attention to a certain matter. This decision, I suppose, 
is an act on the part of the mind. The brain response 
must be somewhat as follows: The highest brain-mecha­
nism takes immediate executive action, which causes the 
sensory-motor mechanism to block, by inhibition, the in­
flow of information that is unrelated to the subject of the 
mind's new interest. At the same time, it allows related 
data to pass through into the stream of consciousness. 
The data that enter the stream of consciousness may 
be sequences of sight and sound from the neighbor­
hood, accepted with immediate interpretations, such as 
awareness of familiarity or of danger. Relevant memories 
may be added automatically from the individual's past 
experience.* 
The automatic sensory-motor mechanism itself comes 
to be conditioned, as the years pass, for many purposes. 
* I suggest that this selection of what enters the stream of 
consciousness is a function of the automatic sensory-motor mech­
anism because, during an attack of epileptic automatism, when 
the automaton is in full control and the highest brain-mechanism 
is paralyzed, this selection still continues, at least in regard to the 
purpose for which the mechanism has been most recently pro­
grammed. Thus, the automaton can walk through traffic as 
though he were aware of all that he hears and sees, and so con­
tinue on his way home. But he is aware of nothing and so makes 
no memory record. If a policeman were to accost him he might 
consider the poor fellow to be walking in his sleep. 

What the Automatic Mechanism Can Do · 61 
It coordinates the action of many semi-separable mecha­
nisms within the brain, such as reading, writing, speak­
ing, and the dextrous skills. As time passes, it learns to 
take over more and more of the body's behavior. Each 
skill, acquired in the light of conscious attention, soon 
becomes automatic and runs itself even more skillfully 
than the individual could carry it out by conscious di­
rection. 
If decisions as to the target of conscious attention are 
made by the mind, then the mind it is that directs the 
programming of all the mechanisms within the brain. A 
man's mind, one might say, is the person. He walks about 
the world, depending always upon his private computer, 
which he programs continuously to suit his ever-changing 
purposes and interest. 

18 · Recapitulation 
Mind, brain, and body make the man, and the man is 
capable of so much! He is capable of comprehension of 
the universe, dedication to the good of others, planned 
research, happiness, despair, and eventually, perhaps, 
even an understanding of himself. He can hardly be sub­
divided. Certainly, mind and brain carry on their func­
tions normally as a unit. 
The neurophysiologist's initial undertaking should be 
to try to explain the behavior of this being on the basis 
of neuronal mechanisms alone—this biped who falls on 
his knees to pray to his god and rises to his feet to lead 
an army, or to write a poem, or to dig a ditch, or to thrill 
to the beauty of the sunrise, or to laugh at the absurdities 
of this world. To me, it seems more and more reasonable 
to suggest, as I did at the close of the Thayer Lectures at 
Johns Hopkins in 1950 (unpublished), that the mind 
may be a distinct and different essence. A science re­
porter, who was present at the lectures, used those words 
in his report as though that were the conclusion. I was 
not ready for that then. I am hesitant still. But, look with 
me for a moment at our world. 
If one is to make a judgment on the basis of behavior, 
it is apparent that man is not alone in the possession of a 
mind. The ant (whose nervous system is a highly compli­
cated structure), as well as such mammals as the beaver 
or the dog or chimpanzee, shows evidence of conscious­
ness and of individual purpose. The brain, we may as­
sume, makes consciousness possible in him too. In all of 
these forms, as in man, memory is a function of the brain. 
Animals, particularly, show evidence of what may be 

Recapitulation · 63 
called racial memory. Secondly, new memories are ac­
quired in the form of conditioned reflexes. In the case of 
man, these preserve the skills, the memory of words, and 
the memory of non-verbal concepts. Then there is, in man 
at least, the third important form of memory, experiential 
memory, and the possibility of recalling the stream of 
consciousness with varying degrees of completeness. In 
this form of memory and in speech, the convolutions, 
which have appeared in the temporal lobe of man as a 
late evolutionary addition, are employed as "speech-cor­
tex and interpretive-cortex." 
Perhaps I should recapitulate. I realized as early as 
1938 that to begin to understand the basis of conscious­
ness one would have to wait for a clearer understanding 
of the neuronal mechanisms in the higher brain-stem. 
They were obviously responsible for the neuronal integra­
tive action of the brain that is associated with conscious­
ness. Since then, electrical stimulation and a study of 
epileptic patterns in general have helped us to distinguish 
three integrative mechanisms. Each has a major area or 
nucleus of gray matter (within the higher brain-stem), 
an aggregation of nerve cells that may be activated or 
paralyzed. 
(a) HIGHEST BRAIN-MECHANISM 
The function of this gray matter (Figure 9) is to carry 
out the neuronal action that corresponds with action of 
the mind. Proof that this is a mechanism in itself depends 
on the facts that injury of a circumscribed area in the 
higher brain-stem produces invariable loss of conscious­
ness, and that the selective epileptic discharge, which in­
terferes with function within this gray matter, can pro­
duce the unconsciousness (seen in epileptic automatism) 

64 · The Mystery of the Mind 
without paralysis of the automatic sensory-motor con­
trol mechanism located nearby. 
(b) AUTOMATIC SENSORY-MOTOR MECHANISM 
The function of this gray matter (Figure 10) is to co­
ordinate sensory-motor activity previously programmed 
by the mind. This biological computer mechanism carries 
on automatically when the highest brain-mechanism is 
selectively inactivated. It causes a major convulsive at­
tack, grand mal, by activation of cortical motor convolu­
tions, when epileptic discharge occurs in its central gray 
matter. 
(c) THE RECORD OF EXPERIENCE 
The function of the central gray matter of this mecha­
nism (Figure 11), as shown by electrode activation, is 
to recall to a conscious individual the stream of con­
sciousness from past time. 
As I have said, the function of each of these three areas 
of gray matter can now be recognized. Each plays a role 
in the normal centrencephalic integration and coordina­
tion, which is prerequisite to, and which accompanies, 
consciousness. As has been pointed out, this integrative 
activity is arrested by any form of general functional in­
terference with neuronal activity in the region outlined 
in Figure 9. The central gray matter for the automatic 
mechanism (b) and that of the mind's mechanism (a) 
are shown in separate figures (9 and 10), since the two 
are capable of separate function and I cannot picture the 
exact anatomical relationship. 
Thanks to patients who have told us about the stream 
of consciousness presented to them while the surgeon's 

Recapitulation · 65 
FORNIX 
IDBRAIN 
EXPERIENTIAL 
RECORD 
HIPPOCAMPUS 
FIGURE 11. The Experiential Record oi Consciousness and Its 
Reactivation. 
A stimulating electrode is shown here applied to a convolution in 
the interpretive-cortex. It recalls the past by activating a func­
tional circuit (experiential response). The circuit has yet to be 
completely defined, but may well include the hippocampus and 
fornix.* (Drawing by Eleanor Sweezey.) 
* The beginning of the pathway of neuronal activation is 
shown by the line of arrows from beneath the electrode. It may 
be that it passes directly through white matter into the higher 
brain-stem. Or it may enter the hippocampus and pass along the 
fornix, which conducts from hippocampus to brain-stem. The 
hippocampus evidently plays an essential role, together with the 
interpretive-cortex, in the function of scanning the experiential 
record and recalling memories. Removal of one hippocampus 
affects memory little. Removal of both abolishes the man's ability 

66 · The Mystery of the Mind 
activating electrode was still in place, we can conclude 
with certainty what data the above integrative mecha­
nisms inhibit (and, thus, eliminate) and what they pre­
sent to the mind, and, thus, cause the brain to record. 
The imprint of memory's engram is somehow added dur­
ing neuronal action. Conscious attention seems to give 
to that passage of neuronal impulses permanent facilita­
tion for subsequent passage of potentials along the neu­
ronal connections in the same pattern. Thus, a recall 
engram is established. This, one may suggest, is the real 
secret of learning. It is effective in the establishment of 
experiential memory, as well as of the memory based on 
conditioned reflexes. 
If this is so, then it was correct to assume that the 
record of the stream of consciousness is not in some 
duplicated separate memory apparatus such as that of 
the hippocampus apparatuses, but in the operational 
mechanism of the highest brain-mechanism. The hippo-
campal gyrus in each hemisphere is part of the mecha­
nism of scanning and recall. Therefore, there must be a 
laying down in each hippocampus of some sort of dupli­
cated key-of-access to the record of the stream of con­
sciousness.27 
to recall past experience, either voluntarily or for the purposes 
of automatic interpretation. In the case of a simple bilateral loss 
of the hippocampi, other forms of memory are retained, e.g., 
memory of language, and of skills, and of non-verbal concepts. 
(See Penfield and Mathieson,27 1974.) 

19 · Relationship of Mind to Brain—A Case 
Example 
Consciousness can be present whenever the highest brain-
mechanism is normally active, even though adjacent parts 
of the brain are inactivated by some abnormal influence. 
A patient, whom I was called upon to see in Moscow un­
der dramatic circumstances in 1962, illustrated the fact 
that conscious understanding may be present when motor 
control has been lost completely, or almost completely, 
and when the brain is not capable of making a permanent 
record of the stream of consciousness. 
The patient was the brilliant physicist, Lev Landau. 
Only intensive nursing had kept him alive during six 
weeks of complete unconsciousness following a head in­
jury in an automobile crash. On my first examination of 
the patient, I agreed that he was completely unconscious. 
I then recommended a minor diagnostic operation (ven­
triculography). His limbs were paralyzed; his eyes were 
open but apparently unseeing. Next morning, when I en­
tered his room to examine him again, I was accompanied 
by his wife. She preceded me and, sitting down at the 
bedside, she talked to him, telling him that I had sug­
gested to the Soviet surgeons that he should have a brain 
operation. As I stood silent, watching over her head, I 
became aware of a startling change in the patient. He lay 
unmoving still, as on the previous night. But his eyes, 
which had been deviated from each other then, were fo­
cused now in a normal manner. He seemed to be looking 
at her. He appeared to hear, and see, and to understand 
speech! How could this be? She came to the end of her 
explanation and was silent. His eyes then moved upward 

68 - The Mystery of the Mind 
to focus quite normally on me. I moved my head from 
side to side. The eyes followed me. No doubt about it! 
Then they swung apart again and he appeared, as he had 
the night before, to be unconscious. 
It was clear that the man had returned to conscious­
ness. He had been able to hear, see, understand speech, 
but not to speak. He could not move, except to focus and 
turn his eyes briefly. Perhaps I should explain that he and 
his wife had been separated for a time. It was our talk of 
possible operation that had led to her being summoned 
to Moscow and to the hospital. She was seeing him that 
morning for the first time since the accident. 
It was thrilling to realize what had happened. He had 
been roused by her presence and probably understood 
her message. Evidently the hemispheres above the higher 
brain-stem, with their speech and visual and auditory 
mechanisms, had not been injured. The to-and-fro ex­
change between brain-stem and cortex was free, but 
when he sent neuronal messages out to the peripheral 
motor nuclei in the lower brain-stem and spinal cord, 
none could pass the block at the level of the hemorrhage 
in the midbrain. None, that is, except those to the eye 
movement center, which is highest of all the peripheral 
centers for motor control. If he was conscious, he must 
have sent down many other messages that would normally 
have flashed outward to the muscles. His wife was an ap-
pealingly handsome woman. His mind may well have 
sent a message intended to cause his hand to take hers. 
But his hand lay motionless. 
However that may be, I went back to the other doctors 
and we decided that no operation was necessary. I had 
seen the first sure sign of recovery. He was transferred 
at once from the outlying hospital, in which he had been 
nursed so magnificently, to the Moscow Neurosurgical 

Relationship of Mind to Brain ·69 
Institute, where he would have the great advantage of 
supervision by Professor B. G. Egorov. Physiotherapy 
was begun at once, and I learned later that there was 
slow but continuous and progressive recovery from that 
day onward.* 
For the first six weeks after the accident, Landau's 
fellow physicists, most of them his disciples, had joined 
the nurses and doctors in their gallant effort to keep the 
patient breathing and capable of recovery if that should 
prove possible. This man, who had already been awarded 
the Lenin Prize for his contributions to physics, was given 
the Nobel Prize during his convalescence. He and his 
wife were happy together and she was with him on the 
special occasion of his acceptance of the award. 
I saw him nine months later, on my return from a visit 
to the university hospitals of China. He had been trans­
ferred to a convalescent hospital. The neurologist, Pro­
fessor Propper Graschenkov, took me, in company with 
Landau's collaborator, the brilliant Professor Lifshitz, 
who had shared the Lenin Prize with his master, to visit 
him. I quote now from my journal note, made a few days 
later: "Landau was sitting up in bed in a fresh white 
shirt looking at me anxiously. He was a handsome person 
with a fine head. He had an air of understanding. He was 
stubborn in his confusion and I could appreciate why, 
several months earlier, he had been depressed and had 
even asked Lifshitz to bring him poison." Landau spoke 
excellent English and did so eagerly. "When I asked him 
if he had received the Lenin Prize, he said 'yes,' but he 
could not tell me when. When I asked him if someone 
had shared it with him he looked around and, finding 
* An account of this case was published by a science reporter 
in an interesting book for lay readers: The Man They Would Not 
Let Die, by Alexander Dorozinski, Macmillan, New York, 1965. 

70 · The Mystery of the Mind 
Lifshitz standing with the others, smiled and pointed to 
him—Ί think he and I shared it.'" The relationship of 
the two men was somewhat like that of David and Jona­
than. "Lifshitz feels he has lost his closest friend and his 
leader." 
The final diagnosis was as follows: A head injury that 
resulted in a small hemorrhage in the conducting tracts 
(white matter) of the higher brain-stem. During the six 
weeks following his accident, the hemorrhage had gradu­
ally absorbed through the brain's own circulation. Even­
tually, neuronal communication had been restored 
through the nerve fibers of the brain-stem. There re­
mained only a difficulty in recalling the recent past. His 
confusion was due to that. 
It is, of course, only a matter of conjecture exactly 
when consciousness did return. Before he could show 
that he was conscious, it was necessary for him to regain 
control of some portion of his motor system. Evidently, 
control of the movement of his eyes returned before any­
thing else. During our first interview, while Mrs. Landau 
was explaining the situation to him, and when he looked 
at me so searchingly, I concluded that the whole explana­
tion continued to be clear in his mind. He was remember­
ing what she had said at the beginning as well as what 
she was saying at the close of her explanation. For that, 
the mind does not need the brain's mechanism of experi­
ential recall. It needs only the mechanism of the stream 
of consciousness, which was normally active. 
When I saw him at the second interview nine months 
later he did not remember me or anything that had hap­
pened to himself for some months after his transfer to 
the Moscow Neurosurgical Institute. The scanning and 
recall of past experience can only be carried out by the 
mechanism in which at least one hippocampus of one 

Relationship of Mind to Brain · 71 
temporal lobe must play an essential role (Figure 11). 
And that mechanism can carry out this recall only for 
periods in which it had been normal and, thus, able to 
form its own clues to the stream of consciousness, its 
duplicate "keys-of-access."27 
I learned still later that Landau did continue to im­
prove in the year that followed, and was able to tutor his 
son in preparing for his university entrance examinations. 
Great recognition came to this man whose mathematical 
genius had been likened to that of Einstein. His country­
men rejoiced at his recovery but the "depression" re­
turned to him. Perhaps he realized that his brain could 
no longer serve him as it had. 
I have described this case in some detail because it, 
Uke many others, demonstrates how it is that when con­
sciousness is present, the highest brain-mechanism is 
used to activate and employ other brain-mechanisms that 
are capable of normal function. Beyond that, it bears out 
our conclusion that the mind can hold the data that have 
come to it during this focusing of attention and while the 
mechanism of the stream of consciousness is moving for­
ward. But the mind, by itself, cannot recall past experi­
ence unless the brain's special mechanism of scanning 
and recall is functioning normally. In such a case as this, 
in which damage brings to the brain a small area of 
paralyzing interference, one's knowledge of how brain 
mechanisms coordinate and integrate is put to the test. 
More than that, such accidental experiments point the 
way toward clearer understanding of how the business of 
the brain is transacted. Human physiology can only wait 
for guidance from such accidental experiments. 
Hughlings Jackson remarked in his Hunterian Oration 
in 1872 that "Medical men, since they, only, witness the 
results of the experiments of disease on the nervous sys-

72 · The Mystery of the Mind 
tem of man, will be looked to more and more for facts 
bearing on the physiology of the mind." Since he used 
the daring phrase "physiology of the mind," he must have 
thought that the brain did, or would someday, explain 
the mind. After a century of study by neurologists who 
observe the paralyzed and the epileptic, and neurosur­
geons who excise and stimulate the convolutions of the 
brain, and electrophysiologists who record and conduct 
experiments, surely the time has come to ask that question 
and other questions. 
Has the brain explained the mind? If it has, does the 
brain do so by the simple performance of its neuronal 
mechanisms, or by supplying energy to the mind? Or 
both? Does it supply the mind with energy and at the 
same time provide it with basic neuronal mechanisms 
that are related to consciousness? 

20 · Man's Being—A Choice Between Two 
Explanations 
Sherrington concluded: "That our being should consist of 
two fundamental elements offers, I suppose, no greater 
inherent improbability than that it should rest on one 
only." 
The challenge that comes to every neurophysiologist is 
to explain in terms of brain mechanisms all that men have 
come to consider the work of the mind, if he can. And 
this he must undertake freely, without philosophical or 
religious bias. If he does not succeed in his explanation, 
using proven facts and reasonable hypotheses, the time 
should come, as it has to me, to consider other possible 
explanations. He must consider how the evidence can be 
made to fit the hypothesis of two elements as well as that 
of one only. 
Man himself, with his enormous brain, his new convo­
lutions, and his capacity of programming his own com­
puter, is a highly improbable end-result to anticipate. 
But end-result he is, in our time. The wonder is not so 
much that man has come out of the slow, slow process of 
evolution with its chance variations and survival values, 
but that there should be a universe at all, with its laws 
and plan and apparent purpose. One suspects that given 
time unlimited, creation begun on any kindly planet 
would come to much the same end-result. 
The certainty, to my mind, is this: When we come to 
understand man, we will see that the nature of the mind 
and the nature of the mind's energy is simple and easily 
comprehensible. However, that shows only that I am an 
optimist. 

74 · The Mystery of the Mind 
Charles Sherrington and his pupils analyzed the inte­
grative action of inborn reflexes in the nervous system of 
unconscious animals. He described the remarkable neu­
ronal machine much as it is possessed by man in common 
with laboratory mammals. It provides for reflex standing, 
walking, and reacting to what the individual sees, hears, 
feels, and smells in his environment. It is an amazing 
machine. When Sherrington stimulated the cerebral cor­
tex electrically and activated one or another motor 
mechanism he showed that there was a facilitation effect. 
Subsequent passage of a weaker electric current could 
produce the same reaction, although facilitation of the 
reaction was temporary, lasting only a matter of seconds 
or minutes. (See Sherrington.32) 
Ivan Pavlov and his disciples studied conscious ani­
mals.11 He described conditioned reflexes that the animal 
acquired because anticipation caused it to pay attention 
to the experience. These reflexes were established and 
the patterns were preserved by permanent facilitation in 
the cerebral cortex and nuclear gray matter of the adja­
cent higher brain-stem. This was recognized as the physi­
cal basis of the learning of skills and simple forms of re­
active behavior. It was assumed to apply to man as well 
as animal. Such permanent facilitation also seems to take 
place, I repeat, in the light of focused attention. 
Since then, further facts have come to light in the 
study of conscious man. There is the record of conscious 
experience that we have discussed. It makes possible 
voluntary and automatic recall of past experiences, and 
it includes those things to which the individual paid atten­
tion, nothing he ignored. One can only conclude that 
conscious attention adds something to brain-action that 
would otherwise leave no record. It gives to the passage 
of neuronal potentials an astonishing permanence of fa-

Man's Being—Two Explanations · 75 
cilitation for the later passage of current, as though a trail 
had been blazed through the seemingly infinite maze of 
neurone connections. The same principle applies to the 
acquisition of speech skills and the storing of non-verbal 
concepts. Permanent facilitation of a patterned sequence 
in these brain mechanisms is established only when there 
is a focusing of attention on the phenomenon that corre­
sponds to it in consciousness. 
If previous decision regarding the focusing of attention 
is made in the mind, then it is the mind that decides 
when the facilitating engram is to be added. One may 
assume that it is the highest brain-mechanism that initi­
ates the brain action associated with that decision. One 
may assume, too, that the engram is simultaneously add­
ed to conditioned reflexes and to the sequential record 
of conscious experience. 
Is there any evidence of the existence of neuronal activity 
within the brain that would account for what the mind 
does? 
Before venturing to give an answer, it may be of inter­
est to refer again to action that the mind seems to carry 
out independently, and then to reconsider briefly our ex­
perience with stimulation of the cortex of conscious pa­
tients and our experience of what effects are produced 
by epileptic discharge in various parts of the brain. This 
should give some clue if there is a mechanism that ex­
plains the mind. 
(a) WHAT THE MIND DOES 
It is what we have learned to call the mind that seems to 
focus attention. The mind is aware of what is going on. 
The mind reasons and makes new decisions. It under-

76 · The Mystery of the Mind 
stands. It acts as though endowed with an energy of its 
own. It can make decisions and put them into effect by 
calling upon various brain mechanisms. It does this by 
activating neurone-mechanisms. This, it seems, could 
only be brought about by expenditure of energy. 
(b) WHAT THE PATIENT THINKS 
When I have caused a conscious patient to move his hand 
by applying an electrode to the motor cortex of one hemi­
sphere, I have often asked him about it. Invariably his 
response was: "I didn't do that. You did." When I caused 
him to vocalize, he said: "I didn't make that sound. You 
pulled it out of me." When I caused the record of the 
stream of consciousness to run again and so presented to 
him the record of his past experience, he marvelled that 
he should be conscious of the past as well as of the pres­
ent. He was astonished that it should come back to him 
so completely, with more detail than he could possibly 
recall voluntarily. He assumed at once that, somehow, 
the surgeon was responsible for the phenomenon, but he 
recognized the details as those of his own past experience. 
When one analyzes such a "flashback" it is evident, as I 
have said above, that only those things to which he paid 
attention were preserved in this permanently facilitated 
record. 
(c) WHAT THE ELECTRODE CAN DO 
I have been alert to the importance of studying the re­
sults of electrode stimulation of the brain of a conscious 
man, and have recorded the results as accurately and 
completely as I could. The electrode can present to the 

Man's Being—Two Explanations · 77 
patient various crude sensations. It can cause him to 
turn head and eyes, or to move the limbs, or to vocalize 
and swallow. It may recall vivid re-experience of the past, 
or present to him an illusion that present experience is 
familiar, or that the things he sees are growing large and 
coming near. But he remains aloof. He passes judgment 
on it all. He says "things seem familiar," not "I have been 
through this before." He says, "things are growing larg­
er," but he does not move for fear of being run over. If 
the electrode moves his right hand, he does not say, "I 
wanted to move it." He may, however, reach over with 
the left hand and oppose his action. 
There is no place in the cerebral cortex where elec­
trical stimulation will cause a patient to believe or to de­
cide. Of course, there are the areas devoted to speech, 
whose function is arrested without the production of any 
distant positive response. There are also, areas of gray 
matter in the higher brain-stem that the surgeon's stimu­
lating electrode does not explore. Yet epileptic discharge 
can take place in any area of gray matter, from dien-
cephalon to spinal cord (except perhaps the cerebellum). 
The Jacksonian march of discharge, from one nucleus of 
the diencephalon to another, does occur as it does in the 
cortex.13 
(d) ACTIVATION BY EPILEPTIC DISCHARGE 
There is no area of gray matter, as far as my experience 
goes, in which local epileptic discharge brings to pass 
what could be called "mind-action." In 1954 my asso­
ciate, Herbert Jasper, and I reviewed our clinical ex­
perience in the field of epilepsy with this question in 
mind. There were only two cases in which one might have 

78 · The Mystery of the Mind 
considered the beginning of an attack to be an example 
of "forced thinking" or "intellectual aura."* 
Since this was the only suspicion of such a thing, I 
am forced to conclude that there is no valid evidence that 
either epileptic discharge or electrical stimulation can 
activate the mind. 
If one stops to consider it, this is an arresting fact. The 
record of consciousness can be set in motion, complicated 
though it is, by the electrode or by epileptic discharge. 
An illusion of interpretation can be produced in the 
same way. But none of the actions that we attribute to 
the mind has been initiated by electrode stimulation or 
epileptic discharge. If there were a mechanism in the 
brain that could do what the mind does, one might ex­
pect that the mechanism would betray its presence in a 
convincing manner by some better evidence of epileptic 
or electrode activation. But, of course, I must admit that 
all of this is only negative evidence. 
Let us consider what light our positive neurophysio-
logical evidence can throw on the nature of man's being: 
If there is only one fundamental element in man's 
being, then neuronal action within the brain must ac­
count for all thp mind does. The "indispensable sub­
stratum" of consciousness is in the higher brain-stem, as 
described in Chapter 5. The highest brain-mechanism's 
activity seems to correspond with that of the mind, as we 
have discussed in Chapter 12. This mechanism, as it goes 
out of action in sleep and resumes action on waking, may 
* See pages 468-469 of our book:25 The patient, w.s., at the 
beginning of an attack, found himself saying to himself that "he 
told somebody or other to do this or that." J.J. tried to describe 
what had happened to his thinking thus: "There was a slice of 
bread on the table. I thought it was necessary to turn or move 
the bread." 

Man's Being—Two Explanations · 79 
switch off the mind and switch it on. It may, one can 
suggest, do this by supplying and by taking away the 
energy that might come to the mind from the brain. But 
to expect the highest brain-mechanism or any set of re­
flexes, however complicated, to carry out what the mind 
does, and thus perform all the functions of the mind, is 
quite absurd. 
If that is true, what other explanation can one propose? 
Only that there is, in fact, a second fundamental element 
and a second form of energy. But, on the basis of mind 
and brain as two semi-independent elements, one would 
still be forced to assume that the mind makes its impact 
upon the brain through the highest brain-mechanism. The 
mind must act upon it. The mind must also be acted upon 
by the highest brain-mechanism. The mind must remem­
ber by making use of the brain's recording mechanisms. 
The mind is present whenever the highest brain-mecha­
nism is functioning normally. 
If there are two elements, then energy must be avail­
able in two different forms. There is force that is made 
available through neuronal conduction in the brain. Is 
there force that is available to the mind, which has no 
such circuits? Can chemical action in nerve cells result 
in brain action on the one hand and in mind action on 
the other? Electricity was first revealed to science while 
it was being conducted along the nerves of living or­
ganisms. Physicists might well consider our questions 
seriously today, if only out of gratitude! 
During brain action a neurophysiologist can surmise 
where the conduction of potentials is being carried out 
and its pattern. It is not so in the case of what we have 
come to call mind-action. And yet the mind seems to act 
independently of the brain in the same sense that a pro­
grammer acts independently of his computer, however 

80 · The Mystery of the Mind 
much he may depend upon the action of that computer 
for certain purposes. 
Now that one begins to see the outlines of the partially 
separable mechanisms taking shape within the brain, and 
can begin to understand what the reflex mechanisms are 
capable of doing, the time has come to propose hypothe­
ses that would account for the transactions of the mind 
that are not so explained and to choose the most reason­
able. 
For my own part, after years of striving to explain the 
mind on the basis of brain-action alone, I have come to 
the conclusion that it is simpler (and far easier to be 
logical) if one adopts the hypothesis that our being does 
consist of two fundamental elements. If that is true, it 
could still be true that energy required comes to the mind 
during waking hours through the highest brain-mecha­
nism. 
Because it seems to me certain that it will always be 
quite impossible to explain the mind on the basis of 
neuronal action within the brain, and because it seems 
to me that the mind develops and matures independently 
throughout an individual's life as though it were a con­
tinuing element, and because a computer (which the 
brain is) must be programmed and operated by an 
agency capable of independent understanding, I am 
forced to choose the proposition that our being is to be 
explained on the basis of two fundamental elements. This, 
to my mind, offers the greatest likelihood of leading us 
to the final understanding toward which so many stal­
wart scientists strive. 
So many questions still confront us! But to ask them 
is the first step toward solution. I am confident that they 
will be answered in time. After adopting the dualist hy­
pothesis one can quite logically call upon the physicists 

Man's Being—Two Explanations · 81 
for help. Can electrical energy take two forms? What is 
the nature of the mind? Has it a structure? Can there be 
energy without structure? What is electricity? Whatever 
the answers to these questions may be, the mind is pres­
ent. 
As Aristotle expressed it, the mind is "attached to the 
body." The mind vanishes when the highest brain-mech­
anism ceases to function due to injury or due to epileptic 
interference or anesthetic drug. More than that, the mind 
vanishes during deep sleep. 
What happens when the mind vanishes? There are two 
obvious answers to that question; they arise from Sher­
rington's two alternatives—whether man's being is to be 
explained on the basis of one or two elements. If the first 
alternative is chosen, the mind no longer exists when it 
vanishes, since it is only a function of brain action. Mind 
is recreated each time the highest brain-mechanism goes 
into normal action. In this case, one must try to see 
the mind as the action of a specialized mechanism of the 
brain, the mechanism that I have called the "highest." 
Or, if one chooses the second, the dualistic alterna­
tive, the mind must be viewed as a basic element in itself. 
One might, then, call it a medium, an essence, a soma. 
That is to say, it has a continuing existence. On this 
basis, one must assume that although the mind is silent 
when it no longer has its special connection to the brain, 
it exists in the silent intervals and takes over control 
when the highest brain-mechanism does go into action. 
Thus, it would seem that this specialized brain-mecha­
nism switches off the power that energizes the mind each 
time it falls asleep. It switches on the mind when it wak­
ens. This is the daily automatic routine to which all 
mammals are committed and by which the brain recov­
ers from fatigue. 

82 · The Mystery of the Mind 
The highest brain-mechanism switches on this semi-
independent element, which instantly takes charge during 
wakefulness, and switches it off in sleep. Does this seem 
to be an improbable explanation? It is not so improbable, 
to my mind, as is the alternative expectation—that the 
highest brain-mechanism should itself understand, and 
reason, and direct voluntary action, and decide where 
attention should be turned and what the computer must 
learn, and record, and reveal on demand. 
But in the case of either alternative, the mind has no 
memory of its own as far as our evidence goes. The 
brain, like any computer, stores what it has learned dur­
ing active intervals. All of its records are instantly avail­
able to the conscious mind throughout the person's wak­
ing life, and in a distorted fashion during the dreams of 
the half-asleep state. 

21 · Comprehensibility 
A century of scientific progress has passed since Hugh-
lings Jackson suggested that there were high levels of 
functional organization in the brain. He seemed to con­
sider the highest as most closely related to the mind. 
Since his time, various partially independent mechanisms 
have been identified and mapped in the cerebral cortex 
and the higher brain-stem. None of them can explain the 
mind. The mind remains a mystery. 
I have told the story here of the progress of one pilgrim 
as he stumbled, sometimes blindly but always hopefully, 
toward a clearer understanding of what seemed to be the 
physical basis of the mind. It is almost forty years now 
since he happened upon the fact that a gentle electric 
current applied to the interpretive cortex of the temporal 
lobe could summon a flashback, thus activating the 
stream of consciousness from the past. Gradually, over 
the years, he has made critical reports of the nature of 
these experiential responses. These and the other results 
of electrical stimulation are reliable data, not opinions. 
The effects of epileptic discharge are clues to understand­
ing. Valid evidence has been presented that the integra­
tive neuronal action, which makes consciousness possible, 
is localized in the higher brain-stem rather than in the 
cerebral cortex. 
Now, I have suggested in this essay that there is a 
special form of energy that activates the mind during 
waking hours and that it must be derived somehow from 
neuronal energy. Hippocrates foretold the discovery of 
the highest brain-mechanism when he said, "to conscious­
ness the brain is messenger." The highest brain-mecha-

84 · The Mystery of the Mind 
nism is the messenger between the mind and the other 
brain-mechanisms. Or, to express it another way, the 
highest brain-mechanism is the mind's executive. Some­
how, the executive accepts direction from the mind and 
passes it on to various mechanisms of the brain. Thus, it 
passes on the short-term purposes of the mind to the 
automatic sensory-motor mechanism, which, in turn, 
carries a man through· much of his apparently conscious 
behavior in life. These two, the highest mechanism and 
the sensory-motor mechanism, coordinate sensory-input 
and motor-output in accordance with the purpose and 
the direction-of-attention of the mind. They manage the 
employment of the various skills, including that of speech. 
Together they carry out the central integrative activity 
of the brain. 
The foregoing statements are, of course, hypotheses in 
regard to the physical basis of the mind. They will serve 
to point the way ahead while one waits for an under­
standing of how messages are sent along neuronal circuits. 
That such mechanisms do exist, and such messages are 
carried, is proved by the evidence of epileptic patterns of 
discharge. It is proved also by electrical stimulation and 
by the many proofs of clinical experience. 
Other, younger men will have to reconsider critically 
the localization of the gray matter that is activated in 
experiential responses (Figure 11), and fill in the detail 
for Figures 9 and 10. They must proceed with the elabo­
ration of hypotheses to explain the "how" of neuronal ac­
tion during the focusing of attention. Finally, fresh ex­
plorers must discover how it is that the movement of 
potentials becomes awareness, and how purpose is trans­
lated into a patterned neuronal message. Neurophysiolo-
gists will need the help of chemists and physicists in all 
this, no doubt. 

Comprehensibility · 85 
There are many men of differing disciplines who can 
use of these data, whether they find it reasonable to at­
tempt to fit them into the hypothesis that the brain ex­
plains the mind, or whether they conclude, as I have 
done, that the mind is a separate but related element. 
One of these two "improbabilities" must be chosen. 
Taken either way, the nature of the mind presents the 
fundamental problem, perhaps the most difficult and most 
important of all problems. For myself, after a professional 
lifetime spent in trying to discover how the brain accounts 
for the mind, it comes as a surprise now to discover, dur­
ing this final examination of the evidence, that the dualist 
hypothesis seems the more reasonable of the two possible 
explanations. 
Since every man must adopt for himself, without the 
help of science, his way of life and his personal religion, 
I have long had my own private beliefs. What a thrill it 
is, then, to discover that the scientist, too, can legiti­
mately believe in the existence of the spirit! 
In the remainder of this chapter I shall at times speak 
less as a physiologist and more as a physician who, in 
addition to his addiction to science, is concerned about 
his patients, his family, and himself. But I shall do my 
best to take critical judgment with me each time I step 
"outside the boundaries of natural science." 
Possibly the scientist and the physician could add 
something by stepping outside the laboratory and the 
consulting room to reconsider these strangely gifted hu­
man beings about us. Where did the mind—call it the 
spirit if you like—come from? Who can say? It exists. 
The mind is attached to the action of a certain mecha­
nism within the brain. A mind has been thus attached in 
the case of every human being for many thousands of 

86 · The Mystery of the Mind 
generations, and there seems to be significant evidence of 
heredity in the mind's character from one generation to 
the next and the next. But at present, one can only say 
simply and without explanation, "the mind is born." 
Physicians, whose task it is to deal with the whole 
man, take a unique view of him. They have long been 
aware of the unexplained dichotomy (the functional 
split) between mind and body. Indeed, they have learned, 
as the saying goes, to "treat the mind as well as the body." 
They are well aware that body, brain, and mind make up 
the child. They develop together and yet they seem to 
remain apart as the years pass. These three, in a sort of 
ontogenetic symbiosis, go through life together. Each is 
useless without the other two. Mind takes the initiative 
in exploring the environment. 
Mind decides what is to be learned and recorded. The 
child grows and the mind comes to depend more and 
more on the memory and the automatic patterns of action 
stored away in the brain's computer. The mind conditions 
the brain. It programs the computer so that it can carry 
out an increasing number of routine performances. And 
so, as years pass, the mind has more and more free time 
to explore the world of the intellect, its own and that of 
others. 
If one were to draw curves to show the excellence of 
human performance, those of the body and the brain 
would rise, each to its zenith, in the twenties or the thir­
ties. In the forties, the curves would level off and begin 
to fall, for there are pathological processes, some pecu­
liar to the body and some to the brain, that inevitably 
slow them down as though with weights of lead. Thus 
the curves of excellent physical performance slope down­
ward toward inevitable zero. The Psalmist saw all this 
3,000 years ago when he wrote: "The days of our years 

Comprehensibility · 87 
are threescore years and ten" or, "by reason of strength 
... fourscore years." Man's span of life is predetermined. 
The legs grow weak. The memory-record, so readily 
available in early years, opens its "file" more slowly and 
reluctantly as the years pass. In the end, the brain may 
even fail, at times, to make any record at all of current 
events. Senescence is a symptom of failing performance 
by the body and the brain. Thus it enters one's life in 
various forms. 
In contrast to the other two, the mind seems to have 
no peculiar or inevitable pathology. Late in life, it moves 
to its own fulfillment. As the mind arrives at clearer un­
derstanding and better balanced judgment, the other two 
are beginning to fail in strength and speed. 
Here, as I approach the end of this study, is a further 
suggestion from the physician's point of view. It is an 
observation relevant to any inquiry into the nature of 
man's being, and in conformity with the proposition that 
the mind has a separate existence. It might even be taken 
as an argument for the feasibility and the possibility of 
immortality! 
"What becomes of the mind after death?" 
That question brings up the other question so often 
asked: "Can the mind communicate directly with other 
minds?" As far as any clearly proven scientific conclu­
sion goes, the answer to the second question is "no." The 
mind can communicate only through its brain-mecha­
nisms. Certainly it does so most often through the mecha­
nism of speech. Nonetheless, since the exact nature of the 
mind is a mystery and the source of its energy has yet 
to be identified, no scientist is in a position to say that 
direct communication between one active mind and an­
other cannot occur during life. He may say that unas­
sailable evidence of it has not yet been brought forward. 

88 · The Mystery of the Mind 
Direct communication between the mind of man and 
the mind of God is quite another matter. The argument, 
in favor of this, lies in the claim, made by so many men 
for so long a time that they have received guidance and 
revelation from some power beyond themselves through 
the medium of prayer. I see no reason to doubt this evi­
dence, nor any means of submitting it to scientific proof. 
Indeed, no scientist, by virtue of his science, has the 
right to pass judgment on the faiths by which men live 
and die. We can only set out the data about the brain, 
and present the physiological hypotheses that are rele­
vant to what the mind does. 
Now we must return, however reluctantly, to the first 
question: When death at last blows out the candle that 
was life, the mind seems to vanish, as in sleep. I said 
"seems." What can one really conclude? What is the 
reasonable hypothesis in regard to this matter, consider­
ing the physiological evidence? Only this: the brain has 
not explained the mind fully. The mind of man seems to 
derive its energy, perhaps in altered form, from the high­
est brain-mechanism during his waking hours. In the 
daily routine of a man's life, communication with other 
minds is carried out indirectly through the mechanisms of 
the brain. If this is so, it is clear that, in order to survive 
after death, the mind must establish a connection with a 
source of energy other than that of the brain. If not, the 
mind must disappear forever as surely as the brain and 
the body die and turn to dust. If, however, during life, 
when brain and mind are awake, direct communication 
is sometimes established with the minds of other men or 
with the mind of God, then it is clear that energy from 
without can reach a man's mind. In that case, it is not 
unreasonable for him to hope that after death the mind 
may waken to another source of energy. 

Comprehensibility · 89 
I mean that if the active mind of a man does commu­
nicate with other active minds, even on rare occasions, it 
could do so only by the transfer of some form of energy 
from mind to mind directly. Likewise, if the mind of 
man communicates with the mind of God directly, that 
also suggests that energy, in some form, passes from spirit 
to spirit. It is obvious that science can make no state­
ment at present in regard to the question of man's ex­
istence after death, although every thoughtful man must 
ask that question. But, when the nature of the energy 
that activates the mind is discovered (as I believe it will 
be), the time may yet come when scientists will be able 
to make a valid approach to a study of the nature of a 
spirit other than that of man. 
Man has no cause to fear the truth. It can, in the end, 
only fortify the valid creeds by which he lives. Deep in 
his nature is the urge to explore, and to learn, and to 
adopt a creed that will give him reassurance. The com­
mon man has a personal credo too. It is apt to differ, if 
only a little, from that of his fellows. And therein lies the 
strength and hope of the race. 
The facts and hypotheses discussed here may well be 
of use in many fields of specialized thinking such as re­
ligion, philosophy, and psychiatry, as well as physics, 
chemistry, and medicine. Whether the mind is truly a 
separate element or whether, in some way not yet ap­
parent, it is an expression of neuronal action, the deci­
sion must wait for further scientific evidence. We have 
discussed here only one body of that evidence. But, since 
it is incomplete, one must consider two hypotheses of 
explanation. 
Meanwhile, there is a practical problem confronting 
man. He must learn to control his own social evolution, 
and I speak, for the moment, as a concerned physician 

90 · The Mystery of the Mind 
rather than as a basic scientist. This is the pressing prob­
lem of human destiny. This problem will be solved only 
through more fundamental understanding. Comprehen­
sion will make clear the way of wisdom. 
Biophysicists might well reflect that after life appeared 
in the long, long story of creation, evidence of self-aware­
ness made its first appearance along with the appearance 
of the complicated brain. Thus, late in the process of 
biological evolution, consciousness—a new and very dif­
ferent phenomenon—had presented itself. This resulted 
in the appearance of a new world, created by the mind 
of man, in which there was understanding and reason 
and, eventually, onrushing social evolution! 
What a challenge is here for man to face, a problem 
no less vast than that to be glimpsed in outer space! It 
was a physicist, Albert Einstein, who in a moment of un­
derstanding exclaimed: "The mystery of the world is its 
comprehensibility." 
I have no doubt the day will dawn when the mystery 
of the mind will no longer be a mystery. 
FINIS 

Reflections by Sir Charles Symonds 
Afterthoughts by the Author 


Reflections 
by Sir Charles Symonds, K.B.E., C.B., D.M. OXON., 
F.R.C.P.* 
My own views on this subject have been influenced by 
the writings of Hughlings Jackson from whom I shall 
quote extracts relevant to the theme of your book. 
Of the three alternatives Hughlings Jackson propound­
ed for the relation of Consciousness to activities of the 
Highest Centers (l),t his own choice was the third— 
Concomitance (or psycho-physical parallelism). This I 
reject as being beyond my understanding. You conclude 
in favor of his first alternative, viz., "An immaterial 
agency is supposed to produce physical effects." This 
also I reject on the ground that it depends, scientifically 
speaking, upon negative conclusions. I am left with the 
second alternative "that activities of the highest centers 
and mental states are one and the same thing, or are 
different sides of the same thing."! 
My standpoint on this view agrees with that of Adrian 
(2) expressed in the 1966 symposium to which you refer. 
"The physiologist," he says, "is not forced to reject the 
old-fashioned picture of himself as an individual with a 
will of his own, for the position allows some validity to 
the introspective as well as the physiological account. It 
* Formerly Neurologist at Guy's Hospital, London. These are 
his "Reflections" written after reading the prepublication manu­
script. 
t The bibliographic references may be found in a separate 
list of references at the end of this critique. 
t See Note A in Afterthoughts. 

92 · Sir Charles Symonds 
admits that the two are incompatible, but does not main­
tain that they must always be so . . . Possibly our picture 
of brain events, or of human actions, may be changed 
so radically, that in the end they will account for the 
thinker as well as his thoughts." Your own conclusion 
and mine are alike in this—each requires an act of faith! 
Hughlings Jackson has a good deal to say about the 
relation of consciousness to the highest nervous centers. 
He insists that every process of "mentation" must be as­
sociated with a corresponding activity in the nervous ar­
rangements of the highest levels. "Consciousness,"* he 
says, "is not an unvarying independent entity." (3) Con­
sciousness arises during activity of some of those of our 
highest nervous arrangements. His meaning in this con­
text is further revealed by the statement, "Consciousness 
is a varying quantity—that is, we are from moment to 
moment differently conscious." (6) And again, "We 
spoke of the substrata of consciousness being the highest 
nervous arrangements. Yet to avoid misunderstanding, 
we pointed out explicitly . . . that we do not really sup-
* Hughlings Jackson makes it clear that for him consciousness 
has a wide meaning. "We have not got a consciousness and latest 
and highest mental states; we have only two names for one 
thing." (4) And again, "Whilst a man is having states of con­
sciousness (in artificial analysis, Willing, Remembering, Reason­
ing and Feeling) there are correlatively with those purely 
psychical states, the physical things, slight discharges of nervous 
arrangements of his highest centers." (5) 
For the clinician, loss of consciousness and impairment of 
mental activities are quite different. A patient who suffers from 
what we call dementia may by our standards be fully conscious. 
The man who is asleep is unconscious, but we do not judge him 
to be demented. Nevertheless in our discussions of the mind-
brain relationship we are accustomed to take consciousness to 
represent the highest level of mentation. 

Reflections · 93 
pose there to be one fixed seat of consciousness. Now, if 
the expression be permitted, we shall speak of several 
highest nervous arrangements." (7) 
His belief is that the pattern of these nervous arrange­
ments is constantly changing. He says, "I do not mean 
that there are fixed nervous arrangements, answering to 
particular ideas, etc., in the anatomical substrata of sub­
ject consciousness;* there are only such nervous arrange­
ments when the ideas etc. are actual. At other times the 
cells and fibres, in constant activity, keep up a state of 
general tension (nervous tonus); it is on the particular 
breaking of this strained equilibrium that nervous ar­
rangements temporarily exist." (8) 
Writing again of these nervous arrangements he says, 
"To speak of the anatomy, physiology, and pathology of 
loss of consciousness may seem strange; but we have al­
ready explained that the anatomical substrata of con­
sciousness are only highly compound sensori-motor 
processes fundamentally like those of lower centres, dif­
fering in being the most special and complex of all. They 
have then, their anatomy, their physiology and their 
pathology." (9) 
And in a footnote he adds, "Moreover the anatomo-
physiological statement is not loss of consciousness, but, 
as previously explained, loss of correspondence of the or­
ganism as a whole with its environment. When we come 
to anatomy we shall point out that there is not one seat 
of consciousness, for consciousness is a varying quantity 
—that is we are from moment to moment differently 
conscious, we are continually changing correspondence 
* In this passage Hughlings Jackson has been discussing the 
duality of consciousness—subjective and objective. Elsewhere he 
states his view that these are in reality two halves of the same 
thing. 

94 · Sir Charles Symonds 
with our environment." (10) Throughout his arguments 
there is insistence on the separation of consciousness, 
which is immaterial, from the nervous arrangements, 
which are physical; but occasionally he seems to depart 
for a moment from his own rule. For example in discus­
sing anarthria, observed in a case of bulbar palsy, he notes 
that the patient can speak "internally," concluding that 
the cerebral motor nervous arrangements continue to 
represent articulatory movements, though the medullary 
centers and muscles have disappeared. He adds "these 
cerebral motor nervous arrangements have, as they have 
in healthy men, a psychical side." (11) On the hypothesis 
I have chosen, all nervous arrangements at Hughlings 
Jackson's highest level "have their psychical side." The 
anatomy, physiology, and pathology of these nervous ar­
rangements are directly concerned with the mental phe­
nomena dependent upon their activities. We are, there­
fore, justified in thinking, as far as we are able, about the 
anatomy, physiology, and pathology of the mind.* 
ANATOMY 
Here I think we should inquire how low in the evolu­
tionary scale can we detect, from behavior, what Hugh-
lings Jackson called "mentation." 
You mention the ant in this connection. I wonder if 
you had in mind the observation recorded by Thomas 
Belt in The Naturalist in Nicaragua. (12) I quote, "I 
shall conclude this long account of the leaf cutting ants 
with an instance of their reasoning powers. A nest was 
made near one of our tramways, and to get to the trees 
the ants had to cross the rails, over which the waggons 
* See Note B in Afterthoughts. 

Reflections · 95 
were continually passing and repassing. Every time they 
came along a number of ants were crushed to death. They 
persevered in crossing for several days, but at last set to 
work and tunnelled under each rail. One day when the 
waggons were not running I stopped up the tunnels with 
stones; but although great numbers carrying leaves were 
thus cut off from the nest, they would not cross the rails, 
but set to work making fresh tunnels underneath them." 
As commentary upon this observation I quote W. H. 
Thorpe: "If we can see purposive behavior in animals or 
man, we have provisional grounds for believing that there 
is within the organism some sort of expectancy of the 
future, which entails or implies a capacity for ideation, 
an integration of ideas about past and future, and a tem­
poral organization of ideas." (13)1 know nothing about 
the nervous system of the ant, but it would seem that it 
contains a prototype of the anatomical substrata of mind. 
J. Z. Young (14) has made a prolonged study of 
learning behavior in the octopus, and pursued in this 
creature the search for the neurones concerned, arriving 
at some interesting conclusions. I suggest that comparable 
studies should be made in other creatures before we jump 
to conclusions about the human mind. There is, I think, 
plenty of scope for this. Dolphins, birds, cats, dogs, and 
chimpanzees all manifest behavior showing that they have 
powers of reasoning. It may be objected that there is no 
evidence of self-awareness in these lower forms of life. 
But then there is no evidence that there is not. The cring­
ing behavior of a dog detected by its master in some mis­
demeanor suggests that there may be.* 
Your concept of a centrencephalic localization of 
Hughlings Jackson's highest level doubtless has more ana-
* See Note C in Afterthoughts. 

96 · Sir Charles Symonds 
tomical basis than I am aware of. I should have welcomed 
more details of this than appear in your monograph. For 
example, you state of sensory impulses that each stream 
comes to a first cellular interruption in the gray matter 
within the brain stem, but continues in a detour out to a 
second cellular interruption in the gray matter of the 
cerebral cortex. From there it returns directly to the target 
nucleus of cells within the gray matter of the higher 
brain-stem. I ask myself where is the anatomical verifica­
tion for this last sentence. Incidentally I would point out 
that your statement takes no notice of the fact that the 
first cellular interruption is in the gray matter of the 
spinal cord, and that at this level there is complex inter­
activity of facilitation and inhibition, both local and 
centrifugal. (15, 16) 
The anatomy of the reticular formation is another mat­
ter and, I suppose, more relevant to wakefulness; though 
this is really an aspect of consciousness.* 
PHYSIOLOGY 
The definition that Stanley Cobb gave me of conscious­
ness was "a function of the brain in action." Function is 
a physiological term, and for this reason Hughlings Jack­
son would not allow its use for a description of mental 
activity; but on my hypothesis the definition is justified. 
It does not imply any localization of the function, which, 
I suggest, may be diffusely represented, varying both in 
space and time. As Hughlings Jackson said, we are dif­
ferently conscious from one moment to another. It is a 
function, presumably, of synaptic activity, now here and 
now there. It seems to me more probable that its repre-
* See Note D in Afterthoughts. 

Reflections · 97 
sentation is in the cortex than in the diencephalon, having 
regard to the relative numbers of neurones available. 
That considerable areas of cortex may be injured, or re­
moved, without loss of consciousness may depend upon 
a large amount of equipotentiality in what you call the 
uncommitted cortex. 
The synaptic activity associated with consciousness is 
continuously present except during sleep. The explana­
tion for this appears to be that the reticular formation in 
the brain stem in some way facilitates, or "drives" the 
higher centers, and that in sleep the activity of the reticu­
lar formation is inhibited. Here the relationship of con­
sciousness to the brain-stem seems well established. 
From an electroencephalogram it appears that neu­
ronal activity in the cortex is constant even in sleep. The 
energy for all this neuronal activity is derived from the 
metabolism of glucose, for which the brain has a demand-
for-size greater than that of any other organ. The crucial 
question, of course, is whether the direction of mental ac­
tivity is itself a neural function. Such direction of mental 
activity appears to occur in the leaf-cutting ant, in which 
it is difficult to suppose that the direction is due to an 
immaterial agent. 
PATHOLOGY 
You say that injury or disease of the higher brain-stem 
always causes loss of consciousness. I think this may be 
true of acute lesions, e. g., trauma or vascular accident. 
But then the loss of consciousness resembles that of sleep. 
Geoffrey Jefferson (17) in writing of concussion made 
this point, and coined the term "parasomnia" to describe 
the condition. The mind is in abeyance, but there are, he 
says, variations in the picture that can be regarded as 

98 · Sir Charles Symonds 
"the arrest of a moment of awakening and the giving to 
it of duration." I wonder whether the state of your patient 
Landau, when you first saw him, may not have been one 
of parasomnia in the Jeffersonian sense? 
Chronic disease of the higher brain-stem, as caused by 
tumors, does not, I think, as a rule, cause dementia, or 
loss of consciousness in the absence of increased intra­
cranial pressure. When there is loss of consciousness it 
takes the form of parasomnia, or of akinetic mutism. 
Cairns (18) in his study of brain-stem tumors arrived at 
the same conclusion. However, dementia is constantly 
observed when the cerebral cortex is extensively affected 
by disease, as in the presenile dementias and the lipi­
doses. The traumatic dementias associated with wide­
spread bilateral damage to white matter, without neces­
sarily any brain-stem lesion (19), offer another example 
of localization other than centrencephalic. 
One of the most significant events in the story of the 
mind-brain relationship was, I think, the occurrence of 
the obsessive-compulsive syndrome as a sequel of en­
cephalitis lethargica. Because the observation is more 
than half a century old it is apt to be forgotten. I saw a 
great many of these patients, whose mental lives were 
preoccupied with compulsive thoughts, compulsive utter­
ances, and compulsive behavior to an extent that often 
caused severe disability. Here were psychical events result­
ing from a physical cause, and one of the regions severely 
involved in this disease was the brain-stem, and especially 
the peri-aqueductal gray matter. 
I imagine the symptoms I have described to have been 
caused by a defect of inhibitory control of neurones whose 
function is to drive the mental machinery—to use a crude 
analogy. This does not imply that the neurones compris­
ing the anatomical substrata of mind are situated in the 

Reflections · 99 
brain-stem. On the contrary, there is evidence to suggest 
that these neurones, those that were in a state of enhanced 
activity in consequence of the failure of inhibition, were 
far remote from the lesion. 
The obsessive-compulsive syndrome, comparable with 
that of the postencephalitic patients, is quite commonly 
observed in persons who have not suffered from encepha­
litis, and is then sometimes subject to remission and re­
lapse, suggesting a reversible biochemical lesion. When 
there is no remission bifrontal leucotomy may effect a 
cure. Of this there is no doubt. I have published a case 
(20) illustrating this sequence of events with a satisfac­
tory follow-up over many years. I assume that in such 
cases it is the removal of the target-neurones, acted upon 
by the overactive centers in the brain stem, that is effec­
tive. It follows that these target neurones (being part of 
the anatomical substrata of mind) lie in the frontal cor­
tex, not in the brain stem. I do not mean to imply that 
the frontal cortex is of special importance in this connec­
tion. I suppose the anatomical substrata of mind to be 
widely distributed throughout the cortex, and that abla­
tion of other areas of cortex might have the same effect. 
Then there is the problem of schizophrenia. Here we 
observe a disorder of mind with characteristic features— 
thought disorder, inappropriate affect, or lack of affect, 
forced thinking, delusions, hallucinations, etc., which 
surely has an organic basis, though as yet none has been 
discovered. The genetic factor in this disease is of out­
standing importance. If one sibling is affected, the 
chances of another having the same disease is 14 per­
cent as compared with a general incidence of 0.8 per­
cent. Genes are physical things. The absence of any 
structural pathology suggests a biochemical disorder— 
perhaps an enzymatic defect. It may be argued that it is 

100 · Sir Charles Symonds 
only the organ of mind that is diseased in schizophrenia, 
but introspective judgment, derived from the observation 
of many cases, leads me to the conviction that there is 
involvement of the thinker as well as his thoughts. 
I used to discuss these problems with Russell Brain. 
Originally a dualist, he became converted to what he 
called a neutral monism, and this, I think, is a fair de­
scription of my own position. 
I have said nothing about your fascinating observa­
tions on the interpretive-cortex, or on speech, which are 
of classical importance, as I do not think they are espe­
cially relevant to the matters I have discussed here. 
References 
1. JACKSON, J. H. 1931. Selected Writings of John 
Hughlings Jackson. Vol. II, p. 84. London: Hodder and 
Stoughton. 
2. ADRIAN, E. D. 1966. In Brain and Conscious Ex­
perience, J. C. Eccles, ed. New York: Springer-Verlag, 
p. 238. 
3. Selected Writings. Vol. I, p. 242. 
4. Selected Writings. Vol. I, p. 289. 
5. Selected Writings. Vol. II, p. 402. 
6. Selected Writings. Vol. I, p. 205, footnote. 
7. Selected Writings. Vol. I, p. 241. 
8. Selected Writings. Vol. II, p. 98, footnote. 
9. Selected Writings. Vol. I, p. 205. 
10. Selected Writings. Vol. I, p. 205, footnote. 
11. Selected Writings. Vol. II, p. 207. 
12. BELT T. The Naturalist in Nicaragua. Everymans 
Library, p. 69. 
13. THORPE, W. H. 1966. In Brain and Conscious Ex­
perience. J. C. Eccles, ed. New York: Springer-Verlag, 
p. 472. 

Reflections · 101 
14. YOUNG, J. Z. 1965. Proc. Roy. Soc. B. 163:235. 
15. DAWSON, G. D. 1958. Proc. Roy. Soc. Med. 51:531. 
16. DENNY-BROWN, D., E. J. KIRK, and N. YANAGI-
s AN A, 1973. J. Comp. Neur. 151:175. 
17. JEFFERSON, G. 1944. B.M.J. 1:1. 
18. CAIRNS, H. 1952. 75:109. 
19. STRICH, S. J. 1961. Lancet. 2:443. 
20. SYMONDS, Sir C. 1956. Imprensa Medica. Lisbon. 

Afterthoughts by the Author 
When the text of this monograph was completed I sent 
a copy to Sir Charles Symonds, a London neurologist for 
whom I have great respect and affection. He responded 
with a letter and a scholarly critique. I wrote him in reply 
as follows: 
Thank you for your letter and for the "Reflections 
on The Mystery of the Mind." When I mailed to you my 
manuscript by way of Adrian, I hoped you would do 
just this. But I hardly hoped for such a studied treatise. 
It is beautifully expressed. You say you have been 
deliberately critical. Yes, of course, that is what I 
wanted. It is only the truth that interests me, as it does 
you. 
Your observations supplement mine in a remarkable 
way. Some of them would inform the reader of my book 
and help him to understand what has been going on 
in the broad field of neurology. Your discussion of the 
philosophy of the great clinician, John Hughlings 
Jackson and your neurological survey of the relation­
ship of "mental disease" due to brain abnormality will 
add perspective to this monograph—if you will agree 
to the proposal I am about to make to you: 
I would like to publish your critique just as you have 
sent it to me. I shall place it after the text. Your ob­
jections and questions would give me an opportunity 
to clarify what was not clear in my descriptions and 
to meet your objections if I can. To this end, I propose 
to follow your critique with a brief clarification, entitled 
"Afterthoughts." 

Author's Afterthoughts · 103 
I am hoping you will join me thus in this endeavor. 
Ourfriendship has been such a happy one!, beginning 
that summer when we were studying neuropathology 
and sat working with microscopes at the same bench 
in Godwin Greenfield's Laboratory at Queen Square. 
We have renewed it through the years, in your home 
and at Harvey Cushing's Clinic in Boston, and chez 
nous here in the Montreal Neurological Institute! 
I shall make a few comments on your arguments, 
inserting a reference such as A, B, or C, etc. in your 
text to signify where each would apply. But I shall not 
attempt to answer you when I am persuaded that the 
text of the monograph has already done this. 
Sir Charles agreed, and so my afterthoughts follow: 
A. 
You review Jackson's three alternative conclusions in 
regard to the brain-mind problem. Then you suppose that 
I am satisfied to adopt his first alternative, "an immaterial 
agency" producing "physical effects," for my own work­
ing hypothesis. 
I am not satisfied to accept Jackson's hypothesis that 
you assign to me. First of all, I do not like the phrase 
"immaterial agency" since it seems to make assumptions 
yet to be examined. Secondly, I don't begin by a conclu­
sion at all and I don't end by making a final and unal­
terable one. But I shall elaborate this point of view at the 
end of these afterthoughts. 
As a matter of fact all through my experimental and 
exploratory career, I adopted the assumption that you 
(and Lord Adrian, you say) accept: "that activities of 
the highest centers and of mental states are one and the 
same thing." 

104 · Author's Afterthoughts 
That is the correct scientific approach for a neuro-
physiologist: to try to prove that the brain explains the 
mind and that mind is no more than a function of the 
brain. But during this time of analysis, I found no sug­
gestion of action by a brain-mechanism that accounts for 
mind-action (Chapter 17). That is in spite of the fact 
that there is a highest brain-mechanism and that it seems 
to awaken the mind, as though it gave it energy, and 
seems itself to be used in turn by the mind as "mes­
senger." Since I cannot explain the mind on the basis of 
your "assumption," I conclude that one must consider a 
second hypothesis: that man's being is to be explained 
by two fundamental elements. 
B. 
I am delighted to have your discussion of the thinking 
of Hughlings Jackson in regard to consciousness and 
what he called the "highest nervous arrangements." No 
one today could present the Gospel of Neurology accord­
ing to John Hughlings Jackson so well as you. Don't think 
I am being flippant or disrespectful. I'm not. Certainly I 
am as much indebted to him as you. I think I am more 
so. 
Jackson came to be London's great prophet of neu­
rology because he read the meanings of epilepsy in terms 
of brain function. He surmised the truth, that in each 
epileptic seizure there is a discharge, a release of energy, 
in gray matter of the brain. He saw the result, in each 
case, as an illuminating experiment that could throw 
light on the functional "arrangements" within the brain. 
It is a hundred years since the time of Jackson. We 
have been able to use stimulating electrodes that do the 
things that an epileptic discharge can do, i.e.: to activate 

Author's Afterthoughts · 105 
or to arrest mechanisms of the brain, elaborating and 
adding to Jackson's surmises. With the help of conscious 
patients, we have charted the motor and sensory cortex, 
and added much detail. Areas of cortex, previously called 
silent, are now recognized as psychical. It is time to re­
consider the data old and new. There is a physiology of 
epilepsy, too, as Jackson discovered. All this can now 
be amplified. It is time to apply this clearer understanding 
of epilepsy, that I have outlined, to the physiology of 
brain function. But I question whether, even now, we 
should speak of a "physiology of the mind," as Jackson 
does; not until we discover more about the nature of the 
mind. 
C. 
Surely you are not suggesting that investigators should 
solve the problems of "mentation" in organisms that are 
lower in the evolutionary scale than man, before ap­
proaching the problem in man! We have learned a great 
deal about the engram that is responsible for memory 
in man. It could not possibly have been discovered in 
lower forms that do not speak. For example, stimulation 
of the interpretive-cortex of a conscious man causes the 
record of the stream of consciousness to bring back to 
him the past, and he speaks during the stimulation to 
tell us of it.19·20·21·22 (See Proceedings of the Royal Society 
of Medicine, August, 1968, "Engrams in the Human 
Brain.") Nothing is more relevant to an understanding 
of consciousness than what we have learned from stimu­
lation of the interpretive-cortex. 
The beautiful story of Belt's leaf-cutting ants that you 
have retold seems, to me, to show clearly that there is 
self-awareness in the ant. That ant who carries his leaf 

106 · Author's Afterthoughts 
to the rail and stops, finding the hole closed underneath 
the rail, must be aware of himself and his predicament if 
he begins to make a new hole. 
Life made its appearance on this planet a long while 
ago and a long while after that, organisms, whose be­
havior suggests self-awareness or consciousness, made 
their first appearance. One can only suppose that it was 
then that mind made its appearance on earth whether it 
was as a function or as a related element. When I speak 
thus of mind and brain I am assuming that a mind existed 
only in relation to a brain. 
After the creation of matter and the appearance of 
life, consciousness made its appearance on earth quite 
late in the universal calendar. We do well to reserve 
opinion of the past until we understand man, who can 
be so much more easily studied in the present. Explorers 
in each field of neuroscience should push ahead wherever 
valid clues present themselves. But exploration of the 
mind and brain of man throws light on all other creatures. 
Such work as this monograph is necessarily hypotheti­
cal and prophetic. It is a study of neurophysiology. Some 
day anatomists, chemists, and physicists will explain 
the "how" of many things, no doubt. Meanwhile the 
mechanisms of brain-action that make sensation, move­
ment, language, perception, learning, memory, and con­
sciousness possible can be understood by us with ever-
increasing certainty, even before we comprehend the 
"how" of a neuron's conduction of electrical potentials, 
and before we complete the mapping of circuits within 
the brain of lower forms. 
I spent six months working on the microscopic anat­
omy of the mammalian brain in Madrid with del Rio-
Hortega and the great Ramon y Cajal, whom Sherring­
ton considered the greatest neuroanatomist of all time. 
One of my Spanish associates in the Madrid laboratories 

Author's Afterthoughts · 107 
had been started by Cajal on a study of the ant's brain 
years before. The disciple complained to me that Cajal 
had hoped originally to discover a simpler brain in the 
ant. Not so. It seemed far more complicated than ex­
pected. Consequently Cajal turned back to the mammal­
ian brain, the brain that you and I are using, as best we 
can, in this effort to understand man. You and I can only 
be thankful that Cajal did turn back, even though he left 
his assistant unaided in his effort to understand the mean­
ing, in terms of function, of the multiform circuits en­
countered in the ant's brain. 
D. 
Yes, I agree that a first cellular interruption for so­
matic sensation does occur in the spinal cord, and I am 
sure it is important for spinal reflexes. But we are con­
sidering a higher integration. I was thinking of the arrival 
of each afferent stream of impulses at a higher level as 
having a first cellular interruption in the diencephalon. 
With the exception of pain, the other important sensory 
streams (visual, somatic, and auditory) make a detour to 
special areas of gray matter on the convolutions of the 
cortex where they come to a second cellular interruption. 
You ask for "anatomical verification" of my statement 
that from there, each sensory stream "returns directly to 
the target-nucleus of cells within the gray matter of the 
higher brain-stem." This question is one that F. M. R. 
Walshe asked. To some extent the answer is self-evident, 
since each convolution is an outbudding of some thalamic 
nucleus in the diencephalon, as shown by Earl Walker's 
early anatomical studies. 
The "target-nucleus," as I have called it, must be 
within the integrative complex. No one, as yet, can de­
scribe the detailed microscopic anatomy of integration 
with its automatic inhibitions and activations. No one 

108 · Author's Afterthoughts 
can map the intricacies of man's marvelous computer. 
But automatic integration does go on. Man has a compu­
ter. There is reflex action and there is reasoned action. 
There is a highest brain-mechanism and it can be inacti­
vated selectively by epileptic discharge within the dien-
cephalon. 
I can also answer your question by giving you the 
conclusions and the evidence of physiology, epilepsy, and 
neurosurgery. This, too, is neurology. 
During surgical treatment for epilepsy, conscious pa­
tients have allowed neurosurgeons to establish exact 
frontiers for all these sensory areas on the human cortex. 
This has been verified, as you well know, by using a 
stimulating electrode and by excising convolutions here 
or there in the hope of cure. 
As a neurosurgeon who has . removed convolutions 
down to where the stem or white matter of the convolu­
tion is attached to the diencephalon in hundreds of cases, 
the answer to your question is quite easy, so easy in fact 
that I am startled to realize that I did not present it 
clearly. * 
* Take the postcentral gyrus: Through it flows sensory data 
that make discriminatory sensation possible. If the gyrus behind 
it is removed or if the precentral gyrus, which is in front of it, is 
removed completely, or if both of them are removed, sensation 
in the fingers of the opposite hand is not lost. Point localization 
is still possible, and the sense of position of a finger in space is 
intact. Therefore, the information has reached the target, which 
must be in the diencephalon. If, however, the postcentral gyrus 
is selectively removed and the white-matter tracts that connect 
the cortex with a thalamic nucleus of the diencephalon are cut, 
discriminative sensation is lost in the fingers of the opposite side. 
The same can be said of the visual cortex. As long as its connec­
tion to the diencephalon is preserved, vision in the opposite 
visual field is preserved. 

Author's Afterthoughts · 109 
Obviously the somatic-sensory data and the visual data 
required for conscious voluntary motor activity do enter 
the diencephalon. 
Next there is clear evidence that the outgoing stream 
of neurone potentials that initiates voluntary activity 
comes from the diencephalon and enters the precentral 
gyrus on its way to the muscles of the body. This initiat­
ing stream of impulses cannot come to the precentral 
gyrus from other parts of the brain along so-called "as­
sociation tracts," because wide removal of other parts of 
cortex down to diencephalon does not interfere with this 
voluntary control.* 
I have referred to the system of connections that must 
serve the integrative activity that comes between the sen­
sory input, into the diencephalon, and the motor output 
as the centrencephalic system. Within that integrating 
system there is an automatic computer and a mechanism 
that makes consciousness possible. When the specialized 
areas of the cerebral cortex are in action, some of them 
at least are as much involved in the neurone action re­
lated to consciousness as is the diencephalon. 
GENERAL CONCLUSION 
To suppose that consciousness or the mind has localiza­
tion is a failure to understand neurophysiology. The great 
mathematician and philosopher, Rene Descartes (159 6— 
1650), made a mistake when he placed it in the pineal 
gland. The amusing aspect is that he came so close to that 
part of the brain in which the essential circuits of the 
highest brain-mechanism must be active to make con­
sciousness possible. 
* More complete substantiation of this and other evidence is 
to be found in "Mechanisms of Voluntary Movement."24 

110 · Author's Afterthoughts 
Centrencephalic integrative action serves the purposes 
of two semi-separable mechanisms, (a) the highest brain-
mechanism, and (b) the automatic sensory-motor brain-
mechanism (or brain-computer). Perhaps I should say 
that these two mechanisms are the two parts of this final 
centrencephalic integration. The centrencephalic system 
has a major direct connection with the new portions of 
the frontal lobes and of the temporal lobes that form 
such a large proportional addition in passing up the 
mammalian scale from ape to man. The anatomical veri­
fication for this statement is to be found in the recent 
anatomical studies of Walle Nauta.12 The connection is 
between anterior frontal cortex and hypothalamus on the 
one hand. It is also between antero-inferior temporal cor­
tex and the medio-dorsal nucleus of the thalamus on the 
other. The evidence from our studies of epileptic patterns 
suggests that gray matter in the highest brain-mechanism 
had direct connection with these parts of frontal and 
temporal lobes while the gray matter of the automatic 
sensory-motor mechanism is directly connected to the 
various areas of sensory and motor cortex. One may as­
sume that the highest brain-mechanism makes its major 
connections with the sensory and motor cortex only 
through the automatic mechanism of the diencephalon.* 
Let me reconsider: Sensory targets must be in close 
relation (i.e., closely connected to) to the mechanism 
from which voluntary motor control emerges to the 
periphery. That means that it is in the higher brain-stem. 
It is a clinical and physiological hypothesis that has now 
been verified by long experience with brain stimulation 
* This anatomical substantiation12 of the basis for the action of 
the centrencephalic system was announced by Nauta (to my de­
light) in his Hughlings Jackson Lecture at the Montreal Neuro­
logical Institute, May 8, 1974. 

Author's Afterthoughts · 111 
and convolution removal. But let me look back for a 
moment: For years it had been assumed that sensory data 
were taken to the cerebral cortex, and that conscious be­
havior was controlled by the cortex, and that the "asso­
ciation" nerve fibers that run over the surface of the cor­
tex somehow accounted for all that takes place between 
sensory input and motor output. Jackson suggested the 
highest level of integration might be in the anterior 
frontal lobes for a time. But in the face of clinical experi­
ence, he let the suggestion lapse. The importance of his 
teaching was that he knew it would be discovered some­
where and he had ideas about its physiological organiza-
zation that had come to him from the study of epilepsy. 
My curiosity about the mind-brain relationship began 
during the 1920s in a major study of decerebrate cats. I 
joined Cuthbert Bazett in this study while in Sherring­
ton's laboratory. We removed the higher brain-stem and 
hemisphere of these animals, preserving the lower brain­
stem and spinal cord. After operation, they had no con­
sciousness, no mind. They were completely automatic 
reflex "preparations." As pointed out in the Preface, life 
was there and reflex mechanisms were there, but there 
was no evidence of mind. After turning from physiology 
to neurology and neurosurgery, I eventually had the op­
portunity of working as a neurosurgeon with an excellent 
team and facilities for study in the Montreal Neurological 
Institute. It opened its doors in 1934. In 1936 I was 
called upon to give the Harvey Lecture at the Academy 
of Medicine in New York.141 chose "The Cerebral Cortex 
and Consciousness" for my title. I presented the obvious 
conclusions that had been forced upon me in the first 
years of neurosurgical practice, notably the evidence de­
rived from therapeutic brain removal, exploratory elec­
trical stimulation, and the obvious relationship of un-

112 · Author's Afterthoughts 
consciousness to injury to the diencephalon, which was 
evident in clinical practice. 
As I pointed out in Chapter 5 (page 18), my Harvey 
Lecture was important in the evolution of my own clinical 
understanding. It was so obvious that the integration 
within the central nervous system, which makes con­
sciousness possible, did not take place in the cerebral 
cortex. It was not to be found in the new brain at all, but 
in the old brain. It was "below the cortex and above the 
midbrain." Much that I surmised in 1936 was proven 
over and over again in clinical cases, during the years 
that followed. 
I closed the Harvey Lecture with these words: 
This discussion has . . . been concerned with the 
localization of the "place of understanding," and 
by "place" is meant the location of those neuronal 
circuits which are most intimately associated with the 
initiation of voluntary activity and with the sensory 
summation prerequisite to it. 
In 1952 I published a paper, "Epileptic Automatism 
and the Centrencephalic Integrating System."15 It was 
clear that epileptic discharge passed directly from an­
terior frontal cortex and also from anterior temporal cor­
tex to the diencephalon, where the interfering discharge 
inactivated a highest brain-mechanism that was most 
closely related to consciousness. Thinking of a new word 
to suggest that final integrative action took place cen­
trally in the diencephalon where primary epileptic in-
activation as well as injury produced loss of conscious­
ness, I proposed the phrase centrencephalic integration. 
I could only presume the existence of the anatomical 
connections that Nauta has now demonstrated. I assumed, 
and still assume, that each sensory area (on whatever 

Author's Afterthoughts · 113 
convolution it is located in the cerebral cortex) sends its 
stream of data onward into that part of the diencephalon 
from which the cortical convolution in question is the 
structural outgrowth. Now that examination of the neuro­
physiology of epilepsy makes it possible to recognize (a) 
the automatic sensory-motor mechanism in the dien­
cephalon, and (b) the highest brain-mechanism, there is 
good evidence that the afferent stream of sensory infor­
mation leads directly into (a) the automatic sensory-
motor mechanism. From there, unless it is blocked by 
inhibition, it passes on to the level of conscious aware­
ness. That is to say, it passes on to (b) the highest brain-
mechanism. 
Without the anatomical detail, I give you indirect evi­
dence, which is clinical and physiological: Voluntary be­
havior is controlled by a stream of neuronal potentials 
that emerges from the diencephalon. Complicated ma­
neuvers have a cellular interruption in the precentral mo­
tor gyrus, while gross control is carried out by direct 
nerve connections to the spinal cord. (A "stroke" that 
blocks conduction through the precentral gyrus makes it 
impossible to play the piano, but leaves the capacity to 
make gross pawlike movements.) From the precentral 
gyrus the stream of potentials goes out along the well 
known pathway to the muscles of the body and results in 
complicated voluntary action. The data, from sensory in­
flow and from mind-action, must reach the neuronal cir­
cuits of the diencephalon. (See Chapters 3, 4, 5, and 6.) 
And so I come to my final reconsideration: I worked 
as a scientist trying to prove that the brain accounted for 
the mind and demonstrating as many brain-mechanisms 
as possible hoping to show how the brain did so. In pre­
senting this monograph I do not begin with a conclusion 
and I do not end by making a final and unalterable one. 

114 · Author's Afterthoughts 
Instead, I reconsider the present-day neurophysiological 
evidence on the basis of two hypotheses: (a) that man's 
being consists of one fundamental element, and (b) that 
it consists of two. I take the position that the brain-
mechanisms, which we (my many colleagues and I all 
around the world), are working out, would, of course, 
have to be employed on the basis of either alternative. 
In the end I conclude that there is no good evidence, in 
spite of new methods, such as the employment of stimu­
lating electrodes, the study of conscious patients and the 
analysis of epileptic attacks, that the brain alone can 
carry out the work that the mind does. I conclude that it 
is easier to rationalize man's being on the basis of two 
elements than on the basis of one. But I believe that one 
should not pretend to draw a final scientific conclusion, 
in man's study of man, until the nature of the energy re­
sponsible for mind-action is discovered as, in my own 
opinion, it will be. 
Thus, let me state again that, working as a scientist all 
through my life, I have proceeded on the one-element 
hypothesis. That is really the same as the Jacksonian al­
ternative that Symonds and Adrian seem to have chosen, 
i.e., "that activities of the highest centers and mental 
states are one and the same thing, or are different sides 
of the same thing." 
I am glad to see that Professor Hendel has referred to 
dualism in his Foreword. In any case, as a scientist, I 
reject the concept that one must be either a monist or a 
dualist because that suggests a "closed mind." No scien­
tist should begin thus, nor carry on his work with fixed 
preconceptions. And yet, since a final conclusion in the 
field of our discussion is not likely to come before the 
youngest reader of this book dies, it behooves each one of 
us to adopt for himself a personal assumption (belief, 

Author's Afterthoughts · 115 
religion), and a way of life without waiting for a final 
word from science on the nature of man's mind. 
In ordinary conversation, the "mind" and "the spirit 
of man" are taken to be the same. I was brought up in a 
Christian family and I have always believed, since I first 
considered the matter, that there was work for me to do 
in the world, and that there is a grand design in which 
all conscious individuals play a role. Whether there is 
such a thing as communication between man and God 
and whether energy can come to the mind of a man from 
an outside source after his death is for each individual to 
decide for himself. Science has no such answers. 

Bibliography 
1. ADRIAN, Ε. D. 1966. Consciousness, in Brain and Con­
scious Experience, J. C. Eccles, ed. New York: 
Springer-Verlag. 
2. FEINDEL, W. and W. PENFIELD. 1954. Localization of 
discharge in temporal lobe automatism. Arch. Neurol, 
and Psychiat. 72:605-630. 
3. JACKSON, J. H. 1873. On the anatomical, physiological 
and pathological investigation of the epilepsies. West 
Riding Lunatic Asylum Medical Reports. 3:315-339. 
4. 
1931. Selected Writings of John Hughlings 
Jackson. Vol. 1, On Epilepsy and Epileptiform Con­
vulsions, J. Taylor, ed. London: Hodder and Stough-
ton. 
5. JAMES, W. 1910. The Principles of Psychology. New 
York: Holt. 
6. HIPPOCRATES. W. Jones and E. Withington, eds. The 
Loeb Classical Library, 4 volumes. Vol. 2, The Sa­
cred Disease, pp. 127-185. Cambridge: Harvard 
Univ. Press. Also London: Heinemann, 1952-1958. 
7. LASHLEY, K. S. 1960. The Neuropsychology of Lashley; 
Selected Papers of. F. A. Beach et al., eds. New York: 
McGraw-Hill. 
8. MAGOUN, H. 1952. The ascending reticular activating 
system. A. Res. Nervous and Mental Disease, Pro­
ceedings (1950) 30:480-492. 
9. MORUZZI, G. and H. MAGOUN. 1949. Brain stem reticu­
lar formation and activation of the EEG. Electro-
enceph. Clin. Neurophysiol. 1:455-473. 
10. MULLAN, S. and W. PENFIELD. 1959. Illusions of com­
parative interpretation and emotion. Arch. Neurol, 
and Psychiat. 81:269-284. 

Bibliography · 117 
11. PAVLOV, I. P. 1927. Conditioned Reflexes: An Investi­
gation of the Physiological Activity of the Cerebral 
Cortex. G. Anrep, trans, and ed. London: Oxford 
Univ. Press. 
12. NAUTA, W. 1971. The problem of the frontal lobe: a 
reinterpretation. J. Psychiat. Res. 8:167-187. 
13. PENFIELD, W. 1930. Diencephalic autonomic epilepsy. 
Arch. Neurol, and Psychiat. 22:358-374. 
14. 
1938. The cerebral cortext in man. The cere­
bral cortex and consciousness. Arch. Neurol, and 
Psychiat. 40:417-422. Also in French, Prof. H. 
Pieron, trans, in L'Annie Psychologique. 1938. Vol. 
39. 
15. 
1952. Epileptic automatism and the centren-
cephalic integrating system. A. Res. Nervous and 
Mental Disorders, Proceedings (1950) 30:513-528. 
16. 
1952. Memory mechanisms. Arch. Neurol, and 
Psychiat. 67:178-191. 
17. 
1954. The permanent record of the stream of 
consciousness. Proc. XIV Int. Congr. Psychol., Mon­
treal. Acta Psychologica. 11:47-69. 1955. 
18. 
1958. The Excitable Cortex in Conscious Man. 
The 5th Sherrington Lecture. Liverpool: Liverpool 
Univ. Press. Also Springfield, 111.: Charles C Thomas. 
19. 
1959. The interpretive cortex. Science. 129:-
1719-1725. 
20. 
1968. Engrams in the human brain. Proc. Roy. 
Soc. Med. 61:831-840. (Gold Medal Lecture.) 
21. 
1969. Consciousness, memory and man's con­
ditioned reflexes. In On the Biology of Learning. 
K. Pribriam, ed. New York: Harcourt, pp. 129-168. 
22. 
1969. Epilepsy, neurophysiology, and some 
brain mechanisms related to consciousness. In Basic 
Mechanisms of the Epilepsies, H. H. Jasper et al., 
eds. Boston: Little, Brown. 

118 · Bibliography 
23. PENFIELD, W. and J. EVANS. 1935. The frontal lobe in 
man: A clinical study of maximum removals. Brain. 
58:115-138. 
24. 
. 1954. Mechanisms of voluntary movement. 
Brain. 77:1-17. 
25. 
and H. JASPER. 1954. Epilepsy and the Func­
tional Anatomy of the Human Brain. Boston: Little, 
Brown. 
26. 
and K. KRISTIANSEN. 1951. Epileptic Seizure 
Patterns. Springfield, 111.: Charles C Thomas. 
27. 
and G. MATHIESON. 1974. Memory. An au­
topsy and a discussion of the role of the hippocampus 
in experiential recall. J.A.M.A. Archives of Neu­
rology. 31:145-154. 
28. 
and P. PEROT. 1963. The brain's record of 
auditory and visual experience. A final summary and 
discussion. Brain. 86:595-696. 
29. 
and T. RASMUSSEN. 1950. The Cerebral Cortex 
of Man. New York: Macmillan. 
30. 
and L. ROBERTS. 1959. Speech and Brain-
Mechanisms. Princeton: Princeton Univ. Press. Also 
New York: Atheneum, 1966. 
31. SHERRINGTON, C. S. 1940. Man—On His Nature. The 
Gifford Lectures, 1937-1938. Cambridge: Cambridge 
Univ. Press. 
32. 
1947. Foreword to a new edition of The In­
tegrative Action of the Nervous System. (Originally 
published in 1906.) Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. 
Press. 

Index 
"absence," 39 
activation, by epileptic dis­
charge, 77; of gray matter, 
29, 33; of mind, 78; of mu­
sic, 22; of the stream of con­
sciousness, 24; physiological, 
26, 30 
Adrian, Lord, 4, 91, 102, 114 
afferent stream of electrical 
potentials, 16 
after-discharge, 30 
American Philosophical Soci­
ety, ix, xviii, 10 
amnesia, 39 
analgesia, local, 12 
ant, brain of, 106; leaf-cutting, 
97, 105; mind of, 62; 
progressive behavior of, 94 
aphasia, 37 
"argument," xx 
Aristotle, 81 
attention, conscious, 74; di­
rected by mind, 61; focus of, 
75; necessary for program­
ming, 60 
automatic coordinator, 48 
automatic sensory-motor 
mechanism, 39, 40, 41, 64, 
113 
automatism, epileptic, 38, 39; 
petit mal, 37; temporal lobe, 
42 
automaton, 39,46; human, 41, 
47; mindless, 37; temporary, 
40 
axonal conduction, 30 
axone, definition of, 11 
Bazett, Cuthbert, 111 
behavior, 44; voluntary, 113 
Belt, Thomas, 94; leaf-cutting 
ants of, 97, 105 
Berger, Hans, 10; Centennial 
Symposium on Brain-Mind 
Relationships, xviii 
bombardment, distant, 37; 
from cortex to higher brain­
stem, 40 
brain, 4, 18; as computer, 57; 
in conscious patients, xxviii; 
definition of, 11; electrical 
activation of, 76; explora­
tion of, 106; mapping of 
circuits within, 106 
Brain, Lord, 100 
brain-mechanisms, xiii, 18; 
auditory, 15; definition of, 
11; highest, 40, 43, 47, 60, 
63, 84, 104, 108, 113; 
motor, 15; somatic sensory, 
15; speech, 15; visual sen­
sory, 15 
brain-mind relationships, Hans 
Berger Centennial Sym­
posium on, xviii, xxii 
brain's machinery for the 
mind, 37 
brain-stem, higher, 14, 40, 63 
Cairns, Hugh, 98 

120 · Index 
Cajal, S. Ramon y, xxvi, 106 
Cartesian philosophy, xxii 
centrencephalic coordinating 
system, 27 
centrencephalic localization, 
95 
centrencephalic system of 
functional integration, 16, 
41, 44, 109, 112, 113; two 
parts of, 110 
"Cerebral Cortex and Con­
sciousness," Harvey Lecture, 
111 
cerebral hemispheres, 14 
Cobb, Stanley, 20, 96 
computer, 40; brain as, 57; 
man's, 41, 61, 108; program­
ming of, 46 
Conklin, E. G., ix 
consciousness, 34, 37, 44, 62, 
67, 90, 109; first appearance 
of, 106; indispensable sub­
stratum of, 18, 78; loss of, 
92; nature of, 7; sequential 
record of, 21; stream of, 21, 
49, 52, 76 
convolution, excision of, 108; 
new, 19; removal of, 13 
convulsion, generalized, 41 
cortex, auditory, 16; interpre­
tive, 15, 32, 34, 105; pre­
frontal, 40; psychical areas 
of, 105; uncommitted, 20; 
visual, 108 
cortical responses, 28 
credo of the common man, 89 
death, 88 
definitions, axone, 11; brain, 
11; brain-mechanisms, 11; 
epilepsy, 12; epileptic fit, 12; 
gray matter, 11; mind, 11; 
neurone, 11; white matter, 
11 
deja vu, 35 
del Rio-Hortega, Pio, xxvi, 106 
dementia, 98 
Descartes, Rene, xxi, xxii, 109 
diencephalon (higher brain­
stem or old brain), 14, 18, 
40, 107; removal of 
(decerebration), 111 
discharge, epileptic, 37, 38, 
104; spontaneous, 29; 
spread of, 30 
divine disease, 44 
Dorozinski, Alexander, 69 
dreamy states, 21 
dualism, 114; and monism, 100 
dualist hypothesis, 80 
efferent stream of electrical 
potentials, 17 
Egorov, Professor B. G., 69 
Einstein, Albert, xxiii, 90 
electrical exploration, 21, 30 
electrical interference, 13 
electrical stimulation of the 
brain, 23, 31 
electrode, effect of, 76; stimu­
lation, 13, 104, 108 
engram, facilitating, 75; in the 
human brain, 105; of ex­
perience, 8; of recall, 66 
epilepsia, 44 
epilepsy, xxiv, xxvi, 8, 12; 
petit mal, 38; physiology of, 
30, 105; riddles of, 45; 
statistics of, 31 

Index · 121 
epileptic discharge, 37, 38, 
104; activation by, 77 
epileptic fit, definition of, 12 
epileptic interference, 47 
evolution, 73 
evolutionary scale, 94 
experience, engram of, 8; 
record of, 64 
facilitation, effect, 74; perma­
nent, 66, 75; synaptic, 32 
faiths men live by, 88 
familiarity, sense of, 22, 34 
Feindel, William, xi, xiv, xxii, 
xxiv, 27, 42 
flashback, 21, 31, 48, 82 
Foerster, Otfrid, xxvi 
forced thinking, 99 
Franklin, Benjamin, 10 
fright, sense of, 34 
frontal lobe, 19 
Galen, 9 
Galvani, 9 
grand mal, 41 
gray matter, 33; activation of 
distant, 29; definition of, 11 
gyrus, of Heschl, 33; post­
central, 108 
happened-before, 35 
Harvey Lecture, 18 
heard-before, 35 
hemispheres, cerebral, 14 
Hendel, Charles, xi, xvi, 114 
higher brain-stem, 14, 40, 63 
hippocampal zone, 17 
hippocampus, 35, 65 
Hippocrates, 7-9, 82 
hypotheses, xviii; two, 4; of 
man's being, 89 
illusion of interpretation, 78 
interference-aphasia, 26 
interpretive cortex, 15, 19, 32, 
34 
introspection, 14 
introspective thinking, 51 
Jackson, J. Hughlings, xxvii, 
71; thinking of, 47, 91-94, 
102, 104; prophet of neur­
ology, 104 
Jacksonian march, 30 
Jackson's highest level, 94, 95 
James, William, xxviii, 49; 
Psychology, xx 
Jasper, Herbert, 21, 34, 40, 77 
Jefferson, Geoffrey, 97 
Kant, Immanuel, xxiii 
keys-of-access, 35, 66, 71 
Kristiansen, Kristian, 42 
Landau, Lev, 67; Lenin prize 
to, 69; Nobel prize to, 69 
Lashley, Karl, 6 
learning, physical basis of, 74 
lectures, Harvey, 18; Thayer, 
xviii 
level of elaboration, 18 
life, first appearance of, 106 
Lifshitz, Professor, 69 
lobe, frontal, 19; temporal, 
19, 33 
local analgesia, 12 
Locke, John, xxviii, xxix 
man, and God, 115; credo of 
the common, 89 

122 · Index 
man's being, 5, 73; hypotheses 
of, 89; nature of, 78; two 
fundamental elements of, 
80, 104 
mechanisms, brain, xiii; inter­
pretive, 52; motor, 14; non­
verbal concept, 35; of the 
mind, xii; sensory, 14; 
sensory-motor, 49, 84; 
sensory motor, automatic, 
39, 40; speech, 52 
memory, experiential, 63; ex­
periential, scanning and 
recall of, 35; mechanisms, 
31; mistaken conception 
of, 31; physiology of, 6; 
racial, 63; of smell, 35; 
trace in animal brain, 6 
mental disease, 102 
mind, absences of the, 39; ac­
tivation of, 78; after death, 
87; anatomical substrata of, 
99; and memory, 82; of the 
ant, 62; as a different essence, 
62; as programmer, 57, 79; 
attention directed by, 61; 
brain conditioned by, 86; 
definition of, 11; explana­
tion of, 75; exploration of, 
106; of God, 88; mecha­
nisms of the, xii, 40, 43, 44; 
messenger of the, 104; na­
ture of, xiii, 73, 81, 85; 
physical basis of, 38; physi­
ology of, xxv; specific mech­
anisms for the, 34; sub­
strata of, 95; transactions 
of, 19, 37 
mind-brain frontier, 55; re­
lationship, 67, 79 
mind energy, 46, 48, 79, 88 
Montreal Neurological Insti­
tute, xi, xxvi, 3, 12, 103, 111 
Moscow Neurosurgical Insti­
tute, 68 
Nauta, Walle, 110 
nervous arrangements, Jack­
son, 93 
neurone, definition of, 11 
neurophysiological evidence, 
78 
neurophysiology, χ 
Oxford, χ 
pain, 14 
paralytic interference, 29 
paralytic silence, 37 
parasomnia, 98 
past experience, 34 
patient, M.M., 23, 24; C.H., 
52; South African, 55; 
thinking of, 77 
Pavlov, Ivan, 74 
perception, 35 
petit mal, 28; automatism, 37 
philosophy, x, xxii 
physiology, of epilepsy, 30; 
of memory, 6; of the mind, 
xxv 
pilgrim's progress, 5, 83 
planned initiative, 19 
Pope, Alfred, 34 
Princeton University, 49 
programming, and attention, 
60; computer, 46; of infant 

Index · 123 
brain, 57; by mind, 57; 
short term, 46; speech, 58 
Propper Graschenkov, Profes­
sor, 69 
psychical functions, 17 
psychical seizures, 21 
Rasmussen, Theodore, xiv, 27 
reflexes, conditioned, 63, 74; 
inborn, 14, 74 
religion, personal, 115 
religious bias, 73 
responses, cortical, 28; distant, 
30; experiential, 31, 34; 
positive, 28, 29 
reticular formation, 16, 96 
Roberts, Lamar, 27 
schizophrenia, 99 
Schmitt, Francis, ix 
science, history of, xxiv 
seizures, generalized, 42; 
grand mal, 43; psychical, 21 
self-awareness, 90 
senescence, 87 
sensation, discriminatory, 14 
sense, of coming near, 34; of 
familiarity, 34; of fright, 34 
sensory input, 16 
sensory summation, 112 
Shakespeare, William, 50 
Sherrington, Sir Charles, ix, 
xxv, xxvi, 3, 74, 106 
Sherringtonian alternatives, 3 
sleeping and waking, 81 
speech, cortex, 35; mapping, 
51; mechanism, 52; pro­
gramming, 19, 58 
Speech and Brain Mechanisms, 
27 
spontaneous discharge, 29 
stimulating electrode, 13, 104, 
108; effect of, 76 
stream of consciousness, 21, 
49, 52, 76; activation of, 24; 
doubled, 55; record of, 35, 
49 
stream of electrical potentials, 
afferent, 16; efferent, 17 
Symonds, Sir Charles, xi, 108, 
114 
syndrome, obsessive-
compulsive, 98, 99 
target-nucleus, 107 
telencephalon, 14 
temporal lobe, 19, 33; attacks, 
31; automatism, 42 
Thayer Lectures, xviii 
Thorpe, W. H., 95 
thought, 44 
unconsciousness, 38, 47 
universe, long perspective of, 
6; time-calendar of, 106 
verification, anatomical, 107 
voluntary control, 109 
voluntary motor activity, 17, 
109 
Walker, A. Earl, 107 
Walshe, F. M. R., 107 
Ward, Arthur, 34 
white matter, definition of, 11 
Williamson, Mark, xiii 
Young, J. Z., 95 

Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data 
Penfield, Wilder, 1891-1976 
The mystery of the mind. 
Bibliography: p. 116 
1. Brain. 
2. Consciousness. 
I. Title. 
QP376.P39 
612'.82 
74-25626 
ISBN 0-691-08159-X (hardcover edn.) 
ISBN 0-691-02360-3 (paperback edn.) 

