Visual Informatics 5 (2021) 23–42
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Visual Informatics
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/visinf
A theoretical model for pattern discovery in visual analytics
Natalia Andrienko a,b,∗, Gennady Andrienko a,b, Silvia Miksch c, Heidrun Schumann d,
Stefan Wrobel a,e
a Fraunhofer Institute IAIS, Sankt-Augustin, Germany
b City, University of London, London, UK
c TU Wien, Vienna, Austria
d University of Rostock, Rostock, Germany
e University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany
a r t i c l e
i n f o
Article history:
Received 11 November 2020
Received in revised form 21 December 2020
Accepted 21 December 2020
Available online 30 December 2020
Keywords:
Visual analytics
Data distribution
Pattern
Abstraction
Data organisation
Data arrangement
Data variation
Pattern discovery
a b s t r a c t
The word ‘pattern’ frequently appears in the visualisation and visual analytics literature, but what
do we mean when we talk about patterns? We propose a practicable definition of the concept of a
pattern in a data distribution as a combination of multiple interrelated elements of two or more data
components that can be represented and treated as a unified whole. Our theoretical model describes
how patterns are made by relationships existing between data elements. Knowing the types of these
relationships, it is possible to predict what kinds of patterns may exist. We demonstrate how our
model underpins and refines the established fundamental principles of visualisation. The model also
suggests a range of interactive analytical operations that can support visual analytics workflows where
patterns, once discovered, are explicitly involved in further data analysis.
© 2021 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of Zhejiang University and Zhejiang University
Press Co. Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
1. Introduction
1.1. Motivation
We began to feel a need in a conceptual and theoretical
model for visual analytics when we started teaching visual an-
alytics to students of a data science course (Andrienko et al.,
2020). Every year it is necessary to explain the students what
visual analytics is, why and for what purposes they will need to
use visual analytics in their job, how to utilise visual analytics
techniques in practice, what principles are important to obey,
and why these principles exist. It turned out to be not easy to
explain these things clearly and convincingly to practice-oriented
and computation-minded people. In particular, when we tell the
students that visualisation is required for observing distributions
and detecting patterns, we need to explain them the meaning of
the terms ‘‘distribution’’ and ‘‘pattern’’. We want the students to
understand that the meaning of ‘‘distribution’’ is not limited to
statistical distribution of values of a variable, and this requires us
to give a general definition which would cover the concepts of
statistical, spatial, temporal, and, desirably, also other principally
∗Correspondence to: Fraunhofer Institute IAIS, Schloss Birlinghoven, Sankt
Augustin, 53757, Germany.
E-mail address:
natalia.andrienko@iais.fraunhofer.de (N. Andrienko).
possible distributions. We need to teach the students how to
find patterns in distributions, and this requires defining what
a pattern is and what kinds of patterns, and why, can exist in
different types of distributions.
Although this work has been originally motivated by ped-
agogical needs, we believe that having a clear conceptual and
theoretical background can also be beneficial for visual analytics
science as well as engineering. Explicitly defined rather than
intuitively understood concepts can potentially enable system-
atic approaches to conducting research work and to developing
new methods and procedures. Solid theoretical foundations of
visual analytics could be especially helpful when entering new
application domains or dealing with new types of data.
1.2. Goals and purposes
With this work, we pursue the following goals:
• Introduce an explicit working definition of the concept of
pattern in data (Section 4.1).
• Describe how properties of data determine the types of
possible patterns that can exist in the data (Section 4.2).
• Draw
implications
for
the
possible
visual
analytics
approaches to discovering patterns existing in data (Sec-
tion 7).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.visinf.2020.12.002
2468-502X/© 2021 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of Zhejiang University and Zhejiang University Press Co. Ltd. This is an open access article under
the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

N. Andrienko, G. Andrienko, S. Miksch et al.
Visual Informatics 5 (2021) 23–42
• Use the explicit definition of a pattern to explain some of
the existing principles of visualisation design (Sections 7.3,
7.4).
• Describe how patterns that have been discovered can be
utilised in further data analysis (Section 6).
We expect that the proposed theoretical model will be useful for
the following purposes:
• For data analysis practitioners: provide a ground for in-
formed and reasoned anticipation of the possibly existing
types of patterns in given data and selection of techniques
for finding these patterns.
• For developers of visual analytics methods and procedures:
provide foundations for
– methodical design of approaches and analytical work-
flows involving discovery and exploitation of different
types of patterns;
– development of approaches to guiding users and sup-
porting the externalisation of the knowledge gained by
them in the process of data analysis.
• For visual analytics researchers: underpin systematic devel-
opment of principles and general approaches to analysing
different kinds of data.
• For students of visual analytics and/or data science: enable
better understanding of patterns, and how they can be used
in visual data analysis.
1.3. Main ideas
The essence of our model can be summarised in the following
statements:
• A pattern consists of relationships between multiple ele-
ments of at least two data components.
• A pattern is such a combination of relationships that allows
multiple elements to be perceived and/or represented holis-
tically as a single object, as, for example, a cluster, a trend,
or a correlation.
• The types of relationships existing between elements of data
(such as ordering and distance relationships) determine the
possible types of patterns that can be made by these ele-
ments.
• Pattern discovery, which involves abstraction, is a princi-
pal way to understand synoptic relationships between data
components.
• To discover patterns, analysts investigate distributions of
elements of one (or more) components with respect to
elements of another component and relationships between
these elements.
• Analysts can use discovered patterns in next steps of data
analysis by applying analytical operations, such as aggregat-
ing, grouping, comparing, and others.
In the following, after reviewing the related work, we shall ex-
plain, justify, and elaborate these statements.
2. Related work
Here we discuss how the concept of pattern is treated in
different scientific disciplines.
2.1. Patterns in mathematics
Modern mathematicians tend to see mathematics as a science
of patterns (Devlin, 1996). It is argued that the primary sub-
ject of study in mathematics is not the individual mathematical
objects but rather the structures (patterns) in which they are
arranged (Resnik, 1997). Here, the term ‘pattern’ is used as a
synonym for ‘structure’.
A pattern consists of one or more objects, called positions,
which stand in various relationships. Positions as such have no
distinguishing features. Only within a pattern positions may be
identified or distinguished, since the pattern containing them
provides a context for so doing. Thus, in a triangle ABC, the points
A, B, C can be differentiated when considered as triangle vertices,
but taken in isolation they are indistinguishable from each other
and from other points.
A context provided by a pattern can be viewed as a represen-
tation system (Oliveri, 1997), and the use of different systems of
representation results in seeing different aspects. Thus, the same
thing can be seen as a table, as a composition of table-parts, as
a collection of molecules, etc., and all these views are correct.
Oliveri (Oliveri, 1997) emphasises that the aspect we perceive is
not a property of an object itself but a relation between it and
other objects.
To summarise, mathematicians define patterns as arrange-
ments of objects in which only relationships between the ob-
jects are important but not properties of the objects themselves.
Patterns have properties that are based on the relationships be-
tween the objects and do not apply to the objects taken sepa-
rately. Giving different representations to the same objects allows
perceiving different patterns, which can complement each other.
Mathematicians define pattern types according to the branches
of mathematics (Devlin, 1996): arithmetic deals with patterns of
numbers, mathematical logics with patterns of reasoning, calcu-
lus with patterns of change and motion, geometry with shapes
and symmetry, and topology with patterns of connectivity and
reachability.
In our work, we deal with patterns existing in data, i.e., made
by elements of data. Like mathematicians, we acknowledge the
key role of relationships in forming patterns. Pattern types can
be defined based on the types of relationships existing between
data elements.
2.2. Patterns in statistics
There is no explicit definition of the concept of data pattern in
statistics; nevertheless, the expressions ‘‘data patterns’’ or ‘‘pat-
terns in data’’ are extensively used in statistical literature (Bruce
and Bruce, 2017; Heumann et al., 2017). Patterns in data dis-
tributions are commonly described in terms of centre, spread,
shape (or form), and presence of particular features, such as gaps
and outliers. Several types of patterns are specifically defined for
time series data (Härdle et al., 2015), namely, trend, seasonal,
cyclic, and irregular (random) patterns. Trend patterns are further
differentiated into linear, exponential, and other subtypes.
The concept of distribution, in turn, is defined as a func-
tion that associates each value of a variable with its probabil-
ity (Forbes et al., 2010). Statistics considers various forms of
distributions (Krishnamoorthy, 2006), such as normal, uniform,
bimodal, long tail, etc.
While the definition of distribution in statistics is limited
to probability distribution, we give a more general definition
covering also spatial distributions as well as other imaginable
kinds of distributions. Another extension is consideration of re-
lationships between data elements and the role of these relation-
ships in forming data patterns. Thus, the types of patterns that
can be found in time series data are made by specific relation-
ships (namely, ordering and distances) between time steps and
between corresponding values of a variable.
24

N. Andrienko, G. Andrienko, S. Miksch et al.
Visual Informatics 5 (2021) 23–42
2.3. Patterns in geography-related sciences
All sciences studying phenomena that occur on the Earth, in-
cluding natural, social, and economic phenomena, are concerned
with analysing spatial distributions and spatial patterns. A pattern
in a spatial distribution is defined in terms of the arrangement
of individual entities in space and the geographic relationships
among them (Chou, 1995; Getis and Paelinck, 2004). Geographic
analysis usually involves observing and describing spatial pat-
terns, testing whether the observed pattern differs from a null
model, such as complete randomness, and fitting empirical data
to theoretical models for the purposes of prediction (Rosenberg
and Anderson, 2016). Spatial patterns are characterised by spe-
cific metrics of concentration or dispersion, eccentricity, random-
ness, clustering, etc. Getis and Paelinck (2004). An important
characteristic is spatial autocorrelation indicating how an object
or feature located in space is influenced by similar objects or
features in the neighbourhood (Chou, 1995).
It is acknowledged that patterns that can be observed in
spatial distributions are dependent on the spatial scale of anal-
ysis (Souris, 2019; Borregaard et al., 2009). Thus, the kinds of
patterns that can exist in the global distribution of a biological
species are very different from the possible kinds of patterns in a
local distribution of individuals belonging this species.
Our definitions of the concepts of distribution and pattern
cover, in particular, the concepts of spatial distribution and spatial
pattern. Our model can explain the role of spatial relationships in
forming spatial patterns.
2.4. Patterns in information theory
In information theory (Shannon, 1948; Cover and Thomas,
2006), the term ‘pattern’ may refer to any distinct arrangement of
symbols or to a combination of pixels in an image, regardless of
whether it is meaningful or interesting. In the context of an ap-
plication, all possible data patterns collectively define a so-called
alphabet, where each pattern is a letter. In data compression, the
resources used to encode different patterns are optimised accord-
ing to the probability of the patterns in the data space. In image
processing and computer vision, patterns are broadly divided into
groups, which are mathematically specified. Various algorithms
were developed to differentiate patterns in one group from oth-
ers. They make use of different information-theoretic metrics
for pattern recognition, matching, segmentation, registration, etc.
Ruiz et al. (2009), Feixas et al. (2014).
Ideas and techniques from information theory have been used
for characterising and studying pattern recognition by humans.
Chen et al. (2014) noticed that humans’ ability to identify inter-
esting patterns when they are overlapped with other patterns
and to connect interesting patterns when they are distributed
away from each other bears some resemblance to the family
of techniques called multiplexing in tele- and data communi-
cation. The researchers used information theory to explain this
phenomenon of visual multiplexing in visualisation. In a survey
of a large collection of empirical studies concerning visualisa-
tion (Kijmongkolchai et al., 2017), the studies were categorised
according to the main independent variables: contexts (e.g., tasks,
applications), patterns (e.g., clusters and changes), and values
(e.g., data values and statistics). It was noticed that patterns were
in the focus of about 50% of the studies. Kijmongkolchai et al.
(2017) also conducted an empirical study to detect and measure
human’s knowledge used in reasoning about time series patterns.
They found that the human’s prior knowledge on pattern iden-
tification brought more benefit than that on context awareness
and statistical estimation. The benefits were measured using the
information-theoretic metric for cost–benefit analysis (Chen and
Golan, 2016).
Importantly, the process of pattern perception and recog-
nition by humans involves abstraction. Since the information-
theoretical view of a pattern does not accommodate the notion of
abstraction, it cannot support the description of the phenomenon
of pattern discovery by means of visual analytics.
2.5. Patterns in data mining
Data mining is defined as an automatic or semi-automatic
process of discovering useful patterns in data (Witten et al., 2011).
A pattern is defined as ‘‘an expression E in some language L
describing facts in a subset FE of a set of facts F so that E is simpler
than the enumeration of all facts in FE’’ (Fayyad et al., 1996, p. 7);
in other words, a pattern is defined as a synoptic representation
of multiple data items.
Han (2005) states that types of patterns can be defined accord-
ing to data mining functionalities, which include: characterisation
and discrimination; mining of frequent patterns, associations,
and correlations; classification and regression; cluster analysis;
outlier analysis. In practice, what is usually called ‘pattern types’
in data mining literature rather refers to the existing forms of out-
puts of data mining methods, such as decision trees, classification
rules, clusters, frequent item sets, frequent sub-sequences, etc.
(Aggarwal, 2015; Klösgen and Zytkow, 2002; Witten et al., 2011).
There is no underlying scheme for a more systematic definition
of possible pattern types.
An important difference of our conceptual model is acknowl-
edging that patterns objectively exist in data regardless of any
representation or someone’s awareness of their existence. By
defining a pattern as a structure formed by relationships between
data elements, we provide a basis for anticipating what kinds of
patterns can exist in given data.
2.6. Patterns in visualisation and visual analytics
Similarly to statistics, visualisation literature often uses the
expressions ‘‘pattern(s) in data’’ or ‘‘data pattern(s)’’, although
there is no commonly adopted explicit definition of what this
term means. Thus, Munzner treats the term ‘pattern’ as a syn-
onym to ‘trend’ (Munzner, 2014), whereas others use this term
as self-evident without explaining what they mean by it. There
was an attempt to adapt the data mining definition: a pattern
was defined as a parsimonious representation of essential fea-
tures of a behaviour in the form of a description in some lan-
guage (natural, formal, or graphical) or a mental image of the
behaviour (Andrienko and Andrienko, 2005, p. 85).
Visual analytics can be seen as a model building activity (An-
drienko et al., 2018) in which an analyst creates a model, in
particular, a mental model, of the analysis subject. A model needs
to be general, i.e., refer to multiple observations taken together
rather than represent each observation separately. Collins et al.
(2018) argue that, in order to generalise, analysts should be able
to perceive multiple data items together and conceptualise them
jointly as a meaningful whole. Such a whole is called a pattern.
Collins et al. propose the following definition of a pattern: ‘‘a
representation of a collection of items of any kind as an integrated
whole with specific properties that are not mere compositions
of properties of the constituent items’’. This is similar to the
definition given in data mining; a pattern is also defined as a
representation rather than an objectively existing structure.
According to Bertin, understanding of data means ‘‘discovering
combinational elements which are less numerous than the initial
elements yet capable of describing all the information in a simpler
form’’ (Bertin, 1983, p. 166). In fact, what is called ‘‘combinational
elements’’ here corresponds to what is usually meant by a pattern
25

N. Andrienko, G. Andrienko, S. Miksch et al.
Visual Informatics 5 (2021) 23–42
in data: it is a structure formed by multiple elements, and it can
be described holistically without enumerating these elements.
Perception of patterns from visual representations of data is
extensively discussed in the Colin Ware’s book (Ware, 2004).
Pattern perception involves seeing multiple visual elements (a.k.a.
‘‘marks’’, in Bertin’s terms) as an integrated whole. The first
attempt to understand this process was undertaken by the Gestalt
School of psychology (Metzger, 2006; Wagemans et al., 2012).
Ware discusses the Gestalt ‘‘laws’’ of pattern perception and
shows how they translate into principles of visualisation de-
sign. The Gestalt laws refer to certain relationships between vi-
sual marks, such as proximity (in the display space), similarity,
smooth continuity, symmetry, and relative size. Visible patterns
can emerge due to these relationships. Acknowledging that data
patterns are formed by relationships between data elements leads
to an obvious implication that visual representations can ef-
fectively and correctly reveal patterns existing in data when
the relationships between the marks representing data elements
correspond to the relationships between the data elements.
In our theoretical model, we strive to give definitions that
can underpin the main principles of visualisation. We attach high
importance to relationships between data elements as pattern-
forming forces and to the phenomenon of abstraction, which
is involved in perception and representation of multiple related
data elements as a unified whole.
Our use of the term ‘theoretical’ corresponds to the defini-
tion of a theory as ‘‘a set of interrelated constructs (concepts),
definitions, and propositions that present a systematic view of
phenomena by specifying relations among variables, with the
purpose of explaining and predicting the phenomena’’ (Kerlinger
and Lee, 2000, p. 11).
We do not pretend that our model can describe everything in
visual analytics. Visual analytics is concerned not only with find-
ing patterns in data but also with other analytical activities, such
as search for specific information (e.g., clues to identify a crimi-
nal) or inspection of the performance of a computer model. Our
theoretical model refers only to the process of finding patterns
in data. It is an important type of analytical activity addressed
in a large part of the visual analytics research. We believe that
this research will benefit from the clarification of the concept of
pattern in data.
3. Distribution
We begin presenting our theoretical model with defining and
explaining the concept of distribution. We describe relationships
within data components and establish a formal notation of the
introduced concepts. This provides us with the necessary back-
ground to define and discuss patterns.
3.1. Definition of data distribution
Among multiple existing definitions of the term ‘‘distribution’’,
the following ones express the meaning relevant to our model:
‘‘the position, arrangement, or frequency of occurrence (as of
the members of a group) over an area or throughout a space or
unit of time’’ (Merriam-Webster Online, 2009) and ‘‘the way that
something is shared or exists over a particular area or among a
particular group of people’’ (Hornby, 2000). An important part of
these definitions is that something is positioned or spread over
or throughout or among something else; the latter may be, in
particular, space, time, or a group of people.
We shall build on these definitions to generate a more spe-
cific definition of distribution of data, or data distribution. A data
distribution involves at least two components of data. For exam-
ple, in the VAST Challenge 2011 dataset (Grinstein et al., 2011),
the data records describing the microblog messages include the
following components: microblog users (denoted by identifiers),
times when the messages were posted, locations from where they
were posted, and message texts. Besides, the data provided for
the challenge include a map of the territory and daily weather
records specifying, in particular, the wind speed and direction.
Furthermore, since message texts consist of words, the set of the
words is also a component of the data. To solve the challenge,
analysts need to consider the distributions of the messages and
of the words over the time and space, and the distribution of the
wind parameters over the time.
This example demonstrates that data components are usually
sets consisting of certain elements: people, messages, words,
spatial locations, time moments, particular values of wind param-
eters, etc. Data describe connections between elements of different
components. Thus, each message text is connected to a particular
person, time moment, spatial location, and words that are used
in the text. Each word is connected to the messages in which it is
used. Each time moment is connected to the messages that were
posted at that moment, each spatial location is connected to the
messages posted from it, and so on.
A data distribution consists of connections between elements
of two or more structural components of data. A data component
is a set of items of the same kind, e.g., a set of entities, or
attribute values, or category labels, or references to places or
times. Data components are typically represented by fields of
database records or by table columns. Data components involved
in a distribution are not treated semantically equally. Each time
when we talk about a distribution we say that one component (or
a group of components) is distributed over another component. It
means that the second component is treated as a kind of base for
the first component. Generally, the base of a distribution must
not necessarily be space, time, or a group of people, as stated
in the definitions from the dictionaries, but it can consist of
elements of any nature (these may also be compound elements
consisting of several simpler ones). For example, we can consider
the distribution of the words over the messages, in which the
base is the set of messages. When we consider the distribution of
the messages over space and time, the base consists of compound
elements comprising spatial locations and time moments.
The concept of distribution assumes that the elements of the
base are regarded as a kind of positions that can be occupied
by elements of another component, or as holders of elements of
another component. Thus, space and time provide positions for
messages, messages can be seen as positions for words, or as
holders of words, people can be seen as holders (i.e., owners)
of the messages they have produced, time units can be seen as
holders of particular values of wind parameters, etc.
We shall use the term overlay of the distribution to refer to a
set of elements that are connected to positions or holders in the
base: in a metaphorical sense, this set is laid over the base. Like the
base, the overlay may consist of any kind of elements, including
compound elements. The elements of the overlay are instances
(occurrences) of elements of some data component that is distinct
from the base. This data component can be called the domain of
the overlay.
Let us illustrate the concepts of distribution, base, and overlay
by simple examples shown in Fig. 1. In the tic-tac-toe game,
players create distributions of crosses and noughts (X and O
symbols) over a 3 × 3 grid (top left). Here, the base is the grid;
the cells are the elements of the grid, which can serve as positions
to the symbols. The overlay is the set of instances of the symbols
X and O placed in particular positions in the grid. The domain of
the overlay is the set of symbols {X, O}.
The upper right part of Fig. 1 demonstrates a distribution of
colours over a set of apples. Here, the set of apples is the base
26

N. Andrienko, G. Andrienko, S. Miksch et al.
Visual Informatics 5 (2021) 23–42
Fig. 1. Simple examples of distributions. Top left: a distribution of symbols over
a grid in a tic-tac-toe game. Top right: a distribution of colours over a set of
apples. Bottom: a distribution of the shapes of the moon over time.
of the distribution. The apples are holders of different colour
instances, which make the overlay of the distribution. The domain
of the overlay is the set of colours {yellow, orange, red, green}.
The lower part of Fig. 1 shows a distribution of the moon
shapes over time. Here, the time is the base of the distribution,
and the overlay consists of different shapes of the moon arranged
in a particular way. The illustration in Fig. 1 does not show the
full distribution. The base of the full distribution includes all
intermediate dates between those specified in the picture and
also extends to the past and to the future beyond the period
shown. The overlay of the full distribution includes instances of
all intermediate shapes between the shapes shown in the picture.
The domain of the overlay is the set of all possible unique shapes
the moon can have.
Data distributions are analysed in order to understand rela-
tionships between components of data, for example, the rela-
tionship between the moon shape and the course of time. It is
mostly a matter of common sense or convenience which of the
data components should be viewed as the base and which as the
overlay. Thus, it is more natural to see the time as the base for the
moon shapes than the set of possible moon shapes as the base for
different dates and times. It is also more natural to consider the
grid in the tic-tac-toe game as the base for the X and O symbols
than the other way around. As apples can be easily treated as
holders of colours, it is natural to see the set of apples as the base
for the colours and less natural to consider the set of colours as
the base for the apples.
The examples in Fig. 1 illustrate an important property of
the base of a distribution: it consists of unique elements. This
means that, when a data component is chosen as a distribution
base, the base is composed of a single occurrence, or instance, of
each element of this component. The overlay is formed by the
elements from another data component that are connected to
each element of the base. It may happen that the same element
of the other component is connected to more than one element
of the base. Hence, the overlay will contain multiple instances of
the same element: multiple cross and nought symbols, multiple
instances of the same colour, re-occurrences of the same moon
shape, etc. It may also happen that two or more overlay elements
are connected to the same element of the base, as two colours can
be connected to the same apple. The tic-tac-toe example demon-
strates that some elements of the base may have no connected
elements of the overlay.
Let us summarise our discussion in the following definition of
a data distribution:
Definition 1.
Let SB and SΩbe two sets, and let the elements
of SB be treated as positions or holders of elements from SΩ. The
distribution of SΩover SB is the set of all connections between
elements of SB and elements of SΩthat are specified in data,
i.e., D(SΩ/SB) = {(eB, eΩ)|eB ∈SB, eΩ∈SΩ}. The set SB is called
the base of the distribution. The set of all instances of elements
from SΩthat occur in D(SΩ/SB) in connection with elements of
SB is called the overlay of the distribution, and the set SΩis the
domain of the overlay. The elements of SΩare called prototypes
with respect to their instances occurring in the overlay.
We shall use the symbol B or B(D) to denote the base of a
distribution and the symbol Ωor Ω(D) to denote the overlay.
According to Definition 1, B = SB, whereas Ωis not the same
as SΩ. Ωmay contain multiple instances of the same element of
SΩ, while some other elements of SΩmay be absent in Ω. Since
each overlay element has its prototype in the overlay domain,
it can be said that overlay elements are linked to their proto-
types by instantiation relationships. We shall call the set of these
instantiation relationships the composition of the overlay.
Definition 2.
The composition of the overlay of a data distribu-
tion is the set of instantiation relationships between the elements
of the overlay and their prototypes in the domain of the overlay.
Overlay composition can be described in terms of the number
of instances of each element of the overlay domain. Thus, the
overlay composition in the tic-tac-toe game (top left of Fig. 1)
consists of four instances of the symbol X and three instances
of the symbol O. The overlay composition in the set of coloured
apples (top right of Fig. 1) includes five instances of the yellow
colour, three instances of red, two instances of orange, and one
instance of green. In the distribution of the moon shapes (Fig. 1,
bottom), the overlay composition includes two instances of the
‘‘new moon’’ shape (i.e., dark disc) and one instance of each other
shape.
3.2. Within-component relationships
Within any data component, elements may be linked by re-
lationships. There are two major groups of relationships: qual-
itative and metric. Qualitative relationships can be represented
by logical statements (predicates) saying if a relationship exists
or not. Examples are relationships of equivalence, ordering, ad-
jacency, or kinship. Metric relationships can be represented by
numeric values. Examples are relationships of distance, similarity,
or intensity of communication.
Some of existing relationships may be intrinsic, belonging
to the very nature of a data component. For example, there
are intrinsic relationships of ordering and distance between el-
ements of a temporal component, i.e., between time units, and
intrinsic relationships of distance between elements of a spa-
tial component, i.e., spatial locations. Intrinsic relationships are
usually not represented in data explicitly, but, when needed,
explicit representations can be obtained in well-known ways.
Non-intrinsic qualitative relationships, such as kinship, need to be
represented explicitly in data. Non-intrinsic metric relationships,
such as similarity, need to be computed by appropriate methods.
Definition 3.
The set of all relationships existing between
elements of a data component is called the organisation of this
data component.
For example, the organisation of the set of grid cells in the
tic-tac-toe game includes qualitative relationships of adjacency,
horizontal ordering, and vertical ordering. The set of symbols
{X, O} has no relationships except identity: X=X, O=O, X̸=O. The
set of apples and the set of colours on the top right of Fig. 1
also have only identity relationships between their elements.
The organisation of the set of dates in Fig. 1, bottom, includes
27

N. Andrienko, G. Andrienko, S. Miksch et al.
Visual Informatics 5 (2021) 23–42
qualitative relationships of linear ordering and metric relation-
ships of distance (i.e., time difference) between the elements. The
organisation of the set of moon shapes includes relationships of
ordering and distance between the sizes of the visible parts of the
moon and same-different relationships between the sides (right
or left) of the visible parts in the moon disc.
Definition 3 relates to the Bertin’s concept of the level of
organisation, which may be qualitative (nominal), ordered, or
quantitative. Each level implies particular types of relationships
between data elements: the qualitative level has no ordering
and no metric relationships, the ordered level has ordering rela-
tionships but no metric relationships, and the quantitative level
implies the existence of both ordering and metric relationships.
However, there may be components that have metric relation-
ships but no ordering (e.g., 2D or 3D space), and there may be
components with partial ordering relationships (e.g., ancestor–
descendant relationships among people). Therefore, we introduce
a more general definition of organisation as a set of all existing
relationships between elements. Since all possible combinations
of different types of relationships cannot be arranged into a single
sequence of levels, we use the term ‘‘organisation’’ rather than
‘‘level of organisation’’. Our definition also corresponds to the
term ‘‘mathematical structure’’ (of data) used by Kindlmann and
Scheidegger (2014).
3.3. Aspects of a data distribution
In a data distribution, the elements of the overlay get ar-
ranged according to the organisation of the base. For example,
the instances of the X and O symbols in the tic-tac-toe game get
arranged according to the relationships of adjacency, horizontal
ordering, and vertical ordering between the grid cells in which
they have been put. The colour instances in Fig. 1, top right,
are arranged by the identity relationships between the apples
holding them: two colour instances have either a common holder
or distinct holders. The instances of the moon shapes in the lower
part of Fig. 1 are arranged in a row by the ordering and distance
relationships between their temporal positions. Let us introduce
a formal definition of the overlay arrangement:
Definition 4.
Arrangement relationships between elements of
the overlay of a data distribution are the relationships between
the corresponding elements of the base. The arrangement of
the overlay of a data distribution is the set of the arrangement
relationships between the overlay elements.
In addition to arrangement relationships, overlay elements are
linked by the relationships pertaining to the organisation of the
overlay domain SΩ, i.e., by the relationships that exist between
the prototypes of the overlay elements. Let b1 and b2 be two
elements of the distribution base B, and let o1 and o2 be the
elements of the overlay Ωconnected to b1 and b2, respectively.
The domain-pertinent relationships between o1 and o2 can be
treated as the way in which the overlay varies between position
or holder b1 and position or holder b2. It is important to note
that the domain-pertinent relationships between o1 and o2 are
considered in connection to their positions in the base b1 and
b2 and the relationships existing between these positions, or,
in other words, in connection to the arrangement relationships
between o1 and o2 (Definition 4).
Definition 5.
The variation of the overlay of a distribution with
respect to the base consists of the domain-pertinent relationships
between the overlay elements (i.e., relationships belonging to the
organisation of the overlay domain) considered in connection to
the arrangement relationships between the overlay elements.
Generally, base elements may contain or hold multiple ele-
ments from the overlay domain SΩor no such elements. The
variation of the overlay with respect to the base includes re-
lationships between any two instances of the elements of the
overlay domain, either having distinct holders or the same holder.
The relationships of having distinct or same holders are a part
of the overlay arrangement; hence, Definition 5 is applicable. To
deal with cases when base elements have no connected overlay
elements, we shall assume that the overlay domain includes a
special null element denoting the absence of any other element.
The null element has no relationships to the other elements
except of being not identical to any other element.
The composition, arrangement, and variation of the overlay
of a data distribution will be called the aspects of the distri-
bution. The concept of a data distribution and its aspects are
schematically illustrated in Fig. 2.
Let us introduce a formal notation for the aspects of a distribu-
tion, which will help us to clarify what they are made of and how
they are related to each other. We already use the symbol B to
denote the distribution base and Ωfor the overlay. The notation
CΩwill refer to the composition of the overlay (Definition 2). The
overlay composition is determined by the existing connections
of overlay domain elements to base elements (Definition 1). To
reflect this dependency, we shall use the expression CΩ(B).
The symbol Or will denote the organisation of a set (Defini-
tion 3). The expression OrB refers to the organisation of the base
and OrΩto the organisation of the overlay, which is the same
as the organisation of the overlay domain. The symbol ArΩwill
refer to the arrangement of the overlay elements according to
the organisation of the base (Definition 4). ArΩis imposed by
OrB, i.e. it is a function of OrB. To emphasise this dependency,
we shall denote the arrangement of the overlay as ArΩ(OrB).
In the tic-tac-toe example, ArΩ(OrB) consists of the particular
placements of the cross and nought symbols in the grid cells. For
the apples, ArΩ(OrB) consists of the particular colouring of each
apple, including both the unicolour and bicolour variants. For the
moon shape, ArΩ(OrB) is the particular sequence of the instances
of the moon shapes corresponding to the sequence of the days.
The variation of the overlay, i.e., the relationships between
the overlay elements within the arrangement (Definition 5) can
be represented by the notation VarΩ(ArΩ(OrB), OrΩ). This means
that the variation exists within a specific arrangement ArΩ(OrB)
and involves relationships from the overlay organisation OrΩ. In
the tic-tac-toe example, the variation is the manner in which
the cell content changes as the grid is traversed. In the example
with the apples, the variation consists of the similarities and
differences between the apples in terms of their colouring. In the
example with the moon shapes, the variation is the manner in
which the moon shape changes from day to day along the time,
i.e., how each shape in the succession relates to the previous one.
The formal notation reflects the asymmetric roles of the base
and overlay of a distribution: while the base is considered as an
independent component, the overlay is composed and arranged
according to the base. The composition CΩ(B) is the instantiation
relationships between instances connected to the base elements
and their prototypes. The arrangement ArΩ(OrB) is the structure
made of the base-specific relationships between the positions or
holders of these instances. In turn, the variation of the overlay
VarΩ(ArΩ(OrB), OrΩ) depends on the arrangement and, through
the arrangement, on the organisation of the base.
Using these concepts, we can formulate the general task of
analysing a distribution as follows: given a data distribution
D(SΩ/SB), characterise the composition, arrangement, and varia-
tion of the overlay, i.e., CΩ(B), ArΩ(OrB), and VarΩ(ArΩ(OrB), OrΩ).
28

N. Andrienko, G. Andrienko, S. Miksch et al.
Visual Informatics 5 (2021) 23–42
Fig. 2. A schematic illustration of the definitions of a data distribution and its aspects. The colours distinguish the composition (purple), arrangement (black), and
variation (red) of the overlay. The labels D2 to D5 refer to the definitions from 2 to 5.
4. Patterns
4.1. Patterns in a distribution
Usually, the purpose of analysing a distribution is to under-
stand how two or more data components are related in general,
i.e., as wholes. For example, the distribution of the symbols over
the tic-tac-toe grid in Fig. 1, top left, would be examined to see
whether there is a linear arrangement of three instances of the
same symbol, irrespective of the specific positions of the symbols.
The distribution of the colours over a set of apples (Fig. 1, top
right) could be analysed for estimating the probabilities of finding
apples of different colours rather than for ascertaining the colour
of each particular apple. The temporal distribution of the moon
shapes (Fig. 1, bottom) would be studied to understand how the
moon shape changes over time in general, regardless of particular
dates.
Data specify connections between individual elements of com-
ponents. We shall thus call these connections elementary. In con-
trast, relationships between components as wholes will be called
synoptic. Synoptic relationships are not mere compositions of
elementary connections but have a higher level of generality. Un-
derstanding synoptic relationships based on elementary connec-
tions requires abstraction, which means that multiple elementary
connections are united and considered all together.
How can elementary connections be unified? What is the force
that can glue them together? It is the relationships between the
elements within the data components, i.e., the relationships that
belong to the internal organisation of the components. Let us
illustrate this statement using the simple examples from Fig. 1.
On the top left, the organisation of the tic-tac-toe grid (i.e., the
set of the spatial relationships between the cells) allows us to
unite individual cells into horizontal, vertical, and diagonal lines.
Simultaneously, the equivalence relationships between the sym-
bol instances allow us to unite multiple instances of the same
symbol in a group. The combination of the relationships be-
tween the cells and between the symbol instances allows us
to consider groups of cells with equivalent symbol instances as
certain shapes. In the set of the apples, there are only identity
relationships between the apples, i.e., each apple is distinct from
all others. This does not give an opportunity for unification.
However, the colour instances can be grouped according to the
equivalence relationships, and the groups can be characterised
in terms of their sizes (i.e., colour frequencies) and intersections.
In our example, the group of the instances of the yellow colour
intersects with the groups of the instances of the red and orange
colours.
At the bottom of Fig. 1, the ordering relationships between the
time steps unite all time steps into a single time line and, simul-
taneously, arrange the different moon shapes into a succession.
Then, the relationships between two neighbouring shapes in the
succession can be seen as the change from the earlier to the later
shape. If similar changes occur successively, they can be unified
and considered all together as a trend. Thus, if we characterise the
moon shape in terms of the visible fraction of the whole moon
disc, we can unite the shapes of the first two weeks into the
trend of increase of the visible fraction from 0 to 100% and the
shapes of the following two weeks into the trend of decrease of
the visible fraction from 100 to 0%. It is also possible to consider
the succession of the changes in more detail, e.g., by taking into
account on which side (right or left) of the moon disc the changes
happen.
In all these examples, we used relationships between elements
of data components for unifying multiple elements and multiple
elementary connections. We described the objects resulting from
the unification as shapes, groups, or trends, without referring
to the elementary connections anymore; hence, we performed
the operation of abstraction. According to the common under-
standing, the objects that we have obtained are examples of
different kinds of patterns existing in data. Hence, a pattern in
data is, generally, a combination of multiple connections and
relationships between elements of data components such that
there exists an operation of abstraction allowing to treat all these
connections and relationships together as a single object. Given
the principal possibility of considering one data component as
the base of a data distribution and the other(s) as the overlay
domain(s), we can use the previously introduced concepts to
formulate the definition of a pattern in a data distribution:
Definition 6.
A pattern in a data distribution is a subset of
the relationships involved in the composition, arrangement, or
variation of the overlay over the base such that there exists an
operation of abstraction allowing to treat this subset as a unified
whole.
29

N. Andrienko, G. Andrienko, S. Miksch et al.
Visual Informatics 5 (2021) 23–42
We emphasise that a pattern consists of relationships, not of
elements. Therefore, the same pattern (i.e., the same combination
of relationships) may occur in data multiple times so that each
occurrence connects different elements. For example, the pattern
‘‘three equal symbols next to one another’’ may occur several
times in one tic-tac-toe game, and it may connect either crosses
or noughts. Moreover, one and the same pattern may occur in
different datasets and even in data of different nature. Thus, the
pattern ‘‘three equal symbols next to one another’’ may also occur
in a text or in musical notation. The groups of elements from the
base and from the overlay that are connected by a pattern will be
called the base and the overlay of the pattern, respectively.
Definition 7. The base of a pattern is the subset of the elements
from the base of the overall distribution whose relationships and
connections contribute to the pattern. The overlay of a pattern
is the subset of the elements from the overlay of the distribution
that are connected to the base of the pattern.
We shall use the notation β and ω to refer, respectively, to
the base and overlay of a pattern; β ⊆B, ω ⊆Ω. Accordingly,
the expressions Cω(β), Arω(Orβ), and Varω(Arω(Orβ), Orω) denote
the composition, arrangement, and variation of the overlay of the
pattern, which are different aspects of a pattern.
Definition 6 implies that patterns objectively exist in data. A
pattern is not a product of observation or computation, it is a
combination of relationships and connections that actually exist
in data. Observation or computation can involve an abstraction
operation that brings these connections and relationships to-
gether and represents as a unified whole. Hence, the product
of observation or computation is a representation of a pattern
rather than the pattern itself. There may be different forms of
representation: verbal, symbolic (e.g., a formula), schematic, etc.
The pattern itself does not depend on the representation form and
on the way in which this representation has been obtained.
We shall use the term abstracted pattern to refer to a holistic
representation of an objective pattern in any form and medium:
Definition 8.
An abstracted data pattern is a representation
of an objective pattern as a unified whole regardless of the
form, language, and medium of the representation. An abstracted
data pattern may represent the composition, arrangement, and/or
variation of the pattern overlay with respect to the base.
The concept of an abstracted pattern corresponds to the def-
inition of a pattern in data mining cited in Section 2.5. The set
of facts in our case consists of all connections and relationships
between elements involved in an objective pattern. However, our
definition of an abstracted pattern refers not only to explicit ex-
pressions in some languages but also to internal representations
constructed in the mind of a human observing objective patterns.
The definition of an abstracted pattern is also consistent with the
definition given by Collins et al. (2018). Unlike these previous
definitions, Definition 8 emphasises the existence of an objective
data pattern represented by an abstracted pattern.
The same objective pattern can be described very roughly in
a short and simple expression or in a more refined and accurate
manner using a longer and more complex expression. The pos-
sible expressions differ in their degree of abstraction: the more
details are included, the lower the abstraction. For example, the
expression ‘‘increasing trend in the morning’’ has a higher degree
of abstraction than ‘‘increase by factor 1.6 in the interval from
8:00 till 10:00’’.
A synoptic relationship between two or more data compo-
nents can be understood and characterised by finding objectively
existing data patterns and representing them by abstracted data
patterns. This process is called pattern discovery.
4.2. Pattern types
Patterns can be categorised first of all according to the data
distribution aspects whose relationships are involved in the pat-
terns, i.e., composition, arrangement, and variation. Based on
this principle, we distinguish composition patterns, arrangement
patterns, and variation patterns.
Composition patterns can be abstracted into frequency distri-
butions or probability distributions (in the statistical sense) of the
elements of the overlay domain. Composition patterns involve
instantiation relationships between overlay elements and their
prototypes (Definition 2) and do not involve any relationships
from the organisation of the base of the data distribution. Rela-
tionship from the organisation of the overlay domain OrΩmay
be utilised in the abstraction operation applied to a composi-
tion pattern. For example, when the overlay domain consists
of numeric values, the ordering and distance relationships be-
tween the values are usually involved in the construction of the
frequency or probability distribution. On this basis, composition
patterns can be further categorised as normal, exponential, left-
or right-skewed, long-tailed, fat-tailed, etc.
Arrangement patterns are formed by relationships between
base elements as signified by the expression Arω(Orβ). Types of
arrangement patterns can be distinguished according to the types
of relationships between the base elements.
Thus, the pattern
type commonly known as ‘‘spatial cluster’’ refers to an arrange-
ment of overlay elements by relationships of spatial distance
between positions in a spatial base. A well-known example is the
cholera outbreak in London in 1854, when John Snow discovered
that the deaths from cholera were arranged into a spatial cluster
around the Broad Street.
Arrangement patterns involving rela-
tionships of ordering between base elements (such as temporal
ordering) may refer to the density of overlay elements along the
order (high or low number of overlay elements corresponding
to sub-sequences of consecutive base elements) and existence
of gaps (positions in the order without corresponding overlay
elements). When the base is time, the density of the overlay
elements is usually referred to as temporal frequency.
Variation patterns involve relationships both from the organ-
isation of the base (incorporated in the overlay arrangement)
and from the organisation of the overlay, as signified by the
expression Varω(Arω(Orβ), Orω). Consequently, possible types of
variation patterns can be defined according to the types of the re-
lationships between the base elements and between the overlay
elements. For example, the pattern type known as ‘‘trend’’ in-
volves relationships of linear ordering in the base, which arrange
the overlay elements in a sequence, and metric relationships
between the elements of the overlay such that the relationships
along the sequence can be treated as changes and linked into
series of similar changes.
While there are specific terms denoting particular types of pat-
terns, such as trend, peak, plateau, fluctuation, cluster, alignment,
etc., the vocabulary of the existing terms does not fully cover
the variety of possible types of patterns. It may be unfeasible
(and not very useful) to enumerate and label all possible types of
patterns. It appears more reasonable to understand the roles of
different kinds of relationships existing in the base and overlay
of a distribution in forming patterns.
This will allow one to
anticipate the types of patterns that can potentially exist in a
given data distribution without the need to know the terms
denoting these pattern types. Our conceptual model introduced in
Section 3 creates prerequisites for gaining such an understanding.
Let us briefly describe the effects of different relationships.
Arrangements of overlay elements are formed by relationships
existing in the base of a distribution (OrB). The types of such
relations include (but are not limited to) the following:
30

N. Andrienko, G. Andrienko, S. Miksch et al.
Visual Informatics 5 (2021) 23–42
• Identity: overlay elements may be arranged in terms of
having distinct or same (identical) holders.
• Ordering:
– Linear: arrange overlay elements into a sequence.
– Cyclic (e.g., temporal): arrange overlay elements into a
succession of subsequences corresponding to consecu-
tive cycles.
• Distances: create an arrangement of overlay elements where
one element can be close to or far from another. The ar-
rangement can be characterised in terms of the density
of the overlay elements: uniform or variable, high or low,
existence of clusters and empty regions, etc.
• Neighbourhood (adjacency): arrange the overlay elements
into contiguous regions.
• Direction (e.g., spatial): arrange subsets of overlay elements
into sequences similarly to linear ordering relationships.
Relationships existing in the domain of the overlay of a dis-
tribution (OrΩ) are involved in the variation of the overlay over
the base. The expression VarΩ(ArΩ(OrB), OrΩ) signifies that the
variation also involves arrangement relationships between the
overlay elements which, in turn, are determined by the organ-
isation of the base. Hence, the effects of the domain-pertinent
relationships in the overlay need to be considered together with
the possible arrangements of the overlay elements according to
relationships in the base, as it is done in the following list:
• Identity or equivalence: create groups of identical or equiva-
lent overlay elements, which can be characterised in terms
of arrangement with respect to the base, e.g., contiguous,
split into parts, or dispersed. Identical overlay elements may
re-occur in a linear or cyclic arrangement, be aligned along
some direction, have close positions in the base, etc.
• Ordering: may (or may not) be related to arrangement with
respect to the base: increase or decrease of the element
order along a sequence, regions with lower- or higher-order
elements, etc.
• Distances: realise themselves as amounts of difference or
change between positions in the base and thus create pat-
terns of change: gradual, abrupt, moderate, etc.
• Neighbourhood: may or may not be preserved in an arrange-
ment with respect to the base, i.e., neighbouring overlay
elements may be close or distant in the arrangement.
• Direction: may or may not be same or similar along a se-
quence or within a region, may consistently change along a
sequence, etc.
Data distributions where the base or the overlay domain has
distance relationships between the elements may contain outliers.
Distance relationships existing in the base may be responsible for
outliers in the overlay arrangement. An outlier in an arrangement
is an overlay element whose position in the base (i.e., the base
element it is connected to) has a large distance to the positions
of all other overlay elements. For example, a spatial outlier is an
overlay element located in a spatial base far away from the bulk
of the overlay elements. Distance relationships existing in the
overlay may be responsible for outliers in the overlay variation.
An outlier in a variation is an overlay element whose prototype in
the overlay domain has a large distance to the prototypes of all
other overlay elements. For example, an outlier in a distribution
of values of a numeric attribute over any kind of base is an
instance of a value that is much higher or much lower than all
other values instantiated in the overlay.
A question arises: should an outlier be treated as a pattern
type? In terms of our conceptual model, a pattern consists of
relationships, not of elements. Accordingly, a particular outlying
element of an overlay is not a pattern. However, its large dis-
tances to other elements, considered together with much smaller
distances between those other elements, is a pattern. This type
of pattern can be called outlierness, leaving the term ‘‘outlier’’ for
applying to elements.
4.3. Patterns in common types of data
The most common, frequently encountered types of data com-
ponents include
• discrete entities, as the cross and nought symbols on the top
left of Fig. 1 and apples on the top right;
• time, as the sequence of the days in Fig. 1, bottom, or se-
quentially ordered abstract steps, as the positions of words
in a text or genes in a DNA molecule;
• space: a continuous or discrete set of locations, as the grid
cells in Fig. 1, top left;
• attributes, as the colours on the upper right of Fig. 1 and
the moon shape characteristics (width and disc side) in the
lower part of Fig. 1.
These types have different organisations, i.e., different rela-
tionships between data elements. Sets of discrete entities, by
default, have only identity relationships, i.e., same or distinct,
between the elements. Time has ordering relationships and may
also have metric distance relationships between the elements,
i.e., how far in time one element is from another. Space has dis-
tance and/or neighbourhood (adjacency) relationships between
the elements. Two- and three-dimensional spaces (and, more
generally, multidimensional spaces) may also have direction rela-
tionships between elements. Attributes may have different organ-
isations of the value sets, usually called scales of measurement:
nominal, ordinal, interval, and ratio. These organisations differ
in the presence or absence of ordering relationships and metric
relationships of distance and ratio.
When a set of entities is a base of a distribution, it can
create an arrangement of the overlay elements in terms of being
connected to same or distinct entities. Such an arrangement may
contain patterns of co-occurrence (i.e., some elements from the
overlay base may repeatedly co-occur in connection with same
entities) or exclusion (e.g., some elements never co-occur, or
some element never occurs together with any other element).
When time is a base of the distribution, relationships of linear
and cyclic ordering and temporal distance between time units
create linear and cyclic arrangements of entities or attribute
values corresponding (i.e., connected) to these time units. In a
time-based arrangement of entities, there may be such patterns
as high or low temporal frequency, temporal gaps (absence of en-
tities for a time period), temporal clusters (groups of temporally
close entities), and regular appearance of entities (i.e., with equal
time intervals in between). For attribute values distributed over
a temporal base, patterns of value variation with respect to the
temporal arrangement are usually of interest. Patterns of tempo-
ral variation, such as trend, periodicity, peak, or plateau, result
from the combination of the time-based arrangement of the at-
tribute values and relationships of ordering and distance between
the attribute values themselves. For attributes with qualitative
(categorical) values, such as labels denoting types of entities,
there may be such patterns as re-occurrence of particular value
sequences or regular re-appearance of some values.
Space as a base creates arrangements of entities and attribute
values according to relationships of spatial distance, neighbour-
hood, and direction between locations. In a space-based arrange-
ment of entities, there may be such patterns as spatial clusters
31

N. Andrienko, G. Andrienko, S. Miksch et al.
Visual Informatics 5 (2021) 23–42
or regions of high and low density. Space-based arrangement of
attribute values together with ordering and distance relationships
between the values themselves can form such spatial patterns
as ‘‘hot’’ and ‘‘cold’’ spots, i.e., regions of high and low attribute
values, respectively. Spatial trend patterns involve relationships
of spatial direction between spatial locations and relationships of
ordering and, possibly, distance, between attribute values. Exam-
ples are increase or decrease from north to south or from centre
to periphery.
What has not been discussed so far is the types of components
in network, or graph data. In terms of our conceptual model,
such data include two components: the set of all possible pairs
of nodes and the set of links connected to some node pairs. The
organisation of the set of node pairs in an undirected graph
consists of the adjacency relationships: two pairs are adjacent
if they have a common node. In a directed graph, there are
relationships of adjacency and partial ordering: pairs (a,b) and
(b,c) are adjacent, and the former precedes the latter in the order.
The links can be considered as discrete entities or as values of a
binary attribute specifying whether a pair is linked or not. In a
weighted graph, the links with their weights can be treated as
values of a numeric attribute; the value 0 can signify the absence
of a link. If we consider the distribution of the links over the set
of the node pairs, the latter will be the distribution base, and
the links will make the overlay. The composition of the overlay
is the set of actually existing links. The adjacency and ordering
relationships in the base arrange the links into various structures,
such as clusters, cliques, paths, stars, trees, and cycles. Such
structures are usually considered as possible types of patterns in
a graph. The concept of variation is relevant when there are some
relationships between the links as such. In particular, when the
links are weighted, there are metric relationships of the weight
difference.
A graph as a whole can be considered as a base for other data
components whose elements are connected to the nodes or links
of the graph. In this case, the organisation of the base consists of
the relationships represented by the links, and the elements of
the other components are arranged by these relationships.
4.4. Patterns in selected examples of visual data analysis
4.4.1. Cluster and calendar view
This example is based on a well-known paper by van Wijk
and van Selow (1999). The data under analysis consist of two
components: time, consisting of hourly time steps with the total
length of one year, and numeric values of the power demand of
a facility for each time step. The analyst wants to understand the
variation of the power demand over time; hence, the time is the
base of the distribution, and the overlay consists of the instances
of the values of the attribute ‘‘power demand’’ recorded in each
hour. The organisation of the base includes several kinds of or-
dering relationships: linear ordering and orderings in the daily,
weekly, and seasonal cycles. These relationships create a complex
arrangement of the attribute values, which is hardly possible to
represent adequately in a single visual display. Therefore, the
variation of the attribute values with respect to this arrangement
is hard to grasp comprehensively using purely visual means.
The analyst tackles the problem by decomposing it. First, the
analyst focuses on the segments of the overall arrangement cor-
responding to the daily cycles and the respective variation of the
attribute values within each day. It can be expected that similar
patterns of daily variation exist in different days, and this expec-
tation is supported by the visual display in Fig. 3. The analyst uses
a clustering technique to capture these similarities. The clustering
puts days with similar sequences of hourly attribute values into
groups. To see the common pattern of the daily variation in
each group, the analyst aggregates the individual value sequences
in each group into sequences of the hourly mean values. The
resulting sequences are represented in a line chart, as shown in
the right part of Fig. 4. The horizontal axis represents the linear
ordering of the hourly intervals in a day. The attribute values are
represented by vertical positions of points, and consecutive points
are connected by lines. This technique represents the variation
patterns by the shapes of the lines. It is possible to observe simi-
larities and differences between the daily patterns corresponding
to the clusters. All but one pattern can be holistically described,
e.g., as low values in the night, steep increase in the morning,
plateau during the day, and gradual decrease in the evening.
The patterns mostly differ in the level of the daytime plateau.
The remaining pattern can be characterised as constantly low
values over the whole day. According to our theoretical model,
these patterns are made by the temporal ordering and distance
relationships between the elements (hours) of the base (time
of the day) together with the quantitative difference relation-
ships between the elements of the overlay (attribute values). The
attribute values are arranged into sequences by the temporal
relationships. The relationships between the values create the
variation along the sequences.
In the next step, the analyst treats the set of extracted daily
patterns as a new component of the data. Each pattern is treated
as a single entity. The analyst studies the distribution of the
occurrences of these entities over the time. Now, the daily cycle
relationships, which are incorporated in the daily patterns, do
not participate in arranging the overlay elements, i.e., the daily
patterns. To consider the arrangement and variation of the daily
patterns by the weekly and seasonal cyclic relationships, the
analyst creates a calendar display shown on the left of Fig. 4.
The elements of the base, i.e., the days of the year in this case,
are visually represented by square marks organised according to
the weeks and months. The pattern occurrences are represented
by different colours. The display effectively enables perceptual
unification of closely located marks painted in the same colour,
and also unification of the marks arranged in the rows, the
columns, and the monthly blocks. The analyst observes repeated
weekly patterns, in which the Saturdays and Sundays are painted
in black and the other days have a different colour. A seasonal
pattern is also noticeable, with the green colour occurring in
colder months of the year and magenta in the summer. There
are multiple disruptions of the seasonal green–magenta pattern
by intrusions of other colours, mostly dark brown and orange.
These disruptions correspond to the differences in the midday
value levels between the patterns.
In this example, visual discovery of variation patterns is sup-
ported by displays in which the relationships between the base
elements (OrB) and the corresponding arrangements of the over-
lay elements (ArΩ(OrB)) are represented using one or two dimen-
sions of the display space. The variations of the overlay elements
(Varω(Arω(Orβ), Orω)) are represented using either the remaining
display dimension (as in the daily time series display on the right
of Fig. 4) or, in Bertin’s terms, a retinal visual variable, namely, the
colours in the calendar display.
4.4.2. VAST Challenge 2011 (Mini Challenge 1)
The challenge requires an investigation of the circumstances
of an epidemic outbreak in a fictive city Vastopolis (Grinstein
et al., 2011). The data are geographically referenced microblog
messages (further called tweets), some of which include key-
words indicating disease symptoms, such as fever, chills, aches
and pains, etc. The time span of the data is three weeks from April
30 to May 20, 2011. An analyst needs to find out when and where
the outbreak started and how it developed.
Here, the data include the following components: set of tweets,
set of people, set of keywords, time, and space. The analyst first
32

N. Andrienko, G. Andrienko, S. Miksch et al.
Visual Informatics 5 (2021) 23–42
Fig. 3. Variation of attribute values over a temporal base with linear and cyclic ordering relationships is hard to understand from a purely visual representation.
Source: van Wijk and van Selow (1999).
Fig. 4. Right: patterns of daily variation are captured by means of clustering. Left: a calendar view shows the distribution of the daily patterns with respect to the
weekly and seasonal cycles.
Source: van Wijk and van Selow (1999).
selects a subset of the relevant tweets, i.e., those whose texts con-
tain occurrences of keywords indicating the disease symptoms.
To find out when the outbreak started, the analyst investigates
the distribution of the relevant tweets over time, specifically,
how the tweets are arranged along the time period under study.
For this purpose, the analyst uses a time histogram (Fig. 5), in
which the heights of chronologically ordered bars represent the
numbers of the tweets that were posted in each day. As expected,
the outbreak start is signified by a pattern of sharp increase of
the tweet numbers. This happened in the last three days of the
studied period.
The analyst focuses on these three days, i.e., selects the data
from this time interval for the further analysis. To analyse only
the new disease cases, the analyst discards the secondary tweets
posted by the same individuals after posting their first messages
mentioning the disease symptoms. The analyst uses map displays
to investigate the spatial distribution of the selected tweets in
the three days of the outbreak (Fig. 6). The maps show the
arrangements of the tweets according to the spatial distance
and direction relationships between the locations in the spatial
base. On the first day of the outbreak, a dense spatial cluster of
tweets appeared in the city centre, with some extension in the
eastern direction. On the second day, the cluster in the centre
remains but does not extend to the east anymore. Additionally,
two dense clusters, or a single cluster divided in two parts by a
river, appeared in the south-western part of the city. On the third
33

N. Andrienko, G. Andrienko, S. Miksch et al.
Visual Informatics 5 (2021) 23–42
Fig. 5. The histogram of the tweet posting times reveals a sharp increase of the frequency of tweets mentioning disease symptoms in the last three days of the
time span of the data.
day, the south-western cluster almost vanished, as the spatial
density of the tweets notably decreased, whereas the central
cluster preserved.
The different behaviours of the clusters over time suggest that
they may differ by other characteristics. To reveal the differences
of the message contents between the clusters, the analyst studies
the respective compositions of the keywords using word cloud
displays, in which word frequencies are represented by font
sizes (Fig. 7). Observing the differences between the frequency
distribution patterns, the analyst concludes that there were two
different kinds of illness: a flu-like disease in the centre and
stomach disorders on the southwest. The latter appeared one day
later than the former. However, the shapes and relative spatial
arrangement of the clusters suggest that the two diseases might
have a common origin somewhere at a motorway bridge crossing
the river.
The analyst extracts the subset of messages posted in the
vicinity of the bridge on the day before the outbreak start, ex-
amines the keyword composition, and finds indications of a truck
crash, fire, and spilling of the truck cargo in the river. The analyst
also looks at additional data concerning the weather and the river
flow direction. The analyst concludes that the smoke from the
fire contaminated the air, which was transmitted by the wind
eastwards and caused the flu-like symptoms, whereas the spilt
substance contaminated the water in the river and caused the
stomach disorders downstream along the river.
The analyst compares the spatial distributions of the primary
and secondary disease-related tweets on the third day (Fig. 8) and
observes multiple compact dense clusters of secondary tweets.
Using the background map, the analyst finds out that most of
the clusters are located at hospitals. The analyst examines the
keyword composition of the tweets in these clusters and finds
out that the most frequent keywords from the tweets posted
at the hospitals correspond to the most frequent keywords that
occurred in the primary tweets posted in central-eastern area.
The analyst selects the subset of people who came to hospi-
tals, studies the trajectories made of their previous tweet loca-
tions, and determines that at least 95% of them had visited the
central-eastern area after the truck accident and before com-
ing to hospitals. This indicates that people with serious medical
conditions, most probably, had been infected while being in the
central-eastern area rather than anywhere else.
This example focuses on analysis of data distributions re-
garding overlay composition CΩ(B) or arrangement ArΩ(OrB).
The arrangement with respect to time was visualised in a time
histogram, where one display dimension was utilised to represent
the temporal ordering and distance relationships. The arrange-
ments with respect to space were visualised in maps, so that
the spatial relationships existing in the physical space were rep-
resented by the spatial relationships between positions in the
display space. The arrangement with respect to the composition
of the space and time (i.e., the spatio-temporal distribution of
the tweets in three days of the outbreak) was examined by
decomposing the complex spatio-temporal base into slices along
the temporal dimension, i.e., consecutive days, and considering
the spatial arrangement in each slice.
4.5. Handling distributions with more than two data components
The previous discussions mostly referred to distributions in-
volving two data components. Relationships between more than
two components can be handled in two complementary ways:
decomposition, i.e., considering the relationships for each pair
of components, and integration, i.e., considering the Cartesian
product of two or more components as a single component. The
latter approach is recommendable when the components have
similar organisation, i.e. same types of relationships between the
elements. Thus, it is quite common to integrate multiple numeric
attributes into an abstract multidimensional space, which can be
considered as a single component. It is also common to treat the
physical space and time as an integrated domain called space–
time continuum. The rationale for the recommendation is that
the elements of the integrated set will be linked by relationships
derived from the relationships existing in the original sets. Thus,
distances between elements of a Cartesian product can be de-
rived from distances within the original sets, and directions in
the integrated set may be defined as compositions of ordering
relationships from the original sets. If the organisation of the
original sets are incompatible, i.e., have no relationship types in
common, it is harder to derive meaningful relationships in the
integrated set.
Section 4.4 contains examples of decomposition applied when
the base of a distribution is composed of several components
(namely, space and time in the epidemic outbreak example) or
has a complex organisation, such as the nested cyclic orderings
in the power demand example. In these cases, the distribution
base was decomposed into slices, or segments. In the space–time
case, the spatio-temporal base was decomposed into spatial slices
corresponding to time steps (days). In the case with the temporal
cycles, the base was divided into one-day segments. The analysts
considered the parts of the distribution corresponding to the
slices or segments and discovered patterns in these distributions.
In the epidemic outbreak case, the analyst constructed a mental
representation of the whole distribution from the discovered
patterns by determining their relationships. In the power demand
analysis, there were too many segments and respective patterns
to deal with; therefore, the analyst used a computational method
(clustering) to group the patterns by similarity and represent
them by the average patterns of the groups.
5. Relationships between patterns
A data distribution may contain more than one pattern. Re-
lationships between two or more patterns existing in the same
distribution can be described in terms of the relationships be-
tween their bases and between the overlays. Obviously, the com-
positions of the bases and of the overlays, i.e., the sets of the
34

N. Andrienko, G. Andrienko, S. Miksch et al.
Visual Informatics 5 (2021) 23–42
Fig. 6. The spatial distribution of the primary outbreak-related tweets posted on three consecutive days.
Fig. 7. The text cloud displays represent the keyword compositions for the central cluster of tweets (top) and for the cluster on the southwest (bottom).
elements they consist of, can be linked by general between-set
relationships, such as inclusion and intersection. Besides, when
there are specific organisation relationships, such as ordering and
distances, between the elements within the base and/or within
the overlay, these relationships can also link patterns. Thus, re-
garding the bases, patterns may be arranged in a particular order
35

N. Andrienko, G. Andrienko, S. Miksch et al.
Visual Informatics 5 (2021) 23–42
Fig. 8. The spatial distributions of the primary and secondary outbreak-related tweets (red and black dots, respectively) on the third day of the outbreak.
within the base, or lie at a certain distance from each other, or be
adjacent, etc. For example, in Fig. 1, bottom, the trend pattern of
the increase of the visible fraction of the moon is followed by the
decreasing trend. In Fig. 6, there are spatial distance and direction
relationships between the bases of the spatial clusters.
Regarding the overlays, patterns may be similar or different
in terms of the composition, arrangement and/or variation of the
overlay elements. Thus, in Fig. 7, we see different patterns of
the word composition in two subsets of texts. As mentioned in
Section 4.4.2, the word composition pattern in the central cluster
of tweets was similar to the pattern in the secondary tweets
concentrated at the hospitals. In Fig. 4, right, the patterns of daily
variation consist of very similar changes and differ only in the
highest attribute values. Patterns involving sequential arrange-
ment of the overlay element may also be opposite in terms of
their variation, as, for example the increasing trend pattern in the
morning and decreasing trend in the evening.
Relationships that exist between patterns unite simpler pat-
terns into more complex patterns. Thus, the trend patterns of the
changes of the moon shape make together a sequential pattern
consisting of the increasing trend following by the decreasing
trend. On a longer time period, there exists a pattern of periodic
repetition of the same sequential pattern, i.e., it consists of mul-
tiple similar sequential patterns following one another. Similarly,
the daily variation patterns in Fig. 4, right, are composed of
shorter patterns of the night low values, morning sharp increase,
daytime plateau, and evening gradual decrease. The calendar
display on the left of Fig. 4 demonstrates how the daily patterns
are organised into weekly and seasonal patterns.
These examples are consistent with the statement of Resnik
(1997) who said that the premier relationships among patterns
are structural similarity and structural containment. Let us discuss
these and other possible relationships in terms of our definitions.
5.1. Similarity
Definition 9.
Two or more objective patterns are similar if they
can be represented by the same abstracted pattern.
For example, each curve in the plot in Fig. 4, right, is an
abstracted pattern representing multiple objective patterns of
daily variation of the power demand.
The concept of pattern similarity does not imply that patterns
need to be in the same distribution, or in distributions with a
common base or a common overlay, or involve occurrences of the
same elements. It is only essential that patterns involve the same
relationships. For example, the daily patterns of the variation of
the power demand in Fig. 4 may be similar to the daily patterns
of the variation of the amount of traffic in a city, or the number
of employees present at their working places, etc.
In Fig. 8, there are multiple patterns of spatial arrangement
that can be represented by the same abstracted pattern ‘‘dense
compact spatial cluster’’; hence, all these patterns are similar.
As we discussed, abstracted patterns representing the same
objective pattern may differ in the degree of abstraction. This
means that the similarity between objective patterns may be
dependent on the degree of abstraction in representing them.
Thus, all curves in Fig. 4, right, except the black one, can be
considered similar because they can be represented by a common
abstracted pattern ‘‘low values in the night followed by sharp
increase in the morning, then plateau with small fluctuations
during the daytime, followed by a gradual decrease to the night
low values’’. However, if the rates of the morning increase and
evening decrease are taken into account, the curves are different.
5.2. Containment
Definition 10.
An objective pattern X includes, or contains, an
objective pattern Y, denoted Y ⊂X, when the base of X includes
the base of Y: β(Y) ⊂β(X). The pattern Y is called a sub-pattern
of X, and X is a super-pattern of Y.
We have had already many examples of containment rela-
tionships. Thus, the pattern of the variation of the moon shape
contains the trend patterns of the increase and decrease of the
visible area of the moon. The daily variation patterns in Fig. 4,
right, contain sub-patterns of uniformly low values, rapid growth,
high plateau, and decrease. The weekly and seasonal patterns in
Fig. 4, left, contain daily sub-patterns. The south-western spatial
cluster in Fig. 6, centre, contains two sub-clusters separated by
the river.
5.3. Repetition
In a distribution, there may be two or more similar pat-
terns with non-intersecting bases. In such a case, it can be said
that some patterns repeatedly occur in the distribution, and this
repetition itself is a pattern. More specifically:
Definition 11.
A repetition pattern is a super-pattern contain-
ing two or more similar sub-patterns with non-overlapping bases
together with relationships existing between the pattern bases.
36

N. Andrienko, G. Andrienko, S. Miksch et al.
Visual Informatics 5 (2021) 23–42
For example, a daily variation pattern in Fig. 4, right, contains
two instances of a pattern of uniformly low values, one at the
beginning and one at the end of the day. On the left of Fig. 4, we
see patterns of multiple repetitions of several daily patterns, as
well as multiple repetitions of weekly patterns composed of five
consecutive repetitions of one daily pattern followed by two rep-
etitions of another daily pattern. Fig. 8 exhibits a spatial repetition
pattern containing multiple dense clusters of outbreak-related
tweets located around hospitals.
A repetition pattern can be called regular if the organisation
of the distribution base includes distance relationships between
the elements, and the distances between the bases of similar
patterns are (approximately) equal. If the base organisation also
includes ordering relationships, a pattern of regular repetition can
be called periodic. Thus, the distribution in Fig. 4, left, contains
a pattern of periodic repetition of the weekend pattern of daily
variation, which is represented by black colour. Besides, there
are sub-patterns with periodic repetition of particular weekly
patterns, sometimes with small disruptions. The variation of the
moon shapes considered on a longer time period than shown in
Fig. 1 is also periodic.
5.4. Cross-overlay relationships
Not only patterns that exist in the same distribution can
be linked by relationships but also patterns existing in two or
more distributions with a common base. More specifically, re-
lationships can exist between the bases of the patterns, and
such relationships may be quite important. They may hint at
correlations or even causal relationships between phenomena
or events. Potentially related patterns may have the same or
overlapping bases, or there may be a particular relationship (such
as a temporal lag) between the pattern bases.
Definition 12.
Cross-overlay relationships between patterns
existing in distributions of distinct overlays over a common base
consist of relationships between the bases of the patterns.
For example, the spatial pattern of the repeated dense clus-
ters of outbreak-related tweets visible in Fig. 8 is related to the
pattern of the spatial distribution of the hospitals in Vastopolis,
as the base of each cluster includes the position of one hospital.
This relationship indicates that many infected people came to
hospitals. Other examples of cross-overlay relationships are those
between the south-western dense cluster of tweets and the river
position (the spatial base of the cluster overlaps with the spatial
base of the river), between the central dense cluster and the wind
direction at the time of cluster emergence (the temporal base of
the cluster coincides with the temporal base of the pattern of
the western wind), and between the spatial position and time of
the track crash event and the spatial positions and times of both
clusters. The latter example demonstrates spatial and temporal
shifts between the pattern bases.
6. Use of patterns in further data analysis
One of the benefits of having a clear definition of a pattern
is the possibility to define in a systematic way various operations
that can be applied to patterns in the course of data analysis. Con-
sequently, designers of systems for data analysis can implement
system functions and interaction techniques supporting these
operations.
In accord with the model building view (Andrienko et al.,
2018), discovered patterns are integrated in an overall model
of the analysis subject, and this model is used for description,
prediction, and/or decision making. Here we do not consider
these final uses of analysis outcomes but discuss how discovered
patterns can be utilised in the further data analysis. We begin
with considering specific examples and then use our conceptual
model to define in a systematic way the possible actions that
can be applied to patterns or their constituents in the process of
analysis.
6.1. Specific examples of pattern use
In Sections 4.4.1 and 4.4.2 we described two examples of vi-
sually analysing data. Let us look how analysts in these examples
used the patterns they had discovered.
E1: In Section 4.4.1, several repeating patterns of daily varia-
tion of the power demand discovered by means of cluster analysis
(Fig. 4, right) were considered as elements of an overlay set
distributed over a base consisting of the days of the year. The
further analysis was applied to the distribution of these patterns
over this base (Fig. 4, left). This is the most obvious example of
application of further analysis steps to discovered patterns.
Section 4.4.2 provides the following examples. E2: After seeing
the pattern of high increase of the number of disease-related
tweets in the last three days, the analyst focused the further
analysis on these three days (Fig. 5). E3: The analyst selected
the tweets that formed the increase pattern in time and con-
sidered their distribution in space (Fig. 6). E4: After detecting
two dense spatial clusters of posted tweets (Fig. 6, centre), the
analyst considered and compared the keyword compositions of
the respective messages (Fig. 7). E5: Observing particular spa-
tial relationships between the two clusters, the analyst came
to the hypothesis of a common reason and origin of both and
inferred the likely place and time of the event that might cause
the appearance of these clusters. E6: The analyst compared the
shapes of the clusters and their positions in space and time
(Fig. 6, top and centre) with the spatial position and flow direction
of the river and with the wind direction at the time of the
cluster emergence and drew conclusions concerning the disease
transmitting mechanisms. E7: Analysing the spatial distribution
of the secondary outbreak-related tweets posted on the last day,
the analyst noticed a pattern of repetition of compact dense
clusters and found out that these clusters were located around
hospitals (Fig. 8). E8: Comparing the keyword compositions of
the tweets posted at the hospitals, in the central-eastern area,
and in the south-western area, the analyst observed similar fre-
quency patterns in the two former compositions. E9: The analyst
selected the subset of people who came to the hospitals, studied
the spatial relationships of their previous tweets to the central-
eastern and south-western areas, and thereby ascertained that
most people had previously visited the central-eastern area and,
most probably, had been infected while being there.
These examples demonstrate the main purpose of pattern
discovery in visual analytics: patterns are involved in analytical
reasoning; analysts use them to make hypotheses and draw con-
clusions. This main use of discovered patterns is supported by
interactively performed analytical operations, such as selection,
extraction of connected elements from other data components,
aggregation, and unified representation. Our theoretical model
allows us to define the set of possible analysis operations on
patterns in a systematic manner.
6.2. General analysis operations on patterns
According to our model, a pattern has its base β and overlay
ω, which are subsets of the base B and overlay Ωof the overall
data distribution. The internal content of a pattern is connections
and relationships between the elements of its base and its overlay
(Definition 6). The base and overlay elements may also have other
37

N. Andrienko, G. Andrienko, S. Miksch et al.
Visual Informatics 5 (2021) 23–42
connections and relationships, external with respect to the pat-
tern. Analytical operations can be applied to the internal pattern
contents or exploit the external connections or relationships.
Operations on internal contents of individual patterns:
• Characterise pattern contents: derive (in particular, com-
putationally) synoptic characteristics of a pattern from the
elements of its base and overlay and their relationships,
e.g., the number of elements in a spatial cluster and their
spatial density.
• Aggregate a pattern: represent a pattern as a single element
of data (as in E1).
• Refine a pattern: divide β or ω into subsets (e.g., the
outbreak-related tweets into primary and secondary), in-
vestigate and characterise the parts of the overall data
distribution including the elements of each subset and the
connected elements of the other component.
Operations on comparing contents of several patterns:
• Compare patterns in terms of relationships they include;
e.g., compare daily variation patterns in E1, compare word
frequency patterns in E4 and E8.
• Group patterns by similarity of their contents; e.g., create
clusters of similar daily patterns in E1.
• Represent similar patterns by a common abstracted pattern
and treat each pattern as an instance of this abstracted
pattern (E1).
Operations using relationships of β and ω to external ele-
ments of B and Ω:
• Determine relationships of a pattern to the rest of the distribu-
tion, e.g., determine the relative time of the tweet number
increase pattern in E2 and the amount of the increase with
respect to the average number.
• Determine relationships between patterns in the same distri-
bution, e.g., between spatial clusters of tweets (E5).
• Unite patterns into compound patterns (super-patterns), e.g.,
unite the compact dense clusters of tweets posted around
the hospitals (Fig. 8) and use them all together, as in E8 and
E9.
Operations using connections of base or overlay elements to
elements of other components:
• Extract elements of other components connected to the el-
ements of the pattern base or overlay, e.g., extract spatial
locations of the tweets in E3, words of the messages in E4
and E8, people who posted the tweets in E9.
• Characterise a pattern using elements of other components,
e.g., characterise spatio-temporal clusters of tweets in terms
of keyword occurrences (E4, E8).
• Determine cross-overlay relationships of patterns in a distri-
bution of a component Ω1 over a base B to patterns or
elements of the distribution of another component Ω2 over
the same base B (E6, E7).
This section emphasises that discovery of distribution patterns
is a part of an analytical workflow, in which the patterns that
have been discovered are used in various ways in reasoning
and further analysis. This emphasis is specific to visual analytics,
whereas data mining, statistics, and other disciplines developing
techniques for data analysis are primarily concerned with pattern
discovery and, possibly, interpretation but not with the further
use.
7. Discussion of model implications
7.1. Summary of the model
The definitions and statements we have formulated earlier can
be briefly summarised as follows:
• A data pattern is a combination of relationships between
connected elements of two or more data components. El-
ements of one of the components make the pattern base,
the remaining elements make the overlay. The relationships
between the overlay elements are considered in connection
to the base and to relationships existing between the base
elements. A pattern does not include its base or overlay ele-
ments; it only includes the system of relationships between
the elements.
• An objectively existing data pattern can be represented and
treated as a single object. Any such representation is called
an abstracted pattern. Similarity of objective patterns means
the possibility to represent them by the same abstracted
pattern.
• Patterns may be linked by containment or intersection re-
lationships between the sets of their base and/or overlay
elements as well as by relationships made from elemen-
tary relationships between the base or overlay elements.
Patterns linked by relationships form composite patterns.
• Once discovered, patterns can be utilised in the further data
analysis through applying interactive analytical operations
to their internal contents and external relationships and
connections.
Let us now discuss the meaning of this model for the visual
analytics science and practice.
7.2. Need for pattern discovery
Understanding relationships among data components is one
of major general tasks for which visual analytics techniques are
applied. A visual analytics process often aims at building a model
(particularly, a mental model in the analyst’s mind) of some sub-
ject of analysis, and the model needs to represent relationships
between components (aspects) of the subject in a generalised
way (Andrienko et al., 2018). The requirement of the generality
means that multiple connections between individual elements of
data need to be unified.
As we have explained in this paper, unification of multiple
elementary connections is possible owing to relationships that
exist between elements within data components. These relation-
ships unite multiple elements and elementary connections into
structures that can be considered and represented holistically.
Such structures are usually called patterns. Hence, general rela-
tionships between components of data and/or analysis subject
can be understood and modelled by discovering patterns in data
distributions. Therefore, pattern discovery can be regarded as a
fundamental operation in visual analytics processes.
There are two approaches to pattern discovery: computa-
tional and visual. Computational pattern discovery is done by
specially designed algorithms. This requires precise specification
of patterns to seek, i.e., what relationships must exist between
elements. Besides, parameter tuning is often needed, such as
setting the minimal number of elements in a pattern, maximal
distance or difference between elements, minimal frequency, etc.
An algorithm will find patterns matching the given specification
and nothing else. Hence, in the context of the general task of
gaining an overall understanding of the relationships between
data components, pattern discovery algorithms do not do the full
job, as they will not find potentially relevant patterns beyond the
38

N. Andrienko, G. Andrienko, S. Miksch et al.
Visual Informatics 5 (2021) 23–42
specifications received. Still, when particular types of patterns are
expected to exist in the data, it makes sense to employ algorithms
designed to detect patterns of these types. The possible pattern
types can be predicted based on the types of the relationships
existing within the data components, as discussed in Section 4.2.
Visual pattern discovery relies on the human capability to
see patterns in visual representations of information. The use of
this capability does not require an exact specification of what
to look for, and a human observer can detect patterns of var-
ious types. However, the visual representation must fulfil the
following requirements:
• Since patterns are formed by relationships between data
elements, the visualisation must faithfully show the existing
relationships.
• The visualisation must not provoke seeing non-existent re-
lationships, to preclude generation of false patterns.
• Since patterns need to be considered and represented holis-
tically, the visualisation should facilitate perceptual unifica-
tion of multiple elements.
These requirements logically follow from the conceptual model
introduced in the previous section. At the same time, they are
consistent with the established principles of the visualisation
introduced by Bertin and further developed by other researchers.
7.3. Principle of correspondence
The first two requirements to visual representation can be
seen as two sides of a single principle of correspondence: re-
lationships that can be perceived by a human observer from a
visual display must correspond to relationships actually existing
in data. This statement is consistent with the Bertin’s formulation
of the principle of the correspondence between the organisation
level of a data component and the perceptual properties of the
visual variable that should be used for representing this compo-
nent (Bertin, 1983). Mackinlay (1986) referred to this principle
using the term ‘‘expressiveness’’ (of a visual variable). Based on
our conceptual model, the principle of correspondence can be
explained by the necessity to make relationships involved in
objectively existing patterns perceivable by a human so that the
relationships between values of a visual variable can be intu-
itively translated into relationships between the data elements
represented.
Talking about organisation of a data component, Bertin con-
sidered only ordering and metric (quantitative) relationships. We
have discussed in Section 4.2 how other types of relationships,
such as equivalence, spatial direction, neighbourhood, cyclic or-
dering, can also be important. Besides, there may be application-
specific relationships, e.g., hierarchical relationships or links in
a network. Hence, the Bertin’s concept of organisation level is
insufficient for describing the variety of possible organisations.
The existing assortment of visual variables is also insufficient for
representing all types of relationships that may exist within data
components. Thus, there is no visual variable that could represent
a cyclic or a hierarchical organisation. Such organisations are
usually represented using other means, such as particular layouts
of visual marks. For example, a cyclic organisation can be repre-
sented by a radial, spiral, or matrix layout. In node-link diagrams,
relationships are represented by special linear marks connecting
nodes. The treemap technique (Johnson and Shneiderman, 1991)
uses a nested layout for representing hierarchical relationships.
Bertin considered various layouts (called ‘‘impositions’’), in-
cluding networks and maps, in separation from the concept of set
organisation, whereas a layout is no less a means to represent re-
lationships within a set than a visual variable. We propose to treat
these and other possible means of representing relationships
between elements equally and thus to state the fundamental
principle of visualisation in the following way:
Analysis-relevant relationships between data elements need to
be represented by appropriate means of visual expression, including
visual variables, layout of visual marks, special marks, spacing, etc.
These means of visual expression must support the perception of
existing relationships and preclude the perception of non-existing
relationships.
Spacing between display components, such as bars in a bar
chart, is often used when the visual variable ‘position’, which
is perceived as continuous, represents a discrete set. This is an
example of an approach to precluding perception of non-existent
relationships.
The principle we have formulated can be called the principle
of correspondence of visualisation means to relationships existing in
data. This is not a new principle; although it was not stated in this
way until recently (see (Karer et al., 2020)), visualisation design-
ers have been always following it by using empirically established
conventions of choosing particular visual means for representing
different kinds of data. The proposed explicit formulation clearly
states: what visualisation designers need to care about primarily
is the relationships existing in data. By matching the possible
types of relationships, including those discussed in Section 4.2,
to the visual means capable to convey them, it is possible to
transform the tacit conventions into explicit rules of visualisation
design.
There are other theoretical models that consider the require-
ment of correspondence between data and visualisation from
different perspectives. Kindlmann and Scheidegger (2014) care
about the correspondence between the so-called ‘‘mathematical
structure of the underlying data’’ (i.e., data types and organ-
isation) and the ‘‘mathematical structure in the perception of
visualisations’’. They formulate their three principles stating that
the visualisation must be invariant to the internal representation
of the data and that changes in the data must result in noticeable,
meaningful, and unambiguous changes of the display. One of the
principles is called ‘‘The Principle of Correspondence’’, but, unlike
ours, it refers to data changes rather than relationships within
the data. Demiralp et al. (2014) propose a model that treats
visualisation as a data embedding that must preserve structures
existing in the data. The model focuses on relationships between
data items that can be represented as distances. The idea is that
distances perceived from the visualisation must correspond to
the actual distances between data items. Wattenberg and Fisher
(2004) focus on the kinds of relationships that organise data into
groups and hierarchies. They propose a formal model that can
describe the organisation of an arbitrary grey-scale image as,
supposedly, would be perceived by an observer. A visualisation
designer can compare the structure reconstructed by the model
with the actual data structure and thus check if the image conveys
the data structure correctly. Unlike those works, our model ex-
plicitly acknowledges the pattern-forming role of different kinds
of relationships between data items and explains the fundamen-
tal principle of correspondence between data and visualisation by
the need to correctly convey data patterns to human observers
and analysts.
7.4. Principle of unification
According to our model, pattern discovery involves unification
of multiple elements and abstraction, that is, integrated represen-
tation of these elements as a single object. Consequently, visual
displays of data should not only correctly represent objectively
existing data patterns but also support perceptual abstraction
from multiple elements and elementary relationships to holistic
representations. This corresponds to the Bertin’s concepts of the
39

N. Andrienko, G. Andrienko, S. Miksch et al.
Visual Informatics 5 (2021) 23–42
overall and intermediate reading levels as opposite to the ele-
mentary level involving perception of individual elements and
relationships (Bertin, 1983). Bertin also introduced the concept
of image as ‘‘the meaningful visual form, perceptible in the min-
imum instant of vision’’ (Bertin, 1983, p. 11). A single image
providing answers to questions of all three levels allows us to per-
ceive patterns as units. Visualisations with more images require
integration across images, which may hinder holistic perception.
Hence, in designing visual representations for data analysis,
it is essential to support integrated perception of multiple rela-
tionship instances. For example, in a line chart, multiple points
are connected by line segments; as a result, a large number of
ordering and distance relationships are integrated into a single
line that is perceived as a unit. In plots or maps where ele-
ments are represented by dots, multiple neighbouring dots can
be perceptually integrated into shapes according to the Gestalt
law of proximity (Metzger, 2006). This capacity of the human’s
perception is also utilised in projection displays where distances
in the projection space represent degrees of similarity, semantic
relatedness, or other kind of relationships whose strength can be
expressed numerically (Wise et al., 1995; Bach et al., 2016; van
den Elzen et al., 2016).
Abstractive perception can be promoted by smoothing, e.g., us-
ing kernel density estimation techniques (Willems et al., 2009),
which, however, hide the original elements and relationships.
Tufte advocated creation of displays supporting both micro- and
macro-readings (Tufte, 1990), such that multiple small visual
marks can be perceived all together. Bae and Watson (Bae and
Watson, 2014) study the use of five cues stimulating visual
grouping, namely, proximity, colour similarity, common region,
connectivity, and alignment, separately and in combinations.
They assess the strengths of the different cues and find that
complex structures can be more effectively communicated by
combining two or more grouping cues.
The development of visual analytics science and technol-
ogy would benefit from a systematic survey of the existing ap-
proaches suitable for supporting abstractive perception, and it
would also be appropriate to evaluate these techniques empir-
ically.
7.5. Directions for empirical research
As we have mentioned, the need to support abstractive per-
ception of patterns calls for empirical research on how different
techniques can promote such kind of perception.
Since relationships play the key role in forming data patterns,
the existing means of visual representation require empirical
evaluation of their capabilities to enable perception of various
types of relationships. The empirical studies that were conducted
so far mostly referred to the ability of display users to perceive
values rather than relationships. Hence, there is a need in further
studies focusing primarily on relationships.
Knowing the types of relationships involved in the organisa-
tion of data components, it is possible to predict what kinds of
patterns may exist, irrespective of the existence of specific terms
denoting these kinds of patterns. This possibility can be used
for testing the capabilities of a particular visualisation to convey
correctly and effectively the kinds of patterns that can exist in
data with components of given types. For this purpose, one can
construct an artificial dataset with these data types that includes
this or that kind of pattern as the ‘‘ground truth’’, and check if
users can efficiently spot the incorporated patterns.
7.6. Practical utilisation of the theoretical model
An analyst who wants to discover patterns in a distribution
can use the model to
• understand which aspects of a distribution are relevant to
analysis goals: composition, arrangement, or variation (Sec-
tion 3.3);
• understand what kinds of relationships between elements
are involved in these relevant aspects and need to be taken
into account (Section 4.2);
• find appropriate means for representing these relationships;
• decompose a distribution over a complex base with several
kinds of relationships into a combination of distributions
with simpler bases;
• understand what relationships can exist between patterns
and determine these relationships (Section 5);
• build an analytical workflow involving appropriate opera-
tions on patterns (Section 6).
Apart from the possible use by data analysts, the model can
provide an appropriate basis for practice-oriented teaching of
visual analytics. It can also be utilised in designing visual analytics
systems providing guidance to users (Collins et al., 2018; Ceneda
et al., 2017, 2020). Intelligent guidance that is not limited to in-
structing users about system functions may help users in pattern
discovery (Collins et al., 2018, Section 5.5.1), e.g., by informing
users about pattern types that can exist in their data and about
visual or computational methods that can be used for finding
patterns of these types (Collins et al., 2018, Fig. 1). An intelli-
gent guide can also help users externalise patterns they have
discovered, i.e., transform mental images of these patterns into
explicit representations. To provide these kinds of user support,
the guiding system needs to have a knowledge base enabling
prediction of possible pattern types depending on the structure
and properties of user’s data (Collins et al., 2018, Section 6). Our
theoretical model can serve as a foundation for such a knowledge
base.
8. Conclusion
In developing our model, we have built on ideas from systems
science (Klir and Elias, 2002) and general mathematics (Resnik,
1997; Oliveri, 1997), and we also generalised and systematised
our vast practical experiences from developing visual analytics
solutions for various kinds of domains, data, and problems. The
model does not include a taxonomy of pattern types, which could
hardly be exhaustively itemised. It also does not explicitly refer
to data types, which can be defined in multiple ways (e.g., in
databases, programming languages, etc.), but refers instead to
fundamental properties of data components, particularly, types
of relationships between elements.
The model gives a working definition of a pattern in a data dis-
tribution, which has been so far a rather vague and not practically
utilisable notion in visualisation and visual analytics. To make
this definition, we have introduced a system of supporting defini-
tions. By drawing implications from the system of definitions, we
have theoretically explained the rationale of some of the existing
empirically established principles of visualisation, which may be
helpful in teaching these principles. We have outlined how the
proposed theoretical model can be used in data analysis practices,
but, of course, its practical utility requires extensive testing.
The model can enlighten designers of visual analytics meth-
ods and systems concerning possible approaches to supporting
pattern discovery. The main idea is to respect and make use of
relationships existing in data domains and to find either com-
putational methods extracting combinations of relationships or
40

N. Andrienko, G. Andrienko, S. Miksch et al.
Visual Informatics 5 (2021) 23–42
visual methods allowing human analysts to observe such combi-
nations and perceive them holistically. In this respect, the model
suggests a need in empirical studies on perception of visual dis-
plays that would specifically focus on perception of relationships
rather than judgement of absolute values. Such studies need
to evaluate the following: (1) how easy is for a user to see
particular relationships between overlay elements and between
their positions in the base; (2) whether or not the user may
see non-existing relationships; (3) how well items linked by the
relationships ‘‘stick together’’ in the user’s eyes (Metzger, 2006).
Another merit of the given definitions is that they enabled us
to describe systematically the analytical operations that can be
applied to discovered patterns in the processes of data analysis
and analytical reasoning. The task of supporting such processes
has primary importance for visual analytics research and design
of visual analytics systems. We have defined the range of possi-
ble analytical actions that can be applied to patterns or involve
patterns. This can inform researchers focusing on supporting
analytical processes and designers of systems intended to support
such processes.
As a direction for further theoretical research, we see a need
in considering in more detail complex bases composed of het-
erogeneous components, such as space × time, entities × time,
entities × space × time, etc. The organisations of such bases
are very complicated. It would be appropriate to consider what
kinds of objective patterns are possible for overlays with different
properties.
This discussion gives us a ground to believe that our work
makes a valuable contribution to the visual analytics research and
can inform and motivate further theoretical researches.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing finan-
cial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared
to influence the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgements
The authors are grateful to Min Chen, Daniel Keim and Jarke
van Wijk for intensive discussions and constructive comments on
earlier versions of this work.
This research was supported by Fraunhofer Center for Machine
Learning within the Fraunhofer Cluster for Cognitive Internet
Technologies, by DFG within Priority Programme 1894 (SPP VGI),
by EU in project SoBigData++, by SESAR in projects TAPAS and
SIMBAD, and by Austrian Science Fund (FWF) project KnowVA
(grant P31419-N31).
References
Aggarwal, C.C., 2015. Data Mining: The Textbook. Springer Publishing Company,
Incorporated.
Andrienko, N., Andrienko, G., 2005. Exploratory Analysis of Spatial and Temporal
Data: A Systematic Approach. Springer-Verlag New York, Inc., Secaucus, NJ,
USA, http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/3-540-31190-4.
Andrienko, N., Andrienko, G., Fuchs, G., Slingsby, A., Turkay, C., Wrobel, S., 2020.
Visual Analytics for Data Scientists. Springer.
Andrienko, N., Lammarsch, T., Andrienko, G., Fuchs, G., Keim, D., Miksch, S.,
Rind, A., 2018. Viewing visual analytics as model building. Comput. Graph.
Forum 37 (6), 275–299. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/cgf.13324.
Bach, B., Shi, C., Heulot, N., Madhyastha, T., Grabowski, T., Dragicevic, P., 2016.
Time curves: Folding time to visualize patterns of temporal evolution in data.
IEEE Trans. Vis. Comput. Graphics 22 (1), 559–568. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/
TVCG.2015.2467851.
Bae, J., Watson, B., 2014. Reinforcing visual grouping cues to communicate
complex informational structure. IEEE Trans. Vis. Comput. Graphics 20,
1973–1982.
Bertin, J., 1983. Semiology of Graphics. University of Wisconsin Press.
Borregaard, M., Hendrichsen, D., Nachman, G., 2009. Spatial distribution patterns.
In: Jørgensen, S., Fath, B. (Eds.), Encyclopedia of Ecology. Elsevier, Oxford, pp.
3304–3310.
Bruce, P., Bruce, A., 2017. Practical Statistics for Data Scientists: 50 Essential
Concepts. O’Reilly Media.
Ceneda, D., Andrienko, N., Andrienko, G., Gschwandtner, T., Miksch, S., Pic-
colotto, N., Schreck, T., Streit, M., Suschnigg, J., Tominski, C., 2020. Guide
me in analysis: A framework for guidance designers. Comput. Graph. Forum
39 (6), 269–288. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/cgf.14017.
Ceneda, D., Gschwandtner, T., May, T., Miksch, S., Schulz, H.-J., Streit, M.,
Tominski, C., 2017. Characterizing guidance in visual analytics. IEEE Trans.
Vis. Comput. Graphics 23 (1), 111–120.
Chen, M., Golan, A., 2016. What may visualization processes optimize? IEEE
Trans. Vis. Comput. Graphics 22 (12), 2619–2632.
Chen, M., Walton, S., Berger, K., Thiyagalingam, J., Duffy, B., Fang, H., Holloway, C.,
Trefethen, A.E., 2014. Visual multiplexing. Comput. Graph. Forum 33 (3),
241–250.
Chou, Y.H., 1995. Spatial pattern and spatial autocorrelation. In: Frank, A.U.,
Kuhn, W. (Eds.), Spatial Information Theory a Theoretical Basis for GIS.
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, pp. 365–376.
Collins, C., Andrienko, N., Schreck, T., Yang, J., Choo, J., Engelke, U., Jena, A.,
Dwyer, T., 2018. Guidance in the human—machine analytics process. Vis.
Inform. 2 (3), 166–180. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.visinf.2018.09.003.
Cover, T.M., Thomas, J.A., 2006. Elements of Information Theory, second ed. John
Wiley & Sons.
Demiralp, C., Scheidegger, C., Kindlmann, G., Laidlaw, D., Heer, J., 2014. Visual
embedding: A model for visualization. IEEE Comput. Graph. Appl. 34 (1),
10–15. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MCG.2014.18.
Devlin, K., 1996. Mathematics: The Science of Patterns: The Search for Order in
Life, Mind and the Universe. Henry Holt and Company.
Fayyad, U.M., Piatetsky-Shapiro, G., Smyth, P., Uthurusamy, R. (Eds.), 1996.
Advances in Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. American Association
for Artificial Intelligence, Menlo Park, CA, USA.
Feixas, M., Bardera, A., Rigau, J., Xu, Q., Sbert, M., 2014. Information theory
tools for image processing. In: Synthesis Lectures on Computer Graphics and
Animation, Vol. 6. pp. 1–164.
Forbes, C., Evans, M., Hastings, N., Peacock, B.J., 2010. Statistical Distributions,
fourth ed. John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, New York, NY.
Getis, A., Paelinck, J.H.P., 2004. An analytical description of spatial patterns. L
Éspace géographique 33 (1), 61–69. http://dx.doi.org/10.3917/eg.033.0061.
Grinstein, G., Whiting, M., Liggett, K., Nebesh, D., 2011. IEEE VAST CHallenge.
http://hcil.cs.umd.edu/localphp/hcil/vast11/.
Han, J., 2005. Data Mining: Concepts and Techniques. Morgan Kaufmann
Publishers Inc., San Francisco, CA, USA.
Härdle, W.K., Klinke, S., Rönz, B., 2015. Introduction to Statistics. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1007/978-3-319-17704-5.
Heumann, C., Schomaker, M., Shalabh, S., 2017. Introduction to Statistics and
Data Analysis With Exercises, Solutions and Applications in R.
Hornby, A.S., 2000. Oxford Advanced Learner’s Dictionary of Current English,
sixth ed. Oxford University Press.
Johnson, B., Shneiderman, B., 1991. Tree-maps: A space-filling approach to the
visualization of hierarchical information structures. In: Proceedings of the
2nd Conference on Visualization ’91, VIS ’91. IEEE Computer Society Press,
pp. 284–291.
Karer, B., Scheler, I., Hagen, H., Leitte, H., 2020. Conceptgraph: A formal model for
interpretation and reasoning during visual analysis. Comput. Graph. Forum
39 (6), 5–18. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/cgf.13899.
Kerlinger, F., Lee, H., 2000. Foundations of Behavioral Research. In: PSY 200 (300)
Quantitative Methods in Psychology Series, Harcourt College Publishers.
Kijmongkolchai, N., Abdul-Rahman, A., Chen, M., 2017. Empirically measuring
soft knowledge in visualization. Comput. Graph. Forum 36 (3), 73–85.
Kindlmann, G., Scheidegger, C., 2014. An algebraic process for visualization
design. IEEE Trans. Vis. Comput. Graphics 20 (12), 2181–2190. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1109/TVCG.2014.2346325.
Klir, G.J., Elias, D., 2002. Architecture of Systems Problem Solving. Da Capo Press,
Incorporated.
Klösgen, W., Zytkow, J.M. (Eds.), 2002. Handbook of Data Mining and Knowledge
Discovery. Oxford University Press, Inc., New York, NY, USA.
Krishnamoorthy, K., 2006. Handbook of Statistical Distributions with Applica-
tions. Statistics: A Series of Textbooks and Monographs, CRC Press, https:
//books.google.de/books?id=FEE8D1tRl30C.
Mackinlay, J., 1986. Automating the design of graphical presentations of rela-
tional information. ACM Trans. Graph. 5 (2), 110–141. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1145/22949.22950.
Merriam-Webster Online, 2009. Merriam-webster online dictionary. http://www.
merriam-webster.com.
Metzger, W., 2006. Laws of Seeing. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, USA.
Munzner, T., 2014. Visualization Analysis and Design. In: A.K. Peters Visualization
Series, A K Peters, http://www.cs.ubc.ca/%7Etmm/vadbook/.
Oliveri, G., 1997. Mathematics. A science of patterns? Synthese 112 (3), 379–402.
41

N. Andrienko, G. Andrienko, S. Miksch et al.
Visual Informatics 5 (2021) 23–42
Resnik, M.D., 1997. Mathematics as a Science of Patterns. Clarendon Press;
Oxford University Press Oxford, Oxford; New York.
Rosenberg, M., Anderson, C., 2016. Spatial pattern analysis. In: Gibson, D. (Ed.),
Oxford Bibliographies in Ecology. Oxford University Press, New York, NY,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/OBO/97801998300600144.
Ruiz, F.E., Pérez, P.S., Bonev, B., 2009. Information Theory in Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition. Springer.
Shannon, C.E., 1948. A mathematical theory of communication. Bell Syst. Tech.
J. 27, 379–423.
Souris, M., 2019. Spatial distribution analysis. In: Epidemiology and Geog-
raphy. John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, pp. 109–175. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/
9781119528203.ch5.
Tufte, E., 1990. Envisioning Information. Graphics Press, Cheshire, CT, USA.
van den Elzen, S., Holten, D., Blaas, J., van Wijk, J.J., 2016. Reducing snapshots
to points: A visual analytics approach to dynamic network exploration. IEEE
Trans. Vis. Comput. Graphics 22 (1), 1–10. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TVCG.
2015.2468078.
Wagemans, J., Elder, J.H., Kubovy, M., Palmer, S.E., Peterson, M.A., Singh, M.,
von der Heydt, R., 2012. A century of gestalt psychology in visual perception:
I. Perceptual grouping and figure-ground organization. Psychol. Bull. 138 (6),
1172–1217.
Ware,
C.,
2004.
Information
Visualization:
Perception
for
Design.
Morgan
Kaufmann Publishers Inc., San Francisco, CA, USA.
Wattenberg, M., Fisher, D., 2004. Analyzing perceptual organization in informa-
tion graphics. Inf. Vis. 3 (2), 123–133. http://dx.doi.org/10.1057/palgrave.ivs.
9500070.
van Wijk, J.J., van Selow, E.R., 1999. Cluster and calendar based visualization
of time series data. In: Proc. IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization
(InfoVis), pp. 4–9.
Willems, N., Van De Wetering, H., Van Wijk, J.J., 2009. Visualization of vessel
movements. Comput. Graph. Forum 28 (3), 959–966.
Wise, J.A., Thomas, J.J., Pennock, K., Lantrip, D., Pottier, M., Schur, A., Crow, V.,
1995. Visualizing the non-visual: Spatial analysis and interaction with
information from text documents. In: Proceedings of the 1995 IEEE Sym-
posium on Information Visualization, INFOVIS ’95. IEEE Computer Society,
Washington, DC, USA, pp. 51–58.
Witten, I.H., Frank, E., Hall, M.A., 2011. Data Mining: Practical Machine Learning
Tools and Techniques, third ed. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc., San
Francisco, CA, USA.
42

