See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/313504587
Machines that Dream: A New Challenge in Behavioral-Basic Robotics
Article  in  Procedia Computer Science · December 2016
DOI: 10.1016/j.procs.2017.01.089
CITATIONS
4
READS
140
2 authors, including:
Some of the authors of this publication are also working on these related projects:
cyberbullying View project
participatory learning View project
Gilberto Marzano
Rezekne Academy of Technologies
173 PUBLICATIONS   300 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
All content following this page was uploaded by Gilberto Marzano on 09 February 2017.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

 Procedia Computer Science  104 ( 2017 )  146 – 151 
1877-0509 © 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license 
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
Peer-review under responsibility of organizing committee of the scientific committee of the international conference; ICTE 2016
doi: 10.1016/j.procs.2017.01.089 
ScienceDirect
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
ICTE 2016, December 2016, Riga, Latvia 
Machines that Dream: a New Challenge in Behavioral-Basic 
Robotics 
Gilberto Marzanoa*, Alessandro Novembreb
aRezekne Academy of Technology, Atbrivosanas aleja 115, Rezekne LV-4601, Latvia 
bUniversity of Salento, Piazza Tancredi 7, 73100 Lecce, Italy  
Abstract 
The digital revolution is transforming contemporary society. Connective intelligence is an emerging property deriving from the 
embedding of intelligence into the connected data, concepts, applications, and people. Furthermore, the progress in behavioral-
basic robotics opens new fields of innovative investigation.   
In this challenging context, might it make sense to provide machines with dreaming-like functions? Indeed, machine inactivity 
can be assimilated to the sleep state of living beings. Furthermore, when dreaming, we can interact with what we take to be other
individuals and things and, in certain respects, the same happens in the virtual world.  
This paper highlights some new directions that have emerged in the field of Artificial Intelligence, focusing on the total Turing 
test and dreaming machines. 
© 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. 
Peer-review under responsibility of organizing committee of the scientific committee of the international conference; ICTE 2016.
Keywords: Artificial intelligence; Turing test; Dreaming machines; Inceptionism; Machine lerning 
1. Introduction
    In the 1990s it was argued that software configurable hardware and software that accelerates the simulation of 
digital devices could be used to build, in the near future, machines that are capable of evolution1.
    Indeed, in those years, various forms of machine-simulated evolution were proposed, although doubts were also 
expressed as to their adequacy for real life contexts2.
* Corresponding author. Tel.: +39 3357035566.  
E-mail address: gilberto.marzano@ru.lv 
© 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license 
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
Peer-review under responsibility of organizing committee of the scientific committee of the international conference; ICTE 2016

147
 Gilberto Marzano and Alessandro Novembre /  Procedia Computer Science  104 ( 2017 )  146 – 151 
    At the time, Calvin, an American theoretical neurophysiologist, suggested the implementation of an autonomous 
robot, the Darwin machine. In his short essay “The brain as a Darwin Machine”3 Calvin argued that parallel 
computer simulation of human brain activity suggested that human beings would have a better claim on the title 
Homo seriatim than Homo sapiens, also due to the fact that humans are more consistently serial than wise. In 
accordance with this presumption, he hypothesized a machine that would have the capacity to chain together 
stochastic sequences of data following the analogous ways of Darwinian evolutionary biology. This machine was 
supposed by Calvin to be able to shape thoughts in milliseconds rather than millennia, using innocuous remembered 
environments rather than noxious real life ones. 
    Nowadays, the growth of information systems, and of the internet in particular, continues to inspire the parallel 
between the human brain and computer-based artificial systems4,5. Despite the fact that the market is currently 
oriented towards artificial systems that are still based on Newtonian physics and on the assumption that every 
element obeys simple and static rules, it has been observed that the experience of the internet and the progress made 
in robotics suggests a different way of designing the next-generation of information systems and robots6,7,8. Indeed, 
new information systems and robots might not be controlled but be self-organized as the result of autonomous and 
self-determining software or firmware agents.  
    This paper focuses on two issues related to the new wave of intelligent systems. The first concerns the Turing test 
and its revision in the light of the perspective of so-called Android science. The second reports on dreaming 
machines, an emerging research field that can stimulate new investigative perspectives, either in Artificial 
Intelligence (AI) or in cognitive and behavioural psychology.  
2. Old and new intelligent systems 
    In the early 1960s, in an article illustrating the state of art of AI at the time, Minsky, the American cognitive 
scientist and co-founder of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology's AI laboratory, highlighted the lack of a 
generally accepted theory of intelligence9.
    Fifty years later, the definition of intelligence continues to be controversial10, although considerable advances 
have been made in the cognitive sciences and in the five areas of AI that Minsky examined in his article: Search, 
Pattern-Recognition, Learning, Planning, and Induction.  
    However, something has changed in AI research over the past decades11, particularly in the last few years12.
Nowadays, the most current research focuses on specific scientific and engineering problems, and maintains a 
distance from the idea of performing the full range of human cognitive abilities. Furthermore, the research focuses 
on the interaction of programs and machines with the environment and with people. 
    Only a small number of researchers are now involved in so-called General Artificial Intelligence (AGI), whose 
aim is the development of programs and machines that can successfully perform any intellectual task that 
a human being can.  
    Recently, AI applications, notably in the form of neural networks and expert systems, can be found all around us.  
They are widely used in the fields of medicine, robotics, law, stock trading, etc., while intelligent programs are 
employed by the military, as well as in factories and homes. Moreover, experts forecast that, in the near future, 
speech recognition systems will be able to communicate with humans, both by text and voice, in unstructured 
English.  
    Due to the diffusion of the internet, a relatively new but expanding sector of current AI research is that of the 
Semantic Web. This will provide an infrastructure for allowing Web data to be used by a computer, making new 
powerful forms of information retrieval possible, as well as strengthening the fast-growing area of data mining, 
which is part of a process called Knowledge Discovery in Databases (KDD) that includes data selection, data 
cleaning, pre-processing of data, and data transformation. 
    Finally, the main changes in AI concern robotics and the attempt to simulate human social attitudes13,14. In 
traditional Artificial Intelligence, robot brains were conceived as serial processing units. The keystone was a 
Cartesian approach based on: 
x
Hierarchical organization of knowledge 
x
Symbolic manipulation 
x
Automatic reasoning 
x
Planning as problem-solving 

148  
 Gilberto Marzano and Alessandro Novembre /  Procedia Computer Science  104 ( 2017 )  146 – 151 
x
Model Building 
x
Functional Decomposition strategies 
    Conversely, the approach to robotics taken recently is quite different. It is behaviour-based, and presumes that 
“intelligence” is the result of interaction among an asynchronous set of behaviours and the environment. The 
keystone concepts behind the behaviour-based approach are ( see Fig. 1):  
x
Embodiment 
x
Situatedness (social behaviour and interactions in a given physical environment populated by humans, animals, 
objects)
x
Emergent complexity (capability to operate in an environment forming more complex behaviours as a collective 
action of different agents) 
x
No planning 
Fig. 1. Traditional vs. behaviour-based robots. 
    In the behaviour-based view, a physical robot is: 
[…] a machine that is able to interact physically with its environment and perform some sequence of 
behaviours, either autonomously or by remote control15.
    Despite the alarm of many researchers concerning the possible impact of super-intelligent machines16, the creation 
of a machine with equal or superior intelligence to human beings doesn’t seem to be a possibility, at least in the 
foreseeable future. 
   Nevertheless, after more than 60 years, the Turing test continues to attract the interest of researchers17, and some 
elements of integration have been proposed for adapting it to the new perspectives of robotics. 
3. The Turing test and Android science 
    In 1950, Turing suggested the Imitation Game to replace the, for him, too ambiguous question “can machines 
think?”18.
    Turing proposed that a human player (the interrogator or evaluator) would interrogate two other, hidden, players, 
a computer and a human, using written questions and receiving written responses in natural language. The task of 
the evaluator would be to determine which of the players was the computer and which was the human. Turing 
predicted that by the year 2000, technological progress would produce a computer extraordinarily powerful enough 
that a program would be able to fool the average evaluator for 5 minutes on about 70% of occasions.  
    Following this, other scientists have varied Turing’s original idea, and various similar tests have been proposed.       
The most widely known of these are: 
x
The Coffee Test19. A machine is given the task of going into an average American home and figuring out how 
to make coffee. It has to find the coffee machine, find the coffee, add water, find a mug, and brew the coffee by 
pushing the proper buttons 
x
The Robot College Student Test20. A machine is given the task of enrolling in a university, taking and passing 
the same classes that humans would, and obtaining a degree 
x
The Employment Test21. We have to test whether or not we have the capability to automate a specific job. 

149
 Gilberto Marzano and Alessandro Novembre /  Procedia Computer Science  104 ( 2017 )  146 – 151 
    Turing’s test deliberately avoided any direct physical interaction between the interrogator and the computer, since 
Turing deemed that the physical simulation of a human was unnecessary for intelligence.  
3.1. The Turing total test 
    Recently, as a result of research in the field of Android Science, a new version of the Turing test, the so-
called total Turing Test, has been formulated. In the early 2000s, Ishiguro coined the term “Android Science” to 
designate the interdisciplinary framework that encompasses two complementary approaches: the use of cognitive 
science to build very humanlike robots, and the use of robots for verifying hypotheses to understand humans22.
    Ishiguro suggested a total Turing test that includes a video signal so that the interrogator can test the subject's 
perceptual abilities, as well as the capability to pass physical objects through a hatch. Accordingly, to pass the total 
Turing Test, the android needs to be equipped with vision tools to be able to perceive objects and movement tools to 
be able to move them around. 
    Ishiguro claimed that the original Turing test was designed to evaluate the intelligence of a computer under the 
assumption that mental capacities could be abstracted from embodiment, whilst “the android enables us to evaluate 
total intelligence” (p. 5)22.
    As with the original Turing test, Ishiguro’s total Turing test involves a time competition. Using the experiment 
with a sample of 20 subjects, the results demonstrated that 70% of the subjects were not aware that they were 
dealing with an android when the android could perform micro movements. 
3.2. The reversed Turing test 
    In accordance with Ishiguro and with regard to the recent progress made in robotics, we propose a challenging 
extension of the Turing total test. We hypothesize that, in the light of the future evolution of the relations between 
humans and robots, the roles of the machine and the human should be reversed, so that the interrogator would be a 
robot rather than a human. The robot’s task should be to recognize the true nature of the respondents, namely, that it 
should determine which respondent is a machine and which is a human. This test would allow the level of efficiency 
of a humanlike robot to be assessed. By all means, the robot interrogator ought to be programmed in order to be able 
to elaborate questions autonomously. This brings us to the basic new issue of machine learning: implementing 
intelligent assistants that are self-modifiable. 
4. Can a machine dream? 
    The Ishiguro experiment showed both the importance of micro movements for the appearance of humanlike 
qualities, and the significant possibilities that exist for interdisciplinary studies between engineering and cognitive 
science.
    In this regard, might the idea of the Darwin machine still be topical? This question suggests another question: if 
machine inactivity can be assimilated to the sleep state of living beings, does it make sense to implement a software 
for machine dreaming inspired by the principle of the Darwin machine? Of course, by a machine that dreams, we 
intend a machine that, when inactive, elaborates its own knowledge autonomously.  
    At the moment, the literature concerning machines that dream is scarce. Although some experiments have been 
made on Memory Association Machines and some theoretical proposals have been advanced on Dreaming 
Machines23,24 no one has yet, as far we know, programmed a computer to dream.  
    Thus, we believe that studying dream activity and machine behaviour together can open new investigation 
perspectives. To this end, Google has recently released the source code for its DeepDream software 
(https://github.com/google/deepdream)25.
    DeepDream is a computer vision program that uses a convolutional neural network to find and enhance patterns 
in images via algorithmic pareidolia, simulating the psychological phenomenon of recognition patterns, shapes, and 
familiar objects as a result of a vague and sometimes random stimulus (see Fig. 2). Instead of precisely prescribing 
something, DeepDream allows one to simply feed the network on an arbitrary image or photo and leave the network 
to analyze the picture. This process has been named inceptionism, from the science-fiction movie Inception (2010), 
and people have compared the images produced by the program to hallucinogenic nightmares. 

150  
 Gilberto Marzano and Alessandro Novembre /  Procedia Computer Science  104 ( 2017 )  146 – 151 
Fig. 2.   Some examples from Google DeepDream. 
    It has also been argued that investigations into visual aspects of external perception, mental imagery, and visual 
mentation can lead to new interesting findings, for example stimulatingly innovative ideas on creativity and creative 
process that could be useful either in machine learning or in pedagogic fields26,27.
    Indeed, several philosophers, psychologists, and neuroscientists have recently characterized dreaming in terms of 
virtual reality, immersive spatiotemporal simulation, or realistic and useful world simulation. Some authors have 
studied dreams in terms of aspects that can stimulate computer-based applications28,29, for example the passive 
attention supposed in dreams is simulated by computer. Furthermore, new interesting suggestions for research can 
derive from the study of social interaction in dreams, which forms a new investigation field of quantitative study of 
dream content30. For example, is there a relationship between an individual’s behavior on the Web and the content 
of their dreams? Studying social relations in dreams and comparing them, not only with those that take place in real 
life but also on the Web, can allow investigation into the possible correlation between an individual’s virtual 
identity/identities and the social content of their dreams. 
    Finally, an integrative theory has recently been proposed to unify human mental imagery, mind wondering, and 
dreaming31. This theory has formed the foundations for a computational model and artwork Dreaming Machine32.
The computational model is a working system that learns from its visual perceptual experience during the day and 
generates hypothetical (simulated) images constructed from collected perceptual material while dreaming at night. 
Currently the computational model is limited to the construction of visual images, but we can hypothesize an 
additional module that could analyze the objects autonomously generated by an inactive machine, and assess their 
usefulness in its active status. Indeed any creative act needs to be assessed and accepted by the creator, as even the 
Bible states: God called the dry land Earth, and the waters that were gathered together he called Seas. And God saw 
that it was good (Genesis, I, 10). 
5. Conclusion 
     Artificial Intelligence (AI) is a broad area that is continuously in progress: some of the first AI applications, such 
as automatic translation and optical character recognition, have become a routine technology today. Furthermore, 
the digital revolution is transforming contemporary society. Connective intelligence is an emerging property 
resulting from the embedding of intelligence into the connected data, concepts, applications, and people33. On this 
purpose, we are persuaded that reflecting on human behaviour, including dreaming activity, at the light of the 
current technologies can contribute to the implementation of the so-called new-generation of intelligent systems.  
     In this paper we have highlighted some aspects and new investigations in AI suggesting some challenging issues.  
We have also tried to show how research in the field of quantitative analysis of dream content, as well as that in 
Android science, leads to the same conclusion: the opportunity for the integration, in the field of AI, between 
cognitive and behavioural approaches. 
References 
1.
de Garis H. Evolvable hardware genetic programming of a Darwin machine. In: Artificial neural nets and genetic algorithms.

151
 Gilberto Marzano and Alessandro Novembre /  Procedia Computer Science  104 ( 2017 )  146 – 151 
Springer. Vienna; 1993. p. 441-449. 
2.
Nolfi S. Evolving non-trivial behaviors on real robots: A garbage-collecting robot. Robotics and Autonomous Systems. 22(3); 1997. p. 
187-198. 
3.
Calvin WH. The brain as a Darwin machine. Nature. 330; 1987. p. 33-34. 
4.
Ishida Y. Self-Repair Networks. Springer; 2015. 
5.
Tessier C. Robots Autonomy: Some Technical Challenges. In: 2015 AAAI Spring Symposium Series; 2015. p. 60-65. 
6.
Chibani A, Amirat Y, Mohammed S, Matson E, Hagita N, Barreto M. Ubiquitous robotics: Recent challenges and future 
trends. Robotics and Autonomous Systems. 61(11); 2013. p. 1162-1172. 
7.
Chen Y, Hu H. Internet of intelligent things and robot as a service. Simulation Modelling Practice and Theory. 34; 2013. p. 159-171. 
8.
Beetz M, Be D, Winkler J, Worch JH, Bartels G, Billard A, Langer H. Open robotics research using web-based knowledge services. 
In:  IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA); 2016. p. 5380-5387. 
9.
Minsky M. Steps toward artificial intelligence. Proceedings of the IRE. 49(1); 1961. p. 8-30. 
10.
Thurstone LL. The nature of intelligence. Routledge; 2013. 
11.
Brooks RA. Intelligence without representation. Artificial intelligence. 47(1); 1991. p. 139-159. 
12.
Hollan J, Hutchins E, Kirsh D. Distributed cognition: toward a new foundation for human-computer interaction research. ACM 
Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction (TOCHI). 7(2); 2000. p. 174-196. 
13.
Cacciabue PC. Modelling and simulation of human behaviour in system control. Springer Science & Business Media; 2013. 
14.
Adam C, Gaudou B. BDI agents in social simulations: a survey. The Knowledge Engineering Review. 31(3); 2016. p. 207–238. 
15.
Krause J, Winfield AF, Deneubourg JL. Interactive robots in experimental biology. Trends in ecology & evolution. 26(7); 2011. p. 
369-375. 
16.
Muller VC, Bostrom N. Future progress in artificial intelligence: A survey of expert opinion. In: Müller VC. (ed). Fundamental issues 
of artificial intelligence. Springer International Publishing; 2016. p. 553-570. 
17.
Saygin AP, Cicekli I, Akman V. Turing test: 50 years later. In Moor, J. The Turing test: the elusive standard of artificial intelligence. 
Vol. 30. Springer Science & Business Media; 2003. p. 23-78. 
18.
Turing A. Computing Machinery and Intelligence. Mind, 59(236); 1950. 433.
19.
Goertzel B. Artificial general intelligence: concept, state of the art, and future prospects. Journal of Artificial General 
Intelligence. 5(1); 2014. p. 1-48. 
20.
Goertzel B, Ikle M, Wigmore J. The architecture of human-like general intelligence. In: Theoretical Foundations of Artificial General 
Intelligence. Atlantis Press; 2012. p. 123-144. 
21.
Nilsson NJ. Human-level artificial intelligence? Be serious! AI magazine. 26(4); 2005. p. 68-75. 
22.
Ishiguro H. Android science: Towards a new cross-disciplinary framework. In: CogSci2005 Workshop: Towards Social Mechanisms 
of Android Science. Stresa, Italy; 2005. p. 1-6. Available: http://robots.stanford.edu/isrr-papers/final/final-12.pdf. 
23.
Bogart BDR. Memory association machine: an account of the realization and interpretation of an autonomous responsive site-specific 
artwork. Doctoral dissertation. School of Interactive Arts & Technology-Simon Fraser University; 2008. Available:  
http://summit.sfu.ca/item/8969. 
24.
de Penning L, D'Avila Garcez A, Meyer JJC. Dreaming Machines: On multimodal fusion and information retrieval using neural-
symbolic cognitive agents. In: Jones AV,  Ng N. (eds). Imperial College Computing Student Workshop. Vol. 35. Schloss Dagstuhl-
Leibniz-Zentrum fuer Informatik; 2013. p. 89-94.
25.
Available: https://research.googleblog.com/2015/06/inceptionism-going-deeper-into-neural.html. 
26.
McCormack J, d’Inverno M. (eds) Computers and Creativity. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg; 2012. 
27.
Colton S, Wiggins GA. Computational creativity: The final frontier? ECAI. 12; 2012. p. 21-26. 
28.
Revonsuo A, Salmivalli C. A content analysis of bizarre elements in dreams. Dreaming. 5(3); 1995. p. 169-187. 
29.
Revonsuo A, Tarkko K. Binding in dreams. Journal of Consciousness Studies. 9(7); 2002. p. 3-24. 
30.
Domhoff GW. Finding meaning in dreams: A quantitative approach. Springer Science & Business Media; 2013. 
31.
Bogart BDR, Pasquier P, Barnes SJ. An integrative theory of visual mentation and spontaneous creativity. In: Proceedings of the 9th 
ACM Conference on Creativity & Cognition; 2013. p. 264-273. 
32.
Bogart BDR, Pasquier P. Dreaming machine #3 (prototype 2). In: Proceedings of the 9th ACM Conference on Creativity & Cognition;
2013. p. 408-409.
33.
Spivack N. Available: http://thenextweb.com/2008/06/03/video-nova-spivack-making-sense-of-the-semantic-web/.
     
Gilberto Marzano, Professor and Head of the Laboratory of Pedagogical Technologies of 
Regional Institute of Research (REGI) at Rezekne Academy of Technology (Latvia). Member 
of the PhD professors board at Udine University (Italy) on Economy, Ecology, Landscape and 
Territory. He was an executive manager in private ICT companies and director of an R&D 
software laboratory in Italy. Contact him at gilberto.marzano@ru.lv. 
View publication stats
View publication stats

