II Synthetic Part: Construction of the Logical
Calculus of Functions from the Elements
of the Syllogistic


§ 41 General Preliminary Remark
The part of the present essay that begins here is arranged so that its first five sec-
tions concern only syllogistic rules and principles. Only in the sixth and seventh
section will non-syllogistic rules and principles be treated. By syllogistic rules I
mean here only such rules which can be formulated in a language which I desig-
nated above – at the end of § 15 – as the elementary language of the syllogistic, the
validity of which rests solely on the meaning of the logical constants that occur in
it. Simply formulating non-syllogistic rules requires no other logical constants be-
sides those of the elementary syllogistic. But the validity of these rules does not rest
on the meaning of these constants. I would like to show that all logical rules which
can be expressed in the language of the calculus of functions are reducible to syllo-
gistic rules, provided that we grant validity to the three principles that are not
strictly universally valid, since this validity is implicitly assumed in the calculus of
functions: these are the principles of the affirmative use of double negation (for
pairs of propositions of the form A and N A), arbitrary sufficient reason, and non-
empty domains (see § 39 above).163 Within the elementary syllogistic they are not
valid, but they can nevertheless be formulated in its language (and actually only in
its language).
To show that the validity of syllogistic rules rests only on the meaning of logi-
cal constants which occur in the expressions of these rules, it is first necessary to
fix this meaning explicitly through definitions. Rules whose validity can be sup-
ported directly by definitions I call principles. They should merely bring to ex-
pression in a different form what the definitions already express. Their content
rests essentially on the analysis of logical vocabulary carried out in Part I of this
essay.
Yet I do not wish to impose on all the definitions which will be established in
what follows the task of making intelligible and explaining the validity of princi-
ples. As I have shown in Part I of this essay, the vocabulary of the calculus of
functions, insofar as it consists of non-syllogistic logical constants and quantifiers,
can be explained as serving to abbreviate complex expressions, and indeed such
expressions as can be completely represented in a language which I designated at
the end of § 15 as the elementary language of the syllogistic. Thus, no new basic
rules will result from the discussion of the use of quantifiers (in § 65) or from the
The calculus of functions of the second level and higher, the language of which unjustifiably
(see § 28 and § 37) permits quantifying over function variables as well, is not considered in what
follows. In Appendix 2, I show that the step into predicate logic of the second level, which Frege
carried out to derive the generalized principle of mathematical induction from the basic proposi-
tions of his Begriffsschrift (see Frege 1879/1967, § 26), can be avoided.
https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110784930-004

explanation of the meaning of truth-functional constants (in § 71), but rather only
rules for abbreviating expressions.
The syllogistic and non-syllogistic principles will be established in what fol-
lows neither as propositions nor as propositional schemata. Instead, they will ex-
clusively take the form of rules and be expressed in inference schemata. Even if it
is always possible to render rules and inference schemata in the form of ‘if-then’
expressions, I will entirely forgo this mode of presentation. I will explain the
meaning of ‘if . . ., then . . .’ by means of a definition in which the concept of the
regular consequence of propositions from other propositions is assumed (see § 47,
def. 2). This definition comes down to the same as the explanation given at the
end of § 30, according to which ‘if . . ., then . . .’ is equivalent to ‘it is impossible
that both: . . . and not . . . .’. What it means for a proposition to follow regularly
from other propositions will be explained in § 43 with just this expression.
Definition 3 in § 43 belongs among the few fundamental definitions on which
depends the validity of those special basic rules which must be made use of to be
able to derive rules from other rules at all. These basic rules are metalogical rules.
They must be established first of all, since the synthetic derivation procedure in its
entirety, which makes up the whole of Part II of this book, depends on them.
Given the metalogical character of this procedure, it would not be correct to
call it deductive or axiomatic – although there are some respects in which it is simi-
lar to a deductive-axiomatic procedure. Typically, a deductive-axiomatic method al-
ready makes use of rules of deductive inference, even applying them to principles
which are not in the form of rules, but rather in the form of propositions. A deduc-
tive-axiomatic method is synthetic in the sense that it ties together given principles
or already derived theorems as premises or premise schemata in such a way that,
according to a given basic rule, a conclusion or conclusion schema results. Each
theorem derived according to the deductive-axiomatic method is derived as a con-
clusion or as a conclusion schema. By contrast, the synthetic method which I make
use of in what follows consists in joining principles (which for their part only ren-
der rules) and theorems (which likewise express only rules), not to inferences or
inference schemata, but rather to schemata of inference chains. Metalogical rules
are here needed to reduce schemata of inferences and of inference chains to other
schemata and to abbreviate inference chains.
In their essentials, all metalogical rules which I make use of can be traced
back to three metalogical basic rules, the validity of which depends on definitions
of logical constants and metalogical signs (namely, the signs of regular and logical
consequence). One of these three rules specifies how one may abbreviate infer-
ence chains. This rule was already known in the school of Aristotle, and this under
the name “synthetic theorem,” and will be rendered below (in § 44) by rule (I. 3).
146
Part II

The second basic rule (see § 44, rule (I. 2)) specifies merely how one may, as-
suming the validity of just one inference, proceed to another inference. This rule
likewise corresponds to an ancient rule of argumentation, known already even in
the pre-Aristotelian era, which I, following the traditional nomenclature, call ‘reduc-
tio ad absurdum’ and which appears in the Aristotelian syllogistic as reductio ad
impossibile. As a metalogical rule, it should of course not be confused with the rule
that is likewise called reductio ad absurdum, which in the method of so-called natu-
ral deduction is used for the introduction of the sign for truth-functional negation.
Finally, the third metalogical basic rule (see § 48, rule (II. 1)) is also one that
was already familiar to ancient logicians. According to this rule, it is permitted to
proceed from an inference whose validity is already granted, to a second infer-
ence, whose premises are the same as the first with one exception, and whose
conclusion is a hypothetical proposition whose antecedent is the exceptional
premise and whose consequent is the conclusion of the first inference. I call this
basic rule the principle of conditionalization.
The synthetic character of the derivation procedure which I use here, in line
with the just given description, rests essentially on the application of the metalo-
gical basic rule I mentioned first, namely, the synthetic principle of the ancient
Peripatetics. For this reason, one could designate the method I take up to derive
logical rules the method of inference chain abbreviation. I will call it the syllogistic
method of derivation, thanks to its provenance in the ancient syllogistic.164
In the following reconstruction of the validity proofs of the Aristotelian syllogistic, I assume
that Aristotle was familiar with this method in its essentials. No direct evidence for or against
Aristotle’s familiarity (or the probability of his familiarity) with rules (I. 3) and (II. 1) have been
offered up to this point, as far as I know. My supposition that he made use not only of rule (I. 2)
but also of these other rules, however, can already be seen to be not implausible by the fact that
the syllogistic method demonstrably goes back to the school of Aristotle, and other methods for
proving the validity of syllogisms have not survived from antiquity. In addition, carrying out
proofs according to the syllogistic method is so simple, clear, convenient, and brief that it is in no
way inferior, but rather much superior, in ‘naturalness’ to the method of so-called natural deduc-
tion (despite its name), which Aristotle certainly could not have known (since it was developed
by Gerhard Gentzen only in the last century), which some of Aristotle’s modern commentators
and interpreters (e.g., Ebert & Nortmann 2007) have used to reconstruct Aristotelian proofs
nevertheless.
§ 41
147


