Jour neys of the Mind


Jour neys of 
the Mind
A Life in History
Peter Brown
Prince­ton University Press
Prince­ton and Oxford

Copyright © 2023 by Prince­ton University Press
Prince­ton University Press is committed to the protection of copyright and the 
intellectual property our authors entrust to us. Copyright promotes the pro­gress  
and integrity of knowledge. Thank you for supporting ­free speech and the global 
exchange of ideas by purchasing an authorized edition of this book. If you wish to 
reproduce or distribute any part of it in any form, please obtain permission.
Requests for permission to reproduce material from this work  
should be sent to permissions@press​.­princeton​.­edu
Published by Prince­ton University Press
41 William Street, Prince­ton, New Jersey 08540
99 Banbury Road, Oxford OX2 6JX
press​.­princeton​.­edu
All Rights Reserved
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Brown, Peter, 1935– author.
Title: Journeys of the mind : a life in history / Peter Brown.
Description: Princeton : Princeton University Press, [2023] |  
 
Includes bibliographical references and index.
Identifiers: LCCN 2022020395 (print) | LCCN 2022020396 (ebook) |  
 
ISBN 9780691242286 (hardback) | ISBN 9780691242293 (ebook)
Subjects: LCSH: Brown, Peter, 1935– | Historians—United States—Biography. |  
 
BISAC: BIOGRAPHY & AUTOBIOGRAPHY / General | RELIGION /  
 
Christianity / History
Classification: LCC E175.5.B798 A3 2023 (print) | LCC E175.5.B798 (ebook) |  
 
DDC 930/.5092 [B]—dc23/eng/20221206
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2022020395
LC ebook record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2022020396
British Library Cataloging-­in-­Publication Data is available
Editorial: Rob Tempio and Chloe Coy
Production Editorial: Lauren Lepow
Text and Jacket Design: Heather Hansen
Production: Erin Suydam
Publicity: Alyssa Sanford and Carmen Jimenez
Jacket photo­graph: © Robert MacLennan
This book has been composed in Arno Pro 
Printed on acid-­free paper. ∞
Printed in the United States of Amer­i­ca
10  ​9  ​8  ​7  ​6  ​5  ​4  ​3  ​2  ​1

v
Contents
Preface  xi
part i. ireland to shrewsbury	
1
	 1	
Home and Abroad: The Protestant Irish	
3
	 2	
Empire: The Greys	
8
	 3	
Decline and Fall	
17
	4	
Squireens: The Warrens from County Meath to Dublin	
21
	 5	
Rugby Football: Bob Warren	
26
	 6	
Dubliners: The Lamont Browns	
30
	 7	
Sudan: North and South	
35
	 8	
Atbara: Life Abroad	
43
	 9	
Time of War: Home and Abroad in Time of War	
49
	10	
The Boss	
55
	11	
Dublin Days: “Number Sixty”	
64
	12	
Who’s What? Identities	
69
	13	
The Modern World	
73
	14	
To Be a Tweak: Shrewsbury School	
80

vi 
contents
	15	
You ­Shall Do Greek	
85
	16	
Modern Side	
89
	17	
The Duke: History with “the Duke”	
93
	18	
Into New Worlds: Laurence Lequesne and Frank McEachran	
97
	19	
Sense of the Past	
102
	20	
Oxford 1952	
107
	21	
Encounters with the Past: Archives and Abbeys	
112
	22	
Switzerland and the Late ­Middle Ages	
116
	23	
German at Home: Ernst Scheyer	
122
	24	 End of the Ancient World	
127
part ii. oxford to all souls	
133
	25	
Idylls: Oxford 1953	
135
	26	
Very “Oxford”: C. S. Lewis	
143
	27	
France 1954	
152
	28	
An Oxford Medievalist 1954	
156
	29	
Friends and Books	
164
	30	
The Age of Augustine	
171
	31	
“De­cadence” or “Late Antiquity”? Henri-­Irénée Marrou	
180
	32	
Cowley Road	
186
	33	
“A Very Special Degree”: Finals	
190
	34	
To All Souls	
198
	35	
All Souls: Courtesy and Ignorance	
202
	36	
Teaching, Writing, and Rome	
210
	37	
Libraries, Lectures, and Talks	
220

contents 
vii
	38	
Religious Dissent: The Case of North Africa	
232
	39	
Religious Coercion	
239
part iii. augustine to the holy man	
245
	40	 Writing Augustine of Hippo	
247
	41	
From Life and Times to Biography	
254
	42	
Patristic Summer 1963	
261
	43	
Encounters: Henri-­Irénée Marrou and Robert Markus	
269
	44	 All’s Well That Ends Well 1966	
277
	45	
Resonances	
285
	46	 ­Toward the East: Bohemia, the Balkans, and East Rome	
293
	47	
Byzantium, Persia, and the Rise of Islam	
304
	48	 Hebrew	
311
	49	 Anthropology and History: E. E. Evans-­Pritchard	
319
	50	
Mary Douglas	
327
	51	
Society and the Super­natural	
335
	52	
Oxford ­under Strain	
342
	53	
The Holy Man	
352
part iv. the world of late antiquity to iran	
365
	54	
The World of Late Antiquity: An Invitation and a Title	
367
	55	
From Marcus Aurelius . . . ​	
373
	56	
To Muhammad: Late Antiquity in a Wider World	
383
	57	
Medieval Change	
392
	58	
Presences	
398

viii 
contents
	59	
From the Mediterranean . . . ​	
404
	60	 To Iran	
409
	61	
The Royal Road: Tehran to Kermanshah	
416
	62	
Palaces and Rock Carvings: Firuzabad and Naqsh-­e Rostam	
423
	63	
Three Cities: Esfahan, Tabriz, and Mashhad	
429
	64	 Yazd	
437
part v: berkeley 1975 to cairo	
445
	65	
Berkeley 1975	
447
	66	 Royal Holloway College	
459
	67	
Genius Loci: Po­liti­cal Thought, World History, and Islam	
463
	68	
On the East Coast	
471
	69	 To the Top of the World: Takht-­e Soleyman	
479
	70	
“Guardians of the Sacred Flame”: David Frost	
485
	71	
From the Zagros to Af­ghan­i­stan	
488
	72	
Af­ghan­i­stan	
493
	73	
Twilight of Empire	
499
	74	
Invisible Friends in Vis­i­ble Places	
505
	75	
Maynooth to California	
515
	76	
The Weight of Islam	
520
	77	
Cairo	
527
part vi: berkeley to prince­ton	
535
	78	
Berkeley 1978: The Phi­los­o­pher and Society	
537
	79	
The Return of Religion: From Revolution to Adab	
545

contents 
ix
	80	
Poverty and Power: Évelyne Patlagean and Paul Veyne	
554
	81	
Teaching	
563
	82	
The Tranformation of the Classical Heritage	
569
	83	
Sexuality: Michel Foucault	
576
	84	
At the Bear’s Lair: Encounters with Foucault	
584
	85	
Virginity in Venice	
591
	86	
Body and City	
596
	87	
Winter in Venice	
600
	88	
Surprised in Venice	
605
	89	
The Collège de France	
611
	90	 Pierre Hadot	
617
	91	
A Might-­Have-­Been	
625
	92	
The Northeast Corridor	
631
	93	
High Gravity	
638
	94	 Writing Body and Society	
645
	95	
From Origen to Augustine	
651
	96	 Arnaldo Momigliano	
661
	97	
Remembering Arnaldo	
667
	98	
Mums	
672
	99	
Shifting Bound­aries	
678
postscript	
687
Since Then	
689
Index  701


xi
Pr eface
The Book
The study of late antiquity (roughly from AD 200 to 700) is a daunting and 
exhilarating enterprise. It involves a reassessment of almost ­every aspect of the 
history of Eu­rope, North Africa, and the ­Middle East from the last centuries 
of the Roman Empire to the early ­Middle Ages. The birth and expansion of 
Chris­tian­ity, the emergence of rabbinic Judaism, the fall of Rome, and the rise 
of Islam all happened in this crucial half millennium.
This book is about my engagement with this remarkable period of history. 
It is not a conventional autobiography; nor is it an impersonal history of the 
field of late antiquity. It is somewhere in between: the story of my life as a 
scholar; of the intellectual world in which I moved; of the institutions where 
I have studied and taught in ­England and Amer­i­ca; and of the many scholars 
whom I have known and admired.
It was inspired by many years of conversations with gradu­ate students and 
younger colleagues in Amer­i­ca and elsewhere. I noticed that, although they 
had followed diligently the stream of publications in the field of late antiquity, 
they often had ­little idea of the social and institutional settings from which 
this field had emerged. I was sometimes left feeling that it was easier to ex-
plain to young Americans and Eu­ro­pe­ans the institutions of Dark Age Eu­rope 
than the workings of Oxford in the 1950s and 1960s, and the often tenuous 
relationship between En­glish and Continental scholarship in the postwar 
period.
Some of the questions ­were about myself. Many assumed that I was En­glish. 
“Near miss,” I would say politely; “I am Irish.” “So you are Catholic?” “No,” 
I would say, “I am Protestant.” Traveling in more militant regions in the ­Middle 
East, I have occasionally had to stretch my language skills to the utmost so as 
to explain that, although I was Irish, I was not a member of the IRA.
So I had to explain myself by becoming a historian of myself.

xii 
Pr eface
Background
I was also inspired by my dissatisfaction with brisk historiographical surveys 
that presented scholars purely as products of academe, as if they had begun to 
think and feel only when they entered their first gradu­ate seminar. A sensitiv-
ity to what might be called background—to region, religion, ­family, and early 
education—is a necessary counterweight to this one-­dimensional approach.
For this reason, I would like the reader to follow (and at a leisurely pace) 
the development within me of a historical sense. This is a precious gift that 
cannot be taken for granted. It may be fostered and disciplined in schools and 
in the universities. But it depends on the mobilization of a wider range of 
sensibilities and enthusiasms than ­those contained within the narrow confines 
of any campus.
The reader may also won­der why I have lingered, in the first few chapters, 
on my ­family’s background. I did this partly out of loyalty to my parents; and 
partly ­because, in themselves, the Protestants of Ireland merit the historian’s 
attention as a minority frequently overlooked by outsiders. But ­there was more 
to it than that. The ambiguities of the Protestant presence in Ireland ensured 
that I grew up with complex memories that recalled many aspects (both 
positive and negative) of the last centuries of Rome.
Friends in the Field
In 1956, I graduated from Oxford and de­cided to specialize in late antiquity. 
Since then the field has grown exponentially, and scholars have had to widen 
their view of the world in ways that ­were barely imaginable in the ­middle of 
the last ­century. Faced by such rapid growth, any account of the development 
of one scholar in the field must, first and foremost, be an exercise in gratitude 
to all the ­others who have shared in this ­grand adventure.
As my account progresses, I have mentioned many names, well known 
to historians of late antiquity and of other periods, who have inspired and 
instructed me: my mentor, Arnaldo Momigliano; my hero, Henri-­Irénée Mar-
rou; my friends, Robert Markus, Mary Douglas, Pierre Hadot, Évelyne Patlag-
ean, Lellia Ruggini, Ian Wood, and Averil Cameron—to mention only a few 
among the array of well-­known scholars who have contributed to the expan-
sion of the field. I had many such distinguished colleagues; and it is only 
for lack of space that I have not discussed them all. For each of them, each in 
a dif­fer­ent way, did more than provide me with information or teach me a 

Pr eface 
xiii
methodology: they also inspired me by their example and gave me the courage 
to continue in a difficult endeavor.
I have also gone out of my way to mention scholars who are less well known 
to present-­day readers—­teachers, to begin with, and then, in ­later years, stu-
dents and colleagues from all over the world. Each deserves to be remembered 
as a contributor to an ever-­expanding field. Many of their names now lie si-
lently (if ­there at all) in modern footnotes. Some of the best of them are now 
deemed out-­of-­date. They are snowed ­under by more recent bibliography, 
much of it published in International En­glish, and are often (to our shame) no 
longer read ­because they wrote in foreign languages.
Networks in a Changing World
In 1956, late antiquity (like any other period of the ancient world) was a field 
pursued in an old-­fashioned manner. The modes of scholarly interchange in 
Eu­rope and Amer­i­ca ­were not so very dif­fer­ent from what they had been when 
Edward Gibbon embarked on his monumental History of the Decline and Fall 
of the Roman Empire in 1776. Most of us (apart from specialists, such as archae-
ologists, epigraphers, and papyrologists) knew the field of late antiquity, as 
Gibbon did, mainly from print alone. Books and articles ­were read at home 
(in well-­worn armchairs, in pubs, and even, at times, in my En­glish days, in the 
bath) or in ­great libraries—­the Bodleian Library and the Ashmolean Library 
in Oxford, the library of the Warburg Institute in London, the Biblioteca Mar-
ciana in Venice, Dow Library and the library of the Gradu­ate Theological 
Union in Berkeley, Firestone Library and the library of the Theological Semi-
nary in Prince­ton. Each of ­these had its own distinctive atmosphere that com-
municated, discreetly but effectively, what a scholar in the field of late antiquity 
could hope to do with the peculiar riches of each of them: creaking volumes 
of the ­Fathers of the Church in Venice; state-­of-­the-­art archaeology in the 
Ashmolean and in the Institute for Advanced Study in Prince­ton; row ­after 
row of journals of New Testament studies in all languages and from ­every 
denomination, in the GTU in Berkeley and the PTS in Prince­ton.
In ­these conditions, educated persons ­were, paradoxically, both more 
cosmopolitan and more parochial than they are ­today. They had fewer contacts 
across national borders. Instead, they traveled through print. It was taken 
for granted that scholars of the ancient world and late antiquity read foreign 
lit­er­a­ture—­French, German, and Italian—to a high standard, as well as Latin and 
Greek. But this was reading and writing knowledge only: many of the most 

xiv 
Pr eface
distinguished among them claimed (often somewhat assertively) to be reluc-
tant to speak a word of a foreign tongue.
Hence a contrast between my wide access, through books, to the overarch-
ing macrocosm, appropriately spoken of in German as gelehrtes Europa—­
“learned Eu­rope”: the Eu­rope of the Learned—­and my ­limited personal 
contacts with scholars outside Britain. The pattern of ­these contacts shifted 
over the years, following both my own interests and the changing shape of 
Eu­rope itself. In the 1960s, my foreign friends and colleagues ­were mainly 
French, connected with my work on Saint Augustine. In the 1970s, as my own 
work widened to embrace the world of late antiquity as a ­whole, the French 
­were joined by Americans, and, ­later, by Italians.
This pattern of widening friendships, region by region, reflected the slow 
but sure growth of interconnectivity throughout Eu­rope itself in the years 
before and ­after the formation of the Common Market. To begin with—in a 
time of postwar currency restrictions—­travel on the Continent was not easy 
for Irish and En­glish nationals; while to cross the Iron Curtain, as I did to 
Czecho­slo­va­kia, in 1966 and 1969, was a major undertaking.
Academic meetings, also, ­were much less frequent than nowadays. They 
­were ­limited to major gatherings at international congresses. The rapid to-­and-­
fro of transglobal seminars and workshops, which now plays such an impor­tant 
role in the ­career of young scholars, was largely absent. It was, perhaps, easier 
for an En­glish student from Oxford or Cambridge to wander at ­will through 
Eu­rope in the ­fourteenth ­century than in the 1950s. Hence the ­great importance 
for me of the Oxford Patristics Conference of 1963, when I first met so many 
of my foreign colleagues face-­to-­face, ­after I had known them for so many years 
from the printed page.
By the 1970s, ­things had changed for the field. Currency restrictions had 
gone, and travel was easier. British academe had grown closer both to Eu­rope 
and to Amer­i­ca. ­Things had also changed for me. I reached out to the ­Middle 
East, traveling through Iran in 1974 and 1976, only a few years before the Ira­
nian Revolution. ­Those weeks of travel in Iran have marked me ever since.
A Portrait of an Age
Last but not least, the reader should know that this book was not meant to be 
only a story of my life and a reconstruction of my own intellectual genealogy. 
It was also intended to be, in part, a portrait of an age—of the remarkable half 
­century ­after the end of World War II in which the study of late antiquity in its 

Pr eface 
xv
pre­sent form came into its own in ­England, Amer­i­ca, and Eu­rope. That age is 
past. Many of us sensed that it had begun to pass already in the late 1980s, with 
clear signs of the imminent revolution that led to the fall of the Berlin Wall.
Hence my decision to end this book in 1987. This was not an arbitrary date. 
A sense of strangeness had begun to ­settle even on so close a past: much of the 
work of previous de­cades had come to seem somehow dated, both to ourselves 
and to a younger generation of scholars. The past was no longer like the pre­
sent. It had become pos­si­ble to ask the historian’s eternal question: “What was 
it like?”—­what was it like when the study of late antiquity got underway?
As for myself, the thirty-­five years ­after 1987 have been filled with further 
journeys of the mind. To narrate them would require an entire new book. But 
I hope that the journeys that are recorded ­here ­will give, at least, a touch of the 
thrill of exploring, in ­those now-­distant days, the long-­neglected last centuries 
of the ancient world.
Autobiography is not like straight history. In writing Journeys of the Mind, 
I have had to learn new skills, and to be more than usually grateful for the 
criticism and advice of ­others. The list of ­those who read through the book in 
many drafts is a testimony to the bonds of friendship that make the academic 
enterprise worthwhile: Raʿanan Boustan, Averil Cameron, Emily Chesley (a 
much-­needed technical assistant), Angela Creager, John Dillon, Andrew Feld-
herr, Kyle Harper and Judith Herrin (both readers for Prince­ton University 
Press), Jamie Kreiner, Harry Liebersohn and Dorothee Schneider, Bob and 
Jane MacLennan, Dave Michelson, Helmut Reimitz, Christian Sahner, Jack 
Tannous, and Ian Wood. By sending me a digitalized version of The Salopian—­
the magazine of Shrewsbury School—­Dr. Robin Brooke-­Smith, Taylor Librar-
ian and Archivist—­brought back to me the feel of a remarkable institution in 
the early years of postwar Britain. Despite the dislocation of COVID-19 in its 
many forms, Rob Tempio, the acquisitions editor, kept an alert eye on the 
pro­gress of this somewhat idiosyncratic experiment in writing and steered it 
­toward Prince­ton University Press, placing it in the hands of Lauren Lepow—
the most exact, the most cultivated, and the least intrusive copy editor that 
I have ever had the pleasure to know. Above all ­else, Betsy, my wife and friend, 
truly dimidium animae meae, half of my soul, read and reread ­every word of it; 
and researched, corrected, and improved it ­every time. It is dedicated to her.


Part I
Ireland to  
Shrewsbury


3
1
Home and Abroad
The Protestant Irish
Two Birth Announcements
­After my ­mother’s death in 1987, I returned to Ireland to sort out her ­house. 
­There, in a bureau in the attic, I found clippings from two very dif­fer­ent 
newspapers from two very dif­fer­ent places: the Irish Times in Dublin and the 
Khartoum Times in Sudan. Apart from noting my arrival on July 26, 1935, at 
Hatch Street Hospital in Dublin, I found on the back of each clipping vari­ous 
items of news. In an interview with the Khartoum Times, Air Marshal Italo 
Balbo (1896–1940), the creator of the Italian air force, insisted that air power 
was the best guarantee of world peace. No nation would dare to go to war, 
knowing that its ­women and ­children, its wives and ­mothers, would face 
destruction from the air. And, in a speech reported in the Irish Times, Éamon 
de Valera (1882–1975), the ­great nationalist leader, declared that within fifty 
years the Irish ­people would all be speaking Irish. They would have forgotten 
­whether they ­were Catholics or Protestants.
Balbo died in 1940, in the first year of the Second World War, shot from the 
sky outside Tobruk, but not before suffocating entire villages with poison gas 
in the course of Mussolini’s conquest of Ethiopia. He did not live to know of 
the London Blitz, still less to know of the dropping of the atomic bomb. As for 
de Valera: relations between Protestants and Catholics have, indeed, improved 
in the Republic; but ­little Irish is spoken in the streets of Dublin.
Sitting in the empty attic of my ­mother’s ­house, in 1987, fifty-­two years ­after 
my birth, I was touched by the primal sadness of all historians. I was reading 
about ­people who knew as ­little of their ­future as I knew of my own.

4 
Ch apter 1
Home and Abroad
As the two birth announcements showed, at the time of my birth and for 
many years afterward, the life of my parents was divided between two 
places: “home,” in Ireland, and “abroad,” in Sudan, where my ­father, James 
Lamont Brown, worked as a traffic man­ag­er in the Sudan Railways from 1930 
to 1947.
As a small child I lived between two worlds, spending the summer in Ire-
land and the winter in Sudan. A ­little ­later, during the war, from 1939 to 1944 
(­until the Mediterranean was opened again to civilian traffic) my ­mother and 
I lived in Ireland while my ­father stayed at his job abroad. Our only links to 
him ­were airmail letters, bearing exotic stamps of camel-­riders and date palms, 
silhouetted against a sepia desert dawn, calculated to fire the imagination 
of a young boy. This experience established “abroad”—­Egypt and Sudan—as 
a strong imaginative pole for me and my ­family.
“Our Crowd”: The Protestant Irish
We ­were a Protestant ­family. This meant that I grew up in Ireland very aware 
that I was a member of a religious minority. Foreigners often assume that the 
Republic of Ireland is an entirely Catholic country, and that Protestantism is 
­limited to the British enclave in Ulster, known as Northern Ireland. But we 
­were ­there in the South. Reduced to a minority of about 5 ­percent by the 1940s, 
Protestants ­were well established in Dublin, though they ­were no longer a 
presence in much of the countryside. In a society where religious differences 
still mattered, Protestants thought of themselves as a group apart, clearly de-
fined against the Catholic majority. Walking around Dublin as a boy, I was 
expected to know, instinctively, to which ­people I should take off my cap: 
well-­to-do or distinctly seedy, they ­were “our crowd.”
This meant that Protestant society in Dublin (as I viewed it through the 
memories of my parents and my aunts) was surprisingly interconnected. 
Among other links, its members shared a re­spect for books. Literary talent was 
appreciated and was often set to work in eloquent letters to the editor of the 
Irish Times on topics as diverse as the evils of censorship (a constant griev-
ance) and the proper care of dogs. ­Until his very last days, my ­father would 
always cut out ­these letters, as specimens of homegrown rhe­toric, to send to 
me, alongside any mention of any achievement by any Irish man or ­woman 
anywhere in the world.

Home a nd A broa d 
5
My aunts remembered that W. B. Yeats (1865–1939)—­the cousin of a 
cousin—­would sit in the front row at their school per­for­mance of Deirdre of 
the Sorrows by John Millington Synge (1871–1909). Another cousin of Yeats, 
William Monk Gibbon (1896–1987)—­known to us schoolboys as Gubb-­
Gubb—­notably failed to teach me Latin at school. He ­later ­rose to fame as the 
­Grand Old Man of Irish Letters, and was, perhaps, best known for his per-
petual grudge against Yeats for having refused to include any of his poems in 
the famous Oxford Book of Modern Verse.
Emily and Ellen Synge, first cousins of the dramatist John Millicent Synge, 
­were friends (maybe even distant relatives) of my ­mother’s ­mother. They 
would occasionally come to Dublin from Annamoe in the Wicklow Moun-
tains to attend the opera. They would bring a large box of choco­lates, which 
they opened, with much rustling of paper, as the overture began, to the ­great 
annoyance of their neighbors. “Ada,” Emily would say in a loud stage whisper, 
“If looks could kill!”
Most of ­these ­people had ­limited means. They did not own many books—­
but they read what they had. Works of poetry, fiction, and scholarship ­were 
expected to resonate among “our crowd.” ­There was a strong sense that high 
ideas and serious learning did not need to be confined to academe. As a writer, 
I have always felt an obligation to “the folk of few books”—to use the phrase 
of Yeats. To write well, to spread knowledge, and to widen sympathies by the 
use of the pen has always been a top priority for me.
Affinities
This background may explain certain affinities between what I picked up in 
the Ireland of my boyhood and the issues on which I have concentrated in the 
study of late antiquity.
Re­spect for the power of religion was the most obvious of them. I remem-
ber being puzzled, in my first years at school in ­England and in subsequent 
years as an undergraduate and teacher at Oxford, by the polite indifference of 
so many of my En­glish friends to the role of religion as a social force. Such 
indifference was unthinkable in Ireland. In a world characterized by dignified 
poverty, both Protestant and Catholic churches offered to their members 
something to be proud of. This confessional mentality provided a social map 
with clearly delineated bound­aries. Altogether, I expected religious ideas to be 
power­ful and to have an impact on society—­often, alas, in the form of intoler-
ance: a sad topic that I came to study early in my life as a scholar.

6 
Ch apter 1
A Past without a ­Future
I am also struck by the way in which I appear to have been drawn to study 
unfamiliar tracts of history, often buried beneath a mound of modern preju-
dice. To rehabilitate lost centuries has been my par­tic­u­lar joy. This is not, per-
haps, so surprising: ­after all, I grew up in a country that, for centuries, had been 
denied a ­future. Its Golden Age lay in the distant past, in the “Isle of Saints and 
Scholars” of the early ­Middle Ages, followed by tragic centuries of invasion 
and submission to alien rule.
By contrast, when I went to school in ­England as a boy, the history text-
books that I used still radiated confidence, even in a battered postwar Britain. 
Firm lines of pro­gress seemed to run from the distant past—­from Magna 
Carta and the origins of Parliament, through the Glorious Revolution of 1688, 
the Reform Bill of 1832, the expansion of the British Empire, and—it was now 
hoped by many—­the new Britain of the welfare state. The history books that 
I read and the teaching that I received for much of the time stressed, with 
admirable robustness, the power of progressive institutions and the supreme 
virtue of common sense.
But where ­were ­those virtues to be seen in the history of Ireland? Where 
­were they during the Irish Famine of 1845 to 1849? Charles Trevelyan (1807–
1886), the En­glish minister in charge of relief for the famine, was a pillar of 
progressive views. He was a Cornishman, who praised his countrymen as im-
proved Celts—­“Celts who by long habits of intercourse with the Anglo-­Saxons 
have learned at last to be practical men.”1 His first notion of practical mea­
sures was to leave Ireland to its fate, so as to allow “the operation of natu­ral 
­causes” to rectify the shortage of food according to strict laws of laissez-­faire 
commerce.2 As a result, one million Irish men, ­women, and ­children died of 
starvation. Trevelyan, the “practical man,” the free-­market economist and 
impeccable administrator, had no regrets. The Irish, the unimproved Celts, 
­were to blame:
The ­great evil with which we have to contend [is] not the physical evil of the 
famine, but the moral evil of the selfish, perverse and turbulent character 
of the ­people.3
1. Cecil Woodham-­Smith, The ­Great Hunger (New York: Harper and Row, 1962), 59.
2. Woodham-­Smith, ­Great Hunger, 374.
3. Woodham-­Smith, ­Great Hunger, 156.

Home a nd A broa d 
7
Not surprisingly with such a past, a growing boy in Ireland (­whether Protes-
tant or Catholic) did not pick up the re­spect for common sense and for the 
beneficent power of institutions that was taken for granted, across the sea, in 
­England.
Altogether, the history of Ireland could not be presented as a steady pro­
gress. It was punctuated by catastrophes and by all too many examples of 
decline and fall. In the past four centuries, Ireland had witnessed the collapse 
not of one ruling class, but of two. The traditional Irish aristocracy had been 
ruthlessly pushed aside by Protestant adventurers in the sixteenth and seven-
teenth centuries, largely (though not invariably) newcomers from Britain. But 
no sooner ­were ­these families established than they also began to decline. 
The agricultural depression ­after 1815, the catastrophe of the ­Great Famine 
of the 1840s, and the mobilization of the Land League of the 1880s scythed 
their income and severed their links to the land. By 1940, their fine ­houses 
littered the countryside as empty shells, some of them burned out in times of 
civil war.
So I grew up among ­people dressed in shabby tweed coats. Many of 
them, and their families, had seen better times. But most of them lived with 
good cheer and a sense of dignity. Even as a boy, I picked up a prevailing 
mood. I learned that a lively and imaginative culture could coexist with con-
strained po­liti­cal and economic circumstances. It was, perhaps, a good start 
with which to approach the world of late antiquity—­a period of history that 
seemed, at first sight, to be ­going nowhere, but which would prove, on closer 
inspection, to be the making of both Eu­rope and the ­Middle East.

8
2
Empire
The Greys
The Double World of Neil Grey
The Irish Protestant gentry had lived for generations in narrow worlds backed 
by im­mense horizons. Many of them depended for their survival on a con-
nection with the military that took them out of Ireland and spun them, like 
the particles that make up the rings of Saturn, around the prodigious mass of the 
British Empire at the time of its expansion.
They formed an ambiguous class: for all their fierce loyalty to the empire, they 
never thought of themselves as En­glish. They have always reminded me of the 
provincials from the frontiers of the Roman Empire in its last centuries (Moors 
in Africa; Illyrians and Pannonians along the Danube)—­men of war who had 
never seen Rome, but whose loyalty to a worldwide empire remained unshaken. 
The strong imaginative polarity between “home” and “abroad” with which I grew 
up was only the last, most modern version of an ancient ambiguity.
My ­mother’s ­mother was born Ada Grey. According to Burke’s Landed Gen-
try of Ireland, “The tradition of this ­family is that they descend from Lord 
Leonard Grey (beheaded in 1541) . . . ​­great ­uncle of the famous and unfortu-
nate Lady Jane Grey (beheaded in 1554).”1
Lord Leonard Grey had come to Ireland as lord deputy (the En­glish gov-
ernor of the island). He ruled for several tumultuous years before he ran into 
trou­ble. ­After the fall of his patrons in ­England, he was recalled and summarily 
executed.
1. Burke’s Landed Gentry of Ireland (London: Burke’s Peerage ­Limited, 1954), 320.

Empir e 
9
He left a son in Ireland—­Neil Grey—­who summed up in his own person 
the ambiguities of the En­glish presence. Neil’s ­mother was a ­daughter of the 
­great Conn O’Neill, and he was brought up among the O’Neills, the dynasty 
that controlled a good part of Ulster. A boy with a double background, fluent 
both in En­glish and in Irish, he was used by the O’Neills as an envoy to the 
current lord deputy, the truculent Earl of Sussex.
Sussex was a sworn ­enemy of Sean O’Neill, Neil Grey’s ­uncle and now 
the head of the O’Neill clan. In 1561, he tried to enlist Neil—­a young man 
caught between two worlds—to get rid of his ­uncle. We know this from a 
secret report of the earl to Queen Elizabeth, preserved in the Calendar of 
State Papers:
I entered talk with Neil Grey. . . . ​I swore him upon the Bible to keep secret 
what I should say unto him, and assured him if it ­were ever known . . . ​it 
should cost him his life.
I used long circumstance in persuading him to serve you to benefit his 
country. . . . ​In fine [fi­nally] I brake with him to kill Shane [Sean] and bound 
myself by oath to see him have a hundred marks of land by the year to him 
and his heirs for reward.
It was a risky business: Neil “seemed desirous to serve your Highness, and 
to have the land but fearful to do it, doubting his own escape ­after with 
safety.”2
Not surprisingly, Neil de­cided not to murder his ­uncle. Undeterred, Sussex 
tried again to get rid of Sean by sending him a barrel of poisoned wine. But the 
wine had no more effect than to give Sean—­a notable drinker—­a heavier hang-
over than usual.3 Eventually, in 1567, he was killed by a rival Ulster clan.
Connections
Neil Grey’s descendants soon sank from view. They survived as minor land-
owners west of the river Shannon. (Some branches of them spelled their name 
as Grey, with an e, ­others as “Gray”). I knew ­little about them, ­until, about 
2. Burke’s Landed Gentry of Ireland, 320, taken from J. A. Froude, The Reign of Elizabeth and 
James (London: Dent, 1911), 1:396–397. See now Ciaran Brady, Shane O’Neill (Dublin: Univer-
sity College of Dublin Press, 2015), 44–62.
3. Brady, Shane O’Neill, 66.

10 
Ch apter 2
thirty years ago, I inherited a cache of letters, most of them from the early 
nineteenth ­century. They offered a glimpse of an Irish Protestant ­family in the 
days of Nelson and Wellington.
The letters are about the six grandsons of Hugh Grey. He was the poor rela-
tion of a power­ful ­family—­the Wynnes of Sligo. In an age when connections 
mattered, the Greys knew that they owed much to their link to the Wynnes. 
For almost two centuries, they ­adopted Wynne as their second name in honor 
of their patrons: even my ­mother, born in 1903, was christened Sheila Wynne 
Warren.
Hugh Grey had two sons. The older son, John Grey, was editor of the Sligo 
Journal—­a publication entirely controlled by the Wynnes. The younger son, 
Captain Owen Wynne Grey of the Sixth Inniskilling Dragoons, may well have 
got his military commission through the Wynnes. It proved to be his passport 
to a wider world for himself and his ­children. In 1792, he was on campaign in 
Flanders ­under the Duke of York. He even brought his son, George, with him, 
although the boy was only fourteen. Young George’s ­horse was shot from 
­under him, and the duke, who had noticed the boy’s courage, immediately 
promoted him to cornet—­the ju­nior officer who carried the ­battle flag of his 
cavalry troop.
The Six Sons of Owen Wynne Grey
Captain Grey faced a common dilemma. A second son, he had ­little land and 
a large ­family: two sons and two ­daughters from his first marriage, to Elizabeth 
O’Neill, and four sons and three ­daughters by his second marriage, to Eliza-
beth Philpott.
I learned about this dilemma from the ­family letters that had come my way. 
Most of them ­were written in 1805 by George Grey—­the brave cornet of the 
Flanders campaign, and now a seasoned officer—to his stepmother, Elizabeth 
Philpott Grey. The most striking aspect of this correspondence was George’s 
loyalty to the ­family as a ­whole. While making arrangements for his younger 
half ­brother, Philpott Grey, he reassured Elizabeth that he was looking out for 
all his other ­brothers and half ­brothers:
I assure you that I have their interests at heart as much as a man can have 
and my pride ­will be to raise them in life—as much as it is mine to get to 
the head of my profession. (George Grey to Elizabeth Grey, March 13, 1805)

Empir e 
11
George would serve ­under the Duke of Wellngton during the Peninsular 
War. In April 7, 1812, the British stormed the highly fortified city of Badajoz 
and suffered terrible casualities. Wellington reported: “The list of killed and 
wounded ­will show that the officers . . . ​put themselves at the head of the at-
tacks. . . . ​I must likewise mention Lieutenant-­Colonel Grey of the 30th who 
was unfortunately killed.”4
Elizabeth was a shrewd ­woman, plainly the brains of the ­family. Her priori-
ties ­were conventional: to find husbands for the girls, and commissions in the 
army (or their equivalent in the navy) for the boys. In both re­spects she suc-
ceeded completely.
Young ­women with exiguous dowries, living in Gort, a village in the far 
West of Ireland, would have found it hard to find suitable husbands. Yet all five 
­sisters got married, three of them to army officers, perhaps introduced by their 
­father and ­brothers. For them, quite as much as for their ­brothers, the British 
army offered an escape from rural stagnation.
The Grey ­brothers joined ­either the army or the navy. They had ­little op-
tion. Short of land, they had to earn a living; and only three professions ­were 
considered suitable for a gentleman—­the law, the church, or the armed forces. 
Individuals needed personal connections to enter any profession, and the con-
nections enjoyed by the Greys (through the Wynnes) steered them ­toward the 
army. The ­brothers ­were part of a massive influx of Irishmen into the British 
forces. In 1780, one-­third of the officers’ commissions ­were held by members 
of the Irish gentry, and the disproportion continued throughout the nine-
teenth ­century.5
Most of the surviving letters concerned the advancement of the ­brothers. 
All six had fighting ­careers. William, the eldest, lost an eye in 1812, fighting the 
Americans at Lundy’s Landing near Niagara Falls, and eventually died from 
the lingering complications of this injury. George—­the second son and the 
writer of most of the letters—­was killed at Badajoz. Owen Wynne Grey (Eliza-
beth Philpott Grey’s first son) ended up in Travancore, as the commander in 
chief of the army of an Indian maharani. Elizabeth’s second son, Matthew 
Philpott Grey, joined the navy. The next son, John, having fought in the Afghan 
4. The Dispatches of Field Marshal the Duke of Wellington from 1799 to 1818, ed. Lieutenant 
Col­o­nel Gorwood (London: John Murray, 1838), 9:39 and 41.
5. T. Bartlett and K. Jeffery, A Military History of Ireland (Cambridge University Press, 1996), 7.

12 
Ch apter 2
War, moved to New Zealand in 1847. The youn­gest, Hugh, died in the Burmese 
war of 1826.
Philpott’s War
The letters mainly concerned George’s younger half ­brother, Matthew Philpott 
Berry Grey (usually known as Philpott). They show very clearly the mecha-
nisms that launched a twelve-­year-­old boy on a ­career of war. On February 17, 
1805, George Grey wrote from ­England to his stepmother, Elizabeth Philpott 
Grey, in Gort. He had good news concerning Philpott. George had found that 
an admiral (Admiral Montagu, an intimate acquaintance of George’s, who was 
sitting beside George as he wrote) was willing to ask a friend to take young 
Philpott aboard his ship. Seeing that Philpott was only twelve years old at the 
time, this was a remarkable stroke of good fortune. But, George warned, it 
would be costly:
My admiral further desires me to say that you allow him £30 a year as he 
means to send him on board a ship where he ­will meet nothing but the sons 
of Noblemen or Gentlemen’s sons of Rank in this Country.
Above all, Philpott must come immediately to ­England:
No time is to be lost as consider his chance of prize money. (George Grey 
to Elizabeth Grey, February 17, 1805)
Prize money was in the air. The British navy was assembling for the campaign 
that would end with Nelson’s victory at Trafalgar, on October 21, 1805, and a 
massive distribution of loot from the captured ships, where even midshipmen 
­were entitled to a share.
George reassured Elizabeth that Philpott would get his war: “­there is plenty 
of fighting which is the only ­thing to do him good in his profession and give 
him a claim hereafter. The more he sees of it the better” (George Grey to Eliza-
beth Grey, April 7, 1805).
So Philpott, aged twelve, was sent off to join the British navy. Even to get 
him to his ship had been no small ­matter. Gort was not exactly at the center of 
the world. Philpott was passed with ­great care along a network of servants 
and clients known to Elizabeth from Gort to Dublin, Dublin to Liverpool, and 
then to London. On his arrival, George was able to reassure Elizabeth: “Phil-
pott is well and in ­great spirits—­you see he is a famous traveller” (George Grey 
to Elizabeth Grey, April 7, 1805). Our “famous traveller” brought with him 

Empir e 
13
from Dublin twelve half-­pound canisters of Ladyfoot Snuff, ­either for George 
or as douceurs for the gentlemen officers he would meet on board his ship 
(George Grey to Elizabeth Grey, March 13, 1805).
­There the letters cease; but I could follow Philpott’s naval ­career. In 1807, 
he was on board HMS Brilliant, “actively engaged on the coast of France, 
where besides blocking the ports of Cherbourg and St Malo, he joined in many 
cutting out affairs, contributed much to the obstruction of the ­enemy’s coast-
ing trade, and assisted at the capture of a privateer.” In 1809, now promoted to 
midshipman, he was on HMS Thallia, chasing two French frigates along the 
west coast of Greenland as far north as Baffin Bay. A few months ­later, “while 
in attendance on the King off Weymouth,” he “assisted in saving the royal 
barge” during a storm. For the next few years, he served mainly in the Ca­rib­
bean, where “he was thrice placed in charge of prizes of ­great value, the ­whole 
of which he succeeded in conducting through the difficult and dangerous 
navigation”—­caused by strong currents and abundant coral reefs—­“which 
leads into Nassau, New Providence [in the Bahamas].”
In 1814, now a sublieutenant, he was sent to fight the Americans. He was 
put in charge of an “advice-­vessel,” a sort of patrol boat, and was soon leading 
a “squadron down the Potomac, and effecting the destruction, during the de-
scent, of one of the enemies’ forts.” (This was the campaign where the British 
failed to capture Baltimore—an event commemorated in “The Star Spangled 
Banner”—­but succeeded in capturing the new capital at Washington and in 
burning down the White House.) He “was next employed in covering a forag-
ing party at Windmill Point,” on the Chesapeake Bay, “where he landed and, 
with only 24 men, defeated a large detachment of American militia, but not 
without receiving a slight sword-­wound on the elbow and two buckshot in the 
leg.” A few days ­later, on September 3, Admiral Cochrane promoted him to lieu-
tenant, in recognition of his “zeal, diligence, and activity.” By 1816, the wars with 
France and Amer­i­ca ­were over, and Philpott, like many other naval officers, re-
tired on half pay. He was only twenty-­three years old. He would live ­until 1863.6
Philpott was the grand­father of Ada Grey, my grand­mother on my ­mother’s 
side. I have his portrait, painted when he was an older man. It is rather grim. 
He has already become a Victorian. By contrast, the portrait of his ­mother, 
Elizabeth Grey, belongs to an ­earlier age—­with powdered hair, a turban, and 
features that are recognizably ­those of my ­mother and myself.
6. William O’Byrne, A Naval Biographical Dictionary. Comprising the Life and Ser­vices of ­Every 
Living Officer in Her Majesty’s Navy (London: John Murray, 1849), 1:425.

14 
Ch apter 2
Of all the Grey ­brothers, only Philpott returned to Ireland and lived ­there ­until 
his death. The ­others died and ­were buried abroad. It was Philpott who preserved 
the letters written to his ­mother that enabled me to glimpse—as if through a crack 
in the wall of time—­a generation saved from penury by an empire at war.
India: Owen Wynne Grey
With the ending of the Napoleonic Wars in Eu­rope, Philpott’s older ­brother, 
Owen Wynne Grey, looked to India. In a letter that he wrote to his ­mother, the 
ever-­vigilant Elizabeth, in 1819, he made plain that he would not return to Ire-
land in the near ­future:
I wish none more than I ever did to get home, but it would be the height of 
folly at the moment to think of abandoning a situation where I am likely to 
pay my debts, assist my ­family and put by something to educate my ­children 
and home with. Mrs Grey [his wife] ­will go to Bath. . . . ​It’s the finest place 
in the world to educate girls . . . ​and eco­nom­ically.
Then he went on:
The appointment I at pre­sent have is the command of the Troops of Her 
Highness the Ranee of Travancore, they consist of a Troop of Cavalry, a 
Brigade of 6 pounders [cannon], and two Battalions of 1000 men each. In 
a few years, should I remain they ­will be something like soldiers. (Owen 
Wynne Grey to Elizabeth Grey, postmarked 1819)
Owen Wynne became, for the next twenty years, the killahdar—­the 
commander in chief—of the army of the maharani (the ­mother regent) of Tra-
vancore. The maharani, Gowri Parvati Bayi, who ruled as regent from 1815 to 
1829, was a remarkable ­women, as was her charge, her nephew Swathi Thirumai 
Rama Varma (1813–1846), a gifted musician and a progressive administrator. 
Owen Wynne was plainly no footloose mercenary captain. He was a profes-
sional soldier, serving a model court.
The ­family memorabilia included an ivory-­framed miniature in the Mughal 
style that Owen Wynne had sent to his ­mother, Elizabeth, on the occasion of 
his thirty-­fifth birthday.
My dear ­Mother,
With this you ­will receive my Picture which I beg your ac­cep­tance of as 
one of the strongest proofs of my love for you. (Owen Wynne Grey to 
Elizabeth Grey, April 9, 1824)

Empir e 
15
The miniature showed Owen Wynne, with ginger-­orange hair, a plump and 
ruddy face, small gray eyes, and a scarlet uniform jacket—­the typical Irish 
soldier viewed through Indian eyes. He spent the rest of his life in India, as did 
his ­children. He had traveled a long way from Gort.
The Romance of a Proconsul:  
Sir George Grey of New Zealand (1812–1898)
The ­children, grandchildren, great-­grandchildren and great-­great-­
grandchildren of the six sons of Owen Wynne Grey continued to serve the 
British Crown—­mainly in the army, but also in the navy and in the colonial 
administration—in places as far apart as Baluchistan and Lemnos, Khorasan 
and Penang. But my ­mother remembered only one of them: Sir George Grey 
(1812–1898), the posthumous son of Lieutenant Col­o­nel George Grey, who 
had died at Badajoz.
Sir George belonged to a dif­fer­ent generation from Philpott and his 
­brothers. He was not a ­career soldier, but an empire-­builder in full Victorian 
style. He was twice governor of New Zealand (in 1845–1853 and 1862–1868) 
and then became its first prime minister (in 1877–1878). He had been governor, 
also, of South Australia (1841–1845) and of Cape Colony, in South Africa (in 
1854–1861). An adulatory biography entitled The Romance of a Proconsul was 
prominently displayed on my ­mother’s bookshelf.7
­There was a lot that The Romance of a Proconsul did not tell. In the modern 
historiography of British imperialism, Sir George appears as “a strange hybrid 
of legend and counter-­legend.” To use the carefully weighed words of the Ox-
ford Dictionary of National Biography: “The humane, reserved, intellectual 
gentleman co-­existed with a racialist and imperialist zealot.” He ended his life 
in angry isolation in his splendid residence at Kawau, north of Auckland, dis-
missed as a crank and an ideologue—­a Prospero on his magic island at the 
bottom of the world.8 When I visited Kawau in 1991, I was astonished to find, 
at the bottom of the main staircase, a white marble bust whose high forehead 
and distinctive droop of the eyes could have been my ­mother’s.
7. James Milne, The Romance of a Proconsul. Being the Personal Life and Memories of the Right 
Hon. Sir George Grey (London: Chatto and Windus, 1899).
8. See J. Rutherford, Sir George Grey (London: Cassell, 1961), with James Belich, The Victo-
rian Interpretation of Racial Conflict: The Maori, the British and the New Zealand Wars (Montreal: 
McGill-­Queen’s University Press, 1989), and Belich, s.v. “Grey, Sir George,” The Oxford Dictionary 
of National Biography (Oxford University Press, 2004).

16 
Ch apter 2
But among the Greys, Sir George was an exception. Most ­were soldiers. 
They lived between two worlds—­home and abroad. They ­were fiercely loyal 
to the British Empire and to the British armed forces. But ­England itself was 
a blank on their map, and even Ireland seemed a narrow place compared with 
the wide spaces of the empire.
That world has now vanished. I was born in its last years. Ireland was in­de­
pen­dent and neutral during World War II. And yet most of my older male 
cousins fought for Britain, and several of them died. I was even told, with 
pride, that an ­uncle by marriage in the Royal Air Force had helped to plan the 
famous raid on the Mohne Dam. This pattern, of being Irish but looking be-
yond Ireland to the British Empire, had lasted for generations and was still 
potent during my childhood. As a result, “abroad” was always charged for me 
with associations of adventure in distant places and tinged with the possibility 
of death.

17
3
Decline and Fall
The Wynnes of Hazelwood
The men of the Grey ­family entered new horizons through ser­vice in the Brit-
ish Empire. It had a cost: three out of the six sons of Owen Wynne Grey ­were 
killed in war. Yet they plainly preferred the risks of ser­vice in distant lands to 
remaining in Ireland. ­Those of their cousins who stayed in Ireland did not fare 
well. Their land would vanish from ­under them in the course of the nineteenth 
­century. Hence a cluster of ­family memories of loss and dereliction.
As we have seen, the Greys had been the poor relations of a power­ful 
­family—­the Wynnes of Sligo. But the power of the Wynnes steadily declined 
throughout the nineteenth ­century. They lost their pocket borough. They lost 
their right to collect tolls. They ­were forced to sell their land to their tenants. 
Yet, for many years, they continued to live in Hazelwood House, the first Pal-
ladian ­house to be built in Ireland (in 1730) by Richard Cassels, the country’s 
leading architect. They still presided over local society at regattas and polo 
matches, and surrounded the ­house with gardens, “plainly the outcome of 
unstinted outlay and exquisite taste.”1
The ­house was named ­after an ancient hazel wood, where the poet W. B. 
Yeats used to walk:
I went out to the hazel wood,
­Because a fire was in my head,
And cut and peeled a hazel wand,
And hooked a berry to a thread. . . . ​2
1. Terrence O’Rorke, The History of Sligo: Town and Country (Dublin: James Duffy, 1889), 1:337.
2. “The Song of Wandering Aengus,” The Wind among the Reeds, in The Collected Poems of 
W. B. Yeats (New York: Macmillan, 1956), 57.

18 
Ch apter 3
The Wynnes fi­nally left Hazelwood in 1923, just ­after the Irish Civil War. The 
beautiful Palladian ­house is now boarded up, on the grounds of a whiskey 
distillery. But the hazel wood remains.
A Brawling Squireen
Other cousins in the Sligo area, the Ormsbys of ­Castle Dargan, ­were ruined 
by the Irish Famine of 1845–1847. John Ormsby tried to help by founding a 
Famine Relief Committee; but the famine cost him much of his land. In the 
1850s, large tracts of his property ­were sold off to pay arrears in rates and taxes. 
A ­little ­later, ­after John’s death in 1870, his grand­son, John Robert Ormsby, 
delivered the coup de grâce to the ­family fortune.
W. B. Yeats, a cousin of John Robert’s wife, often visited Ormsby during 
­these years of decline:
Sometimes I would ­ride to ­Castle Dargan, where lived a brawling 
squireen. . . . ​It was, I daresay, the last ­house­hold where I could have found 
the reckless Ireland of a hundred years ago in final degradation. . . .
The first day I came ­there he gave my cousins a revolver . . . ​and to show 
off, . . . ​he shot a passing chicken; and half an hour ­later, at the lake’s edge 
­under his ­castle, now but the broken corner of a tower with a rising stair, 
he fired at or over an old countryman walking on the far edge of a lake. The 
next day I heard him settling the ­matter with the old countryman over a 
­bottle of whiskey, and both ­were in good humour.
Yeats told another story about John Robert “shooting in the pride of his 
marksmanship, at his own door with a Martini-­Henry ­rifle ­until he had shot 
the knocker off.” Eventually (Yeats concludes), “having now neither friends 
nor money, he made off to Australia or Canada.”3 ­Father O’Rorke, the genial 
historian of Sligo, was less severe:
The pre­sent representative of this branch [of the Ormbys] . . . ​resides now 
in Amer­i­ca, where he is very popu­lar, as he always was in Ireland before his 
emigration.4
Yeats remained haunted by the memory of ­Castle Dargan in its glory days. 
A few years before his death, he wrote:
3. W. B. Yeats, Autobiographies (London: Macmillan, 1955), 54–55.
4. O’Rorke, The History of Sligo, 1:350.

Decline a nd Fa ll 
19
O but I saw a solemn sight
Said the rambling shambling travelling man
­Castle Dargan’s ruins all lit
Lovely ladies dancing in it
What though they danced ­those days are gone.5
Vio­lence
In 1864, Philpott Grey’s ­daughter, Anna Maria, married her distant cousin, 
Captain St George Grey. His branch of the Grey ­family had been more pros-
perous than the Greys of Sligo and Gort. In the first half of the nineteenth 
­century, they had remained comfortably in Ireland, often attending Trinity 
College Dublin, and sometimes practicing law or marrying heiresses. They 
­were not dependent, as the other Greys had been, on power­ful relatives, such 
as the Wynnes.
Yet by the ­middle of the nineteenth ­century the ­family had begun to drift 
away from the Irish countryside. Captain Grey had five ­brothers: two emi-
grated to Amer­i­ca; one joined the Indian Medical Ser­vice; another had a long 
and happy ­career at Trinity College Dublin. Only one chose to remain on the 
land: William Henry Grey (1828–1887), who managed 1,421 acres at Dor-
rington House in county Westmeath. In the 1850s, he built a model farm, with 
barns, milking sheds, and up-­to-­date brick piggeries. He saw himself as a pro-
gressive landowner. But the change from wheat to pigs and ­cattle meant a less 
labor-­intensive farming and fewer jobs.6 Hence, perhaps, the death threat that 
he received in 1869 and duly passed over to the local police station, from 
whence it eventually found its way into the National Archives. It showed a man 
holding a ­rifle above his head:
Gray
Look at your deadly weapon, ­here it is. This ­will be your doom if you 
­don’t alter your way of ­going. . . . ​I have the same gun, eye, and hand that 
took down [Captain Roland] Tarleton.7
5. W. B. Yeats, “The Wicked Hawthorn Tree,” in The Collected Work of W. B. Yeats X: ­Later 
Articles and Reviews, ed. Colton Johnson (New York: Scribner, 2000), 278.
6. D. S. Jones, Graziers, Land Reform and Po­liti­cal Conflict in Ireland (Washington, DC: 
Catholic University of Amer­i­ca Press, 1995), 10
7​.­ https://­www​.­thejournal​.­ie​/­Westmeath​-­ribbonism​-­2550096​-­Jan2016.

20 
Ch apter 3
William held on; but all five of his sons emigrated. His ­daughter, Mary 
Emily, became a military nurse in India; in 1908 she received a medal for her 
devoted care of the wounded during a British army expedition into Af­ghan­i­
stan. Dorrington House has vanished. Only the barns and the state-­of-­the-­art 
piggeries survive, duly recorded in the National Inventory of Architectural Heri-
tage as “an integral part of the architectural heritage of Westmeath.”8
As I look back, ­these stories of ­great ­houses abandoned bear a troubling 
resemblance to the fate of many villas in the last days of the Roman Empire—­
splendid affairs, often larger and more brilliant than at any other time; but then 
suddenly deserted, as if their clock had ­stopped.
8​.­ www​.­buildingsofireland​.­ie.

21
4
Squireens
The Warrens from Count y  
Meath to Dublin
“Drummin”
In 1897, my ­mother’s parents—­Ada Grey (the grand­daughter of Philpott) and 
Robert Gibson Warren—­were married. The Warrens ­were dif­fer­ent from the 
Greys. They ­were an Anglo-­Norman ­family, descended from the first wave of 
settlers who arrived in Ireland with the Normans in the twelfth ­century. They 
had lived for centuries in county Meath, just north of Dublin. Unlike the 
Greys, they had few connections with the empire and the British armed forces. 
My ­mother always regarded them as somehow less ­grand and more comfort-
ably “Irish.”
In around 1770, John Grant Warren built a ­family seat called “Drummin” 
near Duleek in county Meath:
a substantial stone ­house and offices, suitable for a gentleman farmer. It was 
of the old style, with walls at least 30 inches thick, and the woodwork in 
proportion. The win­dows in the rear ­were protected against burglars or 
other enemies and the front win­dows by stout shutters on the inside.1
“Drummin” was not like Hazelwood House. It was as much a ­little fortress 
as a gentleman’s residence. I saw it once, in a thoroughly dilapidated state. 
Recently, I learned that it was on sale, optimistically described as “a country 
­house of exceptional merit.” An aerial photo­graph showed it sitting comfortably 
1. Revd. Thomas Warren, A History and Genealogy of the Warren ­Family, A.D. 912–1902 
(Printed for Private Circulation, 1902), 303–304.

22 
Ch apter 4
in the ­middle of a group of fields that may have been the “two hundred Irish 
acres of which twenty was peat bog” of John Grant Warren’s original estate. He 
was what would be called a “squireen”—­halfway between a farmer and a coun-
try gentleman.
­There was nothing ­grand about “Drummin,” but it was cherished in the 
memory of my older relatives. To them, it was home: the place where they had 
been born, and where their parents and grandparents had died and been buried 
in the nearby Protestant churchyard. Judging by old photo­graphs, it was a place 
where ­people played croquet, not polo, and wore sensible shawls and jackets.
Not all Warrens had been loyal to the Crown. According to ­family tradition, 
John Grant Warren’s son, Mervyn, was hanged for taking part in the ­Great 
Rebellion of 1798—­the famous “Year of the French,” when a major uprising, 
aided by French troops, threatened to drive the En­glish out of Ireland.2 In 
­later generations, a number of Warren boys ­were named Mervyn, presumably 
in his memory.
When Warrens left Ireland, as many of them did, they did not seek glamor-
ous ­careers as soldiers and colonial administrators in the British Empire, as the 
Greys had done. Rather, they found low-­profile jobs as doctors, engineers, and 
businessmen in Toronto, Chicago, and Kansas City. I even traced one Warren 
as far as Alabama, where he was blown up in the explosion of a steamboat in 
1867. In Ireland itself, ­there ­were slim pickings. Mervyn Warren’s younger 
­brother, William, became a revenue official—­not the most popu­lar of occupa-
tions. He was “drowned in Lough Foyle, when on duty.”
Meanwhile, at “Drummin,” the ­family continued to multiply at a rate of 
about nine ­children in ­every generation. It seemed to be a predictable story 
of the slow decline of a gentry ­family eroded by its own fertility. But in 1859, 
John Grant’s grand­son, Henry Warren, saved the ­family by looking for a wife 
outside his usual circle. He married Anna, the ­daughter of Edward Atkinson, 
a rich doctor from the nearby port of Drogheda.
The Atkinsons of Drogheda
Anna’s ­family was dif­fer­ent from the Warrens in almost ­every re­spect: they 
came from Ulster; they ­were clever, energetic, and, sometimes, extremely 
ruthless. Dr. Atkinson had studied medicine at Glasgow University, and then 
2. Genealogy: A Journal of American Ancestry 1 (1912): 89.

Squir eens 
23
he settled in Drogheda in the 1840s, where he plainly prospered. In 1851, only 
a few years ­after the ­Great Famine, he was able to purchase Glenwilliam ­Castle 
near Limerick. He may have bought it at a cut rate, at a bankruptcy sale of the 
property of landowners ruined by the famine. Local legend was kinder: it was 
said that he had won it at cards.3
Much of Edward’s wealth came from his wife, Rosetta McCullough. Her 
­family was descended from a Scotsman named James Shaw who had built a 
grim ­little ­castle at Ballygally on the coast of Antrim (Northern Ireland) in 
1625. It is now a luxury ­hotel, complete with legends of ghosts, making it “one 
of the most haunted ­hotels” in Ireland. The ghosts include Shaw’s unhappy 
wife, allegedly starved to death by her husband.
In the 1780s the ­castle and its rich estate had belonged to John Shaw, an 
el­derly and childless man, who planned to leave it to his nephew. But John’s 
brother-­in-­law, Dr. William McCullough, had other ideas. According to the 
account in the Ulster Journal of Archaeology, McCullough “did all he could to 
turn his brother-­in-­law against his nephew.” Eventually he persuaded old 
Mr. Shaw to visit him, “professedly to stay for one night.” But the next morn-
ing, Mr. Shaw was “so ill that he could not be moved.” His nephew and other 
friends “called at Dr. McCullough’s ­house to inquire ­after him but ­were never 
allowed to see him.” Five or six weeks ­later, the old man was secretly “buried 
at midnight in the churchyard of Cairncastle, with no persons at his funeral 
but ­those that ­were necessary to inter him.” Dr. McCullough “produced a ­will, 
which he alleged had been made by the late Mr. Shaw and by which the gentle-
man’s entire property of ­every kind was left to him.” At the ­castle, he installed 
a guard “who kept constant watch and ward at one of the win­dows with a 
loaded blunderbuss” to block the entry of the rightful heir.4
­After a prolonged lawsuit, Dr. McCullough had to surrender the ­castle, but 
not before stripping the estate of its assets, and making himself bitterly 
unpop­u­lar in the neighborhood. His grand­daughter, Rosetta, married Dr. At-
kinson; and it was their ­daughter, Anna Atkinson, who married Henry Warren 
of “Drummin” in 1859. Her inheritance saved Henry’s ­children from genteel 
poverty.
3. Mark Bence-­Jones, A Guide to Irish Country Houses (London: Constable,1988), 140.
4. C. Porter and J. Bigger, “Ballygally ­Castle,” Ulster Journal of Archaeology, ser. 2, 7 (1901): 
65–77, at 72–73.

24 
Ch apter 4
John Atkinson (1844–1932)
The marriage to Anna Atkinson brought more than money to the Warrens. 
She had useful connections. Her ­brother, John, was “unquestionably the ablest 
man at the Irish bar, as well as its leader.”5 He was queen’s counsel in 1880, 
solicitor general in 1889, and attorney general for Ireland in 1892, an office 
based in Dublin. From 1895 to 1905, he was Conservative MP for Londonderry 
North. In 1905, he was made a life peer and entered the House of Lords as one 
of the four lords of appeal ordinary—­that is, one of the judges at the highest 
level of the British judiciary. He moved to ­England, where he stayed for the 
rest of his life.
Atkinson’s ­legal ­career was a success; but his po­liti­cal ­career ended in ruin. 
Before 1905, he had been an active politician in Dublin. He was a Unionist—­
that is, he wanted to keep Ireland within the United Kingdom, and he wanted 
to do this through reform. He was ­legal adviser for the Land Act of 1896, which 
offered funds to enable tenants to buy the lands they worked on, and for the 
Government Act of 1898, which effectively took local government out of 
the hands of the ­great landlords. ­These acts broke the power of the Protestant 
Ascendancy in Ireland. Some regarded Atkinson as a traitor to his class. His 
promotion to the House of Lords, which took him out of Ireland for good, 
may have come as a relief. But he lived ­until 1932—­long enough to see the Irish 
War of In­de­pen­dence and the end of his hopes for a peaceful ­union of Britain 
and Ireland.
In his Dublin days, before he moved to ­England, Atkinson seems to have 
taken his nephew, my grand­father Robert Warren (Bob Warren to his friends 
and admirers), ­under his wing. He pushed Bob in the direction of the law and 
ensured that he went to Dublin to follow the ­career of a solicitor rather than 
attempting to maintain the life of a country gentleman at “Drummin” in 
county Meath.
Though I heard ­little about him, Atkinson must have been a looming pres-
ence in the early stages of my grand­father’s ­career. Newspaper cuttings, care-
fully placed in an ­album by Bob Warren’s ­daughters—by my ­mother and my 
aunt Freda—­traced the rise of the Atkinsons, husband and wife, in Dublin 
society of the 1890s.
5. H. Montgomery-­Hyde, Carson: The Life of Sir Edward Carson, Lord Carson of Duncairn 
(London: Heinemann, 1953), 209.

Squir eens 
25
Thus when Bob Warren married Ada Grey, the occasion was reported as a 
“Fash­ion­able Wedding.” The Irish Times reporter went out of his way to add 
that the Atkinsons attended. “Mrs Atkinson’s dress was finished with a fichu 
of old lace.” It also recorded, among an impressive list of silverware, that the 
attorney general (John Atkinson) had contributed a check. I suspect that it 
was a big one.
The wedding was in 1897. A generation ­earlier, Atkinson might have encour-
aged my grand­father to follow in his steps as a politician. But now it was too 
late. Undermined by the reforms that Atkinson himself had helped to frame, 
the Protestant Ascendancy was broken. Outside Ulster, Protestants ­were sel-
dom elected to Parliament. ­There was no room for a bright young Dublin 
­lawyer to make a ­career in that direction. Bob Warren had to find other inter-
ests and other ambitions.

26
5
Rugby Football
Bob Warren
“He Played a Perfect Game”
Bob Warren seems to have made ­little use of the support provided by his fa-
mous ­uncle. His heart was elsewhere. He began his ­career in Dublin as a sports 
idol. At the age of twenty-­one, in 1887, he was captain of the Irish Rugby Foot-
ball team that beat ­England for the first time ever. The match took place in the 
newly built Lansdowne Road rugby football stadium. It was a spectacular 
event:
The spectators ­were fairly demented . . . ​hats went flying all over the place 
and handkerchiefs [waved by the ­women] ­were largely on display. . . . ​Saxon 
prestige in the football field was at length lowered, and the Rose had to bow 
down to the Shamrock.1
It takes some effort of the imagination to enter into the sheer excitement 
of the game in a major city such as Dublin. Rugby football was a game in the 
making. It had begun as ritual tussles in En­glish boys’ schools. By the 1880s, it 
had gone public in a ­grand way; but it remained an elite game, played by ama-
teurs only. Many of them ­were like Bob Warren—­former landed gentry who 
had moved to Dublin. For this urban gentry, now established in the profes-
sions, the Saturday match replaced the hunt.
But ­these gentlemanly amateurs now performed in front of ten thousand 
spectators in the newly built stadium at Lansdowne Road. And Bob Warren 
1. Sport, February 12, 1887, cited in P. Rouse, Sport and Ireland: A History (Oxford University 
Press, 2015), 187–188.

Rugby Footba ll 
27
gave them the excitement that they needed. He was a ­little man. He usually 
played half-­back, close to the scrum formed by the forwards. The scrum would 
hunker down to push each other like a ­great crab made up of ­human bodies, 
slowly rotating, advancing, and retreating, ­until the ball came loose between 
their legs. Then Bob Warren would make the ball fly, carry­ing it in spectacular, 
cunning dashes, ducking tackles and wrong-­footing his opponents. He kept 
the game open, for all in the stands to watch.
This was what they had come to see. ­Here was no muscular deadlock, but 
a nimble figure, weaving in and out of the thick of bulky opponents. Bob War-
ren was said to have always worn a bandana around his neck. ­Those who at-
tempted to stop him by grabbing his shirt collar would be left with the silken 
cloth in their hands. That was the style that made him, for a time, the talk of 
Dublin. In the words of a reporter, carefully pasted into the Warren ­family 
scrapbook, “he played a perfect game.”
“You ­Don’t Shoot Bob Warren”
Bob Warren died in 1940, in a world that had changed profoundly since his 
glory days in Dublin. I have a vague memory of a ­little man with a ginger, 
almost golden moustache, sitting bolt upright in a high chair. He would be 
delighted when I ran round the ­table, chanting, “Run Rabbit, Run Rabbit, 
Run, Run, Run” on the days when we would eat rabbit stew (often the only 
meat available in war­time).
All that I was told about Bob Warren concerned his fame as a sportsman. 
His ­legal ­career was barely mentioned, still less the patronage of John Atkin-
son. This may be ­because Atkinson’s patronage had led to a dead end. In any 
case, politics do not seem to have engaged Bob Warren. What mattered for 
him was his reputation as the doyen of rugby football. This was undiminished, 
even though his ­legal ­career may have suffered many disruptions as Ireland 
made its way to in­de­pen­dence.
The first of ­these shocks was the Easter Rising of April 24–30, 1916. When 
the rising happened, the ­family was caught on holiday in Skerries, a beachside 
resort a ­little north of Dublin. I found a letter from this time written by Ada War-
ren (Bob’s wife, my grand­mother) to her eldest ­daughter, my aunt Vivyenne.
My darling Vy,
I ­don’t know if this ­will ever reach you but I must risk it [so that] you can 
let all know how we are ­going on ­here as I expect the papers say [only] a 

28 
Ch apter 5
“small row in Ireland”. ­Here we are likely to remain. The Sinn Feiners (Shin 
Finners) have Dublin. . . .
We are ­here in Skerries now ­under martial law. All in their ­houses at 8 
pm and lights out. . . . ​As I write a cart of ammunition has gone by guarded 
by soldiers with fixed bayonets. . . . ​Fancy an armoured train patrols the 
railway and we ­were actually talking to soldiers on it. . . . ​Artillery yesterday 
swept Westmorland street. This is all true. You ­will not hear it in ­England. 
It is Asquith and his pals [who caused all this, by advocating Home Rule]. 
Thousands of the S[inn] F[einer]s paraded the streets of Dublin a month 
ago and nothing was said. Skerries now has no butter. Its too awful.
Best love from all
Your loving ­mother
Yet the coming of the Republic and the years of ­bitter fighting that preceded 
it seem to have left Bob Warren with his reputation as a popu­lar Dublin figure 
largely intact. At some time at the very end of British rule in Ireland (possibly 
through the support of Atkinson), he became crown solicitor for county Wick-
low. I still have the dress sword, with the crown on its hilt, with which he must 
have attended the viceroy’s receptions at Dublin ­Castle. But the office of crown 
solicitor did not deal with criminal cases or anything ­else that was po­liti­cally 
charged. It was not a danger-­post. He was unlikely to be assassinated. In ­later 
years, however, his ­daughters liked to believe that an order had gone out to the 
IRA: “You ­Don’t Shoot Bob Warren.” He had been the toast of Dublin. His 
portrait had appeared on matchboxes. He was untouchable. I suspect that this 
was how he thought of himself. Politics ­were of ­little interest to him. He re-
mained first and foremost a sportsman.
Indeed, it is a remarkable sign of the strength of the sports-­based networks 
of Dublin that Bob Warren lived on to be the ­Grand Old Man of the Irish 
Rugby Football Union, long ­after any hope of a po­liti­cal ­career had been 
blocked by the departure of Atkinson and, ­later, by the foundation of an in­de­
pen­dent Irish Republic. His heart was in the rugby field, not in politics. He 
was on the board of the International Rugby Football Union from 1887 to 1938, 
where, according to ­family rumor, he gloried in expelling France for violent 
play (­those neck tackles that he himself had avoided so adroitly) and for the 
ultimate taboo in a sport for gentlemen—­for “professionalism”: the highly 
charged issue of payments to members of their international team.
In his ­will, Bob Warren left me a ­great silver salver, covered with the sig-
natures of his friends and fellow players, presented to him, in 1938, on his 

Rugby Footba ll 
29
retirement from the Irish Rugby Football Union. But he had no illusions about 
me. I am told that, when I was first shown to him by my ­mother, a few days 
­after my birth, he declared, “That child does not have the hands of a rugby 
player.” I have only now learned (through the internet) that an eccentric donor 
still pays for flowers to be left on Bob Warren’s grave in Enniskerry, near Bray, 
on behalf of the Rugby Union.
Altogether, I learned from the experience of both sides of my ­mother’s 
­family much that was of use to a historian of the Roman Empire in its last 
centuries. From the Greys, I learned about the magnetic draw of a worldwide 
empire in its glory days—in its Golden Age, like the Rome in the age of the 
Antonines (138–180) with which Edward Gibbon began his melancholy 
narrative in the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire. From the Warrens, I 
learned something more sad but more challenging for a historian: how to un-
derstand what it was like to face the end of empire on the ground—in the small 
world of the ­little big men of the provinces—­and to do so with dignity and 
good nature. John Atkinson and Bob Warren, each in his own way, bowed out 
of the active politics of Ireland—­Atkinson to become a judge in ­England, Bob 
Warren to be a ­Grand Old Man of rugby football—­much as Roman senators 
had detached themselves, discreetly, from a world they could no longer call 
their own.

30
6
Dubliners
The L a mont Browns
The Lamonts
My ­father’s ­family, the Lamont Browns, felt no need for florid ancestors. It was 
dignity enough for them to have been Scots and Presbyterians, and, now, to 
be Dubliners. They ­were part of a sept (a subdivision) of a displaced clan, the 
Lamonts, which had been gradually driven off their land to the west of Glasgow 
(­behind Dunoon, in Strathclyde) by the Campbells.
Recently, I was interested to learn that the bulk of the Lamonts had re-
mained Catholic. The head of the clan is alive and well—­and not quite the 
person one would expect. He is ­Father Peter Lamont, a Catholic parish priest 
in the suburbs of Sydney, Australia. On the clan’s website, ­Father Peter reas-
sured his fellow clansmen that the chieftainship would pass to his married 
­brother and to his nephews.
A Republican Printer
The Lamont Browns, however, had settled into Dublin as staunch Presbyteri-
ans. They ­were not members of the established Church of Ireland, which was 
a branch of the Anglican Church and, for that reason, was intimately identified 
with the Protestant Ascendancy. By remaining Presbyterian, the Lamont 
Browns placed clear ­water between themselves and the core of En­glish rule 
in Ireland. My ­father’s grand­father was a successful color printer—­a craft in 
which Protestants predominated in Dublin at that time.1 He was also said to 
1. Mary E. Daly, Dublin: The Deposed Capital. A Social and Economic History 1860–1914 (Cork: 
Cork University Press, 1984), 125.

Dubliners 
31
have been a po­liti­cal radical: an antimonarchist and an advocate for an Irish 
Republic.
I remember that once, when I was having lunch with my ­father at Bewley’s 
in West­moreland Street (a favored meeting place for businessmen), an el­derly 
historian of the Irish ­labor movement came over to tell us that he had found 
something about my grand­father’s support for the Dublin workers’ ­unions. 
But that was all. It saddens me to know so ­little about the Lamont Browns. 
I suspect that Lamont ancestors would have offered me a very dif­fer­ent set of 
­family memories from ­those that had gathered around the Greys and the War-
rens. But, alas, in Victorian Dublin, no one thought of writing The Romance of 
a Republican Printer.
My ­father’s ­father was known as the Bear. We knew ­little about him. It was 
said that, having run through the fortune made by his ­father, he had retired to 
a back room to read paperback novels, leaving the management of the ­house 
and ­family to my grand­mother, always known by the archaic, Latin title of 
“the Mater.” He died in 1937, before I could know him. But he gave one clear 
indication of his religious loyalties. Once, in his glory days, the Bear had 
owned a yacht. He had called the yacht Ziska. The yacht was long gone; but 
the silver toast rack that he had made from the letters ZISKA was always on 
the breakfast ­table at “Number Sixty”—­the ­family home at no. 60 Lansd-
owne Road.
Much ­later, I realized that the strange name belonged to the hero of the 
Hussite Wars, Jan Žiška. Jan Žiška z Trocnova (ca. 1360–1424) was the one-­eyed 
leader of the Hussite armies and a proto-­Protestant hero. It is strange to think 
that this fragment of Protestant hagiography should come to rest in a bourgeois 
terrace ­house in Dublin, among silverware that spoke of better days.
Worlds Apart
As I look back, it strikes me that the Dublin in which my ­father grew up, and 
even the Dublin that I knew as a boy, was a silently fragmented place. Central 
Dublin was a world of its own—­a world of stately squares and of slums that 
­were among the worst in Eu­rope. The gap between this Dublin and the newly 
developed, middle-­class suburbs was unusually wide. The occupants of the sub-
urbs lived “privileged lives”—to borrow the title of a penetrating recent study.2 
2. Tony Farmar, Privileged Lives: A Social History of Middle-­Class Ireland 1882–1989 (Dublin: 
A. and A. Farmar, 2010).

32 
Ch apter 6
But they lived in a world patterned by any number of unspoken bound­aries 
and social no-go areas.3
­These divisions caused greater suffering than I, as a growing boy, was ever 
allowed to know. The deepest and most cruel of ­these was the division be-
tween Catholics and Protestants. Like a huge, chill iceberg, seemingly at rest 
on a bright, calm sea, a map of Irish society irremediably divided between two 
faiths lay quietly at the back of the minds of almost ­every member of the Dub-
lin ­middle class. In his book Dublin Made Me, Christopher Andrews (an exact 
con­temporary of my parents) describes the attitude to Protestants of his well-­
to-do Catholic ­family:
From childhood, I was aware that ­there ­were two separate and immiscible 
kinds of citizens: the Catholics, of whom I was one, and the Protestants 
who ­were as remote and dif­fer­ent from us as if they had been blacks and we 
whites.4
Sitting in no. 60 Lansdowne Road, the Lamont Browns—­the Bear and the 
Mater—­thought the same, word for word. It was very definitely in Ireland 
that I learned the power of religious intolerance. In ­later life, this was a 
theme that I would follow closely in all my work on the rise of Chris­tian­ity 
and the end of the Roman Empire. Indeed, my very first published work would 
consist of articles on religious conflict and on the theory and practice of reli-
gious coercion in Roman North Africa in the time of Saint Augustine.
Where Love Was Murdered
I have come to realize that this intolerance was by no means uniform and 
omnipresent in the Ireland of my grandparents. In certain circles, class counted 
for more than religion, as was often the case also in the ­later empire: something 
that I came to learn in my own work on the Roman aristocracy. Mixed mar-
riages ­were often less of a charged issue among gentry families than they ­were 
in the suburbs of Dublin. The gentry, I suspect, ­were less afraid of losing their 
identity through such marriages, and ­were less affected by the growing empha-
sis on confessional divisions in Dublin middle-­class society. In August 1897, 
my grand­mother Ada Grey married Bob Warren; in July 1897, her ­sister Anna 
3. Daly, Dublin: The Deposed Capital, 239.
4. C. S. Andrews, Dublin Made Me (Dublin, 1979), 9, cited in Daly, Dublin: The Deposed 
Capital, 151.

Dubliners 
33
had married Captain Bernard Daly of the Royal Irish ­Rifles. The two marriages 
­were recorded in identical terms:
Robert Gibson Warren, son of Henry Warren of Drummin House, Duleek, 
Co. Meath. . . .
Capt. Bernard Daly, JP [Justice of the Peace], of Old Hall, Tullamore, 
King’s Co. [now county Offaly], High Sheriff [in] 1897.5
Bernard Daly was Catholic, from an old county ­family. The religious difference 
worried neither set of in-­laws. Bernard was immediately welcomed by the 
Greys. My ­mother would always speak with affection of “­Uncle Bernie,” and 
his son, Brian, was her favorite cousin.
In the very dif­fer­ent world of the expanding suburbs of Dublin, intolerance 
had usually been held in check by the ­silent fragmentation of society. Protes-
tants and Catholics went their own ways—to dif­fer­ent schools, to dif­fer­ent 
businesses, and to dif­fer­ent marriages. Every­thing seemed to work smoothly, 
provided that both sides kept their distance.
But such separation was not as easy in the 1930s as it had once been. The 
Dublin bourgeoisie (Catholic and Protestant alike) had become more com-
fortable. ­There ­were motorcars for jaunts, cinemas for a night out, and an ever-­
greater number of tennis clubs. On ­these occasions, young men and ­women 
mixed with relative indifference to their religious backgrounds. Bound­aries 
weakened. For a moment, the chill breath off the iceberg of confessional in-
tolerance seemed to have died down. Friendships developed that might turn 
into love. And that, of course, was the prob­lem. Love meant marriage; and, 
for many families of the young ­couple, a mixed marriage meant the end of 
the world.
This is what happened to my youn­gest aunt. At roughly the age of eigh­teen, 
she fell in love—­with a Catholic boy. They had shared in all the pastimes of 
the well-­to-do. They had played tennis together. They had gone on walks to-
gether. They had gone to the pictures together. He had given her a pet spaniel 
as a pre­sent.
Unfortunately, they fell in love. They told their parents that they intended 
to marry. Both families exploded. A mixed marriage of this kind was the 
dread of both religions. It simply could not happen. The Mater was trenchant: 
“It would kill your ­father.” (I suspect that she was the most resolute opponent 
5. Burke’s Landed Gentry of Ireland (London: Burke’s Peerage ­Limited, 1958), 322.

34 
Ch apter 6
of the marriage.) Much the same must have been said in the Catholic ­family. 
All the gifts and letters that the ­couple had exchanged ­were returned. Only the 
spaniel was allowed to remain. My aunt was sent to relatives in Africa and 
eventually found a husband ­there.
Alas, this tragedy was only one of many in the dangerously fluid world of 
suburban Dublin. Bill Beckett, the ­father of the famous writer Samuel Beckett 
(1906–1989), had been heartbroken in the same way. He was a Protestant boy. 
He and his ­sister had both of them fallen in love with the ­daughter and the son 
of a well-­to-do Catholic ­family. William Martin Murphy (1845–1919), the head 
of that ­family and a distinguished Dubliner, was adamant in breaking up the 
two young ­couples. In Sam Beckett’s words:
It ruined both their lives. Bill never got over it, never.
Neither did Bill’s ­sister. Years ­later, Bill Beckett would occasionally take his 
­sister and her ­daughter out for a drive.
As they drove past a castellated mansion near Rathgar, [the ­sister would] 
announce angrily that this was “where the murder took place.” “What mur-
der?” asked her ­daughter. . . .
“William Martin Murphy’s ­house. He murdered love, ­didn’t he Bill?”6
One could have said the same of “Number Sixty.”
My poor aunt was never so open. Indeed, the true horror of the story is that 
I knew nothing of it. The entire incident was buried in silence. It was seventy 
years ­later that I first heard of it. At the age of eighty-­seven, she told the story 
to my wife. She spoke without bitterness or self-­pity. It was all very ­simple. The 
love of her life had been taken from her at the age of eigh­teen. Nothing was 
quite the same ever since. “My ­mother,” she said, “was a very good ­woman. 
But she was terribly wrong about a few ­things.”
6. James Knowlson, Damned to Fame: The Life of Samuel Beckett (New York: Grove Press, 
1996), 32–33.

35
7
Sudan
North and South
A Job Abroad
My ­father, James Lamont Brown, was the eldest son of the Bear and the Mater. 
Born in 1900, he had studied engineering at Trinity College Dublin. In the 
newly in­de­pen­dent, deeply poor Ireland of the twenties ­there ­were few jobs 
in his field. So as soon as he graduated, in 1924, he went to ­England to work in 
the traffic department of the ­Great Western Railway.
He remained in ­England for six years. Then his brother-­in-­law, Leonard 
Bayley, the husband of his eldest ­sister, my aunt Norah, took the ­matter in 
hand. ­Uncle Leonard was a Lancashire man, who had already established him-
self in the Sudan Railways, where he was known to his colleagues as “Buggins” 
Bayley. He had firm views. No man should marry on less than seven hundred 
pounds sterling a year. And “Buggins” knew of a job for seven hundred pounds 
in the Sudan Railways. My ­father took it. Or that was how the story was told.
A year ­later, he met my ­mother, Sheila Wynne Warren, at Skerries, the sea-
side resort north of Dublin where the Warrens had once been stranded, in 1916, 
by the Easter Rising. It was on his first year’s leave from Sudan. My ­father was 
impressed by how neat and trim she looked. My ­mother would tell me that she 
was struck by his courtesy and good nature when he reassured the waitress 
who had accidentally poured a pot of tea on the lap of his ­brother, Billy. They 
married in 1931. I was born in 1935.
­Until war was declared in 1939, my ­mother and I would join my ­father in 
Sudan in the cooler months of the year, by sailing from ­England to Egypt 
through the Mediterranean. From 1939 to 1944 we could not be with him, as 
the Mediterranean was closed to all civilian traffic. We stayed at home in a 

36 
Ch apter 7
self-­consciously neutral Ireland while he faced the risks of war. He would ­later 
tell me how he would be up at dawn as a volunteer observer for the antiaircraft 
batteries that protected Atbara from the occasional raid of Italian Cassini 
bombers—­Air Marshal Balbo’s air force based in conquered Ethiopia.
Like so many men on my ­mother’s side of the ­family, my ­father had found 
a ­career abroad and not at home. But ­there was a difference. My ­father did not 
go to Sudan as an empire-­builder—as a soldier or a colonial administrator. The 
“Romance of a Proconsul” was not for him. He went as a technician. His job 
was to administer trains, not to rule ­people. Both his profession and his Irish 
citizenship kept him at a distance from the solidly En­glish core of the Sudan 
Po­liti­cal Ser­vice, who ­were the true rulers of the country. Rather, he belonged 
to a ser­vice class of experts. The En­glish spoke of them, always somewhat 
condescendingly, as “boffins”—­backroom boys. This meant that he had less 
day-­to-­day contact in the workplace with the En­glish colonial government 
than he did with the Egyptian Copts, the Christian Lebanese, and the Suda-
nese who ­were also part of the expert administration of the railways. He helped 
to “run the railways”; the En­glish “ran the show.”
He settled in Atbara, two hundred miles north of Khartoum, where he 
eventually ­rose to the rank of deputy traffic man­ag­er of the Sudanese Rail-
ways. ­There was a lot of traffic for him to manage. Atbara was called the 
“Crewe Junction” of Sudan (­after the legendary railway junction in the Brit-
ish Midlands). A single railway line, passing north–­south through Atbara 
along the valley of the Nile, held Sudan together. It joined the scorching 
deserts of the North to the ­great, green swamps of the southern Nile. I was 
proud to grow up with a ­daddy whose realm seemed to stretch for thousands 
of miles along rails and river steamers, from the deserts of the North, through 
wide savannas, where the long necks of giraffes frequently became entangled 
with his telegraph wires, to the deep South, where the riverside stations of his 
steamboats would, on occasion, be trampled to matchwood by lovesick 
hippopotami.
“Fighting Dervishes”
So what was Sudan like in the early 1930s? The naval Handbook of the Anglo-­
Egyptian Sudan (a manual for administrators and army officers) told us that 
­there ­were two Sudans: an overwhelmingly Muslim northern Sudan and a 
pagan South, where Christian missions ­were active. The North had to be 

Suda n 
37
treated with care. In northern Sudan, the end of the Mahdiyya was less than 
forty years in the past. It had been led by Mohammad Ahmad (1844–1885) 
who had been acclaimed as the Mahdi—­that is, as the figure whose coming 
was to precede the Second Coming of Jesus and the Last Judgment. He raised 
an army from the camel-­riding tribes of northern Sudan, known to the British 
as “fighting dervishes.” Between 1881 and 1885 he drove all foreign armies (Brit-
ish and Egyptian alike) out of the country, and killed the charismatic General 
Gordon in Khartoum. Ten years ­later the in­de­pen­dent state maintained by the 
Mahdi’s successor, the “Khalifa” Abdallahi ibn Mohammad, was invaded by 
General Kitchener, and the dervishes ­were mowed down with industrial preci-
sion (or so it was claimed, with indecent satisfaction) by the Maxim guns of 
Kitchener’s army at the ­Battle of Omdurman, outside Khartoum in 1898. This 
massacre was the beginning of joint British and Egyptian rule in Sudan.
The Mahdiyya was a drama that the naval Handbook encouraged its readers 
to forget as quickly as pos­si­ble: “in endeavoring to understand the Arab 
­peoples of the Sudan it is necessary to clear one’s mind of the associations 
connected with the words ‘fighting dervishes.’ ”1
This was easier said than done. “Fighting dervishes” ­were not the sort of 
­people that a growing boy was likely to forget. Indeed, the front hall of “Num-
ber Sixty” contained an entire stand of ferocious spears, along with a bullet-
proof buffalo-­hide shield as hard as steel. In my more exuberant moods, I 
would jump into the hall, swinging around the bottom post of the ample stair-
case that led to the upper floor, so as to land with a heavy thump that brought 
a loud clang from ­those deadly spears.
The Hardness of Islam
Altogether, the naval Handbook insisted that, rather than fill our minds with 
such romantic and anxiety-­provoking images, we should think of the “good” 
nomads and the solid peasantry of the Nile valley:
The Arab of the Sudan, who has in varying degrees the blood and tradition 
of the pure Arab races, is proud, tenacious, and intelligent, although curiously 
unappreciative of time, not generally well educated, and prone to bigotry.2
1. A Handbook of the Anglo-­Egyptian Sudan (Naval Staff Intelligence Division, 1922), 200.
2. Handbook, 191.

38 
Ch apter 7
“Prone to bigotry” was a description calculated to set off alarm bells in 
some En­glish readers. It implied that the natives ­were as obdurate and danger-
ous as ­were the Catholics of Ireland. They ­were represented as the adherents 
of a rigid faith, fearsome in its warlike intolerance, but, fortunately, on its way 
to extinction. This was the clear view of Sir Harold MacMichael, the civil sec-
retary (the effective head of the administration) of Sudan:
The religion of the Arab [of the northern Sudan] is the fruit of centuries of 
discipline and dogma, and it appears now to have reached a stage of world-­
wide stagnation periodically rippled by po­liti­cal restlessness.3
Islam, indeed, was frequently presented as the Roman Catholicism of the 
East—as the dried-­out corpse of a religion, waiting to collapse into dust at 
the first touch of a Protestant Reformation, brought by the missionaries and 
(if with more caution and less overt religious zeal) by the progressive admin-
istration of the colonial powers. Much as the Reformation was believed—at 
least, by Protestants—to have superseded rigid Catholicism in Eu­rope, so now 
it was the time for Chris­tian­ity and Western values to supersede the “essential 
hardness of Islam” in Sudan and the ­Middle East.4
All I can say about my parents is that they ­were not involved in ­these toxic 
attitudes, largely ­because they ­were not part of the colonial administration. 
I never heard them speak a word against Muslims or against Islam at any time. 
Indeed, I was surprised to find from his notebooks that my ­father had learned 
considerably more Arabic than he revealed to me. He also kept a copy of 
Sudanese Courtesy Customs: A Foreigner’s Guide to Polite Phrases. This was a 
carefully prepared volume, complete with Arabic sentences, that represented 
a sincere attempt to establish a common etiquette between well-­to-do Suda-
nese and En­glish.5 In my teens, with the help of my ­father and a Teach Yourself 
Arabic book, I would attempt to learn its many gracious greetings. In this way, 
3. Harold MacMichael, October 25, 1928, in Robert O. Collins, Shadows in the Grass: Britain 
in the Southern Sudan, 1918–1956 (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1983), 172.
4. Dr. Lloyd to the Church Missionary Society, November 3, 1922, in Jack Bermingham and 
Robert O. Collins, “The Thin White Line,” in The British in the Sudan, 1898–1956: The Sweetness 
and the Sorrow, ed. Robert O. Collins and Francis M. Deng (London: Macmillan, 1984), 193.
5. V. L. Griffiths and Abdel Rahman Ali Taha, Sudanese Courtesy Customs: A Foreigner’s Guide 
to Polite Phrases in Common Use among the Sophisticated Arabic-­Speaking Population of the North-
ern Sudan (Sudan Government, 1936).

Suda n 
39
my parents’ days in Sudan, though strangely encapsulated in many ways, kept 
open a space in my imagination for the world of Islam.
The South
Over a thousand miles below Atbara, ­there stretched a vast, green world of 
swamps, called by Arabic-­speakers al-­Sudd—­the Barrier. This region was in-
habited by stateless, largely pagan tribes scattered among the infinitely divided 
capillary system of waterways that fed into the southern Nile. At a time when 
the Islam of the North seemed immovable, even still threatening, many En­
glish colonial officers throve on the wide-­open frontiers of the South.
­These ­were the district commissioners. A mystique surrounded them. They 
­were held to represent the colonial venture at its most daring and (so it was 
hoped) its most successful. In real­ity, they ­were an odd lot. Unlike applicants 
for the Indian Civil Ser­vice, they did not have to pass any exams. It was not for 
them to be brainy, but to be tough, sociable, and resourceful. They came over-
whelmingly from Oxford and Cambridge, where almost all of them had been 
outstanding sportsmen. As far as I can tell, ­there was not a single Irishman 
among them all the time that my ­father was in Sudan.
My ­father knew the “D.C.s” only by reputation. As a railway man stationed 
in the North and unconnected with the business of government, he had ­little 
to do with them except for the occasional visit to check the steamer ser­vice 
that extended the reach of the railways into the deep South.
As for myself, the nearest that I ever came to the watery South was the 
Khartoum Zoo. It was one of the first zoos to be designed as a safari park. I still 
remember the sight of giraffes, their preternaturally long necks swaying against 
the sky as they walked down an ave­nue of jacaranda trees. In a pool in one 
corner of the zoo ­there was a large hippopotamus taken straight from the deep 
South. At the age of three, I offered the hippo one of my most prized posses-
sions—­a Mickey Mouse handkerchief. I remember how the courteous beast 
chumbled it, with apparent satisfaction, before swallowing it with an impres-
sive opening and closing of its ­great pink mouth.
Yet it was at this time, and in southern Sudan, that one of the major break-
throughs in our modern understanding of the beliefs and practices of tribal 
socie­ties took place. As this breakthrough affected me deeply when I came to 
work on religion and society in late antiquity, I trust that the reader ­will allow 
me to sketch out the context in which it occurred.

40 
Ch apter 7
The Bog Barons: “Chunky” Willis (1881–1975)
­Those who found themselves in charge of the vast swamps of the southern 
Nile ­were called “Bog Barons.” They ­were ­little emperors in their own vast 
realms. But how much did they actually know of the world to which they had 
come? The answer is, in many (but by no means all) cases—­very ­little. While 
a thick wall of overt prejudice stood between the British and Islam in the 
northern Sudan, a screen of fantasies, as light but as opaque as the rustling 
man-­high grasses of the region, often stood between the district commission-
ers and the realities of tribal life in southern Sudan.
Take the case of Charles Armine Willis—­“Chunky” Willis. “Chunky” was 
so called ­because he had the stalwart legs of a ­great rower. He had rowed twice 
for Oxford. He had gone down from Magdalen with a third class degree. An Old 
Etonian, he was a ­great snob, proud to be the member of seven London clubs.
“Chunky” became governor of the Upper Nile in 1927. He had a favorite 
obsession. He was convinced that the cattle-­raising Nuer of his province 
­were in thrall to witch doctors—­the kujurs—­who acted as “prophets.” For 
him, the kujurs ­were the potential Mahdis of the pagan South. He thought that 
they held the tribes in the grip of religious terror; and that, at any moment, they 
might unleash a pagan holy war against British rule, as the Mahdi had once 
done in the North. ­After failing to hunt down the principal “prophet” of the 
region, “Chunky” de­cided that the Nuer had to be cowed. The RAF was con-
sulted. A few bombs would do the trick. He wanted to test what would be 
“the moral effect of the mere presence of airplanes on this primitive ­people.” 
The next bombing raid was devoted to an attempt (only partially successful) 
to flatten the ­great pyramid raised in the 1890s by Ngundeng, the ancestor of 
the most impressive of the “prophets.” It had been an astonishing monument, 
made of packed mud, sixty feet high and vis­i­ble from five miles away—­like the 
spire of a ­great cathedral—as it ­rose above the dead flat plain.6
“The Poet”: Evans-­Pritchard (1902–1973)
Fortunately, “Chunky” was not representative of all Bog Barons. But he did 
carry to extremes ideas that circulated largely unchallenged among them. It was 
­these entrenched certainties that ­were undermined by a British anthropologist 
6. Robert O. Collins, Shadows in the Grass: Britain in the Southern Sudan (New Haven, 
CT: Yale University Press, 1983), 129 and 152

Suda n 
41
usually known as “E.-­P.”—­Edward Evans-­Pritchard. Evans-­Pritchard would 
soon emerge as the brilliant founder of the British school of social anthropol-
ogy. A young man of only twenty-­five, he was summoned to clear up the mess 
created by the heated imaginations of persons like “Chunky.”
In many ways, Evans-­Pritchard was as magnificently idiosyncratic as any 
Bog Baron. He did ­things his way. This was his first venture in anthropological 
inquiry. He went in among the tribes. He drew his own conclusions from 
months of meticulous fieldwork. From 1927 onward he flickered in and out of 
the world of the governors and the district commissioners. They called him 
“the Poet.” His relations with “Chunky” ­were, predictably, abysmal: “he could 
speak of Willis only in four-­letter words.”7
Witchcraft Demystified
E.-­P.,“the Poet,” was the ­great demystifier of the South. His study of the Azande 
(the neighbors of the Nuer) showed that witchcraft was not a menace. As we 
­will see, he proved that it was a banal ­matter, part of the undramatic, day-­to-­day 
pattern of life among a highly intelligent and hardheaded ­people. It was not 
the object of craven fears on the part of mentally undeveloped “primitives,” as 
was believed by ­people like “Chunky” and, indeed, by most of the reading 
public of that time.8
This was Evans-­Pritchard’s decisive contribution. He, quite simply, removed 
a barrier of prejudice, to show a world in its full humanity, delivered, at last, 
from the ­imagined nightmares of ­those who sought to govern it.
­Little did I know, as I fed my Mickey Mouse handkerchief to the resident 
hippopotamus in the Khartoum Zoo, that, within a quarter of a ­century, I 
would be sitting opposite Evans-­Pritchard (by then professor of social an-
thropology in Oxford) in the lunchroom of All Souls College, Oxford. I owe 
to E.-­P.’s book, Witchcraft, Oracles and Magic among the Azande, an exhilarat-
ing breakthrough in my own study of sorcery in the ­later Roman Empire. But 
the book did more than that. It removed a screen for me, much as it was in-
tended to remove a screen of ignorant fear among the Bog Barons of southern 
Sudan.
7. Douglas H. Johnson, “E.-­P., the Nuer and the Sudan Po­liti­cal Ser­vice,” African Affairs 81 
(1982): 231–246, at 234.
8. E. E. Evans-­Pritchard, Witchcraft, Oracles and Magic among the Azande (Oxford: Claren-
don Press, 1937). See chapter 49: “History and Anthropology.”

42 
Ch apter 7
Reading E.-­P. for the first time (in 1967) revived in me trace memories of a 
­great fear that affected all Eu­ro­pe­ans in Sudan and elsewhere. Scattered by the 
chance of empire in lands whose inhabitants remained dangerously opaque to 
them, they constantly had to ask themselves, “What do the Natives think?” 
even “How do they think?” I now realize that ­there was a basis in the experi-
ence of my ­family and ­those around them for one of the driving forces of my 
work as a historian. This has been to remove such screens of prejudice wher-
ever I found them—to explain practices and beliefs in the distant past that 
seemed, at first sight, to be as irrational and often as repugnant as the ­imagined 
witchcraft practices of the southern Sudan. In this way, by a strange detour 
through a masterpiece generated in the swamps of the southern Nile, I gained 
a new re­spect for the poise and cunning with which ancient and medieval 
persons—­for all the world like the Nuer and the Azande, and just as much the 
objects of adverse modern prejudices—­faced the prob­lems of good and evil 
in ages very dif­fer­ent from our own.

43
8
Atbara
Life Abroad
“An Uninspired Place”: Atbara
My ­father had ­little contact with the southern Sudan. He was based in At-
bara, two hundred miles north of Khartoum, in a very dif­fer­ent world from 
the South. In any case, that wider world was closed to him by the extreme 
compartmentalization of En­glish society in Sudan. The Po­liti­cal Ser­vice (the 
colonial government) was an En­glish, almost an Oxford and Cambridge, pre-
serve. Railway personnel did not count as part of that world. They ­were held 
to be rather boring persons, who would insist on talking “shop” about en-
gines, gradients, and culverts. So my ­father was doubly excluded. He was both 
an engineer and an Irishman.
Even the system of honors in which the staff of the Sudanese Railways 
­were included (and which meant much in the intensely hierarchical world of 
government ser­vice) passed him by. As an Irish citizen he could not receive the 
OBE—­the Order of the British Empire—­that was the accustomed honorific 
“handshake” to departing railway personnel. My ­father’s brother-­in-­law and 
the sponsor of his ­career in early days, “Buggins” Bayley, was an En­glishman 
who duly received his OBE. As a child, I was reminded to be very careful to 
write “Leonard Bayley, Esquire, O.B.E.” in all my letters to him.
In a manner characteristic of En­glish rule in the colonies, my ­father was 
slotted into a compartment from which he was not expected to move. To the 
best of my memory, he never offered any opinion on the politics of Sudan 
when he returned to Ireland. He had done his job. That was enough.

44 
Ch apter 8
We lived in Atbara. Atbara was what one would call a “com­pany town”: it 
existed ­because of the railways. It lacked the imperial tone of Khartoum. In the 
words of an administrator:
Atbara was not highly regarded by the colonial ser­vice proper. It gave to 
outsiders the impression of a local patriotism and a guild fidelity jealous of 
interference. No doubt it was all the romantic stuff about the desert which 
made Atbara seem an uninspired place with its rows of neat bungalows and 
tidy gardens.1
Even in the hubbub of modern Sudan, Atbara has retained that quality. The 
Bradt Travel guidebook speaks of the Railway Quarter (where my ­father 
would have lived) with approval:
Full of neat bungalows of café au lait brick and red roof tiles along quiet 
tree-­lined ave­nues, giving it a distinctly provincial air . . . ​you could al-
most imagine yourself in Surrey, or the cantonment of some Indian colo-
nial town.2
I suspect that my parents liked it that way. Yet this orderly world was, in 
some ways, strangely insecure. The bungalows ­were owned by the Sudan Rail-
ways. In the total absence of ­hotels, their occupants ­were frequently called 
upon to put up strangers. One of the advantages of bridge, which they played 
all the time, was that they did not have to talk while playing, ­either to unknown 
guests or to persons they knew only too well.
The Cost of Abroad
Most impor­tant of all, travel to and from home was in the hands of the Sudan 
government. My ­mother’s diary for 1946 (the only one that has survived from her 
days in Sudan) gives a glimpse of what this meant. It tells a story of extreme de-
pendence on arbitrary schedules that must have been agonizing for ­those who 
wanted to enjoy as much as pos­si­ble of their leave safely back at home.
On the first stage of the long journey back to Ireland, my parents arrived by 
train in Cairo on March 26. My ­mother wrote in her diary:
1. J. E. Frost, “Memories of the Sudan Civil Ser­vice,” in The British in the Sudan, 1898–1956: 
The Sweetness and the Sorrow, ed. Robert O. Collins and Francis M. Deng (London: Macmillan, 
1984), 87.
2. Sophie Ibbotson and Max Lovell-­Hoar, Sudan, 3rd ed., Bradt Travel Guides (Chalfont 
St. Peter, Berks: Bradt Tourist Guides, 2012), 153.

Atbar a 
45
Arrived at Cairo at last.
Demonstration at station, but all went well. Checked into ­Hotel Victoria—­
breakfast, bath.
Tea at Groppi’s
What my ­mother omitted to mention was that the “Demonstration” was 
one of the greatest ever anti-­British demonstrations of the time. Ramses 
Square, outside the station, must have been a heaving sea of protesters. To go 
on to tea at Groppi, the world-­famous café and center of Cairo society, was 
­grand enough. But I notice that, when in Cairo, my parents—­maybe, I suspect, 
short of money—­always spoke of tea, but never of actually dining out. And 
then the long, uncertain wait began. They lost over a month of their leave time 
stranded in Cairo ­until a ship was available to take them to ­England. My 
­mother’s entries in the diary show rare self-­control:
April 2 Sunday. Tea at Groppi’s. Most amusing watching the crowd. Still no 
news of passage.
April 10 Tea at Groppi’s. Still no word of getting passage.
May 1 Went round to Sudan agency. Rumours of a ship on 9th but nothing 
definite.
May 2 Hear we may be out on 9th!!!
By May 13 my parents’ ship had reached Malta:
Very in­ter­est­ing, and, though it was hard to see bomb damage at first—­you 
could see it through glasses. Saw 2 submarines. Took on a Malta contingent 
for V [Victory Day] parade [the ­great parade in London in that year]. All 
ships in harbor have flags.
At last, ­after six weeks of hanging around, the journey from abroad back to 
home was ­under way. They arrived in Ireland on May 21, having spent almost 
half of their leave in transit.
And what of the “­little death” of parting when my ­father had to go back again 
to Sudan in August, at the end of his leave, leaving my ­mother and me at home?
August 7 Had bad night as Peds ­couldn’t sleep and we took him in with us. 
Poor Jimsie went off on early train [to catch the mailboat from Dún 
Laoghaire to Holyhead, and from ­there to a ship from an En­glish port].

46 
Ch apter 8
My ­mother hardly ever used this affectionate diminutive for my ­father—he 
was always Jim or J. “Abroad” had its cost. It demanded of ordinary ­people, 
like my ­mother and ­father, a constant, quiet courage—­a stoicism imposed by 
the sheer size of empire. A month ­later she joined my ­father, having left me off 
at Aravon (the boys’ school in Bray where I was a boarder):
hated leaving Peds, but he seemed alright with the other boys, poor wee 
scrap . . . ​got bus home and did [luggage] labels.
Memories
That was in 1946. By then, I had been away from Sudan for seven years. I had 
been ­there three times—in the winter seasons between November and April 
in 1936/37, 1937/38, and 1938/39. I have snatches of memory: of the huge sound 
of ship’s sirens; of bright overhead lights in passageways and dining rooms on 
board ship; of a dried gecko resting among flowers in my parents’ garden in 
Atbara; of a camel being pulled out of a ditch beside a dusty road; and of my 
­father, looking up from a veranda into a sky weighed down with stars.
Occasionally, memories would return with surprising intensity. In 1974, 
when I was in Iran, and stranded at the end of a bus line in the ­middle of the 
inner desert, I remember that I woke up at dawn to the noise of the grumbling 
of camels. I had a momentary sense of perfect ease. It was a reassuring trace 
memory of dawn in Atbara. The same ­thing happened in Cairo, a few years 
­later, when I used to go to a fleapit theater patronized by Nubians and Suda-
nese. Among ­these very large men, with their scarred ­faces and wide, white 
jibbas, I had, for a moment, a child’s sense of utter security. My ­mother’s snap-
shots show Abdu and Mursi, two Sudanese servants, hovering above me as 
surrogate nannies: perhaps I had remembered them.
Somehow, I always feel that my life began with a band of sunshine on warm 
earth. Both through my own trace memories and through the memories of my 
parents I grew up with a constant sense of the presence of the ­Middle East that 
would add an intimate dimension, a sense of affinity, to my work on the East 
Roman Empire and the rise of Islam.
Martha
The figure from abroad whom I remember best was Martha, a stately Ethio-
pian refugee who was my nanny in Sudan. In October 1935, soon ­after Air 
Marshal Balbo had delivered his reassuring message to the Khartoum Times, 

Atbar a 
47
the Italians invaded Ethiopia. Balbo’s air force bombed the towns and villages 
of the country, dropping poison gas. By May 1936 it was all over. Emperor 
Haile Selassie (1892–1975) fled to Jerusalem and then to ­England. Ethiopian 
refugees, many from the Amhara upper class, streamed into Khartoum and 
Atbara. The local Anglican church did what it could to help them. Aged three, 
I was sent to bed as a punishment for refusing to yield my stuffed panda to be 
donated to a church rummage sale in aid of the Ethiopian refugees.
This was why, in my very last stay in Sudan, from late 1938 to early 1939, I 
had Martha as my nanny. Martha—­alas, I do not even know her full name—­
came from the Amhara elite of Ethiopia. When in Khartoum, she had been 
lodged with Mr. and Mrs. Hamilton, a ­couple of African American Baptist 
missionaries, to whom she ­later referred, with ­great affection, as “my ­mummy 
and ­daddy.” The snapshots of her show a tall young ­woman of remarkable 
beauty. I have a memory of her, standing in the veranda, tall and thin, cutting 
pastry for a pie. Then, in 1939, I left for Ireland, never to return. My ­mother 
and I ­were cut off from Sudan and my ­father by the outbreak of the war: he 
stayed “abroad,” in Atbara and Port Sudan; my ­mother and I returned to 
Ireland and made the best we could of a long absence from him.
Only ­after the war did my parents receive a letter from Martha, written on 
December 13, 1945. She wrote that she had returned from a liberated Ethiopia 
to Khartoum. ­There she was told that my ­father had been drowned at sea, on 
a boat returning home. Alas, this was an all-­too-­credible story. She soon 
learned that this was not so, and received a letter from my ­mother. It is good 
to end an account of life abroad, with its many complexities and rigid barriers, 
with extracts from her reply:
Dear Mrs. Brown,
Your letter came to me ­today, bringing much joy to my anxious heart. Your 
news of Peter is very encouraging. It is hard for me to express my joy in 
writing. The picture of dear Peter is wonderful; he has grown a nice big boy. 
I won­der if he remembers Martha?
You asked what I did. Well, I just served my country. ­After your depar-
ture, [in 1939] I too bought medicine with the money ­daddy [Mr. Hamil-
ton] saved for me over £30 including your last gift of £8 for which I never 
had the opportunity to thank you. Please accept my thanks now. I pur-
chased medicine and all necessary ­things, joined a band of Patriots, and 
went by train. Then at Gedaref southeast of Khartoum, on the Sudanese 
side of the frontier, on the way that led up into the mountains of Gondar] 
we left secretly for Doka, from thence we travelled ­until we reached the 

48 
Ch apter 8
Italian Guard. About midnight we crossed their frontier and entered Ethio-
pia ­behind the Italians and ­there for 9 months we carried on a campaign of 
encouraging, healing and looking for [­after] the Patriots. My clinic was in 
the deep forest where the Italian planes could not spot us. I suffered.
[She ­later received from Haile Selassie himself three medals and the title 
“Arbanya,” ”Patriot”.]
I often think of ­little Peter, who used to tell me that he would grow up 
and fight the Italians. What I have seen of war and its bitterness I do pray 
that our dear Peter may never have to do this job over again.

49
9
Time of War
Home and Abroad in 
Time of War
“Abroad” in Time of War
From September 1939 to 1945 the war closed down the regular traffic between 
home and abroad (based on a system of annual home leaves) that had been 
one of the attractions of my ­father’s job. For five years I did not see my ­father. 
He was caught in Sudan, while my ­mother and I ­were stranded in Ireland, 
since wives and ­children ­were not allowed on the boats that sailed through 
the Mediterranean to Sudan. We settled in Bray, a seaside town south of Dub-
lin where my ­mother’s ­father, Bob Warren, the rugby footballer, still lived. 
And so I grew up in war­time Bray as an only child with a lonely ­mother on a 
lonely island.
I remember ­those years in Bray as gray and anxious in a strange sort of 
way. They ­were dominated by a sharp sense of incongruity. For ­here we 
­were, my ­mother and I, in a neutral Ireland, at a time when the hearts of all my 
­family ­were still “abroad”—­deeply implicated in the fate of an empire at war.
“A Sweet Boy”: Brian St George Daly (1908–1941)
The coming of war in 1939 revealed the extent of the social and emotional ties 
that bound thousands of Irishmen—­Catholics and Protestants alike—to the 
British armed forces. While my ­father had gone to a civilian job in Sudan, 
many members of my ­mother’s ­family (especially on her ­mother’s—­the 
Grey—­side) had followed the path that led directly to a ­career in the British 

50 
Ch apter 9
army, navy, or RAF. This was the case with my ­mother’s first cousin, Brian St 
George Daly.
Brian Daly (“Cousin Brian”) was a favorite relative of the Warren ­family. 
His ­father, Bernard Daly (known to my ­mother as “­Uncle Bernie”), was the 
stuff of ­family gossip. He had inherited from his ­father the distillery of Tulla-
more Dew whiskey. But he proved to be more a sportsman than a business-
man. He had a passion for the turf—­for polo, ­horses, and ­horse racing. It was 
said that he had once wagered the distillery on a ­horse from Tullamore (which, 
fortunately, won). He was also rumored to have been disqualified from the 
Royal Dublin Society Dog Show for having burnished the hair of his favorite 
dog with black boot polish.
Bernie’s son, my ­mother’s cousin, Brian Daly, shared his ­father’s sense of 
derring-do. At the Birmingham Oratory—an En­glish school for Catholic 
boys—­Brian and the Duke of Norfolk (who had inherited the title at the age 
of nine!) ­were said to have made their way around the ­great baroque dome of 
the Oratory on a bet, spread-­eagled on its surface at a dizzying height above 
the ground.
More impressive yet, Brian made a name for himself as a rugby football 
player in ­England. He was acclaimed as the hero of the day by a sports journal-
ist reporting the game between the two Catholic public schools, Beaumont 
and the Oratory:
Daly’s second try [goal] was the outcome of a remarkable run . . . ​but he is 
no mere runner. He knows the game. . . .
He is well-­built, tall and lithe. His home, I am told, is in one of the sub-
urbs of Dublin. . . . ​He is the best public school player I have seen this 
season.
­Here was a cousin ­after the heart of Bob Warren.
For my ­mother and her ­sisters, Brian Daly was always the favorite cousin. 
Freda pasted into her scrapbook the newspaper cutting that had praised his feats 
as a rugby football player. My ­mother always spoke of him as “a sweet boy.” 
But the empire claimed him. As soon as war was declared, Brian joined the 
Lancashire Fusiliers, as a pi­lot in the RAF squadron attached to the regiment 
during the ­Battle of France. He was killed on February 4, 1941, flying one 
of the slow and heavy Blenheim bombers (veritable flying coffins) in a raid 
on Brest.
I found touching tributes to Brian and to his ­father in the “Irishman’s Diary” 
of the Irish Times glued into a ­family ­album. Brian’s ­father, Bernard—­“­Uncle 

Time of War 
51
Bernie”—­had died only nine months before his son: he was praised as “an 
exemplar of the virtues both of the gentry and the ­people of Ireland. He was 
kindly, . . . ​possessed a ­great sense of humour, was completely devoid of class-­
consciousness, and was a ­great ­horse­man.” Now Brian too was dead, at the age 
of thirty-­one. “A friend who met him about twelve months ago . . . ​found the 
same charming, unaffected . . . ​young man, still thoroughly Irish despite his 
long years in an un-­Irish environment.”
Death and Empire
The tragedies of war ­were shared by Catholics and Protestants alike. But Irish 
Protestants experienced them in a distinctive way. The Protestantism of fami-
lies committed to the British armed forces was a religion greatly concerned 
with the commemoration of the war dead. The Roll of Honor for the war dead 
of 1914–1918 in Christ Church, Bray, bore thirty-­nine names and a Latin 
inscription:
Qui ante diem perierunt sed milites, sed pro Patria
Who died before their time—­but as soldiers; but for their Country.
Then came an En­glish phrase: “Called to a higher ser­vice.”
I remember how, in Aravon, the Protestant preparatory school to which 
I would be sent, the walls of the dormitories and of the principal halls ­were 
paneled. Each panel bore the name of an Old Aravonian—­a boy who had 
passed through the school. ­Those who served in the British armed forces 
added the names of their regiment, ship, or squadron. ­Those who died in 
action would be further distinguished. Their regimental badge would be at-
tached to the panel above their name. Only too soon, the panels became 
studded with ­these badges. It was considered bad luck if any one of us found 
himself assigned to a bed close to panels where the badges clustered too 
thickly. In this, and in so many other dif­fer­ent ways, war was right beside us in 
the midst of the strange, self-­conscious peace of a neutral country.
Altogether, death and memory ­were close to me as a boy, all the more poi-
gnantly for being experienced in a country that was not, itself, at war. Many 
years ­later, when I came to study the rise of the cult of saints in early Chris­
tian­ity, I was always touched by the huge sadness of ­great cemeteries—­the 
catacombs of Rome and the sprawling cities of the dead outside ­every Roman 
town—­and by the heroic effort, shown in thousands of late Roman grave-
stones, to overcome, by memory, the cruel face of death.

52 
Ch apter 9
A Time of Fear
For my ­mother, ­these years at Bray ­were sad years. Not only was she separated 
by war from my ­father. She also resumed the role of the unmarried youn­gest 
­daughter. She returned to “Glendair,” the ­family ­house, and took care of her 
­father, Bob Warren. ”Glendair” had a magnificent view to the west, to the 
Wicklow Mountains and the exquisitely ­shaped volcanic cones of the Big Sug-
arloaf and the ­Little Sugarloaf. The mountains brought a touch of wild, barbar-
ian beauty—­a hint of Dark Age Ireland, of forest, bog land, and steep slopes 
covered with purple heather and golden, prickly gorse, often caught in a haunt-
ing storm light—­that formed the backdrop to a stolid seaside town.
When Bob died, in 1941, “Glendair” was sold, and we moved into a succession 
of rented ­houses. I remember accompanying my ­mother, cycling vigorously 
beside her on my tricycle, ringing my bell, and proudly telling all passersby 
that my ­mummy and I ­were moving ­house.
We fi­nally settled into “Sidmonton Lodge,” a fine ­house with a garden and, 
even, an air-­raid shelter—­a sign of emergency—­tastefully covered by a heavy 
growth of bright nasturtians. “Sid. Lodge” also had a ­water barrel fed from the 
roof gutter by a downpipe. It was ­there that I played at naval war. I once reen-
acted with too much enthusiasm the Japa­nese sinking of the Prince of Wales in 
1941 (a chilling victory of new airpower over the old-­fashioned British navy). 
I sent a cigar box to the bottom of the ­water barrel ­under a stream of well-­
aimed pebbles. When I accompanied the sinking with shouts of triumph, I was 
rebuked by my ­mother with a flash of anger that showed the fears of the time. 
A Japa­nese victory was no joke.
“Abroad” was, indeed, a dangerous place. The British Empire in East Asia 
had suddenly folded ­under Japa­nese attack. Hong Kong and Singapore had 
fallen. Entire civilian populations had ended up “in the bag”—­the dry term 
used by my aunts for the horrors of internment by the Japa­nese. If this could 
happen in East Asia, it might yet happen to my ­daddy in the ­Middle East.
It was a time of fear. Occasionally, at night, I would hear the heavy thud of 
the German Condor bombers, as they made their way northward over the 
Irish Sea to strike Belfast and Liverpool. Some German bombs did fall on 
Dublin, and the sinister ­thing was that we never knew ­whether this happened 
on purpose or by accident. On the night of May 30–31, 1941, a stick of bombs 
fell on the crowded tenement ­houses of Summerhill. The raid (if it was a raid, 
and not some pi­lot’s error) was all the more frightening as it was totally 

Time of War 
53
unexpected. If it happened once, it could happen again. For a moment the Blitz 
came to Dublin.1
But I remember the raids somewhat differently. The shadows on the curtains 
that would frighten me on ­those dark nights, as the Dorniers passed by, ­were 
not, for me, the shadows of Germans—­I ­imagined them to be the shadows of 
my fellow Irishmen, the gunmen of the IRA. In many ways, I picked up from 
­those around me the sense that I was abroad and in danger in my own land. 
We could never know for sure who might be anti-­British and pro-­German. 
My ­mother would send me out alone to the barber’s with instructions:
Ask for short back and sides. Give the man a sixpence tip. Be sure not to 
talk about the war. You never know what side he’s on.
A Speech Defect
It was at this time that my stammer began to develop in a way that added to 
my poor ­mother’s anx­i­eties. To be tongue-­tied in a verbal culture, such as 
Ireland—­not to be able to answer questions, or even greetings, instantly, po-
litely, and with wit—­caused embarrassment and shame all round. In 1943, the 
Christmas report for elocution in my primary school was firm:
Peter works hard but is greatly worried by his speech defect, and ­really 
needs medical attention.
“Medical attention” was forthcoming. In the robust, all-­male manner of the 
time, the doctors declared that I was an anxious child, who had been too long 
alone with my ­mother. I needed a tougher and more manly regime. And what 
could be tougher or more manly than to be sent as a boarder to Aravon Prepa-
ratory School for Boys in Bray, presided over by Arthur Craig, known to us all 
as “the Boss”?
I suspect that the doctor often gave this advice to worried parents. He was 
not entirely wrong. Aravon was a preparatory school in the British (not the 
American) sense: a privately owned boarding school for boys between seven 
and thirteen. It was widely considered one of the few outstanding schools for 
young Protestant boys in Ireland.
1. For an eyewitness account of this incident, see Alec King in Kevin C. Kearns, Dublin 
Voices: An Oral Folk History (Dublin: Gill and Macmillan, 1998), 16–21.

54 
Ch apter 9
This took place in 1943. I have an airgraph letter (a smaller photographic 
copy of an original letter, reduced in size so as to take up less space in the mail) 
in which my ­father endeavored to hearten me in my first weeks at Aravon:
I’m sure you have a very good time, and even if every­thing ­isn’t just as good 
as you have been used to, well, that is the way of the world and ­those ­people 
are happiest who can find some good even in ­things that are largely dull or 
unpleasant.
I am glad to hear you ­were at the punch ball, learning how to sock any-
one who has to be socked.
I’m sure you’ll like the steamer I’m on at the moment, for ­there is a 
magnificent big engine room with two ­great diesel engines ­going “thump, 
thump,” in a very power­ful way, as well as other smaller engines ­going about 
their job too.
The combination of gentle, reflective advice with concrete exhortations and 
descriptions calculated to appeal to a young boy was characteristic of my 
­father. I won­der ­whether he was not, in part, addressing such consolation to 
himself. I also won­der ­whether he knew that I would need all the consolation 
I could get when confronted with the Boss.

55
10
The Boss
“The Boss”
It is not often that the headmaster of a small school for boys in Ireland should 
emerge, over half a ­century ­later, in the pages of the London Review of Books, 
as the living incarnation of all that was most horrific in the educational system 
of a cruel and distant age. Yet, discussing the brutal educational methods of 
Tudor ­England, the literary critic Michael Neill allowed himself a flashback to 
his own days at Aravon ­under the Boss—­Arthur Craig (1890–1955).
I grew up in postwar Northern Ireland and at the age of eight . . . ​I was 
loaded on to a train at Belfast Central and was shunted across the border to 
Aravon, a dismal institution . . . ​where Latin . . . ​was taught, as befitted his 
station, by the headmaster. A tall gaunt figure with a lividly scarred cheek-
bone and glittering, oddly-­skewed eyes, A. B. Craig bore a disconcerting 
resemblance to the bird of prey that punningly [A Raven: for Aravon] 
adorned the school coat of arms. Along with his twin ­brother, whose name 
we could see high up on the roll of honour, Craig had fought in the Somme: 
according to school legend a shell had landed on their platoon killing his 
twin ­brother and blowing the right side of Craig’s own face away. By the 
grace of God an ingenious surgeon had managed to patch this wound with 
the dead ­brother’s cheek. The prosthesis, however, was said to be held in 
place with a metal plate which would heat up when the old man became 
annoyed, causing him excruciating pain—­hence the rage triggered by the 
most trivial error in Latin grammar. Craig would begin his classes in a jovial 
mood, often tempting us to relax with a jokey mnemonic (“­Every ­family 
has its ­little soror”); but it would not be long before the scar would redden 
dangerously; a bungled ablative would excite roars of outrage; the strings 

56 
Ch apter 10
of the piano ­behind his desk would begin to vibrate in horrified sympathy; 
and the blows would start to fall. “Stupid, stupid boys.”1
I confess that my memory also stirred, in a similar manner, at the thought 
of the Boss. In 1990, I visited the graves of the Warren ­family in the ­little Prot-
estant cemetery at Enniskerry just outside Bray. Walking among the graves, 
I saw a massive tombstone with the ­simple inscription: A.B. Craig. I instantly 
cried out to my wife, “­Under at last!” A few days ­later, at a dinner at Trinity Col-
lege Dublin, my wife sat beside the registrar. Learning that he also had been to 
Aravon, she asked him, “Is it ­really true what ­people say about the Boss?” The 
registrar put down his knife and fork and turned to her with a serious look.
I can assure you, Mrs. Brown, that every­thing your husband has told you 
about the Boss is true—­absolutely true.
The registrar was a scientist. Even as a boy, he had observed ­these terrifying 
outbursts of rage with cool, analytic eyes. He had figured out the Boss. The 
story of the ­Battle of the Somme was a myth. Craig’s ­brother had indeed been 
killed. But he was an airman—­shot down in Mesopotamia. Craig himself had 
also been in Mesopotamia and had brought back with him, from the marshes 
of southern Iraq, a lingering malarial fever. This recurrent fever accounted for 
the violent swings of his mood. The registrar continued:
But did your husband tell you about the Hoo-­Doo page?
Apparently, the registrar explained, ­there ­were pages in the mathe­matics 
textbook that ­were particularly difficult to explain. They ­were known to insid-
ers as “Hoo-­Doo pages.” When a Hoo-­Doo page coincided with a new bout of 
malarial fever, a perfect storm of rage would ensue. On ­those occasions, his 
yells could be heard emerging from the main building of the school like the 
bellowing of a wounded bull.
Yet it was not the physical vio­lence of the Boss, or even his rages, that hurt 
me. It was the sarcasm with which he made the boys feel small and stupid. He 
insisted that mathe­matics was all a ­matter of common sense. Only babies and 
spoiled weaklings could fail to unravel its manly, grown-up certitudes. ­These 
exhortations had the effect on me of giving me a lasting suspicion of common 
sense. It was the weapon of bullies.
1. Michael Neill, “Wilderness of Tigers,” London Review of Books 37, no. 6 (March 19, 2015): 
41–44: a review of Colin Burrow, Shakespeare and Classical Antiquity (Oxford University Press, 2013).

The Boss 
57
I think that the Boss is best seen as a tragic product of the First World War. 
He was at his happiest showing lantern slides of the Gallipoli campaign. He 
enjoyed telling us how the British troops had made hand grenades out of 
empty bully-­beef tins filled with dynamite to lob at the Turks. ­Little warriors 
ourselves, we loved him for that.
The Boss was one of ­those many veterans of the First World War for whom 
church, army, and death came together in a painful knot. To lead school wor-
ship on Armistice Day (a day heavy with notions of the Higher Calling and 
the Supreme Sacrifice) was the high point of his religious life. What we never 
learned was that his own ­mother, at the age of sixty-­seven, had enlisted as a 
voluntary ambulance driver. She had been killed near Boulogne in the same 
year as his twin ­brother had died.
Conkers
Looking back, I am less surprised by the psychotic be­hav­ior of the Boss than 
by the fact that it had far less effect on the outlook and morale of the school 
than one might have expected. The reason is that the Boss, though outrageous, 
summed up impor­tant features of our education. We ­were not at Aravon to be 
nice. We ­were ­there to become ­little barbarians who throve on toughness and 
conflict. ­Every autumn we would stand beneath the row of ­great chestnut trees 
beside the school yard, throwing sticks and cricket bats up into the branches 
to dislodge the ­great chestnuts. ­These would then be hardened and pitted 
against each other in “conker-­bashing” competitions. The hardest chestnut—­
the most compact and gnarled conker—­won.
And we ourselves wished to be ­little conkers. We wanted tough bodies to 
pit against each other in fistfights and in rugby scrums. The worst insult was 
“flab”—­and, even worse, “flab baby.” In such an atmosphere, rugby football 
emerged less as a game of skill than as a test of conker-­hood. Victory went to 
the tough. Teams that allowed themselves to be beaten in too ignominious a 
manner ­were put on compulsory boxing for the remainder of the year. This 
happened notably when we ­were beaten by Catholic schools—­such as the 
local Pre­sen­ta­tion College: a legendary bunch of ­little toughs, given to brutal 
neck tackles. (Defeat at the hands of the more gentlemanly Catholic school, 
St. Gerard’s, never incurred such punishment.)
We of Aravon ­were convinced that we owed our victories to absence of 
“flab.” By contrast, Castlepark School (north of Bray, in Sandycove) was seen 
as a veritable sink of “flab.” It was known to us as “Curly Pigs,” from its initials, 

58 
Ch apter 10
C. P. “Curly Pigs” boys ­were allowed to see their mummies, aunts, and ­sisters 
­every weekend. The Boss permitted this indulgence only once a month. He 
spoke of weekend visits with ill-­veiled contempt. He called them “C.C. and 
C.”: “Cream Cakes and Cuddles.” No won­der that the Aravon XV—­hard as 
conkers and uncorrupted by female endearments—­trashed the “Curly Pigs” 
in ­every rugby game that I remember.
It is, perhaps, poetic justice on the Boss that his predictions proved him 
right in part. In ­later years, flab won out. ­Castle Park became coeducational. 
When I visited the school in 2014, charming and well-­bred ­mothers from the 
Dublin bourgeoisie ­were picking up their ­little girls in front of the school. So 
that was what Cream Cakes and Cuddles led to! It would have confirmed the 
worst suspicions of the Boss. But the Boss would not have been pleased to 
learn that Aravon, also, became coeducational and has now closed its doors—­
but not before producing Miss World for 2003!
Se­nior Teasing
Yet with all this cult of masculine toughness, ­there was ­little or no bullying at 
Aravon. The reason was one that students of the Nuer of the southern Sudan 
or of Dark Age Eu­rope would understand: the entire fabric of the school was 
held together by carefully engineered, perpetual feuds. Insult, teasing, and 
wisecracks ­were never the mono­poly of a small group of school bullies, di-
rected against a few unlucky victims. Every­body was ­doing it to every­body 
­else, all the time. I was amazed, on rereading my letters to my parents, at 
how much space I devoted to recounting with pride my achievements in 
S.T.—­“Se­nior Teasing.” Seeing that I was, at that time, only nine and most 
se­niors ­were boys of eleven or twelve, I would have thought that “Se­nior 
Teasing” was a most unadvisable activity. But no. We ­were always at it.
More than that, we ­were or­ga­nized for it. We had an “anti-­Senior General.” 
I myself headed a group known as the J.M.P.—­“The Ju­nior Military Police.” 
We worked in many dif­fer­ent ways. We engineered diversionary actions 
and, at times, direct confrontations. I kept my parents informed of ­these feats 
of strategy:
If you shout or even say “Waore!” ­he’ll get waxy [angry], and to get them 
waxy is the ­whole point of the fighting. Another way is to dash across 
the Fives Court while ­they’re playing fives. That makes them ­really waxy. The 
Se­niors ­were beaten yesterday. . . . ​Well, the J.M.P. took a ball off two 

The Boss 
59
Se­niors playing fives and they got angry and whacked an officer [of the 
J.M.P. no less!] with a racquet, but we ­were not beaten. I was chased a bit 
but escaped, we use air-­guns [BB guns], of course not real ones but small 
shoots of bamboo you put one wad of wet brown paper at each end, then 
you push one down the hole and the strength of the compressed air shoots 
one piece out with super force
Looking back, I am struck by this prevalence of low-­level feuding without 
outright bullying, and also by our zest for forming oppositional groups—­
subversive militias staffed by ranked officers, committed to bringing off 
carefully planned operations. Maybe ­there was something in the air of postin­
de­pen­dence Ireland that added an extra frisson to the ­little wars of ­little boys. 
The model of the competing militias of the Irish War of In­de­pen­dence and the 
Irish Civil War lay somewhere in the background of our imagination.
“Brownus Hits Cornishum”:  
Learning Latin from a Poet
Despite its many idiosyncrasies, Aravon was a serious academic establishment. 
It prepared boys for the Common Entrance Examination. This was a test for 
entrance to the public schools of the United Kingdom and Ireland, taken at 
the age of eleven. (American readers must bear with me if I stick to En­glish 
usage: by “public schools” I mean long-­established, private boarding schools 
for boys over thirteen.) Preparation started early and the pace was intense. 
I came to Aravon at the age of eight as a total illiterate. In my first spelling test, 
I could spell only one word—­JAM.
­Little did I know it, but this spelling test was the first of a succession of exami-
nations that would determine ­every step of my ­career ­until the age of twenty-­one. 
By the age of ten, I was already deep into Latin, French, history, and geography 
(but no science), all in preparation for the Common Entrance Examination. 
From then onward, from exam to exam, the pace never slackened.
The teachers who guided us in this brisk forced march of learning ­were a 
mixed bunch. Private schools such as Aravon ­were ­human bird sanctuaries. 
Some teachers ­were local figures. They held part-­time teaching assignments as 
a form of outdoor relief (welfare). Mr. Monk Gibbon (known as “Gubb-­Gubb”) 
was one such gentleman down on his luck. He was a travel writer, who ­later 
wrote a Batsford travel book on the baroque churches of Austria. He was also 
a poet; and not only was he a poet—he was also a cousin of W. B. Yeats. As we 

60 
Ch apter 10
have seen, he was permanently aggrieved that his distinguished relative had 
not included any of his poems in the famous Oxford Book of Modern Verse.
Monk Gibbon made a point of coming to Aravon only on Fridays. It was 
known why he did so. As a Protestant school, we refused to eat fish on Fridays, 
as the Catholics did. Instead, Irish stew was served for lunch. And the Friday 
Irish stew was the best meat dish of the week. Well-­fed, Monk Gibbon would 
then proceed to conduct what he considered to be a Latin lesson.
Latin [he told us] is all about endings. Yes: that’s it . . . ​endings. Nominative 
ending and accusative ending.
Brown! Hit Cornish!
This was a bad turn for the lesson to take. Cornish, who sat beside me, was a 
boy of conker toughness. Such a blow would not remain unavenged ­after class. 
Knowing that I would sign my own death warrant by striking him, I gave Cor-
nish a hesitant tap.
­There you are! [Monk Gibbon continued] Brownus hits Cornishum. That’s 
it. Nominative Brownus. Accusative Cornishum. ­There you have it!
Wherewith the poet wrapped his thick tweed coat more tightly around him, 
placed his feet on the stove that warmed the classroom, and settled down into 
his armchair as if for a good sleep. It was not, perhaps, the best introduction 
to a classical tongue.
The Border and the Uses of Geography
Cyril Ward, our geography teacher, was very dif­fer­ent. With a thin, white face and 
a bushy, almost Edwardian, jet-­black moustache, and the upper pocket of his 
light-­green tweed jacket stuffed with colored pens, he seemed the model teacher. 
But he, too, had his eccentricities. He came from county Down in Northern 
Ireland. That is, he came from the wrong, the northern, side of the border that 
separated an enclave of British rule from the ­free republic of the South.
That was how Mr. Ward saw it. He was a fierce Irish nationalist. He was even 
said to have learned Irish—­a rare achievement for a teacher in a Protestant 
private school. The heavy-­handed insistence on the compulsory teaching of 
Irish in the state schools of the Republic made Irish repugnant to most of us. 
Ignorance of Irish was a sign of our in­de­pen­dence, as a private school, to which 
we clung with a stubbornness that I now regret. His reputed knowledge of 
Irish cast an aura of difference around Cyril Ward.

The Boss 
61
Ward was not allowed to teach Irish. Instead, he taught The Border by 
teaching geography. In his opinion, the border between the republican South 
and the Six Counties of the North, where British rule prevailed, was no ordi-
nary frontier. It was an open wound inflicted on the natu­ral unity of the island. 
So we would learn to trace the exact shape of that wound. Armed with two 
pens—­one green, for the side of the South; and one bright red—an En­glish red: 
the red of Redcoats—­for the side of the North—we would draw The Border 
in its full, complex iniquity. It was impor­tant to know where was where: that 
Armagh was in the North, while Monaghan was in the South; that the iniqui-
tous ­thing (no respecter of natu­ral bound­aries) snaked through the ­middle of 
Lough Melvin and Lough Macnean; and that, paradoxically, county Donegal, 
the northernmost county of the island, was in the South. Taught by Cyril Ward, 
geography was a lesson in civic virtue, seen through southern Irish eyes.
Col­o­nel Blimp—­Aravon Style
The massive demobilization of 1945 brought yet stranger ­human flotsam to 
Aravon. Col­o­nel Lockhart—we never knew his Christian name—­came from 
India. He had served in the Indian army. Given the fact that many of the boys’ 
parents ­were still abroad, working in the territories of the empire, the arrival 
of an au­then­tic representative of the British Raj was more than welcome. And 
Col­o­nel Lockhart looked the part. With bristling moustache and plump fea-
tures, he was set to be the Col­o­nel Blimp of Aravon.
But ­things ­were not quite as they appeared. Col­o­nel Lockhart was no Col­
o­nel Blimp. He had returned from India a convinced Marxist and an ardent 
supporter of Mahatma Gandhi. We soon realized that we had yet another odd 
man out among us. We boys might have shrugged Col­o­nel Lockhart off as a 
bit of a crank. Except for one ­thing. He knew all about tigers. He had seen 
them. He had hunted them. He had brought with him from India the works 
of James Corbett, the ­great spinner of tales about tigers. He would hold us 
spellbound at bedtime, reading The Man-­Eaters of Kumaon.
Mitteleuropa . . . ​or Worse
But, among the rare birds that came our way, Col­o­nel Lockhart was quite 
outshone by Mr. Bowlby. Charles Bowlby (1911–1959) was the most mysteri-
ous of the new arrivals. Apparently, he had emerged from Admiral Horthy’s 
Hungary. He brought with him a tantalizing whiff of Mitteleuropa—of Central 

62 
Ch apter 10
Eu­rope. He was multilingual. When he read to us The Three Musketeers of 
Alexandre Dumas, he would pronounce the names of the protagonists with a 
perfect French accent. ­These alien sounds rolled off his tongue, with hypnotic 
ease, while Col­o­nel Lockhart—­for all his tiger lore—­mangled the names of 
heroes and villains alike whenever he read the works of Dumas to us.
Bowlby was handsome and ferociously athletic. He could kick a rugger ball 
like a cannon shot. He ­later lived up to this prowess as a sportsman by found-
ing the Leprechauns—­a cricket club devoted to raising the standard of ama-
teur cricket throughout Ireland, which is still active ­today.
And Mr. Bowlby knew his Eu­ro­pean history. He covered the blackboard 
with beautifully drawn maps and genealogical trees, drawn in dif­fer­ent colored 
chalks, conjuring up empires and dynasties of which we knew ­little from our 
En­glish textbooks.
Most impor­tant of all, Bowlby set my imagination alight. He did this not 
only by opening the door to wider worlds. He also treated me as a mind. For all 
his athletic commitment, he was uncompromisingly intellectual. Even if I 
was not an athlete, he told me, I did not need to worry about being a “flab.” I did 
not have to be good at games. I did not even have to worry about my stammer. 
It ­didn’t ­matter. “You have a brain.”
Bowlby lived up to his challenge to me to use my brain. He made sure that 
I enrolled to compete for the Townsend Warner Prize in 1947. This was a prize 
to be won by an examination in British history. The competitors came from 
all the preparatory schools in Britain and Ireland. I was the only Irish boy to 
receive mention. It was Bowlby who ensured that I emerged from Aravon with 
confidence that I had a brain.
But I also emerged with something of a prob­lem. The more we paid atten-
tion to Mr. Bowlby’s history lessons, the more we realized that, somehow, 
Mr. Bowlby’s modern Eu­rope was not our modern Eu­rope. He seemed strangely 
unmoved by the certitudes for which my parents had fought in the past six 
years. He suggested that the war was started by the obstinacy of the Poles over 
Danzig. He reminded us that concentration camps ­were in­ven­ted by the 
British during the Boer War. ­These occasional throwaway remarks struck a 
strange note. But, if anything, they served only to heighten Mr. Bowlby’s cha-
risma as a historian and a connoisseur of Eu­rope.
Looking back, I had thought (too charitably, it now appears) that Bowlby 
must have been one of ­those young men whose romanticism had drawn 
him to Eastern Eu­ro­pean and Balkan countries, with their fascist and anti-­
Semitic ele­ments. But then my wife discovered on the internet an article on 

The Boss 
63
Bowlby written by Charles Lysart in “An Irishman’s Diary” in the Irish Times 
of February 16, 2009.
What I read put an entirely dif­fer­ent and more sinister face on the ­whole 
story. Bowlby had arrived in Ireland one step ahead of the hangman. He had 
been a colleague of William Joyce (1906–1946)—­the odious “Lord Haw-­
Haw”—­who had regularly broadcast propaganda for Hitler’s Germany. Having 
hanged Joyce, who claimed to have been born in Galway—­and so to be ex-
empt from British justice—­the British ­were no longer interested in Bowlby. 
In Lysart’s words, they “had no stomach for a wrangle” on the liability of Irish 
citizens to British justice. To hang one putative Irishman was enough. The 
sooner Bowlby was forgotten, the better.
It turns out that the Boss had learned about Bowlby’s past from an article 
in the Daily Mail. He was appalled. He did the right ­thing, by ­going straight to 
Sir John Maffey—­the British representative to Ireland. He was told to do and 
say nothing; and that he should keep Bowlby. The Boss did so willingly. For 
Bowlby was an inspired teacher: I was only one of ­those many who had been 
turned on to the study of history by him. His shady war­time past was kept a 
total secret from parents and pupils alike.
The saga of Bowlby continued. It was a sad one. He left Aravon to found a 
new school. It failed, amid noxious tales of embezzlement and sexual harass-
ment. He died of Hodgkin’s disease in London in 1959. The Leprechauns, how-
ever, had taken off. None other than Sir John Maffey (who must have known 
about Bowlby’s past from the Boss’s visit to him) signed up as a member. 
Shameless to the last, Bowlby even suggested that the Leprechauns should 
celebrate the coronation of Elizabeth II in 1953, by displaying the colors red, 
white, and blue on their fixture card. His fellow members overruled him.
We knew ­little or nothing of this in 1945. But what I had picked up would 
stand me in good stead as a historian. To listen to Col­o­nel Lockhart’s Marxist 
take on the British Raj, juxtaposed with the insidious fascist vision of 
Mr. Bowlby, had already laid the foundations for me of a robust sense of his-
torical relativism. I saw that it was pos­si­ble to look at the same historical events 
from very dif­fer­ent ­angles. This was a lesson that I would carry with me, ­after 
1945, when I left Bray for the less sheltered, more troubled world of Dublin.

64
11
Dublin Days
“Number Sixt y”
“Number Sixty”
In April 1945, my ­mother joined my ­father in Sudan. I moved from Bray to 
Dublin, to live at no. 60 Lansdowne Road—­“Number Sixty”—­with my ­father’s 
­mother and ­sister. ­There I stayed for two years.
Number Sixty was a tall terrace ­house. It stood next to the end of the ter-
race. Then came the railway line, and then the ­great rugby football stadium of 
Lansdowne Road, the site of the glories of Bob Warren. Vast crowds would 
converge to watch major matches, both national and international, filling the 
­house with huge, excited noise ­every Saturday.
But the railway that ran between “Number Sixty” and the stadium was 
equally exciting. It was the line along which the Cork Express would hurtle at 
night. ­Every eve­ning, Rory the dog (of whom more anon) would jump up 
from the fireside with a premonitory woof. Bursting through the kitchen, he 
would hurl himself headlong down the steep staircase into the garden, all four 
paws raising a clatter like a machine gun as he slid down the wooden steps, so 
as to rush up and down the garden barking wildly. Then, honor satisfied, he 
would return with self-­satisfied panting. Once again, he had seen the monster 
off his premises.
The ­house was full of memories. It was reassuring to find that ­there was no 
misdeed that a ­little boy of ten might commit that had not been committed 
before him, in this very ­house, by his ­father and ­uncle. Jessie Brown, my 
­father’s ­mother (the Mater) was a quiet but resolute presence. She seemed to 
spend most of her time in the kitchen, making soda bread by hand alone—­
throwing the ingredients together without the use of a single mea­sur­ing cup. 

Dublin Days 
65
Large mutton roasts would appear on Sundays. We would have cold meat for 
the rest of the week, served with delicious chutneys. The Mater would distrib-
ute huge lumps of fat—­pure white, like alabaster—­with the exhortation “Fat. 
Food for angels!” (When ­later I recounted this anecdote to diet-­conscious 
friends in California, they broke out into helpless laughter.)
Auntie Mai
Auntie Mai was granite. Her rough complexion (she may have suffered from 
a skin disease when young) was all of a piece with her gruff voice and rugged 
opinions. She was an unflappable and deeply reassuring presence. Her de-
mands ­were precise and mercifully delimited. I should write immediately to 
answer letters and to thank for birthday pre­sents. I should wash my teeth in 
hot ­water. Above all, I should “mind my p’s and q’s.” When out for a walk or 
in Dublin, I should raise my cap to ­those to whom I should raise my cap. Who 
­these ­were, she never made plain. She just took for granted that I would know. 
In fact, I did know, instinctively, which of the unpretentiously dressed ladies 
and gentlemen (whom I encountered anywhere: in the ­middle of a Dublin 
bookshop, on top of a bus, or along the banks of the river Dodder) ­were 
known to “Number Sixty.” Apart from this, my conscience was ­free.
Her remedies, also, ­were straightforward. Milk of magnesia was a sure an-
swer to the ills of the heart. When my stammer distressed me, or when I felt 
weepy, Auntie Mai was un­perturbed. Milk of magnesia and a good rest would 
see me through. I spent happy years at “Number Sixty,” unburdened by anxi-
ety. Milk of magnesia was ­there, in a medicine cupboard in a bathroom where 
hot ­water streamed from large brass taps, and the wooden walls of the bath 
smelled more strongly of disinfectant ammonia and health-­giving pine than 
any bathroom I have ever known.
Auntie Mai’s Christmas parties ­were the crowning achievement of her be-
nevolent despotism. Coming from Bray and an only child, I had no friends in 
Dublin. So Mai would summon friends. I would be presented with a list of 
suitable boys and girls, most of whom ­were totally unknown to me: “Linette 
Sinclair. A nice girl. I play bridge with her ­mother.”
The parties ­were invariably successful. Jellies of rare shades ­were served. 
Sweets appeared, made from tinned peaches ingeniously disguised as poached 
eggs. The side rooms of the ­great entrance hall ­were perfect for hide-­and-­seek. 
The darkness into which the stairs led upward to the bedrooms formed a 
spooky backdrop to the game of “Murder.”

66 
Ch apter 11
The secret of all this was Aunt Mai’s trifle. The ­daughter of a stern teetotaler, 
Mai did not drink. But she would lace her trifles with so generous a dose of 
sherry that all of us, ­children and attendant grown-­ups alike, soon became 
voluble and pink with plea­sure.
Aunt Mai was very much the product of a Victorian ­family. The unmarried 
­daughter, she had stayed at home to look ­after her parents. Her ­father—­the 
Bear—­had died in 1937; but the Mater continued to rule her with a quiet but 
indomitable ­will. Mai loved ­music. She would listen on the radio to 
Beethoven—­whom she resolutely pronounced “Beat-­oven”—­for long periods 
and very loud, for the benefit of the Mater, who was hard of hearing. Indeed, 
I always remember her as surrounded with magnificent, classical noise. Amid 
Mai, Beethoven, and the Mater, I needed no elocution lessons to teach me to 
“speak up” or to fill my lungs. Instead of having to break silence with uncertain 
words, I found myself bawling like a ship’s captain on the high seas. It did my 
stammer a world of good.
Mai was not a ­great reader. But she respected books. She ran the patients’ 
library at Sir Patrick Dun’s Hospital. She encouraged me to sink into reading 
­matter of ­every kind. When, in ­later years, I was asked for whom I wrote, I would 
answer immediately, “For my aunts.” This was not a flippant answer. I wanted 
to write for Auntie Mai—­for persons like her, who had received a good high 
school education but had not continued to the university. This was as true for 
men as for ­women. My ­father was the only member of his ­family who had gone 
on from school to university—to Trinity College Dublin. But such ­people 
knew good books when they saw them (just as, like Mai, they knew good 
­music). In the distinctive atmosphere of Dublin, books and the writing of 
books ­were constantly talked about; and the role of teachers and authors as 
spreaders of useful knowledge was respected even in the most seedy of indi-
viduals. As a result, the idea of writing for an ­imagined public came naturally 
to me from this time onward.
Teedah
No two aunts could have been more dif­fer­ent than my aunt Mai and my aunt 
Teedah—­Freda Warren, my ­mother’s ­sister. Freda was the ­middle ­sister, and 
my ­mother the youn­gest. The oldest, Vivyenne—­Aunt Vivy—­had vanished 
abroad. She had married Walter Revell, an able and courageous British officer 
in the Engineer Corps, who had earned the DSO (the Distinguished Ser­vice 
Order) in the First World War. Vivy was good for an annual letter, usually 

Dublin Days 
67
accompanied by a hilarious poem. A strident ­woman and more En­glish than 
the En­glish, she frightened my ­mother.
Teedah, by contrast, was the sweet and worldly-­wise aunt. She had opted 
early for in­de­pen­dence. She trained as a secretary. Her skills placed her at the 
center of an entire network of well-­placed and diverse persons in Dublin. She 
supported the well-­known Dublin doctor Tom Wilson (1901–1969) as his ap-
pointment secretary. “Miss Warren” was a name to conjure with. She was even 
mentioned and praised in the annual pantomime at the Gaiety Theatre by 
none other than the ­great Dublin comic Jimmie O’Dea (1899–1965). He was 
the cameo Irishman—­rather, the Irishwoman: for he played Biddie Mulligan 
of Ballygobackwards on Irish Hour on the BBC. But at the Gaiety he was the 
au­then­tic voice of Dublin. He would often come up with a witty “call out” for 
Teedah.
Teedah, also, was the tolerant aunt. Her move to Dublin had taken her out 
of the narrow cubicles in which the Warrens of Bray and the Browns of Lans-
downe Road ­were both, in their dif­fer­ent ways, enclosed. She was pointedly 
loyal to her Jewish doctor, Dr. Abrahams. She kept in close contact with the 
­family of her Catholic cousin Brian Daly. Her very best friend was a lady from 
Athlone who had converted to Catholicism. Not only did Teedah serve for years 
in the Society for Distressed Gentlefolk. She also did good by stealth to many 
families. When I attended her funeral on an icy day in February 1984, I was as-
tonished to find, at the back of the church, a weeping ­woman. She had been one 
of the many recipients, over the years, of “Miss Warren’s kindnesses.”
For me she was the indulgent aunt. While Mai was of granite, Teedah was 
“Cream Cakes and Cuddles” incarnate. ­Every month, Teedah would drive 
down from Dublin to Aravon in her ­little Austin Mini to take me out for a 
Sunday lunch and tea. We would park by the seaside, immune to the rain in 
the comfortable leather upholstery of the Mini. She would read to me the 
wickedly ironic short stories of “Saki” (H. H. Munro).
Above all, Teedah had the gift for encouraging men of all ages to show off 
unashamedly in her presence. She drew me out—­a ­little boy full of news and 
views from Aravon and Lansdowne Road. I remember her now: with a ciga-
rette in one hand and a glass of sherry in the other, her legs crossed with a hint 
(to which my ­mother drew attention, with a certain envy) of French silk lin-
gerie. The chair in which she sat—­a low chair, suited to her rather dumpy 
figure—is the one that I still use to read and take notes on a board placed 
across its two long arms, close enough to the floor to enable me to reach down 
for the books piled at its feet.

68 
Ch apter 11
A Totemic Dog: Rory
Rory was my aunt Mai’s dog. For me he was more than a dog. He was a sibling 
and a totemic beast. He was a mongrel, the result of an amorous encounter 
between a pedigree spaniel and a Labrador. That meant, in Irish terms, that 
Rory was the product of that most charged of liaisons—­a mixed marriage. He 
was, indeed, a striking mixture. His ears went up, and then drooped softly. His 
tail was as covered with fine hair as a fly whisk. He had a beard like a Chinese 
dragon. He had bandy legs that combined soft, woolly flanks with robust, 
gnarled forelegs. He was more than a dog to me. He was a link to the rough 
earth of Ireland. But what was that Ireland like?

69
12
Who’s What?
Identities
“You Know Where He Is . . .”
On April 30, 1945, Adolf Hitler committed suicide. That same morning, I had 
lost my front tooth while roller skating, and on the next day, May 1, my aunt 
Freda (Teedah to me) took me to the dentist in Dublin.
We took the number 8 bus, which passed the German embassy at 58 North­
umberland Road. On that day, the huge black swastika, set in a white circle on 
a ­great crimson drape, was flying at half-­mast above the door of the embassy. We 
­were on the top of the bus, so we passed this obscene ­thing at eye level. ­There 
­were murmurs all around the bus. But my aunt Freda was cautious. In neu-
tral Ireland, one never quite knew what ­others thought about Britain and the 
Reich. It was safer not to show too much jubilation. Freda leaned ­toward me 
and whispered to me in a low voice, “You know where he is, Peds.” I answered, 
“Indeed I do, Auntie.” It was my first lesson in spiritual geography: Hitler 
was in Hell.
Neutrality
My aunt Freda had better reasons than I knew to have lowered her voice on that 
bus. She had been directly involved in a serious breach of neutrality on behalf 
of British airmen. She was secretary to Dr. Thomas Wilson, a notable eye, 
ear, and throat doctor who played a major role in setting up an “under­ground 
railway.” British airmen who had been forced to land in Ireland ­were in-
terned (as part of the neutrality policy of states such as Ireland, Switzerland, and 

70 
Ch apter 12
Sweden during the war). Tom helped ­these airmen to escape from the intern-
ment camp in the Curragh, and to make their way back to British territory by 
crossing the border into Northern Ireland. He was discovered and convicted 
in 1942.
While ­under threat of a jail sentence (which was ­later suspended), he fin-
ished a biography of the famous Dublin physician Sir William Wilde, who was 
the ­father of Oscar Wilde. It was called Victorian Doctor and was illustrated by 
copper engravings made by Tom himself. Always something of a mystery man, 
Tom was rumored to be the illegitimate son of Oscar Wilde. Freda had a copy 
of Victorian Doctor. In it, Tom Wilson had written,
To Freda Warren, My friend in adversity.
As his secretary, Freda had loyally kept his practice ­going in ­those difficult 
years, and may well have had a hand in helping the escape of the British 
airmen.
Where Did I Belong?
By 1945, at the age of ten, I was already affected by the tension between my 
­father’s involvement in the war in Sudan and the strangely sheltered atmo-
sphere of a neutral Ireland. It made me won­der where I was and who I was. 
Many young ­children have ­these feelings. But the form they took was specific 
to my own situation.
For instance, I now learned that I was a “native” of Ireland. But I had read 
that “natives” ­were dangerous creatures, and prone to “risings.” The Handbook 
of the Anglo-­Egyptian Sudan of 1922 listed thirteen such risings between 1901 
and 1916, and added ten more recent ones in an appendix.
The number of ­these fanatics, petty as many of the “risings” seem, justifies 
the unsleeping vigilance of the government.1
But we in Ireland had mounted any number of “risings” against British rule. 
­These had culminated in the Rising—­the “Easter Rising” of 1916; and we ­were, 
by and large, almighty proud of it. I needed only to travel on the top of a bus 
past the General Post Office, which had been the center of the famous Easter 
Rising of 1916, to be impressed (as small ­children tended to be) by the bullet 
holes that riddled the ­great allegorical figures in bronze which flanked the 
1. A Handbook of the Anglo-­Egyptian Sudan (Naval Staff Intelligence Division, 1922), 178.

W ho’s W h at? 
71
monument to Daniel O’Connell, making their ample bosoms look like 
colanders.
So where did I belong? And, above all, how much did I belong and to what? 
The notion of “fidelity to the nation” (a catchword in nationalist circles in 
Ireland at this time) seemed to imply a disturbingly open-­ended commitment. 
What did it ­really mean? For members of the Protestant minority in the Re-
public (that self-­conscious 5 ­percent) it always posed a prob­lem. How Irish did 
we have to be to be authentically “Irish”? Did we have to speak Irish (or at least 
attempt to learn it)? Did we have to have an au­then­tic “Irish” accent? Last of 
all, did we even have to abandon our Protestant religion in order to be ac-
cepted, by our fellow countrymen, as “real” Irish—­that is, as Catholics?
­Every time I got on a bus, I faced ­these issues in miniature. When I wanted 
to get to the center of the city, would I ask for a ticket to “Nelson’s Pillar” (the 
original En­glish name of the high pillar that bore a statue of Lord Nelson) or 
simply to “the Pillar”? Would I be able to ask for it in a homely, flat Dublin 
accent? Or would my attempts to avoid a stammer by speaking slowly and with 
careful enunciation come out as a high-­pitched, “hoity-­toity” En­glish voice? I 
found myself as if walking on stilts, perched above the “real” soil of Ireland, 
confined by my squeaky voice and the cramp across the chest caused by my 
stammer. I was a permanent “not quite.”
“Are Cowboys Catholics?”
Altogether, I grew up in a world where religion was still a primary identity. My 
map of society was structured with all-­embracing precision around the binary 
of Catholic and Protestant. ­Every person had to be fitted onto that map. So 
what about cowboys? My ­mother had presented me, at the age of four, with a 
box of tin cowboys. I, in turn, dropped her a heavy hint: would she, perhaps, 
like a cowboy outfit for her next birthday? I wanted to be a cowboy; but, before 
I could fully identify with ­these wild men, I had to know one ­thing: ­were they 
Catholics or Protestants? Nobody could tell me.
The binary also passed through the animal world. The dog in the ­family mill 
in Dublin, which my ­father came to manage ­after his return from Sudan, was 
known as “the Protestant dog.” For it would howl when the bells of the neigh-
boring Catholic church tolled the Angelus at midday. Not even our cat was 
immune from suspicion. It would come in to us ­after its long sleep among the 
warm pine ­needles of a neighboring wood, smelling suspiciously of incense. 
Had the cat gone to Mass?

72 
Ch apter 12
Such anecdotes make good stories. But it was just as well that I knew noth-
ing of the tragedy of my poor aunt. Like the granite outcrops washed by the 
waves along the coast of Dublin, the religious prejudices of Ireland seemed, 
most of the time, to be reassuring rather than oppressive. They ­were rock 
firm. You knew where you stood. But the warm stone dropped into chill 
depths, where seaweed and slime gathered in a ­bitter sea. For both sides, active 
intolerance, rather than simply separation, was always just round the corner.
My sense of the power of religion in society dates from ­those Dublin days. 
Coming to ­England as a schoolboy and ­later as a student, I was surprised by 
the genteel oblivion to religion that seemed to be widespread at the time, in 
contrast to the ethos of Ireland. I remained puzzled, and increasingly frus-
trated, by finding a similar underestimating of religion as a social force in many 
of the teachers of history in Oxford. It was against what struck me as this cozy 
attitude that I would direct much of my work in ­later years.

73
13
The Modern World
The Modern World
On August 8, 1945, Japan surrendered, ­after the dropping of atomic bombs on 
Hiroshima and Nagasaki. The news came when I was in the stadium of the 
Royal Dublin Society Horse­show, watching the horse-­jumping competitions. 
It takes some effort to remember what it was like when news was tied so 
closely to place. ­Those away from their home radio depended on the eve­ning 
newspapers for news of the day.
At the end of the after­noon, as the events ­were about to wind down, ­there 
was a sudden murmur at the bottom end of the stadium. The eve­ning newspa-
pers had arrived with the news of Japan’s surrender. A wave of sound started 
from that one corner and spread, like a gust of the wind across a wheat field, 
­until it engulfed the entire stadium.
It was a memorable moment. Looking back, I realize that I had witnessed 
one of the last examples of a phenomenon that reached back to Rome and 
Byzantium—­the sudden swell of ­human sound across a gathering assem-
bled in a hippodrome. For the remainder of the summer, I would stand on the 
rocks at the edge of the sea, satisfying a small boy’s zest for big bangs, by drop-
ping flat stones into the ­water, in the hope of producing mushroom-­shaped 
splashes.
Like many persons of the time, I thought that, with the surrender of Japan, 
a bucolic peace would descend on the world. The sports news would move 
to the front page of the newspapers. Instead, the newspapers came to be filled 
with gray news, particularly disturbing to ­those with a stake in the world “abroad.” 
From Hong Kong to India, the British Empire rapidly unraveled. Strange ­peoples, 
led by leaders with strange names, pushed their way into the headlines.

74 
Ch apter 13
For Christmas 1947, my parents gave me a subscription to The Sphere, a 
weekly photojournal of a new sort. With its high quality black-­and-­white 
photo­graphs, The Sphere was my entry point to the modern world. It caught 
the ambiguities of the immediate postwar period. Sinister blurred photos of 
emergent Communist dictators in Eastern Eu­rope ran side by side with group 
portraits of the royal ­family still shining in full regalia, and with images of the 
most modern of modern objects: streamlined cars; airplanes on the threshold 
of the jet age; buildings with curved walls, their façades consisting of portholes 
and sheets of glass.
My absorption of The Sphere marked a change for me. I was less a schoolboy 
and more a solitary reader. Classes continued. The Boss still roared. Bowlby 
still inspired. But what I remember best was settling into my bed, now in the 
attic bedroom at the very top of “Number Sixty,” looking out on the lights of 
central Dublin and the Liffey Dockland, and reading, with a torch beneath the 
blankets, long ­after lights ­were supposed to be off, sad tales of the modern 
world: Germany Puts the Clock Back by Edgar Mowrer and Hiroshima by John 
Hershey.
Entirely to one side of my Aravon curriculum (where no science was 
taught), I became a ­little scientist. When my cousins, Jennifer and Alison, 
visited us from Scotland, we would share our knowledge of dangerous 
substances:
Jennifer, I, and Alison do lots of chemistry, we are trying to make gunpow-
der and are trying hard to make gunpowder and are not being successful. 
Auntie Mai hopes we ­aren’t and we hope we are.
Alas, we ­were. We burned a hole into the hearth rug of the drawing room.
This change of interest owed much to my ­father. He could now return 
on yearly leave from Sudan. I loved the engineer in him. He would explain 
the workings of his railway lines, and how the old piston engine differed from the 
modern diesel. He had seen the very first jet planes being tested in the desert 
in Sudan. He showed me his plans for complex railroad constructions drawn 
up with exquisite draftsmanship. He was, indeed, an engineer’s engineer.
Altogether, my ­father now came to sum up for me another side of Irish 
Protestant culture—­the rational, Enlightenment side that had produced ­great 
scientists. For instance, ­there was the famous mathematician Sir Rowan 
Hamilton (1805–1865), the director of Dunsink Observatory in Dublin and 
discoverer of Hamiltonian mechanics. We could still see where Hamilton had 
carved the formula for quaternion equations on Portobello Bridge, when it 

The Moder n Wor ld 
75
came to him on a walk along the Dublin Canal. (He was said to have intuited 
the mathe­matics necessary to predict the trajectory of moving objects—­a 
mathe­matics that proved crucial to the development of antiaircraft gunnery 
in the Second Word War—by watching the young ladies of Dublin playing the 
daring new game of tennis.)
Astronomy
Most impor­tant of all, my ­father lent me his binoculars to do stargazing when 
on holiday at Portsalon, in Donegal. For the first time, I viewed the moons of 
Jupiter. It was an extraordinary experience. I was no longer looking at Jupiter. 
With the aid of a pair of eight-­magnification binoculars, I was looking into the 
satellite system of the planet. I could almost feel the distances on which Jupiter 
and its moons floated in the depths of space.
I read The Stars in Their Courses, a history of modern astronomy, by Sir 
James Jeans (1877–1946). I also discovered, in the ­hotel at Portsalon, older 
books of astronomy. In them, the new discoveries of the immensity of the 
universe and complexity of the galaxies ­were still presented, in a thoroughly 
Victorian manner, as evidences of the majesty of God’s Creation. By 1950 I was 
reading far more daring stuff. The Nature of the Universe, by Fred Hoyle (1915–
2001), delivered on the famous BBC Radio 4 (the cultural and scientific pro-
gram, which was very much the voice of rationalist, progressive ­England), took 
me to the edge. Could I ­really imagine (as Hoyle encouraged me to do, in his 
last pages) that our universe itself was only one of many? Could I accept that 
it differed in no way from the newly discovered mini-­universes of atomic par-
ticles? Indeed, our own galaxy might be just that. I speculated that it might 
even be an atomic particle in the leg of a very big dog, barking (I presumed, 
like Rory) in outer space. Seen in this way, from the viewpoint of the universe, 
the vertigos of difference that separated natives from residents abroad, neutral 
Irish from British and Germans, and even Protestants from Catholics, sud-
denly appeared to be mercifully insignificant.
­Little did I know it, but I was on the edge of a decision that would have 
altered the entire course of my ­future ­career. I had intended to opt for science 
when I went on to my next school on leaving Aravon. Science had the addi-
tional attraction for me that it seemed to be an easier ­career for me, given my 
stammer: it did not demand public speaking to such an extent as would law, 
teaching, or membership of the clergy. Given the rigidity of the school systems 
in Ireland and ­England, this choice would have led to almost immediate 

76 
Ch apter 13
specialization in science at the expense of arts subjects, such as languages or 
history. But my low per­for­mance in mathe­matics exams—­for I had been lam-
entably taught by the Boss—­ruled this out. Astronomy would remain a hobby 
for me, and not the way into a scientific ­career.
Invalided Out
Looking back on the years immediately ­after the war, I am a ­little uncertain as 
to the exact chronology of impor­tant events. My parents and I ­were more often 
together, and so ­there was no need for the regular correspondence that I can 
now use to date events in the war­time years. But the reason for this blurring 
was deeper. Developments ­were taking place that ­were totally hidden from 
me by my parents. ­After years of strain in war­time, my ­father’s health had 
collapsed.
During the war, my ­father was responsible for maintaining the crucial link 
between Port Sudan and Atbara, and equally the link between Atbara and the 
rest of Sudan. It was a new burden for him. As long as the Mediterranean was 
closed by the German and Italian occupation of much of North Africa, Port 
Sudan—­hitherto a rather small port—­replaced Suez. The flow of soldiers and 
matériel between Britain and India had to pass through Africa, via Port Sudan 
and Atbara.1
Partly as a result of the strain of work, my ­father developed a kidney disease, 
anemia, and cutaneous leishmaniasis—­a peculiarly draining and painful form 
of skin infection, all too well known in the ­Middle East ­under vari­ous names, 
such as “Jericho Boil.” In 1947, he underwent treatment for the skin infection, 
as well as an operation that removed one kidney, leaving him dependent, for 
the rest of his life, on a ­little ­bottle of hydrochloric acid. Characteristically, he took 
­great pride in having this ­bottle always available, tucked away neatly in a special 
­little travel case. Keeping himself alive was yet another job for him to do well.
But my ­father’s Sudan days ­were over. On October 8, 1948, he sent a tele­
gram to Teedah from London:
INVALIDED OUT AS FROM ­TODAY PROB­ABLY BAYLERYS 
­CONSIDER BEST ­THING SQUAIRES DEFINITELY THINK THAT I 
AM WISE. SPLENDID TRIP. ALL LOVE = JIM
1. R. C. Hill, Sudan Transport: A History of Railway, Marine and River Ser­vices in the Republic 
of the Sudan (Oxford University Press, 1965), 209.

The Moder n Wor ld 
77
The tele­gram referred to a final interview with the Sudan Government 
Agency in London, in which he was signed off and retired as a result of a medi-
cal report.
This final visit to London took place immediately ­after my parents had left 
me off at Shrewsbury School, in Shropshire. For my ­father had planned an 
abroad for me. I would not stay in Ireland. Although public schools on an En­
glish model existed ­there—­Saint Columba’s in Dublin; Portora in the North—
he plainly wanted something ­else for me. As early as 1946, he and my ­mother 
visited Shrewsbury for a day, when at home from Sudan, as part of a lightning 
tour of relatives in ­England. He was given a Shrewsbury School Prospectus at 
that time. It is revealing that the only passage which he marked up in the mar-
gin was that which concerned Entrance Scholarships. ­These ­were worth about 
eighty pounds a year, and ­were awarded on the basis of the results of an exami-
nation that took place at the school in early June of ­every year, for entrance in 
the winter.
And so, in early June 1948, I traveled to Shrewsbury with my parents to take 
the scholarship examination. Of this, I remember only two ­things. The first 
was the extraordinary quietness and beauty of the tree-­lined plateau on which 
the school was set; and the song of the cuckoo in the early morning. The sec-
ond was the winding blow of the mathe­matics papers. Framed in the most 
beguiling manner, with deliberately comic prob­lems to be solved, they ­were 
utterly opaque to me. I handed in, literally, a clean sheet. By contrast, I enjoyed 
the history and En­glish papers so much that, although I did not receive a schol-
arship, I was urged to come to Shrewsbury and to try again. The Boss had let 
me down. Bowlby had done me proud.
At this time, I already knew that my ­father was ill. I had visited him in 1947, 
­after his kidney had been removed, at Portobello Nursing Home—­a splendid 
Georgian building, near the bridge over the Dublin Canal where Sir Rowan 
Hamilton had written his famous equations. We talked seriously about the 
nature of jet propulsion. He explained the virtues and the working of hydro-
chloric acid. He was sitting up, with a ­little smile on his lips, making the best 
of a hospital meal. He explained to me how to make a surgical incision—­a 
“Lane-­like incision,” he called it, from the name of Dr. Lane, the surgeon who 
had just removed his kidney—­across the soft surface of a poached egg. He 
loved skill of any kind.
At the time, I had no idea that this illness had caught his plans for me in a 
cruel scissor cut. Just as he had begun to commit himself to a ­future for me in 
an En­glish public school, his income dropped suddenly. Had he been able to 

78 
Ch apter 13
stay on in Sudan ­until 1952, he could have retired on a full pension. Invalided 
out before his time, he could count on only half that amount.
I discovered this just a few years ago, when I found the letters that my ­father 
had written to J. M. Peterson, the headmaster of Shrewsbury School, in 
July 1952. They did not concern my fees at Shrewsbury. He had paid ­those 
regularly and uncomplainingly, on his ­limited income. What worried him was 
­whether he could now send me to Oxford. He had been told that Shrewsbury 
awarded Leaving Scholarships, to support some of their best scholars at the 
universities. Peterson had asked him for a full statement of his finances. 
­Here it is:
I do not know what information exactly might be required, but the facts of 
my position are that when Peter was entered for Shrewsbury I was in a se­
nior post in the Traffic Department of the Sudan Railways. I had the pros-
pect of occupying the post of Traffic Man­ag­er during the last three years of 
my ser­vice, with a considerable step in pay and consequent on that, a sub-
stantial increase in pension also. Then when I was Assistant Traffic Man­ag­er 
I was sent home ill, and, ­after having had a diseased kidney removed and 
being found to be suffering from a type of pernicious anemia caused by 
tropical conditions (for which I must have treatment for the rest of my life) 
I was invalided out of Sudan Government Ser­vice. Since then I have also 
been found to have a form of arthritis affecting the lower part of my spine.
A Sudan Government pension is calculated with relation to, partly, 
length of ser­vice and, secondly, to the pay drawn during the final two years 
of full ser­vice, and just before the final two years of ser­vice. Any one such 
as I, compelled to retire some years short of full ser­vice, and just before 
receiving the greatly increased pay of a post such as that of Traffic Man­ag­er, 
is entitled to a much smaller pension than he would have received if able to 
serve through to the normal retiring age.
As a result, instead of leaving the Sudan this year (1952) ­after Peter had 
completed his ­career at Shrewsbury, while I was in a well-­paid post, and 
with a good pension to look forward to I had to face the ­whole period of 
Peter’s time at Shrewsbury and at a University on a pension very much 
smaller than it would have been if my ­career had gone ahead normally.
My fitness [was sufficient to enable me to] to take up a Directorship and 
Managerial post that I was given in a small ­family firm manufacturing 
animal feeding stuffs. But conditions in that industry have been far from 
good, and I have never been able to draw more than a small salary and, at 

The Moder n Wor ld 
79
the moment, prospects for a continuance of the business at all are not 
very good.
As regards my annual income from pension is just over £621 and from 
my salary and fees £410. I am receiving (and ­will receive ­until 1955) £100 a 
year from an Educational Endowment Insurance. I have no private means.
I was appalled when I read this many years ­after his death. It meant that my 
parents had returned to Ireland to face a considerably more cramped life 
than they had expected. They had enough to “maintain their estate”—as Tudor 
gentry had once said. They bought a ­house in Glenageary: “Summerland,” at 
the top of ­Castle Park Road. Glenageary was halfway between the two worlds 
of Bray and Dublin. It was within easy walking distance of Dalkey Hill—­with 
its splendid view across Killiney Beach and the Vale of Shanganagh to Bray 
Head in the south. To walk down ­Castle Park Road was to come out onto the 
coastal road that led straight to Dublin, and Sandycove Harbor (well known 
for the Martello tower associated with James Joyce and the writing of his 
Ulysses) and the Forty Foot—­a famous Gentleman’s Bathing Place.
In this ­house (a ­house without central heating, it goes without saying), 
good ­family furniture decorated the rooms. Silver and china from their wed-
ding gifts appeared on the ­tables on special occasions. My ­father ran a car. We 
even had a maid for a short time. But the frills of life that give an extra space 
to the retired, just as their lives seem to be closing in, ­were denied them. My 
­father would have dearly loved to be a member of a golf club, even of a yachting 
club. A polite and witty man, he would have thriven on that extra dimension 
to his life. As it was, he was effectively ­house­bound as he grew older, except 
for visits to Dublin for the occasional good gossip with his ­brother Billy at 
Bewley’s Café in West­moreland Street.
But of all this I heard nothing—no complaints, not the slightest emphasis 
on the sacrifices that my ­father had made for my education. It is a tribute to 
my ­father’s quiet, stoic courage, and to my ­mother’s loyalty to him, that not a 
word of this was breathed to me when they set out with me, in early Octo-
ber 1948, on the mail boat to Holyhead, and then by train to Shrewsbury, to 
leave me in the new “abroad” that they had planned for me.

80
14
To Be a T weak
Shrewsbury School
“A Soft, Gentle Superiority”:  
The En­glish Class System
I had not been altogether wrong in my first impressions of Shrewsbury School 
when I came from Ireland to take my scholarship examination in early June of 
1948. It was a stunningly beautiful site. The school buildings and the Houses 
(where the boys slept, ate, and lived: each a fine mansion of its own) lay around 
a ­great sea of green grass, framed by ave­nues of ancient trees. The steep drop 
from the plateau down to the river Severn made the school seem to hover 
above the town.
It was a quiet place. Aravon had been full of noise—­from the spasmodic 
roars of the Boss to the constant monkey-­chatter of “Se­nior Teasing.” In 
Shrewsbury, it was as if the soundtrack had been turned off. I found myself 
surrounded by quiet, polite voices, speaking in perfectly pitched tones. The 
Boss no longer roared. Even the mathe­matics master, Mr. Hadland—­who had 
to teach me a subject that, at the hands of the Boss at Aravon, had been a 
source of constant terror—­struck me at once (despite a gruff voice and gnarled 
face) as a gentle man. The only time he roared was when he was prevailed upon 
by the boys to treat us to a dramatic rendering, in the original Aramaic, of the 
story of Daniel in the Lions’ Den. Not surprisingly, my math progressed in 
leaps and bounds.
As for the boys, they ­were soft-­spoken ­little gentlemen. They worked by 
words. In Aravon, by contrast, fistfighting had been normal. We ­were ­little 
squireens, given to furious brawling. But the tongues of ­these ­little En­glish 

To Be a T w eak 
81
gentlemen could be as wounding as the fist. When first subjected to well-­
aimed verbal “ragging”—on my stammer and on my Irish-­ness—by fellow 
members of my study room, I found myself living down to the ste­reo­type of 
the “wild Irishman.” I swung a chair at my tormentors. This was deemed to be 
a social faux pas. But it cleared the air.
Unknowingly, I had stumbled against the sharp edge of what was a totally 
new phenomenon to me—­the En­glish class system. ­Here, in Shrewsbury, boys 
­were molded by smooth words. The control of speech (along with the control 
of manners) was the secret of what an acute Sudanese observer of this time 
had seen in En­glish public school men: “a soft, gentle superiority.”
­There are ­people who tell you that they are your lords. With the En­glish you 
know it by yourself.1
This was all new to me: I had not encountered a class system of this kind in 
Ireland. I came from a more archaic, “tribal” world. ­Whether brutish or well-­
groomed, ­whether rich or as poor as church mice, Protestants ­were “our 
crowd.” That was all the identity they needed. The En­glish boys, by contrast, 
seemed less sure of their position in society. As I came to know them, over the 
years, they increasingly struck me as if they ­were always attempting to climb a 
greasy pole, inching ever farther up, and always afraid that they might slip 
down. They seemed to be constantly mea­sur­ing their position against ­others 
by their accents, by their manners, by innumerable unspoken acts of adapta-
tion to the speech, ways, and interests of their betters. Successful mimesis was 
the way to the top.
Fortunately, ­these aspects of the En­glish class system ­were not as oppres-
sive in Shrewsbury as in the public schools of southern ­England. David Gee, 
the historian of Shrewsbury, has rightly said that the school fostered “a 
‘northern’ (or, at least, non-­metropolitan) individualism.”2 It was, indeed, 
a surprisingly diverse school. My parents had chosen Shrewsbury, in large part, 
­because it had the reputation for taking in Irish boys.
Shrewsbury had begun as a grammar school, ­housed in an elegant Tudor 
building in the ­middle of town. In the 1940s, it still preserved something of the 
embedded quality of a local school. Many pupils came from the neighboring 
1. Francis M. Deng, “In the Eyes of the Ruled,” in The British in the Sudan, 1898–1956, ed. 
Robert O. Collins and Francis M. Deng (London: Macmillan, 1984), 216–243, at 229.
2. The Salopian, no. 150 (Summer 2010): 5.

82 
Ch apter 14
gentry or ­were the sons of well-­to-do farmers. A friend of mine was allowed to 
take Thursdays off ­every week. This was so that he could help his ­father bring 
his cows into the weekly ­cattle market.
To add to the mix, Wales was close. Shrewsbury was a “Marcher” town. It 
lay on the frontier between ­England and Wales. And Wales was a Celtic coun-
try. When I arrived at Holyhead, I had to communicate to the railway porters 
that my precious trunk should be put on the Chester train, and then to change 
for Shrewsbury. This meant approaching large men, who spoke a mellifluous 
Welsh. When the effort to communicate my wishes proved too much for my 
stammer, they would gather round me, chanting encouragement in En­glish: 
“Sing it, sonny! Sing it!” To take the train from Holyhead, skirting the moun-
tains of Snowdonia in the dawn light, was to travel through another Ireland.
But Shrewsbury also reached out to the very dif­fer­ent ­England of Liverpool 
and the industrial northern Midlands. Liverpool boys, the sons of industrial-
ists, added a splash of raw color to the House. Their ­fathers would appear at 
inter-­House soccer matches. They and their Liverpool cronies ­were used to 
the free-­spoken manners of the professional soccer stadium. They notably 
lacked sportsmanship. They would barrack vigorously, with shouts of “Specs 
Ref!!” whenever the team of their offspring was penalized. It was said that our 
­house­master (the most gentlemanly of men) had been insulted in this way, 
when acting as a referee. He bore a permanent grudge against Liverpool boys. 
But Liverpool boys stood for urban sophistication. They brought from home 
copies of the News of the World—­a newspaper notorious for its spicy reportage 
of sexual misdemeanors.
Altogether, arriving at Shrewsbury was a pleasant surprise. In my very first 
letter, I reassured my parents that I was safe among the En­glish. They ­were not 
as arrogant or abrasive as my parents had feared they might be. I had fallen 
among the right sort of gentlemen. For all their insidious sense of class, most 
of them ­were polite and good-­natured. Such mildness even puzzled me. By 
Irish standards, they appeared to be softies. They raised neither their voices 
nor their fists. But this softness came as a welcome relief. It was the equivalent 
of the wide and quiet prospects of the plateau on which the school was placed.
To Be a Tweak: Hierarchy and Ambition
Though spared many of the nastier aspects of the En­glish class system, Shrews-
bury School made up for this by creating its own complex hierarchies. Within 
a week, I was memorizing “The Colour Book.” This book itemized, in 

To Be a T w eak 
83
Byzantine detail, an entire structure of privileges and forms of dress that dis-
tinguished ­every category of boys from ­every other: who could wear silk hand-
kerchiefs in their jacket front pockets; who must wear their jackets tightly 
buttoned, who could wear them on one button only; who—­what immortals!—­
could allow their jackets to flap open, as they strode across lawns forbidden to 
lesser beings.
Yet I do not remember finding this intricate system oppressive or conform-
ist. For (as in Byzantium) it did not erect a series of barriers to achievement so 
much as provide a map of the routes that led to the top. And it also showed 
that the top could be reached by more than one route. Inevitably, given public 
school attitudes to games, sportsmen ­were privileged. They ­were known to the 
less sporting as “thicks.” They ­were creatures of brawn, not of brain. But they 
­were not the only ones at the top. The route map of privileges showed other, 
less conventional paths.
Indeed, to a remarkable degree, the structure and ethos of Shrewsbury 
encouraged each of us to “customize” his own excellence. Despite a heavy 
prejudice in ­favor of sportsmen, ­there was a remarkable amount of freedom in 
the choice of personae in which to excel. It was the race to the top that mat-
tered. A constant, headlong search for distinction made the life of the school 
as electric and as all-­absorbing as the politics of any ancient Greek polis or 
medieval Italian city-­state.
Hence the weight of the word “tweak.” This word—­tweak—­was so deeply 
embedded in the consciousness of the school that I have not, so far, been able 
to trace its origin. But its meaning was clear. It meant that you could get away 
with ­doing anything as long as you did it well, with a certain epic démesure—­
and made sure that ­others knew that you ­were ­doing it. To be a tweak showed 
that you ­were fully engaged, in your own way, in the race to the top. You could 
be a tweak in many surprising ­things. Dull dogs and thicks could be tweaks in 
soccer, rowing, and cricket. But you could also be a tweak in dirty jokes—­a 
veritable rhapsode of smut. It ­didn’t ­matter, as long as you did it with flair and 
energy.
My very first contact at Shrewsbury was with one such tweak. Seamus Finn 
was an older boy who had been assigned to me as my “guardian angel” when 
I first arrived. (His name betokened an Irish background: he was prob­ably 
chosen to be my guide for that reason.) Plump, with tight, frizzy, light ginger 
(almost albino) hair and gold-­rimmed spectacles, he was already a tweak. 
And to my delight, he was a tweak in history. At the age of fourteen, he had 
provided the Round Britain Quiz on the BBC with questions as to the titles of 

84 
Ch apter 14
little-­known rulers: What was the name, for instance, of the ruler of Swat? 
(The “Akhoond,” of course!):
he’s a won­der at royal genealogy and can make a tree of the Spanish Suc-
cession from Maximilian to Louis XIV in a minute.
Now that was a tweak ­after my own heart! Like a rare bird treading delicately 
across a pool of crocodiles, Seamus held to his reputation as a “Super Nerd” 
throughout his time at Shrewsbury. He suffered no disturbance or opprobrium 
from the “thicks” and the sportsmen. He was accepted as a tweak among 
tweaks. What sort of tweak would I try to be?

85
15
You ­Shall Do Greek
Classics Side
I had come to Shrewsbury with ­every intention of becoming a scientist. This 
is easily explained by a long-­delayed identification with my ­father, an engineer 
who had just returned from six years of absence. My choice was also linked to 
my passion for astronomy, and to what I had sensed of the robust attitudes of 
the Irish Protestant Enlightenment. Science meant Pro­gress in the face of big-
otry and superstition. Despite my bad per­for­mance in mathe­matics in the 
Shrewsbury entrance exam, I was determined to enter the modern age by opt-
ing for science.
The powers that be in Shrewsbury thought other­wise. I was summoned by 
my ­house­master, W. E. “Willy” Matthews. On this occasion he resembled an 
En­glish schoolmaster straight out of central casting—­corduroy trousers, 
tweed jacket, pipe, and all. He addressed me in between puffs. “Brown,” he 
said, “[puff] . . . ​you have done too well in your Entrance Scholarship . . . ​
[puff] . . . ​to do [puff] . . . ​Science. You ­shall do . . . ​[puff] . . . ​Greek.”
And so I did. For all the coming year, I joined the prestigious Classics Side. 
It was as a classical scholar, versed in Latin and Greek, that I resat the scholar-
ship examination, gaining an award of eighty pounds, and also passed the 
Britain-­wide School Certificate. At the end of the year, I opted for history 
rather than classics. But I never went back to science.
­Little did I know at the time that this would prove to be an irrevocable step. 
It takes some leap of the imagination (especially for ­those used to an American 
system of education) to realize the degree of specialization from an early age 
that my choice implied. The range of topics taught to me narrowed dramati-
cally, year by year, as I concentrated more and more on a single chosen subject. 
By the age of fourteen I was already ­doing ten periods of history a week, eight 

86 
Ch apter 15
of French—­and only three of geography and two of physics. My commitment 
to history would grow higher and higher like a mesa, leaving sheer precipices 
of ignorance on ­every side—no science, no economics, very ­little En­glish.
I was not the only one whose field of vision had narrowed. Scientists ­were 
equally locked into their chosen field. They virtually abandoned the hu-
manities. By the age of fifteen, I found myself ­running a thriving business. In 
exchange for Mars bars (made doubly precious currency by postwar candy 
rationing) I would ghostwrite the En­glish essays of members of the Science 
VIth. I was fully complicit in the division between “the two cultures” (that of 
science and that of the humanities) which Lord Snow (1905–1980) would soon 
come to lament in a memorable pamphlet.
As I look back, the degree of specialization in the education offered in the 
En­glish public schools leaves me aghast. But how ­else could I be a “tweak”? 
How ­else could Shrewsbury come to shine? This brutal narrowing of focus was 
due to an overpowering ambition, shared by ­every public school in ­England: 
that some of their students should excel in exams. In each school, bright boys 
­were singled out and trained like pedigree race­horses to do one ­thing and 
one ­thing only—to succeed in a succession of examinations on their core 
subject: Entrance Scholarship; School Certificate; State Scholarship; and, 
fi­nally—­like the bull’s-­eye on a target waiting for an arrow to strike home—­
the supreme victory of a scholarship at Oxford or Cambridge. That Willy M. 
directed me ­toward Greek meant that I was to aim at the most prestigious 
scholarship of all—­a scholarship in classics.
The culture of examinations, which already reached back to when I first 
wrote “JAM” for my spelling test in Aravon, now closed in around me. From 
the age of thirteen (in 1948) to the time that I took the All Souls Fellowship 
Exam at twenty-­one (in 1956), my fate was de­cided at ­every step in this way.
In order to understand the schools and universities of Britain at this time, 
one must remember the omnipresence and the rigidity of that basic system. 
We did not receive grades in our courses: ­there ­were no report cards filling up 
the years with a continuous assessment of my pro­gress, on the American 
model. My fate would be determined by a few, crucial examinations. Even if I 
did not spend my entire time “swotting” for exams, I knew that they ­were 
­there. I knew that I would have to face a small number of high moments—­each 
as lonely, as exalted, and as inexorable as a public execution or a medieval or-
deal. On each occasion, I would sit down in front of a carefully printed page 
(the number of questions to be answered and the time allowed always shown 
in bold type) and would begin to write, hoping to score—in a series of 

You ­Sh a ll Do Gr eek 
87
three-­hour papers, spread over a few days—­those marks in arcane Greek 
(alpha plus, alpha, alpha minus, alpha/beta, and so on down) on which the 
entire course of my academic ­career would depend. I was a “scholarship boy” 
through and through.
“Ferny”
It was just as well that I knew nothing at the time of ­these forbidding implica-
tions. As it was, Greek and Latin opened my heart. The master in charge of the 
Ju­nior Classics form was the school chaplain, the Reverend Cuthbert Guy 
Furnival. He was known to his charges as “Ferny.” He was the best sort of ro-
mantic Hellenist. He would tell us, with unalloyed plea­sure, that, in Greece, 
the modern word for motorcar—­avtokiníton—­derived directly from classical 
Greek. I last met Ferny in Athens, in 1958, as happy as a child, bathed in sun-
light and on his way to the Parthenon.
Ferny plainly loved what he taught. He somehow managed to reach down 
to deeper levels than the usual stone-­breaking exercise in “Construe”—­
“construction”: the dogged, word-­by-­word translation and grammatical analy­
sis of classical texts—­that made up most of our classical reading. As we read 
book 6 of Vergil’s Aeneid, a change in the tone of Ferny’s usual, somewhat 
bleating, clerical voice ensured that we would feel with him the magic of Ae-
neas’s descent into the underworld. He chanted the lines. He communicated 
that Latin was not all about grammar. It was also about feeling. Locked away 
in a majestic, pre-­Christian past, a pagan world of shifting shapes and ambigu-
ous desires was ­there to be entered. I wrote to my parents, “­Doing dash good 
‘Stru’ about Orpheus and Eurydice, about caligentem nigram horridine fauces 
of which Ferny is very fond.” Then I added, by way of more manly, less schol-
arly validation, “Found out that he was an excellent Rugger player.”
At this time, the golden mists of a distant age (like the fog that ­rose on 
winter’s eve­nings from the river Severn and mingled in a golden glow with the 
lights of the school Houses) began to swirl around me. It blocked out the clear, 
cold spaces of the stars. Within a term, along with the upsurge of so many new 
emotions at the beginning of my teens, I passed, irrevocably, from science to 
the humanities, with Ferny’s Vergil as my guide.
Greek opened other worlds to me. It had begun as a slog. My very first act 
of conscious impiety was to decide, on a strict cost-­opportunity basis, to de-
vote my attention in school chapel not to the Psalms but to the ­silent recitation 
of Greek irregular verbs. But even this grind added a further dimension to my 

88 
Ch apter 15
heart. When muttering verbs, I would stare at the stained glass win­dows of the 
school chapel. ­These ­were classic examples of what could be called “Anglican 
Hellenism.” ­Here was an idealized ancient world, in which Apostles and 
­Fathers of the Church ­were dressed in impeccable togas. In scenes of the life 
of Saint Martin or of the confrontation between Saint Ambrose and Theodo-
sius I, holy persons in pure classical garb appeared before emperors and their 
soldiers, who ­were dressed in uniforms taken straight from our textbooks of 
Roman history. Eventually, Greek and Latin would open up for me not only 
the road back to Athens and Rome, but also (and just as importantly) the road 
to Galilee and to Saint Paul.

89
16
MODERN SIDE
The Modern Side
In 1949, I de­cided to join what was known as the Modern Side as distinct from 
the Classics Side and the Science Side. In other words, I would try to become 
a tweak in history. What surprises me, on looking back, is the extent to which 
I was left on my own in ­these years, to do it my way. One would have thought 
that so determined an effort to encourage boys to excel as specialists would 
lead to heavy class schedules. But this was not so. Shrewsbury boys ­were en-
couraged to become pensive readers quite as much as they ­were expected to 
shine in examinations. What I remember best ­were delicious stretches of ­free 
time even in my first year. As I wrote to my parents:
hardly any of us had been set work to do, so I learnt off a few Greek adjec-
tives, completed a well composed summary of Roman expansion, 220–133 
B.C. by P.R.L. Brown, then spent a blissful 2½ more periods designing a 
model rocket jet and the jet plane to fly with it and then working out the 
weight of the earth by logs [logarithms] and the weight of iron, I was only 
a 1000 tons out, and then drew a few models of cars, a picture of Charles II 
and some characters from “Twelfth Night”, the book ­we’re ­doing for 
School Cert.
I soon found my way to the school library. Known as the Moser Library, it 
was a gem. A capacious bow win­dow in Tudor style looked out over the river 
and the town. I would sit ­there, working my way through the entire run of 
copies of Punch—­the humorous and po­liti­cal journal that stretched from 
the 1840s to the pre­sent. I looked principally at the po­liti­cal cartoons for 
which Punch was famous. ­These cartoons provided a memorable, visual com-
mentary on the politics of the day. Mr. Punch, I noticed, had no love for my 

90 
Ch apter 16
compatriots. Irishmen would regularly appear with long upper lips and bandy 
legs, like noxious apes. Most chilling of all, in 1916, was the drawing of a gallows 
rising into lowering clouds, above a scene of utter destruction that evoked the 
carnage of the ­Battle of the Somme. It bore the title “For Traitors!” This was 
our Easter Rising—­the beginning of Irish in­de­pen­dence—­seen from across 
the sea.
More decisive still, it was through the Moser Library that I learned to look 
at the stars with a historian’s eyes. In modern terms, I “historicized” my passion 
for astronomy. When writing a long (eighteen-­and-­a-­half-­page) essay entitled 
“Science in the Seventeenth ­Century—­Was ­There a Scientific Revolution?” 
I stumbled on a shelf that contained the earliest publications of the Royal 
Society (the society of scientists founded by Charles II). I read the account by 
Robert Hooke (1635–1703) of his attempt to observe, through a Gregorian 
telescope, the moons of Mars and Jupiter. I realized that Hooke was using a 
telescope of roughly the same resolution as my ­father’s binoculars. Hooke and 
I both peered into space with the same equipment, to scan the same planet. 
But what was it like to be Hooke: to see ­those dancing spots of light with the 
eyes of a man of the seventeenth ­century? This was my first serious attempt to 
enter the minds of ­people in the past. And ­these ­were not kings, generals, or 
politicians. They ­were my own heroes—­astronomers like myself, looking up 
at the same stars, but at a distance of three centuries.
“Inclined ­Towards Ideas of Freedom and . . . ​Utopias”
An En­glish public school was a total society if ever ­there was one. It locked me 
into a febrile world shot through with strivings for distinction alternating with 
moments of deep peace, and set against a perpetual background noise of sex-
ual gossip. It is hard to realize that I spent more than half the year back home 
with my parents in Ireland. Yet, each time, the journey to Holyhead, and then 
across the sea to Dún Laoghaire, seemed to bring down a glass wall between 
myself and Shrewsbury.
At that time, I had no friends of my own age in Ireland. The decision to 
send me to Shrewsbury took me out of the loop of the Protestant boys who 
had gone on from Aravon to Irish schools. I was on my own. What was I ­doing 
and thinking? Hence my surprise when I recently discovered the beginnings 
of a diary.
I wrote the diary for only three days—­from January 5 to January 8, 1951. 
Then I abandoned it in order to write, in the following pages, the opening 

MODER N SIDE 
91
chapter of a science fiction novel. Let me linger for a moment on the diary. It 
is not often that an octogenarian can look into the heart of a fifteen-­year-­old 
boy who happens to be himself.
The diary shows that at home, at least, the scientist in me was alive and well. 
I regularly trained my binoculars on the night sky and planned the making of 
a telescope. I devoured the science fiction novels of H. G. Wells (1866–1946). 
Inspired by Wells, my imagination strained ­toward Utopia: “It was a nice clear 
day and I felt in a nice clear mood, specially inclined ­towards ideas of freedom 
and the Utopias of H.G. Wells.” Such high thoughts mingled with reassuring 
­family routines. Traveling by bus with my aunt Norah, I “talked about cats, and 
signals to the moon.” Walking Rory with my beloved aunt Mai, I was still at it: 
“We talked about equality and the morality of the Sweepstakes.” This was the 
famous Irish Sweepstake, a lottery whose principal office, alight with green 
neon shamrocks of the most garish kind, faced the austere, classical façade of 
the Royal Dublin Society in Ballsbridge—­the society devoted to the pro­gress 
of science, which ­housed a rich library that I would soon come to use.
Clutching a precious sheaf of book tokens, I would make my way to the 
A.P.C.K. bookstore (the major Protestant bookstore, run by the Association 
for the Propagation of Christian Knowledge), duly doffing my cap to the many 
“right ­people” who shuffled in shabby overcoats along its shelves. But it was 
not Christian Knowledge that I was ­after. It was Utopia. I bought two books, 
both in the Teach Yourself History series—­models of scholarly outreach to a 
general public. ­These ­were Lenin and the Rus­sian Revolution by Christopher 
Hill and Lorenzo de’ Medici and Re­nais­sance Italy by Cecilia Ady. They dealt 
with the two ­faces of Utopia. Hill’s Lenin struck me as “the story of the ulti-
mately stupid, cruel, futile, horrible story [of the attempt] to create another 
Utopia.”
Ady’s Re­nais­sance was marvelously dif­fer­ent: “what a wonderful period! 
What Freedom . . . ​Of course, only feasible in small communities. . . . ​If only 
one could destroy this horrid, smoky, grimy, hustling ganglion of modern civi-
lization. . . . ​And yet was not modern life caused by this Spring of Mankind? . . . ​
Then I had tea, beans on toast, bread and butter, Xmas cake, ­etc. . . . ​Then to a 
bath . . . ​like the Re­nais­sance, pure, ­free and cleansing.”
I still remember the occasion. I should add that it took some imagining to 
equate that bath with the new birth of Eu­rope. Baths in Glenageary ­were 
Spartan affairs. The electric heater soon ran out of hot ­water. I would lie in two 
inches of it, watching the steam of the bath form into thick clouds as it hit the 
cold draft coming in from the win­dow.

92 
Ch apter 16
For all its effusions, the diary shows a young boy at a crossroads. In Ireland, 
the scientist dreaming Utopias was still very pre­sent. In Shrewsbury, however, 
I had already become the worldly-­wise teenager, fascinated by the ­human 
scene. My letters to my parents took apart the micropolitics of the school as if 
I ­were taking apart the mechanisms of a Greek city-­state or following the ins 
and outs of an eighteenth-­century oligarchy. This meant, in fact, that I had 
reached the History Sixth, and was being taught to do just that by “the 
Duke”—by J.R.M. Se­nior, the head of the History Side.

93
17
The Duke
History with “the Duke”
The Duke
Murray Se­nior was called “the Duke.” Tall, with a hatchet face and upright 
bearing, he did, indeed, resemble the Duke of Wellington. He was an institu-
tion. He had taught history at Shrewsbury since 1932. Above all, he had 
founded the History Library in the classroom of the History Sixth, on the 
corner of the second floor of the School­house, where it enjoyed a splendid 
view across the river on to Shrewsbury town. The library installed by the Duke 
was well stocked. It was not filled with textbooks. Rather, it emphasized the 
fact that modern En­glish history—­above all, the history of the eigh­teenth and 
nineteenth centuries—­was accessible to us through original documents: 
through memoirs, journals, and collections of letters. I was encouraged to 
read through ­these much as I had read through the copies of Punch in the 
Moser Library.
The library did more than this. As I remember it, Gothic bookcases in 
golden oak projected from the walls, cutting the room into a series of bays. 
This was very dif­fer­ent from the regular rows of desks and ­tables, facing a 
blackboard, that characterized the normal classroom. The chairs ­were capa-
cious armchairs in which we could sit back, surrounded by well-­bound vol-
umes as in a gentleman’s library. Indeed, the History Sixth room was not a 
classroom. It was a clubroom. And we ­were ­little clubmen. Better still, we ­were 
­little parliamentarians. We would weigh the respective merits of the ­great poli-
ticians of the Victorian Age as if we ­were their contemporaries, judging them 
from the comfort of the London Athenaeum or the Reform Club.

94 
Ch apter 17
Growing Up
In the Duke’s opinion, the time had come for us to think like grown-­ups. And 
this is what the Duke did for me. I still have a long, stiff-­backed notebook, in dark 
red, in which I wrote an essay for the Duke ­every week of the term, from Octo-
ber 1950 to early 1951. The essays ranged from “The Function of the Historian” to 
topics such as “The Effects of the French Revolution on En­glish History.”
Rereading ­these essays, I was greatly impressed by Duke Se­nior’s comments 
on them. Each essay was marked up with marginal remarks written in a firm 
hand in bright-­red ink. The Duke’s comments ­were intended to provoke a dia-
logue between equals. They amounted to a crash course on how to think like 
a grown-up by being treated like one.
And what was it to be a “grown-up”? In the first place, to be grown-up was 
to avoid sweeping generalizations. Purple passages of high moral content 
flowed all too easily from me. I had to be restrained. I wrote of the Industrial 
Revolution that it had produced “a discontented, suppressed, wretched indus-
trial class, ­women and ­children labouring in vast new gangling and smoking 
machine-­ridden cities.” If only Britain had not been diverted by the French 
Revolution and the Napoleonic Wars, this horror might have been avoided. 
Not so, wrote the Duke: “This is the biggest assumption you make. . . . ​I think 
it is overdone.”
And what about seventeenth-­century Ireland? Surely “Ireland was com-
pletely dif­fer­ent from ­England in all re­spects.” No, wrote the Duke (and this 
came as a revelation to me): “Much of the tragedy of Anglo-­Irish relations 
arises from the similarity of the two islands.”
And above all, the Duke was concrete. Discussing the “Tudor compromise 
in government” (the awkward balance of monarchy and Parliament main-
tained by Elizabeth and upset by Charles I), I had begun with a long, euphoric 
paragraph on the liberation of po­liti­cal thinking in the Re­nais­sance. The Duke 
was unimpressed: “Too vague and vast. . . . ​The essay is about government and 
can be kept on a calmer level altogether.”
On looking back, ­after reading ­these comments, I realize that, in listening 
to the Duke, I was listening to the voice of “grown-up” history throughout the 
British Isles in the 1940s and 1950s. It would follow me through school and into 
the university. Suspicious of generalizations; demanding facts and figures; and 
notably averse to “vast and vague” talk about ideas: the Duke’s comments have 
always been for me the beginning of wisdom.

The Duk e 
95
But they ­were only a beginning. To be challenged by being treated as a 
grown-up at the age of sixteen was a bracing experience. But to continue this 
intellectual pruning was calculated to cramp the spirit. Carried into ­later years, 
by college tutors in the universities, this insistence on ­doing history “like a 
grown-up” often tended to lead students and their mentors into a narrow em-
phasis on po­liti­cal and institutional history and a deeply philistine avoidance 
of ­grand topics such as religion and the history of ideas.
This cramping of the imagination was the product of a system designed to 
turn out members of a ruling class—­politicians, colonial officials, and bureau-
crats. Such persons ­were expected to be good at passing exams devoted mainly 
to po­liti­cal history and to the discussion of institutions. This prepared them 
well for ­careers as civil servants and administrators, dashing off memoranda 
and approaching prob­lems with due caution in what was assumed to be a 
stable, commonsensical world—­a world of solid structures such as I had not 
come across in Ireland.
And in the early 1950s, this limiting of the field of history was not an entirely 
innocent ­matter. The system had developed, in part, so as to rule an empire. 
And now that empire was failing. The educated classes in nations ­under British 
rule ­were demanding freedom; and they ­were being denied this freedom 
­because it was said that they had not yet “grown up.” Could one ­really trust the 
educated elites of Sudan (as of India and other countries) to ­handle the dan-
gerous gift of in­de­pen­dence? “Not yet” was the usual answer.
This answer was invariably couched in terms of a failure to achieve a level 
of intellectual grooming—of “grown-up” attitudes—­such as we ­were receiving 
in Shrewsbury. If it was difficult enough for public school boys to grow up (so 
it was said), what could we hope of the half-­baked babus of India or the effendis 
of Khartoum—­the derogatory terms applied to the educated classes who in-
creasingly challenged British rule? In the words of Sir Douglas Newbold 
(1894–1945), one of the last civil secretaries (the head of civilian government) 
in Sudan:
The effendia are ­going to write and read and talk about “democracy”, “self-­
government” and “nationalism”. And . . . ​we cannot completely clear their 
minds wholly (any more than public schoolboys’ immaturity can be purged 
at Oxford).1
1. K.D.D. Henderson, The Making of the Modern Sudan (London: Faber, 1951), 538.

96 
Ch apter 17
But minds “purged at Oxford” in this manner could turn out to be very dull 
minds indeed. The Duke had truly fortified my mind. But he had not fed my 
imagination. This came in October 1951—­after the Duke had left the school to 
take up a headmastership in Bury Grammar School, near Manchester. He was 
replaced by a young man of twenty-­three, only seven years older than myself, 
and recently down from Oxford—­Laurence LeQuesne.

97
18
Into New Worlds
L aurence Lequesne and  
Fr ank McEachr an
Laurence Lequesne: Into a New World
“Larry” LeQuesne brought with him the air of a slightly dif­fer­ent world. He 
came from the Channel Islands. He was not Lawrence LeQuesne, but Lau-
rence—­a distinctive French spelling current in the Channel Islands. He also 
brought a laugh that seemed to belong to another age—­the slightly high-­
pitched chortle of an Edwardian gentleman confronted by some particularly 
delicious absurdity: a chortle that always seemed to say, “Why not?!” Lau-
rence’s laugh was proverbial in the school. A ­little ­later, he supported Richard 
Inglis—­the ­future editor of Private Eye, no less!—in his first ventures in satiri-
cal writing for The Salopian (the school magazine), “with the loudest laugh 
you’d ever heard.”1
What struck me at the time, however, was not only that laugh, but also a 
voice plainly accustomed to telling the truth. It was said that Laurence was 
a Quaker. In fact, his ­family ­were Baptists. But his voice was certainly a Quaker 
voice—­a voice accustomed to absolute directness. When he first appeared in 
the History Sixth Form Library, Laurence faced (as we have seen) a clubroom 
rather than a classroom. Tweaks of vari­ous persuasions, from myself, a mere 
nerd, to the school captain of football (how ­grand can you get?!), lolled and 
shuffled ostentatiously, in a mood to show their “cool” in front of a new master. 
1. Harry Thompson, Lord of the Gnomes (London: Heinemann, 1994), 42.

98 
Ch apter 18
Laurence simply told them that he did not want so much noise. Carried on so 
clear a voice, LeQuesne’s seriousness was as infectious as his laugh.
We settled down to study the history of ­England at the moment of a major 
crisis of identity, in the first part of the nineteenth ­century. It looked as if En­
glish ancien régime society might founder as dramatically as did that of France, 
in the French Revolution of 1789, ­under the double impact of the Industrial 
Revolution and the ideological storm of radicalism and the Romantic 
movement.
Laurence’s heart was in ­those stormy de­cades. He ­later wrote a book about 
Thomas Carlyle (1795–1881), who reached the peak of his fame in the troubled 
1840s. The book catches the molten core of Carlyle and his age:
The im­mensely fruitful tension, between the moral and the practical, 
between marvel and horror at the achievements and monstrosities of 
industrialism . . . ​[and the] inconsistent but nevertheless profound human-
ity that enabled him to function as the voice and the conscience of the most 
open and socially sensitive generation of the nineteenth ­century.2
Laurence introduced us to this age of crisis from the inside. Duke Se­nior 
had already taken us through the history of nineteenth-­century ­England and 
Ireland with majestic and well-­balanced tread. Unlike Se­nior, Laurence took 
us into the minds and hearts of the protagonists. He encouraged us to read the 
original memoirs and tracts of the times. He conjured up the feelings of young 
men of the 1800s, as the storm winds of the Romantic movement shook down 
the dry leaves of the eigh­teenth ­century Enlightenment. He did not describe 
the Industrial Revolution itself. Instead he entered with marked pathos into the 
hopes and fears of both the radicals and the Romantics as they watched rural 
­England change ­under the pressure of incomprehensible forces. Inspired by 
Laurence, I read all of the Rural Rides (1830) of William Cobbett (1763–1835) 
and many radical manifestos and plans for a better world.
For Laurence always had a soft spot for the losers—­for their failed utopias 
and for their yearnings for an idealized, premodern past. In a word, he took us 
into a new world. While only a year previously my mind had been filled with 
thoughts of scientific utopias placed in the ­future or in the stars, I now explored 
the inner hopes and fears of real persons in a real past, set in the real landscapes—­
alternately beautiful and menacing—of nineteenth-­century ­England.
2. A. L. LeQuesne, Carlyle (Oxford University Press, 1982), 94.

Into New Wor lds 
99
“The Free-­est Man I’ve Ever Known”:  
Frank McEachran (1900–1975)
What we boys could never have guessed was that, at exactly the same time as 
he was inspiring us, Laurence himself was being brought into a new world by 
a fellow member of the staff—by Frank McEachran, a long-­established teacher 
of French and German lit­er­a­ture, with whom he shared bachelor lodgings on 
the edge of the school grounds. “Mac” or “Kek” (Laurence called him “Mac”; 
we boys called him “Kek”) stuck out from the mass of his colleagues at Shrews-
bury (as he would have stuck out anywhere) like an aerolite dropped from 
outer space.
Kek was the son of a construction engineer in Wolverhampton and a prod-
uct of Manchester Grammar School. He had studied the German Romantic 
phi­los­o­pher Johann Gottfried Herder (1744–1803) at Leipzig. He joined the 
staff at Shrewsbury in 1936. ­There was nothing public school about him. He 
regarded or­ga­nized games and or­ga­nized religion as the two ­great enemies of 
the ­human mind. He lived for the mind, in amiable indifference to convention 
and prejudice. With a halo of loose white hair, eyebrows raised in perpetual 
amazement ­behind horn-­rimmed spectacles, he had the look of a vatic lepre-
chaun. He had a voice with a distinctive twang, where words came out, 
through slightly clenched teeth, in all the languages of Eu­rope. In ancient 
times, Kek would have been one of ­those Cynic phi­los­o­phers whose magnetic 
serenity and pithy sayings both subverted and instructed the elites of the 
Greco-­Roman world.
Altogether, Kek was the ­great awakener. He acted as “a goad, an inspirer, a 
kicker of young imaginations and sensibilities into life” (the phrase is Lau-
rence’s). He did this by introducing them to En­glish and to Eu­ro­pean poetry 
of all ages and in many languages in an anthology of poetry that he called 
A Cauldron of Spells. In this anthology he extracted short and incantatory 
passages from any number of poems. They ­were not to be read in silence, or 
in solitude. They ­were to be memorized and then made to explode on the 
world by recitation.3
Each one of us would be called to stand on a chair ringed with a circle of 
chalk, to emphasize the magical quality of the recitation. Or we would chant 
in unison, filling the school building with a burst of massed sound, like the 
3. F. McEachran, A Cauldron of Spells (Wells, Somerset: Greenbank Press, 1992).

100 
Ch apter 18
ringing of hammers on an anvil. Kek always had a spell for me—as a signature 
tune—­chosen from G. K. Chesterton’s The ­Battle of the White Horse:
For the ­great Gaels of Ireland
Are the men that God made mad,
For all their wars are merry,
And all their songs are sad.4
He made sure that we knew what it was to be possessed by cunningly crafted 
verse. Sheathed in magic sound, I never stammered for a moment when I re-
cited his spells.
A large number of the spells ­were taken from the works of T. S. Eliot (1888–
1965), and especially from ­those of W. H. Auden (1907–1973). ­These poems 
­were written before World War II. It was through them that I entered the night-
mare world of interwar Eu­rope. This was yet another new world for me. ­Until 
then, Eu­rope had not figured greatly in my imagination. “Abroad” usually 
meant for me the territories of the British Empire in Africa and Asia. The 
poems collected by Kek introduced me, for the first time, to the tainted de­cade 
that had witnessed the defeat of civilized society all over Europe—­the victory 
of Franco in Spain, the rise of Hitler in Germany, and the monstrous consoli-
dation of the totalitarian state in Stalin’s Rus­sia. ­These ­were the spells that 
I still remember as if I ­were reciting them only yesterday. (Oh, would that they 
­were not still relevant!) Take, for example, Auden’s poem Refugee Blues:
Dreamed I saw a building with a thousand floors,
A thousand win­dows and a thousand doors;
Not one of them was ours, my dear, not one of them was ours.
Stood on a ­great plain in the falling snow;
Ten thousand soldiers marched to and fro;
Looking for you and me, my dear, looking for you and me.5
Kek introduced me, through his se­lection of poems, to the desperate mood 
of interwar Eu­rope. This mood was summed up in the title of Auden’s long 
poem The Age of Anxiety. It was this poem that my compatriot E. R. Dodds 
would ­later choose to invoke as part of the title of his book Pagans and Chris-
tian in an Age of Anxiety. For Dodds, the last centuries of the Roman Empire 
4. McEachran, Cauldron of Spells, no. 458, p. 214.
5. McEachran, Cauldron of Spells, no. 170, p. 76.

Into New Wor lds 
101
seemed to be engulfed in a mood similar to that evoked by Auden in describ-
ing the Eu­rope of his time. ­Whether the parallel between the two ages was 
correct was an issue that I would take up in dialogue with Dodds in the late 
1960s. But it was through Kek’s spells that Eu­rope first gained a place in my 
imagination. They ­were an introduction to the continent whose ancient and 
medieval history I would ­later come to study.

102
19
Sense of the Past
A Sense of the Past
I still look back on 1952, my last year at Shrewsbury, as the true beginning of 
my life as a scholar. Not only did I win an exhibition at New College, Oxford, 
which eventually brought me from Ireland to ­England for the next twenty-­six 
years of my life. But something also happened on a deeper level. I developed 
a historical sensibility that led me, through a series of encounters with the 
sheer beauty of the medieval buildings and stained glass of Oxford and 
Shrewsbury, to a wish to study distant periods of history—­the ­Middle Ages, 
in the first place, and then the ­later Roman Empire.
Laurence LeQuesne played a crucial role in this evolution, by passing on 
to me an acute sense of the past. A turning to the past was not, in itself, unusual 
in postwar ­England. It was part of a mood similar to the disabused view of 
history current among Irish Protestants. I suspect that what drew Laurence to 
Kek was a shared feeling that they both lived at a ninety-­degree ­angle to the 
modern world. At a happy drinking party of fellow teachers at the Lion Inn at 
Shrewsbury, in ­later years, Laurence was somewhat surprised to find that
all four of us, at bottom, hate the pre­sent; is it typical of our age and class, 
or what? . . . ​what is it that makes [us] quarrel with the pre­sent?1
What made Laurence’s quarrel with the pre­sent so distinctive was the in-
tensity of his sense of the past. This was his most personal and decisive gift to 
me. It was not the same as reactionary conservatism; nor was it mere nostalgia. 
It involved a more acute and more tragic sense. The past was ­there, and it was 
not the pre­sent. It had once been as full of life, sound, and color, as much an 
1. A. L. LeQuesne, ­After Kilvert (Oxford University Press, 1978), 119.

Sense of the Past 
103
arena of creativity and of ­human dignity, as the pre­sent. Now, like a trea­sure 
ship seen at the bottom of clear ­waters, it lay ­there, irrevocably trapped in time. 
Laurence’s hero, Thomas Carlyle, shared this feeling: “a quite exceptionally 
acute private awareness of the mysteriousness of time as the transparent me-
dium in which all ­human activity is irretrievably stuck.”2
­After Kilvert
Given his obsession with the irrevocable past-­ness of the past, it is not surpris-
ing that Laurence conceived a brilliant thought experiment. Some twenty 
years ­after he taught me, he took the diary of a Victorian clergyman—­the 
Reverend Francis Kilvert (1840–1897) who had lived in Clyro, in the Wye 
Valley3—­and compared ­every entry in it with the pre­sent, to show how pat-
terns of be­hav­ior in Victorian ­England and the landscape itself had changed 
over the past hundred years. He even went to live in Kilvert’s ­house for the year 
in order to do this. ­There he conducted an investigation of the difference, over 
a ­century, between past and pre­sent that was as meticulous as any anthropolo-
gist’s fieldwork. In each section of the book, a diary entry by Kilvert for 1870 
was paired with a diary entry by Laurence for 1970, usually on the same day 
and at the same place. Both ­were followed by a comment.
By this means, past and pre­sent ­were placed in constant dialogue. What 
was it like for Kilvert, in 1870, to look out on the same landscape as Laurence 
did in 1970? For instance, how did Kilvert experience basic ­things—­things too 
big to be seen, which we take for granted—­such as space and light, in an age 
where he traveled on foot to most places and might see only one candle burn-
ing in an entire village that was now illuminated all night by sodium lamps?
Laurence went for all ­those telltale differences that showed that the past 
had well and truly parted com­pany with the pre­sent. Even the seemingly idyllic 
scene of a harvest festival in the shadow of an ancient church, where time ap-
peared to stand still, was not timeless. Kilvert’s mention of a Volunteer Band 
on this occasion was a reminder of how, with the radio and the rec­ord player, 
­music itself had lost its moorings. It was no longer tied to a single source of 
sound—as when the Victorian band had thumped and trumpeted through the 
long after­noon. In all ­these ­little differences, time was at work: “all of them, 
2. LeQuesne, Carlyle, 32.
3. Kilvert’s Diary, Chosen and Introduced by William Plomer, 3 vols. (London: Jonathan Cape, 
1960).

104 
Ch apter 19
like fallen leaves on a seemingly motionless stream, show the direction of the 
current.”4 Laurence was fascinated by that ­silent chasm that opened, irre-
vocably, between the pre­sent and the past: “It’s an addiction, this passion for 
the past.”5
In ­later years, I would turn to other disciplines—­notably to anthropology—
to bridge the gap between myself and the seemingly exotic socie­ties of the past. 
But a “passion for the past” is what Laurence passed on to me in 1952. History, 
for me, has always been something more than a discipline—­more than a set 
of prob­lems to be solved, a narrative to be put together from bits and pieces 
of evidence about the past. It is, rather, a perpetual awareness of living beside 
an im­mense, strange country whose customs must be treated by the traveler 
from the pre­sent with re­spect, as often very dif­fer­ent from our own; and 
whose aspirations, fears, and certitudes, though they may seem alien to us 
and to have turned pale with the passing of time, must be treated as having 
once run in the veins of men and ­women in the past with all the energy of 
living flesh and blood. I learned from Laurence that the aim of the historian 
was not simply to argue about the past; it was to bring that past alive—to 
recover a lost world.
Oxford or TCD?
It was in this way that Laurence (and, with him, Kek) prepared me to take the 
Oxford scholarship examination. I would try my luck on March 18, 1952, by 
“sitting” (literally sitting at a long ­table in a college dining hall, answering in 
longhand a series of three-­hour-­long papers) the examination for an Open 
Scholarship or Exhibition—­the latter a slightly less valuable but no less pres-
tigious award—to New College, Oxford.
I was all ready for the exam. But then an unexpected prob­lem emerged. 
Did I ­really want to go to Oxford? I had somehow taken it for granted that 
I would go to TCD—to Trinity College Dublin. Founded by Queen Elizabeth 
in 1592, Trinity College was the university of preference for the Protestants of 
Ireland. When I grew up, Catholics ­were still forbidden by the Catholic bishop 
of Dublin to attend it. Quite naturally, my ­father had assumed, with all the 
pride of an Irish Protestant in his university, that the Oxford scholarship ex-
amination was only a trial run, to see ­whether I was good enough for Trinity.
4. LeQuesne, ­After Kilvert, 153.
5. Le Quesne, ­After Kilvert, 224.

Sense of the Past 
105
I still thought of myself as an Irish boy. I did not know what forbidding 
toffs—­what “Anglo-­English” (to use my ­mother’s sardonic phrase) at their 
most arrogant—­might await me in Oxford or Cambridge. As I wrote to my 
parents in October 1952:
I ­really do not like the prospect of involving myself too much in ­England. 
Finn [Seamus Finn: my fellow history tweak and former guardian angel] . . . ​
does say that a person like myself, or himself . . . ​would be quite able to pick 
his own friends at University without getting in with the expensive drinking 
crowd; but once in ­England [I added] ­there is a grave danger of being cut 
off from Ireland.
I told Willy Matthews, my ­house­master, about my hesitation. Not surprisingly, 
my ­father soon received a somewhat frosty letter from him:
Peter tells me that he wishes to try an Oxford Scholarship next March. It 
would give him something to work for and would enable him to mea­sure 
himself as a historian against ­others of his age. He intends to turn the schol-
arship down if he gets the award. Now this latter course would be rather 
hard on the man who would have gained the scholarship if Peter had not 
competed. . . .
It may be that New College would allow him to sit the Examination and 
give him a private report on his paper, but I have yet to find out ­whether they 
would be prepared to do this. I am inclined to doubt ­whether they would.
In any case, I think it quite pos­si­ble that Peter would get an award next 
March, and I am very much in favour of his accepting it and reading history 
at Oxford. It would give him more standing—at least in this country—­than 
a degree at T.C.D. The History staff ­here share my view on the ­matter.
Would you let me know what you think?
My ­father was not entirely convinced:
As regards ­whether Peter should go to Oxford or [Trinity College] Dublin 
University, we wish only to do what is best for Peter himself in the long run 
within the bounds of our means. . . . ​But means apart, ­there are consider-
ations of all sorts that make us, and Peter too, lean ­towards our native Dub-
lin. We can be persuaded, perhaps, but the balance of real advantage to 
Peter must be clear.
I now realize that ­factors other than Irish patriotism weighed with my 
­father. In the draft of his letter to Willy M., ­after the mention of “our means,” 

106 
Ch apter 19
my ­father crossed out a half sentence—­“which unfortunately are such that. . . .” 
His means ­were, indeed, less than he would have wished. As we have seen, his 
pension had been greatly reduced through his having been forced by illness to 
leave Sudan before he had completed his full term of ser­vice. Further expenses 
in Oxford ­were likely to be considerably greater than ­those that I might incur 
in Dublin. Bluntly, could my ­father’s finances stand the strain?
Matthews answered this letter in a reassuring manner. He told my ­father 
that, ­under the new arrangements, if I gained a New College scholarship, I 
would also be entitled to support from a State Scholarship, subject to a means 
test. This amounted to £276 a year. This was, in effect, the full cost of my tuition 
and lodging for the year in Oxford. My ­father was reassured:
Thanks for your letter of 23rd October with all the information it contained. 
The maximum State aid seems to be on a most generous basis and would 
seem to put a very favourable appearance on the financial side of Peter’s 
­going up to Oxford if he can get an award, providing ­there is no difficulty 
likely to arise from his being Irish; and provided [my ­father could not resist 
adding, with a touch of humor] the authorities (in the means test) take the 
same rather dim view of my means as I do.
But, of course, he was wrong to be reassured. Matthews had totally over-
looked the fact that my ­father was an Irish citizen and that Irish citizens ­were 
not entitled to State Scholarships. It is some indication of the insularity of 
Shrewsbury (or—to exonerate Matthews—of the ambiguous status of the 
young Republic: for, ­until 1951, Ireland had remained a member of the British 
Commonwealth) that he had not discovered this fact. I do not know when 
the penny dropped. By June of next year, I had scored sufficiently well in the 
School Certificate examination to be entitled to a State Scholarship. But I now 
knew that, as an Irish citizen, I could not be given one. As I wrote to my par-
ents: “now ­isn’t it a shame the Dept of Education and myself are on dif­fer­ent 
sides of 60 miles of sea?”
It is typical of my ­father that he never breathed a word to me of the financial 
strain that this absence of support would place on him, any more than he let 
me know of his difficulties in sending me to Shrewsbury. On both occasions, 
my ­father had encouraged me to go ahead, what­ever the cost might have been 
for him. So when I took the train south to Oxford in March 1952, to take the 
scholarship examination, I did not know that my very success might restrict 
my ­father’s finances even more drastically than his original decision to send 
me to Shrewsbury had done, in 1948. More than I realized hung on this exam.

107
20
Oxford 1952
The Scholarship Examination
On March 17, 1952, I arrived in Oxford to take the scholarship examination for 
New College. As far as I can remember, the exam took three to four days. On 
my return, I described the ­whole affair in a long letter to my parents. As can 
easily be ­imagined, I made a special effort to sound grown-up.
­Here is how ­things now stand. I went to the exam having done as much as I 
think I could be expected to do and I do think that I did as well as I could—­
maybe I was a bit heavy in my first paper, only the most experienced hands 
­aren’t and I was pressed for time in the history paper—­but who ­isn’t? I was 
never stuck and I never lost my head—­but I’m not expected to.
This was not mere bravado. I had already taken enough examinations to 
know that they ­were not ­really tests of knowledge. They ­were tests of intel-
lectual poise. They ­were rhetorical per­for­mances in being a “grown-up” histo-
rian. I ­rose with zest to such a challenge. I reviewed my notes carefully and 
hoped for the best.
As an Irish boy from a “northern” school such as Shrewsbury (unlike Win-
chester or Eton), I knew that I was not on the inside track. Arriving at New 
College, I observed the competition with care. I wrote to my parents:
THE COMPETITION!?**! I dream about them! ­There ­were about thirty 
of them, and quite honestly, I ­shall consider it a miracle if I get an award 
against them. . . .
They ­were a forbidding lot. For instance, ­there ­were
the aesthetic young gentlemen—3 of them, one, the archetype, walked with 
his head in the air, flipping his hands, and bouncing from side to side. 

108 
Ch apter 20
He had an infuriating habit of throwing back his head for inspiration during 
the exam and pranced out of it with an almost supercilious smile.
Then ­there ­were the natu­ral insiders:
Of course geniuses are eccentric, [but] much more dangerous than [they, 
are the] cold clear intellects. . . . ​­there ­were about 5 of them, ­were very nice 
but obviously very sure. They ­were Etonians and Wykehamists [from Win-
chester], in fact, they knew as much about their subject as I hope to know 
in a year’s time. They ­were getting on to 18. [I was 16 years 8 months at the 
time.] ­These are the real danger as they are the type the college wants.
(On a page in the letter, I drew a series of caricatures of ­these vari­ous types.)
Faced by such competition, I was like a jockey who had to pull out of the 
pack. Laurence LeQuesne had told me how to do it.
In the En­glish History One, at least, I followed Mr. LeQuesne’s advice in 
being a bit daring, in keeping off the beaten track of 1066 and all that and 
solving prob­lems rather than reciting events—of course, all history scholar-
ship papers are prob­lems, historical debating points to be cleared up. For 
instance, I tackled the difficult one about Wolsey as opposed to a very for-
mal one about Elizabeth’s foreign policy, and also made an opening on 
Tudor Social Policy which interests me im­mensely but which I ­really ­hadn’t 
done much directly upon, and also the same applies to my answer on Meth-
odism. This pays when dealing with the terribly beaten track of En­glish 
history. . . . ​The only ­thing I had had against the En­glish History paper was 
that it showed a most irreverent disregard of early 19th ­century Radicalism.
(This was one of Laurence’s favorite topics: but no question on it turned up.)
I ­rose to the challenge of the essay. It was on one word: “Commonsense.” 
I made full use of the three hours:
[It] was up my street. I went off on a delightful tangent miles from the 
beaten track [that would have consisted] of a recitation of the solid, unpre-
possessing virtues of common sense.
I did it my way:
Well, your eccentric ­little astronomer of a son, proved, with liberal quota-
tions from Voltaire, Rousseau . . . ​Pascal and, coup de grâce, Einstein, that 
common sense was the greatest bar to the pro­gress of scientific thought as 
it can lend itself to a ste­reo­typed system which can only be broken by an 

Oxfor d 1952 
109
act of the imagination resembling the ele­ments of the credo quia impossi-
bile of an Act of Faith. . . . ​I ­wasn’t pressed for time and I wrote 8 sides 
so I enjoyed it im­mensely ­whether the stolidly commonsensical dons agree 
or not is a ­matter of no concern to me—­more fool them if they ­don’t.
­Here, I think, a touch of the disabused approach of an Irishman to upbeat nar-
ratives of pro­gress—­a quarrel with the pre­sent, as Larry LeQuesne would have 
put it—­played a role.
I ended the letter cautiously hopeful:
I ­don’t know how I compare [with the other candidates]. I am not hope-
lessly eccentric, certainly not a genius, my facts are far from mechanical, 
and I enjoy my subject not only ­because its deadly serious but ­because 
it can become exceedingly amusing. . . . ​the rest is in the lap of the gods. 
I ­don’t think I’ll get my results for a few days.
In the end, Larry LeQuesne’s chortle won out. On March 27 I received 
news that I had been awarded an Open Exhibition (a minor scholarship) to 
New College, accompanied by a warning that dates the entire operation to the 
immediate postwar years:
We ­shall not be able to allow you to come into residence ­until you have 
completed your National Ser­vice.
This notice led to a further, somewhat baffled, exchange of letters be-
tween my ­father and Willy Matthews. It was fi­nally ascertained that, as an 
Irish boy, I was not liable for compulsory National Ser­vice. If Her Majesty 
was not prepared to pay for my education, I would, at least, not have to serve 
in her army.
What was a triumph for me was a financial challenge for my parents. An 
Open Exhibition was an undoubted honor, awarded to only a few strictly on 
the basis of their academic per­for­mance in the scholarship examination. But 
it was by no means an offer of ­free tuition. If I remember rightly, it amounted 
to £80 a year. I was also given a Leaving Scholarship of £90 a year from Shrews-
bury. My ­father paid the rest, which would have been at least £150 a year.
To go to Trinity College Dublin (where I would have lived at home) would 
have been far cheaper for my ­father; but with his characteristic unspoken 
ambition on my behalf, he settled down to the prospect of my ­going to Oxford. 
His application to the governors of Shrewsbury School for a Leaving Scholar-
ship to pay part of my way through Oxford was made at this time. I knew 

110 
Ch apter 20
nothing of the extent of the financial difficulties that caused him to apply for 
this help. And so I did not gauge the depth of his generosity.
Eventually, it was agreed that ­there was no point in my staying any longer 
at Shrewsbury. I was too young to go to Oxford in the Michaelmas—­the 
winter—­term of 1952. Instead, I would spend a gap year in Ireland, before ar-
riving at New College in October 1953.
But how would I use this gap year? On what periods of history would I 
concentrate? ­Until then, I had done nothing but early modern or modern his-
tory. As was the case for most schoolchildren in the British Isles, I had been 
taught no history before 1485. “Tudors and Stuarts” ­were our common fare, 
and nothing ­earlier. But my visit to Oxford changed this. I was stunned by the 
sheer beauty of the place. From now onward, the ­Middle Ages, a period of 
which I knew nothing at the time, claimed me ­because of the enduring visual 
impact of the Gothic colleges of Oxford.
A Touch of Beauty
My somewhat brittle report to my parents on the examination itself gave only 
a hint of this moment of conversion. All I wrote was this:
As for Oxford itself, I ­don’t think any written letter can do justice to it. 
I was absolutely enchanted. . . . ​I feel that I’d been ­there months when I left and 
was quite sad to leave it. It’s got to my system and I feel very odd without it.
What I encountered in Oxford, for the very first time, was a glimpse of a truly 
premodern world. It was a reminder of the tingling strangeness of the past, 
such as I had learned to appreciate from Larry LeQuesne. But, unlike the past 
contained in books, late Gothic Oxford filled my eyes directly. I was looking, 
face-­to-­face, at what fifteenth-­century persons had looked at: What did ­those 
strange eyes see? What did they think in seeing it?
In ­those days, the colleges of Oxford ­were far more open to the public than 
they are now. In between examinations, I wandered through them in a daze. It 
was as if I had crossed a magic frontier between the pre­sent and the past. I 
walked through cloisters supported by buttresses crowned with fantastic 
beasts, in and out of chapels bathed in multicolored sunlight from ancient 
glass, and passed ­under arches roofed with lacelike stonework studded with 
heraldic shields. Last of all, I vividly remember walking into All Souls College. 
I looked up at the crenellations of the Hawksmoor Towers, in light-­golden 
stone set against the pure blue of a springtime sky. I resolved, at that moment, 

Oxfor d 1952 
111
that I would study the ­Middle Ages. I would enter into the minds of the architects 
and craftsmen who produced such masterpieces. Steeled by this resolve, I went 
out of my way, in the examination paper on En­glish history, to answer the 
question on Cardinal Wolsey. It was the nearest I could get to that charmed age.
Only ­later did I learn that ­those All Souls towers ­were pseudomedieval 
towers—­brilliantly designed “citations” of Perpendicular Gothic architecture, 
built in the early eigh­teenth ­century by the architect Nicholas Hawksmoor ! But, 
at the time, the magic of so much beauty worked on me. Scholars have become 
medievalists for a variety of reasons—­a nostalgia for a Catholic past lost at the 
Reformation, or a taste for courtly legends, or an interest in the distant begin-
nings of institutions that are still with us ­today. I became a medievalist through 
my eyes. This was, perhaps, the most enduring result of my taking the scholar-
ship examination in Oxford in ­those bright spring days.

112
21
Encounters with 
the Past
Archives and Abbeys
“An Orgy of Benevolence”:  
The Shrewsbury Election of 1796
In the short run, my time machine was not pointed ­toward the ­Middle Ages. 
Laurence had devised for me the perfect remedy for “se­nioritis.” He persuaded 
the county archivists to let me examine the papers connected with an uproari-
ous local election that had taken place in 1796, when two members of the same 
­family—­John Hill of Hawkestone (1740–1824) and William Hill of Attingham 
(1772–1842)—­had fought each other for election as the member of Parliament 
for Shrewsbury. I settled down to read the papers connected with the cam-
paign of William Hill.
This would be the only time that I ever worked in an archive. But it left me 
with a lasting awareness of how dif­fer­ent archive-­based history was from 
the text-­based history that was the norm for ancient historians; and with a 
wish, whenever pos­si­ble, to reach something of the degree of richness, when 
describing the ancient or medieval world, that was pos­si­ble to achieve through 
diving into any archive of more modern times. Opening the boxes that con-
tained William Hill’s papers, I experienced the sharp, almost ghostly, thrill of 
direct access to the eigh­teenth ­century. They ­were filled with the bills and re-
ceipt books of the agents of William Hill, carefully folded and bound with 
ribbons. ­These bills and ­little booklets had not been unfolded or opened since 
1796. I would draw out the pins that secured the pink ribbons which tied them 

Encounters w ith the Past 
113
together. I even sent my parents one rusted pin. This was truly a moment of 
encounter with the past.
Working through the account books of the election agents, I discovered 
God’s plenty. The agents recorded innumerable small payments, each con-
nected with some aspect of the canvassing and the mobilization of voters. I 
discovered that considerable sums of money ­were paid for lodgings for voters 
born in Shrewsbury but now living elsewhere—so as to enable them to estab-
lish residence by staying in town for a few days. Some money went to tidying 
up the damage caused by overboisterous campaigning: £9 pounds ­were paid 
out on April 25 “for curing broken heads.” Much went into banquets. But the 
most impressive item, for me, at least, was 1,524 gallons of ­free beer consumed 
in one inn alone. Last but not least, on election day itself, £1,500 ­were spent on 
flamboyant satin “­favors” (rosettes) to be worn by the supporters of the can-
didate. Adding up the sums, I calculated that, in this ­battle of the dinosaurs, 
William Hill of Attingham had spent £15,414 4s. 9d. to win the election in 
Shrewsbury, “that ­free, ancient and in­de­pen­dent borough in which Venality 
and Corruption have never dared to lift their heads.”
At first, such outlays seemed shocking. But the drudgery of totting up the 
paperwork connected with the election demystified the event. Candidates 
­were supposed to make a splash. But exactly how big a splash? Victorians, 
committed to the cause of parliamentary reform, claimed that the Shrewsbury 
1796 election had cost £100,000. For them, the election was an example of 
boundless corruption. They ­were entirely wrong. I found the overall cost to 
have been a ­little over £15,000.1
Furthermore, a comparison of the language of the pamphlets produced at 
the time of the election (many of them ­were kept in the rare books section of 
Moser Library in Shrewsbury School) with the nitty-­gritty of the archives led 
me to a hypothesis on the nature of aristocratic giving in eighteenth-­century 
­England. To spend money in this way was not to bribe. It was not a ­matter of 
the transfer of “hard, dirty, sordid guineas” for votes (as ­later, Victorian critics 
insisted).
As I explained in a letter to my parents, something more ancient was at 
stake: the duty of the rich to show their love for the community by seeming 
to scatter the good ­things of life—­such as beer and satin ribbons—as widely 
1. R. G. Thorne, History of Parliament 1790–1820: Introductory Survey (London: Secker and 
Warburg, 1986), 6.

114 
Ch apter 21
as pos­si­ble. The expenditure of William Hill was supposed to be “an orgy of 
benevolence, in which all flows like ­water into the mouths of the un-­
enfranchised as much as the enfranchised . . . ​a display of wealth and bounty, 
consistent with the 18th ­century idea that wealth in acres was not only the 
pillar of the community, but [was] like a reservoir which watered all around 
it.” It was my first, but by no means my last, encounter with a psy­chol­ogy of 
heavy spending by the upper classes that intrigued me when I came, in ­later 
years, to study attitudes to civic benefaction and to almsgiving among the 
elites of the ­later Roman Empire.
My final study was over twelve thousand words long. My statistics and 
much of my narrative ­were ­later used by Richard Thorne in his monumental 
History of Parliament.2 I was even told by Laurence that Sir Lewis Namier 
(1888–1960), the doyen of the study of eighteenth-­century politics, had read 
the paper with plea­sure. For me, ­those weeks in the Shrewsbury archives ­were 
a direct encounter with the past at its most rambunctious and seemingly alien 
to modern ways.
“As Proud as Our Own and Yet So Dif­fer­ent”
But, despite my researches in the eigh­teenth ­century, it was the ­Middle Ages 
that slowly but surely riveted my attention. I remember sitting uncomfortably 
on a pile of ammunition boxes, which served as seats in the transept of Saint 
Mary’s Church, in Shrewsbury town, during the ser­vice connected with the 
school’s Fourth Centenary Cele­bration on June 20. I found myself under­neath 
a ­great win­dow filled with late medieval glass that had been brought from Trier 
by a Victorian vicar. One panel showed the emperor Constantine (306–337), 
the first Christian emperor, as a saint, dressed like a Holy Roman emperor of 
the fifteenth ­century—­with a golden crown and a bright white beard that 
seemed like a ray of silver light breaking through his heavy purple robes. I re-
member asking myself what it must have been like to live in a culture with 
no sense of anachronism—­for whom the figures such as Constantine could 
be shown, without any sense of incongruity, in fifteenth-­century dress. What 
sense of time did late medieval ­people have, to enable them to think of distant 
Romans as contemporaries?3
2. R. G. Thorne, History of Parliament. The House of Commons 1790–1820, II: The Constituen-
cies (London: Secker and Warburg, 1986), 337–339.
3. Ivo Rauch, Trierische Glasmalereien des Spätmittelalters in Shrewsbury (Trier: Bischöfliches 
Dom-­und Diözesanmuseum, 1999), Abh. 34, at pp. 49 and 80–81.

Encounters w ith the Past 
115
Laurence also led us out on bicycles into the countryside to see historical 
sites. On one occasion, we cycled ten miles to the south to the ruins of Acton 
Burnell, the ­castle founded in 1284 by a bureaucrat-­bishop, who had been 
chancellor to Edward I. I loved ­these visits. As with the archives, they gave me 
direct, concrete contact with the past. I wrote to my parents:
­Unless you do frequent tours of this nature, Medieval History tends to be-
come an absolute fairy tale. . . . ​Their conflicts are over, the issues which 
perplexed them are, if not solved, ignored. But in the ruins of Acton Burnell 
at last you are in touch with a prosperous ecclesiastic, not an image in 
stained glass, but the tangible proof of a contented, self-­made man, who by 
dint of pen-­pushing, good Latin . . . ​became Chancellor of ­England. ­Here 
is the hall where he ate, ­here is his closet, where he gazed contentedly at 
the surrounding countryside and checked his accounts with the bailiff—­
and so on.
My letters also show that I had plainly picked up Laurence’s acute sense of 
the irrevocable past-­ness of the past, as it applied most sharply to the ­Middle 
Ages. ­Here was a truly distant world, ruled by its own values and committed 
to its own sense of time and beauty. ­Whether we liked it or not, the modern 
world was flanked by a majestic presence that would not go away. I described 
our visit to the ruins of Haughmond Abbey, four miles outside Shrewsbury 
and once the richest shrine in Shropshire: “­There again ­there is tangible proof 
of a civilization as proud as our own and yet so, so dif­fer­ent.”
Somewhat to my surprise, in the following month, this pressing sense of 
the strangeness of the medieval past would be reinforced for me, not in 
­England or in Ireland, but in Switzerland.

116
22
Switzerland and the 
Late ­Middle Ages
Switzerland
On July 29, 1952, I left Shrewsbury and took the train to the south with Laurence 
LeQuesne. He was off to the Channel Islands and I to London. Writing to my 
parents, I summed him up in the characteristically laconic manner of a 
teenager:
Mr LeQuesne seems no more than an overgrown schoolboy, yet he is a very 
brilliant man. He is absolutely perfect as a form master as he can get on with 
absolutely every­one. . . . ​He was enterprising and completely mad and has 
given our standard work a tremendous boost. I would not I am sure have 
done so well with Mr. Se­nior [the Duke].
I went on to London to take advantage of an unexpected opportunity. The 
­father of Julian Crispin, a friend from Shrewsbury, intended to drive to Italy 
on holiday with his wife, and offered to drop us off in central Switzerland so 
as to hitchhike in the region.
This was a totally new experience for me for many reasons. For my ­family in 
Ireland, and for most of their acquaintances, foreign travel had meant travel 
“abroad”—to Sudan and Egypt—­and not to the Continent. Even if they had 
wanted to explore Eu­rope, first the war and then their tightly scheduled leaves 
gave them ­little opportunity to wander on the way. An anxious dash across Paris 
(having arrived from the Channel steamer) to catch the train to Marseilles, where 
their boat would leave for Port Said, was about all of France that they could hope 
to experience. (My ­father remembered being so thoroughly flummoxed that 
he addressed the porters in unusually fluent Arabic rather than in French!)

Sw itzer la nd 
117
But the most redoubtable obstacle of all was posed by the draconian cur-
rency restrictions imposed on Irish and En­glish travelers in postwar Eu­rope. 
The quantity of currency that could be taken abroad was severely ­limited. It 
amounted to a wallet of twenty-­five pounds’ worth of traveler’s checks, each 
of which had to be solemnly cashed at a bank and the transaction recorded so 
as to be shown at customs on our return. I learned that, even for well-­to-do 
families, an air of smuggling surrounded trips to the Continent—­banknotes 
hidden in the upholstery of cars, special arrangements with foreign friends.
Fragments of the journal that I kept at this time show that Julian and I went 
through the predictable ups and downs of young hitchhikers in ­those much-­
traveled mountains. But we ­were by no means the happy Eurokids of ­today. We 
had to make that precious twenty-­five pounds sterling last for two weeks. Julian 
and I went hungry more often than I admitted when writing to my parents.
Along with ­these constraints went a sharper note of insecurity. This was a 
truly postwar Eu­rope. To travel was to meet former allies and former ­bitter 
enemies. We traveled from Zu­rich to Einsiedeln with Werner, a sunny, brisk 
young German from Munich, Lederhosen and all. Halfway through the trip, 
without a moment’s hesitation, he informed us that Hitler had been “A Man of 
the ­People”—­aus dem Volk—­and that it was natu­ral that the Germans should 
have loved him. ­After that, we did not quite know what to say to Werner.
Hence, also, a touchiness on our part about being recognized as foreigners. 
For Julian and myself part of the adventure of travel abroad was the attempt to 
“pass” as natives, as if we ­were spies in a foreign land. It never worked. We ­were 
invariably spotted as En­glish. I, at least, could parry that I was not quite what 
they thought I was. I was kein Engländer. I was Irish—­and, therefore, some-
what of an oddity to them.
Looking back, I think that this spy’s wish to merge with our surroundings 
was not entirely a young man’s affectation. It was a tribute to a very real sense 
that, in postwar Eu­rope, before the development of a Eu­ro­pean Community, 
countries and cultures ­were assumed to be very dif­fer­ent from each other. 
We could not act as if every­one spoke En­glish. A very real language gap and a 
culture gap separating the countries had to be crossed.
A re­spect for differences, experienced sharply in foreign travel, was no bad 
start for a historian of distant regions and periods. And, in any case, when it 
came to making our way on a slender bud­get, ­there was nothing affected about 
the wish to speak the local language. It was often a ­matter of bed and board, 
and of making ­those few pounds sterling stretch for yet another day. It helped 
greatly that Julian had been taught by Kek to speak good German.

118 
Ch apter 22
Entering the ­Middle Ages
As I look back, what did this journey mean to me? Above all, it was an entry 
into the ­Middle Ages. I had already begun in Oxford and in Shrewsbury, with 
my enthralled wanderings through the cloisters of Oxford, with my rumina-
tions beneath the stained glass image of Constantine in Saint Mary’s Church 
in Shrewsbury, and my visits to the medieval ruins of Shropshire. My visit to 
Switzerland marked the culmination of a series of unexpected visual encoun-
ters that made me ­eager to study the ­Middle Ages.
In the Historical Museum of Bern I sat for hours in front of the 
Burgunderbeute—­the Burgundian Booty. It consisted partly of splendid Flem-
ish tapestries that had been taken by the Swiss from the defeated Burgundian 
army of Charles the Bold (1433–1477) ­after the fatal ­Battle of Grand­son in 1476. 
This was my first direct contact with the sheer strangeness of the ­later ­Middle 
Ages. In ­these tapestries ­were beautiful men and ­women whose beauty was 
not our own—­figures marked out by exquisite, angular gestures, with long, 
pointing fin­gers and supple hands. They had refined pale ­faces, curly hair, and 
long thin legs prolonged by pointed shoes, so that they looked like opulent 
frogs. Most puzzling of all was their sense of the past. The Roman heroes of 
antiquity ­were shown as medieval knights in full plate armor. The emperor 
Trajan appeared on ­horse­back as a feudal prince, with a ­great shield that bore 
the two-­headed ea­gle of the Holy Roman Empire.
To enter such a world was to pass a frontier between the modern age and 
something hauntingly dif­fer­ent—­ideas of beauty and of time not our own. 
Next to the tapestries ­were a series of rooms, each carefully reconstructed from 
the fifteenth ­century through to the baroque. This was my first experience of 
“period” rooms put on display in this manner in a museum. To linger in the 
subdued light of the late medieval room was to step back into a period just 
before the glare of the modern age, which began (for us schoolboys) with 
Christopher Columbus, Martin Luther, and the Tudors. It was to cross an al-
most occult threshold backward in time, into an unknown, stranger Eu­rope.
The Waning of the ­Middle Ages
I returned to Ireland with the feeling that I had found an entire new world 
to explore, as distant and as challenging, in its way, as the planets floating 
in the depths of space that had riveted my attention only two years previously. 
In the first weeks ­after my return from Switzerland, I went into Dublin ­every 

Sw itzer la nd 
119
morning to read The Waning of the ­Middle Ages by Johan Huizinga (1872–1945) 
in the marble-­encrusted reading room of the National Library of Ireland.
No book could have conveyed more vividly the thrill of making contact 
with an alien world. Huizinga had an extraordinary gift for presenting the glit-
tering surface of life in late medieval France and Flanders as if this plethora of 
vivid details, in itself, revealed a deep otherness, a formidable, challenging 
distance between ourselves and the past. He implied that the hearts and minds 
of late medieval ­people ­were not like ours. They saw the world differently in 
more ways than we had ever realized.
To the world when it was half a thousand years younger, the outlines of all 
­things seemed more clearly marked than to us. . . . ​Honours and riches ­were 
relished with greater avidity and contrasted more vividly with surrounding 
misery. We, at the pre­sent day, can hardly understand the keenness with 
which a fur coat, a good fire on the hearth, a soft bed, a glass of wine, ­were 
formerly enjoyed.
Even the sounds that surrounded medieval ­people struck them with greater 
force, as if they ­were ­human voices—­such as the hideous clanging of the big 
bell of the city of Valenciennes, in 1455, as two citizens hacked at each other in 
a judicial duel.1
Religion, Imagination, and the ­Middle Ages
The vividness and the sense of strangeness communicated by Huizinga in his 
grippingly beautiful descriptions thrilled me. Yet I was also aware that I myself 
lived in a society, Ireland, which shared in religious traditions that went back 
to before the Reformation.
I was a boy from a Protestant ­house­hold. My own religious imagination was 
molded by traditions of personal piety that derived (if largely unknowingly) 
from the inward-­looking, Christocentric devotion of the late ­Middle Ages. 
­Every after­noon, I would solemnly read The Imitation of Christ of Thomas à 
1. J. Huizinga, The Waning of the ­Middle Ages: A Study of the Forms of Life, Thought, and Art in 
France and the Netherlands in the XIVth and XVth Centuries, trans. F. Hopman (New York: Saint 
Martin’s Press, 1924), 1–2: this is a translation of Herfsttij der Middeleeuwen (Haarlem, 1919). For a 
more recent translation, see Johan Huizinga, The Autumn of the ­Middle Ages, trans. R. J. Payton and 
U. Mammitzsch (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1996). See also W. E. Krul, Historicus tegen 
de tijd. Opstellen over leven en werk van J. Huizinga (Groningen: Historische Uitgeverij, 1990).

120 
Ch apter 22
Kempis (a product of the piety of the Brethren of the Common Life in 
fifteenth-­century Holland and Flanders) as the radio of our next-­door neighbor 
played Chopin’s Berceuse at the beginning of ­Children’s Hour. In this moment 
of repose, I found myself reading the Imitation both as a text of late medieval 
lit­er­a­ture and as a guide to my own religious life. I was left wondering what 
Christ had meant to ­those who had first read the Imitation and had filled their 
eyes and hearts with his lean, pale figure, as shown in innumerable fifteenth-­
century paintings. These months ­were very much the time of what I would call 
my “Flemish Mood.”
Hence the profound impact on me of a brilliant historical novel—­The Man 
on a Donkey by Hilda Prescott (1896–1972).2 It was about the Pilgrimage of 
Grace of 1536–1537—­the ­great uprising in ­England against the dissolution 
of the monasteries by Henry VIII. It evoked the turning of an age, between the 
­Middle Ages and the Reformation.
What impressed me most about Hilda Prescott was that she was a fully 
paid-up historian. By the time she wrote The Man on a Donkey, she had already 
written a biography of Mary Tudor and would soon produce brilliant trans-
lations and studies of late medieval pilgrims to the Holy Land.3 She could 
convey the feel of a period through tiny, iridescent details as vividly as could 
Huizinga. She had an uncanny sense not only of the brittle splendor of early 
Tudor ­England but also of its chilling streak of cruelty. The Man on a Donkey 
was an unparalleled evocation of the religious imagination of medieval 
­England in its last days.
Above all, it was a book of ­great beauty. I have always remembered Hilda 
Prescott’s description, at the end of the book, of Gib Dawe, the failed priest, 
leaving London a broken but still proud man, passing Saint Paul’s on the road 
to the West:
As they passed Paul’s ­great church it stood up to the south, between them 
and the drab ending of the day. But the light that smudged the sunset sky 
so mournfully . . . ​blazed fire-­red in the west win­dow, as though some feast 
­were prepared within, with lights in plenty and flame leaping from the 
hearth for the cele­bration of some high holy day; as if a ­great King held 
2. H. Prescott, The Man on a Donkey (London: Eyre and Spottiswoode, 1952).
3. Hilda Prescott, Jerusalem Journey (London: Eyre and Spottiswoode, 1954) and Once to 
Sinai (London: Eyre and Spottiswoode, 1957).

Sw itzer la nd 
121
carousal ­there, with all his joyful ­people around Him, with all His ­children 
brought home.4
I had seen such beauty. Reading this passage, I remembered the stained 
glass of the antechapel of New College, alight with bright greens, deep purple, 
blue, and gold, as the early morning light blazed through it, at the time when 
worshippers gathered before breakfast for Holy Communion.
4. Prescott, The Man on a Donkey, 2:694.

122
23
German at Home
Er nst Scheyer
Dr. Ernst Scheyer (1890–1958)
As had been arranged, I left Shrewsbury one year early and returned home to 
Ireland to spend a gap year before I was old enough to go to Oxford in Octo-
ber 1953. The gap year between high school and college is a far more common 
experience nowadays, and it is easy to forget that it was a rare event at this time. 
(Far from enjoying a gap year, En­glish boys ­were required to do two years of 
National Ser­vice between school and university, which made my own case even 
more unusual.) For me, it was a decisive year. It was the first and only year that 
I had ever passed in its entirety in Ireland since I went to Shrewsbury in 1948. 
It was the year in which I developed on my own, by constant, lonely reading, a 
deep interest in the ­Middle Ages, followed, at the end of the year, by a fascina-
tion with the end of the Roman Empire. But the most impor­tant gain of all in 
that year was an entry into Eu­rope at its very best through learning German 
from Dr. Ernst Scheyer at Trinity College Dublin.
I had returned from Switzerland determined to learn German. In order to 
do so I had planned to make another tour in Eu­rope and then to stay with a 
German ­family. This was not at all to my ­father’s liking. He wanted me to learn 
my German in Dublin at Trinity College. Trinity was only a three-­quarter-­hour 
journey from Glenageary on the familiar number 8 bus. (This was the bus from 
whose top deck I had seen the swastika waving at half-­mast above the German 
Embassy on the day of Hitler’s death, only seven years previously.)
Dr. Scheyer took me on as a private pupil. He was a Jewish refugee from 
Germany. Trained as a ­lawyer in Silesia, he had earned the Iron Cross in World 
War I. ­After Kristallnacht (November 9, 1938), he was placed for a time in the 

Ger m a n at Home 
123
Sachsenhausen concentration camp. He arrived in Ireland in 1939, without 
even a passport, having been urged to do so by his son, who happened to be 
studying medicine at Trinity. He worked his way up as a teacher of German to 
become assistant in German at Trinity College. He gave me lessons in a vacant 
classroom.
An imposing figure, invariably formally dressed in a gray pinstripe, Scheyer 
not only taught me German. He also showed me what it was to be a cultivated 
Eu­ro­pean. His first assignment was to write an essay, in En­glish: “The Meaning 
of Culture.” Similar assignments followed—­“Must the Artist Always Be at 
Odds with Society?” and “What Do We Owe to Ancient Greece?”
Soon I was writing similar essays in German: for instance, on the medieval 
and Re­nais­sance ele­ments in the life and painting of Albrecht Dürer. For 
Scheyer not only taught me to read German; he also taught me to think Ger-
man. His favorite teaching text was Stefan Zweig’s Sternstunden der Menschen, 
with its mixture of vivid historical portraits and ruminations of a very German 
kind on the nature of history. It was my first contact with an entire culture, and 
not just with a language.
I ended up with the privilege of sharing tea with him at Bewley’s Café in 
Nassau Street. He presided at the ­table, lavishing compliments on all the wait-
resses in an innocuously old-­world style. They called him “Dearie” and fed him 
with cream puffs. He plainly loved Ireland. He told me with especial pride that 
he had recently delivered eight talks on the principal broadcasting station of 
the American-­occupied zone of Germany as “The Voice of Ireland.” A few 
years ­later Scheyer taught my cousin, Anthony Tatlow, inspiring him with a 
love of German that ­later made him a leading interpreter of the works of Ber-
thold Brecht.1
­There was yet another academic contact that I could have made through 
Scheyer. My ­father was concerned that I should keep up my Latin before I 
arrived at Oxford. Scheyer immediately suggested a friend, who taught at Uni-
versity College Dublin—­none other than Ludwig Bieler (1906–1981), the 
­great Austrian scholar of early medieval Ireland who had fled to Ireland in 1938. 
But Bieler’s fees ­were too high for my ­father and the bus journey to where he 
lived was too complicated. ­Little did I know that I had missed the opportunity 
1. On Ernst Scheyer, see now Gisela Holfter, “Ernst Scheyer,” in German-­Speaking Exiles in 
Ireland 1933–1945, ed. Gisela Holfter (Amsterdam: Rodopi, 2006), 149–169, and Gisela Holfter, 
An Irish Sanctuary: German-­Speaking Refugees in Ireland 1933–1945 (Oldenbourg: De Gruyter, 
2017).

124 
Ch apter 23
to learn Latin from one of the greatest scholars of early medieval Ireland, 
whose edition of the Confessio of Saint Patrick I have worked through line-­by-­
line on many occasions.
It was only when I came to Oxford that I realized how much I owed to 
Dr. Scheyer. At this time, Oxford medieval studies concentrated heavi­ly on 
­England and France. With German, a larger Eu­rope was opened up to me—­
the entire area east of the Rhine as far as Poland and the Balkans, as well as a 
formidable tradition of German scholarship on the ancient world and on Byz-
antium. In effect, knowledge of German doubled the range of my knowledge 
of medieval Eu­rope, and ­later proved essential for my work in ancient history. 
At the same time, it opened me up to very dif­fer­ent ways of thinking about 
history (especially about the role of ideas in history) from what I could have 
gathered from the sober empiricism that was dominant in ­England. German 
took me across a frontier of the mind, into a very dif­fer­ent historical culture 
from that to which I was accustomed.
Quiet Days
I was happy to be back in Ireland. It was the first and only time ever that I was 
at home with my parents for an entire, unbroken year. I was very much on my 
own. The fact that I had gone to Shrewsbury, rather than to a local Protestant 
public school, meant that I had few friends. Instead, I walked, and read, and 
dreamed, digesting my German lessons and devouring the books that I would 
bring home from the Royal Dublin Society Library.
Glad to be relieved of the financial burden of yet another year of school fees, 
my ­father spent the one hundred pounds that he received ­every year from an 
educational insurance scheme—­very pointedly—on a new anthracite-­burning 
stove for the kitchen. The stove was a demanding creature. It required the regu-
lar removal of the caked ashes ­every evening—­a ritual that my ­father per-
formed with characteristic care and pertinacity. He called it “the Moloch.” But 
the Moloch was a crucial addition to a ­house with no central heating of any 
kind. It kept the kitchen warm and enabled me to read beside it in a comfort-
able wicker chair, with which I associate the absorption of so many books, 
both at this time and in my ­later years, at Oxford. I owe a lot to the Moloch.
Glenageary was a good place to be lonely. Over the hill, beyond Dalkey 
­Castle, the Vale of Shanganach spread out ­toward the south in the direction of 
Bray. This spectacular view was rightly likened to the Bay of Naples. Not for 
nothing ­were roads beside it named the Vico Road and Sorrento Terrace. On 

Ger m a n at Home 
125
a bright day, the view through twisted pines to the golden rocks of Dalkey 
Island could have been a scene from the ancient Mediterranean.
Down the hill from Glenageary lay the Forty Foot—­the Gentleman’s Bath-
ing Place, where the honey-­colored granite rocks dropped sheer into forty feet 
of icy ­water. Pink gentlemen braved the waves in all weathers, launching them-
selves from a rusty iron ladder. Once, as I was standing somewhat hesitantly 
on the ladder, facing a stormy sea, an el­derly gentleman edged past me with 
the words: “Keep an eye on me, young man. It’s the old ‘ticker,’ you know.” 
Wherewith the gentleman with the delicate heart struck out over the swaying 
waves as if on his way to Wales.
My ­father was happy to be back from “abroad.” He seems to have had no 
nostalgia for Sudan and rarely spoke about his days ­there. He took over the 
management of the ­family firm of Brown and Gilmer, which manufactured 
compound feeding stuffs. Brown and Gilmer was not exactly an industrial 
­giant; but it made a sufficient profit, ­every year, to pay my ­father a salary and 
to support my aunt Mai. The work required the exact touch that my ­father, as 
an engineer, was only too glad to contribute. He would tell me (from his care-
fully drawn-up charts) all about the precise balance of chemicals required for 
the weaning of piglets and the growth of young hens.
His clients, alas, did not always appreciate his pains. They ­were slow to pay 
their bills. My first taste of whiskey was when my ­father and I ­were being en-
tertained by one such client, a prosperous farmer in the Wicklow Mountains, 
whom my ­father had visited in order to ­settle an account. We got whiskey but 
no check. I noticed that the powder room of the ­house was hung with expen-
sive drapes to imitate a medieval tent. The farmer could have spared my dad a 
few hundred pounds.
Typing and Shorthand
My own outreach to modern Ireland was dif­fer­ent from that of my ­father. I 
de­cided to learn shorthand and typing at the Dún Laoghaire Technical Col-
lege. This was a visit to yet another world. It revealed, with par­tic­u­lar clarity, 
the ambiguities of Irish nationalism at this time. The Technical College was a 
state institution. And Irish—­not English—of course, was the official language 
of the state. Every­thing we did was in En­glish. But my final diploma was in 
florid Irish, written in an elaborate neo-­Celtic script.
This nationalism extended to the typewriters themselves. Their key-
boards used Irish, not En­glish, characters. They had been designed for the 

126 
Ch apter 23
bureaucracy of the new Ireland, where, indeed, a knowledge of Irish was 
mandatory—­hence their use in a course designed to produce ­future govern-
ment servants. This led to strange anomalies. We learned to type and to take 
shorthand notes entirely in En­glish. But it was on ­these stoutly national ma-
chines that we typed. In the final examination for the diploma, I remember 
typing a passage from Galsworthy’s Forsyte Saga in Celtic characters that went 
directly back to the early Christian Ireland of Saint Patrick.
But Dún Laoghaire Technical College meant more to me than a diploma. 
It was the very first time that I shared a common learning experience with girls 
of my own age—­and with Catholic girls at that. Drawn from the neighbor-
hood, they ­were good-­natured, talkative, and shrewd. They ­were also very 
motherly, as many of them ­were the eldest ­sisters of large families. I never 
stammered for an instant in their presence. It was a necessary reminder—at a 
time when Ireland was seen, from the outside, as a bastion of intolerance—of 
the common bonds of civility that, fortunately, contradicted the impression 
of unremitting conflict given, all too willingly, by the bullies and the 
loudmouths.
Encouraged by the newly acquired skills of typing and shorthand, I settled 
down to read and to take notes on the rich haul of books that I would bring 
back, ­every fortnight, from the Library of the Royal Dublin Society.

127
24
End of the Ancient 
World
­Toward the Ancient World
Around halfway through this gap year, what I would call my “High Flemish” 
enthusiasm for the late ­Middle Ages waned a ­little. The reasons for this ­were 
partly connected with my living in Ireland, where I was constantly made aware 
of my parents’ past in Sudan. Even if they did not talk much of their experi-
ences, the bookshelves in our drawing room made me aware of a wider 
world—­the challenging presence of the “abroad” with which our ­family had 
been involved. A large, deluxe edition of T. E. Lawrence’s Seven Pillars of Wis-
dom was in the privileged bookshelf beside the fire in our drawing room, 
flanked by a copy of Sudanese Courtesy Customs. Whenever I came home from 
Shrewsbury and, then, from Oxford, I would read The Seven Pillars from cover 
to cover.
But I was not especially attracted to the present-­day ­Middle East. Far more 
impor­tant was the ancient Near East. This was largely due to my Protestant 
background. The Church of Ireland maintained an intensely biblical version 
of Protestantism. This did not mean that it was in any way fundamentalist. 
Rather, it valued knowledge of the Bible—­both of the Greek New Testament 
and of the Hebrew Bible: the Old Testament. Jacob Weingreen (1908–1995), 
the author of A Practical Grammar for Classical Hebrew (from which I ­later 
learned Hebrew) was professor of Hebrew at Trinity College Dublin from 1939 
onward. A much-­beloved mentor of the Protestant divinity students at Trinity, 
he ensured that they knew—­and understood—­the Old Testament in its origi-
nal language.

128 
Ch apter 24
As a result of this re­spect for biblical culture, the ancient Near East, revealed 
in the narratives of the Hebrew Bible, was a constant imaginative presence. 
When out of ideas on what to preach—­a frequent enough occasion for him—­
our local rector would read to us, in his sermons, long passages from Sir Leonard 
Woolley’s accounts of his excavation of Ur of the Chaldees. He read out ­these 
descriptions of ancient Ur with such enthusiasm that I was often left wonder-
ing why Abraham should have abandoned such a well-­appointed city!
It was the same with Greek. The Galilee and Judaea of the Gospels and the 
Aegean world revealed by the Acts of the Apostles—­­Middle Eastern and 
Mediterranean landscapes—­were more real to me than ­were the ­great cathe-
drals of northern Eu­rope or even the cloisters of Oxford. In this, I was very 
much the product of a Protestant Hellenism—­shared by Anglicans, such as 
the Reverend Furnival in Shrewsbury, and by members of the Church of Ire-
land. Greek, not Latin, was the key to my faith. In this way, the gravitational 
pull of the world of the Bible made me increasingly interested in the ancient 
Near East and in the Roman Empire that had formed the background to the 
New Testament.
Saint Patrick and the End of Empire
­There was a further interest that pulled me ­toward the last centuries of the 
Roman Empire. Across the sea, in Britain, the Romans had left a heavy im-
print. Roman roads ­were still vis­i­ble in parts. Roman towns and villas had been 
excavated. The ruins of Hadrian’s Wall reached across the North of the island, 
like the sloughed-­off skin of a vast stone snake, as a perpetual reminder of the 
awesome discipline of an empire that had once stretched from Arabia to Scot-
land. En­glishmen still tended to identify themselves with the Roman Empire 
as a model for their own dominions.
But across the Irish Sea, ­there was none of this. Ireland had remained a 
barbarian island, never occupied by Rome. And yet Saint Patrick, the national 
saint, had been a Roman—­a Romanized Briton called Patricius, who had first 
been brought to Ireland as a slave (perhaps in around the year 430). He was a 
piece of ­human flotsam swept across the sea to county Mayo as a result of an 
upsurge of slave raiding that followed the crash of the fall of Rome. I realized 
that, to understand the beginnings of the Golden Age of early Christian Ire-
land, I had to understand the Roman Empire in its dramatic last days.
Rather than bask in an identification with Rome at the height of its power, 
which came only too readily to many En­glishmen, I found myself looking at 

End of the A ncient Wor ld 
129
that colossal structure in its decline, seen from the outside, from the barbarian 
side of the frontier. It was a form of double vision—of Rome and of the world 
beyond Rome—­that would stand me in good stead in ­future years.
The Decay of Ancient Civilization
It was with this interest in the Roman Empire in my mind that I scanned the 
ample shelves of the Library of the Royal Dublin Society for something to 
read. In the early summer of 1953, I found a book that would prove decisive for 
me: one of the greatest masterpieces of Roman history written in our times—­
The Social and Economic History of the Roman Empire of Mikhail Ivanovitch 
Rostovtzeff (1870–1952). I lighted on Rostovtzeff entirely by accident. A mas-
sive, olive-­green volume, brilliantly illustrated with photo­graphs of ancient 
scenes and objects (each explained in lengthy captions) and written in a firm 
and pellucid En­glish, the book ended with a ­grand finale—­a chapter entitled 
“The Oriental Despotism and the Prob­lem of the Decay of Ancient Civiliza-
tion.” In this chapter, Rostovtzeff sketched out in lapidary prose (all the more 
chilling for not being rhetorical) his views on “the social revolution of the third 
­century, which destroyed the foundations of the economic, social and intel-
lectual life of the ancient world.”1
I read this chapter with the thrill of a young man when faced with any ac-
count of some truly memorable disaster. It was a disaster that seemed to speak 
directly to me. It told the story of an empire created and expanded by an 
enlightened bourgeoisie that, in the course of one ­century, was ruined and 
replaced by a military caste drawn from a rebellious peasantry. Rostovtzeff 
argued that the notorious civil wars of the third ­century ­were not irresponsible 
coups d’etat. They amounted to a thinly veiled social revolution, by which the 
vast majority of the Roman world—­a peasantry largely untouched by classical 
culture—­took their revenge (as soldiers) on the cities that had, for centuries, 
exploited and marginalized them. The ­later empire of the fourth ­century was 
a ghost of itself—­a brutalized society, ruled by vio­lence and swayed by irra-
tional, religious forces that had been held in check in ­earlier times.
Rostovtzeff had written his masterpiece in exile from revolutionary Rus­sia. 
The sharpness of his analy­sis owed much to the fate of his own class at the 
hands of the Bolsheviks. Furthermore, when the book appeared, in 1926, ­there 
1. M. I. Rostovtzeff, The Social and Economic History of the Roman Empire (Oxford: Claren-
don Press, 1926), 477.

130 
Ch apter 24
was no telling ­whether this collapse might not happen throughout Eu­rope. 
Pro nobis fa­bula narratur—­the end of Rome, as told by Rostovtzeff, was our 
story also.
In ­later years I came to disagree with the main ­theses of Rostovtzeff and his 
followers. But it was through Rostovtzeff that I gained entrance to the ancient 
world. He had described the crisis of the third ­century AD and its conse-
quences on a ­grand scale, in a way that linked Roman Britain, the Mediterra-
nean, and the ­Middle East in a single, fateful convulsion whose ramifications 
I followed intently as the last months of my gap year slipped by.
As a result of this year of quiet absorption, I came to Oxford with two historical 
interests: the ­later ­Middle Ages and the crisis of the ancient world in the third 
­century. What the two interests had in common was the excitement of studying 
two ­great and ripe cultures about to undergo shattering transformations—­the 
fall of Rome and the Protestant Reformation. Brilliant beginnings, bright 
Golden Ages did not thrill me. ­Whether at the end of the Roman Empire or 
at the waning of the ­Middle Ages, it was the lurch of change ­toward the un-
known and the unthinkable that held my attention. Which one of ­those two 
interests I would follow at Oxford, and which would come to form the basis 
of my more lasting scholarly endeavors, was entirely open at this time.
To Become a Historian
But I had already taken one irrevocable step—­I had “historicized” my imagina-
tion. The history of distant ages now claimed my mind. I maintained my inter-
est in amateur astronomy. I continued to attempt to put together telescopes. I 
exchanged with a zealous fellow astronomer, Frank Mechan, notes on how 
best to take photo­graphs of the moon though mounted binoculars. The cor-
respondence with Frank—­a boy from a working-­class ­family in Belfast whom 
I had met at a Dublin meeting of the Irish Astronomical Society—­was a heart-
ening instance of the ability of science to cross the charged frontier between 
the Irish North and South. I contributed to the Irish Astronomical Journal and 
even engaged, in its pages, in a lively correspondence with the director of the 
Dunsink Observatory concerning the origins of the lunar rays (­those bright, ra-
diating scars that partly covered the dark surface of the Mare Cassium). The ­later 
lunar landing proved us both diametrically and equally wrong! But the stars ­were 
no longer where my mind was. I had become an unregenerate historian.
Maybe I had gone a bit too far. I remember how, at the time when my jour-
ney to Oxford approached, I fell into conversation with an el­derly man at the 

End of the A ncient Wor ld 
131
National Gallery of Ireland as we both walked through the Flemish and Dutch 
rooms. It was a characteristically courteous and unassuming encounter such 
as often happened in Dublin. I explained to him my fascination with the hyper-
realism of the Flemish Primitives. I expatiated on their value as historical 
sources—­how much they told us about the society of the fifteenth-­century 
Netherlands.
He told me that he, also, had once felt the same about ­those paintings. But 
now he felt that he had moved on. He wanted beauty. He had come to love the 
wild seas and lowering skies of the Dutch masters of the seventeenth ­century. 
Dressed in a heavy tweed overcoat, he must have been as old as I am now. He 
told me, at the end, that he was about to enter hospital for an operation. “This 
is my chance to take a breath of sea air.”
I never saw him again. But it was a warning—­not all of lit­er­a­ture and art can 
be dragooned to serve a historian’s agenda: ­people need to “breathe” paintings 
as well as to use them as documents. It would take not years, but de­cades, for 
this warning to sink in. It has never done so entirely. But that is part of what it 
means to become, for good or ill, a historian.


Part II
Oxford to  
All Souls


135
25
Idylls
Oxfor d 1953
Oxford 1953
From 1953 to 1956 I was an undergraduate at New College, Oxford. (It had 
been “new” to the university when founded in 1379.) In many ways, it is decep-
tively easy to write about ­those years. Descriptions of “Oxford Days”—­like 
many other descriptions of student life—­are a well-­known genre, ­whether 
tinged with bitterness or with nostalgia. What is harder to communicate is the 
close interdependence of inner journeys of the mind (launched by the sudden 
profusion of imaginative and intellectual challenges provided by Oxford) and 
the unwieldy structures through which this energy was channeled in the uni-
versity system of that time.
The distinctive structures of Oxford University ­were always difficult to ex-
plain to outsiders (such as Americans and Eu­ro­pe­ans) and have become so 
dif­fer­ent nowadays from what they ­were in the 1950s that they need to be ex-
plained even to persons in con­temporary Britain.
Studying at Oxford was intended to be a short experience: three years only. 
It was also a narrow experience: I was allowed to study only history. ­These 
three years culminated in a drastic occasion. I was not subject to continuous 
grading, as in an American university. Rather, every­thing depended on a final 
examination (two papers a day for about a week). This examination resulted in 
a grading into classes. ­Those who ­were in the first class (restricted to around 
6 ­percent of the candidates) and the top of the second class found the world 
at their feet—­they ­were sure of an entrée into the professions, and would be 
accepted as researchers and teachers in Oxford and elsewhere. But ­those who 

136 
Ch apter 25
did not make it to the first or upper second class could barely hope to continue 
as scholars.
Oxford University itself was an archipelago of autonomous colleges, each 
of them a ­little university in itself, committed to preparing students for their 
final examination in any subject. Almost all of the teaching was done by 
tutors—­the famous dons of Oxford—in each of ­these colleges. It usually took 
the form of weekly (and sometimes biweekly) tutorials of one hour each that 
consisted, ideally, in a one-­on-­one discussion of an essay read out to the tutor. 
­There ­were few lectures, and none of them ­were mandatory: ­there was nothing 
like the American system of university-­wide lecture courses. In the absence of 
a common grading system such as tracks the pro­gress of students in American 
universities, every­thing depended on the one and only throw of the final exam. 
It was the business of the college tutor, through the privileged medium of 
personal tutorials, to prepare the undergraduates for the one, supreme test 
of a single university-­wide exam on which, in many cases, their ­future ­careers 
depended.
How to communicate a system of teaching based to such an extent on the 
face-­to-­face methods of the tutorial system, without the help of the lecture 
courses and seminars that consume the time of so many American and Eu­ro­
pean students? How to mea­sure academic pro­gress in a system where every­
thing depended on the wager of one final examination—­a veritable trial by 
combat—­with no system of cumulative grading with which to back it up? How 
to explain the fact that many of the ­great names of Oxford of this time, though 
well known as Oxford “figures” (one thinks of C. S. Lewis) ­were almost exclu-
sively in contact with students of their own college alone, and ­were known 
to other undergraduates only as creatures of gossip and rumor? How even to 
begin to describe the glacis that separated men from ­women students at ­every 
level up ­until the 1970s? ­There have been times when, speaking to my own 
gradu­ate students at Prince­ton, I have thought that it was easier to explain the 
Merovingians than the ins and outs of the Oxford in which I had once studied 
and taught.
Yet this explaining must be done. The distinctive structures of Oxford ex-
ercised a ­silent but decisive influence on what was taught and what was not 
taught. For instance, the tutorial system, based on weekly encounters with a 
don, might seem a very relaxed and open-­ended affair. But when harnessed to 
the need to satisfy examiners in a single final examination, the system tended 
­toward a narrowing of the topics taught. Historians studied only history; and this 
history itself tended to be reduced to a set of topics that ­were sure to “come up” 

Idylls 
137
in the final examination, and that could be handled briskly in the single hour 
of a tutorial.
Hence a fatal drift ­toward the lowest common denominator of po­liti­cal and 
institutional history—to “grown-up” history such as “Duke” Se­nior approved of. 
This happened at the expense of the wider field of the history of religion and 
ideas and the history of the world beyond Eu­rope. The result was at once philis-
tine and Eurocentric. The history of Asia, Africa, and the Amer­i­cas was left to 
specialists and made ­little or no appearance in the regular curriculum for under-
graduates. Altogether, history, as taught in Oxford, was still seen as a training 
ground for civil servants, colonial administrators, and ­lawyers. It amounted to 
the study of power by ­future wielders of power, largely ­limited to ­England alone.
Choices that have come to seem quite natu­ral nowadays, such as the teach-
ing of non-­European history or the joining of ancient and modern history, 
­were largely unheard-of. For such options to be considered, entire worldviews 
had to weaken, and changes in the syllabus, such as seem quite innocuous 
nowadays, had to be hammered out through a pro­cess of negotiation as slow 
and ponderous as the retreat of a glacier. This was the Oxford to which I came 
as a student in 1953, and which I did not leave ­until 1974. Let me attempt, in 
­these coming chapters, to set the story of my own intellectual development 
against the distinctive rhythms of an educational system that now lies, like an 
intricate coral reef, almost seventy years in the past.
But that, of course (thank God!), was not all that ­there was to Oxford. It 
was also a place where a small number of privileged late adolescents (a tiny 
proportion of the overall population of Britain, and mainly males) ­were set 
­free, in a state of remarkable comfort, to enjoy nothing short of the idyll tradi-
tionally associated with life at Oxford.
Idylls
When I first arrived at New College, on October 7, 1953, and the college porter 
showed me to my rooms, I was convinced that ­there had been a ­mistake. ­These 
rooms seemed far too ­grand for an undergraduate. My two rooms—­a bed-
room and a sitting room—­were on the second floor of a “Gothic” building of 
the 1920s. A large oak door stood open, faced by a splendid bay win­dow, with 
mullioned frames, set in a deep, wide alcove. A fireplace in beige marble was 
decorated with heraldic Tudor roses and framed by white-­painted Gothic pan-
eling. ­These, surely, must be the rooms of a don. But no, said the porter: they 
­were mine.

138 
Ch apter 25
Next morning, I had another surprise. I was disturbed by sounds in the 
living room. Then the door of the bedroom opened and a spritely ­woman with 
tight-­curled hair and a tight slit hobble skirt, which showed bright-­orange silk 
beneath, walked past my bed to pull the curtains, with a “Brr, it’s cold, dearie.” 
She had already turned on the gas fire to warm the living room. She asked 
­whether I would like a cup of tea. This was Rosie Thorne, the wife of Harry 
Thorne. She would be my “scout” for the next two years. Rosie and her hus-
band, Harry, ­were a college institution. When I returned on one occasion, half 
a ­century ­later, in 2004, and talked to a college servant as he polished the wood 
of the stalls of the college chapel in the dim light of a wintry after­noon, I men-
tioned where my rooms had been. Yes, indeed: ­those ­were Rosie’s staircases. 
Of course, he remembered “Rosie and Old ’Arry.”
I became one of Rosie’s young men. She took me in hand. She made sure 
that my shoes ­were polished. She arranged for an academic gown for me. She 
looked out for a reliable bicycle. She passed on a se­lection of the books left 
­behind by the former occupant of the rooms. She told me what college rules 
­were “silly,” and which ones I would be well advised to obey. Within a few weeks, 
I was using my typewriter (with pride in the new skill that I had acquired in Dún 
Laoghaire Technical College) to address envelopes for her for the British Legion, 
of which Rosie was an active member. I could reassure my parents:
in rooms, ser­vice, meals and every­thing, we are treated like the young gen-
tlemen we are supposed to be; . . . ​[this] came to me as quite as pleasant a 
surprise as the furniture of my rooms.
The ­thing I noticed immediately, before every­thing ­else, was the charm-
ing manner of the Porters and servants; no offhandness, no sleekness, not 
a single scrap of wrong information.
Well-­cossetted by Rosie Thorne; graciously received by my tutor only once 
a week; ­under no obligation whatsoever to attend any university lectures; with 
no other academic obligation than a few gentlemanly classes given in college 
in preparation for a preliminary examination that lay a good half year ahead: 
I was ­free to do what we ­were all supposed to do in Oxford—to enjoy an idyll. 
And that, in New College in the late autumn, was not difficult. I could sink into 
the beauty that had first surrounded me when I took the scholarship examina-
tion in 1952:
The sun is setting in a red haze ­behind the medieval crochets and spires of 
the skyline; the ­Virginia creeper and the weeping willows against the Old 

Idylls 
139
Wall are like pink clouds in the sunset; the New College choir is singing 
gorgeously in the Chapel, and for some reason all the bells are tolling, and 
the pidgeons are wheeling to and fro around the silhouetted Bell Tower 
and the black-­edged trees of the Quadrangle.
Or, at least, this was how it was supposed to be. Instead, the very beauty of 
the place, combined with the virtually gravity-­free existence of an Oxford un-
dergraduate of the 1950s, brought on, at the headlong speed of which only 
young persons are capable, a series of religious and imaginative earthquakes.
The Thirties in the Fifties
It takes some effort of the imagination to recapture the sharp tang of loneliness 
that accompanied the life of late adolescents in so privileged an environment. 
Waited on hand and foot in the college, we ­were truly on our own. To “show 
the oak,” by closing the large wooden door into one’s rooms, was the sign of a 
right to absolute privacy.
I had never enjoyed such privacy at Shrewsbury, nor even at home. I had 
no ready-­made peer group to fit into. In New College, Wykehamists (former 
boys from Winchester public school—­the school founded by William of 
Wykeham in the ­fourteenth ­century as the twin of New College) had the repu-
tation of being clannish. But this clannishness was less obvious than I had 
expected: the two years of National Ser­vice tended to loosen the bonds be-
tween members of the same school.
Now we ­were all equally alone. We ­were like ­little drops of mercury on a 
tray. How would that tray tilt, in such a way as to cause ­those lonely drops to 
run together again—to “re-­glob”—in new friendships, coteries, socie­ties, or 
sports teams?
As I look back, one ­thing strikes me. Many of my friends wished to re-­create 
the 1930s. The war still stood like a shell crater between them and the supreme 
ease, mingled with disquiet, of prewar Oxford. They wanted to have their thir-
ties in the fifties. This was not difficult. Many of the public figures who ­were 
invited to speak in Oxford socie­ties or clubs ­were only too happy to fight the 
­battles of ­those years. I described to my parents the talk delivered by Stephen 
Spender (1909–1995) to the Poetry Society at St Hilda’s College:
The room was packed to bursting point, with the effect that we festooned 
ourselves in galleries, on win­dow sills, stood on ­tables, perched, even on 
ladders, and the edge of the low dais . . . ​like prolific baroque cupids. 

140 
Ch apter 25
Stephen Spender was a very power­ful character indeed; a big, greying man, 
in a blue serge suit and light brown shoes, he had a strong face, with bright 
eyes and prominent veins ­behind his eyes. He read some of his own poems, 
and, most in­ter­est­ing, read the poems he had read with [W. H.] Auden in 
the Oxford of the Thirties. He warned us all . . . ​that they had made an 
effort to keep politics and social prob­lems out of their work and poetry, but 
that the slump, and three million unemployed, did more to shake them out 
of that mood than the Spanish War, Fascism or Communism. This is very 
in­ter­est­ing, as he is sure ­there ­will be a slump . . . ​and unemployment ­will 
be near enough [to] home to even the most idyllic poet [and would] have 
very much the same . . . ​effect as [it had had] on Spender and Auden. 
Spender’s poetry was good; and we all shoved out, without paying [a mem-
bership subscription!] at nine-­thirty.
We had been, for an hour, in the 1930s.
Argument
Nowhere ­were the ­battles of the 1930s relived with such intensity as on the 
issue of religion. The old trench-­works of the confrontation between belief and 
unbelief, Marxism and Catholicism, ­were as clearly vis­i­ble in the early 1950s 
as in the prewar days. If anything, they had been sharpened by the perils of the 
war and by the advent of the Cold War.
Hence the fascination of Evelyn Waugh’s Brideshead Revisited, which had 
appeared in 1945. ­Here was a tale of the manner in which sacred and profane, 
Catholicism and class, ­were deliciously mingled in an ­imagined Oxford of 
the 1930s. Brideshead Revisited became something of a cult book in my circle. The 
worldly-­wise among us claimed that Waugh’s sickly-­sweet mixture of snob-
bery and religion was best savored over gin and orange. They usually declared 
that they ­were, of course, unbelievers; but that, of course, the only Chris­
tian­ity that was worthwhile not believing in was the opulent, prickly Catholicism 
of Evelyn Waugh.
For an Irish Protestant boy to find himself in such a heady atmosphere 
was to tempt providence. What had been a frontier between two tribal reli-
gions, where identity was as fixed as granite on both sides—­Protestant and 
Catholic alike—­suddenly collapsed. In the climate of Oxford, religious al-
legiance became as labile as mercury. ­There was no telling which way the 
droplets might flow.

Idylls 
141
I found that some of my best friends ­were Catholics. Richard Bolney 
Brown—­Dick Brown—(1935–2010) came from a recusant Yorkshire ­family. 
A Catholic of the old style, Dick was not given to the subtle paradoxes of sa-
cred and profane represented by Evelyn Waugh. He was a solid and intelligent 
believer, well able to stand up for his faith; but I noticed that jokes about reli-
gion did not amuse him.
We bonded immediately. I wrote about Dick to my parents, with a heavy-­
handed jocularity. I was plainly worried that they might object to my having 
Catholic friends.
I met and spent the eve­ning with, a boy of about my age; Richard Brown, 
a commoner in Zoology and, shadows of the Jesuits, a Roman Catholic. We 
had a long talk about Catholicism, history, the evils of dialectical material-
ism, training falcons and astronomy. He is very nice and very widely read, 
and ­there is no lack of common ground to talk about and argue on; in fact 
I have been with him most of the time.
. . . ​though we talk theology much of the time, it is done without any 
vehemence.
Dick introduced me to the work of his teacher, the ­great Niko Tinbergen 
(1907–1988), on animal ethology. I learned from him what visual signals trig-
gered aggression in the stickleback, and about the rapid breeding habits of the 
short-­lived fruit fly, capable of producing any number of generations in a nano-
second; and how this high-­speed flickering of the generations made pos­si­ble 
experiments in the transmission of ge­ne­tic mutations on which the theory of 
evolution depended. Dick was also a keen ornithologist. I reciprocated his 
introduction to ge­ne­tics and ethology by translating for him a German article 
on the migratory patterns of the Arctic tern.
This cat’s cradle of newly formed friendships was crucial. Undergraduates 
in 1950s Oxford ­were assumed to pick up their general culture from their en-
vironment, not from their tutors. Their tutors ­were usually cultivated, and 
often widely traveled, persons. It was assumed that some of their sophistica-
tion would rub off on their charges. But they related to their students primarily 
as coaches. Their business was to prepare the young for the final examination. 
Our friends ­were our culture. Dons could be dull dogs. What we talked about 
among ourselves was what ­really stirred us.
And in this culture of perpetual argument, religion played a major role. As 
I described myself and my friends to my parents, we seem an egregious bunch, 
out to enjoy our Oxford idyll:

142 
Ch apter 25
I have had innumerable opportunities of tilting, over glasses of port, at a 
confirmed agnostic; yesterday we argued till all hours; Patrick Goodbody 
[an Irish boy, who had gone to Shrewsbury], Richard Brown and myself 
versus two bespectacled unbelievers. We chased them from premise to 
premise, spun a fine web of contradictions around their arguments and 
generally had a wonderful time of it; an enormous amount of give and take, 
without acrimony and mellowed with port.
But what tectonic plates of feeling might come to shift, in oneself, as a result 
of ­those long eve­ning hours?

143
26
Very “Oxford”
C. S. Lewis
Very “Oxford”
The best-­known contributor to the religious debates of the time was C. S. 
Lewis (1898–1963). As a fellow of Magdalen College, Lewis had been a pres-
ence in Oxford since 1925. He left Oxford for a professorship at Cambridge 
in my first year; and although he continued to live on the edge of Oxford, in 
Headington Quarry, he was less often seen in town. I saw him only twice, and 
I never spoke to him. But what ­little I saw made a deep impression on me.
Early in my first term, on October 15, 1953, I attended a meeting of the famous 
Socratic Club—­a club dedicated to debate between Christians and unbelievers. 
It was very much a student initiative, founded in 1941, ­after an undergraduate, 
Monica Shorten—­later an eminent authority on squirrels—­complained that 
nobody seemed to discuss the questions posed by agnostics. The ­women’s 
chaplain, Stella Aldwinckle (1907–1989), an evangelical with the Oxford 
Pastorate, got to work to found a club—­the Socratic Club. She prevailed on Lewis 
to act as faculty sponsor and president. He regularly attended its meetings.1
Lewis was ­there that eve­ning. Given his formidable reputation as a debater, 
I was surprised to see a subdued figure, sitting low and long in an armchair, by 
no means the center of attention. Indeed, he seemed ill at ease as he listened 
to the pre­sen­ta­tion of Peter Geach (1916–2013), a rising star of the analytical 
philosophy movement, who dismantled, one by one, the rational proofs for 
the existence of God. Not that Geach was an unbeliever. Far from it: he and 
1. Stella Aldwinckle, “Memories of the Socratic Club,” in C. S. Lewis and His Circle, ed. Roger 
White, Judith Wolfe, and Brendan N. Wolfe (Oxford University Press, 2015), 192–194.

144 
Ch apter 26
his wife—­the better-­known phi­los­o­pher Elizabeth Anscombe (1919–2001)—­
were devout, even traditional, Catholics. But they ­were also disciples of Lud-
wig Wittgenstein (1889–1951) and resolute upholders of the new, assertive 
trend in critical philosophy that was then very much in vogue among the clever 
young. This was plainly not the way that Lewis wanted philosophy to go.
Yet I sensed from my glimpse of him at that meeting that Lewis was caught 
in his own reputation. He had “a gladiatorial side” and was not immune to the 
intellectual truculence expected of an Oxford figure.2 A review of one of his 
first books on religion—­Pilgrim’s Regress in 1933—­praised it as a “very ‘Oxford’ 
book.” By “very ‘Oxford,’ ” the reviewer meant Lewis’s capacity to administer 
crushing intellectual put-­downs in an urbane and fluent manner. He was ex-
pected to be a “bonny fighter.”3
In Oxford of the early 1950s, a directness of argument that bordered on 
rudeness—­even browbeating—­was highly esteemed, particularly among 
young men. Undergraduates (particularly ­those who studied philosophy) 
­were supposed to value such agonistic qualities, and to thrive on intellectual 
conflicts.4 Many of us came to the Socratic Club in order to hear sharp Oxford 
minds make mincemeat of each other. Hence my surprise to see Lewis uncom-
fortable, when the brittle and esoteric atmosphere of analytical philosophy 
threatened to engulf his Socratic Club.
A few weeks ­later, I attended one of Lewis’s famous lectures on Milton. This 
was a very dif­fer­ent Lewis. The lecture was delivered in the spacious South 
Room of the Examination Hall. What I heard was an orator at the height of 
his powers. Lewis’s resonant voice transformed the room. The heavy swags 
of carving in the ­great wooden canopy beneath which he spoke seemed to 
come alive, and to tumble down in a baroque exuberance that mirrored the 
richness of Milton’s own poetic genius.
Then, suddenly, in the midst of this high oratory, an ad hominem argument 
would come down with the trenchancy of a butcher’s chopper. Some critics 
seemed puzzled that, in his poem Lycidas, Milton spoke more about himself 
2. John Wain, “­Brothers and Friends,” in C. S. Lewis and His Circle, ed. Roger White, Judith 
Wolfe, and Brendan N. Wolfe (Oxford University Press, 2015), 223–238, at 227.
3. Walter Hooper, “Oxford’s Bonny Fighter,” in Remembering C. S. Lewis: The Recollections of 
­Those Who Knew Him, ed. James T. Como (New York: Macmillan, 1979), 241–308, at 247.
4. Benjamin J. B. Lipscomb, The ­Women Are up to Something: How Elizabeth Anscombe, 
Philippa Foot, Mary Midgley, and Iris Murdoch Revolutionized Ethics (Oxford University Press, 
2022), catches this atmosphere very well.

Very “Oxfor d” 
145
than about the dead person whom he was supposed to mourn. Nonsense! 
Lewis answered: if an acquaintance of yours was run over by a bus on High 
Street, your thoughts at the funeral would not be about the fellow in the coffin, 
but about yourself. It was a touch of earthy common sense deliberately de-
ployed to clinch an overpowering rhetorical per­for­mance.
Looking back, I think that I had seen two sides of Lewis, each of which bore 
the imprint of his long years at Oxford. The side that spoke more directly to 
me was not Lewis the “bonny fighter,” but Lewis the exuberant expositor of 
Milton and of other classics in the ­great tradition of Eu­ro­pean religious lit­er­
a­ture. His gifts as an apologist for Chris­tian­ity grew out of a supreme confi-
dence in traditional values and beliefs, nourished by his teaching and by a 
lifestyle that included idyllic moments among like-­minded friends:
My happiest hours are spent with three or four old friends . . . ​sitting up till 
the small hours talking nonsense, poetry, theology, metaphysics over beer, 
tea and pipes. ­There’s no sound I like better than adult male laughter.5
The Oxford countryside spoke to him of a similar ideal. Writing of the sound 
of bell ringing as he walked down Cumnor Hill ­toward Stanton Harcourt, he 
described “the sense of absolute peace and safety: the utter homeliness, the 
En­glishness, the Christendom of it.”6
This was the sort of idyllic moment for which we all yearned and ­were en-
couraged to yearn. For Lewis, to become a Christian was, somehow, to regain 
that peace. Conversion to Chris­tian­ity meant a return to basics—to something 
more solid and more ancient than the fads and feverish ideologies of the mod-
ern age: to certainties that had “the homespun truth of folk-­tales . . . ​and the 
freshness as of earth in the morning.”7
He agreed entirely with Dr. Johnson: “Sir, he who embraces the Christian 
religion rejoins the main tide of ­human existence.”8 It was his mission to show, 
5. C. S. Lewis, biographical preface to Perelandra (New York: Macmillan, 1944); see Roger 
Lancelyn Green and Walter Hooper, C. S. Lewis: A Biography (Hammersmith: HarperCollins, 
1974, 2002), 170.
6. The Letters of C. S. Lewis to Arthur Greeves (1914–1963), ed. Walter Hooper (New York: 
Collier/Macmillan, 1979, 1989), 321.
7. C. S. Lewis, Pilgrim’s Regress: An Allegorical Apology for Chris­tian­ity, Reason and Romanti-
cism (London: Geoffrey Bles, 1933), 172.
8. The Collected Letters of C. S. Lewis, vol. 2, Books, Broadcasts, and the War, 1931–1949, ed. 
Walter Hooper (San Francisco: Harper, 2000), 304.

146 
Ch apter 26
in a major center of learning, that Chris­tian­ity, and not unbelief, could still 
hold the high ground of culture.
Translation and the Desire for God
But I knew Lewis from his writings before I came to Oxford. My own relation 
to him was more inward-­looking, less concerned with his feats as an apologist 
for Chris­tian­ity than with with his works of religious advice. In my gap year in 
Ireland, I had read The Screwtape Letters. With their fine-­grained analy­sis of 
personal motivation (combined with a dash of waspish social satire directed 
against “worldly” snobs and groupies) they ­were a natu­ral successor, in my 
readings, to The Imitation of Christ of Thomas à Kempis. Both books grew, 
ultimately, from the same deep root of Augustinian interiority that I would 
­later come to know, though I had no inkling of it at that time. ­There was also 
a touch of dour, Low Church Ulster Protestantism in Lewis the moralist’s 
impatience with highfalutin nonsense, and his insistence on calling a spade a 
spade, which I recognized and valued.
This sense of kinship was not surprising. ­After all, we shared the same island. 
Though Lewis was an Ulsterman, he had taken many holidays in the South. It 
was while cycling around Glendalough and the Vale of Avoca (only ten miles 
inland from Bray) in 1913, at the age of fifteen, that he had experienced his first 
“imaginative re­nais­sance,” provoked by the sheer beauty of the site.
Indeed, I can well understand how this could happen. At roughly the same 
age as Lewis, I almost disposed of my entire ­family for the same reason. I had 
only just learned to drive. Coming over the crest of the hill that wound down 
from the Wicklow Mountains through the Sally Gap, I was so struck by the 
beauty of the monastic settlement of Glendalough, nestling between two sil-
very lakes, that I wanted to stop to admire the scene. But I mistook the clutch 
for the brake. The car lurched forward, threatening for an awful moment to 
take myself, my parents, and a plenitude of aunts at top speed down the hill!
What I truly admired in Lewis was his ability to treat his readers with re­
spect. He wrote for the average Christian. He deplored the tendency to assume 
that laypersons ­were uninterested in theology and in the rational basis of their 
faith. His animus against High Church, neo-­orthodox gurus was famous. He 
blasted T. S. Eliot for “trying to make of Chris­tian­ity itself one more, highbrow, 
Chelsea, bourgeois-­baiting fad.”9 Caught between the emotional “revivalism” 
9. Roger Lancelyn Green and Walter Hooper, C. S. Lewis: A Biography (Hammersmith: 
HarperCollins, 1974, 2002), 132.

Very “Oxfor d” 
147
of many Protestants and the hieratic snobbery of many High Church theolo-
gians, Lewis wrote that “my task was therefore simply that of a translator—­one 
of turning Christian doctrine into the vernacular, into language that unschol-
arly ­people would attend to and understand.”10 I loved him for it.
But ­there was more to it than that. I was also touched by Lewis’s robust 
notion of the innate desire for God:
That un-­nameable something, desire for which pierces us like a rapier at the 
smell of a bonfire, the sound of wild ducks flying overhead . . . ​the opening 
lines of Kubla Khan.11
All the ­things that have deeply possessed your soul have been but hints of 
it—­tantalizing glimpses. It is the secret signature of each soul, the incom-
municable, unappeasable want, the ­thing we desired before we met our 
wives, or made our friends, or chose our work, and which we ­will still desire 
on our deathbed. . . . ​If we lose this, we lose all.12
Conversion and Imagination
­These ­were high thoughts. But in the Oxford of 1953 it was not easy to live up 
to them. To whom could I turn? A Protestant boy from Ireland, I had no built-
in prejudice against the Low Church, Evangelical religion associated with 
OICCU—­the Oxford Inter-­Collegiate Christian Union. OICCU was called 
by some “Oik’s Union.” Its members ­were assumed to be boorish, anti-­
intellectual, and, somehow, lower-­class. I did not share that snobbish view. 
Many of the leading figures in OICCU had been to Shrewsbury, though I had 
not known them ­there. They had a thriving church. It was also a church that I 
could describe with a good conscience to my parents:
I usually attend choral evensong in Chapel, which is very beautiful but a bit 
Popish. The ­people I admire are the Christian Union; they are very low 
church and evangelical, and, in a very intellectual atmosphere, riddled with 
High Anglicanism, Neo-­Thomism and sheer unbelief, they are very down-­
to-­earth indeed; with prayer meetings, Salvation, and a wonderful, hulking 
­great preacher in a packed church each Sunday [The Reverend Keith De 
Berry of St. Aldate’s]. That was a refreshing sight, last Sunday; a parish 
10. Walter Hooper, C. S.Lewis: A Companion and Guide (San Francisco: Harper, 1996), 27.
11. Lewis, Pilgrim’s Regress, 9.
12. C. S. Lewis, The Prob­lem of Pain (London: Centenary Press, 1940), 150.

148 
Ch apter 26
church so full that they had to have chairs up all the aisles, chairs in front of 
packed choir stalls, and the door wide open, though, I would imagine that 
the numbers ­will thin off a bit in the next few weeks.
So it was ­toward OICCU that I turned. They offered a strong and active 
group. Their anti-­intellectualism did not worry me. I did not want apol­o­getics. 
I wanted moral octane. I wanted a new life, and I wanted it no longer as a 
“tribal” Protestant, but by choice. It was not surprising that, in early spring of 
1954, I went to Harringay Arena to hear Billy Graham (1918–2018) preach in his 
Crusade for Britain. My memory is of the crackling atmosphere of a vast, metal-
lic space, brilliantly lit by banks of searchlights. The sheer size of the gathering 
seemed to proclaim that this was an occasion where ­great ­things might happen. 
It was also strangely moving to hear hymns that reached back to my own child-
hood, at church in Bray and Glenageary, sung by a choir of hundreds.
But Graham himself was no manipulator. A description of his impact, next 
year in 1955, on a large congregation in Cambridge, catches very faithfully the 
essence of Graham’s charisma:
His voice was attractive, his sincerity unchallenged, and his approach to 
religious prob­lems so artless . . . ​as to make his impact on large congrega-
tions equally surprising and alarming.13
It was the utter simplicity of Graham’s message that caught me. He preached 
on one theme only—­the Repentance of King Manasseh. Manasseh was one 
of the last kings of Israel. Having murdered the prophets and reinstalled the 
worship of heathen gods, he had been led into exile by the king of Assyria.
He took Manasseh with hooks and bound him in fetters of bronze and 
brought him to Babylon. And when he was in distress he entreated the ­favor 
of the Lord his God and humbled himself greatly before the God of his 
­fathers. He prayed to Him and God received his entreaty and heard his sup-
plication and brought him again to Jerusalem into his kingdom. Then 
Manasseh knew that the Lord was God. (2 Chronicles 33:11–13)
It was time for me to do the same. I joined the crowd of persons who walked up 
the aisle to the front of the stadium in order to receive the forgiveness of God.
Then a strange ­thing happened. To the best of my memory I had gone alone 
to Harringay. Though I was allotted a counselor ­after I had stepped forward 
13. V.H.H. Green, Religion at Oxford and Cambridge (London: SCM Press, 1964), 357.

Very “Oxfor d” 
149
(as was the normal practice during a Billy Graham crusade), I did not have an 
OICCU minder at my side to interpret the experience to me in orthodox 
Evangelical terms. To my surprise, I felt carried on a wave of sheer pagan joy. 
Somehow, tectonic plates in the back of my mind had shifted to set my imagi-
nation ­free.
I took the train to Ireland the next day, with Lewis’s Pilgrim’s Regress and 
The ­Great Divorce in my luggage. When I read them in the next weeks, it was 
not Lewis the moralist who spoke to me from them. It was the ebullient Lewis, 
the expositor of the “wild Platonism” of late antiquity and of the School of 
Chartres—­a Platonism where ­every joy in Heaven was echoed, somewhere, 
somehow, on earth. The ­great scenes of victory and transformation that gave 
an epic tone to ­those two books ­were what I fastened on. It seemed that my 
imagination—­somehow jolted ­free by Billy Graham—­needed richer fare than 
what OICCU could provide.
“A Living and Organic ­Thing”: Catholicism
In Oxford ­there was, in effect, only one other group that claimed to provide 
such fare—­the Catholic Chaplaincy. The entire tone of Oxford and of ­those 
around me favored this route. I had Catholic friends such as Dick Brown. But 
Dick, as a good son of an old Catholic ­family, was largely uninterested in ef-
forts to send converts along “the road to Rome.” My main support came from 
the atheists. For them, the only Chris­tian­ity worth ­either fighting or adopting 
was Catholicism. Many ­were aesthetes and already well used to travel on 
the Continent. ­Every cathedral, ­every monastery, ­every ­great painting in the 
museums they visited spoke in ­favor of Catholicism as the true religion of 
Eu­rope. The growing Cold War emphasis on the “Unity of Eu­rope” favored 
such a view. ­Whether one believed in it or not, Catholicism seemed to offer 
a way to a wider, richer world than did the unprepossessing Protestantism 
of the British Isles.
What I sought in Catholicism at this time differed greatly from what I had 
absorbed from C. S. Lewis. Lewis had taught me a morality based on intro-
spection and on the desire for God. My questions to the Catholic Church ­were 
driven, rather, by an urgent need to know ­whether this world and the next, the 
natu­ral and the super­natural, truly touched each other at any point, in any 
Christian ritual, within any Christian organ­ization, and in any perceptible 
manner in the long history of humankind. Put bluntly: Did the history of the 
Church show that a naked wire of super­natural power somehow snaked in and 

150 
Ch apter 26
out of the ­human past? Was Christ truly pre­sent in the flow of history as he 
was believed to be pre­sent in any Catholic church, where the red light glowed 
in the dimness of a side altar before the shrine of the Blessed Sacrament—­
that pure white wafer, which contained the real presence of Christ in this 
world? Looking, as a Protestant, into the Catholic churches of Ireland, I had 
glimpsed ­those lights. Was it pos­si­ble that ­these mere “chapels” (as Protestants 
called them) ­were the place in which to find, against all expectation, a world-
wide religion sheathed—­here and now and in all previous centuries—in the 
tingling carapace of truth?
The notion of the church, as presented by Catholic apologists, caught my 
imagination. I was challenged by the claim that the history of humankind had 
room for a vast invisible community—­best seen, in almost biological terms, 
as an organism spreading through the centuries. This is what I read in The Spirit 
of Catholicism of Karl Adam (1876–1966), which had been recommended to 
me by Catholic friends.
What Adam emphasized, in his pre­sen­ta­tion of Catholicism, was that the 
church was not a static institution. It contained within itself an im­mense ca-
pacity for growth, for adjustment, for the further development of its original 
doctrines that made it seem as fertile as the teeming earth, and as irresistible 
as the surge of an evolutionary pro­cess: “a living and organic ­thing . . . ​[driven] 
by the vital power of living fellowship.”14 Read by a nineteen-­year-­old, with the 
triumphant, almost menacing tread of Tchaikovsky’s Fifth Symphony—­heard 
for the first time—­echoing in his head, ­these ­were intoxicating words.
Byzantium
But it was ­there that I ­stopped. The history of the church as I had come to 
know it (for I had begun to study the history of high medieval Eu­rope) was 
not like that. Karl Adam might appeal to the huge self-­confidence of western 
Eu­ro­pe­ans that history—­and, a fortiori, the history of the Catholic Church—­
was on their side. But it struck me that ­there was something parochial in his 
insistence that this majestic growth was ­limited to the Church of Rome alone. 
What of the Chris­tian­ity of the East? In the last months of my gap year in 
Ireland, my interest in an “abroad” that stretched beyond medieval western 
Eu­rope had already led me to Byzantium. It was then that I read the History of 
the Crusades by Steven Runciman (1903–2000), which viewed the intrusion 
14. Karl Adam, The Spirit of Catholicism (New York: Macmillan, 1929), 135 and 137.

Very “Oxfor d” 
151
of the Catholic Crusaders of the West into the ancient Christian lands of Byz-
antium and the ­Middle East as an inexcusable disaster.
In 1954, Runciman delivered the Waynflete Lectures on the Eastern Schism 
(the division between the Orthodox and the Latin churches ­after 1054) in 
the ­great dining hall of Magdalen College. I listened to them spellbound. 
In the dark hall, with his face lit up from below by the light on his podium, 
Runciman looked like a saint from a Byzantine icon of the Palaeologan period. 
He told a miserable story of misunderstandings, of high-­handed bullying, and, 
eventually, of the sack of the city of Constantinople in 1204 by the Latin Cru-
saders, carried out in the name of the Roman Catholic Church.15
Such a sequence of events assorted ill with the euphoric pa­norama sketched 
by Karl Adam. My historical imagination said: No—­there was no unique 
golden thread woven into the rough cloth of history. ­There ­were only ­human 
protagonists. But each of them was as strange and as challenging to the imagi-
nation as any ­imagined triumphal narrative, across the centuries, of an infal-
lible, organically evolving church. Slowly, the strangeness of history won out 
as the dominant preoccupation of my mind. My sense of mystery lay ­there.
In any case, it was time for a break. The summer vacation of 1954 had come, 
and I was planning, with three friends, to tour the Gothic cathedrals and the 
Romanesque churches and abbeys of France. ­Here, if anywhere, we would 
make direct acquaintance with the ­Middle Ages.
Insensibly, over the months, I had drifted away from the Christian pre­sent 
into the Christian past. My interest in this past was that of a historian and not 
of a believer. For the next twenty years I was attached to no church. When I 
resumed worship in the mid-1970s, it was in very dif­fer­ent circumstances, and 
with very dif­fer­ent preoccupations from ­those that had gripped me, at the age 
of nineteen, in the 1950s.
15. S. Runciman, The Eastern Schism (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1955).

152
27
France 1954
On the Road
In the summer of 1954 I was able to soak my eyes in the medieval churches and 
cathedrals of France. This journey proved decisive for my ­future study of the 
­Middle Ages. Ever since my first experience in Oxford, when I had drifted in 
a dream in and out of the colleges in the spring of 1952, I had known that the 
sight of monuments and works of art gave me entry into the past. Now, on my 
first experience of France, I realized, once again, the extent to which I was a 
visual historian: stained glass win­dows, capitals filled with strange beasts, 
­grand porticos, and high apses gave real­ity to what I read in texts.
From June 22 to July 23 1954, I traveled from northern France to Provence 
and back with three friends from New College in a large and antiquated car. It 
was not an easy ­ride. ­There was always the strug­gle (as in Switzerland) to make 
our currency allowance last for an entire month. We camped out ­every night. 
­Every eve­ning we drank our wine by the glass only, when we would have loved 
to drink the entire ­bottle that was invariably brought to our ­table.
We complemented each other very well. I was the only one who had not 
been to France before. The ­others ­were old hands. John Sainty was very much 
the “Eu­ro­pean” of the party. He spoke good French and planned to stay on in 
France with a French ­family. He would eventually become a se­nior civil servant, 
Clerk of the Parliaments and Knight Commander of the Bath. Back then he 
sported bright red hair and a vivid beard, which made him look like Vincent van 
Gogh. ­Every eve­ning, he would be our leader in the all-­important ­matter of ne-
gotiating a camping site in the depths of the country. We would approach a farm:
The talking drill is superb; we advance daintily, through puddles and hay, 
avoiding barking dogs: at a given signal, we all take off our straw hats, hold 

Fr a nce 1954 
153
them humbly in our hands, while John advances slowly and negotiates for 
a camping site and “eau potable”, with much gesticulation and rolled “r” ’s.
Sometimes the camping was idyllic:
dark green trees, splashed with light; a limpid stream bubbling from ­under 
a moss covered bridge; a soft clearing sloping from the roadside and pro-
tected by a bank from the stream; lichenous masonry half covered with 
leaves; a patch of young trees to the right; and the treetops all green and 
gold, up in the eve­ning sky.
Sometimes it was spooky, as when we made our way through thick, dank veg-
etation, like the heroes of Conan Doyle’s The Lost World, to find a sleeping 
place in the caves of the quarries outside Avignon from which the stone of the 
Palace of the Popes had been taken. As we moved farther south, municipal 
camping grounds replaced the isolated farm­houses, and we made contact with 
the local youth culture:
That night, of all nights, was a beano ball; we sat drinking sirops through 
straws ­under fairy lamps . . . ​the loudspeaker blared forth hot American 
numbers, the soldiers from the barracks danced quicksteps and sambas, 
and the majority of girls danced in pairs . . . ​­under the most glorious stars—­
the Milky Way, ­great clouds of light, all Scorpio [above the horizon] and 
Mars glowing well above the foothills of the Alps
Often it rained, with summer cloudbursts that left us flooded out.
­Here Andrew Martindale, the disciplinarian of the party, would remind us 
that we “Had What It Takes,” as our primitive stove alternately spluttered and 
exploded in the attempt to make breakfast. Andrew, like John, knew what he 
wanted. He had traveled in France before. He was already determined to be an 
art historian. The prob­lem of the individuality of the medieval artist attracted 
him even then—as his ­later work on Simone Martini, on the nature of art 
patronage in the late ­Middle Ages, and on the world of Mantegna would show. 
He went on from Oxford to the Courtauld Institute, and taught the history of 
late medieval and early Re­nais­sance art at the University of East Anglia ­until 
his early death in 1995.
Kester George was the Wykehamist of the party—an alumnus of Win-
chester School. As the mechanic and driver of the car, he had much occasion to 
practice the renowned sang froid of a product of Winchester. The car lacked a 
working petrol gauge, leading to unpredictable halts in the ­middle of nowhere.

154 
Ch apter 27
I was the navigator. I had planned the itinerary through intensive reading 
in the art history section of the Ashmolean Library. It was ­there that I discov-
ered L’art religieux du XIIe siècle en France by Émile Mâle (1862–1954), which 
had only recently appeared.1 Our itinerary was largely based upon it. Though 
now dated in many ways, Mâle could not have been a better guide: his works 
unlocked the iconography of Romanesque and Gothic carving, imparting a 
sense of having mastered the grammar of an exotic language. He enabled stu-
dents to understand displays of religious sculpture that, at first sight, ­were as 
exuberant and as opaque to the uninitiated as the mythological sequences of 
a Hindu ­temple. Scenes from the Old and New Testaments, pious legends, and 
mythical beasts all came together as parts of a grandiose diorama of the history 
of mankind, as it was known to medieval persons, from the creation of Adam 
to the Last Judgment.
Furthermore, Mâle was a robust diffusionist. He was interested in the 
spread of skills and motifs from one region to the other. This meant that his 
book followed artistic currents along the pilgrimage routes that reached from 
northern Eu­rope to the depths of Moorish Spain. Mâle also gave due weight 
to the old-­world grandeur of Byzantium, which continued to influence the art 
of the West in the eleventh and twelfth centuries.
Hence the shape of our itinerary, as we followed the flow of artistic creativ-
ity across Romanesque and Gothic France. It was an attempt to combine the 
Gothic North of France with the more southern regions in which Roman-
esque art had developed.
The Lure of the South
The journal that I wrote at this time showed that my heart was already in the 
South and in the Romanesque rather than in the spectacular Gothic cathedrals 
of the North. I was duly stunned by Chartres and Bourges. But I sensed, in the 
Romanesque shrines of Burgundy and of southern France, a society still 
bathed in the long, sad twilight of Rome, before the brilliant but all-­too-­
dazzling supernova of the Gothic Age. I was not particularly interested in 
ancient Roman ruins, and I knew next to nothing about the art of late antiq-
uity. But I did know that I wanted something older and more southerly than 
the France of the ­great cathedrals of the North.
1. Émile Mâle, L’art religieux du XIIe siècle en France (Paris: A. Colin, 1949).

Fr a nce 1954 
155
Hence my joy when I reached the Loire. The exquisite ­little church at Saint 
Germigny-­des-­Prés took me back to a more ancient Chris­tian­ity.
It is a small, warm coloured ­little building with a low tower and three apsi-
dal chapels bulging out on ­either side, roofed with red tiles, and screened 
with hedges of tamarisk and roses. In the porch, covered with rambling 
roses, and housing a baptismal font of the 7th ­century, sat M. Totti, the 
curé. . . . ​He led us into a beautiful ­little garden, overlooked by the apse of 
the church; ­here the red tiled roof ­rose up framed by ­rose bushes and four 
pure white doves waddled—as they have waddled for over a thousand 
years—­along the path to the ­little vicarage. It was a charming scene, perfect 
for the ­little church, which does not seem to have changed since the days 
of Charlemagne.
Inside, the apse was covered with a shimmering mosaic of blues, greens, and 
darkened gold that could have come from Ravenna. It was a fragment of Byz-
antium nestling in the water-­meadows of the Loire.
­Later that eve­ning, sitting in a restaurant looking out at the porch of Saint-­
Bénoît-­sur-­Loire (the ­great abbey of Fleury, founded in the seventh ­century 
and rebuilt in the eleventh), I knew that this was what I wanted:
­Every now and then a saintly looking old man in a monk’s habit would 
come in and have his eve­ning bowl of soup; outside, tonsured monks 
walked from the basilica in the golden light, groups which could well have 
belonged . . . ​to an age a thousand years ago, before the ­Middle Ages had 
­really begun—­when ­there ­were emperors in Byzantium, boy-­popes in 
Rome, and when the Arabs controlled the seashore of Provence.
­There was no doubt, when I returned from my exploration of France, and 
especially of the warm South where Rome had died slowly if at all, as to what 
sort of medievalist I wished to be. But how should I set about it? And who 
would help me?

156
28
An Oxford 
Medievalist 1954
Choices
So what was it like to be an undergraduate interested in medieval history in 
the Oxford of 1954? This needs some explaining. The Oxford of sixty-­five years 
ago was not the Oxford of ­today. The structures that determined the lives of 
undergraduates in the 1950s are no longer ­there or have greatly changed. But 
at the time they seemed immovable. They ­were the landmarks by which we 
steered our course as undergraduates. ­There was no getting round them. They 
summed up, and quietly imposed, an entire view of what history should be. 
When they changed (as they began to do, if ever so slowly, in the 1960s), his-
tory itself changed its content and horizons in Oxford and elsewhere.
First and foremost, it was a system entirely geared, ­after I had passed a 
preliminary examination in the spring of 1954, to a single final examination, 
which would take place in summer 1956. I was awarded a Distinction in the 
preliminary examination. When the postman brought the self-­addressed 
postcard with this news to our home in Glenageary, my proud ­father hugged 
me, without a word. But then I was left to myself for two full years, with the 
knowledge that every­thing would now depend on the ­grand ordeal of the final 
examination—­known in the argot of Oxford as “Schools” or “finals.”
At the time, I had my eye on that one examination, and not on a ­career. As 
far as I can remember, I had no idea of becoming a university teacher, or, 
indeed, of becoming anything. I do not know what my ­father had planned 
for me. With characteristic generosity and quiet pride in what I had done 
so far, he never pushed me in any direction. But I was certain of one ­thing: 
what­ever I might do ­later, I was in the business of getting a first class degree in 

A n Oxfor d Medieva list 1954 
157
history. I put to one side any thought of the difficulties that I might have to 
face ­after Oxford. It was assumed by every­one (my tutors included) that if I 
had a First, somehow doors would open for me. I was ­there to do the college 
proud, by gaining a top degree—as with any college sports team (or, indeed, 
as with a race­horse) what mattered was that I got that prize.
It would be a First in history and in history only. At the time, ­there was no 
possibility of joining history with any other subject. Classicists could mingle 
Greek and Roman history with philosophy and with classical lit­er­a­ture, in a 
mixture called (with no false modesty) “­Greats.” ­Those of a more modern turn 
of mind could combine philosophy, politics, and economics—­the famous 
“PPE,” which enjoyed considerable prestige as a “Modern ­Greats.” But a joint 
school of that sort was unthinkable for Oxford historians in the 1950s. History 
­there was and history we got. But exactly what history and how much of this 
history ­were we ­free to choose for ourselves?
Every­thing depended on a choice of papers—­each of three hours—­that 
would be taken in the final examination. ­These papers ­were offered according 
to a fixed syllabus. It was a choice from a rich but restricted menu. ­Every his-
tory student had to take three papers in the continuous history of ­England 
from Julius Caesar’s invasion of Britain to 1914.
Then the choices began. ­Those who wished to do more medieval En­glish 
history could choose an optional Further Subject of Jurassic solidity, which 
was examined in a single paper. This was En­glish constitutional history from 
the Anglo-­Saxons to the death of Edward I in 1307. Known eponymously as 
“Stubbs,” it was based on the Select Charters and Other Illustrations of En­glish 
Constitutional History from the Earliest Days to the Reign of Edward I assembled 
fifty years before, by William Stubbs, bishop of Oxford (1888–1901).1
I remember first opening this venerable volume when at home in Ireland, 
seated beside the Moloch on a windy night. My eye fell on the first pages: 
Anglo-­Saxon laws from the seventh ­century onward. ­These included provisions 
for the preparation of the red-­hot iron for an ordeal, alongside rulings that shep-
herd dogs should be fitted with bells and that strangers approaching a village 
from the woods should be careful to announce their arrival with a blast of the 
horn lest they be taken for robbers. It was hard to get more medieval than that!
Eu­ro­pean history offered wider horizons. I was determined to do the history 
of the ­Middle Ages. But, once again, my choices ­were strictly ­limited. ­There was 
1. William Stubbs, Select Charters and Other Illustrations of En­glish Constitutional History from 
the Earliest Days to the Reign of Edward I (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1904).

158 
Ch apter 28
no ­grand sweep—no equivalent to a West. Civ. or a World History course. Eu­ro­
pean history was divided up into manageable periods. Faced by a millennium, 
from the last days of the Roman Empire to the Re­nais­sance, the Oxford 
syllabus cut medieval Eu­ro­pean history into slices of roughly three centuries 
each, examined by two papers, divided chronologically. I chose Eu­ro­pean 
History III—­the High ­Middle Ages—­from 919 to 1273. It was entirely Western 
history—­basically, the history of Eu­rope, with Byzantium on the margins, and 
the ­Middle East seen only as a backdrop to the Crusades. In theory, I could have 
opted for an ­earlier period, but the High ­Middle Ages was the period that my 
college tutor, Harry Bell, was accustomed to teach. It was taken for granted that 
I would be taught by him. So Eu­ro­pean III was what I was taught—­and I never 
regretted it for a moment, especially as Harry let me have my head in presenting 
a few essays on Byzantium as well as routine essays on France and Germany.
Last but not least came a Special Subject, based on original documents 
devoted to a significant person or epoch, examined in two papers. This was the 
true Quest Perilous, the most prestigious paper of all. In the stately language 
of the Examination Statutes: “The examination in the School of Modern His-
tory ­shall always include . . . ​A special Historical subject, carefully studied with 
reference to original authorities.” Medievalists could choose among Saint Au-
gustine, Saint Bernard, the Age of Dante, and the Reign of Richard II. I chose 
Augustine, and this would prove to be a crucial step for me, back to the world 
of Rome in its last days. But I did not make that choice ­until the beginning of 
my last year—in the summer of 1955. What I faced immediately was the con-
tinuous history of ­England and a vivid, three-­hundred-­year slice of the his-
tory of high medieval Eu­rope. As far as an undergraduate in the History 
School of Oxford was concerned, no other sort of history could be studied—
no history of Africa, of Asia, or of Amer­i­ca.
Lectures
So how was I to learn my Eu­ro­pean history? Not through lecture courses. The 
Oxford system of the 1950s was marked by the almost total absence of any 
forms of teaching other than the tutorial system based in the individual col-
leges. In a system that was directed ­toward success in a single examination, 
virtually the only forms of teaching offered to prepare for this examination ­were 
the one-­on-­one tutorials taught by one’s college tutor. Only in the case of the 
Special Subject, ­were we farmed out to a tutor in another college who had special-
ized knowledge of the subject. Tied to a tutorial system devoted solely to pro-
ducing successful examinees, Oxford was, in fact, a glorified crammer.

A n Oxfor d Medieva list 1954 
159
This meant that lectures played a very minor role in the life of most history 
undergraduates. Of course, ­there ­were lectures. Some lectures, such as ­those 
of C. S. Lewis for the En­glish School (which I heard in 1953) ­were legendary. But, 
compared with the weekly encounter with our tutors, lectures ­were “noises off,” 
to which we could pay attention or not. They ­were entirely voluntary. To attend 
a lecture was not to commit ourselves, in the American manner, by signing in on 
a course for which we would receive grades at the end of term. Far from it: lectures 
happened like ­free lunch-­hour concerts. We could attend them or not. Once at a 
lecture, we did not need to stay the course—we could drop in and out.
I attended lectures in Byzantine history. Their scanty attendance made only 
too clear the extent to which Byzantium was treated as a marginal field. Steven 
Runciman’s Waynflete Lectures entitled “The Eastern Schism” had been a bo-
nanza. They had filled the ­great hall of Magdalen College for a few weeks. But 
this was not the case when I went to hear Dimitri Obolensky (1918–2001). An 
émigré Rus­sian aristocrat, a prince reputedly descended from Prince Rurik 
(though, as a good historian, he questioned this link to the legendary founder 
of the Rus­sian monarchy), Obolensky had already begun his ­career as a leader 
in the field of Byzantine-­Russian relations. His first book, The Bogomils: A Study 
of Balkan Neo-­Manichaeism, bore a title likely to attract any young person 
interested in religion and Byzantium.2
Attending Obolensky’s course of lectures, on Byzantine diplomacy, I real-
ized the extent of the vacuum created, in Oxford, by the tutorial system. At the 
first lecture, I found that the audience consisted of only myself and a Chinese 
lady. We looked a very small group indeed in the large, long room in the Ex-
amination Schools where lectures ­were delivered. Obolensky entered in a full 
academic gown. Undeterred by his lack of an audience, he made a stiff bow to 
us both with characteristic, somewhat Rus­sian formality. Then, with his back 
to the blackboard, leaning backward on the ­table in front of it, he delivered 
his lecture in exquisite Russian-­inflected En­glish, entirely impromptu, with-
out a single note, for exactly fifty minutes. Then, he bowed again, wished us 
both good morning, and dis­appeared. Next time, the Chinese lady did not 
appear. I was left alone to hear, lecture by lecture, what would ­later become 
the chapters of Obolensky’s classic book, The Byzantine Commonwealth.3 
I had no further contact with Obolensky ­until we became good friends in 
the late 1960s.
2. D. Obolensky, The Bogomils: A Study of Balkan Neo-­Manichaeism (Cambridge University 
Press, 1948).
3. D. Obolensky, The Byzantine Commonwealth (London: Weidenfeld and Nicholson, 1971).

160 
Ch apter 28
Only the delightful Gervase Mathew (1905–1976), a Dominican priest from 
Blackfriar’s Hall—­and a friend of C. S. Lewis—­was able to establish a thin but 
precious presence for Byzantium. ­Father Gervase was always scruffily dressed, 
with his dog collar invariably riding up his neck at an odd ­angle. He looked 
like a flustered parson; but his voice was magic. He gathered a respectably large 
audience who hung on his words. He spoke of the Byzantine court as revealed 
in the tenth-­century Book of Ceremonies of the emperor Constantine VII Por-
phyrogenitus (945–959). His voice ­rose and fell, spacing his words with hier-
atic slowness as he described the birthday greeting of the emperor by his 
courtiers: “Row on row . . . ​[pause] carry­ing golden apples in their hands 
[pause] their beards [pause] . . . ​glistening with sweet perfume.”
Gervase was at his best when lecturing on the age of Richard II (1377–1399), 
which was another of his passions. He did this in the dining hall of Balliol Col-
lege, in the high summer, as a mechanical mower moved relentlessly up and 
down the lawn outside, coming close to the open win­dow and then moving 
away. Unflustered, Gervase used the intermittent roar of the approaching ma-
chine as a metronome. Describing the intellectual life of Oxford in the late 
­fourteenth ­century, he concluded,
And then [vrrrummm] as all embracing as the sky [vrrmmm] but quite as 
distant [vrrummm] was the belief in God.
Of ­those of whom he approved (notably the ­future Byzantinist Anthony 
Bryer, founder of the Birmingham Byzantine Center), he would declare, “He 
has the holy fire.” Gervase had that fire also. But, in the 1950s, it burned virtu-
ally alone.
The Medieval Tutor: Harry Bell (1913–1964)
With ­little or no backup from university-­wide lectures or seminars, we ­were 
totally dependent on our tutors. My tutor in medieval history was Henry Es-
mond Bell—­Harry Bell. In a letter to my parents, I described my first encoun-
ter with him, when I arrived in Oxford, in October 1953:
So far I had met no ogres, so I was rather anxious to find out what this im-
posing personage was like. I tapped ner­vously, and went in. A big room, 
with a low bookshelf ­running round it. Mr. Bell rushed up to me, grasped 
me by the hand, shoved me into a chair, and started talking about how 
much he admired Dublin. He is a small ­little man with a very unimpressive, 
rather weak face. . . . ​Rather untidy, but distinguished looking dark hair, and 

A n Oxfor d Medieva list 1954 
161
a very definite stoop. He gave the impression of a very shy, kind ­little man; 
which indeed he is. The last of the ogres is dead.
Harry Bell taught all medieval history, although his own research had been 
on the Elizabethan Court of Wards and on the last flowering of heraldry and 
the discussion of feudal dues at that time.4 I did not know—­for Harry Bell 
was so unassuming—­that he had been a Monuments Man in Italy during the 
war: he had played a part in saving historical archives as the Allies advanced 
up the peninsula. This may account for the zest with which he encouraged me 
to pursue themes in Italian medieval history, rather than concentrating on the 
more standard history of northern France.
He was a reassuring presence, squeezing ever deeper into his narrow 
armchair, as he chewed his pipe with plea­sure while listening to a good essay. 
He always had his three points. He always had one revealing anecdote of the 
period to round off his comments (an anecdote to feed to the examiners in two 
years’ time). He always told us carefully how the theme of the next essay grew 
out of the one that we had just completed. He was neither the port-­soaked 
guru nor the brilliant young don of Oxford’s dreams. He loved his subject 
and his pupils. That was enough. He was all that a don, a teacher in the Oxford 
tutorial tradition, could be.
Harry and his wife kept open ­house in their college lodgings at the end of 
Holywell. I described one such visit to my parents:
They have a lovely ­house: an old rambling ­little place at the base of Longwall 
Street, which is well decorated and painted, lined with books. ­After a ­whole 
series of anecdotes about the dons and professors they had both known, we 
­were interrupted by his two sweet dogs. They are Schnautzers—­dogs resem-
bling Kerry Blues—­and they are called Otto and Charlemagne.
I learned many ­things of the pets [of fellow medievalists]: Sir Maurice 
Powicke has a beautiful cat called “Henry Bolingbroke”; McFarlane, the 
McFarlane, has a cat of enormous dimensions and, like his master, uncer-
tain temper.
Bell wants a ­giant Schnautzer, and ­will call him Barbarossa.
(Significantly, perhaps, one of McFarlane’s cats was called “Stubbs.”)5
4. H. E. Bell, An Introduction to the History and Rec­ords of the Court of Wards and Liveries 
(Cambridge University Press, 1953).
5. K. B. McFarlane: Letters to Friends, 1940–1960, ed. Gerald Harris with a memoir by Karl 
Leyser (Oxford: Magdalen College, 1995), xxvi.

162 
Ch apter 28
Medieval Figures: Maurice Powicke (1879–1963)  
and Bruce McFarlane (1903–1966)
This was an unexpected view of the medievalist establishment in 1950s Oxford. 
But it was not surprising that leading medievalists, such as Powicke and 
McFarlane, should be seen as legendary figures rather than as active teachers. 
Outside the colleges in which they ­were tutors (or, in Powicke’s case, outside 
his duties as Regius Professor of History) they ­were not well-­known to under-
graduates. As a result, they easily became semimythological figures, who 
moved on the edge of our horizon, in the exotic bestiary of Oxford medieval 
studies. In all my undergraduate years, I never exchanged a word with ­either 
of them. But they stood for two contrasting approaches to the study of the 
­Middle Ages.
Sir Maurice Powicke, the former Regius Professor of History, was the 
­Grand Old Man of medieval history. His vast and wide-­reaching learning was 
held to derive from total immersion in the past, through the abundant archives 
of medieval Britain. In sleuthing in the archives, Powicke made the thirteenth 
­century come alive.
Sometimes, as I work at a series of patent and close rolls [the documents 
where Powicke so often made his discoveries], I have a queer sensation; the 
dead entries begin to be alive. It is rather like the experience of sitting down 
in one’s chair and finding that one has sat on the cat.6
The cat may have been “Henry Bolingbroke” himself.
I remember seeing Powicke once, sitting at the back of Merton College 
Chapel—­a ­little man, dwarfed by his ­great umbrella. He seemed to be com-
muning with the world of the fourteenth-­century grisaille win­dows that sur-
rounded him. He stood for an almost mystical familiarity with the ­Middle 
Ages. It was a degree of familiarity that I myself was anxious to acquire.
Bruce McFarlane was by far the more feline figure. In the imagination of 
the young, he stood for the other, harsher side of a medievalist’s long dialogue 
with the archives. His apparent total mastery of the complexities of fifteenth-­
century ­England, largely based on access to archives of all kinds, both awed 
and cramped younger scholars. He acted on the study of late medieval history 
in Oxford like a polar ice cap. A fierce perfectionist, who published ­little and 
6. F. M. Powicke, Ways of Medieval Life and Thought (London: Odhams Press, 1949), 67.

A n Oxfor d Medieva list 1954 
163
criticized ­others with memorable terribilità, McFarlane was a persecutory su-
perego to us all—to mature researchers quite as much as to students.
I remember a set of lectures that McFarlane delivered on the Flemish 
painter Hans Memling (1430–1495). Given my “High Flemish” mood of only 
a few years before, inspired by Huizinga’s Waning of the ­Middle Ages, I attended 
­these lectures with ­great interest. They had grown from a redating of some of 
Memling’s works based on archival discoveries by McFarlane, concerning the 
­career of one of Memling’s En­glish patrons. But they offered no new perspec-
tive on the culture and society of the ­later ­Middle Ages. McFarlane made clear 
that he had no wish to be a Huizinga. Instead, the lectures turned out to be a 
public execution of art historians (one of them none other than the ­great 
Erwin Panofsky) who had dared to trust to intuition—as judges of the changes 
in a paint­er’s style—­while truth, hard truth lay only in the Public Rec­ords 
Office. ­Later research, based on new techniques for the analy­sis of wood and 
paint, seems to have proved McFarlane right. But it did not ­matter. As far as 
I was concerned, he had killed the subject.7
7. K. B. McFarlane, Hans Memling (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1971), with Dirk de Vos, Hans 
Memling: Cata­logue (Bruges: Stedelijke Musea, 1994).

164
29
Friends and Books
Friends
It was a commonplace among undergraduates at Oxford that we learned more 
from each other than we ever learned from any lectures or, even, from our tu-
tors. Looking back on my vari­ous friends, I realize that each one of them, each 
in a dif­fer­ent way, contributed to the grooming pro­cess that turned us into 
Oxford-­style historians. Together, we listened in to the vast rumor box of the 
Oxford History School. We knew its principal figures, if from a distance, and 
what sort of history each stood for, if only in caricature. We knew which cur-
rents of history ­were “in” and which ­were “out.” We ­were sharp judges of our 
own tutors. We loved to share inside knowledge about the dif­fer­ent periods of 
history that each of us studied. The result of our long conversations was some-
thing of ­great value—­a historical culture considerably wider and more rich 
than the cramped options offered to us by the Examination Syllabus alone.
My friends came from a variety of worlds, all of them new to me. Each 
brought me something dif­fer­ent and exciting. Take one instance only—­Jan 
Safranek. The son of a Czech diplomat and of a famous French pianist, he lived 
in Paris. He was Eu­rope personified—­the sad, divided Eu­rope of the Cold 
War. Having spent the eve­ning listening to Jan as he spoke about Eastern Eu­
rope ­under Soviet rule, I would shiver a ­little as I made my way down the ill-­lit, 
cold staircase of the Victorian part of the New Buildings: Was this what it was 
like to descend into the basement of the Lubyanka Prison in Moscow?
Jan was very much a young Pa­ri­sian in his fierce methodological partisan-
ship. He considered that his principal tutor in early modern history was hope-
lessly out of the loop. Jan may have been right: a fact that did not endear him 
to the tutor in question. It was Jan who introduced me to that masterpiece of 
modern historiography, Fernand Braudel’s La Méditerranée et le monde 

Fr iends a nd Books 
165
méditerranéen à l’époque de Philippe II, which had appeared in 1949. This was 
an extended essay, in the majestic style of a French grande thèse, on the relation 
between history and geography that was as applicable to the ancient world 
as to the sixteenth ­century. Braudel was my first contact with a book that 
placed a distinctive landscape, with its unchanging, ­silent restraints and pe-
rennial rhythms, at the center of the historian’s imagination, rather than the 
narrative of events among the higher-­ups, which was the usual subject of 
history as taught in Oxford and elsewhere. I would constantly turn to him in 
­future years.
I should add—to get the sense of “period” right—­that all my friends ­were 
from New College only, and that all ­were men. New College did not admit 
­women ­until 1979, when I was already far away, in Berkeley. In the 1950s, it was 
as much an all-­male environment as Aravon and Shrewsbury had been. Only 
when I moved out of college into lodgings, in my last year, did my horizons 
open to include regular ­woman friends as part of a life lived at a ­little distance 
from the heavy gravitational field of Oxford proper.
For a medievalist ­there was one further, somewhat unexpected source of 
inspiration. That was the Scala Cinema in Walton Street. For ­these ­were the 
years in which a succession of ­great Japa­nese films brought to Western audi-
ences a touch of the utter strangeness of another ­Middle Ages—­that of the 
Japan of the samurai. The exotic dress, the mettlesome ­horses, the stylized 
gestures, and, above all, the sheer riot of color in the silken robes, the fluttering 
pennants, and the palace décors, seen for the very first time in unfamiliar East-
mancolor, came as a visual shock. Teinosake Kinugasa’s Gate of Hell appeared 
in 1953. Maybe the court of Byzantium looked more like the world of Kinu-
gasa’s daimyos than anything that even Gervase Mathew could evoke. When 
Gate of Hell played at the Scala, I sat through three continuous showings. ­Here 
was yet another exotic world taken in by my eyes.
Reading: ­Toward the South and East
More than anything ­else, my life in ­these two years was the life of a reader of 
books. In the long run, the only way into the Eu­ro­pean ­Middle Ages was an 
old-­fashioned one: reading—­tenacious Sitzfleisch, sedentary study, in one’s 
rooms, in the Radcliffe Camera undergraduate library, in the Upper and Lower 
Reading Rooms of the Bodleian Library, and—­when in Ireland—in the arm-
chair in the sitting room or beside the Moloch in the kitchen during the long, 
quiet vacations.

166 
Ch apter 29
To my surprise, I recently discovered a set of three long, hardback bound 
notebooks in which I took notes at this time. The first two ­were notes on the 
books I read in 1954 to 1955. The third was mainly notes on the lectures that 
I attended in my last year.
My notes made plain my drift ­toward the south and to the east. In my read-
ings on Eu­ro­pean history, I gave ­little attention to the traditional “hot spot” of 
Anglo-­French history. ­Because they ­were focused on po­liti­cal issues, conven-
tional histories of Eu­rope (at least ­those in French and En­glish) tended to give 
most attention to ­England and to France ­because they ­were the two most 
successful feudal kingdoms of their times. ­Here ­were two nation-­states in the 
making. By comparison, Germany and Italy ­were disregarded as unmanage-
able regions that had somehow missed the bus of pro­gress. They ­were treated 
as failed states, condemned to disunity ­until the nineteenth ­century. In any 
case, most history undergraduates ­were expected to know French, but not 
necessarily any other modern Eu­ro­pean language.
I did not take this option. Instead, the German that I had learned from 
Dr. Scheyer opened up an entire world for me. It enabled me to look east of 
the Rhine, to the history of the Holy Roman Empire in medieval Germany, 
reading my way through articles and reviews, and eventually tackling the mon-
umental Kirchengeschichte Deutschlands of Albert Hauck (1845–1918).1
German also took me farther east: I read the definitive Geschichte des byz-
antinischen Staates by Georg Ostrogorsky (1902–1976) a few years before it was 
translated into En­glish.2 Along with Steven Runciman’s History of the Cru-
sades and his lectures on the Eastern Schism, which had impressed me so 
greatly when I heard them delivered in Magdalen College Hall, such reading 
drew me to the ideological and military confrontation between the Byzantine 
Empire and the Catholic nations of the West as one of the ­great tragedies of 
the ­Middle Ages.
The relations between Byzantium and the West also took me south, into 
southern Italy and Sicily, where the two cultures mingled. Somehow I came 
to read Italian. I taught myself through reading articles in Italian journals and 
Italian books on tenth-­century Rome, on the Norman kingdom of Sicily, 
and on the fascinating figure of the emperor Frederick the Second (1194–1250). 
I approached ­these books on the happy-­go-­lucky princi­ple that Italian was, 
1. A. Hauck, Kirchengeschichte Deutschlands (Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1904–1920).
2. G. Ostrogorsky, Geschichte des byzantinischen Staates (Munich: Beck, 1952); trans. Joan 
Hussey: History of the Byzantine Empire (Oxford: Blackwell, 1956).

Fr iends a nd Books 
167
somehow, a mixture of the best in French and the worst in Latin. To read the 
orotund prose of Italian historians was like coming upon the firm lines of a 
Roman inscription in a late, late Latin that had gone to seed, warmed in Medi-
terranean sunlight. Thus encouraged, I stumbled my way through books such 
as the newly published work of Paolo Lamma (1915–1961) on Byzantine inter-
vention in the politics of twelfth-­century Italy.3
In this reading, I found myself concentrating on the parting of the ways 
between Byzantium and the West. ­Here ­were two dif­fer­ent Christian socie­ties, 
with differing views on the relation between church and state and between 
clergy and laity. I was ripe for the Investiture Contest and its consequences—­
that ­great clash of the sacred and profane, in the eleventh and twelfth centuries, 
which made the thrusting feudal society of the Latin West so very dif­fer­ent 
from its more ancient and slow-­moving eastern neighbor. It was time to buy 
and to absorb (beside the Moloch in the kitchen) a monumental treatment of 
this theme: The Growth of Papal Government in the ­Middle Ages by Walter 
Ullmann.4
The Power of an Idea: Walter Ullmann (1910–1983)
Walter Ullmann was a refugee from Nazi Austria. Though hunted as a Jew, he 
was a devout Catholic. He brought to British scholarship a sense of the power 
of ideas, and of how ideas had been transformed into law and abiding institu-
tional structures in the medieval West. As I made my way through his work, I 
realized that Ullmann had shown how a religious idea could bite into society. 
The Growth of Papal Government was a study of religion turned into power. His 
work flouted the unspoken Oxford consensus that religious ideas ­were of ­little 
interest to the historian.
This was an issue that we undergraduates debated vigorously among our-
selves. I was aware that the overall atmosphere of Oxford favored an anti-­
intellectual approach: politics, economics, and society ­were the stuff of 
“grown-up” history—­not ideas. This bias ­toward the concrete was shown with 
par­tic­u­lar clarity in an acrimonious debate that had exploded among histori-
ans of early modern ­England. Known as the “Gentry controversy,” it was a 
3. P. Lamma, Comneni e Staufer. Ricerche sui rapporti tra Bisanzio e l’Occidente nel secolo xii 
(Rome: Istituto di Storia Medievale, 1955).
4. Walter Ullmann, The Growth of Papal Government in the ­Middle Ages (London: Methuen, 
1955).

168 
Ch apter 29
cameo per­for­mance of donnish fisticuffs. It had pitted Hugh Trevor-­Roper 
(1914–2003), a writer of noted acerbity, against several other equally pugna-
cious pundits, in an argument on the changing economic and social position 
of the En­glish gentry in the seventeenth ­century, and its effect on the onset of 
the En­glish Civil War (1642–1651). Was this crisis caused by a social change—­
“the rise of the gentry” at the expense of the aristocracy—or ­were ­there other 
explanations?
The Oxford rumor box resounded with the dispute. It was an academic 
slaughter-­fest, which, for a time, pushed all other historical debates to one side. 
Somehow, to be up-­to-­date on the “Gentry controversy” became a sign of 
being fully “with it” as a historian. I even remember a scene at the final exami-
nation. As every­one ­else entered the examination room to answer the paper 
on early modern ­England, a group held back. They gathered like a football 
huddle to rehearse the pros and cons of the “Gentry controversy” before sit-
ting down to the exam. They ­were convinced that a question on a topic that 
was so urgently debated among the dons of Oxford was certain to turn up. 
Alas, they ­were wrong. The examiner (doubtless a troglodyte, irremediably out 
of the loop) set a question not on the social role of the gentry but on the social 
role of ­lawyers in early seventeenth-­century public life.
What struck me about the controversy was the agreement of all the partici-
pants that religious ­factors, such as the rise of Puritanism, played no role in the 
crisis that led to the Civil War. Social and economic developments, not reli-
gious thought, set the pace for ­those troubled times. It was better to count 
manors and to tot up mortgages than to read sermons.
I found myself unconvinced by this dismissive view. My experience in Ire-
land showed me that some religious ideas might, indeed, be ineffectual—­but 
not all of them ­were. Once given heft through being linked to a church, to a 
state, or to a social movement, religious ideas had it in them to change the 
world. Ullmann’s Growth of Papal Government seemed to me to show that this 
was so.
Ideology to Real­ity: From Ernst Kantorowicz  
(1895–1963) to Karl Leyser (1920–1992)
But how did ideology and real­ity converge? This question explains my ­great 
interest, as revealed in my notes, not only in the papal but also in the German 
side of the story of the clash between papacy and empire at the time of the 
Investiture Contest and ­later.

Fr iends a nd Books 
169
The propaganda of Frederick II (who was Holy Roman emperor from 1220 
to 1250) emerged as a test case for the power of ideology. Frederick’s imperial 
ideology was as ambitious as that of the papacy itself. But did it bite into soci-
ety? How did it relate to con­temporary realities? And so I found myself fol-
lowing, largely in German articles, the debate sparked by a provocative portrait 
of the talented and cosmopolitan emperor. This was Ernst Kantorowicz’s 
Frederick the Second.5
Kantorowicz’s overblown portrait of Frederick II made him the whipping 
boy of all prudent scholars, in Germany as elsewhere. For En­glish medieval-
ists, Frederick II was a dreadful warning. It showed the consequences of an 
excessive study of ideas without any attempt to root ­these ideas in a concrete 
context. I myself found the book unbearably pretentious. But it made me face 
a prob­lem. Given the overwhelming scholarly interest (largely on the part of 
German scholars) in the ideological aspects of medieval German kingship, 
how could the dramatic clash of ideas associated with the Investiture Contest 
and the counterclaims of the German Holy Roman Empire be, as it ­were, 
“grounded”? The language of power, both papal and imperial, was beguiling 
in its clarity and symbolic force. But it seemed to me to be permanently up in 
the air. At that time, I would have heartily agreed with Beryl Smalley in her 
review of a ­later book by Kantorowicz—­The King’s Two Bodies:
By the end of the book I felt as queasy as one would ­after a diet of jam 
without bread. Is it pos­si­ble to study the history of ideas without relating 
them to their genesis in ­actual prob­lems and conflicts?6
It was for this reason that I owed so much to the lectures of Karl Leyser, 
which I attended in the early spring of 1956. They resolved a dilemma for me. For 
the first time, Karl presented German medieval history to me in the round. 
A vivid cast of characters, who ­until then had seemed to be perched on the 
high stilts of ideology, ­were brought down to earth. Their ideas and their slo-
gans ­were, at last, given a concrete context. Altogether, Karl’s lectures gave me 
God’s plenty. They ­were the only course of public lectures that I sat through 
from beginning to end in my last year at Oxford.
When I listened to Karl’s lectures in early 1956, I had already begun to be 
engaged with a figure who was larger and more vivid than any medieval pope 
5. E. Kantorowicz, Frederick the Second (New York: R. R. Smith, 1931).
6. B. Smalley, Past and Pre­sent 20 (1961): 32; see Robert E. Lerner, Ernst Kantorowicz. A Life 
(Prince­ton, NJ: Prince­ton University Press, 2017), 353.

170 
Ch apter 29
or emperor, and whose ideas would echo throughout the ­Middle Ages in both 
papal and imperial circles. In the summer of 1955 I had taken the final step in 
the learning pro­cess of an undergraduate in the History School of Oxford. I 
began to prepare for the papers in the Special Subject. And the Special Subject 
that I chose was not on a theme from the High ­Middle Ages, but from over 
half a millennium ­earlier, from the last days of Rome and the early days of 
Chris­tian­ity in Eu­rope: I would study Saint Augustine and his age.

171
30
The Age of Augustine
The Age of Augustine (354–430)
I spent June and July 1955 in Oxford, reading for the Special Subject on Augus-
tine. The Special Subject represented the culmination of a history undergradu-
ate’s preparation for the final examination. It gave the student the opportunity 
to study an impor­tant moment of history through a se­lection of original texts, 
which ­were listed in the Examination Statutes. ­These texts ­were set in stone. 
Examiners, students, and tutors might come and go; the texts to be studied 
remained the same. But ­there was no standard bibliography of secondary lit­
er­a­ture for the subject. It was up to the tutors or to the enterprise of the indi-
vidual students to make their way to the books and articles that would enable 
them to interpret the texts.
For that reason, the choice of texts determined the entire shape and tone 
of the Augustine Special Subject. And this choice had been made in a manner 
characteristic of Oxford—it was a compromise reached ­after a lively tussle 
among the differing interests of the tutors who normally taught the Special 
Subject. ­These tutors formed a consortium, and the consortium of teachers of 
the Saint Augustine Special Subject had many dif­fer­ent interests.
The result of this pooling of interests was an array of texts of quite remark-
able richness and variety. The Augustine Special Subject was not a study of 
Augustine alone. It was, rather, a study of nothing less than “the Age of Augus-
tine.” And what an age! Alongside the well-­known works of Augustine, the 
Confessions and the City of God, the set texts illustrated the end of paganism, 
the workings of imperial government, the crisis of the cities, and the first fate-
ful de­cades of the barbarian invasions. It was an exciting range of topics. My 
medieval readings had already led me to ponder the relation between religious 

172 
Ch apter 30
ideas and the nitty-­gritty of politics and social life. The Augustine Special Sub-
ject presented me with similar prob­lems, and in a peculiarly invigorating 
mixture.
Readings
My work for the Augustine Special Subject marked the beginning of my life as 
a student of late antiquity. Unlike the other subjects that I studied at Oxford, 
what I read for the Augustine Special Subject has become part of my work 
from that time onward. Texts that I first met in 1955 are the ones that I still 
study. Even the books that I read at this time are still ­there on the shelves of 
my library. They have marginal notes in them in a handwriting that I barely 
recognize as my own, so that I sometimes have the strange feeling of being in 
the presence of someone other than myself, looking over my shoulder as I 
read. Let me relive something of the excitement of this first moment of 
encounter.
Like many decisive steps in life, the choice to take the Saint Augustine Spe-
cial Subject did not seem to be preceded by any very clear intention. Doubt-
less, my religious preoccupations of the previous year made me want to go 
back to the prob­lem of the historical origins of the Catholic Church. But just 
as impor­tant as the religious issue was my feeling that, as a medievalist, I had 
to go back to the fall of Rome, a topic that had already fascinated me when I 
read Rostovtzeff’s magnificent Social and Economic History of the Roman Em-
pire in my gap year in Ireland. This was ­because so much of medieval culture 
and society seemed to have originated in that time of upheaval. While an an-
cient historian might have been interested only in the fall of the Roman Em-
pire, as a medievalist I wanted to know what came next—­how something new 
came out of the ruins of the ancient world.
What I do remember was a happy time. I found that I could indulge in 
moments of eccentricity. Determined to maintain the sprezzatura of an Ox-
ford man, I took Henri-­Irénée Marrou’s Saint Augustin et la fin de la culture 
antique with me on a punt from Magdalen Bridge. The first stage of my ab-
sorption of this masterpiece took place against the swish of willows and of 
splashing ­water, moored on the bank of the Cherwell beside the Marston 
Ferry. It was the only authentically Oxford idyll that I ever went out of my 
way to enjoy.

The Age of Augustine 
173
André Piganiol (1883–1968): “Roman Civilization  
Did Not Die a Natu­ral Death”
As far as I remember, Marrou’s Saint Augustin came last in my reading. In order 
to get right the general background to Augustine and his age, I began with 
L’empire chrétien of André Piganiol.1 This book gripped me. I read it through 
in a single night. What Piganiol communicated to me in memorably pithy 
sentences was totally new to me. ­Here was a Roman Empire of the fourth 
­century that was no longer seen as living in the shadow of a death sentence. 
It was not a shell of its old self. It had not been entirely ruined by the crisis of 
the third ­century, as Mikhail Rostovtzeff had supposed; nor was it caught in the 
pall of some deep-­seated pro­cess of de­cadence (as was the vogue in more 
popu­lar circles). Far from it. ­Until brought to its knees by barbarian warlords 
(­those very warlords whose sinister rise to power and sack of Rome I would 
trace in the course of the Augustine Special Subject), the empire—­despite its 
ancient ills—­was still a ­going concern. I went out of my way to mark heavi­ly 
Piganiol’s last sentence:
La civilisation romaine n’est pas morte de sa belle mort. Elle a été assassinée.
Roman civilization did not die a natu­ral death. It was murdered.2
But I marked other passages as well. I noticed that Piganiol was no lover of 
the ­Fathers of the Church. His perspective was magnificently laïc. He tended 
to regard Chris­tian­ity as a disruptive force. His judgments on the champions 
of Christian orthodoxy ­were severe in the extreme. He characterized Saint 
Athanasius of Alexandria as “cette personnalité orgueilleuse et brutale”—­“that 
proud and brutal character.”3 To this, I added, with evident glee, “pace 
Newman!!”—­a polite academic form of “Take that, Newman!”
This was a rebuke, on my part, to John Henry Newman (1801–1890), the 
nineteenth-­century leader of the High Church movement and eventual con-
vert to Rome. In his history of the Arian controversy, Newman had presented 
Athanasius as the heroic upholder of Christian truth in defiance of the con-
formism of worldly courtier-­bishops (who bore an uncanny resemblance to 
1. A. Piganiol, L’empire chrétien, Glotz, Histoire générale: Histoire romaine IV (Paris: Presses 
Universitaires de France, 1947), 2.
2. Piganiol, L’empire chrétien, 422.
3. Piganiol, L’empire chrétien, 44.

174 
Ch apter 30
the Low Church prelates of his own time). Plainly, this was not how Piganiol 
saw him.
I was in a mood for Piganiol’s resolute laïcité. My religious worries of the previ-
ous year had dissipated. I was not embittered by that crisis. I was disposed to sit 
back for a time, so as to enjoy Chris­tian­ity as a historical phenomenon. Beliefs 
and institutions that would come to dominate medieval Europe—­many of which 
survived up to this day in Roman Catholic and Anglo-­Catholic churches—­
gained ­human warmth for me through being traced back to precise moments in 
a historical pro­cess. I was now learning where it all came from—­from the travails 
of a ­grand empire long before the beginning of the Eu­ro­pean ­Middle Ages.
The Theodosian Code
Inspired by Piganiol, I fell upon the brand-­new translation of the Theodosian 
Code by Clyde Pharr (1883–1972).4 This collection of imperial edicts (made 
in 438) showed the late Roman state at work. I read it in the library of Pusey 
House, which was the only place in Oxford where a copy could be found. 
Pusey House was the center of the Oxford High Church movement—­a 
movement committed to the notion of the unbroken continuity between 
Catholic Chris­tian­ity (Anglican as well as Roman Catholic) and the age of 
the ­Fathers of the Church, Augustine being the most prominent Church 
­Father of all.
But a reading of the Theodosian Code proved that many links in that golden 
chain ­were problematic. The code was a collection of imperial edicts from the 
time of the conversion of Constantine, in 312. It revealed the Roman state at 
work in a no-­nonsense manner defining, patrolling, and advancing the Chris-
tian church almost as if it ­were a branch of government. The edicts made plain 
how much Chris­tian­ity had owed, for its expansion and establishment, to an 
ambitious and robustly secular empire. The Theodosian Code contained so-
norous imperial rulings on the Christian faith—­laying down creeds and con-
demning pagans and heretics. Other texts chosen from the Theodosian Code 
documented the ins and outs of imperial privileges granted to the clergy. Many 
of ­these privileges—­such as the establishment of the bishop’s law court—­
would last throughout the ­Middle Ages. Yet, at the same time, ­these pious 
concessions ­were often accompanied by peremptory ­orders for the arrest of 
monks as troublemakers and draft-­dodgers.
4. The Theodosian Code, trans. Clyde Pharr (Prince­ton, NJ: Prince­ton University Press, 1952).

The Age of Augustine 
175
Altogether, to read such resolutely worldly texts in a library filled with the 
scent of incense that percolated upward from the High Church chapel below 
was a strangely remissive experience. Two worlds met—­that of con­temporary 
Anglo-­Catholic piety and the world of a distant empire where it had all begun. 
I felt, at last, that I had my feet in the warm, rich clay of an ancient world that 
had by no means grown gray.
William Frend (1916–2005): Two Churches,  
Two Socie­ties
It was the same with my readings of Augustine. Far from being faced by an 
etherial religious author (as first impressions of the Confessions and the City of 
God might have led me to suppose), I found an active bishop deeply rooted—­
indeed, almost mired—in the distinctive earth of Roman Africa. ­There was 
one reason for this way of seeing Augustine: William Frend’s masterpiece, The 
Donatist Church: A Movement of Protest in Roman North Africa, had only just 
appeared.5
This book advanced a hypothesis that (if accepted) totally altered our view 
of Augustine and of his North African environment. The Donatist Schism had 
caused the division of the African churches into two irreconcilable parties as 
a result of the ­Great Persecution of AD 303. It was usually dismissed by schol-
ars as an unsavory and vaguely ridicu­lous sideshow to the main work of Au-
gustine, who was bishop of Hippo (modern Annaba, a town on the coast of 
Algeria) from 397 to 430.
Bill Frend challenged this opinion. I immediately realized that Frend was 
an author with a gift for endowing the conflicts of the early church (usually 
presented as purely religious and intellectual affairs) with a magical concrete-
ness. He presented the schism as a clash between two landscapes, even be-
tween two classes and two ethnic groups. The Catholicism of the Romanized 
cities of the Mediterranean was represented by Augustine as bishop of 
Hippo—­a coastal city that looked across the sea to Rome. Farther inland, the 
version of Chris­tian­ity upheld by Romanized Africans such as Augustine was 
challenged by the fierce re­sis­tance of the populous Berber villages of the Nu­
mid­i­an plateau. As Frend presented them, ­these barely Romanized villages 
­were the homeland of the Donatist Church.
5. W.H.C. Frend, The Donatist Church: A Movement of Protest in Roman North Africa 
(Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1952).

176 
Ch apter 30
Instead of two Christian groups, divided by seemingly trivial issues, two 
socie­ties faced each other, represented by two churches, each with a very dif­
fer­ent view of the relations of the church to the Roman social order—­
conservative Catholics (such as Augustine) being met by radical Christians 
associated with the Donatist Church. The ­bitter strug­gle of ­these two versions 
of Chris­tian­ity formed the background to Augustine’s life in Africa. His writings 
on the nature of the Catholic Church, on the Roman Empire, on the “Earthly 
City” and the “City of God,” would dominate medieval views of the relation 
between church and society. Bill Frend’s Donatist Church and the texts that 
I now had to read for the Special Subject showed that ­these views had emerged 
in a distinctive landscape. They had first been hammered out in a situation of 
face-­to-­face social and ethnic conflict in the ­little towns and villages of a di-
vided Africa. I had found, in the distant Maghreb (in what are now Muslim 
countries: Tunisia, Algeria, and Morocco), the beginning of the Western 
­Middle Ages.
Otto Seeck (1850–1921): “An Inner Illness”6
This was exciting enough. But equally exciting was the realization that old ste­
reo­types of the decline of Rome had begun to be challenged. This fundamental 
change in the evaluation of the ­later Roman Empire was summed up in the 
contrast between two authors on whom I took careful notes—­Otto Seeck and 
Santo Mazzarino.
I read Otto Seeck first. Seeck was the ­Grand Old Man of late Roman 
scholarship. He had edited the letters of one of the ­great “last pagans of Rome,” 
Quintus Aurelius Symmachus; he had established the chronology of Sym-
machus’s con­temporary and peer in the Greek world, the Antiochene rhetor 
Libanius; he had compiled (largely from the Theodosian Code) a register of 
the dated edicts of the emperors and popes from 284 to 476. I was unaware 
of ­those achievements; but I took careful notes on the first volume of Seeck’s 
six-­volume Geschichte des Untergangs der antiken Welt, which I found by chance 
in New College Library.7
6. Stefan Rebenich, “Otto Seeck und die Geschichte des Untergangs der antiken Welt,” in 
The New Late Antiquity: A Gallery of Intellectual Portraits, ed. Clifford Ando and Marco Formi-
sano (Heidelberg: Winter, 2021), 451–470 (henceforth New Late Antiquity).
7. O. Seeck, Geschichte des Untergangs der antiken Welt. Band 1 (1895; last edition, Stuttgart: 
Metzler, 1921–1922).

The Age of Augustine 
177
The second part of the first volume offered a uniformly pessimistic valua-
tion of the ­later empire. It was entitled “Verfall der antiken Welt”—­The Decay 
of the Ancient World. Seeck explained that the ­later empire was a doomed 
empire. It was rotten from within:
Nicht die Germanen haben das Römerreich zu Falle gebracht, sondern in-
nere Krankheit verzehrte es.
It was not the Germans who brought the Roman Empire to its downfall; 
rather, an inner illness laid it waste.8
It was precisely this opinion that André Piganiol had rejected with such 
firmness in 1947, in the conclusion of L’empire chrétien. Having just read 
Piganiol, in one unforgettable night, I was in no mood for Seeck’s pseudosci-
entific evocation of the overall decay of the ancient world.
Writing immediately ­after World War II, Piganiol was right to be a ­bitter critic 
of Seeck’s notion of de­cadence. But Seeck had not been a racist of the Nazi kind. 
His was a more subtle, cosmopolitan, and confident intolerance, shared by 
many American, En­glish, and Eu­ro­pean thinkers in the late nineteenth and 
early twentieth centuries. His view of the decline of Rome was derived from 
social Darwinism. He was obsessed with the idea of de­cadence caused by de-
mographic change. In his view, the extinction of the leaders of Roman society 
in the civil wars and the early empire had led to the rise of the mediocre and 
of the cowardly.
For Seeck, “weeding out of the best” and “hereditary cowardice” ­were more 
than meta­phors: he believed that late Roman persons ­really had bad genes. A 
good north German (he was born at Riga and had taught in Berlin), Seeck felt 
that he needed only to look south of the Alps to find confirmation of his views. 
He thought that the constant suppression, execution, and exile of heretics in 
Catholic Spain had brought about the same state of moral anemia as seemed to 
him to have afflicted the Roman world. He was confident that this development 
accounted for “the known fact that also the other Catholic countries stand al-
most without exception at a lower spiritual level than do the Protestant.”9
I had read enough. Such odious pronouncements ­were not for me.
What Seeck did for me at this time was pose a crucial question. ­Were the 
leading figures of the ­later empire (the emperors, the generals, the aristocrats, 
8. Seeck, Geschichte des Untergangs 1:191.
9. Seeck, Geschichte des Untergangs 1:551/52.

178 
Ch apter 30
and the bishops—­even Augustine) mere wraiths struggling in the ruins of a 
de­cadent civilization, doomed to fail? Or ­were they agents in their own right, 
as robust as any other Roman statesmen and authors of any other time?
Santo Mazzarino (1916–1982): East and West
­These questions ­were answered for me in a single book: Stilicone. La crisi im-
periale dopo Teodosio of Santo Mazzarino.10 The first page of Mazzarino’s pref-
ace gave me the answer to Seeck:
The history of the ­later empire is in some ways a relatively young field of 
inquiry: long thought of as a history of imperial “de­cadence” (the history 
of a “lower” empire) it appeared above all in a negative light in relation to 
the periods that had preceded it. . . . ​The effort to give this period a histori-
cal autonomy and a positive function is, one might say, a relatively new 
achievement.11
Brave words. And Mazzarino set out, in no uncertain manner, to prove his 
point: he showed that it was pos­si­ble to write about the politics of the ­later 
empire without invoking the notion of inevitable decay. I was also impressed 
by the way in which he set about ­doing it. In his Stilicone (as in all his ­later 
work), Mazzarino showed a genius for seizing on a few ancient texts (often out 
of the way and hitherto neglected texts) and reinterpreting them in such a 
manner that they cast a new light on major issues of the history of Rome, in-
deed of the ancient world as a ­whole.
It was, above all, this width of vision in Mazzarino’s work that has impressed 
me ever since. Stilicone addressed the ­career of the barbarian generalissimo 
Stilicho, and his relations with the Visigothic king Alaric, which led eventually 
to the disastrous sack of Rome in 410. Mazzarino placed ­these events against 
a wider social background. He showed how the seemingly pointless maneuver-
ings of Roman armies and barbarian war bands back and forth across Italy and 
the Balkans ­were part of a wider crisis.
What was at stake was the opening of a chasm between two worlds, be-
tween the old Latin West and the new world of East Rome. On the one hand 
10. Santo Mazzarino, Stilicone. La crisi imperiale dopo Teodosio (Rome: Signorelli, 1942; 
reprint, Milan: Rizzoli, 1990, with a most perceptive introduction by Andrea Giardina).
11. Mazzarino, Stilicone, v. I use the translation of my friend and colleague Noel Lenski: 
“Santo Mazzarino: Revolutions in Society and Economy in Late Antiquity,” in New Late Antiq-
uity, 273–295, at 277.

The Age of Augustine 
179
­there was the confident empire of Constantinople, secure in its loyalty to an 
emperor who enjoyed the support of increasingly Christian populations—­a 
Byzantium built to last. Compared with the Empire of the East, the Western 
Empire proved to be the more divided, vulnerable society. It was a society 
increasingly controlled by its ­great landowners. Hence the fall of the Empire 
in the West in the course of the fifth ­century. But the empire vanished in the 
West only. East Rome survived for many centuries. It was the division between 
two worlds that lay at the heart of the “imperial crisis” faced by Stilicho. Maz-
zarino made clear that, rather than an overall “decline and fall” of the Roman 
Empire as a ­whole, it was the contrast between East and West—­between 
a buoyant Eastern Empire and a fragile West—­that was the key to the end 
of Rome. This picture, first sketched for me in broad, masterly strokes by 
Mazzarino, has remained with me ever since.
But, at the time, Santo Mazzarino did more than this. Passing from Seeck 
to Mazzarino, I felt that I had passed out of the chill shade of an overblown 
notion of de­cadence into living history. The notion of de­cadence had enjoyed 
such sinister prominence in much of Eu­ro­pean thought in the late nineteenth 
and twentieth centuries that it was difficult to detach the Roman Empire from 
the gray and glutinous embrace of theories of decay. Mazzarino banished ­those 
half-­educated imaginings. He made plain that the Roman Empire in its last 
centuries was full of mighty tensions—­tensions between ­great landowners 
and the state, between Christians and pagans, between the Roman civilian 
elites and a partly “barbarian” military caste. But it was not a de­cadent, nor was 
it even, at the time, a necessarily doomed society. As I read Mazzarino, life and 
warmth flooded back into the fourth ­century.
And so my reading raised a further question. The overwhelming majority 
of studies of the ­later empire had treated this period as if it ­were no more than 
an anxious prelude to the imminent fall of Rome. But what I had found in 
Piganiol and Mazzarino suggested other­wise: ­there was a lot more life in the 
­later empire than we had thought. Far from being an awkward hiatus between 
the ancient world and the ­Middle Ages, it seemed to be a period with a vitality 
of its own. But, in order to become a field of study in its own right, the period 
needed a name. This name was provided for me by yet another ­giant among 
Eu­ro­pean scholars—­Henri-­Irénée Marrou.

180
31
“De­cadence” or “Late 
Antiquit y ”?
Henri-­Irénée M arrou
De­cadence Reconsidered
­Toward the end of my weeks of reading for the Augustine Special Subject, 
I emerged from Thornton’s Bookshop—an Aladdin’s cave of foreign 
publications—­with a big book in two volumes written by Henri-­Irénée 
Marrou (1904–1977). The format itself was strange: the first volume had six 
hundred pages, while the second had only ninety. They had been published 
together in 1949. The first volume was Marrou’s grande thèse, completed in 
1937; the second volume was Marrou’s afterthought about his own grande thèse, 
written twelve years ­later.1
The first volume’s title made its argument perfectly clear: Saint Augustin et 
la fin de la culture antique—­Saint Augustine and the End of Ancient Culture. 
It described a culture that appeared to Marrou to be in the last stages of decay. 
The second volume had a more open-­ended title. It was called Retractatio—­a 
Rereading. And Marrou’s “rereading” effectively rebutted the main theme of 
his grande thèse—­the notion that the culture of the age of Augustine had 
reached its end. In other words, the second volume (written in 1949) was a 
critique of the large first volume (completed in 1937).
Marrou’s second volume—­the Retractatio—­touched the very heart of my 
own preoccupation with the nature of the end of the Roman Empire. Had the 
1. H. I. Marrou, Saint Augustin et la fin de la culture antique with Retractatio, Bibliothèque des 
Écoles françaises d’Athènes et de Rome 145 bis (Paris: de Boccard, 1949).

“De­ca dence” or “Late A ntiquit y”? 
181
Roman world fallen ­because it had been sickened by some deep-­seated, all-­
embracing, and incurable decadence—as Otto Seeck had suggested? Or was 
it still a living organism, developing successfully in new directions, as it passed 
from crisis to crisis, ­until, at last, it was overwhelmed—­but only in its weaker 
western regions—by a largely unforeseen surge of barbarian war-­lordism, as 
Piganiol and Mazzarino had contended? In this debate, with which I had wres-
tled in the previous weeks, Marrou cast the deciding vote. And he did so in the 
most cogent manner pos­si­ble—by explaining that he had changed his mind 
on the issue of “de­cadence.”
What I read in ­these two volumes ­were two Marrous—­a younger and an 
older man. Saint Augustin et la fin had been written in 1937, before the outbreak 
of war in Eu­rope. In it, Marrou presented Augustine as a lettré de la décadence, 
trapped in an age-­old educational system that had run to seed. On this, the 
young Marrou (he was thirty-­three at the time) was firm: “I have hidden noth-
ing of the impoverishment, of the senile sclerosis of that ancient tradition as 
Augustine encountered it. . . . ​­There is indeed something in Augustine [his 
culture] that is dead.”2
Twelve years ­later, having experienced at first hand the horrors of the Nazi 
occupation of France, Marrou declared in his Retractatio that he had changed 
his mind. No: Augustine’s culture had not let him down. It was not a dead 
culture. It was a culture that had changed, subtly but irrevocably, from classical 
times, but (like the Roman Empire itself) it had retained much of its ancient 
vigor. He could no longer say that
Saint Augustine and, with him, the culture of his times ­were, as it ­were, 
being swept away on a current hurtling ­towards a void. No. . . .
The civilization of the ­later empire [the Bas-­Empire], as it is reflected in 
the culture of Augustine, is a vigorous organism, still evolving.3
To this I added in the margin, in capital letters, “Hurrah! Hurrah!!”
What Marrou wrote carried conviction with me precisely ­because it was 
not dogmatic in tone. To use a musical meta­phor, such as Marrou himself used 
when describing the style of Saint Augustine, to read the Retractatio was like 
listening to a ­great symphony, made up of many themes, each exquisitely in-
troduced. ­Grand theories of culture, the literary analy­sis of major late Roman 
writings (such as Augustine’s City of God), the work of art historians, and 
2. Marrou, Saint Augustin et la fin, 543/44).
3. Marrou, Retractatio, 689.

182 
Ch apter 31
considerations of social history ­were brought together in a ­grand finale, to reas-
sess the culture of the ­later empire. ­Here was no dried corpse, but an ancient 
civilization on the edge of yet another splendid flowering ­until unexpectedly 
brought to its knees (but in the Western Empire only) by the barbarian inva-
sions of the fifth ­century.
“­Toward a Healthy Civilization”4
That was enough. It gave me the green light to approach Augustine and his 
contemporaries in a new, less doom-­laden manner. This was my first and most 
lasting impression on reading Saint Augustin et la fin de la culture antique and 
its Retractatio.
I took no notes on the book. I felt that it was too big, too full of life to be 
gutted in that manner—as I had gutted Seeck and Santo Mazzarino. What I still 
have is my own copy, its paper spine now almost totally broken so that it is ­little 
more than a pile of loose pages filled with excited marginal comments.
First and foremost, I was aware that I was reading a book shot through with 
tensions. But, at the time, as I read Marrou as an undergraduate in a punt in an 
Oxford summer, I knew nothing of the fierce origins of ­these tensions in the 
culture of interwar France in the 1920s and 1930s.
­Little did I know, as I read him, that when he was my age, Marrou was al-
ready a fervent and radical young Catholic, anxious to come to grips with what 
he considered to be the crisis of the culture of his own times. He thought that 
it was de­cadent and stood in urgent need of salvation. The jottings in his note-
books (which ­were published ­after his death, in 2006) make this plain. In 1927, 
he wrote: “Our culture is making us into Byzantines. What ­human value is 
­there in it, other than the social game that goes by the name of ‘culture’?”5
This outburst of a twenty-­three-­year-­old shows that, already at that time, Mar-
rou tended to treat the culture of the age of Augustine—in what he saw as its 
“Byzantine” sterility—as a distant mirror of the de­cadence that he also saw in the 
culture of modern France. In 1934 he published a pamphlet-­like book, Fondements 
d’une culture chrétienne. He made plain that what modern times needed was a “une 
civilisation saine”—­a civilization that had recovered its health. The monstrous 
4. See now Philippe Blaudeau, “Henri Irénée Marrou (1904–1977): Antiquité tardive et Cité 
de Dieu,” in New Late Antiquity, 7–26.
5. Henri-­Irénée Marrou, Carnets posthumes, VIII. iii, ed. Françoise Marrou-­Flamant (Paris: 
Le Cerf, 2006), 37.

“De­ca dence” or “Late A ntiquit y”? 
183
expansion of specialized disciplines had negated the humanizing role of educa-
tion, much as the backward-­looking pedantry of the late Roman educational sys-
tem had cramped the souls of Augustine’s contemporaries.6
Hence a heavy charge of disapproval ran through the first, six-­hundred-­
page, volume of Saint Augustin et la fin de la culture antique. It was, indeed, 
about la fin. It laid bare what Marrou considered to be the decay of a ­great 
culture. This de­cadence did not spare even the greatest minds. The drama of 
the book consisted in watching Augustine struggling (never entirely success-
fully) with the enervating climate of his age.
“The Relation of Personal Thought to Its Milieu”
I remember that I was not entirely convinced by Marrou’s pre­sen­ta­tion of the 
supposed de­cadence of late Roman culture (in La fin) even before I read his 
Retractatio. What excited me more was the other side of Marrou—­the master’s 
hand with which he joined the inner life of individuals to the wider frame of 
their culture. On this he was uncompromising. That was his job and his high 
skill. As he made plain in an entry in his notebook for some time ­after 1943: 
“All my theory of culture aims to throw light on the relation of personal 
thought to its milieu, to its tradition, to the community.”7 Marrou had not given 
me the conventional account of “Augustine and His Age,” nor even “Augustine 
in His Age.” He had given me “The Age of Augustine in Augustine.” No one 
had done this for me before, for any period of history. I was thrilled. I ­really 
did not care ­whether the age that was analyzed with this magical touch was 
de­cadent or not. Marrou had brought it alive.
I have read Marrou ever since. To read Saint Augustin et la fin de la culture 
antique and the Retractatio now—­sixty-­five years ­later, in a very dif­fer­ent world 
from 1950s Oxford—is to realize, as I write this chapter, that I had been, and from 
then on would continue to be, in the com­pany of a ­giant.
Spätantike—­Late Antiquity
Last but not least, as I turned to the Retractatio, I realized that Marrou had 
given a name to the period as a ­whole. Although he had shown with such 
masterly skill that Augustine’s culture was deeply, almost irremovably, linked 
6. Henri-­Irénée Marrou, Fondements d’une culture chrétienne (Paris: Bloud et Gay, 1934).
7. Marrou, Carnets, XI (3) 77, 355.

184 
Ch apter 31
to the ancient world, ­there was still much in Augustine that seemed also to 
prefigure the ­Middle Ages. Was Augustine, therefore, an ancient and a medi-
eval man? This view struck Marrou as too abrupt a way of putting it. The 
­Middle Ages ­were too far away to allow Augustine to be treated as “medieval” 
without severe anachronism. No: “Historical real­ity demands a more rich key-
board [un clavier plus riche: Marrou had found a musical image dear to his 
heart] than that summary dichotomy.”8 The peculiar in-­between-­ness of 
Augustine and his age demanded a name. Marrou found it:
German, which welcomes neologisms with ease, has developed the habit 
of speaking of Spätantike [late antiquity].9
This suggestion was crucial. From then onward, I had a name for the period 
that had begun to intrigue me: “late antiquity.” In my case, the term came to 
me from Marrou—­and from Marrou only.
In fact, the word Spätantike had been current in Germany for some time. 
Marrou himself seems to have taken Spätantike from German art historians 
who had begun to use it in the 1920s or ­earlier, in order to characterize the 
hauntingly in-­between quality of works that had already ceased to be classical 
while not yet becoming recognizably medieval. In order to illustrate what he 
meant, Marrou took a well-­known example of such a work of art, for which 
the Germans already had an appropriate adjective—­spätantik, late antique. 
This was the ­great bronze head of a late Roman emperor preserved in the 
Palazzo dei Conservatori on the Capitol of Rome. When Marrou wrote, it 
was ascribed to the emperor Constantius II (337–361), though it has recently 
been allotted to his ­father, Constantine (306–337). He pointed out that it 
would be absurd to speak of it as if it ­were a failed attempt to create a naturalistic 
portrait in the classical manner. With its upraised eyes and masklike features, it 
represented a new departure: a new art for a new image of the emperor—­a su-
perhuman being, whose intense, upturned gaze made real the invisible world 
from which he drew his power. In a ­silent mutation, a recognizably Roman bust 
had taken on the stylized, abstract features of a Byzantine icon.
“Late antique” was the only word for it. It is still ­there, in the Capitoline 
Museum. Since 1981, it has been joined by the ­great equestrian statue of Mar-
cus Aurelius (161–180) that had once stood in the open air on top of the Capi-
tol Hill. Separated by only some fifteen yards, they stare at each other across 
8. Marrou, Retractatio, 691.
9. Marrou, Retractatio, 694.

“De­ca dence” or “Late A ntiquit y”? 
185
the floor of a special section of the museum. Whenever I go to Rome, I sit 
between the two figures—­Marcus Aurelius and Constantine—­musing on the 
nature and the ­causes of the distance between ­these two images of two very 
dif­fer­ent Roman emperors: one so very “classical,” one challengingly “late an-
tique.” It is a lesson in the distinctive nature of late antiquity and the mystery 
of its emergence, ­after classical times, as yet another, surprisingly creative 
phase in the history of the ancient world.

186
32
Cowley Road
Cowley Road: “Boys on the Make”
My last year in Oxford (from October 1955 to July 1956) was the happiest year 
of all. I no longer lived in college, surrounded by endless talk. I lived in lodg-
ings halfway up the Cowley Road—on the way to the Morris Motors factory—­
with a friend from New College, Barry Clarke. ­After the hectic sociability and 
nightlong conversations of life in college, I found myself largely alone, in the 
com­pany of unpretentious ­people. It was another Ireland for me. I wrote to 
my aunt Freda (Teedah) with genuine enthusiasm:
On one ­thing I feel very superior indeed. That is, my lodgings. No one liked 
them when I chose them, now every­one is envying me. . . . ​They have been 
an enormous help in this term as they are just far enough away to cut down 
that useless visiting which takes up so much of the time, pleasantly but 
pointlessly for the first two years, but which is rather out of place for the 
“boys on the make” in the last year.
My colodger could not have been better. Barry Clarke was a scientist, an 
electrical engineer. He was very much a representative of the Other (the sci-
entific side) of the “Two Cultures”—­science and humanities—­whose division 
would soon be lamented by Lord Snow.1 This division troubled Barry not in 
the slightest. He was a grammar school boy—­that is, he came from a local state 
school, not a private public school. Science was his way to the top. He had no 
job worries. He was already as good as signed on to a major laboratory. He had 
1. C. P. Snow, The Two Cultures and the Scientific Revolution, Rede Lecture (Oxford University 
Press, 1959).

Cow ley Roa d 
187
a fiancée whom he married as soon as he left New College to take up the post 
that was waiting for him.
Lectures
I notice from my notebooks that I began, in the spring of 1956, to attend lec-
tures. The lectures that truly held my attention ­were ­those of Karl Leyser on 
the Ottonians and Salians, the tenth-­ and eleventh-­century rulers of what 
would become Germany. They conveyed inside knowledge, the fruit of per-
sonal passion and research.
Karl stood on the platform of the high ­table in Magdalen College dining hall. 
He was a short, robust figure with a worn gown over a sporty brown tweed jacket, 
beige waistcoat, and cavalry twill trousers, and his flashing eyes looked out from 
­under a shock of raven-­black hair. His enunciation was perfect, with the slight 
touch of a guttural, German accent that made his voice sink to a growl at signifi-
cant moments. Karl Leyser just stood ­there and became the refined, Byzantinized 
Otto III (980–1002) or the gruff Conrad the Salian (990–1039) ­under our eyes.
Karl’s lectures ­were what I needed. Each lecture was both a moment of total 
immersion in an unfamiliar and complex world, and, at the same time, an in-
troduction to the equally unfamiliar traditions of modern German scholarship. 
Karl was a Jewish refugee. His parents had miraculously escaped by hiding 
throughout the war in Holland, only to be liberated by Karl himself, who 
marched into the village that had sheltered them as the commander of a troop 
of Black Watch Highlanders.
Listening to Karl, I felt that I was pre­sent at the building of a unique bridge 
between the hard-­nosed medievalism of ­England (represented at its most for-
bidding by Bruce McFarlane) and a ­great tradition of Continental scholarship. 
In Karl’s lectures, ideology and the history of religious and po­liti­cal concepts 
(very much the specialty of the German tradition) ­were firmly welded to social 
realities—­the arming of knights and the building of ­castles, the taming of for-
ests, the endless journeys of a traveling court, and the constant push ­toward 
the Slavonic lands in the East. ­These lectures formed the basis from which 
Karl’s own, power­ful analyses of the po­liti­cal culture of medieval Germany 
would emerge in ­later years. Like a storage heater, Karl simply radiated knowl-
edge of the world east of the Rhine.2
2. K. Leyser, Rule and Conflict in an Early Medieval Society: Ottonian Saxony (London: Ed-
ward Arnold, 1979) and Communications and Power in Medieval Eu­rope: The Carolingian and 

188 
Ch apter 32
Tutors: Tom Parker (1906–1985)
As finals (the final examination) approached, my friends and I began, even, to 
take notice of our tutors. Previously we had been much too busy educating 
each other with urbane scholarly gossip. Now we needed our tutors, for re-
viewing and for advice. Each was dif­fer­ent. Harry Bell was as dependable and 
solicitous as ever. But the ­great discovery of my last year was the Reverend 
Thomas Parker, the chaplain of University College.
Tom Parker taught me for the Augustine Special Subject from October 1955 
to spring 1956. I approached his rooms in University College along a passage-
way that led past a life-­size marble nude of a young man stretched on a beach: 
the memorial for the drowned poet Percy Bysshe Shelley (1792–1822), who 
had been an undergraduate at University College. Tom’s room lay beyond this 
voluptuous late Victorian confection. To enter it was like entering a series of 
trenches of the First World War. This was Tom’s library. Not only did his books 
cover ­every wall: they had expanded in a series of parallel bookcases that took 
up most of the floor.
Tom sat at the far end of this labyrinth. He was a Humpty Dumpty of a man. 
He sat in an armchair where the seat was so pressed down that he squatted, in 
effect, on the floor. I soon learned that, to gain time in tutorials, it was suffi-
cient to mention a fact or a prob­lem and he would heave himself up from his 
seat to rummage in his vast library, and would then flop down—­having ex-
pended much tutorial time in the venture—­with a large tome across his knees.
A convinced Anglo-­Catholic (dog collar, black waistcoat, black, wide-­
brimmed hat, and all), Tom was a robust man—­the son of a Londoner and a 
member of the Honorable Com­pany of Butchers. Medieval po­liti­cal theory 
was his principal interest. He delivered the Bampton Lectures entitled “Chris­
tian­ity and the State in the Light of History” in 1955. ­These ­were delivered from 
the pulpit of Saint Mary’s Church, the university church. He boasted that, 
when discussing sacral kingship, he was the first preacher ever to have used a 
Nilotic language in church!
Like many religious persons, Tom combined an acute sense of the sacred 
with a shrewd appraisal of the profane. He knew how Oxford worked. In his 
priestly capacity, he was ­father confessor to the nuns of the Anglican Com-
munity of Saint Mary the Virgin in Wantage. ­These ­were the “Some Ladies at 
Ottonian Centuries and Communications and Power: The Gregorian Revolution and Beyond, ed. 
Timothy Reuter (London: Hambledon, 1994).

Cow ley Roa d 
189
Wantage” to whom C. S. Lewis dedicated his theological science fiction novel 
Perelandra. To judge by Tom’s account, they ­were a lively lot. On one occasion, 
the younger nuns, for a spree, painted bright red the statue of King Alfred the 
­Great that stood in the center of Wantage looking ­toward the downs on whose 
crest he had defeated the invading Danes in 878. In the coming year, Tom 
would be much more to me than a tutor. With Harry Bell, he was my guide 
into academe. I would need such guidance. But first I would have to face the 
­grand wager of “finals”—­the final examination.

190
33
“A Very Special Degree”
Finals
Finals
This chapter is about final examinations. But I hasten to reassure my readers 
that the “very special degree” was not, as they ­will see, my own. As for myself, 
I needed a top degree more than, perhaps, I was willing to admit. Being Irish, 
I could not count on state aid for continued study in Britain; and it was far 
from certain that my ­father would be able to support me. To make ­matters worse, 
I had made my way to topics that ­were far from the main line. Late antiquity and 
Byzantium ­were exotic subjects, and aroused interest in ­those I spoke with; but 
they ­were no passport to a teaching job, or even to a research fellowship. If I was 
to continue as a full-­time historian, I would have to aim high in the one venture 
over which I had some control—my per­for­mance in “finals.”
Finals began on May 31, 1956, and ended a week ­later. The day ­after this 
ordeal, I took to the river in a rented canoe with Bruce Hyatt, a friend of mine 
from St. John’s, a gifted artist and ­future evangelical missionary, who still pro-
duces beautifully illustrated religious books. As I wrote to my parents:
We made believe we ­were Vikings. We paddled up to Godstow. We ­stopped 
at a pub near Godstow which advised us to go on to the Trout Inn, near the 
nunnery where Henry II kept his poppet, Fair Rosamunde. Not being ­really 
experienced Vikings, we rushed to the river bank, pushed our long boat out 
into the fjord and jumped in. [It capsized.] ­After an hour [drying out] in the 
hot sun two damp sea-­kings ­were able to set out on their adventures. . . .
[Next] time the sea-­kings got into their dragon-­craft very gingerly.

“A Very Specia l Degr ee” 
191
But by then the weather had become deliciously Norse. ­Great bleak 
meadows ringed with vast trees. No sign of anything. Fringes of bulrush 
and a dark ­water, with ­little scales of dull light. It had not changed since the 
Danes had come up river ­after the sack of Oxford. ­There was a vast flash of 
lightning and the rain came sweeping down. ­There ­were even waves. We 
rode into the storm, zig-­zagging from bank to bank, chanting weird dit-
ties. . . . . ​against the bronze sky of a sunset before a terrific storm. It was 
extraordinary to think that in ­these savage conditions we could still almost 
see the towers of peaceful, domesticated Oxford.
As for the examination, I added (almost as a postscript to that ­grand adventure—
as a sign of late adolescent “cool”):
I should give a guarded reply, in the manner of the Abbé Sièyes in 1798, 
when asked about the French Revolution: J’ai survécu [I survived]. On the 
­whole, I cannot complain of my luck in the exam. Some ­people regard luck 
as enabling ­people to shine by handing them ­really good questions on their 
pet topics: as far as that was concerned I got a suitable number of questions 
on Byzantine social policy and on Daniel O’Connell. But, on the ­whole, the 
impor­tant ­thing is the run of solid questions which you felt you could an-
swer directly without taking evasive action. . . . ​I was even able to work in 
the Shrewsbury Election without too obvious a subterfuge.
As was usual, my neighbors soon became a source of absorbing inter-
est. . . . ​To my left was a man with an empty head; I distinctly saw a star of 
daylight shining through his ear. To my right was a clairvoyant; he put his 
writing paper over his exam paper, and seemed to write over half a sheet 
before he looked at the questions. ­Behind me was an amiable Rugger Blue; 
he just sat looking at the paper all the time, getting redder and redder. . . . ​
I can safely say that we all have been through what is perhaps, and what we 
would like to believe [to be], the toughest examination in ­England (eleven 
papers is some chicken) without batting an eyelid.
Late Roman or Medieval?
The results of the final examination would not be known ­until mid-­July. I spent 
a tense month preparing for a ­future that, for all I knew, would not happen. 
The first question concerned the proposed subject of my research. How, in the 
Oxford of the 1950s, would I deal with the splay of my own interests between 

192 
Ch apter 33
the ­later empire and the ­Middle Ages? I consulted with Harry Bell and Tom 
Parker on this issue. I told my parents:
The main prob­lem seems to be at the moment that I am caught in an awk-
ward position between my research interests and what would be most ad-
vantageous. In the long run, it would prob­ably be more eminent to do a 
Continental topic—­such as the Lower Roman Empire1 or the Crusades 
or Byzantine history; Bell says that he would be very glad indeed if I could 
have my head to do exactly this sort of stuff. But the prob­lem of getting a 
post arises; ­here the authorities would prefer someone with a straight 
knowledge of straight En­glish medieval history to someone who has done 
a Continental line of research, especially something as esoteric as Byzan-
tine. Hence, when I first see Jacob,2 I am to manifest enthusiasm for the 
En­glish church in the fifteenth ­century. This is the best type of En­glish 
topic, ­because the En­glish church, as Jacob is never tired of pointing out, 
was an international institution, and could, therefore, serve as a spring-
board for [study of] the Re­nais­sance. However, at the moment, it is quite 
obvious from my own booklist that I am most widely and deeply read in 
Eu­ro­pean history; particularly Byzantine and Lower Empire.
My situation almost forced me to try to get in from the top—to go at once for 
a prestige research fellowship that would give me the time to follow my own 
interest in Byzantium and the ­later Roman Empire:
The most pleasant manner of cutting the Gordian knot is to go straight 
ahead and grab a Fellowship at All Souls—­which Bell advises me to try—­
but, of course, this has the nature of an academic wild goose chase. Anyway, 
the object of the exercise is to get a good degree in Schools, so I am not 
greatly concerned about ­these ­little têtes à têtes, but they are a rather chal-
lenging test of my sincerity! It is quite obvious that despite a ­great enthusi-
asm for history in general I have no patent hobby ­horse; personally I regard 
this as a healthy sign and a ­great advantage to anyone who is ­going to teach 
a wide syllabus, but authorities do have an awkward habit of asking for 
specific notions—to which I can hardly answer. . . . ​I am sure I ­will get 
many useful hints from Tom Parker tomorrow.
1. Note that the French Bas-­Empire, Lower Empire—­and not yet the ­Later Roman Empire—­
was still the dominant term for the period.
2. Ernest Jacob, the Chichele Professor of Medieval History (1893–1971), responsible for 
gradu­ate studies in the medieval field.

“A Very Specia l Degr ee” 
193
The next eve­ning, Tom Parker took me to dinner at the high ­table in 
University College. We de­cided that I should apply to the British School at 
Rome for a fellowship to work on a study tentatively entitled “The Social 
and Economic Position of the Roman Aristocracy in Italy in the Sixth 
­Century A.D.” This was my first, clear step in the direction of late Roman 
history.
The topic that I had chosen did not represent for me a complete break with 
my medievalist inclinations. To study the social and economic history of aris-
tocracies was very much in fashion in Oxford. Bruce McFarlane and his 
students—­such as George Holmes3—­were ­doing for the aristocracies of late 
medieval ­England what Lewis Namier had done for the eigh­teenth ­century 
and what Ronald Syme had done, with infectious success, for the elites of the 
Roman Republic. I felt secure that, in choosing to work on the late Roman 
aristocracy, I was tapping into a theme that was part of the “common sense” of 
Oxford historians, ancient and medieval alike.
Furthermore, the sixth ­century AD was about as close to the ­Middle Ages 
as any historian of the ancient world might venture. I already knew that, in 
sixth-­century Italy, developments that ­were crucial to the history of the medi-
eval West ­were well ­under way—­the settlement of the barbarians, the rise of 
the papacy, the origins of Benedictine monasticism, and the reception of the 
works of Augustine. Tom Parker and I agreed that eve­ning that a study of 
the Italian aristocracy in its last ­century was a topic that could act as a bridge 
between my two interests.
Yet a late medieval option was far from unattractive. My “Flemish” phase 
was not too distant from me. Late Gothic Oxford was all around me. Quite 
apart from its academic prestige in the Oxford of the 1950s, and the availability 
of jobs in the field, late medieval history could well tug at my heart. It repre-
sented a way back to the richness and complexity of the past that the distant 
glimmers of the sixth ­century could not equal.
Leading medievalists radiated an almost occult familiarity with their sub-
ject, based on rich archival resources. I remember one eve­ning a few years ­later 
sitting beside Ernest Jacob at dessert in All Souls College. In the glow of the 
candlelight, his face had the transparency of the face of a late medieval bishop on 
his alabaster tomb. “Brown,” he said, “I have spent all day with Archbishop 
Chichele.” This was said with such evident plea­sure and conviction that it took 
3. G. Holmes, Estates of the Higher Nobility in Fourteenth-­Century ­England (Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, 1957).

194 
Ch apter 33
me some time to remember that Archbishop Chichele (ca. 1364–1442: a con­
temporary of Henry V and the ­Battle of Agincourt) had been dead for over 
five hundred years. I had felt this thrill myself, when working in the archives 
at Shrewsbury. At the time, it was far from certain that I would abandon so 
intimate and absorbing a way of communing with the past for the study of the 
distant ancient world.
Applications
So the first step, in June and July, was to try my luck in applications for the few 
research fellowships that ­were offered by dif­fer­ent colleges. This was not a 
­matter of mere prestige. As I could not count on state support for my gradu­ate 
studies, I needed the money that such a fellowship would give me. The Harm-
sworth Fellowship at Merton College was the most promising of ­these. A week 
­after my canoeing escapade, I was being interviewed at Merton and dined as 
a guest at Merton high ­table. I wrote to my parents:
I have had a very tough interview for the Harmsworth Scholarship at Mer-
ton on last Tuesday. It is not easy to say what impression I made. The com-
petition is high and they always choose in an arbitrary way. But even to have 
got an interview is a good sign.
I talked to them about Cardinal Morton in par­tic­u­lar.
The ­career of Cardinal Morton (ca. 1420–1500) was a pos­si­ble dissertation 
subject if my fortune or interests turned me ­toward the study of the late me-
dieval En­glish church and of the churchman-­administrators who had served the 
early Tudors: Morton was known, ever since my schoolday textbooks, as 
the servant of Henry VII and the originator of a particularly odious form of 
taxation, known as “Morton’s Fork.” A hard-­nosed clerical administrator, 
he was the sort of bishop that an Oxford medievalist was supposed to study. 
I reported the dinner to my parents:
I also talked about Byzantine Studies in general; Astronomy; The Building 
of a Telescope (!!); The Red Spot on Jupiter—­Tidal theories [concerning 
the Red Spot]; The Shrewsbury Election; Augustinian Philosophy. To do 
so, in a cross fire of questions, was difficult. I did not stammer at all; but I 
­don’t know if I shot my mouth off too much. This is the greatest temptation 
in ­these circumstances.
This was a temptation from which my stammer, humiliating though it was, 
frequently protected me, giving me a quite undeserved reputation as a deep 

“A Very Specia l Degr ee” 
195
and diplomatic young man—­when I would have loved to be able to burst into 
speech. Then I added:
This business of application is like waiting for a bus at the wrong bus stop. 
If they ­don’t happen to like or want your line of research, it is no reflection 
on you that they turn you down.
My lack of state funding, as an Irish citizen, lay in the background of my anx­i­
eties. It was the reef that could have sunk all my plans. State scholarships, gener-
ously awarded to British gradu­ates, ­were not for me. And if I could not continue 
in Oxford, what ­else could I do? My stammer seemed to debar me from some of 
the more obvious ­careers that involved public speaking—as a teacher, ­lawyer, or 
clergyman. ­Until then, I had given no thought to ­these issues. Now they settled 
on my head, in a hot and sticky summer when I felt deeply tired and empty ­after 
the effort of finals. It was ­really only then—­and then only in passing—­that I gave 
thought to the fact that I might not be able to remain a scholar.
On July 4, I wrote again to my parents. My application to the British School 
at Rome had failed: I was runner-up to a candidate who had already done two 
years of research.
I am disappointed as I am very fond of the topic I had offered for research 
and also ­because it was such a close shave. However, it is prob­ably best: 
Rome at this time might be a backwater. I prefer to stay in Oxford. But I do 
hope you see what the position is. I have tried for all the big grants pos­si­ble—­
Bell has been very helpful in this. If I do not get the Harmsworth 
Scholarship—­and I am pessimistic in princi­ple—­I ­shall have to stay on on 
a lesser Scholarship or even a renewal of my Exhibition. The most valuable 
scholarship is £150—­the most likely ones are £120 and £100. I have asked, 
as tactfully as pos­si­ble, ­whether Shrewsbury has any fund. I could pick 
­things up during next year; but the prospect is not altogether bright. . . . ​
This is at its most pessimistic: if I get the Harmsworth, ­things ­will be easier; 
but I cannot count on that, much less on All Souls. This is the condition on 
which I ­shall have to start an academic ­career. I cannot even count on a 
requisite degree.
I knew that the examination results would not be known ­until around mid-­
July, and that I still had to face the “viva”—­the viva voce interview with the 
examiners that marked the end of the final examination.
Not much seems to be happening. College is very lonely and I am trying, 
very much against the grain, to summon up the enthusiasm for the viva 

196 
Ch apter 33
voce. It can be an impor­tant step, if I am on the borderline of a Class. I hope 
I ­shall not let myself down.
“A Very Special Degree”
On July 10 I went to the Examination Schools to face the viva. The interview 
varied in length. It usually involved a discussion of the examinee’s papers and 
determined the final grade. ­These grades ­were called classes—­first class, sec-
ond class . . . ​right down to a fourth. The interviews ­were scheduled in alpha-
betical order. The scheduled length of the interview (announced on the day) 
was held to be an indication of pos­si­ble success: a long interview could mean 
that I might have a chance to sing for my supper—to talk myself into a higher 
grade. Short interviews ­were usually taken to be a sign of unambiguous 
mediocrity.
I was perturbed to learn, on arrival at the Examination Schools, that I had 
been allotted only a short, ten-­minute slot. When I came in, I found the 
entire board silhouetted against the blazing morning sunlight of a wide, 
mock-­Tudor win­dow. Karl Leyser, who was the medieval examiner, ques-
tioned me with ­great courtesy about my answer to a question set in the 
general paper on the uses of archaeology. What did I think of the relationship 
between the Anglo-­Saxon epic Beowulf and the Sutton Hoo burial ship? I an-
swered as best I could. Then ­there was a short silence, a shuffling of chairs, 
and the silhouettes ­rose above the ­table. The chairman of the board reached 
out his hand to me. “Congratulations, Mr. Brown. I do not think that you 
need to have any worry as to your final Class.” I had received the rarest of 
all accolades—­a “congratulated first.” (I learned ­later that it was the top first in 
History.)
My parents, as any reader can imagine, ­were im­mensely proud. But glory 
lives in the mouth of ­others. My ­mother received a letter from her friend Hilda 
Baron, whose son, Rupert, had just taken the Cambridge equivalent of finals. 
An athlete through and through with ­little zest for scholarship, Rupert had 
received, in the Cambridge Tripos, the lowest of all imaginable grades—­
gloriously lower even than an Oxford fourth. It was a pass speciali gratia—
by special grace: that is, by the special mercy of the examiners, in the light of 
his ser­vices to the University Rugby XV. But the degree “by special grace” 
was soon transmogrified. Hilda told my ­mother that Rupert had emerged 
from Cambridge with a “Very Special Degree.” What had Peter got to equal 
that? My ­mother was mortified. In her subsequent letters to Hilda Baron, she 
never referred again to my ­humble Oxford first.

“A Very Specia l Degr ee” 
197
Practical Implications
But what exactly ­were the practical implications of an “Oxford first” in 1956? 
First of all, far fewer of them ­were awarded in history at this time than in ­later 
de­cades. Only 18 firsts out of 302 (6 ­percent) ­were awarded that year. It was a 
rare distinction, and a congratulated first was even rarer.
So far, so good. But beyond that, a first did not commit me to any par­tic­u­lar 
­career path. It was a singularly open-­ended distinction. To gain a first was to 
receive a passkey that was supposed to open doors at the top—­especially in 
the Civil Ser­vice, in the Diplomatic Ser­vice, and in similar public ­careers. 
Historical research was only one of ­those many doors, and by no means the most 
impor­tant one. ­Here, the En­glish preference for the talented all-­rounder—­the 
adaptable and gentlemanly member of a ruling class—­made itself plain. Most 
holders of firsts did not expect to stay in Oxford or in other centers of research 
and teaching. They made their way to the wider world.
Nor was the final examination itself—­and the undergraduate teaching that 
prepared for it—­designed to foster any special skills in research. The essays 
that ­were written for tutors ­every week ­were usually read out to them at the begin-
ning of the tutorial. They ­were twenty minutes to half an hour long and ­were ex-
pected to be successful rhetorical per­for­mances. They ­were trial runs for the an-
swers that ­were expected in the final examination. One was encouraged to “think 
on one’s feet”—to give quick (even entertaining) answers to complex questions, 
even if ­these answers bordered on the flip and the facile. ­These ­were the virtues of 
civil servants and journalists. They ­were not ­those needed on the coalface of the 
archives or for studying texts in difficult languages—­that is, for real research.
At this time, Oxford offered no equivalent of an American gradu­ate school 
training. Nor was ­there even an equivalent to the American honors thesis, 
which gave an undergraduate a sneak preview of research. Anyone who em-
barked on research in Oxford, first or no first, started from scratch with ­little 
or no guidance in the years to come.
But a first did designate what in Shrewsbury language one would call “a 
tweak”—an avatar of some epic qualities. In my case, ­these ­were qualities of 
mind. But Rupert Baron also, in his way, was a “tweak”—­a Cambridge Rugger 
Blue so gloriously indifferent to scholarship, so devoted to The Game, as to re-
ceive a pass “by special mercy” only. He, like me, was something of a monstre 
sacré—­a prodigy, a summation of the virtues of the athletic circles in which he 
moved. Hilda Baron was right. Rupert had received a Very Special Degree, suited 
to a Very Special Person. As for me, I would have to turn my first into a ­career in 
the coming months, through a series of further, yet more ambitious tests.

198
34
To All Souls
So what now? For me, a top first ensured that I could return to Oxford. Merton 
offered me a Harmsworth Scholarship that gave me an income and lodgings 
in college for three years. It was understood that I would be writing a disserta-
tion on Cardinal Morton, or on some such late medieval En­glish figure.
But would I also try my luck at All Souls? A prize fellowship at All Souls 
was regarded as the pinnacle of an undergraduate’s ­career. It was awarded to 
no more than two candidates each year on the results of an examination re-
puted to be of Byzantine difficulty, followed by an interview and a notorious 
dinner, where each candidate was wined, dined, and carefully vetted by the 
fellows. The prize was seven years of total freedom in a singularly comfort-
able college, whose members ­were among the leading lights of Oxford (as 
professors, scholars, and authors) and, indeed, of Britain (as ­lawyers, publish-
ers, politicians, and civil servants). Prize fellows could pursue their research 
undisturbed in the com­pany of ­these luminaries: ­there was no obligation 
to enroll in a gradu­ate program; no obligation to teach; no obligation, even, to 
remain in Oxford—­many prize fellows stepped immediately into ­careers in 
the wider world. All Souls, as viewed by undergraduates, was the stuff of 
legends.
Not surprisingly, given this golden fog, I was so uncertain that I would have 
a chance in such a venture that I took the final decision to apply only in late 
September, when I was on holiday with my parents at the farthest end of Ire-
land, at the Butler Arms in Waterville, in county Kerry.
It was a happy time for me. I sat on a sofa in the lounge, driven indoors by 
the rain, gravely discussing Sophocles’s Antigone with Catholic girls my own 
age from a convent school. We danced together in the eve­ning, culminating 
in a conga to the tune of “I’ll take the last chuff-­chuff to Bally James Duff.” It was 
at the Butler Arms that I made telephone calls to Harry Bell and to All Souls, 

To A ll Souls 
199
to put down my name to take the notorious All Souls Fellowship Examination 
in October. The phone call, in itself, was not as easy as one might think. It in-
volved crouching in a cramped position, with piles of coins available, over a 
telephone placed beneath the main staircase, as Irish and then En­glish 
voices transferred me from the Atlantic edge of Eu­rope to the porter’s lodge 
of All Souls.
A week ­later, I was back in Oxford, in comfortable rooms as a Harmsworth 
fellow at Merton College—at the end of Merton Garden, next door to the 
University Botanical Garden. I received a courteous welcome from the dons. 
Roger Highfield (1922–2017), a pupil of McFarlane’s, the historian of Merton 
Library and a ­great lover of late medieval Spain, was kindness itself. But I felt 
like a ghost. Readers unacquainted with the Oxford of this time may not real-
ize the poignancy of the term “postgraduate” applied to what we would now 
call “gradu­ate” students. A “postgraduate” was, in many ways, regarded as a 
has-­been. He or she was past the only “graduation” that ­really mattered—­
finals. “Postgraduates” lingered on, with ­little or no provision for their educa-
tion compared with the im­mense pains lavished on even the most callow of 
undergraduates. They settled down as gray shades—­leftovers from the glory 
days of their undergraduate ­career.
I adjusted none too badly to being a late medievalist—­indeed, an En­glish 
late medievalist. In the Oxford of the time, it was an eminently intelligible oc-
cupation. When I paid my official call (as a new postgraduate) to the Regius 
Professor of History, Vivian Galbraith (1889–1976), he was smoking his pipe, 
bent over his fireplace, vigorously stirring the fire. In between puffs and pokes, 
he validated my choice of a dissertation topic. Bishop Morton—­later Cardinal 
Morton—­was an admirable choice. “Every­body,” he said, very firmly, and en-
tirely without irony, “needs a bishop!”
And so I threw myself into reading chronicles of the Wars of the Roses and 
working my way through the printed registers of fifteenth-­century archbishops 
of Canterbury. It was only occasionally that I would stop and read distant re-
ports in ­these chronicles of the sinister advance of the Turks in southeastern 
Eu­rope that would culminate in the fall of Constantinople in 1453. I even 
thought of changing my subject to one closer to my interests—­the nature of 
excommunication in late medieval ­England. This would have linked up with 
my interest in the relation between religion and society, which I had already 
developed in my medieval readings.
It was with excommunication in Yorkist ­England on my mind that I was 
sitting in the Upper Bodleian on Saturday morning, November 3. I was reading 

200 
Ch apter 34
the commentaries of fifteenth-­century En­glish canon ­lawyers. I noticed, with 
a twinge of nostalgia for the fifth ­century, that large extracts from the works of 
Augustine appeared on almost ­every page. Looking down out of the win­dow 
opposite the Radcliffe Camera, I could see into the Codrington Quadrangle 
of All Souls College and the dining hall where I knew that the fellows ­were 
assembled to elect new fellows on the basis of their per­for­mance in the All 
Souls Fellowship Examination. I did not rate my chances very high. I went 
back to my fifteenth-­century ­lawyers.
I had taken the Fellowship Examination only a few weeks previously. Ever 
since, I had done my best to put it out of my mind. I felt that I had taken a 
beating. I had never met such difficult questions. ­There was a menacing naïveté 
about them: “How Roman was Byzantium?” “Why did anyone expect the 
Crusades to succeed?” “Did the Eigh­teenth ­Century understand Greek art?” 
­After the exam, I lowered my eyes whenever I saw a known member of All 
Souls on the street. I knew that I had shamed myself in front of him and his 
colleagues.
Only the memory of my per­for­mance on the single-­word essay—­
“Islands”—­gave me some comfort. I had just returned from the islands of the 
West of Ireland, and I had also followed my friend Jan Safranek’s urging: in 
August I had read Braudel’s gigantic and nourishing book—­La Méditerranée 
et le monde méditerranéen—­from cover to cover. Braudel was brilliant on the 
role of islands in the historical geography of the Mediterranean. My essay was 
a combination of county Kerry and Braudel.
As for the famous dinner to which examination candidates ­were invited as 
part of their screening pro­cess, all I remember was discoursing in front of a 
studiously courteous but evidently skeptical Isaiah Berlin, about the manner 
in which Aran Island legends of the arrival of a silver knight from the Western 
Ocean echoed island memories of the shipwreck of the last remnants of the 
Spanish Armada in 1588.
But that had been weeks ago. Now, on November 3, Oxford was in chaos. 
War was in the air. The Hungarian revolt was in full swing. The Anglo-­French 
invasion of Egypt had begun. On October 31, British and French planes had 
bombed Egyptian airfields as the opening stage of Operation Musketeer. Leav-
ing the peace of Bodley, I linked up with a new friend from Merton—­Conrad 
Russell, the son of the phi­los­o­pher Bertrand Russell, and a ­future historian of 
early modern ­England. We strolled up to St. Giles to view the scene, being 
buffeted on the way by placards to a loud chant of “Peace! Peace!” As we re-
turned ­toward Merton, Conrad suggested that we should look in to the lodge 

To A ll Souls 
201
of All Souls College . . . ​just in case. The handwritten notice declared that 
Charles Taylor—­the phi­los­o­pher and ­later the author, among much ­else, of 
Sources of the Self: The Making of Modern Identity1—­had been elected, and 
so had I.
I returned to Merton to receive a note from John Sparrow, the warden of 
All Souls, inviting me to dine in college on Sunday; and ­there, on that Sunday 
eve­ning, I realized that I had passed through a looking glass. Silver-­haired men 
in tuxedos chatted about politics as they gathered around the tele­vi­sion set in 
the warden’s lodgings—­the only one in the college. They did not argue about 
Eden or Gaitskill. They talked about “Anthony” and “Hugh.”
I returned late that eve­ning to Merton to find the college shut. I scrambled 
up a part of the wall where the row of spikes on its top gave me a handhold. 
The spikes ­were held on an iron spit, parallel to the top of the wall, between 
two andirons. ­These andirons had become loose. As I reached the top of the 
wall, the row of spikes gave way in my hands. Lifting it up, I threw it down on 
to the cobblestones below. Having recently read Tolstoy’s War and Peace, I 
thought that it was an action worthy of the sturdy and occasionally madcap 
Count Pierre Bezhukov. But Rus­sian novels are not, perhaps, the best guides 
to conduct. It was not a very large length of spikes; but it fell with a ­great clang. 
At once, in the row of buildings that faced Merton College on the other side 
of Merton Lane, win­dow ­after win­dow lit up. It was like a hillside city in a Nea-
politan crèche or a ­giant Advent calendar. I turned to my audience, bowed 
deeply, and dropped over the side onto the compost heap that was con­ve­
niently piled high against the college wall.
1. C. Taylor, Sources of the Self: The Making of Modern Identity (Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press), 1989.

202
35
All Souls
Courtesy and Ignor ance
Co-­optation
My success in the All Souls Fellowship Examination sent a happy clang around 
the circle of my New College friends. Writing from Paris, Jan Safranek com-
posed a celebratory poem in the manner of Winnie the Pooh:
Three cheers for Brown
(For who?)
For Brown!
(Why, what did he do?)
I thought you knew:
He saved himself from the Morton!
Oh Brown was a Bear of Byzantine Brain–
(Of Byzantine what?)
Well, he knew a lot;
So now let’s give him three Soulful cheers
(so now let us give him three soulful whiches?)
­Because he’s reached wisdom and riches
And hope that ­he’ll greet his friends
Who remain somewhat at loose ends,
With erudite talk, and scholarly dinners
(What’s this about sinners?)
HOORAY FOR THE BEAR OF BYZANTINE POWER
AUTOKRATOR OF OXFORD, TSAR OF THE HOUR!

A ll Souls 
203
Jan knew what this fellowship meant for me. I had been heading ­toward a 
thesis in late medieval En­glish history, on the administrator-­bishop Cardinal 
Morton. My prize fellowship at All Souls set me ­free to study late Roman and 
Byzantine history.
The prize fellowship lasted for seven years, ­after which I could be reelected 
as a full research fellow. I received a generous stipend and was able to live in 
the college. To live in college was like being welcomed into an eccentric but 
tightly bonded ­family. I was instantly astonished by the rare courtesy with 
which the older fellows of All Souls co-­opted young prize fellows.
By Oxford standards, All Souls was an unusually diverse body. Not all ­those 
who had gained prize fellowships remained in Oxford as researchers or tutors. 
Most, indeed, went out into the wider world as ­lawyers, civil servants, diplo-
mats, politicians, and journalists, principally in London. Yet they retained their 
full rights in the college. They ­were known collectively as the “London fel-
lows.” They would regularly appear at the weekends, having “come up” from 
London to what amounted to their Oxford club.
For this reason, weekend dining (especially on Saturday night) played a 
crucial role in fostering contact between the young prize fellows and their 
somewhat awesome London colleagues. At ­those weekend dinners, dinner jackets 
­were obligatory. I now realize the impor­tant role played by this old-­fashioned dress 
code. With the diners sheathed in identical black suits, in the flickering light of 
candles, vast distances of age and profession could be treated as absent. As I looked 
down the high ­table in the ­great dining hall and, ­later in the eve­ning, in the more 
intimate setting of the dessert room, what I saw ­were not the ­great of the land, but 
rows of softly lit, seemingly ageless ­faces set in black jackets and shiny white shirts. 
(I should add that, except on special occasions, this uniform array was of men 
only—­and would be so ­until ­women ­were admitted as fellows in 1979.)
­There is a lot to be said for dinner jackets and candlelight as equalizers. Far 
from being marks of antiquated privilege, dinner jackets had a leveling effect. 
I was reminded of this function in the late 1970s. Having moved to Berkeley, I 
de­cided that I would no longer need my dinner jacket—my tuxedo. It was not 
a very glorious piece of clothing. I had bought it at Oxfam for only five pounds. 
But I had used it regularly for weekend dining in All Souls. When I arrived in 
California, it seemed out of place in the more demo­cratic atmosphere of the 
West Coast. I left it on a bench in ­People’s Park, for some lucky vagrant to ap-
propriate. But as I looked up at a powder-­blue sky at the far end of the world, 
I was surprised to feel a twinge of regret. I realized that the dinner jacket had 

204 
Ch apter 35
been both a symbol of collegiality and the means by which unaffected courtesy 
could be extended by the old to the young.
On My Own
I needed all the courtesy that I could get. My deepest memory of my first years 
as a prize fellow at All Souls was of aching ignorance. I had been an unusually 
successful undergraduate in mastering large tracts of history, and skilled in 
producing quick and well-­turned essays. I was the product of a culture of ex-
aminations, which stretched back to my days at Aravon and Shrewsbury. Now 
I had to change roles: I had to become a researcher, and eventually a teacher 
and a writer. ­Those ­were significant changes.
Worse still, as a researcher of the ­later Roman Empire, I was an utter igno-
ramus. I had none of the background needed for such research. I had read 
history, not classics, and so I had to start learning Greek again, which I had last 
studied at the age of thirteen at Shrewsbury. I had chosen for my research a 
period of history (the sixth ­century) that was virtually unknown ­either to 
classicists or to medievalists. I was now left alone, to find out ­whether my intel-
lectual ambition was justified.
I realize that I must have appeared to be a very pretentious young man. 
I use the word “pretentious” without negative connotations. I was in an academic 
system that worked (as much at the gradu­ate level of research as at the under-
graduate level) through fostering the pretentiousness of the young. It offered 
constant encouragement to think and to speak beyond one’s capacity—to 
stand on tiptoes, as it ­were, so as to be one’s own brilliant ­future self in the far 
from brilliant ­here and now.
At the gradu­ate level, it offered ­little ­else. To stay on to do research at Ox-
ford was to be shot, within a few months, from a situation of weekly supervi-
sion, as an undergraduate, into a total educational vacuum. It was a strange 
feeling. When I returned to the Bodleian Library in the fall of 1956, it appeared 
as if nothing had changed. It was as if its readers, all in their familiar seats at 
the long desks, ­were frozen in time. But, for me, every­thing had changed. The 
world was drained of the rich atmosphere built up by three years of tutorial 
teaching, with its constant nurture and feedback, aided by the lively conversa-
tions of friends, none of whom remained in Oxford. Now I was on my own. It 
was as if I had landed on the face of the moon.
­Little did I know it at the time, but as I sat in the Bodleian as an âme d’élite—​
a lonely select soul—­all over Amer­i­ca and Eu­rope persons of my age and 

A ll Souls 
205
ambitions would be gathering in groups, with their fellow gradu­ates, to attend 
seminars or proseminars in which (if they ­were lucky) a ­great professor would 
slowly but surely initiate them, over a term or so, into the mysteries of research 
in their field: bibliography, methodology—­all the tricks of the trade; and they 
would take other seminars directly related to a chosen topic of research, as 
would happen in any American gradu­ate school. By contrast, I sat alone in one 
of the world’s greatest libraries, surrounded by shelves of books, which seemed 
at once exhilarating and menacing. I had to sink or swim. It was simply as-
sumed that a winning product of the Oxford educational system needed no 
further help. I had got my first. Now I would do research. I would embark on 
writing a dissertation with no formal preparation whatsoever: no two years of 
seminars in a gradu­ate program; no general exam; only a somewhat tenuous 
relationship with a supervisor. The dissertation—­and the dissertation alone—­
was the only goal in an other­wise empty landscape.
Looking back, I think that I failed to recognize the advantages of my loneli-
ness. My choice of an eccentric topic of research and the splendid isolation 
granted to young fellows of All Souls protected me from becoming enmeshed 
in the vari­ous factions among the ancient historians and the medievalists of 
Oxford. I was nobody’s client—­not a follower of Ronald Syme in ancient his-
tory, nor of Bruce McFarlane or some other dominant figure in medieval 
history. But at the time, such thoughts would have given me ­little consolation. 
It was an anxious moment.
My success in the All Souls examination had at least removed one anxiety. 
I was, at last, financially in­de­pen­dent. My parents would no longer have to 
support me, as they had done so uncomplainingly, ever since I went to Shrews-
bury in 1948. They took my success for granted, without any sense that I could 
perceive of the risks that might accompany my rare good fortune. I was less 
sanguine. I still have a chill feeling about ­those early years in All Souls. It was 
a time of danger, where I could have been frozen by the combination of loneli-
ness and high expectations that characterized the life of many young scholars 
in Oxford, and most especially young prize fellows at All Souls. I needed all 
the help I could get.
Supervision: Arnaldo Momigliano (1908–1987)
Hence my singular good fortune to have as my supervisor none other than 
Arnaldo Momigliano. It was Peter Fraser of All Souls (1918–2007), the histo-
rian of Hellenistic Alexandria, who put me in touch with him. As I remember, 

206 
Ch apter 35
we first met in Fraser’s rooms. Momigliano immediately gave me one of his 
most recent articles—­a brilliant intellectual portrait of Mikhail Rostovtzeff.1 
He agreed to take me on. At that time, he was deeply engaged in work on Cas-
siodorus and the noble ­family of the Anicii in sixth-­century Italy.2 For that 
reason, he was the natu­ral supervisor for someone who intended to write the 
dissertation I envisioned: “The Social and Economic Position of the Roman 
Aristocracy in Italy in the Sixth ­Century A.D.”—­the topic that I had chosen 
with Tom Parker, and to which I was now ­free to return.
But it would be highly misleading to call Momigliano my “teacher” at this 
moment. In Oxford, dissertation supervisors ­were not expected to teach their 
charges, only to monitor their lonely pro­gress. Momigliano would never 
“teach” or “train” me in the formal sense. Indeed, to be taught by Momigliano 
would be akin to being taught by a supernova in full explosion. It did not hap-
pen. I was content to listen, awestruck, as he talked on what­ever topic was on 
his mind.
In one impor­tant re­spect, however, Momigliano proved to be very En­glish 
in the best pos­si­ble way—­that is, in his unaffected courtesy to the young, such 
as I had experienced also in All Souls. Despite my youth, I was immediately 
co-­opted by him as an honorary colleague—­a fellow adventurer in the all-­
absorbing, vaguely comical enterprise of ancient history. From the moment 
he agreed to be my supervisor, he sent me an offprint of every­thing that he 
wrote. To keep up with the flow of Momigliano’s articles, which ranged from 
the origins of Rome to the settlement of the barbarians in the fifth ­century 
West, was an education in itself.
He also gave me an even more precious gift than a constant share in his eru-
dition. He trusted me to stand on my own feet. He viewed with sovereign 
contempt scholars (even ­great scholars) who attempted to make clones of 
their students. He left me strictly alone to form my own opinions and to follow 
my own instincts.
It was only eventually that Momigliano became a mentor and a friend to 
me. At the time, he was something of a persecutory superego—as supervisors 
tend to be in the beginning stages of a gradu­ate student’s ­career. On one occa-
sion, when I saw Momigliano enter the Lower Bodleian as I was reading ­there, 
1. A. D. Momigliano, “M. I. Rostovtzeff,” Cambridge Journal 7 (1954): 334–346, now in Studies 
in Historiography (London: Weidenfeld and Nicholson, 1966), 91–104.
2. A. D. Momigliano, “Cassiodorus and the Italian Culture of His Time,” Proceedings of the 
British Acad­emy 41 (1955): 207–245, now in Studies in Historiography, 181–210.

A ll Souls 
207
I dropped my pen and hid beneath the desk, pretending to look for it, ­until he 
had passed by.
What Momigliano did represent for me was a very dif­fer­ent pole from that 
of Oxford. Though a frequent visitor to Oxford, he was professor of ancient 
history in University College London. On rare occasions I would go from 
Oxford to London to meet him at University College in Gower Street. In ­doing 
so, I entered another world. On the first occasion I was lost. Accustomed 
as I was, in Oxford, to ask directions at the porter’s lodge of a college, I looked 
down a corridor and saw, to my relief, a gentleman in formal, old-­fashioned dress 
sitting ­behind a glass pane, as Oxford college porters ­were accustomed to sit. 
On drawing near, I discovered that he was not a porter. He was the ­great utilitar-
ian phi­los­o­pher Jeremy Bentham (1748–1832) in person, mummified in a glass 
case in University College, in whose foundation he had played a major role.
When I reached Momigliano’s office, I found the ­table piled high with books 
newly arrived from Rus­sia. He was engaged in a hot debate with a colleague on 
the Greek and Hebrew terms for a city wall. He drew my attention with a wave of 
the hand to the pile of Rus­sian books, implying that, of course, I must be ac-
quainted with them. Then, without introducing me to the colleague, he asked me 
straight out what I thought on the recondite ­matter of city walls. A supervision 
that consisted of heroic encounters of that nature makes for vivid memories. But 
it was hardly a systematic introduction to the ­later empire, such as an American 
(and now even a British) gradu­ate student might expect in his or her first year.
What I did not realize at the time was that my contact with Momigliano in 
London was the beginning of an opening of my horizons that would take part 
of me away from the inward-­looking atmosphere of Oxford. London was 
always more to me than a city. It was the intellectual and imaginative counter-
weight to Oxford, and a bridge to the wider world of Eu­ro­pean scholarship.
In ­these years, however, Oxford was the world I knew. And it was in the Oxford 
manner—­through a pro­cess of co-­optation, and not through any formal teaching 
relationship—­that I slowly found my way to making personal contact with 
leading scholars in the field. They welcomed me with quite outstanding 
courtesy.
My first contact of this kind was with A.H.M. Jones—­Hugo Jones (1904–
1970). He had not yet published his monumental work, The ­Later Roman 
Empire, which would appear in 1964.3 I met him in unusual circumstances. 
3. A.H.M. Jones, The ­Later Roman Empire: A Social, Administrative and Economic Survey, 
284–602, 2 vols. (Oxford: Blackwell, 1964).

208 
Ch apter 35
Jones had been a prize fellow of the college, and would return to All Souls on 
the gaudy night—­All Souls Night, when a solemn and bibulous banquet took 
place in the eve­ning ­after the meeting in which the prize fellows ­were elected. 
On that occasion, the more worldly fellows would disport themselves ­after the 
banquet in the manner of a Guy Fawkes night. They would bombard the dome 
of the Radcliffe Camera with rockets launched from the lawn of the Codring-
ton Quadrangle. Lord Hailsham (Quintin Hogg) would rush around the col-
lege, waving sparklers. ­Great fun was had by all.
Not so Hugo Jones. As Hailsham and his playmates roared outside, Jones 
would sit on the edge of the ­great green sofa in the deserted smoking room, 
puffing his pipe and thinking aloud to me about the history of the ­later Roman 
Empire. His dry common sense was rendered incandescent by his passion for 
the subject. He showed me what could be got out of the most unlikely texts—­
lives of saints, sermons of the ­Fathers of the Church, letters of bishops: each 
of ­these ­great piles of chaff could be winnowed to produce solid grains of evi-
dence about the workings of late Roman society. He was always grappling with 
some impor­tant but neglected aspect of the social history of the ­later empire. 
Did I know that Roman notions of divorce—­which gave each party the right 
to divorce the other, as in the termination of any other form of contract—­had 
lasted ­until the end of the sixth ­century? The thought that such freedom 
had survived for so long into Christian times evidently pleased him. Did I know 
that a good book had yet to be written on the Visigoths of Spain? Encounters 
such as ­these, followed up by patient reading of ­every one of Jones’s articles 
on a late Roman topic—­footnote by footnote to take the mea­sure of the vast 
range of evidence on which they ­were based—­showed me what it was to be a 
master of the ancient historian’s trade.
The gathering of models of the historian’s craft did not always take place 
against such a flamboyant background. But ­those who offered me help did so 
with an openness that needs to be remembered. Many of them ­were Marxists. 
This was particularly the case with a towering scholar of the ancient world: 
Geoffrey de Sainte Croix of New College (1910–2000). Geoffrey did not share 
the tendency of ancient historians of classical training to lose interest in 
Roman history the moment that Tacitus put down his pen. As a Marxist, he 
wanted to know about the stormy ­later centuries of Rome: to follow the an-
cient world to its final ­grand demise, with the collapse of the slave system and 
the rise of feudalism. His very hostility to Chris­tian­ity made him take seriously 
its rise in the Roman world.

A ll Souls 
209
Above all, Geoffrey was quite prepared to look beyond the narrow canon 
of classical authors in order to seize the evolution of Roman society as a ­whole. 
It was Geoffrey who told me, with evident excitement, that the only source in 
the entire history of the ancient world that traced, month by month, the 
rise in the cost of foodstuffs in a time of famine was not any classical Greek 
or Latin text. It was a sixth-­century Syriac chronicle of the city of Edessa—­
the Chronicle of Joshua the Stylite. This was my very first, deliciously unex-
pected, introduction to the largely unknown riches of Syriac lit­er­a­ture in 
late Roman times.
Apart from ­these moments of personal contact, what kept me ­going in 
­those uncertain years? Three ­things. I began to teach. I was commissioned to 
write. I was encouraged to spend time abroad, at the British School at Rome.

210
36
Teaching, Writing, 
and Rome
Scarcity and Riches
In many ways I was uniquely privileged: I had gained a top first and was a prize 
fellow of All Souls. This gave me financial security and an enviable freedom. It 
also gave me time: the prize fellowship lasted for a full seven years. I needed 
­every moment of that time to educate myself in a field of which I was largely 
ignorant, having been taught mainly modern and medieval history as an 
undergraduate.
But I was given no guidance. I had no structures such as an American-­style 
gradu­ate school could provide, through its seminars and term papers, to direct 
my study and to initiate me into the field of ancient history. I had no ever-­
present Doktorvater to turn to: at that time, Arnaldo Momigliano (in London) 
was still a distant figure to me. Nor did I have an academic patron to whose 
school I could attach myself, as in Eu­rope. My first and my fellowship ­were 
deemed to be enough to get me anywhere: I did not need to become a member 
of an équipe. This situation freed me; but it also left me isolated. Despite many 
friendships, I did not have a cohort of fellow students of my own age engaged 
in studying the same field as myself, and bonded by a shared experience of 
gradu­ate training, or (as nowadays) through working as members of a team in 
a research proj­ect.
It was a dangerous moment. Lack of instruction is not necessarily the way 
to true originality. A gradu­ate training often gives the students an ability to 
stand on their own feet that they would not have enjoyed if they had been left 
entirely to themselves. Without formal guidance, it was only too easy, in the 
Oxford of the 1950s, to turn to other ways of making oneself acceptable. I had 

Teaching, W r iting, a nd Rome 
211
already noticed that Oxford worked best on a system of co-­optation. I was 
treated by the old, with ­great courtesy, as one of themselves, and was thereby 
encouraged to join them. For some this system of tacit recruitment proved 
disastrous. It turned them into perpetual wannabees, dangerously over­
identified with the institutions or the mentors with whom they wished to be 
identified: weaker (or nastier) souls became more Oxford than Oxford, or the 
clones and attack dogs of their older protectors.
I remember being told by an immigrant from Germany, Richard Walzer 
(1900–1975), a wise head and a scholar of late Greek and Islamic philosophy 
to whom I came to owe much, that what he found most unnerving in Oxford 
was the way in which nobody was prepared to tell him what he should do in 
the college common room to which he had been admitted. He observed 
shrewdly that, as a result of the total absence of explicit guidance, he felt him-
self ­under constant pressure to overconform, to become more En­glish than 
the En­glish, lest he sin, in an unguarded moment, against the unspoken codes 
of his environment. I sympathized with his dilemma. I needed ­every bit of 
support that I could muster to avoid the situation that he described. As a 
result, I found myself taking advantage of certain distinctive features of the 
Oxford of that time which compensated for the almost complete absence of a 
formal training. I was a magpie; but I had rich pickings.
“Making the Period In­ter­est­ing”: Teaching
In the long run, it was the university and its college-­based tutorial system that 
provided the keel for my life as a scholar. I became a tutor, and my teaching 
saw me through ­those anxious years. The personal, face-­to-­face nature of 
the tutorial was easier on my stammer than exposure to large classes would have 
been. It also involved a style of teaching that was easy to imitate. ­After three 
years of exposure to tutorials it was not difficult to become a tutor myself. 
Though perched on a lonely eminence in All Souls, I soon gained a reputation 
as a teacher whose pupils got firsts or top seconds in their final exams.
My position as a prize fellow at All Souls made me particularly open to 
demands to act as a tutor for undergraduates from other colleges. ­There was 
something paradoxical about that situation. It was a carefully maintained 
princi­ple that All Souls was a college devoted to pure research, an Oxford 
equivalent of the Prince­ton Institute for Advanced Study. This, in fact, was 
pure myth. The prize fellows of All Souls ­were the supply teachers of the uni-
versity. They ­were constantly being asked to take on pupils from all over 

212 
Ch apter 36
Oxford. Already in Michaelmas term of 1957, Tom Parker, my former tutor for 
Saint Augustine, unloaded on me at the last minute ten young persons who 
needed tutorials in a tract of history (En­glish history from 1307 to 1660) that 
was over a thousand years, and well over a thousand miles, away from my 
proposed subject of research. ­These students took time. But they ­were worth 
it. At the end of term, I wrote to my parents, with a touch of pride:
The only relief this week has been the farewells of pupils. . . . ​Some seemed 
­really enthusiastic, and actually thanked me in a rather embarrassed and 
embarrassing way, for “making the period so in­ter­est­ing, Sir.” . . .
. . . ​Life has been terribly circumscribed by writing reports on ­people 
[­after the term’s tutorials] . . . ​and teaching them any subject from the 
­Causes of the Fall of the Roman Empire to the Foreign Policy of James I.
I throve on this teaching. It steadied my nerves. At a time when I was well 
aware that I knew far less than I should about the late Roman Senate, I was 
not at a loss to tell the young three in­ter­est­ing ­things about the Wars of the 
Roses, with which to dazzle the examiners when they came to their final 
examination. Altogether, this teaching brought a touch of normality into what 
was other­wise an overprivileged and isolated existence.
An All Souls Job: The Concise Encyclopedia  
of World History
I was also given my first opportunity to write. This happened in a manner that 
reflected very well the workings of All Souls. All Souls was an unusual college 
in the way in which the world of London was joined to the more local, inward-­
looking world of Oxford. The fellows included London publishers and editors 
who ­were ­eager to seek out young writers for books or essays written for the 
general public, and not only for the academic world. They would often turn to 
All Souls for advice on potential young authors. One of ­these ventures was 
The Concise Encyclopedia of World History, edited by John Bowle (1905–1988). 
On the recommendation of A. L. Rowse (1903–1997), a se­nior fellow, who prided 
himself inordinately on being a literary man, a ­great author and not a stuffy don, 
Bowle turned to me to write a chapter: “Palestine and the Making of Chris­tian­ity.” 
This amounted to nothing less than a history of Judaism, of the mutation of 
paganism, and of the rise and triumph of Chris­tian­ity in the ancient world—­
fifteen hundred years of ancient history, all in thirty pages! I jumped at it.

Teaching, W r iting, a nd Rome 
213
My enthusiasm was genuine. I was already determined that no history 
that I studied would be of any use ­unless it could be communicated in such 
a way as to reach a wide and cultivated public, such as I liked to imagine 
existed, beyond the walls of Oxford. When asked for whom I wrote, I would 
always say that I “wrote for my aunts.” That is, I wrote for persons of suffi-
cient education and cultural interests, but who had never been to university, 
such as my aunt Mai and my aunt Freda. Such persons, and not necessarily 
the dons of Oxford, would be my readers. In the words of W. B. Yeats (writing 
in 1891):
To please the folk of few books is one’s ­great aim. By being Irish I think one 
has a better chance of it—­over ­here is so much to read and think about.1
Judaism, the rise of Chris­tian­ity, and the fall of the Roman Empire ­were cer-
tainly topics for an average reader (and especially an Irish reader, with his or 
her religious preoccupations) “to read and think about.”
But what mattered most for me was the opportunity to read myself into a 
totally new subject. I had not been an ancient historian. The biblical Near East, 
Judaism, Greco-­Roman paganism and the ­earlier centuries of the Christian 
church ­were terra incognita to me. It was time to use the opportunity offered 
by The Concise Encyclopedia to complete my education.
The college provided me with the guides I needed. Peter Fraser lent me a 
brilliant ­little book by Norman Baynes, the ­great Byzantinist (1877–1961). 
Baynes’s mission as a scholar had been “to make the Byzantine Empire in­
ter­est­ing,” which he did in a series of remarkable public lectures at London 
University and elsewhere. But this book was not about Byzantium. Entitled 
Israel among the Nations, it was a short history of Judaism in the time of the 
Old Testament. Baynes had written it mainly for members of his church: for 
he was also a Baptist preacher. Eloquent and accessible, it was every­thing that 
a book for a popu­lar audience should be.2 I wanted to write like Baynes. 
Alas, I was not always successful. Once, when trying out part of my chapter 
by reading it to my ­mother, I noticed that, by the time that I had advanced, in 
somewhat purple prose, from the conquests of Alexander the ­Great to the 
revolt of Judas Maccabaeus, she had fallen fast asleep.
1. R. F. Foster, W. B. Yeats: A Life, vol. 1, The Apprentice Mage (Oxford University Press, 1997), 
110–111.
2. N. H. Baynes, Israel among the Nations (London: Student Christian Movement, 1928).

214 
Ch apter 36
The Prof.: R. C. Zaehner (1913–1974)
Among the fellows of All Souls, some ­were more out­going with their advice 
and encouragement than ­others. My principal guide at that time was Robin 
Zaehner—­R. C. Zaehner, known since his youth as “the Prof.” Zaehner was 
Spalding Professor of Religion and Ethics and a fellow of All Souls. He had 
been British consul in Tehran during and ­after the war. Rumors circulated 
about his activities at that time.
He never discussed his experiences in Iran with me. Rather, he became a 
mentor in out-­of-­the-­way religious ­matters. The Prof. was the perfect denizen 
of All Souls. He lived to read. He looked forward to the summer vacation, when 
the college closed, and he was ­free to cook for himself. He would soften 
beefsteaks by beating them with the college croquet mallet and would ­settle 
down to marathons of reading. He read the entire Sans­krit epic of the Mahab-
haratha in one such summer. Unfailingly kind to young persons, and gifted 
with a delicious sense of the absurd, Zaehner wore his learning lightly. He liked 
to recount (preferably with drink in hand and with Berlioz playing loudly in 
the background) Gnostic, Zoroastrian, and Ismaili myths. As he lived in col-
lege, as I did at this time, he was always available for long after-­dinner conversa-
tions that ­were tutorials in themselves.
Zaehner introduced me to Zoroastrianism, to Gnosticism, and to Man-
ichaeism. He also introduced me to the earliest publications on the Dead Sea 
Scrolls—­the documents associated with a radical Jewish community at Qum-
ran, near the Dead Sea, whose recent discovery had caused a sensation. This 
discovery had raised the hope that scholars had found, at last, a hitherto un-
known, direct way, into the world of Jesus and John the Baptist.3
I owe to the Prof. my first interest in Iran and in many of the wilder aspects 
of Judaism and early Chris­tian­ity. But Zaehner was also engaged in con­
temporary religious debates. His best-­known book was Mysticism Sacred and 
Profane.4 He once introduced me at lunch to a mystic of his acquaintance 
whom he studied: a sweet, old-­fashioned En­glish country gentleman, with 
large, dark eyes. He had recently injured his hand, for an ecstasy had come 
upon him while he was driving a lawn mower across his back meadow.
3. Millar Burrows, New Light on the Dead Sea Scrolls (London: Secker and Warburg, 1958).
4. R. C. Zaehner, Mysticism Sacred and Profane: An Enquiry into Some Preter-­Natural Experi-
ences (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1957).

Teaching, W r iting, a nd Rome 
215
Altogether, Prof. Zaehner introduced me to God’s plenty. I emerged from 
my readings with my imagination saturated with ideas, myths, and religious 
imagery taken from all over the Mediterranean and the ­Middle East. What I 
now needed to do was to ground ­these ­grand imaginings in a concrete social 
context, for without such a context they ­were insubstantial ghosts. It was time 
for me to travel to Rome, to take a closer look at ­things on the ground.
Rome and the Catacombs
For a month in the spring of 1957, and for another month in the spring of 1958, 
I was at the British School at Rome.
On my first visit, in 1957, I alternated between the well-­stocked library of 
the school and the museums and churches of the city. In the library, I devoured 
Santo Mazzarino’s recent book, Aspetti sociali del quarto secolo.5 I was in-
spired by his brilliant proof that the population of Rome did not drop in the 
fourth ­century AD—­that the city had not yet become a ghost of itself but had 
remained a booming megalopolis up to the time of its sack by the Goths in 
410. It made the ­great buildings of the Forum seem even larger, even more 
solid as I moved around them. Santo Mazzarino made plain that fourth-­
century Rome, my Rome, had been no ghost town. This one book, read beside 
his ­earlier Stilicone, decisively influenced my overall view of the ­later empire 
from this time onward.
In the Museo delle Terme and in the Vatican Museum, I lingered for hours 
in front of the ­great sarcophagi of the third ­century AD. I would stare at ­those 
tranquil, still classical ­faces—­those grave public servants; ­those solemn 
­children guarded by austere phi­los­o­phers; ­those wives posed book in hand, as 
Muses to their husbands. Could they have dreamed of the ­future that lay in 
store for them within only a few generations? Could they have dreamed of 
Constantine? Or ­were they already, beneath their classical robes, dreaming 
of new worlds, but in a manner that escapes us?
My letters to my parents reflected my enthusiasm at this time. The British 
School at Rome had opened a new world to me:
The main item was the arrival of Professor Jocelyn Toynbee, who is the first 
­woman Professor of Archaeology in Cambridge. She is a very sweet el­derly 
5. Santo Mazzarino, Aspetti sociali del quarto secolo (Rome: Bretschneider, 1951).

216 
Ch apter 36
lady, who reminds me enormously of a large cat. [She herself, indeed, had 
a handsome white cat called “Mithras.”] . . . ​She has the lovely habit of ­really 
purring, with strange swallowing noises, when she is interested in anything. 
She had a lot of purring to do. We ­were shown round by a host of very big 
names in the Italian, German and Dutch archaeology world. I was taken 
along as a sort of neophyte-­cum-­prize exhibit of Young ­England scholar-
ship. You can imagine how very exciting it was. We saw catacombs which 
are as yet entirely closed to the public, and ­were shown round them by the 
greatest experts in the field. It was fascinating how they worked at their 
prob­lems; and it was very heartening to see how much, if you gave your 
attention to it, you could notice [­things] yourself. This meant that we all 
played a part in making suggestions in deciphering inscriptions and particu-
larly in trying to understand the weird iconography which was a result of a 
real mixture of Pagan and Christian motifs. I have never had an opportunity 
to study early Chris­tian­ity at such close quarters.
I should add that our leader on that occasion, Professor Josi, proudly carried 
a large bundle of keys labeled “Catacombe Gnostiche—­Sincretistiche.” It 
could not get better than that. ­Here, in the galleries of dark red tufa, was the 
rich mud of real­ity in which the mighty dreams of salvation, transformation, 
and ascent of which I had read so much back in All Souls had once been 
planted.
Mud on the Boots
I returned to Rome in 1958. On that occasion, I had received a De Rivoira 
Scholarship to participate in the Southern Etruria Survey conducted by the 
director of the school, John Ward-­Perkins (1912–1981).6 As my dissertation 
topic was on the social and economic position of the late Roman aristocracy, 
I was recruited to help in the fieldwork and to identify, from late Roman 
sources and early medieval documents (mainly from charters that described 
the bound­aries of properties), pos­si­ble sites of late Roman villas, roads, and 
churches for survey and excavation. I would work all morning in the Vatican 
Library, combing charter collections for place-­names, mentions of basalt 
roads—­for ­these ­were often cited as bound­aries—­and similar hints of 
6. Not to be confused with his son, Bryan Ward-­Perkins, the distinguished archaeologist of 
the late Roman and early Medieval West

Teaching, W r iting, a nd Rome 
217
settlement that dated back to the early ­Middle Ages or even before. Then, in 
the after­noon, I would whizz, on the back of a Lambretta, up the Via Cassia to 
explore the countryside around Nepi and Sutri.
This was an unusually happy time for me. As I wrote to my parents:
To be an archaeologist is rather like being a fisherman: you have to know 
so much about so many ­things—­geology, forestry, farming, architecture, 
chemistry and ceramics among the few. It is a wonderful experience in this 
way; to be a historian among archaeologists, and a medievalist among an-
cient historians—no longer as an outsider, but actually as a colleague. Ar-
chaeology is very strange to me as an historian. It is timeless: the bones of 
normal life. It is so normal: it is not concerned with popes and emperors 
who careened over this area . . . ​but with the bare bones of living—­roads, 
wells, aqueducts, foundations. This is not digging; it is a topographical sur-
vey. . . . ​The country is volcanic; ridges with fin­gers, and perfectly blue lakes 
caught in craters; ­every now and then you come from tufa to clay—­the mud 
of a volcanic explosion—­and a flat plateau of hard la­va, which dries slower 
and which shows rather like parts of Connemara. You then walk through 
fields literally strewn with Roman fragments of pottery. . . . ​Personally, this 
is a type of field work which I find intellectually much more exacting and 
exciting than mere digging; it ­really does require im­mense powers of mem-
ory and observation.
. . . ​medievalists come into their own when it comes to dealing with 
the ­little churches with fragments of fresco which litter the countryside, 
and ­were remnants of settlements founded in the ruins of big Roman 
villas. ­There is a most exciting one two miles from Sutri, which is entirely 
unpublished and virtually unknown. We found it in a cave cut into the tufa 
rock, where ­there ­were many un-­Roman looking grave berths in the same 
cliff face. Our entry was met by a habboob [Arabic: sandstorm] of white 
hens. And by standing on straw bales, I was able to wash it down, to reveal 
beneath the dirt the un-­faded colors of a 12th–13th ­century fresco in the 
Byzantine provincial style which you can see in the cathedral: with an inscrip-
tion of the priest who had made it, and Christ—­with an archaic gesture—­
with SS. Peter and Paul, and a priest with a soldier martyr! I could meditate 
about such sort of archaeology for days and days.
A photo of this time shows me perched on a ladder held by Richard Duncan-­
Jones—no less! Richard was the ­future master of the Roman economy. This 
chapel was called by the strange name of San Giovanni a Pollo—­Saint John at 

218 
Ch apter 36
the Hen. The Hen was a misnomer—­a peasant corruption of San Paolo–­one of 
the two patron saints (SS. Giovanni e Paolo) of the ­little church carved out 
of the rock.7
The fieldwork led to many strange encounters. Outside Nepi,
[I met] a ­family of fascist firework makers, who have a hut strewn with 
medieval glazed fragments and a full length portrait of Il Duce in eve­ning 
dress. Between letting off a display of fireworks for my benefit (Personally, 
I think that their main activity is making small bombs for fish poaching) 
and telling how their ­great grand­father brought back the secrets of the art 
from Birmingham, they shake their heads at the picture and say [with evi-
dent regret] “è morto.”
I remember that, on one occasion, I fell into the basement of a ruined ­castle, 
to be confronted, eye-­to-­eye, by a large toad seated on a vivid majolica dish of 
the ­fourteenth ­century. And so I returned to Oxford in June 1958. I was glad to 
be back, with the mud of Rome and its countryside on my boots.
John Ward-­Perkins, the director of the school, did not approve of my sub-
sequent report. I gave him a draft in my last days at the school. It was more 
cautious than he had wished. I carefully spelled out the reasons why so many 
of the medieval documents could not be used to reconstruct Roman condi-
tions. I argued that the distribution of settlements had changed too drastically 
over the centuries that followed the fall of Rome. They reflected a dif­fer­ent 
agrarian landscape, or­ga­nized more around villages than around ­great estates. 
I now notice that the monumental study of Pierre Toubert, Structures du 
Latium, seems to support my novice’s hunch.8 But this was not what John 
wanted to hear. It was not a happy interview.
I did, however, suggest that archaeology could be brought to bear on the 
domus cultae—­the planned estate-­centers of the papacy in the eighth and ninth 
centuries, one of which, I told him, was located on the site of the church of 
Santa Cornelia, near Veii. John affected to be uninterested. He replied, “You 
must tell me, Brown, in words of one syllable . . . ​what is a domus culta?” Only 
three years ­later, in 1961–1964, archaeologists of the British School went to 
the exact spot that I had indicated: the domus culta of Capracorum, Santa 
7. Peter Brown, “Sutri (Sutrium), 701785: Chapel of San Giovanni ‘a Pollo,’ ” Papers of the 
British School at Rome 36 (1958): 127–129.
8. Pierre Toubert, Structures du Latium mediéval, Bibliothèque des Écoles françaises 
d’Athènes et de Rome 221 (Rome: Palais Farnèse, 1973).

Teaching, W r iting, a nd Rome 
219
Cornelia, which lay fifteen miles north of Rome between the Via Cassia and 
the Via Flaminia. Their results are now on display in the Museo dell’Alto 
Medio Evo in Rome. The excavation was hailed as one of the first ventures in 
medieval rural archaeology in Italy. Si jeunesse savait . . . ​Somewhere in the Brit-
ish School my large card index box, portentously stuffed with place-­names, 
references to basalt roads as bound­aries in medieval charters, and coordinates 
of pos­si­ble villas, may still be gathering dust.9
9. Neil Christie, Three South Etrurian Churches: Santa Cornelia, Santa Rufina, and San Lib-
erato, Archaeological Monographs of the British School at Rome 4 (Oxford: Oxbow, 1991), 6 
and 201. It notes that the site of Santa Cornelia “was identified by John Ward-­Perkins,” 3.

220
37
Libraries, Lectures, 
and Talks
Gelehrtes Europa in the Bodleian
On my return from Rome in May 1958, I continued, in the absence of any 
formal supervision, to educate myself in the Bodleian Library.
­There was no seminar on the ­later empire from which to gather biblio­
graphies, no websites to surf. Just books and references to books in the seem-
ingly endless number of journals that lined the walls of the Bodleian. ­There 
I scanned the itemized biblio­graphies of major Eu­ro­pean periodicals and 
worked my way along the new accessions shelves for books and periodicals. 
I did the same in the Library for Classical Studies, attached to the Ashmolean 
Museum. I would approach ­those shelves like a water-­diviner, hoping against 
hope to touch some new, fresh spring in the daunting array of new publica-
tions. At times I was lucky. A single article might open up an entire new way 
of seeing ­things. Sometimes nothing more than a few pages—­often painfully 
puzzled-­out in a largely unfamiliar language—­would give me the green light 
for budding thoughts. The books and articles, which now lie piled up in my 
footnotes as mere titles (many of them now more than a ­little out of date) ­were 
once charged objects for me. They ­were signs from the gods, that I had not 
entirely missed my way.
I did most of my reading in the Lower Bodleian—­“Lower Bodley” on the 
second floor, where classics, ancient history, Byzantium, and theology suc-
ceeded one another in a ­great U, looking down over the Bodley Quadrangle. 
Lower Bodley was more than a library to me. It was my entry point into a 
Gelehrtes Europa—­a learned Europe—­that was wider in its interests than the 
cramped world of Oxford ancient history. I am not speaking ­here of individual 

Libr ar ies, Lectur es, a nd Ta lks 
221
Oxford scholars—­many of whom ­were learned and widely traveled. But the 
range of ancient history that was taught and thought to be worth studying at 
Oxford was exceedingly narrow. It was tied to the horizons of the major clas-
sical historians: students of Greek history studied Herodotus and Thucydides 
but did no Near Eastern or Hellenistic history. As for the Roman Empire, 
students ­were expected to stop with the reign of the emperor Trajan (AD 98–117), 
when Tacitus wrote, and to go no further. It was as if no ­future lay in store for 
Greeks and Romans in the long, last centuries of the ancient world.
Religion in general and Chris­tian­ity in par­tic­u­lar ­were treated as secondary 
concerns. I remember my friend Fergus Millar reporting to me, with disgust, 
that in a meeting of ancient historians, a leading classical scholar had de-
clared that “the Acts of the Apostles are not history, they are footnotes to 
history.” Politics and the prob­lems of ­running the Roman Empire predomi-
nated. I used to call this bias, on the part of Roman historians, a “Pontius Pilate 
complex”—­a legacy of the Victorian identification of the Roman Empire with 
the British Raj. It is good that such parochialism is no longer the case in Oxford; 
but it was widespread at the time.
What helped me to escape this imbalanced vision was to travel to Eu­rope 
along the shelves of foreign journals on display in Lower Bodley. The defini-
tion of ancient history was often wider in Eu­ro­pean universities. It was assumed 
to extend beyond the early Roman Empire as far as the reign of the emperor 
Justinian I in the sixth ­century AD. In many Eu­ro­pean countries, issues that 
had come to the fore in the ­later empire ­were still more alive than in ­England. 
In the 1950s, in par­tic­u­lar, discussions between German and French scholars 
on the role of the barbarians in the fall of the empire ­were still tinged with 
bitterness from the First and Second World Wars. In some parts of Eu­rope, 
the end of paganism and the triumph of the Catholic Church stirred con­
temporary passions among lay and clerical scholars. Altogether, reading in 
Lower Bodley, I felt that I was listening to a ­grand debate of Eu­rope on its 
own past.
In the Cold War years, this debate extended even farther to the east. ­There 
was a wish (not ­limited to Communists) to engage Rus­sian Marxist scholar-
ship on large issues such as slavery and the fall of Rome. In my excursions into 
Eu­rope along the shelves of the Bodleian, I ventured across the Iron Curtain 
on occasions, pitting my rudimentary Rus­sian against articles by Zenija 
Udal’cova on the conflict of social groups in sixth-­century Italy and Aleksandr 
Diakonov on the circus factions of Byzantium. The dark-­green volumes of 
the Vizantiiskij Vremennik ­were all ­there—in the Lower Bodleian, in a corner 

222 
Ch apter 37
devoted to Eastern Eu­ro­pean periodicals beside the win­dow that overlooked 
Hertford College and the Bridge of Sighs. To have a go at them was as exciting 
as passing through Checkpoint Charlie.
Lectures
But how was all this reading to be or­ga­nized so as to find its way into articles 
and books? The first step for me was to commit myself to lecturing on the ­later 
empire to anyone who might be interested in the subject. As a young fellow of 
All Souls, I was encouraged to become what was known as a CUF lecturer. 
I would be paid from the Common University Fund to deliver one lecture a 
week over two terms—­sixteen hours in all. The times, places, and titles of my 
lectures ­were advertised in the university Gazette. Anyone who wanted could 
attend.
As I have explained in an ­earlier chapter, ­these lectures ­were open to all 
comers, and with no obligation to continue in the course. All they offered was 
the chance to come, to listen, and to learn. But I remembered that some of 
­those lectures, such as ­those delivered on medieval German history by Karl 
Leyser, had truly inspired me. Now was my chance to become a Karl Leyser 
for the ­later empire.
The CUF lectureship did not in any way affect my tutorial teaching. This 
continued as usual. The lectures did something entirely dif­fer­ent. They en-
couraged me to shine on my own subject for fifty minutes ­every week. They 
­were frankly rhetorical occasions. Above all, they helped me to develop a tone 
of voice in which to talk about crucial issues of late Roman religion and 
society.
I gave my first lectures in the winter of 1958. When I arrived, I was surprised 
to find the room filled with young persons, largely of the male persuasion. I 
soon realized why. Following the convention that still spoke of the ­later empire 
as le Bas-­Empire—­the Lower Empire—­I had, in all innocence, entitled my lec-
tures “Lower Roman Society.” Alas, what I told ­these young gentlemen was 
not nearly as low as they had hoped, given the time-­honored reputation of 
Roman society for the low life. All they got was a disquisition on the relation 
between social stratification and the circulation of gold coinage in the age of 
Constantine. It was not what they had come for. Next week we ­were down to 
a loyal core of six. But the six stayed the course. Two, at least, went on to be-
come historians: John Dunbabin became a modern historian; his wife, Jean, 
became a medievalist. John’s ­sister, Katherine Dunbabin, would write a book 

Libr ar ies, Lectur es, a nd Ta lks 
223
on the Roman mosaics of North Africa that is still the best introduction to the 
worldly culture that flourished so exuberantly ­there in the ­later empire.1
“Vers le Bas-­Empire”: State and Society in  
the ­Later Empire
I still have the handwritten text of ­these lectures. I reread them with some 
embarrassment. They ­were very much the work of a young don wanting to 
make a splash. But they do show clearly the historical prob­lems that scholars 
of the ­later empire ­were facing at the time. The biggest of ­these prob­lems was 
the role of the late Roman state in the formation of late Roman society. Let me 
explain why this was so.
The fall of Rome had always elicited anxious parallels to modern times. But 
­these anx­i­eties changed over time. Edward Gibbon’s Decline and Fall had 
stressed the dangers of “immoderate greatness” joined to despotic rule. A 
­century ­later, Otto Seeck had indulged his readers with sickly notions of de­
cadence due to the emergence of genet­ically inferior populations. In the twen-
tieth ­century, the fall of Rome seemed even more pre­sent, with the rise of 
totalitarian regimes and planned economies all over Eu­rope. The fate of Rome 
came to be treated as a warning example for modern times of what could hap-
pen to an overgoverned society.
This sharp sense of danger dominated scholarship on the ­later empire in 
the 1920s and 1930s. Twentieth-­century historiography on the end of the empire 
began in 1926 with Mikhail Rostovtzeff, a refugee from Bolshevik Rus­sia, whose 
masterpiece, The Social and Economic History of the Roman Empire, was read by 
scholars who witnessed the rise of dictatorships in Germany, Italy, and Spain and 
the further, monstrous extension of the totalitarian state in Stalin’s Rus­sia. The 
story of the growth of the state in the ­later Roman Empire was their story.
In a moving passage, Rostovtzeff summed up the imperial system set in 
place by the emperors Diocletian (284–305) and Constantine (306–337) ­after 
the crisis of the third ­century:
They took their duties seriously and they ­were animated by the sincere love 
of their country. Their aim was to save the Roman Empire, and they 
achieved it. To this end they used, with the best intentions, the means 
which ­were familiar to them, vio­lence and compulsion. They never asked 
1. K.M.D. Dunbabin, The Mosaics of Roman North Africa: Studies in Iconography and Patron-
age (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1978).

224 
Ch apter 37
­whether it was worthwhile to save the Roman Empire in order to make it a 
vast prison for scores of millions of men.2
That the once-­benign polity of Rome should end up like Soviet Rus­sia was 
writing on the wall for all historians in what remained of liberal Eu­rope. This 
was the opinion of the Romanian Byzantinist Georges Bratianu (1898–1953) 
in his essay of 1938, “Vers le Bas-­Empire: ­Towards the Lower Empire”:
The men of our time can follow the way that once led a ­great empire to its 
end and ruined a ­whole civilization. That is why it is the duty of all men . . . ​
to give the alarm when they see spreading over the world the baneful 
shadow of economic slavery and social tyranny—­the centuries of servitude 
of a Lower Empire.3
Alas, Bratianu’s warning came only too true. He died in prison in Romania 
­under the Communist regime in 1953.
“A De­cadent Leviathan”
In Amer­i­ca, also, the opponents of the New Deal regarded the ­later empire as 
a fearsome example of the dangers of Big Government. The En­glish translation 
of the Theodosian Code (to which I had owed so much when studying for the 
Saint Augustine Special Subject) was made, in part, as a warning. The plethora 
of edicts preserved in the Theodosian Code seemed to show that the Roman 
Empire had died of overgovernment. Amer­i­ca might go the same way as a 
result of the New Deal: “we ­shall ignore the Code at our peril; for it can pro-
vide us with new insight into that period of classical civilization during which 
the organ­ization of society most resembles that ­towards which we are moving.” 
The Theodosian Code revealed the Roman Empire in its last days to have been 
be a “de­cadent Leviathan.”4
The reputation of the ­later empire as a “de­cadent Leviathan” dies hard. 
Faced by a choice of economic policies, President Ronald Reagan once declared 
that price fixing has not worked since the days of the emperor Diocletian, and 
he mischievously added that he was one of the few ­people old enough to 
2. M. I. Rostovtzeff, The Social and Economic History of the Roman Empire, 2nd ed., rev. by 
P. M. Frazer (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1957), 532.
3. G. Bratianu, Études byzantines d’Histoire Économique et Sociale (Paris: Geuthner, 1938), 22.
4. C. Dickerman Williams, introduction to Clyde Pharr, The Theodosian Code (Prince­ton, 
NJ: Prince­ton University Press, 1952), xii and xxii.

Libr ar ies, Lectur es, a nd Ta lks 
225
remember that. The president’s wisecrack was the last gust of a hurricane of 
disapproval of what was ­imagined to have been the rigid social system of the 
­later empire. To dismantle such a view of the late Roman state, in the late 1950s, 
was to deliver oneself from the weight of a collective nightmare, projected by 
modern Americans and Eu­ro­pe­ans onto the Roman Empire of the fourth and 
fifth centuries.
An Age of Gold: Empire and Social Mobility
So what did I give my hearers to replace this sinister image of overblown state 
power? Apart from my reading in more recent lit­er­a­ture (where a less exagger-
ated view of the ­later empire seemed to be emerging) I was galvanized by 
hearing one outstanding lecture—­Hugo Jones’s “The Social Background to 
the Strug­gle between Paganism and Chris­tian­ity,” which he delivered in the 
winter of 1958, as the first lecture in the series of Warburg Lectures subse-
quently published as The Conflict between Paganism and Chris­tian­ity in the 
Fourth ­Century. Delivered in the dry, almost hesitant manner that was charac-
teristic of Jones, the lecture was electrifying. ­Under a shock of light-­ginger hair, 
his eyes glittered with inspired good sense.
Jones concluded with a suggestion (delivered in a tentative, almost offhand 
way that was characteristic of him) that the sudden rise of Chris­tian­ity had been 
due to the unpre­ce­dented degree of upward social mobility that characterized 
Roman society at the time. Chris­tian­ity was ­adopted by the new aristocracy—
an aristocracy of ser­vice. This aristocracy of ser­vice was very dif­fer­ent from 
the well-­ensconced and naturally conservative grandees of the age of the 
Antonines (in the second ­century AD), and, for that reason, was more vulner-
able to the influence of the Christian court of Constantine and his successors. 
If Roman society had ever been rigid and divided into stable castes, it had been 
in the Antonine Age, and not in the fourth ­century. Upward mobility and not 
regimentation had been the overall characteristic of the society set in order 
by Diocletian and Constantine, and would remain so for centuries to come, 
especially in the eastern parts of the empire. Fluidity, not rigidity, was the 
hallmark of the ­later empire. ­These few remarks of Jones, delivered with char-
acteristic modesty, acted as a catalyst to my work in the coming years.5
5. A.H.M. Jones, “The Social Background to the Strug­gle between Paganism and Chris­
tian­ity,” in The Conflict between Paganism and Chris­tian­ity in the Fourth ­Century, ed. A. Momi-
gliano (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1963), 17–37.

226 
Ch apter 37
Put briefly, Jones had unfrozen the image of the ­later empire. Following his 
lecture and the evidence that he adduced in the many articles which preceded 
his masterpiece, The ­Later Roman Empire (which appeared in 1964), I tried to 
show, in my lectures, that this was not a society rigidified, from the top down, 
by governmental regulation. The opposite was the case. The laws of the Theo-
dosian Code, if interpreted correctly, showed that attempts to hold ­people in 
place failed to work. For the imperial administration itself had fostered a re-
markable degree of social mobility. Far from freezing society into static castes, 
it sucked talent upward like a ­great vacuum cleaner.
Furthermore, I pointed out how this race to the top had been accentuated 
by Constantine’s stabilization of the currency around the gold solidus, which 
had introduced an “Age of Gold.” ­Those who had access to the new gold coin-
age, as soldiers and government servants, found themselves “in the enviable 
and invincible position of the dollar-­paid agents of an international organ­
ization in a country such as Greece ­after the war.” My analogy dates the course!
The role of the solidus in quickening the upward rush of Roman society 
was hot news at the time. I had derived this view from Santo Mazzarino’s As-
petti sociali del quarto secolo, which I had read so intently in the British School 
at Rome in 1957. In this brilliant study, Mazzarino stressed the privileged role 
of gold coinage in heightening the gap between ­those with access to gold and 
­those without, which characterized the reign of Constantine and his succes-
sors. This development, by which the solidus became the Mighty Dollar of the 
Roman world, was presented as the economic motor that drove the social 
fluidity to which Jones had drawn attention. My lectures, indeed, ­were largely 
based on the combination of ­those two ­great scholars.
A Tone of Voice
The views of Santo Mazzarino and of Jones have entered so deeply into the 
bloodstream of late Roman studies that we tend to forget their startling nov-
elty at this time. As befitted a young lecturer in Oxford, it was up to me to pass 
on to the young (all six of them!), with almost mystagogic excitement, the 
challenging freshness of ­those breakthroughs.
The weekly rhetorical occasion of a CUF lecture turned my slowly accu-
mulated knowledge, almost instantly, into a tone of voice. It was the tone of 
voice that often lingered with the audience. This was perfectly consistent with 
the Oxford system. Lectures ­were treated as a way of opening up vistas for the 
young, based on the most up-­to-­date research, which often (to their delight) 

Libr ar ies, Lectur es, a nd Ta lks 
227
contradicted the wisdom of their elders and the dominant ste­reo­types in the 
field. Furthermore, the Oxford lecture format proved invaluable as a way of 
organ­izing the material that I had been gathering from all over the place on the 
nature of late Roman society.
Most impor­tant of all, ­these lectures ­were a preparation for writing in a 
synthetic and persuasive manner. Looking back, I am struck by the extent to 
which my writing style in all ­later years would reflect the constant practice of 
oral delivery. At least half of my books and articles have grown out of rhetorical 
occasions—­lecture series, contributions to conferences, talks. Whenever pos­
si­ble, I have tended to reproduce, in print, the rhythms of speech. Growing up 
in Ireland, a very verbal culture, had given me an appreciation of the well-­
turned phrase, spiced with wit.
Furthermore, ­because of my stammer, speech itself was always something 
of an achievement for me—­a form of hang gliding, at once frightening and exhila­
rating. For good or ill, I am a rhetor. But then, in around 1960, I faced a dif­fer­ent 
prob­lem: How could I move from the voice—­the perennial instrument of Oxford 
teaching: the tutorial and the lecture—­into the harder realm of cold print?
The After-­Dinner Talk
Along with lectures, another institution was equally characteristic of the Ox­
ford of that time—­the after-­dinner talk. University-­wide socie­ties—­such as 
the Stubbs Society for historians—­would invite a speaker to offer a paper ­after 
having been dined and wined by members of the society (who ­were under­
graduates) or by a college fellow at high ­table. The aim was to surround the 
reading of the paper with a relaxed, almost bibulous atmosphere.
The meeting usually took place in the college common room or in a similar 
comfortable space. ­There would, of course, be no podium. The speaker was 
expected to read his or her paper from the depths of a large armchair. The audi­
ence would lounge in similar comfortable furniture. This audience consisted 
mainly of undergraduates drawn from all colleges. But it would also include a 
significant number of se­nior persons. Standards ­were high. The after-­dinner 
talk was often the venue in which original work was exposed to discussion for 
the first time. It was a strange mixture of comfort and the cutting edge.
­There ­were times when the search for a relaxed tone went a ­little too far. 
I remember watching a distinguished medievalist being plied with port by 
Ernest Jacob before speaking to the Stubbs Society, which had gathered to 
hear him in the welcoming, low-­lit depths of the Hovenden Room of All Souls. 

228 
Ch apter 37
Installed, ­after an all-­too-­good dinner, in a high, deep chair, the speaker ad-
dressed us in a silvery voice on the much-­debated subject of the origin of the 
fief—­a serious issue, as the fief had always been held to be the basic building 
block of feudal society. It was only when he began to throw in the occasional 
comment—­“Oh dear! My typist has written baboons instead of barons!”—­
that the audience sensed that something was not quite right. Soon the silver 
thread of the voice seemed to vanish into the back of the chair. The speaker’s 
head nodded forward in sleep, only to wake up with a start. Fi­nally, he sat back, 
opened his arms with a beatific gesture, and said: “­Here I am. I am your Saint 
Sebastian. Riddle me with your arrows!” Seeing that the audience contained 
many leading medievalists—­Vivian Galbraith, Beryl Smalley (1905–1984), and 
Naomi Hurnard (1908–1986)—­each of them with firm views on the fief, he 
may not have mistaken their intention.
The Stubbs Society: The Roman Aristocracy—­
Continuity and Conflict
When I gave my talk entitled “The Christianization of the Roman Aristocracy” 
to the Stubbs Society in early 1960, I received nothing but courtesy. I was grate-
ful for the gentlemanly atmosphere of the society. For the paper that I offered 
was a new departure for me. It was not based on my lectures, which dealt with 
Roman society as a ­whole. It grew out of my more local, “Roman” research on 
the Italian aristocracy in the sixth ­century and ­earlier. Put very briefly: I argued 
that, in the fourth and early fifth centuries, the Roman aristocracy had not 
been irreconcilably divided between pagans and Christians; nor was the pro­
cess of the Christianization of the aristocracy hastened in a brutal manner by 
the Christian emperors: rather, I suggested that the swing to Chris­tian­ity was 
best seen in terms of a long-­term evolution, the result of intermarriage and of 
shared social and cultural values.
I wrote the talk entirely on my own. Though I was deeply influenced by 
Momigliano’s recent work on the aristocratic ­family of the Anicii, I prepared 
the paper and my subsequent article without his guidance. He first read it 
when I presented it to the editors of the Journal of Roman Studies; and, to my 
­great relief, he approved of it and urged its publication. Unlike many articles 
by young scholars, nowadays, it did not emerge from a seminar. Nor did I feel 
in any ­great hurry to publish it. Unlike a modern gradu­ate student (American 
or British) I did not need to build up a résumé well stocked with articles based 
on my dissertation. As a young fellow of All Souls, I could take my time.

Libr ar ies, Lectur es, a nd Ta lks 
229
What I did experience, at the talk itself, was the system of co-­optation at 
work. Se­nior persons mingled with the undergraduates in the audience. Even 
Ernst Gombrich (1909–2001), the director of the Warburg Institute, was pre­
sent. In the discussion, he declared that he did not agree with my tendency to 
minimize the extent of the conflict between pagans and Christians in Rome. 
He followed this up with a charming letter, further explaining his reservations. 
But, in the same letter, he even suggested that I might apply for a post at the 
Warburg Institute, to teach seminars on ancient and medieval cosmologies.
I answered Gombrich carefully. I wrote that, given the melodramatic nature 
of most accounts of the end of paganism, I had “tried to trail my cloak in the 
other direction.” It was a diplomatic reply, couched in terms of a criticism of 
the current historiography on the subject. But Gombrich had seen clearly what 
I had been getting at. I had, indeed, wished to demolish the notion of an out-­
and-­out conflict between pagans and Christians in Rome. It seemed that the 
notion of conflict, when applied to a group as cohesive as the Roman aristocracy, 
was excessively dramatic. It assumed an abiding antithesis—­even a hatred—­
between pagans and Christians that, in my opinion, did not exist at the time.
I argued that ­there had been no heroic “Last Pagans”: no last stand of the 
old religion, through the Roman Senate, as this had usually been presented. 
What I proposed was a new way of seeing ­things, and one with which Gom-
brich took issue.
Indeed, only a year previously, in 1958, the last pagans of Rome (all linked 
to the Roman Senate) had been described, in a moving lecture by Herbert 
Bloch (1911–2006), as having led a heroic “Pagan Revival” that culminated in 
the invasion of Italy by the Christian emperor Theodosius in 394. Bloch’s lecture 
was part of the series at the Warburg in London ­later published as The Conflict 
between Paganism and Chris­tian­ity in the Fourth ­Century. This was the same series 
where I had been riveted by the lecture of Hugo Jones on the social background 
to the rise of Chris­tian­ity in the fluid society of the ­later empire. My talk was an 
implicit criticism of the use of Conflict in the title of that collection.6
6. H. Bloch, “The Pagan Revival in the West at the End of the Fourth ­Century,” in The 
Conflict between Paganism and Chris­tian­ity in the Fourth ­Century, ed. Arnaldo Momigliano 
(Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1963), 193–218; see now P. Brown, “Back to the ­Future: Pagans 
and Christians at the Warburg Institute in 1958,” in Pagans and Christians in the Roman Empire 
(IVth–­VIth ­Century A.D.): The Breaking of a Dialogue, Proceedings of the International Confer-
ence at the Monastery of Bosé, October 2008, ed. P. Brown and R. Lizzi-­Testa (Münster: Lit, 
2010), 17–27.

230 
Ch apter 37
Altogether, transformation, not conflict, was what interested me. Looking 
back, I realize that I was struggling to find a language that did justice to the bal-
ance of continuity and discontinuity in the religious and cultural life of the 
Roman aristocracy. For this reason, I avoided placing undue emphasis on the 
binary division of pagans and Christians. Rather than tell a story of conflict 
and of heroic pagan re­sis­tance, I wished to tell a less dramatic, but no less 
significant, tale of the resilience of an elite in a time of religious change.
Continuity
A world without heroes was, nonetheless, a world with a ­future. ­Here the ren-
egade medievalist in me spoke. It was not sufficient for me to end my story 
with the supposed last pagans of the late fourth and early fifth centuries—­nor 
even with the sack of Rome by Alaric in 410. It was the continuity of the Roman 
aristocracy into the early ­Middle Ages that also needed to be explained. With-
out a slow, almost subterranean drift into a “respectable Chris­tian­ity” through 
intermarriage and through shared cultural activity, the preservation of so much 
of the classical tradition and of the myth of Rome itself would not have oc-
curred. An aristocracy fissured by religious differences (such as Bloch and 
­others had ­imagined) would not have survived in such a way as to produce, in 
the sixth ­century, figures like Boethius, Cassiodorus, and Gregory the ­Great. 
And so I ended my paper to the Stubbs Society with a quotation from the 
Christian poet Prudentius, where Rome is made to speak:
Quae vivendo diu didici contemnere finem.
By living long, I have learned to scorn the end.
(Prudentius, Contra Symmachum 2.660)
The paper was a success. It was delivered in the common room of Christ 
Church, in a room hung with the portraits of eighteenth-­century grandees. My 
audience liked to hear that, once again, an aristocracy had pulled through in 
difficult times. This was, ­after all, the Oxford of Ronald Syme (1903–1989) and 
Bruce McFarlane, deeply influenced, also, by the researches of Sir Lewis Namier: 
the resilience of elites was in the air—­whether in the last days of the Roman 
Republic, in the Wars of the Roses, or in the Whig ascendancy of the eigh­teenth 
­century. To have added to their number the last pagans of Rome and their Chris-
tian peers was an altogether welcome contribution.
As I look back, it seems that I had attempted to alter the palette with which 
to paint the well-­known scene of the end of paganism in Rome. I had opted 

Libr ar ies, Lectur es, a nd Ta lks 
231
for more muted shades. I had also opted for a longer time span: I had tried to 
bring together developments in Rome in the fourth ­century with the story of 
the further resilience of the Roman aristocracy in the fifth and sixth centuries. 
If I succeeded at all, I did so by painting with greater nuance and on a wider 
canvas than hitherto. In the next few years, I would try to do the same for an 
even larger, even more fiercely contested landscape—­the North Africa of Saint 
Augustine.

232
38
Religious Dissent
The Case of North Africa
The Landscape of Dissent
For the next few years, I would be in constant dialogue with William Frend’s 
masterpiece, The Donatist Church. Engagement with the work of Bill Frend in 
its many aspects was the equivalent, for me, of gradu­ate school: it turned me 
into a late Roman historian. Eventually, this engagement would prove to be 
my way into a biography of Augustine of Hippo. In other words, my first ap-
proach to Augustine did not lie through the Confessions or the City of God, or 
through his theology of grace (as one might expect); but through the unforgiv-
ing confrontation of two Christian churches, on the ground, in the mean 
streets of the towns and villages of Roman Africa as ­these had been brought 
alive for us by Frend’s Donatist Church.1
In 1960, Bill Frend was unavoidable. Though he himself was a fellow of 
Gonville and Caius College in Cambridge, his Donatist Church had entered 
the bloodstream of Oxford academic life through the teaching of the Saint 
Augustine Special Subject. His daring hypothesis on the relation between 
theological controversy and social protest presented Roman North Africa as 
a veritable so­cio­log­i­cal laboratory. It was in Augustine’s Africa that one could 
trace most clearly the repercussions of the rise of the Christian church within 
the society of the ­later Roman Empire.
For Romans, “Africa” and “African” referred to the Mediterranean regions 
of Africa alone (now called the Maghreb in Arabic), and not to the ­great 
1. W.H.C. Frend, The Donatist Church: A Movement of Protest in Roman North Africa (Oxford: 
Clarendon Press, 1952).

R eligious Dissent 
233
continent of Africa as we now know it. In the fourth ­century it was the most 
prosperous and intellectually vigorous region in the Roman Empire in the West. 
Furthermore, in the 1960s, interest in the social and ethnic tensions of late Roman 
Africa was nourished by events in modern Algeria, where a major War of In­de­
pen­dence had only recently been fought out on the very doorstep of Eu­rope.
As I have already explained, Bill Frend offered a view of the Chris­tian­ity of 
fourth-­century Africa that mapped what was known as the “Donatist contro-
versy” onto a distinctive landscape. He claimed that the fault line between the 
two opposing Christian groups did not lie in any doctrinal disagreement. 
Rather, it lay along an ecological frontier: the eternal contrast between the 
Tell—­the fertile landscapes of the Mediterranean, from Carthage and Hippo 
westward, where Roman cities ­were abundant and the Roman way of life was 
firmly implanted—­and the austere High Plains of Numidia, a dusty landscape, 
swept by desert winds, alternately chill and scorching, with few towns, but 
covered with the villages of a robust and independent-­minded peasantry.
As Frend saw it, Chris­tian­ity had come to Numidia as a “Movement of 
Protest.” ­Those who rallied to the charismatic leadership of Donatus of Car-
thage (from 311/12 to 355) ­adopted the confrontational ecclesiology of the 
martyr-­bishop Cyprian of Carthage (248–258), with its power­ful notion of a 
pure church, tensed against an evil world. They ­were proud to have resisted 
pagan Roman emperors. They refused, in the name of religion, to collaborate 
with the Roman state. They viewed the world from the deep South of Numidia; 
the cities of the Mediterranean ­were distant to them. The Roman Empire 
(even the supposedly Christian empire of Constantine and his successors), 
was regarded as an alien power whose shadow fell across their high, dry land 
like the chill shade of Antichrist.
Above all, Frend asserted that Donatism rested on a secure ethnic bedrock. 
The Nu­mid­i­ans ­were Berbers, and that was what mattered: “Is Donatism part 
of a continuous native religious tradition, as fundamentally unchanging as the 
Berbers themselves in the routine of their daily life?”2 He expected his readers 
to answer the question with a resounding yes.
Nowadays, it is easy to overlook the exhilarating novelty of Frend’s ap-
proach. Hardly anyone had dared to treat a major Christian controversy in 
such a manner.3 And yet it struck me that, somehow, this book was wrong. 
2. Frend, Donatist Church, xvi.
3. E. Rebillard, “William Hugh Clifford Frend (1916–2005): The Legacy of The Donatist 
Church,” Papers of the Sixteenth International Congress of Patristic Studies held in Oxford in 

234 
Ch apter 38
­There was a heavy-­handedness in Frend’s ­grand certitudes. He seemed to be 
so intent on joining the religious and the social that he ended up ramming 
them together at the cost of confining Donatism to a single landscape and to 
a single niche in the complex society of Roman Africa. His unabashed insis-
tence on the “native,” Berber roots of Donatism seemed to me to block the way 
­toward an appreciation of the role of religious dissent among Christians in the 
Roman Empire as a ­whole. I suggested that what was at stake in the Donatist 
Schism was something more than the grievances of a par­tic­u­lar ethnic enclave. 
The schism was part of a far wider debate on the extent to which Christians 
could identify with the social order. It was this consideration that provoked 
my article in History for 1961, “Religious Dissent in the ­Later Roman Empire: 
The Case of North Africa.”4
A Forum: History 1961
I was encouraged to submit my article to History by Ralph Davis—­R.H.C. 
Davis (1918–1991)—­a medievalist and tutor at Merton College. This was a 
significant choice for me. History was the journal of the Historical Association. 
Its members included schoolteachers, clergymen, and persons of scholarly 
inclination quite as much as academics. Many considered History to be a “B-­
team” journal ­because of this commitment to a wider public. I admired it for 
that very reason.
The sense of a diverse audience provided by History enabled me to step 
back and take as wide a view as pos­si­ble of Frend’s Donatist Church. In my 
criticism of Frend, I wished to avoid a donnish Punch-­and-­Judy show. I dis-
liked the academic controversies that raged in Oxford, much to the delight of 
the agonistic young—­such as the “Gentry controversy” (on the social origins 
of the En­glish Civil War), which had pitted Hugh Trevor-­Roper against Law-
rence Stone and ­others in the 1950s. This debate was driven by such an unusual 
degree of personal and ideological rancor that it irreparably divided the field 
of early modern En­glish history. Instead, I wanted to do justice to a ­great if 
wrongheaded book—to draw out its implications to the full as well as to 
2011, ed. M. Vinzent, Studia Patristica 53 (Louvain: Peeters, 2013), 55–71, provides a careful and 
admirably fair appreciation of Frend’s work.
4. Peter Brown, “Religious Dissent in the ­Later Roman Empire: The Case of North Africa,” 
History 46 (1961): 83–101, reprinted in Religion and Society in the Age of Saint Augustine (London: 
Faber, 1972), 237–259.

R eligious Dissent 
235
suggest my own, alternative views before a cultivated but not necessarily ex-
clusively academic readership.
For this reason I wrote the article as a review essay. This was a genre of 
which I approved greatly. A review essay took a controverted topic and placed 
it against the widest pos­si­ble historiographical background. It was with this 
wider picture in mind that I set about my critique of Bill Frend.
Local and Universal in the Maghreb:  
Jacques Berque (1910–1995)
What fi­nally galvanized me to write the article came from an unexpected 
source: from a French tradition of sociology and anthropology that had re-
cently been reviewed by Jacques Berque in a trenchant article in Annales—­a 
journal closely associated with the work of Fernand Braudel, devoted to the 
joining of history and the social sciences.
I found Berque’s article almost by accident when flipping through recent 
periodicals in the Codrington Library. I picked it up in a rather flat mood, 
between an uneventful college meeting and the prospect of a heavy gaudy 
dinner in the eve­ning. It was just what I needed. I still have my notes on Ber-
que, tucked into my copy of Frend’s Donatist Church. ­Here was the answer, 
from a master of the culture and religion of the modern Maghreb, to Frend’s 
lopsided insistence on the Berber background to Donatism.5
In his review of French anthropology in the Maghreb, Berque singled out 
for criticism the tendency in French anthropology and in French colonial ide-
ology to isolate the Berbers. Anthropologists tended to treat them as the 
under­lying “real­ity” of the Maghreb, while they dismissed the religious and 
cultural activities of the Arabophone elites of the cities as a mere “façade.”
As Berque presented it, this fascination with the Berbers was far from in-
nocent. It was linked to the French colonial policy of “divide and rule.” Among 
colonial admnistrators, the Berbers ­were presented as the “real” inhabitants of 
North Africa. In such circles, the intensely local nature of Berber culture was 
cried up in marked contrast to that of the educated elites. For ­these elites ­were 
distinguished by their access to the Arabic-­speaking, Muslim world. It was this 
contact with the wider world of Islam that threatened to make the populations 
of the Maghreb (Berbers and non-­Berbers alike) dangerous, ­because it had led 
5. Jacques Berque, “Cent vingt-­cinq ans de sociologie maghrébine,” Annales 11 (1956): 
296–324.

236 
Ch apter 38
them to embrace pan-­Arabism and its anticolonial ideology. Faced with such 
a challenge, the colonial power found it reassuring to privilege the Berbers and 
to dismiss the urban elites of the Maghreb as if they ­were rootless, squeaky 
voices that would soon fall ­silent.
Berque warned his French readers against this one-­sided view. He pointed 
out that it was precisely the combination of local discontent with the universal 
message of Islam and pan-­Arabism that had led to the explosion of the Alge-
rian War of In­de­pen­dence.
Le génie de l’Afrique du Nord réside dans un certain genre d’interaction 
entre le particulier et le général.
The genius of North Africa lies in some kind of interaction between the.
par­tic­u­lar and the general.6
Bluntly, the notion of the “eternal Berber “ was a construct. It had arisen as 
a result of French efforts to isolate the Maghreb from the wider and more 
dangerous currents of international Islam. By emphasizing the exclusively 
Berber roots of Donatism, Bill Frend had allowed himself to slip into a view 
of Roman Africa that reflected the po­liti­cally motivated bias of a ­century of 
French colonial anthropology.
At the time, I knew ­little of the fierce debates among French scholars and 
politicians on this issue. All I knew, as I read Berque on that dull after­noon in All 
Souls, was that he had given me what I wanted—­a cogent critique of any attempt 
to reduce North African religious movements to nothing but their ­imagined local 
roots. The real dynamite was compounded when the local and the universal came 
together. The Donatist Church was not simply a Berber church. It also claimed 
to be a true church. Its adherents shared a common, universal hope for an in­de­
pen­dent Chris­tian­ity—­a Chris­tian­ity of protest, which joined urban intellectuals 
to the Nu­mid­i­an peasantry in ways that stretched across so­cio­log­i­cal and ecologi-
cal bound­aries. It surrounded even the humblest Donatist chapel with the dignity 
and subversive potential of a universal claim to truth.
“Pious Liberty”: Church, Society, and the Martyrs
So what was the role of Christian dissent in the ­later empire? I suggested that 
its role was less dramatic than we had thought in the short run, but more far-­
reaching in the long run. To reduce all cases of religious dissent to pockets of 
6. Berque, “Cent vingt-­cinq ans de sociologie maghrébine,” 320.

R eligious Dissent 
237
local ethnic discontent (as Frend had done for Africa) was to tie dissenting 
groups too tightly to specific trou­ble spots.
By contrast, I suggested that the prob­lems posed by the rise of Chris­tian­ity 
affected Roman society as a ­whole, in all regions of the empire and in remark-
ably vari­ous social situations. The new religion was a loose cannon. Memories 
of Christian re­sis­tance to the pagan authorities in times of persecution had 
opened a hairline crack in the religious structure of the ancient city, as this 
had been described by Fustel de Coulanges, where “the state and religion ­were 
so completely merged that it was impossible, not only to have the idea of a 
conflict between the two, but even to distinguish the one from the other.”7
But once state and religion had drifted apart, if only so very ­little, ­every 
Christian bishop, in any part of the Roman Empire, was a potential Donatist, 
empowered to challenge the government in the name of religion. Constan-
tine’s conversion and his heavy-­handed patronage of the Catholic Church 
failed to mend that fateful crack. He had tried to close the stable door when 
the ­horse had already bolted.
In the fourth ­century, the Christian catacombs in Rome and elsewhere 
­were already filled with frescoes and with carved sarcophagi that depicted the 
heroic refusal of the Three ­Children of Israel to bow down to the idol erected 
by King Nebuchadnezzar (in Daniel 3). ­These three Jews ­were treated as para-
digmatic Christian martyrs. Significantly, the idol that they refused to worship 
was often shown in the form of an imperial bust such as was displayed in ­every 
Roman courtroom. It was Augustine, not a Donatist writer, who pointed to the 
annual Christian festival of the Three ­Children of Israel, which was celebrated 
by a chanted reading of their story in the book of Daniel. He added that he hoped 
that Christian emperors would take to heart the pia libertas, the “pious liberty” 
of the martyrs. All over the empire, the fateful notion of a conflict between state 
and religion had become, at last, thinkable. And so I concluded:
And in this revolution, which affected so deeply the North African prov-
inces of the fourth and fifth centuries, the issues at stake ­were not merely 
the local grievances of a province; they ­were nothing less than the place of 
religion in society.8
­These ­were my arguments against Bill Frend. The reader might wish to 
know how the author of The Donatist Church responded to what I, at least, had 
7. F. de Coulanges, La cité antique (Paris: Hachette, 1885), 197, cited in “Religious Dissent,” 258.
8. Brown, “Religious Dissent,” 259.

238 
Ch apter 38
intended to be a respectful but searching criticism. The answer: he did not 
respond at all. He always treated me with the utmost good nature and wrote 
with ­great generosity in support of my biography of Augustine when it was 
sent to him as a reader by the publisher. Young scholars like to think that their 
first article ­will be like the trumpet blast of Joshua—­that it ­will bring down 
the walls of Jericho with a resounding crash. In Bill Frend’s case, it appears, I 
blew my trumpet in vain.
I last saw Bill on November 24, 1993. I had come to Cambridge to deliver 
the Tanner Lectures that would become a short book: Authority and the Sa-
cred: Aspects of the Christianization of the Roman World.9 The lectures ­were 
followed, the next morning, by a roundtable discussion. A short way into the 
discussion, Bill Frend made his appearance, wrapped in a heavy tweed coat. 
He soon ­rose to speak. Reaching deep into the pocket of his coat, he pulled 
out a length of leaden piping. With a magnificent sweep of the arm, which 
caused the person in front him to duck (a fact that I noted with some concern, 
for that person was my wife), he brandished his archaeological trophy. “Do you 
know what this is?” he asked, turning to our ­table. “It is a length of pipe which 
I have excavated in my garden. It is a piece of Roman piping. It is the pipe of a 
vast imperial villa of the fourth ­century whose wide acres fed the armies of the 
Rhine. Imagine that!”
My colleagues and the younger souls among the discussants writhed with 
evident embarrassment. The old boy was at it again. I, by contrast (and my 
wife, for Bill Frend’s books had done much to enliven the history of the early 
church for her) ­were spellbound. The round face, the glinting eyes, the oro-
tund phrases (as if they dropped ready-­made from the pages of one of his 
­grand survey books) showed the old magician still at work. I had not heard 
this for thirty years. I basked in it. It was good to have known so boisterous a 
scholar.
9. Peter Brown, Authority and the Sacred: Aspects of the Christianization of the Roman World 
(Cambridge University Press 1995).

239
39
Religious Coercion
Mapping Coercion
In 1963, I wrote another article for History on the subject of religious coercion 
in the ­later empire. In both my article on religious dissent and that on religious 
coercion I was in dialogue with William Frend. It seemed to me that, despite 
my criticisms of The Donatist Church, Frend had contributed handsomely to 
the ­grand debate on the role of Chris­tian­ity in the ­later Roman Empire. While 
Mazzarino and Jones had taught me how to view the ­later Roman Empire as 
a ­whole, Frend had set me a prob­lem that would not go away: the relation 
between religion and society.1
The article on coercion addressed relatively straightforward issues. What 
was the nature of religious coercion in the ­later Roman Empire? How did it 
work? Who suffered most from it? Who benefited most from policies of re-
pression? Last but not least: How did the constant striving for religious uni-
formity in what was now a Christian empire come to mold perceptions both 
of the Roman state and of the Christian church?
I found that ­things ­were not quite as they seemed. Despite the authoritarian 
nature of the late Roman state, religious coercion was a less brutal feature of 
late Roman society than one might have expected. With the exception of the 
exotic Manichees, no religious dissident was threatened with the death penalty 
for his or her beliefs (though some ­were lynched, as Jews and pagans be-
came increasingly exposed to lethal attacks by Christian mobs). ­There was no 
burning of heretics, no Albigensian Crusade, no Saint Bartholomew’s Day 
1. Peter Brown, “Religious Coercion in the ­Later Roman Empire: The Case of North Africa,” 
History 48 (1963): 283–305, in Religion and Society in the Age of Saint Augustine (London: Faber, 
1972), 301–331.

240 
Ch apter 39
Massacre, and no Revocation of the Edict of Nantes. In sheer religious beastli-
ness, the ­later Roman Empire was quite outclassed by medieval and early mod-
ern Eu­rope.
I also discovered that, when it came to the issue of intolerance, the classical 
Roman Empire had been no paradise: cults ­were strictly controlled; alleged 
sorcerers ­were hounded; Christians had been executed in large numbers, 
and their buildings destroyed. The religious legislation of the Christian empire 
had not brought to an end some age of innocence, where all beliefs had been 
tolerated.
Instead, a succession of laws, issued by Christian emperors from the time 
of Constantine (306–337) and Theodosius I (379–395) onward, slowly re-
duced “unorthodox” Christians, pagans, and Jews to the status of second-­
class citizens. ­These laws ­were coercive in the true sense: they did not aim 
to annihilate, but to convert—to edge dissenters, willy-­nilly, into the Catholic 
churches.
Not all classes in the empire ­were equally vulnerable to such pressure. In a 
society marked by a rush to the top among the upper classes, and by a feverish 
scramble at all levels for privileges, exemptions, and other badges of status, 
heretics, Jews, and pagans ­were placed at a permanent disadvantage. As a 
result, the search for wealth and privilege associated with the “Age of Gold” 
instituted by Constantine did more to spread a conformist Chris­tian­ity through-
out the Roman world than did the sermons of any number of bishops.
But the impact of this system varied. Townsfolk and civic elites who de-
pended on imperial privileges caved in easily to official pressure. But in wide 
stretches of the countryside and in mountainous regions beyond the reach of 
the Roman state, hardy groups of Christian dissidents of all kinds—­and also 
Jews and pagans—­held out undisturbed for centuries on end.
Imperial Law, Local Opinion
Indeed, the more closely I examined the capacity of the Roman state to impose 
its ­will in religious ­matters, the more I found a colossus with feet of clay. The 
­whole structure of the late Roman administration militated against the effective-
ness of religious coercion. Provincial governors depended on locally recruited 
staffs to get ­things done. ­These local officials had no wish to push through 
mea­sures that offended the religious sentiments of their region. The ­later 
Roman Empire was by no means a police state of the modern kind, as we 
had been encouraged by scholars of the 1920s and 1930s to imagine it to have 

R eligious Coercion 
241
been. If the constitution of the ­later Roman Empire (like that of tsarist Rus­sia) 
could be described as “despotism tempered by assassination,” so the religious 
policies of the Christian emperors could be called “theocracy tempered by 
inefficiency.”
All this added up to a paradox. At the top, the late Roman state was com-
mitted to a proactive religious policy. But, at the bottom, at the local level, 
­there was very ­little that the government could do to enforce its own laws. This 
meant that enforcement was left to militant grassroots organ­izations. Hence a 
sinister aspect of the period: the prevalence of spasmodic religious vio­lence. 
In many places, the in­effec­tive­ness of the state led to fear rather than to freedom: 
“The result of this weakness was a particularly venomous situation. The 
Emperors, in their public edicts, set a tone of lofty intolerance, while leaving 
local groups to carry it out in their own way.”2
Refraction
I ended up by suggesting that this vacuum of power on ground level had 
enabled the Christian bishops to rise to prominence in the cities. It was they 
who had a vested interest in the application of the laws. It was they, in effect, 
who de­cided to whom the laws applied—­who was a heretic; whose conver-
sion was sincere. Above all, it was they who imposed their own meaning—we 
would now say their own “spin”—on the laws themselves, by presenting 
them as part of a providential order designed to further the interests of the 
church.
It was a case of the tail wagging the dog. The day-­to-­day symbiosis of impe-
rial and ecclesiastical power, at the ground level—­and not high theories on the 
relation between church and state—­ensured that a subtle change of roles took 
place, by which the empire came to be seen as serving the church, ­because the 
church had come to serve the empire, as the only institution with a vested 
interest in making the imperial laws effective on a local level.
In this article, I felt that I had paid my dues as a historian of the ­later empire, 
by deriving a conclusion with wide implications from work on the nitty-­gritty 
of late Roman society. Hence I was particularly pleased to receive a letter from 
Wolfgang Liebeschuetz, then at the University of Leicester. Liebeschuetz was 
a pupil of Jones, and already a model scholar of the ­later empire. In the coming 
years, I would draw with unfailing gratitude on his work on late Roman Antioch. 
2. Brown, “Religious Coercion,” 308.

242 
Ch apter 39
Praise from him was the sort of praise that I had wished for, ­because it was for 
qualities that I valued:
Dear Mr. Brown,
Thank you for your letter and the off-­print on Religious Coercion in the 
­Later Roman Empire. Like your ­earlier papers it conveys the true “feel” of 
the ­Later Empire. This success is achieved—or so it seems to me—by a 
deliberate refusal to simplify complex situations by forcing them into pre-
determined schemes. I was particularly interested in the paragraphs dealing 
with the place of the bishop in municipal affairs and his key role in the 
enforcement of anti-­heretical legislation. The foot-­notes too have taught 
me a ­great deal!
The issue now was this: Where would this work on religious coercion lead me?
The Long Debate
An article on religious coercion and religious intolerance kept open a bridgehead 
into the ­Middle Ages, the Reformation, and the Counter-­Reformation. No 
issue had been debated with such fury, in the Reformation and Counter-­
Reformation periods, as the choice between persecution and toleration in the 
Christian churches. Both sides looked back to the early church and the ­later 
empire to find pre­ce­dents for their actions. As a result, the book of Joseph 
Lecler, Histoire de la Tolérance à l’époque de la Réforme, served me almost as 
a handbook throughout ­these years. ­There ­were very few late Roman texts 
on the issue of toleration and persecution that had not been cited by Reform-
ers or by Catholics, and discussed by Lecler in his levelheaded and comprehen-
sive book.3
The Prob­lem of Authority
It was the same with medievalists. I was particularly struck, at this time, by the 
opening words of Sir Maurice Powicke’s The Christian Life in the ­Middle Ages: 
“The legacy of medieval Chris­tian­ity to ­later ages was the prob­lem of authority.”4 
3. J. Lecler, Histoire de la tolérance à l’époque de la Réforme (Paris: Aubier, 1955); trans. T. L. 
Westow: Toleration and Reformation (New York: Association Press, 1960).
4. F. M. Powicke, “The Christian Life in the ­Middle Ages,” in The Christian Life in the ­Middle 
Ages and Other Essays (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1935), 1–30, at 1.

R eligious Coercion 
243
I agreed entirely with Sir Maurice. This, for me, was where the ­later empire had 
been heading. Already in the fourth ­century an intolerant church allied itself 
with an authoritarian regime to impose its beliefs, from the top down, on the 
mass of the population. ­Whether we liked it or not, this was the most immedi-
ate and decisive legacy of Rome to the Chris­tian­ity of western Eu­rope.
Powicke’s essay was the voice of a doyen of medieval studies. Meditative 
and involuted, it was heavy with intellectual reservations and nuanced sugges-
tions that lent a note of almost vatic authority to his writings. The essay was 
a deeply felt evocation of the manner in which a religion could come to dominate 
an entire society. But on the role of force in bringing about this dominance, 
I noticed that Powicke waffled: “Christians [he went on to say] have never been 
proud of it, for it has been for them a tiresome perplexity, an unmanageable 
side-­issue in a ­labour vastly more impor­tant.”5
I viewed such statements with distinctly cold eyes. They seemed to me 
to impose a benign amnesia on the rougher edges of the rise of Chris­tian­ity. 
I detected in Powicke a touch of the Anglican romantic attachment to the 
­Middle Ages that, as a Protestant from Ireland, I found both intriguing and, in 
the end, naive. In Ireland, religion was serious. It could be expected to have 
hard edges. In postwar Ireland religious issues ­were prominent as the new 
republic took on an increasingly Catholic face: divorce was not available; 
contraceptives could not be sold; censorship was imposed on books and films. 
All ­these issues ­were hotly debated in the correspondence columns of the Irish 
Times for me to read at home, or ­were sent to me as cuttings by my ­father. I was 
convinced that it was to ­those hard edges, where state power merged with 
religion, that thinking persons should direct their attention if they ­were to 
understand the history of Eu­rope.
I notice that Bob Moore, an Ulsterman from Enniskillen in Northern 
Ireland, whom I had taught for the Augustine Special Subject in 1962, was 
driven by a similar dissatisfaction to write his pungent masterpiece, The For-
mation of a Persecuting Society: Authority and Deviance in Western Eu­rope, 
950–1250. “Tiresome” though this fact might be, Western Christendom, for 
all its spiritual achievements, had also been a “persecuting society”; and the 
roots of the attitudes that made it so reached back to the Africa of Saint 
Augustine.6
5. Powicke, The Christian Life in the ­Middle Ages,” 1.
6. The Formation of a Persecuting Society: Authority and Deviance in Western Eu­rope, 950–1250 
(Oxford: Blackwell, 1987).

244 
Ch apter 39
The ­Grand Patriarch of Persecutors
It takes some effort to recapture the extent to which religious coercion of any 
kind was regarded as an obscene topic in the academia of the early 1960s. 
Reviewing the published version of the Warburg Lectures entitled The Conflict 
between Paganism and Chris­tian­ity in the Fourth ­Century, in 1963, I spoke of it 
as “the cloven hoof of the religious history of the ­Later Empire.”7 Despite the 
relative leniency of late Roman coercive measures—­compared with medieval 
and early modern examples of religious persecution—­the very fact of putting 
pressure on the conscience of ­others made large areas of late Roman religious 
life seem toxic to many historians. ­These scholars maintained an upright, lib-
eral view that set a clear boundary between ­free and forced religion, and that 
treated ­those who strayed across that boundary, by advocating any form of 
coercion in ­matters of belief, with par­tic­u­lar repugnance.
Yet in Africa, in around 405, one of the subtlest minds of all antiquity de-
liberately crossed that boundary. Having originally claimed that he wished to 
deal with his Donatist rivals by ­free discussion alone, Augustine of Hippo 
changed his mind. He embraced and justified at length the imperial laws 
against the Donatist Church. Furthermore, this change was not simply a reac-
tion to unusual circumstances. It settled into his mind as part of his vision of 
a Christian society: “His ac­cep­tance of [the] forced conversion [of Donatists], 
­after 405, far from remaining a reluctant capitulation to necessity, pushed deep 
roots into the main body of his thought.”8
In this, as in so much ­else, Augustine proved to be, for good or ill, a Maker 
of the ­Middle Ages. His justification of the coercion of the Donatists circulated 
for the next thirteen hundred years in Christian Eu­rope. As late as the early 
eigh­teenth ­century, Jean Barbeyrac (1674–1744), the ­great Huguenot scholar, 
described Augustine as “le ­grand patriarche des persécuteurs.”9 To be known 
as “the ­Grand Patriarch of Persecutors” was hardly a savory reputation. But it 
was, in part, so as to get inside the mind and life of such a person who, among 
so much ­else in his boundless theological and pastoral activity, could think 
such dark thoughts and justify such practices, that I turned increasingly—­and, 
­after 1963, exclusively—to writing a biography of Augustine of Hippo.
7. Review of The Conflict between Paganism and Chris­tian­ity in the Fourth ­Century A.D., in 
Oxford Magazine, May 16, 1963, 300–301, in Religion and Society, 147–150, at 149.
8. Brown, “Religious Coercion,” 323.
9. Jean Barbeyrac, Traité de la Morale des Pères de l’Église (Amsterdam: Herman Uytwerf, 
1728), 304.

Part III
Augustine to  
the Holy Man


247
40
Writing Augustine 
of Hippo
Learning to Listen
In 1962 I began in earnest to write a biography of Saint Augustine of Hippo, 
which occupied me full-­time ­until the spring of 1966. It was published by Faber 
and Faber in the summer of 1967.1
One would have thought that a biography of the ­great bishop of Hippo was 
a natu­ral subject for any scholar interested in the history of the Roman Empire 
and of Latin Chris­tian­ity in the fourth and fifth centuries. ­Here was a figure 
where history and autobiography intersected, and whose ­career summed up 
the stormy passage of an age. In 397 Augustine wrote the Confessions, a work 
generally acclaimed as the first autobiography in Western lit­er­a­ture. In 413 he 
began the City of God, which was a deeply meditated comment on the nature 
of history, provoked by the Gothic sack of Rome in 410. As we have seen, his 
controversy with the Donatists determined all ­future thought on the relation 
between church and society in western Eu­rope. In his old age, Augustine’s 
opposition to the ideas of Pelagius, on grace and ­free ­will, left an indelible 
mark on Latin Chris­tian­ity up to the time of the Reformation and beyond. 
What could be more challenging than to attempt to bring all ­these ­great mo-
ments together by writing a complete Life of this singular man?
Yet this had not been done. The rich and humane sketch of Augustine as a 
preacher and pastor by Frits Van der Meer (1904–1994) in his Augustine the 
1. Peter Brown, Augustine of Hippo: A Biography (London: Faber and Faber; Berkeley: Uni-
versity of California Press, 1967); Augustine of Hippo: A Biography, new ed. with an epilogue 
(Berkeley: University of California Press, 2000)

248 
Ch apter 40
Bishop dealt only with his activities as bishop of Hippo. The admirably learned 
and fair-­minded book of my friend Gerald Bonner (1926–2013)—­Augustine of 
Hippo: Life and Controversies—­was only a study of the theological controver-
sies in which Augustine had been engaged.2 As far as I was concerned, ­here 
was a mountain still waiting to be climbed.
To move Augustine to center stage by writing his biography was a new 
sort of history writing for me. I would find myself in the com­pany of a soli-
tary ­giant—­a religious genius, whose thoughts still ran, for good or ill, in the 
bloodstream of all western Eu­ro­pean Christians (Catholics and Protestants 
alike); the most prodigious author in the entire history of Latin lit­er­a­ture; 
and—­behind all this, it seemed to me as I came to know him in the course of 
­those years—­a person of magnetic charm and riveting originality, whose qual-
ity of mind was unmistakable even in his smallest turn of phrase and most 
routine writing.
I had to learn to listen to a single voice. I was no longer involved in an ongo-
ing historical controversy, such as I had engaged in with Bill Frend. Nor was I 
out to prove a single point or push through a single agenda for the study of 
Augustine. I was ­there to listen. I had to learn to hear Augustine clearly as he 
spoke the unfamiliar language of an ancient Christian from a millennium and 
a half ago, and then to pass on what I heard to modern readers. In brief: I had 
to stretch my heart in order to read Augustine’s heart. That was the greatest 
challenge, and the greatest joy, of ­those five years.
A Gentleman’s Agreement
The first part of the business was easy. It involved the crucial link between All 
Souls and the wider world through its London fellows. As I have explained, 
the London fellows did not remain in Oxford as academics; but they retained 
their membership of the college and would often appear at weekends. Charles 
Monteith (1921–1995) was one such fellow. He was an editor in Faber and 
Faber in London. In December 1959 I discussed with him, over a drink before 
dinner, the possibility of a biography of Augustine. I then sent him a full 
proposal. As one fellow of All Souls to another, he agreed that Faber’s would 
consider a biography of Augustine whenever I chose to hand in the manu-
script. It was as ­simple as that. With his characteristic, wry view of the En­glish 
2. Frits Van der Meer, Augustine the Bishop (London: Sheed and Ward, 1961); Gerald Bonner, 
Augustine of Hippo: Life and Controversies (London: SCM Press, 1963).

W r iting Augustine of Hippo 
249
academic scene, Arnaldo Momigliano was amused: “Does Monteith allot bits 
of ancient history to ­every fellow?”
At that time, I barely realized that I was enjoying an incomparable privilege. 
I did not have to look for a publisher. The gentleman’s agreement with Charles 
Monteith set my mind at rest. I may have been wrong to be so confident: in 
real­ity, Faber’s had their own system of screening manuscripts that was as dis-
creet and prompt, and as exacting, as that of any university press. In the mean-
time, however, my constant contact with Monteith, through his weekend visits 
to All Souls, spared me much anxiety. I felt confident that I could write what I 
wished as long as it passed muster at the end of the day. So how did I set about it?
Reading Augustine
First and foremost, ­these ­were years of deep reading. I would sit in a large 
armchair with a board across the arms and read my way through the folio 
volumes of the works of Augustine published by the Benedictine scholars of 
St. Maur between 1679 and 1700. I would work my way down ­those generous 
pages noting on a piece of paper the page, the letter on the margin of each 
vertical column, and the position, within each letter, of the passages that inter-
ested me (so that “11r D mbm” would be page 11, right-­hand column, division 
D, middle-­to-­bottom-­middle). Then, having read through the entire text, I 
would return to copy into my notes ­those passages that I had marked. This 
method of taking notes had a direct effect on the way in which I absorbed the 
works of Augustine. I hardly ever made a précis of what Augustine wrote. In-
stead, I went out of my way to copy by hand ­every passage in the original Latin. 
By ­doing this, I aimed to capture, through citations, not only what Augustine 
said, but, quite as much, how he said it. By taking notes in this way, I found 
myself catching his tone of voice.
What struck me most about Augustine was the care that he took to make 
his ideas intelligible to his readers. ­Here was someone who had grappled, 
throughout his life, to express himself—to drag his thoughts into the open, 
“through the narrow lanes of speech.” Augustine once wrote in 399 (when he 
was at the height of his powers as an author) to console a deacon who was 
anxious about his catechism classes. The young man should not worry: “For 
my own way of expressing myself almost always disappoints me . . . ​I am sad-
dened that my tongue cannot live up to my heart.”3 I found that, as a young 
3. Augustine, de catechizandis rudibus 2.3, cited in Augustine of Hippo (2000), 253.

250 
Ch apter 40
author, I could identify my own ache to communicate with Augustine’s con-
stant awareness of the hiatus between himself and the outside world. I knew 
instinctively that I myself would grow as a communicator (as well as in many 
other ways) by keeping close to such a person.
Learning on the Job
It was lonely work. In many ways, I was the wrong person to be ­doing a biog-
raphy of Augustine. I was not a clergyman—­though, a ­little ­later, I was often 
amused to receive letters addressed (on the strength of my known acquain-
tance with Augustine) to “Monsieur l’Abbé.” Nor was I a theologian or a classical 
scholar. ­These ­were the ­people most usually engaged with the study of the Fathers 
of the Church. I lacked the abstract cast of mind of the one, and the training in 
­handling difficult texts of the other. I was an out-­of-­place medievalist, whose 
Latin (fortunately) was up to the job. The best I could do was sit and read.
Old Tomes: The Maurist Edition and the 
“Indefatigable Tillemont”
As far as reading went, I realize that I was doubly spoiled. I was able to carry 
the magnificent pages of the Maurist edition of the complete works of Augus-
tine, one by one, out of the basement of the Codrington Library of All Souls 
where they had been stored. But I was also able to make my way up to the 
upper gallery of the Codrington, to mount a ladder so as to take from a high 
shelf, poised vertiginously a good twenty feet above the marble floor below, 
the thirteenth volume of the Mémoires Écclésiastiques of Louis Sébastien le 
Nain de Tillemont (1637–1698).
Tillemont was a Jansenist scholar, connected with Port-­Royal, who contin-
ued his work on his ­family estate ­after Port-­Royal had been destroyed by Louis 
XIV in 1679. The thirteenth volume of his Mémoires contained a complete Life 
of Augustine put together with unfailing accuracy, and in strict chronological 
order. It was published in 1702, a few years ­after Tillemont’s death. I would not 
begin to write on any incident or embark on any chapter of my book ­until I 
had established its chronology and the place in his life through a careful read-
ing of the relevant pages of that tenacious Jansenist scholar.
I realized, with something of a thrill, that in ­doing this I was following in 
the footsteps of Edward Gibbon. Gibbon would always refer, with gratitude, in 
his Decline and Fall, to “the indefatigable Tillemont”: he was “the sure-­footed 

W r iting Augustine of Hippo 
251
mule” whose patient work on the chronology of the ­later empire as a ­whole 
(not only of the life of Augustine) enabled Gibbon to unroll, with majestic 
certainty, his narrative of the rise of Chris­tian­ity and the fall of Rome.4
New Evidence
So I had all the books I needed—on my own doorstep, as it ­were—­but how 
to write the Life? When it came to listening to Augustine, I could not have 
wished for a more readily accessible subject. Augustine wrote prodigiously on 
innumerable topics and in many dif­fer­ent genres. From the time of his writing 
the Confessions, in 397, to his death in 430, he wrote over a million and a half 
words: I am glad that I did not know of this statistic when I began my reading! 
More impor­tant yet, we also know exactly when, and even why, he wrote al-
most every­thing that he wrote. This was ­because he went out of his way to 
complete what might be called, in modern terms, his own c.v. At the very end 
of his life, in 426–427, he put together his Retractationes—­his “Rereading” of 
his own works. He placed all of his ninety-­two formal works in chronological 
order—­each with a small comment on why it was written. It is hard to exag-
gerate the importance of this fact, which we all too easily take for granted. ­Here 
was a figure who had already laid out the chronological framework of his life 
for ­future historians.
This huge advantage was well known to ­every scholar who studied Augus-
tine. What I did not realize fully at the time was that ­there was an impor­tant 
part of Augustine’s works that he had not put into chronological order in this 
way—­his abundant letters and his sermons. As a result, many of ­these still 
pose serious prob­lems of dating and context. They remain loose cannons. But 
they have also proved to be one of the growth points of modern Augustinian 
scholarship.
4. See now Daniel-­Odin Hurel, “The Benedictines of the Congregation of St. Maur and the 
Church ­Fathers,” in The Reception of the ­Fathers in the West, vol. 2, From the Carolingians to the 
Maurists, ed. Irena Backus (Leiden: Brill, 2001), 1009–1038. It is now pos­si­ble to read Tillemont’s 
Life of Augustine in an En­glish translation: Louis Sébastien, le Nain de Tillemont: Mémoire Écclé-
siastique, vol. 13, The Life of Augustine, trans. Frederick Van Flateren (New York: Peter Lang, 
2012). Tillemont himself has been well studied: see especially Bruno Neveu, Un historien à l’école 
de Port-­Royal. Sébastien le Nain de Tillemont (1637–1698) (The Hague: M. Nijhoff, 1966); David P. 
Jordan, “Le Nain de Tillemont: Gibbon’s ‘Sure Footed Mule,’ ” Church History 39 (1970): 483–502; 
and Jean Laporte, “Le Nain Tillemont sur saint Augustin,” in Le Nain Tillemont et l’historiographie 
de l’Antiquité romaine (Paris: Honoré Champion, 2002), 411–425.

252 
Ch apter 40
Partly ­because of the ­great advances in computer digitalization in recent 
years, we have become more aware of the fact that letters and groups of sermons 
by Augustine may still linger, as yet unrecognized, in medieval collections, 
hidden beneath the cramped Gothic script of unprepossessing late medieval 
manuscripts. In the last few de­cades alone, entire groups of letters and ser-
mons, of which we knew nothing in the 1960s, have surfaced. One of the joys 
of writing an epilogue to my Augustine of Hippo (which I did in 2000) was the 
opportunity to hail some of ­these discoveries. We now have twenty-­nine further 
letters from Augustine’s old age, which ­were discovered by Johannes Divjak and 
first published in 1981. Furthermore, a group of sermons, preached in the years 
when Augustine was writing the Confessions and beginning his ­career as a bishop, 
­were discovered by François Dolbeau and published in 1996.
Although ­these new letters and sermons contain no spectacular revelations, 
they have brought Augustine, once again, into vivid focus as a preacher and 
as a conscientious bishop. We often see him from unexpected ­angles. This was 
not the ethereal figure that we imagine the author of the Confessions to have 
been. He is a bishop with mud on his boots, battling injustice in the harsh 
world of late Roman Africa. In one of the most remarkable of the letters dis-
covered by Johannes Divjak, we find Augustine, at the age of seventy-­three 
(only three years before his death), interviewing a terrified country girl who 
described how her farm had been raided by slave-­traders. The poor child could 
not even speak Latin—­only Punic. Her older ­brother translated for her. This 
was part of a dogged attempt by Augustine and his congregation to break a 
ring of slave-­traders who operated (with the full protection of local bigwigs), 
out of the port of Hippo.
On a lighter note, in an unexpected aside in one of his newly discovered 
sermons, we hear Augustine (in 403) telling his congregation, with total sans 
gêne, how, as young students in Carthage, he and his friends would attempt to 
pick up girls at the heady festivals that took place at the tomb of Saint Cyprian. 
What could I have done with ­these nuggets in 1962!5
It is precisely in this undergrowth of sermons and letters that we have been 
able to discover, against all expectations, further, vivid traits in our portrait of 
Augustine. In the moving image of François Dolbeau, we meet him again, in 
such sermons, “with the emotion that one feels when a tape-­recording brings 
back the voice of a long-­dead friend.”6 I must confess that, ­every time, in the 
5. Brown, Augustine of Hippo (2000), 442–443 and 462–473.
6. Brown, Augustine of Hippo (2000), 440.

W r iting Augustine of Hippo 
253
past fifty years, when a new sermon of Augustine is identified, when a new 
letter is discovered or an old one redated and set in a new context, I suffer a 
twinge of regret. I wish that it had been to hand in the 1960s, to add a touch of 
yet further life to a figure who slowly, as I read him, had begun to come alive.
At the same time, I have ­every reason to be grateful to the older traditions 
of Augustinian scholarship represented by the Maurists and by Tillemont. 
They had laid down for me solid tracks. Along ­those solid tracks I would now 
attempt to run the bullet train of a modern biography.

254
41
From Life and Times 
to Biography
Life and Times
What form would my biography take? For several years, this was by no means 
clear to me. Originally I had intended to write what might be called a Life and 
Times of Augustine. When I approached Charles Monteith with my first pro-
posal, what I offered was a picture of Augustine and his age. I wrote that recent 
studies
only make us realize all the more how necessary it is to treat S. Augustine 
‘in the round’, and to try to conjure up the importance of his life as a ­whole. 
If this attempt is not made, the study of S. Augustine ­will soon be divided 
by specialists into almost watertight compartments—­his personal evolu-
tion, his philosophy, the society and politics of his age—­each of which ­will 
be developed with excellent results, but in complete in­de­pen­dence of the 
­others, and far above the range of the general reader.
We needed a book “which would treat the bishop in Africa as seriously as the 
convert in Milan, and with the aid of the most modern research.”
In effect, what I proposed to Faber’s was a Life and Times that would set the 
well-­known Augustine, the convert and the bishop, against a backdrop of his 
times that would be newly painted, as it ­were, to do justice to the most up-­to-­
date research on the ­later empire.
It was only a few years ­later, in the early summer of 1963, that I began to see 
­things differently. In my reading, I moved suddenly (for some reason that I do 
not recall) from the writings of Augustine at the time of his conversion (the 
famous Cassiciacum Dialogues of 386) to the writings of his extreme old age. 

From Life a nd Times to Biogr aphy 
255
In 426/27, Augustine was doggedly defending his doctrine of predestination 
against a younger generation of African and Provençal monks in what is known 
as the “Semi-­Pelagian controversy.”
It struck me, as I moved forty years in a week, from the Cassiciacum Dia-
logues to the sermons, letters, and writings of the last de­cades of Augustine’s 
life, that this was a man who had done more than change his mind on many 
issues over the course of the years. He himself had changed deeply in him-
self. Even in small ­matters—­such as the manner with which he would address 
a friend, confront an illness, or, even, look out over the iridescent sea—­
Augustine had come to look with dif­fer­ent eyes on a dif­fer­ent world. To follow 
­those inner changes, and especially as they intersected with the changes of the 
times: that was what biography was all about. From then onward I would write 
not a Life and Times but a Biography.
Inside Out
In order to do this, I found that I had to write a life of Augustine, as it ­were, 
from the inside out. He demanded such an approach. He was a man of the 
inner world, a master of introspection. I had taken from my reading of him a 
sense of vertigo. The gap between the opaque material world “outside” and the 
huge dimensions and seemingly limitless energies of the soul “inside” was a 
fixed component of his thought, which he had taken from the radical Neo-
platonism of Plotinus (205–270). This hiatus meant, above all, that the links 
between inside and outside, between thought and expression, seemed fragile 
in the extreme. The sadness that accompanied the gap between heart and 
tongue that Augustine experienced as a preacher even on the most routine 
occasions—­a gap to which he referred in his gentle words of encouragement 
to the young deacon—­was for him an inseparable feature of the ­human 
condition.
My very first impression, when reading the Confessions, was of the perilous 
immensity of the inner world. It seemed to me that, for Augustine, the con-
scious self floated on the surface of unplumbed and troubled depths:
Man is a ­great deep, Lord. You number his very hairs and they are not lost 
in Your sight: (Matthew 30:30; Luke 12:17) but the hairs of his head are 
easier to number than his affections and the movements of his heart.1
1. Confessions 4.14. 22, trans. F. J. Sheed (1942; reprint, Indianapolis, IN: Hackett, 2006), 
67–68.

256 
Ch apter 41
­Great is the power of memory, a ­thing, O my God, to be in awe of, a pro-
found and immea­sur­able multiplicity: and this ­thing is my mind, this ­thing 
am I. What then am I, O my God? What nature am I? A life powerfully 
vari­ous and manifold and immea­sur­able.2
Looking back, I think that I took into myself, at this time, something of 
Augustine’s profound sense of the complexity of the self, and of the hiatus 
between the depths of the inner world and the brittle surface of ­things. It 
seemed to resonate with my own disquiets in the world of Oxford, where so 
much seemed so congealed by common sense, so opaque and hard to shift—­
like the heavi­ly upholstered furniture of an Oxford common room.
Philistines: Augustine and Oxford History
How was a historian to do justice to this acute sense of the individual as con-
taining unplumbed depths beneath the surface of ordinary life? I realized that 
what I was learning from Augustine was not only a challenging notion of the 
person. I had also begun to think that a dif­fer­ent sort of history could be taught 
and written, which did better justice to the inner life as Augustine and many 
­others ­after him had experienced it.
Put very briefly: I found that ­there was ­little or no room in the routine teach-
ing and general outlook of the tutors and students in history for the study of 
aspects of the inner life, such as literary and artistic creativity, nor for the history 
of ideas and of religion. In deciding to write the biography of a religious genius 
and ­great thinker such as Augustine, I claimed a place for individual subjectivity, 
for ideas, for culture, and for religious experience as proper objects of historical 
study for young and old alike in a modern university. I wanted to throw down 
the gauntlet—to issue a challenge to the tweedy philistinism that (in my jaun-
diced eyes) appeared to dominate the Oxford History Schools.
Historical Intelligibility
As part of this campaign, I remember giving a talk in late November 1964 
to a group of history students at St Anne’s College, on the invitation of Mar-
jorie Reeves (1905–2003). Marjorie was one of the distinguished ­women 
2. Confessions 10.17.26, p. 203.

From Life a nd Times to Biogr aphy 
257
medievalists at Oxford at that time: I think of Beryl Smalley, Barbara Harvey, 
Naomi Hurnard, and the gifted nonacademic Hilda Prescott. For all of Oxford’s 
gender imbalances and tendencies to exclude ­women at the undergraduate 
level (in the world of inward-­looking, resolutely single-­sex colleges), the top 
ranks of its ancient and medieval scholarship could boast of a cluster of truly 
remarkable ­women, of whom I found Marjorie Reeves to be the most open 
and enterprising.
Marjorie studied Joachim of Fiore (1135–1202)—­the wild Calabrian abbot 
and author of millennial prophecies: a far from conventional figure. She also 
stood for the best kind of intellectual and social outreach from the universities 
to the British school system. The role of history in education concerned her 
greatly. She wrote and commissioned textbooks on all sorts of historical top-
ics, designed for schoolchildren. What history was taught and how it was 
taught ­were issues close to her heart. Hence her invitation. As for me, the oc-
casion marked the beginning of a collaboration, over the coming years, with a 
distinguished ­woman teacher and her pupils, that led me, for the first time, 
into the world of the ­women’s colleges at Oxford.
My talk was entitled “Historical Intelligibility.” It was a critique of the domi-
nant fashion that wished to make history immediately intelligible in terms of 
single structures and ­causes. In criticizing this view, I used the image of a 
Henry Moore sculpture with a hole in the ­middle. The hole was to be the 
undetermined workings of individual agency and of individual imagination. 
It was a cri de coeur against reductionism. I argued that the drive to make all 
history intelligible as quickly as pos­si­ble led to a flattening of the profile of 
individuals and a watering down of the idiosyncrasies of their worldviews and 
beliefs.
Only fragments of this talk have survived. It now reads like a young don’s 
rant. It was not a model of intellectual coherence. It left the young flummoxed. 
Their reaction was that if historical developments ­were not intelligible, if ­there 
was always some “black box” of individual creativity to be accounted for and 
studied, then what happens to historical causation? What could they answer 
in Schools—at the final examination—­when asked about the ­causes of events 
and the evolution of institutions?
The students ­were right to be leery. My paper was not an abstract discussion 
of historical methodology. It was an attack on the existing structure and syl-
labus of the final examination in history that they all had to face. ­Here I took 
sides. I criticized the exclusive study of po­liti­cal and administrative history. 

258 
Ch apter 41
This bias was most evident in the papers on medieval and early modern 
­England—­papers that, we should remember, ­were compulsory for all history 
students. I pooh-­poohed the idea that concentration on such a narrow range 
of topics was sufficient in itself to open up the riches of the past.
It is even claimed that this narrowing carries with it an increase in “quality” 
by direct contact with the original sources. One must ask ­whether this is 
so: I find it difficult to believe that an undergraduate who spends a week 
chasing the ­house­hold account-­books of Henry VII through the footnotes 
of three modern articles ­will, at the end, be any nearer to the “original 
sources” than one who has spent the same time studying early Humanism 
in ­England, and [who is] enabled to study this subject direct by reading 
well-­commented editions of Sir Thomas More and of Erasmus.
Alas it is my experience that it is pos­si­ble, in Oxford, to perform the al-
most incredible feat of remaining a fully competent, highly sophisticated 
and, even, successful student of the history of modern ­England without 
having, at any time, to come to grips with—­the Re­nais­sance, the ­Counter 
Reformation, Shakespeare, the Cambridge Platonists, the Royal Society, 
the rise of Methodism, or the theory of evolution. Judged by what it ex-
cludes, our preoccupation with a thin line of fully intelligible po­liti­cal and 
social history seems very lean fare indeed.
­These ­were fighting words. But Oxford remained Oxford. Tutorial teaching, 
often of the most routine kind, was still what ­really mattered. Marjorie Reeves’s 
letter of thanks ended with practical business—­the courteous horse-­trading 
by which students ­were farmed out to external tutors such as myself: “[Could 
I] bear to have V. Smith back for 4 revision tutorials next term? . . . ​She would 
explode if I suggested anyone ­else.” It was by ­these ­humble, day-­to-­day links, 
and not by the occasional intellectual fireworks (such as ­were only to be ex-
pected from up-­and-­coming young dons), that an academic community was 
formed in Oxford which might—­just might—­come one day to tip the balance 
­toward more enterprising forms of history.
For the time being, I was firmly established in Oxford. Despite my some-
what peripheral position as a fellow of All Souls (nominally a research post 
only) I was part of the network of tutors to whom students from ­every college 
(men’s and ­women’s alike) could be farmed out for teaching. It gave me a se-
cure base and wide contacts in the Oxford community as I settled down to 
write on Saint Augustine.

From Life a nd Times to Biogr aphy 
259
From Cassiciacum to the Confessions: A Lost ­Future
Meanwhile, I had to look outside Oxford for the intellectual sustenance that 
would help me to write the sort of biography which I had begun to think was 
pos­si­ble. I found this sustenance in a lively debate, mainly among French 
scholars, on the nature of Augustine’s conversion to Catholicism in Milan in 
the years 385 to 387.
Put very briefly: in the 1950s and early 1960s the study of Augustine had 
been revolutionized by new discoveries concerning the intellectual back-
ground to his conversion. They ­were due largely to the researches of the ­great 
French philologist Pierre Courcelle (1912–1980), summed up in a ground-
breaking study, Recherches sur les “Confessions” de Saint Augustin.3
Courcelle identified in the writings of Augustine at the time of his conversion 
distinct traces of non-­Christian, pagan philosophy, taken, principally, from the 
works of the ­great Neoplatonic sage of the third ­century, Plotinus. Furthermore, 
he went on to suggest that Augustine may have been introduced to pagan 
Neoplatonism by none other than Saint Ambrose. Seeing that Ambrose was 
usually known as a notoriously intransigent Catholic bishop, this discovery 
opened up unexpected vistas on the relation between pagan and Christian 
thinkers in late fourth-­century Milan—­they may have been closer to each 
other than we had thought.
As a result, Augustine’s intellectual evolution between the time of his con-
version, in 385, and his writing of the Confessions, in 397, gripped the attention 
of Augustinian scholars. This de­cade had begun, for Augustine, with leisurely 
philosophical dialogues at Cassiciacum, in the bucolic foothills of the Alps. 
But it ended on a very dif­fer­ent note—­with the intensely Christian tone of his 
Confessions. Why had this change happened?
The scholarly debate on the nature of Augustine’s conversion and the sub-
sequent evolution of his thought came as a challenge to write a biography. The 
more I studied the de­cade between Augustine’s conversion and the writing of 
the Confessions, the more I realized that I was not simply studying an intel-
lectual evolution. Augustine himself had changed over the years. He had 
begun with one view of himself and of his ­future in the Christian church. 
3. P. Courcelle, Recherches sur les “Confessions” de Saint Augustin (Paris: de Boccard, 1950). 
The best summary in En­glish remains James J. O’Donnell, Augustine, Confessions II (Oxford: 
Clarendon Press, 1992), 413–424.

260 
Ch apter 41
Initially, he saw himself as a Christian sage who could expect to live a gentle 
life of continued spiritual pro­gress. Ten years ­later, in his Confessions, he pre-
sented himself very differently—as a wanderer still far from his goal, still held 
back by sin. The loss of this sense of a sunny ­future and its replacement by a 
very dif­fer­ent image of himself affected all aspects of Augustine’s life and 
thought in a drastic manner that amounted to a change of character. Seated 
in the Bodleian Library, I made my way through the recent books and articles 
that threw light on that mighty change.
Then, in the late summer of 1963, this debate came to my doorstep: what 
appeared to me to be nothing less than the entire world of Patristic and Au-
gustinian scholarship arrived in Oxford for the fourth international Oxford 
Patristics Conference.

261
42
Patristic Summer 1963
At the Patristics Conference
The fourth international Oxford Patristics Conference met in Oxford for a 
week, September 16–20, 1963. This conference had already met at four-­year 
intervals—in 1951, 1955, and 1959. It was a triumph of foresight and tenacity on 
the part of its convener, F. L. Cross (1900–1968), the Lady Margaret Professor 
of Divinity. It had begun as an occasion for outreach to the churches of post-
war Germany. It soon became a worldwide event, attended by scholars from 
­every Christian denomination or from none, but its postwar origins ­were not 
forgotten. It met in an atmosphere still charged with hope for ecumenical dia-
logue. It also led to the mingling of hitherto separate scholarly traditions, 
linked to dif­fer­ent churches and to dif­fer­ent countries. For me, it was my 
first contact, in one place, with scholars from all over Eu­rope and elsewhere. 
My horizons widened considerably in the course of the week as names known 
to me only through footnotes took on ­faces as colleagues and eventually as 
friends.
The conference itself was a truly daunting affair, made pos­si­ble by the orga­
nizational genius of Elizabeth Livingstone. Six hundred participants converged 
on Oxford from all over the world. They had to be fitted into venerable struc-
tures. The “Miscellaneous Notices” printed at the end of the conference pro-
gram warned participants who ­were lodged in colleges that college gates would 
shut from 11 p.m. to 6 a.m. “Any who wish to go out or come in [­after 11 p.m.] 
should give previous notice to the College Porters, who are entitled to a small 
fee for opening gates.”
­There was a special message for the clergy addressed, appropriately, in 
Latin: “Ad Clerum! Clergy (Roman Catholic and Anglican) requiring the use 
of an altar during the period of the Conference should apply at the Chapter 

262 
Ch apter 42
House.” ­Those who wished to attend the Anglican ser­vices in Christ Church 
Cathedral ­were reminded that “by ancient tradition the times of ser­vices in 
the Cathedral are reckoned by local time (kept by the Cathedral clock) which is 
five minutes ­later than British Standard Time (kept by the clock in Tom Tower).”
The meals ­were held in the ­great hall of Christ Church. Oxford college 
cuisine caused predictable consternation and merriment among the Eu­ro­pe­
ans. We instantly bonded in shared horror, as scholars (some with ­great ­futures 
before them) quailed. I remember taking a seat at the long ­table beside Franco 
Bolgiani of Turin (1922–2012), who was soon to be director of the Biblioteca 
Erik Peterson. He was known to me at this time as the author of a study of 
Augustine’s account of his conversion in book 8 of the Confessions.1 I had 
read this book with care. But it was the college food that ­really brought us 
together. I found myself having to comfort Franco, who had just boasted that 
he had survived his first Oxford dinner, when a college servant unexpectedly 
placed before him the final touch of old-­world British gentility—­a glutinous 
mass of half-­burned cheese, which I explained to him was a Welsh rarebit. We 
remained friends from that time on.
It was a time of spirited conversations at dining ­tables, in and out of college 
quadrangles and cloisters, and up and down the High Street as we moved from 
lecture to lecture. In the eve­nings, the conversations continued ­until late at 
night in pubs. They ­were not always academic. I remember meeting none 
other than Heinrich Bacht (1910–1986), the doyen of studies of Pachomius 
and Egyptian monasticism. He was a large man, dressed in the dark suit of a 
German professor—­like a Mormon missionary. I explained to him, in my best 
German, how to rob a train.
­There was a reason for this strange conversation. Only a month ­earlier, on 
August 8, and only thirty-­five miles from Oxford, the ­Great Train Robbery had 
occurred. The Royal Mail Train had been ­stopped and relieved of 2.5 million 
pounds sterling at Bridego Railway Bridge, near Aylesbury. The foreign visitors 
to Oxford ­were on tenterhooks to learn more about this bold coup. As I had 
driven out to view the scene of the crime, I was much in demand. It was just 
as well that I could offer so much information on this daring crime, seeing that 
the other piece of major news from Britain, at that time, was the Profumo 
scandal and the erotic exploits of Christine Keeler. I deemed it better, with a 
monastic scholar such as Bacht, to dilate upon the ­Great Train Robbery.
1. F. Bolgiani, La conversione di S. Agostino e l’viiio libro delle “Confessioni”, Università di To-
rino, Pubblicazioni della Facoltà di lettere e filosofia 8:4 (Turin: Università di Torino, 1956).

Patr istic Summer 1963 
263
I had other links to foreign visitors than ­those provided by local misdemean-
ors. The fact that I could introduce myself as a student of Arnaldo Momigliano 
opened many hearts among the Italian contingent. Michele Pellegrino (1903–
1986), at that time the professor of early Christian lit­er­a­ture at the University 
of Turin, and soon to be cardinal archbishop of Turin, had been admired by 
Arnaldo for his courage during the Fascist regime, and had been promoted to 
a professorship in Turin on Arnaldo’s urging. I introduced myself to him on 
the strength of this connection, and we fell to talking with the greatest ease. 
He presided over the paper that I read, “Augustine’s Attitude to Religious 
Coercion.”2
­These ­were exciting days for me. As far as I was concerned, the conference 
was an entirely new event. ­Until then, I had not been to a conference of any 
kind anywhere—­neither in Oxford, nor elsewhere in ­England, nor on the 
Continent. In 1963, scholarship had by no means gone global. Unlike nowa-
days, attendance at conferences was not taken for granted as part of the normal 
­career pattern of a young scholar. An international conference such as this one 
was a major and infrequent event. I did not go to another one like it for three 
more years. It was an opportunity that I grabbed with both hands.
For this was the first time that I could meet the scholarly elite of Eu­rope 
gathered in one place. I was impressed by the diversity and learning of the 
Catholic clergy and by the members of the Catholic religious ­orders—­monks 
and nuns alike. But the conference was far from being only a clerical occasion. 
I was particularly impressed by the contingent of French ­women scholars—­all 
of them laypersons and professors in the French university system: Marguerite 
Harl (1919–2020)—on Origen—­Thérèse d’Alverny (1903–1991)—on medieval 
philosophy—­and Anne-­Marie La Bonnardière (1906–1998)—on the chronol-
ogy of the works, letters, and sermons of Augustine. ­Here ­were major scholars 
who ­were not tied (as was the case in Oxford) to ­women’s colleges where their 
main duty was to teach other ­women. They ­were plainly treated as full peers 
of their male colleagues in the more open system of Eu­ro­pean universities and 
institutes.
I particularly remember the paper of Marguerite Harl on the “nudity of 
Adam.” In discussing Patristic views on the nakedness of Adam and Eve in Para-
dise, she conjured up two enduring views on the true nature of humanity—­the 
2. Peter Brown, “Augustine’s Attitude to Religious Coercion,” Journal of Roman Studies 54 
(1964): 107–116, in Religion and Society in the Age of Saint Augustine (London: Faber, 1972), 
260–278.

264 
Ch apter 42
contemplative and the practical. In the first tradition, Adam and Eve ­were 
presented as wrapped in contemplation, unconscious of their bodies ­until the 
rude awakening of the Fall. In such a view, ­human society and ­human efforts 
at self-­improvement ­were always viewed as a sad comedown, as a distraction 
from the vision of God.
The second tradition stemmed from Origen and was ­later revived in the 
medieval Latin West. Medieval scholars claimed that Adam’s awareness of his 
nudity acted as a positive stimulus to invention. A succession of devices de-
signed to lessen ­human vulnerability ­after the Fall began with the making of 
trousers and continued, through the invention of agriculture and the building 
of cities, to culminate in the building of the ­great Gothic cathedrals of Eu­rope. 
As Harl pointed out, this exegesis of the Fall, elaborated in the medieval uni-
versities, lay at the root of the modern notion of technological pro­gress. Her 
paper (along with many ­others) made a lasting impression on me.3
A Climate of Hope
It is easy to recapture ­those happy moments. But it is more difficult to conjure 
up the crackle of expectations within which the Oxford Patristics Confer-
ence took place. Many of the participants at the conference felt that they had 
come together at a turning point in the history of Chris­tian­ity. The Second 
Vatican Council had met only a year before. The second session of the council 
was due to open immediately ­after the conference, on September 29, 1963. 
Many impor­tant Patristic scholars ­were involved directly in the council as 
leading ecclesiastics and as experts attached to vari­ous commissions.
Not only did the Catholic Church face a program of internal reforms; but 
the heady possibility of a reunion of the churches was also in the air. Cardinal 
Jean Daniélou (1905–1974), a leader of the ecumenical movement, closed the 
conference with a lecture chaired by the archbishop of Canterbury himself. 
The title of the lecture was “Les Pères et l’Unité chrétienne.” It was a loving 
evocation of the way in which Basil of Caesarea had strug­gled, by ­every means 
pos­si­ble, to keep the Christians of his time interested in the common good of 
the church. Daniélou described how Basil had instituted the exchange of ­little 
3. Marguerite Harl, “La prise de conscience de la ‘nudité’ d’Adam: une interpretation de 
Genèse 3,7 chez les Pères Grecs,” Studia Patristica VII, ed. F. L. Cross, Texte und Untersuchungen 
92 (Berlin: Akademie Verlag, 1966), 486–495; see Peter Brown, “Trea­sure in Heaven”: The Holy 
Poor in Early Chris­tian­ity (Charlottesville: University of ­Virginia Press, 2016), 67.

Patr istic Summer 1963 
265
terracotta tokens of solidarity between churches; how he had crisscrossed Asia 
Minor and Syria with messengers; how he had constantly appealed to the 
medical notion of sympnoia—of the mysterious power of the breath of life that 
coursed through the body, holding it together like a magnetic force. And all 
this to ensure that, come what may, Christians (though they might be tempo-
rarily divided) would continue to talk to each other. Would that the leaders of 
the churches ­were prepared to do the same ­today! It was a virtuoso display of eru-
dition, mobilized by Daniélou in the ser­vice of a deeply held commitment:
The example of the ­Fathers raises in us the hope that a stunned world may 
yet recognize, one day, the mark of a living God in the amazing spectacle of 
unity regained.4
From the Anglican side, also, Henry Chadwick (1920–2008) had begun to 
reach out to Catholics with a series of deeply learned studies. ­These would 
eventually feed into the balanced phrases of the final report of ARCIC—­the 
Anglican Roman Catholic International Commission—­Salvation and the Church 
(which appeared in 1976). Striding across the lawn of the cathedral, with its 
flowerbeds in full bloom, bending from his ­great height to lend a courteous 
ear to prelates in all degrees of finery, Henry was the Church of ­England. Local 
wits told stories of how Spanish, French, and Italian priests would peer through 
the shrubbery hoping to catch a glimpse of him: “the Anglican Church may 
not have a pope, but it does have Henry Chadwick.”
Ressourcement
How did this climate of hope affect the historians among us? First and fore-
most, ­there was the excitement of discovering that the Patristic period—­from 
AD 200 to 600—­was not a period of decline. Far from it. It had witnessed an 
outburst of creativity that encouraged a climate of hope for our own times. 
Hence the importance of the word ressourcement—­return to the sources—­
which was current among French liberal Catholics at this time. By “return to 
the sources” ­these scholars, lay and clerical alike, meant much more than a 
scholarly reexamination of the thought and institutions of the early church. 
Ressourcement conjured up the hope that our own age might yet see a reen-
actment of the drama of ­those distant centuries. They believed that, in the 
4. J. Daniélou, “Les Pères de l’Église et l’Unité des Chrétiens,” Studia Patristica VII, ed. 
F. L. Cross, Texte und Untersuchungen 92 (Berlin: Akademie Verlag, 1966), 23–32, at 32.

266 
Ch apter 42
Patristic age, Chris­tian­ity had risen from the status of a minority religion to 
occupy the intellectual high ground of an entire, mature civilization. And it 
had done so ­because Christians had been prepared to enter into open dialogue 
with Greco-­Roman pagan culture. It was by reaching out beyond itself, and not 
by walling itself off, that Chris­tian­ity had come to dominate the Roman world.
Looking Back
On Saturday September 21, the participants dispersed. Some would go straight 
from Oxford to Rome, to attend the Second Vatican Council. It was hoped 
that they would bring with them some of that crackle of expectations which 
had played around the conference. Now, over half a ­century ­later, the Oxford 
Patristics Conference, like the far bigger moment of the Vatican Council, 
seems very far away. Many of the hopes of ­those who went on from the Oxford 
Conference to the Vatican Council ­were not realized. They ­were thwarted and 
have now faded. So what ­were ­these hopes?
It struck me, even at the time, that the basic hope of the conference was a 
very scholarly one. Many of the contributions and lectures ­were motivated by 
a touching faith in the collective memory of Chris­tian­ity. They believed that 
the writings of the age of the ­Fathers could be sifted by scholars in such a way 
as to bring healing to the pre­sent. Understanding the Patristic age was like a 
remedium (to use a late Roman Latin term). A remedium was a homeopathic 
poultice—­like a modern medical patch—­which was thought to work slowly, 
and with almost occult power, to heal: to redress deep-­seated imbalances; 
to fortify good humors; to smooth away the cramps and to soften the hard 
constrictions that wracked the body. It was hoped that a remedium could be 
concocted, from our renewed and ever-­deeper knowledge of Patristic Chris­
tian­ity, that could be pressed against the fevered body of the church in our 
own times. Ressourcement was the key word for this remedy. To remember the 
days of the ­Fathers of the Church was not an entirely academic ­matter: it was 
to relive the exhilarating moment when a minority religion had taken over an 
entire civilization ­because it had been open to the wider, non-­Christian world.
The wish to look to the past so as to invigorate the pre­sent took many forms. 
When Cardinal Daniélou evoked the titanic efforts of Basil of Caesarea to 
make sure that divided Christians continued to listen to each other, he plainly 
meant to bring hope to the present-­day ecumenical movements.
Above all, to get ­things right, through the careful study of Patristic texts, 
was to gain a new language with which to speak in a more flexible manner 

Patr istic Summer 1963 
267
about issues that still divided Christians in modern times. To take only one 
example: Henry Chadwick’s early article “Eucharist and Christology in the 
Nestorian Controversy” was a gem of scholarship that was much appreciated 
at the conference. But it was also part of Chadwick’s effort to bring clarity and 
a room for maneuver to modern debates between Protestants and Catholics 
on the nature of the sacraments.5
It was sincerely hoped that a remedium compounded with such care would 
work on Christians in the modern world. But was the remedy strong enough 
to heal their discontents? The size of the issues faced in the modern world 
often left readers of the ­Fathers at a loss. The postwar churches ­were already 
grappling with the challenge of worldwide poverty, with the difficulties of rec-
onciliation between the churches, and with the prob­lems of outreach to non-
believers. But even ­those heavy issues seemed to be not enough. Only a few 
years ­after 1963, the agendas of reform in ­every Christian church widened 
dramatically. A remedium, carefully culled by scholars working on a distant age, 
seemed to many to be inadequate—­like a Band-­Aid on an open wound. The 
cry for Justice, in the ­here and now—­justice for ­women, justice for the poor, 
justice for the excluded, justice for the victims of tyranny exercised by fellow 
Catholics in the name of the church—­pushed to one side the scholarly out-
reach to the Christian past that was so much in evidence in the conference.
Ressourcement was not enough. The collective memory of Chris­tian­ity—­
even the collective memory of the vivid age of the ­Fathers—­was deemed 
by many not sufficient to heal the Chris­tian­ity of our times. Scholars ­were 
saddened by the consequent loss of faith in the past. In the words of Henry 
Chadwick, addressing the General Synod of the Church of ­England in 1988: 
“Nothing is sadder than someone who has lost his memory.”
On the ground, in academe, however, the field of Patristics itself has wid-
ened beyond anything that we could have hoped in 1963. At that time I was 
fortunate to be working on Augustine. He stood at the very center of the Pa-
tristic world. Despite efforts to widen the range of the conference, the study 
of Augustine and of a few major Greek ­Fathers predominated. It was like a 
massive grove surrounded by a mere scattering of other trees. Now this is no 
longer so. If anything, Augustine is neglected, and texts from the Christian 
5. H. E. Chadwick, “Eucharist and Christology in the Nestorian Controversy,” Journal 
of Theological Studies, n.s., 2 (1951): 145–164, now in History and Thought of the Early Church 
(London: Variorum Reprints, 1982), no. XVI.

268 
Ch apter 42
East (in Greek, Syriac, and Coptic, along with many other Eastern languages) 
fill the landscape as far as the eye can reach.
And ­these texts are now owned by every­one. No one church or variant of 
Chris­tian­ity claims a mono­poly of any authors. The comfortable, false famil-
iarity of ­those who once claimed Augustine, Ambrose, or Basil of Caesarea for 
themselves alone has largely dis­appeared among scholars. Jews and Christians, 
Catholics and Evangelicals, mainline Protestants and Mormons find nothing 
strange in sinking their minds into Christians of the ­Middle East, such as 
Ephraim the Syrian, Jacob of Sarugh, or Philoxenos of Mabbug, as writers 
as much deserving of attention as the Greek and Latin ­Fathers whose works 
still dominated the conference in 1963.
As for myself, the conference ended the isolation that had made the first 
years of my work ­toward a biography of Augustine absorbing but unusually 
inward-­looking. I made lasting friendships with scholars from all over Eu­rope, 
but particularly in France. In the coming years I would visit the Augustinians 
of the Assumption (the Pères Augustiniens) whenever I came to Paris. Goul-
ven Madec (1930–2008), Georges Folliet (1920–2011), and Albert de Veer 
(1910–2003) received me in their office, which at that time was in the rue Fran-
çois 1er in the eighth arrondissment, in the district of the Champs-­Élysées. 
They would produce a white wine of the Touraine, praised by Rabelais. Albert 
de Veer had me pegged as an esprit fort—an amiable freethinker, who deserved 
the wine of Gargantua. We would talk all after­noon. It was in Paris and not in 
­England that I found my way to a vivid peer group of Augustinian scholars con-
nected in vari­ous ways with the Études Augustiniennes. Ease of access to Paris 
from ­England (by air or the cross-­Channel steamer) gave my work a distinctly 
French tilt in ­those years. For anyone interested in Augustine, to go to Paris in 
the 1960s was to participate in the belle époque of French scholarship.
This contact was of crucial importance to me for one other reason. In an 
age without websites, the “Bulletin Augustinien”—­the exhaustive, commented 
bibliography produced ­every year by the Augustinian ­fathers in their Revue des 
études augustiniennes—­was as inestimable a boon to scholars of Augustine as 
­were the Maurist editions of his works and the sure-­footed narrative of the 
indefatigable Tillemont. Now the “Bulletin” became for me more than a guide 
to the most up-­to-­date research on any topic connected with Augustine. It was 
something of an academic facebook, where I would trace the writings of my 
many new friends. Among ­those contacts, two stand out as particularly impor­
tant for me—my longtime hero, Henri-­Irénée Marrou, and my En­glish friend 
Robert Markus.

269
43
Encounters
Henri-­Irénée M arrou and  
Robert M arkus
Late Antiquity and the ­Fathers of the Church
No one expressed the climate of hope that characterized the conference with 
greater zest and urgency than my hero since undergraduate days, Henri-­Irénée 
Marrou (1904–1977). As we have seen, it was Marrou who had introduced me 
to the notion of “late antiquity” in his extraordinary Retractatio—­his Reread-
ing (in 1949)—of his Saint Augustin et la fin de la culture antique.1 It was only 
­later that I realized that the notion of late antiquity, as a distinctive and creative 
epoch in the history of the ancient world, had a very specific meaning for him. 
For Marrou, late antiquity was, above all, the age of the ­Fathers of the Church. 
The Christians who ­were his heroes—­such as Clement of Alexandria, Gregory 
of Nyssa, and Augustine—­had ensured, through their daring dialogue with 
ancient culture, that the period between 200 and 600 was a time of unusual 
creativity. In his opinion, ancient culture was “healed” by contact with a cre-
ative minority of Christians. Could the Chris­tian­ity of postwar Eu­rope do the 
same, through a similar open and vigorous dialogue with the modern world?
This hope had suffused Marrou’s work from his early days as a student, in 
the 1930s, through the horrors of World War II, and into a postwar Eu­rope now 
overshadowed by the Cold War. It was accompanied by an austere message. 
Marrou urged Christians to accept the fact that they ­were, once again, in a 
minority. They must forget the days of Christian dominance associated with 
1. Chapter 31: “ ‘De­cadence’ or ‘Late Antiquity’? Henri-­Irénée Marrou.”

270 
Ch apter 43
the ­Middle Ages. The notion of “Christendom”—of a monolithic Christian 
society, such as was believed to have existed in medieval Europe—­must be 
abandoned as a dangerous mirage. On this issue, Marrou was very much a 
liberal Catholic. Bluntly: for him, the hope of Christians in the modern world 
was to creep out from ­under the grandiose shadow of the ­imagined Gothic 
“age of faith.” Instead, they would find, in the ebullient, religiously diverse so-
ciety of the Patristic age, a Chris­tian­ity on which to model their own revival 
of the church.
Marrou had brought this message to all previous Patristics conferences. He 
opened the first conference, in 1951, with an inaugural lecture, “Patristique et 
Humanisme.”2 It was a flat denial of Christian exceptionalism. He insisted 
that, despite their new beliefs, the ­Fathers of the Church had remained ancient 
persons. They ­were rooted in a culture dedicated, for centuries, to bringing out 
the best in ­human beings. This Hellenistic and Greco-­Roman culture had fos-
tered an aesthetic sensibility, a love of ­music (Marrou himself was a passionate 
musician), and a sense of balance in ­human affairs. It had also provided a 
schooling in decorum and self-­restraint. The ­Fathers had upheld ­these ancient 
virtues ­wholeheartedly. They did not borrow bits of ancient classical culture 
only in order to make themselves appear salonfähig—­acceptable in polite com­
pany. They did so ­because they themselves ­were ancient persons. The rich 
blood of centuries flowed in their veins. If we recognized this, Marrou insisted, 
we ourselves would be that much more able to allow the blood of all that was 
good in the modern age to flow in our veins, and, maybe, with the same re-
markable results.
Marrou’s lectures at previous Patristics conferences had been largely de-
voted to Clement of Alexandria (ca. 150–ca. 215). At this time, he was editing 
the Paidagogus of Clement (in collaboration with Marguerite Harl) for the 
new series of French translations of early Christian lit­er­a­ture, the indispensible 
Sources chrétiennes.3 Clement provided him with God’s plenty. Marrou con-
jured up the layers of Hellenistic and Greco-­Roman culture on which Clement 
drew in order to formulate his notion of Christian decorum. With his charac-
teristic sense of humor and openness to his environment, Marrou expatiated 
on Clement’s image of the good Christian’s soul: like a patch of grass—­well 
cut, well watered, and springy. He did so, he said, “en hommage aux lawns 
2. Now printed in Patristique et Humanisme. Mélanges, Patristica Sorbonensia 9 (Paris: Le 
Seuil, 1976), 25–34.
3. Clément d’Alexandrie: Le Pédagogue. Livre I, Sources chrétiennes, 70 (Paris: Le Cerf, 1960).

Encounters 
271
oxoniennes”—in homage to the [­great college] lawns of Oxford.” He urged 
Christian Patristic scholars to do what Clement had done—to adapt to Chris-
tian ends the resilient and diverse modern civilization in which they found 
themselves.4 This was the man to whom I introduced myself, for the first time, 
on Tuesday after­noon, September 17, 1963.
Encountering Marrou
I had first seen Marrou from a distance in late 1958, when he delivered a lecture 
at the Warburg Institute in London as part of the memorable series ­later pub-
lished as The Conflict between Paganism and Chris­tian­ity in the Fourth 
­Century—­the same series in which Hugo Jones had spoken on the social back-
ground to the conflict of paganism and Chris­tian­ity. Marrou spoke about Syn-
esius of Cyrene and Alexandrian Neoplatonism.5 It was a topic ­after his own 
heart—­the portrait of a Christian bishop who had by no means disowned his 
Hellenic culture. In the glow of the reading light on the podium, Marrou’s 
long, white face was as translucent as the bust of a late antique phi­los­o­pher. 
His arms and fine hands moved up and down, like the wings of a ­great bird in 
flight, as he evoked the contemplative ascent of the phi­los­o­pher to God.
Now I saw him at the Oxford conference. On the Tuesday after­noon, he 
delivered a paper entitled “The Place of Jesus of Nazareth in the Valentinian 
Gnostic System.” He sat upright in a high, plush-­lined chair, in the Memorial 
Room of Queen’s College, beside a win­dow that looked out over the garden 
of St. Peter’s-­in-­the-­East in full bloom. Next eve­ning, I saw him transfixed by 
the Orthodox vespers ser­vice that was performed for the conference—­very 
much as part of its ecumenical mood—in the apse of Christ Church Cathe-
dral. Energy sparked from him like an electric wire stripped of its insulation.
Summoning up my courage, I invited him to have dinner with me at All 
Souls. As it was in the depths of the vacation, we dined with a small group in 
the dessert room, looking out in the golden light across the Codrington Quad-
rangle to the dome of the Radcliffe Camera and the spire of Saint Mary’s. He 
4. H. I. Marrou, “Morale et spiritualité dans le Pédagogue de Clément d’Alexandrie,” Studia 
Patristica II, ed. F. L. Cross, Texte und Untersuchungen 64 (Berlin: Akademie Verlag, 1957), 
538–546, at 539 and 542.
5. H. I. Marrou, “Synesius of Cyrene and Alexandrian Neoplatonism,” in The Conflict between 
Paganism and Chris­tian­ity, ed. Arnaldo Momigliano (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1963), 
126–150.

272 
Ch apter 43
explained to Ernest Jacob, who presided at the head of the ­table, the relation 
between the En­glish country dance and the French contredanse of the age of 
Louis Quatorze. All this in exquisite French. Though Marrou was deeply read 
in En­glish lit­er­a­ture, he seldom spoke the language. I suspect that (as with so 
many Frenchmen of his generation) the ancient rhetor in him was too strong. 
He did not wish his flow of beautiful words to be blocked by an alien tongue. 
It worked. Listening to Marrou’s French, we ­were spellbound.
From then onward Marrou and I had infrequent contacts; but each was 
memorable. In 1964, I visited the Marrous for supper in Châtenay, outside 
Paris. At the end of the meal, Marrou put on his beret and played Savoyard 
folk songs on the piano. He told me how the ­great Savoyard smugglers who 
crossed the Alps in the nineteenth ­century ­adopted the names of Homeric 
heroes as their noms de guerre—­Achille, Hector, Agémemnon. It was a ­little 
fragment of folk classicism—­a late, late touch of the ancient world—­which he 
appreciated deeply.
I sent him a copy of Augustine of Hippo in August 1967. He thanked me with 
characteristic generosity and grace: “Cette plume heureuse qui fait de l’anglais 
manié par un Oxonien une si belle langue: on a plaisir de se trouver entre 
Européens”—­“That gift of the pen which makes En­glish in the hands of an 
Oxford scholar such a beautiful language: it is a plea­sure to find oneself with 
a fellow Eu­ro­pean.” Knowing what Marrou thought of the college lawns of 
Oxford, I could not have wished for a more touching tribute. His wife, Jeanne 
Marrou, undertook the translation of Augustine into French.6
Jeanne Marrou’s questions regarding the translation brought us together by 
mail. We exchanged notes on points of erudition like late Roman gentlefolk 
enjoying otium—­a scholarly retirement on their estates. Together, we tracked 
down a passage from Proust that I had used to convey Augustine’s sense of the 
need for spiritual growth in order to read the scriptures: they ­were a closed 
book ­unless the reader had (in Proust’s words) “allowed the equivalents to 
ripen slowly in his own heart.”7
Writing from his summer holiday retreat at La Ferrière (Isère) in the moun-
tains ­behind Grenoble, he wrote a disquisition on the art of early Christian 
sarcophagi ­after I had described to him the dramatic play of hands (hands 
blessing, hands pointing, hands stretching out to touch the flesh of Christ) 
6. Saint Augustin (Paris: Le Seuil, 1971).
7. Brown, Augustine of Hippo (2000), 279; M. Proust, In Search of Lost Time, vol. 1, Swann’s 
Way, trans. C. K. Scott Moncrieff (New York: Modern Library, 2003), 206.

Encounters 
273
that had struck me when I visited the late Roman sarcophagi in the shrine of 
Mary Magdalen at Saint-­Maximin-­la-­Sainte-­Baume near Marseilles. He placed 
­these striking gestures in a long tradition of classical sculpture, and then went 
on to suggest all the other places in Provence where I might view early Chris-
tian sarcophagi.
Alas, this was not entirely a time of otium for Marrou. Apart from his holi-
days in mountain valleys once frequented by heroic smugglers, his time in 
Paris, in the early 1970s, was devoured by the university reforms that followed 
the student uprisings of 1968.
I last saw Marrou in Paris in 1975, two years before his death. Over supper, 
he and his long-­term friend, André Mandouze (1916–2006), fell to reminiscing 
about a journey that they had taken in Algeria sometime in the 1950s. They had 
visited the caves outside Tebessa. A precious Manichaean codex had been 
discovered in ­those caves in 1918. They had hoped to find more fragments. 
“And ­there they ­were [added Madame Jeanne Marrou], André et Henri, sautil-
lants comme des petits chèvres—­jumping in and out of the caves like ­little 
goats.” It reminded me of that deep love of the concrete—of the soil of Africa 
and Rome, as well as of his native Provence—­that never left Marrou, despite 
his openness to the high thoughts of the ­Fathers and the austerity of his reli-
gious commitments.
Only two years ­later, Marrou died. His ­little book Décadence romaine ou 
antiquité tardive? was published posthumously.8 It is a brilliant distillation of 
Marrou’s “polyphonic,” musical sense of the unfolding of history. It is also a trib-
ute to his warm attention to the importance of ­humble ­things. His evocation 
of the significance of changes in dress between the classical and the postclassical 
age—of the change from the toga to trousers—is a ­little masterpiece. It reminds 
me always of that combination of warmth, zest for the concrete, and the stern, 
wide vision that set me on my own way to the study of late antiquity as I first 
read Marrou’s Saint Augustin et la fin de la culture antique in the summer of 1955.
Robert Markus (1924–2010)
I met Robert Markus (then teaching at Liverpool and soon to be professor of 
medieval history at Nottingham) for the first time at the conference, but in a 
very dif­fer­ent manner from the way I met Marrou. Robert and I escaped to-
gether from the Babel of the conference to the Copper ­Kettle (on the corner 
8. H. I. Marrou, Décadence romaine ou antiquité tardive? iiie–­vie (Paris: Le Seuil, 1977).

274 
Ch apter 43
of High Street and Queen’s Lane). Robert sat beside the front win­dow, with a 
pipe in his hand. He leaned back with his head cocked to one side like an alert 
bird, emitting purr-­like chuckles whenever he encountered a good idea. 
Though I had not known Robert previously, we realized, instantly, that our 
concerns converged to a remarkable degree.
First and foremost, Robert, like me, looked for changes in the thought of 
Augustine. His paper for the conference was a model study of how “to trace the 
course of Augustine’s intellectual crystallization.” It showed how Augustine’s 
notion of estrangement from the world had gathered richness over the years.9
Furthermore, Robert had begun to direct his attention to aspects of the life 
and thought of Augustine that had always been impor­tant to me ever since my 
dialogue with Bill Frend on the nature of the Donatist movement. He chose 
to study the middle-­aged Augustine—­Augustine the bishop of Hippo, and 
not the young convert in Milan. His masterpiece, Saeculum: History and Society 
in the Theology of St. Augustine, which appeared three years ­after my Augustine 
of Hippo, showed how much we had in common.10 Like me, Robert did not 
limit himself to debates on the Neoplatonic sources of Augustine’s thought in 
the early days of his life as a Catholic convert. Rather, he lingered by preference 
on the changes in Augustine’s attitudes to society and to history in his ­later 
years. He proved that Augustine showed no slackening of originality as he 
grew older. He traced the subtle changes of Augustine’s mind with the preci-
sion of a master jeweler disassembling a complex watch.
Disenchantment
What drew us together was not just a similarity of temperaments and interests, 
but the fact that we had both been inspired by scholars better known in the 
English-­speaking world than on the Continent. Both of us ­were deeply influ-
enced by the Amor Dei of John Burnaby (1891–1978).11 This remarkable book 
was very much not the work of a ­grand Sorbonnard—of a ­great professor in the 
9. R. A. Markus, “Alienatio: Philosophy and Eschatology in the Development of an Augus-
tinian Idea,” Studia Patristica IX, ed. F. L. Cross, Texte und Untersuchungen 94 (Berlin: Akademie 
Verlag, 1966), 431–450, at 450.
10. R. A. Markus, Saeculum: History and Society in the Theology of St. Augustine (Cambridge 
University Press, 1970).
11. John Burnaby, Amor Dei: A Study of the Religion of Saint Augustine (Cambridge University 
Press 1938).

Encounters 
275
Eu­ro­pean tradition such as Marrou. It was the work of a reclusive don, buried 
in his rooms in Trinity College, Cambridge, wreathed in a dense cloud of 
tobacco smoke. Like Marrou, Burnaby had a profoundly serious side. His ex-
periences as an officer in the Gallipoli campaign of 1916 had marked him for 
life. He would always attend the annual gathering in a London pub of what was 
left of his platoon.
Burnaby had an extraordinary ability to communicate the living religion of 
Augustine as this was revealed in his sermons as well as in his formal writings. 
His Amor Dei set the gold standard for Robert and myself. If ­there was ever a 
book that spoke directly to the changes in Augustine’s life, it was this one. In 
a memorable page, Burnaby caught, as no one ­else had done before, the pathos 
of Augustine’s gradual abandonment of his hope for a serene pro­gress ­toward 
the vision of God, which had characterized his first days as a convert in Cas-
siciacum. We had both been moved by the quotation from Augustine that 
Burnaby had used in order to drive home his point:
Whoever thinks that in this mortal life a man may so disperse the mists of 
bodily and carnal imaginings as to possess the unclouded light of change-
less Truth, and cleave to it with unswerving constancy of a spirit wholly 
estranged from the common way of this life—he understands neither What 
he seeks nor what he is who seeks it.12
Burnaby was not the only creative outlier in the field of Augustine studies. 
Across the Atlantic, Edward Cranz (1914–1998), ­later a professor at Connecticut 
College, was a similar idiosyncratic and deeply learned exponent of the changes 
of Augustine’s mind. In 1954, he published a seminal article, “The Development 
of Augustine’s Ideas on Society before the Donatist Controversy.” This article 
showed how Augustine had changed his mind in the years before he wrote the 
Confessions. He abandoned an optimistic view not only of his own capacity for 
pro­gress but also of the course of ­human history. He no longer saw the ­human 
race as capable of rising ­gently from concern with earthly ­matters to an ever 
more spiritual state, as some Greek Christian writers had promised.13 Such bold 
hopes for himself and for society came to be postponed ­until the end of time.
12. Burnaby, Amor Dei, 36, citing De consensu evangelistarum 4.20.
13. E. Cranz, “The Development of Augustine’s Ideas on Society before the Donatist Con-
troversy,” Harvard Theological Review 47 (1954): 255–316, now in Re­orientations of Western 
Thought from Antiquity to the Re­nais­sance, ed. Nancy Struever (Aldershot, Hants.: Ashgate/
Variorum, 2006).

276 
Ch apter 43
Cranz pointed out that, for Augustine, to abandon this optimistic view of 
himself, as well as the hope of pro­gress for humanity as a ­whole, was no small 
change: it amounted to a tectonic shift in his worldview that ran parallel to the 
­great shift in Augustine’s thought, when he abandoned the hope of becoming, 
in this life, a transcendent sage. As a result of this ­silent shift, Augustine’s Con-
fessions proclaimed a very dif­fer­ent vision of himself from that of the young 
convert—­a wanderer and a sinner, haunted by a desire for God that would 
never be fulfilled ­until the end of time.
Robert and I agreed that many of our ideas went back to Cranz’s article. Yet 
this article was so ­little known to Eu­ro­pean scholars (to whom I would usually 
look for information) that I had found it only by accident when consulting the 
Harvard Theological Review on a totally dif­fer­ent subject.
Talking to Robert, I noticed that we both welcomed disenchantment. Rob-
ert stressed Augustine’s progressive demystification of the Roman Empire in 
his ­middle age. I stressed Augustine’s growing sense of ­human frailty in the 
years that led up to the writing of the Confessions. It seemed to both of us that 
Augustine had changed profoundly since his first years as a convert in Milan. 
He had passed through a dangerous moment of euphoria and had emerged 
with a more gray but more solid view of himself and of the world. Robert 
would ­later sum up this view in his Saint Augustine Lecture at Villanova in 
1989—­“Conversion and Disenchantment in Augustine’s Spiritual ­Career.” Al-
together, having discussed ­these and other ­matters, Robert and I emerged 
from the Copper ­Kettle with a clearer sense that, although we sailed dif­fer­ent 
ships, we ­were sailing them on the same winds.
The week of the Oxford Patristics Conference had been a moment of bless-
ing. I had gained an entire new range of academic friends, and had found that 
the principal lines of my work ­were confirmed. Now it was up to me, in the 
next three years, to get Augustine of Hippo into print.

277
44
All’s Well That Ends 
Well 1966
New Peers
Compared with the excitement of the Oxford Patristics Conference in Sep-
tember 1963, the two and a half years before I submitted the manuscript of 
Augustine of Hippo to Faber’s in the spring of 1966 seemed uneventful. What 
changed in ­those quiet years was Oxford itself. The study of the ­later empire 
had become conceivable at the gradu­ate level. I found myself supervising the 
dissertations of students from the School of Litterae Humaniores (known, 
with no false modesty, as “­Greats”). ­These students had been trained in classics 
and ancient history only.
To move forward into the ­later empire was no small change of scene for 
them. As I have explained, undergraduates who studied ­Greats ­were taught no 
history or lit­er­a­ture beyond the reign of Trajan (98–117). The period from 
Trajan to the accession of Diocletian (in 284) was a total blank. The exciting 
centuries of the ­later empire proper (from 284 to around 600) ­were studied 
only by undergraduates (and very few of them) in the Modern History School. 
Thus students from ­Greats had to fill in a large gap in order to move from their 
undergraduate training to work on late Roman topics. It was a choice for the 
bold who, fortunately, ­were not lacking in the Oxford of the 1960s.
I suspect that this novel impetus was due to Sir Ronald Syme (1903–1989), 
whose vivid curiosity for all periods of Roman history extended into the ­later 
empire.1 Syme encouraged gradu­ate students in ­Greats to work on topics 
1. R. Syme, Ammianus and the Historia Augusta (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1968). See now 
Giusto Traina, “Ronald Syme,” in New Late Antiquity, 630–641.

278 
Ch apter 44
from the third ­century to the fifth. I was often asked to be their supervisor. This 
was a new development for me. Up to the mid-1960s, I had no gradu­ate stu-
dents from ­Greats. Now they came my way and often complemented my own 
interests—­adding an earthy touch at a time when I was wrestling with the 
higher reaches of the thought of Augustine.
The first of ­these students was Roger Tomlin. He embarked on a study of 
the reign of the emperor Valentinian I, in which he rehabilitated the frontier 
policy of that formidable emperor, making full use of recent archaeology in 
Germany, Hungary, and what was then Yugo­slavia.
When teaching for a year at Cornell (in 1968), Roger sent me the poster of 
a lecture that he had delivered: “Ammianus Marcellinus and the Fall of the 
Roman Empire.” It showed a flock of sheep placidly climbing over the ruins of 
Hadrian’s Wall. Roger saw it as an image of the Christians (the sheep) bringing 
about the ruin of the empire. I still have the poster. It was good to find someone 
with whom to share a joke about Ammianus Marcellinus. An archaeologist at 
heart, and a gifted interpreter of scratched messages on slates, bricks, and 
leaden tablets that brought alive the world of ordinary ­people in the farther-
most province of the Roman Empire, Roger kept me in touch with the distant 
world of the northern frontiers of Rome.2
I also supervised John Matthews, who became the first-­ever lecturer in late 
Roman history in 1969, being succeeded by Tomlin in 1975. John’s study of 
the relations between the imperial court and the aristocracies of Spain, Italy, 
and Gaul would ­later appear in a groundbreaking book, Western Aristocracies and 
Imperial Court.3
But the late Roman field had also attracted the attention of young scholars 
all over Britain. At Bedford College, in the University of London, Alan Cam-
eron (1938–2017) had begun to dismantle, in a succession of memorable arti-
cles in the Journal of Roman Studies, almost ­every ste­reo­type concerning the 
relation of Christian and pagan culture at Rome at the turn of the fourth and 
fifth ­century.4
2. See Charlotte Higgins, “How to Decode an Ancient Roman’s Handwriting,” New Yorker, 
May 11, 2017.
3. J. F. Matthews, Western Aristocracies and Imperial Court, A.D. 364–425 (Oxford: Clarendon 
Press, 1975).
4. Alan Cameron, “The Roman Friends of Ammianus Marcellinus,” Journal of Roman Studies 
54 (1964): 15–28, and “The Date and Identity of Macrobius,” Journal of Roman Studies 56 
(1966):25–38.

A ll’s W ell That Ends W ell 1966 
279
Equally impor­tant for me was Keith Hopkins (1934–2004). He was then a 
research fellow at King’s College, Cambridge, and ­later became professor of 
sociology at Brunel University at Uxbridge, 1972. Keith provided daring so­cio­
log­i­cal models for the effects of elite mobility on the po­liti­cal and ­family life 
of the ­later empire.5
This was also the time when I first came to know Averil Cameron. She had 
begun to work on the Greek historians of the age of Justinian and afterward, 
­under the eventual supervision of Arnaldo Momigliano. Working very much 
on her own to begin with, she showed how ­these historians transformed the 
classical tradition of Greek historiography that reached back to Thucydides 
and Herodotus by adapting it for Christian readers. Her dissertation was on 
Agathias of Myrina (ca. 532–ca. 580), the last representative of the classical 
tradition of Greek historiography.
As Averil interpreted him, Agathias was a strangely transitional figure. His 
stilted classical phrases barely covered the presence of the early Byzantine 
Christian culture to which he already belonged. It was precisely this awkward 
attachment to classical models in an increasingly Christian age that Averil 
seized upon with rare insight.
Agathias’ History in fact provides a peculiarly in­ter­est­ing case of the fusion 
of opposites characteristic of a transitional period. Christian and pagan, 
classical and Byzantine.6
At the time, this was an exciting new way of seeing the classical tradition in its 
last days, rooted in the study of a single author and his circle, in which classi-
cism and orthodox Chris­tian­ity (usually thought of by scholars as opposing 
poles) mingled in a paradoxical manner.
Though I was engaged with the study of the late fourth ­century and she 
with the late sixth, Arnaldo Momigliano would always introduce us to ­others 
as Averil “the Classicist” and me as “the Medievalist.” Augustine was over 
two centuries ­earlier than Agathias; but Arnaldo was right. Our two dif­fer­ent 
5. K. Hopkins, “Eunuchs and Politics in the ­Later Roman Empire,” Proceedings of the Cam-
bridge Philological Society 189 (1963): 62–80, and “Elite Mobility in the Roman Empire,” Past and 
Pre­sent 32 (1965): 12–26.
6. Averil Cameron, Agathias (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1970): vii; see Peter Brown, “To 
Make Byzantium In­ter­est­ing: Our Debt to Averil Cameron,” in From Rome to Constantinople: 
Studies in Honour of Averil Cameron, ed. Hagit Amirav and Bas ter Haar Romeny (Louvain: 
Peeters, 2007), 1–9.

280 
Ch apter 44
backgrounds summed up the Janus-­face nature of late antiquity: Averil drew 
on her ­great skill as a classicist in order to understand the very last flowering 
of the classical tradition in the histories of Procopius and Agathias; by con-
trast, I was engaged with Augustine, whose thought and ecclesiastical activities 
set the scene for the Western ­Middle Ages.
This was an abiding difference between two groups of scholars drawn from 
two dif­fer­ent teaching traditions. ­Those trained as classical scholars tended to 
be drawn to the study of late antique and Patristic lit­er­a­ture, and to the fasci-
nating transformations of the classical heritage in the fourth, fifth, and sixth 
centuries. ­Others, such as myself, tended to look forward, to beyond the fall 
of Rome, to the legacy of late antiquity in ­future ages both in Eu­rope and in 
the ­Middle East.
This move into the ­later empire by a brilliant group of young historians of 
the classical world marked the beginning of late antiquity as a distinctive field 
in Britain. Their work provided me with a vivid and up-­to-­date background to 
the age of Augustine, and helped to create the buoyant academic atmosphere 
in which I prepared my book for the publishers.
To the Publishers
I remember very ­little of the final stages of the writing of Augustine of Hippo. 
What I do remember, from 1965/66, are the mechanics of the final draft of the 
book. By pre­sent standards it was an archaic business. Photocopiers ­were rare 
and prohibitively expensive. I did not even compose on a typewriter: I was 
strictly a man of the pen.
Having drafted a chapter in longhand, I would read it aloud to make sure 
of its rhythm. I was determined that Augustine of Hippo would be a book of 
literary value: that the very rhythm of its sentences, when read aloud, 
should maintain a momentum that carried the reader from one end of Au-
gustine’s life to the other. It would be a very oral book—­written to be heard 
as well as read.
Then I would sit down and write out a fair copy (endnotes and all) and take 
the finished chapter up the lane to Mrs. Clayton, a professional typist who 
worked out of her ­house while taking care of her child. Using a touch-­type 
typewriter, with her baby beside her in a carry-­cot, Mrs. Clayton turned ­these 
long sheets of paper (handwritten fair copies in clear, blue ink) into a typed 
top copy with two thin carbon copies. She did this for two years on end, with 
a promptness and intelligence for which no formal recognition is adequate.

A ll’s W ell That Ends W ell 1966 
281
By early spring of 1966, the job was done. A ­little ­later, I wrote to Keith 
Hopkins:
My book on Augustine is now ­under press. . . . ​Having emended an M.S. of 
160,000 words, 3000 footnotes and a bibliography of 400 titles, I am ­either 
(or alternately) full of admiration for the Late Roman senators for having 
preserved the classics by such laborious methods, or convinced that they 
must have done it all by slave ­labour.
A month or so ­later, I took the clean copy—­that is, the only typed copy in 
existence, the rest being carbon copies (forgive this reminder of more ancient 
days!)—­down to Faber’s in a small brown attaché case. I remember that, in 
order to open the locks of the case, I placed the attaché case on the floor and 
knelt beside it. I have a vivid visual memory of two pairs of perfectly creased 
trousers breaking just as they should over two pairs of shiny winkle-­picker 
shoes. The trousers and shoes belonged to two well-­groomed members of the 
staff of Faber’s. Augustine of Hippo had reached London, where I had always 
wished it to be.
To take the mea­sure of a half ­century of change: when I handed in the 
manuscript of my book Through the Eye of a Needle at the Prince­ton University 
Press, in 2012, I brought the hard copy manuscript. It was as large as a car bat-
tery. But that was not what they wanted. They asked me for the USB. I handed 
it to an assistant, who left the room. A few minutes ­later, the assistant returned 
with the USB, and declared, “It is in the system.” On that occasion, the lights 
had not even dimmed for a moment! Technology keeps one ­humble.
Unfortunately, August Frugé (1910–2004) of the University of California 
Press was not so lucky. He did not get a virginal typescript of Augustine. In a 
world without photocopiers or computers, copies of manuscripts ­were scarce. 
Frugé got only a worked-­over carbon copy. He read this worked-­over manu-
script on the plane when he returned from London to the University of 
California Press at Berkeley. It was not an easy read.
The pages ­were amended and added to and written over . . . ​but around and 
under­neath the markings the reader could detect a subtle mind at work on 
another.7
Around the end of 1966, I received the galley proofs of the book. I gave one 
set to Arnaldo Momigliano. It was the first time that I had shown any part of 
7. August Frugé, A Skeptic among Scholars (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1993), 95.

282 
Ch apter 44
my book to him. I was understandably heartened by his response: “I have 
finished your book a few days ago. It is a masterpiece, and has introduced me 
to the mind of Augustine as no other book. We ­shall talk about some details.” 
Then he added, with the extraordinary clairvoyance of which he was so often 
capable:
My feeling is that ­there is a weak spot in the last chapters. I do not know 
­whether I can put my fin­ger on it. A provisional indication may be that you 
have accepted the isolation of Africa without probing it. Whereas Augus-
tine was clearly implying that he was fighting an ecumenic [worldwide] 
­battle, you see him lonely and “safe”. The paradox has to be explained that 
Africa, while crumbling away from the Empire, dictated the fortunes of 
Western Chris­tian­ity.
It is, indeed, a paradox with which I—­and many ­others—­have been wrestling 
ever since.
At about the same time, I received a letter from the Oxford Registry. In 
frosty terms, it informed “Dear Mr. Brown” that the Oxford History Board had 
received no indication that I had completed my dissertation, “The Social and 
Economic Position of the Italian Senatorial Aristocracy in the Sixth 
­Century A.D.” Nor had they received any report from my supervisor, Professor 
Momigliano. For this reason, I was no longer eligible to apply for a doctorate. 
In blunt, American terms: I had been kicked out of gradu­ate school. This was 
not unusual. I did not even keep the letter. Failure to complete a dissertation 
and to gain a doctorate was not viewed as a handicap at this time. Indeed, it 
could appear almost as a sign of distinction—as if I did not need the extra 
certification of a doctorate: Alan Cameron, already a scholar of superb, almost 
nonchalant ability, had done the same.
But the absence of a doctorate meant that my reputation depended that 
much more on Augustine of Hippo. And Augustine of Hippo was a “London” 
book, published by Faber’s, and not an “Oxford” book, published by the 
university press. It would be a metropolitan audience—or, rather, a diffuse 
educated audience outside Oxford—­that would judge its merits.
Reviews
But what would “London” think of Augustine of Hippo? The first review ap-
peared in the Sunday Times on July 30, 1967. It was by John Raymond and 
entitled “Happenings at Hippo.” I read it in a room bathed in the light of a late 
summer’s after­noon. It was all that I needed:

A ll’s W ell That Ends W ell 1966 
283
Peter Brown’s re-­presentation of St. Augustine and his age (354–430) is a 
brilliant achievement. Intended at once for the scholar and for the general 
reader, it should make an impact on both: its air of freshness and discovery, 
of viewing old ­things in a new light, produces something of the effect of 
seeing a ­great painting newly cleaned.
Longer reviews soon followed. They ­were like a chime of bells. They 
showed that, at the very least, I had not misjudged my readers. I remember 
particularly the review by Richard Southern in the New Statesman on Septem-
ber 2, 1967. Richard Southern (1912–2001) was the doyen of medieval history 
at Oxford and Chichele Professor at All Souls (in succession to Ernest Jacob). 
He represented a peculiarly tense form of medievalism. He once told me that 
he had been converted to Anglican Chris­tian­ity by reading both the Grammar 
of Assent of John Henry Newman and all six volumes of the Chapters in the 
Administrative History of Medieval ­England of Thomas Frederick Tout—­a work 
of unrelenting, no-­nonsense research into the sinews of power in high medi-
eval ­England.
The creative tensions that resulted from that unlikely joining marked 
Southern. He was fascinated by the charged relation between the sacred and 
the profane in medieval society. This mirrored a dichotomy within himself—­a 
combination of acute sensitivity to high thought and a leery sense of brutal 
realities. To be taken seriously by Dick Southern was no small ­matter.
Southern made clear from the start that he understood the main thrust of 
my book. He opened the review with a citation from Henry James by his bi-
ographer, Leon Edel: “To live over other ­people’s lives is nothing ­unless we 
live over their perceptions, live over the growth, the changes, the varying in-
tensity of the same—­since it was by ­these that they themselves lived.” I could not 
have wished for a more generous or more perceptive endorsement. “I salute 
Mr. Brown’s achievement in bringing Augustine out of the tomb of theological 
doctrine, and setting his mind and emotions working before our eyes.”
The Editor’s ­Table of the Church Times, “Sinner into Saint,” was less easily 
impressed. I was too clearly a cloistered scholar, without strong views of my 
own on theological ­matters:
This is a donnish book: Augustine is admired, not idolized and [believe it 
or not!] a good word is put in for his opponents, especially for the Dona-
tists and Julian of Eclanum (an unattractive young man).
My friend Gerald Bonner (1926–2013) consoled me for the pejorative appel-
lation of “donnish.” He had worked in the British Museum. On the strength of 

284 
Ch apter 44
this connection, the reviewer of his St. Augustine of Hippo: Life and Controver-
sies had written that ­there was “something of the flavour of the civil servant” 
about the book. “Perhaps [Gerald added] publishers ­shouldn’t reveal their 
authors’ professions.”
The most unexpected accolade of all came from a friend from my Irish days, 
the novelist James Farrell (1935–1979). In the 1950s, we used to climb together 
in the quarry of Dalkey Hill, discussing—of all ­things!—­the value for a bud-
ding writer of the prose of The Book of Common Prayer. I was with James when 
he was struck with polio as an undergraduate at Oxford, and helped him on to 
the flight back to Ireland ­after a long stay in the Wingfield Orthopedic Hospi-
tal. James’s Empire Trilogy (1970–1978) explored, in three novels, the collapse 
of En­glish rule in Ireland, India, and Singapore, respectively. Alas, the polio 
fi­nally killed him. He was swept from a rock by a wave when fishing in Bantry 
Bay, in 1979, and he was unable to use his crippled arms to swim to safety. Ten 
years before, I had sent him a copy of Augustine of Hippo as a memento of our 
literary walks in Dalkey. Writing to Carol Drisko, in 1969, James added as a 
post script:
I’m reading Peter Brown’s biography of St. Augustine. I think it’s marvelous. 
Anyone capable of in­ter­est­ing me in schisms in the Church in Late Roman 
times must be a genius.8
8. J. G. Farrell to Carol Drisko, November 24, 1969, in J. G. Farrell: In His Own Words. Selected 
Letters and Diaries, ed. Lavinia Greacan (Cork: Cork University Press, 2009), 185.

285
45
Resonances
Resonances
Looking back, from the distance of over half a ­century, to the appearance of 
Augustine of Hippo in 1967, I realize that ­those years had a shape of which I was 
largely unaware at the time. The reviewers of Augustine of Hippo and their read-
ers belonged to what was, perhaps, the last generation in Britain and Eu­rope 
where some form of familiarity with traditional Chris­tian­ity could be taken 
for granted. In a highly secularized, progressive Britain, nonbelievers with no 
church attachments whatsoever (such as I was at that time) might not have ad-
mired him. But they felt that, even if they disliked Augustine, they could not avoid 
him. He was like a disreputable ­uncle. He was “­family.” He was ­there to stay.
No one made this more clear than did Frank Kermode (1919–2010) in his 
review, “Forecasts from Hippo,” in The Listener on August 31, 1967:
It is a fact, but not a fact to which all can attend equally, that Saint Augustine 
is one of the writers who require to be known by any who would under-
stand the shape of our world. . . .
Yet he was provincial, vain, enslaved to a fierce ­mother, born into the 
petty gentry. . . . ​­After a bout of literary and philosophical society in Milan 
he went home and became a terribly argumentative clergyman. . . .
Why should we care for this ancient, disagreeable man?
My book seems to have answered Kermode’s question. I had tried to make 
Augustine ­human, even if I did not always portray him as humane. Though Au-
gustine had been long remembered as inflexible, I showed how he developed 
and changed his mind on many issues. By conjuring up the world in which he 
lived and the prob­lems that he faced, I tried to make his choices understand-
able, if not always pardonable. By rescuing his theological opponents from 

286 
Ch apter 45
caricatures (often of Augustine’s own making), I hoped to render Augustine 
himself more three-­dimensional and the issues at stake in his controversies 
more worthy of attention.
I went further than that. By the deliberate use of analogies drawn from 
many aspects of the modern world, I hinted that Augustine was “­family” in a 
deeper sense. I suggested that, somehow, the vehement debates in which Au-
gustine was engaged—­with the Manichees on the nature of evil and perfec-
tion, with the Platonists on the capacities of the soul, with the Donatists on the 
relations among individual, group, and society, and with Pelagius on the limits 
of ­human freedom—­could be transposed into modern terms. They ­were not 
only fifteen hundred years away; but in some way they ­were also still with us.
I believed that, through the careful use of such analogies, it was pos­si­ble to 
rethink Augustine’s thoughts and to relive his passions, even if we shared ­little 
or nothing of Augustine’s own, distinctive late Roman Christian faith. As a 
result, I tried not only to “explain” Augustine to my readers. I also felt that I 
could make my explanation resonate for them, ­because a half-­sensed web of 
kinship—of shared “­family memories,” as it ­were—­still bound them, however 
lightly, to the Christian past and to Augustine.
But it was not only intellectuals who ­were affected by my portrait of Augus-
tine. What moved me most ­were two letters.
One was from a gardener whom I came to know at this time. Mr. Ferris 
belonged to an extreme Protestant sect. He told me that he never took a bath, 
lest it relax his physical and moral fiber. He attacked weed-­filled flower beds 
with a hoe, uttering war cries like a samurai. I gave him a copy of Augustine of 
Hippo. Soon ­after, he sent me this letter:
The eve­ning ­after giving a talk at a Bible class . . . ​I was feeling a bit down-­
hearted . . . ​I took up your book and read “when a man’s finished, that’s 
when he’s just started” [Ecclesiasticus 18:6], and click—­that’s just exactly 
how I felt over the paper I’d given at the class. . . .
­Later on in the book I could enjoy and appreciate Augustine’s frustration 
at not being fully able to proj­ect his feelings and enthusiasms into his hearers. 
I often share this frustration, being so full of an idea, a plea­sure, a prob­lem, and 
being unable to share it with ­others; like, for instance, writing this letter to you.
The other was from Thomas Stewart in Glasgow:
I have come across your Biography “Augustine of Hippo.” I am not in the 
habit of writing fan letters, and ­don’t think this is one . . .
Thank God you had an education.

R esona nces 
287
Thomas Stewart had been taught by a self-­educated ­woman who had fostered 
his wife. He was now widowed and the single parent of ­children. When caring 
for them, he had read
Thomas Paine . . . ​and Thomas à Kempis. À Kempis impressed me most. 
I have quoated and quoated him. Now reading your work, I would say that 
à Kempis must have read Augustine.
Thanks for a good book.
I also had read The Imitation of Christ of Thomas à Kempis, on my return 
from Switzerland in 1952, dreaming of the late ­Middle Ages. Maybe my reading 
of Thomas à Kempis as a boy in Ireland had prepared me to discover Augus-
tine, much as it had prepared Thomas Stewart, a widower in Glasgow, to do 
the same. ­There is no telling where the resonances of a religious culture may 
penetrate, and when and in what diverse circumstances it may do so. It was 
good to think that a book written far away from Glasgow, in the calm provided 
by All Souls College, Oxford, could play a role in this mysterious pro­cess.
­Toward Another Augustine
But what do I now think of Augustine of Hippo? I have already had an occasion 
to say this in 2000, when the book was reprinted with a sizeable epilogue on 
the pro­gress of Augustinian studies. I made special mention of the new letters 
of Augustine discovered by Johannes Divjak, in 1979, and the new sermons 
discovered by François Dolbeau in 1996.1
But 2000 is twenty years ago. What would I say now?
If I ­were to start again, I would certainly write a dif­fer­ent book. In the first 
place, the study of all aspects of Augustine and of his North African back-
ground has progressed by leaps and bounds. This has happened in two ways: 
through the continued work of ­those scholars whom I first met in the Oxford 
Patristics Conference of 1963, most notably Goulven Madec and his colleagues, 
at the Institut des Études Augustiniennes, on Augustine himself; and through 
a thorough revision of our views on late Roman Africa, associated with the 
work of Claude Lepelley (1934–2015) and, more recently, with the work of 
my colleague and friend Brent Shaw.2 Above all, I have been challenged by a 
1. Brown, Augustine of Hippo (2000), 441–520.
2. Claude Lepelley, Les cités de l’Afrique romaine au Bas-­Empire, 2 vols. (Paris: Études Augus-
tiniennes, 1979–1981); Brent D. Shaw, Sacred Vio­lence: African Christians and Sectarian Hatred 
in the Age of Augustine (Cambridge University Press, 2011).

288 
Ch apter 45
development that I did not anticipate in 1967—­the discovery of letters and 
sermons of Augustine that are directly relevant to his life as bishop of Hippo. 
­These discoveries, in par­tic­u­lar, have made me change my mind on many 
topics.
I would now admit that Augustine’s thought may not have been as conflict-­
ridden and as fissured by discontinuities as I had believed. The studies of Goul-
ven Madec, followed more recently by ­those of Carol Harrison and Robin 
Lane Fox, have argued that ­there was more continuity between Augustine the 
convert in Milan and Augustine the mature bishop.3 Very briefly: they suggest 
that the young man was less naively optimistic, and that the old man was by 
no means as glum as I, in the 1960s, had ­imagined him to have been.
­There is no denying that, in his basic theology, Augustine remained all of 
one piece. He never abandoned the hope of the Vision of God. No ­matter how 
difficult it might be to attain to that vision, it remained the heart of his religion. 
The Neoplatonic notion of the soul’s ascent to God still bore him up, on strong 
and ancient wings. Near the end of his life, in a sermon preached before the 
lamps dimmed at the end of a ­simple ser­vice in the church in Hippo and 
the congregation shuffled out, he assumed that ­those ­great wings would beat as 
powerfully as ever, in the hearts of his congregation, as they still did in himself:
I sense that your feelings have been drawn upwards with me to heaven. But 
now I ­will put away the copy of the Gospel. You ­will go home, each your 
own way. . . . ​It was good for us to be bathed for a moment in that common 
Light. It was good that we rejoiced. It was good that we exulted together. 
But now, as we walk away from each other, as we go each to our own home, 
may we not walk away from our shared God.4
A Bishop against the World: The Divjak Letters
What had changed for Augustine was the sense of the density of the saecu-
lum—of the sheer mass of worldly cares that stood between him and the en-
joyment of the presence of God. But ­these cares did not harden him, as I had 
3. G. Madec, La Patrie et la Voie: le Christ dans la vie et la pensée de Saint Augustin (Paris: 
Desclée de Brouwer, 1989), 18–19; Brown, Augustine of Hippo, epilogue (2000), 490 and 497–
498; Carol Harrison, Rethinking Augustine’s Early Theology: An Argument for Continuity (Oxford 
University Press, 2006), and Robin Lane Fox, Augustine: Conversions to Confessions (New York: 
Basic Books, 2015).
4. Augustine, Tractatus in Johannem 35.9.

R esona nces 
289
implied at times when discussing Augustine’s role as a bishop and a contro-
versialist in his old age.
On that ­matter, as in so much ­else, Augustine himself has proved to be my 
best teacher. The discovery of the Divjak Letters and their publication in 1981 
came as a revelation to me. ­Here ­were a set of twenty-­nine letters by Augustine, 
mainly dating from his old age, which had not been copied into the standard 
collection of his letters, and which had lain unnoticed at the back of a fifteenth-­
century manuscript, ­until discovered by the young Austrian scholar Johannes 
Divjak in 1975. The unexpected sound of a voice from the past—­the voice of 
Augustine himself—­made me rethink my views on the old Augustine by 
showing where I had misjudged him.
In the 1960s, my first entry into the study of Augustine had been through 
his involvement in the Donatist Schism. I caught the hard tone of the theorist 
of religious coercion. This ­bitter contest left me with the impression that Au-
gustine the bishop had become a “severe and aggressive figure of authority.”5 
If I remember correctly, in the 1960s, an “aggressive figure of authority” was 
not at all a good ­thing to be. In other words, I tended to dismiss the old bishop 
in terms loaded with overtones of psychoanalytic disapproval.
I was wrong to do so. In the Divjak Letters, I heard a more gentle voice. 
I realized that it was precisely in the low-­profile and often rebarbative business 
of being a bishop, day in and day out, that Augustine showed that “infinite 
capacity for taking pains” which has rightly been deemed to be the mark of 
genius.6
The Divjak Letters show how Augustine, far from being a fierce and with-
drawn figure, opened himself up uncomplainingly to ­every duty to which his 
public status exposed him. We meet an old man in ­these letters—­old by an-
cient standards, that is: in his midsixties and early seventies. In one such letter 
he spoke of his work schedule. In three months he had dictated six thousand 
lines of writing (roughly sixty thousand words). ­These included three works, 
and a series of Sermons to the ­People on the Gospel of Saint John, edited on the 
nights of Saturday and Sunday, that ­were to be sent to the Christian congrega-
tion in Carthage. He had wanted to return to writing the City of God. But no: 
the bishop of Mauretanian Caesarea (Cherchel: 350 miles to the west of 
Hippo) had forwarded to him a two-­volume book on the nature of the soul, 
5. Brown, Augustine of Hippo (2000), 197.
6. Arthur Conan Doyle, “A Study in Scarlet 5: The Lauriston Garden Mystery,” in The Com-
plete Sherlock Holmes (New York: Doubleday, 1988), 31.

290 
Ch apter 45
written by a local intellectual, which required an answer. The City of God 
would have to wait.
I am annoyed ­because of the demands that are thrust upon me to write, 
arriving unannounced, from ­here, ­there, and everywhere. They interrupt 
and hold up all the other ­things that we have so neatly lined up in order. 
They never seem to stop.7
But Augustine’s literary life was only one part of his activity as bishop of 
Hippo. The Divjak Letters enable us to see, far more clearly than ever before, 
the underside of the rise to power of the Christian bishop in late Roman soci-
ety, to which I devoted so much attention in the 1960s. This was no triumphal 
pro­gress. It was a long-­drawn-­out ­battle on the ground that stretched Augus-
tine thin in his old age.
To take one example, to which I have already referred: in 428, Augustine 
led his congregation in an attempt to break a ring of slave-­traders whose 
victims, captured in the mountainous hinterland, “poured in herds like a river” 
through the port of Hippo. As we have seen, Augustine himself had inter-
viewed a terrified girl and her ­brother, who described one of ­these nighttime 
raids on a distant farm.
Led by a pious Christian, the congregation of Hippo had boarded the ships 
and opened the holding prisons. They liberated about 120 captives. Now, how-
ever, the slave-­traders had mobilized power­ful patrons. They intended to sue 
the Church of Hippo for having stolen their property. Augustine would have 
to consult a ­lawyer, to see ­whether they had a case. This was not the letter of a 
prince-­bishop of medieval times, but of a pastor who had to fight ­every inch 
of the way in an uphill ­battle with the powers of this world. I knew none of this 
­until I read the newly published Divjak Letters for the first time, in 1982.8
Altogether, Augustine has emerged for me as a kinder, braver, and more 
patient man than I had thought. Looking back, in the light of this new evi-
dence, I won­der, at times, ­whether ­those ­great tomes of the Maurists had not, 
in some way, misled me. It is not in his treatises and stirring controversies that 
Augustine comes closest to us. It is in the flatlands of his routine duties—in 
7. New Letter 23A*. 4, ed. Lettres 1*–29* (Paris: Études Augustiniennes, 1987), 378, trans. 
R. Eno, Saint Augustine: Letters VI (1*–29*), ­Fathers of the Church 81 (Washington DC: Catholic 
University of Amer­i­ca Press, 1989), 168–169.
8. New Letter 10*. 5 and 7–8, pp. 174 and 178–180, Eno, pp. 79–80, and New Letter 24*, pp. 382–
386, Eno, pp. 172–174.

R esona nces 
291
the undergrowth of letters and stray sermons, where many surprises may yet lie 
in wait for us—­that we (as biographers) can take the full mea­sure of the man.
An Ending
But in 1967, it was time for me to move on from Augustine.
As I look back, it is more clear to me now than it was then that I had come 
as far as I could go in one direction. A period of my scholarly life had reached an 
ending. I would not write the biography of any other person. Only Augustine, 
with his prodigious output already set in chronological order, allowed me to 
write as I had done. If I made biographical sketches, I would from henceforth 
draw them as figures in a landscape. I would no longer spend years listening 
to a single, inimitable voice.
But I think ­there was more to it than that. I had come as far as I could go in 
a distinctive approach to the past. Put very briefly: up to this time I had tried 
to be a faithful listener and communicator. I had sought out themes that still 
tugged at the heart of modern persons as the result of a barely acknowledged 
but still tenacious sense of kinship with the Christian past. I had tried to 
bring Augustine and his times into the pre­sent by reminding my readers of 
what he had in common with them despite the strangeness of the age in 
which he had lived.
This emphasis on communicating the past to the pre­sent led to vivid de-
scriptive history—to the constant painting and repainting of the ­grand fresco 
of the ­later empire and the life of Augustine within it. I had attempted to depict 
with care the working of the forces that had moved the late Roman world in 
Augustine’s times—­the spread of Chris­tian­ity, the genesis of religious dissent, 
the growth of religious intolerance. But now I found that I wanted to go back 
into the past again: to try to understand it in other ways. I wished to take apart 
the mechanisms of ­those forces. I wanted to see what made them tick.
My questions became “Why?” questions. They ­were directed to dif­fer­ent 
prob­lems and to dif­fer­ent parts of the world from ­those that I had encountered 
in my study of Augustine. My work no longer concentrated on Africa and Italy, 
but moved farther east, ­toward the Eastern Empire, Mesopotamia, and Iran. 
Above all, I confronted wider issues of religious history. For instance: sorcerers 
­were widely feared in all regions of the ­later empire. We all knew that. But 
exactly why? In the provinces of the Eastern Empire, holy men came to enjoy 
a prestige out of all proportion to their social status and level of culture. Why, 
and with what results? Throughout the Mediterranean and the ­Middle East, 

292 
Ch apter 45
the shrines of saints came to be seen as places where the dead could bring 
healing to the living. But why? In order to answer ­these broader questions of 
religious history, I would have to leave the ­great pages of the Maurist edition 
of Augustine. I would have to flounder for many years, and in more languages 
than Latin and Greek; and I would have to use dif­fer­ent modern disciplines to 
guide me—no longer psychoanalysis, but social anthropology. I trust that the 
following chapters ­will explain a ­little of how this development in my own 
work happened.

293
46
­Toward the East
Bohemia, the Balk ans,  
and East Rome
Journeys of the Mind: 1966–1967
Augustine of Hippo appeared in late July 1967. When the Fifth International 
Conference on Patristic Studies met again in Oxford, in September 1967, I was 
surprised to learn that the book was already in demand. It was a happy time 
for me. With a panache suited to a young Oxonian, I would appear ­every 
morning to greet my friends at the conference with a newly cut ­rose in my 
buttonhole, to the surprise of ­those who expected the author of a book on 
Augustine to be a wizened cleric. But, even then, I knew that I was not what 
I appeared to be. Despite the success of the book, I would never ­settle down 
to be what the French call an augustinisant—­a student of Augustine alone. 
Why was this so?
Ever since the early spring of 1966, when I had placed the ­little suitcase with 
its manuscript of Augustine on the floor in front of the immaculate shoes of the 
office staff of Faber and Faber in London, I had felt the need for further jour-
neys of the mind. I had been held spellbound long enough by a single mighty 
author as I followed intently the inimitable flow of Augustine’s Latin words. I 
felt, instinctively, that I had given him all that I had for the moment. Quite 
literally, I needed a change of scene—­a new landscape on which to feed my 
historical imagination.
The next two years ­were a time of flux for me. From early 1966 onward, I 
allowed my mind to roam: my interests ranged widely from the Balkans to 
Czecho­slo­va­kia, before turning to the East Roman Empire and to the relations 
between East Rome and the Sasanian Empire of Iran. Having lingered for years 

294 
Ch apter 46
in my imagination in Italy and Roman Africa, I now found myself studying the 
­Middle East and learning Hebrew as a prelude to learning Syriac, in order to 
read the sources for the history of the Fertile Crescent over which the two 
­great empires of the East had fought continuously. Only ­toward the end of 
1967 did contact with two magnetic figures—­Edward Evans-­Pritchard and 
Mary Douglas—­challenge me to engage in yet another all-­absorbing venture: 
the application of the methods of the social anthropologist to the religion and 
culture of late antiquity.
Beyond the Iron Curtain
But where to find a new landscape? First, I thought of what was then Yugo­
slavia, which I had visited in 1960. I settled down with a Teach Yourself Serbo-­
Croat and a plan to study the Byzantine Balkans. I wanted to set the Byzantine 
society and culture of the Balkans (with its complex interweave of Greek and 
Slav) against the mighty landscapes in which it developed. This was to be a 
history from the bottom up, in the manner of Fernand Braudel’s masterly pa­
norama of the Mediterranean in the age of Philip II.
The plan soon fizzled out, but not before leaving me with a lively interest 
in Eastern Eu­rope as a ­whole. ­These ­were charged regions. It is impor­tant to 
remember the extent to which the Iron Curtain weighed on the consciousness 
of Eu­rope in the late 1960s. This was particularly true for scholars of the ­later 
empire and of Byzantium. The Danubian frontier of Rome ran close to or 
through many of the countries ­under direct Soviet control. To study that fron-
tier was to make contacts with scholars from another world—­from the world 
­behind the Iron Curtain. And to pass through that Curtain at any point or for 
any reason was a serious ­matter.
But even at a time when travel to Eastern Eu­rope was difficult, Eastern Eu­
rope occasionally came to Oxford. The International Byzantine Studies Con-
gress met in Oxford in September 1966. Large del­e­ga­tions from Iron Curtain 
countries attended, as a major theme of the conference was the relation between 
Byzantium and its neighbors in the Slavonic world. It was at this conference that 
I met Elka Bakalova, ­later to become the doyenne of Byzantine art studies in 
Bulgaria. At that time, she was working on the Byzantine frescoes of the monas-
tery of Bačkovo. Now she has done more than anyone to preserve the Byzantine 
monuments and to maintain high standards of art history in Bulgaria.
I took her with some colleagues on a tour of All Souls. Perched in the gal-
lery of the Codrington Library, looking down on its ­grand marble floor and 

­Towa r d t he Eas 
295
olive-­green bookcases bathed in light, we discussed as best we could, in a 
courtly mixture of French and Rus­sian, how the life of a teacher in Oxford 
compared with that of a scholar ­under Rus­sian tutelage in Sofia.
The topic of ­Great Powers and their frontiers was a central theme of the 
congress. Alas, frontiers ­were con­temporary history for young scholars in 
Soviet bloc countries such as Poland, Czecho­slo­va­kia, and Bulgaria. The fact 
that they could attend a conference in Oxford gave them some hope that 
­these frontiers might yet open up. It was a hope that was postponed for all too 
many years.
Bohemia: František Šmahel
That was why the crushing of the “Prague Spring” two years ­later, through the 
Rus­sian invasion of Czecho­slo­va­kia in August 16, 1968, came as an amputation. 
­After years of hope, it appeared that the axe had fallen on ­future links with 
Eastern Eu­rope. In Oxford in September 1968, I witnessed the immediate re-
sults of this brutal shutdown. I found myself helping to host a del­e­ga­tion of 
Eastern Eu­ro­pean scholars. By a grisly turn of fortune, a group of Czech schol-
ars had come to Oxford to attend a conference of Anglo-­Czech historians. This 
had been planned some time before, in the heady days of the Prague Spring. 
The new Communist authorities had allowed them to come. For a tense week, 
scholars over whom the sword of Damocles now hung ­were treated to high 
thinking and high living at All Souls College. In his recent autobiographical 
interview, the ­great historian of the Hussite Revolution in fifteenth-­century 
Bohemia, František Šmahel, speaks lightly of this uncanny moment of 
reprieve:
For a week I could use a professor’s room with a valet [a College “scout”] 
for whom I had no work. Other memorable experiences ­were the college 
dinners with many courses, which can perhaps only be seen in En­glish de-
tective stories.1
It was ­after one such dinner that I met Šmahel in the common room of All 
Souls. Seated in a corner, he poured out his soul to me in Czech. In many ways, 
it was a painful moment. I was barely able to keep up with his Czech, yet I did 
1. F. Šmahel in Times of Upheaval: Four Medievalists in Twentieth-­Century Central Eu­rope, ed. 
Pavlína Rychterová, Gábor Klaniczay, Pawel Kras, and Walter Pohl (Budapest: Central Eu­ro­
pean University Press, 2019), 254–255.

296 
Ch apter 46
not wish to stop him in midflow. I came away with a heavy sense of his anger 
and of the uncertainty of his ­future.
It was, above all, the anger of a scholar whose life’s work was threatened by 
ignorant bureaucrats. The Rus­sians ­were not mentioned. What mattered was 
the pro­gress of scholarship, inevitably brought to a halt by the new regime in 
Prague. Šmahel’s mastery of the archives had already opened up an entire 
world, which placed the intellectual origins of the Hussite Revolution against 
an international scene, in the debates held by scholars in universities all over 
Eu­rope in the late ­fourteenth and early fifteenth centuries. This work was en-
dangered less by Marxist ideology than by the shutting down of contacts with 
the wider world that followed the suppression of the Prague Spring. How 
would Czech scholars have a chance to learn about the flow of ideas between 
Prague and Oxford in the days of John Wycliffe (d. 1384)? How would they be 
able to discuss (without ignorant claptrap) the novelty of the idea of “nation” 
in Hussite Bohemia? It was the voice of a young scholar whose ­future had been 
taken from him.
The eve­ning laid a weight on my conscience for having been able to offer 
so ­little effective comfort to his pain. But I remained in touch with Šmahel. I 
sent him offprints and a copy of my Augustine. He reciprocated with long 
Czech articles on Hussite ideology and with two small books on heroes of the 
Hussite Revolution. One was on Jerome of Prague (1379–1416), a fierce intel-
lectual who, like Hus, was burned at the stake in Konstanz in 1416. The other 
was on Jan Žiška (1360–1424), the ­great leader of the Taborite armies. Žiška 
was already known to me as a proto-­Protestant hero. As a child in my grand­
mother’s home at no. 60 Lansdowne Road in Dublin, I had been fascinated by 
the letters—­Z-­I-­S-­K-­A—­that formed the divides of a silver toast rack. ­Little 
did I think that I would be reading the life of a hero, formerly known to me 
only as the name of a yacht commemorated on the breakfast ­table of a Dublin 
Protestant ­family, in a book sent to me by a Czech colleague surviving, in a state 
of suspended animation ­under Communist rule, ­behind the Iron Curtain.
­After 1989, Šmahel returned to public life, now as a leading scholar—in a 
dominant position that he has maintained ­until ­today. I learned only recently, 
from his autobiographical interview with Pavlína Rychterová, how much he 
had suffered. Denied a salary at the Historical Institute, he worked as a tram 
driver in Prague from 1975 to 1979. Typically, all that he complained of in ­those 
years was the fact that his job as a driver forced him to sacrifice spare-­time 
pleasures such as ­music and reading novels so as to concentrate entirely on his 
historical work. This work continued unabated. He poured his learning into a 

­Towa r d t he Eas 
297
three-­volume masterpiece, Husitská Revoluce, which I have read from cover to 
cover in German translation, grateful for the inspiration of a scholar of rare 
tenacity.2
­Toward East Rome
Late medieval Prague was a thousand years and a thousand miles away 
from late Roman Constantinople. And I might have settled for Prague. In 
­those years, my contact with František Šmahel ensured that the Hussite Revo-
lution of the fifteenth ­century remained a challenge to me. It might have 
brought me back to where, in part of me, I still thought that I belonged: to the 
medieval West. My knowledge of Augustine would have been of ­great use to 
me in understanding the roots of Hussite views on church and society. Seldom 
had the issues first raised in Augustine’s North Africa, between Catholics and 
Donatists, been fought out with such ferocity as in fifteenth-­century Bohemia. 
A book could well have grown from this interest in Czecho­slo­va­kia.
But it did not. ­After 1968, travel to Eastern Eu­rope became prohibitively 
difficult and would have tied me to an ideologically blinkered group of spon-
sors. So I soon settled down to study the East Roman Empire in the fifth, 
sixth, and early seventh centuries up to—­and, if pos­si­ble, beyond—­the rise 
of Islam. I did not regret the choice. For I found, on turning eastward, what 
I had so far lacked—­a cohort of friends working in the same field.
Writing about Augustine had been a lonely business. Apart from Robert 
Markus, in Nottingham, my contacts had been mainly with Eu­ro­pean scholars, 
and especially with the French. But in the years when I was finishing the writ-
ing of Augustine of Hippo, a heartening growth of interest in the ­later Roman 
Empire had taken place among British scholars, most of whom ­were trained 
classicists, and many of whom became good friends. They began to apply their 
mastery of Greek to the superabundant lit­er­a­ture—in poetry, prose, and his-
torical writing—of the East Roman Empire, the empire of Constantinople 
and its eastern provinces, in the last centuries of the ancient world. The 
emergence of this cohort tipped the balance for me, away from the West to 
the late Roman East.
For this cohort, 1964 had been an annus mirabilis: Hugo Jones published 
The ­Later Roman Empire, 284–602: A Social, Economic and Administrative 
2. Husitská Revoluce (Prague: Univerzita Karlova, 1993), translated into German as Die hus-
sitische Revolution (Hanover: Hahn, 2003).

298 
Ch apter 46
Survey.3 A three-­volume masterpiece of patient analy­sis, it captured—in a 
manner all the more convincing for being understated—­the sheer vigor and 
complexity of a huge imperial society that controlled the Balkans, Egypt, and 
the western part of the ­Middle East, much as the Ottoman Empire had done 
in the sixteenth ­century. I wrote a long review article on Jones’s ­Later Roman 
Empire for the Economic History Review. It was an occasion for me to take the full 
mea­sure of an empire that had refused to decline and fall at a time when Edward 
Gibbon (with his profound Western bias) had lamented the “awful revolution” 
of the disappearance of the Roman Empire in the fifth-­century West, ignoring 
the fact that the Roman Empire of the East had survived intact.4
From this time onward, I was in regular contact with other scholars in the 
field in ­England who had much to teach me. At the University of Leicester, 
Jones’s student, Wolfgang Liebeschuetz, had begun on a study of Antioch in 
the fourth and fifth centuries that would revise many of our views of the post-
classical city and of social phenomena such as the working of patronage in the 
countryside of northern Syria.5
As a research scholar at Cambridge and, ­later, as professor of sociology at 
Brunel University in Uxbridge, Keith Hopkins had ­adopted an austerely so­
cio­log­i­cal approach to the role of eunuchs in the court of Constantinople. He 
argued that, far from being the symptom of irreparable de­cadence, the power 
of eunuchs was part of an ingeniously balanced system, by which eunuchs ­were 
used as a counterpoise to the influence of the traditional educated elites.
This new approach enabled Hopkins to pre­sent the court eunuchs, who 
usually played a thoroughly negative role in florid modern fantasies of Byzan-
tine life, as spearheads of professionalization and of upward social mobility. 
­After all, this was in the 1960s, when it was widely agreed that a modern society 
could not have too much professionalization and social mobility. It was good 
to know that East Rome, also, had had its fair share of both. Altogether, our 
image of the East Roman Empire was changing for the better year by year.6
3. A.H.M. Jones, The ­Later Roman Empire, 284–602: A Social, Economic and Administrative 
Survey (Oxford, Blackwell, 1964).
4. P. Brown, review of The ­Later Roman Empire, Economic History Review, 2nd ser., 20 (1967): 
327–43, now in Religion and Society in the Age of Augustine (London: Faber, 1972), 46–73.
5. J.W.H.G. Liebeschuetz, Antioch: City and Imperial Administration in the ­Later Roman Em-
pire (Oxford University Press, 1972).
6. K. Hopkins, “Eunuchs and Politics in the ­Later Roman Empire,” Proceedings of the Cam-
bridge Philological Society 139 (1963): 62–80, now in Conquerors and Slaves (Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, 1978), 172–196.

­Towa r d t he Eas 
299
This positive image of East Rome was not entirely new. Recent studies had 
merely added a crispness of analy­sis and a wealth of vivid detail to what was 
already a well-­established view of the East Roman Empire that dated back to 
the 1930s. It was based on an awareness of the contrast between the separate 
destinies of the western and the eastern parts of the Roman Empire—­a contrast 
that had already been highlighted by Santo Mazzarino in his Stilicone. While 
the West collapsed, the East survived. And we tended to think that, compared 
with the fossilized West—­underurbanized and dominated, first, by its ­great 
landowners and, ­later, by its clergy—it deserved to survive. In the words of 
the ­great British Byzantinist Norman Baynes (1877–1961): the East Roman 
emperors of the fifth and sixth centuries and their strangely assorted servants 
did their job successfully. They ensured that “the civil ser­vice and the army 
together formed the steel framework which maintained the entire structure of 
[Byzantine] civilization.” Up to the time of the Arab invasions of the 640s, this 
steel framework had held remarkably well.7 Jones’s ­Later Empire merely con-
firmed this view.
What attracted me most was another surprising aspect of East Rome. That 
was the “dualism” in East Roman culture to which Norman Baynes had re-
ferred in his many brilliant exposés of Byzantine civilization.8 ­Here was a 
vibrant society in which seemingly incompatible traditions coexisted. Mem-
bers of the governing elite of East Rome ­were still schooled in classical Greek, 
and ­were capable of patronizing works of art and of lit­er­a­ture in the best 
classical tradition. Yet this elite was also deeply involved in a rising tide of popu­
lar Christian devotion. As a result, in East Rome, ­things ­were never quite what 
they seemed. Classicism and Chris­tian­ity often came together in startlingly 
anomalous ways. A poet and top administrator—­the last person you might 
expect—­could write a skilled Greek epigram in praise of a wild Syrian holy 
man perched between Heaven and earth on a column overlooking the Bos-
phorus. A young ­lawyer could commission an icon of the archangel Michael, 
“stirred to the depths of the spirit . . . ​by fear, as if He ­were pre­sent”; and then 
go on to bring together a collection of distinctly risqué classical epigrams de-
void of any hint of Chris­tian­ity; Silenus was shown chasing a dancing maenad 
7. N. H. Baynes, “The Decline of Roman Power in Western Eu­rope: Some Modern Explana-
tions,” Journal of Roman Studies 33 (1943): 29–35, now in Byzantine Studies and Other Essays 
(London: The Athlone Press, 1960), 83–96, at 94. Jones, ­Later Roman Empire, 2:1025–1068, 
thought much the same.
8. Baynes, “The Thought-­World of East Rome,” in Byzantine Studies, 24–46, at 35.

300 
Ch apter 46
across a silver dish made in the reign of Heraclius (610–641)—­the emperor 
who would march at the head of a Christian crusade against the pagan Empire 
of Iran. How was I to understand such dualism?
Faced by this conundrum, I could not have found a better guide than Averil 
Cameron. As I have already made plain, her study of the historical work of 
Agathias of Myrina opened up a new way to understanding the strange balance 
of classical and nonclassical in East Rome. But I owed more to Averil than this. 
In early 1966, I was asked by Arnaldo Momigliano to act as examiner for her 
dissertation on Agathias. This dissertation included a translation and com-
mentary on two parts of his History that ­were of par­tic­u­lar interest to the his-
torian. ­These ­were the two long excurses on the Franks and on the Sasanian 
Empire of Persia. Averil’s study of Agathias’s excursus on the Sasanian Empire 
proved decisive for me. ­Here was a view, across the frontier as it ­were, of the 
­great ­Middle Eastern neighbor of East Rome.9
Frontiers
When I settled down, in the summer of 1966, to read Averil’s commentary on 
the excursus of Agathias on the Sasanians, I already had frontiers on my mind. 
This was not only ­because of my growing preoccupation with countries be-
yond the Iron Curtain. It was also a direct outgrowth of my long-­standing 
interest in the rise of religious intolerance in the ­later Roman Empire. My work 
on Augustine and my debate with Bill Frend and ­others on the ethnic basis of 
religious conflict in the ­later empire had made me aware of the active role 
of Chris­tian­ity in sharpening social, po­liti­cal, and ethnic bound­aries. Like 
manganese added to medium carbon steel, Christian notions of orthodoxy 
and Christian intolerance of heresy, paganism, and Judaism tended to make 
preexisting Roman prejudices against outsiders doubly hard.10
Averil’s commentary on Agathias was a masterly confirmation of this view. 
She showed how, in the East Roman world, attitudes to Persia hardened sig-
nificantly in the course of the sixth ­century. Agathias’s pre­de­ces­sor, Procopius 
9. Averil Cameron, “Agathias on the Early Merovingians,” Annali della Scuola Normale Supe-
riore di Pisa, ser. 2, 37 (1968): 95–140, and “Agathias on the Sassanians,” Dumbarton Oaks Papers 
23 (1969): 67–183.
10. Brown, “The ­Later Roman Empire,” in Religion and Society, 54, and “Chris­tian­ity and 
Local Culture in Late Roman Africa,” Journal of Roman Studies 58 (1968): 85–95, now in Religion 
and Society, at 299.

­Towa r d t he Eas 
301
of Caesarea (ca. 500–ca. 570), the ­great historian of the wars of Justinian, still 
viewed Persians with the eyes of a cultivated Greek. They ­were “barbarians” 
in the old sense. They ­were alien and menacing, but they ­were not beyond 
the pale of humanity. A generation ­later, Agathias was less tolerant. He re-
garded Persians as worse than barbarians. They ­were pagans—­Zoroastrian 
worshippers of fire. By the beginning of the seventh ­century, this pro­cess of 
hardening was complete. East Rome was thought of as standing against Persia 
as a united Christian society—­a new “­People of God,” like Israel, faced by a 
pagan nation.
A Religion without Frontiers: Manichaeism
Averil’s study of attitudes to Persia opened a world for me. But, in one way, I 
was already prepared for it. Ever since I began to work on Augustine (who had 
been a Manichee as a young man), I had been fascinated by Manichaeism. This 
was a religious movement that had originated in the interstices between Rome 
and Persia. The prophet Mani (216–277) came from southern Mesopotamia 
(from what is now southern Iraq, below Baghdad). On the strength of his vi-
sions, he founded a truly universal religion. Known as Manichaeism (and its 
followers as Manichees), Mani’s religion was eminently suited to his position 
at the crossroads of Asia, on the frontier between Persia and Byzantium. 
Manichees asserted that Christ had preached only “to the Romans in the 
West,” while Zoroaster had preached only to the Persians, and “the Lord Bud­
dha” had preached only to India and Central Asia. By contrast, Mani would 
preach to them all. His missionaries soon reached the western Mediterranean 
(where Augustine met them in Carthage and Rome) and would ­later cross the 
Ira­nian plateau to Central Asia and China. To study the spread of a new reli-
gion across Eurasia was calculated to widen the heart.
Surprisingly enough, my relation with the religion of Mani went back a long 
way, to my days as a young man in Ireland. For many of the most impor­tant 
Manichaean manuscripts in Coptic ­were ­housed in the Chester Beatty Collec-
tion in Dublin. At the time, ­these manuscripts ­were not in their pre­sent mag-
nificent exhibition space in Dublin ­Castle. They lay where Chester Beatty 
(1875–1966), an eccentric millionaire, had left them, in a sheltered ­house at the 
end of Shrewsbury Road, a suburban ave­nue lined with imposing embassies. 
The exhibition rooms ­were barely lit. The precious codex of the Kephalaia—­a 
major collection of Manichaean teachings, found in the sands of the Fayyum 
Oasis in Egypt—­lay beneath glass panes that ­were covered with dust and dead 

302 
Ch apter 46
flies. Staring at them in the dim, underwater light, I resolved that one day 
I would learn Coptic to read ­these mysterious trea­sures.
As I prepared a paper, “The Diffusion of Manichaeism in the Roman Em-
pire,” for Ronald Syme’s seminar on Roman Syria in 1968, it dawned on me 
that the story of the diffusion of Manichaeism in the Mediterranean and the 
­Middle East was part of the story of the hardening of the frontiers between 
Rome and Persia. A period of open opportunity in the third and fourth cen-
turies, when Manichaean missionaries traveled easily between Persia and the 
Roman world, was followed, in the fifth and sixth centuries, by a sharpening 
of bound­aries and a narrowing of horizons. In western Eu­rope, commercial 
activity receded and the newly Christianized Roman aristocracy came to 
blend traditional anti-­Persian feeling with a new Christian horror of heretics. 
Much the same happened in the East. In Persia, an equally conservative Ira­
nian upper class rallied against religious novelties. In both Rome and Persia 
stability was gained at the price of a greater distrust of the foreigner, the her-
etic, and the barbarian. The spread of a religion that had begun in a time of 
wide horizons, opened up by the crisis of the third ­century, was brought to a 
halt by the emergence, in ­later centuries, of more stable but more intolerant 
and parochial socie­ties.11
But this hardening of bound­aries was not the ­whole story. ­There was one 
crucial area where the frontier between the two empires remained wide open. 
This was the Fertile Crescent. The Fertile Crescent stretched in a ­great arc of 
intensely cultivated land from southern Mesopotamia, along the foothills 
of the Zagros and of the Anatolian plateau, to reach the Mediterranean at An-
tioch. Along this ­great corridor, a common Syriac culture joined the two sides 
of the po­liti­cal frontier. This was the bridgehead across which ideas and per-
sonnel had moved from East to West, and from West to East, since the very 
beginnings of civilization in the ­Middle East.
I had found what I wanted: a zone of ­free movement and religious ferment 
in between two massive empires whose attitudes to each other had begun to 
harden. To do a history of that region would be to stand at the very center of 
western Asia, equidistant from the Mediterranean and the Ira­nian plateau. 
From that position, I could follow, from the third ­century to the seventh, what 
Edward Gibbon had called the “Revolution of the East” that culminated in the 
rise of Islam.
11. Peter Brown, “The Diffusion of Manichaeism in the Roman Empire,” Journal of Roman 
Studies 59 (1969): 92–103, in Religion and Society, 94–118.

­Towa r d t he Eas 
303
Of all the journeys of the mind that I have undertaken, this one appears in 
retrospect to have been the most decisive. It took me in ­little over a year from 
Augustine of Hippo to the frontier between East Rome and Iran, giving my 
work an Eastern tilt that it had not had before.
Eventually, my turn to the East became part of a general recentering of the 
field of late antiquity as a ­whole. From being a strictly Greco-­Roman affair, 
­limited to the Mediterranean and to western Eu­rope, the field has now come 
to embrace large areas of Africa and the ­Middle East, and to include the origins 
of Islam. It has come to require a command of oriental languages—­such as 
Syriac, Arabic, and Coptic—to supplement our traditional knowledge of Latin 
and Greek. If ­there is a “linguistic turn” truly worth celebrating in the study of 
late antiquity, it is this new willingness of young scholars to master the lan-
guages necessary for the study of the Christian East and of early Islam.
With this turn we have entered a world far wider, far more complex, and 
demanding of far greater methodological sophistication than I myself had 
dared to dream, over half a ­century ago, when I first envisioned the possibility 
of a journey of the mind that included the eastern provinces of Rome, the 
Fertile Crescent, and the Empire of Iran.

304
47
Byzantium, Persia, and 
the Rise of Islam
New Opportunities: Richard Southern 
and Syllabus Reform
From 1967 onward, a fortunate set of circumstances enabled me, for the very 
first time, to throw myself into teaching the history of late antique Byzantium 
and Persia in a series of lectures, along with tutorials. It was no longer treated 
as a marginal topic, but as a fully recognized subject in the Modern History 
School of Oxford. That so seemingly exotic a theme should become an optional 
subject in the other­wise unyielding structure of the Oxford history syllabus 
was a revolution in itself. This revolution was due largely to two remarkable 
scholars: to Richard Southern, the Chichele Professor of Medieval History in 
All Souls College, and to Samuel Stern, an Islamicist and a se­nior research 
fellow of All Souls.
As a result of this change in the syllabus, Sam Stern, Dimitri Obolensky, 
and I found ourselves working together to create a Further Subject (that is, an 
optional subject): “Byzantium and Its Eastern and Northern Neighbours, 
500–700 A.D.” This was no big change in itself. A Further Subject was not the 
equal of the Special Subject, which had required texts in the original language 
and was examined in two papers. It was based on translations and was exam-
ined in one paper only.
But it was, nonetheless, a significant change. Before the introduction of 
“Byzantium and Its Eastern and Northern Neighbors,” the only Further Subject 
available to medievalists had been the constitutional history of medieval 
­England based on documents selected well over half a ­century before, by Bishop 
William Stubbs. Given the rigidity of the previous system, the introduction of 

Byza ntium, Persia, R ise of Isla m 
305
this new Further Subject in 1966 was the academic equivalent—to use the 
language of the 1960s—of a gap in the Berlin Wall. A growing number of gifted 
undergraduates could escape through it into the study of the late antique 
­Middle East.
Readers not acquainted with the rigidities of the Oxford of the 1960s 
need to be reminded of the extent to which a seemingly ­simple administra-
tive measure—­which involved (­after all) only one, three-­hour paper in a final 
examination—­was seen as such a breakthrough for us all. To be “on the syllabus” 
was to exist. It was to be deemed to be ­doing real history. For that reason, the 
creation of a Further Subject that included the Persian Wars of Procopius, 
the Miracles of Saint Demetrius of Thessalonica, the Life of Muhammad by Ibn 
Ishâq, parts of the Golden Meadows of Masʿûdi, and the Conquest of the Regions of 
al-­Balahdurî (to name only a few of the texts that ­were set for the new Further 
Subject) was to make ­these exotic persons real for the first time in Oxford.
It was Richard Southern who made pos­si­ble this small but decisive 
aggiornamento—­this opening of horizons in the Oxford History School. 
Canny, instinctively conservative, and inwardly detached, on a deep level, from 
loyalty to any one form of academic institution, Dick Southern was a revolu-
tionary insider—­not unlike the otherworldly but highly effective medieval 
bishops (such as Saint Anselm) whom he studied with such sympathy.
Southern became Chichele Professor in 1961. He delivered his inaugural 
lecture in November 1961. It was entitled “The Shape and Substance of Aca-
demic History.” ­Those who attended the lecture knew that they ­were listening 
to a skillful challenge to the status quo. He historicized the History School. He 
described how, from the Victorian Age onward, it had provided “a system of 
education for practical men”—­for civil servants, colonial administrators, 
­lawyers, and politicians. He went on to say that this was no longer what history 
was about. The present-­day History School was stranded: it represented “the 
remnants of a discipline which had lost its original purpose. . . . ​The greatest 
developments in historical thought have been on the periphery of the old 
syllabus: the centre has remained comparatively unchanged . . . ​it is quietly 
ceasing to be the centre.” Cherwell, the undergraduate magazine, got the 
message: “Top History Don Talks Change.”
Once he got ­going, Dick had a gift for making other ­people work. I was 
recently astonished to find, among my papers, five long pages on publications 
in East Roman and early Byzantine history, complete with comments on the 
state of the field, which I had prepared for Dick Southern at this time. Now he 
announced that the old Further Subject on medieval En­glish constitutional 

306 
Ch apter 47
history—­the famous “Stubbs”—­was no longer the only Further Subject available 
to medievalists. He indicated that interested parties could approach him in order 
to frame new Further Subjects. He then stood back and waited for the zealous to 
push forward. To the best of my memory, I was at the head of the line.
The World of Islam: Sam Stern (1920–1969)
I would not have been so confident if I had not been encouraged and constantly 
informed by another remarkable figure, the Islamicist Sam Stern. Samuel 
Miklos Stern was a Hungarian Jew who had fled to Palestine in 1939. During 
the war, he worked as an interpreter and censor in the ­Middle East. For a while, 
he had even been stationed at Port Sudan, at a time when my ­father was active 
in the railways ­there. For all I know, they might have met. He was elected a 
se­nior research fellow at All Souls in 1957.
Sam was a scholar’s scholar. To me, he seemed to hold the keys to the 
treasure-­house of medieval Islam, in exactly ­those areas where this extraor-
dinarily rich civilization touched the Western world. He discovered love 
lyr­ics in early Spanish disguised by transliteration into Arabic script, thereby 
reopening the hotly contested issue of the role of Muslim Spain in the ori-
gins of courtly love. His work on the Ismailis showed the continued influ-
ence in the Arab world of Greek Neoplatonic mysticism at its wildest. His 
studies of the Fatimid Egyptian archives relative to the Monastery of Mount 
Sinai in the eleventh and twelfth centuries threw a vivid light on the interrela-
tions of monks, Christian pilgrims, and Italian merchants at the time of the 
Crusades.
Furthermore, as the translator from the German of the Muslim Studies of 
the ­great nineteenth-­century Islamicist and fellow Hungarian Ignaz Goldziher 
(1850–1921), Sam introduced me to the very core of Islam and to its mighty 
tensions from the time of Muhammad onward. Unlike Sam, Goldziher had 
been an orthodox Jew, who knew what it was to live ­under a Divine Law. Com-
pared with many flaccid English-­language syntheses of Muslim belief, the 
chapters in Goldziher’s Muslim Studies ­were the genuine article.
To talk to Sam about Islamic ­matters was an “open sesame” to a magic cave. 
And Sam loved to talk. Most fellows eschewed talking shop at dinnertime—­
contenting themselves with small talk, or simply sticking to their glass of 
port. But Sam, by contrast, opened up at dessert. I would sit beside him at the 
dessert ­table, spellbound by his learning. As a result, I remember Sam only in 
profile, his large mouth and heavy face half-­covered with bright brass 

Byza ntium, Persia, R ise of Isla m 
307
spectacles caught in the candlelight, like a benevolent magic frog in a fairy tale. 
This was what All Souls was for. Along with Prof. Zaehner’s after-­dinner rumi-
nations, ­those talks with Sam over dessert ­were crucial to my development as 
a scholar.
Sam died, tragically early and brutally suddenly, of an attack of asthma in 
November 1969. I attended the funeral. Albert Hourani (1915–1993) spoke of 
the grave filled with bright flowers. Alas, all I saw was mud on an icy, rainy 
morning.
At the memorial ser­vice for him in All Souls Chapel, on November 22, 
1969, the warden, John Sparrow (1906–1977), fastened on the maverick in 
Sam—on the unpredictable actions of a devoted scholar, like a Parsifal 
among the courtly knights. He recounted one telling incident. In the com-
petition for the research fellowship, candidates ­were invited to dine at the 
college as part of the vetting pro­cess. Sparrow told how Sam had risen to 
the occasion.
The surroundings ­were unfamiliar, and as for his companions at ­table, 
­whether or not they ­were congenial to him, he modestly supposed that 
he was not likely to be congenial to them, and very soon abandoned the 
hope of being admitted to such an inbred, esoteric body. The talk turned 
upon a proj­ect to admit ­women, not indeed to the College—­this was fifteen 
years ago—­but, as readers, to the Codrington Library. Not much enthusiasm 
was evinced for the proposal. And someone, perhaps the Librarian, sought 
to dispose of it with the argument—if it can be called an argument—­
“What would Archbishop Chichele have thought of such an idea?” Impelled 
by the recklessness of despair, Stern could not help inquiring “What would 
Archbishop Chichele have thought of the election to his college of a Hun-
garian Jew?”1
I doubt very much that Sam spoke out of despair. I think that, as usual with 
him, he simply told the truth as he saw it.
Sam was a truly ­great scholar, a model research fellow of All Souls. He 
was not a teacher. But our friendship showed that pure research of this kind was 
never imprisoned in an ivory tower. In Oxford (and especially in All Souls, 
where teachers and researchers lived in close proximity) research such as 
Sam’s had an immediate trickle-­down effect. It helped to open the teaching of 
1. Memorial Addresses of All Souls College Oxford (Leopard’s Head Press for All Souls College, 
1989), 71–72.

308 
Ch apter 47
history undergraduates in the university as a ­whole to entirely new horizons. 
By helping to create the syllabus for the new Further Subject on Byzantium 
and its neighbors, Sam gave the late antique ­Middle East a place in the study 
of history in Oxford.
“Byzantium, Persia and the Rise of Islam”
It was agreed that I would introduce the new Further Subject through a term of 
eight lectures, entitled “Byzantium, Persia and the Rise of Islam, 500–700 A.D.” 
Preparing ­these lectures turned out to be a joyeuse chevauchée—­a brisk march 
with much plunder—­through the available lit­er­a­ture on Byzantine-­Persian 
relations, on the structure and culture of the Sasanian Empire in Mesopota-
mia, Iran, and Central Asia, and on the continuity of Byzantine and, especially, 
Persian institutions and views of the world in the centuries ­after the Muslim 
conquest.
My reading now took me to parts of the Oxford library system that I had 
not visited before. In the Ashmolean Library of classical history and archaeol-
ogy, where I had long been a regular reader and borrower, I now made my way 
to less frequented parts. I would go up to the very top floor, beyond Egyptol-
ogy and papyrology, to a small and unfrequented room devoted to Coptic 
texts. It was entirely appropriate that a small corridor in the form of a glassed-
in bridge should lead from ­there, over the narrow lane at the back of the 
Ashmolean, to the Oriental Institute, where I would walk down, floor by floor, 
passing shelves of texts in all the languages of the Islamic world and the rows 
of specialized journals in the history and culture of the ­Middle East in all pe-
riods, but especially in Islamic times. This journey to the unfrequented top of 
the Ashmolean, across a bridge, and then down again into the Oriental Insti-
tute summed up for me a new vision of the late antique world.
It was this vision that I tried to communicate in my lectures on Byzantium, 
Persia, and Islam. They ­were intended to be an introduction to the rhythms of 
history in the late antique ­Middle East that would bring together the worlds 
of East Rome and Iran and their role in the creation of the Islamic ­Middle East. 
Hence their title: “Byzantium, Persia and the Rise of Islam, from 500 to 700.” 
I explained what this meant in my first lecture:
What I want to make clear is an aspect of the End of the Ancient World and 
the Beginning of the ­Middle Ages as far as it affects the Near East in general 
and the Byzantine Empire in par­tic­u­lar. . . .

Byza ntium, Persia, R ise of Isla m 
309
In this ­there is a danger that the historian of Late Antiquity ­will give up 
with Islam. It is assumed that Islam came to a tabula ra­sa—­that ­after ter-
rible wars of the early 7th ­century, the two ­giants left a vacuum. That the 
Arabs filled this with something entirely new—­and not our concern.
I pointed out that standard treatments of the ­later Roman Empire (such as 
Jones’s monumental ­Later Roman Empire) ended abruptly in AD 602, and that 
histories of Islam began, in around 610, with the preaching of Muhammad, and 
offered only the most perfunctory introduction to previous history of the 
­Middle East.
In fact, the real chasm may have happened ­earlier in Sasanian Persia, for 
instance, in the terrible crisis of the late 5th ­century; in Byzantium, perhaps 
­after the death of Justinian in 565. . . . ​All through the 6th ­century, the Near 
East, divided between Byzantium and Iran, is slowly taking on the contours 
that ­will determine the ­future shape of Islam ­until the 10th ­century at least.
And so I concluded:
Justinian (527–565) and Khusro I Anoširwan (530–579) in the mid-
6th ­century, Heraclius (610–641) and Khusro II Aparwez (591–628) in the 
early 7th, are just as much “Makers of the ­Middle Ages” as are Muhammad 
and Charlemagne.
The lectures had, for me, the excitement of a journey into a new country. It 
was a novel theme in the Oxford history syllabus; and it seemed to strike a 
chord with ­those in need of wider horizons. I have recently discovered the 
sign-up sheet for one of my earliest lectures in this series, in the Hilary (spring) 
term 1969. (This was nothing like “registration” for a course of lectures as in 
the American system: it was simply a courtesy, like leaving one’s visiting card 
at an old-­fashioned tea party.) I am now surprised at how many of the names 
­were ­those of persons who went on, in ­later years, to study Byzantium, Persia, 
and the Islamic world. Some ­were already gradu­ate students: Robert Hillen-
brand, ­future professor of Islamic art in Edinburgh, repaid me with a kind 
letter and a complete bibliography on Sasanian ele­ments in medieval Persian 
architecture; Zeʾev Rubin (1942–2009), who had come from Israel to Oxford 
to study the age of Septimius Severus, would ­later study the reforms of Khusro 
I Anoshirwan. ­Others ­were undergraduates: James Howard-­Johnston, whose 
Witnesses to a World Crisis and now his The Last ­Great War of Antiquity have 

310 
Ch apter 47
summed up a generation of study of the wars of Heraclius and Khusro II 
Aparwez;2 and Michael Wood, the brilliant director of historical travelogues 
on tele­vi­sion. In this way, my lectures brought me into contact with a far wider 
group of scholars, of dif­fer­ent ages, from undergraduates to gradu­ate 
students—­some of them foreigners—­than I could have met in my tutorial 
teaching alone. It was a good beginning. But now I had to learn the languages that 
­were needed to turn a happy venture, largely related to undergraduate teach-
ing, into real research.
2. James Howard-­Johnston, Witnesses to a World Crisis (Oxford University Press, 2011) and 
The Last ­Great War of Antiquity (Oxford University Press, 2021).

311
48
Hebrew
Back to the Ancient Near East
In making a start on the languages of the Fertile Crescent, I began with the 
Hebrew of the Old Testament (Classical Hebrew). This decision puzzled 
many of my friends. So far I had relied on Latin and Greek. To launch out on 
a Semitic language was very much a new departure. And if I needed a Semitic 
language with which to study the late antique ­Middle East, Syriac (the lingua 
franca of the Fertile Crescent) or Arabic (the vast repository of so many of the 
philosophical and historical traditions of late antiquity) seemed to be the more 
practical choice.
But ­there ­were good old-­fashioned reasons for my choice. At that time, 
Classical Hebrew was still treated as the Latin of the ­Middle East. It was re-
garded as the Semitic language whose grammar, once mastered, served as an 
entry point to all ­others—as Latin grammar was traditionally held to be the basis 
for the study of classical Greek and of the Romance languages of Eu­rope.
Furthermore, Hebrew was the language of the Bible. The strong Biblicism 
of the Protestant Church of Ireland had ensured that the figures and land-
scapes of the Old Testament (the Hebrew Bible) had always been an imagina-
tive presence to me. At an early age we ­were supposed to know many vivid 
stories from the Bible. Indeed, at the age of nine, I won the Scripture Prize in 
Aravon with the winning answer—­that Jehu was the name of the man “who 
drove furiously” (2 Kings 9:20). This triumph led my aunts to declare, with 
evident satisfaction, that I would become a bishop.
But ­there was more to it than that. The more I came to know the thought 
of Saint Augustine, the more I realized the extent to which it was penetrated 
by the language and ideas of the Hebrew Bible—­the Old Testament. In a man 
of entirely Latin culture, with ­little knowledge of Greek and no knowledge 

312 
Ch apter 48
whatsoever of Hebrew, this permeation of an author’s thought by a language 
known only through translation struck me as remarkable. ­Here was a man who 
somehow had managed to “think Hebrew” without any direct knowledge of 
the language, but simply through total absorption, through preaching and 
through daily reading, of the Latin translation of the Hebrew Bible.
This pointed to a wider change. Constant Christian use of the Bible in writ-
ing, preaching, and liturgy caused central words in the religious and social 
vocabulary of the ­later empire to change their valences. The hitherto exotic 
language of the Old Testament came to mold late Roman culture not only in 
religious ­matters: the self-­image of Roman society also changed ­under biblical 
influence. The Roman Empire took on the profile of an ancient Near Eastern 
polity, from an age before the classical city—­a profile characterized by sharp 
assymetries between rich and poor, between God, ruler, and ­people. In study-
ing Hebrew I hoped to gain some knowledge of the original lit­er­a­ture that had 
provoked this mighty change.
Roberta Chesnut
I could not have found a teacher more inspiring and more appropriate to such 
a venture than Roberta Chesnut, now Roberta Bondi. She had come to Oxford 
from the Perkins School of Theology in the Southern Methodist University at 
Dallas, Texas. When I first met her, she was studying Semitic languages in the 
Theology School and had just begun a dissertation on the Syriac works of 
three major anti-­Chalcedonian theologians of the late fifth ­century.1
We began our Hebrew lessons in late 1967. I had not had such a learning 
experience since the time when I was taught German by Ernst Scheyer in 
Dublin, in the gap year between Shrewsbury and Oxford. Like Scheyer, Ro-
berta Chesnut taught me the language from scratch and, at the same time, 
introduced me to an entire culture. I have usually learned languages on my 
own, without the energizing help of such teachers. But in the case of German 
and Hebrew I was singularly fortunate. Each of my teachers opened my heart 
to new horizons.
We worked our way through Jacob Weingreen’s A Practical Grammar for 
Classical Hebrew.2 Even this was appropriate: for, as I have mentioned before, 
1. R. Chesnut, Three Monophysite Christologies: Severus of Antioch, Philoxenus of Mabbug and 
Jacob of Sarug (Oxford University Press, 1976).
2. My copy was J. Weingreen, A Practical Grammar for Classical Hebrew, 2nd ed. (Oxford: 
Clarendon Press, 1959).

Hebr ew 
313
Weingreen (1908–1995) was professor of Hebrew at Trinity College Dublin. 
My aunt Freda’s curate, a clergyman straight out of Trinity, would speak of him 
with awe. His love of Hebrew opened a new world for his Irish students. Ro-
berta did the same. When we turned to the book of Genesis, to Ruth, and to 
the historical books—­especially to 1 and 2 Samuel—­she would draw up for 
me a list of grammatical notes for my daily readings. At times she would add 
splendidly drawn pictures of Hebrew notions of the universe. I was caught in 
the strong summer breeze of her love of the language.
It was thirty years ­later that I came to know where this enthusiasm came 
from. Roberta ­later became professor of church history at Emory University 
in Atlanta, Georgia, from 1978 to 2006, having previously taught for a time in 
the Theology Department at Notre Dame. She changed in ­those years. Her 
studies of Monophysite and Nestorian Christology ­were succeeded by works 
of spiritual guidance for modern readers based on her deep knowledge of the 
writings of the Desert ­Fathers and of the ascetic theologians of the Christian 
East. Turning to Roberta’s spiritual autobiography, Memories of God, I learned 
what lay ­behind the zest with which she taught me Hebrew.3
Hebrew had come to her as a deliverance from the chill world of a conven-
tional Protestant childhood in Kentucky. It had opened wider, warmer hori-
zons. In the summer of 1963, she bought a copy of a Hebrew Bible and Learning 
Hebrew by the Inductive Method. It was a moment of revelation for her:
I still recall the way the shape of the Hebrew letters and the look of the light 
falling across the creamy paper ­were mixed up with what I can only call a 
sense of cosmic goodness and joy in all created ­things I had never encoun-
tered before. . . . ​It was as though the page itself ­were alive and the jots and 
tittles on the letters ­little flames. For the first time I could recall, life seemed 
all of a piece.4
It was only four years ­later that Roberta began to teach me. At the time, I 
knew nothing of her personal religious evolution. But her zest for the majestic 
tread of the Hebrew language and for the massive imaginative patterns from 
which the opening chapters of the book of Genesis ­were constructed swept 
me up, a ­little, into that vision.
At Oxford, Roberta had originally intended to write a dissertation on an 
Old Testament subject. But her enthusiasm had been chilled by the manner 
3. Roberta Bondi, Memories of God (Nashville, TN: Abingdon Press, 1996).
4. Bondi, Memories of God, 66.

314 
Ch apter 48
in which a distinguished Hebrew teacher had cut her off when, ­toward the end 
of a course on the Hebrew of the book of Job, she plucked up the courage to 
ask the ­simple question:
“Could we take just a few minutes to talk about the meaning of the Book 
of Job?”
Embarassed, the students looked at the ­table top. . . .
“My dear madam [the professor had replied] that is something to ask 
your tutor in the privacy of his own tutorial.”5
Alas, I can imagine the incident only too well. Instead of Hebrew, Roberta 
went on to study the spiritual writers and theologians of the Syriac world of 
the fifth and sixth centuries. I did not realize at the time what an impression 
­these writings made upon her. I would soon find my way to the same authors, 
but only as sources for the history of the Fertile Crescent. Roberta read them 
for spiritual comfort. Her dissertation involved the analy­sis of Monophysite 
thought on Christology. It was an exacting task to which her careful, sharp 
mind was supremely well suited. She had a rare gift for communicating the 
seriousness of the concerns of seemingly remote theologians. But theology 
alone was not enough for her. It was the ascetic writings of the Syriac authors 
that truly moved her.
One day, in a dusty autumn morning I opened in the ­middle of a book 
with the unpromising title of The Thirteen Ascetic Homilies of Philoxenos of 
Mabbug. . . . ​It was during this time in the Bodleian Library that I first met 
the generous and gentle God of the early monks.6
What Roberta had found in the writings of Philoxenos (ca. 440–523) was 
shrewd advice, based on long experience and deep self-­knowledge, as to how 
to love one’s fellow monks despite the constant strains of a monastic environ-
ment. Such gentleness was not what she had expected from a forbidding theo-
logian of the late fifth ­century.
As I look back, it is good to think that what, for me, was a historian’s venture 
into the history of the late antique ­Middle East could be experienced, by 
5. Bondi, Memories of God, 69.
6. Bondi, Memories of God, 30 and 133. Roberta would have known the old-­fashioned transla-
tion of Wallace Budge; see now Robert A. Kitchen, The Discourses of Philoxenos of Mabbug, 
Cistercian Studies 235 (Trappist, KY: Cistercian Publications, 2013), with David Michelson, The 
Practical Theology of Philoxenos of Mabbug (Oxford University Press, 2014).

Hebr ew 
315
­others, as a personal source of comfort and an opening of spiritual horizons. 
I was fortunate to begin my study of the Fertile Crescent through learning 
Hebrew from a scholar whose enthusiasm for this new world more than 
matched my own.
Roberta left Oxford in late July 1968. Just before her final departure to the 
United States, she visited Dublin and had tea with my parents. Among many 
other ­things, my ­mother talked about her passion for novels about the Ameri-
can South. ­Later, with typical kindness, Roberta sent her a copy of Faulkner’s 
Absalom, Absalom! Roberta also made her way to the Chester Beatty Collec-
tion and found it as much a trea­sure ­house as I had done:
I have never seen anything like it. In most museums you have to look at a 
hundred pieces which are at best in­ter­est­ing before you see one which is 
beautiful: in the Chester Beatty museum the proportions are exactly re-
versed. ­There is nothing ­there which is not exquisite.
Her last good deed in Oxford was characteristic: she arranged with the abbess 
of an Anglican convent in Burford to teach Hebrew by correspondence to one 
of the nuns.
Back in Amer­i­ca, she wrote from Kentucky that she missed Oxford terribly.
Oxford seems so much closer to me than the room I’m sitting in, and it 
­doesn’t seem pos­si­ble that I ­can’t go outside the win­dow of my room in 
Park Town and watch the misty sun on the trees and buildings.
Despite the few snubs and a mounting dissatisfaction with the ce­re­bral 
nature of the teaching she received in the Oxford Theology School, the anony-
mous life of an American postgraduate in Oxford had suited Roberta’s reclu-
sive and meditative temperament. She was happy with a liminal existence 
among a circle of friends who accepted her for who she was: “This is the reason 
we loved it so much, though we also loved it for its beauty, its stone and gar-
dens. In Oxford, internal ­things are externalized.” Roberta was lucky: she had 
experienced something of the timeless idyll of Oxford that still hovered, tan-
talizingly close, ­behind the careworn university of the late 1960s.
Unlocking Doors
Meanwhile, I settled down without Roberta to make my own way through 
the book of Samuel, as far as the gripping narrative of the death of Saul in the 
­Battle of Gilboa and the lament of David for Saul and Jonathan (2 Samuel 1). 

316 
Ch apter 48
If ever ­there was an unvarnished account of a warrior society in action, caught 
in the lightning flashes of the occasional intervention of a holy man—­the 
prophet Samuel—­this was it. I began to understand why the book of Samuel 
was so impor­tant to history-­writers in Dark Age Eu­rope, such as the Venerable 
Bede. Ancient Israel, and not the well-­organized empire of Rome, was a soci-
ety like their own—­characterized by the same raw juxtaposition of vio­lence 
and sanctity.
­Later I moved on to rabbinic Hebrew, reading, first, the Pirqe Avoth (the 
Talmudic tractate known as “The Sayings of the ­Fathers”) and, then, the Kether 
Malkût—­The Crown of the Kingdom—of Ibn Gabirol (1021–ca. 1070), the 
­great Jewish poet of eleventh-­century Spain. I did this with Nicholas de 
Lange who, at that time, had begun his groundbreaking work on Origen and 
the Jews.7 A true Sephardi, nostalgic for the Spanish background in which 
Judaism had once flourished, Nicholas would go on riding holidays in Anda-
lusia. I would exchange postcards with him in Hebrew praising the hospitality 
and deprecating the rash driving habits of the locals.
Last of all, I began to learn Syriac for my work on the history and hagiog-
raphy of the Fertile Crescent. I did this with ­Father Richard Vaggione, a mem-
ber of an Episcopalian religious order. Richard had grown up on the West 
Coast of Amer­i­ca, where his grand­mother used to tell him stories of a much 
wilder California than the pre­sent laid-­back coast—­stories of gunfights in and 
out of the lines of laundry hanging in the back gardens of Monterey. Richard was 
working on the radical theologian Eunomius (335–393)—­a model study of the 
role of a Christian intellectual in high society at the time of the Arian contro-
versy. Much of the evidence for Eunomius’s views consisted of texts that had 
been translated, centuries ­later, from Greek into Syriac. Only the Syriac versions 
of ­these texts had survived, preserved in the monasteries of the ­Middle East—­a 
lesson, in itself, in the mingling of cultures in late antique and medieval Syria.8
Languages are not learned in a day. My language learning continued for 
many years to one side of my research and bore more fruit for me in ­later years 
(from the 1980s onward) than it did at this precise moment. But I did learn 
enough to open doors to evidence in Hebrew and Syriac that would other­wise 
have remained closed to me: ­these doors ­were now, as it ­were, “left on the 
latch” for me, unlocked, to enter when I needed.
7. N. de Lange, Origen and the Jews (Cambridge University Press, 1976).
8. R. Vaggione, Eunomius of Cyzicus and the Nicene Revolution (Oxford University Press, 
2000).

Hebr ew 
317
And with the languages came the cultures in which they ­were embedded. 
It was ­here that I had the sense of coming upon horizons far wider than I had 
expected. Hebrew gave me access to patterns of thought and to images of so-
ciety that lay at the very roots of Greek and Latin Chris­tian­ity. ­Going through 
my notebooks and biblio­graphies, I now notice that whenever I began work 
on any major theme in the history of late antique Chris­tian­ity—­such as 
wealth, poverty, and almsgiving—­I sooner or ­later found myself back with the 
Psalms, the prophets, and the rabbis of the Talmud. ­These Hebrew sources 
added an entire extra dimension to a history of Christian attitudes to society 
that was usually ­limited to Greek and Latin alone.
With Syriac, I encountered the populations of a ­Middle East divided be-
tween Rome and Persia. Lives of saints, local chronicles, sermons, and hymns 
in Syriac gave me a view, from the ground up, as it ­were, of the two empires at 
work through sources that had been ignored by classical scholars. I remem-
bered how, in my first years in All Souls, Geoffrey de Sainte Croix had pointed 
out to me how much could be learned about the social history of late fifth-­
century Edessa (modern Şanlıurfa in southeast Turkey, a city perched on the 
frontier between Rome and Persia) from a Syriac chronicle, that could not be 
learned from any Greek or Latin text. Often written to console the subject 
populations of war-­torn frontier regions, Syriac historiography recorded a his-
tory of suffering unequaled in the ancient world for its compassion and 
concreteness.
This, in itself, was enough to keep me busy. But learning Syriac offered more 
than that. It gradually opened up for me the other side of the bilingual (Greek 
and Syriac) Christian culture of Syria whose unusual vigor made itself felt 
throughout the late antique world. It was my way into la Syrie bilingue of Paul 
Peeters (1870–1950), whose study of the “oriental subsoil” of Byzantine hagi-
ography influenced me deeply at this time.9 In this distinctive zone, set back 
from the Greco-­Roman Mediterranean, a succession of hymn-­writers and 
preachers created an imaginative world significantly dif­fer­ent from that of 
Greek and Latin Chris­tian­ity. This world would continue up to and beyond the 
rise of Islam, leaving a mark on the Qurʾân and on the ­later formation of Islam.
At the time, however, the opening up of this larger imaginative world 
was of less interest to me than ­were the remarkable figures who emerged from 
the bilingual world of Syria and its neighbors in East Rome and in Persian 
9. P. Peeters, Le tréfonds oriental de l’hagiographie byzantine (Brussels: Société des Bol-
landistes, 1950).

318 
Ch apter 48
Mesopotamia. ­These ­were the holy men whose dramatic impact on the society 
and on the religious imagination of the Eastern Empire had come to fascinate 
me. Side by side with the learning of Hebrew and Syriac, I would devote the 
next few years to intense reading in order to understand the rise and function 
of the holy man in late antiquity. But first I had to equip myself with a new 
methodology that did justice to this challenging phenomenon.

319
49
Anthropology and 
History
E. E. Evans-­Pritchar d
“An Acquaintance with the Habits of Savages”: 
Anthropology at Oxford
My language learning was an oasis of steady, low-­profile pro­gress in the ­middle 
of an academic life that had become ever more challenging. ­These ­were the 
years, roughly between 1968 and 1971, when I was swept up into what was for 
me a new enterprise—an attempt to apply anthropological thought to the 
religious history of late antiquity.
This ensured that, while my teaching remained much the same, my research 
was on brand-­new themes. In April 1968, I delivered a paper at the annual 
conference of the Association of Social Anthropologists: “Sorcery, Demons 
and the Rise of Chris­tian­ity: From Late Antiquity into the ­Middle Ages.” 
The following year, I began to prepare an article, “The Rise and Function of the 
Holy Man in Late Antiquity,” that appeared in the Journal of Roman Studies for 
1971. Between April 1968 and November 1969, I wrote a short book entitled 
The World of Late Antiquity: From Marcus Aurelius to Muhammad, which incor-
porated some of the perspectives that I had recently developed. It appeared in 
June 1971.1
1. Peter Brown, “Sorcery, Demons and the Rise of Chris­tian­ity: From Late Antiquity into 
the ­Middle Ages,” in Witchcraft Confessions and Accusations, Association of Social Anthropolo-
gists Monographs 9, ed. Mary Douglas (London: Tavistock Publications, 1970), 17–45, now in 
Religion and Society in the Age of Saint Augustine (London: Faber, 1972); 119–146; “The Rise and 
Function of the Holy Man in Late Antiquity,” which appeared in the Journal of Roman Studies 

320 
Ch apter 49
­Behind this burst of writing lay a turn to anthropology that marked a deci-
sive moment in my intellectual evolution. With hindsight, this turn can easily 
be presented as an uncomplicated ­matter—as the result of an interdisciplin-
ary linkup, such as would occur easily enough in modern conditions on many 
campuses, American and British. But this was not at all the case. My relation-
ship to anthropology took the form of a series of gradual enrichments, spread 
over time, and hastened by a few unexpected but decisive encounters.
­These encounters need to be set in the context of the Oxford of the 1960s. 
This means that it is the story of a distant time. In fifty years, Oxford has 
changed profoundly. So has anthropology. Its methodologies and the manner 
in which it represents itself are now very dif­fer­ent from what they ­were. Much 
that seemed new and exciting in the 1960s has ­either come to be taken for 
granted, or has fallen by the wayside to make way for new approaches. ­After 
so many changes, all I can do is try to recapture something of the excitement 
generated by a joining of anthropology and history both in my own work and 
in the work of some of my Oxford colleagues.
Anthropology as a discipline hardly existed in Oxford in the 1960s. Unlike 
many American universities, Oxford had no thriving department of anthropol-
ogy from which to effect exchanges with other disciplines through lectures, 
joint seminars, and similar interdisciplinary ventures. A professorship of social 
anthropology had, indeed, been created in 1937, attached to All Souls College. 
But the professor remained ­little more than the head of a small, highly special-
ized institute, responsible only for a handful of gradu­ate students. Anthropology 
was not expected to make any impact on the solid mass of tutorial-­based under-
graduate teaching in the colleges. To many, it was positively unwelcome. When 
the creation of a professorship of social anthropology was debated, Hugh Last 
(1894–1957), the doyen of Roman history and the leader of opinion in the 
prestige-­full School of Litterae Humaniores (of the classics), had roundly de-
clared that “an acquaintance with the habits of savages is not an education.”
A Time Machine
But this was not the end of the story. Paradoxically, its very marginality within 
the university gave to anthropology the aura of a dynamic counterculture. 
It offered new ways to think about ­human nature and society. To historians it 
for 1971 (Journal of Roman Studies 61 [1971]: 80–101), now in Society and the Holy in Late Antiquity 
(Berkeley: University of California Press, 1982), 103–152; The World of Late Antiquity: From 
Marcus Aurelius to Muhammad (London: Thames and Hudson, 1971).

A nthropology a nd History 
321
offered more than that. It gave them a time machine. Anthropologists seemed 
to be engaged in the study of socie­ties which resembled ­those that had existed 
in ­earlier centuries in Eu­rope. They found that to read a study of a warrior 
society in modern central Africa helped them to step into early medieval Eu­
rope as it ­really had been—­lived day in and day out, ­under the eyes of a living 
observer who could ask questions and receive answers, as a historian could 
never hope to do when confronted with the ­silent debris of the past.
This was the secret of the charismatic appeal exercised outside his own 
discipline by the professor of social anthropology, Edward E. Evans-­Pritchard 
(1902–1973). Known always as E.-­P., Evans-­Pritchard held the chair from 1946 
to 1970. We ­were told that he had studied medieval history as a young man. In 
a famous lecture, “History and Anthropology,” delivered in Manchester in 1961, 
he invited historians to complete their education by finding (in con­temporary 
Africa and elsewhere) an early medieval Eu­rope on their doorstep: “­There is 
a big difference between reading about feudal institutions in capitularies and 
living in the midst of something similar.” Young historians (and especially 
medievalists) found it very easy to make this step, entering the distant past 
through reading about “something similar” in the pre­sent.2
I had already begun to do this on occasions. In 1956, as a new prize fellow 
of All Souls, I had read Custom and Conflict in Africa by Max Gluckman (1911–
1975).3 I read it over lunch on a Saturday in the garden of the Turf, beneath 
the bell tower of New College. I remember that I treated it very much as 
“weekend reading.” It was not part of my routine work as a teacher or a re-
searcher. Indeed, it was not even a proper “university” book. It was based on 
a series of talks, delivered on the Third Programme of the BBC, that ­were 
designed to make specialist knowledge available to the general educated pub-
lic. (Fred Hoyle’s talks on the nature of the universe had been broadcast, in the 
same way, on Radio 4.)
Gluckman was a student of Evans-­Pritchard and shared with him the wish 
to make anthropological insights available to historians. I found that Custom 
and Conflict gave me the time machine that I needed. His discussion of feuding 
in modern African socie­ties transformed my view of the Anglo-­Saxons. It gave 
them, as it ­were, the third dimension of real life.
Gluckman showed that feuds did not necessarily result in mindless spirals 
of vio­lence—­the so-­called law of the jungle. Rather, his patient observation 
2. E. E. Evans-­Pritchard, Anthropology and History (Manchester: Manchester University 
Press, 1961), 12.
3. Max Gluckman, Custom and Conflict in Africa (Oxford: Blackwell, 1955).

322 
Ch apter 49
of the ­actual working out of feuds in con­temporary Africa showed the opposite: 
feuds ­were held in check by a complex system of mixed loyalties; moments of 
conflict could become occasions for elaborate ceremonies of reconciliation. 
Altogether, to use the challenging title of Gluckman’s best-known chapter, 
­there was “Peace in the Feud.”4
No medieval historian had told me this. Gluckman’s reassessment of the 
role of the feud dramatically altered my view of the working of “barbarian” 
society in Dark Age Eu­rope. In coming years, I was not slow to pass on this 
news to my undergraduates during tutorials on early medieval ­England. Un-
dergraduates (who delighted in such eccentricities) liked to believe that I had 
once told a staid medievalist that the best book on the Anglo-­Saxons was . . . ​
Gluckman’s Custom and Conflict in Africa.
“That Morass of Ignorance and Superstition”:  
E.-­P. and the Primitive Mind
But ­these occasional borrowings from anthropology did not give me an idea 
of the full mea­sure of E.-­P.’s contribution to the ­human sciences ­until I came 
across his Witchcraft, Oracles, and Magic among the Azande.5 I read it ­because 
of an unexpected invitation. The Association of Social Anthropologists in 
Britain held an annual conference, and it was de­cided that the theme for 1968 
should be “Witchcraft Confessions and Accusations.” The published papers 
­were to be dedicated to Evans-­Pritchard at the time of his retirement in 1970. 
In tribute to E.-­P.’s wish to make anthropology better known among histo-
rians, nonanthropologists ­were invited to contribute. The most notable of 
­these ­were Keith Thomas and Alan MacFarlane, both already zealous in their 
use of anthropological methods for the study of witchcraft in early modern 
­England.
An obvious subtheme in any study of witchcraft was the prob­lem of evil. 
­After Augustine of Hippo appeared, in the summer of 1967, I somehow came to 
be marked out as an expert on evil. I was approached by Mary Douglas, the 
4. See now especially Stephen D. White, “ ‘The Peace in the Feud’ Revisited,” in Making Early 
Medieval Socie­ties: Conflict and Belonging in the Latin West, 300–1200, ed. Kate Cooper and 
Conrad Leyser (Cambridge University Press, 2016), 220–243—­a volume most appropriately 
dedicated to the memory of Mary Douglas.
5. E. E. Evans-­Pritchard, Witchcraft, Oracles and Magic among the Azande (Oxford: Clarendon 
Press, 1937).

A nthropology a nd History 
323
or­ga­nizer of the conference, who at that time was teaching in London, to offer 
a contribution ­either on Augustine and the Manichees or on Augustine and 
original sin. At that time, Mary was a total stranger to me. She suggested that 
I should read Witchcraft, Oracles and Magic, just to get my eye in, as it ­were, for 
an anthropological occasion.
What emerged from my reading was, perhaps, not quite what she expected. 
For, on reading it carefully over a summer vacation, I found that Witchcraft, 
Oracles and Magic carried with it a charge of meaning for me that grew directly 
out of the Sudanese context of its writing. The Azande ­were a Nilotic tribe in 
the southern Sudan. Evans-­Pritchard had done his fieldwork among them at 
the same time as my ­father was working far to the north, in Atbara. Indeed, 
Witchcraft, Oracles and Magic appeared in 1937—­a year before I solemnly 
fed my Mickey Mouse handkerchief to a large hippopotamus in the Khar-
toum Zoo.
Witchcraft, Oracles, and Magic immediately struck a chord with me. For 
Evans-­Pritchard had addressed a central issue in British attitudes to the native 
populations. The notion that ­there was something intrinsically inferior about 
the thought pro­cesses of the mass of their subjects was accepted as a given. 
Belief in a “primitive mentality” held the natives at a distance. It enabled the 
colonial powers to claim that they had come to liberate their subjects from 
the evils associated with the vagaries of subnormal minds—­thereby justifying 
the indefinite continuance of colonial rule.
Most books about Sudan had no doubt on this ­matter. The naval Handbook 
of the Anglo-­Egyptian Sudan of 1922 wrote of the Muslim populations of the 
northern Sudan: “In viewing ­these beliefs one must take into consideration 
the unstable ner­vous and ­mental condition of a ­great part of the population.”6 
The southern Sudan was deemed to be even worse. In the words of one top 
administrator, “In that morass of ignorance and superstition we pro­gress 
slowly.”7
As we have seen, the “Bog Barons” (the governors and district commission-
ers of the swamplands of the southern Nile) had spun around the Nilotic 
tribes, such as the Nuer and the Azande, a web of paranoid fantasies.8 Many 
of ­these Bog Barons ­were convinced that they ­were dealing with irrational 
6. A Handbook of the Anglo-­Egyptian Sudan (Naval Staff Intelligence Division, 1922), 199.
7. Harold MacMichael, May 15, 1929, to the Sudan Agent, in R. O. Collins, Shadows in the 
Grass (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1983), 135.
8. Chapter 7: “Sudan: North and South.”

324 
Ch apter 49
savages, held in the bonds of terror by prophets and witch doctors. The bomb-
ing of Nuer villages, the destruction of a major religious monument, and a 
wave of random arrests ­were the price that the Nilotic tribes had to pay for the 
anthropological naïveté of their masters—­most notably of “Chunky” Willis, 
who became governor of the Upper Nile in 1927.
Hence the importance of the arrival of the young Evans-­Pritchard (at 
the age of twenty-­four) in the southern Sudan. He spent four years among the 
Azande (from 1926 to 1930). The result—­Witchcraft, Oracles and Magic among 
the Azande—­was a masterpiece of detailed observation winnowed by unfail-
ing common sense.
As I read it slowly, in the summer of 1967, I realized that Evans-­Pritchard 
had knocked away one of the most solid props of modern (and not so modern) 
rule over subject populations—­the notion of their ­mental inferiority. But it 
was more than that: by contradicting the notion of a “primitive mentality,” 
anthropologists such as Evans-­Pritchard had recognized the full humanity of 
the tribes of the southern Sudan—­and, with them, of a large proportion of the 
­human race.
Witchcraft Dedramatized
Above all, Witchcraft, Oracles and Magic was a masterpiece of dedramatization. 
Evans-­Pritchard pointed out that, for any Zande (any member of the tribe of 
the Azande), witchcraft was a commonplace happening, as it was not for Eu­
ro­pe­ans. It was not a spooky practice. It was a way of talking about misfortune 
that could be used to explain mis­haps by linking ­these mis­haps to the ill-­
intentions or envy of other persons. As a result, belief in witchcraft put a 
­human face on misfortune; and it did so ­because of a firm belief that what 
­humans can inflict, ­humans can remedy—in this case, by seeking out the per-
son whose “hot” envy (consciously or unconsciously) was held to have caused 
this par­tic­u­lar mishap. The belief that the cause of any misfortune could be 
identified, challenged, and, as a result, reversed or made good in some way, 
accounted for the unusually sunny mood of the average Zande. Witchcraft was 
normal ­because witchcraft was fixable. This mood was the exact opposite of 
what ­others, such as “Chunky” Willis, had expected of socie­ties in which 
witchcraft beliefs appeared to be rife.
­Unless the reader appreciates that witchcraft is quite a normal ­factor in 
the life of the Azande . . . ​he ­will entirely misunderstand their be­hav­ior 

A nthropology a nd History 
325
­towards it. To us witchcraft is something which haunted and disgusted our 
credulous ancestors.9
But witchcraft was not like this at all for the Azande.
Just as Gluckman had shown that the feuds of Dark Age Eu­rope ­were not 
necessarily mindless slaughterfests, so Evans-­Pritchard had integrated witch-
craft into the daily life of the Azande in a manner that made it unremarkable 
­because subject to precise and prosaic forms of ­human control. If ­there could be 
“peace in the feud,” as Gluckman claimed, then ­there could also be room for 
the working of mute common sense in the deployment of witchcraft beliefs.
This was news to me. Confronted with seemingly irrational and “primitive” 
beliefs—­such as belief in sorcery—­that ­were current in late antiquity, I won-
dered ­whether they might lose the histrionic and sinister associations wished 
upon them by modern scholars if examined in the same precise and low-­key 
manner. If the Nuer and the Azande could be made intelligible by anthropolo-
gists, so could the varied inhabitants of the Eastern Empire.
It was time to seek advice from wiser heads. But this advice did not come 
from Evans-­Pritchard himself. Although, as professor of social anthropol-
ogy, E.-­P. was a member of All Souls, I was never as close to him as I was to 
Prof. Zaehner and Sam Stern. This was partly due to his magnificent idiosyn-
cracy. E.-­P. was an Insider’s Outsider: the son of a Welsh-­speaking Anglican 
clergyman and a well-­known convert to Catholicism, he was also very much 
an Old Wykehamist (a product of Winchester College, the quin­tes­sen­tial 
southern En­glish public school). He had something of the country gentle-
man about him. He talked more readily about his dog than about scholarly 
­matters.
But ­there was also a structural reason for this distance. E.-­P. was a university 
professor. In All Souls, a significant, hairline crack separated professorial fellows 
from research fellows. The main interests of a professorial fellow ­were assumed 
to lie outside the college. They ­were seen as busy men, engaged in university 
­matters, who ­were not expected to linger in their cups in the eve­ning.
Professorial fellows tended to appear only at lunch, which they would eat 
along with the other fellows, squashed on benches, at three cramped ­tables in 
the buttery, beneath the elegant oval of a coffered ceiling—­a smaller echo of 
the exquisite baroque vaulting of Bernini’s San Carlino alle Quattro Fontane 
in Rome. They had ­little room to sit back and relax, even if they had wanted to. 
9. Evans-­Pritchard, Witchcraft, Oracles, and Magic, 64–65.

326 
Ch apter 49
Nor was the clatter of eating (amplified by the oval above them) conducive to 
conversation. And Evans-­Pritchard was ­going deaf. It was his face and not his 
conversation that I remember. If I knew him, it was as I knew so many of my 
colleagues in Oxford and elsewhere: through his books, not through his 
teaching—­and still less through his ­table talk.
If I wanted advice, I had to go elsewhere. For this reason, I went down to 
London in late December 1967, to have tea with Mary Douglas at the Com-
monwealth Club—­the tearoom of the Royal Commonwealth Society, a 
literary and scientific body, founded in 1868, and dedicated to the greater 
understanding of what had once been the British colonies.

327
50
Mary Douglas
Anthropology and a Medievalist: Paul Hyams
In 1966, Mary Douglas published the first of her many scintillating studies—­
Purity and Danger: An Analy­sis of the Concepts of Pollution and Taboo.1 I prob­ably 
got hold of it just before I went down to London to meet her in Decem-
ber 1967. I certainly remember who urged me to read it: Paul Hyams, a student 
of the administration of justice in medieval ­England. Given the stolid reputa-
tion of En­glish medieval history, it might seem strange that an expert in me-
dieval En­glish law should recommend a book based largely on fieldwork in 
what had been the Belgian Congo. But this was less surprising than it seems: 
Paul would soon emerge as an exceptionally alert student of conflict and its 
resolution in the face-­to-­face communities of villa­gers who formed the basis 
of medieval En­glish society.2
He took anthropology seriously. This was not only ­because medieval village 
communities and African tribes ­were manageable ­human units—­appropriate 
laboratories for the study of face-­to-­face relations. It was also ­because both 
groups could be studied with ­little or no reference to state power. It was ­here 
that anthropology had a decisive effect on medievalists such as Paul. It offered 
an alternative narrative for the development of medieval polities—­a narrative 
that did not concentrate exclusively on the growing power of the state. For 
Evans-­Pritchard had not only shown that the Azande could ­handle witchcraft 
beliefs without terror and hatred. He had also gone on to describe how the 
1. M. Douglas, Purity and Danger: An Analy­sis of the Concepts of Pollution and Taboo (Lon-
don: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1966). I have used the reprint, London: Ark Paperbacks, 1984.
2. Paul Hyams, Rancor and Reconciliation in Medieval ­England (Ithaca, NY: Cornell Univer-
sity Press, 2003).

328 
Ch apter 50
Nuer, the neighbors of the Azande, functioned without any central power 
whatsoever. They lived in a state of “ordered anarchy” that up to then had baffled 
observers. In another masterpiece of fieldwork, The Nuer, E.-­P. had described 
the complex social mechanisms that enabled this to happen without the entire 
society lapsing into disorder.3
For a medievalist, this was a challenging discovery. The accepted master 
narrative of the En­glish ­Middle Ages had been the story of the triumphant 
growth of law and order in the hands of a central power. E.-­P. showed that 
­there might be exceptions to this upbeat narrative. It was pos­si­ble for me-
dieval Eu­ro­pean communities to idle for centuries largely untouched by the 
brisk pro­gress of the state, resolving conflicts in their own way, without 
resort to royal justice and to the royal gallows. In other words, they ­were 
like the Nuer and none the worse for that. Altogether, an anthropological 
approach offered a way to do history from the bottom up—­from the pri-
mary needs of small communities. It offered an escape from the emphasis on 
the growth of the state and the consequent bias ­toward top-­down po­liti­cal and 
institutional history, such as was studied with antediluvian rigor in Oxford 
and elsewhere.
Sorcery in the ­Later Empire
I was impressed by Paul’s arguments in ­favor of anthropology; but I went to 
see Mary Douglas with dif­fer­ent prob­lems on my mind. In order to prepare 
my paper for the Association of Social Anthropologists’ conference, “Witch-
craft Confessions and Accusations,” I had begun to read all that I could about 
sorcery in the ancient world. This made me realize that I needed some new 
way to think about the convergence of religion and social structure in the ­later 
empire. How did ­these apparently bizarre sorcery beliefs fit into the ­actual 
working of late Roman society? Could I do for the late Romans what Evans-­
Pritchard did for the Azande—­take a seemingly irrational practice and show 
how it functioned on a day-­to-­day basis?
Tea with Mary Douglas in the Commonwealth Club proved to be an ex-
traordinary encounter. I had never met anyone with so consequential a mind, 
with such delight in joining seemingly unrelated phenomena, and with such 
zest in urging ­others to do the same. She spoke in a high whisper. Her eyes 
3. E. E. Evans-­Pritchard, The Nuer: A Description of the Modes of Livelihood and Po­liti­cal 
Institutions of a Nilotic ­People (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1940), 181.

M ary Douglas 
329
­were always slightly raised, as if she ­were reading, from a screen in front of her, 
the laser-­fast succession of her own thoughts. She did not speak to me but, 
rather, seemed to invite me to read with her the thoughts that flashed across 
that screen. I emerged from the tea with a thick sheaf of references to anthro-
pological studies from all regions of the world, from the East End of London 
to the Kalahari Desert, and with the assurance that, if I looked in the right 
direction, I would be able to spot the crucial places where the strains, the limits, 
and the opportunities of a given social structure ­were echoed in the struc-
ture of its religious beliefs and practices.
Other than that, my memory of the tea is blurred. In any truly significant 
conversation with a person or reading of a book, the intensity of the first dawn-
ing of ideas scours the memory like the ground zero of an explosion. What I 
remembered best was the mood that this encounter generated. It convinced 
me that I could do it. Instead of writing on ideas, such as the idea of evil or of 
sin in Saint Augustine, I could write about ­people in action in a given social 
system, and about the beliefs that clustered around their persons as a result of 
the stresses generated by that social system. What Mary had given me over tea 
was not an answer to my questions but a tone of voice with which to write 
about a phenomenon as seemingly alien to modern persons as sorcery in late 
antiquity and the early ­Middle Ages.
I de­cided to do this in two ways: First I would follow Evans-­Pritchard’s 
Witchcraft, Oracles and Magic in looking closely (and in as unmelodramatic a 
manner as pos­si­ble) at the rationale of sorcery accusations in late antiquity. 
The court of the emperor Constantius II (337–361)—­notorious for the sorcery 
­trials described so vividly by the near-­contemporary historian Ammianus 
Marcellinus (ca. 330–395)—­would be my Zandeland. Why did ­these ­trials 
happen? What did they ­really mean? What clash of ambitions generated a 
language of occult power in that tense world?
But I felt encouraged to go beyond Evans-­Pritchard’s study of the Azande 
in a direction that Mary Douglas had pointed out to me: I would try to use 
sorcery beliefs and sorcery accusations like barium traces in an X-­ray. Their 
varying intensity would enable me to chart the stresses and strains of a social 
system caught in a muffled war between fluidity and rigidity. I would trace the 
differing forms of power (both real and ­imagined) associated with each group. 
Mary Douglas predicted that ­those with more fluid social roles tended to be 
more closely associated with sorcery than ­those whose power rested on more 
firm hierarchies and more rigid social structures. If that was so, I could go on 
to ask what the apparent rise and fall of sorcery beliefs in late antiquity could 

330 
Ch apter 50
tell us about the overall structure and evolution of late Roman society from 
late antiquity into the early ­Middle Ages.
When I sent Mary the draft of the paper that I had prepared for the confer-
ence, I received an instant, long reply. Written on February 12, 1968, it was as 
characteristic of Mary as was her conversation at tea. It was a lesson in anthro-
pological thinking. She showered me with comparative material, and dis-
creetly nudged me ­toward ever more consequential and all-­embracing 
interpretations:
Dear Mr. Brown,
I have read your paper with ­great plea­sure. When ­shall we meet to talk 
about it? . . . ​The dangerous demi-­monde is a marvelous idea. . . . ​But when 
I read p.15 [on] the transfer of blame on to capricious malevolent spirits 
who may use or who may not use [­human] agents, I would look for some-
thing ­else in the social structure. . . . ​I have some suggestions for the kinds 
of social system which might produce ­these cosmologies [that is, the 
demon-­filled cosmology of late antiquity].
It was typical of Mary, a field-­worker through and through, not to rely on 
letters but to prefer one-­on-­one conversations over a good cup of tea. Her 
criticisms would always be accompanied by a list of articles and examples. This 
time she pointed me to recent work on the spread of Islam in West Africa as a 
parallel to the snowball effect of conversions to Chris­tian­ity at a time of loos-
ening social bonds in the ­later empire; and she added, “I would also love to 
talk about that. . . . ​Would it be impertinent of me . . . ​to congratulate you on 
a superb ­handling of anthropological materials?”
Heartened and firmly guided by such a letter, I rewrote my paper and en-
titled it “Sorcery, Demons and the Rise of Chris­tian­ity: From Late Antiquity 
into the ­Middle Ages.” I presented it for discussion when the conference met 
in King’s College, Cambridge, April 3–6, 1968.4
Mary wrote to me again on June 30, 1968—­after I had handed in the final 
version of my paper—­with an invitation to contribute a book to a series that 
she hoped to edit on the theme of “religious anthropology.” It was the offer of 
a merger between the two disciplines:
4. P. Brown, “Sorcery, Demons and the Rise of Chris­tian­ity: From Late Antiquity into the 
­Middle Ages,” in Witchcraft Confessions and Accusations, Association of Social Anthropologists 
Monographs 9, ed. Mary Douglas (London: Tavistock Publications, 1970), 17–45, now in Reli-
gion and Society in the Age of Saint Augustine (London: Faber, 1972), 119–146.

M ary Douglas 
331
My role ­will be to try to inject as much anthropology into it as I can in the 
research and thinking stages. . . . ​­There are not enough anthropologists 
trying to make it [anthropology] relevant to other disciplines, and for lack 
of them anthropology itself is dissipating its energies and losing inspira-
tion. . . . ​This series is an alternative channel which ­will draw other work to 
the attention of my colleagues and vice versa.
I did not accept this offer; but I had already begun to appreciate the stature 
of Mary Douglas and the seriousness of her agenda.
Natu­ral Symbols: Ritual and the Bog Irish
A ­little ­after the Cambridge conference, Mary gave me a carbon copy of the 
complete manuscript of what became the signature masterpiece of this period 
in her life—­Natu­ral Symbols. (In a world without photocopiers, the gift of a 
carbon copy was, in itself, an act of rare generosity.) I realized at once that we 
shared with Evans-­Pritchard a dislike of the tendency to treat religious prac-
tices in socie­ties unlike our own in a de haut en bas manner—to dismiss them 
as “primitive” or “superstitious.” But Mary did more than that: Natu­ral Symbols 
offered an entire new way to look at the relations between religion and society. 
This was crucial for me.5
I ­later learned much more about Mary than I knew at that time. What I 
learned partly explained the intensity ­behind Natu­ral Symbols. I learned, for 
instance, that Mary’s ­mother was a Twomey of Cork: in other words, she was 
a member of an impor­tant Munster sept (clan). Her ­father, like mine, had 
found employment in the British Empire—in Mary’s case, in India and Burma. 
But, unlike my parents, her ­family no longer had a home in Ireland. Her link 
to Ireland was through a shared traditional Catholicism. She had grown up as 
thoroughly British as she was Catholic.
In 1970 this meant that she was deeply committed to the idea of Britain as 
a decent and humane community—to the “One Nation” Toryism of the time. 
This seems to have made her more than usually alert to the dangers posed by 
the loss of shared symbols and rituals that held society together. She distrusted 
idealistic programs of reform. In her opinion, ­these programs tended to be 
5. Mary Douglas, Natu­ral Symbols: Explorations in Cosmology (London: Barrie and Rockcliff, 
1970). I have used the edition of Routledge (London and New York, 1996), which has a new 
introduction.

332 
Ch apter 50
generated by persons from social niches that somehow made them indifferent 
to the ritual aspects of social be­hav­ior that played such an impor­tant role 
in the cohesion of British society. Their well-­meaning reform programs (of 
which ­there ­were many in London at that time, particularly in relation to pub-
lic housing and other social amenities) seemed to her to have unwittingly 
sapped the complex system of checks and balances on which real social 
decency depended.
Hence Mary’s peculiar disquiet concerning the zest with which leading 
theologians in the Second Vatican Council and other members of the Catholic 
clergy threatened to purge the Catholic Church of ritual practices—­such as 
abstinence from meat on Friday. ­These clerical reformers dismissed such 
practices as “primitive” and unworthy of the more “spiritual” and “enlightened” 
Chris­tian­ity of modern times. In Natu­ral Symbols, Mary challenged this de 
haut en bas attitude of the reforming hierarchy of the Catholic Church to 
the practices of its own laity. She did this in a deeply moving chapter entitled 
“The Bog Irish.”6
As Mary described them, the “Bog Irish” ­were tenaciously attached to the 
observation of fasts and Friday abstinence. Mary did not defend their practices 
­because she was notably conservative or reactionary in liturgical ­matters (as 
­were many of the opponents of the reforms of Vatican II). She did it for rea-
sons that ­were continuous with her attitude to con­temporary British society. 
She was convinced that to sweep away such rituals—as if they ­were external 
and trivial practices—­belittled the humanity of ­those who remained attached 
to them: it showed a high-­minded contempt for the efforts of vulnerable 
groups to maintain their ­human dignity. In her view, a society without rituals 
was an impoverished society, stripped of its defenses against the antisocial 
be­hav­ior of its less community-­minded members—­many of whom, alas!, ­were 
rich, power­ful, well educated, and, often, lethally high-­minded.
It was not the Irish of Ireland whom Mary had in mind when she wrote the 
chapter on the “Bog Irish,” but the immigrant Irish laborers in London whose 
“sense of exile is softened by a sense of continuity, the Irish newspapers sold 
outside Church ­after Mass, the weekly dances in the parish hall.” It was they 
who ­were likely “to see on the doors of lodging ­houses: ‘No Irish, no colored.’ ” 
For ­people in that situation, Friday abstinence was “no empty symbol, it means 
allegiance to a ­humble home in Ireland and a glorious tradition in Rome. . . . ​
6. Douglas, Natu­ral Symbols, 37–53.

M ary Douglas 
333
Who would dare to despise the cult of Friday abstinence who has not himself 
endured the life of the Irish laborer in London?”7
For this reason, Mary attacked what appeared to her to be the antiritualism 
of many of the post–­Vatican II clergy. Their antiritualist stance was a serious 
­matter. For, in her opinion, high-­minded attacks on ritual weakened the 
paradoxical and largely unperceived supports of a decent society. ­Whether in 
society at large or in the church, the rejection of ritual was not the way “to 
humanize the system.”8
Nothing could equal the verve with which Mary then went on to trace the 
congruence between antiritualist worldviews and “loose” social structures. 
She observed that intellectuals in general, and academics in par­tic­u­lar, tended 
to emerge from environments where thoughts and words formed the primary 
basis of cohesion. Such persons ­were insensitive to the solid structures upheld 
by ritual.
As Mary saw it, socie­ties could be graded according to the re­spect given to 
ritual as a means of social bonding. Some groups failed miserably. The Dutch 
Catholic bishops had recently produced a catechism that rejected most rituals, 
such as Friday fasting, and paid ­little attention even to the Eucharist. To Mary 
their attitude betrayed a dangerous level of “impoverished symbolic percep-
tion.” The good bishops ­were “ritually tone deaf ” and incapable of understand-
ing what their own church meant to the millions who still sought it out as an 
anchor in a rootless world. It was the bishops and not the “Bog Irish” who ­were 
the true “primitives.”9
I did not share Mary’s passionate concern for the fate of the Catholic 
Church. But having watched many representatives of this reforming move-
ment at the Oxford Patristics Conferences of 1963 and 1967, I sat up and took 
notice of her critique of antiritualism. For her, it was the expression of a vocal 
but ­limited niche in modern society occupied by academics and clergymen—­
persons produced by an unceremonious and loose-­knit social environment.
Many Patristic scholars had, indeed, wished to get rid of the “primitive” 
inheritance of con­temporary traditional Catholicism. A strong current of 
antiritualism had accompanied many of the very best efforts at ressourcement. 
­Those who studied Christian practice—­such as liturgy, penance, the care of 
the dead, and the cult of the saints—­seemed to wish to see the Chris­tian­ity 
7. Douglas, Natu­ral Symbols, 37–38.
8. Douglas, Natu­ral Symbols, 159.
9. Douglas, Natu­ral Symbols, 49.

334 
Ch apter 50
of late antiquity as somehow more “enlightened” ­because less ritualistic than 
that of the ­later centuries. Even among the best scholars, it was normal to speak 
of a decline of Chris­tian­ity from the more “spiritual” practices of the early 
church into the “barbaric” ritualism of the early ­Middle Ages.10
I came across ­these attitudes in abundance when I turned to the religious 
history of late antiquity. Along with Evans-­Pritchard, Mary Douglas had made 
me aware of a challenging situation. A large proportion of the modern schol-
arly lit­er­a­ture on the religious history of the ancient world—­pagan, Jewish, 
and Christian alike—­took absolutely for granted a division between the 
“primitive,” ritualistic mentality of the masses and the enlightened ideas of 
the few that was as rigid as any maintained by a colonial government in the 
swamps of the Sudan, or advanced, nowadays, by critics of the Bog Irish.
­These scholars tended to pre­sent late antiquity in a peculiarly sinister light. 
The ­great Martin Nilsson (1874–1967) spoke of it as a period when classical 
Greek religion became swamped with “Lower Forms of Belief” such as magic 
and demonology. This was “the most momentous and saddening development 
of the time . . . ​a thousand year nightmare that came to rest on humankind.”11 
Even Sir Ronald Syme, not the most excitable of historians, was convinced 
that superstitious terror reigned throughout the fourth ­century AD: “High and 
low, Christian or pagan, the ­whole age was dominated by fear of super­natural 
forces.”12
Such sweeping judgments (uttered with complete confidence) would not 
have been acceptable to any modern anthropologist. What would it be like to 
attempt to rewrite the religious history of late antiquity in less melodramatic 
terms, using the insights of Evans-­Pritchard and Mary Douglas?
10. See, for example, A. Angenandt, Das Frühmittelalter (Stuttgart: Kohlhammer, 1990), 
155–158.
11. M. Nilsson, Geschichte der griechischen Religion, 3rd ed. (Munich: C. H. Beck, 1974), 2:520 
and 543.
12. R. Syme, Ammianus and the Historia Augusta (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1968), 31.

335
51
Societ y and the 
Super­natural
Text and Context
I felt that it was now up to me to attempt to look at the religious history of late 
antiquity with fresh eyes, inspired by what I had learned from Evans-­Pritchard 
and Mary Douglas. I tried this out in a way that I had often done in Oxford: 
I advertised a new course of eight lectures, “Society and the Super­natural: 
Social and Religious Change from Marcus Aurelius to Muhammad,” which 
I gave for the first time at five ­o’clock ­every Wednesday in the Hilary (the early 
spring) term of 1970.
The lectures took place in the Hovenden Room of All Souls College—­a 
long, low-­ceilinged cave of a place, with Jacobean paneling and a lack of light-
ing that added a mystic touch to almost any occasion. Like all my other Oxford 
lectures, ­these ­were free-­floating events, open to all without commitment to a 
specific course. For this reason they ­were the perfect place in which to try out 
a new look at the relation between religion and society in late antiquity.
The texts of the first two lectures have survived, as have the biblio­graphies 
for all the ­others. They catch me at work, grappling with a new language with 
which to talk of social and religious change. As I reread them, they strike me as 
a vivid time capsule unearthed by chance half a ­century ­later. They ­were written 
so as to be spoken, not to be read. They make claims far more ambitious than I 
would ever make nowadays. But they catch the excitement of that moment.
First and foremost, I emphasized the difference between the historian 
who worked with religious beliefs contained in texts and the anthropologist who 
had daily access to the full context of ­these beliefs:
I have been led to join the two [Society and the Super­natural] very largely 
­because of the encouragement of the Social Anthropologists. What they 

336 
Ch apter 51
have to teach the historian is summed up neatly by one of them: While 
history is TEXTUAL, the studies of the anthropologist are contextual.1
The student of the religious ideas of Late Antiquity begins [the other 
way round] with a vast body of religious texts.
To make this point, I drew on my recent reading of the seemingly boundless 
modern lit­er­a­ture on sorcery beliefs in the ­later empire.
To take an extreme example of the dangers of studying a body of ideas 
in texts alone, without attention to what the Social Anthropologist would 
call the context—­sorcery in the Late Roman World. We have a vast body 
of texts that illustrate minutely the technology of sorcery—­amulets, leaden 
cursing tablets, books of spells. They lead us into a world of higgledy-­
piggledy demonic powers (among them, “Jesus, ­great god of the Hebrews”), 
bad Greek and worse intentions.
The last phrase got a laugh. But this was my point: historians of religion inter-
ested in sorcery faced a superabundance of texts. By contrast, anthropologists 
approached sorcery in a very dif­fer­ent manner:
Compare Professor Evans-­Pritchard, Witchcraft, Oracles and Magic among 
the Azande, Oxford 1937. He goes to a living tribe. He perceives what few 
students of ancient magic have perceived—­that magic beliefs are not just 
a regrettable, unswept corner of irrational practices based on anti-­social 
feelings, but that (among the Azande at least) they can be a sort of common 
language. . . . ​This shift to the CONTEXT results in our seeing the Azande 
and their prob­lems of explaining themselves to themselves with more sym-
pathy and understanding.
Demons in Context
Second: I argued that an attention to context enabled the scholar to dedrama-
tize many of the more disturbing phenomena referred to in late antique texts. 
For instance: nothing could seem stranger to the modern reader than the 
sudden irruption of the demonic into the religious lit­er­a­ture of late antiquity:
Take one of the most impor­tant characters in Late Antique religious his-
tory: the demons. They pop out at us, fully articulated, in the pages of the 
religious texts of this period. Usually, they scare the living daylights out of 
us scholars. It is a firmly held belief that ­there ­were more of them, and that 
1. R. Redfield, Peasant Society and Culture (Chicago: Phoenix Books, 1960), 51.

Societ y a nd the Super ­natur a l 
337
they inspired more dread, in the period ­after Marcus Aurelius than ever 
before. To enter Late Antiquity is like entering one of ­those ancient maps, 
with the slogan: “­here be more and more demons.”
But what did this irruption ­really mean? What did the demons look like if 
studied by anthropologists, such as Evans-­Pritchard, rather than by conven-
tional historians of late antique religion?
Let us ask the question crudely: what did ­people gain by believing in de-
mons? That is, what anx­i­eties ­were allayed by such a belief? What system 
of control was implicit in such a belief? Thus, what anxious unmanageable 
experience of Late Roman men was summed up and reduced to order by 
the idea of “a demon”?
Like witchcraft among the Azande, the demons often appeared as some-
what banal figures—as jinxes rather than as objects of occult terror. I cited a sixth-­
century Egyptian papyrus in which a demon was invoked, in a thoroughly undra-
matic manner, in a contract of divorce, in which the ­couple stated:
We ­were in time past joined to one another in marriage and community of life 
with fair hopes . . . ​thinking to maintain a peaceful and seemly married life with 
one another for the ­whole time of our joint lives; but on the contrary we have 
suffered from a sinister and wicked demon which attacked us unexpectedly 
from we know not whence, with a view to our being separated from one an-
other. “­After which,” writes Professor Jones, “they get down to business details.”2
Not much terror ­there. Why was this so? What made a belief in demons less 
troubling to late antique persons than we might think? I suggested that it was 
­because such a belief kept evil within bounds. Like witchcraft among the 
Azande, demons ­were invoked ­because demons ­were fixable.
The Jack-­in-­the-­Box
I then offered a dif­fer­ent approach to historical change in late antiquity. Most 
views assumed that the apparent rise in belief in magic and demons in late 
antiquity could only be the result of some catastrophe. To sum up this view, 
I used the image of the Jack-­in-­the-­box:
[In the Jack-­in-­the-­box,] the spring of the irrational is held down by the 
culture of the élite. We are fairly sure ­either that we have the lid of our 
2. A.H.M. Jones, The ­Later Roman Empire (Oxford: Blackwell, 1964), 2:975.

338 
Ch apter 51
Jack-­in-­the-­box well shut or that ­there is not much spring in the Jack. On 
the ­whole, we agree that, among ancient men, the lid was more loosely 
fastened and that the Jack had a more power­ful spring. But we think that, 
in a certain period and among a certain élite, the lid was largely shut.
I went on to stress how much this Jack-­in-­the-­box approach to the religious 
history of late antiquity fed into current, crude notions of “decline and fall,” 
and especially into a melodramatic view of the “crisis of the third ­century”:
The very best accounts of Late Roman religious experience are still domi-
nated by a fascination with the popping-up of the Jack-­in-­the-­Box in the 
period ­after Marcus Aurelius. The religious evolution of Late Antiquity is still 
thought of as ­going in one direction only, AWAY from a classical ideal of civi-
lization ­towards the ­Middle Ages; and this DIRECTION . . . ​is DOWN.
Hence the tendency to dramatize the so-­called crisis of the third ­century 
as the catastrophe that unleashed ­these irrational beliefs. In the words of E. R. 
Dodds, one could expect nothing better from “a world so impoverished intel-
lectually, so insecure materially, so filled with fear and hatred as the world of 
third ­century.”3
Beyond the Third ­Century: A New Social History
But was the third ­century in any way like this? Ever since my first lectures, in 
1958, I had spent much of my time attempting to modify con­temporary views 
on the famous “crisis of the third ­century.” I made plain that this period, though 
it witnessed major changes in the po­liti­cal and social structure of the empire, 
could not be described simply as a time of “catastrophe.”
Altogether, I wanted to tell a new story about the ­later empire. I stressed 
the fact that Roman society would have a long ­future ­after the crisis of the third 
­century. A revolution was followed by centuries of further, stable growth:
The classical historian forgets this; it is enough for him to get the religious 
revolution on its way, in the 3rd ­century, and to assume that, by 400 A.D. 
at least, the damage was done—­and that the medievalist better take over. 
This ignores the fascination of the 5th and 6th centuries, especially in the 
eastern Mediterranean. For ­there we can witness the social, po­liti­cal and 
3. E. R. Dodds, Pagan and Christian in an Age of Anxiety (Cambridge University Press, 
1965), 100.

Societ y a nd the Super ­natur a l 
339
religious stabilization of the Late Roman revolution. We can study this pro­
cess in ­great detail up to the preaching of Muhammad in the early 
7th ­century. And in the last ­century or so of this period, we can follow the 
subtle reassertion in Christian form of just ­those stabilizing forces that 
had buttressed the religious consensus of the pagan empire in the age of the 
Antonines. In this way, I think we ­shall come closer than if we ­were to con-
centrate solely on a supposed crisis of the 3rd ­century to understanding the 
social and religious transformation between Antiquity and the ­Middle Ages.
The lectures ­were a success. I put a lot into them. The Hovenden Room was 
crowded ­every Wednesday after­noon. The lists of signatures that I collected 
from ­those who attended my lectures from 1970 to 1973 (as I had done for my 
“Byzantium and Persia” lectures), reveal a colorful crowd of undergraduates 
and gradu­ate students, with even a few dons.
Reading the list, I am struck by how many of ­those names are still well 
known to me, as colleagues and fellow adventurers in the field of late antique, 
early medieval, and Byzantine studies. Any reader in touch with the field ­will 
recognize them. In 1970, they ­were the ­future of what has become the pre­sent. 
­There ­were dons, ancient and medieval—­Ewen Bowie, an expert on the Sec-
ond Sophistic and Greek culture in the age of the Antonines; Peter Parsons, a 
papyrologist; the indefatigable Geoffrey de Sainte Croix, with a large note-
book open to rec­ord (with characteristic intellectual openness) ever more 
evidence of the vagaries of religious belief in the last centuries of an empire 
whose tensions he understood so well from a Marxist perspective; and Billy 
Pantin (1902–1973), a medievalist best known for his book on the En­glish 
church in the ­fourteenth ­century.4
­There ­were also a number of of my ­future colleagues, many of them now 
long-­term friends, heroes, and heroines: Roger Collins, John Drinkwater, 
Garth Fowden, David Ganz, Martin Henig, James Howard-­Johnston, David 
Hunt, Edward James, Rowena Loverance, Paul Magdalino, Judith McClure, 
Rosemary Morris, ­Sister Charles Murray, Oliver Nicholson, Richard Price, 
Francesco del Punta (­later at Pisa), David Rollason, Philip Rousseau, Clare 
Stancliffe, Richard Vaggione, Otto Wermelinger (­later at Fribourg-­en-­Suisse), 
Chris Wickham, Ian Wood, Patrick Wormald; and Sally Purcell, a poet, who 
was often a source of rare information in Dark Age ­matters.
4. W. Pantin, The En­glish Church in the ­Fourteenth ­Century (Cambridge University Press, 
1955).

340 
Ch apter 51
A few years ago, David Ganz, ­later a leading early medieval paleographer 
and then an undergraduate at Merton College, sent me a moving memoir of 
­these occasions, as seen through the eyes of an observant and streetwise stu-
dent, of which ­there ­were many in Oxford at that time:
On Wednesday after­noons at 5 [they] trooped into the Hovenden Room, 
a long Jacobean parlor with central ­table. The elect or the overbold sat on 
the dozen or so chairs, [with] se­nior members of the university. . . . ​Other 
chairs might be found against the wall, the lithe ventured into win­dow em-
brasures, or even sat on the ugly tele­vi­sion set which sometimes enhanced 
the room. On one memorable occasion three students ­were sitting on a 
drop leaf ­table and suddenly one side dropped. “Well, that se . . . ​e . . . ​eems 
to be the end of that” he interjected, and resumed the lecture, without 
missing a beat. Mostly we lay on the floor, carpeting it with uncomfortable 
bodies, scribbling our notes, or folding ­those strange grey xeroxes with 
handwritten biblio­graphies.
One should note this detail: the introduction of the photocopier machine, 
which happened at this time, led to a flowering of biblio­graphies such as had 
not been dreamed of before. In ­these biblio­graphies, works of anthropology 
and medical sociology mingled with up-­to-­date articles on aspects of the ­later 
empire: they ­were statements in themselves of the interdisciplinary tone of the 
lectures.
But it was not just the range that made ­these lectures incomparable. The 
stammer came into its own as a rhetorical tool, and he did the holy men 
in dif­fer­ent voices. I still remember the desert ­father Pambo tempted by 
demons carry­ing feathers on a stick and crying out “Go, go”. All of us 
laughed, only to be told how the holy man did not laugh, for to laugh is to 
dissolve, the holy man had to be hard as clay. “Are you ­human?” the lay man 
asked Symeon Stylites. The holy man, we found, was the self made man, 
another Julien Sorel. In defining the holy man and his temptations the lec-
tures offered a way of defining oneself. We all strug­gled with the demon of 
fornication, but ­here we learned that men ­were perceived as sons of their 
­mothers, and ­women ­were the sources of all that is stable and enveloping. 
We learned of the pressure to atomization and differentiation, instead of 
explorations of late Roman power we heard about solidarity and concord. 
Best of all, ­these holy men erected anti­theses to their past. The new self 
made man, keeping his wits about him, was the hero. And the demons ­were 

Societ y a nd the Super ­natur a l 
341
the extension of the self “Our ­wills, turned into demons, make war against 
us”. They ­were sixties figures, the rebels we had come too late to join; the 
anchorite in flight from the tax-­collector, “this meant bumming off”, the 
tenant farmers attacking the patron, the saint intimate with the imaginary 
private being. And they explored ­those areas we wanted to dodge: watering 
the ground with their tears, opening their life to grief.
Beyond the magic, the sense of excited awe which left most of us ­silent 
as we left the Hovenden Room and looked up at the emerging stars.

342
52
Oxford ­under Strain
The Ominous Bulge
It was around this time that I remember standing with Dick Southern on the 
edge of the Codrington Quadrangle as Venus and Mars burned in the western 
sky, alongside the dome of the Radcliffe Camera. He asked me what it must 
have been like for a medieval person to look up at ­those planets. Thinking of 
Ibn Gabirol and his vision of a universe shot through with energies radiat-
ing from the planets, I suggested that it must have been strange to look up at 
­those two points of light, and to imagine them to be mere pinholes in the opaque 
firmament that stood between earth and the intolerable blaze of the true 
heavens—­miniature lenses through which streamed the disruptive influences 
of love and war: so much trou­ble on earth caused by such tiny orbs!
It was a very Oxford encounter. But Oxford itself was changing. My publi-
cations of this time (my article “The Rise and Function of the Holy Man” and 
The World of Late Antiquity) now appear in biblio­graphies and footnotes as if 
they ­were weight-­free products, linked one to the other by purely intellec-
tual agendas. But this, of course, was not how they happened. They emerged 
against a background of conflicts in an Oxford that was, in many ways, a tired 
and angry place.
Part of the reason for this sense of strain lay in the sheer weight of num-
bers pressing against a rigid teaching system. “The ominous demographic 
bulge pushing up through the primary and secondary schools” all over Eu­
rope, as a result of the baby boom of the postwar years, had come to affect 
even Oxford.1 The student body grew by a fifth—to almost nine thousand. 
1. Tony Judt, Postwar: A History of Eu­rope since 1945 (New York: Penguin, 2005), 393.

Oxfor d ­under Str a in 
343
Compared with the explosion of university students in Eu­rope and the three-
fold growth of the student population in Britain as a ­whole, this was a mere 
touch. But it was felt as the touch of the fin­ger of a ­giant. The ancient teaching 
system began to creak. Too many undergraduates ­were passing through the 
colleges. Too many by far seemed to be turning up at tutorials.
Almost for the first time, the Oxford tutorial system appeared to be at risk. 
The articles and correspondence for and against tutorials in the Oxford Maga-
zine of that time give the impression of a university whose principal teaching 
medium was ­under question. Tony Quinton (1925–2010)—­later Lord Quin-
ton and the president of Trinity College—­spoke for many of us: “How has this 
wasteful and exhausting practice come about?” He pointed out that dons ­were 
tied to fifteen hours a week of tutorials, in each of which the same, predictable 
set of prob­lems would be thrashed out with each student. It was the life of a 
galley slave, not of a scholar. He wondered “­whether we should not be more ef-
fectively propelled through the heavy ­waters of the bulge” by other teaching 
devices—­undergraduate seminars and carefully coordinated lecture courses.2
The Tutorial ­under Strain
In 1966 the Franks Report appeared. It amounted to an inquiry as to ­whether 
Oxford was up to the job of preparing students for the modern world. In 
the report, the tutorial system received a reprieve. According to many, only the 
tutorial system provided the intimacy of a one-­on-­one relation with a teacher 
on which the Oxford system of education was based. The tutor
has rooms in a college which is small enough to have something of the at-
mosphere of a ­family. His own pupils come to him as individuals. . . . ​He is 
aware of them not as blurred outlines of an audience [at lectures] but as 
sharply defined characters sitting by his fireplace.3
But was this cozy scene what ­really happened? By 1969, 61 ­percent of students 
in history ­were being sent—­“farmed out” was the term used—to tutors out-
side their college, especially for teaching in the increased number of Further 
and Special Subjects.4
2. A. Quinton, Oxford Magazine 70 (May 19 and June 9, 1960): 284 and 324.
3. Report of the Commission of Inquiry, paragraph 208 (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1966), 1:98.
4. Brian Harrison, Oxford Magazine, March 14, 1969.

344 
Ch apter 52
This situation caused the rigidity of the history syllabus (and of other syl-
labuses) to stand out that much more clearly. As we have already seen, the 
anx­i­eties aroused by a system geared to a single and irrevocable final examina-
tion had always encouraged tutors to concentrate only on topics that would 
be certain to “come up” in the final exam. The cost of this rigidity became ever 
more clear now that the study of dif­fer­ent periods or dif­fer­ent sorts of history 
became easier to envision. Even the proud school of Litterae Humaniores had 
begun to realize that ­there was more ancient history “out ­there” than the nar-
row tracts studied for the final examination.
The influences of syllabuses on research, given the Oxford climate, is a 
frightening ­thing, and it would be a disaster in the long run if the concentra-
tion on the high classical periods for teaching discouraged the teachers 
from widening their horizons, and especially from venturing into post-­
classical lit­er­a­ture, thought and history.5
But, all too often, the tutorial system was invoked to block any widening of 
horizons. One retired don had already declared:
The demand for wider history American, Asian and African is objection-
able. . . . ​It would burden the tutors. . . . ​[Indeed] it seems to be infected 
with the most pernicious of all educational heresies—­that which would 
identify education with the acquisition of useful information.6
­Women
Such debates ­were not new. But in the late 1960s and early 1970s, my interstitial 
position as a research fellow at All Souls College, a ­little to one side of the teaching 
routines of the other colleges, made me that much more aware of the under­
lying tensions that ­these debates addressed. ­There was one impor­tant change 
that crept on me almost without my noticing it. I found myself teaching many 
more students from the ­women’s colleges. As a research fellow of All Souls, 
I had always been called to teach students on topics not usually taught by 
college tutors: the Further Subject on Byzantium and its neighbors, the 
5. D. A. Russell, “Litterae Humaniores 1968,” Oxford Magazine, February 23, 1968, 208.
6. Reginald Lennard, “The Modern History School,” Oxford Magazine, n.s., 2 (January 25, 
1962): 143.

Oxfor d ­under Str a in 
345
Augustine Special Subject, and the ­earlier periods of Eu­ro­pean history. ­These 
topics had become increasingly popu­lar. By the late 1960s, I found that as many 
as half of the students who ­were farmed out to me for tutorials in ­these topics 
­were ­women, although ­women ­were only one-­fifth of the undergraduate 
population.
The reader may be surprised that this was so significant a turning point for 
me. That a not-­so-­young man of thirty-­five should find increased contact with 
­women as a teacher to be something of a novelty seems barely credible. But, 
as I have already pointed out, from 1942 to 1952 I had lived in all-­male boarding 
schools, with contact with ­women and girls of my age only in the holidays. My 
last experience of coeducation had been at kindergarten at the age of six. In-
deed, my parents could have thought of no other form of education for me. 
Even day schools (where the students lived at home) ­were for boys only or for 
girls only. If I had had a ­sister, she would have been fitted into the grooves of a 
single-­sex education quite as much as I had been.
Oxford was no dif­fer­ent. Colleges ­were resolutely single-­sex ­until 1974. 
The system of ­women’s colleges mirrored that of the men. The tutors of the 
­women’s colleges ­were entirely female, just as the tutors of the men’s col-
lege ­were entirely male. Oxford was divided into colleges: of ­these, only five 
­were for ­women, and all the rest ­were for men. As a result, in 1960s Oxford, 
men and ­women lived on dif­fer­ent planets to a degree that is now barely 
imaginable.
­There was one narrow bridge between the two worlds that widened at this 
time: that is, the practice of farming out female students to male tutors in 
subjects off the beaten track of the History School, such as my own. It was 
in this way that I came to know many ­woman tutors with whom I would not 
other­wise have had any institutional link. I had long known and admired 
many ­woman scholars, such as Marjorie Reeves; but as an undergraduate 
I had never had the opportunity to be taught by a ­woman. What relations I 
had with the ­women’s colleges ­were purely personal. They amounted to links 
with individual tutors, through agreeing to take on students interested in my 
own field.
I have recently discovered among my papers a correspondence concerning 
one student from Lady Margaret Hall. It is a time capsule of a highly personal-
ized teaching system at work—in a series of ad hoc arrangements, tutor to 
tutor, in what is now a very distant Oxford. Anne Whiteman (1918–2000), the 
principal tutor for medieval historians in Lady Margaret Hall, approached me 

346 
Ch apter 52
in the summer of 1969 to arrange tutorials for a student in the coming aca-
demic year.
Dear Peter,
I am writing to ask you ­whether you could find time in the next academic 
year to take a pupil of mine for Period I [Eu­ro­pean History, 284–717]. . . . ​She 
is both very eccentric and intelligent and I think that you may find her 
rather gauche. . . .
I am sure she has considered her choice of subject very carefully. . . .
I very much hope that you ­will be able to fit her in. If you can do so, ­will 
you kindly let me know when you would like to see her about vacation 
reading?
I know that I may seem to be anticipating ­things rather by writing to you 
now, but sad experience shows that ­under pre­sent competitive conditions 
it is essential to approach one’s friends early in the season.
“A Quiet Domesticity, Inimical to  
Intellectual Ambitions”
Male prejudice throve on this division of the sexes. In donnish circles, ­women 
­were only too often treated as bluestockings and what we would now call 
“overachievers.” The female dons ­were deemed to be formidable—­veritable 
dragons. The per­for­mances of their charges in the final examination was kept 
uniformly, depressingly, high: they seemed to fill the second class (in Ameri-
can parlance, the solid B++ range).
Occasionally, the Oxford Magazine addressed this theme with a streak of 
nasty irony that was, alas, only too revealing of widespread attitudes. In 
1966, “A Tutorial Typography” appeared, as an “Unsolicited Supplement to 
the Franks Report.” It presented a gallery of ste­reo­types, in which ­women 
emerged consistently as caricatures of the least acceptable type of male. 
­There was the Energetic Examinee, to whom tutorials ­were a means to a 
­career and who only considered writing essays on topics sure to “come up” in 
Schools. It adds: “Females wear glasses, cardigans, heavy shoes and stoop.” 
Then ­there was
the Phlegmatic Plodder: heavy jawed and grimly determined. Writes long, 
jejune outpourings weekly; accepts criticism, but never applies it. Drink: 
nothing stronger than cocoa. . . . ​Often female.

Oxfor d ­under Str a in 
347
But their teacher, the Militant Martinet was worst of all:
While less conscientious fellows are sunning themselves in summer deck 
chairs, militant martinets are eagerly scanning the examination results. 
Often female.7
­Behind ­these toxic jibes one can sense the turning of an age. For over a 
­century, Oxford had endeavored to produce imperial administrators and civil 
servants of the old style, brisk and adaptable: manly men with manly minds—­
argumentative, tough-­minded, taught to think on their feet. Many believed 
that the inclusion of ­women would somehow weaken this tough-­minded cul-
ture. One of the most revealing arguments produced against mixed-­sex col-
leges at this time, when they ­were first mooted in the 1970s, was that life with 
­women would eventually lead to “a quiet domesticity, inimical to high intel-
lectual ambitions and the cut-­and-­thrust of academic argument.”8
In such an atmosphere, certain forms of history became gendered. “Real 
history” (a distant but faithful echo of the “grown-up” history of Duke Se­nior) 
still consisted in the standard fare of po­liti­cal and institutional history as 
taught by tutors in history. What room would ­there be in Oxford for other, 
“softer” forms of history, such as the history of religion and ideas? But for me 
and for many of my students, ­these ­were among the most exciting aspects of 
the field of late antiquity: to opt for late antiquity was not only to opt for a 
little-­known period; it was also to opt for a little-­taught kind of history. What 
breathing space was ­there for such history in a university that was still locked, 
in so many ways, into ancient habits?
Gradu­ates
As far as ­women ­were concerned, deep-­rooted prejudices dissolved slowly. It 
was not ­until the year that I left Oxford, in 1974, that five male colleges agreed 
to accept ­women. But change had begun in yet another group of marginals—­
the gradu­ate students.
At this time, I was brought into ever-­closer contact with gradu­ate students 
in late antique and medieval history. Many of ­these gradu­ate students (the 
“postgraduates,” to use the Oxford term) came from Amer­i­ca. I had already 
7. Oxford Magazine, Michaelmas 7, 1966, 121–124.
8. Oxford Magazine, November 20, 1970, 83.

348 
Ch apter 52
been in contact with a few such students; but from January 1971 onward I be-
came directly concerned with them as a group, through serving on the Board 
of the History Faculty as the representative of the medievalists. I was, in effect, 
a stand-in for the current Chichele Professor, Geoffrey Barraclough (1908–
1984), who, with an insouciance worthy of a late medieval pluralist, seldom 
came to ­England (we ­were told, for complex reasons of tax avoidance) and 
rarely appeared in Oxford.
Through the Applications Committee, I would vet the applications for 
admission of potential medievalists. I would then meet them once they ar-
rived. This was a pleasant occasion, when I got to know them personally and 
discussed their projected dissertations. As a result, the ­future leaders in many 
fields passed my way. For instance: one of the notes in my engagement diary 
was a somewhat incredulous entry: “Paul Magdalino, VLACHS??” Now a 
doyen of Byzantine studies, Paul had intrigued me by suggesting a study of the 
nomadic pastoralists of late Byzantine northern Greece.
With the American and other foreign gradu­ates, I would attach to their 
name a list of Oxford medievalists (other than their official supervisor) whom 
they could contact for advice and, generally, to get themselves known in Ox-
ford. I would then be on the phone to ­those colleagues, urging them to take 
an interest in this or that young person. Some responded handsomely. Paul 
Hyams, for instance, arranged eve­ning “at homes.” At such gatherings I would 
meet many Americans and Canadians, thereby entering into a world of dif­fer­
ent universities and scholars; and I would hear of non-­British approaches to 
medieval history of which I had previously known ­little.
Yet, by and large, the situation was deplorable. Even Lord Franks admitted, 
“It must be confessed that the care of post-­graduates has been the blurred 
panel in the triptych of academic activity in Oxford.”9 I was shocked but not 
surprised that this should be so. The grip of the college and of the tutorial 
system on undergraduates left most dons with ­little energy or interest left over 
for other categories of students: it was like expecting a person with a broken 
arm to lift yet another stone. So gradu­ate students ­were left dangling. I had 
read Mary Douglas’s Purity and Danger carefully enough to know that persons 
and animals who did not fit into the normal classifications of a society ­were 
usually treated as “loose,” “impure” creatures—­vaguely threatening objects for 
whom no right place could be found. In Oxford, gradu­ate students in history 
­were like that.
9. Report of the Commission of Inquiry , paragraph 60, p. 26.

Oxfor d ­under Str a in 
349
Too “Late” to be Respectable
I would not have felt this so strongly if I had not shared with many of my 
friends the feeling that we, also, represented a field that did not as yet quite fit 
in. As an academic enterprise, the study of the ­later empire—at least, at the 
gradu­ate level—­had come to stay. But it resisted classification. It notably fell 
outside the firm definition of ancient history that was current in the one school 
to which the late Roman period should have belonged—­the School of Litterae 
Humaniores: the school of classics, where Latin and Greek (up to a high stan-
dard) ­were part of the normal equipment of a young scholar.
All over Britain—­and especially in Oxford, Cambridge, and London—­
there ­were young scholars who had, as it ­were, “gone late.” But they continued 
to fear that this deviation from the conventional framework of ancient history 
and lit­er­a­ture might stand in their way in the job market.
My correspondence with Averil Cameron shows how this situation weighed 
on her as on many ­others. ­After her fine dissertation on Agathias, Averil ap-
plied for a readership in classics in King’s College London. As she wrote to me 
at the time, she was careful to make sure that the committee knew all about 
her publications on “straight” classical topics: “I ­don’t need to explain myself 
to you I know, but I also know that ­there are ­those who think that you cannot 
be interested in both lit­er­a­ture and history at the same time!—or in more than 
one period of history at once!” Her husband, Alan, was anxious on her behalf: 
“I suppose they may consider her (as ­people do me) too ‘late’ to be quite 
respectable—­but she got alphas on ­every paper in ­Greats (as she did also for 
Mods, no mean achievement), and is very well informed about the early Prin-
cipate.” Rereading Alan’s letter, I noticed the “but”: success in ­Greats was still 
the ultimate, unchanged standard of judgment.
John Matthews, whose work on the Western aristocracies I have already 
mentioned, was another “unclassifiable” late Romanist. He was fortunate to 
be appointed to a lectureship in late Roman history (a post created at the urg-
ing of Ronald Syme) in 1969. But his relations with the majority of teachers in 
Litterae Humaniores ­were always tense. On one occasion, we ­were at a meet-
ing together in an attempt to see how some periods of late Roman history 
might be taught to undergraduates in classes open to students from the 
History School as well as from Litterae Humaniores. The meeting did not go 
well. He wrote to me afterward: “Some of the opinions I found frankly unbe-
lievable. . . . ​You ­were absolutely right on what undergraduates want. . . . ​Some 
of the prejudices which I heard last night seemed rather personal as well.”

350 
Ch apter 52
The Seminar and the Photocopier Machine
What is in­ter­est­ing about this outburst of frustration is that it centered, once 
again, on the issue of undergraduate teaching. John had suggested seminar 
classes on wide themes; but could any teaching count as proper teaching except 
that offered through tutorials? At the meeting, many doubted this. They con-
sidered late Roman topics to be too new and too complicated to be passed on 
to undergraduates through tutorials. Therefore, they argued, late Roman his-
tory could not be taught.
Hence a dichotomy in the outlook of the ancient historians in Oxford. On 
the level of undergraduate teaching, changes happened with glacial slowness. 
Yet one of the most heartening features of this time was the flourishing of 
advanced seminars attended largely by gradu­ates and faculty members. ­Here 
many of the classics dons of Oxford showed themselves to be admirable col-
leagues. At ­these seminars, all dons ­were equal, and all ­were equally happy to 
pitch in and learn in an atmosphere closer to that of a learned society than a 
rigidly hierarchical seminar. Geoffrey de Sainte Croix, for instance, was a regu-
lar presence at such meetings, as well as many ­others. It was through ­these 
seminars, many of them or­ga­nized by Fergus Millar and by John Matthews, 
that late antiquity got ­under way among ancient historians in Oxford.
And for this to happen, one unsung hero remains to be praised: the photo-
copier machine. It is impossible to overestimate its importance for the freeing-
up of scholarship in the late 1960s and 1970s. It both multiplied and delocalized 
knowledge. To understand this, we must conjure up a world where huge ac-
cumulations of books went hand in hand with an acute shortage of available 
copies of any one book. No book could be taken out of the Bodleian Library, 
and even when the libraries ­were circulating—as in the case of the 
Ashmolean—­there was usually only one copy of each book.
The photocopier machine suddenly made this knowledge accessible at any 
time and in any place. I could take with me photocopies of the lives of saints 
and the acts of church councils that ­until then had been available only in vast 
tomes stored in the far corner of Duke Humphrey Library, and read them 
anywhere.
Better still, the photocopier machine made the same texts available at the 
same time to any number of ­people who wished to study them. To take, for 
example, my very first experience of a photocopied text: the notorious Carmen 
adversus paganos—­the Poem against the pagans—­was a lampoon written by 
an anonymous Christian author against an unknown pagan leader of Roman 

Oxfor d ­under Str a in 
351
society, sometime in the late fourth ­century. It was a dramatic text, crucial for 
our knowledge of the last days of Roman paganism. The ­great Theodor Mom-
msen had dated it to the year 394, to the time of the last ­great pagan, Nicoma-
chus Flavianus, when momentary hopes for a pagan revival ­were raised at a 
time of a civil war.
But was Mommsen right? Edited in the Teubner edition of classical texts, 
the Carmen adversus paganos had stood for de­cades in Bodley (to be exact: in 
the Lower Reading Room, along with all the other Teubner editions, near the 
circulation desk). Now, through the photocopier, each of us could have our 
own copy of the poem to read anywhere at our leisure. John Matthews, Timo-
thy Barnes, and I each took home a copy of the text—­a sticky yellow 
photocopy—­and read it at our leisure. Each of us came up with a dif­fer­ent 
judgment as to the date, the author, and the person attacked.10 This was a situ-
ation, brought about by a machine, from which magical seminars would grow 
in ­future years.
10. See, most recently, Alan Cameron, The Last Pagans of Rome (Oxford University Press, 
2011), 273–319, with a translation on 806–808.

352
53
The Holy Man
Concordance
By early 1970, I had completed “The Rise and Function of the Holy Man in 
Late Antiquity.” In that article, I attempted to explain the rise to prominence 
of a group of unlikely figures: the holy men of Syria, whose most flamboyant 
representative had been Symeon Stylites (396–459)—­so-­called ­because he 
stood on top of a stylé—­a sixty-­foot pillar. I asked how it was that Symeon and 
­those like him came to crystallize an entire imaginative world around their 
persons. Furthermore, I asked how the rise of the holy man in late antiquity 
cast light on the evolution of late Roman religion and society in general 
throughout the Mediterranean and the ­Middle East.
I chose to study figures such as Symeon Stylites partly for their known shock 
value. To Edward Gibbon (1737–1794), Symeon, as presented by his hagio-
graphic biographer, Bishop Theodoret of Cyrrhus (393–ca. 458), represented the 
nadir of the long decline of civilization in a decaying Roman Empire:
If it be pos­si­ble to mea­sure the interval between the philosophic writings 
of Cicero and the sacred legend of Theodoret, between the character of 
Cato and that of Simeon, we may appreciate the memorable revolution 
which was accomplished in the Roman empire within a period of five hun-
dred years.1
If such a figure could be delivered from the scorn of Gibbon, then our view of 
an entire age might come to be revised.
1. Edward Gibbon, The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, ed. David Womersley (London: 
Allen Lane, Penguin Press, 1994), chapter 37, 2:429.

The Holy M a n 
353
This article has been widely discussed; and I have offered my own thoughts 
about it in relation to the field of late antiquity as a ­whole.2 In this chapter I 
­will concentrate, rather, on the immediate circumstances of its writing—­how 
I came to put it together and what new approaches and recent discoveries 
inspired me.
First and foremost, I approached the subject with the wind of Mary Doug-
las’s Natu­ral Symbols full in my sails. She and Evans-­Pritchard had effectively 
demolished the notion of a “primitive mentality” with all the ugly freight of 
contempt that went with it. Given the tenacity of such prejudices in the field 
of ancient religious history, this was no small deliverance.
But Mary Douglas’s Natu­ral Symbols (which I had read in typescript a year 
before it appeared) took me one step further. In Natu­ral Symbols Mary re-
solved a dualism that weighed heavi­ly on the study of religion and society in 
the ­later empire. Every­one wrote as if, somehow, religion and society ­were two 
distinct ­things. It seemed as if the scholar’s business was to mea­sure the im-
pingement of the one on the other. How much ­were religious movements 
“pushed” by social forces? How much did religious ideas “impinge” on 
society?
Mary Douglas offered an alternative to this dualism. She urged scholars to 
look at religion and society as if they ­were the two ­faces of the same social 
structure, which, as it ­were, spoke of its own stresses and strains through the 
language of religion—­through myths and dogmas, through rituals, through 
narratives of miracles, and through accounts of the lives of holy persons. Some-
how, the one mirrored the other. Mary put it very clearly, in a ­later introduction 
to Natu­ral Symbols: in any given group ­there was always a “concordance between 
symbolic and social experience.” In her opinion, this concordance was so in-
timate that “we should be able to say what kinds of universe are likely to be 
constructed when social relations take this or that form.”3
2. Peter Brown, “The Rise and Function of the Holy Man in Late Antiquity,” Journal of 
Roman Studies 61 (1971): 80–101, now in Society and the Holy in Late Antiquity (Berkeley: Uni-
versity of California Press, 1982), 103–152, at 103. For my own rethinking of many of the issues 
raised in this article, see Peter Brown, “The Rise and Function of the Holy Man in Late Antiq-
uity, 1971–1997,” Journal of Early Christian Studies 6 (1998): 353–376, and, most recently (on 
Syrian asceticism), Trea­sure in Heaven: The Holy Poor in Early Chris­tian­ity (Charlottesville: 
University ­Virginia Press, 2016).
3. Mary Douglas, Natu­ral Symbols: Explorations in Cosmology, new ed. (London: Routledge, 
1996), xxxv and viii–­ix.

354 
Ch apter 53
This was no small claim. I doubt very much if I followed Mary’s views as 
consequentially as she might have wished. I had no desire to reduce religious 
phenomena to mere expressions of the creaking of a social system. But the hint 
that social and religious phenomena should be studied together with an eye 
to their pos­si­ble concordance inspired me. Rather than any par­tic­u­lar infor-
mation or so­cio­log­i­cal doctrine, Mary passed on to me a confidence that such 
work could be done. Her notion of “concordance” offered an entirely new way 
of viewing the relation between religion and society, as the one mirrored the 
other in a time of momentous change.
This approach also encouraged me to turn to ­whole new bodies of evidence 
in my research. I was no longer ­limited to a privileged body of texts. Like an 
anthropologist in the field, I could treat anything as a potential clue to the 
workings of late Roman society. Indeed, the more commonplace the evidence, 
the more likely it was to throw light on the intimate stresses and strains from 
which the religious imagination grew. The wording of stray inscriptions; lines 
from a magical papyrus; an iconographic detail on a mosaic; a dream book or 
a long-­neglected collection of horoscopes—­all ­were potential evidence for the 
structures of society and for their imaginative echo in religious belief and prac-
tice. This was a major change for me. Within less than four years I had aban-
doned the writings of Augustine and similar ­grand texts, to scramble through 
the undergrowth of evidence for the religious and social practices of an entire 
East Roman society.
As a result, I left the Bodleian Library for the Ashmolean Library of classical 
history and archaeology. ­Here was God’s plenty. To take one example only: it 
was ­there that I found the magnificent two volumes, Les villages antiques de la 
Syrie du Nord by Georges Tchalenko (1905–1987), which laid out, for the first 
time, the archaeology of the villages of northern Syria in which Symeon Styl-
ites had been active.4
Hagiography and History: From Norman Baynes 
(1877–1961) to Derwas Chitty (1901–1971)
Faced by a world of archaeology, epigraphy, and papyrology that had suddenly 
opened up before me, I also turned to a tradition with which I was already well 
acquainted. ­There was in ­England a well-­established scholarly and religious 
4. G. Tchalenko, Les villages antiques de la Syrie du Nord (Paris: Institut français de Beyrouth, 
1953).

The Holy M a n 
355
interest in the monasticism and hagiography of the East Roman Empire. This 
field had an outstanding advocate in Norman Baynes.
Baynes summed up in his person the challenge of Byzantine studies to the 
educated public as a ­whole, at a time when Byzantium was ­little regarded. He 
came from a leading Baptist ­family. His ­uncle was editor of the Encyclopaedia 
Britannica, and his ­father was general secretary of the Baptist Missionary 
Society. He himself continued to preach on occasions: hence his masterly his-
torical introduction to the history of ancient Judaism, Israel among the Nations, 
which I had read in my first years at All Souls. He practiced law for a time; and 
during World War II he produced for the government the authoritative transla-
tion of Hitler’s speeches. A brilliant speaker himself, he knew the sinister 
power of words.
Baynes always thought of himself as a “cockney,” devoted to London Uni-
versity, where he held a personal chair in Byzantine studies. I knew him best 
from a series of brilliant and passionately presented articles and lectures, in 
which he already drew attention to the importance of holy men of monastic 
background in what he called the “thought-­world” of East Rome. In many 
ways, my essay on the holy man was an attempt to explain, in modern terms, 
a phenomenon that Norman Baynes already highlighted as central to the study 
of Byzantium.5
Baynes also pointed to the importance of Byzantine saints’ lives for our 
knowledge of East Roman society. ­These lives often presented a bottom-up 
view of society that was almost entirely lacking in other, elite sources. In a 
brilliant ­little article, Baynes had shown how much we could learn about the 
religion of average Byzantines—­their passions, their fears, their deep religious 
loves—­from a single text such as the early seventh-­century collection of pious 
tales, the Spiritual Garden of John Moschus (ca. 550–619). With Elizabeth 
Dawes, Baynes had also translated and commented on three major saints’ lives, 
on which I depended at ­every turn.6
Baynes died soon ­after I was elected to All Souls. But his approach to Byz-
antine studies was represented magnificently in 1960s Oxford by the Reverend 
Derwas Chitty. I did not know Chitty personally, but he was an iconic figure 
5. N. H. Baynes, “The Thought-­World of East Rome,” in Byzantine Studies and Other Essays 
(London: Athlone Press, 1960), 24–246, at 43–46. Brown, “Rise and Function of the Holy Man,” 
103–104.
6. N. H. Baynes, “The Pratum Spirituale” (1947), in Byzantine Studies and Other Essays, 
261–270; and Three Byzantine Saints (Oxford: Blackwell, 1948).

356 
Ch apter 53
for me. He was the very model of the learned Anglican clergyman. Since 1931, 
he had been vicar of Upton, near Didcot, in the Vale of the White Horse—­a 
strangely deserted countryside that had been isolated for centuries by a change 
in the course of the river Thames. I saw him first at the garden party associated 
with the Oxford Patristics Conference of 1967. He was seated in a chair on the 
Deanery Lawn of Christ Church surrounded by friends and ceremonious 
Eastern monks and bishops—­a large man with a game leg and a ­great white 
beard shining against a face tanned to the color of terracotta (the result, one 
felt, of many daring visits to the monasteries of the Judaean Desert).
He was a passionate man. Dimitri Obolensky once told me that, as a boy, 
he had been sent to live with Derwas to perfect his En­glish. One day, Derwas 
spotted a rabbit which had invaded the vegetable garden that he maintained 
with monastic intensity. Enraged by this intrusion, he slammed his hand 
against the glass pane of the kitchen win­dow so hard that it shattered with 
the blow.
Chitty’s The Desert a City appeared in 1966.7 It came as a revelation to me. 
It was my entry into the ­human—­indeed, the humane—­side of the early 
Christian monastic movement. First delivered as the Birkbeck Lectures in 
Cambridge in 1958/59, Chitty’s account of the origins and spread of the mo-
nastic movement in Egypt, Palestine, and elsewhere in the ­Middle East was a 
masterpiece of condensed original research: with characteristic modesty he 
warned the reader that “not a ­little original research lies buried in the notes.”8 
But he treated this tangled tale in a conversational tone of voice that made 
three hundred years of monastic experience (from Saint Anthony in the late 
third ­century to the Islamic conquests of the seventh) sound like an extended 
­family saga, with its unforgettable characters, its high hopes, ­bitter disappoint-
ments, and tragic ­family feuds.
­These ­were not the monks as they ­were usually presented. They ­were not 
masochists, driven by hatred of the body. The desert was not always an un-
canny, hostile place for them: they often responded to its beauty and ­were 
content with the ­little nooks of ­water and greenery hidden among the 
dunes of Egypt and in the arid folds of the hills and wadis of Palestine.9 Nor 
­were they all fanatics. Chitty constantly reminded us of their gentler role as 
7. Derwas Chitty, The Desert a City: An Introduction to the Study of Egyptian and Palestinian 
Monasticism ­under the Christian Empire (Oxford: Blackwell, 1966).
8. Chitty, Desert a City, x.
9. Chitty, Desert a City, 4 and 6.

The Holy M a n 
357
mentors and men of peace. In the words of one of them, Dorotheus of Gaza 
(ca. 505–565),
For I tell you, brethren, that ­there is not a pagan, or a Jew . . . ​who has 
genuine piety and gentleness, who is not loved and found acceptable 
with God.10
Eventually, Chitty bequeathed his library to the House of St. Gregory and 
St. Macrina, adjacent to the Orthodox church in Canterbury Road (near Sum-
mertown in North Oxford). His donation was a testimony to his lifelong 
commitment to a ­union of the Anglican and the Orthodox churches, in the 
hope that this ­union would allow something of that ancient sweetness and 
warmth to flow back into the more frigid Chris­tian­ity of the West.11
“The Most Savage Primitive”:  
A.-­J. Festugière (1898–1982)
Chitty’s humane approach to the ascetics of Egypt and Palestine was unusual. 
A far more representative figure, in his attitude to monasticism in general and 
to the monks of Syria in par­tic­u­lar, was the ­great Dominican scholar André-Jean 
Festugière. The works of the two men ­were very pre­sent to me in ­those years. 
They could not have been more dif­fer­ent in their treatment of the monks.
Festugière was a magical exponent and translator of Greek thought and 
mysticism in the classical and postclassical age. His Personal Religion among 
the Greeks was a classic evocation of the ever more intense turning of religious 
persons ­toward flight from the world and the contemplation of God in Hel-
lenistic times and ­later. The four volumes of his magisterial La Révélation 
d’Hermès Trismégiste traced what was, for him, the sinister mutation of Greek 
thought in the course of the second and third centuries AD in the direction of 
the occult and a reliance on revelation rather than on reason.12
­Here was a man whose heart was firmly in the classical world. I remember, 
as a young prize fellow, attending a lecture that he gave on the Hellenism of 
Libanius of Antioch (314–393), the famous rhetor of the fourth ­century, and 
his relations with his students. Sprawling in his ­great black gown across a large 
10. Chitty, Desert a City, 152.
11. See Kallistos Ware, “Derwas Chitty (1901–1971),” Eastern Churches Review 6 (1974): 1–6.
12. A.-J. Festugière, Personal Religion among the Greeks (Berkeley: University of California 
Press, 1960) and La Révélation d’Hermès Trismégiste, 4 vols. (Paris: Gabalda, 1950–1954).

358 
Ch apter 53
chair in golden oak, he gave the sort of talk that gives gradu­ate students the 
most precious gift of all—­the gift of perseverance. ­After hearing Festugière, 
I was determined to continue the study of the ­later empire.
But when he turned to the monks of Antioch13 and produced a series of 
remarkable translations of the lives of monastic saints in Egypt, Syria, and 
Palestine, Festugière treated his subjects with a contempt more toxic even 
than the scorn of Gibbon. He was utterly dismissive of their thought-­world, 
and of the role of demons in it. On such topics, he spoke with the shrill voice 
of the nineteenth-­century French “civilizing mission” in Africa and the 
­Middle East.
Let us go back to the demons. Let us try to imagine for ourselves the terrors 
of ­those persons of the past. Let us try to get into the skin of such ­people 
[the monks], whose modes of thought and feeling do not ­really rise above 
­those of the most savage primitive lost in the forests of Equatorial 
Africa.14
Once, when asked by my friend Pierre Hadot what he thought of the monks 
of East Rome, Festugière answered, with a full load of colonial contempt: 
“Fakirs!” (a derogatory term used by the British in India for Hindu and Muslim 
holy men).15
It was this contempt, as much for modern Africans as for ancient monks, 
that I was determined to overcome. But how would I set about it? Prompted 
by Mary Douglas’s notion of concordance, I would try to fit the holy men of 
Syria and elsewhere into the precise context of the society in which they ­were 
active, so as to explain their prominence: What was it about the stresses and 
strains of that society which caused it to turn to such apparently untoward 
figures for leadership and guidance?
Figures in a Landscape
In many ways, I had picked the right moment to do this. Knowledge of the 
social conditions of the East Roman Empire had begun to pro­gress by leaps 
and bounds, in a way that challenged many of the ste­reo­types on which con-
ventional outline histories of the late Roman Empire had been based. 
13. A. J. Festugière, Antioche païenne et chrétienne (Paris: de Boccard, 1959), 245–310.
14. A. J. Festugière, Les Moines d’Orient, vol. 1, Culture et Sainteté (Paris: Le Cerf, 1961), 33.
15. P. Hadot Annuaire de l’École pratique des Hautes Études 92 (1983–1984): 31–35.

The Holy M a n 
359
Archaeological surveys of the countryside outside Antioch—­the Limestone 
Massif, still known ­after its hero as the Djebel Semʿan (Symeon’s Mountain)—­
where Symeon had been active, contradicted the notion that the countryside 
was occupied by a uniformly impoverished and oppressed peasantry. Far from 
it: this was not a society of broken-­backed serfs. It was a new society of 
upwardly mobile and intensely competitive villa­gers. It was up to me to try to 
find a place for the holy men of Syria as figures in this ebullient landscape.
The work of Tchalenko and ­others showed that the inhabitants of ­these 
villages ­were new men. I suggested that they also needed new leaders. They 
needed persons who could link their villages to the wider world, and who 
could act, like the “governor” of an engine, to calm the tensions that arose from 
the impact among them of new wealth and new opportunities. They needed 
patrons. But what was a patron like in the Eastern Empire?
“The Good Patron Writ Large”
The archaeological discovery of a new society in the villages of the ­Middle East 
went along with recent discoveries by scholars of late Roman ­legal texts and 
of Egyptian papyri. ­These documents showed that many of the institutions 
which bulked large in conventional accounts of the ­later empire ­were being 
used in new ways by an enterprising peasantry. This was particularly the case 
with the well-­known phenomenon of the patronage of villages by power­ful 
persons. ­Until then, scholars had assumed that the growth of such patronage 
had been an entirely negative development. It was thought to mark the rise of 
“proto-­feudal” conditions in the countryside—an ominous prelude to the 
­Middle Ages.
Now this negative image had begun to change. Papyrologists such as the 
supremely gifted Roger Rémondon (1923–1971) showed that Egyptian villa­
gers ­were well capable of manipulating patronage networks to their own 
advantage—­setting one patron against the other and expecting benefits from 
their patron on the ground, in the form of arbitration and protection from rival 
villages.16 In the case of Syria, I found that the work of Wolfgang Liebeschuetz 
on the social history of Antioch and its hinterland in the fourth ­century was 
decisive. I had read the manuscript of his book before it was published, and 
found ­there exactly what I needed—­the possibility that villa­gers could use 
16. R. Rémondon, La crise de l’empire romain (Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 1964), 
302–308.

360 
Ch apter 53
power­ful patrons for their own ends. For them, ­there could be such a ­thing as 
“a good patron.”17
In recovering agency for the villa­gers of the ­Middle East, I realized that 
I had found a place in village society for holy men such as Symeon. ­These 
seemingly bizarre figures slid with ease into a template of expectations carved 
for them by the activities of the good patron. Their actions mirrored faithfully 
­those of rural men of power. Their curses and blessings enforced norms of 
village neighborliness and imposed peace on rival ­house­holds. Their prayers 
of intercession frequently moved not only God in his distant Heaven but the 
­great of the land in distant Antioch.
Gradually, I discovered that the holy men of Syria ­were not wild, spaced-­
out recluses. They did their job, day in and day out, as mediators and peace-
keepers in a boisterous rural world that needed their ser­vices. Symeon Stylites 
was the most awesomely remote of such holy men. Yet even he intervened in 
the daily life of the villages so as to impose ­water rationing in times of drought. 
He wrote to the priest of one village laying down acceptable rates of interest. 
Perched sixty feet up on his column, but constantly visited by suppliants and 
­little del­e­ga­tions from the churches of the rich lands at the foot of the Lime-
stone Massif, Symeon was “the lion . . . ​before whose roar the oppressors 
trembled.” Altogether, “Symeon, the model holy man of the early Byzantine 
world, was the ‘good patron’ writ large.”18
It was for this reason that I always spoke of the holy man. This was not due 
to a failure to be inclusive. ­There ­were many holy ­women in the Syrian world. 
They played many roles. Some ­were remembered as legendary martyrs, 
­others as leaders in large convents, and yet ­others as saintly lovers of the 
poor and as fearless protectors of dissident groups. Even when living a low-­
profile life, they ­were renowned for wielding the power of prayer. Their vari­
ous roles have come to be ever more fully recognized in modern scholarship.19 
But it seemed to me that ­women ­were seldom, if ever, called upon to play the 
role of a Symeon Stylites—­that is, to act in a fully public role as a surrogate 
patron and enforcer.
17. J.W.H.G. Liebeschuetz, Antioch: City and Imperial Administration in the ­Later Roman 
Empire (Oxford University Press, 1972), 192–208.
18. Brown, “Rise and Function of the Holy Man,” 129.
19. Holy ­Women of the Syrian Orient, trans. S. Brock and S. Ashbrook Harvey (Berkeley: 
University of California Press, 1987).

The Holy M a n 
361
Power on the Ground
I was naturally excited when this part of the puzzle of the holy man’s role ap-
peared to slide into place. It seemed to me as if a constellation of social expec-
tations was at work, tacitly nudging the holy man ­toward a role that mirrored 
that of a rural patron. ­Here was a clear case of a major figure in the structure 
of late Roman society—­the patron—­reflected in religion. In this way, Mary 
Douglas’s notion of the concordance between social experience and religious 
expectations helped to explain the authority wielded by such persons.
Patronage offered to the villa­gers power on the ground: the presence of 
strong men who could allay local feuds and represent the community in its 
relations with the outside world. But how was this power reflected in religious 
terms? ­Here I was struck by the accounts of exorcism that played an impor­tant 
role in the religious lit­er­a­ture of the time. ­Every Life of a holy man seemed to 
include melodramatic accounts of demonic possession overcome through 
exorcism by the holy man. What did ­these incidents mean “on the ground”—­
that is, what did they mean to ­those who witnessed them and ­those who 
sought relief from possession by exorcism? As we have seen, ­Father Festugière 
would have told me with utter confidence that such scenes revealed the work-
ing of a mentality like that of the “most savage primitive lost in the forests of 
Equatorial Africa.”
Festugière was doubly wrong—­wrong about the Africans and about the 
monks. Analyzed in the unruffled manner of Evans-­Pritchard, the melodrama 
of exorcism could be seen very differently. It was a carefully controlled and 
basically reassuring spectacle. It took the form of a duet between the holy man 
and the demon, in which the holy man asserted the stable power of God over 
the random vio­lence of the demonic world. It marked out the holy man as a 
source of power and order in the locality.
Hence I was faced with a fascinating phenomenon. ­Here was power that 
grew from the ground up, with all the accompaniments of popu­lar acclaim 
associated with the exercise of power in secular society in the ­later empire. The 
entry of holy men into cities and villages was accompanied by the same bursts 
of acclamation as practiced in the circus by fan clubs, and in the high ceremo-
nies surrounding the appearances of emperors. Miracles of healing ­were 
greeted in the same way. Bursts of shouting declared them to be miracles—­for 
it was believed that the same spirit which had effected the miracle also caused 
all ­those pre­sent to recognize it as a miracle, much as an emperor was deemed 

362 
Ch apter 53
to have been chosen by God through the inspired acclaim of the army, Senate, 
and ­people.
Put bluntly, holy men ­were deemed to be holy ­because acclaimed as holy by 
­others. Their position was not linked to any official institution. No holy man 
received an imperial mandate as did officials in the carefully graded hierar-
chy of the imperial government. Few ­were ordained by bishops—­and if they 
­were, they tended to keep a distance from the regular clergy. It seemed as if 
holy men wielded a dif­fer­ent sort of power. They notably lacked what Mary 
Douglas, in Purity and Danger, had analyzed so acutely as “vested,” “articu-
late” power—­power that was based on solid institutions. Instead, the holy man 
seemed to be surrounded by a troubling aura of “inarticulate power”—­power 
that lacked that institutional backing.20 Where did this power come from?
“Are You ­Human?”
It seemed to me that the holy man was power­ful ­because he was regarded as 
not quite ­human. A layman once climbed the ladder to Symeon and posed the 
direct question: “Are you ­human or are you an angelic being?” From the so­
cio­log­i­cal point of view, the holy man was neither. He could not be an angel: 
no creature of ­human flesh could belong to that category of vibrant, ethereal 
beings. Yet he was not fully ­human. For he had reduced to a bare minimum 
­those links with society that defined the humanity of ordinary persons. He had 
no wife; he ate as ­little food as humanly pos­si­ble; he had broken with the 
settled world by flight to the desert or (in the case of Symeon) by occupying 
a dizzying position on a high pillar, poised between Heaven and earth. He had 
become the total stranger. He represented a vortex of complete noninvolve-
ment in the ­middle of a crowded and restive world. Attached to no one, the 
holy man could impinge on local affairs as objectivity incarnate.
Paradoxically, ­after a brutal period of dissociation from society (which 
often involved the acting out of the sort of mortifications that repelled scholars 
such as Festugière), the holy man re­entered society as the perfect arbitrator. 
Hence the impression given by East Rome of a society ringed with figures 
whose authority stemmed from the fact that they ­were thought to be totally 
unconnected with it.
20. Mary Douglas, Purity and Danger: An Analy­sis of the Concepts of Pollution and Taboo 
(London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1966; reprint, London: Ark Paperbacks, 1984), 94–113.

The Holy M a n 
363
“The Leitmotiv of the Religious Revolution  
of Late Antiquity”
This phenomenon challenged me to widen my horizons. In studying per-
sons such as Symeon Stylites, I seemed to be looking at something like the 
working of a so­cio­log­i­cal and psychological mechanism that extended far 
beyond Syria, and was not ­limited to dramatic pillar-­squatters such as 
Symeon. In many other areas in the Eastern Empire, late Roman ­people 
opted to depend on figures who could act as arbiters ­because they ­were 
ascetics, totally stripped of the normal attributes of social living that had 
made them ­human.
This had not happened to such an extent previously, in classical times. It 
did not happen in ­every region: the Catholic West struck me as notably unen-
dowed with holy men compared with the Christian East; in the West, bishops 
ruled the roost. Nor did it happen in ­every period of Christian history. Even 
in East Rome the holy man was never entirely secure. At the time that I was 
working on my article on the holy man, I also became fascinated by the Icono-
clast controversy of the eighth and ninth centuries, which seemed to have in-
volved a backlash against monastic holy men as well as against icons. This 
backlash coincided in a significant manner with the drastic restructuring of 
Byzantine society in the wake of the Muslim invasions, which involved an as-
sertion, by the Iconoclast emperors, of vested, articulate power at the expense 
of the inarticulate power of the monks as guardians of icons.21 But between 
the fourth ­century and the seventh, the rise of the holy man was the hallmark 
of an age.
The predominance of the holy man . . . ​marked out a distinct phase of reli-
gious history. The classical period conjures up the image of a ­great ­temple; 
the ­Middle Ages of a Gothic cathedral. In between, it is the portraits that 
strike the imagination, the icons of the holy men, the austere features of 
phi­los­o­phers, the ranks of staring ­faces in frescoes and mosaics. For some 
centuries, the locus of the super­natural was thought of as resting on indi-
vidual persons.22
21. Peter Brown, “A Dark Age Crisis: Aspects of the Iconoclastic Controversy,” En­glish His-
torical Review 88 (1973): 1–34, now in Society and the Holy in Late Antiquity (Berkeley: University 
of California Press, 1982), 251–301.
22. Brown, “The Rise and Function of the Holy Man,” 151.

364 
Ch apter 53
The way in which face and halo came together in this distinctive manner was 
one of the principal themes in the religious history of East Roman society in 
late antiquity on which I would come to work for many years. I had begun with 
an attempt to find a context for the strange figure of Symeon Stylites. I had 
ended by offering a viewing point from which to judge the quality of an entire 
epoch. Almost at the same time as I wrote the article on the holy man, I found 
myself challenged to produce a survey of that epoch, ­under the title The World 
of Late Antiquity.

Part IV
The World of  
Late Antiquit y  
to Iran


367
54
The World of Late 
Antiquit y
An Invitation and a Title
An Invitation
In April 1968, I received a letter from Geoffrey Barraclough, who was then 
teaching at the University of California at San Diego. It was an invitation to 
write a short book on late antiquity for a series called the Library of Eu­ro­pean 
Civilization published by Thames and Hudson. The letter came out of the 
blue, as I was beginning to write my article on the holy man, and at that time 
I had no plans to write a work of synthesis. Yet, within three years, this is ex-
actly what I did: The World of Late Antiquity duly appeared in 1971.1
I accepted Barraclough’s invitation readily for three reasons.
First: the Thames and Hudson series gave me access to a wider, nonaca-
demic public. At a time when I was deeply committed to publishing specialist 
articles, this would be “a book for my aunts”—an extended essay on late an-
tiquity as a ­whole, meant for the average reader. I had always loved that kind 
of writing, and this was a challenge to write nothing less than the portrait of 
an age.
1. Peter Brown, The World of Late Antiquity: From Marcus Aurelius to Muhammad (London: 
Thames and Hudson, 1971; reprinted with expanded bibliography, New York: W. W. Norton, 
1989); see also Peter Brown: “The World of Late Antiquity Revisited,” Symbolae Osloenses 72 
(1997): 5–90. For an acute evaluation of The World of Late Antiquity, see now Andrea Giardina, 
“ ‘Tutto il vigore è negli occhi’: Peter Brown e la nascita della New Late Antiquity,” in New Late 
Antiquity, 183–235.

368 
Ch apter 54
Second: I already knew Thames and Hudson as a publisher of art history 
books. The books in the Library of Eu­ro­pean Civilization series ­were lav-
ishly illustrated. Late antiquity had attracted me first, as it had attracted 
many ­others, ­because of its works of art: its vivid mosaics, haunting ­faces, 
and majestic basilica churches. Abundant illustrations, combined with per-
tinent captions, would tell more than half the story that I wished to tell. But 
­these would not be mere “illustrations.” As they moved from the classical art 
of the Roman Empire at its height to the age of Justinian and beyond, readers 
would see an ancient world changing into something strangely dif­fer­ent be-
fore their eyes.
A Title: The World of Late Antiquity
The third reason was perhaps the most impor­tant: Barraclough had the same 
view of this period as I had myself. He wanted a book on late antiquity; and 
he wanted it for the same reasons as I did: that is, he wanted an account of the 
hitherto neglected period that lay between the two well-­known epochs of clas-
sical antiquity and the ­Middle Ages. Barraclough wrote:
The very tentative title that I have in mind was “The World of Late Antiq-
uity”. It has always seemed to me that ­there has been very ­little attempt in 
En­glish to explore the differences between classical antiquity and late an-
tiquity which nevertheless seems vastly impor­tant in so far as it is ­really late 
antiquity which is the foundation of the medieval world. . . .
. . . ​among other ­things I found the work of Max Dvorak and E[rnst] 
Kitzinger very stimulating.
This last remark acknowledged the origin of the notion of Spätantike in the 
­great tradition of late nineteenth-­ and twentieth-­century German art his-
tory, of which Ernst Kitzinger (1912–2003) was a distinguished modern 
representative.
Readers may remember how I had been introduced to the notion of “late 
antiquity,” when still an undergraduate, by Henri-­Irénée Marrou in the bril-
liant Retractatio of his study of Augustine and the end of ancient culture.2 
For Marrou—as for Barraclough and the German art historians to whom he 
referred—­late antiquity meant a period in which the artistic, cultural, and 
religious forms inherited from the ancient, classical world underwent a series 
2. Chapter 31: “ ‘De­cadence’ or ‘Late Antiquity’? Henri-­Irénée Marrou.”

The Wor ld of Late A ntiquit y 
369
of more or less drastic mutations without, however, being severed from their 
ancient roots.3
The term “late antiquity” had originated among art historians in order 
to describe ­those subtle mutations of style and sensibility that did not march to 
the brisk rhythm of war and politics. For this reason, it was best applied to the 
social and cultural developments that took place in this period, when the clas-
sical core of Greco-­Roman civilization had held firm in some aspects and 
taken on surprising new forms in ­others. ­These long-­term evolutions in reli-
gion, art, and culture, and not the usual brisk tale of emperors, civil wars, and 
barbarian invasions, ­were the central theme of the book.
Hence the importance, for me, of the title “late antiquity.” In the first place, 
it was a challenge to the view that the last centuries of the Roman Empire 
could be seen only as a period of decline and fall—as Edward Gibbon and 
many ­others had seen them. In fact, the ancient world continued for many 
centuries; and ­these centuries ­were marked by unexpected creativity in reli-
gion, art, and lit­er­a­ture. Second, this creativity was not ­limited to the Roman 
Empire alone. It was shared by a wider world, which included Mesopotamia, 
Arabia, and Iran.
­Until this time, I had tended to use the term “late Roman” to describe de-
velopments that had happened within the frontiers of the Roman Empire. But 
“late antiquity” seemed to be the better way to describe ­those pulses of creativ-
ity that crossed ­these frontiers, and that circulated in the wider world in which 
the Roman Empire was only a part.
From Decline and Fall to Change and Continuity
Given a ­free rein to write a book on “late antiquity,” I finished the job quickly: 
Barraclough received the final draft in November 1969. From then onward, 
I collaborated with Stanley Baron (the deeply cultivated and accessible editor 
in the London branch of Thames and Hudson) and with Georgina Bruckner, 
a gifted Hungarian picture researcher. Working out of the Ashmolean Library, 
I identified over 95 ­percent of the illustrations and wrote the captions for 
3. See now Late Antiquity in Con­temporary Debate, ed. Rita Lizzi Testa (Cambridge: Scholars 
Publishing, 2017); P. Corby Finney, The Eerdmans Encyclopedia of Early Christian Art and Ar-
chaeology, s.v. “Late Antiquity” (­Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans, 2017), 2:44–45; and Jás Elsner, 
“Alois Riegl: Art History and the Beginning of Late Antique Studies as a Discipline,” in New 
Late Antiquity, 167–182.

370 
Ch apter 54
them all. As a result, the illustrations in The World of Late Antiquity ­were a 
photo-­essay in themselves on the visual aspects of the classical world’s 
transformation—­the changing styles of portraiture, the vivid mosaics in villas 
and churches, the emergence of provincial, subclassical traditions in art and 
clothing, the majestic new basilicas, and the touches of exotic styles brought 
from far beyond the frontiers of the Roman world.4
I recently discovered among my papers a handwritten draft of what must 
have been an extensive proposal for The World of Late Antiquity. It is tentative 
and overwritten, but it shows very clearly the sort of book that I wanted to 
write. I made clear that this would not be a book like Edward Gibbon’s Decline 
and Fall of the Roman Empire: late antiquity marked not the end of a civiliza-
tion but its transformation into new and adventurous forms, which would 
directly influence all subsequent centuries.
To Gibbon, this theme had seemed the only one pos­si­ble for our period. 
He regarded it as the “awful revolution” that turned the commodious edi-
fice of the classical civilization of the Age of the Antonines into a devastated 
ruin. Gibbon, like his contemporaries, had a refined sense for classical 
ruins. In the 19th ­century, a more sinister theme appears—­a sense of 
“de­cadence” replaces the sad contemplation of the august debris of the 
Roman past. The Late Antique world was treated not only as the story of a 
­great Empire that fell: it was regarded as the tale of a civilization that was 
tainted, corrupted, atrophied by conservatism, in its surviving classical lit­er­a­
ture, and deeply undermined by the irrational in its basic attitudes to the 
world. The theme of the “Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire” gave way 
to “The Decay of the Ancient World”. In both cases, however, this period 
was thought to have left no direct legacy: for Gibbon, darkness descended; 
for the 19th ­century, the sad corpse of a de­cadent Antiquity had to be 
dragged from the stage before the next act of the ­Middle Ages began.
Instead of this, I wished to emphasize the many direct legacies of late antiquity 
to the medieval and even to the modern world:
It is in our sense of the existence of the immediate and lasting legacy of the 
Late Antique period that we differ from such views. Since the end of the 
4. This aspect has been studied in a most illuminating article by Bryan Ward-­Perkins, “The 
Making of the World of Late Antiquity,” Revista Diálog­os Mediterrânicos (Brazil) 21 (2021): 4–18.

The Wor ld of Late A ntiquit y 
371
last ­century, the roots of medieval society have been traced to their origins 
in the “restored” society of the Late Roman world. The 4th ­century aristo-
crat in his fortified estate has been hailed as a distant prototype of the 
medieval baron, just as the titles of medieval feudal courts—­count, for 
instance, for comes “companion of the Emperor; “duke” from dux . . . ​first 
appear in the official hierarchy of Diocletian and Constantine. . . .
In a way less easy to define but more immediately striking to modern 
eyes, the art of the Late Antique period began a way of seeing man and the 
world that lasted up to the 13th ­century. We have only to look at the eyes of 
a Romanesque saint to see that he is closer, across seven centuries, to the 
portraits of a 3rd ­century phi­los­o­pher, than this 3rd ­century phi­los­o­pher 
was to the art of his grandparents in the age of Marcus Aurelius. It is the 
same with the thought of the age: up to the 17th ­century, it was to Plotinus, 
to Augustine, to the laws of Justinian that men turned as models. The 
“ancient” world of medieval and Re­nais­sance men was, in fact, the Late 
Antique world: for the vigorous autumn growth of classical civilization—­
into new philosophy, new theology, new art and new law—­quite overshad-
owed the preceding centuries. It is only recently that Eu­ro­pe­ans have come 
to place the “classical” age of Greece and Rome [that is, without its crucial 
Late Antique sequence] on a lonely, and precarious, pedestal.
For this reason, I made clear that the geo­graph­i­cal focus of the book would 
not be on the Roman provinces of western Eu­rope. Compared with most ac-
counts of the period, this represented a major change of focus. As I pointed 
out in my draft:
This book has tried to capture the quality of what struck the author as the 
most profound changes that occurred in the Late Antique period. This was 
not the transition from a Roman to a post-­Roman world in Western Eu­
rope. Instead, this account has given more prominence to the southern 
socie­ties that had been the heart of the classical world, and to the ancient 
cradles of civilization in the Near East. For the changes described in the 
book ­were all the more vertiginous for having taken place, on the ­whole, 
among sheltered and slow-­moving populations. They ­were set against a 
physical environment that had not greatly changed for millennia, and 
played out in centers overshadowed by classical ­temples, for instance, 
which ­were older, by the 4th ­century AD, than many Gothic cathedrals in 
modern ­England.

372 
Ch apter 54
Put briefly, The World of Late Antiquity would not be a study of decline and 
fall, followed by catastrophic barbarian invasion, as the last centuries of the 
ancient world had usually been presented. Rather, it would be a study of 
change and continuity in a deeply rooted and sophisticated society. ­Under the 
title of “late antiquity,” it would offer the general public a view of the period 
between 200 and 800 as a distinctive and creative moment of history—­a “world” 
of late antiquity. And this world would gravitate around a dif­fer­ent center than 
before: no longer concentrated on Rome and western Eu­rope, it would embrace 
the ancient cultures of North Africa, Egypt, and the ­Middle East.

373
55
From Marcus 
Aurelius . . .
E. R. Dodds (1893–1979)1
It was easy to agree with Barraclough that the title of the book should be The 
World of Late Antiquity. More than that: the reign of the emperor Marcus 
Aurelius (161–180) was the obvious place to begin. In his Decline and Fall of the 
Roman Empire, Edward Gibbon had chosen his reign and the reigns of his im-
mediate pre­de­ces­sors as marking the apogee of the Roman Empire before the 
swift onset of its decline and fall. For Gibbon and his contemporaries, Marcus 
Aurelius was more than a ruler: he was the embodiment of a Golden Age.
If a man ­were called to fix the period in the history of the world, during 
which the condition of the ­human race was most happy and prosperous, he 
would, without hesitation, name that which elapsed from the death of 
Domitian to the accession of Commodus [most particularly, the age of the 
Antonines: Antoninus Pius (138–161) and Marcus Aurelius (161–180)].2
But I had not met Marcus Aurelius in this capacity. Rather, I had met him 
in the brilliant but chilling pages of what was then a recent masterpiece by 
E. R. Dodds, Pagans and Christians in an Age of Anxiety, which had appeared in 
1965. Dodds did not share the enthusiasm of Gibbon and his contemporaries for 
the age of the Antonines. Rather, he saw the educated classes of the Roman 
1. For a generous appreciation of the work of Dodds in many fields, see now C. Stray, C.B.R. 
Pelling, and S. J. Harrison, Rediscovering E.R. Dodds: Scholarship, Education, Poetry, and the Para-
normal (Oxford University Press, 2019).
2. Edward Gibbon, The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, ed. David Womersley (Lon-
don: Allen Lane Penguin, 1994), chapter 3, 1:103.

374 
Ch apter 55
Empire around the year 200 as on the edge of a collective ner­vous breakdown. 
He treated Marcus Aurelius as a psychological case, a man haunted by a sense 
of unreality and by “the desolation of not belonging.”3
This somber diagnosis was based on a psychoanalytic reading of the 
Meditations—­the philosophical thought experiments—of the ­great emperor. 
And ­there would be worse to come. From the time of Marcus Aurelius onward, 
it appeared that “contempt for the ­human condition and hatred of the body 
was a disease endemic in the entire culture of the period.”4
Had the third ­century ­really been like this? On this issue, I found that I 
differed totally from Dodds. What we had come to know about the evolution 
of Roman society in the third ­century, and in the centuries that followed, made 
me suspicious of this view. The debate on the work of Mikhail Rostovtzeff, 
conducted by social historians such as Hugo Jones and Santo Mazzarino, had 
shown that this catastrophic view needed to be replaced. Dodds seemed to be 
using an out-­of-­date social history of the Roman Empire on which to base his 
characterization of the period. For this reason, the second section of The World of 
Late Antiquity was driven by a continuous dialogue—at times admiring, at times 
deeply opposed, but always appreciative—­with Dodds’s negative view of the 
spiritual crisis of the third ­century and of the civilization that emerged from it.5
Quite apart from our shared interests in late antique religion, ­there was 
much to draw us together. Dodds was very much an Irishman. His ­family had 
moved to Dublin from Bangor, a seaside town, the Ulster equivalent of Bray. 
He had thrown himself into the Irish nationalist movement in a way that no 
member of my ­family had ever done. Though he came from a Protestant back-
ground, he did not identify himself in any way as a Protestant. Indeed, when 
his autobiography, Missing Persons, appeared in 1977, I was struck by an anec-
dote that he told about his fiancée. Just ­after they had announced their engage-
ment, she was approached late at night by her ­mother:
“Darling”, said an anxious small voice, “­Father says, Is he a Roman Catholic?” 
“No,” said Bet sleepily, “he’s an atheist”. “Oh, thank goodness! I must tell 
­Father; we ­couldn’t sleep for worrying”.6
3. E. R. Dodds, Pagans and Christians in an Age of Anxiety: Some Aspects of Religious Experi-
ence from Marcus Aurelius to Constantine, The Wiles Lectures Given at the Queen’s University 
Belfast, 1963 (Cambridge University Press, 1965), 9 and 21.
4. Dodds, Pagans and Christians, 35.
5. Brown, World of Late Antiquity, 49–112.
6. E. R. Dodds, Missing Persons: An Autobiography (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1977), 84.

From M arcus Aur elius . . . 
375
It was a quintessentially “Dublin” story. Alas, I wish that ­these prejudices had 
been such a joke in the case of my poor aunt, when she announced that her 
prospective fiancé was a Catholic.
Dublin was a small place. Dodds and his ­sisters settled in Shrewsbury Road 
in Donnybrook, where the Chester Beatty Library would come to be built. 
Shrewsbury Road fell within the radius of ­houses in which my aunt Mai would 
play bridge. If I remember correctly, the Misses Dodds ­were spoken of with ap-
proval by my aunts. I never met them; but they ­were on my map of Dublin.
The Irrational
Sometime in the early 1970s, I also came to know of a side of Dodds that was 
remembered in Dublin. I visited Monk Gibbon, the poet and cousin of W. B. 
Yeats, whom I had known in Aravon as “Gubb-­Gubb”—­the teacher who had 
notably failed to teach me Latin. He showed me an anthology that included a 
set of poems of an extreme Neoplatonic nature written by Dodds at the age of 
twenty-­six for the London journal Côterie:
We are the partly real ones
Whose bodies are an accident,
Whose phantasies ­were never meant
To fix their insubstantial thrones
Inside a ­house of blood and bones.
.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
O undefiled, O lucid Moon!
Hear our attenuated cry!
.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
O Moon, ­shall our release be soon?7
I have recently learned, through Wikipedia, that this fin de siècle confection 
was read and translated into Spanish by a twenty-­year-­old Argentinian, Jorge 
Luis Borges.
Despite ­these youthful flights of fancy, Dodds always struck me as a sturdy 
representative of the Protestant Enlightenment. He took the irrational seri-
ously, at least in ­others. ­Whether in modern Ireland or in ancient Greece, the 
irrational was always close to hand. It had to be watched carefully, lest it swamp 
the all-­too-­frail defenses of the rational mind. Dodds was always interested in 
7. Côterie, no. 3 (December 1919): 10–11.

376 
Ch apter 55
“the more exceptional and extreme forms of ­human experience.” Unlike some 
of his contemporaries, in ­England and Ireland, he did not dabble in the oc-
cult; but he did eye it as a “scientific” phenomenon—­half fascinated and half 
repelled.8
Whenever he came up against Spiritualist circles in early twentieth-­century 
Dublin, Dodds invariably proved hardheaded. Writing to his wife in 1923, he 
described a discussion of mysticism with W. B. Yeats. He found Yeats and his 
circle terminally pretentious:
I tried to persuade them not to converse wholly in capitals [as if always 
talking of grandiose, Gnostic entities, such as ­Great ­Mother, Ancestral 
Soul, and The Above] . . . ​Yeats advised me to read Plotinus and consult 
Mrs. Wreidt the trumpet-­medium. I wish I was not so incurably rational.9
Though “incurably rational,” Dodds remained drawn to what George De-
vereux (1908–1985), a psychoanalyst turned ancient historian and Dodds’s 
adviser on psychological ­matters, called “a turbulent cluster of unexplained 
facts”—­such as cases of telepathy, poltergeists, and possession.10 He re-
mained throughout his life an active member of the Society for Psychical 
Research.
­These paranormal phenomena had a real­ity for Dodds that infused his 
scholarly work with a rare intensity. The mystical ecstasy of Plotinus was a state 
that could happen to modern persons, just as their rational selves could be 
swamped in a manic breakdown, as portrayed in the Bacchae of Euripides.
Dodds’s magnificent Sather Lectures published as The Greeks and the Irra-
tional presented a disturbing vision of the underside of what had once seemed 
to be the clear and rational world of the ancient Greeks.11 His vision was all the 
more unnerving ­because of the frequent hints—in the form of references to 
up-­to-­date modern lit­er­a­ture on personality disorders scattered throughout 
the im­mensely learned footnotes of The Greeks and the Irrational—­that noth-
ing, perhaps, had changed: all that was most primitive and horrendous in 
the blood-­soaked tragedies of ancient Greece lay just beneath the surface in the 
modern age. What had happened once had, indeed, happened in our own times, 
8. Dodds, Missing Persons, 55.
9. Dodds, Missing Persons, 59.
10. Dodds, Missing Persons, 98.
11. E. R. Dodds The Greeks and the Irrational (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1951).

From M arcus Aur elius . . . 
377
and would happen again if reason failed—­yet again—to ­ride the dark ­horse 
of the Unconscious.12
The Third ­Century: Breakdown or Creativity?
The title of Dodds’s book, Pagans and Christians in an Age of Anxiety, made 
his approach plain. It was taken from the title of one of the more portentous 
poems of his friend W. H. Auden. The poem set the tone for the entire book. 
Dodds implied that the nightmares which haunted modern Eu­rope had al-
ready gripped the Roman world in the ­century between Marcus Aurelius and 
Constantine, “when the material decline was steepest and the ferment of new 
religious feelings most intense.”13
On that issue, I found myself disagreeing toto caelo with him. It seemed to 
me that Dodds accepted without question the histrionic characterization of 
the “crisis of the third ­century” against which I had set my face since my very 
first lectures in Oxford. He also applied an old-­fashioned Freudian interpreta-
tion to the figures and the texts of the period. The result was a singularly 
bleak, clinical view of famous writings such as the Meditations of Marcus Au-
relius, and of less well-­known texts such as the Gnostic writings in the Nag 
Hammadi Codices (which had only recently come to light, in 1945). Dodds 
presented the protagonists of ­those views as lonely and estranged persons, 
burdened with guilt and filled with hatred of the body.14
But was this ­really what the texts said? Take, for instance, the dichotomy 
between self and body that had characterized so much of the philosophy of 
ancient Greece: in the words of Dodds, this was “the most far-­reaching, and 
perhaps the most questionable of all her gifts to ­human culture.”15
Dodds assumed that heightened belief in the dichotomy of body and soul 
could only be regarded as a symptom of the rise of a desperate mood. I did not 
agree: this emphasis on the divide between body and soul might sometimes 
mean something entirely dif­fer­ent. For many, to discover the immensity of the 
soul was not to flee the world: it was to become that much more confident of 
the link between the individual and higher realms. Men and ­women could draw 
12. Dodds, The Greeks and the Irrational, 254–255.
13. Dodds, Pagans and Christians, 3.
14. E.g., Dodds, Pagans and Christians, 8, 20, and 35.
15. Dodds, Pagans and Christians, 29.

378 
Ch apter 55
on a heightened sense of the majesty of their own souls to gain the inspiration 
and courage needed to leave their mark on the real world. The dichotomy of 
body and soul was a doctrine for fighters quite as much as for recluses.
It always struck me that the crisis of the third ­century had released many 
such fighters on the Roman world. Far from being a symptom of desperation 
and of a retreat from real­ity, the stress on the possibility of ever-­closer links 
between ­humans and the divine as a source of energy and inspiration was no 
bad ­thing. It was altogether congruent with a “sudden release of creativity such 
as often follows the shaking of an ancien régime.”16
The Late Roman Revolution: Social Mobility
My answer to Dodds was that of a historian interested in the social basis for 
cultural and religious change. I suggested that the centuries ­after Marcus Au-
relius ­were not characterized by a collective neurosis. Rather, the religious 
ferment of the times made greater sense when set against the background of a 
less dramatic view of the evolution of late Roman society that had begun to be 
current, as we have seen, among scholars such as Mazzarino, Jones, and other, 
more recent students of the ­later empire.
This ferment reflected a major shake-up of Roman society that left it 
changed but by no means entirely depleted. Hence I called the entire part 1 of 
the book, where I described that shake-up, “The Late Roman Revolution.” In 
this choice of title, I was consciously adapting the title of Sir Ronald Syme’s 
classic study of the end of the Republic and the emergence of a new order 
­under the emperor Augustus—­The Roman Revolution.
The chapters on late Roman society ­were an attempt to do justice to the ten-
sion between change and continuity that made late antiquity such a distinctive 
period. I tried, region by region and generation by generation, to conjure up 
the social basis on which this intriguing balance of the new and the old de-
pended. It seemed to me that widespread social mobility explained the tension 
that lay at the root of East Roman upper-­class society from the days of Con-
stantine (306–337) to the reign of Justinian (527–565).
From AD 300 onward, the Roman bureaucracy and the court absorbed 
talent like a sponge. But this upward movement was not indiscriminate. It 
drew largely on the educated elites of the Greek world—­a basically conserva-
tive scholar-­gentry still rooted in the ancient cities and groomed by the ancient 
16. Brown, World of Late Antiquity, 33.

From M arcus Aur elius . . . 
379
paideia associated with a classical education. As a result, ­there was more 
mobility at the very top of imperial society (among the generals and the top 
administrators) than halfway down—in the more numerous ranks of the bu-
reaucracy proper. Hence an enduring tension: “Like the opposed vaults of a 
single arch, the ‘new’ society of imperial servants came to rest against the more 
rooted and backward looking society of the educated upper classes.”17
The members of this scholar-­gentry ­were like the mandarins of imperial 
China. They supported the empire with their talent; but they also slowed 
down the workings of a fiercely active court. In this way, they created a new 
East Roman Empire in their own, Greek image—­a remarkable phenomenon, 
now well described by my friend from ­those days Fergus (Sir Fergus) Millar 
as A Greek Roman Empire.18
I confess to having shown a soft spot for such persons. I could not resist a 
class that had produced Olympiodorus of Thebes, an amateur phi­los­o­pher and 
diplomat who
went on missions as far apart as Rome, Nubia and the Dnieper—­accompanied 
by a parrot who spoke pure Attic Greek.19
Nor could I resist being impressed by the succession of gifted poets from 
Egypt described by Alan Cameron in “Wandering Poets,”20 or by the remark-
able balance of pagan and Christian attitudes in a ­later representative of this 
mandarin class—­the ­great historian of the wars of Justinian, Procopius of 
Caesarea (509–565), whose religious views had recently been studied in a brilliant 
article by Averil Cameron.21
We now tend to take this aspect of East Roman society for granted. But in 
1968 the tensions inherent in the culture of ­those Greek scholar-­bureaucrats 
­were a new discovery, largely due to the work of Alan and Averil Cameron, 
both at that time working in London University. Together, they made the 
Eastern Empire look a very dif­fer­ent place from the image of a sclerotic and de­
cadent society that had usually been conjured up by the name “Byzantium.”
17. Brown, World of Late Antiquity, 29.
18. F.B.G. Millar, A Greek Roman Empire, Sather Classical Lectures 64 (Berkeley: University 
of California Press, 2006).
19. Brown, World of Late Antiquity, 140. (Alas, I was misled by my enthusiasm: the parrot 
spoke Greek, but Olympiodorus does not say ­whether it was “pure Attic” Greek.)
20. Alan Cameron, “Wandering Poets,” Historia 14 (1965): 470–509.
21. Averil Cameron, “The ‘Scepticism’ of Procopius,” Historia 15 (1966): 466–482.

380 
Ch apter 55
The Ancient Wisdom
Yet, as I look back, it seems that the happiest chapter in this part of the book—­
chapter 6: “The Last Hellenes”—­was devoted to a group that had stood to one 
side of the rat race of government ser­vice: the pagan phi­los­o­phers.22 Though 
they ­were members of the same class as the scholar-­gentry of East Rome, they 
ostentatiously resisted the temptations of the upwardly mobile. They remained 
pagans at a time when the adoption of Chris­tian­ity had increasingly become 
a “party card” necessary for a successful ­career. From Plotinus onward, ­these 
phi­los­o­phers devoted their energies to the rediscovery of what they took to 
be the au­then­tic teachings of Plato. They stood for an Ancient Wisdom, ­earlier 
than the shrill radicalism of their own age. They defended the numinous 
beauty of the material universe against the Gnostics, who devalued it, and 
against Christians, who denied the multiplicity of divine beings who hovered 
close to the earth, making nature itself a holy ­thing.23
Such men saved the Greek sense of the majesty of the universe. I valued 
them as a reminder that it was often from moments of stability and revival, and 
not only of headlong change, that ­later ages received the legacy of the ancient 
world, passed on to them in the late antique period. In fifth-­ and sixth-­century 
Athens and Alexandria, a remarkable succession of teachers, thinkers, and 
commentators strove fiercely to retain a continuity with the classical past. They 
upheld the ancient sense of the beauty and intelligibility of the cosmos—­the 
star-­filled heavens above the earth. Their stand for the cosmos ensured that it 
would be an ancient, Greek sky (a sky still, to pagans, inhabited by glowing 
gods) which would soar above the heads of Christians of the ­Middle Ages, and 
that Greek wisdom (made available in Syriac and then in Arabic translation) 
would continue to inspire Muslim and Jewish intellectuals throughout the 
Islamic world.
The Democ­ratization of Culture
I also paid special attention to another aspect of the social and cultural evolu-
tion of late antiquity, which had been brought to the attention of scholars 
by that ­giant in the study of the ancient world, Santo Mazzarino. In the Inter-
national Congress of Historical Studies, which was held in Stockholm in 1960, 
22. Brown, World of Late Antiquity, 70–80
23. Brown, World of Late Antiquity, 21.

From M arcus Aur elius . . . 
381
in the presence of a large Rus­sian del­e­ga­tion, Mazzarino had proposed that 
­there had, indeed, been a “revolution” at the end of the ancient world. But it 
had not been such a revolution as Marxists might expect. Rather, it had been 
a revolution brought about by a demo­cratizzazione della cultura—­a “democ­
ratization of culture”—­from above.
As a result of this pro­cess of democ­ratization, the values of the classical 
world came to be transmogrified by being taken out of their narrow elite con-
text and extended to the provincials of the empire as a ­whole. At the same 
time, the ­later empire witnessed a reemergence, in the provinces, of cultural 
and religious traditions that had been suppressed or ignored in classical times. 
The issue was ­whether ­these provincial traditions would prove hostile to the 
empire or ­whether the provincials would be enabled to participate more fully 
in the empire, at the cost of lowering the high wall of an upper-­class culture 
that had once guaranteed the superiority of the elites of the Greco-­Roman 
world.24
The very title of Mazzarino’s pungent intervention at the congress gave a 
signal that was taken up in dif­fer­ent ways by many dif­fer­ent scholars. It seemed 
that what made the culture of late antiquity so distinctive was not only the 
balance between change and continuity within the elites who maintained the 
classical tradition. ­There was also a more profound revolution, by which 
the classical culture of the time opened itself up to a hitherto unpre­ce­dented 
degree of cultural fluidity: “inner barriers collapsed. Another side of the 
Roman world, often long prepared in obscurity, came to the top, like different-­
colored loam turned by the plough.”25
The lowering of ancient cultural bound­aries and the extension of the fran-
chise of Greco-­Roman culture into hitherto peripheral areas was particularly 
marked in the evolution of the Christianities of the Roman East—in Armenia, 
Mesopotamia, Syria, and Egypt. It was in the ­Middle East, and not in the less 
ebullient and more rigid West, that the effects of the democ­ratization of cul-
ture ­were most clearly vis­i­ble.
24. Santo Mazzarino, “La demo­cratizzazione della cultura nel ‘Basso Impero,’ ” XIe Congrès 
international des sciences historiques (Stockholm 21–28 aôut 1960). Rapports, 2: Antiquité (Göte-
borg, 1960), 35–54 = Antico, tardoantico ed èra costantiniana (Rome: Dedalo Libri, 1974), 74–98. 
See now J.-­M. Carrié, “La ‘démocratisation de la culture’ dans l’Antiquité tardive,” Antiquité 
Tardive 9 (2001): 27–46, and Noel Lenski, “Santo Mazzarino, ” in New Late Antiquity, 
280–282.
25. Brown, World of Late Antiquity, 9.

382 
Ch apter 55
As a result of this democ­ratization, the Christian churches in the eastern 
provinces could no longer be treated as peripheral, and still less as intrinsically 
hostile to the empire. I wrote The World of Late Antiquity when I had begun 
my work on the holy men of Syria and Egypt, and was in the pro­cess of learn-
ing Hebrew and Syriac. As a result, I strug­gled throughout the book to do 
justice to the role of two exuberant provinces within the new Greek Roman 
Empire of the East. One was Syria, a bilingual region, whose rich imaginative 
subsoil, in Greek and Syriac, would feed the piety of Byzantium and fill its 
churches with unforgettable chants. The other was Egypt, the home of the 
monks, where Coptic and Greek coexisted to spread throughout the ­Middle 
East, the Mediterranean, the monasteries of southern Gaul, and even, eventu-
ally, of Ireland, a distinctive body of Christian teaching—­the Apophthegmata 
Patrum (The Sayings of the Desert ­Fathers) that was the last ­great flowering of 
the Wisdom Lit­er­a­ture of the ancient Near East.
But ­there ­were yet further participants in the late Roman revolution, from 
yet more distant regions. I must explain what led me to include, in my account, 
socie­ties of the wider ­Middle East—­the Ira­nian empire of the Sasanians 
and the early empire of Islam—as participants, in their own way, in the social and 
religious ferment of the Greco-­Roman world in its last centuries.

383
56
To Muhammad
L ate Antiquit y in  
a Wider World
“The Two Eyes of the Earth”: Byzantium and Iran
Two sections ­toward the end of The World of Late Antiquity—­“The Empires of 
the East” and “The New Participants”—­were the result of my recent interest 
in the ­Middle East.1 From 1966 onward I had become increasingly fascinated 
by the Fertile Crescent and by the Syriac culture that stretched across the po­
liti­cal frontier between the East Roman and the Persian (Sasanian) empires. 
This unbroken corridor of prosperous towns and villages, which ran from 
Mesopotamia to the Mediterranean—­from Ctesiphon to Antioch—­was a re-
gion of unusual cultural and religious ferment. Far from dividing Byzantium 
from Persia, as if they ­were two, totally separate worlds, the Fertile Crescent 
drew them together in unrelenting conflict for supremacy in the ­Middle East.
As I saw it at the time, the Persia of the emperor Justinian’s con­temporary, 
Khusro I Anoshirwan (531–579), was a menace to East Rome not ­because it 
was a totally alien, “barbarian” power, but ­because it was not alien enough. 
It shared with East Rome many features of a late antique society—­a state-­
established religion (Zoroastrianism), a reformed tax system, an increasingly 
power­ful bureaucracy, and a renewed courtly culture. The Sasanian Empire 
also contained a strong Christian presence, whose dominant language was 
Syriac. Syriac-­speaking communities stretched from Mesopotamia to Antioch, 
joining one side of the frontier to the other. Furthermore, an “Eastern 
1. Brown, World of Late Antiquity, 160–171 and 189–203.

384 
Ch apter 56
Hellenism,” based on the translation of Greek works, or their Syriac versions, 
into Pahlavi, also flourished at the court of Khusro Anoshirwan to such an 
extent that the last pagan phi­los­o­phers of Athens considered relocating to the 
Persian Empire to avoid the intolerance of Justinian ­after the Platonic Acad­
emy was closed in 532. The two empires ­were close enough to speak of them-
selves, in diplomatic exchanges, as “The Two Eyes of the Earth.”
At the time, my views on Persia ­were based on relatively slender evidence—
on scattered articles and on one major synthesis, L’Iran sous les sassanides of 
Arthur Christensen (1875–1945).2 Christensen may have exaggerated the 
“westernizing,” “Byzantinizing” aspect of the po­liti­cal reforms of Khusro I. But 
the more we have come to know in recent years about the nature of Sasanian 
culture as a ­whole, the more it appears that Persia was indeed a participant in 
a ­Middle Eastern late antiquity—­a late antiquity based on Mesopotamia 
rather than on the Mediterranean. One of the most heartening breakthroughs 
in more recent late antique studies has been the discovery of further evidence 
for a strong presence of late antique Syriac and Greek culture in Sasanian 
Mesopotamia and, even, in Iran itself.3
It seemed to me that the long wars between East Rome and Persia in the 
sixth and early seventh centuries ­were not (as East Roman writers presented 
them) between two incommensurable cultures—­Greeks and barbarians, 
Christians and Zoroastrian pagans. Instead, they ­were a ­family feud for the 
undivided mastery of the Fertile Crescent.4
But why did I choose Muhammad (570–626), rather than, say, Justinian or 
even Khusro I Anoshirwan, as the second figure in my title—as an appropriate 
bookend to the period of late antiquity? And why did I then continue for a 
further chapter beyond the death of the Prophet, to the age of Harun al-­Rashid 
(788–809) and Charlemagne (768–814)?
2. A. Christensen, L’Iran sous les sassanides (Copenhagen: E. Munksgaard, 1944).
3. See now Kevin Van Bladel, The Arabic Hermes: From Pagan Sage to Prophet of Science 
(Oxford University Press, 2009); Richard Payne, A State of Mixture: Christians, Zoroastrians, 
and Ira­nian Po­liti­cal Culture in Late Antiquity (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2015); 
and Joel Walker, “The Limits of Antiquity: Philosophy between Rome and Iran,” Ancient World 
33 (2002): 45–69.
4. See Matthew Canepa, The Two Eyes of the Earth: Art and Ritual Kingship between Rome 
and Sasanian Iran (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2009) and The Ira­nian Expanse: 
Transforming Royal Identity through Architecture, Landscape, and the Built Environment, 550 BCE–
642 CE (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2018), 251–374.

To Muh a mm a d 
385
The Message of Muhammad:  
Ignaz Goldziher (1850–1921)
My work on Syria and the ­Middle East increasingly indicated that I should not 
isolate the Arabian Peninsula from the politics, economy, and culture of the 
East Roman and Sasanian empires, as if the preaching of Muhammad and 
the formation of Islam had occurred on another planet. Compared with the 
magnificent recent studies of Arabia and the origins of Islam by Glen Bower-
sock and Christian Robin, which have appeared in the last de­cade, I had ­little 
to go on when I explored this theme.5 But I did have my friend and colleague 
at All Souls, Samuel Stern, who introduced me to the works of Ignaz Goldzi-
her, which he was in the pro­cess of translating.
Goldziher’s essays on the conflict between Arab aristocratic, warrior values 
and the message of the Qurʾân gripped me. I was deeply impressed by the 
manner in which he evoked the contrast between the ethics of the aristocratic 
shame culture of the Arabs, which guided the life of individuals in a tight-­knit 
tribal world, and the very dif­fer­ent message of Muhammad, which insisted on 
the relentless stripping down of individual believers to their bare selves, as 
sinners or saved—­like single grains of dust before God. It was a call to a proud 
elite to govern their lives, no longer by braggadocio and the opinion of their 
peers, but by the hope of Heaven and the chill fear of the Last Judgment.
This was an ascetic message that could have come from any con­temporary 
Syrian monastery, where monks lived their lives ­under the same constant 
awareness of the Last Judgment, the same fear of Hell, and the same hope of 
Paradise as that conjured up by Muhammad to guide the conduct of pious 
Muslims. In this sense, the preaching of Muhammad was the last, and the most 
challenging, echo of the religious revolution that I had studied since its begin-
nings in the age of Marcus Aurelius.6
Reading Goldziher, I realized that the message of the Qurʾân carried clear 
echoes of the Syria of the holy men whom I had just come to know: the same 
vivid imagery of Paradise, the same call to repentance, the same fear of Hell, 
and even—as in the case of the “commandments” of Symeon Stylites—­the 
5. G. W. Bowersock, Empires in Collision in Late Antiquity (Waltham, MA: Brandeis Univer-
sity Press, 2012) and The Crucible of Islam (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2017), 
and C. Robin, “Arabia and Ethiopia,” in The Oxford Handbook of Late Antiquity, ed. Scott Fitzger-
ald Johnson (Oxford University Press, 2012), 247–332.
6. I. Goldziher, Muslim Studies, vol. 1 (London: George Allen and Unwin, 1968).

386 
Ch apter 56
same attempt to bring the Law of God into daily life so as to master the tensions 
of a fractious society, as Muhammad did in Mecca and Medina. The Syriac 
background to the religious imagination of early Islam held my attention. 
The book of Tor Andrae (1885–1947), Mohammed: The Man and His Faith, had 
revealed parallels between the hymns of Ephraim the Syrian (ca. 306–373) and 
the religious imagery of the Qurʾân.7 This was only a beginning, but it was 
enough to inspire me.
Altogether, recent work on the origins of Islam had challenged the historian 
of late antiquity to sit up and take notice. I realized that Muhammad had to be 
included as one of the most impressive “new participants” in the religious 
turmoil of the late antique ­Middle East. This did not mean that I considered 
Muhammad to be derivative. Far from it. Rather, he summed up in a new 
language and with a new claim to authority, all that was most distinctive in the 
Christian and Jewish piety of his time.
The Fate of the Mediterranean:  
Henri Pirenne (1862–1935)
­There was also a more humdrum, Oxford reason for the last chapter. The 
Mohammed and Charlemagne of Henri Pirenne, which appeared in En­glish in 
1939, was a “must” for ­every undergraduate who studied the early medieval 
West. The “Pirenne thesis” was regularly debated in tutorials and in the lec-
tures on historical geography for the preliminary examination in the History 
School (an examination that undergraduates who had opted for history took 
in their first year). A brilliant ­little book, Mohammed and Charlemagne was 
one of the first attempts to mea­sure the impact of the rise of Islam on the 
economy of the early medieval West.8
Henri Pirenne was an outstanding historian of the cities of medieval Eu­
rope. In Mohammed and Charlemagne he moved backward in time. He told 
medievalists exactly when the ancient world ended and the ­Middle Ages 
began, and exactly why. It was the fault of the Arabs. He argued that the 
7. Tor Andrae, Mohammed: The Man and His Faith (London: George Allen and Unwin, 
1936).
8. Henri Pirenne, Mohammed and Charlemagne, trans. B. Miall (London: George Allen and 
Unwin, 1939); see Peter Brown, “Mohammed and Charlemagne by Henri Pirenne,” Daedalus 103 
(1974): 25–33, now in Society and the Holy in Late Antiquity (Berkeley: University of California 
Press, 1982), 66–79.

To Muh a mm a d 
387
barbarian invasions of the fifth ­century had not fundamentally altered the basis 
of Western society. This society had continued to be based on the Mediter-
ranean. A somewhat broken-­down “Romanity” survived for as long as the 
Mediterranean remained open to the commerce of the East.
But with the Arab invasions from the 640s onward the Mediterranean be-
came a Muslim lake: it fell into the hands of a hostile power. In Pirenne’s opin-
ion, the Muslim blockade of the Mediterranean brought the ancient world to 
an end. As a direct result of this blockade, the under-­Romanized, Germanic 
North took over from the socie­ties of the Mediterranean South whose com-
merce had been strangled. The empire of Charlemagne was based on Aachen, 
over six hundred miles to the north of Marseilles, in territory that had never 
been part of the Roman Empire. Cut off from its Mediterranean roots, it 
was the first truly post-­Roman society to emerge in western Eu­rope. Hence 
Pirenne’s famous remark: “It is therefore strictly correct to say that without 
Mohammed, Charlemagne would have been inconceivable.”9 Seldom has a 
short book conjured up with such conviction a supposed turning point in the 
history of the West.
The Missing Link: Late Antiquity in Islam.  
Ugo Monneret de Villard (1881–1954)
But was Pirenne right? Paradoxically, it was discussion of this frail but arresting 
hypothesis (proposed by one of the greatest Western medievalists of his time) 
that first introduced me to the prob­lem of the survival of late antique forms of 
art, culture, religion, and administration in the ­Middle East in the centuries 
­after the Muslim conquests. This was ­because the debate sparked by the Pi-
renne thesis had involved a two-­pronged criticism.
The first criticism addressed Pirenne’s views as an economic historian of 
the medieval West. He seemed to have overestimated the degree to which 
Western society had once depended on its commercial links with the eastern 
Mediterranean: only if ­these links had been crucial would a Muslim blockade 
of the Mediterranean have had such drastic effects. But many economic histo-
rians of the late antique and early medieval West thought that this was not the 
case—­trans-­Mediterranean trade had already run down considerably before the 
Muslims reached the sea. Throughout western Eu­rope, many of the changes 
9. Pirenne, Mohammed and Charlemagne, 234; see now Bonnie Effros, “The Enduring 
Attraction of the Pirenne Thesis,” Speculum 92 (2017): 184–208.

388 
Ch apter 56
that Pirenne ascribed to the Muslim invasions ­were already well ­under way by 
the end of the sixth ­century.
The Pirenne thesis posed a dif­fer­ent prob­lem for Islamicists. They ­were less 
concerned with the impact of the Muslim conquests on western Eu­rope than 
with the effect of ­these conquests on the ­Middle East and on North Africa as 
a ­whole. How rapidly did the Muslims change the face of western Asia and the 
southern Mediterranean? Pirenne had assumed, on the basis of the scholarship 
available to him, that the Arab invasions had brought about a sudden and 
drastic change—­that a new and alien society, very dif­fer­ent from that of the 
ancient world, had formed rapidly along the eastern and southern shores of 
the Mediterranean and throughout the ­Middle East.
But was this the case? Every­thing that I had learned about the Islamic world 
in its first centuries spoke against this view. This was particularly so with recent 
studies of the art and architecture of the postconquest ­Middle East. They 
seemed to show that the Muslims ruled a society that changed far less rapidly 
than had been ­imagined by previous scholars. Palaces, country villas, bath­
houses, and marketplaces, even mosques, continued to be built according to 
late antique traditions of art and architecture that endured for centuries, 
changing only slowly into their classical “Islamic” form.
­Here I was fortunate to receive from Sam Stern a rare copy of an Italian 
masterpiece (for most copies of the book had been lost in the disastrous flooding 
of the Arno in Florence in 1966, which had swept away the ware­house in which 
they ­were stored). This was the Introduzione allo studio dell’archeologia Islamica 
of Ugo Monneret de Villard, the ­great Italian pioneer of the study of Islamic art.10
Reading the Introduzione was like discovering the missing link. Monneret 
de Villard showed how buildings and ornamental forms that had been thought 
to be quintessentially new and authentically Islamic ­were by no means new 
creations. They had developed naturally out of the provincial art of Syria in 
the long centuries of late antiquity. The splendid, mosaic-­laden mosques and 
audience halls of the Ummayad caliphs of Damascus ­were not the fairy-­tale 
products of some alien, Arab culture. They ­were late antique products, still 
unfolding with unbroken exuberance for centuries ­after the Muslim conquest 
of the ­Middle East.
In the same way, the non-­Muslim populations of the seventh-­ and eighth-­
century ­Middle East have come to be studied in detail as active agents in the 
10. Ugo Monneret de Villard, Introduzione allo studio dell’archeologia Islamica (Venice: 
Fondazione Giorgio Cini, 1966).

To Muh a mm a d 
389
formation of Islam itself, to a degree that I could not have dared to imagine 
when I wrote The World of Late Antiquity. Just as Islamic architecture grew 
from deep roots in the preexisting traditions of Syria, so Islam developed in 
constant dialogue with Christians and Jews all over the territories of the new 
Islamic empire.
Nowadays, scholars such as Jack Tannous and the late Tom Sizgorich 
(1970–2011) have revolutionized our knowledge of this last and most tan-
talizing phase of late antiquity in the ­Middle East. They have shown how 
persons reared in a world still bathed in the long late after­noon sun of late 
antiquity brought the skills, the learning, and the questionings that would 
root the new religion in the rich subsoil of a very ancient world. In 1968, I 
had only the most fragile hope, supported by a few outstanding friends and 
a few ­really good books, that such a story might be told, and with such an 
ending.11
“Overlooking the Core of Classical Civilization”
The World of Late Antiquity appeared in May 1971. In June I received a warm 
letter from Ralph Davis, the medievalist who had encouraged me to publish 
my first articles in History (the journal of the Historical Association, whose 
outreach I had always admired), and who was now professor of medieval his-
tory at Birmingham.
Dear Peter,
Just a line to say how very much I enjoyed reading The World of Late 
Antiquity. . . . ​Who would have thought that the best qualities of Powicke 
and Jones could be so gloriously married in one book. I ­don’t know if you 
like it to be labeled, but I’m sure it ­will start a New School. Ancients and 
Medievalists alike are thrilled ­because ­we’ve got something to think about. 
Not many books do that, and prompt so much self-­recognition.
Ralph was referring to Sir Maurice Powicke’s capacity for immersion in the 
past and Hugo Jones’s understanding of the workings of late Roman society. 
It could not have been a more welcome compliment.
11. T. Sizgorich, Vio­lence and Belief in Late Antiquity: Militant Devotion in Chris­tian­ity and 
Islam (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2009); and J. Tannous, The Making of the 
Medieval ­Middle East: Religion, Society and ­Simple Believers (Prince­ton, NJ: Prince­ton University 
Press, 2019).

390 
Ch apter 56
Moses Finley (1912–1986), who had recently succeeded Jones as professor 
of ancient history at Cambridge, was less thrilled. He was a sturdy brawler for 
the classical world. The World of Late Antiquity confirmed his worst suspicions 
of ­those who wandered too far beyond its limits. His review appeared in The 
Times for May 1971:
The historian of the ­later Roman Empire leads a hard life nowadays. The words 
“decline and fall” have become taboo in the most fash­ion­able circles. So has 
“pro­gress”. Social anthropologists have indoctrinated us with a relativism 
about social systems in which value-­judgments are not allowed. Artists and 
collectors have discovered modernity in Byzantine icons, Benin bronzes, 
Aztec pottery and carved boomerangs. Peter Brown agrees enthusiastically 
and adds Plotinus, the mystical neo-­Platonist to the cata­logue of “late An-
tique” moderns.
That the historian can no longer rest content with war, politics and in-
stitutions but must also be an art historian, a sociologist, a theologian, a 
phi­los­o­pher and moralist, and a psychologist is no bad ­thing. But universal-
ity has its risks. Mr. Brown’s paean to neo-­Platonism in par­tic­u­lar, and to 
Byzantinism in general (embracing the civilization of Persia too) manages 
to overlook the core of classical civilization.12
Coming from Finley, this was an excommunication rather than an argu-
ment. Other newspaper reviewers ­were more charitable. Philip Toynbee 
(1916–1981) entitled his review (with a pointed dig at the title of Gibbon’s 
masterpiece) “Decline and Fallacy”:
It is obvious from the first pages that Mr Brown likes this highly-­coloured, 
disputatious, confused but courageous world. . . . ​His intention is to make 
us look at this old material with a new and kinder eye.
Among the academics, the review by Averil Cameron was the most per-
ceptive. I still have the typescript of that review, which she sent me in ad-
vance. In the review, she raised the same prob­lem as she had already done 
in a long letter to me on the draft of my article on the holy man—­the prob­
lem of generalization. Given how ­little we know about the ancient world, she 
questioned how much our glimpses of individual ­people in the past could bear 
the weight of generalization that we place upon them. How much can a person 
be a type?
12. Moses Finley, “Overlooking the Core of Classical Civilisation,” The Times, May 1971.

To Muh a mm a d 
391
The fact is that by and large our knowledge of the ancient, even of the late 
antique world, is still largely a knowledge of individuals. The mass of infor-
mation which the modern historian takes for granted is simply not ­there. 
This is less of a handicap for Peter Brown . . . ​for his forte is precisely in the 
sensitive ­handling of isolated scraps of evidence often relating to individu-
als, ­whether obscure or famous. His history . . . ​is very much a history of 
­people. Names like Plotinus or Athanasius recur from page to page ­until 
they acquire an evocative aura of their own, and the book is full of such 
curiosities as the pagan gentlemen of Harran [south of Edessa] who wor-
shipped Socrates, Plato and Aristotle as late as the tenth ­century. It makes 
for absorbing reading, but a warning bell would sometimes be welcome 
when such aberrations are treated as types. . . . ​The method, then, is seduc-
tive but risky, especially when used in conjunction with a literary style of 
such gloss. . . . ​­There is even danger in the bountiful illustrations and their 
in­ter­est­ing captions.13
My answer to Averil, both in correspondence and in conversation, was that, 
as a medievalist, I was used to dealing with periods of rich evidence. This 
meant that I was more confident than she was that one example—if well 
chosen—­would be corroborated by many ­others. It was a ­matter of choosing 
the right example out of a large pool of available evidence. I had two outstand-
ing models for this anecdotal use of evidence—­Marc Bloch’s Feudal Society 
and Richard Southern’s The Making of the ­Middle Ages. Both made extensive 
use of incidents and details culled from a rich hoard of charters, annals, and 
chansons de geste that made the ­Middle Ages come alive.14 I had hoped to 
do the same for late antiquity.
13. Averil Cameron, En­glish Historical Review 88 (1973): 116–117.
14. Marc Bloch, Feudal Society, trans. L. A. Manyon (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 
1961); and Richard Southern, The Making of the ­Middle Ages (New Haven, CT: Yale University 
Press, 1953).

392
57
Medieval Change
Teaching the ­Middle Ages
­There is a danger, when describing any academic trajectory, of concentrating 
on the high points—on the decisive articles and the well-­known books. But, 
in many ways, ­these are only the tips of icebergs. Beneath them lies a ­whole 
world of teaching and administrative duties, relations with colleagues, friend-
ships, and secondary interests.
This was certainly the case with me in the Oxford of the early 1970s. My 
work on the holy man and The World of Late Antiquity showed that I had 
thrown myself into the study of late antiquity, and particularly into the study 
of its ­Middle Eastern regions. This was where what I would call my active 
interests—my principal objects of research—­lay.
Yet I remained deeply attached to the Western ­Middle Ages as a ­whole. On 
a personal level, I was surrounded by friends who ­were medievalists. Further-
more, beginning in 1972, I held a lectureship in medieval history at Merton 
College. Despite the title, the lectureship involved no lecturing. Rather, I was 
expected to give tutorials to all history undergraduates in Merton on the com-
pulsory paper in En­glish history from the Roman Conquest to 1307.
This was no small undertaking. It meant that I would spend at least seven 
hours each week for one term each year trying to persuade intelligent young 
persons, many of whose hearts lay in the modern field, that the Norman Con-
quest and the ­legal reforms of Henry II (which they ­were condemned by the 
Oxford history syllabus to study ­whether they liked it or not) ­were of any in-
terest whatsoever.
Quite apart from ­those institutional links, ­there was one further fiber of the 
heart that held me to the ­Middle Ages; and that was my love of the En­glish 

Medieva l Ch a nge 
393
countryside. At this time, landscape meant far more to me than a pretty back-
ground. The fields, villages, and ancient churches of Oxfordshire offered a 
direct way into the past, as it had done for me when I first cycled around 
Shropshire with Laurence LeQuesne. They kept me in touch with the continu-
ous history of ­England from the last days of Roman Britain onward, as I made 
my way around an ancient landscape, whose roots reached back—­layer ­after 
layer—to the ­later empire.
To take only a few examples: an eighteen-­mile drive along the A40 from 
Oxford to Swinbrook and a short walk beside the river Windrush would lead, 
across fields, to the ­little medieval chapel dedicated to Saint Oswald (635–
642)—­a Saxon king and warrior-­saint, known to the Venerable Bede. In a hole 
in the floor, covered by a glass pane, visitors could look down and see the 
mosaic of the Roman villa in whose ruins an early Saxon church had been 
founded. The Saxon church had been rebuilt in the ­later ­Middle Ages. Its walls 
­were covered with frescoes of the ­fourteenth ­century, showing the quintes-
sentially late medieval, macabre scene of the encounter between the Three 
Living and the Three Dead: a thousand years of history in one small country 
church.
A further fifteen miles west, along the A40, lay Chedworth, a lordly Roman 
villa of the fourth ­century AD; and, close to Chedworth, in the valley of the 
Coln, ­there was the village of Withington, which had only recently been shown 
to have been the center of a Roman estate whose bound­aries remained intact 
and productive, despite the collapse of Roman rule in Britain, from the age of 
Constantine to the age of King Alfred (848/49–899).1
To return from the Frogmill Inn at Withington to Oxford in the eve­ning, 
as I once did, past gentle downs walled with golden stone, as the sun sank in 
the west and a ­great moon ­rose in the east, was to have bonded with the early 
medieval past through the earth of Oxfordshire. Whenever pos­si­ble, when 
teaching, I would use my journeys into the countryside to illustrate themes 
in the history of medieval ­England—­a Roman villa ­here, a Saxon church ­there, 
the ruins of a ­castle or a monastery gave real­ity to the history that I taught to 
my students from Merton. In this way, after­noon drives through the Oxford 
countryside, combined with tutorial teaching, kept me in touch with the West-
ern ­Middle Ages at a time when my mind had traveled far to the East.
1. H.P.R. Finberg, Lucerna: Some Prob­lems in the Early History of ­England (London: Macmil-
lan, 1964).

394 
Ch apter 57
Daedalus in Rome
On one occasion, I wrote an article on a medieval topic. I had been invited to 
take part in a workshop or­ga­nized by Arnaldo Momigliano in collaboration 
with the American Acad­emy of Arts and Sciences. It took place in Rome in 
September 1972 and continued in Venice in September 1973. It was an exciting 
occasion for me, as I had not been in Rome since my stay at the British School 
at Rome in 1958. The workshop was ostensibly devoted to a discussion of the 
notion of an “Axial Age” propounded by Karl Jaspers (1883–1969). But Jaspers’s 
grandiose ideas ­were soon left ­behind. Instead, we focused on the more man-
ageable topic of how decisive intellectual changes happen in traditional, pre-
modern socie­ties.
I offered to represent the ­Middle Ages, by addressing a prob­lem from a field 
that had always attracted me—­the relation between society and the super­
natural. I proposed to reinterpret a significant shift in the role allotted to the 
super­natural in ­human society by studying the abandonment of the ordeal in 
twelfth-­century Eu­rope. I thought that if I could use the social anthropology 
of Evans-­Pritchard and Mary Douglas to make sense of the role of sorcery in 
the ­later empire, I could also make sense of the seemingly barbaric ritual of the 
ordeal in the early medieval West.2
The Medieval Re­nais­sance
The end of the ordeal in the twelfth ­century called for a reexamination of this 
kind. It had usually been presented as a decisive step in the ­grand narrative of 
Eu­ro­pean pro­gress ­toward ever-­greater rationality in law and government—­a 
“birth of reason” in western Eu­rope that signaled the end of the Dark Ages.
Medievalists ­were proud of that birth of reason. They had long pointed out 
that medieval Eu­rope had been the very opposite of a static society. In par­tic­
u­lar, the eleventh and twelfth centuries had witnessed a massive reordering 
of society through the growth of a knightly class, through the establishment of 
an ever-­sharper division between clergy and laity, and through an intensive 
fostering of intellectual life connected with the birth of the universities. In this 
view, the changes of the twelfth ­century ­were presented as the dawn of a new 
2. P. Brown, “Society and the Super­natural: A Medieval Change,” Daedalus 104 (1975): 
133–151, now in Society and the Holy in Late Antiquity (Berkeley: University of California Press, 
1982), 320–332.

Medieva l Ch a nge 
395
age, a Re­nais­sance before the Re­nais­sance, to invoke the challenging title 
of the ­great Harvard medievalist Charles Homer Haskins (1870–1937), The 
Re­nais­sance of the Twelfth ­Century.3
“The Primitive Age”?
But was this ­really how it happened? I had no quarrel with the achievements 
of the twelfth ­century. What I did not accept was the tendency to pre­sent ­these 
changes as if they had emerged from a profoundly archaic, prerational society. 
In his brilliant ­little book Western Society and the Church in the ­Middle Ages, even 
Dick Southern succumbed to this prejudice. His chapter on the early ­Middle 
Ages was entitled “The Primitive Age c700–­c1050.”4 In line with this view, the 
withering of the ordeal in the twelfth ­century was acclaimed as a triumph of 
reason, a sign that Eu­rope had emerged from the long tunnel of its barbaric past.
I challenged the view that early medieval Eu­rope could be treated as no 
more than the “primitive” pre­de­ces­sor of an increasingly rational High ­Middle 
Ages. Such a view seemed dangerously close to that of the proponents of 
the idea of a “primitive mentality,” entirely dif­fer­ent from that of modern 
Eu­ro­pe­ans. But was the ordeal as primitive a mechanism as scholars made it 
out to be? Was its abandonment a sign that medieval society had become 
notably more rational? By working through the rituals of the ordeal and the 
social circumstances of its abandonment, I intended to chip away at one link, 
at least, in what struck me as a self-­satisfied master narrative.
The Ordeal in Action: Ritual and Consensus
How did I do it; and why did I choose this topic of all the changes that had 
occurred in the twelfth ­century? First and foremost, I wanted to show what an 
anthropological approach to a complex ritual could do. Once again, I owed 
much to Paul Hyams, the historian of medieval law who had introduced me 
to the work of Mary Douglas and who was also working on the ordeal.5 Paul 
3. Charles Homer Haskins, The Re­nais­sance of the Twelfth ­Century (New York: Meridian 
Books, 1957).
4. R. W. Southern, Western Society and the Church in the ­Middle Ages (Harmonds­worth, 
Middlesex: Penguin Books, 1970), 27–33.
5. See now P. Hyams, “Trial by Ordeal: the Key to Proof in Early Common Law,” in On the 
Laws and Customs of ­England, ed. M. S. Arnold (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 
1981), 90–126.

396 
Ch apter 57
provided me with a crucial lead: he directed me to a register of cases that had 
been settled by ordeal in the early thirteenth ­century, at Varad in Hungary.
I worked my way through the descriptions of ordeals in the Register of 
Varad much as Evans-­Pritchard had worked his way through the dancing ses-
sions of Azande witch doctors. It seemed to me that ­these rituals functioned 
in ways that had a reason of their own. They ­were far from being the result of 
mere “barbaric” credulity. They ­were ways of dealing with a specific distribu-
tion of power in society that changed—­and not necessarily for the better—in 
the course of the twelfth ­century.
I suggested that the ordeal was a carefully orchestrated device for the reso-
lution of conflict in socie­ties where no power could act as a tiebreaker, other 
than the power ascribed to the super­natural. ­Those who resorted to the ordeal 
­were usually communities of equals or near equals, where neither side would 
give way except to God.
Furthermore, I pointed out that the ordeal was by no means a cut-­and-­dried 
affair—­a sudden miracle that would be accepted by all out of sheer credulity. 
On the contrary: it depended on signs that ­were inherently ambiguous. Each 
form of ordeal had its built-in uncertainties. Had the champion cheated in trial 
by ­battle? Had the festering wound caused by holding the hot iron truly 
healed, to show the innocence of the contestant? In the ordeal by ­water, had 
the person truly floated? I spent much time in a municipal swimming pool, 
testing ­whether I was able to sink unambiguously or to remain buoyant. I in-
variably ended up floundering in a manner from which no clear conclusion 
could be drawn.
Hence the final result of the ordeal was never ­really left to God alone. It was 
worked out in the face-­to-­face group gathered to witness the ordeal. One side 
had to agree, eventually, that the signs of God’s intervention (highly ambigu-
ous though they often ­were) spoke in ­favor of their opponents. But in giving 
way, they gave way to God, and not to their opponents. Thus belief in the in-
tervention of God was a face-­saver. Even more impor­tant, it was a decelerator. 
The solemn rituals of the ordeal ­were spread out over time. They slowed down 
potentially violent confrontations and gave both parties time to negotiate. Far 
from being “irrational,” the ordeal was a tried-­and-­true device for the achieve-
ment of consensus in socie­ties without strong local leadership. Its solemn cer-
emonies ­were a tribute to “the vast bedrock of cunning with which medieval 
man actually faced and manipulated the super­natural in their affairs.”6
6. Brown, “A Medieval Change,” in Society and the Holy in Late Antiquity, 325.

Medieva l Ch a nge 
397
So why had it ended? Was it ­really ­because twelfth-­century persons became 
more rational? No. It was ­because the state grew stronger. The growth of state 
power in many areas of Eu­rope undermined the communities of roughly bal-
anced persons who had made use of the ordeal. ­These communities had con-
sisted of villa­gers at the bottom, and warrior-­elites at the top. Persons in each 
group had the support of families or dependents ­behind them; they needed 
much persuading before they would back down. As a result, law and order 
­were treated as consensual ­matters—­they had to be negotiated, not imposed. 
In the same way, the ordeal helped to create consensus in a group that, without 
it, could have been permanently disrupted. Closure could be reached only 
through consensus; and consensus could be reached only by an appeal to a 
force outside the ­human community—to the super­natural.
In the course of the twelfth ­century, this situation changed. The notion of a 
consensus formed around the ordeal lost out to more forceful ways of bringing 
disputes to an end. Royal agents no longer needed to massage consensus among 
villa­gers by solemn and time-­consuming rituals before coming to a judgment: 
“The gallows could speak for itself, without mystification.”7 In this way, the 
hangman brought the ordeal to an end far more effectively than did any rational 
argument proposed by the schoolmen. Far from being a triumph of reason, the 
end of the ordeal registered a triumph of state power at its most abrasive.
“Society and the Super­natural: A Medieval Change” was my last article writ-
ten in Oxford. It showed the drift of my thought. It was something of a manifesto 
against the Eu­ro­pean exceptionalism that was implicit in many narratives of the 
Western ­Middle Ages. This view seemed to imply that Eu­rope had a mono­poly 
of rationality and pro­gress; and that its more ancient neighbors in Byzantium 
and the Islamic world had somehow missed out, ­because they had not passed 
through the changes that occurred in the privileged West.
But this, of course, raised a further question. If such rituals—­and ­others 
like it, such as the cult of saints, which flourished at the same time—­were not 
to be dismissed as part of a “Primitive Age,” then what had the early ­Middle 
Ages in the West ­really been like? It seemed to me that the quality of an 
entire epoch was at stake. This was a theme worthy of extended research. It 
was time to leave the living holy men of the East and to return to the Latin 
West—to examine more closely the role ascribed, in Western society, to the 
“presence” of the long-­dead saints in their splendid tombs, as sources of heal-
ing, justice, and dignity among the living.
7. Brown, “A Medieval Change,” in Society and the Holy in Late Antiquity, 323.

398
58
Presences
The Aesthetics of the Holy
The Daedalus group met again in Venice in late September 1973 to continue its 
discussion of the Axial Age. But the discussions meant less to me than the fact 
that I was back in northern Italy. I had not traveled ­there for some time. I found 
myself deeply moved by what I saw.
This was not the first time that this had happened to me. Ever since I first 
wandered spellbound through the colleges of Oxford at the time that I took 
the scholarship examination, and had been converted by the experience to the 
study of the ­Middle Ages, I found myself challenged to take in entire periods 
of history through my eyes. To look at works of art, and to ask myself what it 
had been like to see them for the first time, had been an integral part of my 
evolution as a historian.
Now, on coming to Venice on the occasion of the Daedalus workshop, I felt 
as if I had grown new eyes to carry a load of beauty that spoke directly to me. 
I wandered around in the ­great golden honeycomb of San Marco, and then I 
drove down to Ravenna, to view the iridescent mosaics of San Vitale. At 
Sant’Apollinare in Classe, I was struck by the ­great sarcophagi that lay in the 
side chapels. They ­were in Parian marble, so smooth as to seem almost trans-
parent—so transparent, indeed, that local legend could have it that, in such 
sarcophagi, it was pos­si­ble to see the body of the dead person, as if trapped in 
milk-­white glass.1
The churches of Ravenna ­were filled with the shimmering greens of Para-
dise. Ingeniously arranged apses sheathed in gold mosaic and lit by candles 
1. Agnellus of Ravenna, The Book of Pontiffs of the Church of Ravenna, trans. D. M. Deliyannis 
(Washington, DC: Catholic University of Amer­i­ca Press, 2004), John I, 138.

Pr esences 
399
seemed to trap the light of day in the midst of darkness. In ­these moments of 
nonverbal, visual encounter with the past, I received a lesson in the aesthetics 
of the holy in the late antique and early medieval West.
I had always admired late antique and Byzantine art; but this was some-
thing dif­fer­ent. What I sensed was an im­mense effort to make the special dead 
pre­sent in the ­here and now through the beauty that surrounded their graves. 
I realized that I would have to learn what that sense of the presence of the glori-
ous dead, evoked by such beauty, had meant to early medieval persons. Most 
studies of early medieval art told me what ideological message was conveyed 
by the images on the mosaics or by the architectural décor of the shrine. But 
they did not tell me what it felt like to worship at such a shrine. To understand 
this, I would have to learn to look at the art with early medieval eyes, and to 
read the texts with an early medieval sensibility in mind.
In Italy, my thoughts ­were triggered, almost subliminally, by the shimmer 
of mosaics and by the transparent, flesh-­like white of marble tombs. What 
reassured me, when I returned to ­England, was that the link between beauty 
and the holy which I had experienced visually in Venice and Ravenna was 
congruent with what I read in the pages of a well-­known author writing in early 
medieval Gaul—­Gregory of Tours (538–594).
I had embarked on a reading of all the works of Gregory—­not only his 
well-­known Histories, but also his little-­read Books of Miracles. I did not know 
what to expect. Somewhat to my surprise, I found the same aesthetic sensibil-
ity in his accounts of the miracles of the saints in the shrines of Gaul as I had 
found in the mosaics and sarcophagi of sixth-­century Ravenna. The miracles 
he recorded ­were beauty in action. He conjured up a world filled with tombs in 
shining Parian marble, with hints of unearthly perfumes, and with stories of 
church pavements covered in red roses that bloomed miraculously in midwin-
ter. When they appeared in dreams, the saints had lily-­white skins and vivid 
red cheeks. As Gregory described them, they could have stepped straight out 
of the mosaics of their time.
I had not associated Gregory with such a sense of grace and beauty. As 
bishop of Tours (from 573 to 594), Gregory was best known to historians for his 
Histories. ­These ­were consistently misnamed as a History of the Franks, as if to 
place them firmly in the barbarian world. His Latin was judged to be as barba-
rous as the events that he described. His credulity was held to be unbounded. 
As I said in a paper that I wrote at this time, “a tradition of interpretation . . . ​is 
inclined to join, as in a maximum and minimum thermometer, the low ebb of 
Gregory’s Latinity with the high tide of his credulity.”

400 
Ch apter 58
And yet, as I read him, it seemed to me that Gregory, usually presented as 
the mirror of a brutish age, shared with his contemporaries in Gaul and the 
Latin West a distinctive and refined aesthetic of the holy, of which the mosaics 
of Ravenna ­were only one example among many. It struck me that this visual 
beauty was not simply ­there to be enjoyed by viewers. Beauty was a sign of 
power—of power over death. As Gregory described them, the miracles at 
the shrines of the saints represented strange inversions of the grim decay of 
nature. Withered limbs “flowered” like the green trees of Paradise; the stench 
of the grave was replaced by wafts of heavenly perfume; trees blossomed with 
leaves like a flock of white doves to show that ­those buried beneath them 
flourished in the other world. Reading such accounts, I realized that Gregory, 
and ­others like him, had performed the remarkable emotional feat of turning 
the summum malum of physical death into something that condensed all that 
was most beautiful and refined in the life of their age.
The saints themselves ­were represented as graciousness itself, models of 
late classical poise. A para­lyzed ­woman dumped by her relatives so as to live 
from begging alms at the shrine of Saint Julian at Brioude was approached by 
the saint in a dream:
He was tall, he was spotlessly dressed, suave, he had a lit-up face, blond hair 
graying slightly, brisk in his movements, smooth-­spoken and charming to 
talk to; his complexion was brighter than a lily, so that out of all the thou-
sands of men she had ever seen, she had never seen the likes of him.
He gave her his arm, and led her to the tomb—­and she woke up cured.2
From Function to Presence
­These stories came as a challenge to me. They led me to reconsider aspects of 
my own work on holy men and ­women. In my article “The Rise and Function 
of the Holy Man” I had stressed the role of the holy man as an uncommitted 
arbiter in the midst of a conflict-­ridden society. I had claimed that, by adopting 
the role of a total stranger, the holy man became “objectivity personified.”3 
His magnificent opacity to the world around him seemed to make him an 
2. Gregory of Tours, De virtutibus sancti Iuliani, 9, ed. B. Krusch, Gregorii Turonensis Miracula 
Scriptores rerum merovingicarum 1:2 (Hanover: Hahn, 1885), 118–119, now in R. Van Dam, Saints 
and Their Miracles in Late Antique Gaul (Prince­ton, NJ: Prince­ton University Press, 1993), 170.
3. Brown, “Rise and Function of the Holy Man,” in Society and the Holy in Late Antiquity, 132.

Pr esences 
401
object rather than a person: one Syrian holy man, for instance, was transported 
from one village to another, cell and all, without noticing it. He had already 
become an icon. In this way, the line between a holy person and a holy object 
was deliberately blurred.
I wondered ­whether something analogous could have happened with the 
­great closed tombs of the saints in Gregory’s Gaul, wrapped as they ­were in 
mysterious opacity. ­Silent blocks of marble, they could be saturated with the 
hopes and fears of the group gathered around them while themselves remain-
ing faceless. The holy dead could have become, in effect, not persons, but holy 
­things.
Gregory of Tours: Praesentia
Yet this was not what happened. The saints ­were not faceless to Gregory. His 
literary artistry was devoted to conjuring up the vivid men and ­women who 
lay in ­those seemingly impenetrable sarcophagi. They ­were living presences to 
him, more vivid and more active, now that their souls ­were in Heaven, than 
they had ever been on earth.
Praesentia, praesens—­“presence,” “pre­sent”—­were crucial words for Greg-
ory. They summed up an entire view of the relation between Heaven and 
earth. Saints ­were pre­sent in their tombs ­because their souls ­were fully alive in 
Paradise: it was as if the energy of Paradise flowed back into their dead bodies, 
so that their tombs “blazed” like crackling lightning with miracles of healing 
and similar deeds of power.
This meant, among other ­things, that Gregory’s relations to the saints ­were 
not governed by anything as unreflecting as mere “credulity”—as all too many 
scholars claimed. They ­were governed by a punctilious code of etiquette 
­toward ­imagined invisible persons. This etiquette was summed up by Gregory 
in the word reverentia. Reverentia had a heavi­ly freighted opposite—­rusticitas. 
By this, Gregory did not mean surviving remnants of rural paganism. Such 
paganism caused him ­little worry. What mattered for him was slobbishness—­a 
lack of attention on the part of Christians of any class and region to the exact-
ing codes that ­were supposed to govern their relations with the invisible pres-
ences who stood in their midst.
And ­these codes ­were surprisingly courtly. The heavy, proto-­feudal relation 
of patron to client was a part of ­these codes: Gregory knew what it was like to 
approach a saint in fear and trembling, as if the saint ­were an angry lord. But 
the more I read, the more I realized that this was not all ­there was to it. 

402 
Ch apter 58
Gregory’s relations with the saints also seemed to be suffused with a late clas-
sical courtesy. Amicitia—­friendship—­was included, as was imagery taken 
from the heady loyalties of members of the late Roman elites for their teachers 
and mentors. ­These ­people had been approached as objects of gratitude and 
love. In the same way, the saints, as Gregory ­imagined them, ­were not merely 
faceless wielders of power: they ­were beloved persons, dear to the heart.
The Invisible Companion
My interest in the hagiographical work of Gregory of Tours was not only 
guided by my visual experiences. I had also read extensively in general studies 
of ancient religion. What struck me most in this reading was a very old and 
widespread theme—­the belief in an intimate bonding (amounting almost to 
the merging) of the higher reaches of the self with an Invisible Companion. 
This bonding was rooted in the nature of the universe. Person and invisible 
protector ­were seen as linked together in the ­great chain of being that united 
the rustling, many-­layered cosmos of late antique thought.
A millennium of Mediterranean piety lay ­behind this search for invisible 
friends and guiding spirits who joined Heaven and earth: the daimôn—­the 
guiding genius—of Socrates; the divine Comes—­the personal protecting 
god—of the emperors; and the more homely figure of the guardian angel in 
Judaism and Chris­tian­ity.
As I read Gregory, I was impressed to see how much of this ancient theme 
lay in the background of his treatment of the relations between the saints and 
their ­human protégés. It marked him out as a man whose thought-­world still 
belonged to late antiquity. Far from being a grim harbinger of the ­Middle Ages, 
Gregory had gathered into his works the rich harvest of the Christian imagina-
tion of late antique Gaul.4
Altogether, I was made aware, by my work on Gregory’s deep roots in the 
late antique religious world, that new prob­lems had crept up on me. I realized 
that a place had to be found for a wider range of relations between holy figures 
and the society they lived in than the one I had offered in the late 1960s.
When I first wrote on the holy man, it had seemed sufficient to stress his 
role as an objective figure who functioned as an impersonal arbiter in a 
4. For my most recent thoughts on Gregory, see Peter Brown, The Ransom of the Soul: After-
life and Wealth in Early Western Chris­tian­ity (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2015), 
149–182.

Pr esences 
403
tension-­ridden society. But holy men and ­women ­were also persons. Living or 
dead, they had to be approached not only in terms of their social function. The 
scholar also had to make due allowance, when studying the expectations of 
­those who turned to them for guidance and healing, for the heavy tug on the 
heart of worship and for the need for a sense of closeness to benign and beauti-
ful beings with much-­loved ­human ­faces.
One scene summed up the change for me. As I wandered around San 
Marco, I remember being struck by an exquisite Byzantine image of the Virgin 
and Child. It was placed at eye level on one of the corner piers of the central 
dome, on the way to the Trea­sury. It was not a painted icon but was sculpted 
in low relief in pure white marble. Caught in the dancing light of many tapers 
and worn down by innumerable kisses, the marble seemed as luminous and 
as transparent as a waxen candle. It was known as the Madonna of the Kiss. 
Returning to Oxford, I found the verses of W. B. Yeats that summed up, for 
me, the discovery of “presence”—of Gregory’s sense that certain ­things or 
persons could be picked out, in a dark world, as uniquely charged with love 
and beauty:
Both nuns and ­mothers worship images,
But ­those the candles light are not as ­those
That animate a ­mother’s reveries,
But keep a marble or a bronze repose,
And yet they too break hearts—­O Presences
That passion, piety or affection knows,
And that all heavenly glory symbolize.5
In late antiquity and in the early ­Middle Ages, “Presences” had it in them 
to “break hearts.” They touched my heart also. The cult of the saints in early 
medieval western Eu­rope became one of the themes that I would study most 
actively in the coming years. My reading of Gregory of Tours proved to be the 
beginning of a new research agenda that I would pursue, for many years and 
in many dif­fer­ent environments, ­until the publication of my book The Cult of 
the Saints: Its Rise and Function in Latin Chris­tian­ity in 1981.6
5. W. B. Yeats, “Among Schoolchildren,” in The Tower (1928).
6. Peter Brown, The Cult of the Saints: Its Rise and Function in Latin Chris­tian­ity (Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 1981). The enlarged edition of 2015 contains a long introduction, 
which surveys the pro­gress of the field and includes my second thoughts on many of the themes 
touched on in the book.

404
59
From the 
Mediterranean . . .
Landscape and History: Fernand Braudel (1902–1985)
Meanwhile, in 1973, my teaching of historical geography for the preliminary 
examination (for which I had volunteered to give lectures) added a ­whole 
other dimension to my study of the world of late antiquity around the Mediter-
ranean, in the ­Middle East, and, yet further to the east, in the im­mense and 
largely unknown world of Sasanian Iran. This widening and deepening of my 
historical horizon was due largely to the availability, for the first time in En­
glish, of a single, remarkable book.
In 1972, Siân Reynolds published her En­glish translation of Fernand Brau-
del’s masterpiece, La Méditerranée et le Monde Méditerranéen à l’Époque de 
Philippe II. I had first read La Méditerranée in 1956, on the urging of my New 
College friend Jan Safranek. It had lingered in the back of my mind. But now 
I returned to it, in Reynolds’s translation, and found that it opened up new hori-
zons for me. It encouraged me to place the drama of the last centuries of the 
ancient world and the beginning of the ­Middle Ages against the background 
of the varied landscapes of the Mediterranean and the ­Middle East.1
The translation of Braudel’s pa­norama of the sixteenth-­century Mediterranean 
acted like an intravenous drip in En­glish academic circles. It altered our historical 
imagination. Though devoted to the reign of Philip II (1555–1598), its magisterial 
evocation of the enduring features of Mediterranean history—­the rhythm of 
1. F. Braudel, La Méditerranée et le Monde Méditerranéen à l’Époque de Philippe II (Paris: 
Armand Colin, 1949; rev. ed. 1966); The Mediterranean and the Mediterranean World in the Age 
of Philip II, trans. Siân Reynolds (Collins: London, 1972), 2 vols.

From the Mediter r a nea n . . . 
405
the seasons, the unceasing dialogue between plain and mountain, settled land 
and desert, and the unique ecol­ogy shared by all its coasts—­made it a book 
for all periods.
Braudel was never as dominant in Britain as he was in France. I suspect 
that most of us read his Mediteranean as a masterpiece of historical writing, 
not as the source of a brand-­new methodology. I certainly did. But what this 
book conveyed, with ­great power, was belief in the possibility of a wider 
history than hitherto, linked to the rhythms of extensive landscapes. Com-
pared with ­those enduring structures, the politics and ­battles that ­were the 
stuff of conventional, event-­based history (of histoire événementielle) ­were mere 
“surface disturbances, crests of foam that the tides of history carry on their 
strong backs.”2
Braudel’s masterpiece has come to be frequently debated, especially in re-
cent times, when the relation between history and ecol­ogy has become a 
major field of study. ­These debates have made us realize that Braudel painted 
with a large brush. His account of the Mediterranean emphasized enduring 
anti­theses: busy plains and bulging cities overshadowed by im­mense gray 
mountains where time seemed to have stood still; and, to the east and south, 
the seemingly limitless sands of Arabia and the Sahara that dwarfed the 
Mediterranean, making its intensely fertile lands seem small—­like a thin green 
ribbon sewn onto the hem of a sackcloth robe. To come upon Braudel’s evoca-
tion of ­these vast spaces, ­after generations of purely po­liti­cal and administra-
tive history, was to regain a sense of scale. ­Here ­were ­human socie­ties whose 
vociferous hopes and fears ­were silently molded by constant adjustment to the 
slow, enduring rhythms of the seasons and the land.3
The Mediterranean and Its Neighbors
Now made accessible by Siân Reynolds’s lively translation, Braudel’s perspec-
tive brought a new dimension to the teaching of late antiquity and the early 
­Middle Ages in Oxford. This was ­because ­there was already a perfect slot into 
which to insert his perspective. The preliminary examination in history had a 
mandatory paper on historical geography. Medievalists could choose to study 
2. Braudel, Mediterranean, 21.
3. See now Peregrine Horden and Nicholas Purcell, The Corrupting Sea: A Study of Mediter-
ranean History (Oxford: Blackwell, 2000), and W. V. Harris, ed., Rethinking the Mediterranean 
(Oxford University Press, 2006).

406 
Ch apter 59
the historical geography of the period between 300 and 1000 for a paper that 
bore the grandiose title “The Formation of Eu­rope.”
Up ­until 1973, that paper had been dominated by magnificently old-­world 
notions. Students ­were expected to put the barbarian invasions on the map, 
and then to study the origins of the nation-­states of modern Eu­rope which 
­were thought to have grown out of the barbarian settlements that had resulted 
from ­those invasions. When I took the historical geography paper in the pre-
liminary examination in the spring of 1954, a friend told me that it was easy: 
“All you need tell the examiners is that the Huns put butter on their hair, and 
that they ate their grand­mothers; but ­don’t forget to tell them that the Theiss, 
the Danube, the Sava and the Drava lie in between.”
In 1973, I gave the lectures on historical geography ­under a new title: “The 
Mediterranean and Its Neighbors, 300–1000 A.D.” I began by suggesting that 
a new perspective could put old themes in a new light. It would give a sense of 
proportion to current historical narratives of the end of the Roman Empire. 
For instance, we all knew the conventional dates for the barbarian invasions: 378, 
the defeat of the Roman armies by the Goths at the ­Battle of Adrianople; 
410, the sack of Rome; 476, the end of the Western empire. But what about 
364?—­now that was a real date: for it marked the first massed appearance of 
camel nomads on the southern frontier of Roman Africa. This was the begin-
ning of a truly decisive development. For ­these camels ­were the harbingers of 
a fundamental shift away from the Roman civilization of the Mediterranean 
coastline ­toward a civilization based on the ­great inland routes of the Sa-
hara—­a vast and ­silent change that began in the fourth ­century AD and would 
be rendered irrevocable by the rise of Islam.
I should add that, as far as the history of the camel was concerned, this 
somewhat melodramatic view would soon be muted by the work of my friend 
Brent Shaw. He showed that the camel nomads had appeared in North Africa 
much ­earlier, and that they had been absorbed with ­little disruption into the 
economy of the settled land.4 But, at the time, it served a good purpose. It 
gave the young a sense of proportion. I pointed out that not ­every date in the 
conventional narrative of the decline and fall of the Roman Empire was of 
equal importance, ­because not ­every development in this period was equally 
4. See especially “The Camel in Roman North Africa and the Sahara: History, Biology, and 
­Human Economy,” Bulletin de l’Institut Fondamental d’Afrique Noire (Dakar) 41 (1979): 
663–721, now in Environment and Society in Roman North Africa (Aldershot, UK: Variorum, 
1995), no. IV.

From the Mediter r a nea n . . . 
407
profound. Some ­were mere flecks of foam. ­Others (such as the rise of nomad-
ism along the fringes of the southern Mediterranean and the ­Middle East) 
­were carried on rollers of incalculable power.
To see the nomads in this way, I had to go beyond Braudel. At the time, I 
remember being particularly impressed by the work of Xavier de Planhol 
(1926–2016), Les fondements géographiques de l’histoire de l’Islam.5 This book 
showed how the nomads of the ­Middle East and North Africa ­were not a pe-
ripheral group, known only as raiders. They had always played a vital role in 
the life of the settled populations. ­After the Arab invasions of the early seventh 
­century, the nomads came into their own—­but not as destroyers of urban life. 
Far from it. In the early centuries of Islam, nomads and townsmen cooperated 
to create an im­mense commercial network. As a result, the Mediterranean 
came to be overshadowed by the vast hinterlands that lay ­behind its southern 
and eastern shores.
In ­these lectures, I put together two dif­fer­ent traditions of scholarship—­
Braudel’s study of the socie­ties of the Mediterranean and the emergent study 
of the relations between the nomads and the settled world in the hinterland of 
the Mediterranean and in the ­Middle East. I joined them so as to create a nar-
rative by which the one—­the world of the nomads, the masters of distance 
over dry land—­took over from the other, ­earlier, and more inward-­looking 
world—­the ancient world of the inland sea.
From Core to Periphery
I argued that ­there had been two phases in the history of the period between 
300 and 1000. In late antiquity proper, up to around 600, the Mediterranean was 
still at the center. This solid core had been ­little shaken by the barbarian inva-
sions of non-­Mediterranean Eu­rope. Before 600, also, the nomadic socie­ties 
of the Sahara and the ­Middle East still seemed “as fragile as a handful of ­human 
dust blowing in the wind.”6
Then ­things changed. I devoted the second part of term to the eastern and 
southern neighbors of the Mediterranean. I conjured up the unexpected 
resources of the nomadic world that Mediterranean observers of the time 
had failed to appreciate—as had modern scholars with their exclusively 
5. Xavier de Planhol, Les fondements géographiques de l’histoire de l’Islam (Paris: Flammarion, 
1968).
6. Braudel, Mediterranean, 176.

408 
Ch apter 59
Mediterranean focus. Hence I moved to the Hijaz, in Arabia, in order to explain 
the ­career of Muhammad (ca. 570–632) and the subsequent Arab conquests.
Ultimately, ­because of its command of distances based on the camel and 
the caravan, the Islamic empire of the eighth, ninth, and tenth centuries was 
able to create a ­whole new world based on a network of ­great inland cities. 
­These commercial hubs ­were set back from the Mediterranean, along lines of 
communication that stretched from Timbuktu in the southern Sahara, along 
the inner plateau of the Maghreb to Kairouan (inland to the south of Car-
thage), to Egypt, where Fustat/Cairo (over a hundred miles up the Nile) re-
placed Alexandria, and across the ­Middle East and Iran, to join the cold deserts 
of Central Asia.
The huge sweep of the Islamic empire did not bring ruin to the Mediter-
ranean, as Pirenne had suggested in his Mohammed and Charlemagne. It simply 
passed it by. From 800 onward, the Islamic empire was placed at the crossroads 
of western Asia, Africa, and Eu­rope. It would dominate the world as Rome had 
once done. But it did so far from the sea. The immensity of a Eurasian empire 
dwarfed the vivid but narrow world of the Mediterranean that had been 
brought alive for me by the work of Fernand Braudel.
The Camel and the Bath
The lectures entitled “The Mediterranean and Its Neighbors” ­were the last that 
I ever gave in Oxford. When I visited Berkeley a ­little ­later, in early 1975, as a 
visiting professor, they formed the basis of my outline lecture course on late 
antique and early medieval history. The Berkeley students immediately 
grasped where my enthusiasm lay—in the balance between two worlds: on 
the one hand, the compact world of the Mediterranean that had supported an 
age-­old urban civilization, with its ­grand forums, theaters, and busy public 
baths; and, on the other, the wide open spaces, crossed slowly but surely by 
the camel and the caravan, which fi­nally came to dwarf the Mediterranean, in 
a land-­based empire that stretched, through oceans of sand, gravel, and dead 
earth, from the Atlantic to the borders of China. They rightly called the course 
“The Camel and the Bath.”

409
60
To Iran
An Empire in a Landscape
My lectures on the Mediterranean and its neighbors, in late 1973, attempted to 
do justice to the magnificent perspectives opened up by Fernand Braudel. But, 
following Braudel’s example, they did not attempt to cover the ­whole of the 
­Middle East. For Braudel himself was well aware that yet another, very dif­fer­
ent world lay far to the east of the Mediterranean. This was Persia (Iran), 
whose sheer immensity caught his imagination:
The Venetian Giacomo Soranzo describing Persia in his report of 1576, sug-
gests in one sentence its vast emptiness: “one can travel through this land 
for four months without leaving it.”1
For Braudel, Persia remained the ­great unknown. But for a historian of late 
antiquity, and especially one concerned with the ­Middle East, Persia was not 
a distant region. It was the immediate, ever-­present neighbor and rival of East 
Rome. The Sasanian Empire of Iran (which lasted from 224 to 651) came to be 
locked in conflict with East Rome along a front that stretched from the Cau-
casus to Yemen.
Inspired by Braudel, I was ­eager to go back to the East once again; but this 
time I wanted to follow the conflict between the East Roman and the Sasanian 
empires in a dif­fer­ent way. The conflict was not simply a military and diplo-
matic ­matter. It was a conflict between a Mediterranean empire and its vast, 
non-­Mediterranean counterweight in the ­Middle East. Two dif­fer­ent styles of 
empire faced each other, each linked to a dif­fer­ent geography.
1. Braudel, Mediterranean, 173.

410 
Ch apter 60
With this in mind, I rewrote the “Byzantium, Persia and the Rise of Islam” 
lectures, which I had first given in 1969, and delivered the new version of them 
in early 1973. To give such lectures was a further, resolute step ­toward the 
East. I intended that they should be the basis for a pos­si­ble book on the rela-
tions between Byzantium and Iran, up to and beyond the Muslim conquest 
of the ­Middle East. In the lectures, I attempted to compare the two empires. 
I wanted to explain how ­those features of the Sasanian Empire that had 
struck East Romans (and which also had struck most modern scholars) as 
alien and “barbaric” might have functioned in terms of the adjustment of 
politics—­always the art of the pos­si­ble—to the mute constraints of an im­
mense landscape.
Hence I began my lectures with a sense of the tyranny of distance in an 
empire based on the Ira­nian plateau. Although the Sasanian Empire was firmly 
established in southern Mesopotamia, in the royal city complex of Ctesiphon 
(just south of modern Baghdad), in the heart of one of the most ancient and 
fertile landscapes in the Western Hemi­sphere, it also stretched northward 
and eastward, like the tail of a ­great dragon, over the Zagros Mountains 
­toward the Caucasus, and across the bare Ira­nian plateau as far as what are now 
Af­ghan­i­stan and Turkmenistan. Whenever this huge bulk unfolded to lurch 
­toward the west, it was a time of deadly danger for the Eastern Empire.
By contrast, the East Roman Empire was a compact polity. It was a creature 
of the Mediterranean, held together by rapid sea transport. It looked inward 
on itself from shore to shore. Few major cities ­were more than fifteen days’ 
sailing from each other. In the words of Muʾawiya (661–680), the first Arab 
caliph to launch a Muslim fleet in the Mediterranean, “The song of a bird on 
the coast of Syria can be clearly heard in all the cities of Rûm.” By contrast, the 
Sasanian Empire was an empire of the open road. It sprawled ever outward, 
across the “vast emptiness” that had so struck Braudel.
Hegemony and World-­Empire
The difference between the geo­graph­i­cal settings of the two empires 
showed in many ways. Both made claims to universal rule. But the way in 
which this claim to rule was expressed was dif­fer­ent in each case. In Iran, 
the notion of the hegemony of the Ira­nian empire in a world of many king-
doms was a core belief among the governing classes. The recent brilliant 
work of Richard Payne and of Matt Canepa has shown, at length, how this 
ideal worked out in practice in the foreign policy and in the monuments of 

To Ir a n 
411
the Sasanian Empire. I only wish that ­these two books had been available 
when I spoke in 1973.2
I did what I could with the lit­er­a­ture available to me. Reading the Letter of 
Tansar, which had recently been translated by Mary Boyce (1920–2006),3 
and other Persian sources, I found that the sheer size of the Sasanian Empire 
and its geo­graph­i­cal location at the crossroads of western Asia fostered a dis-
tinctive outlook. As I said in my lecture:
An historian who comes from the study of the East Roman empire to that 
of Iran is immediately struck by the beauty and by the appositeness of the 
imagery by which the Sasanian governing class articulated their sense of 
standing at the cross roads of Asia. While the compact East Roman world 
that crowded around the Mediterranean thought of itself as a pool of light, 
surrounded by the faceless shadows of a barbarian world, the Sasanian 
empire took up its position at the centre of a world of clearly defined 
regions, whose characteristics and distinctive contributions to the arts of 
living ­were respected. The theory of the seven Keshvars, of the seven cli-
mates, which linked the individuality of Iran’s neighbours to the influence 
of the planets . . . ​validated this view.
I pointed out that, in this worldview, the ruler of the Sasanian Empire was 
truly a “king of kings”—­a shahanshah. He did not pre­sent himself as ruling an 
empire encircled by uncivilized “barbarians,” as the East Roman emperors 
claimed to do. Rather, he claimed to stand at the head of a pyramid of fully 
civilized, stable kingdoms of which he was the rightful overlord:
The idea of the world divided between four ­great monarchies [according 
to the points of the compass]—­Rome (Rûm) in the West, Persia in the 
­middle, the empires of Central Asia and China to the North and East 
and, far to the South the kingdom of Axum (modern Ethiopia)—­grew up in 
Sasanian Mesopotamia. The throne room of Khusro Anoshirwan was supposed 
to hold three vacant thrones—­one for the Emperor of China, one for the 
King of the Khazars (that is for the ruler of nomad confederacies of Central 
Asia) one for the Emperor of Rûm, in case any of ­these distant vassals of the 
Shahanshah [the king of kings] chose to take up their seats at his court.
2. Richard Payne, A State of Mixture (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2015), and 
Matthew Canepa, The Ira­nian Expanse (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2018).
3. The Letter of Tansar, trans. Mary Boyce (Rome: Istituto italiano per il medio ed estremo 
Oriente, 1968), 16–22.

412 
Ch apter 60
Hegemony and Tolerance
This ideal of a relaxed hegemony spilled over into the treatment of religious 
diversity within the Sasanian Empire itself. The king of kings was committed 
to upholding the Zoroastrian faith. It was an ancient religion, dating from the 
preaching of Zoroaster in the first millennium BC. It was centered on fire 
­temples dedicated to the one god, Ahura Mazda, who was perpetually engaged 
in holding at bay the assaults of Ahriman, an eternal and in­de­pen­dent princi­ple 
of evil, not unlike the Christian Devil. Ira­ni­ans spoke of their religion as “the 
Good Religion,” and ­were fiercely loyal to it in their homelands on the Ira­nian 
plateau and in Central Asia.
Zoroastrianism was the official religion of the empire. But it was not the 
only religion. The attitude of the king of kings to the other religions of his 
empire was very dif­fer­ent from that of the Christian emperors of East Rome. 
While the empire of Justinian (527–565) was committed to a claustrophobic 
maintenance of Christian orthodoxy at the expense of all other faiths (perse-
cuting heretics and pagans and imposing cramped conditions on Jews), the 
Sasanians made room for any number of dif­fer­ent religions in the dif­fer­ent 
regions of their empire—­Christians of all va­ri­e­ties, Jews, and Buddhists.
I stressed this contrast. Altogether, I was struck by the vigor of the inter-
confessional encounters that took place all over the Sasanian territories:
Religious disputations between Christians and Jews, Zoroastrians, Hindus 
and Buddhists; ­these ­were part of the culture of the Sasanian empire. [The 
king of kings] Bahram Gur (421–439) would spend time in the royal ar-
chives: “He studied and compared all the religions of his empire with the 
Magian (Zoroastrian) religion . . . ​and brought Chris­tian­ity into this com-
parison, and said in his anger (with the obdurate Armenian Christians) 
‘Examine. Ask questions. Observe. Let us choose the one which is best.’ ”
Orthodox Zoroastrian though he was, Bahram viewed the other reli-
gions of his empire with a certain cold tolerance: even they had a right to 
exist as so many cubes in the shimmering mosaic of a culture drawn from 
the seven climates of the world.4
Given the reputation, among East Romans, of the Sasanians as cruel perse-
cutors of Christians, the discovery that martyrdoms ­were the exception rather 
4. See now Payne, A State of Mixture, 23–58, and Katharina Heyden, Die “Erzählung des 
Aphroditian” (Tübingen: Mohr Siebeck, 2009), 116–143.

To Ir a n 
413
than the rule came as a surprise to me. I found that the Christian churches 
usually enjoyed a remarkable degree of tolerance. Even pagan phi­los­o­phers 
persecuted by Justinian fled for a time to the court of Khusro I Anoshirwan in 
order to find a more open environment. Altogether, the basic structures of 
Sasanian rule favored diversity. A polity pitted against “Distance, the First 
­Enemy” of all extended empires was held together by a tacit consensus that it 
took all sorts to make a world.5
Splendor and Consensus
It was this ele­ment of tacit consensus that Mediterranean observers failed (or 
refused) to see in the workings of the Sasanian Empire. Yet every­thing that 
seemed to East Roman observers to be most grandiose, top-­heavy, and, at times, 
frivolous in the actions of the king of kings rested, in fact, on the effort to create 
a consensus of the governing classes around the person of the ruler.
In my lectures, I examined the towering position of the king of kings. The 
Sasanian ruler claimed to be a kinsman of the gods. Though such a claim seemed 
outright blasphemy to East Roman Christians, it rested on a widespread con-
sensus on the part of the Persian nobility. Highly competitive among themselves, 
they agreed to treat the king of kings as axiomatically superior to every­body 
­else. They did this for a good reason. By treating the king of kings as somehow 
suprahuman, they ensured that they would not have to bow to any of their 
­human peers. I cited a legendary incident in the Letter of Tansar. It was said 
that, before leaving Iran for India and China, Alexander the ­Great had wished 
to massacre the Persian nobility. He regarded such in­de­pen­dent persons 
(grouped in ­great families and in control of entire regions) as a potential dan-
ger to his rule. The wise Aristotle dissuaded him from ­doing so. Instead, he 
should honor the nobles, so that they would prefer to honor him rather than 
have to honor any of their equals:
The best course is to divide the realm of Iran among ­these princes, to be-
stow a throne and a crown on whomsoever you appoint to any province. . . . ​
For the title of king is a ­great pride, and none wearing a crown is ready to 
pay tribute to another, or to ­humble himself for any man. ­There ­will appear 
among them so much disunity and variance from presumption and haugh-
tiness, so much bragging and vaunting of wealth, so much contention over 
degree, and so much wrangling over retainers, that ­were you at the very 
5. Braudel, Mediterranean, 355.

414 
Ch apter 60
farthest bounds of the earth each would menace his fellow with your dread, 
invoking your power and support.6
I concluded that, in such a situation, if the shahanshah had not existed, he 
would have had to be in­ven­ted. Indeed, much of the ceremonial life of the 
Sasanian Empire consisted in “inventing” the king of kings as superior to 
every­one ­else. Historical accounts of the Sasanian Empire ­were full of memo-
rable court scenes, where the king of kings appeared ablaze with jewels. He 
wore a crown so heavy that it had to be held above him by a chain from the 
dome beneath which he stood lest its weight break his neck. East Roman ob-
servers tended to dismiss ­these gestures as signs of megalomania. But they 
­were not used to express the vanity of the ruler. Seen in a Persian context, this 
splendor was a sign of the agreement of the Persian nobility to invest their 
ruler (and no one ­else) with such unearthly majesty.
A Style of Life
Most significant of all, this consensus was made real, on a day-­to-­day basis, by 
the lifestyle of the king of kings. Nothing could be more dif­fer­ent from that of 
the rulers of East Rome. The king of kings reciprocated the consensus of the 
nobility by sharing with them the joyful, generous habits of a nobleman. Hence 
I pointed to a marked contrast between the rulers of the two empires:
Compared with the Shahanshah the Emperor of Byzantium was a remote 
and over-­worked man: he sat at his desk crushed by the load of paperwork 
that suited the head of a bureaucracy—­Justinian was proud to be known as 
‘the sleepless one’. The Shahanshah, being the symbol of the stability of the 
Persian aristocracy, was a Persian aristocrat writ large. Solemn banquets, 
drinking, hunting and love: though ­these ­were indulged in spontaneously, 
they ­were as much part of the ceremony of rule as any more formalized 
governmental actions.
An International Style
As I read what was available on the subject—­mostly by art historians, such as 
Oleg Grabar (1929–2011) and Prudence Harper—­I was struck by the way in 
which the court culture of the Sasanians, with its frank enjoyment of life, paved 
the way ­toward the creation of a cultural empire that rivaled that of East Rome.
6. Letter of Tansar, 27.

To Ir a n 
415
I cited Oleg Grabar, whose work on Sasanian and early Islamic art I had 
begun to know. His remarks made sense of the haunting beauty of the images 
of the king of kings as the ­great hunter and lord of the banquet. As Grabar 
wrote:
Religious attitudes and meanings attached to hunting around the 
3rd ­century created a visual typology of hunting which the Sasanians trans-
form into a theme illustrating primarily princely power. . . . ​Most of them 
[the Zoroastrian themes] became meaningless outside of their original 
context, but eroticism, dancing and feasting could be and ­were translated 
into a permanent secular language.7
The “permanent secular language” created by the Sasanian style of rule 
proved to be as tenacious, in the Islamic world, as ­were the Arthurian legends 
and the refinements of courtly love in medieval Eu­rope. This language of min-
gled power and plea­sure had originated in the court culture of fifth-­ and sixth-­
century Iran. Its wide diffusion in the ­Middle East and in Central Asia was the 
most sure symptom of all of the ­silent turning of the tide of civilization that 
would soon—­with the Arab conquests of the seventh ­century and the estab-
lishment of the Islamic empire—­race away from the Mediterranean ­toward 
Mesopotamia and the Ira­nian plateau. It was time for me to look for myself at 
that distant land. I would visit Iran.
7. Oleg Grabar, Sasanian Silver (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Museum of Art, 1967), 
55 and 67; see also Prudence Harper, The Royal Hunter: Art of the Sasanian Empire (New York: 
Metropolitan Museum, 1978).

416
61
The Royal Road
Tehr an to Ker m anshah
An Innocent Abroad
From April 12 to May 6, 1974, I traveled in Iran. At the age of thirty-­nine, I was 
still very much an innocent abroad. But I knew what I wanted. I wanted to see 
Iran with my own eyes so as to place the history of the Sasanian Empire against 
a living landscape.
With instant generosity, friends in the British Institute of Persian Studies 
arranged with the British Council that I would deliver a lecture entitled “The 
Sasanian Empire in the Near East” in their vari­ous centers in Iran, and that 
the council’s local representatives would look ­after me as I traveled. The lecture 
was an attempt to understand the Sasanian Empire (from 224 to 651) on its 
own terms, from the inside, instead of judging it by Western standards—­and 
usually finding it wanting.
I soon realized that I had to tread carefully on that issue. Most ­people out-
side Iran had heard of the Achaemenid Empire of Cyrus, Darius, and Xerxes, 
in the sixth and fifth centuries BC. They could visit the stupendous ruins of 
the Achaemenid palace at Persepolis. In October 1971, Reza Shah had cele-
brated the twenty-­five-­hundred-­year anniversary of empire in Iran with a gran-
diose historical parade in front of the ruins.
But the Sasanian Empire of the fifth and sixth centuries AD was another 
­matter. It was an uncomfortable presence. I sensed that Ira­ni­ans tended to 
regard it with acute ambivalence. This empire was part of the glorious past of 
Iran. Its passing had been mourned, throughout the ­Middle Ages, by a succes-
sion of Persian poets. But it was also remembered as the corrupt and arrogant 
empire that had been swept away by the victorious armies of Islam. The palace 

The Roya l Roa d 
417
of Persepolis belonged safely to the dreamtime of Iran. But the Sasanians 
­were still the subject of ­bitter con­temporary debates as to how much or how 
­little modern Iran owed to its pre-­Muslim past. I would have to walk a tight-
rope. But I would at least get to see the country.
Throughout my visit to Iran, I was entertained and guided by ­people of rare 
generosity, whose love for Iran was infectious and all-­embracing. But it was a 
cocooned existence on my part. I met only a self-­selected com­pany of Ira­ni­ans, 
connected with the cultural activities of the British Council. And this was in 
1974. Most of us did not have a glimmer of the Ira­nian Revolution that would 
happen only five years ­later. We ­were like travelers making our way through a 
pearly fog. Soon a more savage landscape would be revealed, as the fog burned 
off in the blaze of the Ira­nian Revolution. Only then did we have time to be 
wise ­after the event.
Accessibility and Majesty: The Iwân
I came to see Sasanian monuments on the ground. Not surprisingly, I saw a 
lot more than that. I also saw religions on the ground. This was the first time 
ever (apart from my childhood in Sudan) that I had been in a Muslim country. 
But I was soon confronted with the im­mense reach of the Islamic world as 
viewed from the plateau of Iran. The day ­after my arrival, an enthusiastic ar-
chitect drove me to Varamin, forty miles southeast of Tehran, where the ruins 
of a Sasanian fire ­temple lay close to an exquisite mosque complex made up of 
four iwâns (­great arched apses) founded in the late thirteenth ­century by a 
Mongol khan. It was a reminder of the Central Asian dimension of late medi-
eval Iran of which I knew ­little.
The architect had just returned from Beijing, where he had designed the 
embassy of Iran in the form of a vast iwân arch. He told me that the iwân was 
a distinctive building, with a mystique of its own: in his opinion, it unfolded 
like the rays of the rising sun. A high-­arched gateway backed by a rectangular 
space, the iwân presented to the world a ­great opening ­behind which lay a 
majestic or divine presence.
What I already knew from my reading was that the iwân was one of the most 
ancient architectural features of the ­Middle East. It was in the form of the gate of 
a palace or a city. From the time of the ­great Gate of Balawat in the British Mu-
seum to the Sublime Porte (the Exalted Gate) of the Ottoman Empire, the iwân 
had been the symbol par excellence of royal power—of an awesome combination 
of accessibility and majesty that was characteristic of the Sasanian style of rule.

418 
Ch apter 61
Looking at the iwâns of Varamin, I realized that I was now on the other side 
of the world from East Rome. In Byzantium, the im­mense domed church of the 
Hagia Sophia in Constantinople became the characteristic form of a Christian 
church. The Ottoman Turks followed the model of the Hagia Sophia for their 
mosques. The distinctive domed mosques with which Eu­ro­pe­ans ­were most 
familiar ­were Ottoman echoes of the Hagia Sophia that spread, in all sizes, 
from Sarajevo to Damascus. By contrast, from the Ira­nian plateau eastward to 
the Taj Mahal in India and far beyond, the iwân—­and not the dome—­reigned 
alone as the preferred architectural form for a mosque. I realized that I had 
come a long way from the Mediterranean.
And how did we orientate ourselves in Iran, to find north and south, east and 
west? To do this was a reminder of belonging to the world of Islam, where all 
roads led to Mecca. As I wrote in a letter:
Arriving at the ruins of the fire-­temple, the first ­thing that we did was to 
ask a local boy for the qebla, the qibla [the direction of prayer to Mecca]. 
Instantly, the boy ­stopped, faced the plain where cyclists pedaled between 
cotton fields, joined his hands in the direction of a row of blue hills caught 
in the sinking light—­there, far, far to the south was Mecca, as distant as the 
late light itself, over how many plains, how many ranges of blue hills.
For almost half a ­century, I have retained this image of the boy standing on 
a hillock, turned, with a sure sense of direction, to face a plateau bathed in a 
seemingly endless sunset light.
On the Royal Road: Tehran to Hamadan
Next day, I took the mea­sure of the spaces of Iran on a bus that went southwest 
from Tehran to Hamadan, ancient Ecbatana, along the Royal Road that led to 
Kermanshah, and then, down from the Zagros Mountains, to Qasr-­e Shirin, 
close to the frontier of Iraq. This was the road that snaked across the Ira­nian 
plateau, joining Mesopotamia to Central Asia.
We set out in the early after­noon crossing a vast plain ringed by mountains. 
For double safety, the bus carried both Muslim invocations in curling, calli-
graphic letters and an icon of the Virgin Mary. I talked to a passenger who had 
been quietly singing a masnavi—­a poem of Jalal ad-­Dîn Rûmi, (1207–1273), 
the ­great Persian mystical poet—­just ­behind me. He was a post office official 
from Hamadan and had a ­brother in Bournemouth. He carefully wrote down 
my En­glish address: “All Sins Kolidj” . . .

The Roya l Roa d 
419
I knew Hamadan as Ecbatana, one of the ­great royal cities of the Achaeme-
nid Empire, standing on the edge of the Ira­nian plateau before the Royal Road 
wound its way down the Zagros Mountains to Mesopotamia. Esther, the sup-
posed wife of Xerxes (486–465 BC)—­known as Ahasuerus in the Bible—­was 
buried ­there. Her mausoleum is still a place of Jewish pilgrimage.
What I did not know, at this time, was that Hamadan was also famous in 
the Islamic world as the burial place of a phi­los­o­pher and scientist who 
founded an empire of the mind that once reached farther than the empire of 
Xerxes—­from Samarkand to Oxford. This was Ibn Sina (980–1037), known 
to the West as Avicenna. Ibn Sina’s daring synthesis of philosophy and medi-
cine, of Platonic mysticism and Aristotelian logic, dominated medieval 
thought in both the Islamic and the Christian worlds. ­Here was a man, now 
buried ­behind the Zagros, whose commentaries, when translated into Latin 
in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, had set the universities of Eu­rope afire. 
The entrance ticket to the Mausoleum of Ibn Sina was justly proud:
The number of his publications is said to be between 195 and 243, most of 
which, such as the Ghanoon [the Qanûn], the Shafa and the Esharaat are 
still used by scholars.
Avicenna had died in 1037.
Strolling around Hamadan, I found myself at my ease among the mullahs 
in the courtyard of a mosque. I stood ­there as a group of middle-­aged men, 
squatting on a carpet, sang the Qurʾân to each other. I wrote “sang”: “recited” 
the Qurʾân would be more correct; although to my unaccustomed ear it 
sounded like Rus­sian or Greek Orthodox chant. They smoked cigarettes, 
joked, settled down in turn to recite, taking the book, kissing it first, and laying 
it on their brow along their nose. A man of ­great fineness of face, in a black 
cloak like an Oxford gown, stood all the time, propped against the doorway of 
the mosque. He may have been the imam. Outside, the mullahs squatted and 
gossiped in gentle tones. I have always carried the memory of this moment as 
my first contact with living Islam.
Mountains, ­Water, and Monuments:  
Bisotun and Taq-­e Bostan
The most significant part of the Royal Road lay beyond Hamadan. The rock 
carvings at Bisotun that towered above the road are well known to ancient 
historians. They carry the ­great inscription of King Darius (552–486 BC), 

420 
Ch apter 61
which described his triumph over usurpers and listed the twenty-­three coun-
tries in his possession—­truly a king of many kings. This inscription is so well 
known, carved onto a high cliff, that I was surprised to find that the moun-
tain of Bisotun itself was a site of eerie grandeur. It was the mountain, rising 
straight from the plain, that was spectacular, not the inscription. As I wrote 
in my letter:
What ­matters is the superb amphitheater at its foot, with the ­water rush-
ing into the pool among cypresses and the distant view of a river and of 
fields with hillocks as far as the eye can see. Nothing grandiose about the 
inscription. It is a signet stamp carefully impressed on the irreducible 
mass of rock.
I had learned something. Close-up photo­graphs of Achaemenid and Sasa-
nian rock carvings encourage us to treat them as if they ­were freestanding 
monuments. I now saw that they ­were ­really only the markers of sites—of privi-
leged ecological niches in a harsh land, where the Zoroastrian goddess Anahita 
showed her presence in the permanent miracle of ­water and green trees.
I had come up against something that I had not considered before. I had 
traveled to Iran to see landscapes in the manner of Braudel—­the ­great stretches 
of plain, desert, and mountain that formed the background to history. But 
what I had just seen was something dif­fer­ent: it was a sacred landscape satu-
rated in the beliefs of ­those who lived in it—­where mountains, plains, and 
­water ­were revered as joining points between the ­human and the divine.
I would have the same experience when we reached Taq-­e Bostan, outside 
Kermanshah. The rock carvings of Taq-­e Bostan ­were to be found in a row 
of carved grottoes standing at the foot of a bare cliff. The largest of ­these 
has always been linked in legend with Khusro II Aparwez “the Victorious” 
(AD 591–628)—­the most ­grand and romantic of all the Sasanian kings. The 
sides of this grotto are covered with dramatic repre­sen­ta­tions of the royal 
hunt—­a huge affair, like an army in motion. The protecting angel of the king 
of kings is shown at the bottom of the cave as a mounted ­horse­man in full 
armor, with a high helmet, raising a massive lance above his armored horse—­
for all the world like a medieval knight: a specimen of the new skills in cavalry 
warfare learned on the plains of Central Asia.
This was exciting enough. I knew it well from the superb photographic 
rec­ord made by the Japa­nese Institute of Ira­nian Studies.1 But I also wanted 
1. Shinji Fukai and Kiyoharu Horiuchi, Taq-­i Bostan (Tokyo, 1969).

The Roya l Roa d 
421
to see what the site itself would have meant to a sixth-­century Ira­nian. On 
arriving in the bus, I knew at once that I was in the presence of a miracle of 
­water.
­There is a crescendo of Aye sabz! Oh, the greenery! [from the passengers 
on the bus]. . . . ​Close to the rock face and the carved caves, the river 
­bubbles in and out of poplar groves. A still lake stands in front of the rock 
face, and—­nearer to the carvings—­a still, perfectly circular pool, with a 
mulberry tree pruned for Persian heads (I hit mine ­every time I passed). . . . ​
Plea­sure boats row in the lake. Good restaurants. It is a place bi-­sifâ—”with 
purity”: a place of relaxed plea­sure. Kurdish girls wash their silver bowls in 
the stream beside the pool and the first cave.
From the World of the Gods to a ­Human Court
I spent my time in Taq-­e Bostan trying to figure out how the rock carvings of 
the grottoes related to this idyllic scene and the cliff into which the grottoes 
had been carved. Scrambling up the side of the cliff (a somewhat perilous 
undertaking in the high wind), I saw how the rich carvings had been gradually 
added to the original raw surface of the grottoes. Originally, ­these had been 
caves, natu­ral indentations of the rock face, in the depths of which the king of 
kings had been shown face-­to-­face with the High God, Ahura Mazda, to re-
ceive the wreath that was the symbol of empire.
By the time of Khusro II, the largest grotto had become no longer a meet-
ing place with the gods, but a palace in its own right, with a Roman-­style 
archway flanked by plump, Roman figures of winged victories and orna-
mented inside with a spectacular repre­sen­ta­tion of the royal hunt. This was 
the ­human world, a world of ­human power and ­human pleasures, where 
previously ­there had been raw rock, from whose feet ­water flowed in miracu-
lous abundance.
Altogether, the ­great grotto attributed to Khusro II Aparwez was a vivid 
sign of the “secularization” of royal ideology. It showed how the iconography 
of kingship could be set loose from its original Zoroastrian roots to become 
an idiom of power and the good life throughout Central Asia and the ­Middle 
East, irrespective of religion. It was his triumphal arch, flanked by Roman vic-
tories, and the frank worldly glory of the royal hunt that made Khusro II 
victorious—­and not initiation by a god, as was usual in Sasanian rock carvings. 
My climb up the rock face to feel the layering of the carved stone on the side 

422 
Ch apter 61
of the ­great arch had been a bracing exercise in putting scenes well known to 
me in photo­graphs against their dramatic physical background.2
Down to the “Heart of the Empire”: Qasr-­e Shirin
Next day I was driven down to Qasr-­e Shirin, to within a few miles of the Iraqi 
border. This was a visit to a very dif­fer­ent part of the Sasanian world—to the 
lush Mesopotamian plain that lies at the foot of the Zagros. Qasr-­e Shirin was 
the site of a major Zoroastrian fire ­temple—­designed to resemble a royal audi-
ence hall, where the fire “reigned” perpetually even when the king of kings was 
absent at the far end of his empire. Shirin was the name of the Christian wife 
of Khusro II, and the subject of endless legends as poignant as any in the Ar-
thurian cycle in the West. All that remained of the ­great fire ­temple was a low 
mound of tumbled, uncut stones. But all around it was a world of ­little gardens 
and rustling trees, noisy with birds and frogs. ­After the gray, winter-­stunned 
mountains, it was a Mesopotamian paradise. ­Little won­der that the Sasanians 
called Mesopotamia (effectively modern Iraq) dil-­i Eranshahr—­the Heart of 
the Empire of Iran. Its hot, im­mensely fertile lands ­were the very opposite to 
their own, austere plateau.
I left early next morning for Tehran.
2. See now Matthew Canepa, The Ira­nian Expanse (Berkeley: University of California Press, 
2018), 360–365; and James Howard-­Johnston, The Last ­Great War of Antiquity (Oxford Univer-
sity Press, 2021), 184–186.

423
62
Palaces and Rock 
Carvings
Firuzabad and Naqsh-­e Rosta m
A Landscape on the Move: The Qashqai
I lectured for the first time on April 17 at the British Institute of Persian Stud-
ies in Tehran. It was a vivid occasion. But my heart was in the landscapes of 
Iran. I wanted to be out in the country again. The principal monuments of the 
early Sasanians ­were to be found outside Shiraz, which was 420 miles by air 
south of Tehran. The ruined palace of Ardashir (224–241)—­the founder of the 
Sasanian Empire—­was at Firuzabad, 70 miles south of Shiraz. It was not only 
the palace that I wished to visit, but also the surrounding region, to see how 
its monuments hung together in a single system. While Bisotun and Taq-­e 
Bostan ­were sacred landscapes, this would be a royal landscape—an interlock-
ing web of roads, palaces, and monuments connected with the movements of 
the king of kings and his court.
It was from the region around Shiraz that Ardashir had risen from the status 
of a provincial magnate (a mere subking) to becoming king of kings of a new 
empire named “Sasanian” ­after his ancestor Sasan. Ardashir’s son, Shapur I 
(AD 240–272) consolidated this empire, most notably through his defeat and 
capture of the Roman emperor, Valerian, in AD 260, in a campaign that took 
place near Edessa (modern Şanlıurfa, in Turkey), in the very ­middle of the 
Fertile Crescent. Shapur’s victories ­were celebrated in rock carvings at Naqsh-­e 
Rostam (near Persepolis) 35 miles northwest of Shiraz, and at Bishapur, 58 
miles west of Shiraz. In visiting ­these sites, I would be at the ground zero of 

424 
Ch apter 62
the explosion of energy by which the Sasanian Empire came to dominate half 
of the ­Middle East throughout late antiquity.
I was prepared to study the way an ancient monarchy had traveled between 
its palaces and monuments. What I had not expected to see was the population 
of an entire landscape on the move. But this was exactly what I saw on the 
journey from Shiraz to Firuzabad.
I was picked up at my ­hotel in Shiraz by Henry Speck, who taught En­glish 
at Shiraz University. He had come to take me by Land Rover to the third-­
century Sasanian palace at Firuzabad. What excited him ­were not only the 
Sasanians but also the news that the annual migration, the famous kuch, of 
the Qashqai nomads was ­under way. The Qashqai ­were Turkmen tribes, 
who spoke Turkish rather than Persian. They ­were believed to have gained 
access to the mountains of Iran as a result of the Mongol invasions of the 
thirteenth ­century. To most Iranians—­townsfolk and sedentary peasants 
alike—­the Qashqai ­were a disturbing reminder of the presence of Central 
Asia in the midst of Iran. The homelands of the Qashqai ­were the moun-
tains, as they moved up and down the mountain slopes throughout the year 
from altitude to altitude in search of grazing land. Now that the pastures of 
the south ­were drying up with the approach of summer, they ­were headed 
north and into the highlands of the southern Zagros where they had been 
told that rainfall had been abundant. This is what Henry told me. As I wrote 
in a letter:
The kuch (the annual migration of the Kashgai) was an occasion of pride—­
like a royal court on the move. In ­earlier times, they would move straight 
through Shiraz—­hence the ­houses ringed with fortress-­like walls and look 
out towers. Now they ­were more cabined and confined, and ­were viewed 
with suspicion by the Ira­nian authorities.
On the way to Firuzabad, we passed the Qashqai. A girl wrapped in a pure 
gold lamé shawl was spurring a white ­horse up the mountainside across an 
emerald-­green field. A caravan of camels passed, with woolly foals. I was struck 
by the meticulous packing of the camels: the loads ­were tightly bound with 
wooden pegs and knots. Girls covered the entire haunches of their ­horses 
with their billowing crinolines of pink, blue, green, and gold. ­These ­were the 
clothes they wore to add to the splendor of the kuch, the migration, while, in 
the eve­ning when encamped, they wore drab clothes.

Pa laces a nd Rock Carvings 
425
The Road and the ­Water Goddess:  
Anahita and the Tang-­e Ab
Soon we arrived at the ­great ravine of the Tang-­e Ab River, some ten miles 
from Firuzabad. Where the river became dark blue in two deep pools, sure 
enough, above it, on a ­little flattened surface of rock, ­there was a carving of 
Anahita, the Zoroastrian goddess of ­water. It being Friday, the pools ­were full 
of happy bathers.
This was our first clue to the placing of the Sasanian rock carvings of the re-
gion: they invariably appeared where the double blessing of ­water and the Royal 
Road converged. Looking up from the pools, from the bottom of the ravine, 
we could see Qaleh Dokhtar (The ­Castle of the ­Daughter of the King of Kings) 
above us on a high spur of rock. It was an enormous structure (somewhat like 
a Romanesque church) with a ­great dome, a circular apse decorated on the 
outside with pillars, and an impressive iwân as an entrance. The resemblance 
to a church came from the fact that this huge building, though now called a 
­castle, had been a royal palace, complete with a solemn audience hall, with an 
iwân entrance, a vaulted nave, and a dome over the circular apse beneath which 
the king of kings stood, like a holy ­thing, in sacred majesty.
Qaleh Dokhtar had been a summer palace. Perched above a ravine on the 
edge of a wide plateau, it would have caught the breezes, as it floated above 
the sizzling plain. The king of kings and his entourage would have ridden out 
to it in a pro­cession quite as colorful, and as tied to the rhythm of the seasons, 
as the kuch of the Qashqai that we had just seen. ­These ­were our thoughts as 
we looked upward. But we de­cided to explore the roads to Firuzabad before we 
made our way up to Qaleh Dokhtar. ­Here are my notes:
The rock carvings in the ravine below Qale-­i Dukhtar are not monu-
ments. They are quite invisible from the modern road that runs on a higher 
contour. [Instead, one should] ­ride along the road that leads from the 
palace of Firuzabad to the bridge over the Tang-­i Ab to Qale-­i Dukhtar. We 
found traces of this road as we walked along. It is ­there that you would meet 
the rock carvings. What you would then see, as you pass on ­horse­back, is a 
series of scenes, like miniatures from a Shahnameh [an illustrated copy of 
the Book of Kings by Firdausi (940–1025)—­the medieval Persian verse epic 
of the kings of Iran] clustered along a wall of rock. Shapur I holds his ­enemy 
in a chain-­mail clad grip—­this is added to the end of the series, nearest to 
Firuzabad. The fairy-­tale vio­lence of a skewered ­enemy, dangling at the end 

426 
Ch apter 62
of a lance—it could be from Firdausi. Is this history, or is it not, rather, a 
kaleidoscope of heroic deeds, performed interchangeably? It is closer to 
epic than to the narrative carving of the ancient Near East. It is the flying 
tails of the ­horses that one remembers.
The carvings belong only to the world of the road beside the ­water. The 
road itself is dwarfed by a ­great hood of mountain that rests above it. It is 
pressed up to the rock, in such a way that the carvings are always viewed 
one ­after the other and always in close-up.
We arrived at the palace of Firuzabad . . . ​Henry meets friends. How odd, 
they say, to find you in this out of the way place. But we are in the capital of 
the third ­century Sasanian empire: where ­else would one find ­people?
Again: what is a palace? It is the marker of a favored site.
The Center of the World
Firuzabad stood at the center of an amphitheater of mountains. As often in 
Iran, mountains never seem to shut in a plain. Rather, they act as amplifiers to 
a sense of spaciousness. They hint at the limitless stretch, ­toward all corners of 
the world, that lies just beyond their peaks. It is not surprising that the 
Sasanian city of Firuzabad, placed in the plain at some distance from the pal-
ace, should be round, and that its gates should open to the four points of the 
compass. The city and the palace of Firuzabad ­were ­there to impress. They 
­were a challenge to the land, claiming to reach beyond the amphitheater of 
mountains to the limitless spaces that the king of kings might yet come to rule. 
The building of such a palace and its neighboring city would have been 
Ardashir’s first step on the road to power.
By Horse to Cool Air: Qaleh Dokhtar
Then we returned to the ravine of the Tang-­e Ab. The ascent to the ­great ruin 
of Qaleh Dokhtar was not as difficult as we thought it would be. The moral: 
This was ­horse country. While our heavy Land Rover was tied to the modern 
road, riders on ­horse­back could make their way to the top along an easy diago-
nal pathway up the side of the ravine. As with the rock carvings along the river, 
the Sasanian world opened easily to the rider. This was the landscape over 
which the Qashqai swarmed without difficulty, using the same tracks as the 
king of kings and his mounted entourage had once used. The view of the river 
was superb. We had reached a palace suited to a crucial stage in the annual 

Pa laces a nd Rock Carvings 
427
rhythm of the Sasanian court—­perched on the edge of the high plateau to 
catch the breezes in the summer season, and complete with deep under­ground 
galleries in which ice would have been stored.
The Epic of the Kings: Naqsh-­e Rostam
Next day, I went to Persepolis to view the remains of the gigantic Achaemenid 
palace, whose ruins dominated the plains like a ­great stage. The Sasanian carv-
ings lay a few miles farther north, at Naqsh-­e Rostam—­the Picture of Rostam, 
a legendary hero of Sasanian times. ­Here ­were the rock carvings that celebrated 
the victories of Ardashir and Shapur I, and especially the triumph of Shapur I 
over the Roman emperor Valerian in AD 260. Valerian, an old-­fashioned Roman 
gentleman, had been no match for the warrior king of kings. Tricked and encir-
cled, he was the only Roman emperor ever to be taken alive by a “barbarian” 
­enemy. He died in captivity, but not before he had been paraded through Iran as 
a proof of the reach of the Long Right Hand of the king of kings.
The carvings at Naqsh-­e Rostam turned this triumph into stone. They ­were 
carved into the rock a ­little above head level. Each victory showed the king of 
kings defeating his ­enemy in person. This was single combat, epic warfare. 
I knew ­these carvings well from photo­graphs—­especially the classic image of 
the Roman emperor Valerian crouching in homage to the victorious Shapur. 
But the site of the carvings at Naqsh-­e Rostam came as a surprise. Two pasts—­
over seven hundred years apart—­met on the rock face: the Achaemenids and 
the Sasanians. This is how I described it:
First you see the Achaemenid tombs, static and square. Forms that express 
a royal power as solid as four-­square architecture. . . . ​Then suddenly, 
[below them] where the Sasanian rock carvings are, you are in a world of 
dramatic movement. ­There is an explosion of fighting, of victory over 
falling enemies and warriors riding at full tilt at each other. On the first 
carving, the left hand grips the bridle, the left shoulder is hunched over the 
lance, the fallen ­enemy is a truly fallen ­enemy: he is truly trampled on, not 
simply subjected to a ritual gesture of dominance—­the hooves are de-
scending on him as a second ­enemy braces for the charge; one down and 
one to go. In the top panel, the shock of the charge is shown with a vigor 
that has survived all erosion of the rock face.
The explosion of energy shown in the rock carvings set me thinking about 
the rhythms of Sasanian history: their empire seemed to have a “boom-­or-­bust” 

428 
Ch apter 62
quality. The prob­lem of writing the history of such an empire was that it saw 
itself in terms of high moments of energy, associated with ­great conquering 
kings. But ­these high moments ­were often followed by long periods of quies-
cence, which have left ­little or no trace in our sources. It was like studying the 
astrophysics that led up to the explosion of a supernova. As historians, we have 
to account for ­those irregular pulses of light in what has remained for us a 
faraway galaxy, large parts of which ­were already opaque to East Romans and 
­were only gradually being understood in the 1970s, by historians of ancient 
and medieval Iran. I returned to Shiraz with a ­whole new set of rhythms of 
history in my head.

429
63
Three Cities
Esfahan, Tabriz, and M ashhad
Esfahan: The Sound of Islam
Next day I was in Esfahan. Nothing Sasanian ­there. My first reaction was de-
pression at the absence of space. Dust from the developing city swept in clouds 
over the Maydan—­the ­great rectangle flanked by Safavid mosques and palaces 
of the time of Shah Abbas (1571–1626) and his successors—­and I had to visit 
the mosques in a dim light more suited to En­glish cathedrals. While the pal-
aces and monuments of ancient Iran ­were usually lost in the countryside, 
placed near the roads and the holy places of a society with few towns, the heart 
of medieval and modern Iran lay in its ­great cities; and in the heart of ­these 
cities lay a living Islam riven by tensions whose explosive power, though 
known to some scholars and observers, largely escaped the notice of Western 
travelers at this time.
It was in Esfahan that I encountered, once again, as I had in Hamadan, 
the unexpected sound of Islam. I found my way to the Chahar Bagh—­the 
ave­nue of the Four Gardens—­made up of a succession of exquisite courtyards, 
beside a sixteenth-­century madrasa—­a theological school and place of 
meditation.
I found myself in a reception room that overlooked a garden of roses. It was 
explained to me that a young man had died ­after four years in a coma as the 
result of a car accident. A memorial recitation was being held. Coffee was 
brought to ­every guest. We all sat quietly as the sound of the Qurʾân and of 
Persian mystic poetry brushed over us softly. I now understood this descrip-
tion by the Muslim biographer of the Prophet Muhammad of the impact of 
the recitation of the Qurʾân on an outsider: “When I heard the Qurʾân my 

430 
Ch apter 63
heart was softened and I wept, and Islam entered into me.”1 For, in the Qurʾân, 
it is God, not the worshipper, who is the sweet singer.
Julfa: The Sound of the Martyrs
Next day, I wandered around the Armenian quarter of Esfahan—­the famous 
Julfa, named ­after the Armenian community transported ­there in the late six-
teenth ­century by Shah Abbas to Isfahan from the town of Julfa, in the far 
northwest corner of Iran. ­There, equally unexpectedly, I experienced a further 
touch on the heart of the songs of yet another religious community. Coming 
to the ­great Armenian cathedral, I approached a splendidly dressed cleric to 
ask him about the times of ser­vices. But the cleric spoke no Persian. He was 
Mesrob Ashjian, the new bishop, who had come straight from the Armenian 
community in Beirut. He spoke perfect En­glish. And who was I? A teacher 
from Oxford, Mr. Brown. Not Peter Brown? The bishop had just returned from 
Prince­ton Theological Seminary and had read my Augustine of Hippo. He in-
vited me to return next day for the cele­bration of the Memory of the Martyrs 
of 1915. I described this in a long letter:
The chant was made by a ­women’s choir dressed in blue robes. They stood 
on a raised platform to one side of the ­great curtain that veiled the raised 
stage of the sanctuary. Such curtains had once veiled the King of Kings on 
his raised throne. I could not follow the Armenian of the liturgy. But the 
movements around the high altar struck me as a combination of the cere-
monial of a royal court and worship on the High Places. At moments, the 
priest was left all alone, standing in the raised sanctuary, with his head lifted 
to heaven as on a mountain top. The chalice was a holy ­thing, a burning 
bush like that which Moses had seen on Mount Horeb. Bells jingled on the 
altar fans.
But this was also the worship of a throne. It was explained to me that the 
curtain was lifted as the King showed himself to the ­people: Christ seated on 
the throne of the Eucharist. Then ­there was a moment of piercing drama when 
the curtain came down again, to hide that glimpse of majesty.
Above all, ­there was the drama of memory. We sat and meditated as the 
priest read an endless list of names to be remembered on this day. ­These names 
­were not only the names of modern martyrs—­the victims of the massacres of 
1. Ibn-­Ishaq, Life of Muhammad, 228, trans. A. Guillaume (Oxford University Press, 1955), 158.

Thr ee Cities 
431
1915 to 1917. They reached back to the very beginnings of late antiquity. And 
this was an Eastern late antiquity—­the memory of a church beyond the frontiers 
of the Roman Empire, whose past was significantly dif­fer­ent from that of the 
Greek and Latin churches. The ­bearers of ­these names belonged to a Chris­
tian­ity of the East that thought of itself as older than that of the West. Abgar 
the Black, the king of Edessa (who died ca. AD 40) was connected in legend 
with Jesus Christ himself. Trdat (Tiridates), king of Armenia (250–330), may 
have been a Christian a ­whole generation before Constantine. ­These ­were the 
names I noticed. But for Armenians—­and especially for ­those in Lebanon, 
such as Bishop Mesrup—it was the generation of their own grand­fathers that 
was also being remembered.
In this ­great Eastern liturgy, God did not sing, as he had sung in the recita-
tion of the Qurʾân. Rather, he was serenaded by a ­women’s choir, in voices as 
pure and light as their blue silk robes. The constant refrain was “Jerusalem, 
Jerusalem.” As the poets declaimed, as the chant ­rose, and the black-­edged 
banners waved in front of the ­great curtain, one sensed a seismic shaking of 
the ­whole church at the coming of God in the Eucharist: it was what I had 
always been told in books on the theory of religion, but never seen—­the litur-
gical creation of a community. This moved me as deeply as had the Qurʾân 
recitals in the Chahar Bagh. In two days, from two religions, I had learned 
something of what it was to worship God.
Outside the cathedral, the high-­mounted machine guns, the ­water cannons, 
and the wireless aerials of the armored personnel vehicles of the Persian secu-
rity forces surrounded the church, looking down on us from the other side of 
the wall, throwing their shadows into the rose-­filled courtyard.
Tabriz: Whose History?
Next I went to Tabriz. This was a very dif­fer­ent landscape, far to the northwest, 
some three hundred miles by air from Tehran. I was only fifty miles from the 
frontiers of Turkey and Rus­sia, in the border province of Azerbaijan. In the early 
spring, the countryside was covered with unpruned cherry trees in exquisite, 
full blossom, with branches twisting like flames, like ­those of the Timurid 
manuscripts of the fifteenth ­century that seemed to bring a breath of China all 
the way to northern Iran.
It was only in Tabriz that I received a direct impression of the tensions of 
modern Ira­nian society. I learned that my lecture was to be given, not at the Brit-
ish Council, but at the University of Tabriz. The university had a dangerous 

432 
Ch apter 63
reputation. The police had occupied it for two years. ­These ­were Shirazi 
police, I was told—­hard men, not locals. In the previous year, some twenty-­
five students ­were said to have been killed, mostly from being beaten up.
I gave my lecture on the Sasanian Empire in a long room, filled with intense 
young men with short beards. I was surrounded by a posse of anxious profes-
sors. Halfway through, something like barracking set up from the back. I lifted 
my pointer, ­stopped dead, and said, in Persian, “I cannot be heard.” Dead silence 
ensued. But the professors ­were visibly flustered. As soon as I sat down, the 
professor who had introduced me barked out: “Questions. No questions? 
Then go!” Deliberately not understanding, I stood up and said that I would be 
delighted to discuss the lecture, as I had much to learn about Iran. Discuss they 
did, with all the intensity that I had often encountered in young men in Iran.
The students and I ­were on a collision course. My lecture had been devoted 
to furthering what I thought was a worthy cause—to rescue the history of Iran 
from Eurocentric value judgments. I wanted to pre­sent the functioning of the 
Sasanian Empire in terms of its own, distinctive po­liti­cal culture, so as to avoid 
the usual negative value judgments, based on Western ideas of what an empire 
should be like, that had been applied to the Sasanian po­liti­cal system by West-
ern scholars. My aim was to vindicate the Sasanians in the face of this oriental-
ist prejudice, by showing how the system worked in its own terms.
But this was not at all the way that my audience heard it. To them, my at-
tempt to defend the Sasanian Empire from Western prejudice sounded like an 
attempt to whitewash the present-­day imperial regime of Shah Reza. Seen by 
the radical young of Tabriz, the Sasanian Empire (corrupt, caste-­ridden, and 
doomed to fall) was a mirror of their own times: to attempt to view it in any 
other light was to surrender to the shah.
The questions came thick and fast. Why was my lecture so superficial? Why 
had I not told them about the social weaknesses that had led to the fall of the 
Sasanian Empire, and to its replacement by a triumphant, more demo­cratic 
Islam? Why did I not tell them about the revolution of Mazdak? Mazdak (died 
524 or 528) had been a notable figure from the last centuries of the Sasanian 
Empire. He was a Zoroastrian preacher of equality, whose movement had 
shaken the basis of noble power throughout the Ira­nian plateau in the late fifth 
­century.
I answered them directly in halting Persian. I told them, as best I could, that 
historians ­were not social scientists. I had to say what my evidence told me. 
I admitted that ­there ­were serious weaknesses in the social structure of the 
Sasanian Empire, and that they should be studied. But the evidence could not 

Thr ee Cities 
433
tell me every­thing. I had to try to understand what was most prominent in the 
sources; and that was the structure of the Sasanian Empire and how it func-
tioned. Would they agree that ­there was a difference between a historian (who 
had to make a society intelligible to modern persons on its own terms, and to 
shield it from modern prejudices) and a social scientist or a reformer who had 
the right to judge a society from a modern viewpoint?
They thanked me politely for my explanations. But I went away having 
learned a sharp lesson. To understand a regime on its own terms—an effort 
that was dear to my heart as I studied the Sasanian Empire, the ­great counter-
weight to the East Roman Mediterranean—­could all too easily seem to ­others 
to come dangerously close to appearing to legitimize it.
With ­these thoughts in my mind, I returned to Tehran once again to fly 
(some 450 miles by plane) to the northeastern corner of Iran, where the ­great 
Shiʾa shrine of the Imam Reza at Mashhad stood on the borders of Af­ghan­i­
stan and Central Asia.
Mashhad: The Glory of Islam
Mashhad means “The Place of Martyrdom.” It is the holiest city in the Shiʾa 
world—­that is, in Iran and in many regions outside Iran. It is said to be visited 
by millions of pilgrims ­every year. In order to understand the intensity of the 
expectations surrounding the shrine, I had to put myself—as best I could as a 
non-­Muslim—­into the frame of mind of a Shiʾa pilgrim. For such persons, the 
shrine was a perpetual memorial to the clash between legitimate and illegiti-
mate power, and a reminder of a huge sadness.
For the Shiʾa, the history of Islam should have gone differently. The descen-
dants of Ali, the son-­in-­law of the Prophet Muhammad, should have ruled as 
caliphs. If that had happened, Islam would have remained pure—­a Utopia of 
just rule on earth. Instead, they ­were pushed aside by ruthless politicians 
who usurped the title of caliph. The concluding act of this sinister takeover 
was the poisoning (in 818) of the last descendant of Ali—­the Imam Reza. 
This was done so as to forestall the pious Reza’s claim to the caliphate, which 
(it was said) had been recognized even by the son of the grandiose Harun 
al-­Rashid (788–809).
Harun al-­Rashid is known to us as a flamboyant figure in the Arabian 
Nights. But to the followers of Ali, he was the epitome of corrupt, illegitimate 
rule in the name of a false Islam. This fierce loyalty to Ali and his descendants 
as the true caliphs—as the ­great might-­have-­beens of Islamic history—­cut the 

434 
Ch apter 63
mainly Persian Shiʾa off from the ­great majority of Muslims, especially in 
Arabic-­speaking lands, who are known as the sunni—­the followers of the 
sunna, which was a broadly defined, less radical tradition.
The followers of Ali ­were known as the Shiʾa—­the “party” of the followers 
of Ali. In a world governed by gross power, they yearned for the return of a just 
ruler. They believed that the Imam Reza, now lying in his martyr’s tomb at 
Mashhad, had been the last, living hope of a true Islam on earth. Now his tomb 
was the focus of the hopes of millions—if not for justice, at least for healing 
and the forgiveness of sins. Mashhad was St. Peter’s in Rome and Lourdes 
rolled into one—at one and the same time a center of pilgrimage for a distinc-
tive version of Islam and a place of healing. The vast shrine was the heart of 
the city to which I had come. It had a noise of its own. This was not the me-
chanical noise of the bazaar and the city streets. It was the sound of a ­great sea 
of ­human voices raised in worship and prayer: not pious mumbling, but shouts 
of adoration mingled with cries for help.
I arrived in Mashhad on April 29 to deliver my lecture for the British Coun-
cil. The visit to the shrine and its adjacent buildings was an overwhelming 
experience. ­Here are my impressions, as I described them in a letter:
Meshed [I wrote, using a dif­fer­ent spelling] is the door to Central Asia. 
I am now standing among ­people who seem to stretch as far as China . . . ​
Mullahs who look like Lamas. Carpet sellers who bow like Mandarins. This 
is Khorasan. And they know it. The cherries of Meshed, says the chauffeur, 
are as big as apples. ­There is a sense of ease and of sweetness in the air. It is a 
strip of green between two deserts. The poplars, in silver bud in Tabriz, are 
out ­here . . . ​Meshed has entered into its long, easeful spring.
First, as a visitor to the British Council, I was shown round the trea­sures of 
the shrine on display in the museum.
The Museum of the shrine was wonderful. It was the Glory of Islam on the 
edge of Central Asia. The walls ­were lined with ­great rugs and carpets; 
stately, flowered red robes of Shah Abbas; silk brocades of 1804 with pat-
terns based on Chinese seals. A turquoise the size of an ostrich egg, that 
made the eyes of the Turcoman visitors glitter with delight.
Shrine and museum seemed to merge in the minds of the pilgrims:
In the Museum, visitors kiss the foot of the ­great standard [dedicated to the 
shrine by a victorious shah] and fasten padlocks to it as tokens of their 

Thr ee Cities 
435
devotion. A man pushes a piece of paper into a shrine that is on exhibit, and 
then bends down to watch intently where it comes to rest in the sediment 
of offerings. The huge noise of pious acclamations comes in ­great gusts 
through the win­dows that overlook the shrine.
The library was a depository that did full justice to the im­mense horizons 
of the Islamic world. Asia and the Mediterranean ­were joined ­here, on the 
borders of Central Asia, halfway to China.
A copy of the Directory of the Lands of Yaqut al-­Hamawi (1179–1229) 
shows the world as a ­great wheel: on top, the Zandj (Equatorial Africa) and, 
at the bottom, Frozen Deserts with China at one end and al-­Andalus 
(southern Spain) on the other. [­There was also a copy of] Theodosius the 
Greek On World Globes, bound by Hajji Nasir of Tus, the vizir of Hulagu 
Khan (died 1265), the Mongol conqueror of much of the ­Middle East.
What ­really caught my eye was a copy of the Herbal of Dioscorides (a Greek 
doctor of the first ­century AD) translated into Arabic by the Syrian Christian 
Hunayn ibn Ishaq (809–873), a copy of which had been presented to Shah 
Abbas. “The only Dioscorides in the world,” the librarian affirmed. But, in 
Vienna, I had seen a copy of the Herbal in the original Greek. It had been 
prepared in around AD 500 for Juliana Anicia, a descendent of one of the last 
Roman emperors of the West and a ­great patron of the arts. Descended also 
from the famous Roman ­family of the Anicii, Juliana was a figure from the old 
nobility, who linked Constantinople (where she resided) to Old Rome. She 
had greatly preoccupied Arnaldo Momigliano and myself in the 1950s.
Knowing what I knew, the librarian’s assertion made my head spin. I had 
entered another galaxy. Seen from Mashhad, the Greek volume owned by the 
famous Juliana Anicia had sunk below the horizon in the distant West. But, in 
Arabic translation, the message of this Greek book had spread all over Asia. I 
was looking at a remarkable example of the survival of the classical tradition 
in the Islamic world.
The Gate of the Imam
The shrine of the Imam Reza was a shrine such as I had come to know through 
my work on Gregory of Tours and the cult of saints in the early ­Middle Ages. 
Non-­Muslims ­were not allowed into the core of the shrine—­the burial place 
of the Imam Reza. But from what I heard, it was like entering the Basilica of 

436 
Ch apter 63
Saint Martin at Tours in the sixth ­century. The inner shrine around the tomb 
was full of mirrors. It was a shimmering place. The crowds trooped through it 
rapidly, bathed in a sea of happy noise.
Outside the tomb chamber, however, the individual pilgrims ­were frozen 
in their tracks with reverence. They would press themselves for hours against 
the gate of the shrine, touching and rubbing the silver bars with their ­faces. It 
was ­there, I was told, that the pilgrim was truly in contact with the saint, plead-
ing with the imam to be admitted to his presence. Only when they felt confi-
dent that the imam had heard their prayers and forgiven their sins would the 
pilgrims pass through the gate to join the euphoric surge around the tomb.
Hence it was at the gate, and not at the tomb, that the real drama of asking 
for healing and forgiveness was played out. Young men would hang weeping 
to the bars of the gate for hours on end, folded into them with all their strength, 
their shoulders heaving with sobs. Less melodramatic pilgrims would rub their 
picnic baskets against the grille (along with their swaddled babies) to secure 
the blessing of the imam on their long journey home. ­Later in the eve­ning, 
I was told, one could see men asleep, with strings around their necks, to bind 
them to the imam at whose gate they lay. I hoped that the imam would bring them 
comfort in their dreams.

437
64
Yazd
Across the Desert
When I first arrived at Mashhad, I had lunch with the McCaffertys, who 
headed the British Council ­there. Their enthusiasm for eastern Iran inspired 
me so much that I de­cided not to go back to Tehran, to linger in that brash, 
chaotic city ­until I had to return to ­England. Instead, I would strike out by 
myself across the desert from Mashhad to Yazd, the last major holdout of 
Zoroastrianism in Iran. So, on May 2, 1974, I was at the bus station at 4:30 a.m. 
The hour of assembly, of course, was not the hour of departure. But I was in 
no hurry. I had the rising feeling of a traveler who has nothing to do but travel 
all day. Incense sellers entered the bus, to give their smoke in blessing. A hajji 
recited a prayer, and then we ­were off on the Asia Highway. High mountains 
­rose above the morning mist.
The desert was in the full won­der of spring. The rocks ­were covered with 
the pillar-­box red of poppies. We passed through villages where the ­houses 
­were palaces in mud—­each of them was exquisite, no ­matter what size, with a 
fretwork of crenellations in silhouette, and domes like ­little Byzantine churches 
framed by the towers of the bâdgîrs, the high chimneys that catch the desert 
wind and lead it down, through a reversed fireplace, into the shade of the 
­house. In the public gardens of the few desert towns through which we passed, 
­there ­were rows of heavi­ly scented roses already dried on their stems. They had 
stood untouched as the Ira­ni­ans, ­great connoisseurs of perfumes, bent over 
ever so delicately ­toward them, careful not to disturb the dried-­out petals. 
Eventually, I reached Yazd.

438 
Ch apter 64
The Zoroastrians of Yazd
While Mashhad had been at the extreme eastern corner of Iran, Yazd was at 
the very center of the plateau. I was made welcome in Yazd as a result of a 
happy serendipity, such as often happens in expatriate communities connected 
with institutions like the British Council. ­After my lecture in Tehran, I had met 
a businessman, Anthony Wynn. Among his many activities, he was studying 
Persian poetry with a dervish in Hamadan. It was from him that I got the ad-
dress of Mr. X. (I ­shall call him)—­a mobed (a religious leader) in the Zoroas-
trian community in Yazd. It was partly in the hope of meeting Mr. X. that I had 
headed for Yazd, rather than returning directly from Mashhad to Tehran. ­Here 
­were the survivors of the religion that had bolstered the self-­confidence of the 
Ira­nian governing class at the time of the Sasanian Empire, and had inspired 
the villa­gers of the Ira­nian plateau in their ceaseless ­battle with an unforgiving 
natu­ral environment.
To the Christians of the East Roman Empire and to the Christians within 
the Sasanian Empire itself, the Zoroastrians had been the only “pagans” that 
mattered. The gods of Greece and Rome ­were less of a challenge to them than 
was this ancient faith. Zoroastrianism—­largely derived from the teachings of 
Zoroaster (Zardusht): a legendary figure of the first millennium BC—­was 
already a deeply rooted religion by the time of the Sasanian Empire.
Zoroastrians (Zardushtis) ­were known to Christians as the “worshippers 
of fire.” Their perpetually burning fires stood for the triumph of the good in a 
dark, polluted world. They survived the Muslim invasion and the spread of 
Islam, though their numbers diminished sharply. Many emigrated to India, 
where they are still known as Parsis—­“Persians.” But, through all ­these drastic 
changes, they had retained a direct relationship with their last days of glory 
­under the Sasanians. To meet a Zoroastrian in 1974 was like meeting a person 
from the world of late antiquity still alive and well, and adjusting to a difficult 
world with still-­unshaken hope.
A Fighting Faith
Zoroastrianism had always been a fighting faith. Zoroastrians believed that 
­human beings had been created by the High God—­Ahura Mazda—to be his 
helpers, not his servants. They ­were placed in the world to fight evil. And this 
was evil of all kinds. It was the spiritual evil in the ­human heart. But it was also 
the evil of a material world, which was seen as being constantly ­under attack 

Yazd 
439
from invisible demonic powers. Ahriman, the personification of the forces of 
evil, was in­de­pen­dent of Ahura Mazda and was his perpetual ­enemy. ­Human 
beings ­were called upon to hold Ahriman at bay on all fronts—­both the spiri-
tual and the material. They ­were responsible for spreading “the good ­things of 
Ahura Mazda” over a landscape that was thought of as constantly ­under threat 
from the dry, chill malevolence of a negative power.
As a result, Zoroastrian belief had always involved a strong sense of social 
responsibility. Zoroastrians valued upright and generous be­hav­ior, which held 
together the villages of the Ira­nian plateau—­from the village headman down 
to the smallest farmer. They felt themselves to be committed to unremitting 
work on the land, which ensured that ­water, greenery, and livestock throve in 
the face of vis­i­ble and invisible forces of destruction.
­Those precious oases of ­water and rustling trees where the Sasanians had 
placed their monuments (which I had recently visited in Bisotun, Taq-­e 
Bostan, and Firuzabad) ­were the signs of a world where the good had held out 
and would, one day, triumph over the forces of aridity and disorder. They ­were 
seen to be the product of a successful collaboration between ­human beings 
and the hosts of benevolent invisible beings (angel-­like figures—­minor gods 
called “Benevolent Immortals”) who guarded the landscape.
The double work of ritual and hard ­labor—­tending the holy fire to keep 
invisible enemies at bay, and nurturing the ox to plow the vis­i­ble earth—­kept 
the world alive. By means of the fire and the plow ­human beings strove to 
maintain the “good ­things of Ahura Mazda” on earth ­until the end of time. 
Then Ahura Mazda would fi­nally triumph; and a new world, rock-­solid in its 
perfection, would replace the tattered, conflict-­ridden age in which ­human 
beings now lived.
The Justice of God
I have included this short explanation simply so as to orientate the reader. 
At the time, ­there was much that I did not know about modern, living Zo-
roastrianism. The studies of Mary Boyce on the con­temporary Zoroastrian 
communities of Yazd had not yet appeared.1 What I did know was that the 
Zoroastrians ­were a tiny minority in modern Iran—­twenty-­five thousand in 
1. Mary Boyce, A History of Zoroastrianism, Handbuch der Orientalistik (Leiden: Brill, 1975); 
A Persian Stronghold of Zoroastrianism (Oxford University Press, 1977); and Zoroastrians: Their 
Religious Beliefs and Practices (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1977).

440 
Ch apter 64
all. Most had emigrated to Tehran. This left the six thousand Zoroastrians of 
Yazd as the only true surviving community—­the last outpost of a religion 
whose fire ­temples had once stretched, ­under the shadow of the king of kings, 
from Cappadocia to Af­ghan­i­stan.
It would be wrong to say that I met an entire “community.” I simply met the 
remarkable Mr. X. I met him as he came in from the fields, which ­were a green 
promontory reaching, with evident effort, out into a waterless plain that was 
as flat and hard as an airstrip. Almost his first words ­were “Mr. Brown, you who 
are a teacher of religion. You who know such ­things. What do you think of 
the justice of God?” I am ashamed to admit that my first instinct was to say, 
“Not much.” Instead, I mumbled vague platitudes. That was not good enough 
for Mr. X.
What do you think, Mr. Brown? Does God see with an equal eye? He sees 
all ­things fairly, does he not? If so, why is ­there evil? It cannot be from God. 
It must come from an other than God. Do you not agree?
I suddenly realized that I did not agree. So we sat for two hours on the bank 
of an irrigation canal, arguing about the justice of Ahura Mazda and the power 
of his ­enemy Ahriman. When I hear colleagues say that ordinary ­people could 
not be expected to have understood the theological issues that ­were debated so 
fiercely in late antiquity, I think of Mr. X. He would have been astonished by 
such a view.
Food and the Gods
We returned from the fields to Mr. X.’s ­family. They came as a surprise to me. 
I had grown accustomed, when traveling outside the cities of Iran, to a world 
where ­women and ­children ­were virtually invisible. I had not seen a single 
­woman in all the desert towns through which I had passed on my way from 
Mashhad to Yazd. Now I found myself surrounded by unveiled ­women with 
handsome leonine ­faces, dressed like fairy godmothers in greens and purples, 
as they squatted on the sides of the immaculately clean lanes of the Zoroastrian 
quarter.
It was a strange experience. The Zoroastrians looked more picturesquely 
“oriental” in their old-­fashioned clothes than did the Muslims, where the men, 
at least, ­were largely Eu­ro­pe­anized in their dress. But in Mr. X.’s ­house­hold it 
was as if I was back in Eu­rope, surrounded by vis­i­ble and vocal ­women and 
­children. When a ­brother telephoned, the ­women pushed the men aside 

Yazd 
441
and took control of the telephone. The patriarch swatted flies as the younger 
­children jumped up and down in front of him on the bed. The ­houses ­were 
spotless, surrounded by pure mud walls.
I noticed that the ­house­holds in the quarter ­were linked, as if by an invisible 
chain, through the giving of food. The mother-­in-­law took me to the fire 
­temple. If I remember correctly, it was a low room with the entrance screened 
in such a way that the fire was invisible ­until one entered the chamber proper. 
This was to ensure that impure eyes did not fall on such a holy ­thing. ­Under 
the cypresses of the ­temple’s courtyard, a boy prayed and burned incense. We 
ate nuts and raisins “for the gods.” Charity took the form of a constant pro­cess 
of distribution from a center of the holy. This distribution ranged from the 
­great stewpots that produced “pure” food for the community ­after ­every 
funeral, down to small gifts of chickpeas, which Mr. X.’s mother-­in-­law gave 
to all comers on her return from the holy fire.
God’s Well
While the fire was the center of a symbolic distribution of good ­things, the heart 
of the Zoroastrian quarter of Yazd was its irrigation system. And the heart of 
the irrigation system was the ­great Leyland engine with which Mr. X. pumped 
up ­water from the artesian well to irrigate the entire neighborhood. “This is 
not my well,” he said. “It is God’s well.” But Muslim farmers paid him one 
hundred rials for an hour of ­water. For them, Mr. X. employed a Muslim fore-
man and rent-­collector. “He must be a very tough man,” I opined. “No, sir, he 
must be a very mild man. If I have a tough man, the farmers get together and 
they hammer him good.” Mr. X. then pointed to the blooming trees. If his 
Leyland failed, all this would be straw. “This land has strength. The ­water is a 
lasting charity.”
Next day, I continued my dialogue with Mr. X. This posed no linguistic 
prob­lems, as he spoke perfect En­glish, having served for fourteen years as a 
soldier in the British army in India and elsewhere. We discussed the nature of 
religious intolerance. In Mr. X.’s opinion it was all over the place, as was shown 
by his experience in India. Hindus say, “Good health” (to Parsis) in public, but, 
in private, they feel polluted by them: “they drink their tea over ­there.” In Yazd, 
he told me, Zardushti ideas of ritual purity ­were a constant irritant to the local 
Muslims. What was most annoying to Mr. X. was Muslim rejoicing over con-
verts made through mixed marriages. One such marriage had happened six 
months ­earlier, “and they rejoiced as if they had conquered Eu­rope.”

442 
Ch apter 64
The Good Patron and the Guardian Angel
Mr. X. saw himself as a local patron. He seemed always aware of the fragility 
of the land and of the social relations that could make the land prosper or turn 
to dust. We rode brakeless bicycles along the edges of the fields as Mr. X. ar-
bitrated between the farmers on ­water distribution. They waved formidable, 
long-­handled spades as part of the drama of the settlement.
In the after­noon, a dust storm from the Dasht-­i Lut Desert hit Yazd. The 
sky was covered. The air tasted like salt, and the ­great silver-­burnished caul-
drons piled up in the cooking area spun around the yard in the fierce wind. 
Every­thing was caught in a strange luminous glow, and the birds hid at the very 
bottom of the trees.
Then, as we ­were about to ­settle down, a rainstorm suddenly broke over the 
mountains. Mr. X. jumped up. “It is worth a dollar a drop!” he cried, and we 
raced on our bicycles to the engine shed to stop the engine, so that we could 
clean the filters. When we ­were leaving the engine ­house, having cleaned the 
filters, I noticed that Mr. X. had left a light on. I reminded him of that. Oh no: 
­every night he leaves that light on above the engine:
“It is for the angel ­there.”
Mazdak in Yazd
Talk of the protecting angel brought us back yet again to the justice of God. 
As I wrote in my journal, Mr. X. could see no way out but belief in an in­de­pen­
dent power of evil:
God sees all ­things and sees them all with one [equal] eye. Yet Mirah, his 
workman, is only forty and looks sixty; he has a bad chest and his land has 
been stolen from him by city ­lawyers. He is working so as to build a single 
hut in among the ­little allotment plots that have grown up in the newly-­
irrigated land. “And yet I eat fish ­every day”. Another worker, ill for eleven 
years, can only say: “I no longer think that ­there is Death. You are fooling 
me. I want Death to come and he does not”. How can God see all this “with 
one eye”? ­There must be an in­de­pen­dent Evil One who alone is responsible 
for such suffering.
Faced by ­these arguments, I remembered that ­there had been other, more 
radical solutions to this dilemma in ­earlier ages of Zoroastrianism. One such 
solution had been offered by the Mazdakite movement of the late fifth and early 
sixth centuries. Mazdak, a radical interpreter of the Zoroastrian scriptures, was 

Yazd 
443
said to have blamed the rich for the sufferings of the poor. He claimed that it was 
not the blind malevolence of Ahriman, the Evil One, which caused famines. It 
was the avarice of the rich. In the late fifth ­century this preaching by Mazdak had 
unleashed a leveling movement. He was said to have preached that men and 
­women ­were equal ­because their souls ­were equal. He also declared that all Ira­
ni­ans ­were ­free, and that the lower classes ­were not tied at birth to positions in 
an unshakable hierarchy, on whose solidity the peace of society depended—as 
was the traditional Zoroastrian view. Mazdak was said to have opened up the 
store­houses of the rich at a time of famine. He was also supposed to have broken 
down the caste system through which the nobility protected its vast fortunes by 
means of close-­cousin marriages. This was the Mazdakite movement that the 
radical young Muslims in the University of Tabriz had admired.
The Mazdakites ­were remembered in the Zoroastrian tradition. While we 
ser­viced the Leyland engine together late at night, discussing how Mr. X. had 
sold shirts to Italian POWs outside Benghazi during the war, Mr. X. told me 
all about Mazdak. Of course he knew about Mazdak. ­There are, he said, Maz-
dakis (Mazdakites) in Yazd. Yes: they ­were followers of Mehr Baba (an Indian 
theosophist) who held that, as all souls ­were equal, so all men and ­women 
should be equal. They kept silence “to rest their souls.” They served tea with 
­great dignity. I should meet them, Mr. X. said, when I returned to Yazd.
Shah Vahram and the Kingdom of Peace
Back at home, Mr. X. expatiated. We talked about the ­great kings of old. It was 
sad talk about the might-­have-­beens of Ira­nian history. Shapur I had savagely 
suppressed the Arabs. That was what a good king of kings should do. Khusro 
II Aparwez (the shah connected with Taq-­e Bostan) was the subject of much 
courtly romance in medieval Muslim lit­er­a­ture. But to Mr. X. he was a bad king 
and a womanizer, who had weakened the empire. He had tried to exterminate 
the Arabs ­because an astrologer had told him that the Arabs would conquer 
Iran. But he failed. Evidently, Mr. X. wished that he had succeeded.
Then the conversation took a serious turn. Mr. X. moved closer to me. Did 
I know about the Shah Vahram? The Shah Vahram was the legendary Ira­nian 
ruler who would appear at the end of the Evil Age to set ­things right again—to 
renew the Zoroastrian religion all over Iran ­after centuries of humiliation, and 
to usher in a Kingdom of Peace.
Who, Mr. Brown, do you think is the Shah Vahram? The Shah who ­will 
come to end the evil epoch? It is the pre­sent Shah, he whispers to me. For 

444 
Ch apter 64
­here I am, I sit with my door open without fear of the Muslims, my ­children 
are well, my engine pumps ­water, ­there is electricity. Surely the Kingdom 
of Peace has come.
Thirty-­six hours ­later I was back in ­England. On Monday, I was attending a 
meeting of the Research Committee in the Hovenden Room at All Souls. Trin-
ity term was already ­under way.
I had returned from another world. My journey to Iran had been no light-
hearted holiday trip. I had truly traveled. I had been infected by the huge 
spaces of Iran. From then onward, spacious regions outside Eu­rope became 
part of my imaginative world. Following the inspiration of Braudel, I had seen 
many of the landscapes on which the Sasanians had based themselves when 
they challenged the East Roman Empire in late antiquity. But I had also added 
a sense for other kinds of landscapes: sacred and royal landscapes, saturated 
with ­human notions of the sacred and linked to the majesty of empire.
Without knowing it, I had passed through a country only a few years before 
it was to change profoundly, with the onset of the Ira­nian Revolution. This 
accounts for the somewhat travelogue-­like tone of ­these last chapters: they are 
glimpses of a world that (as far as I can gather) is now in the past.
It was also a journey of the mind. By traveling to the landscapes and monu-
ments of the Sasanian Empire, I added a ­whole new dimension to my knowl-
edge of the late antique world. Hitherto, for all my curiosity, I had known 
about the Sasanians only through books: now Iran existed for me as a series 
of unforgettable images. Scrambling around monuments and traveling over 
the long roads of the Ira­nian plateau, I somehow got the “feel” of another 
world, far from the Mediterranean shores of East Rome.
More impor­tant yet for the religious historian, it was a journey of the heart. 
For the first time, I made contact with Islam as a living religion not only 
through the drama of a shrine such as Mashhad, but also through the sweet-
ness of recitations of the Qurʾân overheard in passing in mosques, in the recessed 
corners of madrasas, or in snatches on long bus rides. From then onward, the 
presence of Islam, in all its dif­fer­ent forms, in past and pre­sent alike, has always 
claimed my attention as a weight on the heart as well as a challenge to the 
historian.
I was also touched by the chanting of the Armenian church at Julfa and by 
the metaphysical wrangling of Mr. X., the Zoroastrian elder from Yazd. I came 
to feel that ­there was nothing strange about the desire to worship God. On my 
return, ­after a lapse of twenty years, I resumed regular attendance at a Chris-
tian church.

Part V
Berkeley 1975  
to Cairo


447
65
Berkeley 1975
“It Might Be Mars”
In 1974 wider horizons began to open up to me at an unaccustomed pace. The 
year began with my springtime journey to Iran. By the summer, I had de­cided 
to leave Oxford. I accepted the offer of a professorship at Royal Holloway 
College in the University of London.
Quite frankly, I needed a change of scene. I was aware that I lived a highly 
privileged and productive life as a se­nior fellow of All Souls College. But it was 
an interstitial position, to one side of the workings of the university. Such a 
position would have been ideal for a fully committed researcher—­such as Sam 
Stern and many of my other colleagues at All Souls. But I was also a teacher, 
committed to finding a place for the new field of late antiquity in a university 
system that changed slowly, if at all.
At the age of forty, I felt in danger of becoming a sacred cow—­a well-­known 
scholar, but somehow shielded by a studied sense of reverence from having 
any real impact on the world around me. Royal Holloway offered me a new 
field of action as permanent head of the History Department. I would prove 
to myself and to ­others that I could hold down a major job in a university 
whose teaching methods and structures ­were very dif­fer­ent from ­those of 
Oxford.
So I thought in the summer of 1974. The following chapters ­will show how 
this worked out in practice. Meanwhile, I found that I had a few months to fill 
before I took up my new job at Royal Holloway in early summer 1975. I spent 
some of ­those months opening up to yet another distant horizon: from Janu-
ary 3 to March 31, 1975, I was a visiting professor in the History Department in 
the University of California at Berkeley. It was my first long-­term stay in 
Amer­i­ca.

448 
Ch apter 65
I came to Berkeley as a short-­term replacement for Paul Alexander (1910–
1977), the Byzantinist, who was on sabbatical leave. At the time, I had no idea 
that I might come to Berkeley on a more permanent basis. Instead, I came to 
explore a distant world, much as I had explored Iran, but also to accustom 
myself to the workings of a university very dif­fer­ent from Oxford and more 
similar, in its structures and ethos, to the University of London. I spent much 
time learning what I could about administration and teaching in an American 
university, hoping that it might be helpful to me in Royal Holloway College. 
At Berkeley, I had no obligations other than to teach one gradu­ate seminar and 
one undergraduate lecture course in the History Department. I was entirely 
on my own with the prospect before me of a stretch of solitary reading at the 
far end of the world.
Two years previously, Beryl Smalley (1905–1984), the Oxford medievalist, 
had been at Berkeley. She wrote to me:
A ­little Sicilian ­here is planning to write a thesis in aid of ­Women’s Lib. on 
changes in attitudes to ­Women in the ­Middle Ages. . . .
That’s a sample of what one can be confronted with ­here. My first ap-
plicant to register for my course was a young man majoring in psy­chol­ogy 
who belonged to a “Society for Creative Anachronisms”; they stage revels 
and tournaments. One of the next put down “computer science” as his 
major, but it turned out that the computer had got him wrong and ­couldn’t 
be altered; he is ­really studying languages. Dogs come to classes. . . . ​In fact, 
it might be Mars.
This was the astringent humor of an Oxford college tutor, accustomed to 
grooming a small, selected group of students for a single final examination, 
when faced by the daunting openness of the American elective course 
system.
The Athens of the West
The Berkeley of the protest riots of 1968 was still very much pre­sent and talked 
about with pride by many. Long-­term gradu­ate students would speak to me, 
with a touch of shame, of the day when they lapsed from the counterculture—­
shaved, put on a suit, and went to their first job interview. Yet, rather than this 
recent epic, what struck me about Berkeley was that large areas of campus 
(both architecturally and culturally) had a strangely old-­fashioned air. And, 
indeed, my research during the three months that I spent in Berkeley took a 

Ber k eley 1975 
449
decidedly old-­fashioned turn. I went back to the classical world—to authors 
such as Plutarch (ca. 50–ca. 120) and Galen (129–199/216), and to figures from 
the early church, such as Cyprian, bishop of Carthage (ca. 200–258), Origen 
(184–254), and Eusebius of Caesarea (ca. 260–339). In other words, I went 
back to the world before Constantine. Having only recently reached out to the 
Sasanian Empire in the ­Middle East on the eve of the rise of Islam, and to 
the cult of relics in sixth-­century Gaul, this was no small step backward in time. 
Yet ­there was something about Berkeley campus that encouraged it.
Berkeley was the formidable flagship of an entire fleet of campuses of the 
University of California, which had been established so as to bring the best of 
American education to the Golden State. Though first founded in 1868 as a 
mining college, Berkeley soon came to pre­sent itself as the Athens of the 
West—an outpost of Western Civilization (very much in uppercase) brought 
to the shores of the Pacific. It looked the part. In 1904, a Greek Theater, mod-
eled on the famous theater of Epidauros, was built up against the hill at the top 
of the campus, creating the sense of an environment where time had stood still 
for two millennia.
Beneath a timeless Mediterranean sky, the overripe Beaux-­Arts classicism 
of Dow Library could have been built, if not by Pericles, at least by the em-
peror Hadrian. It was the right place in which to begin a stint of reading on the 
Antonine Age (138–180)—­the Gilded Age of the Roman Empire—in prepara-
tion for the Jackson Lectures that I had agreed to give at Harvard in 1976: “The 
Making of Late Antiquity.” ­These ­were published in 1978.1
Antonine Bodies
In Dow Library, the Classics Seminar Room was beautifully maintained. It was 
an oasis of order and comfort in the somewhat ramshackle bulk of the library 
proper. Flooded with eve­ning light as the sun sank ­behind the Golden Gate 
Bridge, it contained all that I needed to read of the authors of the Antonine 
Age and other texts from the late classical period.
The work that I did ­there was, in many ways, a follow-up to my debate with 
E. R. Dodds on the nature of the crisis of the third ­century. The usual view was 
that this crisis was an outright catastrophe that had marked the end of the 
ancient world. I had come to feel that this was not so. The third ­century was a 
1. Peter Brown, The Making of Late Antiquity (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 
1978).

450 
Ch apter 65
time of transformation rather than of disaster, in which many of the long-­term 
tensions of the Roman Empire—­the relations between empire and cities, 
between Romans and provincials, between rich and poor—­came to the fore 
with new intensity and ­were resolved in new ways.
I had already written on this period in The World of Late Antiquity. But that 
had been a work of synthesis which covered the entire period of late antiquity, 
written for the general public. I planned The Making as a very dif­fer­ent book. 
It would be an essay in change: a detailed study (heavy with footnotes!) of the 
social and religious developments in the two centuries between the reign of 
Marcus Aurelius and that of Constantine—­between around 138 and 337.
My notes show that I read deeply in the Moralia of Plutarch and the medical 
works of Galen along with other recondite works on physiognomics, astrol-
ogy, and alchemy. I turned to ­these texts ­because I needed to understand how 
the codes of be­hav­ior current in the Antonine Age (which included po­liti­cal 
be­hav­ior) ­were rooted in images of the body in such a way that the stresses 
and strains of Roman upper-­class society could be seen as somehow mirrored 
in its medical concerns.
It seemed that the search for social stability was reflected in the balance of 
the body itself. Galen’s anxious preoccupation with the balance of “heat” in 
the body, though inherited from Hippocrates, also bore the mark of its age: it 
betrayed a sharp concern for the dangers of aggression in a highly competitive 
society, where physical vio­lence lay close to the seemingly cool and polished 
surface of the elites. Sheathed in a network of distinctive meanings, Antonine 
bodies ­were not like our own.
Society and the Cosmos
And did ­these persons walk beneath the same stars as we do? The answer was 
very definitely: no. In my reading I was brought up against the richness of the 
late classical view of the kosmos, the physical universe. It was a murmurous world 
filled with invisible beings—an entire hidden society of gods, demons, and an-
gels, in which ­human beings and ­human society ­were embedded. This repre­
sen­ta­tion of the kosmos served as a diagram of society and its ills: the pure 
order of the heavens above the moon stood as the antithesis to the disorderly 
interplay of random powers below it. ­Those who won out in the ­great social 
and imaginative convulsion of Roman society of the third ­century ­were ­those 
who claimed to have brought the order of the serene heavens down to earth. 
I realized that I had to think more about ­those vibrant heavens.

Ber k eley 1975 
451
­Here I detect the influence of the genius loci from the very first night of my 
arrival at Berkeley, when Tom Bisson and Bob Brentano (1926–2002) drove 
me to the Faculty Club. As we passed the open vents of heating systems belch-
ing steam like a series of volcanic geysers beneath towering clumps of euca-
lyptus, I looked down ­toward the East Bay at the most dramatic sunset that I 
had ever seen. A recent, minor eruption of Popocatépetl in Mexico (they told 
me) had filled the air with shimmering dust. It stretched across the horizon in 
an opalescent necklace of purple and gold. It continued for many eve­nings. 
Walking up to the Rose Garden on the north side of campus, I would see 
­people standing, alone or in ­little groups, looking out to sea as if riveted by 
some awesome sight—­a ­great ship sinking, perhaps, or Godzilla devouring 
the Golden Gate Bridge. No. It was only the sunset.
­Whether in Berkeley or along the Pacific coast of Marin County, nature was 
not beautiful. It was stunning and, somehow, profoundly prehuman. It drew 
one out of society, as if ­human settlement ­were a thin film that could be 
stripped away to reveal an older world unmarked by ­human structures and 
without ­human names. It was calculated to set one thinking about the late 
antique sense of the imperturbable majesty of the kosmos. In the awed words of 
Plotinus, “Pas de ho khôros hieros: All the place is holy”—as Oedipus had ex-
claimed on reaching Colonus.2 To a pagan such as Plotinus, ­humans ­were the 
“late born” in this universe—­latecomers to a landscape that was not their own.
To sit on a beach in Marin County and to watch flocks of pelicans—­
timeless, antediluvian birds like pterodactyls—­fly in perfect order in the troughs 
of ­giant waves, passing in front of a distant view of the plate-­glass skyscrapers 
of San Francisco downtown glittering on the horizon, was to feel something 
of the smallness of humanity. It caused late antique debates on the relative 
importance of ­human beings and of ­human society in a divine universe to take 
on a new weight for me.
Holy Hill: Angels, Demons, and the Cosmos
But what about the early Christians, whose strong notions of power derived 
from Heaven would fi­nally produce the “holy men” of fourth-­ and fifth-­century 
Syria and Egypt? To understand ­these early Christians, I would have to study 
the New Testament and the early church from the days of Saint Paul to the age 
of Constantine to a degree that I had never done before. I found the perfect 
2. Plotinus, Enneads 1.8.14, trans. A. H. Armstrong, Loeb Classical Library 1, p. 312, with n. 3.

452 
Ch apter 65
place to do this in the Gradu­ate Theological Union Library, in a complex 
known as “Holy Hill,” perched at the top of a steep ave­nue of palm trees that 
ended with a spectacular view of the East Bay. I had never before encountered 
an interdenominational library devoted to all aspects of Chris­tian­ity and its 
environment from Old Testament times up to the pre­sent. I quickly set up a 
carrel and got to work.
I began in Holy Hill by reading what I could about Christian attitudes to 
the demonic and angelic beings who ­were believed to share the kosmos with the 
­human race. While most modern accounts of the period tended to pre­sent the 
demons as omnipresent and all-­threatening, late antique writers, in fact, con-
fined the demons to a clearly delimited niche in the world beneath the moon. 
A sense of the immensity of the universe enabled late antique persons, as it 
­were, to corral in the demons. Their power was bounded and capable of being 
overcome by ­those who wielded more secure, more “heavenly” power.
Furthermore, the pyramidal nature of the kosmos, with its hierarchy of as-
cending powers, gave to special individuals a strong sense of agency. They 
could feel that they shared a universe filled with caring spirits—­with the hosts 
of angels to whom they could draw close for protection and for inspiration. 
Far from living scared in a demon-­ridden world, they thought of themselves 
as possessing reserves of energy that ­were both within them and, at the same 
time, above them—in the form of protecting gods or guardian angels who 
hovered so close to their charges that they could be thought of almost as up-
ward extensions of the self.
It seemed to me that this warm sense of closeness to power­ful, invisible 
presences braced believers to perform feats of courage, of creativity, and even 
(in the case of Constantine) of daring statesmanship that broke with the cau-
tion of an older, more conservative age. ­Whether it was a bishop leading a large 
congregation, such as Cyprian (bishop of Carthage from 248 to 258); the 
founder of a world religion, such as Mani (216–277); or a crowned revolution-
ary, such as Constantine (306–337): a tenacious belief in the presence of divine 
protectors produced a remarkable succession of persons prepared to challenge 
and to change the world.
The Master
A few weeks ­later, I encountered a surprising modern representative of this 
view. I was given a lift to see a friend in Sonora. The driver, Bruce, was a much-­
traveled and well-­informed man. He told me that he had been a ship’s purser 

Ber k eley 1975 
453
all over the Pacific. Now he was a teacher of the Urantia cult, on his way to 
instruct a congregation of fellow believers. He carried with him a holy book—­
The Urantia Book—­a story of the earth that had been delivered by angels in 
Chicago sometime in the 1920s.
Bruce described a world ruled by infinite ranks of guardian angels, cluster-
ing one on top of the other above each believer, to protect and inspire them. I 
hazarded a guess. “I am sure, Bruce, that you have many more than one guard-
ian angel.” “Gee, Peter, how did you know that!” In fact, he explained, as a 
master in the teachings of Urantia, he had as many as ten. I felt that my read-
ings on Holy Hill had not been wasted.
­There was a sequel to this moment of self-­revelation. My Sonora friend 
taught a course at Columbia Junior College in Sonora. During my friend’s 
lecture, the young sprawled in their chairs, sucked at their drinks, adjusted 
their earphones in magnificently insouciant gestures of adolescent “cool,” in a 
largely empty room. On the way back, we looked into the seminar room where 
Bruce was teaching his charges. His long silver beard sparkled in the upward 
light of a desk lamp. He held The Urantia Book before him. Around a crowded 
­table, his disciples all sat bolt upright, all leaning forward over their own copy 
of the holy text. None of them stirred. They ­were riveted in the presence of a 
teacher and his ten angels. For a moment, I had glimpsed a scene straight from 
the third ­century AD.
On Campus: Gradu­ate Students
A ­little ­after that meeting, in mid-­February, I fell ill with a virulent and tena-
cious form of Bay Area flu. I would spend days on end grounded—­watching 
talk shows and flamboyant quiz games on the tele­vi­sion. Even the local cinema 
gave no relief. It was sufficiently close to the intellectual pretensions of cam-
pus, alas, to offer nothing other than a season of the more depressing of Ingmar 
Bergman’s movies.
I suffered from a dramatic loss of energy. I now knew what it was like for 
Plotinus to look up into the blue sky with sadness that his own body was so 
fragile, so very distant from the radiant vigor of the body of the sun. I became 
only too well aware that, in winter, the blue sky of California was not neces-
sarily a warm sky: a thin breeze as sharp as an icicle often blew under­neath it, 
a breeze that seemed to come straight from Antarctica. A ­little ­later, even 
the weather collapsed, as monsoon-­like rain blew in from the Pacific, making the 
clean-­cut stones of the campus sweat with clammy heat.

454 
Ch apter 65
It was in this low season that I began to ­really make friends. Most impor­tant 
of all, at that time, ­were the group of gradu­ate students who attended my semi-
nars and lectures. It was through them that I became accustomed to the ways 
of a university so very dif­fer­ent from Oxford.
I learned ­these differences early and in unexpected ways. For instance, fol-
lowing my Oxford habit, I had scheduled my seminar for the late after­noon—­
after tea, as it ­were. I had also hoped, by such scheduling, to have an open space 
of ­free time afterward, where I might repair with whichever students ­were in 
the mood, to a pizza and beer garden—­many of which I had observed on the 
north side of campus, at the bottom of Euclid Ave­nue.
I soon realized that this was not an entirely good choice of time. For when 
darkness fell, the ­great campus could be a place of danger, especially for 
­women. Furthermore, many gradu­ates had driven into campus from a long 
way out of town and wanted to start back home before it got too late. ­There was 
a whiff of dangers and of ­family responsibilities which told me that ­these 
students ­were not young persons, late teen­agers, like the sheltered undergrad-
uates (and even the gradu­ates) of Oxford.
They ­were would-be professionals. I learned this in the very first meeting 
of my seminar on the age of Augustine. I began by passing out biblio­graphies 
for the topics that we would discuss in the coming weeks. I then asked for 
volunteers to offer a short pre­sen­ta­tion on the topic of the week as a way of 
getting the discussion ­going. Some ­were keen enough, and well-­informed 
enough, to put in bids for well-­known topics, such as Augustine’s Neopla-
tonism or the City of God. But, apart from them, what was notably absent was 
the cheery amateurism of my Oxford class. Though far more reticent than 
Americans, the En­glish undergraduates had been prepared to try their hand 
at anything. To learn to be a jack of all trades and master of none was part of a 
gentlemanly education. They could wing it.
Not so for gradu­ate students in Berkeley. When it came to allotting a 
speaker to introduce the very first topic—­Augustine and the Manichees—­I 
was met by an anxious silence. Surely the Manichees, with their strange writ-
ings in Coptic, Soghdian, and Chinese, could not be approached by mere ama-
teurs from the History Department? Somewhere, perched in an office at the 
top of Dwinelle Hall (among the many experts in recondite oriental lan-
guages), ­there must be a professional or a ­future professional to fill that slot. 
To attempt to wing a pre­sen­ta­tion on the Manichees, when such persons ­were 
available, would be the height of unprofessional be­hav­ior. And then the door 
opened, and in came Martin Schwartz, the professor of Ira­nian languages, 

Ber k eley 1975 
455
altogether looking the part, with a raven-­black Babylonian beard, accompa-
nied by a large man in a green checked suit—­his student, engaged in a disserta-
tion on Manichaean Soghdian—­whom we knew only as “Mr. Flaherty.” The 
day was saved. The correct professionals had arrived.
What I had not realized, with my cheery approach, was that ­these gradu­ates 
­were serious grown-­ups as well as students. Many ­were married. Many had 
returned to gradu­ate school having tried other ­careers. The ancient notion of 
a late “conversion to wisdom” (whose intense sense of commitment had been 
explored by Henri-­Irénée Marrou in the case of Augustine) was alive and well 
in the Berkeley of the 1970s. Many spoke of “­going back to school” as just such 
a conversion. Hence a seriousness that many of my Oxford friends (confronted 
by visiting American gradu­ates) had tended to dismiss as a sign of a pedantry. 
But they ­were not pedants. For many of them, to go to gradu­ate school was an 
existential choice. They felt that they could never be professional enough in 
following it through.
It was a frankly vocational training. They studied with professors so as 
to become professors. In early 1970s Oxford (and especially in All Souls), ­there 
was still a sense that, having shown one’s brilliance by gaining a first or a 
prize fellowship, one might then go on to higher ­things in London—­the law, 
the foreign ser­vice, banking. This was not so among ­these gradu­ate students. One 
of my greatest gaffes, in my first month in Berkeley, was to ask an exceptionally 
gifted student what he would do “­after gradu­ate school.” The poor man thought 
that I had put a jinx on him. He knew what he wanted to be: a professor, like 
myself.
Gradually, a group of friends formed around me, gathered in pizza parlors 
or as visitors to my office in Dwinelle Hall. They illustrated the impressive 
range of interests available among the gradu­ate students of Berkeley. At 
Berkeley, ancient and medieval history joined without so much as a murmur. 
(I looked back to ­those long hours spent in Oxford, attempting to negotiate 
even one shared paper between History and Litterae Humaniores.)
Pericles Georges was engaged with Greek attitudes to Persia in the fifth 
­century BC.3 A man given to much worldly wisdom, he had already taken 
me in hand, ­after the end of my very first seminar and on the way to a pizza 
parlor, with advice as to the remarkable substances—­tranquilizers and ingre-
dients for hair rinse—­that ­were to be found in American bottled beers.
3. P. Georges, Barbarian Asia and the Greek Experience (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University 
Press, 1994).

456 
Ch apter 65
Art Eckstein was a devoted student of Eric Gruen. Already a gnarled figure, 
only recently (or barely) detached from the Los Angeles counterculture, he had 
made very much his own the cantankerous warlords of the Roman Republic 
at the height of their feeding frenzy.4 His sweet friend Jeannie Rutenberg 
(1950–2009) introduced me, as a connoisseur of holy men, to the Lives of Saint 
Francis.
Michael Maas was already well launched into the study of sixth-­century 
Byzantium, ­under the guidance of Paul Alexander, whom he revered and 
whose ­widow, Eleanor, he would always go out of his way to visit ­after Paul’s 
death in 1977. A few years ­later, he completed his dissertation and published a 
prizewinning book on the erudite and alienated figure of the Byzantine bu-
reaucrat John Lydus (ca. 490–ca. 565).5 ­These friends represented only a 
sample of the remarkable range of interests and talents, seriously engaged with 
scholarship, that gathered with such apparent ease in the light air of campus.
Topsy-­Turvy
During my stay in Berkeley, I visited other American campuses. On March 6, 
I flew to Chicago to lecture at the Divinity School. I had arranged to give my-
self the adventure of returning from Chicago to San Francisco by rail. It was 
in the ­middle of lunch, ­after the last discussion group, that I learned that South 
Bend was no more than two and a half hours by train from Chicago, and that 
my friend and Hebrew teacher, Roberta Chesnut, was now teaching at the 
Catholic University of Notre Dame, beside South Bend.6
I was soon on a train to South Bend. The train passed Gary, where the 
wind was blowing the snow parallel to the ­water across Lake Michigan, and 
­stopped at stations where it seemed that nobody spoke anything but Polish. 
I racked my memory for suitable phrases in biblical Hebrew with which to 
greet Roberta.
Apart from the joy of seeing Glen and Roberta again, securely settled in 
South Bend—­a town, Roberta told me, “so quiet that they roll up and stow 
4. Arthur M. Eckstein, Mediterranean Anarchy, Interstate War, and the Rise of Rome (Berkeley: 
University of California Press, 2006).
5. Michael Maas, John Lydus and the Roman Past: Antiquarianism and Politics in the Reign of 
Justinian (London: Routledge, 1992).
6. See chapter 48: “Hebrew.”

Ber k eley 1975 
457
away the sidewalks ­every evening”—­I found myself observing what to me, as 
a traditional Irish Protestant, was an utterly unimaginable situation: a ­great 
Catholic university turned topsy-­turvy.
I had been accustomed to think of a Catholic university as an institution 
like Maynooth, a proud bastion of traditional Catholic learning. Notre Dame 
was not like that at all. Confessional barriers appeared to have vanished. The 
Theology Department was filled with non-­Catholics, Roberta among them. A 
Catholic charismatic movement was in full swing. Above all, the ­women’s lib-
eration movement (as it was then called) was prominent on campus and was 
forcing its way with gathering strength through the narrow channels of the 
local churches, Catholic and Protestant alike.
What struck me forcibly was the way in which the vari­ous churches had 
thrown their weight into the radical movements of the time. As Roberta ex-
plained it to me, the churches had always been, in some ways, cultural theocra-
cies. Often, it was the clergy, and not secular institutions, who had mediated 
high thinking and progressive ideals to their congregations. And now this high 
thinking had taken a radical turn.
Unlike the protest culture of the West Coast, in which so many of my gradu­
ate students at Berkeley had been involved, this was a grassroots movement 
that worked through religious channels—­through prayer groups, vestry meet-
ings, church teach-­ins, and sermons. This would not have come as news to an 
American who had witnessed the civil rights movement in the South; but to 
a person from the British Isles, this peculiar blend of religion, culture, and po­
liti­cal activism gave much food for thought.
I felt the same when I met Roberta’s students. Many came from conserva-
tive or even sectarian religious backgrounds—­Protestant, Catholic, Eastern 
Orthodox, and Mennonite. Unlike so many of my Californian students, many 
of ­these midwesterners had deeply rooted ­family religions in their immediate 
background, to defend or to rebel against. They ­were much more like the Prot-
estants of Dublin than the En­glish, whose polite disregard for religion had 
always puzzled me as a young man.
For such persons, religion and intellect ­were not opposed. Religion was 
often the one way through which students grew to intellectual and imaginative 
maturity. To learn how to face the Bible and the history of the early church as 
scholars, as Roberta insisted that they should do, was to turn childhood beliefs 
into reasoned objects of belief or criticism. It involved crossing a real threshold. 
Roberta, with her combination of fierce scholarship and religious seriousness, 

458 
Ch apter 65
could not have been a better teacher for them, nor could they have been more 
rewarding students for her.
Altogether, I returned from Amer­i­ca to ­England, not as if from Mars, but 
from a large and serious place, to take up a job in a large, public university that 
was more like Berkeley than like Oxford—­the University of London, where 
I would be head of the History Department at Royal Holloway College.

459
66
Royal Holloway 
College
Myths, Ancient and Modern
From May 1975 to March 1978, I was professor and head of the History Depart-
ment at Royal Holloway College—­a part of the confederation of colleges that 
made up the University of London. Academically, it was a more than usually 
productive period for me: The Making of Late Antiquity and The Cult of the 
Saints ­were written ­there. But what mattered most, in ­those years, was a sudden 
widening of my horizons. As head of the History Department (the equivalent 
of permanent chairperson in Amer­i­ca) I was brought into direct contact with 
entire new fields of history and with new, more flexible approaches to teach-
ing. In ­these years I also traveled more widely—­once again to Iran and fre-
quently to Amer­i­ca.
Royal Holloway College was in Egham, Surrey (close to Windsor ­Castle), 
perched on a hill that dominated the water-­meadows of the Thames valley, 
some forty minutes by rail to Waterloo Station and central London. Among 
the many colleges that made up the federated University of London, Royal 
Holloway was something of an outlier. It was not as well known as other Lon-
don colleges. Yet its distinctive position and ethos influenced me immediately 
and profoundly.
I took instantly to the in­ter­est­ing balance of past and pre­sent around 
Egham. The Thames valley was almost a theme park of British history. Run-
nymede, where Magna Carta was signed in 1215, lay in the valley at the bottom 
of Egham Hill. When I drove from Oxford, along the M4, I would turn off at 
Windsor, where I would pass the fifteenth-­century chapel of Eton College, 
rising in the morning mist like a Victorian watercolor above flatlands still 

460 
Ch apter 66
grazed by picturesque cows. Then would come Windsor ­Castle, glimpsed from 
the road at the head of a ceremonious ave­nue of trees, followed by the woods 
and open walkways of Windsor Park.
At the same time, a vibrant symbol of the modern age lay only a quarter of 
an hour’s drive from the college. That was Heathrow Airport. ­Every morning and 
eve­ning the ­great jumbo jets from Amer­i­ca and Asia would level off above 
the college for their final descent. ­Those planes spoke to me of large and 
spacious lands—of Iran and, increasingly, of Amer­i­ca. It was the age of the 
Concorde supersonic jet. I remember one morning, in 1977, sitting in a 
British Airways plane to Washington, passing the Concorde as we taxied out 
over the tarmac. It looked surprisingly small and lonely. I thought differently 
when I arrived at Washington. For ­here was the same Concorde, standing 
cool and aloof, as if it had always been ­there. It had beaten us to Amer­i­ca by 
six hours.
In 2003, I watched the Concorde coming in over Paris, to land for the last 
time. As it glided through the clouds above Les Invalides, a most unmodern 
scene was taking place in the ­great square. The Knights of Malta and their 
wives emerged from the chapel of Les Invalides, having attended a funerary 
mass for one of their fellows. Beautifully dressed el­derly ladies in mantillas, 
with exquisite handbags, hobbled across the cobblestones with extended arms 
to embrace silvery gentlemen in full dress uniform: “Ah, mon général . . . !!” 
The ancien régime had outlived the symbol of the bright new age. It was a 
scene calculated to remind the historian of how ­little we can know the ­future. 
In 1975, Concorde seemed fixed forever in the busy sky above Heathrow.
“­Because They Are the Greatest Sufferers”
In its own time (in the late nineteenth ­century) Royal Holloway had been a 
potent symbol of modernity. Its founder, Thomas Holloway (1800–1883), was 
a Victorian millionaire turned philanthropist. He made a fortune through sell-
ing patent pills by means of relentless, worldwide advertising—­“Holloway’s 
Pink Pills for Pale Persons.” He then de­cided to spend his wealth on works of 
benevolence. Having built a sanatorium for the mentally disturbed at ­Virginia 
­Water, near Egham, in 1873, he went on to plan nothing less than an entire 
university for ­women, “­because they are the greatest sufferers.” He was said to 
have done so on the advice of his wife, Jane.1
1. Caroline Bingham, The History of Royal Holloway College (London: Constable, 1978), 36.

Roya l Holloway College 
461
This may be no more than an edifying legend. What is certain is that Hol-
loway looked to Amer­i­ca for his model—to Matthew Vassar’s new foundation 
for ­women, Vassar College in Poughkeepsie. What Vassar had created beside 
the Hudson River, Holloway wished to place on top of Egham Hill, close to 
the queen at Windsor and at a respectable distance from the unruly sights and 
stimuli of London. He pushed through a ­grand plan: “I hope we ­shall be able 
to beat Vassar into fits. It ­shall not be my fault if we ­don’t.”2
Holloway succeeded. His architect, William Crossland (1835–1909), 
brought back to ­England exact mea­sure­ments of the Re­nais­sance Château de 
Chambord on the Loire. From ­these he created a building twice the size of 
Chambord, arranged around two im­mense rectangular quadrangles. I was 
often told, “Chambord was not the model; it was only the module.” Flaming 
red brick, interlaced with bright white Portland stone, “fairly scorched the eye.”
It was said that nine hundred stonemasons worked on the carvings alone. 
The entire my­thol­ogy of progressive ­England was ­there. The keystones of the 
outer arches of the chapel showed Muhammad, Confucius, Savonarola, and—­
most surprising of all—­Pope Julius II, placed ­there ­because he was regarded 
as the archetypical Re­nais­sance patron of the arts.3
Holloway himself wished to be known as a patron of the arts like Julius II. 
He put together an impressive collection of eminently Victorian paintings to 
cover the walls of a ­grand art gallery in one corner of the college. Among ­these 
was a huge canvas by Sir Edwin Landseer that showed the grisly end of Sir 
John Franklin’s expedition to the Arctic in search of the Northwest Passage in 
1845, with large polar bears tearing the last shreds of the sails of Franklin’s ship, 
crushed in a sea of ice. Painted in 1864, it bore the inauspicious title Man Pro-
poses, God Disposes. On the days when the gallery was filled with chairs and 
desks for students taking the final examination, the picture would be veiled 
with a large Union Jack, lest it disturb ­those seated beside it.
Holloway had intended this huge pile to be a complete, autonomous uni-
versity, awarding its own degrees, as an American ­women’s university would 
do. This plan was not realized. Instead, London University offered to provide 
certification by including Royal Holloway in its federation of colleges. Admi-
rably progressive on this as on so many other issues, London University had 
awarded degrees to ­women as early as 1878: Oxford and Cambridge granted 
full degrees to ­women (as opposed to mere certificates of attendance at 
2. Bingham, Royal Holloway College, 46.
3. Bingham, Royal Holloway College, 56 and 59.

462 
Ch apter 66
lectures) only as late as 1920 and 1948, respectively. Thomas Holloway, a very 
modern man for his times, had placed on top of Egham Hill a fragment of the 
­future.
In 1975, much of this ­future had come true, despite continued ambivalences 
and many changes. “Holl Coll,” as it called itself, remained somewhat periph-
eral to the London University system. Its splendid isolation in Egham con-
stantly tempted the college residents to ­settle down to the cozy ethos of a 
boarding school. Male students had been accepted since 1965. But ­women still 
predominated in the student body (715 to 576 in 1973/74). In many ways, the 
overall ethos of the college was that of a ­women’s campus. To the best of my 
knowledge, I was the first male head of the History Department, though it 
had long had its fair share of male teachers. Lionel Butler (1923–1981), who had 
played a major part in my appointment, was the first male principal. He had 
come only recently, in 1973, having been a charismatic professor of medieval 
history in St. Andrews.
In the eve­nings of May and June 1975, I would sit up late in my office in the 
corner of the block to which the History Department had recently moved, 
away from the splendors of Found­er’s Building—­the original, gigantic college. 
Silhouetted in india-­ink black against the twilight, the elaborate domes and 
chimneys of Found­er’s Building ­were almost swallowed up by the magnificent 
trees and high shrubbery of the gardens that surrounded them. It could have 
been a view of some ­great Indian ­temple or of Angkor Wat. All it lacked, 
I wrote to a friend, ­were tribes of sacred monkeys.

463
67
Genius Loci
Po­liti­cal Thought, 
World History, and Isl am
Colleagues and Counselors
What I found, to my delight, on arriving at Royal Holloway, was a History 
Department ready for change and extremely congenial. As the new head 
of department I was expected to encourage a more modern profile than that 
favored by my pre­de­ces­sor, Joan Hussey (1907–2006), a strict Byzantinist. 
­Here I had the greatest good fortune. My coprofessor (the holder of a personal 
chair) was Neville Sanderson (1919–2001). “Sandy” was a robust Yorkshireman. 
He had ­little patience with what he called “the Southern Counties blancmange” 
whose genteel and undemanding spirit, in his view, constantly threatened to 
infect the college. He was a rock of good sense and fairness, as deeply versed 
in the ways of the central government of London University as of the college. 
Any administrative skill that I showed in my three years at Royal Holloway, 
I owed largely to him.
I quickly realized that I shared a world with Sandy. He was an old Sudan 
hand. He had been head of the History Department in Khartoum University 
from 1953 to 1965 and would still travel ­there regularly to represent the Univer-
sity of London, whose famous external examination system granted degrees 
throughout the former territories of the British Empire.
With his wife, Lillian, Sandy ­later wrote a study of education in the southern 
Sudan. This was an unflinchingly honest book that told the story of the murder-
ous working out of the “baleful mirage” that had encouraged, first, the British, 
and then—­after Sudanese in­de­pen­dence—­the Muslims of the northern 

464 
Ch apter 67
Sudan, to impose a rigid control on the vast territories of the South: an attempt 
that had led to the slaughter of the civil wars of 1955 to 1972.1
My other rock of certainty was Rita Townsend, the departmental secretary. 
Quiet as a wise mouse, she knew every­one and every­thing. We all consulted 
Rita. She combined roles usually kept far apart in American universities. She 
was ­mother and school matron all in one to the undergraduates. At the same 
time, she was at the top of her class as an administrator. Above all, she was a fount 
of humanity. At the time, I was unused to the professorial grandeur of having a 
secretary to take letters and memoranda from dictation. When I did this, I 
would always watch Rita’s face as I dictated. On any delicate issue—­and espe-
cially on any issue that involved the prob­lems of individual undergraduates—­I 
could tell at once from her expression ­whether I was ­doing the right ­thing.
As far as the younger members of the department ­were concerned, I came at 
a significant moment. Structurally, the Royal Holloway History Department had 
suffered from being seen as a stepping-­stone to better posts, in Oxbridge or else-
where. With the freezing of jobs in history throughout Britain, however, gifted 
young scholars knew that they could no longer count on passing rapidly through 
the college to higher ­things. They had to face the fact that they might be at Royal 
Holloway for the long haul. As head of department, it was up to me to try to en-
sure that their life ­there would be intellectually and personally rewarding.
This effort also affected the students. As a residential college, perched at a 
distance from metropolitan London, Royal Holloway was always in danger of 
turning in on itself. Young and old alike needed to feel that in­ter­est­ing ­things 
could happen even in the wilds of Egham. Hence the importance of the newly 
reinvigorated History Society. Each term we would invite distinguished his-
torians to deliver a paper and to dine at leisure with us.
For me, the most moving of ­those visits was from Kathleen Hughes (1926–
1977), the scholar of early medieval Ireland, whose book The Church in Early 
Irish Society had been my most sure—­indeed, at the time, my only—­guide to 
the Chris­tian­ity of Dark Age Ireland.2
For Kathleen, the invitation to Royal Holloway had meant a return to a not 
altogether happy past. Like many leading ­women scholars, she had taught at 
Royal Holloway at the beginning of her ­career ­under the ferule of my 
1. Lillian Passmore Sanderson and Neville Sanderson, Education, Religion and Politics in the 
Southern Sudan, 1899–1965 (London: Ithaca Press; Khartoum: University of Khartoum Press, 
1981), 246.
2. Kathleen Hughes, The Church in Early Irish Society (London: Methuen, 1966).

Genius Loci 
465
pre­de­ces­sor, Joan Hussey. They had been grim years. Now it seemed that the 
lively occasion laid on by the History Society had removed a burden for her:
In fact the visit laid a bogey for me: I met JMH [Joan Hussey] in the UL 
[the Cambridge University Library] yesterday, and actually spoke to her, 
told her I had been to RHC. She said “I suppose it was awful” (typically), 
and I said ”Quite the reverse. I enjoyed it very much”. She just looked a 
rather pathetic pale splodge, not a horror any more.
Kathleen had spoken on the relation between sanctity and pilgrimage 
among the holy men and ­women of early medieval Ireland. It was an inspiring 
talk—­a glimpse of another world, seldom explored by British medievalists. 
Barely over a month ­later, on April 20, 1977, she died unexpectedly of a heart 
attack. Walking through the garden beneath the Found­er’s Building to absorb 
the news, I came upon a heavy patch of daffodils in full flower. It was as if a 
­little bit of Paradise had broken through the earth.
Po­liti­cal Thought
As professor in medieval history and head of department, I could have invoked 
my privilege and ­limited myself to teaching medieval history only. But that 
would have left me somewhat isolated in a department that was tilted ­toward 
the modern age, and would have ­limited my contacts with students. By con-
trast, po­liti­cal thought was an obligatory part of the syllabus for ­every history 
student. To have a hand in teaching it would give me the width of contact that 
I needed. ­Here I was fortunate. In London University I found a vigorous tradi-
tion of the study of the history of social and po­liti­cal thought through the ages, 
from ancient Greece to modern times. The history of po­liti­cal thought had 
always interested me. Now was a time to get to know more about it.
At Royal Holloway College, the teaching of the history of po­liti­cal thought 
had been somewhat piecemeal. I was determined that it should have a higher 
profile, as a star subject, and that I should take part in it. In the general reshuffle 
of seminars and lectures that took place soon ­after my arrival in the summer 
of 1975, I offered to deliver a series of lectures for Royal Holloway students: 
“Theories of History and Society from the Enlightenment to Karl Marx.”
Lectures on such modern themes might appear somewhat quixotic in a 
professor of medieval history. But they served a good purpose. Writing the 
lectures helped me to put together what I already knew about the intellectual 
pre­de­ces­sors of the social anthropologists and the sociologists to whom I had 

466 
Ch apter 67
owed so much in recent years. Furthermore, my new commitment to the history 
of social and po­liti­cal thought introduced me to the works of the Scottish 
Enlightenment—­especially to David Hume (1711–1776)—­which helped me 
greatly when I wrote about Edward Gibbon’s views on culture and society.3
Apart from this immediate payoff for my own study of late antiquity, I felt 
that I had joined a London tradition which I had long admired. Ever since my 
first contacts with Arnaldo Momigliano, I had been intrigued (as he was, also) 
by the metropolitan, radical aspect of London University that dated from the 
days of Jeremy Bentham (1748–1832), the ­great utilitarian phi­los­o­pher. (The 
reader may remember that I had already met Bentham, to my surprise, in 1957, 
as an embalmed figure in a corridor of University College.) This liberal tradition 
spoke to Arnaldo from his very first days in ­England as a refugee from Fascist 
Italy. It was said that, when Italy entered the war and all Italians in Britain ­were 
interned for a spell as “­enemy aliens,” Arnaldo reported at the local police sta-
tion with a copy of John Stuart Mill’s On Liberty in his coat pocket.
In a metropolitan university, with a radical background, the history of po­
liti­cal and social thought was treated as a serious ­matter. Though it was only 
one paper among ­others, the paper on po­liti­cal thought was given special 
weight in the final examination. It somehow summed up the Victorian ideal 
of an urban university where ­people of all classes and both sexes ­were expected 
to think hard and to argue hard about politics and society. It was part of the 
genius loci of London University.
In July 1977, I acted as examiner for the po­liti­cal thought paper in the 
university-­wide final examination. My colleague was Michael Wilks (1930–
1998), an expert on late medieval po­liti­cal theory. Michael taught at Birkbeck 
College, which had been founded as a college for workers. As a result, its lec-
tures always happened in the eve­nings. It was the Victorian ideal of the work-
ers’ eve­ning class now made part of the flexible structure of the university.
One candidate wrote a quite outstanding paper. When his name was fi­nally 
revealed (for, in the sober London tradition, the paper had borne a number 
up to the time of the giving of the final grade, so as to ensure total anonymity 
and total fairness), it turned out that Wilks knew him well as a student at Birk-
beck. He explained to me that this candidate was the man who played the guitar 
sitting on the floor of the entrance to Tottenham Court Road Under­ground 
3. Peter Brown, “Gibbon’s Views on Culture and Society in the Fifth and Sixth Centuries,” 
Daedalus 105 (Summer 1976): 73–88, now in Society and the Holy in Late Antiquity (Berkeley: 
University of California Press, 1982), 22–48.

Genius Loci 
467
station. I had frequently passed him and often dropped a coin into his glass. In 
an essay that began, “Kephalas [the conservative old Athenian in the opening 
dialogue of Plato’s Republic] is the clue . . . ,” he had produced the most search-
ing critique of Plato’s attitude to myth and society that ­either of us had ever 
read. Our Tube-­station musician was a progressive hope come true.
World History
At Royal Holloway I also found myself engaged with a lively group of young 
scholars in modern British history, and in the history of South and Southeast 
Asia. They had already set about creating a course in modern world history 
that was unique in Britain at the time. It covered Asia and Africa since 1900, 
with special attention to comparisons between the regions, such as comparative 
studies of the peasantry. It also examined the fate of transnational movements 
in politics and ideas as ­these impinged on differing socie­ties—­Communism, 
anticolonialism, secularism, Islamic and Hindu revivalism. We had ­every rea-
son to be proud of this course. It gave a distinctive flavor to the teaching of 
history at Royal Holloway that it had lacked before.
The efforts of the world history group influenced my own work deeply at 
this time. So far, my readings in anthropology and in the comparative history 
of traditional socie­ties—­Iran, India, and East Asia—­had a bookish quality. But 
scholars such as Neville Sanderson (for Egypt and Sudan), Francis Robinson 
(for India and Pakistan), and Anthony Stockwell (for Malaysia) studied living 
socie­ties that they would visit regularly, through ­those long flights from Heath-
row, and whose recent history and present-­day dilemmas they could observe 
at close quarters. My own recent experience in Iran (the first non-­European 
country that I had ever visited) made me doubly appreciative of their skills.
This was particularly the case with the study of modern Islam, in which the 
University of London excelled. Outside Royal Holloway, I gained im­mensely, 
at this time, through contact with Michael Gilsenan, at University College 
London—­whom I knew best through his Saint and Sufi in Modern Egypt—­and 
with Ernst Gellner (1925–1995), at the London School of Economics, author of 
Saints of the High Atlas, whose unstinting generosity helped me greatly in my 
work on the Christian cult of the saints in late antique and early medieval 
Eu­rope.4
4. M. Gilsenan, Saint and Sufi in Modern Egypt (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1973); Ernst 
Gellner, Saints of the High Atlas (London: Weidenfeld, 1969).

468 
Ch apter 67
Islamic Revival
As a result of the work of my colleagues at Royal Holloway, Islam, which had 
always fascinated me, took on the weight of living flesh and blood, much as it 
had done in my short visit to Iran. It was not an altogether comfortable realiza-
tion. It showed me that what we had thought was a sleeping ­giant was, in real­
ity, fully, dangerously awake: it was modern Eu­ro­pe­ans who had failed, through 
ignorance and prejudice, to understand the rhythms of its breathing. It was more 
than a ­little scary to think that we—­well-­schooled scholars that we ­were—­could 
have been so very wrong in dismissing Islam as a moribund religion.
I owed most to my colleague Francis Robinson for this enrichment of my 
approach to the Islamic world. Francis was a new arrival in the department. 
He had come to Royal Holloway in 1973. His Separatism among Indian Mus-
lims: The Politics of the United Provinces Muslims, 1860–1923 appeared the next 
year.5 It described how the scattered and somewhat faceless Muslim com-
munity of a crucial Indian region emerged, in the course of the late nineteenth 
and early twentieth centuries, as a highly self-­conscious and militant po­liti­cal 
group. This rallying of Muslim opinion eventually led to the creation of the 
separate Muslim state of Pakistan. The book was acclaimed as a model study 
of the relation between po­liti­cal mobilization and the rise of nationalist feeling 
in a major Third World country.
When I first met him, in 1975, Francis was facing a dilemma for which I had 
the greatest sympathy. Despite the success of his book, he felt that he had not 
entered deeply enough into the living texture of the world that he was study-
ing. Separatism among Muslims had been a highly successful per­for­mance 
within a clear-­cut tradition of British scholarship on India. It studied the jos-
tling of elites. It concentrated on the manner in which the Muslim leadership 
in northern India had mobilized Islamic beliefs in competition with Hindu 
rivals for a share in the patronage of the British government; ­later, for a share 
in the government of an in­de­pen­dent India; and, eventually, for the formation 
of the separate state of Pakistan.
But something was still lacking: in the preface to a ­later edition, Francis 
pointed out that this insistence on the maneuvering of elites for a place in the 
sun had caused him to overlook the religious ideas and traditions that gave 
weight and urgency to ­those maneuvers. As he admitted, “Ideas ­were not 
5. Francis Robinson, Separatism among Indian Muslims: The Politics of the United Provinces 
Muslims, 1860–1923 (Cambridge University Press, 1974; reprinted with an introduction, 1993).

Genius Loci 
469
thought to have a significant power to move men.”6 Above all, Francis thought 
that he had overlooked the Muslims’ own view of the place of Islam in the 
modern world. As a result, he turned away from the politics of the Muslim elites 
in India alone to the considerably wider theme of the Islamic revival of the 
nineteenth and twentieth centuries. In his articles, he showed how the Islamic 
revival had sent a “surge of energy” throughout Africa and Asia. A major, ­silent 
shift in Islamic priorities took place, from the otherworldly Islam of the Sufis 
to a this-­worldly emphasis on the need to reform society in the ­here and now.
Though barely vis­i­ble to outsiders, this was a shift as massive as any experi-
enced in the history of Christian Europe—as decisive as the Protestant Refor-
mation and Catholic Counter-­Reformation of the sixteenth ­century. Beginning 
in the nineteenth ­century, this movement had spread throughout the Islamic 
world. Francis knew of it especially from his Indian researches, in the form of 
the movement for the establishment of Islamic schools based on the Deoband 
Darul Uloom, which was founded in 1866, and on the networks of scholars 
connected with the Farangî Mahall, a center of learning based on Lucknow.7
All this was news to me. From the British Sudan to Dutch Indonesia, Islam 
had been dismissed by Eu­ro­pean observers as on its deathbed. Francis showed 
that it was an awakening ­giant. He took on himself the task of following this 
im­mense awakening across the entire stretch of the Islamic world. His work 
at this time was summed up in a masterly Atlas of the Islamic World since 1500.8
Alas, one has to put a date on this generous moment of realization on the 
part of Eu­ro­pean scholars of Islam: 1976 is not 2020. Islamic revivalism has 
taken many dif­fer­ent forms between 1976 and ­today. A few of them rightly 
appall us. But, at least, ­there was a moment, in the 1970s, when scholars began 
to treat Islam as a living religion, fully engaged with the modern world, and 
not as some grandiose ghost from the ­Middle Ages. For me, a nonexpert, this 
was an impor­tant discovery.
Saints of Learning
Francis’s work did more than provide me with a challenging pa­norama of the 
renewal of a world religion in the modern age. His research nourished and 
challenged my own work on the late antique holy man.
6. Robinson, Separatism among Indian Muslims, introduction to the 1993 reprint, xv.
7. Francis Robinson, “Other-­Worldly and This-­Worldly Islam and the Islamic Revival,” in 
Islam, South Asia and the West (Oxford University Press, 2007), 171–188.
8. Francis Robinson, Atlas of the Islamic World since 1500 (Oxford: Equinox, 1982).

470 
Ch apter 67
In late antique Syria and Egypt, holy men had tended to stand alone (or to 
be presented as standing alone) as embattled, charismatic figures, straight 
from the desert. Francis opened up a world filled with less dramatic figures—­
with learned, this-­worldly saints who maintained, with rare grace, a balance 
between Sufi mysticism and active involvement in the affairs of this world, as 
husbands, merchants, teachers, and politicians. As Francis described them, 
­these modern saints of learning reminded me of the Greek phi­los­o­phers and 
their pupils in the time of Plotinus and the last days of the Platonic Acad­emy 
of Athens: mystics, but also men of vast learning and often pillars of their com-
munity. I realized that, in my study of late antiquity, I would have to pay more 
attention to similar figures—to phi­los­o­phers, bishops, and rabbis—­and not 
only to “my” rugged holy men.

471
68
On the East Coast
Art and Religion
In the spring of 1976 my horizons opened yet further. I spent the entire month 
of April on the East Coast of Amer­i­ca, making contact with an academic world 
hitherto largely unknown to me, and feasting my eyes on splendid late antique 
and Byzantine artifacts in museums all the way from Boston down to Washing-
ton, DC, and the Byzantine Research Center at Dumbarton Oaks. My visit fell 
into two parts, representing two very dif­fer­ent intellectual agendas. The first—­a 
lecture at the Pierpont Morgan Library—­came from my interest in the meaning 
and function of late antique and Byzantine art. The second—in the Carl Newell 
Jackson Lectures at Harvard, “The Making of Late Antiquity”—­stemmed from 
my interest in the origins of late antiquity in the crisis of the third ­century.
On April 13 I went to New York, to give a lecture at the Pierpont Morgan 
Library entitled “Art and Religion in Byzantium and the Early Medieval West.” 
The lecture was based on two reviews that I had recently written for the New 
York Review of Books in 1974 and 1975. In them I had tried to recapture the 
strangeness of the works of early Christian and Byzantine art that we had come 
to take for granted through constant viewing in art books and in museums. 
I attempted to give readers a tingle of vertigo, as they looked down a drop of 
almost two millennia into a world that shared ­little or nothing of our own, 
modern notions of art and religion. I also wanted to take objects, such as icons, 
Gospel books, or precious relic cases, out of the hygienic exhibition cases of 
museums and place them back into the noise and movement of their original 
context.1
1. P. Brown, “The View from the Precipice,” New York Review of Books 21 (1974): 3–5, and 
“Artifices of Eternity” (with Sabine MacCormack), New York Review of Books 22 (1975): 19–22, 

472 
Ch apter 68
I tried to conjure up the Christian crowds that had once swarmed around 
the shrines of early medieval saints, much as I had seen the crowds pressing 
against the silver gates of the shrine of the Imam Reza in Mashhad. I encouraged 
my audience to take a second look at the Byzantine icons that they ­were ac-
customed to viewing in the cool of air-­conditioned galleries; and to imagine 
them swaying at the head of boisterous pro­cessions that wound their way 
through Mediterranean cities of the late antique and Byzantine periods.
In this I sought to do justice to a heartening recent development in late 
Roman and Byzantine studies that stressed the role of ceremonial, drama, and 
movement in the life of the cities. The work of recent scholars had reversed 
many ­earlier negative judgments on the ­later empire. They showed that the 
ceremonies of the imperial court ­were not mounted only as overbearing shows 
of power, as Gibbon and many ­others had thought. They also had a popu­lar 
ele­ment. ­Those who engaged in them ­were held to have given their assent to 
power by their rhythmic acclamations, by their waving palm leaves and scented 
lamps, and by the stately order in which ­every segment of society turned out 
to greet their ruler. Through such ceremonies, they allowed themselves to be 
swept into a ­grand theater, whose ele­ments—­the chants, the waving banners 
and placards, the heavy clouds of incense, the scattered flowers and sweet-­
smelling herbs—­grew from the streets up, with folkloric vigor. They ­were not 
cowed spectators (like many who witnessed the parades of modern dictators), 
but an urban populace seeped in centuries of festival. It was not the emperors 
who made the ceremonies. It was the ceremonies that made the emperors.
I pointed out that this was also the case with the liturgies of the Christian 
churches. ­These ­were not the stilled and reverent occasions that we might 
imagine. Loud acclamations, solemn candlelit pro­cessions, carpets of roses 
and scented herbs strewn across the brightly colored marble pavements of the 
churches ­were all part of a single ­great tide of cele­bration that swirled back-
ward and forward from the depths of the churches into the noisy courtyards 
and the ancient streets. Late antique and Byzantine churches ­were not the 
­silent, empty buildings that they have become. They ­were seen, at the time, 
as the ­grand stage on which the Christian community played out, through 
ceremony, the high drama of the worship of God.2
now in Society and the Holy in Late Antiquity (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1982), 
196–221.
2. Thomas F. Mathews, The Early Churches of Constantinople: Architecture and Liturgy (Uni-
versity Park: Pennsylvania State University Press, 1972); and S. G. MacCormack, Art and 

On the East Coast 
473
Paradise
I also wished to do justice to the intuitions of ­Father Gervase Mathew 
(1905–1976), a wise and ­free spirit to whom I had grown close in ­these 
years. News of his death (on April 4, 1976) had come to me when I was at-
tending the Orthodox liturgy in South Bend only a few days before my 
lecture in New York. Gervase’s lectures on Byzantium had once thrilled me 
as an undergraduate. His Byzantine Aesthetics had posed the question of the 
sheer, sharp beauty of so many Byzantine and early medieval works of art.3 
­These ­were something more than mere carriers of Christian ideology. Still 
less ­were they simply teaching devices, whose message had to be decoded 
by learned iconographers. Instead, their strange, unfamiliar beauty in itself 
spoke of the beauty of an Other World. But of what sort of Other World did 
they speak?
­Here I pointed out that this was not the Other World of the modern Chris-
tian imagination, an ethereal Heaven crowded with serried ranks of ­human 
­faces. It was Paradise—­a more ancient place of rest and of primordial delight. 
The notion of Paradise as a royal garden was one of the greatest legacies of the 
ancient Near East, through Persia, to the imagination of the Jewish, Christian, 
and Muslim worlds.4
The idea of Paradise as an ancient garden of delights came into its own in 
the unexpected drama and sensuous thrill of early Christian and Byzantine 
liturgies—­with their shimmering lights, heavy scents, and scattered flowers. 
Paradise, and not some abstruse theological propositions, was what was 
hinted at in the exuberant, bright-­green vegetation that reached up to the 
dome in the sixth-­century church of San Vitale in Ravenna; and in the fig-
ures of the martyrs in Paradise in the ninth-­century chapel of Santa Prassede, 
in Rome, shown as they “tread on poppies as red as they still grow ­every spring 
in the Roman Campagna.”5
Ceremony in Late Antiquity (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1981). See now John Weis-
weiler, “Paideia in the Andes: Sabine MacCormack on the History of Imperial Culture in Late 
Antiquity,” in New Late Antiquity, 643–657, at 647–649.
3. G. Mathew, Byzantine Aesthetics (London: J. Murray,1963).
4. Annemarie Schimmel, “The Celestial Garden in Islam,” in The Islamic Garden, ed. E. B. 
MacDougall and R. Ettinghausen (Washington DC: Dumbarton Oaks, 1976), 11–39.
5. Brown, “The View from the Precipice,” in Society and the Holy in Late Antiquity, 205.

474 
Ch apter 68
Bob Silvers (1929–2017)
­After the lecture at the Pierpont Morgan Library, I met for the first time 
the man who had prompted me to write about such themes—­Bob Silvers, the 
already-­legendary editor of the New York Review of Books. What I remember 
from that eve­ning was Bob sitting deep in a large, black padded chair in a club 
bar, surrounded by happy and talkative friends, like cherubs around a sun-
burst. Then he was gone. At the time, I did not know about the extraordinary 
self-­discipline with which he would retire, ­every night, to work ­until early 
morning on the Review.
I had come to know Bob through his brief and invariably encouraging 
notes, and through the piles of books that would come in the mail, seemingly 
overnight, from New York to Royal Holloway College. From 1976 onward, Bob 
was installed in my mind as a polestar in the literary world that I had recently 
come to know in London and Amer­i­ca. He was a benign superego. ­Every in-
vitation to write a review was preceded—as by a heavy artillery barrage—by 
innumerable packets of books of varying qualities on any number of subjects. 
Bob left it up to me to sort them out into a plausible theme for a review, as if I 
­were playing a game of Consequences. At a time when I was far from certain 
that the pressure of work as head of department in Royal Holloway College 
would leave me any time at all to write, his requests for reviews came like 
breathing holes punched through thickening ice. They gave me the opportu-
nity to write in a relaxed style on topics that ­were close to my heart, without 
the heavy metal and gladiatorial stances of reviews in academic journals.
Looking back, I now realize that, in some ways, the New York Review of 
Books replaced Faber and Faber in London in my imaginary map of the pub-
lishers through whom I wished to address a wide reading public. I still liked 
to think of myself as writing “for my aunts”—­for average ­people interested in 
history and religion. But now I began increasingly to think also of the sophisti-
cated, well-­educated, but not necessarily academic readers of the New York Re-
view of Books, scattered throughout Amer­i­ca and elsewhere. When I ­imagined 
such an audience, from now onward I would say, “I write for Bob Silvers.”
Glen Bowersock
Next day I took the train to New Haven, to join up with Glen Bowersock. We 
had agreed to meet at a lecture that he gave at Yale, and then to proceed to-
gether to Harvard. His host at Yale introduced the lecture by praising Glen’s 
recent books, vividly and accurately, as like ­those high-­gravity stars that burn 

On the East Coast 
475
with incandescent energy. This referred, in par­tic­u­lar, to his masterly Greek 
Sophists in the Roman Empire.6 This book had given me the courage to enter 
the Antonine Age—­the age of Aelius Aristrides, Marcus Aurelius, and Galen. 
I had also been impressed by his use of an Arabic text—­the Arabic translation 
of the Physiognomica of Polemo (ca. 88–144)—­that described a failed assas-
sination attempt on the emperor Hadrian. Glen’s careful use of Arabic was an 
augury for his move ever farther east, which has taken him, in an exemplary 
scholarly odyssey, from the second-­century Aegean, through Roman Arabia, 
to Axum, Yemen, and the Hijaz on the eve of the rise of Islam.7
In subsequent years, our friendship deepened as my admiration for Glen 
grew. Not only did he show the way to ever-­wider worlds, by moving from the 
Mediterranean to the ­Middle East. He also conjured up the sheer thrill of 
the late antique period as a ­whole by exploring the many ways in which the 
classical world opened itself up to new possibilities, both delightful and dis-
turbing—to new forms of fiction,8 but also to new forms of horror, in the 
blood-­soaked drama of Christian martyrdoms acted out on the bright stage of 
the theaters, main squares, and town halls of the Greek cities.9 He showed how 
Hellenism itself—­Greek culture and Greek art—­did not recede in late antiq-
uity, but, rather, that it reached out to embrace local cults and immemorial 
traditions, providing them with “a new and more eloquent way of giving voice” 
to their rich particularity.10
Throughout this meteor shower of brilliant studies, Glen has caught the 
won­der of it all. Writing on the abundance of shimmering mosaics that cov-
ered the floors of churches, synagogues, and ­grand villas alike with scenes of 
cities and the pantomime, as well as with symbols of Jewish and Christian 
worship, he concluded,
The late-­antique Near East was a kind of miracle, and its like has never been 
seen in that region again.11
6. G. W. Bowersock, Greek Sophists in the Roman Empire (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1969).
7. G. W. Bowersock, Empires in Collision in Late Antiquity (Waltham, MA: Brandeis Univer-
sity Press, 2012); The Throne of Adulis: Red Sea Wars on the Eve of Islam (Oxford University Press, 
2013); The Crucible of Islam (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2017).
8. G. W. Bowersock, Fiction as History: Nero to Julian (Berkeley: University of California 
Press, 1994).
9. G. W. Bowersock, Martyrdom and Rome (Cambridge University Press, 1995).
10. G. W. Bowersock, Hellenism in Late Antiquity (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 
1990), 7.
11. G. W. Bowersock, Mosaics in History: The Near East from Late Antiquity to Islam (Cam-
bridge, MA: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 2006), 122.

476 
Ch apter 68
­After Glen’s talk at Yale, we took the train together to Boston. Next day we 
strolled round Boston in a miniature heat wave and ­were politely refused entry 
to a restaurant as we ­were without tie and jacket. We ­later went together to the 
Saint Matthew Passion in Symphony Hall. I still remember the end of the very 
last chorus:
Wir setzen uns mit Tränen nieder.
We sit down with tears.
The last flakes of sound seemed to float down from the curved ceiling, leaving 
a total, stunned silence.
Among the Elephants: Harvard
I gave the Jackson Lectures at Harvard, “The Making of Late Antiquity,” from 
April 19 through 23. They went well. As a captatio benevolentiae I offered a pas-
sage from the mid-­second-­century Dream Book of Artemidorus of Daldis. 
He wrote that it was good for a man to dream of elephants, for that meant that 
he would go to Italy and mingle with the greatest of the land. At Harvard, I had, 
indeed, found myself among a mighty herd of elephants—­scholars of all ages 
and interests. Many lasting friendships ­were formed at this time—­not least 
with Caroline Bynum, then teaching in the Harvard Divinity School and fin-
ishing her dissertation, Docere Verbo et Exemplo, a marvelously nuanced study 
of the vari­ous styles of leadership and instruction in the monasteries of the 
twelfth ­century.12
­Later in the lectures, I likened the circle of upper-­class mystical Platonists 
who gathered around the phi­los­o­pher Proclus in Athens (411–485), in the late 
fifth ­century AD, to the society of Boston, described in a rhyme of 1910:
This is to good old Boston,
The home of the bean and the cod,
Where Lowells speak only to Cabots,
And Cabots speak only to God.
­There was a burst of laughter. Being a foreigner, I may have got the families 
reversed. A few years ­later, I had to enter into a prolonged correspondence 
12. C. W. Bynum, Docere Verbo et Exemplo, Harvard Theological Studies 31 (Missoula, MT: 
Scholar’s Press, 1979).

On the East Coast 
477
with my French translator, who was totally flummoxed by this touch of local 
humor.
Even the weather did well by me. As a Boston sea storm darkened the room, 
my description of the pagans’ fear that the rise of Chris­tian­ity might incur the 
wrath of the gods was echoed by a heavy roll of thunder.
The Jackson Lectures ­were published in 1978 as The Making of Late Antiq-
uity.13 As I look back, it strikes me as my most adventurous book. It was a 
reappraisal of the well-­known “crisis” of the third ­century and its ­later 
repercussions.
I fastened on what seemed to be a paradox in the history of that tumultuous 
­century: a time of rapid change in the structure of Greco-­Roman society co-
incided, outside the world of the elites, with religious movements led by lead-
ers whose role in the imagination of their followers mirrored, to a remarkable 
degree, the increasingly vertical ordering of upper-­class Roman society.
The Rise of the “Friends of God”
It was this verticality both in society and in the religious imagination that held 
my attention. In the course of the third ­century, the emperor came to be in-
creasingly seen as the chosen of the gods. ­Those who served the emperor also 
emerged ever more sharply at the expense of their peers. Their new promi-
nence, due to their links to the court, disrupted the ­little oligarchies of town 
counselors and local landowners, who had long maintained the traditional life 
of the cities.
A paradox of the third ­century was that the emperor was not alone in claim-
ing to enjoy a divine mandate. The emergence of the “pyramidal” society of 
the ­later empire was accompanied by an outburst of religious creativity among 
classes and in regions that lay outside the horizons of the Roman governing 
class. Individual religious leaders emerged who claimed to have been chosen 
by God or the gods to accomplish ­great ­things—to teach, to spread their faith, 
to face down opponents, even to court death as martyrs.
­These persons ­were regarded by their devotees as “Friends of God.” In the 
religious sphere, they ­were thought to have risen above their peers as sharply 
as the friends of the emperor ­rose above all ­others in con­temporary upper-­
class society. The dominant role of ­these religious leaders was highlighted in 
13. P. Brown, The Making of Late Antiquity (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 
1978), 1.

478 
Ch apter 68
language heavy with reverence, often using imagery and forms of ceremonial 
be­hav­ior borrowed directly from the secular exaltation of the emperor and his 
servants.
A Crisis in ­Human Relations
Why had this happened? Put briefly, I suggested that, in many regions, the 
lower reaches of Roman society had changed as much as had the elites. An 
entire new class of “middling” persons had emerged, to whom the new, more 
vertical styles of religious leadership appealed.
This was particularly the case with the monastic movement in late third-­ 
and fourth-­century Egypt. Ever since Edward Gibbon, scholars had been 
puzzled by the rush to the desert that seemed to have taken place at that time. 
Most explanations have treated it as a movement of protest and despair. I dis-
agreed. Appealing to the studies of modern anthropologists working in the 
villages of Egypt and the ­Middle East, I argued that the ascetic movement did 
not arise from the misery of the peasantry. Far from it: the ascetic movement 
emerged, on the village level, from a crisis of ­human relations brought about 
by new prosperity and by new possibilities for social mobility.
In Egypt, a newly formed class of comfortable farmers and of small-­town 
notables provided the leaders of the monastic movement. Saint Anthony 
(ca. 270–356), the hero of the monks of Egypt, had been a substantial landowner. 
At a time when the average holding of some villages was forty-­four arourae, 
the ­family of Saint Anthony owned some three hundred (almost two hundred 
acres), “very fertile and beautiful to see.”14 ­These ­were the sort of ­people whose 
rising expectations and sharpened spiritual ambitions fed the monasteries and 
the Christian churches with a ready supply of talent for new, experimental 
forms of communal living.
And so I concluded: many aspects of late antiquity repel us modern 
persons—­the sense of hierarchy, the strident militancy, the ever-­sharper 
bound­aries that emerged ­after the delicate equipoise of the Antonine Age; but 
precisely ­those features, through the fierce sense of agency that they unleashed, 
had to be accepted by historians as the dark earth from which so many of the 
achievements of late antiquity sprouted.
14. Brown, Making of Late Antiquity, 82.

479
69
To the Top of 
the World
Takht-­e Soleym an
Dreamtime
From July 16 to August 29, 1976, I traveled in Iran and Af­ghan­i­stan. Apart from 
a few days, I was on my own. I wrote no journal and no letters, and I took no 
camera. I had de­cided not to shield myself from my environment—­even 
through the very slightest imposition of a framework such as writing a diary, 
or fixing a view through a camera lens. As a result, this journey comes back to 
me almost as a series of vivid dream images.
­There was a purpose in this openness. In my previous visit to Iran, I had 
wanted to view the principal monuments of the Sasanians, so as to place each 
of them in its distinctive landscape. Now it was not so much the monuments 
as the landscapes themselves that I wished to view. I traveled some five thou-
sand miles, through Iran and Af­ghan­i­stan, as far as Bamiyan and Kabul. All 
­these places had been part of the im­mense Sasanian Empire. I wanted to do 
justice to the sheer size of this empire that, at its height, had extended from 
Mesopotamia (modern Iraq) as far as Central Asia and northern India. By 
viewing this vast expanse, I hoped to sketch, as it ­were, the second, Eastern 
panel of the diptych whose Western side was the Mediterranean empire of 
East Rome.
Looking back, I cannot resist a certain sadness. I had intended this journey 
to be the first of many journeys. No one I talked to at that time—­even ­those 
with a reputation for being old Persia hands—­foresaw the Ira­nian Revolution 

480 
Ch apter 69
of 1979, which would slam down an iron shutter between Iran and the West. 
Of all the academic ventures that I have embarked upon, my outreach to the 
history of Iran (though it greatly enriched my historical imagination) was 
the one that has left least trace in my published work.
When I arrived in Tehran in July 1976, I knew nothing of what would hap-
pen in the coming years. Yet I soon developed a sense of foreboding. The more 
I traveled in Iran, with many kinds of companions and in many dif­fer­ent envi-
ronments, the more I had the feeling of an entire society slipping out of the 
grasp of the official image that the shah’s regime had created for itself and 
projected to outsiders—­the image of a rapidly westernizing country in which 
religion was doomed to play an ever-­diminishing role. A sense of dread—of 
having come close to something very large about to slide—is what I brought 
home from Iran at that time.
Bobby Warren and the Peacock Throne
­There was one ­thing of which I was totally ignorant: I had a real live cousin at 
the court of the shah. In 1965, my cousin Bobby Warren, from a branch of the 
Warrens of county Meath, which had emigrated to Argentina, became the maî-
tre de ballet of Shah Reza (1919–1980). I had heard of this vaguely, but had as-
sumed that so exotic a figure must have belonged to an ­earlier generation of 
more swashbuckling Warrens. Far from it. He was only a few years older than 
myself. In 2009 he published an autobiography, appropriately entitled Destiny’s 
Waltz: In Step with ­Giants. In it, he described his years at the court of the shah.
Often the ballet troupe performed in private, in front of the shah and the 
diplomatic corps. On one such occasion they danced in praise of the shah’s 
westernizing reforms, in a ballet that showed the liberation of the peasantry 
and the finding of oil. I can only imagine what it must have been like. As Bobby 
described it, the per­for­mance was a tense affair, like a court masque ­under 
Queen Elizabeth I:
Our job was now completed. We held our breath awaiting the reaction of 
our very exclusive audience.
All eyes turned to the Shah and Shahbanou. Their reaction would set the 
tone for the reception we would receive. The Shah seemed pleased and 
applauded with dignified restraint, immediately followed by his courtiers. 
The Diplomatic Corps set its own pace and applauded with more intensity, 
their expressions relieved. The courtiers observed their reaction and added 

To the Top of the Wor ld 
481
more fervor to their applause as the Shah stood and continued his applause. 
­After that it was thunderous.
I had been petrified but began to breathe more normally.1
Bobby and I could have met in Tehran—­but not in July 1976. For, at that 
time, Bobby was leading the Ira­nian Ballet on a tour of the United States. It 
was not an unqualified success. When Bobby’s troupe performed Ira­nian 
dances at Bovary Hall on the campus of UCLA, anti-­shah protesters stormed 
the stage. Bobby received a blow on the face, as a large banner declaring “Death 
to the Shah!” was unfurled from the balcony. Savak, the Ira­nian secret police, 
covered up the awkward incident. They reported back to their master that 
Bobby had received his injuries through being mugged somewhere in Los 
Angeles. Soon ­after that incident, Bobby left Iran.2
A Local Call to Hell
I had returned to Iran with more Persian than I had possessed in 1974. I soon had 
occasion to use it to pick up vibes. Making my way through Tehran, I found 
myself in an old mosque. Against a background of shining tiles, the guardian 
lectured me (as far as I could follow him) on the real­ity of angels. The orientation 
­toward Mecca of the ­whole complex (graves and all) was a ­silent rebuke to the 
chaos of new buildings, whose girders pointed ­every which way around the ­little 
island of order represented by the mosque. The same day I picked up a joke that 
went the rounds at this time. The pre­sent shah, feeling insecure, resolved to ring 
up his ­father, the old Reza Khan, in the other world. He had the call put through. 
­Father and son talked for hours on end about the prob­lems of modern Iran. But 
when he was finished, the shah was surprised to find that ­there was no telephone 
charge. Why? The old shah was in Hell; and in Tehran, Hell is a local call! Look-
ing at the impacted traffic in central Tehran, I saw the point of the joke.
A View from the Mountains
I stayed at the British School of Persian Studies, at a distance from the chaos 
of downtown. For members of the school, to leave Tehran for the countryside 
was a moment of escape. Being an archaeologist meant being out in the open, 
1. Robert de Warren, Destiny’s Waltz: In Step with ­Giants (New York: Eloquent Books, 2009), 
234.
2. De Warren, Destiny’s Waltz, 258 and 265.

482 
Ch apter 69
away from the tensions that ­were building up in the big cities. Nobody led 
expeditions to the wide open spaces of Iran with more piratical zest than did 
David Stronach (1931–2020), the director of the British School. Packed into a 
Land Rover with David and his team, I found myself heading northwest, three 
hundred miles from Tehran in the direction of Tabriz, to visit the ­great Sasa-
nian palace and fire ­temple at Tahkt-­e Soleyman, perched on a high plateau 
of the Zagros Mountains overlooking Mesopotamia and the rising hills of 
northern Iraq.
­Little visited by tourists, the spectacular ruins of Takht-­e Soleyman marked 
the site of one of the four ­great fire ­temples of Iran. It also served as one of the 
rallying points for the northern thrust of the Sasanian Empire ­toward the Cau-
casus and Anatolia (Armenia, Georgia, and modern eastern Turkey). This 
flanking move from the far north—­a maneuver favored by Khusro I (530–579) 
and Khusro II (591–628)—­was particularly threatening to the East Romans. 
The region around Takht-­e Soleyman was an ideal assembly point for the 
Sasanian armies. High above the hot and arid plains of Mesopotamia and 
Syria, the Ira­nian cavalry, as heavi­ly armed as medieval knights, could graze 
their ­horses on the rich upper meadows of the Zagros before they pushed 
westward into what is now eastern Turkey or descended with devastating im-
pact onto the plains of the Fertile Crescent.
We made the journey in stages. First we ­stopped at Ziwiyeh, the center of 
the civilization of Urartu (a mountain polity, often claimed as the original 
nucleus of Armenia), where a spectacular hoard of golden ornaments dating 
from around 700 BC had been discovered in 1947. In the golden light of the 
late after­noon we went out with David simply to taste the joy of being “in the 
field” and away from Tehran. We viewed the ­great conical hillocks that dotted 
the slopes. Any one of them might prove to be the tel piled up above an ancient 
city. David pointed out the foxholes on the sides of the tels. The low sun shone 
on them like a floodlight. It was by noticing fragments of ceramic lying in such 
a foxhole (pushed to the surface from deep beneath the earth by the per­sis­tent 
burrowing of foxes and rodents) that David had discovered the ­great Median 
site of Tepe Nush-­e Jân near Kermanshah in 1967—­a palace-­city that included 
the earliest fire ­temple yet to be discovered in Iran.
It was a time to celebrate. At the end of our tour of the hillocks around 
Ziwiyeh we ­stopped the jeep to admire the sunset. The mountain amphithe-
ater turned purple. We looked down ­toward the ridges beyond which lay 
Iraq. Once in the 1950s, David told us, he had been with Sir Max Mallowan 
(1904–1978) while excavating the ­great Assyrian capital of the eighth ­century 

To the Top of the Wor ld 
483
BC at Nimrud in northern Iraq—­the site from which the enormous winged 
bulls with ­human ­faces had been taken to the British Museum in the nine-
teenth ­century. Pointing upward to the mountains of Iran, David had said to 
Mallowan: “You know, Max. We should have a British School up ­there, in Iran.” 
“Oh, I ­don’t know, David,” Max replied, “Rather unstable country at the mo-
ment.” “And ­here we are,” David added, with some pride. It is as well that we 
do not know the ­future.
The Top of the World: Takht-­e Soleyman
The next day we moved farther northwest to yet wilder, Kurdish country, 
­toward Takht-­e Soleyman (the Throne of Solomon). Takht-­e Soleyman was 
on the high plateau, rich in summer grazing, from which first Khusro II, in the 
early seventh ­century, and, half a millennium ­later, the Ilkhanid Mongol khans 
of the thirteenth ­century had overshadowed the entire ­Middle East. It was like 
a vast Swiss Alm, where watercourses ran across bright-­green fields. The calci-
fication of the ­water had pushed the watercourses ever higher above the 
ground so that they looked like a system of miniature aqueducts—­a hydraulic 
model railway of ­great complexity.
Beside the quiet, circular lake that marked the center of the caldera of an 
extinct volcano lay the ruins of Takht-­e Soleyman. All Eurasia came together 
in ­those ruins. A Sasanian palace arch of the time of Khusro II abutted the 
slender columns of a Mongol pavilion erected by Hulagu Khan (1218–1266), 
the grand­son of Genghis Khan. Nearby, a Buddhist stupa, possibly brought by 
the Mongols from Tibet, had been excavated. Just beside it, the German exca-
vation team had recently pulled from the earth an exquisitely carved Gothic 
capital, prob­ably made by a Eu­ro­pean craftsman on the spot—­perhaps to 
decorate the chapel of the wife of Hulagu Khan, who was a “Nestorian” 
Christian.
I rode a ­horse called Iskender—­after Alexander the ­Great—up to the 
nearby hill of Takht-­e Bilqis—­the Throne of Bilqis. This was the name in Mus-
lim legend of the queen of Sheba, who had visited Solomon in his glory. In the 
Muslim tradition (heavi­ly influenced by Ira­nian ideas of kingship) Solomon 
was far more than a wise king in Jerusalem. He was seen as a magical world 
ruler. The view from his throne and that of his wife was worthy of him. I 
looked down over the hills ­toward Lake Urmia, where Christians of the so-­
called Nestorian Church of the East still survived. Beyond Lake Urmia lay 
a series of plateaux that descended, in ­giant steps, into the lowlands of Iraq 

484 
Ch apter 69
and Syria. At Takht-­e Bilqis I felt I was king of the ­castle. ­Those distant, flat 
lands lay at my feet. It was a place to think big—to plan a history of the rela-
tions between Byzantium and Iran in terms of a conflict between the Mediter-
ranean and its ­great, Asian antithesis for control of the ­Middle East.
But most moving of all ­were the remains of the ­great Zoroastrian fire ­temple 
that had once ­housed the Royal Warrior Fire (the Adur Gushnasp)—­one of 
the three ­great fires of the Sasanian Empire. As I remember it, it was a nonde-
script ruin, except for one striking detail: a low stone wall set at the entrance 
ensured that, from what­ever ­angle one looked, one’s eyes would not fall upon 
the holy fire (much as I had seen it in Yazd two years previously). ­Here was a 
trace of a deeply holy ­thing, surrounded by expectations and shielded by ta-
boos that ­were totally dif­fer­ent from ­those of Christian shrines. I realized that 
I had passed an invisible frontier between the Christendom of East Rome and 
its ­great rival—­the confidently non-­Christian world of Sasanian Iran. To view 
the palace and the adjacent Zoroastrian holy of holies of Takht-­e Soleyman, 
and to take in the landscape that lay around them, made me feel that I was as 
distant from the Mediterranean as if I ­were on the face of the moon.3
I was left at Sanandaj (in the ­middle of Ira­nian Kurdistan) to make my own 
way back by bus to Tehran. Sanandaj was a bustling town, filled with Kurdish 
followers of the Ahl-­e Haq—­the ­People of the Truth—­devotees of a Gnostic 
sect that had held out since late antique times in the inaccessible folds of the 
Zagros. The Kurdish young men carried ­rifles. They sported gold lamé cum-
merbunds and ­great drooping moustaches, grown long (so I was told) so that 
their hairs would dangle in their drink, in studied defiance of Islamic notions 
of purity.
3. See Matthew Canepa, The Ira­nian Expanse (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2018), 
283–290; and James Howard-­Johnston, The Last ­Great War of Antiquity (Oxford University 
Press, 2021), 226–227.

485
70
“Guardians of the 
Sacred Flame”
David Frost
At Firuzabad with David Frost (1939–2013)
Only a few days ­later, I was in somewhat dif­fer­ent com­pany. I was with David 
Frost and a team of filmmakers, seated in the front of a large Ira­nian Air Force 
he­li­cop­ter as we swerved perilously out to sea, over the bright-­blue ­waters of 
the Persian Gulf, as the pi­lot (no archaeologist) attempted, unsuccessfully at 
first, to find the palace of King Ardashir at Firuzabad.
This change of scene requires some explanation. In January 11, 1976, I was 
approached to act as academic adviser for one part of an eight-­part TV series 
(of one hour each) on the history of Iran. It was called Crossroads of Civiliza-
tion, and was a coproduction of the National Film Centre of Iran with the 
Parradine TV Production Com­pany, owned by David Frost. I was asked to be 
academic adviser for the episode devoted to the rise and fall of the Sasanian 
Empire, entitled “Guardians of the Sacred Flame.”
I jumped at it. It was a chance to revisit the landscapes that I had explored 
in 1974. More than that: it was a chance to have a hand in producing a visual 
history of Sasanian Iran, set against the majestic and little-­known landscapes 
of the Ira­nian plateau.
The venture was launched with much razzmatazz; but the job itself was 
fascinating. It brought me into contact with a ­whole world of intelligent and 
enterprising young ­people during the shooting itself. The camera team ­were 
masters of a high craft. ­There was no bullshit among the grippers, lighting 
experts, sound editors, and wielders of exquisitely calibrated movie cameras.

486 
Ch apter 70
It was with the camera team that I landed with David Frost outside the ­great 
palace of Ardashir at Firuzabad, which I had already visited in 1974. Standing 
against the ­great pool of ­water in front of the ruins, David asked me for my 
views on the reasons for the fall of the Sasanian Empire. I was suitably sono-
rous. Then came a reminder that we lived in a world of craftsmen, where real­ity 
itself was a skilled construction. The moment I finished, the camera team 
shouted, in unison: “Hold it, David! Noddies!” And sure enough, Frost turned 
from me to the camera and did his “noddies.” He solemnly nodded ten times, 
to express reverent agreement with the words of the professor. Carefully 
spliced into my monologue, David Frost and I ­were shown chatting amiably 
(himself nodding in a knowing manner) in a suitably exotic environment 
about the fate of an empire from long ago.
A Landscape from Above
Then David and I ­were taken by he­li­cop­ter up over the cliffs above the narrow 
valley of the Tang-­e Ab and deposited on the roof of the Sasanian palace of 
Qaleh Dokhtar—­the ­Castle of the ­Daughter (of the King of Kings). Qaleh 
Dokhtar was perched like a medieval ­castle on a spur of rock with ­great drops 
on ­every side. David was filmed arriving in the he­li­cop­ter, hovering above a 
winding ravine before descending from the sky into a golden cloud of chaff. 
­Here, on the roof, the interviewing continued.
The real star of the filming operation was the Alouette he­li­cop­ter flown by 
a pair of French pi­lots. It took me wherever I wanted to go, so as to explore the 
­whole region from the air. We bounced across the hills beyond Firuzabad, 
Qaleh Dokhtar, and the valley of the Tang-­e Ab. This flight over the uplands 
around Firuzabad taught me something. I saw that the entire mountain area 
was by no means inaccessible. Horse trails led up easily from the valley below 
along sloping paths formed from ­great layers of upended sandstone. Once one 
was on the plateau, all that was needed was to follow the trails of the Qashqai 
on their kuch—­their yearly migration to summer pastures.
This capillary system of ­horse trails, now used by the Qashqai, explained the 
im­mense mobility of the Sasanian kings. A court the size of an army could 
traverse the ­great distances of the Ira­nian plateau, linking palace to palace and 
fire ­temple to fire ­temple with the ease of a hunting party. ­Here (in what ­were 
now the deserted homelands of the nomads) I was able to look down on a web 
of trails, walls, and ­castles that held together the Sasanian realm. Unlike the 
emperor of East Rome, who resided permanently in the ­Great Palace at 

“Guar dia ns of the Sacr ed Fla me” 
487
Constantinople, the Sasanian king of kings was perpetually on the move. 
He could always show himself to be a dirâz-­dâst—­a man of the Long Hand 
who could strike anywhere at the head of a mobile entourage.
Image and Real­ity
Afterward, at the bar of the ­hotel, I spoke with the camera team. They ­were 
persons of skill recruited from all parts of the world (British, Canadians, Aus-
tralians, and one Jordanian). They ­were prepared to go anywhere. They ­were 
positively angry that, in Iran, their work on the series had brought them up 
against a culture of ­great richness about which nobody had told them any-
thing. Their schools had taught them nothing about Iran. “To think that they 
spent their ­whole time stuffing us with Queen Elizabeth and Sir Francis 
Drake—­and all this was ­there to know about!” The eve­nings developed into 
small tutorials. The conversations reassured me that the making of this film 
might be of some use to a wider world.
It was only on the upper edges of the group—on its cultural façade—­that 
the enterprise took on a more sinister tone. The Ira­nian Ministry of Culture 
stayed well hidden in the background. But this apparently hands-­off policy 
was abandoned the moment it came to depicting the role of Islam in the 
history of Iran. When planning the episode on the coming of Islam, we ­were 
firmly presented with the government expert—­a creamy-­faced professor with 
shiny black hair and bell-­bottomed trousers in heliotrope pink. He gave us the 
approved, rose-­tinted version of metaphysical Sufism that was popu­lar at 
court. I wondered what it would have been like to have interviewed, or even 
to have taken film footage of, the grizzled imam at the ­little mosque just off the 
main road outside Shiraz. From our ­hotel, I could see a single lightbulb burn-
ing all night in front of the ­little saint’s shrine adjacent to the mosque, where 
truck ­drivers ­stopped to pray at all hours. Having had my interview with David 
Frost, I was ­free to go to see more of Iran—if from a less privileged, at least 
from a less constrained viewing point.

488
71
From the Zagros 
to Af­ghan­i­stan
Between East and West: Qaleh Yazdegerd
Having said good-­bye to David Frost and his team, I made my way by bus to 
Esfahan and then to Kermanshah and down, through the Zagros Mountains 
­toward Qasr-­e Shirin and Iraq, to visit a newly discovered Sasanian palace at 
Qaleh Yazdegerd (or Qalʾeh-­i Yazdigird). It was perched on a ledge of the 
Zagros, above the road to Qasr-­e Shirin, overlooking the hot lowlands of Mes-
opotamia, as if in the hidden valley of some adventure story. Its ruins ­were 
associated (in local memory, though not necessarily in real­ity) with the Sasa-
nian shah Yazdegerd II (438–457), around whom flamboyant legends had 
developed. Hence its name, Qaleh Yazdegerd—­“the ­Castle of Yazdegerd.” The 
palace was mysterious enough. But it lay below the even more mysterious vil-
lage of an exotic community—­the Gnostic Kurds, known as the Ahl-­e Haq: 
“the ­People of the Truth,” some of whom I had already met, farther north 
along the spine of the Zagros, in Sanandaj, in Ira­nian Kurdistan. I had come to 
know of the excavations at the “­Castle of Yazdegerd” from the work of the 
expedition of the Royal Ontario Museum led by Ed Keall, whom I had met in 
Toronto (on my way to Harvard) ­earlier in the year.1
I found Ed Keall’s team engaged in lifting fragments of third-­century stucco 
from the ruined palace out of the damp ground. ­These fragments ­were intact 
but had been rendered as soft as white cheese. They ­were placed gingerly on 
boards so as to dry out in the sun. What Ed had discovered ­were fragments of 
1. E. J. Keall, “Qalʾeh-­i Yazdigird: A Sasanian Palace Stronghold in Persian Kurdistan,” Iran 
6 (1967): 99–121, and “Qalʾeh-­i Yazdigird: The Question of Its Date,” Iran 15 (1977): 1–9.

From the Zagros to A f­gh a n­i­sta n 
489
the inner glory of a Sasanian palace. Sasanian buildings ­were usually made of 
rough stone bound by cement, like clumsy beehives. When deserted, they 
tended to collapse into unprepossessing mounds.
­These delicate fragments ­were a reminder that the interior walls of ­these 
palaces had once been covered from ceiling to floor with deep-­cut, painted 
stucco work. We should imagine their occupants moving against a background 
made of intricate patterns, like the weave of ­great tapestries, and studded with 
emblems that radiated power, good fortune, and worldly delight. They spoke 
of a world with deep roots in the ancient Near East and in the mythologies of 
Iran and Central Asia. Some also reflected an Eastern Hellenism, where clas-
sical figures had become themes of folk art. Plump Venuses, cupids, and even a 
satyr ­were joined by creatures from the steppes of Central Asia and even from 
China—­fabulous simurgh birds, griffins, and dragons with intertwined necks. 
Qaleh Yazdegerd, with the diverse strands of its art, summed up for me the 
fascination of the Sasanian Empire. ­Here was a world still poised, with haunt-
ing indecision, between East and West.
“Like Wolves to Each Other”: The Ahl-­e Haq
Farther up the road, on the very edge of the plateau, the village of the Ahl-­e 
Haq was shaded with trees and watered by ­running streams. It was a prosper-
ous place. The shrine of a revered leader of the sect was plainly thriving. A 
newly laid tarmac road brought pilgrims all the way from Tehran, where large 
numbers of immigrant Kurds of the sect of the Ahl-­e Haq had prospered. ­Little 
city cars bumped merrily up and down it. At the time, this road was hailed as 
a triumphant sign of pro­gress. I only hope that it was not used ­later to enable 
the jeeps of the Islamic Revolutionary Guard, and, then, of the invading Iraqis, 
to zoom up to the previously inaccessible upper valleys of the Zagros, to bring to 
a brutal end the ancient diversity of the mountain dwellers.
The pre­sent leader of the sect was visiting the village. He was known as the 
Bâb—­the Gateway: the Gateway to all knowledge. And he looked the part: 
with a wide, placid face, he moved slowly in the midst of a large entourage. I 
was told that he was a man with seven guardian angels—­power­ful cosmic 
forces gathered to protect and guide him—­while the average person had only 
one. I thought of Bruce, the ten-­angel teacher of the Urantia cult, whom I had 
met in California.
Most touching of all was the be­hav­ior of the male members of the Ahl-­e 
Haq. I was told that the families of the village ­were bound together by intimate 

490 
Ch apter 71
links of spiritual parenthood. Grown-up men ­were the godfathers of small 
­children. This meant that ­there was nothing strange in seeing a large, musta-
chioed man, armed with a shepherd’s crook—or even a ­rifle—­cuddling a baby 
in his arms.
It was with such a circle of mothering shepherds that I sat on the edge of a 
cliff looking out ­toward Iraq. As befitted such occasions, the conversation 
quickly turned to higher ­things. To exchange mere details of our lives was 
trivial stuff. What mattered ­were the wide open spaces of the mind. What did 
I think of God? Had Iran passed successfully from feudalism to modernity? 
Or was one step still missing? In any case, what was the nature and purpose of 
the state? On that they all agreed. Without government, they said, men would 
be “like wolves—­gorgsan—to each other.” Looking back over my shoulder, 
across the flat plateau, I saw gray shapes slinking between the boulders and the 
fields, edging closer to the flocks. Real wolves. I got the point.
To the Caspian: Gonbad-­e Qabus
On August 9 I was back in Tehran, totally grounded. I had run into a situation 
that was common in the hectic last days of the shah’s Iran. Every­one was travel-
ing. The bus lines and the airways ­were all booked up. No reservations could 
be made. In a country where, in the provinces, one could travel everywhere 
with miraculous ease, Tehran had ground to a halt.
So, early next morning, I took a cab to the junction with the ­great trunk 
roads where I was told that it would be pos­si­ble to hitch a lift from the oil 
trucks on their way to the East. Had I known more about modern Iran, the cab 
­ride could have taught me something very impor­tant. The poorer suburbs of 
Tehran seemed to go on forever. Endless rows of faceless, low-­lying buildings 
passed by. But I noticed that each neighborhood bristled with the outlines of 
small mosques. Many of them ­were flanked by what seemed to be storefront 
offices with green signs. They ­were Islamic credit ­unions. Without realizing 
it at the time, I had seen one of the secrets of the grass roots of popu­lar Islam. It 
was based on the collaboration, in ­every poor neighborhood, of the mosque 
and the Islamic bank—­the source of desperately needed, interest-­free loans.
I found my truck heading where I wanted—­that is, not directly east to 
Mashhad and the Afghan frontier, but northeast, so as to drop from the Ira­nian 
plateau down to the Caspian Sea and to the Central Asian frontier with the 
Soviet Union—­what was then the Turkmen Socialist Republic. I wanted to 
visit the region of the Duwar-­e Iskender—­the ancient ruins of the “Wall of 

From the Zagros to A f­gh a n­i­sta n 
491
Alexander” that marked the legendary frontier between Sasanian Iran and 
Turan—­the vast plains occupied by the nomads of Central Asia, lumped to-
gether, in the Ira­nian worldview, as the dangerous lands of the Turks.
My hosts ­were well equipped to oblige me. In the course of the conversa-
tion, they revealed themselves to be grain smugglers. They ­were bringing the 
early harvest of the Ira­nian plateau down to Soviet Central Asia, where mis-
management more horrendous even than that of the shah’s Iran enabled them 
to make a killing by rushing in the grain of Tehran and Rayy to remedy per-
petual shortages in Turkmenistan.
To drop from the dry desert of Iran to the Caspian (where the moist air of 
the sea was held back on the mountain slopes) was like finding oneself back 
in Ireland or on the green Atlantic side of the Pyrenees. Sinuously twisted trees 
with large green leaves and heavy blossoms lined the road and followed the 
course of flowing streams.
­After the disconcerting exuberance of the mountain slopes above the Cas-
pian, it was almost a relief to turn east ­toward the flat, tawny landscape near 
the Soviet frontier, and to view the succession of ­great mounds that had once 
been the Sasanian wall, the Hadrian’s Wall of Central Asia, known as the “Wall 
of Alexander.” At Gonbad-­e Qabus, in the late after­noon light, the biscuit-­
colored brick of the Gonbad—­the exquisitely domed funerary tower—­stood 
out against a powder-­blue sky. This was the world-­famous tomb of Prince 
Qabus (at one and the same time a savage warrior and a scholar and patron of 
scholars), which had been built in AD 1006.
To Af­ghan­i­stan
Next day I returned to the plateau by taking the bus up to Shahroud, and from 
­there to Nishapur, where I found myself in a tidy ­hotel, with an inner garden 
lined with bright white tiles. It was a ­hotel for businessmen or for families up 
from the country to ­settle ­legal issues in the provincial capital. Their talk was 
disturbing. Marked by frustration and anger, it was more serious than the usual 
rhetorical complaints that keep a Persian conversation rolling. Above all, I 
picked up—as a constant refrain in the background of ­every protracted narra-
tive of failure, double-­dealing, or injustice—­the word “Islam”: Islamic order 
was somehow seen as the only answer to a world out of joint.
Historians are often bad prophets. Their business is diagnosis. They can 
sometimes pick up with considerable alertness hints of strain and of unap-
peased anger. But they seldom commit themselves to a prognosis. They do not 

492 
Ch apter 71
know the ­future course of the malfunctions and ancient grievances that they 
may have spotted. In Iran, in 1976, it was easy enough (even for a foreign trav-
eler) to pick up strong undertones of discontent. It was also easy to link them, 
in some way, to Islam. In the provinces and on the road, appeals to Islam 
seemed to be ever pre­sent. But the speed with which a charismatic leader 
would emerge, in the person of the Ayatollah Khomeini (of whom I knew 
nothing at the time), and the sheer mayhem of what then happened took ob-
servers of Iran by surprise. In 1976, every­one expected a shake-up. They had 
not expected a revolution in their time.
I moved quickly through Mashhad. I did not linger, as I had done in 1974. 
­Things had changed. The shrine was now surrounded by a glacis. The old ba-
zaar that had grown up for centuries around the courtyard of the shrine, like 
an intricate wasp’s nest, had been flattened. Instead, the way to the shrine 
passed across a raw new park, studded with menacing police posts. Shah Reza 
had taken Mashhad firmly in hand.
And so, on August 12, I entered Af­ghan­i­stan at the checkpoint of Islam-­
Qaleh—­the Fortress of Islam. I said goodbye to the row of glitzy buses, 
festooned with merrily blinking fairy lights, that ­were lined up on the Ira­nian 
side, to enter what seemed to be another, more picturesque and less tidy world. 
The famous “wind of a hundred and twenty days” was at its height. This was a 
prevailing wind that spread a film of dust across the Ira­nian plateau in the sum-
mer months, turning the sky an anemic powder blue. Old Testament figures, 
with long beards and flowing robes, chased blown-­off turbans of green silk 
along the sides of a ­great open courtyard. At the far end of the courtyard, look-
ing as merry as a circus, was a row of brightly painted trucks—­the famous 
“lorries” (the Afghan loanword was taken from the British En­glish current in 
India) that ­were the pride of the Afghan roads. In the ­middle of the courtyard, 
where the dust swirled most thickly, a group of gentlemen in well-­coiled, pastel 
headgear, firmly in place, danced to the ­music of the Beatles emerging at full 
blast from a bulky rec­ord player. They ­were Sikh doctors returning home over-
land from Liverpool to India. They had brought with them the Liverpool 
Sound—­the ­music of their ­adopted country.

493
72
Af­ghan­i­stan
From Herat to Mazar-­e Sharif
To enter Af­ghan­i­stan was to pass through a marked threshold. Eating was 
much cruder. The delicious, dry, light herbs and garden vegetables (a touch of 
the refined cuisine of ­great oasis cities) that made even the most meager Ira­
nian dish memorable, gave way to true nomad food—­great, greasy hunks of 
mutton buried in piles of rice.
Squatting in a restaurant set up to resemble a ­great tent, I was instantly 
aware that this was also a world entirely without ­women. Not only ­were 
­women absent. They ­were replaced. The qualities of elegance, poise, and soft-­
spokenness that ­were usually delegated to ­women in Eu­rope (and even in Iran) 
passed directly and in full to young men, with their beautifully wrapped tur-
bans, long, pure white robes, and exquisite hand gestures.
The ­great tiled minarets of Herat, seen in the driving dust, had a ghostly 
look. More dramatic was a visit to the shrine of a local saint. As in the Gaul of 
Gregory of Tours, a ­great tree, heavy with incandescent blossoms, grew vigor-
ously out of the tomb where the holy man was buried. Beside the tomb, two 
parties sat on the ground listening to a bearded elder. Weapons ­were piled 
outside the precinct of the tomb. The old man was the present-­day representa-
tive of the saint. He was negotiating between the two groups on a ­matter that 
my driver explained (somewhat chastely, I suspect) as having to do with “an 
issue of insurance.” It may have been blood money. Early next morning I went 
out to explore the fortress whose ruins dominated the town. The moment I 
set foot on the slope beneath the fortress, the heads of hundreds of feral dogs 
appeared at the top of the wall. It was time to go.
My journey from Herat to Mazar-­e Sharif, a distance of 450 miles along the 
Afghan-­Russian frontier, took place not in a colorful lorry, but in a gray, 

494 
Ch apter 72
battered Rus­sian bus. I was urged to keep a low profile. Foreigners, I was told, 
would be shot if they approached the frontier. And rightly so. For had they 
reached the frontier, they would have seen immediately that ­there was no fron-
tier. At that time, northwestern Af­ghan­i­stan virtually formed a single unit with 
its Soviet neighbors in the Turkmen Republic. Turkic-­speakers moved easily 
from side to side. Unveiled ­women, dressed in Soviet style, ­were common. 
Rus­sian, and no longer En­glish, was the language with which to address for-
eigners. When, next day, our bus broke down, a Turkmen on ­horse­back rode 
up to us. Looking down on us as we sat stoically in a ditch, he spotted me and 
said, with ­great emphasis, in Rus­sian, “Khorosho njet”—­“Not good!”; and then 
rode off, proud to own a more dependable mode of transport.
We passed through true desert that was the home of the nomadic Turkmen. 
Far from being treated as suspect outsiders (as ­were the Qashqai in Iran) the 
Turkmen nomads appeared to dominate the local economy. They controlled 
the transport of the region. Grain harvests extracted from widely scattered 
plots ­were brought together in the large side pouches of their camels and sold in 
the neighboring cities for hard cash. I had learned a further lesson about the 
relation of nomads to the settled world: their rare mobility provided the oxy-
gen without which the cities could not breathe.
I was traveling with a party of young men who ­were returning to their 
homes having made the pilgrimage to the shrine of the Imam Reza in Mash-
had. For them, to go to Mashhad was a substitute for the Haj to Mecca. But it 
was more than that: it was a rite de passage, which showed that ­these young men 
­were fully grown up and could become chiefs. Sons of the gentry and ­future local 
powerbrokers, they returned home with the blessing of the imam and with large 
numbers of knockoff Swiss watches that they proudly showed to me.
­After the endless dunes of kaolin clay that stretched to each side of the 
Soviet-­Afghan frontier, Mazar-­e Sharif was a dream city. A medieval creation 
of the Silk Road, it was full of color. Roses bloomed outside the ­Great Mosque 
with heart-­piercing vividness. ­There was also beer—­the best Czech pilsner 
beer imported to the main ­hotel for the delight of Rus­sian crews working on 
the pipelines of natu­ral gas.
From Mazar-­e Sharif I visited Balkh, an ancient city, the supposed birth-
place of Zoroaster and the center of the Bactrian kingdom—­the easternmost 
outpost of Hellenism ­after the days of Alexander the ­Great—­with huge, bulg-
ing walls of hardened clay. I also found, near Balkh, the ruins of the Masjid-­e 
Haji Piyada (the mosque of the walking pilgrim), known as the No Gombad—­
the Nine Domed Mosque. This was a ninth-­century mosque. With its stocky 

A f­gh a n­i­sta n 
495
columns, sheathed in deep-­cut stucco, it was the very earliest example of 
post-­Sasanian, Islamic art in the region. The stucco work was recognizably 
continuous with what I had seen in Qaleh Yazdegerd. It was a challenge to the 
historical imagination (accustomed as we are to an Islamic art that developed 
in the Arabic-­speaking ­Middle East, and ­later in the Ottoman Empire) to be 
confronted with an Eastern Islam, where the majesty of the new religion was 
expressed in an artistic idiom that reached back directly to the stucco-­laden 
palaces of Sasanian Iran.
On Top of the Bud­dha: Bamiyan
I left Mazar-­i Sharif next day at 4 a.m. hoping to ­ride up into the Hindu Kush 
and then to branch off, before Kabul, to the mountain valley of Bamiyan, the 
site of the stupendous carved Bud­dhas, one of which would be notoriously 
blown up by the Taliban in 2001. It was a journey of some 265 miles.
The assembly time for the bus was fixed by the position of Orion. It was 
time to go when the width of one fist held at arm’s length separated the ­belt of 
Orion from the horizon. It was also time to face an unexpected obstacle. On 
leaving the ­hotel for the bus station, I ran into a traffic jam of camels. Herds of 
camels ­were stealing a march on the day by traversing the city in a single, 
compact mass. It was a ghostly affair. The feet of the camels made no noise. 
Only the occasional loud groan came from the packed beasts. ­Here was a 
major traffic snarl-up without the roar of engines or the honking of horns. 
­Under the ­belt of Orion, the ­great sea of lurching beasts was like a movie where 
the sound track had been switched off.
My principal memory of that day was leaving the desert and grinding up-
ward into the Hindu Kush. The road never flattened, and never seemed to stop. 
At the top we halted at the turnoff for Bamiyan. It was agreed that I would stay 
the night at the turnoff, before taking a lorry down to the valley. Next morning, 
at early dawn, I found myself standing at the back of a lorry filled with stoop 
laborers bound for the fields. It was icy cold as we trickled down the side 
of ­great red mountains. At last we passed Shahr-­e Gholghola—­the “City of 
Screams,” whose inhabitants (I was told by my fellow travelers) had been mas-
sacred by Genghis Khan. Standing on the promontory of a mountain, it looked 
as exquisite and compact as a Tuscan hill city in the background of a quat-
trocento painting. Arriving at Bamiyan, I realized why the lorry was crowded 
with harvesters: we had entered the garden of Eden—­a valley of lush greens, 
trellised fruits, and bubbling streams.

496 
Ch apter 72
I went to see the ­great Bud­dha—­the one that would be destroyed by the 
Taliban. To reach the top of the ­great statue, I climbed an inner staircase carved 
into the rock of the ­great niche. At the end of the staircase ­there was nothing 
but a narrow walkway to the round top of the head of the Bud­dha across a drop 
of 150 feet. I have no head for heights. Having made it across the chasm, I squatted 
cross-­legged on the crown of the Bud­dha’s head, frozen with vertigo. Very cau-
tiously I began to turn, like the turret of a tank, to take in, slowly, the full extent of 
a bucolic landscape of shining greens, streams, and shimmering poplars.
Only gradually did I dare to look upward. I realized that I was surrounded 
by frescoes, painted on the sides of the arch above the head of the ­great statue. 
­These frescoes ­were full of echoes of Sasanian royal iconography, ­adopted by 
Buddhist artists to express the majesty of the Bud­dha, as the true king of kings, 
and of his court of celestial beings. Indeed, so precise ­were ­these echoes of 
Sasanian royal iconography that Professor Katsumi Tanabe has been able to 
date the frescoes exactly to the last days of the Sasanian Empire, by comparing 
a distinctive crown worn in one image of the Bud­dha with that of the vari­ous 
shahs on Sasanian coins. Such was the imaginative reach of the Sasanian Em-
pire in the valleys of the Hindu Kush.1
Kabul
Next day, my bus raced to Kabul. Literally—­raced. Two rival bus lines ran vans 
out of Bamiyan. Both started at the same time. Urged by the young men in 
each bus, one would roar triumphantly past the other, as the buses hurtled 
down the rock-­slope roads.
Kabul in 1976 was, in many ways, what a Persian provincial town of the 
nineteenth ­century would have been like. It consisted largely of ­houses set in 
groves and gardens, surrounded by high walls, around which the irrigation 
channels served also as moats. The British Institute of Afghan Studies was one 
such oasis. I settled into an empty ­house and caught up with my reading, in a 
library well stocked with up-­to-­date archaeological reports stacked on home-
made wooden shelves.
The Rus­sian reports on the excavated ­temples of Dilberjin interested me 
particularly.2 ­Here ­there seemed to have been a blending of Greek and native 
1. K. Tanabe, “Foundations for Dating Anew the 38 Meter Bud­dha Image at Bâmiyân,” Silk 
Road Art and Archaeology 10 (2004): 177–223, at 193–204.
2. I. T. Krugilkova, ed., Dilberdzhin: Raskopki 1970–1972 (Moscow, 1974).

A f­gh a n­i­sta n 
497
divinities that followed the establishment of the Hellenistic kingdom of Bac-
tria. Shiva, Parvati, and the Dioscuri merged into each other. But in other parts 
of the Hellenistic world the two cultures seemed to have coexisted side by side, 
without leading to a creative joining of Greek and Indian gods.
I saw the same compartmentation of cultures in the archaeological mu-
seum. I still have my entrance ticket to it, and a folder guide in Persian, heavi­ly 
annotated in my own handwriting. ­Here Greek, Bactrian, and Indian cultures 
­were displayed in separate rooms, the one untouched by the other. The recent 
finds of an unnamed Greek city at the site of Aï Khanum (“Moon-­Lady” in 
Uzbek: in northeast Af­ghan­i­stan, near the frontier of Tajikistan—­and beyond 
that, of China) ­were hauntingly, purely Greek. By contrast, the Begram ivories, 
in the adjacent room, ­were exuberantly Indian. Each was encased in its own 
culture. No in­ter­est­ing hybrids seemed to have emerged.
What I also saw ­were the ­great terracotta statues that came from the tombs 
of the Buddhist princes of seventh-­century Fondukistan. Duly beheaded by 
the Muslim peasants who first uncovered them, they still reclined with courtly 
ease in a side gallery, enjoying a long twilight of Sasanian imperial elegance, 
painted as if dressed in lavish textiles in whose design Byzantium, Iran, and 
China had mingled. I had come to the outer bounds of the Sasanian Empire, 
the melting pot of western Asia.3
Kabul to Mashhad
Next day I took the after­noon bus from Kabul back to Herat—­a journey of 
some five hundred miles. We ­stopped north of Kandahar just before sunset. 
In the long eve­ning light, I watched a caravan plod due south to Kandahar and, 
beyond Kandahar, to India. My heart went with them. ­Later, I slept ­under the 
bus, looking out to see an eerily ­silent herd of camels pass by. Their ­great feet 
slip-­slopped past me as if they ­were wearing ­giant carpet slippers. Eventually 
we reached Herat and the Ira­nian border. It was a joy to see ­those proudly 
garish Ira­nian buses, with their chrome plate, fairy lights, and bright neon signs 
invoking the name of ʿAli.
By this time I was sick. I reached Mashhad light-­headed with Imodium to 
find that the shrine had been transformed. One of the ­great annual pilgrimages 
3. For the significance of the many new discoveries in Af­ghan­i­stan and Central Asia, 
see Khodadad Rezakhani, ReOrienting the Sasanians: East Iran in Late Antiquity (Edinburgh: 
Edinburgh University Press, 2017).

498 
Ch apter 72
was in full swing. Above the courtyard, a band with trumpets and heavy drums 
appeared on a balcony at regular intervals. The park, so forbidding when 
empty, was now filled with families. They squatted in groups, often with a large 
framed photo­graph of a loved one before them. In the neighboring streets 
groups of young men threw themselves into laments for the martyrdom of 
ʿAli, accompanied by a thunderous beating of their own chests. I had never 
known that weeping could be quite as infectious as laughter. Nor did I know 
that it was pos­si­ble, when in a crowd, to join in its movements with such un-
conscious force. When I returned to my ­hotel, I was astonished to find that my 
entire chest was bruised. Two nights ­later I was back in ­England.

499
73
T wilight of Empire
The Past in the Pre­sent
Parradine Productions ­were not finished with me yet. On October 25, 1976, 
I was taken by limousine to Heathrow from the Senate House of London Uni-
versity, where I had lectured on Ostrogothic Italy and the imperial reconquest 
of Justinian. Next day I was in a ­hotel outside Shiraz, close to Persepolis, for 
the shooting of the scene of the triumph of the Sasanian king of kings, Shapur 
I, over the Roman emperor Valerian in the summer of 260. Parradine Produc-
tions and the National Film Center of Iran ­were collaborating to create a his-
torical reenactment of the victorious return to Persia of Shapur’s army, with 
Shapur himself leading the defeated Roman emperor on a rope beside him. 
My presence was required as academic adviser.
The reenactment took place in the Tang-­e Bolaghi—­a wide water-­meadow 
­behind the ridge that bore the real ­thing—­the ­great stone carvings on the rock 
face of Naqsh-­e Rostam, which included a scene of the triumph of Shapur I 
over Valerian.
­Every morning we would be driven from the ­hotel past a series of rock ­faces 
honeycombed with ­little square holes. ­These ­were the ossuary niches in which 
the ancient Zoroastrians had placed the bones of their dead. Their sheer num-
ber had only recently come to the attention of archaeologists. In 1973, I had 
been riveted by a talk on ­these ossuaries given in Oxford by Paul Gotch, a 
former head of the British Council in Iran, based on the slides that he had 
taken when traveling in the region. Like the distinctive architecture of the 
fire ­temples that I had seen at Takht-­e Soleyman, they ­were ­silent reminders 
of a distinctive belief system very dif­fer­ent from that of Christian East Rome. 
They impressed me deeply as little-­known traces of the deep Zoroastrian 
past of Iran.

500 
Ch apter 73
When it came to the reenactment of Shapur’s triumph, it proved difficult 
to re-­create his army. For extras, we had been loaned the use of a paratroop 
regiment stationed at Shiraz. But this was a unit in a thoroughly westernized 
force. How could we turn them, within a few days, into triumphant Sasanians? 
The trou­ble began with beards. Proper ancient Persians had sported magnifi-
cent beards. But that was exactly the prob­lem. The paratroop regiment was 
close shaven. I was told that the commander of the regiment would not allow 
his men to grow beards for the shooting. He was blunt. He pointed out that 
the regiment consisted not only of Ira­ni­ans, but also of Azeri Turks from the 
far north—­from around Tabriz. To encourage Azeris to grow beards was 
deemed dangerous. The uniformity of shaven ­faces was a ­matter of military 
security. The commander explained why: “­These Azeri boys, when they grow 
a beard, they think they are men. When they think they are men, they wish to 
stick it to us Persian boys.”
The Triumph of the King
A cargo of false beards was rushed from Harrods. This, in itself, caused prob­
lems on the ground. I had chosen from the ranks of the paratroopers a perfect 
emperor Valerian. Heavy-­jowled, with an echo of Mediterranean features, this 
Valerian looked remarkably like Mussolini. Or, rather, he looked like the em-
peror Valerian as he was shown on the rock carvings of Naqsh-­e Rostam and 
Bishapur: a Mediterranean face rendered by Persian sculptors. But I lost him 
for a ­whole morning: an overzealous dresser had plastered a ­great mock beard 
on him, thereby rendering my clean-­shaven Roman emperor unrecognizable. 
We found him just before he was to make his appearance as the captive of the 
king of kings.
The emperor Valerian had been chosen from the ranks. But the role of 
Shapur I as king of kings was reserved for the commander of the regiment. 
Mounted on a white ­horse, with full beard and fluttering ribbons, he was a 
splendid sight. I remember a Polaroid photo that showed Shapur with the 
emperor Valerian standing at his stirrups. The king of kings was reaching down 
with an elegant lighter to light the cigarette of the abject Roman emperor.
The principal prob­lem, however, was how to push the army itself back to 
ancient times. The Ministry of Culture had provided “period” uniforms that had 
been designed for the historical march-­past, in the plain beside Persepolis, in 
1971, on the grandiose occasion of the Twenty-­five-­hundredth-­year anniversary 
of the foundation of the Ira­nian monarchy. It was not that ­these uniforms ­were 

T w ilight of Empir e 
501
anachronistic. It was rather that ­those who wore them ­were proud to be soldiers 
in a state-­of-­the-­art modern army. Even when dressed in exotic uniforms, the 
paratroopers insisted on marching, as in a military tattoo, in rigid ranks. How 
could they be transformed into a riotous mass of the army of the king of kings?
My solution was to wear them down. First, they ­were told to roll, in their 
uniforms, in the sandy earth of the plain of the Tangi-­e Bolaghi. Then they 
marched in a long, narrow ellipse from one end of the floodplain to the other, 
fording a shallow river both ways ­until they ­were thoroughly damp and 
dusty. But they still kept up their modern pride. ­Every time they passed the 
cameras, the ranks would straighten up, the chests would be thrown forward, 
and all eyes would turn, to stare proudly into the camera lens.
My strategy worked only when, at last, I shouted “Tamam”: “It’s all over!” 
Only then did the ranks break. Swords ­were thrown in the air. Soldiers leaped 
up and down. A drum appeared and wild dancing began. Then the cameras 
rolled. Shooting against the sun into a tunnel of dust and splashing ­water, 
framed by ancient poplars, we got superb footage of a bedraggled ancient army 
on the move.
“Dynasties That Last So Short a Time”
On the last eve­ning, before I took the night flight back to Tehran, I visited the 
ruins of Persepolis. ­There I met an Indian doctor. He had been visiting his 
­brother who had been severely injured in the docks of Bandar Abbas, on the 
Persian Gulf. Standing on the ­great platform of the Achaemenid palace, and 
looking into a deep red sky, he meditated on the meaning of history. “Why is 
it, professor, that ­there is pro­gress in some countries . . . ​so many dynasties, so 
­great, so strong, so long-­lasting. . . . ​Why is it that in other countries, dynasties 
are few, are weak, dynasties that last so short a time?”
I last saw him with his injured ­brother, as they brought him on a stretcher 
into the plane to Tehran. Coming back to the Institute of Persian Studies 
through downtown Tehran, I found a darkened world, with police cordons 
much in evidence, as the streets filled up with restless crowds.
From Iran to the Mediterranean
Next morning, on October 31, however, the troubling scenes of the eve­ning 
before ­were no longer in my mind. I was given a dream journey across the 
­Middle East on Iran Air. In perfect weather, the entire arena of my projected 

502 
Ch apter 73
study of the conflict between the Mediterranean and the non-­Mediterranean 
worlds passed beneath me as the plane flew at high altitude from Tehran to its 
first stop in Athens. The Zagros Mountains, where I had visited Takht-­e Soley-
man and Qaleh Yazdegerd in the summer, ­were now snowbound. Immediately 
below the snow, the river Tigris suddenly appeared as a vast, winding flood of 
bloodred ­water held in a thin fringe of green. Then the desert began. Lunch 
was served. Lunch was taken away. I dozed. Still the desert continued beneath 
me. Then, very suddenly, without preparation, we saw a streak of deep green—­
Lebanon—­and beyond it a band of pure blue, the sea, succeeded by another 
patch of green, which was the island of Cyprus. ­After hours over empty desert 
and steppe land, we had passed over the Mediterranean coastline in only a few 
minutes. The lifeline of the Greco-­Roman world was that thin.
When I resumed my Senate House lectures next day, it was appropriate that 
they ­were about the coming of the ­Great Plague of 543. In the opinion of many 
scholars, this plague had emptied the cities and fi­nally burned out the heart of 
the classical Mediterranean. I then told how this disaster was followed by the 
loss, by East Rome, of control of the ­Middle East to non-­Mediterranean 
powers—­first to the Sasanian Empire of Khusro II (who, for a dramatic mo-
ment, overran Syria, Egypt, and much of Asia Minor) and then—­this time for 
good—to Islam. I had seen the entire landscape over which this revolution 
had taken place only the day before.
The End of a Dynasty
Another sort of revolution overtook Crossroads of Civilization. On May 5, 1977, 
I went to a final showing—­the only one that I attended—in a studio in Grape 
Street, Soho. I was saddened—­but not surprised—to find that the historical 
material which the experts provided had been transmogrified and trivialized. 
Most of the hard history had dropped out of the production. Apart from the 
triumph of Shapur over Valerian, ­there ­were no wars. ­There was not even de­
cadence. The end of the Sasanians was reduced to a hurried view of garishly 
dressed Kurdish folk dancers bouncing up and down in the firelight beneath 
the vault of the ­great rock carving of the royal hunt in Taq-­e Bostan.
But images of Iran ­were ­there, often caught with remarkable skill. A Jorda-
nian photographer had made a ­little masterpiece out of the solemn cele­bration 
of Zoroastrian rituals in a ­family home and in a ­temple in Yazd. We saw the 
entourage of the Sasanian king of kings in motion, as I had suggested, through 
a series of remarkable shots of the Qashqai nomads as they made their way up 

T w ilight of Empir e 
503
the mountains ­toward their summer grazing grounds. Shot against a back-
ground of dramatic mountains, the cavalcade of Khusro II slowly dis­appeared 
­behind a sharp ridge ­under an im­mense Ira­nian sky. We all agreed that the 
landscape of Iran, at least, had not let us down.
­There was an American buyer in the audience. We ­were ­later told that he 
was reluctant to invest in the series. He explained to us—­what we had not 
known before—­that the entire last part of the series was to take the form of 
an interview between David Frost and the shah himself—to be shot with the 
ruins of Persepolis in the background. This came as an unpleasant surprise. 
We had not been told that the National Film Center of Iran had intended to 
use the program to showcase Reza Shah.
The American then added that the shah looked as if he would not last long 
enough to have his triumphal interview with Frost. In the words of the pensive 
Indian whom I had met at Persepolis in the twilight of late October, Reza Shah 
was about to go the way of the “short, weak dynasties.” David Frost fi­nally got 
his interview with the shah in 1980: but by that time the shah was an exile in 
Panama; he never got to appear as a monarch at Persepolis. With the fall of the 
shah, the raison d’être of the production vanished. A very dif­fer­ent Iran would 
soon be at the center of world attention.
Such an ending makes for an ironic story. It seems easy, in retrospect, to 
dismiss the entire enterprise—­David Frost and all—as a bogus venture, 
conjured up in support of a bogus regime. But at the time it was a sad ending. 
Many historians—­not least, two good friends: Robin Lane Fox, who was 
adviser for the section on Alexander the ­Great, and David Morgan (1945–
2019), who was adviser on the Mongols—­had joined in the enterprise with 
genuine enthusiasm. We never met on the job. But we shared a feeling with many 
members of the production staff (keen and widely traveled young persons) 
that we had been given a rare chance to view, and to attempt to interpret for a 
wider world, the history of a vast and little-­known land. We ­were proved 
wrong. None of us had gauged the sheer weight and momentum of the boulder 
that was about to roll.
As for me, the Ira­nian Revolution soon brought my projected study of the 
conflict of Byzantium and Iran to an end. I had wanted this study to be based 
on travel; and that was no longer pos­si­ble for me. At the time, it felt like an 
amputation. I had lost an entire horizon. Yet, brutally though it may have 
ended, it was an experience that had changed me. ­Those ­great spaces had wid-
ened my heart and had given me a sense of what it was like to live among them. 
More impor­tant still, that glimpse of the vivid slash of green as the plane from 

504 
Ch apter 73
Teheran approached Lebanon and Cyprus, on my journey home across west-
ern Iran and Iraq, reminded me how the Mediterranean (that vivid center of 
the classical world) bordered on the vast expanse of Asia. It confirmed my 
view that the study of late antiquity should embrace both worlds.
This was not the only lesson that I had learned. Travel through Iran opened 
the Islamic world to me in a manner that I had not anticipated when I first 
arrived ­there. It ensured that a sense of the challenge of Islam has remained 
with me ever since.
I went back to Ireland, ­after my summer travels in Iran, tired and sick. In 
Ireland I visited my ­father’s doctor. A survivor of a Japa­nese prison camp, who 
had correctly diagnosed my ­father’s tropical disease in 1945, he knew the ill-
nesses of the Third World. He found that I was suffering from pneumonia 
contracted from desert dust. A ­little bit of the kaolin clay desert of northwest-
ern Af­ghan­i­stan was lodged beneath my ribs.
I also came to suffer from a low-­intensity virus that drained me for many 
months to come. It was the first time that I had ever had to think about ­whether 
I had the physical energy to carry through the work, as professor and perma-
nent head of department, into which I had thrown myself with zest at Royal 
Holloway College. I remember at the end of the year, in December 1976, lean-
ing against the gray stone of the bridge above the lake in the park of Blenheim 
Palace, looking over the cold ­waters and thinking (­really, for the first time ever) 
that I had never expected that the light of life could burn so very low.

505
74
Invisible Friends in 
Vis­i­ble Places
“Invisible Friends in Vis­i­ble Places”
My travels in Iran, in the summer of 1976, had been a deeply moving experi-
ence for me. But it was time to go west again. I returned to work that I had 
begun in my last year in Oxford, on the meaning of the “presence” of the saints 
in early medieval society in the West.1 In October 1976, I delivered the Sten-
ton Lecture at the University of Reading on relics and social status in the world 
of Gregory of Tours.2 ­After that, I widened my view to include the original 
rise of the cult of the saints in the Latin world of the fourth and fifth centuries. 
Gregory of Tours would be joined by even better-­known figures—­Ambrose, 
Jerome, and Augustine, and by the poets of the saints, Prudentius (348–405+) 
and Paulinus of Nola (353–431).
The theme grew on me in easy stages, marked by times of contact with 
American and Canadian students and scholars. ­These transatlantic visits ­were 
new to me. Apart from my visit to Berkeley in 1975, I had not taught any semi-
nars in Amer­i­ca—­I had only given public lectures. But from March 24 to 
April 20, 1977, I gave a seminar ­under the title of “Invisible Friends in Vis­i­ble 
Places” for the newly founded Center for Early Christian Humanism, directed by 
Liz Kennan, at the Catholic University of Amer­i­ca in Washington. ­Later in the 
year, in September 1977, I gave the same seminar at the University of Toronto, in 
the Department of Comparative Religion, headed by William Oxtoby.
1. Chapter 58: “Presences.”
2. Peter Brown, “Relics and Social Status in the Age of Gregory of Tours” (University of 
Reading, 1977), in Society and the Holy in Late Antiquity, 222–250.

506 
Ch apter 74
In Toronto, largely through the kindness of my friend Ann Hutchison, I was 
introduced to a particularly ebullient group of gradu­ate students. Their spirits 
unbroken by the rigors of the Pontifical Institute of Medieval Studies and 
other forbidding landmarks of their gradu­ate program, they quickly turned 
the seminar into an occasion for fun. A travel brochure entitled “St. Martin 
Tours” soon appeared. It promised to
HIT THE HAGIOGRAPHIC HIGHLIGHTS on the trail of our invisible 
friends, the portable ­people. . . .
ON THIS TOUR . . . ​you ­will
-­ reenact the temptations of St. Anthony in the Desert . . .
-­ try your luck at the exclusive ­tables of Monte Cassino . . .
-­ count the olive presses in North Africa . . .
But best of all was the recently discovered “Gothic Phrasebook”:
AT THE BORDER
Your papyri, please.
Are you entering the Empire for the purpose of immigration or just 
invasion?
What is the purpose of your invasion?
How do you intend to support yourself while in the Empire?
Is ­there anyone ­here who speaks Old Low Ostrogothic with traces of 
Lombard influence?
If you and your tribe would be so kind as to wait just inside the next 
province . . .
Sorry, but we have to have a cognomen.
Fi­nally, I delivered the Haskell Lectures on Comparative Religions at the 
University of Chicago, again entitled “Invisible Friends in Vis­i­ble Places,” in 
April 1978. ­These lectures became my book The Cult of the Saints.3
3. P. Brown, The Cult of the Saints: Its Rise and Function in Latin Chris­tian­ity (Chicago: Uni-
versity of Chicago Press, 1981), reprinted with a substantial preface as The Cult of the Saints . . . ​
Enlarged Edition (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2014). ­Those interested in the cult of 
the saints in Eu­rope in late antiquity and the ­Middle Ages can now enjoy the comprehensive 
study of Robert Bartlett, Why Can the Dead Do Such ­Great ­Things? Saints and Worshippers from 
the Martyrs to the Reformation (Prince­ton, NJ: Prince­ton University Press, 2013).

In visible Fr iends in Vis­i­ble Places 
507
The Breaking of Bound­aries
In order to study the cult of the saints, I set aside my Sasanian interests. But I 
by no means abandoned the world of Islam. The cult of saints in Islam pro-
vided me with a constant basis of comparison with the cult of the Christian 
saints in late antiquity and the early ­Middle Ages. I owed this new dimension 
of my work to Ernst Gellner of the London School of Economics. His study 
of the Muslim marabouts of con­temporary North Africa—­Saints of the High 
Atlas—­had introduced me to a new world.4 When I mentioned my interest 
in the cult of saints to him, a large cardboard box appeared at Royal Holloway, 
filled with recent books on holy men and holy shrines throughout Islamic 
Africa. I could not have got off to a better start. So what was it that attracted 
me to such a theme?
First and foremost, I had been drawn to the subject by a prob­lem in the 
religious imagination of late antique persons. The late antique and early me-
dieval Christian attitude to the cult of the saints had a surreal quality about it. 
­Here ­were dead bodies endowed with qualities that belonged elsewhere. It was 
as if a piece of the shining heavens had descended from its proper place to lie 
buried in the dull earth where normal ­human bodies stank and rotted before 
they turned to dust. With the bodies of the saints, and even with mere frag-
ments of ­these bodies—­known as relics—­the axiomatic boundary between 
earth and Heaven was breached. The shrines of the dead saints “filled with 
­great candelabra, their dense clusters of light mirrored in shimmering mosaic, 
and caught in the golden roof . . . ​brought the still light of the Milky Way to 
within a few feet of the grave.”5 They ­were ­little bits of Paradise on earth.
More than that, not only did the Christian cult of the saints seem to break 
the primal, cosmic boundary between the high, pure heavens and the earth. It 
also threatened to erode ancient civic bound­aries. It moved the center of grav-
ity of public worship from the city to the graveyard, where the tombs of the 
saints lay amid the tumbled monuments of the ordinary dead. In the course of 
time, in the early ­Middle Ages, entire Roman cities ­were pulled out of shape 
as if by the gravitational force of the saints’ graves. The old civic centers—­
the forum with its ­temples—­were deserted as urban settlement came to hud-
dle increasingly around the ­great basilicas that lay in the cemetery area, in the 
4. Ernst Gellner, Saints of the High Atlas (London: Weidenfeld, 1969).
5. Brown, Cult of the Saints, 4.

508 
Ch apter 74
city of the dead, outside the ancient city walls, where the saints ­were buried in 
splendor.
Within a few centuries, between 300 and 600, an entire new structure of 
­imagined ­human relations with the other world was created by Christian 
preachers, Christian poets, and Christian artists. It filled the imagination of 
believers with clearly delineated ­human ­faces, the ­faces of the holy dead. ­These 
­were the invisible friends whose presence tugged at the hearts of so many 
Christians in late antiquity and the early ­Middle Ages.
This peopling of the invisible world with new holy figures, settled in places 
where such holiness had not been found before, was a challenge to the histo-
rian of religion in late antiquity. Why had this change happened, and why did 
it spread with such apparent vigor in the last centuries of Roman rule in the 
West and in the postimperial socie­ties of early medieval Eu­rope? This was 
the question that I attempted to address in my work on the cult of the saints.
By the spring of 1977, I was able to take advantage of the peculiarly conge-
nial occasion of my inaugural lecture at Royal Holloway, on May 26, 1977, to 
sketch out my approach to this prob­lem. The lecture was entitled “Learning 
and Imagination,” and I took changing attitudes to the study of the cult of the 
saints as an example of the need to combine the two—­learning and imagina-
tion—in order to understand this major shift in the imaginative world of late 
antique and early medieval Eu­rope.6
“The Vulgar, That Is, All Mankind, a Few Excepted”
In this lecture, I presented the modern study of the cult of the saints as a chal-
lenge to do justice to a significant turning point in the religious history of late 
antiquity. I felt that this turning point had not received the attention that it 
deserved. It was not so much ignored as taken for granted. It was treated as a 
somewhat embarrassing fact of life that needed no explanation. It was assumed 
that the cult was no more than a passive survival of pagan habits that had im-
perceptibly made their way into Christian worship, as the price that Chris­tian­
ity had to pay for having become the established religion in a world still rooted 
in an aboriginal polytheism.
I soon discovered that this dismissive view had a distinguished ancestry. 
My work on the Enlightenment background to Edward Gibbon’s views on 
6. Peter Brown, “Learning and Imagination,” in Society and the Holy in Late Antiquity (Berke-
ley: University of California Press, 1982), 3–21.

In visible Fr iends in Vis­i­ble Places 
509
society and culture in his Decline and Fall had led me to the Natu­ral History of 
Religion of David Hume. Published in 1757, Hume’s essay was written in an 
urbane style that made it appear to be a statement of the obvious.
Hume claimed that polytheism, not mono­the­ism, was the natu­ral religion 
of mankind. And this was ­because of the ­mental limitations of the average 
person. For “the vulgar, that is, all mankind, a few excepted,” ­were incapable 
of true mono­the­ism. They always tended to believe in a multiplicity of di-
vine powers, embedded in the physical world. By contrast, mono­the­ism was 
based on a capacity for abstract thought that could only be the product of edu-
cation and reflection. Like any other achievement of the Enlightenment, belief 
in one God, uncluttered by imaginary intermediary powers, was thought to 
require careful social and intellectual grooming, such as could not be found 
outside the small circle of the elite. Hence a perpetual tension between the 
beliefs of the many and ­those of the enlightened few. In the words of Hume: 
“It is remarkable that the princi­ples of religion have had a flux and reflux in the 
­human mind, and that men have a natu­ral tendency to rise from idolatry to 
theism and to sink again from theism to idolatry.”7
Edward Gibbon immediately picked up on Hume. For him, Hume’s essay 
showed that the rise of the cult of saints in fourth-­ and fifth-­century Chris­tian­
ity needed no other explanation. In a footnote at the end of the chapter on the 
suppression of pagan worship in the Roman Empire ­under the emperor Theo-
dosius I (379–395), he pointed out that “Mr. Hume . . . ​observes, like a phi­los­
o­pher, the natu­ral flux and reflux of polytheism and theism.” He then went on 
to write, with superb certainty, about the cult of the saints: “The sublime and 
­simple theology of the primitive Christians was gradually corrupted; and the 
MONARCHY of heaven . . . ​was degraded by the introduction of a popu­lar 
my­thol­ogy which tended to restore the reign of polytheism.”8
The Two-­Tier Model
­After such a peremptory judgment, it seemed as if ­there was nothing more that 
needed to be said. Scholars ­were content to believe that, with the establish-
ment of the cult of saints, the Roman world simply settled back into the natu­ral 
7. David Hume, Natu­ral History of Religion VIII, in Essays, Moral, Po­liti­cal and Literary (Lon-
don: Longman’s, 1875), 2:334; Brown, “Learning and Imagination,” 9.
8. The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, ed. D. Womersley (London: Penguin, 1994), 
chapter 28, 2:95–96 and n. 85 on p. 96.

510 
Ch apter 74
inertia of a polytheistic popu­lar religion, largely untouched by the elevated 
beliefs of the elite.
From the time of Hume and Gibbon onward, what I called a “two-­tier” 
model of religious belief and practice became part of the common sense of 
learned persons in Eu­rope, shared alike by believers and unbelievers, Protes-
tants and Catholics: the “true” beliefs and practices of the few seemed to be 
invariably pitted against the degraded beliefs and practices of the many. This 
haughty attitude to “popu­lar religion” often appeared where one would least 
expect it. “A ­people’s religion is ever a corrupt religion.” David Hume? No: 
John Henry, Cardinal Newman.9
Such frankly elitist notions ­were widespread among modern scholars and 
churchmen. But what if they ­were wrong? What if the cult of the saints had 
emerged for dif­fer­ent reasons? It was time for this intellectual block to go, in 
order to do justice to the richness of the new forms of Christian devotion as-
sociated with the cult, and to attempt to understand their function in late 
Roman and post-­Roman society.
Popu­lar Religion
In the 1970s, the cult of the saints was still a charged issue in many circles. My 
previous criticism of the notion of a “primitive mentality”—­a prelogical men-
tality similar to that which Hume had ascribed to “the vulgar”—­had drawn on 
the work of anthropologists, such as Evans-­Pritchard, whose ideas had been 
developed in a distant corner of the British Empire—­among the tribes of the 
southern Sudan. But Hume discussed something far closer to home for many 
scholars. The “vulgar” ­were the majority of Christians in all ages. The debate 
on ­whether the cult of the saints was a mere recrudescence of paganism was a 
debate about the past of Christian Eu­rope.
This debate was by no means purely academic. A controversy over the na-
ture of “popu­lar religion” had flared up all over Eu­rope in the 1970s. In the 
Catholic world ­after Vatican II, fierce debates on popu­lar religion appear to 
have swung both ways. The drive to “de­moc­ra­tize” the church, by allowing a 
greater degree of lay participation, led to an interest in forms of popu­lar Ca-
tholicism. But this was often a “popu­lar” Catholicism that existed largely in 
the heads of intellectuals. The ­actual, traditional Catholicism of Eu­rope (the 
9. J. H. Newman, Difficulties of Anglicans (London: Burns and Oates, 1876), 80–81; Brown, 
“Learning and Imagination,” 11.

In visible Fr iends in Vis­i­ble Places 
511
cult of saints included) was frequently attacked by members of the liberal 
clergy as unworthy of a new, more progressive age of Christian worship.
Outside the churches, the search for an au­then­tic “popu­lar” culture—­a 
potentially subversive culture, opposed to the culture of the elites—­was en-
thusiastically pursued in neo-­Marxist circles. In France, the Annales school 
encouraged studies of Eu­ro­pean Chris­tian­ity, in all periods, as exercises in 
“historical anthropology.” ­These field trips to the past ­were now conducted, 
not in colonial Africa, but in the vast unknown of Alteuropa—of a peasant 
Eu­rope whose surprisingly archaic features (up to the nineteenth ­century) 
­were revealed ever more clearly in the abundant archival evidence of the early 
modern period.
“Oh no . . . ​Only Hindus Do That . . .”:  
A Visit to Chartres
It was this interest in popu­lar culture that led me, at this time, to the work of 
Natalie Zemon Davis. I had already heard of her articles through American 
visiting fellows at All Souls. Her collected essays appeared in 1975, as Society 
and Culture in Early Modern France.10 They addressed issues very similar to 
my own concerns—­the interplay of elite and popu­lar culture in a ­great pre­
industrial city: sixteenth-­century Lyons. Natalie approached this interplay 
with new methods, applied to an enviable abundance of evidence.
On one occasion in ­these years we met in France. We visited Chartres Ca-
thedral, where Natalie, characteristically, had made contact with an abbé who 
delighted in taking visitors into ­every nook and cranny of the ­great shrine. We 
raced up a series of spiral staircases that led up from the nave into the clere-
story, to come out within arm’s distance of the topmost stained glass win­dows. 
Reaching out, monsieur l’abbé tapped the ­great, glowing pane. It yielded to 
his hand: the complex joining of glass and lead had made it as flexible as a 
spider’s web. The thought that such a seemingly stable part of the cathedral 
could wobble in this way gave me a moment of vertigo. As my experience on 
top of the Bud­dha of Bamyan showed, I do not have a good head for heights.
But ­there was worse—or, for the zealous abbé, even better—to come. He 
took us into the loft, beneath the roof, where the high vaulting of the nave 
(which seemed so delicate from below) came together in ­great piles of 
10. N. Z. Davis, Society and Culture in Early Modern France (Stanford, CA: Stanford Univer-
sity Press, 1975).

512 
Ch apter 74
cemented stone like beehive huts or igloos. A wooden floor stood beneath the 
west towers of the cathedral, with a spiral staircase that led up to the belfry. 
This, for the abbé, was the final treat, the last mystery of the cathedral revealed. 
I edged up the wooden spiral staircase to fifty feet above the floor. Half of the 
steps had rotted through. The other half seemed to be occupied by nests de-
fended by irate pigeon chicks. It was a memorable climb.
On the way down, we talked about the pilgrims who would sleep in ­these 
upper quarters. I asked ­whether they practiced incubation—­sleeping over-
night in the cathedral in the hope of receiving a healing dream, as was fre-
quently the case in late antique Christian shrines. “Oh no, mon professeur, they 
­were good Christians. Only Hindus do that.”
Next day we had lunch with Jacques Le Goff (1924–2014), and discussed 
his recent work on what appeared to him to be a split between a folkloristic 
and a learned culture in Merovingian Gaul.11 It was an inspiring encounter 
from which I learned a lot. But it still struck me that, for the abbé and the 
professor alike, popu­lar religion was something “out ­there.” Popu­lar practices 
could be said to have nothing to do with “true” Chris­tian­ity (as with the abbé), 
or they could be valued as offering a fascinating glimpse, beneath the thin 
veneer of the culture of the clerical elite, of another, older world, from the 
dreamtime of Eu­rope (as Le Goff and ­others tended to do).
The Impresarios
In 1977, the current interest in popu­lar culture in medieval and early modern 
Eu­rope, led by scholars such as Le Goff, attracted me greatly. But ­these new 
studies did not seem to me to account for one impor­tant aspect of the rise of 
the cult of the saints in late antiquity—­that is, the active and seemingly 
­wholehearted engagement of a vivid group of upper-­class Christians in pro-
moting the cult, in framing the tombs or relics of the saints with splendid 
architecture and other visual manifestations of reverence, and, above all, in 
creating from their own social experience a language of devotion that would 
come to mold expectations of the holy dead for centuries to come. It was this 
burst of activity in elite Christian circles that needed to be understood.
The evidence for per­sis­tent upper-­class agency in the formation of the cult 
of saints contradicted the impression, generated by the two-­tier model, that 
11. J. Le Goff, “Culture cléricale et tradition folklorique dans la civilisation mérovingienne,” 
Annales 26 (1971): 587–603.

In visible Fr iends in Vis­i­ble Places 
513
the cult of the saints lay somehow outside history—­that it was no more than 
a passive residue of age-­old beliefs. Rather, it struck me that it was the stuff of 
history, linked to the creation of a new imaginative universe adapted to the 
needs of late Roman society at a time when the empire had begun to lose its 
magic and would soon vanish forever from the West.
This was what I wished to communicate most forcibly: we knew so much 
about the cult of the saints in Latin Chris­tian­ity largely ­because, far from leav-
ing its promotion and articulation to “the vulgar,” a succession of outstanding 
Latin Christians had gone out of their way to render it vis­i­ble.
I called ­these ­people impresarios. This term brought upon me the severe 
criticism of Charles Pietri (1932–1991), the master of the history of Christian 
Rome: Oh! Ce vilain mot! Oh that nasty word!12 To Pietri, the word “impre-
sario” seems to have conveyed a negative meaning, as if ­those who advanced 
the cult of the saints ­were mere “man­ag­ers” of the cult. The word “impresarios” 
appeared to imply that the cult of the saints was tarnished by association with 
money-­grubbing show business.
But this was not in any way my intention. I had chosen the word “impresa-
rio” in its wider, En­glish sense of an active promoter and advocate who makes 
available some precious cultural resource. In ­doing so, I had in mind a figure 
such as Sir Thomas Beecham (1879–1961), the conductor of the London and 
the Royal Philharmonic orchestras, who was always spoken of not only as a 
conductor of the orchestra, but also as an impresario, for having introduced 
to ­England the work of Eu­ro­pean musicians such as Berlioz, Delius, and Rich-
ard Strauss. This was what I had in mind. ­Those who promoted the cult of 
saints did not merely “manage” it. They put their lifeblood into it, and made it 
available to an ever-­wider circle of believers, much as Sir Thomas had brought 
new ­music to postwar Britain.
And to what effect? My conclusion was that ­those who promoted the cult 
of saints humanized the other world. They placed a recognizable ­human face 
upon what might have remained, in Christian circles, no more than a flickering 
awareness of the ancient dead, with ­little or no sense of their imaginative pres-
ence among the living. It was a frankly senatorial face. This has often been held 
against the upper-­class promoters of the cult by modern scholars. But ­those 
who promoted it believed that only the strong imaginative presence of a 
power­ful and beloved person, endowed with a ­human face, could rally ­those 
12. C. Pietri, “Les origines du culte des martyrs (d’après un livre récent),” Rivista di archeo-
logia cristiana 60 (1984): 293–319, at 304.

514 
Ch apter 74
forces in society through which justice, amnesty, and concord might be 
achieved.
The shrines of the saints ­were vis­i­ble places to which Christian worshippers 
turned to find invisible friends, to give them justice as well as healing. It was 
in front of their ­great sarcophagi that perjury was detected, that captives broke 
their chains, and slaves ­were set ­free. In the hard world that emerged ­after the 
fall of Rome, such places ­were needed in the Latin West.13
13. Brown, “Learning and Imagination,” 17–19, and The Cult of the Saints, 106–126. On the 
theme of justice in the works of Gregory of Tours, see now Peter Brown, The Ransom of the Soul: 
Afterlife and Wealth in Early Western Chris­tian­ity (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 
2015), 167–174.

515
75
Maynooth to 
California
London to Berkeley
At the beginning of 1977, I was approached by friends in Berkeley to see 
­whether I would be interested in a joint professorship in the Departments of 
Classics and History. This was an unforeseen turn in my life. Though I had 
recently become accustomed to traveling in Amer­i­ca, I had given no thought 
to so drastic a move.
Berkeley was looking for a replacement for Paul Alexander, who had fallen 
ill with cancer from which he eventually died in December 1977. Paul was a 
Byzantinist, a ­great and patient scholar, deeply loved by his students. I knew, 
and greatly admired, his work on the Iconoclast controversy and on Byzantine 
apocalyptic writings.
It was taken for granted that I would go to the History Department. But it 
was my fellow Irishman John Dillon, as chairman of classics, who made the 
daring and decisive move to create a joint appointment for me in classics and 
history. For the first time in my life, I would be a fully paid-up member of a 
Classics Department. This undoubtedly helped to make Berkeley attractive to 
me. But I had to think carefully over the offer. It seemed to pre­sent a ­great 
opportunity—­but it was at the far end of the world.
I had no quarrel with my job at Royal Holloway. It had opened up for me 
intellectual horizons of which I had been unaware in Oxford—­political 
thought and modern Islamic history being among them. I was more than 
happy with my colleagues and had greatly enjoyed my teaching ­there, as well 
as trying, as head of department, to create an in­ter­est­ing life both for members 
of the faculty and for the students.

516 
Ch apter 75
But ­there was one ­factor that weighed more heavi­ly with me than most of 
my friends knew: my health. I was dragged down by periods of tiredness con-
nected with the unknown virus that I had brought back from Iran and Af­ghan­
i­stan in 1976. Bluntly: I needed energy for my pre­sent job, and it seemed that 
this energy might not be available for much longer. In ­going through my 
­mother’s diary and letters, I find that I was still having tests and blood counts 
throughout 1977. My doctors ­were worried. For a time, it looked as if I had to 
slow my pace or (if the virus proved more debilitating) to look for another, 
less demanding post. I had thrown myself into the role of a permanent head 
of department at Royal Holloway with enthusiasm: now I was not sure that I 
had the stamina to maintain this level of activity. At Berkeley, I would be only 
a scholar and a teacher, without the heavy administrative responsibilities that 
went with being a permanent head of department in the London system.
Looking back, I now realize that I had been worrying about the wrong 
­thing. My health would improve in the 1980s. What declined dramatically and 
unexpectedly was the state of the British universities. At the time, I did not 
know—­indeed, few of us could have known—­that we would have to face 
the blizzard unleashed by the crisis in university funding brought about by the 
policies of Mrs. Thatcher. But I was in Berkeley by that time. My coming to 
Amer­i­ca had nothing to do with that crisis, nor even with any premonition of 
it. As I saw it at the time, I was not abandoning a sinking ship. I was moving 
from one first-­rate university to another.
An Irish Interlude: Maynooth
It took me some time to make up my mind. I first pondered this choice in what 
was, for me, an unexpected environment. In January 1977 (just ­after I had been 
approached by Berkeley), I found myself acting as external examiner in medi-
eval history at what is now Saint Patrick’s College in the National University 
of Ireland at Maynooth. In 1977, Maynooth was very dif­fer­ent from what it is 
now. It saw itself as very much a university of its own—­the place of training 
for generations of the Catholic clergy of Ireland. It had been open to lay stu-
dents only since 1968. For me, from a Protestant ­family, to go to Maynooth was 
to enter the other Ireland.
I was lodged in the Bishop’s Bedroom. ­Every morning a cleaning lady 
would come in to stir new warmth from the turf fire in the Gothic fireplace. 
Before leaving, she would turn the Breviary of daily prayers that lay on the 
prie-­dieu (the desk-­like kneeling bench) beside my bed to the right page—­
just in case!

M ay nooth to Ca lifor nia 
517
I was immediately made aware that I had entered a world with wide hori-
zons. At the end of the marking of the examination papers, if I remember 
rightly, ­there was a discussion as to how my marks ­were to be translated into 
“Vatican grades.” In the cloisters of the striking neo-­Gothic chapel designed 
by Augustus Pugin in the 1840s, im­mense portraits of the Irish bishops of ­great 
American cities (New York, Boston, and Chicago) of the nineteenth and twen-
tieth centuries lined the walls, painted in eye-­catching reds and greens. ­Here 
was an “abroad” of which I had, ­until then, known nothing—­the Irish diaspora 
of Amer­i­ca, guided by bishops out of Maynooth: a spiritual empire quite as 
far-­flung and as proud as the British Raj.
I was im­mensely impressed by the priests who formed the core of the teach-
ing staff. One priest was a professor of sociology, deeply engaged with the 
social prob­lems of modern Ireland. ­These ­were real prob­lems, at a time when 
the activities of the Provisional IRA—­the Provos—­were on the rise, and when 
Ireland was still a sadly poor country. As the son of a farmer and, for many 
years, a conscientious priest and trainer of priests, he knew ­every farm lane on 
both sides of the border between the Republic and Northern Ireland. But he 
had only ever been in ­England to make the connection, at Heathrow, with the 
planes that would take him to Catholic communities all over the English-­
speaking world—to Canada, Amer­i­ca, and Australia. His combination of a 
modern sense of global horizons with concern for the hard life of a small coun-
try impressed me greatly. ­There was no danger that ­people such as he would lose 
their identity in a strange land—so why should I be afraid that I would lose 
mine, even if I moved to the other end of the world?
A Change of Systems
So what was it that tipped the balance ­toward my decision to go to Berkeley? 
I did not see it as being as big a move as it might have been for me a few years 
­earlier. In many ways, the truly decisive change in my academic life had already 
taken place, when I went from the Oxford of the colleges to the citywide 
confederation of London University. By contrast, if I went from London to 
Berkeley, I would be ­going to a comparable institution. ­Here was a ­great state 
university, with a sense of mission to the wider public of California as a ­whole. 
Its student body consisted largely of the products of good public schools 
(good high schools, in the American meaning of the word) and not from 
private schools (the “public schools” of ­England). London University was 
similar—in its size, in its sense of mission, and in the wide social range of its 
student body. To move to Berkeley was to move to another London.

518 
Ch apter 75
But what ­really clinched the ­matter was my growing re­spect for the profes-
sionalism of American scholarship and for the university systems that sup-
ported it. This may need some explaining. Put very briefly, I was very aware 
that I had grown up in a system that consistently, silently favored the ideal of 
the gentleman scholar. No ­matter how learned the dons of Oxford might be, 
in their own field, the routines of their teaching encouraged each of them to 
be, for much of their time, a “jack of all trades and master of none.” They ­were 
made responsible for teaching undergraduates (mainly through tutorials) large 
periods of history that had ­little or nothing to do with their own specialty.
Frankly, I had thriven on this system. ­There was a certain thrill of plea-
sure—­a bit like a “Look, no hands!” cyclist—at finding myself keeping up with 
the modern lit­er­a­ture on Magna Carta of 1215, for teaching purposes, at the 
same time as I was engaged with the religious crisis of the third ­century AD. 
It had given me ­great freedom. I could not have ­imagined my intellectual jour-
ney ­toward the East (which had culminated in my travels in Iran) without the 
carte blanche extended to energetic young teachers to develop an interest in 
fields more exotic than their own immediate objects of research, if only for the 
purpose of undergraduate teaching. I had been able to do this in Oxford when 
developing the Further Subject on Byzantium, Persia, and the rise of Islam, 
and had benefited enormously from it.
The offer from Berkeley came as a direct challenge to this way of seeing the 
relationship between my activity as a scholar and my duties as a teacher. It was 
a challenge to nail my colors to the mast as an expert in late antiquity, and in 
late antiquity only. More impor­tant still, one of my main duties at Berkeley 
would be to teach gradu­ate students in formal seminars. I had already learned 
in Berkeley, when I visited it in 1975, that to teach gradu­ate students was a 
demanding job: I would not just be supervising them in a somewhat detached 
manner, to one side of a predominantly undergraduate-­oriented teaching sys-
tem, as I had done in Oxford; I would be forming my ­future peers, many of 
them already my equals in intelligence and zeal.
This point was made to me very forcibly by Caroline Bynum, in Janu-
ary 1977, when I was first mulling over the Berkeley offer:
And of course you should be training the next generation. It is a ­great deal 
of work with good grad students (. . . ​you have already written a ­great book 
and more of your energy should go to the new generation). It ­won’t leave 
you as much time for writing as you have now—­but I won­der ­whether (this 
is a very subjective hunch from seeing your work recently) you may not 
need to pull back a ­little ­here, work a ­little more on method with some first 

M ay nooth to Ca lifor nia 
519
rate students and then write a lot again in five years. I suspect that, ­under 
the stimulus of undergrad teaching, your beautiful prose begins to propel 
your ideas—­with grad students the reverse would happen. Yes, yes, yes, you 
should take it!
This proved to be a most perceptive, even prophetic, insight. It tipped the 
balance.
I remember the morning, in July 1977, when the tele­gram of Berkeley’s for-
mal offer to me arrived at the History Department. It spelled out my teaching 
duties. They amounted to only six hours a week, all of them devoted to aspects 
of my own specialty. I compared this offer with what I was ­doing that day in 
Royal Holloway. At nine ­o’clock, I had, indeed, explained the sack of Rome of 
410. This was “my” lecture—­the Professorial Lecture—to a medium-­sized 
group of ­those students in the college who had opted to do medieval Eu­ro­pean 
history. But then, in the next hour, I held a seminar–­discussion group on Karl 
Marx and the Communist Manifesto; and the hour ­after that a similar seminar 
on the Social Contract of Jean-­Jacques Rousseau. I faced an after­noon that 
consisted of a succession of three hour-­long tutorials, each with two students—­
this week being devoted to King Alfred and the Viking invasions. We would 
be fortified throughout by cups of tea discreetly brought in, at regular intervals 
for me and the two students, by Rita Townsend. No gradu­ate student had 
darkened my door for months. For the first time, perhaps ever, I felt acutely 
that this was all a bit too much. I had a responsibility to my own field. The 
Berkeley offer gave me the opportunity to take on this responsibility—­full-­
time, as it ­were—­along with the challenge to make good use of it.
But, given this freedom to concentrate entirely on the field of late antiquity, 
what would I choose? How much of my previous work—on Saint Augustine, 
on the rise and function of the holy man in East Rome, and, most recently, on 
the rise of the cult of saints in Latin Chris­tian­ity—­would I bring with me to 
Amer­i­ca? Or would I use the opportunity given to me by Berkeley to branch 
out yet further, by including the origins of the Islamic world, as a direct con-
tinuation of the story of the rivalry of Byzantium and Persia? At the time, I was 
far from certain as to which it would be.
Hence I came to Berkeley, as it ­were, carry­ing two suitcases. One suitcase 
was well packed: it contained my previous work on vari­ous aspects of Chris­
tian­ity in the late antique and early medieval periods. Another suitcase was 
more hastily packed: it carried the weight of a relatively new preoccupation 
with the origins and consequences of the rise of Islam. How had this doubling 
of my luggage come about?

520
76
The Weight of Islam
The World of Islam
In 1976, the World of Islam Festival took place in London. It was a ­grand affair, 
funded by several ­Middle Eastern governments, and opened by the queen. It 
was accompanied by exhibitions in museums all over London, by lectures, and 
by a conference in the Albert Hall that attracted some twenty thousand would-
be participants, in a building with a capacity for only five thousand.
Bob Silvers of the New York Review of Books asked me to do a review of 
books on Islam, many of which had been published for the occasion of the 
festival. Package by package, the books arrived—­eleven titles in all. This led 
to the most intensive “read-in” on Islam that I had ever done. It is not that 
I had been ignorant of Islam. In my World of Late Antiquity, I had already 
insisted on including Muhammad, the origins of Islam, and the early centuries 
of the Islamic empire as an integral part of late antiquity. But this was a closer 
look. I felt that the time had come to do justice to my long-­term interest in the 
Islamic world.
This read-in was very necessary. I had gone to Iran, in 1974 and 1976, as a 
scholar of Byzantium and its ­great Eastern neighbor in pre-­Islamic times. I had 
­little interest in studying Islam itself. But while I was in Iran, I was brought into 
contact with living Islam. I had been deeply impressed by my experiences at 
the shrine of Imam Reza at Mashhad, in 1974; by my contacts with ordinary 
Ira­ni­ans as I traveled; and by my visits to mosques both ­great and small.
I returned with a heavy sense of the unacknowledged importance of Islam 
in con­temporary Ira­nian society. It was an awareness tinged with foreboding. 
Something must be wrong, I thought, for so evident a force to be so strenuously 
denied by the regime. I realized that I had been in the presence of a ­great, living 
religion, of which I still knew ­little. Now was the time to learn.

The W eight of Isla m 
521
I did much of my reading during the break from work occasioned by the 
cele­brations of the Silver Jubilee of Queen Elizabeth II in early June 1977. As 
the country rejoiced, and bonfires ­were lit from one end of ­England to the 
other, I enjoyed a short week of pure, undisturbed research. I remember writ-
ing to a friend, ­after the jubilee break, that I was like a lion who had escaped 
from the zoo. I would have to be shot. For I had tasted blood—­the blood of a 
week of pure, unhurried scholarship. The hope that I might come to enjoy 
more of such leisure if I moved to Amer­i­ca cheered me up greatly, as I began 
to consider what my life might be like in Berkeley.
­Later, in an early August stay in Ireland, I read the remainder of the books 
on Islam that Bob Silvers had sent me. I composed the review in my head, in 
the warm sun of an unexpected heat wave on the granite rocks of the Forty 
Foot—­the men’s bathing establishment, beneath James Joyce’s Martello 
tower—­close to my parents’ ­house. As I meditated on Islam, my ­father and 
two other el­derly gentlemen of his acquaintance stripped down ­after a swim 
with their hearing aids removed, talking happily, and entirely at cross-­
purposes, to each other.
Back in my parents’ ­house, I continued to read. It seemed to me to be alto-
gether appropriate to read about Islam in a sitting room crowded with memen-
toes of Sudan and of the ­Middle East, beside a bookshelf where a luxury 
edition of T. E. Lawrence’s Seven Pillars of Wisdom stood next to my ­father’s 
copy of Sudanese Courtesy Customs.
Bob Silvers did not like the review that I first submitted to him. He found 
it heavy-­handed. It was not ­until I had established myself in Berkeley, a year 
­later, in August 1978, that I returned to my draft and rewrote it. The final ver-
sion of my review appeared as “Understanding Islam” in the New York Review 
of Books.1 The most thoughtful and well-­informed response to it came from 
a Black Muslim named Naseer Shabazz. His letter was addressed to me from a 
correctional fa­cil­i­ty, and he praised me for my re­spect for Islamic learning, wish-
ing that such an exacting and enlightened system ­were in place in the USA.
By the time that my review appeared, in early 1979, the role of Islam in the 
­Middle East looked very dif­fer­ent from how it had looked only two years be-
fore. The shah of Iran had fled, and the Ayatollah Khomeini had returned in 
triumph to Tehran. A major revolution had taken place, wholly unexpectedly, 
in the name of religion: in Eu­rope and Amer­i­ca, the public was confronted 
1. Peter Brown, “Understanding Islam,” New York Review of Books 26 (February 22, 1979): 
30–33.

522 
Ch apter 76
with images of Islam in action very dif­fer­ent from the cheery ste­reo­types pro-
duced by the London World of Islam Festival in 1976.
The Weight of Islam
I recently found the ­earlier draft of my review—­the one that Silvers rejected. 
It catches me in a conflicted mood. I was making up my mind on the weight 
of Islam. How much attention should I devote to Islam as a scholar of late 
antiquity and the early ­Middle Ages? How much effort should I expend to 
persuade the average, educated readers of the New York Review of Books (Brit-
ish and American alike) to pay attention to the colossus that had lain for cen-
turies on the doorstep of Eu­rope?
What troubled me most ­were Western ste­reo­types of Islam. As a historian 
of religion in late antiquity—­that is, of the period which immediately pre-
ceded and coincided with the rise of Islam—­I felt that many of the prejudices 
which rested on my own period rested, also, on Islam. I felt that it was my duty 
to challenge ­these misleading interpretations, so as to ensure that Islam would 
be heard. I wanted to encourage the readers of my review to stretch their 
hearts, so as to understand a distant faith that had emerged from the same 
religious turmoil, in late antiquity, as had Chris­tian­ity and rabbinic Judaism.
I was happy to do this. ­After all, it seemed to me that I had spent many 
years lifting a veil of prejudice that had obscured our vision of late antiquity. 
I had gone out of my way to call attention to ­those phenomena that ­were 
often dismissed by outsiders as primitive, superstitious, and unworthy of 
consideration—­sorcery, holy men, the cult of saints: indeed, late antiquity 
itself, as a period long held in scorn as a time of de­cadence. I considered it 
my duty as a historian to do justice to hitherto despised ­peoples and cultures, 
by removing the ste­reo­types that had piled up like guano dust against them.
Furthermore, the vital presence of Islam was not only a challenge to histo-
rians and observers of the modern ­Middle East. It also forced scholars and the 
educated public in general to reassess their views on the importance of religion in 
­human affairs. In the 1970s, historians had only just begun to write religion 
back into their accounts of the past and of the con­temporary world. To recover 
the weight of Islam meant working against the grain of a confident and well-­
entrenched tradition of historical scholarship and of so­cio­log­i­cal investigation 
that denied weight to religious issues in any society. Yet it struck me that reli-
gion would not go away. It had a weight of its own that we had to learn to 
appreciate.

The W eight of Isla m 
523
Looking back, I realize that I was writing at a moment of calm before the 
storm. It was not that Westerners ­were entirely deaf to the message of Islam. 
It was, rather, that they refused to see the con­temporary ­Middle East in reli-
gious terms. The local regimes colluded in this misperception. Most countries 
in the ­Middle East ­were ruled by dictators who wanted to disassociate them-
selves from the religious leadership of their own socie­ties. ­These dictators 
wished to be seen as the leaders of secular nation-­states on a Eu­ro­pean 
model—as Arabs or as Ira­ni­ans first and as Muslims second.
As a result, most outside observers thought of the ­Middle East in secular 
terms. ­Either they viewed it in terms of the Cold War: treating it as a Third 
World region, caught between Rus­sia and the West. Or they thought in 
terms of the anticolonial movements that had brought many Muslim nation-­
states into being—­the movie The ­Battle of Algiers (1966) being one of the 
most vivid repre­sen­ta­tions of such movements. In their opinion, anticolonial-
ism, economic development, and the growth of nation-­statehood ­were what 
mattered—­and not the disquieting background noise of an impending re-
ligious revival.
This ste­reo­type needed to be dismantled. For po­liti­cal reasons, the London 
World of Islam Festival had avoided the hot issue of Islam as a living faith. As 
a result, the publications connected with the festival struck me as having a tin 
ear on religious ­matters. Gothic Eu­rope might have had its age of faith. Medi-
eval Islam was presented, only, as a colorful age of affluence. I jibbed at this. In 
such accounts, I wrote (in the draft of my review for the New York Review of 
Books), “the deep religious anger of Muhammad, as it has echoed down the 
centuries among Muslims, is stilled.” I felt that I had not recently been in Iran 
for nothing. Islam as a living faith could no longer be ignored. ­Whether this 
concern for Islam would ever become a research agenda for me remained to 
be seen. But ­there is no doubt that, at this time, it was a major interest.
Hagarism
Hence, in my review, I drew attention to one book that seemed to fall like 
a hurricane on the grandiose yet cozy image of Islam projected by the festival: 
Hagarism by Patricia Crone (1945–2015) and Michael Cook.2 Compared with 
the bland overviews of Islam elicited by the festival, it stood out as disturbingly 
2. Patricia Crone and Michael Cook, Hagarism: The Making of the Islamic World (Cambridge 
University Press, 1977).

524 
Ch apter 76
original. I or­ga­nized around it both the draft and the final version of my review 
“Understanding Islam.”
Hagarism was a book calculated to make scholars sit up and take notice. Put 
very briefly: the authors suggested, with rare verve, that we should not take for 
granted that Islam had emerged already fully formed from an Arabian setting. 
In their opinion, the early Arab Muslims had received from Muhammad only 
“a sort of elementary religious literacy.”3 They received the rest of their reli-
gion from contact with Jews and Christians in Syria and Iraq ­after the time of 
the conquests, in the seventh and eighth centuries. Far from bringing with 
them a monolithic and alien faith fully formed in the desert, the first Muslims 
stumbled into a religious melting pot on the boil. In its first centuries, Islam 
grew out of this melting pot, through continuous dialogue among Arab Mus-
lims, Jews, and Christians that took place all over a largely Christian ­Middle 
East. Crone and Cook argued that, in its earliest phases, Islam was a religion 
in the making. It took shape as it encountered the ideas of the populations that 
the Arab armies had conquered.
Hagarism has gained such notoriety in academic circles that it is difficult to 
recapture what it first meant. Both Patricia Crone and Michael Cook ­later 
came to distance themselves from its more provocative statements. At the 
time, I remember that it grated on me. “Infuriatingly ce­re­bral and non-­
historical,” “flimsy and precipitate” ­were the kindest adjectives that I could 
muster to describe the tone of the book.4 Filled with so­cio­log­i­cal jargon and 
arcane parallels, it read as if the protagonists had “stepped straight out of a 
brilliantly witty seminar.”5 The book seemed to be marred by the intellectual 
one-­upmanship and in talk that I had come to greatly dislike in parts of En­glish 
academe.
Yet, like a small charge of dynamite detonated in exactly the right place, this 
truculent ­little book did more than any other single publication to bring down 
the high dam that had previously separated “classical” Islamic studies from the 
study of late antiquity. It claimed to abolish the disciplinary divide that had 
isolated the study of Arabic from the study of the languages and cultures of the 
pre-­Islamic ­Middle East—­Syriac, Aramaic, and Hebrew among them. It 
brought scholarship on Islam into intimate contact with research into other 
religions—­Judaism, Chris­tian­ity, and Zoroastrianism. Last but not least, it saw 
3. Crone and Cook, Hagarism, 15.
4. Brown, “Understanding Islam,” 32.
5. Brown, “Understanding Islam,” 33.

The W eight of Isla m 
525
the Arabs themselves in terms of their relations with the populations of the 
settled lands with whom they had long had dealings. They had not been men 
from Mars.
Nonetheless, Hagarism struck me as a ­great opportunity missed. The book 
could have formed the basis for an entirely new study of the pro­cess of Islam-
ization. It introduced an ele­ment of choice and negotiation into that pro­cess 
which had been lacking in most modern accounts. Most scholars simply 
assumed that conversion to Islam had been largely involuntary—­a passive 
capitulation, over the years, to a conquering power. But was this always the case? 
What if some conversions, at least, had been voluntary—if they had resulted 
from the intense dialogues between Muslims, Jews, and Christians that Crone 
and Cook posited as lying at the very roots of the formation of Islam?
This meant that we would have to think again about the innumerable, dif­
fer­ent ways in which Islam spread throughout the southern Mediterranean, 
the ­Middle East, and Iran, much as Chris­tian­ity had spread in the ­later Roman 
Empire. ­These ways, of course, included the ever-­present pressure of state pa-
tronage. In a fluid society, conformity to the religion of the new Muslim rulers 
was as decisive a ­factor in the adoption of Islam, in the seventh, eighth, and 
ninth centuries, as the adoption of Chris­tian­ity had been, when fostered by 
imperial authorities in the post-­Constantinian Roman world of the fourth and 
fifth centuries. But this was a slow and piecemeal pro­cess. In many regions 
and sectors of society, Islam may also have talked itself, slowly but surely, into 
dominance through innumerable encounters, debates, and questionings from 
which Islam itself emerged enriched and changed.
In 1977, this was a challenging assertion, hinted at though not followed 
through by Crone and Cook. Nowadays ­there is no doubt that constant debates 
between Muslims and non-­Muslims did take place. To take one example: the 
brilliant book of the late Tom Sizgorich, Vio­lence and Belief in Late Antiquity: 
Militant Devotion in Chris­tian­ity and Islam, has shown that Muslims and 
Christians did, indeed, argue about the relative merits of the monastic ideal 
of self-­mortification and Muslim notions of self-­sacrifice in holy war—­the 
notion of jihad.6 In ­these debates we can overhear a new religion arguing itself 
into shape, in constant dialogue with its religious neighbors.
Patient modern scholarship has also shown how many distinctive features 
of Islamic civilization emerged slowly, through a pro­cess of negotiation among 
6. T. Sizgorich, Vio­lence and Belief in Late Antiquity: Militant Devotion in Chris­tian­ity and 
Islam (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2009).

526 
Ch apter 76
Muslims, Jews, and Christians. In a recent masterpiece, Jack Tannous has made 
plain that the first Muslim Arabs entered the ­Middle East as a small, if power­
ful, minority, surrounded by religious controversies as vocal as the roar of ci-
cadas in the high season. It is not surprising that Islam emerged from such a 
background as a religion enriched by innumerable contacts, debates, and now 
long-­forgotten conversations between Muslims and non-­Muslims.7
Altogether, we have come a long way from the narrow image of Islam that 
was current in academe in the 1970s, and which Cook and Crone had at-
tempted to challenge in their own way. Recent scholars have revealed a ­Middle 
East that was religiously more ebullient, more open to dialogue and to reli-
gious bricolage—to the mix-­and-­match adoption of religious practices and 
moral precepts by “­simple believers” (that is, not only by theologians)—­than 
we had dared to think forty years ago.
Forty years is a long time. None of ­these studies ­were available in 1977. But, 
at least, as I prepared the first draft of my review, I realized that I had much to 
learn about Islam if I ­were to meet the challenge posed by Hagarism and the 
horizons that Crone and Cook had, almost unwittingly, opened up to scholars 
of late antiquity. To do this I would travel once again to the ­Middle East, but 
no longer to the thrilling landscapes of Iran. ­There, in Iran, I had discovered 
Islam almost by accident. Now I would seek it out, by learning Arabic and 
by rooting myself in the heart of the greatest city in the Muslim ­Middle East. 
I would go to Cairo.
7. Jack Tannous, The Making of the Medieval ­Middle East: Religion, Society, and ­Simple Believers 
(Prince­ton, NJ: Prince­ton University Press, 2018).

527
77
Cairo
Planning a Visit
It seemed easy enough to go to Cairo. The way had been prepared by a previ-
ous short visit. At the very end of 1977, I had joined my colleague Professor 
“Sandy” Sanderson on a visit to Cairo, to establish a link between the History 
Department of Royal Holloway College and ʿAin Shams University in Cairo. 
Sandy was long acquainted with Egypt and Sudan, having taught at the 
University of Khartoum. It was an official occasion that turned out to be 
delightful.
We did the usual ­things. We saw son et lumière at the pyramids, on the 
night when the voice-­over was in Arabic. We ­were driven down to Saqqara in 
the dawn light, passing peasants carry­ing ­great bundles of reeds on their shoul-
ders, which bent in the same perfect curve as did the doorway arches of the 
courtyard in front of the Step Pyramid. This was a reminder that, for all its 
colossal size, ancient Egyptian architecture never lost touch with a grace firmly 
based on the shapes of ­humble objects in the natu­ral world.
We met the En­glish Department of ʿAin Shams, dominated by a group of 
formidable Coptic ladies who had obtained their doctorates at Trinity College 
Dublin for dissertations on Anglo-­Irish lit­er­a­ture. I chatted with them about 
my distant cousin John Synge, author of The Playboy of the Western World and 
Deirdre of the Sorrows.
In the happy mood induced by the Camp David Accords, we spent New 
Year’s Eve playing bingo in the apartment of a general who had fought in Sinai 
during the Yom Kippur War.
Most revealing of all, perhaps, was a visit to the theater to witness an avant 
garde Egyptian play. It was a retelling of the story of the Oedipus Rex of Sopho-
cles. As it was explained to me, the message of the play was pointedly upbeat. 

528 
Ch apter 77
Oedipus’s relation to his ­mother had nothing to do with incest. What mattered 
was that, with a ­mother’s encouragement, he shed his Western, Freudian hang-­
ups and devoted himself, as a king, to the pro­gress of the ­people of Thebes—as 
Gamal Abdel Nasser (1918–1970) had devoted himself to the ­people of Egypt.
I resolved to return for a longer stay. I set off for Cairo on May 13, 1978, and 
stayed ­there ­until July 18. Apart from learning Arabic, I had no academic role 
when in Cairo. I was simply ­there as a visitor. I was very much on my own. 
I was not integrated into some university-­based Arabic course, where my ex-
periences would have been laid on for me. Nor was I on a formal academic 
visit. As a result, my experience of Cairo was fragmented, and in many ways 
frustrating. I think that I underestimated the need for money and for prear-
ranged contacts to make life easy in a country like Egypt. I tried to do it my 
way and, as a result, suffered much frustration. I kept no diary, nor did I write 
many letters. For this reason, my memories have a somewhat kaleidoscopic 
character. I remember a vivid succession of places and persons, from each of 
which I learned something that would remain with me for many years to come.
The Collège de la Sainte Famille
At first I stayed at a Coptic guest­house in Zamalek; then I moved across the 
river to the Jesuit-­run Collège de la Sainte Famille in Fagallah. This was in 
the area of Ramses Square and the main railway station to the south. In what 
seems to be an entire lifetime previously (but actually was only thirty years be-
fore), my ­mother and ­father had been accustomed to arrive at that railway station 
on their way from Sudan to Port Said, so as to catch the boat to ­England.1
The world of the Collège de la Sainte Famille absorbed me with utter lack 
of surprise. French was the dominant language. But ­whether French or Italian, 
Spanish or German, they all seemed to me mere dialects of a common tongue, 
barely distinguishable one from the other compared with the intractable mass 
of the Arabic that I had set out to learn.
This was to be no time of easy travel over bracing distances, as in Iran. It 
was the hottest summer in memory, and I soon fell sick with a virus that left 
me, at times, as weak as a kitten. As a result, I saw none of the well-­known 
monuments of Egypt outside Cairo. I even had to forgo, with a heavy heart, a 
proposed visit to Alexandria in the com­pany of the football team of the 
collège.
1. Chapter 8: “Atbara: Life Abroad.”

Ca iro 
529
What I remember of Cairo is strangely dim. No bright colors. Rather, meet-
ings by lamplight in the cool of the night. In the soft dawn, I would drag myself 
to the ­great flat roof of the collège, to look down over the winding lanes and 
courtyards of Fagallah. On the flat roofs a ­little below the high balcony of the 
collège, gentlemen in nightshirts ­were chasing their chickens. Farther down, 
at the end of lanes and in courtyards, the “invisible economy” throve. Stolen 
cars ­were carefully repainted or meticulously cannibalized.
I knew all this ­because the Spanish Jesuit who taught science pointed it out 
to me; he would usually buy the mechanical parts needed for his laboratory 
from this quarter. He loved Egyptian Muslims. He was convinced that God 
had given them an easier religion ­because of the intrinsic goodness of their 
hearts. But the best time of all was the eve­ning, when the desert wind blew in, 
and, all over Cairo, from the narrowest, poorest lanes, kites would be carried 
upward in the floating breeze.
Poverty
Very soon I realized that I would not only bring home from Cairo a sense of 
the weight of Islam. I would also bring a sense of the weight of poverty in a 
­great ­Middle Eastern city. The poverty of Cairo engulfed me. I had, perhaps, 
less protection from it than the average Eu­ro­pean tourist. I had brought ­little 
money (if I remember right, some savings and a small Leverhulme grant from 
the British Acad­emy) and was largely dependent, for getting around, on public 
transport or on walking the long hot streets, full of deep holes and hummocks 
as if they had been shaken up by an earthquake. I was by no means down and 
out in Cairo. I was well lodged and fed at the collège. But the moment I walked 
out the collège gate, I found myself close enough to the poverty in the sur-
rounding streets to take notice.
This poverty affected me in dif­fer­ent ways. The vast crowds, seemingly for-
ever on the move at all times of day and night, did not worry me. For I was 
amazed by the gentleness and re­spect for the space of ­others that characterized 
this massed humanity, as it drifted down the ave­nues and went round and round 
the wide traffic circle of Tahrir Square. I bobbed around in this ­great Irish stew 
of ­people without ever being hustled or elbowed. It would be usual for me to 
board the crowded bus to the Coptic Patriarchate in ʿAbbasiyya through the 
open win­dows. Kind hands would always reach out to ­settle me in a seat.
What did distress me was the sheer permanency of this urban poverty. The 
Collège de la Sainte Famille did not lie in a privileged area. It towered over 

530 
Ch apter 77
Fagallah, a long street choked by small shops, from which led narrow lanes—­
the lane of the circumcisers among them. The packed slum of Bulaq lay close 
by. On many eve­nings, I would sit in a mosque in the ­middle of Bulaq, review-
ing my Arabic through reading a collection of hadiths—­Sayings of the Prophet 
or stories concerning the Prophet.
The worst poverty was marked by a rhythm of frenzy and lassitude. Gangs 
of diggers, laying drainage pipes outside the collège, would chew cheap aspi-
rins to relieve the pain in their joints. They ­were flat out by midday. I was once 
driven by friends out to the oasis of Fayyûm (a major find spot for administra-
tive papyri and for Manichaean texts buried in the ever-­encroaching sands that 
surrounded the oasis). The courtyards of the mosques ­were filled with sleep-
ing beggars, and the boatman who took us across Lake Qaroun to the ­temple 
of the Crocodile God was evidently so weak from malnutrition that we had to 
take the oars and pull the boat ourselves.
But more distressing still was Shubra. This was a ­great stretch of dusty gray 
buildings seemingly inhabited (at that time: ­things may have changed) by a 
perpetually impoverished lower ­middle class. It was painful to see ­these enter-
prising ­people constantly ground down by shortages and discomfort, and 
never quite able to gain a sure footing eco­nom­ically, compared with the rich 
bourgeoisie of Cairo, whose sons (the grandchildren of Gamal Abdel Nasser 
among them) ­were sent to receive a Eu­ro­pean culture at the collège.
In the ­middle of Shubra was the Catholic shrine of Saint Thérèse of Lisieux, 
which was filled by Muslims, Copts, and Catholics alike. ­There seemed to be 
some strange fascination in the figure of a pale, Eu­ro­pean girl, worn thin by 
illness, surrounded by walls covered with desperate notes, begging for health, 
for safety, and for success in examinations. I carried back from Cairo visual 
memories of systemic poverty in a ­great city that prompted me, in all ­future 
years, to pay more attention than I had done before to issues of wealth and 
poverty in the ­later Roman Empire.
Listening
Though grounded by fever, I was by no means out of touch with the wider 
world. The collège was a listening post of remarkable sensitivity. The newspa-
pers carried regular reports of growing anger in Iran. Fellow Jesuits and other 
clergymen arrived frequently from Lebanon. They would be asked to speak 
­after the Sunday lunch. They told tales that revealed a deeply divided Chris­
tian­ity. On one occasion, a heavy and overbearing Maronite cleric gave us an 

Ca iro 
531
upbeat sermon on the Falangist destiny of Lebanon. Next week, a small and 
soft-­spoken Franciscan simply narrated, step by step, the descent into vio­lence 
that began (in almost medieval fashion) with a brawl at a tollgate and which 
ended in the recent, sickening murder, in his country villa, of Tony Frangieh 
and his ­family. It was in this way that I heard about the beginning of the end 
of the regime of the shah of Iran, and about the further, fateful stages of the 
civil war in Lebanon.
The collège was also a remarkable gathering of persons. The Jesuit staff was 
drawn from all over Eu­rope and from the Christians of the ­Middle East. My 
favorite was ­Father Zamalek. A large man, descended from Albanians who had 
been settled by the Ottomans as a garrison in southern Egypt, he would solemnly 
greet me ­every morning, teaching me the correct way to inquire, in Arabic, 
­whether one’s neighbor at the ­table had had auspicious dreams that night.
­There ­were also numerous visitors, many of them with long experience of 
Egypt and the Muslim world. I gained as much from long conversations with 
them, seated on the roof of the collège in the cool of the night, as I did from 
my own forays into the city. I came to know Patrick Gaffney, a priest-­
anthropologist now at Notre Dame. This huge, redheaded man would sit for 
hours, with his long legs tucked beneath him, taking notes on sermons in a 
mosque in Minya, a sprawling agro-­town in the Nile delta. From the dull sedi-
ment of popu­lar preaching Patrick distilled a remarkable study of the role of 
Islam in a major Egyptian provincial city. The imam with whom he dealt was 
no bigot. He was a believing Muslim, he said: “But I do not wear my beard on 
my sleeve.”2
It was through Patrick that I learned about the omnipresence of the Muslim 
Brotherhood. They had even approached him to warn him off his work in the 
mosques. In the long hot nights, I read what I could about them in books bor-
rowed from the library of the collège, as my small portable wireless played 
Qurʾânic recitations and, occasionally, picked up classical ­music broadcast 
from Bucharest.
From another frequent visitor, Tom Michel, I learned about the vast Mus-
lim populations of Indonesia. Tom had studied Indonesian Islam, and had 
come to be deeply committed to individual Muslims through his ­human rights 
work on behalf of Communists of Muslim background who had been impris-
oned ­under Sukarno. He wrote to me ­later about Java as an island paradise 
2. Patrick D. Gaffney, The Prophet’s Pulpit: Islamic Preaching in Con­temporary Egypt (Berke-
ley: University of California Press, 1994), 88–94.

532 
Ch apter 77
stained with blood where, paradoxically, Islam and radical secularism ­were 
joined (so he hoped at that time) by a shared desire for a just society.
A Worldwide Islam
This sense of the size and continued expansive power of Islam was not re-
stricted only to what I had picked up in the collège. It was in the air in Cairo. 
For liberal Egyptian Muslims, Islam stood out as the one religion that had 
retained its universal vision in the days of Eu­ro­pean colonialism. Cairo claimed 
to be the cultural capital not only of the Arab world but of all Africa—as wit-
nessed by the flow of African students to its universities to avail themselves of 
En­glish courses of high quality, such as ­those offered by the En­glish Department 
at ʿAin Shams. Muslim intellectuals fervently believed that the mea­sured Sunni 
Islam of Egypt (a faith that had stood up to colonialism and to racial prejudice) 
could make a bid to become the dominant religion of the Third World.
They thought big. I remember overhearing a conversation in the salon of 
one such liberal professor. He was speaking about how to bring a correct Sunni 
Islam to a distant extremist group. It was only ­later that I realized that he had been 
speaking of the Black Muslims of Philadelphia. ­There was a pride and an opti-
mism about such ­people that takes some effort of the imagination to recall.
Altogether, it was instructive to spend some time looking at the West from 
the outside. Not only was the Muslim world turning its back on Eu­rope. Eu­
rope also seemed, morally and culturally, to be ­doing the same to Egypt. I 
noticed that when French lit­er­a­ture was being taught at the collège, the stu-
dents responded instantly to the ­great realistic novels of the nineteenth 
­century, to Balzac and Zola. Sons of the Cairo bourgeoisie, they knew that sex 
and money ­were what life was all about. The chill lucubrations of Sartre and 
Camus left them cold. It was as if a common ­human language, which had once 
been shared by the bourgeoisie on both sides of the Mediterranean, had shriv-
eled on its northern, French shores.
Though I had been largely immobilized by illness, I returned to ­England 
having heard a lot and thought a lot. I had gained a sense of the size and sense 
of purpose of modern Islam. I visited Royal Holloway for a few days to attend 
a conference of the Historical Association. One session was on the Crusades. 
I was able to tell my audience that, in Cairo, it was still pos­si­ble to buy ­little 
sugar statues of Saladin (1137–1193), the Muslim leader who had conquered 
Jerusalem from the Crusaders in 1187.

Ca iro 
533
Good-­bye from Ireland
Driving with a friend for a last time in the Oxfordshire countryside, I felt an 
acute sense of loss. I wished that the view of the Windrush River, as it flowed 
through the fields outside Swinbrook, would last forever. It was that intimate 
landscape, soaked in the past, which I was ­going to exchange for the wild sea-
coast of Northern California.
Then I went to Ireland. It was reassuring to be in a country that took emigra-
tion to Amer­i­ca for granted. When, in Oxford, I would announce that I was 
­going to Berkeley, the answer was—­“For a term, I suppose?” My “No: for 
good” was followed by a disapproving “OOooh!” Such a response was not 
intended to encourage me. Not so in Ireland. In Glasthule Post Office, I was 
presented with a ­whole list of the postmistress’s relatives in San Francisco and 
Redwood City. My aunt Norah volunteered that an el­derly gentleman in her 
nursing home—at the age of ninety-­five a notorious Lothario—­was rumored 
to have once been mayor of San Francisco.
On August 8, my parents took me to Dublin Airport to board the TWA 
flight to Boston. From Boston I flew a few days ­later to San Francisco. On the 
day I left, my ­mother entered in her diary, almost—­I suspect—by way of 
consolation:
Peds looked well and happy—he had got the job he had always wanted.
It was a sad entry. But it was certainly what I had communicated to my parents, 
in order to justify my long journey from them. Only the next years would tell 
what use I could make of my new circumstances in a distant land.


Part VI
Berkeley to  
Prince­ton


537
78
Berkeley 1978
The Phi­los­o­pher and Societ y
Culture Shock
I arrived in Berkeley on August 11, 1978, braced for culture shock. But I found 
that, if I suffered from culture shock at all, it was not from leaving Britain and 
Ireland: it was the memory of Cairo, where I had been only three weeks before, 
that made Berkeley seem so very strange. In Cairo, I had been struck by its 
poverty and pent-up energy. In the Bay Area, by contrast, I was ­gently dazed 
by a rare combination of impersonality and supreme ease.
In the first days ­after my arrival, I would stand in the clear, pure sunlight, 
bemused that it did not bite into me like the sun of Cairo. I occasionally 
paused, even more bemused, at a traffic light. Large cars silently came to a halt 
at the red. More amazing still, when the light turned to green (and only then), 
they slid forward without making a sound. It was as if a mighty vacuum cleaner 
had sucked up into the blue sky the roar of a ­great, ­Middle Eastern city to 
which I was accustomed.
Even shopping seemed to be preternaturally smooth compared with the 
stores and bazaars of Cairo. I found that I missed the haggling. At the Safeway 
on Shattuck Ave­nue and Cedar, I would fill my grocery cart in silence, would 
wheel it in silence to the cash register, and with craven self-­surrender (by 
Egyptian standards) would pay not only the full price, but also the added state 
tax, all without a word.
When the time came to collect my library and furniture from the docks of 
Oakland, I expected, on the basis of anyone’s experience of getting ­things done 
in Cairo, to put a personal touch on the transaction. No such ­thing happened. 
I rang the appropriate number. Over the phone, I heard the clicking of a 

538 
Ch apter 78
keyboard. Then: “It’s OK. Have a good day”—­and, ­after a short pause (as the 
agent scanned the screen of his computer for my Christian name) . . . ​“Peter.”
Inevitably, ­there ­were times when I felt uprooted at the other end of the 
world. I would speak of myself to my friends as a pomodoro pelato—­a peeled 
tomato. The image was humorous: the experience itself was no fun. And so I 
found myself taking a very Californian (and also, for me, a very Irish) way out: 
I made for the sea. I regularly drove out to Point Reyes beach in Marin County, 
an hour away from Berkeley. Armed with a beer, I sat in the sand dunes ­until 
the sun sank so low, in the late after­noon, that it shone into the wave tops, turning 
them into light-­filled palaces where one could almost hear the mermaids sing. 
It also helped that the waves came in from the right direction—­from the 
west—as they had done in the days of my holidays on the west coast of Ireland. 
The deeply prehuman (pre­human, not in­human) beauty of the Californian 
coast, which I had already experienced in 1975, saw me through.
The Weight of Freedom
By the time that I began to teach, in late August 1978, I had moved into an 
apartment and had acquired (in a second­hand office supply shop in Oakland) 
an electric, golf-­ball typewriter. This was a total novelty for me: ­until then I 
had been content to hammer at the keys of an Olivetti portable. With its 
smooth, automatic return and neat correction tape, this new typewriter was, 
for me, an emblem of the almost disquieting new ease that I had found in the 
Bay Area. Perching the machine on a packing case—­for I had not yet acquired 
a desk—­I used it to rewrite my review, “Understanding Islam,” for Bob Silvers 
at the New York Review of Books.
Soon ­after, I set to work preparing a paper for a colloquy at the Center for 
Hermeneutical Studies in the Gradu­ate Theological Union: “The Phi­los­o­pher 
and Society in Late Antiquity.”1 This was the first of a series of papers (none 
of which ­were published) that signaled a change of direction in my work, 
­toward a greater interest in the prob­lems of power and moral authority in the 
­later Roman Empire. My interest in this theme led eventually, fourteen years 
­later, to a book: Power and Persuasion in Late Antiquity.2
1. Peter Brown, “The Phi­los­o­pher and Society in Late Antiquity,” in The Center for Herme-
neutical Studies in Hellenistic and Modern Culture, Colloquy, no. 34, December 3, 1978 (Berkeley: 
Center for Hermeneutical Studies, 1980), 1–17.
2. Peter Brown, Power and Persuasion in Late Antiquity: ­Towards a Christian Empire (Madi-
son: University of Wisconsin Press, 1992).

Ber k eley 1978 
539
Looking back, I cannot resist the impression that, by settling down to work 
on such a topic, I already felt the tug of the genius loci. When I visited Berkeley 
in 1975, I had been forcibly struck, as an outsider, by the extent to which men 
and ­women enjoyed a degree of personal freedom unequaled in the modern 
world. Hence, among some at least, a streak of deep seriousness that was the 
obverse of California’s reputation as the home of cranks and faddists. I was 
impressed by friends and colleagues who plainly gave much thought to the 
way they lived their lives. Their freedom weighed upon them. If so much of 
life was a ­matter of choice, then ­these choices had to be made; and they had 
to be right.
But ­there was more to it than that. Paradoxically, my experience of Iran 
(and to a lesser extent of Cairo) sharpened this interest in the forming power 
of distinctive codes of be­hav­ior. Iran and Northern California might seem 
worlds apart in the codes to which they rallied, as the course of the Ira­nian 
Revolution soon made only too clear. But they ­were both rapidly evolving 
socie­ties searching for new rules of life. Both California and Iran seemed 
equally distant from Eu­rope and the British Isles, which seemed somnolent 
places in comparison, where so much of life appeared to be lived, as it ­were, 
on automatic pi­lot. A sense of the seriousness of the search for a rule for life 
in both socie­ties gave ­human weight and urgency to what, ­until then, had 
struck me as the rarefied lucubrations of the ancient ethicists. From now on, 
I would see ­these well-­known figures of the late classical world as engaged in 
the serious business of the formation of souls. They ­were not only pre­de­ces­
sors of the Christian monks but also harbingers of the learned and pious men-
tors of the Islamic world. What fascinated me, at this time, as a historian, was 
what ­these traditions of spiritual guidance (the classical and the Islamic) had 
in common and where they differed from each other in significant ways.
I gave more thought than previously as to how persons of the privileged 
classes in the ancient world chose to set their lives in order. I found myself 
turning with new eyes to the late classical phi­los­o­phers in their role as moral-
ists and spiritual guides—to Seneca, Plutarch, Epictetus, and Marcus Aurelius. 
Back in ­England, ­these Old Masters had left me cold. They seemed to be 
trading in uplift—­Victorians of the ancient world. But, now, they looked very 
dif­fer­ent. In addressing the elites of the Roman world, they addressed persons 
who felt themselves to be ­free, to a dangerous extent, to do anything or noth-
ing with their lives. The ancient phi­los­o­phers offered guidance on the best 
use of this vertiginous freedom. As a result, I wanted to provide a social and 
cultural context for the pagan phi­los­o­phers of late antiquity that explained 

540 
Ch apter 78
their role, not just as abstract thinkers, but as mentors, spiritual guides, and 
public figures.
The Phi­los­o­pher in Society
In order to do this, I would have to dispel many misconceptions. The first of 
­these was the conviction that, in late antiquity, phi­los­o­phers had no social role 
whatsoever: that they ­were, all of them, world-­fleeing mystics.
In my paper, I argued strongly against this view. I pointed out that even the 
most metaphysical phi­los­o­phers, such as Plotinus (205–270), Porphyry (232–
303), and Iamblichus (260–330), in the third and early fourth centuries, and 
Proclus (411–485), in the fifth ­century, had not been recluses. They had con-
tinued to play an active role in the social life of their cities.
I also added that ­there ­were many more examples of phi­los­o­phers engaged 
in public life in the fourth and fifth centuries than we had thought. Scholars of 
the ­later empire had been so convinced that the phi­los­o­pher played no role in 
society that they had paid ­little attention to the cumulative evidence for the 
presence of phi­los­o­phers in municipal politics all over the empire and even as 
advisers at the imperial court.
I had noticed that historians of art and museum curators colluded with the 
ste­reo­type of the otherworldly phi­los­o­pher. In the exhibition galleries of 
major museums, the busts of late antique phi­los­o­phers (or figures said to be 
phi­los­o­phers) ­were usually presented beneath dramatic, vertical lights that 
emphasized their heavenward gaze. But was this how they looked in antiquity? 
In November 1977, I had visited the ­great exhibition, Age of Spirituality, or­ga­
nized by Kurt Weitzmann at the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York. I 
earned a rebuke from the guard ­because I lifted my museum map to block the 
strong vertical light that shone down on the face of the well-­known Bust of Eu-
tropius, a fifth-­century AD head taken from a statue erected in Ephesus. But I 
was satisfied with the experiment. Without the vertical light that seemed to draw 
his eyes upward, as if in rapt contemplation of the other world, the bust changed 
expression. Seen in normal daylight (as it would have been seen in fifth-­century 
Ephesus), the face no longer looked “spacey.” Instead, the eyes had the penetrat-
ing look of an intelligent man, very much at home in this world.3
3. Age of Spirituality. Late Antique and Early Christian Art, Third to Seventh ­Century, ed. Kurt 
Weitzmann (New York, Metropolitan Museum of Art, 1979), no. 55, p. 58, with Peter Brown, 
“Art and Society in Late Antiquity,” in Age of Spirituality: A Symposium, ed. K. Weitzmann (New 
York: Metropolitan Museum of Art, 1980), 17–27.

Ber k eley 1978 
541
A Saint of Paideia
So what did contemporaries see in the phi­los­o­pher that gave him such moral 
authority in the upper-­class circles in which he moved? ­Here I suggested that 
the phi­los­o­pher was revered ­because he was held to have summed up in his 
person the ideals of an entire culture. This was the “civilization of paideia” to 
whose values and tenacity Henri-­Irénée Marrou had drawn attention in so 
many eloquent studies—­most notably in his youthful study of the manner in 
which educated persons ­were shown on their sarcophagi.4
Previously, I had tended to dismiss this classical education (known as pai-
deia) as a superficial ­matter—as a mere badge of status that separated a mandarin 
class of civic notables and public servants from the mass of their uneducated 
inferiors. Now I realized that, in many cases, the acquisition of paideia was far 
from being a superficial pro­cess. The values implied in it ­were supposed to bite 
deep into the person. It involved more than a purely literary education. The 
emphasis on poise, on self-­control, and on gracious be­hav­ior that character-
ized the “civilization of paideia” was thought to be echoed in the harmonious 
style of the ancient authors, and to be reinforced by the treasure-­house of 
examples of correct be­hav­ior stored up in classical lit­er­a­ture. To be educated 
in the classics was not just to learn a language and to read a lit­er­a­ture. It was to 
undergo a moral grooming. It was to learn how to conduct oneself as some-
thing of a ­human classic—as a ceremonious and balanced person. Phi­los­o­
phers ­were believed to have internalized ­these values more successfully than 
any other ­people. Far from being “remote and ineffectual dons,” they ­were 
“saints of paideia”—­the superego of an entire class.
“Awe-­Inspiring Centrality”
At the time, I still found it difficult to explain the chemistry of moral authority 
that enabled one figure (and a figure committed to such an arcane discipline 
as philosophy) to condense in his or her person the values of an entire culture. 
I wondered ­whether the image of the ­great scientist in modern society might 
be analogous to the aura that surrounded the phi­los­o­pher in late antiquity.5
4. H.-­I. Marrou, Mousikos Anér: Études sur les scènes de la vie intellectuelle figurants sur les 
monuments funéraires romains (Grenoble: Didier et Richard, 1938).
5. I used the recent article of Dorinda Outram, “The Language of Natu­ral Power: The 
‘Éloges’ of Georges Cuvier and the Public Language of Nineteenth ­Century Science,” History 

542 
Ch apter 78
It is a sign of my recent arrival in Amer­i­ca that, in this paper, I had not taken 
on board the penetrating work of Edward Shils (1910–1995), of which I had 
known nothing when in ­England. A ­little ­later, as I absorbed his Center and 
Periphery: Essays in Macrosociology, Shils helped me to see how a learned tradi-
tion and the persons who embodied it could be invested with a charisma quite 
as potent, in its quiet way, as the more flamboyant charisma associated with 
persons such as the holy men of Syria.
In Shils’s words, such persons radiated a sense of “awe-­inspiring centrality” 
as representing an entire culture at its best. It was in this way that more low-­
key, less melodramatic figures, from non-­Christian traditions, came to interest 
me. Shils’s subdued notion of charisma enabled me to understand better than 
previously figures such as the pagan phi­los­o­phers, the Jewish rabbis, and, ­later, 
the learned and holy scholars—­the ʿulemaʾ of the Islamic world—to whom I 
had already been introduced by Francis Robinson at Royal Holloway College, 
through his study of the learned and saintly Muslim scholars connected with 
the teaching network of the Farangî Mahall of Lucknow.6 ­These ­were the 
­people I wanted to understand.
“The Phi­los­o­pher and Society” marked a shift in my thinking that had begun, 
a year or so ­earlier, in ­England. The work of Evans-­Pritchard and Mary Douglas 
had helped me to explain the role of holy persons in terms of their function. They 
­were useful as mediators, objective arbiters, and wielders of local power.7 But this 
was not enough to explain their attraction as “presences”—as beloved figures and 
objects of personal loyalty. Now I had to catch up by exploring the nature of sanc-
tity in widely dif­fer­ent environments and in very dif­fer­ent religious traditions. 
What was it that made certain persons loved and respected ­because they ­were 
thought to incorporate the highest expectations of their society?
It was a change of which I was aware at the time. In early February 1979, I 
received a letter from Franco Bolgiani, the head of the Istituto Erik Peterson 
in Turin. Franco had been my friend from my first days at the Oxford Patristics 
Conference of 1963. We had shared our horror at the opaque mass of a Welsh 
rarebit served to us in the dining hall of Christ Church College.
of Science 16 (1978): 153–178. I ­later used A. J. Friedman and C. C. Douley, Einstein as Myth and 
Muse (Cambridge University Press, 1984).
6. E. Shils, “Charisma, Order, and Status,” American So­cio­log­i­cal Review 30 (1965): 199 ff., now 
in Center and Periphery: Essays in Macrosociology (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1975), 
256–275.
7. Chapter 58: “Presences.”

Ber k eley 1978 
543
He now wrote to ask me to explain some aspects of my intellectual itiner-
ary. I wrote back at length on February 27, 1979. Having told him about my 
relationship with other scholars, such as Marrou, Arnaldo Momigliano, Evans-­
Pritchard, and Mary Douglas, I ventured to describe—­somewhat clumsily, but 
as best I could—­the more recent changes in my own viewpoint.
For me at least, the 1960s and early 1970s ­were the age of analy­sis—of the 
almost occultist drive to seize, by modern methods, the inner springs and 
logic of socie­ties and periods that had, previously, seemed impenetrable to 
us, or [I deliberately added in pen] had been endowed with a false familiar-
ity. Now I think that, for a religious and social historian, the ­battle on behalf 
of the rationale of the irrational has been won (for the moment at least); 
and beliefs and actions which we had tried to render transparent with a new 
intelligibility can take back some of the mass and coloring of real flesh, 
[so that] we, who had spent so long peering at them through the X-­ray 
machines of modern interdisciplinary interpretations, have [now] to allow 
them also the opacity of real flesh.
What I wished to communicate to Franco was that I had changed from wish-
ing to know what holiness meant—to observe how it functioned—to seize a 
­little of what holiness was: how expectations of holiness ­were built up, internal-
ized, and set to work in a given society.
As a result of this shift of emphasis, two vivid ­human types—­the phi­los­o­
pher and the monk—­held my attention. Each seemed to be surrounded by a 
distinctive “aura” of holiness. The one—­the philosopher—­seemed to carry in 
his (and her) person the quintessence of the values of an ancient, classical 
society that strug­gled to survive in the changed social and po­liti­cal conditions 
of the ­later empire. The other—­the Christian monk (and the Christian 
virgin)—­summed up the opposite. They ­were the harbingers of a new order. 
Their renunciation of marriage and of wealth ­were more than individual acts 
of rebellion. Rather, ­these renunciations relativized and eventually under-
mined the ancient bond between the individual and the city, at a time when 
the city itself had begun to lose its classical profile.
From this time onward, my interests oscillated between the world of the 
phi­los­o­phers and the world of the monks and virgins. The next few years 
would decide as to which of ­those two worlds I would give most attention. 
As it turned out, Body and Society, on sexual renunciation (which appeared 
in 1988), came first, and Power and Persuasion, where the role of the phi­los­
o­pher and the crisis of the ancient city held center stage, appeared four years 

544 
Ch apter 78
­later. But both themes ­were on my mind throughout my early days in 
Amer­i­ca.
Meanwhile I had another debt to pay. This was my debt to a sense of the 
weight of Islam, which I had carried with me direct from Cairo to Berkeley. 
The need to come to grips with Islam was made even more pressing by the 
rapid pro­gress of the Ira­nian Revolution. This revolution suddenly revealed 
that, far away in Tehran, forms of religious authority that we had tended to 
discount entirely in the modern world could suddenly emerge, filling our tele­
vi­sion screens in real time with figures whose charisma seemed to belong to 
another age.

545
79
The Return of Religion
From Revolution to Adab
My Parents’ Visit
The year 1979 was a very happy one for me. My parents visited me at the begin-
ning of the spring term, from April 24 to May 15. They stayed at the ­Women’s 
Faculty Club, a sumptuous Julia Morgan building. My ­mother recorded in her 
diary the lavish American breakfasts where all the guests sat together around 
the ­table:
­every nationality—­man called Kevin O’Reilly . . . ​Told him about Peter!
Mad on salads—­Avocado Salads, [but] no egg cup . . .
All so friendly, Joe’s [Special] San Francisco Fry . . .
Coca Cola, 7 UP..
All ­these ­were exotic details, stored up to relate to her ­sister Freda (my aunt 
Teedah). She noted many other strange ­things, such as “jogging” and a yet 
more unfamiliar notice: “Smoking Prohibited by Law.”
In the ­middle of their stay, we drove out to Jackson, in the Gold Country. This 
was a half-­Italian and half-­Irish settlement, where, in the cemetery, four-­square 
classical mausoleums bearing only the ­family name—­such as Sanguinetti—­lay 
beside graves marked by florid shamrocks and Celtic crosses with elaborate Vic-
torian epitaphs. Outside the town hall, the Irish tricolor flew beside the bear flag 
of California. We stayed in the local ­hotel, where the bartender was well aware of 
the habits of the Old Country. No ice-­chilled beer for us: “­Pardon me, Sir, . . . ​
would you like your Guinness . . . ​brought up to room temperature?”

546 
Ch apter 79
My parents even sat in on one of the lectures in my “Byzantium, Persia and 
the Rise of Islam” course. My ­mother noted the occasion: “Lecture to about 
40 students [about] Zoroastrian Religion. Easy to understand—­about 1¼ 
hours—­Irish accent. Bellows of laughter.”
They passed through Sproul Plaza on many occasions during the high flood 
of the noonday break, where the air was slightly golden from tree pollen and 
the smoke of the falafel stands and charged with the background rhythms of 
the bongo drums. My parents—my ­father natty as always in his Donegal tweed 
jacket—­made their way through crowds of young persons in vari­ous degrees 
of drastic undress. A young ­woman had installed herself, lying upside down, 
in one of the ­great stone flowerpots that flanked Sather Gate. Nothing could 
be seen of her but two long legs, sheathed in bright green tights, swaying to 
some inner ­music. Passing this scene, my ­mother fixed me with the same 
twinkle in her eye with which she used to fix me, in church, when some par­tic­u­lar 
misdemeanor of King David or the patriarchs was read out in the Old Testa-
ment lesson. It was an eye that dared me not to giggle. They loved ­every minute 
of their visit and hoped to return the next year.
The Return of Religion
At the time of my parents’ visit, the sense of the weight of Islam, which I had 
carried with me from Cairo to Berkeley, was still with me. It was made that 
much heavier by events in Iran. Just as I arrived in Berkeley, the landslide of 
which I had had a vague premonition when traveling in Iran in 1976 gathered 
momentum. On January 16, 1979, Shah Reza fled the country. On February 1, the 
Ayatollah Khomeini (1902–1989) returned from exile. Far, far away, across 
the Sierras, the One Big One—­not the earthquake but the Ira­nian Revolution—­
was happening.
I was bruised by ­these events. During my visits to Iran I had noticed wide-
spread discontent with the regime. I had also been struck by the vitality of 
traditional Islam. But I had never put two and two together. I had never 
guessed how quickly a po­liti­cal Islam could seize on this discontent and turn 
it into a revolutionary force.
My colleagues ­were equally puzzled. Many scholars of the 1960s and 1970s 
had been fascinated by the phenomenon of revolution. ­There ­were any num-
ber of theoretical models of dif­fer­ent sorts of revolutions. But none of them 
­were motivated by religion. Revolutions—in the modern world, at least—­
were assumed to be secular phenomena, driven by secular ideologies. The 
return of religion as a revolutionary force was like the return of a ghost.

The R etur n of R eligion 
547
The Islamic Revolution effectively debarred me from travel to Iran 
in the foreseeable ­future. My scheme for a book on the confrontation of 
Byzantium and Iran in the manner of Braudel had to be dropped. Yet, like 
my ­earlier proj­ect for a study of the Byzantine Balkans, the venture had 
greatly enriched my historical imagination and continued to influence my 
teaching.
At the same time, the memory of my contact with Islamic countries, in Iran 
and Egypt, lingered with me as a constant challenge. I felt that I still needed 
to understand socie­ties whose social conditions and codes of be­hav­ior (nota-
bly but by no means exclusively on the issue of sex and the position of ­women) 
seemed so very dif­fer­ent from ­those of modern Amer­i­ca and Eu­rope. I would 
now have to explore ­these issues not by travel but through books, by stints of 
careful reading of classical and early Christian texts in the Classics Seminar 
Room of Dow Library and in the library of the Gradu­ate Theological Union. 
I had to return to the ancient world, to late antiquity, and to the early church; 
but I would do so with a sense of the seriousness of ­these issues that drew on 
my own experience of the Islamic world.
Qurʾânic Readings: Hamid Algar
For this reason, I persevered with learning Arabic. I signed up to attend a 
gradu­ate seminar on Qurʾânic Arabic, which ran in the fall and winter terms 
of 1978/79. The course consisted of working our way through assigned parts 
of the Tafsîr al-­Jalâlayn—­The Commentary of the Two Jalâls. The Tafsîr was 
a massive commentary on the Qurʾân by two scholars of the fifteenth 
­century—­Jalâl al-­Din al-­Mahalli, and his pupil, Jalâl al-­Din al-­Suyuti. It re-
mained a standard work in the Islamic world up to modern times. Indeed, it 
was so well known that I had already bought a copy in Cairo.
­Little did I know when I signed up that, by so ­doing, I would find myself in 
a ringside seat for the unfolding of the revolution in Iran. The seminar was 
given by Hamid Algar, a convert to Islam and a staunch supporter of the ayatol-
lah. He was one of the few Western scholars to draw attention to the ayatollah 
and to challenge the bland consensus that had encouraged experts on Iran to 
write off the religious opposition to the shah as a ­thing of the past. Now it 
looked as if his dark ­horse was about to win.1
1. Hamid Algar, “The Oppositional Role of the Ulama in Twentieth-­Century Iran,” in Schol-
ars, Saints, and Sufis: Muslim Religious Institutions the ­Middle East since 1500, ed. Nikki R. Keddie 
(Berkeley: University of California Press, 1972), 231–255.

548 
Ch apter 79
The Arabic class that met in Algar’s office took place very much in the 
shadow of the ayatollah. A large photo­graph of Khomenei (the first I had ever 
seen) dominated the room. I even had a dream about the ayatollah, in Decem-
ber 1978, just before his return from Paris to Tehran. He was sitting, Iranian-­
style, on the floor in a corner of his apartment in Neauphle-­le-­Château, 
outside Paris. Speaking in French, he assured me that, by the end of the quar-
ter, I would have read the entire Surat al-­Baqara—­among the longest chapters 
of the Qurʾân. He was right. I did complete the sura. On opening my copy of 
the Tafsîr just now, I see that I had carefully marked in red ink the numbers 
of the verses of the sura, so as to distinguish them from the learned commen-
tary in which they ­were embedded.
Paideia and Adab: The Well-­Constructed Life
Though I abandoned my projected study of Sasanian Iran, I was greatly at-
tracted by the prospect of studying the Islamic world in harness with the world 
of late antiquity. I realized that I could do this on a topic directly related to my 
current work on the role of the late antique phi­los­o­pher in the elite culture of 
his times. The nature and function of the rigorous education in the classics, 
known as paideia, had been central to my view of the role of the phi­los­o­pher in 
society. The medieval and modern Islamic world seemed to offer a comparable 
phenomenon, known as adab. Like paideia, adab was about the intimate relation-
ship between a tradition of teaching and a pro­cess of moral grooming. ­Here ­there 
was a real chance of making meaningful comparisons between two traditional 
educational systems and the types of ­human excellence that they fostered.
Adab carried a weight in the Islamic world similar to that of paideia in the 
Greco-­Roman world. It represented a peak of ­human achievement, and in-
sisted that this peak could be reached by the privileged few—­through educa-
tion and through following exacting codes of deportment modeled on the 
be­hav­ior of exemplary persons. In the words of my Berkeley colleague Barbara 
Metcalf, adab was based on “the concept of the well-­constructed life.”2
The notion of the “well-­constructed life” had come to hold a par­tic­u­lar 
fascination for me when I dealt with the moralists of the Roman Empire and 
their elite readers. ­These moralists challenged members of the elites to put their 
lives in order by self-­discipline and by recourse to trusted mentors. I wondered 
2. Barbara Metcalf, preface to Moral Conduct and Authority: The Place of Adab in South Asian 
Islam, ed. Barbara Daly Metcalf (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1984), vii.

The R etur n of R eligion 
549
how a similar system of moral grooming worked in another major civilization, 
that of Islam.
Hence my enthusiasm when Barbara Metcalf asked me to contribute to a 
conference that she had or­ga­nized: “Moral Conduct and Authority. The Place of 
Adab in South Asian Islam.” The conference took place in June 1979. I contributed 
a paper entitled “Late Antiquity and Islam: Parallels and Contrasts.” I compared 
the “civilization of paideia” with its Islamic analogue, in order to show how our 
understanding of the one might enrich our understanding of the other.3
The Civilization of Paideia
Islam, like late antiquity, had long been buried by Western historians ­under a 
pile of prejudices. The civilization of paideia in Hellenistic and Roman times 
had frequently been dismissed as de­cadent ­because of the extreme conserva-
tism of the classical education on which it was based. Medieval and even mod-
ern Islam ­were dismissed in the same way. Islamic learning was presented as 
irremediably “traditionalist” and backward-­looking. Compared with post-­
Renaissance Eu­rope, Islam was deemed to have missed the bus of pro­gress. It 
seemed to be frozen by its reverence for the past, as if history had ­stopped with 
the Golden Age of the Caliphate of Baghdad, in the ninth ­century, and as if all 
the rest was a decline.
But was this the case? Such a negative pre­sen­ta­tion of the culture of Islam 
challenged me, once again, to unpick the narrative of Western pro­gress that 
cast a shadow over entire periods (such as late antiquity) and over major non-­
European civilizations (such as medieval and modern Islam).
So what had this “traditionalism” ­really meant: was it necessarily a sign of 
decay? I knew the answer for the Greco-­Roman world. It had been given by 
Henri-­Irénée Marrou in his magisterial History of Education in Antiquity. This 
book contained a magnificent evocation of the aims and significance of tradi-
tional education in the Greco-­Roman world, as it had persisted along the 
shores of the Mediterranean for over eight hundred years:
It is a ­mistake to say, as is often said by its detractors, that it was “born with 
its head back to front,” looking back to the past. It is not autumnal, tor-
mented with nostalgic regrets for a vanished spring. On the contrary, it 
looks upon itself as firmly established in an unchanging pre­sent, in the full 
3. Peter Brown, “Late Antiquity and Islam: Parallels and Contrasts,” in Moral Conduct and 
Authority, 23–37.

550 
Ch apter 79
blaze of a hot summer sun. It knows what mighty reserves it possesses, what 
past masters it has had. The fact that ­these appeared at certain moments of 
time, ­under the influence of certain historical forces, is unimportant; what 
­matters is that they exist and can be rediscovered in the same way, again and 
again, by each successive generation.4
Scholars interested in Islamic adab found that the same, unexpected resources 
existed in the seemingly unchanging traditionalism of the Muslim schools. At 
the conference, Francis Robinson described the present-­day attitudes of the 
learned families connected with the Farangî Mahall of Lucknow in very similar 
terms to ­those used by Marrou for the products of paideia in the long centuries 
of the Hellenistic and Roman worlds. Guided by “a vision of a perfect and 
well-­formed life, they live with their ancestors.” Francis went on to show how, 
far from cramping their activities, this adherence to codes of adab rooted in 
the past gave them a rare in­de­pen­dence of mind and action with which to face 
the po­liti­cal storms that accompanied the emergence of modern India and 
Pakistan.5
Paideia, Adab, and the Fear of God
But Islamic adab and late antique paideia differed from each other in one cru-
cial re­spect. Paideia had been created by ­humans for ­humans. It was the cre-
ation of the Greek city and of the intense peer culture of the civic elites. Its 
sanctions ­were purely ­human—­shame and loss of authority among one’s fel-
lows. Unlike Chris­tian­ity and Islam, it had no room for super­natural rewards 
and punishments.
On this issue, an entire world separated Greek paideia from the fear of Hell 
that was supposed to motivate both the good Muslim and the good Christian. 
In the blunt words of John Chrysostom, deportment alone was not enough. 
­There was only so much that the grooming of paideia could do: “How ­shall we 
tie down this wild beast [adolescent sexual urges]? How ­shall we place a bridle 
upon it? I know none, save only the restraint of hell-­fire.”6
4. H. I. Marrou, A History of Education in Antiquity, trans. G. Lamb (New York: Sheed and 
Ward, 1956), 161, cited in Brown, “Late Antiquity and Islam,” in Moral Conduct and Authority, 24.
5. F. Robinson, “The ʿUlamâʾ of Farangî Mahall and Their Adab,” in Moral Conduct and 
Authority, 152–183, at 161.
6. John Chrysostom, On Vainglory, trans. M.L.W. Laistner, in Chris­tian­ity and Classical 
Culture (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1961), 117.

The R etur n of R eligion 
551
That fear was supposed to rest on ­every Muslim. The Muslim phi­los­o­pher 
al-­Ghazali (1059–1111) described how the eighth-­century Muslim mystic al-­
Hasan al-­Basrî let his glass fall at the thought of how the damned in Hell cried 
to the souls in Paradise for one drop of ­water. When it came to the nature of 
­human motivation, John, an Antiochene Christian of the fourth ­century, stood 
closer to a Muslim of the early ­Middle Ages, such as al-­Hasan al-­Basrî, than he 
did to his own teacher, the pagan exponent of paideia—­Libanius of Antioch 
(314–393).
With the fear of Hell, something very new had entered the world of paideia, 
and its ­future lay not only in Chris­tian­ity but in the long centuries of Islam. 
How had this drastic change in the imagination of the classical world come 
about? Furthermore: How did the moral codes that emerged from this revolu-
tion come to differ from each other in significant ways?
By way of conclusion, I suggested that ­these differences should be studied 
more intently. Why, for instance, was it the case that, in late antiquity and the 
­Middle Ages, Christian codes of excellence came to place so ­great an emphasis 
on issues of sexual continence? Muslim adab, by contrast, seemed to privilege 
less icy virtues: it was a distinctly this-­worldly, even world-­affirming, code. 
Muslims seemed to regard marital sex (and even sex with slave concubines) as 
unproblematic. They reached out to catch almost any ­human activity, sacred 
or profane—­from intercourse to war—­under a fine net of Islamic propriety: 
each and all of ­these activities ­were performed beneath the eye of God, who 
bestowed a mea­sured blessing on them all. I suggested that the time had 
come for an attempt to understand the parting of the ways in the sexual codes 
of Christians, Jews, and Muslims—­a prob­lem calculated to engage scholars of 
late antiquity, Islam, and the Western ­Middle Ages in a common venture.
Life Is Ceremony
In Barbara Metcalf’s conference, many of ­these questions ­were hammered out 
by Islamicists and experts on southern Asia. The conference was something 
of a high-­water mark. As in many successful conferences on Islam at this time, 
it was marked by “a sense of something like won­der” at the discovery of so 
much richness and resilience in a ­great civilization that we had neglected for 
so long.7 The participants rallied to appreciate a world so very dif­fer­ent from 
our own. They approved of adab, much as I approved of paideia. In the words 
7. Metcalf, preface to Moral Conduct and Authority, viii.

552 
Ch apter 79
of Ira Lapidus, in an enthusiastic overview of the notion of the ­human person 
implied in the cultivation of adab, we ­were attracted to the idea that “life itself 
is a work of art. . . . ​[that] Life is ceremony.”8
Outer Act and Inward Self
Looking back, I am struck by the extent to which the conference highlighted 
the positive role of ceremonious codes of be­hav­ior practiced by the elites of 
ancient empires, and stressed the manner in which many of ­these codes had 
survived into modern times in the Islamic world.
Many contributions to the conference set out to recover the warmth and 
the weight of the interpersonal bonds of friendship and discipleship on which 
Islamic education depended. Above all, in appreciating adab, they validated a 
psy­chol­ogy which assumed that the ­human person was open to a grooming of 
the self through external rituals that reached deep into the person. As Barbara 
Metcalf pointed out: the proponents of adab assumed “a subtle relationship 
between the outer act and the inward self,” which led them to stress the role 
of “habit or malaka through which outer action transforms and colors the 
soul.”9 Such a view placed a “high valuation on the employment of ­will.”10 
For someone like myself, who had spent many years grappling with the dark 
sayings of Saint Augustine on the weakness of the ­will and the unpredictability 
of the movements of the inner life, the Islam of adab seemed, quite frankly, 
refreshingly, deliciously Pelagian.
It was ­here that the study of the forms of leadership exercised by teachers 
and mystics in the Islamic world converged directly on my study of the “saints 
of paideia” in late antiquity. I was led to qualify the volcanic notion of charisma 
associated with the thought of Max Weber. I found that I was dealing with the 
­bearers of a quiet charisma—­with poised persons, whose very absence of dra-
matic stances enabled them to guide an entire society. They did not do this 
by being spectacular “outsiders”—as my Syrian holy men had been—­but by 
the unruffled confidence with which they summed up, in their own persons, 
the central values of the society that they helped to direct. Phi­los­o­phers in late 
8. Ira Lapidus, “Knowledge, Virtue and Action: The Classical Muslim Concept of Adab and 
the Nature of Religious Fulfillment in Islam,” in Moral Conduct and Authority, 38–61, at 57.
9. Metcalf, introduction to Moral Conduct and Authority, 10.
10. Metcalf, introduction to Moral Conduct and Authority, 3.

The R etur n of R eligion 
553
antiquity, pious men of learning in Islam: both represented ­human types wor-
thy of admiration and of careful study.
As for me, personally, it was a relaxed moment. I linked up with En­glish 
friends who had been invited to the conference. Francis Robinson came, fresh 
from the excitement of beginning his work on the private archives of the Farangî 
Mahall. Along with Simon Digby (1932–2010), with his long wisps of pure-­white 
beard that floated in the air like ­those of a peculiarly raffish Sufi, we sat sipping 
gin on a hummock of chamomile flowers studded with bright yellow buttons, 
as in a Mughal miniature, at the top of Tilden Park. As Simon and I talked about 
what it was like to have grown up for part of the time “abroad”—he in India, I in 
Sudan—we looked out, eastward, away from the bay and ­toward the inner valley, 
to Mount Diablo and a light-­gold landscape as exquisitely ­shaped as the Tuscan 
background to a painting by Piero della Francesca.

554
80
Povert y and Power
Évelyne Patl agean and  
Paul Veyne
­Under New Skies
It is an amiable myth that a move to a new academic environment in a new 
country must inevitably be accompanied by a ­great leap forward into some 
entirely new academic enterprise. This is not always the case. Old themes often 
take on a new interest when looked at ­under new skies. Comfortably sur-
rounded by so many familiar books and journals in the Classics Seminar 
Room in Dow Library, I found myself ­going back to old topics with delight, as 
I discovered dif­fer­ent aspects of them as a result of exposure to the new intel-
lectual environment of Berkeley campus. In my reading and in my preparation 
for teaching, l lingered on themes that I had known almost since my under-
graduate days in Oxford—on the end of paganism, on the city of Rome, on 
the nature of the late Roman state.
­There was one topic to which I now returned with par­tic­u­lar urgency owing 
to my recent experiences in Iran and in Egypt: that was the issue of poverty 
and its relation to the exercise of power in the ­later Roman Empire. I had 
brought from Cairo a sense of the weight of Islam and also a sense of the 
weight of poverty. The poverty of Cairo had left me bruised.
I could not rid myself of the thought of the Lazarus (the poor beggar at the 
rich man’s gate) who seemed to lie at the door of the privileged West. For this 
reason I turned increasingly to the topic of poverty and the care of the poor in 
the ­later empire. My first years at Berkeley coincided with a period of intensive 
reading, on my part, of two ­great French scholars whose work on the charged 
themes of poverty and power has influenced me from that time up to the 

Povert y a nd Pow er 
555
pre­sent: Évelyne Patlagean (1932–2008) and Paul Veyne (1930–2022). Many 
years before, when I wrote my biography of Augustine, I had turned to France; 
and now I turned to France again. ­There I found a tradition of social and cultural 
history of the ancient and late antique world that I found nowhere ­else.
Évelyne Patlagean: The Face of Poverty
I had known Évelyne since 1970. We had been brought together by Arnaldo 
Momigliano, who admired her greatly for her deep knowledge of Italy, where, 
he told me, she had once traveled through the Mezzogiorno along with a 
group of puppeteers. He also appreciated her work on early Byzantine Juda-
ism. She belonged to a Rus­sian Jewish ­family from the Black Sea area that 
had settled in Istanbul and had eventually made their way to France. Her 
surname—­Patlagean—­was striking. Patlıcan meant aubergine/eggplant in 
Turkish. Arnaldo and her other Italian friends would always speak of her as 
Signora Melanzana.
At the time, I found that Évelyne’s academic stance was peculiarly reassur-
ing. She was, in many ways, a rogue Byzantinist. Though her dissertation was 
on the life of the poor in the Eastern Empire, she pursued it by taking the 
seminars of Western medievalists—­Jacques Le Goff, and the famous seminar 
on medieval poverty directed by Michel Mollat (1911–1996). At a time when 
Byzantine scholarship had tended to turn in on itself, her intellectual trajec-
tory showed that Byzantium and the West could be joined creatively in the 
work of a single scholar.
On the prompting of Arnaldo, she first wrote to me on October 4, 1970, 
enclosing two very dif­fer­ent articles: “Ancienne hagiographie byzantine et 
histoire sociale” and “Sur la limitation de la fécondité dans la haute époque 
byzantine.” ­These two articles had established her reputation as a gifted in-
terpreter of the social imagination of the Eastern Empire. She also drew at-
tention to the grim realities of increasing poverty caused by the sheer mass 
of population pressing against the rigid structures of the ancient economy. 
In Évelyne’s opinion, it was this grinding demographic pressure that brought 
about deep changes in the social structure and in the self-­image of late Roman 
society.1
1. Évelyne Patlagean, “Ancienne hagiographie byzantine et histoire sociale,” Annales (1968): 
106–126, translated as “Ancient Byzantine Hagiography and Social History,” in Saints and Their 
Cults: Studies in Religious Sociology, Folklore and History, ed. Stephen Williams (Cambridge 

556 
Ch apter 80
Évelyne came to London in 1971, and John Matthews and I invited her to 
talk at a seminar in Oxford. She spoke in a flawless En­glish of the 1940s. She 
had derived this, she told us, from an En­glish nanny of the old school, who had 
looked ­after her while she and her parents ­were in hiding from the Nazis in 
Antibes during the war. Her sheer presence as a scholar and a person im-
pressed us all. She was the first person to whom I gave a publisher’s advance 
copy of The World of Late Antiquity. Deeply generous and formidably well 
or­ga­nized, she would lavish suggestions and biblio­graphies on me—­both for 
myself and for my students—­often suggesting lines of research that have only 
just now begun to be explored.
The Body Image of an Empire
­These articles led up to a masterpiece that appeared in 1977: Pauvreté 
économique et pauvreté sociale à Byzance: 4e–7e siècles. This book offered nothing 
less than a new vision of the society of the East Roman Empire in late 
antiquity.2
In the past de­cade or so, much pro­gress had been made in the study of late 
Roman society. The masterwork of A.H.M. Jones, The ­Later Roman Empire: A 
Social, Economic and Administrative Survey, had rested on the shelves of scholars 
for over ten years. In this monument of inspired common sense, the ­great dino-
saur of the ­later empire had been pieced together, bone by bone, in a comprehen-
sive survey. But the skeleton of the dinosaur of late Roman society had lacked one 
dimension. How did the dinosaur view itself: what was its body image; how did 
it categorize the constituent groups of which it was composed?
It was Évelyne who first drew attention to the way in which the body image 
of Roman society underwent a drastic change in the course of the fourth and 
University Press, 1983), 101—121; and “Sur la limitation de la fécondité dans la haute époque 
byzantine,” Annales (1969): 1353–1396.
On the work of Évelyne Patlagean, see now É. Patlagean, “Sorting Out Late Antique Poverty 
in Paris in the 60s,” in The Past before Us: The Challenge of Historiographies in Late Antiquity, ed. 
C. Straw and R. Lim, Bibliothèque de l’Antiquité Tardive: Monographies 6 (Turnhout: Brepols, 
2004), 79–87; and B. Flusin, “Récit de sainteté, famille et société: Évelyne Patlagean et 
l’hagiographie,” in Les réseaux familiaux. Antiquité tardive et moyen âge. In memoriam A. Laiou et 
É. Patlagean, ed. B. Caseau, Centre de recherche d’histoire et civilisation de Byzance: Monog-
raphies 37 (Paris: Centre d’histoire et civilization de Byzance, 2012), 113–124.
2. É. Patlagean, Pauvreté économique et pauvreté sociale à Byzance: 4e–7e siècles, École des 
Hautes Études en sciences sociales: Civilisations et Sociétés 48 (Paris/Le Haye: Mouton, 1977).

Povert y a nd Pow er 
557
fifth centuries. Put very briefly: in classical times, the more privileged inhabit-
ants of the empire (­those who provided most of the evidence for the modern 
social historian) thought of themselves as living in a commonwealth of cities. 
For them, the truly impor­tant divisions in their society ­were civic ones. ­Free 
citizens ­were sharply distinguished from foreigners and slaves. The inhabitants 
of the countryside (the vast majority of the population) ­were kept at a distance 
from the citizen body that was considered to be the core of the city. In classical 
times, ­these civic distinctions had been defended on behalf of a strictly delim-
ited number of the overall population—­the citizens in the cities—­with the 
same tenacity as citizen entitlements to medical care and other benefits are 
defended ­today on the strength of the possession of a passport or a green card.
Then, according to Évelyne, this system broke down in the course of the 
fourth and fifth centuries, leaving the inhabitants of the Mediterranean to look 
at the world around them with disabused eyes. They ceased to think of them-
selves as living in a world made up of groups of persons divided one from the 
other by civic categories—­citizen/noncitizen, free/slave. They put on, as it 
­were, new spectacles—­spectacles that enabled them to see Roman society as 
a ­whole in its gray immensity, as brutally divided in frankly economic terms—
in town and countryside alike—­between the rich and the poor. In a funda-
mental, ­silent revolution, late Roman society’s image of itself changed: the 
classical Greco-­Roman world of cities and of citizen entitlement awoke to 
the massive presence of the poor.
To See the Poor
How this fundamental change in the social imagination of the ancient world 
took place, and what ­were its consequences, constituted the subject of Éve-
lyne’s remarkable book. In her opinion, it had happened ­under the pressure of 
an explosion of population in the countryside and a consequent, massive im-
migration into the cities: “Every­thing happened as if the ancient frameworks 
of social organ­ization had slowly burst open . . . ​and poverty appeared in its 
nakedness . . . ​stripped of the civic veil with which Rome had been able to 
cover it.”3 This ­great change in perception (coinciding as it did with headlong 
po­liti­cal and social developments) brought the ancient world to an end in the 
eastern Mediterranean, and ushered in the Christian society of the Byzantine 
­Middle Ages.
3. Patlagean, Pauvreté, 429.

558 
Ch apter 80
Patlagean’s Pauvreté was a triumph of the historian’s art. It dealt with East 
Roman society as a ­whole, on ­every level, in the manner of the histoire totale 
advocated by Fernand Braudel. I have always regretted that it was never trans-
lated into En­glish as Siân Reynolds had translated Braudel’s Méditerranée. In 
the manner of Braudel, this work offered a comprehensive vision of the life of 
the East Roman poor, drawing on evidence of ­every kind, interpreted with the 
greatest skill. Had it been translated, it would have entered the bloodstream of 
English-­language scholarship on the society of the ­later empire.
“The Strange and Brief Moment”
What struck me most, as I made my way through this ­great book, was Évelyne’s 
compassion. ­Behind her austere insistence on the economic and demographic 
aspects of late Roman poverty, it always seemed to me that she was unusually 
open to the pathos of the poor and to the “faceless ones” who haunted the 
pages of the early Byzantine lives of the saints and filled the courtyards of 
the ­great urban basilicas with moaning crowds. She knew what it was for 
Byzantines to weep.4 She understood the paradox by which Byzantine civi-
lization, though distrustful of the body, nonetheless showed an “obsessive 
compassion for the suffering bodies of ­others.”5
Above all, Évelyne could catch the thrill of a world where the old structures 
had begun to “burst” and new ­human possibilities ­were glimpsed, if only for 
a moment, at the turning of an age. It is not surprising that she should also have 
studied, at this time, radical themes in early Byzantine hagiography. Her article 
“The ­Woman Disguised as a Monk” was one of the earliest and the most 
perceptive studies of what was then a daring topic.6 She conjured up with 
electrifying vividness a world turned upside down by subversive forms of 
renunciation—by ­women who shaved off their hair, ­adopted male dress, 
joined male monasteries, or wandered through the countryside in the com­
pany of holy men. Far from being aberrant, ­these gestures “bear witness to the 
strange and brief moment of liberty that the fourth ­century experienced, in 
the interval between two civilizations.”7
4. É. Patlagean, “Pleurer à Byzance,” in Cahiers de Varsovie (Warsaw: Warsaw University 
Press, 1988), 251–261.
5. Patlagean, Pauvreté, 429.
6. É. Patlagean, “L’histoire de la femme déguisée en moine et l’évolution de la sainteté fémi-
nine à Byzance,” Studi medievali, ser. 3, 17 (1976): 597–623.
7. Patlagean, Pauvreté, 130.

Povert y a nd Pow er 
559
It was this acute sense of the changing of an age, due to the weakening of 
the ancient city’s imaginative grip, that drew me to Évelyne’s work at this time. 
It gave me the concrete background against which to place the holy persons 
of late antiquity. It cast into high relief the role of the pagan phi­los­o­pher as a 
“saint of paideia.” Phi­los­o­phers stood for an ancient civic order, for the world 
of well-­groomed urban notables, which was buckling ­under the pressure of the 
immigrant poor.
By contrast, in a society now perceived as divided, in town and country 
alike, by the primal economic binary of rich and poor, radical Christians 
gained the upper hand, as Christian holy men, Christian monks, and Christian 
bishops ­rose to prominence through charitable activities and through a sym-
bolic identification with the downtrodden and the oppressed. Outreach to the 
poor was their way to the top of a civic world that had previously turned to 
phi­los­o­phers for guidance. It was in this way that the Eastern Empire became 
Christian.
I look back to my first reading of Évelyne’s Pauvreté as a decisive branching 
of the ways in my own work, away from the exclusive study of holy men and 
other kinds of late antique holy figures, ­toward continued involvement with 
the wider issues of wealth and poverty. But to understand what I first made of 
my reading of Pauvreté, I would have to add the work of another ­great French 
scholar, a master of intellectual surprises: Paul Veyne, whose Le pain et le 
cirque—­Bread and Circuses—­I read alongside Évelyne’s masterpiece.
Paul Veyne: The Unfamiliarity of the Past
In contrast to my de­cadelong friendship with Évelyne Patlagean, I had known 
nothing of the work of Paul Veyne ­until my arrival at Berkeley. I first encountered 
him through his massive book Le pain et le cirque, which had appeared in 1976. 
I devoured Le pain et le cirque for days on end in the Classics Seminar Room in 
Dow Library, piling onto my ­table the texts and studies to which Veyne referred 
in a never-­failing torrent of erudition enriched by daring comparative studies.8
Veyne’s work overlapped with that of Évelyne Patlagean on many topics—
on Roman perceptions of poverty, for instance, and on the difference between 
8. P. Veyne, Le pain et le cirque. Sociologie historique d’un pluralisme politique (Paris: Le Seuil, 
1976). Abridged En­glish translation by Brian Pearce with introduction by Oswyn Murray, Bread 
and Circuses: Historical Sociology and Po­liti­cal Pluralism (London: Allen Lane, Penguin, 1990). 
I ­will use the En­glish translations from this volume.

560 
Ch apter 80
classical forms of civic benefaction (summed up in the title, Bread and Cir-
cuses) and the Jewish and Christian notion of charity. But this was not the only 
reason that I read Le pain et le cirque. It was also ­because I had found in Veyne 
a fellow militant for the unfamiliarity of the past.
Veyne went out of his way to drive home, at ­every point, the strangeness of 
the classical world. He insisted that Romans ­were not versions of ourselves, 
dressed up in togas: they ­were irreducibly exotic. Institutions and emotions 
that seem continuous with our own sensibilities, such as marriage and love, 
­were profoundly dif­fer­ent from what they are nowadays. “Roman” marriage and 
“Roman” love (even Roman love poetry) ­were as distant from us as ­were mar-
riage and love in the aristocratic Japan of Lady Murasaki.
In Comment on écrit l’histoire (a short book that preceded Le pain et le cirque) 
Veyne had nailed his colors to the mast.9 He insisted that the duty of the 
historian was to seize the irreducible singularity of the past. Why, for instance, 
did the Romans not speak, as we do, of a “blue” sky, but of a caelum serenum—­a 
“serene” sky, with all the overtones of an atmosphere troubled or made peace-
ful by the presence of the gods?10 A worldview entirely dif­fer­ent from our 
own was implied in that single adjective, serenum. As for the Romans them-
selves: “If the Romans are somewhat boring to the public, it is ­because we 
make them into a ­people identified with the highest values [un peuple-­valeur] 
instead of seeing how exotic they ­were.”11
Paideia and Power
It was in this fighting mood that Veyne turned, in his Le pain et le cirque, to one 
of the most distinctive aspects of the classical city—­the tradition of lavish 
giving by the rich to their own cities, which he called “civic euergetism.” Civic 
euergetism had accompanied the growth of Greek-­style cities in ­every part of 
the Mediterranean and the ­Middle East. Veyne brought to the study of this 
well-­known institution his fierce talent for seizing the oddity of the ancient 
world—­a talent displayed over 730 pages, with 60 pages of endnotes!
But it was not the ­grand phenomenon of Greek and Roman euergetism that 
impressed me most when I was reading Veyne. It was his remarks on the 
9. P. Veyne, Comment on écrit l’histoire (Paris: Gallimard, 1971); translated as Writing History: 
An Essay in Epistemology (Middletown, CT: Wesleyan University Press, 1984), from which 
I ­will cite.
10. Veyne, Writing History, 15.
11. Veyne, Writing History, 44.

Povert y a nd Pow er 
561
exercise of power in Roman society. Discussing the leaders of the Greco-­
Roman cities and the role of the emperor in his own city (the city of Rome), 
Veyne led the reader through a prolonged debate on the nature of the authority 
that the ­great—be they civic notables or crowned rulers—­exercised over their 
subjects or dependents. I followed this debate intently. For what Veyne was 
proposing was a richer view of the exercise of power in the ancient world than 
that provided by the largely institutional accounts which had been current 
among ancient historians.
In that sense, Veyne’s Le pain et le cirque was very much a book of the 1970s. 
His discussion of the exercise of power in the Roman world echoed the studies 
of ritual and society (largely in early modern Eu­rope) which had shown that 
the levers of power in a society ­were not necessarily to be found only in its 
institutional structures, but in the “soft power” of its rituals as well. Veyne 
showed that this was also the case with Roman emperors. His insights (lav-
ishly scattered throughout the pages and exuberant footnotes of Le pain et le 
cirque) provided me with a new grammar of politics in the ancient world.
Above all, Veyne’s emphasis on the highly personalized nature of the exer-
cise of power helped me to understand the role of paideia in the politics of the 
­later empire. It explained the way in which the elites of the empire hoped to 
tame their emperors. Far from being mere ropes of silk, the restraints placed 
on upper-­class be­hav­ior by education, and by the codes of decorum generated 
by the “civilization of paideia,” ­were expected to hold even emperors.
Paideia acted as an “unwritten constitution.” In the chilling absence of ­legal 
restraints on the exercise of power in the Roman world, moral pressure and a 
sense of decorum ­were all that remained. Hence the constant vetting of the 
personal character of each emperor in histories of the period. ­These accounts 
­were not passing on idle tittle-­tattle. They reflected the fear of the elites as they 
scanned their rulers with anxious eyes, looking for telltale signs of gracious-
ness or savagery.
In this way, my reading of Veyne helped me to understand the enduring role 
allotted to the phi­los­o­pher in the public imagination of the ­later empire. For 
in this highly personalized system, the phi­los­o­pher could intervene as a 
mentor and a giver of good advice. As Veyne pointed out: “The notion of 
‘counsel’, sometimes forgotten by the moderns, enjoyed for a thousand years 
an importance equal to that of representative democracy nowadays.”12 And it 
was the phi­los­o­pher, with his reputation for moral courage and commitment 
12. Veyne, Bread and Circuses, 404.

562 
Ch apter 80
to speaking the truth, who could be treated as the ­bearer of the most precious 
po­liti­cal elixir of all—­“good counsel” in high places.
To read Paul Veyne was to drink strong wine at midday. If ever ­there was a 
book that offered me an abundance of new insights into some of the old 
themes of Roman history, it was his Bread and Circuses. Our scholarly inter-
change would prove impor­tant for me in the next few years. Along with Éve-
lyne Patlagean’s Pauvreté, Veyne’s Bread and Circuses gave me the impetus to 
continue work on phi­los­o­phers and monks, and then on bishops and the poor, 
that would last me ­until the writing of Power and Persuasion (in 1992) and 
Poverty and Leadership in the ­Later Roman Empire (in 2002).13
So much for the readings that influenced me decisively in my first years 
at Berkeley. But what about the largely novel American teaching system that 
I encountered on campus?
13. Peter Brown, Power and Persuasion in Late Antiquity: ­Towards a Christian Empire (Madi-
son: University of Wisconsin Press, 1992) and Poverty and Leadership in the ­Later Roman Empire 
(Hanover, NH: University Press of New ­England, 2002). For a brilliant summary of the issues, 
see now Brent Shaw, “Charity and the Poor in Roman Imperial Society,” Religion in the Roman 
Empire 6 (2020): 229–267.

563
81
Teaching
The Elective Course System
My return to older themes was greatly helped by my teaching. At that time, 
teaching in the American system was, for me, a venture into almost totally 
unknown territory. In Oxford (and also, if to a lesser degree, in Royal Holloway 
College) I was used to teaching undergraduates only, who ­were preparing to 
take a final examination in one subject (or at most a double subject) only. 
I would do this mainly in face-­to-­face tutorials. It was a narrow one-­way street, 
taken by one kind of student only. Gradu­ates ­were outside that system. 
Although a few seminars ­were provided for them (which became increasingly 
impor­tant in the 1970s), I met them mainly as if I ­were their private tutor.
By contrast, Berkeley offered me a spread of students and of teaching situ-
ations as generous, but often as baffling in its variety, as the many-­laned free-
ways of the West Coast to which I had only begun to become accustomed. By 
En­glish standards, the undergraduates seemed to enjoy a limitless freedom. 
They could switch lanes ­every term, trying out courses on any number of sub-
jects in the humanities and the sciences, ­until they fi­nally de­cided on their 
“major”; and even this decision did not limit them to one subject alone.
This was the elective course system, which came as a total novelty to me. 
Unlike the timorous concentration on a single subject, to which I had been 
accustomed in Oxford and London, the elective course system was a tribute 
to the robust Scottish Enlightenment belief in a “democracy of the intellect” 
where anybody could, in theory, study anything, combining science and the 
humanities in such a way as to produce the well-­rounded, modern person. 
Enterprising undergraduates zoomed in and out of lanes, mixing courses from 
all over campus—­history and languages, physics and classics, and so on.

564 
Ch apter 81
­These bold knights of the road ­were taught in lecture courses, in classes, 
and (at the se­nior level) in seminars at which attendance was mandatory, and 
in which their per­for­mance was graded ­every term. Despite the close links that 
some undergraduates could establish with their professors and teaching as-
sistants, a tutorial system was out of the question.
Unlike the undergraduates, the gradu­ate students had a highly privileged 
lane of their own. I would meet them ­every week, face-­to-­face, in the sort of 
intensive, highly professional seminars that had impressed me greatly when I 
first came to Berkeley in 1975. Hence the juxtaposition of two dif­fer­ent kinds 
of teaching, each of which I was ­free to develop to its fullness: large lectures 
and classes on big subjects; small, intense gatherings (mainly of gradu­ate stu-
dents) around single prob­lems and single bodies of texts.
For all its complexity, this system set me ­free. No longer constrained by the 
need to prepare students for the ­grand finale of a single, final examination, 
whose contents ­were set down by a rigid syllabus, I was the complete master 
of my own courses. I could teach what I liked in the way that I liked. I set the 
tests and the final examinations, and graded the end-­of-­term papers, assigning 
a grade for the course as a ­whole (though often with the help of a TA—­a teach-
ing assistant, who was usually a gradu­ate student). In three quarters, it was 
pos­si­ble to teach up to six entire courses, each on a dif­fer­ent subject. Com-
pared with ­these bold ventures in teaching wide themes, my principal gradu­ate 
course was long and slow: a truly serious ­matter, it took two quarters—­a full 
twenty weeks, which enabled a high degree of specialization and gave time for 
learning the languages necessary for research.
The Millrace
Compared with ­England, my teaching load was remarkably light; but the pace 
of teaching itself was hectic. Berkeley functioned on the quarter system. 
Classes ­were held and lectures ­were delivered in three separate blocks of ten 
weeks each—­fall, winter, and spring. In ­those three, relatively short periods, 
the elective course system flowed at the speed of a millrace—­indeed, with the 
force of turbines turned by a mighty dam. Despite the relaxed atmosphere of 
a campus dotted with eucalyptus groves, crisscrossed by floating skateboard-
ers, with ­music always playing in its public squares, the massive buildings 
themselves hummed with awe-­inspiring educational resolve. Courses ­were 
chosen and registered through the omnipresent IBM cards—­mysterious 

Teaching 
565
tokens of a commitment to a par­tic­u­lar course at a par­tic­u­lar time and place, 
chosen from a mind-­stretching range of available choices.
Teaching rooms ­were allotted according to intricate schedules that varied 
from department to department. ­There was an ele­ment of stock-­car racing in 
this pro­cess. Clashes ­were frequent. As a professor in two departments, I was 
doubly at risk. Once I received a cheery note from the organ­izing secretary of 
the Classics Department, written in an elegant calligraphic script:
Classics 155 can fit into 102 Wheeler Tuesday-­Thursday 3.30–5.
However, Tuesday 3.30–5 has been set aside by Mr Murgia for faculty 
meetings . . . ​I ­will let you confront him with that.
It ­will also conflict with Latin 150, Sallust, but I doubt that creates any 
prob­lems.
Good luck.
I needed it. The course itself could be taught in any building on campus. If I 
remember correctly, I once taught “Byzantium, Persia and the Rise of Islam” in 
the Chemistry Building, surrounded by gigantic models of atomic particles.
Course Offerings
Faced with this new freedom, I splurged. I taught lecture courses and seminars 
on topics that interested me. I would often teach the same subject on two 
levels. Thus the undergraduate lecture course “Byzantium, Persia and the Rise 
of Islam” (which my ­mother had attended) doubled with a gradu­ate seminar: 
“The World of Procopius” (the major historian of Byzantine-­Persian relations 
in the age of Justinian).
Looking back, I note that it was ­here, in my teaching, that I allowed myself 
to feel the tug of my En­glish past in the direction of reassuringly old-­fashioned 
topics: Society and the Super­natural, Julian the Apostate, From Pagan to 
Christian in Rome, Augustine and His Age. In ­these courses, it was a joy to com-
municate with a new freshness, to American students on the West Coast, 
themes that I had already developed over the years in Oxford and Royal 
Holloway. In this way, my course offerings ­were a lifeline to my past at a time 
when I was venturing into many new territories in my research.
This worked very well for my duties in the History Department. But I was 
also a member of the Classics Department. And classics meant the teaching 
of texts—­and, at the gradu­ate level, this involved the careful reading and 

566 
Ch apter 81
stylistic analy­sis of the Old Masters in Latin and Greek. As a professor in clas-
sics as well as in history, I was expected to offer a course on a major Latin text. 
Not surprisingly, I chose the Confessions of Augustine.
Teaching the Confessions turned out to be a major test of nerves. Con-
fronted with a class of keen gradu­ate students, mainly in classics and compara-
tive lit­er­a­ture, I suddenly realized that I knew the Confessions inside out—­but 
I did so only as a historian, instinctively looking at it for evidence of Augus-
tine’s life and times. I had never expounded it as a masterpiece of Latin prose. 
I had been like a win­dow cleaner, wiping a pane of glass ­until I could see 
through it into the fourth ­century. Now I was expected to be a chemist, and to 
analyze the texture of the glass itself. I had to know how to parse each sentence 
in correct grammatical terms.
To make ­matters worse, many of the gradu­ate students had just taken the 
Latin language summer course for which Berkeley was famous. This was an 
awesomely intensive course in Latin grammar—­a veritable boot camp in 
which, so it was rumored, marriages ­were shattered and breakdowns occurred 
­under the pressure to take on board the entire Latin language in ten weeks flat.
For successful survivors, grammar was the Queen of the Sciences, much as 
it had been in the early ­Middle Ages. And rightly so. They had worked for it. 
It stuck out in their minds like a rib cage. By contrast, I realized that I had read 
Augustine’s entrancing Latin for so long that I took it for granted. I had to 
rummage in my memory for the grammatical terms with which to analyze it.
This happened in the winter term, when Berkeley was swept by warm gusts 
of monsoon-­like rain. The class took place half under­ground, in a clammy 
basement room, with a half-­submerged win­dow to the outside. A student had 
brought his dog to class—­a large, long hunting dog. The dog was left out-
side. But devoted to its master (or—­who knows?—­maybe it was devoted to 
the Latin language: we agreed that one could never tell with a Berkeley dog), 
it pushed its head beneath the win­dow into the room. As a result, the torrential 
rain splashed down on its tail, ran along its spine and over its head, so as to 
drip relentlessly from its nose into the room. Altogether, this was a low mo-
ment in the history of the passing on of the classical tradition.
The Call of the North
I soon came to teach the lecture course—­History 4B—­that offered an outline 
of the history of the first millennium AD from Augustus to the age of the Vi-
kings. This was attended by around three hundred undergraduates and a few 

Teaching 
567
interested gradu­ate students. This ­grand survey made me aware of how much 
I had always depended (both for teaching and for research) on a sense of land-
scape. How was I to bring home, to a West Coast audience, a Eu­rope and a 
British Isles at the other end of the world? What memories of home would 
this teaching arouse? In California, I had ­little difficulty in imagining myself 
back in the Mediterranean. Iran also seemed close—­especially when I flew 
across the deserts of the American Southwest. But apart from the fogs, the 
wild seas, and the twisted pines among ­giant boulders on the coast of Marin 
County, ­there was ­little to remind me of the Dark Ages.
When in Oxford, I had always felt bound to Dark Age Britain through the 
land itself. It was the same in Ireland, as I passed high crosses and fields stud-
ded with stones inscribed in mysterious ogham characters when driving 
through the countryside ­toward the west. ­There was nothing like this for me 
in California. I needed a lifeline to that deep northern past.
At this time, the lifeline was provided by two of my very best friends—­Ian 
Wood, the early medievalist, in Leeds, and Denis Bethell, the medievalist, in 
University College Dublin. They kept me in touch with scholarship on the 
early medieval West. Ian and Denis ­were more than colleagues to me: they 
­were a link to my own past and to my continued interest in a period that all 
three of us found fascinating: late Roman Britain, Saint Patrick (died 461), 
Saint Columba (521–597), and the Venerable Bede (672–735). On the few oc-
casions when we met in Ireland or ­England, to listen to them talking about 
Anglo-­Saxon ­England and about the Celtic world was like watching a ­great 
rainbow form across a wide, northern sea. At a time when my own work had 
taken me from the Mediterranean to the borders of Af­ghan­i­stan, they kept me 
straight on Dark Age northern Eu­rope.
I showed my homesickness for the Dark Age North (and, by implication, 
for early medieval western Eu­rope in general) by the shape of the History 4B 
outline lecture course, which gave due prominence to the history of north-
western Europe—­and especially to the history of Britain and Ireland—­from 
the end of the Roman Empire to the time of Charlemagne and the Vikings. As 
a result, teaching History 4B brought me back, ­every year, from the late an-
tique Mediterranean and the ­Middle East to western Eu­rope.
This aspect of my teaching marked the beginning of a tension of which 
I became increasingly aware in my new life in Amer­i­ca. Two landscapes—­
the early medieval North (the world of Saint Patrick and of Beowulf) and 
the late antique Mediterranean and ­Middle East—­tugged at my heart with 
equal force.

568 
Ch apter 81
While many scholars have been content to explore only one major region, 
I was determined to explore both East and West. I was convinced that a wide 
canvas gave me the opportunity to compare regions that had usually been 
studied in isolation. The world of late antiquity looked even more in­ter­est­ing 
if viewed from its peripheries—­both from Ireland and from Iran.
The Sourcebook
When designing the History 4B course, I was greatly helped by what was for 
me one crucial novelty: the photocopier machine. As I have described it, the 
photocopier machine had already made an appearance in Oxford. But, in Ox-
ford, the use of photocopies was still confined to the circulation of reading lists 
and material for small seminars. In Berkeley, Kinko’s Copy Center, just off 
campus, offered to turn out an entire sourcebook for only nine dollars.
With that sourcebook, I could make the Dark Ages speak. Using up-­to-­date 
En­glish translations, I cut and pasted an anthology of texts written by contem-
poraries that stretched from Suetonius’s portrait of the emperor Augustus, 
through visits to the camp of Attila, Saint Patrick, Beowulf, and the Venerable 
Bede, to the account, in the Greenland Saga, of the first contact between Vi-
kings and the Inuit on the coast of the New World around the year 1000.
The sourcebook made the course. Many student evaluations, usually some-
what blasé, gave it top marks. “15! [10 was the maximum] loved it, loved it, loved 
it! Have made copies for my in-­laws and parents. . . . ​At night I’d read some ex-
cerpts to my husband.” Of course, not every­one was impressed. A major in busi-
ness administration failed to see the point of the geography tests: “Its stupid to 
have to memorize dates and places in the maps that are not ­there any more.”
My inclusion of the Eu­ro­pean Dark Ages in my main undergraduate lecture 
course was a sign of my continued love of the landscapes of Britain and of 
Ireland and a pledge—­almost a rain check—­that I would, at some time, return 
to the prob­lems first raised by my reading of Gregory of Tours and of other 
representatives of the religious culture of the early medieval West. It was some 
time before my research on this period caught up with my teaching and spilled 
over into print; but it eventually did so: The Rise of Western Christendom, writ-
ten almost twenty years ­after my arrival in Berkeley, began with ­those sharp 
moments of nostalgia for an old and long-­familiar world that I had left ­behind 
to come to California.1
1. Peter Brown, The Rise of Western Christendom: Triumph and Diversity, A.D. 200–1000 (Oxford: 
Blackwell, 1996; rev. eds. 2003 and 2013).

569
82
The Tranformation of 
the Classical Heritage
The Past in the Pre­sent
Sometime in the summer of 1979, I attended a Re­nais­sance Fair in the 
woods of Marin County. It had been or­ga­nized by the Society for Creative 
Anachronism—­that society of which Beryl Smalley had written to me with 
such amusement. I was enchanted by it. I wondered why this was so. Passing 
through Wantage (south of Oxford) a few years ­earlier, I had seen similar 
groups gathered for a re-­creation of the ­Battle of Newbury (1643) in the 
En­glish Civil War. They had assembled in front of a genuine brick inn dat-
ing from the seventeenth ­century. The juxtaposition of the group—­with 
their plastic beer mugs, shiny cars, and bright new clothing—­with a real 
relic of the past instantly destroyed their credibility. The old inn was real. 
They ­were not.
In Marin County, by contrast, where the arrival of Sir Francis Drake in 1579 
was celebrated (for this remarkable Elizabethan had indeed touched land in 
California in his journey around the world), ­there ­were no ancient pubs to 
weigh in upon the pre­sent. ­Under the eucalyptus trees, Sir Francis met Queen 
Elizabeth in a cloud of golden dust, to the ­music of madrigals performed by a 
professional group. For a moment, time did indeed take a loop, and ­there was 
no heavy relic of the past to call its bluff.
That bucolic meeting between Sir Francis Drake and Queen Elizabeth in 
Marin County was congruent with a question that I had begun to formulate. 
How did late antique persons view their own past? How pre­sent was it to 
them? Did they think that an irreversible chasm had come to stand between 
them and the fullness of classical times? Or did they think that time could be, 

570 
Ch apter 82
as it ­were, turned around, so that figures and values from ­earlier ages might 
become active once again in the pre­sent?
It seemed to me that the more I studied the role of paideia in late antiquity 
and of adab in the Islamic world, the more it seemed to me that, in ­these cul-
tures, the past was thought of as immediately available in the pre­sent to a de-
gree that was alien to a modern sense of the ineluctable passing of time. This 
was certainly the message of Henri-­Irénée Marrou. He pointed out that the 
“civilization of paideia” had no sense that the passing of time had rendered its 
past masters obsolescent:
The fact that ­these appeared at certain moments of time, ­under the influ-
ence of certain historical forces, is unimportant; what ­matters is that they 
exist and can be rediscovered in the same way, again and again, by each 
successive generation.1
In such a culture, the wall between past and pre­sent could seem paper thin: 
avatars from ancient days could be thought to step through that wall with ease, 
as if in a beneficent time warp, to inspire and direct the pre­sent.
A modern sense of time tends to be driven by an acute sense of irreversible, 
unidirectional historical change: the Roman Empire declined; paganism died; 
Chris­tian­ity ­rose. ­There was no ­going back on ­those mighty, one-­way historical 
pro­cesses that placed an ever-­widening chasm between the pre­sent and the 
past. But was this the only way to think about the past?
­Here I was helped by the appearance of a book by Clifford Geertz 
(1926–2006)—­Negara. Ba­li, as Geertz described it, was a culture where time 
seemed to be pushed by a motor less overpoweringly unidirectional than our 
own. The weakening of the Balinese empire was acknowledged. But it “was 
not felt to be an inevitable deterioration, a predestined decline from a golden 
age. . . . ​For most Balinese the decline was the way history had happened to 
happen, not the way it had had to happen.”2 It seemed to me that, for late 
antique persons as for the Balinese, ordinary time did not pulse with ­great 
urgency. It passed. But it did not pass in a hurry ­toward some overriding goal, 
leaving the past irrevocably past and dif­fer­ent from the pre­sent.
1. H. I. Marrou, A History of Education in Antiquity, trans. G. Lamb (New York: Sheed and 
Ward, 1956), 161.
2. Clifford Geertz, Negara: The Theatre State in Nineteenth-­Century Ba­li (Prince­ton, NJ: 
Prince­ton University Press, 1980), 18.

Tr a nfor m ation 
571
I was tempted to think that late antique persons ­were not altogether self-­
deluded to see the world in this way. It was the juxtaposition of the shiny 
modern cars with the old brick of the inn that truly undercut the bravado of 
the latter-­day Cavaliers and Roundheads whom I had observed in Wantage. 
But the gap between past and pre­sent would not have seemed so extreme if 
the material underpinning of life in Wantage had changed ­little since the sev-
enteenth ­century: if we ­were still in a pre­industrial world of ­horses and can-
dles. Then the dissonance between past and pre­sent would not have seemed 
so strident.
­After all, the ancient world experienced no industrial revolution. Times of 
travel by sea had not changed greatly since the days of Homer. A gentleman 
farmer in Pontus (Black Sea Turkey) could be praised, in the second ­century 
AD, for living “in the manner of Hesiod”—­the Greek poet of around 700 BC. 
Given the limitations of the pos­si­ble in an agrarian society, ­there was no reason 
why he should not have thought of himself as the Hesiod of his times. Even 
clothing had not yet changed drastically. When, in the second ­century AD, the 
Greek rhetors of the Second Sophistic claimed to be living and speaking 
like ancient Athenians, they actually still looked like ancient Athenians. They 
wore clothes that differed ­little from ­those of classical Greece. As Paul Zanker 
has pointed out, “At least in the ­matter of clothing the past ­really did live on in 
the pre­sent.”3
­These ­were random ruminations on which I drew for occasional papers and 
for teaching. But they addressed a real prob­lem. What was at stake was the 
notion of late antiquity. ­Here was a civilization that had maintained, to a far 
greater degree than previous scholars had expected, innumerable links with 
the classical world that had preceded it. Yet, at the same time, it had opened 
itself up to face new dangers and new experiences. It eventually witnessed the 
transfer of much of its cultural and religious riches into new worlds—­into 
the Christian church, into Judaism, ultimately into the world of medieval 
Islam and its neighbors, Byzantium and the Catholic medieval West. The 
found­ers of classical civilization, in ancient Greece and Rome, could not have 
dreamed of such ­great changes. Yet they had happened. How ­were we to do 
justice to the tension between past and pre­sent, continuity and discontinuity, 
inherent in the notion of the transformation of the classical heritage?
3. Paul Zanker, The Mask of Socrates: The Image of the Intellectual in Antiquity (Berkeley: 
University of California Press, 1995), 250.

572 
Ch apter 82
Classics at Berkeley: John Dillon
I could not have found a better environment for such ruminations than Berkeley. 
I was now a member of a large Classics Department. And classics, in Berkeley, 
had a very special flavor. In 1980, the department was still somewhat old-­fashioned 
in its self-­presentation and in its teaching methods. Like the ­grand Beaux-­Arts 
classicism of Dow Library, it stood out, among the humanities, as having brought 
a fragment of ancient Greece and Rome into the modern pre­sent.
At the time, John Dillon was chairman of the department. John was a true 
compatriot, a fellow Irishman, but far more deeply rooted in the culture and 
politics of Ireland than I was. He was the son of Myles Dillon (1900–1972), the 
renowned scholar of Irish folklore, and the grand­son of the John Dillon (1851–
1927), the ­great nationalist politician of the end of the nineteenth ­century and 
the beginning of the twentieth.
John had played a decisive role in securing a joint appointment for me in 
classics as well as in history. We would meet in his ­house on Euclid Street to 
discuss the cosmos of ­later Platonism. It was an all-­embracing system that 
emanated, with benign inevitability, from the Wholly One—­the pantelôs hen. 
(John’s wife, Jean, would always refer irreverently to this Supreme Being, who 
plainly occupied a large space in the minds of John and his philosophical 
friends, as “the Pantyhose Hen.”) I particularly remember one late after­noon, 
when we sat over drinks beneath a clear blue sky, discussing the magical unity 
of heaven and earth in the theurgic systems of Jamblichus and Proclus, as “the 
Blimp”—­a ­great Zeppelin—­hung above us in the sweet air, hovering over the 
University of California football field.
­These conversations ­were a delight to me. In the first place, John’s Irish 
background and early education—­like my own, but in a Catholic version—­
made him acutely aware of the abiding appeal of the classics in Ireland. In an 
article on the classical tradition in Ireland, which he wrote for the Crane Bag 
(an Irish journal) in 1979, John showed how, throughout much of Irish history, 
the Irish had played the role of the witty Greeks to the cumbersome Romans 
of the British Empire. Old Irish was as rich and complex as Greek. Its epics 
­were as vivid as Homer. Classical themes took on a strange new beauty in Irish 
translations of the ­Middle Ages: Where ­else in Eu­rope would one read of 
Helen of Troy as “the Lime-­White Lady, She of the Conflict”?4
4. J. Dillon, “Some Reflections on the Irish Classical Tradition,” The Crane Bag 3, no. 2 
(1979): 28–32, at 29.

Tr a nfor m ation 
573
John’s commitment to late antique philosophy was a constant inspiration 
to me. We not only discussed the Pantyhose Hen—­the pantelôs hen, the 
Wholly One, of the more rarefied reaches of Plotinus’s metaphysics. We also 
shared an interest in the social position of the phi­los­o­pher and the nature of 
his school. John showed that the Acad­emy of Athens had not been an institu-
tion, like a modern university or a research center. It was a teaching tradition 
passed on from generation to generation by word of mouth alone (usually 
in the form of verbal commentaries on the works of the Masters), through 
intense master-­disciple relations that ­were close to the way in which learning 
was passed down in the medieval and modern Islamic world.5
Altogether, John had a rare sense of the way in which the tradition of clas-
sical philosophy changed over time without losing touch with its past. His first 
masterpiece, The ­Middle Platonists, had just appeared, in 1977. The ­Middle Pla-
tonists showed how a seemingly dormant period in the history of the Platonic 
tradition had moved forward according to its own rhythms: as he put it so well, 
“like ­those ­humble sea-­creatures whose concerted action slowly builds a coral 
reef.” This slow pro­cess, seldom appreciated by modern scholars, eventually 
led to the formation of the mighty Neoplatonic synthesis, “perhaps the great-
est philosophical edifice of all time,” which would dominate the thought of 
Eu­rope and the Islamic world for the next millennium.6
The Transformation of the Classical Heritage
In late January 1979, John Dillon and I had lunch with Doris Kretschmer, who 
was the acquisitions editor for classics at the University of California Press. 
On January 25, we sent her the full proposal that John and I had worked on 
together in the previous months, and which we had discussed over the lunch. 
We proposed a series: The Transformation of the Classical Heritage. We 
stressed the ­great interest of the period:
This was a period when traditions that we associate with the classical 
world proper did not decline or waste away, but, rather, ­were transformed 
and re-­interpreted to meet new needs. . . . ​More than the carefully arranged 
5. J. Dillon, “Self-­Definition in ­Later Platonism,” in Jewish and Christian Self-­Definition, ed. 
E. P. Sanders (Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1982), 60–75, at 66–67.
6. J. Dillon, The ­Middle Platonists, 80 B.C. to A.D. 220 (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 
1977), 415.

574 
Ch apter 82
debris of a ­great civilization [of classical Greece and Rome]; it was a ­great 
civilization in itself . . . ​seriously “built to last”.
For this reason, we told Doris that we ­were particularly interested in what 
John and I called the “living classical tradition” that emerged directly from the 
late antique restructuring of the classical world—­the “perennial Hellenism” 
of Byzantium; the classical tradition of learning in the postimperial West and 
farther east; the revival of philosophy in the Islamic world; and even the religious 
Platonism of modern times, from Milton to the American transcendentalist 
movement. This was the classical tradition in its late antique forms (Augustine 
and Boethius in the Latin West, Plotinus and Proclus in the East), which 
flowed almost imperceptibly in the veins of medieval and early modern west-
ern Eu­rope, Byzantium, and Islam, and also in the mystical and philosophical 
traditions of Judaism.
At this time, August Frugé was withdrawing from the position of director 
of the press to his ­house in Twenty Nine Palms in Southern California. But he 
plainly put his weight ­behind the venture. Devoted to building up the classics, 
and with strong ties over the years to the Classics Department in Berkeley, he 
evidently approved of the idea of a series that extended this interest in the 
classical heritage into late antiquity and beyond.
And no one could have been a more enthusiastic and shrewd acquisitions 
editor for the series than Doris Kretschmer. ­Those of her letters to me that 
survive show her beating the bounds of the California university system for 
potential authors. She wrote of one “who turned out to be a very personable 
gentleman heading for Sacramento to hunt wild turkeys in a denim jacket 
festooned with revolutionary slogans.”
Removing a Bottleneck
Doris’s journeys and my correspondence showed that ­there was no lack of 
interest in a late antique series in Amer­i­ca. Many departments of classics, re-
ligious studies, Jewish studies, and medieval studies taught courses relevant to 
late antiquity. But the field lacked books. In academe at large, late antiquity 
was still considered to be a marginal field. Thesis advisers tended to direct their 
charges to safer fields where employment and publication ­were more certain. 
Publishers ­were ready to accept manuscripts on conventional classical subjects; 
but manuscripts on late antique topics lingered in publishers’ offices, partly 
­because readers of such manuscripts ­were often hard to find. Altogether, ­there 
was a bottleneck.

Tr a nfor m ation 
575
What the series tried to do was to relieve this bottleneck. In the first place, 
John Dillon and I went over the list of readers used by the University of Cali-
fornia Press, adding many with lively late antique interests and a reputation 
for speed and fairness. Among ­these readers, the older and more established 
scholars ­were often the most generous. They knew what the series needed. 
Hilary Armstrong (1909–1997), the ­great scholar of Plotinus, was one of ­those. 
In a somewhat raw dissertation manuscript he detected “an attractive warmth 
and animation” that pulled the author through. It was the same with Sidney 
Griffith, whose judgment was essential to me in making sure that works on 
Syriac Chris­tian­ity would be part of the profile of the series. On one occasion 
he wrote:
I did not expect to like this manuscript as much as I have done. . . . ​My 
preference is for smaller studies of closer focus. . . . ​But I have come to the 
conclusion that this book might just be what Syriac studies in the USA 
­really needs . . . ​[it] shows the excitement and the relevance of it all.
Within the California system itself, Hal Drake at Santa Barbara was also an 
unfailingly helpful reader and advocate for the series.
The Shape of a Series
As a result of being able to offer quick and fair decisions, followed, if pos­si­ble, 
by a contract (no small ­thing for scholars caught in the exacting American 
tenure pro­cess), we ­were able to build up a list remarkably quickly. Already by 
1982, three books had appeared: on the interrelationship of imperial ceremony, 
art, and society (Sabine MacCormack, Art and Ceremony); on the role of 
­women in imperial politics in East Rome (Kenneth Holum, Theodosian Em-
presses); and on a maverick philosopher-­bishop in a coastal town in modern 
Libya (Jay Bregman, Synesius).
Many books would follow. Up to the pre­sent, over fifty titles have appeared 
in the series. Like a long river, the series has washed as many banks as ­there 
have been changes in the methods and interests of scholars. It began with 
publications that ­were largely ­limited to the Greco-­Roman world; but, as ever-­
new horizons opened up to scholars, especially in the direction of the ­Middle 
East, it has come to include the Syriac-­speaking world east of Antioch, Iran, 
and the late antique roots of Islam. In this way, a proj­ect first broached over 
lunch with John Dillon and Doris Kretschmer in January 1979 has come to give 
the much-­needed weight of print to late antiquity as a field of its own.

576
83
Sexualit y
Michel Foucault
Virginity and Society
By the summer of 1980, I had begun to change gear. I had spent my first two 
years in Berkeley studying codes of excellence and their exemplars: Muslim men 
of learning; Christian holy men and ­women; pagan phi­los­o­phers. Now I wanted 
to dig yet deeper into the differing notions of the self and of the relation between 
the individual and society that ­were current in late antiquity. I would try to offer 
a historical account of the emergence of markedly differing attitudes to sex in 
pagan, Jewish, and Christian circles in late antiquity and beyond.
In many ways, it is not surprising that I moved in this direction in the Cali-
fornia of the 1970s. Sexual emancipation of all kinds was in the air. Though 
generally welcomed in the circles in which I moved, this emancipation raised 
sharp questions for the historian that many of us addressed, each in our dif­fer­
ent ways. My own approach was based on habits of mind derived from my 
previous work on late antiquity. I went for the phenomenon that offered the 
greatest challenge to the historical imagination of modern persons. That is: I 
did not claim to write about ­every aspect of sex, marriage, and the relations of 
men and ­women in this period. Instead I concentrated on a radical group—on 
­those who had renounced sex entirely. It was ­these figures—­men and ­women 
who seemed to live at one extreme of the ­human condition—­who drew my 
attention. The prob­lem that I had to explain was why they came to enjoy so 
much prestige in early Christian circles.
This approach suited me well. Ever since the late 1960s, I had chosen to 
concentrate on persons and on practices calculated to cause disquiet to mod-
ern persons—­sorcery, holy men, the cult of relics, the ordeal. By ­doing this, 

SEXUA LIT Y: MICHEL FOUCAULT 
577
I wanted to challenge my readers to think and feel their way into socie­ties and 
value systems very dif­fer­ent from their own. How and why did ­these seemingly 
strange ­things happen, and with what consequences for society? I would now 
try to do the same for virginity.
My application for sabbatical leave in 1981 provided the occasion to lay out 
this change in the direction of my work. When I wrote to Dean Keppel in the 
summer of 1980, I titled my proposed study “Virginity and Society: Men, 
­Women and Renunciation in Late Antiquity.” I also applied for funding to the 
American Council of Learned Socie­ties; and, a ­little ­later, I agreed with Joe 
Kitagawa, my former host in Chicago for the Haskell Lectures on the cult of 
saints, to give a series of ACLS lectures ­under the same title on vari­ous cam-
puses in 1982/83. Renunciation of sex—­not its cele­bration in modern times 
nor the evils of its supposed repression in the past: but, simply, what such re-
nunciation meant for men and ­women in the last centuries of the ancient 
world—­would hold my attention for the next seven years.
It was while preparing this application that I turned, for the first time, to 
the works of Michel Foucault (1926–1984). It is not that I had not heard of him 
before. He was the rage in Berkeley. Foucault’s learned and brilliantly ironic 
de­mo­li­tions of modern accounts of the pro­gress of medicine and of the emer-
gence of the modern obsession with sexuality had only recently become avail-
able in En­glish translation. His books swept the campus like a brush fire. They 
became a must for gradu­ate students and their teachers.
Academic conversations ­were liberally studded with references to 
Foucault—­“Foucault this,” “Foucault that.” I remember one occasion when I 
was hanging out with my friend Tom Laqueur at Peet’s Coffee in Walnut 
Square (as we regularly did): a lively old lady, who looked as if she had walked 
all the way into town from the crests of Tilden Park, approached us. “What is 
that Fu-­Ko you are always talking about? Is it a form of martial arts?” From 
then onward Tom and I referred to the phi­los­o­pher as “the Martial Artist.” This 
happened in the summer of 1980. A few months ­later, I would meet Michel 
Foucault in Berkeley, in what proved to be a memorable encounter. But what 
had attracted me in his work in the first place, before that time?
“To Render Fragile . . .”
Looking back, I think that what struck me most about Foucault’s work was his 
fierce sense that all that seemed most solid and unquestionable, all that was 
usually taken for granted in ­human affairs, had been made by ­people and so 

578 
Ch apter 83
could be unmade by them. Fragiliser—to render fragile all that seemed most 
certain in the world; to show it to be less solid than we had thought—­this was 
the duty of the thinking person.
And in order to do this, the phi­los­o­pher had to become a historian—­and 
a tenaciously observant historian at that. Foucault believed that only when we 
go back to the past, to see, precisely and without hindsight, how our own in-
stitutions and beliefs came about; when we strip them of the patina of the 
obvious: then we can do something about them—we can reform prisons, criti-
cize medical systems, and altogether come to breathe a more ­free air.
This was very much the message that Foucault brought to Berkeley campus 
in October 1980. As he stated in an interview: “making ­things fragile” was his 
business, “through this type of historical analy­sis . . . ​showing at once why and 
how ­those ­things could be constituted in this way . . . ​constituted through a 
precise history. . . . ​And if it is historically constructed, it can be po­liti­cally 
destroyed.” (­Here Foucault made plain that he used the word “po­liti­cally” in 
the widest sense, to mean creative critical activity on all levels.)1
This, as far as I can reconstruct it, was the “Foucault Sound” as it was known 
in the early 1980s, through his publications and through his statements in the 
course of an increasing number of prestigious visits to American campuses.
Inevitably, not every­body liked that sound. Foucault irritated many, who 
dismissed him as an out-­and-­out relativist, a denier of the possibility of truth; 
as a determinist, who made all thought dependent on its epoch; as a dis-
abused critic of the genuine humanitarian advances of recent times; as a vatic 
mandarin, who used terms of art, such as “discourse,” that ­were as opaque as 
Sumerian logograms. For or against, Foucault’s reputation had already bal-
looned. He had become a mythical figure to many dif­fer­ent groups of scholars 
and admirers.
­Because of this aura, it is easy to forget how ­little of Foucault’s work was 
actually known at this time: many of his most impor­tant lectures—­notably 
­those that he gave at the Collège de France on the nature of government—­­
were not published (let alone translated) ­until very recently. The full implica-
tions of his work ­were unknown, or known only to a select few. What I picked 
1. Interview with André Berten cited in Michel Foucault, About the Beginnings of the Herme-
neutic of the Self: Lectures at Dartmouth in 1980, ed. H.-­P. Fruchard and Daniele Lorenzini (Chi-
cago: University of Chicago Press, 2016), 91. This invaluable volume contains, effectively, the 
lectures that Foucault gave at Berkeley—as they ­were the same (with a few variants) as ­those 
given at Dartmouth—­and adds much material from his visits to Berkeley and New York in 1980.

SEXUA LIT Y: MICHEL FOUCAULT 
579
up at this time was one aspect only of Foucault, but an impor­tant one: Fou-
cault the historian of science at the point of becoming a historian of sex.
So what did this mean? In both the case of the history of science and that 
of the history of sexuality, Foucault’s approach resolutely emphasized the 
differences between dif­fer­ent periods of history. Each period had its own, dis-
tinctive worldview that had ­little or nothing to do with present-­day certitudes. 
Nowhere was a sense of the discontinuity between the ages more challenging 
to the historical imagination than in attitudes to sex. Each age was caught—­
like a goldfish in a bowl—in a series of presuppositions about sex that ­were 
alien to any other age: a glass screen, transparent but impassable, had come 
down between past and pre­sent. To read Foucault at this time was to down a 
stiff tonic—­a remedy for what had always been, for historians, the one unfor-
givable sin—­anachronism: the invasion of the past by the pre­sent.
Ancient Sex and Modern Revolution
The moment that I committed myself to a study of sexual renunciation, I real-
ized that I would need Foucault. His criticism of upbeat narratives of pro­gress 
­toward ever-­greater sexual emancipation was essential. For it helped to remove 
a solid barrier of modern misconceptions that rested heavi­ly on the study of 
sexuality in the ancient world. ­These misconceptions ­were largely based on a 
sense of false familiarity with the past.
This was particularly the case when it came to the contrast between early 
Christian and modern attitudes to sex. I was well aware that my decision to 
study sexual renunciation in early Chris­tian­ity took place at a peculiarly 
fraught time, owing to the sexual revolution in Amer­i­ca and elsewhere. This 
revolution was unusually turbulent across the bay, in San Francisco. Harvey 
Milk, the gay supervisor of the city of San Francisco, had been murdered in 
November 1978, only three months ­after my arrival in Berkeley. In turning 
­toward this theme in 1980, I had no doubt that, unlike many other topics that 
had preoccupied me up to then, this was a charged theme: a high wind of 
present-­day concern would fill my sails.
This revolution had roughly two phases. The first, mainly in the 1960s, was 
a fight against what was considered sexual repression. It validated sexual activ-
ity and sexual choice in virtually any form. It saw itself primarily as a fight for 
freedom. The second phase, beginning with the seventies, was more a fight 
for ­women’s rights and for gay rights. It saw itself primarily as a fight for equality. 
Both movements looked to the ancient world and to the early Christian past 

580 
Ch apter 83
to find pre­ce­dents for their own strug­gle, or, failing that, to find, in ­those dis-
tant times, the origins of their pre­sent discontent.
For this reason, both phases of the sexual revolution had implications for 
scholarship on the early church. To take one example: my projected work 
on sexual renunciation touched on a prob­lem that was acutely relevant to 
con­temporary debate on clerical celibacy in the Catholic Church. As a non-­
Catholic, I felt that I should not try to intervene directly in this debate, one 
way or another, as many of my Catholic friends ­were ­doing. Instead, I would 
try to understand and explain the origins of this tradition, which had evidently 
become so problematic in modern times.
I was impressed, both as a professional historian and as a new arrival in 
Amer­i­ca, by the extent to which debate on sexual issues was driven by the 
churches. I had already experienced this when I visited Notre Dame University 
in 1975. Scholarly and religious concerns seemed to come together to flood the 
Christian churches and much of the scholarship in the early Christian field 
with issues raised both by the ­women’s movement and by the sexual revolu-
tion. This took many forms—­from the demand for a new role for ­women in 
the churches to a criticism of the foundational documents of Chris­tian­ity and 
Judaism for what was considered their repressive and male-­oriented language 
and ideology.
Many scholars and many committed religious persons thought that too 
much toxic waste, in the form of negative attitudes to sex and ­women, had 
accumulated in the headwaters of Chris­tian­ity and in the long centuries that 
linked the Christian past to the pre­sent. It seemed as if Chris­tian­ity itself was 
due for a pro­cess of detoxification; and that the job of the historian was to con-
tribute to this detoxification. As a result, I found myself turning to the past to 
study the origins of what had become burning issues in the pre­sent. Not only 
that: I had chosen to study one aspect of early Chris­tian­ity that was in direct 
contrast to the pre­sent—­the mysterious force of the drive ­toward sexual renun-
ciation that appeared to have gripped both men and ­women in that distant time.
Sex as a Constant: Repression or Emancipation?
One feature struck me in ­these debates, ­whether they happened in academe 
or in the churches. Almost every­one I read or listened to—­from the most 
conservative scholars to the most radical feminists—­seemed to assume that 
the sexual nature of men and ­women was a constant. Furthermore, it was taken 
for granted by most writers that this constant sexual nature had been 

SEXUA LIT Y: MICHEL FOUCAULT 
581
unremittingly repressed throughout the ages, and that the goal of the pre­sent 
age was the removal of the millennial structures of repression that ­were held 
to weigh upon us.
This assumption—­that sex had always been the same, and that sex had al-
ways been repressed—­encouraged certain church historians and theologians 
to judge past ages in a peremptory manner, according to the degree to which 
the benign energy of sex had been accepted or constrained. The result was a 
highly ideological view of history. It involved a rating of the past. Grades ­were 
allotted to each group and period according to their conformity with modern 
norms of liberated sex. Pagans scored top marks: sex did not seem to trou­ble 
them greatly. Jews also scored high marks for accepting sex and marriage as 
instituted by God. And, somehow, Jesus and his earliest followers could not 
be thought of as other than exemplary (an in­ter­est­ing survival, this, of the 
Protestant belief in the purity of the primitive church).
But then, ­these theologians declared, the clouds rolled in. Paul, in the grip 
of an obsessive notion of fornication, scored badly. It was thought that ­later 
Christians did ­little better: ­under the influence of the world-­denying trends of 
Greek philosophy, many of the most articulate among them seem to have re-
coiled in horror from the body and from sex. As for Augustine, at the end of 
the story of the early church, he flunked: he transmitted to ­later ages a view 
that saw in sexuality itself a dark symptom of the Fall of humanity. From Au-
gustine onward, the history of Eu­rope was said to have consisted of a thousand 
years of sexual repression, followed, in modern times, by a slow and painful 
pro­cess of emancipation from the incubus of a sexuality denied, constrained, 
and warped by the power of the Christian religion.
I trust that readers ­will forgive this highly simplified narrative. But it was 
precisely in ­these blunt terms that the issue of sexual renunciation in early 
Chris­tian­ity was often posed. Sex (it was largely agreed) was good. Sexuality 
was a constant in ­human nature. All that remained to be seen—­and judged—
by the historian was the manner in which Christians, in vari­ous times and 
places, accepted or suppressed the primal, unchanging fact of their own sexual-
ity. It was with this ste­reo­typical image of the history of sex in Christian times 
uppermost in my mind that I turned to Foucault’s La volonté de savoir, which 
had appeared in En­glish in 1978, as the first volume of his projected History of 
Sexuality.2
2. M. Foucault, La volonté de savoir (Paris: Gallimard, 1976), translated as History of Sexuality. 
Volume 1: An Introduction (New York: Vintage Books, 1978).

582 
Ch apter 83
“A Garrulous Sexuality”
Foucault’s History of Sexuality. Volume 1 was a book designed to shock. It 
turned on its head the current confident narrative that made our own notion 
of sexuality appear to be valid for all ages. It also dismantled the narratives that 
celebrated the modern person’s emancipation from sexual repression. For Fou-
cault, to say yes to sex was not necessarily the way to liberty. In fact, it led to 
yet further, more subtle forms of social control.
Foucault proposed that modern times ­were characterized by a crying up of 
sexuality—by an overproduction of knowledge about sex and the sexual de-
terminants of ­human personality. In his opinion, this development was quite 
peculiar to Eu­rope and Amer­i­ca. He went on to show that what we thought 
was enduring in ­human nature was no such ­thing. The granting of primacy to 
sex was a passing phase. The way in which sex was approached and talked 
about as if it ­were the key to the ­human condition; the predominant role as-
cribed to sex in our experience of ourselves, in our expectations of normal 
be­hav­ior, and in our definition of ­mental health: all this was a mirage—­a series 
of vastly exaggerated arabesques spun out of the reticent physical facts of plea­
sure and reproduction. Other ages and cultures might view the same facts with 
relative indifference. But we modern Westerners ­were caught—if only for a 
moment in time: from the eigh­teenth ­century onward—in a “garrulous 
sexuality.”3 Sexuality had become “the noisiest of our preoccupations. ­People 
­will won­der what could have made us so presumptuous.”4
Altogether, as Foucault saw it, sexuality, as modern persons experienced it 
and talked about it, was by no means a timeless constant. It was a time-­bound 
creation. It was the result of a crisis of knowingness. And, for Foucault, this 
knowingness was far from innocent. In the name of medical expertise, it 
reached ever deeper into the ­human person, slyly insisting that we answer a 
scientific questionnaire on our own sexuality that placed our very identity in 
the hands of ­others.
Sexuality was declared to be basic to ourselves. But, paradoxically, only 
doctors, as the self-­appointed experts on sexuality, along with bureaucrats and 
­lawyers informed by doctors, could decide for us who we ­were: to which catego-
ries we would be allotted on the basis of our sexuality. ­Were we “normal” or 
“abnormal,” “heterosexual” or “homosexual,” “repressed” or “liberated”? ­These 
3. Foucault, History of Sexuality, 127.
4. Foucault, History of Sexuality, 158.

SEXUA LIT Y: MICHEL FOUCAULT 
583
­were questions that involved the extensive, covert exercise of power over 
­others—­they might determine lawsuits, the allocation of housing, admission 
to institutions, evaluations by employers, judgments on colleagues.
Foucault’s message was clear. The notion that modern persons ­were enjoy-
ing (and should strive to enjoy even more) a period of emancipation from a 
long age of sexual repression was wrong. In modern times, he insisted, sexual-
ity had not been repressed. Far from it: it had been “incited”—­moved to center 
stage and played up in a melodramatic manner as part of the ideology of mod-
ern times.
At the time, this was a hard saying. Faced by reports of Foucault’s impend-
ing Volonté de savoir (The History of Sexuality. Volume One), French intellectu-
als debated his views on tele­vi­sion and in other media. His proposition that 
sex had not been constantly repressed, and his insistence that, in modern 
times, it had been actively incited—­played up and given undue prominence—­
left them speechless. In one such exchange of views, the presenter’s “only re-
sponse was a spluttered ‘Fichtre’ ” (Gosh!).5
­There was a lot to say “Gosh” about in Foucault’s History of Sexuality. For 
me, it came as a liberation. If the notion that sexuality was a constant through 
the ages—­always pre­sent to be embraced or repressed—­could be dismissed 
as no more than a modern creation (and a somewhat sinister one at that), then 
­there was no need to proj­ect our modern, time-­bound views of sexuality into 
the early centuries of the Christian church. At a stroke, we ­were freed from a 
cloying sense of false familiarity with the past.
By a certain irony, the work of Michel Foucault, often celebrated as the 
spokesman of radical modernity, had set historians ­free to do what they had 
always done: to study the past on its own terms. We ­were ­free to look over the 
edge of the chasm of two millennia and to won­der, with a tingle of vertigo, 
what strange bodies, what strange notions of sexuality lay at the bottom of that 
abyss, in the times of Jesus and Saint Paul. In a field dominated by anachronistic 
notions, mobilized in present-­day polemics, we could become historians again.
5. David Macey, The Lives of Michel Foucault (New York: Vintage, 1993), 353.

584
84
At the Bear’s Lair
Encounter s with Foucault
“One of ­Those Small Origins”: Foucault, 
John Cassian, and Confession
Foucault came to Berkeley to deliver “Truth and Subjectivity” ­under the aegis 
of the Howison Lectures on October 20 and 21, 1980. The lectures ­were an 
event. Eight hundred listeners crowded into Wheeler Hall. A further seven 
hundred would-be listeners demonstrated outside, demanding to be let in. The 
police appeared on campus for the first time since the 1960s to drive away 
the disappointed admirers of the ­great man. I only managed to attend the 
second lecture, on October 21.
I did not know what to expect from Foucault. I was pleasantly surprised 
when I found that he would be lecturing on Chris­tian­ity and confession. And 
not only that: what he talked about at ­great length, with fervor and a remark-
able command of the text, ­were the views of the Desert ­Fathers on sexual 
temptation and the need for confession. ­These views had been passed on to 
the Latin world in the Conferences—­the monastic talk-­ins—of John Cassian 
(360–435), a con­temporary and discreet critic of Saint Augustine. Based in 
Marseilles, he wrote to monks who had turned the rugged calanques and off-
shore islands between Marseilles and the French Riviera (a former lurking 
ground of Ligurian pirates) into the equivalent of the desert of Egypt. I myself 
had only just finished a spell of intensive reading of the Conferences of Cassian.
I was gripped. What struck me in par­tic­u­lar was Foucault’s style of delivery. 
This was a dif­fer­ent Foucault from the somewhat vatic polemist I had known 
from his printed works. It was Foucault the master of an art that I had always 
associated with French classical scholarship at its best—­the art of the 

At the Bear’s La ir 
585
explication du texte: the ability to draw out from a single text an entire world, 
through patient and perceptive commentary. André-­Jean Festugière had the 
same magical touch to a high degree when conjuring up the world of the Her-
metic treatises—­a single passage (well-­known or newly discovered, it did not 
­matter) could be made to speak as if for the very first time. It was a style of 
exposition in which Foucault excelled. He used it in all the subsequent vol-
umes of his History of Sexuality, endowing them with a classical lucidity that 
had been absent in his ­earlier writings.
As Foucault presented him, Cassian’s addresses to monks ­were not what we 
expected. His thought on sexuality was not driven by an increasing need to 
repress it. Sexual acts (of the sort that medieval confessionals would cata­log 
with minute care) ­were of no interest to him. Foucault pointed out that Cas-
sian wished to probe deeper. The monk had to consider not only his actions 
but the course of his own thoughts. He had to give attention to the endless 
flow of images (many of them sexual) that flickered in the back of his mind. 
­These thoughts ­were pointers to his deepest self.
And what a self! As Cassian presented it, this was not necessarily a self that 
was in the grip of sexual fantasy (a libidinous creature sweating it out in the 
desert, as modern readers liked to imagine) but a self for whom the ebb and 
flow of sexual thoughts was no more than an epiphenomenon—­a surface 
manifestation of currents hidden in the depths of the self. And what lay at the 
bottom of that self? An antiself, an alien being—­the Devil and his demons—­
Hidden Persuaders whose icy presence was betrayed by the course of the 
monk’s own thought stream. As a result, the monk could not even trust his 
own thoughts. He always had to ask of his own mind, “Am I deceived?”—am 
I deceived by the Devil?
This last turn in Cassian’s thought was eerie and exotic. Foucault did not 
linger on Cassian’s demonology. It was his pre­sen­ta­tion of Cassian’s attitude 
to the monk’s own thoughts (­whether demonically inspired or not) that made 
the audience draw breath. Foucault pointed out that ­here, for the first time in the 
long centuries of the ancient world, was an image of a person made up entirely 
by his or her thoughts alone. And, more frightening still, ­these thoughts could 
not be trusted. What was the monk to do? ­There was only one answer: tell all. 
Only by being prepared to turn at ­every instant to a wiser head—to an Old 
Man of the Desert: an elder monk, well versed in the ups and downs of the 
soul—­could the monk resolve this fundamental uncertainty.
And so Foucault concluded: ­here, in the writings of a fifth-­century monk, 
­little known to scholars of modernity (though dear to my own heart), we could 

586 
Ch apter 84
see the turning of an age. For Cassian’s insistence on the need for a permanent 
guide—in fact, for a ­father confessor—­lay at the roots of “the millennial yoke 
of confession” that had distinguished the Catholic ­Middle Ages in Eu­rope.1 
This yoke, he pointed out, was not based on a fear of sex. It was based on a fear 
of the self. In Foucault’s view, the abiding sense of a “fragment of darkness” 
lodged in the self had been passed on to the ­Middle Ages through the confes-
sional practices of the Catholic Church.2 It had subtly but surely prepared 
the enlightened classes of Eu­rope to place a similar yoke upon themselves, in 
modern times, by turning to similar, priest-­like figures—to scientists, doctors, 
psychoanalysts—to tell them who they ­really ­were.
Foucault ended the lecture with ill-­disguised zest. Who would have ex-
pected such views, with so long a life before them, to come out of a Christian 
monastery hidden in the hills around Marseilles in the last ­century of the 
Roman Empire? In his opinion, the eventual spread throughout medieval 
Eu­rope of the views of Cassian on the necessity for confession, based on a 
startlingly new model of the ­human person, was a delicious example of “one 
of ­those small origins that Nietz­sche liked to discover at the beginning of ­great 
­things.”3
At the Bear’s Lair
­After the lecture, I was entrusted with Foucault by his Berkeley hosts—­Paul 
Rabinow, Harold Dreyfus, and Leo Bersani. It has been said that he had read 
my Augustine of Hippo and knew it “almost by heart.”4 In fact, we hardly 
touched on Augustine in our conversation. A highly purposive man, who knew 
1. Foucault, History of Sexuality. Volume 1: An Introduction (New York: Vintage Books, 
1978), 61.
2. Foucault, History of Sexuality, 69.
3. Foucault, Beginning of the Hermeneutics of the Self, 74; this lecture had been accessible in a 
slightly dif­fer­ent form as “Le combat de la chasteté,” in Communications 35: Sexualités occiden-
tales, ed. P. Ariès and A. Béjin (Paris: Le Seuil, 1984), 15–25, now in Dits et Écrits # 512, 2:1114–1127, 
trans. Carrette, pp. 188–197. On Cassian, see now Foucault’s recently published manuscript of 
volume 4 of the History of Sexuality: Les aveux de la chair (Paris: Gallimard, 2018), 116–145 and 
216–245, translated in The Confessions of the Flesh (New York: Pantheon, 2021), 87–110 and 
166–189. For a criticism of Foucault’s reading of Cassian, see Niki K. Clements, Sites of the Ascetic 
Self (Notre Dame, IN: University of Notre Dame Press, 2020).
4. D. Eribon, Michel Foucault, trans. Betsy Wing (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press 
1991), 313–314.

At the Bear’s La ir 
587
what he wanted to know and to whom to turn for advice, Foucault did not 
want to discuss generalities. He wanted my immediate feedback on his lecture 
on Cassian.
We made our way to the Bear’s Lair—­the student pub on campus, at the 
edge of Sproul Plaza. As we sat down to our beer, ­there was an unnerving mo-
ment. The forceful lecturer suddenly became a pupil. It was like seeing a large 
police dog turn docile. This was the “attentive attitude” that Paul Veyne had 
noticed as characteristic of Foucault.5 His body relaxed. His face seemed to 
broaden, as if to welcome ideas. He stared at me with an expression of utter 
candor. I had never met a distinguished scholar with such a capacity to put 
himself out to listen to ­others.
Tired by his lecture, Foucault was glad to speak in French. And speak we 
did. I think it was for two hours on end. ­There was not an aspect of his lecture 
on Cassian that we did not discuss. ­There was much that we touched on that 
seemed to be new to him. I suspect that he had never given sufficient thought 
to the role of Evagrius of Pontos (346–399)—­and, ­behind Evagrius, to the 
­giant figure of Origen of Alexandria (185–254)—as the source for Cassian’s 
notion of the role of thoughts and the consequent need for self-­scrutiny.
I urged Foucault to consider how ­those two figures, Origen and Evagrius, 
had made explicit the cosmic dimensions of the self that ­were only hinted at 
by Cassian. This implied a wider view of the person than that expounded with 
such force by Foucault. The monk was never alone with his thoughts: he was 
also wrapped in a cosmos filled with angels and demons.
For this reason, I suggested to him that Cassian’s image of the monk was 
somehow depleted by being presented only in terms of the anxiety caused by 
the fluidity of his thoughts. In the monastic traditions of the East (if not so 
plainly in the West), the fear of the demonic had always been balanced by a 
sense of the warm presence of mighty angels who ­were as close to the soul as 
­were the demons. They ­were personal protectors, based on a long and wide-
spread tradition that viewed the Christian as a person perpetually surrounded 
by “Invisible Companions.”
In such a view, ­there was room for warm, strong thoughts of joy and inspira-
tion to ­bubble up in the monk. Such thoughts betrayed the touch of loving 
presences, angels who countered the monk’s chill anxiety in the face of the 
Devil and his wiles. Without the ­imagined counterweight of warm angelic 
5. Paul Veyne, Foucault: His Thought, His Character (Cambridge: Polity Press, 2010), 137.

588 
Ch apter 84
powers, the “spiritual combat” of the monk, as Foucault presented it, seemed 
unnecessarily grim.
I do not know ­whether I persuaded Foucault. But we certainly came to 
agree on one ­thing—­that to study attitudes to sexuality in Christian circles 
was not simply to trace the sad advance of sexual repression through the ages. 
It was a key that unlocked some of the essential features of the Christian and 
post-­Christian West. A month ­later, in November, Foucault told the seminar 
of Richard Sennett at New York University that, “recently, Professor Brown 
stated to me that what we have to understand is why it is that sexuality became, 
in Christian circles, the seismograph of our subjectivity.”6
Solemn words and suited to the mood of the early 1980s. Only time 
would tell how each of us would put this insight to work, each of us in our 
own way.
Brief Encounters
I left next day for Chicago, so as to deliver lectures ­under the rubric of “Phi­
los­o­phers and Monks” at Seabury Western Theological Seminary (very much 
a summary of my work in the past two years); but not before leaving with 
Foucault a photocopy of the typescript of ­those lectures, along with The Mak-
ing of Late Antiquity. It seems that what interested him most in that book ­were 
my remarks on the “watershed” between classical antiquity and the ­later world 
of Christian monasticism (represented by Cassian)—­a watershed that he him-
self was exploring in terms of differing attitudes to the self.7
My next extensive contact with Foucault was very dif­fer­ent from that eve­
ning in the Bear’s Lair. I passed through Paris in February 1981 and had dinner 
at Foucault’s apartment along with Paul Veyne, whom I met for the first time. 
The occasion was utterly unpretentious. Foucault served a stew based on a 
Poitevin ­recipe of his ­mother’s. Purposive as ever, much of the conversation 
hinged on pos­si­ble Anglophone authors in the field of late antiquity who 
might be translated in a new series edited by Gallimard.
6. Foucault, “Sexuality and Solitude,” in The Essential Works of Michel Foucault 1: Ethics, ed. 
Paul Rabinow (New York: The New Press, 1997), 175–184, at 179.
7. Evidence for Foucault’s reading of my Making of Late Antiquity and other papers by me 
that I sent him at a ­later time has been assembled by Professor Niki Clements of Rice University 
in her visits to the Foucault archive at the Bibliothèque nationale. See now Niki Clements, 
“Foucault and Brown: Disciplinary Intersections,” Foucault Studies 22 (July 2022): 1–27.

At the Bear’s La ir 
589
­Later, the conversation turned to the death of Saint Macrina—­the ­sister of 
Gregory of Nyssa (ca. 335–395) and of Basil of Caesarea (ca. 330–379)—as I 
had described it in my Cult of the Saints: I had written of her as “sitting upright 
in bed, facing the setting sun.” But this was wrong. I had been misled by memo-
ries of Schubert’s Der Jüngling und der Tod: Die Sonne sinkt, o könnt’ ich mit ihr 
scheiden! Macrina, however, was no Romantic. As a good early Christian she 
had turned, not to the setting sun, but to the East. Wherewith Veyne (who had 
spotted my ­mistake) launched out into a vivid disquisition on the notion of 
the “Mystic East” in Freemasonry. Then, a bit like the White Rabbit, he took 
his leave, to catch the last train from Paris that would take him back to his 
beloved Provence, to his ­house in Bédoin, at the foot of Mont Ventoux.
In the next few years, I met Foucault in Berkeley for the occasional coffee. 
Once again, ­there was no chitchat: just the same “attentive attitude,” usually 
followed by a devastatingly ­simple question. Why, for instance, when speaking 
of intercourse in marriage, did Paul speak of the “marital debt”? Why did he 
use the commercial language of debt to speak of sexual relations? I was 
stumped. I had never thought of it that way. I gather that, a few years ­earlier, 
he had lobbed the same question at the Jesuits of Paris and, a ­little ­later, at 
members of the Philosophy Department at Berkeley. I hope their answers ­were 
more satisfactory than mine. I had seldom met somebody so skilled at putting 
himself in the learning position, and who gave so much in return, simply by 
being surprised at what he had learned.8
It was the Berkeley gradu­ate students who experienced Foucault at his best. 
Only recently I was moved by the account that my Prince­ton colleague Steve 
Kotkin gave me of the relations between Foucault and the group of gradu­ate 
students who took a seminar with him in 1982. In their com­pany, Foucault 
settled down in an utterly unpretentious manner. He treated them with the 
absolute candor that was so striking a feature of his attentive moments—­
sharing his ideas with them, explaining his more opaque statements, telling 
them where he had been wrong. They had been the lucky ones. By the time 
that Foucault offered his famous Berkeley seminar on the Greek notion of 
parrhésia, in the fall of 1983,9 I was already beyond the Sierras, far to the east, 
in Prince­ton.
8. For the importance of this concept for Foucault’s interpretation of Augustine’s views on 
marriage, see now Les aveux de la chair (Paris: Gallimard, 2018), 358–361; Confessions of the Flesh, 
282–286.
9. M. Foucault, Fearless Speech, ed. J. Pearson (Los Angeles: Semiotext(e), 2001).

590 
Ch apter 84
When, some five years ­later, I completed Body and Society, I summed up my 
debt to Foucault in a citation from his recent book on Greek attitudes to sex—­
L’usage des plaisirs (The Use of Pleasures):
­After all, what would be the value of the passion for knowledge if it resulted 
only in a certain knowingness . . . ​and not, in one way or another . . . ​in 
the knower’s straying afield from himself? ­There are times in life when the 
question of knowing if one can think differently than one thinks, and per-
ceive differently than one sees, is absolutely necessary if one is to go on 
thinking and reflecting at all.10
I did not know at the time that I wrote this (in 1987) that it was precisely this 
passage that had been read aloud at the small memorial ser­vice in honor of 
Michel Foucault that took place, on June 29, 1984, in the courtyard outside the 
mortuary of the Pitié-­Salpêtrière Hospital.11 I had chosen rightly.
Looking back, I ask myself what exactly it was that I owed to Foucault at 
this time. It is not an easy question. Since his death, the image of Foucault has 
swung wildly from having been for a time a cult figure in Amer­i­ca to virtual si-
lence, followed, now, by a more distant and scholarly return of interest. The pub-
lication of his many lectures—­both ­those given at the Collège de France and 
­those he gave in Amer­i­ca—­have revealed the fullness and cohesion of his thought 
far more extensively than I could have dreamed of when I first met him. Foucault 
the writer and thinker is now gathered into innumerable recent volumes.
What I got was a small part of Foucault. But it was sufficient to set me ­free 
from anachronistic approaches to sexuality in the ancient world. His interpre-
tation of John Cassian, which appeared in print in 1982 as “Le combat de la 
chasteté,” reassured me that I was on the right track in my own interpretation 
of the Desert ­Fathers. His other work on the ­Fathers of the Church, Les aveux 
de la chair (which included a chapter on Augustine) did not appear ­until 2018. 
But I did know that we shared a commitment to preserve the integrity of the 
past, disturbingly strange though it might appear to modern persons.
And I was fortunate to have known the living Foucault, even if only as briefly 
as a crackle of lightning, and to be touched by the freshness of his ever-­questioning 
mind—­the mind of a true phi­los­o­pher, brought to bear on so many issues that 
had been blocked by intellectual inertia and false familiarity.
10. M. Foucault, The Use of Pleasures (New York: Pantheon, 1985), 8; P. Brown, The Body and 
Society: Men, ­Women, and Sexual Renunciation in Early Chris­tian­ity (New York: Columbia Uni-
versity Press, 1988), xviii.
11. Macey, The Lives of Michel Foucault, 471.

591
85
Virginit y in Venice
Venice
In late 1980 and much of 1981, I began to work on the theme of virginity and 
society in late antiquity. This proj­ect eventually became a book called Body 
and Society:. Men, ­Women, and Sexual Renunciation in Early Chris­tian­ity, which 
appeared in 1988.1
In many ways, this was a proj­ect that could have been done anywhere with 
a good library. Unlike my intended study of Sasanian Iran (which I had now 
abandoned), I was not dependent on access to a specific landscape. Nor did 
I need to go to a specific archive. Any major library with standard collections 
of classical and Christian texts in Greek and Latin (and, if pos­si­ble, Syriac and 
Coptic) would do. This gave me a rare freedom to take my work wherever 
I wanted.
As it was, in ­those years, my wife Pat was working on her dissertation on 
the art and social setting of that most Venetian of Venetian paint­ers, Vittore 
Carpaccio (1465–1520).2 Her work tied her to the archives and artworks of 
Venice, while I was happy to make use of the abundant resources of the Mar-
ciana and of the other libraries scattered throughout the city. And so we lived 
in Venice from November 1980 to August 1981, and, then, for shorter periods 
each year up to 1986.
1. Peter Brown, The Body and Society: Men, ­Women, and Sexual Renunciation in Early Chris­
tian­ity (New York: Columbia University Press, 1988) and Body and Society: Twentieth-­
Anniversary Edition with a New Introduction (New York: Columbia University Press, 2008). 
I ­will cite from this more recent edition.
2. Patricia Fortini Brown, Venetian Narrative in the Age of Carpaccio (New Haven, CT: Yale 
University Press, 1988).

592 
Ch apter 85
As anyone can imagine, it was a delight to live in Venice. But it was, at first 
sight, inappropriate for my proj­ect. Venice was one of the few cities of Italy 
without a Roman or an early Christian past. In the year 1000 it was still a brash 
new city, without an ancient past. The sense of the slow unbroken growth of 
Chris­tian­ity from roots that plunged deep into Roman times, which was so 
very pre­sent in Rome, was almost entirely absent in Venice. My story would 
end five hundred years before the story of Venice began.
What Is Virginity? Images of the Virgin
Looking back, I think that this sense of a chasm between Venice and the an-
cient world had a salutary effect. It challenged me to define more sharply what 
virginity meant in early Chris­tian­ity—­that is, before the ­Middle Ages and 
before Venice came into existence. In that truly distant time, virginity was not 
what we mean now.
For this reason, Venice could not have been a better place to take the 
mea­sure of the gulf between medieval and modern attitudes to virginity 
and ­those that had emerged in the world of late antiquity. The art of Venice 
condensed, with overwhelming beauty, the role of virginity in the Christian 
imagination of late medieval and early modern Eu­rope. The Accademia 
gallery and the churches of Venice ­were filled with paintings from the days 
of the Re­nais­sance and the baroque. For the artists of that time (as also for 
their pious patrons) virginity meant, above all, the Virgin Mary; and all 
other holy virgins ­were assumed to be ­women—­female isomorphs of the 
Virgin herself.
­Those splendid renderings of fully female, idealized ­women ­were the glory 
of Venetian painting, and for centuries they had exercised a power­ful influence 
on our understanding of the Virgin and of ­women saints. Yet, looking at them 
in the churches of Venice, I had to remind myself that, a thousand years ­earlier, 
in late antiquity, virginity had not been gendered in that way. The virgin state 
had by no means been restricted to ­women: males had been just as prominent 
as ­women as advocates and exemplars of virginity. The early monks ­were often 
spoken of as “virgins”—­and to such an extent that a medieval Armenian sculp-
ture, in the monastery of Yovhannavank’, even showed the Five Wise Virgins 
of the parable (Matthew 25:1) greeting the coming of Christ the Bridegroom 
as monks with full beards! Virginity was a charged option for both sexes to a 
degree that takes some effort of the imagination to recapture.

Virginit y in Venice 
593
Byzantium: The Virgin of Murano
I came closer to the Chris­tian­ity of the late antique world when I viewed the 
art of Venice in a more distant age, at a time when Venice (though a new city 
in itself) was closely linked to the ancient, eastern empire of Byzantium. ­Here 
­were echoes of an older imaginative world, where virginity did not mean what 
it came to mean in western Eu­rope.
I would go frequently to the church of San Donato on the island of Murano, 
so as to stand beneath the twelfth-­century Byzantine mosaic of the Virgin in 
the apse. ­There I caught a hint of a more ancient notion of virginity. For what 
I saw was a ­human body perceptibly elongated, as it stretched from the top to 
the bottom of the dome of the apse—­a thin, vertical figure set against a sky of 
gold. The physical contours and stance of the Virgin expressed a constant, 
insensible contraction of her ­whole person away from normal forms of ­human 
contact. This shrinking and elongation of the body marked out a virgin (not 
just the Virgin: but any virgin, male or female) as somehow standing alone as 
a joining point between Heaven and earth.
In this way, the Virgin ceased to be marked as ­either a man or a ­woman. She 
was what Byzantines called her—­quite simply ho anthrôpos: the ­human being. 
She was not merely an exalted ­woman. Nor was she only a ­woman rendered 
both glorious and curious by the renunciation of sex. She had transcended the 
division of the sexes. She was humanity itself, as ­human persons ­were meant 
to be—­men and ­women alike. In viewing such a mosaic, Byzantines, like late 
antique Christians, glimpsed the true order of the world, made palpable and 
pre­sent in a ­human body irrevocably detached from ­human society. It was a 
vision of the ­human person stripped of the conventional markers of social 
identity—­free from sex, ­free from marriage, ­free from all the narrow boxes 
into which the life of the average person was divided. In late antiquity it was be-
lieved that anyone—­male or female—­could be like that. Indeed, it was more than 
hinted by many early Christian advocates of virginity that every­one should be 
like that—or, in a glorious ­future ­after the resurrection of the dead, that every­
one would be like that.
The sense of representing a model for a new humanity, gained through 
dismantling the conventional building blocks of society, was caught in the apse 
mosaic of the Virgin in San Donato and in other Byzantine works of art in 
Venice. ­These works—­and not the striking, idealized females of Re­nais­sance 
and baroque art—­were a faithful echo of the revolution implied in the late 
antique exaltation of virginity.

594 
Ch apter 85
The Body Isolated
I sought the social and religious background to this radical notion in the vol-
umes of the Patrologia Graeca and the Patrologia Latina, which stood on the 
shelves of the Marciana, the splendid public library of Venice that looked out 
on the busy waterfront of the Piazza di San Marco.
I began my work in the Marciana at the end of the story—­I first immersed 
myself in the rich Latin and Greek hagiographical lit­er­a­ture of the late fifth, 
sixth, and seventh centuries. I did this ­because the late antique notion of 
virginity was expressed at its most triumphant and most radical in ­those texts. 
They passed on dramatic notions of sexual renunciation and virginity in the 
form of legends that would haunt the Christian imagination in Byzantium and 
the West for the next thousand years.
What was the shape of ­those legends? The more I read, the more it struck 
me that the repression of sex was not their main theme. Rather, sexual renun-
ciation was about liberation. It was about freeing the body from the dense 
network of prescribed social roles that tied it to marriage. Cut ­free from society 
in this way, the isolated ­human body jumped into sharp focus: the charged 
body of the virgin martyr, protected from violation by guardian angels (in the 
legend of Saint Agnes); the bodies of bride and bridegroom stripped for 
the first time in the privacy of their bedroom, as they de­cided never to join in 
intercourse (in the Acts of Judas Thomas and in the story of Amoun of Nitria, 
one of the first monks of Egypt); the son of a noble Roman ­family, once 
swaddled in marks of his high rank, reduced to nothing but his famished body 
as a beggar among the faceless poor (in the poignant legend of Saint Alexis, 
the “Man of God”).
­These bodies ­were not seen, primarily, as bodies subject to the repression 
of their sexual urges, as modern persons might expect. They ­were presented, 
rather, as bodies that had been prized loose from their conventional social 
identities as husbands and wives, noblemen and commoners. They ­were 
sacred—­even uncanny—­because they ­were the living bodies of the socially 
dead. It was society, not sex, over which the detached virgin body was thought 
to have triumphed.
Furthermore, the legends did not represent the bodies of their heroes and hero-
ines as maimed by sexual repression. The very opposite was the case. They ­were 
presented as bodies set ­free to await a mighty transformation of the body itself.
At this time, making my way through the well-­stocked new accessions shelf 
of the Marciana, I fell on an essay by the Rus­sian aes­the­ti­cian and historian of 

Virginit y in Venice 
595
Byzantine culture Sergei Averincev: “Gold in the Symbolic System of 
Byzantium.”3 Averincev reminded us that, for Byzantines (with their alchemi-
cal lore), gold was not a mere metal: it was corrupt ­matter “healed.” In the 
same way, the bodies of virgins and ascetics ­were not seen as bodies repressed 
and mortified. They ­were bodies ­imagined to be turning slowly into pure gold 
as they ­were healed of their base ­matter. As I sat in the side chapels of San 
Marco, surrounded by domes and walls of liquid gold mosaic, it was indeed 
pos­si­ble to imagine a higher destiny for the virgin body than the mere absence 
of sex. The virgin body was a body set ­free from the bonds of conventional 
society and sent on its way ­toward the luminous solidity of the Resurrection.
3. S. Averincev, “L’or dans le système des symboles de la culture byzantine,” Studi medievali 
20, no. 1 (1979): 47–67—­taken from his Poetika rannevizantijskoi literatury [The Poetics of Early 
Byzantine Lit­er­a­ture] (Moscow: Akademija Nauk, 1977).

596
86
Body and Cit y
Ancient Bodies
So what did this progressive isolation of the body, associated with the eleva-
tion of virginity, mean in Greco-­Roman society as it passed from the classical 
world to the world of late antiquity? In my next bout of reading in the Marci-
ana, I returned to the doctors and moralists of the Roman Empire at its height, 
whom I had first read in Dow Library during my visit to Berkeley in 1975: the 
indefatigable writer on moral issues, Plutarch (ca. 50–ca. 120); the gynecologi-
cal treatise of Soranus (98–138); and, above all, the works of Galen (129–­
?199/216). Through ­these authors, I gained a better idea of what pagans of the 
second ­century thought about sex and the body, before the rise of the more 
radical notions espoused by Chris­tian­ity.
I found a body image profoundly dif­fer­ent from our own. Roman doctors 
did not represent the body as a reservoir of instinctual drives that demanded 
fulfillment. Far from it. In ­matters of sex, the ancient body was thought to be 
subject to the restraints of a zero-­sum game. Sexual energy was ­imagined 
to be in short supply. Intercourse required caution. It involved an expenditure 
of “heat” and vital energy that weakened the body. Galen could write that, if 
castration could only be performed in a less drastic fashion, then it was obvi-
ous that Olympic champions should be made eunuchs: “Men who remain 
chaste are stronger and bigger than the ­others and pass their time in better 
health” (Galen, On Seed 1.8).
Even if I allowed for the valetudinarian tendencies of ancient doctors and 
their clients, it was difficult to square such views with modern notions of 
Roman pagans as uninhibited ­children of nature, on whom Chris­tian­ity came 
to impose sexual restraints from which they had once been ­free.

Body a nd Cit y 
597
Rather, it seemed to me at the time that, in many circles in the late classical, 
pagan world, sex existed, as it ­were, on parole. It was made subservient to the 
needs of the ancient city. Sex was about supplying the city with generation 
­after generation of citizens. Among the civic elites, the joys of sex ­were ex-
pected to take second place to this solemn mission. The concord of husband 
and wife was held to derive not from sexual plea­sure but from a dif­fer­ent 
source: marital concord echoed the concord of the city. It was an eminently 
decorous view, where even the bedroom could be spoken of by Plutarch as 
“a school of orderly deportment” (Plutarch, Advice to a Bride and Groom 47).
Looking back, I think that I may have exaggerated the rigidity of ­these 
codes. Enjoying easy sexual access to slaves, upper-­class Roman males ­were a 
lot more permissive in sexual ­matters than ­were the doctors and phi­los­o­phers 
who advised them.1
A double morality prevailed, in which men expected ­women of their own 
class to be chaste, while they themselves ­were promiscuous in their dealings 
with unfree persons. But, at the time, I was struck less by the puritanism of the 
upper-­class codes of deportment than by the subservience of all thought on 
sexual ­matters to the needs of the city. Marriage, intercourse, and the relation 
between the sexes seemed to be engulfed in a strenuously asserted ideology 
of civic harmony.
Sex without the City
­These attitudes to sex brought me up against a further prob­lem. The Roman 
world itself changed in the course of the centuries. In AD 200, the imaginative 
grip of the city and its ideology still appeared to be dominant. But what hap-
pened when, by AD 400, this grip had slackened? Faced by this prob­lem, I found 
myself following from a new perspective the intriguing lines of thought opened 
up by Évelyne Patalagean in her study of poverty in the Eastern Empire.
Évelyne had shown that, in ­matters of social relations, the mystique of the 
ancient city evaporated in late antiquity. In a brutally demystified world, 
­people no longer saw their society in “civic” terms of the relations between 
citizens and noncitizens, but, more bleakly, in terms of a universal, economic 
relationship between rich and poor. What if the history of sexuality in the late 
1. See now Kyle Harper, From Shame to Sin: The Christian Transformation of Sexual Morality 
in Late Antiquity (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2013).

598 
Ch apter 86
Roman world followed the same pattern? Closely tied to their civic status, the 
decorous couplings of the elites had gone unquestioned ­because they ­were 
thought to contribute, by reproduction, to the good of the city. But what if 
sex—­even sex in marriage—­came to be seen as in itself problematic ? Once 
the veil of civic ideology had been removed from the marriage bed, what re-
mained? Mere bodies subject to sexual desire irrespective of their social status 
or usefulness to the city.
The tendency of classical moralists and doctors had always been to distin-
guish “good” sex from “bad” sex along civic lines. For them, marital intercourse 
was good sex: it produced heirs to carry on the traditions of their ­fathers. 
“Bad” sex was sex unmotivated and unrestrained by a sense of civic duty—it 
was the freewheeling sex of debauchees and of hotheaded young men.
In the pagan world, freewheeling sex was tolerated, especially in young 
males. This tolerance accounts for the widespread modern ste­reo­type of clas-
sical pagans as being persons of enviably easy morals. But, in real­ity, sex was 
strictly corralled. It was kept in its place in a massively compartmentalized 
view of society. Hence a split image: two dif­fer­ent kinds of sex—­good or bad, 
civic or noncivic—­were thought to belong each to a separate world. ­These 
worlds did not meet.
But what would happen if this cognitive split was removed: if sex could not 
be seen as safely compartmentalized in this way? Demystified, sex would be 
seen as sex wherever it occurred: it would emerge as a universal force, in­de­
pen­dent of the city. Just as ­there ­were no privileged citizens—­only rich and 
poor—so ­there would be no privileged sex—­sex for the sake of the city: only 
the universal libidinous stirring of bodies irrespective of their civic status and 
of the civic justifications for their sexual activity. All bodies ­were equal, and, 
in theory at least, all persons ­were equally ­free to do what they wished with 
their bodies. They could choose ­whether or not to have sex. Some men or 
­women might say no, with dramatic results.
“The Ocean-­Flood of the Messiah”
It was against the background of an unraveling civic world that I wanted to 
place the rise of the Christian ascetic movement. This movement produced 
heroes and heroines whose renunciation of marriage declared that society it-
self was as fragile as a spider’s web. It could be abandoned. The exaltation of 
virginity showed that the body could resist the oceanic pressures of the ancient 
city. ­Human bodies no longer had to serve the city by marriage, intercourse, 
and childbearing.

Body a nd Cit y 
599
In that way, the notions of sexual renunciation that circulated among radical 
Christians threatened to do a lot more than tamp down on sex. Virginity could 
be thought to act as a solvent of the social order. It vaporized the links between 
the individual and society, in a manner that often disturbed ordinary Chris-
tians quite as much as it disturbed Jews and pagans.
For this reason, ­there was a certain poignancy about the texts that I read in 
Venice at this time. Classical authors conveyed a massive sense of confidence 
that sex was ­really no prob­lem: that it could always be subjected to the discreet 
discipline of the city. But already in the second ­century this consensus was 
at risk. The rise of radical forms of Chris­tian­ity produced exponents who 
thought the exact opposite. ­These radicals believed that the proud mass of 
the ancient city (the work of so many centuries) would crumble like a sand-
castle, touched by “the ocean-­flood of the Messiah,” as radical Christians said 
no to sex and marriage.2
­There was a note of exhilaration in ­these radical statements that reminded 
me, in an odd way, of the enthusiasms of the sexual revolution of modern 
times. Just as the full expression of sex was expected to usher in, with almost 
magical ease, a new and happier society in the 1960s, so the fierce “boycott of 
the womb,” advocated by many Christians in around the year 200, was held to 
mark the end of an evil age and the beginning of the kingdom of Christ.
In this way, my study of the more radical forms of sexual renunciation, 
as ­these ­were ­imagined or practiced by early Christians, showed that this 
renunciation had less to do with the fear of sex than might be expected. 
Instead, renunciation provided a language of hope, of the coming of new 
­things.
Indeed, far from being only about sex, the issue of virginity and sexual re-
nunciation was also part of a conflict about the nature of the ancient city, and 
about the rights of the civic community over the bodies of its members. Vir-
ginity meant freedom—­the freedom of the individual to withdraw his or her 
body from the ever-­present constraints of marriage in the interests of society. 
Hence the seriousness of the conflicts for and against sexual renunciation in 
the first centuries of Chris­tian­ity. They ­were part and parcel of the ­grand de-
bate of late antiquity on the nature of society, as the Mediterranean world 
passed from a very ancient, civic world to a new social order that would end 
in Byzantium and in the Catholic ­Middle Ages of the West.
2. Acts of Judas Thomas 31, cited in Peter Brown, Body and Society: Men, ­Women and Sexual 
Renunciation in Early Chris­tian­ity: Twentieth-­Anniversary Edition (New York: Columbia Univer-
sity Press, 2008), 32.

600
87
Winter in Venice
Winter
I came to Venice, in late 1980, in the grip of winter. The city was closed in 
on itself. Its lanes ­were no longer clogged with tourists. A damp cold settled on 
the ancient stones, turning them into ice pads. It was not simply in order to 
understand the Gnostics and the early monks of Egypt that I set about learn-
ing Coptic in ­these winter months. It was also from a wish to study a language 
that conjured up for me a hot and sunny land.
Making my way ­every day through narrow lanes, I began to yearn for a 
wide-­open view. The one that I remember best was the widest of them all, and 
the saddest. It was a sunset view from the church of S. Elena, at the very tip of 
Venice, beyond the Arsenal and the Giardini Pubblici. From that point, the 
entire lagoon lay open. The light of the setting sun was diffused by a cold mist 
and by the smog of Mestre, and filled the sky with pure gold that was reflected 
in the ­water as in a mirror, turning the lagoon into a single spread of pale gold 
satin. Caught in the last rays of sunset, the win­dows on the Giudecca and even 
farther down the coast winked like light buoys. It was then, on the eve­ning of 
January 24, 1981, that I sensed that my ­father had died.
Ireland
My ­father had been battling prostate cancer, which had made itself increasingly 
manifest from October 1980 onward as it metastasized into his bones. With 
characteristic precision and dry humor, he narrated his symptoms—­the “in-
fernal triangle” of pain in his bladder and bowel, added to the occasional loss 
of balance. He chose his meta­phors with care: “My illness still hits at me (yes, 
hits, and quite painfully at times; and with a quite maddening variety of 

W inter in Venice 
601
method and timing, in the manner of a guerilla force ‘teasing’ an adversary 
large and creaking).” He advised me to keep healthy. I must not overwork: 
“You are now about exactly the same age as I was when I was invalided out 
from the Sudan—­just think of what the auld wreck I was, and be warned. . . . ​
Read only in good light . . . ​and hold on to your own faculties like a limpet!”
For three more months, he continued to care not only for my ­mother, but 
also for the ­family as a ­whole. He would drive into Dublin to visit Teedah and 
to make sure that she had a supply of coal for her fire (which meant that he 
lugged a heavy bucket up the long, wooden steps from the coal­house in the 
garden). He also visited his ­sister, Norah, in an old persons’ home on the other 
side of Dublin (no small drive for a man with an uncertain bladder). He would 
sit with her in the garden, as “this old bag of bones” could no longer make it 
up the stairs to her room. He would joke that, if a husband is defined as the 
man who takes tea with you and brings in the coals, then he was as polyga-
mous, in his last years, as King Solomon himself.
When I visited my ­father in ­those months, it was his endurance of perpetual 
discomfort that amazed me. His humor remained. He drew support from a 
coral reef of habits carefully maintained. Buttons ­were slowly but surely fas-
tened on trousers, jackets, and shirts—no Velcro for him.
I remember how I flew from Amer­i­ca to see him, on November 13, 1980 
(three weeks ­after my meeting with Foucault). First, I flew across the conti-
nent to join the Aer Lingus flight from JFK in New York to Dublin. Arriving 
at the ­great Lufthansa terminal in JFK, where Aer Lingus had a ­humble space, 
I walked past endless ice-­blue desks cased in silver steel. Fi­nally I saw my fellow 
countrymen gathered at the very end of the vast concourse—­a ­gaggle of nuns, 
priests, and gentlemen with brown hats, tweed jackets, and rumpled woolen 
cardigans. I was home again.
Settling back in with my parents, I felt as if I had landed on a planet of crush-
ing gravity, whose denizens moved in what was for me an agonizingly slow 
motion. Social custom seemed to rule their lives with a logic all of its own. On 
arrival, I suggested, brightly, that Dads should get a nurse to visit him ­every 
now and then to make him a ­little more comfortable—to wash him and to 
arrange his bedclothes. This was vetoed by both my parents—­and for what, 
for them, ­were irrefragable reasons. Did I not know that the only shop in 
Glasthule where they ­were accustomed to buy biscuits had recently closed? 
The only other grocery shop in the neighborhood was out of walking range for 
my ­mother, so that she could not buy biscuits. And what had biscuits to do 
with a nurse? Every­thing. For how could my ­mother be expected to welcome a 

602 
Ch apter 87
nurse to her home without offering her biscuits along with her cup of tea? It 
was an iron logic. No biscuits, no tea; no tea, no nurse.
Within a few days, ­these domestic rules and rituals came to make perfect 
sense to me. They bolstered the quiet courage with which my parents faced 
death. I came again in January. At the end of the visit, I left my ­father, having 
taken the Eucharist with him from the Reverend Linney, the local Church of 
Ireland clergyman. His clerical gown, put on for the occasion, (as my ­mother 
immediately noticed) failed to cover a pair of bright-­red, most unclerical 
suspenders. Afterward my ­father said how happy he was that we could have Com-
munion together. Then I had to leave for the airport. He died eight days ­later.
­Later in the year, Roberta Chesnut, my old Hebrew teacher, heard of my 
­father’s death. She wrote to me about him. She had visited my parents in 1968 
and had taken a ­great liking to them, but especially to my ­father:
He was a fine man and a good man, too, a ­father to have loved and been proud 
of. I always remember him, natty, dressed in his rust wool suit in Dublin.
That was Dads.
Denis Bethell
I returned to Venice in early February ­after my ­father’s funeral. I soon learned 
that I had lost yet another link to Ireland: my friend Denis Bethell had died, 
on February 15, 1981, of a swiftly moving cancer.
For over a de­cade, Denis had been my link to the medieval past of Ireland. 
Whenever I visited my parents, I would take time off to spend a long eve­ning 
with Denis, talking about the ­Middle Ages in all aspects and in all countries, 
but mainly about Dark Age Ireland. His occasional vivid letters kept Ireland 
before my eyes. In 1971, I had sent him my World of Late Antiquity. He had read 
it “in one day ­under the mulberry tree in the garden of the archbishop’s palace 
at Cashell.” Returning to Dublin, he wrote to thank me, seated at the win­dow 
of his apartment in Monkstown, overlooking Dublin Bay: he could watch
the seagulls circle on the dull blue sea, the light catch the shore of Howth, 
and the ­children scamper down to the Martello tower at Seapoint. . . . ​It is 
a delightful place to live—­but ­there, the Kish light is blinking at me, the 
Claude-­like sunset has vanished. I must close.
Of all pos­si­ble links to Ireland, Denis was the least likely. He was born in 
Gibraltar and educated in ­England. With his twill trousers, round, slightly 

W inter in Venice 
603
flushed face, and ­little moustache, he looked what my ­mother would call 
threateningly “Anglo-­English”—­the image of Col­o­nel Blimp. In fact, from the 
moment that he took up his post in University College Dublin (the National 
University), in 1966, Denis had entered with rare skill and sympathy into the 
intricacies and the sensitivities of the Irish medievalist scene, both as a scholar 
and as a teacher. He worked selflessly to establish an M.Phil. program in Me-
dieval studies, which eventually drew students and scholars to Dublin from all 
over Eu­rope and the English-­speaking world, to benefit from Denis’s extraor-
dinarily diverse and humane learning.
In the Irish manner, Denis’s apartment on Trafalgar Terrace in Monkstown 
was ­grand but had known better days. Its magnificent high ceiling was framed 
in elaborate plasterwork; wide win­dows, draped with velvet curtains, faced 
out onto Dublin Bay: but it was heated by only one turf fire. Professor János 
Bak, who was then a refugee from Hungary and a professor at the University 
of British Columbia in Vancouver, remembers “having my back froze off” as 
he worked with Denis on the translation of a basic introduction to medieval 
studies.1
This once-­lordly apartment was the living heart of an extraordinary group 
of scholars of early Christian and medieval Ireland. It was ­there that I met 
Ludwig Bieler, the ­great authority on Saint Patrick, who, many years before, 
might have taught me Latin, when I was a boy in my gap year before ­going to 
Oxford, had my ­father’s income and the complexities of the Dublin bus system 
permitted it.
­These gatherings could stretch into the wee hours and beyond. One such 
legendary moment in Denis’s apartment marked the end of a groundbreaking 
international conference on Visigothic Spain in May 1975.2 As the sun ­rose 
over Dublin Bay on Whitsunday morning, Denis was heard to exclaim: “Glory 
be! On time as usual!”
Now deathly ill himself, Denis had, with his usual selflessness, driven me 
to the airport on my last visit to my ­father on January 16. When I saw him ­after 
my ­father’s funeral, in late January, he was in bed, propped up by large pillows 
in his oversize, dimly lit bedroom. “You know, Peter,” he said. “They say that 
one should prepare for death. But the fact is that it is Death that takes you.”
1. J. Bak, in Times of Upheaval: Four Medievalists in Twentieth-­Century Central Eu­rope, 
ed. Pavlina Rychterová, Gábor Klaniczay, Pawel Kras, and Walter Pohl (Budapest: Central 
Eu­ro­pean University Press, 2019), 160.
2. Visigothic Spain, ed. E. James (Oxford University Press, 1980).

604 
Ch apter 87
A lectureship was founded in his honor. In 1983, my ­mother reported to me 
the manner in which he was remembered on that occasion: “They said Denis 
was a beautiful man—­gentle, scholarly, ever-­polite, and infinitely patient.” One 
would not wish for better virtues in a scholar and a friend.3
3. See now Marc A. Meyer, “Denis L. T. Bethell (1934–1981) Remembered,” in The Culture 
of Christendom. Essays in Medieval History in Memory of Denis L. T. Bethell, ed. Marc A. Meyer 
(London: Hambledon Press, 1993), ix–­xviii.

605
88
Surprised in Venice
Lellia Cracco Ruggini (1931–2021)
­After ­those sad winter months, we stayed on in Venice ­until August 1981. At 
that time, Arnaldo Momigliano combined his professorship in London with 
an appointment at the Scuola Normale Superiore di Pisa. He encouraged me 
to get in touch with his many friends and with their students, who formed a 
network that stretched across northern Italy.
The most lasting friendship to emerge from ­those contacts was with Lellia 
Cracco Ruggini, the professor of Roman history in Turin. I had long known 
her work. Her Economia e società nell’ “Italia annonaria”, which appeared in 
1961, had immediately struck me as a breakthrough: it was the first successful 
attempt to write the economic history of a major Italian region in the late 
Roman period.1 She invited me to lecture in Turin. I found a grande dame 
in the best Italian tradition, surrounded by the warm admiration of a cadre of 
enthusiastic and well-­trained students, such as Domenico Vera, then at Trieste 
and now at Parma, with whom I have remained in contact ever since. (At a 
­later time, I met a further generation of her students, most notably Rita Lizzi 
Testa of the University of Perugia.) This was the beginning of a lively relation-
ship with a remarkable tradition of Italian scholarship on the institutional and 
social history of the ­later empire. It has proved as impor­tant for me as the one 
that I had already established with scholars in France.
1. Lellia Cracco Ruggini, Economia e società nell’ “Italia annonaria”: Rapporti fra agricoltura 
e commercio dal IV al VI secolo d.C. (Milan: Giuffrè, 1961), reprinted with an updated bibliogra-
phy and a valuable introduction (Bari: Edipuglia, 1995), 1–16. See now Jean-­Michel Carrié, “Lel-
lia Cracco Ruggini,” in New Late Antiquity, 77–110, and Rita Lizzi Testa, “In Memoriam. Omag-
gio a Lellia Cracco Ruggini,” Studi Medievali, ser. 3, 62 (2021): 801–815.

606 
Ch apter 88
I bonded instantly with Lellia’s husband, Giorgio Cracco, a sweet soul, truly 
an anima dulcis. We realized that we shared a love of holy men. Giorgio had 
recently shown how the saints of the Dialogues of Gregory the ­Great ­were 
wilder figures, closer to the Syrian model of “my” holy men than we had 
thought. They brought a breath of charismatic power into the battered prov-
inces of Gregory’s Italy.2 We ­were also surprised to find that we shared a 
curiosity about Marco Polo and the Mongol Empire, though I might have 
expected as much from someone born on the edge of the Veneto and deeply 
engaged with the politics of medieval Venice.3
Four years ­later, in November 1985, I was a visiting professor at Giorgio’s 
Istituto di Storia Medioevale e Moderna in the University of Padua. The lec-
tures that I gave ­there ­were a dress rehearsal for the last parts of Body and So-
ciety, especially on the long-­term implications of the ­great debate between 
Augustine and Julian of Eclanum on sex, marriage, and original sin.4
A Surprise at the Mundial
When I returned to Venice in July and August 1982, I lived in an apartment on 
the waterfront of the Giudecca, close to the local sports club. On July 8 I was 
particularly aware of this proximity. The air shook with the roars of the nearby 
fans, gathered in front of the tele­vi­sion in the bar of the sports club, as Italy 
beat Poland two to zero in the semifinal of the Mundial. I too was glued to the 
screen.
Then the telephone rang. It had to be an international call. No Italian would 
ring at such a sacred moment in the course of the Mundial. I answered rather 
coldly—­yes, this is Peter Brown. It was an American male voice, with the 
heavy tone of someone who had settled down to the pleasant task (maybe, 
I liked to think, with a whiskey in hand) of telling a lot of ­people a lot of very 
good news. He was ringing from Chicago, in order to tell me that I had won a 
prize from the John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation. He asked me 
­whether I had heard of the foundation. No, I’d never heard of it. So I did not 
know what this prize might be: in my case, it was $44,800 per year (virtually 
2. G. Cracco, Uomini di Dio e uomini di Chiesa nell’alto Medioevo (Rome: Edizioni di storia e 
letteratura, 1977).
3. G. Cracco, Società e stato nel Medioevo veneziano (Florence: Olschki, 1967) and Tra Venezia 
e Terraferma. Per la storia del Veneto regione del mondo (Rome: Viella, 2009).
4. Peter Brown, Sesso e persona tra antichità e Medioevo (Padua: Nuova Vita, 1986).

Sur pr ised in Venice 
607
a year’s salary) for the next five years. This meant, in effect, that, if I wished, I could 
take the next five years off from teaching in order to pursue pure research.
Three days ­later, Italy beat Germany in the final of the Mundial, and the 
neighboring sports club exploded with joy, as half its members leaped into 
the lagoon with a huge splash and a wild yell of triumph.
Summertime
It was only when I returned to Berkeley that the full implications of my prize 
became clear to me. In the words of Larry Rosen, a fellow recipient of the prize:
With businessmen, time is money; with academics, money is time.5
In an exacting and highly professional university system, the MacArthur Prize 
enabled scholars (and especially young scholars) to take time off from the 
burden of teaching and administration, to explore new fields and to find a 
voice of their own.
At the time, however, I was content to celebrate by treating myself to a cof-
fee at a ­table in the ottocento splendor of Caffè Florian on the Piazza di San 
Marco. I did it only once—­just to show that I could. I was glad to return to the 
brisk ­little bar beside the entrance to the Marciana, where (standing at the bar, 
of course: never at a ­table!) I would exchange banter with the barman with 
increasing confidence, and would listen to the scuttlebutt of fellow researchers 
in Venice.
I did much of my reading at home. In the full heat of summer, violent thun-
derstorms would explode over the Giudecca. A win­dow of the apartment 
looked out onto the back of the dome of the church of Il Redentore—­the mag-
nificent church of Christ the Redeemer, built by Andrea Palladio as an ex-­voto 
for the ending of the plague in Venice in 1575/76. A huge statue of Christ the 
Redeemer stood on top of the dome. As the storm clouds exploded at night-
time above the statue, lightning flashes threw the ­great figure of Christ into 
ever-­sharper relief, so that it seemed, in the shimmering broken light of the 
storm, that he was walking ever closer to me, down from the dome of the church. 
It was in this sultry season that I settled down in the apartment to enjoy yet 
another surprise—­twenty-­nine hitherto unknown letters written by Augus-
tine of Hippo in his old age.
5. Priscilla Van Tassell, “Rich but ‘Embarassing’ Prize,” New York Times, November 7,, 1982.

608 
Ch apter 88
“While We Groan in Vain and Are Unable to Help”: 
Augustine in the Divjak Letters
Only a few years previously, a young Austrian scholar, Johannes Divjak, had 
discovered ­these letters, hidden at the back of a late medieval illuminated 
manuscript. Traveling on a low bud­get on behalf of the Austrian Acad­emy of 
Sciences, (so I was told) Divjak was living in his trailer car in Le Camping de 
Paris when he went into town to announce his discovery to the Augustinian 
Institute.
Just before I left for Eu­rope, I had been able to check Divjak’s edition of the 
new letters out of Dow Library. I saw at once that many of ­these letters dealt 
with incidents in the life of Augustine as an old bishop of which we had known 
nothing previously; and—­even better still—­some dealt with incidents of 
which we had known only one side of the story. Photocopies of ­these letters 
­were burning a hole in my luggage as I promised myself to read them at my 
leisure in Venice.
The letters bore the smell of the earth of Augustine’s Roman Africa. They 
had plainly slipped out of the main collections of his correspondence ­because 
they contained ­little or no high theology. They ­were too down-­to-­earth for 
medieval tastes. Instead, they dealt primarily with Augustine’s day-­to-­day busi-
ness as a bishop in the last de­cade of his life.
This was a pure fragment of the past, fresh as the dawn, such as rarely comes 
the way of scholars of the ancient world. I have already referred to ­these letters, 
now known from their discoverer as the Divjak Letters.6 Reading through 
them in Venice for the first time, I realized at once that I had to change my 
mind on many aspects of the portrait of Augustine that I had drawn in Augus-
tine of Hippo.
Seen at ground level, through ­these letters, the old Augustine was a far 
less dominant figure as a Catholic bishop than I had once thought. When I wrote 
about Augustine in 1967, I had stressed the confidence with which he wrote (in 
his City of God and elsewhere) on the preordained expansion of the Catholic 
Church. The Divjak Letters showed that ­there was an ele­ment of wishful think-
ing in such claims. What I read in ­these letters revealed how ­little authority the 
Catholic bishops actually enjoyed on a day-­to-­day basis. Their wishes ­were 
frequently flouted by a robustly secular administration. Far from respecting 
6. See chapter 40: “Writing Augustine of Hippo” and chapter 45: “Resonances.”

Sur pr ised in Venice 
609
the church, imperial officials had no hesitation about denying tax exemptions 
to the clergy and overriding the rights of church sanctuary by dragging fiscal 
debtors from the altar: “while we groan in vain and are unable to help.”7
Nor did Augustine appear in ­these letters as a dominant theological author-
ity. In 419, Consentius, a layman who had recently retired to the Balearic Is-
lands, wrote to Augustine in a thoroughly offhand manner. He told Augustine 
that he had read a few pages of the Confessions. But he had put it aside. It was 
not to his taste. He preferred the “clear and elegantly ordered style” of Lactan-
tius, the “Christian Cicero” and apologist for Chris­tian­ity in the age of Con-
stantine. At a time when Augustine was supposed to be at the height of his 
reputation during the Pelagian controversy, Consentius’s letter was a shot 
across the bow: “even if we said that Augustine’s writings are beyond reproach 
[he wrote], still we do not know what the judgment of posterity ­will be on his 
works. Neither did anyone rebuke Origen while he was alive—­Origen who, 
­there is no doubt, was condemned ­after two hundred years or so.”8
I had never ­imagined that Augustine could have been treated in this dismis-
sive way.
Nor did I expect the resilience that he showed in fighting a long uphill ­battle 
with corruption and vio­lence on his own doorstep. In 428 (when seventy-­four 
years old) Augustine mounted a campaign against a ring of local slave-­traders 
who used the port of Hippo as their base so as to raid the mountain villages 
close to the city. Up ­until the discovery of the Divjak Letters we knew nothing 
of this incident: no mention of it was made in any of his surviving works or in 
any other text of the time. Yet ­here he was, interviewing the victims, consulting 
­lawyers, and drafting a petition to the court of the distant emperor that is one 
of the noblest passages in his entire correspondence:
Barbarians are resisted when the Roman armies are in good condition for 
fear that Romans ­will be held in barbarian captivity. But who resists ­these 
traders who are found everywhere, who trade, not in animals but in ­human 
beings. . . . ​Who resists when ­people everywhere and from ­every side, car-
ried off by vio­lence and ensnared by deception, are led into the hands of 
­those who bid for them? Who ­will resist in the name of Roman freedom?9
7. Letter 22*. 2, trans. R. Eno, Saint Augustine. Letters VI (1*-29*) (Washington, DC: Catholic 
University of Amer­i­ca Press, 1989), 151.
8. Letter 12*. 11, Eno, 105.
9. Letter 10*.5, Eno, 79.

610 
Ch apter 88
“Our ­Little Greek”
Nor did I expect to come upon an urbane side of the old bishop. At the very 
end of his life, Augustine approached Firmus, a notable of Carthage, urging 
him to become baptized. He had even sent Firmus a copy of the City of God. 
Firmus had read as far as book 10 and remained unconvinced. Even though 
married to a Christian wife, he still held back.10
As part of their correspondence, Firmus had sent Augustine—of all 
­things!—­the school exercises of his son (prob­ably ­little speeches composed 
by the boy), to ask the former rhetor for his opinion on them. Far from seem-
ing both­ered, Augustine was charm itself. He wrote back at once. How was 
“our ­little Greek”? He hoped that the boy would be a credit to the classical edu-
cation that he was receiving in the schools of Carthage: “for you, of all ­people 
[Firmus], should know that ­these [rhetorical accomplishments] are good 
­things, and of ­great advantage.” Augustine did not condemn the classics. He 
simply urged the boy to be careful to use his education properly. He should 
remember his Cicero: “Eloquence combined with wisdom has proved to be 
of the greatest benefit to states: but eloquence without wisdom, harmful and 
of no good to anyone.”11
This was one of the last letters that Augustine ever wrote, on the eve of the 
Vandal invasion of 429. It was an extraordinary experience to read for the very 
first time, in the damp heat of a Venetian summer, an interchange on Cicero 
between an old bishop and the ­father of a ­little boy in a Carthage still bathed 
in the late sunlight of the ancient world.
10. Letter 2*.3, Eno 20. On Firmus, see now Peter Brown, Through the Eye of a Needle: Wealth, 
the Fall of Rome, and the Making of Chris­tian­ity in the West, 350–550 AD (Prince­ton, NJ: Prince­ton 
University Press, 2012), 357.
11. Cicero, De inventione 1.1, in Letter 2*.12, Eno, 28–29.

611
89
The Collège de France
Paris 1982. Le Fauteuil: The Armchair
In June 1982, I delivered lectures at the Collège de France in Paris. The invita-
tion had been arranged by Paul Veyne and Michel Foucault. In many ways, 
­those intense and happy days ­were like a homecoming. Ever since I had 
worked on Saint Augustine in the 1960s, visiting Marrou at Châtenay, sitting 
in on seminars, and seeking advice from the Augustinian ­Fathers on rue Fran-
çois 1er, Paris had been for me an alternative to Oxford.
My four lectures ­were entitled (in order) “Les Saints de la Paideia”; “Phi-
losophes et Pouvoir au Bas-­Empire”; “Le visage de la Pauvreté”; and “Vers une 
‘philosophie sociale.’ ” (“The Saints of Paideia”; “Phi­los­o­phers and Power in the 
­Later Empire”; “The Face of Poverty”; and “Toward a ‘Social Philosophy’ ”).
I remember a ner­vous walk from the Fondation Hugot, where I was lodged, 
past the church of Saint-­Germain-­des-­Prés, and along the Boulevard Saint-­
Germain to the collège, at Place Marcellin Berthelot, in the heat of the early 
after­noon. It was the first time that I had ever lectured in French, and I was 
worried by the prospect of being derailed by my stammer on such a public 
occasion. I clutched a text of my lectures that was as heavi­ly marked up as a 
musical score, hoping that the written words (carefully accented) would even-
tually turn into correctly spoken French.
I was saved by le fauteuil—by the professor’s armchair. On arriving, I was 
told that it was customary for the lecturer to sit in a solid armchair ­behind a 
­table, rather than to stand at a podium. To sit in the professor’s fauteuil con-
veyed an almost late Roman sense of authority. I could imagine that I was an 
emperor and that my audience was my consistorium, standing before my 
throne. In fact, I found that the armchair was more comfortable and more 

612 
Ch apter 89
intimate than standing at a podium. Most impor­tant of all, it enabled me to sit 
back, and to avoid the cramped breathing brought on by my stammer.
­These lectures did not draw on my recent work on virginity. Instead, they 
reflected my preoccupations in my first years in Berkeley: the conflict between 
the phi­los­o­pher and the monk in late antiquity, and the rise to power of the 
Christian bishop, in alliance with the monks and in the name of the poor, that 
brought an end to the ancient city. The lectures formed the basis of my subse-
quent book, Power and Persuasion, which would appear in 1992.1
Old Friends: Institut d’Études Augustiniennes,  
rue de l’Abbaye; Claude Lepelley (1934–2015)
In between lectures, I spent much time at the Institut d’Études Augustini-
ennes. I had last visited the Pères Augustiniens in their somewhat shabby of-
fice on rue François 1er. Now I found them handsomely installed as an institute 
on the rue de l’Abbaye, in the shadow of Saint-­Germain-­des-­Prés.
I only needed to sit for a few hours in the reading room of the institute for 
the entire world of French Augustinian studies as I had known it since the 
1960s to walk past my desk, as old friends and names long known to me came 
in and out. Among the very best of ­those friends was Claude Lepelley. I had 
first met Claude at the Oxford Patristics Conference of 1967. We had retired 
to the East Gate pub beside the Examination Schools, when the hectic busi-
ness of the conference closed down for the night. He was a big man, with a 
heavy, square face and projecting chin like a Tough Guy in a cartoon. But he 
was the sweetest of men. A pious Catholic of Gallican leanings, he confessed 
to a huge admiration for the Anglican Book of Common Prayer. Whenever he 
came to Oxford, he said, he would go out of his way to attend evensong in 
Christ Church Cathedral.
In 1982, Claude had only recently made his name through a two-­volume 
study of the cities of the Roman provinces of North Africa in the ­later empire. 
In an extraordinarily detailed mobilization of the epigraphic material, he made 
an impressive case for the permanence and for the essential Roman-­ness of 
the urban life of Roman Africa throughout the fourth ­century and ­after.
Claude would defend this position fiercely up to the end of his life. In his 
opinion, the North African city of the ­later empire had managed to remain a 
1. Peter Brown, Power and Persuasion in Late Antiquity: ­Towards a Christian Empire (Madi-
son: University of Wisconsin Press, 1992).

The Collège de Fr a nce 
613
precious oasis of neutral, civic values, at a time when ­these values ­were being 
swept aside in the rising tide of confessional intolerance. ­Here ­were men and 
­women who (when it came to civic ­matters) thought of themselves as citizens 
first, and Catholics, Donatists, and pagans very much second. This emphasis 
on shared classical values echoed the insistence of Claude’s exemplar, Henri-­
Irénée Marrou, on the continued strength of lay culture at a time of headlong 
religious change. It was a view thoroughly consistent with Claude’s good na-
ture and integrity.2 From this time onward I have trea­sured his two volumes 
on the cities of Roman Africa. They set the life of Augustine against the back-
ground of a robust urban culture that had by no means succumbed to the 
otherworldly message of the bishop of Hippo.
Discoveries
At just this time, Claude’s instinct was proved right by an unexpected discov-
ery. ­These ­were the Divjak Letters, which I mentioned in the previous chapter. 
Claude was among the first to get to study them and had instantly notified me 
of the discovery. I was thrilled to find myself once again on a new frontier in 
the study of Augustine.3
By way of return, I suggested to Claude that ­there might be similar letters 
from the province of Africa lying unnoticed in little-­known collections. I urged 
him to look at the Spuria—­the unidentified, spurious letters—­attached to the 
works of Sulpicius Severus (the late fourth-­century biographer of Saint Mar-
tin), which had struck me as having a distinctly local, African flavor. Sure 
enough, Claude looked at them carefully and immediately edited them with 
a full commentary.4 ­Here was a rare voice—­the voice of an unknown land-
owner from the very soil of Africa.
2. C. Lepelley, Les cités de l’Afrique romaine au Bas-­Empire (Paris: Études Augustiniennes, 
1977, 1981), and “Le lieu des valeurs communes: La cité terrain neutre entre paiens et chrétiens 
dans l’Afrique de l’Antiquité tardive,” in Idéologies et valeurs civiques dans le monde romain: Hom-
mages à Claude Lepelley, ed. H. Inglebert (Nanterre: Picard, 2002), 271–285. For a less positive 
view, see now M. Gassman, “A Feast in Carthage: Testing the Limits of ‘Secularity’ in Late 
Antiquity,” Journal of Roman Studies 110 (2020): 199–219. See now Gareth Sears, “Transforming 
Late Antique Africa: Claude Lepelley,” in New Late Antiquity, 551–565.
3. C. Lepelley, “La crise de l’Afrique romaine au début du Ve siècle, d’après les lettres nouvel-
lement découvertes de Saint Augustin,” Académie des Inscriptions et Belles-­Lettres: Comptes 
Rendus, July–­October, 1981, 445–463.
4. C. Lepelley, “Trois documents méconnus sur l’histoire sociale et religieuse de l’Afrique 
romaine tardive,” Antiquités africaines 25 (1989): 235–262.

614 
Ch apter 89
New Friends: Aline Rousselle
I also made new friends. The one who impressed me most was Aline Rousselle. 
When working on the cult of saints, I had been struck by the manner in which 
Aline had applied her deep knowledge of Greco-­Roman medicine to issues of 
late antique religion—to the miracles of Saint Martin and to the workings of 
his shrine compared with the former healing sanctuaries of pagan Gaul.5 
­Here was a bridge between two worlds, the pre-­Christian and the Christian.
Aline also pointed out the extent to which secular medicine converged on 
religious healing. Doctors and priests held similar views on the diagnosis and 
cure of illnesses. She showed, with ­great skill, how the two healing systems, far 
from being opposed to one another, converged on a similar view of the ­human 
body—so that religious actions, such as exorcism, shared the same body fan-
tasies about the extrusion of disease as did the seemingly more “rational” writ-
ings of the doctors on purgative medicine. Her views ­were crucial to the last 
chapter of my Cult of the Saints.
We found that we ­were kindred souls in our fascination with the overlap of 
the rational and the irrational in late antiquity. She told me what it was like to 
grow up in Morocco, in daily contact with beliefs in djinns and with fully work-
ing healing shrines at the graves of Muslim marabouts. This shared interest had 
already led her to take on the translation of my Cult of the Saints and of The 
Making of Late Antiquity.6
Aline’s own work on religion in late antiquity came to fruition a ­little 
­later—­with her prizewinning book, Croire et guérir: la foi en Gaule dans 
l’Antiquité tardive,7 and brilliant chapters on the religious history of the third 
­century in a volume that she wrote with Jean-­Michel Carrié.8
I did not know, when I first met her in Paris, the extent to which Aline had 
carried her knowledge of ancient medicine into the study of the origins of 
Christian asceticism, and especially on the interrrelation of monastic diet, 
ancient medical knowledge, and the suppression of the sexual drive. It was she 
who noticed that John Cassian, of all ­people, had cited ancient medical lore 
5. A. Rousselle, “Du sanctuaire au thaumaturge. La guérison en Gaule au ive siècle,” Annales 
31 (1976): 1085–1107.
6. Peter Brown, Le culte des saints (Paris: Le Cerf, 1984), and La génèse de l’Antiquité tardive 
(Paris: Gallimard, 1983).
7. A. Rousselle, Croire et guérir: la foi en Gaule dans l’Antiquité tardive (Paris: Fayard, 1990).
8. J.-­M.Carrié and A. Rousselle, L’empire romain en mutation: des Sévères à Constantin (Paris: 
Le Seuil, 1999).

The Collège de Fr a nce 
615
which had recommended that athletes should sleep with leaden plates on their 
genitals, so as to “cool” their sperm, thereby avoiding loss of energy through 
night emissions. I had not expected such medical precision in a Desert ­Father.
Aline Rousselle combined, to an impressive degree, a grasp of ancient 
medicine and of ascetic lit­er­a­ture with a humane sense of the vast, ­silent pain 
brought to bear on ­women by the reproductive strategies advocated by late 
antique doctors, ­lawyers, and male intellectuals. ­These studies brought home 
to me the cost to ­women of the notion of ser­vice to the city through childbear-
ing. At the same time, she played an impor­tant role in denouncing vio­lence 
against ­women in her hometown, Montpellier. ­These qualities make her book 
Porneia one of the most serious contributions to feminist studies on the ancient 
world to appear in any language.9
Aline Rousselle shared with Évelyne Patlagean (whom I also met frequently 
at this time) an intense commitment to the social realities of the ­later empire and 
an acute compassion for the faceless millions—­women, ­children, and the 
poor—­who lived in the shade of a brilliant world. It was to this French tradi-
tion, where social history and the study of the body converged, that I would 
turn by preference when writing Body and Society, as a complement and a 
counterweight to the more literary approaches that had come to flourish 
among many historians of the early church.
At a time when early Christian studies tended to be dominated by textual 
approaches derived from New Testament scholarship, from postmodern 
literary criticism, and from the study of ancient rhe­toric, I turned, for a sense 
of real­ity, to the more historically grounded work of Aline Rousselle and Évelyne 
Patlagean in France, and to the school of Lellia Ruggini in Italy. Among such 
scholars, I found the knowledge of law, of social institutions, and of archaeol-
ogy that provided a solid context for the dazzling confections of Patristic and 
late classical lit­er­a­ture.
Paul Veyne
The center of my life in Paris at that time was the group formed around the 
Collège de France. It was ­there that I linked up again with Paul Veyne, ­after 
our first meeting at dinner with Foucault in early 1981. Unlike many campuses 
9. A. Rousselle, Porneia. De la maîtrise du corps à la privation sensorielle (Paris: Presses Uni-
versitaires de France, 1983), translated as Porneia: On Desire and the Body in Antiquity (Oxford: 
Blackwell, 1988).

616 
Ch apter 89
I knew in Amer­i­ca, where I would be passed from dinner to dinner and from 
power lunch to power lunch, the collège was not an absorptive host. Apart 
from one ­grand reception, I was left on my own to make what­ever contacts 
I wished in Paris.
Veyne attended all my lectures, adding his usual puckish comments. ­After 
my third lecture on monks and poverty (where I had stressed the somewhat 
artificial identification of the monks with the poor) he dashed off a hilarious 
analy­sis of a similar play of identities by which Marxist militants claimed to 
represent the proletariat, based on his experiences as a Party member in the 
1950s:
When I was a young man, the relation between the militants of working 
class extraction (not the intellectuals!) was similar to the one between the 
monks and the poor. The communist militant symbolizes the proletariat. 
Each militant is reputed to be a proletarian, even if he becomes a profes-
sional politician and does not work in any factory.
­These militants, Veyne continued, would pay back to the Party their salaries 
as members of Parliament (thirty thousand francs per week) and would get 
from the Party the minimum salary of a French worker (three thousand francs 
per month). But the payoff in prestige was worth it.
For he [the militant] is assumed to be the real proletarian, and a proletarian 
who is intéressant [in one’s interest] to visit, to be on visiting terms with—­a 
reputable and not a tedious nor boring proletarian.
This was vintage Veyne, driven by his unfailing sense of the oddity of 
institutions.

617
90
Pierre Hadot
Oxford Encounters: Paul Henry (1906–1984) 
and Pierre Hadot (1922–2010)
My visit to Paris enabled me to link up again with one ­great friend—­the unri-
valed interpreter of ancient philosophy, Pierre Hadot. Our friendship went 
back for fifteen years. I first met Hadot at the Oxford Patristics Conference of 
1967, when he and Frau Ilsetraut ­were a newly married ­couple. I brought roses 
from my garden for them, and we had supper together at a Chinese restaurant 
at the bottom of the Cowley Road. Hadot’s gray-­blue eyes flashed with intel-
ligence, magnified in their effect by large glasses, as we discussed our vari­ous 
proj­ects of research.
Many years before, I had met Hadot’s mentor, the Jesuit scholar Paul Henry, 
who had written two groundbreaking studies: Plotin et l’Occident1 and an essay 
on the Neoplatonic background to Augustine’s account of the mystical experi-
ence that he had shared with his ­mother in Ostia—­the famous “Vision of Ostia” 
recounted in the Confessions.2 Henry had joined two hitherto distinct worlds by 
studying the reception of the pagan Neoplatonism of the Greek East by Chris-
tian thinkers in the Latin West. It was like the discovery of the missing link.
In the 1960s, Hadot collaborated with Paul Henry to edit the works of the 
Neoplatonic phi­los­o­pher Marius Victorinus and eventually wrote a mono-
graph on him.3 Victorinus was a crucial figure in the transfer of ideas from 
East to West; and he had played a decisive role in the intellectual evolution of 
1. P. Henry, Plotin et l’Occident (Louvain: Spicilegium Sacrum Lovaniense, 1934).
2. P. Henry, La Vision d’Ostie (Paris: J. Vrin, 1938).
3. P. Hadot, Marius Victorinus. Recherches sur sa vie et ses oeuvres (Paris: Études Augustin­
iennes, 1971).

618 
Ch apter 90
Augustine. When teaching in Rome in the 350s, he had converted to Chris­
tian­ity in a fully public manner that impressed Augustine when he heard about 
it at the time of his own conversion in Milan in 386. More impor­tant yet, 
­because Augustine knew no Greek, the only works of Plotinus that he was able 
to read ­were ­those that had been translated into Latin by Victorinus. ­These 
translations ­were Augustine’s gateway to the Greek East.
I had met Paul Henry in 1957, when I was a young fellow at All Souls. He 
had come to Oxford to deliver a course of lectures on the philosophical back-
ground to the ­great Trinitarian controversies of the fourth ­century. He lectured 
to an almost empty room; but I was gripped. Like the lecture of Festugière on 
Libanius and his students, which I must have heard at roughly the same time, 
Henry’s discussion of the role of Neoplatonism in Christian theology was one 
of ­those high moments that gave me the determination (at the age of twenty-­
three) to continue as a student of the ­later empire.
One late after­noon at the time of his visit, I was invited to meet Paul Henry 
at the home of Isobel Henderson (1906–1967) in Summertown in North Ox-
ford. She was a brilliant classicist, an expert on ancient Greek ­music, and a 
good friend both of Paul Henry and of Arnaldo Momigliano.4 I remember 
the late-­afternoon light falling ­behind Henry, as he sat at a win­dow in a small 
armchair, grasping a very full glass of whiskey. Isobel presided over the salon 
with a long black cigarette holder, wearing a pair of Chinese trousers in bright 
orange. It was a somewhat Proustian scene. On the strength of my memory of 
Henry’s visit to Oxford, eleven years ­earlier, I introduced myself to Hadot at 
the Oxford Patristics Conference of 1967.
Spiritual Exercises
In 1967, I knew Hadot for his interventions in the debate on the Neoplatonic ele­
ments in the thought of Augustine, based on his study of Marius Victorinus, and 
for a brilliant ­little monograph (written, I now learn, in only one month!) on 
Plotinus—­Plotin ou la simplicité du regard.5 Although we had remained in contact, 
I had not followed very closely his other work in ancient philosophy. Hence my 
surprise when I came to Paris to the Collège de France, in June 1982, and found 
Hadot’s new book, Exercices spirituels et philosophie antique, prominently displayed 
4. See now Averil Cameron, her student, in Past Masters, October 27, 1994.
5. P. Hadot, Plotin ou la simplicité du regard (Paris: Plon, 1963; Gallimard, 1997), trans. 
M. Chase, Plotinus, or the Simplicity of Vision (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1993).

Pier r e H a dot 
619
on the new accessions shelf of the Institute of Augustinian Studies. I realized im-
mediately that this book would revolutionize our view of the aim of the ancient 
phi­los­o­phers, and of the way in which they passed on their teachings.
Seated at a large ­table rendered golden by streaks of sunlight, with a view 
of the fresh green leaves of the trees that stood between the library of the in-
stitute and the gray roof of Saint-­Germain-­des-­Prés, I began to read. I soon 
realized that I would never again read a text of ancient philosophy, or even the 
most banal ethical treatise, in the same way.
Hadot made clear that ­these written texts ­were meant to transform their 
readers. They ­were not treatises of abstract reasoning. They ­were the living 
voice of their authors, pleading, insisting, and, above all, arguing, that their 
readers should change their lives. For Hadot, ancient philosophy “did not 
consist in teaching an abstract theory . . . ​but rather in the art of living. . . . ​
[It demanded] a concrete attitude and a determinate life-­style, which engaged 
the ­whole of existence.”6
At once, the world of the ancient phi­los­o­phers took on a profound unfa-
miliarity. Our own practices in reading ancient philosophical texts seemed 
somehow trivial. As we sat in our armchairs or around a seminar ­table, leafing 
through the works of ancient thinkers in order to expound or to criticize their 
theories, we ­were ­doing the wrong ­thing. We should have been like the ancients, 
sitting at the feet of a guide who would show us how to use ­these theories so as to 
transform ourselves. The atmosphere of this guidance was totally dif­fer­ent from 
that of a modern university. It was closer to the relation of master and disciple, of 
pir and murshid in Islam, or to Dante as he hung on the lips of Brunetto Latini:
La cara e buona imagine paterna
di voi, quando nel mondo ad ora ed ora
m’insegnavate come l’uom s’eterna.
The dear and kind, paternal image of you,
when, in the world, hour by hour,
you taught me how man makes himself eternal.
(Inferno 15.83–85)
6. P. Hadot, Exercices spirituels et philosophie antique (Paris: Études Augustiniennes, 1981), 
trans. Arnold I. Davidson in Pierre Hadot: Philosophy as a Way of Life (Oxford: Blackwell, 1995), 
83. I ­will use the translations of Exercices spirituels and of other articles and lectures by Hadot 
that are collected in Davidson’s book. See, further, Matthew Sharpe and Federico Testa, The 
Selected Writings of Pierre Hadot: Philosophy as Practice (London: Bloomsbury Academic, 2020).

620 
Ch apter 90
Elite men and ­women in the ancient world expected to get personal guid-
ance of this kind on a regular basis. Hadot pointed out how even the texts 
themselves ­were deliberately written in a dialogic, rhetorical style: they ­were 
seen as no more than the fading echo of a master’s voice. Put bluntly: ­people 
did not turn to a phi­los­o­pher only for his theories. They turned to his theories 
(and ­there ­were many of them, often hotly debated) so as to give rational sup-
port to a slow therapy of the self. The principal aim was always “to steep our-
selves in a rule for life,” preferably ­under the guidance of a mentor.7
We moderns might no longer sit at the feet of a phi­los­o­pher, as ancient per-
sons had done. But we could at least recover something of the existential weight 
of the message ­behind the volumes that lined the shelves of our libraries:
[For] we have forgotten how to read: how to pause, liberate ourselves from 
our worries, return to ourselves, and leave aside our search for subtlety and 
originality, in order to meditate calmly, ruminate, and let the texts speak to 
us. This, too, is a spiritual exercise.8
A lot of what Hadot wrote was not entirely new to me. As I have said, I had 
been increasingly struck by the very real seriousness with which many of my 
friends and colleagues at Berkeley de­cided on how they would live their lives. 
Their preoccupation with the proper use of freedom had already caused me to 
read the ancient moralists with greater sympathy than before. A lively interest 
in self-­formation and self-­fashioning had long preceded the appearance of 
Hadot’s Exercices spirituels and Foucault’s Care of the Self. The Berkeley confer-
ence on adab in the Islamic world in 1979, to which I had contributed, showed 
this clearly. But Hadot’s Exercices spirituels offered something dif­fer­ent. It was 
a pre­sen­ta­tion of the transformative nature of ancient philosophy by a tower-
ing scholar.
Philosophy as a Way of Living
Only twenty years ­later, in 2001, when reading the collection of Hadot’s auto-
biographical interviews with Jeannie Carlier and Arnold Davidson, entitled 
La philosophie comme manière de vivre—­Philosophy as a Way of Living—­did 
I realize the extent to which the power of Hadot’s book came from the fact that 
he had meditated on and lived ­every sentence of it. He had constantly battled 
7. Hadot, Philosophy as a Way of Life, 85.
8. Hadot, Philosophy as a Way of Life, 109.

Pier r e H a dot 
621
a heart condition. ­After four major operations, he spoke of himself, with irony, 
as “a ­great habitué of the hospitals of Paris.” (In Paris, one is usually supposed 
to be an habitué of restaurants.) Maxims of the phi­los­o­phers accompanied him 
into wards and operating rooms.9
Furthermore, Hadot’s standards for public comportment ­were as unflinch-
ing as ­were ­those of any late antique man. He had been pre­sent when the 
­future Pope John XXIII was papal nuncio in Paris and was solemnly enter-
tained at Saint-­Sulpice. A pious layman who was serving at ­table poured the 
nuncio’s wine from the wrong side. The nuncio exploded at the gaffe. Looking 
back to this fit of rage, Hadot concluded that John XXIII, though now beatified, 
may not have been a saint by ancient standards.10 Exercices spirituels was the work 
of a modern sage, based on years of personal meditation on the thought of the 
ancients. ­Every reading of an ancient text and ­every citation from an ancient 
author in it was just right: it could not have been chosen differently.
Versailles
When we met again in Paris, in June 1982, it was a happy time for Hadot. 
He had recently been elected to the Collège de France, largely through the 
support of Michel Foucault. He would give his famous inaugural lecture—­
“Forms of Life and Forms of Discourse in Ancient Philosophy”—on Febru-
ary 18, 1983.11
We spent an entire Sunday together with Frau Ilsetraut at Versailles. We 
moved from pavilion to pavilion discussing every­thing from German Roman-
ticism to the ancient cosmos. Still talking, we saw the ­grands jets d’eau. ­There 
was a lightness about Hadot as he discussed Goethe’s maxim “The pre­sent is 
our only happiness,” which showed that he practiced what he read. He ­really 
was a phi­los­o­pher embracing a moment of intellectual contact with a fellow 
scholar—we ­were linked in the sheer, unassuming enjoyment of ideas.
­After a long and happy lunch, he turned to me and said, “You know, Profes-
sor Brown, the more I study the ancient phi­los­o­phers, the less Chris­tian­ity 
means to me.” My answer was the exact opposite: “No, as for me: the more I 
study ancient paganism, the more I have come to re­spect traditional religions 
such as Chris­tian­ity, Judaism, and Islam.”
9. Pierre Hadot, La philosophie comme manière de vivre. Entretiens avec Jeannie Carlier et 
Arnold I. Davidson (Paris: Albin Michel, 2001), 64 and 180.
10. Hadot, La philosophie comme manière de vivre, 188.
11. Now translated as “Ancient Philosophy,” in Philosophy as a Way of Life, 49–70.

622 
Ch apter 90
Hadot did not agree. He was a true phi­los­o­pher. Religion, in his opinion, 
was a social creation—­a clutter of culturally determined rituals and repre­sen­
ta­tions. This clutter had nothing whatsoever to do with that primal sense of 
oneness with the universe: that “shiver of divine delight” which Lucretius had 
once felt beneath the endless stars—an “oceanic” experience that Hadot him-
self had enjoyed on many occasions.12 Indeed, as he recounted it to Jeannie 
Carlier in 2001, his life as a phi­los­o­pher began in his teens with such an 
experience:
Leaning with my back on the window-­sill, I looked up into the night sky, 
feeling that I had taken a plunge into an im­mense world filled with stars.13
Hadot’s religion was a true phi­los­o­pher’s religion, austerely shorn of mythic 
repre­sen­ta­tions. A similar philosophic religion had once been professed by the 
Stoics and by some radical Platonists. It occasionally emerged in late antiquity 
and in Islam (much to the distress of the orthodox of all three religions—­Jews, 
Christians, and Muslims alike), like a white peak towering above the clouds. 
Alas, from Hadot’s point of view, I was a mere historian, congenitally tolerant 
of clutter.
Foucault and Hadot
The sense of joy through having broken out, for a moment, from the narrow 
confines of the self to the contemplation of an im­mensely wider world was 
what made Hadot so very dif­fer­ent from Michel Foucault. He shared with the 
ancient sages whom he studied (if in a modern idiom) a sense of the thrill of 
kinship with the natu­ral world that drew him always outside himself. For this 
reason, self-­formation, the care of the self (Le souci de soi, to use the title of 
Foucault’s book on the ethics of the Roman world) meant something very 
dif­fer­ent to him from what it meant to Foucault.
Though they esteemed each other, the two men ­were not close, ­either in 
personality or in outlook.14 It was a significant difference, which struck me at the 
time, when I had read Hadot’s Exercices spirituels and then compared it with 
12. Lucretius, On the Nature of ­Things 3.29; Hadot, La philosophie comme manière de vivre, 28 
and 69.
13. Hadot, La philosophie comme manière de vivre, 24.
14. Hadot, La philosophie comme manière de vivre, 214–215, and “Reflections on the Idea of 
the ‘Cultivation of the Self,’ ” in Philosophy as a Way of Life, 206–213.

Pier r e H a dot 
623
Foucault’s Le souci de soi, which appeared three years ­later. Both Hadot and Fou-
cault ­were aware of the effort that educated persons in the ancient world put into 
ordering their lives through prolonged and carefully premeditated work on the 
self. For both, the philosophical lit­er­a­ture of the classical world was not merely a 
gallery of theories. It drove serious endeavors at self-­amendment.
But from then on they differed. Foucault’s notion of the “self” was more 
narrow than that of Hadot. It lacked the cosmic dimension that the ancient 
sages took for granted. In his critique of Foucault, Hadot insisted that, for 
ancient phi­los­o­phers, “care of the self” was never an end in itself. Simply to 
enjoy the plea­sure of having established a carefully constructed lifestyle was 
not enough: that was mere dandyism—­the creation of an eccentric persona. 
Rather, the soul was groomed so as to go beyond itself, to experience the leap 
of joy that came with realizing that it was somehow part of the supreme order 
and beauty of the universe.
Furthermore, it was this sense of working ­toward kinship with an ever-­
widening world that kept the ancient phi­los­o­phers bound to society. Hadot 
rejected the current image of the ancient phi­los­o­pher as a lonely practitioner 
of self-­improvement. Still less ­were ­these phi­los­o­phers otherworldly re-
cluses. He resisted that view as firmly as I had done in “The Phi­los­o­pher and 
Society in Late Antiquity.” Far from it: the phi­los­o­pher’s activity reached 
out, in ever-­wider circles, away from the narrow self, through lively networks 
of students, to the city; and fi­nally, to the contemplation of the vibrant unity 
of the cosmos. Paradoxically, by withdrawing from society, which imposed 
such narrow confines on the self, ancient phi­los­o­phers found that they ­were 
never alone.15
Getting Known in the 1980s
I returned to Amer­i­ca with a copy of Exercices spirituels, which I photocopied 
regularly so as to educate my colleagues in classics and any interested gradu­ate 
students. At that time, Hadot was totally eclipsed in Amer­i­ca by Foucault, 
whose last books—­L’usage des plaisirs and Le souci de soi: The Use of Pleasures 
and The Care of the Self—­had been instantly translated into En­glish in 1985. 
­These two books, and not Hadot’s Exercices, ­were assumed to contain all that 
anyone needed to know about spiritual guidance and self-­formation in the 
ancient world.
15. Hadot, Philosophy as a Way of Life, 273.

624 
Ch apter 90
I was sorry that the work of Hadot was ignored in this way. Looking back, 
however, I think that I should have remembered that academe, even in the 
1980s (at the dawn of the internet and with no YouTube), was a lot more late 
antique in its structures than we realize. Access to entire bodies of thought still 
depended on the vivid presence of the scholar in person—as a visiting lecturer 
or as a teacher in a seminar.
Foucault had offered his presence most willingly in the United States. Not 
so Hadot. As soon as I arrived in Prince­ton, in late 1983, I had urged him to 
come to speak ­there. But he did not think that his En­glish was up to the occa-
sion. So Foucault was what we got. It was only in 1995 that Hadot’s Exercices 
and other articles ­were edited and well translated by Arnold I. Davidson in 
Philosophy as a Way of Life. At long last, this precious flow of French classical 
culture at its best entered the veins of American and En­glish academe.
As for myself, I remained in contact with Hadot, exchanging books and 
articles. I was always aware of his distinctive profile and lucidity of judgment 
in con­temporary ­matters. He had no illusions about his own ­career. He had 
risen from a small Catholic seminary in Rheims to the Collège de France with-
out any of the careful grooming and active patronage by leaders in the field 
that was usually necessary for the ­career of successful French academics. He 
viewed the system of examinations that regulated the advancement of young 
scholars in France (as analogous ones had regulated mine in ­England) as tests 
in rhetorical per­for­mance and not of real intellect.16 This was the character-
istically robust view of a phi­los­o­pher and a shrewd judge of his times.
I last met the Hadots at Limours on June 1, 2008, for a characteristically 
generous and leisurely lunch and tea. Pierre died on April 24, 2010. To have 
known him—­for so many years and through so many changes of interest on 
both our parts—­was like living by the side of a quiet, deep river that was al-
ways in view, flowing serenely past the banks of my own varied engagements 
with late antiquity.
16. Hadot, Philosophie comme manière de vivre, 77–78.

625
91
A Might-­Have-­Been
Michel Foucault and Les aveux de la chair
I returned from Eu­rope to Berkeley in late August 1982 and settled down to 
write a series of five lectures for the American Council of Learned Socie­ties. 
­These lectures ­were the first draft of Body and Society, which appeared in 1988. 
It is odd to think that, at almost exactly the same time, in 1982, Michel Foucault 
had finished an entire book on the same subject. This was the fourth volume 
of his History of Sexuality, called Les aveux de la chair—­The Confessions of 
the Flesh.1 In this volume, Foucault analyzed the attitudes to sex and marriage 
in Christian writers from Clement of Alexandria to Augustine. No book would 
have overlapped more perfectly with my own projected study, both in its sub-
ject ­matter and in its chronological range.
Yet this crucial last volume of Foucault’s History of Sexuality did not appear 
­until 2018. Foucault had handed in a typescript of Les aveux to Gallimard, his 
publisher, in the fall of 1982. At that time, he had been in no hurry to publish 
it. He was busy completing the other two books that had resulted from his 
tournant antique—­his ­giant’s stride across two millennia, from early modern 
Eu­rope to the ancient world, which resulted in L’usage des plaisirs, on ancient 
Greece, and Le souci de soi, on classical Rome.2 He wanted them to appear 
first. The ­Fathers of the Church could wait. Then he died, in June 1984. It was 
1. Michel Foucault, Histoire de la Sexualité 4: Les aveux de la chair (Paris: Gallimard, 2018), 
trans. Robert Hurley, Confessions of the Flesh: The History of Sexuality, Volume 4 (New York: 
Pantheon, 2021).
2. M. Foucault, L’usage des plaisirs (Paris: Gallimard, 1984): The Use of Pleasures (New York: 
Pantheon, 1985) and Le souci de soi (Paris: Gallimard, 1984): The Care of the Self (New York: 
Pantheon, 1985).

626 
Ch apter 91
not ­until thirty-­four years ­later that Les aveux—­The Confessions of the 
Flesh—­appeared.3
As a result of this delay, I now have on my desk a book that takes me back to 
the days when Foucault and I ­were working on the same themes, and very often 
reading the same texts. So what is it like to read Les aveux so many years ­later?
Sources chrétiennes
First and foremost, reading Les aveux ­today has brought me back to the Paris 
of the early 1980s. It reminded me that Foucault and I shared a debt to a common 
academic culture. We drew on the erudition of a remarkable generation. We 
both looked back to the recent Golden Age of French Patristic scholarship, 
associated with the liberal French Catholicism of the years before and ­after 
Vatican II. One of the greatest and most lasting scholarly ventures of this time 
had been the creation of a series that made the texts of ancient Christian au-
thors fully available in reliable editions, accompanied (on the facing right 
page) with fine French translations, and with introductions and commentaries 
that ­were often complete essays in themselves.
The series was known as Sources chrétiennes. It had begun in Lyons in dire 
times—in 1942. ­Under the direction of Cardinal Jean Daniélou, Henri de 
Lubac (1896–1983), and Claude Mondésert (1906–1990), and with the warm 
encouragement of Henri-­Irénée Marrou (who edited the Paidagôgos of Clement 
of Alexandria for the series), the Sources chrétiennes became both the symbol and 
the spearhead of the movement of ressourcement—of a return to the sources. 
Though we two came at it from very dif­fer­ent ­angles, Foucault and I ­were the 
beneficiaries of that remarkable moment in French Catholic scholarship.
The editions of the Sources chrétiennes ­were, in many ways, products of the 
unsung heroes and heroines of the study of Chris­tian­ity in late antiquity in 
the postwar years: Michel Aubineau (1921–2002), Claude Mondésert, Mar-
guerite Harl, Anne-­Marie Malingrey (1904–2002). I had known many of them 
from the Oxford Patristics Conferences of 1963 and 1967. Their patient work 
enabled readers like Foucault and many ­others to enter deeply, and with sane 
guidance, into masterpieces of early Christian thought on sex and marriage in 
a way that had not been pos­si­ble previously.
3. Frédéric Gros, “Avertissment,” Les aveux de la chair, iv–­v; Confessions of the Flesh, ix–­x.
See also Stuart Elden, review of Michel Foucault, Histoire de la Sexualité 4: Les aveux de la 
chair, Theory, Culture, and Society 35 (2018): 293–311, at 293–297.

A Might-­H ave-­Been 
627
Among ­these Christian writers, Gregory of Nyssa (335–395) stood out for 
his ambitious treatise On Virginity, and for his touching study of virginity in 
action in the Life of Macrina—­the life and tranquil death of his ­sister who 
became a nun. I still have a copy of the Sources chrétiennes edition of Gregory 
of Nyssa’s Life of Macrina.4 I notice that, at just this time, I wrote into the 
flyleaf a poem of Robert Frost, “Spring Pools,” that seemed to catch Gregory’s 
notion of virgin flesh as, somehow, a mirror of eternity:
­These pools that, though in forests, still reflect
The total sky almost without defect.5
I note that Foucault’s analy­sis of Gregory’s On Virginity in Les aveux had 
reached a similar conclusion: ­here was a fragment of life on earth that already 
mirrored the world beyond death.6
I remember first reading Gregory of Nyssa’s On Virginity in the capacious 
Sources chrétiennes edition of Michel Aubineau, in the dim cabin light of a plane 
that bounced up and down in the ­middle of a thunderstorm as it left Nashville, 
Tennessee, for San Francisco.7 It is good to think that Michel Foucault may 
have been reading the same text, at much the same time, in the quiet of the 
library of the Dominican Order at Le Saulchoir (43 rue de la Glacière, Paris) 
to which he would retire to work in what, alas, proved to be his last years.
How New Was Chris­tian­ity?
Reading Les aveux I also realize that Foucault was intervening on a topic that 
had long been a subject of debate among scholars of late antiquity: How origi-
nal was the contribution of Chris­tian­ity to the moral life of the Roman Empire 
in its last centuries? Can we speak of the victory of a novel “Christian morality” 
over the values of the pagan past? If so, should we acclaim the victory of this 
morality over the loose mores of a de­cadent empire; or should we regret 
this victory as the beginning of a moral ice age, characterized by the relentless 
suppression of sex?
4. Gregory of Nyssa, Life of Macrina, ed. Pierre Maraval, Vie de Sainte Macrine, Sources 
chrétiennes 178 (Paris: Le Cerf, 1971).
5. Robert Frost, Selected Poems (Harmonds­worth: Penguin, 1973), 145.
6. Foucault, Les aveux de la chair, 196; Confessions of the Flesh, 150.
7. Grégoire de Nysse, La Virginité, ed. M. Aubineau, Sources chrétiennes 119 (Paris: Le Cerf, 
1961).

628 
Ch apter 91
In the early 1980s, this prob­lem was being examined anew in many dif­fer­ent 
ways. The tone had been set by Paul Veyne, Foucault’s friend and mentor in 
ancient ­matters, in a provocative article entitled “­Family and Love in the High 
Empire.”8 In this article, Veyne claimed that the spread of Chris­tian­ity had 
contributed nothing whatsoever to the hardening of the moral tone of the ­later 
empire. This hardening had already happened in the age of Marcus Aurelius. 
At that time, Veyne argued, the elites of the Roman world had opted for a 
puritanical “morality of respectability” quite as repressive as any that devel-
oped in Christian, Jewish, or Muslim circles.
In Veyne’s opinion, the emergence of this austere morality was the “­great 
unnoticed event” that separated the freewheeling sexual mores of classical 
Greeks and Romans from the hard-­bitten, ascetically inclined moralists of 
the second and third centuries. Far from being easygoing gentlemen (as they 
had usually been portrayed, with more than a hint of approval), the Romans 
of the Antonine Age ­were a somber lot. They passed on to the Christian 
church icy views on sex and marriage that would last in Eu­rope ­until modern 
times.
Old Codes in a New Key
­Here Foucault made a brilliant intervention. He did not agree with Veyne. 
Sticking closely to a few well-­known Christian texts, he pointed out that Chris-
tian writers had inherited ­these restrictive codes; but they played them out in 
a new key. The taboos and prohibitions imposed on sexual be­hav­ior, which 
Veyne presented as so prominent in pagan circles in the age of the Antonines, 
took on a new valence among Christians. He showed how Christian writings 
of the third and fourth centuries expressed new forms of experience not to be 
found among pagans.
Most scholars saw Christian advocacy of virginity as no more than the end 
result of a progressive tightening of the screws of prohibitions on sexual activ-
ity, with total rejection of sex as the ultimate form of repression. Foucault did 
not see it this way. He pointed out how the idea and practice of virginity ap-
peared in a new light in Christian circles, freighted with significantly dif­fer­ent, 
emancipatory meanings.9
8. Paul Veyne, “La famille et l’amour sous le Haut-­Empire romain,” Annales 33, no. 1 (1978): 
35–63.
9. Foucault, Les aveux de la chair, 51; Confessions of the Flesh, 36.

A Might-­H ave-­Been 
629
To Be a Virgin
In Les aveux, Foucault dealt with the theme of virginity in a manner that paral-
leled my own approach in 1982. He rejected the notion that the Christian ideal 
of virginity could be explained by a growing taboo on sex. He argued that this 
explanation did not do justice to the novelty of the experience of continence 
itself. By this Foucault meant the expectations that the virgin state awoke in 
­those who practiced or encouraged it, and the views on the person and on 
society that ­were condensed in this drastic choice of lifestyle.
Foucault summed up ­these expectations in a long chapter, “Être vierge”—­To 
Be a Virgin:10
The valorization of virginity is therefore something very dif­fer­ent from and 
much more than the pure and ­simple disqualification or prohibition of 
sexual relations. It involves a substantial valorization of the individual’s rela-
tion to their own sexual conduct, since it makes the relation a positive ex-
perience, which has a historical, metahistorical and spiritual meaning.11
In the third and fourth centuries, the practice of virginity was hailed, in Chris-
tian circles, as the sign of the beginning of a new age; and ­those who ­adopted 
it ­were acclaimed as pioneers carried forward by the march of history.
Had I read Les aveux in 1982, this chapter alone would have come as ­music 
to my ears. For this was exactly the message that I also had begun to draw from 
the same Christian writings on virginity as Foucault had read. Both of us ­were 
facing the same prob­lem: How did a “mystique of virginity” develop in Chris­
tian­ity that would place sexual renunciation at the very top of the list of 
Christian virtues in a way that it was never placed in pagan, Jewish, and (­later) 
Muslim circles?
Subjectivity or Society?
Despite this convergence, we went our separate ways. Foucault was a phi­los­
o­pher who wished to trace the stages by which a modern subjectivity—­a sense 
of the self in relation to sexuality—­emerged, somewhat surprisingly, among 
the Christians of late antiquity. For this reason, he studied early Christian texts 
very much with their ­future in mind. He turned to them ­because major figures 
10. Foucault, Les aveux de la chair, 149–245; Confessions of the Flesh, 113–189.
11. Foucault, Les aveux, de la chair, 201–203; Confessions of the Flesh, 154–155.

630 
Ch apter 91
such as Augustine and John Cassian had left the indelible imprint of their ideas 
on all subsequent generations of Western Catholics, and eventually on western 
Eu­rope as a ­whole.
As a result, Les aveux presented a drastically simplified picture of early 
Chris­tian­ity itself. Judaism did not concern Foucault. Nor did the world of the 
New Testament and the complicated story of early Christian origins. His inter-
est in Chris­tian­ity began two centuries ­after that time, when Christian authors 
such as Tertullian (ca. 160–ca. 240) and Clement of Alexandria (ca. 150–ca. 
215) entered into a dialogue with the cultivated elites of the Roman world and 
struck up an alliance between Chris­tian­ity and classical values that would 
eventually lead to the triumph of the Catholic Church in western Eu­rope.
Tertullian, Clement, and their successors wrote the challenging texts (most 
of them available to French readers in the editions of the Sources chrétiennes) 
on which Foucault the phi­los­o­pher set to work with his ever-­questioning 
mind. But the tensions within the Christian communities themselves, which 
led to the writing of ­those texts, did not concern him greatly.12
By contrast, I was a historian. I wanted to understand the early Christians 
in their own time, regardless of the long-­term ­future of their ideas. I wanted to 
know what exact circumstances caused ­these par­tic­u­lar ideas to be discussed 
at a given time and place within the Christian churches. In Body and Society, 
I would follow how ­these ideas emerged, de­cade by de­cade and region by re-
gion, pushed to the surface through the ­ripple of tensions that ran throughout 
the Christian communities, scattered across the Roman world, from Mesopo-
tamia to Carthage and beyond. While Foucault challenged modern readers to 
look back to the Christian past in order to understand the origins of many of 
their own notions of the ­human person in the pre­sent, I would invite the 
reader to listen in to a ­grand debate within early Chris­tian­ity itself.
12. This is clearly seen by Johannes Zachhuber, “Sexuality and the Christian Self: Michel 
Foucault’s Reading of the Church ­Fathers,” Toronto Journal of Theology 36 (2020): 170–182, esp. 
172–173.

631
92
The Northeast 
Corridor
Berkeley to Prince­ton
On May 22, 1983, I presented a paper, “Augustine and Sexuality,” at a colloquy of 
the Center for Hermeneutical Studies at the Gradu­ate Theological Union on 
Holy Hill. This was the center where I had presented “The Phi­los­o­pher and 
Society in Late Antiquity” when I first arrived in California in 1978.
It was the last paper that I would give at Berkeley. My wife, Pat, having 
completed her dissertation on Venetian Re­nais­sance art, had been offered a 
tenure-­track appointment in the Art History Department in Prince­ton. I went 
with her. ­Here the good fortune of my MacArthur Prize was immediately ap-
parent. I could take it anywhere I wanted. It left me ­free to apply for three years 
of unpaid leave from the University of California, so as to come to Prince­ton 
as a visiting professor in the History Department, to begin in the fall of 1983.
Hence a certain sadness surrounded my last Sunday eve­ning colloquy on 
Holy Hill. With characteristic graciousness, Eric Gruen wound up the discus-
sion, using phrases that ­were dear to Augustine’s heart: “We want to wish you 
well at Prince­ton, but not too well. We hope that this ­will be a short sojourn, 
so that you ­will return to your true amici—­your true friends—­where your true 
necessitudo socialis—­your bond of companionship—­lies.”1
We arrived at Prince­ton on a sultry eve­ning in late August, having driven 
across Amer­i­ca. The velvet darkness was occasionally lit up by the somewhat 
1. Peter Brown, “Augustine and Sexuality,” in The Center for Hermeneutical Studies in Helle-
nistic and Modern Culture, Colloquy no. 46, May 22, 1983 (Berkeley: Center for Hermeneutical 
Studies, 1983), 41.

632 
Ch apter 92
eerie flash of fireflies, which I now saw for the first time—­detonations of bright 
light without so much as a crackle. The air throbbed with the sound of lovesick 
cicadas. It seemed as if I had come to a Mediterranean place. I wondered 
­whether a solemn paseo was taking place in the center of the town, in the 
warmth of the eve­ning: a paseo such as I remembered it from Burgos many 
years before—­groups of boys and girls, and solemn, well-­dressed ­couples, 
accompanied by nannies in pure white dresses, pushing formidable perambu-
lators. I found no such ­thing. Fully lit by power­ful streetlights, Nassau Street 
seemed doubly empty. All that was to be seen was a slightly tiddly Prince­ton 
alumnus, in a bright-­orange blazer, as he made his way out of Lahiere’s Restau-
rant to his parked car. Plainly, I had not reached the Med.
A week or so ­later, I walked from the apartment on College Road ­toward 
the Institute for Advanced Study. Standing at the top of the ­great spread of 
open grass in front of Fuld Hall, I was struck by the sheer size and exuberance 
of the trees that surrounded the institute buildings. In ­these years, the trees-
capes of ­England (which consisted to a large degree of ancient elms) had been 
scythed by Dutch elm disease. To come upon a view of the enormous trees 
that surrounded the institute was like stepping into a Victorian landscape 
painted by John Constable. It was a time warp.
Setting off across the meadow, with grasshoppers buzzing at my feet like 
drops of ­water sizzling on a hot plate, I noticed another figure walking ­toward 
me. I recognized him from a short encounter at Berkeley: it was Clifford 
Geertz. As each of us advanced, we each became less certain of ourselves. Fi­nally 
we met. Not a word was exchanged. We each smiled, bowed to each other in an 
amiable manner, and set off in the opposite direction, ­under a high fall sky.
On the East Coast: A New Geography
On my arrival at Prince­ton, Art Eckstein and Jeannie Rutenberg, my friends 
from my very first days at Berkeley, sent me a power­ful memento—­a few 
leaves from a eucalyptus tree as a reminder of ­those high groves of eucalyptus 
that filled the air of Berkeley campus with an unforgettable smell. Jeannie 
wrote:
You ­will find enclosed a precious relic: a piece of eucalyptus leaf from the 
eucalyptus grove on Berkeley campus. When we first moved away from 
Berkeley, I longed for the smell of eucalyptus, and bought cough-­drops and 
throat lozenges to sniff, hoping for a whiff of the familiar fragrance. . . .

The Northeast Cor r idor 
633
This eucalyptus leaf was acquired through a spectacular athletic feat on 
Art’s part (a miracle in itself, ­really): again and again, fearlessly, he hurled 
himself at the tree, trying to grasp at a branch.
­There ­were no eucalyptus trees in Prince­ton. Instead, I was swept into the 
rapid changing of the seasons as we entered winter. Soon, the uncanny bright-
ness of the Atlantic coast’s winter skies made me forgive the snow and slush 
that lay all over the ground.
But the biggest change of all for me was the change in orientation. I was 
now on a northeast corridor, which stretched (in academic terms) from Har-
vard and Boston in the north to Dumbarton Oaks Byzantine Center and 
Washington, DC, in the south. I used to arrive at ­these places at the end of long 
flights—­whether from Britain or from California. Now they ­were part of a 
busy corridor with Prince­ton almost at the center.
The most extraordinary change of all, of course, was the sudden proximity 
of New York. It was now a neighbor. I remember the solemn thrill of lingering 
in the Frick Collection long into the after­noon with no bus or cab waiting to 
take me to an airport. Instead, I felt that I could wait out the New York rush 
hour, whiling away my time in the palace of a millionaire, before New Jersey 
Transit took me home in ­little over an hour.
Dumbarton Oaks: A. P. Kazhdan
The moment I arrived at Prince­ton, “D.O.”—­the Byzantine Studies Program 
at Dumbarton Oaks, in Georgetown, Washington, DC—­established itself on 
my horizon. At the time, my contact with D.O. was largely due to my Berkeley 
gradu­ate student Paul Hollings­worth, who had won a visiting fellowship ­there 
for 1983–1984, to complete his dissertation on the Rus­sian and Scandinavian 
ele­ments in the legend of the child martyrs of eleventh-­century Kiev, Boris 
and Gleb.2 A gifted linguist and already well traveled in Eastern Eu­rope and 
the ­Middle East, Paul found the atmosphere of D.O. heavy with a sense of 
privilege:
Alas, I’m out of my ele­ment in not knowing ­every Byzantinist in the world 
(one has to pretend, even if one ­doesn’t know them) and every­thing about 
2. P. Hollings­worth, “Rulership and Suffering in Kievan Rus’ ” (PhD diss., University of 
California, Berkeley, 1987), and The Hagiography of Kievan Rus’ (Cambridge, MA: Ukrainian 
Research Institute of Harvard University, 1992).

634 
Ch apter 92
them (who’s ­doing what, who’s looking for a job, whose students are ­doing 
what, ­etc.). . . . ​Apparently, the one “out” from all this is to be eccentric, and 
being British helps that too . . . ​a lot of work is being done ­here, but not 
much thinking.
But Paul knew a ­great scholar when he saw one. That was Alexander Petro-
vich Kazhdan (1922–1997). Edged out of the Soviet historical community as 
a Jew and a scholar with startlingly unconventional opinions based on deep 
learning, Kazhdan had only recently come to Dumbarton Oaks. His work in 
the Soviet Union had already posed a major challenge to conventional views 
on the transition from late antiquity to the Byzantine ­Middle Ages. His defini-
tive article on the cities of Byzantium between the seventh ­century and the 
ninth had appeared as early as 1954.3
It was only when Kazhdan began to publish in En­glish (usually in harness 
with an Anglophone collaborator) that the originality of his views on the over-
all evolution of Byzantine culture and society became known to a wider world. 
It was the article entitled “Continuity and Discontinuity in Byzantium,” which 
he published with Anthony Cutler in Byzantion in 1982, that made the ground 
shake for me when I first came across it in the new accessions shelf for peri-
odicals in the Marciana library in Venice.4
For, in this article, I was confronted with the first consequential statement 
of the view that, in the seventh and eighth centuries, Byzantium had passed 
through a “Dark Age,” a dislocation as drastic as any experienced in the West 
­after the fall of the Roman Empire. Using archaeological and numismatic evi-
dence, Kazhdan suggested that urban life had virtually collapsed throughout 
the empire, and with it the refined Greek culture associated with the civic 
elites—­a culture that had apparently remained buoyant up to the reign of the 
emperor Justinian and a ­little beyond.
For Kazhdan, this drastic recession of urban life and of classical values was 
not due to the Muslim invasions alone. It was due to the inner collapse of an 
overcomplex urban civilization—­a gigantic subsidence that opened a chasm 
between the medieval Byzantine world and its late antique past. At a stroke, 
the conventional view of the nature of Byzantine civilization had to be revised. 
3. A. P. Kazhdan, “Vizantijskie goroda v vii-­–vv.,” Sovietskaya Arkheologija 21 (1954): 
164–188.
4. A .P. Kazhdan and A. Cutler, “Continuity and Discontinuity in Byzantium,” Byzantion 52 
(1982): 429–478.

The Northeast Cor r idor 
635
Byzantium could no longer be treated as a miraculous, direct survival from the 
ancient world—­somehow continuing, by sheer kinetic energy, the glories of 
the Greco-­Roman past. Far from it. Quite as much as the barbarian kingdoms 
of western Eu­rope, the medieval Byzantium that emerged from its own Dark 
Age was a new, rough-­and-­ready society, built from the ground up on the ruins 
of a former, very dif­fer­ent classical and late antique world.
At the time, I was already in contact with Kazhdan on behalf of the Univer-
sity of California Press series with which I was involved, The Transformation 
of the Classical Heritage. In collaboration with Ann Wharton Epstein, Kazh-
dan had submitted a manuscript on social and cultural change in eleventh-­ and 
twelfth-­century Byzantium. Though the period covered lay well outside the 
conventional limits of late antiquity, I urged Doris Kretschmer to bend the rules 
so as to include it in the series, as an exemplary study of the nature of change 
in a society ostensibly committed to making time stand still. The book ap-
peared in 1985.5
It was Paul who brought us together in the early months of my arrival in 
Prince­ton:
I told Kazhdan that I first became acquainted with his work through one of 
your biblio­graphies, and he said, “You know, I have never met Peter Brown. 
We should just get a car and go up and see him one of ­these days.” At first 
glance you ­wouldn’t think Kazhdan to be the kind of person who would do 
something like that, but the more I get to know him and that mischievous 
twinkle in his eye, the more I think we might do it.
Indeed, they did: and it was a ­great, relaxed occasion—­a lunch that 
lasted well into the late after­noon. I had gone out of my way to buy the best, 
most authentically Rus­sian vodka. But Kazhdan was not interested. “Give 
me no vodka. Rather, give me a Campari soda. For it is Campari soda which 
Gemingway [Ernest Hemingway] would drink at Harry’s Bar in Venice. Is this 
not so?”
To know that such a towering scholar now lived “down the way,” as it ­were, 
at the southern end of the northeast corridor, slowly brought a new flavor to 
my work on the late antique Roman Empire of the East in its last centuries, 
before the Dark Ages came, also, to Byzantium.
5. A. P. Kazhdan and A. W. Epstein, Change in Byzantine Culture in the Eleventh and Twelfth 
Centuries (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1985).

636 
Ch apter 92
Across the Pond
On the East Coast, only the Atlantic stood between Amer­i­ca and Eu­rope. I 
now understood how the Atlantic could be spoken of by Britons and Ameri-
cans as “the Pond.” By contrast, the flight from Heathrow to San Francisco had 
always had an epic quality for me. The plane chased the sunset across Green-
land and northern Canada to drop down from a vast wilderness onto a golden 
landscape bathed in late-­afternoon sunlight, as if we had come to another 
world.
No such romance attended flights to and from the East Coast. ­Whether 
from Heathrow or from Newark, the flight departed from and arrived at much 
the same grubby periphery of a sprawling city, usually ­under similar dull 
clouds. It was as if I had dropped off to sleep in the taxi that took me up the 
­Cromwell Road to Heathrow only to wake up, a few hours ­later, in a cab on its 
way to Prince­ton.
I would soon be glad for this unromantic closeness. On February 20, 1984, 
Teedah—my aunt Freda Warren (my ­mother’s ­sister)—­died suddenly of a 
heart attack. She had held on to her apartment in the red-­brick terrace ­houses 
of Morehampton Road, despite the high granite steps in front and the steep 
wooden staircase that led down to the garden and the shed that contained the 
coals which ­were her only source of heat. When she died, the apartment died. 
It was one of the coldest winters in memory. The moment the apartment be-
came empty and heatless, it fell apart: a large chunk of the magnificent plaster 
cornice that ringed the high ceilings collapsed on her bed.
The Death of Memory
With Teedah, a large part of our ­family’s memory died. I have noticed that in 
many families both in Ireland and in Amer­i­ca, the ­daughters (and especially 
the unmarried ­daughters) ­were regarded as the guardians of ­family memory. 
It was they who could identify the figures on the paintings or photo­graphs, 
who preserved the diaries or identified the wearer of this or that piece of 
jewelry.
This was certainly true of Teedah. My ­mother showed ­little interest in 
­family mementoes. That was Teedah’s business. Portraits from the early nine-
teenth ­century hung in the hall of Teedah’s apartment in Morehampton 
Road. Some of ­these portraits even passed from the age of paint to the age of 
photography: a ­little girl holding a dolly, which had plainly been added to the 

The Northeast Cor r idor 
637
painting at her insistence, reappeared as a full-­grown ­woman in an early Vic-
torian daguerreotype. But who ­were they? “Ach! Teedah knows . . . ​She knows 
every­thing.” And now Teedah was dead. Worse than that: Teedah died at the 
wrong season of the year, in an unusually cold winter. Her empty flat was an 
icebox. My ­mother had ­little heart to rummage in ­family papers in such condi-
tions. I suspect that ­whole closets full of bygones ­were simply thrown out.
Three months ­later, my ­mother wrote to tell me that a pile of ­family ­albums 
and scrapbooks had only recently been discovered by the paint­ers who had 
been sent in to redo the apartment. They ­were hidden ­behind the ­great, heavy 
curtains of the dining room. ­These ­were saved. Now occupying ­little more than 
one small drawer of a bureau, they are the scraps—­originally put together, I 
suspect, by Teedah as a young girl—­that led me back to the Protestant Ireland 
of the late nineteenth ­century, when Bob Warren, my grand­father the rugby star, 
was the toast of Dublin; when, for most Protestants, Home Rule or Unionism 
(with no thought of an in­de­pen­dent Republic) was the issue of the day; and 
when war had not yet come to scythe two generations of beloved cousins. In 
such a way, the past hangs on a filament as slender as a spider’s thread.

638
93
High Gravit y
High Gravity
My first years at Prince­ton had a certain dreamlike quality about them. My 
MacArthur Fellowship enabled me to be a visiting professor on a half-­time 
basis in the History Department with minimal teaching and administrative 
duties.
In ­those first three years, I taught an outline course on late antiquity and 
the early ­Middle Ages: my Berkeley 4B became my Prince­ton 343A with very 
­little change. The young of the athletic persuasion—­the jocks—­entered with 
gusto into a course that began with the barbarian invasions and ended with the 
Vikings. A ­little ­after midterm they learned, from Beowulf, that, had they lived 
in seventh-­century northern Eu­rope, they would have spent their teenage 
years shaping up to lead a war band, rather than getting ready for their SATs. 
They could relate to that. A preceptor (a teaching assistant) who once visited 
the bar of the Ivy Inn was surprised to find a happy com­pany gathered around 
a long ­table, thumping their beer mugs to the chant of “­Battle of Adrianople, 
378 . . . ​boom, boom, boom.” This was the famous ­battle where the Visigoths 
had trampled the Roman army and its emperor into the red dust on the plain 
near Edirne in Eu­ro­pean Turkey. The jocks ­were heartened by such events.
At that time, what I missed most in Prince­ton ­were the vivid conversations 
in coffee­houses, such as I had occasionally had with Michel Foucault and had 
frequently enjoyed with Tom Laqueur and other friends in Berkeley. As far as 
I could see, no one hung out at Prince­ton in 1983. Such leisurely habits did not 
seem to belong to a world where, in the university, the heavy gravity of the 
institution set the pace of social as well as intellectual life. I had moved from a 
large campus, like a gigantic low-­gravity galaxy, to an incandescent star, throb-
bing with compressed energy. A strenuous mood prevailed, punctuated only 

High Gr avit y 
639
by power lunches in Prospect House that ended strictly with the resumption 
of teaching at 1:30.
From Late Antiquity to Early Islam
But ­there ­were compensations for this weighty atmosphere. On March 10–11, 
1984, I took part in a conference that made me realize the sheer critical mass 
of learning available at Prince­ton, and within a relatively short distance from 
Prince­ton along the northeast corridor. Entitled “From Late Antiquity to Early 
Islam,” it was a conference on a topic that had been pre­sent to me for de­cades. 
Like a good dream, ­here ­were the authors of the books and articles that had long 
challenged and inspired me, all gathered together for two days in Betts Lecture 
Hall of the Architecture Building on Prince­ton campus, taking the podium, 
stirring their coffee cups, chatting over lunch. ­There was Oleg Grabar, author 
of The Formation of Islamic Art from Harvard.1 ­There was also Michael Cook, 
the author, along with Patricia Crone, of Hagarism.2 (This was the book whose 
bold arguments had jangled the world of Islamic historians, and which had 
both thrilled me and set my teeth on edge when I reviewed it for Bob Silvers 
in the New York Review of Books.) Irfan Shahid (1926–2016), the historian of 
the Christian Arabs, came up from Georgetown. My friend Fergus Millar, then 
a visiting fellow at the Institute for Advanced Study, spoke, along with Glen 
Bowersock, who wound up the conference in style.
The conference proved to be a landmark in the study of the continuity 
between the late antique and the Islamic ­Middle East. It also marked a turning 
point in my own views on the subject. It gave me the opportunity to revisit the 
thesis of the ­great Belgian historian Henri Pirenne, advanced in his Mohammed 
and Charlemagne. As we have seen, Pirenne had stressed the social and eco-
nomic continuity of the late antique Mediterranean up to the end of the sev-
enth ­century.3 In his opinion, it was only when this benign continuum was 
fatally disrupted by the Muslim invasions that it could be said that the ancient 
world had ended and the ­Middle Ages had begun.
Pirenne’s brilliant hypothesis had lasted for de­cades, largely ­because of the 
number of prob­lems that it seemed to resolve. It explained why the barbarian 
1. Oleg Grabar, The Formation of Islamic Art (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1973).
2. Patricia Crone and Michael Cook, Hagarism: The Making of the Islamic World (Cambridge 
University Press, 1977).
3. Chapter 56: “To Muhammad” and chapter 59: “From the Mediterranean . . .”

640 
Ch apter 93
invasions in the West, in the fifth ­century, seemed to have had ­little effect on 
the cultural and economic life of the Mediterranean. ­These invasions did not 
mark the end of an epoch. Instead, Pirenne reassigned the role of the violent 
invader to the Arabs of the seventh ­century. His view had lingered, almost as 
a default position, for students of late antiquity as an explanation of the change 
from the late antique to the medieval world.
I now realized that the Pirenne thesis had been proved wrong. A recent 
book by the archaeologists Richard Hodges and David White­house, Mu-
hammed, Charlemagne, and the Origins of Eu­rope, showed that classical urban 
life and the commercial networks that went with it had collapsed around the 
western Mediterranean as early as the late sixth ­century.4 Their views coin-
cided to a remarkable degree with ­those that I had just learned from the work 
of Alexander Kazhdan on the cities of early Byzantium. It now seemed as 
if the ancient world had already died, almost a ­century before the appearance 
of Islam.
In the paper that I delivered at the conference, I suggested that scholars 
should find a new way of looking at the transition from late antiquity to early 
Islam in the Mediterranean and the ­Middle East. Put very briefly, the Muslims 
did not bring the ancient world to an end by imposing on it a totally new civi-
lization based on a new religion. Far from it. They inherited a world that had 
already changed profoundly.
Above all, the cities had changed. Many had already taken on features that 
we tend to associate only with the Islamic ­Middle Ages. For instance, Hugh 
Kennedy, in a brilliant article entitled “From Polis to Madina,” would soon 
show that a city such as Aleppo had lost its classical shape and taken on an 
“Islamic” look as early as 600. The agora had been abandoned, and the wide, 
classical streets had come to be cluttered with shops, like a sûk, reached 
through narrow, winding lanes.5
High culture lost its roots in the city. It did not vanish. It relocated. The 
cities ­were outflanked by a capillary system of ­great monasteries established 
in the countryside of Syria, Egypt, and the Holy Land, many of which became 
power­houses of religious thought in Syriac and Coptic as well as proving to 
be active centers for the translation of Greek philosophy and theology into 
4. Richard Hodges and David White­house, Muhammed, Charlemagne, and the Origins of 
Eu­rope (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1983).
5. H. Kennedy, “From Polis to Madina: Urban Change in Late Antique and Early Islamic 
Syria,” Past and Pre­sent 106 (1985): 3–27.

High Gr avit y 
641
Syriac. ­These monasteries created the remarkable phenomenon of an “Orien-
tal Hellenism”: Greek thought expressed entirely in Syriac translation.6
­These ­were the changes that eased the transition from a late antique to an 
Islamic world. The Muslim conquests and the formation of Islamic civiliza-
tion took place in what was best called a “­later late antiquity”—­a further phase 
in the social and religious ferment of the Mediterranean and the ­Middle East, 
as much in need of study on its own terms as the brilliant centuries of the ­later 
empire proper.
For this reason, I concluded that studies of the continuity between late 
antiquity and early Islam should not begin by positing an abrupt transition 
from a full-­blown late antique past to a brand-­new Islamic pre­sent. Rather, 
scholars had to develop a sense of ­Middle Eastern society as a ­whole (Byzan-
tine, eastern Christian, and Islamic alike) in constant, roiling motion from the 
days of Justinian to ­those of Harun al-­Rashid. Brave words, and easier to say 
in twenty minutes than to follow up by detailed research. Yet subsequent 
de­cades of scholarship, along the lines suggested at this conference, have in-
fluenced my own work and teaching up ­until ­today.
The Group for the Study of Late Antiquity
Not long ­after, I experienced an unexpected change in my own situation that 
was paradigmatic of the weight of gravity (based on abundant financial re-
sources) whose pull I had already sensed in the social and intellectual life of 
Prince­ton campus. To my complete surprise, as I had not even applied to them 
for funds, the Mellon Foundation offered me a bud­get to form an interdisci-
plinary group. It was called the Group for the Study of Late Antiquity. With 
this bud­get, the committee of the group ran up to four half-­day seminars each 
term, and distributed small grants (mainly for travel) to undergraduates and 
gradu­ate students studying late antique topics. It was a strange turn of events. 
I had come to Prince­ton as a visiting professor with a minimal workload in 
order to have the leisure to write. Now I found myself showered with money 
so as to be busy once again.
At the time I was struck by the contrast between the two campuses that this 
new venture revealed. At Berkeley, John Dillon and I had labored at writing 
6. J. Tannous, The Making of the Medieval ­Middle East: Religion, Society, and ­Simple Believers 
(Prince­ton, NJ: Prince­ton University Press, 2018), sums up work that had only just begun in 
1984.

642 
Ch apter 93
proposals and filling out forms for the National Endowment for the Humani-
ties for money to fund a late antique study group. I remember bending with 
John, late at night, over the large photocopier machine of the Classics Depart-
ment in Dwinelle Hall, hurrying to meet a deadline. We labored in vain. No 
grant came our way.
Instead, a group of gradu­ate students congealed to one side of campus in 
the informal manner that was typical of Berkeley. This was “Holy Men Incor-
porated.” We met in the eve­ning ­every two weeks. Fortified by six-­packs of 
beer and a potluck supper, we would squat on the floor of my ­house and dis-
cuss hagiography in ­every period and region from Ireland to the Gan­ges. ­These 
­were happy gatherings, which showed that late antiquity had come to stay on 
Berkeley campus. But they ­were a purely voluntary group, with no institutional 
recognition and no funding whatsoever to support them. At Prince­ton, by 
contrast, it was taken for granted that any intellectual endeavors worth pursu-
ing must happen on campus, and that, once recognized, they could count on 
generous financial support.
As I look back, it surprises me that the formation of a late antique group 
was treated, at the time, as such a new departure. It takes some effort of the 
imagination to recall a Prince­ton where so few interdisciplinary joining points 
existed. It was a rather bleak scene. The History Department had its Davis 
Center, over which Lawrence Stone (1919–1999) presided with an iron hand, 
encouraging a cut and thrust of argument that invested its Friday morning 
sessions with the thrill of attendance at a public execution in early modern 
style. But for many classicists, ancient historians, historians of classical and 
Byzantine art, scholars in Judaism and Islam, and students of the classical tra-
dition in its medieval and Re­nais­sance forms, the Group for the Study of Late 
Antiquity was the only show in town at that time.
We met on Sundays in what amounted to a miniconference: lunch with 
the speaker, a three-­hour session, and a reception often followed by supper. The 
speaker would not give a paper so much as act as a disk jockey, by introducing 
a set of texts and recent lit­er­a­ture on a given subject that had been circulated 
in advance.
­Those who attended quickly formed a remarkably stable and enthusiastic 
body of persons drawn from all over campus, from the Institute for Advanced 
Study, from the Theological Seminary, and from outside Prince­ton. I was im-
pressed by how many of the faculty took part. While “Holy Men Incorpo-
rated” had been a venture for gradu­ate students only, the Prince­ton group 
proved to be something of an urban lung for faculty members who ­were 

High Gr avit y 
643
usually compartmentalized in strong departments with ­little connection with 
each other.
Late antiquity provided just what was needed to bring ­people together: it 
was a field where any number of disciplines converged so as to explore a civi-
lization of unusual complexity. The group remained as open as pos­si­ble to 
dif­fer­ent themes and approaches. ­There was no single methodological agenda, 
and ­there was as much outreach as pos­si­ble to fields beyond the Greco-­Roman 
world. Judaism and Islam ­were very much part of the mix, along with archaeol-
ogy and art history, beside the more usual themes of religious and cultural 
history. The art historians Danny Čurčić (1940–2017), newly arrived at Prince­
ton, Dale Kinney of Bryn Mawr, and Archer Saint-­Clair of Rutgers ­were regu-
lar attendants. Alan Cameron came from Columbia to talk about his work on 
the circus factions, and Simon Price (1954–2011), as a visiting fellow at the 
institute, spoke on the cities of Asia Minor, while Glen Bowersock introduced 
recent work on late antique Syria. Both Évelyne Patlagean and Aline Rousselle 
came from France to speak on campus and to lead a discussion of their books 
in the Sunday seminar of the group.
I recently discovered in my basement a mass of material that had been xe-
roxed for the meetings of the group. I realized how impor­tant ­these meetings 
had been for me, in maintaining for me a sense of the diversity of late antiquity. 
At a time when I was fully engaged in writing Body and Society, I was worried 
that I might be caught in a world of ethereal texts and high-­pitched arguments 
on sexuality. I feared that I might lose contact with the more earthy realities of 
late antique life by entering the dimly lit tunnel of the history of the early 
church. It was the jolly mood of the Group for the Study of Late Antiquity that 
kept my feet on the ground. For ­here was a group where all aspects of the 
period—­from Plotinus on the soul to urban thuggery in Byzantium—­were 
thrashed out in regular meetings that showed the high gravity of Prince­ton at 
its very best.
Nonetheless, Body and Society had to get written. For this I turned to Speer 
Library (now Wright Library) of the Prince­ton Theological Seminary. In 1983, 
this was the old library, not the ­grand new building of ­today, whose wide cen-
tral space resembles the concourse of a major ­hotel to such an extent that one 
expects to find bellhops in the elevator. The old library preserved a division 
between its floors that seemed to reflect the stern theological and moral world-
view of the seminary’s Presbyterian found­ers. Gnostics and Manichees lurked 
in the darkest reaches of the basement, along with somewhat dubious subjects 
(for good Protestants) such as monasticism and hagiography. At that time, 

644 
Ch apter 93
I worked mainly in the well-­lit upper floor, surrounded by books on Judaism 
and the New Testament. Now, with such a collection to hand, was the time to 
write the final version of Body and Society—­BodSoc, as I now called it. A book 
that was first conceived among the eucalyptus groves of Berkeley would be 
largely finished among the battleship-­gray, steel shelves of Speer Library in 
Prince­ton.

645
94
Writing Body and 
Societ y
Listening
I finished Body and Society in early 1987, and it was published a year ­later.1 It 
was the first book that I had written from beginning to end in an American 
environment. I have always seen it as something of an ex-­voto, an expression 
of gratitude for my freedom from the taxing workload of a British professor 
and for the intellectual stimulation that I had enjoyed in such abundance in 
Berkeley and Prince­ton. Not since I had written Augustine of Hippo, as a young 
fellow of All Souls College, was I so ­free to write at what­ever length I wished.
In 1987, a nuanced book on sexual renunciation was not exactly in tune with 
the spirit of the age. The sexual revolution in Amer­i­ca and elsewhere; the 
growing concern in the Catholic Church over the issue of celibacy among 
priests and members of religous ­orders—­monks and nuns alike; and the wide-
spread tendency to blame the Christian churches in all ages for the ravages of 
sexual repression—­all ­these made renunciation a hot topic. Scholars who 
wrote on the New Testament and on the early church ­were expected to offer 
a judgement—­and usually a negative judgement—on the exaltation of virgin-
ity and celibacy in early Christian circles, and to derive from their work on the 
1. P. Brown, Body and Society: Men, ­Women, and Sexual Renunciation in Early Chris­tian­ity 
(New York: Columbia University Press, 1988). Readers should know that, in an introduction to 
the twentieth-­anniversary edition, I have explained some of the difficulties that I faced in writing 
Body and Society, and how I have revised my views on many points: Peter Brown, introduction 
to Body and Society: Twentieth-­Anniversary Edition (New York: Columbia University Press, 
2008), xxi–­lxvii. Throughout ­these two chapters I ­will cite from that edition as I have done 
previously.

646 
Ch apter 94
distant past some message, some path of action for their own times. Activists 
and theologians of all denominations and shades of opinion ­were lavish in 
offering advice of this kind.
But I was neither an activist nor a theologian. Con­temporary issues con-
cerned me; but I wanted to avoid misrepre­sen­ta­tions of the past in the interest 
of modern agendas. As a historian, I felt that my first duty was to listen care-
fully to the ancient Christian writers in order to make their views on the mean-
ing and implications of sexual renunciation intelligible to modern readers. I 
wanted to catch ­those voices from a distant age, so as to understand what they 
had meant in their own time; what it meant to ­those who first read, heard, and 
debated them; and in what social and cultural circumstances ­these debates 
took place, and with what consequences: only then could I judge their effect 
on ­future ages and their relevance to modern times. So how did I go about it?
Small Groups
From the very beginning I faced an option as to the sort of history I would 
write. Put very briefly: I had to choose between what I might call macro-­
history (a history of broad movements) and micro-­history (a history of small 
communities).
As an example of macro-­history, Paul Veyne’s challenging article “­Family 
and Love in the High Empire” (which had appeared in 1978) intrigued me for a 
time, as it had intrigued Foucault. In this article, Veyne described what ap-
peared to him to be a decisive, empire-­wide mutation in attitudes to sex and 
marriage that took place in the second ­century. This was a study of a major 
change on the macro-­level of Roman society as a ­whole. Following Veyne’s 
lead, I had thought for a time that I would write a sequel to his history of sex 
and marriage in the classical Roman Empire, by tracing the growing influence 
of Christian asceticism and of Christian notions of virginity on sexual be­hav­
ior in the late antique period.
Indeed, immediately ­after my return from my first stay in Venice, in 1981, I 
contributed a chapter on late antiquity to the Histoire de la vie privée, to ac-
company the essay on classical Rome written by Veyne himself.2 But even 
2. Peter Brown, “Antiquité tardive,” in Histoire de la vie privée, ed. P. Ariès and G. Duby (Paris: 
Le Seuil, 1985), 1:226–299; A History of Private Life: From Pagan Rome to Byzantium (Cambridge, 
MA: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 1987), 237–311, and separately as Late Antiquity 
(Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 1998).

W r iting Body a nd Societ y 
647
as I wrote that essay, I realized that I had told only half the story: the history 
of Chris­tian­ity in its first centuries could not be written as a ­grand narrative, 
as if it werethe story of a single, undivided movement (often spoken of, loosely, 
as “the expansion of Chris­tian­ity”) throughout the Roman world. ­There was 
no one-­way traffic ­toward a single upshot that the reader might ­either deplore 
or acclaim in the light of present-­day concerns.
Far from it: to write a history of early Chris­tian­ity amounted to studying a 
series of micro-­histories of the small, but surprisingly vocal, Christian com-
munities that emerged as the new religion gradually gained a foothold in the 
Mediterranean and the ­Middle East. Vivid debates in any number of intense, 
face-­to-­face groups raised storms within Chris­tian­ity itself that eventually 
came to touch Roman society at large.
Contexts
Faced by this situation, I drew on a current in con­temporary New Testament 
studies that was prominent in the 1980s. This was the attempt to “ground” the 
texts of first-­century Judaism, of the New Testament, and of the early church 
by ascribing each to a precise social context and, if pos­si­ble, to an identifiable 
community.
This search for a context was well represented by the work of Gerd Theissen 
and Wayne Meeks. Both scholars appeared to have explained the conflicting 
messages on marriage and sexual renunciation in the Gospels and in the writ-
ings of Saint Paul by placing them in contrasting social milieus. Some of the 
sayings of Jesus ­were deemed to have been addressed to settled village communi-
ties, while ­others (the more radical and ascetic) ­were held to have legitimated 
the activities of charismatic wanderers who roamed the rich countryside of 
Galilee and Syria.3 Both Meeks and Theissen explained the mighty tensions 
in the letters of Paul, on ­whether or not to marry, by locating them in the 
stresses and strains of relatively well-­to-do and articulate groups—­the first 
urban Christians in Corinth and Ephesus.4
Nowadays, it takes some effort of the imagination to recapture the liberat-
ing effect of this approach to the world of the New Testament. It now seems 
3. G. Theissen, Sociology of Early Palestinian Chris­tian­ity (Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1978).
4. W. A. Meeks, The First Urban Christians: The Social World of the Apostle Paul (New Haven, 
CT: Yale University Press, 1983); and G. Theissen, The Social Setting of Pauline Chris­tian­ity: 
Essays on Corinth (Philadelphia: Fortress, 1982).

648 
Ch apter 94
overconfident, even reductionist: texts themselves are now treated as more 
slippery, and the social background of early Chris­tian­ity itself is now seen to 
be more complex than we had thought.5 But, in the early 1980s, this approach 
offered a way to understand the conflicting views of early Christians on sex 
and marriage, such as had long perplexed theologians, by seeing them as the 
product of a variety of social situations.
I fastened on this small-­group approach. It spoke to the historian in me, 
and especially to the anthropological tilt of much history written in the 1970s and 
1980s—­a tilt away from ­grand narratives ­toward the study of small, face-­to-­face 
communities. In this re­spect, the seminal article on Saint Paul by Henry Chad-
wick (1920–2008), which I had already read in Venice, was a model for me. Chad-
wick showed how Paul’s rulings on marriage and virginity, which ­were to play 
such a crucial role in forming all ­future Christian attitudes, ­were not the magiste-
rial pronouncements that many theologians took them to be. They ­were the result 
of unresolved social and cultural tensions within the Christian communities—­
tensions that it was the historian’s business to identify and explain.6
Hence the shape of the first part of Body and Society. ­After a general intro-
duction to attitudes to sex and society in the second-­century Roman Empire, 
I settled down to reconstruct the social contexts in which dif­fer­ent versions of 
the Christian notion of virginity emerged in dif­fer­ent regions—on the roads 
of Syria, in the villages of upland Phrygia, in the complex urban environments 
of the Rome of Hermas, author of The Shepherd (around 120), or in the Car-
thage of Tertullian (160–220).
Throughout, I wanted the reader to listen in to the early Christians in their 
own, distant world. It was a world often revealed in small, vivid details that lay 
on the margins of well-­known treatises—in stray inscriptions, graffiti, and pa-
pyri, and in evidence taken from texts in any number of languages: not only in 
Greek and Latin, but also in Syriac and Coptic. Whenever pos­si­ble, I let the 
early Christians do the talking. Whereas Michel Foucault’s History of Sexuality 
was tied to his own, distinctive philosophical agenda, and many treatments of 
sex in early Chris­tian­ity ­were driven by con­temporary issues, I took a dif­fer­ent 
approach: I concentrated on catching ­those distant voices and the world in 
which they lived.
5. S. Friesen, “Poverty in Pauline Studies: Beyond the So-­Called New Consensus,” Journal 
for the Study of the New Testament 26 (2004): 323–361; P. Brown, Trea­sure in Heaven: The Holy 
Poor in Early Chris­tian­ity (Charlottesville: University of ­Virginia Press, 2016), 1–16.
6. H. E. Chadwick, “All ­Things to All Men,” New Testament Studies 1 (1955): 261–275.

W r iting Body a nd Societ y 
649
At this time, my growing sense of the diversity of Christian regions owed 
much to the work of Robert Murray (1925–2018), whose groundbreaking 
study of Syriac Chris­tian­ity—­Symbols of Church and Kingdom—­had appeared 
only recently (in 1975). Murray traced the manner in which sexual renuncia-
tion among the baptized “Sons and ­Daughters of the Covenant” in the Syrian 
churches took on distinctive meanings, different from ­those current in the 
Greco-­Roman West
In the Syrian churches, the renunciation of sex was treated as a form of 
liberation. To abandon sex and marriage was hailed as a deliverance from the 
tyranny of “this world,” and as the beginning of a new age—an age beyond sex. 
As a result, male and female ascetics ­were not segregated from each other. 
Rather they ­were thought of as complementing each other. They mingled, in 
the Christian communities, much as their mixed voices—in choirs made up 
of continent men and ­women—­were joined, “across the aisle” as it ­were, in the 
beautiful chanting of Syriac hymns.
In regions where strict segregation of the sexes was the norm in daily 
married life, the notion of virginity as a gift of the Holy Spirit set a few men 
and ­women apart in ­every Christian community. Such groups ­were small but 
vibrant. They stuck out as the harbingers of a new age—an age beyond sex—­
brought in by Chris­tian­ity.7
In this way, Syria continued to be a source of surprises to ascetics from 
other regions. For example: an outsider such as Jerome (342–420) was in-
trigued by what he found when he first visited the ­Middle East in the 370s. 
When he settled into a Syrian village near Antioch, he was surprised to find an 
el­derly ­couple walking to church ­every day from the ­house in which they had 
lived together in continence for as long as the villa­gers remembered. Unfazed 
by this mixing of the sexes, the villa­gers simply told Jerome that the pious 
­couple ­were known as “the Holy Ones”—­they had got beyond sex. To Jerome, 
unused to such ease between the sexes in ascetic circles, the ­couple came as a 
challenge: he devoted an entire book to their adventures.8
I trea­sured this small nugget of evidence. For ­here was an encounter 
between two very dif­fer­ent traditions of Chris­tian­ity, of which most of us, in 
the West, had known only the darker side—­the side represented by Jerome, 
7. R. Murray, Symbols of Church and Kingdom (Cambridge University Press, 1975) and “The 
Exhortation to Candidates for Ascetical Vows at Baptism in the Ancient Syrian Church,” New 
Testament Studies 21 (1974): 59–80.
8. Brown, Body and Society, 100–102.

650 
Ch apter 94
the caricature of the repressed monk—­without knowledge of a stranger, 
warmer, and more radical Chris­tian­ity that was to be found in Syria and 
elsewhere.
The more I read, the more I was impressed by the diversity of Christian 
views on ­these issues. Far from following the fate of a single, unambiguous 
line of Christian doctrine, from which discordant voices ­were excluded as 
heretical—as extreme or downright dotty—­I found that I was in a world of 
many voices.
To read myself into early Christian texts, with an eye to their diversity, 
­century by ­century and region by region, was like learning a strange new lan-
guage or picking up an exotic tune. I realized that I was listening in to a ­grand 
debate in which the very nature of society, of the ­human person, and of the 
material world was at stake. This debate, which pitted Christians against Chris-
tians quite as much as it pitted Christians against Jews and pagans, emerged as 
the central theme in my book.

651
95
From Origen to 
Augustine
From Origen to Augustine
In many ways, the ­later chapters of Body and Society ­were dominated by the 
contrast between two ­great Christian writers separated by two centuries—­
Origen of Alexandria (185–254) and Augustine of Hippo (354–430). I had long 
been acquainted with Augustine. But Origen was new to me. ­Here was a larger-­
than-­life figure, both in his own days and in all ­later centuries. He emerged 
from a generation of ­great teachers and scholars as the greatest Christian 
teacher of all. From 203 to 215 he was head of the Catechetical School of Alex-
andria and ­later taught as a priest in Caesarea Maritima in Palestine, ­until his 
death in 254—­brought about by the rigors of imprisonment at the time of the 
Decian persecution. Im­mensely productive, he created in Caesarea a library 
that formed the nucleus of what was, in its time, the equivalent of the first 
Christian university. ­Later generations of Greek and Syrian Christians looked 
back to him as a role model of the Christian scholar and as a seemingly inex-
haustible source of erudition and of challenging ideas.
Origen was also a hotly debated figure. His daring speculations on the 
preexistence of the soul and his suggestion that even the Devil might be saved 
ensured that he would be formally condemned as a heretic in the sixth ­century. 
Even ­after this condemnation, he lingered on the edge of orthodoxy—­a ­great 
Non-­Person and an unspoken alternative to the less ambitious views of the 
average monk and churchman.
The recovery of the full profile of Origen as a scholar and theologian was 
one of the triumphs of French Patristic scholarship in postwar times. The work 
of Jean Daniélou, Pierre Nautin (1914–1997), Henri Crouzel (1919–2003), and 

652 
Ch apter 95
Marguerite Harl (to mention only a few) represented a triumph of the schol-
arly ideal of ressourcement—of the effort to enable the ­great figures of the 
Christian past (and especially the Greek ­Fathers of the Church) to speak to 
the pre­sent in their own voice.1
I remember reading Origen’s commentaries and treatises in the bright, cool 
air of my garden in Berkeley, ­until I could almost hear his voice. Not since 
I had first read myself into the works of Augustine had I had so moving an 
experience. ­Here was an early Christian writer whose primary concern was 
with the growth of the soul, and with the soul’s mysterious relation to the 
body, the sexual drive included.2
I warmed to Origen’s vision of the seemingly unlimited potential for change 
in the individual. He insisted that the body was not a static prison of the soul. 
It was something more flexible: a finely calibrated vehicle for the soul—­a light 
bed in which the soul rested. The body itself was a fluid ­thing, sensitive to the 
movements of the soul. It could be transformed along with the soul; and it 
even played a positive role in spurring on the soul to ever-­greater effort to 
overcome its limitations.
­Behind Origen’s view of the fluidity of the person lay a sense of the immen-
sity of the cosmos. He presented a boundless world where God had infinite 
time in which to bring each and ­every ­human being to perfection. He insisted 
that, even in this life, body and soul alike could change and expand in ways that 
went far beyond our cramped, socially bound imagination.
Origen placed sex against this vast horizon. For him, sexual renunciation 
was not a single, drastic act: it was only the beginning of a slow but sure pro­
cess of transformation. Virginity and continence represented the start—­but 
only the start—of the long journey of the self ­toward ever-­widening horizons: 
to a state where even the restricting categories of gender might come to be 
shed by elect spirits.
This was a voice from the troubled but ambitious days of the third ­century, 
which had seen the emergence of so many religious leaders (pagan as well as 
1. J. Daniélou, Platonisme et Théologie mystique (Paris: Aubin, 1944) and L’être et le temps chez 
Grégoire de Nysse (Leiden: Brill, 1970); Pierre Nautin, Origène: sa vie et son oeuvre (Paris: 
Beauchesne, 1977); Henri Crouzel, Origène et la “connassance mystique” (Paris: Desclée de Brou-
wer, 1961); Marguérite Harl, Origène et la function révélatrice du Verbe incarné (Paris: Le Seuil, 
1958). My other debt was to a scholar in a dif­fer­ent tradition—­W. Völker, Das Vollkommenheit-
sideal des Origenes (Tübingen: J.C.B. Mohr, 1931).
2. Brown, Body and Society, chapter 8: “I Beseech You: Be Transformed,” 160–177.

From Or igen to Augustine 
653
Christian) who ­were believed to have been taken beyond themselves—to have 
been somehow transformed beyond their accustomed identity. For many who 
read Origen in ­later centuries, ­these speculations induced an unsettling sense 
of fluidity, of constant upward movement ­toward some barely imaginable goal. 
Origen’s mighty synthesis came to be seen as a challenge and a danger—­like 
the glimpse of a ­great prehistoric beast from a distant age.
Origen: East and West
A reviewer of Body and Society rightly observed that it was Origen who “haunts 
the book.”3 Origen’s daring view of the ­human person’s capacity for change 
was at the back of my mind when I moved a ­century ­later than Origen in order 
to study the Desert ­Fathers of Egypt. ­Here I did not find sweltering figures, 
obsessed with sex, such as ­were common in popu­lar modern images of the 
monks of Egypt. Instead, I found figures who represented what has come to 
be known as a “Desert Origenism,” devoted to the transformation of the self, 
body and soul together.
As they ­were described by contemporaries, the ­great monks of Egypt stood 
out against a desert landscape that seemed as boundless as the cosmos of Ori-
gen’s imagination. ­Under the guidance of wise mentors, they ­were believed to 
have experienced transformations in their own souls that ­were clearly reflected 
in the poise and magnetic serenity of their bodies. The rise and fall, and the 
eventual ­dying away, of their sexual temptations registered the slow but sure 
workings of God’s providence in the remaking of the ­human person.4
In contrast to his continued, almost subliminal, presence in the spiritual 
writers of the East, Origen fared less well at the hands of leading figures in the 
Latin world. This difference amounted to one of the most decisive partings of 
the way between East and West in early Chris­tian­ity—­between a Greek and 
Syrian world that continued to feel the magnetic power of Origen’s cosmic 
synthesis, and a Latin West that found its own identity through il gran 
rifiuto5—­“the ­great refusal” that took the form of an almost visceral rejection 
of his more daring ideas. It seemed to me that ­there was less room in the imagina-
tion of the Latin ­Fathers than in the East for his wide-­open cosmic horizons, and 
for his daring speculations on the ­future transformation of bodies and souls.
3. Tom Morris, “Lust Beliefs,” Daily Telegraph, April 8, 1989.
4. Brown, Body and Society, 223–232.
5. Dante, Inferno 3.60.

654 
Ch apter 95
Augustine
In the ensuing debate concerning the views of Origen, in which Jerome and 
many ­others ­were heavi­ly involved, Augustine was the odd man out. He point-
edly ignored Origen’s theories and, instead, created a vast system of his own.6 
Returning to Augustine, having spent many years with Origen and the Desert 
­Fathers, I felt like a traveler returning to his hometown ­after a long absence 
abroad and finding it somehow shrunken. Origen’s sense of constantly expand-
ing horizons was absent. Instead, Augustine propounded a view of sexuality 
as an unchanging constant in ­human nature, a negative force singularly imper-
vious to transformation.
This view became so well established in the medieval West that it takes no 
small effort to recapture how idiosyncratic Augustine must have appeared in 
his own time to many other Christians, and especially to the Christians of the 
East. In the first place, he treated sex as part of the original nature of ­human 
beings. Nowadays, this seems so obvious a fact that we forget that many of the 
Greek ­Fathers had followed Origen in thinking that sex was somehow periph-
eral to the ­human person. They believed that Adam and Eve had been sexless 
in Paradise. Sex was an afterthought, added to ­humans by God as a device by 
which ­human beings might be consoled for their loss of immortality by the 
gift of ­children. It was a sign of God’s mercy in the face of death.
This was not Augustine’s view. For him, sex was not an afterthought. He 
insisted that, if Adam and Eve had not rebelled against God, they could have 
had sex in Eden. Their intercourse, had it happened, would have been a 
serene—­indeed, a joyful—­encounter, barely imaginable to present-­day, fallen 
­humans.
­These speculations by Augustine on the possibility of sex in Eden (in book 
14 of the City of God and elsewhere) tend to evoke sniggers in the modern 
reader, as they already did in Augustine’s opponents, the followers of Pelagius. 
But Augustine took this issue seriously. He insisted on the possibility of sex in 
Eden so as to underline the truly tragic nature of the Fall of Adam and Eve. 
They had been punished for their disobedience by losing control of what had 
once been an original, marvelous harmony of body and soul, in which sex was 
included.
6. See now Joseph W. Trigg, “Augustine’s Reception of Origen,” in Augustine and Tradition: 
Influences, Contexts, Legacy. Essays in Honor of J. Patout Burns, ed. David G. Hunter and Jona-
than P. Yates (­Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans, 2020), 233–260.

From Or igen to Augustine 
655
For Augustine, the loss of harmony between body and soul was irrevocable. 
As a result of God’s punishment, Adam and Eve and all subsequent ­humans 
became mortal. Their bodies slipped out of their control in the supreme, ob-
scene wrench of death. Their sexual drive also escaped their control: they ­were 
as ­little able to overcome frigidity or impotence as they ­were unable, by will-
power alone, to master orgasm and sexual thoughts. In this way, intercourse 
was not seen as a benign remedy for death, as it had been among the Greek 
­Fathers; the loss of control associated with intercourse was a small but faithful 
mirror image of death.
Above all, for Augustine, the sexual drive was ­there to stay. It was a perma-
nent reminder of God’s punishment for the rebellion of Adam and Eve. Some-
thing infinitely better could have happened if they had not rebelled. A touch 
of sadness—of Paradise lost—­surrounded even the most pious Christian mar-
ried ­couple. Their intercourse would never be like the untroubled intercourse 
that Adam and Eve might have enjoyed before the Fall, had they not rebelled 
against God.
And this would not change. As Augutine presented it, the sexual drive in 
its pre­sent form was a permanently deranged force, which needed to be con-
tinually kept ­under control even in the holiest of persons. ­There was no pos-
sibility that this drive might somehow be transformed and transcended—­not 
even by a happy few. With Augustine, a ­great, half-­expressed hope of the early 
church died.
John Cassian
This bleak view brought down on Augustine the well-­aimed critique of John 
Cassian (360–435). Cassian was a Latin-­speaker from the mouth of the Danube 
(modern Romania). Equally fluent in Latin and Greek, he had traveled to 
Egypt and interviewed the ­Great Men of the Desert, before returning to the 
Latin-­speaking world to ­settle in Marseilles around 415. He was an au­then­tic 
representative of the wisdom of the Desert ­Fathers and of the “Desert Ori-
genism” that remained such an impor­tant feature of the worldview of Eastern 
Christians. In many ways, he represented, in Provence, a perfect counter-
weight—­a missing vitamin, as it ­were—to the somber synthesis that Augustine 
was in the pro­cess of elaborating in Africa.
In his Conferences—­his monastic talk-­ins—­Cassian treated sex as a passing 
phase. Even though sexual temptation seemed ineradicable to the average 
person, this was not so. Strange ­things could happen in the desert: ascetic 

656 
Ch apter 95
discipline, combined with the grace of God, could bring about a mighty trans-
formation of soul and body alike. “The trea­sures of darkness” associated with 
sexual temptations could be thrown open, to allow the light of Christ to flood 
into the soul.
Cassian went on to insist that sexual fantasies which lingered in the mind 
­were not signs of irremediable depravity. They would pass. God did not allow 
them to continue in the pre­sent only as a punishment. Rather, they served a 
purpose: to remind ascetics, who might be unduly proud of their chastity, that 
they ­were ­human. Their rise and fall acted as a sensor—as warning symptoms 
of the far more dangerous drives of pride and anger that lurked deeper in the 
psyche than did mere sex. It was with ­these sinister, inhuman drives, and not 
with the passing phase of sexual temptation, that the monks must wage their 
most ­bitter spiritual combat.
In this way, Cassian kept open the possibility of some profound mutation 
of the self that showed in the body in the form of a transformation of the sexual 
drive. ­Here I differed from the interpretation of Cassian that Michel Foucault 
had proposed in Berkeley. Foucault had concentrated on the temptations faced 
by the monk in the course of a lonely “­battle of chastity” with his own thoughts. 
But this was not the ­whole story. I emphasized the other side of the picture—­the 
hope of victory that was implied throughout Cassian’s writings on the ascetic life. 
This hope of victory stood as a ­silent rebuke to the dour pessimism of Augustine’s 
view of deranged sex as an immovable reminder of the Fall.
Cassian’s guarded criticism of Augustine marked the ending of an age. For 
this reason, I lingered on the contrast between the two thinkers. They ­were 
almost exact contemporaries. Each of them wrote in seaports within easy sail 
of each other: Marseilles lay almost due north across the Mediterranean from 
Hippo. But they represented two very dif­fer­ent traditions. Their clash of views 
showed that the ascetic traditions of the monks of Egypt (represented by Cas-
sian’s Conferences, written in clear Latin for the monks of Provence) could gain 
a foothold in the Latin world. But Cassian’s critique of Augustine showed how 
far the traditions of the West (as interpreted by Augustine) differed from ­those 
of Egypt and the East.7 In ­later generations, Cassian was sidelined. His works 
remained essential for monks and nuns; but on the general issue of sex and 
original sin, for good or ill, Augustine was allowed to have the last word 
throughout the West.
7. Brown, Body and Society, 420–423.

From Or igen to Augustine 
657
Person and Cosmos
­These comparisons with the ever-­present thought of Origen reflected the last 
turn in my interests as I wrote Body and Society. Over the years of writing the 
book, I came to pay more attention to the differing images of the ­human per-
son and of the cosmos that underlay the vari­ous attitudes to sexuality in Chris-
tian and non-­Christian writers.
I owed this change, in part, to the series of seminars of the Group for the 
Study of Late Antiquity, which had begun in the academic year of 1985/86: 
“Images of the Person in Late Antiquity.” This broad title, which included non-­
Christians as well as Christians, encouraged me to continue to think about the 
ideas and social setting of the last pagan phi­los­o­phers, and about themes that 
I had raised in my conversations with John Dillon in Berkeley on Plotinus and 
the Neoplatonic tradition.
For this reason, in the ­later chapters of Body and Society, I attempted to set 
Christian notions of marriage and virginity against the wider framework of 
philosophical discourse in the late classical world. The pagans Plotinus and 
Porphyry now made their appearance, to highlight the difference between 
their treatment of sex and the views of their Christian contemporaries, Origen 
and Methodius of Olympus.
­These ­were exciting comparisons. ­Because of the surprisingly rapid spread 
of Chris­tian­ity among members of the intelligent­sia of the Greek world, in the 
course of the third and fourth centuries, pagans and Christians now met each 
other as intellectual equals. Yet, on issues such as sexuality and marriage, per-
sons who might seem, at first sight, to belong to the same milieu and to the 
same ­mental universe, emerged with very dif­fer­ent perspectives. They could 
be worlds apart.
The lives of two upper-­class ­women illustrated this point. The pagan phi­
los­o­pher Sosipatra had grown up on a ­family farm ­behind Ephesus in the mid-­
fourth ­century. Her younger con­temporary Macrina (ca. 325–380), the pious 
­sister of Gregory of Nyssa, had done much the same. She lived on a ­family 
estate at Annesi, outside Amaseia (Amasya, in northwestern Turkey), to which 
their formidable ­brother, Basil of Caesarea, had retired, in 358, to begin his 
monastic life.
A few years ­after finishing Body and Society, in 1990, I visited Annesi, now 
known as Kaleköy—­the village of the ­castle. Close by, the river Iris (the 
Yeşilırmak) still swirled with the ominous vortices in which Macrina’s ­brother 

658 
Ch apter 95
Naucratius had been drowned ­after he became entangled in his fishing nets. 
Fishermen still fished with the same nets.
But Annesi/Kaleköy was no desert. Macrina’s formidable ­brother Basil of 
Caesraea (330–379) and his friends had implied (in their letters to each other) 
that Annesi was a remote mountain aerie, lost in the woods of Pontus—­a 
heroically uncomfortable place for budding ascetics. In fact, it was a low hill-
ock set in a smiling valley—­a gentleman’s villa or a well-­appointed hunting 
lodge. It was prob­ably ­little dif­fer­ent from the country villa where Sosipatra 
had grown up.
Yet the lives of Sosipatra the pagan and Macrina the Christian took very 
dif­fer­ent courses. Sosipatra married and had three ­children. She still thought 
of herself as embedded in a very ancient, civic world, which seemed to follow 
comfortably the rhythms of nature. Marriage and childbirth ­were part of ­those 
rhythms. They occurred to all persons in their due time; and they always 
would do so, like the solemn ticks of the clock of an eternal universe.
Macrina, by contrast, remained a virgin. For her, time stood still. Her life 
would not be broken up by marriage and the care of ­children. In this self-­
made suspension of the normal rhythms of a ­woman’s life, she awaited with 
bated breath the Coming of Christ. For her, that Coming marked the end 
of a universe and of a social order which, to Sosipatra the pagan, still ap-
peared to be immovable—­part of a cosmos saturated with the golden light 
of eternity.8
Thinking of ­those two ­women—­so similar in their social position and in 
much of their culture—­I realized that, in late antiquity, the choice between 
marriage and virginity could be rooted in nothing less than two differing views 
of the natu­ral world: Sosipatra saw her body as woven into the texture of a 
perpetual, ever-­fertile universe, whose rhythms she must obey with quiet cer-
tainty in all the stages of her life; for Macrina, the same world (seemingly so 
solid) hung over an abyss, brought out of nothing by the power of God alone. 
It would soon be swept away to make the new heaven and the new earth for 
which her soul longed.
It was by such contrasts between striking individuals, each with a dif­fer­
ent worldview, as well as between dif­fer­ent groups and churches, that 
I hoped to build up a fair and differentiated picture of a revolution that, 
in the name of sexual renunciation, helped to bring about the end of a very 
ancient world.
8. Brown, Body and Society, 301–303.

From Or igen to Augustine 
659
“Sex through the Celibate Centuries!” Reviews
I handed in the manuscript of Body and Society at the office of the Columbia 
University Press in early April 1987. It did not appear in print ­until late in 1988. It 
was also published by Faber in London. Faber had maintained their relation with 
Durant’s press-­cutting agency. The cuttings, which ­were sent to me, showed that 
British reviewers jumped at what they liked to think of as a risqué topic.
Many reviews approached the issue of sexual renunciation with a barely 
concealed snigger. The review in the Daily Mail was captioned “Sex through 
the Celibate Centuries!” The addition of the exclamation mark suggested that 
for sex to happen at all in late antiquity—­still less to be discussed—­was some-
how rather naughty.9
­Others ­were not amused. Writing in the Glasgow Herald, Stewart Lamont 
(for all I know, a fellow clansman) was truculent. This was the voice of the 
Protestant North, robust in its disapproval of the ­whole subject:
It is this Pandora’s box of piety, purity and prurience that Peter Brown has 
collected in an attempt to make sense of the dark obsessional and often 
brutal laws and be­hav­ior of the period from Paul to Augustine. It is difficult 
to read without a growing sense of revulsion. . . . ​a collection of peeps 
through bedroom curtains and monastery grilles.
[­After Constantine] when the monasteries acquired property from the 
Emperor along with their elite status they laid the foundations for the can-
cerous growth of medieval corruption which resulted in the Reformation.
A survey such as this makes one won­der how normal, balanced ­people 
survived to carry Chris­tian­ity forward to the next generation. I suppose we 
should be grateful for continence and celibacy in the Early Church, at least 
for the fact that it ­didn’t permit all ­those “saints” with personality disorders 
to propagate themselves.10
“It Opens Many Doors”: Margaret Mac Curtain
The review that I liked best was written in the Irish Times by Margaret Mac 
Curtain. She was a good judge of such ­matters. A Dominican nun and a lec-
turer in Irish history in University College Dublin from 1964 to 1994, she was 
9. Peter Mullen, “Sex through the Celibate Centuries!” Daily Mail, March 9, 1989.
10. Stewart Lamont, “God’s Virgins,” Glasgow Herald, February 4, 1989.

660 
Ch apter 95
a feminist determined to give ­women their proper place in the history of mod-
ern Ireland. Fully open to the tensions of the 1980s, she described better than 
most reviewers what had inspired me in writing Body and Society:
Ten years ago Peter Brown could not have written this book. It was the 
combination of the new study of the religious world of ­women with the 
influence of Michel Foucault’s thought which enabled him to bring early 
Christian society alive in its complex attitudes to ­human sexuality. As such 
it is a study which permanently alters our understanding of Late Antique 
men and ­women as they strove to achieve the daunting ideal of sexual re-
nunciation. That “per­sis­tent sense of salutary vertigo” which for the author 
accompanied the writing of The Body and Society likewise affects the reader, 
for whom, as promised, it opens many doors.11
All that I can hope now, at a distance of over thirty years, is that it may still 
open doors in ­others, as it certainly did, over almost an entire de­cade, open 
doors in me.
11. Margaret Mac Curtain, “Discovery of the Body,” Irish Times, March 11, 1989.

661
96
Arnaldo Momigliano
Three Hearts
In 1975, Arnaldo Momigliano had moved to the University of Chicago, where 
he would teach for two out of the three terms of the year ­until his death in 1987. 
In 1983, I contributed an article for him in the collection of writings in his 
honor or­ga­nized by Emilio Gabba. The title of the collection was eminently 
appropriate. Tria corda referred to the “three hearts” of the first ­great Latin 
poet, Quintus Ennius (ca. 239–ca. 169 BC), which ­were the three dif­fer­ent 
languages that offered entry into three dif­fer­ent cultural worlds in the multi-
lingual society of southern Italy—­Latin, Greek, and Oscan. Arnaldo’s third 
heart, his “Oscan,” was his mastery of Hebrew, linked to the Jewish traditions 
of his ­family in Piedmont. It was this, the most private and local of his worlds, 
that emerged as the most tenacious in his time at Chicago.
My contribution to Tria corda was “Sexuality and Society in the Fifth 
­Century A.D.” I dealt with the debate between Augustine and Julian of Ecla-
num (a tenacious supporter of Pelagius) on sexuality and marriage. I presented 
this controversy as a Punic War of the mind, which involved the head-on 
collision of two worlds.
Julian of Eclanum (ca. 386–454), was a young southern Italian bishop with 
aristocratic connections. He defended sex as a neutral force, capable of being 
socialized in a manner not so very dif­fer­ent from that proposed in the second 
­century by the doctors of the Antonine Age: sex was “good” and basically 
unproblematic, provided that it served the ­family and—by implication—­the 
city. This sunny view clashed with the profoundly destabilizing opinions of 
Augustine, for whom sex was a permanent reminder of a primeval dislocation: 
a dark, antisocial force incapable of ever being fully tamed and channeled so 

662 
Ch apter 96
as to serve the needs of society—­a ­matter of concern, not of delight, even on 
the marriage bed.
The opening paragraphs of the essay provided me with an opportunity to 
go back in time, almost thirty years, to when I first met Arnaldo as my supervi-
sor for a dissertation on the senatorial Roman aristocracy of Italy, many of 
whose members had been involved, on one side or the other, in the confronta-
tion between Augustine and Julian. I described my debt to him: “As a hesitant 
young student at Oxford, shamefully underequipped with the skills needed to 
perform the tasks of an ancient historian, [I found that] Arnaldo Momigliano’s 
presence, in London, gave me, quite simply, the heart to persevere.” At that 
time, Arnaldo’s study of Cassiodorus and of the noble clan of the Anicii first 
introduced me to “­those lords and ladies, who (in Arnaldo’s words) ‘moved 
with relative security in a world so far from secure.’ ”1
Arnaldo had approved of my move to the East Coast: “I am glad to have 
your good news from Prince­ton which, even if Calvinist, ­will prob­ably be 
nearer your interest than Berkeley.” But I am not so sure that he approved of what 
he may have suspected to be an undue engagement with the early church on my 
part. Religion was not for him. He remained throughout, despite his loyalty to 
the Judaism of his ­family, an unbeliever in the heroic mold of Spinoza.
The more I study and re­spect ­those old Christians, the less I feel they have 
to tell me about myself or my contemporaries. . . .
I am sceptic about monastic values—­miracles included—in a world 
which desperately needs both rationality and distrust of charismatic 
leadership. . . .
If ­there is something about early Chris­tian­ity I would like to know [it] 
is how St. Paul emerged to defeat the Gospels.
When Arnaldo passed through Prince­ton, in late 1984, I was struck by how 
he had changed. Illness and personal sorrow had left him more frail. His intel-
lectual energy was by no means diminished. His sharp and capacious mind 
was ready to confront eye-­to-­eye yet another major theme in the history of the 
ancient world, one that he had touched on only in passing in former years—­
the role of religion, and especially the role of religious biography, as this be-
came ever more prominent in late antiquity. While declaring himself not to be 
1. Rivista storica italiana 69 (1957): 282: P. Brown, “Sexuality and Society in the Fifth 
­Century A.D.: Augustine and Julian of Eclanum,” in Tria corda. Scritti in onore di Arnaldo 
Momigliano, ed. E. Gabba (Como: New Press, 1983), 49–70, at 49.

Ar na ldo Momiglia no 
663
attracted, personally, to “monastic values,” he fell with the full weight of his 
vast erudition and with his habitual lucidity on the novel genre of hagiography 
in late antiquity, and especially on Gregory of Nyssa’s Life of Macrina.2
When I had almost completed writing Body and Society, I sent the entire 
manuscript to Arnaldo, asking for his permission to dedicate the book to him. 
He wrote back to me from London in early 1987:
Now your book is read, and an exceptionally impor­tant book it is, which 
I ­shall be proud to have inscribed with my name. First of all it called my 
attention to so many texts which are never properly considered. It ­will open 
a new stage in the study of Chris­tian­ity in its antique social setting. My only 
hesitation to say so is that I have the impression that Aids ­will soon make 
archaic our scholarly views about sex. The sort of exploitation bishops and 
rabbis (yes, rabbis of all ­people) try is for anyone to see on the pages of the 
London Times. . . .
­After all Italians are deserting bars for fear of badly washed espresso 
cups. . . .
Then he went on, in his usual manner, to open up yet another entire field for 
exploration—­the contrast between Judaism and Chris­tian­ity on the ­matter of 
the afterlife:
If, as you rightly emphasize, sex replaced death as the menace in many 
Christian groups, ­there is prob­ably a relation between this shift and the 
notion that ­there was no death, only hell for a sinful soul. . . . ​Paradise and 
hell have always played a relatively small part in Jewish life. . . . ​This made 
Jewish Civilization in the ­Middle Ages the sanest on the market, at least 
West of China. . . .
“His Wisdom Is Meditation on Life”  
(Spinoza, Ethics 4, Proposition 72)
Arnaldo’s letter ended on a troubling note. “So far my health has kept fairly 
stable, though a collapse is pos­si­ble at any moment.” His heart was giving out. 
In February 1986, he had fainted ­after a lecture. As I was ­later told, his 
2. A. D. Momigliano, “The Life of Saint Macrina by Gregory of Nyssa,” in The Craft of the 
Ancient Historian: Essays in Honor of Chester G. Starr (Lanham, MD: University Press of Amer­
i­ca, 1985), 443–458, also in Ottavo contributo alla storia degli studi classici e del mondo antico 
(Rome: Edizioni Storia e Letteratura, 1987), 333–347, at pp. 338 and 346.

664 
Ch apter 96
condition worsened rapidly. He remained active, surrounded now by a team 
of devoted and solicitous friends; but, like a man on stilts, he feared that he 
might fall at any time. In May 1987, I flew in and out of Chicago on the same 
day to visit him in hospital. His last letter to me included condolences for 
the death of my ­mother, which had occurred in June 1987.
My dear Peter,
I am so sorry for the death of your ­mother. Fortunately the ­mother is the 
­mother for ever, and her par­tic­u­lar beliefs as a Catholic [a good Italian, 
Arnaldo had difficulty in envisioning a ­mother who was not ­either a Catho-
lic or Jewish!] must not count for you more than they counted before. It is 
already difficult enough to understand what the vari­ous religions do of this 
world, without taking into account the other (to my mind) most unlikely 
world. Apart from the Divine Comedy of my namesake [Dante: Arnaldo’s 
second name] and the Jewish fancy that the good ­people like my grand­
father and Moses Finley’s ancestor The Maharal of Prague [it always gave 
Arnaldo ­great plea­sure to point out the pious ancestry of his more secularist 
colleagues] would, in the afterlife, study the Torah for three hours with the 
Blessed Be He ­every eve­ning (they are on the right side and ­free to contra-
dict in this real Yeshiva)—­there is nothing worth I know in the fancies 
about the alleged next world.
However, I may be near the next world or more precisely near death. 
­There is no substantial or foreseeable improvement in my condition. Next 
Monday 20 July I return to London. . . .
Arnaldo then went on to comment on his recent award of a MacArthur 
Fellowship:
The Mac Arthur Foundation was certainly providential. . . . ​The only story 
worth recounting is the entry of [Francis] Hope [the director of the Fel-
lowships Program] in Hospital to announce to me the grant. “Are you still 
prepared to accept anything from us notwithstanding our quarrels?”
Arnaldo had been well known to the committee of the Fellowships Program 
as a vocal advocate of giving the grants only to young persons, and not to aging 
celebrities.
“I thought I had made it clear [Arnaldo answered] that that I was defending 
my own interests.”

Ar na ldo Momiglia no 
665
Well, it was good to see you, very good. But my situation is what it is, no 
real pro­gress, a sense of overwhelming tiredness.
In late August 1987, I flew to ­England to give the plenary lecture at the Ox-
ford Patristics Conference. Knowing how much this congress had meant to 
me in 1963 and in 1967, I was touched to find myself lecturing in a slot once 
occupied by Cardinal Daniélou, Henri-­Irénée Marrou, and Christine Mohrmann 
(1903–1988). More than that: the conference had grown so large that I had to 
give my lecture in the Sheldonian Theatre.
When I first accepted the invitation early in the year, I told this to my 
­mother (who was then still alive). She reminded me that, in 1956, she and 
my ­father had come to see me receive my matriculation, along with a large 
crowd of fellow gradu­ates, in the Sheldonian. I had caused her acute embar-
rassment (an embarrassment that, in fact, spiced the occasion for her) by fail-
ing to leave with the crowd. Instead, she reminded me, I had wandered around 
the emptying theater taking in its baroque ceiling and upper galleries. Now, 
on August 24, 1987, it was ­there that I gave my lecture: “Society and the Body: 
The Social Meaning of Asceticism in Late Antiquity.”
Next day, I went to see Arnaldo, who had been taken to the Central Middle-
sex Hospital from his flat in Latymer Court in Hammersmith. To arrive at 
North Acton Tube station (near the hospital), where the lines ran above­
ground in an open landscape near Wormwood Scrubbs, was like arriving at the 
end of the world. I found Arnaldo in a strange condition. The medi­cations 
that kept his heart ­going had ruined his kidneys. He was both active and aware 
that he was sinking. A smile lit up his face when he was wheeled back to bed 
­after yet another examination, impatient to get busy again on the proofs of yet 
another article. He was plainly angry at the failure of his body to support his 
ever-­active mind. I reflected that, in such a state, the ancient dualism between 
the vivid spirit and the dull prison of the flesh (a dualism of body and soul that 
we, as scholars, had tended to brush aside as a legacy of ancient Greece and of 
Gnostic pessimism—­a dark thought out of place in our sunnier world) made, 
alas, all too much sense. All one could wish, for Arnaldo, was in the verse of 
Psalm 124:7:
We have escaped as a bird
from the snare of the fowlers;
the snare is broken,
and we have escaped!

666 
Ch apter 96
Arnaldo died on September 1, 1987. On October 22, I was back in Chicago. 
I spoke briefly at the memorial ser­vice.3 It was then that I heard, for the first 
time, the words of Spinoza on the wise person, which Arnaldo had chosen for 
his memorial ser­vice, both in Chicago and in London:
And so he thinks of nothing less than death. Instead his wisdom is a medita-
tion on life, q.e.d. (Spinoza, Ethics 4, proposition 72)
3. Peter Brown, “Remembering Arnaldo,” in The American Scholar 57 (1988): 251–252.

667
97
Remembering Arnaldo
An Intellectual Biography
At the end of 1987 I was asked by the British Acad­emy to write the obituary 
memoir for Momigliano, to be published in the Proceedings of the British Acad­
emy. I wanted to do this in the way that Arnaldo might have wanted it—in 
other words, I wanted to write an intellectual biography that set his ever-­
unfolding scholarly agenda against the background of the thought of his times.
To do this, I read all Arnaldo’s works in strict chronological order. This was 
a less heroic feat than it seems. Arnaldo was his own best historiographer. All 
his articles ­were printed, in the chronological order in which they ­were pub-
lished, in a series of volumes, entitled Contributi alla storia degli studi classici 
published by Storia e Letteratura of Rome. By 1987, this series had reached the 
eighth volume. Also, owing to Arnaldo’s spectacular generosity in keeping all 
his charges and friends up to date by lavishing offprints on them, his produc-
tion ­after 1956 was, for me, almost a ­family ­matter. ­These offprints would come 
like the regular arrival of a favorite magazine. The difficulty was to place this 
extraordinary output against the shifting currents of Eu­rope, Britain, and 
Amer­i­ca from 1930 to 1987.
But I was determined to do this. The last ­thing I wanted was to produce a 
standard honorific portrait of Arnaldo—to paint an icon-­like image of the suc-
cessful scholar and public person. The result was a memoir of some thirty-­seven 
pages.1
In July 1988, I flew to ­England in order to interview friends and colleagues 
of Arnaldo in Oxford and London, and then I went on to Italy—to Pisa, Turin, 
1. Peter Brown, “Arnaldo Dante Momigliano 1908–1987,” Proceedings of the British Acad­emy 
74 (1988): 405–442.

668 
Ch apter 97
and Pavia. I had never conducted interviews of this kind before. I quickly 
learned one remarkable fact about the nature of such encounters. In the case 
of obituaries, when the dead person is still an object of grief and mourning, 
the interviewer takes on an almost shamanistic role: to a degree that I had 
never expected, I often became Arnaldo for a moment to ­those whom I inter-
viewed. One did not have to be a very adroit psychologist to pick up the 
quality of the “vibes” that had only recently surrounded the living person. My 
interviews turned out to involve a lot more than gathering information. They 
enabled me to sense the nature of his presence to his vari­ous groups of friends 
and colleagues.
Among Friends
I was struck by the differences of “temperature”—as one might call it—­among 
the vari­ous circles on whom Arnaldo had impinged. Oxford was cool. In re-
sponse to my request for help in finding persons who knew Arnaldo well, Peter 
Brunt (1917–2005)—­the recently retired Camden Professor of Ancient 
History—­was guarded:
His deep interest in the modern historiography of the ancient world was 
­little shared by British scholars, and his conviction that prob­lems in history 
­were best examined through the solutions that had been previously pro-
posed involved an erudition that the rest of us could not match, and a pro-
cedure which in any case most of us would not have acknowledged to be of 
as much value as he believed.
Arriving at Oxford, among many interviews, I had a long and characteristi-
cally vivid conversation with Isaiah Berlin (1909–1997), in what I recognized 
­were my own former rooms in All Souls. He ­later wrote to thank me for the 
draft of the obituary:
I loved your article—it did not go beyond the limit to which he should be 
praised, it was beautifully eloquent, very moving and very true. What more 
can I say?
Reading this note, I had a flashback to a scene of the early 1970s. Arnaldo and 
Isaiah ­were standing beside the ironwork grille that closed the entrance from 
Radcliffe Square to the Hawksmoor Quadrangle of All Souls. To unlock the 
gate, each had taken out a key ring heavi­ly loaded with keys that gave them 
personal access to any number of libraries, archives, and learned institutions 

R emember ing Ar na ldo 
669
that ­were closed to outsiders. In his jocose manner, Arnaldo challenged Isaiah, 
for all the world like a small boy, to show ­whether his equipment—­his key 
ring—­was bigger than his own. I had been pre­sent at a meeting of ­giants.
­Later that after­noon, ­after my talk with Isaiah, I went up to North Oxford 
to interview Iris Murdoch (1919–1999), the phi­los­o­pher and novelist. Iris had 
known Arnaldo from the very first days of his exile in Oxford, during the war 
years and ­after. The after­noon passed by. We ­were back in the 1940s, exploring 
the extraordinary friendship between Iris, a phi­los­o­pher and magician of 
En­glish prose, and this intense man of preternatural learning whose mouth, at 
that time, was still tied by lack of fluency in En­glish. She dabbed her eyes for 
a moment: “You know, Professor Brown, now that Arnaldo is dead, ­there is no 
one from whom I can ask any questions any more.”
Then we broke for a sherry. A ­little ­later, as we settled down to our conversa-
tion once again, Iris suddenly asked me: “Professor Brown, you who know 
about such ­things, what can I read to find out about the influence of Plato on 
the Christian doctrine of the Trinity?” To my amazement, I heard myself say-
ing, with utter confidence and even in the thick Piedmontese accent with 
which Arnaldo always pronounced French: “Ah, of course! You must read 
Pierre Hadot, Marius Victorinus. Recherches sur sa vie et ses oeuvres.” I had 
brought Arnaldo to her quite as much as she had brought to me the edgy exile 
of the 1940s. A ­little ­later, in August 1988, she wrote to me: “I loved and revered 
Arnaldo so much and keep ‘seeing’ him and thinking about him and his par­
tic­u­lar Jewishness and funniness and sweetness and wisdom and that vast 
learning.”
When I went to London, I had the same sense that I was in the ­middle of a 
group of friends, feeling their affection for him as we sat together (as Arnaldo 
must have done with them, in the seat that I now occupied), at the cafeteria 
in University College, and discussed Arnaldo’s inspired chases for hitherto 
unconsidered evidence for the complex interrelations of Jewish scholars in 
Re­nais­sance and in modern times.
Memories of Exile
It was with a similar sense of intimacy with Arnaldo that Carlo Dionisotti 
(1908–1998), the distinguished former professor of Italian at Bedford College, 
handed me a box full of the letters that Arnaldo had written to him from the 
very beginning of his exile in ­England, in 1939. I read them deep into the night. 
Next morning, I woke up convinced that I had had a nightmare. No: it was not 

670 
Ch apter 97
a nightmare; it was the memory of what I had read in Arnaldo’s lucid, regular 
descriptions of the small humiliations of starting life from scratch in a foreign 
country—­the cold, cramped accommodations with a kitchen shared with the 
landlady; the uncertainty of funding; right down to the vulnerability (in a 
prewar Eu­rope, where travel was less frequent) to flus and colds carried by 
local germ pools against which the Momiglianos had developed no immunity. 
It was, indeed, the world of Dante’s days of exile:
Tu proverai sì come sa di sale
lo pane altrui, e com’ è duro calle
lo scendere e salir per l’altrui scale
You ­shall make trial of how another’s bread
tastes like salt,
and how hard is the path to descend and mount
upon another’s stair.2
In the same way, in Italy, over slow and generous meals with Emilio Gabba 
in Pavia—as the frogs in the neighboring lakes (frankly advertised for sale by 
the bucket to the local epicures) honked triumphantly, and the mosquitoes 
­rose around the ­hotel in such swarms that I had to cover myself from head to 
foot with aftershave for lack of an insect repellent—­I relived the difficulties 
that Arnaldo had suffered on his return to Italy immediately ­after the war.
Chicago and Peter­house
In Chicago, which I visited a ­little ­later, I found myself at the center of the many 
circles of Arnaldo’s friends. ­There I met Edward Shils, whose redefinition of 
charisma had made him the hero of my early contacts with American sociol-
ogy in my first years at Berkeley. He now became a friend through his devotion 
to Arnaldo, whom we discussed all day, in Shils’s apartment in a skyscraper 
overlooking Lake Michigan, so high up as to look down on ­every bird.
Among the abundant memories of Arnaldo’s Chicago friends, I was sur-
prised to find how many of ­these concerned his ­later visits to ­England. He had 
plainly regaled his friends at the Quadrangle Club in Chicago with anecdotes 
of solemn ceremonies and high ­table life in Oxford and Cambridge. He spoke 
with par­tic­u­lar affection of his days in Peter­house, Cambridge, in the early 
2. Dante, Paradiso 17.58–60.

R emember ing Ar na ldo 
671
1980s. He had enjoyed the atmosphere of the college feasts. He had been 
touched when the college porter wished him “Happy birthday.” He had invari-
ably found something in­ter­est­ing to talk about at high ­table, even with 
scientists.
This was a side of Arnaldo that I had not expected. But it made sense. He 
had been made a fellow of Peter­house for two years at the behest of the master, 
Hugh Trevor-­Roper (­later Lord Dacre). Trevor-­Roper (1914–2003) had hoped 
to be cheered up by Arnaldo’s presence. From being a highly contested Regius 
Professor of History in Oxford, Trevor-­Roper had become master of Peter­
house in 1980. As he recounted it, the change from Oxford to Peter­house was 
a disaster. He found himself blocked by a morose cabal of ultraconservative 
fellows.3 When I was still in Berkeley, I received a letter from Hugh canvassing 
my support for a protégé of his. He added, with characteristic acerbity: “How 
are you enjoying Berkeley? Is it as strange as Peter­house? I feel that I might as 
well be in Basutoland.”
Affection
What no purely intellectual biography could quite capture was that sense of 
affection which I picked up in ­those charged weeks in July 1988. My friend 
Averil Cameron reminded me of this when I showed her the draft of my 
memoir:
I think I might have wanted to include the extreme affection felt for him by 
his circle of devoted younger friends in his vari­ous places—­London, Pisa, 
Chicago. I myself more and more felt that I could simply not live up to the 
tremendous faith he obviously had in me. . . . ​When he died I ­really realized 
that he had simply always been ­there for me and never failed me. . . . ​In his turn 
he had terrific re­spect for one’s separateness and intellectual integrity—­
usually a much higher conception of it than one had one’s self.
At the end of a book that is devoted, in large part, to my own intellectual 
itinerary, it is good to remember Arnaldo, and the qualities of scholar, mentor, 
and friend, for which he was not only held in awe, but loved.
3. Adam Sisman, Hugh Trevor-­Roper: The Biography (London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 
2010), 454–474.

672
98
Mums
“Better to Live the Life of a Slug”
Ever since my ­father’s death, in January 1981, my ­mother (Mums to me) faced 
a ­great loneliness. Her diary in her last years often makes painful reading.
Tea. Got dinner—­usual lonely eve­ning and it ­will always be the same.
(Diary 2/19/81)
Washed up supper. Glad that Easter is over. I missed Jim so much
(Diary 4/19/81)
It did not get better. As she wrote to me, in 1983, about her visit to Dean’s 
Grange cemetery where my ­father was buried:
I brought out bits and pieces from the garden, including some Christmas 
roses and some iris stylosa. ­People say how quickly the two years have gone. 
I’m afraid I ­don’t agree—­they have just crawled.
(Letter 1/27/83)
But at least in the first years, ­until 1984, she had her ­sister Freda—my aunt 
Teedah. My ­mother could not drive, but Freda had a car—an Austin Mini, a 
­little mouse of a car that made Teedah herself seem even rounder and smaller 
as she rolled out of it on her arrival in front of my ­mother’s ­house. ­Every Mon-
day she drove down from Dublin to have tea with my ­mother. Often, on ­those 
Mondays, Freda would drive my ­mother to the local shops at Glasthule, in 
order to do heavy shopping, and, occasionally, to Dean’s Grange cemetery. 
­After that, they would ­settle down to a “­grand chat”—­a precious exchange of 
news and excitements over tea. It was then that they could joke about them-
selves, and the jokes would be passed on to me in my ­mother’s letters: “So ­here 

Mums 
673
we are, two el­derly ladies, and never a man to darken our doors!! Oh yes, 
[­there is] Bolton Thom [a plump and ceremonious church warden] but he is 
certainly not a Thom cat” (Letter 10/2/81).
When, as we have seen, Freda died suddenly in February 1984 of a heart 
attack (prob­ably the result of a spell of hypothermia in her ­grand, unheated 
flat in Morehampton Road), my ­mother lost half her world. Mondays, now, 
­were always sad days for her: “I still miss Freda so much. No one to chat with 
or have a laugh with” (Letter 5/22/85).
Yet despite this slow but sure narrowing of her horizon, as relatives and 
friends died, or became less mobile—­unable to visit her or even, at last, no 
longer available even on the telephone—my ­mother stayed put. The one ­thing 
she would not consider was to leave her ­house for some more comfortable and 
sociable place to live—an apartment or a retirement home. My phone calls 
from California, in the depths of the worst Irish winter for ninety-­three years, 
­were welcome: “an aura of sanity seems to enter the room, you ­were speaking 
from a warm country with flowers” (Letter 12/12/81). But my ­mother never 
dreamed of moving.
And I think to myself that it is not worth ­going to a place to be miserable—­
it’s much wiser to carry on in this boring way of living—­shopping, R.D.S. 
[the Royal Dublin Society Library in Ballsbridge] hair do!: it is better to 
live the life of a slug as I do.
(Letter 1/25/82)
Slugs throve in the dank atmosphere of the Irish summers. They ­were well-­
established denizens of the ­little walled-in garden at the back of my ­mother’s 
­house. Occasionally they would gather at the kitchen door, like a group of tiny 
carol-­singers. ­Those who found their way into the kitchen itself would be 
picked up with care by my ­mother, on a piece of paper, and deposited, in their 
proper home near the compost heap. They ­were not thought of as disgusting 
creatures. They ­were symbols of tenacity in a dim world.
Sandycove Ave­nue East
Reading my ­mother’s diaries and her letters to me, I cannot resist the feeling 
that the Ireland of the 1980s was a hard place for old persons like my ­mother. This 
was not yet the Ireland of only ten years ­later, when the Celtic Economic Tiger 
began to swish its tail. It was a time of hectic government expenditure, high 
taxes, inflation, and rising unemployment. Above all, the ser­vices on which 

674 
Ch apter 98
the el­derly depended ­were as unreliable as the Irish weather. The telephone, 
for instance, often failed: “This is the year of ‘No Summer’. But all I want is the 
phone—­though I never use it!! . . . ​Still no phone, but its making queer 
sounds” (Letter 9/1/85).
The buses also failed. Her diaries and letters ­were full of accounts of half-­
hour waits, of strikes and rumors of strikes. Yet the ­running of the buses was 
essential to my ­mother. I talk of her world becoming “narrower” with the 
deaths of my ­father and of Freda. In fact, it grew exponentially wider without 
a car. Every­thing became that much farther away. Pulling a trolley for her regu-
lar shopping, she could go only as far as her legs, and then the bus, could carry 
her. Fortunately, the number 8 bus ran past the top of Sandycove Ave­nue all 
the way into Dublin. This was her lifeline. It took her, in a few minutes, to 
Glasthule, to do her shopping. But it continued like a magic carpet to the li-
brary of the Royal Dublin Society at Ballsbridge. Often the magic worked: she 
would be back home from the Royal Dublin Society with four books in her 
trolley bag by the end of the morning. But frequently it did not. Hence the 
accounts of the kindness of strangers—­drivers who ­stopped to offer her a 
lift—­that light up the diary: “Hair done. Was petrified waiting for bus, but kind 
­woman offered me a lift. Another wait of ½ hour coming home. How Jim 
would have taken care of me!” (Diary 1/6/82).
In the unusually cold winter of 1981/82, ­these kindnesses stand out in my 
­mother’s letters to me:
A knock at 7.20 p.m. I saw someone peering in at the letter box—­I was a bit 
scared but de­cided it was too early for a robbery! Guess who it was? You 
­couldn’t. It was one of the three young men from next door [asking if they 
could do shopping for her] . . . ​that offer of help has solved one of my 
dreads—­a bulb “­going” and not being able to stand on a ladder to put one 
in. He smokes 10 to 20 cigs a day, and quite understands that I missed my 
two. It ­really was a lovely surprise.
(Letter 12/23/81)
But despite ­these kindnesses, a dark stain of vio­lence seemed to be spread-
ing. In her diary, she noted the renewed terrorist activities of the Provisional 
IRA. The bomb attack on Harrods of London disturbed her: “Harrods’ bomb. 
5 killed. Dreadful business. I hope they ­won’t start now” (Diary, 12/17/82). 
“Start now” had an ominous ring.
Sandycove was no Belfast. But the undertows of a depressed economy ­were 
­there. I was appalled to learn, from my ­mother’s diaries, that she had been 

Mums 
675
burgled on many occasions, and had told me about only the worst of them. 
Neighbors ­were burgled too. Mr. Doyle, up the road, was robbed of three hun-
dred pounds just taken out of the bank; and Mrs. Doyle’s diamond ring was 
also stolen. Plainly the Doyles had been watched.
My ­mother suffered seriously on only one occasion: she returned home 
from church one day to find that all her jewelry except for her engagement ring 
had been stolen from her bedroom. The other occasions ­were, in many ways, 
more disturbing—­pointless acts of vandalism rather than cold robbery. The 
­house in Sandycove was all too open to such vio­lence. It had once been a one-­
story fisherman’s cottage. A spare room had been fitted ­under the roof, with a 
win­dow. It was easy to shin up the low granite wall of the garden, onto the roof 
and through the win­dow into the spare room. This happened more than once. 
On the last occasion, just before my ­mother’s death, she found mud stains 
all over the sheets, and ­family papers scattered all over the floor. I won­der 
how much of my past went, literally, out the win­dow on that occasion. In-
deed, when I returned to Sandycove in 1990, the new ­owners of the ­house 
handed me a ­little attaché case that they had found in the garden—­among 
the slugs, no less! It contained all my school reports from Aravon, half 
washed away by the damp. Plainly the thief had discarded it, having found 
nothing of value.
“Where Can You Get a Germ in Your Own House?”
It was ­here that my ­mother settled down to endure, for six years, the siege of 
her widowhood. The two principal rooms of the house—­the sitting room and 
the bedroom—­were kept spotless. Carpets ­were brushed and vacuumed well 
beyond necessity. The brass knobs and letter slot on the front door always 
shone, as did the silverware, even though it was tucked away where nobody 
could see it. The daily chores ­were carefully recorded in soft pencil on each 
page of my ­mother’s pocket diary. This diary was not about my ­mother’s 
thoughts or feelings. Written ­every eve­ning, it brought the day to order, by 
recording the ­house­hold tasks that she had successfully performed. Hence the 
few occasions in which she expressed her feelings of loss for my ­father and for 
Freda in her diary ­were that much more poignant.
What kept her ­going? I think it was a huge sense of order and an equally 
sharp desire to pre­sent a neat front in public. She kept up her appearance as 
fiercely as she kept up the shine of her silverware and polished wood. Tiffin, a 
ladies’ dress store, lay at the extreme outward edge of her walking range to 

676 
Ch apter 98
Glasthule. But she made the distance. Tiffin therapy always did her a world of 
good:
I felt I needed a bit of attention so, ­after lunch, I went down to Tiffin and 
bought a lovely shade of dark red—­not ­really red, but a very subdued 
jumper and skirt. I just walked into it.
I am sure you ­will be glad to hear this news, and that I’m not getting 
­really shabby!
(Letter 10/4/84)
Such ­things meant much to her ­because she was a supremely social crea-
ture. She had always combined huge charm with a fear of disgrace in social 
situations. It was a fear that sprouted around her like icicles at the very thought 
of an awkward encounter. My ­father had been, in many ways for many years, 
her bridge to the outside world—­a minister of foreign affairs. A Dublin gentle-
man and a model of politeness, he took ­people as they came. Now that he was 
gone, my ­mother had to ­handle ­these encounters on her own. Her diaries and 
letters showed all too clearly the sharp pendulum swings between dread of 
­others and a capacity to turn what, only a moment before, had seemed to be 
an occasion of acute shame into the most friendly and humorous “­grand chat.” 
Her charm never left her, any more than did the rock-­firm handwriting with 
which she would describe ­these encounters in her letters to me ­every week.
But she had few overriding interests to fall back upon. She had no good 
­causes to which she was devoted. She could not drive a car nor could she type. 
When in danger of being roped into a neighborhood association, she declared 
herself, with a touch of sarcasm, to be a “Useless Female” (Letter 1/27/83).
Nor ­were the clergy very welcome. Mums was pious—­she enjoyed ­going 
to church and said her prayers regularly at night, maybe along with a daily 
scripture reading. But “religion” was not for her. The Reverend Linney, rector 
of St. Paul’s Church, Glenageary, was a conscientious visitor. But “I do wish he 
could talk about something besides religion. I fear he has come to the wrong 
person for that” (Letter 4/20/1981). A devout cousin (prob­ably an Evangelical) 
whose ­family went out of their way to take care of my ­mother—­regularly driv-
ing her to church, and bringing her home for Sunday lunch (where she exer-
cised her charm on all the ­children, who adored her)—­seems to have cut no 
ice on ­matters of religion: “Had a good chat. Had lunch. Then read about sense 
of sin. Had a snooze” (Diary, 4/1/82).
Nor did any doctor darken her door. The medical system then prevailing in 
the area ensured that she experienced a magnificently (though, nowadays, 

Mums 
677
some might say—­criminally) unmonitored approach to death. Dr. Robin Ben-
son was a general practitioner of the old school. He came (or his stand-in came) 
only when called. He occasionally brought a pill. Far from being unsympathetic 
or neglectful (he looked ­after my ­father day by day in his last illness), he treated 
his elder patients with a robust laissez-­faire that kept them cheerful. His advice 
was ­simple: “Put on all your woollies.” My ­mother complied: “I now wear 
(1) two vests (2) 4 pairs of knickers (3) 1 jumper (4) 3 cardigans (5) 1 dressing 
gown!!” (Letter 12/23/81). It was that cold when the sea wind blew.
This regime might appall us. But it slid into place with my ­mother’s deepest 
wish to stand siege in her own ­house on her own terms. She was told once that 
she might have caught a cold from a germ. But how could she have done so, 
having never gone out for days? “The doctor says it can only be caught by a 
germ—­where can you get a germ in your own ­house?!” (Letter 2/24/83). That 
was my ­mother.

678
99
Shifting Bound­aries
Bound­aries
As I reread my ­mother’s letters to me, I increasingly realized that they ­were 
historical documents in a manner that I had not expected. Her letters ­were more 
revealing than the impersonal, clocklike entries in her diaries. She wanted to 
bond with me through shared memories, and (my ­mother being my ­mother, 
with a wicked sense of humor) through shared, long-­standing ­family jokes. 
­These memories reached back directly to our days together in war­time Bray. 
Reading her letters from the late 1980s, I realize that I was being taken back by 
my ­mother to the sadder, more rigid Ireland that we had both known in the 
1940s and 1950s.
For this reason, the social map of Ireland that my ­mother expected me to 
take for granted in her letters was still a map marked strongly in religious 
colors—­Protestant, Roman Catholic. No description of any encounter or 
piece of news was quite complete without ticking one of the two most impor­
tant boxes—­Prot or R.C. In 1982, she voted for Garrett Fitzgerald (­later to 
become the fourth president of Ireland) in the general election: “I voted for 
Garrett Fitzgerald, but he is too good to get in! His ­mother was a Protestant” 
(Letter 4/27/82). Settling into Prince­ton, I had praised to her an Irish stone-
mason with the name of Murphy. My ­mother wrote back: “I won­der if he is a 
Prot.” (Letter 11/17/83). For my ­mother, this was not a sign of intolerance. It 
was simply a ­matter of knowing where one stood. This meant that ­there was 
also room for delicious surprises, noted in her diary: “Went for bus and a very 
nice young man offered me a lift! I took it. He was very nice and knew the 
Frenches in church [a Protestant ­family who came regularly to St. Paul’s 
Glenageary], but was an R.C.” (Diary 7/18/84).

Shifting Bound­ar ies 
679
Yet, at long last, ­things ­were changing. Even Aravon, once the all-­Protestant 
realm of “the Boss,” had crumbled. Not every­one was pleased. “Marjorie 
[a Bray friend of my ­mother’s, of long standing] hates Aravon now—­she says 
its nearly all girls and R.C.s, and not a bit what it was . . . ​[and] it’s the same 
with St. Columba’s [the Protestant public school]” (Letter 10/12/83).
Despite the changing mood of Ireland, the old conundrums still worried 
my ­mother. She wrote to ask me why, in an interview that I had sent her, did I 
need to point out that I was a Protestant Irishman? “Does that mean that most 
­people only connect being Irish with Roman Catholic?” But, no ­matter 
­whether they ­were Protestant or Catholic, “­there is no doubt about it. The Irish 
are, indeed, liked much better than the En­glish” (Letter 6/6/81).
“I Prefer to Be a Warren and Irish”
What struck me in ­these letters was a distinct shift in ­favor of an Irish identity. 
My ­mother never became an anti-­British nationalist. But she was capable of 
unusually strong reactions to what she called “En­glishness.” To her, “En­
glishness” was not a national marker; it was a social vice. It conjured up snob-
bery, assertiveness, and condescension. She had experienced it at first hand as 
a young wife in Sudan. And she ­didn’t like it. She commiserated with me when 
I described to her an awkward dinner with En­glish expatriates in Venice: “How 
I know and hate ­those loud-­mouthed En­glish ­women! I met many in the 
Sudan and it is due to them that I (and many ­others) have such a hatred of 
the En­glish as a ­whole” (Letter 2/26/81). Even to sound a bit “En­glish” over 
the phone was a warning sign. Yet some of her firmest friends from Sudan ­were 
En­glish. This was ­because they had dropped their “En­glishness.” They had 
become, as it ­were, honorary Irish and could be spun into a “­grand chat.”
This ­mental map, which contrasted En­glish high-­handedness and snobbery 
with a more au­then­tic “Irish” identity, was put on display when I sent to my 
­mother a postcard of a Tudor portrait of Lady Jane Grey. In my second chap-
ter, I have already mentioned the importance that some members of the Grey 
­family (from which my ­mother’s ­mother came) attached to a tenuous link to 
Lady Jane Grey, the Protestant would-be queen of ­England, executed by Mary 
Tudor in 1554. My ­mother responded instantly:
The post came with lovely PCs of my ancestor (or should it be ancestress) 
Lady Jane Grey! As a rule I laugh at all this ­family snobbishness, but it ­really 
does impress me when I see someone like Lady Jane and realize that ­there 

680 
Ch apter 99
must be some connection with us—­I suppose. . . . ​But the real snag is that 
Lady Jane and all her ­family ­were very En­glish indeed, so I prefer to be a 
Warren and Irish!
(Letter 10/12/81)
I do not remember Lady Jane ever being discussed in this way when I grew up. 
Slowly, over the years, a shift in the ­family my­thol­ogy had taken place in ­favor 
of Ireland.
Robert de Warren / Bobby Warren
This game of identities based on genealogies was played to the full on the oc-
casion of the unexpected appearance, in Dublin, of a real live Warren. We have 
already met Robert de Warren as the maître de ballet of the shah of Iran.1 As 
I wrote ­there, I had dismissed him as an almost mythological character, be-
longing, perhaps, to an ­earlier generation of Warrens. Far from it. I could have 
met him in Tehran; and, as far as I know, he is still living in Sarasota, Florida, 
where he wrote a memoir, Destiny’s Waltz: In Step with ­Giants, that included 
trea­sured memories of the court of Shah Reza in the 1960s and 1970s. I like to 
think of him as something of a doppelgänger.
In 1984 my ­mother wrote to tell me that Bobby Warren in person had come 
over to Dublin. He came as director of the Northern Ballet Com­pany, in order 
to direct Sleeping Beauty for the opening of the refurbished and upgraded 
Gaiety Theatre—­a long way from the very “Dublin” pantomime humor of 
Jimmie O’Dea! He declared that he wanted to meet my ­mother so as to find out 
more about the Warren ­family from which he was descended. He had been en-
couraged to do so by Cousin Aileen, a relative settled in Taunton, ­England, who 
was, in many ways, the guardian of the memories of his branch of the Warrens.
Like many members of dispersed Irish Protestant families, Bobby was 
buoyed up by the thought of illustrious and energetic ancestors. On entering 
the world of ballet in Eu­rope, he changed his name to Robert de Warren—in 
honor of Earl William de Warenne, a companion of William the Conqueror, 
from whom the Warrens of county Meath traditionally claimed descent. For my 
­mother, this name change was the last straw—­a sign of egregious snobbery.
Bobby’s letter announcing his arrival fell on my ­mother like a meteorite 
from outer space. She was furious with Aileen for having sent her way a virtual 
1. Chapter 69: “To the Top of the World.”

Shifting Bound­ar ies 
681
stranger and, she feared, an ultra-­English snob. Cousin Aileen was fifteen years 
older than my ­mother: a handsome lady, seeming to last forever, she brought 
out all my ­mother’s ambivalences. She was “religion” personified: an ardent 
Christian and Spiritualist, she longed (poor ­woman) to hear the voices from 
the other world of her dead husband, a clergyman, and her son killed in the 
war. My ­mother held her both in awe and in ridicule. She would never mention 
Aileen’s intense religiosity without adding some catty remark that brought her 
down to earth.
Christian and all as she is, she is a bloody snob and Dads always agreed with 
me. My leanings are not ­towards the “Upper Classes” (as they call them-
selves) but my own class which rings me up and says he has an appointment 
at “Half Eight”!!
(Letter 12/12/81)
My ­mother, in fact, would never herself have said “half eight,” which was an 
Irish turn of phrase. She always said “half past eight,” in the most proper 
En­glish manner: but the right sort—­such as gardeners—­did say “half eight.” 
And that was good enough for her.
When Bobby Warren’s visit fi­nally materialized, in late 1984, the encounter 
dreaded by my ­mother turned, almost instantly, into a “­grand talk.” But that 
was not what my ­mother had expected. She kept me posted with regular letters 
on this oncoming meeting. First ­there was the usual ice storm of social 
anxiety:
You’ll never guess who I heard from ­today, Robert de Warren—­“Bobby”, 
Mervyn Warren’s son. You know he was head of the Ira­nian Ballet, and the 
Shah never took the smallest notice of him. He has always kept in with 
Aileen and I suppose wrote and told her he was coming over to the big 
opening of the Gaiety Theatre. . . . ​He wrote a letter “Dear Mrs Brown” and 
wondered would I come to the Ballet, with a friend. If not, he would like to 
come down and see me! Ending the letter “with affectionate greetings—­
Bobby—­Robert de Warren! . . . ​I’ll have to write and ask him down, only 
tea or drinks (I hope he ­doesn’t bring his wife—­Aileen says she has two fur 
coats). . . .
Sunday 14th. Just written to “Bobby”—­I did not call him Robert de War-
ren! Said I ­didn’t go out at night, but would love to see him and when he 
rang me, we could make plans.
(Letter 10/11/84)

682 
Ch apter 99
Just been rung up by Bobby Warren! He and his wife are over. . . . ​He and 
his wife had driven down to Duleek [the church where the Warren ­family 
­were buried, in county Meath], to see all the old places. It ­won’t be much 
fun, ­really, I think. He sounded a bit “En­glish” . . . ​and the wife ­will be a 
“drawback”.
(Letter 10/29/84)
Then the storm blew over:
Well, Bobby Warren and wife came to tea and we had a ­great talk. They ­were 
dressed in jumpers!
It was ­these unpretentious sweaters (“jumpers” in En­glish usage) that did it:
He ­hadn’t even a tie, so it was ­really cheery. He is about 56. I ­don’t know her 
age—­she may be the same but looks years younger—­longish fair hair and 
blue eyes, and she is French. . . . ​The ­whole talk was about the Warren 
­family—we talked of nothing ­else, and he had maps of everywhere. He had 
been to Duleek. Disastrous. The lovely ­little church pulled to bits by van-
dals and now never used—he took photos and showed me them, monu-
ments broken and all the ­people who ­were buried ­there pulled out of their 
graves and left ­there—­all our grand­mothers—­every one. They do it every-
where. So that was the end of Drummin [the ­family house]—­there’s no one 
in the ­house and it’s all falling down. I asked him about the “de”. He said 
every­one had it when they came to ­England first [Bobby meant, of course, 
with William the Conqueror in 1066!] and he de­cided to use it! He had 
thick black hair, and quite nice looking. She was pretty fat. They gave me a 
pound box of Terry’s choco­lates—­beautiful box. . . . .
(Letter 11/12/84)
Bobby returned next year to a more relaxed occasion.
Sunday. They are coming to tea! He needs to go on a drive to Drummin! 
They ­were to come ­here on their way home to tea. I had only one cake, so 
cut brown bread and ­will have biscuits. ­Later I sat from 4 ­o’c to 5.30 p.m, 
not a sign of them !! Phone rang and it was Bobby. He lost his way and has 
just arrived back at the Shelbourne [their Dublin ­hotel]. Could he come 
down? So they ­were ­here having tea at 6 and ­didn’t go till ­after 7. But we had 
a ­great chat. She is very nice too. And we talked about the Shah and how 
much she liked him and Bobbie talked about Drummin. . . . ​He brought me 

Shifting Bound­ar ies 
683
a box of choco­lates—­good of him—(He is ­really quite plain, ­because he 
has his ­mother’s nose—­not a Warren one!)
(Letter 11/18/85)
“ ‘Abroad’ . . . ​but I Am Irish to the Backbone”
Just before Bobby Warren made his last appearance, my ­mother committed 
herself to what was for her a most unaccustomed tea party. Mrs. Cardan was a 
retired civil servant who had moved into Sandycove Ave­nue East. She and her 
two friends represented the new, bureaucratic Ireland. “She was a civil servant 
and you never heard such a common accent (and yet, its not ­really common, 
just Dublin).” That “not ­really common, just Dublin,” was a revealing conces-
sion on my ­mother’s part.
She has a good sense of humour, but I ­can’t imagine having any of ­these 
three ­people in the old days. And yet they ­couldn’t be nicer and they 
loved their tea and admired my blue suit. She said I had an En­glish ac-
cent, and where did it get it? So I said “Abroad . . . ​but I am Irish to the 
backbone!”
So we all enjoyed ourselves.
(Letter 9/1/85)
Despite her time “abroad” among the En­glish, Mums belonged to Ireland.
“Brought Me Strawberries. ­Were Very Nice”
My ­mother lived for almost another two years. Given the near total absence 
of medical monitoring, ­there was no telling when she might die. Chances for 
her to display her charm in a “­grand chat” still came her way. Of all ­people, 
Lellia Ruggini of Turin—­a scholar whom I had admired for many years and 
came to know when I was in Venice—­gave her a phone call on my urging when 
she attended a conference at Trinity College Dublin. “She spoke good En­glish. 
We had a good talk, and I found out she is Italian. ­Aren’t ­people clever about 
the dif­fer­ent languages? I won­der if she ­really understood me at all?” (Letter 
3/13/86).
Most intriguing, for my ­mother, was a telephone call from a Prince­ton un-
dergraduate, Michael Meckler, whom the Group for the Study of Late Antiq-
uity had sent to Dublin to do research that led to a significant article on the 

684 
Ch apter 99
links between Saint Columba and the O’Neill dynasty in Ulster and 
Scotland.2
Just been having a talk with Michael Meckler! We must have talked nearly 
an hour. He seems so friendly. He seems such a nice 21 year old (I asked him 
his age!). . . . ​We had a ­grand chat. Is he good looking, I won­der? Not that 
it ­matters one way or the other, but I just wondered. Its very nice to have a 
chat, and as we ­can’t see each other, it makes it all the easier.
(Letter 4/23/86)
In ­those years, my ­mother herself noticed that she had changed. She was 
no longer an avid reader. Back in 1981, when a major Dublin bus strike had 
ended, this had been a ­great event for her: it meant that the way to the Royal 
Dublin Society Library was open at last: “4 weeks since I smelt the smell of 
books!” (Letter 7/31/81). And ­these ­were no trash novels: they included 
George Eliot’s Daniel Deronda and William Faulkner, whom she had been en-
couraged to read by Roberta Chesnut, almost twenty years ­earlier, in 1968. 
Now, in 1987, that zest had ebbed: “Funny the way the love of reading has 
gone—­except in bed. ­There is always some paper to read. I never take up a 
book and yet, when I was young, I was always reading. I suppose it was to 
discover what the world was ­really like! Now I seem to know!” (Letter 3/31/87).
Only in the last days of May did the handwriting in my ­mother’s diaries 
weaken and lose its shape.
Not feeling so good. Nancy came by. Brought me strawberries. ­Were 
very nice.
(Diary 5/28/87)
Nancy lived two ­houses up the road: I never knew her surname. She had come 
close to my ­mother as she also had lost a ­sister and understood what it felt like.
I found my ­mother’s last letter to me on her bedside ­table. It was the only 
time that her writing was incoherent. Though now confused, the determina-
tion to get her jobs done was still ­there:
I am not ­really very well, and am ­really quite all right, and so its very awk-
ward to have to think of every­thing being all right!! I saw Robin Benson 
yesterday, and all seemed well, and I am ­going to give up my well prepared 
2. M. Meckler, “Colum Cille’s Ordination of Aedán Mac Gabráin,” Innes Review 41 (1990): 
139–150.

Shifting Bound­ar ies 
685
plan of campaign, and start to work again. . . . ​­There’s a new kind of cam-
paign now which ­will be most effective and quite easy to do. May 27th Robin 
Benson ­will be ­here yesterday and to do what he said to do, I’m to do it. . . . ​
But do not expect your room to look your best when you arrive! So ­there 
we are, I must try and go out tomorrow, and do some shopping, if I can.
Mums died on June 9, 1987. Her death was unexpected. I was in Rome at 
the time, at an international conference in honor of Richard Krautheimer, 
which took place in Trastevere. I had intended to fly to Ireland the next week. 
­After I heard the news of her death, I left the conference for a long walk, up 
the steep slope of the Aventine near Sant’Alessio. I remember that I went out 
of my way to help an old lady by carry­ing her shopping bag up the hill.
Soon I was in the spare bedroom beneath the roof of my ­mother’s ­house in 
Sandycove Ave­nue East. It was ­there, in the drawer of a bureau in the adjoining 
lumber room, that I found two newspaper cuttings from the Irish Times and 
the Khartoum Times. One side of each announced my birth. On the other side 
of each, a major politician—­Éamon de Valera and Air Marshal Italo Balbo—­
told their hearers with the greatest confidence what the ­future would be. Both 
­were proved entirely wrong. It was a salutary lesson in the tragic blindness of 
­those we study in the past. It set me thinking. It made me determined, at some 
time, to write this book.


Postscript


689
Since Then
Prince­ton
It has been almost thirty-­five years since 1987. ­Those years have been a time of 
extraordinary creativity for the entire field of late antiquity. When I began to 
study it, in the 1950s, it was a marginal field, barely recognized as a field at all. 
Over the past de­cades it has attracted a remarkable range of young and gifted 
scholars. Once based on a handful of Eu­ro­pean countries, it is now studied all 
over the world.
I have been fascinated and delighted to watch this flowering of the field. But 
if I ­were to trace its pro­gress in the detail that it deserves, I would need to write 
an entire new book, and it would be a long one. So, instead, let me conclude 
with a brief sketch of my life and work as they have evolved over the past 
thirty-­five years.
Since 1987, I have remained in Prince­ton. I found that its high gravity chal-
lenged me to widen yet further my field of interests, and that the campus pro-
vided a perfect balance between teaching and research. To this I should add 
that my friendship with Glen Bowersock, who came from Harvard to the In-
stitute for Advanced Study in 1980, has kept me in touch with that remarkable 
institution and with the constant succession of scholars from Britain and Eu­
rope who have passed through the institute as visiting fellows.
On Prince­ton campus itself, the dynamic presence of Dimitri Gondicas 
(now the director of the Seeger Center for Hellenic Studies) brought me 
into contact with all that was best and most adventurous in the study of the 
Byzantine and modern Greek world. From 2001 onward, my involvement, 
through Dimitri, in the Hellenic Studies Program has given me new, rich air to 
breathe, and an invaluable experience of the day-­to-­day workings of an unusually 
happy academic proj­ect.

690 
Since Then
Turkey
This widening of my field of interest coincided with a notable widening of my 
travels. As early as 1986, I de­cided to pick up again my ­Middle Eastern interests 
by learning Ottoman and modern Turkish from Cemal Kafadar, now at Havard, 
who was then in the Department of Near Eastern Studies in Prince­ton. This 
was not only ­because travel to the rich remains of late antiquity—­and of all 
other periods of the ancient world—­was relatively easy and safe in Turkey. It 
was also ­because I de­cided that, if I was to engage in a serious study of the 
prob­lems of empire in late antiquity, I would need some traditional empire—­
such as the Ottoman Empire at its height—to compare with the workings of 
the autocracy of East Rome.
As a result, I spent many months in Istanbul, in 1989–1990. ­Later (from 1996 
to 2001) I directed an archaeological survey in the region of Beypazarı that led 
to the discovery of the ruins of the monastery and church of Sykeon, the home 
village of none other than Theodore of Sykeon (died 613), one of the most 
notable holy men in the early Byzantine world.1
I journeyed from one end of Turkey to the other, often in the footsteps of 
the indomitable Ottoman traveler Evliya Çelebi (1611–1682). This remarkable 
gentleman, a mixture of globe-­trotter, courtier, and master raconteur, had trav-
eled the full extent of the Ottoman Empire at its height—­from the walls of 
Vienna to Sudan.2 I followed Evliya’s journeys along the old Roman road, 
which led from Constantinople to Antioch and the East, and which had been 
the spine of the East Roman Empire (now known to the locals as the Bağdat 
Yolu—­the Baghdad Road).
­There I caught a glimpse, as it ­were, of two superimposed empires—­that of 
the Ottomans and that of East Rome. Each empire had left its imprint on a vast 
and ancient land: the well-­preserved ruins of classical and late Roman cities, 
with their marble colonnades, theaters, and ­great Christian basilicas, often 
standing, strangely untouched, as if they had gone to sleep in the age of Justin-
ian, only to be reawakened by the modern archaeologist; and (for Evliya) the 
reassuring succession of Ottoman towns, with their caravansaries, their elegant 
1. Peter Brown, “Chorotope: Theodore of Sykeon and His Sacred Landscape,” in Ierotopiia: 
sozdanie sakral’nych prostranstv v Vizantii i Drevneï Rusi [Hierotopy: the Creation of Sacred 
Spaces in Byzantium and Old Rus­sia], ed. A. Lidov (Moscow: Indrik 2006), 117–124.
2. See now An Ottoman Traveller: Se­lections from the Book of Travels of Evliya Çelebi, ed. 
Robert Dankoff and Sooyong Kim (London: Eland, 2020).

Since Then 
691
mosques and attached soup kitchens for the poor, and their quiet central 
squares, where the local intelligent­sia conversed at ease in the shade of ancient 
plane trees. Such journeys across heart-­stretching landscapes, in the alert com­
pany of Evliya, gave me a sense of what Braudel had called la mesure du siè-
cle—­a sense of the pos­si­ble in two ­great empires.
This experience has lingered in my memory. Evliya’s description of his 
visit to the ­great mosques of Edirne formed the basis of my introduction to 
the exquisite volume of photo­graphs—­Sacred Spaces: Turkish Mosques and 
Tombs—by my friend Mary Cross (1936–2016), a brilliant star in the firmament 
of the town of Prince­ton, for whose hospitality this essay was a small return.3
I returned from ­those travels (as from ­later ones in Syria, Jordan, Israel, 
Egypt, Tunisia, and Algeria) with a greater sense of the social structure of the 
late Roman Empire, and especially of the nature of the cities whose ruins ­were 
scattered throughout ­these regions. In this way, I benefited from the archaeo-
logical revolution that had revealed the richness and complexity of rural and 
urban life in East Rome. This revolution reached its peak in a fragile moment 
of relative peace—­peace, at least, for field archaeologists—­between the play-
ing out of the Ira­nian Revolution and the disastrous rise of ISIS in 2014.
Wealth, Poverty, and Power: Power and  
Persuasion and Poverty and Leadership
My next two books—­Power and Persuasion (1992) and Poverty and Leadership 
(2002)—­are what I would call my first Prince­ton books.4 They ­were based 
on frequent travel and on access to state-­of-­the-­art archaeological publications 
in the Marquand Library of Art and Archaeology and in the library of the 
Institute for Advanced Study.
Both books touched on a raw nerve in the conscience of late antique Chris-
tians that has remained sensitive up to this day: what to do with wealth; what 
to do with the poor. Wealth and poverty (like the issue of sexual renunciation) 
­were themes that concerned the very basis of late Roman society, and that have 
3. Peter Brown, “The Garden and the Dome,” introduction to Mary Cross, Sacred Spaces: 
Turkish Mosques and Tombs (New York: W. W. Norton, 2013), 13–20.
4. Peter Brown, Power and Persuasion in Late Antiquity: ­Towards a Christian Empire, Merle 
Curti Lectures (Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1992); Poverty and Leadership in the 
­Later Roman Empire, Menahem Stern Jerusalem Lectures (Hanover, NH: University of New 
­England Press, 2002).

692 
Since Then
attracted the attention both of historians of the ancient world and of polemi-
cists anxious to draw a moral from the fate of Rome.
I wanted to show how the issue of the care of the poor got underway, in 
practice, as the poor came to be mobilized as part of the constituency of the 
Christian bishops in the clergy’s bid for control of the cities, through the cre-
ation of new institutions—­poorhouses, hospitals, and regular food doles. At 
the same time, all over the Roman world, Christian preaching on almsgiving 
presented the relations between rich and poor with an intensity and a pathos 
that posed the issue of the solidarity of late Roman society. Far from being 
the story of a few, idealistic ventures in Christian charity, the emergence of the 
notion of the poor as objects of concern with a claim on the rich brought to a 
head the anx­i­eties of an entire, hard-­driven society. To listen to debates on 
wealth and poverty throughout the Roman world was like listening to the 
creaking of a ­great ship on the high seas.
Rome and ­After in the West:  
Through the Eye of a Needle
And nowhere ­were some Christians so rich, some Christian writers so radical 
and so articulate, and society seemingly so much ­under threat as in the Latin 
West at the time of the fall of Rome, the barbarian invasions, and the formation 
of a postimperial society. Not surprisingly, therefore, Through the Eye of a 
Needle (2012) was my longest book. It was the result of a de­cade of work, 
much of it involving a reassessment of the nature of late Roman society in 
the West. It described the dilemmas of the very rich, whose vast villas (many 
of which had only recently been discovered) had dominated the landscape 
in many parts of Britain, Gaul, Spain, and Italy, and whose old-­world lifestyle 
had once seemed so secure. It followed the way in which ­these aristocrats 
adjusted to a world ­after Rome, in which the ­little big men of the provinces—­
not so rich, regional figures—­won out at the expense of the grandees of the 
Roman ancien régime. And they did this, largely, ­because they sought ­careers 
as bishops, clergymen, and administrators of the properties of an ever-­richer 
church.5
5. Through the Eye of a Needle: Wealth, the Fall of Rome, and the Making of Chris­tian­ity in the 
West, 350–550 AD (Prince­ton, NJ: Prince­ton University Press, 2012). For the next stage in this 
development, see now Ian Wood, The Christian Economy in the Early Medieval West: ­Towards a 
­Temple Society (Binghamton, NY: Gracchi Books, 2022).

Since Then 
693
When working, for almost a de­cade, on Through the Eye of a Needle, I was 
heartened by the emergence of Spain (along with Portugal) as a major center 
of late antique studies. ­Until then, Spain had been somewhat peripheral to the 
study of the late Roman West—­Italy, Gaul, and Rome’s northern frontier with 
the barbarian world had held the center of attention. Now a new generation 
of ancient historians and archaeologists began to give a voice to the Iberian 
Peninsula—an im­mense and hitherto ­silent land.
To mention only ­those whom I knew personally, I found that the work of 
Kim Bowes (originally a gradu­ate student at Prince­ton) on the villa churches 
of Spain and Portugal, and the studies of Javier Arce and Gisela Ripoll, added 
an entire new dimension to the study of religion and society in the Roman 
and post-­Roman West. In this way, a cohort of young scholars (including 
gifted Argentinians and Brazilians) joined their French and Italian colleagues 
as equals in the study of late antiquity and the early ­Middle Ages.6
Christianization
Though working, mainly, on wealth and poverty, I also found myself confront-
ing prob­lems of which I had ­little or no inkling in 1987. This often happens to 
scholars. Like a swimmer on an unknown beach, I learned that it is quite pos­
si­ble to set off in one direction and to find oneself carried, by an invisible 
riptide, to an entirely dif­fer­ent part of the seashore.
My riptide, in the 1990s and early 2000s, was the prob­lem of Christianiza-
tion. It may seem strange that this prob­lem was new to me. ­After all, my very first 
articles ­were written on the Christianization of the Roman aristocracy, and on 
the role of religious coercion in securing the victory of Catholic Chris­tian­ity in 
Augustine’s North Africa and elsewhere.7 But this was dif­fer­ent. I now wanted to 
understand not what happened but what was said to have happened: how the 
piecemeal and ambiguous pro­cess of change by which a pagan society was re-
placed, over a period of centuries, by a new Christian order, was represented—­
written about, talked about, remembered, and celebrated—by Christians 
6. For a sample of work on the Iberian Peninsula, see Kim Bowes, Private Worship, Public 
Values, and Religious Change in Late Antiquity (Cambridge University Press, 2008); Javier Arce, 
Bárbaros y romanos en Hispania (Madrid: Marcial Pons, 2005); G. Ripoll and I. Velázquez, La 
Hispania visigoda (Madrid: Temas de Hoy, 1997); and Damián Fernández, Aristocrats and State-
hood in Western Iberia, 300–600 C.E. (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2017).
7. See chapter 38: “Religious Dissent” and chapter 39: “Religious Coercion.”

694 
Since Then
themselves. It was this Christian “repre­sen­ta­tion” of the end of paganism and 
the triumph of the church that held my attention in ­those years.8
­There was a growing awareness, among scholars of late antiquity (such as 
Françoise Thélamon and Averil Cameron) of the skill with which Christian 
authors presented accounts of the end of paganism in such a way as to make the 
triumph of Chris­tian­ity seem inevitable.9 This was only natu­ral in a once-­
persecuted religious group tasting the fruits of victory. But what struck me was 
something rather dif­fer­ent. As I read accounts of Christianization from all over 
the Roman world and beyond, I realized that ­these accounts varied from region 
to region; and that, paradoxically, the victory of Chris­tian­ity over paganism was 
often remembered in narratives based on pre-­Christian imaginative patterns.
In Egypt, the end of the ­temples was presented as if it ­were the last, abrupt 
round in a long series of clashes between rival gods that was a common theme 
in pharaonic myth. In Armenia, it was the opposite: Christianization was 
treated as a long-­drawn-­out pro­cess, subject to dramatic reversals, like the eternal 
wrestling of the powers of good with the powers of evil in Zoroastrian apocalyp-
tic thought. In Ireland, accounts of the coming of Saint Patrick took the form of 
a ­battle of wits between the saint and local pagan landowners, in which Patrick 
played the role of a trickster god, offering mere Latin words of blessing in return 
for solid food, rich land, and a portion of their ­daughters as nuns. In each of ­these 
cases we are listening in to a rare phenomenon—­traditional socie­ties reflecting, 
in their own terms, on one of the ­great changes of their times.
Triumph and Diversity:  
The Rise of Western Christendom
It was this new interest in the pro­cess of Christianization that led me to write 
The Rise of Western Christendom: Triumph and Diversity, A.D. 200–1000.10 As 
early as 1988, I had agreed with Jacques LeGoff to contribute a volume on 
8. See Peter Brown, “The Prob­lem of Christianization,” Raleigh Lecture, 1992, Proceedings of 
the British Acad­emy 82 (1993): 89–106, and Authority and the Sacred: Aspects of the Christianisa-
tion of the Roman World, Tanner Lectures (Cambridge University Press, 1995).
9. Françoise Thélamon, Paiens et chrétiens au ive siècle: l’apport de l’Histoire ecclésiastique de 
Rufin d’Aquilée (Paris: Études Augustiniennes, 1981); and Averil Cameron, Chris­tian­ity and the 
Rhe­toric of Empire: The Development of Christian Discourse, Sather Lectures (Berkeley: Univer-
sity of California Press, 1991).
10. Peter Brown, The Rise of Western Christendom: Triumph and Diversity, A.D. 200–1000 
(Oxford: Blackwell, 1996).

Since Then 
695
divided Christendoms to his series called Faire l’Eu­rope. It seemed to me that 
such a book gave me the chance to highlight the distinctive qualities of each 
region, as ­these ­were revealed by the dif­fer­ent ways in which they had become 
Christian. Instead of the story of a single, unified Catholic Church, advancing 
triumphantly in the West, I would try to pre­sent a history of late antique and 
early medieval Chris­tian­ity as a ­whole, including the Christian East, like a 
­great chain of distinctive regions, which stretched from Ireland, through the 
Mediterranean and the ­Middle East, to the churches scattered along the Silk 
Road from Central Asia to China.
Each of ­these regions formed what I called a “micro-­Christendom.” Each 
was convinced that its practices and doctrines ­were a microcosm that reflected 
faithfully the worldwide macrocosm of Christian truth. Instead of a conven-
tional history of conflicting churches—of heresies and schisms—­I would offer 
a history of the interaction of dif­fer­ent Christian regions in terms of the rise 
and fall of dif­fer­ent “micro-­Christendoms,” as they withdrew into themselves, 
or reached out to absorb ­others, like amoebic cells contracting and expanding 
beneath a microscope. Eventually, in Eu­rope, a distinctive cluster of “micro-­
Christendoms” came together to form the more uniform world of the medi-
eval Catholic West. But this was not how ­things had been in late antiquity and 
in the early ­Middle Ages: at that time, Western Christendom was only one 
cluster of regions among many, perched at the northwestern tip of a vast and 
variegated Christian world. Hence the importance, for me, of including in a 
book, whose title promised a study of Western Christendom, many chapters 
devoted to Byzantium, Islam, and the Christianities of the East. ­These chapters 
on non-­Western forms of Chris­tian­ity further emphasized the theme of the 
subtitle—­“Triumph and Diversity.”
The Rise got off to a hesitant start. It was first published in 1996 as ­little more 
than an extended essay. It did not even have footnotes; and this for a very 
down-­to-­earth reason: I had broken my wrist and found that pulling books 
from shelves and turning over their pages to find references was exquisitely 
painful. It was only in 2003 that Blackwell brought out a completely rewritten 
version, accompanied by an introduction and ample notes. Ten years ­later, 
Wiley-­Blackwell reprinted the 2003 edition with a further long preface.11
11. Peter Brown, The Rise of Western Christendom: Triumph and Diversity, A.D. 200–1000, 
2nd ed. (Oxford: Blackwell, 2003) and tenth-­anniversary rev. ed. (Malden, MA: Wiley-­
Blackwell, 2013).

696 
Since Then
I wanted to do this rewriting for two reasons. First: I had felt the need to 
return yet again to western Eu­rope, having spent so much time and travel on 
understandng the East. It seeemed to me, looking back, that The World of Late 
Antiquity had skimped on the post-­Roman West, by concentrating on the East-
ern Empire and the ­Middle East. I needed to redress the balance by writing on 
the Christianization of western Eu­rope, as an example of the general prob­lem 
of the methods and meaning of Christianization, to which I was giving much 
attention in my reading and in my teaching. Furthermore, I had come to take a 
second look at my own work in the previous de­cades, with an eye to where it 
needed to go forward.12 It was time to put all this together in a work of synthesis.
Second: I was struck by the veritable dam burst of studies of postimperial 
western Eu­rope, partly fostered by a Eu­ro­pean Science Foundation proj­ect, 
the Transformation of the Roman World, ­under the guidance of Walter 
Pohl. This Europe-­wide breakthrough challenged me to set the spread of 
Chris­tian­ity against a very dif­fer­ent background from what had been conven-
tional hitherto. Instead of the story of a unified Catholic Church impinging on 
solidly “ethnic” barbarian kingdoms—­Goths, Franks, Anglo-­Saxons, and 
Irish—­each with their own, closed culture and static institutions, we find a 
fluid situation, where regional elites engaged in a pro­cess of state formation in 
which the Christian clergy collaborated with enterprising kings to build, from 
a wide variety of traditions, the network of “micro-­Christendoms” that dotted 
the Latin West.
All this time, I was encouraged and inspired by my Prince­ton friends and 
colleagues, each in a dif­fer­ent way. To mention only a few: early on, Judith 
Herrin, the Byzantinist in the History Department, provided, in her adventur-
ous book, The Formation of Christendom (1987), a model for my own treatment 
of the interrelated Christianities of East and West.13 Slobodan Čurčić (1940–
2017)—­Danny Čurčić—­was a gentle ­giant in the field of the art and architec-
ture of the Byzantine and early modern Balkans. His Architecture in the Balkans 
from Diocletian to Süleyman the Magnificent (2010) was a masterpiece.14 I read 
12. Peter Brown, “The World of Late Antiquity Revisited,” Symbolae Osloenses 72 (1997): 
5–90; “The Rise and Function of the Holy Man in Late Antiquity, 1971–1997,” Journal of Early 
Christian Studies 6 (1998): 353–376; and Augustine of Hippo (2000), 441–520.
13. Judith Herrin, The Formation of Christendom (Prince­ton, NJ: Prince­ton University Press, 
1987, reedited with a new preface, 2022).
14. Slobodan Čurčić, Architecture in the Balkans from Diocletian to Süleyman the Magnificent 
(New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2010).

Since Then 
697
­every chapter in draft, and discussed them over long breakfasts replete with 
learning. With his unfailingly fresh eye, his vast range—­from the age of Con-
stantine to early modern Muscovy—­and his unflinching academic integrity in 
the midst of so much ethnic strife within his field, Danny stood for the best in 
Balkan and Byzantine studies. In the Department of Classics, Brent Shaw’s 
im­mense learning, his humanity, and his capacity always to be amazed made 
him a model of what it is to be an ancient historian.15 Throughout, I was for-
tunate to find myself teaching a succession of gradu­ate students (as well as 
class ­after class of undergraduates) whose diverse interests and enthusiasms 
kept my horizons stretched to the limits.
The End of the Ancient Other World:  
The Ransom of the Soul
My last two books—­The Ransom of the Soul: Afterlife and Wealth in Early West-
ern Chris­tian­ity (2015) and Trea­sure in Heaven: The Holy Poor in Early Chris­
tian­ity (2016)—­make plain the pendulum swing from East to West and back 
again that has always made the field of late antiquity so challenging to me.
The Ransom of the Soul (which I delivered in Vienna at the Institut für die 
Wissenschaften vom Menschen) was the story of what one might call the 
Christianization of death and the Other World in the Latin West. It showed 
how the care of the ­dying, and the rituals connected with the fate of the souls 
of the departed, alongside repre­sen­ta­tions of the Other World, changed over 
time. They slowly took on the clarity that we associate with the medieval 
Catholic Church, characterized by a threefold division of Heaven, Hell, and 
Purgatory. This change took place over the centuries, in an unbroken arc that 
reached from the homely symbiosis of living and dead in the catacombs of 
Rome, in the third ­century, to the ­great monasteries—­formidable power­
houses of prayer for the dead—­founded by wandering Irishmen in northern 
Gaul, in the seventh ­century.16
A long-­term change, seemingly unrelated to the dramatic events of the pe-
riod (the sack of Rome, the barbarian invasions, the formation of kingdoms), 
but as power­ful as a long ocean roller, enveloped the populations of Christian 
15. Peter Brown, “Brent Shaw: An Intellectual Profile,” in Empire and Religion in the Roman 
World, ed. Harriet Flower (Cambridge University Press, 2021), 241–251.
16. Peter Brown, The Ransom of the Soul: Afterlife and Wealth in Early Western Chris­tian­ity 
(Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2015).

698 
Since Then
Eu­rope in a new imaginative world beyond this world, centered, as never be-
fore, on the tremulous journey of the soul.
Syria, Egypt, and the Meaning of Work:  
Trea­sure in Heaven
Trea­sure in Heaven (the James W. Richards Lectures at the University of 
­Virginia, Charlottesville) took me to a very dif­fer­ent part of the world. It stud-
ied the clash between two major Christian regions of the East. It describes how 
the ascetics of Egypt and the holy men of Syria came to differ on the role of 
work in the monastic life. Far from being a squabble among monks alone, the 
debate on work involved the very definition of the ­human person and of 
­human society. Could Christian ascetics live the life of the angels by opting 
out of society to such an extent as to live without working, supported by the 
alms of the faithful, as in the “Lands of the Begging Bowl”—­the vast expanse 
of Buddhist countries to the east of Iran? Or must they accept a common 
humanity, defined by the cry of the stomach and the ache of the hands at 
work?
The monasteries of Egypt, and with them, ­those of the West, tended to opt 
for solidarity with ­human toil. By contrast, the holy men of Syria and neigh-
boring regions dared the ­human condition. As they swayed in constant prayer 
on top of pillars, in caves, and on the untilled edges of the settled world, their 
radical stance summed up a yearning to be ­free from the long pain of ­labor that 
went back to the origins of civilization in the ­Middle East.17
“Not by One Ave­nue Alone”
As I look back now, ­after seventy years, on the study of late antiquity, what 
strikes me is the sheer diversity of institutional settings, of scholarly back-
grounds, and of individual intellectual trajectories that have gone into making 
it so vibrant a field. It is too large a field to be tied to any one discipline, meth-
odology, or learned tradition. Something of the awe of the last pagans faced 
by the majesty of the stars is not out of place. Uno itinere non potest perveniri 
17. Trea­sure in Heaven: The Holy Poor in Early Chris­tian­ity (Charlottesville: University of 
­Virginia Press, 2016). For a splendid development of ­these themes, see now Daniel Caner, The 
Rich and the Pure: Philanthropy and the Making of Christian Society in Early Byzantium (Berkeley: 
University of California Press, 2021).

Since Then 
699
ad tam grande secretum: “Not by one ave­nue alone can we make our way to so 
vast a mystery.”18
As for myself, I have become, at the age of eighty-seven, a creature of regular 
habits. I wake up early ­every morning, which gives me time to say my prayers 
and to turn, before dawn’s early light, to reading ancient languages. Lately, I 
have returned, in my mind, to the sources of the Nile, to Ethiopia—­the Ethio-
pia from whence Martha, my nanny in Khartoum, had come as a refugee, in 
1938.19 I have begun to read in Geʾez (in Classical Ethiopic) texts that still 
echo, at a vast distance of time and space, the controversies and ascetic legends 
of Syria and Egypt of the fifth and sixth centuries, which had trickled down 
the Nile and the Red Sea to Ethiopia, to yet another “micro-­Christendom,” 
founded in late antiquity and still surviving in the Horn of Africa. ­There is 
room, in late antiquity, for many more such journeys of the mind.
18. Symmachus, Relatio 3.10, in Prefect and Emperor: The Relationes of Symmachus A.D. 384, 
ed. R. H. Barrow (Oxford: The Clarendon Press, 1973), 40 (my translation).
19. Chapter 8: “Atbara: Life Abroad.”


701
Abbas, Shah, 429–30, 435
Abdallahi ibn Mohammad, 37
Abdu (Sudanese servant), 46
Abgar the Black, King, 431
Abrahams (doctor), 67
Adam, Karl, 150–51, 150n
Ady, Cecilia, 91
Agathias of Myrina, 279, 280, 300–301
Agnellus of Ravenna, 398n
Agnes, Saint, 594
Ahmad, Mohammad, 37
Aileen (cousin of Sheila Wynne Brown), 
680–81
Alaric, 230
al-­Balahdurî, 305
Aldwinckle, Stella, 143, 143n
Alexander, Eleanor, 456
Alexander, Paul, 448, 456, 515
Alexander the ­Great, 413, 483, 503
Alexis, Saint, 594
Algar, Hamid, 547–48, 547n
al-­Ghazali, 551
Ali (son-­in-­law of Muhammad), 433–34
Alison (cousin), 74
Alverny, Thérèse d,’ 263
Ambrose, Saint, 259, 505
Ammianus Marcellinus, 278, 329
Amoun of Nitria, 594
Andrae, Tor, 386, 386n7
Andrews, Christopher, 32, 32n4
Angenandt, A., 334n10
Anicia, Juliana, 435
Anscombe, Elizabeth, 144
Anselm, Saint, 305
Anthony, Saint, 478
Arce, Javier, 693, 693n6
Ardashir, King, 423, 426, 427
Aristotle, 391, 413
Armstrong, Hilary, 575
Artemidorus of Daldis, 476
Ashjian, Mesrob, 430
Athanasius, Saint, 173, 391
Atkinson, Anna, 22–24
Atkinson, Edward, 22–23
Atkinson, John, 24–25, 27–29
Atkinson ­family, 22–23
Aubineau, Michel, 626, 627
Auden, W. H., 100–101, 140, 377
Augustine, Saint, xiv, 32, 158, 170–73, 175–76, 
180–84, 193, 200, 232, 237–38, 243–44, 
247–56, 249n, 259–60, 262–63, 267–69, 
272, 274–76, 279–93, 297, 300–301, 311–12, 
371, 454–55, 505, 552, 555, 566, 581, 584, 
586, 590, 606, 607–13, 617–18, 630–31, 
651–52, 654–56, 661
Averincev, Sergei, 595, 595n
Avicenna (Ibn Sina), 419
Baba, Mehr, 443
Bacht, Heinrich, 262
Bahram Gur, King, 412
Bak, János, 603, 603n1
Bakalova, Elka, 294
Balbo, Italo, 3, 36, 46–47, 685
Balzac, Honoré de, 532
Barbeyrac, Jean, 244, 244n9
Index

702 
index
Barnes, Timothy, 351
Baron, Hilda, 196–97
Baron, Rupert, 196–97
Baron, Stanley, 369
Barraclough, Geoffrey, 348, 367–68, 373
Bartlett, Robert, 506n
Bartlett, Thomas, 11n5
Basil of Caesarea, 264–66, 589, 657–58
Bayi, Gowri Parvati, 14
Bayley, Leonard “Buggins,” 35, 43
Bayley, Norah Brown, 35, 91, 533, 601
Baynes, Norman Hepburn, 213, 213n2, 299, 
299nn7–8, 355, 355nn5–6
Beatty, Chester, 301
Beckett, Bill, 34
Beckett, Samuel, 34
Bede, Venerable, 393, 567
Beecham, Thomas, 513
Beethoven, Ludwig van, 66
Belich, James, 15n8
Bell, Henry Esmond “Harry,” 158, 160–61, 
161n4, 188, 189, 192, 195, 198
Bence-­Jones, Mark, 23n3
Benson, Robin, 677, 684–85
Bentham, Jeremy, 207, 466
Bergman, Ingmar, 453
Berlin, Isaiah, 200, 668–69
Bermingham, Jack, 38n4
Bernard, Saint, 158
Bernini, Gianlorenzo, 325
Berque, Jacques, 235–36, 235n, 236n
Bersani, Leo, 586
Berten, André, 578n
Bethell, Denis, 567, 602–4
Bieler, Ludwig, 123–24, 603
Bigger, J., 23n4
Bingham, Caroline, 460n, 461nn2–3
Bisson, Tom, 451
Blaudeau, Philippe, 182n4
Bloch, Herbert, 229, 229n, 230
Bloch, Marc, 391, 391n14
Boethius, 230
Bolgiani, Franco, 262, 262n, 542–43
Bondi, Roberta. See Chesnut (­later Bondi), 
Roberta
Bonner, Gerald, 248, 248n, 283–84
Borges, Jorge Luis, 375
Boustan, Ra‘anan, xv
Bowersock, Glen, 385, 385n5, 474–76, 
475nn6–11, 639, 643, 689
Bowes, Kim, 693, 693n6
Bowie, Ewen, 339
Bowlby, Charles, 61–63, 74, 77
Bowle, John, 212
Boyce, Mary, 411, 439, 439n
Brady, Ciaran, 9n3
Bratianu, Georges, 224, 224n3
Braudel, Fernand, 164–65, 200, 235, 294, 
404–10, 404n, 405n2, 407n6, 409n, 413n, 
420, 444, 547, 558, 691
Brecht, Berthold, 123
Bregman, Jay, 575
Brentano, Bob, 451
Brooke-­Smith, Robin, xv
Brown, Betsy, xv, 34, 56, 62, 238
Brown, Billy, 35, 79
Brown, James Lamont, 4, 31, 35–36, 38–39, 
43–47, 49, 54, 64, 70, 74–79, 104–6, 109–10, 
116, 122–25, 127, 156, 190, 196, 198, 205, 243, 
323, 504, 521, 533, 545–46, 600–603, 665, 
672, 676, 677
Brown, Jessie “the Mater,” 31–35, 64–66
Brown, Mai, 65–66, 74, 91, 124, 213
Brown, Patricia Fortini, 591, 591n2, 631
Brown (printer; great-­grandfather), 30
Brown, P.R.L., 89
Brown, Richard Bolney “Dick,” 141–42, 149
Brown, Sheila Wynne Warren, 3–5, 10, 24, 
29, 35–36, 43–47, 49–50, 52–53, 64, 66–67, 
71, 76–77, 79, 127, 196, 198, 205, 315, 533, 
545–46, 601–2, 636–37, 664, 665, 672–85
Brown, “the Bear,” 31–32, 35, 66
Bruce (Urantia cult teacher), 452–53, 489
Bruckner, Georgina, 369
Brunt, Peter, 668
Bryer, Anthony, 160
Bud­dha, 301, 496
Burke, John, 8, 8n, 9n2, 33n
Burnaby, John, 274–75, 274n11, 275n12
Burrows, Millar, 214n3

index 
703
Butler, Lionel, 462
Bynum, Caroline Walker, 476, 476n, 518–19
Cameron, Alan, 278, 278n4, 282, 349, 351n, 
379, 379n20, 643
Cameron, Averil, xii, xv, 279, 279n6, 300–301, 
300n9, 349, 379, 379n21, 390–91, 391n13, 
618n4, 671, 694, 694n9
Canepa, Matthew, 384n4, 410, 411n2, 422n, 
484n
Caner, Daniel, 698n
Cardan, Mrs. (civil servant), 683
Carlier, Jeannie, 620, 622
Carlyle, Thomas, 98, 103
Carpaccio, Vittore, 591
Carrié, Jean-­Michel, 380n24, 605n, 614, 614n8
Cassels, Richard, 17
Cassian, John, 584–88, 590, 614, 630, 655–56
Cassiodorus, 206, 230
Çelebi, Evliya, 690–91
Chadwick, Henry, 265, 267, 267n, 648, 648n6
Charlemagne, 384, 387
Charles I, King, 94
Charles II, King, 89, 90
Charles the Bold, 118
Chesley, Emily, xv
Chesnut, Glen, 456
Chesnut (­later Bondi), Roberta, 312–15, 312n1, 
313nn3–4, 314nn5–6, 456–58, 602, 684
Chesterton, G. K., 100
Chichele, Henry (archbishop), 193, 307
Chitty, Derwas, 355–57, 356nn7–9
Chopin, Frédéric, 120
Christensen, Arthur, 384, 384n2
Christie, Neil, 219n
Cicero, 610, 610n11
Clarke, Barry, 186–87
Clayton, Mrs. (typist), 280
Clement of Alexandria, 269–71, 630
Clements, Niki, 588n7
Cobbett, William, 98
Cochrane (admiral), 13
Collins, Robert O., 38n3, 38n4, 40n
Collins, Roger, 339
Columba, Saint, 567, 684
Confucius, 461
Conrad the Salian, 187
Consentius, 609
Constable, John, 632
Constantine, Emperor, 114, 184–85, 223, 
225–26, 240, 371, 377, 378, 452
Constantine VII Porphyrogenitus, 
Emperor, 160
Constantius II, Emperor, 184, 329
Cook, Michael, 523–26, 523n, 524n3, 639, 639n2
Corbett, James, 61
Coulanges, Fustel de, 237, 237n7
Courcelle, Pierre, 259, 259n
Cracco, Giorgio, 606, 606nn2–3
Craig, Arthur “the Boss,” 53–58, 63, 74, 76, 
77, 80, 679
Cranz, Edward, 275–76, 275n13
Creager, Angela, xv
Crispin, Julian, 116–17
Crone, Patricia, 523–26, 523n, 524n3, 639, 639n2
Cross, F. L., 261
Cross, Mary, 691
Crossland, William, 461
Crouzel, Henri, 651, 652n1
Čurčić, Slobodan “Danny,” 643, 696–97, 
696n14
Cutler, Anthony, 634, 634n4
Cyprian of Carthage, 233, 252, 449, 452
Daly, Anna Grey, 32–33
Daly, Bernard, 33, 50–51
Daly, Brian, 33
Daly, Brian St George, 50–51, 67
Daly, Mary E., 30n, 32n3
Daniélou, Jean, 264–66, 265n, 626, 651, 
652n1, 665
Dante Alighieri, 158, 619, 653n5, 664, 670, 
670n
Darius, 419–20
Davidson, Arnold, 620, 624
Davis, Natalie Zemon, 511, 511n
Davis, Ralph H. C., 234, 389
Dawe, Gib, 120–21
Dawes, Elizabeth, 355
De Berry, Keith, 147

704 
index
Deng, Francis M., 81n1
de Valera, Éamon, 3, 685
Devereux, George, 376
de Warenne, William, 680
de Warren, Robert “Bobby,” 480–81, 
481nn1–2, 680–83
Diakonov, Aleksandr, 221
Digby, Simon, 553
Dillon, Jean, 572
Dillon, John, xv, 515, 572–75, 572n, 573nn5–6, 
641–42
Dillon, John (grand­father of John), 572
Dillon, Myles, 572
Diocletian, Emperor, 223, 224, 225, 277, 371
Dionisotti, Carlo, 669
Dioscorides, 435
Divjak, Johannes, 252, 287, 289–90, 608–9, 613
Dodds, Eric Robertson, 100–101, 338, 338n, 
373–78, 374n6, 374nn3–4, 376nn8–11, 
377nn12–15, 449
Dolbeau, François, 252, 287
Donatus of Carthage, 233
Dorotheus of Gaza, 357
Douglas, Mary, xii, 294, 322–23, 322n4, 
326–35, 327n1, 331n, 332n, 333nn7–9, 348, 
353–54, 353n3, 358, 361, 362, 362n, 394, 395, 
542, 543
Douley, Carol C., 542n5
Doyle, Arthur Conan, 153, 289n6
Drake, Francis, 487, 569
Drake, Hal, 575
Dreyfus, Harold, 586
Drinkwater, John, 339
Drisko, Carol, 284
Dumas, Alexandre, 62
Dunbabin, Jean, 222
Dunbabin, John, 222
Dunbabin, Katherine M. D., 222, 223n
Duncan-­Jones, Richard, 217
Dürer, Albrecht, 123
Dvorak, Max, 368
Eckstein, Arthur M., 456, 456n4, 632–33
Edel, Leon, 283
Edward I, King, 115
Effros, Bonnie, 387n
Einstein, Albert, 108
Elden, Stuart, 626n
Eliot, George, 684
Eliot, T. S., 100, 146
Elizabeth, Queen, 9, 94, 104, 108, 487, 569
Elizabeth II, Queen, 63, 521
Elsner, Jás, 369n
Ennius, Quintus, 661
Ephraim the Syrian, 268, 386
Epictetus, 539
Epstein, Ann Wharton, 635, 635n
Eribon, Didier, 586n4
Esther (wife of Xerxes), 419
Eunomius, 316
Eusebius of Caesarea, 449
Eutropius, 540
Evagrius of Pontos, 587
Evans-­Pritchard, Edward E. “E.-­P.,” 40–42, 
41n8, 294, 321–29, 321n2, 322n5, 325n, 
328n, 331, 334–37, 353, 361, 394, 396, 510, 
542, 543
Farmar, Tony, 31n
Farrell, James, 284, 284n8
Faulkner, William, 315, 684
Feldherr, Andrew, xv
Ferris (gardener), 286
Festugière, André-­Jean, 357–58, 358nn13–14, 
361, 585, 618
Finberg, Herbert Patrick Reginald, 393n
Finley, Moses, 390, 390n, 664
Finn, Seamus, 83–84, 105
Finney, P. Corby, 369n
Firdausi, 425–26
Firmus, 610
Fitzgerald, Garrett, 678
Flavianus Nicomachus, 351
Flusin, Bernard, 556n1
Folliet, Georges, 268
Foster, Roy F., 213n1
Foucault, Michel, 577–79, 578n, 581–90, 
581n, 582nn3–4, 586nn1–3, 588nn6–7, 

index 
705
589nn8–9, 590n10, 601, 611, 615, 620–30, 
625nn1–2, 626n, 627n6, 628n9, 629nn10–11, 
638, 648, 656, 660
Fowden, Garth, 339
Franco, Francisco, 100
Frangieh, Tony, 531
Franklin, John, 461
Franks, Lord, 348
Fraser, Peter, 205–6, 213
Frederick II, Emperor, 166, 169
Frend, William Howard Clifford “Bill,” 
175–76, 175n, 232–39, 232n, 233n2, 248, 
274, 300
Friedman, Alan J., 542n5
Friesen, Steven J., 648n5
Frost, David, 485–87, 503
Frost, J. E., 44n1
Frost, Robert, 627, 627n5
Frugé, August, 281, 281n, 574
Fukai, Shinji, 420n
Furnival, Cuthbert Guy “Ferny,” 87, 128
Gabba, Emilio, 661, 670
Gabirol, Ibn, 316, 342
Gaffney, Patrick, 531, 531n
Galbraith, Vivian, 199, 228
Galen, 449–50, 596
Galsworthy, John, 126
Gandhi, Mahatma, 61
Ganz, David, 339–41
Gassman, Mattias, 613n2
Geach, Peter, 143–44
Gee, David, 81
Geertz, Clifford, 570, 570n2, 632
Gellner, Ernst, 467, 467n, 507, 507n4
Genghis Khan, 483, 495
George, Kester, 153
Georges, Pericles, 455, 455n
Gibbon, Edward, xiii, 29, 223, 250–51, 298, 302, 
352, 352n, 358, 369–70, 373, 373n2, 390, 472, 
478, 508–10, 509n8
Gilsenan, Michael, 467, 467n
Gluckman, Max, 321–22, 321n3, 325
Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von, 621
Gogh, Vincent van, 152
Goldziher, Ignaz, 306, 385, 385n6
Gombrich, Ernst, 229
Gondicas, Dimitri, 689
Goodbody, Patrick, 142
Gordon, Charles George, 37
Gotch, Paul, 499
Grabar, Oleg, 414–15, 415n, 639, 639n1
Graham, Billy, 148–49
Green, Roger Lancelyn, 146n
Green, Vivian H., 148n
Gregory of Nyssa, 269, 589, 627, 627n4, 
627n7, 657, 663
Gregory of Tours, 399–403, 400n2, 505, 
514n
Gregory the ­Great, 230, 606
Grey, Ada. See Warren, Ada Grey
Grey, Anna Maria, 19
Grey, Captain St George, 19
Grey, Elizabeth O’Neill, 10
Grey, Elizabeth Philpott, 10–14
Grey, George (lieutenant col­o­nel), 10–13
Grey, Hugh (­father of John and Owen 
Wynne Grey), 10
Grey, Hugh (son of Owen Wynne and 
Elizabeth Philpott Grey), 12
Grey, Jane, 8, 679–80
Grey, John (son of Hugh Grey), 10
Grey, John (son of Owen Wynne and 
Elizabeth Philpott Grey), 11–12
Grey, Leonard, 8
Grey, Mary Emily, 20
Grey, Matthew Philpott Berry, 10–14,  
19, 21
Grey, Neil, 9
Grey, Owen Wynne, 10, 11, 14–15, 17
Grey, Sir George, 15–16
Grey, William, 11
Grey, William Henry, 19–20
Grey ­family, 8–16, 21, 29, 679–80
Griffith, Sidney, 575
Griffiths, V. L., 38n5
Gros, Frédéric, 626n
Gruen, Eric, 456, 631

706 
index
Hadland (teacher), 80
Hadot, Pierre, xii, 358, 358n15, 617–24, 617n3, 
618n5, 619n, 620nn7–8, 621nn9–11, 
622nn13–14, 623n, 624n, 669
Haile Selassie, 47–48
Hailsham, Quintin Hogg, Lord, 208
Hamilton, Rowan, 74–75, 77
Harl, Marguerite, 263–64, 264n, 270, 626, 
652, 652n1
Harper, Kyle, xv, 597n
Harper, Prudence, 414, 415n
Harrison, Brian, 343n4
Harrison, Carol, 288, 288n3
Harrison, Stephen J., 373n1
Harun al-­Rashid, 384, 433
Harvey, Barbara, 257
Hasan al-­Basrî, 551
Haskins, Charles Homer, 395, 395n3
Hauck, Albert, 166, 166n1
Hawksmoor, Nicholas, 111
Hemingway, Ernest, 635
Henderson, Isobel, 618
Henderson, K.D.D., 95n
Henig, Martin, 339
Henry, Paul, 617–18, 617nn1–2
Henry VII, King, 194
Henry VIII, King, 120
Heraclius, Emperor, 300, 309–10
Herder, Johann Gottfried, 99
Hermas, 648
Herodotus, 221, 279
Herrin, Judith, xv, 696, 696n13
Hershey, John, 74
Hesiod, 571
Heyden, Katharina, 412n
Higgins, Charlotte, 278n2
Highfield, Roger, 199
Hill, Christopher, 91
Hill, John, 112
Hill, R. C., 76n
Hill, William, 112–14
Hillenbrand, Robert, 309
Hippocrates, 450
Hitler, Adolf, 63, 69, 100, 117, 122, 355
Hodges, Richard, 640, 640n4
Holfter, Gisela, 123n
Hollings­worth, Paul, 633–35, 633n
Holloway, Jane, 460
Holloway, Thomas, 460–62
Holmes, George, 193, 193n
Holum, Kenneth, 575
Hooke, Robert, 90
Hooper, Walter, 144n3, 146n, 147n10
Hope, Francis, 664
Hopkins, Keith, 279, 279n5, 281, 298, 298n6
Horden, Peregrine, 405n3
Horiuchi, Kiyoharu, 420n
Horthy, Miklós, 61
Hourani, Albert, 307
Howard-­Johnston, James, 309–10, 310n, 339, 
422n, 484n
Hoyle, Fred, 75, 321
Hughes, Kathleen, 464–65, 464n2
Huizinga, Johan, 119, 119n, 120, 163
Hulagu Khan, 435, 483
Hume, David, 466, 509–10, 509n7
Hunayn ibn Ishaq, 435
Hunt, David, 339
Hurel, Daniel-­Odin, 251n
Hurnard, Naomi, 228, 257
Hus, Jan, 296
Hussey, Joan, 463, 465
Hutchison, Ann, 506
Hyams, Paul, 327–28, 327n2, 348, 395–96, 
395n5
Hyatt, Bruce, 190
Iamblichus, 540
Ibbotson, Sophie, 44n2
Ibn-­Ishaq, 430
Ibn Sina (Avicenna), 419
Ilsetraut (wife of Pierre Hadot), 617, 621, 624
Imam Reza, 433–36, 472, 494, 520
Inglis, Richard, 97
Ishâq, Ibn, 305
Jacob, Ernest, 192, 192n2, 193, 227, 272, 283
Jacob of Sarugh, 268

index 
707
Jalâl al-­Din al-­Mahalli, 547
Jalâl al-­Din al-­Suyuti, 547
Jamblichus, 572
James, Edward, 339
James, Henry, 283
Jaspers, Karl, 394
Jeans, James, 75
Jeffery, Keith, 11n5
Jennifer (cousin), 74
Jerome, Saint, 505, 649, 654
Jerome of Prague, 296
Jesus, 301, 431, 647
Joachim of Fiore, 257
John Chrysostom, 550n6, 551
Johnson, Douglas H., 41n7
Johnson, Samuel, 145
John XXIII, Pope, 621
Jones, Arnold Hugh Martin “Hugo,” 207–8, 
207n, 225–26, 225n, 229, 239, 241, 271, 
297–99, 298n3, 299n7, 337, 337n, 374, 378, 
389–90, 556
Jones, D. S., 19n5
Jordan, David P., 251n
Josi (professor), 216
Joyce, James, 79, 521
Joyce, William, 63
Judas Thomas, 594, 599n2
Judt, Tony, 342n
Julian, Saint, 400
Julian of Eclanum, 606, 661
Julius II, Pope, 461
Justinian, Emperor, 309, 371, 378, 384, 412–13, 
414
Kafadar, Cemal, 690
Kantorowicz, Ernst, 169, 169n5
Kazhdan, Alexander Petrovich, 634–35, 
634nn3–4, 635n, 640
Keall, Edward J., 488, 488n
Kearns, Kevin C., 53n
Keeler, Christine, 262
Kennan, Liz, 505
Kennedy, Hugh, 640, 640n5
Keppel, Dean, 577
Kermode, Frank, 285
Khomeini, Ayatollah, 492, 521, 546, 548
Khusro I Anoshirwan, King, 309, 383–84, 
411, 413, 482
Khusro II Aparwez, King, 309–10, 420–22, 
443, 482–83, 502, 503
Kilvert, Francis, 103
King, Alec, 53n
Kinney, Dale, 643
Kinugasa, Teinosake, 165
Kitagawa, Joe, 577
Kitchener, Horatio Herbert, 37
Kitzinger, Ernst, 368
Knowlson, James, 34n
Kotkin, Steve, 589
Krautheimer, Richard, 685
Kreiner, Jamie, xv
Kretschmer, Doris, 573–75, 635
Krul, W. E., 119n
La Bonnardière, Anne-­Marie, 263
Lactantius, 609
Lamma, Paolo, 167, 167n3
Lamont, Peter, 30
Lamont, Stewart, 659, 659n10
Lamont Brown ­family, 30–31
Landseer, Edwin, 461
Lane (doctor), 77
Lane Fox, Robin, 288, 288n3, 503
Lapidus, Ira, 552, 552n8
Laporte, Jean, 251n
Laqueur, Tom, 577, 638
Last, Hugh, 320
Latini, Brunetto, 619
Lawrence, T. E., 127, 521
Lecler, Joseph, 242, 242n3
Le Goff, Jacques, 512, 512n, 555, 694–95
Lennard, Reginald, 344n6
Lenski, Noel, 380n24
Lepelley, Claude, 287, 287n2, 612–13, 613nn2–4
LeQuesne, Laurence “Larry,” 96–99, 98n, 
102–4, 102n, 103n2, 104nn4–5, 108–10, 112, 
114–16, 393
Lerner, Robert E., 169n6

708 
index
Lewis, C. S., 136, 143–47, 145nn5–8, 147nn11–12, 
149, 159, 160, 189
Leyser, Karl, 169, 187, 187n, 196, 222
Libanius of Antioch, 357, 551, 618
Liebersohn, Harry, xv
Liebeschuetz, J. Wolfgang H. G., 241–42, 
298, 298n5, 359, 360n17
Linney (minister), 602, 676
Lipscomb, Benjamin J. B., 144n4
Livingstone, Elizabeth, 261
Lloyd (doctor), 38n4
Lockhart (col­o­nel, teacher), 61–63
Louis XIV, King, 250
Lovell-­Hoar, Max, 44n2
Loverance, Rowena, 339
Lubac, Henri de, 626
Lucretius, 622, 622n12
Lydus, John, 456
Lysart, Charles, 63
Maas, Michael, 456, 456n5
MacCormack, Sabine G., 472n2, 575
Mac Curtain, Margaret, 659–60, 660n
Macey, David, 583n, 590n11
MacFarlane, Alan, 322
MacLennan, Bob, xv
MacLennan, Jane, xv
MacMichael, Harold, 38, 38n3, 323n7
Macrina, Saint, 589, 657–58
Madec, Goulven, 268, 287–88, 288n3
Maffey, John, 63
Magdalino, Paul, 339, 348
Mâle, Émile, 154, 154n
Malingrey, Anne-­Marie, 626
Mallowan, Max, 482–83
Manasseh (biblical king), 148
Mandouze, André, 273
Mani, 301, 452
Mantegna, Andrea, 153
Marcus Aurelius, 184–85, 371, 373–74, 377, 539
Markus, Robert, xii, 268, 273–76, 274nn9–10, 
297
Marrou, Henri-­Irénée, xii, 172–73, 179–84, 
180n, 182n5, 183nn6–7, 184nn8–9, 268–73, 
271nn4–5, 273n, 275, 368, 455, 541, 541n4, 
543, 549–50, 550n4, 570, 570n1, 611, 613, 665
Marrou, Jeanne, 272, 273
Martha (Ethiopian nanny), 46–48, 699
Martin, Saint, 613, 614
Martindale, Andrew, 153
Martini, Simone, 153
Mary Tudor, 120, 679
Mas‘ûdi, 305
Mathew, Gervase, 160, 165, 473, 473n3
Mathews, Thomas F., 472n2
Matthews, John, 278, 349–51, 556
Matthews, J. R., 278n3
Matthews, W. E. “Willy,” 85–86, 105–6, 109
Mazdak, 432, 442–43
Mazzarino, Santo, 176, 178–79, 178nn10–11, 
181–82, 215, 215n, 226, 239, 299, 374, 378, 
380–81, 380n24
McCafferty ­family, 437
McClure, Judith, 339
McCullough, Rosetta, 23
McCullough, William, 23
McEachran, Frank “Kek,” 99–102, 99n, 
100nn4–5, 104, 117
McFarlane, Keith B. “Bruce,” 161–63, 161n5, 
163n, 187, 193, 199, 205, 230
Mechan, Frank, 130
Meckler, Michael, 683–84, 684n
Meeks, Wayne, 647, 647n4
Memling, Hans, 163
Mesrup (bishop), 431
Metcalf, Barbara, 548–49, 548n, 551–52, 551n, 
552nn9–10
Methodius of Olympus, 657
Meyer, Marc A., 604n
Michel, Tom, 531–32
Michelson, Dave, xv
Milk, Harvey, 579
Mill, John Stuart, 466
Millar, Fergus B. G., 221, 350, 379, 379n18, 639
Milne, James, 15n7
Milton, John, 144–45
Mohrmann, Christine, 665
Mollat, Michel, 555

index 
709
Momigliano, Arnaldo Dante, xii, 205–7, 
206nn1–2, 210, 228, 249, 263, 279, 281–82, 
300, 394, 435, 466, 543, 555, 605, 618, 661–71, 
663n
Mommsen, Theodor, 351
Mondésert, Claude, 626
Monk Gibbon, William “Gubb-­Gubb,” 5, 
59–60, 375
Monneret de Villard, Ugo, 388, 388n
Montagu, George, 12
Monteith, Charles, 248–49, 254
Montgomery-­Hyde, Harford, 24n
Moore, Henry, 257
Moore, Robert “Bob,” 243, 243n6
Morgan, David, 503
Morgan, Julia, 545
Morris, Rosemary, 339
Morris, Tom, 653n3
Morton, John (cardinal), 194, 198, 199,  
203
Moschus, John, 355
Mowrer, Edgar, 74
Mu’awiya, 410
Muhammad, 384–87, 408, 429, 433, 461, 520, 
523–24, 530
Mullen, Peter, 659n9
Munro, H. H. (“Saki”), 67
Murasaki Shikibu, 560
Murdoch, Iris, 669
Murphy, William Martin, 34
Murray, Robert, 649, 649n7
Murray, ­Sister Charles, 339
Mursi (Sudanese servant), 46
Mussolini, Benito, 3, 218, 500
Namier, Lewis, 114, 193, 230
Nasir, Hajji, 435
Nasser, Gamal Abdel, 528, 530
Naucratius, 658
Nautin, Pierre, 651, 652n1
Neill, Michael, 56n1
Nelson, Horatio, 12, 71
Neveu, Bruno, 251n
Newbold, Douglas, 95
Newman, John Henry (cardinal), 173, 283, 
510, 510n
Ngundeng (prophet), 40
Nicholas de Lange, 316, 316n7
Nicholson, Oliver, 339
Nietz­sche, Friedrich, 586
Nilsson, Martin, 334, 334n11
Norfolk, Duke of, 50
Obolensky, Dimitri, 159, 159nn2–3, 304, 356
O’Byrne, William, 13
O’Connell, Daniel, 71, 191
O’Dea, Jimmie, 67, 680
Olympiodorus of Thebes, 379
O’Neill, Conn, 9
O’Neill, Sean, 9
O’Neill dynasty, 684
Origen, 263, 264, 316, 449, 587, 609, 651–55, 
657
Ormsby, John, 18
Ormsby, John Robert, 18
O’Rorke, Terrence, 17n1, 18, 18n4
Ostrogorsky, Georg, 166, 166n2
Oswald, Saint, 393
Otto III, Emperor, 187
Outram, Dorinda, 541n5
Oxtoby, William, 505
Paine, Thomas, 287
Palladio, Andrea, 607
Pambo (desert ­father), 340
Panofsky, Erwin, 163
Pantin, William “Billy,” 339, 339n
Parker, Thomas, 188–89, 192–93, 206, 212
Parsons, Peter, 339
Pascal, Blaise, 108
Patlagean, Évelyne, xii, 555–59, 555n, 556n2, 
557n, 558nn4–7, 562, 615, 643
Patrick, Saint, 124, 128, 567, 603, 694
Paul, Saint, 88, 581, 647, 648
Paulinus of Nola, 505
Payne, Richard, 384n3, 410, 411n2, 412n
Peeters, Paul, 317, 317n
Pelagius, 247, 286, 654, 661

710 
index
Pellegrino, Michele, 263
Pelling, Christopher B. R., 373n1
Peterson, J. M., 78
Pharr, Clyde, 174
Philip II, King, 404
Philoxenos of Mabbug, 268, 314
Piero della Francesca, 553
Pietri, Charles, 513, 513n
Piganiol, André, 173–74, 173nn1–3, 177, 179, 181
Pirenne, Henri, 386–88, 386n8, 387n, 408, 
639–40
Planhol, Xavier de, 407, 407n5
Plato, 380, 391, 467
Plotinus, 255, 259, 371, 376, 380, 390, 391, 451, 
451n, 453, 470, 540, 573, 575, 618, 643, 657
Plutarch, 449–50, 539, 596–97
Pohl, Walter, 696
Polo, Marco, 606
Porphyry, 540, 657
Porter, C., 23n4
Powicke, F. Maurice, 161–62, 162n6, 242–43, 
242n4, 243n5, 389
Prescott, Hilda, 120, 120nn2–3, 121n, 257
Price, Richard, 339
Price, Simon, 643
Proclus, 476, 540, 572
Procopius of Caesarea, 280, 300, 305, 379
Proust, Marcel, 272
Prudentius, 230, 505
Pugin, Augustus, 517
Punta, Francesco del, 339
Purcell, Nicholas, 405n3
Purcell, Sally, 339
Quinton, Anthony “Tony,” 343, 343n2
Rabelais, François, 268
Rabinow, Paul, 586
Rauch, Ivo, 114n3
Raymond, John, 282–83
Reagan, Ronald, 224–25
Rebenich, Stefan, 176n6
Rebillard, Éric, 233n3
Redfield, Robert, 336n
Reeves, Marjorie, 256–58, 345
Reimitz, Helmut, xv
Rémondon, Roger, 359, 359n
Revell, Vivyenne Warren, 27, 66–67
Reynolds, Siân, 404, 405, 558
Reza, Shah, 416, 432, 480–81, 492, 503, 531, 
546, 680, 681, 682
Reza Khan, 481
Rezakhani, Khodadad, 497n
Richard II, King, 158, 160
Ripoll, Gisela, 693, 693n6
Robin, Christian, 385, 385n5
Robinson, Francis, 467–70, 468n, 469nn6–8, 
542, 550, 550n5, 553
Rollason, David, 339
Rory (dog), 64, 68, 75, 91
Rosen, Larry, 607
Rostam, 427
Rostovtzeff, Mikhail Ivanovitch, 129–30, 129n, 
172–73, 206, 223–24, 224n2, 374
Rouse, Paul, 26n
Rousseau, Jean-­Jacques, 108
Rousseau, Philip, 339
Rousselle, Aline, 614–15, 614n5, 614nn7–8, 
615n, 643
Rowse, A. L., 212
Rubin, Ze’ev, 309
Ruggini, Lellia Cracco, xii, 605–6, 605n, 615, 
683
Rûmi, Jalal ad Dîn, 418
Runciman, Steven, 150–51, 151n, 159, 166
Rurik, Prince, 159
Russell, Bertrand, 200
Russell, Conrad, 200
Russell, Donald Andrew, 344n5
Rutenberg, Jeannie, 456, 632–33
Rutherford, James, 15n8
Rychterová, Pavlína, 296
Safranek, Jan, 164, 200, 202–3, 404
Sahner, Christian, xv
Saint-­Clair, Archer, 643
Sainte Croix, Geoffrey de, 208–9, 317, 339, 
350

index 
711
Sainty, John, 152–53
Saladin, 532
Samuel (prophet), 315–16
Sanderson, Lillian Passmore, 463, 464n1
Sanderson, Neville “Sandy,” 463, 464n1, 
467, 527
Sasan, 423
Savonarola, Girolamo, 461
Scheyer, Ernst, 122–24, 123n, 166, 312
Schimmel, Annemarie, 473n4
Schneider, Dorothee, xv
Schubert, Franz, 589
Schwartz, Martin, 454
Sears, Gareth, 613n2
Seeck, Otto, 176–79, 176n7, 177nn8–9, 181–82, 
223
Seneca, 539
Se­nior, J.R.M. “the Duke,” 92–96, 98, 116, 
138, 347
Sennett, Richard, 588
Severus, Septimius, 309
Severus, Sulpicius, 613
Shabazz, Naseer, 521
Shahid, Irfan, 639
Shapur I, King, 423, 427, 443, 499–500
Sharpe, Matthew, 619n
Shaw, Brent D., 287, 287n2, 406, 562n, 697
Shaw, James, 23
Shaw, John, 23
Shelley, Percy Bysshe, 188
Shils, Edward, 542, 542n6, 670–71
Shorten, Monica, 143
Sièyes, Abbé, 191
Silvers, Bob, 474, 520–22, 538, 639
Sinclair, Linette, 65
Sisman, Adam, 671n
Sizgorich, Tom, 389, 389n, 525, 525n
Šmahel, František, 295–97, 295n, 297n
Smalley, Beryl, 169, 169n6, 228, 257, 448, 569
Snow, C. P., 86, 186, 186n
Socrates, 391, 402
Sophocles, 198, 527
Soranus, 596
Soranzo, Giacomo, 409
Sorel, Julian, 340
Sosipatra, 657–58
Southern, Richard “Dick,” 283, 304–6, 342, 
391, 391n14, 395, 395n4
Sparrow, John, 201, 307, 307n
Speck, Henry, 424, 426
Spender, Stephen, 139–40
Spinoza, Baruch, 662, 666
Stalin, Joseph, 100
Stancliffe, Clare, 339
Stern, Samuel, 304, 306–8, 325, 385, 388
Stewart, Thomas, 286–87
Stockwell, Anthony, 467
Stone, Lawrence, 234, 642
Stray, Christopher, 373n1
Stronach, David, 482–83
Stubbs, William, 157, 304
Sukarno, 531
Sussex, Earl of, 9
Syme, Ronald, 193, 205, 230, 277, 277n, 302, 
334, 334n12, 349, 378
Symeon Stylites, 340, 352, 354, 359, 360, 
362–64, 385
Symmachus, Quintus Aurelius, 176, 699
Synesius of Cyrene, 271
Synge, Ellen, 5
Synge, Emily, 5
Synge, John Millington, 5, 527
Tacitus, 208
Taha, Abdel Rahman Ali, 38n5
Tanabe, Katsumi, 496, 496n1
Tannous, Jack, xv, 389, 389n, 526, 526n, 
641n
Tarleton, Roland, 19
Tatlow, Anthony, 123
Taylor, Charles, 201, 201n
Tchaikovsky, Pyotr, 150
Tchalenko, Georges, 354, 354n, 359
Tempio, Rob, xv
Tertullian, 630, 648
Testa, Federico, 619n
Testa, Rita Lizzi, 605, 605n
Thatcher, Margaret, 516

712 
index
Theissen, Gerd, 647, 647n3, 647n4
Thélamon, Françoise, 694, 694n9
Theodoret of Cyrrhus (bishop), 352
Theodosius I, Emperor, 240, 435, 509
Thérèse of Lisieux, Saint, 530
Thomas, Keith, 322
Thomas à Kempis, 119–20, 146, 287
Thompson, Harry, 97
Thorne, Harry, 138
Thorne, Richard, 113n, 114, 114n2
Thorne, Rosie, 138
Thucydides, 221, 279
Tillemont, Louis Sébastien le Nain de, 
250–51, 251n, 253, 268
Tinbergen, Niko, 141
Tolstoy, Leo, 201
Tomlin, Roger, 278
Totti (curé), 155
Toubert, Pierre, 218, 218n8
Townsend, Rita, 463, 519
Toynbee, Jocelyn, 215–16
Toynbee, Philip, 390
Trajan, Emperor, 277
Trdat (Tiridates), King, 431
Trevelyan, Charles, 6
Trevor-­Roper, Hugh, 168, 234, 671
Trigg, Joseph W., 654n
Udal’cova, Zenija, 221
Ullmann, Walter, 167–68, 167n4
Vaggione, Richard, 316, 316n8, 339
Valentinian I, 278
Valerian, Emperor, 423, 427, 499–500
Van Bladel, Kevin, 384n3
Van Dam, Raymond, 400n2
Van der Meer, Frits, 247–48, 248n
Van Tassell, Priscilla, 607n
Varma, Swathi Thirumai Rama, 14
Vassar, Matthew, 461
Veer, Albert de, 268
Velázquez, Isabel, 693n6
Vera, Domenico, 605
Vergil, 87
Veyne, Paul, 555, 559–62, 559n, 560nn9–11, 
561n, 587–89, 587n, 611, 615–16, 628, 628n8, 
646
Victorinus, Marius, 617–18
Völker, Walter, 652n1
Voltaire, 108
Vos, Dirk de, 163
Wain, John, 144n2
Walker, Joel, 384n3
Walzer, Richard, 211
Ward, Cyril, 60–61
Ward-­Perkins, Bryan, 216n6, 370n
Ward-­Perkins, John, 216, 218, 219n
Warren, Ada Grey, 5, 8, 13, 21, 25, 27–28, 
32–33
Warren, Bobby. See De Warren, Robert 
“Bobby”
Warren, Freda “Teedah,” 24, 66–67,  
69–70, 76, 186, 213, 313, 545, 601, 636–37, 
672–73
Warren, Henry, 22–24, 33
Warren, John Grant, 21–22
Warren, Mervyn, 22, 681
Warren, Robert Gibson “Bob,” 21, 24–29, 
32–33, 49–50, 52, 64, 637
Warren, Thomas, 21n
Warren, William, 22
Warren ­family, 21–22, 29, 680, 682
Waugh, Evelyn, 140–41
Weber, Max, 552
Weingreen, Jacob, 127, 312–13, 312n2
Weisweiler, John, 473n2
Weitzmann, Kurt, 540
Wellington, Duke of, 11, 93
Wells, H. G., 91
Wermelinger, Otto, 339
White, Stephen D., 322n4
White­house, David, 640, 640n4
Whiteman, Anne, 345–46
Wickham, Chris, 339
Wilde, Oscar, 70
Wilde, William, 70
Wilks, Michael, 466

index 
713
William of Wykeham, 139
Williams, C. Dickerman, 224n4
Willis, Charles Armine “Chunky,” 40–41, 
324
Wilson, Thomas “Tom,” 67, 69–70
Wittgenstein, Ludwig, 144
Wolsey, Thomas, 108, 111
Wood, Ian, xii, xv, 339, 567, 692n
Wood, Michael, 310
Woodham-­Smith, Cecil, 6nn1–3
Woolley, Leonard, 128
Wormald, Patrick, 339
Wreidt, Mrs. (medium), 376
Wycliffe, John, 296
Wynn, Anthony, 438
Wynne ­family, 10, 11, 17–18
Xerxes (Ahusuerus), 419
Yaqut al-­Hamawi, 435
Yazdegerd II, Shah, 488
Yeats, W. B., 5, 17–19, 18n3, 19n5, 59–60, 213, 
375–76, 403, 403n5
York, Duke of, 10
Zachhuber, Johannes, 630n
Zaehner, Robin C., 214–15, 214n4, 307, 325
Zamalek (priest), 531
Zanker, Paul, 571, 571n
Žiška z Trocnova, Jan, 31, 296
Zola, Émile, 532
Zoroaster, 301
Zweig, Stefan, 123


