Appendix 9
Absolute Logical Constants
Symbols hold the selfsame significance for thinking as
did the discovery of using the wind to sail cross-wind for
navigation. Let no one be contemptuous of signs! A good
deal depends on a practical selection on them.
(Frege 1882b, 107 [1964b, 156])
The question of which expressions should be regarded as logical constants can only
be stated relatively, namely, always only in relation to the respective logical system
in which they are used – unless they are expressions of logical vocabulary which
express the logical form of propositions (in the sense of § 83) and are needed to
render rules and laws which belong to the common core of all logical systems.
These expressions could reasonably be called ‘absolute logical constants’.
If one asks for secure criteria by which it is possible to decide whether an ex-
pression is an absolute logical constant and belongs to the vocabulary that is suit-
able to fix and express the logical form of propositions, it suffices to point out four
marks which such an expression must exhibit:
1.
An absolute logical constant is an expression with one or more than one
empty place, such that all these places are suited to be filled either by a con-
cept expression or by a declarative proposition, and by filling all empty pla-
ces in each case a declarative proposition arises.
2.
An absolute logical constant is, as a component of a declarative proposition,
capable of fixing simply through its meaning that this proposition follows regu-
larly from other declarative propositions or that other declarative propositions
follow regularly from it, regardless of the content of all the components that
take the place of concept- or propositional variables in this proposition. (Here
regular consequence is meant in the sense explained in § 43, definition 4.)
3.
An absolute logical constant is an expression which can be used to render a
stable hierarchical conceptual relation (in line with Figure 1 of § 1 and § 6) with
a declarative proposition which makes explicit what the proposition applies to
if it is true.
4.
Expressions which satisfy the first three criteria can only count as absolute
logical constants if an analysis of their meaning does not show them to be
composed of expressions of which at least one already satisfies one of the
first three criteria. –
https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110784930-021

Comment: According to these four criteria, e.g., the expressions ‘. . . is greater
than . . .’, ‘. . . is equal to . . .’, ‘. . . is identical with . . .’ are not absolute logical
constants. All three satisfy the second criterion. For whether a proposition of the
form ‘if x is greater than y, then z is greater than y’ follows regularly from a prop-
osition of the form ‘z is greater than x’ rests only on the meaning of ‘. . . is greater
than . . .’, regardless of what the variables ‘x’, ‘y’, and ‘z’ stand for. But since these
variables can be taken neither as concept variables nor as propositional varia-
bles, the first criterion is not satisfied. (The reasons why the third and fourth crite-
ria are not satisfied either can be easily seen as well.)
One might have supposed that expressions like ‘most . . . are . . .’ or ‘only a
few . . . are . . .’ belong to the vocabulary of formal logic in the narrow sense.
They do satisfy the first two criteria, since, e.g., a proposition of the form ‘only a
few α are not β’ follows regularly from a proposition of the form ‘most α are β’,
and both ‘α’ and ‘β’ are concept variables. For this reason, they are treated as logi-
cal constants in an extended syllogistic. Yet we can see that they do not satisfy the
fourth criterion by analyzing the meaning of propositions of the form ‘most α are
β’. Such an analysis shows that these propositions do not only contain statements
about the relative amount of objects that fall under the concepts α and β or under
the concepts α and not-β, respectively, but they also contain statements which
can be rendered by two propositions of the form ‘some α are β’ and ‘some α are
not β’, whose logical constants each satisfy the first three criteria.
Expressions which tend to be treated as logical constants in so-called deontic
logic – namely, the (deontic) modal expressions ‘it is required that . . .’, ‘it is for-
bidden that . . .’, and ‘it is permitted that . . .’ – should also be subjected to an
analysis of this kind. It is clear first of all that they satisfy the first two criteria,
since for arbitrary interpretations of the propositional variable ‘p’ it holds, e.g.,
that a proposition of the form ‘it is not permitted that not p’ follows regularly
from ‘it is required that p’. However, one can easily see that these expressions
only abbreviate more complex logical expressions which are tied to a specific
content. This content stems from the way each of these expressions points implic-
itly to the validity of a tacitly assumed norm, whether it be a moral principle, a
legal injunction, or a command. Thus, ‘it is required that p’ has the form of a nec-
essary proposition and is equivalent to ‘L [if the norm in question is not violated,
then p]’. Similarly, ‘it is forbidden that p’ means the same as ‘L [if the norm in
question is not violated, then N p]’, and ‘it is permitted that p’ means the same as
‘NL [if the norm in question is not violated, then p]’. It is due to this meaning that,
while p follows logically from L p (as per § 60, rule (IV. 1)), a proposition p follows
neither logically nor regularly from a proposition of the form ‘it is required that
p’. Rather, p only follows regularly from this requirement if the norm which it
implicitly points to is not violated but is obeyed.
366
Appendix 9

Finally, hypothetical propositions of a specific content also hide behind ex-
pressions which are treated as elementary logical constants in so-called temporal
logic, namely, the (temporal) modal expressions ‘it has always been the case that
. . .’ and ‘it will always be the case that . . .’.274 Thus, ‘it has always been the case
that p’ is equivalent to ‘L [if p is in the past, then p]’. Similarly, ‘it will always be
the case that p’ is equivalent to ‘L [if p is in the future, then p]’. p can only be
derived from both formulas if the assumption expressed by the respective ‘if’-
clause of these formulas is satisfied.
According to a widespread doctrine, the most important logical constants in
modern predicate logic are the so-called quantifiers ‘∀. . . (. . .)’ (‘for every . . . it
holds that: . . .’) and ‘∃. . . (. . .)’ (‘there is a . . . such that: . . .’). That these expres-
sions are likewise abbreviations of more complex expressions I have shown in
§§ 31 to 35 (cf. § 64 and § 65).
The expressions (a) ‘it has always been the case that . . .’ and (b) ‘it will always be the case
that . . .’ are elementary expressions of temporal logic insofar as one can trace back to them (c)
‘it has been the case that . . .’ and (d) ‘it will be the case that . . .’, respectively, since (c) is equiva-
lent to ‘N (a) N . . .’ and (d) is equivalent to ‘N (b) N . . .’.
Absolute Logical Constants
367


