Yasunari Miyagi*, Toshiyuki Hata and Takahito Miyake
Fetal brain activity and the free energy principle
https://doi.org/10.1515/jpm-2023-0092
Received March 6, 2023; accepted April 12, 2023;
published online April 26, 2023
Abstract
Objectives: To study whether the free energy principle can
explain fetal brain activity and the existence of fetal con-
sciousness via a chaotic dimension derived using artiﬁcial
intelligence.
Methods: In this observational study, we used a four-
dimensional ultrasound technique obtained to collect
images of fetal faces from pregnancies at 27–37 weeks of
gestation, between February and December 2021. We
developed an artiﬁcial intelligence classiﬁer that recog-
nizes fetal facial expressions, which are thought to relate to
fetal brain activity. We then applied the classiﬁer to video
ﬁles of facial images to generate each expression category’s
probabilities. We calculated the chaotic dimensions from
the probability lists, and we created and investigated the
free energy principle’s mathematical model that was
assumed to be linked to the chaotic dimension. We used a
Mann–Whitney test, linear regression test, and one-way
analysis of variance for statistical analysis.
Results: The chaotic dimension revealed that the fetus
had dense and sparse states of brain activity, which ﬂuc-
tuated at a statistically signiﬁcant level. The chaotic
dimension and free energy were larger in the sparse state
than in the dense state.
Conclusions: The ﬂuctuating free energy suggests con-
sciousness seemed to exist in the fetus after 27 weeks.
Keywords: artiﬁcial intelligence; chaos; facial recognition;
fetus; free energy; ultrasonography.
Introduction
While little is known about fetal brain activity, fetal ex-
pressions can be observed in four-dimensional (4D) ultra-
sound images [1, 2] and are believed to relate to such
activity [3, 4]. We have created a novel artiﬁcial intelligence
(AI) classiﬁer and analyzed seven types of fetal facial
expressions – eye blinking, neutral, mouthing, scowling,
smiling, tongue expulsion, and yawning – in videos from 4D
ultrasound equipment [5, 6]. We embedded the obtained
seven-dimensional time-series conﬁdence score lists in a
multidimensional
dimensional
space
and
performed
chaotic analysis. We have found two diﬀerent states –
dense and sparse – of conﬁdence scores, with signiﬁcant
diﬀerences in the correlation dimension [7]. The meaning
of the value of this chaotic dimension in itself, however,
was diﬃcult to understand.
The free energy principle with active inference is a
comprehensive theory that attempts to explain the structure
and function of cognition and the brain’s behavior [8–11].
The theory is based on a variational Bayesian estimate to
provide a comprehensive explanation of perception,
action, emotion, sentiment, and decision-making. For any
self-organized system to be in equilibrium within its envi-
ronment, the agent performs active inference to minimize
the system’s informational free energy and to reduce the
prediction error from the current presumption to the
generated model. An agent using a free energy formulation
of perception adjusts its internal states and sampling of the
environment to minimize their free energy [11]. To our
knowledge, no reports have evaluated evaluating fetal
brain function with free energy. We, therefore, used the
free energy principle to create a model that describes fetal
brain function in terms of facial expressions. We then
examined the model’s relationship to the chaotic dimen-
sion and studied fetal brain function and consciousness.
Materials and methods
In our previous article [7], we described our method for acquiring
fetal facial expression data. In the present retrospective, non-
interventional study, we obtained informed consent from all partici-
pants at Miyake Clinic (Okayama, Japan) between February 1 and
December 31, 2021, and enrolled them, with data fully deidentiﬁed. The
study was approved by the Institutional Review Board of Miyake Clinic
(Institutional Review Board number 2019–10) [5, 6] and according to
the declaration of Helsinki. Stored videos of fetal faces from
*Corresponding author: Yasunari Miyagi, MD, PhD, Director,
Department of Gynecology, Miyake Ofuku Clinic, 393-1 Ofuku, Minami
Ward, Okayama, Okayama 701-0204, Japan; and Representative, Medical
Data Labo, 289-48 Yamasaki, Naka Ward, Okayama, Okayama 703-8267,
Japan, Phone: +81-86-281-2020, Fax: +81-86-281-7575,
E-mail: ymiyagi@mac.com. https://orcid.org/0000-0003-0962-033X
Toshiyuki Hata, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Miyake Clinic,
Okayama, Japan; and Department of Perinatology and Gynecology, Kagawa
University Graduate School of Medicine, Kagawa, Japan
Takahito Miyake, Department of Gynecology, Miyake Ofuku Clinic,
Okayama, Japan; and Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Miyake
Clinic, Okayama, Japan
J. Perinat. Med. 2023; aop

consecutive singleton pregnancies of outpatients in routine conven-
tional practice at 27–37 weeks of gestation, taken at a rate of 10.008
frames per second (via GE Voluson E10 BT20 [GE HealthCare, Chicago,
IL, USA]) with a four-dimensional ultrasound technique, were trans-
ferred to an oﬄine AI system at Medical Data Labo (Okayama, Japan).
Each video frame was converted into separated images and given an
original AI classiﬁer [6] for the seven conﬁdence scores in each
expression category. We obtained a seven-dimensional vector
comprising conﬁdence scores of the time series for each fetus as
follows:
xt = {xt1, xt2, …, xt7}T
where xt is the seven fetal facial expressions at time, t.
The conﬁdence score proﬁle was subjectively classiﬁed into two
categories: (1) dense, showing substantial ﬂuctuation of the numerical
value, and (2) sparse, showing little ﬂuctuation.
The vector was divided by a length of 200 frames, consisting of
either dense or sparse time, and each unit was deﬁned as a set. Chaotic
analysis was applied to all sets by gestational week, mother’s parity,
fetus’ sex, and dense/sparse proﬁle [7].
Free energy principle for fetal facial expressions
The free energy, F, in generating fetal expressions using the free energy
principle is as follows:
F õ, μ
(
) = DKL Q s∼, u∼⃒⃒⃒⃒μ
(
) ‖ P s∼, u∼⃒⃒⃒⃒õ
(
)
[
] −lnP o∼⃒⃒⃒⃒mdl
(
)
μt = arg minμF({o0, …, ot+1}, μ)
at = arg mina∑
Ω
P(ot+1|ot, a)F({o0, …, ot+1}, μt)
x ∈a
õ = (o1, o2, …, ot)
˜s = (s1, s2, … st)
˜u = (u1, u2, … ut)
where a is actions, DKL is Kullback–Leibler divergence [12], mdl is a
model, ot is observations, P is generative density, Q is recognition den-
sity, st is hidden states, u is prediction of the result of causing an action
[13], Ω is a set of observations, μ is suﬃcient statistics [9], and µt is
perception.
When facial expressions of a fetus are focused,
x ≈a
Chaotic analysis
We calculated the chaotic dimensions of fetal facial expressions. The
chaotic analysis methodology was as follows in our previous article [7]:
“We applied the seven-dimensional vector to a practical algorithm
to determine the character of strange attractors [14–18] to analyze multi-
dimensional data. For a seven-dimensional vector of a time series, we
reconstructed the vector xt by shifting time τ.
Yj = {xjk
T, xj, k+τ
T, …, xj, k+(m−1)τ
T}, (k = 1, 2, …, Nj)
where τ is the time, j is the facial category number, m is the embedding
dimension, and N is the number of video frames.
We then calculated the correlation dimension, D2, as follows:
Cj(r) = 1
Nj
2 ∑
Ni
f =1
∑
Ni
g=1
Q(r −
⃒⃒⃒⃒Y jf −Yjg)
pj = 1
Nij
∑
Nj
g=1
Q(r −
⃒⃒⃒⃒Y jf −Yjg
⃒⃒⃒⃒)
D2j = lim
r→0
logCj(r)
log r
= lim
r→o
∑
Nj
j=1 p2
j
log r
where r is {r ∈R | r > 0} and Q is a Heaviside step function.
We then obtained generalized dimensions [19], Dq, as follows:
Dqj =
1
q −1 lim
r→0
log ∑n(r)
j=1 pq
j
log r
where n(r) is the number of spheres required to cover the object (orbit)
with a sphere of radius r, and q is {q ∈R}. We obtained the capacity
dimension, D0, as follows:
D0j = −lim
r→0
lognj(r)
log r
We obtained the information dimension, D1, as follows:
D1j = lim
r→0
log ∑
nj(r)
j=1
pj log pj
log r
We applied these chaos analyses not only for a seven-dimensional
vector, {Y1
T, Y2
T, …, Y7
T}T but also each element of the vector of category
Yj;{j=1, 2, … , 7}.
When D0, D1, and Dq appeared incorrectly calculated because of
very low conﬁdence scores or inappropriateness of the structure of the
attractor itself, we did not use the values of these dimensions for our
analysis” [7].
A simple invented sample case of free energy and fetal facial
movement was demonstrated.
Development environment
The development tools and conditions used are: Intel Core i5 with
Windows 10 (Redmond, WA, United States), 32 GB (Santa Clara, CA,
United States), and NVIDIA GeForce GTX 1080 Ti (Santa Clara, CA, United
States) and Wolfram Language 12.3 (Wolfram Research, Champaign, IL,
United States).
Statistical analysis
We used Wolfram Language & Mathematica 12.3 (Wolfram Research,
Champaign, IL, United States) for all analyses, and used the Mann–
Whitney test, t-test, linear regression analysis, and analysis of covari-
ance (ANCOVA). We set p<0.05 as statistically signiﬁcant.
Results
Figures 1 and 2, respectively, show samples of the sparse
and dense statuses. The fetal expression image with the bar
chart of the seven conﬁdence scores generated by AI and
the line graph of the conﬁdence score time series proﬁles
are shown in the upper and lower panels, respectively.
2
Miyagi et al.: Fetal brain activity and free energy principle

Each is a still image from a video in the sparse and dense
statuses of the conﬁdence score lists. A sparse score list
shows the score was concentrated on a speciﬁc category of
fetal facial expression, while dense shows the categories of
expression categories are dispersed. The correlation,
information, and capacity dimensions of the seven-
dimensional time series lists were 1.85, 2.23, and 2.25, and
0.79, 1.40, and 1.94 in the sparse and dense statuses,
respectively. All three dimensions for the sparse status
were larger than for the dense status.
Figure 3 shows the correlation dimensions of the two
statuses of the conﬁdence score lists of the seven facial
expressions for all sets as a function of the gestational
week. The two linear regression lines for sparse and dense
were parallel and the intercepts were diﬀerent per
ANCOVA (p=0.032). The common slope was −0.00567 and
the 95 % conﬁdence interval of the intercept diﬀerence was
0.0121–0.2602. The median and mean ± standard deviation
values of the correlation dimension were 1.19, 1.175 ± 0.220
and 1.33, 1.307 ± 0.274 for the dense and sparse statuses,
respectively. The correlation dimension of the sparse status
was signiﬁcantly larger than for the dense status (median,
p=0.0471; mean, p=0.0353) [7]. There was no diﬀerence in
variance between the two statuses.
There were no signiﬁcant diﬀerences in mothers’ parity
and fetus’ sex for the dense and sparse statuses.
A simple invented sample case of free energy and
fetal facial movement was demonstrated in Figure 4.
Assume the fetus is mouthing to swallow amniotic ﬂuid
once the stomach is empty. The stomach is emptied as
gastric peristalsis expels the stomach contents into the
duodenum. The sensory information that the stomach has
emptied is sent to the brain, which issues instructions via
the motor neurons to the mouthing action to ﬁll the stom-
ach with amniotic ﬂuid. This initiates a decrease in free
energy. As the stomach expands, the free energy decreases
and reaches a minimum when the stomach is fully inﬂated.
At the same time, mouthing activity decreases and facial
Figure 1: A sample of the sparse status. A sample of a moment from a video as the sparse status of the conﬁdence score is listed by artiﬁcial intelligence.
This was a female fetus at 29 weeks, 5 days of gestation. The mother was 26 years old. The conﬁdence score proﬁle is shown in the bar chart in the upper
right graph. Time-series changes in the conﬁdence scores are shown in the line graph below. The artiﬁcial intelligence determined that neutral dominated
the score for this expression. The correlation, information, and capacity dimensions of the seven-dimensional time series lists were 1.85, 2.23, and 2.25,
respectively. The correlation dimensions of eye-blinking, mouthing, neutral, scowling, smiling, tongue expulsion, and yawning were “not available,” 1.62,
1.81, 1.80, 1.55, 1.80, and 1.80, respectively.
Miyagi et al.: Fetal brain activity and free energy principle
3

movements become quiescent. The chronological variation
of mouthing activity, volume of ﬂuid in the stomach, and
free energy are shown.
Discussion
We developed a novel model to explain the chaotic dimen-
sion with the free energy principle by a combination of
formulas. Through this, we could interpret fetal brain ac-
tivity using the free energy principle. The time series conﬁ-
dence score proﬁles from AI had sparse and dense statuses
(see Figures 1 and 2). This suggests at least two diﬀerent
states of fetal brain function. As seen in Figure 3, we were
also able to show for the ﬁrst time that the sparse status is
signiﬁcantly greater regardless of the gestational week. The
medians of the sparse and dense statuses were 1.33 and 1.19,
respectively, and diﬀered signiﬁcantly [7]. In the present
study, we applied the free energy principle to fetal brain
activity and found that the chaotic dimension might reﬂect
free energy. The speciﬁc concept was easy to understand by
looking at Figure 4.
In the free energy principle equation in this study, the
Kullback–Leibler divergence, an information-based mea-
sure of disparity between two probability distributions
[12], was used to reduce the diﬀerence between the
generative and recognition density distributions. Per the
free energy principle, the brain function acts in such a way
that free energy as a cost function is reduced by active
inference, thereby providing a comprehensive explana-
tion of actions, emotions, feelings, and decision-making.
No method has been established to determine or measure
free energy directly. Additionally, quantifying brain ac-
tivity is diﬃcult because there is no way to quantitatively
measure such activity, the variables and parameters
involved in brain activity are likely to be extremely large,
Figure 2: A sample of the dense status. A sample of a moment from a video as the dense status of the conﬁdence score is listed by artiﬁcial intelligence.
This was a female fetus at 28 weeks, 4 days of gestation. The mother was 35 years old. The conﬁdence score proﬁle is shown in the bar chart in the upper
right graph. Time-series changes in the conﬁdence scores are shown in the line graph below. The artiﬁcial intelligence judged that these expressions were
distributed among neutral, mouthing, smiling, yawning, etc., and could not be considered speciﬁc expressions. The correlation, information, and capacity
dimensions of the seven-dimensional time series lists were 0.79, 1.40, and 1.94, respectively. The correlation dimensions of eye-blinking, mouthing,
neutral, scowling, smiling, tongue expulsion, and yawning were 1.50, 0.82, 0.81, 0.91, 1.01, 0.88, and 0.90, respectively.
4
Miyagi et al.: Fetal brain activity and free energy principle

and the models used to generate predictions are quite
complex because of the extensive learning that takes place
after birth.
Considering the chaotic dimension of the conﬁdence
score proﬁle of expressions, the sparse status can be inter-
preted as high free energy because a speciﬁc expression
Figure 4: A simple invented sample case of free energy and fetal facial movement. Assume the fetus is mouthing to swallow amniotic ﬂuid once the
stomach is empty. The stomach is emptied as gastric peristalsis expels the stomach contents into the duodenum. The sensory information that the
stomach has emptied is sent to the brain, which issues instructions via the motor neurons to the mouthing action to ﬁll the stomach with amniotic ﬂuid.
This initiates a decrease in free energy. As the stomach expands, the free energy decreases and reaches a minimum when the stomach is fully inﬂated. At
the same time, mouthing activity decreases and facial movements become quiescent. Here, the stomach volume is set to 10 mL. In the left panel,
chronological variation of mouthing activity (mL/min), volume of ﬂuid in the stomach (mL), and free energy (bits) are shown in blue, green, and red,
respectively. In the right panel, the relationship between mouthing activity, volume of ﬂuid in the stomach, and free energy is shown as dots in a three-
dimensional graph. The interval between dots corresponds to 1 s. The red line is the free energy value at each point.
Figure 3: Correlation dimensions of the sparse and dense status of the conﬁdence score lists of the seven fetal facial expressions as a function of the
gestational week. The regression line was y=−0.0108±0.0102 x + 1.5136±0.3323 (coeﬃcient±standard error) and y=0.0099±0.0148 x+1.2752±0.4945 for
the dense and sparse statuses, respectively. The two regression lines for the sparse and dense statuses were parallel and the intercepts were diﬀerent per
analysis of covariance test (p=0.032). The common slope was −0.00567 and the 95 % conﬁdence interval of the intercept diﬀerence was 0.0121–0.2602. As
the gestation weeks progressed, the correlation dimension tended to remain unchanged or gradually decrease in the same manner. The correlation
dimension was 1.19 [1.03–1.35], 1.175±0.2202 (median, [quartile 1–3], mean±standard deviation) and 1.33 [1.15–1.49], 1.307±0.274 for the dense and
sparse statuses, respectively. The correlation dimension of the sparse status was signiﬁcantly larger than that of the dense status (p=0.0471 for median
and p=0.0353 for mean). There was no diﬀerence by variance between the two statuses.
Miyagi et al.: Fetal brain activity and free energy principle
5

accounts for most of the conﬁdence score, suggesting con-
sciousness is focused. Therefore, as shown in Table 1, when
the conﬁdence score list proﬁle is dense, the dimension is
small, and when the dimension is small, the complexity is
small and the free energy may be low; and therefore, the
fetal brain activity may be relaxed. When the proﬁle is
sparse, the dimension is large, and when the dimension is
large, the complexity is large and the free energy may be
high, while the fetal brain activity may be excited or
stressed. Also, although the chaotic dimension values that
may reﬂect fetal brain activity quantitatively do not directly
represent the free energy values, they can be considered of
equivalent magnitude. The fact that the chaotic dimension
by conﬁdence score proﬁle could be measured indirectly
suggests the free energy concept’s existence.
As shown in Figure 3, the gestation weeks were not
related to correlation dimension changes. We speculate
that the chaotic dimension or free energy of the relaxed
state that can be assumed in the dense state tends to
decrease with gestation’s progress, which may be the fetus
gradually learning about and acclimating to its environ-
ment. However, the active brain activity assumed in the
sparse state does not decrease as the gestation weeks
progress but rather shows a slight upward trend, which
may be the fetal brain trying to reﬂect tension and learning
about the unknown situation in utero. No statistical sig-
niﬁcance was detected, but a more accurate method to
observe fetal brain activity may ﬁnd signiﬁcant diﬀerences.
Motor action can be observed as a measure of fetal
brain activity. Therefore, fetal facial expressions and fetal
movements may represent key indicators for assessing
fetal brain activity. Fetal movement is easy to assess in the
second trimester of pregnancy, but in the third trimester,
the ratio of fetal volume to uterine volume is relatively
large; thus, there is no quantitative method for assessing
fetal
movement.
Fetal
facial
expressions
are
easily
observed in the third trimester and can reﬂect various
brain activity, including quale, rather than fetal move-
ments. Fetal facial expressions were the ﬁrst subject of our
quantitative measures of fetal brain activity, as we were
the ﬁrst to use AI to measure the chaotic dimension from
the conﬁdence score proﬁle of fetal facial expressions [7].
In living organisms, active inference is important for
development and survival because canonical neural net-
works that optimize their cost functions implicitly perform
active inference [20]. Though there is no way to measure
and evaluate fetal active inference, if facial muscle move-
ments
and fetal
movements
are
behaviors
of
self-
recognition, active inference may also be a fetal brain
function.
Whether the fetus is conscious is an interesting ques-
tion. Per our study, we believe that the change in the chaotic
dimension also changes the free energy. Active inference has
a purposeful and self-centered aspect with the hallmarks of
consciousness [21]. The theory of consciousness from the
free energy principle also says that consciousness is a pro-
cess of matching recognition density with generative density
[22]. If we consider that chaotic dimensional change corre-
sponds to free energy change, this is a discovery of free
energy change’s process. The discovery of this dynamism
can therefore be considered as detecting the presence of
consciousness in the fetus after at least 27 weeks of gestation.
Each fetal expression’s meaning remains unknown.
Extending our speculation to adults, a blank or neutral
expression is likely present both during sleep and
contemplation. One might quantitatively measure brain
activity by REM and non-REM states during sleep. During
sleep, information to be stored is sent from the hippo-
campus to the cortex, and unnecessary synaptic connec-
tions are organized [23, 24]. The dimensionality was, in fact,
high when neutral was dominant in expressions, suggest-
ing that free energy was high and the fetus may have
considerable brain activity. Technical limitations with
ultrasound equipment still prevent the simultaneous
recording of fetal eye movement and facial expressions.
With this capability, measuring the dimensions of brain
activity via fetal facial expressions during sleep would then
advance our understanding of fetal central nervous system
development.
There were some limitations to this study. First, the
extent of environmental inﬂuences, such as the maternal
condition, is unknown. The dimensional change, or free
energy change, associated with the growth of a particular
fetus is also unknown. Additionally, no mathematical qual-
itative distinction was made between conﬁdence score
proﬁles’ vectors. If a certain facial expression occupies the
majority of the state, any facial expression will have a higher
dimensionality. Also, though our AI showed 99.6 % accuracy
in recognizing fetal facial expressions, anthropometric
variance might aﬀect AI development and the AI cannot
classify unknown images [11]. Finally, chaos analysis may
generally require long-term observation. Obtaining gener-
alized dimensions with high accuracy is not always possible
Table : Estimated relationship of chaotic dimension, free energy, and
fetal brain activity regarding conﬁdence score proﬁles of fetal facial
expressions by artiﬁcial intelligence.
Conﬁdence score
proﬁle
Chaotic
dimension
Free
energy
Brain
activity
Sparse
Larger
Higher
More active
Dense
Smaller
Lower
Less active
6
Miyagi et al.: Fetal brain activity and free energy principle

because the attractor does not always exist. Use of higher
frame rates for recording might resolve this.
Conclusions
The chaotic dimensional values from the AI-calculated
conﬁdence scores related to brain activity had sparse and
dense states. These could be inferred as related to free
energy. It could also be inferred that there were changes in
free energy, from the variation in the chaotic dimension
values. The detection of the process of free energy change
in the fetal brain suggested possible existence of con-
sciousness in the fetus after at least 27 weeks of gestation.
Research funding: None.
Author
contributions:
All
authors
have
accepted
responsibility for the entire content of this manuscript and
approved its submission. The roles of the authors were as
follows. Yasunari Miyagi: Conceptualization, methodology,
software, formal analysis, investigation, data curation,
writing original draft, reviewing and editing, visualization,
supervision. Toshiyuki Hata: Validation, resources, data
curation,
review
and
editing,
supervision,
project
administration. Takahito Miyake: Validation, resources,
review and editing, supervision, project administration.
Competing interests: The authors have no conﬂicts of
interest.
Informed consent: Informed consent was obtained from
all individuals included in this study. The study was
approved by the Institutional Review Board of Miyake
Clinic (Institutional Review Board number 2019–10).
Ethical
approval:
Research
involving
human
subjects
complied with all relevant national regulations, institutional
policies and is in accordance with the tenets of the Helsinki
Declaration (as revised in 2013), and has been approved by the
authors’ Institutional Review Board (IRB No. 2019–10).
Copyright: Manuscripts are accepted on condition of
transfer of copyright to the publisher. Once the manuscript
has been accepted, it may not be published elsewhere
without the consent of the copyright holders.
References
1. Hata T, Kanenishi K, Hanaoka U, Marumo G. HDIive and 4D ultrasound
in the assessment of fetal facial expressions. Donald Sch J Ultrasound
Obstet Gynecol 2015;9:44–50.
2. AboEllail MAM, Hata T. Fetal face as important indicator of fetal brain
function. J Perinat Med 2017;45:729–36.
3. Hata T, Dai SY, Marumo G. Ultrasound for evaluation of fetal
neurobehavioural development: from 2-D to 4-D ultrasound. Infant
Child Dev 2010;19:99–118.
4. Hata T. Current status of fetal neurodevelopmental assessment: 4D
ultrasound study. J Obstet Gynaecol Res 2016;42:1211–21.
5. Miyagi Y, Hata T, Bouno S, Koyanagi A, Miyake T. Recognition of facial
expression of fetuses by artiﬁcial intelligence (AI). J Perinat Med 2021;
49:596–603.
6. Miyagi Y, Hata T, Bouno S, Koyanagi A, Miyake T. Recognition of fetal
facial expressions using artiﬁcial intelligence deep learning. Donald
Sch J Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2021;15:223–8.
7. Miyagi Y, Hata T, Bouno S, Koyanagi A, Miyake T. Artiﬁcial intelligence to
understand ﬂuctuation of fetal brain activity by recognizing facial
expressions. Int J Gynecol Obstet 2022;1–9. https://doi.org/10.1002/
ijgo.14569.
8. Friston K, Kilner J, Harrison L. A free energy principle for the brain.
J Physiol Paris 2006;100:70–87.
9. Friston K. The free-energy principle: a rough guide to the brain? Trends
Cognit Sci 2009;13:293–301.
10. Friston KJ, Daunizeau J, Kilner J, Kiebel SJ. Action and behavior:
a free-energy formulation. Biol Cybern 2010;102:227–60.
11. Friston KJ, Daunizeau J, Kiebel SJ. Reinforcement learning or active
inference? PLoS One 2009;4:e6421.
12. Joyce JM. Kullback-leibler divergence. In: Lovric M, editor. International
encyclopedia of statistical science. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer; 2011:
720–2 pp.
13. Inui T. The free-energy principle: a uniﬁed theory of brain functions.
Brain Neural Network 2018;25:123–34.
14. Miyagi Y, Miyagi Y, Terada S, Kudo T. Variations of multifractal structure
in the fetal heartbeats. Acta Med Okayama 2003;57:49–52.
15. Grassberger P, Procaccia I. Characterization of strange attractors. Phys
Rev Lett 1983;50:346–9.
16. Grassberger P, Procaccia I. Dimensions and entropies of strange
attractors from a ﬂuctuating dynamics approach. Physica D 1984;13:
34–54.
17. Farmer JD, Ott E, York JA. The dimension of chaotic attractors. Physica D
1983;7:153–80.
18. Halsey TC, Jensen MH, KadanoﬀLP, Procaccia I, Shraiman BI. Fractal
measures and their singularities: the characterization of strange sets.
Phys Rev A 1986;33:1141–51.
19. Hentschel HE, Procaccia I. The inﬁnite number of generalized
dimensions of fractals and strange attractors. Phys Nonlinear Phenom
1983;8:435–44.
20. Isomura T, Shimazaki H, Friston KJ. Canonical neural networks perform
active inference. Commun Biol 2022;5:55.
21. Friston K. Am i self-conscious? (or does self-organization entail self-
consciousness?). Front Psychol 2018;9:579.
22. Yoshida M, Taguchi S. Free energy principle and visual consciousness.
Brain Neural Networs 2018;25:53–70.
23. Kim J, Gulati T, Ganguly K. Competing roles of slow oscillations and
delta waves in memory consolidation versus forgetting. Cell 2019;179:
514–26.
24. Yoshida K, Toyoizumi T. Information maximization explains state-
dependent synaptic plasticity and memory reorganization during non-
rapid eye movement sleep. PNAS Nexus 2023;2:pgac286.
Miyagi et al.: Fetal brain activity and free energy principle
7

