Appendix 4
Compatibility and Incompatibility
(To § 30)
We speak of the compatibility of two propositions or two states of affairs when it is
possible that they are both true or both obtain. In the common (everyday) under-
standing, two logically compatible propositions can both be false, indeed even nec-
essarily false. For example, one will not necessarily have to regard it as a logical
error if someone believes the two propositions ‘Triangles have four angles’ and
‘The sum of 2 and 1 is 4’ are indeed both false or even necessarily false, yet still
compatible with each other. One can mention in favor of accepting the compatibil-
ity of both propositions that the proposition ‘If the sum of 2 and 1 is 4, then trian-
gles have four angles’ is not (or at least not in all circumstances) false. On the
contrary, it represents one state of affairs (that does not obtain) following from an-
other (which likewise does not obtain). That both states of affairs do not obtain on
their own, does not preclude that taken together, and perhaps even only taken to-
gether, they could obtain after all and in this sense are compatible with each other.
On the contrary, the statement that the one state of affairs follows from the other
says precisely that the obtaining of the one state of affairs is incompatible with the
non-obtaining of the other. For a proposition of the form, ‘if p, then q’ says the
same thing as the proposition ‘it is impossible that p and not q’ (see § 30 above).
Corresponding to the broad sense of logical compatibility just discussed, there
is a relatively strict concept of logical incompatibility. For the same reason that one
typically does not suppose that every arbitrary declarative proposition follows from
a false declarative proposition (ex falso quodlibet), or that every true declarative
proposition follows from every arbitrary true proposition (verum ex quolibet), one
does not typically suppose that a proposition which is already taken to be false or
necessarily false or contradictory is incompatible with arbitrary other propositions.
One does not typically suppose, for example, that an empirically false proposition
like ‘On the 30th of March, 2009, it snowed in Bielefeld’ is incompatible with arbi-
trary propositions, so that the negation of arbitrary propositions follows from it.
Yet in modern modal logic the concepts of compatibility and incompatibility
often tend to be dealt with differently. To be sure, compatibility and incompatibility
are customarily defined by assuming that both the expressions ‘p is compatible with
q’ and ‘it is possible that p and q’ and that both the expressions ‘p is incompatible
with q’ and ‘it is not possible that p and q’ are equivalent (where this assumption still
completely corresponds to the common understanding). But primarily (outside of
paraconsistent, e.g., relevant-logical, systems) the propositional conjunction occurring
https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110784930-016

in these expressions, ‘. . . and . . .’, is read either as a truth-functional conjunction or
it is supposed (as an axiom or on the basis of an axiom) that for expressions of the
type ‘p and q’ a rule holds which corresponds to the simplification rule
p, q
p
(the same as rule (VI. 3) in § 72), which says that p follows from p & q.245 With this
rule it is at the same time supposed (by the contraposition rule) that ~ q follows
from a contradictory propositional conjunction p & ~ p, where q can be an arbitrary
true or false proposition, thus also a proposition ~ r. If one supposes in addition that
r follows from ~ ~ r, that means one supposes that any arbitrary proposition follows
from a contradictory propositional conjunction.246 The relation of one proposition
following from other propositions is often understood in modal logic as the relation
of strict implication. In this conception, ~ q follows from p & ~ p if and only if it is
not possible that (p & ~ p) & ~ ~ q is true, if thus (p & ~ p) is incompatible with ~ ~ q.
If one accepts the simplification rule, then it is immediately supposed along with
this conception that arbitrary double negated propositions are incompatible with a
contradictory propositional conjunction. If one accepts in addition that (according
to rule (VI. 4) (see § 72)) from a double negated proposition the same non-negated
proposition follows, then one ultimately supposes that every arbitrary proposition
follows from a contradictory propositional conjunction.
The basic assumption behind this supposition is snuck into the understanding
of the connective ‘. . . and . . .’ as an expression whose meaning makes accepting
the simplification rule unavoidable. This assumption can be given up only if one
recognizes that this meaning of ‘. . . and . . .’ is not the only one possible, since it
also admits a reading which corresponds to the definition set up above in § 30 (as
well as in Appendix 1) of the conjunction of premises, according to which the simpli-
fication rule does not need to be assumed as a universally valid rule. If one assumes
this definition and, to avoid misunderstandings, uses the logical constant ‘(. . ., . . .)’
for the connective it defines, then the concepts of logical compatibility and incom-
patibility can be fixed by a definition that corresponds to the common everyday un-
derstanding. This definition says:
In intuitionistic logic, the axiom A ⊃(B ⊃A) corresponds to this supposition. See Heyting
1930, 191.
To be sure, in intuitionistic logic it is not supposed that A follows from ~ ~ A, but is assumed
as an axiom that ~ A ⊃(A ⊃B). See Heyting 1930, 191. This axiom expresses the same thing as the
supposition ex falso sequitur quodlibet.
334
Appendix 4

Two propositions p and q are compatible if and only if it is possible that (p, q) is
true; p and q are incompatible if and only if it is not possible that (p, q) is true.247
It accords with this definition – since the simplification rule for the conjunc-
tion of premises does not hold, so that p does not follow from (p, q) (see § 30) –
that no universally valid rule exists according to which it would be admissible
(say, on the basis of (IV. 29)) to derive M p from M (p, q) or NM (p, q) from NM
p.248 In other words: on this conception, the possible truth of a proposition is not
a necessary condition for its being incompatible with another proposition; and it
is likewise not at all sufficient for its incompatibility with other propositions that
a proposition is impossibly true taken on its own. Rather, one should say accord-
ing to this conception that e.g., the two propositions ‘Triangles have four corners’
and ‘The sum of 2 and 1 is 4’ are completely compatible, without then also having
to suppose that it is possible that one of the two propositions is true taken on its
own. Likewise, it is not false to say that the hypothetical proposition ‘If triangles
have four corners, then the sum of 2 and 1 is 4’ is true and accordingly the propo-
sitions ‘Triangles have four corners’ and ‘The sum of 2 and 1 is not 4’ are incom-
patible, without having to suppose for that reason that the impossibility of the
proposition ‘Triangles have four corners’ being true is already a sufficient condi-
tion for this incompatibility.
Due to the restriction of the concept of compatibility that we have carried out
by means of the concept of the conjunction of premises, the relation of regular
consequence can be explained by means of the relation of incompatibility, with-
out needing to involve the unwelcome supposition that every arbitrary declara-
tive proposition follows from a declarative proposition which is impossibly true,
or that an impossibly false proposition follows from every arbitrary declarative
proposition.
Since H (p, N q) is equivalent to NM (p, q) and NH (p, N q) is equivalent to M (p, q), one could
define the compatibility and incompatibility of propositions just as well using hypothetical prop-
ositions. From the fact that H (p, N q) is also equivalent to N (p, q) and NH (p, N q) to (p, q) (see §
40 as well as Appendix 1, rules (2. 4) and (2. 5)), the noteworthy fact results that N (p, q) is logically
equivalent to NM (p, q) and (p, q) to M (p, q). In other words: N (p, N q) and M (p, q) are only
apparently logical weakenings of NM (p, N q) and (p, q), respectively.
Among the systems of modal logic set up by C.I. Lewis, the so-called S1 is distinguished by its
lacking the axiom ◇(p & q) ⥽◇p. Lewis calls this axiom the ‘consistency postulate’ and thus
indicates that only a statement that is without contradiction and to that extent possible can be
part of a conjunction that is without contradiction and to that extent possible. See Lewis & Lang-
ford 1932, 166–67.
Compatibility and Incompatibility
335


