Introduction
Even if one is not prepared to accept that the analysis of language is the only or
most important method of philosophy, one can still agree to a view which Gottlob
Frege, one of the founding fathers of analytic philosophy, expressed in the follow-
ing way. It is, he says,
one of the tasks of philosophy to break the domination of the word over the human spirit
by laying bear the misconceptions that through the use of language often almost unavoid-
ably arise concerning the relations between concepts and by freeing thought from the
means of expression of ordinary language which only burden it [. . .]. (Frege 1879, vi–vii
[1967, 7])
By the “use of language,” Frege means here the use of natural language.
But one can, or rather should, also connect the task of philosophy to the use
of non-natural languages, especially to the use of formal languages which are ap-
plied in logic to rules of inference and to portray what Frege calls, in the passage
just cited, “relations between concepts.” Already from his perspective logic had
“hitherto always followed ordinary language and grammar too closely” (Frege
1879, vii [1967, 7]). Hence, he saw that the use of formal-logical languages was
open in part to the same critique as the use of natural languages; their vulnerabil-
ity to critique was what provided him with the justification for inaugurating a
new kind of formal-logical language – the concept-script (Begriffsschrift).
However, although we can find in Frege’s writings numerous critical remarks
on the language of the syllogistic going back to Aristotle as well as the “Boolean for-
mal language,” something like a systematic analysis of these languages is still absent
from them. A systematic comparison of the capability of these languages with the
capability of the concept-script – or with the capability of languages which are in
use instead of the concept-script in modern deductive logic – has not (as far as I
know) been undertaken until now, or at least not with the necessary thoroughness.
In Part I of this essay, in §§ 1–40, I will subject the formal languages of deduc-
tive logic to a systematic analysis and a systematic comparison of their merits.
This comparison will especially bear on the capability of these languages to pres-
ent conceptual relations (which Frege mentions in the quote just cited).
Part II, §§ 41–84, presupposes the analysis of Part I of this essay. In these para-
graphs, a clear and precise presentation of the systematic structure of deductive
logic will be given, and this in a language which is able to portray logical relations
between any concepts. In this language, all rules and laws of deductive logic can be
presented. It will emerge that syllogistic rules are distinguished by the fact that their
validity depends only on the meaning of the logical vocabulary of this language.
https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110784930-204

I do not wish to put questions pertaining to the historical relationship be-
tween syllogistic and modern, mathematical logic at the center of the following
investigations. (I will go into these issues only in passing, at the end of Part II,
§ 84.) I would rather like to be guided by the systematic question whether the lan-
guage of syllogistic can be reduced to a more elementary, non-syllogistic language.
In order to be able to answer this question – in the negative (to anticipate my an-
swer) – it will be necessary at first to describe precisely the logical vocabulary with
which the language of syllogistic represents conceptual relations.
– The question of what concepts really are will not be systematically treated in
this book. Frege believed that a ‘real definition’ could not be given to determine
‘the essence of concepts’. But he pointed out that the grammatical distinction be-
tween proper names (nomina propria) and substantives (nomina appellativa) corre-
sponds in some way to the distinction between object-designators and concept
words. Concept words are accordingly expressions which “come with the indefinite
article and with words like ‘all’, ‘some’, ‘many’, etc.” Thus, the expression ‘square
root of four’ in the proposition ‘There is at least one square root of four’ corre-
sponds to “the concept square root of 4.”18 At a later point (§§ 33–35) it will be nec-
essary for me to go into Frege’s views on proper names and concept expressions.
For now, it may suffice to mention that I use the word ‘concept’ in this book so that
it designates precisely what a concept word or a concept expression is used to indi-
cate. Concept words and concept expressions should be understood as expressions
that can be preceded by the definite or indefinite article or a word like ‘all’, ‘some’,
‘many’, etc. This usage corresponds to a use of the word ‘concept’ which is not only
to be found in Frege but was also common practice in the traditional syllogistic. –
My application of the method of logico-semantic language analysis to the lan-
guages of logic will show that the view held by Frege, Hilbert, and others – that
the logical vocabulary of the syllogistic is replaceable, without change in mean-
ing, by truth-functional and quantified expressions, or by expressions of the cal-
culus of classes – is untenable, since truth-functional expressions are equivalent
to complex expressions, and class-logical and quantificational expressions to non-
formal syllogistic expressions. The logical vocabulary of the syllogistic suffices, as
can be proved, to render all valid rules and laws of deductive logic, including
modal logic. On the other hand, the rules and laws formulated only within the
language of a modern system of the calculus of functions or calculus of classes (to
which “classical” predicate logic belongs) prove not to be universally valid, since
their validity does not depend exclusively on the meaning of the logical vocabu-
lary they use. These systems implicitly presuppose the validity of the syllogistic
and are derivable from it so long as, in addition to the universally valid syllogistic
See Frege’s letter to Liebmann from August 1900 in Frege 1976, 150 (1980, 92–93).
XX
Introduction

rules (and in addition to the necessary transformation rules with which complex
and non-formal syllogistic expressions are translatable in other logical languages),
certain non-universally valid rules (on which ultimately depend the divergence of
these different logical systems) are formulated and accepted as valid in the syllogis-
tic language. Part II of this essay will show extensively how this derivation is to be
rigorously and seamlessly carried out, following a method already developed in the
school of Aristotle.
Introduction
XXI


