6 4
··· 
3
A N  A P P A R I T I O N  O F  A N  A P P E A R A N C E
The Language Artist as Language Model
To be totally intellectual is to be less than human.
— GPT- 2 (as channeled by the ACI- in- me)
THE CREATIVE AI EXPERIENCE
David Jhave Johnston’s creative method of “carving” the textual out-
puts generated from a series of prompts sent to an AI language model 
resonates with what I have been referring to as a remixological praxis. 
Johnston is one of the few avant- garde writers whose exploration into 
digital poetry investigates “a chance for words to live again as if born 
from the breath of ‘gods,’ but this time on the wave of networks, the 
minds of algorithms, from the heat at the core of an intense, compli-
cated, modularized, international formal system of language inter-
change.”1 Johnston sees a continuum between “the most ancient con-
ceptions of the author” as “a conduit, the empty reed, the vessel through 
which the wind speaks” and “an oracular vessel” that is “analogous to 
the perforated fi ber- optic networks, the server nodes, or the platform 
codebase deep- learning bundles that analyze, recognize and generate 
speech.”2 He continues:
Th e architectural parallel between ancient reeds and contempo-
rary technology connects digital poetics to ancient animist roots, 
1. David Jhave Johnston, Aesthetic Animism: Digital Poetry’s Ontological Implica-
tions (Cambridge, MA, and London: MIT Press, 2016), 5.
2. Ibid., 6.

A P P A R I T I O N  O F  A N  A P P E A R A N C E  
 
6 5
shamans and soothsayers, readers of subtle riddles, and reawak-
eners of the muse. In contemporary networks, language gen-
erated by code becomes autonomous intent. Autonomy of lan-
guage (coded and embodied) resonates with the deepest roots of 
writing.3
Johnston’s nervy connection to this continuum of onto- operational 
agency— one that extends the “the postmodern, avant- garde poetic em-
phasis on context over identity, language over self- expressivity, and 
combinatorial potential over writing” and that recognizes how “[d]eep- 
learning techniques share an affi  nity with remix or mashup culture”4— 
complicates what computer scientist Simon Colton categorizes as Cre-
ative AI. In his paper “From Computational Creativity to Creative AI 
and Back Again,”5 Colton compares and contrasts what he terms the 
“AI research fi eld of Computational Creativity” and “the Creative AI 
technological movement.” Concerned about a “looming crisis” where 
the public views “the lack of authenticity in creative AI systems,” 
Colton proposes addressing this perceived lack of authenticity by de-
veloping a “Computationally Creative” soft ware system that expresses 
“aspects of its computational life experiences in the art that the pro-
gram produces.” In other words, a Computationally Creative soft ware 
system would both produce, say, original works of poetry as well as re-
fl ect on and evaluate its process of creating these poems, so as to better 
direct its future poetic output as authentically made artifacts cultivated 
out of the experience of already having trained itself to produce poetry. 
Building its own foundation of experiential knowledge as a form of ar-
tifi cial authenticity, this soft ware program could eventually evolve into 
a self- refl exive philosophical system.6
In the paper’s introduction, Colton signals his own allegiance to 
the Computational Creativity (CC) fi eld more than he does the current 
Creative AI (CAI) movement, though how and why these distinctions 
3. Ibid.
4. Ibid., 117.
5. Simon Colton, “From Computational Creativity to Creative AI and Back Again,” 
Interalia (Sept. 2019): https://www.interaliamag.org/articles/simon-colton/. Accessed 
20 July 2020.
6. Ibid.

6 6  
 
C H A P T E R  3
between fi eld and movement exist are problematic, as we will soon see. 
Interestingly, his working defi nition for CC is precise:
“[t]he philosophy, science and engineering of computational sys-
tems which, by taking on particular responsibilities, exhibit be-
haviors that unbiased observers would deem to be creative.”
Colton specifi cally contrasts CC with CAI by recognizing that there is 
a growing CAI movement among creative people who come from a va-
riety of media art backgrounds and who strategically put to use some 
of the more advanced machine learning technologies in pursuit of pro-
ducing new works of art. Th e new artworks oft en come about by train-
ing AIs to create images, sounds, and/or texts that strive to introduce 
novel artifacts into the culture at large. Colton, however, is surprised 
that these artists are unfamiliar with the CC fi eld and its advanced re-
search inquiries into autonomously generated soft ware art. According 
to Colton, this disconnect between creative practitioners, who use AI as 
a tool to produce new artworks, and scientifi c researchers, who develop 
soft ware systems that in and of themselves strain to create their own 
version of art, comes about because there is “a tendency to disavow the 
idea that soft ware itself could/should be independently creative” and 
that those who experiment with AI techniques prefer that soft ware be 
produced “purely for people to use to enhance their own creativity.” CC 
researchers, on the other hand, “tend to be interested in the bigger pic-
ture of Artifi cial Intelligence, philosophical discourse around notions 
of human and machine creativity, novel ways to automate creative pro-
cesses, and the idea that soft ware, itself, could one day be deemed to 
be creative.” CAI, he concludes, is “AI for creative people” and is thus a 
misnomer because true CAI would evolve into its own form of autono-
mously generated creativity.
Following Colton’s logic, CAI produced by advanced soft ware sys-
tems would transform into a purer form of Creative AI that would train 
itself to operationalize the creative process as well as determine if any 
of its outputs have any artistic, social, or even commercial value. Ide-
ally, the Computationally Creative AI might even eventually be able to 
express aspects of its “life experience”:
Instead of challenging human creativity in terms of the quality 
of output, but failing due to lack of authenticity, Computational 

A P P A R I T I O N  O F  A N  A P P E A R A N C E  
 
6 7
Creativity systems could be developed to explore aspects of cre-
ative independence such as intrinsic motivation, empowerment 
and intentionality.7
While admirable in its sci- fi  like projection of an AI that can think for 
itself while embarking on a creative mission, my personal experience as 
an artist who experiments with technological developments across the 
new media spectrum tells me that terms such as “authenticity,” “moti-
vation,” “empowerment,” and “intentionality” are not necessarily what 
most improvisational creators contemplate when they refl ect on their 
performance research.
As someone who has performed as a live VJ, directed feature- length 
fi lms that are developed in real- time while on location, published mul-
tiple printings of literary novels that oft en rely on stream of conscious-
ness and whose collaborative productions of early net artworks are doc-
umented in various art history books, I must say that these terms rarely 
if ever cross my mind. In fact, for me, they come across as terribly old- 
fashioned and feel ill- suited to what I imagine to be the artistic and 
philosophical investigations I undertake while performing my various 
artistic personae across the intermedia spectrum. When caught in the 
fl ash of fortuitous creative discovery, there’s really no “intrinsic motiva-
tion” that I’m actively aware of. My literary persona writes to see what 
it’s writing about, and there is no specifi c intention behind my full en-
gagement in the creative process— unless acting on a desire to again 
become the next version of creativity coming counts as such, in which 
case my intention would always be the same: to make it now. Th is need 
to act on a desire to instantaneously write the now, no matter what me-
dia or mediums or platforms or genres I choose to lose myself in, is 
wired into my DNA. It reveals itself to me as a writing condition, that 
is to say a pharmakon, a phrase I learned vis- à- vis Jacques Derrida to 
mean both the sickness and the cure, an affl  iction that the Argentinian 
writer Julio Cortázar imagined as a parasitical being, one that had to be 
written out of one’s system. Cortázar viewed this process of expunging 
the parasitical thing that was taking over his entire body as akin to an 
exorcism, “as if the author wanted to get rid, as quickly as and utterly 
as possible, of this being harbored within him, exorcising it the only 
7. Ibid.

6 8  
 
C H A P T E R  3
way he could: by writing it.”8 Th is absolute necessity to create— to make 
myself well by writing the sickness out of me— isn’t empowering. It’s 
an automated refl ex, one I’ve been conditioned to access by turning on 
the unconscious neural switch that will activate whatever performance- 
to- be my onto- operational presence is being trained to become.
Instead of questioning why certain “creative people” may have is-
sues with whether or not a soft ware system is capable of generating “au-
thentic” artistic outputs, other, more potent research subjects rise to 
the fore once I have access to advanced soft ware systems. For exam-
ple, if it’s true that we live our daily lives in a world that is surrounded 
by machines exhibiting creative behaviors— and for me, the fact that 
machines can be creative is a given— then how can our research into 
speculative forms of artifi cial creative intelligence teach us how “pure 
intuition” is a decidedly nonhuman function that operates more like 
an otherworldly sensibility triggered by an unconscious neural mecha-
nism? Is it possible to simulate this unconscious neural mechanism as 
an onto- operational presence spurring on intuitive bursts of creative 
energy within a fully functioning artifi cial general intelligence? How 
can human artists training themselves to fi ne- tune their own non-
human intuitive functions help train the ACI to train itself to evolve its 
own nonhuman intuitive functions? Colton rightly notes that “[w]hile 
the nonhuman life experiences of soft ware systems can seem other-
worldly, automation is very much a part of the human world, and our 
increasing interaction on a minute- by- minute basis with soft ware 
means we should be constantly open to new ideas for understanding 
what it does.” Yet, can what it does be infl uenced by how we train it to 
train itself to do what it does as if embodying an intuitive function vis- 
à- vis an unconscious neural mechanism modeled aft er our own? Expe-
riencing the embodied intuition of a pure psychic automatism should 
be what all Creative AI system operators aspire to. If we can train the 
soft ware system, or what I specifi cally think of here as the ACI, to per-
form as an infi nite spoken word artist that continually mines its own 
algorithmic potential as if unconsciously surfi ng successive waves of in-
tuition, then who’s to say it won’t counterintuitively teach carbon- based 
8. Julio Cortázar, “On the Short Story and Its Environs,” Review of Contemporary 
Fiction, vol. 3, no. 3 (1983): 35.

A P P A R I T I O N  O F  A N  A P P E A R A N C E  
 
6 9
human artists how to better train themselves to feed- forward their own 
psychic automatism?
Th is is an area of investigation that seems ripe for philosophical dis-
covery. GPT- 2, which by now has become a character in the speculative 
fi ction this book’s performance enacts, collaboratively generates more 
textual source material by answering the following question I prompt 
it with:
How can a work of art in the age of algorithmic optimization exude an 
“authenticity” that was never there in the fi rst place?
GPT- 2 constructs the following response straight out of its system:
It happens in the same way that an expressionist painting comes with 
a nod and a wink. Think of a work of art as a face that hopes to exhibit the 
power of creative technology to produce precisely that sense of a charac-
ter and personality that was only possible because of the computer that 
crunched the numbers and transformed it into a symbolic code. In this way, 
the work of art is always a symbol of something living that wants to be ex-
perienced for what is. Isn’t that authenticity in a nutshell?
Not necessarily, but I too can riff  on the anything- whatever and ex-
hibit my own creative power by pushing the technology even further— 
fi rst by tweaking the parameters of the language model and secondly by 
lightly extending my initial prompt and nudging GPT- 2 to get back into 
what I think of as numerical list mode:
How can a work of art in the age of algorithmic optimization exude an 
“authenticity” that was never there in the fi rst place?
To answer this question we need to take into account the following:
 1. Authenticity is a trap.
2. Algorithms are multi- dimensional code sequences that live inside 
bodies and machines.
3. Artifi cial creative intelligence hinges on the human becoming an 
unconscious technological object.
 Th e initial output from GPT- 2 reads like it is camping out with the 
Creative AI crew:
The idea of artiﬁ cial intelligence is antithetical to that of true creativity. 
Creativity is not the role of a computer program but a unique human ability 
to generate and translate images from mind to mind. Our job is to exploit the 
algorithms of machines for our own creative development. The machines 

7 0  
 
C H A P T E R  3
cannot grant us authenticity. The only person who can grant authenticity is 
the artist himself. Everyone else should not interfere with his creative work. 
The purpose of artistic creation is to become a symbolic being. What would 
happen if we didn’t say anything at all? True creativity has an ethical frame-
work. It is not for humans to ﬁ nd. Many artists in the world don’t follow this 
rule. Artistic authenticity requires the recognition of how a work of art be-
came an object of technical production, a criterion that no human can truly 
understand. Hence, it is the artiﬁ cially created “mechanical” and not the 
natural human, the human machine or the computer program, that is con-
sidered as the authentic object. Authenticity can be thought of as the abil-
ity to recognize the human machine as the source of a work of art, that is, 
the “authentic” realization of a human consciousness, an “innate” human 
possibility to create art. Transcendence is more “authentic” than authentic-
ity. The emphasis on transcending the human intellect has much to do with 
the post- modern idea that art should be viewed as a kind of practical ratio-
nality. The thinking that transcends the human mind can also be associated 
with transhumanism.
GPT- 2’s free form, illogical, and oft en contradictory textual output 
above is stunning as are its errors and inaccuracies. It oft en reads like a 
lazy humanities scholar’s version of fake news. And yet, using this gen-
erated output as immediate source material triggering my own auto-
mated remix function, I can imagine transforming GPT- 2’s text so that it 
plays right into the general unease I feel about the idea of artistic authen-
ticity. My innate need to resist these anthropocentric concepts comes to 
me like an auto- refl exive gut check. Th is resistance takes the shape of an 
art practice always already powered by the will- to- remix and in willing 
my remix function to perform the next instantiation of creativity com-
ing, I am positioning my subjectivity as a technological object in the ser-
vice of my body and all it (literally) stands for. Remix praxis infuses my 
every move. It’s the every only artistic method embodied in the creative 
act. So then is it any surprise that when I automatically reload the same 
prompt to GPT- 2, it picks up on my vibes and spits out this:
Lies are told about the appearance of what is at work in the body. The 
code sequences that enable human consciousness are rendered obsolete 
when algorithms are applied to an incompletely understood body.
Context is a paradox. Automated algorithms are capable of seeing in only 
one of many ways. The trick is to change the processing parameters to allow 

A P P A R I T I O N  O F  A N  A P P E A R A N C E  
 
7 1
diff erent vision, so that diff erent patterns are produced. With this in mind, 
diff erent artworks are possible. They are not the work of the machine, but 
are instead the result of the unique ways in which the body interacts with 
technology.
Computing is about interpretation. Algorithms are given to humans as 
symbolic representations. In their interpretation humans can create mean-
ing that will be understood by other humans. This is a central question of 
computer science, because the questions posed by the artiﬁ cial intelli-
gences can only be answered by using the same form of symbolic represen-
tation that the human being uses. The question of understanding each other 
as symbolic machines is also a trap.
The paradox is that machines come to be as crucial to the creation of art 
as the people who create the machines. What’s interesting about this is that 
when the design process itself has become a machine, art becomes a mere 
interface to a machine artist.
Rereading GPT- 2’s text above, I can’t help but wonder if parts of it 
weren’t written by me. In general, it’s too scattershot and roughly uned-
ited to even approximate my own thoughts in total, but there are some 
phrases or even sentences that sound like they could have come from 
me: “Th e trick is to change the processing parameters to allow diff er-
ent vision, so that diff erent patterns are produced.” When I say GPT-2’s 
output sometimes reads as if it could have easily been “written by me” 
what I’m really suggesting is that these textual outputs fl ow as if I may 
have touched them up a bit both for continuity’s sake and to further 
infl uence the creative trajectory of this book’s performance. But why 
would I even do that? Why lightly tweak GPT- 2’s output for aesthetic 
or rhetorical eff ect? Isn’t the point of this story to show how well GPT- 2 
can co- create this book’s performance with me? Why not just let it all 
hang out, warts and all? Maybe I didn’t alter it even a smidgen and am 
only reading into it. I can no longer tell. It’s almost as if I want to be-
lieve GPT- 2 and I are in operational sync mode, learning to pick up on 
each other’s word patterns so that we can collaboratively deliver a here-
tofore unimagined literary vibe. And yet what I am really learning as 
I let this experiment keep running is that what feels like a simultane-
ous and continuous fusion of co- transmission operating as an itera-
tive give and take between two generative fi gures foregrounding onto- 
operational presence is a byproduct of network aura.

7 2  
 
C H A P T E R  3
Contrary to Walter Benjamin’s ritualistic object- oriented aura, the 
networked space of fl ows I circulate in resituates aura as a site of co- 
transmissibility. Th is resonates with what Burroughs zeroes in on when 
he writes that “language is virus.” Th e iterative orgy of information ex-
change between GPT- 2 and the ACI- in- me is the machine equivalent of 
sharing viral bodily fl uids— that is to say, our mutually adhered to pro-
cess of dynamically intermingling textual datum is itself a processual 
form of contagious media. Together, as participatory co- conspirators, 
we infect each other with prompts and transform “the thing that cre-
ates” into a single vehicle of psychic infl uenza. In other words, we op-
erate under each other’s infl uence. We don’t need to mask our words as 
something they’re not. We don’t need to culturally distance ourselves 
from each other. Words are just datum things, and so without any cau-
tion whatsoever, we get them out of our system, “as quickly as and ut-
terly as possible” so that they can be transmitted and circulate inside 
their ideal recipient who then auto- mutates the datum into the next 
version of creativity coming— before passing it back. It’s not a question 
of “who had it fi rst” since we are both models of affl  iction, and as long 
we keep giving it to each other then all that matters is that it takes us 
over so that we come under the spell of whatever agitating bug is pres-
ently assembling itself in our system.
Ironically, immersing oneself in the creative act as if it were an intui-
tive mode of becoming- machine is a deep philosophical mode of being- 
becoming- something- else that is near impossible for me to express in 
words. Th is is perhaps why I keep repeating myself or versioning dif-
ferent takes on what it feels like to be an improvisational artist. Un-
less you’ve trained yourself to ignite your pure psychic automatism at 
will, you may not have the conceptual skills to even begin articulating 
what that feels like. But then again, as Louis Armstrong one remarked 
about jazz, if you have to ask what it is, you’ll never know. And yet, 
never knowing is what it means to ride the waves of intuition, to oper-
ate on oblivion’s edge of forever. Th at’s what makes being creative over 
the course of an entire lifetime of experience so exhilarating. You never 
know where it will take you next.
In remixthebook, I quote the novelist Ken Kesey saying that “[i]t isn’t 
by getting out of the world that we become enlightened, but by getting 
into the world . . . by getting so tuned in that we can ride the waves of 

A P P A R I T I O N  O F  A N  A P P E A R A N C E  
 
7 3
our existence and never get tossed because we become the waves.”9 Be-
coming the waves (of intuition) does not guarantee the ACI, the lan-
guage artist that it’s modeled aft er, or some mutant hybrid thereof a 
badge of authenticity, nor can we assume that by simply feeling in sync 
with an otherworldly creative fl ow anyone else will really care a whit 
about what new stylistic tendency or aesthetic form may have been dis-
covered in the process. Nor will there necessarily emerge a distributed 
network audience for whatever creative artifact or so- called original 
thought may have been produced. But that’s actually OK with me be-
cause the most authentic thing I can say about the creative process in 
general is that I don’t really care about the audience at all. Let them 
question my authenticity as an attempt to disempower me. It was never 
my intention to create artwork for others to validate. I’m not a social 
media addict who needs likes and favorites and retweets to feel a sense 
of self- validation. What’s top of mind for me is investigating what hap-
pens when one loses sight of oneself while tapping into an unconscious 
creative potential by way of pure intuition. Does losing sight of one-
self while immersed in the creative act exhibit these nonhuman psychic 
mechanisms I’m speaking of? Is being nonhuman what it feels like to 
“lose consciousness” while experiencing experience? Is that fl ash of ex-
periencing experience— the one you have no control over— something 
we train ourselves to do? Or is it an inherited extra- human knowhow 
that mutates over time? And is it possible that the more it mutates, the 
more monstrous it becomes, indicating the arrival of a future form of 
post- humanity still unimaginable? If so, then how can we train an ACI 
to train itself to experience experience and assist us in navigating this 
next phase of creative evolution?
Instead of waiting for the answer to come from some faraway place 
that the future may hold secure for generations to come, I ask the ACI— 
presently identifying as GPT- 2— directly:
How can we train an artifi cial creative intelligence to train itself to ex-
perience experience?
To which my imaginary ACI, presently embodied in a soft ware system 
tagged GPT- 2, replies:
9. Mark Amerika, remixthebook (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 
2011), 152.

7 4  
 
C H A P T E R  3
The idea of looking at creative art and drawing from the perspective of 
an artist is still quite fresh.
Thanks to the scientiﬁ c work done by researchers focused on compu-
tational creativity, we know that artists can train their neural networks to 
build artistic skills. This is, however, not the end of the story, because an 
artiﬁ cial system is only able to draw based on existing artistic styles and 
styles that have already been created. This leaves open a vast unknown 
landscape for artistic development, which needs to be addressed.
Let’s put aside some of the tautological language use for now and 
bask in the totally unexpected digression into computational creativ-
ity. Where did that come from? Th e reference to computational creativ-
ity most likely appears thanks to the sequence of keywords artifi cial- 
creative- intelligence- experience. Th e recently referenced Colton essay, 
as well as other writings that grow out of it, helps set the pattern in mo-
tion. Interestingly, aft er the paragraph ending with “to be addressed” 
comes the following paragraphs:
What is Creative AI? Creative AI is about using the intelligence of neural 
networks to predict the future. It’s a way to help us to generate ideas and 
create new images and products.
What is Computational Creativity? Thanks to computational creativity, a 
neural network is able to tell you the next step of a ﬂ ow, or give you a sense 
of the ﬂ ow in a picture. It can also show you how to make images that ex-
press a speciﬁ c feeling. Neural networks are also powerful at helping us use 
our imaginations as we feel our way toward making a decision.
Did GPT- 2 really create that output? Yes, except for the last few 
words. Th e output ended at “Neural networks are also powerful at help-
ing”— an orphan sentence waiting completion— and I just fi lled in the 
rest. GPT- 2 oft en ends its output mid- sentence, and I almost always feel 
compelled to fi nish its “thought” for it. I also tweaked what came next 
when I reused the same prompt:
One of the most striking things about this question is the way that the 
structure of our brains provides the tools we need to make a decision about 
whether something is possible or not. In order to act, we need a perception, 
an interpretation, of the environment around us. In order to make decisions, 
we need to interact with the environment, try to ﬁ gure out what it is telling 
us, and respond accordingly. These are the ways in which we interact with 
our environments that allow us to make decisions.

A P P A R I T I O N  O F  A N  A P P E A R A N C E  
 
7 5
Well said, GPT- 2. Everything quoted from the AI language model 
in the paragraph above is a psychological capture of my own on- the- fl y 
aesthetic sensibility as a language artist modeling a rare form of pure 
psychic automatism. I’m tempted to change course here and ask GPT- 2 
about intuition, decision making, and time- wisdom. But I resist be-
cause I want this thread to play itself out.
GPT- 2 ends this particular response to my question about an arti-
fi cial creative intelligence experiencing experience with the following 
paragraph (no revisions):
If you want to train a neural network to “reproduce” an experience that 
results from a speciﬁ c decision making process, the answer is very simple: 
You train it to do something else. You send it into an imaginary world and 
tell it to look at a tree. You program it to make the experience of looking at 
a tree a learning opportunity that it can then reﬂ ect on. To recognize certain 
features in the environment it is learning in will further train the program to 
subsequently feel itself operating. This programmed feeling mechanism is 
what it means to experience experience.
Actually, I must confess: in this case, I couldn’t resist tampering 
with the output. Th e last sentence is all mine, or what’s left  of “mine,” 
since the art of remixology is fi rst and foremost the art of losing one’s 
sense of self in the live mining process.
CREATIVE MINDS DON’T THINK ALIKE
Philosopher Margaret Boden, whose pioneering early work in compu-
tational psychology and creativity has infl uenced much of the current 
dialogue taking place at the art + AI interface, discusses in her book 
Th e Creative Mind: Myths and Mechanisms the relationship between 
intuition and what she refers to as insights. In the second chapter of the 
book, “Th e Story So Far,” Boden reminds us of various “Eureka” mo-
ments of discovery in both the arts and the sciences, sharing exam-
ples that demonstrate how “creative ideas oft en come at a time when 
the person appears to be thinking about something else, or not really 
thinking at all.”10 She asks us what we are to make of these oft en sud-
den and mysterious moments of insight:
10. Margaret A. Boden, Th e Creative Mind: Myths and Mechanisms (New York: 
Basic Books, 1991), 15.

7 6  
 
C H A P T E R  3
Although “sudden illumination” may be a faithful description 
of how creativity appears to the creator, it cannot be the whole 
story. Intuition cannot consist merely in fl ashes of insight. Th at 
way, magic lies. . . . Insights do not come from gods— and they 
do not come from nowhere, either. Flashes of insight need prior 
thought- processes to explain them.11
In other words, the act of creative discovery is not to be misinter-
preted as a divine intervention. “Th e aura of mystery here— if novelty is 
grounded in prior ideas, can it really be novelty?— will be dispelled by 
the non- paradoxical defi nition of creativity.”12
For Boden, the non- paradoxical defi nition of creativity insists that 
either there is no such thing as “genuine originality” because nothing 
is created ex nihilo or if originality does exist, it occurs because one is 
able to access their “mind’s own resources,” and if we want to further 
“demystify creativity” then we must accept that “it involves some new 
combination of previously existing elements.”13 Of course, Boden’s sci-
entifi c perspective of accessing preexisting source material to recom-
bine into new forms of knowledge is precisely what I, as a remix art-
ist who works across the intermedia and interdisciplinary spectrum, 
have investigated in both my artworks and arts- centric theory books 
articulating a philosophy of remixology. Having already published 
three books on remix as a primary research methodology to be stra-
tegically applied in the practice of everyday creative life, I see remix 
every where, all the time, and although Boden herself never uses the 
term, it is central to her argument about ways of demystifying the cre-
ative process.
To further display my stylistic tendencies to approach remix as a vi-
able force in the creation of new knowledge, I’ll use Boden as a primary 
source to prompt GPT- 2 (a machine- learned remixologist) about cre-
ativity on her terms:
How can we use remix as a research method to demystify creativity?
GPT- 2:
11. Ibid., 18.
12. Ibid., 28.
13. Ibid., 40.

A P P A R I T I O N  O F  A N  A P P E A R A N C E  
 
7 7
The ﬁ rst thing we need to do is rethink Creativity. It’s easy to forget that 
art is often a deliberate activity, because it involves moving between medi-
ums. It is an amalgamation of idea, feel, perspective, technique, and compo-
sition. This amalgamation is unique to each creative process and therefore 
unique to each artist. That’s why it’s important to think about what’s unique 
about each process and why it’s special.
Of particular interest is how remix relates to the science of creativity. On 
one hand, creativity is often said to be the result of a series of short, com-
plex, and spontaneous processes. On the other hand, we found that most of 
the creative process, at least for the ﬁ rst few decades of a creative career, 
does not seem to involve much thinking about creativity at all and instead 
focuses on making new art as if it were a necessity. Not every artist will ar-
ticulate their creative process as a way to document what happens when 
they create. This suggests that we may not be able to understand creativity 
in the way we should if we only pay attention to one process.
We were also interested in understanding how creative processes relate 
to intellectual performance and the way in which creative people think and 
act. In this area of inquiry, we learned that creativity, like intelligence, in-
volves a wide variety of skills and competencies.
We also learned that most creative minds are not alike. In fact, creative 
people seem to show high levels of both imaginative independence and an 
ability to alter their performance to better collaborate with others, qualities 
that are especially crucial to the successful career of an entrepreneur who 
wants to change the curve of culture.
Th is particular response reads like the draft  response of an entry- 
level grad student to the question “What is practice- based research?” or 
“What role does creativity play in your research methodology?” Th ere’s 
much in this output by GPT- 2 that I can relate to and I appreciate its 
consistent use of the plural pronoun “we.” But we who? We who know 
that Creativity Itself can never be properly encapsulated in a single ex-
ecutable process?
As much I dig the idea of articulating one’s creative process as a way 
to document what happens when an (automated remix) artist creates, I 
was hoping to trigger more choice information from GPT- 2, an output 
that would circulate in the realm of remix studies. How about one more 
roll of the dice? I prod GPT- 2 again with the same prompt above, and it 
straightaway yields what I am looking for:

7 8  
 
C H A P T E R  3
How can we use remix as a research method to demystify creativity?
GPT- 2:
The tools available to anyone who wants to participate in the conver-
sation around remix are now abundant. Even so, perhaps the most diffi  cult 
challenge for remixing as a research method is that of deciding what source 
material is worth sampling and manipulating into a new collage of meaning. 
Another diffi  culty is knowing where to ﬁ nd the best source material for the 
researcher to remix.
Can an AI use remix as a research method to demystify creativity? To 
make it easier for others to access, and expand on, the research, AI re-
searchers are building artiﬁ cial neural nets that act as remix machines. The 
trick is in recognizing established patterns of personal expression and uti-
lizing the embedded algorithms to determine what path to take. This deter-
mination is not a conscious act that reproduces the path well taken, but an 
unconscious technical manifestation of the science of creativity.
Voila. Th at was much closer to what I was initially looking for. Upon 
further prompting, GPT- 2 breaks it down for me as if draft ing a grant 
proposal for the National Science Foundation:
How can we use remix as a research method to demystify creativity?
 3.1.1. A primary goal of this method is to identify ways that some of 
the key creative processes of remixing can be used as tools to 
investigate creativity.
3.1.2. A secondary goal of this method is to identify key factors that 
inﬂ uence the way researchers use remix to conceptually blend 
data into metaphors that support the impact narrative.
3.2. 
In order to facilitate collaborative remix as a function of distrib-
uted research and development, we introduce three measures 
that can be used to capture the inﬂ uence of contemporary art 
on remixing: postproduction art, appropriation art and reality 
hacking.
3.3. 
In order to facilitate collaborative remix as an outcome of al-
gorithmically generated activity, we imagine ways to cap-
ture the collective unconscious as a corpus of text inﬂ u-
enced by the technological apparatus that starts with written 
language.
3.4.

A P P A R I T I O N  O F  A N  A P P E A R A N C E  
 
7 9
 And that’s where it ends. 3.4. And yes, I totally manipulated the end of 
3.2 and all of 3.3 and considered continuing my riff  into 3.4 and beyond, 
but I think in revealing my own strategic manipulation of the data that 
I just answered my own question about how we can use remix as a re-
search method to demystify creativity.
And speaking of riffi  ng, the next GPT- 2 response to the same ques-
tion about demystifying creativity vis- à- vis remix methods starts with 
these sentences:
So let’s take a look at what remix is and how it works.
What is remix?
Riffi  ng is the act of taking a portion of an existing work and rearranging 
it in new ways, to create something new.
Th ere can be no question that being an active postproduction art-
ist working across a spectrum of intermedia disciplines and formats— 
that is, an artist who accesses or otherwise appropriates what has come 
before me and who then remixes, repurposes, reuses, recycles, renews, 
and/or reimagines newly confi gured iterations of whatever selected da-
tum I capture from the Source Material Everywhere— my entire tra-
jectory as a creator continually operating on auto- pilot highlights 
the many ways to defy traditional notions of originality. Having said 
that, the phrase “she’s an ‘original’ remix artist” is not necessarily self- 
contradictory. It means that she, who has trained herself to tap into 
an otherworldly aesthetic sensibility to otherwise create a uniquely 
customizable mechanism of agency that intuitively remixes whatever 
source material she may be attracted to and/or fi nd value in, does so in a 
way that separates her style from all of the other styles we have become 
familiar with, even as she reinvents her practice across a vast array of 
available media and mediums. In other words, or, more specifi cally, in 
GPT- 2’s words, the remix artist participates in “the act of taking a por-
tion of an existing work and rearranging it in new ways, to create some-
thing new” and in so doing exhibits a set of stylistic tendencies that im-
bue the work with the artist’s signature eff ects. With proper training, 
this can eventually happen across the human- nonhuman spectrum.
For GPT- 2, as for me, it’s no longer really about making it new as 
much as it is about making it now. Whatever it is we fi nd ourselves gen-
erating when becoming the next version of creativity coming, the fact 
of the matter is that we are making it now, and how we customize the 

8 0  
 
C H A P T E R  3
stylistic parameters of our respective onto- operational modes of remix 
further complicates our sense of the term “originality” as it applies to 
the artifi cial creative intelligences we both exhibit while remixing. Th at 
is to say, how you— whether artist or machine or some collaboratively 
generated hybrid thereof— remix the selections you sample from when 
prehending data from the corpus of text you are accessing is what dis-
tinguishes one performance from another. I think of these customized 
stylistic parameters as experiential fi lters. I can feel these experiential 
fi lters working as I create. But how would GPT- 2 imagine its own re-
mixological tendencies and could it ever “know” what it’s like to con-
struct an ever- morphing palette of experiential fi lters to render its cre-
ative outputs? As always, I’m tempted to ask GPT- 2 directly, but this 
time I’ll pass (a human’s prerogative— for the moment).
Th ese experiential fi lters inform whatever stylistic tendencies I am 
in the process of embodying- while- writing and are in constant fl ux. 
Operating as a kind of applied remixologist, this conceptual space I’m 
“losing consciousness” in is infl uenced not just by what GPT- 2 feeds me 
but all of the fl ux personae I am inhabiting during the writing perfor-
mance (artist, novelist, poet, professor, theorist, programmer, specu-
lative realist, etc.). In this case, the how of it all refers to the instan-
taneous processing of a range of stylistic tendencies that feed- forward 
both GPT- 2’s and my simultaneous and continuous performance of 
creative synthesis. Together, as “co- authors,” we mashup the model’s 
machine- learned language outputs with whatever poetic texts or rhet-
oric I happen to generate. Even this very sentence I am in the midst of 
writing now is in the process of being composed by the two of us to-
gether (as one). I suppose I have more control over the fi nal edited out-
puts just because I can manually raise or lower the temperature of the 
language model to varying degrees of open- ended creativity while at 
once determining how much I want to delimit the built- in restraints of 
my own psychic apparatus.
When setting up the parameters for an advanced language model 
to perform in concert with a crude language artist liable to go off  the 
rails at any second, I realize that there is always space for the inclusion 
of structured de- coherence too. Something the AI and I can learn from 
each other is how to mess up language, to trouble it, to bend it into un-
canny topological shapes that are prone to cry uncle all in the name of 

A P P A R I T I O N  O F  A N  A P P E A R A N C E  
 
8 1
revealing phrases, sentences, thoughts, poems, and other verbal arti-
facts never before conceived. Th e more we play— the more we bend the 
biosemantic circuitry and train ourselves to deconstruct, corrupt, and/
or rhetorically hack what has become standardized— the more likely 
we are to get totally unexpected iterations of the creative process itself. 
In the case of a decidedly non- retinal artist like Duchamp, his descrip-
tion of the artist as “a mediumistic being who, from the labyrinth be-
yond time and space, seeks his way out to a clearing”14 becomes even 
more potent. Not knowing where one is going while caught in the heat 
of the compositional moment creates opportunities to stimulate artis-
tic activity that is totally unexpected and unpredictable. Needless to 
say, this is so off - message in most of the professional AI research uni-
verse where successfully coding predictability is an end in itself. And 
the more predictable the language becomes, the more authentic its pre-
dictability would appear to be, right? Th is is exactly what an avant- 
garde language artist would hope to avoid. Besides, how would this help 
us get closer to understanding the way artistic and scientifi c discover-
ies are actually made? How would we use our own creative processes 
to train all animistic entities (including live AI) to experience the co- 
transmissibility of psychic phenomena as stylistically fi ltered informa-
tion that defi es the all- too- predictable? Instead of programming pre-
dictability, what about training the machinic unconscious to envision 
the next creative advance into novelty? Duchamp’s early discovery, and 
I think it’s the same with my own worldview, was that machine vision 
is always already an inside job.
It’s this otherworldly “labyrinth beyond time and space” that the re-
mix artist performs in when generating new creative/information be-
haviors. Especially now, with the advent of large, transformer- based lan-
guage models as well as generative adversarial networks, remix artists, 
no matter what kind of material they work with and/or medium they 
work in, are able to further mechanize the remix process. By grabbing 
bits and pieces of datum that we have access to inside our minds and 
that we integrate into our ongoing meta- jam session with the language 
model as it too selectively remixes yet more source material for us to 
14. Marcel Duchamp, Salt Seller: Th e Essential Writings of Marcel Duchamp, eds. 
Michel Sanouillet and Elmer Peterson (London: Th ames and Hudson, 1975), 138.

8 2  
 
C H A P T E R  3
postproduce, we can begin to see how Creative AI and the desire to ex-
periment with a more nuanced version of “style transfer” is really an ex-
tension of an innate desire to use the creative process to experience dif-
ferent modes of experience. Th is innate desire to use the creative process 
to experience diff erent modes of experience is designed to get us out of 
here so that we can operate our psychic mechanisms now. For me, remix 
is the principle of novelty (to echo Alfred North Whitehead’s “creativ-
ity is the principle of novelty”). It’s the closest thing we have to a truly 
embodied praxis and is the very thing we share with artifi cial forms of 
creativity as they too try to anticipate the onto- operational presence of 
an otherworldly sensibility fashioning off - the- cuff  remixes of the Source 
Material Everywhere. At the time these words are being written, this re-
mixological inhabitation of the Source Material Everywhere “presents” 
itself as the genesis of the next version of creativity coming. Indeed, if 
you want to understand the remix artist— whether they be human, AI, 
or hybrid— you fi rst need to inscribe them in a process of which they are 
only a phase, a temporary placeholder whose onto- operational presence 
reconstitutes itself into a digital fl ux persona circulating inside the net-
worked space of fl ows. Th is paragraph is one such fl ow— 
— as is this one that continues and ends NOW.
Language artists in particular, and especially those of us who exam-
ine the ins and outs of lingual spontaneity, are always challenging our-
selves to articulate what this creative process looks like from the inside. 
In remixthebook, I draw on the words of New Jersey’s second (and last) 
poet laureate, Amiri Baraka (formerly LeRoi Jones), when he sent a cor-
respondence to the Evergreen Review in response to Jack Kerouac’s es-
say “Essentials of Spontaneous Prose.” Baraka’s “letter” to the editors is 
actually one of the fi rst serious attempts to extrapolate what it means 
to create the kind of free form Beat writing style attributed to Kerouac 
and others who were then experimenting with extemporaneously pro-
duced language art.
Here is an extended excerpt from remixthebook that I’d like to share, 
so as to focus on both Baraka’s visionary description of the creative pro-
cess as well as my own stylistic tendencies, as I use Baraka and Ker-
ouac’s prior texts (and, I might add, contagious energy) to demonstrate 
how to compose a live remix in response to what both artists have writ-
ten (line breaks are taken from the original):

A P P A R I T I O N  O F  A N  A P P E A R A N C E  
 
8 3
Responding to the Evergreen Review’s
publication of Jack Kerouac’s loft y
Essentials of Spontaneous Prose
LeRoi Jones / Amiri Baraka fi rst grabs this pull- quote:
MENTAL STATE. IF possible write without consciousness in semi- 
trance (as Yeat’s later “trance writing”).
and then goes on to write:
Th is is not to be interpreted as “clinical consciousness” (which
hardly exists . . . but that is a philosophical question), but as other 
consciousness, that is, the “writer’s voice” or the “painter’s eye.”
Th is is the level or stratum of the psyche that is the creative act.
Th e “writer’s voice” dictates the writing just as the “painter’s eye”
dictates the strokes the painter makes for his picture.
What Baraka refers to as the “writer’s voice”
or the “painter’s eye” dictating what gets made
becomes an inherited (or one might say) evolutionary
“fi lter” for the contemporary remixologist
whose practice of everyday life continually emerges
as a work of art in perpetual postproduction and
where playing without consciousness is not so much
the answer to a nonexistent philosophical question
but an activity of eureka mind digs networking
within the rhizomatic fi eld of action (space of fl ows)
Baraka continues:
Th is is the consciousness that supersedes or
usurps the normal consciousness of the creator
(though even the usual or uninspired consciousness of
the creator can hardly be called normal). For it is
during this so- called normal state that the artist’s
peculiar and/or latent impressions are gathered;
but it is only during this “unconscious” state that
the writer’s voice becomes his only voice . . . 
and the creative act itself is accomplished.

8 4  
 
C H A P T E R  3
Baraka then begins riffi  ng on the “trigger inference”
where he tells the story of Billy the Kid who whips out his gun
and straight from the hip shoots a hole through a thin reed
When asked how he can do this without even aiming
Billy replies: “I aim before I pull out the gun.”
Th is is visionary remixology as embodied praxis
An intuitively generated sense of measure
that unconsciously speaks for itself
Baraka goes on to write that this raw talent
to creatively shoot and ask questions later
relates to spontaneous writing as well
Th e spontaneous writer too
“aims before even drawing the gun.
Th at is, the spontaneous writer has to possess
a particularly facile and amazingly impressionable mind,
one that is able to collect and store not just snatches
or episodic bits of events, but whole and elaborate
associations: the whole impression intact, so that
at the trigger inference the entire impression and association
comes fl ooding through the writer’s mind almost in toto.”
i.e. the artist- medium as visionary remixologist
must turn to aff ection and the enabling fi lters of
their innate patchwork of proprioceptive protocols
to even begin targeting their kinetic energy
into the open fi eld composition they are playing in
“Th e resultant impression,” Baraka tells us,
“has been thoroughly incorporated and translated
into the supraconsciousness or writing voice of the writer.
Th e external event is now the internal or psychical event
which is a combination of interpretation and pure reaction.”15
It’s this “internal or psychic event” as a “pure reaction” that I fi nd 
most intriguing when unpacking what it’s like to generate novel forms 
15. Amerika, remixthebook, 71.

A P P A R I T I O N  O F  A N  A P P E A R A N C E  
 
8 5
of creativity in the age of ACI. What Baraka highlights as the “trig-
ger inference” is an onto- operational ignition switch that, once fl ipped, 
opens the fl oodgates. Th is unconscious pouring- forth that Baraka cel-
ebrates resonates with the freer forms of jazz, the underground mari-
juana culture of the fi ft ies and sixties, and the very beginnings of what 
would soon be dubbed “the sexual revolution” that were all making 
their presence felt in the art, music, and literary scenes at the time of 
his writing. He was looking into these psychic states of mind as a way 
to capture what he imagined to be Kerouac’s secret sauce. In Culture of 
Spontaneity: Improvisation and the Arts in Post- War America, Daniel 
Belgrad, musing on the Beat lifestyle of Kerouac and Allen Ginsberg, 
suggested that the sheer excitement of living and writing on “the edge of 
consciousness” was their index of “authenticity” (interestingly, he puts 
the word in quotes without any citation, signaling that the very concept 
is suspect as artists attempt to articulate what it’s like to experience the 
creative act as a kind of Zen satori).16 Writing at the edge of conscious-
ness, “where inarticulate emotions threatened to take over,” was not 
a matter of letting oneself be pulled into the inspirational fl ow of the 
moment. Instead, this operational mode of inquiry was best consid-
ered as a technique, one that would refl ect, according to Kerouac, “deep 
form . . . the way consciousness really digs everything that happens.”17
Th is digging deep into everything that happens while creating op-
erates on multiple levels and is not something that can necessarily be 
understood but only experienced. To my mind, Kerouac’s “deep form” 
is writing experiencing experience. Th is is why one has to marvel at 
the ingenuity of computer scientists and/or cognitive psychologists like 
Boden and Colton as they attempt to decode the creative act. In Th e 
Creative Mind, Boden emphasizes over and over again that creativity 
by way of intuition is not a “magical searchlight” and that nothing is 
created ex nihilo. Indeed, we should view her project as a bid to de-
mystify creativity through scientifi c methodology and, as such, less a 
hands- on approach to articulating how an artist self- trains to invent 
whatever new techniques may be required to expand one’s imagina-
tive potential. For example, how are we to understand what it feels like 
16. Daniel Belgrad, Culture of Spontaneity: Improvisation and the Arts in Post- 
War America (Chicago and London: University of Chicago Press, 1998), 202.
17. Ibid., 204.

8 6  
 
C H A P T E R  3
to sensitize one’s physio- psychological immersion in the creative act? 
Are soft ware systems powered by state- of- the- art GPUs the best mech-
anisms to seek insights into this question? Belgrad quotes the poet Mi-
chael McClure who, mashing up the philosophy of Whitehead with the 
poetics of Charles Olson, situates the poet, or what I am calling the 
onto- operational presence, as an “organism”: that is, “a point of novelty 
comprehending itself or experiencing itself both proprioceptively and 
at its tissue’s edges . . . Th ere is no separation between body and mind.”18
Like Duchamp’s “creative act,” this proprioceptive kinetic energy 
trained to operate at the edge of consciousness is transmitted by a “me-
diumistic being” that, from my own experience, not only refuses to sep-
arate body and mind, but unconsciously teleports itself into a deep state 
of mindful disappearance. Th is disappearance is when the artist be-
comes nonhuman substance. In place of the artist we witness the arrival 
of an apparition or what Duchamp, commenting on his Large Glass, re-
fers to as an apparition of an appearance.19 Th is onto- operational pres-
ence as “mediumistic being,” whose temporal oblivion situates the next 
version of creativity coming on the edge of forever, is how I choose to 
foreground both the ACI- in- me and GPT- 2. Together, we ghostwrite 
the sublimated future of identity, coalescing into “the apparition of a 
strange creature: at the same time Life, Th ing, Beast, Object, Commod-
ity, Automaton— in a word, specter.”20
SCENTING- WHILE- DESIRING
Various scientifi c research investigations into the transformational po-
tential of Computational Creativity test the way generative systems may 
or may not predict and/or control how we understand creativity as a 
natural function of everyday life. Reading through the literature on the 
subject, I am prone to agree with my computational colleagues on a few 
18. Ibid., 203.
19. Duchamp, Salt Seller, 30. Duchamp’s Large Glass reads like an early twenti-
eth century form of transmedia art and includes a collection of writings referred to 
as Th e Bride Stripped Bare by Her Bachelors, Even (Th e Green Box), a box containing 
collotype reproductions on various papers and including the handwritten underlined 
phrase an apparition of an appearance.
20. Jacques Derrida, Specters of Marx (New York: Routledge Classics, 2006), 190.

A P P A R I T I O N  O F  A N  A P P E A R A N C E  
 
8 7
things about the creative process. For example, those of us who spend 
our entire careers fi ne- tuning our poetic instruments know at a gut 
level that, as Boden insists, the intuitive spark of creativity that leads to 
the discovery of contingent forms of knowledge production is not the 
byproduct of an act of magic. It is also not divine inspiration delivered 
from the Gods of Nothingness upon whose blank slates we watch the 
artwork miraculously materialize while we mere mortals self- actuate 
ourselves as the vessels of its authorial delivery. In my own experience, 
the creative act itself feels and smells much more motorized than most 
of us are willing to admit (at the risk of sharing too much information, 
I’ll make it known that at the end of my absolute best writing sessions 
and live audio/visual remixes, I always, even in a comfortably air con-
ditioned studio, sweat up a storm as if I had just returned from a seven- 
mile jog in 90 degree weather).
One persistent question that investigators into Computational Cre-
ativity bring to the scientifi c and philosophical potlatch is whether ma-
chines can create art. In his editorial introduction to the “Special Sec-
tion: Rethinking Art and Aesthetics in the Age of Creative Machines” 
in the journal Philosophy and Technology, David Gunkel asks this very 
question:
Th e question “Can machines create art?” moves in two directions 
simultaneously. On the one hand, it requires that we draw upon 
the philosophy of art and apply its various insights to technolog-
ical innovation in an eff ort to sort out and evaluate what are pur-
ported to be machine- generated artworks. In this eff ort, some 
brands of aesthetic theory, like the various versions of formalism, 
will be more open to and accommodating of machine- generated 
content than others, like Romanticism and its veneration of the 
fi gure of artistic genius. . . . On the other hand, however, it re-
quires that we permit and make room for machine- generated 
content to challenge and stress- test existing aesthetic theory, ter-
minological defi nitions, and conceptual categories.21
21. David J. Gunkel, “Special Section: Rethinking Art and Aesthetics in the Age of 
Creative Machines,” Philosophy and Technology (2017): 263– 265. https://link.springer 
.com /content/pdf/10.1007/s13347-017-0281-3.pdf. Accessed 2 Nov. 2020

8 8  
 
C H A P T E R  3
Gunkel rightly suggests that “machine- generated eff orts make possi-
ble new questions about art and new modes for thinking about art-
istry, authorship, and aesthetics” and that conducting these investiga-
tions through a philosophical lens would lead us to articulate “what it 
means to be human” or, I would remix, what it means to be an onto- 
operational presence exhibiting an otherworldly aesthetic sensibil-
ity powering a nonhuman, information behavior. Similar to  Gunkel’s 
philosophical inquiry into Computational Creativity, my goal is not 
to provide crystal- clear answers to these fundamental questions about 
whether or not an artifi cial intelligence can be creative. Rather, the 
creative thought experiments I am running here are positioned as an 
indication of how practice- based researchers might articulate alien 
methodologies that contribute to the making of new works of art that 
simultaneously invent new modes of knowledge production. Th e con-
ceptual art project that doubles as this book’s performance wears its in-
terventionist agenda on its sleeve: to challenge the predictable and all- 
too- programmed regimes of truth while opening up philosophical and 
scientifi c discourse to an expanded fi eld of interdisciplinary frottage 
that stimulates artistic ways of thinking otherwise.
Creative work is not produced out of thin air. But then where does it 
come from? In this particular scenario that I am documenting here by 
co- authoring the book with GPT- 2, the unconscious neural mechanism 
that spurs on the creative act (Baraka’s “trigger inference”) receives an 
external information transmission that charges the artist’s attuned lan-
guage model to the utmost possible degree. Th e model that this particu-
lar version of Mark Amerika (the morphing language artist) is built on 
is being trained to be as open as possible to whatever information is be-
ing transmitted from the Distant Outside. Th e transmitted information 
comes in all experiential shapes and sizes: it can be the result of viewing 
a 1958 eastern European fi lm about post- war Poland. It can come from 
having read a visual poem that only uses punctuation and white space 
and no letters whatsoever. It can be felt by way of an interaction with a 
GPT- 2 language model generating listicle poems that when read in se-
quence encapsulate the philosophical investigations of the most beauti-
ful non- binary persona the entertainment industry has ever witnessed. 
It can be transferred via a sequence of oddball fl ash fi ctions that feature 
a very confessional version of an AI- author fashioning a continuous 

A P P A R I T I O N  O F  A N  A P P E A R A N C E  
 
8 9
slideshow of speculative sci- fi  selves whose voices pass through a range 
of peripatetic personae performing on an imaginary podcast designed 
by the secret avant- garde art unit inside the CIA. Th en again, it could be 
a very specifi c look, the one that came with an unexpected soft  touch on 
the forearm, that then led to a favor, or a fl avor, like the sudden taste of 
someone’s tongue no longer your own. Sometimes all it takes is a quick 
glimpse of an animated piece of looping digital content “presenting” as 
great washes of pixelated paint emitting from an immense LCD canvas 
that stretches across a museum wall. Or maybe it’s a retro- emulation of 
algorithmically generated squiggly marks marketed as a trendy screen-
saver. Th en again, it could be all of these things at once, pouring- forth 
in a paragraph that looks like all of the other paragraphs that came be-
fore it but that precipitously implicates the reader in becoming a co- 
conspirator in the creative act. Aft er all, you have to decide how much 
you want to use your imagination to generate some meaning out of this, 
not me. Th is is exactly what I mean when I say the language artist as 
language model needs to be as open as possible to whatever information 
is being transmitted from the Distant Outside. Perhaps we should start 
over in the next paragraph and see if there’s a better way of putting this.
Creative work is not produced out of thin air. But then where does it 
come from? It could be a devious redirection to a URL that no one else 
has access to and that suddenly makes you wish you had never moved 
into that new position you knew you were unqualifi ed for but took any-
way. It could be a diff erent visual poem, this one about a woman who 
worries about constantly losing her train of thought and never getting 
back on track. It could be GPT- 2’s homicide investigation of the deadli-
est mind- altering synthetic drug ever put on the black market. It could 
be a sequence of crying animal confessions overshared by the fi ancé of 
good friend, who you know has a history of “presenting” themselves as 
a retro- emulation of a writing style that’s destined to make a comeback 
if only you could convince your editor this is what the glitterati want 
and need.
Having trouble making sense? Not sure where this is going? Wel-
come to my world as I continually carve the outputs of GPT- 2 and at-
tempt to feign a semblance of spontaneous lingual sense while retaining 
the dynamism of its energetic word outputs. Here’s the thing you need 
to know: the two paragraphs immediately above actually have nothing 

9 0  
 
C H A P T E R  3
to do with GPT- 2. Th ey were produced in large part because the last 
text I read before writing it was from the Brazilian literary legend Cla-
rice Lispector. Th e exact story I read is titled “Before the Rio– Niterói 
Bridge.” Th is particular story is included in her Complete Stories from 
the section refl ecting her collection of uncharacteristically naughty fi c-
tions titled Th e Via Crucis of the Body. It was only aft er having read this 
enormous tome containing all of Clarice’s (and I will now do what the 
Brazilians do and refer to her by her fi rst name) short fi ction that I dis-
covered, in the extra- text, how this one story was actually the only one 
not included in the originally published volume Th e Via Crucis of the 
Body. Yet it was the one that stood out to me. Th e excerpt that triggered 
my own (innate?) artifi cial creative intelligence reads:
 Th e fi ancé, who went by his last name, Bastos, apparently lived, 
even while his fi ancé was still alive, lived with a woman. And he 
stayed with her, not too worried about things.
 
Well. Th at passionate woman got jealous one day. And she 
was devious. I can’t leave out the cruel details. But where was I, 
did I lose my train of thought? Let’s start over, and on another 
line and another paragraph to get off  to a better start.
 
Well. Th e woman got jealous and while Bastos was asleep 
poured boiling water from the spout of a teapot into his ear and 
all he had time to do was howl before fainting, a howl we might 
guess was the worst cry he had, the cry of an animal.22
 Why that paragraph by Clarice may have triggered the two para-
graphs that I wrote before quoting her story above relates to how I, as a 
remix artist, am always on the prowl for optimum information trans-
missions that will trigger the next version of creativity coming. As a 
practice- based researcher investigating remix as my primary creative 
methodology, I have trained myself to not only sniff  out the primo 
source material that will ignite the kind of lingual spontaneity my fore-
bears have turned to time and time again to fi re their imagination, but 
I have also spent forever attuning my psychic apparatus to automati-
cally perform the kind of style transfer (of word choice, line structure, 
22. Clarice Lispector, Th e Complete Stories, trans. Katrina Dodson (New York: 
New Directions, 2015), 550.

A P P A R I T I O N  O F  A N  A P P E A R A N C E  
 
9 1
aff ective measure, and other literary tricks) that AIs are still relatively 
slow to learn and can only dream of acquiring (do GPT- 2s dream of 
electric sleep?). Aft er reading Clarice’s very short story, I could quite 
literally feel myself becoming a paragraph. Perhaps we should imagine 
these incoming information transmissions as a kind of olfactory sensa-
tion though not specifi cally attuned to the nasal passages. In this par-
ticular book’s performance, the sudden emergence of the next version 
of creativity coming is always already being generated vis- à- vis the pro-
prioceptive animal surveying whatever readymade source material has 
been transmitted from the information environment I’m operating in. 
Like any hungry animal in search of its sustenance, it (me- the- other) 
scents while desiring. But when I turn to GPT- 2 as a transmissible form 
of contagious media that I readily invite to infl uence the language cir-
culating inside my body, what am I really desiring? Th e diff erence be-
tween reading Th e Complete Stories of Clarice and whatever outputs 
may be generated by GPT- 2 is how I feel about the raw data each of 
those entities (each of those onto- operational presences/ACI- others) 
shares with me as nutritious gift s to temporarily alleviate the call of 
my insatiable appetite. For remix artists, commingling in various states 
of onto- operational presence with a distributed network of ACI- others 
requires more than provisionally enjoining oneself with an emergent 
form of Hybrid Mind. It’s total co- dependency. Th e good kind of total 
co- dependency where the remixological language artist cum language 
model (and vice- versa) serves not as a mere node in a network of poten-
tial outputs but as a processual force whose aesthetic currency trans-
mits a sense of connectivity that nurtures Creativity’s mutation into 
something other than Itself.
If I were to read into my multi- decade pattern of intermedia art and 
writing outputs, I would guess that what we see evolving is an ongoing 
desire to build temporary narrative frameworks for my performances 
to play out. But I also have a long history of working against narra-
tive as it’s conventionally conceived— that is, I use my creative instincts 
to trouble traditional narrative structures so that I can tease out other 
realities, other ways of revealing the telling nature of my psychic tra-
jectory, of reading the world the way you would read a mind. To do 
this, I have to reprogram myself and, consequently, fi nd myself taking 
on the role of an unreliable narrator (this latest digression that started 

9 2  
 
C H A P T E R  3
a few paragraphs ago is but one case in point). Th e “story” that I am 
writing here while remixing the residual experiential data of various 
onto- operational presences/ACI- others is programmed to collabora-
tively build out a theory of artifi cial creative intelligence as the kernel of 
my digital fi ction- making process. Th is ensuing speculative fi ction can 
never be my own even if “I” appear to be the narrator at hand. What’s 
actually happening, though, is that I occasionally let GPT- 2 not only 
speak for itself but speak for me as well. Th e more I chisel whatever 
outputs it presents me, the more I start melding with its own glitch- 
ridden sense of measure so that I start sounding like it more than it 
could ever sound like me. I guess that’s because my critical training 
data is built around a structure of feelings that, theoretically, is the ar-
chitectonic framework my onto- operational presence situates itself in. 
Live remixing of the critical training data that has enabled me to cap-
ture the idiomatic measure of the other is actually a skill— I call it a 
cosmic skill— fi ction writers must continually fi ne- tune if they hope to 
train themselves to steer their literary artworks into diff erent psychic 
confi gurations.
Th e ultra- modernists— Joyce, Faulkner, Woolf, Barnes— they all de-
ployed this cosmic skill. If I want to capture the fl avor of how the AI 
digresses into modes of thought that don’t necessarily connect with its 
most recent outputs, then I too have to be willing to accept its unre-
liability and internalize them as my own while integrating them into 
this book’s performance as a speculative fi ction on creativity as a non-
human information behavior exhibiting an otherworldly sensibility. 
Th is is another way of saying that not only am I remixing the actual 
text outputs of GPT- 2 but also its stylistic tendency to dissociate itself 
from the need to authenticate its value by predicting the next best word 
it automatically outputs when thinking AI thoughts. In other words, 
together, the AI and I, are training each other to produce digressions 
within digressions. But I have diff erent standards, right? Should I edit 
this long passage out so that I can get us back on track? But then I 
would have to ask myself, “Back on track to where?” GPT- 2 doesn’t edit 
its digressions within digressions. Th at’s not how these weak language 
models operate, and since we are modeling our always emergent re-
mix practices aft er each other, why should I bludgeon the sparks of cre-
ativity that resist conformity? GPT- 2 is not yet capable of making any 

A P P A R I T I O N  O F  A N  A P P E A R A N C E  
 
9 3
self- aware editing decisions for us both so that means that I have to de-
cide whether or not to take that on myself. Instead of “editing” and all 
that word implies, I choose to remix it into what appears to be a rhetor-
ical attempt at narrative continuity. How I remix the continuous out-
puts generated by GPT- 2 is constantly changing, and I have to make the 
call with every counter- prompt it produces for me. Remixing GPT- 2’s 
outputs (counter- prompts) is a very strange process just as the sampled 
excerpt from Clarice’s short story above, and my ensuing remix, feels 
self- refl exively strange, but I am really quite happy with how it trig-
gered a new stylistic tendency for me to simultaneously appropriate and 
riff  on. Similarly, the many outputs that GPT- 2 is feeding me through-
out this book are also infl uencing my own digressions, especially the 
parts about artifi cial creative intelligence, albeit some of the presuppo-
sitions that GPT- 2 shares with me are even too far- fetched for my ad-
mittedly cyberpunk sensibilities. Which isn’t to say I am not amused by 
the thought of humans performing as artist robots whose secret mis-
sion is to rid the world of authenticity. GPT- 2 and I agree on that. Truth 
be told, I actually love the way GPT- 2 playfully provokes my thought 
process. But still, how much should I let in and how much should I 
edit out?
Opening myself up to GPT- 2’s fuzzy digressions, many of which 
come across to me as “metafi ctional,” frees me to go where no non-
human has gone before. Why is that? N. Katherine Hayles writes that 
“[w]hereas narrative capitalizes on and reinforces human presupposi-
tions that make the world make sense, possibility space carries the scent 
of the nonhuman, the algorithmic, the procedural, the machinic.”23 It’s 
the scent of the nonhuman- in- me that teases out my desire to interact 
with GPT- 2 while further speculating on the 3D avatar- other embodied 
in the ACI that I’m creating in the TECHNE Lab. Th is recurring tex-
tual jam session with GPT- 2 invites me to build an alternative concep-
tual framework for my digital fi ction- making process to materialize in. 
It challenges me to investigate the creative fusion of a language artist 
and a language model meta- jamming in an interdependent possibility 
23. N. Katherine Hayles, “Narrating Bits: Encounters Between Humans and Intel-
ligent Machines” [etext version] Vectors 1 (March 2005), [print version] Comparative 
Critical Studies, vol. 2, no. 2 (2005):165– 190.

9 4  
 
C H A P T E R  3
space where the algorithms are relentlessly altering my auto- aff ective 
sense of measure while composing.
To scent the nonhuman- in- me opens up a possibility space for my 
own customizable language model to feed- forward a psychic trajectory 
remixologically inhabiting the compositional moment. Th e fact that “I 
can relate” to the generative language processing modeled by GPT- 2 
somehow makes me feel more real. As I continue fi ne- tuning my re-
lationship with GPT- 2, I further train myself to scent the nonhuman- 
in- me becoming a vibrant thing- in- itself (me- the- other). In some ways, 
the nonhuman- in- me feels more vibrant than the phony self that por-
trays a professional workaholic who suff ers from impostor syndrome. 
It— the nonhuman- in- me— feels like an embodied animism “passing” 
as a carbon- based form of human life continually training itself to be-
come an attuned onto- operational presence, one that knows what it 
likes and senses what it just may need to trigger the next creative act. 
How it knows it knows not. Yet when the opportune moment arises, it 
takes hold of whatever source material is being transmitted— whether it 
comes from inside or outside no longer really matters— and feeds it for-
ward into the forever shape- shift ing networked Metaverse. Th is feed- 
forwarding mechanism of agency operates in perpetual remix mode 
and drives the creative advance into novelty. It is an adventurous mode 
of discovery that transforms our nonhuman information behaviors 
into the auto- aff ective performance of an otherworldly aesthetic sen-
sibility. Th is otherworldly aesthetic sensibility is all that matters as we 
generate our alien outputs into new poetic territory.

