58
Michael Rottmann
The Aesthetics of (Digital) Machine Sculpture
Automatization, Mechanization, and Mathematization in Minimal, Serial, 
Conceptual, and Computer Art
Abstract
Today’s 3D-printed digital sculpture can be traced back—not only in a technical sense—to the 1960s, when 
our digital culture developed. Using the examples of pioneers Robert Mallary and Charles Csuri, this paper 
reconstructs and distinguishes computer-based productions of sculpture, its reception, and its ontology. One 
focus is the discourse of sculpture, image, and form. A comparison with Minimal, Serial, and Conceptual 
Art is suggested not only because Minimal Art was a hot spot of sculptural discourse, but also because it 
reveals correspondences between digital and non-digital arts, which exist on the level of draft, production, 
and discourse: a creation with certain machines, mathematization, automatization, mechanization, and a 
2D/3D-discourse.
	
It will be argued that the examined digital and non-digital artforms in the 1960s, the time of 
pre-post-digital art, are only understandable in relation to each other and their common historical con-
text: cybernetics, systems theory, the Cold War, and computerization. Taking the cultural-historical and 
politico-economic context into account, it will be demonstrated that one can identify specific reactions to 
digital technology and media and its impacts on art and society—which is why I call the non-digital artforms 
“co-digital art.”
Key Words
Computer sculpture, automation, 2D/3D, machine, form, co-digital art
Sculpture in the 1960s: Arrival of the Computer
Following the story of Charles Csuri that he posed for fellow artist and friend George Segal 
for his work The Diner (1964–66), the life-sized, figurative plaster sculpture in it represents 
an artist, who is sitting at a diner bar and who had studied at Ohio State University with a 

59
The Aesthetics of (Digital) Machine Sculpture
focus on portrait painting and turned toward computer art in the 1960s.1 After Csuri had 
started teaching at the same university, and around 1965 became interested in computer 
graphics and film, he made works such as Sine Curve Man (1967), which was awarded 
from Computers and Automation, and created—and this is of interest here—the computer 
sculpture Numeric Milling (1968) with an IBM 7094 computer system (figs. 1, 2).2 So, Csuri 
not only acted as a model, but also developed a mathematical one. In this regard, together 
with programmer James Shaffer he published the paper “Art, Computers and Mathematics” 
(1968), where they wrote: “Our most recent project is sculpture using a 3-axis, continuous 
path, numerically controlled milling machine.”3 Numerical representation in connection with 
a computer is considered a characteristic of digital media.4 George Segal, in turn, had made 
automation a subject in his figurative work Laundromat (1966–67).
1	
See Kerry Freedman, “Oral History Interview with Charles A. Csuri,” Charles Babbage Institute, October, 
23, 1989 (University of Minnesota, Minneapolis), pp. 1–35, here pp. 3–4, 14, https://conservancy.umn.
edu/handle/11299/107236 (accessed April 6, 2021).
2	
Anonymous, “Charles A. Csuri, Numeric Milling,” Charles A. Csuri Project website, Ohio State University, 
https://www.csuriproject.osu.edu/Detail/objects/768 (accessed April 6, 2021).
3	
Charles Csuri and James Shaffer, “Art, Computer and Mathematics,” AFIPS—Conference Proceedings 
33 (1968), pp. 1293–98, here p. 1297.
4	
See Lev Manovich, The Language of New Media (Cambridge, MA/London: MIT Press, 2001), pp. 27–29.
2  Charles Csuri, Numeric Milling, 1968, wood, 
3-axis milling machine, IBM 7094, punch cards, 
36 × 56 × 22 cm.
1  Charles Csuri, with James Shaffer, Sine Curve 
Man, 1967, black ink, paper, Calcomp drum plotter 
model 565, punch cards, IBM 7094, 104 × 104 cm. 

Michael Rottmann
60
In 1964, it was Donald Judd who reviewed Segal’s The Diner in a commendatory man-
ner, for what he argued was the tension between the real (size, appearance, and space) and 
the artificial (material).5 In the same year, he penned his essay “Specific Objects” (1965), 
which served as a theoretical basis for (his) three-dimensional object art and as an attack 
against the well-established genres of painting and sculpture.6 Last, but not least, at that 
time he also created his works—especially the bar-like series progressions like Untitled 
(1965) (DSS 84)—on the basis of numerical schemes and made use of fabrication.7 
This was recognized by artist and theorist Jack Burnham, who argued in his 1968 book 
Beyond Modern Sculpture—a teleological history of sculpture since modernism in light of 
the development of technology—with a view to the above-mentioned progression: “More 
than anything else, the efforts of the Minimal or Object sculptors characterize the mathe-
matical intentions of this decade.”8 We will come back to these intentions, especially those 
of the “sculptors,” who are inappropriately called Minimal artists.
At this point, we can record the fact that the notion of sculpture was by no means 
homogeneous in the 1960s: at first, the modernist, especially figurative and nonfigurative 
handmade plastic art like that of Pablo Picasso, was discussed as sculpture as well as “con-
struction-sculpture,”9 which Clement Greenberg made out, for instance, in David Smith and 
which will be introduced in more detail. This broad range widens out in the second half of 
the decade through (Minimalist) object art and computer sculpture. This is documented 
by the inventory-taking exhibitions The 1960s: Painting and Sculpture from the Museum 
Collection (1967) at the Museum of Modern Art10 and the Annual Exhibition: Contempo-
rary American Sculpture (1968) at the Whitney Museum of American Art. In each of these 
shows, George Segal, Donald Judd, and Robert Mallary—a further computer sculptor, who 
will be treated here—were represented. Mallary exhibited in the Whitney show his “com-
puter sculpture” Quad II (1968), the second one of the Quad series  (fig. 3).11 Like Csuri, he 
was an educated artist who got access to computers as a faculty member. In 1967, after he 
  5	
See Donald Judd, “Local History” (1964), in Donald Judd, Complete Writings 1959–1975: Gallery Re-
views, Book Reviews, Articles, Letters to the Editor, Reports, Statements, Complaints (Halifax/New York: 
The Press of the Nova Scotia College of Art and Design, 2005), p. 153.
  6	
For it and discrepancies between Judd’s essay, works, and Minimal Art, see Michael Rottmann, Ge­
staltete Mathematik: Geometrien, Zahlen und Diagramme in der Kunst in New York um 1960: Mel 
Bochner – Donald Judd – Sol LeWitt – Ruth Vollmer (Munich: edition metzel, 2020), pp. 108, 116, 125.
  7	
See ibid., pp. 116, 181–92.
  8	
See Jack Burnham, Beyond Modern Sculpture: The Effects of Science and Technology on the Sculpture 
of This Century, 4th printing (New York: Braziller, [1968] 1975), p. 147.
  9	
See Clement Greenberg, “Sculpture in Our Time” (1958), in Clement Greenberg: The Collected Essays 
and Criticism, vol. 4: Modernism with a Vengeance 1957–1969, ed. John O’Brian (Chicago/London: 
University of Chicago Press, 1986), pp. 55–61, here pp. 57–58.
10	
See “The 1960s: Painting and Sculpture from the Museum Collections,” press release, Museum of Mod-
ern Art New York, June 27, 1967, https://assets.moma.org/documents/moma_press-release_326520.
pdf (accessed April 8, 2021).
11	
See 1968 Annual Exhibition Contemporary American Sculpture, exh. cat. Whitney Museum of Ameri­
can Art New York (New York: Whitney Museum of American Art, 1968). The catalogue mentions 
Quad III, which is considered to be made in 1969. So I assume it was the very similar Quad II.

61
The Aesthetics of (Digital) Machine Sculpture
had started his professorship of art at the University of Massachusetts in Amherst, he turned 
toward the computer, in particular with an understanding that the machine could generate 
and transform images.12 In 1968, together with his son Michael Mallary and/or student 
programmers, he wrote the first version of his “computer sculpture program” TRAN2 for 
the local IBM 1130 system,13 which was introduced into the market in 1965, and created 
with it, still without a screen, his first computer sculpture Quad I (1968)—just in time for 
presenting it at Cybernetic Serendipity in London.
Against this background, the following discussion will look at computer sculpture of the 
1960s, which will be understood as an art form, but also foremost as a three-­dimensional 
object. As computer sculpture emanates from a creative process that integrates a digi-
tal computer—which basically defines digital art—computer sculpture qualifies as a digital 
machine sculpture and an early field of three-dimensional digital image making. This study 
will especially be done because computer sculpture has been treated in art history, but has 
received less attention than computer graphics. It may be due to a quantitative asymmetry 
of artworks and their historical technical dispositif as well: special machines for graphics 
(e.g. the plotter) had been developed, but comparable output devices for three-­dimensional 
objects didn’t exist, and only a few protagonists gained access to the milling machines of 
industry.
12	
Robert Mallary, “Computer Sculpture: Six Levels of Cybernetics,” Artforum (May 1969), pp. 29–35, here 
p. 31.
13	
Ibid.
3  Robert Mallary, Quad II, 1968, computer-aided sculpture, 
plywood and laminate, IBM 1130, ca. 195.5 × 25.5 × 30.5 cm 
(without base).

Michael Rottmann
62
For a variety of reasons, computer sculpture will be related to Minimal, Serial, and 
Conceptual Art, which are closely connected in the second half of the 1960s.14 The latter 
are regarded as central places for a (critical) negotiation of sculpture. Furthermore, what 
will be demonstrated is that parallel developments can be made out: a mechanization in 
the sense of an increasing use of machines, as in the fabrication of Minimal Art’s objects, 
can be identified. It can thus be understood as non-digital machine sculpture, although it 
was brought into position against sculpture—thus we have two kinds of machine arts in 
play (yet the relationship between humanity and machine will not here be an issue per se). 
In addition to this, mathematization and automatization—both usually associated with the 
use of a computer—as well as a 2D/3D debate have to be mentioned, and each of these 
will be discussed. Last but not least, the connection between sculpture, Minimal Art, and 
information technology has been drawn (in the historical discourse).15 
If sculpture in a broader, structural sense (à la Rosalind Krauss), which has been dis-
cussed via the “sculptural” (dem “Skulpturalen”), is pursued less here than a work-centered 
(werkzentrierte), object-oriented conception of sculpture—although a tendency of “lique-
faction” of the object has been described in the historical discourse16—this is because the 
latter can be found in both fields of machine sculpture. 
One focus of what follows is the discourse of sculpture, image, and form in light of 
technology, in which a predominating understanding of sculpture since modernism once 
again considerably changed in the context of the use of (digital) machines. Another focus is 
the creative and production processes, ending in sculpture as object. An aesthetics of (digi-
tal) machine sculpture demands this because the artwork is determined by its machinic pro-
duction, and refers to it, which is preserved in its form and materiality. “In the aesthetic pres-
ence the production is constitutively forgotten,” as Sebastian Egenhofer has explained. “But 
it belongs to the structure of the artwork, to touch and turn the border of this ­oblivion.”17 
It remains to be shown with the examples below how this applies to technology-­based art 
from the 1960s.
All art movements that are treated here—and this is the claim—have to be thought 
of in a common historical ground, which prevails all the more if one takes into account 
the sociopolitical and cultural-historical situation in the United States—keywords here are 
cybernetics, systems theory, computerization, and Cold War—and the embedding into the 
historical dispositif of production. There was a critique on and a reflection of production and 
technology in art tied to it there, which will be considered here. 
14	
See Edward Shanken, “Art in the Information Age: Technology and Conceptual Art,” Leonardo 35, 
no. 4 (2002): 433–38.
15	
See, e.g., Jack Burnham, “Systems Esthetics,” Artforum 7, no. 1 (September 1968), pp. 30–35, p. 32.
16	
See Rosalind Krauss, “Sculpture in the Expanded Field,” October, no. 8 (1979): 30–44. See Burnham, 
“­Systems Esthetics,” 1968, pp. 30–35; Martina Dobbe and Ursula Ströbele, “Gegenstand: Skulptur,” in 
Gegenstand: Skulptur, ed. idem (Paderborn: Wilhelm Fink, 2020), pp. 1–16.
17	
Sebastian Egenhofer, Produktionsästhetik (Zurich: diaphanes, 2010), p. 7. Translation by the author.

63
The Aesthetics of (Digital) Machine Sculpture
It will become evident that the examined (digital) machine sculpture of the 1960s—
when today’s digital culture significantly started to develop—can be understood as a pre-
history of today’s 3D-printed sculpture, like that of Karin Sander or Nick Ervinck, not only in 
a technical, but also in a conceptual respect.
This will be argued in a theoretical manner and a historical reconstruction. Let’s now 
closely examine Csuri’s and Mallary’s computer sculptures,18 whose same date of origin 
invite a comparison. A first contextualization in the discourse of sculpture will be revealing.
The Otherness of Computer Sculpture(s) 
In a formal respect, both artists’ computer sculptures follow a certain tradition of moder-
nity but can also be related to the already mentioned “construction-sculpture,” which was 
announced by Clement Greenberg in 1958 again as new and forward-looking.19 Since mo-
dernity, sculpture no longer needed to be mimetic and monolithic.20 Both computer sculp-
tures make use of the former, but not of the latter. Csuri’s Numeric Milling is made of un­
polished wood; it is small-sized and compact (33 × 56 × 22 cm) and without a pedestal. It 
has convex and concave parts, and the latter show groove-like depressions. Like ­Constantin 
Brâncuși, who was mentioned by Greenberg as a transformer of the human figure into 
geometric, abstract forms,21 Csuri kept the shape blocky and used a single material. Con-
trary to this, Mallary used expanded possibilities. The life-sized, pole-like sculpture Quad III 
(213 × 35 × 33.6 cm) which is very similar to the already mentioned Quad II, seems to sur-
pass its pedestal and to head in a meandering and line-like manner for height. One could 
get the impression of a potentially infinite continuation, as in Brâncuși’s Endless Column, 
but for a thick plug at the upper end that closes it off and, pushing downward in accord-
ance with gravity, opposes the upward soaring. The material and color of Quad III no longer 
appear—as in construction-sculpture in which color could also a be applied22—as a unity.
The computer sculptures nowhere near fulfill all the characteristics of construction-sculp-
ture.23 But Csuri, Mallary, and the “constructor-sculptor” are unified by an open-mindedness 
toward new techniques and materials: “a work or its parts can be cast, wrought, cut or 
simply put together: the new sculpture is not so much sculpted as constructed, built, as-
sembled, arranged.”24 To distinguish sculpture and plastic art (Plastik) just in the manner 
of subtractive or additive work by “carving and modeling” had become anachronistic.25 In 
that way, Mallary could take up his assemblages, which he described as a “combining and 
18	
Two male artists are treated here, so a desideratum would be to identify and research female artists 
working in the 1960s as computer sculptors.
19	
See Greenberg, “Sculpture in Our Time,” 1958, pp. 57–58.
20	
Ibid.
21	
Ibid.
22	
Ibid.
23	
Ibid.
24	
Ibid., pp. 58, 61.
25	
Ibid., p. 58.

Michael Rottmann
64
recombining” of (found) objects.26 Furthermore, the computer sculptors could build on the 
material culture and practices of construction-sculpture. Traditional materials like “stone, 
bronze and clay” would be substituted by “industrial materials like iron, steel, alloys, glass, 
plastics, celluloid, etc., etc., which are worked with the blacksmith’s, the welder’s and even 
the carpenter’s tools.”27 Thus Greenberg attested to “the medium a new flexibility” and “a 
wider range of expression.”28
The two computer sculptors belong to that group of artists in the 1960s who mainly 
speak euphorically and assertively about the possibilities of computers in art: technical re-
strictions, which they also mentioned, were understood as challenges29—let’s keep in mind 
that both artists did research at universities. However, when their forms and materials seem 
to be modern, this must be seen in the context of the technical dispositif of the 1960s. In a 
paradoxical manner, the surfaces provide information about the difference of their produc-
tion methods: Numeric Milling shows traces of the milling machine, whereas the smooth, 
shining paint (Fassung) of Quad results from the artist’s manual work. It was an aesthetic 
decision by Csuri because the milling machine could produce smooth surfaces.30 With the 
machinic sculptura an impression of direct carving could even appear—a method without 
a model as an intermediate step. At the same time, the decisions of the artists were bound 
with the possibilities of technology. So, Mallary’s program TRAN2 could calculate forms, 
which could be printed with an inkjet printer, but it was Mallary himself who had to transfer 
them onto a plastic or plywood panel, cut disks out, and stack and cover them with the 
help of a metal axis.31 The 48 to 100 contours, which could be realized with the IBM 1130 
system, where not enough to reach a smooth, continuous form as Mallary explained.32
Here, a first differentiation of computer-sculpture can be done with a view to its pro-
duction and the role of the computer: Csuri produces the object directly with the ma-
chine, Mallary develops forms with the computer, and his subsequent manual process 
could be described as plastic-constructive. In each case, the computer enabled just a partial 
­automatization, and the creative processes were manual-machinic or analog-digital hybrids 
in a pre-postdigital (art) world.
26	
See Copper Giloth and Justin P. West, Robert Mallary: Pioneer in Computer Art 1992, Vimeo video, 
26 : 53, no date, uploaded by Copper Giloth, https://vimeo.com/133915501, here 3 : 24 (accessed De-
cember, 27, 2021).
27	
See Greenberg, “Sculpture in Our Time,” 1958, pp. 58–59.
28	
Ibid.
29	
See Csuri and Shaffer, “Art, Computer and Mathematics,” 1968, p. 1298; Mallary, “Computer Sculp-
ture,” 1969, pp. 32–33.
30	
See the Charles A Csuri Project website, https://csuriproject.osu.edu/index.php/Detail/objects/768 (ac-
cessed April 11, 2021).
31	
See Mallary, “Computer Sculpture,” 1969, p. 32.
32	
Ibid., p. 31. 

65
The Aesthetics of (Digital) Machine Sculpture
Ontological Aspects of Computer Sculpture
For Charles Csuri and Robert Mallary, the computer possessed outstanding significance be-
cause of its potential to generate multiple forms, also new ones, in the sense of the ge-
stalt of an object.33 Referring to this in the historical discourse, which was characterized by 
thinking about forms, the following question was relevant: Which (artistic) media can be 
operated by computer and controlled and modified dynamically with the passage of time? 
Visual forms could be displayed with the principle of light on a screen in two dimensions or 
with a projection in three dimensions—as both artists mentioned34—but in each case only 
in an ephemeral manner. They could permanently be supplied to perception with a plotter in 
two dimensions (fig. 4) and with a milling machine in three dimensions. With these different 
appearances a question of ontological modes arises: What was the historical conception of 
computer sculpture?
In contemporary theory of digital images, which is more applied to computer ­graphics, 
it is common to think in a binary relation of image and code, thus ascribing the digital 
medium a dual nature.35 It is in dispute whether a materialized and externalized image 
33	
See Csuri and Shaffer, “Art, Computer and Mathematics,” 1968, pp. 1294–95. Mallary; “Computer 
Sculpture,” 1969, p. 31.
34	
Ibid.
35	
Actually, there are more relevant elements like diagrams, programs, etc. See Michael Rottmann, “Pro-
gramm und Diagramm: Überlegungen zum digitalen Bild und zur Automatisierung anhand der Computer­
grafik der 1960er Jahre von Frieder Nake,” Kunstgeschichte Open Peer Reviewed Journal (December 7, 
2021): 1–23, here 4, https://www.kunstgeschichte-ejournal.net/589/ (accessed December, 7, 2021).
4  Charles Csuri, plotter drawing of Numeric Milling, 1968, ink, paper, Calcomp Drum Plotter Model 565, 
punch cards, IBM 7094. 

Michael Rottmann
66
outside the computer system can be regarded as a digital one. This is furthered by the fact 
that otherwise its specific digital technical conditionality would remain unconsidered; the 
counterargument is that an external image, other than an internal one, could no longer be 
processed.36 In any case, code and image—which can be also three dimensional—are in a 
close but “paradoxical relationship”:37 the image is caused by the code in an arbitrary way 
and refers back to the latter—if it can be identified as coded.
Csuri and Mallary share an awareness of the connection of sculpture and code, they 
distinguish “code,” “program,” “data,” and “sculpture,” not least because they were both 
programming or were otherwise rather involved.38 Nevertheless, they understood computer 
sculpture as a three-dimensional object. The ontological problem, appearing with computer 
sculpture, was not treated explicitly in the American discourse of sculpture of the 1960s to 
my knowledge.39 However, the artists examined here exemplarily show a distinction of the 
following states of computer sculpture: (1) the external sculpture as a real three-dimensional 
object, generated with a computer system and produced by machine and/or hand afterward 
(computer-generated/produced sculpture). (2) The internal sculpture—we would talk nowa-
days about a virtual object—as a pictorial object, which is processed within a digital system 
and becomes visible, for example, on a screen; as Csuri could not display the “[m]athemati-
cally generated surfaces,” they were printed.40 (3) A mathematical and algorithmical mode of 
being can be identified as associated with it. Addressed here are the program and the data of 
a sculpture, whose basis is mathematical, because it is a central property of the computer to 
automate calculations; algorithms for the calculation of mathematical issues could moreover 
be included in what was mentioned as a basic principle for a (parametric) generation and 
examination of visual forms.41 
In research literature a “dematerialization of art” (Lippard/Chandler) and information 
technology have been considered together, especially with a view to the transformation of 
an artwork into code and information.42 With the same direction of impact and in the con-
text of his systems aesthetics for painting and sculpture, Jack Burnham described a change 
36	
Ibid.
37	
See Claus Pias, “Das digitale Bild gibt es nicht – Über das (Nicht-)Wissen der Bilder und die informa-
tische Illusion,” Zeitenblicke 2, no. 1 (May 8, 2003), n.p., https://www.zeitenblicke.de/2003/01/pias/pias.
pdf (accessed March, 22, 2008). Translated by the author.
38	
They also used technical terms like “processing” and “transformation.” See Csuri and Shaffer, “Art, 
Computer and Mathematics,” 1968, p. 1293; Mallary, “Computer Sculpture,” 1969, pp. 29–35. 
39	
The difference between “object” and “software” was discussed. See Les Levine, “Systems Burn-off X 
Residual Software,” in Software: Information Technology: Its New Meaning for Art, ed. Jack Burnham, 
exh. cat. The Jewish Museum (New York: The Jewish Museum, 1970), pp. 60–61. For a discussion in 
the German discourse (e.g., by Herbert W. Franke) see the essay of Ursula Ströbele in this volume.
40	
See Csuri and Shaffer, “Art, Computer and Mathematics,” 1968, p. 1297.
41	
Ibid., p. 1294. See Margit Rosen, “A Record of Decisions,” in Charles A. Csuri: Beyond Boundaries, 
1963—present, ed. Janice Glowski (Columbus, OH: College of the Arts, Ohio State University, 2006), 
pp. 25–45, 34–35, 42.
42	
See Shanken, “Art in the Information Age,” 2002.

67
The Aesthetics of (Digital) Machine Sculpture
from the “unique work” to an “unobject” in the way of a “liquefaction”;43 Robert Morris, 
for instance, had transmitted the working plans of his L-Beams so they could be rebuilt on 
site without transporting them between the exhibition venues44—this is close to the idea of 
sending data and 3D-printing a work. 
Accordingly, it is remarkable that, although Csuri was interested in movement, varia-
tion, and transformation and thus in dynamical forms—we remember his interest in portrai-
ture—which computer film enabled him to pursue, Csuri made a permanent sculpture.45 It 
is insightful to speculate about the reasons: the production of a three-dimensional object 
could be motivated by Csuri’s technical research. Such an object was permanent, experi-
ential, exhibitable, and tradable—this artwork-oriented attitude could be rooted in Csuri’s 
education. We have to consider that in the 1960s a real (but not too big) sculpture—from 
today’s perspective perhaps surprising—could circulate better than a virtual one, because 
computers, if at all, were difficult to transport, generally not networked, and mostly not 
equipped with a screen, and thus hardly usable in exhibitions.46 In Serial and Conceptual 
Art, the work-centered concept of art was relativized by the emphasis on order or the idea, 
as well as the transition to languages, diagrams or even certificates, which also attacked 
the suitability for the market. It remains an open question whether a virtual sculpture would 
have been accepted as art in the 1960s; it anyhow could have been reproduced easily 
with a data carrier, but not protected with the technology of non-fungible tokens (NFT). 
In any case, computer sculpture as a three-dimensional object could be reconnected to an 
established genre and in such a way legitimized and more easily fed into the discourse of 
sculpture. 
Let’s now turn toward the mathematical characteristics and art experience of (comput-
er) sculpture and its theorization, because, with the machine, mathematics is also in play: 
not only is the construction of a machine prepared by calculations, but with digital machines 
at the latest computing also became an essential task.
Mathematical (Computer) Sculpture
If one asks for the experience of an external computer sculpture, one can assume methodi-
cally initially that it differs from that of a traditional sculpture. Therefore, specific properties 
have to be identifiable on a phenomenal level, otherwise the respective experiences would 
coincidence.
Specifications could be: (1) traces of the (technical) production method, (2) materials 
and forms, as well as (3) their mathematical/coded basis. An identification due to previous 
knowledge, for instance via discourse or provided by additional information like photo-
43	
See Burnham, “Systems Esthetics,” 1968, p. 32.
44	
Ibid.
45	
See Csuri and Shaffer, “Art, Computer and Mathematics,” 1968, p. 1295.
46	
Here, it proves true that art history benefits from precise argumentation concerning historical technol-
ogy.

Michael Rottmann
68
graphs, diagrams, and texts in the exhibitions of Serial and Conceptual Art, is not meant 
here. Arguing with sculpture as an object reminds us that its infrastructure or display can 
also be decisive: for instance, is the computer relation of a virtual sculpture on a screen (in 
an exhibition) evident. The sense of the introduced description, “computer relation” refers 
to a problem: a received computer sculpture can be made totally by machine (like that of 
Csuri or today’s 3D-printed pieces) or partly by machine and partly by hand, when, for ex-
ample, prefabricated elements were assembled. They can also be made totally by hand (like 
that of Mallary), when, for example, a computer-calculated and -generated form becomes 
artistically converted. One could distinguish between a digital sculpture and a quasi-digital 
sculpture, which are both computer-based sculptures, fully or partly made by machine, and 
a virtual sculpture in the sense of a computer-based draft, which serves as an intermediate 
step in a creative process, ending in a handmade sculpture. A crucial aspect—for the term 
“computer sculpture”—is that at least at one point of the creative process—in an interplay 
of artists, things, and techniques—the computer comes into operation, whose basic deter-
mination is numerical computation. In response to this, here I will focus on mathematiza-
tion in the sense of a “synthetic math,”47 as Robert Smithson puts it, not least because the 
other, above-named identifiers are not less problematic: the materials can, but need not be 
specific. While Csuri worked with the traditional material wood, which can be carved by 
machine, today’s 3D-printing uses Acrylnitril-Butadien-Styrol (ABS), for instance, which can 
be glued. Likewise, the consultation of traces proves a delicate matter. When Robert Morris 
asks us to consider that new mechanical production methods in the art could eliminate 
traces of production,48 he related this to manual work, that is why one has to object that 
exactly his detection can be a trace, to namely that of the machine. Moreover, we have to 
consider that manual work can be imitated with machines and machined precision can be 
imitated with manual work. The “problem of form” will be discussed more detailed now.
Questions of form and materiality, on production and perception of art as well as their 
complex interplays have been treated within Minimal, Serial, and Conceptual Art, in particu-
lar for three-dimensional objects on a numerical basis. Aiming at the realization of certain 
aspects within production and perception, especially neutrality and objectivity as well as 
a debate concerning European aesthetics (i.e., proportion),49 Donald Judd and Sol LeWitt 
created since 1963—actually before there was a talk of Minimal and Serial Art—works like 
Untitled (1963) (DSS 41) and Wall Structure (1963) by numerical schemes and considered 
appearing effects, especially the relationship of form and order. It is insightful to contextu-
alize computer sculpture with these processes, even though they were determined by other 
traditions and intentions/objectives, and the numerical schemes are not strict formalizations 
because they don’t have to be executable on a digital machine. However, the same goes 
47	
Quoted in Rottmann, Gestaltete Mathematik, 2020, p. 18.
48	
See Robert Morris, “Notes on Sculpture: Part III,” Artforum 5, no. 10 (Summer 1967), pp. 24–29, p. 26.
49	
See Rottmann, Gestaltete Mathematik, 2020, pp. 220–24, 289–93.

69
The Aesthetics of (Digital) Machine Sculpture
for the digital code, depending on the way of production of a computer sculpture, or rather 
the degree of automatization.
Since the beginning, the unusual forming of the (pre-)minimalistic objects aimed at 
visual exploration of their structure, especially by offering shadows, reflections, and parts 
for looking at, through, or inside in an interplay with the three-dimensionality. In such a 
way, they aimed at the relation of seeing, thinking, and knowing. The genesis of a form out 
of manifold impressions corresponds to the problem of constancy of form (Formkonstanz), 
which was discussed in Rudolf Arnheim’s Gestalt-based theory of perception. He pointed 
out that form and color play an important role in perceiving an object, but also in the con-
text of visual thinking.50 Another important issue was explained by Donald Judd: a numerical 
order could be realized and could compete against the form or even dominate it.51 Thus, a 
form could be relativized—as the Minimalists also argued—not only by color and materiali-
ty.52 Depending on the ontological model on which it was based, this was contrary to an art 
based on factuality, but was beneficial in the intended argument with Clement Greenberg 
and his formalist modernism. With the appearing relationships of the empirical and intelligi-
ble, or rather the visual and invisible, the roles of form and seeing as constitutive elements 
of art were challenged—in accordance with contemporary theory of perception. For the 
sake of completeness it should be noted that Robert Morris went one step further with a 
view of the self-experiences of the viewer—what is known today as the phenomenological 
approach to Minimal Art—and showed with his works, such as his L-Beams, referring back 
to Maurice Merleau-Ponty, that a form can be understood only as gestalt in space-­situation-
body-relations53—Greenberg himself modified formalism in 1967.54 
Due to these events, in particular relating the Minimalist objects to numerical orders, 
Judd, and even more so Morris, were described by Burnham as precursors of a systems aes-
thetic, which he considered paradigmatic with a view to the technological situation; it start-
ed with Morris when he brought forms like in Permutation (1967) gradually in changing re-
lations,55 while for Judd’s Progressions he declared: “Here sets, defined as numerical values, 
have nothing to do with dimension or finite proportion generated through Euclidean space 
perception, but transcend the intuitive-concrete to become extensions of pure process and 
transformation.” He continues: “Sculpture becomes ‘thingified’ by means which cannot be 
perceived except through the rules for ordering finite or infinite sets of abstract points in 
a given continuum.”56 Sculpture would mirror a development in modern geometry, which 
has left (according to Oswald Spengler) the area of visual and empirical and measurable ob-
jects behind, and acts now with mathematical functions; thus “Object sculpture,” following 
50	
Ibid., p. 153.
51	
Ibid., pp. 204–17, 236–40.
52	
Ibid., pp. 135–36.
53	
Ibid., pp. 166–71.
54	
See Clement Greenberg, “Complaints of an Art Critic,” Artforum (October 1967), pp. 38–39.
55	
See Burnham, “Systems Esthetics,” 1968, p. 32.
56	
Burnham, Beyond Modern Sculpture, 1975, p. 147.

Michael Rottmann
70
Burnham, shows “that the mathematical model can no longer solve the iconic problems of 
sculpture.”57 There was a harsh replica by Judd—we will get back to this at the end.
Here, it is important to note that while Judd takes actions against the identification of 
the intelligible part or rather the mathematical connotation, LeWitt made the tension the 
content of his work. In his Serial Project #1 (ABCD) (1966) he played with it and carries the 
relativization of form to extremes, which now could be shaped arbitrarily to some degree—
as long as the generative rule, here a linguistic-combinatorial one, could be reconstructed. 
At the same time, Burnham made out a discrepancy in Judd’s Progressions with a view 
to the numerical determination of the objects and their impression and declared with it an 
inextricable entanglement of the determinants of sculpture: “More than simply an art ob-
ject’s list structure, Judd included phenomenal qualities which would have never shown up 
in a fabricator’s plans, but which proved necessary for the ‘seeing’ of the object.”58 Actually, 
the alleged sparse, geometrical objects offer quite a few sensual dimensions regarding their 
chromaticity, materiality, and lighting conditions, and in that way they would be more than 
a “list-structure”—which is what programmers call it, namely a listing of those properties 
which are required for the recreation of a physical object.59
Computer sculptors Csuri and Mallary, who had presumably to face up to the technical 
challenges, could have profited from this discourse. This affects more than the proportion 
between work and viewer—as a life-sized vertical Quad III evokes an anthropomorphism. 
When the role of form was questioned, the computer sculptors at the same time exposed 
the potential of the computer within the process of form-finding: in a combinatorial manner 
as a variant-machine and in a cybernetic manner as a decision-machine. Like the objects 
of Minimal Art, the computer sculptures were not built for a reception or illustration of its 
mathematical bases. The latter were elaborated in such a way that they hardly could be 
identified by a common viewer. The curved forms of Numeric Milling are based on Bessel 
functions—the canonical solutions of Bessel’s differential equations60—which are of media-­
technological interest because they find application in calculating how electrical waves 
propagate in wires.61 However, in art and design they were not used to my knowledge. 
Nevertheless, on this level Numeric Milling refers to the development of procedures for 
generating curved surfaces with smooth transitions in mathematics. Such surfaces, which 
were researched and advertised by General Motors Research Laboratories, were of impor-
tance, for instance, for the bodywork of the automobile industry. Thus, the computer sculp-
tures—particularly also the biomorphically appearing one of Mallary—touch on the tradi-
tional dualism of geometric and organic forms. What kind of form a given one is, could no 
longer be determined “superficially” in the 1960s, but only via its manner of ­origin; ­Donald 
Judd could have profited from this insight, because he showed—despite his familiarity with 
57	
Ibid.
58	
Burnham, “Systems Esthetics,” 1968, p. 32.
59	
Ibid.
60	
See Csuri and Shaffer, “Art, Computer and Mathematics,” 1968, pp. 1297–98.
61	
See Paul Schafheitlin, Die Theorie der Besselschen Funktion (Berlin/Leipzig: Teubner, 1908), pp. 2–3.

71
The Aesthetics of (Digital) Machine Sculpture
mathematical geometries—a dualistic understanding of form.62 It seems paradoxical, since 
Judd’s works provide an impression and even identification of mathematics, whereas com-
puter sculptures disable the identification. Finally, computer sculptures like Numeric Milling 
indicate that in the 1960s knowledge and practices of the working world were picked up 
and applied in the arts. The (mathematical) modeling of surfaces was one thing, but their 
technical realization quite another—even when both could be entangled in computer pro-
duction systems.
Mechanization/Automatization
For his work with computer sculpture Charles Csuri was in the right place: he was an aca-
demic in Ohio, where the Cincinnati Milling Machine Company operated, and with which 
he cooperated around 1968.63 An objective of the use of such machines was to automa-
tize production in an economic sense, reducing primarily manual work, which had been 
­emphatically sought since the 1950s.64 This happened in the “navigable water” of cyber-
netics, which was known by the computer sculptors,65 and in which automatization pos-
sessed not inconsiderable significance66—Norbert Wiener was called the father of modern 
cybernetics and the “Father of Automation.”67 Correspondingly, in 1952 an Automatically 
Programmed Tool System (ATP system) was presented in Scientific American as an innova-
tion, which as an analog-digital milling machine system for tools not only proceeded the 
production process automatically, but also controlled it with “[f]eedback control.”68 Such 
automation technology makes evident that automatization in a technical sense has to be 
distinguished in different grades. Under these circumstances one could say that Mallary 
was engaged in a semi-automation (Quad III) and Csuri strived for a complete automation 
(­Numeric Milling). Because the functionality of the programming language, which was ap-
plied in Automatically Programmed Tool systems, had been not adequate for his artistic 
purposes, Csuri developed his own procedures.69 
Mechanization and automatization can be made out—in different ways—also in Mini-
mal and Conceptual Art as well as Serial Art. Arguments were made on the level of methods 
and objects, which happened in particular in the context of a systems discourse in which, 
62	
See Rottmann, Gestaltete Mathematik, 2020, pp. 29, 51–55.
63	
See Csuri and Shaffer, “Art, Computer and Mathematics,” 1968, p. 1298.
64	
See William Pease, “An Automatic Machine Tool,” Scientific American (September 1952), pp. 101–15, 
p. 105.
65	
See Mallary, “Computer Sculpture,” 1969, p. 29.
66	
See Norbert Wiener, Cybernetics or Control and Communication in the Animal and the Machine, 
2nd edition, 4th printing (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, [1948] 1985), p. 39.
67	
Anonymous, “Dr. Norbert Wiener Dead at 69: Known as Father of Automation,” The New York Times, 
March 19, 1964, p. 1.
68	
Pease, “An Automatic Machine Tool,” 1952, p. 101.
69	
See Csuri and Shaffer, “Art, Computer and Mathematics,” 1968, pp. 1297–98.

Michael Rottmann
72
among other things, work with numbers and rules was understood as systemic.70 Accord-
ingly, Minimal Art was characterized in the second half of the 1960s not only by industrial 
materials like steel, aluminum, acrylic or mirror glass, but also by “machine production”—as 
art historian Jutta Held has analyzed.71 With fabrication, the artworks changed from the ear-
ly ones with “traces of workmanship” to “precisely worked, standardized articles.”72 What 
was done to realize neutrality, for example by erasing the personal handwriting, as was 
rightly criticized, resulted in the opposite, because now references to industrial or social 
conditions of production existed. The applied “mathematical rules,” following Held, would 
have been taken “out of the technical world” and “reproduced” by the artists, the “alleged 
primary shapes” (Urformen) are “mediated by recent industrial products” and the “normal-
ized boxes” would mirror “the automatic way of production.”73 
With the use of commercial, technical machines, especially the self-acting ones like 
the automaton, a certain automatization happened—here understood as a process, which 
runs totally or partly without the participation of a human being. The debate was not only 
held on automation technology in the narrow sense. Robert Morris, for instance, attested 
to Minimal Art another kind of automation, which “precludes any ‘arranging’ of parts”: 
“The ‘how’ of making was automated by accepting the method of forming necessary to 
rectilinear things.”74 For Morris, this practice fits in a system-based art, which his broad con-
ception of “automation” rests on. So “many 20th-century artists”75 as well as Renaissance 
sculptor Donatello would have in common, as Morris quite understandably explained, “that 
some part of the systematic making process has been automated.”76 In these cases, “the 
artist has stepped aside for more of the world to enter into the art,” and at the same time 
external determinants could unfold their effects within the forming process.77 Morris offers 
only a few artists (such as Jasper Johns, Frank Stella, John Cage, and Jackson Pollock), but 
not LeWitt, who will be addressed here. In a characterization of his Conceptual Art, LeWitt 
explained that after choosing the formal means, the application of an “idea,”78 for example 
70	
See Michael Rottmann, “Kalkulierte Innovationen: Zur Kritik der Systematisierung von Entwurfs- und 
Innovationsprozessen in der Kunst um 1960,” in Claudia Mareis and Rottmann, Entwerfen mit ­System, 
Studienhefte Problemorientiertes Design, no. 10, ed. Jesko Fezer, Oliver Gemballa, and Matthias ­Görlich 
(Hamburg: Adocs, 2020), pp. 123–221.
71	
See Jutta Held, “Minimal Art – Eine amerikanische Ideologie,” in Minimal Art: Eine kritische Retrospek-
tive, ed. Gregor Stemmrich (Basel/Dresden: Verlag der Kunst, 1995), pp. 444–70, here pp. 446–47. 
Translation by the author.
72	
Ibid., pp. 446–47. Translation by the author.
73	
Ibid., pp. 459–61. Translation by the author.
74	
See Robert Morris, “Some Notes on the Phenomenology of Making: The Search for the Motivated,” 
Artforum 8, no. 8 (April 1970), pp. 62–66, here p. 66.
75	
Ibid., p. 65.
76	
Ibid.
77	
Ibid.
78	
LeWitt used “idea” and “system” synonymously. See Rottmann, Gestaltete Mathematik, 2020, 
pp. 249–53.

73
The Aesthetics of (Digital) Machine Sculpture
a system (of rules) implies that: “The process is mechanical.”79 His machine metaphor be-
came famous: “The idea becomes a machine that makes the art.”80 As I have argued else-
where, LeWitt, as well as Mel Bochner, partly automatized their processes in their Serial Art 
by working with matrixes of mathematics in a generative manner, because these diagrams 
operated on paper as “symbolic machines.”81 One can also find this notion, which is bound 
to “rule-media” as I put it,82 in LeWitt’s understanding of text as a kind of a flow chart, 
which could function as “an operational diagram to automate art”—the artist exemplified 
this through his programmatic Sentences on Conceptual Art (1969).83 
It becomes apparent that in Serial and Conceptual Art alternative mechanizations and 
automatizations were declared and pursued. Such practices were by no means only imi-
tative or assertive. Rather, they have to be considered explorative and reflexive; they ad-
dressed internal art categories like the idea of the artist genius and were targeted against 
­modernism. As Morris explained: “However it is employed, the automation serves to remove 
taste and the personal touch by co-opting forces, images, processes, to replace a step for-
merly taken in a directing or deciding way by the artist.”84 Other than écriture automatique, 
the automatism of Surrealism, which was used to activate and explore unknown areas (of 
the unconsciousness)—a procedure which stimulates the artist by turning off the control 
of consciousness, but keeps her/him determinative in the end—with technical-machinic 
automatization, parts of the creative process were handed over to overcome the restrictions 
of the (conscious) self.85 They were also used with a view to addressing the cultural imprint, 
especially to turn off the personal “biases,” which is something Csuri mentioned for comput-
er work.86 Morris talked about a “controlled lack of control.”87 He made a good point when 
he accentuated that with automation the arbitrary in art would just not diminish, because 
now forces would be effective, which are “beyond his [the artist’s] total personal control.”88
2D/3D and In Between
One technical problem in the making of computer sculpture in the 1960s was the entire 
representation of a three-dimensional object with a digital model, as Robert Mallary has 
79	
See Sol LeWitt, “Sentences on Conceptual Art,” 0–9, no. 5 (January 1969), pp. 3–5.
80	
Sol LeWitt, “Paragraphs on Conceptual Art,” Artforum 5, no. 10 (1967), p. 79–83, here p. 80.
81	
See Michael Rottmann, “Checking Creativity: Machines, Media and Mathematics in Early Computer, 
­Serial and Conceptual Art,” Proceedings: Conference EVA Copenhagen 2018: Politics of the Machine—­
Art and After, Aalborg University Copenhagen, May 15–17, 2018, pp. 1–10, here p. 5–6, doi: 10.14236/
ewic/EVAC18.2.
82	
See ibid., p. 6.
83	
Quoted in Rottmann, Gestaltete Mathematik, 2020, p. 278.
84	
Morris, “Some Notes on the Phenomenology of Making,” 1970, p. 65.
85	
For Bochner, see Rottmann, Gestaltete Mathematik, 2020, p. 289.
86	
See Csuri and Shaffer, “Art, Computer and Mathematics,” 1968, p. 1295.
87	
Morris, “Some Notes on the Phenomenology of Making,” 1970, pp. 65–66.
88	
Ibid., p. 66.

Michael Rottmann
74
­explicated.89 It can be assumed that computer programs were oriented to existing output 
devices like the screen and plotter, which had been designed for two-dimensional display-
ing. If three-dimensional objects were displayed on its surfaces in an illusionistic manner, 
their representations did not need to be identical with those of an actual three-dimension-
al object. Considering this technical condition, it becomes comprehensible why sculpture 
was thought and practiced—as discussed for Quad III—as a compound of two-dimen-
sional elements. A starting point was the older idea of “multi-planar image synthesis,”90 
the description and creation of three-dimensional forms with two-dimensional ones—in 
Quad III stapled disks—in the way of a contour map (fig. 5). The displaying and making of 
three-­dimensional forms could be stimulated by mathematics, which has a long tradition 
of representing (geo­metrical) objects (of higher dimensions) and methods of projection and 
intersection, as well as by industry, in which such concepts must be developed for ­milling, 
89	
Mallary, “Computer Sculpture,” 1969, p. 30.
90	
See Robert Mallary, Interview, in Artist and Computer, ed. Ruth Leavitt (New York: Harmony Books, 
1976), pp. 4–8.
5  Robert Mallary, plotter ­drawing, 
1968, computer-­generated ­Drawing 
with TRAN 2, ink on ­plotter paper, 
IBM 1130, plotter, ca. 30 × 40 cm.

75
The Aesthetics of (Digital) Machine Sculpture
punching, or casting three-dimensional forms (e.g., milling machines with three axes).91 
From this viewpoint, computer sculpture—plastic procedures included—could be more in-
teresting than ­computer graphics for industry and its development of mostly three-dimen-
sional products.
The subject of dimensionality was also an issue for Greenberg and for Minimal, Serial, 
and Conceptual Art, as I have shown elsewhere, in respect to the theory of sculpture and 
the aesthetics of production: the relationship of two- and three-dimensionality was an in-
gredient, because these art forms operated with transforming media, for instance a draft 
into an object, and they related both types of dimensionality, in presentations of multipart 
works for example.92 One could talk about pendulousnesses. Painting as a starting and 
reference point was increasingly made and understood as object-like (Johns, LeWitt, Judd, 
­Stella), thus helping to reach object art; the same goes for Mallary: “I conceive of an image 
as a monolith, an actual object in an actual place, aggressive in the factuality of its phys-
ical and sculptural attributes of surface, shape and substance.”93 He was interested in the 
interspace between painting and sculpture—the “impasto of painting” could “preserve[] its 
pictorial ‘skin,’” but also allows for being “transformed into sculpture”—seeing in himself 
“more a painter than a sculptor.”94 Many of the mentioned artists continued a kind of draw-
ing and/or turned back to graphics later; LeWitt even pursued a maximal two-dimensionality 
with his Wall Drawings.95 So, artists like Judd and LeWitt not only attacked modernism with 
a rhetoric of change, for example with their terms “Specific Objects” (Judd) and “Structures” 
(LeWitt), but also with an interdimensionality (Zwischendimensionalität), as I call it, which 
can be ascribed to their painting-originated space-expanding objects in the early 1960s, 
like the already mentioned Wall Structure (1963) or Judd’s Relief (1961).96 These objects are 
in-betweens and can be located between painting and sculpture, which are commonly de-
scribed as two- and three-dimensional media; actually, Greenberg argued that media spec-
ificity is also determined by dimension number—he declared painting as two-­dimensional, 
sculpture as three-dimensional. Minimal and Serial Art were busy with the relation of draft 
and artwork and their discrepancy.97 Moreover, the object’s three-dimensionality was an 
important ingredient in the discourse of image and sculpture of the 1960s (in Minimal 
Art)—aspects of it had been already addressed (L-Beams): a specific body-relatedness and a 
critique of its (kinaesthetic) experience (Krauss, Morris) as well as the discrepancy between 
91	
See Jens Schröter, 3D: History, Theory, and Aesthetics of the Transplane Image (New York/London/New 
Delhi/Sydney: Bloomsbury, 2014).
92	
See Rottmann, Gestaltete Mathematik, 2020, pp. 122–25. Dimensionalites are here understood in 
an art-­historical sense, not in a strictly mathematical one (a physical, flat surface is actually not a 2D 
object).
93	
Robert Mallary, Statement, in Sixteen Americans, ed. Dorothy Miller, exh. cat. Museum of Modern Art 
(New York: Museum of Modern Art New York, 1959), pp. 47–51, here p. 47.
94	
Ibid.
95	
See Rottmann, Gestaltete Mathematik, 2020, p. 295.
96	
Ibid., p. 123.
97	
For Stella and Judd, see Rottmann, “Checking Creativity,” 2018, p. 7.

Michael Rottmann
76
system and object. While in the context of a phenomenological approach, the object-viewer 
relation was also treated.98 Therefore, Robert Morris suggested that Minimal Art “attempted 
to mediate between the notational knowledge of flat concerns (systems, the diagrammatic, 
the logically constructed and placed, the preconceived) and the concerns of objects (the 
relativity of perception in depth).”99 In contrast, the artistic process and media of draft-like 
drawing were exposed, aiming not only against formalism, but also against capitalism and 
materialism. LeWitt explained that a “doodled drawing“ with the basic idea is as important 
as a “three-dimensional structure.”100 And elsewhere he wrote: “I wasn’t showing a formal 
sculpture, I was showing a thought process.”101 The well-known “dematerialization of art” 
was diagnosed. It is quite understandable that the transformation of reality into informa-
tion—and this can be applied to today’s debate about social media—was criticized (by Les 
Levine) because “direct, corporal experiences” would be replaced by “second-hand mental 
experiences.”102 
A Broader Perspective and Conclusions
Computer sculpture on the one hand, and Minimal, Serial, and Conceptual Art on the oth-
er hand, have considerable intersections concerning internal themes of art—in terms of 
the discourses of form, image, and sculpture. They clearly show parallels with a view to 
­mathematization, mechanization, and automatization as well as a 2D/3D debate. The his-
torical context in the United States, which was built in particular by cybernetics, systems 
theory, computerization, and digitalization as well as the Cold War, gives us a framework 
for further explanations. I want to argue that both art fields have to be thought of together. 
The presented events in Minimal, Serial, and Conceptual Art can be made out as a parallel 
history of early digital art. Accordingly, Conceptual Art and art and technology were deter-
mined in their relation as “constituents of larger social transformations from the machine 
age of industrial society to the so-called information age of post-industrial society.”103 Such 
art movements, which can be linked to digital art and its subjects and its (information) tech-
nology, which are—like LeWitts’s Conceptual Art—more or less explicitly thematized and 
reflected, but without commercial or built (digital) machines, I want to call “co-digital art.” 
Their intersection—for just that reason they are named here as (digital) machine arts—is 
still the current question, how certain artforms behave with technology and the mechani-
zation of art and society, in particular which man-machine relationship they represent and 
which role they assign to the body.104 This all is the more true since mechanization and the 
  98	 For a reconstruction, see Rottmann, Gestaltete Mathematik, 2020, pp. 165–77.
  99	 Robert Morris, “Aligned with Nazca,” Artforum 14, no. 2 (October 1975), pp. 26–39, here p. 39.
100	 Here quoted in Rottmann, Gestaltete Mathematik, 2020, p. 294.
101	 Quoted in ibid., p. 297.
102	 See Shanken, “Art in the Information Age,” 2002, p. 436.
103	 Although he does not differentiate Conceptual Art, see ibid., p. 433.
104	 See, e.g., Charlie Gere, Digital Culture (London: Reaktion Books, 2002), pp. 75–149.

77
The Aesthetics of (Digital) Machine Sculpture
promotion of interdisciplinary cooperations, for instance in art and technology movements 
like Experiments in Art & Technology (E.A.T.), were driven forward strategically on the part 
of industry and politics to serve an “instrumental creativity” in the course of economic and 
hegemonial competition.105
The discussed representatives of computer sculpture have to be described as techno-
phile, if not techno-euphoric and, albeit it sounds chlichéd, assertive by trend. They even 
seem to have the belief in progress, e.g., when they praised (future) possibilities of com-
puter work. This is also indicated by Csuri’s first project grant, which was part of a National 
Science Foundation program to show the usefulness of computers, especially in art and 
design.106 When the computer sculptors treated interaction and production—in particular 
of art—in the context of tackling the man-machine relationship they did it pragmatically 
and outcome-orientedly. But Minimal Art also behaved assertive toward technological and 
industrial society. This was explained by competition with Europe and a related stocktaking.107 
When a “mechanization of the artistic production,” with an “equalizing technical working 
process” and a generating of non-relational artworks with numerical schemes, which were 
considered as objective and naturally inevitable, should help to reduce the belief in the art-
ists’ special position prevailing in Europe (especially since Kant), as Jutta Held has argued, 
this activity has to be understood as being based on the “American ideology of egality.”108 
Finally, the theories of Minimal Art would be infiltrated by “American ideology,” the belief 
in science and technological rationality, as well as in the superiority of American civilization 
due to technical leadership, and this would determine the forms of their “products.”109 Tak-
ing a subordinate role to technology would no longer be experienced as alienation, but as 
a natural historical development—Held also recalled Andy Warhol’s statement “I want to 
be a machine.”110
The situation turned out to be rather ambivalent. The aesthetics and politics of machi-
nation and automatization were also criticized, foremost in Minimal, Serial, and Conceptual 
Art. To say it paradoxically: this was done with machines against machines and with autom-
atization against automatization—by the way, the different notions of the terms “machine” 
and “automatization” have so far been used because of a historical and disciplinary vari-
ance, which I am pursuing in my current research project “Automated Innovations.” When 
Donald Judd, for instance, pursued with his numerical schemes a “one-shot” production,111 
this can be interpreted as a reaction against cybernetic feedback; together with Frank ­Stella, 
105	 See Claudia Mareis, “Kreatives Problemlösen: Entwurfsdebatten im Kontext von Designmethodologie 
und Kreativitätsforschung,” in Mareis and Rottmann, Entwerfen mit System, 2020, pp. 25–120. Trans-
lation by the author.
106	 See Freedman, “Oral History Interview,” 1989, n.p.
107	 See Held, “Minimal Art,” 1995, pp. 458–59.
108	 Ibid., pp. 457, 464–65. Translation by the author.
109	 Ibid., pp. 458–59. Translation by the author.
110	 Ibid., pp. 460–61. Translation by the author. See Gene Swenson, “What Is Pop Art? Answers from 
8 Painters, Part I,” Art News 62, no. 7 (November 1963), pp. 24–27, 60–63, here p. 26.
111	 Quoted in Rottmann, Gestaltete Mathematik, 2020, p. 208.

Michael Rottmann
78
who worked with systematic/automated draft methods, he debated the (fundamental)­ 
­limits of such methods (in art and beyond).112 The loss of control, intrinsic to the work with 
(self-­chosen or created) machines or systems and related automations, was exercised and 
demonstrated by the artists; “control” was not least a key term in the discourse of creativity, 
which was also exploited politically. With the help of an aesthetics of surprise, artists like 
­LeWitt brought home their thoughts about the moment of a fundamental uncontrollability 
in so-called rational, system-based and automatized processes and their limitations.113 In 
Serial and Conceptual Art, the introduced work with machines and automatization can be 
understood, especially because it happened without commercial machines, not only as a 
critique of cultural production, but also of a social and economical one and its effects. We 
have to consider the fact that not only was production, as well as administration, automa-
tized in the US, in particular for information processing. Jack Burnham called it the “auto-
mated state” in 1968, explaining that “power resides less in the control of the traditional 
symbols of wealth than in information.”114 Against this background, i.e., the development of 
an information society and a digital culture, LeWitt’s activities were related to information 
technology.115 It was quite rightly indicated that his concept of machine, which suggests 
mass production, is contradictory; the mathematical systems he used, like in Incomplete 
Open Cubes (1977), are anachronistic, inconsistent, and idiosyncratic (which LeWitt himself 
stressed again and again), thus his machines do not allow faultless, identical reproduction.116 
In the end, a gap revealed itself between predicted future possibilities and a technological 
possible reality. Until today, not everything can be automatized; this goes for the course 
of automated processes as well as for their necessary infrastructures, which must be in-
stalled before. When LeWitt characterized Conceptual Art as machine-like, which implicates 
a proximity to technology, and at the same time he warned that the idea could fall behind, 
a dilemma of the relationship of art and technology was called out.117 An art that orients 
itself to technology could be criticized not only as “dominated by the materiality and spec-
tacle of mechanical apparatus,” as it was expressed for the art-and-technology movement, 
but also, when tending to materialization and work- and ware-likeness, that it could lose its 
anti-capitalist line of attack, and especially, with a view to Conceptual Art, its primacy of the 
idea.118 Furthermore, negative aspects of technology could become part of art—for instance 
the development and use in the military complex (Vietnam War) or its instrumentalization 
in Cold War (space race).119 Robert Smithson wrote very clearly: “To celebrate the power of 
technology through art strikes me as a sad parody of NASA. I do not share the confidence 
112	 See Rottmann, “Kalkulierte Innovationen,” pp. 148–53.
113	 Ibid., p. 185.
114	 Burnham, “Systems Esthetics,” 1968, p. 31.
115	 See, e.g., Sabeth Buchmann, Denken gegen das Denken (Berlin: b_books, 2007). 
116	 See Rottmann, Gestaltete Mathematik, 2020, p. 342. 
117	 See Shanken, “Art in the Information Age,” 2002, p. 436.
118	 Ibid.
119	 Ibid.

79
The Aesthetics of (Digital) Machine Sculpture
of the astronauts. The rationalism and logic of the engineer is too self-assured. Art aping 
science turns into a cultural malaise.”120 
Donald Judd also pleads for a separation of art and science, although he was academ-
ically trained and well informed about scientific issues, in particular those of mathematics.121 
He expressed his displeasure about Jack Burnham—to come back to it—who related the 
innovation of sculpture to the altered relationship of human and technology, in which ob-
jects would have regained their autonomy. Judd criticized this “sort of sloppy correlations of 
such highly different activities as science and arts” and Burnham’s conception of history as 
thoughtless and deterministic.122 Similarly, he was displeased by Burnham’s prognosis, who 
saw only two ways for sculpture: “it can be fashioned as a reaction against technology or 
as an extension of technological methodology.”123 Certainly, one could discuss Burnham’s 
and Judd’s arguments, but the relationship of art and technology has become an issue with 
growing importance for sculpture in the (post-)digital age.
120	 Robert Smithson, letter to Gyorgy Kepes (1969), in Robert Smithson: The Collected Writings, ed. Jack 
Flam (Berkeley/Los Angeles/London: University of California Press, 1996), p. 360.
121	 See Rottmann, Gestaltete Mathematik, 2020, pp. 335–36.
122	 Donald Judd, “Complaints: Part I,” Studio International 182 (April 1969): 182–88, here 184.
123	 Ibid.


