Chapter Eight 
Nelson's Work on Logic and Foundations and 
Other Reflections on the Foundations of 
Mathematics 
Samuel R. Buss* 
This chapter was begun with the plan of discussing Nelson's work in logic and 
foundations and his philosophy on mathematics. In particular, it is based on our 
talk at the Nelson meeting in Vancouver in June 2004. The main topics of this talk 
were Nelson's predicative arithmetic and his unpublished work on automatic theo-
rem proving. However, it proved impossible to stay within this plan. In writing the 
chapter, we were prompted to think carefully about the nature of mathematics and 
more fully formulate our own philosophy of mathematics. We present this below, 
along with some discussion about mathematics education. 
Much of the chapter focuses on Nelson's philosophy of mathematics, on how 
his philosophy motivates his development of predicative arithmetic, and on his un-
published work on computer-assisted theorem proving. We also discuss the nature 
of mathematical reality and Nelson's views and our own views on the nature of 
mathematics. Predicative arithmetic and, more generally, Nelson's philosophy of 
mathematics are closely related to Nelson's development of internal set theory and 
nonstandard analysis, but this connection is not pursued in the present paper; for 
this, the reader may consult G. Lawler's chapter in this volume. 
The main body of the paper is written to be accessible to a mathematician with 
little knowledge of logic. The paper begins with a quick overview of three of the 
main philosophies of mathematics: formalism, platonism, constructivism. We then 
present the basic ideas behind Nelson's predicative arithmetic, a framework that he 
has put forward as being the correct general setting for mathematical reasoning. 
The next section, section 8.4, discusses our own views of mathematics. We give 
one definition of mathematics, and then a second characterization of mathematics 
and discuss some implications for mathematics education. After that, we return to 
Nelson's work on automatic theorem proving, and then the main body of the paper 
concludes with some quotes from Nelson's writings. 
Two appendices include extra material. The first appendix gives a new, weaker 
base theory Q- for predicative arithmetic. The second appendix proves that expo-
nential time computability is predicative . 
• Depanment of Mathematics, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA 
Supponed in pan by NSF grant DMS-0400848 

184 
CHAPTER 8 
8.1 PLATONISM, CONSTRUCTIVISM, AND FORMALISM 
In our conference talk [1], we described Nelson's philosophy of mathematics as 
being "radical constructivism." Afterward, Nelson suggested that he thinks of him-
self as a "formalist" rather than a "radical constructivist." In fact, both of these 
labels apply very well to Nelson's philosophy; he is not merely a formalist, he also 
gives both predicative arithmetic and nonstandard analysis very constructive foun-
dations. The reader is warned, however, that we will be expressing our personal 
opinions of Nelson's philosophy, and Nelson might not always agree with what we 
say. In particular, in comparison with the present chapter, Nelson would probably 
stress formalism more and constructivism less. 
The "platonist" philosophy of mathematics takes the view that the usual objects 
of mathematical study, such as the integers, the real numbers, functions on the real 
numbers, etc.--even abstract sets-have some kind of independent existence. 1 The 
nature of this existence is typically left vague, and the platonist philosophy usually 
posits that these mathematical objects exist only in some abstract or nonphysical 
sense. Nonetheless, the hallmark of the platonist philosophy is that human mathe-
maticians have direct intuition about or direct perception of mathematical objects. 
The platonist philosophy holds that our mathematical theorems and constructions 
are "about" something real. 
Most mathematicians are platonists, but there are competing schools of thought. 
These include the "intuitionists," the "constructivists," and the "formalists."2 Con-
structivism was advocated by D. Hilbert as a means to establish the consistency of 
formalizations of theories about the real numbers and set theory. The constructivist 
philosophy takes the point of view that finite objects, notably the integers, exist in 
some platonic sense and that finitary combinatorial operations on the integers have 
a well-defined semantics. A constructivist would generally reject the existence of 
infinite sets, or at least the existence of a "completed infinity," but would accept the 
meaningfulness of the concept of an arbitrary integer. The usual convention is that 
primitive recursive operations are the constructive operations. 
Formalism is the viewpoint that mathematics is merely a "game" that acts on 
symbols according to a fixed set of rules. For a formalist, the activity of a math-
ematician consists of manipulating formulas according to fixed rules to generate 
proofs, for instance, manipulating statements of first-order logic to generate theo-
rems. The formalist rejects the platonist assumption of the existence of mathemat-
ical objects; therefore, the semantics, or meaning, of formulas and theorems is not 
considered to be relevant or, for that matter, even to be defined. 
The platonist and formalist philosophies are diametrically opposed. To a platon-
ist, the formalist philosophy would be felt to be a sterile environment of unmoti-
vated reasoning using meaningless symbols. To a formalist, the platonist philoso-
phy would appear to be a misguided-perhaps dangerously misguided-study of 
objects that do not exist. Needless to say, most mathematicians are closer to the 
platonist philosophy than the formalist philosophy. If nothing else, the platonist ap-
I We follow the usual convention in logic of using "integers" to mean the nonnegative integers. 
2We will not discuss intuitionism at all in this paper. 

NELSON'S WORK ON LOGIC AND FOUNDATIONS 
185 
proach has proved to be immensely powerful and fruitful. Nonetheless, there has 
been trouble in paradise. Hilbert proposed his so-called Hilbert's program to es-
tablish at least the formal consistency of platonistic reasoning using constructive 
methods. However, Godel's incompleteness theorems showed that. Hilbert's pro-
gram was impossible and its goals could not be achieved. In fact, GDdel's theorem 
showed that constructive methods could not even establish the consistency of the 
constructive theories of arithmetic. Thus Hilbert's program for justifying the use of 
platonic methods failed completely even for justifying the platonic use of construc-
tive objects. 
Nelson takes this failure of Hilbert's program at face value. He doubts not only 
the platonic existence of the set of all integers, but even the consistency of Peano 
arithmetic. As we shall see, Nelson does believe, at least implicitly, in the existence 
of some kind of mathematical infinity and in the meaningfulness of some simple 
kinds of constructive operations such as integer addition and multiplication. How-
ever, he does not accept the set of integers as a given entity or even the reality of 
all primitive recursive operations. Hence, I use the terminology "radical construc-
tivism" to describe this part of his philosophy. 
The radical constructivist philosophy underlies Nelson's predicative arithmetic; 
predicative arithmetic is a weak formal theory of the integers that is mathematically 
very similar to the theories of bounded arithmetic of [24,31,2]. The original defini-
tion of bounded arithmetic, I ~o, by Parikh [24], was motivated in part by construc-
tivism and in part by feasible computability (see the survey [3]); however, most 
researchers in bounded arithmetic adopt only the mathematical trappings of con-
structivity and very few subscribe to radical constructivism. Sazonov [26, 27, 28], 
however, advocates a form of radical constructivism. 
Along with doubting the existence of the integers, and thereby doubting the ex-
istence of a fixed semantics for reasoning about infinite objects, Nelson also main-
tains a formalist philosophy. To reiterate, this means he maintains that there are no 
platonic mathematical objects which mathematics is about; rather, he maintains that 
mathematics consists purely of formal manipulation of first-order formulas. The pa-
per [17] contains Nelson's most emphatic declaration of the formalist philosophy. 
A more recent discussion is in [20]. 
The pure formalist philosophy is usually coupled with a rejection of any non-
formal intuition or reasoning. When I was a graduate student, Nelson told me on 
more than one occasion that his approach to mathematics is purely formal and that 
he does not have any intuition for what is true or false. At the time I took this to 
mean that he asserted that he did not have intuition for mathematics. I found this 
surprising since it contradicts our usual experiences in mathematics; indeed, even 
Nelson's own writing and teaching are full of intuition and motivation in a way that 
appear to contradict his being a pure formalist. I was, of course, misinterpreting 
Nelson's statements. Nelson maintains a purely formalist position and denies the 
existence of platonic mathematical objects; correspondingly, he feels there is no 
possibility of having intuition about what is true or false, on the grounds that there 
are no platonic objects to have intuition about. But he strongly asserts that one 
can have intuition about what theorems are provable and about what mathematical 
constructions are possible. In a recent emailed personal communication, he says 

186 
CHAPTERS 
I admit-proclaim!-the possibility and necessity of intuition about 
what kinds of formulas can be proved. 
To make an analogy, a formalist might view mathematicians as being similar to 
architects. An architect who is preparing to design and erect a building cannot an-
swer questions like, "How many floors are there in your building?" since the design 
is not complete. Nonetheless the design and construction of the building must re-
spect the physical properties of the building materials, just as a formalist's proof 
must respect the formal definitions of the object under study and the characteristics 
of the proof system. Similarly to the architect with a yet-unbuilt building, and for 
much the same reasons, the formalist will maintain that the mathematical concepts 
do not satisfy definite properties before the proper mathematical constructions and 
proofs have been carried out. The constraint of physical building materials in no 
way precludes an architect's use of intuition or creativity. Analogously, the con-
straints of formal logic in no way preclude a formalist's having full use of, and 
need of, intuition and creativity. 
For now, we leave formalism aside and tum to trying to give some justification 
for radical constructivism. In section 8.3, we shall see how this has motivated Nel-
son's theories ofpredicative arithmetic. 
8.2 RADICAL CONSTRUCTIVISM 
Now I live in a world in which there are no numbers save those that 
human beings on occasion construct. (Nelson [18, p. 7]) 
One frustrating aspect of trying to understand Nelson's philosophy is that he 
never makes a clear statement of his reasons for doubting the integers. The clearest 
quote of his on this issue is as follows: 3 
The reason for mistrusting the induction principle is that it involves an 
impredicative concept of number. It is not correct to argue that induc-
tion only involves the numbers from 0 to n; the property of n being 
established may be a formula with bound variables that are thought 
of as ranging over all numbers. That is, the induction principle as-
sumes that the natural number system is given. A number is con-
ceived to be an object satisfying every inductive formula; for a par-
ticular inductive formula, therefore, the bound variables are conceived 
to range over objects satisfying every inductive formula, including the 
one in question. [22, p. I] 
Nelson actually raises two objections to the use of induction. Both objections are 
well known, although it is not common to apply them to integer induction. The first 
objection is the observation that induction to an integer n is justified by the fact that 
it is possible to count to n, or in other words, it is possible to reach n from 0 by 
3See (21) for another account of Nelson's doubt about the integers. 

NELSON'S WORK ON LOGIC AND FOUNDATIONS 
187 
applying the successor operation (the "+ 1" operation) a finite number of times. The 
objection is raised to the fact that there is a circularity in the definition of "finite." 
Integers represent finite values, whereas finite values are values that correspond to 
integers.4 
Nelson's second and main objection is more subtle; namely, he questions the 
platonic assumption that there is a set of integers and from this rejects the idea that 
induction can hold for formulas that quantify over all integers. What he objects 
to especially is, on the first hand, that the integers are being defined as the set of 
numbers for which induction is valid, and on the second hand, that the formulas for 
which induction must hold involve quantification over the set of all integers. 
Since our description of the second objection probably made no sense on first 
reading, we try to say it again: one common idea of defining the (finite) integers 
is to say that the integers are the numbers n for which induction up to n is valid. 
Nelson objects that this definition of the integers is flawed since the formulas for 
which induction must hold quantify over the very same set of integers which is in 
the process of being defined. 
Section 8.3 will discuss how Nelson formulates a definition of the integers in a 
way that avoids this second objection. First, however, we shall try to further con-
vince the reader that there could actually be good reasons to doubt the existence of 
the integers. 
8.2.1 Engendering doubt in the integers 
How could a mathematician possibly doubt the integers? Even if one does not ac-
cept the strong platonist viewpoint that the integers exist as "actual" entities, surely 
one should believe in them as a set of mental constructs that have definite proper-
ties? 
The alternatives are unpalatable. If the integers do not exist. then how could 
they have fixed properties? For example, consider the question,5 Do there exist 
odd perfect integers? Most mathematicians certainly believe that the existence or 
nonexistence of an odd perfect integer should be a definite property of the integers, 
that is, that odd perfect integers exist. or do not exist. independently of the successes 
or failures of human efforts in doing mathematics. 
In contrast to the widespread surety about properties of integers, reasonable peo-
ple might agree to doubt the relevance or meaningfulness of set-theoretic principles 
such as the axiom of choice (AC) or the continuum hypotheses CH and GCH. It is 
plausible that there could be multiple. equally compelling, concepts of "set" and 
thus no reason to believe that CH or GCH have any independent meaning as a 
platonic truth (or platonic falsity) about actually existing objects. 
If the reader will bear with us, we would like to try to engender some doubt about 
the platonic existence of the integers. 
Suppose, hypothetically perhaps, that you believe beyond doubt in the integers 
4The set-theoretic method of defining "finite" in terms of not being equinumerous with a proper 
subset is too technical and is not convincing as a foundational definition of the integers. 
5Recall that a perfect integer is one that is equal to the sum of its proper divisors. for instance. 
6 = 1 + 2 + 3 and 28 = 1 + 2 + 4 + 7 + 14. The question stated is open. 

188 
CHAPTERS 
and the existence of the set of all integers in some sense. In this case, the concept 
of a set of integers also surely makes sense. So consider the class of all sets of 
integers, that is, the powerset, P(N), of the integers. Now, consider the continuum 
hypothesis question: Is there a subset of P(N) of cardinality strictly between the 
cardinalities of Nand P(N)? This is just a question about relations on P(N) x 
P(N). That is, it is a question about sets of pairs (binary relations) which are subsets 
of P(N) x P(N). 
But then you must believe (beyond doubt?) in the meaningfulness of the contin-
uum hypothesis problem. However, this was something one might think reasonable 
to doubt. In short, we have taken faith in the existence of the integers to justify 
surety in the meaningfulness of the continuum hypothesis. Since one might rea-
sonably doubt the meaningfulness of CH, one should thus reasonably doubt the 
existence of the integers. 
The above argument hinged on the formation of an infinite powerset, so at this 
point, we have three options of what to believe and what to doubt. We can hold one 
of the following positions: 
1. A platonic belief in the existence of integers and reals, including belief in the 
meaningfulness of the continuum hypothesis. 
2. A platonic belief in the existence of the set of integers, that is, in the com-
pleted infinity, but doubt about the meaningfulness of forming powersets of 
infinite sets. 
3. Doubt about the existence of the set of all integers. 
Option I is the traditional viewpoint of mathematicians; however, the history of set 
theory has not been very encouraging to this viewpoint. Option 2 is also a widely 
held view. However, on closer consideration, option 2 has some problems. In partic-
ular, it seems that once one accepts the existence of the integers, one is compelled 
to accept the existence of at least some sets of integers. And once one accepts the 
existence of some infinite sets of integers, how can one refuse to accept the ex-
istence of the class of all infinite sets of integers? Thus, option 3 is viable as an 
alternative to option 2. 
To be honest, there is a fourth option, but it is perhaps the coward's way out: 
4. An agnostic viewpoint which refuses to worry about the issue. 
We realize that the arguments above will not appeal to everyone, and that the 
reader may not buy into radical constructivism and may even have absolutely no 
doubts about the integers. For these readers, we hasten to point out that Nelson's 
philosophy has led him to develop predicative formulations of arithmetic and non-
standard analysis which are interesting mathematics in their own right, quite apart 
from any philosophical motivations. These mathematical developments will be dis-
cussed in the next section, which describes the foundations of theories of pred-
icative arithmetic. These are weak formal systems of consistency strength much 
weaker than Peano arithmetic. 

NELSON'S WORK ON LOGIC AND FOUNDATIONS 
189 
8.3 NELSON'S PREDICATIVE ARITHMETIC 
Nelson's system of predicative arithmetic6 is a weak form of arithmetic which 
avoids platonic assumptions about the existence of an infinite set of integers which 
satisfy induction. Nelson's predicative arithmetic begins with a vague notion of 
"integer" which is then transformed into a more refined notion of integer. In ef-
fect, we start with the assumption that there is an infinite set of "proto-integers" 
(however, Nelson does not use the terminology "proto-integer"), and then we cre-
ate refined notions of "integer" by taking subsets of the proto-integers. The proto-
integers are closed under successor, addition, and multiplication; furthermore, the 
proto-integers exist as an infinite set and it is permissible to quantify over the set of 
all proto-integers. However, the proto-integers are not presumed to satisfy induc-
tion. For that matter, not even all the usual properties of addition and multiplication, 
e.g., the commutative law, are presumed to hold. 
Nelson's predicative arithmetic theories are defined by defining subsets of the 
proto-integers that satisfy more and more properties of the integers, starting with 
basic properties like commutativity and working up to stronger properties including 
induction for bounded formulas. The intuition is that the process of defining more-
and-more refined subsets of proto-integers is evolving towards more-and-more re-
fined concepts of integers. However, in keeping with the radical constructivist phi-
losophy, one does not expect to reach the actual integers in the limit (since, after 
all, the "actual integers" are not believed to exist) or even to reach a limit (since 
reaching a limit is an infinite process which is certainly at least as complicated as 
the integers we are trying to capture). 
We quickly sketch the mathematical definition of predicative arithmetic; for more 
details, consult [22]. To begin, the proto-integers are axiomatized in first-order 
logic. First-order logic includes the logical connectives 
Boolean connectives: -, (not), A (and), V (or), ---t (implies). 
Quantifiers: V and 3. 
Equality: =. 
Numeric constants and functions: 0, S, + and 
S is the successor function 
S(x) = x + 1. 
The quantifiers are used with variables x that range over all proto-integers. 
The axioms for the proto-integers are just the axioms of R. Robinson's theory Q: 
SxfO, 
Sx = Sy ---t x = y, 
x f 0 ---t (3y)(Sy = x), 
x +0 = x, 
x + Sy = S(x + y), 
x,O = 0, 
x . Sy = x . y + x. 
6The temlinology predicative arithmetic as used by Nelson is quite different from the 
(semi)constructive concept of predicativity studied by S. Fefemlan and others. Nelson's predicative 
arithmetic is at a much lower level of logical complexity. 

190 
CHAPTER 8 
The theory Q is very weak. For instance, it does not imply the seemingly obvious 
principles 'Vx'Vy (x + y = y + x) or'Vx (0 + x = x). Nonetheless, Q is powerful 
enough to serve as the base theory for Peano arithmetic (PA), which is often defined 
as Q plus induction for all formulas. 
Nelson's Predicative Arithmetic is defined starting with Q and augmenting the 
theory by (a) extending the language and (b) restricting to refined subsets of the 
proto-integers where more properties hold. In this way, certain kinds of induction 
are part of predicative arithmetic. We will briefly illustrate the main ideas behind the 
formation of Predicative Arithmetic from Q up through showing that 0 + x = x is 
predicative. In order to simplify this, we make the assumption that Q also contains 
the axioms asserting the associativity of addition and multiplication.? 
8.3.1 Extensions by definition 
Initially, only the theory Q is accepted as predicative. The theory Q is strengthened 
in a series of steps by the introduction of new numeric predicates and functions and 
the establishment of new axioms. This is an iterative process; at each stage there 
is a "current" version of predicative arithmetic and subsequent stages are stronger 
and stronger predicative theories. 
The first, and easiest, method of extending predicative arithmetic is via the intro-
duction of predicates and function symbols which are defined in terms of previously 
introduced symbols. For example, the inequality predicate, ~, is a binary relation 
and can be defined by 
x~y ¢:} (3z)(x+z=y). 
(8.1) 
Adding the symbol ~ to the language of predicative arithmetic along with its defin-
ing axiom (8.1) yields a conservative extension of Q. That is to say, anything that 
can be expressed (or, proved) in the enlarged language can be expressed (resp., 
proved) in the original language. 
Functions can be conservatively introduced by a similar process. For example, 
the predecessor function, P(x) = max{O, x-I}, can be defined by 
P(x)=y 
¢:} S(y)=xV(x=OAy=O). 
(8.2) 
In order for this definition to be proper, an existence condition and a uniqueness 
condition must hold. Letting M (x, y) be the right-hand side of (8.2), the existence 
condition is 'Vx 3y M(x, y) and the uniqueness condition is 'Vx 'Vy 'Vz (M(x, y) A 
M (x, z) -+ y = z). These conditions must be provable in the already introduced 
version of predicative arithmetic. 
8.3.2 The predicativity of 0 + x = x 
The property 'Vx (0 + x = x) does not follow from the theory Q; nonetheless, it can 
be taken as predicative by defining a suitably refined notion of proto-integers. The 
7There is no need to assume associativity; rather, the associativity axioms are established predica-
tively in [22). FunhemlOre, the assumptions that addition and multiplication are total functions can also 
be dropped; see Appendix 8.7. 

NELSON'S WORK ON LOGIC AND FOUNDATIONS 
191 
first idea might be to just consider the subset of proto-integers that satisfy 0 + x = 
x; however; this subset might not satisfy the axioms of Q. Instead a more subtle 
construction is needed. This construction is due independently to Solovay [29] and 
Nelson [22]; related methods were used much earlier by Gentzen for the ordinals. 
DEFINITION 8.1 Aformula </J(x) is inductive provided it has been proved that 
</J(O) 1\ VX(</J(x) --+ </J(Sx)). 
By "it has been proved," we mean in the current theory of predicative arithmetic. 
THEOREM 8.2 (Solovay [29], Nelson [22]) Suppose </J(x) is inductive. Let 
1. </JI (x) be the formula Vy (y ~ x --+ </J(y)); 
2. </J2 (x) be the formula Vy (</JI (y) --+ </JI (y + x)); and 
3. </J3(X) be the formula Vy (</J2(y) --+ </J2(y. x)). 
Then, </J3(x) defines an initial segment of the integers which is closed under S. + 
and·. 
This theorem is intended to be interpreted as a (meta)theorem about predicative 
arithmetic. More formaJly, if predicative arithmetic proves that </J(x) is inductive, 
then predicative arithmetic proves that 
</J3(y) 1\ x < y --+ </J3(X) 
and 
THEOREM 8.3 Let 'l/J(x) be the formula 0 + x = x. Then. 'l/J(x) is inductive (rela-
tive to Q). 
Proof We argue informaJly in Q. First, 0 + 0 = 0 holds by an axiom of Q. Second, 
suppose 0 + x = x. Then 0 + Sx = S(O + x) = Sx. 
D 
Now, consider the set of proto-integers that satisfy 'l/J3, that is, the set {x : 
1/13(X)}, where 1/13 is defined from 1/1 as in Theorem 8.2. Then, by Theorem 8.2, 
this set is inductive and closed under addition and multiplication, and it satisfies 
the axioms in Q2 := Q U {Vx (0 + x = x)}. 
In this way, we have predicatively justified the axiom O+x = x. This permits the 
axiom to be adjoined to the list of predicative principles, and the enlarged theory Q2 
to be used as the next iteration of predicative arithmetic. 
The predicative justification of Q2 can be viewed either semanticaJly or syntacti-
caJly. The semantic view is that we started with a set of proto-integers satisfying Q 
and obtained a definable subset that satisfies Q2. In this view, the "real" integers are 
approximated better and better by successively strong theories of predicative arith-
metic. The syntactic view is based on consistency and relative interpretation. The 
above construction shows that Q2 is interpretable in Q, that is, that any Q2-proof 
can be transformed into a Q-proof by relativizing to the objects that satisfy 1/13. In 
particular, if Q is consistent, then so is Q2. 

192 
CHAPTER 8 
DEFINITION 8.4 [22} A theory T ~ Q is predicative if it is interpretable in Q. 
The main methods for establishing interpretability are the use of extension by 
definitions and the use of inductive formulas. Indeed, these are the only methods 
used by Nelson. After establishing 0 + x = x, a host of other principles can be es-
tablished predicatively, starting with commutativity of addition and multiplication 
and working up to much more complicated principles. Examples of predicative 
principles include: 
1. Induction on bounded formulas. Bounded formulas may only use quantifiers 
which are bounded, "Ix :::; t and 3x :::; t. This includes all of bounded arith-
metic, I ~o and 8 2 • 
2. Least number principles for bounded formulas. 
3. Sequence coding, G6del numbers for syntactic objects including formulas 
and proofs. The smash function, #, 
x#y = 2lxl·lyl 
4. Metamathematic concepts including consistency and interpretability and the 
proof of the GOdel incompleteness theorem. 
Establishing the predicativity of the above items is the main content of Nelson's 
book [22]. On the other hand, some principles which are not predicative include: 
5. The totality of exponentiation: exp := "Ix 3y (2X = y). 
6. Having an inductive initial segment on which superexponentiation 2 it x is 
total. Here, 2it 0 = 1 and 2it (x + 1) = 22ftx. 
7. The Gentzen cut elimination theorem. 
8. The consistency of the theory Q. 
However, in regard to (5), principles that follow from a finite number of uses 
of exponentiation are predicative. This includes the tautological consistency of Q 
and the bounded consistency of Q. More generally, Wilkie and Paris [31] showed 
that any bounded formula which is a consequence of Q + exp is predicative; how-
ever; their proof of this fact is impredicative since it depends on the cut elimination 
theorem. 
8.3.3 Connections with computational complexity 
As we just discussed, predicative arithmetic includes induction for all bounded for-
mulas and the totality of the smash function. It thus includes the theory of bounded 
arithmetic I ~o + 0 1 and the equivalent theory 8 2 . The present author's own work 
in bounded arithmetic [2] was based in part on Nelson's work on predicative arith-
metic and also in part on earlier work of Parikh, Dimitracopolous, Paris, Wilkie, 

NELSON'S WORK ON LOGIC AND FOUNDATIONS 
193 
Wilmers, and Pudhik. Much of the motivation for bounded arithmetic comes from 
its close connection to computation complexity; the theories S~ and T~ have par-
ticularly close connections to low-level complexity classes [2]. 
Via its inclusion of bounded arithmetic, predicative arithmetic also has close 
connections to computational complexity. However, predicative arithmetic is prop-
erly stronger than bounded arithmetic. Indeed, every exponential-time function is 
predicative. What this means is that it is possible to form a predicative theory with 
function symbols for exponential time functions and which has axioms fully char-
acterizing the functions. These axioms are universal closures of bounded formulas. 
This construction is sketched in more detail in Appendix 8.8. Since the polynomial 
space functions are a subset of the exponential time functions, the polynomial space 
computable functions are also predicative. 
On the other hand, the superexponential function is not predicative. 
It is also possible to give a predicative development of parts of real analysis, at 
least up through standard results on integration. Ko and Friedman [16, 15] showed 
that polynomial space computability is sufficient for the definition of integration 
(more precisely, they showed that the counting class #P is sufficient). However, 
they only considered computability, not provability, so this did not say anything 
per se about predicatively. J. Hook in his 1983 Ph.D. thesis [11] under Nelson 
developed a predicative version of real analysis with the additional assumption that 
exponentiation is not total. More recently, Fernandes and Ferreira [6] have given 
a predicative treatment of parts of real analysis within the framework of reverse 
mathematics for bounded arithmetic. They show explicitly that their theory of real 
analysis is interpretable in Q. 
8.3.4 Nelson's predicative philosophy 
Nelson apparently proposed his predicative arithmetic as a way of establishing a 
model for the mathematical universe that encompasses both his formalism and his 
rejection of the integers. We next discuss to what extent he has succeeded and 
present two objections to the use of predicative arithmetic as the measure of math-
ematical reality. 
As discussed above, predicative arithmetic starts with the assumption of an initial 
collection of "proto-integers." These are refined by defining inductive cuts, which 
are initial segments of the proto-integers that satisfy successively stronger axioms. 
The motivation behind the proto-integers is that they represent the integers that can 
be represented in unary notation, perhaps. However, if one is concerned that the 
integers may not exist as a completed platonic infinity, why should one accept the 
existence of an infinite set of proto-integers? Since the formation of formulas such 
as <jJ2 and <jJ3 in Theorem 8.2 requires quantifying over all proto-integers, they im-
plicitly assume the existence of the proto-integers as a completed infinity. Although 
the existence of a set of proto-integers is a weaker assumption than assuming the 
existence of the set of platonic integers, it is hardly a more convincing assumption. 
Nelson himself (private communication) does not not wish to make semantic as-
sumptions about the existence of an infinite set of proto-integers and regards even 
the consistency of Q, and thereby the consistency of predicative theories, as an 

194 
CHAPTER 8 
open problem. 
Nelson gave a compelling and elegant development of much of basic number 
theory in predicative arithmetic and, as mentioned earlier, this has been extended 
to a predicative treatment of real analysis. Nelson also argues in [22] that this is 
the way mathematics should be developed, and he raised the following "compati-
bility problem" as an open question. The compatibility problem asks whether any 
two predicative principles are compatible. Namely, if ¢ and 'ljJ are both predica-
tive, is their conjunction ¢ /\ 'ljJ also predicative? Unfortunately, Solovay (personal 
communication) was able to show that the answer is "no." 
Solovay's example can be expressed as follows. Define a number x to log-even 
(resp., log-odd) if 21't n < x ~ 21't (n + 1) for some even (resp., odd) number n. 
The eventually log-even property states that there is an x such that all y > x are 
log-even. Let ¢ be the property 
¢ = (exp) V (eventually log-even) 
and'ljJ be 
'ljJ = (exp) V (eventually log-odd). 
Then it can be shown that each of ¢ and 'ljJ is predicative; in fact, they are each 
interpretable in Q with an inductive cut. However, their conjunction is equivalent 
to the totality of exponentiation and is not interpretable in Q. (Another disproof of 
the compatibility problem was recently outlined by H. Friedman [8].) 
8.4 WHAT IS MATHEMATICS? TWO DEFINITIONS 
In this section, we will set aside Nelson's philosophy and present some of our own 
ideas on the nature of mathematical reality. This will tum out to be a subtle and 
vague combination of formalism and ptatonism. 
Before saying what mathematics is, let us say what it is not. In recent years there 
has been discussion about "postmodem" ideas about the nature of mathematical 
reality, for example, that it is a social activity and mathematics does not have any 
independent existence (cf. Hersch [10]). An extreme form of post modernism might 
assert that mathematical truth depends on the culture or bias of the mathemati-
cian. This postmodem idea is completely silly if it is taken as saying that particular 
mathematical statements could be true for some people and false for others. 
On the other hand, the postmodem idea is more-or-Iess a triviality if it is mak-
ing the less extreme statement that different individuals or different cultures may 
make different choices of what kinds of mathematics to study and what kind of 
evidence is accepted as mathematical proof. There are many examples of the fact 
that mathematics could be done in different ways. We give three examples here. 
First, there is a strong tendency to think of the real numbers as being the "real" 
numbers: we think of the integers and rational numbers as being only a proper sub-
set of the actual numbers and the complex numbers as being an augmentation of 
the real numbers with "imaginary" numbers. But in actuality, the complex numbers 
are arguably more natural than the real numbers, and certainly the theory of ana-
lytic complex functions of a single variable is a beautiful theory that surpasses the 

NELSON'S WORK ON LOGIC AND FOUNDATIONS 
195 
elegance of the theory of real functions. However, at least in the U.S. educational 
system, we do not properly introduce the complex numbers until late in college and 
only to highly technical students. As a second example, consider the fact that we 
use vectors and dot products and cross products, whereas historically we had the 
viable alternative of using quaternions instead. For a third example, consider that 
the real numbers could be formulated using nonstandard analysis instead of using 
the traditional measure theory. Only time will tell whether the nonstandard analysis 
approach will be found to have enough advantages to overcome the societal inertia 
of using measure theory. 
Nonetheless, we wish to reject a definition of mathematics based on human math-
ematical activity. Rather, we seek a definition of mathematics that transcends the 
merely social aspect and exposes a more eternal nonsocial aspect, much as we ex-
pect mathematical truths to be eternal. 
We also would not be satisfied with a definition of mathematics that merely lists 
the subjects of mathematical inquiry such as "number," "shape," "pattern," "proof," 
etc. This kind of definition has several problems: First, it leaves extremely vague 
what these concepts mean. Second, these same objects can also be the subject of 
non mathematical investigations; for instance, an artist might explore properties of 
geometric shapes and patterns, or a linguist might investigate the etymology of 
names for numbers. Third, simple concrete ideas like "number," "shape," and "pat-
tern" do not exhaust the objects of mathematical study. Furthermore, as discussed 
above, the actual objects of mathematics study can change over time. 
8.4.1 Our first definition of mathematics 
Without further ado, here is our proposal for a definition of mathematics: 
Mathematics is the study of objects and constructions, or of aspects of 
objects and constructions, which are capable of being fully and com-
pletely defined. [4] 
Our original statement of this definition was on the foundations of mathematics 
(FOM) mailing list, and the reader might refer to that for some related discussion. 
At the time it was met by a modest amount of discussion, plus some opposition.8 
However, this definition is by no means completely new; for example, Polya [25, p. 
26] states in passing, "Numbers and figures are not the only objects of mathematics. 
Mathematics is basically inseparable from logic, and it deals with all objects which 
may be objects of an exact theory.,,9 
To clarify the definition of mathematics, we consider the case of integers. The in-
tegers can be defined in a second-order logic in what is generally felt (by platonists) 
to be a categorical definition; namely, the integers are linearly ordered, each integer 
8The definition from [4] wa~ immediately followed by the following sentence: "A defining character-
istic of mathematics is that once mathematical objects are sufficiently well-specified then mathematical 
reasoning can be carried out with a robust and objective standard of rigor." We still believe this state-
ment, but are emphasizing it less in the present discussion. 
9We are grateful to Khait [14] for bring this quote of Polya's to our attention. For more on Polya's 
views of the nature of mathematics and mathematical reasoning, see the introduction to [25]. 

196 
CHAPTER 8 
has a unique successor, each integer except 0 has a unique predecessor, and every 
nonempty subset of the integers has a unique least element. Platonists certainly feel 
this is enough to settle every property about the integers in a definite way. Even for 
mathematicians who are not platonists, there is generally agreement that common 
properties like the existence of odd prefect numbers is a definite fixed property of 
the integers; in other words, that our conception of integers is already sufficiently 
well formed so that there can be only one answer to whether odd perfect integers 
exist. 
The situation of sets is more precarious. Reasonable people might feel that the 
concept of set is not sufficiently well formed for sets to be considered to be fully 
and completely defined. This is probably true, but certainly many aspects of sets 
are sufficiently well defined, in particular, the parts of set theory used by logicians 
as the foundations for mathematics. Some of the more problematic questions in set 
theory, such as the continuum hypothesis, may depend on aspects of sets that have 
not yet been fully and completely defined; the continuum hypothesis may need 
some refinement of the concept of set before it has a chance to be settled as true 
or false. ryve know our formal axioms for set theory are not enough to settle the 
continuum hypothesis; however, it is unknown whether our intuitive concept of set 
is sufficiently precise to settle the continuum hypothesis.) 
Our definition of mathematics requires only that mathematical objects are "capa-
ble of being" fully and completely defined. This phrase was included deliberately. 
The intent is that (aspects of) objects that have not yet been fully and completely 
defined are still part of mathematics, provided they are ultimately capable of being 
fully and completely defined. JO 
Let's consider what our definition means for the formalist and platonist philo-
sophical conceptions. We start with formalism. On the surface, the definition is 
neutral on the issue of formalism; it says nothing about what kinds of methods are 
used to reason about the "fully and completely defined" objects and constructions. 
Of course, this means the definition is somewhat opposed to formalism. A formal-
ist would maintain that formal symbol manipulation is the only acceptable form of 
reasoning. Although rigorous deduction and formal reasoning are incredibly pow-
erful for mathematics, we still wish to allow intuitive and commonsense thinking 
about mathematical objects to be considered mathematics. 
Formalism is not completely wrong-headed, of course. It is an empirical fact 
that mathematical reasoning can be carried out with a robust and objective standard 
of rigor. Disagreements over what constitutes a valid (social) mathematical proof 
are rare, and when disagreements arise, they can be readily resolved to everyone's 
satisfaction by fleshing out the proof in more detail. Furthermore, this standard of 
rigor is, in principle, codifiable in purely formal terms, most notably in first-order 
IO(This footnote is intended mostly for logicians or other readers who appreciate paradoxes and 
self-reference.) It is interesting to note that the very definition of mathematics implies that we are not 
fully and completely defining mathematics. Namely, when we are defining mathematics, we are doing 
philosophy, not mathematics. If we were able to fully and completely define mathematics, it would make 
the definition of mathematics itself a mathematical definition! 

NELSON'S WORK ON LOGIC AND FOUNDATIONS 
197 
logic. I I In this way, formal reasoning does encompass all of mathematical reason-
ing; However, we do not agree that formal reasoning is the only correct form of 
mathematical reasoning nor that formal symbol manipulation is the entire content 
of mathematics. 
Next, we consider what the definition means for platonism. It is evident that this 
definition allows for a kind of platonism, but it is a rather unusual kind of platon-
ism. These "fully and completely defined" objects and constructions or aspects of 
objects and constructions enjoy some kind of mental existence, at least in the triv-
ial sense that we are thinking of them. However, the "aspects of' part is troubling; 
namely, how could an object exist with some fully defined aspects but have some of 
its other aspects not be fixed? For example, if sets exist, then surely they either do 
or do not satisfy the continuum hypothesis? How could sets exist if their properties 
are not fixed? 
However, this issue is not a problem for mathematics alone. Consider the con-
cept of a unicorn. We all have some conception of a unicorn and would admit that 
unicorns exist in some mental way. However, many aspects of unicorns are vague. 
For instance, what is a unicorn's gestation period? Is it mortal? Is it susceptible 
to lice infections? All these are clearly silly questions to ask, especially because 
a unicorn is supposed to be an idealized animal, not a "real" animal. I maintain, 
however, that mathematical objects should be thought of as existing, like unicorns, 
in a partial fashion. Furthermore, even though they exist in this sense, mathematical 
objects may have some aspects fully and completely defined and other aspects not 
fully defined. 
To finish considering this definition of mathematics, it is worth considering 
how it applies to subjects other than mathematics. Inspired by some comments 
of S. Simpson on my FOM posting, we consider the case of biology. Suppose a 
biologist is using mathematical models to study the size of a population over time. 
Clearly the biologist is using some mathematics, quite possibly even developing 
new mathematics. But her work is a blend of mathematics and nonmathematics. 
Many concepts from biology, including core concepts like "popUlation," "individ-
ual," and "alive," are not fully and completely defined. They are useful and robust 
concepts, to be sure, but in exceptional cases, their definition becomes unclear. The 
mathematical model abstracts from these biological concepts into mathematical 
concepts; naturally this involves some simplifications and does not fully reflect the 
biological situation. Thus we see, not surprisingly, that the work with the mathe-
matical model can certainly be considered mathematics, but the application of the 
mathematical model to biological systems is not mathematics in the sense of our 
definition. 
We also should consider the implications of our definition for the field of mathe-
matics. For practicing researchers in pure mathematics, the definition is completely 
appropriate and fits well with how mathematics is done in practice. An applied 
mathematician might be a little less sure of how well it applies to his work. If the 
emphasis of the applied work is on applications to non mathematical subjects, then 
II This is by Giide\'s completeness theorem. In most practical cases, the reduction to first-order logic 
is too detailed and lengthy to carry out by hand, but the theoretical possibility is usually clear. 

198 
CHAPTER 8 
it might not fit the above definition of mathematics. On the other hand, experimen-
tal mathematics, for instance studying the efficacy of numerical procedures, would 
fit into our definition of mathematics. 
We add that the definition of mathematics does not involve a value judgement: 
mathematical reasoning is not meant to be construed as superior to reasoning in 
other intellectual fields. The specificity of mathematical objects makes possible the 
high level of rigor in mathematics, and it also allows us to strive for absolute, incon-
trovertible knowledge about mathematical objects (subject always to human falli-
bility). However, the specificity of mathematics is also a weakness, since it means 
that mathematical constructions are merely idealizations of, or approximations to, 
physical reality. That is to say, by itself, mathematics cannot speak directly of the 
real, scientific world. 
In the next subsection, we say something about the definition of mathematics for 
people outside the mathematical research community. 
8.4.2 A second, operational definition of mathematics 
The definition of mathematics given above suffers from being too abstract; it does 
not give much guidance as to how one should do mathematics in practice, how 
one should learn mathematics, nor any way to evaluate the importance of what 
mathematics is done. To partially make up for this, we give a second descriptive, or 
operational, definition of mathematics: 
Mathematical reasoning is a refined form of common sense. 
We call this a "descriptive" or "operational" definition since it is not meant to pro-
vide a definition of what is mathematics. Indeed, almost any intellectual activity 
could be considered to be using refined common sense. Instead, this second defini-
tion is meant to describe the nature of mathematical reasoning. 
This second definition is not intended to contradict the earlier discussion about 
the level of rigor in mathematics; rather, it says that mathematical rigor is an ex-
tension of ordinary commonsense thinking. There are two claims contained in this 
second definition: (a) Rigorous mathematical thinking is a refined form of common 
sense; it is not alien to ordinary thinking. (b) Mathematics should "make sense"; 
that is, it is not purely formal or rule-based. Rather, mathematics is about something 
commonsensical. 
Our primary motivation for presenting this second definition is for its implica-
tions for mathematics education. Our thesis is that the kind of reasoning used for 
mathematics is in essence the same as commonsense reasoning, albeit tailored for 
the more abstract and formal environment of mathematics. Common sense reason-
ing is used in ordinary activities like cooking a meal, washing the dishes, playing 
with blocks, working on a jigsaw puzzle, and planning a vacation. Mathematical 
reasoning differs from commonsense reasoning in degree, but not in kind. An im-
portant consequence for education is that a student should expect mathematics to 
"make sense"; that is, the student should not be satisfied to learn a set of rote pro-
cedures for solving problems, but rather should expect to find that the problems 

NELSON'S WORK ON LOGIC AND FOUNDATIONS 
199 
concern definite objects with definite properties and that the procedures should cor-
respond to commonsense ideas about manipulating those objects. 
I was prompted to present this second definition in large part by a paper by 
A. Khait [14] that I received while writing a first draft of this chapter. Khait also 
gives a definition of mathematics based on the quotation from Polya above; Khait 
did his work independently, but upon later finding my FOM posting felt that his 
definition was the same as mine (personal communication). This, however, is not 
the case. Khait's definition reads as follows: "Mathematics is a linguistic activity, 
which is characterized by the association of words with precise meanings." Khait 
defines "precise" by saying "[For finite mathematics,] computers can serve as the 
precision criterion: a precise formulation is one that can be translated for a com-
puter. Concerning infinite structures and theories there is no such referee except 
the public opinion of colleagues." Note that Khait's definition differs from mine in 
several important ways. First, he defines mathematics in social terms as an activity, 
much like Hersch's recent arguments that mathematics should be defined as a so-
cial activity. Second, Khait's definition, with its emphases on linguistic activity and 
on computerization as the measure of precision, leans mostly towards the formalist 
position, albeit with the difference that Khait does not say symbols are manipulated 
according to definite rules, but rather that words are manipulated that have definite 
meanings. In contrast, our own definition defined mathematics in terms of its sub-
ject matter, and allows for many kinds of reasoning, including linguistic, formal, 
geometric, and intuitive. 
Khait [14] applies his definition to make suggestions for mathematics education, 
saying that the goal of mathematics education should be to inculcate "an ability to 
work with words to which precise meanings are assigned." He draws on research 
of Stanovich and West [30] and others that concludes that individuals have two 
different styles of thinking. The first style, called "System I" thinking, is intuitive, 
associative, heuristic, automatic, fast, and compatible with low cognitive capacity. 
The second style, called "System II," is rational, analytic, controlled, conscious, 
slow, and demanding of higher cognitive capacity. It is recognized that everyone 
is capable of System I reasoning, but the further claim is that "experts plus some 
laypersons" are fluent at System II reasoning, but the majority of the population 
consists of "untutored individuals" who do not use System II reasoning as effec-
tively. (This is from Khait [14], drawing from Stanovich and West [30]. We are 
paraphrasing their positions, not endorsing them! The ability to do System II rea-
soning is largely measured in terms of performance on the SAT tests widely used 
for college admission in the USA.) Khait suggests that the minority group of people 
who are naturally adept at System II should be educated differently from the major-
ity group who use primarily System I. For the latter group, he advocates improving 
their System II skills by training them in principles of logic using discrete mathe-
matics examples. Of these students, he says that System II thinking does not come 
naturally to them, but that many of them nonetheless must learn formal linguistic 
thinking for their future occupations, which are likely to be computer-related. 
This emphasis on the dichotomy of thought processes into System I and Sys-
tem II is questionable. Of course there are different thinking styles, and of course 
System II thinking benefits greatly from education, but we reject completely the 

200 
CHAPTER 8 
proposition that the majority of people are incapable of thinking effectively in a 
System II fashion. In fact, System II and System I processes arise in all human ac-
tivities. Consider riding a bicycle: 12 when first learning to ride a bike with gears and 
hand brakes, one has to consciously think about keeping one's balance, not going 
too slow or too fast, changing gears, applying the brakes, etc. This conscious co-
ordination of actions is a kind of System II thinking. Once these skills are learned, 
they become completely automatic (System I), and it is no longer necessary to think 
consciously about them at all. In spite of the fact that mathematics is mental instead 
of physical, one has analogous experiences in mathematics. When first learning a 
mathematical definition, one has to to think through its implications carefully and 
working even simple problems about the new definition can require large mental 
effort. However, once the mathematical concepts have been mastered, the same 
problems become very simple and intuitively obvious. Once a mathematical con-
cept is fully mastered, it may even be difficult to apply System II reasoning to the 
concept. (See Khait [12, 13] for similar discussions on how mathematical thinking 
integrates both systems of thinking.) 
In addition, the emphasis on a dichotomy between System I and System II is 
potentially very harmful to the practice of mathematics education. Both Khait and 
Stanovich and West talk of educating people to use System II reasoning and the 
need to train students to use both System I and II thinking; Khait [12] particu-
larly emphasizes that the goal in mathematics education is for students to integrate 
System I and II thinking. Nonetheless, there is the danger that an overemphasis 
on the dichotomy between System I and System II thinking could lead to an eli-
tist philosophy that some people, even a majority, cannot handle the more abstract 
and formal thinking that characterizes System II. It could be extremely detrimental 
to mathematics education for teachers and students to have these attitudes, since 
expectations playa large role in performance. 
The best application of the theory of System I and System II thinking would not 
focus solely on improving System II thinking but would instead seek to lead stu-
dents to combine System I and System II thinking and use both methods to learn 
and utilize mathematics. Teachers and students should take to heart the maxim that 
mathematics is a form of common sense. They should accept that mathematics is 
not arbitrary formal manipulation of symbols, but rather is about precisely defined 
(aspects of) objects and constructions. Teachers should expect students not only 
to master rote skills but also to use commonsense reasoning about mathematical 
objects, and in more advanced classes, to phrase their commonsense reasoning in 
formal terms. Most importantly, students should expect and demand that the math-
ematics they learn make sense and not be merely rote manipulation. 
We add that we do not advocate a content-blind approach to mathematics educa-
tion with the goal of teaching reasoning skills independently of any subject matter, 
nor do we advocate jettisoning all rote skill training. The best way to teach math-
ematical reasoning is to introduce meaningful and useful mathematical content. A 
prime example is the use of geometry as a vehicle for teaching formal mathemati-
12 After writing the first draft of this paper, I discovered that the bicycle analogy is hardly original. 
Gowers [9. p. 32) writes. "After one ha~ learned to think abstractly. it can be exhilarating. a bit like 
suddenly being able to ride a bicycle without having to worry about keeping one's balance." 

NELSON'S WORK ON LOGIC AND FOUNDATIONS 
201 
cal proof in high school, since one can use formal proofs effectively in establishing 
useful and nonobvious concepts from geometry. 
8.S NELSON'S AUTOMATED PROOF CHECKER 
We now return to discussing Nelson's work. Sections 8.2 and 8.3 studied mostly the 
radical constructivist aspects of Nelson's work, but Nelson tells us that he thinks of 
himself as a formalist rather than a constructivist. 
The formalist philosophy is in many ways a very sophisticated philosophy. We 
do not think the historical development of mathematics could have begun with for-
malism. Rather, mathematics historically passed through various stages, starting 
with basic concrete facts about quantities and shapes, progressing to the realization 
that these concrete facts can be abstracted into platonic concepts, and then on to 
the recognition, via Frege, Russell and Whitehead, Hilbert's program, and Gooel's 
completeness theorem, that pure logic and formal reasoning are sufficient tools for 
all mathematical reasoning. 
Certainly in recent times, the trend in mathematics has been towards increasing 
formalization. The modem versions of formalization started in the nineteenth cen-
tury and reached full maturity in the first half of the twentieth century. The advent 
of computerization has given further impetus to formalizat.ion, both because math-
ematical logic and formalization have contributed much to the theory of comput-
ers and programming languages and because of the possibility that computers can 
mechanize formal reasoning. A further impetus to formalization is that the heavy 
use of computerization exposes society to more abstract symbol processing and is 
arguably predisposing us to think in a computer-like fashion. Whether this trend 
will continue is unclear. There is even a possibility that, in the next few decades, 
computers will pick up so much of the burden of calculation and formalization that 
humans will actually become less adept at formal reasoning rather than more. 
Nelson has explored in depth the idea of expressing formalized reasoning in a 
form that would be amenable to both human understanding and computer verifi-
cation. In an untitled, unpublished, and unfinished manuscript dated 1993, Nel-
son revisited the development of predicative arithmetic with an automated proof 
checker [23]. For this, he wrote an automated proof checker, qed, which works di-
rectly from text in his TeX files. 13 The system allows theorems to be stated and 
proved in a formal system with all details automatically checked by the computer. 
A striking feature is that the same source is used both as input to the qed system 
and to generate a (highly technical) TeX typeset proof. The technical content of the 
theorems is similar to [22], but now theorems are stated and proved with sufficient 
formality to be computer-checked. 
The proof system qed is a deduction proof system (similar to a deduction proof 
system of Fitch [7], but using very different notations). To illustrate the system qed, 
I3Nelson's software system qed should not be confused with the completely independent QED 
project in automated theorem proving. 

202 
CHAPTER 8 
consider using the axiom 
'ix'iy(x + Sy = Sex + y)) 
(S.3) 
to prove the equality 
x = 0 + x ---+ Sx = 0 + Sx. 
(S.4) 
As a precursor to the actual qed proof, (S.4) can be proved from (S.3) as follows: 
'ix'iy(x + Sy = Sex + y)) 
x = 0 + x ---+ Sx = 0 + Sx 
(S.3) Hypothesis (Axiom) 
(S.4) Goal to be proved 
Assume its negation 
{ 
} 
e = 0 + e !\ Se i- 0 + Se 
0+ Se = S(O + e) 
New variable e for x in .(8.4). 
Instance of (S.3). 
Simple contradiction reached. 
For space reasons, we don't give Nelson's definition of a "simple contradiction," 
but it is a polynomial time test which can detect tautological unsatisfiability in 
many cases (but cannot detect all cases of unsatisfiability). The proof above shows 
a single assumption of the negation of the goal, but qed also permits more general 
nesting of assumptions of (negations of) goals. 
Nelson adopts a very compact representation of qed proofs. The proof given 
above would be written in qed as follows (x is now used in place of e): 
8.4{:x 8.3;0;x}. 
Reading the compact proof from left to right, the "8.4{" means to assume the nega-
tion offormula (S.4), the ":x" means to replace x by the variable x, the "8.3" refers 
to formula (S.3), the ";O;x" means to substitute 0 and x for the universally quanti-
fied variables x and Y of (8.3), and the "}" means the assumption is closed. (The 
replacement of x with x in the negation of (S.4) is redundant, but is required by 
the syntax of qed. The variable x is implicitly universally quantified in (S.4) but is 
treated as a free variable after the replacement.) 
A more complicated example of a proof from Nelson [23] is the following: 
Th 158: xi- 0 ---+ x/x = 1. 
158{:x 113;x;x;1;0 16;x 47;x 130;x 3;x·1 134;x }. 
For another example, here is another theorem and proof, also from [23]. We 
show verbatim the statement of the theorem, a human-readable form of the proof, 
and then the corresponding qed proof. 
Th 159: 
Xl::; x2 ---+ xt/y ::; X2/Y' 
We have (.1) y i- O. There is a nonzero u such that X2/y + u = xt/y, so 
Xl =Y'(X2/y+u)+rl =(Y'(X2/y)+(y,u))+rl =y,(xdy)+(y·u+rd· 
There is a z such that X2 = Xl + z, so that X2 = (y. (X2/Y) + (y. u + rl)) + Z = 
Y'(X2/Y)+((Y' u + rl) + z). Consequently, r2 = (y·u+rd+z = y·u+(rl +z), 
so y . u ::; r2 and hence y . u < y, which is impossible. 

NELSON'S WORK ON LOGIC AND FOUNDATIONS 
203 
159{: Xl : X2 : Y 
.1{ 
156;XI 
156;X2 
16;0 
} 
113;xI;y;xl/y;rl 
113;X2;y;x2/y;r2 98;X2/Y;XI/Y 44;x2/Y;Xl/Y;U 1O;y;x2/Y;u 9;y· (x2/y);y' u;rl 
15;Xl;X2;Z 9;y· (X2/Y);Y' u + rl;z 9;y· u;rl;Z 54;y· (X2/Y);(Y' u + rl) + z;r2 
14;y·u;rl + z;r2 69;y·u;r2;y 95;y;u }. 
The qed proofs are checked by the qed software and automatically generate the 
TeX code to display the compact qed proofs as shown above. 
Nelson evidently intended the qed project to a be step towards automated proof 
systems that would support mathematicians supplying proofs in completely formal 
format that would be both human checkable and machine verifiable. 
8.6 SOME QUOTATIONS 
Nelson's philosophy of formalism does not mean that mathematics is removed from 
the everyday, ordinary real world. Indeed, he apparently finds his very formal math-
ematics to be part and parcel of the ordinary world, including personal relationships 
and even religious feeling. Some of this philosophy can be found in the following 
quotations, which are taken from both published and unpublished sources. 
Numbers are divine, the only true divinity, the source of all that is in 
the world, holy, to be worshiped and glorified. Such is the Pythagorean 
religion, and such is the origin of mathematics. This is the religion 
from which I am apostate. (Nelson [17, p. I]) 
This paper [17] contains Nelson's strongest statements about his formalism. 
It must be exhilarating to the superbly skilled people restoring the Sis-
tine Chapel to reveal the original work that lay under the smoke and 
grime of centuries. I felt exhilaration writing Chapter 2: for the first 
time I experienced mathematics without the obscuring layer of seman-
tics. 
I feel confident now that complete formalization of mathematics is not 
only feasible, but practical. The question remains: is it worthwhile? To 
me the answer is clearly yes. (Nelson [23, pp. 88-89]) 
The previous quote and the next are from Nelson's manuscript using qed. 
In the not distant future there will be huge data banks of theorems 
with rapid search procedures to help mathematicians construct proofs 
of new theorems .... 
But for centuries to come, human mathematicians will not be replaced 
by computers. We have different search skills. There is a phase tran-
sition separating feasible searches from infeasible ones, a phase tran-
sition that is roughly described by the distinction between polynomial 
time algorithms and exponential time algorithms. The latter are in gen-
eral infeasible; they will remain forever beyond the reach of both peo-
ple and machines. (Nelson [23, p. 89]) 

204 
CHAPTER 8 
This explains what Nelson expects for computer-based mathematics research, 
namely that for the foreseeable future (centuries) computers will not attain all the 
capabilities of humans. Nelson discusses this further in [19]. 
Mathematicians no more discover truths than the sculptor discovers 
the sculpture inside the stone. (Surely you are joking, Mr. Buonarroti!) 
But unlike sculpting, our work is tightly constrained, both by the strict 
requirements of syntax and by the collegial nature of the enterprise. 
This is how mathematics differs profoundly from art. (Nelson [18, p. 
4)) 
This indicates, in part, how Nelson reconciles pure formalism with the stability 
of the truth of statements like the odd perfect number question. It was also the 
inspiration for the "architect" analogy presented earlier in the present article. 
I cannot resist ending with one more quote of Nelson's: 
Perhaps infinity is not far off in space or time or thought; perhaps it 
is while engaged in an ordinary activity-writing a page, getting a 
child ready for school, talking with someone, teaching a class, mak-
ing love-that we are immersed in infinity. (Nelson [22, p. 50)) 
This quote was made during the formalization of predicative arithmetic, where the 
idea of the mathematical infinite was being explored from Nelson's predicative 
viewpoint. It is clear that Nelson does not see any dichotomy between the mathe-
matical and non mathematical parts of life. 
8.7 APPENDIX 1: ADDITION AND MULTIPLICATION AS RELATIONS 
This section describes how predicative arithmetic can be modified so as to remove 
the assumption that addition and multiplication are total functions. 
We define a new base theory Q- to replace the theory Q. The nonlogical sym-
bols of Q- are the unary successor function S and the ternary relation symbols A 
and M. The intended meaning of the latter two symbols is that 
A(n, m,p) 
means 
n + m = p, 
and 
M(n, m,p) 
means 
n· m = p. 
These two symbols are intended to replace the function symbols + and· of Q. 
The axioms of Q- are as follows: 
Sx =I 0, 
Sx = Sy --t X = y, 
x =I 0 --t (3y)(Sy = x), 
A(x, y, z) /\ A(x, y, u) --t z = u, 
M(x, y, z) /\ M(x, y, u) --t Z = u. 
A(x, 0, x), 
A(x, y, z) --t A(x, Sy, Sz), 
M(x,O,O), 
M(x, y, z) /\ A(z, x, u) --t M(x, Sy, u), 
Note that these are the direct translations of the axioms of Q plus axioms stating 
that A and M are not multivalued. We define ~ in Q- by x ~ Y B 3z A(x, z, y). 
It is straightforward to show that Q is interpretable in Q- via inductive cuts. 

NELSON'S WORK ON LOGIC AND FOUNDATIONS 
205 
8.8 APPENDIX 2: PREDICATIVITY OF EXPONENTIAL TIME 
This section sketches a proof that there is a bounded theory T which is interpretable 
in Q via inductive cuts, and such that all exponential time functions are intension-
ally defined in T. We give mostly a hint of the proof. Recall that Chandra, Kozen, 
and Stockmeyer [5] characterized exponential time computability in terms of al-
ternating polynomial space computability. We restrict attention to exponential time 
functions f with polynomial growth rate (for more general exponential time func-
tions, one would have to make do with the bit graph of the function). By Chandra, 
Kozen, and Stockmeyer, the bit graph of the function f is computed by an alter-
nating Turing machine which uses space O(nk) on input of length n, for some 
fixed k. From this, it is straightforward to construct functions g, h, r, and s which 
are polynomial time computable so that 
f(x) = h(O, 0, x), 
h(t,m,x) =g(h(t + 1,r(m,x),x),h(t + 1,s(m,x),x)), 
where there is an integer k such that Ih(t,m,x)1 ~ Ixlk for all x and such that 
h(t, m, x) = ° 
whenever It I > Ixl k or Iml > Ixlk . The intuition is that t is a time 
parameter, that m serves as an instantaneous description of a step in the computa-
tion of f(x), and that g, r, and s implement a finite state controller. 
We now form a predicative theory as follows. First define an inductive cut Q3 
which is closed under the # function and where bounded induction holds. On this 
cut, we say a number x is small if there is a z = 2X E Q3. It is straightforward to 
introduce functions f, g, and h so that the above two equations hold for all small x. 
The set of small elements forms an inductive cut closed under .; by using the con-
struction of Theorem 8.2, we find a subset of Q3 which is also an inductive cut and 
is closed under # again. On this cut, the functions f(x), g(a, b), and h(t, m, x) are 
all total and satisfy the two defining equations for f. 
8.9 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
I would like to thank Bill Faris for inviting me to participate in the Vancouver con-
ference, pushing me to write this, and suggesting that I formulate my own philos-
ophy of mathematics instead of just Ed Nelson's. I also thank Guershon Harel and 
Alfred Manaster for their extensive comments on an earlier draft of this manuscript, 
Alexander Khait for helpful correspondence, and Curtis Franks and Fernando Fer-
riera for corrections to a later draft. 
Ed Nelson helped considerably with comments on an earlier draft of this paper. 
Ed was an invaluable help during my graduate school days as an unofficial second 
thesis advisor. He has always been an inspiration. 

206 
CHAPTER 8 
Bibliography 
[1] Samuel R. Buss, Nelson 's 
work on logic and foundations: 
For-
malism and radical constructivism. Talk at a Workshop on Analy-
sis, Probability and Logic: A Conference in Honor of Edward Nel-
son, June 2004, PIMS, Univ. of British Columbia. Slides available at 
http://math. ucsd.edul ,,-,sbusslResearch Web/nelson. 
[2] ___ , Bounded arithmetic, Bibliopolis, Naples, 1986, Revision of 1985 
Princeton University Ph.D. thesis. 
[3] ___ , Bounded arithmetic. proof complexity and two papers of Parikh, An-
nals of Pure and Applied Logic 96 (1999), 43-55. 
[4] ___ , FOM posting on NYC logic conference and panel discussion, 
posted in the FOM Foundations of Mathematics online discussion forum, 
http://www.cs.nyu.eduipipermail/fornlI999-December/003547.html. Dec. 6, 
1999. 
[5] Ashok K. Chandra, Dexter C. Kozen, and Larry J. Stockmeyer, Alternation, 
28 (1981),114-133. 
[6] Antonio M. Fernandes and Fernando Ferreira. Groundworkfor weak analysis, 
Journal of Symbolic Logic 67 (2002), 557-578. 
[7] Frederic Brenton Fitch, Symbolic logic. an introduction, Ronald Press, New 
York,1952. 
[8] Harvey Friedman, Re: Interpretability in Q, FOM mailing list posting. De-
cember 2004. 
[9] Timothy Gowers, Mathematics: A very short introduction, Oxford University 
Press, Oxford, UK, 2002. 
[10] Rueben Hersch, What is mathematics. really?, Oxford University Press, Ox-
ford, UK, 1999. 
[11] Julian L. Hook, A many-sorted approach to predicative mathematics, Ph.D. 
thesis, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, June 1983. 
[12] Alexander Khait, Advanced mathematical thinking in computerized environ-
ment, Topic Study Group 13: Research and Development in the Teaching and 
Learning of Advanced Mathematical Topics, 10th IntI. Congress on Mathe-
matical Education, http://www.icme-organisers.dkltsg 19/, 2004. 
[13] ___ , Proofs as a tool to develop intuition, Topic Study Group 19: Rea-
soning, Proof and Proving in Mathematics Education, 10th IntI. Congress on 
Mathematical Education, http://www.icme-organisers.dkltsgI3. 2004. 
[14] ___ , The definition of mathematics: Philosophical and pedagogical as-
pects, Science and Education 14 (2005), no. 2,137-159. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 
207 
[15] Ker-I Ko, Computational theory of real functions, Birkhauser, Boston, 1991. 
[16] Ker-I Ko and Harvey Friedman, Computational complexity of real functions, 
Theoretical Computer Science 20 (1982), 323-352. 
[17] Edward Nelson, 
Confessions of an 
apostate mathematician, Pre-
sented at the University of Rome, November 1995. Available at 
http://www.math.princeton.edu/ ... nelson/papers.html. 
[18] ___ , Mathematics and faith, Presented at Jubilee for Men and Women 
from the World of Learning, The Vatican, May 2000. Available at 
http://www.math.princeton.edul ... nelson/papers.html. 
[19] ___ , Mathematics and the mind, Presented at Toward a Science of 
Consciousness-Fundamental Approaches, Tokyo, May 25, 1999. Available 
at http://www.math.princeton.edul ... nelson/papers.html. 
[20] ___ , 
Syntax 
and 
semantics, 
Presented 
at 
Foundations 
and 
the 
Ontological 
Quest, 
November 
1995. 
Available 
at 
http://www.math.princeton.edu/ ... nelson/papers.html. 
[21] ___ , On induction, Typeset manuscript, fragmentary chapter 1 of uncom-
pleted book, 1979. 
[22] ___ , Predicative arithmetic, Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, 
1986. 
[23] ___ , Untitled manuscript, Contains four chapters, 156 pages, 1993. 
[24] Rohit J. Parikh, Existence and feasibility in arithmetic, Journal of Symbolic 
Logic 36 (1971), 494-508. 
[25] George Polya, Mathematics and plausible reasoning, Volume I: Induction and 
analogy in mathematics, Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, 1954. 
[26] Vladimir Yu. Sazonov, Polynomial computability and recursivity infinite do-
mains, Elektronische Informationsverarbeitung und Kybernetik 16 (1980), 
319-323. 
[27] ___ , On existence of complete predicate calculus in metamathematics 
without exponentiation, Mathematics Foundations of Computer Science, Lec-
ture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 118, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1981, 
pp.383-390. 
[28] ___ , Onfeasible numbers, Logic and Computational Complexity (Daniel 
Leivant, ed.), Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 118, Springer-Verlag, 
Berlin, 1995, pp. 30-51. 
[29] Robert M. Solovay, Letter to P. Hajek, August 1976. 

208 
CHAPTER 8 
[30] Keith E. Stanovich and Richard F. West, Individual differences in reason-
ing: Implications for the rationality debate?, Behavioral and Brain Sciences 
23 (2000), 645-726, Includes commentaries. Additional commentaries in the 
same journal, 26 (2003) 527-534. 
[31] A. J. Wilkie and J. B. Paris, On the scheme of induction for bounded arith-
meticformulas, Annals of Pure and Applied Logic 35 (1987), 26\-302. 

