CHAPTER 7 
Some Applications of the Ising Model 
to Biology 
7-1 Introduction 
7-2 Myoglobin and Classical Enzymes 
7-3 Hemoglobin 
7-4 Monod-Wyman-Changeux Model for Hemoglobin and AUosteric Enzymes 
7-5 Decorated Ising Models for Allosteric Enzymes 
7-6 Ising Models for DNA 
PROBLEMS 
7-1 Introduction 
The Ising and related models have been applied with some success to a number 
of biological systems. We shall discuss three examples here: hemoglobin, 
allosteric enzymes, and deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA). These examples are 
by no means exhaustive, but they illustrate how general lattice combinatoric 
problems and their methods of solution may be applied to biological problems. 
The common feature in the examples we shall consider here is " coopera-
tivity," which is playing a role of increasing importance in biology these days. 
Hemoglobin, for example, which is the oxygen carrier in red blood cells, has 
four distinct binding sites for oxygen with apparent interactions between the 
sites. In other words, if a molecule of oxygen is bound to a hemoglobin 
molecule, it will be more likely than not to bind other oxygen molecules. 
This cooperative interaction between the binding sites reflects itself in the 
saturation curve shown in Figure 7.1, where the percentage of oxygenated 
hemoglobin is plotted as a function of the partial pressure of oxygen (or 
equivalently the concentration of oxygen). 
It is clear from the S, or sigmoid, shape of the hemoglobin saturation curve 
that binding of a few molecules of oxygen favors the binding of more and 

178 
Some Applications of the Ising Model to Biology Ch. 7 
100 
Myoglobin 
Hemoglobin 
Partial pressure of oxygen 
FIGURE 7.1. Percentage of oxygenated hemoglobin and myoblogin 
as a function of the partial pressure of oxygen. 
that binding occurs best at high oxygen concentrations. This naturally makes 
the hemoglobin molecule a very efficient little machine, since in the lungs 
where the oxygen concentration is high binding is easy, and, as hemoglobin 
travels through the body to places with low oxygen concentration, the oxygen 
leaves the molecule rather easily. 
In Figure 7.1 the saturation curve for hemoglobin is compared with the 
corresponding curve for myoglobin, the oxygen-bearing molecule found in 
muscle tissue, which has only one binding site for oxygen and hence no chance 
of displaying any cooperative effects. 
A similar situation holds for enzymes, which are catalysts for biochemical 
reactions. The agent undergoing a particular reaction is usually referred to as 
the substrate, and the reaction of the substrate, catalyzed by an enzyme, pro­
ceeds by substrate molecules occupying distinct binding sites on the enzyme. 
For a "classical enzyme," the initial reaction rate, which is assumed to be 
proportional to the number of occupied sites on the enzyme, as a function of 
substrate concentration, has the same form as the myoglobin saturation 
curve, showing that there is no apparent interaction between the (possibly 
many) distinct binding sites. A number of enzymes, the " allosteric enzymes," 

Sec. 7-2 Myoglobin and Classical Enzymes 
179 
were recently found, however, to have an S-shaped initial reaction-rate 
curve reflecting some degree of cooperativity among the binding sites. 
Finally, DNA also has an S-shaped denaturation or melting curve; i.e., 
the fraction of broken bonds as a function of temperature has the same form 
as the hemoglobin saturation curve. If one accepts the Watson-Crick model 
for DNA, which pictures the molecule as a double helix with hydrogen bonds 
connecting the two strands, denaturation occurs through the breaking of the 
hydrogen bonds as the temperature is increased. The denaturation process is 
then often referred to as the helix-coil transition, and the fraction of broken 
bonds as a function of temperature gives the "melting curve." The S shape 
of the melting curves presumably means that the bond-breaking process is 
cooperative rather than random. 
To set the stage for a discussion of the cooperative processes described 
above we present in the next section a model for the myoglobin and classical 
enzyme noncooperative processes. In the following sections we shall discuss 
the structure and function of hemoglobin, allosteric enzymes, and DNA 
in more detail and show how the random or independent model in Section 
7-2 can be modified to take cooperativity into account. 
For some background, the interested reader is referred to Perutz (1964) for 
hemoglobin, Changeux (1965) for enzymes, and Watson (B1968) for DNA. 
7-2 Myoglobin and Classical Enzymes 
Consider an enzyme with η noninteracting or independent binding sites for 
substrate (n = 1 corresponds to myoglobin and in this case the " substrate " 
is oxygen). We number the sites by an index i = 1,2and associate 
with each site a parameter μι which takes two values, +1 if the ith site is 
occupied by substrate and — 1 if the ith site is unoccupied by substrate. (It 
would perhaps be better to consider lattice gas variables tt = 1 or 0 instead 
of μι = +1 or -1, respectively, but we will see in the following sections that 
the relation to the Ising model is made easier by starting with the Ising 
magnet variables μι = +1.) 
A configuration of the molecule is specified by the values of μ1( μ2 
μη· 
In other words, a particular configuration specifies which sites are occupied 
and which sites are unoccupied. Since there are two states for each site, there 
are 2" possible configurations. Henceforth we shall denote a configuration by 
{μ} = (μ 1,μ 2,...,μ η). 
(2.1) 

180 
Some Applications of the Ising Model to Biology 
Ch. 7 
The quantity we wish to calculate is the average number of occupied sites 
on the enzyme. In a particular configuration 
the number 
of occupied 
sites is given by 
(2.2) 
since by definition 
1 when the ith site is occupied and zero when 
the ith site is unoccupied. The average number of occupied sites N is then 
defined by 
(2.3) 
where the sum is over all 
configurations 
and 
is the probability of the configuration 
So far the discussion has been completely general. To proceed further we 
must specify the probability distribution 
In the case of independent 
binding sites we define 
to be the probability that a site is occupied and 
to be the probability that a site is unoccupied. Since a site is either 
occupied or unoccupied we must have 
(2.4) 
To simplify the algebra we now define quantities C and J by 
(2.5) 
where, from Equation 2.4, 
(2.6) 
Equation 2.5 can then be written simply as 
(2.7) 
which gives the probability distribution for the ith site. 
Now in the case of independent binding sites the probability distribution for 
the whole molecule P{fi} is simply the product of the probability distributions 
for each site, i.e., 
(2.8) 

Sec. 7-2 Myoglobin and Classical Enzymes 
181 
We are now in a position to calculate the average number N of occupied 
sites. From Equations 2.2, 2.3, 2.7, and 2.8 we have 
(2.9) 
and from the normalization condition 2.4, 
(2.10) 
Also, after summing over 
in Equation 2.9, we obtain 
(2.11) 
where in the last step we have used Equations 2.5 and 2.6. Combining 
Equations 2.9, 2.10, and 2.11 we then have 
(2.12) 
Defining a by 
(2.13) 
we can write Equation 2.12 in the form 
(2.14) 
which is the classical Michaelis-Henri equation for enzyme kinetics if a is 
interpreted as the concentration of substrate. From Equations 2.5 and 2.13, 
a is the ratio of the probability that a site is occupied to the probability that a 
site is unoccupied, so it seems reasonable to interpret a as a measure of the 
concentration of substrate. 
The Michaelis-Henri equation (2.14) fits the myoglobin saturation curve 
(Figure 7.1) and the initial reaction-rate curve for classical enzymes extremely 
well. Note that the "units" in Equation 2.14 are chosen so that half-satura-
tion occurs at concentration unity. 

Some Applications of the Ising Model to Biology Ch. 7 
FIGURE 7.2. Schematic illustration of the hemoglobin molecule 
showing the four hemes (hatched) and the associated α (white) and β 
(black) amino acid chains. 
7-3 Hemoglobin 
The hemoglobin molecule is huge, with a molecular weight of about 64,500. It 
is composed of about 10,000 atoms of hydrogen, carbon, nitrogen, oxygen, 
sulfur, and four atoms of iron which lie at the center of a group of atoms 
that form the pigment heme. The heme gives blood its red color, and each 
heme constitutes a binding site for an oxygen molecule. 
The structure of hemoglobin, shown schematically in Figure 7.2, was first 
unraveled by Perutz et al. (1960) after 23 years or so of painstaking work. 
Their primary tool was X-ray diffraction, which came into its own in the 
1950s as a means for studying the structure of large molecules. Using X-ray 
diffraction techniques, for example, Kendrew found the structure of myo­
globin [see Perutz (1964)] and Wilkins's X-ray pictures of DNA lead to the 
discovery of the Watson-Crick double-helix model for DNA [see Watson 
(B1968)]. All these remarkable events occurred in London and Cambridge 
(England) in the 1950s. 

Sec. 7-3 
Hemoglobin 
183 
As shown in Figure 7.2, hemoglobin consists of four (hatched) binding 
sites, or hemes, and, in normal form, two types of amino acid chains, the 
α and β chains, shown as white and black, respectively, in Figure 7.2. The 
unlike chains are rather strongly coupled to one another, whereas the like 
chains have virtually no contacts with one another. To a good approximation 
the hemes are at the vertices of a regular tetrahedron, shown schematically 
in Figurt 7.3 with the associated amino acid chains. The slight asymmetry of 
the real molecule reflects itself in the different number of contacts the β 
chains have with the α chains; in one case 34 residues participate and in the 
other case 19 residues participate. We shall assume for simplicity that the 
degree of cooperativity or interaction among hemes coupled by different 
chains is symmetric. (The nonsymmetric case can also be handled with the 
present formalism.) We shall also assume that interactions among the hemes 
are transmitted solely through the α-β contacts. In other words, from Figure 
7.3, heme 1 interacts with hemes 2 and 4 but not with 3, heme 2 interacts with 
hemes 1 and 3 but not with 4, and so forth. This means that we can represent 
the hemoglobin molecule by a ring of four sites with nearest-neighbor sites only 
interacting. To be a little more general, let us consider now a ring of η sites 
as shown in Figure 7.4. The problem is to calculate the average number of 
1 
3 
FIGURE 7.3. Simplified model for hemoglobin. The four hemes are 
approximately situated on the vertices of a regular tetrahedron. Unlike 
chains are rather strongly coupled, whereas like chains have virtually 
no contacts with one another. 

184 
Some Applications of the Ising Model to Biology 
Ch. 7 
FIGURE 7.4. Nearest-neighbor interaction model for a molecule con-
sisting of rt binding sites. 
occupied sites defined by Equation 2.3. Assuming that only nearest-neighbor 
sites interact, we can take the probability distribution 
to be of the form 
(3.1) 
where Z is such that P{n) is properly normalized 
(3.2) 
and 
The first factor in the product (Equation 3.1), exp(J/i;), 
represents the independent binding term (see Equations 2.7 and 2.8) and the 
second term, 
represents interactions or correlations between 
nearest-neighbor sites, which is attractive when 
and repulsive when 
for hemoglobin). Z (Equation 3.2) will be recognized imme-
diately as the partition function of a one-dimensional Ising magnet in an 
external magnetic field kTJ, with nearest-neighbor coupling constant equal 
to 
In magnetic language, N defined by Equations 2.2 and 2.3 is equal 
to 
where m is the magnetization per spin. 
One point which should be stressed is that 
is the most 
general probability distribution describing nearest-neighbor correlations. [Since 
and 
the most general functions of 
and of 
are 
linear functions, and as was shown in Section 6-1, linear functions of a given 
product of n's can always be expressed as exponentials, and vice versa.] 

Sec. 7-3 Hemoglobin 
185 
To evaluate the average number of occupied sites N (Equation 2.3), we note 
first of all from Equations 2.2, 3.1, and 3.2 that 
(3.3) 
Now, in Section 5-3 it was shown that 
(Equation 3.12 of Chapter 5) 
(3.4) 
where 
and 
are the eigenvalues of the transfer matrix (Equation 3.10 of 
Chapter 5) 
(3.5) 
i.e. (Equation 3.14 of Chapter 5), 
(3.6) 
Equations 3.3 and 3.4 then give 
(3.7) 
and it is straightforward, but rather tedious, to show from Equation 3.6 that 
in terms of the interaction parameter U and the concentration 
(Equation 2.13) the average fraction of occupied sites is given by 
(3.8) 
where 
(3.9) 

ι86 
Some Applications of the Ising Model to Biology Ch. 7 
s/ \ 
llLiv τ 
^ jv 
T * 1 
η m 
/(«) = , . ,,... . 
, ^2v.l . ,^..3 , ..4' 
(3-1!) 
It is to be noted that in the limit U = O, Equation 3.8 reduces to the classical 
Michaelis-Henri equation (2.14). In the limit t/->oo, <5 = ja — 11, and 
Equation 3.8 reduces to the Hill equation 
/(«)~> 
(3.10) 
after Hill, who first attempted to fit hemoglobin saturation curves to this 
form (the fit is actually reasonably good for η « 2.6). 
For hemoglobin, η = 4 and Equation 3.8 takes the simple form 
α [Κ + (2 K + K2)a + IKa2 + α3] 
1 + 4 Ka + (4 K + 1Κ2)α2 + 4 Ka3 + α4 
where 
K = exp(—4ί/). 
(3.12) 
Apart from trivial changes in the scale of concentration, Equation 3.11 is 
identical with Pauling's model [Pauling (1935)] and is a special case of the 
square model of Koshland et al. (1966). 
In Equation 3.11 there is only one adjustable parameter, K, which is 
determined by fitting to one experimental point. The resulting theoretical 
curve for the choice K = 0.11 (i.e., from Equation 3.12, U = 0.55), is compared 
with experiment in Figure 7.5. The agreement is reasonably good, but there 
appears to be a slight systematic deviation from the theoretical curve at high 
oxygen concentrations. This is probably due to the asymmetric nature of the 
molecule. As mentioned above, this can be taken into account, specifically in 
the model, by taking two coupling constants Ui and U2 for the two different 
contacts between unlike chains. With one extra parameter, however, a perfect 
fit to experiment is almost assured. In fact, a number of two-parameter 
models, particularly the Monod-Wyman-Changeux model discussed in the 
following section, give remarkably good results. What is perhaps surprising is 
the fit obtained using only a one-parameter model. 
One interesting feature of hemoglobin saturation curves is that the degree 
of cooperativity appears to be independent of pH and temperature. In other 
words, identical saturation curves are obtained over a range of pH and tem­
perature if the concentration scale is chosen (for example) so that half-
saturation always occurs at concentration unity. This means in particular that 
our model parameter U = 0.55 is independent of pH and temperature (J, of 
course, does depend on pH and temperature). 

Sec. 7-4 Monod-Wyman-Changeux Model 
187 
/(α) 
0.5 -
1.0 
2.0 
3.0 
a 
Figure 7.5. Fraction of oxygenated hemoglobin /(a) as a function 
of oxygen concentration α in units such that half-saturation occurs at 
concentration unity. The solid curve is obtained from Equation 3.11 
with U = 0.55 and the circles are experimental values taken from 
Changeux (1965). 
7-4 Monod-Wyman-Changeux Model for Hemoglobin and Allosteric 
Enzymes 
Hemoglobin is considered as a prototype for the recently discovered allosteric 
enzymes, which are characterized by sigmoid-shaped initial reaction-rate (or 
saturation) curves, rather than by curves of the Michaelis-Henri type for 
classical enzymes (Figure 7.1). Hemoglobin is, of course, not an enzyme, 
but it does have an S-shaped saturation curve, and its does have distinct 
binding sites for " substrate" (i.e., oxygen). Unfortunately, almost nothing is 
known about the structure of allosteric enzymes except that they have distinct 
binding sites for substrate. 
Typically, allosteric enzymes are also regulatory enzymes. The enzyme 
aspartate transcarbamylase (ATCase), for example, with aspartate as substrate 
catalyses a reaction with citosine triphosphate (CTP) as an end product. With 
CTP present, the initial aspartate reaction is inhibited. In other words, CTP 
controls or regulates the rate of its own production. Such regulatory or 

Some Applications of the Ising Model to Biology Ch. 7 
feed-back behavior appears to be extremely important in body chemistry 
and is thought to be caused by cooperative interactions (or "allosteric 
effects") among the binding sites on the enzyme [Changeux (1965)]. 
A model for such behavior was proposed in 1965 by Monod, Wyman, and 
Changeux (1965). We shall discuss this (MWC) model here before discussing 
some generalizations of the Ising model as models for allosteric enzymes in 
the following section. 
The MWC model assumes first of all that the whole molecule can exist in 
one of two conformational states (i.e., states with different" shapes ") denoted 
by R (for relaxed) and T (for tense), respectively, independently of whether 
substrate is bound to the enzyme or not. X-ray data for hemoglobin show that 
the molecule does undergo conformational changes when oxygen binds to the 
molecule, but not otherwise; so it would seem that the first assumption in 
the MWC model is rather unrealistic. Thesecond assumption is that binding in 
each of the two conformational states is an independent process. That is, there 
are no interactions or correlations between the binding sites. This also appears 
to be a little unrealistic in view of our discussion in the previous section. 
Let us consider first an enzyme in the presence of substrate only. In the 
present language the MWC is then very simple. We introduce an additional 
parameter σ which takes values +1 if the molecule is in an R state and -1 if 
the molecule is in a T state. A configuration is then specified by 
{σ;μ} = (σ;μ 1,μ 2,...,μ η), 
(4.1) 
the σ to tell which state the molecule is in and the μ, = +1, / = 1, 2,..., «, 
as before, to tell which sites are occupied and which sites are unoccupied. 
Since binding is assumed to occur independently in each state (R or T) the 
probability distribution is a sum of two independent distributions (Equation 
2.8), i.e., 
Ρ{σ; μ} = Z"1 ί±(1 + σ) Π 
+ ζ  (1 - σ) Π e·^1+"''I, 
(4.2) 
L 
ϊ= ι 
2 
ί =ι 
J 
where for normalization 
ζ =  Σ  
+  
W-,μ) |> 
ί=1 
·= 1 
J 
= ΣΠ/,(1+'") + ΐΣΠ^<1+'") 
(4-3) 
0.)(=1 
Wi=I 
= (1 + α)" + U\ + ca)". 

Sec. 7-4 
Monod-Wyman-Changeux Model 
OL = exp(2Jj) 
(4.4) 
is the ratio of the probability that a site is occupied to the probability that 
a site is unoccupied in the R state and 
is the ratio of the probability that a site is occupied to the probability that a 
site is unoccupied in the T state, a, as before, is assumed to be a measure of 
the concentration of substrate, and L in Equation 4.2 is the "allosteric 
constant," i.e., the ratio of the probability of the T state to the probability 
of the R state in the absence of substrate (i.e., all μι = — 1). 
The average number of occupied sites N is easily found to be given by (see 
Problem 1) 
a(l + a)"-1 + Lca(l + ca)""1 
K 
) 
(1 + a)" + L(1 + ca)" 
The similarity in form of Equations 4.6 and 3.8 should be noted. 
In the MWC model an S-shaped saturation curve is obtained, for example, 
by taking L small and c large, which is to say that the number of T molecules 
is small compared with the number of R molecules, but the probability of 
binding to a T molecule is large compared with the probability of binding to 
an R molecule. It is this competitive effect that produces in a somewhat 
artificial way the characteristic S-shaped saturation curve. 
Equation 4.6 fits hemoglobin and allosteric enzyme data rather well 
[Monod et al. (1965)], which is perhaps not surprising in view of the fact 
that there are two adjustable parameters (L and c). As we have remarked, the 
basic assumptions of the model seem to be rather unrealistic since it is likely 
that there are interactions between binding sites, and that conformational 
changes of the molecule and binding of substrate to the molecule are not 
independent of one another. Notice also that the model takes no account of 
structure. For hemoglobin this is a definite defect in the model, but for 
allosteric enzymes, where almost nothing is known about structure, it may 
be an advantage. By considering more sophisticated models, however, it may 
be possible to deduce some structural information (but probably not a great 
deal) from the saturation curves. Some work along these lines is discussed in 
the following section. 
ca. = exp(2J2) 
(4.5) 
- = J- Σ 
Σ (1 + 
/4 
tl 
2ΐΐ i= 1 
{σ; μ} 

190 
Some Applications of the Ising Model to Biology Ch. 7 
In conclusion we remark that the MWC model above can be generalized 
to take various modifiers (e.g., CTP for ATCase) into account (see Problem 
2). These generalized models also fit the experimental data rather well. 
7-5 Decorated Ising Models for Allosteric Enzymes 
There are 30 or so known allosteric enzymes, but unfortunately almost 
nothing is known about their structure, even their quaternary structure, i.e., 
the number of subunits or binding sites. The most studied allosteric enzyme 
has been aspartate transcarbamylase (ATCase). Early experiments on ATCase 
[Gerhart and Pardee (1963) and Gerhart and Schachman (1965)] demonstrated 
that there were separate distinct binding sites for substrate and for modifiers 
(e.g., the inhibitor CTP). This appears to be still the case. The number of 
binding sites in each case, however, is a little in doubt at the moment. The 
original experiments suggested that there were eight binding sites for sub­
strate (catalytic sites) and eight binding sites for modifiers (regulatory sites). 
More recent experiments by the original group [Changeux and Schachman 
(1968a), Changeux and Rubin (1968b) and Gerhart and Schachman (1968)] 
suggest four regulatory and four catalytic sites, whereas an independent 
group [Weber (1968)] suggests six catalytic sites and six regulatory sites. Let 
us suppose then that there are n( 4 <n< 8) catalytic sites and m(4 < m < 8) 
regulatory sites on the enzyme. 
A possible model for ATCase in the absence of modifiers is the model 
discussed in Section 7-3 with probability distribution given by Equation 3.1 
and average number of occupied (catalytic) sites given by Equation 3.8. 
For the model to be reasonably close to the truth we need the molecule to 
have a one-dimensional interaction structure. By this we mean that contacts 
between subunits can be traced along a one-dimensional path, as for hemo­
globin. The molecule will, of course, have a three-dimensional shape, as 
hemoglobin does, if for no other reason than the molecule will want to occupy 
the minimum volume. 
On general grounds one might argue that all biological molecules have 
essentially a one-dimensional interaction structure. If this were not so, it 
would be virtually impossible to make such molecules either naturally or 
artificially by stringing together components in a definite sequence, which is 
the way it is done artificially and is probably the way nature does it as well. 
If the one-dimensional interaction structure is granted, and if it is assumed 

Sec. 7-5 
Decorated Ising Models for Allosteric Enzymes 
191 
that only nearest-neighbor subunits interact, the probability distribution 
(3.1) for configurations of the molecule is the only possibility. 
The fact that the number of subunits is not known precisely is of little 
concern, since for the model the fraction of occupied sites given by Equation 
3.8 is rather insensitive to η for η > 4 or so. Thus in Equation 3.8 if we 
\ 
divide top and bottom by (1 + α + <5)" and allow η to approach infinity we 
obtain, since 
The error committed in approximating Equation 3.8 by Equation 5.1 for finite 
η is then exponentially small in η and hence constitutes a negligible error for 
η larger than about 4. 
In Figure 7.6 we have compared a theoretical curve obtained from Equa­
tion 3.8 with /7 = 8, with experimental values obtained for ATCase in the 
. 
N 
a(<5 + α — 1 + 2e~ w) 
Iim — = 
T7; 
JT 
„-.00 η 
<5(1 + α + δ) 
(5.1) 
m 
1.0 
0.5 
1.0 
2.0 
3.0 
a a 
FIGURE 7.6. Saturation curve for ATCase in theabsenceof modifiers. 
The solid curve is obtained from Equation 3.8 with η = 8 and U = 0.55 
and the circles are experimental values taken from Gerhart and Pardee 
(1963). 

192 
Some Applications of the Ising Model to Biology 
Ch. 7 
presence of substrate only [Gerhart and Pardee (1963)]. The value of U that 
best fits the data is 0.55, which is surprisingly the same value obtained for 
hemoglobin. 
We consider now a modification of the model 3.1 to take occupation of 
regulatory sites into account. 
In the presence of CTP, as we have noted, the initial reaction rate is inhibited 
as shown in Figure 7.7; i.e., the saturation curve moves off to the right in 
the presence of CTP, making the initial reaction rate smaller for a fixed sub­
strate concentration in the presence of CTP. 
The precise number m of regularity sites is unfortunately not known 
(4 < m <> 8) and the arrangement of the regulatory subunits with respect to 
the catalytic subunits is also not known. We consider here only one possible 
+ 2 χ IO-4MCTP 
Control 
0.5 
•X 
2.0 
3.0 
FIGURE 7.7. Saturation curves for ATCase. Black circles are experi­
mental values for control (no CTP) and white circles are experimental 
values for ATCase in the presence of2x IO-4M CTP. The solid curve 
for control is obtained from Equation 3.8 with η = 8 and exp(—41/) = 
0.11; the solid CTP curve is obtained from Equation 3.8 with α and U 
replaced by 5 and U(Equations 5.9 and 5.10) and η — 8 and exp(—4Σ7) = 
0.10. The dashed curve is the CTP curve rescaled so that half-saturation 
occurs at concentration unity. The crosses are the rescaled experimental 
values. 

Sec. 7-5 Decorated Ising Models for Allosteric Enzymes 
193 
FIGURE 7.8. ATCase model. The white subunits bind substrate and 
the black subunits bind modifiers (CTP). Neighboring white subunits 
and neighboring black and white subunits only are assumed to interact. 
model, based on the original experiments, which assumes eight catalytic and 
eight regulatory subunits, as shown in Figure 7.8. As discussed above, 
assuming four, six, or eight of each will not make any appreciable difference 
to the saturation curves (the error in any case is probably significantly less 
than the experimental error). 
To take account of CTP in the model shown in Figure 7.8 we introduce a 
set of additional parameters 
with values 
if the ith 
regulatory site [between the ith and 
catalytic sites] is occupied by 
CTP and — 1 if the ith regulatory site is unoccupied by CTP. The parameters 
as before, specify the states of the catalytic sites and a 
configuration of the molecule is specified in the presence of CTP by 
(5.2) 
We take the probability distribution for such a configuration to be 
(5.3) 
where for normalization 
(5.4) 

194 
Some Applications of the Ising Model to Biology Ch. 7 
When all 
all regulatory sites are unoccupied, Equation 5.3 
reduces, as it should, to the previous model Equation 3.1. The factor 
in Equation 5.3 represents independent binding on the regula-
tory sites and the last factor, 
with 
represents repulsive interactions between nearest-neighbor regulatory and 
catalytic sites. We have not included any interactions between neighboring 
regulatory sites since it is found experimentally that ATCase, in the presence 
of CTP only, fits the classical Michaelis-Henri equation; i.e., there are no 
apparent interactions among regulatory sites. 
Note that the "interaction term" in Equation 5.3, 
(5.5) 
when 
when the /th regulatory site and its two 
neighboring catalytic sites are all occupied. This means that when U = V, 
which, in fact, turns out to be the choice that best fits the data, the repulsive 
interaction between occupied neighboring regulatory and catalytic sites, 
completely annihilates the attractive interaction between occupied neighboring 
catalytic sites. In other words, U = V for the present model corresponds to 
complete inhibition. 
The evaluation of Z (Equation 5.4), which in magnetic language is the par-
tition function for a " decorated Ising model" (or an Ising magnet with spin 
impurities), is accomplished in much the same way as before with the aid of 
the transfer-matrix method. Thus, if we first sum over the v variables in 
Equation 5.4 we obtain 
(5.6) 
where 
or, in matrix form, 
(5.7) 

Sec. 7-5 Decorated Ising Models for Allosteric Enzymes 
195 
where 
(5.8) 
is a measure of the CTP concentration, 
(as before) is a measure of 
the substrate concentration, and U and J are defined by 
(5.9) 
and 
(5.10) 
Apart from the factor 
which is independent of the 
substrate concentration a, the matrix L' is identical with the matrix L (Equation 
3.5) with J and U replaced by 
and 
respectively. It follows that the (two) 
eigenvalues of 
are, apart from the constant C, given by Equation 3.6 with 
J and U replaced by 
and 
respectively. The argument leading to Equation 
3.7 for the average number of occupied catalytic sites can now be repeated. 
Since C is independent of J it cancels in Equation 3.7 and we find that the 
fraction of occupied catalytic sites 
is given by Equation 3.8 with 
and 
U replaced by a and U defined by Equations 5.9 and 5.10, respectively. 
Half-saturation occurs when 
i.e., from Equation 5.9, 
when 
(5.11) 
Since V is assumed to be positive, 
is an increasing function of CTP con-
centration P with the limiting value 
(5.12) 
The increase of a1/2 with increasing CTP concentration is observed experimen-
tally [Figure 7.7, Gerhart and Pardee (1963)] and so is the limiting behavior 
described by Equation 5.12. Notice that in our model the limiting value of 
a 1/2 is directly related to the interaction parameter V between regulatory and 
catalytic sites. 

196 
Some Applications of the Ising Model to Biology Ch. 7 
It is clear from Equation 5.10 that U > U; i.e., in the presence of CTP the 
"effective interaction" between catalytic sites is increased. Notice, however, 
from Equation 5.10, that U as a function of β achieves a maximum value UM 
given by 
when β = 1, and that Iim^00 U = U. In other words, according to the model, 
cooperativity should at first increase with increasing CTP concentration until 
it reaches a maximum at a certain concentration βΜ(=1 in our units), and for 
β > βΜ cooperativity should decrease until in the limit β -> oo, U = U, which is 
also the case when β = 0. This effect should be clearly visible if the saturation 
curves for different CTP concentrations are plotted on a scale so that half-
saturation always occurs at concentration unity (see Figure 7.7). Unfor­
tunately, the data necessary to test this prediction do not seem to exist. The 
only published data for ATCase of the desired type [Gerhart and Pardee 
(1963)] give two saturation curves (shown in Figure 7.7), one for ATCase in 
the absence of modifiers (" control") and one in the presence of 2 χ 10~4 M 
CTP. These two curves are sufficient, however, to determine all the parameters 
in the model (U, V, and the scale of concentration β). 
With the control a1/2 = 1 we have found that the choice U = 0.55 best 
fits the control data. In the presence of 2 χ IO-4 M CTP, α1/2 = 1.7 (from 
Figure 7.7), so from Equation 5.11 we obtain 
Furthermore, if we rescale the CTP curve as described above (shown as a 
dashed curve in Figure 7.7) and fit the resulting curve to Equation 3.8 we 
obtain exp(—41/) S 0.10. Since exp(—AU) = 0.11 we find from Equation 
5.10 that 
(5.13) 
(5.15) 
Solving Equations 5.14 and 5.15 for β and V we obtain 
β s 0.93 
and 
exp(2K) s 3.0. 
(5.16) 
(5.17) 

Sec. 7-6 
Ising Models for DNA 
197 
The values of β and V are unfortunately very sensitive to the values of U and 
U, so Equations 5.16 and 5.17 could conceivably be in error by as much as 
20 percent or so (if U and U are in error by a few percent). 
Nevertheless, from Equations 5.17 and 5.12 we conclude that the ratio of 
alj2 in the limit of infinite CTP concentration, to Ctli2 for no CTP, should be 
approximately 3. Also, from Equation 5.16 and the above discussion, we 
conclude that maximum cooperativity should be achieved at a CTP concentra­
tion of about 2 χ IO-4 M. Unfortunately, the data to test either of these 
predictions do not seem to exist. 
One interesting result, which emerges from Equation 5.17, is that V « 
U « 0.55, which means, as remarked above, that in the model, at least, we 
have complete inhibition. 
The model described above can be generalized in any number of ways, for 
example, to take activators, which shift the curve to the left, as well as in­
hibitors into account on ATCase. Models can also be formulated for allosteric 
enzymes that do not have distinct subunits for substrate and modifiers (e.g., 
DPN-isocitrate dehydrogenase). Some discussion of these cases can be found 
in Thompson (1968b) (see Problem 3). 
7-6 Ising Models for DNA 
Deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA for short) is the blueprint for life, the carrier 
of the genetic code. Naturally occurring DNA is a large molecule, typically 
30,000 A long and 20 A thick, composed of some 1 million atoms. It contains 
four essential components, called bases: adenine (A), thymine (T), cytosine 
(C), and guanine (G); and sections of the molecule from a given organism, 
consisting of sequences of A's, T's, C's, and G's, are claimed to determine the 
set of proteins that the organism can make. 
According to the Watson-Crick model [Watson (Bi968)] DNA is com­
posed of two strands wrapped around one another to form a double helix, 
as shown in Figure 7.9. There are sequences of the four bases on each strand 
which are connected to one another by (relatively weak) hydrogen bonds, 
also shown in Figure 7.9. An important feature of the model is that A can only 
be coupled to T, and C can only be coupled to G, so AT and CG are the 
only possible base pairs. In the model this is necessary to obtain a compact 
structure. The occurrence of equal amounts of A and T and of C and G was, 

198 
Some Applications of the Ising Model to Biology Ch. 7 
FIGURE 7.9. Watson-Crick model for DNA. 
however, discovered by Chargaff (1950) before the invention of the Watson-
Crick model and is known as ChargafTs rule. 
Because of Chargaff's rule and the two-stranded structure, the sequence of 
bases on one strand completely determines the complementary sequence of 
bases on the other strand. This has very important genetic implications. 
Replication of DNA, for example, can be achieved in the model by unwinding 
the molecule and making two new complementary strands from free bases. 
The sequence of bases on one strand (or its complementary sequence) is also 
claimed to be the blueprint for the production of proteins. 
Since the model is so simple and explains almost everything that needs to 
be explained, it has been almost universally accepted. Its inventors, Crick and 
Watson, and also Wilkins, who provided the X-ray pictures that suggested a 
double-helix structure, were justly rewarded with the Nobel prize for medicine 
in 1962—the same year, in fact, that Perutz and Kendrew were awarded the 
chemistry prize for the structure of hemoglobin and myoglobin. Some very 

Sec. 7-6 Ising Models for DNA 
199 
recent work, however, suggests that the structure of DNA may not be quite 
as simple as that proposed by Watson and Crick. Wu (1969), in particular, 
has made a very careful reevaluation of the X-ray pictures (at high humidity) 
and finds that the data fit a four-strand model much better than a two-strand 
model. The final word on the subject, however, will have to wait until more 
detailed X-ray pictures become available. 
The considerable amount of theoretical work that has been done on the 
Watson-Crick model has been mainly concerned with the denaturation pro­
cess, i.e., the breaking of the hydrogen bonds connecting the two strands 
under treatment by heat or other things, such as pH. As the temperature is 
increased, for example, bonds break until finally one is left with two separate 
strands or coils. The denaturation process, or helix-coil transition, produces 
melting curves (the fraction of broken bonds as a function of temperature) 
with the characteristic sigmoid shape shown in Figure 7.10, reflecting some 
degree of cooperativity or interaction among the hydrogen bonds connecting 
the two strands. The temperature T1 where one half of the bonds are broken is 
called the melting point, and around this point the bonds break rather easily. 
The first theoretical treatment of the denaturation process was given by 
AT) 
0.5 
FIGURE 7.10. Fraction of broken bonds f(T) as a function of tem­
perature T. One half of the bonds are broken at the melting point T t. 

200 
Some Applications of the Ising Model to Biology Ch. 7 
Zimm and Bragg (1959), who assumed that all bonds are identical. This is 
surely not the case in naturally occurring DNA, since AT pairs are connected 
by two hydrogen bonds, while CG pairs are connected by three hydrogen 
bonds. Synthetic one-component DNA's consisting of all AT or all CG 
pairs can be made, however, and the Zimm-Bragg model should be applicable 
to such molecules. We begin, therefore, with a discussion of one-component 
DNA. The presentation given by Montroll and Goel (1966) and Goel and 
Montroll (1968) will be followed throughout, since they use Ising-model 
language exclusively. Various periodic synthetic two-component (i.e., AT and 
CG pairs) DNA molecules are also discussed by Montroll and Goel, and we 
shall have a little to say about these at the end of this section. The interested 
reader is referred to Montroll and Goel (1966) and Goel and Montroll (1968) 
for lists of references and relations between previous work and the models to 
be discussed here. 
For all intents and purposes we can consider the Watson-Crick model as 
the ladder shown in Figure 7.11, the sides of the ladder corresponding to the 
two strands and the rungs of the ladder to the complexes joining the base 
pairs. By complexes we mean the two hydrogen bonds connecting an AT 
A 
A 
c 
T 
G 
A 
C 
C 
T 
T 
T 
G 
A 
C 
T 
G 
G 
A 
FIGURE 7.11. Ladder version of the Watson-Crick model (Figure 
7.9). 

Sec. 7-6 
Ising Models for DNA 
201 
pair and the three hydrogen bonds connecting a CG pair. We number the 
complexes by an index /=1,2,...,« and assume for simplicity that a 
complex is either broken or intact. We then assign a parameter μί to the /th 
complex with values 
( + 1 
if the /th complex is broken 
μι = \ 
(6.1) 
(— 1 
if the /th complex is intact. 
In a given configuration of broken and intact complexes {μ} = (μ ι,..., μη), 
the number of broken complexes is given by 
Ν{μ} = Σ id + M,), 
(6.2) 
i= 1 
and if Ρ{μ} is the probability distribution for the configuration {μ}, the 
average number of broken complexes N is given by 
Ν = ΣΝ{μ}Ρ{μ}, 
(6.3) 
ί μ )  
where the sum is over all (2") possible configurations μ ι  — ± 1, μ 2  = ± 1,..., 
μ„ = ± 1 of the molecule. 
The formulation given so far is completely general and is equivalent to the 
formulation given in previous sections for hemoglobin and (allosteric) 
enzymes. The problem, as before, is to specify the probability distribution 
Ρ{μ}· 
Consider first the random one-component case, i.e., with probability dis­
tribution Ρ{μ} given by Equations 2.7 and 2.8, 
Ρ{μ} = ΐΐ/>(/Λλ 
(6.4) 
i= 1 
ρ{μ i) = (2 cosh J)~1 exp(J^j), 
(6.5) 
where now />(+1) is the probability that a complex is broken and p(— 1) is 
the probability that a complex is intact. In this case the fraction of broken 
complexes/is given by Equation 2.12, i.e., 
/ = -
J 
η 
(6.6) 
= i(l + tanh J). 

202 
Some Applications of the Ising Model to Biology Ch. 7 
To determine the temperature dependence of/ we must determine the tem­
perature dependence of J. The obvious statistical-mechanical choice, from 
Equation 6.5, is J = E/kT, where E is the energy difference between bonded 
and unbonded states. In the limit of infinite temperature (J = 0), however, 
Equation 6.6 then gives f = i, which is certainly incorrect since we know from 
experiment that all bonds are broken at sufficiently high temperatures. E, 
defined above, must then be temperature dependent if we wish to imitate 
Figure 7.10 with Equation 6.6. We therefore make the empirical choice 
/=/(Γ) is then one half at the melting point T1 and Equation 6.6 gives the 
curve shown in Figure 7.12. 
The slope of the curve at T = T1 from Equations 6.6 and 6.7 is obviously 
a/2, so the melting curve can be made more "cooperative" or less "cooper­
ative" by increasing or decreasing a. 
For pure synthetic AT-DNA, Equations 6.6 and 6.7 give a reasonably 
good fit to experiment with the choice a = 1 and Ti = 65°C. 
The random model, however, is a little unrealistic and does not in general 
give a good fit to experiment. A more reasonable choice for the probability 
J =  U(T-T 1). 
(6.7) 
KT) 
1.0 
0.5 
T, 
T 
FIGURE 7.12. Melting curve obtained from the random model 
Equations 6.6 and 6.7. 

Sec. 7-6 Ising Models for DNA 
203 
distribution 
which takes nearest-neighbor complex interactions into 
account, is (Equation 3.1) 
(6.8) 
where 
(6.9) 
is again the Ising-model partition function, and for simplicity we have taken 
"circular DNA" (since n is large, boundary, or free end, 
terms are unimportant). 
The fraction of broken complexes from Equations 3.6 and 3.7 is given 
by 
(6.10) 
where 
(6.11) 
In the limit 
only the largest eigenvalue 
contributes to Equation 6.10, 
giving 
(6.12) 
In the limit 
interactions) Equation 6.12 reduces to the ran-
dom model equation (6.6) and in the limit 
the "zipper limit,"/ 
becomes a step function; 
and 
as 
shown in Figure 7.13 for the choice 
(Equation 6.7). 
In general the model gives a reasonably good fit to experiment, but it has 
one serious deficiency—it does not take long sequences of broken bonds into 
account in a realistic way. As bonds break, rings or loops are formed by the 
separated strands. Such rings can exist in a number of possible geometrical 
configurations, giving rise, in statistical-mechanical language, to a ring 
entropy. Also it is reasonable to suppose that bonds will break more easily 
in the neighborhood of a loop. Neither of these effects is taken into account in 
Equation 6.8 for the probability distribution 

204 
Some Applications of the Ising Model to Biology Ch. 7 
f(T) 
Slope = ^ exp (2U) 
0.5 
Zipper limit (U = <*>) 
FIGURE 7.13. Melting curves obtained from Equation 6.12. 
Various models have been proposed to take account of the ring entropy 
[see Goel and Montroll (1968) and references therein], but none is entirely 
satisfactory. It should be noted, however, that the above model is probably a 
reasonably good model for temperatures below the melting point, where large 
rings or loops are not yet formed. 
The Ising model can in principle be modified to take loops and different 
complexes (AT and CG) into account, but the mathematical manipulation 
required then becomes extremely unwieldy. One interesting question, which has 
not been satisfactorily answered, is: Can one deduce any (statistical) informa­
tion about the distribution of base pairs in naturally occurring DNA from the 
melting curves? In an attempt to answer this question Goel and Montroll 
considered various synthetic DNA's with known periodic distribution of 
AT's and CG's. One obtains a variety of melting curves for such molecules 
(some examples are shown in Figure 7.14) and the hope is that by considering 
simple models for such molecules, model parameters will be found to fit more 
complicated DNA forms. 
One interesting fact that appears to emerge from these studies is that the 
coupling constant U is temperature independent and is essentially the same 
for nearest-neighbor AT-AT, AT-GC, or GC-GC complexes. Assuming that 
V is, in fact, independent of temperature and complex, a probability dis-

Sec. 7-6 Ising Models for DNA 
205 
FIGURE 7.14. Melting curves for DNA: 
tribution P{u} appropriate for the sequence of AT's and CG's shown in 
Figure 7.15 is 
(6.13) 
FIGURE 7.15. Periodic two-component D N A . 

206 
Some Applications of the Ising Model to Biology Ch. 7 
where J1 refers to AT complexes and J2 to CG complexes. The evaluation of 
the fraction of broken bonds for such a distribution can be carried out with 
the aid of transfer-matrix methods (see Problem 4 for some special cases) 
and, if one wishes, loops can be included as well. 
1. Derive Equation 4.6 for the fraction of occupied sites in the Monod-
Wyman-Changeux model. 
2. Construct a probability distribution for the following generalized Monod-
Wyman-Changeux model: 
(a) The whole molecule can exist in either an R state or a T state; 
(b) Substrate (S) binds exclusively to molecules in the R state; 
(c) Inhibitor (I) binds exclusively to molecules in the T state; 
(d) Activator (A) binds exclusively to molecules in the R state. Assuming 
that there are η binding sites for S, I, and A, show that the fraction of sites 
occupied by substrate is given by 
<x(l +Dcy-1O +?)" 
(1 +a)"(l + y)"+L(l +β)"' 
where L is the allosteric constant (Equation 4.2) and α, β, and γ are the con­
centrations of substrate, inhibitor, and activator, respectively. 
3. Consider a molecule composed of η subunits with one binding site for 
substrate and one binding site for inhibitor on each subunit. Assuming that 
only nearest-neighbor substrate sites interact and that occupation of a sub-
unit by inhibitor affects only the substrate occupation of that subunit, show 
that the probability distribution given by (see Equation 5.3) 
leads to the fraction of occupied substrate sites /(a) given by Equation 3.8 
with ά defined by Equation 5.9 (and U unchanged). (This is a possible model 
for DPN-isocitrate dehydrogenase [Thompson (1968b)].) 
P R O B L E M S  
Ρ{μ;ν} = Ζ 1 fl exP [ 

Problems 
207 
4. The probability distribution for periodic AT, CG, AT, CG,... DNA, 
excluding loop effects and assuming only nearest-neighbor complex inter­
actions, is given by (Equation 6.13) 
where J1 refers to AT complexes and J2 to CG complexes. Use the transfer-
matrix method to calculate the average number of broken bonds, assuming 
that J1 = a(T — T1) and J2 = a(T — T2). 
Do the same for AT-AT-AT · · · AT-CG-CG · · · CG DNA, assuming only 
one interaction parameter U for nearest-neighbor complexes. 


