9 
Dostoevsky and Swedenborg 
Very few books and studies on Dostoevsky appeared in the first 
two decades after his death. The year 1900 may be chosen as the 
turning point; after that date the number of publications, first in 
Russian and then in other languages, increased steadily. By the 
middle of our century the canon of Dostoevsky scholarship was 
well established, so that hardly any new departures seemed to 
be possible. Today, whether our attention is focused upon Dos-
toevsky's opinions or upon the stylistic devices and structures 
of his novels, we note that practically every method of ap-
proach has already been tried by at least one of our predeces-
sors. Thus Dostoevsky, not unlike Nietzsche, was discovered 
and appropriated by the first half of the twentieth century. It 
was then that he grew to the stature he now possesses, and it 
was then that he was recognized as a forerunner of new trends 
in European literature and philosophy. 
Seen from the present, as the past recedes in time, it is quite 
normal for the perspective to change and for some habits of 
thought once accepted as universal to reveal their conventional 
character. These habits explain certain blind spots or uninten-
tional omissions, while new questions arise concerning Dos-
toevsky's significance as a historical phenomenon. This essay 
toys with some interpretations of Dostoevsky which may be 
applied in the future, when the present transitional stage is 
over. It introduces the name of Emanuel Swedenborg as a useful 
catalyst. 
120 

Dostoevsky and 
Swedenborg 
121 
Swedenborg may be linked with Dostoevsky in two ways. 
First, Russia's cultural lag left the Russian intelligentsia open to 
a sudden onslaught of Western scientific thinking, with centu-
ries compressed into a few decades. That is why Dostoevsky the 
religious thinker is similar in many respects to religious thinkers 
in the West who earlier resisted the corroding impact of scien-
tific innovations. Not infrequently he resembles and even 
sounds like Pascal. In the seventeenth century Pascal was, after 
all, the most representative of those writers engaged in the 
defense of the faith against the skeptics. Also the Age of Rea-
son, as personified by Voltaire, oppressed Dostoevsky, as did 
nineteenth-century science, personified for him by Claude Ber-
nard ("Bernardy" in The Brothers Karamazov). 
As a theologian 
confronted with the rationalistic science of the day Swedenborg 
had recourse to an aggressive exegesis of Christianity, and an 
analogous tendency can be distinguished in Dostoevsky. 
A second link is provided by Dostoevsky's borrowings from 
Swedenborg. To affirm that they exist is not farfetched, for 
even the books in Dostoevsky's library supply a sort of material 
proof. The catalog of Dostoevsky's library, published in 1922 
by Leonid Grossman,1 lists three such books. These are, all in 
Russian, the following: A. N. Aksakov, The Gospel 
according 
to Swedenborg. 
Five chapters of the Gospel of John with an ex-
position and a discussion of their spiritual meaning according to 
the teaching on correspondences 
(Leipzig, 1864); A. N. Aksa-
kov, On Heaven, the world of spirits and on Hell, as they were 
seen and heard by Swedenborg, 
translation from the Latin 
(Leipzig, 1863); A. N. Aksakov, The Rationalism of Sweden-
borg. A critical analysis of his teaching on the Holy Writ (Leip-
zig, 1870). A. N. Aksakov was in Russia a chief proponent of 
spiritism or, as we would say today, parapsychology—an inter-
est which was treated unkindly by Dostoevsky in The Diary of 
a Writer. He became acquainted with Swedenborg, however, 
'L. P. Grossman, Seminarii po Dostoevskomu 
(Gosudarstvennoe Izda-
tel'stvo, 1922; reprint Great Britain: Prideaux Press, 1972). 

122 
Dostoevski 
and 
Swedenborg 
thanks to Aksakov's essays and translations and he took from 
these books what suited his purpose. 
SWEDENBORG IN THE FIRST HALF 
OF THE TWENTIETH CENTURY 
During the first half of our century much attention was paid 
to so-called symbolism in poetry. It seems strange that, in spite 
of this preoccupation, Swedenborg was little known. After all, 
Baudelaire's sonnet "Les Correspondences"—a poem crucial to 
symbolist poetics—took its title and its contents from Sweden-
borg. Curiosity alone should have directed critics to explore the 
original concept, not just its derivatives. The truth is that every 
epoch has dusty storage rooms of its own where disreputable 
relics of the past are preserved. Swedenborg was left there to-
gether with the quacks, miracle workers, and clairvoyants so 
typical of the not-so-reasonable Age of Reason—people like 
Count Cagliostro, the legendary Count Saint-Germain, and an 
initiator of the "mystical lodges" in France, Martinez Pasqualis. 
The risk of taking Swedenborg seriously was too great; besides, 
nobody seemed to know what to think of him. 
Neither his contemporaries nor posterity ought to be blamed 
too much for this neglect. Swedenborg's destiny was extraordi-
nary. A scientist of wide reputation who pursued researches in 
various disciplines from geology to anatomy, a member of the 
Royal Mining Commission in Sweden, he had a sudden moment 
of illumination, abandoned his scientific pursuits, and produced 
a voluminous oeuvre in which he described his travels through 
Heaven and Hell and his conversations with spirits. He con-
tinued to frequent the high society to which he belonged as a 
royal counselor, and even though he claimed to move simul-
taneously in the other world, his congeniality and humor dis-
armed those who would have been ready to call him a madman. 
After his death in 1772 his works, translated into English, made 
several converts who organized themselves into the Sweden-

Dostoevsky and Swedenborg 
123 
borgian Church of New Jerusalem. Romanticism in its turn 
made use of Swedenborg, adapting him to its own needs. For its 
adherents an ethereal, spiritual world opposed to the world of 
matter was most alluring: it was this they saw, albeit not quite 
correctly, in Swedenborg's teachings. Balzac's Seraphita is typi-
cal of such a Romantic misinterpretation. 
Swedenborg's legend was still alive at the time of Balzac and 
Baudelaire, but gradually it waned during subsequent decades. 
In the period which interest us, namely the first half of the 
twentieth century, Swedenborg was at best an enigma attract-
ing explorers of mental abnormality. It will suffice here to men-
tion two major names which exemplify an attitude of uncer-
tainty, if not of actual helplessness. 
The first name is that of Karl Jaspers, who published a study 
of schizophrenia in 1922; he chose Strindberg, Van Gogh, 
Swedenborg, and Holderin as cases of famous schizophrenics. 
The second name is that of Paul Valéry, whose 1936 essay on 
Swedenborg is quite curious. Valéry was once at the center of 
the symbolist movement; moreover, as a brilliant essayist he 
dominated the French literary scene for several decades. He con-
fesses that Swedenborg has always been for him no more than a 
literary myth and leaves one wondering whether he has ever 
read the author with whom he is dealing. Valéry's essay was 
written as an introduction to the French translation of a book 
on Swedenborg by the Swedish scholar Martin Lamm. The 
book does not provide any answer to the question which pre-
occupies Valéry, namely: "How is a Swedenborg possible?" so 
he looks for a solution of his own, rejecting the most common 
hypotheses, those of charlatanism and of insanity. But his own, 
psychological, explanation sounds even less convincing than 
Jaspers' diagnosis of mental illness and betrays Valéry's posi-
tivistic bias. His rather weak essay on Swedenborg offers us an 
insight into the positivistic background of French symbolism, 
into its basic duality. Swedenborg's visions were, according to 
Valéry, a kind of daydreaming—they occurred in a state be-
tween sleep and wakefulness. Perhaps we would not be guilty of 

124 
Dostoevsky 
and 
Swedenborg 
insolence if we read into that statement, precisely because it 
lacks Valéry's usual sharpness, an avowal of his skepticism re-
garding creations of the human mind. He is very tactful and 
voices his respect for the "real" reality of Nature and of human 
society; another reality, that of the artist, of the visionary, is 
autonomous, a separate area where veracity and delusion are 
on an equal footing. 
Swedenborg was not the only writer who was something of a 
nuisance then. Another was William Blake. The question of 
Blake's mental illness was debated quite seriously at the begin-
ning of our century, and though his admirers rejected it as non-
sense, their studies published in the thirties and in the forties 
were known to relatively few people. The fact that Blake today 
has become a major figure of English literature is one of the 
signs indicating a serious change in attitude. And of course an 
acquaintance with Blake must awaken interest in Swedenborg, 
not only because Blake was influenced by him but also because 
Swedenborg can best be understood when approached using 
Blake's own criteria. 
Let us pose a simplistic question: did Swedenborg really 
travel through Heaven and Hell and did his conversations with 
spirits really take place? The most obvious answer is: no, not 
really. He only believed that he had access to the other world at 
any time, for instance when attending a party or walking in his 
garden. Everything happened only in his mind. This amounts to 
conceding that Jaspers was right when he pronounced his ver-
dict: schizophrenia. We should note that Romanticism had 
already treated Swedenborg in a way no different from the way 
positivistic psychiatry did later on, namely, a split into the 
material (that is, real) and the spiritual (that is, illusory) had 
been accepted, but with a plus sign, not a minus, added to the 
phantoms of our mind. If, however, William Blake's help is en-
listed in reading Swedenborg, the picture changes radically. The 
question asked and the answer given would be rejected by Blake 
as absurd. Blake read Swedenborg exactly as he read Dante: 
these were for him works of the supreme human faculty, Imagi-

Dostoevsky and 
Swedenborg 
125 
nation, thanks to which all men will one day be united in Divine 
Humanity. Through Imagination spiritual truths are trans-
formed into visible forms. While opposing Swedenborg on 
certain crucial matters, Blake felt much closer to his system than 
to the system of Dante, whom he accused of atheism. Blake's 
Marriage of Heaven and Hell is modeled upon Swedenborg, 
and he would have been amused by an inquiry into whether he 
had "really" seen the devils and angels which he describes. The 
crux of the problem—and a serious challenge to the mind—is 
Blake's respect both for the imagination of Dante, who was a 
poet, and the imagination of Swedenborg, whose works are 
written in quite pedestrian Latin prose. Dante was regarded by 
his contemporaries as a man who had visited the other world. 
Yet Jaspers would not have called him a schizophrenic, because 
the right of the poet to invent—that is, to lie—was recognized in 
Jaspers' lifetime as something obvious. It is not easy to grasp the 
consequences of the aesthetic theories which have emerged as 
the flotsam and jetsam of the scientific and technological revo-
lution. The pressure of habit still forces us to exlaim: "Well, 
then, Swedenborg wrote fiction and he was aware it was no 
more than fiction!" But, tempting as it is, the statement would 
be false. Neither Swedenborg nor Blake were aestheticians; they 
did not enclose the spiritual within the domain of art and poetry 
and oppose it to the material. At the risk of simplifying the issue 
by using a definition, let us say rather that they both were pri-
marily concerned with the energy which reveals itself in a con-
stant interaction of Imagination with the things perceived by 
our five senses. 
SWEDENBORGIAN ELEMENTS IN 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
The doctrine of correspondences is treated at length in 
Swedenborg's Heaven and Hell, which Dostoevsky may have 
purchased or read in Aksakov's translation during his stay in 

126 
Dostoevsky 
and 
Swedenborg 
Germany in 1865. Let us note the place of publication, Leipzig, 
and the date, 1863. Crime and Punishment was begun in Wies-
baden in 1865. That Baudelaire in his Flowers of Evil was in-
debted to Swedenborg is well known, but there are in my opin-
ion strong traces of Swedenborg's influence in Crime 
and 
Punishment 
also. A big phantasmagoric city, whether it be 
Paris, literally called by Baudelaire la cité infernale, 
or St. 
Petersburg, where Raskolnikov is beset by nightmares, already 
seems to be the modern form of a Dantesque hell; a description 
of it may refer implicitly to the doctrine of correspondences. To 
sound convincing, one ought to quote numerous passages from 
Swedenborg. However, this is beyond the scope of a brief essay 
and I shall limit myself to a few sentences. 
"What a correspondence is, is not known at the present day" 
—says Swedenborg—"for several reasons, the chief of which is 
that man has withdrawn himsel from heaven by the love of self 
and love of the world."2 That lost vision embraced Creation as 
a unity, because "the whole natural world corresponds to the 
spiritual world, and not merely the natural world in general, 
but also every particular of it; and as a consequence everything 
in the natural world that springs from the spiritual is called cor-
respondent."3 Man by virtue of his mind is part of the spiritual 
world and therefore "whatever effects are produced in the 
body, whether in the face, in speech, or in bodily movements, 
are called correspondences."4 Perhaps the gist of Swedenborg's 
teaching resides in his carrying the anthropocentric vision 
implied by Christianity to an extreme. The maxim: "as above, 
so below" has always been invoked by hermetic Christian 
movements with their system of mirrors, for according to them 
the macrocosm was reflected in the microcosm and thus corres-
pondences are to be found in the whole tradition of alchemy 
and in Jakob Boehme. But Swedenborg went one step further: 
for him the whole universe in its only valid essence, celestial 
2Heaven and Hell, p. 87. 
3Ibid., p. 89. 
4Ibid., p. 91. 

Dostoevsky and 
Swedenborg 
127 
and spiritual or infernal, had a human shape: "It has been 
shown that the entire heaven reflects a single man, and that it is 
in image a man and is therefore called the Greatest Man."s As a 
consequence everything human acquires an extraordinary 
importance, for this entire world to which we apply physics and 
chemistry exists so as to provide human imagination with arche-
types and human language with signs.6 Any man may live in a 
constant relationship with the Greatest, Cosmic, Man—in other 
words, live in Heaven—but he may also avoid it and keep com-
pany with the Cosmic Evil Man—in other words live in Hell. 
When he dies he finds himself in one of the innumerable heavens 
or hells which are nothing other than societies composed of peo-
ple of the same inclination. Every heaven or hell is a precise re-
production of the states of mind a given man experienced when 
on earth and it appears accordingly—as beautiful gardens, 
groves, or the slums of a big city. Thus everything on earth per-
ceived by the five senses will accompany a man as a source of 
joy or of suffering much as the alphabet, once learned, may be 
composed into comforting or depressing books. In the eigh-
5Ibid., p. 94. 
6 In this respect an English metaphysical poet, Thomas Traherne, is Sweden-
borg's predecessor, as for instance in the following stanza: 
This made me present evermore 
With whatsoere I saw. 
An object, if it were before 
My Ey, was by Dame Natures Law, 
Within my Soul. Her Store 
Was all at once within me; all her Treasures 
Were my imediat and Internal Pleasures, 
Substantial Joys, which did inform my Mind. 
With all she wraught, 
My Soul was fraught, 
And evry Object in my Heart a Thought 
Begot, or was; I could not tell, 
Whether the Things did there 
Themselves appear, 
Which in my Spirit truly seemd to dwell; 
Or whether my conforming Mind 
Were not even all that therin shind. 
"My Spirit" in The Poetical Works of Thomas Traherne (New York, 1965). 

128 
Dostoevsky and 
Swedenborg 
teenth century Swedenborg was not alone in discovering this 
strange dimension: the dimension of human inwardness. Others 
as well searched for a counterbalance to the world of scientists, 
which was conceived as a mechanism seen from the 
outside. 
Different as they are from each other, in many ways several 
thinkers have in common this search for the inside: Berkeley 
with his esse est percipi—to be is to be perceived—Kant with his 
categories of the mind, and of course Blake. Swedenborg's 
choice of states of mind and images as the foundation of his sys-
tem was to appeal to romantic and symbolist poets for obvious 
reasons. Yet by shifting the emphasis they obtained the opposite 
of the original idea. Correspondences are not symbols to be 
arbitrarily chosen by a poet or a novelist. If the word symbol 
applies here, they are "objective symbols," preordained by God 
and determined by the very structure of Nature and of human 
imagination. A visionary, a prophet unveils them and Sweden-
borg, who assigned himself a prophetic role, deciphered with 
their help the hidden spiritual meaning of the Bible. All this had 
little to do with literature, at least as far as he was concerned. It 
was not destined to become a basis for legitimizing uncontrolled 
subjectivity or for establishing a democratic equality of subjec-
tive symbols and metaphors. It is true, some poets have noticed 
that not all symbols are of equal power and they have valued 
the most those which have their roots in archetypes. But this is a 
separate issue, alien to Dostoevsky, at least on a conscious level. 
In Crime and Punishment the streets of St. Petersburg, the 
dust, the water of the canals, the stairs of tenement houses are 
described as seen by Raskolnikov; thus they acquire the quality 
of his feverish states. His dreams, his coffinlike room, and the 
city itself are woven into the rich symbolic texture of the novel. 
All this is not unfamiliar to a reader of the early Dostoevsky, 
and seems only to intensify the devices already used in The 
Double or in The Landlady. There is, however, one character 
who displays too much kinship with the spirits of Swedenborg 
for his direct descent from the book Heaven and Hell to be 
doubted. This is Svidrigailov. We will grant that he has capti-

Dostoevski 
and Swedenborg 
129 
vated many readers and scholars who sensed in him a some-
what exotic element previously unencountered in Dostoevsky's 
novels. While a good deal of symbolism is involved in the 
name, appearance, and behavior of Sonya, we feel in Svidrigai-
lov still another dimension, as though he had just arrived from 
and were returning to the beyond, in spite of his palpable pres-
ence and his presumed biography. Everything about him—the 
way he visits Raskolnikov for the first time, his physical fea-
tures, his gestures, his speech, and his dreams—qualify as 
Swedenborgian correspondences; viewed from that angle he is, 
though alive, a melancholy inhabitant of Hell. In parenthesis, 
the strong identification of Dostoevsky with Svidrigailov has 
been noted by critics, but nobody to my knowledge has pointed 
to the origin of that hero's name to back the assumption. Dos-
toevsky was not indifferent to the past of his family and he liked 
to refer to his ancestors, nobles who had owned an estate, Dos-
toevo, in the Grand Duchy of Lithuania. One of the Lithuanian 
rulers of the fifteenth century was Duke Svidrigaila, a well-
known historical figure. No other character of Dostoevsky's is 
endowed with a Lithuanian name. 
But unraveling the author's little secrets is more or less an idle 
game. What is important is that love of self, as a central theme, 
appears in Crime and Punishment in two forms: the one repre-
sented by Raskolnikov who gradually becomes aware of its 
power, the other by his double, Svidrigailov, who has nothing 
to learn for he knows his evil nature and has a feeling of eternal 
damnation. Love of self, according to Swedenborg, character-
izes all the inhabitants of the infernal realm that remains, how-
ever, infinitely differentiated. To quote: "Every evil, as well as 
every good, is of infinite variety. That this is true is beyond the 
comprehension of those who have only a simple idea regarding 
every evil, such as contempt, enmity, hatred, revenge, deceit, 
and other like evils. But let them know that each one of these 
evils contains so many specific differences, and each of these 
again so many instances of particular differences, that a volume 
would not suffice to enumerate them. The hells are so distinctly 

130 
Dostoevsky and 
Swedenborg 
arranged in accordance with the differences of every evil that 
nothing could be more perfectly ordered or more distinct. Evi-
dently, then, the hells are innumerable."7 Raskolnikov is an in-
tellectual of the nineteenth century who has rejected Heaven 
and Hell as depicted in Christian iconography and rejected im-
mortality along with them. The conversation between him and 
Svidrigailov on that subject is one of the strangest in world 
literature: 
"I don't believe in a future life," said Raskolnikov. 
Svidrigailov sat lost in thought. 
"And what if there are only spiders there, or something of that 
sort," he said suddenly. 
"He is a madman," thought Raskolnikov. 
"We always imagine eternity as something beyond our conception, 
something vast, vast! But why must it be vast7 Instead of all that, 
what if it's one little room, like a bathhouse in the country, black and 
grimy and spiders in every corner, and that's all eternity is? I some-
times fancy it like that." 
"Can it be you can imagine nothing juster and more comforting 
than that?" Raskolnikov cried, with a feeling of anguish. 
"Juster? And how can we tell, perhaps that is just, and do you know 
it's what I would certainly have made it," answered Svidrigailov, with 
a vague smile. 
This horrible answer sent a cold chill through Raskolnikov. 
How could we assume that this image of a private hell does 
not come straight from Swedenborg? Spiders, tarantulas, scor-
pions as symbols of evil return so persistently in Dostoevsky's 
late works that they deserve the appellation of correspondences. 
A passage from Swedenborg enlightens us sufficiently as to the 
hells which are built out of correspondences to things perceived 
by the senses: "Some hells present an appearance like the ruins 
of houses and cities after conflagrations, in which infernal 
spirits dwell and hide themselves. In the milder hells there is an 
appearance of rude huts, in some cases contiguous in the form 
of a city with lanes and streets, and within the houses are infer-
nal spirits engaged in unceasing quarrels, enmities, fightings, 
7Heaven and Hell, p. 588n. 

Dostoevsky and 
Swedenborg 
131 
and brutalities; while in the streets and lanes robberies and 
depredations are committed."8 Of course, in view of the infinite 
variety of hells, there is room also for a country bathhouse with 
spiders.9 
Svidrigailov suffers from the systematic visits of specters, but 
he does not dismiss them as delusions. He is inclined to think 
that "ghosts are, as it were, shreds and fragments of other 
worlds, the beginning of them." The dreams he has shortly 
before his suicide are so vivid that they resemble visions more 
than sequences of blurred images loosely bound together by an 
oneiric logic. Their horror surpasses even Raskolnikov's dream 
after the murder. One would not be far wrong in considering 
Crime and Punishment a novel that deals with Raskolnikov's 
self-will on one level only, while on a depper level there is 
another crime and another punishment: Svidrigailov's rape of a 
child and his suicide. But is there any reason to think that Svi-
drigailov had really committed that crime? Not necessarily. The 
coffin in which a fourteen-year-old girl lies among flowers, like 
Shakespeare's Ophelia, may lead us to believe that he had 
debauched an adolescent who then committed suicide. If so, he 
is a very sensitive devil indeed, for in the next dream the victim 
changes into a five-year-old child and he is terrified when sud-
denly she opens her eyes and looks at him with "a glowing, 
shameless glance." Faced with Svidrigailov's presumed mis-
deeds the reader is more or less in the position of Dostoevsky's 
biographers, aware of his obsession and uncertain whether he 
had in fact once raped a little girl. 
Just as in Crime and Punishment the very core of evil had to 
do with the rape of a child, so in The Possessed 
Stavrogin, 
though he harbors in himself all the devils of Russia, accuses 
himself in his Confession of precisely the same sin. Yet his con-
versation with Tikhon leaves the reader perplexed. It is impos-
"Ibid., p. 586n. 
'In Swedenborg's system there are no angels and devils except the saved and 
the damned humans. To this Dostoevsky refers in his notebook of 1875-1876: 
"Are there devils? I could never imagine what satan's would be like. Job. 
Mephistopheles. Swedenborg: bad people. . .about Swedenborg." [The Un-
published Dostoevsky, ed. Carl R. Proffer, Vol. II (Ann Arbor: Ardis, 1975).] 

132 
Dostoevsky and 
Swedenborg 
sible to be certain that Stavrogin once behaved as he says he 
did. The purpose of his confession, reflected in the ugliness of 
its style, is noted by Tikhon: this is an act of defiance by Stavro-
gin, not of contrition; he does not ask for forgiveness, but tries 
to provoke hatred and scorn. If this applies to the style, it may 
apply to the content as well and the whole story of the rape 
might have been invented. It seems as if Dostoevsky's feelings 
of guilt were constantly searching for expression through one 
symbolic event which returns again and again as a fixed corres-
pondence. That symbolic reality has the same substance as do 
Swedenborg's hells; it resides beyond commonly accepted 
notions of the existing and the imaginary, the objective and the 
subjective. 
A literary parentage going back to Gogol and E. T. A. Hoff-
mann is sufficient to explain the fantastic elements in the young 
Dostoevsky's fiction, for instance the pranks of Golyadkin Jr. in 
The Double which are still explained away in a rational manner 
by Golyadkin Sr.'s mental illness. Beginning with Crime and 
Punishment the rational cover for these extraordinary, bizarre 
occurrences grows very thin and thus they are elevated above 
mere phantoms. A rational explanation is contrived in the form 
of a state between dreaming and wakefulness, as experienced by 
Svidrigailov on the night before his suicide; of a confession 
written by Stavrogin; of falling asleep in The Dream of a Ridi-
culous Man, though his travel through time into the remote past 
of mankind has nothing dreamy about it; or, in The Brothers 
Karamazov, 
of the sober, psychiatric title of a chapter: "The 
Devil. Ivan's Nightmare"—while neither Ivan nor the reader is 
convinced that the Devil was merely a product of Ivan's sick 
brain. 
DOSTOEVSKY AS A HERESIARCH 
It is more than likely that Dostoevsky read Swedenborg when 
working on Crime and Punishment and that he was emboldened 
by a theology which assigns such a prominent place to the 

Dostoevsky and 
Swedenborg 
133 
imagination. Whether and precisely what he borrowed from 
Swedenborg remains uncertain, with the possible exception of 
Svidrigailov's bathhouse full of spiders. But Dostoevsky's strat-
egy as a religious thinker is of more consequence than possible 
borrowings of details, and Swedenborg's writings may offer 
some clues in this respect. 
Anna Akhmatova used to call Dostoevsky and Tolstoy 
"heresiarchs," as we learn from Nadezhda Mandelstam's 
memoirs.10 This is true enough. Their extraordinary minds, 
their fervor, and the gigantic stakes they played for did not save 
them from preaching fuzzy or even wild doctrines. Although 
basically dissimilar, they were alike in their effort to adapt 
Christianity to what they believed to be the needs of modern 
man. Yet Tolstoy's "true" Christianity, diluted by Rousseauism, 
resembled more and more a nontheistic Buddhism, as Solovyov 
noted. In Tolstoy's copious output as a sermonizer the meta-
physical meaning of the Gospels evaporated and only the moral 
meaning remained. It would hardly be an exaggeration to say 
that Tolstoy ended where Dostoevsky started, and to locate the 
latter's point of departure during his fourierist phase, at the time 
when the belonged to the Petrashevsky circle. 
The Christian vocabulary of Utopian socialism should be kept 
in mind, whether its spokesman be Saint-Simon, Fourier, or 
George Sand. In its rejection of Christian churches and in plac-
ing itself under the sign of the Gospels, Utopian socialism was to 
some degree the inheritor of such populist Christian movements 
of the past as the Hussites or the Anabaptists, who had pro-
claimed a return to the original purity of the early Christian 
communes. Yet the vocabulary veiled a profound change in 
belief, a result of the eighteenth-century Lumières. A social 
utopia now occupied the first place, not Christ: he was admired 
only as its announcer, as the most sublime teacher and re-
former. Dostoevsky, as we know, was shocked by Belinsky's 
derogatory and scornful words about Christ. When he joined 
the Petrashevsky circle, it was different; discussions on Fourier 
or Considérant did not threaten his personal attachment to the 
10Nadezhda Mandelstam, Vtoraya kniga (Paris: YMCA Press, 1972). 

134 
Dostoevsky and 
Swedenborg 
figure of Jesus as a moral ideal, for the precise reason that they 
focused upon the Kingdom of God on earth as something not 
very remote and easily attainable. Subsequently Dostoevsky's 
whole life, beginning with his stay in the penal colony of Omsk, 
would be marked by the incessant struggle in his mind between 
two images of Christ; one, a model of perfection never equaled 
by anyone else, yet still a mortal man and thus subject to the 
law of death; the second, a God-Man triumphant over death. A 
contradiction, overlooked by the humanists and socialists of the 
Petrashevsky circle, gradually was to take shape in Dostoev-
sky's work, up to its most poignant presentation in The Legend 
of the Grand Inquisitor. For the argument of the Grand Inquisi-
tor with Christ is nothing more and nothing less than that of a 
Utopian socialist with his supposed leader who refuses to serve 
as such and, what is worse, shows that his disciple had mis-
understood him. Christ says in fact that his Kingdom of God is 
not of this world—and the freedom he offers man does not lead 
to any perfect society. No one but the God-Man intending to lift 
man up to his own divine level can ask for acceptance of this 
freedom. The Utopian in Dostoevsky yearned so much for the 
Kingdom of God on earth that he sided with the Grand Inquisi-
tor; it is this that explains the forceful speech the author, himself 
internally divided, puts into the mouth of his tragic old man. 
The divine nature of Christ appears as a major obstacle to 
human happiness on earth and therefore should be denied. But, 
by a dialectical countermovement, as soon as the earthly happi-
ness of man is chosen as a goal it becomes obvious that it can be 
attained only at the price of the total annihilation of human 
freedom. Thus the argument expresses Dostoevsky's despair at 
the thought of the erosion of Christian faith—in himself, in the 
Russian intelligentsia, and in Western Europe. And it was this 
that forced him to resort to arbitrary and unrealistic remedies. 
In that big either/or—either a Christian civilization or the total-
itarian society of Shigalev and of the Grand Inquisitor—he 
paradoxically hoped to find a third way, and clung to his Holy 
Russia with the peasant below and the tsar above as the only 

Dostoevsky and Swedenborg 
135 
possible mainstay of Christianity and consequently of human 
freedom. 
THE HUMAN AND THE DIVINE 
The problem of the two natures of Christ underlies Dostoev-
sky's whole work, and it also determines his journey from a 
socialist utopia to a nationalistic one. To say that at some given 
moment he became an atheist (whatever that word may mean) 
under Belinsky's influence is not truly relevant, for he was 
haunted by the figure of Christ the teacher perhaps no less in the 
forties than later on, when in the penal colony. Yet undoubtedly 
he underwent a change of heart in Omsk, in the sense that now 
the necessity of an act of faith became clear. His much quoted 
letter of 1854 to Fonvizina, written upon his release from the 
prison camp, contains the nucleus of those internal contradic-
tions which torment his major heroes: 
I will tell you regarding myself that I am a child of the age, that I have 
been a child of unbelief and doubt up till now and will be even (I know 
it) until my coffin closes. What terrible torments this thirst to believe 
has cost and still does cost me, becoming the stronger in my soul the 
more there is in me of contrary reasonings. And yet sometimes God 
sends me moments when I am utterly at peace; in those moments I 
love and find that I am loved by others and in such moments I have 
constructed for myself a symbol of faith in which everything is clear 
and sacred to me. This symbol is very simple: to believe that there is 
nothing more beautiful, more profound, more sympathetic, wiser, 
braver, or more perfect than Christ; and not only is there nothing, 
but, as I tell myself with jealous love, there could not be anything. 
Even more: if somebody proved to me that Christ is outside the truth, 
and if it were a fact that the truth excludes Christ, I would rather 
remain with Christ than with the truth. 
This last sentence is potentially that of a "heresiarch." Who 
could prove to Dostoevsky that Christ was beyond the truth? A 
scientist, a philosopher, for whom everything is submitted to 

136 
Dostoevsky and 
Swedenborg 
deterministic laws and who would shrug at the story of Christ 
rising from the dead as an offense to our reason? That sort of 
proof, through the universal order of Nature, is accepted by 
those characters of Dostoevsky's who are, more or less, the 
spokesmen for his "intellectual part"—Ippolit in The Idiot, Kir-
illov in The Possessed, and Ivan Karamazov. "And if Christ be 
not risen, then is our preaching vain, and your faith is also 
vain," says Saint Paul (I Cor. 15:14). Ippolit, Kirillov, Ivan, 
and the Grand Inquisitor have their negative proofs that it is 
really so, but they also realize that if it is so, if Christ deluded 
himself in foretelling his resurrection, then the world is a devil's 
farce. Dostoevsky himself, or that part of him which turns 
against his skeptical characters, "would rather remain with 
Christ than with the truth" and thus yields the field in reality to 
the so-called scientific Weltanschauung. The opposition of faith 
to reason has behind it an old tradition, but the opposition of 
faith to truth is a desperate novelty and dangerously favors any 
self-imposed deception.11 
There is perhaps also a second layer of meaning in that enig-
matic sentence. Since the Gospels are not a treatise on ethics 
and their message is often self-contradictory, many Christian 
mystics counseled clinging to the person of Christ as opposed to 
norms or values. A well-founded counsel—but at the same time 
a precept cherished by every sectarian, for it authorizes trans-
forming the image of Christ as suits a given man or community. 
The suspicion arises whether "the Russian Christ" of Dostoev-
sky is not connected with such an exalted arbitrariness. 
"Here Dostoevsky comes close to Kierkegaard, but the dichotomy is re-
solved by Kierkegaard who tips the scales in favor of "inwardness," "subjec-
tivity," and thus identifies faith with truth: "The truth is precisely the venture 
which chooses an objective uncertainty with the passion of the infinite." "But 
the above definition of truth is an equivalent expression for faith." "Faith is 
precisely the contradiction between the infinite passion of the individual's in-
wardness and the objective uncertainty." [Concluding Unscientific Postscript, 
(Princeton University Press edition), p. 182], A saying of Meister Eckhart's 
may be recalled here: "If God were able to backslide from truth I would fain 
cling to truth and let God go." 

Dostoevsky and Swedenborg 
137 
THE ONSLAUGHT OF PHILOSOPHY— 
AND OF GNOSTICISM 
A brief digression is necessary here. Christianity has in mod-
ern times, beginning with the Renaissance, been forced to renew 
its quarrel with philosophic thought. At one time, in the Roman 
Empire, it had been Greek philosophy; assimilated and tamed 
by the Church, it tended nevertheless to recover its autonomy 
and at last—thanks to so-called humanism—it grew in strength, 
inspiring modern science. Or to be more precise, one side of 
Greek thought was now taken over and turned against the 
other, which had been fused with the Jewish heritage. Quite 
symptomatic was the revival in the sixteenth century of the 
Anti-Trinitarian heresy also known as Arianism, though Arius 
had been condemned by the Council of Nicaea long before, in 
A.D. 325. Perhaps one should call it the heresy and trace it 
down through the history of Christianity in its various contra-
dictory guises. At first sight the "luminous" rationalistic trend 
in the Renaissance (and undoubtedly Arianism with its dislike 
of incomprehensible dogma belongs here) had nothing to do 
with its contemporary "dark," more esoteric counterpart. Yet 
the two were just the two sides of the same philosophic coin, 
much as they had been before in the Hellenistic world. The 
origins of attacks upon the Trinity should be traced back to 
Gnosticism, which had already by the second century A.D. in-
troduced a duality, a separation between Christ on the one 
hand and the God of the Old Testament on the other. The very 
dogma of the Trinity—of the three hypostases designated the 
Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost—was elaborated as the 
response of the early Church to that Gnostic cleavage which 
broke the continuity of the Revelation through history. From its 
birth the Gnostic heresy, in its various ratiocinations, had at its 
core a resentment of the evil world: a God responsible for such 
evil could not be a supreme Being, while Christ was—or repre-

138 
Dostoevsky and 
Swedenborg 
sented—the true deity.12 Then the Manichaeans stepped in and 
followed a well-blazed trail. Ever since, Christology has been a 
territory for which heretics have had a predilection; they have 
tended to oppose Redemption to Creation, the Savior to Jeho-
vah, or even to exult in the human nature of Christ, who, 
through kenosis, "emptied himself" of his divine attributes. In 
Dostoevsky's major novels all these problems are present 
implicitly or explicitly. 
The theology of Swedenborg, who was both a modern Chris-
tian and a scientist, was a major attempt at wrestling with the 
dogma of the Trinity as recognized by all three branches of 
Christianity: Roman Catholic, Orthodox, and Protestant. He 
accused them all of teaching the faithful to imagine three gods, 
and thus disguising polytheism under a formula incomprehen-
sible to the human mind. At the same time, however, he dis-
approved of the solution offered by the Arians, for whom 
Christ was not of the same nature as the Father and for a large 
number of whom he was merely a man. Swedenborg's system is 
dominated by a Christ who is the only God, not in spite of his 
12"The following may be noted as the main points in the Gnostic conception 
of the several parts of the regula fidei: 
a) The difference between the supreme God and the creator of the world, 
and therewith the opposing of redemption and creation, and therefore the sep-
aration of the Mediator of revelation from the Mediator of creation. 
b) The separation of the supreme God from the God of the Old Testament, 
and therewith the rejection of the Old Testament, or the assertion that the Old 
Testament contains no revelations of the supreme God, or at least only in cer-
tain parts. 
c) The doctrine of the independence and eternity of matter. 
d) The assertion that the present world sprang from a fall of man, or from 
an undertaking hostile to God, and is therefore the product of an evil or inter-
mediate being. 
e) The doctrine that evil is inherent in matter and therefore is a physical 
potence [sic/]. 
f) The assumption of Aeons, that is, real powers and heavenly persons in 
whom is unfolded the absoluteness of the Godhead. 
g) The assertion that Christ revealed a God hitherto unknown." 
[ Adolph Harnack, History of Dogma, English translation (New York: Dover 
Publications, Inc., 1961), I, 257-259. Harnack also lists other, additional 
points.] 

Dostoevsky and 
Swedenborg 
139 
having been born a man but precisely because he was born a 
man. Absolutely Christo-centric, Swedenborg's system is also 
absolutely anthropocentric. Its most sacred books are the Gos-
pel of Saint John and the Apocalypse; by coincidence these were 
also the most sacred books for Dostoevsky. Swedenborg's 
credo is embodied in the exclamation of Thomas the Apostle 
when he touched Christ's wounds: "My Lord and my God." 
Man was created in the image and semblance of God, for Our 
Father in Heaven is Man; Heaven, as I have already quoted, is 
according to Swedenborg the Greatest Man. 
To compare Dante and Swedenborg as writers would be 
hazzardous, but their respective visions of "the other shore" 
constitute two decisive testimonies to the imaginative life of our 
civilization. Dante's cosmology is medieval and his theology is 
based upon Thomas Aquinas, in whose syllogisms Greek philo-
sophy was put to a Catholic use. The importance of Man, 
created and redeemed by God, is guaranteed in Dante by the 
Earth's central place in the universe. But by Swedenborg's time 
the universe is resolved into a motion of whirling planets and 
stars. If it were not for one man, Christ, God incarnated, man-
kind would dwindle into a speck of dust, into an accident in the 
incomprehensible mechanical order of things. Perhaps for that 
reason Swedenborg emphasizes God-Man as preexisting, the 
Creator and Redeemer in one person. It would be incorrect to 
classify Swedenborg as an Anti-Trinitarian, for all he wanted 
was to propose a new concept of the Trinity. Yet his disciple 
William Blake, occasionally a rebel against his master, hardly 
modified the Swedenborgian doctrine when he chose the 
Human Form Divine as the key to all the secrets of existence. 
And, unlike in Swedenborg, Gnostic affinities are obvious in 
Blake's multiple reversals of religious concepts: God the law-
giver equated with Satan, Glohim with inferior demiurges. The 
creation of the world, presented by Blake as an act of divine 
mercy after the Fall has already taken place (or simultaneously 
with it, which is the same where there is no time) is purely Man-
ichaean. In the teachings of the founder of Manichaeism, Mani 

140 
Dostoevsky and Swedenborg 
(d. A.D. 277), after the Kingdom of Light was contaminated by 
the Kingdom of Darkness, the Kingdom of Light allowed an 
inferior demiurge to create the world in that zone so that it 
might be purified through the action of time. 
Swedenborg (and Blake) humanized or hominized God and 
the universe to such an extent that everything, from the smallest 
particle of matter to planets and stars, was given but one goal: 
to serve as a fount of signs for human language. Man's imagina-
tion, expressing itself through language and identical in its high-
est attainments with the Holy Ghost, was now to rule over and 
redeem all things by bringing about the era of the New Jerusa-
lem. Man was again at the center, even though his Earth and his 
galaxy were not. The Christian strategy of Swedenborg (and 
Blake) perhaps parallels that of Thomas Aquinas, who felt that 
philosophy (or at least Aristotle, the philosopher) must be 
absorbed by Christian thought. In the eighteenth century the 
Christian strategist was confronted with a more difficult task: 
philosophy was to be absorbed in its two derivatives, in the 
rationalistic trend and in the more somber heretical tradition of 
duality, of a chasm between Creation and Redemption. It was 
made possible by affirming that the Divine is eternally Human 
and that the Human is potentially Divine. 
But Swedenborg (and Blake) teetered on the very edge, where 
the equilibrium between Christian faith and its anti-Christian 
denial was constantly threatened. The divinization of Man was 
already in the offing, accompanied by the advent of "European 
nihilism" as foretold by Frederick Nietzsche. Our era, the sec-
ond half of the twentieth century, is marked by a tragicomic 
escapism, namely a "death of God" theology which proceeds 
from the idea of Divine Humanity and subjects it to an imper-
ceptible alteration, so that it changes into its opposite. It is 
enough to read a book on Blake by one of the chief "death of 
God" theologians13 to observe how this can be accomplished— 
obviously by enlisting the help of Hegel. To Dostoevsky's 
"Thomas J. Altizer, The New Apocalypse: 
the Radical Christian Vision of 
William Blake (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1967). 

Dostoevsky and 
Swedenborg 
141 
credit, let us recall here that, while the dialectics of God-Man 
and Man-God were present in his novels, he desperately strug-
gled against blurring the basic antinomy between the two. 
DOSTOEVSKY'S ATTEMPTS TO SOLVE THE PROBLEM 
When describing the books in Dostoevsky's library, Leonid 
Grossman admits the probability of Swedenborg's influence 
upon what we may consider Dostoevsky's last word in religious 
matter, namely upon the discourses of Father Zosima on prayer, 
love, Hell, and contact with other worlds." Grossman's hint 
has not, to my knowledge, been taken by anybody and a study 
of the subject is lacking. Father Zosima in many of his pro-
nouncements indeed sounds like Swedenborg, particularly in 
his talk on eternal damnation. A man's life, according to 
Zosima, is "a moment of active living love" and is given to him 
as a gift of time and space, where love can be exercised. The 
drama of eternal life resides precisely in the brevity of this 
encounter with time and space, which soon are no more and 
then everything one has lived through becomes part of his in-
terior states. The flames of Hell are within the damned and cor-
respond to the quality of their love on earth: "For them hell is 
voluntary and they cannot have enough of it." "They cannot 
behold the living God without hatred and demand that there be 
no God of life, that God destroy himself and all his creation." 
In Father Zosima's thinking, a Manichaean hatred of creation 
is characteristic of the damned. Yet Dostoevsky, like Sweden-
borg and Blake before him, tried hard to absorb the heresy and 
integrate it into a Christology of his own. In a novel this is, 
however, more difficult than in theology and poetry. Dostoev-
sky seems to say: if the concept of God-Man free from sin is to 
have any validity, then human nature should allow us at least 
an inkling as to how it might be possible. That is why Dostoev-
sky spent so much energy striving to create a perfect good man 
14L. P. Grossman, Seminarii po Dostoevskomu. 

142 
Dostoevsky and 
Swedenborg 
as a hero of fiction. And he failed. Prince Myshkin is a living 
negative proof, for his acts show to what extent love of self is at 
the root of human nature and how insufficiently human some-
one is who lacks it. Myshkin, who is completely selfless, devoid 
of aggression and sexual drive, is no less a monster of emptiness 
than is Stavrogin with his excess of self-love. Father Zosima 
comes straight from the lives of the saints and eludes our ques-
tioning, for he is protected by his prestige as a repentant sinner. 
As for Alyosha, he is convincing only as one of the Karama-
zovs, united by their dark, violent blood. His missionary activi-
ties among schoolboys and the resulting brotherhood are, to be 
frank, melodramatic and outright schmalz. Artistic falsity re-
veals here the falsity of Dostoevsky's self-imposed collectivistic 
belief, his heresy which he propagated especially in his journal-
ism. Alyosha, a Christlike leader, suggests the future Russian 
Christ and is surrounded by twelve children-disciples, but by a 
strange twist of stylistic fate (there are stylistic fates), the pre-
sumed Church changes into a Boy Scout unit. It is a doubtful 
proposition that one can achieve the Kingdom of God on earth 
by converting mankind into boy scouts, and that is why those 
chapters of The Brothers Karamazov 
read like an unintended 
parody. Shatov in The Possessed, who loves the Christlike Rus-
sian people but does not believe in God, might, however, have 
been a sarcastic jab intentionally directed by Dostoevsky 
against himself. 
In the history of the rebellion of Man against God and against 
the order of Nature, Swedenborg stands out as a healer who 
wanted to break the seals on the sacred books and thus make 
the rebellion unnecessary. By revealing that God is Man he was 
convinced that he had fulfilled Christ's promise to one day send 
a Comforter, the Spirit of Truth; that Spirit spoke through him. 
Swedenborg's serene Christology may help in elucidating Dos-
toevsky's tormented and tortuous Christology. At the same 
time such a study would uncover some Blakean elements in 
Dostoevsky, who never heard of Blake. 
Dostoevsky's rebels are invested with a false, exaggerated 

Dostoevsky and Swedenborg 
143 
moral sensitivity: the order of the world should be rejected be-
cause it offends Man's moral judgment; this world is full of the 
suffering and agony of creatures tormenting one another. The 
ideal man, Jesus, must stand in opposition to that natural order; 
unfortunately, he was for the rebels merely a man and his mis-
takes had to be corrected; hence the only logical conclusion was 
to postulate the advent of a Man-God. But Dostoevsky's "posi-
tive" heroes fare no better. His failures in drawing them prob-
ably testify to his Utopian (Fourierist) vision of the ideal man as 
perfectly meek, perfectly humble and deprived of selfhood. 
William Blake knew better: he distinguished between Imagina-
tion enslaved by the Specter—by the Self—and Imagination 
making use of the Specter which is a permanent component of 
human nature. Such an appraisal of human faculties is more 
realistic. But Dostoevsky's failures, even more than his suc-
cesses, pay tribute to the permanence of the dilemma which, 
some eighteen centuries ago, emerged in the guise of a quarrel 
between the early Christian churches and the Gnostics. The 
divinization of Man, when one abhors the order of the world as 
essentially evil, is a risky and self-contradictory venture. 
1974 

