THE ­WILL TO PREDICT


THE ­WILL  
TO PREDICT
Orchestrating the ­Future  
through Science
Eglė Rindzevičiūtė
CORNELL UNIVERSITY PRESS  ​  ​ITHACA AND LONDON

Copyright © 2023 by Cornell University
All rights reserved. Except for brief quotations in a review, this book, or parts 
thereof, must not be reproduced in any form without permission in writing  
from the publisher. For information, address Cornell University Press,  
Sage House, 512 East State Street, Ithaca, New York 14850. Visit our  
website at cornellpress​.­cornell​.­edu.
First published 2023 by Cornell University Press
Library of Congress Cataloging-­in-­Publication Data
Names: Rindzevičiūtė, Eglė, author.
Title: The ­will to predict : orchestrating the ­future through science /  
Eglė Rindzevičiūtė.
Description: Ithaca : Cornell University Press, 2023. | Includes bibliographical 
references and index.
Identifiers: LCCN 2022036261 (print) | LCCN 2022036262 (ebook) |  
ISBN 9781501769771 (hardcover) | ISBN 9781501769788 (pdf) |  
ISBN 9781501769795 (epub)
Subjects: LCSH: Forecasting—­History—20th ­century. | Science—­Soviet 
Union—­History.
Classification: LCC CB161 .R56 2023 (print) | LCC CB161 (ebook) |  
DDC 303.4947—­dc23/eng/20220923
LC rec­ord available at https://­lccn​.­loc​.­gov​/­2022036261
LC ebook rec­ord available at https://­lccn​.­loc​.­gov​/­2022036262

To Francis


Acknowl­edgments	
ix
List of Abbreviations	
xiii
Note on Translation and Transliteration	
xv
Introduction	
1
	
1.	 What Is Scientific Prediction?	
15
	
2.	 Visibility, Transparency, and Prediction	
38
	
3.	 Cybernetic Prediction and Late Modern Governance	
58
	
4.	 Forecasting and the Cybernetic Sensibility	
72
	
5.	 Prediction and the Opaque: Prospective Reflexivity	
102
	
6.	 Reflexive Control	
122
	
7.	 Global Prediction: From Targeting to Orchestration	
150
Conclusion	
183
Notes	
195
Bibliography	
249
Index	
277
Contents


ix
This book grew out of a research agenda that I began to develop in my previous 
book entitled The Power of Systems: How Policy Sciences Opened Up the Cold War 
World (Cornell University Press, 2016), which explored interactions between East 
and West policy scientists as they used system-­cybernetic approaches to copro-
duce the concept of global governance. Writing this book made me realize that 
many questions regarding the logic of scientific expertise cannot be answered 
without a proper understanding of the conceptual and institutional history of 
scientific prediction: a key ele­ment of both system-­cybernetic thinking and the 
politics of scientific expertise as it was developed in both liberal and authoritar-
ian regimes. This work is an extension of research initiated as part of the research 
proj­ect Futurepol, directed by Jenny Andersson, whose pioneering work on the 
history of the ­future and scientific prediction has informed this book in many 
ways.
This book would not have been pos­si­ble without the generosity of many ­people 
who invited me to test my ideas in seminars and pre­sen­ta­tions. The idea to em-
bark on this journey crystallized during my visiting stay at the Reppy Institute 
of Peace and Conflict Studies in Cornell University by invitation from Matthew 
Evangelista in 2018. At Cornell, I was not only woken up by the bell duly ring-
ing from campus library tower early ­every morning, but I also had a splendid 
opportunity to have the brightest minds to scrutinize The Power of Systems. 
I would like to thank the brilliant postgraduates, who did not leave a stone un-
turned when discussing this book, and the faculty, especially Ronald Kline, Re-
becca Slayton, and Judith V. Reppy for their questions and suggestions. I was 
able to take ­these inspirations forward thanks to Richard Staley, who hosted me 
as Visiting Scholar at the Department for History and Philosophy of Science in 
the University of Cambridge in Spring 2019, where I could dedicate two terms 
for writing up the first drafts while discussing the ideas with the faculty and post-
graduates. While at Cambridge, I am particularly grateful to Robert Northcott 
and Anna Alexandrova for the conversations about the epistemology of scien-
tific prediction and positivism. At a ­later stage Tony Bennett, Ivan Boldyrev, Bar-
bara Czarniawska, Francis Dodsworth, and Irina Sandomirskaja offered their 
insightful comments on the manuscript and its parts. ­Earlier versions of chap-
ters ­were presented in too many academic contexts to be listed ­here, but I would 
like to particularly thank the colleagues for their support and encouragement 
Acknowl­edgments

x	
Acknowl­edgments
at Kingston University London, the Centre for Research in the Arts, Social Sci-
ences and Humanities at the University of Cambridge, the School of Public Ad-
ministration in Gothenburg University, and the Department of Technology and 
Social Change in Linköping University. I would also like to thank the organiz-
ers and participants of the international conference “Worlds of Management,” 
or­ga­nized by the Institute of Con­temporary History, Vienna, Austria, April 
14–16, 2021, which provided an invaluable forum to discuss the global circula-
tion of scientific governance at the crucial stage of writing.
Risking to miss many names, I want to thank Carina Abrahamson Löfström, 
Anna Alexandrova, S. M. Amadae, Jenny Andersson, Dmitry Arzyutov, Stefan 
Aykut, Lukas Becht, Daniel Bessner, Christophe Bonneuil, Jochen Böhler, Camilo 
Castillo, Felicity Colman, Ettore Costa, Grégory Dufaud, Till Duppe, Emma Ek 
Österberg, Linus Ekman Burgman, Marc Elie, Giulia Galli, Nicolas Guilhot, Alex-
andra Kapeller, Sandra Kemp, Roman Khandozhko, Olessia Kirtchik, Gary Kokk, 
Michal Kopeček, Katharina Kreuder-­Sonnen, John Krige, Andres Kurg, Cristian 
Lagström, Robin Andersson Malmros, Andrew McKenzy McHarg, Jonathan Old-
field, Poornima Paidaipaty, Jürgen Renn, Klaus Richter, David Runciman, Elke 
Seefried, Johanna Selin, Clifford Siskin, Mark Solovey, Vítězslav Sommer, Anna 
Storm, James Sumner, Ksenia Tatarchenko, Aaro Velmet, Andreas Wenger, Steve 
Woolgar, and Vladislav Zubok for creating opportunities to air my ideas to inter-
disciplinary academic audiences and/or for your comments.
An indispensable force in organ­izing research on the history of transnational 
flows of scientific knowledge was Larissa Zakharova, who died tragically too early. 
Larissa’s input was indispensable for this work especially as she acted as the most 
effective bridge-­builder between French and Rus­sian academic communities.
I would like to thank separately Maria Jose Zapata Campos and Patrik Za-
pata for engaging discussions about rationalities and lived realities of organ­
ization and planning in Nicaragua, ­Kenya, and Zanzibar. Their insights derived 
from active engagement with some of world’s poorest communities drove me to 
reconsider the Soviet developmental experience. Also, I am indebted to Tatiana 
Kasperski and Paul Josephson for their academic friendship and unfalteringly 
humorous engagement with my ponderings on scientific prediction.
At Cornell University Press Roger Haydon supported the idea of this book 
from the very beginning and Jim Lance steered the publication pro­cess with ex-
emplary efficacy. I also want to thank the two anonymous readers as well as 
Faculty Board members at Cornell for their constructive comments that helped 
to improve the manuscript. Michael Durnin, Andrew Lockett, and Anne Jones 
did fabulous proof reading and copy editing of the manuscript.
Parts of this book draw on my ­earlier published work. Chapter 3 draws on 
ideas first presented in my article “The Cybernetic Prediction: Orchestrating the 

	
Acknowl­edgments	
xi
­Future,” in ­Futures, edited by Jenny Andersson and Sandra Kemp (Oxford: Ox-
ford University Press, 2021). I used the research that informed my article “A 
Strug­gle for the Soviet ­Future: The Birth of Scientific Forecasting in the Soviet 
Union,” Slavic Review 75, no. 1 (2016): 52–76, to conceptually widen and chron-
ologically extend the survey of the development of Soviet forecasting to situate 
it in the context of the nineteenth ­century’s government by numbers and early 
debates on planning and prediction. Ele­ments of this article ­were worked into 
chapters 2 and 4. Chapter 5 is based on my article “The ­Future as an Intellectual 
Technology in the Soviet Union: From Centralised Planning to Reflexive Man-
agement,” Cahiers du monde Russe 56, no. 1 (2015): 111–134 offering an extended 
discussion of the notion of prediction in Georgii Shchedrovitskii’s thought and 
practice. Chapter 7 draws on my article “Soviet Policy Sciences and Earth Sys-
tem Governmentality,” Modern Intellectual History 17, no. 1 (2020): 179–208, 
which served as an incubator for the principal idea and the argument of this pre­
sent book.
This book was finalized in London during a series of lockdowns in response 
to the Covid-19 pandemic in 2020–2021, the time when many scholars strug­
gled to balance work and life obligations. Francis, thanks to you this time was 
not just productive but also bright and full of life. The least I can do is to dedi-
cate this book to you.


xiii
ANT	
Actor-­Network-­Theory
ARAN	
Archives of the Rus­sian Acad­emy of Sciences
ASAI	
Automated System of Analy­sis of Social Information
CPSU	
Communist Party of the Soviet Union
GCM	
General Circulation Model
GKNT	
State Committee for Science and Technology
GOELRO	
State Commission for Electrification of Rus­sia
Gosplan	
All-­Union State Planning Committee
ICBM	
Intercontinental ballistic missile
IIASA	
International Institute of Applied Systems Analy­sis
IKSI	
All-­Union Institute of Concrete Social Research
IMRD	
Institute for the International ­Labor Movement
ISA	
International Sociology Association
ISA	
Institute of Systems Research
KGB	
State Security Committee (komitet gosudarstvennoi bezopasnosti)
MAD	
Mutually assured destruction
MGU	
Moscow State University
MIFI	
National Nuclear Research University
NBER	
US National Bureau of Economic Research
NEP	
New Economic Policy
NIEI	
Scientific Research Institute of Economics at Gosplan
NIIAA	
Scientific Research Institute of Automatic Machinery
NOT	
Scientific Organization of Labor (nauchnaia organizatsiia truda)
OECD	
Organisation for Economic Co-­operation and Development
OGAS	
National Automated System for Computation and Information 
Pro­cessing
OR	
Operations research
RGAE	
Rus­sian State Archives of Economics
SAS	
Soviet Association of Sociology
SSF	
Society for Scientific Forecasting
STP	
Scientific-­technical pro­gress
STR	
Scientific-­technical revolution
STS	
Science and technology studies
Abbreviations

xiv	
Abbreviations
TsEMI	
Central Institute of Mathematical Economics at the All-­Union 
Acad­emy of Sciences
TsIRKON	
Centre for Intellectual Resources and Cooperation in Societal 
Sciences
UNECE	
United Nations Economic Commission for Eu­rope
UNEP	
United Nations Environment Program
UNESCO	
United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organ­ization
VNIISI	
All-­Union Institute for Systems Research
VNIITE	
All-­Union Institute for Technical Aesthetics
Znanie	
All-­Union Association for Popularization of Science
WFSF	
World ­Future Studies Federation

xv
All translation from Rus­sian is done by the author ­unless indicated other­wise. 
In transcribing Rus­sian, the Congress Library transliteration ­table was followed 
without using the diacritic signs. The original transliteration was retained in 
texts quoted in En­glish.
Note on Translation and Transliteration


THE ­WILL TO PREDICT


1
The ability to predict is a form of power. The capacity to form a judgment about 
what is to come, to infer the consequences of actions, and the ability to use ­those 
predictions to act, amplifies power by making it appear willful and strategic. Pre-
diction is also central to the status of modern science and its partial displace-
ment of other regimes of ­future knowledge—­religious revelation, divination, 
astrology—­from the governmental imagination. Deploying scientific predictions 
in planning for the long term, ­whether that takes the form of the Soviet Union’s 
infamous five-­year plans, cap­i­tal­ist industrial strategies, or global attempts to 
regulate the climate, is central to the legitimacy and power of government itself. 
And yet, the power of scientific prediction is not a given, nor is the pro­cess of 
prediction a straightforward case of input translated mechanically into output, 
prediction feeding into action. Scientific prediction is at once technical, po­liti­
cal, social, and institutional.
In his philosophy of the ­will to power (der Wille zur Macht), Friedrich Nietz­
sche argued that ­people experience themselves as having “power” only when they 
are aware of their actions, when they issue “cognizant commands.” However, as 
Linda Williams put it, for Nietz­sche this cognizant ­will is not a “single entity,” 
not “a capacity ­humans have that enables them to effect change according to their 
wishes,” but “a complex strug­gle of drives,” a strug­gle for superiority both in-
side and outside the subject’s mind.1 No one can freely ­will ­either oneself or ­others 
to action. Even when the ­will is enacted, it is rarely enacted perfectly.2 The ­will 
to predict and to do this scientifically, as I suggest in this book, resonates with 
the Nietz­schean strug­gle between the drives, but it is less about domination and 
INTRODUCTION

2	
Introduction
more about navigating complexity. Nowhere ­else can this strug­gle be seen bet-
ter than in the history of the efforts to predict scientifically.
This book examines the history of scientific prediction as both a concept and 
a form of practice as it developed in the quintessentially future-­oriented coun-
try of Soviet Rus­sia. It argues that the Rus­sian experience of creating and using 
scientific predictions to transform and govern society, the economy, and nature, 
was not unique, but part of the wider landscape of late modern governance, of-
fering a particularly helpful insight into the ways in which scientific prediction 
became a key part of the orchestration (I ­will return to this term ­later) of knowl-
edge and power. The main purpose of this study, therefore, is more general than 
a history of Rus­sian scientific thought on prediction: I use the Rus­sian case to 
demonstrate that the meaning of scientific prediction changed and diversified 
over time as dif­fer­ent notions of prediction ­were articulated in dif­fer­ent areas of 
science. Few are aware, however, of this rich diversity, which tends to get lost in 
public debate, where scientific prediction is commonly understood as an esti-
mate made by presumably best-­informed experts and which can be confidently 
evaluated as ­either right or wrong. In turn, the success of scientific predictions 
is judged in a somewhat naive way: when scientific predictions appear to be right, 
they are taken as proof of the power of science to deliver knowledge and cer-
tainty. When scientific predictions are not confirmed by the ­actual turn of the 
events, they are dismissed, perhaps undermining the status of the organ­izations 
or individuals involved, or perhaps undermining the power and legitimacy of 
science more generally. This simplistic sense of scientific prediction as future-­
telling, which always proves to be ­either correct or incorrect, is pervasive. For 
instance, in 2013 the New Yorker carried an article stating that “we are now able 
to prophesy impending cataclysms with a specificity that would have been in-
conceivable just several years ago.”3 Scientists, however, continued reminding the 
public that “mathematicians ­will be the first to tell you that the output of their 
models are ‘projections’ predicated on their assumptions, not ‘predictions’ to be 
viewed with certainty.”4 Particularly instructive is public debate about the global 
climate crisis revealing that the complexity of scientific predictions can baffle 
politicians, journalists, and society, ­because it is clear that scientific predictions 
of the climate ­future do not offer certainty, it can be difficult to compare predic-
tions based on dif­fer­ent methodologies, and, fi­nally, dif­fer­ent policymakers and 
the public respond differently to them. Moreover, scientific predictions can be 
used to manipulate and mislead.5 In all, it appears that instead of simplifying 
real­ity, scientific predictions make it more complex.
The idea for this study emerged in response to a range of influential research 
into predictive expertise in cap­i­tal­ist economics and politics from the nineteenth 
­century to pre­sent.6 Much of this work focuses on scientific prediction as an ex-

	
Introduction	
3
pert practice in the fields of economics, finance, and politics, approaching pre-
diction as a positivist concept and mounting a critique of elitist, top-­down uses 
of prediction as a device of control. The growing ambition to use scientific pre-
dictions in government, accordingly, is criticized as an alarming development 
­toward authoritarianism expressed, for instance, in expert technocracies and po-
lice states, and particularly in the context of the so-­called digital transforma-
tion of public ser­vices where the bound­aries of the public and private government 
get blurred in the pro­cess of datafication and algorithmic decision support sys-
tems, creating new forms of exploitation.7 In this way scientific prediction is said 
to be performative, not merely a repre­sen­ta­tion of the world, but a way of reor­ga­
niz­ing the world. Critiquing the Cold War uses of scientific prediction as a form 
of societal control, the historian Jenny Andersson proposed that “prediction . . . ​
should be understood as a technology of ­future making and world crafting, a 
social and po­liti­cal technology in the Foucauldian sense.”8 Andersson draws at-
tention to the internal diversity of ­these predictive technologies, which she classi-
fies into rationalist and humanist, the former being quantitative approaches to 
decision techniques and the latter qualitative cultural and po­liti­cal critique and 
the imagination of alternative ­futures.9 Having posited that the study of ­future 
visions and planning must involve a study of future-­making techniques, includ-
ing scientific prediction, Andersson and ­others addressed the po­liti­cal and so-
cietal impact of prediction in the context of the development of a par­tic­u­lar field 
of expertise—­future studies—­a set of social and natu­ral scientific approaches 
explic­itly focused on producing knowledge about ­future events.10 For instance, 
Elke Seefried charts the transnational travels of ­future studies and system-­
cybernetic decision sciences East–­West and North–­South, regarding the his-
tory of prediction as a development of estimates about ­future po­liti­cal, social, 
and economic conditions.11 Christian Dayé explores the development of the 
Delphi method in forecasting in the postwar United States. In addition to ­these 
Cold War uses of scientific prediction, historians have scrutinized the related 
areas of scientific epistemology, environmental and climate science, and the 
politics of security as well as everyday knowledge. An impor­tant insight gener-
ated in this strand of scholarship is that the ­will to predict scientifically gener-
ated not only conceptual models, but also institutional cultures based on dif­fer­ent 
attitudes to uncertainty and a range of practices forging trust in data. For in-
stance, Ann Johnson offers a very useful discussion of what she described as em-
pirical and rational cultures of prediction among engineers. The empirical 
culture of prediction was based on testing the ­actual per­for­mance of materials, a 
pro­cess that is reliable but demanding in terms of the number of tests. The ratio-
nal culture of prediction was based on mathematical methods, where equations 
appeared to save time for the engineers but then the predictions ­were less reliable 

4	
Introduction
and prone to failure.12 The environmental historians Matthias Heymann, Ga-
briele Gramelsberger, and Martin Mahony, arguing that prediction is “an in-
trinsic part of ­today’s society, economy and science” and inseparable from 
“deference to the authority and expertise of ­others,” show that the environmen-
tal computer modeling community formed a culture of prediction, creating in-
fluential techniques, which ­were then transferred to other scientific and policy 
communities.13 Seeking to identify distinct cultures of prediction, ­these schol-
ars helpfully point out a wide range of social and institutional resources that 
are required for creating and legitimizing scientific predictions in the scientific 
and public policy communities, demonstrating that the meaning of the term 
“scientific prediction” is not universally shared among scientists. The pluralism 
of approaches to prediction has also been addressed in security studies: for in-
stance, in their impor­tant volume, Andreas Wenger, Ursula Jasper, and Myriam 
Dunn Cavelty explore scientific prediction in the late modern policy context. 
They use terms such as “forward reasoning” and “prevision” to delineate the 
study of diverse predictive techniques of data analy­sis and decision-­making, 
such as futurology, scenario planning, game theory, forecasting, and risk as-
sessment.14 Fi­nally, historians such as Jamie Pietruska detailed the ways in 
which statistical forecasting cohabited with premodern forms of prevision in the 
nineteenth ­century United States. Extending this work, Caley Horan’s ongoing 
research explores the overlaps between astrological predictions and financial 
forecasting.15
­These works form a valuable resource for understanding the social impor-
tance, historical development, and conceptual complexity of scientific prediction. 
However, ­these studies rarely explore differentiation of the notions of scien-
tific prediction beyond indicating the transition from premodern divination and 
mantic knowledge to modern science; although ­there is a consensus that ­these 
two forms of knowledge can coexist and overlap in the practice of both experts 
and lay public. Moreover, the development of scientific prediction in non-­Western 
and non-­liberal governmental contexts remains insufficiently known. This gap in 
knowledge reflects the common presumption that understanding the history of 
modern science, technology, and governance requires a focus on the crucible of 
modernization: Western countries and institutions, where the rest of the world 
performed a passive role as recipients of “Western” science and are, accordingly, 
nonessential for the study of modern scientific prediction. Although this view has 
been challenged in the work on anticipatory knowledge regimes in ancient China 
as well as the emergent research on Cold War transnational knowledge, ­there is 
still much to be done to decolonize the Eurocentric narrative of modernization.16 
This book, I hope, ­will make it clear that the Soviet Rus­sian trajectory of predic-

	
Introduction	
5
tion’s epistemologies cannot be reduced to a mere diffusion of Western science, as 
Rus­sian debates about scientific prediction have coevolved with ­those of the rest 
of the world through exchanges, creative adaptations, and innovation since at 
least the eigh­teenth ­century.
Furthermore, despite differences in the po­liti­cal design of communist sys-
tems, particularly the pervasive use of state vio­lence and repression, Soviet in-
stitutions faced what could be described as the typical prob­lems of modern 
bureaucracies and the po­liti­cal and social use of scientific expertise. In this re­
spect they resembled their Western counter­parts, perhaps just constrained ad-
ditionally by po­liti­cal restrictions and economic shortages.17 This becomes 
particularly clear by expanding the scope of the study of scientific prediction be-
yond social and po­liti­cal control to the wider orchestration of knowledge, the 
social, and the material. For example, following a ste­reo­typical rendering of au-
thoritarian prediction, one might expect that scientific prediction in the Soviet 
Union would be used to boost the power of the Communist Party, express a uto-
pian belief in ­human reason, and, in its applications, reinforce the repressive 
apparatus that sought to know and control the population and master the econ-
omy. Historical analy­sis of the course of events could then be used to argue that 
the Soviet belief in scientific prediction was part of the delusion and failure of 
the technocratic communist bureaucracy, as the system lost its po­liti­cal legiti-
macy by not being able to deliver the promised state socialist cornucopian ­future. 
At the same time as the police state exhausted and fragmented society, the econ-
omy, being based on false statistics, nonviable schemes of industrialization, and 
ridden with mismanagement and corruption, was run down to collapse. Ergo, 
the lesson learned is that governmental uses of scientific prediction are expres-
sions of technocratic naivety and dangerous utopianism of the kind critiqued 
by James C. Scott.18 This, however, would be a sadly impoverished account of 
both the intellectual history and historical sociology of scientific prediction in 
Soviet Rus­sia and elsewhere.
Focusing on developments in late modern Soviet Rus­sia, this book compli-
cates this standard narrative and seeks to fill the gap by introducing a set of Rus­
sian thinkers who developed influential concepts of scientific prediction, 
concepts that they deemed necessary to both advance scientific knowledge and 
shape new governmental approaches to cope with uncertainty. ­These concepts 
­were interrelated with Western intellectual developments, but they ­were not just 
an example of secondary modernization, of East–­West transfer. In contrast, So-
viet Rus­sian debates about scientific prediction ­were informed by local intellec-
tual tradition and emerged in response to the local institutional and po­liti­cal 
challenges faced by the Soviet state and society. ­These debates arose in response 

6	
Introduction
to social and economic reforms in the post-­revolutionary period and ­were in-
formed by similar discussions about the predictive power of social science and 
the uses of statistical prediction in management and planning in Germany, 
France, and the United States. This was a very complex discursive field where 
dif­fer­ent institutional actors relied on a range of the notions of order, control, 
and prediction: for instance, approaches to prediction migrated between math-
ematical statistics, biology, neurophysiology, social research and economic plan-
ning, rocket science, control engineering, and war mobilization plans. While some 
of ­these fields suffered harsh ideological constraints and repression during the 
heights of Stalinism from the late 1920s to the early 1950s, the conceptual and in-
stitutional landscape of scientific prediction began to diversify vigorously from the 
1950s. Prediction (prognozirovanie, predvidenie) became a key category in official 
Soviet discourses on governance in the 1960s. In the last de­cades of the Soviet re-
gime, the 1970s to 1980s, debates about scientific prediction evolved and diversi-
fied further to address the prob­lem of global complexity and what was seen as a 
need to devise a new governmental framework in response to global environmen-
tal changes. This book seeks to capture this fascinating diversity of the concepts of 
prediction, exploring the ways in which Soviet actors engaged with premodern 
notions of mantic practice, modern prognosis, and positivist prevision, statistical 
forecasting and explanation, behavioral adaptation, and sense-­making in pattern 
pro­cessing.
By focusing on scientific prediction this book also develops the research 
agenda of the emerging scholarship on the Soviet risk society: the history of So-
viet policy approaches to anticipation of global risks, disaster governance, and 
emergency response.19 I propose that we must study the conceptual, social, and 
po­liti­cal architecture of scientific prediction in the way that ­earlier scholarship 
did in relation to risk. As Mary Douglas and Aaron Wildavsky put it succinctly, 
the term “risk” encapsulates both knowledge about the ­future and consent about 
desirable outcomes.20 But the notion of prediction, ­either common sense or sci-
entific, is part of this knowledge, even if it is not always explic­itly considered. In 
order to understand how risk governance shapes society, we need to understand 
scientific prediction better, particularly its diverse forms. For this, however, the 
existing lens of risk studies is not enough: the organ­ization of uncertainty 
through risk, influentially outlined by Michael Power, overlaps with the organ­
ization of prediction, but is not equivalent to it.21 As I show, the social and insti-
tutional impacts of scientific prediction are dif­fer­ent from risk: the ­will to predict 
scientifically can work as a socially integrating force, creating new types of col-
lectives and alliances, enabling joint action. Indeed, a successful scientific pre-
diction requires a par­tic­u­lar kind of orchestration.

	
Introduction	
7
Orchestration
This book primarily concerns the forms of scientific prediction that are meant 
to inform governance, where the notion of governance refers to both public pol-
icy and strategic management. A common fallacy is to understand policy ac-
tion as a linear model of input and output, where scientific expertise (predictions) 
informs policy decisions which are then implemented by the executive. This lin-
ear model has been widely criticized.22 It is particularly unsuitable for under-
standing how scientific predictions originate and function. In this book I show 
how scientists required orga­nizational and institutional reforms to facilitate both 
the making of predictions and their use in governmental practice: ­these prediction-­
makers ­were reflexive reformers, who argued that predictions could only be 
scientific when par­tic­u­lar orga­nizational conditions ­were in place. In this way, 
prediction-­makers coproduced scientific approaches and social and orga­nizational 
settings for their production and use. While coproduction of scientific knowledge 
and social and po­liti­cal practice has been widely theorized and explored in science 
and technology studies, I argue that the case of scientific prediction points to a 
par­tic­u­lar form of coproduction, one that is based on recognizing dif­fer­ent levels 
of complexity allocating appropriate types of epistemology and action to each 
level.
The coordination of the complex social and governmental pro­cesses and 
structures required for the creation and use of scientific prediction I term “or-
chestration,” borrowing a term that was used in the 1940s by the ­father of 
cybernetics, Norbert Wiener, to describe the complex conditions of organ­izing 
observations of natu­ral phenomena and filtering them into the abstract models of 
scientific prediction.23 The term “orchestration” has also proved useful in organ­
ization studies, analy­sis of policy pro­cesses and science and technology studies. 
I suggest that orchestration can serve as a conceptual orientation ­because it can 
bridge the concerns of social constructionist approaches to science and technol-
ogy and process-­oriented studies of organ­izations and orga­nizational be­hav­ior. 
The term “orchestration” describes the pro­cess through which scientific knowl-
edge, social order, and po­liti­cal government are coproduced through the creation 
of data-­gathering apparatuses, design of new research objects and subjects, and 
enactment of new models of order, both behavioral and institutional.24
Moreover, the term orchestration offers a particularly useful link to the long-­
standing academic interest in temporalities and orga­nizational be­hav­ior.25 Max 
Weber’s influential analy­sis of the rationalization of time through administra-
tive bureaucracy is commonly seen as a defining feature of Western modernity.26 
However, empirically oriented organ­ization studies have found equal mea­sures 
of chaos as well as order in modern organ­izations. In the 1970s the prominent 

8	
Introduction
organ­ization scholars Michael Cohen, James March, and Johan Olsen proposed 
the influential “garbage can” model to explain what appeared to them as illogi-
cal allocation of priorities and unsystematic problem-­solving in organ­izations. 
According to this theory, the key ­factor that influences what is being done in an 
organ­ization is timing and synchronization: it is not the “intrinsic” meaning or 
logic of the prob­lem that shifts it to priority status, or how the prob­lem fits with 
the orga­nizational structure, but the prob­lem’s position in the temporal frame-
work of orga­nizational activities.27 The key insight from the garbage can model 
was that to make an organ­ization more effective one has to address the prob­lem 
of synchronization.
Fast forward several de­cades and organ­ization and policy scholars have em-
braced the study of pro­cess as no less impor­tant than orga­nizational structure 
(bureaucratic forms, norms, and values). Synchronization of intraor­gan­i­za­tional 
and interor­gan­i­za­tional activities has been a central task for man­ag­ers and pol-
icymakers, particularly in the context of the internationalization of business and 
governance. Whereas the garbage can model suggests a high degree of ad hoc 
action and therefore can only serve as a descriptive (but, understandably, not a 
normative) concept, the term orchestration began to gain popularity as it sug-
gests purposiveness and harmony. In the management lit­er­a­ture, resource or-
chestration has become an established approach which puts the emphasis on 
management pro­cesses, particularly the diverse forms of mediation inside and 
between organ­izations.28 However, it is in the research on policy design and pol-
icy pro­cesses, an increasingly significant area of research in po­liti­cal studies, 
that the model of orchestration as a form of governance has been rising to prom-
inence. This rise is motivated by both conceptual development and ­actual re-
forms in governance, particularly the introduction of the open method of 
coordination of policy pro­cesses, formally initiated by the Eu­ro­pean Union in 
2000, which was then theorized as orchestration by Kenneth Abbott and col-
leagues.29 They defined orchestration as both a descriptive and normative term 
applicable to global, international, and multilevel governance. ­Here orchestra-
tion refers to a form of indirect governance, where action is coordinated between 
dif­fer­ent territorial-­administrative units: local, regional, national, and interna-
tional.30 ­There is a distinct orchestrator (a po­liti­cal authority) that acts through 
intermediaries (lower-­level authorities) to achieve clear targets or outputs. Or-
chestration underscores “voluntary agency” (of local-­level authorities), “indirect 
governance” through intermediaries (institutions and other actors), mobiliza-
tion of resources, and establishing and achieving shared targets.31 The key chal-
lenges are coherence and coordination, where the governor may lack operational 
capacity, regulatory competence, or legitimate authority.32

	
Introduction	
9
Note that the model of indirect, mediated po­liti­cal orchestration echoes cy-
bernetic steering, the idea imported from electronic engineering into manage-
ment and policy thinking in the 1950s to 1960s.33 The term cybernetics, proposed 
by the American mathematician Norbert Wiener in 1948, was derived from the 
Greek word kubernētēs, which means the steersman of a ship. I discuss Wie-
ner’s theory of prediction and control in chapters 1 and 2; ­here it is enough to 
note that the cybernetic model of steering was conceived to address the prob­lem 
of effective behavioral response to changing environments. In its most ­simple 
version, the control center (the steersman) pro­cesses information flows by ob-
serving the environment and issues commands through signals. In more com-
plex versions, several layers of control centers can be combined, they can also 
be hierarchically or­ga­nized, as in second-­order cybernetics. Note that the task 
of the steersman is both more challenging and, at the same time, narrower than 
that of an orchestrator. The steersman needs to direct and balance the ship, avoid-
ing getting lost and capsizing. The orchestrator’s task is more complex: they need 
to secure coherent action between many ­human and nonhuman actors, aligning 
their intentions and interactions. (Luckily for the orchestrator, nobody rocks the 
stage, although some ­human participants might “rock the boat” sometimes.) It is 
clear that the orchestration and cybernetic steermanship models are not oppo-
site, they overlap in many ways, but they deal with dif­fer­ent temporalities. The 
orchestration model of governance, scholars argue, ­will compensate for the fail-
ures of linear control in complex, uncertain, and long-­term situations, where the 
use of simplistic administrative management based on short-­term predictions 
and error corrections (which are the basis of cybernetic steering) is ­limited.34 
Furthermore, the model of orchestration does not replace, but develops the 
model of liberal governance at a distance that is based on self-­regulation, a ver-
sion of what I described as system-­cybernetic governmentality in my ­earlier 
work.35
In this book, I use the term orchestration in a wider sense to describe the 
organ­ization of dif­fer­ent forms of agencies (i.e., not only governmental admin-
istrations, but also be­hav­iors and materialities) in a synchronized manner. The 
meta­phor of orchestration is, indeed, very suitable for the study of scientific pre-
diction: an orchestra is not a solo, and, as Martin Carrier noted, “prediction is 
a ­great team player but a lousy soloist.”36 In this way, I approach the history of 
scientific prediction not as a trajectory of attempts to control ­future outcomes, 
doomed to fail, but as an open epistemological experimentation that feeds into 
the orchestration of the ­future, which is productive of new subjectivities and 
modes of action. However, by suggesting that dif­fer­ent predictions have to be 
orchestrated in order to meet the criterion of scientificity, in turn, orchestrating 

10	
Introduction
the ­future in dif­fer­ent ways, I do not suggest that ­either science or the ­future are 
produced in a consensual and consistent way. This would be an unhelpful sim-
plification that the term orchestration helps avoid. The analytical usefulness of 
the term orchestration has already been indicated, for instance, in actor–­network 
theory, where orchestration was used synonymously alongside terms such as as-
sembling, arranging, and coordinating, which described the pro­cess of mobi-
lizing and integrating dif­fer­ent agencies and materials (­these verbs ­were famously 
turned into nouns, for instance, “assemblage” and “agencement”).37 The very et-
ymology of the term reveals the imperative to recognize the centrality of plural 
agencies and materialities: losing this plurality an orchestra ­will stop being 
orchestral.
The meaning of the word “orchestra” is derived from the Greek word orkhēstra, 
which originally referred to a section of the stage where dance per­for­mance took 
place and was ­adopted to describe a group of musicians performing a piece of 
­music. ­There are very in­ter­est­ing studies in the history of ­music which examine 
orchestration as both a social and material pro­cess. It is fascinating that the ­great 
shift in orchestral practice took place as a result of Joseph Haydn’s late eighteenth-­
century innovation in re­orienting orchestration away from singers’ voices to 
give equal importance to instruments; accordingly, the quality of the instru-
ments became increasingly impor­tant. New materialities, in the form of im-
proved instruments, in combination with the coordination of their diverse 
­human manipulators, ­were to create new forms of ­music.38 I find this shift away 
from the embodied, ­human voice (singing) to embrace the polyphony of ­music 
instrumentation helpful for thinking about the historical trajectory of scientific 
prediction, where the “voices” of instruments, such as mathematical equations, 
algorithms, and formal cognitive models come to the fore.
The story of modern scientific prediction, as I show in this book, started as a 
drive for orchestration of data production and repre­sen­ta­tion practices: attempts 
to map, chart, and read the signs in what appeared as mute objects, planets, and 
events. The importance of the voice of the reader—­the predictor—­grew with the 
development of the method of continuous observation (diagnosis) and predic-
tion that was continuously adjusted in line with the changing symptoms (prog-
nosis). Orchestration of observation and prediction became central for the 
sciences of fleeting phenomena, such as meteorology, public health, and the econ-
omy. The more macro ­these phenomena became, the more pertinent was the 
pro­cess of orchestration, especially with the introduction of statistics and math-
ematical methods of prediction in governance. Starting in the 1950s and 1960s, 
computerized automation technologies began to churn out what appeared to be 
machine-­produced predictions. By the second de­cade of the twenty-­first ­century 
many residents of the plugged-in world turn to Amazon’s virtual assistant Al-

	
Introduction	
11
exa for the latest weather forecasts. However, as I show in this book, computer 
data and digital voices are not soloists: they are but some of many ele­ments or-
chestrated to produce a scientific prediction. Computer technology is not sepa-
rable from other material, social, and institutional resources. The ­father of 
cybernetics, the informational theory of control, Norbert Wiener, saw this in the 
1940s, and so did Nikita Moiseev, the patron of global environmental model-
ling and governance in the Soviet Union in the late 1980s.
The Structure of the Book
­There are several dif­fer­ent notions of prediction that circulate in the language 
of policymakers, scientists, and members of the public. The roots of some of ­these 
notions, as I show in chapter 1, go back to the premodern era, whereas other no-
tions are more recent and fundamentally dif­fer­ent from the former ones. Chap-
ter 1 explores three types of scientific prediction: premodern prediction, modern 
positivist prediction, and late modern prediction based on the cybernetic sensi-
bility, showing how dif­fer­ent notions of prediction ­were created to understand 
and explain fleeting, ephemeral social and po­liti­cal phenomena.
Chapter 2 traces the first debates on scientific prediction in the postrevolu-
tionary Rus­sia of the 1920s and 1930s. Focusing on the Rus­sian pioneer of eco-
nomic forecasting, Nikolai Kondrat’ev, I situate the early Soviet approach to 
scientific prediction in the context of the long nineteenth ­century and French 
positivism. I show that some of the early positivist thinkers involved in making 
social and economic predictions ­were aware of the limitations of the approach 
and the link between scientific epistemology and institutional practice. They rec-
ognized that statistical numbers can create an illusion of control, especially 
when governance at a distance is at stake: large-­scale and long-­term governmen-
tal imagination operates with maps and numbers.39 Such visibility came at the 
cost of distortion and disregard of the local.40 When applied to ­future develop-
ments, the meaning of numerical prediction becomes even more complicated.
Once ­these differences are clarified, it is easier to understand the distinctive-
ness of the cybernetic notion of prediction, which is presented in chapter 3. Pro-
posed by Norbert Wiener in the 1940s, the model of cybernetic prediction played 
a key role in informing policy and management thinking and underpinned ad-
vances in robotics, neuroscience, ge­ne­tics, and climate science. Indeed, although 
such dif­fer­ent communities as climate modelers, neoliberal thinkers of the Geneva 
school, and state socialist planners deployed very dif­fer­ent notions of prediction, 
they shared a fascination with cybernetics, which inspired them to use scientific 
prediction to conceptualize, inform, and or­ga­nize the governance of the social 

12	
Introduction
and natu­ral worlds.41 Wiener’s cybernetics has been foundational for a ­whole range 
of scientific and engineering fields, particularly neuroscience, physiology, psy­chol­
ogy, and artificial intelligence (AI).42 His work on servomechanisms is seen as 
an impor­tant pre­de­ces­sor to Cold War cybernetic totalitarianism, leading to the 
emergence of what Paul Edwards termed “closed worlds,” ruled by surveillance 
and military technology.43 Wiener’s take on cybernetic prediction, therefore, is 
crucially impor­tant, and is presented and analyzed in this chapter. The central ar-
gument is that Wiener understood prediction as a relational concept: not as a dis-
embodied, boundless control loop, but as an orga­nizational princi­ple that relies on 
information and materiality and is bounded by complexity. The aim of cybernetic 
prediction was quite narrow, but it was inseparable from a wider effort to orches-
trate knowledge production and feed it into action.
Wiener’s model of the informational loops of prediction and behavioral con-
trol, as shown in the subsequent chapters, was selectively ­adopted and adapted 
in attempts to make sense of governmental prob­lems in the economy, the man-
agement of organ­izations, public policy, Cold War strategy, and Earth system 
science. This wide-­ranging fascination with cybernetics posed challenges: some 
areas of scientific prediction, such as statistical forecasting (defined as statisti-
cal techniques of interpolation or extrapolation of data), ­were expected to serve 
as cybernetic prediction, but this was not achievable ­because of dif­fer­ent con-
ceptual demands.
In the context of Soviet authoritarianism, however, quantification increased 
visibility and ­limited the informal and insulating power of the Communist Party. 
To quantify amorphous practices one needs to collect data, which, in turn, re-
quires interinstitutional cooperation and exchange. In chapter 4, I discuss the re­
introduction of the statistical forecasting of the Soviet economy and society in the 
1960s as part of what I call a “cybernetic sensibility,” which led to institutional re-
forms to the politicized, bureaucratic system. Although ­these reforms failed, they 
did so in a productive way, creating a par­tic­u­lar “culture of forecasting,” which 
combined the positivist notion of prediction as generation of reliable scientific 
knowledge with a cybernetic notion of prediction as pattern recognition and ad-
aptation. This culture of forecasting was transnational and took shape in the insti-
tutional context of late state socialism and East–­West knowledge transfer.
Both positivist and cybernetic theories of prediction ­were meant to be instru-
mental, to help decision-­makers achieve their goals. But who—­and how—­decides 
the goals? In chapter 5, I pre­sent attempts to marry the informal, nontransparent 
social practice of goal-­setting with scientific prediction in a remarkable phenom-
enon of post-­Stalinist Rus­sian science, the Moscow Methodological Circle. The 
Circle’s leader, Georgii Shchedrovitskii, devised a formalist, cognitive method of 
reflexive goal-­setting and used it to create informal collectives of scientific, cul-

	
Introduction	
13
tural, and managerial elites. Prospective reflexivity is neither an inference from 
empirical data nor an explanation, it is about collective sense making and action. 
In contrast to the input–­output method of statistical forecasting, prospective 
reflexivity envisions a ­future course of action where the be­hav­ior and percep-
tions of the actors are part of the plan. In the Soviet context, its po­liti­cal effects 
­were highly ambivalent: prospective reflexivity empowered bottom-up decision-­
makers, enabling them to bypass bureaucratic compartmentalization. However, 
it also legitimized informality, creating opaque spaces for decision-­making out-
side of institutional accountability, all of which mattered during the professional-
ization of management in Rus­sia ­after 1990.
The orchestration of scientific prediction in secretive and securitized contexts 
is analyzed in chapter 6. According to classical cybernetic theories by Wiener 
and W. Ross Ashby, the loops of prediction as pattern recognition help organ-
isms adapt to their environments. In the social and military context, however, 
some predictions are used to destabilize the situation and deceive the oppo-
nent. This chapter pre­sents the case of Rus­sian reflexive control, a Cold War stra-
tegic framework for decisions that sought to make the opponent—­the 
West—­more predictable and deceivable. Created by Vladimir Lefebvre in the 
1960s, reflexive control theory became a fundamental component of Rus­sian 
military strategic and operational action. This chapter details the trajectory of 
reflexive control as an epistemological attempt to tackle the prob­lem of reflexiv-
ity that has been associated with unpredictability, ungovernability, and uncer-
tainty. While harnessing reflexivity proved to be utopian from the cognitive 
science perspective, reflexive control theory survived as a conceptual tool to 
legitimize deception, used, for instance, by the Rus­sian authorities during the 
annexation of Crimea and the war in Ukraine.
The final chapter 7 explores the changing understanding of the role of scien-
tific predictions of global pro­cesses, where ­human activities transform the Earth. 
The notion of cybernetic prediction describes goal-­seeking be­hav­ior. However, 
the language of goals and targets has proven to be inadequate when facing long-­
term and large-­scale pro­cesses. Decision scientists have shown that it is very dif-
ficult and sometimes quite impossible to establish collective preferences.44 
However, AI scientists maintain that individual and collective preferences must 
be worked into goal-­setting systems.45 Climate change must also be mitigated 
by taking into consideration collective preferences to avoid green authoritari-
anism.46 The question is ­whether the cybernetic model of predictive be­hav­ior and 
goal-­setting is suitable for addressing large-­scale and long-­term prob­lems. In this 
chapter I pre­sent a case study of a historical context in which this prob­lem was 
addressed and the conceptual innovation of the idea of “government through 
milieu” and thinking from the limits. The central argument is that cybernetic 

14	
Introduction
prediction and government through milieu do not necessarily oppose each other 
but represent dif­fer­ent stages in decision-­making and governmental orchestra-
tion. The case study explores 1970s and 1980s Rus­sian thought about the “algo-
rithms of global development” that emerged from a debate among East and West 
climate scientists in the 1980s and 1990s and which paved the path for the ­later 
idea of the Anthropocene as a governmental prob­lem.
My story ends in the late 1980s, when the ­will to predict scientifically gath-
ered momentum as the center of the global po­liti­cal economy was shifting away 
from the Western advanced industrial democracies to China and Southeast Asia 
and when the capacity of digital technology and algorithmic governance was be-
coming not an expectation, but an everyday real­ity. For better or worse, the age 
that has followed promises to be the age of prediction and this book sketches a 
few paths that led to it.

15
In this chapter I outline three distinct types of prediction: the premodern no-
tion of prediction as conjecture, the modern notion of prediction articulated in 
positivism and logical empiricism, and the late modern notion of prediction an-
chored in cybernetic sensibility. By proposing ­these three types of prediction I 
am not suggesting that this categorization is ­either precise or complete but rather 
that it is useful to indicate the historical and conceptual differences that char-
acterize the concept of scientific prediction.1 ­These loose types ­will also help un-
derstand the evolution of the Soviet ­will to predict scientifically as it embraced 
all of ­these forms of scientific prediction. Focusing on the conceptual differences 
can also help understand a more general prob­lem of a somewhat naive approach 
to scientific prediction in government and management. For instance, policy 
decision-­makers tend to assume that scientific prediction is just another estimate 
made by scientists or experts who happen to be “better informed” and able to 
pro­cess larger amounts of data.
While one can find many dif­fer­ent notions of scientific prediction in the aca-
demic lit­er­a­ture, ­these notions are compartmentalized in respective disciplines, 
which define or use the term prediction in dif­fer­ent ways. In the 2018 edition of 
the Encyclopaedia Britannica, for instance, prediction is considered in the articles 
on criminology (predicting reoffending) but the most extensive discussion of 
prediction is presented in relation to probability theory (the prob­lem of control), 
and automata theory (servomechanisms).2 Indeed, many historians reproduce 
similar notions of scientific prediction as an ele­ment derived from automation 
and machine control that is transferred to the models of economic planning and 
1
WHAT IS SCIENTIFIC PREDICTION?

16	
CHAPTER 1
governance.3 However, as I show, prediction has a much broader conceptual man-
date as a central component within established “scientific knowledge” in the West-
ern tradition, as well as part of sense-­making in both Western and non-­Western 
contexts. Contrary to common sense, scientific prediction is not always about 
guessing the ­future.4 Contrary to the histories of the Cold War scientific expertise, 
scientific prediction is not always about control.
The Premodern Notion of Prediction  
as Conjecture
In the early twenty-­first ­century, historians of science have turned to explore the 
epistemological, social, and po­liti­cal uses of prediction in premodern eras. Their 
interest was guided by two overarching questions: first, how socie­ties in the past 
coped with the ­future and, second, the role of prediction in the development of 
modern Western science. Historians studied philosophical debates but also so-
cial practices in ancient Greece, the Roman republic, and China. As their stud-
ies identified a fascinating range of concepts that ­were deployed to or­ga­nize the 
knowledge of the unknown, the unknown being situated along a temporal axis 
in the ­future, ­there is no space to do full justice to this research. I limit my dis-
cussion to a few key aspects of prediction that ­will ­matter for my subsequent 
analy­sis of late modern scientific prediction.
In the Western context, the first extensive philosophical debates about the 
types of knowledge of unknowns situated in the ­future took place in ancient 
Rome, where Roman phi­los­o­phers drew on the Greek tradition. As Federico San-
tangelo shows in his extensive study of the late Roman republican debates about 
the limits of ­human knowledge, the first systematic discussion of the key no-
tions that ­were used to or­ga­nize thinking about the unknown was produced by 
Cicero (106–143 BC). According to Santangelo, Cicero introduced the notion of 
divination, a version of the Greek term mantike, from which the notion of man-
tic science was ­later derived; examples of mantic science are, for instance, chi-
romancy, hydromancy, and astrology. To practice mantike meant to identify and 
read constellations of signs in order to reveal the meaning and the order of the 
events that ­were to happen. Like mantike, the practice of divination also entailed 
reading signs. However, unlike mantike, divination sought to produce not just 
a reading of fleeting signs, but a form of structured knowledge (scientia) that was 
reaching out to the fundamental unknown, the area of the gods.5 Divination was 
conducted as part of a ritual, performed to access the divine knowledge. For in-
stance, augurs would interpret birds’ flights and oracles would engage in dif­fer­
ent practices to survey land and prevent disasters.6

	
WHAT IS SCIENTIFIC PREDICTION?	
17
­These dif­fer­ent knowledge practices ­were tied to the view of the world that 
was split into areas of which some ­were knowable to ­humans while ­others ­were 
less knowable. In the ancient Greek tradition, the ­whole universe, including 
­human lives and events, was considered finite and in princi­ple knowable, but 
only from the gods’ point of view. In contrast, in ancient China, the notion of 
the world was more open to uncertainty: the universe of ­things and events was 
seen as evolving and changeable. The Chinese version of mantic knowledge was 
used to help ­people anticipate changes and adjust their course of action in the 
most beneficiary way, without providing complete certainty.7 Although the an-
cient Greek worldview was more static than the ancient Chinese, even this rela-
tively static world was understood as consisting of two domains, one being 
more predictable than another. Cicero, according to Santangelo, proposed that 
some areas of life could be subject to prudent techniques of reason and judgment 
(mantike). ­Others could hardly be known, being subject to divine fate:
[A]rs and prudentia may be useful for the prediction of fortuitous events: 
sailors, doctors and generals face ­these kinds of events at all times and 
use their knowledge to anticipate, or face them. Predicting someone’s 
death is tantamount to reading what is ‘in the domain of fortuna’ (quae 
in fortuna positae sunt); such prediction is not based on any practice 
(ars) or knowledge (sapientia).8
For Cicero, as for the ancient Chinese, to be prudent meant to foresee events and 
take action before they happened. Action and moral judgment ­were deemed in-
separable from dif­fer­ent forms of knowledge of the unknowns as well as the 
­future. But prudent predictions could be reliably made only in the areas that are 
in princi­ple knowable to men and which could be acted on with a degree of 
certainty: such as sailing the seas, treating a patient, or commanding an army. 
However, many areas ­were outside the scope of prudent predictions: existential 
events, such as death or securing a po­liti­cal victory, belonged to the realm of the 
gods. Nevertheless, Greeks and Romans believed that some knowledge could 
be obtained even about ­these areas with the help of divination: partaking in the 
divine knowledge that can be accessed by reading the signs that reveal ­future 
events.9 This constituted the classical notion of prediction: reading the signs in 
order to identify events, the knowledge of which was necessary for taking pru-
dent action. This knowledge was regarded as a domain of specialists, it was far 
removed from a common guess. Without a qualified prediction (mantic or divi-
nation), ­there could be no prudent action. Mantic knowledge and divination ­were 
strongly associated with a temporal axis, but only interested in the ­future events, 
not in the past.10 This formula was ­adopted and further developed in the medi-
eval period.

18	
CHAPTER 1
In the Eu­ro­pean ­Middle Ages, according to the historian Alexander Fidora, 
­there was a shift from divination and mantic knowledge to prognosis, a type of 
knowledge that emerged in medical theory and shared many features with what 
­later would become the modern notion of scientific prediction. In the medieval 
texts, divination was discussed in the context of writings on magic. For instance, 
in the seventh ­century AD the Spanish scholar and theologian Isidore of Seville 
wrote that “augurs and astrologers claim for their predictions a status of knowl-
edge that, they allege, partakes knowledge of God, which elevates it above the 
limits of natu­ral knowledge.”11 Other texts presented ancient Greek and Roman 
typologies of mantic sciences, such as chiromancy, pyromancy, geomancy, and 
hydromancy, but also astrology and, initially, medicine. ­These types of knowl-
edge, as Fidora observed, was grouped together ­under one category ­because it 
was primarily interested in signs (signa) and not ­causes (causae). Mantic knowl-
edge was locational, topological, concerned with logistical relations: situating 
events on the temporal and spatial axis. To separate the mantic knowledges from 
natu­ral sciences they ­were classified as sciencia coniecturalis, conjectural science.
Conjectural science was deemed hierarchically inferior to natu­ral sciences, 
particularly mathe­matics and physics, ­because conjectural science offered less 
certainty. Moreover, conjectural science was considered less reliable than the em-
pirical sciences or even opinions. This is ­because conjectural science studied 
signs that ­either ­were changing or could be changed: for instance, the moving 
constellations of stars or evolving symptoms of an illness. In contrast, empiri-
cal sciences ­were based on universal laws. Similarly, opinions ­were also consid-
ered based on equally universal morals. Therefore, both empirical sciences and 
opinions ­were regarded more reliable and truthful.12
Nevertheless, although unreliable, conjectures ­were deemed necessary 
­because they informed decisions and guided be­hav­ior in the changing, uncer-
tain context. Conjectures did not explain the order of ­things, but they required 
a skillful semiological reading and the ability to bridge conjectural knowledge 
and practice. To give a con­temporary example, originally suggested by the phi­
los­o­pher Nicholas Denyer, having a railway timetable and identifying arrival and 
departure times does not cause the train to arrive. However, reading the time-
table helps a traveler to get on the right train.13 What Denyer pre­sents is the case 
of a very loose coupling between the reading of signs (the timetable) and the 
course of action (the arrival of the train), where signs and material infrastruc-
tures appear to “rule” ­human be­hav­ior. This phenomenon has fascinated social 
scientists since the late twentieth ­century. For instance, scholars representing the 
actor–­network theory (ANT) would argue that the railway timetable does “cause” 
the train to arrive to a par­tic­u­lar spot at a par­tic­u­lar time, although not in a 

physical way. The timetable is the central ele­ment in an actor network, a locus 
which enables accountability and control of the trains that might be other­wise 
early or late or go to the wrong destination.14 Organ­ization scholars, like the so-
cial psychologist Karl Weick, would argue that the timetable is an ele­ment of a 
“causal loop,” a sequence of expectations, explanations, and actions which re-
sult in what may appear as a self-­fulfilling prophecy, the arrival of the train.15 In 
line with Weick, I suggest that conjectural knowledges help orchestrate, espe-
cially synchronize, real­ity. As I ­will show in the last section of this chapter, this 
performative strive is characteristic of both premodern conjectures and late 
modern predictions infused with cybernetic sensibility.
Conjectural knowledge was an impor­tant step in the history of modern science 
as an attempt to create and systematize knowledge that could account for volatile 
and changing aspects of real­ity. The ­human body was one instance of such a real­
ity: whereas key events of ­human ­future, such as life and death, belonged to the 
god’s knowledge and action, health and illness ­were understood as cumulative 
pro­cesses that could be both known by ­humans and acted on. It was in the medi-
eval medical treatises that, according to Fidora, the epistemological roots of mod-
ern scientific prediction can be found.16 When it came to health and illness, the 
practice of divination was eventually replaced with “prognostication.” The term 
prognostication was derived from the Greek physician Hippocrates’s treatise Prog-
nôstikon (Book of Prognosis), written in ca. 370 BC.17 Hippocrates wrote that a 
physician “­will the better be able to effect a cure if he can foretell, from the pre­sent 
symptoms, the ­future course of the disease.” Foretelling, as Lisa Raphals noted, is 
a continuous pro­cess, ­because the course of the disease cannot be wholly foretold 
from its beginning. As symptoms change and evolve, they can create new courses 
of development and must be constantly monitored.18
In medical practice, conjectural semiology (the reading of symptoms as they 
are expressed in a given constellation of signs) foregrounded the development 
of diagnostic methods and what is ­today understood as medical prognosis. A 
new prognostic model was articulated in the late twelfth ­century, when the con-
jectural model of “if . . . ​then . . .” became widely used to structure prognosis in 
medical treatises. According to Fidora, this type of prognostic knowledge was 
increasingly specialized to increase precision in answering specific questions. An 
influential expression of this specialization of prognosis was decision trees, which 
­were drawn to guide the medical judgment.19 In medicine, as well as in meteo-
rology, precision became a key criterion for conjectural knowledge. The differ-
ence from the ancient mantic practice was the growing importance of temporal 
relations between signs: a good prognosis was guided not only by structural re-
lations, as in a decision tree, but also by chronologies of temporal relations. Not 
	
WHAT IS SCIENTIFIC PREDICTION?	
19

20	
CHAPTER 1
only forms of symptoms, but also the sequence and rate of change had to be iden-
tified, charted, and interpreted. This gave rise to the notion of prognosis as “a 
cumulative interpretation of consecutive events.”20
The crucial epistemological breakthrough, according to Fidora, was the under-
standing that the course of events itself has an effect on the final outcome. This 
idea served as a basis for what would become modern scientific prediction, which, 
in turn, would form a key component of the epistemological apparatus of modern 
science. Indeed, Fidora suggested, it was precisely this understanding of predic-
tion that would ­later separate “proper,” modern sciences from nonscientific knowl-
edges: medicine, based on the prognostic method, was accepted into the canon of 
modern science, whereas astrology and other mantic sciences, such as chiromancy 
and hydromancy, ­were not. Astrology was deemed nonscientific ­because astrolo-
gers ­were completely uninterested in the ­actual course of events. Instead, astrolo-
gers offered what ­were described as “global” predictions, where ­future events ­were 
entirely determined by a priori constellations of signs, which ­were removed both 
in terms of distance and time from the person or event in question. Unlike physi-
cians, astrologers ignored the role of the mediated, pro­cessual, and cumulative 
character of real­ity.21 It is in­ter­est­ing that the difference between medicine and as-
trology was not principal, but gradual, based on the distance in time and space: in 
medical knowledge signs, the symptoms of illness, ­were pre­sent more immedi-
ately, whereas astrology dealt with signs that ­were distant both in time and space, 
for instance, the planet constellation at the moment of birth.22 However, because 
conjecture was closely associated with the mantic knowledges, its status was ques-
tioned in the early modern and modern periods. As the historian Mary Poovey 
shows in her influential study of eighteenth-­ and nineteenth-­century Britain, crit-
ics of conjectural knowledge associated it with “self-­interest, irresponsible specula-
tion, and partisanship.”23 In its extreme version, conjectural knowledge was 
derided for not being based on systematic rec­ords or empirically observable facts. 
The more moderate version of critique pointed to the absence of interest in the 
mediating phenomena that linked the facts.
To summarize, modern scientific prediction, in this way, developed as a result of 
the rejection of divination as partaking in the gods’ knowledge. It also rejected 
mantic conjectures, particularly astrology, ­because they ignored the mediating 
pro­cesses that linked signs and the final outcomes. However, operating with con-
jectures and exercising prudence remained central for the modern notions of scien-
tific prediction that tackled the issues posed by fast-­changing, obscure real­ity, such 
as sailing rough seas, commanding a ­battle, or curing a patient. However, as I show 
in the next section, an additional notion of scientific prediction was formed in phi-
losophy, where prediction was dissociated from both conjecture and prudent ac-
tion; it was placed at the very heart of modern scientific knowledge and practice.

­Towards the Modern Notion of Prediction 
in Positivism and Logical Empiricism
The philosophical debate that zooms in on prediction (of the ­future) as an epis-
temological prob­lem of science (what can be known with high degree of cer-
tainty) and not so much a prob­lem of action, as in mantic knowledge (what 
could be done to ensure a beneficial course of events), is traditionally traced to 
Francis Bacon’s skepticism about the possibility of coalescing par­tic­u­lar obser-
vations into general abstractions or “universals” and David Hume’s prob­lem of 
induction.24 In his An Enquiry Concerning ­Human Understanding (1748) Hume 
proposed that ­there is neither logical nor empirical basis to make reliable state-
ments on ­future occurrences. According to Hume’s famous example, it does 
not ­matter how many times one saw the sun rise in the morning; the regularity 
of observation alone is not enough to claim with certainty that the sun ­will rise 
tomorrow. Accordingly, the ­future course of events cannot be scientifically 
known if science consists of empirical observation only. According to Poovey, 
this statement, known as Hume’s prob­lem of induction, challenged the status of 
conjecture as a scientific form of knowledge. Nevertheless, some proposed that 
even Hume admitted that regularity still ­matters and that scientific predic-
tion somehow “accords with past regularity.”25 Just what exactly is required to 
bridge the gap between knowledge of the known event with the unknown one, 
as indicated by Hume, would become a central question in the philosophy of 
knowledge and science, particularly in the applied domains.26 In what follows 
and in subsequent chapters I show that scientific prediction works as a rela-
tional concept that is used to bridge “the Humean gap”—­the prob­lem of in-
duction linking the observer and observed phenomena into chronological 
chains. Poovey, drawing on Peter Dear, offers an accessible definition of in-
duction that is helpful ­here: “induction is the method Bacon recommended for 
moving gradually from observed particulars to the generalizations that con-
stituted systematic knowledge.” For my argument the procedure of “moving 
gradually” is centrally significant and prediction can be regarded as a key part 
of this pro­cess.27
One of the most influential ways of bridging the Humean gap was proposed 
by the French positivist phi­los­o­phers who argued that it is precisely the power 
to predict the ­future that confers scientific status on knowledge. This definition 
of science is said to have been first proposed by Auguste Comte in his Course de 
philosophie positive (1830–1842). Comte used the term prevoyance (prevision) to 
describe a fundamental component of both scientific knowledge and the trans-
formative application of science to the improvement of the ­human condition: 
“from science comes Prevision, from Prevision comes action” (Course, 1830).28 
	
WHAT IS SCIENTIFIC PREDICTION?	
21

22	
CHAPTER 1
The power to predict, to leap from the known to the unknown, is what separates 
scientific knowledge from lay knowledge:
Till the rising of the sun or of some star could be accurately predicted, 
as to time and place, ­there was no astronomical science. Its ­whole pro­
cess since has been by introducing more and more certainty and preci-
sion into its predictions, and in using smaller and smaller data from 
direct observation for a more and more distant prevision. No part of 
natu­ral philosophy manifests more strikingly the truth of the axiom 
that all science has prevision for its end: an axiom that separates sci-
ence from erudition, which relates the events of the past, without any 
regard to the ­future (Course, 1835).29
Furthermore, “the punctual arrival of comets and eclipses” as they are pre-
dicted by science, for Comte disproves the existence of super­natural forces. 
The ­great precision that Comte posits as a normative standard, separates sci-
ence from what he described as “vague” prophecies.30 Accordingly, Comte 
ranked sciences differently according to their ability to predict precisely and to 
express ­those predictions mathematically. In this ranking, astronomy was at 
the top, while physics and chemistry ­were classed as less precise. The knowl-
edge of such highly volatile and varied phenomena as tides was classed low in 
scientific status ­because it lacked precision.31 Indeed, as historians noted, 
Comte strongly disliked probabilistic thinking, unlike other phi­los­o­phers of 
his time who ­were not that much invested in the search for precision.32 The 
absence of precision, particularly in statistics, was tolerated when the overall 
contribution of knowledge was valued. A good case in point is what Poovey 
described as the rise of belief in “general effects” as opposed to individual, and 
more concrete, experiences that took place in the nineteenth ­century Britain. 
As Poovey puts it, ­because the ability to see “general effects,” such as “national 
prosperity” that might not be related to individual well-­being, was increas-
ingly valued, the missing chain of evidence or unaccounted data could be tol-
erated.33 Similarly, while Comte’s take on scientific prediction had a deep 
influence on the French school of “social science,” social scientists ­were torn 
between a striving for precision and attempts to accommodate precision with 
probability and a less rigid approach to general laws. For instance, at the end of 
the ­century, in his Rules of So­cio­log­i­cal Method (1895), Émile Durkheim pos-
ited that the approximate certainty of scientific knowledge is sufficient: “sci-
ence knows no first ­causes, in the absolute sense of the term. For science a fact 
is primary simply when it is general enough to explain a ­great number of other 
facts.”34 Furthermore, much more attuned to statistics than Comte, Durkheim 

suggests that general laws can be deduced from a full data set if it contains 
enough variation.35
Alongside the prob­lem of precision as a desirable though not always pos­si­ble 
quality of scientific prediction of fleeting phenomena, modern scientists exam-
ined the prob­lem of the ­future asking ­whether prediction must be associated with 
the ­future. The next key conceptual move in elevating the status of conjectural 
knowledge to that of proper, modern science was to destabilize the link between 
scientific prediction and the ­future. In the first half of the twentieth ­century logi-
cal empiricists proposed that prediction in fact equals explanation, and its main 
task is to produce novel, robustly scientific knowledge. In what follows, I briefly 
pre­sent an influential discussion of scientific prediction as explanation, expli-
cated by the German-­born phi­los­o­phers, Carl Hempel and Paul Oppenheim, 
both of whom fled from Nazi Germany in the 1930s. Hempel was briefly exposed 
to logical positivism of the Vienna Circle, which he critiqued ­later in his work, but 
he inherited a strong interest in prediction as a criterion of scientificity.
For Hempel and Oppenheim, to put it simply, scientific knowledge is consti-
tuted by two principal building blocks: classification and explanation. Classi­
fication entails sorting observations according to dif­fer­ent categories. Scientific 
explanation, as they put it, is at work when an event can be “explained by subsum-
ing it ­under general laws, i.e., by showing that it occurred in accordance with ­those 
laws, by virtue of the realisation of certain antecedent conditions.”36 An impor­tant 
condition ­here is that the procedure of explanation (which could be expressed 
­either in words or in mathematical equations) should not contradict the princi­ples 
of formal logic. As Douglas usefully summarized, “The explanandum (the state-
ment explained) should be logically deducible from a set of statements (the ex-
planans) that included general laws.”37 For medieval physicians it was extremely 
impor­tant to collect cumulative observations of the ­actual course of developing 
symptoms in order to produce what they considered a good prognosis. The focus 
on the pro­cess and rate of change is what makes knowledge prognostic for them. 
Hempel and Oppenheim turn their attention to the way in which observations are 
described and explained, to the medium of language and particularly the logical 
apparatus of explanation. I suggest, however, that both medieval physicians and 
Hempel and Oppenheim shared the ­will to bridge the Humean gap between ob-
served and unobserved facts with the help of prediction.
For Hempel and Oppenheim scientific prediction and explanation are sym-
metrical, but this does not mean that they are identical, ­because prediction is an 
explanation that is made before the event has been observed. The unobserved 
	
WHAT IS SCIENTIFIC PREDICTION?	
23

24	
CHAPTER 1
event in question can be situated ­either in the ­future or in the past, it does not 
­matter. It could even exist outside of the historical chronology, as a piece of com-
pletely unknown data. Prediction is the explanation that helps detect previously 
unknown data. What would make a scientific explanation/prediction rigorous? It 
must be based on the observation of an empirical event. Then it should offer a 
logically consistent description of the reasons explaining why this event has oc-
curred. The explanation must refer to both “antecedent conditions” (the empirical 
structure of the event) and “general laws” (that are drawn from relevant scientific 
theories):
If E is given, i.e. if we know that the phenomenon described by E has 
occurred, and a suitable set of statements C1, C2, . . . ​, L1 is provided af-
terwards, we speak of an explanation of the phenomenon in question. 
If the latter statements are given and E is derived prior to the occur-
rence of the phenomenon it describes, we speak of a prediction.38
Thus, for Hempel and Oppenheim prediction is an explanation that allows find-
ing a (previously unobserved) fact. This take on prediction has been presented 
as a core feature of science, which separates it from commonsense knowledge, 
in the works of many science writers, particularly ­those covering the fields of 
evolutionary science, quantum physics, and complexity. According to Hempel 
and Oppenheim, the possibility of using the “explanans,” the combination of the 
characterization of antecedent conditions and general laws to describe the em-
pirical phenomenon that has not been yet observed, is necessary: without the 
capacity to predict, explanation “is not fully adequate”:39
Only to the extent that we are able to explain empirical facts can we 
attain the major objective of scientific research, namely, not merely to 
rec­ord the phenomena of our experience, but to learn from them, by 
basing upon them theoretical generalizations which enable us to an-
ticipate new occurrences and to control, at least to some extent, the 
changes in our environment.40
For example, the explanation that a car turned over on a road ­because of a blown 
tire is considered unscientific. It is a commonsense explanation ­because, accord-
ing to Hempel and Oppenheim, the statement contains no generalization and no 
description of antecedent conditions. Such commonsense explanations are weak 
scientifically ­because they are useless as a basis for prediction. They do not allow 
identifying conditions where cars turned over on roads in the past or ­will in the 
­future.41
Explanations can also be “incomplete”: they might refer to general laws and 
antecedent conditions, but still fail to predict. An example of an incomplete ex-

planation would be stating that ­there is a link between a par­tic­u­lar style of an 
artwork and the artist’s illness, for instance an expressionist painting and de-
pression or schizo­phre­nia.42 However, according to Hempel and Oppenheim, 
also the incomplete explanations that lack predictive power are not necessarily 
wrong. Rather, they are hypotheses which can be developed into scientific ex-
planations with predictive power through further research.43
An impor­tant question is ­whether the symmetry thesis is valid in social sci-
ences, which differ from natu­ral sciences ­because they deal with behavioral phe-
nomena that are influenced by such ­factors as intentions. According to Hempel 
and Oppenheim, ­there are no reasons why this could not be the case. Their argu-
ment goes as follows. Critics claim that social be­hav­ior is purposive, driven by 
goals and not so much by “antecedent conditions,” like, for instance, physical con-
ditions that lead to a blown tire. Social be­hav­ior should therefore be explained by 
“teleological” and not “causal” analy­sis.44 Such a teleological analy­sis of social be­
hav­ior must include goals that are pursued in the situation in question, ­because 
“the ­future appears to affect the pre­sent in a manner which is not found in the 
causal explanations of the physical sciences.”45 Hempel and Oppenheim dismiss 
this criticism:
But, clearly, when the action of a person is motivated, say, by the desire 
to reach a certain objective, then it is not the yet unrealized ­future event 
of attaining that goal which can be said to determine his pre­sent be-
haviour, for indeed the goal may never be actually reached; rather—to 
put it in crude terms—it is (a) his desire, pre­sent before the action, to 
attain that par­tic­u­lar objective, and (b) his belief, likewise pre­sent be-
fore the action, that such and such a course of action is most likely to 
have the desired effect. The determining motives and beliefs, therefore, 
have to be classified among the antecedent conditions of a motivational 
explanation, and ­there is no formal difference on this account between 
motivational and causal explanation.46
FIGURE 1.  The structure of scientific explanation. Reprinted from Carl G. 
Hempel and Paul Oppenheim, “Studies in the Logic of Explanation,” Philosophy 
of Science 15, no. 2 (1948), 138. Courtesy of University of Chicago Press.
	
WHAT IS SCIENTIFIC PREDICTION?	
25

26	
CHAPTER 1
For my argument it is impor­tant to understand the way in which the so-­
called positivist approach that considers prediction as a necessary criterion 
of scientificity of knowledge interacts with the notion of purposive be­hav­ior, 
­because much of the late twentieth-­century debate ­will be centered on this par­tic­
u­lar prob­lem as a prob­lem of scientific knowledge and governance. Indeed, Hem-
pel and Oppenheim’s model resonates with the early behaviorist approach 
developed by the much-­criticized American psychologist B. F. Skinner in the 
1950s to 1970s. Skinner suggested a flat, empirical epistemology where decisions 
and goals can be grouped together with the material “antecedent conditions” as 
equally “pre­sent” ­factors that shape be­hav­ior. Cognition, from Skinner’s perspec-
tive, is nothing more than just another form of be­hav­ior, in ­humans or animals.47 
Skinner’s approach was extremely simplistic and much criticized as it appeared to 
deny the notion of individual capacity to think, choose, and act; moreover, it 
tainted other, more sophisticated takes on incorporating cognitive goals in be-
havioral systems and prediction such as cybernetics, which I discuss in the next 
chapter.48
Hempel and Oppenheim’s theory of scientific knowledge was further criticized 
by phi­los­o­phers of science who deemed it incomplete, ­because it did not provide 
a procedure to explain and evaluate general laws. How can general laws be estab-
lished with scientific certainty? What are their antecedent conditions? Can gen-
eral laws be predicted? Logical empiricism could not answer ­these questions. 
Furthermore, postmodern theorists challenged the very ambition to explain, ar-
guing that the most social sciences and humanities could do was to interpret.49 
Interest in prediction would regularly resurface in social sciences as part of the 
ever-­widening introduction of quantitative methods as well as a growing demand 
for expert scientific advice in public policy. However, ­those branches of social sci-
ence that claimed to be predictive ­were criticized as a form of astrology or, worse, 
expression of a mindless positivist authoritarianism, and the concept became un-
fashionable.50 It was not ­until the first de­cade of the twenty-­first ­century that phi­
los­o­phers, such as Heather Douglas, returned to logical empiricism to reassess 
the notion of scientific prediction as a productive device:
Explanations help us to or­ga­nize the complex world we encounter, mak-
ing it cognitively manageable (which may be why they also give us a sense 
of understanding). However, . . . ​the sense of understanding is no good 
indicator of the accuracy of the explanation. It is the ability of an expla-
nation to generate new predictions, which then serve as a check on the 
explanation, that improves the accuracy of our scientific explanations.51

For Douglas and Robert Northcott it is impor­tant to maintain the criterion of 
prediction and accuracy ­because they make scientific knowledge more robust. 
According to ­these phi­los­o­phers, it is not a prob­lem if predictions fail; in fact, it 
is impor­tant that scientific predictions do fail, ­because failing is a fundamental 
part of testing a scientific method. Northcott argued that, for instance, errone-
ous predictions can reveal weak theories, point to the insufficiency of existing 
explanations, and help undermine excessive certainty in the existing beliefs or 
understanding. In this sense, scientific prediction as explanation is understood 
as the engine of the heuristic, open epistemology that is required to produce ever-­
evolving knowledge of complex, changing real­ity. Northcott emphasized the 
value of accurate scientific prediction keeps dogmatism in check, ­because it re-
quires more accuracy and accountability of theoretical postulates.52 In a similar 
vein, as I ­will show in subsequent chapters on Soviet statistical forecasting, the 
criteria of prediction and precision ­were instrumental for ­those Soviet actors 
who desired to reform the authoritarian and failing governmental policy and 
institutions.
The Late Modern Notion of Prediction  
and Cybernetic Sensibility
The modern notion of prediction as explanation is not concerned with the flow 
of time in the sense that it does not care if the data in question already exist or 
do not exist yet. It demands well-­tested knowledge: according to the phi­los­o­
pher Karl Popper, only ­those theories that have not been falsified should be used 
to make predictive statements.53 However, our everyday lives are continuously 
­shaped by predictions that are not necessarily based on logically consistent and 
theoretically anchored explanations. Indeed, a ­great many of ­those predictions 
are not even made by ­people but by machines that perform billions of predic-
tions without knowing any single theory or having a logically consistent expla-
nation ready. The word pro­cessor that autocorrects my text as I type, the ad that 
pops up on the wall of my Facebook profile, the Google search suggestions, the 
self-­driving car—­all ­these technologies are based on probabilistic predictions of 
what is most likely to happen next. Note that the examples I listed ­here refer to 
digital software. Like medieval physicians, software algorithms intently observe 
symptoms (relations between words that I sequence in a sentence or my ­earlier 
clicks) trying to discern the next move. Unlike the ancient mantic experts or con­
temporary astrologers, algorithms do not use “global” predictions, where the 
initial event fully determines the final outcome: algorithmic predictions are blind 
to the end result of their guesses.54 In a peculiar way ­these process-­tracking-­based 
	
WHAT IS SCIENTIFIC PREDICTION?	
27

28	
CHAPTER 1
predictions are closer to the medieval notion of cumulative prognosis than to 
Comtean positivism emphasizing precision and certainty.
The notion of prediction as pattern recognition is used in scientific lit­er­a­ture 
in a dual way, both as a component of scientific knowledge and as a natu­ral pro­
cess, a part of what is considered the natu­ral order of ­things that enables cogni-
tion in general. For instance, prediction as pattern recognition in statistics and 
engineering can be referred to as a “scientific prediction,” a cognitive operation 
that is based on a set of scientific methods and theories. However, in other areas 
of research, such as ge­ne­tics and neuroscience, but also some fields of computer 
science and engineering, prediction as pattern recognition is approached as an 
empirical phenomenon that needs be explored, can be modeled and engineered. 
The concepts of prediction as hypothesis and explanation, and prediction as pro­
cess tracing, have similarities in that they address phenomena that are pos­si­ble 
but not yet evident (see figure 2).
Historians of science would link prediction as pattern recognition with an-
other long-­standing philosophical prob­lem of deduction, an approach which tra-
ditionally favored the use of logic and numbers. The history of pattern recognition 
long predates computer modeling, and it can be tracked back to the debate ­whether 
numbers could be used to describe society and economy in the early nineteenth 
­century. As Poovey showed in her influential study of the modern fact, eighteenth-­
century thinkers ­were rather indifferent to numeric descriptions, ­because num-
bers ­were deemed not as reliable as “princi­ples” and therefore useless for scientific 
explanations. Numbers ­were considered neither “true” nor “valuable.” According 
FIGURE 2.  Prediction in knowledge. Source: Eglė Rindzevičiūtė.

to Poovey, a preference for the quantitative expression of facts was undermined 
with the declining scientific status of mantic and conjectural knowledges in the 
early modern period. Numerical repre­sen­ta­tion had to be purged of super­natural 
powers.55 The mastery of numbers and the legitimation of the numerical language 
was eventually established with the rise of statistical surveys and related tech-
niques forecasting the weather, population, and economy in the nineteenth ­century 
(to which I return in the chapters examining the statistical forecasting in imperial 
and Soviet Rus­sia).56
The difficulty with unpacking the notion of prediction as pattern recognition 
is that it relies on vari­ous statistical methods where the term prediction is used to 
describe what can be quite dif­fer­ent operations.57 Without ­going into excessive 
technical details, I would like to illustrate this diversity by drawing on the lucid 
discussion of the types of statistical prediction offered by Andrew Ehrenberg and 
John Bound. According to Ehrenberg and Bound, the classical definition of sta-
tistical prediction as a technique of making inference from a sample to a popula-
tion, offered by the British statistician Ronald Fisher in 1935, in fact does not 
reflect what statisticians always do when facing large sets of data.58 Trying to go 
beyond what they call the blind belief in the least square regression technique as 
the gold standard of statistical prediction where probabilities ­were used to mea­
sure errors, Ehrenberg and Bound distinguish two key types of statistical predic-
tion. The least squares technique refers to curve fitting “that minimizes the sum 
of the squares of deviations of the curve from the data,” an approach developed 
by nineteenth-­century astronomers to mea­sure planetary orbits. 59
The first type of statistical prediction is interpolative. It can be inductive, de-
ductive, or theoretical. Arguing that interpolative prediction requires absence of 
unusual events or controversial data, Ehrenberg and Bound note that interpola-
tion refers to an inference from observed phenomena which happens as part of 
“routine deductions of a well-­established finding.” For instance, the statement that 
the sun ­will rise tomorrow, criticized by Hume, is one such example of a valid in-
terpolation simply ­because it is based on routine observations which register a fact 
which is considered uncontroversial. Interpolative predictions, according to Eh-
renberg and Bound, do not have to be based on large-­scale observations; they can 
include the so-­called individual interpolations, based on small sets of data. For 
example, a doctor’s estimate made on the basis of their own routine observations 
of a par­tic­u­lar patient or a group of patients is an example of interpolative predic-
tion. Statistical interpolation can also include “now-­casting,” where inference is 
done from the same population of data and is not about the ­future events. For ex-
ample, looking through a win­dow, seeing that it is raining and saying “it’s raining 
now” is an example of now-­casting or, to put in a statistical language, “predicting 
y from x for the data to which the model has actually been fitted.”60
	
WHAT IS SCIENTIFIC PREDICTION?	
29

30	
CHAPTER 1
The second type of statistical predictions is extrapolatory, which is used where 
routine observations are not readily available. Examples include forecasting, 
which Ehrenberg and Bound define as “assertions about the ­future . . . ​when even 
the past patterns are unclear.” Extrapolation can also refer to discoveries where 
theory points to novel data (which is consistent with Hempel and Oppenheim’s 
notion of symmetry between prediction and explanation). Another example of 
extrapolation is the “what if . . . ?” reasoning, where the outcome depends on 
varying the input assumptions.61
In addition to this internal conceptual diversity, statistical prediction is part of 
messy social and institutional practice, as sociologists of science and technology 
have shown. To borrow Erving Goffman’s term of frontstage and backstage, at the 
backstage statistical prediction is characterized by the mess caused by misbehav-
ing numbers and machines.62 Computer programs have bugs, they make ­mistakes. 
Very large sets of numbers do not follow the same mathematical rules as small sets 
of numbers.63 At the frontstage, statistical prediction is entangled with social, po­
liti­cal, and institutional rationales and practices that can depart significantly from 
the philosophical criteria of logic and accuracy.64 This does not mean however that 
statistical prediction is a somehow fake or utopian science. Instead, I would argue 
that this internal conceptual diversity and complexity means that the practice of 
statistical prediction requires a complex orchestration of dif­fer­ent conceptual, so-
cial, and material agencies. For instance, in their insightful and very timely call to 
explore the internal complexity of statistical “prediction cultures,” Matthias Hey-
mann, Gabriele Gramelsberger, and Martin Mahony argue that in making statisti-
cal predictions dif­fer­ent actors seek to balance accuracy and uncertainty.65 The 
stakes for this balance can be high, as statistical predictions, as outlined by Comte, 
are used to guide managerial and governmental actions that can be damaging 
for society if applied wrongly. This is impor­tant for my argument that the ­will to 
predict scientifically entailed balancing dif­fer­ent types of predictions. Debates 
on what constitutes a method and practice that would qualify as a properly sci-
entific prediction can be understood as part of this balancing act. In the remain-
ing section, I discuss the movement away from the Comtean linear model of 
prediction → action, to a heuristically open approach to prediction that toler-
ated lack of precision by compensating with prudent action.
Coping with Uncertainty
In his influential treatise on risk and uncertainty published in 1921, Frank H. 
Knight reflected on what he described as “the prob­lems of life.” This prob­lem for 
him was the issue of the lack of routine observations enabling accurate inferences, 

for, as he put it, “we know so ­little.” Knowing more, according to Knight, is im-
perative, ­because this enables a person or an organism to have a “forward-­looking” 
mentality. To be able to infer is also a question of identity: for Knight “to see ­things 
coming,” “to react to a situation before it materializes,” is what separates an un-
conscious vegetable and an advanced cognitive being such as a ­human. Not only 
prudence but also pragmatics is impor­tant: the adjustments that must be made 
when looking forward “require time, and the farther ahead the organism can ‘see,’ 
the more adequately it can adapt itself, to more fully and competently it can live.”66 
However, according to Knight, prediction as inference is central for perception 
and be­hav­ior: he suggests that “we perceive the world before we react to it, and we 
react not to what we perceive, but always to what we infer.” This inference concerns 
pos­si­ble ­futures: for instance, considering the way in which the situation would 
turn out without intervention or the consequences of intervention. Inferences can 
be riddled with errors and they are often probabilistic estimates.67 In the 1940s, 
two de­cades ­after the publication of Knight’s treatise, a similar proposition, but 
formulated at the lower level of organ­ization, was articulated by cyberneticians 
and neuroscientists studying brain and neural networks.
The idea that ­human and animal be­hav­ior, as well as self-­regulatory pro­cesses 
inside organisms and the pro­cesses linking organisms to their environment, can-
not be explained (and predicted) by mechanical models of linear causality was 
posited as a challenge for a radically new research agenda, which, as Ronald Kline 
showed in his history of cybernetics, would pave the way for information sci-
ences in the 1940s (in what follows I rely heavi­ly on Kline’s account). At the heart 
of the prob­lem was that the task was pattern recognition in fast-­changing phe-
nomena rather than a description of change in relatively stable phenomena by 
outlining the antecedent conditions and applying general laws to explain change. 
The idea that linear causality must be replaced with circular causality, or con-
trol through feedback loops, was proposed in a set of conferences in New York 
in 1946 to 1953.68 ­These conferences gathered influential scholars from natu­ral 
science, engineering, and social science disciplines and ­were or­ga­nized by the 
Macy Foundation, originally established in 1938 to fund medical research. One 
of the leading applications of ­these ideas was in brain research, which overlapped 
with the work of creating the first digital computer. As Kline detailed in his study, 
the American neurophysiologist Warren McCulloch and the mathematician 
Walter Pitts modeled the brain as a system of digital neurons that could be ­either 
on or off. Their work inspired John von Neumann and Julian Bigelow to design 
the first electronic computer at Prince­ton in 1946.69
The digital model of the brain as an equivalent of computer pro­cessing was an 
impor­tant, albeit insufficient, step in the understanding of neural networks. The 
concept that bridged neurological and cybernetic research was “information.” As 
	
WHAT IS SCIENTIFIC PREDICTION?	
31

32	
CHAPTER 1
Norbert Wiener put it in 1949, information “is a concept that can go over directly 
from the study of the ner­vous system to the study of the machine; it is a perfectly 
good physical notion, and it is a perfectly good biological notion.”70 The scientific 
discussion of cybernetic control spilled over into the public debate following the 
publication of Norbert Wiener’s Cybernetics: Or Control and Communication in 
the Animal and the Machine (1948), an unexpected international bestseller that 
found itself a target of the Cold War as the very term “cybernetics” was banned in 
the Soviet Union in the early 1950s. One of the reasons for this controversy was 
the US media reports on Wiener’s ideas, which ­were linked with what then was an 
ongoing topic of social anxiety about the dominance of “thinking machines,” the 
societal detriments of the automation of ­labor, and the destabilizing onset of ro-
bots.71 Wiener’s cybernetics was critiqued as a cap­i­tal­ist attempt to dehumanize 
­people by turning them into automatic cognitive machines.72 This line of critique 
has been continued since, for instance in the discussions of the po­liti­cal economy 
of cybernetics and the digitization of ­labor by Seb Franklin and, somewhat un-
fairly paired with Skinner’s behaviorism, in Shoshana Zuboff’s attack against 
cybercapitalism.73
­These media debates of the 1950s and the 1960s conferred on cybernetics, as 
Kline put it, the status of “science of robot brains.” This was an unfortunate 
misrepre­sen­ta­tion of very diverse research that was done ­under the umbrella 
term of cybernetics. Indeed, strands of cybernetic research argued the very op-
posite, that the pro­cess of cognition and be­hav­ior are so complex that they cannot 
be appropriately simulated in the computer ­because of its ­limited architecture.74 
The cybernetic notion of information and feedback loops influenced neurophysi-
ology, ge­ne­tics, and what would be defined as behavioral sciences in response to 
the Ford Foundation’s use of the term in 1949.75 Cybernetics also influenced the 
artificial intelligence (AI) field, the founding date of which is considered to be a 
conference funded by the Rocke­fel­ler Foundation at Dartmouth College in the 
United States in 1956, which led to a split between the strictly symbolic AI and 
neurophysiological modeling.76 The rapprochement between neurophysiology 
and the so-­called AI would happen only about half a ­century ­later. ­Until then, 
attempts to understand how the brain makes predictions and controls be­hav­ior 
and to create computer systems that can pro­cess information and automatically 
steer machines would develop in parallel. However, prediction remained a cen-
tral prob­lem and category for both streams of research.
In cyber sciences the key prob­lem was complexity, and the term prediction was 
used to draw the distinction between order and chaos. In the 1970s, Chilean neuro-
biologists Francisco Varela and Humberto Maturana proposed the term “autopoi-
esis” drawing on the 1960s’ idea of a second-­order cybernetics. The key princi­ple of 
second-­order cybernetics is the idea of multilevel control, where each controlling 

system is controlled by another system. The interaction between them is hierarchi-
cally or­ga­nized and takes place through information exchange via feedback loops. 
Varela and Maturana argued that such multilayered systems can inflict change on 
themselves and regulate themselves so that they stay balanced and ­viable; hence 
the term autopoiesis. The notion of autopoiesis and informational self-­regulation 
widely resonated in social theories (particularly the work of Niklas Luhmann), in 
part in poststructuralism (Gilles Deleuze and Félix Guattari), and in art theory and 
practice (including con­temporary art installations by the cybernetic psychologist 
Gordon Pask, presented in Cybernetic Serendipity, an exhibition or­ga­nized at the 
Institute of Con­temporary London in 1968). Since the 1940s, the role of informa-
tional self-­regulation and prediction was part of many groundbreaking research 
agendas in the fast-­growing environmental sciences, particularly computer model-
ing, policy sciences, AI, and neuroscience, all of which wanted to crack the prob­lem 
of coordination and the integration of dif­fer­ent ­orders of complexity.
With the advance of ge­ne­tics, digital monitoring technologies, and computer pro­
cessing power, neuroscientists gained unpre­ce­dented access to observational data 
on neural networks and simulation, a pro­cess that began in the 1950s and took off 
in the late 1990s. The key insight was formulated: the brain does not ­really work 
like Neumann’s and Bigelow’s digital computer, an information-­processing ma-
chine that receives input via sensors from the outside, pro­cesses them, and pro-
duces output via impulses that produce be­hav­ior. However tempting this ­simple 
and elegant model might be, the brain is not equipped to do all this work, ­because 
the informational volume of the outside is enormously vast and beyond the physi-
cal abilities of the brain to sort. The question was, how do ­people manage to make 
sense of the world, even on a basic perceptual level? As Andrew Pickering demon-
strates in his history of cybernetic approaches to biological cognition, as early as 
1948 the British cybernetician W. Ross Ashby warned that “To some, the critical 
test of ­whether a machine is or is not a ‘brain’ would be ­whether it can or cannot 
‘think.’ But to the biologist the brain is not a thinking machine, it is an acting ma-
chine; it gets information and then it does something about it.”77 Ashby insight-
fully described the brain as an acting machine, but his suggestion that the brain 
acts on the received information was still insufficient ­because it did not specify the 
cascade of mediators involved in the ­actual pro­cess.
Writing in the 1920s, Knight argued that ­humans make decisions not on the 
basis of perception, but on the basis of inference. Two de­cades ­later, Wiener hy-
pothesized that the brain was essentially predictive. Since then, neuroscientists 
embraced this argument.78 In the second half of the twentieth ­century a consensus 
emerged that brain activity is “data-­driven,” captured in the notion of bottom-up 
	
WHAT IS SCIENTIFIC PREDICTION?	
33

34	
CHAPTER 1
pro­cessing.79 However, how exactly this bottom-up pro­cessing is or­ga­nized is far 
from clear. It has been proposed that instead of gathering all perceptual data and 
analyzing it, the brain starts with estimating the most likely pattern, compares it 
with signals that it is receiving via perception organs, and corrects errors if its esti-
mate deviates from the incoming signals. Indeed, the Humean gap between ob-
servation and inference does not seem to bother the brain at all. The sequence, 
therefore, is not
input → prediction → output
but
prediction → input → output.
From the brain’s perspective, every­thing is continuously anticipated and what 
Hume described as “empirical observations” are not a source of proof, but a con­
ve­nient source for correction of error. Neuroscientists have proposed that this 
predictive power of the brain can be related to the evolutionary need to adapt to 
a fast-­changing environment, which can need reactions in milliseconds while 
the ­limited brain capacity to pro­cess information does not allow pro­cessing in-
puts and issuing a signal to behave quickly enough.80
However, it is impor­tant to note that the notion of prediction as pattern pro­
cessing is restricted to the lower levels of information pro­cessing. It does not scale 
up to the level of cognition that deals with abstractions. A useful explanation of 
this pro­cess has been presented by the British phi­los­o­pher Andy Clark who draws 
on cognitive psy­chol­ogy and neurophysiology to conceptualize the predictive 
brain.81 Like the ­earlier quoted cybernetician Ashby, Clark considers the brain a 
black box, a machine that sorts out its sensorial states. The pro­cess of sorting out 
is not like having on and off positions, as in a thermostat. It is or­ga­nized into a 
multilevel system of information transmission as “a predictive cascade,” where 
each level of a neural network tries to predict the patterns that are assembled at 
the level below. In this heuristic pro­cess of prediction and error correction the 
sensorial real­ity is an output of the brain, not an input into the brain. How does 
the brain know that its predictions are correct? Clark writes that the predictive 
success is achieved when a stable pattern that could be integrated with patterns at 
a higher level is established; that is, that ­there is a consistency between predic-
tions as they get integrated at higher levels of abstraction. On the basis of ­these 
patterns, the brain can generate a model of the causal relations that exist ­behind 
sensory inputs, the world out ­there, and issue appropriate signals for the body to 
respond to the external environment through be­hav­ior.82 This neurophysiologi-
cal behaviorism is very dif­fer­ent from Skinner’s behaviorism, ­because Skinner 
greatly simplified the internal architecture of cognition and was not aware of the 
complex cascades of predictions that link information pro­cessing and be­hav­ior.

Therefore the notion of prediction as the best estimate of a pattern can only ap-
ply well to understand lower levels of complexity, where a lot of ­simple and diverse 
sensorial signals are sorted: for instance, touching a rough surface without look-
ing at it and recognizing that it is a sheet of paper as opposed to the smooth surface 
of the desk on which it is lying. The sorting could go wrong and result in a predic-
tive error: seeing a cat in a shadowy corner, where in fact ­there is no cat (but the 
brain is desperate to find a cat, so it mismatches a projection of cat-­like patterns 
with what it actually sees). However, how this kind of sorting is integrated with 
abstract concepts and systems of concepts at higher levels remains unknown.83
Another impor­tant aspect of the model of predictive brain is that the predic-
tion cascades operate by eliminating errors rather than by looking for proof. Ac-
cording to Clark, “the task of the perceiving brain is to account for (to ‘explain 
away’) the incoming or ‘driving’ sensory signal by means of a matching top-­down 
prediction. The better the match, the less prediction error then propagates up the 
hierarchy.”84 Higher-­level (model) predictions “explain away”—­sort or dismiss—­
lower-­level prediction errors and this is a continuous pro­cess that never ceases.85 
This continuous flow of prediction as pattern recognition orchestrates “environ-
mental awareness.” The predictive brain, argues Clark, actively shapes an under-
standable environment by coordinating neural cognition with action: “Working 
together, perception and action serve to selectively sample and actively sculpt the 
stimulus array.”86 It can be suggested that at a higher abstraction level this need 
for the brain to explain away irrelevant signals has informed the architectures of 
informational environments that seek to make them brain friendly through clear 
markers, like road signs and price tags in shops, and se­lection of colors, like, for 
instance, high visibility or camouflage.
Critics like Zuboff are concerned that B. F. Skinner’s reductionist ideas are re-
turning via neuroscience and digital technology. However, predictive pro­cessing 
of pattern recognition refers to much more complex phenomena than ­those de-
scribed in Skinner’s work. In neuroscience, the ontological status of “ideas” or “in-
formation,” which for Skinner are simply “be­hav­iors,” is more nuanced, ­because it 
recognizes more clearly the dif­fer­ent levels of complexity at which the chains of 
information pro­cessing take place, are integrated, and give rise to both conceptual 
abstractions and action. According to Clark, “First, they suggest that probabilistic 
generative models underlie both sensory classification and motor response. And 
second, they suggest that the forward flow of sensory data is replaced by the for-
ward flow of prediction error.”87 Clark calls this “action-­oriented prediction pro­
cessing,” which seeks to integrate a theoretical framework embracing mind, brain, 
and action. Some cognitive scientists claim that forward-­prediction is a funda-
mental model that can operate without “goals,” merely through comparison of 
sensory flows with expectations.88 This is a model that modifies the cybernetic 
	
WHAT IS SCIENTIFIC PREDICTION?	
35

36	
CHAPTER 1
paradigm, a goal-­driven teleological action that is based on having a clear set tar-
get, which is approached via error correction by using negative feedback loops, 
as outlined by Rosenblueth and Wiener. Clark, however, suggests that not all 
feedback-­based predictions need a set target to operate. Drawing on Clark, I sug-
gest that forward-­prediction does not have to be part of teleological be­hav­ior, in 
the sense that it does not need a preset target to operate as it is already part of neuro­
physiological architecture. Nevertheless, forward-­predictions form a basis from 
which teleological be­hav­ior can emerge and operate on the basis of other types of 
prediction at a higher level of abstraction. In other words, prediction cascade as a 
difference—or error-­sorting—­engine works at the sensory level, but it does not 
automatically scale up to the higher cognitive level. I return to this in chapter 6, 
where I introduce the attempts to formalize strategic deception in reflexivity the-
ory. In chapter 7, I engage with the question of orchestrating target-­based, teleo-
logical predictions to match appropriate levels of complexity in a global governance 
model.
In many scientific fields pattern recognition was made into an engineering 
prob­lem, particularly in cases where a ­great volume of data has already been ac-
cumulated, where strong explanatory frameworks exist, and where categories for 
searching and sorting are readily available. Prediction as pattern recognition is a 
fundamental princi­ple in research and design in ge­ne­tics and biotechnologies, AI 
and algorithmically controlled markets of ­future be­hav­ior, and parametric archi-
tecture. Regarding the latter, architecture and design theorists have begun to ad-
dress prediction (as explanation) as a ­thing of the past, hailing pattern recognition 
as the ­future modus operandi of design systems.89 However, the discrepancy be-
tween low-­level sensory prediction as pattern recognition and high-­level cogni-
tive prediction as manipulation with complex abstractions remains to be bridged.
Conclusion
The notion of prediction as pattern recognition is so dif­fer­ent from Hempel and 
Oppenheim’s notion of prediction as explanation, identified with modern sci-
entific epistemology, that it led Andrew Pickering to go as far as declaring that 
cybernetic sciences are a case of nonmodern science. Pickering offered the fol-
lowing discussion of scientific prediction
One could crudely say that the modern sciences are sciences of pushes 
and pulls: something already identifiably pre­sent ­causes ­things to happen 
this way or that in the natu­ral or social world. Less crudely, perhaps, the 
ambition is one of prediction—­the achievement of general knowledge 

that ­will enable us to calculate (or, retrospectively, explain) why ­things in 
the world go this way or another. . . . ​[T]he cybernetic vision was not one 
of pushes and pulls; it was, instead, one of forward-­looking search.90
Accordingly, real­ity, from a cybernetic point of view, is not out ­there as an assem-
bly of ­causes and effects, but is unfolding, always in the making. Just like the 
medieval mantic sciences, late modern cybernetic sensibility is part of “groping 
in the dark,” a heuristic attempt to cope with fleeting real­ity as described by Do-
nella Meadows, John Richardson, and Gerhart Bruckmann in their 1982 report 
on the pro­gress of computer simulation.91 Perhaps what Pickering calls a “non-
modern adaptation” is a predictive pro­cess that so far has been observed to oper-
ate at par­tic­u­lar levels, such as micro (neural sensorial networks) but also macro 
(global biosphere systems). In this book, I offer a historically anchored discussion 
which shows just how much was at stake, socially, po­liti­cally, and institutionally 
in the effort to define and bridge ­these levels of scientific prediction.
	
WHAT IS SCIENTIFIC PREDICTION?	
37

38
When Peter the ­Great embarked on the proj­ect of modernizing Rus­sian society at 
the end of the seventeenth ­century, he set off to import not only the ship-­building 
technologies, bureaucracy, and architecture styles, but also to translate German 
and Polish almanacs containing prognostication of the weather and astrological 
readings of the ­future.1 In the following ­century, however, astrology had to move 
aside to make place for a new form of modern science that was ­shaped through 
growing demands to develop reliable methods of prediction. And, from the ruler’s 
point of view, what was more impor­tant to predict if not the economy and society? 
In this and the following chapter, I map the evolution of statistical forecasting in 
Rus­sian science and governance from the nineteenth ­century to the 1980s as an 
orchestration of ­people, institutions, data, and ideas of what can be vis­i­ble and 
knowable.2 Without this wider orchestration, the practice of statistical forecasting 
would lose its scientificity. As Vaclav Smil puts it, statistical forecasting was cre-
ated to describe mathematically ­those physical and immaterial changes in society 
and the biosphere that appear to be regular. Its primary purpose was to mea­sure 
growth, pro­gress, and decline.3 I show that in ­doing this, the epistemology of mod-
ern scientific forecasting in many ways continues to draw on the medieval ideas of 
prognosis, the reading of signs and closely following the course of change. Like 
medieval prognosis, forecasting seeks to construct a conjecture that situated a par­
tic­u­lar constellation of signs on the axis of time, in the ­future.4
My other purpose is to explore positivist statistical forecasting as it developed 
in Soviet Rus­sia. Many social scientists and historians use the term positivism as a 
derogatory term. Accordingly, they criticize the deployment of statistical forecast-
2
VISIBILITY, TRANSPARENCY, 
AND PREDICTION

	
Visibility, Transparency, and Prediction	
39
ing in policy as a positivist and reductionist approach that disregards the fluid and 
heterogeneous character of social real­ity and is used to legitimize top-­down deci-
sions, leading to technocracy. However, as I show in this chapter, many pioneers of 
statistical forecasting debated positivism and scientific prediction and ­were reflec-
tive about their limitations. In Rus­sia, positivism developed alongside mathe­
matics and statistics in a symbiosis with what would become a modern state 
apparatus and industrial economy, although the Rus­sian imperial authorities 
banned Auguste Comte’s writings on positive knowledge and prevision briefly in 
1848 and 1849.5 In the early twentieth ­century Soviet scholars, who ­were fasci-
nated with what appeared to be regularities in chaos such as population growth, 
epidemiology, and business cycles, delved into statistical forecasting and engaged 
with the Comtean positivist tradition critically. At the same time, the very pro­cess 
of creating forecasts alerted them to per­sis­tent uncertainties both in the method 
and the phenomena observed. I argue that for ­these Rus­sian scientists the “scien-
tific” component of forecasting did not always refer to certainty and blind belief in 
statistical data. Indeed, forecasts ­were considered “scientific” ­because they ­were 
part of asking a question rather than giving an answer. Scientific prediction was 
understood as an ultimate test of both method and data.
Numbers, Visibility, and Transparency
Statistical forecasting promised to enhance both visibility and transparency, in-
form policy decisions, make governance more effective, and, accordingly, aug-
ment its power. Policy planners, investors, insurers, meteorologists, marketing 
man­ag­ers, educators, and traders desired to have a firmer basis for their deci-
sions in the context of shifting and unstable realities, such as weather, crops, 
natu­ral resources, and consumer choices. Statistical forecasting answered this 
need, supplying graphs and curves to decision-­makers seeking, as the popu­lar 
orga­nizational jargon went, to “future-­proof” their decisions. However, forecasts 
are rarely perfect; they often fail to deliver reliable knowledge as to what ­will hap-
pen in the ­future, particularly in the long term. Furthermore, knowing the like-
lihood of an event happening is not necessarily useful for a decision-­maker if 
the information is not accompanied with transparency, the knowledge of the 
mechanism by which this event happens, so that it could be amenable to inter-
vention and management.6 What makes statistical forecasting a scientific pre-
diction? What kind of politics is associated with this type of knowledge? I 
examine ­these questions through three cases central to the history of Soviet fore-
casting: the 1920s discussions of the limits of social and economic forecasting 
in the first communist state plans; the 1960s reform that established prognoses 

40	
CHAPTER 2
as part of long-­term economic planning; and, in chapter 4, the emergence of so-
cial forecasting as a subfield of sociology in the 1960s and 1970s.
I argue that although the communist planners expected statistical forecasting 
to be a neutral method of gathering data that would indicate social and economic 
trends, statistical forecasting was more than that. Statistical forecasting had 
impor­tant social and po­liti­cal effects ­because it pointed to the failures of the So-
viet organ­ization of science and governmental apparatus, and, ultimately, to the 
intractable nature of social change. In theory, statistical forecasting was meant to 
help the state authorities “to see,” to map, diagnose, and govern complexity. In 
practice, the making of statistical forecasts was not even pos­si­ble without a more 
liberal institutional design, ­because, as I ­will show, this is a prerequisite of the 
production and use of reliable data. The authoritarian framework churned out 
flawed statistical data. This was criticized as early as the 1920s. ­Later, in the 1960s, 
scientists demanded transparency or glasnost’ in the circulation of data, which 
they saw as a necessary condition for scientific forecasting.7 Economists ­were not 
alone ­there: in 1966, for instance, researchers at the history institute demanded 
access to the archives documenting the Stalinist period.8 However, economists 
­were uniquely positioned to be trusted with development of new techniques, such 
as scientific forecasting, to help tame the chaos of the economy and social change. 
In effect, the institutional and epistemological requirements of forecasting began 
to act as constraints on communist policymakers and man­ag­ers. Some of them 
expected that computerization of decision-­making would neutralize what they 
saw as “grassroots Stalinism,” communist party informers.9 But the expected ef-
fect was also conceptual and fundamental: by outlining the negative economic, 
social, and environmental consequences of “positive” programs of development, 
forecasts influenced the po­liti­cal pro­cess of Soviet economic planning.
The Soviet experience of forecasting that is discussed in this chapter has im-
plications that apply to all modern policy contexts, be they authoritarian, lib-
eral demo­cratic, or hybrid: statistical forecasting not only challenges the 
mechanistic, linear notions of governance and creates new forms of visibility of 
transient phenomena, but it also requires a par­tic­u­lar social organ­ization of sci-
entific expertise. Furthermore, statistical forecasting is about building trust in 
data and data producing networks and institutions by enhancing transparency, 
a pro­cess theorized by Theodore Porter that was not ­limited to Western liberal 
democracies and that characterized the development of Soviet expert gover-
nance.10 The latter ele­ment, transparency, is particularly in­ter­est­ing ­because of 
its ambivalence. Transparency, as Stefano Geroulanos showed in his extensive 
study, was first criticized in French cultural debates as being part of the reper-
toire of authoritarian regimes and their striving for control. Only ­later, in the 
1980s, did transparency become a desirable feature of governance.11 The Soviet 

	
Visibility, Transparency, and Prediction	
41
debate about statistical conjectures of the ­future and the role of glasnost’ must 
be understood in this context of shifting understanding of transparency.
Statistical Forecasting in Rus­sia
The foundations of Soviet social and economic forecasting ­were laid in the trans-
national development of modern Eu­ro­pean science in the eigh­teenth ­century, 
when the first Rus­sian scientific institutions ­were established, and in the nine-
teenth ­century in the context of the social and administrative reforms of the Rus­
sian empire. In Western Eu­rope, the first efforts to collect quantitative data 
describing population, natu­ral resources, and the economy started in parallel with 
the first scientific revolution and the expansion and institutionalization of the 
modern state in the seventeenth and eigh­teenth centuries. At the same time, re-
search was extended from individual sick bodies to the health of populations, in 
relation first to nutrition and food and then hygiene. However, ­until the 1830s, 
­these studies ­were pursued by individual scholars and social improvers rather 
than governmental institutions (which, one should remember, at that time ­were 
­either very “thin” or did not exist at all).12 In Western Eu­rope, the first half of the 
nineteenth ­century saw a slow institutionalization of the emerging governance by 
numbers, often in response to what ­were perceived as social prob­lems. For in-
stance, in Britain the first statistical socie­ties, formed in the 1830s, sought to cap-
ture the composition of the “social body.” They ­were interested principally in the 
poor urban populations and the emerging figure of the “modern man,” which was 
understood as a symptom of decline and social malaise.13 This interest in reading 
symptoms of what is to come echoed the prognostications of the medieval physi-
cians, but this time the reading of signs as symptoms and the monitoring of the 
course of their change ­were applied not just to individual biological bodies but to 
social groups and populations as a ­whole. In this pro­cess, the trajectories of math-
ematical sciences, governance, and social and po­liti­cal reform began to intertwine. 
It could be suggested that clear parallels between the emergent science of social 
change and the medical epistemology of prediction ­were not a coincidence. The 
scientific knowledge of the social body had to combine the knowledge of the 
initial state of the organism and of the course of events, that is, the development 
of symptoms. To meet the criteria of modern science, as defined by Comte and 
other thinkers of the Enlightenment, the readings and conjectures of symp-
toms had to be explained with reference to general laws. Establishing ­those gen-
eral laws for populations and society, however, became a ­great challenge. To do 
this, Victorian scholars of the economy and the social drew on physics, on the 
Darwinian theory of evolution, the notion of stage-­driven development, and 

42	
CHAPTER 2
eventually mathematical laws, particularly ­those pertaining to the S-­curve, a lo-
gistical growth function which allowed a mathematical description of the pro­cess 
of change. It is impor­tant to note that the role of mathe­matics in statistical calcula-
tions increased only ­toward the end of the nineteenth ­century, when larger data 
sets became available. This is a very simplified portrayal of what was a very diverse 
and turbulent period of scientific ideas and public debates, but it sets the context 
for Soviet scientific forecasting.
In the Rus­sian empire, the first mathe­matics research department was founded 
by a prominent Swiss scholar, Leonhard Euler, who was invited to St. Petersburg in 
1727 and who made a breakthrough in what would become one of key techniques 
of forecasting, the logistical curve, a calculation device that allows data to be plot-
ted on the axes of time and rate of change—­a way to smooth disparate data that 
represents change by fitting it into a ­simple trajectory. In the beginning, mathe-
matical statistics described the changes that had occurred in the past. It is impor­
tant to understand that at this early stage, governance by numbers was mainly 
involved with mapping out the historical and the pre­sent condition of population. 
An exercise in statistical forecasting—­establishing regularities and values of the 
data in the ­future—­requires not only a lot of data on past regularities but also so-
phisticated methods of calculation. Both ele­ments ­were developed during the 
1800s. The key strand of modern scientific prediction was mathematical methods 
to work out chains of values and the rate of their change. As Smil showed in his 
helpful overview of the history of the logistical curve, the foundations for this the-
ory ­were laid by Euler in his Introduction to Analy­sis of the Infinite (1748). This 
calculative device was further developed into what became known as a sigmoid 
curve (or S-­curve) by the French mathematician Pierre Francois Verhulst, who ap-
plied the S-­curve to mea­sure population growth in 1838. Whereas the S-­curve was 
largely disregarded ­until the early twentieth ­century, mainly ­because of the lack of 
large sets of data that is required, it became the work­horse of global trends fore-
casters in the 1960s, when S-­curves ­were fitted to virtually any statistically mea­
sur­able phenomenon.14
To put it in a greatly simplified manner, a statistical forecast offers a hypoth-
esis, a systematic, mathematical method to approximate the real­ity. The statisti-
cal technicalities of this approximation seek to capture the observed regularities 
in a faithful manner and to offer a glimpse into the unobserved. This glimpse, a 
jump into the unknown, happens through extrapolation or interpolation of data 
on the basis of past patterns, where the explanation (a full account of ­causes and 
impacts) might be absent (at the moment of analy­sis, though it could be found, 
ideally, at the ­later stage). The gap between the past data and the ­future (fore-
casted) data is bridged with a beautiful mathematical invention—­the logistic 
curve or an S-­curve. Mathematical curves, as Smil put it, helped to quantify the 

	
Visibility, Transparency, and Prediction	
43
pro­cess of “growth” as a cumulative rate of change.15 Applied to economic and 
social development, growth became an explanatory and normative framework 
for the understanding of social change in the nineteenth ­century.16 In scientific 
forecasting, the theory of “quantifiable” growth served as a general law in Hem-
pel and Oppenheim’s sense, enabling explaining (predicting) relevant facts.
In the 1820s, scientists began to apply the calculations of statistical probability 
to demographic and actuarial data (both still extremely scarce at that time). A 
growing number of Rus­sian scientists received their education in Paris and 
brought back the ideas of Pierre-Simon Laplace, Siméon Poisson, Joseph Fourier, 
André-Marie Ampère, and French positivists.17 One of ­those Paris-­trained schol-
ars was the prominent mathematician Viktor Buniakovskii, who absorbed both 
the methods and the politics of the emerging field of social statistics. Like his 
contemporaries in Western Eu­rope, Buniakovskii first applied probabilistic 
methods to work out more precise and “morally justified” insurance premiums. 
He also studied Rus­sian demography and economy.18 Just like Laplace, who gifted 
his book on probability to Napoleon, Buniakovskii presented a luxuriously bound 
copy of his influential treatise Foundations of the Mathematical Theory of Proba-
bilities (1846) to Alexander II, who succeeded the throne in February 1855.19 In 
that same year the devastating loss of the Crimean War shook up the Rus­sian 
empire and marked the start of extensive modernization reforms, such as build-
ing transport infrastructure and, eventually, abolishing serfdom in the 1860s.
In response to ­these changes, the Rus­sian social hygiene movement became 
more expansive. Its members began to apply statistical theory to discern regulari-
ties and governing laws from the ebb and flow of births, deaths, profits, and 
losses, all of which ­were becoming vis­i­ble thanks to the growing body of data. In 
­doing this, Rus­sian social reformers and demographers ­were relying on the posi-
tivist ideas. Starting in the 1840s, Auguste Comte’s ideas ­were introduced in Rus­
sia and protoso­cio­log­i­cal research began to emerge ­after the 1860s reforms.20 The 
small educated social circles ­were receptive to the Enlightenment ideas of the par-
allel technical and moral pro­gress of humankind, espoused by Comte, Turgot, 
and Condorcet.21 Social reform and demographic research was, even more so 
than in Western Eu­rope, an elite minority pursuit: the literacy rates in the Rus­
sian empire remained very low ­until the end of the ­century: only 45.3 ­percent of 
inhabitants in urban Rus­sia could read, according to the 1897 census.22
Rus­sian reformers and social thinkers also faced ­great difficulties in bridging 
ideas, mathematical methods, and empirical data. Imperial governance by num-
bers was still at the embryonic stage: population statistics ­were gathered in a 
patchy way, dispersed across dif­fer­ent administrations and research institutions. 
Numbers ­were not trusted: it was widely recognized that ­those few statistics that 
­were available ­were often false; for instance, pervasive fiscal obscurity worried tax 

44	
CHAPTER 2
collectors.23 The prevailing mode of governmental engagement with the provid-
ers of numbers was through inspections and revisions, the spirit of which was 
profoundly captured in Nikolai Gogol’s The Government Inspector (1836). Math-
ematical competence that would be greater than ­simple accounting skills was 
also lacking. Indeed, the shortage of mathematically trained statisticians would 
plague Rus­sia for another ­century, ­until the 1950s.24 This said, the available statis-
tical data sets ­were growing, albeit slowly. The first “medico-­topographic sur-
veys,” which characterized the public health of the population, ­were assembled in 
the early nineteenth ­century; the majority of medical research took place in mili-
tary hospitals.25 In the 1840s, following the establishment of the Imperial Rus­sian 
Geo­graph­i­cal Society, the first attempts to classify and map ethnic populations 
­were introduced.26 This was a particularly impor­tant development; it was where 
the study of the ­future economic use of natu­ral resources was conducted along-
side mapping indigenous ­peoples and assessing their role in the ­future society. In 
this pro­cess the Rus­sian empire saw an incremental birth of its own version of the 
Humboldtian systems science.27 The modernization of the empire, the need to 
account for its natu­ral trea­sures and ­peoples, drove the institutionalization of 
modern science. In the 1850s and 1860s, a plethora of scientific socie­ties was es-
tablished in Rus­sia; scientific knowledge was promoted in the public through 
their publications.28
The scoping of natu­ral resources, monitoring of the weather, and the health 
of the social body ­were becoming part of the imperial governmental imagina-
tion. A department of social hygiene was established at the Ministry of Internal 
Affairs in 1863, large-­scale medical research was launched in military hospitals, 
local statistics ­were gathered by new regional governmental administrations 
(zemstva) from 1864.29 However, the imperial Rus­sian social body was not scru-
tinized to the same extent as in Western Eu­rope, not only ­because of the short-
age of scholars but also ­because of the structurally dif­fer­ent social real­ity: 
Rus­sians did not have the Western prob­lem of “the modern man,” ­there was a 
lack of rural–­urban movement and Rus­sia remained an agrarian society.30 In 
turn, the social hygiene movement, led by physicians, focused on the introduc-
tion of basic medical ser­vices rather than solving acute public health prob­lems 
faced by the intensively urbanized Western Eu­ro­pean socie­ties.
The emerging fields of public health could enjoy the status of proper science 
only if general laws, characterizing patterns of growth and change, ­were avail-
able to justify the gathering and interpretation of the data. Attempts to formulate 
­those general laws abounded: as Nikolai Krementsov showed in his study of Rus­
sian eugenic thought, scholars widely borrowed from Western thought on social 
improvement, particularly from the newly established fields of research into 
­human physiology and psy­chol­ogy. The Rus­sian intelligent­sia sought to discover 

	
Visibility, Transparency, and Prediction	
45
a scientific way to assess “pro­gress” and plan the ­future society, inspired by Dar-
winian ideas of evolution, environmental ethnogenesis, and Marxist dialectics. 
They also worried about decline and degeneration.31 As a writer Shelgunov put it 
in 1863, “history—­the physiology and pathology of the collective man—­defines 
­those inescapable laws that regulate the healthy development of a social organ-
ism.”32 This health, however, was no longer written in the stars, as Boris Kurakin, 
the prominent Rus­sian diplomat and writer on astrology of the early eigh­teenth 
­century would have believed, but to be found with the modern instruments of 
empirical research and carefully considered insights from statistics.33
If ­human nature, however amenable for intervention, changes slowly, nothing 
changes faster than weather and economic fortunes. As Jamie Pietruska showed in 
her fascinating study, the first statistical forecasts in the United States ­were devel-
oped in the nineteenth ­century to inform farmers and traders about ­future crops. 
The early US forecasters made calculations using data from locally observed 
weather and estimates of the productivity of soils. ­These forecasts soon came to be 
regarded as a valuable commodity in their own right. They ­were bought and sold 
and constituted an impor­tant part of the grain market.34 In the Rus­sian empire, 
weather monitoring began ­under Peter the ­Great in the first half of the eigh­teenth 
­century. The first meteorological observation stations ­were established in Siberia 
in the 1700s. The first systematic attempts to prospect for natu­ral resources and 
predict weather dated to 1849, when the Central Physical Laboratory was estab-
lished in St. Petersburg. Starting in 1872, this laboratory began to publish weather 
forecasts. However, at that time Rus­sian social hygienists, biologists, meteorolo-
gists, and other natu­ral scientists just did not have the same kind of data to draw 
on about population, crop yields, and natu­ral resources as US forecasters.35 The 
surveys ­were fragmented: the widespread censorship did not encourage produc-
tion and distribution of data. The situation did not improve ­until the first (and the 
last) population census was held in the Rus­sian empire in 1897.36
Rus­sian society was becoming intensively alert to anticipated changes, particu-
larly as the nineteenth ­century was coming to end. The emerging late imperial 
“prediction culture” did not yet feature what would be known as a statistical fore-
cast.37 The subjects of the Rus­sian empire, as Yuri Slezkine showed, turned ­either 
to “prophets, soothsayers and itinerant preachers” or to Marxian “prediction” of 
the ­future, emplotted in the drama of universal decline, which spoke to the mille-
narian sensibility.38 The nascent communist movement could be situated in the 
context of this greatly diverse population of future-­tellers. As Slezkine put it, “A 
conversion to socialism was a conversion to the intelligent­sia, to a fusion of mille-
narian faith and lifelong learning.”39 Even in the 1920s, as Richard Stites discussed, 
peasants ­were targeted by propaganda encouraging them to trust what ­were per-
ceived as “godless,” scientific forecasting rather than their own instinct.40 Rus­sian 

46	
CHAPTER 2
peasants had their own approach to the economy, their key spokesman being the 
prominent economist Aleksandr Chayanov (1888–1937), who situated the peasant 
economy in a material and social space that was dif­fer­ent from the one envisioned 
by imperial and state planners and which was not captured in a statistical form.41 
In this re­spect Rus­sian peasants ­were not an exception: as Beckert suggested, 
drawing on Pierre Bourdieu’s study of Algerian peasants’ approach to the ­future, 
the statistically mediated economic vision did not fit easily with the agrarian pre-
diction culture.42
The diagnostic and prognostic lenses developed by physicians to cure an indi-
vidual body ­were eventually applied to monitor and, ­later, predict the health of 
society and the national economy.43 Forecasting was informed by a modern sci-
entific sensibility, acutely aware of the cumulative character of physical and social 
phenomena. For instance, ethnography, a science that developed alongside geol-
ogy and geography—­initially, in the context of museum collections—­theorized 
and localized the cumulative change of ­human cultures in relation to the geologi-
cal knowledge of the Earth’s layers.44 The ­will to predict and to do this “scientifi-
cally” was fueled by the belief that ­future dynamics could be made both vis­i­ble 
and transparent, and amenable to change. Once the cumulative past was charted 
and theorized, once providence was revealed by the emerging discipline of pro-
fessional history, once quantitative data became increasingly available, the insti-
tutional and po­liti­cal foundations for scientific forecasting could be laid.45 The 
next section pre­sents the institutionalization of forecasting and its use for state 
planning purposes in what became Soviet Rus­sia.
Prediction and Early Soviet Planning
While the nineteenth-­century social improvers gathered quantifiable snapshots 
of populations, in the early twentieth ­century their interest shifted to the study of 
complex interactions of societal and economic systems and the predictive use of 
statistical data. A growing governmental apparatus facilitated this interest. In this 
section I pre­sent at length the ideas of Nikolai Kondrat’ev (1892–1938), the pio-
neering Rus­sian economic forecaster, positivist thinker, and theorist of prediction. 
Kondrat’ev was a student of Mikhail Kovalevskii, known as the first Rus­sian soci-
ologist, president of the Imperial ­Free Economic Society (1915–1916), and founder 
of the first sociology department at Vladimir Bekhterev’s Institute of Psychoneu-
rology in St. Petersburg. Kovalevskii also authored a study on economic growth in 
Eu­rope (1898–1903). During his studies at Bekhterev’s institute, Kondrat’ev be-

	
Visibility, Transparency, and Prediction	
47
came close friends with Pitirim Sorokin, who was influenced by Emile Durkheim’s 
sociology (and would ­later leave Rus­sia to become established at Harvard).46 
Kondrat’ev excelled in mathematical statistics and was interested in so­cio­log­i­cal 
approaches and economic history. In the wake of the communist revolution in 
1917, experts in any fields of scientific and technical knowledge ­were rare, ­because 
the rates of literacy and higher education ­were extremely low across the peasant 
and worker estates, hence many of the gradu­ates hailing from upper strata of soci-
ety ­were directly enrolled in the Soviet state-­building proj­ect.47
As mentioned ­earlier, Rus­sian imperial population statistics had been system-
atically gathered in regional governmental agencies (zemstva) since 1864. This 
task was centralized ­under the Central Statistical Agency, which was created by 
the Bolshevik government in 1918 and which remained the primary number 
cruncher ­until the Soviet Union collapsed in 1991.48 However, the agency lacked 
competence to analyze this data; many of its staff had only basic mathematical 
education, often in accounting.49 To fill this gap of expertise, at the age of twenty-­
eight Kondrat’ev created the Conjuncture Institute at the former Imperial Agri-
cultural Acad­emy in Moscow in 1920. The institute pioneered the development 
of economic indicators to forecast the economic development of Rus­sia (prog-
nozirovanie).50 Kondrat’ev’s Conjuncture Institute was one of the first of its kind. 
Its rationale was inspired by the US National Bureau of Economic Research 
(NBER), which was also established in 1920 by a group of business and progres-
sive politicians, and directed by the Columbia economist Wesley Mitchell, who 
was known for his work on business cycles. Like Kondrat’ev’s institute, NBER 
also developed economic indicators, a field of research that had emerged in the 
United States in the 1890s and which was gaining an increasing prominence, 
largely thanks to the work of Russian-­American economist Simon Kuznets, who 
joined NBER in 1927.51 Similar institutes for macroeconomic forecasting ­were 
established in Cambridge (UK), Paris (1921), and Germany (1925).52 At that time 
it was considered that both cap­i­tal­ist and communist economies had similar in-
formational needs to be served by statistics. In postrevolutionary Rus­sia it was 
hoped that economic indicators would help operationalize the Soviet theory of 
economic growth. Based on Karl Marx’s distinction between producer goods and 
consumer goods, the Soviet theory of growth received its canonical expression 
in the writings of Grigorii Feldman, who offered a conceptual separation of the 
productive (industrial) and nonproductive (ser­vices) sectors of the economy in 
1928. Growth, it was believed, could be achieved only by directing capital in-
vestments to the productive sector, particularly the heavy industries.53 However, 
translating this theory into policy posed a difficult if not impossible task for plan-
ners. Regardless of the centralized statistical agency, collection of statistical 
data was extremely fragmented. It was hoped that this could be ameliorated by 

48	
CHAPTER 2
the Conjuncture Institute, which joined the ranks of the many 1920s agencies 
that turned to amassing quantifiable data on the economy, ­labor, and society.54
The prob­lem with the economy was that it was demonstrably unstable. The 
question was ­whether ­these instabilities ­were a pathology, which could be cor-
rected by returning the economy to its equilibrium state, or ­whether they ­were 
a defining characteristic of the system.55 A chain of painful recessions, as histo-
rians showed, created the demand for economic forecasting in the nineteenth-­
century United States.56 Kondrat’ev, like his Western counter­parts, was interested 
in both predicting and taming business cycles of boom and bust. Indeed, his 
name would become internationally known in relation to his theory of “long 
waves”—­business cycles lasting forty-­five to sixty years, called by the Austrian 
economist Joseph Schumpeter “Kondrat’ev cycles.”57 For us it is impor­tant that 
Kondrat’ev was also interested in the scientific status of economic knowledge, 
particularly forecasting: What made statistical forecasting a science and not a 
mere guess or estimate?
In 1926, Kondrat’ev published an essay “On the Prob­lem of Foresight” 
(predvidenie), to my knowledge the first extended piece of writing on scientific 
prediction in Rus­sia. In this essay, Kondrat’ev, who read En­glish, German, and 
French, drew on what was an established canon of the philosophy of science at that 
time, mainly the positivism of Auguste Comte, Ernst Mach, and Emile Durkheim. 
He also engaged with the con­temporary writings on the methodology of statistical 
forecasting, as well as French so­cio­log­i­cal debates on prediction (prévision) in so-
cial research. The latter interest was ­shaped by his tutor Kovalevskii who, during 
his exile in France, founded what was considered to be the first French school of 
sociology, the Rus­sian School of Advanced Social Studies in Paris (1901–1906).58 
The footnotes of Kondrat’ev’s “On the Prob­lem of Foresight” contain references to 
much French positivist thought, including articles in the Revue international de 
sociologie, a publication of the Paris Sociology Society, established by René Worms, 
whom Kondrat’ev met at Bekhterev’s institute.59 Kondrat’ev drew extensively on a 
positivist argument on prediction, presented in the Revue by Pericles Grimanelli, a 
proponent of positivism in social research who also served as a director general of 
prisons in several French départements. Kondrat’ev expanded Grimanelli’s ideas 
on prediction with insights from statistical theory adding a greater emphasis on 
the uncertain character of the phenomena in the context of both social research 
and socioeconomic governance.60
In his writing, Kondrat’ev used several synonyms for prediction: predskazanie 
(prediction), predvidenie (foresight, prevision), and prognoz (prognosis, also used 
for what in En­glish is termed forecast). He opens his argumentation with the 
Comtean postulate that all proper science is based on prediction and that predic-
tion is necessary for governmental action. According to Kondrat’ev, planning is 

	
Visibility, Transparency, and Prediction	
49
pos­si­ble only on the basis of “scientific knowledge and foresight.”61 But by writing 
this Kondrat’ev does not suggest that such knowledge is readily available and per-
fect foresight is achievable; he rather develops this statement as a criticism of the 
problematic statistical and administrative realities in postrevolutionary Rus­sia. 
Initially, his discussion of prediction follows a typical positivist argument. Previ-
sion, writes Kondrat’ev, can be defined as knowledge of two types of events, the 
ones that are not yet known and the ones that have not yet happened. The relations 
and transition between the known and the unknown events must be scientifically 
explained. ­These relations can also be quantifiable and described mathematically. 
It is precisely this focus on the relations and transition between the known and 
unknown that makes prediction scientific, dif­fer­ent from common sense, from a 
mere guess.62 Like Comte, Kondrat’ev differentiates between scientific prediction 
and “prophecy,” the latter being based on a belief in super­natural forces that gov-
ern ­these transitions between known and unknown events.63
However, unlike Comte, and like ­later positivists, Kondrat’ev is particularly 
alert to the difficulty of knowing ­these transitions between events. This type of 
knowledge, which is the basis of forecasting, is hardest to achieve. At the same 
time, it is imperative. Kondrat’ev draws heavi­ly on Durkheim, particularly his 
Rules of the So­cio­log­i­cal Method, to argue that the study of the evolutionary char-
acter of social events and the transition between them is at the core of social 
research. As Durkheim puts it, “The stages through which humanity successively 
passes do not engender each other. We can well understand how the pro­gress 
realized in a given era in the fields of law, economics and politics, ­etc., makes 
fresh pro­gress pos­si­ble, but how does the one predetermine the other?”64 Dur-
kheim continues: “We can certainly say how ­things have succeeded each other 
up the pre­sent, but not in what order they ­will follow subsequently, ­because the 
cause on which they supposedly depend is not scientifically determined, nor can 
it be so determined.”65 Facing economic science, a field that was just coming into 
being and in which the basic characteristic data ­were very scarce, Kondrat’ev did 
not share Durkheim’s optimism about knowing even the “pre­sent events,” not 
to mention the ­future.66 Kondrat’ev’s skepticism was rooted in the evolutionary 
and biological concept of cumulative real­ity, according to which ­every given po-
sition (or data) is not exchangeable with the other positions. As he put it, eco-
nomic and social “events” are strongly individual and the links between them 
are difficult to capture with existing methods. ­Here Kondrat’ev is leaving the do-
main of Laplacian social physics, which, as Philip Mirowski showed, would 
become a preferred epistemological accommodation for neoclassical econo-
mists.67 Instead, Kondrat’ev’s conceptual architecture allows for greater com-
plexity, where the ­whole and individual parts are understood as interconnected, 
evolving systems rather than static, physical positions, an approach that reso-

50	
CHAPTER 2
nated with the insights that ­were articulated in Soviet Rus­sian and Western neu-
rophysiology at that time.68
If for Comte the ability to predict was an ultimate criterion of the scientificity 
of knowledge, for Kondrat’ev prognosis (prognoz) means “a working hypothesis” 
rather than a statement of certain facts.69 Kondrat’ev’s argument is as follows. 
Some phenomena are more predictable than ­others. For instance, astronomic 
events appear to be quite regular and can be scientifically predicted, unlike 
weather and ­human be­hav­ior, which are highly complex and volatile. Prediction is 
pos­si­ble only when the transition between events (from A to B) follows a law that 
could be discovered by science. Now, ­these laws could be very ­simple (static) or 
very complex (dynamic). However, even in the case of static laws, a model of indi-
vidual causalities, such as the initial state and primary constellations, may not be 
fully known. Even if individual causalities are known, they might not be sufficient: 
one cannot simply add up causalities that may apply to a singular event to predict 
a long and complex course of events. In the end this means that the combination of 
both empirical knowledge of causality and knowledge of general laws is necessary 
for scientific prediction. However, even if ­these criteria are satisfied, scientific pre-
dictions are only approximations, they do not offer full certainty.
Kondrat’ev also considers existing methods for making scientific judgment, 
such as induction, deduction, a historical-­comparative method, and statistics (of 
which he is particularly fond) and concludes that they all have their uses but also 
significant limitations.70 He ends his essay listing dif­fer­ent types of limitations 
that scientific prediction can face. ­These include the lack of richness of data, the 
long term, the ­factor of ­human intervention, and what he describes as the lack of 
the autonomy of the field (by this he means the level of complexity).71 Kondrat’ev 
is also very critical of his very own field of research, namely the statistical model-
ing of business cycles and economic growth. This method, he writes, is highly 
imperfect, it remains to be developed. Economic prevision, argues Kondrat’ev, 
could be considered a good scientific prediction if it could localize a par­tic­u­lar 
event in space and time, estimating the event’s “intensity.”72 But to think that this 
was achievable was nothing short of utopian. Such skepticism was not uncom-
mon in Kondrat’ev’s intellectual milieu. For instance, in 1927, Kondrat’ev’s close 
friend Sorokin entirely dismissed the predictive claims of the theories of business 
cycles ­because Sorokin did not believe that ­these theories could be scientifically 
proven. However, Sorokin admitted that regularity of events is what makes social 
science pos­si­ble at all; the perceptions of trends and tendencies can serve a heu-
ristic function, helping uncover causalities and formulate general laws.73
In his pioneering essay, Kondrat’ev addressed the key issues of the epistemol-
ogy of scientific prediction that would go on to define the debate for the re-
mainder of the twentieth ­century. One of the key prob­lems that forecasters have 

	
Visibility, Transparency, and Prediction	
51
been trying to bridge is the trade-­off between the precision of prediction (its em-
pirical content) and its location on the time and space axes (telling what exactly 
is ­going to happen at a par­tic­u­lar time and place—or point forecasts). Although 
he did not suggest that it is fundamentally impossible to achieve this sort of pre-
diction in fields such as meteorology, “socioeconomic disciplines,” and “psy­
chol­ogy sciences,” he could not see this happening in a near ­future.74 Kondrat’ev 
judged the existing work on business cycles as indicative at best, lacking con-
creteness, ergo useless for decision-­making.
Kondrat’ev also addressed the performative and pragmatic character of scien-
tific prediction. He wrote that the scientific status and usefulness of prediction’s 
outcomes depended on its “purpose,” by which he meant its context of use, the 
link with governmental or managerial practice. Scientific prediction, in this way, 
is deeply relational—­both in terms of its epistemology and its social context.75 I 
suggest that Kondrat’ev’s notion of prediction contains seeds of thinking about 
scientific prognosis as a component of adaptive be­hav­ior. This emphasis is not 
surprising, ­because it is very likely that Kondrat’ev was exposed to the theories of 
coevolution of the environment and organisms as they ­were developed by 
Bekhterev in his work on reflexology.76 Indeed, I would situate Kondrat’ev’s un-
derstanding of the social and economic dynamic in the context of the emerging 
nonmechanistic approach to order. For instance, the restrictive positivist reduc-
tionism, based on the material models of physics, was criticized in Soviet neuro-
psychology by the prominent scholar and the founder of the field Alexander 
Luria. According to Luria, the mechanistically deterministic neurological theory 
failed to explain the way in which brain, organism, and be­hav­ior interact: “the 
conception of ‘organ­ization’ is to a certain degree opposed to a mechanical con-
ception of the organism [understood] as an equilibrium of its component parts, 
in that it is adequate for an analy­sis of some of the more complicated pro­cesses of 
­human be­hav­ior.”77 Like Luria, Kondrat’ev questioned deterministic models of 
the economy. One could not simply proceed from parts to the ­whole; neither the 
organism nor the economy was “a mosaic,” but rather “the complex interweaving 
of superimposed systems,” as Geroulanos and Meyers put it.78
In 1926, the first Soviet census was taken. The dizzying number of calcula-
tions of ­future prices, industrial outputs, and crop yields formed the basis for 
the first Five-­Year Plan. ­These calculations ­were not, Kondrat’ev wrote clearly 
and repeatedly, scientific forecasts. Indeed, the Five-­Year Plan was more like an 
astrological conjecture than a scientific prognosis ­because it ignored the ­actual 
course of events. Tracking the ­actual course of events and adjusting the plan to 
it was actually proposed by the first Planning Committee. However, as I show 
in the remainder of this chapter, the interwar approach to planning that was en-
dorsed by the party remained a mixture of simplistic positivism and what 

52	
CHAPTER 2
I would call astrological conjectures. ­There was no room for hypothesis testing, 
falsification, and adjustment. The practice of planning paid ­little heed to the com-
plex and cumulative character of the economy and the social.
Prediction between Astrological  
Conjecture and Management
The building of the new Soviet state entailed building new infrastructures and 
their construction inevitably led to what Chris Otter described as a modern 
“growth of government” by enrolling vast numbers of experts, a phenomenon 
that had emerged in the liberal Britain of the 1840s and that characterized the 
first Soviet government in the 1920s.79 As Stephen Collier noted, the first proper 
infrastructural proj­ect in Rus­sia that went beyond local and regional “works” 
was the building of the national electric grid. In 1920, a body of experts, the State 
Commission for Electrification of Rus­sia (GOELRO) was launched to develop a 
fifteen-­year state plan for the development of electrical infrastructure. GOELRO 
planners and engineers became aware that the costly and large-­scale infrastruc-
ture of the electricity grid could not be developed without very precise knowl-
edge of the types and locations of the ­future industries to be served by it. 
Furthermore, as the horizon of the implementation of the plan extended to at 
least fifteen years, the planning had to anticipate ­future technology changes.80 
This, in turn, led to the understanding that planning should be informed by the 
history of science and technology, which was expected to give insight in the “laws 
of development” of the nascent industrial society.81
The GOELRO proj­ect led to the institutionalization of centralized national 
planning in Soviet Rus­sia and the establishment of a central planning commission 
(Gosplan). At Gosplan methods of long-­term planning ­were developed by many 
scholars, including Vladimir Bazarov, born Rudnev (1874–1939). A childhood 
friend of the pioneering systems theorist Aleksander Malinovskii-­Bogdanov, Ba-
zarov was interested in mea­sur­ing economic growth. He contributed methodologi-
cal guidelines for the Five-­Year Plan, which was the first perspective plan 
(perspektyvnyi plan) in 1921–1929. Convinced that technoscientific development 
was a continuous pro­cess that could not be wholly determined beforehand, Bazarov 
published articles claiming that Soviet plans should avoid specifying the means and 
ends in minute detail. Instead the plans should be open-­ended “plan-­prognoses.” 
Indicating that policy mea­sures would be adjusted as the need arose, this ap-
proach stated the need for an open and flexible framework to govern the ­future.82
Kondrat’ev was highly critical of the system of Soviet planning and, although 
he was sympathetic with Bazarov’s attempt to bring some conceptual discipline 

	
Visibility, Transparency, and Prediction	
53
to what he described as a chaos of “mass planning,” he critiqued even Bazarov’s 
approach for being confused and insufficiently scientifically grounded. In his es-
say “Plan and Foresight” (1927), Kondrat’ev presented a carefully argued and dev-
astating critique of the first planners’ claim for scientificity and ­will to forecast. 
His verdict was merciless: he called the Five-­Year Plan “bad and illusory,” “built 
on sand,” and an example of “autohypnosis” by numbers.83 The key prob­lem with 
the perspective plan, according to Kondrat’ev, was that Soviet planners set out 
to complete an impossible task: to specify all goals and objectives, as well as the 
mea­sures to achieve them in ­great detail. This approach to planning, also criti-
cized by Bazarov, could not be implemented ­because all the available calculations 
­were wrong: they ­were based on insufficient data and established without a proper 
understanding of under­lying pro­cesses. Most detrimentally, the plan required 
accuracy in identifying what would happen at the set location and time in the 
long term. It can be useful to remind the reader that the early Soviet planning 
used three types of plans: operational plans for one year, perspective plans for 
three to five years, and general plans for ten to fifteen years.84 Kondrat’ev called 
the five-­year plans “five-­year hypotheses,” although he was not against planning 
itself.85 In his discussion, he invoked Comte’s statement that “plan without previ-
sion is nothing.”86 How to plan then if scientific possibilities for prevision are ex-
tremely ­limited?
Kondrat’ev proposed what was essentially a separation of operational and 
strategic planning. In this he drew on what was an established practice in major 
Western infrastructure companies, which, for instance, built railways and gas 
and oil rigs and used a rudimentary economic prevision in their planning. ­These 
infrastructure proj­ects, wrote Kondrat’ev, ­were based on a “deep analy­sis” of eco-
nomic and market trends. However, this well-­founded expertise did not seek to 
predict ­those trends with ­great accuracy and certainty. Instead, it sought to es-
tablish the par­ameters of the minimum rentability of the planned infrastruc-
ture. This general positioning in the wider economic, po­liti­cal, and social context 
(a strategy) was completely missing from the Soviet five-­year plans. Minimum 
rentability was not considered. Plans, for Kondrat’ev, had to be reasonably prac-
tical and “realistic.” Unfortunately, as he showed in his essay, this is not what 
happened in Soviet planning, although enormous volumes of numbers and 
graphs ­were produced, describing in detail the sectors that ­were planned and 
depicting their state in the ­future. Calculations of separate components of the 
economy, the balance method, ­were mechanistically glued together. They could 
give some insight into the regularities that occurred in the past but ­were not suit-
able to scientifically forecast the ­future. For Kondrat’ev, ­these plans manifested 
“excessive courage” to make an accurate and detailed long-­term prediction.87 
This, argued Kondrat’ev, was not scientifically pos­si­ble in the field of society and 

54	
CHAPTER 2
economy. Moreover, this gargantuan task was duplicated by a ­great many dif­
fer­ent agencies, thus wasting institutional resources.88
To rectify the situation, Kondrat’ev wanted to see a “summary orientation” 
of control figures, which would give “confidence” to policymakers and man­ag­
ers to run their enterprises and sectors skillfully. In ­these orientations, the un-
certainties of understanding society and the economy should not be hidden but 
made vis­i­ble. Genuinely scientific planning, according to Kondrat’ev, would be 
based on forecasts as “hypotheses,” which would not be masked as truths. Hy-
potheses would inform operational and perspective plans, where the plans would 
not be “official directives” (kazennaia direktiva), but “guiding directives,” the 
implementation of which would require “maximal creative flexibility.”89 This ap-
proach to scientific governance as guidance would return in the 1970s and 
1980s in the work of the mathematician Nikita Moiseev, which I discuss in chap-
ter 7. However, in the 1920s and 1930s, planning remained dominated by ad 
hoc production of numbers that had ­little relation to real­ity and, as Kondrat’ev 
put it, in some fortunate cases, ­little impact on practice. Kondrat’ev’s approach 
was strongly resisted by other planning thinkers. His most prominent opponent 
was Stanislav Strumilin, who advocated what was called a teleological approach 
to planning (completely unrelated to the flexible goal-­steering teleology, theo-
rized ­later by Norbert Wiener).90
The autohypnosis by numbers and the quasi-­religious search for certainty in the 
1920s and 1930s does stand out starkly as overcompensation in the context of the 
dearth of statistics in the preceding ­century. The communist state builders ­were 
determined to use science to modernize the state and society: mathematical meth-
ods ­were promoted in life sciences and social sciences in publications like Statis-
tical Method in Scientific Investigation (1925).91 Alongside economic planning, 
scientific management was introduced as a priority expertise area that was ex-
pected to lift the Soviet population out of poverty by increasing efficiency and the 
productivity of ­labor. Inspired by American Taylorism and Fordism, the move-
ment nauchnaia organizatsiia truda (NOT) emerged in the 1910s and 1920s to 
develop “scientific” methods of ­labor. The relation between management, eco-
nomic planning, and prediction was performative: scientific management was to 
reduce the chaos of the economy by making economic activities more regular and 
routine and, accordingly, more predictable (in the sense of being amenable to in-
terpolation). At the same time, management thinkers engaged with epistemologi-
cal questions of chronology and synchronization. Their principal interest was, of 
course, efficiency of ­labor and the use of resources. However, like their Western 
counter­parts, Soviet management thinkers wrestled with complex questions about 

	
Visibility, Transparency, and Prediction	
55
the epistemology of order and the nature of cognitive and behavioral communica-
tion and control.92 One of the first systematic Rus­sian thinkers about the role of 
time in management was the French-­educated Valerian Murav’ev, a research sec-
retary at the Central Institute for ­Labor, founded by Aleksei Gastev in Moscow, 
1920.93 Murav’ev’s essay “The Mastery of Time as the Key Task in the Organ­ization 
of Work” (1924) elaborated the Einsteinian notion of time and relativity, formu-
lated in 1905. For Murav’ev, if time ­were understood as an expression of the mate-
rial relations between ­things, it would be pos­si­ble to know the ­future by studying 
­these abstracted sequences of material relations. As he put it, time is “nothing ­else 
but change and movement.” In the same way as Laplace, for Murav’ev to scientifi-
cally predict the ­future meant accumulating knowledge about pos­si­ble configura-
tions of ­things and their relations, and then sequencing ­these configurations. 
Murav’ev reflected on the systematicity of ­those multiple relationships. However, 
his writing belongs to idealist philosophy; he does not engage with positivist de-
bates, but rather with Hegel and Bergson, contrasting the “blind and stupid” natu­
ral time with time as a result of rational ­human activity.94 Unlike Kondrat’ev, 
Murav’ev did not address the prob­lem of data, complexity, scale, and policy inter-
vention as part of the proj­ect of the knowing the ­future.
The positivist striving for precision was expressed in the behaviorist meth-
ods of time control, developed in Rus­sian time and motion studies. Gastev, to-
gether with Platon Kerzhentsev, a journalist and member of the communist 
government, founded what was called the League of Time, a group that, between 
1923 to 1925, sought to “systematize time” through planning, aiming to trans-
form what they perceived as inefficient and backward practices of Soviet indus-
tries and administration by introducing precision: “Instead of ‘maybe,’ an exact 
calculation; instead of ‘in some way,’ a well thought-­through plan; instead of 
‘somehow,’ a scientific method; instead of ‘in some time,’ at 20 hours 35 minutes 
on the 15th of October.”95 Time, wrote Kerzhentsev, is “a material value” and 
therefore must be bud­geted and accounted for.96 It was once again a simplistic 
Laplacian approach: when ­future configurations are sequenced properly, they can 
be controlled, and controlled precisely.97 However, not all forms of managerial 
control ­were conceived as a linear pro­cess that could be described logistically and 
rationalized. For instance, in the same institute at the same time, a prominent 
Rus­sian neurophysiologist Nikolai Bernshtein (1896–1966) formulated a notion 
of biomechanics as a cycle constituting of actions and corrections, which, ­later in 
the 1940s, he called a “reflex circle.”98 Many more examples could be invoked to 
support my case, but my point is that in postrevolutionary Rus­sia ­there ­were di-
verging approaches to what is a proper scientific prediction in state governance. 
On the one hand, ­there was understanding of ­great complexity of social and eco-
nomic phenomena which constrained the reach of scientific prediction. On the 

56	
CHAPTER 2
other hand, the urgency of economic development, the logic of po­liti­cal bureau-
cracy, and the positivist thrust of management science propagated “illusory” pre-
dictions which did not meet even the positivist epistemological criteria as science, 
but which nonetheless ­were legitimized as scientific. The notion of scientific 
prediction as a crucial part of scientific hypothesis-­making was maintained by a 
wide range of innovative scholars. The criterion of predictability served as a test of 
knowledge, demanding better quality data, better models of dynamic relations, 
and, in the economy, strategic planning and flexible management. However, the 
very attempt to predict scientifically challenged the mechanistic contention that 
governed objects—be they ­human bodies, firms, or large-­scale technical systems—­
were fundamentally knowable. Soviet Rus­sian neurophysiologists, economists, 
and sociologists argued just that.99 At the same time, they insisted that proper 
governance should be based on heuristic, scientific forecasting.
In the 1930s, macroeconomic statistics would become of ­great interest to govern-
ments seeking to understand and cope with the ­Great Depression. Although, as 
Matthias Schmelzer noted, extensive quantitative descriptions of national econo-
mies came to full existence only in the 1950s, for the interwar period ­there was a 
sense of urgency of making the workings of a failing economy vis­i­ble and finding 
a remedy.100 Some of ­those pioneering efforts in producing such visibility by num-
bers belonged to Rus­sian émigrés, such as Simon Kuznets, who was asked to esti-
mate the US national income in 1934, a joint effort that led to the establishment of 
the notion of gross domestic product (GDP) as a mea­sure­ment following the Bret-
ton Woods agreement (1944), and Wassily Leontief, who directed the production 
of an input–­output ­table to calculate the US postwar economy at Harvard in the 
1940s.101
In parallel to this growth of governmental demand for numbers, in Stalin’s 
Soviet Union the intellectual prob­lem of making economic and social complex-
ity vis­i­ble, predictable, and governable was largely replaced with a po­liti­cal strug­
gle for power: the ­great purges. Shortly ­after Kondrat’ev published his The Long 
Wave Cycle (1928), in which he argued that the ongoing decline of cap­i­tal­ist econ-
omies could be explained as a stage in a long cycle, thus indirectly suggesting 
that capitalism’s decline was not an expression of “internal contradictions,” as 
Marx and Lenin would have it, the Conjuncture Institute was shut down. Some 
of Kondrat’ev’s researchers ­were lucky to change their field of application, mov-
ing to meteorological studies or the pure mathematical development of time se-
ries methods, and survived the purges.102 Kondrat’ev himself was not that lucky 
and was executed.

	
Visibility, Transparency, and Prediction	
57
Soviet planning pro­cesses, as detailed by Peter Rutland and then Paul Greg-
ory, remained conceptually confused and disor­ga­nized. Only five-­year plans pro-
vided some general guidelines, albeit in a highly aggregated manner.103 Many 
Soviet workers remained unskilled and their living conditions ­were often worse 
than before the revolution.104 Soviet management scientists lacked basic equip-
ment to conduct their experiments or to train man­ag­ers.105 That many time and 
motion studies could not be empirically conducted for a lack of stopwatches was 
one of the lesser concerns: the changing po­liti­cal climate would soon claim the 
very lives of the scientific time man­ag­ers. Gosplan itself was purged in 1937, 
Murav’ev was sentenced to death on po­liti­cal grounds but died from disease be-
fore the execution. Like Kondrat’ev, Gastev and Kerzhentsev ­were executed be-
tween 1938 and 1940. Access to their work was forbidden to the public and 
specialists. The work of Gastev and Kerzhentsev would be republished in the mid-
1960s, but the work by Murav’ev and Bazarov would become available in Rus­sian 
only in the 1990s. Although Kondrat’ev’s work on long waves was discussed in 
specialist circles, such as the International Institute of Applied Systems Analy­sis 
(IIASA) in Austria in the late 1970s and 1980s, his writings would be first made 
available to Soviet audiences in 1984.106 The development of mathematical meth-
ods to describe and predict complex dynamics would be retained in the applied 
fields of electronics, mechanics, and logistics, particularly the methods of linear 
programming. However, the development of Soviet policy sciences would resume 
­after the war in dialogue with American and Western Eu­ro­pean scholarship, in 
par­tic­u­lar technology assessment. As I show in the next chapter, a fundamental 
role in opening up a space for this dialogue was played by cybernetics.

58
Whereas the first half of the twentieth ­century was characterized by the wish to 
make the economy and society more regular and predictable, the postwar pe-
riod saw the rise of concern with predictability and particularly the scientific 
and technical applications that ­were created with the purpose of prediction in 
mind. The humanities’ suspicion of scientific prediction was part of an academic 
culture that was critical of positivism, the roots of which go back to nineteenth 
­century Germany.1 It did not help that prediction and predictability formed part 
of the social changes described by Max Weber as the rationalization and bureau-
cratization of the social, expressed in the dehumanizing and mechanizing ef-
fects of Fordist and Taylorist methods of management and organ­ization science, 
programs of social engineering, and the rise of technocracy, that is rule by tech-
nically educated elites. The tragedy of the Second World War amplified ­these 
concerns, evidencing the mass destructive power of “scientific” authoritarian-
isms.2 ­After the war, the two ­great powers, the communist Soviet Union and the 
liberal demo­cratic United States, emerged from the conflict armed with new, 
unpre­ce­dented technologies of computerized servomechanisms. The emerging 
Cold War culture of surveillance and long-­range warfare further challenged the 
compatibility of scientific prediction and humanist values.
However, it was precisely in the postwar years that scientific prediction became 
more prominent than ever, thanks to its centrality in the new theory of cybernet-
ics created by the US mathematician Norbert Wiener between the 1940s and the 
1960s. In 1948, Wiener outlined a new theoretical agenda for understanding con-
3
CYBERNETIC PREDICTION AND 
LATE MODERN GOVERNANCE

	
Cybernetic Prediction and Late Modern Governance	
59
trol mechanisms in complex, dynamic systems. He called this theory or approach 
“cybernetics,” a term which he derived from the Greek word kubernētēs, meaning 
“steersman” or “governor.”3 In his cybernetics, Wiener defined the prob­lem of 
control as a prob­lem of communication and information pro­cessing, based on 
probabilistic prediction. Like the medieval mantic and conjectural knowledge, cy-
bernetics paid attention to fleeting, irregular phenomena. It sought to discern 
regular patterns in what appeared as highly irregular or chaotic phenomena. The 
key difference between ­those modern science disciplines that seek to find “order in 
chaos,” such as population statistics or natu­ral evolution, and cybernetics is that 
cybernetics is interested in goal-­oriented pro­cesses. ­These pro­cesses characterize 
conscious organisms, such as animals and ­humans, but they also could be part of 
the operation of unconscious machines or systems, such as thermostats, neural 
networks, and self-­regulating ecological systems. Wiener’s impact in conceptual-
izing behavioral prediction has been deep and lasting, particularly in the field of 
artificial intelligence (AI).4
Cybernetics addressed a wide field of natu­ral and man-­made phenomena. Its 
insights and terminology have been widely applied to analyze, model, and engi-
neer automated technologies and social organ­ization systems.5 As early as the 
1950s, humanities scholars questioned the applications of cybernetic control 
theory—as applied, for example, in the computer, electronic, and automation tech-
nologies and genetics—to understand individuals and society. Critics ­were 
particularly concerned about the contention that cybernetic prediction through 
feedback loops could help explain neural and behavioral coordination in bio-
logical organisms, as well as their interactions with the environment. They saw 
this as a threat of biological determinism that could lead to new forms of racism 
and subjugation of individuals. In the main, cultural critics identified cybernet-
ics with technocracy and saw it as a new source of authoritarianism, this time 
founded on belief in digital technology and rationality.
From the 1950s to the 1960s, ­these lines of critique ­were advocated by some of 
the most prominent thinkers on both sides of the Atlantic. In France, as Stefanos 
Geroulanos details in his extensive history of transparency as an epistemological 
and po­liti­cal idea, cybernetics was criticized by Georges Canguilhem and Jacques 
Derrida.6 Similarly, Martin Heidegger and Hannah Arendt argued that cybernet-
ics threatened dehumanizing and depoliticizing social action, ­because cybernet-
ics rendered social action as a purely technical prob­lem. Heidegger, for instance, 
stated that “cybernetics is the form of technology replacing philosophy.”7 Al-
though Arendt rarely used the very term cybernetics, she widely critiqued auto-
mation that was based on cybernetics, for instance, in The ­Human Condition 
(1958).8 In ­these and similar critiques, as Debora Hammond puts it, “cybernetics 

60	
CHAPTER 3
tends to be seen as primarily mechanistic and deterministic in its approach, de-
spite its rootedness in the recognition of contingency and indeterminacy that 
came out of nineteenth-­century work on statistics and probabilistic systems.”9
This chapter pre­sents Norbert Wiener’s approach to cybernetic prediction. It 
demonstrates that Wiener’s theory of prediction was embedded in an epistemol-
ogy friendly to uncertainty, as expressed in the idea of ­limited determinism. It is 
impor­tant to clarify Wiener’s understanding of cybernetic prediction ­because his 
writings form an impor­tant basis to manifold theoretical developments though 
they themselves became objects of criticism, misunderstanding, and rehabilita-
tion. This chapter, however, does not only provide an impor­tant background for 
the cases and argument developed in the rest of this book, it is also impor­tant in its 
own right. As John Johnston has noted, cybernetics emerged not just as a histori-
cal curiosity, but “a moment that should now be considered essential to the history 
of our pre­sent,” a “historical nexus” out of which developed the late modern epis-
temology and technology of governance.10 Indeed, the understanding of the com-
plex epistemological legacy of cybernetics is manifest in the growing scholarship 
on the heterogeneous legacy of cybernetics. For example, historians have exam-
ined how the cybernetic notion of predictive control based on feedback loops—­
transferred from the field of electronic engineering to managerial, public policy, 
and cultural discourses—­has been employed to enhance certainty, rationalization, 
and centralist direction in dif­fer­ent po­liti­cal contexts.11 Although the term cyber-
netics went out of common use in the 1970s as it was replaced with informatics (a 
term that designated a much more narrow field), the cybernetic model of predic-
tive control has continued to underpin understanding of behavioral systems, lead-
ing to the development of what Peter Galison described as Manichean sciences, or 
sciences that seek to extend control of socie­ties in the name of rationality and effi-
ciency, as well as the Cold War strug­gle between the ­great powers and, ­later, neo-
liberal competition.12 Clarifying the cybernetic notion of prediction is particularly 
impor­tant for understanding the history of Soviet scientific expertise and its im-
pacts on governance and wider public culture.
Cybernetic Prediction Beyond  
Militarized Cold War Culture
­Because Norbert Wiener’s cybernetics grew out of the Second World War defense 
effort, it acquired a lasting reputation as a military technology. Wiener’s key con-
tribution to control science was the smoothing of statistical time series theory 
which he developed to improve the automated tracking and targeting functions in 
an antiaircraft predictor, although Wiener’s work was never applied to the ­actual 

	
Cybernetic Prediction and Late Modern Governance	
61
predictor at that time, ­because weapons technology lagged ­behind his mathe­
matics.13 However, this research laid the ground for what would become Wiener’s 
cybernetics theory. Wiener broadened his theory of predictive control pro­cess into 
a wider philosophical undertaking thanks to the interactions with dif­fer­ent scien-
tists at the famous Macy conferences on cybernetics in New York (1946–1953). 
Extending his scientific engagement to a wider philosophy about the changing 
character of control in the thermodynamic world and its societal impacts, Wiener 
drew on Josiah Willard Gibbs’s statistical physics, which pointed to the contingent 
character of the universe, where “order is least probable and chaos is most proba-
ble.”14 In such a universe, one could not rely on stationary laws of Newtonian me-
chanics. New types of mechanisms for the understanding of emerging order and 
adjustment to it had to be developed. Cybernetic theory of feedback-­based control 
was one of the answers to this call; the other key components ­were fast-­developing 
radar and computer technology.15 Computer-­powered cybernetic prediction could 
make knowledge work: it could fly and shoot down planes, and schedule trans-
port logistics, but also operate electronic prosthetic limbs and machine translation 
systems.
What does it mean to predict cybernetically? For Wiener, prediction has a 
very par­tic­u­lar meaning that builds on statistical extrapolation, where inferences 
about the unknown data are made on the basis of the incomplete data in the past, 
but is not ­limited to a statistical technique.16 What makes statistical extrapola-
tion a cybernetic prediction is its area of application as logistic knowledge that 
enables action: it is the estimation of a precise phenomenon’s position in a given 
time and space, before this location actually takes place. To predict cyberneti-
cally means to gather real-­time information about the observed change in a phe-
nomenon and extrapolate a most likely trajectory of this change in the (very 
immediate) ­future. In servomechanism theory, prediction is about the extreme 
short-­term situation of a given phenomenon in time and space. It requires quan-
tifiable empirical data supplied through a sensor.
Cybernetic prediction is not just an intellectual exercise but a core part of 
steering action or be­hav­ior. It can be directed externally, as when a radar tracks 
an incoming missile and positions antimissile guns to shoot it down. It can also 
be directed internally, as when a thermostat regulates the internal temperature of 
a body or a room. Cybernetic prediction observes the changes in the phenome-
non and in the be­hav­ior of the predictor itself, seeking to align them. As Wiener 
put it, ­these observations circulate through feedback loops which govern the pre-
dictive machine on the basis of its “­actual per­for­mance” rather than “expected 
per­for­mance.” A well-­known example of a feedback mechanism is an automatic 
elevator, which ­will not let the doors open if the cabin is not in place.17 In this way, 
the feedback mechanism is about simultaneity and effective adaptation to the 

62	
CHAPTER 3
environment. In computer engineering, feedback functions as a method of con-
trol, but Wiener expanded the concept and described feedback as a form of learn-
ing. Wiener defined learning as a pro­cess in which feedback can change “the 
general method and pattern of per­for­mance.”18 Even in the engineering context, 
cybernetic prediction can have a transformative effect, able to track and feed back 
the ­actual data and initiate learning, such as in a machine translation system.19
It is also impor­tant to consider Wiener’s view of information. For Wiener, in-
formation is not a mechanical sorting of number values, as in a classical statistical 
device, but rather a probabilistic detection of patterns. Cybernetic prediction is an 
informational pro­cess, which takes place through decoding an order of what Wie-
ner calls “events” or “messages”: “The message is a discrete or continuous sequence 
of mea­sur­able events distributed in time—­precisely what is called a time series by 
the statisticians. The prediction of the ­future of a message is done by some sort of 
operator on its past, ­whether this operator is realized by a scheme of mathematical 
computation, or by mechanical or electrical apparatus.”20 In this passage Wiener 
emphasizes that prediction is not based on the explanation of a phenomenon in 
relation to stationary laws. Prediction happens when data on the events are de-
tected and collected (input). The next step is to conjure ­these data so that they 
shape a pattern and to proj­ect a most likely sequence of ­these events (patterns). 
Wiener notes that the world that is subject to prediction is changing and change-
able: as the world is evolving, it cannot be completely foreknown. To be able to 
predict, in turn, is to adapt and change alongside the world or the environment. 
Cybernetic prediction, in this way, is principally part of an open, evolving system.
While the probabilistic and statistical functions of prediction have antecedents 
in eighteenth-­ and nineteenth-­century mathe­matics, perhaps the most original 
and power­ful part of Wiener’s cybernetics is that it placed feedback-­based predic-
tion as the driver of open-­ended, adaptive be­hav­ior rather than the deterministic 
mechanism of an automaton (as nineteenth-­century statisticians would have had 
it). In this way, Wiener’s model of prediction introduces an additional epistemo-
logical layer to statistical forecasting by aligning a statistical predictor with goal 
steering. For Wiener statistical prediction is but a part of what was described as a 
circular causality, where ­causes are placed in the ­future and not in the past. In the 
seminal article “Be­hav­ior, Purpose and Teleology,” cowritten with Arturo Rosen-
blueth and Julian Bigelow in 1943, Wiener defined teleological be­hav­ior as “di-
rected to the attainment of the goal—­i.e. to a final condition in which the behaving 
object reaches a definite correlation in time or in space with re­spect to another 
object or event.”21 They distinguished predictive and nonpredictive purposeful be­
hav­ior. For example, a bloodhound following a trail merely tracks the rec­ord of 
traces without predicting the trail, while a cat chasing a mouse must predict the 

	
Cybernetic Prediction and Late Modern Governance	
63
­future moves of its prey. Predictive be­hav­ior of a higher order can anticipate the 
target’s anticipations and act upon them.22 It was precisely this teleological aspect 
of cybernetic prediction that worried positivist scientists, ­because the model of 
cybernetic control claimed to include something that materially did not yet exist.23 
However, for Wiener, Rosenblueth, and Bigelow this was not a prob­lem, ­because a 
study of teleology was concerned not with linear, functional causality in physics, 
but with the mechanisms of emergent be­hav­ior.24 As Andrew Pickering put it, cy-
bernetic ontology readily embraced the unknown and non­ex­is­tent.
Another impor­tant point argued by Wiener is that predictive teleological be­
hav­ior could be automated: a man-­made device could trace, register, and analyze 
the patterns of be­hav­ior as “sequences of events.” This aspect of Wiener’s cyber-
netics has been widely commented on by critics fearing that cybernetic prediction-­
based technology would lead to a society governed by servomechanisms and AI 
machines. Wiener himself, however, did not think that cybernetic totalitarianism 
was encroaching on society. He did not consider the “automated government ma-
chines” dangerous, simply ­because they ­were “far too crude and imperfect to ex-
hibit a one-­thousandth part of the purposive in­de­pen­dent be­hav­ior of the ­human 
being.”25 The real danger, according to Wiener, is in ­people themselves who may 
adopt the idea of cybernetic prediction to dominate ­others. For Wiener, an ex-
ample of this misuse of prediction was von Neumann’s game theory of Cold War 
strategy.26 Wiener argued against using cybernetic terminology to express mod-
els of social and po­liti­cal governance as undesirable and dangerous, not only 
­because it is ethically problematic but also ­because cybernetic language can be 
FIGURE 3.  The types of be­hav­ior. Reprinted from Arturo Rosenblueth, Norbert 
Wiener, and Julian Bigelow, “Be­hav­ior, Purpose and Teleology,” Philosophy of 
Science 10, no. 1 (1943): 18–24, 21. Courtesy of University of Chicago Press.

64	
CHAPTER 3
subjugated to po­liti­cal promises of certainty. Wiener alerted that any predictor, 
­human or machine, is beset by errors “of a roughly antagonistic nature” ­because 
no predictor is exempt from the laws of thermodynamics, where any form of or-
der is subject to entropy.27 Incorporating fundamental uncertainty is part of the 
cybernetic culture of prediction.
However, this does not mean that cybernetic prediction could not be used 
for social governance. Quite the opposite. Wiener’s notion of cybernetic predic-
tion as an adaptive, informational, and goal-­oriented pro­cess invites a par­tic­u­
lar model of future-­oriented be­hav­ior. In order to make prediction theory work, 
it is necessary to imitate naturally occurring purposeful be­hav­ior. Animals and 
­humans can display predictive be­hav­ior without being aware of its physics and 
mechanics, but the ­actual engineering of teleological machines or organ­izations 
requires appropriate understanding of the under­lying physical and cognitive 
mechanisms.28 In Wiener’s cybernetics, therefore, prediction is the beginning 
not the end of the pro­cess in scientific understanding.
­Here it is worthwhile to pause and briefly consider servomechanism theory, 
­because it exemplifies the symmetrical notion of prediction as explanation, which 
may resemble the logical empiricist take on prediction, presented in chapter 1, but 
which is substantially dif­fer­ent in its performative effect. Servomechanism theory 
conceptualizes control pro­cesses, which are used to create automated weapon sys-
tems such as antiaircraft missiles. The engineering prob­lem is how to shoot down 
an ­enemy aircraft that tries to evade targeting. The missile’s trajectory has to be set 
in such a way that it tracks the moving target. The trajectory is based on calcula-
tions that are themselves based on a more general physical theory of movement. 
The radar that does the tracking feeds the information to the computer, which 
identifies (statistically extrapolates) the most probable location of the aircraft on 
the space and time axes. This prediction is not a pure guess but is based on the 
time series analy­sis and par­ameters of pos­si­ble trajectory, which are established by 
aerodynamics, which, in turn, was developed and tested through physical model-
ing. This engineering model of automated control can operate on prediction ­under 
the condition that its operational environment is sufficiently known, that it can be 
explained with reference to general laws. Moreover, the predictor inside the anti-
aircraft missile system must be “aware” of the positioning of guns and their ability 
to perform in response to the calculated results. This is a very ­simple model of 
what could be described as “self-­reflexivity,” a form of information pro­cessing that 
shapes be­hav­ior. As I show in the remaining part of this chapter, the integration of 
predictive scientific calculations (which are “estimates” accompanied by “explana-
tions” or references to general laws) with ­actual be­hav­ior is what complicates the 
positivist model of scientific prediction. This is an impor­tant point, ­because the 
wider applications of cybernetics have been driven by a positivist culture of sci-

	
Cybernetic Prediction and Late Modern Governance	
65
ence and, in turn, cybernetic prediction-­based control has been labeled as an ex-
pression of technocratic positivism.
From the 1940s to the 1960s, mathematicians, engineers, economists, and nascent 
management scientists from East and West, and also the global South, pursued the 
idea that cybernetic prediction could be applied to any purposive, change-­bound 
system, for example, urban, social, and economic planning.29 However, Wiener 
argued very clearly that social statistical forecasting is a poor technique for pre-
dicting social phenomena for two reasons. First, according to Wiener, in order to 
be reliable, predictions of complex systems require statistical extrapolation from 
very long runs of data reflecting the sequence of events in question. Second, ­these 
runs need to take place “­under essentially constant conditions.”30 This means that 
in order to be predictable scientifically, social phenomena must be homogeneous 
and unfold in a smooth manner. But, unlike Comte and the positivists, Wiener 
did not believe that societal development is lawful. Socie­ties, wrote Wiener, evolve 
disruptively and are uneven from the data point of view, particularly ­because of 
changing norms and values. This means that the same material phenomenon 
might mean completely dif­fer­ent ­things at dif­fer­ent times and therefore have a dif­
fer­ent social effect. For instance, as Eric Wolf showed, beaver fur was highly valued 
in the seventeenth and eigh­teenth centuries in Eu­rope, driving colonial expansion 
of the British empire.31 It would be, however, a ­great ­mistake to attribute the same 
economic value to beaver fur in the late twentieth ­century, ­because the context is 
entirely dif­fer­ent. The differences of this nature, the value of which depends on the 
context and is changeable, are notoriously difficult to integrate in statistical mod-
els. Even when some societal or economic systems might appear to be predictable 
at one par­tic­u­lar moment in time they have the capacity to become unpredictable 
at another: for instance, in econometric models, the data on steel change their 
significance and meaning with ­every new invention that may modify the overall 
demand for steel.32 In all, Wiener warned the enthusiasts of social and economic 
cybernetics that the advantage of long runs in social statistics, even when avail-
able, is “specious and spurious” at best. Using cybernetic methods for predicting 
socie­ties—­and economies—­for Wiener was simply bad science.33
Another impor­tant area of the application of cybernetic prediction is the en-
vironment. Unlike social and economic systems, environmental systems could 
be regarded as relatively well described and explained by physical sciences. By 
the mid-­twentieth ­century considerably long statistical data runs on the aspects 
of physical environment had been accumulated. The quality of this data was con-
sistently improved by establishing new, global networks to monitor the land, 
the ocean, and the atmosphere.34 However, many environmental applications of 

66	
CHAPTER 3
cybernetic prediction ­were restricted by high sensitivity to both scale and time. 
Wiener illustrates this point with a well-­known example of the difference in pre-
dicting the ­future of astronomical and meteorological systems (an example which 
was favored by the nineteenth-­ and early twentieth-­century positivist scholars).35 
Astronomical systems comprise a relatively small number of very large particles 
(planets), which can differ a lot in size among themselves. By contrast, meteoro-
logical systems have a very large number of particles which are of similar size and 
are constantly interacting.36 While accurate recording of initial positions and ve-
locity of large particles (planets) in astronomy can be done with a high degree of 
certainty, in meteorology this is impossible:
If all the readings of all the meteorological stations on earth ­were si­mul­
ta­neously taken, they would not give a billionth part of the data neces-
sary to characterize the ­actual state of the atmosphere from a Newtonian 
point of view. They would only give certain constants consistent with an 
infinity of dif­fer­ent atmospheres, and at most, together with certain a 
priori assumptions, capable of giving, as a probability distribution, 
a mea­sure over the set of pos­si­ble atmospheres.37
­Here Wiener makes a strong point that the princi­ple of linear causality has a 
­limited role in predictive epistemology when applied to small scales and the long 
term. In highly complex systems even known causal relations can become unsta-
ble as a result of new, unpre­ce­dented interactions. As Wiener put it, using the 
Newtonian or any causal laws, “all that we can predict at any ­future time is a prob-
ability distribution of the constants of the system, and even this predictability 
fades out with the increase of time.”38 Timescale, in this way, imposes impor­tant 
epistemological limits on scientific prediction. For this reason Wiener’s work on 
cybernetic prediction was predominantly concerned with very short-­term loops of 
information pro­cessing and be­hav­ior.
Fi­nally, an impor­tant question for Wiener and his critics was ­whether scien-
tific prediction was purely cognitive and informational or material. This question 
particularly both­ered humanists, who ­were concerned that the separation of 
future-­oriented control and ­human body would lead to a society dominated by 
the values, embodied not in living beings but in the informational, automated, 
and authoritarian machine.39 Indeed, Wiener famously declared that “the me-
chanical brain does not secrete thought as ‘the liver does the bile,’ ” claiming that 
“information is information, not ­matter or energy.”40 It appears that information 
for Wiener is part of the physical constitution of the universe. ­Today this episte-
mological stance corresponds with the quantum information theory as advo-
cated by David Deutsch. However, Wiener’s own thoughts ­were forgotten in what 
would become a conversation lasting half a ­century on the conceptual split be-

	
Cybernetic Prediction and Late Modern Governance	
67
tween information and ­matter. For instance, responding to computer science and 
telecommunications theory, which equated information with binary computer 
logic, Katherine Hayles developed her influential argument on the posthumanist 
effect of cybernetics. According to Hayles, the notion of nonmaterial information 
leads to an erroneous conceptual divide of materiality/body and information/
mind, in this way perpetuating old Western cultural hierarchies where material, 
embodied, noncognitive activities ­were deemed to be existentially and socially in-
ferior to cognitive and abstract operations.41 A popu­lar example of such a divide, 
for instance, was seen in the organ­ization of the early AI research. AI researchers 
regarded the chess-­playing computer as a model of ­human brain. This led many to 
believe that computers may replace ­humans in tasks that require thinking. How-
ever, ­later work on AI showed the reverse—­that the game of chess requires only a 
partial cognitive function of the ­human brain.42 Indeed, even the author of the 
first computer chess program, orga­nizational theorist Herbert Simon, argued that 
­human rationality is influenced by social and orga­nizational contexts, and thus is 
not entirely disembodied. It is true, as Kline demonstrated in 2015, that influential 
forms of information theory place an extraordinary emphasis on decontextualiza-
tion and disembodying of information. However, a close reading of Wiener’s writ-
ing shows that his views on materiality and information ­were more complex and 
materiality friendly.43 In what follows, I review ­these ideas, ­because the ques-
tions of materiality and cognition are very impor­tant for the notion of cybernetic 
prediction.
The question of materiality emerges in Wiener’s discussion of scientific pre-
diction as a model of agency. As mentioned ­earlier, in cybernetics, prediction is 
not a discrete function of a structure but rather a feature of an emergent be­hav­
ior. In other words, prediction makes be­hav­ior pos­si­ble and it is part of it. What 
prediction is not is a clockwork-­like mechanism that ensures the same type of 
response to the same situation. Clocks can make complex and unstable be­hav­
iors of other ­people predictable. Cybernetics is interested in ­those sorts of be­
hav­iors that incorporate a form of prediction to cope with uncertain changes.
To put it in other words, the cybernetic notion of prediction does not refer to 
single logical operation. Wiener described prediction as the orchestration of dif­
fer­ent agencies: a predicting system, an observed system, and a pro­cess of interac-
tion between the two. It is impor­tant to note ­here that all ­these agencies are not 
only dynamic (changing) but also materially mediated. Wiener wrote that all sci-
entific predictions are made pos­si­ble only through “observations” of par­tic­u­lar 
“agencies.” Stars, for instance, are observed thanks to the agency of light, what 
physics describes as a flow of photons.44 In this way, ­there can be no direct obser-
vation and, accordingly, no purely “informational” prediction. Instead, the world 
must be materially mediated in a par­tic­u­lar way in order to become “predictable.” 

68	
CHAPTER 3
Wiener noted that the ­human ability to orchestrate material systems is quite 
amazing but still ­limited. It is the material and conceptual limits to orchestration 
that constitute the bound­aries to scientific predictability. Indeed, this is where 
Wiener’s notion of a cybernetically predictable universe departs from the positiv-
ist view. Scientific epistemology, for Wiener, is ultimately humbling: as he put it, 
“the direction of time is uniform” where the ­human role is quite ­limited. This 
means that we can see the stars thanks to the energy that has been sent, we can 
see the stars as the energy is arriving, but we cannot see it out­going, ­because of 
the irreversibility of the pro­cess.45
To predict the ­future cybernetically, for Wiener, is not to employ abstract rea-
son to master the world and time. It is rather to build predictive collectives that 
combine ­human and nonhuman actors, ­people and machines. For Wiener, ­these 
predictive collectives should be guided not only by the questions of feasibility 
(know-­how) but also by desirability (know-­what), that is, ethics. Scientific pre-
diction thus conceived welcomes the incremental arrival of a new form of the 
universe.46
In orga­nizational terms, cybernetic prediction as the orchestration of dif­fer­ent 
material agencies requires creating par­tic­u­lar techniques of recording, mea­sur­
ing, and interpreting data, as well as the coordination of the many actors who are 
in charge of them. Cybernetic prediction is materially mediated and social, 
bound to physics, devices, scientific epistemologies, and social institutions.
As Henning Schmidgen argued, for Wiener “the ­human brain, cybernetically 
speaking, was nothing more than a precision timer controlling the organ’s pro­
cessing of information.”47 This is a very helpful observation, but one should not 
rush and equate this notion of the brain as a synchronization device with a me-
chanical clock. As Schmidgen shows, Wiener extends this argument to suggest 
that the existence of entire cultures and socie­ties in fact depends on the synchro-
nized activities of ­people. In ­doing this, Wiener relied on research into neuro-
physiology, the origins of which dated to the early nineteenth ­century. Prediction 
plays an impor­tant part in this pro­cess of synchronization. Schmidgen refers to 
Kenneth Craik, a British proto-­cybernetician, who described ­humans as “pre-
diction machines” in 1947, hence before the publication of Wiener’s Cybernet-
ics. According to Craik, ­people engage in prediction not by choice but by necessity, 
as ­human decisions and responses lag due to their slow physiology: “Since [the 
­human operator] is always subject to this lag, in attempting to keep up with the 
pre­sent he is always in fact being a prophet and extrapolating from past data.”48 
The challenge for the predictive mind is to integrate discrete observations into 
a meaningful ­whole without losing their chronological dimension (what comes 
before and what comes ­after). As Schmidgen shows very clearly in his article, 

	
Cybernetic Prediction and Late Modern Governance	
69
synchronization of cognition, be­hav­ior, and interagential action are central for 
cybernetic prediction.
Wiener’s own writings and Schmidgen’s contextualization of cybernetic pre-
diction in the history of neurophysiology and psy­chol­ogy make it clear that the 
societal implications of Wiener’s cybernetic prediction are significantly dif­fer­
ent from Knightian risk calculation. In the spirit of cybernetics, society predicts 
itself into being. Social action is based on individuals and collectives being able 
to mutually predict each other and synchronize their multiple activities. This 
synchronization is made pos­si­ble via feedback loops and corrective self-­regulation 
as well as by a high level of integration of incoming signals. If risk society, as 
Michael Power put it, is about accounting and establishing networks of trust and 
security via mutual observation, a society based on cybernetic prediction is about 
the orchestration of synchronicity, building collectives and collective be­hav­ior.49
Cybernetic Prediction and Its Critics
It should be clear by now that Wiener’s version of cybernetic prediction has much 
more to offer than has been hitherto recognized. The genealogy of cybernetic 
epistemology as a source for a militarized, control-­seeking governmental frame-
work that overspilled from servomechanical theory into public policy and man-
agement addresses only one side of the story.50 While Wiener ­adopted a fierce, if 
not always consistent, antimilitaristic stance, a strong case has been made by ­later 
historians who have begun mapping the internal heterogeneity of cybernetic 
epistemology, as it is conducive to countercultural movements, and also ideas of 
transparency and transnational cooperation in contrast to the militarized track-
ing of an ­enemy.51 Most importantly, the intellectual and orga­nizational impact 
of Wiener’s cybernetics and cybernetic prediction has been partially obscured by 
an excessive focus on the digital and computer sides of this approach. Revisions 
like Schmidgen’s and Pickering’s show that cybernetic prediction is an extension 
of a much more complex epistemology of order and evolution, one that was for-
mulated in neurophysiological and psychological sciences.
This epistemological and po­liti­cal complexity of cybernetic prediction must 
be taken seriously as prediction devices are becoming a central object of analy­sis 
in social and po­liti­cal histories. Whereas historians have long referred to ma-
chines as meta­phors of social order, science and technology studies scholars have 
proposed a stronger theoretical program suggesting that machines are performa-
tive mechanisms generating social order. However, dif­fer­ent types of machines 
do not correspond directly with dif­fer­ent sociopo­liti­cal ­orders. For instance, Otto 

70	
CHAPTER 3
Mayr proposed that adaptive, feedback-­guided systems that are open to the envi-
ronment historically emerged as both meta­phors and models for a liberal social 
and po­liti­cal order. Mayr contrasted liberal machines, such as steam engines, 
with closed systems, such as mechanical clocks, which, according to him, em-
bodied the idea of a rule-­bound and completely predictable order.52 However, as 
Peter Galison demonstrated, ­actual mechanical clocks ­were, in fact, a continuous 
source of frustration, ­because they rarely ran as they ­were supposed to, lacked 
precision, and, most importantly, ­were notoriously hard to coordinate. The cha-
otic character of the mechanical clock, as Galison shows, inspired Einstein to 
develop his theory of relativity.53 Perhaps Mayr’s proposition could be inverted to 
suggest that authoritarian regimes end up being like clocks in the sense that they 
are chaotic. After all, a clock mechanism is but part of a wider system of synchro-
nization and orchestration of information pro­cessing and be­hav­ior.
In a similar vein, as a meta­phor and mechanism of government, cybernetic 
prediction has become the target of cultural criticism as inadequate for describing 
social relations and possibly dangerous if deployed in policy and management. 
This association of cybernetic prediction with at best technical terminology and at 
worst a po­liti­cally bankrupt ambition ­toward authoritarian control of information 
can be attributed to the legacy of Cold War governmentality.54 Cold War ­future 
visions ­were formulated by experts and increasingly removed from public debate, 
as the ­future of industrial development, social planning, and foreign policy began 
to increasingly rely on extensive statistical data and forecasts.55 ­Those cases that 
criticize the uses of prediction in governance tend to draw on a par­tic­u­lar linear 
notion of prediction as a statistical extrapolation. This linear prediction was con-
trasted with alternative forms of engaging with the ­future, such as diagnosis, sce-
nario, and normative planning.56 One could speculate that Wiener would have 
agreed with ­these criticisms in the sense that statistical extrapolation is of only 
­limited use in the organ­ization of society, ­because it draws on short runs of imper-
fect data. But it should not be forgotten that Wiener himself tried to overcome this 
limitation by pointing to the complex epistemological role of prediction as adap-
tive be­hav­ior that extended beyond calculation and control.
Louise Amoore has contrasted what she describes as “the poverty of probabilis-
tic prediction” with new strategies for dealing with ­future uncertainty through the 
preemption of possibilities. Amoore’s study of the emerging field of risk consul-
tancy enumerated an entire list of practices that risk-­assessment experts them-
selves claim to use instead of probabilistic prediction: “consulting, screening, 
remote tracking, biometric identifying, and algorithmic profiling.”57 ­These types 
of activities fit well with what Michael Power described as an orga­nizational reper-
toire of risk and accounting society. However, ­these practices could be seen as 
lower-­level components of cybernetic steering via predictive feedback; they are 

	
Cybernetic Prediction and Late Modern Governance	
71
parts of a ­whole that is more than just a sum of its parts. Identification, tracking, 
surveilling could be parts of a mechanically conceived bureaucracy, but they could 
also be orchestrated into a wider cybernetic epistemology. I propose that notions 
of preemption and preparedness can be better understood as new forms of what 
Wiener described as “orchestration of prediction.” Cybernetic prediction still 
feeds into preemption and preparedness at lower scales of complexity through the 
need to acknowledge the necessity of pattern recognition and conjecture.
Conclusion
In 1959, C. P. Snow wrote about the emergence of two distinct cultures of exact 
mathematical sciences and humanities, which are characterized by a deep mis-
understanding of each other that constructs obstacles to more productive devel-
opment of both types of knowledge.58 In this chapter I have proposed a case for a 
cybernetic culture of prediction that differs in its treatment of uncertainty from 
the commonsense use of prediction. One culture of prediction seeks to eliminate 
uncertainty by formalizing the pro­cess of conjecture and seeking for greater pre-
cision in foretelling the unknown events. The key method is linear statistical fore-
casting and algorithmic trees. The other culture of prediction places uncertainty 
at the heart of estimating the unknown, calling for a reflexive orchestration of the 
many material and conceptual mediators to enable detection of patterns and em-
power adaptive action. In Wiener’s cybernetics, prediction is not the end but the 
beginning of purposeful be­hav­ior.
Half a ­century ago, Wiener wrote that ­humans need more foresight in the age 
of automation, where goal-­seeking machines ­will multiply and where the pos-
sibility of machine production of goals is very real.59 However, one should be cau-
tious of “merchants of certainty” who trade in probabilistic predictions as if 
they are astrological prognoses or mechanistic models.60 In this context, and in 
line with Naomi Oreskes’s argument that uncertain knowledge opens up new 
vulnerabilities in existing institutional practices, cybernetic prediction makes 
a case for vulnerabilities that in the end could bridge existing po­liti­cal divides.61 
The following chapters pre­sent moments from this kind of history as it unfolded 
in the Soviet Union, where dif­fer­ent forms of scientific prediction ­were articu-
lated in a conversation with cybernetics to orchestrate new forms of the social.

72
Between the 1940s and 1960s, the cultural expectation that science should supply 
a continuous flow of predictions of such fleeting phenomena as weather, econ-
omy, and social changes became entrenched in what I call a cybernetic sensibil-
ity: an idea that individual and orga­nizational be­hav­ior should be based on 
informational pro­cessing, predictions, and feedback. Slava Gerovitch called cy-
bernetics a movement, not a theory: ­there was not a par­tic­u­lar, well-­defined the-
ory of cybernetics that could be applied in dif­fer­ent areas. Instead, the cybernetic 
notion that control is a performative adjustment via predictive pro­cessing was 
­adopted in a loose manner, sometimes as a meta­phor (in management and semi-
otics, for instance) and sometimes as a rigorous science (applied to servomecha-
nisms, automation, and neurophysiology).1 The cybernetic sensibility spread in 
the global North and South in a ­great variety of forms, ranging from postpositiv-
ist, relational, and posthumanist approaches to technocratic utopian proj­ects.2 
Dif­fer­ent scientists, engineers, con­sul­tants, and artists ­adopted selectively the ele­
ments of cybernetics to match their own worldviews and orga­nizational needs.3 
Such was the fate of cybernetics in the Soviet Union as well.
As I showed in the previous chapter, cybernetics, a science of communication 
and control, became an object of boundless enthusiasm and criticism. As part of 
the early Cold War attack on “bourgeois pseudosciences,” the Soviet ideologues 
banned cybernetics in 1948 without ­really understanding what cybernetics was 
about, as Gerovitch showed. Soviet cybernetics was rehabilitated in the magic 
year of 1956, to be declared the science of governance in the 1960s.4 I ­will not re-
hearse the story, which is well covered in the many excellent histories of cyber-
4
FORECASTING AND THE 
CYBERNETIC SENSIBILITY

	
Forecasting and the Cybernetic Sensibility	
73
netics that the reader can turn to.5 This chapter pre­sents some of key moments in 
the history of postwar scientific forecasting as it was reintroduced into Soviet so-
cial research and economic planning. It cannot do justice to the complexity and 
diversity of the ways forecasting was applied in dif­fer­ent branches and adminis-
trative territories, such as regions and Soviet republics. The key purpose ­here is to 
demonstrate how the two dif­fer­ent logics of prediction, positivist and cybernetic, 
intertwined and informed the epistemological and institutional work that was 
pursued by Soviet social forecasters from the 1960s to the 1980s. The study of 
cybernetics—­research into communication and control through information 
loops—­shares the ambition to discern and understand regular patterns and de-
scribe them mathematically so as to be able to forecast scientifically. In the Soviet 
Union ­after the Second World War, cybernetics served as an icebreaker, a new 
governmental epistemology that facilitated the return of scientific forecasting to 
planning.6 The notion of a cybernetic governance of society, economy, and nature 
required a flow of information about past, current, and ­future states.7 Enter scien-
tific forecasting (nauchnoe prognozirovanie, which includes but is not ­limited to 
statistical forecasting; from ­here on I ­will use the term scientific forecasting and 
­will specify statistical forecasts where relevant), a method that promised data 
about pos­si­ble ­future states of society, technology, and economy.
Now, as I showed ­earlier, the cybernetic notion of prediction is performative: it 
is based on pro­cess tracking which is plugged into feedback loops enabling an 
organism or machine to adjust to its environment. Cybernetic prediction is very 
dif­fer­ent from the positivist prediction. The epistemology of cybernetic predic-
tion is not about testing a hypothesis (and improving knowledge), but about get-
ting on with the unknown by developing ­viable coping strategies via trial and 
error. It is about information pro­cessing and goal-­seeking. The link between what 
was described as cybernetic technology—­servomechanisms and automated 
systems—­and scientific or statistical forecasting is very intimate. In engineering, 
a cybernetic system can be built as a servomechanism, containing a radar, and a 
calculator, able to pro­cess predictive statistical data, time series analy­sis. So statis-
tical forecasting can be part of cybernetic engineering. However, to think that 
­every use of scientific forecasting leads directly to “cybernetization” of manage-
ment or policymaking is at best meta­phorical and at worst misleading. Of course, 
the power of meta­phors to shape governmental expectations should not be under-
estimated: eventually in the Soviet Union the notion of a mechanical universe was 
replaced with a cybernetic one. The meta­phor of workers as cogs in the machine 
(scientific Taylorism and in the movement of scientific organ­ization of ­labor, 
nauchnaia organizatsiia truda (NOT)) was replaced in Soviet governmental dis-
courses by the meta­phor of ­people as carriers and conductors of information (cy-
bernetic governance).8 However, as I show in this chapter, for a management or 

74	
CHAPTER 4
policy practice to become cybernetic, a number of orga­nizational conditions 
must be met. This was acutely perceived by Soviet reformist scientists who argued 
for the introduction of proper scientific forecasting in planning and the reform-
ing of the institution of planning and scientific expertise to accommodate a more 
cybernetic, responsive model of organ­ization. In turn, scientific forecasting is not 
­limited to the method of sorting statistical data: what makes scientific forecasts 
“predictions” in a logical empiricist sense is their task of testing the quality of 
data and explanations by succeeding (or failing) to generate novel facts.
Forecasting the Soviet Economy
The period from the Stalinist terror of the 1930s to the thaw in the late 1950s 
was not entirely void of efforts to apply predictive science to orga­nizational and 
policy decisions. Although lofty epistemological debates on prediction ­were ab-
sent, impor­tant fundamental research into predictive methods was continued, 
which would provide an impor­tant basis for the postwar boom of forecasting. 
During the period, however, this work was no longer hosted in universities or 
the Acad­emy of Science’s institutes but moved to the military and state security 
sector. A good example of this is research into resource allocation techniques 
that underpinned the war plan prepared by the famous Soviet Rus­sian reformer 
of the army, Mikhail Tukhachevskii. In this plan known resources ­were allo-
cated to known orga­nizational units. This framework of war planning required 
both complete knowledge of available and required resources and precise logis-
tical distribution of activities, in this re­spect very similar to the princi­ples of eco-
nomic planning criticized by Kondrat’ev in the 1920s. In 1926, Abram Vol’pe, 
an instructor at the Military Acad­emy, advocated “a precise plan of industrial 
mobilization” in the event of war.9 Vol’pe, however, was accused of plotting a 
coup and executed in 1937. At the same time Soviet military planners under-
stood that preparation for the ­future war included some efforts to anticipate tech-
nological innovations in weapon systems, something that became very clear 
during the war, when, for instance the Soviet engineers raced to develop tanks 
that would be faster and less susceptible to damage from firing.10
Another strand of research into prediction was developed by Rus­sian math-
ematicians working on time series techniques in statistics.11 Some of the most 
impor­tant advances in applied mathe­matics ­were made by the ­future Nobel Prize 
winner Leonid Kantorovich, who began to experiment with statistical methods 
to improve the efficiency and productivity of management during his internship 
at the ­water board in Tashkent, Uzbekistan, in 1929. This kind of expertise was 
welcomed in princi­ple, but its practical applications ­were extremely ­limited 

	
Forecasting and the Cybernetic Sensibility	
75
­because ­actual management practices in the context of shortage and technologi-
cal constraints ­were primitive and did not extend beyond basic organ­ization of 
the presence of workers.12 However, in 1939, Kantorovich developed an algorithm 
for linear programming to optimize the pro­cess of production, a method that 
he saw as applicable at both enterprise and national levels. He informed the State 
Planning Committee about this potentially useful method but the proposal was 
rejected (in 1942 and again in 1954). The rejection referred to an old issue, one 
faced by the imperial administrators and Kondrat’ev: the application of Kanto-
rovich’s algorithm required gathering “too much information,” which was rec-
ognized as not feasible.13 Kantorovich and his colleagues did not give up and 
submitted the proposal again in 1956.
Prediction as a prob­lem of science and engineering resurfaced in the 1950s, 
when the Soviet economy began to recover and the po­liti­cal balance of powers 
had shifted with the death of Stalin and the rise of Nikita Khrushchev. ­There was 
also “something in the air”: the year 1956 was described by Hunter Heyck as an 
annus mirabilis for the development of new ideas about governability and control 
in the United States. Around this date a ­whole array of foundational texts was 
published in the Western world, declaring the birth of new policy sciences, such 
as decision analy­sis, operations research (OR), and systems analy­sis.14 ­These stud-
ies also alerted Western governments to rapidly emerging technical and social 
changes, which could not be dealt with without richer, more reliable anticipatory 
knowledge. The Soviet government was also increasingly conscious of the grow-
ing complexity of its industries and economy. This was boosted by the Cold War 
competition: the West that Nikita Khrushchev sought “to catch up and surpass” 
was about to embrace a new way of thinking about the knowability of both nature 
and society and the uses of this knowledge for governmental purposes. Many 
Western governments and a growing number of postwar international organ­
izations explored the ave­nues of using scientific expertise for planning.15 Although 
to rehabilitate Kondrat’ev, who suggested that the decline of cap­i­tal­ist economies 
was just a moment in a cycle, was still unthinkable, the ideas of Kantorovich no 
longer looked so out of place.
In the wake of the Twentieth Congress in 1956, Soviet planners turned their 
attention back to the Western experience of economic governance, but this was a 
protracted and guarded pro­cess. The Soviet Union relied on its own national ac-
counting system, the System of Balances of the National Economy, also called 
the Material Product System, which was used to mea­sure and proj­ect growth. 
This meant that the Soviets hoped to rely on their own statistics and methods. 
However, from the 1960s, they also engaged in partnerships to secure access to 
internationally produced economic data and methods of statistical analy­sis, fore-
casting, and modeling.16 During postwar reconstruction, but even more so in 

76	
CHAPTER 4
response to the slowing growth of the initial industrial burst of the Soviet econ-
omy that became evident by the late 1950s, the All-­Union State Planning Com-
mittee (Gosplan) grew and professionalized.17 An impor­tant innovation was the 
establishment in 1955 of a Scientific Research Institute of Economics (NIEI), 
dedicated to macroeconomic prob­lems and the development of normative con-
ceptual foundations for perspective planning.18 One of the tasks of NIEI was to 
learn from similar governmental bodies in the West. To this purpose, high-­level 
meetings ­were or­ga­nized. In May 1958, a del­e­ga­tion of French planners traveled 
to Moscow hoping to learn about what they considered “an alternative approach”: 
the French government put a premium on large-­scale and rather centralized 
planning and, ­under Pierre Massé, new methods of planning based on long-­term 
forecasting ­were developed.19 However, in their report the French wrote that they 
had discovered a vast gap between the “logic of planning” and the real­ity of 
paused factory lines, the black market, and poverty.20 The French visit was recip-
rocated in November 1958, when NIEI’s director and prominent economist Ana-
tolii Efimov, together with six colleagues, embarked on a two-­week trip to France. 
Soviet economists visited factories and learned about Jean Monnet’s plans and 
the work of the Commissariat Général du Plan. They ­were also disappointed with 
what they found. Back in Moscow, Efimov wrote in his report that “[French] 
planning organs naturally need to satisfy themselves with merely making a kind 
of ‘program-­prognosis,’ which is made on the most general level and does not 
command anyone. It is in this sense that the term ‘planning’ is used in relation to 
the French economy.”21 Having labeled this kind of planning as “indicative,” Efi-
mov continued: “it is clear that ­under the indicative system of planning, even the 
most perfect method of making the branches of the economy proportionate can-
not guarantee a lawful development of economics.”22 This Soviet encounter with 
French practices of central planning was crucial, ­because it shows that Soviet 
economists considered scientific forecasting inseparable from the orga­nizational 
design and po­liti­cal authority. They understood the French system of integrating 
forecasting with decision-­making as an inevitable compensation for “failed plan-
ning,” a compromise, an informational tool that a weak state planning agency 
used to coordinate a free-­market economy. Soviet economists, therefore, did not 
consider forecasting necessary in central directive-­based planning. Kondrat’ev’s 
insights into the epistemological limitations of scientific prediction of the econ-
omy and the value of indicative, hy­po­thet­i­cal forecasts for decision-­making ap-
peared to be completely lost.
Just as in the 1920s, in the 1940s and 1950s Soviet long-­term plans ­were made 
without forecasting. The first long-­term plan (for fifteen years) was put together 
by Gosplan just before the Nazi invasion in 1941. In the late 1950s, Gosplan pro-
duced a twenty-­year plan, the “general perspective,” for the period 1961 to 1980.23 

	
Forecasting and the Cybernetic Sensibility	
77
Both plans claimed to be based on interbranch balances, which perhaps could be 
classified as a type of forecasting, ­because they contained statistical projections of 
the ­future economy. But ­these balances ­were deeply flawed. The 1941 plan was 
mainly a conceptual exercise devoid of mathematical methods for calculating in-
terbranch balances. The 1950s plan was no better. The talented economist Emil’ 
Ershov, who would leave ­later NIEI to become the director of the Central Insti-
tute of Mathematical Economics (TsEMI) recalled a complete absence of any 
methodological lit­er­a­ture when he was asked to develop interbranch balances in 
the late 1950s.24 The calculations done for the 1961 to 1980 plan ­were criticized 
both by Westerners, most famously Wassily Leontief, but also by some Soviet 
economists themselves.25
This slow and painstaking search for improvement of economic planning 
methods began to converge with the military-­industrial research into statistical 
series extrapolation methods, as well as other methods of decision sciences in the 
1940s and 1950s.26 While few archival documents are available to offer a detailed 
discussion of this rapprochement, the primacy of the military research is sug-
gested by the fact that some of the first Soviet publications on forecasting focused 
on research and development (R&D) and technology assessment, all part of mili-
tary planning. For instance, in 1964 an influential academic journal, Voprosy fi-
losofii (The Issues of Philosophy), published the first article about methods of 
forecasting in organ­izing scientific research, authored by Genadii Dobrov, a 
Ukrainian scientist who participated in pioneering proj­ects for the development of 
computers in Kyiv, Ukraine, and ­later established himself as the leading authority 
on research policy.27 The many memoirs written by the Soviet mathematicians 
hint that the spread of forecasting in the Soviet Union resembled that of the United 
States, where the military studies at the RAND military think-­tank ­were extended 
to the civil sector, although Rus­sian historiography remains opaque about this.28
The transfer of scientific forecasting from the military to the civil sector was 
stimulated by large-­scale industrial infrastructure development proj­ects. A par-
ticularly impor­tant breakthrough can be dated to the Soviet government’s deci-
sion to develop Siberian oil and gas fields and build a pipeline to Eu­rope, a proj­ect 
that in its significance equaled the State Commission for Electrification of Rus­sia 
(GOELRO). In the capacity of a vice chairman of the Council of Ministers and of 
the chairman from 1964, Aleksei Kosygin personally supported this proj­ect and 
was aware that the new technological structure required a longer-­term outlook. I 
do not know if Kosygin read Kondrat’ev, but he was certainly receptive to the 
ideas of the prominent computer scientists Germogen Pospelov and Viktor Glush-
kov, who offered to computerize planning and re­orient it to incorporate dif­fer­ent 
methods of forecasting.29 Furthermore, Kosygin worked in tandem with his son-­
in-­law, the influential Westernizer of Soviet management and the mediator of 

78	
CHAPTER 4
many large East–­West trade deals, Dzhermen Gvishiani. The Soviet version of 
Taylorism from the 1920s was revived, but in a significantly upgraded form that 
incorporated cybernetic insights and the science of ergonomics. Gvishiani in 
1963 authoritatively announced that “governance was first and foremost a sci-
ence.”30 Once Khrushchev was ousted in 1964 (his failed projections of Soviet 
economic growth ­were listed as evidence of the incapacity of his leadership) and 
Kosygin climbed up the po­liti­cal hierarchy to become second only to Brezhnev, 
the ­future of Soviet scientific forecasting studies was sealed. Planning was to be 
optimal, scientific, and based on a wide array of short-­ and long-­term predic-
tions.31 Calls for flexibility that resonated with Kondrat’ev’s ideas began to appear 
in the press.32 In his 1965 speeches at both Gosplan and the Plenum of the Central 
Committee, Kosygin proclaimed that scientific forecasting was the key compo-
nent of planning. Gosplan from then on should supply the republics’ govern-
ments and companies with scientific forecasts, to be revised and sent back to the 
central planners.33 Kosygin’s notion of the role of forecasting in planning would 
remain set for the next twenty-­five years: “Discussions of scientific forecasts need 
to precede the development of plans for the branches of the national economy. . . . ​
We need to forecast scientifically the development of ­every branch of industry to 
be able to give way in time to the most advanced and progressive developments.”34 
­These are, for sure, general phrases, typical of po­liti­cal discourse. However, it is 
impor­tant that forecasting is presented ­here as part of policy practice, following 
Comte’s formulation, according to which a scientific prediction must foreground 
rational action. It also resonates with the cybernetic model of a ­viable system, 
where prediction is also fundamental for any teleological, goal-­oriented be­hav­ior. 
However, positivist prediction, cybernetic prediction, and goal orientation in in-
terwar and postwar planning should not be considered as equivalent. ­There are 
impor­tant conceptual differences. First, Wiener’s idea of cybernetic teleology 
should not be confused with the Soviet concept of tselevoe planirovanie, created 
in the 1920s and translated into En­glish as “teleological planning,” ­because ­these 
are two dif­fer­ent approaches that invoke dif­fer­ent types of governmentality. Ac-
cording to Stephen Collier, the Soviet tselevoe planirovanie put a premium on the 
internal consistency of the plan, preferably expressed numerically, and thus gave 
the illusion of total control of planning instruments and targets.35 In this way, 
tselevoe planirovanie did not allow for the flexibility of a real-­time feedback sys-
tem as conceptualized by Wiener, geared to respond to the ever-­changing envi-
ronment in order to stay on its course. Second, it appears that Kosygin’s call for 
integrating scientific forecasting and planning, and Gvishiani’s call for scientific, 
cybernetic management, did not anticipate the clash between the mechanistic, 
positivist prediction and the performative, cybernetic prediction. I doubt that 
they expected such subversive consequences in the entire institutional organ­

	
Forecasting and the Cybernetic Sensibility	
79
ization of science and policy that the cybernetic approach to data collection and 
pro­cessing would require.
And so, following the slogan of putting “cybernetics in the ser­vice of com-
munism,” starting in 1965, Gosplan began to develop what they saw as properly 
scientific, long-­term forecasts for economic development.36 The Acad­emy of Sci-
ences institutes also embarked on this task.37 The academic community em-
braced the po­liti­cal ­will to make social and economic forecasts ­because many 
scholars saw this as a win­dow of opportunity to reform the ­whole estate of sci-
ence, ridden with ideological censorship, in­effec­tive orga­nizational compart-
mentalization, and secrecy. This was made very clear in December 1966, when 
the first open academic meeting dedicated to the conceptual development of 
long-­term planning on the basis of forecasting was or­ga­nized in Moscow.38 Ar-
ranged at NIEI, this meeting was stormed by enthusiastic crowds of scholars. 
According to Efimov, the novelty and importance of scientific ­future studies was 
“illustrated by the energy with which many comrades attempted to enter this 
hall. Such Anschlag is normally seen only in ­grand theater premieres. This is un-
derstandable, ­because the question of long-­term prognosis is so exciting for 
us.”39 This was forty years ­after the publication of Kondrat’ev’s essay on previ-
sion. Although about 250 participants registered to attend a session on the fore-
casting of the national economy, more than 450 showed up; another session on 
mathematical forecasting was attended by 100 persons.40 The transcript of the 
discussion reveals that obligatory propaganda dues ­were paid to the superiority 
of the Soviet system: the Soviet Union was called “the motherland of planning.” 
Con­ve­niently forgetting about Comte and the nineteenth ­century’s reformers, 
the old-­timer of Gosplan Shamai Turetskii claimed that French planners bor-
rowed the “very essence of forecasting” from Rus­sia.41 In ­these pronouncements, 
the narrative that the GOELRO proj­ect was the source of scientific forecasting 
was cemented. The speakers repeatedly argued for the importance of cross-­
branch forecasting to estimate the ­future demand for energy, referring to the 
1920s’ “achievements” in Soviet long-­term planning and the debates about the 
long-­term prognoses as if self-­evident and well known to all. However, the 1920s 
criticisms by Kondrat’ev and Bazarov ­were con­ve­niently bypassed.42 All this was 
prob­ably both ideological and pragmatic. Many speakers ­were accomplished 
scholars and it is difficult to imagine that they ­were not aware of the flawed ways 
in which the economic data was collected in the 1920s and 1930s, as well as the 
limitations of the methodology of the plans, which required excessive levels of 
detail, even if they had never read Kondrat’ev. It is likely that in their statements 
they sought to establish the pre­ce­dence of a Soviet tradition in forecasting, on 
which basis the Soviet government could legitimize establishing cooperation 
with the cap­i­tal­ist forecasters from the position of scientific parity.43

80	
CHAPTER 4
The payment of po­liti­cal dues aside, the archival rec­ords of ­these discussions 
show that Soviet economists hoped to use this official orientation to promote fore-
casting as a tool to change practices in hitherto ad hoc and nonsystematic Soviet 
planning. Gosplan, they argued, did not so much develop the plans as mechani-
cally glue them together, using proposals submitted by separate branches.44 Proper 
scientific forecasting was expected to discipline the collection of data and method-
ology of planning as well as to expand the intellectual scope of Gosplan. The meet-
ing discarded the 1950s idea of forecasting as an informational compensation for 
failed state planning. Whereas Gvishiani proclaimed that governance was first a 
science, a young economist, Boris Breev, insisted that “governance is not pos­si­ble 
without prognosis.”45 In his lengthy talk, Abel Aganbegian, who was then in his 
mid-­thirties and who ­later ­rose to become an economic advisor to Mikhail Gor-
bachev, pronounced that prognoses ­were not “a step back from planning,” a pos­si­
ble interpretation of Kosygin’s formula of forecasting as a stage of preplanning, but 
“a move deeper.”46 In Kondrat’ev’s spirit, Aleksandr Anchishkin argued that the 
effort ­toward mathematical modeling should first be directed at understanding 
the current situation of the Soviet economy and only then at creating previsions 
(predvidenie).47
The goal of forecasting was to explore several alternative directions of devel-
opment, which implied that the Soviet ­future was open to dif­fer­ent trajectories.48 
To this, Leonid Kantorovich, the creator of the input–­output methodology of lin-
ear planning, added that the plans should be understood as probabilistic and 
not deterministic. The economy, argued Kantorovich, “could not be expected to 
develop according to the plan,” and hence multiple possibilities need always be 
considered.49 This view of the fleeting character of the economy was shared by 
many leading mathematical economists. Years ­later, Ershov recalled agreeing 
that it would have been the utmost nonsense to expect the five-­year plans to be 
implemented to the detail; however, this could not be suggested in public.50
The visibility of alternatives was accompanied by a strong emphasis on trans-
parency (glasnost’). Glasnost’ was perhaps the most striking aspect of ­these dis-
cussions in 1966. This was the most impor­tant difference between Kondrat’ev’s 
time, when ­there was a dearth of data, and the 1960s, when historical statistics had 
already been accumulated and the key perceived issue was scholars’ access to data. 
Transparency, economists argued, was part of the method that would make fore-
casting truly scientific. Like Kondrat’ev, at the 1966 meeting, an economist argued 
that the existing forecasts of separate branches, such as carbon fuels, ­were simply 
absurd and incorrect, ­because ­future development of a par­tic­u­lar sector was being 
extrapolated without regard to the changes happening in related sectors. Scientific 
forecasting for him required sharing the data horizontally across academic and 
governmental organ­izations. Furthermore, the methodology of forecasting, it was 

	
Forecasting and the Cybernetic Sensibility	
81
argued, demanded that Soviet planners openly face some incon­ve­nient facts. Breev 
insisted that the current practice of grounding the plans exclusively on “achieve-
ments” was gravely misleading. Calling for an “analytical history of national eco-
nomic planning,” Breev added somewhat realistically that this requirement was 
not expected “to be fulfilled soon.”51
The economists’ calls for glasnost’ did not stop at the data issue. The 1966 meet-
ing went as far as to insist on public discussion of forecasts. They did not go as far 
as the Austrian futurologist and the demo­cratizer of ­future studies Robert Jungk, 
who called for grassroots involvement in the making of forecasts: the public for 
­these Soviet economists was not the general public, but academic experts.52 Gos-
plan economists trod carefully in this treacherous zone of permissibility, giving 
assurances that the method of forecasting did not challenge the existing power 
concentration ­because it was ­limited to a “small circle of specialists” at the top of 
government.53 It would be easy to criticize this approach as yet another techno-
cratic grabbing for power, but one should not forget the context, where scholars 
fought to get minimal conditions of institutional autonomy and access to ­actual 
data, challenging the Party’s orga­nizational mono­poly on information.54
Looking back, it is quite clear that ­these arguments alone did not translate 
into institutional reform. Glasnost’ did not liberalize the centralized, censored, 
and compartmentalized data flows within Gosplan. Although the Acad­emy of 
Sciences and branch institutes ­were commissioned to prepare forecasts pertain-
ing to their respective sectors, they sometimes ­were not given access to the key 
statistical data held by the branch ministries and Gosplan, not to mention other, 
crucially relevant sectors. The resulting forecasts remained methodologically 
flawed, what Kondrat’ev would have seen as the continuation of the practice of 
“auto-­hypnosis with numbers.” In the Western context, intellectual historians 
criticized scientific forecasting as a technocratic activity. However, even the most 
technical and narrow forecasting required a considerable degree of open infor-
mation flow, robust and testable data, and a set of falsifiable theories explaining 
the transitions between events. The Soviet system was not prepared to allow for 
this as it would have required institutional and epistemological reform of sta-
tistical agencies, research institutes, and the po­liti­cal bureaucracy of planning 
at all levels. In practice, Gosplan resembled a medieval fiefdom where branch 
decisions continued to be taken without any regard to cross-­branch effects.55 Like 
in astrological conjecture, statistics that populated long-­term plans did not re-
flect the ­actual and cumulative development of the economy.
If scientific forecasting was methodologically dissonant with the Soviet power 
structure, the question is, why was it encouraged? A pos­si­ble answer, as I show in 
the next section, can be found in the wider shift of Soviet governmentality, as it 
called for scientific governance of an increasingly complex society. The imperative 

82	
CHAPTER 4
of technoscience was taken seriously. This was bolstered by the theory of the 
scientific-­technical revolution (STR), which revised the Marxist–­Leninist dogmas 
of ideological and materialist change to accommodate the view that science and 
technology ­were no longer a superstructure, but a direct driver of social transfor-
mation. As new sciences and technologies ­were being introduced, the develop-
ment of Soviet society became opaque again and Marxian predictions ­were no 
longer sufficient. Scientific forecasting was called forth to map the trends of Soviet 
social development, not only in regard to resource planning to ensure effective 
implementation of large-­scale infrastructures, but also to the rates and trends in 
education and ­labor participation to staff the growing industrial enterprises. Enter 
social forecasting, a branch of applied sociology.
Social Forecasting
The 1920s and 1930s saw multiple efforts to gather quantitative information that 
would help to make the Soviet society vis­i­ble, the most prominent of which ­were 
the censuses run in 1937 and 1939. ­These ­were the only censuses conducted ­under 
Stalin, who refused to take stock of the Soviet population changes ­after the Sec-
ond World War. However, the results of the 1937 census ­were never published 
and only aggregate numbers of the 1939 census ­were made available.56 Although 
Stalin’s purges ended the life of Soviet Rus­sian sociology as an academic disci-
pline, this did not mean that social data ­were not collected at all. On the con-
trary, data ­were amassed by demographers, ­labor institutes, and statistics 
departments of dif­fer­ent ministries as the administrators and planners required 
knowledge about the presence of the social classes, workers, students, consum-
ers, and cultural audiences of po­liti­cal enlightenment.57 The Soviet population 
had to be employed, educated, fed, ­housed, and kept warm, and so its ­labor ca-
pacity and basic needs had to be known.58 Patchy as they ­were and fragmented 
across the archipelago of the ever-­growing bureaucracy, imperfect and often sim-
ply made up, statistical data on Soviet society ­were coming into being. In the 
1960s, when all-­union and regional planners became concerned with social as-
pects of growth, demographic research and sociology became reinstated.59
Soviet sociology was fully rehabilitated at about the same time as scientific fore-
casting in the context of incremental opening up to the West. In 1956, when the 
chairman of the Council of Ministers Nikolai Bulganin announced the arrival of 
the STR in the Soviet Union, a del­e­ga­tion of Soviet academicians was invited to 
participate in the Third Sociology Congress in Amsterdam to discuss the social 
consequences of technoscientific innovations.60 In 1957, a group of Western soci-
ologists came to Moscow. The Soviet Association of Sociology (SAS) was estab-

	
Forecasting and the Cybernetic Sensibility	
83
lished in 1958 as a Cold War instrument, conceived to proj­ect a positive image of 
Soviet science and to make its presence felt at the International Sociology Associa-
tion (ISA), established ­under the auspices of the United Nations Educational, Sci-
entific and Cultural Organ­ization (UNESCO).61 Institutions and individuals could 
become members of the SAS for an annual fee of forty and five rubles, respec-
tively.62 As a public organ­ization, the powers of the SAS ­were ­limited.
The research agenda of social forecasting was placed ­under the umbrella of the 
studies of the STR and scientific-­technical pro­gress (STP). Announced in 1956, the 
idea of the STR was integral to Khrushchev’s declaration that the Soviet Union 
would catch up with and surpass the United States, foreseeing the building of com-
munism in two de­cades.63 The STR, the genealogy of which I have discussed else-
where, extended Grigorii Feldman’s theory of growth. As mentioned ­earlier in 
chapter 2, according to Feldman, the driver of growth was investment in heavy in-
dustries and industrial goods.64 This now would include fundamental and applied 
science, R&D, and, particularly, the new information and digital technologies.
In the early 1960s, Soviet scholars strategically positioned the STR as a state 
socialist alternative to modernization theory; the STR was expected to have a 
global reach and justify Soviet aid proj­ects in developing countries. I date the 
beginning of this pro­cess to Walt Rostow’s visit to Moscow in 1960, where he gave 
a talk on disarmament to the sixth Pugwash conference. In the same year he pub-
lished his The Stages of Economic Growth: A Non-­Communist Manifesto.65 Two 
years ­later, in 1962, Soviet social researchers fully encountered the growing im-
pact of Rostow’s modernization theory in the Fifth World Congress of Sociology 
in Washington, DC. From 1963 onward, Soviet academic journals began publish-
ing criticisms of modernization theory contrasting it with what was presented as 
a socialist “scientific-­technical revolution.” One of ­those critics was Anatolii Zvo-
rykin (1901–1988), a prominent historian of science and technology who survived 
Stalin’s purges and who was tasked to coordinate the Soviet participation in 
UNESCO’s History of Mankind proj­ect from 1956 to the early 1960s. As Elena 
Aronova showed, Zvorykin was fascinated with the multidisciplinary effort to 
write a universal history of ­human evolution embracing the global North and 
South addressing the pro­cess of decolonization, and mobilized Soviet researchers 
from dif­fer­ent institutes in humanities and public health to contribute to the 
study.66 At the same time Zvorykin had been interested in the ways in which 
changing technology was shaping the social, ­going beyond primitive Marxist de-
terminism.67 In Washington, Zvorykin debated ­these issues with Talcott Parsons 
and Robert Merton. The debate was published in the Soviet Union, but Merton 
refused to have it covered in So­cio­log­i­cal Abstracts.68
Studying the STR and forecasting the ­future Soviet society ­were impor­tant 
mandates of the newly established Institute of Concrete Social Research (IKSI, 

84	
CHAPTER 4
1968), which became, as Elena Zdravomyslova put it, “the institutional symbol 
of separation of sociology from Marxist philosophy.”69 The explanatory power 
of social forecasting was ideologically ­limited to the application of the official 
“general laws,” an obligatory theoretical framework of historical materialism and 
scientific communism (the application of historical materialism to the analy­sis 
of Soviet society). However, the mid-­range theories of urban or cultural sociol-
ogy, as well as “concrete empirical analy­sis,” provided legitimate analytical 
frameworks.70 According to Titarenko and Zdravomyslova, Soviet social research 
of the 1960s and 1970s embraced a structural functionalist approach that was 
supposedly based on positivist princi­ples.71
It was difficult to practice prediction in its positivist or logical empirical sense 
in Soviet social statistical research. The recollections of mathematically apt so-
ciologists, such as Boris Grushin, who pioneered public opinion surveys, and 
Vladimir Shlapentokh, show this clearly. ­There was ­little room for critical ex-
amination of facts and rigorous testing of predictions. In practice, social fore-
casting was mainly ­limited to simplistic statistical analy­sis of cross-­sectional 
data, for instance of the changing structure of ­labor markets and related educa-
tion patterns.72 However, the princi­ple of monitoring the cumulative character 
of real­ity and tracing symptoms was expressed in regular surveys.
The greatest issue was integrating statistical forecasts that ­were principally 
heuristic instruments, as Kondrat’ev put it back in 1920, with policy and man-
agement practice. Indeed, such an integration was expected from Soviet sociol-
ogy as an applied science, considered, as Liah Greenfeld noted, somewhat 
surprised, “a branch of social technology.”73 However, the use of prediction as 
social technology was ­limited: researchers ­were mainly interested in the pro­cess 
of stability and reproduction rather than change, not symptoms of social pathol-
ogy and deviance, like the nineteenth-­century public health reformers. As I 
show in the remainder of this chapter, changes and uncertainties ­were studied 
as part of the research agenda into social consequences of the STR, exploring 
disruptions generated by techno-­scientific innovation. In terms of the so­cio­log­
i­cal method, IKSI sociologists mainly applied micro analy­sis of individual en-
terprises.74 Macro social trends ­were forecasted, but, as I show in chapter 7, not 
in sociology departments, but in the emerging systems research institutions and 
this work was done by OR and computer scientists.
According to the official definition, social forecasting (sotsialnoe prognozirovanie) 
was “the most advanced form of governing social relations and pro­cesses, which 
makes it pos­si­ble to scientifically predict and solve social prob­lems.”75 Social fore-
casting was, to paraphrase Comte (and Bruno Latour), science in action. The 

	
Forecasting and the Cybernetic Sensibility	
85
prob­lems of Soviet society, in other words, could be anticipated and prevented. 
This emphasis on governability and control was contrasted with the epistemol-
ogy of forecasting, according to which societal development was probabilistic. 
If society was governed by a game of chance, one had to acknowledge that at least 
some of the aspects of the ­future of Soviet society ­were beyond knowledge and 
control.76 It was this gray zone between the promise of control and the open-
ness of uncertainty that attracted scholars wishing to escape the straitjacket of 
Marxist–­Leninist development theory.
This subversive effect of uncertainty, inherent in social forecasting, was explic­
itly addressed, and mea­sures ­were taken to rein it in. First, the access to scientific 
forecasts was reserved to selected institutes and party authorities. Second, sociolo-
gists ­were restricted to exploring and forecasting only ­those social volatilities that 
­were deemed relevant for economic planning. Economists ­were mainly interested 
in the forecasts of living standards. This was driven by the concern that the dis-
crepancy between the income of peasants, workers, and the professionals’ income 
was growing, a pro­cess that was exacerbated by access to private allotments. As N. 
Lagutin of Gosplan put it in 1966, a possibility that ­people ­will grow only flowers 
and not, for instance, root vegetables that could be used for food or sold on the 
market in allotments was “very remote.”77 The prob­lem with private sources of 
income was that ­these ­were classified as a “nonproductive” sphere according to 
Feldman’s model. However, Soviet economists understood clearly that this was a 
­mistake. They resolved this absurd inconsistency by delegating to sociologists re-
search into what they defined as eco­nom­ically profitable social activities.78
A study of deviance, po­liti­cal, and security ­matters was reserved for the State 
Security Committee (KGB) and not sociologists, although IKSI was sometimes 
commissioned to write reports on “social prob­lems of defense.”79 For instance, in 
1972, Fedor Burlatskii and Aleksandr Galkin’s monograph “Sociology and Poli-
tics” was denied publication, ­because it “transgressed the remit of the IKSI.”80 
Furthermore, forecasting social value change was a contradiction in terms: tech-
nically, what ­were the correct norms and should values be allowed to develop 
spontaneously? Both values and norms ­were fixed in the ideological discourse by 
the party institutions that set the desirable ­future norms and values. To keep the 
lid on the knowledge about social change, forecasting, like censuses and any 
large-­scale data sets, was subject to censorship. The role of sociologists—­the intel-
lectual workers—­was not to improvise creatively in heuristic research, but to har-
vest social data deemed relevant for economic per­for­mance indicators, for 
instance, ­labor productivity and consumption needs. Explorative forecasting was 
allowed within certain limits, as it was recognized that the government should be 
aware of pos­si­ble divergence from ideologically approved values.81 However, the 
interpretation of social forecasts was a minefield of responsibility: no researcher 

86	
CHAPTER 4
wanted to be accused of uncovering undesirable features of Soviet society, ­because 
this could be regarded as a criticism of the Party’s failure. This was the key differ-
ence between late state socialist scholars of the social body and social reformers 
in the nineteenth ­century: in the late state socialist context, numbers ­were ex-
pected to speak for themselves and in only very ­limited contexts.
Nevertheless, sociology’s subordination to economic planning entailed a con-
stant demand for social statistics and provided the institutional rationale for 
the organ­ization of social forecasting as a subdiscipline of sociology. ­There ­were 
many dif­fer­ent applied fields in which so­cio­log­i­cal survey and (­limited) attempts 
at forecasting emerged in the 1960s. ­These included public opinion surveys and 
demographic forecasts, linked to ­labor and urban planning, and time bud­get 
forecasts, linked to social provision of leisure.82 However, social forecasting never 
became a priority science, on a par with cybernetic and systems modeling and 
the analy­sis of natu­ral resources. The first generation of sociologists ­were mainly 
trained in humanities and had ­little or no experience of quantitative methods.83 
Large in terms of staff, IKSI was not as badly underequipped as the NOT insti-
tute in the 1920s, but they still lacked access to technology. At the beginning, 
Soviet sociologists lacked enough calculators to work out the effects of the STR, 
although they eventually received a Minsk-32 computer, staffed with forty-­one 
personnel. In 1972 and 1973, an Automated System of Analy­sis of Social Infor-
mation (ASAI) was put in place, but it was used only for basic statistical analy­
sis and image recognition. ­There was no capacity for computer simulation and 
modeling. IKSI researchers ­were to receive training in quantitative methods. It 
is difficult to tell what the uptake was, but the reports contain many complaints 
about “noise and paper dust” coming from the perforation hall that pro­cessed 
400,000–500,000 punch cards annually. Complaints about the staff’s general ab-
senteeism from offices and being late ­were made in the 1970s.84
Just like NOT in the 1920s, IKSI was shaken by severe, although not as vio-
lent, po­liti­cal turbulence soon ­after its establishment.85 An impor­tant part of this 
was an attempt to create a subdiscipline of social forecasting on the all-­union 
scale. This attempt, as I show in the remaining part of this chapter, was of a very 
dif­fer­ent character from Kondrat’ev’s work, as the energies ­were directed more 
to “action” rather than the “prediction” and “explanation” of the Comtean model.
The history of this attempt revolves a ­great deal around the personality of Igor’ 
Bestuzhev-­Lada, who was the face of Soviet forecasting in the international future 
studies community.86 It is impor­tant to explore Bestuzhev-­Lada’s case in detail, 
­because he is often referred to as key promoter of East-­West cooperation in ­future 
studies. However, as I show, Bestuzhev-­Lada should not be regarded as representa-
tive of the Soviet field of forecasting, ­because he had very par­tic­u­lar institutional 
and intellectual interests that do not encapsulate the diversity of the field. Born in 

	
Forecasting and the Cybernetic Sensibility	
87
1927 into a peasant ­family in a small village called Lada (hence his pen name) in 
Mordovia, about three hundred miles from Moscow, Bestuzhev-­Lada began his 
academic ­career as a military historian of the Crimean war in the 1950s. He was a 
loyal communist, a sympathizer of collectivist decisions: for instance, in 1951 he 
sent a letter to Stalin suggesting taking away by force ­those ­children who ­were in-
appropriately reared by their parents in order to educate them as communist citi-
zens in orphanages. This was, Bestuzhev-­Lada wrote in his memoir, an expression 
of his desire to be useful and serve the central power organs.87
The many writings by Bestuzhev-­Lada explic­itly acknowledge his ambition 
to become a leader of ­future studies—­but not futurology—in Soviet Rus­sia.88 In 
his memoir, he recalled wishing to write a science fiction story on moral com-
munist citizenship. Having consulted the library cata­log section on “Utopian so-
cialism,” he found H.G. Wells’s Forecast (1901) and K.  E. Tsiolkovskii’s The 
­Future of Humanity and the Earth (1928). ­These works, wrote Bestuzhev-­Lada, 
gave him the idea that the ­future could be studied scientifically in the same way 
as the past; this idea is similar to the suggestion of Hempel and Oppenheim that 
scientific prediction is a logical operation that can be equally applied to phenom-
ena in the past and in the ­future, although I do not know if Bestuzhev-­Lada had 
a chance to read Hempel and Oppenheim. In any case, Bestuzhev-­Lada claimed 
having coined the term “futurology” in 1956, completely in­de­pen­dently of Os-
sip Flechtheim, the German futurist, who first suggested the term in Western 
lit­er­a­ture.89 It is, however, uncertain to what extent he pioneered the field in the 
Soviet Union: Bestuzhev-­Lada’s first publications in the ­future studies field ap-
peared in 1967; hence they postdated Genadii Dobrov’s work in technology as-
sessment and Kosygin’s call for forecasting.90
­After the Second World War, scientific forecasting was one of many innova-
tive scientific approaches that explic­itly sought to make the ­future vis­i­ble and 
transparent. This ambition worried the Western critics of governmental ratio-
nalism and authoritarianism, who identified opaqueness not as an ­enemy, but 
as a vital resource for individual autonomy and the functioning of civil society. 
In his history of the French thought on transparency, Geroulanos detailed the 
arguments that individual citizens had a right to remain invisible and nontrans-
parent to the state, but the state and its experts, in contrast, had to be transpar-
ent to the citizens.91 To diminish the negative impacts of what was perceived as 
asymmetrical transparency where the population could be scrutinized by the 
state but not the other way around, public participation and engagement ­were 
increasingly debated in relation to the production and use of scientific knowl-
edge of ­future development. This led, as historians have shown, to the prolifera-
tion of ­future studies methods, as they diversified into embracing qualitative, 
participatory approaches in addition to the positivist and statistical methods.92 

88	
CHAPTER 4
For instance, the Austrian writer Robert Jungk established his Institute of the 
­Future in 1954 with the aim of promoting ­future studies as a participatory, demo­
cratic pro­cess of creating grassroots expertise. In contrast, other experts worked to 
increase transparency of the volatile social, economic, and po­liti­cal realities by 
refining the tools for decision-­makers in the governmental departments. The US 
operations researcher Herman Kahn founded his think tank, the Hudson Insti-
tute, to supply what he presented as impartial cost–­benefit scenarios of the demo-
graphic and economic consequences of nuclear war. Kahn also sought to change 
the terms of public debate in his controversial On Thermonuclear War (1960). In 
the 1940s and 1950s, US ­future studies frequently sprang from the military-­
industrial complex, most notably the RAND Corporation, where Kahn began his 
­career. At RAND, Olaf Helmer and his team developed the Delphi method, an 
influential technique based on an anonymous expert opinion survey conducted 
over several rounds to bring expert views close to consensus. This method was first 
publicized in 1964.93 In Eu­rope, large-­scale infrastructure planning demanded 
statistical data and predictive expertise; this demand was met by international 
organ­izations such as the United Nations Economic Commission for Eu­rope 
(UNECE) and the Organisation for Economic Co-­operation and Development 
(OECD), for which the prominent representative of technoscientific forecasting, 
Erich Jantsch, conceptualized explorative and normative forecasting techniques in 
1967.94 As the richer data sets ­were becoming increasingly available, scientific fore-
casting branched out into more technical, statistical approaches, which combined 
time series analy­sis and complex modeling and more normative approaches, inte-
grated with orga­nizational pro­cesses of goal-­setting and decision-­making.
In many cases, Hempel and Oppenheim’s notion of scientific prediction as a 
heuristic search for pos­si­ble explanations prevailed over the Comtean notion of 
prediction as inference based on certain knowledge. To predict in statistical fore-
casting meant to correlate data points, aiming to replicate the dynamic of 
change that is observed in real­ity as faithfully as pos­si­ble. A theoretical expla-
nation about why some correlations held was not always considered necessary. 
At this stage, the making of statistical forecasts entailed a ­great national and in-
ternational effort to orchestrate data, particularly the orga­nizational practices 
that produced the data, the techniques—­including the mathematical apparatus 
and computer technology—­and the culture of interpretation of the results in the 
decision-­making context. The postwar pioneers of forecasting experimented 
with all components of this pro­cess.95
Bestuzhev-­Lada quickly realized that if governmental decisions had to be 
grounded in prognostic research, a new institutional and social landscape would 
need to emerge. In the summer of 1966 a Rus­sian publicist and thinker Edvard 
Arab-­Ogly—­a former editor of the influential publications Voprosy filosofii (The 

	
Forecasting and the Cybernetic Sensibility	
89
Issues of Philosophy) and Problemy mira i sotsializma (World Marxist Review), 
then the head of the concrete social research department at the Institute for the 
International ­Labor Movement (IMRD)—­offered Bestuzhev-­Lada a position as 
head of a unit (in Rus­sian, sektor) for forecasting the socioeconomic conse-
quences of STR.96 In the mid-1960s IMRD provided a pocket of relative liberty 
for highly heterogeneous scholarship, united by a search for ways to bypass com-
munist dogma.97 Arab-­Ogly was personally interested in forecasting, especially 
in the field of demography.98
To get this higher administrative position Bestuzhev-­Lada was ready to sacri-
fice his academic prestige: at that time IMRD belonged to the trade ­union organ­
ization (it became an Acad­emy of Sciences institute ­later) and had a lower status 
than the Institute of History.99 Nevertheless, for Bestuzhev-­Lada to head a unit 
was a step ­toward establishing himself as the authority in the field of Soviet fore-
casting. At the IMRD, he was not keen on competitors. For instance, Bestuzhev-­
Lada is said to have prevented the publication of a book on approaches to prediction 
authored by several colleagues at IMRD, such as Merab Mamardashvili, Alek-
sandr Zinov’ev, and Oleg Genisaretskii.100 Bestuzhev-­Lada’s ambition ran high 
and he dreamt about creating a scientific council for forecasting at the Acad­emy of 
Sciences.101 Therefore, when two years ­later academician Aleksei Rumiantsev in-
vited Bestuzhev-­Lada to join the newly established IKSI as a head of department 
(in Rus­sian, otdel) with a promise of about seventy staff, he immediately agreed 
(and cunningly planned to remain at his IMRD unit as a vice-­chairman).102
In February 1969 Bestuzhev-­Lada joined IKSI but found out that ­things did 
not work out as expected. He did not get to chair the promised department with 
a staff of seventy, but only a unit with four or five ­people. ­There was no office 
space ­either: in the beginning the unit held meetings in an apartment in the sci-
ence town Dubna, outside Moscow. Then, it turned out that Bestuzhev-­Lada had 
to share his research agenda with Zvorykin, the head of a unit for studying the 
social consequences of the STR, who oversaw the collaboration with the ISA and 
research programs at UNESCO, and who prepared reports on the STR for high-­
level Soviet repre­sen­ta­tions abroad, such as at the Council of Eu­rope. Zvorykin 
also led social forecasting studies of ­labor and leisure, and corresponded with 
leading researchers, such as Radovan Richta in Czecho­slo­va­kia.103 Indeed, the So-
viet report on cultural policy for UNESCO contained a detailed account of fore-
casting in the cultural sector, which was no longer perceived as serving solely as 
ideological education but rather as a postindustrial economic sector. Thus, Zvo-
rykin wrote:
For the purpose of forecasting the development of culture and work-
ing out a long-­term cultural policy, increasing use is now being made 

90	
CHAPTER 4
of the methods of structural and system analy­sis. By ­these means it is 
pos­si­ble to make forecasts by smoothing the statistical curve obtained 
by the observation of recent pro­cesses, expressing it in analytical terms, 
and then extrapolating to the ­future. . . . ​The first question of interest . . . ​
was how the ratio between scientific and artistic culture in the U.S.S.R. 
is changing. We compared the numbers of scientists—­doctors and mas-
ters [kandidaty] of science—­with the number of members in the main 
­unions of creative artists. . . . ​We took the statistical data for the period 
1950–1967, worked out the extrapolation formulae by smoothing the 
statistical curve obtained, and then, using ­these formulae, calculated 
the number of scientific workers and creative artists for the years 1970, 
1980, 1990, and 2000. As a check, the corresponding figures for 1950 
and 1960 ­were also calculated by the same method. Comparison of the 
­actual and calculated figures for 1950 and 1960 indicated that our 
method of forecasting was sufficiently accurate.104
According to this forecast, the membership of ­unions of creative artists would 
increase by ca. 400 ­percent and by 2000 would reach a total of 128,600. As the 
number of scientists was expected to grow by about 600 ­percent to 383,100, 
the number of artists in relation to the number of scientists would decrease from 
30.4 ­percent in 1950 to 25.1 ­percent in 2000. The report was an expression of a 
postindustrial optimism, indicating increases in creative professions. The only 
anticipated decline concerned cinema-­goers, who ­were expected to be watching 
tele­vi­sion at home.105 This forecast, typically, did not anticipate a new type of 
technology driving social chance. For instance, VCR recorders would boom in 
the late 1980s, creating a black market of illegal home recordings and their sales, 
and bringing into existence unlicensed “video salons”—­cinema halls where 
­people would pay to see a poor-­quality copy of Rambo.106
When it was not commissioned by international organ­izations, IKSI research 
was fundamentally subordinated to the needs of Gosplan, which required it to de-
velop statistical methods for social indicators to inform industrial planning, par-
ticularly regarding the siting of factories and the availability of ­labor, as well as the 
population’s education and consumption needs.107 Unlike Zvorykin, Bestuzhev-­
Lada was not interested in statistics; his preferred method was expert surveys.108 In 
contrast, Zvorykin was more comfortable with the functionalist view of the STR 
and well equipped for conducting (at least ­simple) statistical trend surveys.109
It is difficult to pinpoint the substance of Bestuzhev-­Lada’s contribution to 
social forecasting. The intellectual content of his writing was mainly derivative 
of Western publications, and his so­cio­log­i­cal surveys ­were methodologically 
flawed. It could be fair to say that his role was that of an or­ga­nizer, seeking both 

	
Forecasting and the Cybernetic Sensibility	
91
to consolidate Soviet forecasting as an autonomous field and to establish links 
with Western ­future studies.110 His international contacts dated back to the 
IMRD times. In 1967 the prominent institutional entrepreneurs of ­future stud-
ies Robert Jungk and Fritz Baade, who would ­later be involved in Soviet energy 
forecasts, visited Moscow and met Bestuzhev-­Lada at Ivan Efremov’s apartment. 
Efremov was a scientist and author of the famous novel Andromeda Nebula 
(1957), which describes a global communist society set several thousand years 
in the ­future.111 At this meeting the idea of the World ­Future Studies Federation 
was discussed. Inspired by this discussion, Bestuzhev-­Lada initiated a forecast-
ing section at the SAS. Reportedly, not all members of the board welcomed this 
suggestion.112 Nevertheless, Bestuzhev-­Lada was included in Soviet del­e­ga­tions 
to the World ­Future conferences in Oslo (1967) and Tokyo (1970), but could not 
go: according to archival documents, for bureaucratic reasons the Soviet del­e­
ga­tion was late and did not participate.113 In 1969, on the invitation of Johan Gal-
tung, a pro-­Soviet thinker, founder of peace and conflict studies, and, indeed, 
the World ­Future Studies Federation, Bestuzhev-­Lada visited the Peace Research 
Institute in Oslo.114 Further international contacts ­were developed through the 
ISA. Bestuzhev-­Lada was first elected as the head of the STR section of the ISA 
Congress in Varna (1970) and ­later as a vice-­chairman, alongside the prominent 
French futurist Bertrand de Jouvenel, of ISA’s committee for ­future studies, and 
he was included as a founding member of the World ­Future Studies Federation 
(1973). He described retrospectively the year 1970 as the high point in his inter-
national ­career and, indeed, Bestuzhev-­Lada established himself as gatekeeper 
for Soviet–­West interaction on social forecasting.115 Furthermore, unlike some 
of his colleagues, he emerged unscathed through the po­liti­cal overhaul of IKSI 
in 1970 and 1971. Bestuzhev-­Lada got entangled in this pro­cess ­because he par-
ticipated in the unsanctioned Society for Scientific Forecasting (SSF).
The story of the SSF is all smoke and mirrors. Facts are scarce and can only 
be drawn from conflicting personal memoirs and the few archival documents, 
which are essentially accusations and therefore very likely heavi­ly biased.116 Es-
tablished in 1968, but never formally registered, the society stemmed from the 
Committee for All-­Union Symposia in Scientific Forecasting (established in Feb-
ruary 1967) at the SAS. This committee was chaired by Bestuzhev-­Lada.117 Al-
though it was supported by the top leaders of the Acad­emy of Sciences and 
included members of Gosplan, apparently no formal permission from the Cen-
tral Committee was sought. Such informal arrangements ­were not unusual: even 
large construction proj­ects such as museums, sports stadiums, and even science 
cities ­were built without formal permissions in the Soviet Union.118
The society was headed by the academician Vasilii Parin, a prominent bio-
physicist, who specialized in space research and conducted several studies about 

92	
CHAPTER 4
­future medical developments.119 In the documents Bestuzhev-­Lada is named as 
co-­organizer of SSF, although he denied having this role and, in line with the 
prosecutors of SSF, claimed that this organ­ization was used as a vehicle for ex-
tending the personal influence of the engineer Boris N. Tardov of the Research 
Institute of the Metallurgical Ministry.120 In 1969 Tardov, acting as a vice-­
president, attempted to formally register the SSF as a public all-­union organ­
ization, governed by an assembly and able to confer academic degrees. In 1970, 
the SSF planned to or­ga­nize 1,600 events involving 200,000 participants. The 
prob­lem with the SSF, it seems, was not so much the content but the form and 
scale of its activities: the SSF emerged from the bottom up and or­ga­nized its ac-
tivities horizontally across the industrial branches and academic institutes.
In June 1971, an investigation was launched and the outcomes ­were severe, 
although not for every­one. Consumed with anxiety, Parin had a stroke and died 
before being summoned for questioning. Tardov was penalized and had to move 
to Latvia.121 However, Bestuzhev-­Lada made an informal agreement with pros-
ecutors to serve as scapegoat; in his words, they needed to symbolically punish 
someone who had a doctor’s degree, and therefore he was given a reprimand (vy-
govor). To say that he got off lightly is an understatement: Bestuzhev-­Lada 
wrote in his memoir that by way of compensation he received two holiday trips 
abroad and was then requested to suspend his academic activities for one year, 
mainly staying in his summer ­house. Bestuzhev-­Lada kept his position as head 
of unit at IKSI (renamed the ISI in 1972). In June 1972 he was back at work, in-
cluded in a group to provide expertise for the national complex program of so-
cial development.122 In September 1972 Bestuzhev-­Lada traveled to Bucharest to 
participate in the Third ­Future Studies Conference, or­ga­nized with the personal 
support of Nicolae Ceaușescu.123 Following this conference, the Presidium of the 
Soviet Acad­emy of Sciences de­cided not to formally support the organ­ization of 
the World ­Futures Studies Federation (WFSF), but instead to consider Soviet par-
ticipation in ­future meetings case by case.124 This gave the opportunity for 
Bestuzhev-­Lada to attend the WFSF meetings, but without the formal status of 
Soviet participation, although he was named as a founding member of WFSF.
It is difficult to tell if the prob­lem was the method (statistical forecasting of so-
cial developments) or the horizontal, interor­gan­i­za­tional, and international activi-
ties that provoked the crackdown. I could not find much substantive research that 
emanated from the SSF. In terms of chronology, the purge of the SSF coincided 
with purges at IKSI but it is difficult to say if they ­were directly related.125 It is pos­
si­ble that ­these attacks ­were of a personal nature, using ideology as a rhetorical tool 
to legitimize decisions.126 In spring 1972, IKSI’s director Rumiantsev was replaced 
by Mikhail Rutkevich, a hard-­line communist but also someone who promoted 
sociology at Urals University.127 Lurii Levada and Grushin ­were transferred to 

	
Forecasting and the Cybernetic Sensibility	
93
TsEMI. ­Under the wing of Gvishiani, an influential promoter of East-­West coop-
eration in policy science, some IKSI employees found shelter in the State Commit-
tee for Science and Technology (GKNT) Institute of Management Prob­lems and, 
­after 1976, in the All-­Union Institute for Systems Research (VNIISI). Social fore-
casting was retained as a unit at the reor­ga­nized IKSI/ISI and in 1972 a commission 
for forecasting was or­ga­nized ­under the All-­Union Council of Scientific Socie­
ties, a lower-­rank structure which mainly engaged in retraining academics.128
One ­thing is clear though, the epistemology of social prediction interested 
very many dif­fer­ent scholars and this interest led to novel forms of research 
organ­ization, even if they ­were short lived. The epistemological questions were 
not addressed explic­itly: unlike the NIEI economists, Bestuzhev-­Lada was not 
concerned with glasnost’ or transparency, data flow, and trust in data. Rather, he 
dreamt of social forecasters having the central role in government. In the late 
1960s, Bestuzhev-­Lada contacted several aides of Politburo members suggesting 
a secret commission for social forecasting, which would analyze the social conse-
quences of po­liti­cal decisions taken by the Politburo. This commission, wrote 
Bestuzhev-­Lada, would work in partnership with the military-­industrial com-
plex as the Acad­emy of Sciences.129 If Bestuzhev-­Lada was keen to help the secu-
rity apparatus, what kind of society did his ­future methods envision?
Soviet ­Future Society Forecasted
The early work of Bestuzhev-­Lada shared many visions with Efremov’s Androm-
eda Nebula, particularly a global orientation and a belief in inexhaustible re-
sources. Bestuzhev-­Lada’s turn from historical research to current affairs was 
documented in his book If the World Disarms (1961), written as a propaganda 
commentary for peace talks between Khrushchev and Kennedy that took place in 
Vienna, June 1961. Outlining several alternatives for societal development which 
could be boosted by redirecting the expenditure on armament, If the World Dis-
arms engaged with themes that ­were becoming central in ­future studies: the con-
sequences of nuclear war and societal and industrial ­futures. Bestuzhev-­Lada’s 
notions of the ­future ­were extractive and exploitative: he detailed the pro­gress that 
would be achieved by transforming natu­ral systems and did not consider ecologi-
cal consequences.130 He wrote about, for instance, industrial megaprojects in the 
far north, such as the construction of “new Leningrads” and “new Stockholms” by 
removing the permafrost in Siberia and by warming up the Arctic Ocean by redi-
recting the Gulf Stream to create a “British climate” in the Far East.131 Interest in 
climate engineering was indeed developed by the Soviet atmosphere sciences, par-
ticularly Mikhail Budyko.132 As the world population growth was welcomed, in 

94	
CHAPTER 4
line with the Soviet humanist ideas, Bestuzhev-­Lada found it “unacceptable” that 
such a large surface area of the Earth was occupied by the ocean. This major natu­
ral restructuring could start, for example, with draining the Mediterranean Sea 
and creating picturesque islands, a pro­cess which, according to Bestuzhev-­Lada, 
“would not be costly at all.”133 The book is filled with similar utopian stories, which, 
regardless of Bestuzhev-­Lada’s self-­presentation as a rigorous scholar, are not sub-
stantiated with research findings or even basic environmental forecasts. The tropes 
­were also clichéd, widely used in the genre of social utopian writing since Wells’s 
Forecast.
At the same time the environmental costs of economic development increas-
ingly worried Soviet economic modelers. For instance, in an international meeting 
on technology assessment, or­ga­nized in Warsaw in 1970 (hence before the publica-
tion of The Limits to Growth), Soviet scholars argued for the inclusion of climate 
change in technology assessment, as well as for the need to study negative outcomes 
of the “scientific-­technical pro­gress,” such as pollution.134 Bestuzhev-­Lada, how-
ever, did not engage with the policy agenda in a substantive manner. His publica-
tions became less empirical, restricted to methodological reviews, and based on 
secondary sources. During the IKSI’s overhaul Bestuzhev-­Lada prob­ably learned 
the lesson that it was safest to say nothing of substance. Even A Win­dow to the 
­Future: The Con­temporary Prob­lems of Social Prognosis (1970), his key work done at 
IMRD was ­little more than a superficial introduction to Western ­future studies 
containing no Soviet data. He does, however, offer an in­ter­est­ing linguistic discus-
sion of scientific and nonscientific forms of prediction. The Rus­sian words describ-
ing statements about what is to come are prorochestvo, proritsanie, predugadovanie, 
and predskazanie. Like Kondrat’ev, Bestuzhev-­Lada considers predvidenie (previ-
sion) as a suitable analytical term, while predskazanie (prediction) he equates with 
guessing. But his favorite term is prognozirovanie (prognosis), which he defines as a 
type of predvidenie. Bestuzhev-­Lada ­adopted a positivist, Comtean notion of prog-
nosis as not simply a statement about the ­future but a form of a systematic, scientific 
research into the course of change that is used to influence this change in a desir-
able direction.135 Then, somewhat similarly to Hempel and Oppenheim, Bestuzhev-­
Lada considers prognosis scientific if the following criteria are met: “analy­sis and 
synthesis, induction and deduction, observation and scientific experiment, classifi-
cation and systematization, assumption and hypothesis, analogy and extrapolation 
(the extension of a line of development, the lawfulness of which structure in the 
past and in the ­future are sufficiently well known, to the ­future by thought).”136 
­These are formal qualities, wrote Bestuzhev-­Lada, but the practice of prognosis en-
tailed both less formal and less technical approaches, such as the intuition of a sci-
entific expert, the use of analogy with already-­known phenomena and pro­cesses, 
and, fi­nally, direct extrapolation of pro­cesses into the ­future.137 In this discussion, 

	
Forecasting and the Cybernetic Sensibility	
95
Bestuzhev-­Lada pools together a wide range of scientific approaches and method-
ologies without clear distinction of their differences and limitations. All scholarly 
research, it seems, can be predictive.
In the context of sociology, the public opinion survey and social attitude sur-
veys fascinated young social scientists since the 1960s as a method allowing a 
glimpse into Soviet society. As noted by the historian Aro Velmet, Soviet sociolo-
gists initially saw their role as providers of self-­regulatory feedback in the increas-
ingly complex industrial society.138 Although Bestuzhev-­Lada advocated the 
method of expert surveys, in line with Olaf Helmer’s Delphi method, he did not 
practice it himself. A significant issue was that “experts” ­were difficult to find. As 
his colleague at IKSI noted, “Do we have such experts? They still have to be born, 
finish school or university, receive scientific degree, and learn to prognose. We do 
not have such a quantity of experts.”139 Furthermore, Bestuzhev-­Lada prob­ably 
understood that to be able to elicit expert opinions, a ­great formal authority was 
required, as well as access to high-­level decision-­making. Expert surveys are a ver-
sion of the Delphi method, in which a group of anonymous experts are asked to 
assess the likelihood of ­future developments; their answers are statistically aggre-
gated and circulated within the group. They then revise their opinions based on 
this aggregated data. In 1969 two influential scientists from the military-­industrial 
complex and promoters of information theory, Germogen Pospelov and Vitalii 
Maksimenko, pointed out that “the best-­known method in our country” was the 
Delphi method, adding that although it was created at RAND, the Delphi method 
was equally suitable to inform decisions in a state socialist system.140
The deployment of the Delphi method in the Soviet Union, however, was jeop-
ardized by the extreme lack of trust. No single Soviet expert would trust a soci-
ologist’s promise of anonymity and volunteer information that would diverge 
from the official discourse and expectation. Surveys ­were perceived as question-
ing and posed a risk: the KGB ran their own “expert interviews” with man­ag­ers 
and gathered public-­health data in­de­pen­dently of research institutes, ministries, 
and branch agencies.141
The epistemological complexities of prediction, the quality of data, the intrica-
cies of the mathematical apparatus, and what the under­lying “laws” that would 
help identify and explain change could be did not interest Bestuzhev-­Lada. When 
he did engage with statistical forecasting, he did it in such a simplistic way that 
even his colleagues could not help but criticize him. For instance, in 1972 
Bestuzhev-­Lada’s unit developed social indicators and forecasted the ­future needs 
of young ­people in the 1990s. The categories for needs ­were established, it appears, 
without preliminary research and included “food, clothing, healthcare, sex, so-
cialising, love.” The report contains a shallow study that had no substantive find-
ings.142 A verbatim report of an internal discussion revealed that Bestuzhev-­Lada 

96	
CHAPTER 4
had built his study on the assumption that “­people in the 1990s ­will behave in the 
same way as ­today.” As he put it, “we should not expect to discover Amer­i­ca.”143 
His colleagues disagreed, particularly the sociologist Vladimir Shlapentokh, one 
of the leading scholars specializing in quantitative survey methods, who suggested 
that should the environment that satisfied the needs dis­appear, the needs would 
dis­appear too. Furthermore, as Shlapentokh observed, the so­cio­log­i­cal studies of 
current Soviet lifestyles ­were flawed and insufficient, hence they could not serve as 
a reliable basis for forecasting. For instance, a study of time bud­gets, conducted at 
IKSI, for some reason gathered the data that registered respondents’ activities dur-
ing one day only.144 Indeed, Shlapentokh suggested that a survey of what ­people 
consider as unsatisfied needs would serve as a better indication of what the ­future 
holds.145 Further criticism pointed to the importance of industrial changes. A frus-
trated Vladimir Lisichkin, who defended a doctoral thesis on forecasting as a com-
plex scientific prob­lem in 1967, appealed to common sense, arguing that Western 
forecasts ­were predicting that ­there would be about 85 ­percent of new goods in 
France in 1985 and thus, quite possibly, dif­fer­ent needs among young ­people.146 
Bestuzhev-­Lada had ­little to say in defense of his forecast.147
This was not the individual case of an ambitious but failed scholar but part of a 
general phenomenon: even in the late 1980s, when social value studies ­were ex-
tended to include studies of deviation, particularly alcohol and drug prob­lems, 
Soviet social forecasting did not indicate the coming of disruptive social change. 
Projecting continuity, social forecasting served as a tool for conserving the status 
quo.148 Perhaps Soviet social forecasts worked as now-­casts, but instead of fitting 
­actual data to a model, they fitted the data to a normative ideological framework. 
Another pos­si­ble reason is that like the late nineteenth-­century forecasters, who 
studied cycles and trends with the aim of eliminating them rather than under-
standing their dynamic and adjusting to complexity, the late twentieth-­century 
Soviet government sought for simplified solutions.149 In princi­ple, statistical fore-
casts of macro phenomena ­were expected to be plugged into feedback channels to 
ensure the self-­regulation of the complex Soviet social system. In practice the on-
set of the fatigue of meaningless statistical data churned out by the growing Soviet 
bureaucracy lost the aura that it had in the 1920s, the times of Kondrat’ev. Statis-
tics ­were not good even for “autohypnosis.” In the context of informality that gov-
erned decisions at enterprise and policy levels, statistical forecasts ­were deemed 
irrelevant, a mere orga­nizational ritual that was observed and then ignored.
IKSI did not have a mono­poly in social forecasting: statistical forecasts of so-
cial, industrial, and environmental changes ­were developed in many other aca-
demic milieus that ­were closer to the heart of economic planning, industrial 
management, and national security. As I have demonstrated in detail elsewhere, 
Soviet scientific forecasting was more substantial when it was practiced in the 

	
Forecasting and the Cybernetic Sensibility	
97
context of international cooperation, but also in the fields of OR and computer 
modeling, which became alternative social sciences, offering dif­fer­ent conceptual 
structures for predictions that departed from historical materialism.150 The insti-
tutional link connecting the perestroika of the 1980s and the 1960s is found in 
the 1970s, when economic and technoscientific forecasting became solidly estab-
lished as an area of East–­West cooperation. At the VNIISI, equipped with West-
ern computers, alternative long-­term forecasts ­were made and submitted to the 
Politburo.151
The key point is that the very ­will to predict served as an impor­tant criterion 
of proper science. Soviet scholars ­were required to make predictions, but then 
they ­were prevented from ­doing this by the very po­liti­cal organ­ization of re-
search institutions. The ­will to predict thus fueled the criticism of the entire So-
viet system of social and economic sciences. This was made evident when many 
the participants of the 1966 debate on forecasting the Soviet economy took up 
prominent positions ­after 1986, when, for instance, the economist Aganbegian 
became Mikhail Gorbachev’s economic advisor. Although it took them two 
de­cades, economists succeeded where Bestuzhev-­Lada had failed: in 1986 the In-
stitute of Economics and Forecasting of Technoscientific Pro­gress was formed on 
the basis of several departments at the TsEMI on the initiative of Aleksandr Anch-
ishkin, Iurii Iaremenko, and Stanislav Shatalin. In the late 1980s Soviet scholars 
began applying their forecasts to model difference and change, outlining pathway 
scenarios to alternative ­futures. It was none other than Shatalin, in his capacity as 
economic advisor to Gorbachev, who masterminded joining the expertise of East-
ern Eu­ro­pean and Western planners to design the restructuring of state socialist 
economies. The famous five hundred days program outlining the transition to a 
managed market economy, developed in 1989, was conceived at the International 
Institute of Applied Systems Analy­sis (IIASA) in Austria, an institute created 
­under patronage of Kosygin and Gvishiani in 1972.152 However, as Zubok showed, 
by that time it was too late to forecast and plan the Soviet economic development 
as the decentralization of the economic system led to chaos and collapse, which 
was in part caused by corruption and in part by the lack of local expertise in man-
agement and planning.153
The failure of Gorbachev’s reforms could be seen as a failure of synchroniza-
tion of activities among newly established enterprises and existing companies 
and bureaucracies, a pro­cess that was well vis­i­ble in the field of scientific fore-
casting where the institutional center of gravity for predictive expertise was shift-
ing away from central national institutions to international organ­izations. The 
head of central archives, Rudolf Pikhoia, reminisced that while it took him a few 
hours to find the Ribbentrop–­Molotov Pact in the state archives, locating Gos-
plan’s primary statistical data took weeks.154 Not that ­these statistics would have 

98	
CHAPTER 4
been of much help: as Zubok showed in his detailed account of the economic 
reforms initiated by Gorbachev, the existing system of accounting for finance 
and production was quickly eroded by the privatization and liberalization of en-
terprise activities.155 At the ­later stage, in the early 1990s, the economic data gap 
was hurriedly filled by the experts from the International Monetary Fund and 
the World Bank.156As perestroika accelerated, the institutional landscape of so-
cial and economic forecasting was quickly fragmenting. From 1988 to 1990, a 
dizzying range of nongovernmental commissions, socie­ties, and associations was 
established to develop a research and policy lobby in economic, social, and en-
vironmental forecasting. Some of them claimed to have been modeled on the 
RAND Corporation, prob­ably to gain a competitive edge through symbolic as-
sociation with the famous Cold War think tank.157 A case in point is the profes-
sional trajectory of Igor’ Zadorin, a mathematician who began his education in 
the prestigious Fiztekh, the Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology, in the 
mid-1980s. At the same time Zadorin worked at a secret defense research insti-
tute, where he or­ga­nized a biweekly seminar on sociology and forecasting. 
Among ­those who attended ­those seminars was Sergei Glazyev, ­later a mem-
ber of Boris Eltsin’s government, more recently economic advisor to Vladimir 
Putin, and said to be a pos­si­ble successor to Putin’s presidency.158 Zadorin was 
increasingly fascinated with sociology, changed his field, and wrote a doctoral 
thesis ­under Bestuzhev-­Lada’s supervision in parallel to his job at the secret 
laboratory Almaz which developed cruise missile systems during the 1980s. 
Seeing potential in what was an untapped field of research into voters’ be­hav­ior 
and attitudes, in 1989 Zadorin established the Centre for Intellectual Resources 
and Cooperation in Societal Sciences (TsIRKON), a non-­governmental think 
tank specializing in applied social and po­liti­cal research.159 TsIRKON con-
ducted its first studies of po­liti­cal attitudes in 1990 and 1991 and continued its 
activities for the next three de­cades, positioning its activities as a “pure” re-
search agency rather than a po­liti­cal consultancy.160 To establish legitimacy, Za-
dorin used his ties with the Moscow Methodological Circle adopting its 
performative approach to scientific prediction, which is considered in the fol-
lowing chapters. Ironically, as Zadorin’s TsIRKON emphasizes its autonomy 
from decision-­makers, it departs from Bestuzhev-­Lada’s utopian dream of an in-­
house scientific expertise that would feed directly into the governmental loops.
Conclusion
In his Growth (2019), Smil forewarns the reader that the omnipresent logistic 
curve and the data that is fitted does not forecast but indicates the ­future.161 The 

	
Forecasting and the Cybernetic Sensibility	
99
unknown, the missing piece of the puzzle, is indicated by the curve, but the 
mechanism of how this puzzle fits with the wider picture, why it is located pre-
cisely where it is, might not necessarily be clear. Statistical forecasting, from 
Hempel and Oppenheim’s point of view, can be understood as an example of a 
heuristic, hy­po­thet­i­cal science that is moving ­toward an explanation. When 
­people forget the heuristic character of forecasts, wrote Smil, they are at risk of 
making grave errors in their decisions. Ignoring the forecasts, as the Soviet 
government routinely did, can be equally damaging.
It should not be forgotten that forecasting is a form of scientific prediction that 
is very dif­fer­ent from predictive processing—­a pro­cess that is conceptualized in 
the cybernetics of adaptive systems. However, in the macro models of gover-
nance, the function of an informational signal—­feedback correction—­was attrib-
uted to scientific forecasting. This was a major source of error ­because it led to the 
orga­nizational culture that placed too much trust in forecasts as trackers of a 
real­ity that was presumed to be out ­there. Smil describes this as a “mechanistic 
use” of forecasting, which is based on a fundamental misunderstanding of the 
statistical method.162 Phi­los­o­phers of science, such as Robert Northcott, critiqued 
this habit of the unreflexive use of forecasts, proposing that economic forecasts 
should be put to the test by requiring them to provide precise “point predictions” 
rather than indicating wide ranges of pos­si­ble outcomes. Such point predictions 
are more easily falsifiable, they enable a more proper scrutiny of the forecasting 
method. Most importantly, many, if not most, point predictions fail, reminding 
the users of this kind of method that ­these are instruments for the scientific ex-
ploration of an uncertain real­ity.163
The economic historian Paul Gregory showed that with the exception of short, 
quarterly plans, the exuberant Soviet planning system had ­little impact on ­actual 
orga­nizational practices and the per­for­mance of the Soviet economy.164 However, 
I suggest that the heuristic epistemology of scientific prediction was changing the 
normative understanding of what it means to govern. As revealed in the NIEI 
debate in 1966, leading Soviet economists expected that the methodological im-
peratives of forecasting would enable them to overcome the fragmentation of So-
viet planning into branches. Their aims resonated with Cold War politics. The 
Soviet government, concerned with maintaining its image as a superpower, could 
not afford to lag ­behind in the development of predictive policy sciences. In prac-
tice, this ambition was reined in by the lack of data that could be trusted, a side 
effect of pervasive restrictions of circulation of raw data that could be tested.165 
The Soviet orchestration of social and economic prediction as a form of scientific 
knowledge was failing to support the regime. In their conceptual architecture, 
Soviet numerical pre­sen­ta­tions of the ­future ­were closer to medieval conjectures 
and astrology (although popu­lar astrology was banned in the Soviet Union ­until 

100	
CHAPTER 4
1988).166 Soviet official publications contained numbers, graphs, and curves to 
evidence the victorious growth of communism, which ignored transitions be-
tween the dif­fer­ent states of the system—­events or symptoms.
Just like the interwar time man­ag­ers, who lacked timers to test their ­simple 
time–­motion models, social and economic forecasters at the institutes of the So-
viet Acad­emy of Sciences lacked access to computers and data sets. This lack of 
data was acknowledged, but only in internal reports: regardless of the widely 
propagated technoscientific pro­gress that was to propel the Soviet Union into the 
foremost ranks of advanced countries, the Gosplan statisticians complained that 
“statistical data on technoscientific pro­gress in the Soviet Union is collected abso-
lutely inadequately.”167 Or, in a discussion at the Presidium of the Soviet Acad­emy 
of Sciences in 1983, the economist Shatalin stated that although TsEMI employed 
one thousand staff, it did not manage to construct an optimal plan for the Soviet 
economy during the two de­cades of its existence; in turn, even the twenty thou-
sand staff of the Gosplan system had never produced a well-­balanced plan.168 
Economists complained that in real­ity planning was fragmented and “monopo-
lized” by the branch ministries, which ­were in charge of the entire pro­cess of 
­labor, production, capital investments, construction, and social provision for 
their workers; a situation described as “feudalism” by the physicist Lev Landau. 
The complex, long-­term development program, based on interbranch forecasting 
and developed since the early 1970s, was meant to bridge this fragmentation. By 
1983 it was clear to economists that this effort was doomed to fail.169
For my argument it is centrally impor­tant that this gap was noticed and crit-
icized. This criticism hinted that new governmental norms ­were in place, which 
enabled observers to view ­actual Soviet planning practices as structurally de-
fective. The ­future of the Soviet economy was constructed as more open, proba-
bilistic, and even uncertain. However, the ideological restriction of public 
discourses constrained the ­actual repertoire of alternative ­futures of Soviet so-
ciety that could be forecasted. This would change only in the late 1970s and 1980s, 
in line with increasing awareness of the deterioration of the global biosphere and 
the recognition that the gas and oil resources ­were not boundless and would be 
exhausted in the foreseeable ­future.170
To conclude, Soviet scientific forecasting contributed to the development of 
a belief that governance without reliable information was condemned to fail. It 
was becoming clear that the pre­sent state of production and economic sectors 
could not be interpreted without some idea of their ­future values, and ­these 
­future values could not be known without data about the past. Making this vi-
cious loop of nonknowledge explicit, Soviet forecasting of the 1960s called for 
better visibility and accountability, something that paved the way for glasnost’ 
and the policies which opened up Soviet society to more of a ­free flow of infor-

	
Forecasting and the Cybernetic Sensibility	
101
mation. However, not all reformers considered the transparency of numbers a 
key resource for prediction. As I show in the next two chapters, no less influen-
tial notions of prediction ­were formulated by ­those who engaged with murky 
informality and extreme complexity of cognition and be­hav­ior. ­These champi-
ons of invisibility, unlike cultural critics of transparency in East and West, saw 
it as an impor­tant governmental resource to be harnessed and manipulated.

102
The construction of Soviet communist society was the orchestration of the ­future 
par excellence: the government assembled ideological, material, and institutional 
resources to propel its populations into a new state of existence, expected to be 
characterized by equality, prosperity, and a cornucopian vision of pro­gress.1 In line 
with the ideals of Enlightenment modernity, the communist social order was 
meant to be legible, transparent to the gaze of the leader, the bureaucrat, and the 
scientist.2 However, at the same time the communist regime relied heavi­ly on the 
asymmetry of knowledge, secrecy, and fear. The ideal of comprehensive vision and 
the corresponding certainty of knowledge was not equally distributed, but or­ga­
nized hierarchically to enable centralized, top-­down control. Even ­those at the top 
of the po­liti­cal hierarchy could never be certain to know it all. The arbitrary ap-
plication of power and terror resulting in lack of consistency and transparency of 
governmental actions, according to Hannah Arendt, is the preferred mode of gov-
ernment in totalitarian regimes, the opposite of the demo­cratic ideal of the rule of 
law and effective at keeping populations in a state of permanent anxiety and sub-
mission.3 In the Soviet Union, particularly in the late period of the 1950s to 1980s, 
the lack of transparency was further amplified by the continuous failure of cen-
trally commanded, bureaucratically run institutions, which led to the emer-
gence of a pervasive compensatory mechanism, an informal society and economy, 
characterized by the exchange of ­favors known as blat.4 In this way, both the 
organ­ization of the Soviet state and the lived everyday experience of the popula-
tion contradicted the princi­ples of consistency, visibility, and rationality.
5
PREDICTION AND THE OPAQUE
Prospective Reflexivity

	
Prediction and the Opaque	
103
This chapter explores the way in which scientific prediction was used to main-
tain and legitimize opacity generated by informal social practices in the au-
thoritarian society. It pre­sents a genealogy of the idea of “prospective reflexivity” 
(in Rus­sian, vpered napravlennaia refleksiia and prospektivnaia refleksiia) as it 
was articulated in the writings of a Soviet management thinker, Georgii Petro-
vich Shchedrovitskii (1929–1994). The legacy of the thought and practice of 
Shchedrovitskii (pronounced Shae-­dro-­vitsky) forms a fascinating mangle of 
ideas, social networks, myths, and legends that continue to animate both aca-
demic and practitioner management communities in Rus­sia ­today. The magnetic 
power of prospective reflexivity is the promise of a scientific prediction that em-
braces informal practices.
Indeed, unlike scientific forecasting, discussed in chapter 4, prospective re-
flexivity’s ambition was not to make the complex objects of governance legible 
and accountable, “predictable” over the long term. Prospective reflexivity was not 
a guess, an estimate, or an explanation. The concept of prospective reflexivity 
captures the performative aspect of predictive knowledge that enables integration 
and coordination of collective action. As I show in this chapter, prospective re-
flexivity sought to reconcile a formalist theory of cognition with murky depths of 
social informality and uncertainty, the ­great unknown of the Soviet social. Pro-
spective reflexivity promised a mechanism of coping with the mess of ­things and 
­people that ­were dysfunctional, invisible, disorderly. Scientific forecasting har-
bored the promise of an automated steering of large trends by providing statisti-
cal data input to computer software that could replace a ­human decision-­maker 
churning out policy recommendations and issuing signals to steer production. In 
contrast, the concept of prospective reflexivity referred to a fundamentally em-
bodied practice, seeking to capture the part of ­human subjectivity that unfolds in 
a collective action. Instead of making ­things vis­i­ble, prospective reflexivity al-
lowed them to stay invisible. Instead of modeling continuity and stability, like 
Soviet scientific forecasting, prospective reflexivity sought to first destabilize and 
deformalize managerial relations, in order to create preconditions for a new form 
of an interactive order.5
Prospective reflexivity, in this way, drew upon and amplified what was seen as 
informal social relations. ­These informal relations compensated for the dysfunc-
tion of the Soviet economy by redistributing goods and ser­vices but, as Alena 
Ledeneva argued, informality turned out to be a “modernization trap” in the post-­
Soviet context.6 Scholars interpret the impact of Soviet informalities in dif­fer­ent 
ways, depending on ­whether they ­were located in the economic sphere (the infor-
mal economy) or politics (the nascent civil society). In the post-­Soviet context 
both forms of informality are criticized as sources of corruption: vast corruption 

104	
CHAPTER 5
was indeed an insurmountable prob­lem in the Soviet economy, its destructive 
power was fully revealed in the collapse of the Soviet economy in the 1980s when 
Gorbachev’s reforms unleashed the chaotic be­hav­ior of industrial and commercial 
enterprises.7 However, the picture is even more complicated: sociologists and 
organ­ization scholars suggest that formal rules and informal practices constitute a 
complex assemblage rather than opposites. Prospective reflexivity arose from a 
similar insight, acknowledging that cognition can be represented through a for-
mal, scientific knowledge but it must be actively inserted into a social context in 
order to have an impact on practice. Whereas the proponents of scientific forecast-
ing ­were mainly interested in institutional design, Shchedrovitskii was interested 
in personal interaction as the key context for the orchestration of the ­future.
It is impor­tant to understand that the concept of prospective reflexivity was 
consciously developed as an alternative to central planning and centrally com-
manded management practice. It first emerged in Shchedrovitskii’s writings and 
lectures in the 1960s and spread widely through the practice of activity games in 
the late 1970s and the 1980s. Prospective reflexivity did not have an institutional 
home, it was born in the informal intellectual context of the Moscow Method-
ological Circle (first called the Moscow logical circle, 1952–1954), which evolved 
from a student discussion group into a network centered first on the phi­los­o­pher, 
and ­later dissident, Aleksandr Zinov’ev and, from 1958, on Shchedrovitskii. The 
members of the circle discussed Marxism, formal logic, and social psy­chol­ogy, 
but also the systems approach and information theory. Retrospectively, Moscow 
methodologists described themselves as adhering to the systems approach.8
Shchedrovitskii’s authority was derived not from technocratic neutrality or 
institutional position, but rather his bravado in claiming to have developed a new 
theory of knowledge, his unorthodox approach to intellectual discussion, and a 
certain disregard that he had ­toward ideological but also social bound­aries. His 
contemporaries recall his aura, describing him as a mysterious, charismatic per-
sonality, a Voland, the dark character from Mikhail Bulgakov’s novel Master 
and Margarita.9 Shchedrovitskii was one of the first genuine management con­
sul­tants and gurus in the Soviet Union: in the 1980s he conducted almost 100 
training sessions, many of which hosted 150–200 prac­ti­tion­ers. His legacy has 
become part of public culture, at least among Moscow elites.10 Shchedrovitskii’s 
work is quoted in thousands of research papers and dissertations published 
mainly by Rus­sian researchers in the fields of management, media studies, po­
liti­cal science, philosophy, and pedagogics.11 However, as management writing 
continues to be treated as gray lit­er­a­ture in the mainstream po­liti­cal science and 
sociology, and as management con­sul­tants have yet to find their place in the so-
cial history of governance, Shchedrovitskii’s work remains ­little known outside 
Rus­sian academia.12

	
Prediction and the Opaque	
105
The Shchedrovitskii legacy is not ­limited to the somewhat narrow niche of 
management theory but is directly linked with the post-­Soviet business and po­
liti­cal elites that emerged in the 1990s: many high-­level government officials who 
shared engagement with Shchedrovitskii ­rose in ranks ­under Putin. For instance, 
Sergei Kirienko, the deputy chief of staff at the Kremlin and a former head of 
Rosatom, the Rus­sian nuclear power corporation, responsible for nuclear weap-
ons, appointed Georgii’s son Petr Shchedrovitskii as Rosatom’s head of strategy 
in 2008. Other influential supporters include Anton Vaino, the chief of staff 
(2016–2022); Viktor Khristenko, previously the minister of industry, trade, and 
energy, and the chairman of the board of the Eurasian Economic Commission 
(2012–2016); and Andrei Reus, a former director-­general of Oboronprom, a 
Russian–­Belarusian corporation specializing in the defense industry, including 
the production of military he­li­cop­ters. Reus is chairman of the Georgii Shche-
drovitskii Institute of Development.13
In this chapter I examine Shchedrovitskii’s role in the development of Soviet 
management and policy sciences, analyzing his efforts as a par­tic­u­lar attempt to 
harness informal practices to enhance control of the ­future, practices that com-
plemented planning based on formal, scientific knowledge. By formal knowledge, 
I refer to the scientific expertise produced within established institutional envi-
ronments, such as research institutes and laboratories, documented in publica-
tions, and fed into the governmental pro­cess through reports and statistics, the 
end products of science. It is on this formal scientific knowledge that the existing 
studies of the Soviet scientific governance tend to focus, attributing to the Soviet 
regime the characteristics of a high modernist state.14 Now, high modernist states, 
the argument goes, have a particularly formal take on time: time is a dimension 
produced by knowledge instruments, such as clocks, diagrams, statistical time 
series, history, and, an array of ­future studies methods.15 High modernist states 
seek to capture, understand, and control the apparent chaos of life by creating 
institutions and professions to mediate knowledge production, planning, and 
governance. This ambition increased in scale from the 1940s to the 1960s, when 
so-­called Big Science, bringing together the military and industrial complexes and 
flagship infrastructural and space proj­ects, required its combination of scientific 
and managerial expertise, both in the East and the West.16 However, as I showed in 
the previous chapters, this pro­cess of formalization was obstructed by multiple 
failures and bottlenecks. ­These failures created a niche for Shchedrovitskii’s meth-
odology. I argue that Shchedrovitskii’s methodology, in par­tic­u­lar his notion of 
prospective reflexivity, challenged the input–­output model of scientific forecasting 
(according to which the information revealed by scientific forecasting was sup-
plied to the Soviet planning organs to assist decision-­makers).17 I detail the ways in 
which Shchedrovitskii developed his own model of the reflexive coproduction of 

106	
CHAPTER 5
the ­future, as revealed in his theoretical writings and the documentation of his 
workshops and lectures. A brief note on my sources is necessary. I mainly draw 
on the published primary materials, namely books, articles, and memoirs pub-
lished by Shchedrovitskii and his colleagues, which reveal the conceptual impor-
tance of informality for future-­oriented governance. Shchedrovitskii famously 
taped his workshops and transcribed them; although not all ­these transcripts are 
available, the materials that I could access contain useful examples of informal 
interaction.
Goal-­Setting
Goal-­setting is at the heart of planning. The declaration of goals works like a 
searchlight showing what is to come. In the organ­ization and management the-
ory, goal-­setting is expected to make be­hav­ior and its outcomes predictable—­
identifiable, explainable, expectable, and accountable. In practice, organ­ization 
and social psy­chol­ogy researchers such as Karl Weick have showed, the goals 
that are achieved tend to be ascribed to actions retrospectively. In other words, 
goal-­setting can be understood as a performative fiction, written looking both 
forward and backward.
What is the place of scientific prediction in this context? As I showed in chap-
ter 3, the notion of teleological be­hav­ior that was driven by ­future goals and not 
past ­causes was proposed by the foundational thinkers of cybernetics Wiener, 
Rosenblueth, and Bigelow in 1943.18 For them, prediction is a form of heuristic 
information pro­cessing that supports adaptive be­hav­ior. It is a form of alignment 
with the changing environment, rather than an objective, formal repre­sen­ta­tion 
of the world (as Hempel and Oppenheim would have it). The cybernetic theory 
defines teleological be­hav­ior as a pro­cess that seeks a par­tic­u­lar goal and con-
tinuously evaluates the pre­sent state with regard to an anticipated, final state. 
The goal is reached when the current state overlaps with the anticipated state. 
Goal-­seeking be­hav­ior, exhibited by a ­human, an animal, or a machine, relies 
on communication with the external environment, flowing through feedback 
loops. Goal-­seeking be­hav­ior operates on the basis of perceived difference be-
tween the anticipated state and the ­actual state. Fi­nally, perception of difference 
activates teleological be­hav­ior.19
In computer science and engineering, the idea of teleological prediction was 
applied in radar tracking and targeting systems. In physiology and neuroscience, 
it informed the notion of bottom-up pro­cessing, which is activated by the differ-
ence between the anticipated and the ­actual sensorial input to a neural network. 
At its highest level of engineering, the integration of informational signals, teleo-

	
Prediction and the Opaque	
107
logical be­hav­ior is about goal-­setting. This hypothesis has informed many po­liti­
cal theorists, from Karl Deutsch, who sketched an institutional skeleton of the 
state as an information pro­cessing system in his The Nerves of Government (1963), 
to the proponents of network governance in the 1990s and the open method of 
coordination, introduced in the Eu­ro­pean Union in 2000. However, the original 
cybernetic notion of prediction-­based, teleological be­hav­ior was only applied to 
lower rungs of be­hav­ior, the perceptual alignment with the environment. It is 
about the neural networks trying to identify “what is ­really happening.”
In the Soviet Union, the question of what was ­really happening was close to 
impossible to answer. Marxist–­Leninist theory offered a clear and quite rigid 
model of social mobilization: what ­were presumed to be inert, unreflexive 
masses ­were to be activated, made conscious of their social and historical mis-
sion, and set on a course of action in achieving it. The Communist Party’s role 
was to steer the masses by issuing programs and instructions, but the very mo-
ment this model of command was activated, the ontological and epistemologi-
cal real­ity appeared to crumble into pieces. Paying dues to the ideology and the 
party power structure was not negotiable, but, at the same time, informal and 
personal relations ­shaped the everyday po­liti­cal and orga­nizational decision-­
making.20 Yet though ­these informal practices ­were a public secret, they ­were 
not recognized as legitimate in the Soviet Union: any divergence from the top-­
down organ­ization of demo­cratic centralism and party control was suspect and 
subject to the investigations of the security organs (KGB).21 Every­one knew about 
the personalist approach to decision-­making, but this knowledge was a source 
of per­sis­tent anxiety. Informality was everywhere but it was not to be seen. As I 
show in the following section, Shchedrovitskii’s genius was to lend a formal, sci-
entific methodology to confer an aura of legitimacy on informality, wedding it 
to the formal planning of the ­future in Soviet enterprises and administrations.
The First Soviet Management Guru
Georgii Petrovich Shchedrovitskii was born into a highly educated ­family in 
Moscow. His ­father was an engineer, hailing from a po­liti­cally active and affluent 
­family of Rus­sian Jews, and his ­mother was a medical doctor, trained in micro-
biology. Like many Rus­sian families, they lost some of their relatives in Stalin’s 
terror, but this did not weaken their loyalty to the regime.22 During the Second 
World War, Georgii’s ­father was sent to oversee an aircraft factory in Kuibyshev 
(now Samara, in the southeast of Eu­ro­pean Rus­sia). ­After the war, he was ap-
pointed the director of Orgaviaprom, the Research Institute for the Organ­ization 
of the Aviation Industry. In his memoir, Georgii recalled meeting members of 

108	
CHAPTER 5
both the party and the military-­industrial complex elites as part of a normal ev-
eryday life.23 His was a privileged social environment of scientific and technical 
intelligent­sia, who shared a commitment to communism and ­were well inte-
grated in the Soviet elite nomenklatura but saw themselves as being on the pe-
riphery of the ­really influential circles. They led what was a comfortable life in 
Moscow in the 1940s and 1950s: the Shchedrovitskii ­family occupied two rooms 
in a large communal apartment, with a shared kitchen and bathroom, situated in 
a beautiful building on Vozdvizhenskaia Street, a stone’s throw from the Krem-
lin. At school, Georgii excelled in mathe­matics and enrolled to study physics, a 
very popu­lar subject, at Moscow State University (MGU) in 1946. However, in 
1949, he transferred to the philosophy department, to the disappointment of both 
his parents and physics teacher. They worried not only about Georgii’s ­career but 
also about his personal safety: phi­los­o­phers ­were frontline “ideological workers,” 
the first to suffer from sporadic party purges.24 The education was ­limited: Karl 
Marx’s Capital was virtually the only original philosophical writing on the cur-
riculum, but Shchedrovitskii read Marx with ­great interest, absorbing Marx’s 
theory of knowledge and intrigued by the notion of thinking as a social and ma-
terial activity. In a dif­fer­ent world Shchedrovitskii could have become a phi­los­o­
pher of science, but such a subfield, extending beyond Marxist dialectics, did not 
exist at that time. Feeling that rigid observance of Marxist–­Leninist dogmas and 
“pervasive fear” among the faculty ­were not helping him address fundamental 
questions of knowledge, Georgii sought shelter in a newly established depart-
ment of logic, which was relatively unaffected by ideological dogmatism (and at 
times heavi­ly criticized for its “formalist,” hence nonmaterialist dialectic, ap-
proach).25 It was not a safe haven: for instance, in June 1948, phi­los­o­phers of logic 
felt ­under attack and wrote a letter to Stalin dissociating themselves from what 
they described as excessive scholasticism and declaring their allegiance to social-
ism’s goals. The party zealots distrusted logicians, ­because it was impossible to 
infer scholars’ po­liti­cal views from their writing.26 Nevertheless, it was in the de-
partments of logic and, ­later, analytical philosophy that a Soviet strand of episte-
mology and philosophy of science would develop from the 1960s.27
Shchedrovitskii graduated in 1953 and, in February 1954, he launched a semi-
nar on logic and philosophy at MGU. This seminar became the Moscow logical 
circle: an informal group of five or six young gradu­ates who took long walks 
around the city, pausing sometimes in a bar.28 The group included some of the 
­future members of what would become the Moscow Methodological Circle, such 
as the mathematician Aleksandr Zinov’ev, the author of a famous satire of Soviet 
academia The Yawning Heights (who fell out with the group in 1958), the sociolo-
gist Boris Grushin, and a Georgian phi­los­o­pher, Merab Mamardashvili.29

	
Prediction and the Opaque	
109
Such informal scholarly gatherings ­were becoming more common in the mid-
1950s when, following Khrushchev’s direction of “peaceful coexistence” with 
capitalism, the Soviet public space began to open up to the East Eu­ro­pean press 
and tourism, first from the state socialist countries, the so-­called the third world 
countries, and eventually from the West.30 The mid-1950s saw the beginning of 
the Soviet postwar recovery and the first results of heavy investment in science 
education; the first science cities ­were built fast to serve the Soviet military-­
industrial complex as well as the industrial economy.31 In Moscow, the spirit of 
relative openness provided a space for the encounters among humanities and 
exact science scholars, particularly when ­these meetings ­were mediated with the 
transdisciplinary umbrella of cybernetics.32 For instance, the first seminars on 
mathematical linguistics ­were or­ga­nized by young gradu­ates Viacheslav Ivanov 
and Vladimir Uspenskii at MGU in 1956, who discussed, among other ­things, 
machine translation and the parallels between neuroscience of brain and com-
puter science.33 In 1957, the neurophysiologist Bernshtein, who worked at Gas-
tev’s institute and survived Stalin’s purges, used cybernetic concepts of system 
and feedback to articulate his theory of circular neurophysiological action. In 
his theory of reflexive action loops, Bernshtein replaced Wiener’s term target 
with the term “a model of ­future event.”34 Cybernetic language was, in this way, 
both ­adopted and modified to make sense of predictive and teleological be­hav­
ior. In philosophy, several informal groups sought to conceptually reform 
Marxism–­Leninism, most famously in the circles around the phi­los­o­pher Evald 
Il’enkov, founder of a content-­genetic approach to logic.35 Such group meetings 
­were not without risk: they ­were closely scrutinized by the KGB. Shchedrovitskii’s 
group, for instance, was questioned and reprimanded, but not prevented from 
meeting. ­After all, their intellectual interest was more than legitimate—it ad-
dressed the burning concern of how to make behavioral control more effective. 
The group gained reputation and recognition in Moscow’s intellectual world. In 
1962, together with ­later prominent systems theorists Vadim Sadovskii and Erik 
Iudin, Shchedrovitskii launched a seminar on systems analy­sis methods in sci-
ence and technology ­under the auspices of the Scientific Council for Cybernet-
ics of the Acad­emy of Sciences; the work of this seminar continued ­until 1976. 
In this seminar young scholars discussed Western approaches to general systems 
theory.36 Other systems thinkers, such as Igor Blauberg, formed a close circle of 
Shchedrovitskii’s friends. ­Later in the 1960s, Shchedrovitskii would coauthor one 
of the first works on the systems approach in the Soviet Union.37 In all, the Mos-
cow Methodological Circle sought to combine the emerging systems approach 
with Marxist po­liti­cal theory and epistemology: it revisited Marx’s Capital 
searching for a definition of systematic and performative knowledge.38

110	
CHAPTER 5
Exposure to Marxian dialectics—­according to which thought was a form of 
activity—­formal logic, and Jean Piaget’s and Lev Vygotsky’s developmental psy­
chol­ogy ­shaped Shchedrovitskii’s intellectual agenda. He attended lectures of 
educational psychologist Lev Landa, who promoted algorithmic approach to 
learning and was increasingly interested in orga­nizational be­hav­ior and learn-
ing.39 His candidate of science dissertation (kandidatskaia dissertatsia), defended 
in 1964, examined cognitive reflexivity in learning as it was presented in the work 
of Vygotsky, a prominent psychologist who hailed from Belarus and established 
his school in Moscow.40 Another impor­tant influence was his peer, a rising star 
scientist, Vladimir Lefebvre, who developed a theory of reflexive control in mili-
tary strategy in his Conflicting Structures, first published in 1967.41 According 
to Lefebvre, a person can influence the opponent by imposing on the opponent 
their own conceptual basis for decision-­making.42 Lefebvre’s semiotic strategy 
of control, to which I return in the next chapter, would inspire Shchedrovitskii 
to develop psychological and system-­analytical elaborations of reflexive control 
of collective be­hav­ior in nonmilitary settings.
In 1956, just at the beginning of de-­Stalinization, known as the Thaw, Shche-
drovitskii joined the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (CPSU). This was 
explained retrospectively by his friends as a pragmatic decision. According to 
them, Shchedrovitskii did not believe in changing Soviet institutions or policies. 
Instead, he wished to “change the ­people.”43 Joining the CPSU was therefore the 
expression of his loyalty to the Soviet government and, prob­ably, of a hope that 
this would help advance his professional ­career.44 In the mid-1960s, Georgii mar-
ried a philologist, Galina Davydova (his third wife), whom he met at a seminar 
in 1963, and they settled in an apartment on Malyi Mogiltsevskii Street in a 
pretty neighborhood, not far from Arbat, filled with museums and theaters, a 
short walk from MGU’s Department of Philosophy. At that time, his life was as 
comfortable as it could have possibly been for a young Soviet intellectual.
Following his graduation, Shchedrovitskii was affiliated with the Acad­emy 
of Pedagogical Sciences, then the All-­Union Institute of Technical Aesthetics 
(VNIITE) from 1965 to 1969, and ­later the Institute for the International ­Labor 
Movement (IMRD). Although Shchedrovitskii traveled abroad only once, to Bul-
garia in 1991, his affiliation with ­these and other institutes facilitated his access 
to Western scholarship.45 Both VNIITE and IMRD hosted scholars interested 
in novel social approaches. However, ­these and similar spaces of relative liberty 
­were contracting as Khrushchev lashed out against artists and writers who tried 
to push the limits of permissibility of socialist realism, particularly in 1962 and 
1963.46 When Khrushchev was replaced with Leonid Brezhnev in 1964, the space 
for cultural expression continued to shrink, a pro­cess which accelerated ­after the 
Prague Spring in 1968.47 The 1969 attempt to murder Brezhnev was not condu-

	
Prediction and the Opaque	
111
cive to the culture of permissibility, but the changing context was not able to ex-
tinguish what Zubok described as a “culture of self-­help,” practiced by Soviet 
intelligent­sia, which translated into po­liti­cal action.48 Shchedrovitskii was not 
an anti-­Soviet dissident in any sense, but he signed a letter in support of his for-
mer students Aleksander Ginzburg and Iurii Galanskov in the same year. Ginz-
burg and Galanskov ­were tried for engaging in under­ground publication, 
including a compilation of documents pertaining to an ­earlier trial of the anti-­
Soviet writers Andrei Siniavsky and Iulii Daniel (1966).49 The punishment was 
harsh: Shchedrovitskii was expelled from both the party and the VNIITE in 
March 1969. His monographs on design methodology, which ­were already in the 
pipeline, ­were never published. Nevertheless, friends saved Shchedrovitskii from 
becoming an outcast, arranging for a position at the experimental workshop of 
the Artists’ Union, which provided a modest income and enabled him to con-
tinue his work on the theory of learning. He remained actively involved in the 
development of the Methodological Circle.50 Although a ­career in the top insti-
tutes at the Acad­emy of Sciences was no longer pos­si­ble, Shchedrovitskii was in-
vited to give talks, participated in research seminars, and maintained informal 
connections with the Institute of Systems Research (VNIISI, established in 
1976) and the Institute of Control Sciences, where innovative research into sys-
tems approach was concentrated.51 His informal club was regarded with suspi-
cion by the authorities, but his scientific approach was not.52
Excluded from the Soviet academic mainstream, Shchedrovitskii turned to 
intellectual entrepreneurship. In the late 1970s, he embarked on the increasingly 
popu­lar form of management training through business or simulation games, 
which he used as a testing ground for his theory of reflexive thinking activity. 
Some compared Shchedrovitskii’s games with existing approaches to critical 
thinking training.53 They also resembled strategy and decision simulation games, 
which ­were developed in the military and operations research centers (more in 
Chapter 6), as well as the VNIISI and the Acad­emy of National Economy in Mos-
cow.54 The novelty of Shchedrovitskii’s approach was that he transferred this 
method to a lower-­level managerial practice, first and foremost to regional and 
urban planning.
Making Reflexivity Work
Shchedrovitskii defines his methodology as an intense, reflexive formulation and 
coordination of group goals through the means of a highly formalized scientific 
method. Methodology, according to Shchedrovitskii, is first and foremost per-
formative: “The essence of methodological work is not so much understanding 

112	
CHAPTER 5
but the creation of methods and proj­ects; it does not simply reflect, but rather 
builds, creates anew through constructing and projecting.”55 He continues: “the 
principal products of methodological work, such as constructions, proj­ects, 
norms, methodical prescriptions, and so on, cannot be tested and are never tested 
as truthful. Only their feasibility can be tested. . . . ​When we design a proj­ect for 
a city, it is meaningless to ask if our proj­ect is truthful, for this proj­ect corre-
sponds not to a city that is, but to a city that ­will be; the proj­ect does not reflect 
a city, but the city ­will realize the proj­ect.”56 Shchedrovitskii posits his method-
ology as a value-­neutral tool, a nonpo­liti­cal technology: methodology is neither 
truthful nor false, it ­either works or does not. The question to what end meth-
odology is working is the responsibility of man­ag­ers, not methodologists. The 
role of a methodologist, according to Shchedrovitskii, is to create conditions that 
would enable man­ag­ers to cope with the ­future uncertainty through collective 
efforts of thinking activity, in which reflexivity plays an impor­tant role.
The original meaning of the word “reflexivity” entails looking back and not 
forward. Reflexivity describes “a ­mental action, pro­cess, ­etc. turned or di-
rected back upon the mind itself; involving intelligent self-­awareness or self-­
examination.”57 How does this fit with Shchedrovitskii’s notion of “prospective 
reflexivity” or, as it is sometimes translated into En­glish, reflexiveness?58 To de-
fine prospective reflexivity, Shchedrovitskii blended Hegelian and Marxist 
theories which attributed a generative function to ideas, the role of conscious 
goal-­setting for be­hav­ior and change. Also, Shchedrovitskii was inspired by the 
cognitive and system-­cybernetic sciences, particularly their applications in op-
erations research.59 Shchedrovitskii’s work was part of a wide movement in 1960s 
psy­chol­ogy and social science ­toward reflexivity and I return to this in chap-
ter 6.60 The way in which he sought to anchor his theory in practice is reminis-
cent of both French la prospective (indeed, he uses the term “prospective,” in 
Rus­sian, prospektivnaia refleksiia) and American business and policy simulation 
games. If la prospective was designed to facilitate strategic planning in large, bu-
reaucratic organ­izations, such as the state administration in France, American 
business games ­were developed to assist in solving concrete prob­lems in firms.61 
Both sought to establish informal relations across administrative divides, mo-
bilizing informality to proj­ect new visions of the ­future and create consensus 
that would stabilize ­future activities and make them more “predictable,” but by 
prediction they meant “coordinated anticipation.”62 Shchedrovitskii’s approach 
was similar in spirit: he argued that his methods did not aim to offer certainty 
about the ­future, ­because “no one can tell beforehand what system-­structural 
understandings are necessary” for resolving a managerial prob­lem.63 By this, 
Shchedrovitskii meant that relevant knowledge, solutions, and certainty can 
emerge only as a side effect of group activity thinking. According to his biogra-

	
Prediction and the Opaque	
113
phers, Shchedrovitskii did not believe in the production of policy-­useful knowl-
edge in the isolated environment of a scholar’s office. The ­future was to be 
discovered jointly by the group of stakeholders, and the role of the scholar, or 
methodologist, was to guide this discovery with the help of techniques specially 
developed for the training sessions.
Let us look more closely at activity games, a curious component of Rus­sian 
management thinking that achieved surprising popularity in the 1980s. The ori-
gins of activity games can be traced to the period ­after the end of the New Eco-
nomic Policy (NEP), when in 1932, Maria Birshtein (1902–1992) applied the 
method of war gaming to the management of the Ligovo typewriter factory with 
the aim of increasing production. First affiliated with the Bureau of Scientific 
Organ­ization of ­Labor, Birshtein was ­later based at the Leningrad Institute of 
Engineering and Economics. In Leningrad, she developed a forty-­eight-­hour-­
long simulation game for a textile factory, which was said to enable man­ag­ers, 
engineers, and administrators to establish new ways of communicating with each 
other across administrative divides, a practice that they ­later transferred to the 
­actual working environment. Although proven successful, this method was short 
lived: alongside all scientific approaches to management and economics, activ-
ity games ­were banned by Stalin in 1938. Birshtein survived Leningrad’s block-
ade, but her first complete work was published only in 1989 (and circulated in 
thirty thousand copies).64 However, the first department of business games was 
established at Leningrad State University in 1972.65 In the West, simulation 
games ­were developed ­after the Second World War, pioneered with the Mono-
polog game simulating decision-­making in military logistics which was devel-
oped at the RAND corporation in the United States and widely spread through 
the American Management Association and McKinsey.66 At Harvard Business 
School, case method of teaching students was introduced to train the students to 
assess management prob­lems from dif­fer­ent viewpoints, extending Alfred North 
Whitehead’s idea of action-­oriented learning that was originally formulated in 
1933. The ele­ments of Shchedrovitskii’s technique resemble both the Harvard 
case study method and business games: it uses a lot the veneer of scientificity ex-
pressed in schemes, formulas, and diagrams—­all of which became part of man-
agement learning repertoire in the 1970s.67
To tackle cognition as part of social interaction, Shchedrovitskii drew heavi­ly 
on Vygotsky’s theory of learning and borrowed Birshtein’s idea of simulation 
games, which he rebranded as thinking activity (in Rus­sian, mysle-­deiatel’nost).68 
Unlike both the US business games and Soviet military games, which often used 
computer software and ­were based on scoring to mea­sure the decisions’ impacts 
and results, Shchedrovitskii’s games ­were “open.” ­These sessions encouraged par-
ticipants to become more reflexive by considering the conceptual schemes that 

114	
CHAPTER 5
they rely on habitually in their work. Once they became more aware about their 
cognitive and interactional patterns, they would be asked to create new forms 
aligning them with the reflections of their game partners. This conceptual frame-
work was strongly influenced by the cybernetic notion of teleological be­hav­ior, 
discussed ­earlier, according to which ­human be­hav­ior is a goal-­directed system 
in which thinking is mobilized to both set the goals and regulate the be­hav­ior 
through feedback.69 Shchedrovitskii’s games ­were designed as reflexive feedback 
systems. Following Lev Vygotsky, and in contrast to structuralists, Shchedro-
vitskii contended that “the world is not structured through language . . . ​it is, in 
contrast, structured through activity [deiatel’nost’].”70 Activity was more than 
just be­hav­ior (povedenie): he differed from Skinner in claiming that thoughts 
­were not be­hav­iors, but rather systems of thinking be­hav­iors. Shchedrovitskii’s 
approach was close to the second-­order cybernetic notion of autopoiesis, a cir-
cular pro­cess where “a living system’s organ­ization ­causes certain products to 
be produced, . . . ​[and] ­these products in turn produce the orga­nizational char-
acteristics of that living system.”71 For Shchedrovitskii, collective thinking ac-
tivity was precisely such a case of societal autopoiesis, fundamentally embodied, 
social, and enfolding through collective action. Importantly, thanks to the Ko-
sygin reform of the mid-1960s, all Soviet enterprises that had more than one 
thousand staff ­were required to formally research and professionalize their man-
agement practices. This led to the establishment of departments specializing in 
applied industrial sociology which produced an endless flow of policy papers and 
recommendations on how to improve orga­nizational and management practices. 
By the 1970s, ­there was a vast orga­nizational demand for Shchedrovitskii’s 
expertise.72
One of the earliest games addressed the prob­lem of the supply of consumer 
goods to the Urals region and was or­ga­nized in August 1979. During this game 
(which lasted nine days) in the village of Novaia Utka in Sverdlovsk region, it was 
recognized that “the in­effec­tive supply of consumer goods” to the region could 
not be solved as such: this would have been utopian and impossible. However, 
participants came up with a dif­fer­ent goal, to create a new “program of complex 
research and proj­ects,” an orga­nizational resource which would help to or­ga­nize 
the supply of consumer goods in the ­future.73 This outcome might appear to be a 
trivial one. Man­ag­ers who face a complex orga­nizational dilemma tend to invest 
in the pro­cess, this way postponing the dealing with the dilemma to the ­future. 
However, in the context of Soviet administration, this was something of an 
achievement. Habituated to repetitive affirmation of commitment to the faithful 
implementation of the party’s plan, Soviet man­ag­ers strug­gled to shape their own 
understanding, goals, and proj­ects. A participant of ­these first games wrote retro-
spectively that both local administrators and intellectuals found the idea of re-

	
Prediction and the Opaque	
115
flexive goal-­setting and an open ­future mystifying: “­There was a lot of dif­fer­ent 
gossip spread and we whispered that this was Voland with his entourage.” Geor-
gii Shchedrovitskii, the witness wrote, “trained his team ­until exhaustion. . . . ​We 
­were gradu­ates from Ural universities, who did not possess ­either new ideas or 
high academic degrees; we had not been abroad, did not speak foreign languages, 
and did not have experience of exploration, research, and analy­sis. . . . ​In all, 
­people enjoyed [Shchedrovitskii’s] internal dialogue.”74 ­Here this participant de-
scribed the seminar as a captivating per­for­mance, but it is also clear from this 
account just how new the idea was that management was an intellectual activity, 
not just following administrative rules. Shchedrovitskii himself was pleased with 
this game: on its basis, he prepared twenty-­nine further games conducted from 
1979 to 1981. The areas of application included the planning of nuclear power 
plants, cities, geological research, and higher education.75
Activity games, wrote Shchedrovitskii, ­were “a new, complex and systemic 
orga­nizational form for team thinking activity,” the outcome being a new, bet-
ter, and shared understanding of the situation.76 This form of socialized knowl-
edge was achieved through a performative, prospective reflexivity:
methodology was not simply a theory of the means and methods we 
employ in our thinking and activity, but was also a form of organ­ization 
and thus a “framework” for all of ­people’s vital activity, including think-
ing activity. This kind of methodology could not be transmitted, like 
knowledge or a set of instruments, from one person to another, but 
rather could only evolve, grow out of a context, as it ­were, through 
­people’s being brought into a sphere of methodological thinking activ-
ity that was new for them, but in which they ­were given the opportu-
nity to participate in a complete and integral vital activity.77
That a repressed scholar was commissioned to rectify failures in such a sensitive 
area of Soviet industry as nuclear energy is a telling fact of the orga­nizational 
demand for novel solutions. Shchedrovitskii was approached by the Institute for 
Staff Training of the All-­Union Ministry of Energy in Moscow to design an ac-
tivity game for top man­ag­ers at one of the most impor­tant Soviet nuclear plants, 
Beloiarsk, in the closed science city Zarechnyi. This game ran from Decem-
ber 1980 to July 1981.78 Beloiarsk was the first Soviet nuclear power plant to use 
a new fast breeder reactor, BN-600, which, in theory, could recycle spent nuclear 
fuel (a very unstable pro­cess). It would also produce plutonium close to weap-
ons grade.79 The construction of this power plant was ­going excruciatingly slowly, 
as it had started in 1969. In March and April 1980, Shchedrovitskii went to Za-
rechnyi to conduct an activity game, called, in the best spirit of Soviet bureau-
cracy, “Providing for the normal functioning and development of technologies 

116	
CHAPTER 5
and development of the Nuclear Power Plant.” Unlike the exercises of la prospec-
tive, ­these activity games ­were not so much about anticipating the unexpected: 
they aimed to facilitate a shared understanding of what the “expected” or “nor-
mal” could be like.80
The goal was to remove the unexpected, a pervasive part of Soviet manage-
rial real­ity. Workers would get drunk and not show up on the floor. The build-
ing materials would not be supplied in time. When supplied, they would be of 
inferior quality and a large part of them would anyway be stolen. Most of the 
time “management” meant dealing with last-­minute emergencies. Decisions 
could not be taken without approval of superiors, and the pro­cess of approval 
would be highly bureaucratic. As the result, workers and man­ag­ers would be 
averse to ­doing anything that fell outside their administrative responsibility. 
Their activity was a “nonthinking” one; their decisions and actions followed the 
administrative script, ignoring the evolving environment around them. This is, 
of course, a crudely simplified picture. However, it gives some idea of what sort 
of universe of thought and action Shchedrovitskii’s “prospective reflexivity” was 
set to question and transform.
The hope was that the games would enable the participants to “proj­ect and pro-
gram their ­future thinking activity” and re­create this activity in any orga­nizational 
context.81 Prediction, in this case, is an effect of social, reflexive alignment of 
meaning-­making. Shchedrovitskii understood predictability in a par­tic­u­lar way. 
He rarely used the term itself (predskazuemost’). He preferred traditional catego-
ries of management speak, such as planning, programming, and projecting.82 This 
neutral vocabulary rendered his method familiar, it fitted well with the party plan-
ning jargon. The focus on reflexivity tapped directly into the source of real power: 
informal relations and networks. Prospective reflexivity promised a methodology 
to enable pro­cesses “­here and now”; situational analy­sis, goal-­setting, and situa-
tional problematization.83
According to Shchedrovitskii, “the central law and princi­ple” of an activity 
game is what he described as an “or­ga­nized chaos.” By this he actually meant 
an in­de­pen­dently active (samodeiatel’naia), self-­organizing and self-­developing 
system of be­hav­ior.84 And, as I mentioned ­earlier, Shchedrovitskii’s “thinking 
activity” underscored the collective and performative character of thinking: for 
him, thinking is never a disconnected, solitary exercise. Thinking activity could 
be pursued only as part of a team where a joint world (mir), amenable to gover-
nance, would emerge. This world would include both governors and the gov-
erned, as they align their projections of themselves and ­others—­how each of 
the participants is mirrored in the mind of the ­others. Shchedrovitskii’s approach 
resembled Erving Goffman’s description of games as world-­building activities. 
Thinking activity was a way to create and perpetuate an informal collective into 

	
Prediction and the Opaque	
117
the ­future.85 The social is ­imagined, reflexively and collectively. To govern the 
social entails the orchestration of this reflexive thinking activity. In this way, 
Shchedrovitskii’s methodology mobilized a par­tic­u­lar notion of governance, 
based on an embodied, social, and reflexive mind. An individual actor for him 
is not a data point, a rational decision-­maker who seeks to maximize utility or 
minimize risk; an individual actor is but an ele­ment of their own and ­others’ 
projections that intersect, mirror, and shape each other. Prospectiveness is about 
making this mirror game last over longer or shorter time periods. It is about co-
ordination, alignment, synchronization—­the orchestration of the ­future.
This is an in­ter­est­ing version of technocracy. According to the traditional un-
derstanding, technocratic governance appears where individuals in charge rely 
on specialist knowledge to govern what they perceive as objective, lawful real­ity 
that could be in princi­ple known and acted upon. For Shchedrovitskii, when a 
man­ag­er deals with objects or technical systems, they inevitably confront the 
cognitive schemes, intentions, and behavioral patterns of other ­humans associ-
ated with ­these objects. In this way, a managerial real­ity cannot be fully domi-
nated by a par­tic­u­lar expert knowledge. Managerial realities are heterogeneous 
games of mirrors. An effective man­ag­er ­will be one who aligns ­those mirrors 
with a desirable effect (on time).
How does prospective reflexivity fit with our classification of the scientific 
uses of prediction? Clearly, it is not a method to obtain new data that could be 
scientifically explained, in Hempel and Oppenheim’s sense. It is neither a guess 
nor statistical extrapolation. It is a mode of aligning cognitive schemes and ac-
tions, a pro­cess similar to the be­hav­ior theorized by cyberneticians, which gives 
birth to a ­viable collective be­hav­ior able to agree on and carry out par­tic­u­lar proj­
ects. It is a form of social engineering—­but completely dif­fer­ent from Taylorist 
scientific management, closer, perhaps to what Stephen Collier and Anke Gru-
endel described as planning by design, a radical idea that emphasized partici-
patory methods and that emerged in Western Eu­rope in the 1960s and the 
1970s.86 Shchedrovitskii sometimes called his activity thinking a sociotechnics 
(sotsiotekhnika), by which he meant an intellectual technology to disturb and 
destabilize bureaucratic patterns of organ­ization, be­hav­ior, and thinking.87 It 
should be noted ­here that Shchedrovitskii derived the term sociotechnics from 
the En­glish term “systems engineering,” applying the systems engineering ap-
proach to any orga­nizational situation.88 The idea was that sociotechnics dealt 
with hybrid objects or, as Shchedrovitskii called them, “centaurobjects,” where 
­human activities and material objects ­were located on the same epistemological 
plateau. They ­were both cognitive and material.89
The purpose of the games was to develop a new understanding of prob­lems 
rather than to find the best solution to a very par­tic­u­lar orga­nizational task. The 

118	
CHAPTER 5
route was long and winding.90 For example, Shchedrovitskii described an activ-
ity game dedicated to the development of societal systems, which involved 160–
190 participants in Krasnoiarsk in 1986 as follows:
So we, the gaming team, sought to “break out” from the pre­sent space of 
the activity into the space of history. I had ­really amused myself with my 
fellow gamers ­there, and took a chance to enjoy myself. Why so? The 
[theme of the] game was so [­great] that every­one was saying, I, I, I ­will 
come! And they came. . . . ​I was saying, guys, excellent, since you are 
­here, so get out! And they looked at me and said, we cannot see anything, 
it is dark and scary. I waited for a while and then suddenly pulled the 
carpet from under­neath their feet, and they all went flying in the space of 
history, and it was very in­ter­est­ing to see how they jerked their ­little arms 
and legs.91
To be sure, this quote is drawn from Shchedrovitskii’s retrospective narrative 
and tells us more about his own approach to his seminars rather than what was 
actually happening ­there. He enjoyed watching ­people lose the safety of conven-
tional meaning-­making, disrupting the existing templates of speaking about 
the past and ­future. One way of ­doing this was to position the habitual under-
standing of the prob­lem in relation to a dif­fer­ent time scale. For example, in an-
other activity game, conducted with the municipality of Riga in Soviet Latvia 
(1986), the chairman of the Riga city council realized that they would never solve 
their managerial prob­lems without a long-­term, strategic understanding of the 
­future of the city.92 Using the long term to frame current prob­lems in the con-
text of ­either the past or the ­future, Shchedrovitskii aimed to estrange Soviet 
man­ag­ers from their administrative scripts, the minute, day-­to-­day problem-­
solving. The long term was not a space of statistical curves, but of intersubjec-
tive reflection on the man­ag­ers’ roles and identities, projected into the far ­future.93 
Shchedrovitskii criticized scientific forecasting (having a ­limited understand-
ing of the statistical method) ­because he presumed that forecasts merely pro-
vided knowledge about the “self-­developing” “natu­ral world,” whereas reflexive 
thinking activity, expressed in programming and projecting, was part of ­human 
teleological be­hav­ior.94
Orchestrating Post-­Soviet Informality
Shchedrovitskii’s work has been continued by his followers to the pre­sent day, 
largely by his son Petr, who pioneered much of the strategy training in the public 

	
Prediction and the Opaque	
119
sector of the Rus­sian Federation, established a School of Cultural Policy, and, in 
2005, the Scientific Foundation of Georgii Shchedrovitskii in Moscow. Petr Shche-
drovitskii himself became a highly influential management con­sul­tant and po­
liti­cal technologist in Rus­sia: he claims to have trained about 100,000 man­ag­ers, 
ranging from cultural man­ag­ers to diamond producers. Also, from the year 2000 
he coauthored and widely disseminated the idea of the “Rus­sian world” (Ruskii 
mir). The Rus­sian world idea has become part of Rus­sia’s soft power arsenal, driv-
ing her cultural diplomacy by reaching out to global and transnational communi-
ties of Rus­sian speakers and strategically mobilizing them to pursue Rus­sia’s 
national goals.95 Furthermore, the intellectual legacy of Georgii Shchedrovitskii 
has been institutionalized through the many volumes republishing his articles, 
lectures, and activity-­game training sessions. Histories of Rus­sian managerial 
thought inevitably include Shchedrovitskii as an impor­tant phenomenon and at-
tempts are made to introduce him in En­glish and French, while highly positioned 
officials in Putin’s regime pay homage to Shchedrovitskii’s methodology.96
In the 1970s and 1980s Shchedrovitskii’s notion of thinking activity consti-
tuted an impor­tant break in the governmental logic of progressive time and, in 
turn, the communist ­future, as laid out in the party’s plans. Unlike the linear, 
input–­output model of scientific forecasting of social and economic develop-
ment, where specialists feed data to policymakers to help them make informed 
decisions, Shchedrovitskii did not separate the data, the subject, and the action. 
For prospective reflexivity ­there is no clear division between language, think-
ing, and be­hav­ior, subject and object. Instead, Shchedrovitskii’s method under-
scores the reflexive and performative character of thinking in a group: he argues 
that ideas cannot be separated from subjects and that thinking is a form of ac-
tivity. Thinking activity is an open (documented in methodological publications 
and transcripts) but, at the same time, opaque practice. It is a method that does 
not hide its manipulative power.
Conclusion
Unlike scientific forecasting, which produced detailed images of the ­future in 
graphs and maps of statistical trends, thinking activity was a performative in-
tellectual technology, which sought to destabilize the Soviet pre­sent by over-
throwing the administrative and conceptual frameworks that guided the 
man­ag­ers who participated in Shchedrovitskii’s games. The idea was to under-
mine the rigidly defined administrative bureaucratic roles, which ­were strongly 
linked with specific, short-­term prob­lems and enmeshed in avral, or last-­minute 

120	
CHAPTER 5
management. The breaking down of this framework, according to Shchedro-
vitskii, gave an opportunity to the man­ag­ers to think about the long term and 
develop a more holistic, systemic view of their governmental task. Yet what did 
the long-­term ­future hold in Shchedrovitskii’s seminars? What was the role of 
prospective reflexivity in coping with uncertainty?
It is difficult to give a conclusive answer, yet the methodology of Shchedro-
vitskii’s seminars suggests the primacy of fostering a shared understanding and 
trust which would perpetuate relations that ­were informal but anchored function-
ally in organ­izations. It led to the building of new, horizontal ties in the organ­
ization that departed from administrative scripts. Prospective reflexivity was a 
scientific method to cope with ­future uncertainty, but it (1) did not produce knowl-
edge of something before it happened, (2) did not explain the anticipated phenom-
enon, and (3) did not provide guesswork or estimates of probabilities and chance. 
What prospective reflexivity sought to accomplish was to reshape the understand-
ing of the actorial self, making vis­i­ble the way in which the self is projected into the 
­future and is integrated in the equivalent projections of the other actorly selves. It 
is a method of cognitive positionality: the question is not only “Who is the I that 
acts and thinks?” as in a ­simple form of reflexivity, but “What are the versions of I 
that are projected in the ­future by ­others and how my I ­will fit best with ­those pro-
jections so that the projecting actors can engage in a joint activity?”
This is a fairly complicated theory. The activity game worked as a ritual: be-
coming part of Rus­sian managerial culture, part of everyday. Not unlike the 
Americans who engaged in everyday futuring by consulting clairvoyants, 
fortune-­tellers, and mediums, as shown in Jamie Pietruska’s Prediction in Amer­
i­ca, Soviet and post-­Soviet man­ag­ers flocked to Shchedrovitskii’s workshops, 
which had an aura of exclusive, esoteric knowledge.
Shchedrovitskii wanted to change ­people, not institutions. If scientific forecast-
ers at the Gosplan Research Institute of Economics called for transparency and 
more open circulation of data, the sessions of orga­nizational activity games would 
foster the formation of informal, nontransparent networks never aimed at reform-
ing the system itself. Unlike economic forecasters, dismissed as elitist technocrats, 
Shchedrovitskii’s man­ag­ers remained invisible sociopo­liti­cal technologists. Al-
though some scholars interpreted Shchedrovitskii’s seminars as examples of So-
viet civil society, ­others considered them ambivalent. His activity games sought to 
discover the conditions for the “normal” rather than to experiment with the con-
ditions for radically new ­things. Even in the late 1980s, Georgii Shchedrovitskii 
emphasized that his method was dif­fer­ent from the alarmist and critical warnings 
of other scientists, who sought, in the words of Aaron Wildawsky, to “speak truth 
to power.”97 Instead, thinking activity is geared to providing “concrete solutions,” 
the emphasis being on coordination and self-­regulation beyond formal bu-

	
Prediction and the Opaque	
121
reaucratic structures. In Shchedrovitskii’s circles, the power to shape the ­future 
became linked to the notion of an informal community, integrated through infor-
mational pro­cesses. ­After 1991, the reflexive methodology of Shchedrovitskii lost 
its alter ego, the centralized command economy, to become a power­ful tool in the 
hands of the new Rus­sian po­liti­cal technologists.

122
In the previous chapter, I considered how a form of prediction, the concept of 
prospective reflexivity, fared in Soviet and post-­Soviet Rus­sia. Prospective re-
flexivity was intended to establish and consolidate a new form of the nonbureau-
cratic social relations to empower orga­nizational action. It helped ­people to 
interact directly, bypassing their hierarchical and compartmentalized roles to 
address orga­nizational prob­lems by projecting their actions into the ­future. In 
contrast to scientific forecasting, the principal resource was neither statistical 
data nor estimates of probability, but the very pro­cess of intersubjective align-
ment: projecting the self reflexively in the collective ­future.
In this chapter I turn to the theory of reflexive control (in Rus­sian, refleksivnoe 
upravlenie), whose origin in Moscow in the 1960s overlapped with that of pro-
spective reflexivity. While prospective reflexivity is ­little known outside Rus­sia, 
reflexive control theory commands international interest ­because it is linked 
with security concerns: since 2014, ­there is hardly any mention of Rus­sia’s “hy-
brid” and “informational” warfare in Ukraine without reference to the princi­
ple of reflexive control.1 Reflexive control theory is considered the first distinctive 
strategic concept originating in Rus­sia, its prominence comparable with West-
ern concepts such as the Prisoner’s Dilemma, first proposed by RAND strate-
gists in 1950 and mutual assured destruction (MAD), coined by Donald Brennan 
in 1962 and ­adopted in the US nuclear defense by Robert McNamara in 1965.2
Unlike prospective reflexivity, reflexive control is not meant to enhance coop-
eration and solve collective prob­lems, but to support a winning strategy and make 
the opponent lose. To enact reflexive control means to lure the opponent into a 
6
REFLEXIVE CONTROL
“Reflexivity is generally seen as a mixed blessing.”
(Flanagan 1981, 375)

	
Reflexive Control	
123
frame of thinking that would eventually lead to the opponent’s disadvantage.3 The 
goal of reflexive control is to make the outcomes of manipulation and deception 
more predictable. The term prediction ­here refers not only to estimating the out-
comes of manipulation by logical deduction of the opponent’s course of action, but 
also to explanation and active intervention. It is assumed that the opponent’s ac-
tion is guided by an under­lying cognitive scheme, which can be manipulated and 
replaced with a dif­fer­ent one that is passed on to the opponent secretly, without 
one’s knowledge. The creator of the theory, Vladimir Lefebvre (1936–2020), ex-
plained the princi­ple of reflexive control by using a classic example of deception: 
“ ‘Do with me what­ever you like,’ said Brer Rabbit to the Fox, ‘but do not throw me 
into a briar patch.’ The Fox throws Brer Rabbit into a bush. Brer Rabbit escapes.”4
A scientific method of deception sounds like an oxymoron. In the Western 
tradition, as Robert Merton put it, science is identified with the values of truth-
fulness, transparency, and fairness.5 Culturally, cheating is seen as a skill that 
could be admired but that is deeply problematic, as in the figure of a con artist. 
In what way can a “science of cheating” claim legitimacy and authority? ­Here it 
is useful to revisit Nikolai Gogol’s play The Gamblers (1842), where Gogol laid 
out the gamblers’ own justification of the ethical dilemma posed by professional 
cheating. A passionate and talented gambler, Uteshitelny, relays a story of how 
a group of gamblers managed to smuggle a set of marked cards into a game. This 
enabled them to score a big win. His interlocutor responds enthusiastically:
Ikharev: That’s what I call clever! ­People say it is fraud and deception, 
but in real­ity it is brain work, development, finesse!
Uteshitelny: ­Those ­people ­don’t understand the spirit of play. Play is 
impartial; it is no respecter of persons. Let my own ­father sit down 
at a game with me—­I’d skin him the same as any stranger. Who 
tells him to play? At the card ­table all are equal.6
Gogol’s gamblers justify their be­hav­ior by claiming that the rules of the game are 
not discriminatory, but objective. They have no relation to moral judgment. A 
similar reasoning, as I ­will show, underpins the ethical justification of reflexive 
control as a scientific technology of deception. However, what makes both reflex-
ive control and Gogol’s gamblers’ strategy work is the asymmetry of knowledge 
where the objectivity of the game is a mere illusion: the lines that separate “the 
game” and “the real­ity” are obscured and known to only one contesting side. Suc-
cessful deception means shaping the interpretive frames of the opponent in such 
a way that the opponent’s real­ity and choices narrow down and their be­hav­ior 
becomes predictable.
In the context of policy or managerial strategy, deception is both ethically and 
socially problematic ­because deception influences actorial identities, particularly 

124	
CHAPTER 6
their social or symbolic status. Practicing deception is costly: if cheating is de-
tected, the gambler risks punishment and ­will certainly be excluded from the 
­future games. Moreover, cheating and deceptive manipulation threaten the very 
fabric of the social: Émile Durkheim would have classified deception as anomic 
be­hav­ior. Deception is particularly costly for collective actors, such as organ­
izations. For instance, companies and governments seek to appear as trustworthy 
agents at all costs, even when they are caught cheating. This observation has led 
some commentators of international politics to classify reflexive control as part of 
the arsenal of “weak,” typically nonstate actors facing stronger opponents.7 Strong 
states and organ­izations, according to this line of thinking, do not need to resort 
to ensnaring the opponent. They have enough resources to shape the opponent’s 
be­hav­ior via persuasion or coercion. However, other commentators argue that this 
is no longer the case ­because digital media have transformed the playing field: 
trustworthiness is not what it used to be ­because of the ubiquitous content and 
endless possibilities of manipulating audiovisual materials. In this context, Rus­
sia’s adoption of reflexive control, which was known in the Soviet military for 
more than half a ­century, could be understood not as weakness, but as a reason-
able response to the opportunities presented by information technology. Indeed, 
some see the use of reflexive control as an expression of Putin’s decisive re­
orientation away from the notion of Rus­sia as a weak regional power to a major 
world power.8 As a Finnish scholar of Rus­sian national security Katri Pynnöniemi 
noted, Rus­sia’s invasion in Ukraine in February 2022 was preceded by extensive 
rounds of diplomacy which was used as strategic deception at an unpre­ce­dented 
scale.9
In Rus­sia, reflexive control theory has a strong purchase in both military and 
business thinking. It is understood as something more than mere cheating, a 
“science” of decision-­making. Leading Rus­sian strategy con­sul­tants regularly 
publish academic studies on the subject, conferences and entire research cen-
ters are or­ga­nized to explore the application of reflexive control in military and 
civil contexts.10 The concept of reflexive control has been established in Rus­sian 
philosophy, management, public policy, and pedagogic research: research proj­
ects and training programs on reflexive governance are conducted at prestigious 
institutions such as the Institute of Systems Research at the Rus­sian Acad­emy 
of Sciences and the National Nuclear Research University.11 The wide-­ranging 
interest in reflexive control theory can be explained by a long-­standing desire 
to predict and influence complex ­human cognition and be­hav­ior. Reflexive con-
trol fits well with (and is genealogically related to) the behaviorist approach, 
which was notoriously declared by B. F. Skinner as immune from ethical con-
cerns.12 Reflexive control is also driven by ongoing innovation in digital tech-
nology, ­because it addresses a fundamental prob­lem faced by artificial intelligence 

	
Reflexive Control	
125
(AI) researchers, namely how to formalize abstract, integrative concepts and op-
erational schemes in ways that would enable an autonomous AI.13 In this way, 
reflexive control theory forms an impor­tant part of the evolution of anticipa-
tory governance, behavioral science, and AI.
Reflexive control theory was originally developed by a Rus­sian game theo-
rist Vladimir A. Lefebvre (in Rus­sian, Lefevr) in the 1960s. Lefebvre was initially 
trained as a mathematician, defended his kandidatskaia dissertation in psy­chol­
ogy, and had extensive experience working on military applications of decision 
theory. In 1974 he emigrated to the United States and did not return to Rus­sia 
­until 1990. His work on East–­West negotiation strategies informed the Reagan–­
Gorbachev talks on nuclear disarmament in Reykjavik in 1986. Following Lefe-
bvre’s suggestion, US and Soviet administrations used dif­fer­ent communication 
strategies to report the agreement to the US and Soviet populations.14 In Rus­sia, 
Lefebvre’s students have long praised reflexive control theory’s significance be-
yond military strategy, claiming that it was a groundbreaking attempt to inte-
grate the mathematical and psychological sciences and philosophy in order to 
study anticipation and behavioral control.15 Indeed, a vigorous institutionaliza-
tion of Lefebvre’s intellectual legacy is currently taking place in Rus­sian aca-
demia: some followers contend that Lefebvre deserves to be acknowledged as a 
central figure in social and po­liti­cal thought, pointing out a certain conceptual 
proximity between Lefebvre’s ideas on reflexive control, Karl Popper’s notion of 
imperfect knowledge, and George Soros’s writing on reflexivity in finance.16
In what follows, I reconstruct the emergence of Lefebvre’s reflexive control 
theory in the Soviet Union, situating it in the context of Cold War politics and 
intellectual thought. I then trace Lefebvre’s intellectual and personal journey as 
he developed his approach to prediction of reflexive be­hav­ior in the 1960s and 
the 1970s. The chapter concludes with a discussion of the performative role of 
reflexive prediction as strategy.
Reflexivity
­There is, of course, a very long history of the idea of reflexivity and its role in the 
transformation of the social. Historically, the concept of reflexivity emerged in 
Western philosophy to describe a ­human ­mental pro­cess of creating images of 
both external and internal worlds. The external world included the objects that 
existed outside the mindful subject, such as the sun, mountains, and other ­people. 
The idea of the internal world referred to the mind’s ability to consider itself, to 
practice self-­reflection.17 This model of cognition was expanded to include a reflec-
tion, as in a mirror image, of the ­mental operations of other subjects. Visual artists 

126	
CHAPTER 6
have long engaged with the phenomenon of reflection and projection, drawing on 
it as a resource in their work. Consider Diego Velázquez’s painting Las Meninas 
(1656), which has mesmerized historians and phi­los­o­phers for much of the last 
­century (see figure 4).
Michel Foucault, for instance, starts The Order of ­Things (1966) by describing 
Las Meninas as a network of gazes. According to Foucault, the viewer who is 
looking at Velázquez’s painting is actually standing in the position where the sit-
ter (the royal ­family) would have sat. This is suggested by the mirror, painted in 
FIGURE 4.  Diego Velázquez, Las meninas o La Familia de Felipe IV (1656)  
© Photographic Archive Museo Nacional del Prado. Courtesy of Museo  
Nacional de Prado.

	
Reflexive Control	
127
the background, which reflects the image of the royal ­couple. The viewer is in-
vited to self-­identify with the royal reflection and, accordingly, to realize that they 
are “observing being observed by the paint­er.”18 Velázquez, according to Fou-
cault, did not just paint an unusually complex portrait of the Spanish royal ­family 
(who are only seen in a mirror reflection in the background) but also produced a 
critical commentary on classical repre­sen­ta­tion. The viewer is in the position of 
the sovereign. However, this position cannot be perceived directly. It is revealed by 
the mediation of both the gaze of the ­others (the painter) and the reflection (in the 
mirror). This, Foucault suggests, prompts a redefinition of thought itself: thought 
should be understood not as a ­simple mirror image of the world out ­there, but as a 
transformative reflection, “both knowledge and a modification of what it knows, 
reflection and a transformation of the mode of being of that on which it reflects.”19 
The prob­lem is, however, that, according to the art historian Joel Snyder, Foucault 
misunderstood the technical structure of perspective drawn by Velázquez. The 
viewer would not have been reflected in the mirror had the room presented in 
the painting been “real.” Furthermore, Foucault’s suggestion that the traditional 
repre­sen­ta­tion places the individual subject at the center, suggesting a privileged 
point of view of the individual mind, does not apply to classical paintings, ­because 
they can be viewed successfully (appearing as “realistic”) from many dif­fer­ent po-
sitions.20 Snyder adds that Foucault erroneously presumed that the mirror was 
meant to provide an objective reflection of the outside world. It did not: in the re­
nais­sance culture, the mirror reflection represented “the self that is fashioned 
through art” and to observe a reflection in the mirror was seen as superior to the 
direct physical act of gazing at “the unmediated” real­ity.21 In turn, Velázquez’s 
painting is better interpreted as a statement that real­ity could be improved by 
making it imitate its own reflection.
If ­there is a lesson to be learned from this debate on Las Meninas it is that per-
ception, interpretation, and mobilization of reflexive images is open to dif­fer­ent 
pathways of understanding, reducing ­these pathways is a serious challenge: as 
Owen Flanagan observed, “reflexivity is a mixed blessing.”22 Foucault’s work was 
part of the long-­standing so­cio­log­i­cal debate on determinism and freedom. The 
question was how automatic, mechanical habits and mindful, abstract reflexivity 
combined as building blocks of social order. Historians traced the development 
of the notion of the self as a composition of parts that act upon each other reflex-
ively. For instance, Foucauldians argued that this architecture of the self was fun-
damental for the liberal “conduct of conduct”: self-­betterment, self-­governance, 
and external influence through reflexive pedagogy.23 However, the debate about 
the composite, reflexive self also concerned the ­factors that automatized and con-
strained individual be­hav­ior: neural, physical, and social systems. The answer to 
the question of ­whether individual be­hav­ior can be determined mainly internally 

128	
CHAPTER 6
or externally had po­liti­cal implications. The debate was also about disciplinary 
identities of social research and natu­ral science. Since the early twentieth ­century, 
the ­whole social science and humanities field was ­shaped by a strug­gle between 
what was understood as a materialist and reductionist behavioral approach (which 
focused on habits), and a cultural, interpretivist approach (which focused on re-
flection). Following Immanuel Kant, for whom reflexivity was the key capacity of 
­human reason and a necessary precondition for ­human civilization, many influ-
ential thinkers defended reflexivity as the special domain of social sciences and 
humanities.
In this context, reflexivity was defined as a capacity of mind to form abstrac-
tions that are dynamic and amenable to change. Anthony Giddens, for instance, 
classified late modern society as “reflexive modernity,” exemplifying a Kantian 
belief in the civilizational quality of reflexivity as an advanced stage of ­human 
evolution, a stage that is characterized by a greater individual freedom.24 Schol-
ars of science and technology studies (STS) declared that social constructionist 
epistemology was inherently reflexive.25 As Dick Pels noted, in its po­liti­cally 
stronger version, feminists and race scholars employed reflexivity “to position” 
their own role in the production of knowledge, avoiding what ­were seen as biased 
abstract concepts.26 In a similar spirit, historians called for a “more reflexive” 
historiography.27
In contrast, habit was defined as the other of reflexivity, an automatic mech-
anism that enslaved the individual self and reproduced existing social systems. 
Foucauldian scholars suggested that habit and reflexivity ­were socially stratified 
concepts that informed dif­fer­ent forms of governance. Governmental practices 
that targeted habits ­were deemed suitable to control lower social classes. For in-
stance, pedagogical institutions would encourage the working-­class students to 
follow instructions and defer to authority. In contrast, the notion of reflexivity, 
embedded in the Kantian ideal of cultivation of the self, was reserved for elite 
education, where students ­were encouraged to think individually, critically, and 
creatively.28 As sociologist Tony Bennett argued, following Dewey, making mass 
be­hav­ior predictable was about imposing habits, “unthinking routines.”29 In this 
context, habit was understood as part of the mechanization of the social, whereas 
reflexivity was seen as a pathway to escape the iron cage of bureaucracy and so-
cial conformism.30
However, the separation of habit and reflexivity did not happen in physiol-
ogy, neuroscience and neuropsychology, ecol­ogy, and cybernetics, where both 
reflection and habit ­were understood as fundamental orga­nizational components 
of complex, evolving systems. For instance, in the early twentieth ­century, the 
French phi­los­o­pher Gabriel Tarde proposed that social change can be driven not 

	
Reflexive Control	
129
only by reflexivity, but also by habit. However, to understand this habit’s func-
tion one needs to consider the scale of complexity and the temporal horizons. 
According to Tarde’s evolutionary approach, habits emerge as ­people respond 
to their environment. ­These responses might appear as automatic at the time 
when they happen, but in fact they are part of a long cycle of corrections. ­Those 
habits that have proven to be successful ­will be transmitted to the next genera-
tion. In other words, what might appear at a given moment to be the mindless 
habit of a given population can appear as a reflexive change, shaping the popu-
lation’s interaction with its environment, from the long-­term perspective.31 
Habits can be cogs of change. Reflection can be a control device.32
The prob­lem of understanding the relation between reflexivity and habit was 
addressed in the postwar cognitive and behavioral sciences, pre­de­ces­sors of what 
is now called “cybernetic behaviorism.”33 An influential model was suggested by 
the cybernetician Gordon Pask, who conceptualized the dialogical self and of-
fered a model of reflexivity as multilevel information pro­cessing (see figure 5).34
Cybernetic thinkers linked be­hav­ior with cognitive operations of the mind, 
but not always conscious ones. In turn, the working of the mind was described 
in behaviorist terms: the brain was understood as a machine of both calculation 
and action. A participant of the Macy conferences, which mapped the agenda 
for the pioneering research in cybernetics in New York in the 1940s, the anthro-
pologist Gregory Bateson theorized be­hav­ior and cognition as reflexive pro­
cesses. Bateson was particularly excited by Ross Ashby’s model of homeostat, 
which simulated learning and emerging order and applied ­these insights to the 
study of social be­hav­ior. For Bateson, the individual mind and social order 
emerge as they interact with the environment through perception and informa-
tion loops. ­These loops are or­ga­nized in a hierarchical system: what can be con-
sidered reflexive at one scale is automatic on another scale. This insight allowed 
Bateson to propose a new model of learning, which was very similar to Tarde’s 
ideas: Bateson explained learning as a pro­cess of reflexive adaptation to contexts, 
which eventually “sink into habits.”35
As I show in the next section, the Rus­sian reflexive control theory deployed 
a notion of reflexivity that was similar to Tarde’s and Bateson’s. For Cold War 
strategy, reflexivity was not so much a “privileged point” of generating more re-
liable knowledge, but an actionable point. This action, however, had ­little to do 
with the Kantian pedagogy of enlightenment and persuasion, and every­thing 
to do with the shaping of (cognitive) behavioral environment and habituation. 
The key prob­lem was how to formally represent this reflex–­habit system and how 
to use ­these repre­sen­ta­tions to conduct the conduct in what Foucauldian schol-
ars refer to as a liberal governmentality.

FIGURE 5.  Drawing by Gordon Pask. Reprinted from Heinz von Foerster, “On 
Self-Organizing Systems and Their Environments,” in Self-­Organizing Systems, 
eds. Marshall Clinton Yovits and Scott Cameron (London: Pergamon Press, 
1960), 31–50, 34. Courtesy of Elsevier.

	
Reflexive Control	
131
Reflexive Control
Since the 1960s, a Soviet version of what can be called cybernetic behaviorism 
emerged. The prob­lems of adaptive and teleological be­hav­ior interested linguists 
working on the cybernetics of the brain (Viacheslav Ivanov), atmosphere scien-
tists (Mikhail Budyko), and environmental scientists (Evgenii Fedorov), as well as 
psychologists and phi­los­o­phers (Georgii Shchedrovitskii and Georgii Afanas’ev). 
The most fertile soil for the cybernetic notion of teleological, future-­oriented be­
hav­ior was in the applied, high-­priority fields of operations research (OR), sys-
tems analy­sis, and management. They formed the basis for “scientific governance” 
(in Rus­sian, nauchnoe upravlenie), a Soviet version of public policy science. Re-
flexive control theory grew from this context. As Lefebvre put it, reflexive control 
is not merely about prediction, but about the shaping of be­hav­ior.36
Born in Saint Petersburg (then Leningrad) in 1936, Lefebvre experienced the 
Leningrad blockade during the Second World War. The members of the Lefeb-
vre ­family ­were lucky—­they ­were evacuated to Alma-­Aty in Kazakhstan in 
1942.37 Vladimir would grow up in Moscow and attend an elite school a short 
run from the Kremlin. However, the evacuation imprinted Lefebvre with trau-
matic memories: for instance, he described in his memoir seeing the bodies of 
­those who had died in the overcrowded transit being thrown off the packed train 
car, which affected him deeply.38 Many survivors of Soviet deportations and the 
Second World War witnessed similar experiences of the crumbling of social val-
ues and order. ­These experiences, according to Irina Sandomirskaja, had an 
impor­tant intellectual legacy too ­because they encouraged reflexivity. For in-
stance, Sandomirskaja suggested that witnessing the extreme disruption of life 
during the siege of Leningrad, but also Stalinist terror, Soviet literary scholars 
and linguists turned instead to investigate the formalist disruptions of the sym-
bolic order of ­things: when real­ity stops making sense, the mind turns to inves-
tigating its own structure.39
In 1962, before graduating in mathe­matics from the prestigious Mathematical 
Mechanics Faculty at Moscow State University, Lefebvre followed a friend’s advice 
and applied for a research position in a secret research institute, a so-­called post-
box (pochtovyi iashchik), the Scientific Research Institute of Automatic Machinery 
(NIIAA), directed by Vladimir Semenikhin. NIIAA was established in 1956, with 
code name NII-101, ­under the Ministry of Radioelectronics. The institute special-
ized in automated missile-­control systems. Lefebvre was appointed at the labora-
tory of engineering psy­chol­ogy (established in 1961 by Vladimir Zinchenko, a 
prominent cognitive psychologist), where he directed a group of young research-
ers, such as Vladimir Lepskii, Pavel Baranov, and A. Trudoliubov. Zinchenko’s 
laboratory was part of the Theoretical Department, directed by Dmitrii Panov, “a 

132	
CHAPTER 6
very intelligent man with a pale face and hands.”40 Lefebvre and his colleagues, 
whom he described as “student types,” shared a small corner office. Lefebvre was 
described as an insightful and imposing, “masculine” personality, able to formu-
late complex ideas in a clear way, although he expressed himself with difficulty, 
his speech being punctuated with pauses.41 For Lefebvre this period of his ­career 
was particularly stimulating and creative; ­there was a sense of mission and mys-
tery as the laboratory’s research was instrumental in how the Soviet Union per-
formed in the Cold War. The missile gap contributed to the sense of urgency: the 
United States accelerated the development of its first intercontinental ballistic 
missile (ICBM) Minuteman in response to the Soviet Sputnik, launched in 1957. 
As the Soviets rushed to catch up with this technological breakthrough, all staff 
had to be involved and the young researchers ­were given unusual tasks.42
Although at that time Lefebvre’s research task did not have much to do with 
the ­grand strategy of Cold War communication it presented a few in­ter­est­ing in-
tellectual challenges. Lefebvre worked in a team that was developing a new type 
of a mobile military computer system that could be deployed in a battlefield, 
“Beta-1.”43 Creation of this system was tasked to the Central Defense Research 
Institute No. 27 of the Ministry of Defense (TsINII), established by Anatolii Kitov 
in 1954. Its versions ­were also developed in the Scientific Research Institute of 
Electronic Mathematical Machines (NITsEVT), ­housed in a building that was 
nicknamed a horizontal skyscraper, the longest building in Moscow (720 meters). 
­There was an urgency to this proj­ect. The United States launched its first system, 
Mobidic, a digital computer mounted on trucks, in 1959 so the Soviet Union had 
to catch up. Eventually sixteen such mobile computer systems, able to assist bat-
tlefield operations that deployed missiles and radars, ­were produced.44
Lefebvre was tasked with creating a wargame, a software simulation of bat-
tlefield operations for the purpose of training commanding officers. While work-
ing on this game, he suggested including decision-­making and communication 
in addition to the movement of troops and deployment of weapons. The com-
manding officers ­were skeptical about this proposal. As Lefebvre wrote retro-
spectively, Soviet military commanders considered battlefield military decisions 
as a ­matter of art and creative improvisation and emphasized that decision-­
making in combat situations had to deal with deception both by issuing deci-
sions with intention to deceive and by recognizing deceptive information. A 
military decision-­maker not only had to pro­cess physical information (e.g., the 
evasive action of an ­enemy pi­lot that is being targeted), but also to judge if the 
received information was intentionally misleading. In turn, one also had to re-
lease deceptive information strategically. As servomechanisms could track, tar-
get, and anticipate the evasive action of a moving object very quickly, they could 
replace a ­human operator in automated antiaircraft missile defense systems. 

	
Reflexive Control	
133
However, a computer could not replace ­human decisions when it came to ma-
nipulating the opponent’s understanding and recognizing being deceived by the 
opponent. This argument that the computer could not possibly cheat better than 
­humans did not deter Lefebvre from the task. He began dreaming about creat-
ing a logical machine of deception.45
Another source of inspiration for Lefebvre was astronomy. He was fascinated 
with the discrepancy between the laws described in theories of astrophysics and 
­human perception, the fact that although the natu­ral phenomena ­were not like 
they appeared to be but sometimes the mechanisms of natu­ral phenomena could 
be felt intuitively. He became particularly interested in classical proportion of 
the golden ratio, which suggested that ­humans ­were able to recognize perceptu-
ally mathematical structures.46 Curiously, a similar insight led the prominent 
American neurophysiologist Warren McCulloch to develop an interest in stud-
ies of neuropro­cesses. McCulloch studied classical proportions and went on, with 
Walter Pitt, to develop the pioneering mathematical models of communication 
and control in neural systems.47 Like McCulloch, Lefebvre desired to develop “a 
proper science” of ­mental pro­cesses, in which “the work of a psychologist would 
somehow resemble the work of a theoretical physicist.”48 Lefebvre wanted to find 
a way in which the mind was aligned with the universe.
Pursuing this task, Lefebvre began to read all Western publications on decision 
science that he could obtain: as luck would have it, his highly secret research insti-
tute was fairly well provided with translations of key works and scientific jour-
nals.49 Lefebvre’s early work refers to such central authorities as Thomas Schelling, 
Anatol Rapoport (who ­later would become Lefebvre’s intellectual supporter), and 
John von Neumann, as well as mathematical modelers such as Edward Moore, bi-
ologists and linguists, working in a cybernetic spirit, such as Lars Lofgren, and 
military thinkers, such as Basil Liddell Hart.50 Furthermore, Lefebvre retrospec-
tively wrote that Duncan Luce and Howard Raiffa’s Games and Decisions (1957, 
translated into Rus­sian in 1961) “had a ­great influence on every­body who worked 
in our ‘postbox.’ ”51 Based at Columbia and then at Harvard’s Kennedy School, 
Raiffa promoted an empirically grounded approach to game theory that served as 
an alternative to abstract rational choice theory. Indeed, ­later, Raiffa’s course about 
approaches to teaching negotiations caused controversy in the national press. In 
1979, the Wall Street Journal wrote that students ­were taught “to lie” at Harvard. In 
fact, Raiffa taught students to analyze dif­fer­ent bargaining strategies, including 
what he called “strategic misrepre­sen­ta­tion.”52 Lefebvre sympathized with Raiffa’s 
criticism of US rational choice theorists who attempted to eliminate the man from 
the decision situation, which was presented as a purely logical puzzle. Criticisms 
like Raiffa’s ­were also pressed by scholars based at RAND Corporation’s Social Sci-
ence Division.53 However, sensing that good decisions cannot be made without 

134	
CHAPTER 6
taking into consideration the ­human ­factor, Lefebvre began to explore the possi-
bility of the mathematical modeling of reflexive pro­cesses that take place in the 
mind.
As early as 1968 Lefebvre wrote about the futility of construing “a strict the-
ory of any kind of pro­cesses” in society and the economy. ­Human activity, ac-
cording to Lefebvre, “evolved in the context of continuous clashes of activities, 
ideas and feelings”; the agentic structure thus conceived was a challenge to ex-
isting cybernetic thought and mathematical methods. While Lefebvre acknowl-
edged the importance of groundbreaking work by John von Neumann and 
Oskar Morgenstein’s Game Theory and Economic Be­hav­ior (1944), he wrote that 
game theory, while being normative and prescriptive, could not help a decision-­
maker understand ­either the dif­fer­ent actors involved in a conflict or, sometimes, 
even the very character of the conflict itself. Instead, as Lefebvre put it, “[A] clas-
sical tragedy and a serious novel still remain the best source of our knowledge 
about ­human conflict.”54 Reflexive control was to do what Frederick Lanches-
ter’s equations, devised in 1914 to 1916 to identify the optimal distribution of 
military weapons and logistic systems and to calculate the attrition in a ­battle, 
could not do: namely, to theorize the distribution of strategic decision positions 
in politics and public policy. This task required a method and epistemology that 
sought to formalize the pro­cesses previously attributed to empathy.
The young Lefebvre’s life was not confined to the postbox institute, he was 
active in several informal intellectual milieus in Moscow. As a university stu-
dent, he attended the famous seminars of the Moscow Methodological Circle, 
an informal initiative of young philosophy students seeking to rejuvenate the stale 
discipline, which was being choked off by Marxism–­Leninism. The circle was 
led by the phi­los­o­pher Georgii Shchedrovitskii, an eccentric and charismatic 
thinker (see chapter 5), who taught Lefebvre a course in logic in the elite school 
(the one located close to the Kremlin). Shchedrovitskii, only seven years older 
than Lefebvre, was known as an engaging and innovative teacher who told stu-
dents to ignore textbooks as he preferred to invent his own prob­lems. However, 
Lefebvre found Shchedrovitskii’s approach “insufficiently scientific” and was dis-
appointed to find initially ­little interest in exploring reflexivity in the circle. 
Lefebvre left the seminar in 1963. Only ­later Shchedrovitskii would realize the 
importance of reflexivity and start exploring it in his work on prospective re-
flexivity in the 1970s.55
According to his contemporaries in the mid-1960s Lefebvre, who was still in 
his thirties, became something of an intellectual celebrity in Moscow. Lefebvre 
presented his work at seminars on game theory at Moscow State University or­ga­
nized by the prominent mathematician and the pioneer of Soviet game theory Iu-
rii Germeier.56 Lefebvre’s mathematical, formalist approach to thought pro­cess 

	
Reflexive Control	
135
promised a meaningful intellectual and scientific engagement in the desert of the 
ideology of dialectical materialism.57 Lefebvre’s early ideas on the formalization of 
reflexivity inspired ­others, such as Feliks Ereshko, a student of Nikita Moiseev (for 
Moiseev, see chapter 7; Ereshko would go on to become a prominent game theorist 
and operations researcher, tasked with implementing computer systems in the ag-
ricultural sector in the 1980s).58 Lefebvre’s first book, Conflicting Structures (Kon-
fliktuiushchie struktury, 1967), was followed by a brief version, The Algebra of 
Conflict (Algebra konflikta, 1968), coauthored with the phi­los­o­pher Georgii Smo-
lian. Smolian, whom Lefebvre had met at NIIAA in 1966, would become a promi-
nent systems theorist, based at the All-­Union Institute of Systems Research 
(VNIISI). The Algebra of Conflict was published in a run of sixty thousand copies, 
which sold well being priced at twelve kopeiki by the All-­Union Association for 
Popularization of Science (in Rus­sian, Znanie).59 Work on reflexive control was 
mainly developed and disseminated in the community of Soviet psychologists and 
military thought.60
In the late 1960s Lefebvre or­ga­nized a research group on psychological and 
cybernetic approaches to reflexivity in cooperation with the computer scientist 
Dmitrii Pospelov, phi­los­o­pher Vadim Sadovskii, and psychologist Veniamin 
Pushkin. This group included the mathematician and psychologist Vladimir 
Lepskii, the phi­los­o­pher Georgii Smolian, and the electronics engineer Pavel Ba-
ranov. Lefebvre’s intellectual influence was growing: his research was published 
in the first yearbook of the prestigious Systems Research (in Rus­sian, Sistemnye 
issledovanie) of the Acad­emy of Sciences in 1969. In 1972, Lefebvre defended a 
dissertation on mathematical and psychological approaches to reflexivity in con-
flict situations. Recognizing that advances in theorizing reflexivity and its con-
trol could have impor­tant implications for management and planning, the 
leading economic research center, the Central Economic and Mathematical In-
stitute (TsEMI), invited Lefebvre and his NIIAA group to join them.61 At TsEMI, 
Lefebvre ran an interdisciplinary seminar on mathematical logics, cybernetics, 
semiotics, and psy­chol­ogy, in which he sought to develop what he called “psy-
chographics,” a mathematized, formal repre­sen­ta­tion of reflexivity.62
His theoretical work was received with ­great interest in the military strategy 
community and, what worried Lefebvre, the State Security Committee (KGB). 
According to Lefebvre, Dmitry Panov, the cofounder and the first director of the 
All-­Union Institute of Scientific and Technical Information (VINITI, established 
1956), was interested in the prospect of modeling reflexive systems and was 
known to have strong links with the KGB. In the late 1960s, Lefebvre was in-
vited to brief KGB officers; they invited to him to “cooperate,” a euphemism that 
referred to becoming an associate. Lefebvre wrote retrospectively that he agreed 
to provide the security organs with briefs about his research but declined the 

136	
CHAPTER 6
KGB’s offer to work for them.63 This was not unusual: while many Soviet scien-
tists keenly worked with the military, few agreed to work for the KGB. Scientists 
saw the military as a legitimate partner ­because they used scientific discoveries to 
enhance the Soviet Union’s international status and to contribute to the national 
security. Furthermore, the culture of militarism, as David Priestland suggested, 
pervaded Soviet culture and society, where the values of honor, self-­sacrifice, and 
mobilization served as a social glue. The military ethos, espoused by scholars 
and unskilled workers alike, helped individuals cope with their everyday hard-
ships and justify their personal sacrifices; it served as a prosthesis of individual 
dignity and as such was widely exploited by the Soviet ideological and security 
agencies.64 ­There was also a very practical reason: the military funded scientific 
research generously, at the same time allowing scientists considerable intellec-
tual autonomy. ­There ­were, of course, difficulties. The link between theory and 
practice was not as direct in the military as ­there was a lag in implementation 
and many scientific innovations prob­ably ­were never deployed. The relative au-
tonomy was also an obstacle: like in the West, the operations research and deci-
sion scientists argued that their decision techniques could only perform well 
when the OR expert gets on well with the military, ­because key information could 
never be fully disembedded from interpersonal relations.65 Hence Lefebvre’s 
direct experience of working in a military research unit helped the transfer of 
his ideas to the military operational planners, but his position as an outsider 
prevented him from testing out his approaches in practice, as far as it can be 
told from the sources that are available.
The field where the young Lefebvre’s ideas ­were readily ­adopted was in mili-
tary strategic thought, particularly publications by Valentin V. Druzhinin, a gen-
eral, a military theorist, and deputy director of the agency for automation of 
control and radioelectronic combat at the General Staff (Genshtab). Trained in 
radioelectronic science, Druzhinin contributed to the establishment of the inte-
grated early warning radar system, which was initiated in the early 1960s and 
implemented in the 1970s.66 The General Staff and the Soviet military strategy 
community ­were known as forming a somewhat surprisingly open intellectual 
milieu, engaging with Western thought even during the Stalinist period. ­Under 
Brezhnev, the General Staff invested in training programs in operational re-
search, systems analy­sis, and other cognitive and computer-­based methods, pub-
lished textbooks, and research journals. The idea that war action was a systematic 
pro­cess that had to be studied scientifically underpinned the military’s interest in 
Lefebvre’s reflexive control. However, it is difficult to tell ­whether they ­adopted 
Lefebvre’s ideas in practice. Lefebvre’s reflexive control theory belongs to what 
could be described as “operational planning,” a highly flexible technique to be 
applied in a combat situation, based on interaction with the ­enemy, recognition 

	
Reflexive Control	
137
of errors, and correction. This approach is sometimes described as a cognitive 
behavioral technique. Operational planning, as the historian William Thomas 
noted, is conceptually and institutionally separate from logistics, which in the 
Soviet Union was embodied in Tukhachevskii’s war planning. Logistical war 
planning was or­ga­nized around the princi­ples of linear programing, optimal re-
source allocation, and rational procurement, the areas, where, as Condoleezza 
Rice estimated, the Soviet General Staff experts had a very ­limited impact.67
Regardless of growing recognition in academia and policy circles, Lefebvre was 
increasingly dissatisfied ­because the institutional space for his work was narrow-
ing. At the end of the 1960s, Lefebvre realized that his new work might never get 
published. He did not receive rejection letters, but some editors told him person-
ally that his work was no longer publishable and a few publications that he had 
submitted ­were in­def­initely delayed. The po­liti­cal context was becoming more 
tense. Following the Prague Spring of 1968, many scholars who engaged with 
Western approaches and who ­were typically located in the newly established, post-­
Stalinist Soviet social science institutions, ­were accused of disloyalty and of cor-
rupting communist science, and they ­were sometimes fired. Although TsEMI was 
not particularly affected (in fact it has served as a shelter for many scholars), many 
sociologists ­were forced to leave the Institute of Concrete Social Research (IKSI), 
the key site for Soviet so­cio­log­i­cal research. The space for qualitative social science 
and relative academic freedom shrank. Even ­those Soviet scientists who applied 
what ­were considered safe and po­liti­cally neutral mathematical methods in their 
research ­were at risk. In addition to this, Lefebvre worried that he might become a 
victim of repression for medical reasons. In his letter to Anatol Rapoport, he ex-
plained that he wanted to emigrate ­because of his psychological condition which 
he described as “a vegetative neurosis.” Worried that he might be diagnosed as 
mentally ill, Lefebvre feared ending up in a Soviet psychiatric clinic: he knew only 
too well the physical consequences of overmedication. An official diagnosis could 
have also ruined his ­career.68 As it happens, Lefebvre’s wife, Victorina, was Jewish 
and the Lefebvre ­family de­cided to emigrate, using a win­dow of opportunity when 
the government announced permission for Jews to leave the Soviet Union. From 
the 1960s to the mid-1990s, 1.2 million Jews, about a half of the total Soviet Jewish 
community, emigrated.69 In 1972, the year Lefebvre defended his candidate thesis, 
Richard Nixon visited Moscow to meet Brezhnev, and the Lefebvres applied for a 
permission to leave the Soviet Union. They departed for the United States in 1974, 
in this way adding to the exodus of scientists and intellectuals who left the Soviet 
Union in the 1960s to 1980s.70 Before leaving Moscow, Lefebvre received an unex-
pected invitation to meet with Aksel Berg, an admiral, pioneer, and a key patron of 
Soviet cybernetics. Berg’s invitation indicates not only the significance of Lefeb-
vre’s work but also the concern ­there was about the brain drain that the Soviet 

138	
CHAPTER 6
Union had begun to experience. For instance, in 1977, a prominent linguist, Igor’ 
Melchuk, left for Canada and the Lithuanian semiotician Tomas Venclova, who 
was also a member of the Soviet branch of the Helsinki Committee for ­Human 
Rights, emigrated to the United States. Departures of significant scholars ­were, 
however, still rare. The major wave of emigration of Soviet scientists would start 
only in the late 1980s and peak in the early 1990s, when an estimated seven thou-
sand research scientists left. Many émigré scholars specialized in mathe­matics and 
systems modeling.71
The life as an emigrant in the United States was challenging in the beginning. 
Lefebvre did not speak En­glish to a high standard and had to resort to working 
as a teaching assistant of Rus­sian.72 Indeed, he was dependent on his wife’s lin-
guistic competences (and analytical expertise): Viktorina Lefebvre was an ac-
complished linguist, a scholar in her own right. She translated her husband’s 
main works into En­glish and helped design experiments for his cognitive psy­
chol­ogy research proj­ects. Eventually, Vladimir Lefebvre obtained a research-
er’s position at the Institute of Mathematical Behavioral Sciences at the University 
of California, Irvine, where Victorina got a position teaching Rus­sian in the lan-
guages department.
In emigration, Lefebvre became fascinated with what he saw as cultural differ-
ences that informed decision pro­cesses in the Soviet Union and the West. He be-
gan to broaden reflexive control theory aspiring to build a general theory of 
cognitive valuation. In the 1980s, he gained a reputation as an expert in cognitive 
value systems in Soviet and Western socie­ties. ­There could not have been a 
more relevant time to explore such a theme: East–­West relations had stalled with 
the disruption of arms control talks in 1983 and Reagan’s launch of the Strategic 
Defense Initiative, or “Star Wars” program. The United States withdrew from sev-
eral international collaboration schemes, such as the International Institute of Ap-
plied Systems Analy­sis. At the time when Soviet and US scientists published a 
warning to world governments about the global environmental impact of nuclear 
war, in 1983, increased efforts ­were put into research of negotiation pro­cesses. 
Many perceived the world as being on the brink of disaster, and popu­lar media 
reinforced this feeling by broadcasting films on nuclear war. As a member of the 
Rus­sian elite expat community, Lefebvre became known to Jack Matlock, a diplo-
mat and ­later the US ambassador to the Soviet Union, who advised Ronald Reagan 
on Soviet and East Eu­ro­pean ­matters. In 1984, Matlock wrote to Robert McFar-
lane, Reagan’s National Security Advisor, informing him about Lefebvre’s work 
on Soviet and US approaches to conflict and suggesting that Lefebvre be included 
in a small group of eminent Rus­sian expats due to meet Reagan.73 Although this 
idea did not materialize, in 1985 Matlock did invite Lefebvre to the White House, 
where they had a lengthy conversation on the US–­USSR negotiations. Following 

	
Reflexive Control	
139
this meeting, Lefebvre sent a report to Matlock in which he recommended that US 
negotiators should not demand that Gorbachev make any public statements ac-
knowledging compromise. Lefebvre wrote that acknowledging compromise was a 
feature of the Western model of negotiation. In contrast, the Soviet model of nego-
tiation was based on explicit confrontation, the statement of what was not accept-
able ­under any circumstances. This, according to Lefebvre, did not mean that the 
Soviets refused to compromise, but the ­actual compromise had to be left between 
the lines and not acknowledged in public. It was not only a way to preserve face by 
asserting autonomy, but also the expression of a cognitive model that helped sort 
options. The unacceptable options are stated first; this helps to scope the space for 
maneuvering.74 It is difficult to tell just how much Lefebvre’s ideas influenced ne-
gotiations in Reykjavik, but Matlock did send a letter thanking the scientist for the 
suggestions and materials.75
Lefebvre became engaged in what was at that time a small East–­West network 
of scientists interested in the institutionalization of cybernetics and systems 
thinking.76 ­These exchanges convinced Lefebvre further about the East–­West 
cultural divide. For instance, he recalled arguing with Stafford Beer, following 
Lefebvre’s pre­sen­ta­tion of a paper at the Seventh Eu­ro­pean Meeting on Cyber-
netics and Systems Research (EMCSR) at Vienna University in 1984.77 In this 
conversation, Lefebvre realized that it was difficult to translate the term “self-­
reference” into Rus­sian “­because ­there is no tradition of thinking in ­these terms.” 
The Western scholars of self-­organization focused on examining the mechanism 
that enables “the image of the self to become adequate to the self.” The Rus­sian 
scientists, in contrast, ­were more interested in the ways in which the image of 
the self could become inadequate to the ­actual self. Lefebvre gave an example 
of the self-­image of the saint: a person cannot be considered as a proper saint if 
she already has an image of herself as a saint. The status of sainthood can only 
be awarded externally, by society. Accordingly, this status is only valid where 
­there is mismatch between the socially projected image of the self and the inter-
nally constructed image of the self.78 Another difference, according to Lefebvre, 
was that the Western second-­order cyberneticians ­were interested in the emer-
gence of self-­organizing systems, while the Soviet version of second-­order cy-
bernetics was principally developed in application to Cold War strategy, to work 
out the mechanisms of influencing the observer (the Cold War opponent). This, 
of course, was not exactly the case: Soviet second-­order cybernetics was widely 
used to rethink the theory of learning, neuroscience, environmental science, 
management, public health, and linguistics.79 Lefebvre’s statement rather de-
scribes his own intellectual milieu where the premium was placed on strategic 
applications of reflexivity.

140	
CHAPTER 6
A Reflexive Game of Deception
Whereas in the Soviet Union, reflexivity was increasingly perceived as a resource 
to be weaponized, in Western decision science it was posited as an insurmount-
able obstacle. As Isaac Joel elucidated, in Cold War United States reflexivity was 
understood as “a power­ful, potentially dizzying, kind of mutual dependence of 
decision makers,” where “[E]ach player knows that their best move depends on 
what ­others do; but each player also knows that the other players know this too, 
and they know that the other players know that they know, and so on, in a po-
tentially infinite regress.”80 The prob­lem of reflexivity becomes more difficult 
when ­there is no information intentionally exchanged between players. Joel uses 
Thomas Schelling’s example of a homeowner facing a burglar, where the absence 
of informational exchange results, paradoxically, in an overflow of information 
to be pro­cessed by both parties. Neither of the parties confronting each other, 
the homeowner or the burglar, wishes to reveal their true intentions (both ac-
tually want to flee), ­because they are worried about being attacked from ­behind. 
At the same time, both opponents are aware of this. They are also aware of each 
other’s awareness. This overflow of reflexivity, according to Schelling, results in 
an unstable outcome (the increased likelihood of a first strike that ­will escalate 
the conflict).81 Information on the opponent’s reflection in conflict situation, it 
appears, constituted excess, which decision scientists sought to reduce in order 
to make it controllable. According to Joel, US decision scientists bracketed away 
reflexivity as an unavoidable prob­lem, which was to be tolerated and tempered.82
In contrast, Lefebvre approaches reflexivity as a resource, as an actionable 
characteristic of be­hav­ior. In his influential publications, The Algebra of Conflict 
(1968) and an article written for the influential journal Voprosy filosofii (1971), 
Lefebvre distinguished between two approaches to conflict. The first is an OR and 
game theory approach that seeks to establish the optimal strategy in the context of 
any given par­ameters. The second is what Lefebvre described as a new, loosely de-
fined approach that explores the operation of ­human consciousness in conflict 
situations. Lefebvre termed this latter pro­cess as a “reflexive game,” in which play-
ers reflect judgments of their opponents in their own consciousness.83
Lefebvre was skeptical about rational choice theories, particularly the Prison-
er’s Dilemma games, where no information was exchanged between players. How-
ever, this does not mean that he rejected rational choice. According to Lefebvre, 
experiments with such games provided “an external statistical description,” which 
is only a first step in the exploration of internal cognitive mechanisms.84 A formal 
description of consciousness could not be represented in the language of formal 
logic, based on fixed true and false values. This is ­because decisions in conflict sit-
uations necessarily operate on the basis of judgment and not a procedural search 

	
Reflexive Control	
141
for truth.85 However, Boolean algebra could be used to represent ­these cognitive 
operations, argued Lefebvre, helping to open up the black box of cognition, some-
thing that ­people do intuitively without much effort: “An escaper can escape from 
a persecutor only if he correctly proj­ects on his own screen not only the activities 
of the persecutor, but also the way in which the persecutor is reflecting the activi-
ties of the escaper on his own screen.”86 In the reflexive game, “each opponent 
strives to reflect the other [and in so ­doing] thus gets an opportunity to outsmart 
him.”87 This model of reflection is partially based on formal logic as it tries to con-
struct accurate pre­sen­ta­tions of real­ity, operating with “real” or “true” characteris-
tics. But it does not stop ­there. The next step is to model exchange and relationality 
in the reflexive game, where the opponents try to consider each other’s reflexive 
constrictions of each other, passing the values of true as false and of false as true.
In the Cold War context, this epistemological stance of mobilizing true/false 
values as performative rather than repre­sen­ta­tional has in­ter­est­ing implications. 
In Algebra of Conscience Lefebvre refers to Edgar Allan Poe’s story “The Pur-
loined Letter,” which describes a boy who outsmarts ­others. The boy’s winning 
strategy is to identify with the opponent’s intellect, assuming even the opponent’s 
body language and emotive expressions.88 This is an example of effective reflex-
ivity, usefully summarized by Anatol Rapoport:
A person experiences his feelings, beliefs, attitudes, ­etc. directly. Possibly 
a dog also experiences his feelings (e.g., hunger, rage) directly. A ­human 
being, however, has also higher ­orders of awareness. He can be aware of 
his own awareness. “This is good” is an expression of a feeling. “I know 
that this is good” expresses awareness of still higher order. As far as we 
know, only ­human beings are capable of “multiple-­tier” awareness of this 
sort. Thus, a person has an “inner world” of which he is directly aware. 
He may also be aware of his awareness of his inner world, have an image 
of someone ­else’s inner world, an image of someone ­else’s image of his 
own inner world, ­etc.89
Lefebvre was not alone in positing the importance of intuition and identifica-
tion with the opponent in decision situations—­a similar idea was famously ar-
gued by the RAND analyst Bernard Brodie.90 However, unlike the scholars of 
the RAND’s Social Science Division, Lefebvre tried to find an algebraic expres-
sion of this internal game of mirrors. At the same time, he formulated a strong 
princi­ple that deemed that a dialectical materialist approach and the Marxist–­
Leninist po­liti­cal criticism of Western capitalism ­were both deeply insufficient 
for a winning Cold War strategy. In the context of Soviet criticism of the idea of 
structural convergence of Western and state socialist economies and socie­ties, 
Lefebvre claimed that some form of intellectual convergence with the opponent 

142	
CHAPTER 6
is absolutely necessary as a stage in strategic decision-­making. Convergence, 
from this point of view, must be at once genuine and manipulative: the identifi-
cation with the opponent should not lead to structural isomorphism and the 
adoption of the same goals and reconciliation.
The difficulty lay in making the recognition and reproduction of “the real­
ity” (the opponent’s perception of the situation) amenable to manipulation. As 
Lefebvre put it, ­there is a par­tic­u­lar logic to reflexive games, “[O]ne cannot base 
this logic on the notions of ‘true’ and ‘false’. Conflict situations are played out 
in a par­tic­u­lar mode of reasoning, where, in contrast to a scientific dispute, the 
more sophisticated liar wins.”91 In the terms of reflexive control theory, “a more 
sophisticated liar” is “a player who has a greater level of reflexivity.” This means 
that a player can articulate a ­whole system containing his/her own choices in 
relation to the opponent’s choices that are also reflexively linked to his/her own 
choices.92 However, in organ­izations or international relations, writes Lefebvre, 
players tend to have very similar imitational abilities. Parity in the capacity to 
simulate reflexive conflict situations poses a very difficult prob­lem for reflexive 
control theory.93
The key claim of reflexive control theory is that sharing information with the 
opponent leads to a more predictable scenario of events. Information sharing 
can increase the chance of determining the opponent’s ­future be­hav­ior. In his 
early publications, published in the 1960s, Lefebvre illustrated his theory with 
dif­fer­ent examples, both hy­po­thet­i­cal and borrowed from history. The arsenal 
of the means of deception included “provocations and intrigues,” “disguise” (in 
Rus­sian, maskirovka), “challenges,” “creation of false objects,” and “lies in gen-
eral in all contexts.”94 Reflexive control could target dif­fer­ent aspects of the op-
ponent’s ­mental world, for instance, to shape the opponent’s goals. The most 
ambitious task of all is to shape the opponent’s “doctrine,” by which Lefebvre 
referred to “a certain algorithm, which helps to develop a solution from ‘the goals’ 
and ‘the screen’ [the reflexive pre­sen­ta­tion of the conflict situation].”95 Further 
examples of reflexive control include passing on “the screen” to the opponent, 
the neutralization of the opponent’s capacity to deduce the sequence of events 
from pre­sent situation, and identification of the opponent who is engaged in 
counterreflexive control.
­Those actors who use game theory in their decision-­making can be targeted 
with reflexive control. According to Lefebvre, “[G]ame theory, like any mathemat-
ical technique, can only be used when real­ity is schematized and reflected on ‘the 
screen’ ”; therefore, a good strategist could feed the opponent with the information 
that ­will shape the preconditions of the game.96 In this case, an in­ter­est­ing inter-
play of truthfulness and cheating emerges. A player X truthfully calculates accord-
ing to a payoff matrix a result which provides X “with a sort of guarantee.” This 

	
Reflexive Control	
143
creates a strategic opportunity for the opponent Y, who “has a potential opportu-
nity to ‘pass’ the information that benefits Y. On the basis of this information X 
­will do a ‘truthful’ calculation, which ­will lead to X’s loss.” Lefebvre concludes that 
“[T]his type of ‘dishonest’ game is a type of an ‘honest’ reflexive control.”97
In the model of reflexive control, the considerations of morality and ethics 
vanish. According to Lefebvre, ­because reflexive control “is not tainted with lies,” 
social and moral constraints do not apply to it. This makes reflexive control an 
objective and universal method that can be used not only in conflict situations, 
but also in dif­fer­ent areas of management.98 However, what does it mean to ap-
ply a reflexive strategy in practice?
Reflexive Control in Practice
First of all, it is very difficult to observe and mea­sure the impact of reflexive strat-
egy, ­because it operates internally, as a semiotic projection. It is difficult to link 
occurring be­hav­iors and decisions with acts of manipulation that cause them. 
Perhaps this is why the textbook examples of reflexive control often draw on dia-
logues and situations presented in fiction: in ­actual practice the thought pro­
cess is not always expressed and documented in a conversation. However, is this 
not the case with any course of action that is presented as a result of strategy?
A good case in point is George Soros, an influential stock exchange speculator 
and global philanthropist, who claims that the awareness of reflexivity guides his 
investment decisions, particularly helping him to recognize the symptoms of 
boom and bust in financial markets. Born in Hungary in 1936, Soros emigrated 
to London in 1947 and studied economics at the London School of Economics 
(LSE). At the LSE, Soros also read philosophy with Karl Popper and ­adopted his 
ideas of the open society and the princi­ple of falsifiability of theories as the key 
criterion of scientific knowledge. Following his studies, Soros worked in finance 
in the City of London. This experience made him realize the limitations of neo-
classical models of the economy. Soros understood that stock markets do not be-
have like a natu­ral world, which was presumed in economists’ models, ­because it 
was expectations of financial markets that determined supply and demand, and 
not the other way around. As Christopher Bryant put it, Soros observed that par-
ticipants in the markets respond not to the presumed fundamentals of value such 
as, for example, dividends and assets, but rather to the opinions of other partici-
pants. Like for the viewer of Velázquez’s Las Meninas, the finance trader’s real­ity 
is always mediated by the reflections of ­others, “markets can influence events they 
anticipate.”99 In 1956 Soros moved to New York and continued developing his 
interest in reflexivity in finance, when Lefebvre was grappling with reflexivity in 

144	
CHAPTER 6
military operations in Moscow.100 Both Lefebvre and Soros would come to the 
conclusion that uncertainty that is generated by reflexivity cannot be resolved, 
but it can be acted upon and become an instrument of action.101 As Soros put it, 
“[I]n the real world, the participants’ thinking finds expression not only in state-
ments but also, of course, in vari­ous forms of action and be­hav­ior. That makes 
reflexivity a much broader phenomenon than self-­reference: it connects the uni-
verse of thoughts with the universe of events.”102 This connection, once known, 
could be profitably exploited:
I developed my own variant of Popper’s model of scientific method for 
use in the financial markets. I would formulate a hypothesis on the ba-
sis of which I would invest. . . . ​In contrast to science, a financial hy-
pothesis does not have to be true to be profitable; it is enough that it 
should come to be generally accepted. But a false hypothesis cannot pre-
vail forever. That is why I liked to invest in flawed hypotheses that had 
a chance of becoming generally accepted, provided I knew what the flaw 
was: It allowed me to sell in time. I called my flawed hypotheses fertile 
fallacies and I built my theory of history, as well as my success in fi-
nancial markets, around them.103
According to Soros, strategic thinking is a reflexive practice, where subjects seek 
to gain adequate images of their opponents’ minds in order to shape their own 
course of action, as well as to predict their opponents’ be­hav­ior.104 The concept 
of reflexivity, in this way, seeks to bridge individual cognitive pro­cesses and col-
lective be­hav­ior. As Alex Rosenberg put it, for Soros, “reflexiveness is a relation-
ship between strategies,” that is expressed in manipulation or participation.105 
Historians and theorists of military and foreign policy strategies are principally 
interested in exploring the possibilities and limitations of, first, judging the sit-
uation correctly, and second, anticipating the opponents’ be­hav­ior. The pri-
mary focus of such research is to help decision-­makers to reduce their own 
misperceptions. Once correctly identified, the opponent’s misperceptions can be 
exploited.106
In his memoir, Soros wrote that he took advantage of his opponents’ misper-
ceptions ­because thanks to ­those misperceptions the opponents behaved predict-
ably. In contrast, Lefebvre wanted to find a mechanism in which the misperceptions 
could be planted in the opponent’s mind to make the opponent’s be­hav­ior predict-
able. In both cases, prediction is understood as a ­simple deduction of a course of 
action. It is not a probabilistic pattern recognition, but an inference based on the 
explanation provided by their theory. This is what enables both Lefebvre and Soros 
to claim that their approach is “scientific.” The temporal horizon for both types of 
intervention, financial and military strategy, are generally short. The action cycle 

	
Reflexive Control	
145
of reflexive deception (reflexive control for Lefebvre) or taking advantage of 
misperception (fertile fallacy for Soros) can work only once and, ideally, in a very 
straightforward situation where ­there is sufficient information. Once complex 
Popperian philosophy and Boolean algebra are put aside, one cannot help but no-
tice that the reflexive practices suggested by Lefebvre and Soros are quite common 
sense. Why bother, then, to pre­sent ­these techniques of taking advantage or cheat-
ing as a scientifically grounded strategy?
The answer could be found in the symbolic meaning of the very notion of 
strategy. According to Luca Zan, strategy theory oscillates between two oppos-
ing poles. At one extreme, strategy is expressed in highly abstract models of 
­mental cognition such as rational choice and other models in decision science. 
At the other extreme, the idea of rational decision is abandoned entirely; strat-
egy is approached as a purely pragmatic be­hav­ior, situated in a par­tic­u­lar con-
text which can be observed and researched ethnographically but not from the 
perspective of logic or mathe­matics.107
One way of bridging the pragmatic and abstract approaches to strategy is to 
consider both forms of strategic thinking as social phenomena that perform a 
symbolic orga­nizational function.108 This notion posits strategy as a complex me-
diator that enables dif­fer­ent actors to perform together, providing “an obliga-
tory point of passage, whereby [strategy] enacts and connects an organ­ization 
and its world.”109 Thanks to this power to connect dif­fer­ent actors and actions, 
strategic thought can perform not so much as a decision tool, but as a symbol.110 
The symbolic power of strategy lies in its capacity to explicate and embody sci-
entific rationality and modernity in an orga­nizational context.111
Although modern governments and firms have always engaged in some form 
of planning their ­future, the discourse of strategy as a key governmental instru-
ment became widespread only beginning in the mid-­twentieth ­century. During 
and ­after the Second World War, strategic approaches ­were developed in large 
US corporations and then further advanced by the military-­industrial complex. 
From the 1970s onward, strategy became institutionalized as an academic sub-
ject in US and West Eu­ro­pean universities, particularly in the newly founded 
business schools.112 The US business school approach to strategy was based on 
industrial economics; however, the field was much more diverse in Eu­rope, where 
so­cio­log­i­cal approaches informed strategy thought.113 In the Soviet Union, in-
dustrial economics and sociology did not thrive as they ­were classified as bour-
geois sciences, designed to empower man­ag­ers and therefore deemed unsuitable 
to the egalitarian Soviet society. Soviet strategic thought, however, was mainly 
anchored in the so-­called exact sciences, appearing in the fields of cybernetics, 
OR, and systems analy­sis, but also, as it turned out in the case of Lefebvre, 
cognitive psy­chol­ogy.

146	
CHAPTER 6
As a result of the spread and proliferation of strategy as an orga­nizational de-
vice in corporations, firms, and government departments, as well as the belief that 
strategy can improve per­for­mance and enable better accountability and control, 
many leading Western and Soviet intellectuals and policymakers came to consider 
strategic thought as a symbol of late modernity itself. A history of strategy’s talis-
manic role could shed new light on strategy as the expression of a par­tic­u­lar Cold 
War modernity. In line with organ­ization scholars John  W. Meyer and Brian 
Rowan, as well as Car­ter, Clegg, and Kornberger, it can be proposed that strategy 
has become an institutionalized myth that confers legitimacy on organ­izations.114
This is a particularly impor­tant insight when considering the deployment of re-
flexivity in Rus­sia’s military operations in the twenty-­first ­century, leading to what 
the British journalist Edward Lucas has described as the New Cold War. Reflexive 
control, according to the US military analyst Timothy Thomas, informed Soviet 
and post-­Soviet operations planning at many stages, from being aware of pos­si­ble 
targeting by reflexive control to enacting reflexive control of the West through pub-
lishing Rus­sian military doctrines, from nuclear deterrence to internet phishing 
and leaks of confidential documents.115 The analysts listed the following events as 
evidence of reflexive control: covert actions of “­little green men” (the obfuscated 
Rus­sian forces) in Crimea, the fake footage of the escalation of the Donetsk–­
Luhansk conflict in 2014 (actors ­were employed to play the victimized East Ukrai-
nians in footage that was broadcast on Rus­sian news channels), and dif­fer­ent 
messages sent to dif­fer­ent audiences reporting the downing of Malaysian Airlines 
flight MH17 in July 2014.116 The goal of ­these activities is said to replace the existing 
“interpretative screen” with one that would lead Western leaders to take decisions 
that are advantageous for Rus­sia. For instance, cyber forces defaced Ukrainian and 
Polish websites by placing visuals linking the nationalist content with fascist sym-
bols, and they hacked billboards in Kiev to display casualties and describe the lead-
ers of the nationalist movement as war criminals.117 It was suggested that Rus­sia’s 
informational warfare operations in Ukraine achieved their objective ­because the 
Rus­sian government managed to maintain plausible denial of involvement for a 
considerable time, si­mul­ta­neously minimizing the threshold of vio­lence so as not to 
prompt an international reaction. The Rus­sian annexation of Crimea is presented 
as the culmination of a de­cade of “cognitive operations,” which solidified the Rus­
sian identity and undermined the West in the eyes of Crimean residents and in 
Rus­sia proper.118 The Rus­sian cyber operators also targeted the West: the North 
Atlantic Treaty Organ­ization (NATO) computer system, the Eu­ro­pean Union (EU) 
referendum campaign in the United Kingdom, and the presidential election in the 
United States. They bought commercials spreading divisive content and sent phish-
ing emails in summer 2015 and spring 2016 to targets in the United States, when the 
presidential election campaigns ­were announced. An estimated 2.5 ­percent of re-

	
Reflexive Control	
147
ceivers clicked on a malware link, enabling hackers to gain access to documents 
and monitor information on their computers. Only in October 2016 Rus­sia was 
accused with interfering in the elections.119
­These activities are described as symptoms of informational warfare, which 
was enshrined in Rus­sia’s strategic documents and in the institutions it built, 
for instance, establishing information operations forces, which was announced 
by Rus­sia’s Minister of Defense in 2017.120 Among the outcomes of ­these efforts, 
according to the analysts, ­were an attempt to frame the Ukrainian democracy 
movement as a fascist revolution and to undermine trust in the procedures of 
the presidential election in the United States and the EU membership referen-
dum in the United Kingdom. The intensity of engagement was attributed to the 
availability of digital means to spread information on a large scale and was com-
pared with the propaganda exchange that used to occur during major wars in 
the twentieth ­century.121 However, Rus­sia’s strategic deception preceding the 
invasion in Ukraine in February 2022 was regarded as unpre­ce­dented.
Given the range of diversity of actions in this context it is necessary to ask 
­under what conditions a par­tic­u­lar course of action gets recognized as a “strategic” 
one. Actions and events can be retrospectively described as “strategic,” although 
they might appear as mundane or opportunistic when they are happening.122 In a 
similar vein, when is manipulation a mere lie and when does it become reflexive 
control? Insights from orga­nizational sociologists might be relevant ­here. Accord-
ing to Car­ter, Clegg, and Kornberger, strategic thought is about power garnering 
and self-­legitimation: “Bearing the name of strategy, a par­tic­u­lar form of rational-
ity gets made up; one that is very good at rationalizing and sanctioning itself in the 
name of the ‘bigger picture,’ the ‘mission,’ ‘the ­future’ and other heroic images.”123 
From this perspective, the rise of reflexive control theory in post-­Soviet Rus­sian 
policy discourses begins to make more sense: its mission is to offer a “bigger pic-
ture” and to legitimize existing and new constellations of power relations. When 
deception is not just a lie, but part of “reflexive control,” the work of a policymaker, 
a journalist, an actor, and a soldier can acquire an aura of professionalism and le-
gitimacy. If the symbolic power of strategy is to link dif­fer­ent actors in a func-
tional, pragmatic framework of action where meaning-­making plays an impor­tant 
role, reflexive control theory can be said to work, even in the absence of a clear 
causal link between strategy and events.
Conclusion
­Every conflict, wrote Lefebvre, is primarily “an intellectual exchange,” where 
cognition is a special form of power.124 Indeed, Soviet and post-­Soviet Rus­sian 

148	
CHAPTER 6
attempts to harness reflexivity to control be­hav­ior must be read in the context 
of what Bruno Latour described as the dream of governing at a distance, a form 
of governance that is pos­si­ble only through multiple translations that may ap-
pear weak: “What we so much admire in the Greek miracle is a reversal of power 
relations: the weakest, that is, a tiny ­people holding only shadows and paper 
forms become stronger than the ancient and power­ful Egyptians with their heavy 
stone pyramids.”125 ­These shadows and paper forms, in the cases discussed in 
this chapter, are the sketches of cognitive schemes of ­others. ­These sketches of 
reflexive systems are sorting mechanisms that help generate, group, and report 
the dif­fer­ent narratives, labels, and programming codes as part of reflexive strat-
egy. Although Rus­sia was described as “the most advanced nation in informa-
tional warfare,” reflexive control expresses a wider desire to influence and shape 
the be­hav­ior of ­others so that it becomes predictable.126
In the Cold War context, reflexive control theory appealed to the status of 
exact knowledge, even science, ­because it posited the strong need for knowledge 
of the opponent’s perspective as a prerequisite for Soviet strategic advantage. To 
practice reflexive control meant to formulate research agendas that would go be-
yond ideological caricatures of the be­hav­ior of cap­i­tal­ist powers. It called for a 
nuanced empirical and psychological understanding of Soviet and Western 
socie­ties. Both qualities, Lefebvre hoped, could be described and modeled in the 
networks of Boolean algebra. However, whereas this epistemological realism was 
a welcome addition to Soviet science, the control part of Lefebvre’s theory of re-
flexivity remained deeply problematic and, ultimately, unresolved. How can 
one know if one’s own premises are passed on successfully to the opponent? Was 
not Lefebvre’s hope to formalize reflexive games in a mathematical language set 
to fail from the start?
For Popperian thinkers such as Soros, reflexivity was a source of misconcep-
tions, leading to market failures; Soros claimed to be able to identify ­these mis-
conceptions at the right moment and take advantage of them.127 Lefebvre hoped 
that that unruly reflexivity, just like dark ­matter in physics, could be harnessed 
for governmental purposes, that ­there was a way to describe and order the re-
flexive chaos. However, as Lefebvre noted himself, the reflexive control princi­
ple worked best when the opponent was not aware of it being applied.128 Once 
reflexive control enters a loop of intersubjective reflexivity, it soon becomes prac-
tically useless, ­because complexity increases. Counterreflections become un-
manageable and the opponent ceases to be predictable. This insurmountable 
informational barrier constitutes a serious limitation of reflexive control theory. 
A logical outcome of the overflow of reflexivity would be, following Lefebvre’s 
own observation, to dumb down the opponent: the greater the intellectual gap 
between the reflexive capacity of conflicting agents, the better the chance of out-

	
Reflexive Control	
149
smarting the opponent. In this re­spect, Rus­sia’s effort to spread false informa-
tion both at home and abroad, which has intensified to the extreme during the 
war in Ukraine, coheres well with some of the princi­ples of Lefebvre’s reflexive 
strategy, where the identity of the reflecting subject is being transformed, for in-
stance, when Putin accuses Western countries of being “the empire of lies” and 
his strategists argue that the spread of disinformation is nothing but “an ultra, 
super truth” in the context of the military conflict. During the early days of the 
war in Ukraine it does appear that reflexive control is being deployed at home, 
targeting the Rus­sian population, as much as abroad.
It is difficult to assess the exact impacts of the deployment of reflexive con-
trol. Historians of traditional strategy can evaluate strategic princi­ples and plans 
in the light of additional data describing the events. However, historians of re-
flexive control face the difficulty of the very identification of relevant events. 
Whereas ­grand strategy debates entail often lofty considerations of geopolitics, 
rationality, and history, reflexive control theory appears as a technical device em-
powering the deception and manipulation of individuals.
The obvious conceptual weakness of reflexive control theory is its failure to 
consider the opacity of language, translation, and meaning-­making. It relies too 
heavi­ly on the assumption that actors ­will think consistently and seek to make 
their decisions align with their actions. The Soviet Rus­sian theorists’ attempt to 
make reflexivity work is certainly a signal of a strong modernist hope in taming 
chaos and chance, this time both being located inside and not outside of the 
decision-­maker. De­cades ­later, in the context of Rus­sia’s war in Ukraine reflex-
ive control appears to be used not as a rational decision-­making tool, but as a 
justification, legitimization, and identity shaping device.

150
This final chapter concludes the intellectual journey of scientific prediction in 
Rus­sian and Cold War modernity. It pre­sents an attempt to address what is prob­
ably the most challenging task for scientific prediction—to generate knowledge 
about extremely complex, large-­scale, and long-­term phenomena, knowledge 
that would be faithful to real­ity and, at the same time, actionable, useful for col-
lective decision-­makers. This ambition is no less bold than the Newtonian de-
sire to discover the mechanical laws of the universe enabling us to understand 
and operate the physical world. It is also destined to fail. However, as I show in 
this chapter, the failure to make such scientific predictions could be and was pro-
ductive. The iterative pro­cess of preparing large-­scale, long-­term predictions 
can bring about significant social and po­liti­cal impacts, for it entails an impor­
tant form of orchestration of the ­future.
At the moment of writing, in 2022, few would disagree that the risks posed 
by the ongoing global climate crisis demand scientific predictions. At the same 
time, journalists and members of the public have been agonizing over the range 
of pos­si­ble outcomes that scientists have been predicting, as well as the shortage 
of predictions that are specific in terms of time and space. In order to make pre-
dictive knowledge actionable, decision-­makers ­will need to know what exactly 
the thresholds of the warming of the atmosphere and the ocean are, where ­will 
winds, rains, floods, and droughts hit, and when. ­These are Comtean criteria of 
scientific prediction, so deeply ingrained in policy thinking, but which cannot 
be fulfilled in the context of global changes. However, as I showed in previous 
chapters, the limitations of positivist prediction ­were questioned by the Rus­sian 
7
GLOBAL PREDICTION
From Targeting to Orchestration

	
Global Prediction	
151
economist Nikolai Kondrat’ev in the 1920s and the US mathematician Norbert 
Wiener in the 1950s and 1960s. They both argued that the Comtean model of 
scientific prediction is too simplistic and cannot cope with high complexity. 
While ­these and other thinkers agreed that not all complex phenomena could 
be scientifically predicted, they also pushed the conceptual reach of scientific pre-
diction so that it could still be of use in the science of fleeting phenomena. ­After 
all, they agreed that without the ­will to predict ­there could be no science.
The very role of predictability as a criterion of the scientificity of knowledge 
became a central concern in the field of Earth system governmentality, an in-
terdisciplinary area of study that combines the perspectives of environmental 
history, international organ­ization, and studies of science and technology to in-
vestigate the social and po­liti­cal consequences of the emerging role of mankind 
as a geological force.1 In the 1960s and the 1970s Earth system scientists became 
convinced that the rigid, positivist notion of prediction could not cross the 
threshold of high complexity, in terms of both knowledge and action.2 In this 
chapter I trace this pro­cess by examining the intellectual contribution to the de-
bates on scientific prediction made by a prominent Soviet Rus­sian scientist, 
policy entrepreneur, and public intellectual, Nikita Moiseev (1917–2000). Moi-
seev’s thought forms a particularly impor­tant part of the global history of sci-
entific prediction, bridging the histories of cybernetics and systems analy­sis, on 
the one side, and the histories of authoritarian, liberal, and infrastructural gov-
ernance, on the other side. Following an outline of Moiseev’s intellectual biog-
raphy, the main part of the chapter details how computer-­based policy sciences 
­shaped the epistemological framework of late Soviet thought on Earth systems 
governance (what Moiseev identified as the noosphere) and the role of predict-
ability. The chapter concludes with a discussion of the transformation of the no-
tion of governance from purposive control to guidance through milieus. This, I 
propose, constituted an impor­tant shift to embrace the collective, synchroniz-
ing role of scientific prediction as it goes beyond cognitive operation as in logi-
cal empiricism and beyond target-­seeking pro­cesses of adaptation in cybernetic 
behaviorism.
Prediction, Milieu, and the  
Anthropocene
Before we proceed, it can be useful to remind the reader about the conceptual 
features of cybernetic prediction (presented in chapter 3), ­because it bridged the 
transition from a positivist notion of prediction as the knowledge of facts that 
can be explained with reference to general laws to a performative notion of 

152	
CHAPTER 7
prediction as a behavioral pro­cess that is part of the adaptation and modifica-
tion of the environment. In Norbert Wiener’s cybernetics, the governance of 
be­hav­ior or what would be called dynamic systems is an informational pro­cess, 
which can be characterized by the following stages. First, a desirable state of a 
governable system (a target) is identified. Then, a path for reaching this target is 
de­cided on the basis of observation of what is actually happening (the ­actual 
be­hav­ior of the system). This observation of what is happening must be contin-
uous, for the environment is changing: for example, a mouse or an ­enemy pi­lot 
is evading the pursuer, air temperatures or market values are fluctuating. Ob-
servations of ­these changes are channeled to the decision-­making center (the 
brain of the predator, the investor, or the computer powering the antiaircraft 
missile system), which issues signals to start the corresponding action (to an-
ticipate the ­future location of the mouse in order to catch it, to estimate the 
­future location of the ­enemy plane in order to shoot it, or to estimate the market 
value of shares to buy or sell them). This information flow that feeds into action 
was described by Wiener as feedback loops.
This model of cybernetic control through feedback loops was highly practi-
cal. It was applied to both the study and the engineering of integral, hybrid sys-
tems that could incorporate men, machines, and biological pro­cesses.3 It has 
made pos­si­ble automatic lift doors, digital prosthetics, self-­driving vehicles, digi-
tal marketing on social media, telecom queuing, and medical diagnostic sys-
tems, among other ­things.
However, ­there ­were limits to the scalability of cybernetic control: it is one 
­thing to create a self-­driving metro line or even a car, and another to create a self-­
regulating urban transport system. It is pos­si­ble to create a functioning thermostat 
for a room or even a large building, but such buildings must be strongly isolated 
from their environment, forming a system that is linked with their environment 
in a highly controlled manner (insulation, solar panels, win­dow shades, and rain 
collection points, for example). Some environmental scientists initially embraced 
the cybernetic princi­ple to conceptualize the self-­regulation of ecological systems, 
such as rivers, lakes, or populations of plants and animals, while ­others, like James 
Lovelock, ­were even more ambitious and thought that the entire planet Earth 
could be characterized as such a cybernetic self-­regulating system. However, as the 
empirical data ­were beginning to accumulate in the 1970s and 1980s, Earth system 
scientists understood that they could not rely solely on the cybernetic control the-
ory to conceptualize and steer ­human intervention in global change. The prob­lem 
of shooting an agile ­enemy bomber during the Second World War, which had 
given rise to cybernetics, was a very dif­fer­ent prob­lem from the challenge posed by 
the accumulation of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere and the slow melting of 
glacial ice. Control of long-­term and large-­scale pro­cesses was of a dif­fer­ent order, 

	
Global Prediction	
153
as their scale exceeded the frameworks of ­human time. In this case, the horizons 
of change stretched from seconds as in the cat and mouse chase, from de­cades as 
in economic planning, to hundreds and thousands of years.
This new prob­lem of large-­scale, long-­term, and complex change called for a 
revision of the intellectual apparatus of governance. As I show in this chapter, nei-
ther positivist nor cybernetic notions of scientific prediction ­were abolished as 
such. Instead, they ­were carefully orchestrated into layers of complexity. To put it 
in a ­simple way, at a low level of complexity a positivist, Comtean or logical empiri-
cist prediction could be used, for instance in mechanical engineering and hypoth-
esis testing. At a higher level of complexity where not only facts but also be­hav­iors 
are in question and where short-­term adaptation is required for achieving goals, 
cybernetic prediction can serve well, in, for instance, ­human communication and 
a self-­driving car. The models of reflexive control and prospective reflexivity can 
be deployed to manage social interactions in groups. In the cases of long-­term and 
large-­scale pro­cesses, where the reach of positivist, logical empiricist and cyber-
netic predictions is extremely ­limited, the emphasis shifts to creating milieus in 
which all of ­these types of predictions could operate in a ­viable way.
Governance of the long term and large scale becomes the orchestration of de-
cision and be­hav­ior environments: creating institutional, ­legal, and material 
limits and channels for decisions and actions that operate with ­these lower-­level 
predictions. The role of milieu is to guide the be­hav­iors and pro­cesses that are 
driven by mechanisms that could be “predicted.”
The orientation to milieu as an epistemological and governmental approach 
was not meant to replace but to complement scientific prediction as a cognitive 
operation. Indeed, the term goes as far back as modern scientific predictions: the 
concept of milieu was referenced in nineteenth-­century sciences that described 
and conceptualized relationality, such as mathe­matics, evolutionary biology, neu-
rophysiology, and psy­chol­ogy. The idea of milieu as an epistemological device for 
curing organisms and shaping individual and collective be­hav­iors has been ana-
lyzed in a range of excellent histories of medicine, science and technology. Milieu 
informed the late twentieth ­century’s complexity science and resilience approach. 
In the early twenty-­first ­century, governance through milieu has been addressed 
in the work on neoliberal governmentality and behavioral public policy.4
The idea that governance through milieu constitutes a distinct form of state 
intervention in the fields characterized by ­great complexity and uncertainty, such 
as, for instance, ­human population, was proposed by Michel Foucault in his lec-
tures delivered at the Collège de France in 1978 and 1979.5 With governance 
through milieu, Foucault tried to capture ­those forms of steering and control 
that did not seek to influence individuals as discrete agents, whose minds and 
­wills ­were sources of action, but rather focused on their “environment.” ­Here 

154	
CHAPTER 7
“environment” referred to material systems of relations, in which ­these individ-
uals ­were embedded and upon which they ­were functionally dependent. Fou-
cault’s use of the concept “milieu” was significantly influenced by the writings 
of his doctoral examiner and mentor Georges Canguilhem.6 According to Can-
guilhem, the modern scientific notion of milieu refers to relationality itself, where 
it is impossible to separate the object from its environment.7 As I showed in the 
­earlier chapters, this notion of milieu to which Canguilhem referred was devel-
oped by biologists and particularly neurophysiologists in the early twentieth 
­century, whereas its crudely simplified and mechanistic version was ­adopted by 
B. F. Skinner and in some forms of behaviorist psy­chol­ogy.8 As Skinner’s behav-
iorism was rejected as unethical and conceptually flawed, the concepts of mi-
lieu and be­hav­ior became suspect in many critical cultural disciplines. However, 
the ongoing research in psychological and neurological sciences as well as so-
cial and cultural studies, especially the studies of digital culture, that embraced 
the cybernetic concepts of system, materiality, complexity, and informational 
regulation constitutes a growing field where the coproduction of the self, be­hav­
ior, and milieu are analyzed beyond Skinnerian behaviorism.9
Since the 1980s, Foucault’s idea of government through milieu has inspired 
several influential research agendas: Foucauldian scholars historicized colonial 
attempts to use dif­fer­ent milieus, or complex material and institutional infra-
structures, to control at a distance ­those colonial subjects who ­were deemed un-
able to reflexively govern themselves.10 Urban sociologists and media theorists 
focused on infrastructural milieus’ effects on social and po­liti­cal practices.11 En-
vironmental sociologists and historians created the new term environmentality 
to analyze the emerging global climate governance.12 While ­these government 
through milieu studies developed in disparate fields, they share a focus on the 
governmental effects of dif­fer­ent types of material milieus, be they urban archi-
tecture, roads, or digital networks, but also regulatory milieus such as the ar-
chitecture of financial and economic systems.13
This chapter introduces the conceptual shift from target-­oriented governance 
to government through milieu as it took shape as part of the attempts to create a 
new world order during the Cold War. ­These ­were attempts to reorchestrate the 
politics and organ­ization of data and scientific knowledge so that they could be 
deployed to predict the global environmental ­future. ­These efforts, as Moiseev’s 
example shows, led to fundamental revision of authoritarian dogmas of govern-
ability, the role of scientific expertise in global governance, and concepts of 
man’s relationship with nature. I argue that through this pro­cess, a Soviet ver-
sion of Earth system governmentality has emerged. The Soviet Earth system 
governmentality shared strong parallels with what has been described as a clas-
sical liberal model of negative governance (the night watch state) as well as with 

	
Global Prediction	
155
Friedrich von Hayek’s approach to global nongovernability. Both classical lib-
eral and von Hayek’s approaches emphasized the creation of institutional and 
informational milieus that would guide individual and collective be­hav­iors by 
preventing and limiting their consequences, rather than by establishing policy 
and management targets. The liberal notion of ­limited governance coupled with 
active intervention in orchestration of the milieu ­rose to prominence thanks to 
the advancement of computer modeling technology and the attempts to manage 
Cold War tensions through East–­West intellectual transfer. Rethinking the epis-
temology of scientific prediction was key to this pro­cess.
In previous chapters I detailed the ways in which Soviet scientists approached 
scientific prediction in the economy and management. This chapter concerns the 
Soviet contribution to Earth system governance and its role in what was named 
by the Dutch atmospheric scientist Paul Crutzen as the era of the Anthropocene. 
Crutzen attributed his concept’s intellectual origins to Rus­sian theories of the 
biosphere and noosphere.14 The origin of the concept of the biosphere, that part 
of the Earth’s layer constituting of living ­matter, dates to the second half of the 
nineteenth ­century. Conversely, its sibling concept, the noosphere, was devel-
oped by the Rus­sian geologist and natu­ral scientist Vladimir Vernadskii (1863–
1945) and French phi­los­o­phers Pierre Teilhard de Chardin and Edouard Le Roy, 
whom Vernadskii met in Paris from 1922 to 1925.15 Vernadskii’s book The Bio-
sphere (published in Rus­sia in 1926 and first translated into En­glish only in 1986) 
posited that living ­matter was ­shaped through the interaction of solar energy 
and biogeophysical pro­cesses. While Teilhard de Chardin coined the concept of 
the noosphere to describe the ultimate stage of ­human pro­gress, where cosmos, 
god, reason, and the material world would unite, Vernadskii saw the noosphere 
as a stage of the development of living ­matter, the biosphere, where humankind 
becomes a geological force and ­human reason (razum in Rus­sian) acquires power 
to drive the change.16 A noosphere is therefore a par­tic­u­lar stage of biospheric 
development, where global coevolution becomes governable.17
Vernadskii’s legacy significantly ­shaped Soviet thought on global governance 
during the Cold War as his geophysical philosophy was extended beyond the 
natu­ral sciences into the new field of decision and policy sciences, characterized 
by operations research (OR), economic and management cybernetics, and sys-
tems analy­sis.18 Yet as I show, the unique challenges of global environmental gov-
ernance required a substantive revision of the scientific concept of prediction. It 
was Nikita Moiseev who offered this revision, transforming Vernadskii’s geo-
physical philosophy into an applied policy science, entrenched in the global con-
cerns of the Cold War. For Moiseev, to govern the global biosphere required the 
invention of new policy sciences, which would enable humanity to step into what 
Vernadskii described as a stage of the noosphere.

156	
CHAPTER 7
However, neither Comtean positivist nor a cybernetic notion of prediction 
could help to serve as a criterion of scientificity and a guiding mechanism for 
action. In this chapter I argue that Moiseev, in Nikolai Kondrat’ev’s spirit, ad-
dressed the central prob­lem of scientific (un)governability head on, as he pointed 
out that scientific prediction of global change cannot be achieved by a ­simple 
combination of statistical methods of data production and a cybernetic model 
of feedback-­based information pro­cessing. Like Norbert Wiener, Moiseev called 
for a substantive reorchestration of the social and material universe so as to make 
the world ­future predictable. Scientific prediction, in other words, was a futile 
cognitive experiment if it was not embedded in an institutional reform. Moi-
seev hoped to see a new, global ecol­ogy to predict itself into being and, in that 
pro­cess, erode Cold War divides.
Indeed, Moiseev was a patron of global computer modeling in the Soviet 
Union, and in the early 1980s he cooperated with Crutzen on the famous nu-
clear winter study, a computer simulation of the environmental effects of nu-
clear war. While the legacy of the nuclear winter study can certainly be seen in 
Crutzen’s formulation of the Anthropocene theory, Moiseev used the nuclear 
winter simulation to argue that the idea of governing the global biosphere was 
not an intellectual utopia, but a challenge for policy science. Furthermore, the 
Soviet po­liti­cal context was becoming receptive to Moiseev’s ideas, ­because, as 
Vladislav Zubok detailed in his exhaustive history of the last de­cade of the So-
viet Union, in the late 1970s and first half of the 1980s, a strong po­liti­cal con-
sensus emerged to reform the system of po­liti­cal administration and economic 
planning.19 This reformist orientation was accelerated by Mikhail Gorbachev, 
whom Moiseev advised both when Gorbachev was the chairman of the Stavropol 
region and the general secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union 
(CPSU).20 The area of burning concern was the failure of Soviet agriculture to 
deliver food to the population; Moiseev initiated the development of a comput-
erized decision-­making model for agricultural development in the Stavropol re-
gion, a proj­ect which was implemented in cooperation with the International 
Institute of Applied Systems Analy­sis (IIASA) in Laxenburg, Austria.21 The ex-
tent of Moiseev’s contribution to the late Soviet domestic and foreign policy ­will 
not be clear ­until his archival materials become available in the ­future. It is clear, 
however, that Moiseev worked closely with Gorbachev’s aides Ivan Frolov and 
Vadim Zagladin in this way feeding directly to the idea of the new world order 
promoted by Gorbachev. This is not surprising, ­because, as the historian Vladislav 
Zubok observed, Gorbachev was deeply committed to the development of new 
intellectual approaches to governance.22 Moiseev was also central to the intro-
duction of “global prob­lems” as a priority area in the CPSU’s long-­term plan in 
1986; the global prob­lems included such issues as carbon dioxide emissions, 

	
Global Prediction	
157
world population growth, and world energy resources, all of which could not be 
resolved within the bound­aries of a single state. In addition to high-­level policy 
engagement, Moiseev had a wide societal impact as a prolific pop­u­lar­izer of sci-
ence: his books ­were published in runs of thousands of copies and ­were widely 
read in society and by managerial elites in the 1980s. Since Moiseev’s death in 
2000, his intellectual legacy has been fostered by institutes of the Rus­sian Acad­
emy of Sciences and leading university departments.23 In the next section I pre­
sent Moiseev’s intellectual biography, for his figure deserves to be included in 
the international cast of what Quinn Slobodian described as globalists, forgers 
of the new world’s conceptual and institutional order to implement neoliberal, 
­limited government.24 However, while Western neoliberal globalists shared their 
background in economic and social sciences, Moiseev arrived at similar insights 
from mathe­matics and Earth system modeling.
An Institutional Entrepreneur  
of the Soviet Anthropocene
To trace the biography of Moiseev, a scholar who bridged dif­fer­ent po­liti­cal re-
gimes, social worlds, and scientific disciplines, is to trace central shifts in gov-
ernance in the twentieth ­century. The story of Moiseev is the story of the 
communist revolution and Rus­sian nationalism rooted in an imperial past, but 
also of technoscientific modernity, based on postpositivist epistemology and 
global thinking. It is also a story of the search for po­liti­cal rationality and con-
trol with the help of the instruments of technoscience, leading to fundamental 
revision of what it means to be rational. To do justice to the personality of Moi-
seev is therefore beyond the limits of this chapter; I introduce only briefly his 
intellectual and po­liti­cal trajectory.
Born in Moscow in 1917, Moiseev grew up in a noble ­family, the legacy of 
which, as he detailed in his memoirs, was expressed in his deep skepticism ­toward 
the Communist Party, although Moiseev passionately endorsed the socialist 
princi­ple of social equality and regarded himself as a communist. Moiseev’s ma-
ternal grandparents died in cholera epidemics and his ­mother was ­adopted by a 
Baltic German aristocrat Nikolai Karlovich von Meck (1863–1929), an influential 
railway entrepreneur and patron of the arts. The ­house­hold of von Meck hosted 
such luminaries as Claude Debussy and Pyotr Tchaikovsky, the latter a member of 
the extended ­family. Nikita Moiseev’s ­father, Nikolai Moiseev, graduated from the 
law faculty at Moscow State University (MGU), was keenly interested in econom-
ics and statistics, and studied Japa­nese language and economics as a diplomat in 
Tokyo. The Moiseev ­family suffered Stalin’s repressions: the adoptive grand­father 

158	
CHAPTER 7
was shot in 1929 and Moiseev’s ­father was killed in Butyrki prison in 1931. How-
ever, Moiseev joined the Communist Party during the Second World War, moti-
vated by his patriotic feelings for Rus­sia rather than to the party. In his memoir, 
Moiseev reflected extensively on his relationship to Soviet Rus­sia, trying to recon-
cile his interest in science and ser­vice to the state with his painful ­family history.25 
The trajectory of the Moiseev ­family can be well understood through the lens of 
the viability of the imperial Rus­sian social estates, which, as Tomila Lankina de-
tailed, continued reproducing and generating social solidarity regardless of the 
brutal repression and bureaucratic imposition of the communist class system.26
The young Moiseev attended the mathematical seminars for talented ­children 
or­ga­nized by the prominent mathematician Israel Gel’fand at the renowned 
Steklov Institute of Mathe­matics; he won a national competition in mathe­matics 
and passed the exams for the prestigious MGU department of mathe­matics and 
mechanics. However, Moiseev was refused a place on the course ­because of his 
bourgeois background; only thanks to Gel’fand’s personal support was Moiseev 
eventually enrolled at the university, from where he graduated in 1941.27 Imme-
diately Moiseev was recruited to the army, appointed as an engineer to the air 
force, and sent to the frontline.
­After the war, in 1948 to 1949 Moiseev was employed in the military-­industrial 
complex specializing in rocket technology: as a se­nior engineer, he worked on 
dynamics and ballistics at the missile design institute NII-2 of the Ministry of the 
Aviation Industry and taught the dynamics of guided missiles at the Bauman 
Moscow State Technical University, where he met some of the key scientists 
­behind the Soviet space program, such as Iurii Pobedonostsev, Sergei Korolev, 
and Vladimir Chelomei.28 However, in 1949 the Moiseev ­family ­were again re-
pressed: his el­derly stepmother was arrested, Moiseev was fired, and he fled from 
Moscow in 1950, finding shelter in the Rostov State University in Southwestern 
Rus­sia, where he taught hydromechanics. Only at the beginning of the Thaw in 
1956, when Nikita Khrushchev denounced Stalin’s terror and personality cult, 
could Moiseev return to Moscow. The influential academician Mikhail Lavrent’ev, 
the founder of the principal Soviet science city, Akademgorodk, in Novosibirsk, 
invited Moiseev to become a professor and dean at the Department of Control 
and Applied Mathe­matics (which trained specialists for the Soviet space pro-
gram) at the Moscow Physics-­Technical Institute (MFTI). In the same year Moi-
seev was appointed as a researcher at the Computer Center of the Soviet Acad­emy 
of Sciences, where he would work for more than three de­cades.29 In 1966 Moiseev 
became a corresponding member of the Soviet Acad­emy of Sciences (full mem-
ber in 1970) and was appointed as a vice-­director for research of the Computer 
Center in 1967. Moiseev’s scientific contribution to the Soviet military-­industrial 
complex, particularly space, aviation, and nuclear programs (from 1956 he had 

	
Global Prediction	
159
clearance to access high-­level classified data), and his unparalleled social skills 
propelled him into the position of research director at the Computer Center in 
the Soviet Acad­emy of Sciences. The Computer Center became established as the 
leading research center in computer science, applied mathe­matics, and automa-
tion, providing support, for instance, for Pavel Sukhoi’s jet-­fighter design lab.
In addition to tapping into the Cold War arms race and the expansion of the 
Soviet military-­industrial complex, Moiseev’s ­career coincided with the opening 
of the Soviet system to the West and Prime Minister Kosygin’s call to introduce 
scientific forecasting into Soviet planning and management, which I discussed in 
chapter 4. ­Here Moiseev bridged the gap between academia and government by 
initiating several strategically impor­tant and intellectually innovative fields: OR, 
the systems approach, and, from the 1970s, computer-­based modeling of complex 
environmental and socioeconomic pro­cesses. Having established a solid reputa-
tion as an applied mathematician, Moiseev worked closely with several founding 
figures of innovative research institutions, such as Lavrent’ev; scholars working 
in diverse fields falling ­under the umbrella term of cybernetics, including the in-
fluential mathematician Aleksandr Lyapunov, who taught Moiseev mathe­matics 
at university in the 1930s, and with whom Moiseev had a long-­lasting friendship; 
and Viktor Glushkov, who would launch the ambitious but unsuccessful pro-
gram of the all-­union computer network.30 Fluent in French (he also read En­
glish), Moiseev traveled abroad and actively forged links with leading Western 
scholars. ­These trips inspired Moiseev to integrate Vernadskii’s theory of the bio-
sphere and noosphere with computer-­based control sciences.
The Soviet 1960s ­were characterized by continued technoscientific optimism, 
but also by growing awareness of the in­effec­tive­ness of centralized planning, 
stalling economic growth, concern with the environment, and increasing pollu-
tion.31 Moiseev encountered what Sverker Sörlin and Paul Warde described as the 
emerging “integrative imagination” of environmental change as a mathematician 
specializing in control pro­cesses.32 The idea of the environment as a system of 
relations which is changing and needs to be explained, and not just a context that 
can be used to explain changes in organisms, emerged ­after 1948 in the writings 
of William Vogt and Fairfield Osborn.33 In 1955, a Wenner-­Gren symposium, 
“Man Changing the Face of the Earth,” consolidated what would become envi-
ronmental thinking as a form of concern about global, long-­term, and future-­
oriented changes. The term “environment” entered policy use in 1957 when the 
British governmental science advisor Solly Zuckerman proposed the notion of 
the “environmental sciences.”34 The development of Soviet scientific environ-
mental thinking was rooted in the nineteenth ­century’s scoping for resources and 
the subsequent work on the Earth’s “living ­matter” in the spirit of Vernadskii. As 
Jonathan Oldfield noted, in the 1960s Rus­sian scientists coined the concept of 

160	
CHAPTER 7
biogeocenose, which resembled the Western concept of ecosystem.35 Moiseev’s 
writings draw on this Rus­sian scientific tradition at the same time expressing 
similar concerns to ­those of the systems scholars Donella and Dennis Meadows, 
the polymath James Lovelock, and the economist Kenneth Boulding, to mention 
but a few Earth system thinkers who crossed disciplinary bound­aries to concep-
tualize coevolving Earth and ­human systems in the 1970s and 1980s. However, in 
contrast to the Meadows, Lovelock, and Boulding, Moiseev distinctively focused 
on the epistemology of governance and control, becoming in effect a phi­los­o­pher 
of public policy.
By the 1960s the Soviet policy science community was ready to embrace the 
environmental turn not only ­because they ­were concerned with the pollution and 
preservation of nature. Soviet scholars ­were also attracted to the concept of the 
environment as a hybrid system, which integrated ­human and nonhuman actors. 
Conceived as part of the environmental system, society and ­human be­hav­ior 
could be explored scientifically outside Marxist–­Leninist dogma according to 
which economic structures and property relations determined social and cultural 
forms.36 To define the communist society as “Earth’s living ­matter” meant to de-
politicize the social in terms of the official ideology. Of course, such depoliticiza-
tion was regarded as po­liti­cal in its own right, creating new forms of agency and 
institutional autonomy. The freedom it offered, however, was relative: as I showed 
in previous chapters, scientists experienced many institutional obstacles to access-
ing data and providing direct input in policymaking, despite the Soviet govern-
ment’s investment in the economic applications of mathe­matics. For instance, 
being a specialist in dynamic programming and optimization of decision-­making 
in technical systems, Moiseev was enthusiastic about applying his expertise to eco-
nomic planning and began to advise the State Planning Committee (Gosplan) re-
garding the development of social indicators of economic growth. However, 
having encountered the institutional real­ity of absent data and fragmentation, 
Moiseev realized that Gosplan’s planning pro­cess was not based on scientific ex-
pertise, but on po­liti­cal bargaining among enterprises as well as what accounted as 
social and orga­nizational rituals of the high-­level economy of ­favors.37 Even from 
a scientific point of view ­there was not much that Moiseev could have contributed: 
not only was the quality of the economic statistics data poor, but access to it was 
very ­limited. But this did not ­matter in the end, ­because like Friedrich von Hayek, 
Moiseev became convinced that the economy was too complex to be mathema-
tized. As Moiseev put it, the very assumption of regular economic development 
and planning (in Rus­sian, planomernoe razvitie) was conceptually erroneous. 
Quantitative policy science alone, argued Moiseev, could not guarantee efficient 
governance of the national economy, be it communist or cap­i­tal­ist.

	
Global Prediction	
161
In the same de­cade, from the 1960s to the 1970s, Hayek, an economist, en-
countered systems theory and the mathematician and systems theorist Moiseev 
approached economy as a governmental prob­lem.38 Hayek did not read Moiseev, 
but he read writings on cybernetic self-­regulation, while Moiseev read Hayek, 
which stimulated his interest further in the role of scientific expertise in the gov-
ernment of complex systems. Moiseev crystallized this view during his visits as a 
guest professor at Yale University, where he was invited by the economist Tjalling 
Koopmans—­who ­later won the Nobel Prize—in 1974 and 1976.39 In a paper pre-
sented for the Yale faculty, Moiseev proposed the idea of the ultimate ungovern-
ability of economics. Just like Norbert Wiener, Moiseev argued that socioeconomic 
pro­cesses ­were far too complex to be captured by existing computer modeling 
techniques.40 Moiseev even suggested that the term “planned economy” was an 
oxymoron. He proposed to use the term “guided economy” instead of governed 
(or controlled) economy (napravliaemaia ekonomika instead of upravliaemaia 
ekonomika, in Rus­sian). Koopmans, invested in linear programming methods, 
reportedly, “did not like this paper at all,” which did not bother Moiseev very 
much, but the Rus­sian scientist was apprehensive about the pos­si­ble po­liti­cal con-
sequences of his talk. Moiseev was relieved to find out ­later that back in Moscow 
“no one had even noticed it.”41
In his memoir, Moiseev reported having lost his belief, in the late 1960s, in 
the capacity of positivist science and mathematical applications to make long-­
term economic forecasts, which could come across as ironic, ­because in 1968 he 
established what would become one of the leading centers of economic model-
ing in the country.42 But in ­doing this, Moiseev developed a reflexive approach 
to computer modeling and prediction. Like Nikolai Kondrat’ev in the 1920s, 
Moiseev argued that macroeconomic models can give “at best” a snapshot of the 
pre­sent and that their capacity to produce reliable long-­term forecasts is close to 
zero. He wrote this bluntly in his confidential letter to the head of Soviet research 
and development, the vice-­chairman of the State Committee for Science and 
Technology (GKNT) in 1980.43 Convinced that the growth of scientific exper-
tise increases the rate of change in socioeconomic systems, ­because increasing 
availability of knowledge makes decision-­making harder rather than easier, Moi-
seev turned to the issues of complexity, evolution, and self-­organization. Con-
sidering that policy sciences could be more fruitfully applied to environmental 
prob­lems than eco­nom­ical ones, particularly in the Soviet context, he began to 
develop computer-­based modeling of the biosphere and to rethink the funda-
mentals of scientific knowability and governance.44
Moiseev did not develop ­these ideas in isolation: encounters with Vernadski-
ian scholars and links with Western scientists ­were vital. Moiseev himself wrote 

162	
CHAPTER 7
that his interest in global systems and biosphere emerged during his visit to a 
French research center dedicated to the management of large technical systems in 
Fontainebleau near Paris. This was a formative experience of Western intellectual 
culture: Moiseev stayed in the Latin Quarter, drove a small Renault, read von 
Hayek’s The Road to Serfdom in French, and regularly met with Rus­sian expatriate 
intellectuals, such as the Rus­sian microbiologist Sergei Vinogradskii’s ­daughter, 
who knew Vernadskii when he stayed at Sorbonne from 1922 to 1926.45 Since then 
Moiseev would keenly engage in international collaboration; his interest was fa-
cilitated by the United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organ­ization 
(UNESCO) program Man and the Biosphere launched in 1971, events or­ga­nized 
by the Club of Rome in relation to its first report, The Limits to Growth (1972), the 
IIASA (established in Laxenburg, Austria, in 1972), and the Paris Institut de la Vie, 
founded by the French policy activist Maurice Marois in 1971. Having initiated 
one of the first Soviet computer laboratories modeling geophysical and biological 
pro­cesses in land, ocean, and atmosphere at the Computer Center, Moiseev had 
contacts with climate research centers at Livermore and the University of Oregon 
in the United States. Fi­nally, from 1983 to 1985, ­under the auspices of the Interna-
tional Council of Scientific Unions, Moiseev participated in the follow-up study of 
the environmental consequences of nuclear war.
Starting in the early 1970s Moiseev published widely on the applications of 
policy sciences for economic and orga­nizational planning, drawing on theoreti-
cal advances in cybernetics and systems analy­sis.46 His ­later work drew inspira-
tion from Vernadskii’s writings on the biosphere and noosphere, resulting in the 
publication of Man, the Environment, Society (1980), Man and Biosphere (1985), 
and The Algorithms of Development (1987). The last book, which was reworked 
into Man and Noosphere, and printed in a 100,000-­copy run in 1990, argued that 
governability and control ­were central intellectual issues in the age of mankind 
as a geological force.47
Moiseev was by no means alone in the emerging field of Earth system gover-
nance in the Soviet Union: he drew on the work of the leading atmosphere and 
climate engineering scientist Mikhail Budyko, who significantly advanced bio-
sphere thinking into what was then a nascent global environmental science.48 The 
prominent geophysicist Evgenii Fedorov’s writings on the interaction between 
man and biosphere as a social and governmental issue formed another impor­tant 
influence.49 Moiseev’s competence in mathematical modeling also helped him to 
forge interdisciplinary links: according to the historian Douglas Weiner, by the 
mid-1970s mathematical methods became the dominant approach in Soviet en-
vironmental and ecological science, promoted by scientists following Nikolai 
Timofeev-­Resovskii’s intellectual lineage. However, ­there ­were impor­tant po­liti­
cal cleavages among the pioneers of mathematized environmental governance. 

	
Global Prediction	
163
Some environmental scientists, such as Stanislav Shvarts and Evgenii Fedorov, 
­were strongly committed to the centralist, scientific proj­ects of the transforma-
tion of nature, while ­others, such as Nikolai Reimers and Moiseev, ­were deeply 
skeptical about it.50 Unlike ecologists, who ­were interested in conservation, Moi-
seev sought to extend mathematical insights into self-­organization to the gover-
nance of the biosphere. Initially this intellectual pursuit fell on deaf ears: Moiseev 
wrote that even bright mathematical biologists, like Iurii Svirezhev, and mathe-
matical cyberneticians, like Lyapunov, did not appreciate his interest in the epis-
temology of the governability of the complex organ­ization of the biosphere.51
Moiseev’s breakthrough came during the escalation of the Cold War ­under 
Ronald Reagan in 1983, when Moiseev became widely known as the patron of the 
Soviet study of the environmental effects of nuclear war. In 1982 Paul Crutzen and 
John Birks formulated the hypothesis that a nuclear exchange would generate 
smoke particle emissions, a cloud causing a global darkening and cooling. This 
hypothesis was tested jointly by US and Soviet scientists who simulated several 
scenarios of the environmental consequences of nuclear war on the General Cir-
culation Models (GCMs) of global climate in 1983. ­These simulations confirmed 
the hypothesis of nuclear winter, where the biosphere of the global North and 
South would be destroyed by the global cooling, and the less harsh scenario, nu-
clear autumn, where the biosphere in the Northern hemi­sphere, although badly 
affected, would survive. In any case, both scenarios established that nuclear war 
would cause irreversible climate change. Led by Moiseev, the Soviet team gathered 
such leading scientists as atmosphere physicists Georgii Golitsyn and Vladimir 
Aleksandrov, climatologist Mikhail Budyko, mathematician Georgii Stenchikov, 
and population biologist Iurii Svirezhev, among ­others.
The nuclear winter study informed nuclear strategy, disarmament, and Earth 
system science, but it can also be argued to have contributed to the development of 
Moiseev’s concept of the noosphere, where the biosphere can become governable 
once the princi­ple of governance through milieu is applied, and Crutzen’s concept 
of the epochal change to the Anthropocene.52 Indeed, both the noosphere and the 
Anthropocene are epochal and analytical concepts, as they indicate a historically 
changing relationship between mankind and the Earth. The key difference be-
tween ­these terms is that Crutzen’s Anthropocene sought to draw attention to sci-
entific evidence of humanity’s geological impact on the planet (he was not the first 
to propose this), whereas Moiseev borrowed Vernadskii’s concept of the noosphere 
to explore the potential and limit of the application of policy sciences on the global 
level. It is impor­tant to add, however, that both Crutzen and Moiseev called for 
the renewal of a global governmental agenda. For instance, in his seminal article 
Crutzen connected the Anthropocene with the control revolution, the rise of auto-
mation since James Watt’s invention of the steam engine, writing that control is 

164	
CHAPTER 7
the key prob­lem posed by this new era: “a daunting task lies ahead for scientists 
and engineers to guide society ­towards environmentally sustainable manage-
ment during the era of the Anthropocene.”53 It is quite remarkable that Moiseev 
attempted to do just that some two de­cades ­earlier on the other side of the Iron 
Curtain.
From 1980 Moiseev began to pop­u­lar­ize the global modeling of the biosphere 
and to speak up for grave environmental prob­lems, both in the Soviet Union and 
in developing countries, such as Vietnam.54 He saw ­these activities not only as 
part of being of ser­vice to society, an impor­tant part of scientific ethos in Rus­sia, 
but also as a form of policy entrepreneurship. By ushering in the noosphere, 
where global biospheric change becomes governable in the governmental dis-
courses, he began to engage with higher levels of politics, beyond academia and 
the military-­industrial complex. Moiseev’s publications in influential journals 
paved the way for the introduction of global prob­lems in the CPSU’s program in 
1985. When Gorbachev began advancing his reforms to introduce glasnost’ and 
international collaboration, Moiseev’s globalism informed the emerging agenda 
of the new world order. The significant public status of Moiseev is testified by the 
fact that alongside the prominent Rus­sian physicist Evgenii Velikhov, Moiseev 
was appointed to the commission set up to clean up Chernobyl ­after the explo-
sion in 1986.55 ­Later, Moiseev became the president of the Green Cross Rus­sia, an 
international organ­ization that was established by Mikhail Gorbachev in 1993 to 
deal with the environmental consequences of military activities. Moiseev also 
chaired the State Council for the Analy­sis of Crisis Situations and was the presi-
dent of the Rus­sian National Committee for the United Nations Environment 
Program (UNEP). In 1995 UNEP awarded Moiseev the Global 500 Award; Paul 
Crutzen would receive this prize the next year. However, by the time Moiseev’s 
ideas found their receptive audience at the highest echelons of the Soviet power, 
the Soviet system began collapsing due to Gorbachev’s economic reforms and 
strengthening nationalist movements. The 1990s saw an extreme deterioration of 
Rus­sian economy, accelerating brain drain of globally oriented scientists.56
Unlike many Soviet science and civic activists who established socie­ties to 
pursue specific issue-­driven agendas, Moiseev focused on intellectual and insti-
tutional reform seeking to fundamentally transform the intellectual apparatus 
under­lying global governance. His position ­toward the official government in-
stitutions could be described as that of an enterprising “reform technocrat,” to 
borrow a phrase from David Priestland.57 Moiseev saw his duty as enlightening 
policymakers and facilitating new institutional designs for governing complex-
ity, using the noosphere theory to establish conceptual and institutional links 
between expanding geophysical sciences and public policy sciences.58 Accord-
ingly, in what follows, I focus not so much on the theory of the noosphere as an 

	
Global Prediction	
165
instrument to legitimize environmental protection in the Soviet Union, but as 
part of a new approach to governance through milieu, one that required defini-
tion of new notions of rationality and control that went beyond the idea that 
global pro­cesses can be steered on the basis of cybernetics.
Transnational Development  
of the Biosphere and Noosphere
Although the term biosphere and the name of Vernadskii occasionally surfaced 
in specialist writings in the West, such as Eugene Odum’s influential textbook 
Fundamentals of Ecol­ogy (1953), it was only at a UNESCO conference in 1968 that 
the term biosphere was first used in the context of international science and pol-
icy.59 In the same year Odum’s Fundamentals ­were translated into Rus­sian. Since 
then, the development and spread of the biosphere concept has been documented 
in many histories of the geosciences, but it is less widely known that the concept 
of the biosphere also entered management and policy sciences, in parallel with 
the rise of the systems approach, a transdisciplinary science of organ­ization that 
achieved prominence in the East and West from the late 1960s.60
The concept of the biosphere was introduced into Soviet policy discourses and 
systems thinking in the late 1950s. Vernadskii’s ideas inspired dif­fer­ent schol-
ars, ranging from climate science (Mikhail Budyko, Evgenii Fedorov), soil sci-
ence (Viktor Kovda, with whom Moiseev had a close professional relation), to 
anthropology (Lev Gumilev, with whose interpretation of the noosphere Moi-
seev strongly disagreed).61 For Moiseev the central figure was the ge­ne­ticist Niko-
lai Timofeev-­Resovskii, who was based in the closed science city of Obninsk, 
home to the first Soviet nuclear power plant. Timofeev-­Resovskii was interested 
in the cross-­fertilization of mathe­matics, ge­ne­tics, and computer modeling and 
was among the first ones to revive Vernadskii’s theory of the biosphere ­after the 
end of the Stalinist era in 1956.62 Moiseev met Timofeev-­Resovskii through the 
mathematical biologist Iurii Svirezhev; this encounter led to regular meetings-­
turned-­informal-­seminars in Moiseev’s office, which often ran late into the eve­
ning. Discussions with Timofeev-­Resovskii not only enthused Moiseev to develop 
computer applications for modeling interactions among geophysical and living 
systems, but also facilitated Moiseev’s friendship with Kovda, an influential So-
viet Rus­sian scientist who was involved in the setting up of the UNESCO pro-
gram “Man and the Biosphere.”63
In addition to biologists and soil scientists, Moiseev fostered relations with 
scholars at the Central Geophysical Laboratory in Leningrad, the Institutes of 
Oceanography and Geography, and MGU. His networks did not stop at the Iron 

166	
CHAPTER 7
Curtain: Moiseev met Jay Forrester and Dennis Meadows at the first UNESCO 
Conference on Global Prob­lems in Venice, Italy, in 1971. Capitalizing on the mo-
mentum in the wake of the Venice conference and the subsequent publication of 
The Limits to Growth (1972), Moiseev obtained a grant to create two laboratories 
for mathematical modeling of the biosphere, which ­were awarded by the chairman 
of the section of Earth Sciences at the Soviet Acad­emy of Sciences, Aleksandr 
Sidorenko. This institutional innovation must be seen in both domestic and inter-
national po­liti­cal contexts: while the Soviet Union began to actively brand its for-
eign policy with global environmental concerns, prominent scientists such as 
Budyko and Fedorov began to publish specialist and popu­lar books on the global 
environmental crisis. The emerging computer-­based global modeling was an 
impor­tant nexus that bridged techno-­optimism and global concerns. For instance, 
in his long afterword for Forrester’s World Dynamics (published in Rus­sian in 
1978), Moiseev declared that computer simulation of complex biosphere pro­cesses 
could provide a scientific foundation for world government.64 The Rus­sian transla-
tion of World Dynamics resonated widely: Moiseev’s name became familiar in the 
circles of cultural and environmental dissidents.65
Having borrowed Vernadskii’s idea of mankind as a geological force and in-
spired by Vernadskii’s vision of the noosphere where scientific reason would 
or­ga­nize planetary development, Moiseev operationalized Vernadskii’s geophys-
ical philosophy to rethink the wider governmental implications of mathemati-
cal methods, drawing on insights from OR, systems theory, computer-­based 
modeling, ecol­ogy, and climate science. In his writings, Moiseev often used the 
terms biosphere and noosphere interchangeably, but generally by the noosphere 
he meant the near ­future when the application of policy sciences to global plan-
etary governance would be pos­si­ble both conceptually and institutionally. First 
and foremost, Moiseev was interested in the applied mathematical side of ratio-
nal planetary governance: ­here Moiseev was deeply influenced by Henri Poin-
caré’s work on differential equations. Indeed, mathematical thinking about 
par­ameters and limits led Moiseev to define governmental rationality as think-
ing from the limits, rather than as a maximizing or optimizing pro­cess.66 Moi-
seev also read Teilhard de Chardin’s The Phenomenon of Man (1955) and was 
familiar with James Lovelock’s Gaia theory, which was first formulated in the 
1960s; indeed, the first computer-­based modeling system of global ecol­ogy at the 
Computer Center was called “Gaia” in the early 1980s.67 Moiseev certainly knew 
work by Paul Erlich, a US biologist and active public policy lobbyist who pop­u­
lar­ized the term “coevolution” in the West in the late 1960s; ­these two scientists 
met through the nuclear winter proj­ect in the early 1980s.68 While coevolution 
was defined by Erlich and Peter Raven as a reciprocal change in the interaction 
of dif­fer­ent species, Moiseev extended the definition to embrace the coevolution 

	
Global Prediction	
167
of living and nonliving ­matter.69 In addition to the prominent geologist Vasily 
Dokuchaev, the theorist of tektology Aleksandr Bogdanov (Malinovsky), Ver-
nadskii, and Teilhard de Chardin, impor­tant influences ­were Budyko’s and Fed-
erov’s writing on global climate, Kovda’s writings on waste, Piotr Anokhin’s 
work on biological cybernetics, and Ivan Schmalhausen’s work on evolution, all 
of which Moiseev put in dialogue with ideas on changing systems and self-­
organizing order developed by such scientists as molecular biologist Manfred 
Elgen, energy dissipation theorist Lars Onsager, and, obviously, Norbert Wie-
ner’s cybernetics. Furthermore, Moiseev touched upon po­liti­cal economy debates 
by Adam Smith, David Ricardo, Vilfredo Pareto, and, at a ­later stage, Hayek. Al-
though Moiseev paid dues to dialectical philosophy, making occasional refer-
ences to Karl Marx and Hegel, he made it clear that Marxist approaches ­were 
insufficient to understand the complexity of global coevolution. In 1970, Moi-
seev argued that Marx’s omniscient and mechanistic Laplacian model of the 
economy and society could not be applied to the complex realities of the late 
twentieth ­century.70 His proposal echoed Hayek’s idea that one can engineer 
components but not the ­wholes of national and world economies.71 Unlike Hayek 
and Geneva neoliberals, Moiseev believed that computer modeling had an 
impor­tant role to play in global governance. This, as I ­will show, was due to Moi-
seev’s intimate knowledge of the social and po­liti­cal effects of computer model-
ing as a social practice and not only as a source of numerical repre­sen­ta­tion and 
an informational input and output in decision pro­cess.72
How should we interpret Moiseev’s ideas in the Soviet context? Was he a So-
viet version of a neoliberal globalist? As I show in the remainder of this chapter, 
Moiseev arrived at his views on ­limited governance by trying to be conceptu-
ally consistent with what was a changing notion of the scientific prediction of 
fleeting phenomena. It is this awareness of the uncertain but at the same time 
productive and performative nature of scientific prediction that forms a com-
mon denominator in Moiseev’s and the Geneva neoliberals’ ideas. However, Moi-
seev’s originality was in cross-­fertilizing ideas from dif­fer­ent fields to redefine 
the role of scientific prediction in global environmental governance, where econ-
omy is only part of a complex ­whole.
From Targeting to Orchestration
In the 1980s Moiseev joined the ranks of scholars alerting governments to the 
fact that the coevolution of man and the biosphere could not be left ungoverned: 
mankind’s activities had become such a significant ­factor in deterioration of the 
­whole biosphere, creating the risk of nuclear war, industrial accidents, pollution, 

168	
CHAPTER 7
and, ultimately, carbon dioxide-­induced climate change, while growing produc-
tion and consumption was causing depletion of global resources.73 But in order 
to govern, as Comte said, one needs to have predictions first and the paradigm 
for scientific prediction was a combination of the cybernetic notion of predic-
tion as information pro­cessing and statistical forecasting, where forecasts served 
as a source of information to be pro­cessed. In order to address ­these complex 
issues from the perspective of cybernetic predictive rationality, one has to iden-
tify a desirable state of the global system, establish policy targets, and allocate 
pathways for achieving ­those targets by optimal control methods.
However, this conceptual model of steering based on prediction can be ap-
plied only to relatively stable and ­simple systems. In contrast, change in the global 
biosphere is driven by complex, contingent ­factors that affect dif­fer­ent scales of 
the system differently. Causal mechanisms at the micro level are often decou-
pled from pro­cesses at the macro level: for instance, the individual be­hav­ior of 
an animal does not explain the collective be­hav­ior of a pack of animals, ­because 
the two are dif­fer­ent systems. While the planetary system is highly regular and 
relatively well predictable, many subsystems of the Earth, such as the weather 
or ­human economies and socie­ties, are not predictable in the long term.74
Could global Earth governance ever be rationalized in line with cybernetic 
prediction? According to Moiseev, it is only pos­si­ble if we use a par­tic­u­lar concept 
of governance and rationality. Mankind’s role as a geological force, argued Moi-
seev, can be theorized as a pro­cess of self-­organization, where living and nonliv-
ing natu­ral components intertwine and shape each other. In this pro­cess, he 
wrote, the ontological distinction between man and nature becomes redundant. 
Accordingly, the science of the global biosphere should approach changes in soci-
ety and nature not as a clash between two essentially dif­fer­ent systems, but as the 
coevolution of par­tic­u­lar orga­nizational forms.75 In line with the logical empiri-
cist notion of prediction, the laws describing the interaction between society and 
nature as coevolving systems are required for predictions to count as scientific.
Proposing that “organ­ization” is a fundamental concept just like “energy” and 
“­matter,” Moiseev defined organ­ization as stabilization, a condition where vari-
ables are conservative and change slowly.76 In other words, ­things that change 
more slowly are more “or­ga­nized.” Mankind’s role on Earth, then, is to become 
a wise and responsible or­ga­nizer, to slow down the global environmental changes 
that are spurred by ­human activities. This clashed with the modern notion of 
management, practiced by the scientific organ­ization of ­labor movement in Rus­
sia in the 1920s and revived by Gvishiani in the 1960s, which aimed at speeding 
up production pro­cess, by assembling faster factory machines and enabling faster 
­labor. Clearly speeding up and slowing down are strategies that apply to dif­fer­
ent levels of complexity and that need dif­fer­ent types of predictions.

	
Global Prediction	
169
Equipped with scientific data, methods, and computer technology, man could 
become “a master of the biosphere,” but not in the sense that man would fi­nally 
“conquer nature” (a popu­lar trope of the Soviet discourse of pro­gress). Man 
would become a man­ag­er, able to “consciously use the resources of the planet 
in order to guarantee the conditions for coevolution.”77 It is impor­tant to note 
that Moiseev’s use of the term management (upravlenie, still better translated 
as “governance”) resonates strongly with the original notion of scientific man-
agement, proposed by Frederic Winslow Taylor and promoted by the US presi-
dent Franklin Roo­se­velt in the early twentieth ­century. Roo­se­velt backed 
Taylor hoping to introduce more efficient, scientific management techniques 
with the aim not to speed up production, but to “conserve” and not waste capi-
tal, ­labor, and machines. As management theorists argued in 2017, the original 
approach of scientific management was created to work against the misuse of 
­humans and nature, albeit this original meaning of scientific management has 
been lost and replaced with notions emphasizing technocracy, productivity 
and growth.78
Like Roo­se­velt, Moiseev looked for a way to reduce damage caused by indus-
trial development, but his concern was the global scale and high complexity. 
Moiseev proposed that it would be intellectually consistent to base the princi­
ples of the governance of global development not on acceleration and growth, 
but on slowing down the rate of change. In ­doing this, mankind could no lon-
ger rely on self-­organization through adaptation to the changing environment, 
­because the environment had begun to change in such a way that adaptation was 
not a ­viable strategy anymore. Therefore, adaptation, which Moiseev termed “the 
strategy of nature,” must be replaced by “a strategy of Reason,” a new mentality 
of governance based on a qualitatively dif­fer­ent scientific definition of what can 
be considered as rational and effective control.79
First, in order to think meaningfully about rational governance of the global 
Earth system, one must go beyond the policy thinking that prevailed in the 1960s 
and 1970s, which was based on a model of linking information, decision, and ac-
tion, utilizing the cybernetic notion of teleological control via feedback. Moiseev’s 
argument proceeds in the following way: predictive control in cybernetic engi-
neering systems is pos­si­ble only ­under conditions where the purpose of the system 
which is being controlled is known. Consider the classical prob­lem of the antiair-
craft defense system: if the ­enemy pi­lot’s intention (target) is known, the trajectory 
of the plane and the missile can be predicted with a high level of certainty and the 
­enemy bomber can be hit. However, this model of control is difficult to apply to 
complex systems, such as ­human socie­ties, which are characterized by multiple, 
intertwined goals, and are therefore less predictable. Dif­fer­ent actors can evaluate 
the same situation differently or have contradictory goals. Even if a shared goal is 

170	
CHAPTER 7
agreed upon, ­there can be many dif­fer­ent ways of achieving it.80 Whereas this so-
cial complexity makes teleological control mechanisms, such as social policy, very 
difficult to translate from an intellectual program into action, the geophysical 
complexity of the global Earth system (the interaction of the atmosphere, the 
ocean, and the land) makes teleological control simply redundant. One cannot ask 
the Earth what is her goal.
The question of ­whether the global Earth system can be described as a purpo-
sive system has actually both­ered many bright minds. Some thinkers, such as the 
British scientist James Lovelock and American biologist Lynn Margulis, consid-
ered that the Earth can be seen as teleological, proposing that all ecological sys-
tems, including the planet Earth, actively seek homeostasis, a par­tic­u­lar state of 
equilibrium.81 However, writing ten years ­after the original publication of the ar-
ticle outlining the Gaia theory, Moiseev, aware of historical examples of unpre-
dictable and catastrophic changes to biospheric systems as well as being informed 
by the nuclear winter study, did not believe in naturally occurring homeostasis. 
According to Moiseev, the very idea of equilibrium promised a false hope of con-
trol and was dangerous, ­because it obscured the fact that ­human activities im-
pacted geophysical pro­cesses in nonlinear ways, which could never be fully 
understood. The outcomes of interventions in the biosphere could never be pre-
dicted with confidence over the long term. Furthermore, Moiseev argued that it is 
centrally impor­tant to recognize that, in the case of the Earth system, the govern-
ing bodies are not outside but inside the system that is being governed.82 This 
means that in order to predict the global biosphere policymakers ­will need to 
predict themselves—­thus adding the level of reflexivity and additional complex-
ity to what is already a highly complex system.
Drawing on systems theories of growing complexity, Moiseev posited that 
theoretically the controlling center coevolves with the controlled system by being 
part of it. Controlling interventions make the system ever more complex and un-
certain.83 ­There is simply no starting point, no stable Newtonian position from 
which the ongoing changes could be observed, levered, and steered. The Comtean 
positivist ideal of predictive scientific rationality was not achievable. In this con-
text, Moiseev viewed the optimal governability of the environment significantly 
differently from many Soviet contemporaries who resorted to the simplistic ideo-
logical argument according to which the cap­i­tal­ist strive for profit was the source 
of imbalance. A good case in point is the influential environmental scientist Ev-
genii Fedorov, who used his scientific authority to criticize the irrational use of 
global natu­ral resources, at the same time carefully aligning their arguments 
with the ideological doctrine of the po­liti­cal superiority of communism and the 
commitment to growth. Fedorov proclaimed that the long-­term global goals of 
world governance could only be achieved by replacing the cap­i­tal­ist system with 

	
Global Prediction	
171
a socialist society, where environmental governance could be put to optimal, ra-
tional use.84 Such arguments ­were not only deterministic in the sense that they 
attributed ­causes to the po­liti­cal and economic nature of a regime, but also sim-
plistic in that they drew a clear dividing line between the natu­ral world and the 
social and po­liti­cal world. Moiseev sought to show that both aspects of this argu-
ment ­were flawed.
The po­liti­cal identity of the governmental system, argued Moiseev, was irrele-
vant for Earth system governance. He argued that growth, in many cases, was a 
prob­lem not a solution. However, the key issue for Moiseev was the understanding 
of control that had to be revised. In Soviet policy sciences “control” was defined as 
“purposive governance” (in Rus­sian, upravlenie): an intellectual, interventionist 
activity based on information. According to the ideal model of cybernetic control, 
any given object of control must be thoroughly examined by scientists; its be­hav­ior 
must be monitored, tracked, and predicted. If the controlled object is a social col-
lective, such as an organ­ization, a state, or a sector of the economy, the control of 
its be­hav­ior must be institutionalized through a centralist bureaucracy and the 
po­liti­cal party apparatus, which sets the object’s goals for the ­future. This cyber-
netic model of steering proliferated in Soviet management lit­er­a­ture. Such diverse 
activities as the performative brain, the management unit in a firm, and the pre-
sumed control center of the economy—­Gosplan—­were described as being able to 
formulate goals, proj­ect them into the ­future, and reflexively adjust the be­hav­ior of 
the systems ­under their control according to changes in the environment.85 It was 
precisely this intellectual model of informational control that formed the basis of 
Viktor Glushkov’s proj­ect of OGAS, the all-­union national automated system for 
computation and information pro­cessing, which was meant to provide a centrally 
integrated flow of information across all Soviet enterprises and institutions.86 
However, in the case of the global Earth system, wrote Moiseev, ­there was no cer-
tain knowledge to be had, ­there ­were too many intertwined behavioral systems to 
control and, importantly, ­there was no central authority to set the goals.87 What 
can it mean to govern the Earth system, if it is unpredictable and uncontrollable?
In response to this question, Moiseev offered what can be described as the-
ory of governance that orchestrates predictions, rather than operates on the ba-
sis of prediction. In this model, scientific predictions are not scientific inputs into 
the governmental machine where policies are outputs. Instead, the governmen-
tal machine must be or­ga­nized and streamlined in such a way that scientific pre-
dictions are produced in an orchestrated manner, at an appropriate level of 
knowledge, and used at an appropriate level of action. Governance as guidance 
takes care to align epistemological and governmental practices to avoid errone-
ous uses of predictions. First, according to Moiseev, the institution of predictive 
scientific expertise remains indispensable at lower scales of the Earth system: 

172	
CHAPTER 7
statistical forecasting can map long-­ and short-­term consequences of ­human ac-
tivities that could potentially destabilize the biosphere.88 At the global scale, 
­these negative consequences must be prevented by establishing bound­aries and 
thresholds to ­human activities, such as limits to local and aggregate levels of pol-
lution, exploitation of resources, and the extinction of species. In this way, the 
lower-­level predictive scientific expertise forms an impor­tant basis for manag-
ing higher levels of complexity, the global scale, and the long term. However, the 
gap between ­these two levels can be bridged only if the prevailing governmen-
tal attitude to precision and certainty is abandoned. The role of scientists in Earth 
system governance (what Vernadskii and Moiseev would describe as the noo-
sphere: the biosphere plus governmental apparatus) is to identify basic, crude 
par­ameters that define the bound­aries of global environmental change within 
which mankind’s biological survival is pos­si­ble. This sort of scientific knowledge 
can be only approximate, imperfect, and uncertain. This is a very dif­fer­ent re-
quirement, if compared with the epistemological grounds for cybernetic con-
trol, which seeks to make predictions as precise as pos­si­ble. For Moiseev, the 
crudeness of knowledge is not a prob­lem, but an asset: it is impor­tant not to elim-
inate uncertainty by offering false precision. To put it in other words, the cyber-
netic prediction is suitable for very short-­term interventions in response to fast 
changing situations, where precision of information and intervention is desir-
able. To govern the global, planetary scale and the long term means to slow down 
and use crude, uncertain knowledge to map the limits of viability.
However, this crude, parametric knowledge of the limits must be made ac-
tionable. Positive, target-­based control must be replaced with negative guidance. 
To govern the global biosphere, according to Moiseev, is not to govern prescrip-
tively (do x, y, z), but to govern prohibitively (do anything except for x, y, z). ­Here 
the governor does not impose a concrete goal on the governed system, but in-
stead imposes limits through a system of prohibitions.89 It is easy to see how dif­
fer­ent is this model of prediction concerned with limits from the positivist 
notion of prediction, based on complete knowledge. Negative guidance can be 
reconciled with the logical empiricist notion of prediction as a hypothesis, where 
the criterion of precise prediction can be used to assess the quality of theories, 
but the overall expectation in global governance as guidance is based more on 
pragmatic approach, seeing what works rather than a pure theory testing. The 
notions of forward reflexivity and reflexive control can feed into the government 
of governing apparatus, but they are clearly unsuitable to address the biosphere’s 
changes. In other words, global governance for Moiseev is inherently liberal at 
the large scale, long term, although this does not entail that more precise pre-
dictions and controls cannot be used at the short term and lower complexity.90

	
Global Prediction	
173
Moiseev terms this type of control as “guided development,” one that aban-
dons the desire to set concrete goals, to mea­sure intentions, and to exercise in-
formational control and is therefore dif­fer­ent from “the control of a pro­cess” 
(napravliaemoe razvitie versus upravlenie pro­cessom). Moiseev employs mathe-
matical language and hydromechanics meta­phors to describe such negative 
guidance: he writes about “algorithms” and “channels” of development, but ­these 
algorithms and channels do not guide the movement to a predefined end goal. 
They work as shores, as prohibitions or taboos, setting limits to ­those ­human 
activities which are deemed to threaten the desirable evolution of the biosphere. 
Mankind, in this way, is left in princi­ple ­free to formulate and pursue its many 
dif­fer­ent goals, as long as its actions remain within the bound­aries of given par­
ameters. Moiseev ­imagined ­human activity to be channeled like a ­water stream 
in such a way that it does not disturb the biosphere.91 Interestingly, at about the 
same time, 1979, Hayek would also employ the meta­phor of ­water stream to ar-
gue that the flow of society and economy cannot be governed in a “rational” 
way but must be approached as an adaptive pro­cess.92
Scientific articulation and institutionalization of ­these thresholds serve as the 
epistemological foundation for a global governance that moved away from cy-
bernetic “targeting” discourse, which in turn, as Geroulanos observed, required 
transparency and, ideally, precise data and understanding of the under­lying 
mechanisms, to cybernetic “orchestration,” which entailed the building of sci-
entific infrastructures and institutions and po­liti­cal negotiation.93 Note that tar-
geting and orchestration are not incompatible. I suggest that the two approaches 
belong to the same cybernetic spectrum, but they are situated at its opposite ends. 
While targeting is suitable for cybernetic control of ­simple behavioral or dynamic 
phenomena, orchestration characterizes the governance of highly complex phe-
nomena. Orchestration, in Moiseev’s writing, is mainly negative and legalistic; it 
is about setting the limits to damage. It is also productive, ­because the role of ­these 
limits is not to mechanically constrain the autonomy of individuals and social 
groups, but to serve as cognitive channels, a computer-­mediated milieu, guiding 
pluralistic social self-­organization. Limits, not targets, come first in policy deci-
sions within governance as guidance. Once limits are set, the many actors are left 
­free to make scientific predictions to guide their activities.
Debates on “critical thresholds” of climate change and the ensuing securiti-
zation and risk management abounded among Western climate scientists in the 
early 1990s.94 Moiseev saw ­these debates not as a mere technical quibble, but as 
a central component of the cybernetic governmentality of the noosphere. In this 
re­spect Moiseev’s view is close to what Timothy O’Riordan and Steve Rayner de-
scribe as precautionary science: government of high complexity must combine 

174	
CHAPTER 7
intuition and foresight rather than knowledge that claims certainty.95 However, 
whereas O’Riordan and Rayner promote the role of scientists as persuaders, en-
suring institutional pluralism, Moiseev wanted to redefine the very notion of 
rationality and control and educate a wide range of decision-­makers about the 
inevitable uncertainty of scientific knowledge, the impossibility of positivist pre-
diction at the global scale and long term, and the importance of parametric 
limits in considering policy options. Moiseev wanted to change the existing epis-
temological culture of global governance that mobilized the notions of inten-
tion, prediction, certainty, and linear control.
It is impor­tant to note that since the late 1990s, policymakers’ responses to 
uncertainty ­were mapped and theorized in the influential scholarship on the pol- 
itics of preparedness.96 Particularly impor­tant is the work on the adoption and 
implementation of the concept of resilience, developed by C. S. Holling at the 
East–­West think tank IIASA, with which Moiseev was also closely involved, in 
the 1970s and 1980s.97 In this context, Moiseev’s efforts to develop a conceptual, 
technical, and institutional basis for governing uncertainty at a global scale in 
the Soviet Union during the period when the Soviet economic system was in se-
vere decline are quite remarkable.
Indeed, it is worthwhile to pause and consider Hayek’s ideas on the nongov-
ernability of the world economy. It may read as counterintuitive that a commu-
nist OR scientist and an Austrian economist would arrive at a similar conclusion 
regarding the nature of scientific expertise and world government. In what fol-
lows, I draw on the excellent study by Quinn Slobodian to demonstrate that what 
would become known as a neoliberal approach to ­limited governance was a reac-
tion to ­limited predictability. In their own ways, both Moiseev and Hayek reacted 
against the simplistic Comtean model of scientific prediction and planning, 
which they deemed deeply unsuitable for the complex realities of the global econ-
omy and environment. Both trajectories extend the line of inquiry that Kondrat’ev 
grappled with in the 1920s and 1930s.
The parallels are striking. Hayek, together with Ludwig von Mises, established 
the Business Cycle Research Institute in Vienna in 1927. As Slobodian put it, 
“neoliberalism was born out of proj­ects of world observation, global statistics 
gathering, and international investigations of the business cycle.”98 Hayek was 
initially enthused with the promise of “­great predictions,” which he discovered 
at the National Bureau of Economic Research in the United States.99 However, 
his enthusiasm waned. Neoliberal epistemology was founded on the insight that 
the accumulating data remained insufficient for “forecasting”; the apparent ex-
pansion of numbers on the national and, starting in the 1930s and 1940s, world 
economies ­were of ­little use in predicting the ­future dynamics. According to Slo-
bodian, the neoliberals felt that the avalanche of numbers posed a risk of false 

	
Global Prediction	
175
belief and even worse decisions, thus voicing exactly the same concern as Niko-
lai Kondrat’ev, who warned the Soviet planners of “auto-­hypnosis with numbers” 
in the 1920s.100 As Slobodian showed, the use of business “barometers” placed 
economists alongside the established “esoteric” sciences, such as weather fore-
casters and medical doctors.101 This is not just a meta­phor or a loose parallel, as 
I showed in chapter 1: indeed, science’s attempt to predict fleeting phenomena 
continued to be associated with mantic, conjectural knowledge even in the twen-
tieth ­century. However, further development of knowledge was away from sci-
entific prediction as explanation ­toward scientific prediction as a performative 
information pro­cessing, part of behavioral action.
The Geneva school of neoliberals thus turned away from the sophisticated nu-
meric repre­sen­ta­tions to think in “­orders.”102 This also characterizes Moiseev’s 
direction, when he moved away Gosplan’s attempt to refine social indicators to 
embrace thinking in ­orders, inspired by complexity science as it developed in 
mathe­matics of chaos, neurophysiology, ecological dynamics, and global Earth 
systems theory. Both Geneva neoliberals and Moiseev placed less belief in sta-
tistical prediction as inference from a given set of numbers that are believed to 
reflect the real­ity out ­there, than in the design of institutions that would secure 
a more predictable order.103
Being experienced in both scientific research and policy, Moiseev harbored 
no naive hopes that Earth system science could provide certainty or that scien-
tific experts could directly influence Soviet, or indeed any, policy decisions. He 
therefore never offered any “optimal solutions,” particularly in the long term. 
Instead, Moiseev cautioned against the illusion that such solutions may exist 
(hence his fierce criticism of the term sustainable development). Instead of long-­
term solutions, he called for the creation of forms of long-­term engagement in 
the pro­cess of a continuous search for compromise, a pro­cess in which globally 
accessible scientific expertise would be coproduced with stakeholders. This pol-
icy interface, envisioned by Moiseev, also placed a significant emphasis on a ro-
bust ­legal framework, consisting of mainly negative prohibitions to regulate 
­human activities. In this re­spect, Moiseev’s policy thinking coheres with the 
stance of Geneva school neoliberals and Walter Lipp­mann, as described by Slobo-
dian.104 Like neoliberal globalists, Moiseev argued for an international ­legal 
setup. He wanted to see what he called “institutes of agreement” developed for 
this purpose, ideally ­under the auspices of the United Nations.105
However, this institutional change at the international level alone would not 
suffice: the conceptualization of governance and control must change as well. 
Moiseev argued that it would be impossible to define and solve the prob­lems of 
the global biosphere if the under­lying discourse remained based on a teleologi-
cal, cybernetic notion of control and a reductionist expectation of science to 

176	
CHAPTER 7
supply decision-­makers with a linear, deterministic analy­sis of complex pro­cess. 
Nowhere could this concern be more adequately placed than in the Soviet Union, 
where the party and industry leaders ­were blind to persuasion from below and 
suspicious of anybody who questioned the value of certainty and centralist leader-
ship. Accordingly, Moiseev proposed abandoning centralist control, based on the 
idea (but not practice) of long-­term forecasting and plans, replacing it with nega-
tive, regulatory government through taboos. Like the 1930s’ globalist neoliberals, 
who held that “If the economy was beyond repre­sen­ta­tion, then the task was to 
find a framework to contain and protect it,” Moiseev was searching for a system of 
taboos to prevent global self-­destruction.106 This negative, ­legal framework, based 
on the imperative of the self-­preservation of humanity was his “algorithm of gov-
ernance.” The program was not prescriptive, but negative, not tracking a goal like 
Wiener’s predictive cat chasing a mouse, but avoiding danger, rather like the lift 
doors that would not open if the cabin is not aligned with the floor. Note that by 
government as algorithmic activity Moiseev did not mean a centralized computer 
and surveillance system, the visions of which ­were attempted by Stafford Beer in 
Allende’s Chile and Viktor Glushkov in the Soviet Union. It is closer to Hayek’s 
neurophysiological notion of knowledge as a program of rules that enable pattern 
recognition and steer be­hav­ior.107
Like the US decision scientist Kenneth Arrow, Moiseev recognized that it is im-
possible to reach a global agreement on the target outcomes of environmental pro-
tection ­because of international economic inequalities. He hoped, however, that the 
consensus on the limits of global environmental change could be achieved. The 
desirable target would be universally defined as a state of the biosphere that ensures 
­human survival; its par­ameters would be set by Earth system scientists, engaged in 
cross-­border cooperation in data collection and modeling, thus producing a cogni-
tive, computer-­mediated milieu for governance. Moiseev’s model resonates with 
what Hayek arrived at in­de­pen­dently in the 1970s, when, according to Slobodian, 
he borrowed insights and terminology from systems and cybernetic discourses. 
Hayek, like Moiseev, worked to find a way to get around the prob­lem of limits. For 
Moiseev, the solution was a conceptual shift from targets to limits, guidance, and 
milieus. Hayek made a remarkably similar move, proposing to replace what for 
Wiener was control with cultivation: “cultivation, in the sense in which the farmer 
or gardener cultivates his plants, where he knows and can control only some of the 
determining circumstances, and in which the wise legislator or statesman ­will 
prob­ably attempt to cultivate rather than to control the forces of the social pro­
cess.”108 Although Hayek’s cultivation and Moiseev’s milieu may sound similar to 
what Zygmunt Bauman described as “a gardening state,” ­these are very dif­fer­ent 
approaches. The model of a gardening state described by Bauman is based on the 
Laplacian, positivist notion of the possibility of perfect knowledge, visibility, and 

	
Global Prediction	
177
transparency.109 Bauman’s meta­phor of the gardening state, as Jacobsen and Marsh-
man noted, extended the line of social critique of the use of positivist prediction in 
the government of the social originally suggested by Charles Wright Mills in the 
1950s.110 Moiseev’s arguments should be seen as an extension of this criticism of 
simplistic scientific positivism. In contrast to the gardening state that relied on 
strict categorization between desirable plants and nondesirable weeds, described by 
Bauman, Moiseev proposed the models of cultivation and guidance through milieu 
recognizing self-­regulation, the limitation of knowledge, and the importance of 
ethics, and pointing to the complex orchestration of cognitive and material means 
to channel preexisting energies so that they thrive and do not undermine them-
selves. It is about orchestrating the world into ­viable being where the power of sci-
entific prediction is ­limited, but central. As I suggested ­earlier, many levels of 
prediction could be involved. At the level of lower complexity, predictions as expla-
nations can help engineer robust system components. However, at higher levels of 
complexity, scientific prediction becomes closer to its neurophysiological meaning: 
Hayek, for instance, proposed in his Nobel speech that “pattern prediction” is the 
most that science can offer for the understanding of fleeting phenomena.111
Thinking from the limits would lead to dif­fer­ent policy solutions: Moiseev 
made a range of such proposals, applying guidance in the areas of national se-
curity, economy, and the environment, following Mikhail Gorbachev’s reforms 
of the Soviet economy and state ­after 1986.112 For instance, instead of compli-
cated institutional bargaining over the reduction of the nuclear arsenal, trying 
to identify which types of weapons should be decommissioned first, Moiseev 
proposed limiting the efficiency of nuclear defense by imposing new constraints 
on it. All nuclear nations would cooperate, creating a vast and expensive global 
surveillance system, enabling all members to track the activities in their nuclear 
sectors. A surprise launch of a nuclear missile and retaliation would become stra-
tegically impossible and nuclear weapons would eventually become obsolete.113 
In the economy, Moiseev wanted to abolish “authoritarian planning,” introduc-
ing market mechanisms as conductors for negative feedback in the economy. 
However, this liberalization would be beneficial only if limits to the markets ­were 
established, providing guidance ­toward socially desirable goals.114 As Zubok de-
tailed in his history of the collapse of the Soviet economy, Gorbachev failed to 
establish precisely such limits before decentralizing economic activities.115
In the environmental governance, trust in data was crucial for such negative 
guidance, which would have to rely on global ecological information databases. 
The limits for global environmental planning would be set in the light of loads that 
local and regional social and economic systems could bear, thus ensuring the wel-
fare of local populations.116 For Moiseev, scientific expertise, particularly computer 
modeling, was vital for the establishment of such taboos or thresholds, forming a 

178	
CHAPTER 7
socio-­informational milieu of decision-­making which would socialize the govern-
ing elites into ­these new notions of a rationality of limits and guidance. Technical 
solutions have their own politics: this had been made clear in Foucauldian re-
search on the governmental effects of material milieus, such as urban, transport, 
and energy infrastructure, the construction of which shapes local populations.117 
The next section proposes that Moiseev’s governance through guidance was just 
such a po­liti­cal proj­ect of informational infrastructure.
The Liberal Politics of Governance  
through Milieu
In order to be actionable upon, the complex Earth system must be subjected to a 
par­tic­u­lar form of articulation, one which Theodore Porter called a “thin de-
scription,” expressed (ideally) in a mathematical language.118 Soviet global mod-
elers had long argued that ­those computer simulations that seek to represent the 
full complexity of geophysical and anthropogenic pro­cesses ­were useful only for 
research, not for policy decisions.119 As O’Riordan and Rayner would ­later ob-
serve, the method of computer-­based modeling uses a simplified system of dis-
crete ele­ments, which does not replicate faithfully the complex character of the 
biosphere.120 The simplicity and reductionism of global models, wrote Moiseev, 
are not necessarily misleading, ­because the data are but one component of scien-
tific expertise for policymaking. The governance of the complex, global bio-
sphere should be based on relatively primitive models, ­because such models can 
identify the most significant causal effects and major trends. ­Whether this ap-
proximate information is sufficient to establish limits to guide development, it 
is pos­si­ble to judge only on the basis of a combination of scientific, social, and 
pragmatic intelligence, which is fundamentally impor­tant in modeling such 
complex systems. This is why Moiseev did not limit his interest to mathematical 
modeling but sought to transform the very conceptual and institutional con-
texts in which modeling was used. His theoretical ambition was to bridge the 
so-­called cultural lag between advanced scientific and technological knowledge 
and societal and po­liti­cal values.121
This debate on the quality and use of models and data pointed to the fact that 
­there would have to be a change in repositioning of scientific expertise to govern-
ment if governance was to guide the global biosphere: for Moiseev, Soviet global 
modelers ­were not mere advisors (providers of predictions) to politicians, but or-
chestrators of the entire milieu for decision-­making. Furthermore, this Soviet vi-
sion of governance through milieu adds an impor­tant focus to the Foucauldian 
studies of negative, liberal governance, where governance through milieu is gener-

	
Global Prediction	
179
ally associated with the regulation of subjects considered unable to govern them-
selves. This approach enabled top-­down government-­at-­a-­distance without relying 
on the mechanism of self-­regulation, as the capacity to self-­regulate has been seen 
as absent in such subjects of governance as the working class, criminals, or indig-
enous ­peoples. As Tony Bennett put it, “It is particularly in relation to populations 
that are excluded from the forms of self-­action identified with liberal forms of 
subjectivity that the logic of government via milieus comes into play.”122
In Moiseev’s model of the negative government of the Earth system through the 
milieu of computer simulation, the subjects who display a lack of what was deemed 
to be adequate self-­regulation ­were the elites: Soviet Communist Party leaders, no-
menklatura, and man­ag­ers of enterprises. In his vision of the noosphere, a scien-
tifically governed Earth system, control does not flow top down, from the central 
government, but bottom up, from internal, autonomous discussion among experts 
to the government decision-­makers. This can be understood as an attempt at lib-
eralization without full democ­ratization: Moiseev’s model of government as 
guidance does not consider wider public engagement in decisions but is restricted 
to securing a form of interaction between scientists and policymakers.
Furthermore, governance as guidance through milieu can be impor­tant in 
­those cases where strongly polarized po­liti­cal ideologies are at play and where 
po­liti­cal and administrative hierarchies are very strong. For example, mathemat-
ical language and computer modeling enjoyed a unique epistemological auton-
omy in the Soviet context of po­liti­cal censorship. Whereas Soviet literary and 
policy discourses ­were tightly controlled to communicate positive images of the 
Soviet ­future and technoscientific pro­gress, paying explicit dues to the primacy 
of the party in decision-­making, the modeling of the global Earth system repre-
sented innovative and critical thought beyond official planning. The intellectual 
mission of global modeling was to enhance awareness of the limits to ­human 
knowledge and control, socializing policymakers to accept uncertainty as an in-
evitable condition. ­Here Earth system modeling formed a hybrid milieu where 
scientists could not be separated from the results crunched out by the computer, 
­because the interpretation of modeling results was not accessible to a nonspe-
cialist; tacit knowledge of how a par­tic­u­lar mainframe computer worked was 
necessary to understand and evaluate the results. As global modelers held the 
mono­poly of the production and interpretation of data about the past, current, 
and ­future state of the global biosphere, they broke down the centralist struc-
ture of party decision-­making. Global modeling also transformed the Soviet gov-
ernmentality by habituating policymakers into working without the notion of 
purposive control of individuals and socie­ties, at least at the global level.
In this way, by developing a policy science for Earth system governance, Moi-
seev effectively contributed a building block for a new governmental milieu in 

180	
CHAPTER 7
the late Soviet Union. The po­liti­cal effect of this theory was establishing what 
can be described, paraphrasing Tony Bennett, as a new set of natu­ral and social 
givens, where natu­ral givens ­were the planetary bound­aries, established with the 
help of computer-­based modeling of global geophysical pro­cesses.123 The plan-
etary bound­aries could only emerge as “natu­ral givens” thanks to the invention 
of new social givens, namely, transnational scientific networks that cut across 
the Iron Curtain that ­were crucially impor­tant for the production and exchange 
of data describing the Earth system. Moiseev’s extension of policy science to the 
global biosphere was not only an original intellectual experiment, but also an 
effort to intellectually transform existing Soviet policy practices, both institu-
tionally and socially, in the 1970s and 1980s.124
Conclusion
Just like the pioneers of cybernetics in the 1940s, many Earth system scientists 
created their own theories of sociopo­liti­cal governance as they ­were searching for 
new models of engagement with policymaking. As Brian Wynne has repeatedly 
argued, climate science emerged not so much as a truth machine, but as reality-­
based social and policy heuristics, “an organising basis for a broader co­ali­tion of 
motivations, meanings, and social, ethical and po­liti­cal concerns.”125 Most early 
twenty-­first ­century debates among Earth system scientists themselves reveal a 
continued search for new governmental epistemologies and practices that could 
bridge the intellectual and po­liti­cal gap between scientific expertise and govern-
ment.126 It is in this context that this chapter proposed viewing the Soviet case of 
Earth system governance as an instructive lesson in the politics of ideas at the 
changing interface between science and global governance.
Moiseev’s extension of Vernadskii’s ideas about the biosphere and noosphere to 
global governance resulted in the articulation of a liberal, negative, bottom-up 
mode of government through milieu. While in the West, Teilhard de Chardin’s 
noosphere theory remained mainly a philosophical explanation of the relation-
ship between mankind and the Earth,127 in the Soviet Union, Vernadskii’s writing 
about the noosphere inspired innovative policy thinking. Its legacy is still felt in 
twenty-­first ­century Rus­sia: through Moiseev’s publications in the 1980s and 
1990s the noosphere spread as a model of a new, global governmental imagination, 
inspiring a diverse range of applications.128 Intellectually, the postcybernetic no-
tion of control as guidance undermined several components of the very institu-
tional identity of the Soviet system: centralized administration and branch-­specific 
goal-­setting, the belief in linear control, and, ultimately, the utopia of a bright, 
predictable ­future. This argumentation was made pos­si­ble by the legitimacy that 

	
Global Prediction	
181
Soviet global modelers enjoyed, having contributed to the nuclear winter forecast, 
but it was also related to the po­liti­cal agenda of Gorbachev’s perestroika, where 
institutional reform suddenly became pos­si­ble. Indeed, Gorbachev’s strive to de-
centralize party apparatus was extended to include the Earth system as a nonhu-
man agent in decision-­making, mediated by computer simulations. But the scale 
and long-­term nature of planetary purposes challenged the use of scientific predic-
tion. For Moiseev, to govern in the age of the noosphere was to create a globally 
integrated governmentality, based on new institutions, but also on new intellec-
tual models of control, able to make sense of complexity, remaining reflexive over 
the contingent coevolution of mankind and planet Earth.
In this re­spect, Moiseev’s theory of governance through guidance entailed an 
epistemological revolution in the context of Soviet modernization, where scien-
tific expertise was traditionally allocated the role of loyal ser­vice to po­liti­cal lead-
ers. Governmental use of milieu to guide societal practices posited the importance 
of carefully orchestrated efforts by international scientists. In the Soviet Union, 
one of the first such milieus was the Gaia modeling system designed at the Com-
puter Center in Moscow, which was used to simulate the environmental effects of 
nuclear war, the acidification of ­water, soil, and forests, and the impact of carbon 
dioxide on climate change. This epistemological infrastructure was mobilized 
by scientists to lobby for dif­fer­ent policies, ranging from nuclear disarmament to 
the reduction of pollution and resource use. The global biosphere, materialized 
through computer systems, became a medium to govern the governor, the party, 
and industrial elites, an instrument of bottom-up activity.
Many of the conceptual princi­ples enshrined in Moiseev’s framework of gov-
ernance through guidance of the 1980s remain relevant in the second de­cade of 
the third millennium, as world climate scientists continue trying to get to grips 
with issues of a similar character. The idea of prohibitive regulation found its im-
plementation in the setting of “planetary bound­aries,” first approved by the inter-
national climate change scientists’ collective in 2009.129 The search for “institutes 
of agreement” continues, most visibly in the team led by Frank Biermann, seeking 
to develop a ­viable model of international environmental governance. However, 
Biermann’s proposal mainly focuses on orga­nizational design, completely reject-
ing the management approach as a form of rigid, hierarchical steering through 
control.130 In contrast, Moiseev’s approach is more perceptive of the need to renew 
the very understanding of management as a new type of governance, to look for a 
new governmental imagination. The epistemological proj­ect of inquiring into the 
orga­nizational forms of the coevolution of social, living, and nonliving ­matter is 
pursued in science and technology studies. While dif­fer­ent conceptual approaches 
to the governance of complexity are tested by resilience scholars, it should not be 
forgotten that much of the vocabulary of resilience theory is derived from Cold 

182	
CHAPTER 7
War policy sciences. This is particularly impor­tant, ­because the bridging of 
Earth system sciences, policy sciences, and ­actual governmental practice re-
mains a ­great challenge. Taken seriously, Moiseev’s point that the cybernetic 
notion of purposive governance, based on short-­term prediction and feedback, 
is fundamentally unsuitable for large-­scale and long-­term aspects of Earth sys-
tem governance, could open up new ave­nues for reconceptualizing government 
and control at the pragmatic level.

183
In this book I sought to make a case for the treatment of scientific prediction as 
navigation of complexity by orchestration of knowledge and action. In ­doing this, 
I sought to extend the field of risk studies into the field of prediction, ­because 
just like the term risk in the twentieth ­century, prediction is becoming a defin-
ing term of the twenty-­first ­century as socie­ties face the unpre­ce­dented uncer-
tainties posed by the global climate crisis and the development of digital 
technologies. The global climate crisis posits the prob­lem of the unpredictabil-
ity of the natu­ral environment, while digital technology is perceived to threaten 
­people’s liberty by making them more predictable. Indeed, the questions of 
agency, liberty, risk, and prediction are intrinsically related: socie­ties and indi-
viduals desire to predict risks to be secure, ­free from worry and danger, ­free to 
pursue their goals, but then, what does it mean to predict, particularly to pre-
dict scientifically?
The mandate of scientific prediction, however, goes beyond risk management 
and be­hav­ior control: as I showed in this book scientific predictions can be de-
ployed as a critical and reflexive device, requiring a constant search for new ways 
of orchestrating cognition and ­human and nonhuman agencies. I hope that the 
story of the Soviet Rus­sian scientific predictions presented in this book can help 
us better understand the ways in which scientific prediction can operate in gov-
ernance in liberal demo­cratic contexts too. In creating new approaches to pre-
diction, Rus­sian thinkers ­were not just catching up or lagging ­behind the West: 
East–­West interaction during the Cold War was multidirectional and new ap-
proaches to prediction ­were developed in response to local intellectual, social, 
CONCLUSION

184	
Conclusion
and institutional contexts. While both French positivism and Norbert Wiener’s 
cybernetics constituted major intellectual influences in Rus­sian science, the dis-
tinctive approaches developed by Rus­sian scholars such as Nikolai Kondrat’ev’s 
notion of ­limited prevision in economic planning, Georgii Shchedrovitskii’s 
prospective reflexivity, Vladimir Lefebvre’s reflexive control, and Nikita Moi-
seev’s call to orchestrate multilevel predictions in order to create governance as 
guidance through milieu, represent original and timely intellectual innovations. 
On both sides of the Iron Curtain, diverse approaches to scientific prediction, 
based on the ideas of reflexivity and complexity, emerged in response not only 
to the epistemological criteria of science, but also the experience of orga­nizational 
and social practices, particularly orga­nizational failures of state planning, en-
terprise management, and international and global governance.
The distinct approaches to scientific prediction presented in this book have 
hopefully encouraged the reader to consider the internal diversity of predictive 
knowledge. But acknowledging diversity is not enough: it is also impor­tant to 
recognize that scientific predictions are not formal techniques of decision-­
making, they cannot be reduced to data, formulas, schemes, algorithms, or 
narratives. ­These Rus­sian scientists discussed in this book emphasized that us-
ing scientific prediction in policy and management is not like following a ­recipe 
for a discrete decision or judgment in an isolated context: in contrast, the ­will 
to predict scientifically requires wide social and institutional orchestration of 
scientific knowledge production, synchronizing it with decision-­making in 
organ­izations.1 Scientific predictions, first and foremost, are stabilizing devices: 
they focus attention, mobilize agency, and synchronize collective action. How-
ever, it is the way in which predictions are bound to their context that makes 
predictions scientific in the modern sense: decontextualizing ­those predictions 
as mere ­tables, numbers, equations, or scenarios leads to a form of knowledge 
that I call “scientific in form, astrological in content.”2
For instance, as I showed in chapter 2 focusing on the emergence of economic 
forecasting in the postrevolutionary Rus­sia in 1917 to 1939, the positivist notion 
of prediction informed economic planning and social forecasting and even in 
its simplistic, reductionist, and overtly optimistic forms was a criterion of the 
scientificity of planning. For Nikolai Kondrat’ev scientific prevision was about 
faithful factual description and explanation of transition between two events, 
the known and the unknown ones, the known events being captured by statis-
tical data on the economy and the ­future events being goals set in an economic 
development plan. As Kondrat’ev was acutely aware that knowledge about past 
events—­especially ones characterizing economic and social development—­was 
­limited, Kondrat’ev recognized the severe limitations of economic and social 
statistics, deeming them unsuitable for long-­term and precise planning. More-

	
Conclusion	
185
over, each time scientists like Kondrat’ev examined social and economic pre-
dictions they unmasked their flawed assumptions and ideological as well as 
incompetent uses of statistics. The history of positivist scientific prediction in 
interwar Soviet Rus­sia is therefore not only a story of centralized state control, 
but rather a story of criticism of the communist planning utopia and orga­
nizational be­hav­ior and a call for institutional reform to develop new orga­
nizational practices for statistical data gathering and scientific epistemologies 
for the economy. It is also a story of interruptions, where Rus­sian thought on 
scientific prediction, devastated by Stalin’s repressions and Second World War 
destruction, developed in bursts and jumps, rediscovering its past and forget-
ting it again, reassembling the ele­ments in a strategic and pragmatic way.
As I showed in this book, following the Second World War, a wide-­ranging 
consensus has been reached across many scientific disciplines and policy spheres 
that to focus on prediction scientifically is to treat the mediating pro­cesses, which 
link symptoms/signs and outcomes, seriously. To put it in ­simple words, the mod-
ern epistemology of scientific prediction led Soviet scientists to face social and 
orga­nizational real­ity, however incon­ve­nient it was, as it diverged from the po­
liti­cal utopian notions of Soviet pro­gress.3 This led to an increasing discrepancy 
between po­liti­cal planning and expert knowledge production in the policy fields: 
a pro­cess that can be characterized as a dysfunctional orchestration of predic-
tion. As I showed in chapters 2 and 4, tracing the development of Soviet eco-
nomic and social forecasting from the 1920s to the 1980s, the question to what 
extent complex social and economic pro­cesses can be knowable, can be described 
in numbers, and how their change can be represented and modelled statistically, 
was debated in the field of social and economic prognosis. For Kondrat’ev, an 
economic prognosis was a working hypothesis rather than a source of reliable 
facts, predicting ­future events precisely was unlikely and the success of predic-
tion depended on the context of its use. This critical, relational approach to eco-
nomic forecasting was not welcomed by the Soviet authorities. On the one 
hand, Soviet authorities required economists to churn out statistical numbers 
as part of the orga­nizational rituals of accounting, where the role of statistics 
was to po­liti­cally legitimize decisions rather than to guide them. On the other 
hand, the view of society as a ­simple machine, where inputs, be they ideology, 
money, or vio­lence, determined the outputs, for instance such as social be­hav­
ior, prevailed. The Soviet regime produced a lot of statistical numbers, many of 
which claimed to be results of prognoses, but ­these numbers obfuscated rather 
than revealed the cumulative development of the economy and society.
Only during Khrushchev’s thaw, as I showed in chapter 4, did the Soviet re-
gime open up for the scientific orchestration of prediction in the Soviet Union. 
The path for this opening was paved by war­time mobilization during the Second 

186	
Conclusion
World War and postwar technological developments, requiring a more robust 
science of organ­ization to secure logistics and ­battle operations, and operate the 
nuclear, mining, and chemical industrial complexes. Dif­fer­ent types of scientific 
prediction emerged: the positivist notion of prediction as a criterion of scien-
tific knowledge remained influential in planning and management, the statistical 
mea­sure­ment of evolutionary change informed a range of disciplines from eco-
nomics to biology, and, with the onset of cybernetics, prediction based on pattern 
recognition was developed in computer science. The latter became particularly 
influential, leading to what I call the cybernetic sensibility, an understanding that 
evolutionary, complex, and fleeting phenomena are structured through informa-
tional feedback and prediction and an expectation that they can be described 
mathematically, simulated in computers, and deployed as part of organ­ization. 
The cybernetic sensibility legitimized the need to recognize divergence, differ-
ence from the policy goal being not as deviant and treacherous but as an organic 
part of spontaneous evolution, and to act on it. The cybernetic sensibility was 
­adopted across East and West, requiring a pro­cessual integration of the produc-
tion of predictive scientific expertise and orga­nizational decision-­making. In the 
Soviet Union, as I showed in the last four chapters of this book, this integration 
could not take place fully, in part ­because of the leadership’s naive approach to 
scientific prediction as titbits of information that are instructive, to be used as 
astrological prognoses, in part ­because of the demand for nonknowledge gener-
ated in what Ledeneva described as the informal economics of ­favors, and, last 
but not the least, ­because of the paucity of the available data. However, despite 
this, the cybernetic sensibility was a source of innovation as it ­shaped the concep-
tual architecture of scientific prediction in communication, management, and 
governance. Some of ­these innovative strands ­were detailed in the chapters ex-
ploring what I called the late modern concepts of scientific prediction—­
prospective reflexivity, reflexive control, and global governance as guidance 
through milieu.
I would like to propose that it is ­these three intellectual legacies of the late mod-
ern notions of scientific prediction that paved the way for the con­temporary Rus­
sian governmental imagination, enabling it to exploit the new conditions of 
increasingly digitally mediated and globally interconnected politics and social life. 
Focusing on the reflexivity and complexity of long-­term and planetary scale devel-
opments, ­these approaches are only loosely coupled with the positivist scheme of 
science–­prediction–­action. With regards to prospective reflexivity and reflexive 
control, the ­will to predict individual cognition and group be­hav­ior and to orches-
trate them poses serious ethical issues, where man­ag­ers use forward-­directed 
technologies of reflexivity to tap into social informality in organ­izations and the 
Rus­sian government uses reflexive control to or­ga­nize and justify strategic decep-

	
Conclusion	
187
tion in informational wars, both at home and abroad. Both prospective reflexivity 
and reflexive control thrive in spheres of opacity, that is, the lack of a subject’s own 
understanding of the self and the other, at the same time increasing rather than 
decreasing this opacity in the name of effective pursuit of orga­nizational or strate-
gic goals. To predict reflexively means to mobilize be­hav­ior through identity con-
struction rather than to account for a logistics of goal-­directed action. For instance, 
as a result of the Rus­sian government’s strategic deception deployed in the buildup 
to the invasion of Ukraine, Rus­sia is said to have undermined its actorial identity 
as a rational state ­because it misused diplomacy to deliver lies.4 However, Kremlin 
actors regard themselves like Dostoyevsky’s players—­craftsmen of warfare and 
performative tellers of truth bringing about a new real­ity.
It was not the purpose of this book to pre­sent an exhaustive discussion of the 
dif­fer­ent types of scientific prediction, but rather to develop a so­cio­log­i­cal and 
historical study of prediction that is sensitive to plurality. As I showed, ap-
proaches to scientific prediction developed in a spontaneous, ad hoc, and lively 
manner, thriving on conceptual and technical transfers between dif­fer­ent fields. 
What can be gleaned from the cases presented in this book is that the develop-
ment of notions of scientific prediction was as turbulent as the growth of post-
war technoscience. This turbulence and plurality of approaches led to multiple 
transfers and cross-­fertilization of ideas and techniques, but it also led to some-
what mistaken use of dif­fer­ent types of prediction, where dif­fer­ent techniques 
­were expected to deliver the same kind of result. For instance, the techniques of 
statistical forecasting of mid-­ and long-­term social and economic development 
­were deemed equivalent of very short-­term pattern recognition used in cyber-
netic models of tracking and correction via feedback loops. ­After all, designers 
of servomechanisms, neurophysiologists, and ge­ne­ticists used statistical meth-
ods and computers, just like economists and planners. The military planners of 
logistical systems used linear programming, while combat interactions, which, in 
Lefebvre’s theory also included the ­enemy’s cognition, used feedback loops to read 
and deceive the opponent. Despite ­these apparent technical and conceptual paral-
lels, the techniques of linear programming as a decision aid ­were dif­fer­ent from 
feedback-­based pro­cessing of fast changing information in neurophysiological 
systems and servomechanisms.5 Indeed, the epistemological differences between 
the statistical forecasting of macro developments and the behavioral control de-
scribed by cybernetics should not be underestimated.
Attempts to combine ­these techniques mechanically in a policy context led 
to disappointment in the techniques as planning and decision aids, at best, and 
bad decisions at worst, where forecasts ­were regarded as a form of certain knowl-
edge and acted upon. In the 1960s Karl Deutsch wrote about “the nerves of 
government” and Marshall McLuhan dreamt about the “cybernation” of society 

188	
Conclusion
through media technology. In the 1970s, cyberneticians such as Viktor Glush-
kov and Stafford Beer tried to put this idea into action by devising digitally 
networked command centers for the Soviet Union and Chile, OGAS and Cy-
bersyn. All of them underestimated the many levels of complexity and the 
number of mediators required to produce and channel data through ­those 
“nerves.” No statistical forecasting of complex ­human actions could be done at 
such high speed and quality so as to feed into real-­time decisions. ­Today we are 
not short of such examples as, for instance, so-­called real-­time algorithmic pro­
cessing in predictive policing. As researchers have shown, the algorithmic pre-
dictions of crime events do not feed directly into the police response in real time, 
as in a cybernetic prosthetic arm. Instead, guesses of pos­si­ble crimes are screened 
at regular periods and used as a rationale to launch or withhold action.6 Algo-
rithmic predictions in policing are mediated by too many agencies and cannot 
be qualified as being “real-­time.”7 The only situation when the policing algo-
rithms are applied in what counts as real time, that is, immediately, is the case 
of “sorting” observations into predefined categories, for example in instances of 
ethnic profiling during stop and search at border control.8 It can be argued that 
ethnic profiling and “stop and search” policing is but one component of the loop 
of the situational prediction pro­cess.9
It is clear that the ­will to predict scientifically requires careful balancing be-
tween levels of complexity and the ability to deploy the correct epistemological 
tools (predictions) in appropriate contexts. As I showed in chapter 7, focusing 
on the global and long-­term prediction of the coevolution of mankind and the 
environment, Soviet complexity scientists, such as Nikita Moiseev, proposed that 
cybernetic target-­based predictions could only perform well at a lower level of 
complexity. As Moiseev wrote in the 1970s and 1980s, to make sense of govern-
ment at the higher level of complexity, such as the interaction of economy, de-
mography, pollution, and the global biosphere, new terms are required, such as 
negative guidance, which works not through setting targets and predictive ori-
entation of be­hav­ior, monitored by the steersman, but through bound­aries that 
are instead channeling be­hav­ior. ­Today the ongoing debates about global climate 
governance are looking for new models integrating scientific expertise, policy 
decisions, markets, and implementation actions.10 ­These debates are still taking 
place along the same conceptual lines that ­were articulated by systems scholars 
in the 1980s.11
Perhaps the most pressing challenge for such scholarship is shaping the public 
culture of coping with failure as an inevitable part and parcel of scientific predic-
tions. For example, the experience of the Covid-19 pandemic made it evident that 
statistical forecasting of the rates of spread of the infection and mortality was not 
a win­dow on the ­future, but an impor­tant heuristic tool enabling both the moni-

	
Conclusion	
189
toring of the population and checking the relations between policy mea­sures and 
public health.12 That many of ­these forecasts failed is not so much a failure of sci-
ence as such, but rather an expected part of a robust pro­cess of scientific knowl-
edge production. However, dif­fer­ent forms of prediction fail in dif­fer­ent ways: the 
Comtean and, ­later, logical empiricist notion of prediction as explanation help 
testing the explanatory power of theories. The failure of prediction as pattern 
recognition helps us to notice changes in the environment and inform the organ-
ism’s or machine’s adaptation to it. The notions of reflexive control and prospec-
tive reflexivity address failures of collective be­hav­ior in organ­izations or seek to 
cause a failure of the opponent. Scientific prediction, in this way, requires coping 
with failure in ways that echo what Theodore Porter described as the politics of 
mechanical objectivity, a form of bureaucratic quantification that generates trust 
precisely because it is vulnerable to scrutiny.
Making Sense of the Failure to Predict
Cold War governments have been widely criticized for having evolved into elitist 
technocratic systems, blinded by the arms race and guided by a utopian idea of 
rationality. In this context the ­will to predict was added to the catastrophic portfo-
lio of Cold War governmentality as the list of harmful uses of scientific (and scien-
tifically engineered) predictions is a long one and growing. As I showed in this 
book the notions of prospective reflexivity and reflexive control constitute tech-
niques that seek to manipulate the be­hav­ior of ­others, be they collaborators or 
opponents. A similar ­will to predict but, at the same time, to govern through opac-
ity stemming from the asymmetry of power is expressed in the algorithmic gover-
nance based on tracking and modifying online user be­hav­ior and the efforts to 
create digital be­hav­ior markets by reducing individual ­people to data points, as 
criticized by Shoshana Zuboff.13 Even the uses of climate change predictions to 
balance out the world economy and the biosphere pose the threat of environ-
mental authoritarianism.14 Although ­these are valid and very serious concerns, 
the prob­lem lies, I argue, not with a par­tic­u­lar type of scientific prediction that is 
­either erroneous or misapplied, but with the orchestration of the entire decision 
and behavioral milieu where ­these predictions are created and used.
First, politics and socie­ties that are “unpredictable,” in the commonsense 
meaning of the term as having knowledge about ­future events, appear to cause a 
lot of concern. The dismantling of the bipolar Cold War order, the pluralization 
and changing character of social and po­liti­cal power with the advance of the 
internet and social media, is increasingly understood as a presumably new, “un-
predictable” world, where even mature liberal demo­cratic socie­ties experience 

190	
Conclusion
fragmentation and polarization, pro­cesses that put democracies to the test. When 
Rus­sian military forces invaded Ukraine in 2014, Western media repeated that 
Putin had become “unpredictable.” A few years ­later, the label of unpredictability 
was applied to the US President Donald Trump.15 The outcomes of the British 
referendum to leave the Eu­ro­pean Union in 2016 surprised even the Conservative 
Party who or­ga­nized the referendum. The culmination of the failure of predict 
was the scale of Rus­sia’s war in Ukraine in February 2022 that extended beyond 
the already destabilized regions of Donetsk and Luhansk putting the entire coun-
try ­under threat. Both scholars and po­liti­cal commentators argue that the loss 
of the sense of predictability is accompanied by the rise of conspiracy theories, 
where neither facts, nor explanations, nor informed ­future guesses appear to 
­matter any longer.16
Second, the tolerance for unpredictability decreases among politicians and 
the public when ­things are perceived as turning out for the worse. Scholars, on 
the other hand, get baffled when events stop complying with their theories even 
when they change for the better, as they did in the annus mirabilis of 1989. The 
collapse of the communist regimes in Eastern Eu­rope followed with the disso-
lution of the Soviet Union in 1991 placed the entire field of East Eu­ro­pean and 
Soviet studies in an uncomfortable situation, ­because ­these major events ­were 
perceived as unexpected, challenging the prevailing consensus about the stabil-
ity of the communist system. Area scholars ­were judged for failure like medi-
eval physicians seeking to diagnose and foresee the course of illness of a patient, 
­because they failed to predict the outcomes of the course of reform. Controversy 
ensued: ­were the par­tic­u­lar experts to be blamed for inadequate knowledge, or 
did the communist collapse question the very legitimacy of social science (re-
member the positivist criterion of prediction as a test of scientific knowledge)? 
Indeed, it was neither/nor. Many scholars mounted sophisticated theoretical ar-
gumentation to explain why and when the Soviet system should collapse and 
this collapse was expected. According to Michael Ellman, both Bolsheviks and 
Trotskyists expected the communist regime to collapse in the 1920s and 1930s. 
­Later, Soviet economists warned the communist government about the severe 
decline of rates of growth in the late 1970s and early 1980s. Some Western schol-
ars also indicated that the Soviet regime was seriously threatened by dif­fer­ent 
forces.17 For instance, in 1978 the prominent Sovietologist Archie Brown sug-
gested that Rus­sian nationalism threatened the communist order, while other 
scholars, such as the French historian Hélène Carrère d’Encausse, warned about 
the destabilizing power of Islamic communities in the Soviet Union.18 Similarly, 
in 1981, the émigré Jewish-­Lithuanian po­liti­cal scientist Alexander Shtromas ar-
gued that the Soviet Union would inevitably collapse not only ­because of Rus­
sian nationalism, but also ­because of the internal loss of ideological legitimacy.19 

	
Conclusion	
191
In the same period, ­others, like Randall Collins presented a prediction that the 
Soviet Union would collapse, dating this collapse before a nuclear war would oc-
cur (on the basis of his theory of state power).20 Other theories ­were presented 
as having a predictive capacity following the event: for instance, the Estonian 
émigré Rein Taagepera, who modeled collapses of the ­great empires in the 1970s 
and 1980s, argued that the same dynamics featured in the Soviet Union and, post 
factum, modeled its collapse.21 It is true, however, that at the time when they ­were 
made, ­these estimates ­were minority views and ­were mainly ignored in main-
stream Soviet and Cold War scholarship. What is more, although it had been 
established in retrospect that ­these scholars happened to anticipate correctly the 
evolution of the Soviet system, this did not make their work more influential in 
the field.
In the 1990s, many journals and books hosted forums debating the very sci-
entific status of social science knowledge, which was undermined by the per-
ceived scholars’ inability to predict the end of the Soviet Union and, in turn, of 
the Cold War.22 ­These debates, however, revolved around two meanings of sci-
entific prediction: the logical empiricist one as hypothesis and explanation, and 
the logistical one, as in statistical forecasting, where an event is pinned firmly 
to a point in space and time. Other scholars, particularly po­liti­cal scientists and 
economic historians, examined the ­earlier explanatory frameworks hoping to 
identify the reasons that hindered their ability to foresee the collapse.23 The sig-
nificance of the wider orchestration of prediction escaped the focus of atten-
tion. Zubok’s study of the Soviet collapse, for instance, pre­sents a fascinatingly 
rich story of the orga­nizational chaos unleashed by Gorbachev’s economic lib-
eralization reforms that changed the rules for production and trade without 
modeling the pos­si­ble impact on the economy. Moreover, the perestroika reforms 
did not challenge the in­effec­tive collection of reliable statistical data on the en-
terprises. The Communist Party of the Soviet Union failed to anticipate both the 
actions of economic actors and the prob­lem with acquiring data on their activi-
ties. In a fabulously ironic way, Gorbachev’s glasnost’ increased opacity of the 
late Soviet economy instead of making its workings transparent and account-
able to the actors and government.24
However, does this evidence of failure, where the ­will to predict scientifically 
does not live up to expectations, suggest that the ­will itself must be relinquished? 
The answer is probably not. In the 1970s the social psychologist Karl Weick 
wrote about the mystery of prediction, which is embedded in a par­tic­u­lar cog-
nitive dynamic, where ­people align their judgments in relation to their per­for­
mance, a pro­cess that happens retrospectively. Repetitive “cause loops,” wrote 
Weick, create a sense of predictability. ­These loops consist of judgments, state-
ments, and actions; together, they constitute order, which is enacted in a way 

192	
Conclusion
that can resemble a self-­fulfilling prophecy. ­These prophecies are not just posi-
tive feedbacks, described by Robert Merton (when gossip of a failing bank 
­causes a bank run and results in the failure of the bank). Prediction in orga­
nizational sense-­making, according to Weick, is always retrospective.25 To ex-
tend Weick’s thought, the most basic form of prediction performs the function 
of synchronization of orga­nizational action, where ­people in organ­izations act 
“as if” they can predict (each other’s be­hav­ior and the changes in the organ­
ization’s environment). ­These “as if” actions are performative: together they en-
act a predictable organ­ization. However, this condition of collective, 
synchronized predictability is fragile, it is good as long as the actors continue 
acting “as if.” Once the actors give up their convention of predictability and 
agree that their organ­ization and the surrounding world are “unpredictable,” 
the order is likely to fall apart. When this happens—­and it happens all the 
time—­dif­fer­ent notions of scientific prediction can be deployed to rebuild the 
stability. While many decision-­makers deploy the models of scientific predic-
tion described in this book, ­others, like their pre­de­ces­sors hundreds of years ago, 
resort to astrologers, clairvoyants, and witchcraft.26 One has to be cautious to 
avoid rigid binaries of modern and nonmodern when analyzing ­these forms of 
predictive knowledge, for their conceptual architecture and social worlds 
overlap in many ways.27
To reset the debate about the legitimacy of the ­will to predict—­and to do this 
scientifically—it is imperative to look back at the history of prediction. The key 
argument of this book is that the debate about scientific prediction’s validity and 
usefulness for governance constituted an impor­tant part of Soviet Rus­sian mod-
ernization. But this was not an exclusively Rus­sian story: a similar study could be 
done on the basis of Western or Chinese materials, but the Soviet Rus­sian case 
allowed me to articulate the key conflict lines and tensions that emerge where 
scientific and commonsense notions of prediction are confused. In the context of 
the centrally commanded, extremely politicized administrative governance of the 
Soviet system, science was both endowed with ­great authority (and, in some in-
stances, ­limited autonomy from party politics), but was also made vulnerable to 
the volatile po­liti­cal context of its application. I believe that my argument can be 
extended to consider Rus­sia’s war in Ukraine as an extreme case of politics where 
the ­will to predict scientifically is virtually absent. Although at the moment of 
writing in March 2022, many commentators argued that Putin’s decision to in-
vade Ukraine is based on multiple miscalculations of the societal dynamics in the 
country and is therefore missing a ­viable strategy for the long term, perhaps a 
reference to the murky Nietz­schean strug­gle of drives in the ­will to power helps 
better to characterize the decision-­making at Kremlin, where the role of scientific 
expertise is far from evident. It is beyond the powers of scientific prediction to 

	
Conclusion	
193
foretell the outcomes of the war in Ukraine; however, a demo­cratic use of scien-
tific prediction could contribute to making sure that ­those outcomes will benefit 
the Ukrainian society as much as possible.
In all cases of scientific predictions and their failures, the flows of data and 
be­hav­ior must be orchestrated by synchronizing the social, institutional, and 
material agencies of ­humans and non-human. Refocusing the scholarly discus-
sion on the ­will to predict scientifically as demo­cratic orchestration of dif­fer­ent 
forms of knowledge and agencies, hopefully, ­will help us better understand the 
failures so that we can fail better.


195
INTRODUCTION
1. Linda L. Williams, Nietz­sche’s Mirror: The World as ­Will to Power (Lanham: Rowan & 
Littlefield, 2001), 26, 32.
2. Andy Clark, “What­ever Next? Predictive Brains, Situated Agents, and the ­Future 
of Cognitive Science,” Behavioral and Brain Sciences 36 (2013): 181–253; Daniel Kahne-
man and Amos Tversky, “On the Psy­chol­ogy of Prediction,” Psychological Review 80, 
no. 4 (1973): 237–251; Dan Ariely, Predictably Irrational: The Hidden Forces That Shape 
Our Decisions (New York: HarperCollins, 2008).
3. Nathaniel Rich, “The New Science of Disaster Prediction,” New Yorker, (19 Novem-
ber 2013, https://­www​.­newyorker​.­com​/­news​/­news​-­desk​/­the​-­new​-­science​-­of​-­disaster​
-­prediction.
4. Kit Yates, “Why Mathematicians Sometimes Get Covid Projections Wrong,” Guard-
ian (UK edition), 26 January 2022.
5. Elke U. Weber and Paul Stern, “Public Understanding of Climate Change in the 
United States,” American Psychologist 66, no. 4 (2011): 315–328; Retto Knutti, “Should 
We Believe Model Predictions of ­Future Climate Change?” Philosophical Transactions 
of the Royal Society Series A 366 (2008): 4647–4664. For manipulation and deception see 
Naomi Oreskes and Erik M. Conway, Merchants of Doubt: How a Handful of Scientists 
Obscured the Truth on Issues from Tobacco Smoke to Climate Change (London: Blooms-
bury, 2011).
6. Sandra Kemp and Jenny Andersson, eds., ­Futures (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
2021); Max Saunders, ­Imagined ­Futures: Writing, Science and Modernity in the To-­Day 
and To-­Morrow Book Series, 1923–31 (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2019); Jenny An-
dersson, The ­Future of the World: Futurology, Futurists, and the Strug­gle for the Post-­
Cold War Imagination (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2018); Jens Beckert, ­Imagined 
­Futures: Fictional Expectations and Cap­i­tal­ist Dynamics (Cambridge, MA: Harvard Uni-
versity Press, 2016); Helga Nowotny, The Cunning of Uncertainty (Cambridge: Polity 
Press, 2016); Peter J. Bowler, A History of the ­Future: Prophets of Pro­gress from H.G. Wells 
to Isaac Asimov (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2017); Walt Friedman, For-
tune Tellers: The Story of Amer­i­ca’s First Forecasters (Prince­ton, NJ: Prince­ton Univer-
sity Press, 2014).
7. Shoshana Zuboff, The Age of Surveillance Capitalism: The Fight for a ­Human ­Future 
at the New Frontier of Power (New York: Profile Books, 2019); Seb Franklin, Control: Digi-
tality as Cultural Logic (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2015).
8. Andersson, The ­Future of the World, 6, 27.
9. Andersson, The ­Future of the World.
10. This work, in turn, was an impor­tant extension of the intellectual history of the 
­future and temporality, pioneered by Reinhart Koselleck, ­Futures Past: On the Seman-
tics of Historical Time (New York: Columbia University Press, 2004 [1979]) and extended 
by Barbara Adam and Chris Groves, ­Future ­Matters: Action, Knowledge, Ethics (Leiden: 
Brill, 2007). The history of the ­future can include, but goes beyond, the traditional agenda 
of the po­liti­cal and cultural critique of studies of utopia, as in, for instance, the influen-
tial work by Frederic Jameson, Archaeologies of the ­Future: The Desire of Utopia and Other 
Notes

196	
NOTES TO PAGES 3–6
Science Fictions (London: Verso, 2005) or imaginaries such as in Peter Bowler, A History 
of the ­Future, as well as the epistemology of prediction in premodern cultures, as in Fed-
erico Santangelo, Divination, Prediction and the End of the Roman Republic (Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press, 2013).
11. Elke Seefried, “Steering the ­Future: The Emergence of ‘Western’ ­Futures Research 
and Its Production of Expertise, 1950s to Early 1970s,” Eu­ro­pean Journal of ­Futures Re-
search 2, no. 29 (2014), https://­doi​.­org​/­10​.­1007​/­s40309​-­013​-­0029​-­y.
12. Ann Johnson, “Rational and Empirical Cultures of Prediction,” in Mathe­matics 
as a Tool, eds. Johannes Lenhard and Martin Carrier (Cham: Springer, 2017), 23–35.
13. Matthias Heymann, Gabriele Gramelsberger, and Martin Mahony, eds., Cultures 
of Prediction in Atmospheric and Climate Science: Epistemic and Cultural Shifts in 
Computer-­based Modelling and Simulation (London: Routledge, 2017).
14. Andreas Wenger, Ursula Jasper, and Myriam Dunn Cavelty, eds., The Politics and 
Science of Prevision: Governing and Probing the ­Future (London: Routledge, 2020). See 
also Stefan C. Aykut, David Demortain, and Bilel Benbouzid, “The Politics of Anticipa-
tory Expertise: Plurality and Contestation of ­Futures Knowledge in Governance—­
Introduction to the Special Issue,” Science & Technology Studies, Finnish Association for 
Science and Technology Studies 32, no. 4 (2019), 2–12.
15. Jamie Pietruska, Looking Forward: Prediction and Uncertainty in Modern Amer­
i­ca (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2017); Caley Horan, “Investing in the Stars: 
The Astrology of Money and Markets in the Modern United States,” an unpublished pre­
sen­ta­tion, STS Circle at Harvard, 19 November 2018.
16. For Cold War ­future studies in Eastern Eu­rope and global South see Lukas Becht, 
“From Euphoria to Frustration: Institutionalizing Prognostic Research in the Polish 
­People’s Republic, 1969–76,” Acta Poloniae Historica 116 (2017): 277–299; Vítězslav Som-
mer, “Forecasting the Post-­Socialist ­Future: Prognostika in Late Socialist Czecho­slo­va­
kia, 1970–1989,” in The Strug­gle for the Long Term in Transnational Science and Politics 
during the Cold War, eds. Jenny Andersson and Eglė Rindzevičiūtė (New York: Rout-
ledge, 2015), 144–168; Elke Seefried, “Globalized Science: The 1970s ­Futures Field,” Cen-
taurus: An International Journal of History of Science and Its Cultural Aspects 59, nos. 
1–2 (2017): 40–57. For comparison of classical Western and Chinese approaches to pre-
diction see Lisa Raphals, Divination and Prediction in Early China and Ancient Greece 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2013).
17. Janos Kornai, The Socialist System: The Po­liti­cal Economics of Communism (Prince­
ton, NJ: Prince­ton University Press, 1992).
18. James C. Scott, Seeing Like a State: How Certain Schemes to Improve the ­Human 
Condition Have Failed (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1995).
19. On East–­West collaboration in the governance of global risks, see Eglė Rindzevičiūtė, 
The Power of Systems: How Policy Sciences Opened Up the Cold War World (Ithaca, NY: 
Cornell University Press, 2016); Marc Elie, “Late Soviet Responses to Disasters, 1989–1991: 
A New Approach to Crisis Management or the Acme of Soviet Technocratic Thinking?” 
Soviet and Post-­Soviet Review 40, no. 2 (2013): 214–238; Marc Elie, “Governing by ­Hazard: 
Controlling Mudslides and Promoting Tourism in the Mountains Above Alma-­Ata (Ka-
zakhstan), 1966–1977,” in Governing Disasters: Beyond Risk Culture, eds. Sandrine Revet 
and Julien Langumier (Cham: Palgrave, 2015), 23–57. See also Sonja Schmid, “Chernobyl: 
Data Wars and Disaster Politics,” Nature, 566, no. 7745 (2019): 450.
20. Douglas and Wildavsky do not consider the meaning of prediction, for instance 
­whether it means induction, inference, or prospective reflection. They use the term pre-
diction to describe an estimate of an unknown event occurring in the ­future—­a com-
mon understanding of prediction in risk studies. Mary Douglas and Aaron Wildavsky, 
Risk and Culture: An Essay on the Se­lection of Technological and Environmental Dangers 

	
NOTES TO PAGES 6–8	
197
(Berkeley: University of California Press, 1983), 5; Ulrich Beck, Risk Society: ­Towards a 
New Modernity (Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 1993).
21. Michael Power, The Audit Society: Rituals of Verification (Oxford: Oxford Uni-
versity Press, 1997); Michael Power, Or­ga­nized Uncertainty: Designing a World of Risk 
Management (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2007).
22. Key criticism was presented by Benoît Godin, “The Linear Model of Innovation: 
The Historical Construction of an Analytical Framework,” Science, Technology and 
­Human Values 31, no. 6 (2006): 639–667; see also, Silke Beck, “Moving Beyond the Lin-
ear Model of Expertise? IPCC and the Test of Adaptation,” Regional Environmental 
Change 11 (2011): 297–306.
23. Norbert Wiener, Cybernetics: Or Control and Communication in the Animal and 
the Machine (1948; Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1965), 34–36.
24. Bruno Latour, Reassembling the Social: An Introduction to Actor Network Theory 
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2005). Writing on governmentality, Michel Foucault 
captured this simultaneous coproduction of governmental techniques and objects, al-
though neither Foucault nor governmentality scholars paid much attention to predic-
tive expertise, focusing instead on the classificatory effects of the politics of statistical 
data. See Nikolas Rose, The Powers of Freedom: Reframing Po­liti­cal Thought (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1999); for an overview of the role of data in governmental-
ity studies see Evelyn Ruppert, Engin Isin, and Didier Bigo, “Data Politics,” Big Data & 
Society 4, no. 2 (2017): 1–7; for an explicit focus on prediction see Claudia Aradau and 
Tobias Blanke, “Politics of Prediction: Security and the Time/Space of Governmentality 
in the Age of Big Data,” Eu­ro­pean Journal of Social Theory 20, no. 3 (2017): 373–391.
25. ­There is a wealth of research into social and cultural temporalities and notions of 
time, which are relevant, but go beyond the scope of this study. For a foundational eth-
nographic study, see Mircea Eliade, The Myth of Eternal Return: Cosmos and History (Ox-
ford: Blackwell, 2018 ([1949]).
26. Paul du Gay, In Praise of Bureaucracy: Weber–­Organ­ization–­Ethics (London: Sage, 
2000).
27. Michael D. Cohen, James G. March, and Johan P. Olsen, “A Garbage Can Model 
of Orga­nizational Choice,” Administrative Science Quarterly 17, no. 1 (1972): 1–25.
28. David G. Sirmon, Michael A. Hitt, R. Duane Ireland, and Brett Anitra Gilbert, 
“Resource Orchestration to Create Competitive Advantage: Breadth, Depth, and Life Cy-
cle Effects,” Journal of Management 37, no. 5 (2011): 1390–1412; see also Nielsen Åker-
strøm Andersen and Justin Grønbaek Pors, Public Management in Transition: The 
Orchestration of Potentiality (Bristol: Policy Press, 2016).
29. Martina Prpic, “The Open Method of Coordination,” Eu­ro­pean Parliamentary Re-
search Ser­vice, PE 542.142 (2014), 1–2; Kenneth W. Abbott, Philipp Genschel, Duncan 
Snidal, and Bernhard Zangl, eds., International Organ­izations as Orchestrators (Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press, 2015); Kenneth Wayne Abbott, Philipp Genschel, 
Duncan Snidal, and Bernhard Zangl, “Orchestration: Global Governance through In-
termediaries” (2012) http://­dx​.­doi​.­org​/­10​.­2139​/­ssrn​.­2125452; Kenneth W. Abbott, Philipp 
Genschel, Duncan Snidal, and Bernhard Zangl, “Two Logics of Indirect Governance: 
Del­e­ga­tion and Orchestration,” British Journal of Po­liti­cal Science FirstView (2015): 1–11; 
Thomas Hale and Charles Roger, “Orchestration and Transnational Climate Gover-
nance,” Review International Organ­ization 9 (2014): 59–82.
30. This model of orchestration is derived from the management of informational sys-
tems and networks and can be found in network governance and meta-­governance 
studies. Jonna Gjaltema, Robbert Biesbroek, and Katrien Termeer, “From Government 
to Governance: A Systematic Lit­er­a­ture Review,” Public Management Review 22, no. 12 
(2020): 1760–1780.

198	
NOTES TO PAGES 8–13
31. Lena Bendlin, Orchestrating Local Climate Policy in the Eu­ro­pean Union: Inter-­
Municipal Coordination and the Covenant of Mayors in Germany and France (London: 
Springer, 2020), 36.
32. Bendlin, Orchestrating, 40.
33. See, for instance, Karl W. Deutsch, The Nerves of Government: Models of Po­liti­cal 
Communication and Control (New York: ­Free Press, 1963).
34. An engineer specializing in ­human–­computer interaction, Guy André Boy pro-
posed the model of the orchestra to describe and or­ga­nize the governance of complex-
ity: “agents require a common frame of reference (a ­music theory analogue), contracts 
(scores) must be appropriately and formally coordinated (the role of the composer), real-­
time coordination must be assured (the role of the conductor), and an agent must have 
specific abilities to perform according to contracts (role and proficiency of the musicians). 
Contracts are seen as scenarios or story­boards, with an additional responsibility dimen-
sion.” Guy A. Boy, Orchestrating Human-­Centred Design (London: Springer, 2013), 9.
35. Rindzevičiūtė, The Power of Systems.
36. Martin Carrier, “Prediction in Context: On the Comparative Epistemic Merit of 
Predictive Success,” Studies in History and Philosophy of Science 45 (2014): 100.
37. For instance, John Law occasionally used the term orchestration as a component 
of “translation,” an STS concept created to describe and analyze arrangements of dif­fer­
ent agencies, such as ­human–­nonhuman actions that are mediated mainly through in-
scriptions. John Law, ­After Method: Mess in Social Science Research (London: Routledge, 
2004), 29; John Law “Notes on the Theory of the Actor-­Network: Ordering, Strategy and 
Heterogeneity,” Systems Practice 5 (1992): 379–393.
38. Emily Dolan, The Orchestral Revolution: Haydn and the Technologies of Timbre 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2013).
39. Theodore Porter, Trust in Numbers: The Pursuit of Objectivity in Science and Pub-
lic Life (Prince­ton, NJ: Prince­ton University Press, 1995).
40. Scott, Seeing Like a State.
41. Rindzevičiūtė, The Power of Systems; Heymann et al., Cultures of Prediction; Quinn 
Slobodian, Globalists: The End of Empire and the Birth of Neoliberalism. (Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press, 2018).
42. Ronald Kline, The Cybernetics Moment: Or Why We Call Our Age the Informa-
tion Age (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2016); Stuart Russell, ­Human Com-
patible: Artificial Intelligence and the Prob­lem of Control (London: Viking, 2019).
43. Peter Galison, “The Ontology of the ­Enemy: Norbert Wiener and the Cybernetic 
Vision,” Critical Inquiry 21, no. 1 (1994): 228–266; Paul Edwards, The Closed World: Com-
puters and the Politics of Discourse in Cold War Amer­i­ca (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 
1996); Dominique Pestre, “Complex Systems and Total War: British Operational Re-
search and the PM Statistical Branch at the Beginning of World War II,” in Nature En-
gaged: Science in Practice from the Re­nais­sance to the Pre­sent, eds. N. Biagoli and J. Riskin 
(New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2012), 83–100.
44. Kenneth Arrow, Social Choice and Individual Values (New York: Wiley, 1951); 
Beckert, ­Imagined ­Futures.
45. Russell, ­Human Compatible.
46. Christophe Bonneuil and Jean Baptiste Fressoz, The Shock of the Anthropocene: 
The Earth, History and Us (London: Verso, 2016); Astrid Kirchhof and John Robert Mc-
Neill, eds., Nature and the Iron Curtain: Environmental Policy and Social Movements in 
Communist and Cap­i­tal­ist Countries, 1945–1990 (Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh 
Press, 2019).

	
NOTES TO PAGES 15–16	
199
1. WHAT IS SCIENTIFIC PREDICTION?
1. For discussion of the term prediction see ­these impor­tant studies: Jens Beckert, 
­Imagined ­Futures: Fictional Expectations and Cap­i­tal­ist Dynamics (Cambridge, MA: Har-
vard University Press, 2016); Philip Mirowski, Machine Dreams: Economics Becomes a 
Cyborg Science (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2002). Particularly extensive re-
flections can be found in Jenny Andersson, The ­Future of the World: Futurology, Futurists, 
and the Strug­gle for the Post-­Cold War Imagination (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
2018) and Louise Amoore, The Politics of Possibility: Risk and Security Beyond Probability 
(Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2013) as well as the volume edited by Andreas 
Wenger, Ursula Jasper, and Myriam Dunn Cavelty, eds., The Politics and Science Prevision: 
Governing and Probing the ­Future (London: Routledge, 2020). ­These studies, however, tend 
to ­settle on one definition of scientific prediction, while I argue that it is impor­tant to rec-
ognize the plurality of dif­fer­ent notions of prediction in science and expertise.
2. In Britannica the most comprehensive article on prediction is dedicated to the 
mathematical statistics of time series and the use of time series to solve engineering prob­
lems of information and control, theorized by a Swedish mathematician, Herman 
Wold, in 1938. Wold’s work informed both the American Norbert Wiener and the Rus­
sian Andrei Kolmogorov, who contributed highly influential theories on the extrapola-
tion and smoothing of time series in the 1930s and 1940s. In the next chapter I offer a 
detailed discussion of cybernetic prediction, which influenced dif­fer­ent domains of sci-
entific knowledge and orga­nizational practice in the second half of the twentieth ­century. 
This chapter lays the groundwork for this discussion, sketching out the richness and di-
versity of prediction’s history and epistemological scope.
3. It is worth citing this passage that defines prediction as a logical inference of value 
that can be applied in dif­fer­ent fields:
An impor­tant prob­lem of probability theory is to predict the value of a ­future obser-
vation Y given knowledge of a related observation X (or, more generally, given sev-
eral related observations X1, X2, . . .). Examples are to predict the ­future course of the 
national economy or the path of a rocket, given its pre­sent state. Prediction is often 
just one aspect of a “control” prob­lem. For example, in guiding a rocket, mea­sure­
ments of the rocket’s location, velocity, and so on are made almost continuously; at 
each reading, the rocket’s ­future course is predicted, and a control is then used to 
correct its ­future course. The same ideas are used to steer automatically large tankers 
transporting crude oil, for which even slight gains in efficiency result in large finan-
cial savings.
David O. Siegmund, “Probability Theory,” Encyclopaedia Britannica (2018), https://­
www​.­britannica​.­com​/­science​/­probability​-­theory​/­Conditional​-­expectation​-­and​-­least​
-­squares​-­prediction#ref407444.
4. This commonsense understanding of prediction is presented, for instance, in the 
Oxford En­glish Dictionary, where “to predict” is explained as “to know beforehand,” to 
estimate the ­future.
5. Federico Santangelo, Divination, Prediction and the End of the Roman Republic 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2013), 47–48. Some historians, however, refer 
to divination and mantic knowledge as synonymous, but this is not the place to resolve 
this long-­standing debate. See Michael Lackner, ed., Coping with the ­Future: Theories and 
Practices of Divination in East Asia (Leiden: Brill, 2018); Lisa Raphals, Divination and 
Prediction in Early China and Ancient Greece (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
2013); and the particularly lucid study by Alexander Fidora, “Divination and Scientific 

200	
NOTES TO PAGES 16–19
Prediction: The Epistemology of Prognostic Sciences in Medieval Eu­rope,” Early Science 
and Medicine, 18 (2013): 517–535.
6. Santangelo, Divination, 106.
7. Raphals, Divination and Prediction.
8. Santangelo, Divination, 63. The Roman practice of divination, “the consultation 
of the gods with a view to establishing their ­will and their position on an envisaged ac-
tion,” according to Santangelo (p. 5), was a part of religious ritual that ­shaped Roman 
everyday life. Divination is also characterized by Lisa Raphals as the “normal” everyday 
activity of consulting “extrahuman” knowledge. Raphals, Divination and Prediction, 2.
9. Santangelo, Divination, 64.
10. “The prob­lem of the ­future,” argues Raphals, is “universal,” a defining feature of 
Eu­ro­pean and Chinese socie­ties (p. 6). In Chinese the interaction of time and space is 
called yu zhu (p. 10). The ancient Greeks had a notion of a fairly predetermined and there-
fore knowable ­future, in contrast, the Chinese had a pragmatic and flexible notion of 
the ­future. Raphals compares ­these two cultures by exploring the institutional, social, 
and po­liti­cal contexts and practices of the production of divinatory knowledge. She shows 
that divination was a source of “power, authority and consensus” in ­these socie­ties. How-
ever, ancient “Chinese normative questions on good and ill auspicea did not seek pre-
dictions, but they ­were centrally concerned with regularity in cycles of time” (p. 380). 
For Raphals, it is not so much “prediction” as an attempt to “know the ­future” that is 
impor­tant in ancient Chinese and Greek divination, which can also be explained as a 
“systematizing attitude to the world” (p. 380). For a very helpful discussion on how the 
Chinese approach to time can be linked with modern forms of forecasting in ­future stud-
ies and how it can be dif­fer­ent from the Western approach to prediction as mantic 
knowledge, see Dragos Simandan, “Wisdom and Foresight in Chinese Thought: Sens-
ing the Immediate ­Future,” Journal of ­Future Studies 22, no. 3 (2018): 35–50; and Leo 
Howe and Alan Wain, eds., Predicting the ­Future (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 1993).
11. Fidora, “Divination and Scientific Prediction,” 519–521. See also Ilkka Kantola, 
Probability and Moral Uncertainty in Late Medieval and Early Modern Times (Helsinki: 
Luther-­Agricola Society, 1994).
12. According to Mary Poovey early modern thinkers ­were skeptical about quantita-
tive economic knowledge ­because they deemed it conjectural and therefore less reliable 
than solid, morally grounded opinions. Mary Poovey, A History of the Modern Fact: Prob­
lems of Knowledge in the Sciences of Wealth and Society (Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, 1998). To fast forward, the predictive power of opinions would return to the sci-
entific agenda in the mid-­twentieth ­century, not ­because of their moral value, but ­because 
of their collective nature that could be capitalized on by polling methods. See Christian 
Dayé, “How to Train Your Oracle: The Delphi Method and Its Turbulent Youth in Op-
erations Research and the Policy Sciences,” Social Studies of Science 48, no. 6 (2018): 849–
850; and Philip Tetlock and Dan Gardner, Superforecasting: The Art and Science of 
Prediction (New York: Random House, 2016).
13. Nicholas Denyer, “The Case Against Divination: An Examination of Cicero’s De 
Divinatione,” Cambridge Classical Journal 31 (1985): 5, cited in Raphals, Divination and 
Prediction, p. 3.
14. Michel Callon, “Some Ele­ments of a Sociology of Translation: Domestication of 
the Scallops and the Fishermen of St Brieuc Bay,” So­cio­log­i­cal Review 32, no. 1 (1984): 
196–233.
15. Karl E. Weick, Making Sense of the Organ­ization (Oxford: Blackwell, 2001), 11–14.
16. Fidora, “Divination and Scientific Prediction,” 526.
17. Fidora, “Divination and Scientific Prediction,” 523.

	
NOTES TO PAGES 19–25	
201
18. Lisa Raphals, “The Ethics of Prediction,” in How Should One Live? Comparing Eth-
ics in Ancient China and Greco-­Roman Antiquity, eds. R. A. H. King and Dennis Schil-
ling (Berlin: De Gruyter, 2011), 278–303, 284.
19. Fidora, “Divination and Scientific Prediction,” 529.
20. Fidora, “Divination and Scientific Prediction,” 531–532.
21. Fidora, “Divination and Scientific Prediction,” 531–532.
22. Fidora, “Divination and Scientific Prediction,” 524–525.
23. Poovey, A History of the Modern Fact, 220.
24. Poovey, A History of the Modern Fact, 8.
25. Poovey, A History of the Modern Fact, 222.
26. It is not pos­si­ble to do justice to the long and vast debate on prediction in phi-
losophy of science. For a useful overview, see Jonathan Fuller, Alex Broadbent, and Luis J. 
Flores, “Prediction in Epidemiology and Medicine,” Studies in History and Philosophy 
of Biological and Biomedical Sciences (2015), 1–4.
27. Poovey, A History of the Modern Fact, 14.
28. Auguste Comte, The Positive Philosophy (1830–1842), trans. Harriet Martineau 
[1896] (Kitchener, ON: Batocher Books, 2000), 43. On the same page, “­There can be no 
doubt that Man’s study of nature must furnish the only basis of his action upon nature; 
for it is only by knowing the laws of phenomena, and thus able to foresee them, that we 
can, in active life, set them to modify one another for our advantage.” For Comte, previ-
sion is part of what he understood as an indirect modification, arranging material phe-
nomena so that they can impact each other, ­because, as he put it, the “direct” power of 
man is very weak. This relates to Wiener’s idea of orchestration as management of the 
“arrival” of the universe through material and sensorial inputs in organisms and ma-
chines, which I discuss in chapter 3.
29. Comte, The Positive Philosophy, 151–152
30. Comte, The Positive Philosophy, 181–182.
31. Comte, The Positive Philosophy, 198.
32. Gertrude Lenzer, ed., Auguste Comte and Positivism: The Essential Writings (Lon-
don: Routledge, 1998), cited from Roy Moxley, “Ernst Mach and B. F. Skinner: Their Simi-
larities with Two Traditions for Verbal Be­hav­ior,” Be­hav­ior Analyst 28, no. 1 (2005): 33.
33. Poovey, A History of the Modern Fact, 234.
34. Emile Durkheim, The Rules of So­cio­log­i­cal Method, trans. W. D. Halls (1895; New 
York: ­Free Press, 1982), 138.
35. Durkheim, The Rules of So­cio­log­i­cal Method, 155.
36. Carl G. Hempel and Paul Oppenheim, “Studies in the Logic of Explanation,” Phi-
losophy of Science 15, no. 2 (1948): 136. I am grateful for the inspiration to revisit the 
writings of positivists to the postgraduates at the Department of History and Philoso-
phy of Science at the University of Cambridge, with whom I had the privilege to discuss 
this study during my visit in Spring 2019.
37. Heather Douglas, “Reintroducing Prediction to Explanation,” Philosophy of Sci-
ence 76 (2009): 446.
38. Hempel and Oppenheim, “Studies in the Logic of Explanation,” 138.
39. Hempel and Oppenheim, “Studies in the Logic of Explanation,” 138.
40. Hempel and Oppenheim, “Studies in the Logic of Explanation,” 138.
41. Hempel and Oppenheim, “Studies in the Logic of Explanation,” 139.
42. Sami Abuhamdeg and Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi, “The Artistic Personality: A Sys-
tem Perspective,” in The Systems Model of Creativity, ed. Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi 
(Dordrecht: Springer, 2014), 227–237.
43. Hempel and Oppenheim, “Studies in the Logic of Explanation,” 139. The debate 
in philosophy of science on the symmetrical link between prediction and explanation is 

202	
NOTES TO PAGES 25–29
a long-­standing one. For more, see John Losee, The Golden Age of the Philosophy of Sci-
ence (London: Bloomsbury, 2018).
44. Hempel and Oppenheim, “Studies in the Logic of Explanation,” 142.
45. Hempel and Oppenheim, “Studies in the Logic of Explanation,” 143.
46. Hempel and Oppenheim, “Studies in the Logic of Explanation,” 143.
47. A popu­lar version was presented in a bestseller, see B. F. Skinner, Beyond Free-
dom and Dignity (New York: Pelican, 1971). According to Zuboff, this environmentalist 
and positivist approach to be­hav­ior and cognition informed cap­i­tal­ist practices of digi-
tal extraction, which she describes as algorithmically controlled ­future be­hav­ior mar-
kets. Shoshanna Zuboff, The Age of Surveillance Capitalism: The Fight for a ­Human ­Future 
at the New Frontier of Power (New York: Profile Books, 2019).
48. In the early versions of cybernetics, purposive be­hav­ior was conceptualized in such 
a way that knowing the intention of an animal or a machine was not necessary to predict its 
be­hav­ior. In engineering and management applications, dynamic systems—­that is, sys-
tems that both change internally and can generate changes in their environment—­were 
designed to be controlled via feedback loops. From a ­human point of view such systems 
may appear to “have a purpose,” for instance, in a robot vacuum cleaner. However, what 
appears as “purpose” is in fact just an expression of the system’s architecture, its ability to 
interact with the environment. Similarly, in cybernetically informed approaches in neuro-
science and psychiatry, the concept of the intentional decision can also be bypassed at 
lower levels of organ­ization, where information exchange is seen as part of (subconscious) 
be­hav­ior and adaptation. Note that ability to adapt alone does not guarantee viability: ad-
aptation can be dysfunctional. See, for instance, Gregory Bateson’s double bind theory of 
schizo­phre­nia. Andrew Pickering, The Cybernetic Brain: Sketches of Another ­Future (Chi-
cago: University of Chicago Press, 2010), 173–175.
49. Zygmunt Bauman, Legislators and Interpreters: Of Modernity, Post-­Modernity and 
Intellectuals (London: Polity, 1989).
50. See, for instance, Donald McCloskey, “The Art of Forecasting: From Ancient to 
Modern Times,” Cato Journal 12, no. 1 (1992): 23–48.
51. Douglas, “Reintroducing Prediction to Explanation,” 454.
52. Robert Northcott, “When Are Purely Predictive Models Best?” Disputatio 9, no. 47 
(2017): 631–656.
53. Wesley C. Salmon, “Rational Prediction,” British Journal for the Philosophy of Sci-
ence 32, no. 2 (1981): 115–125.
54. Stuart Russell, ­Human Compatible: Artificial Intelligence and the Prob­lem of Con-
trol (London: Viking, 2019).
55. Poovey, A History of the Modern Fact, 282.
56. The meaning of prediction in statistics has been changing, just like the very mean-
ing of statistics itself; for a useful review see Bertrand S. Clarke and Jennifer L. Clarke, 
Predictive Statistics: Analy­sis and Inference Beyond Models (Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, 2018).
57. For a revisionist history of inference in statistics as a shift from detecting “prob-
able errors” to “probable data,” see Jeff Bidel and Marcel Boumans, “Exploring the His-
tory of Statistical Inference in Economics: Introduction,” History of Po­liti­cal Economy 
53S (2021): 1–24.
58. Ronald A. Fischer, “The Logic of Inductive Inference,” Journal of the Royal Statis-
tical Society 98, no. 1 (1935): 39–82.
59. John Norton, The Material Theory of Induction (Calgary, AB: University of Cal-
gary Press, 2021), 202.
60. A. S. C. Ehrenberg and J. A. Bound, “Predictability and Prediction,” Journal of the 
Royal Statistical Society, Series A (Statistics in Society) 156, no. 2 (1993): 167–206, 167–168.

	
NOTES TO PAGES 30–35	
203
61. Ehrenberg and Bound, “Predictability and Prediction,” 168. ­Here the term pre-
diction is used to describe a situation where the result in question ­will hold for some 
other, dif­fer­ent data (e.g., for a sample from another population). “Predictability” means 
that it ­will hold routinely, within a relevant range of conditions.
62. Goffman, Erving. Encounters (New York: Bobbs-­Merrill, 1961).
63. Andrew The Mangle of Practice: Time, Agency, Science (Chicago: University of Chi-
cago Press, 1995).
64. Ian Hacking, The Taming of Chance (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
1990); Alain Desrosières, The Politics of Large Numbers: A History of Statistical Reason-
ing (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2002).
65. Matthias Heymann, Gabriele Gramelsberger, and Martin Mahony, “Key Charac-
teristics of Cultures of Prediction,” in Cultures of Prediction in Atmospheric and Climate 
Science, eds. Matthias Heymann, Gabriele Gramelsberger, and Martin Mahony (Lon-
don: Routledge, 2015), 26–27.
66. Frank H. Knight, Risk, Uncertainty and Profit (Boston: Riverside Press, 1921), 200.
67. Knight, Risk, 201–202.
68. The idea of circular causality was central for the understanding of be­hav­ior be-
yond mechanical determinism and the traditional teleology that attributed the source 
of be­hav­ior to ­human intentions.
69. Ronald Kline, The Cybernetics Moment: Or Why We Call Our Age the Informa-
tion Age (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2015), 47.
70. Kline, The Cybernetics Moment, 57.
71. Kline, The Cybernetics Moment, 71–72.
72. Slava Gerovitch, From Newspeak to Cyberspeak: A History of Soviet Cybernetics 
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2002).
73. Seb Franklin, Control (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2015); Zuboff, The Age of Sur-
veillance Capitalism.
74. Kline, The Cybernetics Moment, 83.
75. Kline, The Cybernetics Moment, 136.
76. Kline, The Cybernetics Moment, 153–1954.
77. W. Ross Ashby, cited in Pickering, The Cybernetic Brain, 6.
78. Anil K. Seth, “The Cybernetic Bayesian Brain: From Interoceptive Inference to 
Sensorimotor Contingencies,” in Open MIND, eds. T. Metzinger and J. M. Windt (Frank-
furt am Main: MIND Group, 2020), 1–24, doi:10.15502/9783958570108.
79. I thank Dr Giulia Gallia for advising me on neuroscientific approaches to predic-
tion and for reading this chapter. Any views and errors are mine only.
80. Moshe Bar, “The Proactive Brain: Memory for Predictions.” Philosophical Trans-
actions of the Royal Society of London, Series B, Biological Sciences 364, no. 1521 (2009): 
1235–1243.
81. Andy Clark, Surfing Uncertainty: Prediction, Action and the Embodied Mind (Ox-
ford: Oxford University Press, 2016); see also Andy Clark, “What­ever Next? Predictive 
Brains, Situated Agents, and the ­Future of Cognitive Science,” Behavioral and Brain Sci-
ences 36 (2013): 181–253.
82. Clark, “What­ever Next?” 183.
83. Moshe Bar, “Visual Objects in Context,” Nature Reviews Neuroscience 5 (2004): 
617–629.
84. Clark, “What­ever Next?” 185.
85. Clark, “What­ever Next?” 187.
86. Clark, “What­ever Next?” 194.
87. Clark, “What­ever Next?” 199.
88. Clark, “What­ever Next?” 200.

204	
NOTES TO PAGES 36–40
89. The notion of cybernetic prediction as pattern recognition can be found in the 
influential writings of Luciana Parisi, Contagious Architecture: Computation, Aesthetics 
and Space (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2013); Mario Carpo, The Second Digital Turn: 
Design Beyond Intelligence (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2017).
90. Pickering, The Cybernetic Brain, 18–19.
91. Donella Meadows, John Richardson, and Gerhart Bruckman, Groping in the Dark: 
The First De­cade of Global Modelling (Chichester: John Wiley & Sons, 1982).
2. VISIBILITY, TRANSPARENCY, AND PREDICTION
1. Robert Collis, “ ‘Stars Rule Over ­People, but God Rules Over the Stars’: The Astro-
logical World View of Boris Ivanovich Kurakin (1676–1727),” Jahrbücher für Geschichte 
Osteuropas 59, no. 2 (2011): 196.
2. The link between the state and dif­fer­ent regimes of visibility has been explored by 
scholars and fiction writers in too many works to list ­here. My argument in this chapter 
is that scientific prediction constituted a novel resource for the po­liti­cal optics of visibil-
ity, which, in the Soviet context, had the potential to empower marginalized, nonparty 
actors (scholars and experts). As in the cases of environmental monitoring, computer 
technology and citizen science, analyzed by Jennifer Gabrys, the strive for scientific pre-
diction pluralized the Soviet regime of visibility, serving, however, sometimes top-­
down and other times bottom-up governance. For representative studies on liberal and 
demo­cratic technologies of visibility see Chris Otter, The Victorian Eye: A Po­liti­cal His-
tory of Light and Vision in Britain, 1800–­1910 (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 
2008); Jennifer Gabrys, Program Earth: Environmental Sensing Technology and the Mak-
ing of a Computational Planet (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2016).
3. According to Vaclav Smil, growth mea­sure­ment comes in three forms: linear, ex-
ponential, and finite growth patterns. Linear growth occurs when an identical quantity 
is added during a specified period (p. 876). In statistics, the most common are S-­shaped 
patterns of growth consisting of peak and decline (p. 883). As Smil noted, “growth is al-
ways a function of time,” where the change of “physical or immaterial phenomena” can 
be mea­sured against the change of other variables. Vaclav Smil, Growth: From Microor-
ganisms to Megacities (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2019), Kindle location 820.
4. For the technicalities of dif­fer­ent forms of scientific forecasting see Tuomo Kuosa, 
The Evolution of Strategic Foresight: Navigating Public Policy Making (London: Routledge, 
2016).
5. Elena Aronova, Scientific History: Experiments in History and Politics from the Bol-
shevik Revolution to the End of the Cold War (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 
2021), 35.
6. Corinne Bara, “Forecasting Civil War and Po­liti­cal Vio­lence,” in The Politics and 
Science of Prevision: Governing and Probing the ­Future, eds. Andreas Wenger, Ursula Jas-
per, and Myriam Dunn Cavelty (London: Routledge, 2020), 183.
7. Note that the KGB used the term glasnost’ to describe what they presented as their 
new normative orientation, seeking to distance themselves from the Stalinist repressions 
and rehabilitate their public status in the late 1950s. Julie Elkner, “The Changing Face of 
Repression ­under Khrushchev,” in Soviet State and Society ­Under Nikita Khrushchev, eds. 
Melanie Ilic and Jeremy Smith (London: Routledge, 2009), 149.
8. Vladislav Zubok, Zhivago’s ­Children: The Last Rus­sian Intelligent­sia (Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press, 2011), 271–272.
9. Zubok, Zhivago’s ­Children, 273.
10. Theodore Porter, Trust in Numbers: The Pursuit of Objectivity in Science and Pub-
lic Life (Prince­ton, NJ: Prince­ton University Press, 1996).

	
NOTES TO PAGES 40–44	
205
11. I draw on Stefanos Geroulanos’s discussion of the utopian expectation of “trans-
parency” in the French context: “To make the world transparent had meant knowing it 
without illusion and without intermediary. To make the social and po­liti­cal realms trans-
parent had meant cleansing them of injustice, corruption, superstition, and oppression 
from authority and capital. To make the vis­i­ble transparent had meant purging it of false 
images and reaching to its supposed essence.” ­These expectations, however, ­were never 
fulfilled: the attempts to introduce greater transparency resulted in the reor­ga­ni­za­tion 
of opacity. Stefanos Geroulanos, Transparency in Postwar France: A Critical History of 
the Pre­sent (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 2017), 8.
12. Francis Dodsworth, The Security Society: History, Patriarchy, Protection (Cham: 
Palgrave Macmillan, 2019).
13. Mary Poovey, Making a Social Body: British Cultural Formation, 1830–­1864 (Chi-
cago: University of Chicago Press, 1995).
14. Smil, Growth. See a useful discussion of the epistemology of curves by John Nor-
ton, The Material Theory of Induction (Calgary: University of Calgary Press, 2021). Both 
Smil and Norton emphasize that the choice of fitting a par­tic­u­lar curve to data is ulti-
mately pragmatic.
15. Smil, Growth.
16. Matthias Schmelzer, The Hegemony of Growth: The OECD and the Making of the 
Economic Growth Paradigm (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2016), 75–78.
17. According to Seneta, O. S. Pavlovsky’s work On Probability (1821) was possibly 
directly inspired by Laplace (1812), as Pavlovsky was trained in Paris. Eugene Seneta, 
“Early Influences on Probability and Statistics in the Rus­sian Empire,” Archive for His-
tory of Exact Sciences 53 (1998): 201–213.
18. Alexander Vucinich, Science in Rus­sian Culture, 1861–­1917 (Stanford, CA: Stan-
ford University Press, 1970), 167; Nikolai Krementsov, With or Without Galton: Vasilii 
Florinskii and the Fate of Eugenics in Rus­sia (Cambridge, UK: Open Book Publishers, 
2018), 5206. In the UK, the first study of mortality was done by John Graunt in 1662. A 
­century ­later, the methods for demographic studies, driven by public health and taxa-
tion concerns, ­were launched by the Paris school of medicine.
19. Seneta, “Early Influences on Probability,” 203.
20. Larissa Titarenko and Elena Zdravomyslova, Sociology in Rus­sia: A Brief History 
(Cham: Palgrave, 2017).
21. Yuri Slezkine, The House of Government: A Saga of the Rus­sian Revolution (Prince­
ton, NJ: Prince­ton University Press, 2017), 18, 103–104.
22. Joseph Bradley, “Patterns of Peasant Migration to Late Nineteenth ­Century Mos-
cow: How Much Should We Read into Literacy Rates?” Rus­sian History 6, no. 1 (1979): 25.
23. For an excellent study of the tax regimes and politics of visibility in imperial and 
Soviet Rus­sia, see Yanni Kotsonis, States of Obligation: Taxes and Citizenship in the Rus­
sian Empire and Early Soviet Republic (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2014).
24. Eugene Seneta, “A Sketch of the History of Survey Sampling in Rus­sia,” Journal 
of the Royal Statistical Society 148, no. 2 (1985): 118–125; see also Alain Blum and Mar-
tine Mespoulet, L’anarchie bureaucratic: statistique et pouvoir sous Staline (Paris: La Dé-
couverte, 2003).
25. Krementsov, With or Without Galton, Kindle location 5206. For the importance of 
military medicine see Suman Seth, Difference and Disease: Medicine, Race, and Locality in 
the Eighteenth-­Century British Empire (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2018). 
More than a ­century ­later, a famous study led by Tiana Zaslavskaya, a Novosibirsk sociolo-
gist, would use the clustering method to reveal the pervasive social underdevelopment of 
Soviet village population. This study would spearhead the revival of quantitative sociology 
and, eventually, the economic reform movement in the 1980s. See Olesia Kirtchik, “From 

206	
NOTES TO PAGES 44–46
Pattern Recognition to Economic Disequilibrium: Emmanuil Braverman’s Theory of Con-
trol of the Soviet Economy,” History of Po­liti­cal Economy 51, no. S1 (2019): 190.
26. Vytautas Petronis, “Mapping Lithuanians: The Development of Rus­sian Imperial 
Ethnic Cartography, 1840s–1860s,” Imago Mundi 63, no. 1 (2011): 62–75; Juliette Cadiot, 
“Searching for Nationality: Statistics and National Categories at the End of the Rus­sian 
Empire (1897–1917),” Rus­sian Review 64, no. 3 (2005): 440–455.
27. Simon Naylor and Simon Schaffer, “Nineteenth-­Century Survey Sciences: Enter-
prises, Expeditions and Exhibitions,” Notes and Rec­ords 73, no. 2 (2019): 135–147; Dmi-
try V. Arzyutov, Reassembling the Environmental Archives of the Cold War: Perspectives 
from the Rus­sian North (Stockholm: KTH Royal Institute of Technology, 2021).
28. Joseph Bradley, Voluntary Associations in Tsarist Rus­sia: Science, Patriotism, and 
Civil Society (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2009).
29. Krementsov, With or Without Galton.
30. Alexander Vucinich, Social Thought in Tsarist Rus­sia: The Quest for a General Sci-
ence of Society, 1861–1917 (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1976).
31. Darwin’s On the Origin of Species reached Rus­sia in a German translation in 1860; 
a Rus­sian version appeared in 1864. Krementsov, With or Without Galton. The theory of 
ethnogenesis was established in the 1930s, influenced by Marr’s paleontology of language 
and Vladimir Vernadskii’s ideas on the cumulative eco-­evolution of culture and bio-
sphere. Mark Bassin, The Gumilev Mystique: Biopolitics, Eurasianism, and the Con-
struction of Community in Modern Rus­sia (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2016); 
Arzyutov, Reassembling the Environmental Archives.
32. Nikolai Shelgunov, “Ubytochnost neznaniia,” Russkoe slovo 4, no. 1 (1863): 5, cited 
in Krementsov, With or Without Galton, Kindle location 2371.
33. Robert Collis, “Stars Rule Over ­People.”
34. See Pietruska’s study of the rise of statistical forecasting in the United States in 
the 1860s and 1870s. Jamie Pietruska, Looking Forward: Prediction in Amer­i­ca (Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 2017).
35. Pietruska, Looking Forward.
36. David Moon, “Estimating the Peasant Population of Late Imperial Rus­sia from 
the 1897 Census: A Research Note,” Europe-­Asia Studies 48, no. 1 (1996): 141–153.
37. For a discussion of the concept of the culture of prediction, see Pietruska, Look-
ing Forward, and Matthias Heymann, Gabriele Gramelsberger, and Martin Mahony, eds., 
Cultures of Prediction in Atmospheric and Climate Science: Epistemic and Cultural Shifts 
in Computer-­based Modelling and Simulation (London: Routledge, 2017).
38. Slezkine, The House of Government, 72–73.
39. Slezkine, The House of Government, 36–37.
40. Richard Stites, The Revolutionary Dreams: Utopian Vision and Experimental Life 
in the Rus­sian Revolution (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1989), 108. Stites, however, 
does not expand on ­these “godless” scientific predictions and their reception.
41. Mark Harrison, “Chayanov and the Economics of the Rus­sian Peasantry,” Jour-
nal of Peasant Studies 2, no. 4 (1975): 389–417. See also work by Teodor Shanin, ed., Peas-
ants and Peasant Socie­ties (Oxford: Blackwell, 1987).
42. Jens Beckert, ­Imagined ­Futures: Fictional Expectations and Cap­i­tal­ist Dynamics 
(Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2016), 24.
43. It is impor­tant to note that dif­fer­ent explorations of the social body ­were informed 
by dif­fer­ent scientific epistemologies. In the eigh­teenth and nineteenth centuries, which 
represent the exploratory stage of the documentation and classification of social malaises, 
as shown by Poovey, social reformers relied on the visual nomenclature of anatomy. The 
notions of light, vision, hygiene, and self-­regulation informed the assessment and transfor-
mation of urban spaces, as shown in many works of Foucaultian historians and sociolo-

	
NOTES TO PAGES 46–48	
207
gists, such as, for instance, Chris Otter and Tony Bennett. As Poovey noted, the anatomic 
perspective on the social resulted in static pictures that ­were compatible with the early 
positivist epistemology. However, at the same time, ­there ­were other forms of understand-
ing emerging, which drew on biology and physiology to conceptualize the social body and 
looked for rhythms, cycles, and cumulative development of changes. Krementsov, With or 
Without Galton, Kindle location 2854; Alexander Vucinich, Darwin in Rus­sian Thought 
(Berkeley: University of California Press, 1989); Tony Bennett, Fiona Cameron, Nélia Dias, 
Ben Dibley, Rodney Harrison, Ira Jacknis, and Conal McCarthy, Collecting, Ordering, Gov-
erning: Anthropology, Museums, and Liberal Government (Durham, NC: Duke University 
Press, 2017).
44. Tony Bennett, Pasts Beyond Memory: Evolution, Museums, Colonialism (London: 
Routledge, 1994).
45. Slezkine, The House of Government, 105.
46. Alexander Gofman, “The Rus­sian ­Career of Durkheim’s Sociology of Religion and 
‘Les Formes Élémentaires’: Contribution to a Study,” Durkheimian Studies / Études Dur-
kheimiennes 19 (2013): 101–124
47. Tomila V. Lankina, The Estate Origins of Democracy in Rus­sia: From Imperial Bour-
geoisie to Post-­Communist ­Middle Class (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2021).
48. Martine Mespoulet, Construire le socialisme par les chiffres: enquetes et recense-
ments en URSS de 1917 a 1991 (Paris: Institute National d’Etudes Demographiques, 2008).
49. Blum and Mespoulet, L’anarchie bureaucratique.
50. V. M. Bautin, “Nikolai Dmitrievich Kondrat’ev i ego rol’ v stanovlenii agroeko-
nomicheskoi nauki i obrazovaniia v Rossii,” Izvestiia TSKhA 2 (2017): 134–153. See also 
Vincent Barnett, Kondratiev and the Dynamics of Economic Development: Long Cycles 
and Industrial Growth in Historical Context (Basingstoke, UK: Macmillan, 1998).
51. Eli Cook, The Pricing of Pro­gress: Economic Indicators and the Capitalization of 
American Life (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2017), 255–261; Pietruska, 
Looking Forward.
52. Beckert, ­Imagined ­Futures, 309. The Rus­sian émigré and economic modeler Wasily 
Leontieff started his ­career at the Kiel Institute for World Economy, where business cycles 
­were modeled in the 1920s. At Kiel, according to Bockman, economists ­were interested in 
discerning par­tic­u­lar development paths, which could be evolutionary (understood as 
linear at that time) or cyclic. Their research agenda was ­later expanded to include the idea 
of a world economy, global structure, and development. Johanna Bockman, “The Strug­gle 
Over Structural Adjustment: Socialist Revolution Versus Cap­i­tal­ist Counterrevolution in 
Yugo­slavia and the World,” History of Po­liti­cal Economy 51, no. S1 (2019): 256.
53. This model of growth that split the economy into two sectors of goods of uneven 
priority was proposed by Grigorii Feldman in 1928 and ­adopted widely in state socialist 
planning of public policy, for instance, influencing the hierarchy of priorities in cultural 
policy. See Eglė Rindzevičiūtė, Constructing Soviet Cultural Policy: Cybernetics and Gover-
nance in Lithuania ­after World War II (Linköping, Sweden: Linköping University, 2008). 
On how Rus­sian economic work on growth interacted with Western economic thought, 
see Schmelzer, The Hegemony of Growth, 78–80. See also Michael Ellman, Socialist Plan-
ning (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2008); Adam Leeds, “Administrative Mon-
sters: Yurii Yaremenko’s Critique of the Late Soviet State,” History of Po­liti­cal Economy 51 
(2019): 139.
54. Titarenko and Zdravomyslova, Sociology in Rus­sia, Kindle location 829.
55. See the extensive work by Natalia Makasheva who situated Kondrat’ev’s empiricist 
and data driven approach in the wider economic debates on equilibrium. Natalia Maka-
sheva, “Zagadka N.D. Kondrat’eva: neokonchennaia teoriia dinamiki i metodologicheskie 
problemy ekonomicheskoi nauki,” Voprosy ekonomiki (2002): 4–16. ­There is a growing 

208	
NOTES TO PAGES 48–49
body of work in economic history exploring Kondrat’ev’s intellectual legacy, although a 
full history of the East–­West transfer of his ideas remains to be written. Kondrat’ev’s early 
work on long waves was translated into German in 1926 and En­glish in 1935. Although the 
four volumes of translation of Kondrat’ev’s work into En­glish ­were published only in 1998, 
Kondrat’ev’s long wave cycle theory was very widely discussed in the 1980s. See Mary S. 
Morgan, “Narrative Inference with and without Statistics: Making Sense of Economic Cy-
cles with Malthus and Kondratiev,” History of Po­liti­cal Economy 53S (2021): 113–138.
56. Walt Friedman, Fortune Tellers: The Story of Amer­i­ca’s First Forecasters (Prince­
ton, NJ: Prince­ton University Press, 2014); Pietruska, Looking Forward. See also Laetitia 
Lenel, “Searching for a Tide ­Table Business: Interwar Conceptions of Statistical Infer-
ence in Forecasting,” History of Po­liti­cal Economy 53S (2021): 139–174.
57. Among other Rus­sian scholars who worked on business cycles was Viktor Novozhi-
lov, who ­later supported the ­future Nobel prize winner, Leonid Kantorovich, an operations 
researcher and key figure in the Soviet optimal planning ­after the Second World War.
58. Vucinich, Science in Rus­sian Culture, 466–469; Dmitrij Gutnov, “L’École russe des 
hautes études sociales de Paris (1901–1906),” Cahiers du monde Russe 43, nos. 2–3 (2002): 
375–410.
59. Titarenko and Zdravomyslova, Sociology in Rus­sia.
60. Kondrat’ev read Grimanelli’s lecture on the uses of Comte’s theory of prediction in 
social research. Grimanelli’s argument went as follows: in order to be scientific, sociology 
must be able to predict social facts. However, ­because sociology is a young science, its pre-
dictive capacity is low. It does not help that social phenomena are complex and interrelated. 
Grimanelli argued that it would be impossible to calculate the evolution of the economy 
without factoring in social conflict, population movements, and po­liti­cal events. In con-
trast, astronomical prevision is more accurate ­because it is easier to abstract the qualities of 
astronomical phenomena, whereas the observed phenomena, albeit interacting with each 
other, are fairly in­de­pen­dent. Given the lack of social facts, argued Grimanelli, so­cio­log­i­cal 
prediction should aim to establish the general and average direction of evolution and avoid 
seeking to predict individual events. This, according to Grimanelli, was much more impor­
tant for “social arts and po­liti­cal practice”. Pericles Grimanelli, “La prévision en sociolo-
gie,” Revue internationale de sociologie 12 (1911): 861–879, 875.
61. N. D. Kondrat’ev, Bol’shie tsikly, kon”iunktury i teoriia predvideniia (Moscow: Aka-
demicheskii proekt, 2015), 473. He sets out the scope for prediction with the examples of 
astronomy (Halley’s Comet) and mathe­matics (Laplace’s demon), which is a classic ap-
proach to the historiography of modern science used also by Norbert Wiener in 1948: see 
the next chapter.
62. Kondrat’ev, Bol’shie tsikly, 474, 476–477. Kondrat’ev argued that prediction of the 
“facts which are not known yet” is part of a constructionist science, one that reconstructs 
the unknown, reserving the notion of foresight (predvidenie) as a prediction of what has 
not happened yet. He added though that the discovery of the facts that are simply not 
known and are situated in the past can be regarded as a “retrospective prognosis.” Heather 
Douglas would have called this conceptual operation “accommodation.” Kondrat’ev, 
Bol’shie tsikly, 477.
63. Kondrat’ev, Bol’shie tsikly, 477.
64. Emile Durkheim, The Rules of So­cio­log­i­cal Method, trans. W. D. Halls (1895; New 
York: ­Free Press, 1982), 139.
65. Durkheim, The Rules of So­cio­log­i­cal Method, 140.
66. Other scholars, such as, for instance the Dutchman Jan Tinbergen, worked on eco-
nomic barometers for business cycles and ­were greatly both­ered by the difficulty of making 
logical inferences from incomplete economic statistics. They resorted to narrative as an aid 
to make sense of the transitions between events. See Morgan, “Narrative Inference.”

	
NOTES TO PAGES 49–52	
209
67. As Mirowski summarized helpfully, “In the Laplacian Dream, science aspired to 
discover the single mathematical formula that described the entire world. . . . ​The only real 
difficulty with the use of such a formula would be the required collection of the staggering 
number of facts that characterize the system at a given point in time. It is of profound im-
portance to note that the world, the subject of prediction, is assumed to be fully captured 
by the equation at any point of time, and therefore must be indifferent to the passage of 
historical time.” Philip Mirowski, More Heat Than Light. Economics as Social Physics: Phys-
ics as Nature’s Economics (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999), 28.
68. See Stefanos Geroulanos and Todd Meyers, The ­Human Body in the Age of Catas-
trophe: Brittleness, Integration, Science and the ­Great War (Chicago: University of Chi-
cago Press, 2018); Eugene Raikhel, Governing Habits: Treating Alcoholism in Post-­Soviet 
Clinic (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2016).
69. Kondrat’ev, Bol’shie tsikly, 477. According to the traditional view, Comte did not 
approve of hypothesizing (a theoretical induction) as a proper scientific method, although 
some historians of science offer an alternative interpretation suggesting that Comte’s 
writing contained ele­ments of predictive hypothesis, for instance, expressed in his idea 
of “logical artifice,” which Comte considered dif­fer­ent from a physical discovery of a fact. 
See Larry Laudan, “­Towards a Reassessment of Comte’s ‘Méthod Positive,’ ” Philosophy 
of Science 38, no. 1 (1971): 50–51.
70. Kondrat’ev, Bol’shie tsikly, 481–482, 490–493, 496–497.
71. Kondrat’ev, Bol’shie tsikly, 497.
72. Kondrat’ev, Bol’shie tsikly, 504.
73. Pitirim Sorokin, “A Survey of the Cyclical Conceptions of Social and Historical 
Pro­cess,” Social Forces 6, no. 1 (1927): 28–40.
74. Kondrat’ev, Bol’shie tsikly.
75. As I show in chapter 6, Nikita Moiseev powerfully reintroduced the awareness of 
uncertainties in prediction methods to criticize not only the existing practice of Soviet 
planning and governance, but also the emergent framework of global government in the 
1970s -1990s. The intellectual trajectory of Rus­sian predictive thought tracks the develop-
ment of the Western debate about the limits of statistical scientific prediction. As Slobo-
dian shows, in the 1930s Hayek argued that it was common to misunderstand mea­sure­ment 
as prediction. For instance, a barometer can be considered as a predictor of the weather, 
although it just mea­sures the pressure. This critique was developed by Hayek, Oskar Mor-
genstern, and Alfred Cowles in the 1930s and expanded by Karl Popper ­after the Second 
World War. See Beckert, ­Imagined ­Futures, 227–228; Quinn Slobodian, The Globalists: The 
End of Empire and the Birth of Neoliberalism (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 
2018), Kindle location 1196. See also Alfred Cowles, “Can Stock Markets Forecast?” Econo-
metrica 1, no. 3 (1933): 309–324.
76. Joan Valsiner, “From Energy to Collectivity: A Commentary on the Development 
of Bekhterev’s Theoretical Views,” in Collective Reflexology by V. M. Bekhterev, ed. 
Lloyd H. Strickland (Abingdon, UK: Routledge, 2017), 1–12.
77. Alexander Luria, The Nature of ­Human Conflicts, of Emotion, Conflict, and 
­Will (New York: Liveright Publishers, 1932); cf. Geroulanos and Meyers, The ­Human 
Body, 23.
78. For Luria, see Geroulanos and Meyers, The ­Human Body, 196.
79. Otter, The Victorian Eye, 14.
80. Stephen Collier, Post-­Soviet Social: Neoliberalism, Social Modernity, Biopolitics 
(Prince­ton, NJ: Prince­ton University Press, 2011).
81. This was suggested by Boris Kuznetsov, who chaired the research unit for energy 
and electrification at GOELRO and ­later pioneered the Soviet history of science. Kuznetsov 
was a member and ­later the head of the Institute of History of Natu­ral Sciences and 

210	
NOTES TO PAGES 52–56
Technology, established in 1932 and first headed by Nikolai Bukharin. The institute was 
shut down in 1938, when Bukharin was executed. However, the institute was revived in 1944 
and became a key platform for the development of Soviet theories of scientific and technical 
revolution. On Kuznetsov, see Boris Doktorov, Sovremennaia Rossiiskaia sotsiologiia: Tom 
9, Istoriko-­biograficheskoe i avtobiograficheskoe (Moscow: TsSPim, 2016), 30–32; on the in-
tellectual origins of the scientific-­technical revolution theory and its deployment to ­counter 
Talcott Parson’s and ­Will Rostow’s modernization theory in the Cold War competition, see 
Eglė Rindzevičiūtė, The Power of Systems: How Policy Sciences Opened Up the Cold War 
World (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2016), chap. 2. On the notion of “scientific his-
tory” as a source for developmental models of growth, see Aronova, Scientific History.
82. V. S. Klebaner, “V.A. Bazarov: Myslitel’, uchenyi, grazhdanin,” Problemy prog-
nozirovaniia 6 (2004): 150–156, 153–154.
83. Nikolai D. Kondrat’ev, “Plan i predvidenie,” in Nikolai D. Kondrat’ev, Bol’shie tsikly 
kon’iunktury i teoriia predvideniia. Izbrannye Trudy (Moscow: Akademicheskii proekt, 
2015), 542, 554, 555.
84. Kondrat’ev, “Plan i predvidenie,” 519.
85. Kondrat’ev, “Plan i predvidenie,” 519.
86. Kondrat’ev, “Plan i predvidenie,” 529.
87. Kondrat’ev, “Plan i predvidenie,” 536. He focused on two examples of such un-
necessarily detailed, flawed, and failed plans: the Siberian agricultural plan to introduce 
a soil management system known as “travopol’e” (1926) and Strumilin’s “Perspective ori-
entation of Gosplan” (1926). Kondrat’ev, “Plan i predvidenie,” 536–538.
88. Kondrat’ev, “Plan i predvidenie,” 542–543.
89. Kondrat’ev, “Plan i predvidenie,” 556.
90. I thank Ivan Boldyrev for pointing out the importance of this confrontation. For 
more on Strumilin’s approach to teleological planning, see Collier, Post-­Soviet Social.
91. Nikolai Krementsov, A Martian Stranded on Earth: Alexander Bogdanov, Blood 
Transfusion and the Proletarian Science (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2011). Note 
that Bogdanov’s writings contained ­little engagement with the theoretical sophistication 
presented in the work of neurophysiologists or even Kondrat’ev. Bogdanov’s take on order 
and the system ­were closer in its spirit to Comtean positivism and Laplacean mechanics.
92. For an excellent revisionist criticism of the historiography of Western manage-
ment as excessively focused on efficiency see Stephen Cummings, Todd Bridgman, John 
Hassard, and Michael Rowlinson, A New History of Management (Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press, 2017).
93. I thank Oleg Genisaretskii for drawing my attention to Murav’ev.
94. Valerian Murav’ev, Ovladenie vremenem kak osnovnaia zadacha truda (Moscow: 
Mospoligraf, 1924).
95. Platon Kerzhentsev, “Bor’ba za vremia (1923),” in Printsipy organizatsii (Moscow: 
Ekonomika, 1968), 376.
96. Kerzhentsev, “Bor’ba za vremia (1923),” 338.
97. Elsewhere in Eu­rope, scientific management was criticized, most influentially in 
the French school of Eu­ro­pean Science of Work. In the Soviet Union, a more nuanced, 
feedback-­based approach to management was developed in response to the cybernetic 
breakthrough in the 1960s. Christopher O’Neill, “Taylorism, the Eu­ro­pean Science of 
Work, and the Quantified Self at Work,” Science, Technology and ­Human Values 42, no. 4 
(2017): 600–621.
98. Slava Gerovitch, From Newspeak to Cyberspeak: A History of Soviet Cybernetics 
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2002), 44–45.
99. Theories that brought together individual physical bodies, social groups, and the 
natu­ral environment as interrelated systems ­were articulated in the works on biosphere 

	
NOTES TO PAGES 56–59	
211
by Vladimir Vernadsky (1863–1945) and general organ­ization by Aleksander Bogdanov 
(Malinovsky) (1873–1928).
100. Schmelzer, The Hegemony of Growth, 75, 86.
101. Smil, Growth, Kindle location 8181.
102. Judy L. Klein, Statistical Visions in Time: A History of Time Series Analy­sis, 1662–
1938 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2008), 278.
103. Peter Rutland, The Myth of the Plan: Lessons of Soviet Planning Experience (London: 
Open Court, 1985). Gregory suggested that the Soviet economy was in fact guided by short 
term operational plans, five-­year plans being only “propaganda instruments” for focusing 
“the population on the bright ­future.” Gregory does not, however, discuss the role of longer 
term, fifteen-­ to twenty-­year plans. Paul R. Gregory, The Po­liti­cal Economy of Stalinism: Evi-
dence from the Soviet Secret Archives (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004), 
118–120, 124. For a brief discussion of forecasting see Pekka Sutela, Economic Thought and 
Economic Reform in the Soviet Union (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1991).
104. Loren Graham, The Ghost of the Executed Engineer: Technology and the Fall of 
the Soviet Union (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1996).
105. Daniel A. Wren, “Scientific Management in the U.S.S.R., with Par­tic­u­lar Refer-
ence to the Contribution of Walter N. Polakov,” Acad­emy of Management Review 5, no. 1 
(1980): 1–11.
106. At IIASA, Kondrat’ev’s ideas informed the work on innovation cycles; Dennis 
Meadows developed a STRATAGEM decision training tool on the basis of Kondrat’ev’s 
cycle theory. Several IIASA papers drew on pre­sen­ta­tions of Kondrat’ev’s ideas found in 
secondary sources, such as work by Joseph Schumpeter, computer modeler Jay Forrester, 
and the US–­German economist of innovation Gerhard Mensch. See Rindzevičiūtė, The 
Power of Systems; Makasheva, “Zagadka N.D. Kondrat’eva.”
3. CYBERNETIC PREDICTION AND THE LATE MODERN GOVERNANCE
1. Elena Aronova, Scientific History: Experiments in History and Politics from the Bol-
shevik Revolution to the End of the Cold War (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 
2021), 19.
2. Danielle Judith Zola Carr, “ ‘Ghastly Marionettes’ and the Po­liti­cal Metaphysics of 
Cognitive Liberalism: Anti-­behaviourism, Language, and the Origins of Totalitarian-
ism,” History of the ­Human Sciences 33, no. 1 (2020): 147–174; M. Susan Lindee, Ratio-
nal Fog (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2020).
3. Norbert Wiener, The ­Human Use of ­Human Beings: Cybernetics and Society (Bos-
ton: Da Capo, 1954), 15.
4. For an example of the use of Wiener’s concept of prediction in the context of AI 
see Stuart Russell, ­Human Compatible: Artificial Intelligence and the Prob­lem of Control 
(London: Viking, 2019).
5. Karl W. Deutsch, The Nerves of Government: Models of Po­liti­cal Communication 
and Control (New York: ­Free Press, 1963); Stafford Beer, Decision and Control: The Mean-
ing of Operational Research and Management Cybernetics (London: Wiley, 1966); Nik-
las Luhmann, Social Systems (1984; Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1995).
6. Stefanos Geroulanos, Transparency in Postwar France: A Critical History of the Pre­
sent (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 2017), 318. For the influence of Wiener’s 
concepts in French theory, particularly Gilbert Simondon, Jean-­François Lyotard, De-
leuze, and Guattari, see Céline Lafontaine, L’empire cybernétique: Des machines à penser 
à la pensée machine (Paris: Le Seuil, 2004); Bernard Dionysius Geoghegan, “From In-
formation Theory to French Theory: Jakobson, Lévi-­Strauss, and the Cybernetic Appa-
ratus,” Critical Inquiry 38, no. 1 (2011): 96–111.

212	
NOTES TO PAGES 59–63
7. Martin Heidegger, “Nur noch ein Gott kann uns retten,” Der Spiegel 23 (31 
May 1976): 193–219; cf. Brian Simbirski, “Cybernetic Muse: Hannah Arendt on Auto-
mation, 1951–1958,” Journal of the History of Ideas 77, no. 4 (October 2016): 589–613, 
595, 597. See also Geroulanos, Transparency in Postwar France, 327.
8. Simbirski, “Cybernetic Muse,” 597.
9. Debora Hammond, The Science of Synthesis: Exploring the Social Implications of 
General Systems Theory (Boulder: University Press of Colorado, 2003), 64.
10. John Johnston, The Allure of Machinic Life: Cybernetics, Artificial Life, and the New 
AI (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2008), 25.
11. See Slava Gerovitch, From Newspeak to Cyberspeak: A History of Soviet Cybernet-
ics (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2002); Eden Medina, Cybernetic Revolutionaries: Tech-
nology and Politics in Allende’s Chile (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2011); Benjamin Peters, 
How Not to Network a Nation: The Uneasy History of the Soviet Internet (Cambridge, MA: 
MIT Press, 2016), Thomas Rid, Rise of the Machines: The Lost History of Cybernetics (Lon-
don: Scribe, 2016); Alcibiades Malapi-­Nelson, The Nature of the Machine and the Col-
lapse of Cybernetics: A Transhumanist Lesson for Emerging Technologies (Basingstoke, 
UK: Palgrave Macmillan, 2017). The scholarship exploring the complexity of Soviet cy-
bernetics has been growing and is covering increasingly wide ground. The key impetus 
for ­these studies was Slava Gerovitch’s study of Soviet cybernetics as a component of so-
cial and po­liti­cal reform, followed by Benjamin Peter’s history of cybernetics and the 
Soviet internet, my own work on cybernetics and systems analy­sis in cultural policy and 
global governance, Aro Velmet’s ongoing work on the legacy of Soviet cybernetics in the 
Estonian e-­state, the work on cybernetics and economic thought by Ivan Boldyrev, Ya-
kov Feygin, Adam Leeds, and Olessia Kirtchik, as well as the growing body of interdis-
ciplinary scholarship on Soviet urban planning, architecture, design, and art with key 
works by David Crowley, Andres Kurg, Diana Kurkovsky-­West, and Yanina Prudenko.
12. Eglė Rindzevičiūtė, The Power of Systems: How Policy Sciences Opened Up the Cold 
War World (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2016).
13. Leone Montagnini, Harmonies of Disorder: Norbert Wiener, a Mathematician-­
Philosopher of Our Time (Berlin: Springer, 2017); Rid, Rise of the Machines; Ronald 
Kline, The Cybernetics Moment: Or Why We Call Our Age the Information Age (Balti-
more: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2015), 19–21; Flo Conway and Jim Siegelman, 
Dark Hero of the Information Age: In Search of Norbert Wiener, the ­Father of Cybernetics 
(New York: Basic Books, 2009); Lars Ingelstam, System: Att tänka över samhälle och 
teknik (Eskilstuna, Sweden: Energimyndighetens förlag, 2012); Pesi Masani, Norbert Wie-
ner, 1894–1964 (Basel, Switzerland: Birkauser, 1990); Steve J. Heims, John Von Neumann 
and Norbert Wiener: From Mathe­matics to the Technologies of Life and Death (Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press, 1980).
14. Wiener, The ­Human Use of ­Human Beings, 12.
15. Wiener, The ­Human Use of ­Human Beings, 153.
16. For a helpful discussion of how prediction operates in statistical theory, see A. S. C. 
Ehrenberg and J. A. Bound, “Predictability and Prediction,” Journal of the Royal Statis-
tical Society, Series A 156, no. 2 (1993): 167–206.
17. Wiener, The ­Human Use of ­Human Beings, 24.
18. Wiener, The ­Human Use of ­Human Beings, 61.
19. Wiener, The ­Human Use of ­Human Beings, 61–62.
20. Norbert Wiener, Cybernetics: Or Control and Communication in the Animal and 
the Machine (1948; Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1965), 8–9.
21. Arturo Rosenblueth, Norbert Wiener, and Julian Bigelow, “Be­hav­ior, Purpose and 
Teleology,” Philosophy of Science 10, no. 1 (1943): 18–24, 18.
22. Rosenblueth et al., “Be­hav­ior, Purpose and Teleology,” 20–21.

	
NOTES TO PAGES 63–69	
213
23. Johnston, The Allure of Machinic Life, 29.
24. Rosenblueth et al., “Be­hav­ior, Purpose and Teleology,” 24.
25. Wiener, The ­Human Use of ­Human Beings, 180–181.
26. Wiener, The ­Human Use of ­Human Beings, 180–181.
27. Wiener, Cybernetics, 9.
28. Rosenblueth et al., “Be­hav­ior, Purpose and Teleology.”
29. See, for instance, Aksel I. Berg, Cybernetics in the Ser­vice of Communism (Wash-
ington DC: U.S. Army Foreign Science and Technology Center, 1969).
30. Norbert Wiener, God and Golem, Inc.: A Comment on Certain Points Where Cy-
bernetics Impinges on Religion (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1964), 92.
31. Eric Wolf, The ­People Without History (Berkeley: University of California Press, 
1982).
32. Wiener, God and Golem, Inc., 91.
33. Wiener, Cybernetics, 25; Wiener, God and Golem, Inc., 94.
34. Matthias Heymann, Gabriele Gramelsberger, and Martin Mahony, eds., Cultures 
of Prediction in Atmospheric and Climate Science: Epistemic and Cultural Shifts in 
Computer-­based Modelling and Simulation (London: Routledge, 2017); Jennifer Gabrys, 
Program Earth: Environmental Sensing Technology and the Making of a Computational 
Planet (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2016); Paul Edwards, The Closed 
World: Computers and the Politics of Discourse in Cold War Amer­i­ca (Cambridge, MA: 
MIT Press, 1996).
35. Wiener, Cybernetics, 32.
36. Wiener, Cybernetics, 33.
37. Wiener, Cybernetics, 33.
38. Wiener, Cybernetics, 33.
39. Seb Franklin, Control: Digitality as Cultural Logic (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 
2015).
40. Wiener, Cybernetics, 132.
41. Katherine Hayles, How We Became Posthuman: Virtual Bodies in Cybernetics, Lit­
er­a­ture, and Informatics (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1999), 54–57.
42. Nick Bostrom, Superintelligence: Paths, Dangers, Strategies (Oxford: Oxford Uni-
versity Press, 2014), 14.
43. Kline, The Cybernetics Moment, chap. 4. See also Mara Mills, “On Disability and 
Cybernetics: Helen Keller, Norbert Wiener, and the Hearing Glove,” Differences 22, nos. 
2–3 (2011): 74–111.
44. Wiener, Cybernetics, 33–34.
45. Wiener, Cybernetics, 35.
46. Wiener, The ­Human Use of ­Human Beings, 183.
47. Henning Schmidgen, “Cybernetic Times: Norbert Wiener, John Stroud, and the 
‘Brain Clock’ Hypothesis,” History of ­Human Sciences 33, no. 1 (2020): 81.
48. Craik (1947), 59, quoted in Schmidgen, “Cybernetic Times,” 88.
49. Michael Power, Or­ga­nized Uncertainty: Designing a World of Risk Management 
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2007).
50. Peter Galison, “The Ontology of the ­Enemy: Norbert Wiener and the Cybernetic 
Vision,” Critical Inquiry 21, no. 1 (1994): 228–266; Paul Edwards, A Vast Machine: Com-
puter Models, Climate Data and the Politics of Global Warming (Cambridge, MA: MIT 
Press, 2010); Hunter Heyck, Age of System: Understanding the Development of Modern 
Social Science (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2015).
51. In the early 1950s Wiener cut off his relations with McCulloch, Wiesner, and Pitts, 
whom he regarded as being too closely involved in the military-­industrial complex 
(Kline, The Cybernetics Moment, 65, 85–87). For the argument that system-­cybernetic 

214	
NOTES TO PAGES 70–73
epistemology enabled liberal forms of social order, see also Fred Turner, From Counter-
culture to Cyberculture: Stewart Brand, the Whole Earth Network, and the Rise of Digital 
Utopianism (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2006); Andrew Pickering, The Cyber-
netic Brain: Sketches of Another ­Future (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2008); 
Kline, The Cybernetics Moment; Rindzevičiūtė, The Power of Systems; Clifford Siskin, 
System: The Shaping of Modern Knowledge (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2016).
52. The classical work ­here is Otto Mayr, Authority, Liberty and Automatic Machin-
ery in Early Modern Eu­rope (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1986).
53. Peter Galison, Einstein’s Clocks, Poincare’s Maps (London: Sceptre, 2003), chap. 5.
54. Paul Erickson, Judy L. Klein, Lorraine Daston, Rebecca Lemov, Thomas Sturm, 
and Michael D. Gordin, How Reason Almost Lost Its Mind: The Strange ­Career of Cold 
War Rationality (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2013).
55. Ariel Colonomos, Selling the ­Future: The Perils of Predicting Global Politics (Lon-
don: Hurst, 2016).
56. Franklin, Control, 47–48, 54.
57. Louise Amoore, The Politics of Possibility: Risk and Security Beyond Probability 
(Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2013), 11.
58. C. P. Snow, The Two Cultures and the Scientific Revolution (New York: Cambridge 
University Press, 1961).
59. Wiener, God and Golem, Inc., 68.
60. For examples of deterministic uses of predictive technology in security and risk 
assessment see Amoore, The Politics of Possibility, chap. 2.
61. Naomi Oreskes, “The Fact of Uncertainty, the Uncertainty of Facts and the Cul-
tural Resonance of Doubt,” Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society Series A 373, 
no. 2055 (2015): 1–21.
4. FORECASTING AND THE CYBERNETIC SENSIBILITY
1. Slava Gerovitch, From Newspeak to Cyberspeak: A History of Soviet Cybernetics 
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2002).
2. For the systems-­cybernetic approach in social information management in com-
munist China, see Angela Xiao Wu, “Journalism via Systems Cybernetics: The Birth of 
Chinese Communication Discipline and Post-­Mao Press Reforms,” History of Media 
Studies 2 (2022). doi:10.32376/d895a0ea.182c7595.
3. I argued this first in my doctoral dissertation, Constructing Soviet Cultural Policy: 
Cybernetics and Governance in Lithuania ­after World War II (Linköping, Sweden: 
Linköping University, 2008), where I showed that cybernetics influenced epistemologies 
in many fields of knowledge ­because separate ele­ments of cybernetics, such as concepts, 
models and princi­ples, could be bricolaged and adapted depending on the context.
4. Gerovitch, From Newspeak to Cyberspeak.
5. Gerovitch, From Newspeak to Cyberspeak; for cybernetics and the Soviet internet, 
Benjamin Peters, How Not to Network a Nation: The Uneasy History of the Soviet Inter-
net (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2016); for cybernetics, culture and design, see David 
Crowley and Jane Pavitt, eds. Cold War Modern 1945–1970 (London: V&A, 2010); An-
dres Kurg, “Feedback Environment: Rethinking Art and Design Practices in Tallinn 
During the Early 1970s,” Kunstiteaduslikke Uurimusi nos.1–2 (2011): 26–50; Ianina 
Prudenko, Kibernetika v gumanitarnykh naukakh i iskusstve v SSSR: Analiz bol’shikh baz 
dannykh i komp’iuternoe tvorchestvo (Moscow: Garazh, 2018).
6. The relay development of governance by numbers was picked up in the 1930s and 
1940s by applied mathematicians, who developed methods for logistics and linear plan-
ning, as well as for electronics, and automatic engineering. In the Soviet Union, thought-

	
NOTES TO PAGES 73–76	
215
ful and extensive reflections about scientific prediction and governance, as in Kondrat’ev’s 
writings, dis­appeared and resumed only in the 1970s in writings about the global bio-
sphere and the long-­term ­future. Aspects of the epistemology of scientific prediction ­were 
examined mainly in niche scientific publications. Interest in statistical forecasting, how-
ever, returned as part of economic and administrative reforms in the 1960s.
7. For a link between Soviet economic thought and theoretical and applied strands of 
cybernetics, mathe­matics, and computer science, see Adam Leeds, “Dreams in Cyber-
netic Fugue: Cold War Technoscience, the Intelligent­sia, and the Birth of Soviet Mathe-
matical Economics,” Historical Studies in the Natu­ral Sciences, 46, no. 5 (2016): 633–668. 
For the cybernetic logic of informational organ­ization of the economy in Soviet territorial 
administrations, see Diana Kurkovsky, “Cybernetics for the Command Economy: Fore-
grounding Entropy in Late Soviet Planning,” History of the ­Human Sciences 33, no. 1 
(2020): 36–51.
8. The Archives of the Rus­sian Acad­emy of Science (henceforth ARAN), f. 1977, 
op. 2, d. 5, l. 2.
9. Lennart Samuelson, Tankograd: The Formation of a Soviet Com­pany Town: Cheli-
abinsk, 1900s–­1950s (Basingstoke, UK: Palgrave Macmillan, 2011), 15.
10. For technology assessment in the Red Army, see Ian Johnson, “Technology’s Cut-
ting Edge: Futurism and Research in the Red Army, 1917–1973,” Technology and Cul-
ture 59 (2018): 689–718.
11. Judy L. Klein, Statistical Visions in Time: A History of Time Series Analy­sis, 1662–­
1938 (Cambridge: University of Cambridge Press, 1997).
12. Ivan Boldyrev and Till Duppe, “Programming the USSR: Leonid V. Kantorovich 
in Context,” British Journal of History of Science (2020): 1–24, 5.
13. Boldyrev and Duppe, “Programming the USSR,” 7–9, 11.
14. Hunter Heyck, The Age of System: Understanding the Development of Modern So-
cial Science (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2015).
15. See the excellent studies on postwar planning in Michel Christian, Sandrine Kott, 
and Ondřej Matějka, eds., Planning in Cold War Eu­rope: Competition, Cooperation, Circu-
lations (1950s–1970s) (Berlin: de Gruyter, 2018) and Quinn Slobodian’s Globalists: The End 
of Empire and the Birth of Neoliberalism (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2018).
16. Matthias Schmelzer, The Hegemony of Growth: The OECD and the Making of the 
Economic Growth Paradigm (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2016), 96.
17. Paul R. Gregory, The Po­liti­cal Economy of Stalinism: Evidence from the Soviet Se-
cret Archives (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004). In 1954, Soviet economists 
began lobbying to reintroduce training in statistical methods in universities. Yakov Fey-
gin, “Reforming the Cold War State: Economic Thought, Internationalization, and the 
Politics of Soviet Reform, 1955–1985” (unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of 
Pennsylvania, 2017), 57–58.
18. The Rus­sian State Archives of Economics (henceforth RGAE), f. 99, op. 1, l. 1–4. 
From 1960 to 1964, the NIEI was ­under the State Economic Council.
19. Polish planners also travelled to meet French planning specialists in 1956. Lukas 
Becht, “From Euphoria to Frustration: Institutionalizing Prognostic Research in the Pol-
ish ­People’s Republic, 1969–76,” Acta Poloniae Historica 116 (2017): 283.
20. For more on the French trip to the Soviet Union and the exchange between the 
French and Soviet economists, see Isabelle Gouarné, “Mandatory Planning Versus In-
dicative Planning? The Eastern Itinerary of French Planners (1960s–1970s),” in Planning 
in Cold War Eu­rope: Competition, Cooperation, Circulations (1950s–1970s), eds. Michel 
Christian, Sandrine Kott, and Ondřej Matějka (Berlin: De Gruyter, 2018), 71–77.
21. “Otchet” (November 1958), RGAE, f. 99, op. 1, d. 858, l. 5–6.
22. “Otchet” (November 1958), RGAE, f. 99, op. 1, d. 858, l. 5–6.

216	
NOTES TO PAGES 76–78
23. For instance, a scheme for continuous planning (1957) included general perspec-
tive plans (fifteen to twenty years), five-­year plans, and annual plans. RGAE, f. 99, op. 1, 
d. 862, l. 21–22. A French planner noted that Gosplan’s perspective planning was based 
on calculations of the optimal development of existing trends. The French also stated 
that their prospective planning that examined several alternative ­futures alongside each 
other was “not thinkable” for Soviet economists. Robert Fraisse, “Notes sur planifica-
tion a long terme en Union Sovietique” (December 1966), BR 4/513/8, Sciences Po, p. 11. 
See also Pekka Sutela, Socialism, Planning and Optimality: A Study in Soviet Economic 
Thought (Helsinki: Finnish Society of Science and Letters, 1984).
24. Grigorii Sapov, “Tri interv’iu s E.B. Ershovym” (February to March 1999), http://­
www​.­sapov​.­ru​/­staroe​/­si06​.­html.
25. “Stenograma” (Moscow, 14 December 1966), RGAE, f. 99, op. 1, d. 869; Bernard 
Rosier, ed., Wassily Leontief: textes et itinéraire (Paris: La Découverte, 1986).
26. I base this statement on the memoir by Nikita Moiseev, Kak daleko do zavtresh-
nego dnia . . . ​Svobodnye razmyshleniia 1917–1993 (Moscow: Taideks, 1997).
27. Iu. V. Ershov and A. S. Popo­vich, “Propushchennaia vozmozhnost’ obognat 
Ameriku, ili k chemu provodit ignorirovanie prognoz,” Top Club Journal 3, no. 21 (2012): 
8–17. For more on the intellectual legacy of Dobrov as a theorist of the history of science 
and technology, see Elena Aronova, Scientific History: Experiments in History and Poli-
tics from the Bolshevik Revolution to the End of the Cold War (Chicago: University of Chi-
cago Press, 2021).
28. The historiography of the Soviet military-­industrial complex is still ­limited due to 
the lack of access to archival sources, although as Vladislav Zubok noted in his Collapse: 
The Fall of the Soviet Union (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2021) some archives 
of individual institutes and enterprises that ­were part of the military-­industrial complex 
are becoming available. Many historians continue using memoirs as key sources, ­because 
they capture informal social interaction that was key for the industry. Key work on the 
Cold War military-­industrial complex and public policy expertise includes Slava Gero-
vitch, Soviet Space Mythologies: Public Images, Private Memories, and the Making of a 
Cultural Identity (Pittsburgh: Pittsburgh University Press, 2015); John Barber and Mark 
Harrison, eds., The Soviet Defence Industry Complex from Stalin to Khrushchev (Basing-
stoke, UK: Macmillan, 2000). For RAND, see Daniel Bessner, Democracy in Exile: Hans 
Speier and the Rise of the Defense Intellectual (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2018); 
Paul Rubinson, Redefining Science: Scientists, the National Security State, and Nuclear 
Weapons in Cold War Amer­i­ca (Amherst: University of Mas­sa­chu­setts Press, 2016); Joy 
Rohde, Armed with Expertise: The Militarization of American Social Research during the 
Cold War (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2013); Nils Gilman, The Mandarins of the 
­Future: Modernization Theory in Cold War Amer­i­ca (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Univer-
sity Press, 2007); Jennifer S. Light, From Warfare to Welfare: Defense Intellectuals and 
Urban Prob­lems in Cold War Amer­i­ca (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2003); 
Fred Kaplan, The Wizards of Armageddon (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 
1991).
29. Dmitry Travin and Otar Marganiya, “Resource Curse: Rethinking the Soviet Ex-
perience,” in Resource Curse and Post-­Soviet Eurasia: Oil, Gas and Modernization, eds. 
Vladimir Gel’man and Otar Marganiya (New York: Lexington Books, 2010), 31–32; Dmi-
try Efremenko, Vvedenie v otsenku tehniki (Moscow: MNEPU, 2002), 59.
30. Dzhermen Gvishiani, “Upravlenie: prezhde vsego nauka,” Izvestiia no. 118 (1963): 2.
31. For Kosygin, see Aappo Kähönen, “Optimal Planning, Optimal Economy, Opti-
mal Life? The Kosygin Reforms, 1965–72,” in Competition in Socialist Society, eds. Kata-
lin Miklossy and Melanie Ilic (London: Routledge, 2014), 23–40.

	
NOTES TO PAGES 78–82	
217
32. In 1964, the academician Vadim Trapeznikov published an article in Pravda, 
where he criticized the blind use of numbers in true Kondrat’ev’s spirit. For Trapeznikov 
and the economic reform, see Feygin, “Reforming the Cold War State,” 148–150.
33. Aleksei Kosygin, “Povyshenie nauchnoi obosnovannosti planov-­vazhneishaia za-
dacha planovykh organov,” Planovoe khoziaistvo 4 (1965): 4–5.
34. Kosygin, “Povyshenie,” 4. See alsoA. N. Klepach and G. O. Kuranov, “Razvitie 
sotsial’no-­ekonomicheskogo prognozirovaniia i idei A.I.Anchishkina,” Voprosy eko-
nomiki 8 (2013): 143–155.
35. Stephen Collier, Post-­Soviet Social: Neoliberalism, Social Modernity, Biopolitics 
(Prince­ton, NJ: Prince­ton University Press, 2011), 62–64.
36. RGAE, f. 4372, op. 65, l. 3; RGAE, f. 99, op. 1, d. 869, l. 3.
37. The most influential ­were the institutes of the all-­union Acad­emy of Sciences, Gos-
plan, and the State Committee for Science and Technology (GKNT) ­under the Council 
of Ministers. The Central Institute for Mathematical Economics calculated economic and 
demographic forecasts; the acad­emy’s Computer Center did forecasts on oil and gas pro-
curement, and environmental and climate change; ­labor markets ­were forecasted by the 
Institute of International ­Labor Movement; and the way of life and the attitudes of youth 
­were explored at the Institute for Concrete Social Research.
38. “Stenograma” (Moscow, 14 December 1966), RGAE, f. 99, op. 1, d. 869, l. 115.
39. RGAE, f. 99, op. 1, d. 869, l. 15.
40. RGAE, f. 99, op. 1, d. 869, l. 15, 97–105.
41. RGAE, f. 99, op. 1, d. 869, l. 15, 43–46, 52.
42. RGAE, f. 99, op. 1, d. 869, l. 15, 27.
43. RGAE, f. 99, op. 1, d. 869, l. 15, 13.
44. Klepach and Kuranov, “Razvitie sotsial’no-­ekonomicheskogo prognozirovanie.”
45. “Stenograma” (Moscow, 14 December 1966), RGAE, f. 99, op. 1, d. 869, l. 17.
46. “Stenograma” (Moscow, 14 December 1966), RGAE, f. 99, op. 1, d. 869, l. 17, 
32–33.
47. RGAE, f. 99, op. 1, d. 870, l.7. See also Klepach and Kuranov, “Razvitie sotsial’no-­
ekonomicheskogo prognozirovanie.”
48. This was a ­limited and modest pluralism referring to dif­fer­ent pathways leading 
to dif­fer­ent levels of achievement, such as maximum, minimum, and average. RGAE, 
f. 99, op. 1, d. 869, l. 7–9.
49. RGAE, f. 99, op. 1, d. 869, l. 7–9, 64–68.
50. Sapov, “Tri interv’iu s E.B. Ershovym.”
51. ARAN, f. 2, op. 1, d. 858, l. 172–173.
52. ARAN, f. 2, op. 1, d. 858, l. 172–173, 26.
53. “Stenograma” (Moscow, 14 December 1966), RGAE, f. 99, op. 1, d. 869, l. 2.
54. ARAN, f. 2, op. 1, d. 858, l. 76.
55. For scientific patronage and clientelism in Soviet policymaking see Alexei Ko-
jevnikov, Stalin’s ­Great Science: The Times and Adventures of Soviet Physicists (London: 
Imperial College Press, 2004); Stephen Fortescue, ed., Rus­sian Politics: From Lenin to Pu-
tin (Basingstoke, UK: Palgrave Macmillan, 2010).
56. Lee Schwartz, “A History of Rus­sian and Soviet Censuses,” in Research Guide to 
the Rus­sian and Soviet Censuses, ed. Ralph Clem (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 
1986), 48–69. In the 1920s and 1930s, Stanislav Strumilin, another student of Kovalevskii, 
amassed the data on ­labor for economic sociology studies. However, from 1929 the very 
term “sociology” was not used anymore. The only legitimate social theory was Marxist 
philosophy and historical materialism. Larissa Titarenko and Elena Zdravomyslova, So-
ciology in Rus­sia: A Brief History (Cham: Palgrave, 2017), Kindle location 844.

218	
NOTES TO PAGES 82–85
57. Rindzevičiūtė, Constructing Soviet Cultural Policy.
58. The first Soviet institute to conduct demographic research was established in the 
Ukrainian Acad­emy of Science in 1919 (closed in 1938). In Rus­sia, the first such aca-
demic institution was founded at the Leningrad branch of the Acad­emy of Science in the 
1930s (closed in 1934). Thereafter population data was collected only by the Central Sta-
tistical Agency. Population data was published ­until the 1930s, although even then it was 
edited to emphasize population growth and hide the deaths caused by the communist 
terror. ­There was a weak link between demography and sociology, however. The first so-
ciologists hailed from philosophy and economics departments; in the summer of 1968, 
the Institute of Concrete Social Research (IKSI) was established as a separate institute, 
on the basis of the Department of Social Research (established February 1966) at the In-
stitute of Philosophy. ARAN, f. 1977, op. 1, d. 2, l. 1–2. See Elisabeth Weinberg, Sociology 
in the Soviet Union and Beyond: Social Enquiry and Social Change (Farnham, UK: Ash-
gate: 2004).
59. Wolfgang Lutz, Sergei Scherbov, and Andrei Volkov, “Introduction: Past and Pre­
sent Studies of the Soviet Population,” in Demographic Trends and Patterns in the Soviet 
Union Before 1991, eds. Wolfgang Lutz, Sergei Scherbov, and Andrei Volkov, xxxi–xl 
(London: Routledge, 1994).
60. For a detailed discussion of the genealogy of the term “scientific-­technical revo-
lution” as it was used in both the Soviet Union and the West, see chapter 1 in my The 
Power of Systems: How Policy Sciences Opened Up the Cold War World (Ithaca, NY: Cor-
nell University Press, 2016).
61. Titarenko and Zdravomyslova, Sociology in Rus­sia, Kindle location 1021.
62. “Ustav” (1968), ARAN, f. 2, op. 6m, d. 437, l. 137.
63. Margaret J. Osler, Rethinking the Scientific Revolution (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 2000).
64. Michael Ellman, Socialist Planning (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2008).
65. Papers of John F. Kennedy, Presidential Papers, National Security Files, Meetings 
and Memoranda, Staff memoranda: Rostow, Walt W., December 1960 to June 1961, 
JFKNSF-323-006, John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum, Boston, MA.
66. Aronova, Scientific History, 126.
67. I have detailed on this in Rindzevičiūtė, The Power of Systems, 27–32.
68. “Spravka,” ARAN, f. 1977, op. 1, d. 40, l. 14–15.
69. Titarenko and Zdravomyslova, Sociology in Rus­sia, Kindle location 1096.
70. This is based on the very useful description of the official Soviet so­cio­log­i­cal frame-
work proposed in 1971 that is offered in Titarenko and Zdravomyslova, Sociology in 
Rus­sia, Kindle location 1341.
71. Titarenko and Zdravomyslova, Sociology in Rus­sia, Kindle location 1313.
72. The reports ­were sent to Gosplan, GKNT, and the Foreign Ministry. ARAN, 
f. 1977, op. 1, d. 40, l. 4.
73. Liah Greenfeld, “Soviet Sociology and Sociology in the Soviet Union,” Annual Re-
view of Sociology 14 (1988): 99, 113.
74. Titarenko and Zdravomyslova, Sociology in Rus­sia, Kindle location 1406.
75. “Sotsialnyi pro­gress v SSSR” (1973), ARAN, f. 1977, op. 2, d. 66, l. 52.
76. IKSI’s research plan (1969), ARAN, f. 1977, op. 1, d. 7, l. 3.
77. “Sotsialnye aspekty prognozirovaniia urovnia zhizni” (1966), RGAE, f. 99, op. 1, 
d. 879, l. 2.
78. RGAE, f. 99, op. 1, d. 882, l. 2.
79. RGAE, f. 99, op. 1, d. 869, l. 47; ARAN, f. 1977, op. 1, d. 42, l. 6.
80. ARAN, f. 1977, op. 1, d. 59, l. 12.
81. ARAN, f. 1977, op. 1, d. 59, l. 12, 77.

	
NOTES TO PAGES 86–87	
219
82. As in the Soviet Union, public opinion surveys ­were launched in Poland in the 
1960s. Becht, “From Euphoria to Frustration.”
83. In 1960, only 17.5 ­percent of Soviet sociologists had degrees in economics, natu­
ral science, and psy­chol­ogy and none was trained in sociology. Titarenko and Zdravo-
myslova, Sociology in Rus­sia, Kindle location, 1268–1275.
84. IKSI staff grew from about one hundred in 1968 to almost three hundred in the mid-
1970s, and Bestuzhev-­Lada’s unit grew to fifteen staff. A year ­after its establishment IKSI 
lacked basic equipment, such as desks and typewriters. Scholars complained about having 
to work in insufficiently lit basement offices. IKSI’s first computer, a standard machine used 
in universities and research institutes, Minsk-32, arrived only in 1971. ARAN, f. 1977, op. 1, 
d. 42, l. 1–2; ARAN, f. 1977, op. 1, d. 7, l. 114; ARAN, f. 1977, op. 1, d. 38, l. 16; ARAN, f. 1977, 
op. 1, d. 59, l. 12; ARAN, f. 1977, op. 1, d. 59, l. 12, 48–49; ARAN, f. 1977, op. 1, d. 203, l. 78.
85. At the end of the 1960s two publications attracted harsh ideological criticism: a 
­humble print run of lecture notes on Western so­cio­log­i­cal theories by Iurii Levada and 
an edited collection The Mathematical Modeling of Social Pro­cesses, edited by Osipov, 
Aganbegian, and Moiseev. See Boris Firsov, Istoriia sovetskoi sotsiologii 1950–1980 gg (St 
Petersburg: Izd. Evropeiskogo universiteta v Sankt Peterburge, 2012).
86. Bestuzhev-­Lada did not hesitate to pre­sent himself as “the leading Soviet fore-
caster,” which in turn was echoed in the Western historiography on Soviet ­future studies. 
See, for instance, Gordon Rocca, “ ‘A Second Party in Our Midst’: The History of the So-
viet Scientific Forecasting Association,” Social Studies of Science 11, no. 2 (1981): 199–247. 
For Bestuzhev-­Lada’s early involvement in the emerging futurist networks, see Wendell 
Bell, Foundations of ­Futures Studies: History, Purposes, and Knowledge, vol. 1 of ­Human 
Science for a New Era (London: Routledge, 2009), 36. For Bestuzhev-­Lada as an interna-
tionalizer see Jenny Andersson, The ­Future of the World: Futurology, Futurists, and the 
Strug­gle for the Post-­Cold War Imagination (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2018).
87. Igor’ Bestuzhev-­Lada, “Prognozirovanie bylo iznachal’no oberecheno na pogrom,” 
in Rosiiskaia sotsiologiia shestidesiatykh godov v vospominaniakh i dokumantakh, edited 
by G. Batygin, M.G. Pugacheva, S. F. Iarmoliuk, 404–427 (Saint Petersburg: Izdatel’stvo 
Russkogo Khristianskogo gumanitarnogo universiteta, 1999).
88. The Western term “futurology,” coined by the German scholar Ossip Flechtheim in 
1943, was not well received in the Soviet Union: like cybernetics, futurology was derided as 
a bourgeois science although, unlike cybernetics or ge­ne­tics in the 1950s, futurology was 
never completely rejected. The Soviet ideologues did not like the emancipatory touch with 
which Flechtheim imbued his version of ­future studies. The purpose of ­future studies, for 
Flechtheim, was to liberate the ­future from technocrats, be they state socialist or cap­i­tal­ist.
89. Bestuzhev-­Lada, “Prognozirovanie bylo iznachal’no.”
90. The 1967 paper was intended for the First ­Future Studies conference or­ga­nized by 
Johan Galtung in Oslo. Bestuzhev-­Lada was invited alongside the leading figure of tech-
nical assessment and history of science and technology, Genadii Dobrov, but due to bu-
reaucratic delays neither could attend. Their papers ­were published in the conference 
proceedings Mankind 2000. ARAN, f. 1977, op. 2, d. 60, l. 4. Bestuzhev-­Lada’s first publi-
cations in the field of scientific forecasting included a report Problemy obshchei i sotsialnoi 
prognostiki (Moscow: USSR Acad­emy of Sciences, 1968), and lecture notes on social fore-
casting, published in 1969.
91. Geroulanos, Transparency in Postwar France: A Critical History of the Pre­sent 
(Stanford,CA: Stanford University Press, 2017).
92. Andersson, The ­Future of the World; Ariel Colonomos, Selling the ­Future: The Perils 
of Predicting Global Politics (London: Hurst, 2016), but see also the internalist perspective 
by Tuomo Kuosa, The Evolution of Strategic Foresight: Navigating Public Policy Making 
(Farnham, UK: Ashgate, 2012).

220	
NOTES TO PAGES 88–91
93. Jens Beckert, ­Imagined ­Futures: Fictional Expectations and Cap­i­tal­ist Dynamics 
(Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2016); Andersson, The ­Future of the World; 
Christian Dayé, Experts, Social Scientists and Techniques of Prognosis in Cold War Amer­
i­ca (Cham: Palgrave, 2019).
94. Christian et al., Planning in Cold War Eu­rope.
95. On the Delphi method, see Dayé, Experts, Social Scientists. See also Philip Tet-
lock and Dan Gardner, Superforecasting: The Art and Science of Prediction (New York: 
Random House, 2016).
96. ARAN, f. 1957, op. 1, d. 29, l. 16.
97. See, for example, a nostalgic tale about the intellectual circles at IMRD in the 
documentary Otdel by Aleksandr Arkhangel’skii (2010). Note that Bestuzhev-­Lada did 
not feature in this documentary.
98. Arab-­Ogly actively networked with Western thinkers: in 1959 he met Daniel Bell, 
and at the ISA Congress in Italy, he met Raymond Aron and Robert Merton. Starting in 
the late 1950s he corresponded with a French Christian Marxist, Roger Garaudy, who 
would ­later be the first to publish Bestuzhev-­Lada’s writings in the West in 1968. Arab-­
Ogly, Demograficheskie i ekologicheskie prognozy (Moscow: Statistika, 1978); Arab-­Ogly, 
“Togda kazalos’,chto koe-to udavalos’,” in Rossiiskaia sotsiologiia shestidesiatykh godov 
v vospominaniiakh i dokumentakh, edited by G. Batygin, M.G. Pugacheva, S. F. Iarmo-
liuk, 358-370. St Petersburg: Izdatel’stvo Russkogo Khristianskogo gumanitarnogo uni-
versiteta, 1999).
99. Bestuzhev-­Lada, “Prognozirovanie bylo iznachal’no.”
100. Author’s interview with a Rus­sian scientist Sergei, Moscow, April 2013.
101. Bestuzhev-­Lada, “Prognozirovanie bylo iznachal’no.”
102. Bestuzhev-­Lada, “Prognozirovanie bylo iznachal’no”; Arab-­Ogly, “Togda ka-
zalos’, chto koe-to udavalos’.”
103. ARAN, f. 1977, op. 1, d. 31, l. 26–76.
104. A. A. Zvorykin, Cultural Policy in the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (Paris: 
UNESCO, 1970), 32. For more, see Rindzevičiūtė, Constructing Soviet Cultural Policy. 
On the significance of Zvorykin for Soviet cultural planning, see Vitaly Kurennoy, “Con­
temporary State Cultural Policy in Rus­sia: Organ­ization, Po­liti­cal Discourse and Cere-
monial Be­hav­ior,” International Journal of Cultural Policy 27, no. 2 (2021): 163–176.
105. Zvorykin, Cultural Policy, 32–35; cf. Rindzevičiūtė, Constructing Soviet Cultural 
Policy.
106. Rindzevičiūtė, Constructing Soviet Cultural Policy.
107. ARAN, f. 1977, op. 1, d. 42, l. 1–5.
108. In his memoir Bestuzhev-­Lada wrote that he hated mathe­matics almost as much 
as homo­sexuality, Igor’ Bestuzhev-­Lada, Svozhu schety s zhizn’iu: zapisi futurologa o pro-
shedshem i prikhodiashchem (Moscow: Algoritm, 2004), 289–290.
109. This is suggested by the speed at which Zvorykin completed his research proj­
ects at IKSI. Although Bestuzhev-­Lada began his work in winter 1969, his first research 
proj­ect, a forecast of young ­people’s ­future values, was not launched before 1972. Dur-
ing this time Zvorykin delivered several research reports to the Acad­emy and the Cen-
tral Committee.
110. In 1969, Bestuzhev-­Lada spoke at several of the Acad­emy institutes and deliv-
ered a course on the history of forecasting at the philosophy department of Moscow State 
University. ARAN, f. 1977, op. 1, d. 7, l. 86.
111. Due to a lack of space, the connections between scientific forecasting and science-­
fiction writing could not be addressed in this chapter; this subject, indeed, merits a 
study of its own. I ­will only note that Efremov’s biographers appear to have overlooked 
his international connections with Western futurologists, something that might have ex-

	
NOTES TO PAGES 91–92	
221
plained the KGB’s suspicion of Efremov ­after his death. Ol’ga Erelina and Nikolai 
Smirnov, Ivan Efremov (Moscow: Molodaia gvardiia, 2013).
112. Dmitri N. Shalin, “The Development of Soviet Sociology, 1956–1976,” Annual 
Review of Sociology 4 (1978), 171; Bestuzhev-­Lada, “Prognozirovanie bylo iznachal’no.”
113. ARAN, f. 1977, op. 2, d. 60.
114. Bestuzhev-­Lada was instructed to strictly focus on the socioeconomic aspects 
of disarmament in his Oslo talk. IKSI (September 1970), ARAN, f. 1977, op. 1, d. 52, l. 
70–72; “Direktivnye ukazaniia” (IMRD, 30 October 1968), ARAN, f. 1957, op. 1, d. 39, l. 
38. I could not locate his report on this visit; Rocca indicated that Bestuzhev-­Lada in-
deed travelled to Oslo.
115. Bestuzhev-­Lada, “Prognozirovanie bylo iznachal’no.”
116. In the 1980s Rocca, “A Second Party in Our Midst,” painstakingly tried to trace the 
organ­ization of the SSF, but with ­little success due to the lack of reliable sources and con-
flicting narrative accounts. Some more reliable information about the SSF can be found in 
Firsov, Istoriia sovetskoi. It is still not clear just how significant was this movement to estab-
lish a cross-­disciplinary community around the idea of predictive social science.
117. In his autobiography, Bestuzhev-­Lada claimed that ­these spontaneous confer-
ences on forecasting stemmed from his seminar at IMRD in 1967. In May 1968 the SSF 
committee or­ga­nized a Public Institute for Social Prognosis with Bestuzhev-­Lada named 
as director (although he denied this). Bestuzhev-­Lada was tasked to or­ga­nize of the sec-
ond congress on scientific prognosis, and Tardov took over the organ­ization of the third 
congress. Bestuzhev Lada, “Prognozirovanie bylo iznachal’no.”
118. Maria Rogacheva, The Private World of Soviet Scientists: From Stalin to Gorbachev 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2017); Eglė Rindzevičiūtė, “When Formal Or-
ganisations Meet Informal Relations in Soviet Lithuania: Action Nets, Networks and 
Boundary Objects in the Construction of the Lithuanian Sea Museum,” Lithuanian His-
torical Studies 15 (2011): 107–134.
119. Vasilii Parin, “Nauchnye trudy za 1935–71,” ARAN, f. 1640, op. 1.
120. Mitrokhin, 536–537. One document noted that Dobrov and Bestuzhev-­Lada re-
fused to join this initiative to reform the committee into an association. “Zapiska otdela,” 
in S. F. Iarmoliuk, ed., Rossiiskaia sotsiologiia shestidesiatykh godov v vospominaniiakh i 
dokumentakh (St Petersburg: Izdatel’stvo Russkogo Khristianskogo gumanitarnogo uni-
versiteta, , 1999).
121. “Dopolnenie k zapiske,” in S. F. Iarmoliuk, ed., Rossiiskaia sotsiologiia shestide-
siatykh godov v vospominaniiakh i dokumentakh (St Petersburg: Izdatel’stvo Russkogo 
Khristianskogo gumanitarnogo universiteta; Firsov, Istoriia sovetskoi, 31.
122. Bestuzhev-­Lada, “Prognozirovanie bylo iznachal’no”; “Prikaz no.14–104” (Mos-
cow 23 June 1972), ARAN, f. 1977, op. 1, d. 59, l. 17–18. In July Bestuzhev-­Lada was ap-
pointed as the head of the unit for the methodological prob­lems of forecasting social 
needs. Iarmoliuk, Rossiiskaia sotsiologiia shestidesiatykh.
123. ARAN, f. 1977, op. 2, d. 60.
124. This was some achievement ­because B. M. Kedrov spoke vehemently against par-
ticipating in such conferences. ARAN f. 1731, op. 1, d. 160, l. 127–136. Another issue 
was that the famous Western futurologist Jungk pressurized the Soviet Union to permit 
the emigration of Jewish scientists at the Bucharest conference.
125. The common denominator for ­these purges is prob­ably the attack against Ru-
miantsev. For instance, a letter to the Central Committee which listed the ideological 
errors committed at IKSI did not mention ­either Bestuzhev-­Lada or forecasting. TsKhSD, 
f. 4, op. 20, d. 770, l. 41–42, in Iarmoliuk, Rossiiskaia sotsiologiia shestidesiatykh.
126. Nikolai Krementsov, Stalinist Science (Prince­ton, NJ: Prince­ton University Press, 
1996).

222	
NOTES TO PAGES 92–96
127. ARAN, f. 2, op. 6m, d. 500, l. 180–181.
128. Starting in 1975 the commission or­ga­nized annual conferences and summer 
schools in forecasting. Igor’ Bestuzhev-­Lada, ed., Rabochiaia kniga po prognozirovaniiu 
(Moscow: Mysl’, 1982), 69.
129. In his interview, Bestuzhev-­Lada mentioned regular meetings with assistants of 
Politburo members in 1967 to 1969; he wrote, “in my thoughts I was far away from IKSI 
and close to the Politburo.” Bestuzhev-­Lada, “Prognozirovanie bylo iznachal’no.”
130. On the high modernist plans for large-­scale industrialization with catastrophic 
effects on the natu­ral environment, see Paul R. Josephson, Industrialized Nature: Brute 
Force Technology and the Transformation of the Natu­ral World (Washington, DC: Island 
Press, 2002).
131. Igor’ Bestuzhev-­Lada, Esli mir, 6, 18, 43–44.
132. Jonathan Oldfield, The Soviet Union and Global Environmental Change: Modi-
fying the Biosphere and Conceptualizing Society–­Nature Interaction (London: Routledge, 
2021).
133. Bestuzhev-­Lada Esli mir, 63. A revised version was entitled The Contours of the 
­Future: Igor’ Bestuzhev Lada and Oleg Pisarzhevski, Kontury griadushchego (Moscow: 
Znanie, 1965).
134. “Otchet,” RGAE, f. 99, op. 1, d. 890, l. 111.
135. Igor’ Bestuzhev Lada, Okno v budushchee: Sovremennye problemy sotsialnogo 
prognozirovaniia (Moscow: Mysl, 1970), 14–15.
136. BestuzhevLada, Okno v budushchee, 62.
137. Bestuzhev-­Lada, Okno v budushchee, 63.
138. Aro Velmet, “The Blank Slate E-­State: Estonian Information Society and the Poli-
tics of Novelty in the 1990s,” Engaging Science, Technology, and Society 6 (2020): 162–184.
139. Protocols (1969), ARAN, f. 1977, op. 1, d. 8, l. 35–36.
140. The term Delphi method was originally created by Kaplan in 1950, and was de-
veloped by Olaf Helmer, Norman Dalkey, and T. J. Gordon at RAND. See G. S. Pospelov 
and V. I. Maksimenko, “Predislovie,” in Gorizonty nauki i tekhniki, eds. I. V. Bestuzhev-­
Lada and R. A. Fesenko (Moscow: Mir, 1969), 8–9; Andersson, The ­Future of the World.
141. Extending the NKVD (­People’s Commissariat for Internal Affairs) practice where 
special gulag camps ­were created for secret research, the KGB gathered economic infor-
mation via expert opinion surveys in factories and its own hospitals and medical research 
agencies; see Asif Siddiqi, “Scientists and Specialists in the Gulag: Life and Death in Sta-
lin’s Sharashka,” Kritika 16, no. 3 (2015): 557–588; Kate Brown, Manual for Survival: A 
Chernobyl Guide for the ­Future (London: Penguin, 2019); Feygin, Reforming the Cold War 
State, 202–203. ­These KGB information and surveillance systems ­were incrementally 
computerized in the late 1980s, Rindzevičiūtė, Constructing Soviet Cultural Policy.
142. IKSI (3 March 1972), ARAN, f. 1977, op. 1, d. 61, l.11.
143. ARAN, f. 1977, op. 1, d. 91, l. 8–9.
144. “Pi­lot fieldwork, 1973,” ARAN, f. 1977, op. 1, d. 91, l. 2–3.
145. ARAN, f. 1977, op. 1, d. 91, l. 8–9.
146. IKSI protocols (6 February 1973, 6–15 March 1973), ARAN, f. 1977, op. 1, d. 91, 
l. 6–9.
147. His published work also contained hardly any empirical information. See Igor’ 
Bestuzhev-­Lada, Poiskovoe sotsial’noe prognozirovanie: perspektivnye prob­lem ob-
shchestva (Moscow: Nauka, 1984), 81–84.
148. Although domestic social research into existing patterns of addiction and devi-
ance was done in psy­chol­ogy research institutes. ­These patterns, to my knowledge, ­were 
not projected into the ­future. See Eugene Raikhel, Governing Habits: Treating Alcoholism 

	
NOTES TO PAGES 96–100	
223
in Post-­Soviet Clinic (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2016). However, demographic 
studies of mortality and addictions ­were pursued in Soviet collaboration with interna-
tional partners, such as the IIASA. Rindzevičiūtė, The Power of Systems.
149. Klein, Statistical Visions in Time.
150. Eglė Rindzevičiūtė, “The Unlikely Revolutionaries: Decision Sciences in the 
Soviet Government,” In The Decisionist Imagination: Sovereignty, Social Science and 
Democracy in the 20th  ­Century, eds. Daniel Bessner and Nicolas Guilhot (Oxford: 
Berghahn Books, 2019), 217–249.
151. Rindzevičiūtė, The Power of Systems, chap. 5.
152. Rindzevičiūtė, The Power of Systems, chap. 5; “Academician S. Shatalin,” Options 
(September 1989), 10–11.
153. Zubok, Collapse.
154. Rudolf G. Pikhoia, unpublished paper presented in workshop “Reevaluating the 
Soviet Collapse: Domestic and International Frameworks of Politics and Economics” 
(London School of Economics, London, UK, 23 March 2018).
155. Zubok, Collapse.
156. Leeds, “Dreams in Cybernetic Fugue.”
157. For an overview, see Jane Cave, “Po­liti­cal Reform and Scientific Freedom ­Under 
Gorbachev,” Technology in Society 13 (1991): 69–89.
158. In 2014, Glazyev was placed on the UK’s sanctions list in response to Rus­sia’s 
invasion of Ukraine, https://­assets​.­publishing​.­service​.­gov​.­uk​/­government​/­uploads​
/­system​/­uploads​/­attachment​_­data​/­file​/­957466​/­Russia​.­pdf.
159. Boris Doktorov, “Interv’iu s I.V. Zadorinym: ‘V otnoshenie k rabote moia 
professional’naia pozitsiia vsegda byla sil’nee grazhdanskoi . . .’.” Monitoring obshchest-
vennogo mneniia: ekonomicheskie i sotsialnye peremeny 1 (2016): 363-380.
160. TsIRKON employs about ten staff. The com­pany is presented as in­de­pen­dent, 
not involved in ­either direct consultancy of po­liti­cal parties or “social engineering” of 
public opinion. Boris Doktorov, Sovremennaia Rossiiskaia sotsiologiia: istoriko biogra-
ficheskie poiski, vol. 8.1 (Moscow: TsPIM, 2016), 127; A. A. Iakovlev’s interview with Igor’ 
Zadorin, “V professionalnom sotsiologicheskom soobshchestve ne khvataet nezavisi-
mykh ekspertov,” Ekonomicheskaia sotsiologiia 14, no. 1 (2013): 10–26.
161. Vaclav Smil, Growth: From Microorganisms to Megacities (Cambridge, MA: MIT 
Press, 2019), Kindle location 1689.
162. Smil, Growth, Kindle location xx.
163. Northcott, “When Are Purely Predictive Models Best?” Disputatio 9, no. 47 
(2017): 631–656.
164. Gregory, The Po­liti­cal Economy of Stalinism.
165. For example, in 1969 Rumiantsev complained to Suslov that much social research 
was unnecessarily classified in the Soviet Union, indicating that similar studies ­were pub-
licly available in the United States. This secrecy, argued Rumiantsev, was an obstacle to 
both Soviet science and governance. “Zapiska A.M. Rumiantseva M.A. Suslovu o poez-
dke v SShA” (22 January 1969), Rossiiskaia sotsiologiia shestidesiatykh godov v vospomi-
naniiakh i dokumentakh, edited by G. Batygin, M.G. Pugacheva, S. F. Iarmoliuk, 473–475 
(St Petersburg: Izdatel’stvo Russkogo Khristianskogo gumanitarnogo universiteta, 1999).
166. Although ­there was an under­ground movement of Soviet astrology that started 
in the 1970s. Joseph Kellner, “As Above, So Below: Astrology and the Fate of Soviet Sci-
entism,” Kritika 20, no. 4 (2019): 783–812.
167. “Otchet” (Geneva, 2–7 October 1967), RGAE, f. 99, op. 1, d. 890, l. 54.
168. “Stenograma” (28 April 1983), ARAN, f. 2, op. 1, d. 585, l. 169.
169. “Stenograma” (28 April 1983), ARAN, f. 2, op. 1, d. 585, l. 91–177.

224	
NOTES TO PAGES 100–104
170. In May 1972 GKNT warned the Central Committee that coal, oil, and gas resources 
would be exhausted within the next 150 years. RGAE, f. 9480, op. 9, d. 1566 (1), l. 69.
5. PREDICTION AND THE OPAQUE
1. For key studies on utopian, modernist proj­ects in the arts, architecture and design, 
society and industry, see Boris Groys, The Total Art of Stalinism: Avant-­garde, Aesthetic 
Dictatorship and Beyond (Prince­ton, NJ: Prince­ton University Press, 1992); David Crow-
ley and Jane Pavitt, eds., Cold War Modern 1945–1970 (London: V&A, 2010); Richard 
Stites, The Revolutionary Dreams: Utopian Vision and Experimental Life in the Rus­sian 
Revolution (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1989); Edith Cloves, Rus­sian Experimen-
tal Fiction: Resisting Ideology ­After Utopia (Prince­ton, NJ: Prince­ton University Press, 
1993); Paul Josephson, “ ‘Proj­ects of the ­Century’ in Soviet History: Large-­Scale Tech-
nologies from Stalin to Gorbachev,” Technology and Culture 36, no. 3 (1995): 519–559.
2. James C. Scott, Seeing Like a State: How Certain Schemes to Improve the ­Human 
Condition Have Failed (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1999).
3. Hannah Arendt, The Origins of Totalitarianism (1951; London: Penguin, 2017). See 
also Katherine Verdery, Secrets and Truths: Ethnography in the Archive of Romania’s Se-
cret Police (Budapest: Central Eu­ro­pean University Press, 2014)
4. Alena Ledeneva, Can Rus­sia Modernise? Sistema, Power Networks and Informal 
Governance (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2013); Alena Ledeneva, ed., The 
Global Encyclopaedia of Informality: Understanding Social and Cultural Complexity, vols. 
1–2 (London: UCL Press, 2020).
5. Il’ia Kukulin criticized Shchedrovitskii’s method as a distinctly illiberal alterna-
tive to state socialist control. Il’ia Kukulin, “Alternative Social Blueprinting in Soviet So-
ciety of the 1960s and the 1970s, or Why Left-­Wing Po­liti­cal Practices Have Not Caught 
on in Con­temporary Rus­sia,” Rus­sian Studies in History 49, no. 4 (2011): 51–92.
6. Alena Ledeneva, How Rus­sia ­Really Works: The Informal Practices That ­Shaped Post-­
Soviet Politics and Business (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2006); Carole Sig-
man, “Les clubs politiques informels acteurs du basculement de la perestroïka,” Revue 
française de science politique 5, no. 58 (2008): 617–642; Alena Ledeneva, Rus­sia’s Econ-
omy of Favours: Blat, Networking and Informal Exchange (Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, 1998).
7. Vladislav Zubok, Collapse: The Fall of the Soviet Union (New Haven, CT: Yale Uni-
versity Press, 2021).
8. Georgii Shchedrovitskii, “Sistemnoe dvizhenie i perspektivy razvitiia sistemno-­
strukturnoi metodologii,” in Izbrannye Trudy by Georgii Shchedrovitskii (Moscow: 
Shkola kul´turnoi politiki, 1995), 57–87.
9. Tatiana Osintseva, “Novaia utka,” accessed 10 April 2015, http://­www​.­Prometa​.­ru.
10. This is evidenced in several documentary films that ­were produced to demonstrate 
the link between the intellectual avant-­garde of the 1960s and 1970s and the post-­Soviet 
intellectual elites in the capital. See films by Grigorii Kakovkin, Shchedrovitskii: v poiskakh 
elity (2004), Aleksandr Arkhangel’skii, Otdel (2010), Elena Laskari, Kto esli ne ia? (2019).
11. For instance, the cata­logue of the National Library of Rus­sia lists over 1,700 doc-
toral dissertations dating from the 1990s that contain references to Georgii Shchedro-
vitskii’s work.
12. ­Earlier studies on Soviet management distinguished a group of “Americanizers” 
who directly borrowed US ideas of leadership and ­human interaction. Focusing on the 
formalization of governance through institutional design, new technologies of data pro­
cessing and control, such as computers and computer networks, and planning tech-
niques, ­these studies overlooked the impor­tant role of the Rus­sian intellectual tradition 

	
NOTES TO PAGES 105–107	
225
of conceptualizing management. They also missed the cross-­fertilization of Soviet man-
agement thinking and Soviet physiology, biology, cognitive science, and operations re-
search. Semi-­underground approaches to management and ­those which ­were not 
institutionalized, like Shchedrovitskii’s, also escaped the attention. Richard Vidmer, 
“Management Science in the USSR: The Role of ‘Americanizers’,” International Studies 
Quarterly 24, no. 3 (1980): 392–414, 402. This said, Shchedrovitskii is not always acknowl-
edged in the Rus­sian historiography of management thought, prob­ably ­because he is 
considered a phi­los­o­pher. For instance, Shchedrovitskii is missing from N. V. Ovchin-
nikova, ed., Istoriia upravlencheskoi mysli (Moscow: RGGU, 2013), but is featured prom-
inently in Vladislav A. Lektorsky and Marina F. Bykova, eds., Philosophical Thought in 
Rus­sia in the Second Half of the Twentieth ­Century: A Con­temporary View from Rus­sia 
and Abroad (London: Bloomsbury, 2019). The only extensive historical account on Geor-
gii Shchedrovitskii is published by his former student in French, where Shchedro-
vitskii’s thought and practice are explored in relation to Marxist philosophy, social theory, 
and social psy­chol­ogy, but not management. Svetlana Tabatchnikova, Le cercle de mé-
thodologie de Moscou (1954–1988): Une pensée, une pratique (Paris: EHESS, 2007).
13. Both Khristenko and Reus hail from Cheliabinsk in Siberia ­because their parents 
­were deported to the Gulag. Khristenko and Reus published a sizeable collection on 
Shchedrovitskii’s and their own writing, not only in Rus­sian, but also in En­glish with 
Bloomsbury in 2014. The UK publication was shortlisted for the Chartered Management 
Institute’s Management Book of the Year. Shchedrovitskii’s thought had traveled on quite 
a journey, from semi-­underground discussion clubs of the 1950s to the boardrooms of 
Rosatom and the pages of an officially endorsed publication with a major London-­based 
press. See V. B. Khristenko, A. G. Reus, A. P. Zinchenko et al., Methodological School of 
Management (London: Bloomsbury, 2014).
14. For a comparative analy­sis of high modernism see Scott, Seeing Like a State.
15. For a well-­structured overview of dif­fer­ent methods of forecasting, see J. Scott Arm-
strong, Long-­Range Forecasting: From Crystal Ball to Computer (New York: Wiley, 1985); for 
governmental uses of statistics, Alain Desrosières, The Politics of Large Numbers: A History 
of Statistical Reasoning (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1998). For predictive 
technologies in the high modernist state, see Jenny Andersson, “Governing ­Futures: States 
and the Management of Expectations,” in Reconfiguring Eu­ro­pean States in Crisis, eds. Pat-
rick Le Gales and Desmond King (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2017), 298–312.
16. For a useful discussion of dif­fer­ent notions of technocracy, see Frank Fischer, Tech-
nocracy and the Politics of Expertise (Newbury Park, CA: Sage, 1990); see also Peter 
Galison and Bruce William Hevly, eds., Big Science: The Growth of Large Scale Research 
(Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1992).
17. Georgii Shchedrovitskii, Orgupravlencheskoe myshlenie: ideologiia, metodologiia, 
tekhnologiia (Moscow: Studia Artemeva Lebedeva, 2013).
18. Arturo Rosenblueth, Norbert Wiener, and Julian Bigelow, “Be­hav­ior, Purpose and 
Teleology,” Philosophy of Science, 10 (1943): 18–24.
19. See a summary of the cybernetic approach to goal-­seeking be­hav­ior by the cyber-
netician Bernard Scott, “The Sociocybernetics of Observation and Reflexivity,” Current 
Sociology 67, no. 4 (2019): 495–510.
20. See Ledeneva’s work on informality and Stephen Fortescue, ed., Rus­sian Politics: 
From Lenin to Putin (Basingstoke, UK: Palgrave Macmillan, 2010).
21. This led some scholars to propose that it was the KGB and not scientific experts 
that played the central role of information pro­cessing in Soviet governance. Scott Shane, 
Dismantling Utopia: How Information Ended the Soviet Union (Chicago: Ivan R. Dee, 
1994). See also Michael Ellman and Vladimir Kantorovich, eds., The Destruction of the 
Soviet Economic System: An Insider’s History (London: Routledge, 1988).

226	
NOTES TO PAGES 107–109
22. Georgii Shchedrovitskii, Ia vsegda byl idealistom . . . (Moscow: NNF Institut raz-
vitiia im. G.P. Shchedrovitskogo, 2001).
23. Shchedrovitskii, Ia vsegda byl idealistom; Elena Laskari, Kto, esli ne ia (2019).
24. Laskari, Kto, esli ne ia.
25. One of the first Rus­sian phi­los­o­phers of logic was Pavel Florensky, a trained math-
ematician and an Orthodox priest, who proposed a formal method to systematize Or-
thodox theology. Florensky was invited to participate in the first large-­scale infrastructural 
planning effort, the GOELRO. He was killed in Stalin’s purges in 1937. Kirill Sokolov 
and Avril Pyman, “­Father Pavel Florensky and Vladimir Favorsky: Mutual Insights into 
the Perception of Space,” Leonardo 22, no. 2 (1989): 237–244.
26. A. M. Anisov, O. V. Maliukova, and L. A. Demina, Stanovlenie otechestvennoi 
logiki: diskursy i sudby (Moscow: Prospekt, 2019); Valentin Bazhanov, Istoriia logiki v Ros-
sii i SSSR: kontseptualʹnyĭ kontekst universitetskoĭ filosofii (Moscow: Kanon, 2007); Geor-
gii Shchedrovitskii, “Lektsiia 1: 18 fevralia 1988,” in Zapisi Rizhskogo metodologicheskogo 
seminara, vol. 1 (Riga: BISI, 2010), 27–28.
27. For the links between philosophy and history, see Elena Aronova, Scientific His-
tory: Experiments in History and Politics from the Bolshevik Revolution to the End of the 
Cold War (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2021).
28. Shchedrovitskii, “Lektsiia 1,” 17, 52.
29. Ianina Prudenko, Kibernetika v gumanitarnykh naukakh i iskusstve v SSSR: Analiz 
bol’shikh baz dannykh i komp’iuternoe tvorchestvo (Moscow: Garazh, 2018), 168.
30. Vladislav Zubok, Zhivago’s ­Children: The Last Rus­sian Intelligent­sia (Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press, 2011), 90–93. For the Soviet aid programs and exchanges 
with the developing countries, see James Mark, Artemy M. Kalinovsky and Steffi Marung, 
eds., Alternative Globalizations: Eastern Eu­rope and the Postcolonial World (Blooming-
ton: Indiana University Press, 2020).
31. Zubok, Zhivago’s ­Children, 126; Asif Siddiqi, “Atomized Urbanism: Secrecy and 
Security from the Gulag to the Closed City,” Urban History (2021): 1–21.
32. Some historians suggested that Shchedrovitskii’s group launched “a seminar 
movement” in Soviet humanities and social sciences. See Larissa Titarenko and Elena 
Zdravomyslova, Sociology in Rus­sia: A Brief History (Cham: Palgrave, 2017), Kindle loca-
tion 1291. However, such meetings ­were fairly common, they expressed the spirit of the 
times: the mid-1950s, at least in Moscow, saw a spontaneous rise in informal group activi-
ties among cultural intelligent­sia. ­These meetings ­were clamped down on, starting in 
1956 and 1957. See Vladislav Zubok, Zhivago’s ­Children, 81–82. The sociologist Tomila 
Lankina links this form of carefully cultivated informal intellectual sociability to the 
habitus of the Rus­sian ­middle class as it resisted the fragmenting and disruptive forces of 
the communist repression and bureaucracy. Shchedrovitskii—as well as other key think-
ers discussed in this book—­were certainly representatives of the ­middle and upper classes. 
Tomila Lankina, The Estate Origins of Democracy in Rus­sia: From Imperial Bourgeoisie to 
Post-­Communist ­Middle Class (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2021).
33. Slava Gerovitch, From Newspeak to Cyberspeak: A History of Soviet Cybernetics 
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2002); Prudenko, Kibernetika, 70.
34. Gerovitch, From Newspeak to Cyberspeak, 219–220.
35. Vesa Oittinen, ed., Evald Ilyenkov’s Philosophy Revisited (Helsinki: Kikimora, 
2000).
36. This seminar was criticized by some influential hardliners, such as phi­los­o­pher 
and academician Todor Pavlov. Georgii Shchedrovitskii, “Problemy metodologii sistem-
nogo issledovaniia (1964),” in Izbrannye Trudy by Georgii Shchedrovitskii (Moscow: 
Shkola kul´turnoi politiki, 1995), 155–196; also Anatolii Piskoppel´, “K tvorcheskoi bio-

	
NOTES TO PAGES 109–111	
227
grafii G.P. Shchedrovitskogo (1929–1994),” in Izbrannye Trudy by Georgii Shchedro-
vitskii (Moscow: Shkola kul´turnoi politiki, 1995), xxiii–­xxiv.
37. Georgii Shchedrovitskii, “Problemy metodologii sistemnogo issledovaniia.”
38. Shchedrovitskii situated his approach in the context of the East–­West transfer of 
management sciences, such as systems analy­sis and operations research. Shchedrovitskii’s 
thought was inspired by the interwar study of linguistics and pedagogy. Yet due to space 
limitation, in this chapter I focus my discussion on the postwar development of cybernet-
ics and systems analy­sis, the fields that gave legitimacy to Shchedrovitskii’s work during 
the Soviet period. See Vladislav A. Lektorsky, “The Activity Approach in Soviet Philoso-
phy and Con­temporary Cognitive Studies,” in Philosophical Thought in Rus­sia in the Sec-
ond Half of the Twentieth ­Century: A Con­temporary View from Rus­sia and Abroad, eds. 
Vladislav Lektorsky and Marina Bykova (London: Bloomsbury, 2019), 137–153.
39. Ekaterina Babintseva, “ ‘Overtake and Surpass’: Soviet Algorithmic Thinking as a 
Revinvention of Western Theories during the Cold War,” in Cold War Social Science: 
Transnational Entanglements, eds. Mark Solovey and Christian Daye (Cham: Springer, 
2021), 45–72; Matvei Solomonovich Khromchenko, Letopis’ (Moscow: Studia Korolovae, 
2019), 27, https://­conflictmanagement​.­ru​/­wp​-­content​/­uploads​/­2016​/­02​/­letopis​_­MKh03​
.­pdf.
40. See the biography on www​.­fondgp​.­org.
41. Vladimir Lefebvre, Konfliktuiushchie struktury (Moscow: Vysh.shkola, 1967).
42. Timothy L. Thomas, “Rus­sia’s Reflexive Control Theory and the Military,” Jour-
nal of Slavic Military Studies 17 (2004): 237–256.
43. Some criticized Shchedrovitskii’s “totalitarian attitude”; see the memoir by his 
colleague at VINITE. Igor Golomstock, A Ransomed Dissident: A Life in Art ­Under the 
Soviets (London: I.B. Tauris, 2019).
44. Laskari, Kto, esli ne ia.
45. Shchedrovitskii often cited academic works published in En­glish. He read the prin-
cipal works in systems analy­sis by Edward Quade, Stanford Optner, Russell Ackoff, 
Ludwig von Bertalanffy, Anatolii Rapoport, and Herbert Simon, many of which ­were 
both translated into Rus­sian and available in the original languages at Moscow librar-
ies. Shchedrovitskii often referred to structuralists, such as Saussure and Parsons. It is 
curious, however, that he did not refer to any Western works on business games or strat-
egy simulation games, although publications on ­these methods ­were available, for in-
stance, published by Voenizdat (a publishing ­house specializing in military defense). See 
Shchedrovitskii, Izbrannye Trudy (Moscow: Shkola kul´turnoi politiki, 1995).
46. For Soviet artists and intelligent­sia pushing the limits of the freedom of expres-
sion in the 1960s, see Zubok, Zhivago’s ­Children, 140–200.
47. Dmitry Azrikan, “VNIITE, Dinosaur of Totalitarianism or Plato’s Acad­emy of De-
sign?” Design Issues 15, no. 3 (1999): 45–77.
48. Zubok, Zhivago’s ­Children, 277.
49. This became known as the Trial of the Four. It led to a protest and a petition cam-
paign. In all, about ninety individuals signed the letters, including the designer of the first 
Soviet thermonuclear bomb, Andrei Sakharov. Robert Horvath, The Legacy of Soviet Dis-
sent: Dissidents, Demo­cratisation and Radical Nationalism in Rus­sia (London: Routledge, 
2005).
50. Reportedly, all the signatories of this letter lost their jobs. Shchedrovitskii began to 
publish again a few years ­after the repression: in addition to many articles, he coauthored a 
monograph on automated systems in design, together with Oleg Genisaretskii and Anatolii 
Rapaport, among ­others, published in 1975. Piskoppel´, “K tvorcheskoi,” xxxii–­xxxiii.
51. Piskoppel´, “K tvorcheskoi,” xxxii–­xxxiii.

228	
NOTES TO PAGES 111–113
52. Biographers note that several colleagues of Shchedrovitskii left his circle in the 
mid-1970s fearing that their participation in this informal collective could obstruct their 
­careers. Piskoppel´, “K tvorcheskoi,” xxxiii.
53. Andrew Schumann, “Rationality in Belarusian Thinking,” Studies in Logic, Gram-
mar and Rhe­toric 13, no. 26 (2008): 7–26, 19.
54. Nikolai Lapin and Boris Sazonov, “The Activity-­Systems Approach to Develop-
ment of the ­Human ­Factor in Innovation,” in A Science of Goal Formulation: American 
and Soviet Discussions of Cybernetics and Systems Theory, eds. Stuart A. Umpleby and 
Vadim N. Sadovsky (New York: Hemi­sphere, 1991), 195–206.
55. Georgii Shchedrovitskii, “Printsipy i obshchaia schema metodologicheskoi orga-
nizatsii sistemno-­strukturnykh issledovanii i razrabotok (1981),” in Izbrannye Trudy by 
Georgii Shchedrovitskii (Moscow: Shkola kul´turnoi politiki, 1995), 95.
56. Shchedrovitskii, “Printsipy.”
57. See the entry in the Oxford En­glish Dictionary, www​.­oed​.­com, accessed 10 
April 2015.
58. Georgii Shchedrovitskii, “­Mental Activity and Pure Thought,” in Methodological 
School of Management, eds. V. B. Khristenko, A. G. Reus, A. P. Zinchenko, et al. (Lon-
don: Bloomsbury, 2014), 33–50, 38.
59. Namely, the work of Lefebvre, see Georgii Shchedrovitskii, “Refleksiia (1974),” in 
Izbrannye Trudy (Moscow: Shkola kul´turnoi politiki, 1995), 485–495.
60. For a discussion of dif­fer­ent modes and historical development of reflexivity, see 
Margaret Archer, The Reflexive Imperative in Late Modernity (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 2012); Roger Smith, “Does Reflexivity Separate the ­Human Sciences 
from the Natu­ral Sciences?” History of the ­Human Sciences 18, no. 4 (2005): 1–25. I re-
turn to the question of reflexivity in chapter 6.
61. George Dantzig and Jay Forrester ­were among the first to develop computer ap-
plications for group decisions. For RAND and planning, see Jennifer S. Light, From War-
fare to Welfare: Defense Intellectuals and Urban Prob­lems in Cold War Amer­i­ca 
(Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2003); Jennifer S. Light, “Taking Games Se-
riously,” Technology and Culture 49, no. 2 (2008): 347–375. For an overview of business 
games, see Joseph Wolfe, “A History of Business Teaching Games in English-­Speaking 
and Post-­Socialist Countries: The Origination and Diffusion of a Management Educa-
tion and Development Technology,” Simulation and Gaming 24, no. 4 (1993): 445–463; 
D. J. Power, A Brief History of Decision Support Systems, DSSResources​.­com, version 4.0 
(10 March 2007).
62. On la prospective as a form of social engineering, see Jenny Andersson, The ­Future 
of the World: Futurology, Futurists, and the Strug­gle for the Post-­Cold War Imagination 
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2018), 65–70. For examples of normativity asserted 
by the representatives of la prospective, see Michel Godet, “From Forecasting to la pro-
spective: A New Way of Looking at ­Futures,” Journal of Forecasting 1 (1982): 293–301; 
Tuomo Kuosa, The Evolution of Strategic Foresight: Navigating Public Policy Making 
(Farnham, UK: Ashgate, 2012).
63. Shchedrovitskii, “Printsipy,” 112.
64. John H. Gagnon, “Mary M. Birshtein: The ­Mother of Soviet Simulation Gaming,” 
Simulation Gaming 18, no. 3 (1987): 3–12; M. Belchikov and M. M. Birshtein, Delovye 
igry (Riga, Latvia: AVOTS, 1989).
65. V. N. Makarevich, “Igropraktiki, metodologi: ‘Nezrimoe soobshchestvo’ vykhodit 
iz podpol’ia,” SOTSIS 7 (1992): 50–56.
66. A. J. Faria, David Hutchinson, William Wellington, and Steven Gold, “Develop-
ments in Business Gaming: A Review of the Past 40 Years,” Simulation and Gaming 40, 
no. 4 (2009): 464–487.

	
NOTES TO PAGES 113–118	
229
67. Stephen Cummings, Todd Bridgman, John Hassard, and Michael Rowlinson, A 
New History of Management (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2017), 65–174.
68. Georgii Shchedrovitskii and S. I. Kotel´nikov, “Organizatsionno-­deiatel´nostnaia 
igra kak novaia forma organizatsii i metod razvitiia kollektivnoi mysledeiatel´nosti 
(1983),” in G. P. Shchedrovitskii, Izbrannye Trudy (Moscow: Shkola kul´turnoi politiki, 
1995), 115–142.
69. Gregory Bedny, Mark Seglin, and David Meister, “Activity Theory: History, Re-
search and Application,” Theoretical Issues in Ergonomics Science 1, no. 2 (2000): 168–206.
70. Georgii Shchedrovitskii, “Lektsiia 2: 19 fevralia 1988,” Zapisi Rizhskogo 
metodologicheskogo seminara, vol. 1 (Riga, Latvia: BISI, 2010), 65.
71. Katherine Hayles, How We Became Posthuman: Virtual Bodies in Cybernetics, Lit­
er­a­ture, and Informatics (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1999), 136.
72. Titarenko and Zdravomyslova, Sociology in Rus­sia, Kindle location 1060.
73. Shchedrovitskii and Kotel´nikov, “Organizatsionno-­deiatel´nostnaia igra,” 121, 
124–125.
74. Osintseva, “Novaia Utka.”
75. Shchedrovitskii and Kotel´nikov, “Organizatsionno-­deiatel´nostnaia igra,” 
127–128.
76. Shchedrovitskii and Kotel´nikov, “Organizatsionno-­deiatel´nostnaia igra,” 
113–142.
77. Shchedrovitskii and Kotel´nikov, “Organizatsionno-­deiatel´nostnaia igra,” 118.
78. Petr Shchedrovitskii, “Predislovie,” in Georgii Shchedrovitskii, Orguprav-
lencheskoe myshlenie: ideologiia, metodologiia, tekhnologiia (Moscow: Izdatel’stvo Stu-
dii Artemiia Lebedeva, 2014).
79. I thank Tatiana Kasperski for the information on the Beloiarsk nuclear power 
plant.
80. Petr Shchedrovitskii, “Predislovie.”
81. Petr Shchedrovitskii, “Predislovie,” 140.
82. See the story narrated by Georgii Shchedrovitskii, “Perspektivy i programmy raz-
vitiia SMD-­metodologii,” www​.­bdn​-­steiner​.­ru, accessed 10 April  2015, http://­bdn​
-­steiner​.­ru​/­modules​.­php​?­name​=­Archives&l​_­op​=­visit&lid​=­31.
83. Shchedrovitskii and Kotel’nikov, “Organizatsionno-­deiatel´nostnaia igra,” 138.
84. Shchedrovitskii and Kotel’nikov, “Organizatsionno-­deiatel´nostnaia igra,” 138.
85. Erving Goffman, Encounters (New York: Bobbs-­Merrill, 1961); cf. Light, “Taking 
Games Seriously,” 372.
86. Boris Iudin, “Ot gumanitarnogo znaniia k gumanitarnym tekhnologiiam,” Gu-
manitarnye nauki: teoriia i metodologiia 4 (2005): 104–107. Stephen Collier and Anke 
Gruendel, “Design and Government: City Planning, Space-­Making, and Urban Politics,” 
Po­liti­cal Geography 97 (2022): 1–13.
87. Shchedrovitskii and Kotel’nikov, “Organizatsionno-­deiatel´nostnaia igra,” 141.
88. Shchedrovitskii refers to the Rus­sian translation (1962) of the work of US schol-
ars Harry Good and Robert Machol, Systems Engineering: An Introduction to the Design 
of Large-­Scale Systems (New York: McGraw Hill, 1957).
89. Georgii Shchedrovitskii, “Budushchee est´ rabota myshleniia i deistviia,” Voprosy 
metodologii, 3–4 (1994). Available at fondgp.ru/publications/.
90. Shchedrovitskii and Kotel’nikov, “Organizatsionno-­deiatel´nostnaia igra.”
91. Shchedrovitskii, “Lektsiia 2,” 71.
92. Shchedrovitskii, “Lektsiia 2.”
93. This was perceived as transgressive by some Party ideologues. For instance, at a 
game on ­free elections, a high official in the Riga city government warned the participants 
to “behave themselves,” something which game technologist Sergei Popov refused to do. 

230	
NOTES TO PAGES 118–124
Georgii Shchedrovitskii, Organizatsiia, rukovodstvo, upravlenie II (Moscow: Put´, 2003), 
36–37.
94. Shchedrovitskii, “Budushchee est´ rabota myshleniia i deistviia.”
95. For more on “Rus­sian world,” see Michael Gorham, “Virtual Rusophonia: Lan-
guage Policy as ‘Soft Power’ in the New Media Age,” Digital Icons 5 (2011): 23–48; Andis 
Kudors, “ ‘Rus­sian World’: Rus­sia’s Soft Power Approach to Compatriots Policy,” Rus­sian 
Analytical Digest 81 (16 June 2010): 2–4.
96. Violetta Volkova, Iz istorii teorii sistem i sistemnogo analiza (St Petersburg: SPb-
GPU, 2004); also Tabatchnikova, Le cercle; Khristenko et al., Methodological School of 
Management.
97. Aaron Wildawsky, Speaking Truth to Power: The Art and Craft of Policy Analy­sis 
(London: Macmillan, 1980).
6. REFLEXIVE CONTROL
1. Reflexive control appears in many papers written to alert Western governments to 
the Rus­sian threat. Timothy Thomas, “Rus­sia’s Military Strategy and Ukraine: Indirect, 
Asymmetric, and Putin-­Led,” Journal of Slavic Military Studies 28, no. 3 (2015): 445–461; 
Kan Casapoglu, “Rus­sia’s Renewed Military Thinking: Non-­Linear Warfare and Reflex-
ive Control,” NATO Defence College Research Paper 121 (2015): 1–12; Michał Wojnowski, 
“ ‘Zarządzanie refleksyjne’ jako paradygmat rosyjskich operacji informacyjno-­
psychologicznych w XXI w.,” Przegląd Bezpieczeństwa Wewnętrznego 12 (2015): 11–36; 
Han Bowmeester, “Lo and Behold: Let the Truth Be Told—­Russian Deception Warfare in 
Crimea and Ukraine and the Return of ‘Maskirovka’ and ‘Reflexive Control Theory,’ ” in 
Netherlands Annual Review of Military Studies 2017, eds. Paul  A.  L. Ducheine and 
Frans P. B. Osinga (The Hague: Springer, 2017), 140–142; Hakan Gunneriusson and Sascha 
Dov Bachmann, “Western Denial and Rus­sian Control: How Rus­sia’s National Security 
Strategy Threatens a Western-­Based Approach to Global Security, the Rule of Law and 
Globalization,” Polish Po­liti­cal Science Yearbook 46, no. 1 (2017): 9–29; Nicolás de Pedro, 
Panagiota Manoli, Sergey Sukhankin, and Theodoros Tsakiris, Facing Rus­sia’s Strategic 
Challenge: Security Developments from the Baltic Sea to the Black Sea (Brussels: Eu­ro­pean 
Parliament Policy Department, Directorate General for External Policies, 2017).
2. Vladimir Lefebvre, “Elementy logiki refleksivnykh igr,” Problemy inzhinernoi psi­
khologii 4 (1966): 273–299. Although Lefebvre himself wrote that reflexive control theory 
is not about strategy if “strategy” is defined in a narrow way as the most efficient means to 
the achievement of par­tic­u­lar ends. For Lefebvre, reflexive control theory is rather a wider 
governmental technique that can contain a strategic component but is not reduced to it.
3. Robert Seely, “Defining Con­temporary Rus­sian Warfare: Beyond the Hybrid Head-
line,” RUSI Journal 162, no. 1 (April 3, 2017): 50–59.
4. Vladimir Lefebvre, Lektsii po teorii refleksivnykh igr (Moscow: Kogito-­Tsentr, 
2009), 7.
5. Robert Merton, The Sociology of Science: Theoretical and Empirical Investigations 
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1972), 265–278.
6. Nikolai Gogol, The Gamblers and Marriage, trans. Alexander Berkman (Digireads, 
Kindle edition, 2014), Kindle location 256–257.
7. Diego A. Ruiz Palmer, “Back to the ­Future: Rus­sia’s Hybrid Warfare, Revolutions 
in Military Affairs, and Cold War Comparisons,” NATO Defence College Research Pa-
per 120 (2015): 1–12.
8. For the changing direction of Putin’s geopolitics see Iver B. Neumann, “Rus­sia’s Eu­
rope, 1991–2016: Inferiority to Superiority,” International Affairs 92, no. 6 (2016): 1381–
1399; Maria Snegovaya, Putin’s Information Warfare in Ukraine: Soviet Origins of Rus­sian 

	
NOTES TO PAGES 124–125	
231
Hybrid Warfare, Rus­sia Report I (Washington, DC: NATO STRATCOM, September 2015). 
For Cold War analyses of Soviet reflexive control see Diane Chotikul, “The Soviet Theory 
of Reflexive Control in Historical and Psychocultural Perspective: Preliminary Study,” 
(unpublished thesis, Naval Postgraduate School, Monterey, CA, 1986); Brian D. Dailey and 
Patrick J. Parker, eds., Soviet Strategic Deception (Lanham, MD: Lexington, 1987); 
E. Boginskii, Refleksivnoe upravlenie pri doprose (Kharkiv: KhIuI, 1983). Note that ­these 
authors share an assumption that reflexive control is “realist,” that is, rational, instrumen-
tal and directly implemented in practice.
9. For background, see Katri Pynnöniemi, “Rus­sia’s National Security Strategy: Analy­
sis of Conceptual Evolution,” Journal of Slavic Military Studies 31, no. 2 (2018): 240–256.
10. In 2004, ­there was an attempt to create a Club of the Strategic Elite, gathering 
scholars and leaders to shape the domestic and international strategy for Rus­sia’s devel-
opment. Moscow-­based reflexive control scholars kept close links with key corporations 
such as Rosatom and the presidential administration. For instance, as pointed out by Sne-
govaya, Aleksandr Beritskii, an influential strategy con­sul­tant and now the director of 
Tavricheskii Informational-­Analytical Center, wrote a doctoral dissertation on reflex-
ive control. See Mark Galeotti, Rus­sian Po­liti­cal War: Moving Beyond the Hybrid (Lon-
don: Routledge, 2019); Aki-­Mauri Huhtinen, Noora Kotilainen, Saara Särmä, and Mikko 
Streng, “Information Influence in Hybrid Environment: Reflexive Control as an Ana-
lytical Tool for Understanding Warfare in Social Media,” International Journal of Cyber 
Warfare and Terrorism 9, no. 3 (2019): 1–20.
11. In addition to Georgii Shchedrovitskii, see, for instance, Aleksandr Avilov, Re-
fleksivnoe upravlenie: metodologicheskie osnovanie (Moscow: GUU, 2003); Vladimir 
Usov, Refleksivnoe upravlenie: filosofsko-­metodologicheskii aspect (Cheliabinsk: Iurgu, 
2010); and the many works by Vladimir Lepskii, the key promoter of reflexive control 
theory in Rus­sia at this moment of writing.
12. B. F. Skinner, Beyond Freedom and Dignity (New York: Pelican, 1971). Skinner-
ian behaviorism, according to Shoshanna Zuboff, informed the practice of “cybernetic 
behaviorism” where digital technology companies seek to make user be­hav­ior predict-
able, although as I show in this book, the concept of prediction is much more compli-
cated than the one presented in Zuboff’s account. Shoshanna Zuboff, The Age of 
Surveillance Capitalism: The Fight for a ­Human ­Future at the New Frontier of Power (New 
York: Profile Books, 2019).
13. Stuart Russell, ­Human Compatible: Artificial Intelligence and the Prob­lem of Con-
trol (London: Viking, 2019).
14. Il’ia Kriger, “Vladimir Lefevr: Ideologiiu nel’zia sozdat’—­ona vozniknet neza-
metno samo soboi,” Novaia gazeta 84 (1 November 2007).
15. Some of Lefebvre’s writings ­were discussed by Karl Popper and ­there is an attempt 
to situate Lefebvre’s ideas in the history of second-­order cybernetics. Vladimir Lefeb-
vre, Research on Bi­polar­ity and Reflexivity (New York: Edwin Mellen, 2006); Alexander 
Riegler, Karl Muller, and Stuart Umpleby, eds., New Horizons for Second Order Cyber-
netics (Hackensack, NJ: World Scientific, 2017). 
15. For instance, Lefebvre’s former gradu­ate student Vladimir Lepskii made sure that 
from the 1990s, the Acad­emy of Sciences’ Institute of Philosophy published a number of 
volumes dedicated to Lefebvre. In the United States, Stuart Umpleby facilitated links 
between Rus­sian and US systems thinkers from the 1980s. See Stuart Umpleby, “From 
Complexity to Reflexivity: Under­lying Logics Used in Science,” Journal of the Washing-
ton Acad­emy of Sciences 96, no. 1 (2010): 15–26.
16. Georgii Smolian, “Refleksivnoe upravlenie: tekhnologiia priniatiia manipulia-
tivnykh reshenii,” Trudy instituta sistemnogo analiza RAN 63, no. 2 (2013): 54–61. Reflex-
ive control entered popu­lar culture through the fiction writer Viktor Pelevin. In his many 

232	
NOTES TO PAGES 125–128
bestsellers, such as Chapaev and the Void (originally published in Moscow in 1996, trans-
lated into En­glish and published as Bud­dha’s ­Little Fin­ger by Penguin in 2001), Pelevin 
depicted social relations in Rus­sian society as subject to extreme semiotic manipulation 
that undermines the stability of social and physical real­ity. Pelevin combined references 
to Buddhism and reflexive control to narrate the post-­Soviet transition from central plan-
ning to a marketing-­based business model as a semiotic construct. The ­free choice, wrote 
Pelevin, was a necessary illusion, although the ­actual mechanism of choosing could be 
better captured in the phrase “coercive orientation.” Indeed, this translation of reflexive 
control into popu­lar fiction was explored by Smolian, Lefebvre’s close intellectual collabo-
rator. See Georgii Smolian and Galina Solntseva, “Vladimir Lefevr i Viktor Pelevin ob 
upravlenie vyborom resheniia” (unpublished paper presented at “Reflexive Pro­cesses and 
Governance,” RAN Institute of Philosophy, Moscow, October 2013), 1–18.
17. Hilary Lawson, Reflexivity: The Post-­Modern Predicament (London: Hutchinson, 
1985).
18. Michel Foucault, The Order of ­Things: An Archaeology of the ­Human Sciences (New 
York: Vintage Books, 1970), 6.
19. Foucault, The Order of ­Things, 327.
20. Joel Snyder, “ ‘Las Meninas’ and the Mirror of the Prince.” Critical Inquiry 11, no. 4 
(1983): 539–572.
21. Snyder, “Las Meninas.”
22. Owen Flanagan, “Psy­chol­ogy, Pro­gress, and the Prob­lem of Reflexivity: A Study 
in the Epistemological Foundations of Psy­chol­ogy,” Journal of the History of Behavioral 
Sciences 17, no. 3 (1981): 375.
23. Tony Bennett, Francis Dodsworth, Greg Noble, Mary Poovey, and Megan Wat-
kins, “Introduction,” Body and Society 19, nos. 2&3 (2013): 3–29. For the affinity between 
Michel Foucault’s notion of the reflexive self and neoliberal subjectivity see Mitchell Dean 
and Daniel Zamora, The Last Man Takes LSD: Foucault and the End of Revolution (Lon-
don: Verso, 2021).
24. Pierre Bourdieu and Loic Wacquant, An Invitation to Reflexive Sociology (Cam-
bridge, UK: Polity Press, 1992). From the mid-1970s, Giddens developed an approach to 
reflexivity as social self-­regulation at the individual and institutional levels, where the 
circulation of social scientific knowledge as a reflexive device plays a constitutive role. 
See Christopher G. A. Bryant, “George Soros’s Theory of Reflexivity: A Comparison with 
the Theories of Giddens and Beck and a Consideration of Its Practical Value,” Economy 
and Society 31, no. 1 (2002): 112–131; Anthony Giddens, New Rules of So­cio­log­i­cal Method 
(Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1976).
25. Steve Woolgar, ed. Knowledge and Reflexivity: New Frontiers in the Sociology of 
Knowledge (London: Sage, 1988).
26. Dick Pels, “Reflexivity: One Step Up,” Theory, Culture and Society 17, no. 3 
(2000): 1–25.
27. Michael Werner and Benedicte Zimmerman, “Histoire Croisée: Between the Em-
pirical and Reflexivity,” Annales: Histoire, science sociales 1 (2003): 7–36.
28. See a special issue examining the use of habit as a stratifying and discriminatory con-
cept in the early so­cio­log­i­cal accounts of ­human be­hav­ior, Bennett et al., “Introduction.”
29. Tony Bennett, “Habit: Time, Freedom, Governance.” Body and Society 19, nos. 2&3 
(2013): 107–135, 108.
30. Although see Richard Staley’s argument that the uses of the machine as a meta­
phor for the social addressed complexity and synchronization in early twentieth ­century 
discourses. Richard Staley, “The Interwar Period as a Machine Age: Mechanics, the Ma-
chine, Mechanisms and the Market in Discourse,” Science in Context 31, no. 3 (2018): 
263–292.

	
NOTES TO PAGES 129–131	
233
31. Eugene Raikhel, “Reflex/Рефлекс,” Somatosphere (November  2014), http://­
somatosphere​.­net​/­2014​/­reflex%D1%80%D0%B5%D1%84%D0%BB%D0%B5%D0%BA
%D1%81​.­html​/­.
32. As the medical historian Eugene Raikhel has shown, following Georges Canguil-
hem, in biology, reflex was not ­limited to “an isolated organ’s mechanical response to a 
stimulus.” On the contrary, biologists understood reflex as “an already coordinated move-
ment determined in part by stimuli in a certain part of the organism and in part by the 
organism’s global state.” Raikhel, “Reflex/Рефлекс.”
33. The principal studies draw mainly on US, UK, and French intellectual develop-
ments and oscillate between the po­liti­cal critique of cybernetic models of decisions and 
control as a form of (neoliberal) authoritarianism and genealogical analy­sis of its hybrid 
roots in dif­fer­ent disciplines. Nicolas Guilhot and Daniel Bessner, eds., Decisionist Imagi-
nation: Sovereignty, Social Science and Democracy in the 20th ­Century (Oxford: Berghahn 
Books, 2018); Ron Robin, The Cold World They Made: The Strategic Legacy of Roberta and 
Albert Wohlstetter (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2016); S. M. Amadae, Pris-
oners of Reason: Game Theory and Neoliberal Po­liti­cal Economy (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 2015); Daniel Bessner, “Organ­izing Complexity: The Hopeful Dreams 
and Harsh Realities of Interdisciplinary Collaboration at the Rand Corporation in the 
Early Cold War,” Journal of the History of the Behavioral Sciences 51, no. 1 (2015): 31–53; 
Paul Erickson, The World the Game Theorists Made (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 
2015); Roger Back­house and Philippe Fontaine, eds., A Historiography of the Modern Social 
Sciences (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2014); Rebecca Slayton, Arguments That 
Count: Physics, Computing, and Missile Defense, 1949–2012 (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 
2013); Mark Solovey and Hamilton Cravens, eds., Cold War Social Science: Knowledge Pro-
duction, Liberal Democracy, and ­Human Nature (Basingstoke, UK: Macmillan, 2012); Nico-
las Guilhot, “Cybernetic Pantocrator: International Relations Theory from Decisionism to 
Rational Choice,” Journal of the History of the Behavioral Sciences 47, no. 3 (2011): 279–301; 
Paul Edwards, Vast Machine: Computer Models, Climate Data and the Politics of Global 
Warming (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2010); John Agar, The Government Machine: A Rev-
olutionary History of the Computer (Cambridge: MIT Press, 2003); S. M. Amadae, Rational-
izing Cap­i­tal­ist Democracy: The Cold War Origins of Rational Choice Liberalism (Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 2003).
34. See also Bernard Scott, “The Sociocybernetics of Observation and Reflexivity,” 
Current Sociology 67, no. 4 (2019): 495–510.
35. Gregory Bateson, Steps to an Ecol­ogy of Mind: Collected Essays in Anthropology, 
Psychiatry, Evolution, and Epistemology (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2000); Pe-
ter Harries-­Jones, A Recursive Vision: Ecological Understanding and Gregory Bateson (To-
ronto: University of Toronto Press, 1995), 111–112. Harries-­Jones refers to Bateson’s model 
of the self as a reflexive loop, “which somehow acquires a contrast of self, in relation to 
system, as it spirals ­towards its own origin” (A Recursive Vision, 180). For Lefebvre this 
trajectory of the self would describe only one dimension of reflexivity, where the projection 
of the self seeks to be identical with the self that is projected by ­others. Bateson’s influential 
idea of the “double bind” described a type of dysfunctional communication where the in-
dividual sends contradicting signals to another, for instance, a ­mother says that she loves 
her child but at the same time pushes the child away. In Rus­sian reflexive control, this 
Batesonian “double bind” was ­adopted as a cognitive resource to confuse and paralyze the 
opponent. See V. E. Lepskii, Tekhnologii upravleniia v informatsionnykh voinakh (ot klas-
siki do postneklassiki) (Moscow: Kogito-­Tsentr, 2016), 76.
36. Xenia Kramer, Tim Kaiser, Stefan Schmidt, Jim Davidson, and Vladimir Lefebvre, 
“Ot predskazanii k refleksivnomu upravleniiu,” Refleksivnye protsessy i upravlenie 2, no. 3 
(2003): 35–52.

234	
NOTES TO PAGES 131–134
37. Aleksandr G. Rappaport, “V.A. Lefevr—20 (50) let spustia,” Refleksivnye protsessy 
i upravlenie 16, nos. 1–2 (2016): 85–91.
38. A. E. Levintov, “Proiskhozhdenie i priroda refleksii,” Refleksivnye protsessy i up-
ravlenie 16, nos. 1–2 (2016): 82–85.
39. Irina Sandomirskaja, Blokada v slove: Ocherki kriticheskoi teorii i biopolitiki ia-
zyka (Moscow: NLO, 2013).
40. Vladimir Lefebvre, “Vozvrashchenie,” in Vladimir Lefevr, Refleksiia (Moscow: 
Kogito-­Tsentr, 2003), 436; Vladimir Lefevr, “Rasskazy o Zinchenko,” Refleksivnye 
protsessy i upravlenie 11, nos. 1–2 (2011): 93–98, 95.
41. The first publication about reflexive control theory, “The Ele­ments of the Logic of 
Reflexive Games,” appeared in the journal Prob­lems of Engineering Psy­chol­ogy, published 
by Leningrad University, in 1966. Georgii Smolian, “Sub’ektivnye zametki k iubileiu V.A. 
Lefevra,” Refleksivnye protsessy i upravlenie 6, no. 1 (2006): 14–26.
42. A small detour. In 1967, the design of the third generation of the ICBM missile 
landed on Lefebvre’s and Zinchenko’s desk: but what their boss wanted to know was their 
opinion on why the Americans had made public the materials on this strategic weapon. 
At that time, wrote Lefebvre, they considered this publication was a message to the So-
viets, demonstrating the procedure preventing an un­co­or­di­nated or accidental launch 
(two buttons had to be pressed synchronously to launch the missile). However, writing 
in retrospect, Lefebvre noted that making the secret designs public was prob­ably des-
tined for internal communication with American taxpayers to reassure them that the 
military-­industrial complex was delivering. Lefebvre, “Vozvrashchenie,” 96.
43. The NIIAA (nauchnoe-­issledovatel’skii institute avtomaticheskoi apparatury), 
located in the southwest of Moscow.
44. V. P. Isaev, “Pervyi v SSSR podvizhnyi vychislitel’nyi tsentr voennogo naznache-
niia (1963–1968 gg),” Virtualnyi komp’iuternyi muzei (26 January 2011), http://­www​
.­computer​-­museum​.­ru​/­histussr​/­pvp​_­platforma​.­htm.
45. Lefebvre, “Vozvrashchenie,” 437.
46. Lefebvre, “Vozvrashchenie,” 436.
47. Tara Abraham, Rebel Genius: Warren S. McCulloch’s Transdisciplinary Life in Sci-
ence (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2016). See the seminal article by Warren McCulloch 
and Walter Pitts, “A Logical Calculus of the Ideas Immanent in Ner­vous Activity,” Bul-
letin of Mathematical Biophysics 5 (1943): 115–133.
48. Lefebvre, “Vozvrashchenie,” 436.
49. See Elena Aronova’s work on scientific information in the Soviet Union as East–­
West exchange, for instance, Elena Aronova, “The Politics and Contexts of Soviet Sci-
ence Studies (Naukovedenie): Soviet Philosophy of Science at the Crossroads,” Studies 
in East Eu­ro­pean Thought 63, no. 3 (2011): 175–202; and Elena Aronova, Scientific His-
tory: Experiments in History and Politics from the Bolshevik Revolution to the End of the 
Cold War (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2021).
50. Vladimir Lefebvre, “Konfliktuiushchie struktury (1967),” in Vladimir Lefevr, Re-
fleksiia (Moscow: Kogito-­Tsentr, 2003), 132–133.
51. Lefebvre, “Vozvrashchenie,” 438.
52. Cecily Deegan and Stephen Latham, “The B-­School vs the Wall Street Journal: 
Who Is Misrepresenting Whom,” Harvard Crimson (1 March  1979), https://­www​
.­thecrimson​.­com​/­article​/­1979​/­3​/­1​/­the​-­b​-­school​-­vs​-­the​-­wall​-­street​/­.
53. Bessner, “Organ­izing Complexity.”
54. Vladimir Lefebvre and Georgii Smolian, Algebra konflikta (Moscow: Librokom, 
2013), 3. Not only Rus­sian decision scholars resorted to lit­er­a­ture: fiction was held in high 
regard by RAND’s Social Science Division scientists as well. See Daniel Bessner, Democ-

	
NOTES TO PAGES 134–137	
235
racy in Exile: Hans Speier and the Rise of the Defense Intellectual (Ithaca, NY: Cornell 
University Press, 2018).
55. Lefebvre, “Vozvrashchenie,” 436. See also Roman Khandozhko, Vzaimodeistvie 
neofitsial’noi filosofii i nauchno-­tekhnicheskogo soobshchestva v pozdnem SSSR: sluchai 
Obninska (Moscow: Ranepa, 2016); Vladimir Lepskii, “Lefevre i refleksiia,” Refleksivnye 
protsessy i upravlenie 6, no. 1 (2006): 28.
56. Slava Gerovitch, “ ‘We Teach Them to Be ­Free’: Specialized Math Schools and the 
Cultivation of the Soviet Technical Intelligent­sia,” Kritika: Explorations in Rus­sian and 
Eurasian History 20, no. 4 (2019): 717–754.
57. Rappaport, “V.A. Lefevr—20 (50) let spustia,” 86.
58. F.  I. Ereshko, “Ravnovesie na mnozhestve refleksivnykh strategii,” Refleksivnye 
protsessy i upravlenie 16, nos. 1–2 (2016): 59–64; I. N. Semenov, “Personologiia zhiznet-
vorchestva V.A. Lefevra i razvitie refleksivnykh nauk (ot logiki i psikhologii cherez kiber-
netiku i etiku k kosmologii,” Refleksivnye protsesy i upravlenie 16, nos. 1–2 (2016): 100–106. 
A circle of Lefebvre’s followers continued the institutionalization of the interdisciplinary 
study of reflexivity: research centers and education departments ­were established at the 
Rus­sian Acad­emy of Sciences and the National Research University—­Higher School of 
Economics in Moscow. The RAN center is a member of the World Organ­ization of Systems 
and Cybernetics.
59. Vitalii Tsygichko, “Predislovie ko vtorumu izdaniiu,” in Vladimir Lefebvre and 
Georgii Smolian, Algebra konflikta (Moscow: Librokom, 2013), 1.
60. For instance, Lepskii presented his work on reflexive control at the fourth all-­
union congress of psychologists in Tbilisi, 1971. Research into behavioral prediction was 
developed by S. L. Rubinshtein and his students, such as Andrei Brushlinskii (1933–2002), 
who directed the Institute of Psy­chol­ogy at the Rus­sian Acad­emy of Science from 1989 to 
2002.
61. For more on TsEMI’s role in the development of Soviet economic cybernetics, see 
Ivan Boldyrev and Olessia Kirtchik, “The Cultures of Mathematical Economics in the 
Postwar Soviet Union: More Than a Method, Less Than a Discipline,” Studies in History 
and Philosophy of Science Part A 63 (2017): 1–10.
62. Semenov, Personologiia, 100–101.
63. Jack Murphy, “Rus­sian Reflexive Control Is Subverting the American Po­liti­cal 
Landscape,” Sofrep (26 September  2018), https://­sofrep​.­com​/­news​/­russian​-­reflexive​
-­control​-­is​-­subverting​-­the​-­american​-­political​-­landscape​/­.
64. David Priestland, Merchant, Soldier, Sage: A New History of Power (London: Al-
len, 2012), 126–132.
65. ­Will Thomas, The Rational Action: The Sciences of Policy in Britain and Amer­i­ca, 
1940-1960 (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2015), 84.
66. Pavel Podvig, “History and the Current Status of the Rus­sian Early Warning Sys-
tem,” Science and Global Security 10 (2002): 21–60; V. G. Repin, “Sobytie i liudi,” in 
Rubezhy oborony: v kosmose i na zemle. Ocherki istorii rakteno-­kosmicheskoi oborony, 
ed. N. G. Zavalin (Moscow: Veche, 2003), 433–472.
67. Thomas, Rational Action, 139, 145, 179; Condoleezza Rice, “The Party, the Mili-
tary, and Decision Authority in the Soviet Union,” World Politics 40, no. 1 (October 1987): 
55–81.
68. Correspondence between Vladimir Lefebvre and Anatol Rapoport, reproduced 
in a magazine published by the Rus­sian Acad­emy of Sciences, Anatol Rapoport and Vlad-
imir Lefebvre, “Vozmozhno li samoosvobozhdenie?” Chelovek 5 (1991): 79–85.
69. Petrus Buwalda, They Did Not Dwell Alone: Jewish Emigration from the Soviet 
Union, 1967–1990 (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1997), xv.

236	
NOTES TO PAGES 137–142
70. Jim Washburn, “The ­Human Equation: UC Irvine Theoretical Psychologist Vlad-
imir Lefebvre Uses Mathe­matics to Show Us Who We Are,” Los Angeles Times (31 
March 1993). For the emigration of scholars and intelligent­sia, see Slava Gerovitch, From 
Newspeak to Cyberspeak: A History of Soviet Cybernetics (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 
2002), 290–291; and particularly Vladislav Zubok, Zhivago’s ­Children: The Last Rus­sian 
Intelligent­sia (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2011).
71. The Rus­sian mathematician and game theorist Andrei Toom defected in 1989. Lo-
ren Graham and Irina Dezhina, Science in the New Rus­sia: Crisis, Aid, Reform (Bloom-
ington: Indiana University Press, 2008).
72. Vladimir Lefebvre, “Algebra sovesti: vospominanie avtora,” Znanie i sila 3 (2002).
73. Jack Matlock to Robert Mcfarlane, National Security Council, 3 August 1984; Jack 
Matlock to Robert McFarlane, National Security Council, 7 June 1984. Ronald Reagan 
Presidential Library Digital Library Collections, Collection: Matlock, Jack F.: Files Folder 
Title: Matlock Chron June 1984 [06/01/1984-06/07/1984] Box: 5.
74. Iuliia Netesova, “Upravliaiushchie katastrofoi: refleksivnye modeli sovetskogo i 
amerikanskogo obshchestv,” Ruskii zhurnal (Summer 2008): 129–130.
75. Jack Matlock to Vladimir Lefebvre, 8 October 1986. Copy supplied by Lefebvre 
to the journal. Ronald Reagan Presidential Library Digital Library Collections, Collec-
tion: Matlock, Jack.
76. Anatol Rapoport personal rec­ords, B2005–0018, University of Toronto Archives.
77. Lefebvre’s session was also attended by Ernst von Glasersfeld, Francesco Maturana, 
and Stuart Umpleby. EMCSR meetings ­were or­ga­nized by the Austrian Society of Cy-
bernetics and chaired by Robert Trappl; the first meeting was or­ga­nized in Vienna, in 
1972. Robert Trappl, ed., Power, Autonomy, Utopia: New Approaches ­toward Complex Sys-
tems (New York: Plenum Press, 1986).
78. Vladimir Lefebvre interviewed by N. Kuznetsova, “Vozvraschenie,” Voprosy fi-
losofii 7 (1990): 51–58. For Lefebvre’s engagement with the international community of 
cybernetics and systems thinkers, see Vladimir Lefebvre, “Second Order Cybernetics in 
the Soviet Union and the West,” in Power, Autonomy, Utopia: New Approaches ­toward 
Complex Systems, ed. Robert Trappl (New York: Plenum Press, 1986), 123.
79. Raikhel, “Reflex/Рефлекс”; Eglė Rindzevičiūtė, The Power of Systems: How Policy 
Sciences Opened Up the Cold War World (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2016).
80. Isaac Joel, “Strategy as Intellectual History,” Modern Intellectual History (2018): 
1–15, 4.
81. Joel, “Strategy,” 7.
82. For reflexivity as a difficult and therefore ignored prob­lem in social science, see 
Steve Woolgar and Malcolm Ashmore, “The Next Step: Introduction to the Reflexive 
Proj­ect,” in Steve Woolgar ed., Knowledge and Reflexivity: New Frontiers in the Sociol-
ogy of Knowledge (London: Sage, 1988), 1–13.
83. Lefebvre and Smolian, Algebra konflikta, 8.
84. Lefebvre and Smolian, Algebra konflikta, 12, 14.
85. Lefebvre and Smolian, Algebra konflikta, 20.
86. Lefebvre and Smolian, Algebra konflikta, 18.
87. Lefebvre and Smolian, Algebra konflikta, 18.
88. Lefebvre and Smolian, Algebra konflikta, 18–19.
89. Anatol Rapoport, “Foreword,” in Vladimir Lefebvre, Algebra of Conscience: A 
Comparative Analy­sis of Western and Soviet Ethical Systems (Dordrecht, Holland: D. Re-
idel, 1982), vii–­xii, ix.
90. Bessner, “Organ­izing Complexity.”
91. Lefebvre and Smolian, Algebra konflikta, 20.

	
NOTES TO PAGES 142–146	
237
92. For Lefebvre reflexive control theory is not necessarily about individual ­human 
beings, but rather about “macro individuals,” that is, actors whose minds are inevitably 
tapped into the environments of meaning.
93. Lefebvre and Smolian, Algebra konflikta, 30–31.
94. The strategy of disguise “aims to supply the opponent with fairly concrete infor-
mation, rather than blocking any flow of information,” seeking to convince the oppo-
nent that “­there is nothing ­here” or to create “false objects,” such as the presence of troops 
that actually are not ­there. Lefebvre and Smolian, Algebra konflikta, 36–37.
95. Lefebvre and Smolian, Algebra konflikta, 37.
96. Lefebvre and Smolian, Algebra konflikta, 43.
97. Lefebvre and Smolian, Algebra konflikta, 45.
98. Lefebvre and Smolian, Algebra konflikta, 50.
99. Christopher G. A. Bryant, “George Soros’s Theory,” 118.
100. Daniel Bessner, “The Globalist: George Soros ­After the Open Society,” N + 1 (18 
June 2018).
101. For Soros, see Bryant, “George Soros’s Theory,” 121.
102. George Soros, “Fallibility, Reflexivity, and the ­Human Uncertainty Princi­ple,” 
Journal of Economic Methodology 20, no. 4 (2014): 309–329, 312.
103. George Soros, The Crisis of Global Capitalism: Open Society Endangered (Lon-
don: ­Little, 1998), 22, cited from Bryant, “George Soros’s Theory,” 127.
104. Soros, “Fallibility.”
105. Alex Rosenberg, “From Rational Choice to Reflexivity: Learning from Sen, Keynes, 
Hayek, Soros, and Most of All, from Darwin,” Economic Thought 3, no. 1 (2014): 21–41, 35.
106. For an example, see Robert Jervis, Perception and Misperception in International 
Politics (Prince­ton, NJ: Prince­ton University Press, 1976), for a practice-­oriented analy­
sis, see Gregoire Mallard and Andrew Lakoff, “How Claims to Know the ­Future Are Used 
to Understand the Pre­sent: Techniques of Prospection in the Field of National Security,” 
in Social Knowledge in the Making, eds. Charles Camic, Michele Lamont, and Neil Gross 
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2010), 339–379.
107. Luca Zan, “Complexity, Anachronism and Time-­Parochialism: Historicising Strat-
egy While Strategising History,” Business History 58, no. 4 (2016): 571–596. This divide is 
also acknowledged in histories of strategic thought based on case studies. For instance, in 
his magisterial work, Lawrence Freedman demonstrated that although strategy thinking is 
enjoying high status in po­liti­cal circles, historically it has been difficult, or even impossible, 
to “implement” strategy in tactics, particularly in complex and messy battlefield situations. 
Lawrence Freedman, Strategy: A History (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2013).
108. Chris Car­ter, Stewart Clegg, and Martin Kornberger, “Strategy as Practice?” Stra-
tegic Organ­ization 6, no. 1 (2008): 83–99.
109. Chris Car­ter, Stewart Clegg, and Martin Kornberger, “Re-­framing Strategy: 
Power, Politics and Accounting,” Accounting, Auditing and Accountability Journal 23, 
no. 5 (2010): 573–594, 574.
110. Car­ter et al., “Strategy as Practice?” 83.
111. Strategic discourse as an orga­nizational mediator is a modern phenomenon, de-
scriptions of which can be found in treatises from the eigh­teenth and nineteenth centu-
ries. Freedman, Strategy.
112. Mark Solovey and Hamilton Cravens, Cold War Social Science.
113. Car­ter et al., “Re-­framing Strategy,” 574–575.
114. John W. Meyer and Brian Rowan, “Institutionalized Organ­izations: Formal 
Structure as Myth and Ceremony,” American Journal of Sociology 83, no. 2 (1977): 340–
363; Car­ter et al. “Re-­framing Strategy,” 580.

238	
NOTES TO PAGES 146–152
115. Timothy L. Thomas, “Rus­sian Military Thought: Concepts and Ele­ments,” MI-
TRE Corporation (August 2019), 44–46.
116. Thomas, “Rus­sian Military Thought,” 47–48; M. Hammond-­Errey, “Understand-
ing and Assessing Information Influence and Foreign Interference,” Journal of Informa-
tion Warfare 18, no. 1 (2019): 1–22.
117. Brandon Valeriano and Ryan Maness, “Fancy Bears and Digital Trolls: Cyber 
Strategy with a Rus­sian Twist,” Journal of Strategic Studies (ahead of print, 2019): 14.
118. Ronald W. Sprang, “The Development of Operational Art and CEMA in Multi-­
Domain ­Battle during the Guadalcanal Campaign 1942–1943 and Rus­sia in the Ukraine 
2013–2016,” School of Advanced Military Studies, US Army Command and General Staff 
College, Fort Leavenworth, 2018; T. S. Allen and A. J. Moore, “Victory without Casual-
ties: Rus­sia’s Information Operations,” Par­ameters 48, no. 1 (2018): 64.
119. Valeriano and Maness, “Fancy Bears,” 9–10.
120. Lord Jopling, Countering Rus­sia’s Hybrid Threats: An Update (Committee of the 
Civil Dimension of Security, NATO Parliamentary Assembly, 1 October 2018), 2.
121. Valeriano and Maness, “Fancy Bears,” 14. Ido Kilovaty, “Doxfare: Po­liti­cally Mo-
tivated Leaks and the ­Future of the Norm on Non-­Intervention in the Era of Weapon-
ized Information,” Harvard National Security Journal 9, no. 1 (2018): 146–179.
122. Car­ter et al., “Strategy as Practice?” 92.
123. Car­ter et al., “Strategy as Practice?” 93.
124. Lefebvre and Smolian, Algebra konflikta, 61.
125. Bruno Latour, “The Politics of Explanation: An Alternative,” in Knowledge and 
Reflexivity: New Frontiers in the Sociology of Knowledge, ed. Steve Woolgar (London: Sage, 
1988), 155–176, 159.
126. Hammond-­Errey, “Understanding and Assessing,” 11,
127. Soros, “Fallibility,” 326.
128. Xenia Kramer et al., “Ot predskazanii,” 49.
7. GLOBAL PREDICTION
1. Michael Mahony and Martin Hulme, “Epistemic Geographies of Climate Change: 
Science, Space and Politics,” Pro­gress in ­Human Geography (2016): 1–30. For anteced-
ents of the Anthropocene concept, see Christophe Bonneuil and Jean-­Baptiste Fressoz, 
The Shock of the Anthropocene: The Earth, History and Us (London: Verso, 2016); Libby 
Robin, Sverker Sörlin, and Paul Warde, eds., The ­Future of Nature: The Documents of 
Global Change (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2013).
2. ­These ­were not only the emerging global climate scientists, but also vulcanologists, 
who ­were expected to deliver policy-­relevant information about the highly uncertain 
movement of tectonic plates. For an East–­West study, see Elena Aronova, “Earthquake 
Prediction, Biological Clocks, and the Cold War Psy-­ops: Using Animals as Seismic Sen-
sors in the 1970s California,” Studies in History and Philosophy of Science, Part A 70 
(2018): 50–57; Elena Aronova, “Citizen Seismology, Stalinist Science, and Vladimir Man-
nar’s Cold Wars,” Science, Technology, & ­Human Values 42, no. 2 (2017): 226–256.
3. The work on the social and po­liti­cal history of cybernetic feedback was pioneered by 
James Beniger, The Control Revolution: Technological and Economic Origins of the Infor-
mational Society (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1989) and continued in Pe-
ter Galison, “The Ontology of the ­Enemy: Norbert Wiener and the Cybernetic Vision,” 
Critical Inquiry 21, no. 1 (1994): 228–266; Slava Gerovitch, From Newspeak to Cyberspeak: 
A History of Soviet Cybernetics (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2002); David Mindell, Be-
tween ­Human and Machine: Feedback, Control, and Computing Before Cybernetics (Balti-
more: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2002); John Agar, The Government Machine: A 

	
NOTES TO PAGES 153–155	
239
Revolutionary History of the Computer (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2003); Andrew Pick-
ering, The Cybernetic Brain: Sketches of Another ­Future (Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, 2009); Eglė Rindzevičiūtė, “Purification and Hybridisation of Soviet Cybernetics: 
The Politics of Scientific Governance in an Authoritarian Regime,” Archiv fur sozialge-
schichte 50 (2010): 289–309; Eden Medina, Cybernetic Revolutionaries: Technology and 
Politics in Allende’s Chile (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2011); Ronald Kline, The Cybernet-
ics Moment: Or Why We Call Our Age the Information Age (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins 
University Press, 2015); Benjamin Peters, How Not to Network a Nation: The Uneasy His-
tory of the Soviet Internet (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2016); Clifford Siskin, System: The 
Shaping of Modern Knowledge (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2016).
4. Eldar Shafir, ed., The Behavioral Foundations of Public Policy (Prince­ton, NJ: Prince­
ton University Press, 2013); for the epistemological analy­sis of behavioral policy see 
Magdalena Małecka, “Knowledge, Behaviour, and Policy: Questioning the Epistemic Pre-
suppositions of Applying Behavioural Science in Public Policymaking,” Synthese 199 
(2021): 5311–5338.
5. Michel Foucault, Security, Territory, Population: Lectures at the Collège de France 
1978–1979 (Basingstoke, UK: Palgrave, 2009), 20–21, 23.
6. For Canguilhem’s influence see Jennifer Gabrys, Program Earth: Environmental 
Sensing Technology and the Making of a Computational Planet (Minneapolis: University 
of Minnesota Press, 2016); Stuart Elden, Canguilhem (Cambridge: Polity, 2019).
7. Georges Canguilhem, “The Living and Its Milieu,” trans. from French, originally 
published 1952, Grey Room 3 (2001): 7–31.
8. Stefanos Geroulanos and Todd Meyers, The ­Human Body in the Age of Catastrophe: 
Brittleness, Integration, Science, and the ­Great War (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 
2018). For Skinner see Roy Moxley, “Ernst Mach and B. F Skinner: Their Similarities with 
Two Traditions for Verbal Be­hav­ior,” The Be­hav­ior Analyst 28, no. 1 (2005): 29–48.
9. Very in­ter­est­ing articulations of governance through milieu, materiality, and be­
hav­ior have been offered in museum and heritage studies. See Haidy Geismar, Museum 
Object: Lessons for the Digital Age (London: UCL Press, 2018); and Rodney Harrison and 
Colin Sterling, eds., Deterritorializing the ­Future: Heritage In, Of and ­After the Anthro-
pocene (London: Open Humanities Press, 2020).
10. Tony Bennett, Making Culture, Changing Society (London: Routledge, 2013); Tony 
Bennett, Fiona Cameron, Nélia Dias, Ben Dibley, Rodney Harrison, Ira Jacknis, and 
Conal McCarthy, Collecting, Ordering, Governing: Anthropology, Museums, and Liberal 
Government (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2017).
11. Gabrys, Program Earth.
12. Timothy W. Luke, “On Environmentality: Geo-­Power and Eco-­Knowledge in the 
Discourses of Con­temporary Environmentalism,” Cultural Critique 31 (1995): 57–81; 
Arun Agrawal, Environmentality: Technologies of Government and the Making of Sub-
jects (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2005).
13. For the overlap between Foucault’s own and the neoliberal thinking about indi-
rect governance through milieu see Dean and Zamora, The Last Man Takes LSD: Fou-
cault and the End of Revolution (London: Verso, 2021).
14. Paul Crutzen, “Geology of Mankind,” Nature 415, no. 3 (2002): 23.
15. ­Will Steffen, Katherine Richardson, Johan Rockstrom, Sarah E. Cornell, Ingo 
Fetzer, Elena M. Bennett, Reinette Biggs, et al., “Planetary Bound­aries: Guiding ­Human 
Development on a Changing Planet,” Science 347 (2015): 736.
16. Jonathan Oldfield and Denis Shaw, eds., The Development of Rus­sian Environmen-
tal Thought: Scientific and Geo­graph­i­cal Perspectives on the Natu­ral Environment (Lon-
don: Routledge, 2016); Jonathan Oldfield, The Soviet Union and Global Environmental 

240	
NOTES TO PAGES 155–157
Change: Modifying the Biosphere and Conceptualizing Society–­Nature Interaction (Lon-
don: Routledge, 2021).
17. Although Vernadskii’s biosphere theory is familiar to environmental historians, the 
Rus­sian version of noosphere theory is ­little known in the West. Key works are Jonathan 
Oldfield and Denis Shaw, “V.I. Vernadskii and the Development of Biogeochemical Under-
standings of the Biosphere, c.1880s–1968,” British Journal for the History of Science 46, 
no. 2 (2013): 287–310; Stanislav Shmelev, Ecological Economics: Sustainability in Practice 
(Berlin: Springer, 2012); Rafal Serafin, “Noosphere, Gaia and the Science of the Biosphere,” 
Environmental Ethics 10, no. 2 (1988): 121–137. Also see Nikita Moiseev, “Reflection on 
Noosphere: Humanism in Our Time,” in The Biosphere and Noosphere Reader: Global En-
vironment, Society and Change, eds. David Pitt and Paul Samson (London: Routledge, 
1999), 167–179.
18. See the volume comprising statements on Vernadskii’s influence by scientists repre-
senting dif­fer­ent disciplines: Andrei Lapo and Aleksandr Ianshin, eds., V.I.Vernadskii: Pro 
et Contra (Saint Petersburg: Izdatelstvo Russkogo Khristianskogo gumanitarnogo univer-
siteta, 2000); Giulia Rispoli, “Between ‘Biosphere’ and ‘Gaia’: Earth as a Living Organism in 
Soviet Geo-­ecology,” Cosmos and History: The Journal of Natu­ral and Social Philosophy 10, 
no. 2 (2014): 78–91; Jonathan Oldfield, “Rus­sia, Systemic Transformation and the Concept 
of Sustainable Development,” Environmental Politics 10, no. 3 (2001): 94–110. For impor­
tant studies on the Soviet environmental movements and scientific expertise see Doug-
las  R. Weiner, A ­Little Corner of Freedom: Rus­sian Nature Protection from Stalin to 
Gorbachev (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1999); Paul Josephson, Nicolai Dro-
nin, Ruben Mnatsakanian, Aleh Cherp, Dmitry Efremenko, and Vladislav Larin, An Envi-
ronmental History of Rus­sia (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2013); Andy Bruno, 
The Nature of Soviet Power: An Arctic Environmental History (Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, 2016).
19. Vladislav Zubok, Collapse: The Fall of the Soviet Union (New Haven, CT: Yale Uni-
versity Press, 2021).
20. This is based on Moiseev’s contemporaries’ memoirs; a study of archival materi-
als is necessary to further detail his influence on Gorbachev. Aleksandr A. Petrov, Ni-
kita Nikolaevich Moiseev: Sud’ba strany v sud’be uchenogo (Moscow: Ekologiia i zhizn, 
2011), 106–107.
21. Petrov, Nikita Nikolaevich Moiseev, 107–109. This agricultural decision-­making 
model was developed by Feliks Ereshko, V. Y. Lebedev, and Kirit Parikh in 1983, see I. V. 
Iakimets, “Background and Requirements for the SOVAM: Soviet Agricultural Model” 
(IIASA Working Paper, WP-84-097, IIASA, Austria, 1984).
22. Zubok, Collapse.
23. Moiseev’s biographies and volumes engaging with his work ­were published shortly 
­after his death in 2000. See Ivan Larin, On uchil berech zemliu (Moscow: Rosekopress, 
2002); Myslitel’ planetarnogo mashtaba: materialy ‘kruglogo stola’ po kn. N.N.Moiseeva 
‘Byt’ ili ne byt’ chelovechestvu?’ (Moscow: MNEPU, 2000). Prominent politicians such 
as former Prime Minister Evgenii Primakov endorsed Moiseev’s contributions, see Ev-
genii Primakov, “Nikita Moiseev: vydaiushchii’sia uchenyi’ i grazhdanin,” Alma Mater 
6 (2007): 43. Many con­temporary Rus­sian scholars draw on Moiseev’s work to rethink 
Rus­sia’s development, see Elena Glushenkova, Ekopolitologiia N. N. Moiseeva i ustoichi-
voe razvitie Rossii (Moscow: MNEPU, 2015). Major memorial conferences marking an-
niversaries of Moiseev’s birth ­were convened by the Moscow State University (2007) and 
the Trapeznikov Institute of Control Prob­lems at the Rus­sian Acad­emy of Sciences (2017), 
not to mention the many events or­ga­nized by the International In­de­pen­dent Ecological-­
Political University in Moscow, which was cofounded by Moiseev and Nikolai Reimers 
in 1992.

	
NOTES TO PAGES 157–161	
241
24. Quinn Slobodian, Globalists: The End of Empire and the Birth of Neoliberalism 
(Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2018).
25. Nikita N. Moiseev, Kak daleko do zavtrashnego dnia . . . ​Svobodnye razmyshleniia 
1917–1993 (Moscow: Taideks, 1993/2002), 148, 331, 339; Petrov, Nikita Nikolaevich Moiseev.
26. Tomila V. Lankina, The Estate Origins of Democracy in Rus­sia: From Imperial 
Bourgeoisie to Post-­Communist ­Middle Class (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
2021).
27. Moiseev, Kak daleko, 22, 111.
28. For more on the Soviet space program, see Asif Sidiqqi, The Red Rocket’s Glare: 
Spaceflight and the Rus­sian Imagination, 1857–1957 (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 2010); Slava Gerovitch, Voices of the Space Program: Cosmonauts, Soldiers, and En-
gineers Who Took the USSR into Space (London: Palgrave, 2014); Slava Gerovitch, Soviet 
Space Mythologies.
29. Moiseev, Kak daleko, 25–28; Nikita N. Moiseev, Izbrannye trudy (Moscow: Taid-
eks, 2003), 261. Moiseev retired from the Computer Center in 1987 but served as a mem-
ber of the center’s directors’ board ­until 2000.
30. For Moiseev’s links with mathematical economists see Ivan Boldyrev and Olessia 
Kirtchik, “The Cultures of Mathematical Economics in the Postwar Soviet Union: More 
Than a Method, Less Than a Discipline,” Studies in History and Philosophy of Science Part 
A 63 (2017): 1–10. For Lavrent’ev’s role in the modernization of Soviet science, see Kse-
nia Tatarchenko, “Calculating a Showcase: Mikhail Lavrentiev, the Politics of Expertise, 
and the International Life of the Siberian Science-­City,” Historical Studies in the Natu­
ral Sciences 46, no. 5 (2016): 592–632. For Moiseev’s correspondence with Lyapunov, see 
the Open Archive of the Siberian Branch of the Rus­sian Acad­emy of Sciences, fund of A. A. 
Lyapunov, http://­odasib​.­ru​/­OpenArchive​/­Portrait​.­cshtml​?­id​=­Xu1​_­pavl​_­635212335​13578​12​
50​_­4042. For Gluskhov, see Peters, How Not to Network a Nation.
31. Vladislav Zubok, A Failed Empire: The Soviet Union in the Cold War from Stalin 
to Gorbachev (Chapel Hill: North Carolina University Press, 2009); Charles Ziegler, En-
vironmental Policy in the USSR (Amherst: University of Mas­sa­chu­setts Press, 1987).
32. Paul Warde and Sverker Sörlin, “Expertise for the ­Future: The Emergence of ‘Rel-
evant Knowledge’ in Environmental Predictions and Global Change, c.1920–1970,” in 
The Strug­gle for the Long Term in Transnational Science and Politics during the Cold War, 
eds. Jenny Andersson and Eglė Rindzevičiūtė (New York: Routledge, 2015), 39–62.
33. Warde and Sörlin, “Expertise for the ­Future.”
34. Warde and Sörlin, “Expertise for the ­Future.”
35. Oldfield, The Soviet Union and Global Environmental Change, 42–65.
36. Joan DeBardeleben, The Environment and Marxism–­Leninism: The Soviet and East 
German Experience (Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 1985); Oleg Ianitskii, “Environmen-
tal Sociology Yesterday and ­Today,” So­cio­log­i­cal Research 33, no. 1 (1994): 7–32, 9.
37. For the rituals of scientific expertise in Soviet planning see Peter Rutland, The Myth 
of the Plan: Lessons of Soviet Planning Experience (London: Open Court, 1985).
38. Slobodian, Globalists, Kindle location 4514.
39. On Koopman’s links with Soviet science see Till Düppe, “Koopmans in the So-
viet Union: A Travel Report of the Summer of 1965,” Journal of the History of Economic 
Thought 38, no. 1 (2016): 81–104.
40. Norbert Wiener, Cybernetics: Or Control and Communication in the Animal and 
in the Machine (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1965), 25.
41. Moiseev, Kak daleko, 193–195.
42. Boldyrev and Kirtchik, “Cultures of Mathematical Economics,” 7; Nikita Moiseev, 
Prosteishiie matematicheskie modeli ekonomicheskogo prognozirovaniia (Moscow: 
Znanie, 1975).

242	
NOTES TO PAGES 161–164
43. Eglė Rindzevičiūtė, “The Unlikely Revolutionaries: Decision Sciences in the So-
viet Government,” in The Decisionist Imagination: Sovereignty, Social Science and De-
mocracy in the 20th ­Century, eds. Daniel Bessner and Nicolas Guilhot (Oxford: Berghahn 
Books, 2019), 217–249.
44. Moiseev, Kak daleko, 230; Nikita Moiseev, Chelovek i noosfera (Moscow: Molo-
daia gvardiia, 1990), 269–270.
45. In his memoir, Moiseev dates this trip 1959, although he mentions meeting the 
prominent, US-­based mathematician and engineer Rudolf Kalman, who established a 
systems automation research unit at the École des Mines in Fontainebleau, which makes 
it more likely to be the late 1960s. Although Moiseev noted reading Hayek as a signifi-
cant event, he did not engage with Hayek’s idea of the failure of any centers to govern 
complex, large scale economy. Instead, Moiseev often referred to the Rus­sian organ­ization 
theorist Aleksandr Bogdanov, who proposed that any governmental apparatus must be 
regularly decentralized. It is clear, though, that Hayek’s neoliberal ideas had appeal to 
Moiseev as a policy scientist interested in complexity. For Hayek’s intellectual affinity 
with the resilience approach see David Chandler, Resilience: The Governance of Complex-
ity (London: Routledge, 2014).
46. Moiseev had close links with some of the leading cyberneticians: he co-­published 
with Alexei Rumiantsev and Sergei Sobolev, who was the opponent of Moiseev’s doc-
toral dissertation. Moiseev’s key publications from this period are concise volumes On 
the Theory of Optimal Systems (1975), Methods of Optimization (1978), and Mathe­matics, 
Governance and Economics (1970).
47. Many of Moiseev’s books remain in print, the most recent editions dating to 2020.
48. Mikhail Budyko, Global Ecol­ogy (Moscow: Pro­gress Publishers, 1977); Jonathan 
Oldfield, “Mikhail Budyko’s (1920–2001) Contributions to Global Climate Science: From 
Heat Balances to Climate Change and Global Ecol­ogy,” WIREs Climate Change 7, no. 5 
(2016): 682–692.
49. Evgenii Fedorov, Vzaimodeistvie obshchestva i prirody (Leningrad: Gidrometeoiz-
dat, 1972); Evgenii Fedorov, Ecological Crisis and Social Pro­gress (Moscow: Pro­gress, 
1977); Julia Lajus, “Soviet Official Critiques of the Resource Scarcity Prediction by Lim-
its to Growth Report: The Case of Evgenii Fedorov’s Ecological Crisis Rhe­toric,” Eu­ro­
pean Review of History 27, no. 3 (2020): 321–341.
50. For an overview of Soviet scientific ecol­ogy’s shift ­toward mathematization, see 
Weiner, A ­Little Corner of Freedom, 384–389.
51. Moiseev, Kak daleko.
52. Lawrence Badash, A Nuclear Winter’s Tale: Science and Politics in the 1980s (Cam-
bridge, MA: MIT Press, 2009); Joseph Masco, “Bad Weather: On Planetary Crisis,” So-
cial Studies of Science 40, no. 1 (2010): 7–40; Paul Rubinson, “The Global Effects of Nuclear 
Winter: Science and Antinuclear Protest in the United States and the Soviet Union Dur-
ing the 1980s,” Cold War History 14 (2014): 47–69; Eglė Rindzevičiūtė, The Power of 
Systems: How Policy Sciences Opened Up the Cold War World (Ithaca, NY: Cornell Uni-
versity Press, 2016).
53. Crutzen, “Geology of Mankind,” 23.
54. Rindzevičiūtė, “The Unlikely Revolutionaries.”
55. Nikita Moiseev and Ivan T. Frolov, “Vysokoe soprikosnovenie: obshchesto, che-
lovek, i priroda v vek mikroelektroniki, informatiki i biotekhnologii,” Voprosy filosofii 9 
(1984): 24–41.
56. Zubok, Collapse.
57. For scientific and civic activism in the late Soviet Union, see Weiner, A ­Little Cor-
ner of Freedom, 12–14; David Priestland, Merchant, Soldier, Sage: A New History of 
Power (London: Allen, 2012).

	
NOTES TO PAGES 164–169	
243
58. The first explicit pre­sen­ta­tion of this idea can be found in Moiseev’s short book 
Mathe­matics, Government and Economics, published in 1970, translated into German 
in 1973. ­Those few of Moiseev’s publications that are available in En­glish lack the lucid-
ity of argument and engaging style that characterize his writings in Rus­sian. Nikita Moi-
seev, “A New Look at Evolution: Marx, Teilhard de Chardin, Vernadsky,” World ­Futures 
36, no. 1 (1993): 1–19.
59. Oldfield and Shaw, “V.I. Vernadskii,” 299.
60. Beryl Radin, Beyond Machiavelli: Policy Analy­sis Comes of Age (Washington, DC: 
Georgetown University Press, 2000); Hunter Heyck, Age of System: Understanding the 
Development of Modern Social Science (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2015); 
Rindzevičiūtė, The Power of Systems.
61. Mark Bassin, The Gumilev Mystique: Biopolitics, Eurasianism, and the Construc-
tion of Community in Modern Rus­sia (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2016).
62. Gerovitch, From Newspeak to Cyberspeak, 215–216; Oldfield, The Soviet Union and 
Global Environmental Change.
63. Marc Elie, “Formulating the Global Environment: Soviet Soil Scientists and the 
International Desertification Discussion, 1968–91,” Slavonic and East Eu­ro­pean Review 
93, no. 1 (2015): 181–204.
64. Such afterword essays played an impor­tant role in intellectual agenda setting in 
the Soviet scientific culture and ­were widely understood as such. For instance, the influ-
ential geophysicist and climatologist Fedorov wrote an afterword to the first translation 
of Barry Commoner’s The Closing Circle (published in Rus­sian in 1974), thus spearhead-
ing the globally oriented environmental policy. Nikita Moiseev, “ ‘Mirovaia dinamika’ 
Forrestera i aktual’nye voprosy mirovoi evoliutsii,” in Mirovaia dinamika, ed. Jay For-
rester (Moscow: Nauka, 1978), 264–290; also Lajus, “Soviet Official Critiques of the Re-
source Scarcity.”
65. Moiseev’s afterword inspired the prominent dissident Viacheslav Igrunov to or­ga­
nize an alternative department of the Club of Rome in Rus­sia. Viacheslav Igrunov, “O 
Nikite Nikolaiche Moiseeve i o tom, kak nesostoialsia Moskovskii Rimskii klub,” http://­
www​.­igrunov​.­ru​/­cv​/­vchk​-­cv​-­memotalks​/­talks​/­vchk​-­cv​-­memotalks​-­talks​-­moiseev​.­html.
66. Moiseev, Chelovek i noosfera.
67. Nikita Moiseev, Vladimir Aleksandrov, and Aleksandr Tarko, Chelovek i biosfera 
(Moscow: Mysl’, 1985), 5; Moiseev, Chelovek i noosfera, 235.
68. Thomas Robertson, “Revisiting the Early 1970s Commoner–­Erlich Debate About 
Population and Environment: Dueling Critiques of Production and Consumption in the 
Global Age,” in A World of Populations: Transnational Perspectives on Demography, eds. 
Heinrich Hartmann and Corinna Unger (New York: Berghahn, 2014), 108–215, 109.
69. Paul Erlich and Peter Raven, “Butterflies and Plants: A Study in Coevolution,” Evo-
lution 18, no. 4 (1967): 586–608, 606; Andrei Lapenis, “Directed Evolution of the Bio-
sphere: Biogeochemical Se­lection or Gaia?” Professional Geographer 54, no. 3 (2002): 
379–391, 380.
70. Moiseev, Matematika, Upravlienie, Ekonomika (Moscow: Znanie, 1970), 15.
71. Slobodian, Globalists.
72. See my argument in “The Unlikely Revolutionaries.”
73. Moiseev, Chelovek i noosfera, 10–11.
74. Moiseev, Chelovek i noosfera, 55.
75. Moiseev, Chelovek i noosfera, 141.
76. Moiseev, Chelovek i noosfera, 61.
77. Moiseev et al., Chelovek i biosfera, 11.
78. Stephen Cummings, Todd Bridgman, John Hassard, and Michael Rowlinson, A 
New History of Management (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2017), 99–103.

244	
NOTES TO PAGES 169–174
79. Moiseev, Chelovek i noosfera, 7.
80. Moiseev, Chelovek i noosfera, 72, 84–85.
81. James E. Lovelock and Lynn Margulis, “Atmospheric Homeostasis By and For 
the Biosphere: The Gaia Hypothesis,” Telus 26, nos. 1–2 (1974): 2–10.
82. Moiseev, Chelovek i noosfera.
83. Moiseev, Chelovek i noosfera, 85.
84. Evgenii Fedorov, Man and Nature: The Ecological Crisis and Social Pro­gress (New 
York: Pro­gress, 1981), 88–99, 164.
85. Rindzevičiūtė, The Power of Systems; Adam Leeds, “Dreams in Cybernetic Fugue: 
Cold War Technoscience, the Intelligent­sia, and the Birth of Soviet Mathematical Eco-
nomics,” Historical Studies in the Natu­ral Sciences 46, no. 5 (2016): 633–668.
86. For OGAS, see Peters, How Not to Network a Nation.
87. To this list of prob­lems we can add synchronization, which Moiseev did not con-
sider extensively, ­because he was more interested in destabilizing the link between what 
was presumed to be certain scientific knowledge about the evolution of the biosphere. The 
prob­lem of implementation and action was secondary for him. But at the same time, in the 
1970s, synchronization, which is an impor­tant part of predictive governance, was explored 
by orga­nizational scholars like Michael Cohen, James March, and Johan Olsen, who pro-
posed the famous garbage can model to explain decisions in organ­izations. In the garbage 
can model, decisions are taken on the basis of the synchronization and timing that allows 
prob­lems and actions to converge. It is ­because of what is perceived as good timing and less 
structural or logical reasons that certain prob­lems and actions are prioritized in organ­
izations. To improve an in­effec­tive organ­ization, therefore, means to fix the prob­lem of 
synchronization. Michael Cohen, James March, and Johan  P. Olsen, “A Garbage Can 
Model of Orga­nizational Choice,” Administrative Science Quarterly 17, no. 1 (1972): 1–25.
88. Moiseev, Chelovek i noosfera, 319.
89. Moiseev, Chelovek i noosfera, 319.
90. In this re­spect Moiseev’s model of planetary governance resembles what Mitchell 
Dean described as the hidden authoritarianism of Western liberal governmentality. 
Mitchell Dean, Governmentality: Power and Rule in Modern Society (London: Sage, 2009).
91. Moiseev, Chelovek i noosfera, 316–319. Moiseev noted that his concept of guided 
development was in princi­ple similar to prominent geographer Lev Berg’s concept of 
“guided evolution,” although Berg based his theory on completely dif­fer­ent argumenta-
tion. Moiseev, Izbrannye Trudy, 111.
92. Slobodian, Globalists, Kindle location 4590.
93. Stefanos Geroulanos, Transparency in Postwar France: A Critical History of the 
Pre­sent (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 2017).
94. Angela Oels, “Climate Security as Governmentality: From Precaution to Prepared-
ness,” in Governing the Climate: New Approaches to Rationality, Power and Politics, eds. 
Johannes Stripple and Harriet Bulkeley (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2013), 
197–216, 205–206.
95. Timothy O’Riordan and Steve Rayner, “Risk Management for Global Environ-
mental Change,” Global Environmental Change 1, no. 2 (1991): 91–108, 103–104.
96. Stephen Collier, Post-­Soviet Social: Neoliberalism, Social Modernity, Biopolitics 
(Prince­ton, NJ: Prince­ton University Press, 2011); Claudia Aradau and Rens van Mun-
ster, Politics of Catastrophe: Genealogies of the Unknown (London: Routledge, 2011).
97. Oels, “Climate Security,” 208; Isabell Schrickel, “Von Schmetterlingen und Atom-
reaktoren: Medien und Politiken der Resilienz am IIASA,” Behemoth 7, no. 2 (2014): 5–25; 
Jeremy Walker and Melinda Cooper, “Genealogies of Resilience: From Systems Ecol­ogy to 
the Po­liti­cal Economy of Crisis Adaptation,” Security Dialogue 42, no. 2 (2011): 143–160.
98. Slobodian, Globalists, Kindle location 1128–1136.

	
NOTES TO PAGES 174–180	
245
99. Slobodian, Globalists, Kindle location 1236.
100. Slobodian, Globalists, Kindle location 1144.
101. Slobodian, Globalists, Kindle location 1220.
102. Slobodian, Globalists, Kindle location 1152.
103. Slobodian, Globalists, Kindle location 1152.
104. In 1938, Lipp­mann, as Slobodian argued, signaled a move “from the economic 
to the ­legal,” to bypass the “prob­lem of knowledge” of the volatile workings of national 
and world economies. Slobodian, Globalists, Kindle location 1582.
105. Moiseev, Chelovek i noosfera, 275.
106. Slobodian, Globalists, Kindle location 1693. In the 1930s, neoliberals rejected the 
nineteenth ­century’s model of governance by numbers; as Slobodian put it, for them a 
proper governmental intervention “was not in mea­sure­ment, observation, or surveillance 
but in the establishment of a common, enforceable law and a means of accounting for 
the vital needs of humanity not provided by the market.” Slobodian, Globalists, Kindle 
location 1700.
107. Slobodian, Globalists, Kindle location 4672. As Slobodian suggested, for Hayek 
the concept of order did not entail prescription of goals and targets, but rather, as for 
Moiseev, it posited a need to “defer to the wisdom of the system” (Kindle location 4743).
108. Slobodian, Globalists, Kindle location 4548.
109. Zygmunt Bauman, Modernity and the Holocaust (Cambridge: Polity Press, 1989).
110. Michael Hviid Jacobsen and Sophia Marshman, “Bauman on Meta­phors: A Har-
binger of Humanistic Hybrid Sociology,” in The Sociology of Zygmunt Bauman: Chal-
lenges and Critique, eds. Michael Hviid Jacobsen and Paul Poder (London: Routledge, 
2008), 19–40.
111. Slobodian, Globalists, Kindle location 4556.
112. Moiseev, Chelovek i noosfera.
113. Moiseev, Chelovek i noosfera, 305.
114. Moiseev, Chelovek i noosfera, 331–336.
115. Zubok, Collapse.
116. Moiseev, Chelovek i noosfera, 340–342.
117. Thomas Hughes, Networks of Power: Electrification in Western Society, 1880–1930 
(Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1993); Gabriella Hecht, The Radiance of 
France: Nuclear Power and National Identity ­After World War II (Cambridge, MA: MIT 
Press, 1998); Andrew Barry, Po­liti­cal Machines: Governing a Technological Society (Lon-
don: Routledge, 2001); Paul Edwards, A Vast Machine: Computer Models, Climate Data 
and the Politics of Global Warming (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2010).
118. Theodore Porter, “Thin Description: Surface and Depth in Science and Science 
Studies,” Osiris 27, no. 1 (2012): 209–226.
119. Moiseev et al., Chelovek i biosfera, 34.
120. O’Riordan and Rayner, “Risk Management,” 91.
121. Rens van Munster and Casper Sylvester, eds., The Politics of Globality Since 1945: 
Assembling the Planet (London: Routledge, 2016), 25–27.
122. Bennett, Making Culture, 37.
123. Bennett, Making Culture. See also Tony Bennett, “Habit: Time, Freedom, Gov-
ernance,” Body and Society 19, nos. 2 & 3 (2013): 107–135.
124. Eglė Rindzevičiūtė, “­Toward a Joint ­Future Beyond the Iron Curtain: East–­West 
Politics of Global Modelling,” in The Strug­gle for the Long-­Term in Transnational Sci-
ence and Politics: Forging the ­Future, eds. Jenny Andersson and Eglė Rindzevičiūtė (Lon-
don: Routledge, 2015), 115–143.
125. Brian Wynne, “Strange Weather, Again: Climate Science as Po­liti­cal Art,” The-
ory, Culture and Society 27, nos. 2–3 (2013): 289–305, 295.

246	
NOTES TO PAGES 180–187
126. Ingrid Visseren-­Hamakers, “Integrative Environmental Governance: Enhanc-
ing Governance in the Era of Synergies,” Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainabil-
ity 14 (2015): 136–143; Hans Joachim Schellnhuber and Volker Wenzel, eds., Earth 
System Analy­sis: Integrating Science for Sustainability (Berlin: Springer, 2013).
127. Pierre Teilhard de Chardin, The Phenomenon of Man (New York: Harper, 1959); 
Kenneth Boulding, Ecodynamics: A New Theory of Societal Evolution (London: Sage, 1978).
128. The noosphere is often invoked in con­temporary po­liti­cal discourses in Rus­sia. 
One example is the theory of a Eurasian civilization, developed by anthropologist Lev 
Gumilev (1912–1992), which incorporated some mystical aspects of Vernadskii’s noo-
sphere theory. From the 1990s Gumilev’s Eurasianism inspired a new era of Rus­sian 
geopo­liti­cal thinking, according to which Rus­sia is the crucible of a spiritual civiliza-
tion, dif­fer­ent from the rationalist West and therefore destined to become a world leader. 
The most disturbing version of this sort of radicalized Eurasianism is Aleksandr Du-
gin’s vision of Rus­sia’s ­future. Furthermore, a peculiar version of Vernadskii’s noosphere 
theory attracted international attention when it tran­spired that Vladimir Putin’s chief 
of staff, Anton Vaino, published several fairly senseless articles on government of the 
global noosphere, claiming to have developed a global predictive control machine, the 
nooscope. Anton Vaino, “Kapitalizatsiia budushchego,” Voprosy ekonomiki i prava 4 
(2012): 42–57. In the 1990s Moiseev, too, became attracted to Eurasianist ideas, writing 
that the North Eurasia continent is the geopo­liti­cal ­future of Rus­sia, but it is difficult to 
imagine Moiseev endorsing an antagonistic foreign policy for Rus­sia.
129. Johan Rockstrom, ­Will Steffen, Kevin Noone, Åsa Persson, F. Stuart III Chapin, 
Eric Lambin, Timothy M. Lenton, et al., “Planetary Bound­aries: Exploring the Safe Op-
erating Space for Humanity,” Ecol­ogy and Society 14, no. 2 (2009): 32.
130. Frank Biermann, Earth System Governance: World Politics in the Anthropocene 
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2014).
CONCLUSION
1. This resonates with the work of Philip Tetlock and Dan Gardner, who searched not 
for a magical formula of prediction, but rather a form of a collective orchestration of 
prediction-­making that can perform best in a changing context. Philip Tetlock and Dan 
Gardner, Superforecasting: The Art and Science of Prediction (New York: Crown Publish-
ing, 2015).
2. It is argued that the idea of rationality as rule-­based decision-­making that can be 
divorced from its context became a sort of myth in the Cold War, leading to blunders in 
both science and politics. See Paul Erickson, Judy L. Klein, Lorraine Daston, Rebecca 
Lemov, Thomas Sturm, and Michael D. Gordin, How Reason Almost Lost Its Mind: The 
Strange ­Career of Cold War Rationality (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2013).
3. A good example is the treatment of the findings of the Soviet population census of 
1937, which revealed not only a disastrous demographic situation, but also the failure to 
enhance the social mobility of workers and peasants. See Tomila V. Lankina, The Estate 
Origins of Democracy: From Imperial Bourgeoisie to Post-­Communist ­Middle Class (Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press, 2021).
4. Katri Pynnöniemi, “Rus­sia’s War against Ukraine: Wider Implications” (pre­sen­
ta­tion, discussion panel, Aleksanteri Institute, 4 March 2022).
5. As Thomas noted, the increasingly mechanical and applied character of military 
operations research frustrated the found­ers of the field, such as Russell Ackoff and C. 
West Churchman, who thought that the OR was no longer intellectually stimulating in 
the 1970s. ­Will Thomas, The Rational Action: The Sciences of Policy in Britain and Amer­
i­ca, 1940-1960 (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2015), 276–277.

	
NOTES TO PAGES 188–191	
247
6. Bilel Benbouzid, “Values and Consequences in Predictive Machine Evaluation: A 
Sociology of Predictive Policing,” Science and Technology Studies (2020): 119–136; An-
gèle Christin, “Predictive Algorithms and Criminal Sentencing,” in The Decisionist Imag-
ination: Sovereignty, Social Science and Democracy in the 20th  ­Century, eds. Daniel 
Bessner and Nicolas Guilhot, 272–294 (New York: Berghahn, 2018).
7. Matthias Lesse, “ ‘We Do That Once per Day’: Cyclical ­Futures and Institutional 
Ponderousness in Predictive Policing,” in The Politics and Science of Prevision: Govern-
ing and Probing the ­Future, eds. Andreas Wenger, Ursula Jasper, and Myrian Dunn 
Cavelty (London: Routledge, 2020), 213–226.
8. Louise Amoore, The Politics of Possibility: Risk and Security Beyond Probability 
(Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2013); Claudia Aradau and Tobias Lemke, Algo-
rithmic Reason (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2022).
9. See also the argument about opacity as a form of civic re­sis­tance to algorithmic 
surveillance in Engin Isin and Evelyn Ruppert, “The Birth of Sensory Power: How a Pan-
demic Made It Vis­i­ble?” Big Data and Society (2020): 1–15.
10. See Frank Biermann, Earth System Governance: World Politics in the Anthropo-
cene (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2014); as well as Oran Young, Governing Complex Sys-
tems: Social Capital for the Anthropocene (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2017).
11. The work by Adriana Petryna on horizoning as orchestrating scientific predictive 
statements is a good example of this evolving approach. Adriana Petryna, Horizon Work: 
At the Edges of Knowledge in an Age of Runaway Climate Change (Prince­ton, NJ: Prince­
ton University Press, 2022).
12. Adam Kucharski, “How Modelling Covid Has Changed the Way We Think About 
Epidemics,” Guardian (UK edition), 4 January 2021; Isin and Ruppert, “The Birth of Sen-
sory Power.”
13. Shoshana Zuboff, The Age of Surveillance Capitalism: The Fight for a ­Human ­Future 
at the New Frontier of Power (New York: Profile Books, 2019).
14. Christophe Bonneuil and Jean Baptiste Fressoz, The Shock of the Anthropocene: 
The Earth, History and Us (London: Verso, 2016).
15. Julia Ioffe, “ ‘Before, Putin Was Unpredictable; Now It’s Trump’: Moscow Grap-
ples with a Strange Week in Washington,” Atlantic, 18 February 2017, https://­www​
.­theatlantic​.­com​/­international​/­archive​/­2017​/­02​/­putin​-­trump​-­flynn​/­517224​/­.
16. Peter Pomerantsev, This Is Not Propaganda: Adventures in the War Against Real­
ity (London: Faber & Faber, 2019).
17. Michael Ellman and Vladimir Kantorovich, eds. The Destruction of the Soviet Eco-
nomic System: An Insider’s History (London: Routledge, 1988).
18. Michael Ellman, “Was the Collapse of the USSR Entirely Unforeseen?” Perspec-
tives on Po­liti­cal Science 31, no. 3 (2002): 132–135.
19. Leonidas Donskis, “Aleksandras Shtromas: The Lithuanian Prophet of Postcom-
munism,” Journal of Interdisciplinary Studies 18, nos. 1–2 (2006): 76.
20. Randall Collins, “Prediction in Macrosociology: The Case of the Soviet Collapse,” 
American Journal of Sociology 100, no. 6 (1995): 1552–1593.
21. ­Later, Taagepera argued for the need to embrace statistical modeling in social and 
historical sciences, equating “scientificity” with prediction. Rein Taagepera, Making So-
cial Science More Scientific: The Need for Predictive Models (Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 2008).
22. Jack Goldstone, “Predicting Revolutions: Why We Could (and Should) Have Fore-
seen the Revolutions of 1989–1991 in the U.S.S.R. and Eastern Eu­rope,” Contention 2, 
no. 2 (1993): 127–152.
23. For a good overview, see Richard Sakwa, “The Soviet Collapse: Contradictions 
and Neo-­Modernisation,” Journal of Eurasian Studies 4 (2013): 65–77; the review essay 

248	
NOTES TO PAGES 191–192
by Manfred Zeller, “Before and ­After the End of the World: Rethinking the Soviet Col-
lapse,” Kritika 18, no. 3 (2017): 591–601; and, for the reconstruction of the po­liti­cal pro­
cess leading to the Soviet collapse, see Vladislav Zubok, Collapse: The Fall of the Soviet 
Union (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2021); Chris Miller, The Strug­gle to Save 
the Soviet Economy: Mikhail Gorbachev and the Collapse of the USSR (Chapel Hill: Uni-
versity of North Carolina Press, 2016).
24. Zubok, Collapse.
25. Karl E. Weick, Making Sense of the Organ­ization (Oxford: Blackwell, 2001), 74–
77, 159–164.
26. For instance, in post-­Soviet Lithuania, politicians’ reliance on clairvoyants was 
widely debated in relation to the impeachment of President Paksas, bringing back the 
debate about the status of expertise and the po­liti­cal legacies of astrology. See S. C. Row-
ell, “The Jagellonians and the Stars: Dynasty-­Sponsored Astrology in the Fifteenth 
­Century,” Lithuanian Historical Studies 7 (2002): 23–42; Algis Krupavicius, “Lithuania’s 
President: A Formal and Informal Power,” in Presidents Above Parties? Presidents in Cen-
tral and Eastern Eu­rope, Their Formal Competencies and Informal Power, eds. Vít 
Hlouŝek et al. (Prague: Masaryk University, 2013), 205–232. ­There is vast research on 
witchcraft and magical practice in African politics and business: James Howard Smith, 
Bewitching Development: Witchcraft and Reinvention of Development in Neoliberal ­Kenya 
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2008).
27. See Donald McCloskey, “The Art of Forecasting: From Ancient to Modern Times,” 
Cato Journal 12, no. 1 (1992): 23–48; and the ongoing work by Caley Horan, as well as 
Matthew Connelly, “­Future Shock: The End of the World as They Knew It,” The Shock of 
the Global: The 1970s in Perspective, eds. Niall Ferguson, Charles S. Maier, Erez Manela, 
and Daniel J. Sargent (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2011), 337–356.

249
ARCHIVES
Archives of the International Institute of Applied Systems Analy­sis, Laxenburg, Austria
Archives of the Rus­sian Acad­emy of Sciences (ARAN)
John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum
Ronald Reagan Presidential Library Digital Library Collections
Rus­sian State Archives of the Economy (RGAE)
University of Toronto Archives
Abbott, Kenneth W., Philipp Genschel, Duncan Snidal, and Bernhard Zangl, eds. Inter-
national Organ­izations as Orchestrators. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
2015.
Abbott, Kenneth Wayne, Philipp Genschel, Duncan Snidal, and Bernhard Zangl. “Orches-
tration: Global Governance through Intermediaries” (6 August 2012). doi:10.2139​
/ssrn.2125452.
Abbott, Kenneth W., Philipp Genschel, Duncan Snidal, and Bernhard Zangl. “Two Logics 
of Indirect Governance: Del­e­ga­tion and Orchestration.” British Journal of Po­liti­cal 
Science FirstView (2015): 1–11.
Abraham, Tara. Rebel Genius: Warren S. McCulloch’s Transdisciplinary Life in Science. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2016.
Abuhamdeg, Sami, and Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi. “The Artistic Personality: A System 
Perspective.” In The Systems Model of Creativity, edited by Mihaly Csikszentmih-
alyi, 227–237. Dordrecht: Springer, 2014.
Adam, Barbara, and Chris Groves. ­Future ­Matters: Action, Knowledge, Ethics. Leiden: 
Brill, 2007.
Agar, John. The Government Machine: A Revolutionary History of the Computer. Cam-
bridge, MA: MIT Press, 2003.
Agrawal, Arun. Environmentality: Technologies of Government and the Making of Sub-
jects. Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2005.
Åkerstrøm Andersen, Nielsen, and Justin Grønbaek Pors. Public Management in Transi-
tion: The Orchestration of Potentiality. Bristol: Policy Press, 2016.
Allen, T. S., and A. J. Moore. “Victory Without Casualties: Rus­sia’s Information Opera-
tions.” Par­ameters 48, no. 1 (2018): 59–71.
Amadae, S. M. Prisoners of Reason: Game Theory and Neoliberal Po­liti­cal Economy. Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press, 2015.
Amadae, S. M. Rationalizing Cap­i­tal­ist Democracy: The Cold War Origins of Rational 
Choice Liberalism. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2003.
Amoore, Louise. The Politics of Possibility: Risk and Security Beyond Probability. Durham, 
NC: Duke University Press, 2013.
Andersson, Jenny. The ­Future of the World: Futurology, Futurists, and the Strug­gle for the 
Post-­Cold War Imagination. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2018.
Andersson, Jenny. “Governing ­Futures: States and the Management of Expectations.” In 
Reconfiguring Eu­ro­pean States in Crisis, edited by Patrick Le Gales and Desmond 
King, 298–312. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2017.
Bibliography

250	
Bibliography
Andersson, Jenny, and Eglė Rindzevičiūtė, eds. The Strug­gle for the Long Term in Transna-
tional Science and Politics: Forging the ­Future. New York: Routledge, 2015.
Anisov, A. M., O. V. Maliukova, and L. A. Demina. Stanovlenie otechestvennoi logiki: dis-
kursy i sudby. Moscow: Prospekt, 2019.
Arab-­Ogly, Edvard. Demograficheskie i ekologicheskie prognozy: kritika sovremennykh 
burzhuaznykh kontseptsii. Moscow: Statistika, 1978.
Arab-­Ogly, Edvard. “Togda kazalos’, chto koe-to udavalos’.” In Rossiiskaia sotsiologiia 
shestidesiatykh godov v vospominaniiakh i dokumentakh, edited by G. Batygin, 
M.G. Pugacheva, S. F. Iarmoliuk, 358–370. St Petersburg: Izdatel’stvo Russkogo 
Khristianskogo gumanitarnogo universiteta, 1999.
Aradau, Claudia, and Tobias Blanke. “Politics of Prediction: Security and the Time/Space 
of Governmentality in the Age of Big Data.” Eu­ro­pean Journal of Social Theory 20, 
no. 3 (2017): 373–391.
Aradau, Claudia, and Tobias Lemke, Algorithmic Reason. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 2022.
Aradau, Claudia, and Rens van Munster. Politics of Catastrophe: Genealogies of the Un-
known. London: Routledge, 2011.
Archer, Margaret. The Reflexive Imperative in Late Modernity. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University, 2012.
Arendt, Hannah. The Origins of Totalitarianism. London: Penguin, 2017 [1951].
Ariely, Dan. Predictably Irrational: The Hidden Forces That Shape Our Decisions. New 
York: HarperCollins, 2008.
Armstrong, J. Scott. Long-­Range Forecasting: From Crystal Ball to Computer. New York: 
Wiley, 1985.
Aronova, Elena. “Citizen Seismology, Stalinist Science, and Vladimir Mannar’s Cold 
Wars.” Science, Technology, & ­Human Values 42, no. 2 (2017): 226–256.
Aronova, Elena. “Earthquake Prediction, Biological Clocks, and the Cold War Psy-­ops: 
Using Animals as Seismic Sensors in the 1970s California.” Studies in History and 
Philosophy of Science, Part A 70 (2018): 50–57.
Aronova, Elena. “The Politics and Contexts of Soviet Science Studies (Naukovedenie): So-
viet Philosophy of Science at the Crossroads.” Studies in East Eu­ro­pean Thought 63, 
no. 3 (2011): 175–202.
Aronova, Elena. Scientific History: Experiments in History and Politics from the Bolshevik 
Revolution to the End of the Cold War. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2021.
Arrow, Kenneth. Social Choice and Individual Values. New York: Wiley, 1951.
Arzyutov, Dmitry V. Reassembling the Environmental Archives of the Cold War: Perspec-
tives from the Rus­sian North. Stockholm: KTH Royal Institute of Technology, 2021.
Avilov, Aleksandr. Refleksivnoe upravlenie: metodologicheskie osnovanie. Moscow: GUU, 
2003.
Aykut, Stefan C., David Demortain, and Bilel Benbouzid. “The Politics of Anticipatory 
Expertise: Plurality and Contestation of ­Futures Knowledge in Governance—­
Introduction to the Special Issue.” Science & Technology Studies, Finnish Associa-
tion for Science and Technology Studies 32, no. 4 (2019): 2–12.
Azrikan, Dmitry. “VNIITE, Dinosaur of Totalitarianism or Plato’s Acad­emy of Design?” 
Design Issues 15, no. 3 (1999): 45–77.
Babintseva, Ekaterina. “ ‘Overtake and Surpass’: Soviet Algorithmic Thinking as a Revin-
vention of Western Theories during the Cold War.” In Cold War Social Science: 
Transnational Entanglements, edited by Mark Solovey and Christian Daye, 45–72. 
Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2021.
Back­house, Roger, and Philippe Fontaine, eds. A Historiography of the Modern Social Sci-
ences. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2014.

	
Bibliography	
251
Badash, Lawrence. A Nuclear Winter’s Tale: Science and Politics in the 1980s. Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press, 2009.
Bandura, Albert. “­Human Agency in Social Cognitive Theory.” American Psychologist 
9 (1989): 1175–1184.
Bar, Moshe. “The Proactive Brain: Memory for Predictions.” Philosophical Transactions of 
the Royal Society of London. Series B, Biological Sciences 364, no.  1521 (2009): 
1235–1243.
Bar, Moshe. “Visual Objects in Context.” Nature Reviews Neuroscience 5 (2004): 617–629.
Bara, Corinne. “Forecasting Civil War and Po­liti­cal Vio­lence.” In The Politics and Science 
of Prevision: Governing and Probing the ­Future, edited by Andreas Wenger, Ursula 
Jasper, and Myriam Dunn Cavelty, 177–193. London: Routledge, 2020.
Barber, John, and Mark Harrison, eds. The Soviet Defence Industry Complex from Stalin to 
Khrushchev. Basingstoke, UK: Macmillan, 2000.
Barnett, Vincent. Kondratiev and the Dynamics of Economic Development: Long Cycles 
and Industrial Growth in Historical Context. Basingstoke, UK: Macmillan, 1998.
Barry, Andrew. Po­liti­cal Machines: Governing a Technological Society. London: Routledge, 
2001.
Bassin, Mark. The Gumilev Mystique: Biopolitics, Eurasianism, and the Construction of 
Community in Modern Rus­sia. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2016.
Bateson, Gregory. Steps to an Ecol­ogy of Mind: Collected Essays in Anthropology, Psychia-
try, Evolution, and Epistemology. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2000.
Bauman, Zygmunt. Legislators and Interpreters: Of Modernity, Post-­Modernity and Intel-
lectuals. London: Polity, 1989.
Bauman, Zygmunt. Modernity and the Holocaust. Cambridge, UK: Polity Press, 1989.
Bautin, V. M. “Nikolai Dmitrievich Kondrat’ev i ego rol’ v stanovlenii agroekonomiches-
koi nauki i obrazovaniia v Rossii.” Izvestiia TSKhA 2 (2017): 134–153.
Bazhanov, Valentin. Istoriia logiki v Rossii i SSSR: kontseptualʹnyĭ kontekst universitetskoĭ 
filosofii. Moscow: Kanon, 2007.
Becht, Lukas. “From Euphoria to Frustration: Institutionalizing Prognostic Research in 
the Polish ­People’s Republic, 1969–76.” Acta Poloniae Historica 116 (2017): 277–299.
Beck, Silke. “Moving Beyond the Linear Model of Expertise? IPCC and the Test of Adap-
tation.” Regional Environmental Change 11 (2011): 297–306.
Beck, Ulrich. Risk Society: ­Towards a New Modernity. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 1993.
Beckert, Jens. ­Imagined ­Futures: Fictional Expectations and Cap­i­tal­ist Dynamics. Cam-
bridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2016.
Bedny, Gregory, Mark Seglin, and David Meister. “Activity Theory: History, Research and 
Application.” Theoretical Issues in Ergonomics Science 1, no. 2 (2000): 168–206.
Beer, Stafford. Decision and Control: The Meaning of Operational Research and Manage-
ment Cybernetics. London: Wiley, 1966.
Belchikov, M., and M. M. Birshtein. Delovye igry. Riga: AVOTS, 1989.
Bell, Wendell. Foundations of ­Futures Studies: History, Purposes, and Knowledge. Vol. 1 of 
­Human Science for a New Era. London: Routledge, 2009.
Benbouzid, Bilel. “Values and Consequences in Predictive Machine Evaluation: A Sociol-
ogy of Predictive Policing.” Science and Technology Studies (2020): 119–136.
Bendlin, Lena. Orchestrating Local Climate Policy in the Eu­ro­pean Union: Inter-­Municipal 
Coordination and the Covenant of Mayors in Germany and France. London: Springer, 
2020.
Beniger, James. The Control Revolution: Technological and Economic Origins of the Infor-
mational Society. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1989.
Bennett, Tony. “Habit: Time, Freedom, Governance.” Body and Society 19, nos. 2–3 (2013): 
107–135.

252	
Bibliography
Bennett, Tony. Making Culture, Changing Society. London: Routledge, 2013.
Bennett, Tony. Pasts Beyond Memory: Evolution, Museums, Colonialism. London: Rout-
ledge, 1994.
Bennett, Tony, Fiona Cameron, Nélia Dias, Ben Dibley, Rodney Harrison, Ira Jacknis, and 
Conal McCarthy. Collecting, Ordering, Governing: Anthropology, Museums, and 
Liberal Government. Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2017.
Bennett, Tony, Francis Dodsworth, Greg Noble, Mary Poovey, and Megan Watkins. “In-
troduction.” Body and Society 19, nos. 2–3 (2013): 3–29.
Berg, Aksel I. Cybernetics in the Ser­vice of Communism. Washington D.C.: U.S. Army 
Foreign Science and Technology Center, 1969.
Bessner, Daniel. Democracy in Exile: Hans Speier and the Rise of the Defense Intellectual. 
Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2018.
Bessner, Daniel. “The Globalist: George Soros ­after the Open Society.” N + 1 (18 June 2018).
Bessner, Daniel. “Organ­izing Complexity: The Hopeful Dreams and Harsh Realities of 
Interdisciplinary Collaboration at the Rand Corporation in the Early Cold War.” 
Journal of the History of the Behavioral Sciences 51, no. 1 (2015): 31–53.
Bestuzhev-­Lada, Igor’, ed. Malaia rosiiskaia entsiklopedia prognostiki. Moscow: Institut 
ekonomicheskikh strategii, 2007.
Bestuzhev-­Lada, Igor. Okno v budushchee: Sovremennye problemy sotsialnogo prog-
nozirovaniia. Moscow: Mysl, 1970.
Bestuzhev-­Lada, Igor’. Poiskovoe sotsial’noe prognozirovanie: perspektivnye prob­lem ob-
shchestva. Moscow: Nauka, 1984.
Bestuzhev-­Lada, Igor. “Prognozirovanie bylo iznachal’no oberecheno na pogrom.” In Ro-
siiskaia sotsiologiia shestidesiatykh godov v vospominaniakh i dokumantakh, edited 
by G. Batygin, M.G. Pugacheva, S. F. Iarmoliuk, 404–427. St Petersburg: Izdatel’stvo 
Russkogo Khristianskogo gumanitarnogo instituta, 1999.
Bestuzhev-­Lada, Igor’. Svozhu schety s zhizn’iu: zapisi futurologa o proshedshem i prikho-
diashchem. Moscow: Algoritm, 2004.
Bidel, Jeff, and Marcel Boumans. “Exploring the History of Statistical Inference in Eco-
nomics: Introduction.” History of Po­liti­cal Economy 53S (2021): 1–24.
Biermann, Frank. Earth System Governance: World Politics in the Anthropocene. Cam-
bridge, MA: MIT Press, 2014.
Blum, Alain, and Martine Mespoulet. L’anarchie bureaucratic: statistique et pouvoir sous 
Staline. Paris: La Découverte, 2003.
Bockman, Johanna. “The Strug­gle over Structural Adjustment: Socialist Revolution Ver-
sus Cap­i­tal­ist Counterrevolution in Yugo­slavia and the World.” History of Po­liti­cal 
Economy 51, no. S1 (2019).
Boginskii, E. Refleksivnoe upravlenie pri doprose. Kharkiv: KhIuI, 1983.
Boldyrev, Ivan, and Till Duppe. “Programming the USSR: Leonid V. Kantorovich in Con-
text.” British Journal of History of Science (2020): 1–24.
Boldyrev, Ivan, and Olessia Kirtchik. “The Cultures of Mathematical Economics in the 
Postwar Soviet Union: More Than a Method, Less Than a Discipline.” Studies in 
History and Philosophy of Science Part A 63 (2017): 1–10.
Bonneuil, Christophe, and Jean Baptiste Fressoz. The Shock of the Anthropocene: The 
Earth, History and Us. London: Verso, 2016.
Bostrom, Nick. Superintelligence: Paths, Dangers, Strategies. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 2014.
Boulding, Kenneth. Ecodynamics: A New Theory of Societal Evolution. London: Sage, 
1978.
Bourdieu, Pierre, and Loic Wacquant. An Invitation to Reflexive Sociology. Cambridge, 
UK: Polity Press, 1992.

	
Bibliography	
253
Bowler, P. J. A History of the ­Future: Prophets of Pro­gress from H.G. Wells to Isaac Asimov. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2017.
Bowmeester, Han. “Lo and Behold: Let the Truth Be Told—­Russian Deception Warfare in 
Crimea and Ukraine and the Return of ‘Maskirovka’ and ‘Reflexive Control The-
ory.’ ” In Netherlands Annual Review of Military Studies 2017, edited by Paul A. L. 
Ducheine and Frans P. B. Osinga. The Hague: Springer, 2017.
Boy, Guy A. Orchestrating Human-­Centred Design. London: Springer, 2013.
Bradley, Joseph. “Patterns of Peasant Migration to Late Nineteenth ­Century Moscow: 
How Much Should We Read into Literacy Rates?” Rus­sian History 6, no. 1 (1979): 
22–38.
Bradley, Joseph. Voluntary Associations in Tsarist Rus­sia: Science, Patriotism, and Civil 
Society. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2009.
Brown, Kate. Manual for Survival: A Chernobyl Guide for the ­Future. London: Penguin, 
2019.
Bruno, Andy. The Nature of Soviet Power: An Arctic Environmental History. Cambridge, 
UK: Cambridge University Press, 2016.
Bryant, Christopher G. A. “George Soros’s Theory of Reflexivity: A Comparison with the 
Theories of Giddens and Beck and a Consideration of Its Practical Value.” Economy 
and Society 31, no. 1 (2002): 112–131.
Budyko, Mikhail. Global Ecol­ogy. Moscow: Pro­gress Publishers, 1977.
Buwalda, Petrus. They Did Not Dwell Alone: Jewish Emigration from the Soviet Union, 
1967–1990. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1997.
Cadiot, Juliette. “Searching for Nationality: Statistics and National Categories at the End 
of the Rus­sian Empire (1897–1917).” Rus­sian Review 64, no. 3 (2005): 440–455.
Callon, Michel. “Some Ele­ments of a Sociology of Translation: Domestication of the Scal-
lops and the Fishermen of St Brieuc Bay.” So­cio­log­i­cal Review 32, no.  1 (1984): 
196–233.
Canguilhem, Georges. “The Living and Its Milieu.” Translated from French, originally 
published in 1952. Grey Room 3 (2001): 7–31.
Carpo, Mario. The Second Digital Turn: Design Beyond Intelligence. Cambridge, MA: MIT 
Press, 2017.
Carr, Danielle Judith Zola. “ ‘Ghastly Marionettes’ and the Po­liti­cal Metaphysics of Cog-
nitive Liberalism: Anti-­behaviourism, Language, and the Origins of Totalitarian-
ism.” History of the ­Human Sciences 33, no. 1 (2020): 147–174.
Carrier, Martin. “Prediction in Context: On the Comparative Epistemic Merit of Predic-
tive Success.” Studies in History and Philosophy of Science 45 (2014): 97–102.
Car­ter, Chris, Stewart Clegg, and Martin Kornberger. “Re-­framing Strategy: Power, Poli-
tics and Accounting.” Accounting, Auditing and Accountability Journal 23, no. 5 
(2010): 573–594.
Car­ter, Chris, Stewart Clegg, and Martin Kornberger. “Strategy as Practice?” Strategic 
Organ­ization 6, no. 1 (2008): 83–99.
Casapoglu, Kan. “Rus­sia’s Renewed Military Thinking: Non-­Linear Warfare and Reflex-
ive Control.” NATO Defence College Research Paper 121 (2015): 1–12.
Cave, Jane. “Po­liti­cal Reform and Scientific Freedom ­Under Gorbachev.” Technology in 
Society 13 (1991): 69–89.
Chandler, David. Resilience: The Governance of Complexity. London: Routledge, 2014.
Chotikul, Diane. “The Soviet Theory of Reflexive Control in Historical and Psychocul-
tural Perspective: Preliminary Study.” Unpublished thesis, Naval Postgraduate 
School, Monterey, CA, 1986.
Christian, Michel, Sandrine Kott, and Ondřej Matějka, eds. Planning in Cold War Eu­rope: 
Competition, Cooperation, Circulations (1950s–1970s). Berlin: de Gruyter, 2018.

254	
Bibliography
Christin, Angèle. “Predictive Algorithms and Criminal Sentencing.” In The Decisionist 
Imagination, edited by Daniel Bessner and Nicolas Guilhot, 272–294. New York: 
Berghahn, 2018.
Clark, Andy. Surfing Uncertainty: Prediction, Action and the Embodied Mind. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 2016.
Clark, Andy. “What­ever Next? Predictive Brains, Situated Agents, and the ­Future of Cog-
nitive Science.” Behavioral and Brain Sciences 36 (2013): 181–253.
Clarke, Bertrand S., and Jennifer L. Clarke. Predictive Statistics: Analy­sis and Inference 
Beyond Models. Cambridge: Cambridge University, 2018.
Cloves, Edith. Rus­sian Experimental Fiction: Resisting Ideology ­After Utopia. Prince­ton, 
NJ: Prince­ton University Press, 1993.
Cohen, Michael D., James G. March, and Johan P. Olsen. “A Garbage Can Model of Orga­
nizational Choice.” Administrative Science Quarterly 17, no. 1 (1972): 1–25.
Collier, Stephen. Post-­Soviet Social: Neoliberalism, Social Modernity, Biopolitics. Prince­
ton, NJ: Prince­ton University Press, 2011.
Collier, Stephen and Anke Gruendel. “Design and Government: City Planning, Space-­
Making, and Urban Politics.” Po­liti­cal Geography 97 (2022): 1-13.
Collins, Randall. “Prediction in Macrosociology: The Case of the Soviet Collapse.” Ameri-
can Journal of Sociology 100, no. 6 (1995): 1552–1593.
Collis, Robert. “ ‘Stars Rule Over ­People, but God Rules Over the Stars’: The Astrological 
World View of Boris Ivanovich Kurakin (1676–1727).” Jahrbücher für Geschichte 
Osteuropas 59, no. 2 (2011): 195–216.
Colonomos, Ariel. Selling the ­Future: The Perils of Predicting Global Politics. London: 
Hurst, 2016.
Comte, Auguste. The Positive Philosophy (1830–1842), translated by Harriet Martineau 
[1896]. Kitchener, ON: Batocher Books, 2000.
Connelly, Matthew. “­Future Shock: The End of the World as They Knew It.” In The Shock 
of the Global: The 1970s in Perspective, edited by Niall Ferguson, Charles S. Maier, 
Erez Manela, and Daniel J. Sargent, 337–356. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press, 2011.
Conway, Flo, and Jim Siegelman. Dark Hero of the Information Age: In Search of Norbert 
Wiener, the ­Father of Cybernetics. New York: Basic Books, 2009.
Cook, Eli. The Pricing of Pro­gress: Economic Indicators and the Capitalization of American 
Life. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2017.
Cowles, Alfred. “Can Stock Markets Forecast?” Econometrica 1, no. 3 (1933): 309–324.
Crowley, David, and Jane Pavitt, eds. Cold War Modern 1945–1970. London: V&A, 2010.
Crutzen, Paul. “Geology of Mankind.” Nature 415, no. 3 (2002): 23.
Cummings, Stephen, Todd Bridgman, John Hassard, and Michael Rowlinson. A New His-
tory of Management. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2017.
Czarniawska, Barbara, and Guje Sevón, eds. Translating Orga­nizational Change. Berlin: 
De Gruyter, 1996.
Dahl, Matilda. States ­Under Scrutiny: International Organ­izations, Transformation and 
the Construction of Pro­gress. Stockholm: Stockholm University Dissertations, 
2007.
Dailey, Brian D., and Patrick J. Parker, eds. Soviet Strategic Deception. Lanham, MD: Lex-
ington, 1987.
Dayé, Christian. Experts, Social Scientists and Techniques of Prognosis in Cold War Amer­
i­ca. Cham, Switzerland: Palgrave, 2019.
Daye, Christian. “How to Train Your Oracle: The Delphi Method and Its Turbulent Youth 
in Operations Research and the Policy Sciences.” Social Studies of Science 48, no. 6 
(2018).

	
Bibliography	
255
de Pedro, Nicolás, Panagiota Manoli, Sergey Sukhankin, and Theodoros Tsakiris. Facing 
Rus­sia’s Strategic Challenge: Security Developments from the Baltic Sea to the Black 
Sea. Brussels: Eu­ro­pean Parliament Policy Department, Directorate General for 
External Policies, 2017.
Dean, Mitchell. Governmentality: Power and Rule in Modern Society. London: Sage, 2009.
Dean, Mitchell, and Daniel Zamora, The Last Man Takes LSD: Foucault and the End of 
Revolution. London: Verso, 2021.
DeBardeleben, Joan. The Environment and Marxism-­Leninism: The Soviet and East Ger-
man Experience. Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 1985.
Deegan, Cecily, and Stephen Latham. “The B-­School vs the Wall Street Journal: Who Is 
Misrepresenting Whom?” Harvard Crimson, 1 March 1979, https://­www​.­thecrimson​
.­com​/­article​/­1979​/­3​/­1​/­the​-­b​-­school​-­vs​-­the​-­wall​-­street​/­.
Denyer, Nicholas. “The Case Against Divination: An Examination of Cicero’s De Divina-
tione.” Cambridge Classical Journal 31 (1985): 1–10.
Desrosières, Alain. The Politics of Large Numbers: A History of Statistical Reasoning. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2002.
Deutsch, Karl W. The Nerves of Government: Models of Po­liti­cal Communication and Con-
trol. New York: ­Free Press, 1963.
Dodsworth, Francis. The Security Society: History, Patriarchy, Protection. Cham, Switzer-
land: Palgrave Macmillan, 2019.
Doktorov, Boris. Sovremennaia Rossiiskaia sotsiologiia: istoriko biograficheskie poiski. 
Vol. 8.1. Moscow: TsPIM, 2016.
Doktorov, Boris. Sovremennaia Rossiiskaia sotsiologiia: istoriko-­biograficheskoe i avtobio-
graficheskoe. Vol. 9. Moscow: TsSPim, 2016.
Doktorov, Boris. “Interv’iu s I.V. Zadorinym: ‘V otnoshenie k rabote moia professional’naia 
pozitsiia vsegda byla sil’nee grazhdanskoi . . .’.” Monitoring obshchestvennogo mne-
niia: ekonomicheskie i sotsialnye peremeny 1 (2016): 363–380.
Dolan, Emily. The Orchestral Revolution: Haydn and the Technologies of Timbre. Cam-
bridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2013.
Donskis, Leonidas. “Aleksandras Shtromas: The Lithuanian Prophet of Postcommu-
nism.” Journal of Interdisciplinary Studies 18, nos. 1–2 (2006): 75–92.
Douglas, Heather. “Reintroducing Prediction to Explanation.” Philosophy of Science 
76 (2009): 444–463.
Douglas, Mary, and Aaron Wildavsky. Risk and Culture: An Essay on the Se­lection of Tech-
nological and Environmental Dangers. Berkeley: University of California Press, 
1983.
du Gay, Paul. In Praise of Bureaucracy: Weber–­Organ­ization–­Ethics. London: Sage, 2000.
Düppe, Till. “Koopmans in the Soviet Union: A Travel Report of the Summer of 1965.” 
Journal of the History of Economic Thought 38, no. 1 (2016): 81–104.
Durkheim, Emile. The Rules of So­cio­log­i­cal Method, translated by W. D. Halls [1895]. New 
York: ­Free Press, 1982.
Edwards, Paul. The Closed World: Computers and the Politics of Discourse in Cold War 
Amer­i­ca. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1996.
Edwards, Paul. A Vast Machine: Computer Models, Climate Data and the Politics of Global 
Warming. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2010.
Efremenko, Dmitry. Vvedenie v otsenku tekhniki. Moscow: MNEPU, 2002.
Ehrenberg, A. S. C., and J. A. Bound. “Predictability and Prediction.” Journal of the Royal 
Statistical Society, Series A (Statistics in Society) 156, no. 2 (1993): 167–206.
Elden, Stuart. Canguilhem. Cambridge: Polity, 2019.
Eliade, Mircea. The Myth of Eternal Return: Cosmos and History. Oxford: Blackwell, 2018 
[1949].

256	
Bibliography
Elie, Marc. “Formulating the Global Environment: Soviet Soil Scientists and the Interna-
tional Desertification Discussion, 1968–91.” Slavonic and East Eu­ro­pean Review 
93, no. 1 (2015): 181–204.
Elie, Marc. “Governing by ­Hazard: Controlling Mudslides and Promoting Tourism in the 
Mountains Above Alma-­Ata (Kazakhstan), 1966–1977.” In Governing Disasters: 
Beyond Risk Culture, edited by Sandrine Revet and Julien Langumier, 23–57. 
Cham, Switzerland: Palgrave, 2015.
Elie, Marc. “Late Soviet Responses to Disasters, 1989–1991: A New Approach to Crisis 
Management or the Acme of Soviet Technocratic Thinking?” Soviet and Post-­
Soviet Review 40, no. 2 (2013): 214–238.
Elkner, Julie. “The Changing Face of Repression ­under Khrushchev.” In Soviet State and 
Society ­Under Nikita Khrushchev, edited by Melanie Ilic and Jeremy Smith, 142–
161 (London: Routledge, 2009).
Ellman, Michael. Socialist Planning. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2008.
Ellman, Michael. “Was the Collapse of the USSR Entirely Unforeseen?” Perspectives on 
Po­liti­cal Science 31, no. 3 (2002): 132–135.
Ellman, Michael, and Vladimir Kantorovich, eds. The Destruction of the Soviet Economic 
System: An Insider’s History. London: Routledge, 1988.
Erelina, Ol’ga, and Nikolai Smirnov. Ivan Efremov. Moscow: Molodaia gvardiia, 2013.
Ereshko, F. I. “Ravnovesie na mnozhestve refleksivnykh strategii.” Refleksivnye protsessy i 
upravlenie 16, nos. 1–2 (2016): 59–64.
Erickson, Paul. The World the Game Theorists Made. Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, 2015.
Erickson, Paul, Judy L. Klein, Lorraine Daston, Rebecca Lemov, Thomas Sturm, and Mi-
chael D. Gordin. How Reason Almost Lost Its Mind: The Strange ­Career of Cold War 
Rationality. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2013.
Erlich, Paul, and Peter Raven. “Butterflies and Plants: A Study in Coevolution.” Evolution 
18, no. 4 (1967): 586–608.
Ershov, Iu. V. and A. S. Popo­vich. “Propushchennaia vozmozhnost’ obognat Ameriku, ili 
k chemu provodit ignorirovanie prognoz.” Top Club Journal 3, no. 21 (2012): 8–17.
Faria, A. J., David Hutchinson, William Wellington, and Steven Gold. “Developments in 
Business Gaming: A Review of the Past 40 Years.” Simulation and Gaming 40, no. 4 
(2009): 464–487.
Fedorov, Evgenii. Ecological Crisis and Social Pro­gress. Moscow: Pro­gress, 1977.
Fedorov, Evgenii. Man and Nature: The Ecological Crisis and Social Pro­gress. New York: 
Pro­gress, 1981.
Fedorov, Evgenii. Vzaimodeistvie obshchestva i prirody. Leningrad: Gidrometeoizdat, 
1972.
Feygin, Yakov. “Reforming the Cold War State: Economic Thought, Internationalization, 
and the Politics of Soviet Reform, 1955–1985.” Unpublished doctoral dissertation, 
University of Pennsylvania, 2017.
Fidora, Alexander. “Divination and Scientific Prediction: The Epistemology of Prognostic 
Sciences in Medieval Eu­rope.” Early Science and Medicine 18 (2013): 517–535.
Firsov, Boris. Istoriia sovetskoi sotsiologii 1950–1980 gg. St Petersburg: Izd. Evropeiskogo 
universiteta v Sankt Peterburge, 2012.
Fischer, Frank. Technocracy and the Politics of Expertise. Newbury Park, CA: Sage, 1990.
Fischer, Ronald A. “The Logic of Inductive Inference.” Journal of the Royal Statistical Soci-
ety 98, no. 1 (1935): 39–82.
Flanagan, Owen. “Psy­chol­ogy, Pro­gress, and the Prob­lem of Reflexivity: A Study in the 
Epistemological Foundations of Psy­chol­ogy.” Journal of the History of Behavioral 
Sciences 17, no. 3 (1981): 375–386.

	
Bibliography	
257
Fortescue, Stephen, ed. Rus­sian Politics: From Lenin to Putin. Basingstoke, UK: Palgrave, 
2010.
Foucault, Michel. The Order of ­Things: An Archaeology of the ­Human Sciences. New York: 
Vintage Books, 1970.
Foucault, Michel. Security, Territory, Population: Lectures at the Collège de France 1978–
1979. Basingstoke, UK: Palgrave, 2009.
Fraisse, Robert. “Notes sur planification a long terme en Union Sovietique.” Decem-
ber 1966, BR 4/513/8, Sciences Po.
Franklin, Seb. Control: Digitality as Cultural Logic. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2015.
Freedman, Lawrence. Strategy: A History. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2013.
Friedman, Walt. Fortune Tellers: The Story of Amer­i­ca’s First Forecasters. Prince­ton, NJ: 
Prince­ton University Press, 2014.
Fuller, Jonathan, Alex Broadbent, and Luis J. Flores. “Prediction in Epidemiology and 
Medicine.” Studies in History and Philosophy of Biological and Biomedical Sciences 
(2015): 1–4.
Gabrys, Jennifer. Program Earth: Environmental Sensing Technology and the Making of a 
Computational Planet. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2016.
Gagnon, John H. “Mary M. Birshtein: The ­Mother of Soviet Simulation Gaming.” Simula-
tion Gaming 18, no. 3 (1987): 3–12.
Galeotti, Mark. Rus­sian Po­liti­cal War: Moving Beyond the Hybrid. London: Routledge, 
2019.
Galison, Peter. Einstein’s Clocks, Poincare’s Maps. London: Sceptre, 2003.
Galison, Peter. “The Ontology of the ­Enemy: Norbert Wiener and the Cybernetic Vision.” 
Critical Inquiry 21, no. 1 (1994): 228–266.
Galison, Peter, and Bruce William Hevly, eds. Big Science: The Growth of Large Scale Re-
search. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1992.
Geismar, Haidy. Museum Object: Lessons for the Digital Age. London: UCL Press, 2018.
Geoghegan, Bernard Dionysius. “From Information Theory to French Theory: Jakobson, 
Lévi-­Strauss, and the Cybernetic Apparatus.” Critical Inquiry 38, no.  1 (2011): 
96–111.
Geroulanos, Stefanos. Transparency in Postwar France: A Critical History of the Pre­sent. 
Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 2017.
Geroulanos, Stefanos, and Todd Meyers. The ­Human Body in the Age of Catastrophe: Brit-
tleness, Integration, Science and the ­Great War. Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, 2018.
Gerovitch, Slava. From Newspeak to Cyberspeak: A History of Soviet Cybernetics. Cam-
bridge, MA: MIT Press, 2002.
Gerovitch, Slava. Soviet Space Mythologies: Public Images, Private Memories, and the 
Making of a Cultural Identity. Pittsburgh: Pittsburgh University Press, 2015.
Gerovitch, Slava. Voices of the Space Program: Cosmonauts, Soldiers, and Engineers Who 
Took the USSR into Space. London: Palgrave, 2014.
Gerovitch, Slava. “ ‘We Teach Them to Be ­Free’: Specialized Math Schools and the Cultiva-
tion of the Soviet Technical Intelligent­sia.” Kritika: Explorations in Rus­sian and 
Eurasian History 20, no. 4 (2019): 717–754.
Giddens, Anthony. New Rules of So­cio­log­i­cal Method. Stanford, CA: Stanford University 
Press, 1976.
Gilman, Nils. The Mandarins of the ­Future: Modernization Theory in Cold War Amer­i­ca. 
Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2007.
Gjaltema, Jonna, Robbert Biesbroek, and Katrien Termeer. “From Government to Gover-
nance: A Systematic Lit­er­a­ture Review.” Public Management Review 22, no.  12 
(2020): 1760–1780.

258	
Bibliography
Glushenkova, Elena. Ekopolitologiia N. N. Moiseeva i ustoichivoe razvitie Rossii. Moscow: 
MNEPU, 2015.
Godet, Michel. “From Forecasting to la prospective: A New Way of Looking at ­Futures.” 
Journal of Forecasting 1 (1982): 293–301.
Godin, Benoît. “The Linear Model of Innovation: The Historical Construction of an Analyti-
cal Framework.” Science, Technology and ­Human Values 31, no. 6 (2006): 639–667.
Gofman, Alexander. “The Rus­sian ­Career of Durkheim’s Sociology of Religion and ‘Les 
Formes Élémentaires’: Contribution to a Study.” Durkheimian Studies / Études 
Durkheimiennes 19 (2013): 101–124
Goffman, Erving. Encounters. New York: Bobbs-­Merrill, 1961.
Gogol, Nikolai. The Gamblers and Marriage, translated by Alexander Berkman. Di-
gireads, Kindle edition, 2014.
Goldstone, Jack. “Predicting Revolutions: Why We Could (and Should) Have Foreseen 
the Revolutions of 1989–1991 in the U.S.S.R. and Eastern Eu­rope.” Contention 2, 
no. 2 (1993): 127–152.
Golomstock, Igor. A Ransomed Dissident: A Life in Art ­Under the Soviets. London: I. B. 
Tauris, 2019.
Good, Harry, and Robert Machol. Systems Engineering: An Introduction to the Design of 
Large-­Scale Systems. New York: McGraw Hill, 1957.
Gorham, Michael. “Virtual Rusophonia: Language Policy as ‘Soft Power’ in the New Me-
dia Age.” Digital Icons 5 (2011): 23–48.
Gouarné, Isabelle. “Mandatory Planning Versus Indicative Planning? The Eastern Itiner-
ary of French Planners (1960s–1970s).” In Planning in Cold War Eu­rope: Competi-
tion, Cooperation, Circulations (1950s–1970s), edited by Michel Christian, Sandrine 
Kott, and Ondřej Matějka, 71–77. Berlin: De Gruyter, 2018.
Graham, Loren. The Ghost of the Executed Engineer: Technology and the Fall of the Soviet 
Union. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1996.
Graham, Loren, and Irina Dezhina. Science in the New Rus­sia: Crisis, Aid, Reform. 
Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 2008.
Greenfeld, Liah. “Soviet Sociology and Sociology in the Soviet Union.” Annual Review of 
Sociology 14 (1988): 99–123.
Gregory, Paul R. The Po­liti­cal Economy of Stalinism: Evidence from the Soviet Secret Ar-
chives. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004.
Grimanelli, Pericles. “La prévision en sociologie.” Revue internationale de sociologie 
12 (1911): 861–879.
Groys, Boris. The Total Art of Stalinism: Avant-­garde, Aesthetic Dictatorship and Beyond. 
Prince­ton, NJ: Prince­ton University Press, 1992.
Guilhot, Nicolas. “Cybernetic Pantocrator: International Relations Theory from Deci-
sionism to Rational Choice.” Journal of the History of the Behavioral Sciences 47, 
no. 3 (2011): 279–301.
Guilhot, Nicolas, and Daniel Bessner, eds. Decisionist Imagination: Sovereignty, Social 
Science and Democracy in the 20th ­Century. Oxford: Berghahn Books, 2018.
Gunneriusson, Hakan, and Sascha Dov Bachmann. “Western Denial and Rus­sian Con-
trol: How Rus­sia’s National Security Strategy Threatens a Western-­based Approach 
to Global Security, the Rule of Law and Globalization.” Polish Po­liti­cal Science 
Yearbook 46, no. 1 (2017): 9–29.
Gutnov, Dmitrij. “L’École russe des hautes études sociales de Paris (1901–1906).” Cahiers 
du monde Russe 43, nos. 2–3 (2002): 375–410.
Gvishiani, Dzhermen. “Upravlenie—­prezhde vsego nauka.” Izvestiia no. 118 (1963): 2.
Hacking, Ian. The Taming of Chance. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1990.

	
Bibliography	
259
Hale, Thomas, and Charles Roger. “Orchestration and Transnational Climate Gover-
nance.” Review International Organ­ization 9 (2014): 59–82.
Hammond, Debora. The Science of Synthesis: Exploring the Social Implications of General 
Systems Theory. Boulder: University Press of Colorado, 2003.
Hammond-­Errey, M. “Understanding and Assessing Information Influence and Foreign 
Interference.” Journal of Information Warfare 18, no. 1 (2019): 1–22.
Harries-­Jones, Peter. A Recursive Vision: Ecological Understanding and Gregory Bateson. 
Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1995.
Harrison, Mark. “Chayanov and the Economics of the Rus­sian Peasantry.” Journal of 
Peasant Studies 2, no. 4 (1975): 389–417.
Harrison, Rodney, and Colin Sterling, eds. Deterritorializing the ­Future: Heritage In, Of 
and ­After the Anthropocene. London: Open Humanities Press, 2020.
Hayles, Katherine. How We Became Posthuman: Virtual Bodies in Cybernetics, Lit­er­a­ture, 
and Informatics. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1999.
Hecht, Gabriella. The Radiance of France: Nuclear Power and National Identity ­After 
World War II. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1998.
Heidegger, Martin. “Nur noch ein Gott kann uns retten.” Der Spiegel 23 (31 May 1976): 
193–219.
Heims, Steve J. John Von Neumann and Norbert Wiener: From Mathe­matics to the Tech-
nologies of Life and Death. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1980.
Hempel, Carl G., and Paul Oppenheim. “Studies in the Logic of Explanation.” Philosophy 
of Science 15, no. 2 (1948): 135–175.
Heyck, Hunter. Age of System: Understanding the Development of Modern Social Science. 
Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2015.
Heymann, Matthias, Gabriele Gramelsberger, and Martin Mahony, eds. Cultures of Predic-
tion in Atmospheric and Climate Science: Epistemic and Cultural Shifts in Computer-­
based Modelling and Simulation. London: Routledge, 2017.
Heymann, Matthias, Gabriele Gramelsberger, and Martin Mahony. “Key Characteristics 
of Cultures of Prediction.” In Cultures of Prediction in Atmospheric and Climate 
Science, edited by Matthias Heymann, Gabriele Gramelsberger, and Martin Ma-
hony, 18–42. London: Routledge, 2015.
Horan, Caley. “Investing in the Stars: The Astrology of Money and Markets in the Mod-
ern United States.” Unpublished pre­sen­ta­tion, STS Circle at Harvard, 19 November 
2018.
Horvath, Robert. The Legacy of Soviet Dissent: Dissidents, Demo­cratisation and Radical 
Nationalism in Rus­sia. London: Routledge, 2005.
Howe, Leo, and Alan Wain, eds. Predicting the ­Future. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 1993.
Hughes, Thomas. Networks of Power: Electrification in Western Society, 1880–1930. Balti-
more: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1993.
Huhtinen, Aki-­Mauri, Noora Kotilainen, Saara Särmä, and Mikko Streng, “Information 
Influence in Hybrid Environment: Reflexive Control as an Analytical Tool for Un-
derstanding Warfare in Social Media.” International Journal of Cyber Warfare and 
Terrorism 9, no. 3 (2019): 1–20.
Hviid Jacobsen, Michael, and Sophia Marshman. “Bauman on Meta­phors: A Harbinger of 
Humanistic Hybrid Sociology.” In The Sociology of Zygmunt Bauman: Challenges 
and Critique, edited by Michael Hviid Jacobsen and Paul Poder, 19–40. London: 
Routledge, 2008.
Iakimets, I.  V. “Background and Requirements for the SOVAM: Soviet Agricultural 
Model.” IIASA Working Paper, WP-84-097, IIASA, Austria, 1984.

260	
Bibliography
Iakovlev, A.A. Interview with Igor’ Zadorin, “v professionalnom sotsiologicheskom soob-
shchestve ne khvataet nezavisimykh ekspertov.” Ekonomicheskaia sotsiologiia 14, 
no. 1 (2013): 10–26.
Ianitskii, Oleg. “Environmental Sociology Yesterday and ­Today.” So­cio­log­i­cal Research 33, 
no. 1 (1994): 7–32.
Iarmoliuk, S. F., ed. Rossiiskaia sotsiologiia shestidesiatykh godov v vospominaniiakh i do-
kumentakh. St Petersburg: Izdatel’stvo Russkogo Khristianskogo gumanitarnogo 
universiteta, 1999.
Igrunov, Viacheslav. “O Nikite Nikolaiche Moiseeve i o tom, kak nesostoialsia Moskovskii 
Rimskii klub.” http://­www​.­igrunov​.­ru​/­cv​/­vchk​-­cv​-­memotalks​/­talks​/­vchk​-­cv​-­memo​
talks​-­talks​-­moiseev​.­html.
Ingelstam, Lars. System: Att tänka över samhälle och teknik. Eskilstuna: Energimyn-
dighetens förlag, 2012.
Ioffe, Julia. “ ‘Before, Putin Was Unpredictable; Now It’s Trump’: Moscow Grapples with a 
Strange Week in Washington.” Atlantic, 18 February 2017, https://­www​.­theatlantic​
.­com​/­international​/­archive​/­2017​/­02​/­putin​-­trump​-­flynn​/­517224​/­.
Isaev, V.  P. “Pervyi v SSSR podvizhnyi vychislitel’nyi tsentr voennogo naznacheniia 
(1963–1968 gg).” Virtualnyi komp’iuternyi muzei, 26 January  2011, http://­www​
.­computer​-­museum​.­ru​/­histussr​/­pvp​_­platforma​.­htm.
Isin, Engin, and Evelyn Ruppert. “The Birth of Sensory Power: How a Pandemic Made It 
Vis­i­ble.” Big Data & Society (2020): 1–15.
Iudin, Boris. “Ot gumanitarnogo znaniia k gumanitarnym tekhnologiiam.” Gumanitar-
nye nauki: teoriia i metodologiia 4 (2005): 104–107.
Jameson, Frederic. Archaeologies of the ­Future: The Desire of Utopia and Other Science Fic-
tions. London: Verso, 2005.
Jervis, Robert. Perception and Misperception in International Politics. Prince­ton, NJ: 
Prince­ton University Press, 1976.
Joel, Isaac. “Strategy as Intellectual History.” Modern Intellectual History (2018): 1–15.
Johnson, Ann. “Rational and Empirical Cultures of Prediction.” In Mathe­matics as a Tool, 
edited by Johannes Lenhard and Martin Carrier, 23–35. Cham, Switzerland: 
Springer, 2017.
Johnson, Ian. “Technology’s Cutting Edge: Futurism and Research in the Red Army, 
1917–1973.” Technology and Culture 59 (2018): 689–718.
Johnston, John. The Allure of Machinic Life: Cybernetics, Artificial Life, and the New AI. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2008.
Jopling, Lord. Countering Rus­sia’s Hybrid Threats: An Update. Committee of the Civil 
Dimension of Security, NATO Parliamentary Assembly, 1 October 2018.
Josephson, Paul R. Industrialized Nature: Brute Force Technology and the Transformation 
of the Natu­ral World. Washington, DC: Island Press, 2002.
Josephson, Paul R. “ ‘Proj­ects of the ­Century’ in Soviet History: Large-­Scale Technologies 
from Stalin to Gorbachev.” Technology and Culture 36, no. 3 (1995): 519–559.
Josephson, Paul, Nicolai Dronin, Ruben Mnatsakanian, Aleh Cherp, Dmitry Efremenko, 
and Vladislav Larin. An Environmental History of Rus­sia. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 2013.
Kahneman, Daniel, and Amos Tversky. “On the Psy­chol­ogy of Prediction.” Psychological 
Review 80, no. 4 (1973): 237–251.
Kähönen, Aappo. “Optimal Planning, Optimal Economy, Optimal Life? The Kosygin Re-
forms, 1965–72.” In Competition in Socialist Society, edited by Katalin Miklossy 
and Melanie Ilic, 23–40. London: Routledge, 2014.
Kantola, Ilkka. Probability and Moral Uncertainty in Late Medieval and Early Modern 
Times. Helsinki, Finland: Luther-­Agricola Society, 1994.

	
Bibliography	
261
Kaplan, Fred. The Wizards of Armageddon. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1991.
Kellner, Joseph. “As Above, So Below: Astrology and the Fate of Soviet Scientism.” Kritika 
20, no. 4 (2019): 783–812.
Kemp, Sandra, and Jenny Andersson, eds. ­Futures. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
2021.
Kerzhentsev, Platon. “Bor’ba za vremia (1923).” In Printsipy organizatsii by Platon Ker-
zhentsev, 335–384. Moscow: Ekonomika, 1968.
Khandozhko, Roman. Vzaimodeistvie neofitsial’noi filosofii i nauchno-­tekhnicheskogo 
soobshchestva v pozdnem SSSR: sluchai Obninska. Moscow: Ranepa, 2016.
Khristenko, V. B., A. G. Reus, A. P. Zinchenko., Methodological School of Management. 
London: Bloomsbury, 2014.
Khromchenko, Matvei Solomonovich. Letopis’. Moscow: Studia Korolovae, 2019, https://­
conflictmanagement​.­ru​/­wp​-­content​/­uploads​/­2016​/­02​/­letopis​_­MKh03​.­pdf.
Kilovaty, Ido. “Doxfare: Po­liti­cally Motivated Leaks and the ­Future of the Norm on Non-­
Intervention in the Era of Weaponized Information.” Harvard National Security 
Journal 9, no. 1 (2018): 146–179.
Kirchhof, Astrid, and John Robert McNeill, eds. Nature and the Iron Curtain: Environ-
mental Policy and Social Movements in Communist and Cap­i­tal­ist Countries, 1945–
1990. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press, 2019.
Kirtchik, Olesia. “From Pattern Recognition to Economic Disequilibrium: Emmanuil 
Braverman’s Theory of Control of the Soviet Economy.” History of Po­liti­cal Econ-
omy 51, no. S1 (2019): 180–203.
Klebaner, V. S. “V.A. Bazarov: Myslitel’, uchenyi, grazhdanin.” Problemy prognozirovaniia 
6 (2004):150–154.
Klein, Judy L. Statistical Visions in Time: A History of Time Series Analy­sis, 1662–1938. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1997.
Klepach, A.  N., and G.  O. Kuranov. “Razvitie sotsial’no-­ekonomicheskogo prog-
nozirovanie i idei A. I. Anchishkina.” Voprosy ekonomiki 8 (2013): 143–155.
Kline, Ronald. The Cybernetics Moment: Or Why We Call Our Age the Information Age. 
Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2015.
Knight, Frank H. Risk, Uncertainty and Profit. Boston: Riverside Press, 1921.
Knutti, Retto. “Should We Believe Model Predictions of ­Future Climate Change?” Philo-
sophical Transactions of the Royal Society Series A 366 (2008): 4647–4664.
Kojevnikov, Alexei. Stalin’s ­Great Science: The Times and Adventures of Soviet Physicists. 
London: Imperial College Press, 2004.
Kondrat’ev, N. D. Bol’shie tsikly, kon”iunktury i teoriia predvideniia. Moscow: Akademi-
cheskii proekt, 2015.
Kornai, Janos. The Socialist System: The Po­liti­cal Economics of Communism. Prince­ton, 
NJ: Prince­ton University Press, 1992.
Koselleck, Reinhart. ­Futures Past: On the Semantics of Historical Time. New York: Colum-
bia University Press, 2004 [1979].
Kosygin, Aleksei. “Povyshenie nauchnoi obosnovannosti planov-­vazhneishaia zadacha 
planovykh organov.” Planovoe khoziaistvo 4 (1965): 4–5.
Kotsonis, Yanni. States of Obligation: Taxes and Citizenship in the Rus­sian Empire and 
Early Soviet Republic. Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2014.
Kramer, Xenia, Tim Kaiser, Stefan Schmidt, Jim Davidson, and Vladimir Lefebvre. “Ot 
predskazanii k refleksivnomu upravleniiu.” Refleksivnye protsessy i upravlenie 2, 
no. 3 (2003): 35–52.
Krementsov, Nikolai. A Martian Stranded on Earth: Alexander Bogdanov, Blood Transfu-
sion and the Proletarian Science. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2011.
Krementsov, Nikolai. Stalinist Science. Prince­ton, NJ: Prince­ton University Press, 1996.

262	
Bibliography
Krementsov, Nikolai. With or Without Galton: Vasilii Florinskii and the Fate of Eugenics 
in Rus­sia. Cambridge, UK: Open Book Publishers, 2018.
Kriger, Il’ia. “Vladimir Lefevr: Ideologiiu nel’zia sozdat’—­ona vozniknet nezametno 
samo soboi.” Novaia gazeta 84 (1 November 2007), https://­novayagazeta​.­ru​/­articles​
/­2007​/­11​/­01​/­31285​-­vladimir​-­lefevr​-­ideologiyu​-­nelzya​-­sozdat​-­ona​-­vozniknet​
-­nezametno​-­sama​-­soboy.
Krupavicius, Algis. “Lithuania’s President: A Formal and Informal Power.” In Presidents 
above Parties? Presidents in Central and Eastern Eu­rope, Their Formal Competen-
cies and Informal Power, edited by Vít Hlouŝek et al., 205–232. Prague: Masaryk 
University, 2013.
Kucharski, Adam. “How Modelling Covid Has Changed the Way We Think About Epi-
demics.” Guardian (UK edition), 4 January 2021.
Kudors, Andis. “ ‘Rus­sian World’: Rus­sia’s Soft Power Approach to Compatriots Policy.” 
Rus­sian Analytical Digest 81 (16 June 2010): 2–4.
Kukulin, Il´ia. “Alternative Social Blueprinting in Soviet Society of the 1960s and the 
1970s, or Why Left-­Wing Po­liti­cal Practices Have Not Caught on in Con­temporary 
Rus­sia.” Rus­sian Studies in History 49, no. 4 (2011): 51–92.
Kuosa, Tuomo. The Evolution of Strategic Foresight: Navigating Public Policy Making. 
Farnham, UK: Ashgate, 2012.
Kurennoy, Vitaly. “Con­temporary State Cultural Policy in Rus­sia: Organ­ization, Po­liti­cal 
Discourse and Ceremonial Be­hav­ior.” International Journal of Cultural Policy 27, 
no. 2 (2021): 163–176.
Kurg, Andres. “Feedback Environment: Rethinking Art and Design Practices in Tallinn 
During the Early 1970s.” Kunstiteaduslikke Uurimusi, nos.1–2 (2011): 26–50.
Kurkovsky, Diana. “Cybernetics for the Command Economy: Foregrounding Entropy in 
Late Soviet Planning.” History of the ­Human Sciences 33, no. 1 (2020): 36–51.
Kuznetsova, N. “Vozvraschenie.” Voprosy filosofii 7 (1990): 51–58.
Lackner, Michael, ed. Coping with the ­Future: Theories and Practices of Divination in East 
Asia. Leiden: Brill, 2018.
Lafontaine, Céline. L’empire cybernétique: Des machines à penser à la pensée machine. 
Paris: Le Seuil, 2004.
Lajus, Julia. “Soviet Official Critiques of the Resource Scarcity Prediction by Limits to 
Growth Report: The Case of Evgenii Fedorov’s Ecological Crisis Rhe­toric.” Eu­ro­
pean Review of History 27, no. 3 (2020): 321–341.
Lankina, Tomila V. The Estate Origins of Democracy in Rus­sia: From Imperial Bourgeoisie 
to Post-­Communist ­Middle Class. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2021.
Lapenis, Andrei. “Directed Evolution of the Biosphere: Biogeochemical Se­lection or 
Gaia?” Professional Geographer 54, no. 3 (2002): 379–391.
Lapin, Nikolai, and Boris Sazonov. “The Activity-­Systems Approach to Development of 
the ­Human ­Factor in Innovation.” In A Science of Goal Formulation: American and 
Soviet Discussions of Cybernetics and Systems Theory, edited by Stuart A. Umpleby, 
and Vadim N. Sadovsky, 195–206. New York: Hemi­sphere, 1991.
Lapo, Andrei, and Aleksandr Ianshin, ed. V.I.Vernadskii: Pro et Contra. Saint Petersburg: 
Izdatelstvo Russkogo khristianskogo gumanitarnogo instituta, 2000.
Larin, Ivan. On uchil berech zemliu. Moscow: Rosekopress, 2002.
Latour, Bruno. “The Politics of Explanation: An Alternative.” In Knowledge and Reflexiv-
ity: New Frontiers in the Sociology of Knowledge, edited by Steve Woolgar, 155–176. 
London: Sage, 1988.
Latour, Bruno. Reassembling the Social: An Introduction to Actor Network Theory. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 2005.

	
Bibliography	
263
Laudan, Larry. “­Towards a Reassessment of Comte’s ‘Méthod Positive.’ ” Philosophy of Sci-
ence 38, no. 1 (1971): 35–53.
Law, John. ­After Method: Mess in Social Science Research. London: Routledge, 2004.
Law, John. “Notes on the Theory of the Actor-­Network: Ordering, Strategy and Heteroge-
neity.” Systems Practice 5 (1992): 379–393.
Lawson, Hilary. Reflexivity: The Post-­Modern Predicament. London: Hutchinson, 1985.
Ledeneva, Alena. Can Rus­sia Modernise? Sistema, Power Networks and Informal Gover-
nance. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2013.
Ledeneva, Alena, ed. The Global Encyclopaedia of Informality: Understanding Social and 
Cultural Complexity, Vols. 1–2. London: UCL Press, 2020.
Ledeneva, Alena. How Rus­sia ­Really Works: The Informal Practices That ­Shaped Post-­
Soviet Politics and Business. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2006.
Ledeneva, Alena. Rus­sia’s Economy of Favours: Blat, Networking and Informal Exchange. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998.
Leeds, Adam. “Administrative Monsters: Yurii Yaremenko’s Critique of the Late Soviet 
State.” History of Po­liti­cal Economy 51 (2019): 127–151.
Leeds, Adam. “Dreams in Cybernetic Fugue: Cold War Technoscience, the Intelligent­sia, 
and the Birth of Soviet Mathematical Economics.” Historical Studies in the Natu­ral 
Sciences 46, no. 5 (2016): 633–668.
Lefebvre, Vladimir. “Algebra sovesti: vospominanie avtora.” Znanie i sila 3 (2002). Avail-
able online http://­www​.­reflexion​.­ru​/­Library​/­Lefebvre​_­2002​_­a​.­htm
Lefebvre, Vladimir. “Elementy logiki refleksivnykh igr.” Problemy inzhinernoi psikhologii 
4 (1966): 273–299.
Lefebvre, Vladimir. “Formal’nyi metod issledovaniia refleksivnykh protsessov.” Voprosy 
filosofii 9 (1971): 103–115.
Lefebvre, Vladimir. “Konfliktuiushchie struktury (1967).” In Vladimir Lefebvre, Reflek-
siia, 132–133. Moscow: Kogito-­Tsentr, 2003.
Lefebvre, Vladimir. Lektsii po teorii refleksivnykh igr. Moscow: Kogito-­Tsentr, 2009.
Lefebvre, Vladimir. Research on Bi­polar­ity and Reflexivity. New York: Edwin Mellen, 
2006.
Lefebvre, Vladimir. “Second Order Cybernetics in the Soviet Union and the West.” In 
Power, Autonomy, Utopia: New Approaches ­Toward Complex Systems, edited by 
Robert Trappl, 123–132. New York: Plenum Press, 1986.
Lefebvre, Vladimir. “Vozvrashchenie.” In Refleksiia. Moscow: Kogito-­Tsentr, 2003.
Lefebvre, Vladimir, and Georgii Smolian. Algebra konflikta. Moscow: Librokom, 2013 
[1967].
Lefevr, Vladimir. Konfliktuiushchie struktury. Moscow: Vysh.shkola, 1967.
Lefevr, Vladimir. “Rasskazy o Zinchenko.” Refleksivnye protsessy i upravlenie 11, nos. 1–2 
(2011): 93–98.
Lektorsky, Vladislav A. “The Activity Approach in Soviet Philosophy and Con­temporary 
Cognitive Studies.” in Philosophical Thought in Rus­sia in the Second Half of the 
Twentieth ­Century: A Con­temporary View from Rus­sia and Abroad, edited by 
Vladislav Lektorsky and Marina Bykova, 137–153. London: Bloomsbury, 2019.
Lektorsky, Vladislav A., and Marina F. Bykova, eds. Philosophical Thought in Rus­sia in the 
Second Half of the Twentieth ­Century: A Con­temporary View from Rus­sia and 
Abroad. London: Bloomsbury, 2019.
Lenel, Laetitia. “Searching for a Tide ­Table Business: Interwar Conceptions of Statistical 
Inference in Forecasting.” History of Po­liti­cal Economy 53S (2021): 139–174.
Lenzer, Gertrude, ed. Auguste Comte and Positivism: The Essential Writings. London: 
Routledge, 1998.

264	
Bibliography
Lepskii, Vladimir. “Lefevre i refleksiia.” Refleksivnye protsessy i upravlenie 6, no. 1 (2006): 
26–37.
Lepskii, Vladimir. Tekhnologii upravleniia v informatsionnykh voinakh (ot klassiki do 
postneklassiki). Moscow: Kogito-­Tsentr, 2016.
Lesse, Matthias. “ ‘We Do That Once per Day’: Cyclical ­Futures and Institutional Ponder-
ousness in Predictive Policing.” In The Politics and Science of Prevision: Governing 
and Probing the ­Future, edited by Andreas Wenger, Ursula Jasper, and Myrian 
Dunn Cavelty, 213–226. London: Routledge, 2020.
Levintov, A. E. “Proiskhozhdenie i priroda refleksii.” Refleksivnye protsessy i upravlenie 
16, nos. 1–2 (2016): 82–85.
Light, Jennifer S. From Warfare to Welfare: Defense Intellectuals and Urban Prob­lems in 
Cold War Amer­i­ca. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2003.
Light, Jennifer. “Taking Games Seriously.” Technology and Culture 49, no.  2 (2008): 
347–375.
Lindee, M. Susan. Rational Fog. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2020.
Losee, John. The Golden Age of the Philosophy of Science. London: Bloomsbury, 2018.
Lovelock, James E., and Lyn Margulis. “Atmospheric Homeostasis By and For the Bio-
sphere: The Gaia Hypothesis.” Telus 26, nos. 1–2 (1974): 2–10.
Luhmann, Niklas. Social Systems. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1995 [1984].
Luke, Timothy W. “On Environmentality: Geo-­Power and Eco-­Knowledge in the Dis-
courses of Con­temporary Environmentalism.” Cultural Critique 31 (1995): 57–81.
Luria, Alexander. The Nature of ­Human Conflicts, of Emotion, Conflict, and ­Will. New 
York: Liveright Publishers, 1932.
Lutz, Wolfgang, Sergei Scherbov, and Andrei Volkov. “Introduction: Past and Pre­sent 
Studies of the Soviet Population.” In Demographic Trends and Patterns in the Soviet 
Union Before 1991, edited by Wolfgang Lutz, Sergei Scherbov, and Andrei Volkov, 
xxxi–xl. London: Routledge, 1994.
Mahony, Michael, and Martin Hulme. “Epistemic Geographies of Climate Change: Sci-
ence, Space and Politics.” Pro­gress in ­Human Geography (2016): 1–30.
Makarevich, V.  N. “Igropraktiki, metodologi: ‘Nezrimoe soobshchestvo’ vykhodit iz 
podpol’ia.” SOTSIS 7 (1992): 50–56.
Makasheva, Natalia. “Zagadka  N.D. Kondrat’eva: neokonchennaia teoriia dinamiki i 
metodologicheskie problemy ekonomicheskoi nauki.” Voprosy ekonomiki (2002): 
4–16.
Malapi-­Nelson, Alcibiades. The Nature of the Machine and the Collapse of Cybernetics: A 
Transhumanist Lesson for Emerging Technologies. Basingstoke, UK: Palgrave Mac-
millan, 2017.
Małecka, Magdalena. “Knowledge, Behaviour, and Policy: Questioning the Epistemic 
Presuppositions of Applying Behavioural Science in Public Policymaking.” Syn-
these 199 (2021): 5311–5338.
Mallard, Gregoire, and Andrew Lakoff, “How Claims to Know the ­Future Are Used to 
Understand the Pre­sent: Techniques of Prospection in the Field of National Secu-
rity.” In Social Knowledge in the Making, edited by Charles Camic, Michele Lamont, 
and Neil Gross, 339–379. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2010.
Mark, James, Artemy M. Kalinovsky, and Steffi Marung, eds. Alternative Globalizations: 
Eastern Eu­rope and the Postcolonial World. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 
2020.
Masani, Pesi. Norbert Wiener, 1894–1964. Basel, Switzerland: Birkauser, 1990.
Masco, Joseph. “Bad Weather: On Planetary Crisis.” Social Studies of Science 40, no. 1 
(2010): 7–40.

	
Bibliography	
265
Mayr, Otto. Authority, Liberty and Automatic Machinery in Early Modern Eu­rope. Balti-
more: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1986.
McCloskey, Donald. “The Art of Forecasting: From Ancient to Modern Times.” Cato 
Journal 12, no. 1 (1992): 23–48.
McCulloch, Warren, and Walter Pitts. “A Logical Calculus of the Ideas Immanent in Ner­
vous Activity.” Bulletin of Mathematical Biophysics 5 (1943): 115–133.
Meadows, Donella, John Richardson, and Gerhart Bruckman. Groping in the Dark: The 
First De­cade of Global Modelling. Chichester, UK: John Wiley & Sons, 1982.
Medina, Eden. Cybernetic Revolutionaries: Technology and Politics in Allende’s Chile. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2011.
Merton, Robert. The Sociology of Science: Theoretical and Empirical Investigations. Chi-
cago: University of Chicago Press, 1972.
Mespoulet, Martine. Construire le socialisme par les chiffres: enquetes et recensements en 
URSS de 1917 a 1991. Paris: Institute National d’Etudes Demographiques, 2008.
Meyer, John W., and Brian Rowan. “Institutionalized Organ­izations: Formal Structure as 
Myth and Ceremony.” American Journal of Sociology 83, no. 2 (1977): 340–363.
Miller, Chris. The Strug­gle to Save the Soviet Economy: Mikhail Gorbachev and the Col-
lapse of the USSR. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2016.
Mills, Mara. “On Disability and Cybernetics: Helen Keller, Norbert Wiener, and the 
Hearing Glove.” Differences 22, nos. 2–3 (2011): 74–111.
Mindell, David. Between ­Human and Machine: Feedback, Control, and Computing Before 
Cybernetics. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2002.
Mirowski, Philip. Machine Dreams: Economics Becomes a Cyborg Science. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 2002.
Mirowski, Philip. More Heat Than Light. Economics as Social Physics: Physics as Nature’s 
Economics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999.
Moiseev, Nikita. Chelovek i noosfera. Moscow: Molodaia gvardiia, 1990.
Moiseev, Nikita N. Izbrannye Trudy. Moscow: Taideks, 2003.
Moiseev, Nikita. Kak daleko do zavtreshnego dnia . . . ​Svobodnye razmyshleniia 1917–1993. 
Moscow: Taideks, 1997.
Moiseev, Nikita. Matematika, Upravlienie, Ekonomika. Moscow: Znanie, 1970.
Moiseev, Nikita. “ ‘Mirovaia dinamika’ Forrestera i aktual’nye voprosy mirovoi evoliutsii.” 
In Mirovaia dinamika, Jay Forrester, 264–290. Moscow: Nauka, 1978.
Moiseev, Nikita. “A New Look at Evolution: Marx, Teilhard de Chardin, Vernadsky.” 
World ­Futures 36, no. 1 (1993): 1–19.
Moiseev, Nikita. Prosteishiie matematicheskie modeli ekonomicheskogo prognozirovaniia. 
Moscow: Znanie, 1975.
Moiseev, Nikita. Chelovek, sreda, obshchestvo: problemy formalizovannogo opisaniia. 
Moscow: Nauka, 1982.
Moiseev, Nikita. Algoritmy razvitiia. Moscow: Nauka, 1987.
Moiseev, Nikita. “Reflection on Noosphere: Humanism in Our Time.” In The Biosphere 
and Noosphere Reader: Global Environment, Society and Change, edited by David 
Pitt and Paul Samson, 167–179. London: Routledge, 1999.
Moiseev, Nikita, and Ivan T. Frolov. “Vysokoe soprikosnovenie: obshchesto, chelovek, i 
priroda v vek mikroelektroniki, informatiki i biotekhnologii.” Voprosy filosofii 
9 (1984): 24–41.
Moiseev, Nikita, Vladimir Aleksandrov, and Aleksandr Tarko. Chelovek i biosfera. Mos-
cow: Mysl’, 1985.
Montagnini, Leone. Harmonies of Disorder: Norbert Wiener, a Mathematician-­Philosopher 
of Our Time. Berlin: Springer, 2017.

266	
Bibliography
Moon, David. “Estimating the Peasant Population of Late Imperial Rus­sia from the 1897 
Census: A Research Note.” Europe-­Asia Studies 48, no. 1 (1996): 141–153.
Morgan, Mary S. “Narrative Inference with and without Statistics: Making Sense of Eco-
nomic Cycles with Malthus and Kondratiev.” History of Po­liti­cal Economy 53S 
(2021): 113–138.
Moxley, Roy. “Ernst Mach and B. F Skinner: Their Similarities with Two Traditions for 
Verbal Be­hav­ior” Be­hav­ior Analyst 28, no. 1 (2005): 29–48.
Murav’ev, Valerian. Ovladenie vremenem kak osnovnaia zadacha truda. Moscow: Mo-
spoligraf, 1924.
Murphy, Jack. “Rus­sian Reflexive Control Is Subverting the American Po­liti­cal Land-
scape.” Sofrep (26 September  2018), https://­sofrep​.­com​/­news​/­russian​-­reflexive​
-­control​-­is​-­subverting​-­the​-­american​-­political​-­landscape​/­.
Naylor, Simon, and Simon Schaffer. “Nineteenth-­century Survey Sciences: Enterprises, 
Expeditions and Exhibitions.” Notes and Rec­ords 73, no. 2 (2019): 135–147.
Netesova, Iuliia. “Upravliaiushchie katastrofoi: refleksivnye modeli sovetskogo i ameri-
kanskogo obshchestv.” Ruskii zhurnal (Summer 2008): 129–130.
Neumann, Iver B. “Rus­sia’s Eu­rope, 1991–2016: Inferiority to Superiority.” International 
Affairs 92, no. 6 (2016): 1381–1399.
Northcott, Robert. “When Are Purely Predictive Models Best?” Disputatio 9, no.  47 
(2017): 631–656.
Norton, John. The Material Theory of Induction. Calgary, AB: University of Calgary Press, 
2021.
Nowotny, Helga. The Cunning of Uncertainty. Cambridge, UK: Polity Press, 2016.
Oatley, Keith. Our Minds, Our Selves. Prince­ton, NJ: Prince­ton University Press, 2018.
Odum, Eugene. Fundamentals of Ecol­ogy. Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders Co, 1959
Oels, Angela. “Climate Security as Governmentality: From Precaution to Preparedness.” 
In Governing the Climate: New Approaches to Rationality, Power and Politics, ed-
ited by Johannes Stripple and Harriet Bulkeley, 197–216. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 2013.
Oittinen, Vesa, ed. Evald Ilyenkov’s Philosophy Revisited. Helsinki, Finland: Kikimora, 
2000.
Oldfield, Jonathan. “Mikhail Budyko’s (1920–2001) Contributions to Global Climate Sci-
ence: From Heat Balances to Climate Change and Global Ecol­ogy.” WIREs Climate 
Change 7, no. 5 (2016): 682–692.
Oldfield, Jonathan. “Rus­sia, Systemic Transformation and the Concept of Sustainable De-
velopment.” Environmental Politics 10, no. 3 (2001): 94–110.
Oldfield, Jonathan. The Soviet Union and Global Environmental Change: Modifying the Bio-
sphere and Conceptualizing Society–­Nature Interaction. London: Routledge, 2021.
Oldfield, Jonathan, and Denis Shaw, eds. The Development of Rus­sian Environmental 
Thought: Scientific and Geo­graph­i­cal Perspectives on the Natu­ral Environment. 
London: Routledge, 2016.
Oldfield, Jonathan, and Denis Shaw. “V. I. Vernadskii and the Development of Biogeo-
chemical Understandings of the Biosphere, c.1880s–1968.” British Journal for the 
History of Science 46, no. 2 (2013): 287–310.
O’Neill, Christopher. “Taylorism, the Eu­ro­pean Science of Work, and the Quantified Self 
at Work.” Science, Technology and ­Human Values 42, no. 4 (2017): 600–621.
O’Rand, Angela, and Robert A. Ellis. “Social Class and Social Time Perspective.” Social 
Forces 53, no. 1 (1974): 53–62.
Oreskes, Naomi. “The Fact of Uncertainty, the Uncertainty of Facts and the Cultural Res-
onance of Doubt.” Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society Series A Mathe-
matical Physical and Engineering Sciences 373, no. 2055 (2015): 1–21.

	
Bibliography	
267
Oreskes, Naomi, and Erik M. Conway. Merchants of Doubt: How a Handful of Scientists 
Obscured the Truth on Issues from Tobacco Smoke to Climate Change. London: 
Bloomsbury, 2011.
O’Riordan, Timothy, and Steve Rayner. “Risk Management for Global Environmental 
Change.” Global Environmental Change 1, no. 2 (1991): 91–108.
Osintseva, Tatiana. “Novaia utka,” http://­prometa​.­ru, accessed 10 April 2015.
Osler, Margaret J. Rethinking the Scientific Revolution. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 2000.
Otter, Chris. The Victorian Eye: A Po­liti­cal History of Light and Vision in Britain, 1800–
1910. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2008.
Ovchinnikova, N. V., ed. Istoriia upravlencheskoi mysli. Moscow: RGGU, 2013.
Parisi, Luciano. Contagious Architecture: Computation, Aesthetics and Space. Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press, 2013.
Pels, Dick. “Reflexivity: One Step Up.” Theory, Culture and Society 17, no. 3 (2000): 1–25.
Pestre, Dominique. “Complex Systems and Total War: British Operational Research and 
the PM Statistical Branch at the Beginning of World War II.” In Nature Engaged: 
Science in Practice from the Re­nais­sance to the Pre­sent, edited by N. Biagoli and 
J. Riskin, 83–100. New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2012.
Peters, Benjamin. How Not to Network a Nation: The Uneasy History of the Soviet Internet. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2016.
Petronis, Vytautas. “Mapping Lithuanians: The Development of Rus­sian Imperial Ethnic 
Cartography, 1840s–1860s.” Imago Mundi 63, no. 1 (2011): 62–75.
Petrov, Aleksandr A. Nikita Nikolaevich Moiseev: Sud’ba strany v sud’be uchenogo. Mos-
cow: Ekologiia i zhizn, 2011.
Petryna, Adriana. Horizon Work: At the Edges of Knowledge in an Age of Runaway Cli-
mate Change. Prince­ton, NJ: Prince­ton University Press, 2022.
Pickering, Andrew. The Mangle of Practice: Time, Agency, Science. Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press, 1995.
Pickering, Andrew. The Cybernetic Brain: Sketches of Another ­Future. Chicago: University 
of Chicago Press, 2010.
Pietruska, Jamie. Looking Forward: Prediction in Amer­i­ca. Chicago: University of Chi-
cago Press, 2017.
Piskoppel´, Anatolii. “K tvorcheskoi biografii G.P. Shchedrovitskogo (1929–1994).” In Iz-
brannye Trudy, edited by G.  P. Shchedrovitskii, xxxii–­xxxiii. Moscow: Shkola 
kul´turnoi politiki, 1995.
Podvig, Pavel. “History and the Current Status of the Rus­sian Early Warning System.” 
Science and Global Security 10 (2002): 21–60.
Pomerantsev, Peter. This Is Not Propaganda: Adventures in the War Against Real­ity. Lon-
don: Faber & Faber, 2019.
Poovey, Mary. A History of the Modern Fact: Prob­lems of Knowledge in the Sciences of 
Wealth and Society. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1998.
Poovey, Mary. Making a Social Body: British Cultural Formation, 1830–1864. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 1995.
Porter, Theodore. “Thin Description: Surface and Depth in Science and Science Studies.” 
Osiris 27, no. 1 (2012): 209–226.
Porter, Theodore. Trust in Numbers: The Pursuit of Objectivity in Science and Public Life. 
Prince­ton, NJ: Prince­ton University Press, 1995.
Pospelov, G. S., and V. I. Maksimenko. “Predislovie.” In Gorizonty nauki i tekhniki, edited 
by I. V. Bestuzhev-­Lada and R. A. Fesenko, 5–17. Moscow: Mir, 1969.
Power, D. J. A Brief History of Decision Support Systems. DSSResources​.­com, version 4.0 
(10 March 2007).

268	
Bibliography
Power, Michael. The Audit Society: Rituals of Verification. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 1997.
Power, Michael. Or­ga­nized Uncertainty: Designing a World of Risk Management. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 2007.
Priestland, David. Merchant, Soldier, Sage: A New History of Power. London: Allen, 2012.
Primakov, Evgenii. “Nikita Moiseev—­vydaiushchii’sia uchenyi’ i grazhdanin.” Alma Ma-
ter 6 (2007): 43.
Prpic, Martina. “The Open Method of Coordination.” Eu­ro­pean Parliamentary Research 
Ser­vice, PE 542.142 (2014), 1–2.
Prudenko, Ianina. Kibernetika v gumanitarnykh naukakh i iskusstve v SSSR: Analiz 
bol’shikh baz dannykh i komp’iuternoe tvorchestvo. Moscow: Garazh, 2018.
Pynnöniemi, Katri. “Rus­sia’s National Security Strategy: Analy­sis of Conceptual Evolu-
tion.” Journal of Slavic Military Studies 31, no. 2 (2018): 240–256.
Pynnöniemi, Katri. “Rus­sia’s War against Ukraine: Wider Implications.” Paper presented 
at discussion panel, Aleksanteri Institute, 4 March 2022.
Radin, Beryl. Beyond Machiavelli: Policy Analy­sis Comes of Age. Washington, DC: 
Georgetown University Press, 2000.
Raikhel, Eugene. Governing Habits: Treating Alcoholism in Post-­Soviet Clinic. Ithaca, NY: 
Cornell University Press, 2016.
Raikhel, Eugene. “Reflex/Рефлекс.” Somatosphere (November 2014). http://­somatosphere​
.­net​/­2014​/­reflex%D1%80%D0%B5%D1%84%D0%BB%D0%B5%D0%BA%D1%81​
.­html/
Raphals, Lisa. Divination and Prediction in Early China and Ancient Greece. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 2013.
Raphals, Lisa. “The Ethics of Prediction.” In How Should One Live? Comparing Ethics in 
Ancient China and Greco-­Roman Antiquity, edited by R. A. H. King and Dennis 
Schilling, 278–303. Berlin: De Gruyter, 2011.
Rapoport, Anatol. “Foreword.” In Algebra of Conscience: A Comparative Analy­sis of West-
ern and Soviet Ethical Systems, edited by Vladimir Lefebvre, vii–­xii. Dordrecht, 
Holland: D. Reidel, 1982.
Rapoport, Anatol and Vladimir Lefebvre. “Vozmozhno li samoosvobozhdenie?” Che-
lovek 5 (1991): 79-85.
Rappaport, A. G. “V.A. Lefevr—20 (50) let spustia.” Refleksivnye protsessy i upravlenie 16, 
nos. 1–2 (2016): 85–91.
Rayner, Steve. “Uncomfortable Knowledge: The Social Construction of Ignorance in Sci-
ence and Environmental Policy Discourses.” Economy and Society 41, no. 1 (2012): 
107–125.
Repin, V. G. “Sobytie i liudi.” In Rubezhi oborony: v kosmose i na zemle. Ocherki istorii 
rakteno-­kosmicheskoi oborony, edited by N. G. Zavalin, 433–472. Moscow: Veche, 
2003.
Rice, Condoleezza. “The Party, the Military, and Decision Authority in the Soviet Union.” 
World Politics 40, no. 1 (October 1987): 55–81.
Rich, Nathaniel. “The New Science of Disaster Prediction.” New Yorker, 19 November 2013, 
https://­www​.­newyorker​.­com​/­news​/­news​-­desk​/­the​-­new​-­science​-­of​-­disaster​
-­prediction.
Rid, Thomas. Rise of the Machines: The Lost History of Cybernetics. London: Scribe, 2016.
Riegler, Alexander, Karl Muller, and Stuart Umpleby, eds. New Horizons for Second Order 
Cybernetics. Hackensack, NJ: World Scientific, 2017.
Rindzevičiūtė, Eglė. Constructing Soviet Cultural Policy: Cybernetics and Governance in 
Lithuania ­after World War II. Linköping, Sweden: Linköping University, 2008.

	
Bibliography	
269
Rindzevičiūtė, Eglė. The Power of Systems: How Policy Sciences Opened Up the Cold War 
World. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2016.
Rindzevičiūtė, Eglė. “Purification and Hybridisation of Soviet Cybernetics: The Politics of 
Scientific Governance in an Authoritarian Regime.” Archiv fur sozialgeschichte 
50 (2010): 289–309.
Rindzevičiūtė, Eglė. “­Toward a Joint ­Future Beyond the Iron Curtain: East–­West Politics 
of Global Modelling.” In The Strug­gle for the Long-­Term in Transnational Science 
and Politics: Forging the ­Future, edited by Jenny Andersson and Eglė Rindzevičiūtė, 
115–143. London: Routledge, 2015.
Rindzevičiūtė, Eglė. “The Unlikely Revolutionaries: Decision Sciences in the Soviet Gov-
ernment.” In The Decisionist Imagination: Sovereignty, Social Science and Democ-
racy in the 20th ­Century, edited by Daniel Bessner and Nicolas Guilhot, 217–249. 
Oxford: Berghahn Books, 2019.
Rindzevičiūtė, Eglė. “When Formal Organisations Meet Informal Relations in Soviet 
Lithuania: Action Nets, Networks and Boundary Objects in the Construction of 
the Lithuanian Sea Museum.” Lithuanian Historical Studies 15 (2011): 107–134.
Rispoli, Giulia. “Between ‘Biosphere’ and ‘Gaia’: Earth as a Living Organism in Soviet 
Geo-­ecology.” Cosmos and History: The Journal of Natu­ral and Social Philosophy 
10, no. 2 (2014): 78–91.
Robertson, Thomas. “Revisiting the Early 1970s Commoner–­Erlich Debate About Popu-
lation and Environment: Dueling Critiques of Production and Consumption in the 
Global Age.” In A World of Populations: Transnational Perspectives on Demogra-
phy, edited by Heinrich Hartmann and Corinna Unger, 108–125. New York: 
Berghahn, 2014.
Robin, Libby, Sverker Sörlin, and Paul Warde, eds. The ­Future of Nature: The Documents 
of Global Change. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2013.
Robin, Ron. The Cold World They Made: The Strategic Legacy of Roberta and Albert Wohl-
stetter. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2016.
Rocca, Gordon. “ ‘A Second Party in Our Midst’: The History of the Soviet Scientific Fore-
casting Association.” Social Studies of Science 11, no. 2 (1981): 199–247.
Rockström, Johan, ­Will Steffen, Kevin Noone, Åsa Persson, F. Stuart III Chapin, Eric 
Lambin, Timothy M. Lenton, et al. “Planetary Bound­aries: Exploring the Safe Op-
erating Space for Humanity.” Ecol­ogy and Society 14, no. 2 (2009), https://­www​
.­ecologyandsociety​.­org​/­vol14​/­iss2​/­art32​/­.
Rogacheva, Maria. The Private World of Soviet Scientists: From Stalin to Gorbachev. Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press, 2017.
Rohde, Joy. Armed with Expertise: The Militarization of American Social Research during 
the Cold War. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2013.
Rose, Nikolas. The Powers of Freedom: Reframing Po­liti­cal Thought. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press, 1999.
Rosenberg, Alex. “From Rational Choice to Reflexivity: Learning from Sen, Keynes, Hayek, 
Soros, and Most of All, from Darwin.” Economic Thought 3, no. 1 (2014): 21–41.
Rosenblueth, Arturo, Norbert Wiener, and Julian Bigelow. “Be­hav­ior, Purpose and Teleol-
ogy.” Philosophy of Science 10, no. 1 (1943): 18–24.
Rosier, Bernard, ed. Wassily Leontief: textes et itinéraire. Paris: La Découverte, 1986.
Rowell, S. C. “The Jagellonians and the Stars: Dynasty-­Sponsored Astrology in the Fif-
teenth ­Century.” Lithuanian Historical Studies 7 (2002): 23–42.
Rubinson, Paul. “The Global Effects of Nuclear Winter: Science and Antinuclear Protest 
in the United States and the Soviet Union During the 1980s.” Cold War History 
14 (2014): 47–69.

270	
Bibliography
Rubinson, Paul. Redefining Science: Scientists, the National Security State, and Nuclear 
Weapons in Cold War Amer­i­ca. Amherst: University of Mas­sa­chu­setts Press, 
2016.
Ruiz Palmer, Diego A. “Back to the ­Future: Rus­sia’s Hybrid Warfare, Revolutions in Mili-
tary Affairs, and Cold War Comparisons.” NATO Defence College Research Paper 
120 (2015): 1–12.
Ruppert, Evelyn, Engin Isin, and Dider Bigo. “Data Politics.” Big Data & Society 4, no. 2 
(2017): 1–7.
Russell, Stuart. ­Human Compatible: Artificial Intelligence and the Prob­lem of Control. 
London: Viking, 2019.
Rutland, Peter. The Myth of the Plan: Lessons of Soviet Planning Experience. London: 
Open Court, 1985.
Sakwa, Richard. “The Soviet Collapse: Contradictions and Neo-­Modernisation.” Journal 
of Eurasian Studies 4 (2013): 65–77.
Salmon, Wesley C. “Rational Prediction.” British Journal for the Philosophy of Science 32, 
no. 2 (1981): 115–125.
Samuelson, Lennart. Tankograd: The Formation of a Soviet Com­pany Town: Cheliabinsk, 
1900s–1950s. Basingstoke, UK: Palgrave Macmillan, 2011.
Sandomirskaja, Irina. Blokada v slove: Ocherki kriticheskoi teorii i biopolitiki iazyka. Mos-
cow: NLO, 2013.
Santangelo, Federico. Divination, Prediction and the End of the Roman Republic. Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press, 2013.
Sapov, Grigorii. “Tri interv’iu s E.B. Ershovym” (February to March 1999), http://­www​
.­sapov​.­ru​/­staroe​/­si06​.­html.
Saunders, Max. ­Imagined ­Futures: Writing, Science and Modernity in the To-­Day and To-­
Morrow Book Series, 1923–31. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2019.
Schellnhuber, Hans Joachim, and Volker Wenzel, eds. Earth System Analy­sis: Integrating 
Science for Sustainability. Berlin: Springer, 2013.
Schmelzer, Matthias. The Hegemony of Growth: The OECD and the Making of the Eco-
nomic Growth Paradigm. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2016.
Schmid, Sonja. “Chernobyl: Data Wars and Disaster Politics.” Nature 566, no. 7745 (2019): 
450.
Schmidgen, Henning. “Cybernetic Times: Norbert Wiener, John Stroud, and the ‘Brain 
Clock’ Hypothesis.” History of ­Human Sciences 33, no. 1 (2020): 80–108.
Schrickel, Isabell. “Von Schmetterlingen und Atomreaktoren: Medien und Politiken der 
Resilienz am IIASA.” Behemoth 7, no. 2 (2014): 5–25.
Schumann, Andrew. “Rationality in Belarusian Thinking.” Studies in Logic, Grammar 
and Rhe­toric 13, no. 26 (2008): 7–26.
Schwartz, Lee. “A History of Rus­sian and Soviet Censuses.” In Research Guide to the Rus­
sian and Soviet Censuses, edited by Ralph Clem, 48–69. Ithaca, NY: Cornell Uni-
versity Press, 1986.
Scott, Bernard. “The Sociocybernetics of Observation and Reflexivity.” Current Sociology 
67, no. 4 (2019): 495–510.
Scott, James C. Seeing Like a State: How Certain Schemes to Improve the ­Human Condition 
Have Failed. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1999.
Sebastián-­Enesco, Carla, and Felix Warneken. “The Shadow of the ­Future: 5-­Year-­Olds, 
but Not 3-­Year-­Olds, Adjust Their Sharing in Anticipation of Reciprocation.” Jour-
nal of Experimental Child Psy­chol­ogy 129 (2015): 40–54.
Seefried, Elke. “Globalized Science: The 1970s ­Futures Field.” Centaurus: An International 
Journal of History of Science and Its Cultural Aspects 59, nos. 1–2 (2017): 40–57.

	
Bibliography	
271
Seefried, Elke. “Steering the ­Future: The Emergence of ‘Western’ ­Futures Research and Its 
Production of Expertise, 1950s to Early 1970s.” Eu­ro­pean Journal of ­Futures Re-
search 2, no. 29 (2014), doi:10.1007/s40309-013-0029-­y.
Seely, Robert. “Defining Con­temporary Rus­sian Warfare: Beyond the Hybrid Headline.” 
RUSI Journal 162, no. 1 (2017): 50–59.
Semenov, I.  N. “Personologiia zhiznetvorchestva V.A. Lefevra i razvitie refleksivnykh 
nauk (ot logiki i psikhologii cherez kibernetiku i etiku k kosmologii).” Refleksivnye 
protsesy i upravlenie 16, nos. 1–2 (2016): 100–106.
Seneta, E. “Early Influences on Probability and Statistics in the Rus­sian Empire.” Archive 
for History of Exact Sciences 53 (1998): 201–213.
Seneta, Eugene. “A Sketch of the History of Survey Sampling in Rus­sia.” Journal of the 
Royal Statistical Society 148, no.2 (1985): 118–125.
Serafin, Rafal. “Noosphere, Gaia and the Science of the Biosphere.” Environmental Ethics 
10, no. 2 (1988): 121–137.
Seth, Anil K. “The Cybernetic Bayesian Brain: From Interoceptive Inference to Senso-
rimotor Contingencies.” In Open MIND, edited by T. Metzinger and J. M. Windt, 
1–24. Frankfurt am Main: MIND Group, 2020, doi:10.15502/9783958​570108.
Seth, Suman. Difference and Disease: Medicine, Race, and Locality in the Eighteenth-­
Century British Empire. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2018.
Shafir, Eldar, ed. The Behavioral Foundations of Public Policy. Prince­ton, NJ: Prince­ton 
University Press, 2013.
Shalin, Dmitri N. “The Development of Soviet Sociology, 1956–1976,” Annual Review of 
Sociology 4 (1978): 171–191.
Shane, Scott. Dismantling Utopia: How Information Ended the Soviet Union. Chicago: 
Ivan R. Dee, 1994.
Shanin, Teodor, ed. Peasants and Peasant Socie­ties. Oxford: Blackwell, 1987.
Shchedrovitskii, Georgii. “Budushchee est´ rabota myshleniia i deistviia.” Voprosy 
metodologii 3–4 (1994), https://­www​.­fondgp​.­ru​/­publications​/­.
Shchedrovitskii, Georgii. Ia vsegda byl idealistom . . . ​Moscow: NNF Institut razvitiia im. 
G.P. Shchedrovitskogo, 2001.
Shchedrovitskii, Georgii. Izbrannye Trudy. Moscow: Shkola kul´turnoi politiki, 1995.
Shchedrovitskii, Georgii. “Lektsiia 1: 18 fevralia 1988.” In Zapisi Rizhskogo metodologichesk-
ogo seminara, vol. 1, 27–28. Riga, Latvia: BISI, 2010.
Shchedrovitskii, Georgii. “Lektsiia 2: 19 fevralia 1988.” In Zapisi Rizhskogo metodologichesk-
ogo seminara, vol. 1, 65. Riga, Latvia: BISI, 2010.
Shchedrovitskii, Georgii. “­Mental Activity and Pure Thought.” In Methodological School of 
Management, edited by V. B. Khristenko, A. G. Reus, and A. P. Zinchenko, 33–50. 
London: Bloomsbury, 2014.
Shchedrovitskii, Georgii. Organizatsiia, rukovodstvo, upravlenie II. Moscow: Put´, 
2003.
Shchedrovitskii, Georgii. “Organizatsionno-­deiatel´nostnaia igra kak novaia forma orga-
nizatsii i metod razvitiia kollektivnoi mysledeiatel´nosti (1983).” In Izbrannye Trudy 
by Georgii Shchedrovitskii, 115–142. Moscow: Shkola kul´turnoi politiki, 1995.
Shchedrovitskii, Georgii. Orgupravlencheskoe myshlenie: ideologiia, metodologiia, tekh-
nologiia. Moscow: Studia Artemeva Lebedeva, 2013.
Shchedrovitskii, Georgii. “Perspektivy i programmy razvitiia SMD-­metodologii,” http://­
bdn​-­steiner​.­ru​/­modules​.­php​?­name​=­Archives&l​_­op​=­visit&lid​=­31.
Shchedrovitskii, Georgii. “Printsipy i obshchaia schema metodologicheskoi organizatsii 
sistemno-­strukturnykh issledovanii i razrabotok (1981).” In Izbrannye Trudy by 
Georgii Shchedrovitskii, 88–114. Moscow: Shkola kul´turnoi politiki, 1995.

272	
Bibliography
Shchedrovitskii, Georgii. “Problemy metodologii sistemnogo issledovaniia (1964).” In Iz-
brannye Trudy by Georgii Shchedrovitskii, 155–196. Moscow: Shkola kul´turnoi 
politiki, 1995.
Shchedrovitskii, Georgii. “Refleksiia” (1974). In Izbrannye Trudy by Georgii Shchedro-
vitskii, 485–495. Moscow: Shkola kul´turnoi politiki, 1995.
Shchedrovitskii, Georgii. “Sistemnoe dvizhenie i perspektivy razvitiia sistemno-­
strukturnoi metodologii.” In Izbrannye Trudy, 57–87. Moscow: Shkola kul´turnoi 
politiki, 1995.
Shchedrovitskii, Georgii, and S. I. Kotel´nikov. “Organizatsionno-­deiatel´nostnaia igra 
kak novaia forma organizatsii i metod razvitiia kollektivnoi mysledeiatel´nosti 
(1983).” In Izbrannye Trudy by Georgii Shchedrovitskii, 113–142. Moscow: Shkola 
kul´turnoi politiki, 1995.
Shchedrovitskii, Petr. “Predislovie.” In Orgupravlencheskoe myshlenie: ideologiia, 
metodologiia, tekhnologiia by Georgii Shchedrovitskii, 9–21. Moscow: Izdatel’stvo 
Studii Artemiia Lebedeva, 2014.
Shmelev, Stanislav. Ecological Economics: Sustainability in Practice. Berlin: Springer, 2012.
Siddiqi, Asif. “Atomized Urbanism: Secrecy and Security from the Gulag to the Closed 
City.” Urban History (2021): 1–21.
Siddiqqi, Asif. The Red Rocket’s Glare: Spaceflight and the Rus­sian Imagination, 1857–1957. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2010.
Siddiqi, Asif. “Scientists and Specialists in the Gulag: Life and Death in Stalin’s Sha-
rashka.” Kritika 16, no. 3 (2015): 557–588.
Siegmund, David O. “Probability Theory.” Encyclopaedia Britannica (2018), https://­www​
.­britannica​.­com​/­science​/­probability​-­theory​/­Conditional​-­expectation​-­and​-­least​
-­squares​-­prediction#ref407444.
Sigman, Carole. “Les clubs politiques informels acteurs du basculement de la perestroika.” 
Revue française de science politique 5, no. 58 (2008): 617–642.
Simandan, Dragos. “Wisdom and Foresight in Chinese Thought: Sensing the Immediate 
­Future.” Journal of ­Future Studies 22, no. 3 (2018): 35–50.
Simbirski, Brian. “Cybernetic Muse: Hannah Arendt on Automation, 1951–1958.” Journal 
of the History of Ideas 77, no. 4 (2016): 589–613.
Sirmon, David G., Michael A. Hitt, R. Duane Ireland, and Brett Anitra Gilbert. “Resource 
Orchestration to Create Competitive Advantage: Breadth, Depth, and Life Cycle 
Effects.” Journal of Management 37, no. 5 (2011): 1390–1412.
Siskin, Clifford. System: The Shaping of Modern Knowledge. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 
2016.
Skinner, B. F. Beyond Freedom and Dignity. New York: Pelican, 1971.
Slayton, Rebecca. Arguments That Count: Physics, Computing, and Missile Defense, 1949–
2012. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2013.
Slezkine, Yuri. The House of Government: A Saga of the Rus­sian Revolution. Prince­ton, NJ: 
Prince­ton University Press, 2017.
Slobodian, Quinn. Globalists: The End of Empire and the Birth of Neoliberalism. Cam-
bridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2018.
Smil, Vaclav. Growth: From Microorganisms to Megacities. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 
2019.
Smith, James Howard. Bewitching Development: Witchcraft and Reinvention of Develop-
ment in Neoliberal ­Kenya. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2008.
Smith, Roger. “Does Reflexivity Separate the ­Human Sciences from the Natu­ral Sci-
ences?” History of the ­Human Sciences 18, no. 4 (2005): 1–25.
Smolian, Georgii. “Refleksivnoe upravlenie: tekhnologiia priniatiia manipuliativnykh 
reshenii.” Trudy instituta sistemnogo analiza RAN 63, no. 2 (2013): 54–61.

	
Bibliography	
273
Smolian, Georgii. “Sub’ektivnye zametki k iubileiu V.A. Lefevra.” Refleksivnye protsessy i 
upravlenie 6, no. 1 (2006): 14–26.
Smolian, Georgii, and Galina Solntseva. “Vladimir Lefevr i Viktor Pelevin ob upravlenie 
vyborom resheniia.” Unpublished paper presented at “Reflexive Pro­cesses and 
Governance,” RAN Institute of Philosophy, Moscow, 1–18 October 2013.
Snegovaya, Maria. Putin’s Information Warfare in Ukraine: Soviet Origins of Rus­sian Hy-
brid Warfare, Rus­sia Report I. Washington, DC: NATO STRATCOM, 2015.
Snow, C. P. The Two Cultures and the Scientific Revolution. New York: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, 1961.
Snyder, Joel. “ ‘Las Meninas’ and the Mirror of the Prince.” Critical Inquiry 11, no. 4 (1983): 
539–572.
Sokolov, Kirill, and Avril Pyman. “­Father Pavel Florensky and Vladimir Favorsky: Mu-
tual Insights into the Perception of Space.” Leonardo 22, no. 2 (1989): 237–244.
Solovey, Mark, and Hamilton Cravens, eds. Cold War Social Science: Knowledge Pro-
duction, Liberal Democracy, and ­Human Nature. Basingstoke, UK: Macmillan, 
2012.
Sommer, Vítězslav. “Forecasting the Post-­Socialist ­Future: Prognostika in Late Socialist 
Czecho­slo­va­kia, 1970–1989.” In The Strug­gle for the Long Term in Transnational 
Science and Politics during the Cold War, edited by Jenny Andersson and Eglė 
Rindzevičiūtė, 144–168. New York: Routledge, 2015.
Sorokin, Pitirim. “A Survey of the Cyclical Conceptions of Social and Historical Pro­cess.” 
Social Forces 6, no. 1 (1927): 28–40.
Soros, George. The Crisis of Global Capitalism: Open Society Endangered. London: ­Little, 
1998.
Soros, George. “Fallibility, Reflexivity, and the ­Human Uncertainty Princi­ple.” Journal of 
Economic Methodology 20, no. 4 (2014): 309–329.
Sprang, Ronald W. “The Development of Operational Art and CEMA in Multi-­Domain 
­Battle during the Guadalcanal Campaign 1942–1943 and Rus­sia in the Ukraine 
2013–2016.” School of Advanced Military Studies, US Army Command and Gen-
eral Staff College, Fort Leavenworth, 2018.
Staley, Richard. “The Interwar Period as a Machine Age: Mechanics, the Machine, Mech-
anisms and the Market in Discourse.” Science in Context 31, no. 3 (2018): 263–292.
Steffen, ­Will, Katherine Richardson, Johan Rockström, Sarah E. Cornell, Ingo Fetzer, 
Elena M. Bennett, Reinette Biggs, et al. “Planetary Bound­aries: Guiding ­Human 
Development on a Changing Planet.” Science 347, 1259855 (2015), 736–746.
Stites, Richard. The Revolutionary Dreams: Utopian Vision and Experimental Life in the 
Rus­sian Revolution. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1989.
Stockdale, Liam P. D. Taming an Uncertain ­Future: Temporality, Sovereignty, and the Poli-
tics of Anticipatory Governance. London: Rowman & Littlefield, 2016.
Sutela, Pekka. Economic Thought and Economic Reform in the Soviet Union. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1991.
Sutela, Pekka. Socialism, Planning and Optimality: A Study in Soviet Economic Thought. 
Helsinki, Finland: Finnish Society of Science and Letters, 1984.
Taagepera, Rein. Making Social Science More Scientific: The Need for Predictive Models. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2008.
Tabatchnikova, Svetlana. Le cercle de méthodologie de Moscou (1954–1988): Une pensée, 
une pratique. Paris: EHESS, 2007.
Tatarchenko, Ksenia. “Calculating a Showcase: Mikhail Lavrentiev, the Politics of Exper-
tise, and the International Life of the Siberian Science-­City.” Historical Studies in 
the Natu­ral Sciences 46, no. 5 (2016): 592–632.
Teilhard de Chardin, Pierre. The Phenomenon of Man. New York: Harper, 1959.

274	
Bibliography
Tetlock, Philip, and Dan Gardner. Superforecasting: The Art and Science of Prediction. 
New York: Random House, 2016.
Thomas, Timothy L. “Rus­sian Military Thought: Concepts and Ele­ments.” MITRE Cor-
poration, August 2019, 44–46.
Thomas, Timothy. “Rus­sia’s Military Strategy and Ukraine: Indirect, Asymmetric, and 
Putin-­Led.” Journal of Slavic Military Studies 28, no. 3 (2015): 445–461.
Thomas, Timothy  L. “Rus­sia’s Reflexive Control Theory and the Military.” Journal of 
Slavic Military Studies 17 (2004): 237–256.
Thomas, ­Will. The Rational Action: The Sciences of Policy in Britain and Amer­i­ca, 1940-
1960. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2015.
Titarenko, Larissa, and Elena Zdravomyslova. Sociology in Rus­sia: A Brief History. Cham, 
Switzerland: Palgrave, 2017.
Trappl, Robert, ed. Power, Autonomy, Utopia: New Approaches ­toward Complex Systems. 
New York: Plenum Press, 1986.
Travin, Dmitry, and Otar Marganiya. “Resource Curse: Rethinking the Soviet Experi-
ence.” In Resource Curse and Post-­Soviet Eurasia: Oil, Gas and Modernization, ed-
ited by Vladimir Gel’man and Otar Marganiya, 23–38. New York: Lexington Books, 
2010.
Tsygichko, Vitalii. “Predislovie ko vtorumu izdaniiu.” In Algebra konflikta, Vladimir 
Lefebvre and Georgii Smolian, 1–2. Moscow: Librokom, 2013.
Turner, Fred. From Counterculture to Cyberculture: Stewart Brand, the Whole Earth Net-
work, and the Rise of Digital Utopianism. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2006.
Umpleby, Stuart. “From Complexity to Reflexivity: Under­lying Logics Used in Science.” 
Journal of the Washington Acad­emy of Sciences 96, no. 1 (2010): 15–26.
Usov, Vladimir. Refleksivnoe upravlenie: filosofsko-­metodologicheskii aspect. Cheliabinsk: 
Iurgu, 2010.
Vaino, Anton. “Kapitalizatsiia budushchego.” Voprosy ekonomiki i prava 4 (2012): 42–57.
Valeriano, Brandon, and Ryan Maness. “Fancy Bears and Digital Trolls: Cyber Strategy 
with a Rus­sian Twist.” Journal of Strategic Studies 42, no. 2 (2019): 212–234.
Valsiner, Joan. “From Energy to Collectivity: A Commentary on the Development of 
Bekhterev’s Theoretical Views.” In Collective Reflexology, V. M. Bekhterev, 1–12. 
Abingdon: Routledge, 2017.
van Munster, Rens, and Casper Sylvester, eds. The Politics of Globality Since 1945: Assem-
bling the Planet. London: Routledge, 2016.
Velmet, Aro. “The Blank Slate E-­State: Estonian Information Society and the Politics of 
Novelty in the 1990s.” Engaging Science, Technology, and Society 6 (2020): 162–184.
Verdery, Katherine. Secrets and Truths: Ethnography in the Archive of Romania’s Secret 
Police. Budapest: Central Eu­ro­pean University Press, 2014.
Vidmer, Richard. “Management Science in the USSR: The Role of ‘Americanizers.’ ” Inter-
national Studies Quarterly 24, no. 3 (1980): 392–414.
Visseren-­Hamakers, Ingrid. “Integrative Environmental Governance: Enhancing Gover-
nance in the Era of Synergies.” Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability 
14 (2015): 136–143.
Volkova, Violetta. Iz istorii teorii sistem i sistemnogo analiza. St Petersburg.: SPbGPU, 2004.
Vucinich, Alexander. Science in Rus­sian Culture, 1861–1917. Stanford, CA: Stanford Uni-
versity Press, 1970.
Vucinich, Alexander. Social Thought in Tsarist Rus­sia: The Quest for a General Science of 
Society, 1861–1917. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1976.
Vucinich, Alexander. Darwin in Rus­sian Thought. Berkeley: University of California 
Press, 1989.

	
Bibliography	
275
Walker, Jeremy, and Melinda Cooper. “Genealogies of Resilience: From Systems Ecol­ogy 
to the Po­liti­cal Economy of Crisis Adaptation.” Security Dialogue 42, no. 2 (2011): 
143–160.
Warde, Paul, and Sverker Sörlin. “Expertise for the ­Future: The Emergence of ‘Relevant 
Knowledge’ in Environmental Predictions and Global Change, c.1920–1970.” In 
The Strug­gle for the Long Term in Transnational Science and Politics during the Cold 
War, edited by Jenny Andersson and Eglė Rindzevičiūtė, 39–62. New York: Rout-
ledge, 2015.
Washburn, Jim. “The ­Human Equation: UC Irvine Theoretical Psychologist Vladimir 
Lefebvre Uses Mathe­matics to Show Us Who We Are.” Los Angeles Times, 
31 March 1993.
Weber, Elke U., and Paul Stern. “Public Understanding of Climate Change in the United 
States.” American Psychologist 66, no. 4 (2011): 315–328.
Weick, Karl E. Making Sense of the Organ­ization. Oxford: Blackwell, 2001.
Weinberg, Elisabeth. Sociology in the Soviet Union and Beyond: Social Enquiry and Social 
Change. Farnham: Ashgate, 2004.
Weiner, Douglas R. A ­Little Corner of Freedom: Rus­sian Nature Protection from Stalin to 
Gorbachev. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1999.
Wenger, Andreas, Ursula Jasper, and Myriam Dunn Cavelty, eds. The Politics and Science 
of Prevision: Governing and Probing the ­Future. London: Routledge, 2020.
Werner, Michael, and Benedicte Zimmerman. “Histoire Croisée: Between the Empirical 
and Reflexivity.” Annales: Histoire, science sociales 1 (2003): 7–36.
Wiener, Norbert. Cybernetics: Or Control and Communication in the Animal and the Ma-
chine. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1965 [1948].
Wiener, Norbert. God and Golem, Inc.: A Comment on Certain Points Where Cybernetics 
Impinges on Religion. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1964.
Wiener, Norbert. The ­Human Use of ­Human Beings: Cybernetics and Society. Boston: Da 
Capo, 1954.
Wildawsky, Aaron. Speaking Truth to Power: The Art and Craft of Policy Analy­sis. London: 
Macmillan, 1980.
Williams, Linda L. Nietz­sche’s Mirror: The World as ­Will to Power. Lanham: Rowan & 
Littlefield, 2001.
Wojnowski, Michał. “ ‘Zarządzanie refleksyjne’ jako paradygmat rosyjskich operacji 
informacyjno-­psychologicznych w XXI w.” Przegląd Bezpieczeństwa Wewnętrznego 
12 (2015): 11–36.
Wolf, Eric. The ­People Without History. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 1982.
Wolfe, Joseph. “A History of Business Teaching Games in English-­Speaking and Post-­
Socialist Countries: The Origination and Diffusion of a Management Education 
and Development Technology.” Simulation and Gaming 24, no. 4 (1993): 445–463.
Woolgar, Steve, ed. Knowledge and Reflexivity: New Frontiers in the Sociology of Knowl-
edge. London: Sage, 1988.
Woolgar, Steve, and Malcolm Ashmore. “The Next Step: Introduction to the Reflexive 
Proj­ect.” In Knowledge and Reflexivity: New Frontiers in the Sociology of Knowl-
edge, edited by Steve Woolgar, 1–13. London: Sage, 1988.
Wren, Daniel A. “Scientific Management in the U.S.S.R., with Par­tic­u­lar Reference to the 
Contribution of Walter  N. Polakov.” Acad­emy of Management Review 5, no.  1 
(1980): 1–11.
Wu, Angela Xiao. “Journalism via Systems Cybernetics: The Birth of Chinese Communi-
cation Discipline and Post-­Mao Press Reforms.” History of Media Studies, 2 (2022), 
doi:10.32376/d895a0ea.182c7595.

276	
Bibliography
Wynne, Brian. “Strange Weather, Again: Climate Science as Po­liti­cal Art.” Theory, Cul-
ture and Society 27, nos. 2–3 (2013): 289–305.
Yates, Kit. “Why Mathematicians Sometimes Get Covid Projections Wrong.” Guardian 
(UK edition), 26 January 2022.
Young, Oran. Governing Complex Systems: Social Capital for the Anthropocene. Cam-
bridge, MA: MIT Press, 2017.
Zan, Luca. “Complexity, Anachronism and Time-­Parochialism: Historicising Strategy 
While Strategising History.” Business History 58, no. 4 (2016): 571–596.
Zeller, Manfred. “Before and ­After the End of the World: Rethinking the Soviet Collapse.” 
Kritika 18, no. 3 (2017): 591–601.
Ziegler, Charles. Environmental Policy in the USSR. Amherst: University of Mas­sa­chu­setts 
Press, 1987.
Zuboff, Shoshana. The Age of Surveillance Capitalism: The Fight for a ­Human ­Future at the 
New Frontier of Power. New York: Profile Books, 2019.
Zubok, Vladislav. Collapse: The Fall of the Soviet Union. New Haven, CT: Yale University 
Press, 2021.
Zubok, Vladislav. A Failed Empire: The Soviet Union in the Cold War from Stalin to Gor-
bachev. Chapel Hill: North Carolina University Press, 2009.
Zubok, Vladislav. Zhivago’s ­Children: The Last Rus­sian Intelligent­sia. Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press, 2011.
Zvorykin, A. A. Cultural Policy in the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics. Paris: UNESCO, 
1970.

277
Page numbers followed by f or n indicate figures or notes.
Index
Abbott, Kenneth, 8
accountability, 100
action-­oriented learning, 113
action-­oriented prediction pro­cessing,  
35
actor–­network theory, 10, 18
adaptation: “non-­modern,” 37; reflexive, 129, 
151; strategy of nature, 169
adaptive be­hav­ior: open-­ended, 62; prognosis 
as component of, 51; role of prediction, 70; 
supported by information pro­cessing, 106
Afanas’ev, Georgii, 131
Aganbegian, Abel, 80, 97
Algebra of Conflict, The (1968), 135, 140
algorithms: of global development, 14; 
predictions, 12, 27, 188; profiling, 70
All-­Union Institute for Systems Research 
(VNIISI), 93, 97, 111, 135
Anchishkin, Aleksandr, 80, 97
Andersson, Jenny, 3
Andromeda Nebula (1957), 9, 93
antecedent conditions, 24–26, 31
Anthropocene, 14, 155–56, 163–64
antiaircraft systems, 60, 64, 132, 169
Arab-­Ogly, Edvard, 88–89, 220n98
Arendt, Hannah, 59, 102
Aronova, Elena, 83
Arrow, Kenneth, 176
artificial intelligence (AI): influence of 
cybernetics, 32; research, 67, 125; Wiener’s 
impact in field, 59
Ashby, W. Ross, 13, 33, 129
astrology, 20, 38, 45, 99
astronomical vs, meteorological systems, 66
astronomy, 22, 66, 133
authoritarianism: cybernetic, 12, 59; 
environmental, 13, 189; hidden liberal, 
244n90; neoliberal, 233n32; positivist, 26; 
“scientific”, 58; Soviet, 12; technocratic, 3
“autohypnosis” by numbers, 53, 54, 96, 175
automata theory, 15
Automated System of Analy­sis of Social 
Information (ASAI), 86
automation: age of, 71; Arendt’s critique, 59; 
technologies, 10
autopoiesis, 32–33, 110, 114
Bacon, Francis, 21
Bateson, Gregory: model of learning, 129; 
model of self, 233n35
Bauman, Zygmunt, 176–77
Bazarov, Vladimir, 52, 57
Beer, Stafford, 139, 176, 188
behaviorism, 26; cybernetic, 129, 131, 151, 231; 
methods of time control, 55; neurophysi-
ological, 34–35; Skinnerian, 26, 32, 154, 
231n12
Bekhterev, Vladimir, 46, 51
Beloiarsk power plant, 115
Bennett, Tony, 128, 179, 180, 206–7n43
Berg, Axsel, 137
Bernshtein, Nikolai, 55, 109
Bestuzhev-­Lada, Igor’, 86–96, 98, 219n86, 
221n117
Biermann, Frank, 181
Bigelow, Julian, 31, 62, 106
Big Science, 105
biogeocenose, 160
biological determinism, 59
Biosphere, The (1926)
biosphere: governing the, 156, 163; man as 
man­ag­er of, 169; modeling, 161, 164; and 
noosphere, 165–67; Moiseev’s use of idea, 
162, 172–73; origin, 155; history of term, 
165; theory, 173–76, 178–81, 210n99; 
Vernadiskii’s theory, 159
Birshtein, Maria, 113
blat, 102
Bogdanov, Aleksandr, 167, 242n45
Boolean algebra, 141, 145, 148
bottom-up pro­cessing, 33, 106
Bound, John, 29
brain, the: acting machine model, 33; activity, 
33; digital model of, 31; predictive, 33–35
brain drain, 137, 164
Breev, Boris, 80

278	
INDEX
Brezhnev, Leonid, 78, 110, 136, 137
Bryant, Christopher, 143
Budyko, Mikhail, 93, 131, 165, 166
Buniakovskii, Viktor, 43
Canguilhem, Georges, 59, 154
Car­ter, Chris, 146, 147
causalities, 50, 66
causal loop, 19, 192
censorship, 85
Central Institute of Mathematical Economics 
at the All-­Union Acad­emy of Sciences 
(TsEMI), 77, 100, 135, 137
Central Statistical Agency, 47, 218n58
Centre for Intellectual Resources and 
Cooperation in Societal Sciences 
(TsIRKON), 98, 223n160
Chayanov, Aleksandr, 46
Chernobyl, 164
chronology, prob­lem of, 24, 54
Cicero, 16–17
circular causality, 31, 62, 203n68
Clark, Andy, 34–35
Clegg, Stewart, 146, 147
climate change crisis, 13, 94, 150
climate engineering, 93
“closed worlds”, 12
coevolution: conditions for, 169; definitions, 
166; global, 155, 167; orga­nizational forms, 
168, 181
cognition: abstract models, 146; coordinating 
with action, 35; cybernetic approaches, 33; 
form of power, 147; higher levels, 34; part of 
social interaction, 113; self-­reflexive model, 
125, 129; Skinner’s perspective, 26; special 
form of power, 190
cognitive valuation theory, 138
Cold War: competition, 60, 75, 183; moder-
nity, 146, 150; politics, 99, 125; strategy, 12, 
13, 139, 140–41, 148; totalitarianism, 12; 
uses of scientific prediction, 5. See also 
Neumann, John von: game theory of 
strategy
collapse of Soviet system, 190–191
collective preferences, 13
Collier, Stephen, 52, 78, 117
commonsense knowledge, 24, 189
commonsense notion of prediction, 192, 
199n4
Communist Party of the Soviet Union 
(CPSU), 5, 12, 110, 156, 164, 191
complexity, levels, 35–36, 50, 153, 168, 172, 
177, 188
Computer Centre, Soviet Acad­emy of 
Sciences, 159, 162, 166, 181
computer modeling: “alternative social 
sciences”, 97; global, 156, 166; in policy 
sciences, 33; as social practice, 167, 177–79
Comte, Auguste: influence in Rus­sia, 39, 43, 
49–50, 94; positivist tradition of, 28, 39, 48, 
153, 170, 189; on science and prediction, 
21–22, 150–51
Conflicting Structures (1967), 135
conjectural knowledge(s), 18–21, 175
conjectural science (sciencia coniecturalis), 18
conjectural semiology, 19
conjecture: astrological, 52; Greek tradition of 
conjecture, 16–17; prediction as, 15, 16–20; 
pro­cess of, 71; status of, 21
Conjuncture Institute, Moscow, 47, 48, 56
consciousness, 140
control: behavioral, 12, 55, 109, 187; guidance, 
as, 180; prob­lem of, 15, 59; semiotic strategy 
of, 110; revolution, 163; societal, 3, 60, 179; 
Soviet definition, 171; teleological, 169, 170, 
175. See also guided development; reflexive 
control theory: practical of; cybernetic 
control
control science, 60
corruption, 97, 103
Course de philosophie positive (1830–1842), 
21–22
Covid-19, 188
Craik, Kenneth, 68
Crimea: annexation of, 43, 87, 146; War 
(1853–1856), 13
critical thresholds, 173
Crutzen, Paul, 155–56, 163, 164, 173
cultivation, 176–177
cultural sector, 89
culture of forecasting, 12
cultures of prediction, 4, 45, 71, 206n37
cumulative prognosis, 28. See also prognosis
curve fitting, 29
cybernation, 187
cybernetic control, 32, 59, 60, 63, 152, 171–73. 
See also control: teleological
cybernetic engineering systems, 73, 169
cybernetic prediction: critics, 69–71; 
influence, 11; materially mediated, 67; 
misuse for domination, 63; orchestration, 
68, 71, 173; use for social governance, 64; 
Wienerian, 59–62. See also governance
cybernetics: biological, 167; interest in 
goal-­oriented pro­cesses, 59; history of, 31, 
57–59; institutionalization, 139; “non-­modern 

	
INDEX	
279
science”, 36; posthuman effect, 67; science of 
governance, 72–73, 80; second-­order, 9, 32, 
114, 139, 231n15; Soviet, 72, 137, 212n11
Cybernetics: Or Control and Communication in 
the Animal and the Machine (1948), 32, 68
cybernetic sensibility, 12, 15, 27–30, 72, 186
cybernetic steering, 9, 171
data collection, 7, 79, 178, 185
Dayé, Christian, 3
deception: activities of, 142, 146–47; “anomic 
be­hav­ior”, 124; in combat situations, 132; 
legitimatizing, 131; logical machine of, 133; 
making outcomes predictable, 123; 
strategic, 36, 124, 187
decision science, 113, 140, 145
decision trees, 19
deduction: logical, 25f, 123; prob­lem of, 28, 50
Delphi method, 88, 95, 220n94, 222n140
demographic research, 43, 82, 218n58
Denyer, Nicholas, 18
Deutsch, Karl, 107, 187
digital computer(s), 31, 33, 132
digitization of ­labor, 32
disarmament talks, Reykjavik, 125, 139
divination, 16–18, 200n8
Dobrov, Genadii, 77, 87, 216n27
Douglas, Heather, 26–7
Druzhinin, Valentin V., 136
Durkheim, Émile, 22, 49, 124
dynamic systems, 59, 152, 202n48
Earth system science(s), 12, 163, 175, 181.  
See also governmentality: Earth system
economic forecasting: critical approach, 185; 
demand for, 48; emergence, 184
economic growth: social indicators, 160; 
Soviet, 78, 159; Soviet theory of, 47; 
“prob­lem”, 171; statistical modeling, 50
economic indicators, 47
economic planning: models influencing, 15, 
77, 184; reforms, 156; Soviet, 40, 54, 74, 85
economics: cap­i­tal­ist, 2; development of, 76; 
industrial, 145; scientific approaches to, 113; 
ungovernability of, 161
economy: evolution of, 208n60; models of, 51, 
167; “not a mosaic”, 51; sectors, 47
economy of ­favors, 102, 160, 186
Efimov, Anatolii, 76, 79
Efremov, Ivan, 91, 220–21n111
Ehrenberg, Andrew, 29
Ellman, Michael, 190
emergent be­hav­ior, 63, 67
empathy, 134
engineering: cybernetic systems in, 73, 
202n48; teleological prediction applied, 106. 
See also systems engineering
Enquiry Concerning ­Human Understanding, 
An, (1748)
environment, the: application of cybernetic 
prediction, 65; hybrid system, 160; 
interactions with, 129; term, 159. See also 
environmental governance; global 
environmental change
environmental governance, 155, 162, 167, 171, 
177, 181
environmental systems. See Earth system 
science(s)
epistemology: cybernetic, 69, 73; empirical, 
26; of forecasting, 85; of governance, 60, 
160, 173–180; heuristic, 99; medical, 41; 
modern scientific, 36; neoliberal, 174; of 
order, 55; postpositivist, 157; scientific, 3, 
11, 36, 68; of scientific prediction, 19, 50, 51, 
99, 185; social constructivist, 128; of social 
prediction, 93; of transparency, 59
equilibrium: of economy, 48, 207n55; of Earth, 
170
Ereshko, Feliks, 135
ergonomics, 78
Erlich, Paul, 166
Ershov, Emil’, 77, 80
ethics: collectives guided by, 68; vanish in 
reflexive control model, 143, 177
ethnic profiling, 188
ethnogenesis, 45, 206n31
Euler, Leonhard, 42
evolution: biosphere, 173, 244n87; brain, 34; 
Darwinian theory, 41, 45; development 
paths, 207n52; economy, 208n60; epistemol-
ogy of, 69; guided, 244n91; social/human, 
49, 83, 128; of Soviet system, 191; statistical 
mea­sure­ment of, 186
expert surveys, 90, 95
explanans, 23–25
extrapolatory prediction, 30, 61, 94
failure of prediction, 189–93
falsifiability, 27, 81, 99, 143
Fedorov, Evgenii, 131, 163, 165, 166, 170, 
243n64
feedback loops, 12, 13, 31, 33, 59–62, 152, 187
Feldman, Grigorii, 47, 83
Fidora, Alexander, 18–20
finance, reflexivity in, 143
Five-­Year Plan, first, 51–53

280	
INDEX
Flanagan, Owen, 127
Flechtheim, Ossip, 87, 219n88
Forecast (1901), 87, 94
forecasting: Soviet scientific, 42, 78, 88, 96, 
99–100, 103, 105, 118; Soviet social, 82–93, 
96, 98. See also statistical forecasting
foretelling, 19, 71
formal knowledge, 105
Forrester, Jay, 166, 228n61
forward-­prediction model, 35–36
Foucault, Michel, 126–27, 153–54, 197n24
foundations, 41; institutional landscape, 98; 
limits, 39; macroeconomic, 47; in postrevo-
lutionary Rus­sia, 184. See also Soviet 
economy, forecasting
Foundations of the Mathematical Theory of 
Probabilities (1846), 43
French government, 76
Fundamentals of Ecol­ogy (1953), 165
­future, the: prob­lem of, 23; intrinsic 
association with prediction, 200n10
future-­making, 3
­Future of Humanity and the Earth, The (1928), 
87
­future studies, 3, 86, 87, 91, 196n16
future-­telling, 2
futurology, 87, 219n88
Gaia modeling system, 166, 181
Gaia theory, 166, 170
Galanskov, Iurii, 111
Galison, Peter, 60, 70
Gamblers, The (1842), 123
games. See Shchedrovitskii, G.P., activity/
simulation games and Stalin, Joseph: ban on 
activity games
Games and Decisions (1957), 133
game theory, 4, 63, 133–34, 140, 142
Game Theory and Economic Be­hav­ior (1944), 
134
“garbage can” model, 8
“gardening state”, 176–77
Gastev, Aleksei, 55, 57
general effects, 21
general laws: how formulated, 22–24, 25f, 44, 
50, 64; for populations and socie­ties, 41, 64. 
See also antecedent conditions
General Staff (Genshtab), 136
Geneva school neoliberals, 11, 175
geological force, humanity as, 151, 155, 
162–63, 166, 168
Geroulanos, Stefano, 40, 59, 87, 173, 205n11
Gerovitch, Slava, 72, 212n11
Giddens, Anthony, 128n232
Ginzburg, Aleksander, 111
glasnost’, 40–41, 80–81, 93, 164, 191, 204n7
Glazyev, Sergei, 98, 223n158
global climate crisis, 2, 166, 183
global environmental change: due to ­human 
activities, 168; imagination of, 159; impact 
of nuclear war, 138; limits of, 172, 176
global governance, 36, 154–55, 164, 167–69, 
172–174, 180; as guidance, 171, 178, 179, 181, 
184, 186; nongovernability, 155, 174
globalists, neoliberal, 67, 157, 175–176, 245n106
global modeling, 164, 166, 178–179
Glushkov, Viktor, 77, 159, 171, 176, 188
goal-­seeking be­hav­ior, 13, 73, 106, 112, 225n19
goal-­setting, 12–13, 106–7, 115
Gorbachev, Mikhail: disarmament talks, 125, 
reforms, 97, 104, 139, 164, 177; new 
approaches to governance, 156, 181
Gosplan, 52, 57, 76, 78–81, 90, 160, 171
governance: of complexity, 164, 181, 198n134; 
diverging approaches, 55; embodied, social, 
117; indirect, 8; habit vs. reflexivity in, 128; 
limited/ negative, 154–55; network, 107, 197; 
by numbers, 41–43; purposive control, 15, 
171, 181; “science”, 80; Soviet scientific, 105, 
131; technocratic, 117; without reliable data, 
100. See also environmental governance; 
global governance; milieu, governance 
through; target-­oriented governance
governmentality: Cold War, 70, 189; Earth 
system, 151, 170–71; globally-­integrated, 
181; liberal, 129, 244; neoliberal, 153; of 
noosphere, 173; scholarship, 197n24; Soviet, 
81, 154, 175, 179; Soviet Earth system, 154, 
180; system-­cybernetic, 9, 173; types of, 78
Gramelsberger, Gabriele, 30
Gregory, Paul, 57, 99, 211n103
Grimanelli, Pericles, 48, 208n60
Grushin, Boris, 84, 92, 93, 108
guidance: negative, 173, 177, 188; through 
milieu, 151, 155, 179, 184, 186
guided development, 173, 244n91
Gumilev, Lev, 165, 246n128
Gvishiani, Dzhermen, 78, 97, 168
habit: cycle of corrections, 129; vs. reflexivity, 
128
Hayek, Friedrich von, 155, 160–61, 167, 173, 
174, 176
Hayles, Katherine, 67
Heidegger, Martin, 59
Helmer, Olaf, 88

	
INDEX	
281
Hempel, Carl, 23–25, 87, 88, 99
heuristics: character of forecasts, 99; climate 
science, 180; information pro­cessing, 106
Heymann, Matthias, 30
“high modernist state”, 105
Hippocrates, 19
homeostasis, 170
­human body, 19
­Human Condition, The (1958), 59
­humans, as prediction machines, 68
Hume, David, 21
Humean gap, 21, 23, 34
hypotheses: incomplete explanations, 25; 
“five-­year”, 53; flawed, 144; forecasts as, 54; 
predictive, 209n69
If the World Disarms (1961), 93
induction, Hume’s prob­lem of, 21
informality: in decision-­making, 96; 
importance of, 106; legitimizing, 13, 107; 
mobilizing, 112; orchestrating, 119; social, 
103, 186; sources of corruption, 103
information: conceptual split re ­matter, 67; 
quantum theory, 66; Weiner’s view, 32, 62, 66
informational warfare, 122, 146–47
information theory, 66, 67, 95, 104
information transmission, “a predictive 
cascade”, 34–35
input–­output model, 7, 13, 34, 56, 80, 105, 119, 
185
Institute for the International ­Labor 
Movement (IMRD), 89, 110
Institute of Concrete Social Research (IKSI/
ISI), 83–86, 89–93, 96, 137, 218n58, 219n84
Institute of ­Future, 88
Institute of Psychoneurology, 46
institutes of agreement, 175, 181
institutional design, 40, 104, 181, 224n12
International Institute of Applied Systems 
Analy­sis (IIASA), 57, 97, 138, 156, 174
International Sociology Association (ISA), 83, 
89, 91
interpolative prediction, 29
Introduction to Analy­sis of the Infinite (1748), 42
Isidore of Seville, 18
Ivanov, Viacheslav, 109, 131
Joel, Isaac, 140
Johnson, Ann, 3
Jungk, Robert, 81, 88, 91, 221n124
Kahn, Herman, 88
Kant, Immanuel, 128
Kantorovich, Leonid, 75, 80, 208n57
Kerzhentsev, Platon, 55, 57
KGB (State Security Committee), 85, 95, 109, 
135–36, 204n7, 222n141, 225n21
Khristenko, Viktor, 105, 225n13
Khrushchev, Nikita, 75, 78, 83, 109, 110, 158
Kline, Ronald, 31
Knight, Frank. H., 30–31, 33
knowledge of unknowns (premodern), 16, 17
knowledge transfer, 12
known and unknown events, 49
Kondrat’ev, Nikolai: death, 56; and early 
Soviet planning, 46–52; pioneer of 
forecasting, 11; prevision idea, 53, 79, 184; 
value of indicative forecasts, 161; influence 
of Grimanelli, 208n62
Koopmans, Tjalling, 161
Kornberger, Martin, 146, 147
Kosygin, Aleksei, 77, 78, 97, 159
Kovalevskii, Mikhail, 46, 48
Kovda, Viktor, 165
Krementsov, Nikolai, 44
Kurakin, Boris, 45
Landa, Lev, 110
Landau, Lev
language: cybernetic, 63, 109; of formal logic, 
140; mathematical, 178; statistical, 23
Lankina, Tomila, 158, 226n32
Laplace, Pierre-­Simon: influence in Rus­sia, 43, 
55; Laplacian “Dream”, 209n67; model of 
economy and society, 167; notion of perfect 
knowledge, 176; simplistic approach, 55; 
social physics, 49
Latour, Bruno, 148
Lavrent’ev, Mikhail, 158, 159, 241n30
League of Time, the, 55
Ledeneva, Alena, 103, 186
Lefebvre, Viktorina, 137, 138
Lefebvre, Vladimir, 13, 110, 123, 125, 131–48, 
184
Leontief, Wassily, 56, 77, 207n52
Lepskii, Vladimir, 131, 231n11, 231n15, 
235n60
limits: thinking from, 166, 177; setting, 173; 
shift from targets, 176; use of prohibitions 
with, 172; Limits to Growth, The (1972), 94, 
162, 166
linear causality, 31, 66. See also causalities
linear model of prediction → action, 30
living standards forecasts, 85
logical empiricism, 21, 26, 64, 151, 153, 172, 191
logics of prediction: cybernetic, 73; positivist, 73

282	
INDEX
Long Wave Cycle, The (1928), 56
Lovelock, James, 152, 160, 166, 170
Luce, Duncan, 133
Luria, Alexander, 51
Lyapunov, Aleksandr, 159
machine translation, 61, 62, 109
macroeconomics: forecasting, 47; models, 161; 
prob­lems, 76; statistics, 56
Macy conferences on cybernetics, 61, 129
Mahony, Martin, 30
Maksimenko, Vitalii, 95
Mamardashvili, Merab,89, 108
management: cybernetization of, 73, 78; 
Moiseev’s use of term, 169; professionaliza-
tion in Rus­sia, 13; reflexive control, 143; as 
resource orchestration, 8; Soviet, 54, 57, 78, 
84, 104, 105, 114, 171; uses of statistical 
prediction, 6; time in, 55; type of gover-
nance, 181. See also scientific management; 
Shchedrovitskii, G. P.; Taylorism
Man and Noosphere (1990), 162
Manichean sciences, 60
manipulation, 36, 123, 124, 144, 147, 149, 
232n16
mantic knowledge: Chinese version, 17; 
declining status, 29; shift to prognosis, 18, 
174; transition from, 4
mantic practice: ancient, 19; premodern 
notions, 6
mantic science: etymology, 16; typologies, 18, 37
mantike, 16–17
Marx, Karl: Capital,108, 109; insufficient 
model of society, 167; producer goods vs. 
consumer goods, 47
Marxism–­Leninism, 109, 134
“Mastery of Time as the Key Task in the 
Organ­ization of Work, The” (1924)
materiality question, 67
mathematical modeling: of biosphere, 166; 
Moiseev’s competence in, 162, 178; of 
reflexive pro­cesses, 134; for Soviet economy, 
80
mathe­matics: methods, 3, 54; role of, 42
Matlock, Jack, 138, 139
McCulloch, Warren, 31, 133
McLuhan, Marshall, 187
Meadows, Dennis, 160, 166, 211n106
Meadows, Donella, 160
medical prognosis, 19
medicine, 19–20
Meninas o La Familia de Felipe IV, Las (1656), 
126f–27, 143
Merton, Robert, 83, 123, 192
­Middle Ages, Eu­ro­pean, 18
milieu(s): concept, 153; Foucault’s use of, 154; 
milieu, governance through, 13, 151, 165, 
178–180, 184, 186. See also guidance: 
through milieu
militarism, culture of, 136
military decision-­making, 132
military-­industrial complex: USA, 88, 145; 
USSR, 93, 109, 158–59, 216n28
military research, 77
military strategy, 110, 125, 135, 144
military technology, 12, 77
Mirowski, Philip, 49, 209n67
modernity, reflexive, 128. See also Cold War: 
modernity
modernization: Eurocentric narrative of, 4; 
Soviet, 181, 192; theory, 83; trap, 103
“modern man”, the, 41, 44
Moiseev, Nikita: biosphere and noosphere, 
165–67; on complexity, uncertainties, 188, 
209n75; contribution, 15, 180–82; ­family 
background, 157–58; global concerns, 11, 
155–56, 168–71, 178–79; governance as 
guidance approach, 54, 174–78; intellectual 
biography, 159–64; orchestration in, 173; 
prescriptive vs prohibitive approaches, 172
Morgenstein, Oskar, 134
Moscow Methodological Circle, 12, 98, 104, 
108–9, 111, 134
Murav’ev, Valerian, 55, 57
mutual assured destruction (MAD), 122
natu­ral givens, 180
nauchnaia organizatsiia truda (NOT), 54, 73, 
86
negotiation models/strategies, 125, 139
neoliberalism, 174
Nerves of Government, The (1963), 107
Neumann, John von: influence on Lefebvre, 
134; game theory of strategy, 63
neural networks, 31, 33, 37, 59, 106, 107
neural systems modes, 133
neurophysiology, 32, 34, 50, 69
neuropsychology, Soviet, 51
neuroscience, 35
New Cold War, 146
New Economic Policy (NEP), 113
Nietz­sche, Friedrich, 1
nooscope, 165
noosphere: de Chardin vs. Vernadiskii, 155; 
governmentality of, 173; Moiseev’s work on, 
162–64, 166, 172, 179–81; Rus­sian legacy, 

	
INDEX	
283
180, 240n17, 246n128; Vernadiskii’s vision 
of, 166
Northcott, Robert, 26, 27, 99
now-­casting, 29
nuclear disarmament, 163, 177, 181. See also 
disarmament talks
nuclear energy, 115
nuclear war, 88, 93, 138, 181, 191
nuclear winter study, 156, 163, 170, 181
numbers: avalanche, 174; large sets of, 30; 
reliability, 28; transparency, 39, 101; 
visibility, 56. See also governance: by 
numbers; “autohypnosis” by numbers; 
statistical forecasting
numerical repre­sen­ta­tion, 29, 167
observation, continuous, 10, 35, 72, 152
Odum, Eugene, 165
OGAS proj­ect, 171
Oldfield, Jonathan, 159
“On the Prob­lem of Foresight”, 48
ontology: cybernetic, 63; man/nature 
distinction, 168; status of ideas, 35
opacity, 103, 149, 187, 189, 191, 205n11, 247n9. 
See also transparency
operational planning, 136–137
operations research (OR), 75, 112, 131, 136, 
159, 246n5
Oppenheim, Paul, 23–25, 87, 88, 99
orchestra: etymology of, 10; model of 
complexity, 198n34
orchestration: case for, 182; demo­cratic, 193; 
form of governance, 8; of the ­future, 117, 
150; limits to, 68, 117; long-­term predictions, 
150, 171; of scientific prediction, 7–10, 13, 71; 
synchronicity, 69; Wiener’s description, 67, 
201n28. See also cybernetic prediction; 
orchestration; guidance: through milieu
orchestrator, the, 8
Oreskes, Naomi, 266
organ­ization, as fundamental concept, 168
Organisation for Economic Co-­operation and 
Development (OECD), 88
organ­izations: management of, 8, 12, 184
organ­ization studies, 7
O’Riordan, Timothy, 173, 174, 178
Panov, Dmitry, 131, 135
Parin, Vasilii, 91–92
Pask, Gordon, 33, 129, 130f
pattern pro­cessing and recognition: 
cybernetic notion, 12, 204n89; detection, 
71; in fast-­changing phenomena, 3; 
prediction as, 28–29, 34–35, 186; probabilis-
tic, 62
Pelevin, Viktor, 231–232n16
performative methodology, 111
performative nature of prediction, 3, 51, 73, 
78, 98, 125, 151–52
performative strive, 19
perspektyvnyi plan, 52
Peter the ­Great, 38
Phenomenon of Man, The (1955), 166
Pickering, Andrew, 33, 36, 37, 63
Pietruska, Jamie, 4, 45
“Plan and Foresight” (1927), 53
planetary bound­aries, 180–181
planning by design, 117
Poe, Edgar Allan, 141
point predictions, 99
policy action, linear model of, 7, 176
policy pro­cesses, 7–8
po­liti­cal economy: of cybernetics, 32; debates, 
167; global, 14
Poovey, Mary, 20, 21, 28, 200n12
Popper, Karl, 27, 143
Porter, Theodore, 40, 178, 189
positivism: criticism of, 58, 177; French, 11, 21, 
43, 48, 181; Laplacian, 176; logical, 23; in 
Rus­sia, 39, 48; in USSR, 51; technocratic, 65
positivist prediction, 78, 150, 174, 177
Pospelov, Gemogen, 77, 95
Power, Michael, 6, 69, 70
Prague Spring (1968), 110, 137
precision: false, 172; as normative standard, 19, 
21, positivist striving for, 55; search for, 71
predictability, 56, 66, 116, 151, 174, 190–92, 
203n61
prediction, term, 199n1
predictive control, 60–61, 169
predictive expertise, research into, 2
predictive knowledge: actionable, 150; forms 
of, 192; internal diversity, 184, performative 
aspect, 103
predictive power: of brain, 34; and hypotheses, 
25; of opinions, 200n12; of social science, 6
predictive pro­cessing, 35, 72, 99
predvidenie, 6, 48, 80, 94
prévision, 48
prevision: Comtean, 21–22; economic, 50, 53; 
Kondrat’ev’ and, 49, 184; premodern, 4
prevoyance (prevision), 21
Priestland, David, 136, 164
Prisoner’s Dilemma, 122, 123, 140
probabilistic methods, 27, 35, 43, 62
probabilistic thinking, 21, 22, 62, 80

284	
INDEX
probability theory, 15, 199n3
Prognîstikon (Book of Prognosis), 19
prognosis, 6, 18–20, 23, 38, 79, 94
prognostication, 19, 38
prognoz, 48, 50
prognozirovanie, 6, 47
prophecy: “super­natural”, 49; self-­fulfilling, 
19, 192
la prospective, 112, 116, 228n62
prospective reflexivity, 13, 103–4, 112, 115–20, 
122, 186
psychographics, 135
“Purloined Letter, The” (1844), 141
purposeful be­hav­ior, 62, 63f, 64, 71
purposive be­hav­ior, 26, 202n48
Putin, Vladimir, 105, 124, 149, 190
Pynnöniemi, Katri, 124
“quantifiable” growth, 43
quantification, 12
radar technology, 61, 64, 106, 132, 136
Raiffa, Howard, 133
RAND Corporation: Delphi method, 88, 95; 
military studies, 77; and planning, 228n61; 
simulation games, 113; Social Science 
division, 133, 141
Rapoport, Anatol, 133, 137, 141
rational choice theory, 133, 140, 145
Raven, Peter, 166
Rayner, Steve, 173, 174, 178
Reagan, Ronald, 138, 163
real-­time information, 61, 188
reflexive control theory: ethical justification, 
123, 230n1; events as evidence, 146; practice 
of, 143–49, 172; prob­lem of parity, 142; 
“science” of decision-­making, 124; 
“scientific status”, 148; tactics, 124; Western 
reporting on, 125
reflexive deception, 13, 122–24, 132–33, 
140–43, 155. See also deception
reflexive games, 140–43, 148
reflexivity: forward, 172; in finance, 125; 
informal relations, and, 116; methodology, 
115; “mixed blessing”, 127; multilevel 
information pro­cessing, 129–30; original 
meaning, 112; overflow, 140; performative 
and prospective, 13, 102–5, 112, 116–20, 
122, 186–87; strategic applications, 139; in 
Western philosophy, 125, 128
resilience, 174, 181
Reus, Andrei, 105, 225n13
risk society, 69
risk studies, 6, 183
Roo­se­velt, Franklin, 169
Rosenberg, Alex, 144
Rosenblueth, Arthur, 62, 63, 106
Rostow, Walt, 83
Rules of So­cio­log­i­cal Method (1895), 21, 49
Rumiantsev, Aleksei, 89, 92, 221n125, 223n165
Rus­sia: cognitive operations, 146; ethnogra-
phy, 46; eugenic thought, 44; information 
warfare, 148; institutional foundations of 
forecasting, 46; literacy rates, 43, 47; 
military hospitals, 44; peasants, 45; 
population statistics, 47; public health, 44, 
189; scientific prediction, 48
Rus­sian empire, 41–45
Rus­sian nationalism, 157, 190
Rus­sian world idea, 119
Sandomirskaja, Irina, 131
Santangelo, Federico, 16–17
Schelling, Thomas, 133, 140
Schmidgen, Henning, 68
science and technology studies (STS), 128,  
181
scientific explanation(s): capacity to predict, 
24; incomplete, 24; procedure of, 23; 
structure of, 25f; ultimate test, 39
scientific forecasting: conditions for, 40, 46; 
criticism of, 30, 81, 118; logics of prediction, 
73; Soviet, 76–82, 87, 91, 96, 100, 159
scientific knowledge: approximate certainty, 
21; formal, 105; Hempel and Oppenheim’s 
theory, 23, 26; inevitable uncertainty, 174; 
vs. lay knowledge, 22; orchestration of 
production, 184; prediction in, 20, 28f, 186
scientific management, 54, 169, 210n97.  
See also Taylorism
scientific prediction: behavioral, 59, 151, 
235n60; as explanation, 23–4, 64; Humean 
gap in, 21; and hypothesis-­making, 56; as 
inference, 31, 33, 174; late modern, 27–30; 
logistical meaning, 191; mandate, 183; 
means to maintain opacity, 102; positivist, 
21–26, 151; power to predict, 22; premod-
ern, 16–20; probabilistic, 27, 59, 70, 71; 
relational concept, 12; structure, 25f. See also 
conjecture; epistemology: of scientific pre-
diction; orchestration: of scientific predic-
tion; pattern pro­cessing and recognition: 
prediction as; performative nature of 
prediction
Scientific Research Institute of Automatic 
Machinery (NIIAA), 131, 135

	
INDEX	
285
Scientific Research Institute of Economics 
(NIEI), 76, 79, 99
scientific-­technical pro­gress (STP), 83
scientific-­technical revolution theory (STR), 
82–84, 86, 89, 209–10n81
s-­curves, 42
Seefried, Elke, 3
self-­images, 139
self-­organization, 139, 161, 163, 168, 173
self-­organizing systems, 130f, 139
“self-­reference”, term, 139, 144
self-­reflexivity, 64
self-­regulation: absence of, 179; corrective, 69; 
cybernetic, 161; via feedback, 96; beyond 
formal structures, 120; governance at a 
distance, 9; informational, 33; reflexivity as, 
232n24; system level, 59, 152
semiotics, 110, 135, 143, 231–32n16
servomechanisms, 12, 15, 58, 63, 72–73, 132, 187
servomechanism theory, 61, 64, 69
Shatalin, Stanislav, 97, 100
Shchedrovitskii, Georgii Petrovich: activity/
simulation games, 113–17; first Soviet 
management guru, 107–11; legacy, 103–106, 
134, 120–21; reflexivity methodology, 118; 
work continued, 119. See also reflexivity; 
prospective reflexivity
Shchedrovitskii, Petr, 118
Shlapentokh, Vladimir, 84, 96
Skinner, B. F., 26, 34, 124, 154
Slobodian, Quinn, 157, 174–76, 245n106
Smil, Vaclav, 38, 98–99, 204n3
Smolian, Georgii, 135, 231–32n16
Snyder, Joel, 127
social be­hav­ior, 25, 129, 185
social engineering, 58, 117, 228n62
social hygiene movement, 43, 44
social mobilization model, 107
social research: domestic, 222n148; prediction 
in, 48; Soviet, 73, 84; transition between 
events in, 49
social statistical forecasting, 65
social statistics, 43, 65, 86, 184
social values studies, 85, 93, 96
Society for Scientific Forecasting (SSF), 91–92, 
221n116
so­cio­log­i­cal prediction, 208n60
sociology, Soviet, 82–86
sociotechnics (sotsiotekhnika), 117
Sorokin, Pitirim, 47
Soros, George, 125, 143–145, 148
Soviet agriculture, 156
Soviet Association of Sociology (SAS), 82–83
Soviet censuses: 1926, 51; 1937 and 1939, 82
Soviet economy, forecasting, 74–82
Soviet planning: 1920s–1930, 53; 1950s, 76–77, 
80; 1960s, 79; early, 46–52; Kosygin era, 78; 
pro­cesses, 57; types of plans, 53
Soviet planning practice, r, 53, 99, 100, 106
Soviet space program, 158, 241n28
stabilization, 168, 184
Stages of Economic Growth, The: A Non-­
Communist Manifesto (1960), 83
Stalin, Joseph, ban on activity games, 113
State Commission for Electrification of Rus­sia 
(GOELRO), 52, 77, 79
State Committee for Science and Technology 
(GKNT), 93, 161, 217n137
State Security Committee (KGB): and studies, 
85, 95, 135, 222n141; investigations, 107, 
109; policies, 204n7
static vs. dynamic laws, 50
statistical forecasting: input–­output method, 
13; cybernetic-­like functions, 12; debates, 
191; with goal-­steering, 62; linear, 71; 
promise of, 38–40; in Rus­sia, 41–47; status, 
48; United States, 4, 45. See also social 
statistical forecasting
statistical prediction: types of, 29–30; cultures, 
30, 45, 46
steersman pro­cesses, 9, 59, 188
strategic deception. See deception: strategic
Strategic Defense Initiative, 138
strategic thought, Soviet, 136, 145–47, 237n107
strategy, symbolic power, 145, 147
Strumilin, Stanislav, 54, 217n56
surveillance, Cold War, 12, 58
sustainable development, 175
symmetry, notion of, 25, 30
synchronization: brain as device, 68; of 
orga­nizational action, 192; prob­lem of, 8, 
54, 244n87; of social action
systems approach and analy­sis, 104, 109, 111, 
151, 159, 165, 170
systems engineering, 117
Taagepera, Rein, 191, 247n21
taboos, 173, 176, 177
Tarde, Gabriel, 128–129
Tardov, Boris N., 91, 221n117
target-­oriented governance, 154, 172
target-­seeking pro­cesses, 151
targets: illusion of control, 78; vs. limits, 173, 176
Taylor, Frederic Winslow, 169
Taylorism: American, 54, 169; Soviet version 
of, 78

286	
INDEX
technocracy, 39, 58, 117, 169
technoscience, 8, 82, 157, 187
technoscientific forecasting, 88, 97
Teilhard de Chardin, Pierre, 155, 166, 167, 180
teleological be­hav­ior, 106, 107, 114
teleological control. See control: teleological
teleological planning approaches, 54, 63, 78
Thermonuclear War, On, (1960), 88
thinking activity, 111–20
Thomas, Timothy, 146
time series: analyses, 60, 88; methods, 56, 74; 
use in prediction, 199n2; theory, 60
timetables, 19–20
Timofeev-­Resovskii, Nikolai, 165
Titarenko, Larissa, 84
transparency: absence of, 102; desire for, 
39–40, 101; in economics, 80, 120; history of 
idea, 59, 69, 87–88, 123, 173. See also 
glasnost’
Trump, Donald, 190
tselevoe planirovanie, 78. See also teleological 
planning approaches
Tukhachevski, Mikhail, 74, 137
Turetskii, Shamai, 79
Ukraine: decision to invade, 192; Donetsk–­
Luhansk conflict (2014), 146, 190; invasion 
(2022), 124, 147, 187; reflexive control used 
in, 13, 122, 149, 187. See also reflexive 
control theory; strategic deception
uncertainty: in cybernetic prediction, 64, 71; 
epistemology friendly to, 60; governing, 174, 
179; instrument of action, 144; in prospec-
tive reflexivity, 120; subversive effect, 85
ungovernability: economic, 161; scientific, 156
United Nations Educational, Scientific and 
Cultural Organ­ization (UNESCO), 83, 89, 
162, 165, 166
United Nations Environment Program 
(UNEP), 164
US National Bureau of Economic Research 
(NBER), 47, 174
utopianism: in Bestuzhev-­Lada’s work, 94, 98; 
modernist proj­ects, 224n1; Soviet ideas of, 
185; technocratic, 5, 189; and transparency, 
205n11. See also cybernetic sensibility
Vaino, Anton, 105, 246n148
Velázquez, Diego, 126–27
Velmet, Aro, 95, 212n11
Verhulst, Pierre Francois, 42
Vernadskii, Vladimir, 155, 159, 162, 165, 172, 
240n18
visibility, 11–12, 39–40, 56, 100, 102, 176, 
204n2
Vol’pe, Abram, 74
Voprosy filosofii (Issues of Philosophy), 77, 88, 
140
Vygotsky, Lev, 110, 114
weather monitoring, 38, 44, 45
Weick, Karl, 19, 106, 191
“Western” scientific tradition, 4, 16, 75, 81,  
123
what if reasoning, 30
“what is to come”, Rus­sian words, 94
Wiener, Norbert: cybernetic prediction, 11, 12, 
59–65, 68, 71; defining of cybernetics, 9, 59; 
“events” and “messages”, 62; goal-­steering, 
54; information, 32; loops, 13, 66; material-
ity, 67; teleology, 78
Wildawsky, Aaron, 120
­will to power, 1, 193
­will to predict: beliefs ­behind, 46; legitimacy 
and ethical issues, 186, 189, 191–92; fueled 
criticism, 97; generates models, 3; 
integrating force, 6; requires orchestration, 
184; Soviet, 15
Win­dow to the ­Future, A: The Con­temporary 
Prob­lems of Social Prognosis (1970), 94
World Dynamics (1978), 166
World ­Future Studies Federation,  
91–92
world government, 166, 174
Zadorin, Igor’, 98
Zan, Luca, 145
Zdravomyslova, Elena, 84
Zinov’ev, Aleksandr, 89, 104, 108
Zuboff, Shoshana, 32, 35, 189
Zubok, Vladislav, 97, 111, 156, 177,  
202n47
Zvorykin, Anatolii, 83, 89, 216n28

