CHAPTER FOUR 
ROBOTS AND 
SOULS 
Are people just complicated robots . . . or do we have souls? On 
the one hand, being conscious certainly feels like something more than 
the mechanical working out of a computer program. But on the other 
hand, what could a soul possibly be? How could it act on matter? Might 
a machine have a soul? 
A theorem of mathematical logic, Godel's Incompleteness Theorem, 
is widely thought to have a bearing on this constellation of problems. In 
this chapter we will begin by investigating Godel's famous theorem and 
end by making some speculations about mechanical intelligence and the 
nature of consciousness. 
The first section gives a quick overview^of Godel and his Incomplete-
ness Theorem. In the following section I describe a series of conversa-
tions that I had with Godel about his theorem and some related matters. 
"Towards Robot Consciousness" contains a more detailed treatment of 
Godel's theorem and explains exactly what Godel thought the conse-
quences of his theorem were for the field of Artificial Intelligence. (An 
even more detailed treatment is to be found in Excursion II.) In "Be-
yond Mechanism," I explore Godel's claim that there is a nonmaterial 
component to human consciousness. 
GODEL'S INCOMPLETENESS 
THEOREM 
In the summer of 1930, the twenty-four-year-old mathematician 
Kurt Godel proved a strange theorem: mathematics is open-ended. There 

INFINITY AND THE MIND 
can never be a final, best system of mathematics. Every axiom-system 
for mathematics will eventually run into certain simple problems that it 
cannot solve at all. This is Godel's Incompleteness Theorem. 
The implications of this epochal discovery are devastating. The think-
ers of the Industrial Revolution liked to regard the universe as a vast 
preprogrammed machine. It was optimistically predicted that soon sci-
entists would know all the rules, all the programs. But if Godel's Theo-
rem tells us anything, it is this: Man will never know the final secret of 
the universe. 
Of course, anyone can say that science does not have all the answers. 
What makes Godel's achievement so remarkable is that he could rigor-
ously prove this, stating his proof in the utterly precise language of sym-
bolic logic. To come up with a mathematical proof for the incomplete-
ness of mathematics is a little like managing to stand on one's own 
shoulders. How did Godel come to think of such a proof? What kind of 
person was he? 
Kurt Godel was born on April 28, 1906, in Briinn (Brno), Czech-
oslovakia, at that time part of Austria-Hungary. His family was part of 
the sizable German minority in Briinn, and his father was the successful 
manager of one of the city's numerous textile mills. Godel's childhood 
was marred by a case of rheumatic fever at the age of six. He recovered 
from the disease, but for the rest of his life he had morbid fears about 
his health.1 
He attended the University of Vienna, starting as an undergraduate 
in 1923 and earning his doctorate in mathematics in 1930. Vienna was a 
terribly exciting place to be in those years. The beginnings of psycho-
analysis, twelve-tone music, modern architecture, and non-representa-
tional painting can all be traced to this period—with Sigmund Freud, 
Arnold Schonberg, Adolf Loos, and Oskar Kokoschka all active in 
Vienna. 
But, more importantly for Godel, this was also a period of great phil-
osophical ferment in Vienna. In 1921 the Viennese intellectual Ludwig 
Wittgenstein had published his gem-like Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus. 
And logical positivism was being founded and developed by a group of 
philosophers known as the "Vienna Circle." Godel's principal teacher, 
Hans Hahn, was a prominent member of this group, as were Moritz 
Schlick, Philipp Frank, and Rudolf Carnap. The Vienna Circle held its 
meetings in a seminar room near the mathematics department, and 
Godel attended these meetings regularly. 
The basic credo of logical positivism is summed up by Rudolf Car-
nap's manifesto: "We give no answers to philosophical questions and in-

ROBOTS AND SOULS 
deed reject all philosophical questions, whether of Metaphysics, Ethics or 
Epistemology."2 The idea was that abstract philosophical statements 
such as, " A l l is One," are meaningless—not true or false, but simply 
without content. This position was based on the so-called "Verifiability 
Principle," according to which the meaning of a statement is equated 
with the method for verifying the statement. Since the positivists could 
see no way scientifically to document metaphysical statements like, " A l l 
is One," or "The Absolute is outside time," these statements were re-
garded as wholly devoid of significance. 
This basically negative part of logical positivism was greatly in-
fluenced by Wittgenstein's celebrated Tractatus. This short and aphoris-
tic book offers the following solution to the problems of traditional phi-
losophy: "What we cannot talk about we must pass over in silence."3 
But it should be pointed out that Wittgenstein, although friendly with 
members of the Vienna Circle, was never quite a logical positivist. On 
the contrary, he sometimes sounds like a Zen mystic. He elegantly de-
scribes his position in the Tractatus: 
"We feel that even when all possible scientific questions have been an-
swered, the problems of life remain completely untouched. Of course 
there are then no questions left, and this itself is the answer. The solution 
of the problem of life is seen in the vanishing of the problem."4 
The positive part of logical positivism was a program to unify all of 
science, using the language of symbolic logic. The inspiration came 
from Whitehead and Russell's Principia Mathematica of 1910.5 In this 
monumental work (three mammoth volumes), it is shown how all of our 
familiar mathematical concepts and facts can be logically derived from 
certain very simple and primitive principles of reasoning. The logical 
positivists hoped to put other branches of science, including physics and 
psychology, on a similarly rigorous footing. 
The principal achievement of Whitehead and Russell was to get a me-
chanically precise definition of what we mean when we say that some 
statement follows logically from some other statements. With this defini-
tion in hand, the "formalist" mathematician David Hilbert pointed out 
that mathematics was now only a matter of choosing the right axioms 
and examining the logical consequences of these axioms. The positivists 
hoped to extend this approach to all the sciences, and even to all of 
human thought. 
In order to grasp the implications of such a programmatic approach 
to human knowledge, I would like to run a little thought-experiment 
here, an alternate-world fantasy. Imagine: 
159 

160 
INFINITY AND THE MIND 
A complete axiom-system for mathematics was obtained by 1950. The 
system was called MT for Mathematical Truth. It was theoretically estab-
lished that any true mathematical statement could be proved from MT, 
and that any false mathematical statement could be disproved from MT. 
Thus, the axioms of MT, along with the Whitehead-Russell-Hilbert rules 
for logical deduction, captured the whole of mathematics. 
The existence of the complete theory MT did not really begin to affect 
mathematicians until the twenty-first century. They went on much as be-
fore, using their intuition and ingenuity to find ways of combining the 
various axioms of MT to yield logical proofs of interesting theorems. But 
in the year 2000, the computers became big enough to take over. In the 
space of ten years a single linked system of Josephson-junction proces-
sors had made mathematicians as obsolete as slide-rules. The system was 
called MTM for Mathematical Truth Machine. 
The functioning of MTM was as follows. MTM was programmed with 
the basic axioms of the complete system MT. What MTM did was simple. 
It exhaustively worked out all the logical consequences of these axioms: 
first all the theorems with one-step proofs; then all the theorems with 
two-step proofs; then three; and, before long, three million; and so on 
and on. 
As MTM proved theorem after theorem, these were added to its sys-
tematic master list. If you wanted to know about some mathematical 
problem ("Is Fermat's Last Theorem true?" "What is the solution to this 
differential equation?" "What is the shortest route connecting these ten 
cities?") you fed your question into MTM, and MTM would search its 
master list for your answer. 
If the answer was already in the master list, fine. If not, you had to wait 
a bit, but sooner or later MTM would get to the theorem answering your 
question. There was no point consulting a mathematician instead, since 
MTM had already gone far beyond all logical derivations short enough to 
be' humanly comprehensible. 
All this was fine with everyone except the mathematicians. A few of 
them rebelled to create a new "surreal mathematics" based on deliber-
ately false and inconsistent assumptions. But MTM one-upped them by 
taking a spare hour to work out the most interesting false theorems of 
"surreal mathematics." With its ever-increasing store of mathematical 
and logical fact, MTM was getting faster and faster. You could feed it any 
set of axioms and it could work out the most interesting consequences in 
next to no time at all. 
The physicists were the next to go the way of the mathematicians. Late 
in the 1990s an Israeli graduate student had achieved the final unification 
of General Relativity with Quantum Mechanics. A simple list of axioms, 
twenty-five in number, summarized all the laws of nature. This theory, 
called PT for Physical Truth, was programmed into a computer linked up 
with MTM. The new system, called PTM for Physical Truth Machine, 
began systematically working out the consequences of PT. Soon the 
three-body problem was solved, an explanation for the mass of the elec-

ROBOTS AND SOULS 
tron was produced, the exact age of the universe was calculated, and sev-
eral methods for safe nuclear fusion were discovered. 
A critical mass of knowledge had been reached by MTM and PTM. In 
the next few years, complete theories were found for biology, psychol-
ogy, and sociology. A planet-wide system of linked computers combined 
all of these complete theories to produce the god-like STM, for Scientific 
Truth Machine. 
Any scientific question at all was best answered by consulting STM. 
Either STM had already worked out the answer, or it soon would. No 
scientist could know as much as STM, so independent work was useless. 
During the Italian Renaissance there were certain mathematicians who 
made their living by being able to solve cubic equations. Imagine their 
dismay if one of the princes had been given the simple formula for solv-
ing cubics, along with a pocket calculator to work out the solutions! This 
was the situation in which the scientists now found themselves. The ut-
terly mechanical working out of a complete theory had replaced any need 
for scientific intuition or creativity. 
The last step came suddenly, in the year 2060. An embittered Argen-
tine scientist had, with the help of the STM, worked out a complete the-
ory of aesthetics. The immutable laws of what makes a great novel, paint-
ing, or symphony were incorporated into an axiom system called AT for 
Artistic Truth. The clandestinely assembled ATM sprang into action and 
began producing short works magnificently expressive of the condition 
of man in the cosmos. 
Over the protests of the artists, the government coupled ATM with 
STM to get UTM, the Universal Truth Machine. There was no longer 
any need to do anything. Whatever any person wanted to know or do or 
say would, sooner or later, be done better by UTM. Terrorist acts against 
UTM were impossible, as UTM had a complete theory of human behav-
ior, and could predict and ward off any such attack. About the only thing 
people still had left for their own was sports. A UTM terminal was placed 
in each home, and the world slid toward senescence, watching the tube. 
Depressing? Don't worry! 
In 1930 Kurt Godel proved that there can never be a U T M (Univer-
sal Truth Machine). There can't even be an M T M (Mathematical Truth 
Machine). There is no complete set MT of axioms for mathematical 
truth. Any system of knowledge about the world is, and must remain, 
fundamentally incomplete, eternally subject to revision. 
Of course, the future could follow a scenario similar to what I just 
outlined. The difference, thanks to Godel, is that the machines will 
never have all the answers. There will always be room for a creative per-
son who can think of a better way of doing things. 
Try to catch the universe in a finite net of axioms and the universe 
will fight back. Reality is, on the deepest level, essentially infinite. No 
161 

162 
INFINITY AND THE MIND 
finitely programmed machine can ever exhaust the richness of the men-
tal and physical world we inhabit. 
The proof of Godel's Incompleteness Theorem is so simple, and so 
sneaky, that it is almost embarrassing to relate. His basic procedure is as 
follows: 
1. Someone introduces Godel to UTM, a machine that is supposed to be a 
Universal Truth Machine, capable of correctly answering any question at 
all. 
2. Godel asks for the program and circuit diagrams of the UTM. The program 
may be complicated, but it can only be finitely long. Call the program 
P(UTM) 
for Program of the Universal Truth Machine. 
3. Smiling a little, Godel writes out the following sentence: "The machine 
constructed on the basis of the program P(UTM) 
will never say that this 
sentence is true." Call this sentence G for Godel. Note that G is equivalent to 
"UTM 
will never say G is true." 
4. Now Godel laughs his high laugh and asks UTM whether G is true or not. 
5. If UTM says G is true, then "UTM will never say G is true" is false. If 
"UTM will never say G is true" is false, then G is false (since G = "UTM 
will never say G is true.") So if UTM says that G is true, then G is in fact 
false, and UTM has made a false statement. So UTM will never say that G is 
true, since UTM makes only true statements. 
6. We have established that UTM will never say G is true. So "UTM will 
never say G is true" is in fact a true sentence. So G is true (since 
G = "UTM will never say G is true."). 
7. " I know a truth that UTM can never utter," Godel says. " I know that G is 
true. UTM is not truly universal." 
Think about i t — i t grows on you. 
The gimmick in Godel's proof is very similar to the gimmick in the 
famous Liar paradox of Epimenides: " I am lying," says Epimenides. Is 
he? Or, as in "What is Truth," define B to be the sentence "B is not 
true." Is B true? The problem is that B is true if and only if B is not true. 
So B is somehow outside the scope of the applicability of the concepts 
"true" and "not true." There is something viciously meaningless about 
the sentence B, and one is inclined just to try to forget about it. 
But Godel's G sentences cannot be so lightly dismissed. With his 
great mathematical and logical genius, Godel was able to find a way (for 
any given P(UTM) 
actually to write down a complicated polynomial 
equation that has a solution if and only if G is true. So G is not at all 
some vague or non-mathematical sentence. G is a specific mathematical 
problem that we know the answer to, even though UTM does not! So U T M 
does not, and cannot, embody a best and final theory of mathematics. 

ROBOTS AND SOULS 
Godel's Incompleteness Theorem flew in the face of the formalist 
and logical positivist movements of the time. But everyone who was ca-
pable of following the many steps of the detailed proof was forced to 
concede its correctness. Godel became famous. 
When the Second World War broke out, Godel moved to Princeton, 
New Jersey, to take up a permanent position at the Institute for Ad-
vanced Study. This famous "college without students" had been estab-
lished a few years earlier with the financial help of Louis Bamberger, the 
department-store magnate. The aging Einstein was also there, and he 
became one of Godel's few intimates. They could often be seen walking 
the great lawn in front of the Institute's Fuld Hall discussing relativity. 
Godel himself published a curious paper in relativity, in which he de-
scribed a special class of universe where time-travel by rocket ship is 
possible.6 
Godel did some of his most interesting work during the 1940s. Soon 
after arriving in the United States he published his only book, a mono-
graph on set theory called The Consistency of the Continuum Hypothesis.1 
This book contains his proof that Cantor's Continuum Hypothesis 
cannot be disproved from the existing axioms of set theory. As with his 
Incompleteness Theorems, it was not only the statement of the theo-
rem, but also the method of proof that had such an impact on mathe-
matics and philosophy. Here Godel found a whole new way of thinking 
about the class of all sets and discovered certain absolute features of the 
mathematical universe that had never been suspected. 
In the mid-1940s he wrote a pair of rather philosophical papers 
aimed at the non-specialist, "Russell's Mathematical Logic" and "What 
is Cantor's Continuum Problem?"8 These beautifully written papers re-
veal Godel as anything but a logical positivist. He argues here that sets 
and concepts exist external to any individual's activities, and that ques-
tions about infinite sets are every bit as meaningful as questions about 
physics. This Platonistic strand in Godel's thought became more and 
more pronounced over the years, culminating in his 1964 addendum to 
the "What is Cantor's Continuum Problem?" paper, which contains 
these passages: 
Despite their remoteness from sense experience, we do have some-
thing like a perception of the objects of set theory, as is seen from the 
fact that the axioms force themselves upon us as being true. I don't see 
any reason why we should have less confidence in this kind of percep-
tion, i.e., in mathematical intuition, than in sense perception . . . The 
set theoretical paradoxes are hardly any more troublesome for mathe-
matics than deceptions of the senses are for physics. . . . Evidently the 
163 

INFINITY AND THE MIND 
given' underlying mathematics is closely related to the abstract elements 
contained in our empirical ideas. It by no means follows, however, that 
the data of this second kind, because they cannot be associated with ac-
tions of certain things upon our sense organs, are something purely sub-
jective, as Kant asserted. Rather, they, too, may represent an aspect of 
objective reality, but, as opposed to the sensations, their presence in us 
may be due to another kind of relationship between ourselves and real-
ity.9 
Despite his high level of scientific creativity during this period, Godel 
seems to have had some opposition at the Institute, as he was not pro-
moted from member to faculty status until 1953.1 0 It may have been 
that to some people Godel's Incompleteness Theorems seemed wholly 
negative, and that as a result they tried to dismiss these theorems as 
mere curiosities with no real mathematical or philosophical significance. 
But in point of fact, Godel's Incompleteness Theorems are of an im-
portance comparable to the Pythagoreans' proof that the square root of 
two is irrational. The analogy is quite close. The Pythagoreans learned 
that no ratio of natural numbers could fully describe the relation be-
tween the diagonal and the side of a square. For his part, Godel showed 
that no finitely describable theory can codify all mathematical truth. 
That is, he has shown that the set of all true statements about mathe-
matics is finitely unnameable, and thus essentially random and infinite. 
It is characteristic of Godel's work that the Incompleteness Theo-
rems use purely mathematical reasoning to prove certain facts about the 
objective world. In 1949 he actually attempted to demonstrate the un-
reality of time by means of an argument in mathematical physics.11 
Godel published only one paper after this, a 1958 discussion of how 
one might prove the consistency of mathematics by assuming that men-
tal objects have an objective existence.12 He did not like publicity and 
made at most two or three public appearances during the latter part of 
his life. Nevertheless, he continued as a guiding force in logic and set 
theory. Any mathematician who was invited to do so eagerly made the 
pilgrimage to his office at the Institute for Advanced Study. 
In the next section, I describe my own pilgrimages. 
CONVERSATIONS WITH GODEL 1 3 
I didn't know where his real office door was, so I went around to 
knock on the outside door instead. This was a glass patio door, looking 
164 

ROBOTS AND SOULS 
out on a little pond and the peaceful woods beyond the Institute for 
Advanced Study. It was a sunny March day, but the office was quite 
dark. I couldn't see in. Did Kurt Godel really want to see me? 
Suddenly he was there, floating up before the long glass door like 
some fantastic deep-sea fish in a pressurized aquarium. He let me in, 
and I took a seat by his desk. 
Kurt Godel was unquestionably the greatest logician of the century. 
He may also have been one of our greatest philosophers. When he died 
in 1978, one of the speakers at his memorial service made a provocative 
comparison of Godel with Einstein . . . and with Kafka. 1 4 
Like Einstein, Godel was German-speaking and sought a haven from 
the events of the Second World War in Princeton. And like Einstein, 
Godel developed a structure of exact thought that forces everyone, sci-
entist and layman alike, to look at the world in a new way. 
The Kafkaesque aspect of Godel's work and character is expressed in 
his famous Incompleteness Theorem of 1930. Although this theorem 
can be stated and proved in a rigorously mathematical way, what it 
seems to say is that rational thought can never penetrate to the final, ulti-
mate truth. A bit more precisely, the Incompleteness Theorem shows 
that human beings can never formulate a correct and complete descrip-
tion of the set of natural numbers, {0, 1, 2, 3, . . . }. But if mathemati-
cians cannot ever fully understand something as simple as number the-
ory, then it is certainly too much to expect that science will ever expose 
any ultimate secret of the universe. 
Scientists are thus left in a position somewhat like K. in The 
Castle.15 
Endlessly we hurry up and down corridors, meeting people, knocking 
on doors, conducting our investigations. But the ultimate success will 
never be ours. Nowhere in the castle of science is there a final exit to 
absolute truth. 
This seems terribly depressing. But, paradoxically, to understand 
Godel's proof is to find a sort of liberation. For many logic students, the 
final breakthrough to full understanding of the Incompleteness Theo-
rem is practically a conversion experience. This is partly a by-product of 
the potent mystique Godel's name carries. But, more profoundly, to 
understand the essentially labyrinthine nature of the castle is, somehow, 
to be free of it. 
Godel certainly impressed me as a man who had freed himself from 
the mundane struggle. I visited him in his Institute office three times in 
1972, and if there is one single thing I remember most, it is his laughter. 
His voice had a high, singsong quality. He frequently raised his voice 
165 

166 
INFINITY AND THE MIND 
toward the ends of his sentences, giving his utterances a quality of ques-
tioning incredulity. Often he would let his voice trail off into an amused 
hum. And, above all, there were his bursts of complexly rhythmic 
laughter. 
The conversation and laughter of Godel were almost hypnotic. Lis-
tening to him, I would be filled with the feeling of perfect understand-
ing. He, for his part, was able to follow any of my chains of reasoning to 
its end almost as soon as I had begun it. What with his strangely infor-
mative laughter and his practically instantaneous grasp of what I was 
saying, a conversation with Godel felt very much like direct telepathetic 
communication. 
The first time I visited Godel it was at his invitation. I was at Rutgers 
University, writing my doctoral thesis in logic and set theory. I was par-
ticularly interested in Cantor's Continuum Problem. One of Godel's 
unpublished manuscripts on this problem was making the rounds, and I 
was able to get hold of a Xerox of a Xerox of a Xerox. 1 6 
I deciphered the faint squiggles and thought about the ideas for sev-
eral months, finally giving a talk on the manuscript at Rutgers. I had a 
number of questions about the proof Godel had sketched and wrote 
him a letter about them. 
He probably would not have answered—Godel almost never an-
swered letters. But I happened to be attending a weekly seminar at the 
Institute with Gaisi Takeuti, an eminent logician who was there for a 
year's research. Godel knew this, and one day while I was at the seminar 
in Takeuti's office, he phoned up and asked that I come see him. 
Godel's office was dim and unlit. There was comfortable carpeting 
and furniture. On the empty desk sat an empty glass of milk. Godel was 
quite short, but his presence was such that visitors sometimes left with 
the impression that he was very tall. 
When I saw him he was dressed as in all his pictures, with a suit over a 
warm vest and necktie. He is known to have worried a great deal about 
his health and was always careful to keep himself well bundled-up. In-
deed, in the winter, one would sometimes see him leaving the Institute 
with a scarf wrapped around his head. 
He encouraged me to ask questions, and, feeling like Aladdin in the 
treasure cave, I asked him as many as I could think of. His mind was 
unbelievably fast and experienced. It seemed that, over the years, he 
had already thought every possible philosophical problem through to 
the very end. 
Despite his vast knowledge, he still could discuss ideas with the zest 

ROBOTS AND SOULS 
and openness of a young man. If I happened to say something particu-
larly stupid or naive, his response was not mockery, but rather an 
amused astonishment that anyone could think such a thing. It was as if 
during his years of isolated thought he had forgotten that the rest of the 
human race was not advancing along with him. 
The question of why Godel chose to live most of his life in splendid 
isolation is a difficult one. Although he was not Jewish, the Second 
World War forced him to flee Europe, and this may have soured him 
somewhat on humanity. Yet, he loved life in America, the comfortable 
position at the Institute, the chance to meet Einstein, the great social 
freedom. But he spent his later years in an ever-deepening silence. 
The first time I saw Godel, he invited me; the second two times, I 
invited myself. This was not easy. I wrote him several times, insisting 
that we should meet again to talk. Finally I phoned him to say this again. 
'Talk about what?" Godel said, warily. When I finally got to his office 
for my second visit, he looked up at me with an expression of real dis-
like. But annoyance gave way to interest, and, after I'd asked a few 
questions, the conversation turned as friendly and spirited as the first. 
Still, toward the end of a conversation, when he was tired, Godel would 
sometimes look at a visitor with an eerie mixture of fear and suspicion, 
as if to say, what is this stranger doing in my retreat? 
Godel was, first and foremost, a great thinker. The essence of the 
man is not to be found in his physical description, but rather in his 
ideas. I would like to describe now some of our discussions on mathe-
matics, physics, and philosophy. 
One of Godel's less well-known papers is a 1949 article called, "A 
Remark on the Relationship Between Relativity Theory and Idealistic 
Philosophy."17 In this paper, probably influenced by his conversations 
with Einstein as well as by his interest in Kant, Godel attempts to show 
that the passage of time is an illusion. The past, present and future of 
the universe are just different regions of a single vast space-time. Time 
is part of space-time, but space-time is a higher reality existing outside of 
time. 
In order to destroy the time-bound notion of the universe as a series 
of evanescent frames on some cosmic movie screen, Godel actually con-
structed a mathematical description of a possible universe in which one 
can travel back through time. His motivation was that if one can con-
ceive of time-travelling to last year, then one is pretty well forced to 
admit the existence of something besides the immediate present. 
I was disturbed by the traditional paradoxes inherent in time-travel. 
167 

168 
INFINITY AND THE MIND 
What if I were to travel back in time and kill my past self? If my past self 
died, then there would be no I to travel back in time, so I wouldn't kill 
my past self after all. So then the time-trip would take place, and I would 
kill my past self. And so on. I was also disturbed by the fact that if the 
future is already there, then there is some sense in which our free will is 
an illusion. 1 8 
Godel seemed to believe that not only is the future already there, but 
worse, that it is, in principle, possible to predict completely the actions 
of some given person. 
I objected that if there were a completely accurate theory predicting 
my actions, then I could prove the theory false—by learning the theory 
and then doing the opposite of what it predicted. According to my 
notes, Godel's response went as follows: "It should be possible to form 
a complete theory of human behavior, i.e., to predict from the heredi-
tary and environmental givens what a person will do. However, if a mis-
chievous person learns of this theory, he can act in a way so as to negate 
it. Hence I conclude that such a theory exists, but that no mischievous 
person will learn of it. In the same way, time-travel is possible, but no 
person will ever manage to kill his past self/' Godel laughed his laugh 
then, and concluded, "The a priori is greatly neglected. Logic is very 
powerful." 
Apropos of the free will question, on another occasion he said: 
"There is no contradiction between free will and knowing in advance 
precisely what one will do. If one knows oneself completely then this is 
the situation. One does not deliberately do the opposite of what one 
wants." 
As well as questions, I also brought in for Godel's enjoyment some 
offbeat theories of physics I had come up with recently. I was quite sat-
isfied when, after hearing one of my half-baked theories, he shook his 
head and said, "This is a very strange idea. A bizarre idea." 1 9 
There is one idea truly central to Godel's thought that we discussed at 
some length. This is the philosophy underlying Godel's credo, " I do ob-
jective mathematics." By this, Godel meant that mathematical entities 
exist independently of the activities of mathematicians, in much the 
same way that the stars would be there even if there were no astron-
omers to look at them. For Godel, mathematics, even the mathematics 
of the infinite, was an essentially empirical science. 
According to this standpoint, which mathematicians call Platonism, 
we do not create the mental objects we talk about. Instead, we find them, 

ROBOTS AND SOULS 
on some higher plane that the mind sees into, by a process not unlike 
sense perception. 
The philosophy of mathematics antithetical to Platonism is formalism, 
allied to positivism. According to formalism, mathematics is really just 
an elaborate set of rules for manipulating symbols. By applying the 
rules to certain "axiomatic" strings of symbols, mathematicians go about 
"proving" certain other strings of symbols to be "theorems." 
The game of mathematics is, for some obscure reason, a useful game. 
Some strings of symbols seem to reflect certain patterns of the physical 
world. Not only is "2 + 2 = 4" a theorem, but two apples taken with 
two more apples make four apples. 
It is when one begins talking about infinite numbers that the trouble 
really begins. Cantor's Continuum Problem is undecidable on the basis 
of our present-day theories of mathematics. For the formalists this 
means that the continuum question has no definite answer. But for a 
Platonist like Godel, this means only that we have not yet "looked" at 
the continuum hard enough to see what the answer is. 
In one of our conversations I pressed Godel to explain what he meant 
by the "other relation to reality" by which he said one could directly see 
mathematical objects. He made the point that the same possibilities of 
thought are open to everyone, so that we can take the world of possible 
forms as objective and absolute. Possibility is observer-independent, 
and therefore real, because it is not subject to our will. 
There is a hidden analogy here. Everyone believes that the Empire 
State Building is real, because it is possible for almost anyone to go and 
see it for himself. By the same token, anyone who takes the trouble to 
learn some mathematics can "see" the set of natural numbers for him-
self. So, Godel reasoned, it must be that the set of natural numbers has 
an independent existence, an existence as a certain abstract possibility 
of thought. 
I asked him how best to perceive pure abstract possibility. He said 
three things, i) First one must close off the other senses, for instance, by 
lying down in a quiet place. It is not enough, however, to perform this 
negative action, one must actively seek with the mind, ii) It is a mistake 
to let everyday reality condition possibility, and only to imagine the 
combinings and permutations of physical objects—the mind is capable 
of directly perceiving infinite sets, iii) The ultimate goal of such 
thought, and of all philosophy, is the perception of the Absolute. Godel 
rounded off these comments with a remark on Plato: "When Plautus 
could fully perceive the Good, his philosophy ended." 
169 

170 
INFINITY AND THE MIND 
Godel shared with Einstein a certain mystical turn of thought. The 
word "mystic" is almost pejorative these days. But mysticism does not 
really have anything to do with incense or encounter groups or demo-
niac possession. There is a difference between mysticism and occultism. 
A pure strand of classical mysticism runs from Plato to Plotinus and 
Eckhart to such great modern thinkers as Aldous Huxley and D. T. Su-
zuki. The central teaching of mysticism is this: Reality is One. The prac-
tice of mysticism consists in finding ways to experience this higher unity 
directly. 
The One has variously been called the Good, God, the Cosmos, the 
Mind, the Void, or (perhaps most neutrally) the Absolute. No door in 
the labyrinthine castle of science opens directly onto the Absolute. But 
if one understands the maze well enough, it is possible to jump out of 
the system and experience the Absolute for oneself. 
The last time I spoke with Kurt Godel was on the telephone, in 
March 1977. I had been studying the problem of whether machines can 
think, and I had become interested in the distinction between a system's 
behavior and the underlying mind or consciousness, if any. 
What had struck me was that if a machine could mimic all of our be-
havior, both internal and external, then it would seem that there is 
nothing left to be added. Body and brain fall under the heading of hard-
ware. Habits, knowledge, self-image and the like can all be classed as 
software. All that is necessary for the resulting system to be alive is that 
it actually exist. 
In short, I had begun to think that consciousness is really nothing 
more than simple existence. By way of leading up to this, I asked Godel 
if he believed there is a single Mind behind all the various appearances 
and activities of the world. 
He replied that, yes, the Mind is the thing that is structured, but that 
the Mind exists independently of its individual properties. 
I then asked if he believed that the Mind is everywhere, as opposed 
to being localized in the brains of people. 
Godel replied, "Of course. This is the basic mystic teaching." 
We talked a little set theory, and then I asked him my last question: 
"What causes the illusion of the passage of time?" 
Godel spoke not directly to this question, but to the question of what 
my question meant—that is, why anyone would even believe that there 
is a perceived passage of time at all. 
He went on to relate the getting rid of belief in the passage of time to 
the struggle to experience the One Mind of mysticism. Finally he said 

ROBOTS AND SOULS 
171 
this: "The illusion of the passage of time arises from the confusing of 
the given with the real. Passage of time arises because we think of occu-
pying different realities. In fact, we occupy only different givens. There 
is only one reality." 
I wanted to visit Godel again, but he told me that he was too ill. In the 
middle of January 1978, I dreamed I was at his bedside. 
There was a chess board on the covers in front of him. Godel reached 
his hand out and knocked the board over, tipping the men onto the 
floor. The chessboard expanded to an infinite mathematical plane. And 
then that, too, vanished. There was a brief play of symbols, and then 
emptiness—an emptiness flooded with even white light. 
The next day I learned that Kurt Godel was dead. 
TOWARDS ROBOT 
CONSCIOUSNESS 
20 
The human mind is incapable of formulating (or mechanizing) all its mathemati-
cal intuitions, i.e., if it has succeeded in formulating some of them, this very fact 
yields new intuitive knowledge, e.g., the consistency of this formalism. This fact may 
be called the 'incompletability' of mathematics. On the other hand, on the basis of 
what has been proved so far, it remains possible that there may exist (and even be 
empirically discovereable) a theorem-proving machine which in fact is equivalent to 
mathematical intuition, but cannot be proved to be so, nor even be proved to yield 
only correct theorems of finitary number theory. 
—Kurt Godel'11 
For many years there has been debate over the precise significance of 
Godel's Incompleteness Theorem for the field of Artificial Intelli-
gence.22 Godel, especially in his later years, was a reclusive, even secre-
tive, man, and the quotation printed above is very nearly the sum total 
of his published words on this important question. The purpose of this 
section will be to tease out the meaning and implications of that quota-
tion. 
The section breaks into four subsections. The first, which can be 
skimmed, describes precisely what is meant by a theorem-proving ma-
chine. The second develops the argument for the undefinability of truth 
a bit further, and shows how Godel reaches the conclusion that humans 
can never write down a complete description of how they think about 
mathematics. The third subsection explains how machines too complex 

INFINITY AND THE MIND 
to design can nevertheless evolve, and the final subsection advocates a 
mystical answer to the question, "What is consciousness?" 
F O R M A L 
S Y S T E M S 
A N D 
M A C H I N E S 
Quite generally, a formal system is a set of symbols together with 
rules for employing them. A formal system has four components: (1) 
alphabet, (2) spelling and grammar, (3) axioms, and (4) rules of infer-
ence. 
The alphabet is simply a supply of symbols. If one wishes to be quite 
abstract, he can get by with "0" and " 1 " as his only symbols. But nor-
mally one allows the upper-case and lower-case English and Greek al-
phabets, the punctuation symbols, the blank space, the usual logical 
symbols, the numerals and other mathematical symbols, and so on. 
The spelling rules specify which strings of symbols are to be regarded 
as noun phrases (terms) and which strings are to be regarded as verb 
phrases (relations). The grammar rules specify which sorts of verbs and 
nouns can be meaningfully combined to make simple sentences, and 
how one can go on to build up compound sentences, sentences with 
quantifiers, and multi-sentence statements. A statement formed in ac-
cordance with the spelling and grammar rules is called well-formed. 
The formal system singles out a certain set of well-formed statements 
as axioms or fundamental assumptions. The rules of inference specify 
the precise ways in which axioms can be changed and combined to 
"prove" the theorems of the formal system. 
To be more precise, the well-formed statement A is said to be proved 
by the formal system if and only if there is a finite proof sequence Mu 
. . . , Mn of well-formed statements such that each of the Mt is either 
an axiom or is obtained from some of the previous M/s by one of the 
rules of inference, and such that the last sentence Mn is actually A. Now, 
the theorems of the formal system are those well-formed statements A 
for which there exists a proof sequence ending with A. 
The theorems of a formal system are already latently present in the 
$ystem's axioms and rules of inference. Normally the formal system it-
Self can be finitely described, but it will be able to prove infinitely many 
theorems. So a formal system can be thought of as a very compact way 
0f summarizing a large body of fact. 
All the theorems of classical mathematics, for instance, can be proved 
from the axioms and rules of inference of the formal system obtained by 
combining the propositional calculus, the predicate calculus, and the 

ROBOTS AND SOULS 
axioms of ZF (Zermelo-Fraenkel set theory). This formal system can be 
completely described in a few printed pages. There is, thus, a sense in 
which everything we know about mathematics is coded up in a few 
pages of print. 
No other entire branch of science has allowed itself to be fully codi-
fied as a formal system yet, but there are many successful piecemeal ef-
forts in this direction. The rules for how many electron shells a given 
atom has, the laws of heredity, the theory of electromagnetism, special 
relativity . . . all these can be expressed as formal systems yielding 
certain bodies of fact. 
Usually the alphabet of a formal system will include something that 
can be used as a negation symbol. One normally only considers formal 
systems that are consistent, where this means that for no statement S 
can we obtain both S and the negation of S as theorems. This is a natural 
requirement because a formal system is, in practice, intended to sum-
marize a collection of facts that obtain in some one possible world or 
part of a world . . . and it could never happen that S and the negation 
of S are both true facts. 
Normally, one also requires that the formal systems we consider be 
put in an unambiguous and finitely describable form. When we say that 
a formal system is finitely describable, we mean that there are three def-
inite finite procedures, WELL, A X I O M , and RULE, determining the 
system as follows. 
Given any string S of symbols drawn from the system's alphabet, 
WELL can be applied to determine whether or not S is a well-formed 
statement and A X I O M can be applied to determine whether or not S is 
an axiom. The finite procedure RULE can be applied to any well-
formed statement in combination with any finite set of well-formed 
statements to determine whether or not the former follows from the 
latter according to any single rule of inference. 
Without getting too technical, the essential aspect of the algorithmic 
procedures, WELL, A X I O M , and RULE, must be that they are (a) ut-
terly mechanical in application and (b) always give an unequivocal YES 
or N O answer after some finite amount of time. 
A finitely describable formal system T is sometimes best thought of as 
a theorem-listing machine. Given the formal system T based on the triple 
of algorithms (WELL, A X I O M , RULE), we can construct a machine MT 
that will print out all of T's theorems, one after another. 
Before describing MT, we should first note that given a fixed alphabet 
there is an utterly mechanical procedure for generating all possible 
173 

174 
INFINITY AND THE MIND 
"words" or strings of symbols drawn from that alphabet. If, for example, 
the alphabet were the lower-case English alphabet, one could first list, 
in dictionary order, all one-letter words, then, in dictionary order, all 
two-letter words, then, in dictionary order, all three-letter words, and 
so on and on. 
Now, MT will operate by looping through the following list of in-
structions to generate three ever-growing stores St, We and Th, consist-
ing, respectively, of possible strings, well-formed statements, and theo-
rems. At the same time, MT will print the theorems out. 
1. Generate the next possible string and add it to store St. 
2. Check the most recent string with the procedure WELL. If YES, then add 
the string to the store We. 
3. Check the most recent well-formed sentence with procedure AXIOM. If 
YES, then add the sentence to the store Th. 
4. Use the procedure RULE to check, one by one, each member of We for 
derivability from the set Th. Add each sentence for which the answer is 
YES to the store Th, and print each of these new theorems on the output 
tape. 
5. Return to (1). 
There is a general theorem of recursive function theory stating that 
not only can any formal system be viewed as a machine, the converse is 
true as well. That is, given any digital computer M with unlimited mem-
ory, we can find a formal system TM such that the possible outputs of M 
are exactly the possible theorems of TM. This holds not only for ma-
chines that simply print out long lists of theorems, but also for machines 
that exhibit branching behavior patterns, and even for machines that in-
tereact with their environment. 
A typical machine is non-deterministic in the weak sense that it does 
have branching futures. M begins in an initial state (compare axioms), 
and 
then passes through a series of transitions according to pro-
grammed rules (compare rules of inference). M can be nondeterministic 
in the sense that for certain states S there are a variety of allowable 
"next states" S*, S\, • . . , 51 • I want to make the point that even if one 
allows the choice of next state to be made randomly (say, by counting 
clicks on a Geiger counter), the machine's range of possible outputs is 
still equivalent to the set of possible theorems of some fixed formal sys-
tem. 
This is the case because, in and of itself, a formal system does not 
actually generate a list of its theorems. A formal system is, strictly 

ROBOTS AND SOULS 
175 
speaking, a gestalt or starting state from which one can move out along 
various possible proof sequences to reach various possible theorems. 
The essential form of a formal system is thus more like a tree than a 
line. At the base of the tree we have the axioms and growing out from 
them we have all one-step proofs, and so on. At each node or fork of 
this tree is a theorem—a possible output. 
Suppose, however, that we have a machine M that interacts with its 
environment. M then can be thought of as embodying a behavior func-
tion of the form M(h, i) = o. "h" stands for the history of what has hap-
pened to M since it was turned on, 
stands for the stimulus or input at 
the present time, and V 
stands for a response or output that M may 
give to stimulus /, having had history h. Note that, as mentioned above, 
it is permissible that for given h and / there be several possible 0's. But 
now if we assume that the h's, /"s, and o's can be specified by strings of 
symbols, then it is not hard to see that the behavior of machine M can 
be coded up in some formal system TM that has a variety of strings of 
the form "M(b9 i) = o" as its theorems. 
THE 
LIAR PARADOX AND THE 
NON-MECHANIZABILITY OF MATHEMATICS
Let us now return to the idea of a theorem-listing machine, a finitely 
described device that prints out an endless list of statements. Ob-
viously, the best possible theorem-listing machine would manage to 
print out all and only the true statements expressible in, let us say, the 
English language plus the customary printers' symbols. Such a Universal 
Truth Machine would be a fine thing indeed. Once we had devised its 
finite procedures, WELL, A X I O M , and RULE, we could set it to run-
ning and simply lean back and watch the^ printout. If you were curious 
about the truth of some well-formed statement 5", you would only have 
to sit there and wait until either 5, or the negation of S, was printed out. 
Before going any further, we should be a bit more precise about what 
sorts of string S will count as (well-formed) statements for which one 
can expect an unequivocal true or false decision. 
A first point is that we do not necessarily expect a statement to con-
sist of a single grammatical unit. That is, a statement can consist of sev-
eral sentences, a whole paragraph, a book, or even a large number of 
books. We desire only that the entire welter of symbols embody a sin-
gle assertion that is in fact either true or false. We will, however, not 
allow infinitely long strings of symbols as statements, for a statement 

176 
INFINITY AND THE MIND 
should be, at least in principle, unambiguously and finitely communica-
ble. 
A second point is that a string such as "x is smaller t h a n / ' is not, in 
itself, a statement. For without being told what* andy are, no one could 
ever say that this string expressed either a truth or a falsehood. So a 
statement should not include any undefined terms or relations. 
But now we have a rather nasty problem. What about the phrase "is 
smaller than" in the example above? Must the meaning of that too be 
explained before we have a definite statement? But if every term and 
relation, every noun and verb, must be explained, then we seem to face 
a real mess. A full statement will take on the form of an initial assertion, 
followed by definitions of the words used in the first definitions, fol-
lowed by definitions of the words used in the second definitions, and so 
on. 
Well . . . why not? Such are the joys of abstract speculation! By 
way of preventing unnecessary regresses, we specify that within any ex-
panded statement, no word's definition need be repeated. Since there 
are only finitely many words and word-creation schemata in English, the 
process should normally terminate. There may, however, be some cases 
in which the full expansion of a statement becomes infinite, and in such 
a case we will just have to write the statement off as non-well-formed, 
not really a statement. 
Someone might object that a fully expanded statement will consist of 
circular sequences of definitions and will thus be useless. To this there 
are two responses. First, any circular definition more complicated than 
"x is x" does convey some information. Euclid's circular definitions-of 
space as the set of all points and of a point as a region of space that has 
no parts-tells us that a point, whatever it is, cannot be made up of a 
number of component points. Second, the fact that one is using strings 
of symbols enables one to exhibit certain concepts without really having 
to define them. Take, for instance, the concept of the length of a string 
of symbols, "xxx" is a longer string than "a \ and by multiplying such 
examples (perhaps schematically) the meaning of string length can be 
made evident. 2 3 
So let us expand our statements to be self-explanatory. When we are 
done, a statement such as "the square root of two is irrational" will have 
blossomed into a hefty volume of mathematics, and "all men are mor-
tal" will have expanded to include a definition of most of the words in 
the English language. 
But the simple listing of dictionary definitions will not always be 

ROBOTS AND SOULS 
enough to make a statement definite enough to be susceptible to a 
true/false determination. In order to evaluate a statement such as 
"Jimmy Carter is good/' one needs to know which criterion of "good-
ness" is intended. Does the statement assert that Jimmy Carter teaches 
Bible School, that Jimmy Carter should have been reelected, or that the 
flesh of Jimmy Carter is sweet and tasty? In filling the bare assertion out 
to a full statement, one of the many possible options must be chosen. 
Let us return now to the concept of a U T M (Universal Truth Ma-
chine.) What we want is a finitely programmed device that will print out 
all the true statements, and no false statements. It is easy to prove that 
there can be no such U T M . (We repeat the argument from the section 
"Godel's Incompleteness Theorem.") 
For, say that you have a candidate U T M based on the triple of finite 
procedures (WELL, A X I O M , RULE). Now, since WELL, A X I O M , and 
RULE are entirely finite and mechanical, one should be able to con-
struct a well-formed statement G saying, "The U T M based on the triple 
(WELL, A X I O M , RULE) will never print out this statement"24 
If your U T M ever prints out G, then G will be false—so the U T M 
will have printed out a false sentence. But this would be impossible, as 
the U T M is to print out only true sentences. Therefore the U T M will 
never print out G. And therefore, G is in fact true. But now we have a 
true sentence that will never be printed out by our candidate U T M — 
which is therefore not truly universal. 
Truth, in short, is not finitely describable. This fact provided the res-
olution of the Liar paradox discussed in "What is Truth?" Consider the 
string of symbols B, "This string of symbols does not express a well-
formed statement that is true." Clearly B cannot in fact be expanded to 
make a well-formed statement that is true—because if such a statement 
if true, then it isn't. The reason B can't be made well-formed is that if we 
expand B to include a complete explication of all the words it uses, then 
B will have to include a complete explication of what it means for a fi-
nite statement to be "true." But, as we have just seen, this word "true" 
does not admit of any finite explication! So B is one of those statements 
that, if expanded to be completely understandable, becomes infinitely 
long. Now, an infinitely long string of symbols is not allowable as a 
statement, so there is really no paradox here. If B were a finite state-
ment, then B would be true if and only if B were not true . . . but B is 
infinite, and that is the end of it. B gives the feel of a paradox, as does 
the similar string, "This sentence is not true," but this is simply an illu-
sion on a par with a man suspending himself by a piano wire and saying 
177 

INFINITY AND THE MIND 
he can fly. In the case of B, the 'piano wire" is infinitely long, and B is 
not really a statement at all. 
So the concept of truth for finite statements is itself infinite. One 
might now be tempted to ask if there might be some higher notion of 
truth that can arbitrate the truth of every statement, whether finite, infi-
nite, or transfinite? Not in this world. Looked at another way, the mes-
sage of the Liar paradox is that one can never define truth in such a way 
as to apply to statements involving the concept of truth being defined. 
Let me illustrate this with an example. There is in Rome a church, 
Santa Maria in Cosmedin, outside of which stands a huge stone disc. 
The face of the disc is carved in bas-relief to depict the visage of a hairy, 
bearded man. The mouth, located at about waist-level, is shaped some-
thing like a letter slot. Legend has it that God himself has decreed that 
anyone who sticks a hand in the mouth slot and then utters a false state-
ment will never be able to pull the hand back out. But I have been 
there, and I stuck my hand in the mouth and said, " I will not be able to 
pull my hand back out." (May God forgive me!) 
It is perhaps not really so surprising that there is no set of rules that 
will suffice to generate all the possible truths. There is something about 
the fact that the rules exist in the world they attempt to describe that 
forbids this. What perhaps is surprising is that the same phenomenon 
also holds true for the small and orderly world of number theory. 
The natural numbers, along with the equality relation and the opera-
tions of plus and times, do not seem very complicated. Even if one 
cannot get a finite description of all true statements, one might hope to 
get at least a finite description of all the true facts about natural num-
bers. But, according to Godel's 1930 Incompleteness Theorem, this is 
also impossible. 
Godel's two Incompleteness Theorems state that all formal systems 
of a certain kind are subject to two related limitations. His results apply 
to any formal system T that is (i) finitely describable, (ii) consistent, and 
(iii) strong enough to prove the basic facts about whole-number arith-
metic. 
Godel's First Incompleteness Theorem states that no such formal system 
T is capable of deciding every statement about natural numbers. That is, 
for any such T there will be a fairly simple sentence about natural num-
bers such that neither this sentence nor its negation ever appears as a 
theorem of T. We already have seen the idea of the proof, as follows. 
Let MT be the theorem-listing machine that prints out all the theo-
rems of T. Suppose G(T) is the sentence saying, " M T will never print 

ROBOTS AND SOULS 
this sentence." Now, as we saw in the discussion of Universal Truth Ma-
chines, G(T) must in fact be a sentence that is true, but that MT never 
prints out. 
The hard part is to show that G(T) can actually be put in the form of a 
sentence about natural numbers. Godel did this by a process called 
Godel-numbering, something like the coding process described in "The 
Library of Babel." When Godel is done, the self-referential sentence 
G(T) 
saying, "T cannot prove (x(T)," has been converted into a sen-
tence of pure mathematics stating that a certain polynomial equation 
has no solutions in the whole numbers. 
The upshot is that any finitely describable consistent theory T pro-
vides an incomplete description of the natural numbers; for given any 
such T there will be a sentence G(T) about natural numbers that T can 
neither prove nor disprove. 2 5 
Now for the Second Incompleteness Theorem. Recall that the condition, 
"T is consistent" means that for no sentence S does T prove both S and 
the negation of S. This condition can be abbreviated as Con(T), and by 
using Godel-numbering again we can convert Con(T) into a purely 
number-theoretic sentence, once again a sentence saying that a certain 
Diophantine equation has no solution. 
Insofar as the theory T embodies a correct description of the mathe-
matical universe, we might expect Con(T) to be a fairly obvious and 
readily deducible fact. But the Second Incompleteness Theorem tells us 
that if T is a theory satisfying conditions (i) through (iii), then T cannot 
prove Con(T). 
The proof works by going back and formalizing the proof of Godel's 
First Incompleteness Theorem inside the system T. Once we do this, 
we have proved "Con(T) implies G(T)". But now, since T cannot prove 
G(T), it must be that T cannot prove Con(T) either! 
We are now in a position to understand the first part of the quote 
from Godel that stands at the head of this paper. As mentioned above 
in "Conversations with Godel," Godel took the viewpoint that the natu-
ral numbers, the transfinite sets, and all other mathematical objects are 
immaterial, but actually existing, entities. By a process that Godel called 
mathematical intuition, humans come to learn certain facts about the 
universe of mathematics, and we also come to learn certain correct 
methods of reasoning from given facts to further facts. Mathematical in-
tuition is to be thought of as a process just as reliable as ordinary sense 
perception. 2 6 
Now, since the facts and methods of reasoning that we learn are cor-
179 

180 
INFINITY AND THE MIND 
rect descriptions of an actually existing mathematical universe, there is 
no possibility of ever producing a contradiction in mathematics. On the 
basis of true mathematical facts and correct mathematical reasoning, we 
will never find ourselves proving that, say, zero is not equal to zero. In 
other words, whenever we can produce a description K of our present 
body of mathematical knowledge, then we can be sure that Con(iC) is 
true. 
Now, say that we are able to come up with a finite description of a 
formal system 
that summarizes our entire present body of mathemati-
cal knowledge. On the one hand, by the considerations of the last para-
graph, we know that Con(K) 
is true. On the basis of our finite descrip-
tion of K we can even apply Godel numbering and come up with a 
specific true number-theoretic sentence Con(K). 
But, on the other hand, 
since K satisfies conditions (i) through (iii), the Second Incompleteness 
Theorem tells us that K cannot prove 
Con(K)\ 
It is for this reason that Godel says the human mind is incapable of 
mechanizing all of its mathematical intuitions. For to mechanize our in-
tuitions is to produce a finite description of a formal system K. But as 
soon as we see this finite description, our mathematical intuition shows 
us a fact, Con(iC), which the mechanized system does not prove. So it is 
not true that the mechanized system K proves all facts that we can per-
ceive through our mathematical intuition. 
A R T I F I C I A L 
I N T E L L I G E N C E 
V I A 
E V O L U T I O N A R Y 
P R O C E S S E S 
Let us now consider the second part of Godel's remark. He remarks 
that even though we cannot write the program for a theorem-proving 
machine that is equivalent to human mathematical intuition, it is possi-
ble that such a machine could exist and even be empirically discover-
able. 
Let us suppose that there is a machine R that is equivalent to human 
mathematical intuition. A first fact to be established is that we could 
never understand R's program. Let us make this point quite clear. 
(i) Being a theorem-proving machine, R is finitely describable. (ii) 
Since R is equivalent to our a priori consistent mathematical intuitions 
about the mathematical universe, R is consistent, (iii) For the same rea-
sons, R is of course strong enough to prove the basic facts of whole-
number arithmetic. Therefore, by the Second Incompleteness Theo-
rem, R cannot prove Con(/?). 

ROBOTS AND SOULS 
181 
Now, since R is in fact exactly equivalent to human mathematical in-
tuition, it must be that the humans can never prove Con(l?) either. This 
can only be because the humans can never understand the finite de-
scription of R well enough to prove that R is, in fact, equivalent to their 
own mathematical intuitions, which are known, by a sort of higher-level 
intuition, to be consistent. The grounds for our lack of understanding 
of R's program will, presumably, lie in the program's length and sub-
tlety. 
But how could such an utterly incomprehensible machine actually be 
produced, when we know that we could never understand it, let alone 
build it? 
The answer is evolution. Before his premature death in 1957, John 
von Neumann worked out the basic theory of self-reproducing auto-
mata.27 There is, in principle, no difficulty in designing robots that are 
capable of building factories to produce other robots. There is also no 
difficulty in arranging things so that the old robots can copy their own 
programs onto the processors of the new robots. It is simply a matter of 
assembling the hardware, and then replicating one's software onto the 
new hardware. 
A current I B M design goal is the construction of super-cooled com-
puters that will fit inside an 8 x 8 x 10 centimeter box, and have a 
256,000 word cache memory (workspace) and a 64 million word main 
memory. Each bit will be represented by a quantum of magnetic flux 
generated by a persistent current in a super-conducting Josephson junc-
tion. It is perhaps not too much to hope that the following generation of 
computers will be able to enter the 10 1 0 word range characteristic of 
human brains. 
Now imagine equipping a few thousand robots with these liquid-he-
lium-temperature silicon brains and setting them loose on the moon. 
Their prime directive is to mine, smelt, fabricate, and assemble the ma-
terials necessary to build more robots. They find the moon congenial: 
the low temperatures, the abundant solar energy, the lack of corrosive 
water vapor or gaseous oxygen, the abundance of silicon. They are fruit-
ful, and they multiply. 
Assuming that they are programmed to place high priority on self-re¬
production, there will be an inevitable competition for the raw materials 
and finished supplies with an attendant effect of natural selection. In ad-
dition, we can ensure that their programs undergo regular mutations. 
This could be done by placing somewhere in the base program an im-
perative never to copy oneself exactly. Each time a program was trans-

INFINITY AND THE MIND 
ferred, a substantial number of changes would be made in it, these 
changes to be determined randomly, let us say by counting cosmic rays, 
or simply by waving a powerful magnet over the new scion's head. 
Actually, a large part of evolutionary diversity arises not from actual 
mutating gene change, but rather from the shuffling of genes inherent 
in sexual reproduction. Presumably something along these lines could 
be arranged, with two (or more) robots "sexually reproducing" together 
by pooling their hardware resources and shuffling together various of 
their subprograms to produce a new program for the little scion. 
Rather than immediately sending billions of dollars worth of hard-
ware to the Moon, one would in practice begin a project of this nature 
in the laboratory. It would not even be initially necessary to deal with 
mobile hardwares capable of physical self-reproduction. Instead, as a 
first stage, I would envisage some thousands of A I programs competing 
(perhaps on the basis of scores on certain tests) for the right to be repli-
cated, with one copy always incorporating some randomly determined 
mutations. It seems possible that the process could be speeded up 
enough for significant evolutionary effects to emerge after only a few 
years run-time. 
Once the programs had gotten intricate enough to be incomprehensi-
ble, or understandable only with great difficulty, they could be packed 
into the factory-building robots and shipped off to the Moon. The eco-
nomic incentive for this is, of course, that we would like to be able to 
exploit the Moon's resources, and it is possible that robots would have a 
better cost to productivity ratio than human colonists.28 
As the robots on the Moon continue to evolve, there is always the 
danger that an unfortunate series of lethal mutations might force them 
into extinction. One would like perhaps to guard against lethal mutation 
by leaving certain core life-support sections of their programs inviola-
ble. A problem with this is that a mutation that is lethal now may not be 
lethal to future variants of the species, and vice versa. Lungs, for in-
stance, are very bad for a fish, but very good for an amphibian. 
But assuming all goes well, that God, perhaps, will guide the robots' 
evolution as He may have guided ours, then we could expect that there 
would eventually be a large and autonomous robot civilization on the 
Moon, and that some of the robots there might interest themselves in 
mathematics. It is at this point that there is a real possibility that there 
could arise a theorem-proving machine R (a robot 
mathematician) 
whose abilities are, in fact, equal to the resources of human mathemati-
cal intuition. 

ROBOTS AND SOULS 
There is no reason why R could not print out his program for us, per-
haps in some extremely compact and coded form (compare sperm 
cells!). But, as was discussed above, we would not be able to understand 
this program, nor would we be able to prove to our satisfaction that R 
was consistent. The interesting thing is that even though we cannot un-
derstand the program of JR, we are able to set up the physical conditions 
that lead to R's coming into existence. 
R O B O T 
C O N S C I O U S N E S S 
With the paradigm of the last subsection in mind, it now seems evi-
dent that there could be robots whose general behavior was the same as 
the behavior of human beings. These robots would be thinking beings 
who had evolved on a substrate of metal and silicon chips, just as we are 
thinking beings who have evolved on a substrate of amino acids and 
other carbon-based compounds. Would one be justified in saying that 
these highly evolved robots possess consciousness in the same sense 
that humans do? 
Upon lengthy introspection, most people will agree that the individ-
ual person consists of three distinct parts: (a) the hardware, the physical 
body and brain; (b) the software, the memories, skills, opinions, and be-
havior in general; (c) consciousness, the sense of self or personal iden-
tity, pure awareness, the spark of life, or even the soul. 
I would like to argue that any component of parts (a) or (b) can be 
replaced or altered without really affecting (c). My purpose in arguing 
this way will be to show that there is nothing about part (c) that is spe-
cific to the individual. 
Let us begin with the hardware. If one gets an artificial leg, kidney, or 
heart, one is still the same person. I maintain that it is possible to envis-
age a time when one could even get a new artificial brain. This could be 
done by, let us say, holographically recording the physical, electrical, 
and biochemical structure of the brain, and then transferring this struc-
ture isomorphically onto a large silicon-chip system or onto some ap-
propriate module of culture-grown tissue. Presumably one would expe-
rience such a transfer only as a brief period of unconsciousness after 
which one would go on thinking much the same as one had before. The 
whole process would be comparable to putting a given program into a 
new computer. 2 9 
Now for the software. It is an utterly familiar feeling to look back on 
the way one was behaving a year, a month, or an hour ago and to be 
183 

184 
INFINITY AND THE MIND 
amazed. One's personality is always changing, and one is always learning 
new things and forgetting old ones. There is also the extreme example 
of brainwashing. We are inclined to say that a person's essential identity 
is unchanged, even if he has been given a completely false set of memo-
ries. 
What then remains for part (c)? I contend that the sum total of the 
individual consciousness is the bare feeling of existence, expressed by 
the primal utterance, / am. Anything else is either hardware or software, 
and can be changed or dispensed with. Only the single thought / am ties 
me to the person I was twenty years ago. 
The curious thing is that you must express your individual conscious-
ness in the same words that I use: / am. I am me. I exist. The philosopher 
Hegel was very struck by this fact, and deemed it an instance of "the 
divine nature of language." 
What conclusion might one draw from the fact that your essential 
consciousness and my essential consciousness are expressed in the same 
words? Perhaps it is reasonable to suppose that there really is only one 
consciousness, that individual humans are simply disparate faces of what 
the classical mystic tradition calls the One. 
But we can go farther than this. The essence of consciousness is, 
really, nothing more than simple existence. / am. Why should the pos-
session of this sort of consciousness be denied to anything that does 
exist? Aquinas has said that God is pure existence unmodified. Is it not 
evident that there is a certain single something-call it God, or the One, 
or pure existence-that pervades the world as it is? Consider the Zen 
phrasing of this: The universal rain moistens all creatures.™ Or think of 
the world as a stained-glass window with light shining through every 
part. 
To exist is to have consciousness. The other things one might feel are 
necessary for consciousness are more or less complicated sorts of hard-
ware and software, patterns of mass and energy. But no pattern can be 
conscious until it exists, until it is brought into reality. Existence is, fi-
nally, the only thing required for consciousness. A rock is conscious. 
This piece of paper is conscious. And so, of course, is a robot, both be-
fore and after his behavior evolves to our level. 
Traditionally, those who have asserted the equivalence of men and 
(possible) machines have been positivists, mechanists, materialists. 
They put their viewpoint this way: "Men are no better than machines." 
But if one only changes the emphasis, then this equivalence can become 
the expression of a deep belief in the universality and reality of con-
sciousness: "Machines can be as good as men!" 

ROBOTS AND SOULS 
BEYOND MECHANISM? 
There seem to be three possible viewpoints regarding questions 
about human and robot souls. Mechanism: Neither men nor robots are 
anything but machines, and there is no reason why man-like machines 
cannot exist. Humanism: Men have souls and machines do not, there-
fore no robot can be quite like a man. Mysticism: Everything, whether 
man or machine, participates in the Absolute, therefore it should be pos-
sible for man-like machines to exist. Perhaps "mysticism" is not really a 
good name for this last view, but let it stand. 
In the last section I argued for the third viewpoint, under which 
"having a soul" is a concept automatically satisfied by anything that 
exists. But, since this view leads to a conclusion identical to that of 
mechanism, the reader may feel that I have ducked the real issue. One 
feels oneself to be "more than just a machine." Is there any possible 
justification for this belief short of recourse to an all-pervading Abso-
lute? 
In two classic papers, Alan M . Turing developed a powerful argu-
ment for mechanism: All that we can know about another person's 
mind is based on observing his behavior (i.e., by conversing with him, 
reading his writings, and so on); and there seems to be, in principle, no 
reason why there could not be a machine whose "conversation" is just 
like a person's.31 
Now, it might be objected that such an argument does not account 
for private mental phenomena, such as mental images, purposes, emo-
tions, and the like. But a determined mechanist can say that what we call 
a mental image is merely a model or simulation such as computers often 
use, that a purpose is simply an assignment of utility values to certain 
internal states, and that emotions are just ways of assigning values to 
external phenomena as well. 
An even stronger argument for the mechanist position can be formu-
lated by asserting that: 1) The activities of the mind are isomorphic to 
certain electro-chemical processes in the brain; and 2) The brain func-
tions basically like a digital computer. 3 2 
These assertions can be restated: 1) There is no mind apart from mat-
ter; and 2) The brain is finite. The idea is that, given 1) and 2), we can be 
sure that the operation of the mind is a finite law-like process; and any 
such process can, in fact, be modelled by a large enough digital com-
puter. 
Assumption 1 is often questioned by those who believe in telepathy 
and other forms of ESP. These investigators have pointed out various 
185 

186 
INFINITY AND THE MIND 
unusual occurrences or perceptions that do not seem to fit in with the 
idea that the mind is simply a phenomenon taking place in the limited 
confines of the skull. I really do not know what to make of the claims 
made for ESP. Like any other person, I have experienced my share of 
what Jung calls synchronicities: meaningful concidences, true premoni-
tions, and lucky guesses.33 But the desire for results is so strong, and the 
opportunities for deception so great, that the most extreme caution is 
necessary. 
One of the things most lacking in ESP research is any reasonable the-
ory of how the mind could, in fact, go beyond the confines of the 
brain. 3 4 As I suggested at the end of Chapter 2, it would be nice if Can-
tor's two-substance theory were true, for then we could perhaps have 
the mind or "astral body" made up of some higher-level substance quite 
different from matter. But there is no evidence for such a theory—it is 
still only an idea for an idea. 
A recent development in physics that could lead to some interesting 
developments is the experimental disproof of the Bell Inequality. 3 5 
What the experiments indicate is that there is a very real sense in which 
particles that have interacted continue to affect each other long after 
the interaction has taken place . . . and in an instantaneous way! If this 
is indeed true, then the universe would of necessity behave like a single 
organic whole, leading to the possibility of choosing to identify one's 
mind with the cosmos rather than with some individual brain. But, as I 
pointed out at the end of the last section, there is no reason why such a 
form of higher consciousness would not be open to robots as well. Of 
course, then robots would not be "machines" in the narrow, finitistic 
sense intended by the mechanists. 
Going back to the argument for mechanism, what about assumption 
2? As was discussed in the section "Infinities in the Small," it is certainly 
possible that matter is infinitely divisible. If this were indeed true, then 
any material object, such as a human brain, would in fact be infinitely 
complex. Perhaps we really do think infinite thoughts, and it is simply 
an accidental property of this limited scale level that our descriptions of 
them come out finite. Sometimes I actually am able to believe this for a 
few minutes, keeping in mind Cantor's remark that "the infinite even 
inhabits our minds." 3 6 
"I can't believe that!" said Alice. 
"Can't you?" the Queen said in a pitying tone. "Try again: draw a long 
breath, and shut your eyes." 
Alice laughed. "There's no use trying." she said: "one can't believe im-
possible things." 

ROBOTS AND SOULS 
"I daresay you haven't had much practice," said the Queen. "When I was 
your age, I always did it for half-an-hour a day. Why sometimes I've 
believed as many as six impossible things before breakfast."37 
Perhaps the mechanists are right. But it is certainly worthwhile to 
keep an open mind, even if this means occasionally seeing how it feels 
to believe something that is "impossible." 
PUZZLES AND PARADOXES 
(Answers, p.(301) 
1. Consider the sentence S: 
"THIS 
SENTENCE 
C A N N E V E R 
BE 
PROVED." Show that if S is meaningful, then S is not provable, and that 
therefore you can see that S must be true. But this constitutes a "proof" of 
S. How can the paradox be resolved?38 
2. Consider the following argument for the unreality of death: a) A person's 
mind and personality is equivalent to his software, that is, to the program-
ming of his brain; b) Any software structure can be coded up by some large 
set of natural numbers; c) Every set of numbers exists eternal^ as a mathe-
matical abstraction independent of the physical universe; d) Therefore each 
individual's personality is immortal. Why is it that this type of immortality 
does not seem like enough? 
3. Consider this somewhat stronger argument for the immortality of artists: a) 
In a great work of art, an artist codes up a large part of his software, his 
personal feelings about life; b) When one deeply immerses oneself in a 
work of art, one takes on, for a few moments, the actual software coded up 
by that work; c) Therefore every time one truly appreciates a work of art, 
one is, for the moment, isomorphic to the artist, and the artist is thus 
(briefly) reincarnated over and over. If there were, a hundred years from 
now, someone exactly like you, would it make a difference to you? Would 
this be any different from being frozen for a hundred years and then resus-
citated? 
4. Consider the following fanciful example of self-reproduction (due to Doug 
Hofstadter). "Imagine that there is a nickelodeon in the local bar that, if 
you press buttons 11-U, will play a song whose lyrics go this way: Put an-
other nickel in, in the nickelodeon, I All I want is 11-U, and music, music, music." 
Assuming that everything goes well, some state of some system will occur 
over and over here. Specify the state and the complete system. 
5. There is a word game sometimes called "word golf" that embodies a simple 
analogy of a formal system. One starts with a given word (say, LOVE) that 
serves as the initial "axiom." The "rule of inference" is that at each step one 
can change one letter of the word in hand, provided the change produces a 
187 

188 
INFINITY AND THE MIND 
new English word. The "theorems" following from a given "axiom" word 
are those words that can be reached by a series of transformations accord-
ing to the rule of inference. Thus H A T E is a theorem, or consequence, of 
LOVE. The "proof " of this is the sequence LOVE, ROVE, R A V E , H A V E , 
H A T E . The reason it is called "word golf" is that one tries to find "proofs" 
with the shortest possible number of steps. If you allow the somewhat ob-
scure word LAVE, then the derivation above can be shortened by a step to 
L O V E , LAVE, LATE, H A T E . How many steps do you need to turn C O L D 
into WARM, BEER into WINE, FISH into FOWL? 
6. In this chapter we discussed a U T M (Universal Truth Machine) that would 
print out all true statements. In the section "What is Truth," a sort of TSM 
(Truth Sorting Machine) was discussed. The TSM was to look at any book 
and decide, after a longer or shorter interval of time, whether or not the 
book was true. We have proved that neither a U T M nor a TSM can 
exist. BUT, ignoring this fact for now, show that, with a few modifications, 
any U T M could be converted into a TSM, and any given TSM could be 
converted into a UTM. 
7. Present day computers are, both with respect to hardware and with respect 
to software, far superior to the computers of thirty years ago. Show that this 
improvement can be viewed as a sort of robot evolution, and point out what 
processes have played the roles of reproduction, selection, and mutation. 
8. The passage from Godel quoted at the beginning of "Towards Robot Con-
sciousness" goes on to make a further point: "Either the human mind sur-
passes all machines (to be more precise, it can decide more number-theo-
retical questions than any machine) or else there exist number-theoretical 
questions undecidable for the human mind." 4 0 Explain how this is really 
just a restatement of the result that no machine can answer all number-the-
oretical questions. 

