Sergio Torres-Martínez*
Metaphors are embodied otherwise they
would not be metaphors
https://doi.org/10.1515/lingvan-2019-0083
Received November 24, 2019; accepted August 4, 2021; published online June 27, 2022
Abstract: In an interesting paper, Casasanto, Daniel & Tom Gijssels. 2015. What makes a metaphor an
embodied metaphor? Linguistics Vanguard 1(1). 327–337 introduce a skeptical view of recent studies into the
embodied character of metaphorical source domains. According to the authors, there cannot be conclusive
evidence on the matter thus far, since, for a metaphor to be embodied, speciﬁc simulations must be modality-
speciﬁc and not simply restricted to modality-speciﬁc activity brain areas. In line with this, I argue that
metaphors reﬂect a connection between perception, memory, and consciousness (embodied extended
mind). The Embodied Extended Mind Theory (EEMT) introduced in this paper is indebted to Active Inference
(AIF), a process theory for the comprehension of intelligent agency. EEMT defends the idea that language
bears traces of nonlinguistic, bodily acquired information that reﬂects biological processes of energy ex-
change and conservation. Therefore, it is assumed that what makes a metaphor embodied is not only the
relation between a source domain and a target domain in ad hoc regions in the brain, but the alignment of
multiple independent systems during the (re)construction of events. Central to this is the idea that humans
use stored perceptual maps, the combination of which permits us to manipulate concepts as part of complex
event partitioning.
Keywords: active inference; conceptual metaphor; embodied extended mind theory; embodiment; modal-
amodal representation
1 Introduction: on embodiment and metaphor
The general aim of this paper is to develop an embodied theory of mind for the comprehension of linguistic
phenomena through addressing the complexities of metaphors. One thing that needs to be clarified at the
outset is what embodiment means for those studying the phenomenon of metaphor. Suffice it at present to say
that the most relevant distinction to be made is between embodied (e.g. Gibson 1966, 1979) and computational
(e.g. Fodor 1981, 1983) theories of mind. For Gibson, representation is not a symbolic reconstruction of reality
occurring in the brain, since perception is direct (there is no need to add mental information to sensations),
directed to action, and, hence, any necessary information guiding adaptive behavior is already present in the
environment. One can certainly grant that objects, entities, and events possess speciﬁc affordances that guide
higher-order cognition.1 For example, to run out of wiggle room expresses a negative-affordance relation
whereby an agent cannot move freely as a result of a lack of sufﬁcient space (the space being the negative
affordance), which is translated metaphorically as the impossibility to undo something or change what you
have said. However, a positive affordance can also have a negative connotation, as in the German expression
auf seinem hohen Ross sitzen ‘to sit on one’s tall horse’; the horse is a positive affordance but nonetheless the
expression means that someone is haughty. It might thus be argued that a model of the world is reenacted
*Corresponding author: Sergio Torres-Martínez, Escuela de Idiomas, Universidad de Antioquia, Medellin, Antioquia, Colombia,
E-mail: surtr_2000@yahoo.es. https://orcid.org/0000-0002-8823-1676
1 In this paper, representation is deﬁned as the combination of affordance and reenactment as a means to create useable pictures of
the world. This is possible thanks to the constant updating of exogenous-endogenous states (through conditional independence) in
open biological systems.
Linguistics Vanguard 2022; 8(1): 185–196

every time speakers make a speciﬁc linguistic selection.2 In the words of Gibbs (2005: 207), “for aspects of
higher-order cognition, embodied activity shapes parts of on-line communication and the off-line knowledge
that is accessed during linguistic processing”. This embodied view was later complemented with the idea of
situatedness (Barwise and Perry 1981) according to which thinking is only possible in a speciﬁc location in time
and space. So, there is, I think, a deeper way of putting these points, and it is one that can be summarized in
three basic assumptions supporting the idea of an embodied extended mind, namely that the environment is
part of our minds in terms of what is relevant for agents (they are embedded therein); that the body is not
simply a capsule for an autonomous perceptual system (it is extended thereto); on any account, then, the mind
is predictive in ways that go beyond the basic survival needs of living organisms (it is tuned thereto).
1.1 Metaphor: embodied or disembodied?
Although many definitions and approaches have been proposed (e.g. Black 1954; Gibbs 2008; Isenberg 1963;
Kirby 1997; Kövecses 2005, 2010; Lakoff and Johnson 1980, 1999; Ortony 1993; Ricœur 1975; Semino 2016),
there is no consensus (or even a structured discussion) about the type of embodiment activated during
metaphor construction. In particular, Lakoff and Johnson’s Conceptual Metaphor Theory (1980, 1999)
endorses an amodal (disembodied) baseline, “a metaphor in thought” (Gibbs 2017: 3), whereby the source of
concepts is determined by representations created in the brain: “Thought is physical. Ideas and the concepts
that make them up are physically ‘computed’ by brain structures” (Lakoff 2008: 18). On this view, conceptual
knowledge is not considered as innately given, but learned (see Jamrozik et al. 2016; Kövecses 2002, 2005,
2010). Moreover, “root or conceptual metaphors [are said to] motivate our understanding and use of language
in general” (Katz 1998: 4). A main consequence of this characterization is that abstract concepts are deemed to
be “derived” from more concrete ones (hence, “death” can be conceptualized in terms of “departure” [source
domain]). As a result, the role of the body is reduced to a mechanical simulation of experience with the world
that can be further computed in the brain through dedicated neural circuitries (Gallese and Lakoff 2005; Lakoff
2008, 2014). Along the same lines, Dynamical Systems Theory (see Gibbs 2016) states that metaphor, and
ﬁgurative language in general, emerges “as a context-sensitive dynamical system that incorporates multiple
forces that are closely coupled” (Gibbs and Colston 2012: 340). In other words, metaphor “is as much a part of
ordinary thought as it is a special feature of language” (Gibbs 2017: 3). In sum, Gibbs’s plea is “for a fair reading
of the literature [on Conceptual Metaphor Theory] intended as a cautionary warning to those who glibly
dismiss the theory in its entirety” (Gibbs 2017: 263).
Here I want to consider a different way to affirm the distinctiveness of metaphors as doors to speakers’
embodied (radically modal) linguistic knowledge. By this criterion, some of the ideas developed in Casasanto
and Gijssels’s (2015) paper will be revisited in the belief that this research brings to the fore one current tension
in neuroscience and the philosophy of mind, namely the deﬁnition of the extent to which concept formation is
either modal (embodied) or amodal (disembodied).3 Put more concretely, current cognitive (Lakofﬁan)
research into metaphor usually assumes that “observing modality-speciﬁc neural activity is the only way to
distinguish embodied simulations from disembodied (or non-embodied) alternatives according to which
thinking happens entirely in modality-nonspeciﬁc areas of the brain” (Casasanto and Gijssels 2015: 328). More
precisely, Casasanto and Gijssels’s clever argument places pressure on the design of experiments that do not
convincingly
prove
“whether
modality-nonspeciﬁc
areas
are
supporting
multimodal
or
amodal
2 However, as I have stated elsewhere, “the fact that something stands in front of me, beside me, behind me is always a matter of
being able to perceive the position of an object in relation to my location, and not the naming of that position” (Torres-Martínez
2021a: 18).
3 Whereby concepts are purely amodal and justify themselves as objects isolated from their referents (only ﬁxed categories
correspond to some concepts; see e.g. Lupyan and Winter 2018).
186
Torres-Martínez

representations” (Casasanto and Gijssels 2015: 334). The relevance of the underlying question to linguistics is
evident, since determining the ontology guiding the type of experiments required to understand the embodied
character of language would shed light on the nature of the human mind. Here I want to launch one expedition
into an ontology that may serve as a basis for the design of experiments more attuned to the needs of a truly
embodied cognitive exploration of metaphor. Fittingly, the present proposal defends the innateness of some
conceptual content, which facilitates the integration of perception and higher-order thinking. Thus, intrinsic
properties of objects in the world need to be incorporated into the construction of concepts. For example, a
metaphor consisting of the concept X (heaviness) can be formally represented as the combination of a
P(perception)1 + C(context)2 associated with distributed brain networks:
Concept = [X →(P + C)]
The main point of this formula is to suggest that constant energy exchange between an organism and the world
creates a distinct, continuously updating boundary, a Markov blanket (Friston 2010; Pearl 1988).4 Conditional
independence from an environment thus explains why embodied cognitive processes, rather than complex
source-target domain relations, can be used to capture the intricacies of metaphors in a more straightforward
manner. However, conditional independence from an environment means here that an organism is simulta-
neously apart from and part of the world, which illustrates a signal feature of the linguistic system, namely the
disambiguation of uncertain states. This is captured by the uncertainty-reduction formula below (see also
Torres-Martínez 2021b):
(Asl + Bsn) = P(L →l+
s−)
MB
where A (salience of an exogenous/endogenous signal) becomes associated with B (salience of the resulting
sign [psychological relevance]), leading to P (the associative strength of a signal for the reconstruction of an
event). According to this formula, language (L) works as a tool for the reduction of uncertain states. In other
words, the consumption of free energy (increasing reduction of unknown information) is accomplished
through a mechanism of inequality that which mandates the gathering of reliable evidence. As a result, when
l+, that is, a nonconﬂicting, least-effort combination of constructions (arranged by constructional attachment
patterns, see Section 1.2) reaches a maximum coherence, an s−state can be attained.
This is evident in the case of, for example, mixed metaphors. In the example below (taken from Semino
2016: 204) a conﬂicting domain represented by the verb to defuse, usually associated with bomb disposal, is
used along with the bizarre scene of an elephant standing in a room:
But there’s no getting around the fact that Chappelle’s sudden disappearance was pretty much bat-@#$% crazy, and though
Murphy and Rawlings do their best to defuse the big elephant in the room (there’s a mixed metaphor for you), I never quite
escaped
the
feeling
that
this
was
just
weird,
and
perhaps
unnecessary
(http://www.dvdverdict.com/reviews/
chappellesshowlost.php).
Using the embodied concept formula, we obtain:
Concept (a type of person) = [Elephant →P(big −heavy threat) + C(room)]
The point to notice is that, the bomb-disposal source domain and the confined-big-animal source domain are
fused as a single event involving an agent whose presence must be dealt with by means of extraordinary
resources (by other agents). On this account, the addition of conceptual structure “in thought” is replaced by a
reading by which world knowledge with force (to deal with the problem), barrier (the person whose presence is
a problem), enclosure (the locus of the problem, that is, the room) and path (the means to solve the problem) is
summoned.
4 In this paper, a Markov blanket is not an identiﬁable boundary, but refers to the dynamic inﬂuence (energy exchange momentum)
of an agent on an environment, whereby the system and the world can be distinguished from each other (the system does not
possess a distinct boundary itself).
Metaphors are embodied otherwise they would not be metaphors
187

To progress beyond this point, a theory is needed that explains embodiment in a way that does not
radically locate metaphor construction in specific regions in the brain. This is what I term Embodied Extended
Mind Theory (EEMT). EEMT is inspired by Active Inference (AIF, also known as Intelligent Agency; see Linson
et al. 2018 for a review), a processing principle whereby open biological systems are deﬁned in terms of their
interactions with the physical world (see Da Costa et al. 2021; Kiverstein and Sims 2021). These interactions are
regulated by an action/perception loop whereby free-energy states (uncertain states) are reduced in order to
increase the organism’s chances to survive (see Friston 2009, 2010, 2012, 2013, 2019; Friston et al. 2017).
One important contribution of AIF is the idea that, in order to reduce entropy (that is, disorder leading to
the collapse of a system), living organisms need to apply statistical predictions to attune the niche to their own
ends. For our purposes, however, a fundamental thesis must be inserted at this point. Thus, instead of viewing
humans as biological agents determined a priory by a species-specific, phylogenetically shaped architecture,
the view of intelligent agents endorsed herein views uncertainty as a hallmark of action, rather than an
obstacle thereto. In this sense, entropy is understood not as a critical point causing dissipative effects of
random fluctuations, but a thermodynamic state in which energy dispersion (increasing uncertainty) is not
only sought after by humans, but, essentially, a condition for the construction of complex relations within and
across interacting systems. Decision-making is thus guided by the need to accommodate some actions to a sort
of “preferred future” in line with our expectations and beliefs. In this view, linguistic knowledge is constructed
as an affordance-reenactment continuity, whereby signal-sign relations create embodied representations
through a mechanism of memory integration. So, the coupling of affordance and reenactment (perception-in-
action) is accomplished through an Embodied Working Memory (EWM, not to be confused with the notion
originally introduced by Miller et al. 1960). The renewed model of working memory introduced in this paper is
comprised of three systems: an embodied reception system (ERS, for the identiﬁcation of embodied signaling),
a multi-signal squashing system (MSS, for the integration of attention and memory), and a reenactment loop
(RL, for the assignation of perceptual content to phonological strings; see Figure 1).
Figure 1: The model of embodied working memory. As
shown, the embodied reception system (ERS) captures
a noisy bulk of bodily acquired signals that are
organized in the multi-signal squashing system (MSS).
The MSS deploys memory and attention in order to
retrieve emerging reenactment patterns in the reen-
actment loop (RL). A set of modulators (M) processes
precognized memory traces which can be further con-
ventionalized as recognizable constructional attach-
ment patterns in the Semantic Long-Term Memory
(Illustration by the author).
188
Torres-Martínez

1.2 EEMT and the origins of language
Central to EEMT is the idea that the human cognitive system is the result of the integration of bodily acquired
information, the cognitive processing thereof, and the reaffirmation of a bodily self in a context of usage.
However, a relevant distinction to be made here is that only humans can be considered as agents possessing
intentionality as a result of a distinct state of consciousness.5
As we see in example 1, the prediction made by the agent conceptualizer is defined by the latter’s particular
point of view which defines the nature of an upcoming event:
(1)
Vi er no i gong med å sjå gjennom dei innsendte bidraga.
‘We are now in the process of reviewing the submitted contributions.’
(nno-no_web_2017_300K-sentences)6
As a result, the process of conceptualization does not consist in a selection of objects located in the brain, but
the continuous reconnection of the self with the phenomenal substance of objects, entities, and events. That, in
outline, is the argument I propose. I now want to substantiate this diagnosis by pointing out that, event
partition results from the hybridization of agentic models of action that are activated in order to deal with
uncertainty (governed by the uncertainty-reduction formula introduced previously). Therefore, we are likely to
make headway by taking on the thesis that categories are formed as a result of the combination of perception,
beliefs, and the ways we connect with the world and other organisms. As we will see further below, the essence
of natural kinds (concepts associated with specific categories in the world) is not to be found in their DNA, nor
is it a result of particular atomic or chemical structures: what makes natural kinds what they are is their
Figure 2: The body-brain interface for language. The
figure depicts the process of conceptualization of
sensorimotor information and its further reconstruction
in the form of constructional attachment patterns
(CAPs). Beginning in the panel to the left, we see that a
Markov blanket is created by the interplay of sensory
(external) and active (internal) states. Sensorimotor
information is further processed in the brain where
predictions about the state of the world are made in a
process termed allostasis. Nonetheless, allostatic
processing does not create additional information
regarding the nature of perceptual content, but in-
tegrates information provided by afferent-efferent
feedback loops as part of concepts. In this sense,
visceral and sensory prediction errors converge to
create different types of concepts (prototypes, exem-
plars, or theories). Finally, the surprise reduction
formula (see Section 1.1) brings to the fore the need of
speakers to reduce uncertainty and ambiguity through
the selection of speciﬁc CAPs (on the right of the
diagram) (Illustration by the author).
5 I deﬁne consciousness as “knowledge about the existence of an outer reality in relation to a constructed model of the self in the
world”.
6 Taken from the Leipzig Corpora Collection (2021).
Metaphors are embodied otherwise they would not be metaphors
189

continuous character in relation to other kinds, and not their being things-in-themselves. Further, what is
intrinsic about things and phenomena is their being out there and their alignment with our perceptual
apparatus. Thus, it is argued that concepts such as “dog” are not simply constructed relationally (in terms of
causes coming from within), that is, on the basis of speciﬁc causal links for the activation of prototypes (a
reduced set of idealized tendencies) or exemplars (an extended set of stored examples). Essences are thus not
totally subjective. They point to an internal relation between the mind of a conceptualizer-as-biological-
system, the categorization of the natural kind, and some environmental constraints shaping the referent.
For example, in the sentence the birds chirp in the morning, the prototype “bird” (created by our experience
with some bird-essences including size, form, and behavior) becomes associated with a type of action
(“chirping”, rather than, say, “bleating”), thereby creating a nonconﬂicting agent-action combination during
an event which is captured in the formula below, where P stands for an unspeciﬁed essence assigned to a
verb + spatiotemporal relation to create an event:
[P(essencen) →(Verb + Space −Time Frame)]EVENT
This process is captured by the mechanism of it needsbodily system integration (BSI). The BSI is crucial for the
construction of bodily awareness through signals, since it shapes the perception and further conceptualization
of the world. As we will see, BSI-driven constructional attachment patterns (CAPs; that is, uncertainty-driven
patterns of linguistic sign combination) bear traces of afferent (sensory)-efferent (neural) feedback loops
connecting the body and the brain, thereby resulting in the consolidation of an image of the self and others
(bodily self; see Noel et al. 2015). The process is further illustrated in Figure 2.
This process is governed by two reenactment principles:
(1) Exteroceptive signals (exogenous) motivate motor reenactment in motional events (including lexical
priming).
(2) Interoceptive (endogenous) signals motivate interoceptive reenactment (balance and self-stabilization are
often integrated with emotionally arousing stimuli) in non-motional events.
Figure 3: Bayesian inference scheme leading to the linguistic reconstruction of multisensory channels (Illustration by the author;
see also Video 1).
190
Torres-Martínez

As might be recalled, what I have in mind by “reenacting” is, as suggested in Section 1, a phenomenal
experience is not necessarily generated on the basis of hierarchies (based on higher levels only whose com-
plexities increases as an agent is exposed to new experiences; see Marvan and Havlík 2020). This means that
humans are more than predictive machines conditioned a priory by a species-speciﬁc phylogenetically shaped
architecture.7
In this context, language is deemed to encode both bodily acquired, prior-posterior information on the
nature of an event (a happening), the agent’s identity, and the type of action carried out, and so on.8 A prior is a
belief based on probability, a hypothesis that needs to be adapted to a posterior or contingent behavior.
However, the present reading favors the view that probability is the measure of our experience with the world
in terms of object-entity affordance recognition, and not a generated representation in the brain. According to
this alternative Bayesian reading, a set of top-down expectations are priors (predictions) that update objective
characteristics of objects in the world on the basis of affordance recognition (see Figure 3). In biological terms,
these predictions are confronted with incoming signals (posteriors) acquired by receptors associated with
speciﬁc modalities, namely exteroception (that is, experiencing something from a peripersonal compass),
proprioception (i.e. aligning bodily systems to interact with objects and entities), and interoception (that is,
being aware of inner-body dynamics as a result of such interactions with the world). As discussed in Section
1.1, multisensory integration occurs at the interface of brain and body as a mechanism for the construction of a
sense of selfhood. As shown in Figure 3, all decisions made by an agent rest on a brain-body interface in which
neural processes and speciﬁc modalities (e.g. motor, visual, olfactory, proprioceptive, interoceptive, etc.)
integrate. In order to construct a representation, agents need to combine hypothetical information regarding
the behavior of, for example, dilophosauruses, with real-life reference frames involving knowledge of modern-
day reptile behavior or some emotional content associated with dinosaurs in general. This results in the joint
reconstruction of reality through the brain-body interface. For instance, modern-day conceptualizers familiar
with ﬁlms like Jurassic Park, in which these predators are depicted as small, venomous carnivores equipped
with a retractable frill, would use these priors to create a representation of the animal. A mismatch between
Figure 4: The construction of language through signal-CAP mappings (Illustration by the author).
7 And yet, belief updating is not always “rational” (information-driven). Correlatively, agent adverse selection “follows from the
subjective nature of decision making that is an inherent characteristic of changing open systems” (Annila and Salthe 2009: 627), and
is at the heart of risk-taking (a form of uncertainty), rather than ambiguity, risk being perceived as less aversive than ambiguity (see
Becker and Brownson 1964; Camerer and Weber 1992). These heuristics facilitate the emergence of orderly structures that facilitate
the construction of more efﬁcient mechanisms of energy consumption (see Annila and Salthe 2010).
8 This includes not only language processing, but also cue-driven multimodal prediction processes (see Zhang et al. 2021).
Metaphors are embodied otherwise they would not be metaphors
191

these priors and the incoming sensory prediction errors about the form of a dilophosaurus may result in a new
set of more correct guesses. These create mental schemas that may yield a set of hypotheses that include senses
of movement, trajectory, force, barrier, and so on, which can be encoded in utterances such as Dilophosauruses
were middle-sized, nonvenomous solitary hunters. Finally, CAPs (see also Torres-Martínez 2015, 2016, 2017,
2018a, 2018b, 2019, 2021a, 2021b, 2022b, 2022c), that is, hypothesis-driven semiotic relations among
constructions, make possible the perceptually driven type of reality reconstruction based on Bayesian
inference.
1.3 From perception to concepts
The linguistic coupling of perception and conceptualization (Figure 4) is immediately explicable on the
assumption that bodily acquired information (involving spatial, kinetic, or balance-oriented sensory infor-
mation) is used to distribute information regarding interoceptive states (I), proprioceptive, balance-oriented
signaling (P), and exteroceptive feed-forward mappings (E). We also see that embodied cognitive processes are
responsible for the iconic (imagistic)-indexical reconstruction of events by an agent conceptualizer (A). This
semiotic information is crucial for the entrenchment of form-function symbolic relations in the form of
entrenched constructions in the linguistic system (LS).
For example, CAPs are part of broader cognitive processes used to evaluate, predict, or hypothesize events
involving someone else’s decisions, attitudes, beliefs, and behavior (e.g. action recognition; see Ferstl et al.
2017), how speciﬁc mental simulations are reﬂected in language (e.g. speed simulations [see Speed and
Vigliocco 2014] or abstract action sentence processing [e.g. Schaller et al. 2016]), or spatial perspective taking
(e.g. Kessler and Thompson 2014).
2 To have a “T-Rex attitude”?
We are then in possession of everything we need to apply the above analysis to metaphorical language
encoding senses such as spatial navigation, for example, by means of spatial projective terms (e.g. left, right,
behind, above, etc.). As we can see in Figure 5, the type of signs associated with these terms are indexical, as
shown in the following glosses:
(1) To reconstruct metaphorically an event involving the spatial category of occlusion: The tree is behind the
T-Rex.
(2) To report an event of placement involving the spatial category of support: The cone is in front of the
dilophosaurus (some pointing may be involved).
Figure 5: Deictic disambiguation of spatial cognition
(Illustration by the author; see also Video 2).
192
Torres-Martínez

(3) To communicate to someone else the position of an object in the space. This entails a type of perspective
alignment, that is, “producing or comprehending a spatial description [that] requires an individual to
adopt a perspective on a scene” (Watson et al. 2009: 13): The ball is next to the T-Rex.
Now, taken that way, it may seem reasonable to claim that perspective selection requires the development of
specific systems of reference for spatial navigation through a series of spatial templates encoding navigational
information.
2.1 Embodied source-domain representations need different experimental designs
We may conclude that the mapping of spatial information in language provides important elements for the
reconstruction of events through concepts. For instance, to have “a T-Rex attitude” (meaning to have a bad
attitude or be a bully) summons emotions that are not produced by local source-target domain relations in the
brain, but “entail [an] exchange of information among members in a social group that depends on the presence
of an expressive body and its relation to objects and other expressive bodies” (Wachsmuth et al. 2008: 3). The
point to be made is that the construction of metaphors requires the existence of a sense of bodily ownership.
As shown by several studies in body ownership and self-identiﬁcation (Ehrsson 2007; Noel et al. 2015), the
convergence of bodily signals is crucial for the development of bodily awareness. As shown in Section 1.1, in
addition to a model of the environment, agentic processes propel the emergence of expanded surprising states,
whereby prediction can be tested beyond the experiential boundary of the system. Accordingly, patterns of
mental alignment encoded in language help agents to coordinate actions in order to create an energy land-
scape in which their world knowledge converges. An agent wanting to communicate with others is, at the same
time required to deﬁne himself or herself both as a distinct biological entity and a participant affecting their
environment through speciﬁc actions. Stated otherwise, the evolution of human societies follows patterns of
energy exchange deﬁned by least action. Consciousness is thus constructed upon patterns of interaction
associated with agentive perception (involving the detection and awareness of one’s bodily state) that can be
projected onto the environment and other entities with minimal-cost functions and representations. Therefore,
the T-Rex example shows that such metaphors are embodied because they create a series of representations in
the mind that combine our scarce experience with giant carnivore theropods with our general experience with
force, barrier, and balance that allows us to consume free energy most effectively (thereby maximizing
Bayesian model evidence, that is, uncertainty reduction). Differently put: an embodied processing of meta-
phors increases energy conservation (and, hence, least effort), while the positing of source-target domains
increases randomness (and, hence, entropy, that is, variational free energy). This is a paradox, of course, since
the idea of transposing a set of “embodied” general representations (source domain) to explain a particular one
(a target domain) seems to point in the opposite direction, namely the reduction of randomness. And yet, as
Casasanto and Gijssels aptly note, there is a gap between this formulation and actual evidence.
Expectedly, what vision, touch, and audition modalities tell us about an object or its position in the space
is that someone (force) has placed that object there (an end location), or that the object is a barrier,
an undergoer, a container, a path, an enclosure, and so on, all of which are nothing but embodied referential
frames. There is no shortage of such embodied language in English: a long way to go (involving force-barrier
relations, not only distance), a hard time (involving barrier, not simply touch), a rocky year (involving path,
barrier, not only touch), a steep learning curve (entailing barrier, path, direction, not only vision), and so on.
3 Conclusion
As the foregoing has hopefully conveyed, the idea that embodied metaphors are acquired and stored in specific
areas in the brain, as suggested by Lakoff and Johnson, still waits for sound empirical validation (see also
Madsen 2016). As I have shown, the embodied computational model of the conceptual metaphor paradigm is
Metaphors are embodied otherwise they would not be metaphors
193

reductionist in terms of the deﬁnition of the extent to which language and mind are connected. EEMT,
as discussed in this paper, might lead us to expect two things: First, that the design of research scenarios able
to test how concepts are formed needs to include a solid deﬁnition of the role of perception in concept
formation (see also Torres-Martínez 2022a, forthcoming). Second, metaphor researchers need to explore how
the brain and the body become integrated to create subjective experience. Since the mind is a combination of
perception, memory and consciousness (Perlovsky and Sakai 2014), we need to deﬁne the place of language
in this continuity. It is a help here to remember that the role of language is to create a link between the
organism’s need to negotiate uncertainty and maintain homeostatic (inner-body) integrity and our intended,
goal-oriented action on the world. On this reading, the body is a “constitutive or transcendental principle,
precisely because it is involved in the very possibility of experience” (Gallagher and Zahavi 2008: 135). One
thing that justiﬁably fuels this view is the evidence that an active participation of nonlinguistic cognition
(in the form of a parallel route for language production) exists given “the contribution of several brain regions
organized into a large-scale network via long-distance association pathways” (Turken and Dronkers 2011: 1).
One should ﬁnally notice that, the idea that the same type of metaphors surface in all languages in different
ways is untenable (cf. Gandolfo 2019: 6). It falls to future research to answer the riddle of how metaphors
become embodied as part of an extended mind phenomenon.
Acknowledgments: I am grateful to an anonymous reviewer for insightful comments on earlier versions of this
paper. I also want to thank Alice Gaby for valuable commentaries on the revised versions. My thanks also go
to Tim Curnow for his ﬁne editing of the manuscript. All remaining errors are mine.
References
Annila, Arto & Stanley Salthe. 2009. Economies evolve by energy dispersal. Entropy 11. 606–633.
Annila, Arto & Stanley Salthe. 2010. Cultural naturalism. Entropy 12. 1325–1343.
Barwise, Jon & John Perry. 1981. Situations and attitudes. Journal of Philosophy 77. 668–691.
Becker, Selwyn W. & Fred O. Brownson. 1964. What price ambiguity? Or the role, of ambiguity in decision-making. Journal of
Political Economy 72(1). 62–73.
Black, Max. 1954. Metaphor. Proceeding of the Aristotelian Society 55. 273–294.
Camerer, Colin & Martin Weber. 1992. Recent developments in modeling preferences: Uncertainty and ambiguity. Journal of Risk
and Uncertainty 5(4). 325–370.
Casasanto, Daniel & Tom Gijssels. 2015. What makes a metaphor an embodied metaphor? Linguistics Vanguard 1(1). 327–337.
Da Costa, Lancelot, Thomas Parr, Biswa Sengupta & Karl Friston. 2021. Neural dynamics under active inference: Plausibility and
efﬁciency of information processing. Entropy 23(454). 1–20.
Ehrsson, Henrik. 2007. The experimental induction of out-of-body experiences. Science 317(5841). 1048.
Ferstl, Ylva, Bülthoff Heinrich & Stephan de la Rosa. 2017. Action recognition is sensitive to the identity of the actor. Cognition
166. 201–206.
Fodor, Jerry. 1981. Representations. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Fodor, Jerry. 1983. The modularity of mind. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Friston, Karl. 2009. The free-energy principle: A rough guide to the brain? Trends in Cognitive Science 13. 293–301.
Friston, Karl. 2010. The free-energy principle: A uniﬁed brain theory? Nature Review of Neuroscience 11. 127–138.
Friston, Karl. 2012. The history of the future of the Bayesian brain. NeuroImage 62(2). 1230–1233.
Friston, Karl. 2013. Life as we know it. Journal of the Royal Society Interface 10. 20130475.
Friston, Karl. 2019. A free energy principle for a particular physics. Unpublished manuscript.
Friston, Karl, Thomas FitzGerald, Francesco Rigoli, Philipp Schwartenbeck & Giovanni Pezzulo. 2017. Active inference: A process
theory. Neural Computation 29(1). 1–49.
Gallagher, Shaun & Dan Zahavi. 2008. The phenomenological mind: An introduction to philosophy of mind and cognitive science.
London: Routledge.
Gallese, Vittorio & George Lakoff. 2005. The brain’s concepts: The role of the sensory-motor system in conceptual knowledge.
Cognitive Neuropsychology 22(3–4). 455–479.
Gandolfo, Stefano. 2019. Metaphors of metaphors: Reﬂections on the use of conceptual metaphor theory in premodern Chinese
texts. Dao 18. 323–345.
Gibbs, Raymond W. Jr. 2005. Embodiment and cognitive science. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
194
Torres-Martínez

Gibbs, Raymond W. Jr. 2008. Metaphor and thought: The state of the art. In Raymond W. Gibbs Jr. (ed.), The Cambridge handbook of
metaphor and thought, 3–13. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Gibbs, Raymond W. Jr. 2016. Metaphor, language, and dynamical systems. In Semino Elena & Zsóﬁa Demjén (eds.), The Routledge
handbook of metaphor and language, 56–70. New York: Routledge.
Gibbs, Raymond W. Jr. 2017. Metaphor wars: Conceptual metaphor in human life. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Gibbs, Raymond W. Jr. & Herbert L. Colston. 2012. Interpreting ﬁgurative meaning. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Gibson, James J. 1966. The senses considered as perceptual systems. Boston: Houghton Mifﬂin.
Gibson, James J. 1979. The ecological approach to visual perception. Boston: Houghton Mifﬂin.
Isenberg, Arnold. 1963. On deﬁning metaphor. Journal of Philosophy 60(21). 609–622.
Jamrozik, Anja, Marguerite McQuire, Eileen R. Cardillo & Anjan Chatterjee. 2016. Metaphor: Bridging embodiment to abstraction.
Psychological Bulletin Review 23(4). 1080–1089.
Katz, Albert N. 1998. Figurative language and ﬁgurative thought: A review. In Albert N. Katz, Cristina Cacciari, Raymond W. Gibbs Jr.
& Mark Turner (eds.), Figurative language and thought, 3–43. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Kessler, Klaus & Lindsey Anne Thompson. 2014. The embodied nature of spatial perspective taking: Embodied transformation
versus sensorimotor interference. Cognition 114. 72–88.
Kirby, John T. 1997. Aristotle on metaphor. The American Journal of Philology 118(4). 517–554.
Kiverstein, Julian & Matt Sims. 2021. Is free-energy minimisation the mark of the cognitive? Biology & Philosophy 36(25). 1–27.
Kövecses, Zoltán. 2002. Cognitive-linguistic comments on metaphor identiﬁcation. Language and Literature 11(1). 74–78.
Kövecses, Zoltán. 2005. Metaphor in culture: Universality and variation. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kövecses, Zoltán. 2010. Metaphor. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Lakoff, George. 2008. The neural theory of metaphor. In Raymond W. Gibbs Jr. (ed.), The Cambridge handbook of metaphor and
thought, 17–38. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Lakoff, George. 2014. Mapping the brain’s metaphor circuitry: Metaphorical thought in everyday reason. Frontiers in Human
Neuroscience 8(958). 1–14.
Lakoff, George & Mark Johnson. 1980. Metaphors we live by. Chicago: Chicago University Press.
Lakoff, George & Mark Johnson. 1999. Philosophy in the ﬂesh. New York: Basic Books.
Leipzig Corpora Collection. 2021. https://wortschatz.uni-leipzig.de/en (accessed 5 June 2022).
Linson, Adam, Andy Clark, Subramanian Ramamoorthy & Karl Friston. 2018. The active inference approachto ecological perception:
General information dynamics for natural and artiﬁcial embodied cognition. Frontiers in Robotics and AI 5. 1–22.
Lupyan, Gary & Bodo Winter. 2018. Language is more abstract than you think, or, why aren’t languages more iconic? Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society B 373. 20170137.
Madsen, Mathias W. 2016. Cognitive metaphor theory and the metaphysics of immediacy. Cognitive Science 40. 881–908.
Marvan, Tomáš & Marek Havlík. 2020. Is predictive processing a theory of perceptual consciousness? New Ideas in Psychology
61. 100837.
Miller, George A., Eugene Galanter & Karl H. Pribram. 1960. Plans and the structure of behavior. New York: Holt, Rinehart and
Winston.
Noel, Jean-Paul, Christian Pfeiffer, Olaf Blanke & Andrea Serino. 2015. Peripersonal space as the space of the bodily self. Cognition
144. 49–57.
Ortony, Andrew (ed.). 1993. Metaphor and thought. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Pearl, Judea. 1988. Probabilistic reasoning in intelligent systems: Networks of plausible inference. San Mateo: Morgan Kaufmann.
Perlovsky, Leonid & Kuniyoshi L. Sakai. 2014. Language and cognition. Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience 8. 1–2.
Ricœur, Paul. 1975. La métaphore vive. Paris: Le Seuil.
Schaller, Franziska, Sabine Weiss & Horst M. Müller. 2016. Pushing the button while pushing the argument: Motor priming of
abstract action language. Cognitive Science 41(5). 1328–1349.
Semino, Elena. 2016. A corpus-based study of “mixed metaphor” as a metalinguistic comment. In Raymond W. Gibbs Jr. (ed.),
Mixing metaphor, 203–222. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Speed, Laura J. & Gabriella Vigliocco. 2014. Eye movements reveal the dynamic simulation of speed in language. Cognitive Science
38. 367–382.
Torres-Martínez, Sergio. 2015. A constructionist approach to the teaching of phrasal verbs. English Today 31(3). 46–58.
Torres-Martínez, Sergio. 2016. Working out multiword verbs within an applied cognitive construction grammar framework.
European Journal of Applied Linguistics 5(1). 1–32.
Torres-Martínez, Sergio. 2017. Applied cognitive construction grammar: A usage-based approach to the teaching of phrasal verbs
(and other constructions). European Journal of Applied Linguistics 6(2). 279–314.
Torres-Martínez, Sergio. 2018a. Constructions as triads of form, function and agency: An agentive cognitive construction grammar
analysis of English modals. Cognitive Semantics 4(1). 1–38.
Torres-Martínez, Sergio. 2018b. Exploring attachment patterns between multi-word verbs and argument structure constructions.
Lingua 209. 21–43.
Torres-Martínez, Sergio. 2019. Taming English modals: How a construction grammar approach helps to understand modal verbs.
English Today 35(2). 50–57.
Metaphors are embodied otherwise they would not be metaphors
195

Torres-Martínez, Sergio. 2021a. Complexes, rule-following, and language games: The philosophical method of Ludwig Wittgenstein
and its relevance to semiotics. Semiotica 2021(242). 63–100.
Torres-Martínez, Sergio. 2021b. The cognition of caused-motion events in Spanish and German: An agentive cognitive construction
grammar analysis. Australian Journal of Linguistics 41(1). 33–65.
Torres-Martínez, Sergio. 2022a. On English modals, embodiment and argument structure: Response to Fong. English Today 38(2).
105–113.
Torres-Martínez, Sergio. 2022b. On the cognitive dimension of metaphors and their role in education: A response to Molina Rodelo
(2021). Revista Senderos Pedagógicos 13(13). 1–18.
Torres-Martínez, Sergio. 2022c. The role of semiotics in the uniﬁcation of langue and parole: An agentive cognitive construction
grammar approach to English modals. Semiotica 244(1/4). 195–225.
Torres-Martínez, Sergio. forthcoming. A radical embodied characterization of German modal constructions. Cognitive Semantics.
Turken, And U. & Nina F. Dronkers. 2011. The neural architecture of the language comprehension network: Converging evidence
from lesion and connectivity analyses. Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience 5. 1.
Wachsmuth, Ipke, Lenzen Manuela & Knoblich Günther. 2008. Introduction to embodied communication: Why communication
needs the body. In Ipke Wachsmuth, Manuela Lenzen & Günther Knoblich (eds.), Embodied communication in humans and
machines, 1–28. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Watson, Matthew E., Martin J. Pickering & Holly P. Branigan. 2009. Why dialogue methods are important for investigating spatial
language. In Kenny R. Coventry, Thora Tenbrik & John Bateman (eds.), Spatial language and dialogue, 8–22. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Zhang, Ye, Diego Frassinelli, Jyrki Tuomainen, Jeremy I. Skipper & Gabriella Vigliocco. 2021. More than words: Word predictability,
prosody, gesture and mouth movements in natural language comprehension. Proceedings of the Royal Society B 288.
20210500.
Supplementary Material: The online version of this article offers supplementary material (https://doi.org/10.1515/lingvan-2019-
0083).
196
Torres-Martínez

