277
Introduction
1. See chapter 15 of this book for the contemporary political consequences of 
the earth’s instability.
2. Craig Welch, “Half of All Species Are on the Move—­And We’re Feeling It,” 
National Geographic, 27 April 2017. https://news.nationalgeographic.com/2017/04/
climate-change-species-migration-disease/
3. For a review of the various “-­cene” designations and their shortcomings and 
strengths, see Jairus Grove, Savage Ecology: War and Geopolitics at the End of the 
World (Durham: Duke University Press, 2019).
4. Paul Crutzen and E.F. Stoermer, “The ‘Anthropocene,’” Global Change News-
letter (2000) 41: 17–­18. The rhetoric of the Anthropocene often makes it sound like 
all humans are equally responsible and equally vulnerable when they are not. See 
Dipesh Chakrabarty, “Postcolonial Studies and the Challenge of Climate Change,” 
New Literary History 43, no. 1 (Winter 2012): 1–­18.
5. See Kathryn Yusoff, “Anthropogenesis: Origins and Endings in the Anthro-
pocene,” Theory, Culture & Society 33, no. 2 (2016): 3–­28; Timothy LeCain, “Against 
the Anthropocene: A Neo-­Materialism Perspective,” International Journal for His-
tory, Culture and Modernity 3, no. 1 (2015): 1–­28; Jason W. Moore, Anthropocene 
or Capitalocene? Nature, History, and the Crisis of Capitalism (Oakland: Pm Press, 
2016); Astrida Neimanis, Cecilia Åsberg, and Johan Hedrén, “Four Problems, Four 
Directions for Environmental Humanities: Toward Critical Posthumanities for the 
Anthropocene,” Ethics & the Environment 20, no. 1 (2015): 67–­97; Eyal Weizman and 
Fazal Sheikh, The Conflict Shoreline: Colonization as Climate Change in the Negev 
Desert (Göttingen: Steidl, 2015); McKenzie Wark, Molecular Red: Theory for the An-
thropocene (New York: Verso, 2016); Jan Zalasiewicz, Mark Williams, Will Steffen, 
Notes

278	
Notes to Pages 2–3
and Paul Crutzen. “The New World of the Anthropocene,” Environmental Science 
and Technology 44, no. 7 (Feb 2010): 2228–­31; Arianne Conty, “The Politics of Nature: 
New Materialist Responses to the Anthropocene,” Theory, Culture & Society 35, no. 
7–­8 (Oct 2018): 73–­96; Heather Davis and Etienne Turpin, Art in the Anthropocene: 
Encounters Among Aesthetics, Politics, Environments and Epistemologies (London: 
Open Humanities Press, 2015); Richard Grusin, Anthropocene Feminism (Minneap-
olis: University of Minnesota Press, 2017); Adam Bobbette and Amy Donovan, eds., 
Political Geology: Active Stratigraphies and the Making of Life (London: Palgrave 
Macmillan, Cham, 2019).
6. See chapter 15 of this book for more on the ethics of the Kinocene.
7. Kathryn Yusoff, A Billion Black Anthropocenes or None (Minneapolis: Uni-
versity of Minnesota Press, 2018); Dipesh Chakrabarty, “The Climate of History: 
Four Theses.” Critical Inquiry 35, no. 2 (Winter 2009): 197–­222; Andrew Baldwin, 
Life Adrift: Climate Change, Migration, Critique (London: Rowman & Littlefield 
International, 2017).
8. “For most of the last two centuries, with some exceptions, social thought has not 
given serious attention to the earth sciences. While the social sciences and humanities 
have conversed productively with biology, linguistics, psychoanalysis, complexity 
studies and even mathematics, the geosciences seem to have offered less fertile ground 
for engagement.” Nigel Clark and Yasmin Gunaratnam, “Earthing the Anthropos? 
From ‘socializing the Anthropocene’ to geologizing the social,” European Journal 
of Social Theory 20, no. 1 (Aug 2016): 146–­63; 147. See also Nigel Clark, Inhuman 
Nature: Sociable Life on a Dynamic Planet (London: Sage, 2011).
9. For a literature review of the limited work done on the philosophy of geology, 
see Claude C. Albritton, “Philosophy of Geology,” in General Geology. Encyclopedia 
of Earth Science (Springer, Boston, MA: 1988). https://link.springer.com/reference-
workentry/10.1007%2F0-387-30844-X_45
10. Ecofeminists have been writing about this for a long time. See Carolyn Mer-
chant, The Death of Nature: Women, Ecology, and the Scientific Revolution (San Fran-
cisco: Harper One, 2008).
11. “With some half a century of developments in the geosciences converging 
on the idea of earth systems with multiple possible operating states, the very nature 
of ‘the ground’ needs major overhauling.” Clark and Gunaratnam, “Earthing the 
Anthropos?,” 159.“Here Arendt rediscovers Heidegger’s analyses that we cited in the 
first part of this present work: The Earth viewed from outer space is no longer the 
‘earth on which man lives,’ it is no longer the homeland (Heimat). In the same way 
that for Husserl, the Earth is not a heavenly body in motion among many others 
but first and foremost a ‘ground,’ it ‘does not move and does not rest,’ since ‘only 
in relation to it are movement and rest given as having their sense of movement 
and rest.’ It is in this sense that the Earth is the ‘arche-­dwelling,’ the ‘ark of the 
world’ that nothing can replace and that we reference and intellectually give as an 
answer each time we imagine that the Moon or an airplane could constitute another 
foundational basis or ‘ground.’ ‘Arche-­dwelling,’ ‘homeland,’ ‘habitat,’ for Arendt, 

	
Notes to Pages 3–4	 279
Heidegger, and Husserl, the thesis is clear: humanity is under condition of the Earth, 
understood as that which can’t be reduced to an object, or a subject—­in other words, 
a transcendental nonobjective form.” Frédéric Neyrat, The Unconstructable Earth: 
An Ecology of Separation, trans. Drew S. Burk (New York: Fordham University Press, 
2018), 170.“In a certain way, Arendt’s concrete transcendental is neither concrete 
nor historical enough, just as Husserl’s arche-­dwelling does not take into account 
the fact that the Earth has not always been for humanity. And Heidegger failed to 
make a cosmic event out of the ‘homeland.’ In order to concretize the transcendental 
of the Earth, we must not consider it as an object (that we can capture from outer 
space thanks to a camera) or as a quasi-­subject (such as Gaia, a rather local expres-
sion of naturing nature) but rather as a trans-­ject or perhaps more specifically and 
simply a traject, as an interval spanning space-­time. In fact, the Earth is not merely 
a ‘ground’ upon which we stand, not simply a planet surrounded by a moon and 
artificial satellites; it’s also a long-­term event that began 4.54 billion years ago, the 
historical trajectory of an entity that will disappear in several billion years.” Neyrat, 
The Unconstructable Earth, 171.
12. See Thomas Nail, Being and Motion (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2018), 
chapter 14.
13. See Nail, Being and Motion, chapters 17–­20.
14. See Stephen J. Gould, Time’s Arrow, Time’s Cycle: Myth and Metaphor in 
the Discovery of Geological Time (Cambridge: International Society for Science and 
Religion, 2007).
15. Vladimir Ivanovich Vernadsky, The Biosphere, eds. David B. Langmuir and 
Mark A. McMenamin (New York: Springer Science, [1998] 2013).“As historian John 
Brooke recounts, the years 1966–­73 alone saw the emergence of four major new per-
spectives on the dynamics of the earth: (1) the confirmation of the theory of plate 
tectonics; (2) a new appreciation of the role of extra-­terrestrial impacts in shaping 
earth history; (3) the thesis that evolution is punctuated by catastrophic bursts linked 
to major geophysical events; and (4) the beginnings of the idea that the different 
components of the earth function as an integrated system—­as expressed in the Gaia 
hypothesis and earth systems theory. Look beyond the immediacy of Anthropocene 
debates into the encompassing field of contemporary geosciences and we are soon 
reminded that such processes as cyclical changes in the planet’s orbit and axis, the 
openness of the earth to solar radiation and astronomical events, the magma-­driven 
movements of tectonic plates, the stratal composition of the earth’s crust, the deep 
structures of biological life and functioning of the biosphere continue to set the 
broad parameters for the functioning of the earth system.” Clark and Gunaratnam, 
“Earthing the Anthropos?,” 156.“If we take seriously evidence from the earth sciences 
that the main driver of the Mid-­Holocene Climatic Transition was variability in the 
earth’s axis and orbit, then there may indeed be a trace of ‘universality’ woven into 
the fabric of human cultural-­historical difference.” Clark and Gunaratnam, “Earth-
ing the Anthropos?,” 157.“Neocatastrophism has enlivened modern geo-­science by 
dispatching the belief that the planet took on its current shape only through the 

280	
Notes to Page  4
gradual and continuous operation of familiar processes like erosion and sediment 
buildup. The new geology lets into the picture abrupt die-­offs and bursts of species 
formation, climatic and geomorphological upheavals, and high-­speed collisions with 
extraterrestrial bodies.” Jeremy Davies, Birth of the Anthropocene (Oakland, CA: 
University of California Press, 2018), 9.“Neocatastrophism has introduced us to a 
whole list of geophysical forces—­asteroids, ocean currents, volcanoes, and the like—­
that, under the right circumstances, can suddenly come to exert a much greater and 
more destabilizing influence than usual on the workings of the earth system.” Davies, 
Birth of the Anthropocene, 10.
16. Aristotle, Physics, trans. Joe Sachs (New Jersey: Rutgers University Press, 
2001), Book VIII, page 188.
17. Several contemporary thinkers have conceived of a world “without us” (Alan 
Weisman, The World Without Us [New York: HarperCollins, 2014]; Eugene Thacker, 
Cosmic Pessimism [Minneapolis: Univocal, 2015]), or an “earth after us” (Jan Zala-
siewicz, The Earth After Us: What Legacy Will Humans Leave in the Rocks? [Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 2014]), or an “ancestral” earth revealing a “world where 
humanity is absent” (Quentin Meillassoux, After Finitude: An Essay on the Necessity 
of Contingency [London: Bloomsbury, 2017]).“This fiercely unilateral conception 
maintains the divide between ‘us’ and the ‘world,’ between the human ‘subject’ and 
the ‘ancient’ realities that can only be accessed by pure science.” Neyrat, The Uncon-
structable Earth, 172.
Meillassoux is right that the past-­being, before humans, is not related to humans 
(who did not exist yet). Nevertheless, this does not mean that our thoughts about this 
being are unrelated to that past-­being. The past makes human thought and existence 
possible. This is not a non-­relation but rather an asymmetrical relation.Furthermore, 
by making thought and being non-­relational, Meillassoux is anthropocentric and 
rationalist, because he says that nature cannot think. Nature, however, is already 
mathematical and thoughtful to some degree. Humans are not a break with nature; 
they are a regional expression of processes already present in nature.
Meillassoux says that humans are mere matter, but that we are unique matter 
that is radically different than what nature has. However, how does such a break 
occur in matter? It cannot.
18. Uniformitarianism still holds sway over many geologists and remains a matter 
of lively debate. See Marcia Bjornerud, Timefulness: How Thinking Like a Geologist 
Can Help Save the World (New Jersey: Princeton University Press, 2018), 61.
19. Bjornerud, Timefulness, 61.
20. Bjornerud, Timefulness, 63. See also John L. Brooke, Climate Change and the 
Course of Global History: A Rough Journey (New York: Cambridge University Press, 
2014); Mike Davis, “Cosmic Dancers on History’s Stage? The Permanent Revolution 
in the Earth Sciences,” New Left Review 217 (1996): 48–­84. “One of the crucial break-
throughs, hinging on a wealth of empirical evidence and a deepening appreciation of 
the way feedback operates in complex systems—­was the discovery that climate change 

	
Notes to Pages 4–5	 281
in the past has often been abrupt rather than incremental.” Clark and Gunaratnam, 
“Earthing the Anthropos?,” 153.
21. “Just think, as I write this in 2008, more than one thousand of the world’s 
best climate scientists have worked for seventeen years to forecast future climates 
and have failed to predict the climate of today. I have little confidence in the 
smooth, rising curve of temperature that modelers predict for the next ninety 
years. The Earth’s history and simple climate models based on the notion of a live 
and responsive Earth suggest that sudden change and surprise are more likely.” 
James Lovelock, The Vanishing Face of Gaia: A Final Warning (Vancouver: Langara 
College, 2013), 7.
22. Peter D. Ditlevsen and Sigfus J. Johnsen, “Tipping Points: Early Warning 
and Wishful Thinking,” Geophysical Research Letters 37, no. 19 (October 2010). DOI: 
10.1029/2010GL044486
23. Neyrat, The Unconstructable Earth, 41.
24. See Bjornerud, Timefulness, chapter 6, for a full description and critique of 
each technological fix.
25. Georges Bataille, “Corps célestes,” Oeuvres Complètes, Volume 1 (Paris: Gal-
limard, 1970), 516.
26. “Where did we ever get the strange idea that nature—­as opposed to cul-
ture—­is ahistorical and timeless? We are far too impressed by our own cleverness 
and self-­consciousness. . . . We need to stop telling ourselves the same old anthro-
pocentric bedtime stories.” Steve Shaviro, Doom Patrols: A Theoretical Fiction about 
Postmodernism (New York: Serpent’s Tail, 1997).
27. “One can have interesting thoughts about the long intervals between such 
revolutions, about the more profound revolutions caused by alterations of the earth’s 
axis, and also those caused by the sea. They are, however, hypotheses in the historical 
field, and this point of view of a mere succession in time has no philosophical sig-
nificance whatever.” Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel, Hegel’s Philosophy of Nature: 
Being Part Two of the Encyclopedia of the Philosophical Sciences (1830), translated 
from Nicolin and Pöggeler’s edition (1950) and from the Zusätze in Michelet’s text 
(1847) by A.V. Miller (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2004), 283.
28. See Immanuel Kant, “Idea for a Universal History from a Cosmopolitan 
Perspective,” in Toward Perpetual Peace and Other Writings on Politics, Peace, and 
History (Yale University Press, 2008).
29. “One reason for this may be that our planet—­as presented by the scientific 
disciplines specializing its study—­has appeared to change so gradually that it can 
largely be taken for granted as the static backdrop of social existence. Perhaps more 
importantly, in its very obduracy, the earth has generally signified inertia and stabil-
ity, so that any association with social life has usually been taken to imply a limitation 
or closure of the possibilities open to collective social action.” Clark and Gunaratnam, 
“Earthing the Anthropos?,” 147.
30. See Benjamin Lieberman and Elizabeth Gordon, Climate Change in Human 
History: Prehistory to the Present (London: Bloomsbury Academic, 2018).

282	
Notes to Pages 5–6
31. See Clark, Inhuman Nature; Karen Bosworth, “Thinking Permeable Matter 
through Feminist Geophilosophy: Environmental Knowledge Controversy and the 
Materiality of Hydrogeologic Processes,” Environment and Planning D: Society and 
Space 35, no. 1 (2017): 21–­37.
32. See Isabelle Stengers and Andrew Goffey, In Catastrophic Times: Resisting the 
Coming Barbarism (London: Open Humanities Press, 2015), 44. “The intrusion of 
Gaia. It is a matter here of thinking intrusion, not belonging.” Stengers and Goffey 
think of Gaia as a subject distinct from humans that intrudes on them. This assumes 
an anthropocentric division.For similar vitalist and subjectivist theories of the earth, 
see Bruno Latour, Facing Gaia: Eight Lectures on the New Climatic Regime (Polity: 
United Kingdom, 2017); Jane Bennett, Vibrant Matter: A Political Ecology of Things 
(Durham: Duke University Press, 2010); Isabelle Stengers, “Autonomy and the In-
trusion of Gaia,” South Atlantic Quarterly 116, no. 2 (2017): 381–­400.
33. I agree with much of Gaian systems theory and think it pushes in the right 
direction on many fronts. In particular, Gaia theory’s emphasis on the earth as a 
non-­static and non-­stable planet is key. I support “a perspective in which one inhabits 
not a static environment,” as Dorian Sagan puts it. However, Gaian theory, as Sagan 
admits, “has occasionally served as a platform for a New Age joy slide into the muck 
of planetary personification. If biocentrism is currently a prime grove for the culling 
of noble fictions, then certainly the tree of Gaia, at the very best, bears some of the 
most tempting fruit” (Dorian Sagan, Cosmic Apprentice: Dispatches from the Edges 
of Science [University of Minnesota Press, 2013], 176). My main concern is with those 
who personify the earth and think of Gaia from a narrowly biocentric perspective.
34. See Thomas Nail, Lucretius I: An Ontology of Motion (Edinburgh: Edinburgh 
University Press, 2018); Thomas Nail, Lucretius II: An Ethics of Motion (Edinburgh: 
Edinburgh University Press, 2020).
35. “In this actual world there is . . . not much point in counterposing or restating 
the great abstractions of Man and Nature,” wrote the cultural theorist Raymond 
Williams. “We have mixed our labour with the earth, our forces with its forces too 
deeply to be able to draw back and separate either out.” Or, as the geographer Neil 
Smith asserted, surveying the cumulative effects of the ever-­expanding forces of 
production: “No God-­given stone is left unturned, no original relation with nature 
unaltered, no living thing unaffected.” Quoted in Clark, Inhuman Nature, 8. See also 
Bill McKibben, The End of Nature (New York: Random House, 2006).
36. Clark, Inhuman Nature, 7. See Andrew Baldwin and Giovanni Bettini, eds., 
Life Adrift: Climate Change, Migration, Critique (London: Rowman & Littlefield 
International, 2017), for an excellent study of the “climate refugee.”
37. See Rosi Braidotti, The Posthuman (Oxford: Polity Press, 2012).
38. Excellent work has been done on human-­nature hybrids. See Bruno Latour, 
We Have Never Been Modern (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1993); Donna 
Haraway, Staying with the Trouble: Making Kin in the Chthulucene (Durham: Duke 
University Press, 2016); Eduardo Kohn, How Forests Think: Toward an Anthropology 
Beyond the Human (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2013). However, not 

	
Notes to Page 6	 283
much has been said about nature-­nature hybrids before there were humans. For all 
their talk of post-­humanism, the humanities have been extremely hesitant to examine 
a time before the human.“In a weird resonance with critiques by Donna Haraway, 
Bruno Latour, Philippe Descola, Jane Bennett, William Connolly, and others who 
have effectively demonstrated that there is no ‘nature’ external to humans, ecomod-
ernists have conceded the point, declaring the need to invent precisely the human/
non-­human or culture/nature binary of modernist social theory via an unprece-
dented scale of global governance.” Jarius Grove, “The Geopolitics of Extinction,” 
in The Anthropocene to the Eurocene in Technology and World Politics, ed. Daniel R. 
McCarthy (New York: Routledge, 2018), 204–­33; 213.
39. See Stacy Alaimo and Susan J. Hekman, eds., Material Feminisms (Indiana: 
Indiana University Press, 2008), Introduction. “If we acknowledged this energetic 
subsidy as lending of not just materials but capacities for the geologic within hominid 
corporeality, then the location of agentic power shifts. When we understand our being 
is mineralogical as well as biological, and that we already possess a capacity for the 
geologic, then the specific constellations of where and how we locate responsibility 
changes.” “There can be no human that is other to these forces, because the human 
is an expression of the various constellations of this minerality. There is no telos or 
origins to this experimentation and mutation—­it is just that.” Yusoff, “Anthropogene-
sis,” 12; 21–­22.“Geometry, in effect, is the science of what is absolutely objective—­i.e., 
spatiality—­in the objects that the Earth, our common place, can indefinitely furnish 
as our common ground with other men. But if an objective science of earthly things 
is possible, an objective science of the Earth itself, the ground and foundation of 
these objects, is as radically impossible as that of transcendental subjectivity. The 
transcendental Earth is not an object and can never become one. And the possibility 
of a geometry strictly complements the impossibility of what could be called a ‘geo-­
logy,’ the objective science of the Earth itself.” Jacques Derrida, Edmund Husserl’s 
Origin of Geometry: An Introduction [1962], trans. J. P. Leavey Jr. (Lincoln: University 
of Nebraska Press, 1989), 38 (emphasis in original).
40. “In summary, we suggest that one of the main provocations of contemporary 
earth science—­within and beyond the Anthropocene thesis—­is to push critical social 
thought’s own insistence on locatedness, positionality and contextualization to its 
logical conclusion. From this perspective there are no societies that do not bear the 
trace of the geoclimatic conditions in which they emerged, no social formations that 
are not in some significant way shaped by the geological formations in which they 
are embedded, no cultures that are impervious to the flows or strata they tap into.” 
Yasmin Gunaratnam and Nigel Clark, “Pre-­Race Post-­Race: Climate Change and Plan-
etary Humanism,” Darkmatter 9, no. 1 (2012). Available at: http://www.darkmatter101 
.org/site/2012/07/02/pre-race-post-race-climate-change-and-planetary-humanism/
41. Michel Foucault, Giorgio Agamben and others remain focused on human 
history. See Neyrat, Unconstructable Earth.
42. Clark and Gunaratnam, “Earthing the Anthropos?,” 159.

284	
Notes to Pages 6–7
43. See Nail, Being and Motion, chapter 4, for the theory of the kinetic transcen-
dental.
44. Clark, Inhuman Nature, 11.
45. “The earth is characterized as living or quasi-­living not to emphasize the 
organic interconnection between everything on earth, but to take into consideration 
the surplus that results from any project of technological dominance. It’s precisely 
this surplus that makes the earth into a wholly full body—­not a body filled with 
matter or organs, but with potentialities that no system—­whether technical or living, 
artificial or organic—­is able to contain.” Frédéric Neyrat, “Eccentric Earth,” Diacritics 
45, no. 3 (2017): 4–­23.
“No longer a static, rigid taxonomy; it becomes protean, upwelling, a vital force 
erupting forth, proliferating, unpredictable, and metastasizing. We may actually 
be facing the most extraordinary frontier—­the frontier of nature as an ultimately 
creative, responsive, and transformative power, which regards human beings simply 
as a trace that is overcome and left behind.” Michael Bess, “Deconstructing Nature,” 
Letters 8, no. 1 (Fall 1999): 2.
“The long-­held barriers between nature and culture are breaking down. It’s no 
longer us against “Nature”. Instead, it’s we who decide what nature is and what it will 
be.” Christian Schwägerl, The Anthropocene: The Human Era and How It Shapes Our 
Planet (Santa Fe: Synergetic Press, 2014).
46. The unpredictable earth is what Frederic Neyrat calls the traject. “As uncon-
structable traject, the earth can neither be controlled nor dominated. From its dark 
origins to its glacial ends, the earth will always love to hide.” See Neyrat, “Eccentric 
Earth,” 11.
47. Neyrat calls this the “concrete transcendental” (“Eccentric earth,” 9). “This 
proto-­anthropogenic subject whose death is signaled through this epochal shift her-
alds a new philosophy in which the earth returns not to ground the figure of thought, 
but as a condition of its labour; thought must continually move through and with 
the inhuman, before, during and after subjectivity. So there is a shift in register from 
humanist thought, which characterized the inhuman as a dehumanizing force, to a 
concept of the inhuman as materially constitutive of the possibilities of life.” Yusoff, 
“Anthropogenesis,” 7.
48. The increasing mobility of the earth is not an “epochal concept” of “our era” in 
a univocal or exclusive sense. It is only one of the most popular and powerful features 
of the present, among others. See Gabriel Rockhill, Interventions in Contemporary 
Thought: History, Politics, and Aesthetics (Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 
2016), 51–­52.“Such an ontological framing draws upon the new geoscience notion 
that the earth system has, at any stage, the potential to shift into other, not yet ac-
tualized states—­though we should be mindful that, as a philosophical or cultural 
thematic, this is an extrapolation from scientific findings that may exceed the con-
cerns or priorities of these sciences themselves.” Clark and Gunaratnam, “Earthing 
the Anthropos?,” 159.

	
Notes to Pages 7–8	 285
49. We cannot know everything about the earth, but we can learn something 
new about it.
50. See Lovelock, The Vanishing Face of Gaia, 7, on climate change feedback and 
unpredictability.
51. Geophilosophy is not nearly deeply historical enough. Deleuze’s geophiloso-
phy only goes back to the Greeks. See Gilles Deleuze, What is Philosophy? (New York: 
Columbia University Press, 1994), 87–­89. There is thus a kind of implicit anthropo-
centrism in geophilosophy. A true geophilosophy would start with the earth before 
humans and with the cosmos before the earth. See Gasché Rodolphe, Geophilosophy: 
On Gilles Deleuze and Félix Guattari’s “What Is Philosophy?”; Anna Hickey-­Moody 
and Timothy Laurie, “Geophilosophies of Masculinity: Remapping Gender, Aesthet-
ics, and Knowledge,” Angelaki 20, no. 1 (Mar 2015): 1–­10; Gary Shapiro, “Nietzsche 
on Geophilosophy and Geoaesthetics,” in A Companion to Nietzsche, ed. Keith A. 
Pearson (Chichester: Wiley-­Blackwell, 2009), 707–­31.
For an excellent survey and critique of the geophilosophy literature (Lefebvre, 
Kant, Husserl, Hegel, Bataille, Derrida, Deleuze), I can do no better than Nigel Clark 
has already done in chapter 1 of Inhuman Nature.
52. “If we are unable to enclose this involvement against an outside that pur-
portedly has no language, and if the subject of interpretation is consequently also 
its object, then we are within the perverse desires of a geomancy, a geo-­logy, whose 
figurations are strangely ‘fitting.’ Could the generalized origin of re-­presentation, 
the hiccough of this subject/object shimmering as the ‘always already not yet,’ be 
thought as the Earth’s own scientific investigations of itself?” Vicki Kirby, Quantum 
Anthropologies: Life at Large (Durham and London: Duke University Press, 2011), 34.
53. The study of human knowledge is important, but that is not the subject of this 
book. See Bruno Latour, Politics of Nature: How to Bring the Sciences into Democracy 
(Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2009). Latour has not given nearly enough 
attention to nonhuman or prehuman networks. Graham Harman acknowledges this 
as well. Despite the hypothetical embrace of other-­than-­human autarchies, “only 
the most flickering hints of networks devoid of human involvement” can be found 
anywhere in the Latourian corpus. Graham Harman, Prince of Networks: Bruno 
Latour and Metaphysics. (Melbourne: re.press, 2009), 124.“This may be more than 
an accidental oversight. If it is not permitted for human interlocuters to speak of 
non-­human worlds without documenting their own role in the description, trans-
lation and inevitable re-­composition of these realities, then it is hard to imagine 
how a domain fully independent of the human can legitimately receive attention 
as anything more than an abstract possibility. To engage substantively with an 
inhuman region in and for-­itself would by definition repudiate the entanglement 
that attends all such intervention, according to Latour’s logic, thereby constitut-
ing an act of purification of the human presence. And yet, as I suggested in the 
introduction, if we pursue the injunction of actor-­network theorists to follow the 
things themselves, it is inevitable that sooner or later we are going to be drawn 
into realms which precede, antecede or otherwise exceed human influence—­as the 

286	
Notes to Pages 8–9
current understanding of issues like global climate change makes all too apparent.” 
Clark, Inhuman Nature, 37.
On the possibility and status of doing a nonhuman philosophical geology and 
the question of asymmetrical relations between past and present See Ian Hodder 
and Gavin Lucas, “The Symmetries and Asymmetries of Human-­Thing Relations. a 
Dialogue,” Archaeological Dialogues 24, no. 2 (2017): 119–­37.
54. Thomas Nail, Theory of the Object (Oxford: Oxford University Press, under 
review). See also Daniel Lee Kleinman and Kelly Moore, eds., Routledge Handbook 
of Science, Technology, and Society (New York: Routlege, 2019).
55. See Nail, Lucretius II.
56. The earth also continues to move today in ways that are not affected by what 
humans think or do.
57. There is no symmetry between the present and the past. However, that does 
not mean that things are radically unrelated. Ontology is not flat and symmetrical 
but curved and topologically heterogeneous. There can be no flat ontology in an 
irreversibly entropic cosmos. See Ilya Prigogine and Isabelle Stengers, Order Out 
of Chaos (New York: Verso, 2018); Ilya Prigogine, From Being to Becoming (San 
Francisco: Freeman, 1980).Graham Harman is right that matter is related to itself 
without us. However, it does not follow that a) we are unrelated to the past (which 
supports and conditions and persists through us) or b) that there is an irreducible, 
non-­relational, vacuum-­sealed, withdrawn essence hiding in every object. It just 
means that there are regional relations that occur within larger pedetic, entropic, or 
asymmetrical relations between the past and present of all objects. Harman calls this 
a “non-­relation,” but it is just a pedetic or asymmetrical relation.The problem with 
vitalism is that it treats all relations as having an equally flat ontology, as a democracy 
of things. However, this provides no tools for helping us to think about new things, 
or for politically clarifying the asymmetrical relations between and among things 
and humans. Vitalism poses a political problem because it assumes the equality 
of agency. Vitalism is also an ontological problem because it does not account for 
changing relationships of dependence.
58. “If this virtual ‘geometry’ requires no outside to access the human—­for the 
genesis of humanness would be an internal articulation of and within itself—­then, 
by implication, ‘the human’ would not be bound and restricted by some special lack 
of access to that same generative unfolding. ‘The human’ would certainly be a unique 
determination, yet ‘one’ whose cacophonous reverberations would speak of earthly 
concerns.” Kirby, Quantum Anthropologies, 39.
59. “We are at a moment, I have been arguing, when ongoing developments in 
the earth sciences, some recent turns in philosophical inquiry, and a range of ethico-­
political issues arising out of our ecological predicament are gathering over the theme 
of an autonomous, dynamic, self-­generating cosmos.” Clark, Inhuman Nature, 211.
60. This is what Merleau-­Ponty called the “flesh.” See Maurice Merleau-­Ponty, 
“Eye and Mind,” in The Primacy of Perception: And Other Essays on Phenomenolog-
ical Psychology, the Philosophy of Art, History and Politics (Chicago: Northwestern 

	
Notes to Pages 9–11	 287
University Press, 2015). See also Maurice Merleau-­Ponty, The Visible and the Invisible: 
Followed by Working Notes (Evanston: Northwestern University Press, 1997).
61. Kathryn Yusoff challenges fellow critical social thinkers to “use the Anthro-
pocene as a provocation to begin to understand ourselves as geologic subjects, not 
only capable of geomorphic acts, but as beings who have something in common with 
the geologic forces that are mobilised and incorporated.” Kathryn Yusoff, “Geologic 
Life: Prehistory, Climate, Futures in the Anthropocene,” Environment and Planning: 
Society and Space. 31 (2013): 779–­95; 781.
62. There are several major historical conditions of the present. For a closer look 
at each of them see my following books: Thomas Nail, The Figure of the Migrant 
(Stanford University Press, 2015); Thomas Nail, Theory of the Border (Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 2016); Thomas Nail, Theory of the Image (Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 2019); Nail, Theory of the Object; and Thomas Nail, Being and Motion (Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 2018).
63. For more on the methodology of kinetic philosophy see Nail, Being and Mo-
tion.
64. See Nail, Being and Motion, for a full description of the historical method. Or, 
as the historian Christophe Bonneuil puts it: “Anthropocene science offers ‘a single 
grand narrative from nowhere, from space or from the species.’” Christophe Bon-
neuil, “The Geological Turn: Narratives of the Anthropocene,” in The Anthropocene 
and the Global Environmental Crisis: Rethinking Modernity in a New Epoch, eds. 
Clive Hamilton, Christophe Bonneuil, and François Gemenne (London: Routledge, 
2015), 29. “Anthropocene discourses will need to embrace ‘a plurality of narratives 
from many voices and many places’” to avoid a new master narrative. Bonneuil, “The 
Geological Turn,” 29.
65. See Karen Barad, Meeting the Universe Halfway (Durham: Duke University 
Press, 2007).
66. See Barad, Meeting the Universe Halfway, and Kirby, Quantum Anthropologies, 
for a critique of the notion of a single objective nature.
67. See Nail, Lucretius II. If the  cannot be “false” or “unreal” to itself, then “all 
perceptions are true,” just as Lucretius says.
68. Theory, however, also has its own material kinetic process of inscription. The 
study of this process of inscription warrants its own independent investigation. See 
Nail, Being and Motion.
69. See Nail, Being and Motion; Nail, Theory of the Object.
70. For a kinetic theory of quantum gravity see Nail, Theory of the Object.
71. See Nail, Being and Motion.
72. Speaking of climate, Michel Serres reminds us that “our lives depend on this 
mobile atmospheric system, which is constant but fairly stable, deterministic and 
stochastic, moving quasi-­periodically with rhythms and response times that vary 
colossally.” Michel Serres, The Natural Contract (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan 
Press, 1995), 27.
“A symphony of rhythms and temporalities thus underpins our development 

288	
Notes to Pages 11–14
as humans and as living organisms. It marks us as creatures of this earth, as beings 
that are constituted by a double temporality: rhythmically structured within and 
embedded in the rhythmic organisation of the cosmos.” Barbara Adam, Timescapes 
of Modernity: The Environment and Invisible Hazards (London: Routledge, 1998), 
13.“Beyond this short-­term frequency, now relatively well-­understood, climate sci-
entists speculate about larger-­scale periodicities that could range between decades, 
centuries or even millennia.” Mike Davis, Late Victorian Holocausts: El Nino Famines 
and the Making of the Third World (London: Verso, 2001), 234.
73. Western culture has also taken itself to be universal, and critical theorists 
have shown the geographical, historical, gendered, raced, and classed particularity 
of that claim. But we have yet to appreciate the deeply geological and atmospheric 
particularity of all our planetary pretensions to universality and particularity.
74. In the example of the line AB, it is “already motion that has drawn the line” 
to which A and B have been added afterward as its endpoints. Henri Bergson, Matter 
and Memory (New York: Zone Books, 1991), 189.
75. I have made it clear in the conclusion to each of my books that limiting his-
torical ontology to human history is not the same as an ontological commitment to 
anthropocentrism. I have always believed that these patterns are not the sole invention 
of humans, but exceed them. They are emergent patterns of the cosmos itself, as we 
will see in depth in this book.
76. See Vicki Kirby, ed., What If Culture Was Nature All Along? (Edinburgh: 
Edinburgh University Press, 2018).
77. “What would a human be without elephants, plants, lions, cereals, oceans, 
ozone or plankton?” Bruno Latour, “To Modernise or Ecologise? That is the Ques-
tion,” in Remaking Reality: Nature at the Millennium, eds. Bruce Braun and Noel 
Castree (London and New York: Routledge, 1998), 220–­41; 231.
78. T.J. Demos, “Anthropocene, Capitalocene, Gynocene: The Many Names of 
Resistance,” FotoMuseum.com, 6 December 2015. https://www.fotomuseum.ch/en/
explore/still-searching/articles/27015_anthropocene_capitalocene_gynocene_the_
many_names_of_resistance“Carbocene: an age of powerful carbon-­based fuels that 
have helped to create ways of thinking and acting that humans now find exceedingly 
difficult to escape.” LeCain, “Against the Anthropocene,” 1.
79. LeCain, “Against the Anthropocene.”
80. Donna Haraway’s concept of the Chthulu scene is perhaps closest to recog-
nizing the constitutive role of the earth in climate change. See Haraway, Staying with 
the Trouble. “Consider that none of the other officially recognized geological periods 
are named for a specific class or order of creatures, much less one species.” LeCain, 
“Against the Anthropocene,” 19.
81. Katherine Yusoff, “Anthropogenesis.” “Yet in suggesting that humans were 
indeed powerful enough to cause such global ecological shifts, the Anthropocene 
concept also tends to encourage the hubristic modernist faith in the human ability 
to fix the resulting problems.” LeCain, “Against the Anthropocene,” 4.“But rather 
than crediting humans alone, neo-­materialism suggests that they accomplished these 

	
Notes to Pages 15–23	 289
things only at the price of throwing their lot in with a lot of other things, like coal 
and oil, whose powers they only vaguely understood and certainly did not really 
control. Likewise, once the partnerships were made, these powerful things began to 
shape humans and their cultures in all sorts of unexpected ways, many of them not 
necessarily for the better. In sum, neo-­materialist theory pushes us to consider how 
the planet has made humans rather than the other way around.” LeCain, “Against 
the Anthropocene,” 5.
82. “Geologic corporeality is something that is inherited; it is before us and im-
manent within the condition of our being. If there is a response to be made to our 
fossil fuelled-­being, it must acknowledge this condition, and seek to question its 
geosocial reproduction.” “Only by learning to know and sense ourselves as geological 
(and accepting that this knowledge will never be complete), and as a being that is 
toward the geological, can we hope to move against coal-­fired inheritances.” Yusoff, 
“Anthropogenesis,” 23.
Chapter 1: The Flow of Matter
1. “Through loss man can regain the free movement of the universe, he can 
dance and swirl in the full rapture of those great swarms of stars. But he must, in 
the violent expenditure of self, perceive that he breathes in the power of death.” 
Georges Bataille, “Celestial Bodies,” translated by Annette Michelson, October, Vol. 
36, Georges Bataille: Writings on Laughter, Sacrifice, Nietzsche, Un-­Knowing (Spring, 
1986), pp. 75–­78; 78.
2. “The crowning achievement of this tendency is anthropocentrism. The weak-
ening of the terrestrial globe’s material energy has enabled the constitution of the 
autonomous human existences which are so many misconceptions of the universe’s 
movement.” Bataille, “Celestial Bodies,” 77.
3. See Nail, Lucretius II.
4. Helge S. Kragh and Dominique Lambert, “The Context of Discovery: Lemaître 
and the Origin of the Primeval-­Atom Universe,” Annals of Science 64, no. 4 (2007): 
445–­70.
5. Carlo Rovelli, Reality Is Not What It Seems: The Journey to Quantum Gravity 
(New York: Riverhead Books, 2018).
6. Rovelli, Reality Is Not What It Seems; Nail, Theory of the Object; Lee Smolin, 
Trouble with Physics: The Rise of String Theory, the Fall of a Science, and What Comes 
Next (New York: Penguin Books, 2008).
7. Martin Heidegger, Being and Time, trans. Joan Stambaugh (New York: SUNY 
Press, 1996).
8. For a full development of this triple parallel, see Nail, Theory of the Object on 
elasticity in modern objects and Nail, Being and Motion on elasticity in the modern 
ontology of time.
9. See Lisa Randall, Dark Matter and the Dinosaurs: The Astounding Intercon-
nectedness of the Universe (New York: Vintage, 2017).
10. See Rovelli, Reality Is Not What It Seems; ChunJun Cao, Sean M. Carroll, and 

290	
Notes to Pages 23–24
Spyridon Michalakis, “Space from Hilbert Space: Recovering Geometry from Bulk 
Entanglement,” Physical Review D 95, no. 2 (2017). DOI:10.1103/PhysRevD.95.024031; 
Lee Smolin, Three Roads to Quantum Gravity (New York: Basic Books, 2017); Nail, 
Theory of the Object.
11. What the ice cores showed were the signatures of sudden transformation. 
See Wallace S. Broecker, “Unpleasant Surprises in the Greenhouse?,” Nature 328 
(1987): 123–­26.“Each long wave movement in and out of an ice age turned out to be 
rent by multitudes of rapid warmings and coolings, vicious see-­sawings that saw the 
temperature of Greenland transformed by around 15 degrees Fahrenheit in a decade, 
and global weather tipped into a completely different state in as little as a few years.” 
Clark, Inhuman Nature, xi.
As the glaciologist Richard Alley reflects: “for most of the last 100,000 years, a 
crazily jumping climate has been the rule, not the exception.” Richard Alley, The Two-­
Mile Time Machine: Ice Cores, Abrupt Climate Change, and Our Future (Princeton, 
NJ: Princeton University Press, 2000), 120. “The real point is that not only is climate 
change natural, but it’s also easy to set in motion.” Matthew Huber, “North Pole’s 
Ancient Past Holds Clues about Future Global Warming,” Phys.org, 31 May 2006, 
www.physorg.com/news68305951.html.
12. See Nail, Being and Motion and Nail, Lucretius I.
13. Bruno Latour warns us against the “view from Sirius.” “From now on, it is 
from this Great Outside that the old primordial Earth is going to be known, weighed, 
and judged. What was only a virtuality is becoming, for the greatest minds as well 
as the smallest, an exciting project: to know is to know from the outside. Everything 
has to be viewed as if from Sirius—­a Sirius of the imagination, to which no one has 
ever had access.” Bruno Latour, Down to Earth: Politics in the New Climatic Regime 
(Cambridge: Polity, 2018), 68.
Latour is still committed to a human-­hybrid construction of the earth. He fears 
the exo-­terrestrial because it cannot be constructed by humans.
14. Even Carlo Rovelli has said that below the Planck scale “there is nothing”—­
and chosen to affirm a version of the ancient atomism of so-­called “granules” of 
spacetime. “Below [the Planck] scale nothing more is accessible. More precisely, 
nothing exists there” (Rovelli, Reality Is Not What It Seems, 152). For a full critique, 
see Nail, Theory of the Object.
15. Robert M. Hazen, The Story of Earth: The First 4.5 Billion Years, from Star-
dust to Living Planet (New York: Penguin Books, 2013). See also Natalie Wolchover, 
“Physicists Debate Hawking’s Idea That the Universe Had No Beginning,” Quanta 
Magazine, 6 June 2019. https://www.quantamagazine.org/physicists-debate-hawk 
ings-idea-that-the-universe-had-no-beginning-20190606/
16. Real indeterminacy is different from what is commonly understood as the 
influence of human observers on their observations. Quantum indeterminacy is 
real and ontological because observation is not something that only humans do. 
Everything observes. See Barad, Meeting the Universe Halfway.
17. Vladimir Ivanovich Vernadsky, The Biosphere, eds. David B. Langmuir and 

	
Notes to Pages 24–29	 291
Mark A. McMenamin (New York: Springer Science [1998] 2013); Randall, Dark Matter 
and the Dinosaurs; John Briggs and F. David Peat, Turbulent Mirror: An Illustrated 
Guide to Chaos Theory and the Science of Wholeness (New York: Harper & Row, 
2000), 42–­43.
18. In quantum gravity, the Big Bang is only one of several “big bounces” in which 
the universe expands and contracts, endlessly and uniquely each time.
19. “It is certainly not so that it moves in space, although it could move, but rather 
as we tried to show above: the earth is the ark which makes possible in the first place 
the sense of all motion and all rest as mode of motion. But its rest is not a mode of 
motion.” Edmund Husserl, “Foundational Investigations of the Phenomenological 
Origin of the Spatiality of Nature,” trans. Fred Kersten, in Husserl, Shorter Works, 
ed. Peter McCormick and Frederick A. Elliston (Indiana: University of Notre Dame 
Press, 1981), 222–­33; 230.
20. Doreen Massey, “Landscape as a Provocation: Reflections on Moving Moun-
tains.” Journal of Material Culture 11 (2006): 33–­48.
21. See Nail, Lucretius I; Nail, Lucretius II; Thomas Nail, “Matter and Motion,” 
unpublished manuscript.
22. See Nail, Theory of the Object, chapter 16. See also Barad, Meeting the Universe 
Halfway.
23. “This then is one account of nature, namely that it is the primary underlying 
matter of things which have in themselves a principle of motion or change.” Aris-
totle, Physics II, 193a28–­193a29. “This is Motion. This becoming, however, is itself 
just as much the collapse within itself of its contradiction, the immediately identical 
and existent unity of both, namely, Matter.” Georg W. F Hegel, Hegel’s Philosophy of 
Nature: Being Part Two of the Encyclopaedia of the Philosophical Sciences, trans. and 
eds. Arnold V. Miller and Karl L. Michelet (Oxford: Clarendon Press, [1830] 1970), 41.
24. See Nail, Being and Motion for a full account of this history.
25. Karl Marx, The Poverty of Philosophy (New York: International Publishers, 
1963), 78.
26. Georges Bataille, “Base Materialism,” in Visions of Excess: Selected Writings, 
1927–­1939, trans. Allan Stoekl (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2008), 45–­48.
27. The shape of the earth’s orbit varies between nearly circular and mildly ellip-
tical. These variations occur with a period of 413,000 years. Other components have 
95,000-­year and 125,000-­year cycles. They loosely combine into a 100,000-­year cycle.
28. For a study of Saturn’s chaotic orbit, see Briggs and Peat, Turbulent Mirror, 42–­43.
29. Randall, Dark Matter and the Dinosaurs.
30. The Clay Mathematics Institute (CMI), http://www.claymath.org/millennium 
-problems/navier–stokes-equation
31. The quote is probably apocryphal, but the sentiment is striking.
32. For a non-­epistemological interpretation of uncertainty and indeterminacy, 
see Rovelli, Reality Is Not What It Seems, 132–­34. See Barad, Meeting the Universe 
Halfway, 301 for an interesting interpretation of uncertainty beyond Bohr’s idea of 
limiting observation to the walls of the laboratory.

292	
Notes to Pages 30–39
33. See Nail, Lucretius I.
34. Consider also the likelihood of certain recurring patterns in the case of a 
cosmic big bounce scenario put forward by Carlo Rovelli and others, or in the case 
of the multiverse put forward by Sean Carroll and others.
35. (299,792,458 m/s)
36. (9.81 m/s/s)
37. “The first system (left) converges on a steady state—­a point in phase space. 
The second repeats itself periodically, forming a cyclical orbit. The third repeats itself 
in a more complex waltz rhythm, a cycle with “period three.” The fourth is chaotic.” 
James Gleick, Chaos: Making a New Science (New York: Viking, 1987), 50–­51.
Chapter 2: The Fold of Elements
1. Randall, Dark Matter and the Dinosaurs.
2. Michel Serres develops a similar theory of vortices: “The vortex conjoins the 
atoms, in the same way as the spiral links the points; the turning movement brings 
together atoms and points alike.” Michel Serres, The Birth of Physics (Manchester: Clin-
amen Press, 2000), 16. Deleuze and Guattari then further develop this under the name 
of “minor science” in Gilles Deleuze and Félix Guattari, A Thousand Plateaus: Capi-
talism and Schizophrenia, trans. Brian Massumi (London: Continuum, 2008), 361–­62.
Schelling illustrates this in a footnote with the image of the whirlpool: “A stream 
flows in a straight line forward as long as it encounters no resistance. Where there is 
resistance—­a whirlpool forms. Every original product of nature is such a whirlpool, 
every organism. The whirlpool is not something immobilized, it is rather something 
constantly transforming—­but reproduced anew at each moment. Thus no product in 
nature is fixed, but is introduced at each instant through the force of nature entire.” 
F. W. J. Schelling, First Outline of a System of the Philosophy of Nature, trans. Keith 
R. Peterson (Albany: State University of New York Press, 2004), 18.
3. David Grandy, Everyday Quantum Reality (Chicago: Indiana University Press, 
2010); Johnjoe McFadden and Jim Al-­Khalili, Life on the Edge: The Coming of Age of 
Quantum Biology, (New York: Broadway Books, 2016).
4. Steven Strogatz, Sync: The Emerging Science of Spontaneous Order (New York: 
Hyperion, 2003), 70–­100.
5. Daniel Graham, The Texts of Early Greek Philosophy: The Complete Fragments 
and Selected Testimonies of the Major Presocratics (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 2010), 159. 62 [F39].
6. See Strogatz, Sync; Briggs and Peat, Turbulent Mirror, 42–­43; Ilya Prigogine 
and Isabelle Stengers, The End of Certainty: Time, Chaos, and the New Laws of Nature 
(New York: Free Press, 1997).
7. K. Zioutas, M. Tsagri, Y.K. Semertzidis, T. Papaevangelou, D. H. H. Hoffmann, 
and V. Anastassopoulos, “The 11-­Years Solar Cycle As The Manifestation Of The 
Dark Universe,” Modern Physics Letters A 29, no. 37 (2014). arxiv.org/abs/1309.4021
8. See Thomas Nail, Marx in Motion: A New Materialist Marxism (Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 2020).

	
Notes to Pages 39–62	 293
9. For a philosophical theory of diffraction, see Barad, Meeting the Universe 
Halfway.
10. See Anatoliĭ Burshteĭn, Introduction to Thermodynamics and Kinetic Theory 
of Matter (New York: Wiley, 1996).
11. As Hume argues. See Nail, Being and Motion.
12. See Nail, Being and Motion.
13. See Thomas Nail, “Matter and Motion,” unpublished manuscript, chapter 1.
14. See Nail, Lucretius I.
Chapter 3: The Planetary Field
1. Randall, Dark Matter and the Dinosaurs.
2. Latour, Lovelock, and Stengers argue for the autonomous functioning of the earth.
3. See Hodder and Lucas, “The Symmetries and Asymmetries of Human-­Thing 
Relations.”
4. The debate between relation and non-­relation in new materialism misses a third 
option: asymmetrical relations, or what Neyrat calls “separation,” which is a relation 
of distance. See Graham Harman, “Agential and Speculative Realism: Remarks on 
Barad’s Ontology,” Rhizomes: Cultural Studies in Emerging Knowledge 30 (2016), 
https://doi.org/10.20415/rhiz/030.e10; Neyrat, The Unconstructable Earth.
5. The theory of knots is further developed in Nail, Being and Motion, chapter 3.
6. If “the forming of the five senses is a labour of the entire history of the world 
down to the present,” as Marx says (Karl Marx, Early Writings [New York: Penguin, 
1992], 353; translation modified), then Marxism requires a much deeper historical 
materialism of the earth itself.  We need a Marxist geology and cosmology, a Marxism 
for the Anthropocene. Marx wrote extensively about geology, and the theory of the 
earth plays a role throughout his writings. See Nail, Marx in Motion.
Chapter 4: Centripetal Minerality
1. “In sum, my aim here is to interrupt the way that Derrida’s ‘nonconcept textu-
ality’ or ‘language in the general sense’ has been taken up, knocked into disciplinary 
shape, properly and predictably contextualized, and, inevitably, conceptualized.” 
Kirby, Quantum Anthropologies.
2. See Kohn, How Forests Think. I disagree with Kohn that human thought is 
continuous with but different from the distinct network of habitual relays or relations 
between beings. Kohn, following Peirce, claims that only humans can use abstract 
symbols. Pierce and Kohn do not want to say that all of nature has “language” in 
the same way. They are committed to the idea of dividing nature into three kinds of 
sign: icon, index, and symbol. But this division cuts nature off from itself in a way 
that is materially and historically untenable. There are differences in distribution or 
arrangement of relation, but they are differences of degree, not of kind.
Furthermore, by leaving non-­living matter out of language, Kohn and Peirce 
both end up relegating matter to mechanistic meaningless objects. Kohn directly 
rejects Jane Bennet’s position and the new materialists on this point. For Kohn and 

294	
Notes to Pages 62–69
Peirce, icons = matter, indexes = life, and symbols = human. Kohn and Peirce thus 
end up reproducing the age-­old great chain of being, couched in linguistic terms. 
Even though both say that they want a kind of ontological continuum, they end up 
undermining it with the tripartite division of semiotic levels.
3. Kirby, Quantum Anthropologies.
4. Jeffrey Jerome Cohen, ed., Animal, Vegetable, Mineral: Ethics and Objects (Wash-
ington, DC: Oliphaunt Books, 2012); Jeffrey Jerome Cohen, Stone: An Ecology of the 
Inhuman (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press: 2015); Jeffrey Jerome Cohen 
and Lowell Duckert, Elemental Ecocriticism: Thinking with Earth, Air, Water, and Fire 
(Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2015); Ömür Harmansah, ed., Of Rocks and 
Water: Towards an Archaeology of Place (Oxford and Philadelphia: Oxbow Books, 2014); 
Kohn, How Forests Think; John Sallis, Stone (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 
1994); Christopher Y. Tilley and Wayne Bennett, The Materiality of Stone: Explorations in 
Landscape Phenomenology (Oxford: Berg, 2004); David Macauley, Elemental Philosophy: 
Earth, Air, Fire, and Water As Environmental Ideas (Albany, NY: SUNY Press, 2011).
5. This is what vitalism does. See Bennett, Vibrant Matter; Cohen, Animal, Veg-
etable, Mineral.
6. Georges Bataille, The Accursed Share: An Essay on General Economy (New 
York: Zone Books, 1988).
7. See Nail, Lucretius I.
8. Hazen, The Story of Earth.
9. Hazen, The Story of Earth.
10. Cohen, Stone; Tilley and Bennett, The Materiality of Stone.
11. “Relations do not create things like rocks and mountains; things like rocks 
and mountains are what enable relations to flourish.” Cohen, Stone, 3.
12. Ben Woodard, On an Ungrounded Earth: Towards a New Geophilosophy 
(Brooklyn, NY: punctum books, 2013), 18–­25.
13. Nancy Tuana, “Viscous Porosity: Witnessing Katrina,” in Material Femi-
nisms, eds. Stacy Alaimo and Susan J. Hekman (Indianapolis: Indiana University 
Press 2008), 188–­213; 194. Tuana contends that fluidity and flows overlook “sites 
of resistance and opposition” while viscosity “retains an emphasis on resistance to 
changing form.” Thickness is not impenetrable nor immutable, but something that 
undergoes change in and through friction (188).
14. “Infinite productivity must counter itself, it must put the brakes on itself, it 
must slow itself down. Nature can’t only be forward advancement, nature must also 
lag behind, it must also constitute its own ‘constraint.’ This lag can be defined as 
an ‘antiproductive’ tendency without which all productivity would be vain: There 
would only be the absolute, the infinite, endless movement, and as a result, nothing 
that would be finite, no object whatsoever.” Neyrat, The Unconstructable Earth, 156.
15. Ted Toadvine, “Thinking after the World: Deconstruction and Last Things,” 
in Eco-­Deconstruction: Derrida and Environmental Philosophy, eds. Matthias Fritsch, 
Philippe Lynes, and David Wood (New York: Fordham University Press, 2018), 50–­80.
16. “The mutation in technology changes not simply the archiving process, but 

	
Notes to Pages 70–81	 295
what is archivable –­ that is, the content of what has to be archived is changed by the 
technology.” Jacques Derrida, “Archive Fever. A Seminar . . .” in Refiguring the Archive, 
ed. Carolyn Hamilton (Dordrecht, Boston, London: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 
2002), 38–­80; 46.
17. “Archivization produces as much as it records the event.” Jacques Derrida, 
“Archive Fever: A Freudian Impression,” Diacritics 25, no. 2 (1995): 17.
18. “Thus, rocks, we argue, queer archives.” Stephanie Springgay and Sarah E. 
Truman, “Stone Walks: Inhuman Animacies and Queer Archives of Feeling,” Dis-
course: Studies in the Cultural Politics of Education 38, no. 6 (2017): 851–­63; 861.
19. “Poetry of molecular parsings whose alphabet is the periodic table—­chemical 
vocatives for assemblage and dissociation. A metaphor of language? Or more instan-
tiations of a language whose ‘langue’ involves the Earth itself?” Kirby, Quantum 
Anthropologies, 41.
20. See Nail, Being and Motion.
21. Robert Epstein, “The Empty Brain,” Aeon, 18 May, 2016. https://aeon.co/essays/
your-brain-does-not-process-information-and-it-is-not-a-computer. See also Nail, 
Theory of the Object.
22. “Which bring[s] the flow of events to a standstill, that history forms, at the 
interior of this flow, as crystalline constellation.” Walter Benjamin, The Arcades Proj-
ect, trans. Howard Eiland (Cambridge, Massachusetts, 1999), 854.
23. Meillassoux (After Finitude) thinks that organic life, reason, and God are ex 
nihilo emergences radically distinct from material nature.
Chapter 5: Hadean Earth
1. Arthur C. Clarke, Greetings, Carbon-­Based Bipeds!: Collected Essays, 1934–­1998, 
ed. Ian T. Macauley (New York: St. Martin’s Griffin, 2000), 333.
2. The title of this section comes from Frédéric Neyrat’s wonderful paper of the 
same name. Frédéric Neyrat, “Our Troubled Planet: Dialectics of Meteors,” filmed 
19 December 2018 at NYU Center for French Language and Cultures, video, 25:22, 
https://atoposophie.wordpress.com/2018/12/19/dialectics-of-meteors/
3. Centre National De La Recherche Scientifique (CNRS) Press Release, “Moon 
Thought to Play Major Role in Maintaining Earth’s Magnetic Field,” Astronomy Now, 
1 April 2016. https://astronomynow.com/2016/04/01/moon-thought-to-play-major-
role-in-maintaining-earths-magnetic-field/
4. “The experimental approach to deep water has focused on the possibility that 
the most common of minerals—­olivine, pyroxene, garnet, and their denser deep-­
Earth variants—­may be able to incorporate a small amount of water at mantle condi-
tions. The study of water in ‘nominally anhydrous’ minerals, which became a major 
focus of high-­pressure mineralogy in the 1990s, yielded astonishing results. It turns 
out that at high pressure and temperature, it’s relatively easy for some minerals to 
incorporate lots of hydrogen atoms, which are the mineralogical equivalent of water 
(because hydrogen atoms combine with oxygen in these minerals). Minerals that are 
invariably dry in the cooler, low-­pressure environments of the shallow crust—­where 

296	
Notes to Pages 81–82
explosive volcanism releases any water—­can become rather wet in the deep mantle.” 
Hazen, The Story of Earth, 91.
5. Andy Coghlan, “There’s as Much Water in Earth’s Mantle as in All the Oceans,” 
New Scientist, 7 June 2017. https://www.newscientist.com/article/2133963-theres-as 
-much-water-in-earths-mantle-as-in-all-the-oceans/
6. “Thus, ancestral anteriority can too easily be converted into anteriority for us.” 
“By way of contrast, the posteriority of extinction indexes a physical annihilation 
which no amount of chronological tinkering can transform into a correlate ‘for us,’ 
because no matter how proximal or how distal the position allocated to it in space-­
time, it has already cancelled the sufficiency of the correlation.” Ray Brassier, Nihil Un-
bound: Enlightenment and Extinction (Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 2010), 229.
I disagree with Brassier on this point. The past is what is more radically asym-
metrical (not non-­relational), because it cannot be affected by humans.
The future, however, is that which most definitely will retain traces of humans 
even in the final moments of the universe. The past is always related to the future as 
its immanent condition, but the future is not the condition of the past. The future 
as a hypothetical later present state is not yet and thus remains an immaterial and 
idealist speculation. In looking for a world without humans in the future Brassier 
finds the speculative mind without a world.
Brassier continues: “Accordingly, there can be no ‘afterwards’ of extinction, since 
it already corrodes the efficacy of the projection through which correlational synthesis 
would assimilate its reality to that of a phenomenon dependent upon conditions of 
manifestation. Extinction has a transcendental efficacy precisely insofar as it tokens 
an annihilation which is neither a possibility towards which actual existence could 
orient itself, nor a given datum from which future existence could proceed. It retro-
actively disables projection, just as it pre-­emptively abolishes retention. In this regard, 
extinction unfolds in an ‘anterior posteriority’ which usurps the ‘future anteriority’ 
of human existence.” Brassier, Nihil Unbound, 230.
I disagree here as well. Transcendental annihilation assumes absolute entropy 
as a law of the universe when it is actually an emergent feature in our region of the 
universe. Brassier tries to step outside our region of the cosmos but actually ends 
up universalizing entropy and solar death as Bataille does. But quantum gravity 
theories hold that the beginning of the universe was not a singularity and its death 
will not end in absolute stillness. The universe will begin and end through quan-
tum fluctuations that are fundamentally indeterminate. Indeterminacy is more 
fundamental than vitalism or nihilism. Quantum indeterminacy is the source of 
the vital birth and rebirth but also of the particular history of death and decay in 
this universe.
In short, Brassier assumes a strictly classical, thermodynamic, and pre-­quantum 
universe where there are no quantum fluctuations to alter the law of entropy. The 
heat death of the universe is not an ontological or necessary fact.
7. Alain Badiou has recently announced that “the rethinking of the univocity of 
ground is a necessary task for the world in which we are living today.” Alain Badiou, 

	
Notes to Pages 82–109	 297
Deleuze: The Clamor of Being, trans. Louise Burchill (Minneapolis: University of 
Minnesota Press, 2000), 46. But he has at the same time abandoned “the philosophy 
of or as nature” to be a “contemporary impossibility.” See Paul Patton, ed., “Deleuze, 
The Fold: Leibniz and the Baroque,” in Deleuze: A Critical Reader (Oxford: Blackwell, 
1997), 51–­69; 64. For more discussion see Iain Grant, Philosophies of Nature After 
Schelling (London, New York: Continuum 2006), 199.
In contrast, I claim here that the earth gives us an ever-­changing metastable 
ground that is both natural and historical. Badiou embraces the latter without the 
former, while Deleuze embraces the former without the latter. This is what Theory 
of the Earth hopes to overcome.
8. “The laws of nature,” writes Deleuze, “govern the surface of the world,” while a 
“transcendental or volcanic spatium” troubles its depths. Gilles Deleuze, Difference 
and Repetition, trans. Paul Patton (New York: Columbia University Press, 1994), 241.
9. Hazen, The Story of Earth, 97.
10. M.L. Wong, B.D. Charnay, P. Gao, Y.L. Yung, and M.J. Russell, “Nitrogen 
Oxides in Early Earth’s Atmosphere as Electron Acceptors for Life’s Emergence,” 
Astrobiology 17, no. 10 (Oct 2017): 975–­83. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/m/
pubmed/29023147/.
11. ‘‘Exactly how the stepped leader works is not understood.’’ Marin A. Uman, 
All About Lightning (Mineola, NY: Dover, 2009), 74.
12. Karen Barad, “Transmaterialities: Trans/Matter/Realities and Queer Politi-
cal Imaginings,” GLQ 21, no. 2–­3 (2015): 387–­422; Kirby, Quantum Anthropologies.
Chapter 6: Centrifugal Atmospherics
1. Per Bak, How Nature Works: The Science of Self-­Organized Criticality (New 
York: Springer, 2013).
2. See Addy Pross, What Is Life? How Chemistry Becomes Biology (Oxford : Oxford 
University Press, 2016), 58–­81.
3. See Hazen, The Story of Earth, chapter 6; Peter Ward and Joe Kirschvink, A 
New History of Life: The Radical New Discoveries about the Origins and Evolution of 
Life on Earth (London: Bloomsbury Publishing Plc, 2016).
4. Hazen, The Story of Earth, 143–­44.
5. Stuart A. Kauffman, The Origins of Order: Self-­Organization and Selection in 
Evolution (Oxford, New York: Oxford University Press, 2015).
6. See Nail, Marx in Motion.
7. See image in Sean Carroll, The Big Picture: On the Origins of Life, Meaning, 
and the Universe Itself (New York: Dutton, 2016), 255.
8. On Rayleigh–­Bénard Turbulence, see Eric D. Schneider and Dorion Sagan, 
Into the Cool: Energy Flow, Thermodynamics, and Life (Chicago: The University of 
Chicago Press, 2006).
Chapter 7: Archean Earth I: Pneumatology
1. Arthur Rimbaud, Rimbaud: Complete Works, Selected Letters: A Bilingual 

298	
Notes to Pages 109–20
Edition, trans. Wallace Fowlie and Seth A. Whidden (Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, 2005), 187. My translation.Bottom of FormBottom of Form
2. Paul Valéry, Cahiers, vol. 1, ed. Judith Robinson (Paris: Gallimard, Bibliothèque 
de la Pléiade, 1973), C1, 990. English translation, Insook Webber.
3. See John Durham Peters, The Marvelous Clouds. Toward a Philosophy of Ele-
mental Media (Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 2015).
4. Ibid., 256.
5. See Geoffrey West, Scale: The Universal Laws of Life, Growth, and Death in 
Organisms, Cities, and Companies (New York: Penguin Books, Reprint edition, 2018).
6. For instance, Venus is born from the castrated falling seed of the sky god, Ura-
nus, mixing in the ocean, and the sky woman falls through a hole in the sky to earth.
7. See Gleick, Chaos.
Chapter 8: Archean Earth II: Biogenesis
1. See Pross, What Is Life?; Eva Jablonka, Marion J. Lamb, and Anna Zeli-
gowski, Evolution in Four Dimensions: Genetic, Epigenetic, Behavioral, and Sym-
bolic Variation in the History of Life (Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press, 2014); Lynn 
Margulis and Dorion Sagan, Microcosmos: Four Billion Years of Evolution from 
Our Microbial Ancestors (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1998); Hazen, 
The Story of Earth.
2. Daniel J. Nicholson and John Dupré, eds., Everything Flows: Towards a Proces-
sual Philosophy of Biology (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2018).
3. Georges Cuvier, The Animal Kingdom: Arranged in Conformity with Its Orga-
nization, trans. Henry M’Murtrie (New York: G. & C. & H. Carvill, 1833), 14.
4. T. H. E. Huxley, “Address to the British Association: Liverpool Meeting, 1870,” 
Nature 2 (1870): 399–­406; 402.
5. Charles Sherrington, Man on His Nature (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 1940), 83.
6. Carl R. Woese, “A New Biology for a New Century,” Microbiology and Molecular 
Biology Reviews 68 (2004): 173–­86; 176.
7. Alvaro Moreno and Matteo Mossio, Biological Autonomy: A Philosophical and 
Theoretical Enquiry (Dordrecht: Springer, 2015), 18.
8. See John Marks, “Molecular Biology in the Work of Deleuze and Guattari,” 
Paragraph 29, no. 2 (Jul 2006): 81–­97.
9. François Jacob, The Logic of Living Systems: A History of Heredity, trans. Betty 
E. Spillman (London: Allen Lane, 1974), 276.
10. Ibid., 292.
11. Ludwig von Bertalanffy, Problems of Life: An Evaluation of Modern Biological 
and Scientific Thought (New York: Harper & Brothers, 1952), 134.
12. Paul A. Weiss, “From Cell to Molecule,” in The Molecular Control of Cellular 
Activity, ed. John M. Allen (Toronto: McGraw Hill), 1–­72; 3.
13. Paul A. Weiss, “The Living System: Determinism Stratified,” Studium Generale 
22 (1969): 361–­400; 369.

	
Notes to Pages 120–28	 299
14. Richard C. Lewontin, “The Dream of the Human Genome,” The New York 
Review of Books 39, no. 10 (1992): 31–­40; 33.
15. Sarah Lewin, “New Equation Tallies Odds of Life Beginning,” Space.com, 8 
July 2016. https://www.space.com/33374-odds-of-life-emerging-new-equation.html.
16. “The hydrophobic force is interesting for our current discussion because it 
is not something a single molecule simply possesses, given its intrinsic properties.” 
Stephan Guttinger, “A Process Ontology for Macromolecular Biology,” in Nicholson 
and Dupré, eds., Everything Flows, 303–­20; 318.
17. Elizabeth Howell, “Sun’s UV Light Helped Spark Life,” Astrobiology Magazine, 
30 March 2017. https://www.astrobio.net/origin-and-evolution-of-life/suns-uv-light 
-helped-spark-life/.
18. Brian Mahy and Marc van Regenmortel, Desk Encyclopedia of Animal and 
Bacterial Virology (Burlington: Elsevier, 2009), 26; Luis P. Villarreal, Viruses and the 
Evolution of Life (Washington, DC: ASM Press, 2005). N. J. Dimmock, A. J. Easton, 
and K. N. Leppard, Introduction to Modern Virology, 6th edition (Malden, MA: Black-
well Publishing Ltd., 2007), 16.
19. E. V. Koonin and V. V. Dolja, “A Virocentric Perspective on the Evolution of 
Life,” Current Opinion in Virology 3, no. 5 (Oct 2013): 546–­57.
20. Ricard V. Solé and Santiago F. Elena, Viruses As Complex Adaptive Systems 
(Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2019).
21. Mary Jane West-­Eberhard, Developmental Plasticity and Evolution (Oxford, 
New York: Oxford University Press, 2003), 192.
22. Jablonka, Lamb, and Zeligowski, Evolution in Four Dimensions.
23. Evelyn F. Keller and L. L. Winship, Century of the Gene (Cambridge: Harvard 
University Press, 2009), 63.
24. National Institutes of Health (NIH) News Release, “New Imaging Technique 
Overturns Longstanding Textbook Model of DNA Folding,” U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services, 27 July 2017. https://www.nih.gov/news-events/news-re 
leases/new-imaging-technique-overturns-longstanding-textbook-model-dna-folding.
25. Carl Zimmer, “Everything You Thought You Knew about the Shape of DNA 
Is Wrong,” Stat News, 31 March 2016, https://www.statnews.com/2016/03/31/dna 
-shape-double-helix-dekker/.
26. W. Wang, H. W. Hellinga, and L. S. Beese, “Structural Evidence for the Rare 
Tautomer Hypothesis of Spontaneous Mutagenesis,” Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences 108, no. 43 (Oct 2011), 17644–­48.
27. McFadden and Al-­Khalili, Life on the Edge, 226.
28. Ibid., 227.
29. See A. Datta and S. Jinks-­Robertson, “Association of Increased Spontaneous 
Mutation Rates with High Levels of Transcription in Yeast,” Science 268, no. 5217 
(1995): 1616–­19; Jürgen Bachl, Chris Carlson, Vanessa Gray-­Schopfer, Mark Dessing, 
and Carina Olsson, “Increased Transcription Levels Induce Higher Mutation Rates in 
a Hypermutating Cell Line,” Journal of Immunology 166, no. 8 (2001): 5051–­57; P. Cui, 
F. Ding, Q. Lin, L. Zhang, A. Li, Z. Zhang, S. Hu, and J. Yu, “Distinct Contributions 

300	
Notes to Pages 128–39
of Replication and Transcription to Mutation Rate Variation of Human Genomes,” 
Genomics, Proteomics and Bioinformatics 10, no. 1 (2012): 4–­10; John Cairns, Julie 
Overbaugh, and Stephan Miller, “The Origin of Mutants,” Nature 335 (1988): 142–­45.
30. Johnjoe McFadden and Jim Al-­Khalili, “A Quantum Mechanical Model of 
Adaptive Mutation,” Biosystems 50, no. 3 (Jun 1999): 203–­11.
31. Hazen, The Story of Earth.
32. The principal source of this region is what Vernadsky calls living matter: the 
collection of organisms and living bodies that are responsible for the creation of new 
compounds and that “exert a powerful permanent and continuous disturbing effect 
on the chemical stability of the surface of our planet.” Cited in Emanuele Coccia, 
The Life of Plants: A Metaphysics of Mixture (Cambridge: Polity Press, 2019), 57–­58. 
See also Vladimir Ivanovich Vernadsky, The Biosphere, eds. David B. Langmuir and 
Mark A. McMenamin (New York: Springer Science [1998] 2013).
Chapter 9: Tensional Vegetality
1. For example, Meillassoux, After Finitude, preface by Alain Badiou.
2. For example, Michael Marder, The Philosopher’s Plant: An Intellectual Herbar-
ium, illustrations by Mathilde Roussel (New York: Columbia University Press, 2015).
3. Immanuel Kant expressed doubt that biology would ever find a Newton to 
explain even a “single blade of grass.” Immanuel Kant, Critique of Judgment [1790], 
Part 2: Critique of Teleological Judgment, trans. W. S. Pluhar (Indianapolis: Hackett 
Publishing Co., 1987), 282.
4. Erwin Schrödinger, What Is Life? The Physical Aspect of the Living Cell; with 
Mind and Matter; & Autobiographical Sketches (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 2017).
5. Peter McCourt, “Hormones and Developmental Timing Boundaries in Ara-
bidopsis,” abstract circulated by the University of Toronto Department of Botany, 
18 March 2005. “A project of engaging philosophy on its classical terms and sub-
jecting ‘the plant’ to those terms—­terms of resemblance, difference as degrees from 
similarity of function, relevant functions and their relative value anchored by ‘the 
human’ and of hoping, as was the case with the animal, to find a common ground 
and a ‘common logic between these two kingdoms’ so that plants, now, too, can be 
taken seriously.” Cited in Karen L. F. Houle, “Animal, Vegetable, Mineral: Ethics as 
Extension or Becoming? The Case of Becoming-­Plant,” Journal for Critical Animal 
Studies 9, no. 1–­2, (2011): 95.
6. Michael Marder, Grafts: Writings on Plants (Minneapolis: University of Min-
nesota Press, 2016); Elaine Miller, The Vegetative Soul: From Philosophy of Nature 
to Subjectivity in the Feminine (Albany: State University of New York Press, 2002); 
Matthew Hall, Plants as Persons: A Philosophical Botany (Albany: State University of 
New York Press, 2011); Monica Gagliano, John C. Ryan, and Patrícia I. Vieira, eds., 
The Language of Plants: Science, Philosophy, Literature (Minneapolis: University of 
Minnesota Press, 2017); Craig Holdrege, Thinking Like a Plant: A Living Science for 
Life (Barrington, MA: Lindisfarne Books, 2013); Luce Irigaray and Michael Marder, 

	
Notes to Pages 139–45	 301
Through Vegetal Being: Two Philosophical Perspectives (New York: Columbia Univer-
sity Press, 2016); Michael Marder, Plant-­Thinking: A Philosophy of Vegetal Life (New 
York: Columbia University Press, 2013); Marder, The Philosopher’s Plant; Jeffrey T. 
Nealon, Plant Theory: Biopower and Vegetable Life (Stanford, CA: Stanford University 
Press, 2016).
7. See Nail, Lucretius I  and Nail, Being and Motion.
8. Yutaka Sumino, Ken H. Nagai, Yuji Shitaka, Dan Tanaka, Kenichi Yoshikawa, 
Hugues Chaté, and Kazuhiro Oiwa, “Large-­scale Vortex Lattice Emerging from Col-
lectively Moving Microtubules,” Nature 483 (March 2012): 448–­52; R. E. Goldstein 
and J. W. van de Meent, “A Physical Perspective on Cytoplasmic Streaming,” Interface 
Focus 5, no. 4 (2015): 2015003; W. F. Pickard, “Absorption by a Moving Spherical 
Organelle in a Heterogeneous Cytoplasm: Implications for the Role of Trafficking 
in a Symplast,” Journal of Theoretical Biology 240, no. 2 (May 2006): 288–­301; Yoshio 
Yotsuyanagi, “Recherches sur les phénomènes moteurs dans les fragments de proto-
plasme isolés II. Mouvements divers déterminés par la condition de milieu,” Cytologia 
18 (1953): 202–­17; Tamás Vicsek and Anna Zafeiris, “Collective Motion,” Physics 
Report 517, no. 3–­4 (2012): 71–­140.
9. William O. Hancock, “Cytoskeletal Organization: Whirling to the Beat,” Cur-
rent Biology 22, no. 12 (June 2012): R493-­R495.
10. Schneider and Sagan, Into the Cool.
11. “Using live-­cell imaging and computer simulations, we identify a flow pattern 
that produces vortices (eddies) on the upstream side of the septum. Nuclei can be 
immobilized in these microfluidic eddies, where they form multinucleate aggregates 
and accumulate foci of the HDA-­2 histone deacetylase-­associated factor, SPA-­19. 
Pores experiencing flow degenerate in the absence of SPA-­19, suggesting that eddy-­
trapped nuclei function to reinforce the septum. Together, our data show that eddies 
comprise a subcellular niche favoring nuclear differentiation and that subcompart-
ments can be self-­organized as a consequence of regimented cytoplasmic streaming.” 
Laurent Pieuchot, Julian Lai, Rachel Ann Loh, Fong Yew Leong, Keng-­Hwee Chiam, 
Jason Stajich, and Gregory Jedd, “Cellular Subcompartments through Cytoplasmic 
Streaming,” Developmental Cell 34, no. 4 (Aug 2015): 410–­20; 410.
12. S. Yoshiyama, M. Ishigami, A. Nakamura, and K. Kohama, “Calcium Wave 
for Cytoplasmic Streaming of Physarum Polycephalum,” Cell Biology International 
34, no. 1 (Dec 2009): 35–­40.
13. On the formation of cellular subcompartments through eddies, see Pieuchot 
et al., “Cellular Subcompartments.”
14. “It is not so much that the structures begin to move, but movements—­for ex-
ample in the assembly and self-­organization of the cytoskeleton—­begin to constitute 
structure.” Hannah Landecker, “The Life of Movement: From Microcinematography 
to Live-­Cell Imaging,” Journal of Visual Culture 11, no. 3 (Dec 2012): 378–­99; 393–­94.
15. “As recently as two decades ago, college students were still being taught that 
organelles within eukaryotic cells probably ‘pinched off’ from the nucleus and sub-
sequently evolved their separate specific functions. With the ability to analyze DNA, 

302	
Notes to Pages 145–50
however, it soon became clear that the pinch-­off theory had a major failing: it couldn’t 
explain the presence of DNA in certain organelles, nor the fact that this DNA was like 
that of bacterial genophores and different from that of the nucleus’s chromosomes.” 
Margulis and Sagan, Microcosmos, 120.
16. “At this late stage, the vortices showed a tendency to arrange their positions 
into a hexagonal lattice, although not perfectly. A given vortex consists of a sparse core 
and a dense peripheral annulus inside which microtubules move both clockwise and 
anticlockwise in small streams and slide past each other (Fig. 2 and Supplementary 
Movie 2). That is, the streams show nematic rather than polar order. Microtubules 
were never trapped in a vortex: they would circulate inside one vortex for some time 
before moving to a neighbouring one or travelling farther and starting to revolve 
around a more distant core. Large-­scale vortex lattice emerging from collectively 
moving microtubules.” Sumino et al., “Large-­scale vortex lattice,” 448.
17. Margulis and Sagan, Microcosmos, 110–­15.
18. Ibid., 30.
19. Pieuchot et al., “Cellular Subcompartments.”
20. Michiel T. M. Willemse, “Evolution of Plant Reproduction: From Fusion and 
Dispersal to Interaction and Communication,” Chinese Science Bulletin 54, no. 14 
(Jul 2009): 2390–­403; 2397.
21. See Andrew J. Heidel, Oz Barazani, and Ian T. Baldwin, “Interaction Between 
Herbivore Defense and Microbial Signaling: Bacterial Quorum-­Sensing Compounds 
Weaken JA-­Mediated Herbivore Resistance in Nicotiana Attenuate,” Chemoecology 
20, no. 2 (Jun 2009): 149–­54. See also R. Karban, I. T. Baldwin, K. J. Baxter, G. Laue, 
and G. W. Felton, “Communication Between Plants: Induced Resistance in Wild 
Tobacco Plants Following Clipping of Neighboring Sagebrush,” Oecologia 125, no. 
1 (Oct 2000): 66–­71.
22. “We now know that plant chemical language, for example, is endowed with 
true semantic flexibility, so that new meanings may be assigned to old chemical words 
and used in novel interactions and new contexts.” Monica Gagliano, “Breaking the 
Silence: Green Mudras and the Faculty of Language in Plants,” in The Language of 
Plants: Science, Philosophy, Literature, eds. Monica Gagliano, John C. Ryan, and 
Patrícia I. Vieira (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2017), 84–­102; 92. 
See also J. K. Holopainen, “Multiple Functions of Inducible Plant Volatiles,” Trends 
in Plant Science 9, no. 11 (Nov 2004): 529–­33.
23. Paul W. Paré and James H. Tumlinson, “Plant Volatiles as a Defense against 
Insect Herbivores,” Plant Physiology 121 (Oct 1999): 325–­31; R. Karban et al., “Com-
munication between Plants”; M. Heil and J. Ton, “Long-­Distance Signalling in Plant 
Defence,” Trends in Plant Science 13, no. 6 (Jun 2008): 264–­72.
24. M. Dicke, A. A. Agrawal, and J. Bruin, “Plants Talk, but Are They Deaf?,” 
Trends in Plant Science 8, no. 9 (Sep 2003): 403–­5; 403.
25. M. A. Crespi and J. J. Casal, “Photoreceptor-­Mediated Kin Recognition in 
Plants,” New Phytologist 205, no. 1 (Jan 2015): 329–­38.
26. Susan A. Dudley and Amanda L. File, “Kin Recognition in an Annual Plant,” 

	
Notes to Pages 150–66	 303
Biology Letters 3 (2007): 435–­38; Guillermo P. Murphy and Susan A. Dudley, “Kin 
Recognition: Competition and Cooperation in Impatiens (Balsaminaceae),” American 
Journal of Botany 96, no. 11 (2009): 1990–­96.
27. For discussion, see Alexander Kravchenko, “How Humberto Maturana’s Bi-
ology of Cognition Can Revive the Language Sciences,” Constructivist Foundations 
6, no. 3 (Jul 2011): 352–­62.
28. See František Baluška et al., “Introduction,” in Communication in Plants: 
Neuronal Aspects of Plant Life, eds. František Baluška, Stefano Mancuso, and Dieter 
Volkmann (Berlin: Springer-­Verlag, 2006).
29. Georg W. F. Hegel, A. V. Miller, and J. N. Findlay, Hegel’s Philosophy of Nature: 
Being Part Two of the Encyclopaedia of the Philosophical Sciences [1830] (Oxford: 
Clarendon, 2007).
Chapter 10: Proterozoic Earth
1. Stefan Bengtson, Birger Rasmussen, Magnus Ivarsson, Janet Muhling, Curt 
Broman, Federica Marone, Marco Stampanoni, and Andrey Bekker, “Fungus-­like 
Mycelial Fossils in 2.4-­billion-­year-­old Vesicular Basalt,” Nature Ecology & Evolution 
1, no. 6, article no. 0141 (Apr 2017).
2. See Deleuze and Guattari, A Thousand Plateaus.
3. Barbara K. Kennedy, “First Land Plants and Fungi Changed Earth’s Climate, 
Paving the Way for Explosive Evolution of Land Animals, New Gene Study Suggests,” 
Penn State: Eberly College of Science, 9 Aug 2001, https://science.psu.edu/news-and-
events/2001-news/Hedges8–2001.htm.
4. Gordon Grice, “Lichens: Fungi That Have Discovered Agriculture,” Discover 
Magazine, 6 January 2010, http://discovermagazine.com/2009/nov/06-lichens-fun-
gi-that-have-discovered-agriculture.
5. S. R. Gradstein and H. Kerp, “A Brief History of Plants on Earth,” in The Geo-
logic Time Scale 2012, eds. Felix M. Gradstein, James G. Ogg, Mark D. Schmitz, and 
Gabi M. Ogg (Amsterdam: Elsevier, 2012), 233–­37. Increasing oxygenation levels from 
as far back as 700 million years ago suggest that photosynthesis may have already 
been going on. See Kennedy, “First Land Plants and Fungi.”
6. Claire P. Humphreys, Peter J. Franks, Mark Rees, Martin I. Bidartondo, Jona-
than R. Leake, and David J. Beerling, “Mutualistic Mycorrhiza-­Like Symbiosis in the 
Most Ancient Group of Land Plants,” Nature Communications 1, article no. 103 (2010).
7. Alice Klein, “Plants ‘See’ Underground by Channelling Light to Their Roots,” 
New Scientist, 1 November 2016, https://www.newscientist.com/article/2111027 
-plants-see-underground-by-channelling-light-to-their-roots/.
8. Mei Mo, Ken Yokawa, Yinglang Wan, and František Baluška, “How and Why 
Do Root Apices Sense Light under the Soil Surface?,” Frontiers in Plant Science, 26 
October 2015, https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fpls.2015.00775/full.
9. “It is hardly an exaggeration to say that the tip of the radicle thus endowed, 
and having the power of directing the movements of the adjoining parts, acts like 
the brain of one of the lower animals; the brain being seated within the anterior end 

304	
Notes to Pages 166–80
of the body, receiving impressions from the sense-­organs, and directing the several 
movements.” Charles Darwin, The Power of Movement in Plants (New York: D. Ap-
pleton and Co., 1900), 576.
10. See František Baluška, Stefano Mancuso, Dieter Volkmann, and Peter W. 
Barlow, “The ‘Root-­Brain’ Hypothesis of Charles and Francis Darwin: Revival after 
More than 125 Years,” Plant Signaling and Behavior 4, no. 12 (Dec 2009): 1121–­27.
11. See T. T. Kozlowski, Seed Biology: Importance, Development, and Germination 
(New York: Academic Press, 1972).
12. Paul Valéry, The Collected Works, Vol. 2: Poems in the Rough, ed. Jackson 
Mathews, trans. Hilary Corke (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1969), 
233–­34.
13. Jeremy Rehm, “Dandelion Seeds Fly Using ‘Impossible’ Method Never Before 
Seen In Nature,” Nature Online, 17 October 2018, https://www.nature.com/articles/
d41586-018-07084-8.
Chapter 11: Elastic Animality
1. “Whilst, therefore, it is essential to consider the social construction of ‘the 
animal’ in contradistinction to the human, and to trace the processes through which 
animals are socially constructed, we cannot dissolve other species into their symbolic 
reference in human cultures.” Erika Cudworth, Social Lives with Other Animals: Tales 
of Sex, Death and Love (Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 2011), 36.
2. Richard York and Stefano B. Longo, “Animals in the World: A Materialist 
Approach to Sociological Animal Studies,” Journal of Sociology 53, no. 1 (Sept 2015): 
32–­46.
3. See Jacques Derrida, The Animal That Therefore I Am (New York: Fordham 
University Press, 2008).
4. This is why I reject the idea of “flat ontology.” See Thomas Nail, “Kinopolitics: 
Borders in Motion,” in Posthuman Ecologies: Complexity and Process After Deleuze, 
eds. Rosi Braidotti and Simone Bignall (London, New York: Rowman & Littlefield 
International Ltd., 2019), 183–­203.
5. “Animality is like an unthinking, unthinkable mirror-­twin of subjectivity. 
According to Lacan, looking into the mirror, the human being appropriates its own 
image as ‘human’ in a form originally exterior to itself. But what if it is the animal 
that exists outside of the mirror, where the human being has to recognize itself and 
at the same time cannot do so. Re-­reading Lacan, Derrida specifies that the real 
enigma is to be found not in the human being gazing at its own mirror reflection, 
but rather in the animal that stares back at the human.” Oksana Timofeeva and 
Slavoj Žižek, The History of Animals: A Philosophy (London, New York: Bloomsbury 
Academic, 2018), xv.
6. “Homo sapiens, then, is neither a clearly defined species nor a substance; it 
is, rather, a machine or device for producing the recognition of the human. . . . It is 
an optical machine constructed from a series of mirrors in which man, looking at 
himself, sees his own image always already deformed in the features of an ape. Homo 

	
Notes to Page 180	 305
is a constitutively ‘anthropomorphous’ animal . . . , who must recognize himself in 
a non-­man in order to be human.” Giorgio Agamben, The Open: Man and Animal, 
trans. Kevin Attell (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 2013), 26.
7. Derrida, The Animal That Therefore I Am.
8. Jakob von Uexküll only gives worlds to animals, not plants. He is animal-­ 
and bio-­centric. For Uexküll, “there is no space independent of subjects,” and 
these subjects include nonhuman animals. Any human concept of a holistic, “all-­
encompassing world-­space” is an anthropocentric “fiction” or “fable.” Jakob von 
Uexküll, A Foray into the Worlds of Animals and Humans: With A Theory of Mean-
ing (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2010), 70. Merleau-­Ponty is also 
biocentric because non-­life has no field of action. He finds in the Umwelt a theory 
of “life as the opening of a field of action,” an opening onto an “inter-­animality” 
that connects beings within species and between different species. See Maurice 
Merleau-­Ponty and Dominique Séglard, Nature: Course Notes from the Collège De 
France, trans. Robert Vallier (Evanston, Ill: Northwestern University Press, 2003), 
170. See also Louise H. Westling, “Merleau-­Ponty’s Human-­Animality Intertwin-
ing and the Animal Question,” Configurations 18, no. 1–­2 (Winter 2010): 161–­80; 
and Derek Ryan, Animal Theory: A Critical Introduction (Edinburgh: Edinburgh 
University Press, 2015), 105.
9. “And yet, there remains something unsatisfying about the very manner in 
which Heidegger dismisses the possibility of animals relating to their environment 
‘as such.’” “In not considering that some relation to the ‘as such’ may be possible, he 
asserts that ‘the animal is separated from man by an abyss’.” Ryan, Animal Theory, 105, 
106. See also Martin Heidegger, The Fundamental Concepts of Metaphysics: World, 
Finitude, Solitude, trans. William McNeill and Nicholas Walker (Bloomington and 
Indianapolis: Indiana University Press, 1995), 264. “[Merleau-­Ponty] is clear that 
the animal—­and like Heidegger it is often a singular, homogenised ‘animal’ that is 
under discussion in this lecture—­engages ‘a process of  “giving shape” to the world.’” 
Ryan, Animal Theory, 59.
10. “In fact, this approach ‘does not even privilege human bodies’ because ‘all 
bodies, including those of animals . . . evince certain capacities for agency. As a 
consequence, the human species, and the qualities of self-­reflection, self-­awareness, 
and rationality traditionally used to distinguish it from the rest of nature, may now,’ 
according to Coole and Frost, ‘seem little more than contingent and provisional 
forms or processes within a broader evolutionary or cosmic productivity’ (20).” Ryan, 
Animal Theory, 74.
As an alternative, according to Ryan, “Barad therefore presents a non-­
anthropocentric conception of agency: ‘refusing the anthropocentrisms of human-
ism and antihumanism, posthumanism marks the practice of accounting for the 
boundary-­making practices by which the “human” and its others are differentially 
delineated and defined.’ New materialism shifts the discussion away from sub-
ject/object, human/nonhuman dichotomies and towards messier entanglements 
of agency.” Ryan, Animal Theory, 75. See also Karen Barad, Meeting the Universe 

306	
Notes to Pages 181–88
Halfway: Quantum Physics and the Entanglement of Matter and Meaning (Durham, 
NC: Duke University Press, 2007), 136.
11. Natalie Angier, “Bone, a Masterpiece of Elastic Strength,” New York Times, 27 
April 2009, https://www.nytimes.com/2009/04/28/science/28angi.html.
12. Barad, Meeting the Universe Halfway, 185.
13. See František Baluška and Michael Levin, “On Having No Head: Cognition 
throughout Biological Systems,” Frontiers in Psychology 7, article no. 902 (2016).
14. “Complex signal processing and signal integration, including perception, 
memory and decision-­making, should be extended from neural to aneural systems. 
Even though the concept of plant neurobiology has been controversially debated 
and the essential requirements for conscious as compared to unconscious cognition 
remain the topic of investigation and discussion an exploration of common principles 
underlying biological information processing in plants and animals leads to new 
insights and ideas. For instance, it has recently been suggested that both animals 
and plants are capable of active inference and anticipatory behavior. It is tempting to 
speculate that to achieve optimal accumulation of information and predictive coding, 
evolution would have developed strategies for exploiting the benefits of both classical 
as well as quantum information processing.” Peter Jedlicka, “Revisiting the Quantum 
Brain Hypothesis: Toward Quantum (Neuro)biology?,” Frontiers in Molecular Neu-
roscience 10, article no. 366 (2017). See also František Baluška and Stefano Mancuso, 
“Plant Neurobiology: From Stimulus Perception to Adaptive Behavior of Plants, Via 
Integrated Chemical and Electrical Signaling,” Plant Signaling and Behavior 4, no. 6 
(Jun 2009): 475–­76; Peter Jedlicka, “Quantum Stochasticity and Neuronal Computa-
tions,” Nature Precedings (2009), http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/npre.2009.3702.1; Anthony 
Trewavas, “Response to Alpi et al.: Plant Neurobiology—­All Metaphors Have Value,” 
Trends in Plant Science 12, no. 6 (2007): 231–­33.
15. Margulis and Sagan, Microcosmos,149.
16. Jedlicka, “Revisiting the Quantum Brain Hypothesis.”
17. See Ahmed El Hady and Benjamin B. Matcha, “Mechanical Surface Waves 
Accompany Action Potential Propagation,” Nature Communications 6, article no. 
6697 (2015).
18. Mo Costandi, “Action Waves in the Brain,” The Guardian, 1 May 2015, https://
www.theguardian.com/science/neurophilosophy/2015/may/01/action-waves-in-the 
-brain.
19. See image in El Hady and Matcha, “Mechanical Surface Waves,” 3.
20. Rodolfo R. Llinás, I of the Vortex: From Neurons to Self (Cambridge, Mass: 
MIT Press, 2008).
21. See P.W. Glimcher, “Indeterminacy in Brain and Behavior,” Annual Review 
of Psychology 56, no. 1 (Feb 2005): 25–­56; and Jedlicka, “Revisiting the Quantum 
Brain Hypothesis.”
22. Glimcher, “Indeterminacy in Brain and Behavior.”
23. See Gustavo Deco, Viktor K. Jirsa, Peter A. Robinson, Michael Breakspear, 
and Karl Friston, “The Dynamic Brain: From Spiking Neurons to Neural Masses and 

	
Notes to Pages 188–93	 307
Cortical Fields,” PLoS Computational Biology 4, no. 8, article no. e1000092 (Aug 2008); 
Wolf Singer, “The Brain, a Complex Self-­Organizing System,” European Review 17, 
no. 2 (May 2009): 321–­29; Emmanuelle Tognoli and J. A. Scott Kelso, “The Metastable 
Brain,” Neuron 81, no. 1 (Jan 2014): 35–­48.
24. Deco et al., “The Dynamic Brain.”
25. See Glimcher, “Indeterminacy in Brain and Behavior”; D. J. Tolhurst, J. A. 
Movshon, and I. D. Thompson, “The Dependence of Response Amplitude and Vari-
ance of Cat Visual Cortical Neurones on Stimulus Contrast,” Experimental Brain 
Research 41 (1981): 414–­19; and D. J. Tolhurst, J. A. Movshon, and A. F. Dean, “The 
Statistical Reliability of Signals in Single Neurons in Cat and Monkey Visual Cortex,” 
Vision Research 23, no. 8 (1983): 775–­85.
26. Tolhurst, Movchon, and Thompson, “The Dependence of Response Ampli-
tude”; Tolhurst, Movshon, and Dean, “The Statistical Reliability of Signals.” Recently 
confirmed by Fred Rieke, David Warland, Rob de Ruyter van Steveninck, and William 
Bialek, Spikes: Exploring the Neural Code (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1997); and 
Michael N. Shadlen and William T. Newsome, “The Variable Discharge of Cortical 
Neurons: Implications for Connectivity, Computation, and Information Coding,” 
JNeurosci 18, no. 10 (1998): 3870–­96.
27. See Glimcher, “Indeterminacy in Brain and Behavior”; Johnjoe McFadden, 
“The Conscious Electromagnetic Information (Cemi) Field Theory: The Hard Problem 
Made Easy?,” Journal of Consciousness Studies 9, no. 8 (2002): 45–­60.
28. Dante R. Chialvo, “Emergent Complex Neural Dynamics,” Nature Physics 
6 (2010): 744–­50.
29. Jeffrey Satinover, The Quantum Brain: The Search for Freedom and the Next 
Generation of Man (New York, NY: John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2001).
30. Haim Sompolinsky,  “A Scientific Perspective on Human Choice,” in Judaism, 
Science, and Moral Responsibility, eds. Yitzhak Berger and David Shatz (New York: 
Rowman & Littlefield, 2006), 13–­44. “What cannot be ruled out is that tiny quantum 
fluctuations deep in the brain are amplified by deterministic chaos and will ultimately 
lead to behavioral choices.” Christof Koch, “Free Will, Physics, Biology, and the Brain,” 
in Downward Causation and the Neurobiology of Free Will, eds. Nancey Murphy, George 
F. R. Ellis, and Timothy O’Connor (Berlin: Springer-­Verlag, 2009), 31–­52; 40. See also 
McFadden, “The Conscious Electromagnetic Information (Cemi) Field Theory.”
31. See Akira M. Lippit, Electric Animal: Toward a Rhetoric of Wildlife (Minne-
apolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2010).
Chapter 12: Phanerozoic Earth I: Kinomorphology
1. The “Cambrian explosion” of diversity cannot be explained by the mere increase 
of oxygen alone. See Douglas Fox, “What sparked the Cambrian explosion?,” Nature 
530 (Feb 2016): 268–­70.
2. See Robert M. Hazen, Dominic Papineau, Wouter Bleeker, Robert T. Downs, 
John M. Ferry, Timothy J. McCoy, Dimitri A. Sverjensky, and Hexiong Yang, “Mineral 
Evolution,” American Mineralogist 93 (2008): 1693–­720.

308	
Notes to Pages 194–96
3. “Just as evolution is largely ecology writ large, so the organism seems to be 
ecology writ small. Clearly work needs to be done in this area, but perhaps individ-
ual organisms can be understood as spatially and temporally condensed versions of 
ecological processes.” Schneider and Sagan, Into the Cool, 256.
4. Fisher’s “evolutionary fitness landscape” model is static. For a critique, see 
John Gribbin, Deep Simplicity: Bringing Order to Chaos and Complexity (New York: 
Random House, 2005).
5. “The relationship is non-­linear because phenotype, or set of observable char-
acteristics, is determined by a complex interplay between an organism’s genes—­tens 
of thousands of them, all influencing one another’s behaviour—­and its environ-
ment.” Keith Bennett, “The Chaos Theory of Evolution,” New Scientist, 13 October 
2010, https://www.newscientist.com/article/mg20827821–000-the-chaos-theory-of 
-evolution/.
6. McFadden and Al-­Khalili, Life on the Edge
7. Jablonka, Lamb, and Zeligowski, Evolution in Four Dimensions, chapter 4.
8. Luciana Parisi, Abstract Sex: Philosophy, Bio-­Technology and the Mutations of 
Desire (London: Continuum, 2004).
9. Margulis and Sagan, Microcosmos.
10. “As argued by proponents of embodied cognition, intelligent behavior emerges 
from the interplay between an organism’s nervous system, morphology, and envi-
ronment [10]–­[14]. In a given task environment certain morphologies can readily 
succeed with simple neural systems, while other morphologies require the discov-
ery of more complex neural systems, or may prevent success altogether.” Joshua 
E. Auerbach and Josh C. Bongard, “Environmental Influence on the Evolution of 
Morphological Complexity in Machines,” PLoS Computational Biology 10, no. 1, 
article no. e1003399 (Jan 2014).
11. Jablonka, Lamb, and Zeligowski, Evolution in Four Dimensions, chapter 5.
12. Arhat Abzhanov, “The Old and New Faces of Morphology: The Legacy of 
D’Arcy Thompson’s ‘Theory of Transformations’ and ‘Laws of Growth,’” Development 
144 (2017): 4284–­97.
13. Briggs and Peat, Turbulent Mirror, 37–­38.
14. See David R. Butler, Zoogeomorphology: Animals As Geomorphic Agents (New 
York: Cambridge University Press, 2007).
15. Per Bak, How Nature Works: The Science of Self-­Organized Criticality (New 
York: Springer, 2013).
16. “Our views on natural selection owe much to Lotka and Wicken. Lotka held 
that natural selection works to increase both the mass of organic systems and the 
rates of circulation of matter through those systems.” Schneider and Sagan, Into the 
Cool, 240. See also Alfred J. Lotka, Elements of Mathematical Biology (New York: 
Dover, 1956); and Jeffrey S. Wicken, Evolution, Thermodynamics, and Information: 
Extending the Darwinian Program (New York: Oxford University Press, 1987).
17. Gribbin, Deep Simplicity, chapter 6.
18. Flow produces pedetic mutation. Increased flow increases mutation. Indeed, 

	
Notes to Pages 196–97	 309
seen thermodynamically, variation is inevitable. The “Second Law,” writes Wicken, 
“teleomatically promotes replication errors as ways of increasing configurational 
randomness. By this law, replication cannot be error-­free.” Wicken, Evolution, Ther-
modynamics, and Information, 89.
19. Free energy is the key to evolution. Diversity is produced through gradient 
reduction. The number of North American bird and plant species increases with 
evapotranspiration, which is the main activity of ecosystems. Indeed, judged by 
energy expenditure, transpiration is considerably more important than growth in cli-
max ecosystems. Finding a close correlation between the amount of energy degraded 
and the number of species, Brown compliments the Yale group and “Hutchinson’s 
emphasis on the fundamental role of energetics in evolutionary and community 
ecology. The acquisition and utilization of energy in accordance with the second 
law of thermodynamics remains the best place to start ‘to understand the higher 
intricacies of any ecological system.’” James H. Brown, “Two Decades of Homage to 
Santa Rosalia: Towards a General Theory of Diversity,” American Zoologist 21, no. 
4 (1981): 877–­88; 884. Any general theory of biological diversity, adds Brown, will 
have to deeply incorporate thermodynamics. See Schneider and Sagan, Into the Cool, 
246–­47. Island size, tree count, and temperature all increase species diversity. See 
also Francis G. Stehli and John W. Wells, “Diversity and Age Patterns in Hermatypic 
Corals,” Systematic Biology 20, no. 2 (1971): 115–­26.
20. “The animal’s various limbs, organs, and tissues represent an increase in 
diversity similar to the growing biodiversity seen in a developing ecosystem. Then, 
as in an ecosystem, growth tapers off. An integrated, energy-­efficient mature form 
appears. Adult organisms and mature ecosystems have achieved high levels of energy 
use and gradient reduction.” Schneider and Sagan, Into the Cool, 208.
21. Zongjun Yin, Maoyan Zhu, Eric H. Davidson, David J. Bottjer, Fangchen Zhao, 
and Paul Tafforeau, “Sponge Grade Body Fossil with Cellular Resolution Dating 60 
Myr before the Cambrian,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the 
United States of America (PNAS) 112, no. 12 (Mar 2015): E1453–­60.
22. J. Alex Zumberge, Gordon D. Love, Paco Cárdenas, Erik A. Sperling, Sunithi 
Gunasekera, Megan Rohrssen, Emmanuelle Grosjean, John P. Grotzinger, and Roger 
E. Summons, “Demosponge Steroid Biomarker 26-­Methylstigmastane Provides Evi-
dence for Neoproterozoic Animals,” Nature Ecology and Evolution 2 (2018): 1709–­14.
23. B. F. Lang, C. O’Kelly, T. Nerad, M. W. Gray, and G. Burger, “The Closest 
Unicellular Relatives of Animals,” Current Biology 12, no. 20 (Oct 2002): 1773–­78.
24. See Thomas Cavalier-­Smith, “Origin of Animal Multicellularity: Precursors, 
Causes, Consequences—­The Choanoflagellate/Sponge Transition, Neurogenesis and 
the Cambrian Explosion,” Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Bio-
logical Sciences 372, no. 1713 (Feb 2017): 20150476; Rosanna A. Alegado and Nicole 
King, “Bacterial Influences on Animal Origins,” Cold Spring Harbor Perspectives in 
Biology 6, no. 11 (Nov 2014): a016162; and Manuel Maldonado, “Choanoflagellates, 
Choanocytes, and Animal Multicellularity,” Invertebrate Biology 123, no. 1 (Mar 
2004): 1–­22.

310	
Notes to Pages 199–206
25. Edward E. Ruppert, Richard S. Fox, and Robert D. Barnes, Invertebrate Zool-
ogy: A Functional Evolutionary Approach, 7th ed. (Belmont, CA: Thomson-­Brooks/
Cole, 2004), 83.
26. This is like what happens in the Sierpinski sponge.
27. “If the water be absolutely still, there is established between these afferent 
and efferent currents a re-­entrant vortex, whose section is a circle in any radial plane 
through the osculum.” G. P. Bidder, “The Relation of the Form of a Sponge to Its 
Currents,” Journal of Cell Science (1923): 293–­323; 296.
28. M. Nickel, “Kinetics and Rhythm of Body Contractions in the Sponge Tethya 
wilhelma (Porifera: Demospongiae),” Journal of Experimental Biology 207 (2004): 
4515–­24.
29. Ruppert et al., Invertebrate Zoology, 76–­97.
30. Paulyn Cartwright, Susan L. Halgedahl, Jonathan R. Hendricks, Richard 
D. Jarrard, Antonio C. Marques, Allen G. Collins, and Bruce S. Lieberman, “Ex-
ceptionally Preserved Jellyfishes from the Middle Cambrian,” PLoS ONE 2, no. 10, 
article no. e1121 (2007).
31. Ed Yong, “Why a Jellyfish Is the Ocean’s Most Efficient Swimmer,” Nature, 
7 October 2013, https://www.nature.com/news/why-a-jellyfish-is-the-ocean-s-most 
-efficient-swimmer-1.13895.
32. Ruppert et al., Invertebrate Zoology, 111–­24.
33. “It is possible the urbilaterian never had a brain, and that it later evolved 
many times independently. Or it could be that the ancestors of the acorn worm had 
a primitive brain and lost it—­which suggests the costs of building brains sometimes 
outweigh the benefits. Either way, a central, brain-­like structure was present in the 
ancestors of the vertebrates. These primitive, fish-­like creatures probably resembled 
the living lancelet, a jawless filter-­feeder.” David Robson, “A Brief History of the 
Brain,” New Scientist, 21 September 2011, https://www.newscientist.com/article/
mg21128311–800-a-brief-history-of-the-brain/.
34. For more detail on the vortex motion of eel and the flatworm’s twisting mo-
tion, see Figure 11.8 in George V. Lauder and Eric Tytell, “Hydrodynamics of Undu-
latory Propulsion,” Fish Physiology 23 (Dec 2005): 425–­68; 445.
35. See Rodolfo R. Llinás, I of the Vortex: From Neurons to Self (Cambridge, Mass: 
MIT Press, 2008).
36. This allows us to overcome the dualism posted by Hayles and others who 
biocentrically draw the line between cognitive and noncognitive activity at the level 
of “life.” This only begs the question of how non-­living matter produced life in the 
first place. No matter where one draws the line, ontological dualism creeps back in. 
Differences in the structure and circulation of affect do need to be attended to, but 
this can be done kinetically, without recourse to or need for metaphysical concepts 
like “cognition,” “consciousness,” or “thought.” See N. Katherine Hayles, Unthought: 
The Power of the Cognitive Nonconscious (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2017).
37. H. M. Platt, Foreword to The Phylogenetic Systematics of Freeliving Nematodes, 
by Sievert Lorenzen (London: The Ray Society, 1994).

	
Notes to Pages 211–29	
311
Chapter 13: Phanerozoic Earth II: Terrestrialization
1. See “List of Animals by Number of Neutrons,” Wikipedia, accessed 23 August 
2019, https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_animals_by_number_of_neurons.
2. See West, Scale; and Adrian Bejan, The Physics of Life: The Evolution of Every-
thing (New York: St Martin’s Press, 2016).
3. Ruppert et al., Invertebrate Zoology, 518–­22.
4. J. Dzik, “The Verdun Syndrome: Simultaneous Origin of Protective Armour 
and Infaunal Shelters at the Precambrian–­Cambrian Transition,”Geological Society 
of London: Special Publications 286 (Jan 2007): 405–­14.
5. Bernard L. Cohen, “Not Armour, but Biomechanics, Ecological Opportunity 
and Increased Fecundity as Keys to the Origin and Expansion of the Mineralized 
Benthic Metazoan Fauna,” Biological Journal of the Linnean Society 85, no. 4 (Aug 
2005): 483–­90.
6. Carla Stecco, Warren Hammer, Andry Vleeming, and Raffaele De Caro, eds., 
“Connective Tissues,” in Functional Atlas of the Human Fascial System (London: 
Churchill Livingstone Elsevier), 1–­20.
Chapter 14: Kinocene Earth
1. See Nail, Theory of the Object.
2. See Nail, Being and Motion; and Nail, Lucretius I.
3. The American mathematician, physical chemist, statistician, and energy the-
orist Alfred James Lotka called this “the maximum power principle,” or Lotka’s 
principle, and it has been proposed as the fourth principle of energetics in open 
system thermodynamics, where an example of an open system is a biological cell. Ac-
cording to Howard T. Odum, “The maximum power principle can be stated: During 
self-­organization, system designs develop and prevail that maximize power intake, 
energy transformation, and those uses that reinforce production and efficiency.” H. 
T. Odum, “Self-­Organization and Maximum Empower,” in Maximum Power: The 
Ideas and Applications of H. T. Odum, ed. Charles A. S. Hall (Niwot, CO: University 
Press of Colorado, 1995), 311–­30; 311.
My contribution to this theory is to have shown that this maximum power is ex-
pressed historically in four major kinetic patterns: centripetal, centrifugal, tensional, 
and elastic. The kinetic pattern is related to the rate of dissipation. “The concept of 
second law efficiency under maximum power . . . Neither the first or second law of 
thermodynamics include a measure of the rate at which energy transformations or 
processes occur. The concept of maximum power incorporates time into measures of 
energy transformations. It provides information about the rate at which one kind of 
energy is transformed into another as well as the efficiency of that transformation.” 
Martha W. Gilliland, ed., Energy Analysis: A New Public Policy Tool (Boulder, CO: 
Westview Press, 1978), 101.
Lotka’s work was important because he “provided the theory of natural selec-
tion as a maximum power organizer; under competitive conditions systems are 
selected which use their energies in various structural-­developing actions so as to 

312	
Notes to Pages 229–37
maximize their use of available energies. By this theory systems of cycles which 
drain less energy lose out in comparative development. However Leopold and 
Langbein have shown that streams in developing erosion profiles, meander sys-
tems, and tributary networks disperse their potential energies more slowly than if 
their channels were more direct. These two statements might be harmonized by an 
optimum efficiency maximum power principle (Odum and Pinkerton 1955), which 
indicates that energies which are converted too rapidly into heat are not made 
available to the systems own use because they are not fed back through storages 
into useful pumping, but instead do random stirring of the environment” H.T. 
Odum, “Energy Values of Water Sources,” Proceedings of the Nineteenth Southern 
Water Resources and Pollution Control Conference—­April 1970, 62. https://ufdc.
ufl.edu/AA00004068/00001/2j.
The concept of maximum power can therefore be defined as the maximum rate 
of useful energy transformation. “. . . the maximum power principle . . . states that 
systems which maximize their flow of energy survive in competition. In other words, 
rather than merely accepting the fact that more energy per unit of time is transformed 
in a process which operates at maximum power, this principle says that systems.” 
Gilliland, Energy Analysis, 101–­2. “The maximum power principle is a potential 
guide to understanding the patterns and processes of ecosystem development and 
sustainability. The principle predicts the selective persistence of ecosystem designs 
that capture a previously untapped energy source.” T.T. Cai, C.L. Montague and 
J.S. Davis, “The maximum power principle: An empirical investigation,” Ecological 
Modelling 190, no. 3–­4 (2006): 317–­35.
4. See Nail, Theory of the Object.
5. See image in Schneider and Sagan, Into the Cool, 266.
6. See Nail, Being and Motion and Nail, Theory of the Object.
7. Vaclav Smil, Energy in Nature and Society: General Energetics of Complex Sys-
tems (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2008), 91.
8. Ibid., 29.
9. Ibid., 48.
10. Ibid., 54.
11. Ibid., 58.
12. Ibid., 53.
13. Ibid., 46.
14. Ibid.
15. Ibid., 39.
16. Schneider and Sagan, Into the Cool, 134.
17. Smil, Energy in Nature and Society, 39.
18. Ibid., 41.
19. Ibid., 46.
20. Ibid., chapter 10.
21. Ibid., 63.
22. Schneider and Sagan, Into the Cool, 256.

	
Notes to Pages 237–40	
313
23. John P. DeLong, Jordan G. Okie, Melanie E. Moses, Richard M. Sibly, and 
James H. Brown, “Shifts in Metabolic Scaling, Production, and Efficiency across Major 
Evolutionary Transitions of Life,” PNAS July 20, 2010 107 (29) 12941–­45; https://doi.
org/10.1073/pnas.1007783107.
24. A. I. Zotin, “Thermodynamic Aspects of Developmental Biology,” Monographs 
in Developmental Biology 5 (1972): 1–­59.
25. Schneider and Sagan, Into the Cool, 242.
26. Viviane Richter, “The Big Five Mass Extinctions,” Cosmos Magazine, accessed 
24 August 2019, https://cosmosmagazine.com/palaeontology/big-five-extinctions.
27. “Human gradient-­reducing abilities pale in comparison to those of plants. . . . 
Plants are our great planetary gradient reducers—­and, yes, they perceive the solar 
gradient, turning their leaves and flowers to follow the sun. Indeed if we accept the 
evidence for anthropogenic global warming, it is clear that humans, despite our 
minds, have depleted global gradient-­reducing function by increasing temperatures 
near the surface. Human technics are amazing but literally globally dysfunctional.” 
Sagan, Cosmic Apprentice, 215.
28. Schneider and Sagan, Into the Cool, 136.
29. See image in ibid., 222.
30. Christopher M. Gough, “Terrestrial Primary Production: Fuel for Life,” Nature 
Education Knowledge 3, no. 10 (2011): 28.
31. J. C. Luvall and H. R. Holbo, “Measurements of Short-­Term Thermal Re-
sponses of Coniferous Forest Canopies Using Thermal Scanner Data,” Remote Sensing 
of Environment 27, no. 1 (1989): 1–­10.
32. See E. D. Schneider and J. J. Kay, “Nature Abhors a Gradient,” in Proceedings 
of the 33rd Annual Meeting of the International Society for the Systems Sciences, ed. 
Paul Ledington, vol. 3 (Edinburgh: International Society for the Systems Sciences, 
1989), 19–­23; and Schneider and Sagan, Into the Cool, 40.
33. See image in Schneider and Sagan, Into the Cool, 255.
34. See image in ibid., 193.
35. H. J. M. Bowen, Trace Elements in Biochemistry (London: Academic Press, 
1966); Robert H. Whittaker and Gene E. Likens, “The Biosphere and Man,” in Pri-
mary Productivity of the Biosphere. Ecological Studies (Analysis and Synthesis), eds. 
H. Lieth and R. H. Whittaker, vol. 14 (New York: Springer, 1975): 305–­28; Vaclav 
Smil, Enriching the Earth: Fritz Haber, Carl Bosch, and the Transformation of World 
Food Production (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2001), cited in Smil, Energy in Nature 
and Society, 111.
36. See Paul Colinvaux and Cristina Eisenberg, Why Big Fierce Animals Are Rare: 
An Ecologist’s Perspective (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, [1978] 2018).
37. Vaclav Smil, Energy and Civilization: A History (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 
2018), 19.
38. Smil, Energy and Civilization, 23.
39. Smil, Energy in Nature and Society, 134.
40. Ibid., 137.

314	
Notes to Pages 243–45
Chapter 15: Kinocene Ethics
1. Sagan, Cosmic Apprentice, 235.
2. See Yinon M. Bar-­On, Rob Phillips, and Ron Milo, “The Biomass Distribution 
on Earth,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences Jun 2018, 115 (25) 6506–­
11. For a nice summary and framing of human impact, see John Vidal, “The Rapid 
Decline of the Natural World Is A Crisis Even Bigger than Climate Change,” Huff-
ington Post, 03/15/2019. https://www.huffpost.com/entry/nature-destruction-climate 
-change-world-biodiversity_n_5c49e78ce4b06ba6d3bb2d44
3. Bar-­On, Phillips, and Milo, “The Biomass Distribution on Earth”.
4. See image in ibid.
5. J. M. Adams and H. Faure, “A New Estimate of Changing Carbon Storage on 
Land Since the Last Glacial Maximum, Based on Global Land Ecosystem Recon-
struction,” Global and Planetary Change 16–­17 (1998): 3–­24.
6. See R.A. Houghton, “Why Are Estimates of the Terrestrial Carbon Balance So 
Different?,” Global Change Biology 9, no. 4 (Apr 2003): 500–­509; and Sassan S. Saat-
chi, Nancy L. Harris, Sandra Brown, Michael Lefsky, Edward T. A. Mitchard, William 
Salas, Brian R. Zutta, Wolfgang Buermann, Simon L. Lewis, Stephen Hagen, Silvia 
Petrova, Lee White, Miles Silman, and Alexandra Morel, “Benchmark Map of Forest 
Carbon Stocks in Tropical Regions across Three Continents,” PNAS 108, no. 24 (Jun 
2011): 9899–­904.
7. Benjamin D. Lieberman and Elizabeth Gordon, Climate Change in Human 
History: Prehistory to the Present (London and New York: Bloomsbury Academic, 
2018); Sing C. Chew, World Ecological Degradation: Accumulation, Urbanization, 
and Deforestation, 3000 B.C.-­ 2000 A.D. (Walnut Creek: AltaMira Press, 2001); 
Christopher T. Fisher, J. Brett Hill, and Gary M Feinman, eds., The Archaeology of 
Environmental Change: Socionatural Legacies of Degradation and Resilience (Tuc-
son: University of Arizona Press, 2009); Naomi Klein, This Changes Everything: 
Capitalism vs. the Climate (New York: Simon & Schuster, 2014); Marcel Mazoyer 
and Laurence Rodart, A History of World Agriculture: From the Neolithic Age to the 
Current Crisis (New York: Monthly Review Press, 2006); Bill McKibben, Falter: Has 
the Human Game Begun to Play Itself Out? (New York: Henry Holt and Co., 2019); 
Timothy Mitchell, Carbon Democracy: Political Power in the Age of Oil (London: 
Verso, 2011); Jason W. Moore, ed., Anthropocene or Capitalocene? Nature, History, 
and the Crisis of Capitalism (Oakland, CA: PM Press, 2016); Jason W. Moore, “The 
Capitalocene, Part I: On the Nature and Origins of Our Ecological Crisis,” The 
Journal of Peasant Studies 44, no. 3 (May 2017): 594–­630; Jason W. Moore, “The 
Capitalocene, Part II: Accumulation by Appropriation and the Centrality of Unpaid 
Work/Energy,” The Journal of Peasant Studies 45, no. 2 (Feb 2018): 237–­79; William 
Ruddiman, Plows, Plagues, and Petroleum: How Humans Took Control of the Climate 
(Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2005); and Michael Williams, Deforesting 
the Earth: From Prehistory to Global Crisis, An Abridgment (Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press, 2006).

	
Notes to Pages 245–53	
315
8. Nail, The Figure of the Migrant; Nail, Theory of the Border.
9. For a full account of this long history, see Nail, The Figure of the Migrant and 
Nail, Theory of the Border.
10. Susan Casey, The Wave: In Pursuit of the Rogues, Freaks, and Giants of the 
Ocean (New York: Doubleday, 2010), 153.
11. Rafi Letzter, “Climate Change Could Make These Super-­Common Clouds 
Extinct, Which Would Scorch the Planet,” Live Science, February 25, 2019. https://
www.livescience.com/64852-clouds-extinct-climate-change.html
12. Will Dunham, “Bolt from the Blue: Warming Climate May Fuel More Light-
ning,” Reuters, 13 November 2014, https://www.reuters.com/article/us-science-
light ning/bolt-from-the-blue-warming-climate-may-fuel-more-lightning-idUSKC 
N0IX2B020141113
13. Kathryn Yusoff, A Billion Black Anthropocenes or None (Minneapolis, MN : 
University of Minnesota Press 2018).
14. Craig Welch, “Half of All Species Are on the Move—­And We’re Feeling It,” Na-
tional Geographic, April 27, 2017. https://www.nationalgeographic.com/news/2017/04/
climate-change-species-migration-disease/
15. Brad Plumer, “How More Carbon Dioxide Can Make Food Less Nutritious,” 
New York Times, 23 May 2018, https://www.nytimes.com/2018/05/23/climate/
rice-global-warming.html.
16. Perhaps the most notable proponent of this theory was Howard T. Odum, 
sometimes considered the father of ecosystems ecology.
17. See Smil, Energy in Nature and Society; and Vaclav Smil, Cycles of Life: Civili-
zation and the Biosphere (New York: Scientific American Library, 2001).
18. According to Tennenbaum, Leontief’s input-­output method was adapted to 
embodied energy analysis by Hannon to describe ecosystem energy flows. Hannon’s 
adaptation tabulated the total direct and indirect energy requirements (the energy 
intensity) for each output made by the system. The total amount of energies, direct 
and indirect, for the entire amount of production was called the embodied energy. 
See Stephen E. Tennenbaum, Network Energy Expenditures for Subsystem Production 
(Gainsville, FL: University of Florida, 1988); and Bruce Hannon, “The Structure of 
Ecosystems,” Journal of Theoretical Biology 41, no. 3 (Oct 1973): 535–­46.
19. Smil, Energy in Nature and Society.
20. See Smil, Energy in Nature and Society and Schneider and Sagan, Into the 
Cool, chapter 19.
21. See Gribbin, Deep Simplicity.
22. Adrian Bejan, The Physics of Life: The Evolution of Everything (New York: St 
Martin’s Press, 2016).
23. McKibben, Falter and David Wallace-­Wells, The Uninhabitable Earth: Life 
After Warming (New York: Tim Duggan Books, 2019).
24. Aisha Majid, “WHO Reveals 7 Million Die From Pollution Each Year in Lat-
est Global Air Quality Figures,” The Telegraph, 1 May 2018, https://www.telegraph 

316	
Notes to Pages 253–62
.co.uk/news/2018/05/01/estimates-7-million-die-pollution-year-reveals-latest-
global/.
25. See Bataille, The Accursed Share; and Allan Stoekl, Bataille’s Peak: Energy, 
Religion, and Postsustainability (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2007). 
Stoekl agrees that Bataille is anthropocentric because he restricts the knowledge and 
ethics of expenditure to humans (religion). Animals are unaware of their limits, have 
no meaning, and no purposive act. They are just homogeneous movement. Stoekl’s 
ethical solution to expenditure is the use of human muscle power and recycling. 
But additionally, we need to waste more as a planet by repopulating the biosphere. 
“To deny the ethical moment, the moment in which conservation and meaning are 
established only the better to affirm the destruction of expenditure, is to relegate that 
destruction to the simple, homogeneous movement of the animal, unaware of limit, 
meaning, and purposive act.” Stoekl, Bataille’s Peak, xvii.
For Stoekl and Bataille, the cosmos wastes but humans get to be the ones that 
know that they waste and thus choose ethically to waste and thus are religious—­
contra animals plants and the earth. I disagree.
26.  “The second law tugs organisms to find ways to work together to stably reduce 
gradients, dissipating the energy that sustains them. The ‘sustainable’ part is crucial 
but often gets lost in the work of thermodynamic theorizers and those who would 
critique them as making an unreconstructed unthinking and politically dangerous 
contribution to neoliberalism, as objectionable in its way as is social Darwinism and 
neo-­Darwinism’s caricature of Darwinism.” Sagan, Cosmic Apprentice, 214.
27. “The generalized sensitivities proposed here (whose values are reported in 
Table 1) demonstrate that the climate system becomes less efficient, more irrevers-
ible, and features higher entropy production as it becomes warmer.” See image in 
Valerio Lucarini, Klaus Fraedrich, and Frank Lunkeit, “Thermodynamics of Climate 
Change: Generalized Sensitivities,” Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics 10 (2010): 
9729–­37; 9736.
28. Blaise Pascal, Pensées and Other Writings, trans. Honor Levi (Oxford: Oxford 
University Press), 126. 
29. Smil, Energy in Nature and Society, 386.
30. Ibid.
31. Lucretius, On the Nature of Things: De Rerum Natura, trans. Walter Englert, 
ed. Albert Keith Whitaker (Newburyport, MA: Focus Publishing, 2003), Book IV, 
line 833.
32. For a lovely critique of conservation, see Stoekl, Bataille’s Peak.
33. Even new-­materialist vitalism projects life onto inorganic matter. See Chris 
Gamble, Josh Hannan, and Thomas Nail, “What Is New Materialism?” Angelaki: 
Journal of the Theoretical Humanities 24, no. 6 (2019): 111–­34. See also Nail, Being 
and Motion, chapter 3.
34. Lijing Cheng et al., “Record-­Setting Ocean Warmth Continued in 2019,” 
Advances in Atmospheric Sciences  37 (2020): 137–­42.
35. C. Dyke, “Cities as Dissipative Structures,” in Entropy, Information, and 

	
Notes to Pages 262–67	
317
Evolution: New Perspectives on Physical and Biological Evolution, eds. Bruce H. Weber, 
David J. Depew, and James D. Smith (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1988), 355–­67; 365.
36. Harold J. Morowitz, The Kindly Dr. Guillotin: And Other Essays on Science 
and Life (Washington, DC: Counterpoint, 1997), 121.
37. “[N]o other conception could be further from the correct interpretation of 
facts. Even if only the physical facet of the economic process is taken into consid-
eration, this process is not circular, but unidirectional. As far as this facet alone is 
concerned, the economic process consists of a continuous transformation of low 
entropy into high entropy, that is, into irrevocable waste or, with a topical term, into 
pollution.” Nicolas Georgescu-­Roegen, The Entropy Law and the Economic Process 
(Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1971), 281.
38. For a book-­length defense of this claim, see Nail, Marx in Motion.
39. For a nice, brief history, see Raj Patel and Jason W. Moore, A History of the 
World in Seven Cheap Things: A Guide to Capitalism, Nature, and the Future of the 
Planet (Oakland, CA: University of California Press, 2018).
40. J. E. Lovelock and M. Whitfield, “Life Span of the Biosphere,”  Nature 296 
(1982): 561–­63.
41. Smil, Energy in Nature and Society, 387.
42. Lorraine Chow, “The Climate Crisis May Be Taking a Toll on Your Mental 
Health,” Salon, 22 May 2017, https://www.salon.com/2017/05/22/the-climate-crisis 
-may-be-taking-a-toll-on-your-mental-health_partner/.
43. Winona LaDuke, All Our Relations: Native Struggles for Land and Life, 2nd 
ed. (Chicago: Haymarket Books, 2016).
44. Vandana Shiva, Who Really Feeds the World? The Failures of Agribusiness and 
the Promise of Agroecology (Berkeley, CA: North Atlantic Books, 2016).
45. See Greta Gaard, “Ecofeminism Revisited: Rejecting Essentialism and Re-­
Placing Species in a Material Feminist Environmentalism,” Feminist Formations 23, 
no. 2 (Summer 2011): 26–­53; and Deane Curtin, “Recognizing Women’s Environmen-
tal Expertise,” in Chinnagounder’s Challenge: The Question of Ecological Citizenship 
(Bloomington and Indianapolis, IN: Indiana University Press, 1999), 73–­88.
46. See Karen Warren, ed., Ecofeminism: Women, Culture, Nature (Bloomington, 
IN: Indiana University Press, 1997); and Greta Gaard and Lori Gruen, “Ecofeminism: 
Toward Global Justice and Planetary Health,” Society and Nature 2 (1993): 1–­35.
47. “Women and Hunger Facts,” World Hunger: Hunger Notes, accessed 24 August 
2019, https://www.worldhunger.org/women-and-hunger-facts/.
48. Catriona Mortimer-­Sandilands and Bruce Erickson, eds., Queer Ecologies: 
Sex, Nature, Politics, Desire (Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 2010).
49. See Betsy Hartmann, Reproductive Rights and Wrongs: The Global Politics of 
Population Control, 3rd ed. (Chicago: Haymarket Books, 2016).
50. See Silvia Federici, Caliban and the Witch: Women, the Body and Primitive 
Accumulation (Brooklyn, NY: Autonomedia, 2014); Silvia Federici and Peter Line-
baugh, Re-­Enchanting the World: Feminism and the Politics of the Commons (Oakland, 
CA: PM Press, 2019); Floraine Clement, Wendy Harcourt, Deepa Joshi, and Chizu 

318	
Notes to Pages 271–72
Sato, “Feminist Political Ecologies of the Commons and Commoning,” International 
Journal of the Commons 13, 1: 1–­15; Peter Linebaugh, The Magna Carta Manifesto: 
Liberties and Commons for All (Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 2009); 
David Bollier and Silke Helfrich, eds., Patterns of Commoning (Amherst, MA: The 
Commons Strategies Group, 2015).
Conclusion: The Future
1. See Nail, The Figure of the Migrant; Nail, Theory of the Border; Nail, Being and 
Motion; Nail, Theory of the Image; and Nail, Theory of the Object.
2. “My thoughts are to show me where I stand, but they are not to tell me where 
I am going to—­I love the ignorance about the future and I do not want to perish in 
light of impatience and the anticipation of augured things.” Friedrich Nietzsche, 
The Gay Science: With a Prelude in Rhymes and an Appendix of Songs, trans. Walter 
Kaufmann (New York: Vintage Books, 1974), 231.

