Conclusion
§ 82 Principles and Rules on Which the Complete System of the Calculus
of Functions Depends
According to § 78, the complete system of axioms and derived rules of the calculus
of functions depends directly on the rules (VI. 8), (VI. 11), (VI. 17), (VI. 18), (VI. 23),
and (VI. 24). If one considers the proofs which were given above (in § 74 and § 75)
for the validity of these rules, and if one traces the principles which are used ei-
ther directly or indirectly in these proofs, one will find that – disregarding the
weakened or non-weakened versions of the three meta-rules (I. 2), (I. 3), and
(II. 1), as well as the meta-rule (VI. 7) (which are used directly or indirectly for
derivation) – the validity of the complete system of axioms and derived rules of the
calculus of functions depends on eight syllogistic and three non-syllogistic basic
rules in total. The syllogistic basic rules are
(I. 1)
The rule of double negation as a result of an affirmation
(II. 2)
Modus ponendo ponens,
(III. 1)
Dictum de omni,
(III. 3)
The first exposition rule,
(III. 7)
Subalternation in the weak logical square,
(III. 8)
Basic rule of the universal limitative proposition,
(III. 9)
Basic rule of the particular limitative proposition,
(III. 10)
Basic rule of the singular limitative proposition.
For non-syllogistic basic rules, the three postulates of the extended deductive
logic are needed, namely
(VI. 3)
The postulate of the arbitrary sufficient reason
(VI. 4)
The postulate of the affirmative use of double negation
(VI. 5–6)
The postulate of non-empty domains.
I had already taken as an assumption in Part I of this essay that these three postu-
lates are non-syllogistic basic rules – namely, rules whose validity must not be
claimed within the elementary syllogistic. But only now that I have, in Part II, let
the main features of the structure of the syllogistic systematically confront the
main features of the structure of the calculus of functions should it become clear
that the elementary syllogistic can be described as that sphere of deductive logic
in which the validity of the three mentioned postulates does not need to be
assumed.
https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110784930-012

Since, conversely, syllogistic principles must be assumed as valid within the
sphere of the calculus of functions, the elementary syllogistic has, in comparison
to the calculus of functions, proved to be the more fundamental region of deduc-
tive logic: the calculus utilizes, at least implicitly, syllogistic rules, while the ele-
mentary syllogistic is for its part entirely independent of the rules and laws of the
calculus.
The systematic relationship between the elementary syllogistic and the calcu-
lus of functions can be described somewhat more precisely by considering still
more closely theorem (4) as mentioned in § 80, one of the axioms of the calculus
of functions. According to § 78, the validity of this theorem depends on the singu-
larization rule (VI. 15) being valid, from which the law of singularization (VI. 24)
in § 75 was derived. The proof that is carried out for this law in § 74 only came off
by bringing into play not only expressions with concept variables, but also ex-
pressions with conceptual constants. This proof thus relies (directly or indirectly
by means of the rules (VI. 12) and (VI. 14)) on the substitution of ζ and ξ in expres-
sions of rules which can be formulated in the syllogistic language. In this way, we
can see that theorem (4) is dependent on rules of contentful inference. The case is
just the same for the generalization rules (VI. 10)✶and (VI. 11)✶of the calculus of
functions, whose validity is proven in § 74 with rules (VI. 10) and (VI. 11). There
are thus good reasons not to count the calculus of functions among the formal
part of deductive logic but rather as a special division within the theory of con-
tentful inference. Of course, since it presupposes the standing of more particular,
non-syllogistic principles, it is not to be regarded as a calculus of contentful syllo-
gistic inference, which I have described in Section Five of Part II.
The syllogistic differs from the calculus of functions not only by its rules’
being more fundamental but also by their more formal character. The syllogistic
is, as can now be seen with great exactness, formal logic (in a narrower, more
precise sense of this expression). The equation of formal logic and the logic of the
classical functional or predicate calculus (including its non-classical derivatives),
which is very widespread and almost customary nowadays, clearly rests on a pro-
found lack of insight into the logical presuppositions of this logic. The rules of the
classical calculus of functions or predicates are better seen as rules of informal
deductive inference.
Connected with the syllogistic’s status of being a more fundamental and more
formal part of deductive logic is the fact that syllogistic rules are valid for all de-
ductive inference. For this reason, the syllogistic is to be regarded as general
logic, or more precisely, the general part of deductive logic. The phrase ‘general
part of deductive logic’ has the advantage of not letting the misunderstanding
arise that the syllogistic could contain all rules of deductive inference, rather
than the rules of all deductive inference. In truth, syllogistic rules make up only
Conclusion § 82
307

an extremely small part of the totality of deductive rules – which is already evi-
dent from the fact that the syllogistic does not contain all principles which can be
assumed in deductive inference.
§ 83 Logical Form: A Review of the Results Attained
It is now time to summarize some results of this essay and to highlight more
clearly those which are especially important and interesting from a philosophical
point of view. The most important of them is contained in the response to the
question: What does the logical form of a statement consist in? It cannot be said
that the answer we have discovered delivers an insight that is completely new in
every respect. But precisely the fact that here something well-known appears in a
new light may in the eyes of some readers have something surprising to it, if not
even something altogether provocative.
The answer we have discovered can be summarized as follows:
The logical form of a statement is precisely what is expressed in the syllogistic
propositional schema corresponding to this statement. It is, in other words, pre-
cisely that in a statement which is left over when its conceptual content (i.e., what
concept variables stand for) is left out of consideration. Behind this answer is con-
cealed the old idea that the logical form of a statement is a constellation of state-
ment-properties which do not exceed the dozen that Kant’s table of judgments
enumerates in a symmetrical arrangement and contains “no more than what Aris-
totle and his direct students have regarded as the main logical moments in the the-
ory of judgment and inference” (Reich 2001, 4–5). Of course, the old idea needs to
be made precise in two respects if it is supposed to be correct and tenable, and this
precision is, as it were, the light in which the well-known appears in a new way.
First: the qualitative, relational, and modal statement-properties, insofar as they
contribute to logical form, should not be interpreted truth-functionally or understood
as properties which are interpretable with the aid of a truth-functional explication;
distinct types of truth-functions have something to do with distinctions of logical
form only indirectly, since truth-functional expressions – including expressions of ne-
gation – are structures which, as I have shown above, admit a logical analysis in
which they are equivalent to expressions composed of non-truth-functional expres-
sions. Second: quantitative properties, insofar as they contributed to the logical form
of a statement, should not be confused with various kinds of saturation of proposi-
tional functions. Distinctions of logical form do depend on whether empty places in a
functional expression are filled by individual constants or bound individual varia-
bles. But nevertheless particular conceptual contents, which can be clearly distin-
guished from the logical form, are connected to the use of these signs. As has been
308
Part II Conclusion

shown, these signs admit an analysis in which they are equivalent to phrases that
contain only concept expressions and the logical vocabulary of the syllogistic.
The question of logical form was one of the central questions in twentieth-
century philosophy. Bertrand Russell and the young Ludwig Wittgenstein – who
were even ready to equate the logical form of statements with the subject-matter of
philosophy as such – had seen that the logical form of expressions of the type ‘F (a)’
is not apparent on their surface. At the same time, they were proponents of the view
that giving a logical analysis of linguistic expressions always requires a reduction to
truth- and propositional functions. Such a constellation of positions naturally had
the consequence that the question of logical form had to become a philosophical rid-
dle of the first order. To be sure, this riddle has given some impetus to the analytic
philosophy of language, especially its attempts to ascertain the essence of expres-
sions for which the ‘a’ in ‘F (a)’ stands – the essence of proper names and so-called
singular terms. But the riddle itself has found no satisfactory solution in these at-
tempts. We have seen that even the distinction between singular and general terms
rests on mistaken assumptions and that no clarity is secured for the question of the
essence of proper names so long as the question of the essence of logical form has
found no suitable answer.
An explanation of what a logical consequence is and what logical validity is
also depends on this answer.234 On these two questions, too, the present essay has
achieved an important result: a proposition p follows logically from one or more
propositions if and only if the occurrence of one or more than one logical constants
of the syllogistic makes it impossible that p is false and each of the remaining pro-
positions involved is true. A proposition is logically valid if and only if it is equiva-
lent to a hypothetical proposition that can be generated by conditionalizing a rule
according to which a proposition logically follows from one or more propositions.
Accordingly, tautologies are not just as such logically valid. Thus, a tautologi-
cal proposition of the form ‘every α is an α’ can well be false, and indeed it is
false if α is an empty concept, so that there is no object with which the proposi-
tion (as an affirmative proposition) could correspond. A tautology of the form ‘if
A, then A’ (consisting of identical clauses) does not express a logical truth either.
For it depends on the content of the proposition A whether its truth is incompati-
ble with the truth of N A, so that A follows from A. If one replaces A in both places
with N A, there is no such incompatibility. Thus, a proposition of the form ‘if N A,
then N A’ can be false.
I have shown in § 81 that within the calculus of functions there is a way of using the expres-
sions ‘logically true’ and ‘follows logically’ that clashes with the concepts of logical validity and logi-
cal consequence developed above, but that this clash can be eliminated with a suitable terminology.
Conclusion § 83
309

Only the logical form (in the sense given to this expression) can decide
whether a proposition is logically valid or logically follows from other proposi-
tions. Theorems of a logical calculus, of which one may be able to say (according
to § 81) that they are ‘logically true’ or ‘logically follow’ from other theorems in
this calculus, presuppose the universal validity of rules and laws whose logical
form can be represented only in the syllogistic.
§ 84 Stages in the History of Logic
If one wants to be an innovator,
then one longs to be the first;
if one wants only truth,
one longs for predecessors.
(Kant, Refl. 2159)
That the old appears in a new light means that what is past must be seen in a
new way. – Kant writes in the second edition of the Critique of Pure Reason of
1787, that “logic” has
since the time of Aristotle [. . .] not had to go a single step backwards, unless we count the
abolition of a few dispensable subtleties or the more distinct determination of its presenta-
tion, which improvements belong more to the elegance than to the security of that science.
What is further remarkable about logic is that until now it has also been unable to take a
single step forward, and therefore seems to all appearance to be finished and complete. [. . .]
It is not an improvement but a deformation of the sciences when their boundaries are al-
lowed to run over into one another; the boundaries of logic, however, are determined quite
precisely by the fact that logic is the science that exhaustively presents and strictly proves
nothing but the formal rules of all thinking (whether this thinking be empirical or a priori,
whatever origin or object it may have, and whatever contingent or natural obstacles it may
meet with in our minds). / For the advantage that has made it so successful logic has solely
its own limitation to thank, since it is thereby justified in abstracting – is indeed obliged to
abstract – from all objects of cognition and all the distinctions between them; and in logic,
therefore, the understanding has to do with nothing further than itself and its own form.
(CPR B viii–ix)
This passage is gladly quoted in modern books on logic and the history of logic in
order to show, on the one hand, how great and lasting the influence that Aristotle’s
logic had exercised for centuries, and, on the other hand, how biased even great phi-
losophers had been under this influence when it came to assessing the actual value
of Aristotelian logic and its place within the history of logic. As the quotation shows,
Kant does not only not anticipate the possibility of substantial progress beyond Aris-
totle, he was apparently even ready to definitively exclude such a possibility. Accord-
ing to the image promoted by modern handbooks and standard works of the history
310
Part II Conclusion

of logic, Kant would not have had to wait even a hundred years to see his view re-
futed by the facts.
According to this image, the history of logic can be divided into two great main
epochs. The first begins with Aristotle’s (382–322) Analytica priora, the second with
Frege’s (1848–1925) Begriffsschrift published in 1879. The division of traditional and
modern logic is used today such that it corresponds to the division within logic be-
fore and after 1879.
“Logic is an old subject, and since 1879 it has been a great one” (Quine 1959,
vii). – With Frege’s work a dramatic upswing began, which allowed the initially
small sphere of logic, which could be treated between two book covers on a few
pages, to become a branch of science which today can hardly be surveyed even by
experts. A development which was already initiated by scattered predecessors of
Frege has ultimately led to the establishment of modern logic as a many-branched
area of mathematical research. Modern and mathematical logic have basically be-
come synonyms. Modern logic is called mathematical for two reasons: firstly, it has
itself become the object of mathematical investigations; secondly its language is
suited to seamlessly present mathematical proofs. Traditional logic was not actually
in a position to do this.
Now, the fact that the field of logic has since 1879 strongly enlarged itself and
grown into mathematics admits of two different readings.
According to the first reading, the historical process can be read as though in
the course of expanding the region of logic there was at the same time a reconfigu-
ration of its foundations, in which the syllogistic as the standalone region of logic
dissolved and something else took its place. From this perspective, which is today
the reigning opinion of logicians and historians of logic, a revolution within logic
took place in 1879, whereby the Aristotelian syllogistic was “dissolved” “as a para-
digm”.235 After the revolution, the syllogistic could only claim validity for special
cases of deductive inference.236 Incidentally, Frege himself prepared the way for the
revolutionary reading of the events since 1879: he advanced the view in his Be-
griffsschrift that the logical laws which can be derived within that system, would
“take the place of the Aristotelian modes of inference” (Frege 1879, 10, § 6 [1967, 17]).
This view, as has hopefully been shown clearly enough in this book, cannot
be maintained. In any case, not insofar as one can interpret the Aristotelian doc-
trine of inference as a theory which deals in its essentials with the forms of syllo-
gistic argumentation as they have been presented systematically in Section One
This is how, e.g., Wolgang Künne (1996, 325) sees it.
See on this the article “Logic” in Blackburn (1994, 221): “Syllogistic is now generally regarded
as a limited special case of the forms of reasoning that can be represented within the proposi-
tional and predicate calculus. These form the heart of modern logic.”
Conclusion § 84
311

of Part I and in the first four Sections of Part II of this essay. These forms have
been definitively established as basic forms of deductive inference.
It thus stands to reason that the revolutionary reading of modern logic should
be given up and replaced by a description that does not comport with its self-image.
According to this rival description, it was merely an expansion of the region
of deductive logic which occurred with the emergence and branching-out of
mathematical logic, without in the process compromising the autonomy of its
core region, namely, the independence of the syllogistic. Considered in this way,
new non-syllogistic sub-spheres of logic, which did not exist or only rudimentarily
prior to 1879, have been added on to the core sphere of logic, which coincides in
its essentials with the traditional syllogistic tracing back to Aristotle.
This description comports with a perspective which in its basics is completely
compatible with the assessment that Kant made of the history of logic since Aris-
totle in the passage quoted above. It comports with this perspective especially in-
sofar as Kant was also ready to regard the syllogistic, which he called “formal
logic,” as only a part, namely, as the general (pure) part of deductive logic, and to
distinguish from it other, more specific parts which he called logics of the “special
use of the understanding”, among which he counted mathematical logic (which
was in his lifetime admittedly still stuck in its very first beginnings).237 As the last
sentence of the passage quoted at the beginning of this § indirectly shows, Kant
refers there only to a part of logic which has to do with the general use of the
understanding (cf. CPR A 52, B 76).
How could it nevertheless come about that Frege’s innovations have been re-
ceived by experts almost unanimously as if they were a revolution within deductive
logic and not its mere expansion with a specific sphere (however large and extraor-
dinarily important for mathematics it may be) of the theory of contentful deductive
inference?
This question will not be able to be satisfactorily answered without accounting
for the fact that the enduring lack of insight into the systematics of deductive logic
is not due only to the self-image of modern logic as shaped by Frege, but also to the
lack of an exact logical analysis of past systems of the syllogistic systems, which
because of their predominantly verbal form have made it less clear than modern
logical systems that they make up no more than one part of deductive logic. For
this a more exact semantic comparison of the differences in the logical vocabulary
of syllogistic and modern systems was needed. Lacking such an analysis, it could
always look as if traditional syllogistic systems were merely imperfect precursors
to what is commonly called modern logic.
Cf. M. Wolff 1995, 204–30. A second, improved edition of this book is in preparation.
312
Part II Conclusion

If it was Kant’s view that already Aristotle had brought the syllogistic to a sci-
entific level in such a way that a “more distinct determination of its presentation”
was either ruled out or could only still lead to such “improvements” as “belong
more to the elegance than to the security of that science” (see the first sentence of
the passage quoted at the beginning of this §), then he was obviously not right in
this opinion. It suffices to recall questions about the validity of the rules of the logi-
cal square or the modal syllogistic – which began first to take off in the 19th and
20th centuries in their full acuity – to see that the ‘security of science’ with respect
to the traditional syllogistic was no lesser a desideratum than ‘elegance’. But it
could have achieved security only on the basis of a suitably comprehensive system
of sufficiently precise and elaborate definitions which fix the meaning of expres-
sions in its logical vocabulary, and this in sharp delimitation to the meaning of ex-
pressions of the calculus of functions. Neither Aristotle nor Kant were in a position
to carry out such a delimitation, simply because there was no calculus of functions
in their time. Neither Aristotle nor Kant could have left behind a comprehensive
system of explicit definitions that fix the meaning of logical constants sufficiently
precisely and elaborately, which why only starting attempts at such definitions can
be found in their work. The need to establish an appropriate system of definitions –
and thus to make a start at a modernized syllogistic – could naturally only appear
after a logical calculus of functions was fully formed.
Conclusion § 84
313


