An Algorithm for Nudity Detection 
 
Rigan Ap-apid 
College of Computer Studies 
De La Salle University 
Manila, Philippines 
apapidr@dlsu.edu.ph 
 
 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
This paper presents an algorithm for detecting nudity in color 
images.  A skin color distribution model based on the RGB, 
Normalized RGB, and HSV color spaces is constructed using 
correlation and linear regression.  The skin color model is 
used to identify and locate skin regions in an image.  These 
regions are analyzed for clues indicating nudity or non-
nudity such as their sizes and relative distances from each 
other.  Based on these clues and the percentage of skin in the 
image, an image is classified nude or non-nude. 
 
The skin color distribution model performs with 96.29% 
recall and 6.76% false positive rate on a test set consisting of 
2,303,824 manually labeled skin pixels and 24,285,952 
manually labeled non-skin pixels.  The Nudity Detection 
Algorithm is able to detect nudity with a 94.77% recall and a 
false positive rate of 5.04% on a set of images consisting of 
421 nude images and 635 non-nude images.  
 
 
Keywords: pornography, nudity, non-nudity, skin color, 
correlation, linear regression, skin regions 
 
 
1.  INTRODUCTION 
 
The rapid development in the field of digital media has 
exposed us to huge amounts of non-textual information such 
as audio, video, and images.  In fact, one can be easily 
overwhelmed by the amount of information available 
through electronic means.  More often than not, we are 
exposed to information that is irrelevant for our own 
purposes.  Thus, retrieval and classification techniques have 
been and are continuously being developed and improved to 
facilitate 
the 
exchange 
of 
relevant 
information.  
Correspondingly, there is a clear necessity for user-
customized information selection. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In recent years, problems with the lack of control and 
regulation over what information can be made available, 
especially over the Internet, have increasingly been apparent.  
One such problem is the proliferation of pornography or 
nudity, which has been the focus of various studies in 
Internet security.  
 
Determining image content continues to be an active research 
area even as the distribution of all types of images becomes 
more widespread than ever.  Nudity detection is recognized 
as an important step towards limiting the proliferation of 
unwanted 
and 
damaging 
information. 
 
Technology 
companies devoted to image recognition acknowledge that 
the state of the art in nudity detection is still crude, yielding 
inexact results at the cost of computing power.  Thus, new 
methods for detecting nudity are continually being sought.       
 
This paper describes an algorithm for detecting nudity in 
images.  Contrary to most detection systems, images are not 
compared to pre-classified images in a database.    Aside 
from raw RGB values, the system uses two other color 
spaces (HSV and normalized RGB) to aid in the 
classification.  The set of images used is limited to color 
images in JPEG (Joint Photographic Experts Group) format.  
However, the detection scheme can theoretically be easily 
modified to allow for classification of images in other 
formats.   
 
 
2.  BACKGROUNDS 
 
A basic nudity filtering solution requires the analysis of an 
image to determine the presence of objects in the image that 
may signify nudity or inappropriate content.  Image features 
are initially extracted and analyzed, and then classified 
according to some parameters.  Common features that give 
clues to image content include color, texture, filenames, 
image dimensions, object shapes, and the number of relevant 
objects found in the image.   
 
 
2.1.  Skin Color 
 
The most important feature that provides clues to image 
content is color.  Color is a low level feature, which makes it 
computationally inexpensive and therefore suitable for real-
time object characterization, detection and localization 
(Martinkauppi, 2002).   

Nudity often consists of showing naked persons, special 
shots of sexual organs, or a picture of sexual intercourse (Lin 
et al., 2003).  These images show a lot of skin and thus, skin 
color is a basic feature used in nudity detection.  A 
disadvantage of systems using color as a primary feature is 
that the systems will not work with black and white images.  
However, nude images are rarely in black and white.   
 
The simplest methods in skin detection define or assume skin 
color to have a certain range or values in some coordinates of 
a color space.  Usually, the skin is recognized due to the fact 
that it is composed of a group of color containing red for the 
blood and yellow and brown for melanin.  
 
In general, the fairness or darkness of skin depends on the 
amount of melanin in the skin.  Due to the emerging 
importance of skin detection in computer vision several 
studies have been made on the behavior of skin chromaticity 
at different color spaces. Many studies such as those by Yang 
and Waibel (1996) and Graf et al. (1996) indicate that skin 
tones differ mainly in their intensity value while they are 
very similar in chrominance coordinates.  Several surveys on 
the use of color spaces such as those by Zarit et al. (1999) 
and Vezhnevets et al. (2003) have been made to identify 
optimal methods for skin detection using different color 
spaces.  While some studies show differences in performance 
due to the color space used (Terillon et al., 2000), 
(Vezhnevets et al., 2003), some researchers (Bosson et al., 
2002), (Chan et al. 1999) agree that the choice of color space 
is not critical provided that enough training is done and that 
an appropriate data set is used.     
 
The main goal of skin color detection or classification is to 
build a decision rule that will discriminate between skin and 
non-skin pixels.  Identifying skin colored pixels involves 
finding the range of values for which most skin pixels would 
fall in a given color space.  This may be as simple as 
explicitly classifying a pixel as a skin pixel if R>G or R>B or 
both (Brown et al., 2000) or may be as complex as models 
using neural networks and Bayesian methods (Jones & Rehg, 
1999), (Chai & Bouzerdoum, 1999).  In general, a good skin 
color model must have a high detection rate and a low false-
positive rate.  That is, it must detect most skin pixels while 
minimizing the amount of non-skin pixels classified as skin.   
 
 
2.2.  Color Spaces 
 
The purpose of a color space is to facilitate the specification 
of colors in some standard, generally accepted manner.  A 
color space is a specification of a coordinate system and 
subspace within a system where each color is represented by 
a single point.  Most color spaces today are oriented toward 
hardware such as color monitors or toward applications 
where color manipulation is a goal such as the creation of 
color graphics or animation (Gonzalez & Woods, 2002). 
 
Various color spaces are used for processing digital images.  
For some purposes, one color space may be more appropriate 
than others.  For skin detection, researchers do not quite 
agree on whether the choice of color space is critical to the 
overall performance of the detection system.  One obvious 
reason for this is the lack of a standard set of images that can 
be used as a benchmark for algorithms using different color 
spaces.   
 
 
2.2.1. The RGB Color Space 
 
The RGB color space originated from CRT display 
applications.  In the RGB space each color appears in its 
primary spectral component of red, green, and blue.  Images 
represented in the RGB space consist of three component 
images, one for each primary color.  When fed into an RGB 
monitor, these images combine on the phosphor screen to 
produce a composite color image (Gonzalez & Woods, 
2002). 
 
The RGB color space is one of the most widely used color 
spaces for storing and processing digital image.  However, 
the RGB color space alone is not reliable for identifying 
skin-colored pixels since it represents not only color but also 
luminance.  Skin luminance may vary within and across 
persons due to ambient lighting so it is not dependable for 
segmenting skin and non-skin regions.   Chromatic colors are 
more reliable and these are obtained by eliminating 
luminance through some form of transformation.  The color 
spaces 
Normalized 
RGB, 
HSV, 
and 
YCbCr 
are 
transformations commonly used by studies on skin color 
(Waibel et al., 1999).   
 
 
2.2.2. The HSV (HSI, HSL) Color Space 
 
The RGB color space is ideal for hardware implementations.  
However, it is not well suited for describing colors in terms 
that are practical for human interpretation.  For example, we 
do not refer to the color of a car in terms of the percentages 
of each of the primary components composing color.  We 
also do not think of a color image as being the composite of 
three images.  When humans view color objects, we describe 
them in terms of hue, saturation, and brightness  (Gonzalez & 
Woods, 2002). 
 
The HSV (Hue, Saturation, Value/Intensity/Luminance) 
color space describes color with intuitive values, based on 
the artist’s idea of tint, saturation and tone.  This was 
introduced when there was a need to specify color properties 
numerically.  Hue defines the dominant color as described by 
wavelength, for instance the distinction between red and 
yellow.  Saturation measures the colorfulness of an area in 
proportion to its brightness such as the distinction between 
red and pink.  Value refers to the color luminance, the 
distinction between a dark red and a light red.   
 
For skin detection, the value component is discarded to 
eliminate the undesirable effect of uneven illumination.  The 
transformation is defined by  
 
(
)
(
)
1
2
2
(
)
(
)
arccos
(
)
(
)(
)
R G
R
B
H
R
G
R
B
G
B
−
+
−
=
−
+
−
−
 
 
min(
,
,
)
1
3
R G B
S
R
G
B
=
−
+
+
 

 
1
3(
)
V
R
G
B
=
+
+
 
 
Some studies show that HSV is invariant to highlights at 
white light sources, to matte surfaces, and ambient lighting.  
However, hue discontinuities and the computation of the 
luminance component conflict badly with the properties of 
color vision.  The cyclic nature of Hue-Saturation spaces also 
makes it inconvenient for parametric skin color models that 
need a tight cluster of skin performance for optimum 
performance (Vezhnevets et al., 2003).   
 
 
2.2.3.  The Normalized RGB Color Space 
 
The Normalized RGB color space removes the luminance 
component through the normalization 
 
 
R
r
R
G
B
=
+
+
 
 
 
G
g
R
G
B
=
+
+
 
 
 
B
b
R
G
B
=
+
+
 
  
 
Since the sum of the three components r, g, and b is 1, the 
blue (b) component can be omitted to reduce space 
dimensionality.  
 
 
2.3.  Classifying Images         
 
After extracting the relevant features of an image, filtering 
systems use various algorithms to classify the image as 
pornographic (nude) or otherwise.  Since pornography is a 
relative term, most filtering systems have sensitivity settings 
to allow the user to have some degree of control over what 
images are classified as pornographic or not.  Nevertheless, 
some images may be wrongly classified.  Nude images 
classified as non-nude are referred to as false-negatives while 
non-nude images classified as nude are called false-positives.  
The efficiency of filtering systems can be measured in terms 
of the amount of false-negatives or false-positives. 
 
In classifying images, most systems use skin color models to 
process and characterize the images.  In these systems, the 
color model is trained on a number of examples under 
varying degrees of illumination conditions (Jones & Rehg, 
1998).  A common procedure for image characterization is 
by comparing an image to a database of pre-classified images 
using histogram color models. 
 
The classification algorithm by Wang et al. (1997) involves 
matching an image against a small number of feature vectors 
obtained from a training database of 500 objectionable 
images and 8,000 benign images.  If the image closely 
matches two or more of the marked objectionable images in 
the training database within the closest 15 matches, it is 
considered objectionable.  The algorithm works with 9% 
false-positives. 
 
The pornography detection algorithm developed by Lin et al. 
(2003) uses the correlation between skin and non-skin 
regions as the input of a support vector machine (SVM), a 
tool for classification with learning abilities.  The algorithm 
has an accuracy of 75% and a false alarm rate of 35%.   
 
Jones & Rehg (1998) constructed skin and non-skin models 
from a dataset of nearly one billion labeled pixels.  A neural 
network was then trained on 5453 adult images and 5226 
non-adult images.  The procedure resulted in 93% correct 
detections with 8% false-positives.  Lin, Chen, & Fuh (2003) 
contends that the training process for neural networks is very 
slow and difficult because pornography classification is a 
matter of opinion. 
 
PornsweeperTM (Bosson, 2002) first compares an image with 
images in its exception list, which are common images pre-
classified by an administrator as pornographic or not.  If an 
image is found to be in the exception list, it is quarantined for 
administrator inspection.  If the image is not on the list, it is 
passed on to an analyzer for further analysis.  PornsweeperTM 
detects nude images with 15% false negatives. 
 
We can compare the performance of nudity detection 
systems in terms of the percentages of the images correctly 
or wrongly classified by the systems.  However, this method 
is very unreliable because different systems use different test 
data sets (Jones & Rehg, 1998).  Different data sets generally 
yield different results.  
 
 
3.  THE ALGORITHM 
 
The Nudity Detection Algorithm is based primarily on 
observations that in general, nude images contain large 
amounts of skin, people have different skin tones, and skin 
regions in nude images are relatively close to each other.  
These observations require the identification of skin and non-
skin pixels in an image to be classified.  The identified skin 
pixels are analyzed to determine which among them are 
connected or form continuous regions.  These skin regions 
are further analyzed for clues of nudity or non-nudity.    
 
In general, the Nudity Detection Algorithm consists of the 
following steps: 
 
1. 
Detect skin-colored pixels in the image. 
2. 
Locate or form skin regions based on the detected 
skin pixels. 
3. 
Analyze the skin regions for clues of nudity or 
non-nudity. 
4. 
Classify the image as nude or not.    
 
The first step in the algorithm requires a skin color 
distribution model, which is the basis for classifying pixels as 
skin or non-skin. 
 

Most skin color distribution models use a single color space 
to classify pixels as skin-colored or not (Chai & 
Bouzerdoum, 1999), (Lin et al., 2003), (Forsyth & Fleck, 
1999), (Jones & Rehg, 1999).  However, based on the 
researcher’s experiments, the performance of a model can be 
improved by using two or more other color spaces.  Thus, 
aside from RGB values, the skin color model used in this 
system uses the Normalized RGB and HSV color spaces.   
 
The set of images used for developing the color model in this 
study consists of manually labeled skin regions representing 
all types of skin color.  Contrary to some studies, different 
skin tones do not exhibit the same chromaticity if the 
luminance component is removed.  Thus, the set of images 
were partitioned into three subsets based on perceived 
illumination level – light, brown, and dark.  Using correlation 
and linear regression the color properties of each subset are 
analyzed and used to develop the skin color model.   
    
Experiments show that the skin filter developed for this study 
works with 96.29% recall and a 6.76% false positive rate on 
the training set.   
 
The percentage of skin pixels relative to the image size is one 
of the main features that affect the probability of an image 
being nude or not.  The larger the percentage of skin is, the 
higher the probability that an image will be classified nude.  
Experiments show that a threshold of 15% yields good 
results in terms of recall.  Thus, for this study an image is 
considered not nude if it contains less than 15 percent skin.  
If the skin percentage is greater than or equal to 15, the 
image has to be analyzed further.   
 
The next step in the algorithm is the analysis of detected skin 
pixels in terms of adjacency or continuity to identify or 
locate skin regions.  The number of skin regions, the sizes of 
the three largest skin regions and the relative positions of 
these skin regions are important features that aid in the 
classification. 
 
Although the percentage of skin is a good indicator of the 
presence or absence of nudity in an image, it allows too 
many false positives if used alone.  The results show that the 
performance can be improved by combining skin percentage 
feature and region properties.   
 
In summary, the nudity detection algorithm works in the 
following manner: 
 
1. 
Scan the image starting from the upper left corner 
to the lower right corner. 
2. 
For each pixel, obtain the RGB component values. 
3. 
Calculate the corresponding Normalized RGB and 
HSV values from the RGB values. 
4. 
Determine if the pixel color satisfies the 
parameters for being skin established  by the skin 
color distribution model.   
5. 
Label each pixel as skin or non-skin. 
6. 
Calculate the percentage of skin pixels relative to 
the size of the image. 
7. 
Identify connected skin pixels to form skin regions. 
8. 
Count the number of skin regions.   
9. 
Identify pixels belonging to the three largest skin 
regions.  
10. Calculate the percentage of the largest skin region 
relative to the image size. 
11. Identify the leftmost, the uppermost, the rightmost, 
and the lowermost skin pixels of the three largest 
skin regions.  Use these points as the corner points 
of a bounding polygon. 
12. Calculate the area of the bounding polygon. 
13. Count the number of skin pixels within the 
bounding polygon. 
14. Calculate the percentage of the skin pixels within 
the bounding polygon relative to the area of the 
polygon. 
15. Calculate the average intensity of the pixels inside 
the bounding polygon. 
16. Classify an image as follows: 
a. 
If the percentage of skin pixels relative to 
the image size is less than 15 percent, the 
image is not nude.  Otherwise, go to the 
next step. 
b. 
If the number of skin pixels in the largest 
skin region is less than 35% of the total 
skin count, the number of skin pixels in 
the second largest region is less than 
30% of the total skin count and the 
number of skin pixels in the third largest 
region is less than 30 % of the total skin 
count, the image is not nude. 
c. 
If the number of skin pixels in the largest 
skin region is less than 45% of the total 
skin count, the image is not nude. 
d. 
If the total skin count is less than 30% of 
the total number of pixels in the image 
and the number of skin pixels within the 
bounding polygon is less than 55 percent 
of the size of the polygon, the image is 
not nude. 
e. 
If the number of skin regions is more 
than 60 and the average intensity within 
the polygon is less than 0.25, the image 
is not nude. 
f. 
Otherwise, the image is nude.  
 
The threshold values used in the algorithm have been 
determined empirically. 
 
 
4.  RESULTS 
 
Separate sets of images were collected for training and 
testing the algorithms developed in this study.  The training 
set for the skin filter consisted of 1,182,608 manually labeled 
skin pixels and 10,471,553 manually labeled non-skin pixels 
while the testing set consisted of 2,303,824 manually labeled 
skin pixels and 24,285,952 manually labeled non-skin pixels.  
The training set for the nudity detection algorithm consisted 
of 264 nude images and 300 non-nude images. The testing 
set consisted of 421 nude images and 635 non-nude images.   
 
 

4.1.  The Performance of the Skin Filter 
 
Experimental results suggest that there is no significant 
difference between the performance of the skin filter on the 
training and testing images.  The skin filter performs with a 
97% correct detection rate and an 8% false positive rate on 
the testing set.  
 
The skin color distribution model was compared to several 
common models using the set of images obtained for this 
study.  The results are shown in Table 1.  As shown in the 
table the skin filter developed and used for this algorithm 
outperforms the other skin filters.   
 
Table 1.  A Comparison of Skin Color Models 
 
 
 
 
4.2.  The Performance of the Nudity 
Detection Algorithm   
 
The performance of the Nudity Detection Algorithm on the 
testing images is unexpectedly better than its performance on 
the training images. On the training set, the algorithm 
worked with a 92.80% recall and an 8.67% false positive 
rate.  On the testing set, the algorithm correctly identified 
399 out of 421 nude images, a 94.77% recall.  It wrongly 
classified 32 out of 635 non-nude images, a false positive 
rate of 5.04%. 
 
False alarms cannot be avoided because some benign images 
have characteristics that are very similar to that of nude 
images.  Some images are wrongly classified as nude due to 
the presence of features usually associated to nudity.  
Possible reasons are the presence of large objects whose 
colors are very similar to skin and clothed or scantily clad 
persons resulting in continuous skin regions being detected.   
 
The researcher was not able to obtain data sets used by other 
researchers dealing with nudity detection.  The researcher 
was also unable to obtain detailed algorithms or software 
implementations of the algorithms.  Thus, it is impossible to 
compare the algorithms directly using the same image set.  
The reported results can be compared but a meaningful 
evaluation of the relative performances cannot be done.  
Table 2 shows a comparison of the Nudity Detection System 
with other similar systems in terms of the reported results. 
 
Table 2.   A Comparison With Other Systems 
 
Algorithm/System 
 
Recall 
(%) 
 
False-
Positives 
(%) 
 
SVM 
 
86 
 
35 
 
WIPE 
 
97.5 
 
18.4 
 
Jones-Rehg 
 
86.7 
 
9 
 
Fleck-Forsyth 
 
43 
 
4.2 
 
The Nudity Detection 
Algorithm 
 
94.32 
5.98 
 
 
Although it cannot be concluded that the Nudity Detection 
Algorithm designed by the proponent is better than other 
similar systems, it can be said that it performs relatively well 
compared to other similar algorithms.   
 
 
 
5.  CONCLUSIONS  
 
The proponent is inclined to agree with the belief that the 
choice of color space is not crucial as shown by several 
studies.  However, using a single color space may limit the 
performance of the skin color filter.  This study shows that 
better performance can be achieved by using two or more 
color spaces.   
 
Contrary to some studies, experimental results in this study 
suggest that chrominance values still significantly differ for 
light and dark skin even if the luminance component is 
removed through a normalization or transformation of RGB 
values.  Thus, a skin color model should not treat light and 
dark skin in the same manner.  This may be more 
computationally expensive but it allows for more skin pixels 
to be labeled correctly.   
 
The proponent was unable to find researches on skin color 
using linear regression.  The correlation coefficients for the 
color values (Normalized RGB and HSV) for different skin 
color suggest a high linear correlation.  Thus, it is possible to 
model skin color using linear regression analysis and this is 
confirmed by the results of this study.  However, linear 
regression may not be the best model for skin color.  The 
relationship between the values may not be strictly linear.  If 
this is the case, using curves may be more appropriate than 
using lines to model the relationship. 
 
The proponent believes that the performance of the system 
can be improved by using similarity measures or template 
matching where images are compared to pre-classified nude 
images.  However, large memory requirements for the use of 
templates may present undesirable consequences.  The 
appropriateness of the templates used must also be carefully 
established.     
 
Skin Filter 
Correct 
Detection 
(%) 
False 
Positives 
(%) 
 
Kovac et al., 2003 
 
10 
 
42.5 
 
Marius et al., Lin et al., 2003
 
34 
 
7.5 
 
Solina et al., 2002 
 
98 
 
14 
 
The Skin Color Distribution 
Model in This Study 
 
96.29 
98 
 
6.76 
12.46 

The performance may also be improved by using convex 
bounding polygons and using polygons with more than four 
sides.  The drawback is the effect on execution time.  It is 
computationally more expensive to identify interior points 
for concave polygons than for convex ones.  Increasing the 
number of sides also has a corresponding increase in 
execution time.  Thus, care must be taken in determining the 
appropriate threshold for the optimal number of sides of the 
bounding polygon.  
 
The evaluation of performance results would have been more 
meaningful if the comparison with other similar systems was 
done using a single image set.  However, it is difficult to 
obtain image sets used in other researches on skin color.  The 
implementations of the algorithms are also not publicly 
available.  Thus, it would be worthwhile for someone to 
develop a benchmark for algorithms in skin and nudity 
detection.   This would enable researchers on the field to 
establish standard performance targets and to carry out 
objective performance evaluations. 
 
 
6.  REFERENCES 
 
[1]   Bosson, A., Cawleyz, G., Chanz, Y., & Harveyz, R. 
(2002).  Non-retrieval: blocking pornographic images. 
[online]. Available:  
ttp://www2.cmp.uea.ac.uk/~rwh/research/reprints/civr2
002.pdf. (17 September 2004) 
 
[2]   Brown, D., Craw, I., & Lewthwaite, J. A SOM  
Based Approach to Skin Detection with Application in 
Real Time Systems. In Proc. Of the British Machine 
Vision Conference, 2001. 
 
[3]  Chan, Y, Harvey, R., & Smith, D.  Building Systems to 
Block Pornography.  In Proc. Of Challenge of Image 
Retrieval, BCS Electronic Worckshops in Computing 
Series, pp.34-40, 1999. 
 
[4]  Chai, D. & Bouzerdoum, A.  A Bayesian Approach to 
Skin Color Classification in YCbCr Color Space.  In 
Proc. Of IEEE Region Ten Conference, vol. 2, 421-
4124. 
 
[5]   Forsyth,D.A. & Fleck, M.M. (1999).  Automatic 
Detection of Human Nudes. In Proc. International 
Journal of Computer Vision, 32(1), 63-77. 
 
[6]   Gomez , G. On Selecting Colour Components for Skin 
Detection.  In Proc. Of the ICPR, vol. 2, 961-964, 2000. 
 
[7]   Gomez, G & Morales, E.  Automatic Feature 
Construction and a Simple Rule Induction Algorithm 
for Skin Detection.  In Proc. Of the ICML Workshop on 
Machine Learning in Computer Vision, 31-38, 2002. 
 
[8] Jones, M. & Rehg, J. (1998) Statistical Color Models 
with Application to Skin Detection. [online] Available:  
http://www.hpl.hp.com/techreports/Compaq-DEC/ 
CRL-98-11.pdf. (30 September 2004) 
 
 
[9] Kovac, J. (2002).  Eliminating the Influence of 
Nonstandard Illumination From Images. Diploma 
Thesis, University of Ljubljana. 
 
 
[10] Lin, Y., Tseng, H. & Fuh, C.  Pornography Detection 
Using Support Vector Machine. 16th IPPR Conference 
on Computer Vision, Graphics and Image Processing 
(CVGIP 2003). Kinmen, ROC. 
 
[11] Martinkauppi, B. 2002.  Face Colour Under varying 
Illumination. [online].  Available: 
http://herkules.oulu.fi/isbn9514267885/isbn9514267885
.pdf.  (02 October 2003) 
 
 
[12] Peer, P., Kovac, J, & Solina, F.  Human Skin Colour 
Clustering for Face Detection.  In Proc. Of EUROCON 
2003 – International Conference on Computer as a 
Tool, 2003. 
 
[13] Pornsweeper Review (2002).  [online].  Available: 
http://www.dansdata.com/pornsweeper.htm. (24 
September 2003) 
 
[14] Solina, F., Peer, P., Batagelj, B., & Juvan, S.  15 
seconds of Fame – An Interactive, Computer-Vision 
Based Art Illustration.  In Proc. Of the 7th Int’l 
Conference on Control, Automation, Robotics, and 
Vision, pp. 198-204, 2002.  
 
[15] Terrillon, J.,  Shizarit M, Fukamachi, H, & Akamatsu, 
S.  Comparative Performance of Different Skin 
Chrominance Models and Chrominance Spaces for the 
Automatic Detection of Human Faces in color Images.  
In Proc. Of the International Conference on Face and 
Gesture Recognition, pp. 54-61, France, 2000. 
  
[16] Vezhnevets, V., Sazonov, V. & Andreeva, A. A Survey 
on Pixel-Based Skin Color Detection Techniques.  In 
Proc. Graphicon-2003, pp. 85-92, Moscow, Russia, 
Sep. 2003. 
 
[17] Waibel, A., Yang, J., & Lu, W. Skin-color modeling 
and Adaptation.  In Proc. Of ACCV1998, 687-694, 
1998. 
 
[18] Wang, J., Li, J., Wiederhold, G., & Firschein, O.  
System for Screening Objectionable Images Using 
Daubechies’ Wavelets and Color Histograms. In Proc. 
of the International Workshop on Interactive 
Distributed Multimedia Systems and 
Telecommunication Services, pp. 10–30, 1997. 
 
[19] Zarit, B., Super, B. & Quek, F.  Comparison of Five 
Color Models in Skin Classification. In Proc. Of ICCV 
’99 International Workshop on Recognition, Analysis, 
and Tracking of Faces and Gesture 
 
 

