ONE 
Spanish Science and the Reception 
of Relativity 
AROUND 1900 a political consensus favoring vigorous aca-
demic freedom emerged at the same time when Spaniards 
were reassessing national goals in the wake of the Spanish-
American War. Modernization was one of the answers to the 
nation's most pressing problems, and young academics of the 
"Generation of 1914," such as Jose Ortega y Gasset, took up 
the cry eagerly. For Ortega, science was the way to regenera-
tion, and, since where there was shouting there would be no 
science, civil discourse was a necessary precondition for mod-
ernization.1 In the first decade of this century, when the young 
Ortega was formulating his program for national regenera-
tion, Spanish mathematics, physics, and astronomy—the 
three scientific disciplines on which the theory of relativity 
was to have an impact toward the end of the decade—were all 
undergoing a process of modernization and renewal. These 
disciplinary developments form the immediate context of the 
reception of relativity in Spain. 
THE REVITALIZATION OF MATHEMATICS 
According to Julio Rey Pastor, the mathematics of nineteenth-
century Europe was not introduced in Spain until 1865 when 
Jose de Echegaray (1832-1916), who taught mathematics at 
the Escuela de Caminos (Civil Engineering School) in Madrid, 
published two volumes on plane and analytical geometry. Be-
1 On Ortega's early political program, see Robert Wohl, The Generation of 
igi4 (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1979), pp. 122-159, esp. 
P- 134· 
17 

CHAPTER 1 
fore then, mathematics instruction was based entirely on com-
pendia of eighteenth-century mathematics, texts made obso-
lete after analysis had been completely remade by Gauss, Abel, 
and Cauchy and after Riemann had created the modern theory 
of functions. 
Spanish mathematicians before and contemporaneous with 
Echegaray believed that the field had been fully developed and 
that there was nothing left to solve except a few intractable 
problems, such as the quadrature of the circle and the trisec-
tion of the angle. Echegaray put an end to the circle-squarers 
in 1886, when he divulged Carl Lindemann's 1882 research on 
the transcendence of pi which demonstrated the impossibility 
of quadrature. Later he finished off the trisectors as well. At 
the Escuela de Caminos, he introduced the higher geometry of 
Michel Chasles and initiated a profound renovation of Spanish 
mathematics, centered in the engineering schools, which re-
sulted in the assimilation of European mathematics (for ex-
ample, that of Cauchy and von Staudt) of the first half of the 
century by around 1890. In this task he was aided by a few 
other figures, such as Eduard Torroja (1847-1918), Echega-
ray's successor at the Escuela de Caminos after the former ac-
cepted the chair of mathematical physics at the University of 
Madrid in 1878, who introduced Christian von Staudt's pro-
jective geometry; Ventura Reyes Prosper (1863-1922) andjo-
sep M. Bartrina i Capella, two of the few Spanish mathemati-
cians who were interested in non-Euclidean geometry; and 
Zoel Garcia de Galdeano (1846-1924). Torroja's signal contri-
bution was the initiation of original research in mathematics; 
his best work was the synthetic study of the curvature of sur-
faces.2 Reyes Prosper, significantly, was unable to gain a uni-
versity chair and always taught in secondary schools. His in-
terests extended to mathematical logic, and he introduced the 
work of such logicians as Charles Sanders Pierce and Christine 
Ladd-Franklin in Spain. Of all Spanish mathematicians of his 
2 See discussion by Jose M. Plans, "Las matematicas en Espana en los ulti-
mos cincuenta anos," Iberica, 25 (1926), 172. 
18 

THE RECEPTION OF RELATIVITY 
generation, Galdeano was most in contact with European, 
particularly German, colleagues, and he was a regular partici-
pant in European mathematical congresses. Primarily a peda-
gogue, he introduced Cauchy's work on the functions of a 
complex variable.3 
This is where matters stood—squarely in the early nine-
teenth century—when Rey Pastor sketched the recent history 
of Spanish mathematics in 1915. "Mathematical ideas," he 
wrote in summary, "arrive [in our country] when they have 
given of themselves all they have to give, when it is virtually 
impossible to continue the exploitation of the lode, that is, 
when they have crystallized into a book. The history of our 
mathematical culture is not the history of ideas, nor even the 
history of mathematicians; it is the history of text-books."4 
Both the textbooks and curricula of Spanish mathematics 
around the turn of the century were based on antiquated 
French models, the texts following pre-1850 French manuals 
both in format and contents. 
The next phase in the history of Spanish mathematics, di-
rected by Rey Pastor (1888-1962) himself, witnessed the as-
similation of contemporary research. In 1915, at Rey Pastor's 
behest, the Junta para Ampliacion de Estudios created the 
Mathematical Seminar and Laboratory (possibly modeled 
after Vito Volterra's seminar in Rome) where Rey Pastor 
trained the first generation of modern Spanish mathematicians 
whose work was fully contemporaneous with that of research-
front mathematics. Rey Pastor's own research covered much 
of the ground of contemporary mathematics: functions of real 
and complex variables, theory of groups, and conformal map-
3 See ibid., p. 172, and Gino Lona, "Le matematiche in Spagna ien ed oggi: 
I matematici moderni," Saentia, 25 (1919), 443-444. 
4 Julio Rey Pastor, "El progreso de Espana en las Ciencias y el progreso de 
las Ciencias en Espana," in Ernesto and Enrique Garcia Camarero, eds., Lapo-
lemica de la ciencia espanola (Madrid: Alianza, 1970), pp. 458-478; Santiago 
Garma Pons, "Jose Echegaray y Eizaguirre," "Ventura Reyes Prosper," and 
"Eduardo Torroja Caballe," in J. M. Lopez Pinero, et al., Diccionario de la 
Ciencia Moderna en Espana (Barcelona: Ediciones Peninsula, 1983), s.v. 
19 

CHAPTER 1 
ping, as well as a whole series of problems in projective ge­
ometry. Research topics for his disciples were carefully chosen 
by Rey Pastor and were designed to overcome the derivative 
nature of previous Spanish work in the field: "The choice of 
research topics appropriate to the capacity of each, of not ex­
cessive difficulty so as to avoid discouragement, of previously 
established novelty so that the research might be fruitful and 
useful, represents, without doubt, the professor's most im­
portant task."
5 Research had to be novel, to ensure that the stu­
dents' efforts were not wasted and to contribute to progress in 
the discipline as a whole. 
By the end of the war decade Rey Pastor had created a "Val­
uable nucleus of mathematicians. . . . Pedro Pineda, Olegario 
Fernandez Banos, Pere Puig Adam, Jose M. Lorente Perez— 
he, above all, the best—Roberto Araujo, Jose Maria Orts, etc., 
and, among the youngest, Tomas Rodriguez Bachiller, Fer­
nando Lorente de No, Teofilo Martin Escobar . . . all of them 
my students."
6 These young men worked on problems of cur­
rent interest: Lorente de No and Puig Adam on relativity, Fer­
nandez Banos on complex spaces of η dimensions, Pineda on 
conformal mapping, Orts on Dirichlet's problem, and so 
forth. 
Virtually all of these men had studied abroad, most of them 
in Italy, an all but compulsory requisite to their assignment to 
original and current problems. In 1917 Pineda received a Junta 
grant to study the theories of functions and groups with Her­
mann Weyl in Zurich. The following year Araujo also went to 
Switzerland to study higher geometry, and Fernandez Banos, 
with another grant from thejunta, traveled to Switzerland and 
Italy. Lorente de No began to study harmonic curves (those 
with equations satisfying Laplace's equation) at the Mathe­
matical Seminar in 1918, but the next year he was in Italy 
studying relativity with Tullio Levi-Civita. At a meeting of 
5 Quoted m Sixto Rios et al., Julio Rey Pastor, matematico (Madrid: Instituto 
de Espana, 1979), p. 31. 
6 Ramiro Ledesma Ramos, "El matematico Rey Pastor," La Gaceta Literaria, 
II, 30 (March 15, 1928), 1. I have provided given names. 
20 

THE RECEPTION OF RELATIVITY 
the Mathematical Society in Madrid the same year, Josep 
Maria Plans read an extract sent by Lorente on the movement 
of a point in an Einsteinian field, "which is a preview of re-
search carried out in Rome under the direction of Prof. Levi-
Civita and which, in its final form, will be published in the 
Rendiconti of the Reale Accademia dei Lincei."7 Plans's letters 
to Levi-Civita over the following decade mention Lorente fre-
quently. "Together," Plans remarked in 1922, "we speak fre-
quently—and with all due praise—of the Italian mathemati-
cians." In another letter, Plans notes that Vito Volterra had 
been "very friendly" to Lorente when the latter was studying 
in Rome with Levi-Civita. Indeed, when Volterra visited 
Madrid in 1932, it was noted in the press that Lorente had at-
tended his classes in Rome in 1919 and that "to him is owing 
the first accounts of the original theories of Volterra, which he 
divulged after his return from Rome; thereafter he continued 
to correspond with his two great professors."8 More of Rey 
Pastor's disciples followed, as Plans mentioned in a letter to 
Levi-Civita on March 9, 1926: "A number of times those 
young men who have had the good fortune to study [in Italy] 
(T. Martin Escobar, [Angel] Saldana, etc.) speak of you in 
their letters to me." Others of Rey Pastor's group were indi-
rectly in touch with the Italians: through letters, Puig Adam 
consulted Levi-Civita about his dissertation on the theory of 
relativity, and, following Plans's advice, Fernando Pena sent 
copies of his articles.9 To publish in Italy was a mark of dis-
tinction; for example, Cabrera, Comas Sola, Plans, Rey Pas-
7 Junta para Ampliacion de Estudios, Memorias, Igi6-igi7 (Madrid: 1918), 
pp. 42, 53, 187; Revista Matematica Hispano-Americana, 1 (1919), 224. I have 
been unable to locate Lorente's paper. 
8 Plans to Levi-Civita, October 23, 1921, April 20, 1922, and May 2, 1925. 
These and the following letters are cited from copies deposited in the Califor-
nia Institute of Technology Archives, Pasadena, by the Accademia dei Lincei, 
Rome. 
9 Plans to Levi-Civita, October 23, 1921, January 3 and September 9, 1924. 
Plans also sent Jose Maria Orts to Levi-Civita in 1924, but only for a recom-
mendation to an Italian colleague with whom the Spaniard could study prob-
ability theory. 
21 

CHAPTER 1 
tor, and Terradas all published in the influentialjournal Scientia 
between 1917 and 1936. 
In welcoming Federigo Enriques to Buenos Aires in 1927, 
Rey Pastor gave, in passing, a clue to his understanding of the 
value of the Italian connection for Spanish mathematicians. 
Enriques, he noted, 
also knew how to cast the net of inspiration, capturing the 
imaginations of those who could aspire, later on, to a 
deeper pedagogical experience than was contained in the 
more ephemeral one of his lectures. It is much to be de-
sired that Argentinian students, for whom Europe is 
Paris, would share their preferences with the universities 
of Italy, where more intimate contact with professors 
makes study there more fruitful. With reference to the ex-
act sciences, it is difficult to find at any one European uni-
versity figures of the stature of Levi-Civita, Volterra, 
Enriques, Severi, Bompiani, Fermi, Amoroso, Gini, 
Amaldi, Vacca . . . under whose tutelage one can not 
only learn the present state of any theory and contribute 
to its advance, but also acquire that higher synthetic vi-
sion of science which only philosophical minds can 
achieve and without which scientific learning is mere eru-
dition, falling short of cohesive understanding.10 
This revealing passage suggests a number of observations. 
There is, first, the derogatory reference to Paris, symbol of 
French culture and science, against whose former dominance 
over Spanish science Rey Pastor was reacting. Second, he em-
phasizes the highly personalized pedagogical style of Italian 
professors and their ability to create affective bonds with their 
students. I believe there is an implicit comparison here with 
IO Julio Rey Pastor, "Federico Enriques," clipping from La Nation, 1927. I 
discuss the connection of Spanish mathematics with Italy more fully in "Ein-
stein, Rey Pastor y la promocion de la ciencia en Espana," Adas, I Simposio 
sobreJulio Rey Pastor (Logrono, 1985), pp. 79-90. In the same volume, Giorgio 
Israel notes that there were also significant cognitive affinities between the two 
schools. 
22 

THE RECEPTION OF RELATIVITY 
German pedagogy, characterized by the distance between stu-
dent and teacher. Given the lack of a strong scientific tradition 
in Spain, Rey Pastor wanted his students to avail themselves of 
a more personal and nurturing relationship with the professo-
riate. 
Rey Pastor's group was the most cohesive nucleus of scien-
tists to receive the theory of relativity in Spain. Those physi-
cists and astronomers who participated in the process did so 
more as individuals than as members of an articulated discipli-
nary network of discussion. The primary institutional focus 
of reception, beyond the Mathematical Seminar, was the 
Mathematical Society of Madrid (founded in 1911) whose 
discussions can be followed in the Revista Matematica 
Hispano-Americana, founded by Rey Pastor in 1919. Garcia de 
Galdeano's pioneering journal, El Progreso Matematico, had 
failed in the 1890s because of the lack of quality material avail-
able for submission. The Mathematical Society's Revista, the 
predecessor of Rey Pastor's journal, suffered the same fate. 
Rey Pastor's 1915 attack on senior colleagues and his call for 
the Europeanization of Spanish mathematics had the effect of 
making many Spanish mathematicians, ostensibly those of the 
old school, unwilling to publish at all. The Revistas editor, 
Cecilio Jimenez Rueda, complained in an editorial the same 
year: "When all Spanish mathematical papers are accused of 
discovering things already discovered, one hears talk of semi-
obscurity in which, like bats, a group of Spanish mathemati-
cians enjoys a comfortable position, when it is alleged that the 
Spanish Mathematical Society has lived long enough already 
and we must incorporate ourselves into the European scientific 
movement, we can understand the fear that many worthy per-
sons display when we ask them to contribute to ourjournal."11 
The Revistas successor—still extant today—was wholly dom-
inated by the "European" group of the Mathematical Seminar. 
This group, in spite of its dynamism in the 1920s, did not 
produce sustained research of a highly original nature. Many 
" Revista de la Sociedad Matematica Espanola, 5 (1915), 4. 
23 

CHAPTER 1 
of these mathematicians, after completing competent theses, 
ended up as secondary-school teachers and authors of text­
books (Puig Adam, who wrote his dissertation on relativity, is 
a good example). But the role that those textbooks played in 
the revitalization of Spanish mathematics (their excellence as 
didactic tools is emphasized by present-day Spanish mathe­
maticians and physicists who learned from them) should not 
be underestimated. 
The protagonist of Francisco Vera's novel El hombre bicua-
drado, a mathematician who worked as a bureaucrat in an office 
in Madrid, was accustomed, when suffering insomnia, to calm 
his nerves by reading Rey Pastor's Introduction a la matematica 
superior. His choice of reading material was not adventitious. 
Rey Pastor's book, which explicated contemporary mathe­
matical theory by breaking it down into three principle fami­
lies of ideas—sets, functions, and groups—was recognized at 
the time as having contributed notably to the inculcation of in­
terest in modern mathematics among Spanish students. Vera, 
who had himself been a student of Rey Pastor, explained 
through his fictional alter ego that mathematics, "all order and 
method, is the best remedy for overstimulated nerves, the best 
antidote for obscure ideas." Oscuridad (darkness) was a code 
word that Rey Pastor invoked to characterize the routine text­
book mathematics of the preceding generation, as well as its 
retrograde appeal to "traditional values" to oppose modern 
science—an excuse, in Rey Pastor's view, for its inability to 
come to terms either with modern science or with modern 
society.
I2 
How successful, then, was the movement of institutionali­
zation centered around the Mathematical Seminar and the 
Mathematical Society? In retrospect, and in the context of the 
present volume, the high quality of the members' education, 
their international connections, and their strong internal cohe-
12 Plans, "Las matematicas en Espafia," ρ 174; Francisco Vera, El hombre bi-
cuadrado (Madrid: Paez, 1926), pp. 88—89; Rey Pastor, "El progreso de Espana 
en las Ciencias," p. 459. 
24 

THE RECEPTION OF RELATIVITY 
sion make intelligible the swift and nearly unanimous accept-
ance of relativity by the Spanish scientific community. But the 
leadership was uncertain of its own success. For Esteve Terra-
das, there was insufficient interest in higher mathematics 
among prospective students to permit the launching of the dis-
cipline, in spite of his best efforts. As he explained to Levi-
Civita in 1922: "What a pity it is that interest in mathematics is 
so little developed among us! I do all I can to awaken it, al-
though I recognize the insufficience of my own mind. But just 
like one who makes it a duty to instruct persons with little ap-
titude for music in the marvelous refinement of a Brahms, I 
strive to sow seeds which perhaps might flower in a not too 
distant future."13 Scientists, of course, fully participated in the 
myth that Spain provided infertile soil for the cultivation of 
science. Plans, more optimistic, reached somewhat similar 
conclusions, although his analysis was sociological, not cul-
tural. In summing up Spanish progress in the field since the 
1880s, he wrote: 
Mathematics has made a great leap in Spain; the lack of 
phase with respect to other countries has almost been 
overcome. What is lacking is to increase research, which 
is still in diapers and restricted to a few, very few, privi-
leged minds. Foreign journals are now read here, but one 
still notes in them the absence of Spanish names. How to 
remedy this? It is mainly a question of numbers. There 
can be no abundance of research papers so long as there is 
no regular number of persons who devote themselves to 
it.1* 
Einstein's visit, along with others by Levi-Civita, Jacques 
Hadamard, and European figures of similar stature, contrib-
uted to the crystallization of the discipline, at least as far as its 
self-image was concerned. But it is noteworthy that these vis-
its took place not even a full decade after Rey Pastor's 1915 
13 Terradas to Levi-Civita, March 22, 1922. 
14 Plans, "Las matematicas en Espafia," p. 174. 
25 

CHAPTER 1 
speech, at a time when the vital core of the discipline was com-
posed in large part of men in their twenties or early thirties, 
few of whom held—or would ever hold—chairs in major uni-
versities. It was this discrepancy between promise and pros-
pect that made it appear that the undeniable achievements of 
the Mathematical Seminar still rested on shifting sand. 
T H E RENEWAL OF PHYSICS 
In physics (and astronomy) the pattern of historical develop-
ment just observed was repeated: a rudimentary level of in-
struction in the late nineteenth century, with very poor mate-
rial facilities, followed by a leap forward during the first decade 
of the twentieth century. The lowly state of Spanish laborato-
ries was a leitmotif of nineteenth-century scientific literature. 
The chair of biochemistry in Madrid, which served the facul-
ties of medicine, pharmacy, and sciences, had no laboratory 
budget at all since its establishment in 1887 until 1901. As a re-
sult, according tojose R. Carracido, the subject was taught "as 
if it were metaphysics." Finally, the sum of 6,000 pesetas, ap-
proximately the cost of a Huefner spectrophotometer, was al-
located for a laboratory. The total laboratory budget for all five 
university faculties was also 6,000 pesetas annually, or 38.25 
pesetas per chair per trimester, according to Carracido's cal-
culations!15 
The result of such impoverishment, in physics as well as in 
chemistry, was not only a practical lag but a theoretical one as 
well. Without laboratories it was impossible to demonstrate 
recent theoretical advances. At the close of the nineteenth cen-
tury the University of Madrid had but one laboratory of phys-
ics. As Jose M. Madariaga complained in 1902, "In what phys-
ics laboratory can the Zeeman effect be observed? In how 
many is Verdet's constant in rotary magnetic polarization fa-
miliar? Where has it been possible to secure an accurate value 
15 Jose R. Carracido, Estudtos historico-criticos de la cienaa espanola, 2nd ed. 
(Madrid: Imp. Alrededor del Mundo, 1917), pp. 388-390. 
26 

THE RECEPTION OF RELATIVITY 
for the length of Hertzian waves?"
16 Manuel Moreno-Carac-
ciolo recalled "the picturesque chair of higher physics in the 
Central University [in the 1890s], from which its incumbent 
advised us not to believe what was said of X-rays, explicable, 
so he said, as a photographic trick." The early appreciation of 
the nature of X-rays, discovered by Roentgen in 1896, was de­
pendent upon having access to the equipment. In contrast to 
the situation in Madrid, Eduard Fontsere and Eduardo Lozano 
gave a public demonstration of the obtainment of X-rays from 
a cathode tube at the Academy of Sciences of Barcelona in 
1896, and the following year Bernabe Dorronsoro, professor 
of pharmacy in Granada, demonstrated in his own course pho­
tographs taken in May 1897 with X-ray apparatus he had ac­
quired in Paris with his own funds.
I7 
Renewal began after the turn of the century, and new labo­
ratories sprang up in the years just preceding World War I— 
new chemistry laboratories in particular, because these were 
directly linked to the interests of major industries. Thus the as­
say laboratory (Laboratori General d'Assaigs) of the Manco-
munitat (regional authority) of Catalonia was established in 
1908, and the Laboratory of General Chemistry of the Resi-
dencia de Estudiantes in Madrid in 1912. By the early 1920s 
there was a well-established network of industrially oriented 
laboratories, housed in private industrial concerns, in engi­
neering schools, or under the auspices of various public enti­
ties.
 l 8 
16 Jose Maria Albareda, Creadon dejacultades universitarias γ production cienti-
fica en el pasado sigh (Granada: Universidad de Granada, 1950), p. 45, citing 
Bias Cabrera; Jose M. Madariaga, "Exposicion de algunas consideraciones 
sobre la explicacion de ciertos fenomenos y de sus relaciones con los de luz 
(1902), cited by Antonio Lafuente, "La relatividad y Einstein en Espana," 
Mundo Cientifico, no. 15 (June 1982), 585. 
17 M[anuel] Moreno Caracciolo, "El Laboratorio de Investigaciones Fisi-
cas," El Sol, September 10, 1920; Albareda, Creacwn de Facultades Universita­
rias, pp. 47-48 
18 See, for example, Guia de les institutions cienttfiques i d'ensenyanca, pp. 58 
(Laboratori General d'Investigacions i Assaigs), pp. 156-157 (chemistry lab­
oratory of the Escola de Tenena), pp. 159-160 (Laboratori d'Estudis Superiors 
27 

CHAPTER 1 
Exhibits of laboratory hardware were an important feature 
of the meetings of the Spanish Association for the Progress of 
Science (founded in 1908), and the War provided a direct stim-
ulus for locally produced laboratory equipment. With the 
products of Zeiss and other German glassware suppliers cut 
off, the Spanish Army, as well as private and public chemistry 
and medical laboratories, had to replace equipment locally. By 
1919 both optical equipment and laboratory glassware were 
being produced by Spanish companies.19 
The most striking advances in instrumentation, however, 
were centered in a unique institution, the Laboratory of Au-
tomation, founded in 1906 in the Palace of Industry of the old 
Hippodrome of Madrid, and enlarged in 1914. There the di-
rector, Leonardo Torres Quevedo (1852-1936), best known 
for his spectacular inventions such as the automatic chess 
player and the aerial tramway at Niagara Falls, built a whole 
series of scientific instruments requested (and frequently de-
signed) by various Spanish scientists to fit their own research 
requirements. Thus he built microtomes for Ramon y Cajal's 
neurohistology group; cardiographs for the physiologist Jose 
Gomez Ocana; a device for determining the constricting or di-
lating action of different substances passing through blood 
vessels for Gomez Ocana's successor Juan Negrin; a seismo-
graph for Eduardo Mier y Mirva; a spectrograph and many 
other devices for magnetochemical measurements for Bias 
Cabrera; a Michelson-style interferometer for Manuel Marti-
nez Risco, and so forth. 2° 
de Quimica); Anon., "Los laboratorios de la Residencia [de Estudiantes]," Re-
sidencia, 5, no. 1 (1934), 26-30; Iberica, 11 (1919), 101 (Laboratorio Quimico 
Industrial of the Escuela de Minas); ibid., 18 (1922), 146-147 (Laboratorio 
Quimico de Analisis Industnales y Agricolas, Zaragoza), etc. Iberica featured 
frequent articles on laboratories, particularly industrial ones. 
" Diego de Imaz, "Los vidrios cientificos. Nueva industria espanola," Ibe-
rica, n (1919), 221-223. 
20 On the Laboratorio de Automatica, see Jose Garcia Santesmases, Obra e 
inventos de Torres Quevedo (Madrid: Instituto de Espana, 1980), pp 301-306. 
A list of apparatus built for specific scientists is in the exhibition catalog, Leo-
28 

THE RECEPTION OF RELATIVITY 
In the 1920s, Spanish laboratories were at least able to sup-
port experimentation in a limited range of subdisciplines, re-
lying on the resourcefulness of individual researchers and a 
mechanical genius like Torres Quevedo. But outside of a few 
well-funded organizations, such as Cabrera's physics Institute 
and the six medical laboratories of the Residencia de Estu-
diantes, the infrastructure, particularly in the universities, was 
weak. Study abroad continued to be a basic requirement for 
advanced research that, in the experimental sciences, could not 
be undertaken on the basis of the limited facilities available in 
Spain. The problem of university instruction was critical. As 
late as 1927 the chemist Enric Moles (1883—1953) was threat-
ening to resign his chair of chemistry at the University of 
Madrid because of the laboratory problem: 
. . . the installation of laboratories is indispensable—to 
the point where I told the Director General [of higher ed-
ucation] that if I don't secure their installation during the 
next academic year I will consider that I have failed and 
will resign my chair. Believe me, there is no arrogance in 
this. It is just a matter of my conviction that every effort 
is sterile without them. The teaching of chemistry in 
Spain has been a bad joke. It has been explained on black-
boards, more or less as grammar is. All this is fruitless and 
would be considered not only laughable in any European 
country, but inconceivable.2I 
Perhaps the most important change, then, was one of val-
ues. In the nineteenth century, according to Carracido, there 
had been no "public conception" regarding the laboratory 
needs of chemists or other scientists. By the 1920s, the image 
nardo Torres Quevedo (Madrid: Colegio de Ingenieros de Caminos, Canales y 
Puertos, 1978), pp. 121-122. On instrumentation for Negrin, see Gonzalo R. 
Lafora, "El Congreso Internacional de Fisiologia en Paris," El Sol, August 10, 
1920. On Cabrera, see Moreno Carraciolo, "El Laboratorio de Investigaciones 
Fisicas." 
21 "Una conversacion con el quimico Sr. Moles," El Sol, June 20, 1927. 
29 

CHAPTER 1 
had clearly changed. The protagonist of Ramon Gomez de la 
Serna's science-fiction novel, El dueno del atomo (1926), is a 
physicist who works in a Madrid laboratory seemingly in­
spired by that of Bias Cabrera, "a recondite institute hidden in 
the outskirts of the city." He is, moreover, an experimentalist 
"who works in an important laboratory with new apparatus, 
extraordinary clocks, machines to weigh the imponderable 
and a lot of glass in spirals and retorts, and all this teratology 
of small transparent monsters that complexify laboratories."
22 
There, after patient experimentation, he splits an atom. 
Scientists themselves, and those with scientific education 
who popularized their vocation, were responsible for chang­
ing the public image of the scientist. To Luis Urbano, a Do­
minican philosopher who had studied physics in Madrid with 
Plans and spent long hours of research in Cabrera's Institute, 
laboratory researchers were to be admired: "They are solitary 
workers in the shop of science, who labor through vocation 
and without philosophical bias."
23 
Practically speaking, modern physics in Spain dates to 1910, 
when the Junta para Ampliation de Estudios created the Insti­
tute of Physical Research in the Hippodrome of Madrid, with 
Bias Cabrera as its director. Cabrera (1878-1945) received his 
doctorate at Madrid in 1901 and had pursued research mainly 
on the properties of electrolytes. He had already established 
himself as the country's leading experimental physicist by 
1910. The subsequent development of Spanish physics was in­
extricably linked to Cabrera's Institute. 
In an evocative article written ten years after the founding of 
the Institute, Moreno-Caracciolo noted that those who, like 
himself, had passed through the University of Madrid's sci­
ence faculty in the last years of the nineteenth century, with its 
"oral classes of physics and chemistry, with their undigestible 
lessons, repeated from memory," could scarcely believe that 
" Ramon Gomez de la Serna, El dueno del atomo (Buenos Aires: Losada, 
1945), Ρ ii. 
23 Luis Urbano, Einstein y Santo Tomas: Estudio critico de las teorias relativistas 
(Madrid-Valencia: La Ciencia Tomista, [1926]), pp. xxv—xxvi. 
30 

THE RECEPTION OF RELATIVITY 
the institute was an official center of instruction.24 Of course, 
in reality it was not an official center because it was not de-
pendent on a university but rather upon the Junta, which sup-
plied its budget (40,000 pesetas in 1919). Cabrera had total fi-
nancial control, and Caracciolo stressed the connection 
between budgetary independence, the independence of work 
carried out at the Institute, and, in a broader perspective, the 
consequent reinvigoration of Spanish physics and the over-
throw of rote instruction. The independence of research was 
crucial. As an example, Santiago Pina de Rubies, who had 
studied in Geneva and held an assistantship in the physics de-
partment there, received 300 pesetas monthly to support his 
spectrographic research. But Pina had no Spanish academic ti-
tle and thus, Caracciolo notes ironically, "he could serve only 
as a beadle in an official educational institution." The Insti-
tute's independence attracted the very best researchers, as they 
were able to work there without having to waste time attempt-
ing to ascend the tortuous Spanish academic ladder, a fact that 
caused considerable resentment among the established profes-
soriate. 
Assaying the practical accomplishments of the Institute's 
first decade, Moreno-Caracciolo noted that it had educated a 
whole generation, first, of university professors (Jeronimo 
Vecino at Zaragoza was the leading figure) and, second, of sec-
ondary school teachers (Vicente Garcia Rodeja in Oviedo and 
Jose de la Puente in Barcelona, among others).25 Beyond that 
considerable accomplishment, its investigations "have cor-
rected scientific theories universally held to be certain and have 
exposed errors committed by foreign scholars which have 
given rise to the deduction of false consequences." Below I will 
comment on the contents of this research, but here I stress the 
24 The following section is based on Moreno-Carraciolo, "El Laboratono 
de Investigaciones Fisicas." 
25 Both Vecino and de la Puente participated in the reception and diffusion 
of relativity. On Vecino's role, see chapter 4. De la Puente was the translator 
of P. Kirchenberger, {Que puede comprenderse sin matemahcas de la Teoria de la 
Relatividad? (Barcelona: Juan Ruiz Romero, 1923). 
31 

CHAPTER 1 
seemingly ingenuous, or rather modest, nature of Caracciolo's 
criterion for scientific excellence. For a Spanish scientist—he 
implies—the ability to criticize mainstream science intelli­
gently is goal enough. In fact, the ability to criticize is inti­
mately linked to the effectiveness of scientific communication 
and is a necessary complement of the capability for independ­
ent research. 
Around 1920, nearly all the significant research in Spanish 
experimental physics was concentrated in the Institute. There 
Cabrera, the chemist Moles, and their disciples worked on 
magnetism—Moles on atomic weights, Miguel Catalan and 
Pifia on spectrography, and so forth. In 1926 the Institute re­
ceived a Rockefeller (International Education Board) grant to 
upgrade its physical plant. This concentration of energy pro­
duced astounding results: of all articles on physics published in 
the Anales de la Sociedad Espanola de Fisica γ Quimica, from the 
founding of the Institute in 1910 through 1937, this single cen­
ter (and the successor National Institute of Physics and Chem­
istry, established in 1931) accounted for 40.9 percent of all au­
thors and no less than 72.3 percent of all articles.
26 
THE RECEPTION OF RELATIVITY BY SPANISH SCIENTISTS 
Esteve Terradas 
The first Spaniards to grasp the significance of relativity and its 
place in modern physics were Esteve Terradas and Bias Ca­
brera. Terradas (1883-1950) had attended elementary schoolin 
Berlin-Charlottenburg, as a result of which he became the best 
Germanist among Spanish physical scientists. As a university 
student, according to his Madrid roommate Enric de Rafael, 
he never read the assigned texts but would prepare himself 
with some better volume in German. For the second-level 
course in analysis, accordingly, Terradas prepared for the ex-
26 Manuel Valera Candel, "La production espanola en fisica a traves de los 
Anales de la Sociedad Espanola de Fisica y Quimica, 1903-1937," doctoral dis­
sertation, University of Murcia, 1981. 
32 

THE RECEPTION OF RELATIVITY 
animation by reading Eugen Netto's Vorlesungen tiber Algebra. 
Terradas spoke German to a fault and his mastery of the lan-
guage was legendary.27 
Because of his easy access to German culture, especially sci-
entific culture, Terradas was probably the first Spaniard to 
learn of special relativity. Most likely, he had read Einstein's 
article soon after publication because he subscribed to (or 
owned many numbers of) the Annalen der Physik from 1903 
on, and in 1905 he had corresponded with the editor Paul 
Drude on a problem related to his doctoral dissertation on the 
absorption of light by pleochroitic crystals.28 Terradas re-
ceived his doctorate in physics from the University of Madrid 
in 1905 and was auxiliary professor there in 1906 while obtain-
ing another doctorate in mathematics in order to compete for 
a chair of Rational Mechanics at the University of Zaragoza, 
which he held in 1906-1907. In April 1907 he won the chair of 
Acoustics and Optics at the University of Barcelona, where he 
was also interim professor of Electricity and Magnetism. 
Special relativity made its first appearance in Spain in papers 
by Terradas and Cabrera at the first congress of the Spanish 
Association for the Progress of Science, held in Zaragoza in 
1908. Terradas, in presentations on black-box radiation and 
theories of the emission of light (and again the following year 
in his discourse of reception in the Barcelona Academy of Sci-
ences) alluded to the Special Theory only as a new deduction 
of the "principle discoverd by Lorentz," adding that Einstein 
and Laub "have recently applied it to establish more general 
laws of Electrodynamics."29 
'i Enrique de Rafael, "Juventud y formation cientifica de Terradas," in Real 
Academia de Ciencias Exactas, Discursospronunciados en la ses'wn necrologica en 
honorde. . . Esteban Terradas e Ilia (Madrid, 1951), p. 6; onNetto (1848-1919), 
see Dictionary of Scientific Biography, 16 vols. (New York: Charles Scnbner's 
Sons, 1970-1980), X, 24. 
28 De Rafael, "Juventud de Terradas," p. 8; on Drude, see Dictionary of Sci-
entific Biography, IV, 189-193. 
29 Terradas, "Teorias modernas acerca de la emision de la luz," in Asociacion 
Espanola para el Progreso de la Ciencia, Zaragoza Congress, Seccion segunda, 
Ciencias Fisico-Quimicas (Zaragoza, 1908), pp. I—21; "Sobre la emision de ra-
33 

CHAPTER 1 
At the University of Barcelona, the young Terradas im­
pressed his students with his innovative teaching methods as 
well as his grasp of the new physics. One of his early students, 
Julio Palacios, remarked that the usual approach to physics en­
countered by Spanish university students in the first decade of 
the century was that "science was already something finished 
and closed, to which nothing remained to be added."
30 By con­
trast, Terradas made clear to his students his total receptivity 
to new ideas. Palacios recalled: 
Around the middle of my [undergraduate] career, I had 
the good luck to have Terradas as a professor, and the con­
trast [with the former view] could not have been more 
brusque. He had no method, no text, not even a syllabus, 
and the first day he left us speechless when he asked if we 
wanted to learn classical wave optics or if we preferred (in 
1910!) Planck's quantum theory. If that wasn't enough, 
every day he assigned books and journals in English and 
German, assuring us that, with but a little effort, we 
would be able to understand them.
31 
By 1910, therefore, Terradas had incorporated quantum phys­
ics into his university teaching, and in 1915 he gave a course on 
quantum theory entitled "Discrete Elements in the Matter of 
Radiation" at the Institut d'Estudis Catalans. In 1912 he pub­
lished a detailed, discursive review of Max von Laue's book on 
special relativity, in which he noted that "The principle of rel­
ativity is accepted today by almost everyone. In chairs of phys-
diaciones por cuerpos fijos ο en movimiento" (Barcelona, 1909), and discus­
sion by Antoni Roca, "La incidencia del pensament d'Emstein a Catalunya," 
in Centenari de la naixenca d'Albert Einstein (Barcelona: Institut d'Estudis Cata­
lans, 1981), pp. 170-172. 
JO Julio Palacios, "Terradas fisico," in Real Academia de Ciencias Exactas, 
Discursos, p. 16. This was a stereotypical view expressed by leading physical 
scientists prior to 1905—for example, Albert Michelson's assertion (in 1903) 
that "the most important fundamental laws and facts of physics have all been 
discovered"; cited by Lewis Feuer, Einstein and the Generations of Science (New 
York: Basic Books, 1974), p. 253. 
31 Palacios, "Terradas fisico," p. 16. 
34 

THE RECEPTION OF RELATIVITY 
ics its language has been generally adopted."32 We can assume 
that Terradas had in mind not only his own pedagogy but also 
direct information from European physics departments—Ger-
man, most likely—which testified to the reception of the new 
physics. At this juncture, according to Antoni Roca, relativity 
was for Terradas still wholly consistent with the theory of 
electromagnetism, a new language for thinking about electric-
ity. He did not yet see it as the basis for a new mechanics." 
By the middle of the decade, when he was following devel-
opments in general relativity, Terradas had abandoned the 
Lorentzian framework and he now presented relativity in 
completely Einsteinian terms. Then, in the winter of 1920-21, 
he gave a thirty-session course, "Relativity and the New The-
ories of Knowledge," given under the auspices of the Manco-
munitat of Catalonia. The text of the course is not preserved, 
but de Rafael published his notes from a number of Terradas's 
lectures, broken down into six themes: Galilean relativity, the 
aether, the Michelson-Morley experiment, some generaliza-
tions regarding aether-drift experiments, the Lorentz contrac-
tion, and local time.34 In contrast to many Spanish commen-
tators, Terradas was unequivocal in his acceptance of special 
relativity, which had disproved the existence of aether, an im-
ponderable substance that supposedly filled space and served 
as a medium for the propagation of light waves: "Aether does 
31 Victor Navarro Brotons, "Esteve Terradas e Ilia," in Diccwnario Historico 
de la Ciencia Moderna en Espana, s. v. Terradas, "Sobre'l pnncipi de relativitat," 
Arxius de I'Institut de Ciencies, 1 (1912), 94. 
33 Roca, "Incidencia del pensament d'Einstein," pp. 172-173. As proof of 
this contention, Roca notes that the first mention of Einstein in the Enciclopedia 
Universal llustrada is in the article "Electricidad," which Terradas wrote around 
1914. There is no article on Einstein. Terradas's 1912 review of von Laue is 
"Sobre'l principi de la relativitat," Arxius de I'Institut de Ciencies, 1 (no 2), 84-
94· 
34 Enrique de Rafael, "De relatividad (Apuntes con ocasion de las confe-
rencias de E. Terradas en el Institut)," Iberica, 15 (1921), 89-91, 218-221, 376-
379. On Terradas's early appreciation of general relativity, see "Sesion aca-
demica de ciencias, 20 enero 1914," Boletin de la Real Academia de Ciencias e 
Artes de Barcelona, 3 (1909-16), 427. 
35 

CHAPTER 1 
not exist, and neither does absolute space, inasmuch as we can-
not in any way demonstrate its existence by physical means." 
Continuing in the same vein, Terradas discusses Dayton 
Miller's 1904, 1905, and 1906 interferometer experiments to 
test for aether drift. According to Albert Michelson's hypoth-
esis, inasmuch as the aether is at rest and the earth moves 
through it, the speed of light on the earth's surface should de-
pend on what direction it is traveling. The interferometer was 
an instrument that Michelson devised to measure minute 
phase shifts between two parts of a light beam. It could be used 
to measure differences in the speed of these two parts if they 
traveled along different paths in the same medium. The 
"aether drift," or the effect of earth's motion through the 
aether on the speed of light, was to be measured by observing 
the extent of the phase shift between the two beams as the in-
terferometer was rotated through ninety degrees. In the Mi-
chelson-Morley experiment no difference in the velocity of the 
two parts was detected. The precise role of this experiment in 
the elaboration of special relativity is a polemical subject. "The 
fringes didn't shift because they had no reason to," Terradas 
(or de Rafael) noted testily. "All that shifted were some aphor-
istic concepts which had been accepted in science without suf-
ficient examination, with excessive rigidity, and retained stub-
bornly 
and futilely 
by men of science."3S Terradas's 
uncompromising posture in favor of relativity was unusual, 
given a scientific tradition where eclecticism was the norm and 
where the same eclecticism was frequently a screen for an ina-
bility to judge theoretical issues accurately. His advocacy of 
relativity reached a very wide audience after 1923, when his 
fifty-page article on the subject appeared in the Enciclopedia 
Universal Ilustrada, together with a biographical sketch of Ein-
stein.36 
" Ibid., p. 220. Later in 1921, Terradas gave two additional lectures on rel-
ativity in Madrid; see Iberica, 16 (1921), 67. 
36 "Relatividad," Enciclopedia Ilustrada Universal, L, 455—512. See Roca, "In-
cidencia del pensament d'Einstein," pp. 172-173. The proofs of the article 
"Relatividad," dated May 5, 1923, are preserved in the Terradas Archives. In-
36 

THE RECEPTION OF RELATIVITY 
Throughout the 1920s Terradas received offprints of Levi-
Civita's publications, including those relating to relativity. 
These publications form part of the Terradas collection, now 
housed at the Institut d'Estudis Catalans, and include proofs of 
Levi-Civita's 1920 article on geometric optics and general rel-
ativity. This is a striking indication of the speed with which 
Terradas received information from the research front that 
contradicts the generalized perceptions of information lag. 
Terradas also reported to the Spanish mathematical commu-
nity on Levi-Civita's latest research.37 
Terradas's activities stand in contrast to cliches regarding 
the lag between the appearance of physical concepts in the sci-
entific "mainstream" and their reception in Spain. The percep-
tion commonly held by Spanish scientists from the late sev-
enteenth century well into the twentieth was that Spaniards 
were the last to receive new ideas. However, by the second 
decade of this century the lag was not as great as it appeared. 
N e w ideas were often received quickly, but by an extremely 
limited number of persons. The reason a lag was so generally 
perceived seems to be the result of the slowness of secondary 
diffusion of ideas beyond small circles of specialists. The no-
tion or perception of lag in information, which was a keystone 
in the often articulated defensive view that Spaniards were un-
able to do science, was developed by scientists and engineers 
terestingly enough, the article, although perhaps drafted by Terradas, may 
have been more the work of his assistant Ramon Jardi (1881-1972), according 
to what Jardi told his own students. Seejosep M. Vidal 1 Llenas, "L'Entrada 
de la relativitat entre nosaltres," in Centenari de la naixenca a"Albert Einstein, p. 
140. On the other hand, there are passages in this article very similar to others 
in Rafael's "Apuntes" of Terradas' lectures. 
37 Terradas received proofs of Levi-Civita's article, "L'Ottica geometrica e 
la relativita generale di Einstein," published in Revista d'Ottica e Mecanica di Pre-
cisione, 1 (1920), 187-200. At a meeting of the Sociedad Matematica in Madrid 
in 1929, he presented reports on Levi-Civita's Hamburg seminar on adiabatic 
invariants and his Bologna lecture on the application of the theory of integral 
invariants to some problems of astronomy; Revista Matematica Hispano-Ame-
ricana, 4 (1929), 61-62. 
37 

CHAPTER 1 
who, as students, had to face directly real institutional and cul-
tural barriers to the flow of new ideas. 
Bias Cabrera 
Cabrera's assimilation of relativity followed a similar course. 
At the Zaragoza meeting in 1908 he presented a paper on the 
theory of electrons, explicating Maxwellian and Hertzian elec-
tromagnetic conceptions of light. In this presentation, Ein-
stein's theory is again mentioned as a refinement of Lorentz's 
electron theory, and Cabrera still presupposed the existence of 
an aether.38 It was not until 1912 that he was able to state, in 
discussing special relativity, that there was no experiment to 
detect the aether.39 
In a series of lectures on electricity delivered at the Residen-
cia de Estudiantes in January 1917, Cabrera presented a view 
of the Special Theory in which he was fully cognizant of its 
revolutionary nature. The failure of attempts to determine ab-
solute motion, he noted, had created the need to "reorganize 
science" in order to rid it of "such evident contradictions." The 
confusion which the theory, with its seemingly paradoxical 
reinterpretation of simultaneity, incites in us is simply the 
product of "a mental habit, of the supposed independence of 
space and time."40 
In November 1921 Cabrera delivered an important address 
at the Academy of Sciences on the current state of physics.41 
Since he was to become, in the eyes of the Spanish public, the 
leading spokesman for relativity during Einstein's visit, his 
jS Cabrera, "La teoria de los electrones y la constitucion de la materia," cited 
by Roca, "La incidencia del pensament d'Emstein," p. 170. 
39 "Principios fundamentales de analisis vectorial en el espacio de tres di-
mensiones y en el universo de Minkowski," Repista de la Real Academta de Cien-
cias Exactas, 11 (1912-13), 326-344ff. 
40 Cabrera, {Que es la electriadad? (Madrid: Residenciade Estudiantes, 1917), 
pp. 173-176. 
" Momento actual de la fisica (Madrid: Real Academia de Ciencias Exactas, 
Fisicas y Naturales, 1921). 
38 

THE RECEPTION OF RELATIVITY 
views on the current state of physics, and relativity's role 
therein, are of great interest. For Cabrera, quantum theory and 
the structure of the atom were the dominant issues in 1921. He 
was an experimental physicist, and his identification of atomic 
structure as the central issue is hardly surprising. But how did 
relativity fit into the picture? Although he was not, of course, 
unmindful of the changes in conceptualization that relativity 
had introduced into physical research, Cabrera stressed, in this 
address, the social concomitants of relativity's reception. Re-
ferring to resistance to relativity in the name of "immutable 
principles," he insists on the urgent need to create a favorable 
environment "to give a greater impulse to the advancement of 
national science," and notes the difficulty of doing this "in the 
midst of an absolutely indifferent society, without receiving 
the heat given off by the favorable or adverse criticism of those 
who directly surround us."42 Cabrera, like other Spanish sci-
entists in touch with mainstream European science, under-
stood that both the smallness of Spain's scientific community 
as well as the lack of scientific discussion in the society at large 
made it difficult to establish the necessary climate for the crit-
ical and informed evaluation of ideas that scientific advance 
requires. 
Turning to current physics, but still with an obvious reflec-
tion on the intellectual environment familiar to him, Cabrera 
observes that a science based on postulates, in the sense of ax-
iomatic truths, is false. Relativity, he notes, had been opposed 
in the name of the immutability of principles: two of those that 
it had invalidated were Lavoisier's principle of the conserva-
tion of mass and Newton's concept of attraction. But this 
statement merely serves him as an introduction to quantum 
theory, which also "contradicts the extrapolation of princi-
42 Ibid., p. 8. In another context (an observation by Odon de Buen on the 
origin of the world), Cabrera remarked: "There exists much prejudice and 
sediment which must be destroyed in order for new theories to take root"; see 
Mariano Salaverria, "Terminacion de la Semana Cientifica," El Sol, Septem-
ber 15, 1921. 
39 

CHAPTER 1 
pies."
43 The view of physics that Cabrera presented was not so 
different from his similar presentation in January 1915 at the 
Madrid Athenaeum, in which he also stressed the structure of 
the atom in its relation to quantum theory, in particular Som-
merfeld's quantum of action.
44 It is clear that Cabrera related 
the discussion of atomic structure directly to the work that he 
and Moles were carrying out on magnetons, which Cabrera 
believed to be "constituent elements of the nucleus." 
Cabrera's views are significant because the events of 1923 
thrust him into the position of the leading Spanish spokesman 
for Einstein, a role he might not have played had Spanish phys­
ics not been so thinly staffed. In the absence of any voice in the­
oretical physics, the experimentalist Cabrera shared the de­
fense of relativity with mathematicians. 
Among Spanish scientists lecturing on relativity in the 
1920s, Cabrera probably had the widest audience—in spite of 
the fact that his lecturing style was characterized (albeit by a lis­
tener skeptical of relativity) by a "diffuse slowness."
45 His suc­
cess as a spokesman for relativity was due to his ability to in­
terpret Einstein's theories on a number of levels, with equal 
comprehensibility, whether speaking to a lay or a scientific au­
dience. With regard to his "popular" presentations, he was the 
only leading Spanish relativist who was interested in the phil­
osophical ramifications of the theory. In a 1921 lecture to phi­
losophers, he endeavored to place relativity in the context of 
the theory of knowledge. In the investigation of nature, he be­
gan, there are but two ways to proceed. Either we travel a path 
of thought already developed, in order to find a solution, or 
else there is no path and we must proceed "through tentative 
probings." Quantum physics, characterized by a mass of ex­
perimental data but lacking a logical construction through 
which to interpret them (because, he believed, of the lack of an 
43 Cabrera, Momento actual de la fisica, p. 12. 
44 "Estado actual, metodos y problemas de la fisica," in Estado actual, metodos 
γproblemas de las ciencias (Madrid: Ateneo de Madrid, 1916), pp 109-143. 
45 Ataulfo Huertas, "La relatividad de Einstein," Revista Calasanaa, 11 
(1923), 246. 
40 

THE RECEPTION OF RELATIVITY 
adequate mathematical theory), is an example of the latter. 
Relativity illustrates the former: "It has been constituted in a 
very short time as a construct of exemplary logic, because ap-
propriate methods of reasoning were known prior to posing 
the problem which science imposed." All that was necessary 
was to examine the origin of contradictions in the old theory 
in order to eliminate false extrapolations from it.46 
From an analytical, logical standpoint, Cabrera continued, 
relativity is easy to analyze: "It has to do with a simple change 
of variables, with the condition that a certain number of ana-
lytical expressions . . . be 'invariant' of the transformation." It 
does not matter which invariants we select to resolve a specific 
problem: "In all cases we arrive at the same group of Lorentz." 
When we then look at the physical world, modifying our con-
ceptions in accord with the Lorentz transformation, we note 
that time and space are no longer independent but now appear 
to us to be "symmetrically combined, the three dimensions of 
ordinary space and time, which we now treat as the four di-
mensions of a hyperspace." Cabrera then notes that a number 
of the well-known paradoxes associated with the Special The-
ory—the Lorentz contraction, the variability of mass, and its 
relation to energy—had attracted resistance from scientists, 
but these objections were largely of a sentimental nature, he 
judged.47 
Turning to general relativity, he observed that Einstein had 
replaced a rigid system describing the universe in terms of the 
classical heliocentric coordinates and a single clock determined 
by the earth's rotation with a flexible system that could be 
molded to the circumstances of time and space—Einstein's 
"mollusk of reference." The classical problems of the finitude 
versus infinitude of the universe and of its origin and end were 
simply the obligatory consequences of a system of references 
with indefinite rectilineal axes and a permanently running 
46 Bias Cabrera, "Las fronteras del conocimiento en la filosofia natural," 
Verburn, 14, no. 55; reprinted in Revista de Filosofia (Buenos Aires), 14 (1921), 
153-
47 Ibid., pp. 154-155. 
41 

CHAPTER 1 
clock. In the mollusk of reference, neither time nor space can 
be infinite.48 
In the fall of 1921 Cabrera gave a short course of twelve lec-
tures at the University of Madrid, "with incredible attend-
ance" of the scientific community.49 Cabrera's presentation 
from the perspective of an experimental physicist provides an 
illuminating counterpoint to the presentations of Plans, Ter-
radas, and others more attuned to mathematical physics. In 
Cabrera's view physicists had lost sight of the experimental 
basis of Galilean-Newtonian relativity (by making it a postu-
late) and had since striven to make theoretical physics accord 
as closely as possible to the principles of Rational Mechanics.50 
Not unexpectedly, Cabrera placed great emphasis on the ex-
perimental proofs, not only of the General Theory but of the 
Special as well: 
But where the relativistic theory has gained its most 
brilliant proofs has been in the field of electromagnetic 
phenomena; the sage lecturer, after expounding the varia-
tions which relativistic mechanics introduced in the 
expression of Hamilton's principle and of electromag-
netic field equations, referred with deeply felt enthusiasm 
to predictions of Bohr and Sommerfeld, especially those 
related to the breaking down of the rays of hydrogen, 
which experience fully confirmed afterwards. This fact is 
the one which locates the ideas of Einstein and Planck in 
the panorama of fully accepted scientific advances.SI 
48 Ibid., p. 156. 
49 Enrique de Rafael, "Conferencias de relatividad en la Universidad de 
Madrid," Iberica, 16 (1921), 306. In September 1921 Cabrera had also given a 
popular lecture on relativity at the Sociedad de Oceanografia de Guipuzcoa, 
published as La teorta de la relatividad (San Sebastian, 1921); see review in Ibe-
rica, 19(1923), 63. 
!° Iberica, 16 (1921), 324. 
" Ibid., p. 356. "Sommerfeld was the first to point out and carry through 
the idea that the variation of mass demanded by the theory of relativity must 
have an effect on the spectrum. He replaced the classical energy-function by 
42 

THE RECEPTION OF RELATIVITY 
Sommerfeld's research of the previous decade, which pro-
posed that the fine structure of the spectral lines of hydrogen, 
revealing relativistic increases in the mass of electrons, was ar-
cane by comparison with the notoriety of the eclipse observa-
tions, and surely Cabrera, a few colleagues at his Institute, and 
Terradas were the only persons in Spain who had followed it.52 
Cabrera also discussed the astronomical evidence supporting 
general relativity: the perihelion of Mercury in the seventh lec-
ture and the 1919 eclipse results in the tenth. Like Terradas, he 
was unsparing of those who attempted to explain away the re-
sults: 
First they questioned the exactitude of the observa-
tions. But then they wanted to seek an ad hoc explanation. 
This is wholly futile; one can explain a single phenome-
non in a variety of ways, but the entirety [of phenomena] 
is more difficult to harmonize. It costs us nothing to sup-
pose a solar atmosphere which refracts rays in a ratio con-
ducive to the production of an observed effect. But if one 
bears in mind that this is a fact which must be explained 
along with many others than come before it, one sees the in-
consistency of such an aprioristic manner of thinking." 
Rafael concludes his description of this lecture with this florid 
characterization of the audience reaction: "The enthusiasm 
with which today's audience received the luminous observa-
tions of the lecturer was depicted so keenly on their faces, that 
for one moment it seemed that, leaving aside matter and its 
base demands, the spirits of those present were transported to 
the relativistic one . . ."; Max Born, Problems of Atomic Dynamics [1926] (Cam-
bridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1979), p. 41. 
52 On Sommerfeld's research, see Paul Forman and Armin Hermann, "Ar-
nold Sommerfeld," Dictionary of Scientific Biography, XII: 529. 
53 Ibid., p. 388. It is interesting to compare Rafael's summary with Ca-
brera's later volume, Principio de relatividad (Madrid: Residencia de Estu-
diantes, 1923), pp. 254-259. There Cabrera concludes that all the cavils over 
the eclipse results were based on an unacceptable extrapolation of the New-
tonian gravitational hypothesis that had acquired the value of "an imposition 
of Nature." 
43 

CHAPTER 1 
the purest realms of ecstatic contemplation of the loftiest ideals 
of science." 
The enthusiasm of Cabrera's audience, composed princi-
pally of scientists and engineers (we may presume), was faith-
fully recorded by Enric de Rafael. But those persons were not 
so much seeking ecstatic contemplation of pure science as they 
were celebrating the demise of a discredited science. It is sig-
nificant that the most positive audience reaction occurred not 
when Cabrera announced some innovation of the new physics 
but when he debunked the old. Such rites de passage were char-
acteristic of Spanish science in the 1920s—if not in all disci-
plines, then at least in the most advanced or successful. 
Josep Maria Plans 
Plans (1878—1934), who won a prize offered in 1919 by the 
Academy of Exact Sciences for a work explaining "the new 
concepts of time and space," was the third leading spokesman 
for relativity in the 1920s. The referee charged by the Acad-
emy with evaluating his manuscript was a military engineer 
and mathematician, Nicolas de Ugarte (d. 1932). Ugarte, al-
though favorable to relativity, had no profound understanding 
of it, and his report was based on notes provided him by Bias 
Cabrera.54 Cabrera makes a number of interesting points. 
First, the idea for a prize on relativity had been in the air for a 
number of years before 1919, and that explains why Plans's 
treatment, later published as Nociones fundamentales de Mecanica 
relativista,is was mainly devoted to the Special Theory (only 
the last two of the volume's nine chapters deal with general rel-
54 See Ugarte's article, "Las teorias relativistas," Madrid Cienttfico, 31 (1924), 
178-179, where he notes that relativity "is congenial and attractive owing to 
its conceptual novelty," but that the destruction of classical mechanics will take 
a long time and profound modifications of it are unnecessary. Although his 
enthusiasm for innovation marks his distance from traditional values, Ugarte's 
closing statement that nothing is absolute except "the Supreme Being" seems 
designed to allay the fears of conservative Catholics. 
55 Madrid, Real Academia de Ciencias Exactas, 1921. 
44 

THE RECEPTION OF RELATIVITY 
ativity). But, the report notes, the Academy could not have 
had in mind an essay on the General Theory, "because at the 
time when the competition was devised, the theory of relativ-
ity was little known." Second, the prize was offered by the ex-
act science section of the Academy, not the physical, and this 
explains the omission of detail regarding experimental facts. 
(Still, Plans's ninth chapter is a discussion of the equations of 
movement in a gravitational field and their application to the 
deformation of the perihelion of Mercury and the deflection of 
light rays.) The point is interesting because the conceptualiza-
tion of both the prize and Plans's response to it must have 
taken place before the eclipse observations of 1919 had directed 
public and scientific attention to experimental results. Plans, 
moreover, always stressed the experimental results in his sub-
sequent popularizations of relativity. In a 1920 article, for ex-
ample, he noted with respect to the General Theory that one 
could ask nothing more of a theory than to have its predictions 
confirmed by observation and, with the hindsight of several 
more years, he added that "the great success of Einstein's the-
ory and its relativistic mechanics" was the correct prediction of 
the deformation of the perihelion of Mercury.56 
According to Tomas Rodriguez Bachiller, Plans was the 
only person in Madrid in the 1920s who was capable of teach-
ing relativity at an advanced level, and this was undoubtedly 
because of his ability to introduce original interpretations or 
formulations into his discussion. Plans himself noted that, 
while teaching a course on relativistic mechanics in Madrid, it 
occured to him that, by applying Paul Appell's analogy be-
56 Plans, "Algunas ideas sobre la relatividad," Iberica, 13 (1920), 380, and 
"Bosquejo histonco y estado actual de la mecanica celeste," Iberica, 23 (1925), 
i n . In Cabrera's view, Plans drew his inspiration from Laue's 1912 summary 
but had introduced a number of original points, mainly having to do with the 
movement of material points in the universe of Minkowski. The referee's re-
port also notes that, although relativity modifies certain concepts of classical 
mechanics, "it should not spread panic among partisans [of the latter]"; Ni-
colas de Ugarte, "Informe de la Real Academia de Ciencias Exactas sobre la 
Memoria presentada en el concurso de premios del ano 1919 . . . ," Revista de 
la Real Academia de Ciencias Exactas, 2nd series, 19 (1920-21), 234-243. 
45 

CHAPTER 1 
tween the form of equilibrium of a cord and the trajectory of a 
light ray, it was possible to derive a formula for the deflection 
of light in a gravitational field with an equation that was sim­
pler, "more natural and logical" than that of Einstein: the de­
flection was simply the angle of the asymptotes of the hyper­
bola formed by the ray passing through the field.
57 
Plans's note was one of the few original contributions on 
relativity produced in Spain in the 1920s. Another by a math­
ematician was Pere Puig Adam's thesis on four problems in the 
mechanics of special relativity, carried out in the Mathematical 
Laboratory under the direction of Plans. It should be noted, in 
light of Rey Pastor's policy of identifying significant current 
problems for doctoral candidates, that Puig Adam's avowed 
motivation in pursuing this topic was not to present "a theo­
retical work of scientific merit" but only to "handle . . . the 
fundamental equations of this Mechanics, applying it to spe­
cific problems to see the difficulties of calculation that these 
present and making the necessary comparison with the diffi­
culties of calculation that appear, and the results which are ob­
tained, for the same problems in classical Mechanics."
58 The 
interest of Spanish mathematicians in relativity was more in 
the formal representation of specific aspects of the theory than 
in physical problems. 
Plans was well-known for his exaggerated religiosity. Edu­
cated by Jesuits before entering the University of Barcelona, 
he acquired, according to one of his students, a "love for 
everything Jesuitical."
59 For Terradas, who was scarcely less 
fervent in his piety, Plans, "armed with the divine excellences 
57 Plans, "Nota sobre la forma de los rayos iuminosos en el campo de un 
centro gravitatorio segun la teoria de Einstein," Amies de la Soaedad Espanola 
de Ftsica γ Quimica, 18 (1920), pt. I, 367-373. The course was given in 1919-
20; see Revista Matematica Hispano-Americana, 1 (1919), 226-227. 
58 Pedro Puig Adam, "Resolucion de algunos problemas elementales en 
Mecanica relativista restnngida," Revista de la Real Academia de Ciencias Exac-
tas, 20 (1922), 161-216. The four cases had to do with the movement of a point 
on a line or surface, under various circumstances. 
59 Tomas Rodriguez Bachiller, interview, Madrid, April 10, 1980. 
46 

THE RECEPTION OF RELATIVITY 
of the elect paladins of the Catholic faith," assumed the de­
meanor of an apostle.
60 Yet, except for one notable lapse, he 
steered clear of controversial issues involving the conflict of re­
ligion and science. The exception had to do with his transla­
tion of Sir Arthur Eddington's Space, Time and Gravitation, 
each chapter of which was preceded by a literary quotation. 
The epigraph in chapter ι was from Descartes and stated: "In 
order to reach the Truth, it is necessary, once in one's life, to 
put everything in doubt—so far as possible." Plans, who found 
this statement contrary to his firm religious convictions, con­
sulted Enric de Rafael, who assured him that Descartes "ex­
cepted religious ideas" although readers may well be unaware 
of this. Not satisfied, Plans added a footnote registering his 
disagreement with Descartes: "It is unnecessary to say that the 
translator does not associate himself with this principle." He 
apprised Terradas of his decision, asking the latter to advise 
him if he did not think the note a good idea. Terradas must 
have agreed with Plans, because the note appeared in print, 
whereupon Plans was promptly attacked in El Sol for having 
added a gratuitous disclaimer.
61 
Despite Plans's prudence in avoiding socially controversial 
aspects of the reception of modern science, we might speculate 
that his choice of Eddington's volume, which was viewed in 
the English-speaking world as having brought to the public 
the comforting message that absolute values and standards 
were still intact and that science and religion were reconcilable, 
6 0 Terradas, in La Veu de Catalunya, March 22, 1934, cited by F. Navarro 
Borras, "Don Jose Maria Plans y Freyre," Anales de la Vniversidad de Madrid, 
Ciencias, 3 (1934), 231. 
61 Arthur Eddington, Espacio, tietnpo, gravitation (Madrid: Calpe, 1922). 
Plans to Terradas, January 1, 1922, Terradas Archives, Institut d'Estudis Ca­
talans, Barcelona: "Page 48. Saying of Descartes at the beginning of Chap. I. 
It really strikes me as very strong, as I told you. Even though de Rafael told 
me that Descartes did not have religious ideas in mind, people generally don't 
know that. I am considering this translator's note which you can look at. If you 
don't like it, tell me so." El Sol, August 1, 1922. The literary excellence of 
Plans' translations was noted by Navarro Borras, "Jose Maria Plans," p. 243. 
47 

CHAPTER 1 
may well have figured in a hidden agenda to achieve the same 
ends in Spain.
62 
RELATIVITY AND SPANISH ASTRONOMY 
Unlike their colleagues in mathematics and physics, Spanish 
astronomers born in the middle decades of the nineteenth cen­
tury produced original research that merited the approval of 
foreign scientists. Jose Joaquin Landerer (ι841-1922) pro­
duced a valuable series of observations of the satellites of Jupi­
ter. He also concluded that our own moon has no atmosphere, 
based on his studies of the polarization of sunlight reflected off 
its surface. Josep Comas Sola (1868-1937) published signifi­
cant research in the 1890s on the topography of Mars, which 
Camille Flammarion incorporated into his own work on that 
planet; in particular, he demonstrated that the Martian "ca­
nals" were more apparent than real.
63 
In spite of the high quality of individual research, however, 
the available facilities, the national observatories in particular, 
were impoverished. Juan de la Cierva's ministerial inspection 
visit to the Madrid Observatory around 1900 was notorious: 
On my visit . . . I found: that the most important tele­
scope was not working because the rails on which it 
turned had to be fixed, and the money had been spent on 
decorating the offices of the astronomers in the same 
building; that two other magnificent telescopes acquired 
for the last solar eclipse visible in Spain were lacking elec­
trical connections of scant cost. They wanted me to see 
the stars with those telescopes and naturally I could see 
61 On Eddington's message, see Loren R. Graham, "The Reception of Ein­
stein's Ideas: Two Examples from Contrasting Political Cultures," in Gerald 
Holton and Yehuda Elkana, eds., Albert Einstein- Historical and Cultural Per­
spectives (Princeton, N.J : Princeton University Press, 1982), p. 119. 
6J E. Portela Marco, "Jose Joaquin Landerer y Climent," and V. Navarro 
Brotons, "Josep Comas i Sola," in Diccionario Histonco de la Ciencia Moderna en 
Espana, s.v.; Antoni Roca, "J. Comas Sola, astronomo de posicion," Mundo 
Cientifico, 6 (1986), 290-303 
48 

THE RECEPTION OF RELATIVITY 
none! Then the business about the missing light bulb 
came out. The result was that the three telescopes I men-
tioned were impossible to use. They showed me, as a cu-
riosity, some magnificent telescope lenses that Godoy 
. . . had donated in his time. The curious thing was that 
the boxes containing the lenses were closed and banded; 
no one had ever opened them.64 
The Observatory of San Fernando, in Cadiz, was in better 
condition, and, after the turn of the century, there were two 
new private observatories of great importance, both in Cata-
lonia: the Fabra Observatory in Barcelona, founded in 1904, 
and the Ebro Observatory, established the following year in 
Tortosa. The former, under the direction of Comas, was sup-
plied with excellent instrumentation, including a meridian cir-
cle that permitted precise measurements of sidereal time as 
well as of the right ascensions of stars, and a great telescope 
with which photographic studies of the Delevan and other 
comets were made.6s 
As in the sister disciplines discussed above, the quality of 
Spanish astronomy improved rapidly after 1900. Symbolic of 
the advance was the great effort mobilized to observe the solar 
eclipses visible from Spain—those of 1900, 1905, and 1912. 
These observations were significant not only because they in-
volved the coordination of a large part of the astronomical 
community but also because they were executed in conjunc-
tion with foreign astronomers—hosts of whom, especially in 
1905, descended upon the country. Landerer viewed the 1905 
eclipse, whose trajectory he had predicted with great accuracy, 
from Alcoseba, Comas from Vinaroz, and the British and 
other visiting scientists (including no less than twelve teams of 
Jesuit astronomers alone) dispersed throughout the peninsula: 
64 Juan de la Cierva, Notas de mi vida (Madrid, 1955), pp. 65-66, cited by 
Juan Vernet, Historic! de la ciencia espanola (Madrid: Institute de Espana, 1975), 
p. 223. 
63 Diputacio de Barcelona, Quia de les institutions cienttfiques i d'ensenyanc.a 
(Barcelona: Consell de Pedagogia, 1916), p. 55. 
49 

CHAPTER 1 
John Buchanan in Torreblanca, John Evershed in Pineda de la 
Sierra, Alfred Fowler and Hugh Callendar in Castellon de la 
Plana. Coordinately, the eclipse was viewed by Spanish and 
foreign personnel from hydrogen balloons of the army's 
Aerostatic Service, directed by Pere Vives i Vich (i868-1938). 
Vives had first presented his plans for the eclipse in September 
1904 at the fourth meeting of the International Commission 
for Scientific Aerostation in St. Petersburg. Observations 
were to take place from one captive and two free balloons to 
obtain readings of solar diffraction, to observe the corona, and 
to gather meteorological data. In St. Petersburg he consulted 
with foreign specialists in aerostatic meteorology, notably 
A. Laurence Rotch of the Blue Hills Observatory in Boston 
and Arthur Berson of the Prussian Meteorological Observa-
tory. The final plans were devised by Vives and Augusto T. 
Arcimis (1844-1910), director of the Central Meteorological 
Institute of Madrid and longtime professor of astronomy at 
the Institution Libre de Ensenanza. A variety of observations 
were made from balloons that ascended from Burgos. In one, 
Emilio Herrera drew the solar corona, from another Arcimis 
took photographs, and in a third Vives and Berson obtained 
meteorological data.66 
The Exposition of Lunar Studies, held in Barcelona in May 
and June 1912, was nothing less than a celebration of Spanish 
66 On the scientific importance of the four "Spanish" solar eclipses, begin-
ning with that of 1860, see M. Lopez Arroyo, "La espectroscopia en el Obser-
vatono Astronomico de Madrid," Boletin Astronomico del Observatorio de 
Madrid, 8, no. 2 (1972), esp. pp. 4-7. On the eclipse of 1905, see Pedro Vives 
y Vich, "Emploi des ballons pour l'observation de l'eclipse totale de soleil 30 
aout 1905," in Quatrieme Conference de la Commission Internationale pour 
l'Aerostation Scientifique, Proces-verbaux des Seances et Memoires (St. Peters-
burg: Academie Imperiale des Sciences, 1905), pp. 74-75; on the scientific data 
produced by the various observation points, see Vives, Avarice de los resultados 
obtenidos en las observaciones del eclipse total de sol de 30 de agosto de 1905 (Madrid. 
Parque Aerostatico de Ingenieros, 1906). The episode is discussed in my intro-
duction to Emilio Herrera, Flying: Memoirs of a Spanish Aeronaut (Albuquer-
que: University of New Mexico Press, 1984), pp. 176-177. 
50 

THE RECEPTION OF RELATIVITY 
astronomy and meteorology. Stands of European and Ameri­
can observatories and instrument makers alongside those of 
Spanish exhibitors gave a strong impression of the maturity of 
Spanish astronomy and the ability of Spanish astronomers to 
occupy a place in the forefront of research, particularly in the 
area of photography.
67 
As in other fields, astronomers of the younger generation 
tended to be more abreast of current developments than their 
older colleagues. The Madrid Athenaeum's 1915 lecture series 
on the present state of the science contained two presentations 
by astronomers of the Madrid Observatory. The first, an over­
view of problems in astronomy by Antonio Vela (1865-1927), 
was largely devoted to a history of astronomy, with only a few 
passing remarks, near the end, on spectral analysis. The sec­
ond, by Pedro Carrasco (1883-1966), was on the theory of rel­
ativity. This presentation, limited to a discussion of the Special 
Theory, was in part influenced by Cabrera's 1912 article and 
reveals a cautious, skeptical approach. Relativity changes the 
way we conceive the universe, he notes at the outset, even 
though classical science still persists. Rather than overthrow 
classical science, relativity broadens it, in spite of the long list 
of classical concepts—including length, mass, action at a dis­
tance (he thought), absolute time, and motion—which have 
been overthrown. Yet it is a simple theory, basically a problem 
of the transformation of coordinates. Carrasco, without dis­
cussing the point, retains an aether concept and notes that to 
take the velocity of light as a limit "is somewhat repellent to 
reason." Relativity is not about to be overthrown, nor is it 
wholly proven; disinterested criticism is called for.
68 
Although he held a chair of mathematical physics, Carrasco 
67 Sociedad Astronomica de Barcelona, Exposition General de Estudios Lu-
nares, Catalogo (Barcelona, 1912). 
68 "Teoria de la relatividad," in Ateneo de Madrid, Estado actual, metodos γ 
problemas de las ciencias (Madrid, 1916), pp. 149-150. Carrasco was not the Ate-
neo's first choice but a last-mmute substitute, probably for Cabrera, who had 
given the previous two lectures on physics, making no mention of relativity. 
51 

CHAPTER 1 
was not much of a theoretician. His original work was exper-
imental in nature. For example, he devised a number of novel 
ways to measure the speed of light.69 His interest in relativity, 
therefore, was more on the practical level. To his mind, rela-
tivity had made possible great advances in the kinematic study 
of electrical systems, as well as in establishing the relationship 
between electrical and material systems (in his conception, it 
"connects the physics of matter with the physics of aether, and 
makes presumable a common explanation for both. Whence it 
may be said that relativity strengthens electrical theories of 
matter").70 For Carrasco, the most appealing aspect of relativ-
ity was that it opened up new avenues for research in physics. 
Carrasco followed the experimental outflow of the General 
Theory, in particular the eclipse of 1919, with close attention. 
Indeed, he might well have participated in some of the obser-
vations himself except that, "during the first years of the Eu-
ropean war, the astronomers of Madrid, lacking adequate 
means, lost the opportunity to participate in the resolution of 
very interesting scientific problems stimulated by Einstein's 
theories."71 
Evaluating the experimental results stimulated by the Gen-
eral Theory, Carrasco arrived at the following balance sheet in 
1920: 
Positive, for the movement of Mercury; 
Probably affirmative, for the deflection of stellar images 
in the vicinity of the sun; 
6s See Carrasco, "Metodo para determinar la velocidad de la luz," Anales de 
la Sociedad Espaiiola de Fisica y Quimtca, 17 (1919), 296-306, 316-330, which 
describes various ways to measure the speed of light with a diapason (tuning 
fork), and "Nuevo metodo para medir la velocidad de la luz. Determinacion 
de algunas constantes fisicas, que dependen de la medida de pequenos mter-
valos de tiempo," Revista de la Real Academia de Ciencias Exactas, 17 (1918-19), 
201—216, 340-357, which discusses the problem of measuring small intervals 
of time on photographic film. 
70 "Teoria de la relatividad," p. 163. 
71 "Conferencia de don Pedro Carrasco. Lo que es y debiera ser el Obser-
vatono Astronomica de Madrid," El Sol, April 19, 1924. 
52 

THE RECEPTION OF RELATIVITY 
Negative, for the rays of the solar spectrum; and we 
could even add, on the basis of an article by Evershed on 
the spectrum of Venus: 
Probably negative, for the deflection of the spectral line 
ofVenus.
72 
Carrasco clearly recognized the ambiguous nature of the 
English results that, taken together, yielded a value for deflec­
tion somewhere between Einstein's value and that obtained in 
Newton's theory, where one assumes that light rays are sub­
jected to gravitational attraction. The results were received as 
a confirmation of the General Theory largely because of the 
prestige of Eddington and Frank Dyson, whose readings of 
the conflicting values of the Sobral 4-inch instrument (which 
gave a higher value than Einstein's) and the Sobral and Prin­
cipe astrographs (which gave lower values) were weighted in 
Einstein's favor.
73 Carrasco, who had worked with Dyson, 
must have been swayed by the latter's interpretation that was 
favorable to relativity, and accordingly he presented the re­
sults, though not definitive, as "a brilliant triumph of the Eng­
lish expeditions." 
Einstein's formula for the gravitational red shift was not ver­
ified experimentally until 1962. From Carrasco's perspective, 
the mixed results of initial observations, following Einstein's 
1911 paper, up to 1920 suggested that there was an internal 
contradiction in the General Theory, "the same as was found 
before, in classical science, in the contradiction between the 
Michelson experiment and the phenomenon of the aberration 
of light." It is possible that Augusto Righi and others may have 
uncovered inconsistencies in the way the Michelson-Morley 
experiment had been interpreted. More likely, there were 
72 "Estado presente de la teoria de la relatividad," Anales de la Sociedad Espa-
iiola de Fisica γ Qutmica, 18 (1920), pt. 2, p. 94. 
7J See John Earman and Clark Glymour, "Relativity and Eclipses: The Brit­
ish Eclipse Expeditions of 1919 and Their Predecessors," Historical Studies in 
the Physical Sciences, 11 (1980), 76, who point out that Dyson simply omitted 
any mention of the Principe results, those least favorable to Einstein, in his re­
port to the Royal Astronomical Society. 
53 

CHAPTER 1 
problems of interpreting the results of the deflection of light 
rays by the sun. It is naturally repugnant to an astronomer, he 
noted, to consider the sun as "a trimmed-down geometrical 
entity," when in fact it is a body characterized by extreme 
physico-chemical complexity. "But right away astronomers 
and physicists must see a greater complexity in the phenome­
non, since for them the light ray is an abstraction and the phys­
ical reality is the electromagnetic wave which traverses a very 
complex mediuiji, including the electromagnetic field of the 
sun." To Carrasco, both the Einsteinian solution and that of 
his opponents who thought the deflection was due to simple 
refraction were simplistic. "It is the contrast between a physi­
cal mechanism and a mathematical symbol, whose value and 
beauties are undeniable, but which, as a real representation of 
our physical world meets with enormous difficulties." Physi­
cists, he noted, prefer to deal with concrete entities, even if 
these are hypothetical, rather than with abstract ones. In this 
attitude Carrasco seems close in spirit to the position of those 
English physicists who were unable to dispense with electro­
magnetic models. Yet he retained an open mind: "If the astro­
nomical results of the relativistic theory were to be fully con­
firmed, and, in connection with them, we were to have a 
group of non-gravitational physical phenomena which would 
have, as well, a relativistic explanation, we would have to con­
template a revision of theoretical physics according to a rela­
tivistic criterion, and we would have taken a giant step towards 
the yearned-for unity of science."
74 
In his 1915 presentation Carrasco had noted that once infi­
nite velocity had been abandoned, instantaneous action at a 
74 Carrasco, "Teoria de la relatividad," pp. 96-97, 99. In 1928 Carrasco pub­
lished a small volume entitled Filosofia de la mecanica, in which his reluctance 
either to abandon the aether or to admit the speed of light as the limit of ve­
locities is conjoined with acceptance of other elements of the theory. For ex­
ample, he accepted the equivalence of accelerated motion and gravity, using 
Einstein's famous elevator example (pp. 115-116). Elsewhere in the book, 
though, he seems unable to abandon pre-Einsteiman views typically held by 
anti-relativist British physicists. See discussion in Thomas F. Glick, Einstein γ 
los espaiioles (Madrid: Alianza, 1986), chap. 6. 
54 

THE RECEPTION OF RELATIVITY 
distance was ruled out. Carrasco was here repeating a com-
monly held misconception. Since special relativity is a kine-
matic, not a dynamic, theory, it does not rule out the possibil-
ity of action at a distance. Since Carrasco was confused on this 
point, he could not bring himself to break completely with the 
necessity for an aether—"the most necessary substance in 
physics . . . in spite of its hypothetical character."75 
Carrasco, in spite of his conceptual difficulties with special 
relativity, was virtually the only Spanish astronomer who 
could handle the theory at all. In general, those astronomers 
who knew mathematical physics (Carrasco held the chair at 
Madrid) were able to follow the theory. In particular, most of 
the British astronomers with whom Carrasco had studied had, 
as students, passed through the Cambridge mathematics cur-
riculum and were able to interpret relativity in the context of a 
continuing discussion in British physics of a possible linkage 
between electromagnetism and gravitation. Carrasco's asso-
ciation with this tradition adequately equipped him to discuss 
the theoretical ramifications of the observational results of 
general relativity. Astronomers who lacked commensurate 
mathematical background and who were mainly oriented to 
observation (most American astronomers, as well as Comas 
Sola) were unable to follow relativity theory.76 
TOWARD EINSTEIN'S TRIP: SPAIN AND EUROPE 
By 1923 Spanish mathematics, physics, and astronomy were 
represented in the international science community by a small 
number of researchers who were able to participate in research 
75 "Teoria de la relatividad," p. 163; Filosofia de la mecanica, p. 164. On the 
confusion over action at a distance, see the exhaustive discussion byj. M. San-
chez Ron, "Studies of Relativistic Action-at-a-Distance Theories," doctoral 
dissertation, University of London, 1978, and "Einstein y Lorentz: Signifi-
cado de la relatividad especial y la mconmensurabihdad entre paradigmas," 
Pensamiento, 38 (1982), 425-440. 
76 Jeffrey Crehnsten, "William Wallace Campbell and the 'Einstein Prob-
lem': An Observational Astronomer Confronts the Theory of Relativity," 
Historical Studies in the Physical Sciences, 14 (1983), 2. 
55 

CHAPTER 1 
problems defined by that community as having significance. 
In order to achieve such participation, peripheral scientists had 
to adopt the language of the center; visit, study, or perform re-
search at central institutions; and correspond with scientists 
there. The research could then be continued at home institu-
tions, such as Cabrera's Institute or the Mathematical Seminar, 
modeled after those of the center. Because of the smallness of 
the pool of national scientists, first-rate research was confined 
to a very few subdisciplines, with one or two professors and 
their immediate disciples working on problems originally de-
fined by "central" figures and carried on under conditions of 
close communication with them.77 
Science and Language 
In the 1920s it was patently clear that contact with mainstream 
science was dependent upon the linguistic competence of 
Spanish scientists. The issue was raised constantly, frequently 
in a defensive context because doubts about the ability to com-
municate effectively reminded the scientific community of its 
tenuous position on the periphery of European science. The 
preceding generation had been autodidactic in languages. Jose 
Gomez Ocana noted that "Necessity makes its own laws and 
on me it imposed autodidacticism. When I had to read a book 
in French, I plunged ahead through its pages with no other aid 
than that of a dictionary. Nor did I have an English teacher, not 
counting a friend who taught me how to pronounce a few 
phrases."78 Although the foreign fellowship program of the 
Junta para Ampliacion de Estudios presupposed mastery of a 
foreign language, the linguistic competence of scientists was 
still a sensitive issue in the 1920s. Weakness in language skills 
implied that the persons or disciplines so accused (as in a stri-
77 See Thomas Schott, "Fundamental Research in a Small Country: Math-
ematics in Denmark, 1928-1977," Minerva, 18 (1980), 243-283, especially pp. 
246-247, 280-281. 
78 Alberto Ruiz de Galarreta, "El doctor Jose Gomez Ocana: Su vida y su 
obra," Archivos Iberoamericanos de Historia de la Medicina, 10 (1958), 401. 
56 

THE RECEPTION OF RELATIVITY 
dent 1920 polemic over the linguistic competence of the 
Madrid Faculty of Medicine) were unable to keep abreast of 
current research.
7 9 
In the exact sciences, French, the language of the foreign lit­
erature most read at the turn of century, became increasingly 
less important. It is significant, in this regard, that Echegaray 
did not participate in the early discussion of relativity, of 
whose significance he was but dimly aware, because he sub­
scribed only to French journals and was poorly informed on 
developments elsewhere. The early Spanish discussants of 
Einstein's theory knew German well. Terradas had attended 
elementary school in Germany and was proficient in German. 
Cabrera, Rafael Campalans, and other scientists were able to 
communicate with Einstein in German during his visit. 
Discussing the linguistic competencies necessary for the 
study of chemistry, Enric Moles, who had himself studied in 
Geneva and Zurich, did not even mention French: 
Nowadays in order to learn chemistry one is not com­
pletely helpless knowing English. Nevertheless, for ad­
vanced study, of rigor and seriousness, the German lan­
guage is an unavoidable instrument. I want my students 
to acquire it. I know too well that the law gives them the 
right to choose between English and German and that the 
professor cannot formally impose one or the other. Still, 
I don't think it is too difficult to obey the law and teach 
what must be taught at the same time.
8 0 
In physics the shift away from French was marked. In a 
study of bibliographical references in articles published in the 
Anales de la Sociedad Espanola de Fisica γ Quimica, broken down 
into three periods, Manuel Valera Candel has documented 
the shift in linguistic focus in Spanish physics over the first 
third of the century. In the first period (1903-15), 32.5 percent 
79 See Sebastian Recasens, "En defensa de la Facultad de Medicina," El Sol, 
February 3, 1920. 
80 "Una conversation con el quimico Sr. Moles." 
57 

CHAPTER 1 
of all references are to materials in French, 30 percent in Ger­
man, 25 percent in English, and the rest in Spanish. In the sec­
ond period (1916—30), French references drop to third place 
(16.4 percent of references), behind German (37.2 percent), 
and English (30.3 percent). Spanish references (15.5 percent) 
occupied fourth place. In the last period (1931-37), English 
references led (39.8 percent), followed by German (34.2 per­
cent), and Spanish (15 percent). French now occupied last 
place, with less than 10 percent of all references.
81 Of course, a 
similar shift could be documented in other national literatures 
of the same period. What makes the Spanish case interesting is 
that the educational infrastructure required to educate scien­
tists in German and English was still extremely weak, and we 
must assume, even in the 1930s, a high incidence of autodidac-
ticism. In all probability, most holders of foreign grants 
learned the requisite language, or substantially perfected their 
knowledge of it, on the site and not in Spain. 
Spaniards Abroad 
At the heart of the renewal of Spanish science in the early 
twentieth century was the grant program of the Junta para 
Ampliacion de Estudios. Under the Junta's aegis, most of the 
leaders of Spanish mathematics, physics, and astronomy stud­
ied abroad between 1910 and 1920. Such persons not only 
studied abroad, but in most cases returned with research pro­
grams they continued in Spain, frequently in conjunction with 
the foreign center. Among early grants in mathematics, Rey 
Pastor studied analysis and higher geometry in Berlin in 19ιο­
ί ι; the engineer Rafael Campalans studied differential and in­
tegral calculus at the Sorbonne in 1911; and Pedro Pineda Gu­
tierrez studied the theory of groups with Hermann Weyl in 
Zurich in 1916—17. In physics, Cabrera studied magnetochem-
istry with Pierre Weiss, also in Zurich, from 1910 to 1912, de­
veloping the lines of research that were to occupy the rest of his 
81 Valera, Produccion espanola enfiska. 
58 

THE RECEPTION OF RELATIVITY 
career. Virtually all of his experimental research over the next 
decade cited Weiss's magneton theory. Martinez Risco studied 
physical optics in Zeeman's laboratory in Holland in 1911. In 
the same year, Pedro Carrasco received a grant to study astro­
physics at the Astrophysical Laboratory at South Kensington, 
as well as with Alfred Fowler at Imperial College, London, 
Hugh Newall at Cambridge, and Frank Dyson at Greenwich. 
Julio Palacios worked on low-temperature physics in Holland 
and Germany in 1918. By 1919, Olegario Fernandez Banos, 
then studying mathematics on a Junta grant in Italy, could al­
lude to the founding of the Junta as having signaled "the hour 
of renovation" of Spanish science.
82 
In 1920-21 the physical chemist Miguel Catalan (1894-
1957) was awarded ajunta grant to study atomic spectroscopy 
in Fowler's laboratory, leading to his famous research on mul-
tiplets in the manganese spectrum. Arnold 
Sommerfeld 
learned of Catalan's research on a trip to Madrid in April 1922, 
and this led to a Rockefeller (International Education Board) 
grant, which brought Catalan to Sommerfeld's laboratory in 
Munich in 1923-25; when Catalan returned to Madrid, he 
brought with him Karl Bechert, also on an I.E.B. grant, to 
continue research on theoretical spectroscopy.
83 
A number of conclusions are suggested by the experiences 
of those Spaniards who studied or performed research abroad. 
There was a strong correlation between study abroad and high 
scholarly productivity. Seventy-five percent of Spanish phys­
icists who studied abroad between 1911 and 1937 were ranked 
by Valera in the most productive category of scholarly out­
put.
84 Nevertheless, the research profiles of other Spanish sci­
entists show profound discontinuities since many were unable 
82 [Olegario] Fernandez Bagnos (Banos), "Lo spinto scientifico in Spagna," 
Intesa intellettuale, 2 (1919), 155. 
8J Junta para Ampliacion de Estudios, Memorias, igio-11 (Madrid, 1912), 
ΡΡ- 43, 59, 85; Memorias, 1916-ij (Madrid, 1918), p. 42; Valera, Production es-
panola en fisica, p. 1253; Varadaraja V. Raman, "Miguel Antonio Catalan," 
Dictionary of Scientific Biography, III, 124-125. 
8* Valera, Production espanola en fisica, p. 1218. 
59 

CHAPTER 1 
to continue projects begun abroad, lacking the necessary 
equipment in Spain. Examples are Martinez Risco whose 
work on physical (including relativistic) optics was performed 
almost wholly abroad—with Zeeman in 1911 and again in 
1928, and finally in France where he was exiled in the 1940s; 
and Julio Palacios, whose research on low-temperature phys-
ics in Holland with Heike Kamerlingh Onnes during World 
War I was suspended when he returned to Madrid "because he 
lacked the necessary equipment to continue the same kind of 
experiments in which he was trained at Leiden."85 
The high productivity of returnees, however, reflected their 
ability to participate in research-front science by virtue of their 
continuing relationships with foreign centers. Again, Catalan 
provides the prototypical example. In Spanish spectral re-
search, a high number of studies were written, according to 
Valera, either abroad or in conjunction with some foreign cen-
ter: Sommerfeld's Institute of Theoretical Physics in Munich 
or the South Kensington Astrophysical Laboratory.86 The 
tight relationship of the Mathematical Seminar with Italian 
mathematics is another example. This process, which the 
Junta made possible, of inserting Spanish scientists in interna-
tional disciplinary or subdisciplinary networks was a charac-
teristic mode in which basic research of high quality was made 
possible in a small country. As Rey Pastor understood it, "To 
train [scientists] we need centers of research, and to found cen-
ters we need capable men. This is the vicious circle in which 
85 Ibid., p. 1253; Bias Cabrera, m Academia de Ciencias Exactas, Discurso 
leido en el acto de su recepcion por don Julio Palacios Martinez (Toledo, 1932), p. 
68. Martinez Risco (1888-1954), professor of optics in Madrid, was the only 
experimental physicist active in Spain in the 1920s who pursued relativistic re-
search interests. He performed interferometer experiments in the 1920s but 
appears not to have published any results on relativistic optics until the later 
1940s, when he was in exile in France. See, for example, "Concept interfe-
rential des images optiques dans la theone de la relativite," Comptes Rendus de 
I'Academie des Sciences, 228 (1949), 2014-2016, and other articles published in 
the Journal de Physique and reproduced in Martinez Risco, Oeuvres scientifiques 
(Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 1976). 
86 Valera, Production espanola enfisica, p. 1243. 
60 

THE RECEPTION OF RELATIVITY 
Spain is locked, and to break out of it, there is no other solu-
tion than to seek spiritual communion in other countries of 
brilliant scientific culture and perfect organization, to send 
young men to associate with great teachers, in the very well-
springs where science rises." Such men, whom he styled 
"modern argonauts," returned to Spain not only with new 
theories and methods, but with something even more impor-
tant: "a new spirit of research."87 
Subsidiary but related phenomena were extended tours of 
foreign research centers and attendance by Spaniards at inter-
national scientific meetings. The first had the aim of unearth-
ing models for the establishment of new scientific and techni-
cal institutions or facilities or the upgrading of inadequate 
existing ones; the second was for purposes of establishing or 
maintaining lines of communication as well as presenting re-
search results. 
Foreign technical tours were popular in the late nineteenth 
century and by the twentieth had lent themselves to a distinc-
tive genre of scientific literature. Casimir Lana Serrate, who 
held a prewar Junta grant to study physical chemistry in Ber-
lin, made extensive technical tours in the postwar period when 
he was professor of metallurgy at the Industrial School in Bar-
celona. His first reports were on technical education (the In-
dustrial School had been founded in 1904 to train industrial en-
gineers for the textile industry; as such, it had an important 
chemistry laboratory). In 1918, having already visited techni-
cal institutions in eight countries, Lana visited Cambridge, 
Massachusetts, reporting on technical education at the Mas-
sachusetts Institute of Technology (where, he noted sadly, not 
a single Spaniard was currently enrolled).88 The following dec-
ade, when Lana was director of the Hispano-Suiza metallur-
gical laboratory, his travel interests turned to the steel indus-
tries and the laboratories that served them.89 
87 Julio Rey Pastor, "Aspecto social de la vocation cientifica," La Nation, 
November 4, 1923. 
88 See Lana's reports in Iberica, 10 (1918), 201, 252-255. 
89 See, for example, "La signification de los laboratonos en las modernas ln-
61 

CHAPTER 1 
Another tireless traveler of the same period was the Jesuit as­
tronomer Lluis Rodes Campdera (i881-1939). Rodes studied 
physics at the University of Barcelona, learning astronomy at 
the Observatory of Valkenburg, Holland, under Theodor 
Wulf. In 1914 he was in Sweden to view the solar eclipse of Au­
gust 2i, and in 1916 he traveled to the United States to con­
tinue his astronomical education at various American observ­
atories. In 1918 he wrote popular reports on current research 
at the Yerkes and Harvard observatories. At the former, he 
noted research on the Doppler-Fizeau effect, while at the latter 
he was impressed by the archive of photographs and visual ob­
servations, undoubtedly thinking of the relevance of such a 
collection to the Ebro Observatory, his home institution.
90 
Another peripatetic astronomer was Jose Tinoco of the 
Madrid Observatory, who was in Paris in 1924 investigating 
procedures for studying radiotelegraphic signals.
91 
Because of World War I and its aftermath, Spanish partici­
pation at scientific meetings did not become highly visible un­
til the 1920s. Enric de Rafael was a delegate to the mathemati­
cal congress at Stockholm in 1920. Eduard Fontsere attended 
international meteorological congresses throughout the dec­
ade. Rodes attended the Rome Congress of Astronomy and 
Geophysics in May 1922, and read a paper on the action of the 
sun on magnets at the Los Angeles meeting of the American 
Association for the Advancement of Science in 1923.
92 The 
pace of Spanish participation at international meetings picked 
up dramatically in the middle of the decade. Jose G. Alvarez 
Ude and Antoni Torroja Miret represented Spain at the Inter­
national Congress of Mathematicians at Toronto in August 
dustrias siderurgicas y de construccion de maquinas," Ingemeria γ Construction, 
August 1923, pp. 366-369, and "La pista de pruebas en la nueva fabrica de au-
tomoviles 'Fiat' en Turin," Iberica, 11, pt. 1 (1924), 217-219. 
9 0 Luis Rodes, "Una visita al Observatono de Yerkes," Iberica, 10 (1918), 
232-236, 296-300; "El Observatono de Harvard College," ibid., pp. 377-381. 
Rodes became director of the Observatorio del Ebro in 1920. 
91 Iberica, 11 (1924), 211. 
92 Iberica, 17 (1922), 382-383; 20 (1923), 261. 
62 

THE RECEPTION OF RELATIVITY 
1924, and Obdulio Fernandez and Enric Moles were delegates 
to the International Congress of Chemistry at Bucharest in 
June 1925.93 The Bologna meeting of the International Con-
gress of Mathematicians in September 1928 provided an op-
portunity for Spanish mathematicians to strengthen and, in 
many cases, renew contacts with their Italian counterparts. 
The Spanish delegation of fourteen included not only Plans 
and Terradas, but a half dozen other figures who are identifi-
able as having played roles in the reception of relativity in 
Spain: Alvarez Ude, Teofilo Martin Escobar, Pedro Gonzalez 
Quijano, Carlos Mataix Aracil, Jose Antonio Perez del Pulgar, 
andRey Pastor.94 
EUROPEANS IN SPAIN: LEVI-CIVITA, PLANS, 
AND GENERAL RELATIVITY 
The countermovement, involving lecturing or research by Eu-
ropean scientists in Spain, was to a great extent dependent 
upon previous contacts made by Spanish scientists abroad. In 
the late teens, Spain had benefited from the dislocation of the 
war by attracting a number of foreign scientists, particularly 
physicists, to its laboratories. Jakob Laub, Einstein's early col-
laborator who had begun the decade at the University of La 
Plata in Argentina, worked in Bias Cabrera's laboratory in 
1915. Another central European, B. Szilard, collaborated in 
the Institute of Radioactivity in Madrid in 1918-19. Szilard's 
favorite research topic was the determination of radium and 
thorium content in minerals containing them, for which he 
93 Iberica, 11, pt. 2 (1924), 85; 12, pt. 1 (1925), 361. Enric de Rafael was a 
delegate to the Mathematical Congress at Stockholm in 1920. 
94 Atti del Congresso Internazionale dei Matematici (Bologna: Nicola Zani-
chelli, 1928), vol. 1. On p. 32 are listed official delegates of Spanish institu-
tions, most of which produced relativists: Ministerio de Instruccion Pubhca 
(Terradas), Academia de Ciencias Exactas (Plans, Alvarez Ude, Terradas), Es-
cuela Central de Ingenieros Industriales, Madrid (Mataix Aracil), and Escuela 
de Ingenieros de Caminos (Gonzalez Quijano). The Confederacion Sindical 
Hidrografica of Zaragoza was represented by Manuel Lorenzo Pardo, who 
was prominent in the reception of Einstein in that city in 1923. 
63 

CHAPTER 1 
constructed a number of measuring devices. In 1918 he built a 
new one in Torres Quevedo's laboratory, which he described 
in a pamphlet published by the Institute.95 
A more public phenomenon was the steady stream, begin-
ning in 1921, of foreign scientists—including the major figures 
in the discussion of relativity—who came to lecture in Spain. 
The first of the series was Tullio Levi-Civita's course on clas-
sical and relativistic mechanics given in Barcelona and Madrid 
in January-February 1921. The invitation had come from Ter-
radas, who had met the Italian mathematician at the 1912 
meeting of the International Congress of Mathematicians at 
Cambridge, England.96 
Levi-Civita was at this time a leading figure in general rela-
tivity research, having been drawn into contact with Einstein 
because of the latter's adoption of absolute differential calculus 
in the fomulation of the theory. The absolute differential cal-
culus, or tensor analysis, is an extension to w-dimensional 
manifold of the idea and method of calculus. It was invented 
by Gregorio Ricci-Curbastro (1853-1925) between 1887 and 
1896. In the 1890s Levi-Civita (1873-1941) expanded the scope 
of Ricci's method from its original applications to differential 
geometry to embrace a wide variety of mathematical and 
physical problems, including non-Euclidean spaces. When 
Einstein was struggling with the formulation of the General 
Theory in Zurich, his friend Marcel Grossmann drew his at-
tention to Ricci and Levi-Civita's work. In 1915 Einstein and 
the latter began a brief, although intense, correspondence on 
the mathematical properties of the gravitational field equations 
that Einstein was developing. Levi-Civita published a major 
mathematical contribution to relativity, the theory of affinity 
95 Lewis Pyenson, The Young Einstein (Bristol: Adam Hilger, 1985), pp. 
231-234. Laub was again in Madrid briefly in 1920. B. Szilard, Nuevo electro-
metro para la medida de la radioactividad (Madrid: Instituto de Radioactividad, 
1918); see Iberica, 11 (1919), 35. Szilard worked on radioactive fertilizers, 
among other things. The Instituto was located on Calle Amaniel 2, next to the 
Faculty of Sciences, and was directed by Jose Munoz de Castillo. 
96 See La Veu de Catalunya, January 20, 1921. 
64 

THE RECEPTION OF RELATIVITY 
connected spaces, in 1917.97 The last two lectures of the Spain 
course (in Madrid these were given on February 1 and 2, 1921) 
were on general relativity.98 
Levi-Civita's visit to Spain provided an opportunity to so-
lidify contacts between Spanish and Italian mathematics. The 
intimate nature of that bond was exhibited by the extraordi-
nary interest that students showed in his course, particularly in 
the portions dealing with relativity. In Barcelona a fourth ses-
sion, not included in the original schedule, was added, "owing 
to the insistence of the audience. . . . It was, for this reason, an 
intimate session in which there was established that contact be-
tween professor and students which creates dialogue." In this 
additional talk he clarified certain concepts raised in the first 
lecture on the stability of movement.99 
This lecture tour took place just as relativity was beginning 
to awaken the interests of the Spanish scientific community, 
beyond the few specialists like Cabrera and Terradas who had 
followed the theory before the war. Levi-Civita's visit, there-
fore, was the occasion for the emergence of a distinct circle of 
scientists who would diffuse relativity in Spain. Table 1 is a list 
of those invited to a dinner for the Italian mathematician, held 
in Madrid on February 1, 1921. Of the sixteen participants, 
nine were mathematicians, including virtually the entire lead-
ership of Spanish mathematics, all of whom were favorable to 
relativity. Levi-Civita, as previously noted, had already re-
ceived a number of Rey Pastor's students in Rome, including 
one—Fernando Lorente de No (1896-1955)—with research in-
terests in relativity. The large representation of mathemati-
cians at the dinner explains a number of the idiosyncracies of 
the reception of relativity in Spain. First, mathematics was the 
97 On Levi-Civita and Einstein, see Judith R. Goodstein, "Levi-Civita, Al-
bert Einstein and Relativity in Italy," in Tullio Levi-Civita, Convegno Inter-
nazionale Celebrativo del Centenario della Nascita (Rome: Accademia Na-
zionale del Lmcei, 1975), pp. 43—51. 
98 Questions de Mecanka dassica 1 relativista (Barcelona: Institut d'Estudis Ca-
talans, 1922). 
99 "Curso Levi-Civita," Iberica, 15 (1921), 98-99. 
65 

CHAPTER 1 
TABLE Ι 
GUESTS AT A DINNER FOR LEVI-CIVITA (MADRID, 
1921) 
Primary Disciplines 
Scientific Middle Class 
Mathematicians 
Julio Rey Pastor 
Josep Maria Plans 
Luis Octavio de Toledo 
Jose Sanchez Perez 
Cecilio Jimenez Rueda 
Sixto Camara 
Jose Gabriel Alvarez Ude 
Ignacio Suarez Somonte 
Ruperto Fontanilla 
Physicists 
Bias Cabrera 
Julio Palacios 
Astronomer 
Pedro Carrasco 
Engineers 
Emilio Herrera 
Mariano Moreno-
Carraciolo 
Gregorio Uriarte 
Joaquin La Llave 
SOURCE: El Sol, February 2, 1921. 
strongest and largest discipline in the exact or physical sciences 
at this time; identification with relativity enhanced its prestige. 
Second, its members had close connections with Italian math­
ematicians, also relativists, which explains their interest in the 
General Theory. Third, mathematicians were needed by phys­
icists and others interested in understanding the new ideas to 
explain to them the distinctive language—absolute 
differential 
calculus—in which these were expressed. Spanish mathema­
ticians consistently emphasized, in their public utterances, the 
services lent by their discipline to Einstein's theory. Fourth, 
and consequently, scientific interest in relativity was prepon­
derantly in the General Theory, partly because of the period in 
which relativity's major impact was felt (1921-24), and partly 
66 

THE RECEPTION OF RELATIVITY 
because the predominance of mathematicians in its reception 
ensured a focus on what was agreed to be the mathematically 
most interesting aspect of the theory. 
Josep M. Plans stressed exactly this point later in the same 
year at the Oporto congress of the Spanish Association, in his 
inaugural lecture of the mathematics session entitled "The 
Historical Development of Absolute Differential Calculus and 
Its Current Importance."100 In the history of the interpenetra-
tion of mathematics and the physical sciences, Plans began, 
there have been cases of two different kinds. In the first, a 
physical problem stimulates a useful abstraction: vibrating 
chords and the properties of heat gave rise to the Fourier series. 
In the second, the opposite is true. Here, an abstraction lends 
itself, at some time after its initial conceptualization, to the ex-
plication of some physical problem. Plans's examples are the 
non-Euclidean geometry of Lobatchevsky, Bolyai, and Rie-
mann in special relativity, and absolute differential calculus in 
general relativity. Relativity, Plans asserted, was "the scientific 
event of greatest consequence at the present time" and stressed 
"The great services lent, in the hands of the Italian school of 
Ricci and Levi-Civita, to Einstein's theory of relativity and 
gravitation, by absolute differential calculus, which, as our 
colleague Sr. Terradas has so wisely said, has become the lan-
guage appropriate to the study of Reimannian space-time of 
four dimensions, just as ordinary vectorial calculus serves for 
the Euclidean space of three dimensions."101 
It is interesting to contrast this programmatic statement by 
Plans with Cabrera's statement of the same year, cited earlier 
in this chapter. For the experimental physicist, relativity was 
epistemologically important, but the structure of the atom was 
an issue of greater current significance. For the mathematician, 
general relativity was the central scientific issue because of the 
signal role of mathematics in its conceptualization. In 1924 
100 Asociacion Espanola para el Progreso de las Ciencias, Congreso de 
Oporto [1920] (Madrid, 1921), I, 23-43. 
101 Ibid., pp. 24, 41. 
67 

CHAPTER 1 
Plans wrote a manual of absolute differential calculus, ob­
viously designed to make general relativity accessible to phys­
ical scientists and engineers. Like his earlier volume on relativ-
istic mechanics, this book had its origin in a prize offered by 
the Academy of Exact Sciences, "desiring a book wherein one 
might acquire the primordial ideas of this powerful mathe­
matical resource developed some years ago by the mathemat­
ical school of the University of Padua."
102 The last two chap­
ters of the volume consider Einstein's gravitational equations 
and the field theories of Weyl and Eddington, respectively.
103 
The intent and value of Plans's volume were not lost on the 
Spanish mathematical community. The prize, which Plans 
won, was offered in anticipation of Einstein's visit, and there 
was no doubt about its purpose: 
The rationale for the competition and [Plans's] book 
must be sought in the rapid development in Spain of in­
terest in Einstein's theory of relativity; said interest met 
not only with new and profound conceptual difficulties, 
but also with others of a formal nature derived from the 
use which all the commentators from [Marcel] Gross-
mann (Einstein's first collaborator) on made of absolute 
differential calculus, the creation of Professor Ricci of the 
University of Padua, subsequently developed and en­
riched with algorithms by his disciple and colleague Pro­
fessor Levi-Civita, whose personal contribution to rela-
tivistic theory is well known and was decisive for its 
principles.
104 
This review, by Fernando Lorente de No, appeared in the Re-
vista Matematica Hispano-Americana and further served to em­
phasize the point that mathematics had provided the means for 
103 Nociones de calculo diferencial absolute γ sus aplicaaones (Madrid: Real Aca-
demia de Ciencias Exactas, 1924), p. 5. 
103 In the last chapter, in particular, Plans was aided by Fernando Pefta; see 
Pena's article in Reuista Matematica Hispano-Americana, 6. 
104 Fernando Lorente de No, review of Plans, Nociones de calculo diferencial 
absolute, in Revista Matematica Hispano-Americana, 7 (1925), 206. 
68 

THE RECEPTION OF RELATIVITY 
resolving the conceptual problems of General Relativity. In 
addition, Plans's volume had a further impact that transcended 
the original purpose of satisfying the public's urge to learn 
something about relativity. Jose Maria Orts stated it well: 
Once the moment had elapsed when, as a result of the 
rapid expansions of the ideas of Einstein, everyone (in-
cluding those who, lacking the requisite mathematical 
background, could not pass beyond the frontiers of the 
land in which the new theory settled) was talking about 
the subject . . . when the flood of more or less well-in-
formed popularizing lectures and pamphlets ceased . . . 
when this first period, which might be styled that of rel-
ativistic fever had gone by, a cooling set in among the gen-
eral mass of pseudo-scholars, and the new doctrines con-
densed around a smaller circle composed of those few 
who were able to handle the elements necessary to pene-
trate to their depths. And from this small nucleus of con-
scientious relativists, among whom the works of Ricci, 
Levi-Civita, Einstein, Weyl, Eddington, Laue, etc., were 
reflected, we can say, although we knowingly wound his 
innate modesty, that the most enthusiastic, he who delves 
into the theory to the greatest depth, he who has contrib-
uted with tangible proofs to the study of Relativity in 
Spain, is the author of the book under review .1°5 
It is obvious that for Orts, a mathematician who had studied 
in Italy, the relativistas conscientes were mathematicians, 
whether relativity occupied them centrally or not (Orts's own 
specialty was probability theory). 
There can be no doubt of the effective role played by Plans's 
volume in Spanish scientific education. According to one of 
his students, Plans's manual had, by 1934, placed absolute dif-
ferential calculus "within the reach of persons of middling sci-
entific education. . . . Even the most recent graduating classes 
,os Jose Maria Orts, review of Plans, Nociones de calculo diferencial absolute*, in 
Iberica, 24(1925), 335. 
69 

CHAPTER 1 
learned from this book how to handle this potent instrument 
of calculation, which two years ago I included in my syllabus 
of Mechanics as an auxiliary discipline."106 
When speaking of relativity, Spanish mathematicians con-
tinually stressed their discipline's service to it and to science in 
general. Consider Rey Pastor's response (in 1928) to Ramiro 
Ledesma's question of whether it was true that Einstein's 
problems in formulating a unified field theory arose from his 
lack of mathematical skills. Nineteenth-century mathematics, 
regarded until recently as abstract or useless, Rey Pastor ex-
plained, was the basis of Einstein's theory, just as Italian phys-
icists of the Renaissance grounded their concepts in ancient 
Greek mathematics. The same was true of Copernicus and the 
Pythagoreans. Newton had to create his own mathematical in-
strument (infinitesimal calculus), but Einstein had the good 
fortune to find his already made. "It is not, therefore, the lack 
of mathematical knowledge which impedes reaching the clar-
ity desired in the theory of relativity," Rey Pastor asserted. 
"What happens is that we are dealing with very complex cal-
culations."107 The intent to demystify relativity (contrasting, 
for example, with Sir Arthur Eddington's delight in con-
founding the public with paradoxes and boasting that only a 
few could understand the General Theory) complemented 
Rey Pastor's program of presenting mathematics to the Span-
ish public (the intelligentsia, in this case) just as he presented it 
to the engineering schools (see chapter 6): as a practical instru-
ment for the development of practical knowledge, including 
the theory of relativity. 
The overwhelming support given to relativity by Spanish 
mathematicians confirms a central presupposition of this 
book: that by the supercharged nature of its reception, relativ-
ity obliged scientists to confront both themselves and their dis-
ciplines. As Jeffrey Crelinsten observed, "To a great extent, 
•0« Navarro Borras, "Jose Maria Plans," p. 242. 
107 Ramiro Ledesma Ramos, "El matematico Rey Pastor," La Gaceta Lite-
raria, 2, no. 30 (March 15, 1928), 1. 
70 

THE RECEPTION OF RELATIVITY 
the appearance of Einstein's theory of relativity crystallized 
many facets of the national character of the scientific enter-
prise, and focused the attention of disciplinary leaders upon 
the strengths and weaknesses of their professional commu-
nity."108 What was true for the American astronomers studied 
by Crelinsten was true for Spanish mathematicians. Plans and 
Rey Pastor, with specific reference to relativity, focused on the 
strengths of Spanish mathematics, while Terradas was perhaps 
more concerned for its weaknesses. In either case, relativity 
was a touchstone by which the program of the discipline could 
be assessed. 
In March-April 1922, Weyl, Sommerfeld, Otto Honig-
schmid, and Kasimir Fajans all lectured in Madrid and Barce-
lona. Weyl spoke mainly on non-Euclidean geometry, with 
one lecture devoted to the relativistic view of space. IO° While 
in Madrid, Weyl attended a meeting of the Mathematical So-
ciety, where he gave his "pertinent observations" on remarks 
by Perez del Pulgar on uniform velocity and by Emilio Herrera 
on a "difficulty" suggested by the theory of relativity.110 Som-
merfeld lectured on X-ray spectra and Bohr's research on the 
spectrum of hydrogen, but embodied in his remarks was a 
philosophical note, linking quantum mechanics' overthrow of 
classical notions of causality with the theory of relativity. 
When speaking of the quantification of energy and its appli-
cation to special relativity, Sommerfeld remarked that "classi-
cal or rational mechanics is the least rational of all." It was pre-
cisely this kind of paradox that delighted the popular 
readership that followed developments in the new physics. 
•°s Crelinsten, "William Wallace Campbell," p. 88. 
109 This lecture series was published in German as Mathematische Analyse des 
Raumproblems (1923) and was dedicated to Terradas. On Weyl's visit, see Re-
vista Matematica Hispano-Americana, 4 (1922), 50-54, 59. In a letter dated Jan-
uary 15, 1922, Plans informed Terradas of the Madrid faculty's appropriation 
of funds for the visits of Weyl and Sommerfeld (Biblioteca Esteve Terradas, 
Institut d'Estudis Catalans, Barcelona). 
"° Revista Matematica Hispano-Americana, 4 (1922), 101 (meeting of April 1, 
1922). Herrera's "difficulty" is discussed in chapter 7. 
71 

CHAPTER 1 
Honigschmid and Fajans, both colleagues of Sommerfeld's at 
Munich, closed the cycle with lectures on atomic weights and 
radioactivity, respectively.111 
The following year, Cabrera reciprocated with a short 
course in Munich on the structure of matter and magnetic 
properties. Sommerfeld, Fajans, Max Wien, and Karl Herzfeld 
participated in the discussion. Cabrera's international reputa-
tion had been rising rapidly. In spring 1925 he lectured on 
magnetism and the structure of the atom at the Societe de Phy-
sique in Paris. Then, while Spanish delegate to the Interna-
tional Research Council meeting in Brussels that October, he 
was invited to Berlin to talk on magnetochemistry. According 
to one report, these scientific interchanges had begun with the 
Madrid visit of the four Germans, which had been recipro-
cated by the lectures of Cabrera, the biochemist Antonio de 
Gregorio Rocasolano (who had spoken at Gottingen on cata-
lytic chemistry in June 1924), and Moles in Germany.112 With 
the exception of Cabrera, there would appear to have been no 
direct connection between the Germans' visit and the Span-
iards' lectures in Germany; but the perception of a quickening 
of interchange was accurate nonetheless. 
By the mid-i92os, therefore, the Spanish scientific com-
munity had become accustomed to relatively frequent expo-
sure to foreign scientists of the highest caliber, particularly 
Germans and Italians. After Einstein's trip, subsequent lecture 
tours by Henrick Lorentz and Wolfgang Ostwald (in 1925), 
Eddington and Vito Volterra (in 1932), and Francesco Severi 
(1928 and 1935) simply added to the newly acquired patina of 
international scientific respectability, whereby Madrid and 
Barcelona had become stops on the international lecture cir-
cuit. Lorentz was presented to the public not only as the "cre-
ator of the electron theory" but also as "the main precursor of 
Einstein." Bias Cabrera, in introducing the visitor, noted that 
Einstein had called Lorentz "the father of physicists." Lorentz 
'" Iberica, 17(1922), 340-341. 
113 Iberica, 11 (1924), 66; 12 (1925), 290. 
72 

THE RECEPTION OF RELATIVITY 
gave two lectures, one on the theory of magnetism and an-
other on Bohr's theory of the structure of the atom. Lorentz 
was awarded the Echegaray Medal of the Spanish Academy of 
Sciences, before which Josep M. Plans again alluded to the in-
vention by Lorentz of "benchmarks for the development of 
Einstein's theories, with his famous transformation of electro-
magnetic equations and the notion of local time.""3 
According to Olegario Fernandez Banos, the fact that Eu-
ropean scientists, already in 1919, were passing through Spain, 
"collaborating directly with the men of the new Spanish sci-
entific renaissance," was an evident sign of "a new scientific 
life."114 Einstein's visit, however, was the crucial episode that 
converted scientific prestige into a broad popular awareness of, 
and support for, pure science. 
'" Revista Matematica Hispano-Americana, 7 (1925), 168. 
'" Fernandez Banos, "Spinto scientifico in Spagna," p. 158. 
73 

