Preface
Mathematical logic is a particular branch of mathematics that applies mathematical
tools to investigate the nature of mathematics. Consequently, in this book our atten-
tion will be focused on the language of mathematics. This will be done by discussing
formal languages, first-order logic, model-theoretic semantics, deductive systems, and
their mathematical properties and relations. Such a focus radiates a bright and direct
light on mathematics itself.
Aristotle was the first formal logician who identified several key principles of cor-
rect reasoning, namely, the syllogisms. On the other hand, modern mathematical logic
is based on the late nineteenth- and early twentieth-century innovative work of Boole,
Frege, Peano, Russell, Whitehead, Hilbert, Skolem, Gödel, Tarski, Cantor, and their fol-
lowers. The material presented in this text is the result of these pioneers in mathematical
logic.
This textbook delivers an upper-division undergraduate course in mathematical
logic. This subject typically attracts students with various backgrounds, some of whom
may be quite familiar with logical notation and mathematical proof while others may
not be as familiar. The book strives to address the needs of such a course. My primary
goal was to write a book that would be accessible to all readers having a fundamental
background in mathematics. Thus, I have made an effort to write clear and complete
proofs throughout the text. In addition, these proofs favor detail over brevity. This ap-
proach should be to the benefit of all students, readers, and instructors.
Topics covered
The book presents the fundamental topics in mathematical logic that will lead to the
statements and coherent proofs of Gödel’s completeness and incompleteness theorems.
The basics of logic and elementary set theory are first discussed in Chapter 1. Since stu-
dents, typically, are acquainted with these topics, one should not necessarily begin the
book by starting with this chapter. However, Section 1.1.5 and Theorem 1.1.27 should def-
initely be discussed. In particular, Theorem 1.1.27 is a recursion theorem that justifies
many of the key definitions and proofs that are presented in the text. Few books in math-
ematical logic explicitly state and prove this often applied result. Such books usually jus-
tify their definitions and proofs with the expression “by recursion;” however, we in such
cases will cite and apply Theorem 1.1.27. Understanding the statement of this theorem is
more important than reading and understanding its proof.
Chapter 2 introduces the syntax and semantics of propositional logic. The chapter
also carefully discusses an induction principle that is illustrated by correctly proving
fundamental results about the language of propositional logic. This is followed by estab-
lishing the completeness of the logical connectives, the compactness theorem, and the
deduction theorem. We also state and prove the associated soundness and completeness
https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110782073-201

VI
౪
Preface
theorems. Most students who are familiar with propositional logic have not yet seen a
mathematical development of this logic. Therefore, these topics offer an important pre-
requisite for the development of first-order logic.
Chapter 3 discusses the syntax and semantics of first-order languages. First-order
logic is quite a bit more subtle than propositional logic, although they do share some
common characteristics. The chapter also introduces structures, which can be viewed as
vehicles for interpreting a given first-order language. Tarski’s definition of satisfaction
gives a precise meaning that yields a method for interpreting a first-order language in
a given structure. This is then followed by the notion of a deduction (formal proof) in a
first-order language.
The main goal of Chapter 4 is to present and prove the soundness and completeness
theorems of first-order logic. For each of these proofs, I have respectively isolated the
technical lemmas (Sections 4.1.1 and 4.2.1) that support the proofs of these important
theorems. The compactness theorem is then presented with a proof. The chapter ends
with several applications of the soundness, completeness, and compactness theorems.
In Gödel’s proof of the incompleteness theorem, he encodes formulas into natural
numbers using (primitive) recursive functions. In preparation for the proof of Gödel’s
theorem, Chapter 5 covers (primitive) recursive functions and relations. Since Gödel’s
encoding techniques created a link between logic and computing, we begin the chapter
with an introduction to abstract computing machines and partial recursive functions.
Today, computability theory in mathematical logic is closely related to the theory of com-
putation in computer science.
In Chapter 6 the focus is on the language of elementary number theory ℒand the
standard model 𝒩for number theory. The chapter begins with the question: Is there a
decidable set of ℒ-sentences, that hold in 𝒩, from which one can deduce all the sentences
that are true in 𝒩? This is followed by an introduction to the Ω-axioms. These axioms
allow one to deduce some of the basic statements that are true in the standard model.
Then representable relations and functions are discussed. Eventually it is established
that a function is representable if and only if the function is recursive. Then a technique
is presented that allows one to perform a Gödel encoding of all of the formulas in the
language ℒ. This is followed by a proof of the fixed-point lemma and two results of Gödel,
namely, the first and second incompleteness theorems. These two theorems are among
the most important results in mathematical logic.
How to use the book
It is strongly recommended that the reader be familiar with the basics of sets, functions,
relations, logic, and mathematical induction. These topics are typically introduced in a
“techniques of proof” course (for example, see [1]). As the emphasis will be on theorems
and their proofs, the reader should be comfortable reading and writing mathematical
proofs.

How to use the book
౪
VII
If time is short or an instructor would like to end a one-semester course by cover-
ing Gödel’s incompleteness theorems, certain topics can be bypassed. In particular, the
following sections can be omitted without loss of continuity:
–
3.2.5 Classes of structures
–
3.2.6 Homomorphisms
–
4.3.1 Nonstandard models
–
4.3.4 Prenex normal form
–
5.1 The informal concept
–
5.2.1 Turing machines
–
5.2.2 Register machines
Furthermore, an instructor could focus on the statements of the technical lemmas in Sec-
tions 4.1.1 and 4.2.1 rather than on the proofs of these lemmas. These proofs could then be
given as assigned reading. These technical lemmas support the respective proofs of the
soundness and completeness theorems in Chapter 4. Similarly, in Sections 5.3 and 5.4 one
could focus attention on the results rather than on the proofs. Of course, the material in
Chapter 6 is more interesting than the proofs presented in these two sections. Perhaps,
after seeing the theorems presented in Chapter 6, one would be more interested in the
meticulous proofs presented in Sections 5.3 and 5.4.
Exercises are given at the end of each section in a chapter. An exercise marked with
an asterisk ∗is one that is cited, or referenced, elsewhere in the book. Suggestions are
also provided for those exercises that a newcomer to upper-division mathematics may
find more challenging.


