61
Language and Semiotic Studies
Vol. 1  No. 2
Summer 2015
Catastrophe Theory and Semiophysics: With an 
Application to “Movie Physics” 
Wolfgang Wildgen
Universität Bremen, Germany
Abstract
In the humanities the applications of catastrophe theory and other models stemming from 
“dynamic systems theory”, a field of applied mathematics based on topology and differential 
calculus, was the first theoretical innovation since the computer/mind-boom which began in 
the sixties and brought many research fields to public recognition and institutional success 
which exploited the metaphor of the computer as mind or artificial intelligence; cf. AI and 
the Chomsky paradigm. The rise of dynamic model designs began in the late sixties with the 
publications of René Thom, a Fields Medal winner in mathematics, and Christopher Zeeman, 
a renowned researcher in applied mathematics (mostly in biology and psychology/neurology). 
The French and English endeavor received much support after 1974-1977 culminating in a 
joint conference in Cérisy-la-Salle in 1982.
The first sections review this development, the catastrophe controversy 1978-1980 and later 
developments mainly in the work of René Thom and his major followers (Petitot, Wildgen, 
& Brandt). Thom’s new impulse, his “semiophysics” (Thom, 1988), and the research which 
followed are summarized and the notions of “saillance”—“prégnance” (perceptual salience and 
biological relevance) including its evolutionary aspects are sketched. A specific application to 
the concept of sign applying the hyper-cycles proposed by Eigen and Schuster (1979) is put 
forward. Eventually, a new application by the author called “movie physics” is described, which 
gives a hint to further evolutions of this new field of semiotic theorizing, mainly in the media.
Keywords: catastrophe theory, René Thom, semiophysics, movie physics
1. Catastrophe Theory as a Mathematical Tool Applied to the Human Sciences
René Thom calls catastrophe theory the application of specific mathematical results in the 

62
field of differential topology and the theory of singularities. These applications concern 
rather specific problems in different sciences (from the physics of light, e.g. caustics, to 
biology, neurology, psychology, sociology and linguistics). The underlying mathematics 
has been further elaborated, e.g., in chaos theory, and in statistical dynamics (cf. the 
“Synergetics” developed by Hermann Haken and the “Dissipative Structures” advocated 
by Ilya Prigogine).
The first phase of CT beginning in 1967 has been dominated by Christopher Zeeman’s 
scientific imagination. He invented a large number of applications ranging from models 
of the brain, to the behavior of dogs (flight/attack) and finally to prison insurrections. At 
the International Conference of Mathematics in Vancouver (1974), Zeeman had to repeat 
his presentation for an audience of journalists who received his ideas enthusiastically. 
As he proposed more and more models (Zeeman, 1977), in which CT was used in 
different manners (interpreting the internal and external parameters in different ways), his 
procedure became an object of controversy. It concerned first the partial and often very 
specific interpretation of the variables in the mathematical model and secondly the fact 
that no quantitative or statistical test of the hypotheses was given or advocated.
René Thom (in 1996) argues that applied mathematics were at that time (1974) 
dominated by people using either computers (coming from the information sciences) or 
statistics (as in economy and psychology). The qualitative nature of Zeeman’s models 
was not acceptable to them. Later, when the qualitative dynamics (already sketched by 
Poincaré, 1874-1912) became again an object of scientific innovation, a better theoretical 
understanding was reached, but the original euphoria of catastrophe theoretical modeling 
was weakened.
1 Fifteen years after the controversy (in 1993) the Dutch mathematician 
Floris Takens judges: 
“Exaggerating somewhat, one can say, that where applied mathematics used to be confined to 
investigate the equations, and their solutions, given by the accepted mathematical models, for 
the different phenomena, the work of Zeeman showed a much more liberal attitude towards 
the choice of these models. In this sense he paved the way for abstract parts of mathematics to 
the applications.” (Takens, 1993, p. 256)
Insofar as Thom was not immediately concerned by the critique of Zeeman’s model 
building in applied mathematics he neither reacted to the critics nor did he change his 
own strategy. Zeeman developed a preference for biological and evolutionary modeling 
and avoided sociological and political modeling after the controversy. Many rather “soft” 
applications of “catastrophe theory” which do not share the mathematical scrutiny of 
Thom and Zeeman will be ignored in the following.
In the domain of mathematics, Thom’s proposals were more or less restricted to the 
field of singularities of a potential, i.e., to gradient dynamics. He agreed that after his early 
contributions American and Russian mathematicians (Mather, Milnor, Smale, Arnold) had 
further advanced the theory of singularities (Thom, 1973/2003, p. 4), but his primary aim 
Catastrophe Theory and Semiophysics: With an Application to “Movie Physics” 

63
Wolfgang Wildgen
was to further unfold the morphodynamic intuitions he had described in his basic book 
Stabilité structurelle et morphogenèse (1972). Thom’s and Zeeman’s proposals had shown 
that the mathematical results in singularity theory and dynamic systems theory not only 
had deep historical sources in mathematics (ibid) but that they were very promising for 
future applied research. 
After the controversy the tandem Zeeman/Thom separated, and both engaged into 
different directions but with a similar intellectual background. Zeeman contributed to the 
conference on Thom in 1982 (cf. Petitot, 1988, pp. 298-309) with an article on perception 
(“Sudden Changes of Perception”). Aspects of his work were continued by his pupils 
Poston and Stewart (Poston & Stewart, 1978) and in a diffent context by the work of 
Haken and Kelso. In the late seventies, Thom returned to Aristotle and his theory of 
genres and introduced the terms “prégnance” and “saillance” which make up the heart of 
his “Semiophysics” (cf. Thom, 1988; Petitot, 1992).
2. René Thom’s Work in Linguistics and Semiotics
René Thom’s interest in linguistics started in 1970 and he says (Thom, 1996/2003, p. 29) 
that his first contacts with linguists had been deceiving, because many of them rejected the 
idea of language universals. It was only with the success of Jakobson’s and Chomsky’s 
ideas (in the U.S.A. in the sixties; in Europe after 1968) that these linguistic concerns were 
again taken seriously. In Tesnière’s grammar Thom found an application of graph-theory 
to grammar, and thus an intuitive topological model. The basic idea is that at the center of 
the sentence one finds a dynamic kernel (the verb), around which more classificatory and 
stable elements (nouns and nominal phrases) are turning. This invited a gradient dynamic 
model (ibid, p. 31). This intuition which Thom found also in Peirce’s writings (at a later 
time in his intellectual evolution) is the starting point of his proposals for “topological 
semantics”. Many of his basic articles on linguistics written between 1968 and 1974 were 
assembled in the volume of 1974 (reedited in 1980 and translated into English in 1983). 
The PhD-theses of Wildgen (1979) and Petitot (1982; unpublished) have elaborated these 
ideas and broadened their field of application (cf. in English, Wildgen, 1982, and Petitot, 
2003).
Already in 1982 David Ruelle, one of the founders of modern chaos theory, showed 
the continuity existing between CT and Hopf-bifurcations on one side and CT and 
Feigenbaum-fractals on the other (Ruelle, 1988, p. 103). The so-called “generalized 
catastrophes” described in Thom (1972) were a cover term for all systems later described in 
the domain of fractals and chaos theory. However, the rather simple structures of gradient 
dynamics around one central attractor were not sufficient, insofar as in many domains 
of application either higher dimensions of attractors (on a circle, a torus, etc.) or chaotic 
attractors have to be considered (cf. Wildgen & Plath, 2005). The applications of CT had 
therefore (at least after 1982) to consider further domains of dynamic systems theory. In a 
collaboration which started in Cérisy-sur-Salle (at the conference on Thom’s work in 1982) 

64
I undertook such an expansion together with psychiatrist and linguist Laurent Mottron, 
which led to the book Dynamische Sprachtheorie (Wildgen & Mottron, 1987), where the 
first part dealt also with Prigogine’s and Haken’s applications of “dissipative systems” 
and “synergetics” to the humanities. In Petitot (1992, Chapter 5) this evolution of the field 
was also acknowledged. The second part is the translation of major contents in Mottron’s 
unpublished “PhD-thesis”. He was and is a specialist in the psychiatry of autistic children.
2
The intellectual situation in France in the seventies led to the consequence that only 
the Paris semiotic school (directed by Greimas) became interested in Thom’s work. Petitot 
and Brandt were both concerned with Greimas and Thom (Petitot, 1992, Chapter 7, and 
Brandt, 1992). In the context of the European “Groupe Sigma” and its conferences and at 
meetings at the Center of Semiotics in Aarhus (Denmark) and Urbino (Italy) the research 
on dynamic modeling in semiotics and linguistics had been continued and several 
authors (Brandt, Petitot, Wildgen) tried to establish a link with west-coast linguistics 
(Fillmore, Lakoff, Talmy, Langacker). This cooperation was blocked by the rejection of 
mathematical modeling by this group known as “cognitive semanticists”. More recently 
Per Aage Brandt succeeded in introducing topological thinking into the American school 
of “Blending and Conceptual Integration” (Brandt, 2004, and the journal Cognitive 
Semiotics). The book series “European Semiotics” (Lang, Bern) also has a focus on 
semiotics in the spirit of René Thom.
It would be an interesting topic in the epistemology of science to explain why 
Chomsky’s mathematical linguistics, which was widely ignored or rejected by linguists 
in the late fifties and early sixties (in Europe until the seventies) could have such an effect 
in theoretical linguists and why the even more radical mathematically based hypotheses 
of Thom (and its later elaborations by linguists) were not successful to the same degree. 
Chomsky was in fact not a mathematician, although his dissertation (Chomsky, 1955) 
had the appearance of a mathematical (or logical) treatise. His innovation fitted, however, 
the general atmosphere dominated by the information sciences (Thom’s remark on the 
catastrophe controversy 1976-1978). The Brussels-school of Prigogine and Haken’s series 
of “Applications in Synergetics” learned the lesson of the catastrophe controversy and 
avoided the humanities as domains of application. Only in the late eighties did Haken 
enter this field with a preference for experimental psychology and neuroscience (Haken & 
Stadler, 1990; Stadler & Kruse, 1995; and Haken, 1996).
Meanwhile, the innovative era of information sciences seems to have passed 
its climax. This technology and its methodology became a general tool used in all 
sciences and has lost the character of a generalized metaphor of the human mind. The 
neurosciences with their window to the mind and genetics took over the role of zones 
of rapid growth. In a certain sense, modern neuro-dynamics give a more precise and 
experimentally more sophisticated view on the mind than Zeeman’s articles did in the 
late sixties. But the general prospect to develop dynamic models of the human mind, 
of thought and language persists. Thus, the endeavor of Thom and Zeeman, of their 
colleagues in biology, psychology, and linguistics was not lost. Their enterprise was just 
Catastrophe Theory and Semiophysics: With an Application to “Movie Physics” 

65
a long journey and in the eighties and nineties the scientific community was not eager to 
wait until they come nearer to their goal.
It cannot be the intention of this article to make guesses for the future, but one can 
already feel the overall changes which reduce the charm of mechanical (computer-
based) models in the humanities. This can either trigger an (undesirable) return to folk-
models of the mind and language (see my criticism of cognitive semantics in Wildgen, 
1994, Chapter 1 and in Wildgen, 2008a, Chapter 8 in German) or lead to a renaissance 
of dynamic model building in the humanities (surely with better empirical data and more 
advanced conceptual tools). The advantage of this direction is that it introduces new 
mathematical models, which have been successfully applied in the natural sciences, and 
uses them to reshape traditional questions in the human sciences.
René Thom, the famous mathematician and critic of current science, was only attracted 
by semiotics and linguistics indirectly. At a point in his career as a mathematician,
3 being 
appointed to the Institute of Advanced Research in the Sciences (Institut des Hautes 
Études Scientifiques) in Paris, he began to reflect on the role of topology and topological 
dynamics in the fields of physics, chemistry and biology. In the 60s he exchanged letters 
with the English theoretician of biology C.H. Waddington, who wrote a preface to the first 
(French) edition of Thom’s book Stabilité Structurelle et Morphogenèse (1972) and to its 
translation into English (1975). In the second preface Waddington refers to his own book 
published in 1940 Organizers and Genes (Thom, 1977, p. XVIII), where he formulated 
some fundamental questions of theoretical biology, to which Thom found a mathematical 
answer. One problem of biology is that it cannot be explicitly founded in laws of physics 
or chemistry. Such a foundation would ask for systems with millions or billions of factors. 
A topological treatment allows us to jump (theoretically) over these complexities and to 
formulate the general contours of an explanation (with all the risks such a jump implies). 
In his foreword to the English translation of Thom’s book (1975), Waddington says that 
the last chapter of Thom’s book, “From animal to man: thought and language”, is the 
most stimulating one. The reader of Thom must be surprised to see topics from physics 
linked to problems of human communication and language (ibid, p. XIII). The picture 
Waddington gives is clear-cut: Thom is a mathematician (topologist) normally concerned 
with questions of theoretical physics, who applies his structural intuitions to the fields of 
biology, semiotics and linguistics and for this purpose neglects some of the restrictions 
which narrow scientific discourse in these disciplines. In a later phase (prepared by 
articles since 1978), Thom wrote his book on semiophysics Esquisse d’une sémiophysique 
(sketch of a semiophysics), 1988 with the subtitle Physique aristotélicienne et théorie des 
catastrophes (Aristotelian physics and theory of catastrophes).
4 His modern Aristotelism 
and his renewal of a “Naturphilosophie” in the spirit of Goethe and Schelling provided 
the philosophical horizon, into which he could embed his theoretical thinking. His theory 
of “prégnance”, which is one of my topics in this article, pertains to this period of his 
research, and one of my basic concerns will be to explain why and how it stands in a 
continuity with the models proposed in his book published in 1972.
Wolfgang Wildgen

66
3. From Differential Topology to “Semiophysics”: Thom’s Intellectual 
Itinerary
Thom saw language in a quasi continuity with biological development (morphogenesis). 
As in the case of biological morphogenesis, the specific mechanisms (genetic, chemical 
or neural) are not yet known (since then some of them have been discovered, however). 
Thus the model proposed by Waddington and elaborated by Thom was rather global 
and concerned the major topological features and the process of differentiation as such 
(bifurcations, appearance of barriers, separation of specific organs and subfunctions, etc.). 
In this realm, Thom could apply the new results obtained in catastrophe theory based on 
the classification theorem proven by Mather in 1964. The broad view of these concerns 
is summarized in his book (ready in 1968, published in 1972) Stabilité structurelle et 
morphogenèse. At this point the geometry of the umbilics (catastrophes with two internal 
parameters and a complicated multi-dimensional unfolding) was not yet known in detail, 
and in the second (French) edition Thom added some remarks concerning the umbilics, 
but he did not modify the list of semantic archetypes, although those derived from the 
umbilics could not be maintained under the new insights. In my habilitation thesis of 
1979 (Wildgen, 1979 and, for the published major chapters, Wildgen, 1985), I gave a 
more correct derivation of the sending-archetype from the compactified elliptic umbilic 
and showed that the archetypes with more than three minima have to be derived from the 
(non-elementary) double cusp (X9) and that other possible types have to be considered. 
The classification of paths which had been done intuitively by Thom is also problematic 
for all catastrophes beyond the cusp (cf. Guckenheimer & Holmes, 1983). The necessary 
elaboration of catastrophe theoretic semantics (Wildgen, 1982; Petitot, 1985; and Wildgen, 
1985) was only done by a few researchers and did not influence the main stream of 
linguistics in the 70s and 80s dominated by the Chomskyan paradigm (although Thom’s 
innovative and mathematically minded impulse is not very far from the original impulse 
by Chomsky in the 50s based on results in logics and meta-mathematics). In semiotics the 
fields of investigation were broader and more diverse than in theoretical linguistics, but 
it was dominated by researchers interested in media and literature who were not keen to 
apply mathematics in their field.
In the same period (after 1978), Thom went one step further and tried to specify the 
forces which govern the process of semiosis and not only the topology of its outcomes. 
In the frame of his training as a mathematician primarily concerned with applications in 
physics, he first tried to link the forces of the morphogenesis of meaning (semiogenesis) 
to known basic forces like gravitation, radiation (light), etc. These universal fields 
embed the living beings and govern their environment (ecology). They are naturally the 
background of all perceptual and motor processes. In perception, light is at the basis of 
our visual perception; gravitation underlies human and animal motor-processes and the 
sensation of pressure and weight; sound waves are registered by the ear and the diffusion 
of chemical substances evokes reactions of our taste and smell organs.
Catastrophe Theory and Semiophysics: With an Application to “Movie Physics” 

67
As the dynamics of such fields (e.g., light) have been the topic of physics since 
Newton, and wave dynamics the topic of specific mathematical treatments since Maxwell, 
it was straightforward for Thom to postulate a specific field that is registered and filtered 
by our sensory organs. He called it “saillance”, i.e., those effects which stand out may 
be selected as informative in a psychophysical field. His program was to extract as much 
systematic content as he could from the analogy between physical fields and perceptual 
fields. Insofar as perception is the basic stratum of semiosis, any perceptually based 
symbolic structure elaborates the psychophysical fields of our sensory systems.
Although this strategy from physics to semiotics allowed for the transfer of many 
mathematical techniques, which had been shown to be successful in physics, there 
remained a large gap between psychophysics (the level of perception) and linguistics (or 
cultural semiotics). The term “prégnance” had to fill this gap and to explain the transition 
between very basic perceptual reactions and language (culture).
This very coarse summary of René Thom’s itinerary between 1965 (exchange of ideas 
with Waddington) and the eighties (elaboration of the theory of “prégnance” and other 
cultural applications) has to be understood as the background for more specific comments. 
I shall begin with the sources Thom could use for the elaboration of his concepts: 
“saillance” and “prégnance” 
4. The Concept of “Prégnance” (Vital Relevance)
5
The basic meaning of the term introduced by Thom comes from German “Prägnanz”, 
which has been internationalized by Gestalt-psychology. In German the adjective 
“prägnant” means that something perceived, enounced, and remembered has outstanding 
properties, which catch attention, make it relevant, important in a specific situation; one 
also associates brevity (laconism) and sudden effect as in jokes or aphorisms with it. 
Other words, that may be associated to this lexical field, are “prägen”, “Prägung”, i.e., the 
coining of a piece of money or the imprinting of a sign on an object. “Prägnanz” also has 
a positive value in Gestalt-psychology insofar as the term “gute Gestalt” (optimal form) 
refers to “Prägnanz”. The term in French “prégnance” (or even less evident in English 
“pregnancy”) should be understood as a lean-translation with the lexical content of 
German “Prägnanz”.
6 In the following I shall use the English term “pregnancy” with the 
meaning of “prégnance” given by Thom.
The dichotomy introduced by Thom has a precursor in Aristotelian philosophy, and 
it is Peirce who pointed to this grounding in 1905, although he did not use the terms 
“pregnancy” and “salience”; he rather distinguishes the principle of growth (or germ; 
the female principle) versus the principle of impact (or chock; the male principle). The 
Aristotelian notions for this duality are: dynamis (δύναμις) or energeia (ε̉νέργεια) for the 
female principle, and morphe (μορφή) and typos (τύπος) for the male principle. If we 
come back to the original meaning of pregnancy, we are very close to the notion Peirce 
takes from Aristotle, i.e., the female principle, the germ and the principle of growth. 
Wolfgang Wildgen

68
The female principle is furthermore associated by Peirce to the mind (the available 
consciousness), whereas the male principle is associated with experience, it is the 
confrontation with reality (typos is translated as the hitting on something which resists, 
i.e. reality). Thom was not aware that he was thinking in the footsteps of Peirce, but both 
thinkers had Aristotle as the firm ground of their theoretical thinking; thus the coincidence 
does not astonish.
7
Thom refers explicitly to a number of modern scientific currents which contain 
a similar dichotomy. In the scientific use of the two terms, concepts stemming from 
different traditions may be distinguished:
a)	 In Pavlov’s experiments, dogs salivate if presented with meat and “learn” the 
conditioned reflex of an associated bell (which evokes similar reactions). Here the 
concept is used implicitly; the meat and the bell are “pregnant”. The meat is “pregnant” 
by virtue of the biological constitution of the dog, its body shows a set of automatic 
reactions which are thus the content of the presented sign “meat”. The associated sign 
“bell ringing” inherits the meaning of the sign “meat”, and classical stimulus-response 
theory postulates that all meanings are derived by stimulus conditioning from basic 
reflexes (elaborated by “operand conditioning” which starts from chance reactions, 
reinforced by success).
8
b)	 Konrad Lorenz observed the process called “Prägung” (imprinting) in birds (e.g. 
geese). During a short period after they left the egg, many birds select rather unspecific 
stimuli in their environment and quickly elaborate them to form basic concepts like 
that of a “mother bird”. Thus, if Lorenz quickly uttered sounds and the freshly hatched 
out goose registered his presence, he filled the slot of a “mother-goose”. As soon as 
this concept had been fixed, he remained the prototype of a “mother-goose” for them. 
Lorenz generalized this observation and postulated so-called “super releasers”, i.e., 
very primitive schemata which only ask for minimal perceptual and neural control. 
They may even fit better to formal molds than to biologically real entities. In the 
process of “Prägung”, a rich semantic system is developed which could not have been 
coded genetically. The super-releaser has an optimal effect but minimal conditions for 
its application.
c)	 A similar concept of “Bedeutungswelt” (meaningful universe) was proposed by another 
biologist, Jakob von Uexküll. His theoretical biology influenced Cassirer’s philosophy of 
symbolic forms, while they were both teaching in Hamburg. For Uexküll, every animal 
creates its own “Bedeutungswelt”, which depends first on its windows of perception 
and then on its vital needs. Thus a tick reacts perceptually to the concentration of 
butyric acid, typical for warm-blooded animals. If this stimulus is received, the tick 
drops and eventually gets into the fur of the animal. As it feeds on the blood of the 
animal, this minimal semiotic system guarantees its survival.
9
d)	 In the realm of psychology, Gibson elaborated the concepts of “prägnante Gestalt” 
and “Valenz” of his teacher Koffka and coined the term of affordance. Any object or 
process in our environment may have affordances; thus a chair allows for sitting, a 
Catastrophe Theory and Semiophysics: With an Application to “Movie Physics” 

69
bed for sleeping, etc. Therefore, the whole ecology is meaningful in terms of possible 
actions or events it allows (it signifies the potential events and actions). As some 
actions are more frequent or have more value for survival than others, the concept of 
affordance may be graded. Maximal affordance would then correspond to “Prägnanz”.
e)	 Cassirer generalized the perceptual/motoric “Prägnanz” to “symbolische Prägnanz” 
as perception is the first level of semiosis (~ symbol creation) in his system. If for 
Gestalt-psychology meaningfulness was one of the criteria of a good gestalt, for 
Cassirer meaning, i.e., symbolic content, is the precondition of true perception, insofar 
as elements of perceptual input have to be integrated into a system of perceptually 
based concepts, which is created by the mind. The signs associated with these concepts 
allow the halting of the steady stream of consciousness, in which something stable is 
fixed and brought to attention.
10
f)	 The American psychologist David Hebb, whose work has become basic for modern 
neuropsychology (cf. Hebb-assemblies), discusses different types of instincts and two 
models. The first model, which may be called monogenetic, assumes one basic force 
field of biological motivation which is then separated into different subfields like: 
hunger, thirst, sexual appetence, aggression, fear, intellectual curiosity, etc. The second 
assumes the preexistence of a topology of motivations with different centers (attractors) 
(Hebb, 1959, p. 246 f.).
g)	 The application of the concept “Prägnanz” (imprinting) to language acquisition was 
proposed by William Stern, who recognized a type of goal-oriented, internally controlled 
process in language acquisition. Thomae linked this idea with the more general discussion 
in ethnology and psychoanalysis (Thomae, 1972, p. 244).
11 Freud’s theory of psycho-
genital development assumes far-reaching consequences of basic processes in early 
childhood, which fix specific personality traits for the whole life of a person. Thomae 
included also the concept of “canalization” which assumes a primary morphogenesis 
of the epigenetic field, in which all further developments are inscribed. This idea links 
the concept of “Prägnanz” with the discussion between Waddington and Thom on 
epigenetic fields in the 60s and thus prefigures Thom’s semiophysics of “prégnance”.
Summarizing this discussion which has almost occupied biologists and psychologists for 
more than one century, one can assume on one side that all animals have specific windows 
to their ecology and on the other side that a small set of motivations or vital force 
fields exist. The list of relevant basic types remains an open question. René Thom just 
presupposes the existence of such a basic and very simple set, which shares the feature 
of structural stability and is independent from specific material contexts. This basic set is 
subdivided into “salience” and “pregnancy”.
To these rather general ideas already found in the discourse of the contemporary 
scientific community, Thom adds two new ideas: 
•	 The salience effect in perception may be linked via psychophysical laws to the 
dynamics of objective fields in physics and chemistry; i.e., perception is related in its 
basic principles to laws in natural science. In Thom’s terms, there is an explanatory 
Wolfgang Wildgen

70
continuum between objective salience in physics and chemistry and subjective salience 
in cognition and semiosis.
•	 The topology of salient objects and events governs the flow of pregnancies via a 
process called “diffusion de prégnance” (channeling of pregnancy). As in Lorenz’s case 
of “Prägung” (imprinting), the attractor landscape of pregnancy is filled with actual 
or memorized salience effects. In this channeling, the multiple forms of (perceptual) 
salience are molded into the instinctive and inborn forms and elaborate them to rich 
and context-dependent fields of categorical perception and behavior.
12
Thom’s hypotheses apply mathematical techniques and theorems to solve the most 
basic problems. But the psychophysical transition calls for the application of the laws of 
physical dynamics, not only the mathematics applied in this field. This line of thought 
has been elaborated by the group of Turvey, Kelso and others (Kelso, 1997, and for 
linguistic applications Wildgen, 1994, Chapter 3). The diffusion of pregnancy calls for 
something like fluid dynamics and models of growth in space and time. The mathematical 
and physical aspects of Thom’s proposals have been discussed and elaborated in Wildgen 
(1981, 1982, 1985, 1994, 2005), and we shall concentrate in the following on the semiotic 
aspects of Thom’s proposals.
5. The Propagation of “Pregnancy” (Basic Meaning) and the Origin of 
Language
Thom’s theory of propagation of basic meaning is essentially a causal theory of meaning. 
All basic meanings are “theoretical entities”, i.e., they are difficult or impossible to 
observe, but must be assumed in order to understand the observable effects. We may 
observe basic behavioral categories in new-born children (first weeks and months), 
register the semantic structures in one-word or two-word utterances and finally describe 
the lexicon and syntax of the adult language. These stages form a causal chain with four 
major strata:
S0
before birth
> S1
newborn child, 
prelinguistic
> S2
linguistic start
>S3
adult competence
The theoretical starting level S0 must evolve regularly given a human genome. At birth 
only some auditory capacities already developed in the womb exist; the first period of 
development concerns other sensory organs and basic motor programs (see for Piaget’s 
sensory-motor level of cognitive development Piaget 1973, Chapter 3). The genome cannot 
code for specific sensory forms or motor-patterns, i.e., it can only fix some gradients that 
allow the detection of relevant input in order to trigger the process of elaboration (intrinsic) 
and learning (extrinsic). Parallel to these basic gradient-fields, the sensory capacities and 
corresponding categorical and memory capacities evolve. For simplicity’s sake, I assume 
Catastrophe Theory and Semiophysics: With an Application to “Movie Physics” 

71
only one basic (inborn) gradient (a correlate should be found in the genetic code) called 
P (pregnancy). As the sensory capacities Si (saliences) evolve, P is interpreted by the 
content of Si, via a regular fitting between P and Si. As a precondition of such a fitting, our 
sensory organs must be in a rough harmony with P. A first division of P may be due to the 
multiplicity of Si. If the different sense organs evolve in a consecutive order, e.g., Sau(ditive) 
→ Svi(sual), the types of P invested by Sau may condition the structure of P invested by Svi. 
This leads to a cascade of Pk invested by Si:
P invested by Sau 
→ 
Pk (Sau)
P invested by Svi  
→ 
Pk (Svi)
The same thing may occur with all sensory fields (whose number is open, traditionally 
five, maximally 30). If the first investments prefigure the later, we obtain a more 
complicated net:
 
P 
 Pk (Sau) 
P 
 Pk (Svi)
 
So far the propagation described a general rule in the formation of sensory schemata in 
animals. I have neglected the motor aspect for which a parallel process of propagation 
may be assumed. Both are further coordinated as in the case of the perception of a 
predator, followed either by flight or a mobbing action.
6. Evolutionary Semiotics Based on Thom’s Concepts
A new level is reached in alarm calls or other socially relevant and culturally transmitted 
signals. In these cases, perception is coupled to a behavior which is able to redistribute the 
perception and to trigger collective action in a community (independent of consciousness, 
free will or intentionality).
13 In this case, the category of Interpretant (a lawful and 
stable link between sign and meaning) begins to surface in behavior (not necessarily in 
consciousness). If the individual formation of a pregnant sign P, which links perception 
and action, is the base line, then the alarm is efficient by virtue of the stability of the link 
between both relata ”Perception” and “Object” (in Figure 1) across the community of 
adults. This enables true thirdness (involving the Interpretant) in terms of Peirce’s sign 
classification.
14
The alarm-call is perceived and causes action (in adult animals which have learned 
the rule).
15 The cascade of semiosis can be further completed if a semiotic culture, i.e. a 
stable and shared system of signs, which governs social life, evolves. This seems not to 
be the case for most primates, although it is difficult to detect animal sign systems for 
humans, if they do not have clear cut ecological or behavioral consequences (if they don’t 
fit a stimulus-response schema).
Wolfgang Wildgen

72
Figure 1. The “alarm-call” as an “Interpretant”
 
Figure 2. The second level and the start of an iterative process of semiosis
 
The semiotic cascade can be continued if social intelligence and a high level of 
consciousness (theory of mind, mind-reading) enable the formation of a system of 
collective knowledge, which is learned and stabilized (adapted) via a system of signs. The 
new object of the sign (its referent) is now the collective knowledge (or sections of it).
Catastrophe Theory and Semiophysics: With an Application to “Movie Physics” 

73
Figure 3. The third level of semiosis (the first two levels are not represented)
Under these conditions the origin of language and linguistically based cognition may 
be modeled in analogy with the origin of life, i.e., the transition from simple chemical 
structures to living beings. The key to the transition is a type of self-organization based 
on hypercycles (Eigen & Schuster, 1979 and applied to semiotics Wildgen, 2008b). I shall 
try to venture a comment on this idea, because bifurcation alone seems to be a mechanism 
too poor and unstable to explain the emergence of such a powerful faculty as the faculty 
of symbolic behavior and language.
In a first period the chain I1 → I2 just allows for a powerful distribution, i.e., the 
stable perceptual reaction of one or a few animals reaches the whole population via signs. 
In a second period this chain contributes to socialize the individual perception-action 
cycles. In such a cycle, “interaction, exploration, and information are co-specific (or co-
implicative)” as Turvey, Carello, and Kim (1995, p. 282) tell us. As a consequence, a 
network in which information circulates is created; individual problem solving is diffused 
through social learning and thus a new level of competence is enhanced in the community. 
The coordination of individual perception/action cycles allows for a (social) control on 
the performance of others, which again stabilizes the patterns of collective action and 
creates a stable distribution of roles (in chasing, production, child-rearing etc.). In the 
sequel, social intelligence and social competence are further developed.
16
The binding of signs and action patterns at level I2 (semiotic culture) involves 
mechanisms of social control, by which the result of an action is anticipated in view of a 
collective goal (e.g. the specific shape of a hand axe) and the result evaluated relative to 
the goal (the ideal). In the process of instruction (and education) chains of such control 
processes on action/perception cycles occur, the ideal (good) forms of artefacts, rituals, 
and behavior in general establish a higher control to which also teachers must submit. 
These considerations show that cyclic and self-referential structures exist already at the 
single levels; therefore the cycle which links the levels I1, I2 and I3 in a self-referential 
mode can be called a hypercycle in the sense used by Eigen and Schuster (1979).
17 Figure 
4 at left describes the simple process of pregnancy diffusion described by Thom (the 
length of the chain and possible interferences by imitation and learning are neglected). 
The right part of the figure gives a schematic picture of the hypercycle which links the 
Wolfgang Wildgen

74
three levels of Interpretants in a self-referential fashion.
Figure 4. Diffusion of a sign (left) and elaboration of the chain: I1 → I2 → I3 with closure in I*1
 
The closure means that the categories transported and possibly modified in the chain I1 → 
I2 → I3 have again a determining effect on the primary (perceptually based) semiosis I1. 
As a consequence the individual mind begins to react to socially stabilized and selected 
categories (I3 → I1). In terms of the Sapir-Whorf hypothesis, the cultural world-view 
(in this case produced by selective transformations in the chain I2 → I3) modifies I1 and 
produces I1* which again shapes the signs at the next level I2* and so forth. The cycle 
tends to be cooperative insofar as all the elements in the cycle adapt to form a collective 
mode, and it is violently competitive against any replicative structure not being part of 
the cycle (cf. Eigen & Schuster, 1979, p. 6). I shall not elaborate this topic, but it is clear 
that the diffusion of pregnancy on a single level is not sufficient to explain the dramatic 
shift between animal communication and human language. The question is: Can such a 
three level semiosis and a self-referential hypercycle explain the emergence of grammar 
and of syntactic complexity? I will give hints to cognitive grammar and semiotics, where 
questions of syntax and valence are treated, in the next section.
The great merit of René Thom’s thinking (since the mid-sixties) lies in his focus on 
very basic questions of biology, semiotics, and linguistics. But it was not sufficient, as 
Tesnière (Thom’s major linguistic inspiration) did, to point to analogies between structural 
syntax on one side and chemistry (valency) and drama constellations (actants) on the 
other. These hints (already Peirce had conjectured such a link) had to be specified. In a first 
move, Thom proposed a mathematically based conjecture on the nature of valency patterns 
based on the classification of very general process-types (derived from catastrophe theory). 
The semantic archetypes (see Wildgen, 1982, 1985) are pure theoretical entities, and they 
formulate a program of research that gives rise to empirical analyses, such that some of 
Catastrophe Theory and Semiophysics: With an Application to “Movie Physics” 

75
them may be elaborated or falsified in later work. In the late seventies, Thom took up the 
notion of “prégnance” with its multiple readings in different disciplines (biology, etiology, 
psychology, linguistics). His proposals for an evolutionary process remained in the 
intellectual horizon of epigenetic models and should be brought nearer to current thinking 
in evolutionary theory (which is basically Darwinian and not morphological). I think that 
both lines of thought can be unified, insofar as Darwinian evolution does not preclude the 
effect of internal factors of coherence and stable epigenesis. The concept of hypercycle 
introduced by Eigen and Schuster (1979) is a possible bridge because it is firmly rooted in 
Darwinian premises. They state (ibid, p. VII):
If we analyze the conditions of hypercyclic organization we immediately see their equivalence 
to the prerequisites of Darwinian selection. The latter is based on self-reproduction which 
is a kind of linear autocatalysis. The hypercycle is the next higher level in a hierarchy of 
autocatalytic systems […]. It is made up of autocatalysts or reproduction cycles which are 
linked by cyclic catalysis, i.e. by another superimposed autocatalysis. Hence a hypercycle is 
based on non-linear (e.g. second or higher order) autocatalysis.
The further elaboration of the model would have to consider the catalytic properties 
already at the levels I1 and I2, i.e. when perception is already made up from cyclic 
processes in which memory and actual inputs interact, and the same is probably true 
for signal transmission and reception (and the necessary ongoing learning processes). 
Compared with the explicit treatment of chemical autocatalysis in the formation of RNA 
by Eigen and Schuster (1979), there is still a long way to go for semiotic theorizing. In the 
next section I shall just give a hint at “cognitive semiotics” in the spirit of semiophysics 
and its relation to cognitive grammar in the style of Langacker. He may stand for the 
theoretical endeavors in West-Coast linguistics since the eighties (Langacker, Talmy, 
Lakoff, Fillmore and others). Their style is compared with semantic model building 
by Wildgen and Petitot in the tradition of catastrophe theoretical semantics, mainly in 
Wildgen (1994) and Petitot (2011).
7. Semantic “Construals” in Cognitive Grammar and Cognitive Semiotics
Whereas Bloomfield (1926/1987) reduced meaning to stimulus-response-patterns and 
gave the responsibility for its treatment to psychologists,
18 cognitive semantics has to 
consider a meaning for all constituents in terms of a cognitive representation, and it must 
also specify the composition-process as a meaningful operation. Langacker (1987) calls 
these meaningful constructions: construals. His notation stops midway between a logical 
model (two states - one predicate of change) and a continuous model (an infinity of stages 
and a smooth function of time). The “dynamics” of the proposition the man found the cat 
is reduced to a set theoretical sequence shown in Figure 5. 
Wolfgang Wildgen

76
Figure 5. The “dynamics” in Langacker’s analysis of the man found the cat
 
The “dynamics” consist just in an aggregation of three set-theoretical situations, which 
are rendered by quasi-topological Venn-diagrams: 
•	
No intersection between set M (man) and set C (cat), 
•	
Set M and C have one point in common (tangency), 
•	
Set M includes set C. 
This representation contains neither an intrinsic time-scale (and motion on this scale; i.e., 
kinematics) nor does it specify any forces (i.e., dynamics). Contrary to Langacker's model 
(see Wildgen, 2008a, pp. 133-140 where different treatments of valences and processes 
by Langacker are compared), the catastrophe theoretical model for CATCH specifies a 
topology (a poor geometry so to say), that has two types of dynamics (quick dynamics of 
vector fields and slow dynamics of motion in time), a critical point (bifurcation between 
two attractors and one), and a rudimentary force defined by the potential V. Nevertheless, 
it is still dynamically very poor. In Wildgen (1994, Chapter 3) the dynamic decomposition 
of verbs of motion has shown the strategy for further specifications of the catastrophe 
theoretical model. It uses results from the psychological study of motion programs and 
motion perception (see several contributions to the Elmau conference 1988 in Haken and 
Stadler 1990 and Kelso 1997). 
Movements of living bodies and body parts are subject to two types of control: 
1.	 The non-linear control of movements, which is largely independent of specific 
contextual factors, defines the goal of a movement. Non-linear controls involve 
catastrophes, i.e., sudden changes in the evolution of a process. 
2. The linear control adapts the movement in its metrical detail to specific contextual 
features, and it “tunes” the qualitative motion-schema. 
Two levels of limb-motions can be distinguished: 
a.	 The rhythm of the composed movements, which is a code for the categorical 
perception of moving agents. 
b.	 The overall “gestalt” of the movement. 
The coarse topology of locomotion has three phases: 
A.	 Loss of position of rest, beginning of motion;
B.	 Steady motion;
Catastrophe Theory and Semiophysics: With an Application to “Movie Physics” 

77
C.	 Gain of a new position of rest, end of locomotion. 
The steady motion in phase B is the basic schema, which underlies the semantics 
of simple verbs of locomotion like go, run, or drive. These have been traditionally 
characterized as durative. The process of locomotion of a body is either continuous 
(durative) or it involves an implicit or explicit boundary and an orientation of the process 
relative to this boundary. The introduction of an orientation defines a goal and introduces 
a kind of intentionality. 
Beyond such a qualitative analysis more specific neural mechanisms can be 
advocated. This is done by Petitot (2011, p. 273f.) where he describes neural algorithms 
which are able to analyse a visually presented situation and to extract an action-schema, 
e.g. the schema of giving/transfer of an object between two agents. Petitot (2011, p. 272ff) 
proposes a model which uses cognitive algorithms, such as the cut locus and the diffusion 
of contours. Figure 6 gives an idea of the phases of such a process analyzed via a neural 
algorithm.
Figure 6. Critical phases of A gives C to B analyzed by Petitot (2011, p. 274, Figure 14)
   
Petitot (2011, p. 273) writes: “the temporal evolution of the cut locus itself is slow 
dynamics […] and may present bifurcations, emergence and vanishing of branches, or 
splitting of branches. These dynamics encode events of interaction between actants. We 
can in this way develop a program analogous of contour diffusion, Figure 14 gives an 
example of the transfer type.” The middle phase is the point of maximal activity of the 
agents A and B, insofar as it engages both agents and risks to be unstable, if A loses C or B 
misses to take it. A more recent treatment of case theory under the aspect of semiophysics 
and the proposals by Thom and Petitot is given by Wildgen (2015).
In the last section I will give an example beyond language and cognition in order to 
show the direction the field called “semiophysics” could take in the humanities, mainly in 
cultural and media studies.
Wolfgang Wildgen

78
8. An Application of Semiophysics Beyond Language: “Movie Physics”
In the sciences of language, media, history and art, the static and classificatory tradition 
cherished in the Middle Ages and early Modernity is still valid. Basic logical tools and 
rule-governed analyses dominate and reduce all dynamical and spatial aspects to a static 
and combinatorial design. However, the analysis of the kinematics (motion, change) and 
dynamics (study of forces and their effects) lies at the heart of modern natural sciences. 
The Copernican revolution expanded by Galileo in his kinematics, by Kepler in his laws 
of planetary motion and Newton in his principles of modern physics (1687) was applied to 
semiotics in the work of René Thom. The semiophysics of Thom (1988), which have been 
summarized in the earlier sections of this paper, mark this transition. Petitot (1992) calls 
this new direction of thought “physics of meaning” (“physique du sens”). In fact, similar 
expansions have been proposed historically for psychology and sociology. Thus Fechner 
coined the term “Psychophysik” (psychophysics) in 1860 and the father of semiotics 
Charles Sanders Peirce published in 1885 an experimental control and criticism of some 
laws Fechner had proposed (Peirce & Jastrov, 1885). A precursor of quasi-chemical 
literature was Johann Wolfgang Goethe (1749-1832). In his novel Wahlverwandtschaften 
(Elective Affinities, Goethe, 1809), he used chemical metaphors as background of the 
emotional transformations in two couples, i.e. he applied chemical/physical laws in 
literature and thus prefigured a kind of “literature physics”. 
With the rise of general systems theory and new fields of mathematical study such 
as stability theory, differential topology, bifurcation theory, chaos theory, synergetics, 
statistical thermodynamics etc. new impulses were taken up in several disciplines. In 
sociology, Luhmann applied insight of modern “systems research” beginning with 
publications on the topic around 1970 and culminating in his book Soziale Systeme (social 
systems in 1984; see Luhmann, 2005). His proposals are partially based on the concepts 
of “self-reference” and “autopoesis” developed by the biologists Maturana and Varela 
(1980). Weidlich and Haag (1983) applied mathematics coming from physics to sociology 
(e.g. to migration patterns). These techniques were used by Wildgen (1986) in order to 
describe the language shift in German towns at the end of the 19th century. Based on 
semiophysics, we can conceive a series of new sub-disciplines in the humanities which 
consider the possibility of a naturalization of basic concepts and regularities in relation to 
the current state of knowledge in the natural sciences. Thus, in relation to phonetics and 
brain science a naturalized theory of language may be called language physics. In other 
media we can introduce movie physics, comic physics
19 and literature physics. In order to 
exemplify one such direction, I shall give a short introduction to movie physics (see for 
a broader introduction and analysis of movies under this aspect Wildgen, 2014 and 2016 
forthcoming). 
The term “movie physics” does not mean that film becomes a proper field of research 
for physicists; rather that the creation and economy of meaning in film and similar media 
may be related to concepts which show up in nature (and culture). At the heart lies the 
Catastrophe Theory and Semiophysics: With an Application to “Movie Physics” 

79
concept of motion in space, its perception, memorization, categorization and the mimesis 
of human motion, locomotion and action in sign structures.
20 The link between physics 
and semiotics can be explained by the evolution of animals with vision, audition and 
brains. In order to survive in a world governed by physical laws, animals and humans 
had to adapt their bodily constitution (e.g. mobility) and senses (e.g. vision, audition etc.) 
and in the sequel their means of communication so that they were fitted to the laws which 
govern locomotion and action. I shall describe its impact in a set of applications mainly 
to action films, because here motion, chase, fight and challenge dominate the narrative 
content.
In reality and correspondingly in movies (specifically in action movies) one can 
distinguish different positions on a scale going from states/rigid positions to very quick 
and complicated motions. Physical analogs of the dynamics in movies (“movie physics”) 
are:
•	 The inertia of a body in space without external forces acting on it. Examples are a 
steady state or a totally damped oscillation. The pendulum in a viscous liquid is the 
physical prototype. Galileo’s inclined plane or the free fall corresponds to motion 
with a constant acceleration. Thus, in the case of jumps and scenes where objects 
or persons roll and glide down a slope they make use of these dynamics: see the 
famous ski-chases in James Bonds: On Her Majesty’s Secret Service (1969) and The 
Spy Who Loved Me (1977).
•	 A steady motion can be combined with forces acting on it. The physical prototype is 
the elliptical motion of the planets attracted by the sun (Kepler’s laws). Along with 
natural forces the human will can be a force, which directs motion, locomotion and 
action. If two humans interact, the force-fields may be coordinated or antagonistic, 
symmetrical or complementary (see Watzlawick’s fifth axiom of communication).
•	 With three moving bodies depending on each other, chaotic modes occur. If the 
bodies are very different in size, the system is relatively stable (e.g. the system of 
several planets moving around the sun). Human action may be confronted with 
chaotic dynamics, in case more than two human wills with similar force profiles 
interact or apply to the same object/process (triangular social relations or ménage à 
trois).
In the following I shall discuss correlates of these motion patterns in “movie physics”. 
The mechanical counterpart of this dynamic/static type is the simple or the damped 
pendulum, which makes the system remain close to the resting point. Other prototypical 
dynamical systems are the transmission of energy between pendulums, and the coupled 
pendulum. The case of the double pendulum, which shows episodes of chaos will not be 
considered here. It is analyzed in Wildgen (2014) and (2016) in relation to action movies.
Wolfgang Wildgen

80
Figure 7. Simple pendulum with resting point, a series of pendulums with transmission of force, 
and a coupled pendulum
    
8.1 Ad a: Steady motion and lack of motion or rigidity
This position is found in classical art, in photography and at the limit in movies (mostly in 
short passages at the beginning or the end of a story):
•	 The movement of a river, the passers-by, the traffic or the wind and the waves. 
This is the eternal movement of the type of “Panta Rhei” in Heraclitus. Galileo 
saw against Aristotle that steady motion corresponds to rest. A character walking 
in the street, a car rolling on a road is experienced as (almost) forceless and thus 
fits Galileo’s prototype of an inclined space or free fall. Biro (2008) distinguishes 
“turbulence” and “flow” in movies. The “flow” corresponds to steady motion; in 
many action pictures “turbulence” is the dominant mode, but short phases of “flow” 
interrupt the accelerated action phases.
•	 The classic landscape or architecture picture in the Fine Arts has a parallel in 
descriptive scenes of the film, when the camera either shows a landscape slightly in 
motion by wind in the branches, a town, an interior or if it moves steadily on a car, a 
train etc.
•	 The static portrait has a filmic counterpart in close-ups of the face, which often 
have a characteristic rigidity. This can refer to hidden emotional (in a romance) or 
cognitive processes (in a thriller). 
In the closing scene of Queen Christine (USA, 1933) where Christine (Greta 
Gabo) leaves Sweden and her throne on a ship the immobility of her body and face is 
characteristic. 
8.2 Ad b: Motion controlled by a force
In a pendulum, the original motion pushing it refers to a specific force in the system (e.g. 
clockwork) or its context; the rest position is a minimum position, i.e. either the forces 
disappear or contrary forces nullify each other. In a planetary system gravitation is the 
basic force which transforms the normal linear motion of the planet into a stable orbit if 
the distance is adequate. In the context of locomotion and action beyond physical and 
muscular forces a kind of will is assumed as controlling force. Major types of controlled 
motion are:
Catastrophe Theory and Semiophysics: With an Application to “Movie Physics” 

81
•	 The targeted locomotion. It has two limitations: start and finish. Often the target 
dominates; e.g. the extreme west in the Western film (frontier motive: the settlers try 
to reach the far West) or marriage in a love movie.
•	 Spatially structured movements. The space has boundaries and transitions. 
Consecutive episodes repeat similar actions (e.g. chases) in different spatial 
contexts. Normally the series ends with a final scenario: death of the antagonist, 
union of the lovers. 
In the movie Bonnie and Clyde (USA, 1967) the final showdown repeats the basic line 
shown in many episodes of the picture: Driving (by car) ► Stop ► Confrontation 
► Death. In the final scene the protagonists (the gangsters) are killed and not their 
adversaries.
8.3 Ad c: A plurality of movements affecting each other
Simple physical analogues are cascaded pendulums which transmit the initial momentum 
from the first to the last one in a chain. More complicated motion patterns are shown 
in coupled pendulums. These can have stable modes, such as the movement of bipeds, 
quadrupeds and insects (the limbs are the pendulums; in general they move in pairs or 
triples thus simplifying the dynamics to two main forces; see Haken, 1996). Chaotic 
modes occur with double or multiple pendulums; the motion of the second pendulum 
depends on the motion of the first one. 
Coupled dynamics occur in movies, in which a series of processes is shown or where 
a plurality of forces interacts. This feature is central in many action films. Some examples 
may illustrate the three types of dynamics:
•	 Domino effects: one event triggers the next. Thus, a series of murders occurs in the 
crime film, either the murderer continues the given type (the case of Jack the Ripper) 
or in order to escape or hide his first murder commits further ones. Repeated scenes 
of attack and flight are shown in war movies; the classical example is Eisenstein’s 
“Massacre on the stairs in Odessa” in the film Battleship Potemkin.
• Chase and escape sequences in many action films and Western films. The underlying 
momentum of the persecution is: A pursues B (in space with obstacles).
•	 Parallel sequences of events that are linked selectively. The events are originally 
independent but come into contact/interaction by chance; see the analysis of scenes 
in the film “A Quantum of Solace” with James Bond in Wildgen 2014 and 2016 
(forthcoming).
9. First Conclusions From the Example of Movie Physics
The typical signs in cinema are kinematic and dynamic in their nature, i.e. they refer 
to motion, locomotion, and action. If action and conflict are not the central concern, 
emotional events, dialogues and changes in the social, political status or of emotional 
constellations may be the relevant dynamics (emotion instead of motion). A frequent 
Wolfgang Wildgen

82
consequence of conflict is the disappearance/death of agents, the breaking of alliances and 
love connections and the building or consolidation of new ones. 
The focus on motion, forces, and the control of motion and stable states gives a new 
relevance to space and its organization in one, two or three dimensions. The linguistic bias 
with its preference for concatenation (one-dimensionality and discreteness) is overthrown 
and the door for a proper treatment of non-linguistic (visual, musical, olfactory, etc) signs 
in our real world is opened.
The tools of dynamic systems theory (attractors, vectors, bifurcations, catastrophes, 
chaos) may be used to further specify the inventory of types which reoccur in many 
semiotic (and non-semiotic) systems. They can complete (if not replace) the purely 
relational, mostly static, terms of logics which have dominated semiotics since Hjelmslev’s 
structuralism (in the sequel in the semiotics of Eco and Greimas) and in linguistic schools 
inspired by Analytic Philosophy (e.g. in the Chomskyan paradigm). The dialogue with 
the natural sciences relevant in this field (physics, chemistry, biology, cognitive sciences) 
requires new conceptualizations and a proper way of applying mathematics. The tradition 
of catastrophe theoretic modeling since the end of the sixties and of semiophysics since 
the end of the eighties have shown the path which should be followed. Semiophysics can 
be elaborated in several disciplines such as: linguistics, media and film studies, comics, 
literature, and cultural studies.
Notes
1	
After an article in Nature the replies by mathematicians, physicists, and biologists were 
unanimously in favour of catastrophe theory (cf. Zeeman, 1993, p. 268). Smale, in his review 
of Zeeman (1977), did at least not make the mistakes his pupils had shown in the controversy, 
which finally separated more progressive (Zeeman) and more conservative (Smale) proponents 
of applied mathematics.
2	
See Mottron, 2004 and many more recent publications accessible via the Internet.
3	
Thom got the Fields medal for his mathematical work in 1958.
4	
See the English translation published in 1990.
5	
See the contributions to this topic in Wildgen and Brandt (2010) and Wildgen (2010b), which 
contain some of the arguments presented in the following pages.
6	
In the etymology of “pregnant” and “Prägnanz” one may distinguish two different sources: 
a) before “prae” + be born “(g)nasci” in Latin, with the figurative meaning: heavy, full; b) the 
etymology of “prägen” (imprint), medieval German: praech (en). The modern meaning blends 
both sources.
7	
Peirce also mentions autobiographical sympathies for a Schelling-like conception and thus he 
shares a grounding in the Goethe-Schelling tradition also considered by Thom. Peirce writes: 
“I may mention, for the benefit of those who are curious in studying mental biographies, that 
I was born and reared in the neighborhood of Concord—I mean in Cambridge—at the time 
when Emerson, Hedge, and their friends were disseminating the ideas that they had caught 
from Schelling, and Schelling from Plotinus, from Boehm, or from God knows what minds 
Catastrophe Theory and Semiophysics: With an Application to “Movie Physics” 

83
stricken with the monstrous mysticism of the East. […] and I am not conscious of having 
contracted any of that virus. Nevertheless, it is probable that some cultured bacilli, some 
benignant form of the disease was implanted in my soul, unawares, and that now, after long 
incubation, it comes to the surface, modified by mathematical conceptions and by training in 
physical investigations.” (Peirce, 1931-1935, pp. VI, 103)
8	
Pavlov developed a more sophisticated model in his further work, and the neo-behaviorists 
like Osgood postulated an inner space of semantic dispositions which direct the creation of a 
semantic network (Osgood, 1976).
9 
Beyond this basic reflex there are also stochastic conditions, i.e. ticks often adhere by chance 
to the fur of animals which move through bush or grass where ticks are “waiting”.
10	 See Cassirer 1923/2001, p. 20 and van Heusden, 2003, p. 126 f.
11	 Bischof replaced the sensitive period of imprinting by the concept of a “sensitive situation”. 
Such situations may even occur later in life, e.g., after sexual maturity in humans (and 
mammals). He proposed to separate “releasers” based on perception and “detectors” linked 
to behavioral systems (“Funktionskreis”). The instinctive behavior described by Lorenz 
belongs to a biologically necessary (releaser) imprinting, whereas sexual imprintings belong to 
behavioral systems using detectors (Bischof, 1994).
12	 In Petitot-Cocorda (1992) this idea is elaborated using the term “physics of meaning” instead 
of “semiophysics”. In Chapter V, 3 he introduces more advanced mathematical tools and 
explains fractal structures and chaos. The topics “prégnance” and “saillance” are discussed in 
chapter VI, 5 (pp. 315-324).
13	 See Wildgen (2004) for the evolution of language and the role of dynamic patterns in it. In 
Bax, van Heusden and Wildgen (2004), some aspects of biological and cultural evolution are 
discussed. In Wildgen (2010a, Chapter 13) the field of neuro- and bio-linguistics is evaluated.
14	 Beyond a stable correlation, a complexity reduction must occur, i.e. the interpretant must be 
less complex than the totality of dyadic relations encountered or present in the environment. 
This topic is discussed in Luhmann (2004) in relation to social systems and measures of 
complexity proposed in cybernetics.
15  Basically our simplified models only focus on the relations to the object (R–O and I–O). The 
iteration opens an infinite regress, which may be halted by levels of attention or consciousness. 
The infinite series may be compressed by integration because the process of thought is 
basically a continuous one, which is only segmented artificially for the sake of reconstruction. 
The underlying paradox is similar to the classical paradox of Zenon (the race between Achilles 
and the turtle).
16	 In Herrmann et al. (2007) the evolution of social cognition is described as a major motor of 
human evolution.
17	 Eigen and Schuster (1979, p. 3f) mention as examples of cycles: the enzyme which turns 
a substrate into a product, the carbon-cycle proposed by Bethe-Weizäcker, “which keeps 
the sun shining” (ibid), the Krebs-cycle, which regulates the metabolism of the living cell. 
Their main examples of hyper-eycles are the precursors of the reproduction and translation 
apparatus found in present prokaryotic cells, and thus the basic mechanism underlying the 
Wolfgang Wildgen

84
origin of life (ibid, p. 62). The Darwinian nature of hyper-cycles is described in the following 
passage: “Non-coupled self-replicative units guarantee the conservation of a limited amount 
of information which can be passed on from generation to generation. This proves to be one 
of the necessary prerequisites of Darwinian behaviour, i.e. of selection and evolution […]. In 
a similar way, catalytic hyper-cycles are also selective, but in addition, they have integrating 
properties, which allow for cooperation among otherwise competitive units. Yet they compete 
even more violently than Darwinian species with any replicative entity not being part of their 
own. Furthermore, they have the ability of establishing global forms of organization as a 
consequence of their once-forever-selection behaviour, which does not permit a coexistence 
with other hypercyclic systems, unless these are stabilized by higher order linkage.” (ibid, p. 6).
18	 Bloomfield (1926/1987, p. 72) states: “a meaning is a recurrent stimulus-reaction feature 
which corresponds to a form”. A major aim of his postulates was: “in particular it cuts us 
off from psychological dispute” (ibid, p. 71). Chomsky continued this strategy insofar 
as his competence model is cut off from the performance model which may be tested by 
psychologists.
19	 Compare the term “cartoon physics” coined by Bukatman (2014, p. 301f).
20	 This approach puts the indexical (cause and effect) and iconic aspects of semiosis into the 
foreground and derives the symbolic/conventional aspect from the dynamics of semiosis 
including its socio-semiotic features.
References
Arnold, V. I. (1986). Catastrophe theory. Heidelberg: Springer.
Bax, M., van Heusden, B., & Wildgen, W. (Eds.). (2004). Semiotic evolution and the dynamics of 
culture. Bern: Peter Lang.
Biro, Y. (2008). Turbulence and flow in film. The rhythmic design. Bloomington: Indiana University 
Press.
Bischof, N. (1994). Das Rätsel Ödipus: die biologischen Wurzeln des Urkonfliktes von Intimität. 
München: Piper.
Bloomfield, L. (1926/1987). A set of postulates for the science of language. Language, 2, 153-164. 
(Repr. in A Leonard Bloomfield anthology, pp. 70-80, by F. H. Charles, Ed., 1987, Chicago, Ill: 
Indiana University Press) 
Brandt, P. A. (1992). La charpente modale du sens. Pour une sémio-linguistique morphogénétique 
et dynamique. Aarhus: Aarhus University Press.
Brandt, P. A. (2004). Spaces, domains, and meaning. Essays in cognitive semiotics. Bern: Lang.
Bukatman, S. (2014). Some observations pertaining to cartoon physics; Or, the cartoon cat in the 
machine. In K. Beckman (Ed.), Animating film theory (Chapter 17). Durham: Duke University 
Press.
Cassirer, E. (1923, 1925, 1929). Philosophie der symbolischen Formen, new edition. Hamburg: 
Meiner. (Repr. in ECW, Vols. 11-13, 2010) [English translation: The Philosophy of Symbolic 
Forms. Vol. 1. Language, Vol. 2. Mythical thought, Vol. 3. The phenomenology of knowledge, 
1955-1957, New Haven & London: Yale UP]
Catastrophe Theory and Semiophysics: With an Application to “Movie Physics” 

85
Chomsky, N. (1955). The logical structure of linguistic theory. Retrived from http://alpha-leonis.
lids.mit.edu/chomsky (Partial publication, 1975, New York: Plenum Press)
Eigen, M., & Schuster, P. (1979). Hypercycle. A principle of self-organization. Berlin: Springer.
Fechner, G. T. (1860). Elemente der psychophysik. Leipzig: Breitkopf & Härtel. (Repr. in 1984, 
Amsterdam: Bonset) [English translation: Elements of psychophysics, 1912, Boston: Houghton 
Mifflin] (Original work published 1860)
Fillmore, C. J. (1977). Scenes-and-Frames semantics. In A. Zampolli (Ed.), Linguistic structures 
processing (pp. 55-81). Amsterdam: North Holland.
Goethe, J. W. von (1809/2009). Die Wahlverwandtschaften. Tübingen: Cotta’sche Verlagsbuchhandlung. 
[English translation: Electic affinities, 2009, Richmond: Oneworld Classics]
Greimas, A. J. (1966). Sémantique structurale. Recherche de méthode. Paris: Larousse.
Guckenheimer, J., & Holmes, P. (1983). Nonlinear oscillations, dynamical systems, and 
bifurcations of vector fields. Berlin: Springer.
Haken, H. (1996). Principles of brain functioning. A synergetic approach to brain activity, 
behavior and cognition. Berlin: Springer.
Haken, H., & Stadler, M. (Eds.). (1990). Synergetics of cognition. Proceedings of the international 
symposium at Schloss Elmau, 1989. Berlin: Springer.
Hebb, D. O. (1959/1966). A textbook of psychology. Philadelphia: Saunders.
Hermann, E. et al. (2007). Humans have evolved specialized skills of social cognition: The cultural 
intelligence. Science, 317, 1360-1366.
Heusden, B. van (2003). Cassirers Ariadnefaden—Anthropologie und Semiotik. In H. Sandkühler, 
& D. Pätzold (Eds.), Kultur und Symbol. Ein Handbuch zur Philosphie Ernst Cassirers (pp. 
111-147). Stuttgart: Metzler. 
Hjelmslev, L. (1953). Prolegomena to a theory of language. Baltimore: Waverly Press. 
Kelso, J. A. S. (1997). Dynamic patterns: The self-organization of brain and behavior. Cambridge, 
MA: Bradford.
Lakoff, G. (1987). Women, fire, and dangerous things: What categories reveal about the mind. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Langacker, R. (1987). Foundations of cognitive grammar: Theoretical prerequisites. Stanford: 
Stanford University Press. 
Luhmann, N. (2004). Einführung in die Systemtheorie (2nd ed.) (D. Baecker, Ed.). Heidelberg: 
Carl-Auer-Systeme.
Luhmann, N. (2005). Soziale Systeme. Grundriss einer allgemeinen Theorie. Frankfurt/Main: 
Suhrkamp.
Maturana, H. R., & Varela, F. J. (1980). Autopoiesis and cognition. The realization of the living. 
Dordrecht: Reidel. 
Mottron, L. (2004). Matching strategies in cognitive research with individuals with high-
functioning autism: Current practices, instrument biases, and recommendations. Journal of 
Autism and Developmental Disorders, 34(1), 19-27.
Nicolis, G., & Ilya, P. (1989). Exploring complexity. An introduction. New York: Freeman.
Osgood, C. (1976). Focus on meaning. The Hague: Mouton.
Wolfgang Wildgen

86
Peirce, C. S. (1931-1935). Collected papers of Charles Sanders Peirce (Vols. 1-6), C. Hartshorne, 
& P. Weiss (Eds.). Cambridge MA: Harvard University Press.
Peirce, C. S., & Jastrow, J. (1885). On small differences in sensation. Memoirs of the National 
Academy of Sciences, 3, 73-83.
Petitot, J. (2003). Morphogenesis of meaning (F. Manjali, Trans.). Bern: Lang.
Petitot, J. (2011). Cognitive morphodynamics. Dynamical morphological models of constituency 
and syntax. Bern: Lang.
Petitot-Cocorda, J. (1985). Morphogenèse du sens. Paris : Presses Universitaires de France. [English 
translation: Petitot, 2003]
Petitot-Cocorda, J. (Ed.). (1988). Logos et Théorie des Catastrophes. Genf: Patiño.
Petitot-Cocorda, J. (1992). Physique du sens. De la théorie des singularités aux structures sémio-
narratives. Paris: Éditions du CNRS.
Piaget, J. (1973). The child and reality problems of genetic psychology (A. Rosin, Trans.). New 
York: Grossman.
Poston, T., & Stewart, I. (1978). Catastrophe theory and its applications. London: Pitman.
Ruelle, D. (1988). Idéalisation en physique. In J. Petitot (Ed.), Logos et Théorie des Catastrophes 
(pp. 99-105). Genf: Patiño.
Stadler, M., & Kruse, P. (Eds.). (1995). Ambiguity in mind and nature. Berlin: Springer.
Sussmann, H. J., & Zahler, R. S.  (1978). Catastrophe theory as applied to the social and biological 
sciences: A critique. Synthèse, 37, 117-216.
Takens, F. (1993). The work of Professor Sir Christopher Zeeman FRS. Niew Archief voor 
Wiskunde, 11(3), 251-256.
Tesnière, L. (1959). Éléments de syntaxe structurale. Paris: Klinksieck.
Thom, R. (1972/1977). Stabilité structurelle et morphogenèse. Essai d’une théorie générale des 
modèles (2nd ed.). Paris: Interéditions.
Thom, R. (1974). Modèles mathématiques de la morphogenèse. Paris: Union Générale d’Editions.  
[2e édition, Bourgois, Paris, 1980; augmented English translation: Mathematical Models of 
Morphogenesis, Horwood, Chichester, 1983]
Thom, R. (1975). Structural stability and morphogenesis. Reading: Benjamin. [Translation with 
some omissions from the French original: Stabilité structurelle et morphogenèse, 1972]
Thom, R. (1988/1990). Esquisse d’une sémiophysique. Physique aristotélicienne et théorie des 
catastrophes. Paris: Interéditions. [Translated into English Semiophysics: A Sketch, 1990, 
Redwood City, Calif.: Addison-Wesley]
Thom, R. (1996/2003). Document 4.2.: Graphes-Signaux-Prégnances. In Thom (2003: Inédits 
1997: 29-36).
Thom, R. (1997/2003). Document 1: Mémoire de la théorie des catastrophes. In Thom (2003: 
Inédits 1997: 1-28).
Thom, R. (2003). Oeuvres complètes, CD-Rom, Institut des Hautes Études Scientifiques. Bures-
sur-Yvette, Paris. 
Thomae, H. (1972). Entwicklung und Prägung. In H. Thomae (Ed.), Entwicklungspsychologie. 
Handbuch der Psychologie in 12 Bd. (pp. 240-311). Göttingen: Hogrefe.
Catastrophe Theory and Semiophysics: With an Application to “Movie Physics” 

87
Turvey, M.T., Carello, C., & Nam-Gyoon, K. (1990). Links between active perception and the 
control of action. In H. Haken, & M. Stadler (Eds). Synergetics of cognition (pp. 269-295). 
Berlin: Springer. [Springer Series in Synergetics, Vol. 45] 
Uexküll, T. von (1984). Zeichen und Realität als anthroposemiotisches Problem. In Oehler, K. (Hg.), 
Zeichen und Realität, Narr, Tübingen.
Waddington, C. H. (1940). Organisers & genes. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Watzlawick, P., Jackson, D. D., & Bavelas, J. B. (1967). Pragmatics of human communication. A 
study of interactional patterns, pathologies, and paradoxes. New York: Norton.
Weidlich, W., & Haag, G. (1983). Concepts and models of a quantitative sociology. The dynamics 
of interacting populations. Berlin: Springer. [Springer Series in Synergetics, Vol. 14]
Wildgen, W. (1979). Verständigungsdynamik. Bausteine für ein dynamisches Sprachmodell, thesis 
of Habilitation. University of Regensburg. [electronic copy: http://elib.suub.uni-bremen.de/ip/
docs/00010402.pdf]
Wildgen, W. (1981). Archetypal dynamics in word semantics. An application of catastrophe theory. 
In H. Eikmeyer, & H. Rieser (Eds.), Words, worlds and contexts. New approaches to word 
semantics (pp. 234-296). Berlin: de Gruyter. 
Wildgen, W. (1982). Catastrophe theoretic semantics. An elaboration and application of René 
Thom’s theory. Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Wildgen, W. (1985). Archetypensemantik. Grundlagen für eine dynamische Semantik auf der Basis 
der Katastrophentheorie. Tübingen: Narr.
Wildgen, W. (1986). Synergetische Modelle in der Soziolinguistik. Zur Dynamik des Sprachwechsels 
Niederdeutsch-Hochdeutsch in Bremen um die Jahrhundertwende (1880-1920). Zeitschrift für 
Sprachwissenschaft, 5(1), 105-137.
Wildgen, W. (1994). Process, image, and meaning. A realistic model of the meanings of sentences 
and narrative texts. Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Wildgen, W. (1998). Chaos, fractals and dissipative structures in language. Or the end of linguistic 
structuralism. In G. Altmann, & W. A. Koch (Eds.), Systems. New paradigms for the human 
sciences (pp. 596-620). Berlin: de Gruyter.
Wildgen, W. (2004). The evolution of human languages. Scenarios, principles and cultural 
evolution. Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Wildgen, W. (2005). Catastrophe theoretical models in semantics. In R. Köhler, G. Altmann, & R. G. 
Pietrowski (Eds), Quantitative linguistics/Quantitative Linguistik. An international handbook 
(pp. 410-423). Berlin: de Gruyter.
Wildgen, W. (2008a). Kognitive Grammatik. Klassische Paradigmen und neue Perspektiven. 
Berlin: de Gruyter.
Wildgen, W. (2008b). Semiotic hypercycles driving the evolution of language. Axiomathes 18(1), 
91-116.
Wildgen, W. (2010a). Die Sprachwissenschaft des 20. Jh.s: Versuch einer Bilanz. Berlin: de 
Gruyter.
Wildgen, W. (2010b). Thom’s theory of “saillance” and “prégnance” and modern evolutionary 
linguistics. In W. Wildgen, & P. A. Brandt (Eds.), Semiosis and catastrophes. René Thom's 
Wolfgang Wildgen

88
semiotic heritage.
Wildgen, W. (2014). Dynamic meaning construction in action-films (specifically in the last James 
Bond Trilogy). RASK: Internalionalt Tidsscrift for Sprog og Kommunikation, Nr. 40 (pp. 
423-448).
Wildgen, W. (2015). En cas de catastrophe. Les systèmes casuels et la dynamique qualitative, 
Contribution to the Colloque Petitot, Paris-Nanterre, 29 mai 2015. Presentation in the net: 
http://www.fb10.uni-bremen.de/homepages/wildgen/pdf/En_cas_de_catastrophe_Paris_2015.
pdf
Wildgen, W. (forthcoming 2016). “Movie physics” or dynamic patterns as the skeleton of movies. 
In J. Wildfeuer, & J. A. Bateman (Eds.), Film text analysis (Routledge advances in film 
studies). London: Routledge.
Wildgen, W., & Mottron, L. (1987). Dynamische Sprachtheorie. Sprachbeschreibung und 
Spracherklärung nach den Prinzipien der Selbstorganisation und der Morphogenese. Bochum: 
Brockmeyer.
Wildgen, W., & Plath, P. (2005). Katastrophen- und Chaostheorie in der linguistischen 
Modellbildung. In R. Köhler, G. Altmann, & R. G. Pietrowski (Eds), Quantitative linguistics/
Quantitative Linguistik. An international handbook (pp. 688-705). Berlin: de Gruyter.
Wildgen, W., & Brandt, P. A. (Eds.). (2010). Semiosis and catastrophes. René Thom’s semiotic 
heritage. Bern: Lang.
Zeeman, C. (1977). Catastrophe theory: Selected papers 1972-1977. Cambridge, MA: Addison-
Wesley.
Zeeman, C. (1993). Controversy in science: On the ideas of Daniel Bernoulli and René Thom. 
Niew Archief voor Wiskunde, 11(3), 257-282.
About the author
Wolfgang Wildgen (wildgen@uni-bremen.de) was born in Fürth, Bavaria in 1944; He 
graduated in German and French Philology from the University of Regensburg, and 
finished his PhD there in General Linguistics and German Linguistics in 1976. He 
received a Scientific Award for his doctoral dissertation (Ostbayrischer Kulturpreis) and 
finished his habilitation-thesis on Dynamics of communication in 1981. After that he 
became Professor of German and General Linguistics at the University of Bremen and 
has been Professor Emeritus since March 2009. He is author and co-author of 25 books 
and over 200 articles. His main topics include general and mathematical linguistics, 
sociolinguistics, history of linguistics and semiotics, evolution of language, visual 
semiotics and art.
Catastrophe Theory and Semiophysics: With an Application to “Movie Physics” 

