Swcdenborg 
THE IINE NAME of Swcdcnborg sounds strange to French 
cars. It awakens in me whole depths of confused notions sur­
rounding the fantastic image of a singular personality who 
seems to be more a literary creation that an historical char­
acter. I confess that, until a few days ago, all I knew about 
him came from books read long ago. 
In the far-off past, Balzac's Seraphitus-Seraphita and a 
chapter of Gerard de Nerval had been my only sources, and 
it is thirty years since I drew on them. . . . 
There was, however, a charm about this fading memory. 
The mere sound of the syllables of the magic name, whenever 
I happened to hear it, suggested incredible intimations, the 
attractions of a weird science, the mystery of a great influence 
emanating from dreams. Above all, it pleased me to visualize 
the shadowy figure of the Illuminatus in that century in 
which I myself would have chosen to live. 
I imagine this period must have been one of the most bril­
liant and satisfying ever known to men. It was marked by the 
glittering close of one world and the powerful struggles of 
another to come to birth, also by a highly refined art, by 
forms and manners that were still very temperate, by all the 
strength and all the graces of the mind. There were magic and 
no 

S WEDENBORG 
the differential calculus; as many atheists as mystics; the most 
cynical of cynics and the oddest of dreamers. The excesses of 
the intellect were not unknown, yet were counter-balanced 
—sometimes in the same head—-by an astonishing credulity. 
All the subjects ot that boundless intellectual curiosity which 
the Renaissance had inherited from antiquity, or derived 
from its own fme frenzy, reappeared in the eighteenth cen­
tury, but more vividly, more acutely, more precisely. The 
folios gave place to volumes of smaller format. 
The Europe of the day recognized the coexistence of com­
pletely opposing doctrines, ideals, systems. That is character­
istic of what is called "modern" civilization. Rome and 
Alexandria had already known this accumulation of contra­
dictor)* tendencies and theories, publicly paraded and debated. 
They seethed with different religions and philosophies; no 
one could fail to be aware, in an environment of such a high 
intellectual temperature, that there is more than one solution 
to ever\r speculative problem. The result was contacts and ex­
changes, surprising combinations and contrasts of ideas 
which, often occurring in the same individual, made him the 
incarnation of the richness and confusion of the period. 
In the eighteenth century, while the d'Alemberts, the 
Clairauts, the Eulers were busy constructing a relentlessly 
pure mechanical universe by the completely novel methods of 
mathematical analysis; while others were trying their hands 
at biology, catching glimpses of different philosophies of liv­
ing nature, and attempting to deduce from them the origins 
of what they thought they knew about matter; while the 
great Linnaeus was embarking on the vast labor of classifying 
all the organic forms of life, there were some who were con­
structing a variety of metaphysical systems, still following the 
ancients, or else continuing the work of Gassendi, Descartes, 

M A S T E R S  A N D  F R I E N D S  
Spinoza, Leibnitz, or Malebranche. In the realm of theology 
Jansenists, Quictists, Pietists, and a good many other sects 
were quarreling over the possession of truth and the dominion 
of souls. There were also a great many freethinkers. 
But if free inquiry, which had become more or less per­
missible in most countries, if the progress of the exact sciences 
and their astonishing success, and the discovery of the whole 
face of the earth—if these created a sort of encyclopedic appe­
tite, a thirst for knowledge, a spirit that stopped at nothing, 
this same thirst for knowledge and power was not above ex­
ploring the penumbra of the mind as well, and even that 
suspcct darkness where, since the earliest antiquity, men had 
imagined treasures of power and knowledge, and even 
secrets of supernatural importance. 
At that time there existed in many minds certain interests 
and expectations which we are astonished to find together. 
The rational and the irrational were strangely blended. Men 
like Leibnitz or Bayle may appear to us endowed with too 
many different preoccupations; and we are disconcerted to 
find in one and the same man, Newton, an interpretation of 
the Apocalypse (based on hypotheses about the astronomy 
of the Argonauts) and the discovery of fluxional calculus and 
universal gravitation. But the century was bursting with re­
search in every field, and its passion for accuracy, the cult of 
observation and experiment did not preserve it from the 
temptations and seductions of doctrines and practices which 
had been mysteriously handed down from the past. 
(I observe, in passing, that the most prudent and positive 
of sciences demands of those who take it up with the passion 
that leads to discoveries, a certain taste for the marvelous; the 
prodigious and unexpected result obtained by a rigorous 
process of deduction or by a flawless method of experiment 

SWJEDENBORG 
provides the mind with one of the greatest joys it can know.) 
In short, during the eighteenth century we witness the 
spread, we might almost call it the popularization, of all those 
normal or degenerate varieties of knowledge which are en­
gendered by the desire to know more than we can. Adepts 
multiplied; initiates swarmed; charlatans abounded. The 
social and political role of the occult became immense. 
Never have credulity and skepticism been more closely 
associated or, so to speak, more indiscriminately dealt out to 
the human race than at that time. Symbology, which de­
ciphered the universe as though it were a hieroglyphic; 
hermeneutics, which gave Scripture a deeper interpretation 
than its literal meaning; thcosophy, which looked for and 
found immediate illumination; and still more daring and dis­
turbing in their ambitions and their modes of operation, 
magic, alchemy, divination by the stars, by dreams, by conjur­
ing up spirits, existed in many a mind together with the most 
limpid classical culture and the discipline of the exact sciences. 
Such was the mental climate, the intellectual drama, sug­
gested to me by the name of Swedenborg. Its three syllables 
were simply a sort of musical chime, an incantatory formula 
that evoked a fantastic picture of the secret spiritual life of the 
age of Louis XV. I never dreamed that I should one day have 
to probe a little deeper and consider with a wholly new, with 
an almost personal interest, a character who for so long had 
appeared to me only as one of the shades of a society that was 
voluptuously inquisitive about arcane things. 
But the book I have just been reading presents us with a 
very different picture of Swedenborg.* The vague and some­
what Hoffmannesque idea I had formed of him in my igno-
*This study was written as an introduction to the French translation 
of Mr. Martin Lamm's Swedenborg. [p. v.] 

MASHiIiS AND FIiIENDS 
ranee has changed into that of a figure no less enigmatic, but 
clear, intensely interesting, whose intellectual history raises 
a considerable number of problems of the first importance 
in the field of the psychology of cognition. 
I read Mr. Martin Lamm's book with increasing pleasure; 
I saw emerging, chapter by chapter, the extraordinary Ro­
mance of a "Second" Life: I say "romance" because while I 
was reading I was naively aware of the intense desire to know 
ii'lmt happens next, which usually grips us only in works writ­
ten to make us feel the delights of adventure. . . . 
No doubt the adventure it relates is not one of those which 
excite and hold the attention of the great reading public; the 
whole action takes place in the most secret places of the inner 
life, on those indeterminate frontiers where the powers, the 
ambitions, the light and darkness within us are revealed in 
opposition to one another, as they are, on the other hand, to 
the ordinary phenomena of the "external world." But so far 
as my personal taste is concerned, there are no journeys to the 
edge of the real, no magic tales, no epic or dramatic stories 
which can rival the study of that inexhaustible creator and 
universal transformer we call the Mind. 
The Swedenborg who emerges from Mr. Lamm's book is a 
being who has known, suffered, and passed through every 
state or phase of the most intense and complete psychic life, 
since he seems to have had personal experience of the whole 
range of intellectual activity from the most normal to those 
extreme forms which might be described as abnormal if the 
use of this (to my mind) purely negative term did not involve 
too shallow and too simplified a judgment. The analysis of 
Swedcnborg's successive works, which the author has carried 
out in masterly fashion, shows us the evolution of a remark­
able case which every reader, according to his cast of mind, 

SWfcDENBORG 
can usefully thmk over and interpret; and, whether as his­
torian or philosopher, psychiatrist or mystic—or even as a 
poet—can study, discuss, admire, or judge in his own way. 
But whatever use the thoughtful reader of this book may 
make of it, he will undoubtedly be astonished at its abundance 
and clarity. He will observe with respect the wealth of learn­
ing, the amount of work, and the intellectual vigor which 
were required for an examination and exposition of the whole 
of Swedenborg's enormous output. This output, I imagine, 
is not always pleasant or easy to deal with, though here and 
there we come across passages of great poetic beauty, de­
lightful visions from some transcendental childhood. But it 
provides an incomparable document whose interest I should 
not even have suspected without the trouble taken by Mr. 
Lamm to reduce to its essentials an immense amount of ma­
terial and to act as our guide through the Swedenborgian 
Heavens and Hells. In his foreword he modestly describes his 
work as a contribution to the study of the origins of Sweden­
borg's theosophy—a study on which he embarked as a result 
of his researches into the "tradition of emotional mysticism 
which foreshadowed romanticism and later became a part of 
it." But in my opinion he has drawn the portrait of one of the 
strangest characters in the great drama of the human mind. 
That is not all. What gives a book its value in my eyes is the 
number and novelty of the problems it creates, poses, or re­
vives in my own mind. Books that presuppose or produce a 
passive attitude in the reader are not to my taste. I expect the 
books I read to rouse me to comment and reflection, to bring 
on the sort of arrested attention that makes us stare into space, 
opening up fresh perspectives and all at once engaging our 
deepest curiosity, our own particular preoccupations, and 
the immediate sense of our own living presence. 
ι '  5  

M A S T E R S  A N D  F R I E N D S  
I shall therefore try, in a few words, to given an idea of 
some of the dormant questions that Mr. Lamm's book awak­
ened in my mind. 
Swedcnborg appears to me now as the exemplar and subject 
of a most remarkable and complete inner transformation, ac­
complished in several stages over a period of some sixty years. 
This transformation of a psychic life, observed and traced 
through the chronological sequence of his writings, was that 
of a man of very wide culture who could be described at the 
outset as a scholar and philosopher of the type familiar to the 
scholars and philosophers of his time, one who gradually 
changed into a mystic toward his fortieth year. This was 
Swedenborg's first change, and it was prepared for by his early 
education, the mystical outlook of his father, and the en­
vironment in which he spent Iiis childhood. All the same, 
how was he able to shift from a mechanistic view of the 
world, and from habits of mind formed by the practice of 
precise observation in the field of natural science, to a kind of 
meditation that was theological in origin, to a preoccupation 
with questions deriving from Scripture and tradition? How 
did this transfer of values come about? Yet, so far, this had 
amounted to no more than a switching of ordinary attention 
from one object to another; one form of theoretical think­
ing was replaced by another. Now a little later on, a deeper 
and much more unusual change occurred: from the theo­
retical and speculative phase, concerned with arguments 
about the dogma of the Fall or the nature of angels, Sweden-
borg moved forward to another state in which not only ideas 
were in question, but knowledge itself. The theoretical phase 
was followed by a phase in which interior events occurred 
that no longer had the purely transitory and potential char-

S W E D E N B O R C  
acter of ordinary thought, but introduced into consciousncss 
an awareness ofpowers and presences different from those of the 
Self, and set oft from it, not as responses or arguments or 
ordinary intuitions, but as phenomena. We therefore find 
that exposition and dialectic are replaced by narrative and 
description; which means that the conditions and methods of 
intellectual research—doubt, the recognition of a number of 
possibilities, choice, demonstration, etc.—are supplanted by 
an insight that carries immediate and absolute conviction. 
This kind of certainty· has nothing in common with that ex­
pressed by the word "evidence": evidence is, briefly, a re­
action of our mind in wliich we are aware of participating, 
whereas die certainty of the mystics takes the form of the 
awareness of an existence independent of us, the kind of 
awareness we commonly receive from physical objects and 
bodies which give us the impression of being separate from ns. 
That is why the introduction of the powers and presences of 
which I have just spoken may well be regarded as the forma­
tion of a second "reality," or reality of the second order; 
and the possession of this kind of dual vision of things is the 
definition of the mystic state. 
But with Swedenborg the theoretical activity of the mind 
does not entirely disappear with the advent of direct percep­
tion. It resumes its role of formulating and defending intel­
lectual arguments. It was "natural" that a mind so highly en­
dowed and cultivated should apply itself to the task of estab­
lishing, between its two realities, relations as systematic as 
possible, and should lay down a sort of method invested with 
a quasi-scientific form or procedure. That is what Swcden-
borg did in his famous Theory of Correspondences, in which he 
brought together, on the one hand, a number of different 

M A S T E R S  A N D  F R I E N D S  
metaphysical, cabalistic, or magical traditions with his earlier 
rationalism, and 011 the other, the discoveries that came with 
the awakening of his new faculty of cognition. 
This Theory enabled him to draw up a table or dictionary 
in which, for everything in the world of ordinary experience, 
or for every word of the common language, there was a cor­
responding being or thing belonging to the "spiritual" 
world. Even the laws of physics were to be translated into 
"spiritual" terms. 
This brings me to another question suggested by Mr. Lamm's 
book. What are we to understand by the word "spiritual"? 
I might easily have gone on with my reading in the belief 
that I understood it. I have heard the word thousands of 
times. I have used it myself on countless occasions. But I found 
that, in this book, it assumed a force and importance that 
made me pause. 
This is what I said to myself: It is the vice of the ordinary 
philosophical vocabulary that though it must necessarily put 
on the appearances of technical language, it is nonetheless 
necessarily lacking in really precise definitions: for the only 
precise definitions are instrumental (that is to say, reducible to 
acts, such as pointing at an object or carrying out an opera­
tion). It is impossible to convince ourselves that words like 
reason, universe, cause, matter, or idea possess single, uniform, 
unchanging meanings. What usually happens is that every 
attempt to make the meaning of such terms clearer leads to 
introducing under the same name a fresh object of thought 
which differs from the original object in so far as it is new. 
But the vocabulary of mysticism is far more evasive still. 
For here the value attributed to the parts of speech is not 
merely personal, but is the product of exceptional states or 

S WEDENBORG 
moments on die part of the person concerned. Not only is it 
not independent of the person who thinks and speaks, but it 
also depends on his state of mind. Moreover, with the mystics, 
sense perceptions themselves are invested with values no less 
peculiar than those attributed to words. A chance sound or 
(as happened with Jakob Bohme) a reflection on a pewter 
plate are not taken for what they are or confined to the as­
sociations of ideas suggested by them: they have the impact 
of an event, and as though by an actio praesentiae become 
"catalytic," provoking a change of state. 
The subject then enters without difficulty into his "sec­
ond" life, as though the initial phenomenon were a pivotal 
element, a point of contact or junction of two separate 
"universes." 
That is what happens with the principal terms used by the 
mystics: they possess an ordinary, or "dictionary" meaning, 
and another meaning whose reverberations are only per­
ceived in the "interior" regions of a given individual. The 
ambiguity of this twofold function facilitates passage from 
the normal to the privileged state, providing an effortless com­
ing and going between two worlds. This last observation seems 
to me of some importance: it makes it possible for us to avoid 
mistaking mysticism for delirium; delirium confuses the two 
worlds and their values; the Swedenborgian mystic dis­
tinguishes them to the point of regarding the Table of Cor­
respondences between them as his particular problem and 
task; and moreover his everyday activities, his relations with 
people and things, are either perfectly normal or irreproach­
ably adapted. 
In the case with which we are concerned, "spiritual" is a 
key word, a word whose meaning lies in its echoes. It docs not 

M A S T E R S  A N D  F R I E N D S  
guide the mind toward an object of thought, but agitates a 
whole hidden area of the affective and imaginative life. It 
answers the need to assert that the aim and value of what we 
say does not lie in what we see; and still more, that the aim 
and value of what we think docs not lie in what can be 
thought. It is a sign which, in the form of an epithet, prompts 
us to reduce the objccts and events of everyday life and ma­
terial reality to the role of mere symbols; and besides, brings 
home to us the symbolic nature of thought itself. The "spir­
itual" world gives the visible world its true meaning, but is 
itself only the symbolical expression of an inaccessible world 
of essences, in which the distinction between being and know­
ing ceases. 
The one fact of capital importance (for the psychologist) 
which is contained in all this and appears to be worth study 
is the following. Someone has the feeling, even the convic­
tion, that something may be present in his thought other than 
his thought itself. The mystical or spiritual event par ex­
cellence is the introduction, or supposed intervention, in the 
group of attributes belonging to a Self, of quasi phenomena, 
impulsive powers, judgments, etc., which the Self does not 
recognize as its own and which it can only attribute to 
Another . . . in a realm where normally there is no Other— 
the indivisible realm of Oneself. 
No doubt what takes place "in us" is quite often a surprise 
"for us"; sometimes owing to its superior quality, and some­
times, on the contrary, owing to a weakness or deficiency 
that becomes apparent and astonishes us. Wc fmd that we 
are sometimes more and sometimes less than "ourselves." But 
we nevertheless attribute these deviations to some subjective 
or functional cause, more or less as we do when we are sur­
prised by some unexpected physical sensation. A sudden pain 

S W EDENBORG 
transforms our idea of our Self; it is the same with a flash of 
acute pleasure; but we never for a moment imagine that these 
incidents or events do not belong to our substance itself, that 
they are not simply one of its properties seldom called into 
play. The mystic, on the contrary, has a sense of the exterior­
ity*, or rather extraneousness, of the source of the images, 
emotions, words, and impulses which reach him through 
some inner channel. He feels compelled to give them the force 
of real it}'; but as he cannot confuse this reality with everyday 
reality, his life is a journey between two worlds equally real, 
but of very unequal importance. 
At this point there inevitably arises a question I cannot 
undertake to answer, and I am not even sure that I can formu­
late it clearly. 
How can we conceive that a man like Swcdenborg, a highly 
cultivated man—accustomed by serious work of a scientific 
nature, and by reflection in which logical thought and in­
ternal concentration are sustained over prolonged periods, 
to observe the formation of his own thought and to look 
more deeply into himself while at the same time remaining 
conscious of the workings of his mind—could have failed to 
perceive the part played by his own mind in producing the 
images, admonitions, "truths" which came to him as though 
from some secret source? These productions were no doubt 
strange, but not so strange that one could not recognize, on 
reflection, those elements borrowed from the ordinary ex­
perience of life. 
How can we fail to see that whatever takes shape in our 
minds belongs to that group of combinations which can take 
shape within us out of our sensory data and our own psychic 
and emotional freedoms and potentialities? While Swcden­
borg the scientist had certainly regarded the world of sense 

M A S T E R S  A N D  F R I E N D S  
perception as the superficial aspect of the physicomechanical 
world of Descartes or Newton, Swedenborg the mystic re­
garded this superficial sensory world, known by naive in­
tuition, as the expression of a "spiritual" world. If therefore 
this spiritual world is revealed by some supernatural poiver, that 
power chooses to express itself through Swedenhorg by means of 
appearances that would have been suitable for the instruction of an 
ignoramus. . . . 
I have italicized these words, but I can bring home the 
idea they express even more forcibly by the following obser­
vation. The oddest vision of a visionary can always be related 
or traced back to some simple distortion of observable reality 
which yet conforms to the conditions of knowledge, and 
more than that, such a vision can be expressed in the terms of 
ordinary language. But think of the structure of things and 
the nature of the universe as they are presented by contempo­
rary developments in the mathematical and instrumental re­
sources of Science. On the one hand, these results are positive 
since they refer to powers of action; on the other hand, they 
form part of the unintelligible, they explode the venerable 
"categories of the understanding" and undermine the very 
concepts of law and cause—so much so that what used to be 
"reality" has become simply a matter of statistics, while the 
imagination itself, which is the source of all possible "visions," 
and the common language, which is their vehiclc of expression, 
are condemned to impotence, incapable of expressing what 
our instruments and our calculations force us to try to con­
ceive. . . . 
The Swedenborgian Universe, the Spiritual World, the 
Place of Conjugal Love in the Realm of Angels and Spirits is 
therefore "human, all too human," too like our own world, 
while the universes constructed by science (even those con­
ceivable in Swedenborg's time) arc, on the contrary, more 

S W  E D E N B O R G  
and more "inhuman"; we find in them neither weddings, 
nor Ime speeches, nor shining virgins; and they cannot serve 
as symbols tor anything at all, being themselves mere sym­
bols, tensors, operators, matrices, and symbols whose con­
crete meaning escapes us. 
I have spoken ot all this only to emphasize the question that 
seems to me to be paramount in the case with which we are 
concerned: How is a Sirctlcuborgpossible? From what premises 
must we start when we come to study the coexistence in the 
same person of a scientist and engineer, a high official, a man 
at once wise in practical affairs and learned in everything, who 
yet had the characteristics of an Illuminatus, who did not hesi­
tate to write and publish an account of his visions, and who 
claimed to have been visited by the inhabitants of another 
world, to be in touch with them, and to have spent part of 
his life in their mysterious company? 
I will go further still: it is not sufficient to speak of co­
existence; we must also note a certain degree of collaboration, 
the most remarkable and most astonishing example of winch 
is provided by the treatise on representations and corre­
spondences which is to be found in the Arcana Coelcstia. 
I find it difficult to believe that this work was not con­
ceived and written by an author who was much more system­
atic and more master of himself than inspired or lost in con­
templation. The concern for orderly arrangement, the will 
to careful definition, the well-prepared introduction of new 
ideas, all these are much in evidence and must have called for 
a considerable outlay of logic, which is in strange contrast 
with the content of the reveries. But what is still more extraor­
dinary is that part of the treatise in which Swedenborg de­
velops the correspondences of organs and limbs; he displays, 
in this section, a remarkably exact and detailed knowledge of 

MASTERS AND FRIENDS 
anatomy, and he expresses himsclflike a man who has thought 
deeply about the problems of physiology; a knowledge and a 
power of thought which he uses to make every part of the 
human organism correspond to the strangest "spiritual" 
meanings, evaluations, or creations. This mixture of knowl­
edge, method, and dream, of perfect and constant lucidity of 
mind with imaginary relationships, is so difficult to accept 
that we should sometimes feel tempted to suspect the good 
faith of our visionary if, on the one hand, the considerable 
expenditure of labor, the duration and continuity of his 
effort, and on the other hand, the disinterestedness, the nobil­
ity of character we recognize in him, did not make the 
hypothesis of trickery, of a vast lie in the grand manner, 
highly improbable. 
Swedenborg himself replied to the anxious questionings of 
his own faith in Iiis personal illumination: Haec vera sunt quia 
sigmtin hahco. 
This sign was sufficient to dispel all inner resistance and to 
maintain the close union between Swedenborg the rationalist, 
the physicist, the practical and sociable man, and Swcdenborg 
the familiar companion of spirits and confidant of angels. 
These sublime and marvelous relationships did not prevent 
him from enjoying an activc social life; he maintained them 
as he did the ordinary intercourse of a cultivated man with 
his own contemporaries, just as easily and as continuously as 
a person who frequents several "worlds" (such as that of his 
pleasures and that of his business) maintains and interlinks 
their different observances. 
The nature of the sign is not explained. On the assumption 
that Swcdenborg's reply was not a mere admission of de­
feat, we may attribute his silence to the fear of seeing the 
foundation of his inner life challenged, or else to the fear that 

SWEDFNBORG 
the sign might lose its virtue if the secret were revealed. But 
the difficulty ot describing it may also have forced him to re­
main silent. It is well known that what makes our mind fix 
on a certainty is indefinable. I do not propose therefore to try 
to discover this one, but I shall nevertheless put forward a 
certain analogy as a mere suggestion. 
I am thinking of the kind ot power and consistency which 
affirms or confirms in us an opinion or a resolution that com­
pletely answers the needs of our sensibility. If we receive from 
an external source something we have intensely desired, it 
seems to us that the tiling which satisfies us so completely is 
in a sense the product of our desire. We feel that a certain 
idea, put to us by someone else, delights us as though the 
desire to be delighted had formed the idea for itself; we find 
that a work has been so ideally made for us that it is as though 
we had done it ourselves; and we even say the same thing of 
a person; and this immediate and invincible feeling is for us 
an indubitable sign, because we cannot doubt that what 
pleases us does please us, or believe that what satisfies us so 
completely leaves room for the slightest hesitation. 
By what "sign" does an artist know that, at a given 
moment, he has hit on his "truth"—by what "sign" does he 
sense at once the necessity and the pleasure (both of them in­
creasing) of his creative act? 
Swedenborg's sign was perhaps no more than the sense of 
energy, of blessed fulfillment and well-being that he always 
experienced when he let himself conjure up and organize his 
spiritual world, and the certainty of his creative joy could no 
doubt sufficc to put off his doubts indefinitely and to lull his 
critical sense. 
Nevertheless, in the Swedenborg case we arc faced, it seems, 
with a number of supposed facts that cannot be reduced cither 

M A S T E R S  A N D  F R I f c N D S  
to mystic vision or to the admitted existence of a certain sign. 
The fundamental metamorphosis of his thought, which 
had been entirely scicntiftc and metaphysico-theological, 
into an intuitive "second reality" and a transcendental doc­
trine, came about by degrees, and the degrees were marked 
by "subjective" events which were, strictly speaking, hal­
lucinatory, and of which the scene at the London inn was 
completely characteristic. 
Must we accept the account of them which the theoso-
phist himself gives, and which of necessity only he could give, 
as "accurate"? The importance of the question I am asking 
will soon be apparent. The accuracy I mean is not something 
that can depend on Swedcnborg's good faith. We can take 
it for granted that this was absolute. But the most transparent­
ly honest of men, when it comes to telling us what he has seen 
and, above all, what he has seen in a realm to which he alone 
has access, inevitably alters the nature of his own sincerity 
simply by using the common language, which compounds the 
first and no less inevitable alteration due to the act of direct 
memory by adding a second which results from dividing 
that memory into words and combining them according to 
the forms and laws of syntax. In the sphere of ordinary inter­
course such alterations are usually negligible and in any case 
are rectified by common experience: the world of common 
experience serves to verify our means of communication. 
But every description of our individual perceptions radically 
destroys that very element in those perceptions which it 
would be most valuable to know and to analyze. 
That is why I am very far from putting confidence in the 
pretended analysis of dreams which is so fashionable at the 
present time and in which we seem to have forged a new Key 
to Dreams. 

SW EDENBORG 
The dream is a hypothesis, since we never know it except 
as a memory, and that memory is ot necessity a fabrication. 
We construct and refashion our dreams; we describe a dream 
to ourselves; we give it a meaning; it becomes tellable: a story, 
with scenes and a cast of characters, and in the scenario of 
memory the part played by awakening and recognition is for 
us indistinguishable from the part that restores, perhaps, some­
thing of the forever lost original. But m addition to this, we 
may take it into our heads to relate our dreams; the listener in 
turn translates the story into his own system of images: if he 
prides himself on the study of dreams he will argue in terms of 
what he himself imagines, which is the transmutation of a 
transmutation. 
The translation of a translation may well preserve some­
thing, but not that something which is nameless. What cannot 
be named is precisely the thing which it would be important 
to grasp and which would give us some idea of what con­
sciousness in sleep may be, the production and substitution 
of quasi phenomena, the perpetual coming to birth of a 
mental life which is essentially instantaneous, unrepeatable. 
But to base speculation on the account of a dream is to use the 
product of a waking action which deprives the hypothetical 
original of its real substance, turning it into an abstract simu­
lacrum—just as a statue no longer represents the intimate 
creative relationship that existed between the form and the 
living substance of the model. In brief: we are basing our argu­
ments on the schema of an event that has totally disappeared, 
and interpreting it; but a schcma is the result of a number of 
different acts, and these acts are acts performed in the waking 
state: we have to be "awake" in order to express ourselves. 
But suppose, on the contrary, that we deliberately attempt 
to modify the perceptions and representations wc produce in 

MASTIiRS AND FRIENDS 
the waking state in such a way as to diminish their meaning, 
to exhaust their transitory and conventional value (as happens 
when we repeat a word until it loses its meaning): we shall see a 
few characteristic signs of a state of which the dream state 
would be the final phase. We observe it quite well, for example, 
when we feel our mind being overtaken by sleep: that we are 
stumbling, so to speak, between two worlds, the stronger of 
wliich gradually dissolves into the weaker. . . . At such 
moments, we glimpse the mode of transformation of con­
sciousness wliich will dominate the world of dreams, and 
admitting (on a purely hypothetical basis) that this world is 
distinguishable from the waking world by the way in which 
every impression that affects us develops, we shall have some 
idea of what may transpire under the sway of sleep when our 
remaining powers of feeling are disturbed by organic in­
cidents or by external events that are insufficient to produce 
a total change in our state—an awakening. 
Similar conditions must, in my opinion, be present in 
"visions." The ways in which appearances are transformed 
in them must closely resemble those in dreams. That is what 
I believe I have established by a detailed study of a few ac­
counts of visionaries, chosen from among the most naive 
cases. It is, indeed, of some importance that the evidence 
should be taken from someone as uneducated and as un­
imaginative as possible, in order that the creation of images 
should be as free as possible from secondary intentions and 
corrections. 
In the case of Swedenborg, the conditions are quite the 
opposite and very unfavorable to any examination of the 
degree of accuracy of the account he gives in his writings. All 
the same, certain details of the celebrated London vision seem 
to me to be of the kind that "are not invented," that is to say, 

SW EDENBORG 
that do not seem able to be desired, to be preceded by an 
intention, or to respond to some conscious need. . . . 
I have indulged in reflections of which only this should be re­
tained: that I should never finish if I pursued all the questions 
which Mr. Martin Lamm's book has suggested to me. 
I began reading it widiout suspecting that I was penetrat­
ing into an enchanted forest where every step roused sudden 
flights of thought, and everywhere were crossroads of radiant 
hypotheses, psychological ambushes, and echoes; where every 
glance opened up perspectives bristling with enigmas, where 
the hunting intellect is alerted, loses the trail, wanders, then 
picks it up again. . . . But diis docs not mean that one is in 
any sense wasting one's time. I like the hunt for its own sake, 
and there are few hunts more gripping and more varied than 
the quest for the Swedenborg Mystery. 

