Piotr Bukowski
“Harmony and Openness to Many Levels
of Reality”– the Thought of
Emanuel Swedenborg in the Writings of
Czeslaw Milosz
Abstract: One of the most important features of Czeslaw Milosz’s (1911–2004)
literary output is his dialogue with religious thinkers. The Swedish eighteenth-
century theologian and mystic Emanuel Swedenborg is among his important
“interlocutors”. The present paper aims at discussing the key motifs in Milosz’s
reflections on Swedenborg’s theology as well as defining the specific character of
his interpretation of the thought of the author of Arcana Coelestia. In Sweden-
borg’s work, Milosz looked primarily for a remedy for the disease of modernity,
whose most severe symptom is the disintegration of the world, which became
subjected to the rule of William Blake’s Urizen. For Milosz the modern man is
homeless within the inhuman space of an infinite universe which cannot be
grasped by imagination. Swedenborg, on the other hand, restores the vertical
points of reference, Heaven and Hell, and at the same time places them within the
human soul. The restitution of spatial points of reference is of immense signifi-
cance to Milosz, who emphasizes that Swedenborg’s system was aimed at liberat-
ing imagination, fettered by the scientific world-view. While reading Swedenborg,
Milosz remarked also that the cause of Christianity’s weakness lay in its loss of
original integrity and unity, and in its theology of marital love characterized by
fear and escapism. The source of Milosz’s fascination with Emanuel Sweden-
borg’s thought has to do, among other things, with the positive and integrating
force of Swedenborg’s thought, the idea of uniting man with God, matter with
spirit, faith with reason, and language with being.
Keywords: Milosz, Religious Thought, Modernity, Unification, Disintegration
Prof. Dr. Piotr Bukowski: os. Akademickie 4/24, PL-31-866 Krakow/Poland,
E-Mail: pbuk@kki.net.pl
Swedenborg’s thought has been the source of inspiration for many renowned
Polish authors of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. It influenced both
the leading Polish Romantic poets and modernist writers. The most extensive,
significant and interesting contribution to the Polish reception of Sweden-
DOI 10.1515/arcadia-2012-0022
Arcadia 2012; 47(2): 328–344

borg’s work was made by Czeslaw Milosz (1911–2004) – a poet, prose writer,
historian of literature and translator as well as Nobel Prize Laureate in Literature.
Milosz was, as it seems today, the last great metaphysical poet of the past
century.
In this article, I would like to discuss the key motifs in Czeslaw Milosz’s
reflections on the theology of Swedenborg as well as to define the specific
character of his interpretation of the thought of the Swedish mystic.
Spiritual Leaders
At the beginning of the road that led Milosz to Swedenborg’s thought we find the
poet’s family home – namely in the very heart of Lithuania, in Szetejnie on the
Niewiaża river. He left Szetejnie for ever in 1940 when the Red Army entered and
overran Lithuania. In Native Realm, Milosz writes that when he reached maturity
he began to take an interest in religion and the issue of religious experience. He
read St. Augustine and William James and gradually came to the conclusion that
reality is “much deeper” and much more multidimensional than his earlier con-
ceptions of it. When, later on in life, Milosz was looking for the other dimensions
of reality, he remained “faithful to his mother” who was a person of profound faith
“and loyal to Lithuania – a Lithuania haunted by the ghost of Swedenborg”
(Milosz, Native Realm 87).
Milosz’s first important spiritual guide in the world of poetry and mysticism
was Adam Mickiewicz (1798–1855), the most eminent representative of Polish
Romanticism. He was close to Milosz for a number of reasons: as a countryman, a
Lithuanian who was rooted in the same culture, in the “’superstitions’ of his local
land” (Miłosz, O twórcach 115), and also as an author who was deeply immersed
in religious thinking and who “had an strong inclination (…) to mystical subtle-
ties” (Pigoń 160). Milosz viewed Mickiewicz not so much as a national bard, but
rather as a “hermetic”, a “secret and mysterious” poet. (Miłosz, O podróżach 16)
The hermetic poet had his own masters: he mentioned, among others, Sweden-
borg, alongside Jacob Böhme and Louis Claude Saint-Martin, the modern “pro-
phets”. He was also the author of the drama Forefathers’ Eve, in the second part of
which, critics noticed certain “traces of Swedenborg’s thought”. In 1921, Stanis-
law Pigon, an eminent scholar of Polish literature, wrote that “the metaphysical
foundation of this poem is to be found in (…) a belief in the interaction between
spirits and man, expressed in an almost identical way as in Swedenborg’s
thought; a convergence that could not but make one wonder” (Pigoń 149).
Although Milosz did not think later that Mickiewicz had received any significant
impulses from Swedenborg’s mysticism, (he pointed instead to the influence of
“Harmony and Openness to Many Levels of Reality”
329

Saint-Martin) the issue remained, nonetheless, a subject of considerable interest
to him.
Milosz’s reading of Mickiewicz’s texts had placed him directly onto a course
of thinking that transformed him into a follower of Swedenborg’s thought when
he emigrated. It had led him to a thinking that was open to images of man and the
world that were different from the ones that science had been offering us ever
since the eighteenth century. They were images steeped in metaphysics.
Most probably in 1951, having read George R. Noyes’ study on the similarities
between Mickiewicz and the British Baroque poet Thomas Traherne, Milosz
became convinced that the epic work of the Polish bard entitled Pan Tadeusz had
a metaphysical dimension. (Fiut 68) Milosz developed the thought that it is a
“camouflaged work” in a “metaphysical guise” in his book The Land of Ulro. It is
here, pointing to the recurring images of the “order of existence” as reflections of
“pure being”, that Milosz claims that “Pan Tadeusz belongs to the same body of
metaphysical and religious poetry as his ‘Roman lyrics’ and Forefather’s Eve, Part
III” (Milosz, The Land of Ulro 123). Mickiewicz’s Forefather’s Eve seems to Milosz in
this context to be a great Christian drama, enacted between heaven and hell,
between good and evil (124). In my opinion, this drama opened for the author of
The Land of Ulro a space of eschatological imagination that henceforth became
the object of his fascination. A little later, Czeslaw Milosz became acquainted with
the mystical and hermetic work of Oscar Milosz, which he subsequently translated
and propagated throughout the world.
Oscar Vladislas de Lubicz Milosz (1877–1939), a French-Polish-Lithuanian
poet, playwright and philosopher was Czeslaw Milosz’s relative who supported
the young poet (both materially and intellectually); he was also the one who had
ultimately “given the novice poet the first clue as to the work of Emanuel Sweden-
borg” (Zawada 56).1 Czeslaw had first come into contact with the mystical and
hermetic work of Oscar Milosz at the age of thirteen. He had first met his relative in
person during his stay in France in 1931. He recalled years later: “my attitude to
Oscar Milosz had in fact the character of a relationship between pupil and his
master” (Miłosz, Rozmowy 25). In the last published collection of his poems,
entitled Second Space, Milosz devotes a long poem entitled “Apprentice” to his
master, in which he recalls his “years of study” under the supervision of Oscar
Milosz who specialized in literature dedicated to the contemplation of time and
eternity.
1 “Thanks to him [Oscar Milosz – P.B.] I discovered Swedenborg, who in turn led me to William
Blake” – said Milosz in one of his late interviews (Milosz, Conversations 186).
330
Piotr Bukowski

So I read “The Letter to Storge” like a revelation,
Learning that time and space had a beginning,
That they appeared in a flash together with so-called matter,
Just as medieval scholars from Oxford to Chartres had guessed,
Through a transmutation of divine light into light merely physical.
How much it changed my poems! They were dedicated to the contemplation of time
Behind which, since that moment, eternity transpired.
(Miłosz, Apprentice 83)
The author of The Letter to Storge, Oscar Milosz, regarded the revival of Christian
metaphysics and a vision of future Christianity to be his mission. He was immen-
sely interested in the writings of Swedenborg and he derived his inspiration from
them. He read Swedenborg’s works avidly and passionately, making interesting
comments in the margins in French, English and Polish.2 It was during his stay in
France, after reading Stanley Guise’s doctoral dissertation on the mysticism of the
author of Ars Magna, that Czeslaw Milosz discovered the scope and depth of Oscar
Milosz’s fascination with Swedenborg. He writes about this in his poem “Appren-
tice”:
His treatise reproduces faithfully many notes
That Oscar scrawled in the margins of an English edition of Swedenborg.
The notes are in French, English,
And, in more emotional moods, Polish.
For instance when he found what seemed a description of his own initiation,
He exclaimed, “In the name of the Father, the Son and the Holy
Spirit. Amen. The night between the 14th and 15th December 1914.”
He also comments in Polish on the spiritual sun in Swedenborg:
“My sun moved from my brow up to the summit of my cranium,
So it was probably the angel of Jehovah.”
(Milosz, Apprentice 85)
Oscar Milosz’s remarks and comments had subsequently become important inter-
pretative guidelines for Czeslaw, when he was discovering Swedenborg’s works.3
In this context, it should be mentioned that Oscar Milosz’s famous metaphysical
2 On Swedenborg’s influence on Oscar Milosz see: Stanley Guise, “Milosz et Swedenborg” and
Jean Bellemin-Noël, “Milosz lecteur de Swedenborg”.
3 In a note to “Apprentice” Milosz explains: “The majority of the notes were made in the margins
of Vera Christiana Religio, which book is divided into numbered paragraphs. Some notes come
from the margins of another book, Conjugal Love. Though he treated Swedenborg as a celestial
“Harmony and Openness to Many Levels of Reality”
331

treatise Ars Magna played a similar role: the author alludes here directly to De
Amore Conjugiali by the “good Swedenborg”, who writes about the garden of love
Adramandoni. Ars Magna (which Milosz had already got to know in his twenties),
introduced Milosz to the sphere of metaphysical speculations on the “arcanum of
marriage”; it “goes to the very heart of being, which is erotic” (Milosz, The Land of
Ulro, 203). Undoubtedly, becoming acquainted with this work had encouraged
the poet to carry out a careful and in-depth analysis of Swedenborg’s De Amore
Conjugiali and to meditate on “angelic sexuality”.
Czeslaw Milosz had learnt a great deal from Oscar: it was thanks to the latter
that he acquired a deeper understanding of the books of the Bible (the “Song of
Songs” in particular) and learnt that “a catastrophe was imminent”; he also came
to believe that the deeper causes of the spiritual crisis of humankind were rooted
in the erroneous direction taken by science in the Eighteenth Century. In Oskar
Milosz’s metaphysical poems, Czeslaw discovered inspiring reflections on the
topic of spatial imagination and on the law of analogy that is binding the entire
universe. This “general orientation” had marked out Milosz’s spiritual horizons.
Thanks to his relative, Milosz became “an attentive reader of Swedenborg, inter-
preting him not, it is true, as was common in the Romantic era” (Milosz, The Noble
Price Lecture).4
Since the 1930s, Milosz came under the strong influence of Stanislaw Brzo-
zowski (1878–1911), a writer, philosopher, and literary critic – one of the most
eminent Polish theoreticians of modernism. It was from the latter that Milosz had
borrowed the concept of a “great Romantic crisis of the European culture” at the
turn of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, which is the key to the under-
standing of The Land of Ulro and the theory of “another heaven, another earth”
contained in it. Milosz consistently emphasized Brzozowski’s anthropocentrism,
which juxtaposed man (history) and nature (see Milosz, The History of Polish
Literature 378). Stanislaw Brzozowski mentioned that in Swedenborg’s theology
“heaven has the shape of a man” (Miłosz, Człowiek wśród skorpionów 62). As Milosz
emphasizes, it aroused a “genuine dread among his progressive readers”, who
were expecting a negative attitude to all kinds of Mysticism from a philosopher
who sympathized with Marx. Brzozowski boldly reached out to Christian thought,
in which he traced various motifs leading to the central idea of “man’s diviniza-
tion”, an idea that also constituted one of the fundamental idea in Swedenborg’s
theology. In spite of his distrust of anything that is “supernormal” in the Swedish
guide, he treats his descriptions of Heaven and Hell somewhat critically, seeing in them an
attempt to get out of the spaces that our minds so incessantly multiply and divide.” (85)
4 On Czeslaw Milosz’s relation to Oscar Milosz cf. Fiut, W stronę Miłosza 113–126.
332
Piotr Bukowski

mystic, Brzozowski appreciated him as an outstanding thinker and as an anti-
naturalist who attempted to prove that the superhuman creates and defines man.
He expressed this, above all, in his Diary (edited in 1913), in which Milosz later
discovered extremely poignant comments on Swedenborg and Blake (Brzozowski,
Pamiętnik 96 and 142)5 Milosz perceived Brzozowski as an “eschatological symbo-
list”, regarding him in his The Land of Ulro as a spiritual successor of Swedenborg
like Vladimir Solovyov and Oscar Milosz. (Milosz, The Land of Ulro 243)
In sum, Czeslaw Milosz grew up in an environment and cultural entourage
that made him particularly sensitive to the “different dimension” of reality (Mi-
losz, Native Realm 86), as well as to religion and mysticism with which it was
associated.
Milosz had first come into contact with the teachings of Swedenborg through
the works of Adam Mickiewicz, whereas his first “teachers” of Swedenborgianism
were the young poet’s spiritual leaders, Oscar Milosz and Stanislaw Brzozowski.6
Thanks to these authors, Milosz not only discovered the works of Swedenborg,
but also received important interpretative guidelines. It was they who channelled
Milosz’s literary interests and directed him towards Swedenborg’s writings, at the
same time pointing out to him such motifs as the anthropocentric conception of
God-man, the idea of a contemporary prophet who single-handedly proclaims
truths that are “no longer in fashion”, the problem of science and religion “part-
ing ways”, and a vision of man’s “inner space”.
The question remains, when had Czeslaw Milosz himself reached out for
Swedenborg’s works and what specific works were they? Unfortunately, we have
little knowledge of this. As we can learn from Milosz’s published works and
letters, the author had intensively read Swedenborg during his stay in France in
1959 (see Merton, Milosz 59), and then in English in the 1960s and 70s, during his
stay in the USA: “my years spent in America, where Swedenborg readers and
admirers outnumber those in other countries, have given me easier access to the
Royal Counselor’s work and to the secondary literature about him” (Milosz, The
Land of Ulro 136). It seems that during this time he had studied most thoroughly:
Heaven and Hell, The True Christian Religion and Conjugial Love.
5 Brzozowski concluded in his Diary: „Swedenborg says: woe to anybody who puts Nature at the
beginning. (…) The superhuman creates man and defines him. All Nature is held by the super-
natural” (cited in Milosz, The One-Man Army: Stanisław Brzozowski 251).
6 On Milosz’s way to getting familiar with Swedenborg’s ideas cf. Ciesielski, Czesław Miłosz i
Emanuel Swedenborg 89–93.
“Harmony and Openness to Many Levels of Reality”
333

Great Depression and the Birth of the Prophet
In Ars Magna, Oscar Milosz repeats with a mimetic gesture the initiation and
ecstasy of Swedenborg: “On the fourteenth of December, nineteen hundred and
fourteen, at about eleven o’clock in the evening, in the state of perfect wakeful-
ness, having said my prayer and meditated my daily verse from the Bible, I
suddenly felt, without the slightest amazement, a completely unexpected change
occurring in my whole body. At first I noticed that I was granted a power, until that
day unknown, of soaring freely through space (…)” (Oscar Milosz 244). Such is the
birth of the prophet who will throw down the gauntlet to his times, to the era of a
science “deprived of its median vision” (249). The era of darkness, in which there
appears the leaven of the New Life.
Czeslaw Milosz is fascinated with this prophetic discourse. Prophets such as
Swedenborg, Blake and Oscar Milosz – are, as he puts it, the “enemies of the Land
of Ulro”; they announce a “new era of reborn imagination”. They were mobilized
by the frightening vision of the triumph of the “Church of Science” and its
“mechanistic orthodoxy” (Miłosz, Rok myśliwego 95). What is the essence of the
threat? What is the space of the Land of Ulro and what is its alternative?
“The name Ulro is from Blake”, writes Milosz. “It denotes that realm of
spiritual pain such as is borne and must be borne by the crippled man.” (Milosz,
The Land of Ulro 32) According to the mythology of William Blake, Ulro is the earth
exclusively in its material shape; it is the earth of Newton. For Blake, Newton’s
universe and its space are dead. From Blake’s perspective, “deism, materialism,
and ‘natural religion’ deprive man of the ability to perceive the ‘Infinite in all
things’; they are conducive to an erroneous vision of the world and they inculcate
the ethics of egoism” (Tomkowski 56). Urizen, who symbolizes the pride of a
rebellious mind, is the lord of the Land of Ulro. In his work The Land of Ulro Milosz
paints the intellectual landscape of the “age of Urizen” in an extremely suggestive
way: “Nature, perceived as a system of mathematical relations, had begun to
usurp God in the minds of the educated. The universe was construed as an infinity
of absolute, void, Newtonian space (…), whose rotating planets and planetary
systems overwhelmed the mind by their infinite profusion: thus was man’s dethro-
nement, a process begun with the death of the geocentric theory, made complete.”
(Milosz, The Land of Ulro 140)
In Milosz’s poem entitled “Oeconomia Divina” (1973; from The Rising of the
Sun), the “crisis of the foundations” that turns the Earth into the kingdom of
Urizen is thought out to the very end; God abandons man without leaving him any
signs and prophets, and allows him to take unlimited advantage of free will. He
grants man complete sovereignty:
334
Piotr Bukowski

I did not expect to live in such an unusual moment.
When the God of thunders and of rocky heights,
The Lord of hosts, Kyrios Sabaoth,
Would humble people to the quick,
Allowing them to act whatever way they wished,
Leaving to them conclusions, saying nothing.
(Miłosz, Oeconomia Divina 225)
In this situation, reality is, as it were, running short of its binding material; it
ceases to be itself; it becomes alienated, elusive and spectral.
Roads on concrete pillars, cities of glass and cast iron,
Airfields larger than tribal dominions
Suddenly ran short of their essence and disintegrated.
Not in a dream but really, for, subtracted from themselves,
They could only hold on as do things which should not last.
Out of trees, field stones, even lemons on the table,
Materiality escaped and their spectrum
Proved to be a void, a haze on a film.
Dispossessed of its objects, space was swarming. (225)
And thus the world loses its justification; when separated from the Universal
Existence, it freezes in a quasi-existence. (See Prokop 236) Why? Because in this
conception, the objects perceived in a sensual way, do not send us – to use the
language of Milosz, a reader of Swedenborg – to the “spiritual reality” and to
values. Physical reality is “meaningful” – as Milosz will say in the context of
Swedenborgian eschatology. (Miłosz, O piekle 99) If we deprive it of its meaning,
it will become alien and unintelligible to us (“Letters in books turned silver-pale,
wobbled, and faded”); therefore, it will become inhuman.
In The Land of Ulro, Milosz talks about the heroes of the Great Breakthrough,
about the prophets of another reality, “about those who looked for a solution at
the price of insanity”, about those who “dreamt about a completely new direc-
tion” in the development of humanity. (Miłosz, Rozmowy 241) Swedenborg, Blake,
Mickiewicz, Oscar Milosz affirmed spiritual energy and turned against the one-
dimensional world of formulas.
How does the history of the “Swedish prophet” Swedenborg present itself in
this context? In his essay entitled “Swedenborg and Dostoevsky” written out into
two voices, Milosz writes that Swedenborg, an eminent scholar operating in an
era of progressing secularization of minds, “fell into a severe inner crisis when he
suddenly realized where science and learning lead man: namely, to the weaken-
ing of the Christian religion and, subsequently, to the abolition of all values”.
“From this inner crisis”, Milosz emphasizes, “there emerged a new Swedenborg, a
visionary and theologian” (Miłosz, Swedenborg i Dostojewski, 383). Having experi-
“Harmony and Openness to Many Levels of Reality”
335

enced a mystical enlightenment, he announces a “new vision of the world”, in
which the fundamental postulate is “the recovery of a broken unity of the internal
and the external, spirit and matter, religion and science” (Milosz, Introduction 32).
This unity disintegrated as science rejected inner experience, spirit and religion,
establishing its absolute hegemony.
Uniting the World
In Emanuel Swedenborg’s work, Milosz looked primarily for a recipe for the
disease of modernity, whose most severe symptom is the disintegration of the
world, which, having experienced inner conflict, became subjected to the rule of
Urizen. That is why, when writing about Swedenborg, Milosz continues to revert
to the fundamental questions in this context:
–
How to turn back from the road to perdition? How to free oneself from the
Land of Ulro and regain one’s freedom and dignity?
–
How to restore the marred unity of the interior and exterior whose conse-
quence is man’s inner split?
–
How to save the Christian faith?
The answer to the first two questions is contained in Swedenborg’s fundamental
credo: one should recognize the humanity of God. In an excellent comparative
essay entitled “On Hell”, Milosz follows the trail which leads to this mystery.
Swedenborg “felt”, as Milosz puts it, “called upon to embark on a mission that
was necessary at the critical moment, i.e., when due to scientific discoveries the
Earth had lost its central place in the universe; this consequently led to the loss of
this highest dignity granted to man” (Miłosz, O piekle 100). While showing us in
what way we can recover this dignity, Swedenborg follows the trail which had
once been blazed by medieval theologians. Milosz reconstructs his train of think-
ing in the following way:
There are two works of God that are accessible to our senses: the universe and Holy
Scripture, which is the Revelation written down by people with divine inspiration. Let us
note the consequences of this fact, namely: human language and writing are more important
than myriads of stars and planets. For the great mystery of existence that Swedenborg
reveals can be summed up in the following sentence: Our Heavenly Father is a Human. […]
The eternal and prelegal humanity of God signifies that man’s chief distinguishing feature,
namely his speech, acquires an eternal, pre-legal significance. Holy Scripture is present both
in heaven and upon earth; each of His words is aimed in advance at all generations of the
human family. (Miłosz, O piekle 100)
336
Piotr Bukowski

God-Human speaks to people through the agency of Holy Scripture, whereas our
task consists in reaching out to the sense of His words. Therefore, we have to
undertake the hermeneutic effort so that with the help of the Spirit of Truth we
would be able to understand what the Holy Scripture signifies, what truths are
concealed behind the words recorded in the Holy writ. What is of crucial signifi-
cance here is the reading and anthropocentric understanding of the ordered
cosmos. So if, as Milosz puts it, “The Creator is a Human (God-Human), and
Heaven and Hell have the shape of man (Good Cosmic Human and Evil Cosmic
Human), and if speech, which is a human attribute, was inscribed in advance in
the order of cosmos through a system of correspondence, then man’s dignity has
been restored. This dignity is not ensured to us by reason itself, as the latter tends
to identify God with Nature […]. Man is elevated by his ability to read and commu-
nicate symbols” (100–101). His speech “is derived from the very core of existence”
(101). It seems therefore that the road of escape from the Land of Ulro is the road of
hermeneutics, the road of understanding the universe as the universe of God-
Human.
What does this elevation of man mean in the context of a crisis of his
subjectivity? What is it its significance in relation to his inner homelessness
associated with a lack of a “reference frame and orientation”? It is homelessness
within the inhuman space of an infinite universe which cannot be grasped by
one’s imagination. It is about this existential feeling of being lost, experienced by
modern man and about the Swedeborgian remedy that Milosz writes in his The
Land of Ulro: ”The eighteenth-century cosmos: myriads of planets spinning
around in an infinite space. Easily said; but let us try to imagine to locate our home
in that infinity. Swedenborg understood that the only refuge lay in assigning a
central place to the Divine Human. And what distinguished the human if not the
mind and imagination – the inner life of a subject, in other words – whence that
other world, the subjective, which was not only parallel to the objective world but
was its reason and purpose. Here we have a vague foreglimpse of Hegel and the
makings of an anti-Hegelian vaccine.” (Milosz, The Land of Ulro 153)
As the human mind needs “a reference frame and orientation”, Swedenborg
restores the vertical points of reference, Heaven and Hell, and at the same time
interiorizes them. “His descriptions of journeys through Heaven and Hell”, writes
Milosz, “constitute a discovery of the dimension of human interioritas, of his
interior” (Miłosz, Co doradzał Mr. Blake?, 50). Hell, likewise Heaven “are trans-
ferred entirely into man’s interior” (Miłosz, O piekle, 99). As we can read in The
Land of Ulro, the inner space is “purely subjective creation”, so “it follows that the
number of heavens and hells is legion” (Milosz, The Land of Ulro, 145). They are
creations which constitute a function of the human will (love), which is either
directed towards God, or towards its proprium. Yet these spaces are attuned with
“Harmony and Openness to Many Levels of Reality”
337

each other as they all refer to the central Spiritual Sun which corresponds to our
“material” sun. What is more, as Milosz emphasizes, they are all real in a specific
way. And so both Heaven and Hell remain real precisely because they are woven
from meanings and references as well as correspondences. (Miłosz, O piekle, 99)
They create man’s “inner landscape”, which is governed by the axiological princi-
ples of sympathy and antipathy. Spiritual reality materializes itself in the world of
correspondences, and matter becomes infused with spirituality (“physical rea-
lity”). In this way, a unity of the interior and exterior is attained.
This restitution of spatial points of reference is of immense significance to
Milosz, who emphasizes that “Swedenborg’s system was aimed at liberating the
imagination already fettered by the ‘scientific world-view’” (Milosz, The Land of
Ulro 223–224). The latter endows man with freedom and at the same time it opens
before him a door to “the second space”. This opening of the gates to “the second
space” has a soteriological dimension in Milosz’s conception; it opens a way that
leads out of the darkness of the Egyptian slavery; it is a way to salvation. Let us at
this point recall the first part of Milosz’s late poem entitled “Second Space”:
How spacious the heavenly halls are!
Approach them on aerial stairs.
Above white clouds, there are the hanging gardens of paradise.
A soul tears itself from the body and soars.
It remembers that there is an up.
And there is a down.
Have we really lost faith in that other space?
Have they vanished forever, both Heaven and Hell?
(Milosz, Second Space 3)
When commenting on this poem in his conversation with Ireneusz Kania, Milosz
says: “You know, the title ‘Second Space’ constitutes an expression of regret that
we have lost the second space, i.e. that the images of paradise and hell have
ceased to exist. In Swedenborg’s writings, however, we have an extremely power-
ful vision and vivid expression of them” (Miłosz, Kania 8).
In another poem from the same collection, entitled “Treatise on Theology”,
entering into Swedenborgian eschatological space equals opening oneself up to
the truth about oneself.
Christians lost their faith in the severe Judge
Who sentences sinners to kettles of boiling tar.
I profited from my reading of Swedenborg.
338
Piotr Bukowski

In whom no verdict falls from above,
And the souls of the dead are drawn, magnet-like, to similar souls.
By their karma, as the Buddhists say.
I feel myself so much veiled evil
That I do not exclude myself from the possibility of hell.
I would probably be the hell of artists.
I.e., people who valued the perfection of their oeuvre
Over their duties as husbands, fathers, brothers, citizens.
(Milosz, Treatise on Theology 61)
An image of particular judgement appears here, which is perceived through the
angle of the Swedenborgian conception of “ruling love”. “It is man’s ruling love
that awaits him after death, and this is in no way changed to eternity”, wrote the
author of De Coelo et ejus Mirabilibus. (Swedenborg § 477) While generating
innumerable projections, this love becomes transformed into a “permanent state”,
sums up, as it were, the revealed will of man. According to Swedenborg, when
man identifies himself fully with his ruling love, he begins to experience a strong
attraction to the society within which his love is to be found. He begins to feel an
attraction to society which evaluates according to this very love: that is how
heavens and hells are born. That is also how Milosz’s concept of “the hell of
artists” is born and continues to exist. At the very source of this suggestive image
of the other world, one finds a language of analogy that links the sensual with the
spiritual space that is stretched out between poles of values.7
Let us now pass to the last question, namely: how to save the Christian faith?
In Milosz’s writings, we come across an interesting train of thought concerning the
crisis of the Christian faith. Namely, the writer expresses the view that in confron-
tation with its enemies (atheists and supporters of the “scientific outlook”), the
Christian faith loses when it becomes deprived of its original integrality and unity.
This confrontation is extremely beneficial for both sides, provided that the Chris-
tians and naturalists remain themselves and they preserve their own identity (See
Milosz, Native Realm 69–90). In this context, one begins to understand more fully
7 See also the image of the spiritual space in Milosz’s poem “On the Other Side”. This space
resembles Dostoevsky’s vision of Svidrigailov’s hell (in Crime and Punishment).
“Harmony and Openness to Many Levels of Reality”
339

Milosz’s fascination with the radical factions of Christianity, with the “heretic”
trends that present the key problems of faith in a sincere and uncompromising
way – for instance, the Manicheists, the Gnostics, and authors such as Sweden-
borg or Blake.
As Milosz points out, the sharpness of vision with which Swedenborg looks
upon the activity of the Christian Churches is the result of his conviction that
together with the advances in science and the expansion of the scientific outlook
these communities find it increasingly difficult to preserve their integrality. Ac-
cording to his prophesy, the “time of Judgment when all Christian churches will
be doomed to fall apart” is indeed close at hand. While reading Swedenborg,
Milosz remarked that according to this thinker “the cause of Christianity’s weak-
ness lay in its paganization, which is always the consequence of polytheism:
according to him, the dogma concerning the Holy Trinity forced the clergy and
the faithful to believe in three gods” (Miłosz, Co doradzał Mr. Blake 50). Yet,
Swedenborg decided to preserve this dogma endowing it with a different mean-
ing. As Milosz puts it, he “recognized one God-Human, Christ who is the Creator,
Redeemer and Comforter” (50). Christ is the only God, as he was born as man.
“Absolutely Christocentric, Swedenborg’s system is also absolutely anthropo-
centric” concludes Milosz in his essay entitled “Dostoevsky and Swedenborg”.
(See Milosz, Native Realm 69–90)
Another weakness of Christianity that Swedenborg had correctly observed
had to do with the theology of marital love characterized by an irrational fear and
escapism. In his ABC, Milosz recorded under the entry “Angelic Sexuality”:
No theological system assigns as central a place to the love of two people as does Sweden-
borg’s imagined edifice. Since the sensual world and the spiritual world are linked there by
threads of “correspondence”, what takes place on earth is continued in heaven. In this
system, love here on earth does not acquire the form of medieval asceticism nor Platonic
idealization. For him, love is fulfilled in marriage; it is of the flesh, but strictly monogamous.
(Milosz, Milosz’s ABC’s 36)
Milosz was fascinated by the theological potential contained in the Swedeborgian
idea of marital love, to which Oscar Milosz had at one time drawn his attention to.
Some of the comments relating to marital love that his relative had penned on the
margins of Vera Christiana Religio were so important to Milosz that he included
them in his collection of poems Unattainable Earth.
340
Piotr Bukowski

Theology and Literature
The language, as well as the sphere of imagination of modern poetry, have been
shaped under the influence of and in confrontation with the religious reflection of
theologians, theosophists and mystics. An excellent example of this is the recep-
tion of Swedenborg’s works, about which Milosz had frequently and poignantly
written. Thus, in one of his essays, Milosz remarks that the “doctrine of correspon-
dences, at one time stolen from Swedenborg, has served poets and their pupils,
rhetoricians and grammarians – to defend the symbolic code, by means of which
human beings are to communicate to one another their moments of illumination
as well as their encounters with the inscrutable core of existence” (Miłosz, Liturgia
Efraima 23–24).
By interiorizing space, Swedenborg elevated, as it were, the subject at the
expense of the object, and in consequence he enhanced the role of the artist, the
priest of “the imagination freed” (Milosz, The Land of Ulro 144). After all, was he
not in reality an artist and a man of letters? Milosz seems to be intrigued by this
issue. On the one hand, he concludes that Swedenborg’s literary effort is “non-
poetic in style” (151), and, on the other, he gives voice to his conviction that it is a
marvelous creation of a vivid imagination. While looking for a point of reference
for Swedenborg’s prose, particularly for his famous Memorabilia, Milosz points to
the English novel which was contemporary to the author of Arcana Coelestia:
“Stylistically, Swedenborg’s realism evokes comparison with the early English
novel, for example Defoe’s Robinson Crusoe, which, considering the work’s sub-
ject matter, now and then has its comic effects; to quote Emerson, Swedenborg’s
otherworldly inhabitants often remind us more of elves and gnomes” (138). When
reading Swedenborg, Milosz drew attention, just as Olof Lagercrantz later did, to
the presence of eighteenth-century literary conventions in his work. (See Lager-
crantz) “As a writer”, one reads in The Land of Ulro, “Swedenborg was susceptible
to eighteenth-century conventions, among others to the authenticating device of
the pseudo-memoir or pseudo-diary, the ‘manuscript found in the tree trunk’,
etc.” (Milosz, The Land of Ulro 139) Thus one can speak here of “the role of
[literary – P.B.] convention in Swedenborg’s artistic rendering of theological
material”, particularly that Swedenborg endowed, according to Milosz, his “re-
ports” from the beyond with an eminently persuasive character. What is more,
these reports seem to justify the question that Oscar Milosz at one time penned on
the margin of Vera Christiana Religio: “The work is composed of two parts: one
revealed in the spiritual world, the other constructed in the form of a theological-
philosophical system in the natural world. Which came first? Did the memorabilia
come before or after the system? Was the work born of a vision or an idea? For
these ‘memorabilia’ have the look of inventions designed as an allegorical proof.”
“Harmony and Openness to Many Levels of Reality”
341

(138–139) Czeslaw Milosz concludes that this question touches upon the very
heart of the problem, but he remains at the same time skeptical as to the
possibility of finding an answer to it. Although it seems that Milosz very often
gives priority to the vision, maybe in a less pronounced way as later Olof Lager-
crantz, there is no shortage of evidence that points to his fascination with the
Swedenborgian images. One such image is the representation of a tree that looms
as a symbolic tree, the Tree of Life and the Tree of Knowledge from De Amore
Conjugali.
The tree, says good Swedenborg, is a close relative of man.
Its boughs like arms join in an embrace.
(Milosz, Into the Tree 417)
This is how Milosz begins his poem “Into the Tree” (1986; from Unattainable
Earth), inspired by the vision of a “shady tree” which signifies something and
expresses a certain spiritual condition, without losing any of its colour, scent and
shape. This tangible presence of the literary sense and the anticipated figurative-
ness are of fundamental significance here.
Harmony and Openness
One of the most important features of Milosz’s literary output is a dialogue with
religious thinkers, a dialogue which is conducted with consideration and respect
for those who happen to think differently. Among Milosz’s “interlocutors” we can
find some very special figures who exerted an influence on him, not only on the
intellectual but also on the ethical plane. Among them, we find Simone Weil,
Thomas Merton and also Emanuel Swedenborg. In the context of his religious
readings, Milosz writes about “edifying readings”, those that strengthened him
spiritually, as they showed an “enlarged” and “multidimensional” man (Milosz,
Milosz’s ABC’s 107–108). In this sense, it was the works of St Augustine, Sweden-
borg, the text of the Zohar, and the writings of the French theologians, such as
Gaston Fessard, that Milosz found truly “edifying”. Yet, the phenomenon of the
ethical impact which we are referring to here goes even beyond the framework of
this spiritual “strengthening” and sends one back to the fundamental questions
that relate to happiness, and a sense of life and death. “You know, reading
Swedenborg it occurred to me that he must have been one of the happiest people
in human history”, says Milosz in an interview with Ireneusz Kania. “It was
because he had a vision of the other world that death was like going from one
room to the next for him. (…) He was a man for whom the fear of death was totally
alien” (Miłosz, Kania, Ciągle poszukujemy klucza 7). Was this optimism the result
342
Piotr Bukowski

of a feeling of an “absence of suffering in nature”? Or was it the result of a kind of
blindness, or a sudden inspiration of the revealed truth? Milosz left this question
unanswered. Yet, regardless of what the source of Swedenborg’s thought and of
his anthropocentric system really was, it exerted a “great soothing influence” –
Milosz remarks towards the end of the above-mentioned interview. “His happi-
ness”, adds Milosz, “radiates, regardless of what we think about this system. This
soothing influence is the consequence of some immense openness”, of “harmony
and openness to many levels of reality” he concludes (22). I think that the answer
to the question concerning the source of Milosz’s fascination with Emanuel
Swedenborg’s thought is contained in this very conclusion; it has to do, among
others, with the positive and integrating force of Swedenborg’s thought, uniting
man with God, matter with spirit, faith with reason, and language with being.
Milosz, the great skeptic of Polish literature, was unable to resist this force, and he
kept looking until the very end of his life for ways leading to its source.
Works Cited
Bellemin-Noël, Jean. “Milosz lecteur de Swedenborg”. Revue des Sciences Humaines, 116, 1964.
521–562.
Brzozowski, Stanisław. Pamiętnik (Diary). Warszawa: Czytelnik, 2000.
Ciesielski, Zenon. “Czesław Miłosz i Emanuel Swedenborg” (Milosz and Swedenborg). Studia
Scandinavica 10, 1988. 89–104.
Dostoyevsky, Fyodor. Crime and Punishment. Translated by D. McDuff. London: Penguin Classics,
2003.
Fiut, Aleksander. W stronę Miłosza (Towards Milosz). Kraków: WL, 2003.
Guise, Stanley. “Milosz et Swedenborg“ (Milosz and Swedenborg). In: 0. V. de L. Milosz, Paris:
A. Silvaire, 1959. 178–189.
Lagercrantz, Olof. Dikten om livet på den andra sidan. En bok om Emanuel Swedenborg (The
Poem of Life on the Other Side. A Study of Emanuel Swedenborg). Stockholm: Wahlström &
Widstrand, 1997.
Merton, Thomas, Miłosz, Czesław. Listy (Letters). Tłum. M. Tarnowska. Kraków: Znak, 1991.
Milosz, Czeslaw. “Apprentice”. In: Czeslaw Milosz. Second Space. New Poems. Translated by the
Author and R. Hass, New York: Harper Collins, 2005. 67–95.
– Conversations. Ed. by C.L. Haven. Jackson: University Press of Mississippi, 2006.
– “Dostoevsky and Swedenborg”. Slavic Review 1975, 2, p. 302–318.
– “Into the Tree” (translated by C. Milosz, R. Hass and M. Levine). In: Czeslaw Milosz, New and
Collected Poems (1931–2001). New York: Harper Collins, 2003. 417.
– “Introduction”. In: Oscar de Lubicz Milosz. The Noble Traveller. Introduced by C. Milosz. Edited
by Ch. Bamford. New York: Lindisfarne Press, 1985. 15–47.
– Milosz’s ABC’s. Translated by M.G. Levine. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2001.
– Native Realm. A Search for Self-Definition. Translated from the Polish by C.S. Leach. New York:
FSG, 2002.
“Harmony and Openness to Many Levels of Reality”
343

– “On the Other Side” (translated by C. Milosz, R. Hass and M. Levine). In: Czeslaw Milosz,
New and Collected Poems (1931–2001), New York: Harper Collins, 2003. 200.
– “Second Space”. In: Czeslaw Milosz. Second Space. New Poems. Translated by the Author and
R. Hass, New York: Harper Collins, 2005. 3.
– The History of Polish Literature. Second Edition. Berkeley – Los Angeles – London: University of
California Press, 1983.
– The Land of Ulro. Translated by L. Iribarne. New York: FSG, 2000.
– “The One-Man Army: Stanisław Brzozowski”. In: Czeslaw Milosz. Emperor of the Earth. Modes
of Eccentric Vision, Berkeley – Los Angeles – London: University of California Press, 1977.
186–253.
– The Nobel Price Lecture. http://nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/literature/laureates/1980/
milosz-lecture-en.html
– “Treatise on Theology”. In: Czeslaw Milosz. Second Space. New Poems. Translated by the
Author and R. Hass, New York: Harper Collins, 2005. 61.
– “Co doradzał Mr. Blake?” (The Advices of Mr. Blake). In: Czesław Miłosz, Ogród nauk
(The Garden of Science). Lublin: Norbertinum, 1991. 102–116.
– Człowiek wśród skorpionów. Studium o Stanisławie Brzozowskim (Man Among Scorpions.
A Study of Stanislaw Brzozowski). Kraków: Znak, 2000.
– “Liturgia Efraima” (The Liturgy of Efraim). In: Czesław Miłosz, Historie ludzkie (Human Stories).
Warszawa-Paryż: Zeszyty Literackie, 2007. 20–26.
– “Oeconomia Divina” (Translated by C. Miłosz). In: Czesław Miłosz, Poezje wybrane – Selected
Poems, Kraków: WL, 1996. 225.
– “O piekle” (On Hell). In: Czesław Miłosz, Ogród nauk (The Garden of Science). Lublin: Norberti-
num, 1991. 83–101.
– O podróżach w czasie (On Time Travels). Kraków: Znak, 2004.
– “O twórcach” (On Artists). In: Czesław Miłosz, Ogród nauk (The Garden of Science). Lublin:
Norbertinum, 1991. 102–116.
– Rok myśliwego (The Year of the Hunter), Kraków: Znak, 1991.
– Rozmowy (Conversations). Kraków: WL, 2002.
– “Swedenborg i Dostojewski” (Swedenborg and Dostoevsky). In: Czesław Miłosz, Zaczynając od
moich ulic (Starting from My Streets). Kraków: Znak, 2006. 380–400.
– Kania, Ireneusz. “Ciągle poszukujemy klucza” (We are Still Looking for the Key). In: Signe
Toksvig, Emanuel Swedenborg. Przekład I. Kania. Kraków: Universitas, 2002, 5–24.
Milosz, Oscar Vladislas de Lubicz. “Ars Magna”. Translated by C. Milosz. In: Oscar de Lubicz
Milosz. The Noble Traveller. Introduced by C. Milosz. Edited by Ch. Bamford. New York:
Lindisfarne Press, 1985. 231–296.
Pigoń, Stanisław. „Przypuszczalny ślad Swedenborga w III. części Dziadów” (A Possible Trace of
Swedenborg in Mickiewicz’s Forefather’s Eve, Part III). In: Pigoń, Z epoki Mickiewicza.Studia
i szkice (From Mickiewicz’s Time). Lwów: Wydawnictwo Ossolinskich, 1922. 142–162.
Prokop, Jan. “Antynomie Miłosza” (Milosz’s Antinomies). In: Poznawanie Miłosza (Reading Mi-
losz). Red. J. Kwiatkowski, Kraków – Wrocław: WL, 1985, 229–241.
Swedenborg, Emanuel. Heaven and Hell. Translated by J.C. Ager. New York: Swedenborg Founda-
tion 1900.
Tomkowski, Jan. “Wstęp do Blake’a” (Introduction to Blake). In: Ewa Kozubska, Jan Tomkowski.
Mistyczny świat Williama Blake’a (The Mystical World of William Blake). Milanówek: WWS,
1993. 23–82.
Zawada, Andrzej. Miłosz. Wrocław: Wydawnictwo Dolnośląskie, 2004.
344
Piotr Bukowski

