Contributors
Jeremy Avigad is a professor of philosophy and mathematical sciences at 
Carnegie Mellon University, with an MA in Mathematics from Harvard 
(1989) and a Ph.D. in mathematics from the University of California, Berkeley 
(1995). He was trained as a mathematical logician in the tradition of Hilbert’s 
Beweistheorie and is generally interested in applications of logic to mathematics, 
philosophy, and computer science. He has worked on philosophical theories 
of mathematical understanding and has also done research in the history of 
mathematics, with a focus on nineteenth- century mathematics in particular. 
Finally, he has a long- standing interest in formal methods in mathematics and 
interactive theorem proving. He has coauthored formalizations of the prime 
number theorem and the central limit theorem in Isabelle, and he contributed 
to the landmark formalization of the Feit- Thompson theorem in Coq. He is 
currently involved in the Formal Abstracts project and the development of the 
mathematical library for Lean, a new interactive theorem prover.
Michael J. Barany (http:// orcid .org /0000 -0002 -4067 -5112) studies the 
institutional, political, social, conceptual, and material dimensions of abstract 
knowledge in modern societies and is preparing a book on the globalization 
of the mathematics profession in the twentieth century. He is currently a 
lecturer in the history of science at the University of Edinburgh, after com-
pleting his Ph.D. at Princeton University (2016) and holding postdoctoral 
fellowships at Dartmouth College (2016– 2018) and Northwestern Univer-
sity (2018). This is his fourth appearance in the Best Writing on Mathematics 
series. You can read more of his work at http:// mbarany .com and follow him 
on Twitter at @mbarany.
Tiziana Bascelli holds a Ph.D. in theoretical philosophy, a BA in mathemat-
ics, and a BA in philosophy. She obtained all three degrees at the University 
of Padua, Italy. She has edited and coedited a number of books and published 
several scientific publications on the history of science. Her field of research 
is interdisciplinary. She is mostly interested in the shaping of modern science 
through mathematics, examined from the point of view of history and epis-
temology, with an integrated but also constructivist approach. In particular, 

242 
Contributors
she studies the transformation of natural philosophy into modern science by 
focusing on key concepts related to motion, matter, and force.
Piotr Błaszczyk (https:// orcid .org /0000 -0002 -3501 -348) is a professor 
at the Institute of Mathematics, Pedagogical University (Kraków, Poland). 
He obtained degrees in mathematics (1986), philosophy (1994), and a Ph.D. 
in philosophy (2002) from Jagiellonian University (Kraków). He authored 
“Philosophical Analysis of Richard Dedekind’s memoir Stetigkeit und irrationale 
Zahlen” (2007, Habilitationsschrift), and coauthored “Euclid, Elements, Books 
V– VI. Translation and Commentary” (2013), “Descartes, Geometry. Trans-
lation and Commentary” (2015), and “Descartes, Dioptrics. Translation and 
Commentary” (2018). His research interest is the idea of continuum and conti-
nuity from Euclid to modern times. His recent papers on nonstandard analysis 
include “Calculus without the Concept of Limit” (coauthored with J. Major) 
and “A Purely Algebraic Proof of the Fundamental Theorem of Algebra.”
Paul J. Campbell (MR Author ID: 44685, https:// orcid .org /0000 -0002 
-0556 -5540) graduated summa cum laude from the University of Dayton and 
received an M.S. in algebra and a Ph.D. in mathematical logic from Cornell 
University, where he was a Woodrow Wilson, Danforth, and NSF Graduate 
Fellow and a teaching assistant in statistics under Jack Kiefer. He taught at St. 
Olaf College, has been a frequent guest professor at the University of Augs-
burg in Germany, and recently retired from Beloit College. He has been the 
reviews editor for Mathematics Magazine since 1977 and editor of The UMAP 
Journal of Undergraduate Mathematics and Its Applications since 1984. He is a co-
author of For All Practical Purposes (11th ed., W.H. Freeman, forthcoming), a 
textbook of applications- oriented introductory collegiate mathematics that 
has been used by more than 1 million students. He is interested in everything.
Toby S. Cubitt’s research in quantum information theory straddles theoret-
ical physics, mathematics, computer science, and much of Europe. He origi-
nally hails from Luxembourg. His undergraduate degree from the University 
of Cambridge (U.K.) is in physics, as is his 2006 Ph.D. from the Max Planck 
Institute in Munich (Germany), where he met and first began collaborating 
with Michael Wolf and David Pérez- García. Cubitt then spent the better part 
of a decade in mathematics departments, first at the University of Bristol 
(U.K.), then at Universidad Complutense de Madrid (Spain), before being 
awarded a Royal Society University Research Fellowship and returning to 
Cambridge. He completed the set by moving to the University College Lon-
don department of computer science in 2015, where he is now a reader (asso-
ciate professor) in quantum information and head of the CS Quantum group. 

 
Contributors 
243
Cubitt is also a cofounder and director of the quantum start- up PhaseCraft. 
He was awarded the 2017 AHP- Birkhäuser Prize for research into connec-
tions between theoretical computer science and many- body quantum physics, 
which remains one of his major research interests.
Alessandro Di Bucchianico holds an M.Sc. in mathematics from Am-
sterdam University and a Ph.D. in mathematics from the University of 
Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands. Currently he is an associate profes-
sor of statistics in the Mathematics and Computing Science Department of 
Eindhoven University of Technology. From 2007 to 2011, he was the deputy 
head of LIME (Laboratory for Industrial Mathematics Eindhoven). He was 
quartermaster of the Data Science Center Eindhoven. From 2007 to 2019, 
he was the director of the permanent office of ENBIS, the European Net-
work of Business and Industrial Statistics. From 1999 to 2009, he was one of 
the coordinators of the Industrial Statistics program at the research institute 
EURANDOM. At a national level, he is one of two coordinators of the Study 
Group Mathematics with Industry (http:// www .swi -wiskunde .nl). He is a 
member of the Big Data team of the Applied Mathematics Institute of the 4 
Technical Universities in the Netherlands— the activity that resulted in the 
current publication. His main research interests are statistical process con-
trol, reliability (both of hardware and software), and teaching of statistics.
Moon Duchin is a mathematician at Tufts University, where she’s also a se-
nior fellow in the Tisch College of Civic Life and the Director of the Program 
in Science, Technology, and Society. Since 2016, she has been focused on 
electoral redistricting as an application of mathematics to civil rights. In 2018 
and 2019, she is working on interdisciplinary projects on gerrymandering as 
a Radcliffe Fellow and a Guggenheim Fellow.
Andrew Gelman is a professor of statistics and political science at Colum-
bia University. He has published research articles on statistical theory, meth-
ods, and computation, with applications in social science and public health. 
He and his colleagues have written several books, including Bayesian Data 
Analysis, Teaching Statistics: A Bag of Tricks, Regression and Other Stories, A Quan-
titative Tour of the Social Sciences, and Red State, Blue State, Rich State, Poor State: 
Why Americans Vote the Way They Do.
Kevin Hartnett is the senior math writer for Quanta Magazine. From 2013 
to 2016. he wrote “Brainiac,” a weekly column for the Boston Globe’s Ideas sec-
tion. A native of Maine, Kevin lives in South Carolina with his wife and three 
sons. Follow him on Twitter at @kshartnett.

244 
Contributors
Reuben Hersh is a magna cum laude graduate in English literature of 
Harvard College (1946), Ph.D. in math (NYU, 1962, Peter Lax), professor 
emeritus of the University of New Mexico, coauthor with Philip J Davis 
of The Mathematical Experience (National Book Award 1983), originator 
(with Richard J. Griego) of the theory and applications of random evolu-
tions, author of What Is Mathematics, Really?, editor of 18 Unconventional Es-
says on the Nature of Mathematics, author of Experiencing Mathematics (AMS) 
and Peter Lax, Mathematician (AMS), winner of the Chauvenet Prize (MAA) 
with Martin Davis and the Ford prize (MAA) with Ray Lorch. His article 
“Under- Represented Then Over- Represented on Jews in mathematics ap-
peared in this series in 2011.
Theodore P. Hill is a professor emeritus of mathematics at Georgia Tech 
and lives on the Central Coast of California, where he is currently a Research 
Scholar in Residence at California Polytechnic State University. He is co-
author of An Introduction to Benford’s Law (Princeton University Press 2015), 
and author of the memoir Pushing Limits: From West Point to Berkeley and Beyond 
(AMS/MAA 2017). Most of Dr. Hill’s 100- plus publications have been in 
mathematical probability, but he has also written essays for lay audiences that 
have appeared in Academe, American Scientist (five articles on different topics), 
Chance, Chronicle of Higher Education, Mathematical Intelligencer, and Quillette. 
For more information, see http:// www .tphill .net.
Laura Iapichino holds a bachelor’s degree in applied mathematics from 
the Università di Catania (Italy), an M.Sc. in applied mathematics from 
the Università degli Studi di Milano (Italy), and a Ph.D. in mathematics 
from the École polytechnique fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL) in Switzerland. 
Currently she is an assistant professor within the Scientific Computing 
Group at the Mathematics and Computing Science Department of Eind-
hoven University of Technology. She is a member of the Big Data team of 
the Applied Mathematics Institute of the 4 Technical Universities in the 
Netherlands— the activity that resulted in the current publication. Her re-
search interests include model order reduction, parameterized partial dif-
ferential equations, reduced basis methods, optimal control, optimization 
and multiobjective optimization, domain decomposition combined with 
reduced basis methods, computational fluid dynamics, and complex geo-
metrical parameterization.
Vladimir Kanovei graduated in 1973 from Moscow State University, and 
obtained a Ph.D. in physics and mathematics from Moscow State University 
in 1976. In 1986, he became a doctor of science in physics and mathematics at 

 
Contributors 
245
Moscow’s Steklov Mathematical Institute (MIAN). He is currently the lead-
ing researcher at the Institute for Information Transmission Problems (IPPI), 
Moscow. Among his publications is the book Borel Equivalence Relations: Struc-
ture and Classification, University Lecture Series 44, American Mathematical 
Society, Providence, RI, 2008.
Karin U. Katz obtained her B.A. from Bryn Mawr College in 1982, and her 
Ph.D. from Indiana University in 1991. Her article “A Counterexample to 
the Equivariant Simple Loop Conjecture” (Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 118 (1993), 
no. 1, 321– 329) was based on her dissertation. One of her recent publica-
tions is the article “What Makes a Theory of Infinitesimals Useful? A View 
by Klein and Fraenkel” (with Vladimir Kanovei, Mikhail Katz, and Thomas 
Mormann) in J. Humanist. Math. 8 (2018), no. 1, 108– 119.
Mikhail G. Katz (BA Harvard 1980; Ph.D. Columbia 1984) is a professor 
of mathematics at Bar Ilan University, Ramat Gan, Israel. His monograph 
Systolic Geometry and Topology was published by the American Mathematical 
Society. He is interested in Riemannian geometry, infinitesimals, debunk-
ing mathematical history written by the victors, as well as true infinitesimal 
differential geometry; see Journal of Logic and Analysis 7.5 (2015): 1– 44 at 
http:// dx .doi .org /10 .4115 /jla .2015 .7 .5. For a list of publications on the his-
tory, mathematics, and philosophy of inifnitesimals, see http:// u .math .biu .ac 
.il / ~katzmik /infinitesimals .html.
Semen S. Kutateladze (http:// orcid .org /0000 -0002 -5306 -2788) is a 
senior principal research officer of the Sobolev Institute of Mathematics in 
Novosibirsk, Russia, and professor at Novosibirsk State University. He has 
written more than 30 books and 300 papers on functional analysis, convex 
geometry, optimization, and nonstandard and Boolean valued analysis. He 
is a member of the editorial boards of Siberian Mathematical Journal, Journal of 
Applied and Industrial Mathematics, Positivity, and Mathematical Notes.
Mary Leng (https:// orcid .org /0000 -0001 -9936 -5453) is a senior lecturer 
in philosophy at the University of York (U.K.). Her book, Mathematics and 
Reality (Oxford U Press 2010), offers a defense of mathematical fictionalism, 
the view that we have no reason to believe that our mathematical theories 
are true. In 2016– 2017, she held a research fellowship from the Leverhulme 
Trust to work on analogies between debates over realism and antirealism in 
the philosophy of mathematics and in metaethics. Perhaps surprisingly, she 
believes that we have more reason to be realists about moral truths than we 
have to be realists about the existence of mathematical objects.

246 
Contributors
Nelly Litvak is a professor at the University of Twente and Eindhoven Uni-
versity of Technology in the Netherlands. She received the Stieltjes Prize for 
the best Ph.D. thesis and the Google Faculty Research Award. Her research 
interests are in the study of large networks, such as online social networks 
and the World Wide Web, randomized algorithms, and random graphs. She 
is the leader of the Big Data team of the Applied Mathematics Institute of the 
4 Technical Universities in the Netherlands— the activity that resulted in the 
current publication. In her free time, Nelly is a best- selling nonfiction au-
thor. Her book Who Needs Mathematics? A Clear Book about How the Digital World 
Works, coauthored with Andrei Raigorodski (in Russian, her native language), 
was short- listed for the 2017 Enlightener Prize for the best popular science 
book in Russia.
Melvyn B. Nathanson is a professor of mathematics at the City University 
of New York (Lehman College and the Graduate Center). An undergraduate 
major in philosophy at the University of Pennsylvania, he started graduate 
school at Harvard in biophysics, then began to study mathematics and com-
pleted a Ph.D. in mathematics at the University of Rochester in 1971. He 
was a visiting student at Cambridge University in 1970, worked with I. M. 
Gel’fand in Moscow under an IREX fellowship in 1972– 1973, and was as-
sistant to André Weil at the Institute for Advanced Study in 1974– 1975. He 
is a Fellow of the American Mathematical Society.
Roice Nelson is a software developer with a passion for exploring mathe-
matics through visualization. For him, to “see” something mathematical often 
means coding the ideas and rendering an image. A Platonist at heart, his 
mathematical interests center around non- Euclidean geometry, tilings, poly-
topes, and honeycombs. In 2017, he and his wife Sarah Nemec established an 
endowment at the University of Texas at Austin for mathematics outreach. 
He enjoys spending time with Sarah and their five cats; nurturing his Twitter 
bot, @TilingBot; unicycling; and indoor skydiving. Follow his mathematical 
adventures at roice3 .org or on Twitter at @roice713.
Tahl Nowik is a professor of mathematics at Bar- Ilan University, Ramat 
Gan, Israel. His area of research is low- dimensional topology. He has stud-
ied finite order invariants of mappings in various low- dimensional settings, 
such as immersions of surfaces into 3- manifolds, curves in surfaces, and knot 
diagrams. He is interested in probabilistic questions in this setting and has 
studied random knots, random surfaces, and random simplicial complexes. 
He is also interested in nonstandard analysis, particularly in relation to dif-
ferential geometry.

 
Contributors 
247
David Pérez- García started his research career working on functional 
analysis and obtained his Ph.D. in mathematics at Universidad Complutense 
de Madrid (Spain) in 2004. In 2005, he moved as a postdoctoral researcher to 
the Max Planck Institute of Quantum Optics in Germany, where he started 
to work in quantum information theory, his main research topic since then. 
Currently, he is a professor of mathematics at Universidad Complutense de 
Madrid and director of the research group Mathematics and Quantum In-
formation. He has been awarded the Young Researcher RAC- Endesa Prize 
in Mathematics in 2012 and the Young Researcher Miguel Catalan Prize in 
2017. In 2015, he was awarded an ERC Consolidator Grant to investigate the 
mathematics behind exotic quantum phases of matter.
James Propp is a full professor in the Department of Mathematical Sci-
ences at the University of Massachusetts Lowell. Most of his research is in 
combinatorics, probability, and dynamical systems theory, with forays into 
the study of cellular automata and games. His monthly essays are posted 
at his Mathematical Enchantments blog at http:// mathenchant .wordpress 
.com; one of these essays, “The Paintball Party,” was published in Math 
Horizons and won the 2018 Trevor Evans Award from the Mathematical 
Association of America. Propp is a member of the advisory council of the 
National Museum of Mathematics and the chair of the advisory council of 
the Gathering 4 Gardner Foundation. You can follow him on Twitter at  
@jimpropp.
David M. Schaps (BA Swarthmore 1967, Ph.D. Harvard 1972) is a pro-
fessor emeritus of classical studies at Bar- Ilan University, president of the 
Israel Society for the Promotion of Classical Studies (2016– 2019), and author 
of Economic Rights of Women in Ancient Greece, The Invention of Coinage and the 
Monetization of Ancient Greece, Handbook for Classical Research, and a few dozen 
articles, including “The Woman Least Mentioned: Etiquette and Women’s 
Names,” “The Women of Greece in Wartime,” “Zeus the Wife- Beater,” and 
“Nausicaa the Comedienne: The Odyssey and the Pirates of Penzance.”
David Sherry is a professor emeritus of philosophy at Northern Arizona 
University, among the tall pines of the Colorado Plateau. He has research 
interests in the philosophy of mathematics, especially applied mathematics. 
Recent publications include “Fields and the Intelligibility of Contact Action,” 
Philosophy 90 (2015), 457– 478; “Infinitesimals, Imaginaries, Ideals, and Fic-
tions,” with Mikhail Katz, Studia Leibnitiana 44 (2012), 166– 192; and “Ther-
moscopes, Thermometers, and the Foundations of Measurement,” Studies in 
History and Philosophy of Science 24 (2011), 509– 524.

248 
Contributors
Neil J. A. Sloane (http:// orcid .org /0000 -0001 -7386 -5222) is the author of a 
dozen books, including Sphere Packings, Lattices and Groups (with J. H. Conway) 
and The Theory of Error- Correcting Codes (with F. J. MacWilliams), and more than 
300 papers and videos. The (now On- Line) Encyclopedia of Integer Sequences 
(OEIS) was started by him in 1964 and contains more than 300,000 entries; he 
is the president of the OEIS Foundation. He is also a Member of the  National 
Academy of Engineering, an AT&T Fellow, and a Fellow of the American 
Mathematical Society, the IEEE, and the Learned Society of Wales. Google 
Scholar Citations: 53,000, h- index: 79; i10- index: 249.
Kokichi Sugihara is a Meiji University distinguished professor emeritus, 
as well as a professor emeritus of the University of Tokyo. His research area 
is mathematical engineering. In his research on computer vision, he found a 
method for constructing 3D objects from “impossible figures” and extended 
his research interest to include human vision and optical illusion. Construct-
ing mathematical models of human vision systems, he created various new 
impossible objects and won the first prize three times (2010, 2013, and 2018) 
and the second prize twice (2015 and 2016) in the Best Illusion of the Year 
Contest of the Neural Correlate Society.
Frank van der Meulen (https:// orcid .org /0000 -0001 -7246 -8612) is an 
associate professor in statistics at Delft University of Technology. His re-
search is directed to statistical inference for stochastic processes, with a focus 
on uncertainty quantification and indirect observation schemes. Here, the 
stochastic process is defined as a continuous time object, but observations 
are discrete in time. Examples include Wiener driven stochastic differential 
equations and Lévy processes. He developed a general framework for condi-
tional simulation of diffusion processes, which has been used in algorithms 
for Bayesian smoothing and parameter estimation. A second area of research 
consists of constructing algorithms for Bayesian nonparametric estimation 
and frequentist validation of Bayesian nonparametric inferential procedures. 
He is a member of the Big Data team of the Applied Mathematics Institute of 
the 4 Technical Universities in the Netherlands— the activity that resulted in 
the current publication.
Ron Wehrens is the business unit manager at Biometris, Wageningen 
University & Research, Wageningen, Netherlands. He earned his Ph.D. at 
Radboud University Nijmegen, Netherlands, and is the author of more than 
100 research papers, one monograph, and several R packages available from 
CRAN and Bioconductor. His research interests include applied statistics, 
statistical software, chemometrics, and metabolomics.

 
Contributors 
249
Michael Wolf began his scientific career in high- energy physics. After a 
Ph.D. in mathematical physics under the supervision of Reinhard Werner 
and a postdoc at the Max Planck Institute of Quantum Optics, he became a 
professor at the Niels Bohr Institute in Copenhagen, Denmark, in 2008. In 
2011, he moved to the Technical University of Munich, where he works as the 
chair of Mathematical Physics at the Department of Mathematics.
Noson S. Yanofsky has a Ph.D. in mathematics from The Graduate Cen-
ter of The City University of New York. He is a professor of computer sci-
ence at Brooklyn College and The Graduate Center. In addition to writing 
research papers, he has coauthored Quantum Computing for Computer Scientists 
(with Mirco A. Mannucci, Cambridge University Press) and authored The 
Outer Limits of Reason: What Science, Mathematics, and Logic Cannot Tell Us (MIT 
Press). He recently completed Theoretical Computer Science for the Working Cat-
egory Theorist and is currently working on a book tentatively titled Monoidal 
Categories: A Unifying Concept in Mathematics, Physics, and Computers. Yanofsky 
lives in Brooklyn with his wife and four children.


