Literature, Language, 
Thought: The Beginnings  
A Conversation between Oswald Wiener   
and Thomas Eder

First contacts with music and writing in the 1950s 
 
TE:   The three conversations in this book are supposed to document 
your intellectual development from the late 1950s and early 1960s 
until today. This one deals with your early phase as a poet and as an 
artist. What made you as a young man want to become a musician and 
a poet? Did you only have intrinsically artistic goals — to create inno-
vative poetry, for instance? Did you want to add to the historic devel-
opment of poetry? Or did you also have external goals relating to what 
art and poetry should develop into? 
OW:  If I had an external goal, it was only a metaphysical one. At that 
time I was a quite naïve philosopher of mind. Unraveling the mystery 
of consciousness — this was our ultimate goal. To this end, we hoped 
to gain insights and clues via poetry. I understood the question of con-
sciousness to be beyond the reach of science, and this made me a 
fierce adversary of science right from the start. I invested a lot of time 
convincing myself of the idea that science is nothing but bullshit and 
a huge disaster. 
TE:   To which the alternative would be art? 
OW:  I didn’t formulate my goals that clearly. Rather, I had the vague 
feeling that any possible breakthrough would come through art. 
Somehow we had to penetrate this blurry wall, and we did not really 
wonder much about what would loom behind it. 
TE:   Could you really separate your goals as neatly as you later 
claimed, namely that your work followed two tendencies in parallel 
or maybe against each other — toward the goal of intensifying sensa-
tion and experience through art on the one hand, and toward the goal 
of better understanding the mechanisms of consciousness through 
art and poetry on the other? 
OW:  The latter rather came by itself, so that I didn’t realize it at first. 
At one point it became clear, of course, that I myself belonged to those 
people, whom I attacked with my criticism of science. In the end, I 
too wanted to understand in the sense of what I today call clear under-
standing. I didn’t seek emotional understanding, which simply didn’t 
12

13
satisfy me. A true artist, I believe, would have been content with it. I 
was very receptive to moods and affects though. But they just weren’t 
enough; I wanted to know more clearly what we could discover 
behind this wall we tried to break through. In the process, I acquired 
new knowledge without realizing it. I read a lot. So during this phase, 
I took notice of a few authors’ names for the first time — Spinoza, for 
instance. During these years, the first half of the 1950s, the founda-
tions of my thought were laid, not very solidly but at least sketchily. 
For me, the main conflict, as I once wrote, was this: “On the one hand, 
one could cancel out the effect [of making or receiving art] by com-
prehensively explaining the mechanisms involved; this knowledge 
made it possible to contrive and create effects at will, relativizing one’s 
own heightened emotion and making the manipulator proof against 
manipulation. On the other hand, one must intensify the effect of art 
as far as humanly possible [...]. [T]his dichotomy led to wild oscilla-
tions between mentalist philosophy and behaviorism. Naïveté dic-
tated the following compromise. In the 1950s I turned myself into a 
fanatical artist, because I regarded art as the supreme means of gain-
ing knowledge. Art was experimental, because its varying effects on 
others, and above all on myself, could be observed and could thus give 
rise to hypotheses concerning the underlying mechanisms. [...] [I]t 
was possible to have both emotion and insight, and (this was the apo-
theosis of ’self-referentiality,’ the ubiquitous slogan that had by then 
supplanted Hegel’s notion of ’synthesis’) emotion through insight. [...] 
It was not until the 1970s that I realized that [André] Breton’s program 
(not his results) had anticipated one aspect of our work. If Surrealism 
is a ‘pure psychic automatism, whereby one seeks to express, in writ-
ing or by any other means, the true process of thought,’ then in a sense 
I was looking for the same thing. The ’true process of thought’ had as 
far as possible to be documented. However, the art work was not the 
documentation. It was not about the process of ’expressing’ anything 
— indeed, that process was the problematic thing — but about observ-
ing the impression made by the given text [...]. Art as understanding, 
understanding as art. The role of the art work in the art process is now 

just this: to be neutralized by an effort on the viewer’s part. [...] The 
maker is thus superfluous and his intention, if any, non-authoritative.”1 
TE:    Outsourcing texts to blueprints, algorithms, or mathematical 
principles could be viewed as a complementary or the backside of 
this kind of automatic text production, e.g., the “methodical inven-
tionism” of Marc Adrian,2 who applied formal principles to generate 
texts from a stock of words to be manipulated externally. There had 
been similar attempts within the Vienna Group as well. 
OW:  Yes, these came from me. In a simpler form, Gerhard Rühm had 
achieved this already with his permutations, and I with my constella-
tions. So it was obvious to further mathematize and complicate these 
attempts, which showed itself in the guise of texts such as “bissen 
brot” by Gerhard Rühm and Konrad Bayer.3 This is an effective poem, 
I think. Then I realized that one could do similar texts by applying the 
theory and method of Claude Elwood Shannon, who had combined 
words by their probability. Shannon generated letter sequences 
according to probabilities of letters in natural language. At first glance, 
these sequences looked like letter salads. But if you then added the 
next letter of the statistics, it already sounded a bit like English, and 
so on and so forth. Eventually, the sequences became more and more 
like English, although the more English they become, the more banal 
they also get, of course. 
TE:    Had you heard of the German computer scientist Theo Lutz’s sim-
ilar experiments on Konrad Zuse’s Z22 computer at roughly the same 
time? Or of the so called “autopoems” Gerhard Stickel produced on 
an IBM 7090? 
OW:  No, I didn’t know these. 
TE:    He came from the circle around Max Bense. 
OW:  Max Bense annoyed me because of both his clear commitment 
to behaviorism and his belief in cybernetic esthetics, which is basi-
cally an esthetics of probability. I assume that efforts like these also 
had deeper, hitherto misunderstood facets, and a critical intelligentsia 
should scrutinize them and then write a monograph beginning with 
Shannon via Abraham Moles and Max Bense to Helmar Frank, etc. For 
14

15
their effort continues to have an effect, albeit in a slightly disguised 
form. Yet, it is still unclear what this approach is able to achieve and 
what it is good for. Obviously, it is good for something but not for cre-
ativity, I believe. One can fake creativity with it, and one can also 
deceive oneself and take the fake for the real thing. 
TE:    Yes, reading such a product generated by means of probability 
may give you similar esthetic experiences as reading a text written by 
a person. Yet, this is a consequence of the esthetic attitude with which 
the reader approaches and unfolds the text, and not a consequence 
of the text surface as such or of properties of the generating process. 
OW:  Once we have a chess program like Deep Blue, chess ceases to be 
an intellectual challenge. It will certainly continue as a sport, but there 
will be no further thought about how humans play chess, I guess. 
Obviously, Deep Blue proves that surface processes suffice to bring 
somebody who knows how to play chess to attribute depth to the 
machine. Kasparov, for example, the world’s best chess player at that 
time, who nevertheless lost to Deep Blue, believed that his own 
thought was deep, and he also attributed “depth” to some moves by 
the machine. He thus was convinced that the machine was literally 
thinking, even though he knew how it worked technically. Nonethe-
less, he was inclined to say: “Yes, the machine does exactly what I do.” 
And yet it doesn’t. 
 
 
The stream of consciousness 
 
TE:    There is probably a similarity to automatic or algorithmic text and 
art production. What about the text der vogel singt by Konrad Bayer? 
Is it true that you did its mathematical blueprint? 
OW:  Yes. Bayer asked me to do it after he had sketched out what he 
wanted. But it is clear that the quasi mechanically created text was 
only a rough draft, to which Bayer then added the highlights. His basic 
idea was definitely a constellation in the astronomical sense. His 
vision of the machine was connected to Ramon Lull and Giordano 

Bruno. It was about rotating spheres coming apart and together again 
in certain moments, so that, for example, three planets appear in a 
straight line. Assuming, for example, that there are seven spheres, you 
can construct a machine that starts with the initial state in which they 
are all in a certain order. Then the constellation seems to become dis-
orderly until it reaches some extreme disorder, but in the end every-
thing falls back into a simple form. Many people had this idea, not just 
in the astronomical domain. But the latter is the closest metaphor 
for it. 
TE:    Was Bayer’s goal, or maybe your own goal in some passages of the 
verbesserung (cf. infra), to mimic the stream of consciousness by 
means of language? 
OW:  At least I claimed so, for instance, in the passage “für kornbluth,” 
in which I described visual perceptions at the end of a drunken night.4 
But I already knew that the last chapter of James Joyce’s Ulysses, for 
instance, was no realistic depiction in the sense of mimicking con-
scious or even unconscious processes. Only columnists are able to say 
that these sentences copy the “stream of consciousness.” In fact, this 
final monologue by Joyce is totally artificial. At least my consciousness 
is very different to that in Molly Bloom’s monologue. 
TE:    Unfortunately, it’s not only columnists who claim that. It is also 
advocated doggedly in some debates in literary studies and cognitive 
science. Patrick Colm Hogan, a cognitive literary scholar, a few years 
ago claimed that Joyce consequently followed an arguably “critical 
psychological realism.” The latter Hogan defines as “a form of realism 
that seeks to enhance the reader’s understanding of human mental 
processes. ‘Critical realism’ is a form of realism that sets out to dis-
place false beliefs that have been fostered by earlier works (e.g., by 
earlier novels).” 5 Joyce’s novel, Hogan believes, precisely illustrates 
the paradox that emerges when you try to represent parallel pro-
cesses of consciousness by a linear medium, such as language, with 
its necessarily temporal order. The serial processing of linguistic sen-
sations is used to represent the parallel processing in consciousness. 
OW:  This claim is evident but nonetheless misleading, because it aims 
16

17
at the mere surface of language. I don’t see how one could render con-
scious processes into a somehow plausible linguistic representation. 
I have tried it repeatedly but always failed. The only thing you can do 
by means of language is triggering a number of specific experiences 
in the reader. One starting point would be the “time slices” of William 
James. In his Principles of Psychology, he writes: “As we take, in fact, a 
general view of the wonderful stream of our consciousness, what 
strikes us first is this different pace of its parts. Like a bird’s life, it 
seems to be made of an alternation of flights and perchings. The 
rhythm of language expresses this, where every thought is expressed 
in a sentence, and every sentence closed by a period. The resting-
places are usually occupied by sensorial imaginations of some sort, 
whose peculiarity is that they can be held before the mind for an 
indefinite time, and contemplated without changing; the places of 
flight are filled with thoughts of relations, static or dynamic, that for 
the most part obtain between the matters contemplated in the 
periods of comparative rest. […] Let us call the resting-places the ‘sub-
stantive parts’, and the places of flight the ‘transitive parts’, of the stream 
of thought.”6 
        Onto this description I project a concept, which I name time 
slices. James’s “perchings” are in actual fact relatively slight orienta-
tion developments, insofar as the major part of orientation remains 
more or less the same or seems static. Maybe some things change but 
at the periphery and not in focus of consciousness. In contrast, 
James’s “flights” of the metaphorical bird are larger changes of back-
ground orientation. From this perspective I recently tried to precisely 
imagine the path of a gnomon’s shadow as described in Alain Robbe-
Grillet’s novel La Jalousie. In order to do so, I had to reconstruct this 
path mentally according to the situations described in the book. At 
first I found this very difficult. I keep watch especially for introspec-
tion tasks such as this, because they are too difficult for me at first. But 
I want to observe how my attempts at understanding proceed. In 
some respect, this is comparable to what Bühler already demanded 
in 1909, namely to find an “appropriate degree of task complexity that 

is favorable to the results of introspection.”7 Tasks of this appropriate 
degree of complexity are still pending for the subject area of “lan-
guage comprehension.” 
TE:    Perhaps this also has to do with Gertrude Stein, who you, the 
members of the Vienna Group, read so intensely? She wrote (in her 
introduction to Last Operas and Plays, p. XII): “the mind is at every 
stage a theater of simultaneous possibilities.” Stein was, after all, a stu-
dent and early collaborator of William James. 
OW:  In the mid-1950s, I adored Gertrude Stein’s Last Operas and Plays, 
especially the libretto “Four Saints in Three Acts”8 (written in 1927) — 
even today I think it’s the best piece Stein ever wrote. This text trig-
gered a kind of pre-understanding in me, which, I believed then, the 
author intended. Today I must confess that I am not so sure about her 
intention any more. This work is the most difficult that I know of her. 
For me, it had the effect of triggering totally vague waves of emotion 
and mood. I still get that feeling when I leaf through it. One of her tricks 
in this play is that the acts and scenes are central. The actors are the 
acts and the scenes themselves, although the title suggests that it is 
about four saints in a drama of three acts, which is totally misleading. 
For there are many saints in many acts/scenes that cannot be traced 
clearly; some passages appear repeatedly, as do stage directions such 
as “Repeat First Act” or “Enact end of an act.” So the acts and scenes 
are jumbled and repeated; they do not follow the numerical order. Sud-
denly at one point, for example, it reads: “Scene X.” But what is being 
said in the tenth scene? Answer: “Could Four Acts be three.” These 
words are thus both notation and text. You can’t trace that so easily. 
Today I think I would be able to interpret quite a lot in the piece, but 
back then I didn’t understand anything at all. It just touched me in a 
peculiar way. It was so mysterious that I hoped something would sud-
denly come to light ... As a young man, I was always inclined to believe 
in intangible powers, which I deemed real nonetheless — something 
like the objective chance of the surrealists, which I didn’t know then. 
Maybe this feeling was in the air once they had put that idea into the 
world; it certainly felt that way to me. I hoped, that by way of art I 
18

19
would be able to achieve things that could not be achieved otherwise. 
That’s why I became a fanatical art lover and art enthusiast. 
TE:    But back to the desire for clear understanding that you spoke of 
earlier. Would you say that your friends in the Vienna Group shared it? 
OW:  At least they understood the questions that I posed myself, I 
think, and that these topics interested me in particular. We shouldn’t 
forget that these were the first years of us going at least a bit public, 
as well as the first years when the so-called linguistic turn made itself 
felt. It was an international change of atmosphere leaning strongly 
toward the humanities, that means away from science. Naturally, we 
didn’t identify it as an entire international wave yet. But our very exis-
tence itself was evidence that something was just changing. It is very 
strange how such things develop. It seems that something is in the air, 
which some people realize and others don’t. 
        Thinking about August Stramm or Gertrude Stein, for instance, 
and not about everyday language I wondered why their texts made 
such a strong impression on me? But hell, how come? So I thought 
about language. But if I had been friends with visual artists, who I 
could have taken equally seriously as my poet friends, I could have 
easily asked myself: Why the effect of painting? Why of music? I did 
pose the question, why music appealed to me, but any answer seemed 
totally out of reach. But if anything gave my philosophy of mind a 
direction, it was the experience of music. As a young person, I was 
brought to musical ecstasy incredibly easily. In fact, music functioned 
like a narcotic for me. With language, ecstasy seemed much more dif-
ficult to attain. But then I started reading some philosophy of language 
— at first Friedrich Kainz from Vienna University, who had written a 
five-volume work entitled Psychologie der Sprache (Psychology of Lan-
guage). The Vienna Group had nothing to do with academia at all, but 
at least the names of philosophers were familiar to us. At that time, 
Hubert Rohracher, who had published, among others, the book Die 
Arbeitsweise des Gehirns und die psychischen Vorgänge (Brain Function 
and Mental Processes), was still the head of the psychology depart-
ment, and the Hegelian Erich Heintel was teaching at the philosophy 

department. So the first few things I read sufficed to prove to me that 
I wouldn’t find my answers there. Not that there was a lack of inter-
esting facts, but step by step and more or less on my own I got to know 
more radical people. And then came the Wittgenstein accident, which 
would cost me an entire decade. 
 
 
The Wittgenstein accident 
 
TE:    Accident? In what sense? At first you were certainly enthralled, 
weren’t you? 
OW:  A friend of ours had stolen a Wittgenstein book from a library. One 
day the thief showed up in a café and claimed to have found an 
extremely interesting book at the British Council in Vienna. This was 
the British equivalent of the American Information Center, and it had 
a library on the Freyung in the first district. For us, these two institutes, 
but more so the American one, were the decisive sources of infor-
mation about the Anglo-Saxon world. It was normal to be very unscru-
pulous in such libraries and to steal things. The man showed me the 
book, and I borrowed it from him right away. It was the Tractatus. 
TE:    In German? 
OW:  No, the bilingual Routledge edition. I was enthralled. At first the 
book was hard to understand, but I sensed that this man had had 
insights, and that they were important. But I didn’t understand what 
the insights were. The tone in which the Tractatus is written is very 
certain: “I say how it is! And it is incredible that hitherto nobody has 
seen it this way!” But how it really is, Wittgenstein does not say. He only 
pretends to know it. The copy here on the table I then ordered at  
the bookseller Gerold am Graben, who had begun to import foreign-
language books. I had to wait six months to get it — until June 1956. It 
was a different edition but the same book — the same publisher, the 
same design. Well, so I started to grit my teeth with “Luigi.” 
TE:    Didn’t you soon hold lectures, which could count as the first 
instances of Wittgenstein scholarship in Austria outside academia? 
20

21
OW:  Yes, but this didn’t happen before 1961, I believe. So I have been 
chewing on the Tractatus for five years — not only on the Tractatus 
but also on other works. 
        They affected me much like the works of Gertrude Stein. Both 
authors’ works have the same drive, if I may say so maliciously. Today, 
I’d say that the drive is due to the fact, that each sentence of Wittgen-
stein makes you expect something very important to follow in the 
next sentence. But this pertains to the entire book, so as soon as you 
reach the last line, you close it and ask yourself: What was that? Well, 
it was an experience of drive similar to the reading experience of Ger-
trude Stein’s texts. 
        At the beginning of my pursuit I expected more and something 
different. I expected instruction on what interested me, for instance. 
It’s just like I wrote in my later, already critical essay on “Wittgenstein’s 
influence on the Vienna Group.”9 In Tractatus, Wittgenstein seems to 
“believe in the possibility of studying the postulated isomorphic map-
ping of language parts on ’facts’ [Tatsachen] and ‘atomic facts’ [Sach-
verhalte] of the ’world’ without any reference to mental or physiologi-
cal processes. The central role given to Language conceals the further 
radicalization of this behaviorist idea. […] today we expect answers to 
the questions of ’understanding’, of ’meaning,’ ’form,’ ’content,’ etc., as 
well as of the nature of Language most likely from a unified science of 
the ’mental,’ which will encompass some mutations of psychology and 
focus on the ’representing relations.’ It will not search for Wittgen-
stein’s ’form of representation’ in the mechanisms of language but in 
the nervous system and other material devices. […] today i believe that 
we can and we should study ’mental’ and physiological representa-
tions without special reference to Language; i believe that language 
may play an important role in cognitive mechanisms, but not that it is 
a crucial part of them (at least if defined as the phenomenon investi-
gated by linguists).”10 
        These were the crucial questions for me then as they still are now. 
What is consciousness? How does it function? Wittgenstein couldn’t 
have been less interested in these questions, or rather he might have 

been interested in asking but absolutely not in answering them, as I’d 
say today. On the contrary, I believe that he later said that if we ask 
such questions, we realize how stupid we are that we ask them. We 
should not explain, e.g., the psychological (mental) causes which lead 
to this and that use of concepts, but should rather elucidate concepts 
such as “aspectual seeing” and their position within experiential con-
cepts, for example. But why we are stupid to ask such questions, Witty 
did not say. Thus he immunized himself. Because if you say, to ask 
such questions is tantamount to being stupid, you are right in any case 
and from any point of view. 
TE:    Wittgenstein later tried to justify this by demonstrating the mis-
use of words/phrases. Didn’t that have some influence on you at that 
time? 
OW:  A tremendous one even! Above all, my Wittgenstein reading cost 
me a lot of time without learning one single theorem that I could have 
kept and used as a treasure from time to time. 
TE:    Did your reading of Wittgenstein eventually influence the col-
laborations within the Vienna Group? In the essay quoted above, for 
instance, you wrote the following about its literary cabarets: “our 
experimental arrangements of randomly found words and language 
parts: we wanted to test how and why one could always understand 
these arrangements, and which factors specified this understanding. 
We introduced simple arithmetic and combinatorial methods in order 
to preferably exclude any unconscious meaning intentions, and 
boosted our interest in formal relations; complementarily, we devel-
oped a new standpoint concerning ’automatic’ production, whereby 
our interest in the surrealists obtained a new facet […]; our already 
existing relativistic tendency, equal validity of all possible interpreta-
tions, the inner meaninglessness of symbols — all these now became 
conscious and used for production.”11 
OW:  An indirect influence was noticeable. Indirect insofar as we in the 
group agreed that anyone who thinks this is a problem doesn’t know 
what the problem is. This motto had something liberating about it, 
because if we didn’t get anywhere with a text, we could either say that 
22

23
it doesn’t go any further here, or, better still, we could ask, why we 
should even continue with it when it doesn’t make any sense. That 
helped me to get a more detached attitude, even to what I myself was 
doing, and to cope with the disappointment that my reading of 
Wittgenstein constantly inflicted on me without having to admit it. 
TE:    I do think that there was some influence of Wittgenstein’s writings 
on the two literary cabarets of the Vienna Group in 1958/59, to whose 
conception you and Konrad Bayer contributed a lot of theory. In your 
retrospective 1967 essay “the literary cabaret of the vienna group”, 
you wrote that you also wanted to demonstrate the “control of con-
crete situations by the use of language.” That, at least, sounds like an 
application of the later Wittgenstein. Then you once described what 
you call the “new realism” of the “literary cabarets”: Realism “under-
stood as direct symbolic manipulation of innate or habitual modes of 
reaction; [we had] the concept of a direct artistic impact on the life of 
the reader/audience by demonstrating or concealing their mech-
anisms of understanding.”12 And to quote further: “it was amazing that 
most combinations of any words could be made to mean things they 
did not signify — the fascinating aptitude of the human mind for con-
structing metaphors and mental images, the obviousness of ’meaning’ 
projected on the most outlandish symbol combinations, but also the 
adherence to hypotheses once found, [and thus] a certain hopeless-
ness of understanding.”13 
 
literary cabarets 
The two “literary cabarets” of the Vienna Group took place on 
December 6, 1958 in the theater hall of the artist association “alte 
welt” (on Windmühlgasse in Vienna’s 6th district) and on April 15, 
1959 in the trade union’s “Porrhaus” (on Treitlgasse 3 in the 4th dis-
trict). They were jointly planned and performed by Friedrich Achleit-
ner, Konrad Bayer, Gerhard Rühm, and Oswald Wiener. H.C. Artmann 
had already resigned from the group by that time. Named in refer-
ence – and distinction – to both the Dadaist cabarets in Zurich 
(1916) and the cabarets of Helmut Qualtinger and Carl Merz in post-

war Vienna, these intermedia evenings could today also count as 
“happenings” avant la lettre. There is one structural parallel to this 
actionist art form, which has been thus dubbed predominantly in the 
USA and Great Britain, insofar as their press release called the literary 
cabarets “simply a happening [schlichte begebenheit].” The German 
word “Begebenheit” means “happening,” as it was ﬁrst used by Allan 
Kaprow in 1959 for an action in the Reuben Gallery in New York. In 
retrospect, Oswald Wiener classiﬁed the acts of the two “cabarets” 
as “chansons and dramatic poetry, polemic numbers, and happen-
ings” (Wiener 1997: 310). 
       From today’s perspective, the crucial features of these two 
events are not so much the traditionally Dadaist content of many of 
the sketch-like acts nor the qualities of the mainly sarcastic chan-
sons written and performed by the artists themselves and meant to 
liven up the programs. With respect to the art movements to come, 
speciﬁcally to Viennese Actionism, mainly two closely associated 
questions are of interest. Firstly, the group did not represent or play-
act their actions but rather showed persons and situations in their 
real and direct presence. Secondly, they challenged the traditional 
role of the passive audience: It was “one of the basic ideas of the 
event [...] to exhibit ‚reality‘ and thus, consequently, to abandon it. 
Another idea was to consider the audience as a group of actors and 
ourselves as spectators” (Wiener 1997: 308f.). 
       The protagonists of the literary cabarets should neither “present 
the illusions of other people (like Stanislawki’s actors) nor will they 
pretend to be other persons (like Brecht’s players)” (Achleitner, Bayer, 
Rühm und Wiener, 1997: 356). All persons involved should rather 
remain themselves. As “performative processes” the cabarets did not 
depict, perform, or represent but produce and present actions 
(Fischer-Lichte 2004). To this end, the group members instrumental-
ized their co-participants and pitted them against their ﬂaws (“the 
miserable clumsiness, the naïve attitude, the lack of histrionic or musi-
cal talent, the complete lack of understanding of our ideas, their ’per-
sonal interpretation’” [Wiener 1997: 314]). In order to exhibit and 
24

25
thereby abandon reality, the group had also considered plans “of 
transmitting the speaking-clock announcements by loudspeaker 
during the entire performance” (Wiener 1997: 320). At one time, the 
artists “placed a radio set in front of the curtain, tuning it to some sta-
tion […] and leaving the audience alone with it” (Wiener 1997: 312). 
The idea of spraying “phenol” during an “olfactory chanson” in order 
to directly affect the sense of smell only failed because “this liquid 
had not been obtained through sheer negligence” (Wiener 1997: 318). 
The role of language as a medium for conveying reality, for instance, 
was critically questioned through tautological real-time descriptions 
of events taking place on stage – so the emptying of a bottle and a 
glass of beer in the number “Friedrich Achleitner as a Beer Drinker.” 
With an onstage “piano smashing” the theme of destruction 
emerged in the second cabaret. It became more virulent in the 
1960s, ﬁnally playing a crucial role not least in Viennese Actionism. 
       The wish to unveil and disturb the illusionary mechanisms of the 
theatre by reversing the roles of actors and audience is put into 
effect most concisely in the opening act of the second cabaret: “the 
curtain rose, the ensemble was sitting on chairs in three rows, facing 
the audience and looking at it with great interest. the stage was dark, 
the auditorium lighted. we behaved like ordinary theatre-goers. one 
of us was late and tiptoed to his seat. we pointed a ﬁnger on indi-
vidual spectators in the audience, gawking through our opera 
glasses, whispering. after some ﬁve minutes occasional bursts of 
laughter rose from the audience, which we interpreted as an impor-
tant turn in the play we were watching; so we started to applaud just 
when the audience had started to do so as well, calling for the occa-
sional encore. the atmosphere was great” (Wiener 1997: 316). 
       So the insistence on reﬂecting the context of the happening on 
stage replaced passive reception. The spectators were confronted 
with a role they themselves believed to fulﬁll. “Thus, into the real sit-
uation [= framing] its difference to the ﬁctitious internal situation [= 
stage situation] is introduced (and vice versa)” (Backes 2001: 312). 
So a “collapse of framing” is enacted, and the implicit contract 

between recipient and producer of the artwork – a willing suspen-
sion of disbelief – is cancelled. According to this contract, the 
audience reacts to ﬁctitious texts and scenes at the theater emo-
tionally similar that in reality, yet without interfering in the latter. 
 
Achleitner, Friedrich, Konrad Bayer, Gerhard Rühm, and Oswald Wiener, 1997 
[1959]. literary cabaret. In: Weibel, Peter (ed.), The Vienna Group: The 
Visual Works and the Actions, a Moment in Modernity 1954–1960. 
Vienna, New York, 356. 
Backes, Michael, 2001. Experimentelle Semiotik in Literaturavantgarden. 
Über die Wiener Gruppe mit Bezug auf die Konkrete Poesie. Munich. 
Fischer-Lichte, Erika, 2004. Ästhetik des Performativen. Frankfurt am Main. 
Wiener, Oswald, 1997 [1967]. the “literary cabaret” of the vienna group. In: 
Weibel, Peter (ed.), The Vienna Group: The Visual Works and the Actions, 
a Moment in Modernity 1954–1960. Vienna, New York, 308–320. 
TE 
 
OW:  Yes, of course, but at that time we wouldn’t be aware of it. We 
only later saw that we had developed a theory of the “control of con-
crete situations by the use of language,” although theory is too 
strong a word. Regarding this, Konrad Bayer and I are guilty of “blas-
phemies against the Holy Spirit,” because we made experiments 
with real people. We deliberately agreed to make someone else we 
both knew do something by manipulating him or her. Then we drew 
lots: one of us was given the task of getting him to do something, and 
the other had the task of keeping him from doing it. Konrad and I 
were fighting implicit battles with each other all the time, and they 
went very far. Once it was about a girl who was undecided about 
which of two men she should choose. One of us sponsored one of 
them and the other sponsored the other. We had promised each 
other to keep working on it for a year. We even agreed on the 
allowed means of manipulation. So, for example, we were not 
allowed to praise our own protégé and belittle the other in direct 
conversation with the girl. That was taboo. But the more indirectly 
26

27
we manipulated, the more permissible and the more desirable it 
seemed to us. This reminds me of what I once paraphrased from 
Gustav Bychowski. I called it a “marauding dandyism” “that reinter-
prets the threat of an insight to be caused the inadequacy of the sub-
ject into and the unworthiness of the object.”14 
TE:    This example stems from everyday life, when such an agreement 
on a manipulative competition might appear as an art form. But does 
that actually have to do with art forms? Can we separate it at all from 
art events such as the “literary cabarets”? How would you see the “lit-
erary cabarets” in relation to these life-world experiments? 
OW:  Our goal was to put an end to the very notion of artwork and 
instead view our own behavior as art. The “literary cabarets” consti-
tute but one step on the way to this end. We wanted to free ourselves 
from previous forms of art presentation and to dissolve such narrow 
definitions like “language arts” or “visual arts.” We were almost at the 
point of wanting to be an artist of everyday life — without an œuvre 
so to speak. The artist without an œuvre! Very early Artmann had 
attempted something quite similar with his “Eight Point Proclamation 
of the Poetic Act” of 1953. But to me his poetic act still seemed too 
romantic. Generally, my attitude towards Artmann wavered a lot 
between admiration and embarrassment. I was often embarrassed by 
his production, and then the pendulum swung back again. Yet, I 
hardly let him notice that. The periods when he embarrassed me also 
came later, when I didn’t see him so often. 
        All in all, what I wanted to indicate is our attempt to change our 
whole life. And one of the ways to do that was to distance oneself from 
everything. In other words, we were unknowingly moving toward the 
ideology of the dandy.  
 
Dandy 
Wiener adapted the concept of “dandyism” to his theoretical inter-
ests at the latest in his essay “Eine Art Einzige” (An Ego of Her Own) 
in the pertinent anthology Riten der Selbstauﬂösung, which he co-
edited in 1982 together with Verena von der Heyden-Rynsch for 

Matthes and Seitz publishers (Wiener 1982). Both the concept and 
the social phenomenon developed from the mid-18th century to the 
beginning of the 19th century. But Wiener is neither interested in the 
affects nor in the fashionable demeanor of a speciﬁc social milieu. 
Instead, he dwells on a single trait of dandyism, which he allegedly 
adopts “for Baudelaire’s sake:” “dandyism is a very particular form of 
resistance to the notion that the human can be explained down to 
the last aspects of his psychological life by mechanical principles. […] 
in the dandy, this resistance takes the form of a lone warrior who  
will not consider more than occasional alliances. argumentative con-
sensus, the consensus of philosophizing, is out of the question: for-
mal agreement must in any event be endowed with subjective mean-
ing; absent meaning, it is mechanical, contradicting the intention that 
may bring it about. […] idiosyncratic in the forms of his society, the 
dandy is an exacting and sensitive observer of his inner and outer 
environments but a theorist only ad hoc (maxims, apothegms, apho-
risms). he has understood that the emotions that seize him obey 
internal laws, which is to say, are forced upon him a priori. he dis-
covers the mechanics of ever-larger parts of what he thought of as 
his freedom, including even the apparatus of despair. where is i?” 
(Wiener 2019: 69). 
       For a lecture at the Kunsthalle in Bern in 2017, Wiener amended: 
“Dandyism is a speciﬁc form of warding off the thought that I can be 
explained. What is necessary for success is to immediately recognize 
and interrupt regularities in one’s own behavior. The dandy is on an 
inward spiral, he subtracts meaning from everything he has become 
aware of: that is not you. Or (in a dispute with Günther Anders [and 
his Outdatedness of Human Beings]) ‘Promethean deﬁance,’ wanting 
to remain a subject vis-à-vis objects that are better than me – ‘I don’t 
want to be made;’ ‘… especially not by myself;’ ‘I don’t want to play a 
role;’ ‘I don’t want a mission;’ ‘I have no fate’” (Wiener 2017). 
 
Wiener, Oswald, 1982. Eine Art Einzige. In: Heyden-Rynsch, Verena von der 
(ed.), Riten der Selbstauﬂösung. Munich, 34–78. 
28

29
Wiener, Oswald, 2019. An Ego of Her Own, trans. Gerrit Jackson with Jakob 
Schillinger. October, 170 (Fall 2019), 69–94.  
Wiener, Oswald, 2017. http://kunsthalle-bern.ch/veranstaltungen/2017-04-
21-dandysme-in-der-globalisierung-vortrag-von-oswald-wiener/ (12 
Nov 2021). 
TE 
 
TE:    But wasn’t that already the content of your 1954 “cool manifesto” 
[“cooles manifest”], which was lost later? 
OW:  Yes, the “cool manifesto” was a very early attempt in the same 
direction. My first motive to write it was that I had come to know 
André Breton’s Manifestoes of Surrealism and liked the word “mani-
festo” a lot. So I wanted to write one, too. Secondly my discussions, 
primarily with Konrad, had already progressed quite far, and we 
agreed that it’s ultimately the recipient who renders something an art-
work. Thus, everything becomes art as soon an artist sees and rec-
ognizes it as such. That was the basic idea. So the “cool manifesto” 
called for giving up art production. I had started to quote and make 
montages from existing poetry and from advertising, and Rühm and 
Achleitner also declared found texts to be works of art. I also connect 
this with the attempt to train the gaze to become an artist without 
having produced anything at all. 
TE:    But this could also mean a lyrical, rather uncool attitude towards 
the everyday and its objects, just like in Artmann’s “Eight Point Procla-
mation of the Poetic Act.” What then was cool in the “cool manifesto”? 
OW:  Yes, there are similarities between the two attitudes, but mine 
was much riskier. Konrad and I weren’t harmless and didn’t rule out 
connections to groups similar to the Red Army Fraction in Germany. 
At least I didn’t, and neither did Konrad, I believe. We would have 
been strange terrorists, but the option to kill somebody was definitely 
there, if only to have tried it once. 
TE:    Did you both know Breton’s dictum: “The simplest Surrealist act 
consists of dashing down the street, pistol in hand, and firing blindly, 
as fast as you can pull the trigger, into the crowd.” 

OW:  Probably yes, but it didn’t have anything to do with us, because 
this “firing blindly” would have sounded quite affected to me. My slo-
gan in the “cool manifesto” was again paradoxical — stay cool in order 
to do away with affects. Carl Einstein had written the same thing dec-
ades earlier, but we didn’t know it then. 
TE:    I find it remarkable that the “literary cabarets” coincided with, or 
even slightly predated, the happenings in New York. 
OW:  This was also something that was in the air internationally. It’s 
one of those concurrences, which I have hinted to before. 
TE:    But weren’t the “literary cabarets” more art-historically and theo-
retically motivated? Finally, you didn’t only want to have an effect on 
the audience, you also wanted to connect your performance with epi-
stemic claims, didn’t you? 
OW:  For me it turned out to be more of an endpoint. The cabarets con-
vinced me, that my artistic aspirations would never come true. I was 
searching for something I couldn’t find in and through art. So I 
stopped doing art altogether and quit the Vienna Group, so to speak. 
I didn’t declare my resignation though, but simply didn’t meet the 
others any more and destroyed everything I had written so far. I real-
ized that the texts, which I liked best, were still pretty much in Rühm’s 
wake — and this view didn’t please me at all. Various circumstances in 
my life prompted me to make the decision to stop doing art in favor 
of something completely different. I did not know exactly what that 
would be, but one option was to become a leader in real life, namely 
an important man in some industry. 
TE:    You mean your employment with Olivetti, where you became 
very successful as a sales manager? 
OW:  Yes, I joined the company right after the cabarets, because 
I hoped that Olivetti would achieve crucial innovations in the 
development of computers, and I could eventually contribute to it. 
But in contrast to IBM, Olivetti backed the wrong horse. So my 
engagement with them soon stalled too. In general, my life has been 
marked by many little shoves in the most different directions, which 
then lost momentum. These shoves were mostly connected to a 
30

31
change of residence. Olivetti sent me to Upper Styria where I lived 
in a farmhouse near the town of Judenburg. From there I ventured 
out professionally, because this was an industrial region then. I had 
no contact with my friends back in Vienna whatsoever, until Konrad 
started to send me letters. First, I received them from Vienna,  
then from Paris. He said what a pity it was that we were no longer 
in contact. And one day I traveled to Vienna to meet him in his 
apartment on Dannebergplatz, where he lived with his wife Traudl 
Bayer. Immediately, we became close friends again. But only the two 
of us. 
 
 
die verbesserung von mitteleuropa, roman 
 
OW:  Being friends with Konrad Bayer, was one of the reasons why I 
started to write die verbesserung von mitteleuropa, roman (the 
improvement of central europe, a novel). I had the impression that 
both of us had emancipated ourselves from our 1950s attitude. So my 
incipient knowledge of computers and computer science, which was 
called cybernetics then, already informed the writing process. I had 
read quite a bit. This was the direction I headed towards, yet still in 
connection with the then fashionable philosophy of language. I hoped 
that cybernetics would somehow elucidate the problems of language. 
And this wasn’t entirely wrong. More than anything, I felt a strong urge 
to liberate myself from everything that I had learned from the philos-
ophy of language. That is why there are so many flat swipes at it in the 
verbesserung. Of course I knew that I was going way too far, throwing 
the baby out with the water. But I simply needed it for cathartic rea-
sons. It had to be written down because Konrad didn’t react when I 
was saying it to him. I had already said it dozens or hundreds of times. 
Now it had to be written down. 
TE:    Didn’t you, from the very beginning of the writing process, have 
any doubts whether the philosophy of language and linguistics might 
fail to give you any new insight? Why didn’t you switch to traditional 

science instead of writing the verbesserung, which so clearly had an 
artistic aspect to it? 
OW:  Well, it was exactly this traditional science that I rejected so 
fiercely! My opinion about science had stayed the same. I regarded it 
as a kind of bullshit mimicking the surface of things when fundamen-
tally their depth would be important. Science knew nothing of these 
depths. On the other hand, I wanted to learn its tools because I 
wanted to know what I was talking about when I was denouncing it. 
Furthermore I was fascinated by the “drive” of writing the verbesse-
rung, which I already discussed with regard to Wittgenstein, and I was 
still touched by experiencing and doing art. With this book I tried to 
somehow amalgamate art and science, at least in the sense I under-
stood them then. At the beginning, the poetic elements were much 
stronger than the rational ones, but this gradually changed during the 
writing process. 
TE:    You once called the verbesserung an example of “suicide of a 
poetic artwork.” 
OW:  Well, the verbesserung is a ceaseless manifestation of paradoxes. 
By “suicide of an artwork” I wanted to drastically emphasize that the 
author is permanently sawing at the branch he sits on. Each and every 
sentence is written, so that the author undermines — with respect to 
logic — his own principles. He is pulling away the carpet, which he 
stands on. “The suicide of a poetic artwork” aims at a language art-
work, which despises and denounces language — what is more, in an 
artistic way. Basically this isn’t possible. It contradicts itself. 
TE:    But your targets remained the philosophers of language, that is, 
Wittgenstein? 
OW:  Yes, of course! But practically, I targeted everybody whom I 
deemed an authority. As soon as a name came up, I took its bearer as 
a punching doll, no matter who it was — from Kant to the most 
obscure philosopher such as Ferdinand Canning Scott Schiller whom 
I was also reading then — a lesser pragmatist. 
TE:    Are there any affirmative references in the verbesserung? Perhaps, 
for instance, to the work of Noam Chomsky? 
32

33
OW:  If there are, I didn’t intend to make any. I wanted to see the others’ 
defects only, but often I just couldn’t find them. Then I would pretend 
that I had found some. 
        At that time, I hadn’t read Aragon’s Traité du style yet. With this 
book, Aragon tried something similar. At least in some passages he 
really lets fly as unenthusiastically and unfairly as I did. If I had known 
this book, my work would have taken another direction because I 
wouldn’t have wanted to take the same line. So I am happy that I hadn’t 
read it before. And then I almost stole from Proudhon. The epigraph 
of the verbesserung is from the Gospel of John “ὅ γέγραφα, γέγραφα“, 
meaning “What I have written, I have written.” In the introduction to 
his book, Proudhon stated that he also could have taken this sentence 
as a motto. So I thought: Well, I am happy that you didn’t! 
TE:    As far as anarchism in the verbesserung is concerned, it reads on 
page CXLVI: “let’s put on record, that anarchy does not suffice; only 
anomie could do. so far the conformity of anarchism is dismal.” 
OW:  True enough! Anarchism based on science isn’t anarchism at all, I 
think. If anarchism, then it would have to be an anarchism of con-
sciousness. The one and only conscious being that one believes to have 
to identify with must control everything. Every rule would have to fol-
low. There is no such thing as a social anarchism. Therefore, apart from 
Konrad Bayer, one of the few authors I could accept was Max Stirner. 
Brill publishers had begun to deal with anarchism by releasing the 
book Von Bakunin zu Lenin by Peter Scheibert.15 This work played an 
important role in my early political education. The more individualis-
tic anarchism got, the more I liked it. That was clear. Stirner was most 
impeccable. He wrote this one book, let it take effect — and then sat in 
the dairy of his common-law spouse until the end of his life. 
TE:    Some sentences in the verbesserung seem to prefigure things you 
wrote later and could thus be seen as early expressions of your theory 
of thought: “that which affects you, your state, you attune to some-
thing, you understand in e flat major,” for instance.16 Is there a con-
nection between sentences such as this and the notion of “attune-
ment” in your theory today? 

OW:  Of course I have been preoccupied with this notion for a long 
time. Unfortunately, we haven’t got very far with it until today. At the 
beginning I tried to view an attunement [which is felt as a kind of 
mood in introspection] as the antecedent of a concept. I believe that 
this idea was fortunate but it came before the verbesserung. I observed 
that putting me in a specific mood — by reading, say, Alain Robbe- 
Grillet’s La Jalousie — I viewed things under this specific aspect only. 
Thus, the attunement to this text seems to represent a very generic 
concept. The things which have an effect on this attunement or which 
are, in turn, particularly salient or noticeable through it, are selected 
in the same way as the organism selects certain traits through a con-
cept or, let’s say more generally, through a theme. 
TE:    How do concept and attunement relate? 
OW:  I see gradual transitions between them. With respect to theory I 
think of a concept as an organization of structures, or a structure of 
structures, if I may say so. On the one hand, I view an attunement with 
the help of my concept of structure, and on the other hand, under the 
aspect of the notion of action readiness, which is by far not elaborated 
enough yet. Tentatively, a “concept” is an organization of readinesses. 
Much the same is true for “attunement,” except that it is less struc-
tured than a full-fledged concept. The same holds true for concepts, 
which also exist at many developmental stages. My concept of a tri-
angle as a geometric form is, or so I believe, quite precise, but my con-
cept of “melancholia,” for instance, is rather little structured but still 
more than my concept of “attunement.” If you scrutinize something 
you don’t really know yet, you always have to begin with a certain 
attunement, which, while recognizing the thing connected to it, is reg-
istered almost as a quale. Earlier in my life, I used the psychological 
concept of “screen,” which was important to me for some time. My 
idea was so vague then that I rather should not have spoken of a con-
cept. At the beginning there was only something which I wanted to 
label with this word but couldn’t detail out. The only thing I had was 
a strong and recurrent attunement, and this already is the beginning 
of concept formation. When retrieving something you have already 
34

35
thought about before — let’s call it a standpoint or a perspective — it 
doesn’t matter that you don’t experience it clearly. That’s how I imag-
ine an incipient concept. Its further fate is, of course, uncertain — 
either it develops fully or not. My concept of screen, if I may call it 
concept, did indeed develop and change over time. For some years I 
viewed it as the equivalent of a Turing machine; later the concept’s 
material aspect vanished and it remained the border between two 
processes — between processes of type 1 and type 2, respectively.17 So 
I was really able to experience its slow development from attunement 
to concept, as if something slowly emerges out of the fog. In the end, 
the concept may not be entirely clear but at least its shape, its outline 
is there. So I believe the transition is continuous. 
TE:    Now you are talking about concept formation in the individual. 
But concepts also have something objective or official, at least that’s 
the consensus. 
OW:  But the objective and the official are two different things! Official 
is only the word denoting the concept and a specific way to talk about 
it, nothing else. The individual always depends on him- or herself, if 
he or she wants to apply the concept. 
TE:    That’s how I see it too, but there are some approaches, albeit 
philosophical ones, emphasizing that the symbol reaches beyond the 
individual and its isolated mind. Think of Gottlob Frege, who, roughly 
speaking, aimed at distinguishing “sense” and “reference” of a concept 
from its individual “conceptions” (without, I think, satisfyingly defin-
ing these words). Others again, such as the pragmatists, want to pro-
ceed from social practice in language learning and use. 
OW:  This is legitimate as long as you remain within language alone. At 
least you have agreed on a specific sound pattern denoting the con-
cept, if it even has one single name only. But many full-fledged con-
cepts cannot be denoted by one single word. 
TE:    This leads to the question, to what extent thought is dependent 
on language and which role language plays for cognitive processes. 
Later in your life you seem to have reached a clear position on this 
question: Language is an encapsulated module only mnemonically 

supporting thought processes. At the time of the verbesserung, you 
weren’t so clear on that. It’s trivial to say that in the verbesserung you 
posited that there is communication by language because it is itself a 
verbal artwork. Did you have any hopes then, that language could be 
used to mediate content, even if only regarding the questions we just 
talked about? 
OW:  On the one hand, certainly! On the other hand, I hoped that lan-
guage would implode or hang itself in the verbesserung — that it would 
commit suicide. I wanted to get rid of language. At that time I felt 
threatened by it. This was one of my paranoid traits at that time. I felt 
my thoughts were being constricted by language. 
TE:    What was your antidote? 
OW:  To quit writing. Or to develop other areas of interest — such as the 
bio-adaptor, solipsism, the technically feasible and sanctioned. 
 
 
The “bio-adapter” 
 
TE:    Within the verbesserung, the sections on the “bio-adapter” 
(together with their theoretical underpinnings) count as the first 
sketches of a “bliss suit” or virtual reality (avant la lettre) in which man 
and machine fuse into a cyborg. Although you repeatedly undermine 
your own arguments in this sketch, I believe that they epitomize your 
stance, that the bio-adapter offers the “first debatable outlines of a 
complete resolution of all world problems.”18 Could you comment on 
the original idea? 
OW:  The sections on the “bio-adapter” are based on the concept of 
“functional equivalence.”  
 
Functional Equivalence 
Based on metaphors taken from automata theory, functional equiv-
alence refers, on the one hand, to the indistinguishability between 
the output or behavior of two different entities reacting on the same 
input or stimulus, e.g., of man and machine. On the other hand, an 
36

37
organism may react to two stimuli in the same way, thus making 
them functionally equivalent (see the example of the wooden board 
in this conversation). With a slightly different emphasis, namely per-
taining to the relation of external objects and their models within an 
organism, Wiener stated: “A model of an object is a heterarchy of 
schemas and other structures realized in an organism that are able 
to generate a functional equivalent of this object with respect to 
these schemas as a set of internal symbols” (Wiener 2007: 169). But 
functional equivalence can also be interpreted as a behavior indis-
tinguishable to an observer, although generated by two essentially 
different entities (man vs. machine, for instance): “May not machines 
carry out something which ought to be described as thinking but 
which is very different from what a man does? This objection is a very 
strong one, but at least we can say that if, nevertheless, a machine 
can be constructed to play the imitation game satisfactorily, we need 
not be troubled by this objection” (Turing 1950: 435). 
       Turing conceived of an imitation game (known as the Turing test) 
consisting of three players – a man (A), a woman (B), and a ques-
tioner (C). Today (2022), this setting based on sexual difference 
would have to be discussed separately and reformulated in view of 
wokeness, doing gender, and possibly Turing’s own sexual orienta-
tion. “The players can neither see nor hear each other and thus com-
municate anonymously, e.g., by means of teletype or keyboard and 
screen. Their tasks are deﬁned as follows: Player C (questioner): by 
asking A and B questions, C must try to ﬁnd out who of the two is 
the woman and who is the man. Player A (man) must try to get the 
questioner to falsely identify him as the woman. Player B (woman) 
must try to get the questioner to correctly identify her as the woman. 
In the standardized test procedure devised to decide whether 
machines can think, a machine takes the role of a man and a male 
player takes the role of a woman [...]. Turing postulated that we 
should ascribe intelligence to a machine, if the machine is no worse 
at pretending to be a woman than the man. He predicted that in the 
year 2000, a questioner would mistake the machine for the man in 

three out of ten cases after a ﬁve-minute conversation, so that ‘at 
the end of the century [...] general educated opinion will have altered 
so much that one will be able to speak of machines thinking without 
expecting to be contradicted’” (Stephan und Walter 2021: 168). 
       Among other objections to Turing’s arguments concerning the 
imitation game the following objection is worth a discussion: 
       “Turing is merely aiming at a deﬁnition: ‘>thinking< is what 
passes Turing’s test’ [...] One may guess from occasional remarks 
that Turing himself preferred a behaviorist perspective in the narro-
west sense. Psychology should restrict itself to publicly observable 
and instrumentally measurable behavior and, above all, avoid any 
reference to consciousness. This indeed points to his intention to 
deﬁne intelligence behaviorally, since the behaviorist dogmatic tried 
to save psychology from the ’mental’ by merely censoring its vocab-
ulary. But language restrictions by deﬁnition, of course, do not 
decide whether or not a theory is correct. Apparently, we did not have 
to wait until the year 2000 to be quite naturally served phrases like 
’intelligent terminal,’ ‘thinking brake system,’ ’compassionate zipper,’ 
etc. in the sense of ’smart book.’ On the other hand, language restric-
tions are unavoidable in this case. Even a complete formal descrip-
tion of thought acceptable for most people would encompass, 
among other things, language restrictions. The arbitrariness of 
behaviorists’ terms results from the unscientiﬁc components of their 
dogma. By mere inference from sense data, like we do with physical 
systems, we simply cannot understand human behavior. We also get 
essential clues for a prospective theory from introspection, which 
can often be correlated intersubjectively. Behaviorism prevented sci-
entiﬁc introspection by simply declaring it superﬂuous, even if 
behaviorist concepts, like any other, rely on semi-intentional, or unin-
tentional, and, I think, intentional, albeit tacit introspection. Turing 
seems to deﬁne his notions by emphasizing the functional equiv-
alence [emphasis TE] of the symbols on the terminal screen. Yet the 
matter must be decided on the basis of the adequacy or inadequacy 
of interpretations, which would still be necessary, even if one would 
38

39
allow for the inspection of a reasonably efﬁcient program ’behind’ 
the terminal” (Wiener 1996 [1984]: 78). 
       Later and until recently, Wiener obviously considered the objec-
tion that Turing only sought to deﬁne “thinking” less important than 
the following: You can include into the simulation any argument you 
detect, which is missing in the simulation, simply because you are 
now able to formulate it. Wiener thus boils down the conclusions 
from Turing’s test to two punch lines: “either Turing means that all 
efforts to structurally specify what can be justiﬁably called ‚thinking‘ 
are in vain; or you have to conclude that he proposes that the respec-
tive program embodies the best systematic hypothesis of thinking 
in order to permit tests of the best systematic counterarguments. In 
the second case, of course, Turing’s test would be no more than a 
metaphor. At least one could extend it into a scientiﬁc, if curious, 
practice, because one may hope, after all, that each consistent 
debunking of a program leads to stronger hypotheses, as any sys-
tematic argument could be integrated into the program [at least 
according to the Church-Turing thesis]. It seems to me, however, that 
Turing simply preferred the ﬁrst interpretation of his test as a sufﬁ-
cient criterion for attributing ‘thought.’ This can be inferred from his 
remark that the conditions of the test put the program at a disadvan-
tage [as quoted above]: ‘May not machines carry out something 
which ought to be described as thinking but which is very different 
from what a man does?’ Turing’s answer is typical of his thoroughly 
behavioristic attitude: ‘if, nevertheless, a machine can be con-
structed to play the imitation game satisfactorily, we need not be 
troubled by this objection.’ Turing seems to be satisﬁed by the inde-
ﬁnable ‘intuition’ of functional equivalence [emphasis TE] at the level 
of the screen symbols. To search the program itself for any structural 
similarities with human thought is thus out of the question” (Wiener 
1996 [1990]: 246). 
       Wiener follows this direction by demanding a “structural speci-
ﬁcation” instead of “functional equivalence” as the deﬁnition of intel-
ligence: “I tried to specify a task, which a machine has to fulﬁll, in 

order for me to begin to ascribe intelligence to it: to ‘fold’ strings 
under constraints. But for Turing’s test not even this would be a reli-
able criterion. First, [...] even humans do not always succeed in such 
‘folding,’ and second, a benchmark for the difﬁculty of such tasks for 
humans – and for machines – cannot be effectively determined. 
Therefore, I took one step further and tried something like a struc-
tural characterization of my own thinking. Beyond this, I don’t know 
further. If someone would present me with a machine, in which I rec-
ognize the same processes at work that I ﬁnd in introspection, then 
I would just settle down to the opinion that it thinks just like me” 
(Wiener 1996 [1990]: 247–248). 
 
Stephan, Achim, and Sven Walter, 2021. Nachwort. In: Turing, Alan M., Com-
puting Machinery and Intelligence / Können Maschinen denken?. Dit-
zingen, 131–183. 
Turing, Alan M., 1950. Computing Machinery and Intelligence. Mind, 59/236, 
433–460. 
Wiener, Oswald, 1996 [1984]. Turings Test. In: id., Schriften zur Erkenntnis-
theorie. Vienna, New York, 69–95. 
Wiener, Oswald, 1996 [1990]. Probleme der Künstlichen Intelligenz. In: id., 
Schriften zur Erkenntnistheorie. Vienna, New York, 198–277. 
Wiener, Oswald, 2007. Über das „Sehen“ im Traum (Zweiter Teil). manuskripte, 
178, 161–172. 
TE 
 
OW:  Although I am able to define functional equivalence now, I couldn’t 
have done so when I was writing the bio-adapter. The realization that 
functional equivalence exists was just shocking to me. The brain of 
somebody, who so far naïvely believed that every fact in the world is 
unique — who believed in absolute things, so to speak —, received a 
heavy blow. If there is functional equivalence then there is nothing 
real. That might be too harshly said but that’s how I felt then. So I had 
to digest this notion first — that, for example, only a few conditions at 
a few nerve cell endings suffice to evoke in me the feeling of touching 
40

41
a sanded wooden board. This feeling can be produced in very many 
ways — with the wooden board but also with different stimulants. 
        One lesson was that what really matters is what I had understood 
about the organization of my organism. Where does the feeling come 
from, which I experience as a quale? Some philosophers assure us 
that this is a stupid question, but this doesn’t help me. While it is clear 
that we are not talking about a topographical location here, the ques-
tion remains as to which agency registers this feeling. One can even 
question whether there is an agency that actually feels. What would 
it look like? What does the path to this agency, that is not yet this 
agency, look like? As long as we don’t know these processes for sure, 
we could imagine a lot of intermediate stages in between, on which 
one could evoke the same feeling at any time, without always implying 
the entire sensory apparatus. 
        In the verbesserung this shows in the following passage: “the 
adapter must furthermore be capable in any event of performing all 
sorts of operations on a body that, initially, is after all still human 
(amputations; organ transplantations; neurosurgery) and carry out 
the regeneration of any of its own functions that may be impaired or 
design and install replacement modules and, more generally, newly 
developed components. in other words, it modifies not only its pro-
grams, which must be interpreted as command sequences of ‘material 
states,’ but also, in the course of its self-adaptation, its physical mod-
ules, which, as program carriers, are what makes sequential control 
possible in the first place. in this regard, the latter are no longer in any 
way passive media of the operation but in fact determinant states; the 
distinction between hardware and software is solely didactic and 
without any substantial basis: the installation of a joint between 
shoulder and elbow will usher in a new era of back-washing.”19 
Ideas such as these brought me to the concept of the bio-adapter. In 
1988 I commented on it in retrospect, noting that I later found a pas-
sage in the First Meditation of Descartes where he outlines the notion 
of a demon simulating the impressions and things you feel without 
them being present: 

        “I shall suppose that some malicious, powerful, cunning demon 
has done all he can to deceive me — rather than this being done by 
God, who is supremely good and the source of truth. I shall think that 
the sky, the air, the earth, colours, shapes, sounds and all external 
things are merely dreams that the demon has contrived as traps for 
my judgment. I shall consider myself as having no hands or eyes, or 
flesh, or blood or senses, but as having falsely believed that I had all 
these things.”20 
        Without being aware of the text by Descartes, I had had exactly 
the same thoughts while writing the bio-adapter.21 
 
the bio-adapter 
“I began to write my book die verbesserung von mitteleuropa, roman 
as an honest attempt at ﬁnding man’s soul, his freedom, as well as 
his exceptionality within nature. [...] Incommensurable images always 
boil down to the logical conclusion, by which they lose their discon-
nectedly individual character. Again and again it’s only a re-folding 
of machines; deliberate and involuntary reshufﬂings always yield clear 
shapes, and what now is false by way of not being coherent with the 
new insight will not turn out to be heroically but only trivially false. 
Each personality desires at order because it is self-contained struc-
ture itself. [...] So the only source of a personality worth desiring would 
be the incomprehensible, because then one would at least manifest 
one irrational feature of any kind. Yet obviously, merely to think about 
achieving the unlikely, charisma, and the belief in the self is forbidden. 
Hence, one must not think about anything at all. The irrational would 
have to have an idea of me in order to be relevant for my conscious-
ness. Then it could delineate the revolt, and my suffering would 
become its power. Therefore, the desire for freedom channels into 
movement, drive, rebound, the frenzy of intoxication, sex, and daze. 
Things become unintelligible because they happen so fast, and they 
have to be accelerated or, at least, blurred further as soon as analysis 
impends on them. Maybe this tempo can be reenacted into a frenzy 
of insight? The tentative signal stems from the unconscious: I got it! 
42

43
Every intuition, every initial understanding, every feeling to have 
understood is a new beginning. Does the self manifest itself in the 
chaotic moment before the dust settles? But soon the effort to see 
differently turns into the desire, nay, the compulsion to see differently 
as one actually does and probably has been seeing before. So the 
capacity of re-interpretation is soon exhausted. What seemed to cor-
roborate my ego – a paradox, a conﬂict – now is only evidence that I 
have not really understood. As much as I hate my abilities, the irra-
tional remains nothing but my inability. 
       Okay, inability. Anyway, only trivial things touch me. Self-deni -
gra ted and indulged in the embarrassment of my own opinion and my 
own style I search for discomfort, which I shortly enjoy because at 
least now I seem to be the master of my triviality – against nature for 
the poor. One has to declare valid the very ﬁrst impulse for action 
because trying to improve would only bring to light higher naïveties, 
which one can no longer easily undermine. Then again the insight that 
all this takes place merely within an imagined social world, and every-
thing has always been motivated by the attempt to understand the 
rationale of the others. Since freedom merely means discarding what 
is understood, the ﬁnal stage is the total demolition of all values. The 
desire for the impossible delivers me to the insight – I myself am a 
mechanism too. ‘The self cannot be saved.’ The only thing to be under-
stood is the structure of the natural numbers, as far as I embody it. 
       That’s how I arrived at the bio-adapter. It is an allegory for my 
mental development (the book is a novel of personal development 
[Entwicklungsroman]). Yet it also describes what I wanted the reader 
to experience, namely the same development – start and takeoff. 
Above all, however, it formulates the idea that the intuition of self 
depends on values prescribed from the outside but not realized at 
the inside. Only change is able to enrich me, but this change must 
appear as a coincidence because I do not yet possess its structure, 
and it must complicate me without destroying me. 
       About the same time, the English philosopher John Wilson con-
sidered ‘eudaimonia machines.’ Yet, he was not a pathological case 

such as I am, searching for a paradox, which would falsify an entire 
mode of thought and not just a single theory. He too wanted to save 
a piece of humanity but he was more modest. He saw the threat to 
personality clearly: ‘A properly programmed machine could both 
know what we were like better than we did, and also make the kind 
of choice that we would make if we were not disturbed by the human 
obstacles of prejudice and bias or other obstacles such as lack of 
time, patience, or the ability to concentrate. […] Now we are faced, 
not only by a machine that produces eudaimonia chosen by men, nor 
only by a machine that chooses eudaimonia for men, but also by a 
machine that alters men, perhaps to ﬁt an extended concept of 
eudaimonia’ (Wilson 1964: 230). 
       If we want to experience ourselves coherently, we should not 
think beyond epiphenomena. Only the inconsiderate will survive 
mechanization. Personalism presupposes something authentic. But 
it turns out that the idea of functional equivalence is no deception. 
The world is a measurement process of which every part can be sub-
stituted. My thought is such a measurement section, too. […] Do I 
bet on a machine interpreting and complicating my appetites and 
values so that my intellect can follow? Or shall I be reduced to those 
nerve bundles, which mediate wellness so that I feel ‘eternally’ well? 
Is this idiocy all that remains authentic? 
       Maybe hopelessness. die verbesserung von mitteleuropa, roman 
aims at reaching escape speed in order to take revenge for the hopes 
of its author. All right – I am not planned but I have evolved. But fuck 
evolution! Is there a way of escaping it? Also the bio-adapter lies 
around somewhere and in the way, say, of a stone. But isn’t that a 
nice step backwards in the end – adaptation [...] masking my further 
complication? No, it’s not. If the bliss bundle is to grow irregularly, 
the adaptor must also communicate meaningfully with the world, 
and any mode in which this happens will also complicate the world. 
In the sixties I didn’t grasp that yet. Only disintegration counts; and 
only to me. Furthermore I can only stop, if it stops. Worse, it does not 
matter to me or to it, only the sporty aspect remains. I am born into 
44

45
the adapter, so both more bliss and more hopelessness is inconceiv-
able. Or is it? 
       My reﬂections during the past twenty-ﬁve years have led me to 
the conviction that, in order to correct me, the bio-adapter must itself 
be conscious and willful, maybe experience lust and pain, certainly 
have appetites and prejudices. Suppose a radical new science would 
make this possible. How will the bio-adapter itself cope with its per-
sonality? Will it build its own bio-adaptor? And how could I, its tha-
lamus, proﬁt from it – by a third-order failure?” 
 
Wiener, Oswald, 1996. Notizen zum Konzept des Bio-Adapters (1988). In: id.,  
Schriften zur Erkenntnistheorie. Wien, New York, 108–111, originally in: 
Maschinenmenschen. Katalog zur Ausstellung des Neuen Berliner Kunst -
vereins in der Staatlichen Kunsthalle Berlin vom 17. Juni bis 23. Juli 1989. 
Berlin. 
Wilson, John. 1964. The Frankenstein Problem. Philosophy, 39/149, 223–
232. 
 
TE:    Did you develop concepts such as functional equivalence during 
the writing of or the reading for the verbesserung? 
OW:  It had brewed up somehow — rather from the background 
readings for the verbesserung. And some passages, which obviously 
express what I have just felt, I didn’t know at that time. Especially the 
quote from the Meditations of Descartes only later impressed itself on 
me. Probably I had even read it, but read over it at first. 
TE:    The essay on the “bio-adapter” stands out in the book because of 
its style. So it has often been considered a separate part. Do you see it 
as an integral part of the verbesserung or not? 
OW:  Unfortunately, it has been considered as separate, while I do see it 
as an integral part. Even more, it winds up an entire development, 
which didn’t result from the work on the verbesserung. It rather took 
place in the general background of my life, which my writing only 
accentuated. The style of the essay is consciously parodist. I tried to 
mock popular science writing. That’s why the section “Introduction” of 

“notes on the concept of the bio-adapter, essay” was so important to 
me, although it remains totally unacknowledged in secondary litera-
ture. The true core of my anarchism is formulated there. I even went 
so far as to nastily claim — nastily at least at that time —, that it would be 
better to be killed by a spree killer than to be put on the iron lung for a 
few years or to waste away as a state pensioner. I tried to show under-
standing for leftist young radical people of the time. All of this has to 
do with the bio-adapter, but perhaps in somewhat convoluted ways. 
For example, I already chose the quotes very consciously, say, the motto 
of Karl Kraus: “and let chaos be welcome; for order has failed.” I find 
that great! Equally the quote of Schopenhauer: “where calculating 
starts, understanding ends.” Or vice versa (laughs) … 
TE:    In the bio-adapter, too, language and linguistics are often a major 
topic, even if not in a positive sense. You wrote, for instance, that only 
linguistics conceiving of itself as a part of behaviorist psychology will 
practically fulfill its fate. 
OW:  Yes, language does play a role. Back then I understood language in 
several respects as an instrument for mental engineering. This led me 
to ideas which I still find quite intriguing. Soon after I “perceived lan-
guage as a part of the objective world, onto which I have to project my 
‘contents’.”22 But then, how does language as an external stimulus in -
fluence consciousness? Insofar as it is capable, like a visual stimulus, to 
cause the individual to change its orientation, language belongs to the 
environment just like any object in the external world, which, for in -
stance, cast light rays on your retina. In the verbesserung, I tended to 
exaggerate this aspect and called language the only environment. Non-
etheless, I already realized that linguistics evaded the actual problem, 
because “language” does not mean anything at all, as long as you don’t 
know how it affects the brain (in thinking, understanding, and imagery).23 
The bio-adapter has only little matter at its disposal, so it must be very 
economical. As already mentioned, I then thought, that if one strokes 
a tabletop with one’s hand, for instance, the bio-adapter would only 
surrogate the stimulus at those places where the surface is touched. 
Everywhere else nothing would happen ... there would be no table, of 
46

47
course, but only its sensation. At the first stage, before bio-adapter 
intervenes directly in the nervous system, it still has to work with 
matter in order to simulate it, and so the tactile receptors of the hand 
are stimulated — but only at the points where the finger really touches 
the tabletop. Things like that fascinated me, because they immediately 
imply the following idea: Probably the world in which we live is just 
the same! We have already been living within the bio-adapter for a 
long time! Thus the section “bio-adapter” ends with a sentence with-
out period: “maybe we all are”.24 
TE:    What remains? Not even a brain, but …? 
OW:  … something functionally equivalent. 
TE:    So that the medium of intelligence is irrelevant? 
OW:  Right. The premise is, of course, that this is possible in principle. 
Until today I am not convinced that it is. The remains of my philoso-
phy of consciousness is, after all, supported by a slight doubt that sim-
ulation can never be pushed so far that it actually becomes what it is 
supposed to simulate but that some remainder cannot be simulated. 
This remainder, however, would constitute the essence of intelligence. 
These are doubts I harbored and still harbor, but I wouldn’t want to 
call them claims. 
TE:    Would you say that the bio-adapter developed a radical utopia, 
which also plays a role in the following stages of your work but is ques-
tioned again and again? 
OW:  Yes. Even today the thoughts that led to the bio-adapter are 
important to me. 
TE:    Which authors were you interested in while writing the bio-
adapter? All those named in the bibliography? 
 
 
Cybernetics and automata theory 
 
OW:  At that time, I could no longer youthfully enthuse about other 
kinds of texts such as before those of August Stramm or, in particular, 
of Benjamin Péret. In the mid-1950s, I had read these authors in an 

entirely different mood than the authors I now read for the bio-
adapter. Now, I primarily read technical works and I started to deal 
with automata theory. I was successful as an employee and so Olivetti 
paid me a trip to Milan. There I purchased a book, which marked the 
beginning of my ongoing and rather dynamic commitment to com-
puter programming. The book was Computer Logic: Functional Design 
of Digital Computers by Iván Flores, and it proved to be equally serious 
as Boris A. Trakhtenbrot’s Wieso können Automaten rechnen? (Why Do 
Automata Compute?) from the late 1960s on.25 This paved the way for 
dealing with the concept of the Turing machine.26 
        At first I entered a prominent and rather fashionable field of the 
1960s, namely content analysis, of which I read and also bought a lot. 
Some of these tomes I still own. I was very interested in it because 
this was a kind of beginning of artificial intelligence, only without 
computers. These attempts went in the direction of finding a defini-
tion of meaning, whereby meaning was to be determined by the 
detection of word accumulations, statistics, information-theoretical 
esthetics, and other fields fashionable then. The beginning of so-
called content analysis was actually political, because its target was 
the analysis of Russian bureaucratic language. Of course, I was deeply 
satisfied when I realized this, since it supported my views about the 
connection between language and politics. As an example, let me 
quote from the verbesserung: “but the rest of us add forcefully: the 
words together with their use are inseparably connected with polit-
ical and social organization; they are this organization; they are that 
a priori, about whose existence these idiots have used up so much 
thought; in truth they are only there to make idiots believe in reality 
as they did before believe in the hereafter; believe in the hereafter, 
so that idiots toil properly and become still more streamlined and 
more well-behaved [...].”27 
        Later, I put that into perspective. I doubted the relation of a word 
or a sentence to any content outside the apparatus that establishes 
this relation within the individual. Something like “content” or “sense” 
or “meaning” (all these expressions are the same to me) cannot be 
48

49
deduced from the words used. So the demand for “political correct-
ness” of language use is built on false premises, too. In search of the 
conditions of the fact that contradiction-free interpretations of an 
arbitrarily large set of data are widely found, although infinitely many 
interpretations of this set of data, e.g. of a sequence of words, are pos-
sible, I concluded first: “As the main source of constraints we identi-
fied language (Whorf) and all social institutions, which (presumably) 
emanated from it. So the trajectory arcs back to politics; society’s 
dominance over language must be countered by our own production, 
which we must not fall for either. From this standpoint progressive 
conservatives will define the ‘politically correct,’ except for the last 
remark.”28 
TE:    What did you read about content analysis back then? Ithiel de 
Sola Pool?29 
OW:  This name was familiar then but only to people specializing in 
content analysis. I also dealt with its mathematical branch but not 
with factor analysis. That chastened me a lot, because I thought that 
by this they build up a concept of meaning without any reference to 
human thinking. On the one hand, this radicalism struck me as very 
attractive, but on the other hand, it seemed an unbearable anathema. 
TE:    Especially speech recognition is still applying vector spaces for 
so-called “latent semantic analysis.” 
OW:  Yes, but the means are entirely different. Today, a lot of statistics 
and probability theory is used in connection with the language phi-
losophy and technology of Bayes, which is equally fascinating for engi-
neers. In 2017, I held a lecture in Cologne, where I tried to acquaint a 
larger audience with this fact, which seems downright monstrous to 
me — yet monstrous in an ambiguous sense, namely both positive and 
negative. The latest technical developments allow for the implemen-
tation of many tasks, which formerly only humans were thought to 
be capable of. But the machines fulfill them in a completely different 
way. We’re witnessing a kind of “alien intelligence” there. I’ll give one 
brief example that impressed me in particular because it has some-
thing to do with the bio-adapter. The task is speech recognition and 

translation problems that are solved in a statistical way. On the one 
hand, the tremendous capacity of today’s mainframe computers in 
terms of number of memory locations is impressive. It reaches 
numbers that are no longer imaginable. Also the processing speed is 
unimaginable, especially if many processors are working in parallel. 
My example is the television quiz game Jeopardy. In 2011, a program 
called Watson won three episodes of Jeopardy! against the two current 
champions of that series. Compared to the ambitions of current proj-
ects, Watson was quite modestly equipped: only ninety IBM Power 
750 servers with only sixteen terabytes of RAM, each server with only 
a 3.5 GHz 8-core processor, and each core could only process a maxi-
mum of four threads at a time. 
        Jeopardy has a lot to do with language, with linguistic wit, puns, 
and the like. A sentence is uttered and the participants have to invent 
a suitable question, which this sentence is an answer to. When they 
believe they have found a suitable answer, they have to press a button 
which makes a sound. From statistical measurements we know that 
the first to hit the button needs 3.5 seconds on average. Therefore, the 
engineers must design the machine according to the premise that the 
matching question is found in less than 3.5 seconds. So in only 3 sec-
onds — I don’t know exactly how many — billions of memory locations 
are read, compared, and merged. 
        But what does “compared and merged” mean? From an engineer-
ing perspective this is not so uncanny yet. But what is uncanny is the 
capacity, which makes the computation possible without seemingly 
any limit from the parsimony of thought. Insight — actually advanta-
geous from a parsimonious point of view — no longer plays a role 
because of the machine’s capacity and processing speed. Thus, if 
these machines would have something that I’d call insight — which 
they don’t have yet, but let’s just assume they will attain it —, then it 
would certainly not depend on parsimony. Let’s take a closer look at 
how these statistics work. The sentences are “analyzed,” but it would 
be better to say that word probabilities are measured. That is the most 
primitive way to approach the following question: What is the prob-
50

51
ability of a specific word occurring after a specific precedent word. 
For example, you say “because” and this predicts the probability that 
the word “that” will come next. This requires a huge corpus, on the 
basis of which nothing but measurements are made. 
        So far this was the preparation phase of Watson’s Jeopardy per-
formance: A gigantic collection of probabilities is created, not only for 
the respective next word, but also for the third word and so forth. At 
first I was tempted to shrug my shoulders and think: “What’s the big 
deal, it’s only probabilities?” But then it dawned on me what these 
probabilities result from. They result from texts that people have 
written, and it’s quite clear that the statistics of their word usage some-
how reflect, to use big words, the structure of the universe insofar as 
people have grasped or viewed it. Hence, it is evident that such an 
approach to solving tasks like the Jeopardy game, if pushed further, 
must necessarily be successful on a broader scale. 
        Are epistemology and cognition after all only a question of the 
technical progress of computing capacity? In a more general sense, I 
decidedly believe that no, it is not. For these machines do not invent 
anything at all. They have no ideas, they have no concepts, they have 
no structure — at least not how I define structure. They don’t build 
machines themselves, and they don’t use these machines. So they rep-
resent the surface of intelligence, which is structured insofar as there 
exist historical “channels” such as the text corpora in Watson. There 
exists a tremendous channel system through which very thick chan-
nels and extremely thin, even hair-thin ones are running. They repre-
sent millions, billions of historically established “associations” in the 
sense of connections between words and sentences historically 
uttered — including some in tasks of previous Jeopardy games.30 
TE:    But Jeopardy is often about mere puns. I could accept your stance 
if the machine’s lexicon would consist of older puns that have been 
uttered and written down before. But what about creative or new word 
uses, newly generated wordplays or metaphors that have never been 
uttered in this way before? Of course one could opine that the fact that 
they have never been uttered and thus never appeared on the linguis-

tic surface before does not imply that there might not be any so-called 
“conceptual mappings” underlying the comparisons made. 
OW:  It’s mainly about puns indeed, and puns are, to my understand-
ing, close to wordplays. You play with words and not with their mean-
ing. The meaning of a pun is mostly either nonsense or corny. But 
even a corny joke is deeper than a pun, because it sometimes plays 
with word meanings. For a pun you exploit the ambiguity of a word 
in its current environment, so that a second meaning can also be 
attributed to it. Generally, the latter has nothing to do with the first 
meaning, but in some fortunate cases it indeed has. These are then 
particularly good puns. 
        To detect them is an ideal task for language statistics because the 
machine “knows” the different ways of pronouncing a word and com-
pares billions of possibilities within an insanely short period. At the 
first stage, which takes half a second, it lists these billions of word 
combinations; then it detects those that become statistically conspic-
uous from the point of view of “searching for something that fits.” All 
the dictionaries in the world that have anything to do with English 
have already been preprocessed and are thus available. So the statis-
tics is already there; it doesn’t have to be recalculated anew each time, 
but represents a gigantic corpus of statistical connections. That’s the 
machine’s memory, so to speak. Difficulties only arise if analogies at 
a deeper level of meaning play a role. But that’s hardly the case with 
Jeopardy, which is a superficial game. Let me sum up what I want to 
say with this digression in one sentence: With such programs you 
create something similar to the bio-adapter! If I can no longer differ-
entiate whether I am talking to a human being or a machine on the 
phone, then we are already in the bio-adapter. 
TE:    This hints at Turing’s test, as you said. 
OW:  This is an example of Turing’s test — it’s about whether machine 
can be distinguished from man, and if so how. Turing’s test is crucial 
for the bio-adapter, of course, although I didn’t know that at the time. 
I got there by other means, or rather by my own means. As I said, the 
basic concept was “functional equivalence,” and that was a real blow 
52

53
to me. This reminds me of how the poet Heinrich von Kleist felt the 
insights of Kant, if one can say so, were like a blow to his sensibility. 
To me it happened in a similar way — maybe not with such dramatic 
consequences as for Kleist, but in a similar vein. I felt an axe blow 
against my concept of the real, which until then had been one of my 
guiding notions. 
TE:    In the secondary literature about the verbesserung, there is con-
troversy about the role that cybernetics, statistics, and behaviorism 
have played for you. Some say that the verbesserung, including the bio-
adapter, are prime examples of the view that human consciousness 
and intelligence will be suspended and replaced by cybernetics and 
cybernetic machines. Others, however, say that the book propheti-
cally implies that behaviorism, which has been dominating the 
sciences from the beginning of the 20th century (just as the varieties 
of positivism did before), is a mode of thinking, if not an ideology, and 
will transform all science, medicine, and politics. So it will inevitably 
lead to the conditioning of the individual by the state and even to the 
loss of the remains of individuality. The concluding section of your 
book reflects this scientific stance, which in the 20th century (and also 
at the beginning of the 21st century) had risen to the status of an 
engrained theory of the world, as if it was a distorting mirror. Accord-
ing to this second view, statistics is neglecting details, and statistical 
correlations skip the description of the underlying processes. Yet 
intelligence precisely consists in reconstructing these underlying pro-
cesses. 
OW:  Doubtlessly, both views hold true. A friend and esteemed col-
league, Friedrich Wolfram Heubach, has recently written a book on 
dandyism,31 wherein he wrote about an idea that he had already put 
forward at the time when both of us held joint seminars on this sub-
ject at the Academy of Fine Arts in Düsseldorf. The idea is that the 
dandy could be subsumed under the psychoanalytic notion of “iden-
tification with the aggressor,” which has become popular under the 
heading of “Stockholm syndrome.” Originally, the idea of identifica-
tion with an aggressor stems from Anna Freud, I believe. This was 

pretty much true in my case at that time, and I would not hesitate to 
say that there indeed exists something like this syndrome. One aspect 
of dandyism surely is this identification with the aggressor; only that 
Heubach understands the concept of “aggressor” quite conven-
tionally. A mother, for instance, could be such an aggressor. This is 
probably the way the concept was coined by Anna Freud. 
In my case, however, the aggressor was behaviorism with all its impli-
cations. If I may dare to treat this intricate matter so trivially, the ver-
besserung expressed my idealistic attitude, which was, of course, anti-
materialistic. So instead of behaviorism, which actually doesn’t 
necessarily have to be materialistic, I ventured to postulate a blunt 
materialism right away. Most philosophers in Europe abominated 
behaviorism, and so did I. And consequently I also abominated the 
idea that machine could eventually replace man. Beneath it there is 
again the notion of the real, which I’ve already mentioned a couple of 
times in this conversation. So I think, I identified with materialism, as 
if suddenly a switch was flipped, and with it came a new sense of self: 
“Wow, now I’m a materialist, now that’s so very bad — now that’s the 
radical chic.” 
        That’s how the book should be understood. That’s why it is so 
ambivalent: once this way, then that way. And that’s why it was never 
really completed. For I never fully accomplished the transition to 
become the aggressor myself. There’s always a relapse. I think that’s 
how you should interpret it. 
TE:    And as a consequence you fully turned to automata theory? 
Could you see it like that? 
OW:  Well, you know that I don’t belong to the species of unambiguous 
people who are capable of fully professing one thing. There is always 
a remainder, and sometimes quite a large one, which I can’t overcome 
completely. And so I didn’t change to the side of automata theory with 
flying colors. First, I hit an obstacle, because I had to find out whether 
or not it is really so important. So I had to learn automata theory more 
thoroughly in order to be able to judge it. Even now, I always return to 
one essential point: Efforts in the fields of behaviorism and statistics 
54

55
will fail. Although they will be able to replace man, they will do so only 
by functional equivalence and not in the sense of real man, if you will. 
Today, however, I can specify these matters better, namely: Machines 
on a behavioral and statistical basis will not have any ideas in the 
sense of what I call “proxy objects;” they will not experience what I 
experience when I work to solve a geometric problem, for instance. 
In fact, they will not experience anything at all, but still they will func-
tion. And yet I cannot say: Okay, that’s enough for me. It simply isn’t. 
At the end of the day, my last excuse when I feel really cornered, my 
last point of support is, that all I really want to know is how I myself 
think. How does my thinking function? After all, I’m not interested in 
anything else. But it’s not about me alone, of course, it’s about but how 
people do this — thinking. Today, I am convinced that it cannot be 
explained by former means — and these are computers. So the pen-
dulum is swinging back again, so to speak, but over time these swings 
always take place at higher levels. 
TE:    But no previous level was without consequences, and you expect 
more insight every time you have passed through such a level, don’t 
you? 
OW:  I guess that’s what they called dialectics back then … 
TE:    But it is not only about a mere denial of automata theory and its 
offshoots, but also about what you can adopt from it and what you 
may have to supplement. 
OW:  Yes, plus now there are new imponderables: Certain programs, 
especially neural networks, can no longer be understood in terms of 
algorithms. Their programmers themselves no longer understand 
how their machines perform their tasks. Behind this lurks a threaten-
ing corollary: The machine isn’t any different than man, because, after 
all, we don’t understand how we function either. Yet, this seeming 
comparability must be harshly denied. We must show clearly how 
these two kinds of incomprehensibilities differ from each other. 
 
 
 

Language and thought processes 
 
TE:    Back to the verbesserung. It seems that your attitude toward “lan-
guage” as an instrument was in many respects very skeptical then. 
Which role did you attribute to language for thought processes? 
OW:  During my work on the verbesserung I also made initial attempts 
at introspection with epistemological goals. Every introspector 
notices that even before he uses a word or utters a sentence, there is 
something somehow mysteriously connected with the word or sen-
tence. This something is not the word or sentence, but the general 
feeling that you know something without yet having actualized it con-
sciously. I have recently begun to develop a theory according to which 
this knowledge can be unfolded, and that it then shows itself intro-
spectively in concrete successive moves. 
        A simple example, which unfortunately can easily be doubted 
because of its obviousness, is arithmetic. If you mentally calculate, for 
instance, you must definitely execute each single step, as soon as the 
task exceeds the times table. When multiplying multi-digit numbers, 
every observer sees the same as Turing saw in the calculation pro-
cesses of others: you “write down” numbers, then there is a pause, 
then you “write down” another number, and so on. If you do that your-
self, then you know what happens in the pauses — at least you get the 
feeling for it. The final resolution of what we see here is that there is 
a process, a procedure, a method. It is in the nature of any procedure 
that it cannot be executed all at once while being present to the intro-
spector. You can’t play a melody by playing all the tones at once, 
because within that single concurrence of all the tones there are innu-
merable melodies. Even if you play some tones louder, there are still 
innumerable melodies. 
        This sequential way of proceeding or this procedural feature of 
thought is an important insight that I first had when I was working 
on the last parts of the verbesserung. It was the beginning of a way of 
thinking that later brought me to Piaget, because I was looking for 
psychologists emphasizing the active and dynamic aspect of thought. 
56

57
Until then, I had only found static and statistical explanation 
attempts. Strikingly, scholars focusing on language, the philosophy 
of language, and on linguistics did not ask for the mechanism that 
leads to the very existence of the statistics of language use. Instead, 
they assumed that, by its sheer possibility and applicability, statistics 
is already self-evident. In their view, there was no cause why certain 
probabilities were distributed in a certain way. They did not even 
bother to look for causes. In contrast, I was convinced that there  
are good causes why thought is not statistical. Statistics actually  
only describes things, but does not unravel them, because it only 
describes their surface. 
        There is no doubt that language does play a role in thinking, 
namely the role of a stabilizer or an exoskeleton, if you want. Although 
it doesn’t globally subserve “memory,” if only because you would have 
to define the latter much more precisely, it does help with memory 
retrieval. When something does not come to my mind, I often find 
myself searching for a word denoting the thing that does not come to 
my mind. The fact is: In order for me to have the feeling that I have 
designated something with a word, I must first have another feeling, 
which is directed at something else, which is not this word. To put it 
somewhat self-tormentingly, there must exist something retrievable 
before the word. But how do I retrieve it? Unfortunately, we don’t 
know yet. But if I have the feeling of “Ah, there is the hint of a thought!,” 
then sometimes it wasn’t a full-fledged thought yet that appeared. The 
thing that was meant was yet far too unclear. But still something was 
meant, that isn’t new to me. At just that moment I have something that 
I can name with a word, and that is exactly where instrumental lan-
guage use begins. 
        The mere existence of the word “retrievable” alone suggests that 
there is something worthy of that name. In this case you have to 
ponder a bit, but this pondering also belongs to the domain of knowl-
edge. If you think about it a bit, you immediately realize: This “retriev-
able” does indeed exist, because you now remember that you have 
been talking about it before. Hence, you just recovered something that 

can be denoted. And if we talk about it very often, then we’ll find a 
short word denoting the retrievable. In this sense, language is practi-
cally indispensable. Theoretically speaking, I don’t think it is indis-
pensable because, for example in mental arithmetic, “inner” words 
and symbols don’t play any role. Mental arithmetic is a very strange 
process, adding up numbers, for instance. Even more striking is men-
tal multiplication, because up to a certain point you learn it by heart. 
The multiplication table is so deeply entrenched into my brain that I 
no longer even notice what I’m actually doing when I multiply. So 
there is nothing left of the multiplication process. But how did I learn 
it in the first place? I have heard of children who wanted to under-
stand why 3 x 7 is 21. In order to explain it, you must take pains to 
count aloud, then maybe to make dashes on paper. Dashes may be 
very practical under certain circumstances, but are perhaps not really 
necessary, not even at this level. And dashes are not words, mind you. 
A stroke with the pen can mean much more than a word ever could. 
You must already know what the stroke means in this context, that it 
stands for something that is pompously called a unit, as opposed to 
two or three units. 
        I base this characterization on introspection, which in this case, 
I believe, again offers the opportunity not to be misled or to be inac-
curate, because the question is not about accuracy at all. The matter 
is simply to determine what is going on when I am mentally calculat-
ing. In the example of multiplying 3 x 7, I start by adding up three 
sevens, representatives of the number 7, so to speak. For me, the sym-
bol is not the number. What a number is, mathematicians have dis-
dainfully failed to tell us so far. So you have to develop your own ideas 
about it. Let me begin by stating that a number is a structure named 
with a number symbol. These numbers differ tremendously as far as 
their structure is concerned. If you follow Turing in one of his most 
difficult essays, you could even conceive of all human thought as 
number manipulation, but I won’t go into that here. The piece is titled 
“System of Logic Based on Ordinals” and was written in 1938. In it, 
Turing conceives of logic as an ordinal number. 
58

59
        Anyway, what I said is actually quite simple: There exists some-
thing, which is different from words but can be named. Words hardly 
ever play a role in thought processes at all, except under very specific 
circumstances, for example when you have to repeat literally what 
has just been said. Try to repeat, for instance, the following sentence 
about an alleged “Pilsen beer stamp” by August Klotz, who is repre-
sented in the Prinzhorn collection [of outsider art]: “The Pilsen beer 
stamp does not lack the hair worm, it is itself.”32 In such sentences, 
words do matter, because very little can be associated with them. I for 
my part do have associations connected to this sentence, but of 
course I know that they have nothing to do with August Klotz himself. 
For example, the word “beer stamp” troubles me, but at the same time 
it reminds me of the word “beer brush,” which is the name of a build-
ing in West Berlin. In my view, only the proverbial Berlin humor was 
able to produce that name. 
TE:   I don’t really get it. Why beer brush? 
OW:  Well, very simply because of its shape [sketches the building on 
paper]. It looks like a tree and is located in the district of Steglitz near 
the Bundesplatz. It is slightly elevated and thus visible from afar. I 
think, there is a city railway station nearby, and in its building there 
is a restaurant where people drink beer. That is the beer brush. 
TE:    It’s about the brush form, so to speak. 
OW:  I’d rather name it “beer tree.” But if you think of a shaving brush, 
then “beer brush” fits quite well. And with this help I arrive at “beer 
stamp.” 
TE:    I’d like to return to the role of language for thought from another 
perspective. In 1987, you wrote a short essay entitled “Wahl eines 
Wortes” (“Choice of a word”). Let me try to reconstruct this piece in 
the light of what has been said so far. Its starting point is that there 
are inexpressible sensations or intentions. Specifically, you wanted to 
specify one aspect of a landscape, or wilderness, in Canada. Since men 
enter it, it ceases to exist as wilderness or nature untouched by 
humans. The ideal, fitting adjective is on the tip of your tongue but 
won’t spring to mind. In order to find it you tentatively try out several 

words. Finally, you arrive at “weakened,” the connotations and ety-
mology of which you list. Somehow, finding this word for a specific 
state of mind or sensation of how, as far as I can understand, you 
experience or want to see this landscape, satisfied you. 
        I want to suggest two things. Firstly, I can track very well what you 
described here. I can even track it better when I read your elaboration 
on how you found the word “weakened.” The word alone impresses 
me, because when hearing it I get the feeling that I could eventually 
approximate your sensation. So the symbol that you present me with 
enables the communication of an experience from one mind to the 
other, so to speak. Secondly, I sometimes have similar experiences 
attempting to find an adequate word. By finding it, the fact that I want 
to describe something becomes clearer to me. Or rather, the corre-
sponding state of mind only snaps in through the word. For me, this 
incremental search for a word feels different from the process of 
searching a word and having a still ambivalent, not yet fixed feeling. 
In such cases, it seems that words fulfill a bigger role than a merely 
mnemonic or supporting one, which you called an exoskeleton. 
OW:  I don’t think that I can agree. Let’s stick with the example of 
“weakened.” How do I search for the word? First, I know that there is 
one. I think I can say that for sure. Then I don’t search haphazardly 
but try to remember the features of the object in question, which 
made the biggest impression on me. I try to remember specific attune-
ments in connection with the landscape in question, which should be 
“sublime,” to use the old word. The Yukon wilderness does bear this 
aspect; especially up north it has attracted and impressed me beyond 
measure. When I stood there, I’d preferred to stand there alone — just 
to stand there and watch the wind blow! Only few creatures are able 
to live there. Now that only describes how I got there first but not the 
feeling I tried to find a word for. I am talking about Canada, where 
Ingrid and I lived for so long. That was the beginning. Okay, how do 
you get there today? By car. But there is only one road to the place 
where we lived. We had already been there in 1985, when I was 50 
years old. I was very strong at that time and could go on long hikes. 
60

61
Only 100 meters away from the road you became nervous on hearing 
a little noise, because it could have been a bear or a wolf or some 
other dangerous thing. This danger contributed to the overall attune-
ment. I don’t want to use this corny cliché, but you felt very small — 
no, that’s not true, on the contrary: you felt tall because you were even 
able to feel that way! Central Europeans just don’t know how the wind 
blows there! 
        In search of a fitting word, I first looked for a seed pertaining to 
this very attunement. As soon as I found the seed, the respective 
attunement already set in. Yet, in the short piece “Choice of a word” 
this attunement wasn’t sublime, but referred to the fact that this wil-
derness is already ruined. There is nothing sublime left on earth 
because man pollutes everything. Then I imagined experiences that 
you have in this landscape. Amidst this wilderness, you believe, for 
instance, that the nearest house is very far away. You went out by car 
and then you walked ten kilometers into the woods. It’s very difficult 
to walk there, for during summer everything is swampy because the 
permafrost soil is thawing. Finally, you stand there and you think: 
“Wow, that’s it!” You look around, and all of a sudden you hear a loud 
noise. There’s a helicopter flying very low over your head! Imme-
diately you know that a government agency must have sent it. There’s 
some government guy sitting in it and he’s getting paid, for example 
for counting the wolves in the area. All of a sudden, you realize that 
nature has reached its endpoint. You turn around and leave, get in the 
car and drive home. 
        When I was there I felt exactly this attunement, but I couldn’t 
name it. While writing the essay, I then searched for the word. I rumi-
nated a bit about the meaning of the word “to weaken” — to make 
something weaker, to take away strength from someone. In this way, 
I reconstructed the attunement. This has only to do with language 
insofar as the word has several meanings. In actual fact, I am not 
searching for or by words at all, because I simply wouldn’t know how 
to do so. If I searched by words, then I would have to proceed com-
pletely differently. I would say, for instance, “okay, the word begins 

with ‘w,’ and probably there is ‘ea’ in it.” If my search really went like 
that, it would justify or corroborate the hypothesis, that words are 
essential for thought. 
        The entire passage in the essay “Choice of a word” runs like  
this: “In the first draft [of the addressed essay “Von der Freiheit eines 
Grizzlybären” (“On the freedom of a grizzly bear”)] it reads: ‘… in an 
environment … not contaminated by any consciousness …’ But the 
word ‘contaminated’ does not satisfy me. Without any ado ‘devalued,’ 
‘compromised’ appear, but ‘something is missing.’ I have to ask myself 
what exactly my unconscious is referring to. The word ‘un-authenti-
cated’ appears, together with the image of an almost transparent stone 
hill landscape superposed on this shoe rack there, juxtaposed to some-
thing like myself standing three meters beside me as an enacting 
shadow. Not only do I seem to know which things these vague schemes 
refer to, but also what they mean. Something I imagine as being outside 
is relativized by being doubled — by being simulated. It becomes the 
simulation of its own mental image. It becomes a model of the theory, 
whereby its putatively autonomous status and its objective character 
are lost, or rather, reduced. I have known for a long time that ‘objective’ 
is only a label attached to some of my ideas in contrast to others, and 
thus I am satisfied by the notion that here nothing happens but an 
exchange of this symbol between two ideas. On the other hand, I 
believe that this notion will threaten the feeling of orientation in others 
— which is exactly what I am poking fun at. Another aspect of it is that 
the ‘matter’ gets drawn into man’s conceptual muck. Not only is it now 
nothing but my idea (it has never been anything else, only that I 
obviously must concretize this again and again), but it moreover nour-
ishes the bullshit of the public castrating and spoiling my ideas in turn. 
        Of course, I didn’t really tell this to myself then, I only knew it — and 
I tell it now. Immediately, the word ‘weakened’ emerged to satisfy me 
deeper. Yet my doubts still urged to be dissipated. I looked up the word 
in the etymological dictionary and indeed I find the meaning of 
‘diluted’ as well as ‘disgraced.’ Only now I realized that another compo-
nent had been in play, namely the sexual, which in the first draft was 
62

63
prepared by the words ‘abstinence in thought,’ delightfully referring to 
the Holy Spirit (only appealing to the philistine, by the way). The word 
‘weaken’ was my ‘solution’ for the ‘problem’ of ‘reducing the substance 
of something while curtailing its status plus libidinal compulsivity plus 
breaching a taboo.’ Although my notion of the nature of this ‘de-realiza-
tion’ remained unarticulated, I was determined to keep this word 
because, as it occurred to me, a brief account of its emergence will, as 
an appendix, illustrate what has been said in the text.”33 
        In short, I believe that what you’ve just said about the supposedly 
bigger role of language is an illusion. I think it is reasonable “to under-
stand ‘word’ as a central element of language very narrowly: we 
should use ‘word’ as neutrally as possible and restrict it to the acoustic 
stimulus (or grapho-visual stimulus of written words), insofar as we 
recognize it ‘automatically’ as a language element (and, to start with, 
nothing else). As a consequence, everything that words or word 
sequences trigger in the speaker or hearer belongs not to the word 
(and thus to language in a strict sense) but to thought.”34 
Already in the essay “subjekt, semantik, abbildungsbeziehungen” 
[“sub ject, semantics, representation”], I tried to show that there can-
not be any semantics in the sense you suggested, namely as relations 
between words.35 There, I argue that the representation of the world 
that the individual develops is independent from its linguistic rep-
resentation (or, more generally, its symbolic representation). Further-
more, I argued in the 1970s that “the use of symbols can absolutely not 
be grasped or explained by the symbols themselves,” and that a symbol 
only symbolizes “through a mechanism that establishes a connection 
between the symbol and what it signifies.”36 Only then it becomes 
something that is supposed to refer to something beyond itself. Other-
wise we would remain within the scope of statistics as described 
before, and statistics just have nothing to do with semantics. For me, 
semantics has to do with meanings, and meanings are not simply 
experiences, meanings are — and in this respect I have learned a lot 
more in the many years since then — complexes of structures, which 
one naturally cannot run simultaneously. 

TE:    To put it bluntly, one could also say that the entire evolution of lan-
guage manifested, or sedimented, a lot of such feelings and attunements. 
OW:  I am convinced of that, if I understand you correctly. 
TE:    That’s how it is sometimes conceived of. And that yields a pretty 
mighty archive already, an archive of acronyms maybe in your sense — 
of shortcuts. 
OW:  Certainly, I don’t deny that. But at the same time, it is clear that 
there are a lot of duds among them. Elsewhere, I wrote the following 
on the role that words (as names) play in the thought process: “The 
meaning of a symbol is a model (a cognitive representation […]), which 
the symbol makes ready to be run (’invoking’ it); is the invoking sym-
bol a stimulus, then I call it a name of the invoked structure […]). […] 
Since meaning is a structure it can only be experienced while operat-
ing, that is, as a stepwise temporal sequence. Meaning is never present 
‘as a whole.’ This implies that a name only indirectly invokes a model, 
namely by way of changing switches in order to unfold ever more spe-
cific components of the structure according to their availability and 
the task at hand. As introspection shows (and parsimony predicts), 
these developments unfold by way of seeds. Thus, a name at best 
invokes the seed of a structure. In a narrow sense it is the name of the 
seed in question and its meaning is the meaning of the seed.”37 
Although for many (most?) thought processes words do not play a 
role, they may appear at certain points within the process. Words are 
components of seeds “and the name of an [internally developed] 
object usually only appears at one step in the expansion of the seed.” 
Conversely,“ the name of an [proxy] object usually invokes its seed.”38 
TE:    But then, how do you explain that similar sounding names some-
times superpose, thereby blocking the attempt at remembering? 
Recently, I was talking to someone about the poet Hartmut Geerken, 
and when shortly afterwards we came to talk about an artist whose 
work strongly refers to commemorative culture and to monuments, 
we just couldn’t remember his name. It turned out to be Jochen Gerz. 
Couldn’t the phonetic similarity of “Geerken” and “Gerz” have blocked 
or superposed the correct word? 
64

65
OW:  I think it is obvious that phonetic similarities do play a role. If you 
consider that Anthony Marcel’s research showed that every sound, 
which we apprehend as linguistic, triggers the machinery of meaning 
search.39 At first, the multiple names, which a polysemous word 
stands for, momentarily activate several (if not all?) corresponding 
structures. But this isn’t a feature of the word or of what is commonly 
called semantics. The initially unsuccessful search for a word, such as 
in your example, is rather the result of a mechanical blockade. In any 
case, the exact mechanism of this search process remains unex-
plained, to say the least. 
TE:    Yes, Marcel’s work on the perception of ambiguous expressions is 
very exciting in itself. In the discussions of the results of his highly 
sophisticated experimental studies, he distinguishes between precon-
scious and conscious processing of visually presented linguistic sti-
muli. According to Marcel, word recognition is a complex process con-
sisting of preconscious identification and conscious perception. 
Preconscious identification of (potentially polysemous) words pro-
ceeds just like the proponents of the so-called “non-selective view” 
describe, while conscious perception of (potentially polysemous) word 
stimuli follows the so-called “selective theory.” The latter predicts that 
only one of the possible interpretations can be active at a time, 
whereas the advocates of the “non-selective view” assume that, at first, 
several (or all) of the lexical and semantic “representations” triggered 
by the polysemous word are invoked at once. Only then the context of 
conscious perception decides which of them is pursued further.40 In 
principle, Marcel thus assumes a preconscious uptake of letter stimuli, 
which only in the following conscious phase — unfortunately he does 
not define the word conscious very sharply — are somehow integrated 
into and thereby disambiguated by a meaningful context. During the 
preconscious phase, everything that the letter sequences could pos-
sibly mean is still simultaneously activated, so to speak. This is what 
Marcel tried to test on subjects in his masking experiments. However, 
he did not record any phenomenal descriptions of the subjects’ intro-
spections, but only measured their reaction (times).41 

OW:  Well, that just comes from the scientific ideal. In this respect 
Noam Chomsky said something apt during an interview in 2012.42 It 
touched me very much, because there he voiced a conclusion that I 
also arrived at on the same matter. He came under heavy attack by 
somebody working in the artificial intelligence business, but who, I 
believe, hadn’t understood at all what Chomsky was getting at. As far 
as I understood him, he is concerned with a generative theory of lan-
guage, that is, he wants to know the mechanism that allows not only 
new sentences to bubble out, but to understand the mechanism that 
generates meaning and significance. His critic is missing this com-
pletely. Chomsky criticizes that the people who develop today’s trans-
lation or speech recognition software have no theory of language at 
all. The statistics they use does not amount to a theory, he says, and I 
could not agree more. At most, the critic could adopt the position that 
there will never be a theory of language because it is impossible in 
principle. And then s/he could argue that what we, the statistics pro-
grammers, do is already the theory. Our statistical trees are an, albeit 
very complicated, theory of language. On the other hand, Chomsky, 
who is an old-fashioned and honest philosopher and scientist, just 
makes the point that any theory must have something to do with 
Occam’s principle of parsimony. So he is searching for a non-trivial 
structure (in my sense) and does not want to have a trivial structure 
in all its vastness put down as the structure of the thing. 
        This harks back to Chomsky’s influential review of B.F. Skinner’s 
book Verbal Behavior, which is in turn viewed as the beginning of cog-
nitive science. In typically behavioristic style, Skinner had tried to 
describe linguistic competence by way of statistical “analysis” of sti-
mulus and response, which led to, as Chomsky put it, “masses of 
unanalyzed data.” In contrast, he insisted on the complexity of “inner 
representations” underlying language processes. Whatever he himself 
meant by that, they are what we are trying to elucidate more closely 
by our efforts. Chomsky explicitly stated this in his review: “One would 
naturally expect that prediction of the behavior of a complex organism 
(or machine) would require, in addition to information about external 
66

67
stimulation, knowledge of the internal structure of the organism, the 
ways in which it processes input information and organizes its own 
behavior.”43 As you know, I don’t want to limit Chomsky’s thoughts, 
which are close to me, to the subject of language alone. Let me quote 
internal notes of mine commenting on Yarden Katz’s interview: 
“Chomsky says something more clearly than I have ever read before: 
‘The externalization [! he seems to mean the level of language/speech] 
is yielding all kinds of ambiguities but for simple computational rea-
sons, it seems that the system internally [does he now refer to what he 
earlier called ‘deep structure’?] is just computing efficiently, it doesn’t 
care about the externalization44 [...]. That tells something about evolu-
tion. What it strongly suggests is that in the evolution of language, a 
computational system developed, and later on it was externalized [if 
he refers to the thinking ‘system’ here, he means what we have ‘always 
meant’ — only that Chomsky still views it under the general heading of 
‘language’]. And if you think about how a language might have evolved, 
you’re almost driven to that position. At some point in human evolu-
tion, and it’s apparently pretty recent given the archeological record 
— maybe [the] last hundred thousand years, which is nothing — at some 
point a computational system emerged w[hich] had new properties, 
that other organisms don’t have, that has kind of arithmetical type 
properties ... [Katz:] It enabled better thought before externalization? 
Chomsky: It gives you thought. Some rewiring of the brain, that 
happens in a single person, not in a group. So that person had the 
capacity for thought — the group didn’t. So there isn’t any point in 
externalization [! here suddenly language is left out]. Later on, if this 
genetic change proliferates, maybe a lot of people have it, okay then 
there’s a point in figuring out a way to map it to the sensory-motor sys-
tem and that’s externalization but it’s a secondary process’.”45 
        In this direction — “the system is internally computing efficiently, 
it does not care about the externalization“ — we must push on with 
our questions (which we already begun, cf. the following two conver-
sations). I don’t think that language analysis would be particularly 
promising for it. 

1           Wiener, Oswald, 2001. Remarks on Some Tendencies of the “Vienna Group,” translated by David 
Britt. October, 97, 124—126. 
2          Adrian, Marc, 1980. inventionen. Linz, Vienna. 
3          In: Rühm, Gerhard (ed.), 1985. Die Wiener Gruppe. Texte, Gemeinschaftsarbeiten, Aktionen. Reinbek, 
297. Cf. Rühm’s remark on the blueprint, ibid., 487. 
4          The people sitting opposite the author in the semi-darkness move, turn their heads in conver-
sation, and drink alcoholic beverages. One or two friends sit across from the narrator, who pays 
attention only to their shadows, which he gives names to (“kroneis,” “otto,” “elfie,” “alma,” “wilma,” 
etc.). He describes how the shadows relate to each other in optical terms and speaks of them get-
ting longer, shorter, splitting, expanding, etc. 
5          Hogan, Patrick Colm, 2014. Ulysses and the Poetics of Cognition. New York, 6. 
6          James, William, 1890. The Principles of Psychology, Vol. I. New York, 243. For a critique of James's 
metaphor, see Wiener's essay in this volume. 
7          Bühler, Karl, 1909. Über das Sprachverständnis vom Standpunkt der Normalpsychologie aus. 
Bericht über den III. Kongreß für experimentelle Psychologie in Frankfurt a. Main vom 22. bis 25. April 
1908. Leipzig, 94—130. 
8          Stein, Gertrude, 1949. Four Saints in Three Acts. In: Vechten, Carl van (ed.), Last Operas and Plays. 
New York, Toronto, 440—480. 
9          Wiener, Oswald, 1987. Wittgensteins Einfluß auf die Wiener Gruppe. In: Walter-Buchebner-Gesell-
schaft (ed.), die wiener gruppe. Vienna, Cologne, 46—59. 
10        Ibid., 52, 56. 
11         Ibid., 53. 
12        Ibid., 53. 
13        Ibid., 54—55. 
14        Wiener, Oswald, 1998 [1982]. Eine Art Einzige. In: id.,  Literarische Aufsätze. Vienna, 43—85, here: 81. 
15        Scheibert, Peter, 1956. Von Bakunin zu Lenin: Geschichte der russischen revolutionären Ideologien 
1840—1895. 1: Die Formung des radikalen Denkens in der Auseinandersetzung mit deutschem Idealis-
mus und französischem Bürgertum. Leiden. 
16        Wiener, Oswald, 1969. die verbesserung von mitteleuropa, roman. Reinbek, XV. 
17        Wiener, Oswald, 2007. Über das „Sehen“ im Traum (Zweiter Teil). manuskripte, 178, 161—172. 
18        Wiener, Oswald, 2019. appendix A: the bio-adapter, translated by Gerrit Jackson and Jakob Schil-
linger. October, 170, 51. 
19        Ibid., 53. 
20       Descartes, René, 1641. Meditations on First Philosophy, translated by Jonathan Bennett.  
www.earlymoderntexts.com/assets/pdfs/descartes1641_1.pdf (28 Apr 2023). 
21        These and further aspects of Wiener’s principal early work die verbesserung von mitteleuropa, 
roman are discussed by Nicola Cipani in an extensive commentary, including a theoretical intro-
duction: Cipani, Nicola, 2022. Zur Theorie eines “, roman”. Oswald Wieners “verbesserung von mit-
teleuropa”: Ein Kommentar. Baden-Baden. 
22        Wiener, Oswald, 1987. Wittgensteins Einfluß auf die Wiener Gruppe. In: Walter-Buchebner- 
Gesellschaft (ed.), die wiener gruppe. Vienna, Cologne, 46—59, here: 48. 
23        Cf. Eder, Thomas, 2013. Nachwort. In: Wiener, Oswald, die verbesserung von mitteleuropa, roman. 
New edition ed. Thomas Eder. Salzburg, Vienna, 207—220, here: 213. 
24        Wiener, Oswald, 1969. die verbesserung von mitteleuropa, roman. Reinbek, CLXXXIII. 
25        Flores, Iván, 1960. Computer Logic: Functional Design of Digital Computers. Englewood Cliffs; Trach-
tenbrot, Boris A., 1959. Wieso können Automaten rechnen? Cologne. 
26       Wiener, Oswald, 1996. Schriften zur Erkenntnistheorie. Vienna, New York. 
27        Wiener, Oswald, 1969. die verbesserung von mitteleuropa, roman. Reinbek bei Hamburg, CXXIX. 
68

69
28        Wiener, Oswald, 1998. Bemerkungen zu einigen Tendenzen der „Wiener Gruppe“. In: Kunsthalle 
Wien, Fetz, Wolfgang, and Gerald Matt (eds.), Die Wiener Gruppe, Vienna, 20—28, here: 27. 
29       Sola Pool, Ithiel de (ed.), 1959. Trends in Content Analysis. Urbana. 
30       Cf. Wiener, Oswald, 2015. Kybernetik und Gespenster: Im Niemandsland zwischen Wissenschaft und 
Kunst. manuskripte, 207, 143—162. See the unchanged text also in this volume. 
31        Heubach, Friedrich Wolfram, 2017. le dandysme. Hamburg. 
32        August Klotz quoted in: Jadi, lnge (ed.), 1985. Leb wohl sagt mein Genie. Ordugele muß sein. Texte 
aus der Prinzhorn-Sammlung. Heidelberg, 215. The entire text passage is: “The Pilsen beer stamp 
does not lack the hair worm, it is itself. / a) (am no beer agent) / and red tail grass comports itself 
handpurely essential like fibers / b) ad=acquisition bottles (beer (ad bubbly) quittance bottle (?0) 
/ thicket of ivy yeast through mountain water of the nose tips:” [„Dem Pilsener Bierstempel fehlt 
der Haarwurm nicht, er ist es selbst. / a) (Bin kein Bieragent) / und Rothschwanzgras führet sich 
handrein wesentlich wie Fasern / b)ad= acquisitionsflaschen (Bier- (ad Sekt)-) Quittungsflasche 
(?0) / dickicht der Efeuhefe durch das Bergwasser der Nasenspitzen:“]. 
33        Wiener, Oswald, 1998. Wahl eines Wortes. In: id., Literarische Aufsätze, Vienna, 111—112. 
34       Eder, Thomas, 2015. Selbstbeobachtung und Sprachverstehen: Beim Hersagen eines Gedichts von 
Paul Celan. In: Eder, Thomas, and Thomas Raab (eds.), Selbstbeobachtung: Oswald Wieners Denk-
psychologie. Berlin, 315—371, here: 315—316. 
35        Wiener, Oswald, 1970. subjekt, sema[n]tik, abbildungsbeziehungen. ein pro-memoria. manuskripte, 
29/30, 45—50. 
36       Wiener, Oswald, 1975. Was ist der Inhalt dieses Satzes, was du draus entnimmst, was hast du draus 
entnommen, wirst du dir auch das Leben nehmen, den neuen Salat probieren, erröten. Lecture 
at the colloquium Die Sprache des Anderen [The Language of the Other] by the Société Internation-
ale de Psychopathologie de l’Expression. In: Gedanken (ed. Brus, Günter, and Oswald Wiener). Ber-
lin, Oct. 22 1975, 23, 24, 27, here: 23. 
37        Wiener, Oswald, 2008. Über das „Sehen“ im Traum (Dritter Teil). manuskripte, 181, 132—141, here: 
133—134. 
38       Wiener, Oswald, personal correspondence, 2014. 
39       Marcel, Anthony J., 1980. Conscious and Preconscious Recognition of Polysemous Words: Locating 
the Selective Effects of Prior Verbal Context. In: Nickerson, Raymond S. (ed.), Attention and Per-
formance VIII. Hillsdale, NJ, 435—457. 
40       Ibid., 436—437, 453. 
41        Cf. Eder’s essay in this volume. 
42       Chomsky, Noam, and Yarden Katz, 2012. Noam Chomsky on Where Artificial Intelligence Went 
Wrong. Noam Chomsky Interviewed by Yarden Katz. The Atlantic, 1 Nov 2012, https://philpapers.org/ 
archive/KATNCO.pdf (28 Jan 2022). 
43       Chomsky, Noam, 1959. Verbal behavior. Language, 35/1, 26—58, here: 27. 
44       The example brought up by Chomsky shortly before in the interview is this: “There are cases 
where you find clear conflicts between computational efficiency and communicative efficiency. 
Take a simple case, structural ambiguity. If I say, ‘Visiting relatives can be a nuisance’ — that’s ambig-
uous. Relatives that visit, or going to visit relatives. It turns out in every such case that’s known, 
the ambiguity is derived by simply allowing the rules to function freely, with no constraints, and 
that sometimes yields ambiguities. So it’s computationally efficient, but it’s inefficient for com-
munication, because it leads to unresolvable ambiguity.” Cf. Eder’s essay in this volume. 
45       Chomsky, Noam, and Yarden Katz, see note 42. 


