8
Summary and outlook
Programming analog and hybrid computers is fundamentally different from the
purely algorithmic approach used in digital computers, as the preceding chapters
have shown. At first sight, using an analog computer seems to be much more
involved and complicated than programming a digital computer. This is decep-
tive. Apart from the scaling issues, programming analog computers is much more
straightforward than programming digital computers since the mathematical de-
scription of a problem is basically sufficient to set up an analog computer, while
in the case of a digital computer a plethora of additional quirks and complications
regarding the implementation on a specific machine have to be taken into account.
The main advantages of analog computers, either as stand-alone systems or
as part of a hybrid computer setup, are
–
the extremely high degree of parallelism that this class of machines exhibits,
–
the high overall computational power, and
–
the high energy efficiency.
Every change of a bit from 0 to 1 or vice versa in a digital computer requires
a small parasitic capacitance to be charged or discharged. Together with other
effects, such as the structure of typical output driver stages of logic gates, this
results in a superlinear relationship between clock frequency and the overall energy
consumption of a digital computer. Given today’s clock frequencies of up to several
GHz this results in power requirements of way over 100 W for a typical multi-core
CPU chip. Apart from the challenge of cooling such devices, this is, quite simply,
an excessive amount of energy for the computations and does not scale well in

244
8 Summary and outlook
the long term.203 Increasing the clock frequency of digital computers further to
achieve higher computing power is not an easy feat since the problem of heat
removal gets increasingly worse.
Digital computers are plagued by other problems as well – one of the most
important effects is the upper bound of parallelism that can be obtained by an
algorithmic approach for a certain problem, as described by Amdahl’s law. Only
few problems are so well behaved that they can exploit the computing power of
a highly-parallel supercomputer with thousands and sometimes several millions
of individual cores. The majority of programs can’t be scaled effectively over so
many processing units.
Obviously, alternative approaches to classic digital computing are required to
fulfill the ever increasing demands for computational power. Analog computers
will be a central part of such novel systems, where they will act as coprocessors to
speed up time-consuming or time-critical simulations, etc., as they do not suffer
from the aforementioned problems.
Due to the representation of values as continuous voltages or currents and
the continuous time of operation within an analog computer, all signals (with
the exception of comparator and switch outputs) representing variables are “well
behaved”, i. .e, they do not exhibit discontinuities. This results in a very high
energy efficiency.
Abandoning the idea of a central memory system which stores commands and
data to be processed in favor of interconnecting individual computing elements
in order to set up an analog computer for a given problem, there is nothing like
a von Neumann bottleneck. Further, the abdication of an algorithm allows for a
perfect degree of parallelism of the various computing elements within an analog
computer.
Nevertheless, a lot of development work is required in the future to turn the
classic analog computer with its cumbersome patch panel into a useful, general
purpose, reconfigurable integrated circuit.204 A main challenge will be the design
and implementation of the configuration circuitry which will allow the elements
of such an analog computer to be interconnected automatically under the control
of a digital computer acting as a host system. In addition to the hardware, a soft-
ware ecosystem must be developed, including a suitable (standardized) hardware
description language to define the required interconnections of a particular analog
203 It has been estimated that the world wide digital information technologies may account
for 10 to 20% of the world’s energy consumption in 2030. Even today the total energy consump-
tion of these systems is well above 5% (see [Gelenbe et al. 2015], [Heddeghem et al. 2014],
[Jones 2018], or [Belkhir et al. 2018]).
204 Currently quite a lot of research is being carried out in academia and industry to develop
such ICs, but in 2023 there are no general purpose systems commercially available.

8 Summary and outlook
245
computer setup, libraries allowing the tight integration of the analog computer on
a chip into a hybrid computer are required, etc.
These challenges are formidable, but the possibilities of analog computing are
nearly endless and will more than justify all the necessary research and develop-
ment expenses.
Given the high energy efficiency of analog computers compared with digital
approaches, they will create new fields of application – such as medical implants,
which might consume so little electrical energy that they could be powered by
energy harvesting within the body, thus making energy storage devices that must
be changed or recharged at regular intervals superfluous. It will also find numerous
applications in mobile and wearable devices for signal pre- and post-processing to
save precious battery capacity. Even complex tasks such as trigger word detection
for assistance systems can be implemented using analog computer techniques,
saving power in standby mode, etc.
Other applications will benefit from the fact that a system that is not con-
trolled by a program stored in some volatile memory cannot be “hacked” in a
traditional sense.205. This will make analog computers the systems of choice when
it comes to control systems in critical infrastructure systems, systems on which
human lives depend, etc.
Also, most branches of artificial intelligence, (AI), and machine learning will
benefit substantially from the application of analog computing techniques. Spiking
and bursting neurons can be directly implemented as analog circuits and the fact
that neuronal networks are basically defined by their interconnection structure,
together with their synaptic weights, fits perfectly with the paradigm of analog
computing.
All in all, analog computing is an extermely promising approach for future
high performance and/or low energy computing and will be part of most future
computing systems.
Happy analog computing!
205 If a reconfigurable analog computer is used, the reconfiguration capability must be phys-
ically disabled to gain that benefit.


