https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110723380-003
Chapter 1  
Eight commonplace assumptions about language
I would like to start this book not with what linguists know about language and its 
usage, but with certain ordinary assumptions, which certainly have a logic, but 
which are highly questionable. The interesting point is that they form a whole: 
they are all connected. Here are some assumptions about language and its usage 
that ought to be abolished.
1 Non-written languages are not “real” languages
The first assumption about language taps into the supposed qualitative differ-
ence between written and spoken languages. This idea is absurd to linguists, but 
is believed by many people. I suddenly realised this during a professors’ council, 
in which I was advocating for the application of a Kenyan PhD student working 
on Swahili*, the official language of Kenya. A professor of Latin asked how it 
would be possible to write a PhD thesis on a “language which is not a language”. I 
confess I was surprised by the question, and spluttered out an answer: more than 
fifty million people speak this language in Kenya, therefore, Swahili is certainly 
a language. It has variants such as Sheng, a variety of Swahili spoken by young 
people in the suburbs of Nairobi. When the Latin professor objected, “But it’s not 
a written language!”, I didn’t have the presence of mind to mention Nairobi news-
papers in Swahili or literature written in Swahili. But I did grasp the assump-
tion behind the initial question: only written languages are real languages. Going 
beyond this anecdote, it is important to put forth arguments that demonstrate the 
importance of spoken languages.
Today there are more than 6,900 languages spoken around the world.10 The 
vast majority of them are spoken; only two hundred are written. Certain initiatives 
of language description, particularly in Africa, are run by missionary linguists of 
the Summer Institute of Linguistics. Their goal is to translate parts of the Bible, 
generally one of the gospels, into spoken and non-described languages, thereby 
turning them into written languages.
A great number of languages will disappear before the end of the 21st century: 
fifty to seventy percent of them will die out. They are known as potentially endan­
10 See Crystal (2010), Anderson (2012); the best website is ethnologue.com, written by SIL Inter-
national. Crystal (2010) refers to 6,912 languages.

14 
 Chapter 1 Eight commonplace assumptions about language 
gered languages (Austin and Sallabank 2012). The process through which this 
happens is quite simple: a language dies with the death of its last speaker. The 
various causes of language extinction are easy to understand: globalisation, 
systematic usage of standard languages of communication, and bilingualism. 
Indeed, as soon as a population begins to use another language of communica-
tion, it takes only three generations for a borrowed language to become a mother 
tongue. This is what happened and is still happening in certain areas of the 
Swiss Valais region, where the Franco-Provençal patois of the Hérens and Bagnes 
Valleys is doomed to disappear.11
Many linguists study endangered languages, including the Aboriginal lan-
guages of Australia, those of the mountains of Borneo and Papua New Guinea, 
and those of the Andean highlands. Collected data is processed in large data-
bases by linguistic typologists in a race against time. Interesting findings have 
been made about how time and space are expressed by speakers of these lan-
guages. Spatial orientation is governed in many languages by the cardinal points 
or the direction of streams, which contrasts with the way in which Indo-European 
languages are oriented by the subject – think of before, behind, to the right, to the 
left, for which the spatial points of reference are the human body and its verti-
cal orientation. In French, temporal reference points are indicated by verb tenses 
(imparfait ‘imperfect’, passé simple ‘simple past’, plus­que parfait ‘pluperfect’, 
passé composé ‘present perfect’, présent ‘present’, futur ‘future’)12 and are almost 
completely unconnected to the system of spatial reference. Exceptions include 
la semaine prochaine ‘next week’ (the future lies ahead) or la semaine d’avant 
‘the week before’ (the past lies behind). In Yupno*, a language of Papua New 
Guinea, on the other hand, the expression towards the sea indicates the past, 
while towards the mountain indicates the future: water which flows towards the 
sea thus denotes the past, and water which has not yet flowed represents the 
future. The gestures that accompany speech are also significant: a hand pointing 
behind the shoulder indicates the future, while a hand pointing ahead indicates 
the past (Núñez et al. 2012).
Another factor which shows that languages are fundamentally spoken is 
acquisition: we naturally and easily acquire our mother tongue, whereas learn-
ing reading and writing during our school years is much more difficult. For some 
children this is extremely hard and for others it is easier, but years of learning and 
11 See Knecht (1995). Diglossia*, or the existence of a standard language* (for instance German) 
alongside the vernacular language* (Swiss German) (see chapter 4) explains the preservation of 
these varieties of the German language.
12 Germanic languages do not have morphological future tenses, unlike Romance languages 
such as French and Italian.

1 Non-written languages are not “real” languages 
 15
practice are needed to master the spelling of written languages such as written 
French and English.
What can be said about the first languages of humanity? It is obvious that the 
first languages of Homo sapiens* could only have been spoken. There are good 
reasons to think that language is a phenomenon which emerged only with our 
species, certainly a long time after the emergence of Sapiens 300,000 years ago. The 
reasons for the gap between the appearance of Sapiens and the emergence of lan-
guage are based on human migration, which took place 60,000 years ago, begin-
ning in African and spreading over the globe to Oceania, Eurasia, and Europe, and 
passing through the Bering Strait to North America and finally South America. 
The dominant thesis for the emergence of human language today is monogene-
sis, with a single linguistic centre. Research in genetics confirms this hypothesis, 
which correlates with linguistic research on typology and language classification, 
or the history of linguistic families (Ruhlen 1994, Cavalli-Sforza 2000).
But the most interesting phenomenon that illustrates the difference bet-
ween spoken and written languages is the emergence of writing 5,000 years 
ago. According to the evolutionary biologist, geographer, and historian Jared 
Diamond, sedentary and agricultural societies, which were politically organized 
and had begun dividing labour, were well enough off to pay scribes who special-
ized in writing. The scribes essentially took inventory: since it was necessary to 
archive and relay information about production, exchanges and goods, writing 
began as accounting. Here is how Jared Diamond describes the first Sumerian 
texts (Diamond 1997: 234):
The uses of these telegraphic, clumsy, ambiguous early scripts were as restricted as the number 
of their users. Anyone hoping to discover how Sumerians of 3000 B.c. thought and felt is in 
for a disappointment. Instead, the first Sumerian texts are emotionless accounts of palace and 
temple bureaucrats. About 90 percent of the tablets in the earliest known Sumerian archives, 
from the city of Uruk, are clerical records of goods paid in, workers given rations, and agricul-
tural products distributed. Only later, as Sumerians progressed beyond logograms to phonetic 
writing, did they begin to write prose narratives, such as propaganda and myths.
Like the Sumerians, I use abbreviated writing when I jot down a shopping list. 
However, I use a more complex style to answer emails, and express myself in an 
even more sophisticated manner for articles, books, and comments on my PhD 
students’ research. At the beginning, writing had a completely different function. 
According to Jared Diamond (1997: 236–237),
Writing arose independently only in the Fertile Crescent, Mexico, and probably China pre-
cisely because those were the first areas where food production emerged in their respective 
hemispheres. Once writing had been invented by those few societies, it then spread, by 

16 
 Chapter 1 Eight commonplace assumptions about language 
trade and conquest and religion, to other societies with similar economies and political 
organizations.
While food production was thus a necessary condition for the evolution or early adoption of 
writing, it was not a sufficient condition.
This perspective helps us to understand why languages were not originally writ-
ten, and why writing appeared much later than spoken language, as well as why 
it had a much less significant function than it does today.13
2 Some languages are more important than others
I encountered the second assumption in a lecture given by a famous French lin-
guist, who tried to convince his audience that some languages, including French, 
have a “global purpose”, whereas others, like Chinese, don’t. He also tried to 
show that the place of English as the most common language of communication 
was not legitimate, because English can be ambiguous. To illustrate this, he gave 
the dramatic example of an airline disaster caused by the mistaken interpretation 
of the air traffic controller’s Right now!, which was understood by the pilot as 
“turn right, now”, even though the controller had just given the order Turn left!, 
and the meaning of Right now! was “immediately!”.
The idea of a hierarchy between languages is often quantitatively correlated 
with the number of its speakers. The spoken language with the highest number of 
speakers, Mandarin Chinese, has little chance of becoming the most widespread 
language in the world, despite the impressive development of the Confucius Insti-
tutes, because political, economic and cultural hegemonies determine the spread 
of a language more than other factors. English, on the other hand, has succeeded 
in conquering fundamental areas of social, political, cultural, and scientific life. 
The worlds of banking, finance, and politics (consider the EU) are more and more 
dominated by English. All major international scientific conferences are held in 
English, and the vast majority of scientific publications, articles, books, confer-
ence proceedings, etc. are now almost mandatorily in English.14
13 For the dissemination of agricultural societies from the Fertile Crescent, see Renfrew (1987), 
who explains the relationship between the dissemination of germs and Indo-European languages.
14 This does not mean that publications in other languages than English are not valuable: they 
simply target a more limited scientific community. For instance, the original version of this book 
was written and published in French (Pourquoi le langage? Des Inuits à Google, Paris, Armand 
Colin, 2020), because I was targeting a French readership and also because I wanted to write 
about the situation of French in France and other French-speaking countries.

2 Some languages are more important than others 
 17
Does it make sense to quantify the importance of a language? The reasons for 
which some languages emerge as international languages are multiple. During 
the entire Middle Ages, Latin was the lingua franca for literate people and the 
clergy, and during the modern period, through the first half of the 20th century, 
French was the language of diplomacy. In documents produced by the European 
Union, the distribution of the main European languages (French, English, and 
German) was more or less equal until 1997. 45% of its documents were in English 
and 41% were in French. But from 2012 on, these numbers changed: 75% of docu-
ments produced are now in English, while only 21% of them are in French.15
But does it make sense to wonder whether a language does or doesn’t have 
an international purpose? Languages with a strong cultural tradition – literary, 
artistic, scientific – are all international languages. However, what really counts 
is not the number of native speakers of a language, but the number of non-native 
speakers who use it to read, write, and communicate. Another way of assessing 
this phenomenon is to compare the most frequently spoken languages of the 
Cambridge Encyclopedia of Language (Crystal 2010) in terms of the ratio between 
native and non-native speakers.
The ratio between the mother tongue and the usual language of communica-
tion (Crystal 2010: 36) is 20% for Chinese Mandarin, 37% for Hindi-Urdu, 85% for 
English, and almost 90% for French. Other languages have weak ratios. Spanish 
is often referred to as a world language because it is the fourth most frequently 
spoken language in the world, but its ratio is less than 10%. In comparison, Por-
tuguese has a ratio of about 20%, Arabic almost 30%, and Russian about 60%.16 
Some languages have a very low ration: 0% for Japanese and Bengali, and only 12% 
for German. The language with the highest ratio is Malay, with 160%. This means 
that there are many more non-native speakers of Malay than native ones, because 
of the very large number of languages – more than 600 – in use in  Malaysia.17
This parameter – the ratio of native to non-native speakers – is certainly 
important, but it is not the only one. Languages, indeed, are the result of his-
torical events, and are often unpredictable. French language historian Henriette 
Walter has made a very interesting conjecture about the One Hundred Years’ 
War (1337–1453) between the Kingdom of Normandy and the Kingdom of France. 
15 https://www.lemonde.fr/les-decodeurs/article/2016/05/06/l-usage-de-la-langue-francaise-
recule-au-sein-des-institutions-europeennes_4914763_4355770.html, accessed on 5 November 
2018.
16 This figure, which dates from the beginning of the 21st century, shows that at the beginning of 
the new century, Russian still had an influence in the former communist bloc countries, as well 
as in the former Socialist Soviet Republics.
17 See the excellent documentation in Pour la Sciences, Les langues du monde, October 1997.

18 
 Chapter 1 Eight commonplace assumptions about language 
It is not generally known that, had England won the war, the Kingdom of Nor-
mandy would certainly not have disappeared, mainly because it would have 
been strengthened and consolidated by this victory. The Normans, established in 
England since William the Conqueror’s conquest in 1066, spoke French: they were 
the grandchildren of a small Viking population in Normandy which had sailed 
from the Scandinavian coast to Normandy between the 9th and 10th centuries, and 
they spoke French, or rather old French, because their mothers were Normans. It’s 
amusing to imagine that if the Kingdom of Normandy had conquered the Kingdom 
of France, the British conquerors of North America would have spoken French. 
The conclusion of this counterfactual story is quite funny: had things really hap-
pened this way, French would hold the role currently held by English in the world!
Accidents of history are therefore the second factor in determining the impor-
tance of a language. An interesting anecdote explains why William the Conqueror 
managed to conquer England. Here is how Jared Diamond describes this event 
(Diamond 2005: 185):
The year 1066, famous for the Battle of Hastings at which William the Conqueror (William of 
Normandy) led French-speaking descendants of former Viking raiders to conquer England, 
can also be taken to mark the end of the Viking raids. The reason why William was able to 
defeat the English king Harold at Hastings on England’s southeast coast on October 14 was 
that Harold and his soldiers were exhausted. They had marched 220 miles south in less than 
three weeks after defeating the last Viking invading army and killing their king at Stamford 
Bridge in central England on September 25.
This explanation of the Norman victory in England is quite surprising: the main 
reason for the English defeat is that they arrived at the battle exhausted by a 
forced walk of 220 miles. On what does the importance of a language depend? It 
depends on several things, as these two examples, one counterfactual, and the 
other factual, have shown.
3 Logic, clarity, and beauty in languages: The case for French
Why do people say that some languages are more beautiful than others? Almost 
all Swiss-French speaking people, for example, feel that Swiss-German dialects 
are among the ugliest languages in the world. Such purely subjective judgements 
should logically include all Northern Germanic languages: the many varieties of 
Dutch, the Scandinavian languages, the varieties of German spoken in southern 
Germany and Austria, as well as Alsatian dialects and Luxemburgish.
This inacceptable position definitely has cultural, psychological, and soci-
ological reasons. My own French-speaking family, for example, some of whom 

3 Logic, clarity, and beauty in languages: The case for French 
 19
earned university degrees, lived in a city with a majority of Swiss German Speak-
ers. However, the Swiss German language was considered by my family to be a 
dialect, a sublanguage when compared to the German spoken in Germany. This 
judgement was accompanied by strong contempt for Germanic culture, and 
especially German literature, which was contrasted with the link between Swiss 
French literature and French literature. The best explanation for this feeling of 
superiority is the fact we belonged to a linguistic minority in a largely German- 
speaking region whose economic centre was in German-speaking Switzerland 
(Zurich); these facts reinforced our need to inverse the hierarchy of cultural, liter-
ary, and linguistic values.
However, we know from a linguistic point of view that Swiss German varieties 
are in fact real languages. They are now used in the media (radio, television), 
have been standardised in their written form (which is more a social fact than 
a linguistic necessity), and above all are very interesting in terms of their gram-
mars.18 To sum up, beauty is neither a criterion for evaluation nor a guarantee for 
a language to belong to the category known as natural languages.
What about the second claim, that some languages are more logical than 
others. Logic19 is even less acceptable as a criterion than is beauty.20 For instance, 
why would a language like English or French, whose word order is SVO (subject- 
verb-object), be more logical than SOV languages like Japanese? And what about 
Latin, a final verb language, considered by most teachers in European secondary 
schools as a language that develops students’ logical reasoning? From a typolog-
ical point of view, languages are distributed between six possible combinations 
of word order, but with different statistical distributions: SVO, SOV, OSV, OVS, 
VSO and VOS (Greenberg 1963, 2005). English is clearly a VO language, whereas 
Japanese is OV. In his 1963 article, Greenberg proposed 45 language universals, 
the most important being about word order. Here are three of them:
(4) Three language universals (Greenberg 1963: 88)
 
 1.  In declarative sentences with nominal subject and object, the dominant 
order is almost always one in which the subject precedes the object. [. . .]
18 See Scherrer (2012) for a description of some grammatical properties of Swiss German dia-
lects compared to those in standard German.
19 The term logic is used in a non-technical way. However, most ordinary explanations given 
to grammatical facts refer to the “logical” criterion. I confess that I have never understood the 
meaning of the term in this context.
20 One criterion applied by American university students in choosing to study French as a for-
eign language is its supposed beauty, coupled with the fact that it is such a “romantic language” 
and the prospect of studying in Paris.

20 
 Chapter 1 Eight commonplace assumptions about language 
 
3. Languages with dominant VSO order are always prepositional.
 
4.  With overwhelmingly greater than chance frequency, languages with nor mal 
SOV order are postpositional.
It is possible to show the correlation between word order and the presence of 
pre- or post-positions (adpositions). The languages investigated show that for the 
order VSO, all languages have prepositions; with the SOV order, all have post-
positions; and in the SVO order (like in French), 10 out of 30 of the investigated 
languages by Greenberg have prepositions. Briefly stated, the rules that govern 
word order have nothing to do with logic: the differences in word order are not 
evenly distributed.21
We now come to the third assumption, which states that some languages 
are clearer than others, which in turn implies that some languages are more 
ambiguous than others. Now, ambiguity* is a universal phenomenon in natural 
languages. Ambiguity can take different forms: (i) lexical, when the word is 
ambiguous because it is polysemous (5), such as the word bank, which denotes 
different types of entities; (ii) syntactic (6), when the Noun Phrase (NP) an 
umbrella is either a complement of the NP the man, or an adjunct to the Verb 
Phrase (VP) hit the man; (iii) semantic (7), when the word Norwegian designates 
either a specific person or someone that is from Norway; and (iv) pragmatic, 
when an unambiguous utterance has different meanings in different contexts, 
such as in (8):
(5) A bank
 
a. a financial institution
 
b. a place for storing things
 
c. a hillside
 
d. a mass of earth, cloud, or fog
(6) Mary hit the man with an umbrella.
 
a. Mary hit the man with [an umbrella].
 
b. Mary hit [the man with an umbrella].
(7) John wants to marry a Norwegian woman.
 
a. John wants to marry a particular Norwegian woman, Ilse.
 
b. John wants to marry whoever is a Norwegian woman.
21 For a discussion of Greenberg’s theses, see Newmeyer (2005).

3 Logic, clarity, and beauty in languages: The case for French 
 21
(8) The postman has just come.
 
a. It is 11 o’clock.
 
b. Go get the post.
 
c. You can let the dog out now. 
What conclusion can be drawn here? Simply that ambiguity* is a property of 
natural language, and French, as well as English – despite the French linguist’s 
argument about the ambiguous Right now! – is a language like any other. This 
does not mean that the French writer Boileau (1636–1711) was incorrect in his Art 
poétique (Chant I, verses 150–154):
Avant donc que d’écrire apprenez à penser.
Selon que notre idée est plus ou moins obscure,
L’expression la suit, ou moins nette, ou plus pure.
Ce que l’on conçoit bien s’énonce clairement,
Et les mots pour le dire arrivent aisément.
[Thus, before writing, learn to think.
Depending on whether our idea is more or less obscure,
The expression follows, either less clear or purer.
What has been well conceived is clearly uttered,
And the words for saying it come easily.]
But Boileau’s advice is about written language, since thought precedes its linguis-
tic expression. When we speak, we produce utterances in about 6 seconds, and 
it is not surprising that clarity is not our primary concern; that said, the idea of 
clarity has been explored by the philosopher Paul Grice, the idea being that coop-
erative speakers respect a conversational maxim of clarity (maxim of manner) to 
avoid ambiguities and obscurities, and to be brief and ordered (Grice 1975: 46). It 
is interesting that this maxim explains the reasons why we are able to say less, 
which contrasts with situations in which another maxim, the maxim of quan-
tity (“Make your contribution as informative as required”, Grice 1975: 45), takes 
precedence. In some cases, both maxims can contradict each other. If Peter asks 
Mary where Anne lives and she answers (9), either Mary means that she doesn’t 
know where Anne lives (Mary has given the strongest information), or that she is 
respecting the maxim of manner “be brief”, which could lead to the understand-
ing that she does not wish to give more information:
(9) Somewhere in the south of Burgundy.
Clarity, unlike beauty and logic, makes sense, but in a very different way: it is not 
language which is clear, but its usage.

22 
 Chapter 1 Eight commonplace assumptions about language 
4 Languages change when influenced by other languages
The fourth commonplace assumption about language is the influence of language 
contact on language change: when a language changes, this occurs through contact 
with another language. The issue is not so much knowing whether this idea is 
true or false – some questions linked to linguistic changes, like lexical borrow-
ing, are currently explained by linguistic contact. The main issue is that language 
contact is often seen as having a harmful effect. For instance, in Switzerland there 
is a false assumption that the German language leads to grammatical mistakes 
in Swiss French, especially in bilingual regions. For instance, when compared to 
correct French syntax (10), the Swiss French sentence (11) is a copy of German (12): 
in German, the verb helfen ‘to help’ governs the dative case, whereas in French, 
aider ‘to help’ is transitive, governing the accusative case (le ‘him’) and not the 
dative case (lui ‘him’):
(10)
Il 
l’
aide.
3sgProSub
3sgProAcc
help
‘He helps him.’
(11)
*Il 
lui 
aide.
3sgProSub
3sgProDat
help
‘He helps him.’
(12)
Er 
hilft
ihm.
3sgProSub
help 3sgProDat
‘He helps him.’
However, in (11) the pronoun lui is an old French pronoun, and the form lui 
aider ‘to help him’ is an archaism, an old-fashioned manner of speaking French. 
This phenomenon is general and easy to explain: regions on the periphery of 
French-speaking regions are more conservative. An a contrario argument is the 
type of French spoken in the canton of Valais in French-speaking Switzerland, 
which is a more recent version of French than the French spoken in Geneva, 
which is more conservative because it is an older version. The canton of Valais 
joined the Swiss Confederation relatively recently and, since it is a Catholic 
canton, only used French in the 19th century. Protestant cantons, like the one 
including Geneva, adopted French earlier, because people in this canton read the 
Bible in French.
Now, what can we say about contact between languages? Is it disadvanta-
geous or advantageous? For instance, is English a threat to French because of the 

4 Languages change when influenced by other languages 
 23
many terms the latter has borrowed from the former, including frequently used 
technical terms like start­up, blog, podcast, PC, peer­review, upgrade, download, 
etc.? In fact, contact between languages is not harmful. On the contrary, it is a 
common situation in the world. How can we explain this fact?
Let us begin with a banal and ordinary fact: languages change over time. We 
will use French as an example. The ancestor of French is a variety of Latin, Vulgar 
Latin, which gave rise to varieties of Gallo-Roman dialects during the Middle 
Ages. One of these varieties of old French yielded modern French. A moderately 
well-informed reader knows that texts from the Middle Ages texts are fairly dif-
ficult to read, whereas works by Rabelais, a Renaissance French physician and 
writer (1483 or 1494–1553), are much easier: although French from the 17th century 
has some syntactic differences with contemporary French, as (13) and (14) show, 
it is not a foreign language:
(13)
17th century French
Il
le
peut
faire.
3sgProSub
3sgProAcc
can
do
‘He can do it.’
(14)
21st century French
Il
peut
le
faire.
3sgProSub
can
3sgProAcc
do
‘He can do it.’
Syntactically speaking, the French language has changed only a little since the 
17th century. It has certainly evolved much more in terms of prosody, phonet-
ics, and lexicon. This can be readily observed when the lexicon and prosody of 
current Parisian French is compared to Quebec French.22
One of the central questions for historical linguistics is to identify factors 
of linguistic change. A classic theory evokes language contact as an important 
factor. In other words, languages change under the influence of other languages 
with which they come in contact. According to this theory, change is an external 
(or exogenous) factor, essentially bound to linguistic contacts between speakers.
We must then ask how language contacts influence or modify a language. 
Stated in this way, the phenomenon sounds rather mysterious and gives a neg-
ative impression. Statements of the following sort often crop up: German has a 
harmful influence on Swiss French, and English, whose lexicon is more and more 
22 For instance, a car is in Quebec French un char, and in standard French une voiture.

24 
 Chapter 1 Eight commonplace assumptions about language 
common in French, negatively impacts the structure of French. Fortunately, both 
statements are false.
First, the influence of German has no impact on French syntax or phonology. 
Some German and French bilinguals’ “slice” (trancher in French), or maintain 
some prosodic features of their most commonly used language. One example is 
my cousin from Bern, Switzerland, whose mother tongue is French. Her French 
is perfect, but she speaks with a German accent. Her older sister, on the other 
hand, raised in the same bilingual milieu (a native French-speaking mother and 
a native German-speaking father), has no German accent. What conclusions can 
be drawn here? It is clear that the German-speaking environment had a greater 
influence on my younger cousin, but that it did not impose German syntax or the 
German lexicon on her French syntax.
It is certain that German has an influence, albeit a limited one, on the lexicon 
of the bilingual regions of Switzerland. As children growing up in a bilingual 
region of French-speaking Switzerland, we delighted in lexical intrusions, making 
up sentences like (15), that mixed French syntax with the German lexicon, as the 
reference clause in German shows (16):
(15)  Le fatre a schlagué le katz avec un stock parce qu’il avait stohlé le speck.
 
the father beat the cat with a stick because it had stolen the bacon
 
‘Dad beat the cat with a stick because it stole the bacon’.
(16)  Der Vater hat die Katze mit einem Stock geschlagen, weil sie den Speck ges­
tohlen hatte.
 
 the father has the cat with a stick beaten because she the bacon stolen had
 
‘Dad beat the cat with a stick because she stole the bacon.’
These examples show that only the lexicon is affected – fatre for père ‘father’, 
schlaguer for battre ‘to beat’, katz for chat ‘cat’, stohler for voler ‘to steal’, etc. –, 
and not syntax.23 No French-speaking child would have used German syntax – 
the German grammatical structure in which the verb falls at the end of the sub-
ordinate clause and the past participle falls at the end of the matrix clause, as 
in (17):
23 It is not surprising that French morphology is applied to these lexical borrowings. For in-
stance, the verb schlaguer behaves like a first group verb with an -er inflection. Nouns like katz 
or stock take the same morphological gender as their French counterparts (le chat ‘the cat’, le 
baton ‘the stick’).

4 Languages change when influenced by other languages 
 25
(17) Le fatre a le katz avec un stock schlagué parce qu’il le speck stohlé avait.
 
the father has the cat with a stick beaten because he the bacon stole had
 
‘Dad beat the cat with a stick because she stole the bacon.’
When we consider the ‘bad’ influence of English on French, the crucial point is 
also the lexicon. Some French speakers condemn inappropriate usage of what 
they call franglais, or ‘Frenglish’, a mix of French and English. A typical example, 
from the article on franglais in Wikipedia,24 is shown in (18), with the standard 
French version in (19):
(18)  Je reboote pour que les drivers que je viens d’updater soient loadés sans que 
le système ne bugue.
 
 ‘I’m rebooting so the drivers I have just updated can be loaded without the 
system bugging.’
(19)  Je redémarre pour que les pilotes que je viens de mettre à jour soient chargés 
sans que le système ne plante.
 
 ‘I’m rebooting so the drivers I have just updated can be loaded without the 
system bugging.’
Note that today, lexical units like redémarrer ‘to reboot’, pilote ‘driver’, mettre à jour 
‘to update’, charger ‘to load’, buguer ‘to bug’ are quite frequent. As these examples 
show, the “negative influence” of one language (here English) on another (French) 
is mainly a question of lexicon. In specialised professions like computer program-
ming, finance, and banking, for which English is used as a working language, this 
type of jargon is used very frequently.
When pervasive usage of Frenglish took off, a strong political reaction 
occurred in France, resulting in the 1994 Toubon Law, whose name refers to the 
then- Minister of Culture and Francophonie (defined as countries that promote 
French language, multilingualism, and cultural diversity, as well as peace, democ-
racy, and human rights, based on (higher) education and research, economic 
cooperation, and sustainable development25). The Toubon Law stipulates that 
French must be used in public; in scientific conferences, French scholars may use 
French if all participants are not foreign speakers; and university theses must be 
written in French.26
24 https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Franglais, accessed 8 November 2018.
25 https://www.francophonie.org/lorganisation-internationale-de-la-francophonie-81.
26 In fact, most PhD theses in scientific fields, including linguistics and philosophy, for in-
stance, are written in English.

26 
 Chapter 1 Eight commonplace assumptions about language 
What were the effects of this law? French speakers certainly understood 
that the intrusion of the English lexicon had become increasingly pervasive 
in all aspects of public life, and that it was not possible to resolve the issue of 
foreign words.27 Furthermore, we know that new words are introduced into ordi-
nary language usages only if the things they denote are also adopted. Borrowed 
lexicon is not always adopted verbatim, with both its original pronunciation and 
meaning.28 Some Frenglish words are not used in the same way in English. In 
England, for example, one does not say WC (water closet) as one does in France, 
but toilets; smoking does not mean a man’s dress suit; tuxedo is used in North 
America, and dinner jacket is used in the United Kingdom; and pressing is not 
used for dry­cleaning. However, some lexical expressions have been copied: like 
has become genre in French, as in (20):
(20) Il est genre gentil garçon.
 
He is gender nice boy
 
‘He’s, like, a nice boy.’
It is important to recall that lexical phenomena are passing fashions that do not 
last. The borrowed lexicon is used for the time it is necessary; in the technological 
domain, needs change very quickly. Does anyone still use a walkman (balladeur in 
French)? What company still has brainstorming (remue­méninge in French) sessions? 
Ten years from now new words will emerge because new concepts, new practices, 
and new objects will have appeared on the market, influencing people’s behaviour.
What conclusion can be drawn from the above? Mainly that contributions 
from foreign languages to the lexicon are positive for the language that does 
the borrowing. French has borrowed many now-common words from other lan-
guages, though few native speakers are aware of this:
(21) Nahuatl, Mexico
 
cacao, chocolat, cacahuète, tomate
 
‘cocoa, chocolate, peanut, tomato’
27 Remember that this process is not unidirectional. Because of the Norman presence in Eng-
land for more than four centuries in the Middle Ages, English imported more than ten thousand 
French words. Nowadays a lot of technical culinary terms have been imported from French into 
English: vinaigrette, sauté, foie gras, croissant, etc. It is also important to recall the creation of 
words like courriel ‘email’ which is used more in French Canada than in France.
28 There is a strong tendency in France to pronounce borrowed words according to French 
spelling conventions: the best example is the pronunciation of Bruxelles: [brysɛl] in Belgium, 
[bryksɛl] in France. 

5 One country, one language 
 27
(22) Quechua, Peru
 
caoutchouc, pampa
 
‘rubber, pampas’
(23) Arawak, The Antilles
 
maïs, ouragan, savane
 
‘corn (maize), hurricane, savannah’
(24) Tupi, Brazil
 
acajou, ananas
 
‘mahogany, pineapple’
(25) Tamul, India
 
mangue
 
‘mango’
(26) Mandarin Chinese
 
typhon
 
‘typhoon’
(27) Malay
 
jonque, bambou
 
‘junk, bamboo’29
These words were borrowed at the same time as the things they refer to. To sum 
up, word borrowings are positive, and are not a threat.
5 One country, one language
The fifth commonplace assumption is the equation between one country and 
one language. When I was studying in the US in the early 1980s, I was asked 
by neighbours in West Hollywood, a higher-middle class suburb of Los Angeles, 
whether people in Switzerland spoke ‘Swiss’? My attempts to explain the multi-
lingual situation of this mountainous country – the only familiar things about it 
were banks, chocolate, and watches – were not very successful, especially when 
29 Most of these words are the same in English; the only difference is their spelling. The sole 
exception is mahogany.

28 
 Chapter 1 Eight commonplace assumptions about language 
they examined a map of Europe: “Wow, so many countries, and so many lan-
guages!” The contrast with the linguistic situation of the US was very clear, and 
the complex situation of Europe was difficult to fathom.
The equation ‘one country, one language’ is erroneous. First, not all Euro-
pean countries are monolingual. Besides Switzerland there are other well-known 
exceptions: in Spain, Castilian, Catalan, Basque and Galician, closely related 
to Portuguese, are all spoken; in Italy, French is spoken in the Aosta Valley and 
German is spoken in the north of the Veneto region; in France, apart from French, 
which is spoken by 80% of the population, Basque, Breton, Catalan, Corsican, 
Alsatian, Flemish, and Occitan are minority languages; in Belgium, German is 
spoken in the eastern part of the country, whose two official languages are French 
and Flemish; in the United Kingdom, Welsh is spoken in Wales, and Gaelic in 
Scotland. There are many varieties of Italian and German in Italy and Germany, 
with a typical situation of diglossia in Germany; that is, varieties of spoken 
German that differ from the standard common language. Finally, in  Switzerland, 
four national languages are defined in the Swiss Constitution: German, French, 
Italian, and Romansh. Whereas French-speaking Switzerland is a rather homog-
enous dialectal region – the main differences are lexical and prosodic – a wide 
variety of German dialects are used in central and eastern German- speaking Swit-
zerland. Most are mutually comprehensible, with the exception of one variety of 
Alemannic German in the Upper Valais; there are five varieties of Romansh and 
several varieties of Italian dialects in the cantons of Tessin and Graubünden.
Two issues must be addressed: firstly the erroneous equation “one country, 
one language”, and secondly the reason why there are so many varieties of lan-
guages. We will begin by examining the question about varieties of languages.
We have already mentioned why North Americans speak English: it is the 
result of British colonisation of what are now Canada and the United States of 
America, with some French-speaking enclaves like Louisiana in the US, and 
Quebec and New Brunswick in Canada. A striking fact about North America – and 
the same is true for Central and South America – is the almost total disappearance 
of Amerindian languages. In the early 21st century there were only 949  Amerindian 
languages and 47 million speakers of Amerindian languages on the entire Ameri-
can continent. This is a very low ratio of speakers per language. There are still 210 
living languages in Brazil, 240 in Mexico, and more than 100 in the US. It is very 
striking that in the National Museum of the American Indian in Washington, D.C., 
the topic of Amerindian languages is completely absent from the exhibitions and 
bookstore. As a comparison, there are 1,995 languages in Africa, 209 in Europe, 
2,039 in Asia, and 1,341 in Oceania, with different  repartitions in the number of 
speakers in the world: 11.8% for Africa, 0.8% for America, 61% for Asia, 6.3% for 
Europe, and 0.1% for Oceania, as shown in Table 1:

5 One country, one language 
 29
Table 1: Numbers of languages and speakers per continent.30
Languages
Speakers
 Nb
   %
Nb (in millions)
 %
Asia
2,034
31%
3,490
61%
Pacific 
1,341
21%
6
0.1%
America
949
15%
47
0.8%
Africa
1,995
30%
676
11.8%
Europe
209
3%
1,504
6.3%
This table illustrates the pronounced difference between the number of lan-
guages and the number of their speakers: this difference correlates with the ratio 
speakers/languages worldwide, giving rise to a generalisation: the more lan-
guages there are, the less the number of their speakers, which explains why there 
is a serious risk of endangered languages, those with less than 10,000 speakers, 
of dying out. Crystal’s data is presented below (Crystal 2010: 294):
Table 2: Ratio languages-speakers.
Number of speakers
Number of languages
% of languages
More than 1,000,000 
283
4%
More than 100,000 
616
9%
More than 10,000 
1,364
21%
More than 1000 
1,631
25%
More than 100 
1,040
16%
Less than 100 
455
7%
Known to be extinct
310
5%
No estimate
905
15%
Number of speakers: N = 5,022,648,000 
Number of languages: N = 6,604
These data allow a new assumption to be made: the languages with the highest 
number of speakers are not many, only 13%. This means that the majority of languages 
(69%) have fewer than 100,000 speakers: these languages are potentially in danger.
It is clear that this macro-linguistic data, particularly for countries like Brazil 
(210 languages), Mexico (240), Cameroun (270), Democratic Republic of Congo 
30 Crystal (2010: 295), according to Ethnologue (Gordon 2005), based on 6,912 languages.

30 
 Chapter 1 Eight commonplace assumptions about language 
(210), India (380), Indonesia (670), New Guinea (670), and Australia (250), shows 
no correlation between country and language. But the question of why there so 
many languages remains.
One possible response is geography. In Amazonia the complexity of the river 
networks and the density of the forest are all factors of isolation. In Papua New 
Guinea the Highlands also isolate populations. Jared Diamond (2012: 2) describes 
a scene in 2006 at the airport of Port Moresby, the capital of Papua New Guinea, in 
comparison with what occurred in 1931 when the first contact between Highland 
people and Australian patrols took place:
A linguist listening to the crowd would have distinguished dozens of languages, falling into 
very different groups: tonal languages with words distinguished by pitch as in Chinese, 
Austronesian languages with relatively simple syllables and consonants, and non-tonal 
Papuan languages. In 1931 one could have encountered individual speakers of several dif-
ferent languages together, but never a gathering of speakers of dozens of languages. Two 
widespread languages, English and Tok Pisin (also known as Neo-Melanesian or Pidgin 
English), were the languages being used in 2006 at the check-in counter and also for many 
of the conversations among passengers, but in 1931 all conversations throughout the New 
Guinea Highlands were in local languages, each of them confined to a small area.
We know that geographically isolated populations are differentiated in both 
genetic and linguistic terms (Cavalli-Sforza 2000). One extreme situation, which 
is well-known in the domain of Romance languages, is the case of Romansh*, 
which is spoken in the canton of Graubünden, a mountainous canton in eastern 
Switzerland. Five varieties of Romansh are spoken in five valleys of this canton: 
Surlivan in Disentis, Sutsilvan in Thusis, Surmiran in Albula, Puter in Samedan, 
and Vallader in Zernez. Geography – Graubünden is known as the canton of a 
thousand valleys – is correlated to this linguistic diversity.31
We will now return to the first issue, the inadequacy of the equation “one 
country, one language”. We have observed that the geography of certain coun-
tries explains the extreme diversity of their languages and language varieties. The 
homogeneity of languages in Europe can be understood through the history of the 
countries in question. The unification of European countries in the 19th century 
also included the unification of language. Italy and Germany were defined as 
countries during this period, and the emergence of a strong centralised power 
explains why one language was attached to new political entities. In older coun-
tries like Spain, the United Kingdom, and France, the reasons are different. In 
France, the process of linguistic unification was triggered during the French rev-
olution by the Abbot Grégoire’s report, which recommended the eradication of 
31 For a linguistic study about Romansh, see Anderson (2016).

6 Children learn their mother tongue by imitating their parents’ speech 
 31
French dialects and advocated the use of a single language in the French nation.32 
However, it was primarily the 1882 Ferry Law, which made attendance in school 
mandatory for children aged 6 to 13, that caused French to spread. French was 
the only spoken language allowed during schooltime, on the playground, and at 
home – pupils were punished if they were caught speaking their dialect or patois 
at home. This was not as successful as had been anticipated, however: in 1914, 
at the beginning of the First World War, only a quarter of young French soldiers 
understood the officers’ orders given in French. French only became the main 
language of communication in France after World War I.
The political decision to eradicate all other languages in France shows that 
France is an exception in Europe: it has no other varieties like those in Italy and 
Germany.33 In other words, variations in French are mainly prosodic, phonetic, or 
lexical, and contrast with the situations of diglossia* found in Italy, Switzerland, 
and Germany as regards Italian and German. The French situation is exceptional 
worldwide, and can elucidate some difficulties in the management of French 
society in terms of education and culture.34
To conclude, we have observed that historical and geographical factors cancel 
out the assumption “one country, one language”. As we will see in chapter 3, the idea 
of national languages is an external language issue, which is not a central topic in lin-
guistics. Internal language issues, on the other hand, are investigated by linguistics.
6  Children learn their mother tongue by imitating their 
parents’ speech
Every parent has experienced the magical moment of their child’s first word, his 
or her learning the lexicon, and then a continuous flow of speech. How does this 
happen? The French linguist Jean-Yves Pollock (1997: 13) has summarized this 
process well: “L’apprentissage du langage n’est pas quelque chose que font les 
enfants, mais quelque chose qui leur arrive” [Learning language is not something 
children do, but something that happens to them]. One of the best examples is 
given by Steven Pinker, a psycholinguist who studies lexicon acquisition, in his 
book The Language Instinct (Pinker 1995: 281)
32 For the complete story of this unification process, see Certeau, Julia, and Revel (1985). It 
should be noted that French has been the official language for all administrative decrees in 
France since the Ordonnance de Villers-Cotterêt in 1539: all administrative texts, official acts, 
decrees and laws must be written in French, rather than in the Latin that was used until this time.
33 See chapter 4 for a more nuanced description of variations in French.
34 See chapter 7 for a discussion of a major societal issue in French society.

32 
 Chapter 1 Eight commonplace assumptions about language 
Indeed, when fussy parents or meddling experimenters do provide children with feedback, 
the children tune it out. The psycholinguist Martin Braine once tried for several weeks to 
stamp out one of his daughter’s grammatical errors. Here is the result:
Child: Want other one spoon, Daddy.
Father: You mean, you want the other spoon.
Child: Yes, I want other one spoon, please, Daddy.
Father: Can you say “the other spoon”?
Child: Other . . . one . . . spoon.
Father: Say . . . “other.”
Child: Other.
Father: “Spoon.”
Child: Spoon.
Father: “Other . . . Spoon.”
Child: Other . . . spoon. Now give me other one spoon?
The acquisition of the mother tongue is thus not a learning process in the edu-
cational sense of the term. It is a natural process, which follows, as far lexicon 
is concerned, a regular curve: from 12 to 16 months, 0.3 words a day; from 16 to 
22 months, 0.8 words a day; from 22 to 30 months, 1.6 words a day; from 30 to 72 
months, 3.6 words a day; from 6 to 8 years, 6.6 days a day; finally; from 8 to 10 
years, 12.1 words a day (Bloom 2000).
In a more general way, acquisition processes follow different steps. During 
the first year, the babble period, the baby exercises and adjusts her articulators 
with the sounds of her environment. An infant is born with the capacity to learn 
any language, but this ability is very quickly reduced to the phonetic characteris-
tics of her mother tongue. Here is how Steven Pinker describes this period (Pinker 
1995: 264–265):
Babies continue to learn the sounds of their language throughout the first year. By six 
months, they are beginning to lump together the distinct sounds that their language col-
lapses into a single phoneme, while continuing to discriminate equivalently distinct ones 
that their language keeps separate. By ten months they are no longer universal phoneti-
cians but have turned into their parents; they do not distinguish Czech or Inslekampx pho-
nemes unless they are Czech or Inslekampx babies.35
35 Inslekampx* is a Shalishan language spoken in Western Canada.

6 Children learn their mother tongue by imitating their parents’ speech 
 33
From 12 months utterances consist of single words like mommy, daddy, no, and yes. 
The period from 27–28 to 37–38 months is the most extraordinary period, known 
as the grammatical explosion, accompanied by the whole range of grammatical 
categories and constructions present in the child’s environment. It is the period in 
which clauses expand from one to two or three words. The order of grammatical 
category acquisition is first nouns, then verbs, and lastly prepositions and deter-
miners (functional categories). We can thus conclude that Brain’s daughter was at 
a developmental stage in which verbs and nouns had been acquired, but not deter-
miners. Here is how Pinker describes a three-year old child (Pinker 1995: 276–277):
The three-year-old, then, is a grammatical genius – master of most constructions, obeying 
rules far more often than flouting them, respecting language universals, erring in sensible, 
adultlike ways, and avoiding many kinds of errors altogether. How do they do it? Children 
of this age are notably incompetent at most other activities. We won’t let them drive, vote, 
or go to school, and they can be flummoxed by no-brainer tasks like sorting beads in order 
of size, reasoning whether a person could be aware of an event that took place while the 
person was out of the room, and knowing that the volume of a liquid does not change when 
it is poured from a short, wide glass into a tall, narrow one. So they are not doing it by the 
sheer power of their overall acumen. Nor could they be imitating what they hear, or else 
they would never say goed or Don’t giggle me. It is plausible that the basic organization of 
grammar is wired into the child’s brain [. . .].
The grammatical genius of children is not sociological, then, but biological: the 
child is programmed to acquire a language, whichever one she is exposed to. 
But this does not mean that the linguistic environment, the quality of the lexical 
entries provided by her parents, brothers and sisters and grandparents, do not 
have an important role, too. The linguistic environment is now seen to play a dif-
ferent role than what was believed in the 1960s.36 The social and linguistic environ-
ment is indeed crucial: if this environment does not allow the faculty of language 
to be activated, learning will be differed, obtained with difficulty, or may not occur 
at all. Several cases of wild children have been observed since the 19th century, and 
their stories have been told in films by François Truffaut (The Wild Child, 1970) and 
Werner Herzog (The Enigma of Kasper Hauser, 1974). It is believed today that there 
is a critical period in childhood during which she must be surrounded by language.
This data allows for a second conclusion about the acquisition and devel-
opment of language: children acquire the phonology, morphology, syntax, and 
semantics of their mother tongue with no difficulty, but these learning processes 
36 See Bernstein (1966) on his concepts of restricted and elaborated codes. See also Tomasello 
(2003) for a used-based theory of acquisition and Zufferey (2015) for the pragmatics of language 
acquisition.

34 
 Chapter 1 Eight commonplace assumptions about language 
do not depend solely on the quality of the stimuli in their environments: the poverty 
of stimulus* thesis encapsulates this idea.37 This thesis states that the quality of the 
linguistic competence* developed by a child cannot be explained by the nature, 
often limited and poor, of the speech of her parents and her environment.
7 Only words in dictionaries belong to languages
There is a remarkable belief shared by many speakers, especially in French- 
speaking Switzerland,38 that only words found in the dictionary belong to a 
language. In other words, using these words is allowed, while words not in dic-
tionaries are prohibited. What is to be made of this assertion? Is it acceptable or 
mistaken? In my opinion, this kind of reasoning mixes cause and effect: words 
are in a dictionary because they are used, and if some of them disappear from 
dictionaries it is because they are no longer in use. The introduction of regional 
words into language dictionaries only mirrors their importance in language use.
For instance, the Swiss French word pive ‘woodpecker’ appears in the 1993 
edition of the French dictionary Le Petit Robert, because its usage was sufficiently 
widespread, especially in French-speaking Switzerland. The first occurrence of 
the word dates from 1661. It derives from the Latin pipa ‘flute’, and means “conifer 
fruit”, resulting in words like pive de pin ‘pine cone’, which differs from the stand-
ard French version of the word: pomme de pin.39
We must now ask why the lexicons of languages change over time. Why do 
new words emerge? I already mentioned two reasons for such changes. First, lex-
icons include many borrowings. As noted above, the fact that French was spoken 
in England from the 11th to the 14th century resulted in around 10,000 words with 
French origins becoming part of the English lexicon, often creating duplicates 
like liberty and freedom, people and folk, flower and blossom, to commence and to 
begin, to annoy and to bother, intelligent and clever, saintly and holy, in fact and 
indeed, etc. (Walter 1994: 454).
The second reason why new words appear is because new things appear and 
must be labelled. One beautiful example of the creation of a new word occurred 
with the appearance of the machine called the computer, which was not trans-
37 See Fodor and Crowther (2002) for a development.
38 This population has a certain inferiority complex: for many of the French speakers in this 
linguistic area, French is not their native language, but a borrowed language, hence their greater 
or lesser degree of linguistic insecurity.
39 Note that there is a conceptual motivation between the word’s Latin root and its meaning: a 
pive resembles a flute because of its conical and elongated form. See Note 40 about motivation.

7 Only words in dictionaries belong to languages 
 35
lated literally into French as calculateur,40 but named ordinateur instead. The 
lexical root used for the French word corresponding to computer is not calcul- 
‘to compute’ but ordin-, from ordonner ‘to order’. This choice was made by the 
French Latin scholar Jacques Perret (1906–1992) in 1955, in answer to a request 
from IBM. The choice is interesting because it focuses on another function of the 
computer. Along with computing, it also orders. This example shows that there is 
a weak motivation between form and meaning, but does not refute the arbitrary 
relationship between form and meaning.41
Now, do new words always lack motivation? No, because in some morpholog-
ical processes of word formation, especially words that are formed from proper 
nouns, motivation is present: terms like sadiser, hollandiser, zlataner all refer 
to the proper nouns of the people they are named after: the Marquis de Sade, 
François Hollande, and Zlatan Ibrahimovic.42 The meaning of these words derives 
from a particular characteristic associated with the person to whom they refer:
(28) sadiser (someone) = to behave in a sadistic manner
(29) hollandiser = to behave in an indecisive manner
(30)  zlataner (someone) = to treat someone in a haughty and contemptuous 
manner
French is a language whose morphology is largely derivational: word formation 
begins with a root, to which prefixes and/or suffixes are added. This morpholog-
ical process explains how verbs like zlataner can be formed:
40 Note that this word is used in French for very large computers such as the quantum computer, 
which is called calculateur quantique in French.
41 According to Saussure ([1916] 1968), there is no motivation between the signifiant ‘acoustic 
image’ and the signifié ‘concept’: the relationship between these two parts of a linguistic sign is 
arbitrary. In some cases, like in compounds such as the French dix­sept ‘seventeen’, there is some 
motivation because the number (17) is the sum of ten (10) and seven (7). Even in onomatopoeias, 
there is no clear motivation, since they vary from one language to another: the cock’s cry is cock­
a­doodle doo in English, cocorico in French, kikeriki in German, kukeleku in Dutch, kukkokiekuu 
in Finnish, kokekokkoo in Japanese, gugugugu in Koerean, ü­ürü­üüü in Turkish for instance.
42 The Marquis de Sade was an 18th-century French writer. The adjective sadistic was formed 
from his last name. François Holland is a former French president. Zlatan Ibrahimovic is a Swed-
ish football player, who played for Ajax Amsterdam, Juventus Torino, Inter Milano, FC Barcelo-
na, AC Milano, Paris-Saint-Germain, Manchester United, Los Angeles Galaxy, and currently AC 
Milano. Whereas Sade is well-known for imposing painful sexual relations, François Holland is 
described as an indecisive President, and Zlatan Ibrahimovic as an arrogant person. 

36 
 Chapter 1 Eight commonplace assumptions about language 
(31)
Zlatan + er
 =  zlataner
Zlatan + verbal suffix =  to zlatan42
Word formation processes are simpler in German. One example is composition. 
In German, a new word as well as a new philosophical concept, Weltanschauung 
‘vision of the world’, was formed from the words Welt (‘world’) and Anschauung 
(‘vision’). In English, the process is even simpler: a noun can be added before 
another noun, in a recursive way, as in (32):
(32)  book > text book > department text book > math department text book > 
Harvard university math department text book
In French, compound nouns are not as productive as in English, because new 
nouns are not formed in the same way.44 But new artefacts have given rise to new 
compound nouns in French:
(33) Verb-Noun compounds 
 
sèche­cheveux, sèche­linge, lave­vaisselle
 
‘hair dryer, clothes dryer, dishwasher’
(34)
Compounds with prepositions 
Noun-P-Verb:
chambre à coucher, machine à laver , machine à écrire
‘bedroom, washing machine, typewriter’
Noun-P-Noun:
machine à café
‘coffee machine’
Other processes of word formation go unnoticed because they generally concern 
frequently used words. For instance, portemanteau words are made by eliminat-
ing the duplicate syllables of two words:
43 In English, a simpler process occurs: to zlatan could be a verb as to dog is a verb derived from 
the noun dog. This simpler morphological process is limited in French to certain deverbalised 
nouns: nager ‘to swim’ gives rise to nage ‘swimming’.
44 According to Fradin (2003), the most common word formation process in French is affixation 
(personnel = personne+el ‘personal’) rather than conversion (orange ‘orange’, from noun to ad-
jective), replication (guéguerre ‘war’), Verb-Noun composition (tire­bouchon ‘corkscrew’), and 
Noun-Noun composition (poisson­lune ‘moon fish’).

7 Only words in dictionaries belong to languages 
 37
(35) French
 
a. informatique = information + automatique
 
      ‘computer science’
 
b. franglais = français + anglais
 
     ‘Frenglish’
 
c. courriel = courrier + électronique
 
     ‘email’
(36) English
 
motel = motor + hotel
 
smog = smoke + fog
 
modem = modulator + demodulator
(37) German
 
famillionär = familiär + millionär (Freud)
 
‘family of millionaires’
As these examples show, there are naturally more words in use than words 
included in the dictionary at any given time. I have not addressed the terminology 
issue, because it refers to specific areas of knowledge or professions, such as the 
extensive terminology used in aviation, medical science, fiscal and commercial 
law, banking, etc.
To sum up, the words belonging to a language are those that are used. The 
existence of dictionaries is, however, useful. The inventory of words in a diction-
ary constitutes a lexical and general common ground, and is also a resource about 
form (spelling) and meaning. Specialised lexicons on the other hand, are specific 
to their users, who are generally professionals, or members of younger genera-
tions. This is easy to understand. For younger generations, a specialised lexicon is 
a way to be different from and not be understood by their parents. French verlan, 
for example, is a youth jargon in which words are made by reversing the order 
of their syllables: vénère for énervé ‘irritated’, teufe for fête ‘party’, ouf for fou 
‘crazy’, chelou for louche ‘shifty’. Specialized jargon used by experts, especially 
scientists, allows for precise and unambiguous meaning. Jargon* therefore has 
two functions: first, it optimizes communication (experts), and second, it ensures 
obscurity of comprehension (younger generations).45
45 The traditional sociolinguistic analysis attributes several functions to jargon. They consider 
it to be cryptic, playful, and an aid to creating one’s identity.

38 
 Chapter 1 Eight commonplace assumptions about language 
8 Linguists are interested in word origins
The last assumption about language is etymology and its role in the analysis and 
comprehension of language. Although etymology is a science in and of itself and 
produces books of obvious documentary and historical interest,46 I would like to 
show why etymology is not part of linguistics.
The explanation of why the origin of words does not play a role in their usage 
is simple: when a speaker uses a particular language, her brain is mobilised to 
access words and progressively build the continuation of the clause, but never to 
access information about the origin of the words which make up the clause.
Take the example of garden­path sentences*, or sentences whose grammat-
ical analysis leads to a dead end, like when one arrives at a dead end in a laby-
rinth. Here is a simple example of a garden-path sentence:
(38) The old man the boat.47
The grammatical analysis starts in the following way (the brackets indicate the 
first step of the syntactic analysis):
(39) [the old man] the boat
If the reader groups the words the, old, man to build the Noun Phrase (NP) the old 
man, he immediately comes to a dead-end: a Verbal Phrase (VP) is expected after the 
NP. However, he immediately encounters two problems. First, the following word, 
the, cannot be bound to a VP or be a verb. Moreover, the word following the is a noun 
(boat), and can be merged into an NP with the determiner (D) the to build the NP the 
boat. Furthermore, a sentence cannot be made up of two adjacent NPs, as in (40):
(40) * [the old man] [the boat]48
What can the reader do now? The only solution is to retrace his steps, like in a lab-
yrinth: when you come to a dead end in a labyrinth, you return to the most recent 
46 One good example for French is the Dictionnaire historique de la langue française (cf. Rey 1998).
47 For French readers, I have included the original example, suggested by Gérard Sabah (per-
sonal communication):
Le lac que l’écrivain décrit dans ce livre contemple est le lac de Côme.
The lake that the writer describe-s/d in this book contemplates is the lake of Como.
Try to figure it out, you will be surprised! The answer is given at the end of this chapter in Note 55
48 The asterisk * is used to mark a sentence as agrammatical.

8 Linguists are interested in word origins 
 39
intersection and take another path, repeating the process until you find the way 
out. So, the best thing to do with this sentence is to change the first grouping; 
instead of (39), you try a shorter grouping:
(41) [the old] man the boat
The old can be a NP (old being the head of the NP). Now, can the word man be a 
verb? Yes, to man means “to staff”. So, if man is the verb (it needs to be in the 3rd 
person plural form), can the next words the boat be a complement of a verb such 
as man? Yes, and therefore the complete parsing of the sentence will yield (42), 
which means (43):
(42) [the old] [man [the boat]]
(43) The old are the people who man the boat.
I chose the example of a garden-path sentence to show that the speaker’s and 
hearer’s tasks are already complex enough – even with a sentence of just five 
words – without complicating things with issues linked to word origin. Etymol-
ogy plays no role whatsoever in sentence production or in grammatical analysis.
That said, etymology is often used as an argument for criticising speakers’ mis-
takes. Here is a typical example in French: the adjective achalandé ‘crowed’, whose 
origin is the noun chaland ‘client’ is generally used to mean “well supplied with 
goods”. Now, when this word is used, as in (44), French purists49 claim that the usage 
is incorrect because the adjective achalandé should be used only to mean “with a lot 
of clients”. So, (44) should be used with meaning (45) and not with meaning (46):50
(44) Ce magasin est bien achalandé.
 
‘This shop is well supplied.’
(45) This shop is well supplied with clients.
(46) This shop is well supplied with goods.
An alternative analysis, which is non-normative, like the purists’ analysis, con-
sists of asking whether frequent use – achalandé meaning “well supplied with 
49 See Pinker (1995: chapter 1 2) on English purists, and Leeman-Bouix (1994) on French ones.
50 For the complete argument, see Leeman-Bouix (1994).

40 
 Chapter 1 Eight commonplace assumptions about language 
goods” – can be explained according to linguistic principles. The answer is yes: 
this usage is indeed a classic case of metonymy*, or a correspondence relation-
ship. The “client-goods” relationship, as well as other connections, can easily 
be explained in pragmatic and cultural terms. For instance, the following corre-
spondence relationships frequently occur in language usage:
(47) a. Cause-goal: Pelé’s head could not be stopped
 
b. Meal-client: The ham omelette left without paying.
 
c. Author-book: George Sand is on the left­hand shelf.
 
d. Residence-government: Downing Street has signed Brexit.
 
e. City-government: Paris has issues with Brussels.
It is possible to understand the relationship between “client” and “shop well 
supplied with goods”: clients go to shops that are well supplied with goods. We 
must then ask whether phenomena connected to a change of meaning are not 
more common. Here are two examples of such phenomena: first, the case of the 
preposition chez ‘at, to’ in French, which is an exception in Romance languages; 
second, the example of French negation, which is also an exception in Romance 
languages.
Let us start with the history of the preposition chez (Longobardi 2001). French 
has two spatial prepositions, one for places (à), the other indicating a building 
where a professional service is offered, or a social relationship:
(48) Jacques va à Paris.
 
Jacques go at Paris
 
‘Jacques goes to Paris.’
(49) Jacques va {chez le docteur, chez sa sœur}.
 
Jacques go {to the doctor, to his sister}
 
‘Jacques goes {to the doctor’s, to his sister’s}.’
Less standard usages use the preposition à instead of chez:
(50) Jacques est allé {au docteur, à la boulangerie}.51
 
Jacques is gone {at+the doctor, at the bakery}
 
‘Jacques went {to the doctor’s, to the bakery}.’
51 Au (contracted form) is the combination of the preposition à and the masculine determinant 
le: à + le = au. This is not the case with a feminine noun: à + la = à la.

8 Linguists are interested in word origins 
 41
What happens in these non-standard usages? Simply a generalisation of the 
usage of the locative preposition à. So, spoken French has the tendency to use the 
spatial preposition à for any type of location.
Why are there two prepositions in French? One recent hypothesis is that the 
preposition chez is historically derived from the noun casa, from Vulgar Latin, 
meaning “house”, as opposed to the classical Latin domus, from which nouns 
like domicile are derived.52 This process is known as grammaticalisation* and 
results in the following generalisation: changes in grammatical categories always 
go from a lexical category (in this case a common noun) to a grammatical or func-
tional category (in this case a preposition).53
The second example is French negation, which follows a different path from 
other Romance languages. The latter display a single preverbal negation, whose 
origin is the Latin non, whereas French negation is at once preverbal (with ne) 
and postverbal (with pas), as shown in (51) (Reinheimer and Tasmowski 1997):
(51)
Latin:
Non plouet.
Italian:
Non piove.
French:
Il ne pleut pas.
‘It is not raining.’
Where does this difference come from? The important point is that in Old French, 
negation is marked by ne (coming from the Latin non) followed by a noun denot-
ing a small quantity, like mie ‘crumb’ (miette in contemporary French). Contem-
porary French still contains some traces of these small quantities, such as the 
words point ‘a stitch’ and goutte ‘a drop’. What about pas? Pas indicates a small 
quantity, un pas ‘a step’ is a way of measuring a short distance. So the following 
negative sentences have these literal meanings:
(52) Je ne marche pas = I do not walk a step
 
I neg walk step
 
‘I don’t walk.’
(53) Je ne couds point = I do not sew a stitch
 
I neg sew a stitch
 
‘I don’t sew.’
52 English still uses the word domicile borrowed from French.
53 See Traugott and Dasher (2002) for generalisations about semantic changes, beyond gram-
maticalisation.

42 
 Chapter 1 Eight commonplace assumptions about language 
(54) Je ne bois goutte = I do not drink a drop
 
I neg drink drop
 
‘I don’t drink.’54
This process was described in the early 20th century by the French Indo- 
Europeanist linguist Antoine Meillet in these terms:
Les langues suivent ainsi une sorte de développement en spirale: elles ajoutent des mots 
accessoires pour obtenir une expression intense; ces mots s’affaiblissent, se dégradent et 
tombent au niveau de simples outils grammaticaux; on ajoute de nouveaux mots ou des 
mots différents en vue de l’expression; l’affaiblissement recommence et ainsi sans fin. 
 
(Meillet 1912: 140–141)
[Thus, languages follow a kind of spiral development: they add accessory words to obtain 
an intense expression; these words weaken, deteriorate and fall to the level of simple gram-
matical tools; new or different words are added with a view to expression; the weakening 
begins again and the cycle continues without cease.]
Five steps in the formation of negation have been described from the point of view 
of the history of the French language. This is called Jespersen’s cycle (Jespersen 
1917; van der Auwera 2009), and can be observed in the following sequence 
(Mosegaard Hansen 2018):
(55) ne > ne (pas) > ne pas > (ne) pas > pas
 
not > not (not) > not not > (not) not > not
(56)  je ne dis > je ne dis (pas) > je ne dis pas > je (ne) dis pas > je dis pas
 
I neg say> I neg say (neg) > I neg say neg > I (neg) say neg > I say neg
 
‘I do not say.’
A precise table has been established for the removal of ne from negations: in 
old and middle French, ne is hardly ever removed, whereas in classical French 
(17th–18th centuries), ne is sometimes removed. In modern Quebec French, 
however, ne has been completely removed (Martineau and Mougeon 2003).
The negation has moved from ne to pas because the negative clitic ne has 
weakened so much that it has become almost non-existent. If Jespersen’s cycle is 
correct, it would predict that the process will continue, that pas will also weaken, 
54 Today, goutte is limited in its usage to the verb voir ‘see’, as in ne voir goutte ‘to not see any-
thing’.

9 Conclusion 
 43
and that a new negative word, called a forclusive*, will indicate the negation. This 
is exactly what is happening in Quebec French today (Déprez and Martineau 2003):
(57) Quebec French
 
J’ai pas vu personne.
 
I have neg seen nobody
 
‘I have not seen anybody.’
(58) European French
 
J’ai vu personne.
 
I have seen nobody
 
‘I have seen nobody.’
What conclusions can we draw from these facts? That the observation of linguis-
tic phenomena is not carried out to learn about the origins of word meaning; its 
goal is rather to understand the changes in the grammatical form of sentences. 
Negation is a good example, because it shows the dynamics of linguistic change.
9 Conclusion
The conclusion of this chapter is simple. The eight questionable assumptions we 
have examined can be replaced with the following alternatives:
1) 
non-written languages are real languages;
2) there are no languages that are more important than others;
3) logic, clarity, and beauty are not properties for defining languages;
4) languages do not change solely because of the influence of other languages;
5) there is no “one country, one language” equation;
6) children acquire their mother tongue naturally rather than by imitation, 
because they are programmed to do so;
7) the number of words in a language is higher than the number of words in the 
dictionary;
8) the main topic of linguistics is studying the processes of linguistic change 
rather than etymology.

44 
 Chapter 1 Eight commonplace assumptions about language 
In the next chapter, I will discuss the difference between language and commu-
nication, and will show that language is not communication and that communi-
cation is not language.55
55 The solution to the problem of the garden-path sentence is as follows:
Le lac que l’écrivain décrit dans ce livre contemple est le lac de Côme. 
The lake which the writer described in this book contemplates is the lake of Como.
First attempt: [Le lac [que l’écrivain décrit dans ce livre] contemple] est le lac de Côme.
The problem is twofold: first, the matrix clause le lac contemple ‘the lake contemplates’ 
does not make sense; second, est le lac de Côme ‘is the lake of Como’ is a VP, which is disconnect-
ed from the first clause. We have come to a dead end, and have to parse again.
Second attempt: [Le lac [que l’écrivain [décrit dans ce livre] contemple] est le lac de Côme]
The matrix clause is le lac est le lac de Côme ‘the lake is the lake of Como’. The relative clause 
is que l’écrivain contemple ‘which the writer contemplates’, and décrit dans ce livre ‘described in 
this book’ is a parenthetical clause. The steps of parsing are as follows:
Le lac [que l’écrivain [décrit dans ce livre] contemple]
Le lac [que l’écrivain décrit dans ce livre contemple] est le lac de Côme

