9 
Mach's Principle and 
the Laws of Logic 
In this paper I wish to raise a philosophical question about logic, 
namely, the question whether its laws can consistently be thought of 
as analogous to those of the empirical sciences, i.e., as subject in some 
sense or other to test and confirmation, or whether, as is more often 
maintained, they must be thought of as analytic and a priori if not as 
conventional. In order to float the question, some general idea of what 
kind of activity logic is must be presupposed. The problem of logic I 
take to be as follows: Given the truth (or probability) of sentences {P}, 
what can we say (with what degree of confidence, etc.) about the truth 
(or probability) of sentences { 0 ? The method of logic I take to consist 
in performing operations on the sentences {P} or on supplementary 
sentences introduced for the purpose and in performing further opera-
tions on the sentences so generated, and so on until the sentences {Q} 
or some obviously related sentences are generated. According to the 
rules employed in these operations we may then say that the sentences 
{Q} are true or have a certain degree of probability in relation to the 
sentences {/>}. 
We thus arrive at a degree of confidence in the sentences {Q}. But 
what of our confidence in the whole procedure by which this degree of 
confidence is arrived at? Well, we can construct a second-order scheme 
for that and talk about the sentences {/>} and the rules by which we 
operated on them. We thus arrive at a degree of confidence in the 
procedure. But what of our confidence in this second-order scheme? 
And so on. 
It is tacitly agreed by almost everyone except Quine that this regres-
138 

Mach's Principle 
139 
sive problem presents itself in two distinct cases. The first covers de-
ductive inference and gives us absolute confidence in the conclusion on 
the object level as well as in the rules at all subsequent levels. The 
second covers everything else; we can't even think of pursuing the 
regression more than one or two levels, and even there we have to cut 
off debate by shifting attention from truth, probability, etc., to accepta-
bility, epistemic utility, and the like. Whenever bits of the problem 
under its second aspect can be so arranged as to yield to the techniques 
proper to its first, this is instantly done; we thus have deductive theories 
of probability, utility, acceptance, and so on—a veritable deductivizing 
of all tractable parts of inductive logic. It seems reassuring to be able 
to say with deductive certainty that the conclusion follows inductively, 
even if we can't assert the conclusion itself with anything more than 
inductive probability. This activity takes place mainly on the first meta-
level, and represents a kind of sidestepping of second- and higher-order 
inductive issues. My admiration for the people who do it is great and 
sincere, but I have no contribution to make along these lines. Instead 
I wish to confront one of the issues they sidestep and to suggest in a 
slightly different way from Quine's that the separation of cases will not 
stand up under scrutiny. 
I start with Hume and in particular with the distinction between 
matters of fact and relations of ideas. We tend on the whole to give 
Hume too much credit as a contemporary and to make too little allow-
ance for his belonging to the eighteenth century. Given the tenor of 
immediately preceding discussions, especially Berkeley's, Hume may 
certainly be excused for believing in "ideas," but that does not excuse 
us for following him in this aberration, whether or not we call things by 
the same name. The main contention of this paper is that matters of fact 
are enough—are, indeed, all we have—and that the complex matters 
of fact which we call "relations of ideas" (or which we call "logic," 
deductive or inductive) are reflections of the inclusive matter of fact 
which we call "the world" and are as contingent (or as necessary) as 
it is. 
This contention can be looked upon as a philosophical analogue of 
the generalized form of Mach's principle. What Einstein called Mach's 
principle was of course the restricted claim that the inertia of a given 
body is determined by the distribution of matter in the physical uni-
verse. The generalized claim is that the laws of nature are so deter-
mined, and the philosophical analogue is that the laws of logic are deter-
mined, not to be sure by the distribution of matter, but by some feature 
or features of the world as a whole, so that they would be different if 
it were different. This means among other things at least a reinterpreta-
tion of what we can mean by the expression "possible world," since 

140 
Logic and Causality 
as presently understood the limitations on possible worlds are precisely 
logical limitations, whereas if the world determines the logic (rather 
than the other way around) it would seem difficult to rule out a priori 
any world whatever, by any other argument, at least, than follows from 
the fact that this world already exists. Given logical rules (and the dis-
tinction between rules and laws is an important one in this context) we 
can of course explore the set of worlds in which they hold and the 
relative possibilities within this set; for that matter, we can devise sys-
tems with any rules we like, the only limitations being the scope of our 
imagination. (But that limitation is far from trivial.) 
This, however, is running ahead somewhat. My proposal is really a 
double one, of which the analogical form of Mach's principle is only 
one element, the other element being the reconstruction of logic and all 
other relations of ideas as matters of fact. And even if both these ele-
ments were upheld, there would still remain the question of what light, 
if any, they threw on inductive logic and confirmation theory. The last 
question is the easiest. As I have already said, I claim to make no 
contribution to the technical discipline, but it may be that success in 
the philosophical enterprise would lead to a different view of what the 
technical discipline is all about and what can reasonably be expected 
of it. In particular it might help along the démystification of deductive 
logic, which as the unattainable paradigm has been responsible for driv-
ing so many inductive logicians to despair. 
"Relations of ideas" are represented by Hume (for example, in the 
passage about consigning books to the flames) as the kinds of thing that 
form the object of reasoning about quantity or number. Matters of fact, 
on the other hand, are the kinds of thing that enter into causal relations. 
We can know some relations of ideas certainly, because (to use post-
Humean language) they are analytic, definitional, and so on, and hence, 
as later came to be thought, empty of factual content. We can never 
know any matters of fact certainly, because in order to do so we would 
need certainty in causal relations, and these run into the notorious 
difficulty that future exceptions are always possible. (I include here of 
course future knowledge as well as future events.) I do not wish to 
rehearse all this, but to comment on the insertion of temporal considera-
tions into the inductive case when they are absent from the deductive 
case. Suppose we were to ask. How do you know the deductive rela-
tions will hold in the future any more than the inductive ones? 
After a bit of spluttering, and assuming that the question is taken 
seriously (as I mean it to be), the reply to this is likely to be a challenge: 
How could the deductive relations be different, since they are rules of 
procedure and not laws of nature? What would it be like for them to be 
different? What conceivable test could be proposed that would reveal 

Mach's Principle 
141 
exceptions to them? To which I readily answer that I have no idea, I 
can't imagine an exception, it doesn't even make sense to me—but nor 
do I conclude, from these limitations on my powers of fantasy, that the 
thing is impossible. I can readily think of exceptions in the case of 
induction; I can't conceive of them in the case of deduction—but there 
must surely be more to it than that, or if there isn't, then the debate is 
shifting to my territory. For imagining, conceiving, and the like aren't 
logical categories at all, but rather psychological and thus empirical 
ones. 
But for counterinstances to arise in the deductive case would surely 
involve a self-contradiction. Here the deductive logician is likely to 
start writing things down, showing that the very rules of the language 
L entail the analyticity of this proposition or that. Now, however, I can 
afford to be generous. I have no objection whatever to analyticity within 
languages—for incorporating the law of contradiction as a rule in such 
languages; indeed, given the world we live in, it seems a sound move. 
But I can quite easily imagine a language in which the law of contradic-
tion was not a rule, in which (let us say) truth-values were assigned at 
random; it might be spoken by some latter-day Epimenides, who would 
explain that Cretans aren't really liars, it's just that they don't care one 
way or the other, and if they contradict themselves then they contradict 
themselves and that's all there is to it. We care about truth—and that 
is a fact, not a principle of logic. And it is our caring about truth, 
not just about the rules of the language, that makes us choose the rules 
we do. 
If during the argument the logician has written something down, that 
is particularly gratifying. For inscriptions have a factual presence, and 
as long as we hang on to them we can keep ideas (and propositions 
and a lot of other metaphysical baggage) at arm's length. The curious 
dependence of logicians on factual things like inscriptions (not to men-
tion brains) ought to tip us off to a discrepancy between theory and 
practice. In theory logic reaches for immutable truth (most logicians 
are at heart Platonists); in practice the logician writes something down 
on paper or a blackboard, thinks for a bit, imagines, conceives, and so 
forth, and then writes something else down. But, you say, these are 
mere tokens—tokens stand for types, and the types refer to all those 
logical categories, truths, relations, and the like. That may be, but all 
I see are the inscriptions, the furrowed brow, the puzzled look. If I 
could give an adequate account of logic in terms of them, would we 
need the rest of the apparatus? 
The kinds of matter of fact required for this reconstruction are two: 
first, obvious things like inscriptions and utterances, which can be lo-
cated in the world easily enough alongside chairs and tables; second, a 

142 
Logic and Causality 
rather specialized kind of animal behavior (in this case the behavior of 
logicians) which can be located alongside eating and sitting, and so on. 
I am prepared in the latter case to talk dispositionally about "abilities" 
provided it is understood that the possession of the ability in question 
is a factual matter to be judged in terms of behavior. What abilities do 
logicians need in order to ply their trade? They are not I think especially 
exotic abilities. The fundamental operation of logic is one that every 
functioning human being is capable of performing, indeed one that we 
all do perform all the time; I call it, borrowing from the classical English 
grammarians, "apposition," and it consists of taking two things—any 
two things—and putting (and holding) them together. I say "taking" 
and "putting" metaphorically; knowing a person's name is a case of 
apposition, so is knowing the French for an English word, so is using a 
metaphor, and so on. Apposition is a perfectly general binary operation, 
unconstrained by category considerations, and by means of it we build 
our world. The special behavior of logicians lies in the invention and 
following of special rules of apposition, which impose constraints under 
which we do not ordinarily work. (The laws of logic are not the laws of 
thought, any more than the laws of chess are the laws of moving objects 
on checkered surfaces. If Ayer or Berlin or Popper have black-and-
white tiled bathrooms, that does not compel them to walk one square 
forward and one diagonally.) 
The special rules of logic are formation-rules that preserve or at least 
safeguard type homogeneity and transformation-rules that preserve or 
at least keep track of truth. The chief talent that logic requires is an 
ability to stick to these rules; the looseness and redundancy, the ellipses 
and shortcuts of ordinary language give way to a more or less rigorous 
formalism (which has nothing to do with notation). This talent is rarer 
than might be supposed, which accounts for the fact that logic (as I 
have pointed out elsewhere)1 is too simple for many people who look 
for subtlety in its elements. It rapidly gets complex, of course, but 
its complexities always break down into simple elements as the fuzzy 
complexities of everyday life do not. People are always putting more 
or less complicated objects and expressions in apposition with each 
other and one another; this activity is governed by no principles other 
than immediate utility or intelligibility and the conventions of ordinary 
language and behavior, and consequently the coherence and even rele-
vance of any element of the resulting structure with or to any other 
element are not guaranteed, indeed it is normal for this structure to be 
incoherent and fragmented. These defects do not often appear because 
different parts of the structure are usually brought into play in fairly 
specific contexts which do not overlap; when incompatible parts of it 
are activated at the same time the various psychological phenomena of 

Mach's Principle 
143 
dissonance are observed, and there are also contexts which activate 
no parts because they are just not comprehended. (Note that these 
structures are specific to individuals.) Logical structures on the other 
hand are such that except under Russellian or Godelian stress all their 
parts are mutually consistent and no parts are lacking. The very idea of 
such comprehensive austerity is well-nigh inconceivable to the ordinary 
talker or thinker in daily life. 
But what the logician does is different only in degree from what 
ordinary people do, and it too is governed in the end by utility and 
intelligibility and convention. What the additional constraints of logic 
make possible are just those logical properties that we think of as char-
acteristic, namely, analytic precision and synthetic open-endedness. 
Everyday thought is at once grosser and more limited than logical infer-
ence: grosser because it works with unanalyzed complex wholes, more 
limited because these cohere imperfectly with one another and relate 
for the most part intransitively, so that inferential sequences are always 
short. Still it is adequate to the conditions of its world and survives 
because of this adequacy. Its world is an aspect of the world; the temp-
tation we have to resist is that of supposing that because logical refine-
ments enable us to transcend the limitations of everyday thought they 
also enable us to transcend the actuality of the world. The logical opera-
tions we are capable of performing are just some of the things that our 
evolutionary development has equipped us to do, and like other fea-
tures of our heredity they can be assumed to reflect a close adjustment 
to the facts of our environment. If these facts are contingent, then 
logical laws are also contingent, while if they are necessary the neces-
sity of those laws is still extrinsic to logic and depends on an empirical 
relationship between it and the world. 
In this light we need to look again at the doctrine that tautologies are 
empirically empty, perhaps to abandon it in favor of the doctrine that 
on the contrary they are empirically full, if I may so put it.2 Identity 
and contradiction aren't just logical rules (although they are that), nor 
are they laws of thought; they are laws of nature, reflecting just those 
properties of the world which, according to the analogous form of 
Mach's principle, determine the logic we are bound to use in dealing 
with it. They aren't obviously falsifiable (as remarked earlier, our imagi-
nations aren't up to envisaging counterinstances, and by now it should 
be obvious why not), but their nonfalsifiability is clearly of a different 
kind from the nonfalsifiability of pseudoscientific or metaphysical 
claims. For that matter, in an important sense the other inductively 
established laws of nature aren't falsifiable either. It is one thing to 
know (to be able to imagine, etc.) what a counterinstance would be 
like, another to be able to produce one. We can of course construct 

144 
Logic and Causality 
interesting but as yet useless systems incorporating alternative rules, 
but we can do that for logic too. Physical laws, like logical ones, func-
tion as rules within the theoretical systems to which they belong and 
acquire the status of laws only on the successful application of those 
systems to empirical problems. 
What holds for the laws of deductive logic holds equally and under 
precisely the same conditions for the laws of inductive logic. In neither 
case are we really guaranteed success in advance; if in the deductive 
case it is claimed that consistency itself requires the outcome, it must 
be recognized that consistency in language is one thing, consistency in 
the world another, and that the former, again, reflects the latter. We 
count heavily on the world's consistency and are perpetually vindicated 
in doing so. We count heavily also on the world's continuity, on its 
regularity, and so on, and are vindicated in this too. The really serious 
difference between the cases lies in the information available in the 
premises, and from this point of view the current tendency to deducti-
vize inductive problems seems to me entirely appropriate. But here a 
different distinction emerges, a form of the old distinction between 
theory confirmation and instance confirmation. In its traditional form 
the problem of induction focused mainly on scientific laws, which as 
conclusions of inductive inferences are regularly detached without 
modal qualifications and used as assertoric premises in making predic-
tions. It would be absurd to say, every time we wanted to calculate 
quantities of chemical reagents or stresses in airframes, for example, 
"Well, the law is only confirmed to such and such a degree, so we can't 
really be sure how much we need," just as it would be absurd to place 
bets on the truth of special relativity theory. On the other hand in 
Bayesian estimation problems, statistical computations, etc., there isn't 
the same need for detachment; we can always go back to the original 
probabilities or the original figures and start again, and the probability 
estimate in the conclusion is of course the essential part of it. This 
difference in the use of inductive inference seems to me crucial. It is 
only in the former case that my version of Mach's principle can be 
thought of as applying, since in the latter our problem isn't with the 
behavior of the world exactly, but with the changing scope of our knowl-
edge of it. The reason why the next raven should be black is quite 
different from the reason why the next ball drawn from the urn should 
be black. 
I conclude by reiterating one or two points. Logic, like science, is a 
rule-governed human activity which consists in putting things (inscrip-
tions, acts of judgment) in apposition with one another, in spatial juxta-
position, or in temporal sequence. Nobody can compel us to accept its 
conclusions, as the tortoise taught Achilles, but accepting (and de-

Mach's Principle 
145 
taching) them is one of the things it is useful to do in our dealings with 
the world. (Doing logic for no ulterior purpose is a form of having 
dealings with the world.) Within the systems we construct we can be 
as formal, as analytic, etc., as we like, but the choice among systems 
for use in dealing with the world rests, in the deductive as in the induc-
tive case, on empirical (and in the long run on pragmatic) grounds. And 
there are limitations on the kinds of system we can construct, imposed 
by the finite scope of our intellect and its prior adaptation to the special 
circumstances in which we find ourselves. Success in theory, logical or 
scientific, consists in bringing it into parallel with the world so that it 
reflects essential features of the world. Some parallels are long-estab-
lished and practically unquestioned, others are more recent and tenta-
tive. Also we can construct systems independently of questions of rele-
vance, but their rules remain merely rules and are not to be confused 
with logical or empirical laws. 

