Karen /. Vaughn 
The Limits of Homo Economicus in Public Choice 
and in Political Philosophy 
Abstract: This paper argues that there are areas of political behavior for 
which the usual assumption of wealth maximlzing homo economicus is to 
narrow to generate convincing explanation of behavior. In porticular, it is 
ar gued that for many political decisions, people choose according to some 
set of maral preconceptions while for others, people have insufficient 
Information to make economic choices even if they were inclined to do so. 
This implies that normative public choice can only be part of a political 
decision 
process 
in 
which 
non-pecuniary concerns influence choices. 
Finally, constitutional economics insofar as it is conceptually concelved, 
mu st presume some set of maral and informational properties of the parties 
to the social contract. 
1. Introduction 
In recent years, the subdiscipline of public choice has made dramatic in-
roads into the traditional fields of political science anä political philosophy. 
By applying a consistent model of human actlon originolly developed in 
order to study behavior in market settings to the study of behavior in 
political settings, public choice economists have to a large extent 'taken 
the blinders off' the way we Iook at our political Institutions . By making 
the simple assumption that the same kind of people act in political settings 
as act in markets, the field of public choice has deromanticized our view 
of government. We have come to see not only economic reasons behind 
much public behavior, but also the way in which public trusts can be and 
have been used for private purposes. Public choice teaches us to be 
skeptical of public professions of ideological mativations and apparent self-
less actions. We have come to expect that in public life, people say one 
thing and mean another. The implication drawn. ls that good science 
requires us to assess what people actually do and what the consequences 
of th.eir actions are rather than what they say they want and what they 
expect will hoppen. In public life a s in market settings, saying is not be 
trusted. Doing is what matters. 
Analyse & Kritik 10 (1988), S. 161- 180 
© Westdeutscher Verlag, Opladen 

162 
Karen I. Vaughn 
And what do people do? The assumptlon behind positive public choice 
models is that indlviduols are narrow self-interested moximizers who do not 
restrein their self-seeking accordirig to any ideological or meral principles. 
This nrdel of man OS homo economicus is of Course derived from economic 
theory 
which, when properly interpreted, has generated so many frult-
ful theories of market phenomena. The point of this paper is to argue that 
homo economicus is not equally sufficient to generate fruitful theories 
about some important areas of the political process . While there is no 
question that economic science owes its success to a stylized view of human 
nature, it is not also true that the same stylized view is equally applicable 
to oll empirical settings nor that it allows us to say everything there is to 
say about human action. The position I will orgue below is that there are 
\ 
areas of political action that can only be unde ~stood if one takes the moral 
and ideological views of the actors ·1nto account. I further argue that one 
cannot make any policy prescription at oll without presupposing some moral 
or political philosophy as the guide to the good. 
2. The Generality of the Economic Paradigm 
Economic analysis and its subset, public choice, begins with a simple and 
perfectly general model of hl.oman action. Indeed, it is the simplicity and 
the generality of the model that gives economic analysis its explanatory and 
its predictive edge over other sociol sciences. Economists conventionolly 
begin with the empirical glven that human beings, by the nature of the 
material world within which they live and their finite life spans, are con-
fronted with scarcity and hence cannot have everything (or even much of) 
what th.ey want. Hence, humans must make choices. From t hat simple 
beginning, economists add empirical observations to their basic framewerk 
in order to try to provide satisfying accounts of why some choices are 
made with predictable frequency while others are not. In order to carry 
out this program, they start from the premise that indlviduals are rational 
or 'self-interested', but at thls Ievel of generality, oll self-interest means 
ls that individuals have purposes and projects which they wish to ac-
complish. These purposes and projects are not necessarily confined ex-
clusively to those that will bring personal beneflt in a narrow sense. It is 
perfectly within the scope of the self-interest· assumption for individuals to 
want to improve the welfare of others rather than their own. 2 To say 
that individuals choose rationally among alternatives to achieve thelr 
purposes simply means that indi.viduals will never knowlngly sacrifice a 
greater end for the sake of a lesser one or will never knowingly choose a 
more expensive means to their end than is necessar:y. 8oth are ways of 
saying that rational action means economizing action. 
The formal neoclassical statement of these assumptions is the constrained 
moximization formulation where individuals are modeled as moximizing their 

The Limits of Homo Economicus 
163 
'utilities' subject to the constraints they face. As is weil known, at this 
Ievel of generality, the formulation is empty of ·ony content and any real 
explanatory power. lt simply says that individuals choose what they choose 
becau se that's what they want. 'Rationality' in this context can be made 
consistent with any kind of action imaginable so lang as the actor is 
conscious and not mentally deranged. 3 We impose the rationality con-
struct on human choices because it is the only way we can moke sense out 
of individual actions. lndeed, at this Ievel of generality, the rationality 
formulation is simply a translation of what human beings recognize and 
define as an explanation of a human action. To say someone acts rationally 
is simply to say that his choice had a recognizable purpose (von Mises 
1963, 18-21). 
In order to develop predictive theories about human action, it is necessary 
to fill the framewerk of rationality and self-interest with content, to 
specify the purposes and to identify the constraints that individuals face. 
The particular assumption that positive economics generally makes is that 
human beings hav.e a strong preference for material wealth, or rather, he 
kind of wealth that can be evaluated in money terms. While most people, 
including most economists, would recognize that the preference for money 
wealth 
is 
not the 
sole 
preference individuals exhibit, most people, 
including non-economists ·da recognize that the preference is an important 
one. Much of the debate between economists and those who accuse them of 
methodological imperialism, then, seems to revolve ·around the relative 
weights one observes 
people giving to pecuniary and non-pecuniary 
preferences and to what extent non - pecuniary preferences can be said to 
dominate individual choices. 
Clearly, the hypothesis that the desire for pecu niary wealth explains ~ 
human 
action is demonstrably false. 
Where they have 
real choices, 
individuals are often observed to choose alternatives other than those that 
maximize monetary wealth. For example, we observe people choosing Ieisure 
over work when they have the option of working more, choosing to 
specialize in occupations that are financially less rewarding than real 
alternatives, choosing to give money away to charities, engeging in act s of 
kindness that either do not add to or may even detract from pecuniary 
wealth and a hast of other non money-wealth enhancing activities. While 
real hard-line advocates of the wealth maximizing hypothesis might try to 
argue that some of these activities are directed toward lang run wealth im-
provement, that approach is impossible to sustain for oll such activities. 
Economists generally recognize this and argue that people observe·d to be 
engaged in activities that do not maximize their .money wealth are actually 
maximizing their subjective wealth. This, of course, brings us back to the 
generat formularization of self-interest and hence, as analytically precise 
as this may seem to say that an economic actor is maximizing subjective 

164 
Karen I. Vaughn 
wealth, the fact is that saying that people maximize subjective wealth is 
simply another way of soying that people want many different things some 
of which are of a non-pecuniory nature. These non-pecuniary things might 
include not only leisure, but also good fellowship, Iove, social status, 
association with others of a like nature, o sense of rectitude or personal 
integrity, any one of which could dominate specific choices and falslfy 
. 
d. I 
4 
econom1c pre Jet ons. 
Unless we have some notion of what it is that people want, we cannot 
devise predictlve theories of choice; we can at best share a language with 
which to discuss people's actions ex post. The positive economlst who 
assumes pecuniary wealth moximization to explaln action knows thls and is 
moking an empirical generalization that need not be totally descriptively 
accurate to moke his point. lt need only be 'good enough'. The polnt of 
this paper is simply that this particular empirical generalization is less 
likely to be fruitful for genuine explanations of events when applied to 
political action than when it is applied to market activity. There are two 
reasons I have to offer for this assertlon. The first is that in political 
action more than in morket action, people's values and ideas of what 
constitute the good society enter lnto their choices. The second reason is 
that in analyzing and describing politlcal choice, the application of the 
model of deliberative rational choice itself becomes problemotic. Citlzens 
have limited and faulty Information obout the consequences of politlcal 
choices ond hence often have no idea whot would constitute o rational 
decision even if they were disposed to moke one. 
In order to discuss the first cloim, that moral ond ideological beliefs influ-
ence politlcal cholce, we must first consider how to occount for notions of 
morolity in ou r 
s tan dard madel of human behavior. Homo economicu s, 
br'?odly conceived, has preferences ond ls llmited by constroints. To whlch 
category do we relegate moral volues: to preferences or const rolnts? The 
answer to thls question has implicotions for the kinds of publlc cholce 
models one con fruitfully construct. 
Conslder the following situation: 
Two men ore engaged in o heated 
argument. They hurl Insults ot eoch other until 'it seems inevitable that 
they will come to blows. One of the men, however, with greot effort, 
controls 
his 
temper and wolks away from the confrontotion. 
In the 
longuage of revealed preference, the economist might soy that obvlously, 
the man who walked away preferred to give up rather than to fight. While 
on one Ievel that is correct, on another Ievel, it violotes conventionol 
discourse to describe the situation in that woy. The man hirnself might 
cloim that he really preferred to fight, but he knew that was wrang ond 
so could not permit hirnself the luxury of punching his opponent. In the 
first instonce, we describe the morol behavior in terms of preferences, 
while in the second, the morol conviction ls o constraint on behovior. lt 

The Limits of Homo Economicus 
165 
seems more in concert· with conventional language to accept the second 
characterization where the moral code is a constroint on behavior, but to 
do this means the observer must believe the participant's verbal account of 
his behavior rather than relying only on observation clone, something 
positive economists are reluctant to do. Treating morals as rules thot 
constrain behavior, 
then, must of necessity place us outside of the 
positive economists' world right from the beginning. 
If people conduct themselves according to rules of personal behovior to 
which they ascribe moral weight so that following these rules may result in 
short ierm sub-optimal choices, clearly it ·is not descriptively accurate to 
madel them as narrow pecu niory maximizers in any settlng. However, the 
descriptive inaccuracy is more pronounced, it seems to me, in modeling 
political action than in modeling merket action. Morkets are u seful to actors 
precisely because they aid people in enhancing_ their material wealth. The 
polity, on the other hand, is valued by individuals for other reasons as 
weil. Public choice emphasizes the Hobbesian aspects of the stete, the 
delegation of authority to create the order that makes wealth possible. The 
stete also seems to many people to be symbolic of shared values and shared 
notions of the good life. Since political action is as much concerned with 
establishing the rules by which citizens will live as with the exploiting of 
the rules for one's own •benefit, it seems obvious that people will choose 
rules at least partly for their moral content. If this is so, then politics 
cannot be successfully modeled purely as economics. 
3. Economic Man and Political Choices 
One obvious orea in which narrow economic analysis hos failed to provide 
an inteFesting explanotion of political behavior is the analysis of voting 
behavior. lt is a well- known irony that public choice theory, the theory of 
how public goods are demanded, produced and allocated in a democratic 
society, cannot provide a satisfactory explanation of why people vote. 5 
Economic theory predicts that since the likelihood of any one person's vote 
influencing the outcome of an election is almest infinitesimal, os long as 
there ore ony costs ot oll associated with voting, it is irrational for an 
individual to vote. Yet we commonly observe individuals turning out to 
vote in huge numbers in national election~. Why? 
The fact is, the paradox is only o paradox if one insists on looking at 
voting os an oct of choice among real alternatives open to the individual 
the purpese of which is wealth maximization. Few citizens seriously believe 
that his/her vote will decide an election, yet people vote nevertheless. 
Common explonotion in the Iiterature oll must move outside of the model of 
pecuniary odvontage to provide an explanation. Buchenon and Brennen, 
for exomple, compa·re voting to a kind of consumption activity like rooting 

166 
Koren I. Vougnn 
for o sports tecm (Brennon/Bucnonon 1984). lt is also possible tnot people 
vote becouse they hove o sense of civic responsibility thot only ollows them 
to opprove of their own behovior if they toke the time to vote. They vote 
ot 
scme irrmediate cost 
to themselves not becouse it 
is an oct of 
consumption but becouse their internolized set of marol constroints makes 
voting scmething thot is not o matter of immediate choice. They provide 
evidence to themselves ond to their peers thot they ore 'good' citlzens. 6 
Whotever the explonotion, the oct of votlng con only be exploined by some 
oppeol to non- pecunior y volues. One con think of other exomples of clvlc 
behovior thot do not fit the normal colculus; for example, volunteering for 
t he ormy in war time, and carrying litter to o litter basket rather than 
dropping it on t he ground are two thot ronge frcm the drcmotic to the 
mundane. 
This is not to orgue that the economists' cost benefit colculotions ore ir -
relevant to the individual's political octs. At the margin, one would expect 
to observe less of the behavior in question when the costs ore hlgher than 
when tney are lower. For example, election tur n-outs are higher in good 
weather than on rainy days, enlistments are higher when tne threat of tne 
droft is mare imminent and mare litter ends up in baskets on beocnes when 
the baskets ore placed at convenlent intervals. 7 However, the overoge 
amount of such behavior is largely a function of the marol volues ond 
ideologies of the actors. lt is alway s in one sense 'irrational' to hold lltter 
for 
the 
lltter 
basket 
when 
rotionallty 
means 
maxumztng 
pecuniory 
ad vontoge (see the ar ticle by Vanberg/Buchanan in this issue). Cleorly 
however, that is not the sum total of what mativates human action . 
The positive public choice economist might counter that in economic theory, 
it is margins, not averages tnat count . Even though individuols cloim to 
hold volues that do not moximize their pecuniary wealth, the foct ls thot 
at the moment of choice, tne madel of pecu niary maximizotion wlll predict 
behavior better than any other. Hence, it mokes scientific sense to ignore 
non-pecuniory interest. This is, of cou r se, an empirical question, but 
there is ot least scme evidence thot exists in the Iiterature to support the 
a priori oppealing notion that ideology or non-pecuniary volues do cou nt in 
the woy people vote (Rubin/Kau 1979). lndeed, there are good reosons 
why individuols could not even formulote an opinion about the relative 
merits of various condidotes in an election without scme set of maral pre-
suppositions to guide them. 
I am not disputing that pecuniary wealtn moximization is 
.2. goal of 
individ uals acting in a political setting. Tnot is, I am not a rguing that 
public cnolce nas mlssed the boat entirely. It seems perfectly appropriate 
to madel individuals as wealth moximizers within o system of established 
rules. Hence, positive public choice madels are useful for exploinlng such 
things as lobbying behavior and productlvity and Iabor relotions in o 
bureaucracy, for exomple. However, when it ccmes to madeling the woy in 

The Limits of Homo Economicus 
167 
which individuals choose their rules, (and their representatives) or how 
the basic structure of a political society is developed, positive public 
choice is simply inadequate. There are other goals besides pecuniary 
wealth maximization which people expec.t the political system to provide for 
them and these goals ·affect behavior and outcomes. 
4. Ideology and Public Choice 
My secend claim was that for some political choices that individuals make, 
the application of a 
deliberative choice model is probably inadequate 
because choosers have very little informotion 
upon which to base a 
deliberate choice. Political ideologies and, 
on a mare immediate Ievel, 
political parties seem to be the natural implication of the limited information 
and the radical uncertainty faced by voters in a democracy. 
There are obviously many political decisions individuals must make for 
which· they have very poor information, or where they would be unable to 
calculate their 
self-interest even if they 
had 
good Information. 
For 
instance,. are the interests of world peace served by the Star .Wars defense 
system currently advocated by the Reagan administration? If in principle, 
interests are served, is the system technologically feasible and is it worth 
to cost? Does the public debt have important consequences and if so, is it 
better to reduce the debt by -increasing taxes or reducing spending? Both 
these questions are examples of · problems where the 'experts' do not agree 
on even the theoretical Ievel of the problem. Clearly, the non-expert 
citizen is totally incapable of making a correct decision on the merits of 
any proposal that requires his consent. lt is even more unlikely that the 
citizen could take a position on these question that reflected his pecuniary 
self-interest in the matter. What, then, is the citizen to do? 
In markets, where information is poor and difficult to obtain, entre-
preneurs have a financial incentive to provide that information. Competition 
amang entrepreneurs insures that where accurate information is possible, 
accurate informotion is generated and made available to an otherwise 
ignorant public. Or perhops it would be better to say that the merket 
process of competition 
allows 
consumers to discover the information 
relevant to their own needs. In political settings, however, the kind of 
Information that people need in order to make intelligent decisions is often 
the kind that no one knows even in principle . . Individuals must not only 
assess what public goods it is in their interest to demend (a far more 
difficult problern than assessing what kind of car one should buy), they 
must also determine which elected representative will best serve their 
purposes and what the consequences of present legislation is likely to be 
for their own future welfare. 

168 
Karen I. Vaughn 
While there ore plenty of political entrepreneurs willing to offer voters 
their opinions on the answers to these complex questions, there is no 
effective testing process in politics to weed out errors and incorrect 
Information comparable to the competition in markets. Political entre-
preneurs supply individuals with what they think they want, but what 
they think they want may have very little resemblance to what they would 
want if they were correctly informed . 
Since on many of these issues, 
Information is only in the form of untested theories, voters ore led to 
economize on this very difficult decision process by adopting a political 
ideology to aid them in their choices. Even if the public choice theorist 
were to assume that men are solely pecuniary wealth maximizers, he could 
not hope to understand the political decision process without understanding 
the Information individuals ascribe to· their ideologies. 
Achieving this understanding is no easy task. Political ideologies usually 
consist of statements of broad values (iike "political equality is a good 
thing", or "people shouldn't be poor") and of theories about how those 
values can be accomplished (like "allowing eighteen year olds to vote will 
promote equality and redistribution of income will reduce poverty"). Actual 
political party platforms, on the other hand, ore imperfect translations of 
those values and theories into specific sets of policies that may or may not 
be either internally consistent or empirically warkable. What people think 
the ideological and practical implications of a party plotform are may be 
different from what they 
really ore. 
The public choice theorist has 
generally conducted his analysis of public policy by first applying his 
theory to calculate the policy's consequences and then assuming that those 
who support the policy understand the consequences and have a pecuniary 
interest in them even if the predicted consequences are different from 
those supporters claim they will be·. 8 They tacitly assume that anyone 
who supports the policy for non wealth maximizing reasons is lying in 
order to conceal his potential gain from others. While this may often be the 
case, it may also be the case either that policy advocates simply do not 
understand the wealth implications as weil as the public choice theorist 
understands them, or it may simply be the case that advocates of a 
particular policy su pport it for non maney wealth maxmuzmg reasons. 
Their reasons for supporting a particular policy may simply be what they 
claim them to be. 
For example, assume that it is calculated that a bill to subsidize higher 
education will increase the expected incomes of college teachers and re-
distribute wealth to the middle dass . From this the public choice theorist 
might try to predict the disposition of the bill according to the size and 
political clout of the coalition. Note that there ore two parts to this 
formulation, 
an 
explanatory and a 
predictive. lf the 
public choice 
economist ignores ideology where ideology happens to be important to 
making a decision, he will construct a madel that provides an inaccurate 

The Limits of Homo Economicus 
169 
explanation of events even if the predictions of the model hold - which moy 
or moy not be the case. 
First of oll, it may be the case that many higher educators genuinely 
believe that it ls appropriate national policy to provide higher education to 
anyone regardless of ability to pay and do not understand the re-
distributive consequences of their actions. Or they may understand them 
but thlnk, nevertheless, the consequences are fair . While the educators 
may be beneficiaries of the bill also, lt ls simply not accurate to explain 
their actions solely in terms of the pecunlary income they can expect as a 
consequence. 
Secondly, voters may also believe that higher education 
should be subsidized regardless of the fact that university faculty and 
middle dass fomilies with children benefit disproportionately. They may 
fully believe t hat the importance of widespread occess to higher educotion 
supercedes any redlstributive consequences. 9 
The public choice theorist might argue that whether or not he is carrect in 
the motives he ascrlbes to individual actors, the predictive power of hls 
model ls nevertheless protected. The foct is that regardless of what people 
soy, ot the margln, pecuniary self-interest ls a good predictor of resource 
allocatlon. Yet, if for some goods, either because Information is so in -
complete or non-pecuniary values are so important, people choose according 
to ideologicol considerotions rother thon self-interest, the strict opplicatlon 
of homo economicus can only be correct by occident. The foct is, there ore 
olwoys people who support public meosures even when they don't gain; 
10 
even, in foct, when they personally may stand to lose. 
Consider, ogain, the widespread support for public educotion. lt is of 
course true thot most voters believe they ond their children will be better 
off financially lf the cost of educotion can be spread to oll tox - poyers 
rather than borne by themselves olone. 
But the demand for 
public 
educotlon seems also hove another component to it that is far more pre-
valent in politicol decisions thon in market choices; that is, o deslre to 
affect the woy others behove. A typical orgument for public educotion is 
thot society ls 'better' if more people ore literote ond 
educoted. Here, 
'better' meons 
not only weolthier, 
but 
also more 
stoble 
and 
better 
governed. While, I suppose 'more stoble' and 'better governed' could be 
tronsloted into 'weolthier' os weil, I belleve the sense of the orgument has 
more to do with the kinds of people with which one wants to live. The 
non-pecuniory volue of having others behave in certoin ways is very 
important to pollticol choices. Cleorly such values are self-interested, but 
only in the tautologicol sense in which oll values ore held by o self. 
Polltics ls largely obout creating a soclety of shared volues and establish-
ing a set of shored behaviors. In pollticol soclety, 'utility' is a functlon of 
the behovior of others as weil os of one's meosuroble weolth. Economists 
sometimes coll the demond for shared values ond shared behaviors "meddle-

170 
Koren I. Voughn 
some preferences" (Sen 1970), but thls seems to miss the centrot polnt of 
humon culture. We ore interested in eoch other's behovior becouse thot is 
how we define ond judge ourselves. The simple norrow madel of homo 
economicus connot do justice to this importont chorocteristlc of humon be-
lngs. 
5. Efficiency ond Sociol Institutions 
One may gront thot individual human belngs oct occording to mony volues 
some of which ore not self-interested in the norrow sense, ond still orgue 
thot positive economic onolysis provldes the best tools for exploining 
sociol phenomeno including politicol instltutions. One orgument thot hos 
been made ls thot the outcomes of sociol oction do not depend so much on 
the ends thot human beings pursue os on the constroints they foce. ln 
this view, lorgely ossocioted with the Chicogo School olthough not limited 
to it, no matter whot individuols hold os marol beliefs ond no matter whot 
kinds of non - pecuniory goods they moy choose in the short run, in the 
long run the only thing thot explolns soclol chonge ore chonges in relative 
prices brought obout by 
shlfts in constroints. The implicotion is thot the 
only economic, politicol ond sociol Institutions thot will survive ore those 
thot moximize the pecuniory weolth of the populotion (or some lmportont 
segment thereof?). ln soying this, I om creoting something of o strow mon 
since it is difficult to find ony one economist who will hold to thls line 
without wovering. As we hove noted obove, mast economists orgue thot 
men moximize utility, not pecuniory weolth. However, utility is not o use-
ful concept for positive economics unless we ore oble to speclfy the 
orguments in the utility function. Those economists who postulote moteriol 
weolth os the moximand ot least ore soylng mare thon people try to get 
the mast of whot they wont. WJ:!ot this orgument seems to soy is thot no 
matter whot they think they wont, whot they get is maxlmum pecunlory 
weolth since oction thot Ieads to thot porticulor end will be differentlolly 
reworded in o competitive struggle (for exomple, see North/Thomos 1973). 
Such 'survivolist' orguments borrow the longuoge of evolutionory biology 
ond Interpret sociol Institutions os the result of some form of competltion in 
whlch only the fittest or mast efficient con survive. Any ottempt to exploin 
o phenomenon in evolutionory terms mu st however, describe o process by 
which competing elements ore selected 
ond inefficiencies weeded out. For 
sociol lnstitutions, lt would be importont to exploin how innovative sociol 
orrongements ore introduced ond how humons oct to select omang these 
Institutions either consciously or unconsciously. ln the orgument under 
conslderotion, there is some vogue notion thot sociol Institutions compete 
much in the some woy thot firms compete, ond hence efficient Institutions 
will drive out inefficient ones in the competitive struggle. But whot ls on 
efficient Institution? 

The Limits of Homo Economicus 
171 
lt is toutologlcolly true thot in evolutionory explonotions1 the efficient sur-
vive1 but only becouse survivol is the definition of efficiency. One mlght 
opply the scme 
reosoning to sociol Institutions but only with 
some 
difficulty. For instonce1 the sociol scientist could observe whot Institutions 
ond societies hove in foct survived competltlon ond then seorch for ex-
plonotions for why the survivors ore adaptive to their environment. Those 
who hold thot only efficient sociol Institutions con survive moy hypothesize 
thot weolth moxlmizotion is the mojor explonotory variable in lnstitutionol 
survivol. In thot cose1 it would be imperative for the theorist to speclfy 
how he deflnes weolth 
ond then to describe o process by which moximizlng 
this definitlon of weolth Ieads Institutions to survive before the profositlon 
is tested. So for 1 no one hos ottempted to follow such o procedure. 1 
Discussion of the efficiency of economic Institutions whose mojor purpose is 
to ollow individuols to improve their economic well-being ot least mokes 
some intuitive sense becouse we hove o theory thot ollows us to define 
whot constltutes an efficient economic Institution (it ollows individual octors 
to effect more tronsoctions ot lower cost thon wlthout it) ond to describe o 
process by which efficient Institutions survive ond others fall 
( those 
Institutions llke business firms thot ore profitable sur vive while those thot 
moke Iosses foil). More inclusive Institutions llke o bonkin g system or o 
stock exchonge1 thot is Institutions thot consist of regulorized trodlng 
orrongements1 survive thot improve the profits of the individuols who use 
it for their own purposes. In either case 1 the foct thot individuols who 
choose to portlcipote in the Institution hove purposes they wish to sotisfy 
ond hove o cleor meosure1 profit 1 by which to judge whether or not the 
Institution is serving their needs1 ollows us to describe o process by which 
efficient Institutions con envolve. An evolutlonory opprooch to the study 
of 
economic institutions1 t hen1 moy 
prove fruitful 
becouse we 
con 
hypothesize o recognizoble gool ond describe 
o process by which efficient 
Institutions ore selected by the competitlon omong self-interested human 
octors. However 1 
when one ottempts to describe an economic process by 
which other forms of sociol Institutions ore selected1 the problern is not 
neorly so cleor cut. 
Whot is an efflclent politicol orgonizotion? If we wish to be consistent with 
our notion of economic efficiency 1 
then it must in some woy reduce the 
costs of individuols pursuing their own interests (os1 for exomple1 Hobbes 
ond Locke exploined the reoson for government) . Cleorly 1 we con see how 
some politicol orgonizotion moy be better thon no politicol orgonizotion1 but 
this is not the some thing os orguing thot the most efficient politlcol 
orgonizotion from the perspective of the weolth moximizing octivities of 
individual cltlzens necessorily is the one thot will survive international 
competitlon. An evolutionol theory of pollticol orgonizotion might stort from 
the hypothesls thot those politicol orgonlzotion thot con commond the 

172 
Koren I. Voughn 
greotest number of resources in times of stress ore the most efficient ond 
hence most likely to survive politicol competition. This seems o reosonoble 
empiricol hypothesis but it does not hove ony reodily opporent connection 
to the weolth moximizing octions of individuols. And it certoinly does not 
imply thot individuols connot successfully p ursue other gools besides 
pecuniory weolth moximizotion. The course of human events hos been 
altered more thon once by the ideos ond volues of individuols who were 
not pursuing either individual or national material weolth. 12 
Politicol orgonizotions ore systems of power •OS weil os economic resources. 
A successful polity probobly depends os much on variables such os 
intelligent militory strotegy 1 willingness to woge defensive wars 1 conniness 
of Ieaders in world ond domestic offoirs 1 o sense of national purpose bosed 
an shored volues 1 ond o hast of other intongibles thot connot be odequote-
ly .proxied by meosures of weolth. Given the wide voriety of relotively 
long -lived politicol institutions of oll different shopes ond sizes 1 it seems 
cleor thot weolth moximizotion olone cannot occount for the survivol of oll 
of them. 
6. Public Choice 1 Public Policy 1 ond the Choice of Institutions 
So for 1 this poper hos been concerned with ·the limitotions of the norrow 
homo economicus ossumption for positive public choice 1 the economic theory 
of individual politicol behovior. Now we turn to the difficulties ossocioted 
with ossuming norrow homo economicus in normative publit ·choice 1 
· the 
exercise of divising politicol institutionol rules ·ta improve the woy thot 
government functions to serve··the purposes of its citizenry. 13 
· 
Normative public choice begihs ' with 
the ossum·ption thot 
insof<ir os 
individuols wont government •tO' provide public goods 1 
t he public choice 
economist is in o position to design institutionol rules to help them ochieve 
their purposes more efficiently. I rother coll this octivity 'prescriptive' 
public choice since it prescribes methods for ochieving given gools; it is 
not strictly positive science since it does not ottempt simply to onolyze and 
exploin whot is 1 nor is it normative policy since it does not explore gools 
or volues nor does it choose omong them. It does 1 
however 1 presuppose 
the norm thot using fewer resources to ochieve one's gool is better thon 
using more. 
One method by which to engoge in prescriptive public choice is to apply a 
simple colculus of benefits ond costs to oll public policies 1 and to ottempt 
to 
des~n r ules ond procedures thot moximize the rotio of benefits to 
costs. 1 
The colculotions ore mode in money terms ·ond non-morket volues 
ore given money proxies. The presumption in this exercise is thot oll 
preferences count equolly ond thot oll consequences con be effectively 

The Limits of Homo Economicus 
173 
meosu red in money terms. So, for exomple, if it would hove been eheaper 
to buy up oll the sloves in the ontebell'um· South ond monumit them thon to 
fight the civll war, prescriptive policy would hove argued for the former 
cou r se of oction. 
There is much merit in this opprooch ·to public policy. It provides some 
framewerk for comporing the consequences of alternative palides ond some 
rough ond 'ready meosure of the mognitudes of those consequences. 
Calculoting the potential costs of o war ond then figuring out how much 
you could poy the opposing soldiers not to fight ot least gives the citizen-
ry some bosis upon which to judge the degree to which they believe the 
war is in their national interests. lt might even open up o debote on 
possible pebceful alternatives. If one v"iews the public policy economist's 
(er the prescriptive public choice theorist's) role os affering some meosure 
of the relative costs of vorious policies, cost-benefit onolysis is useful ond 
importont. 
However, 
given the multiplicity of volues 
people hold os 
citizens, it should not be surprising if the so-called 'efficient' policy is not 
followed. Whot is efficient in terrris of money ·calculotions moy not be 
efficient in terms of the non-pecuniory · gools individuols os citizens hold. 
When it comes to designing politicol institutions, however, the cost/benefit 
approoch to prescrfptive policy connot even in principle be opplied. To soy 
something is efficient implies thot one is judging it occording to some end 
one hos in view. 
We 
hove olreody orgued thot the gool of politicol 
institutions is not limited to promoting weolth moximizotion of the citizens 
of a polity even in the eyes of the citizens 
themselves. Hence opplying o 
rational colculus to devising, soy, voting rules or distributions of rights is 
meoningful only in a very generol sense. Certoinly, o rational colculus 
bosed on pecuniory weolth maximizotion could eosily Iead to the develop -
ment of rules thot conflict with individuols' notions of foirness or rights. 
Consider, for · exomple, the controversy· surrounding the Coose theorem. 
Coose showed thot in any conflict of externolities thot is to be settled by 
specifying property rights, who gets the right to the property in question 
is irrelevant from the per spective of efficiency. Regordless of who gets the 
right to use the hitherto corrmon resource, the . person who con moke most 
efficient use of it (thot is, generote the most morket incorr:e from its use) 
will end up with it so Ieng os the property is tradeoble in the morket. 
Cleody, however, eveh if the terms of the settlement of the property 
right ore irrelevant to the eventual emergence of efficient use of the 
resource, it is not irrelevoht in terms of rights. It is not legitimote to 
infer from the Coose theorem thot moximizing merket volue is the only - or 
even the most importont - considerotion in solving disputes over property 
( Coose 1960). 

174 
Koren I. Voughn 
Efficiency is an end-state notion. lt implles that the desired outcome 
should be orrived ot in the cheapest possible woy. lt also implles thot the 
ends ond the meons ta ochieving them ore known to the decision moker. 
The rules of politicol society, on the other hod, are process notlons. 
Port 
of the 'end' that is desired is a woy of living and o woy of doing things. 
The rules of sociol order are important preclsely because there is no one 
ogreed upon set of ends for the society os o whole thot ore to be 
moximized 
nar ore the full consequences of rules known ot the time of 
odoptlon. Hence the term "efficient rules" would seem to be an oxymoron 
- thot is, self-cantrodictory. 15 
It is the difficulties with the conventionol notions of efficiency that 
motivotes Jomes Buchanan's contractarian approoch to government or "con-
stitutionol eoonomics". 16 Buchanan's contractorion model is portly pre-
scriptive in notu re, olthough it is different from the uncomplicoted utilitor-
ionism of cost/benefit onolysis. Generolizing from subjectivist insights into 
the choice process, Buchanan reolizes that individual evoluotions of alter -
natives ore olwoys subjective ond thot money equivolents con't olwoys re-
flect indivld ual s u bjecti ve evoluotions. Con seq uentl y, 
Buchonon arg ues 
thot the only test of the efficiency of elther immediate policies or of more 
long run institutionol - in his case, constitutional - rules is the agreement 
of porticiponts in the Institution. This ls a generolizotion from the subject-
ivists' inslght thot the only evidence 
we hove of the goins from trode is 
that the trade was entered into voluntorily ( Buchonon 1985o). 
Buchonon recognizes 
that for the exercise of prescriptive public choice 
especially at the constitutionol Ievel, the simple calculation of money goins 
ond Iosses moy not be a good guide to the kinds of policies and rules to 
which a collection of individuols will agree. So, for instonce, in the cose 
of the civil war, 
Buchonon's opprooch can occomodote the foct thot 
Southerners ond Northerners 
both 
sow 
volues 
like morol 
rectitude, 
regional outonomy ond ingroined Iife-styles ot stake, ond o policy of 'buy-
ing out the opposition' would have been unocceptoble to either side. This 
is not to say thot ot the Ievel of irrmediate policy, colculoting benefits and 
costs in money terms is not o useful exercise to aid decision moking. 
lndeed, it moy be the only way for decision mokers to understand the 
trode-offs lnvolved in some policies. However, ot the Ievel of constitutionol 
design, the Ievel of deciding what octions ore permissible ond impermissible 
to the state ond to individuals, the simple colculotion of money benefits 
ond costs is impossible. lt begs oll the questions of mine ond thine thot 
must be onswered before money volues have meoning. 
Buchonon's alternative to the utilltarian brand of prescriptfve publlc choice 
is to ottempt to devise constitutional rules thot might commond agreement 
if octually put to the test. 
The rules he proposes ore long ronge 
constitutional rules where colculotion of immediate gains ond Iosses to 

The Limits of Homo Economicus 
175 
individuols is difficult, but where procedures for moking decisions ond 
limitotions on government power con be ogreed to bec9use of the un-
certointy eoch person foces obout his own position in the future. Since 
Buchonon does not belleve there is o spontaneaus order by which politicol 
processes Iead to unintended beneficiol outcomes for citizens, his controct-
orionism is o woy of designing constitutions thot provide the benefits thot 
spontaneaus processes generote in market settings. 
The constitutionol 
controctorion serves o useful role in this politicol process specificolly 
becouse there is no benevolent spontaneaus order; there ore no processes 
by which Information obout the chorocteristics ond consequences of con-
stitutions con be generoted 
in order for individuols to moke informed 
choices, nor is there o process by which on onolysis of the unintended 
consequences 
of 
individual 
octions 
Ieads 
to 
the 
discovery 
of this 
Information in an unombiguous monner. The constitutionol-controctorion, 
then, hirnself serves os o politicol entrepreneur who 'discovers' Information 
obout constitutions ond, hoving discovered the Information, is in o position 
to serve os o politicol broker affering potential borgoins untll the right 
one is struck omong politicol troders. Given the foct thot the con-
stitutionol broker does not know the preference functions of individual 
portles to the borgoln, he only knows if he hos hit on an efficient trode if 
the borgoin is in foct made. 
At this Ievel, Buchonon provides the prescriptive public choice theorist 
with o roJe to ploy in public policy formation thot hos its justiflcotion in o 
Information foilure in the politicol process. It is procticol in thls exercise 
(ond not misleoding) to use the homo economicus construct 
os o first 
opproximation to orrive ot potential politicol borgoins since octuol human 
beings will be decidlng just how close to the mork the proffered borgoin is 
to their own volue st ructure. At onother Ievel of obstroction, however , 
Buchonon's controctorionism moves out of the ronge of prescrlptive public 
choice ond into the reolm of normative politicol philosophy. At this Ievel, 
homo economicus is not neorly so benign an ossumption to make. We orrive 
ot this Ievel th rough the discussions of the conceptuol controct. 
Buchonon orgues thot becouse it is impossible to octuolly put constit utionol 
rules to the test of octuol ogreement, the constltutionol politicol economist 
must devise constltutions thot could in principle commond unonimous ogree-
ment omong those who will be governed by the constitution. He storts from 
the normative premise fomilior to economists thot only individuols count ond 
thot oll individuols count equolly regordless of their preferences (or morol 
volues or personal chorocters?), ond thot the only morol bosis for o 
pollticol 
society 
is ogreement. 
However, 
since we don't 
hove octuol 
emplrlcol tests of ogreement to legitimize governments, we must model those 
humons who might porticipote in the sociol controct in order to theorize 
obout the kind of government upon which they might be oble to ogree. 

176 
Koren I. Voughn 
The only legitimate governments ore governments upon which real human 
beings would be oble to ogree. Notice thot the rr.orol presuppositions of 
this opprooch ore minimal, but strong. ·Jndivlduol volues ore not to be 
questioned. All individuols must count equolly in the controct, negotiotion 
is the only legitimate process ond ogreement the only woy to legitimize on 
outcome. 
Since the conceptuol controct is never put to the market test, yet is 
intended to serve os o meons of judging existing or potential constltutions, 
the chorocteristics of the people one presumes ore porty to the controct is 
importont. lf we begin with the subjectivist ossumption thot no one but the 
individual 
hirnself 
con 
know 
his 
utility 
function, 
then 
finding 
the 
oppropriote model of the human beings who ore o porty to the controct con 
be problematic. Buchenon solves this problern by peopling his sociol con-
troct with beings thot Iook remarkobly like homo economicus. Buchonon's 
controctors oll hove different tostes ond different endowments to begin 
with, but the long run nature of constitutionol rules tends to mute these 
differences os the consequences of odopted rules ore only reolized in the 
future. More signiflcont ore the chorocteristics they oll hove in common. 
They ore oll rational, adult, mentolly competent, ond concerned exclusively 
with their material well-being. More significontly, they know everything 
the economist 
knows 
obout 
the 
functioning 
of 
society. 
Even 
mare 
importontly, they hove no interest in the behovior of others except insofor 
os it directly offects their own pecuniory interests. They ore not real 
people but ideal types who copture the essence of rational, economic mon. 
We hove olreody orgued thot norrow economic man is descriptively in-
correct ond onolyticolly too restrictive o concept to judge economic policy. 
Certoinly, it is even more off the mark to model men in this norrow woy 
for the purpose of devising conceptual contracts. By definition, the con-
ceptual contract ls conceptual because the contract cannot in fact be put 
to the test. Hence, it is oll the more importont to toke seriously the 
subjectivist presumptian thot people not only have different tostes ond 
preferences, but also different marol beliefs and different ideologies. 
People think differently obout the world. 
To model men in the conceptual contract as strictly h6mo economicus either 
presumes that that ls in fact the best description of human beings 
or it 
implies thot thot is the way men should behove. We hove olreody orgued 
that the first alternative is incorrect. lt is doubtful that ony contractorian 
would want to subscribe to the second alternative. Hence, unless we want 
to ossume thot some rational ethic con be built into the social contract 17 
which puts us further away from a real controct ond blunts the lndividuol-
ity of persons even more thon the fictionol sociol controct normally does, 
we must assume something obout the moral philosophies thot these rational 
beings will bring to their bargaining. Otherwise it is impossible to come 

The Limits of Homo Economicus 
177 
up with criteria by which ta judge existing or potential contracts in the 
absence of actual agreements. The contractarian who takes individuals as 
the source of oll values, I think, must logically take individuals as the 
source of information about values as well. This implies that maral pre-
suppositions must be assumed to be part of the package that individuals 
bring to the social contract. This, of cou r se, makes the roJe of the 
contractorion philosopher far mare difficult than that of the contractarian 
economist. lf the requirements of the differing maral systems must be 
added to the caiculations of the different alternative rules in order to have 
some rational basis for judging their efficiency in the absence of actual 
agreement, how do we deal with conflicting maral systems? 
The contractarian position is that oll individuals who are a party to the 
contract must be counted equally in arriving at the rules of the game. 
Yet, there may be some cases involving the definition of corrmon standards 
of behavior (cis for example, whether or not abortion is legitimate) where 
coming· to agree!fle'nt may be almest impossible. 18 One also must question 
whether oll moral beliefs, no matter how repugnant to other members of 
the comTounity, 
must be counted equally. 
Should the beliefs of the 
primitive tribesman who takes it as religious dogma that infant girls should 
be sexually mutilated 
corrmand the same respect in the social contract as 
the beliefs of those who oppose the practice simply because both want to 
live in the same political order? While a large degree of maral relativism is 
necessary in a pluralistic society, it is not clear that a philosophical con -
tractarian can be totally agnostic on the question of whidi maral values 
count. 
7. Conclusion 
This paper has been concerned with the Iimits of the narrow madel of homo 
economicus that ignores the roJe of maral rules and ideological cOmToitments 
in the actions of human beings. The recent fashion in economics is to ex-
tend the model of homa economicus into other fields besides economics, to 
engage in a proud kind of economic imperialism. In general, there is 
something to be gained from this adventure, especially in those fields like 
political science and sociology where the effects of narrow economic 
calculation had hi.therto been completely ignore.d. However, this essay is 
offered as a cautionary tale to those crusaders of the economics faith who 
long to spread the Word ·into oll corners of the intellectual world. The 
economists madel d9e·s not translote perfectly into other langvages 
or 
other cultures, and to f~il to recognize the truth of this observation can 
Iead to ,a total misperception of the phenomenon under consideration. In 
the specific case of the analysis of political activity, the economists has 
made great gains in understanding the way in which special interests can 
use the political process to gain an advantage. But to say that this is the 

178 
Karen I. Vaughn 
only useful way of understqnding t he politicol process is in ltself an 
ideological position thot would corrmand little ogreement crnong porticiponts 
in the intellectuol debate. 
1. 
This is an extreme version of what economists seem to believe. Very 
few would actuolly odhere to such o hord line if they were forced to 
do so explicitly, but the argument is implicit in the way in which 
some economlsts dismiss the investlgotions of oll other disciplines such 
OS philosophy or sociology with 0 contemptuous wove of t he hand. In 
the typicol lunch time conversation omong 'hard nosed' economlsts, the 
typicol attitude suggests thot only economic self-interest is important 
In explonation - or oppropriote personal behavior. 
2. 
Kirzner 1963, 5. Kirzner's formulotion follows von Mises' view of o man 
as a purposeful onlmal, and it is far superior to the mare stondord 
self-lnterest formulotion since it implies nothing about the content of 
lnterests. People may or moy not be selfish 1 but they do have ends 
or purposes for which they will choose omong alternative meons. Jock 
Wiseman prefers to model men as making plons that ore subject to 
revision thereby lncluding the notion of time and learning in human 
action. See Wlseman 19831 18-20. 
3. 
Gory Becker 1 
for instonce 1 
hos modeled altruistic behovior withln 
fomilles by ossuming thot individual utility functions depend in port 
on the utility of other fomlly members. See Becker 1981. 
4. 
Merely including such arguments in individual utility functions does 
not eliminote the possibility of economic explanation in the brood 
sense since one can still wont mare or less of these values ot differ-
ent 'prices'1 but it does suggest that a convention empirical economics 
of 1 say 1 Iove or duty will be problematic since act performed for the 
soke of Iove or duty moy not be omenoble to onolysis with maney 
proxies. 
5. 
For a brief summary of orguments on the paradox of voting 1 
see 
Mueller 19791 120-123. 
6. 
It might be argued thot both rooting for a teom and exerclslng one's 
'clvic responsibility' are just two forms of consumption. However 1 it ls 
at least likely that they ore fundomentally different forms of behovlor 
in that the individuols behove differently in response to changes in 
incentives. While o marginal increase in the price of votlng from 1 say 1 
rain or distonce 
from the polls will normally reduce voter turn 
out 
in an election 1 an increose in the price of voting from pollticol re-
pression or violent confrontotion has induced some people to increose 
rother than decreose their voting behovior. lnsofar as voting is con-
sidered a right of citizenship, ottempts to thwart its exercise can 
Iead to more rather than less assertion of thot right. 

The Limits of Homo Economicus 
179 
7. 
Jomes Buchenon uses the exomple of the litter on o beoch to illustrote 
the need for rules of sociol order. Low ond the Invisible Hand, in 
Buchenon 1977. 
8. 
This is the tocit ossumption of the interest group theory of public 
policy. While I do not disogree with much of the empiricol results thot 
follow from this ossumption, I think it is overly ombitious to ossume 
thot it exploins oll policies. There ore coses where there ore simply 
unintended 
redistributive consequences to public policy thot ore 
secondory 
to the moin purpese of the policy. Gordon Tullock mokes 
thls polnt in Tullock 1983, 9-10. Of course, Tullock points out thot 
once o mlstoke is mode, the benefitted 
group is likely to fight to 
keep its benefits. 
9. 
Or they moy not think of it os redistrib utive. The public might 
regord higher incomes for university foculty os poyment for services 
rendered, ond subsidies to middle closs toxpoyers os an unovoidoble 
consequence of moking higher educotion ovoiloble to oll citizens. 
10. 
I suppose one could orgue thot the reoson something is of over- riding 
importonce is precisely becouse the costs ore difficult to colculote ond 
thot lf the colculotion could be mode in o woy thot would copture the 
ottention of the voter, the 'importonce' of the gool would dimlnish 
greotly. 
11. 
I understand from verbal reports thot Friedrich Hoyek is working on 
an evolutionory explonotion of politicol societies 
where populotion 
moximizotion is the survivol principle. While ot the moment this 
sounds an unpromising line of orgument, one con only woit until the 
full eloborotion is published to judge foirly. 
12. 
This orgument is not to be confused with the interest group theories 
of the stote mentioned obove thot ottempt to exploin porticulor policies 
occording to which interest groups goin within o stote. The orgument 
I om criticizing here tries to exploin the survivol of o porticulor stote 
itself in terms of weolth moximizotlon. 
13. 
The theory of normative public choice ls outlined in Buchonon/Tullock 
1962. 
14. 
This is the position thot Gordon Tullock tokes. See Tullock 1971. 
15. 
On the lnobility to define an efficlent pollticol Institution, see Colemon 
1984. 
16. 
The best stotement of Buchonon's position is in Buchenon 1975. 
17. 
This is exoctly whot Dovid Gouthier t rles to do in hls 1986 book, 
Morols by Agreement. 
18. 
Jomes Buchenon took o step in thot directlon in his recent poper 
( 1985b), in which he included behind the veil o recognition thot men 
would become ottoched to the good s they produced. in other words, 
he worked out some implicotions of an emotional ottochment to o 
primitive notion of property for the soclol controct. 

180 
· Karen I. Vaughri 
Bibliography 
Becker, G.S. (1981), A Treatise on the Family, Cambridge/Mass. -Lon-
don 
Brennan, G./J.M. Buchenon (1984), Vater Choice, in: American Behavioral 
Scientist 28.2, 185-201 
Buchanan, J.M. (1975), Th'e Limits of Liberty: Between Anarchy and Levia-
. than, Chicago 
( 1977), Freedom in Constitutional Contract, College Station/Texas 
(1985a), Rights, Efficiency and Exchange: The lrrelevance of Trans-
action Costs, in: Liberty, Market and State: Political Economy in the 
1900's, New York University, 92-107 
( 1985b), Comnunity and Coercion: The Relationship Between Taxation 
and Liberty, unpublished 
/G. Tullock (1962), The Calculus of Consent, Ann Arbor/Michigan 
Coase, R. (1960), The Problem of Social Cast, in: Journal of · Law and 
Economics 3, 1-44 
Coleman, J. (1984),· The Foundations of Constitutional Economics, in: R.B. 
McKenzie (ed.), Constitutional Economics,· Lexington/Mass., 141 - 156 
Gauthier, D. (1986), Marals by Agreement, Oxford 
Kirzner, I. ( 1963), Market Theory and the Price System, New York 
~ses,· L. von (1963), Human Action, New Haven-London 
Mueller, D. (1979), Public Choice, Cambridge 
North, 0./R. Thomas (1973), The Ri~e of the Western World, Cambridge 
Rubin, P./J.B. Kau (1979), Self-lnterest, ldeology and Log-Rolllng in 
Congressional Voting, in: Journal of Law and Economics 22, 365-384 
Sen, A.K. (1970), The Impossibility of a Paretian Liberal, in: Journal of 
Political Economy 78, 152-157 
Tullock, G. (1971), 
The Logic of the Law, New York 
(1983), Economics of lncome Redistribution, Norweii/Mass. 
Wiseman, J. (1983), Beyond Positive Economics, London 

