American Mineralogist, Volume 84, pages 725–732, 1999
0003-004X/99/0506–0725$05.00
     725
Ising models of undercooled binary system crystallization:
Comparison with experimental and pegmatite textures
DON R. BAKER1,* AND CARMELA FREDA2,†
1Earth and Planetary Sciences, McGill University, 3450 rue University, Montréal, Quebec H3A 2A7, Canada
2CNR-Centro di Studio per gli Equilibri Sperimentali in Minerali e Rocce, c/o Dipartimento di Scienze della Terra, Università degli Studi
“La Sapienza”, P. le Aldo Moro, 5 I-00185 Rome, Italy
INTRODUCTION
The petrogenesis of granitic pegmatites may be one of the
greatest enigmas of igneous petrology at the present time.
Pegmatites are typically defined by the presence of large (cen-
timeter scale) to extraordinarily large (several meters across)
crystals. The presence of such large crystals suggests that
pegmatites cooled slowly and that crystals grew from melts in
which diffusion was rapid. However, pegmatites are small bod-
ies, rarely more than 50 m long (Cameron et al. 1949), and
commonly intrude cool upper crustal rocks at low tempera-
tures. Consequently, cooling is rapid, requiring only hundreds
to thousands of years, at most, to reach solidus temperatures
(Chakoumakos and Lumpkin 1990; London 1992; Webber et
al. 1997). Additionally, diffusion of silicate components in
pegmatite melts is expected to be slow based upon their simi-
larity to granitic compositions (Baker 1991, 1992) and their
low liquidus temperatures, near 923 K (Chakoumakos and
Lumpkin 1990). If one were to choose a melt composition and
conditions of emplacement best suited to the production of
small crystals in an intrusive rock, one would choose a pegma-
tite. Instead, we find that conditions thought to produce small
crystals result in exactly the opposite.
Most granitic pegmatite bodies are internally zoned, either
symmetrically or asymmetrically, in mineral texture and ele-
ment distribution. A general zoning pattern has been recog-
nized in many pegmatites. This pattern consists of a lower zone
(footwall) composed of a fine grained, albite-rich aplite (in
ABSTRACT
Simulations of crystal growth in hydrous albite-quartz and albite-orthoclase systems were performed
with the Jackson, Gilmer, and Temkin formulation of the Ising model. These simulations demonstrate
that at 873 K (approximately 100 K undercooling), comb textures are produced when growth and diffu-
sion probabilities are equivalent. If the growth probability is decreased to 0.1 times that of diffusion,
discrete alternating zones of albite and quartz are produced; however, increasing the growth probability
to 10 times that of diffusion results in an intergrowth of small domains of albite set in a quartz matrix.
At near-liquidus temperatures (973 K), textures similar to those at 100 K undercooling are produced
although the crystal-melt interfaces of the comb texture are smoother and the absolute value of the
diffusion probability exerts a strong control on the texture, unlike results at 873 K. The textures pro-
duced in the simulations with a scale of 10–7 m are similar to experimentally produced textures with
scales of 10–6 to 10–4. The fractal dimension of a comb-textured simulation has been measured and
shown to be similar to the fractal dimension of a natural pegmatite with a meter-scale texture. This
scaling similarity suggests that these simulations may provide insight into the formation of natural
pegmatites despite the 5–7 orders of magnitude difference in scale.
some cases banded or layered); a middle zone that is quartz-
rich, in a few cases with open pockets that may contain tour-
maline and beryl, quartz, alkali feldspar, and various accessory
minerals, and an upper zone (hanging wall) above the quartz
core rich in potassium feldspar, commonly graphically
intergrown with quartz and typically containing extraordinar-
ily large crystals (Cameron et al. 1949; Jahns 1982). Although
this zoning is common it is not ubiquitous and many pegmatites
do not display, or only display part of, the zoning pattern
(Cameron et al. 1949; Jahns 1982; London 1996).
According to the Jahns and Burnham model (1969)
pegmatites are distinguished from typical granites by the pres-
ence of a vapor phase (dominated by water) in the former, in
addition to melt and crystals; the transition from granitic to
pegmatitic texture represents attainment of aqueous vapor satu-
ration of the melt. Jahns and Burnham (1969) argued that
pegmatites did not undergo sequential crystallization, but in-
stead experienced eutectic crystallization with near-equilib-
rium, simultaneous crystallization of quartz, plagioclase, and
alkali feldspar in eutectic proportions (Jahns 1982). Jahns and
Burnham (1969) attributed the formation of both aplitic albitic
rocks in the footwall and giant microcline crystals in the hang-
ing wall to differential solubility of K and Na in an aqueous
vapor coexisting with the growing crystals. However they did
not provide any explanation of why this vapor did not interact
with quartz crystals growing in the center of the pegmatite.
On the basis of experimental studies an alternative expla-
nation for pegmatite formation was proposed by London (Lon-
don et al. 1989; London 1992, 1996). According to this model
the pegmatitic mineral zoning pattern is due to the slow crys-
tallization response of volatile-bearing, but not necessarily
*E-mail: donb@geosci.eps.mcgill.ca
†E-mail: freda@axrma.uniroma1.it

 BAKER AND FREDA: MODELS OF PEGMATITE TEXTURES
726
water-saturated, granitic melts to cooling. London determined
that experimentally produced textures were affected by the bulk
composition of the melt and by the degree of undercooling.
Experiments performed at greater undercooling resulted in the
formation of coarse-grained, pegmatitic textures whereas those
performed at small degrees of undercooling produced fine-
grained, granitic textures.
This study presents the results of a theoretical investigation
of the creation of crystal textures using Ising models for the
crystallization of the binary systems albite-quartz and albite-
orthoclase. Although Ising models cannot provide exact simu-
lations of crystal-growth phenomena, they allow investigation
of the effects of composition, diffusion coefficients, crystal
growth rate, and supercooling on the textural development of
binary systems. Results of simulations are extrapolated upward
in scale and shown to be similar to previous experimental stud-
ies of crystal growth and natural pegmatite textures. Following
London’s proposal that pegmatite crystallization occurs at sig-
nificantly undercooled conditions, most simulations were per-
formed at 873 K, approximately 100 K below the eutectic
temperature. However, a few simulations were performed at
973 K to compare with textures produced at 873 K.
ISING MODEL OF CRYSTALLIZATION
The Ising model was created in the 1920s to explain the
effects of temperature on ferromagnetic behavior (Stanley
1971). The fundamental basis of the model is the concept of a
lattice (one dimensional or greater) containing at each point a
spin that can be oriented either positively or negatively. Any
individual spin only interacts with its nearest neighbors on a
lattice; the energy of the system is determined by interactions
between each spin and its neighbors and is described by the
Hamiltonian, H:
(1)
where J is the interaction energy between spins, and σi and σj
are spins with the values of + 1 or –1 corresponding to positive
and negative spin orientations (Stanley 1971; Ross 1991). The
transition frequency (or transition probability) of a spin from
one orientation to another is determined by the exponential of
the opposite of the Hamiltonian divided by Boltzmann’s con-
stant multiplied by the temperature (Stanley 1971; Ross 1991).
At low temperatures virtually all spins are aligned in either the
positive or negative orientation and the object is magnetic; at
high temperatures the spin orientations are random and no
magnetic behavior is observed. Although a gross simplifica-
tion of natural systems, the Ising model has been applied suc-
cessfully to modeling gas-liquid phase transitions and the
crystallization of binary alloys, in addition to magnetic phase
transitions (Stanley 1971; Ross 1991).
The version of the Ising model used in this study to investi-
gate the crystallization of the albite-quartz and albite-ortho-
clase binaries is the spin-1 Ising model of Jackson et al. (1995),
hereafter referred to as the JGT model. The JGT model has
been demonstrated to reproduce experimental results in the sili-
con-bismuth binary system (Jackson et al. 1996; Beatty and
Jackson 1997). This model contains four “spins,” one each for
the components i and j in either melt or crystal. A negatively
oriented “spin” is considered to be in the liquid phase and a
positively oriented one is in the crystalline phase. The model
calculates the crystallization of a supercooled melt in a binary
system on a square lattice (i.e., four nearest neighbors in both
crystal and melt) at constant temperature. Three transition fre-
quency expressions are used for the calculations: one for addi-
tion of adatoms (which in this work are either quartz, albite, or
orthoclase molecules) to the growing crystal; one for removal
of adatoms from the crystal; and one for diffusion of adatoms
in the melt. The frequency of conversion of adatoms from melt
to crystal, 
i
LS , is given by (Jackson et al. 1995; Beatty and
Jackson 1997):
νi
LS =
νexp −∆S
k
 
 
 
 exp −
Φ ij
kT
j∑
 
  
 
  
(2)
where ν is a normalizing frequency based upon diffusion in the
melt, ∆S is the normalized entropy of melting, k is the
Boltzmann constant, Φij is the bond energy between a chosen
adatom and its neighbor atom of either type i or j, and T is the
temperature in kelvins. The frequency at which adatoms de-
tach from the crystal and enter the melt, 
i
SL , is given by:
νi
SL = νexp −
Φij
kT
j∑
 
  
 
  .
(3)
 Following Beatty and Jackson (1997) diffusion of adatoms
in the melt toward the growing crystal was modeled as a simple
exchange of two components on different lattice sites in the
melt with a frequency, Γ, determined by:
Γ = 2Dd
a
2
(4)
where D is the diffusion coefficient, d is the dimensionality (2 in
the present study), and a is the “jump distance,” which is esti-
mated to be 1 nm (Baker 1992). This frequency provides the
normalizing value, n, in the equations for the attachment and
detachment of an adatom to the growing crystal in JGT model
(Beatty and Jackson 1997).
Crystallization is modeled using the Monte Carlo technique
(Heermann 1986) on a lattice with periodic boundary condi-
tions such that when an adatom diffuses to the right of the col-
umn at the right-hand boundary, it diffuses into the first column
at the left-hand boundary. At each point on the lattice the com-
puter determines which composition, i or j, is present and
whether the adatom is in the liquid or crystalline state. If the
adatom is liquid, the diffusion frequency is calculated and com-
pared to a random number; diffusion occurs when the frequency
is greater than the random number. If the liquid adatom is in
contact with one or more crystalline adatoms, the attachment
frequency is calculated and compared to a random number; the
adatom is converted from liquid to solid if the frequency is
greater than the random number. If the adatom at the lattice
site is solid and totally surrounded by solid adatoms nothing
occurs. If, instead, one of the four nearest-neighbor adatoms is
liquid, the detachment frequency of the adatom under consid-
eration is calculated and compared to a random number; if the
detachment frequency is greater than the random number, the
adatom is converted from a solid to a liquid. Note that no diffu-
sion is allowed in the crystalline phases. A single sweep is com-
posed of performing these calculations at each lattice point in
the model. A typical model in this study is composed of 5 × 104
H

 BAKER AND FREDA: MODELS OF PEGMATITE TEXTURES
727
to 3 × 106 sweeps of a 300 × 150 lattice of which 10 rows were
initially crystalline albite and the others were melt. These condi-
tions were chosen as a compromise between the computational
time necessary for calculation of substantial amounts of crystal-
lization and the desire to have a model as large as possible. All
models were constrained to have one row of crystalline material
at the bottom and one row of molten material at the top of the
lattice. The simulations do not include any gravitational effects;
thus, any simulated growth upward from the seed crystal at the
base can also represent growth downward from the top.
Pressure, temperature and water concentration in the
models
Modeling the crystallization of albite-quartz and albite-or-
thoclase binaries was performed at temperatures of 873 K and
973 K. The temperature of 973 K is the eutectic temperature in
the albite-orthoclase system at 500 MPa, water-saturated con-
ditions, and is close to the estimated eutectic temperature in
the water-saturated, albite-quartz binary at 400 MPa (Ehlers
1972). The choice of the eutectic temperature reflects the ob-
servation that pegmatite compositions commonly plot close to
the eutectic in the system albite-orthoclase-quartz (London
1996) and should be modeled as eutectics in the binary sys-
tems. Eutectic temperatures near 500 MPa were chosen to re-
flect magmatic conditions at mid-crustal depths. The temperature
of 873 K was chosen to represent an undercooling of 100 K ex-
perienced by a pegmatite at its contact with surrounding coun-
try rocks that are 200 K cooler than the intruding pegmatite
(cf., Chakoumakos and Lumpkin 1990).
The models do not explicitly investigate the role of water in
the crystallization of feldspars and quartz. However, because
water affects the melting temperatures of minerals, and the bond
energies used in the models are determined from mineral liquidi
(discussed below), water affects the model indirectly. This study
only investigated crystallization from water-saturated melts to
constrain the effects of undercooling and differing diffusion
and growth rate transition probabilities on the textures produced.
Importantly, no free fluid is present in these models.
Diffusion in the melt
Chemical diffusion coefficients used for the calculation of
the frequency of diffusive exchange, Γ, were chosen to span
the possible range of values present in a pegmatitic melt at tem-
peratures between 873 and 973 K. The maximum values for Γ
are calculated from the chemical diffusion coefficients of Na
and K determined by Freda and Baker (1998) in hydrous alkali
feldspar melts extrapolated to the model temperatures. The
minimum values for Γ were calculated from viscosities of gra-
nitic melts with the Eyring equation and correspond to Si-Al
interdiffusion (Baker 1992).
Attachment and detachment frequencies
The normalizing frequency, ν, in the expressions for both
attachment and detachment is related to the diffusion probabil-
ity, Γ, and both are in s–1. Although the relationship between
diffusion in the melts and the crystallization kinetics of plagio-
clase from hydrous melts has been demonstrated (Muncill and
Lasaga 1988), the exact relationship between the diffusion fre-
quency and the attachment and detachment frequencies remains
experimentally unconstrained. Therefore, modeling was per-
formed with ν equal to three values: the diffusion probability,
10 times the diffusion probability and 0.1 times the diffusion
probability. The use of three different values allows investiga-
tion of how the relationship between diffusion and crystal
growth affects the crystallization behavior of the system even
though the exact relationship remains unknown.
The correspondence between sweeps and elapsed time in a
simulation is complicated when ν is not equal to 1 because the
time of a diffusive event and of a growth or dissolution event
are not the same. In this case an average time can be computed
by storing the number and type of events that occur during each
simulation. Currently we are not interested in the exact dura-
tion of the simulations. However, the durations can be roughly
estimated by multiplying the time step used for the diffusion
probability by the number of sweeps. These approximate times
are on the order of milliseconds to hundreds of seconds.
Bond and interaction energies for crystallization model
To create a microscopic model for the crystallization of two
minerals (i and j) from a melt in a binary system it is necessary
to specify the interaction (bond) energy,Φij, between two i mol-
ecules, between two j molecules, and between i and j molecules
in both molten and crystalline phases. For simplicity, the inter-
action energies between all components in the melt have been
taken to be 0 (Beatty and Jackson 1997). The interaction energy
of each end-member bond energy (i-i or j-j) can be established
through knowledge of the melting temperatures of crystals of
pure i and pure j at the conditions of interest (pressure, water
concentration in the melt, etc.). This initial value for the deter-
mination of the bond energy is the enthalpy of crystallization of
the crystal divided by Avogadro’s number. This value is modi-
fied until the model melting temperature of the pure end-mem-
ber crystal is within ±10 K of the real melting temperature. In
this study three end-members were considered, albite, orthoclase,
and quartz, and their bond energies determined for water-satu-
rated melting at 500 MPa. These values in terms of J/k for albite,
orthoclase, and quartz are 1300, 1430, and 1800, respectively.
Interaction energies between i and j end-members in the crys-
tals are based upon a regular solution model for the solid. Al-
though such a model is a simplification of the real interactions
between the end-members (Navrotsky 1994), it is sufficient for
the present purposes. The symmetric Margules parameter, WG,
is calculated from the estimated consolute temperature of the
solvus between i and j (Navrotsky 1994). This value is then scaled
using the enthalpies of melting of i and j and the bond energies
necessary to reproduce the melting temperatures of the pure end-
members. The estimated consolute temperature of the solvus
between albite and orthoclase at 500 MPa is 1048 K which yields
a WG of 16.6 kJ/mol. This value was divided by the average of
the enthalpies of melting for albite and orthoclase, and then
multiplied by the average of Φij for albite and orthoclase to cal-
culate the normalized i-j interaction energy, 369 J/k. There is no
measured solvus between either orthoclase or albite and quartz
at 500 MPa. However, Navrotsky et al. (1982) summarize ear-
lier studies of the amounts of excess silica in albite and ortho-
clase. These data indicate that the solid solution of quartz in

 BAKER AND FREDA: MODELS OF PEGMATITE TEXTURES
728
feldspars (and vice versa) may be approximated with a solvus
exhibiting a consolute temperature far in excess of 2400 K
that, when normalized, produces an i-Quartz (where i is ei-
ther albite or orthoclase) interaction energy that is at least
1000 J/k; this value was used in the simulations presented
herein.
Entropy of crystallization
The value of ∆S/k used in all calculations was 5. This es-
timate is similar to that of Beatty and Jackson (1997) and is
based upon the bond-bond energy divided by the temperature
of melting of the pure end-member phase. Although the esti-
mate is not exact, small deviations from this value do not have
any significant effect on the simulations of this study.
MODELING RESULTS
Crystallization far below the liquidus
Simulations at 873 K represent conditions approximately
100 K below the water-saturated albite-quartz eutectic at 400
MPa. Simulations at the eutectic composition, XAlbite = 0.3 on
an anhydrous basis, were performed on a 300 × 150 lattice
with the first 10 rows composed of a pure albite seed crystal.
A time step of 10 ns was used in simulations with a rapid
alkali interdiffusion coefficient, 5.9 × 10–13 m2/s, and a step of
0.01 s was used in simulations with a slow Si-Al interdiffu-
sion coefficient, 1.7 × 10–17 m2/s, for the calculation of diffu-
sion and growth probabilities per time step. The simulations
presented below are either in the albite-quartz or albite-or-
thoclase binary systems. Simulations of the quartz-orthoclase
binary system produced results indistinguishable from those
of the albite-quartz binary and are not shown.
Figure 1 presents a time series during crystallization when
the growth probability equals the diffusion probability, and dif-
fusion is rapid. Although the simulation begins with a smooth
crystal-melt interface, the growing quartz dominates the simu-
lation and rapidly develops a comb structure with the long di-
mension perpendicular to the horizontal seed crystal. The
growing quartz traps melt inclusions of albite composition that
crystallize during later steps in the simulation. The individual
domains of quartz and albite are almost pure end-member
phases with little solid solution, as demanded by the high al-
bite-quartz interaction energy in the model.
Increasing the probability of growth relative to diffusion by
10 times results in a change from a comb texture to a much finer-
grained one with smaller domains of quartz and albite that are
densely intergrown one with another (Fig. 2b). If the probability
of growth is 0.1 times that of diffusion, the texture changes into
one of discrete zones with nearly pure quartz followed by albite
(Fig. 2c). As discussed above, the exact durations of the simula-
tions were not determined, but estimates of the duration based
upon the number of sweeps multiplied by the time step demon-
strates that reducing the growth probability by a factor of ten
decreases growth rates by a factor of ten as expected.
Simulations using the slow diffusion values produced tex-
tures virtually identical to those discussed above (Fig. 3). Note
that crystallization was complete before the simulation with
equal growth and diffusion probabilities reached 100,000
sweeps, which prevents any estimation of crystal growth rates
for these conditions. When growth and diffusion probabilities
are equal, a comb structure is observed (Fig. 3a). When the
growth probability is only 0.1 times that of diffusion (Fig. 3b)
large discrete zones of quartz and albite grow, as seen in Fig-
ure 2c at higher diffusivities. A simulation involving a higher
growth probability was not performed on a 300 × 150 lattice,
but smaller simulations on 150 × 150 lattices (not shown) dem-
onstrate the same results as seen for the slow diffusion values.
The effect of composition when growth and diffusion prob-
abilities are equal is striking. If the composition is changed
from XAlbite = 0.3 to XAlbite = 0.7 (anhydrous basis), the texture
changes from the comb structure shown in Figure 1 to a struc-
ture similar to that observed in the eutectic composition when
the growth probability is 10 times that of diffusion (Fig. 2b),
but with larger domains of albite and quartz (Fig. 4a). The crys-
FIGURE 1. Ising model simulation of albite and quartz crystal
growth for a eutectic composition, XAlbite = 0.3, anhydrous basis, at 873
K (approximately 100 K below the equilibrium crystallization
temperature when water-saturated at 400 MPa). Diffusion in this
simulation is based upon Na-K interdiffusion coefficients in feldspar
melts (5.9 × 10–13 m 2/s). In this and all other simulations, dark gray
and black represents crystalline and molten albite, respectively; white
and light gray represents crystalline and molten quartz, respectively;
the number of Monte Carlo sweeps, which is proportional to the elapsed
time in the simulations, is given under each panel in the diagram. See
text for further discussion.

 BAKER AND FREDA: MODELS OF PEGMATITE TEXTURES
729
tallization of the albite-orthoclase eutectic composition, XAlbite
= 0.66 (anhydrous basis) was modeled at 873 K using alkali
interdiffusion coefficients and equal diffusion and growth prob-
abilities. The resulting structure is composed of an intimate
mixture of albite and orthoclase with a smooth melt-crystal
interface (Fig. 4b). The great difference between the structures
produced in the albite-quartz and albite-orthoclase simulations
is due to the high interaction energy between albite and quartz,
which results in domains of nearly pure end-member phases
rather than an intimate mixture.
These simulations demonstrate that the important controls
on the textures produced at 873 K are the composition and the
relative probabilities of diffusion and growth, not the absolute
values. Changing the relative probabilities of diffusion and
growth result in drastically different textures of quartz and al-
bite at approximately 100 K below the equilibrium crystalliza-
tion temperature.
Crystallization near the liquidus
A small number of simulations were performed at 973 K
for comparison with those at 873 K. These simulations were
performed on a 300 × 150 lattice with the first 10 rows com-
posed of a pure albite seed crystal and the eutectic composi-
tion in the albite-quartz system. A time step of 10 ns was used
in simulations with a rapid alkali interdiffusion coefficient, 3 ×
10-12 m2/s, and a time step of 0.01 s was used with a slow Si-Al
interdiffusion coefficient, 1.5 × 10–16 m2/s.
The overall texture is similar at both temperatures when the
diffusion probability equals the growth probability and the al-
kali interdiffusion coefficient is used to calculate Γ (Fig. 5a).
The comb structure seen at 873 K is present, but crystals grown
at 973 K have smoother interfaces with the melt compared to
those at 873 K (Fig. 2a). Reducing the growth probability to
0.1 times that of diffusion results in the formation of large
masses of quartz crystals, but no significant crystallization of
albite (Fig. 5b) as observed in the 873 K simulation (Fig. 2c).
However, albite-enriched regions of melt exist at the edges of
the growing quartz crystals and, if the simulation had been per-
formed for a longer time, a domain of crystalline albite would
probably have been produced as seen at 873 K.
FIGURE 3. The effect of relative probabilities (frequencies) of
growth and diffusion on the structures produced from an albite-quartz
eutectic composition crystallized at 873 K, when the absolute value of
diffusion is that of Si-Al interdiffusion in a granitic melt (1.7 × 10–17
m2/s). Note the similarity between Figures 2a and 3a and 2c and 3b,
respectively.
FIGURE 2. The effect of relative probabilities (frequencies) of
growth and diffusion on the structures produced from an albite-quartz
eutectic composition crystallized at 873 K, when the absolute value of
diffusion is that of Na-K in feldspar melts (5.9 × 10–13 m2/s).
FIGURE 4. The effect of composition on the structures produced
by crystallization at 873 K when growth probability equals diffusion
probability and the diffusion coefficient is that of Na-K in feldspar
melts (5.9 × 10–13 m2/s). In the albite-orthoclase simulation, dark gray
and black represent crystalline and molten orthoclase, respectively;
white and light gray represent crystalline and molten albite, respectively.

 BAKER AND FREDA: MODELS OF PEGMATITE TEXTURES
730
Decreasing diffusion in the melt to the low value at 973 K
results in a dramatic change in the crystallized texture when
diffusion and growth probabilities are equal (Fig. 6a). No sem-
blance to a comb structure is observed when growth and diffu-
sion probabilities are equal. Instead, the texture is composed
of moderate-sized domains of crystalline albite set in a quartz
matrix. This simulation resembles that produced at 873 K when
the growth probability was 10 times the diffusion probability
(Fig. 2b), except that the domains of crystalline albite are larger.
Reducing the growth probability to 0.1 times the diffusion prob-
ability results in a comb texture (Fig. 6b) similar to that formed
at 873 K (Fig. 2a). The near-total crystallization of both 973 K
simulations in Figure 6 is due to the long time step used, 10-2 s,
which results in estimated simulation durations of hundreds of
seconds. In all 973 K simulations the initial albite seed crystal
partially dissolved early in the simulation even though albite
crystallizes at later times.
The near-liquidus crystallization textures of the simulations
at 973 K are affected by the absolute value of diffusion as well
as by the relative probabilities of diffusion and growth. How-
ever, the general results at 973 and 873 K remain the same, the
lower the growth probability relative to diffusion the larger the
single crystal domains of quartz and albite.
DISCUSSION
Comparison with experimental microtextures
The control of crystal textures by undercooling, composi-
tion, and the relative probabilities (which are equivalent to rates)
of crystallization and diffusion in the melt identified by the simu-
lations is consistent with experimental studies, despite the dif-
ference in scale between simulations experiments (10–7 m vs.
typically 10–6 to 10–4 m). The effects of undercooling and com-
position have been demonstrated experimentally in studies of
crystal growth in geological systems that have produced tex-
tures similar to those in the simulations (e.g., Fenn 1977, 1986;
Lofgren 1980; London 1992). Good examples of this similar-
ity between modeling results and experiments are in Fenn
(1986) and London (1992). Fenn (1986) contains numerous
photographs of micrometer-sized quartz-albite intergrowths
formed by undercooled crystallization of natural pegmatite
compositions. Figures 8b and 8c of London (1992) display feld-
spar-quartz intergrowths whose texture is mimicked by the
simulation in Figure 1d of this contribution despite the 2 or-
ders-of-magnitude difference in scale between experiment and
simulation. Although the similarities between experimental and
simulated microtextures is great, rigorous quantitative compari-
son using fractal dimensions (see below) failed because we
could not find any published photographs of experimental tex-
tures with the necessary resolution.
Although much has been learned from experimental studies
on crystal growth, the simulations for the eutectic composition
provide additional insight into the experimental observations,
despite our current inability to make quantitative scaling com-
parisons through the use of fractals. The simulations at 100 K
undercooling indicate that, although the absolute values of diffu-
sion and growth probabilities affect growth rates, they are unim-
portant in controlling texture. However, changes in the relative
values of growth and diffusion rates exert significant effects on
the texture and growth rate. At near-liquidus conditions, the ab-
solute values of growth and diffusion probabilities affect the tex-
tures produced as well as the growth rates. These observations of
the simulations can be used to investigate some of the experi-
mental observations on crystal growth even though experimental
and simulation systems are not compositionally identical.
FIGURE 5. The effect of relative probabilities (frequencies) of
growth and diffusion on the structures produced from an albite-quartz
eutectic composition crystallized at 973 K, when the absolute value of
diffusion is that of Na-K in feldspar melts (3.0 × 10–12 m2/s).
FIGURE 6. The effect of relative probabilities (frequencies) of growth
and diffusion on the structures produced from an albite-quartz eutectic
composition crystallized at 973 K, when the absolute value of diffusion is
that of Si-Al interdiffusion in a granitic melt (1.5 × 10–16 m2/s).

 BAKER AND FREDA: MODELS OF PEGMATITE TEXTURES
731
The experimental observation that crystals grown at near-
liquidus conditions are euhedral with no morphological insta-
bility (e.g., Lofgren 1980) combined with simulations at 973
K (Figs. 5 and 6) suggest that growth probabilities in experi-
ments are significantly lower than those of diffusion at these
conditions. The probability of growth relative to diffusion nec-
essary for morphological stability appears to be either <1, esti-
mated from Figure 5 with rapid diffusion coefficients in the
simulations, or <0.1, estimated from Figure 6 when the slower
diffusion coefficients are used in the simulations.
The loss of morphological stability when crystallization
occurs at significant undercoolings (100 K) might be due to an
increase in the probability of growth relative to that of diffu-
sion based upon simulation results presented Figures 1, 2, and
3. This relative increase is due to a combination of higher Gibbs
free energies of crystallization with increasing undercooling
(e.g., Dowty 1980) and decreasing diffusion coefficients at
lower temperatures (e.g., Baker 1991). Simulation results indi-
cate that to prevent morphological instability, the growth prob-
ability must be maintained at a value less than approximately
0.5 that of the diffusion probability.
Fenn (1977) demonstrated that feldspar growth rates are
strongly affected by H2O concentrations in the melt. His ex-
periments demonstrated that at an undercooling of 100 K, an
increase in H2O from 5.4 to 9 wt% decreases sodic feldspar
growth rates by a factor of 2.5. A similar effect was observed
by Muncill and Lasaga (1988) in their experimental study of
albite-anorthite growth kinetics from water-saturated melts at
200 and 500 MPa. Because increasing H2O concentrations al-
ways result in higher diffusivities in granitic melts (Baker 1991;
Freda and Baker 1998), the simulations suggest that the de-
crease in observed growth rates is due to the depression of the
growth probability relative to that of diffusion by H2O addi-
tion. Such behavior with increasing H2O concentration may
result in a return to morphological stability, but this has not
been observed yet. The simulation results combined with the
experimental results of Fenn (1977) and Muncill and Lasaga
(1988) indicate that significantly undercooled melts with low
H2O contents should produce crystals with morphological in-
stabilities. Thus, higher H2O concentrations would lead to the
decreasing growth rates that are expected to produce morpho-
logically stable crystals, such as those possibly existing in al-
ternating domains as in Figures 2 and 3.
An increase in growth probability to 10 times that of diffu-
sion produces smaller crystals (Fig. 2b). Although crystallo-
graphic controls on the orientation of growing quartz and albite
are not included in the square lattice simulations, the structure
produced is similar to graphic granite, which Fenn (1986) pro-
duced experimentally by crystallization of hydrous pegmatitic
compositions at undercoolings of 100–165 K below the liquidus.
This structure appears in all albite-quartz simulations at 873 K
in which the growth probability is 10 times that of diffusion
and is not dependent upon composition.
The most exciting result of the simulations is the prediction
that relatively small changes in the probability of growth rela-
tive to diffusion can have significant effects on the microtextures
produced in experiments.
Comparison with pegmatite textures
The Ising model simulations create textures that are remark-
ably similar to those observed in pegmatites. However, each
adatom in the simulation (equivalent to a pixel in the figures)
is approximately 1 nm. Therefore the textures produced in the
simulations have dimensions on the order of 10–7 m whereas
the mineralogical zoning seen in pegmatites is 5–7 orders of
magnitude larger (centimeters to meters in size). Despite quali-
tative similarities between simulations and natural textures, and
the observation that pegmatitic fabrics exist on scales that vary
from centimeters to meters in size, or >2 orders of magnitude
(Cameron et al. 1949; Jahns and Burnham 1969; Jahns 1982),
application of the modeling results to natural systems requires
scaling the simulation textures up these many orders of magni-
tude. Although we recognize that such scaling is fraught with
potential problems, we cannot resist our curiosity and make
the comparison between microscopic and macroscopic textures.
Quantitative comparison between simulated and natural tex-
tures can be achieved through determination of the fractal di-
mensions of both types of textures (Fowler 1995). Fowler (1995)
summarized his previous research on the fractal nature of
quench crystals in basaltic rocks and demonstrated that simple
fractal models using adatoms can be scaled from atomic to cm-
scale dimensions and accurately reproduce observed textures.
 We evaluated the fractal dimension of the texture of quartz
crystals developed in Figure 1d and compared this dimension
to those of natural pegmatite fabrics with meter-scale textural
variations displayed in Figures 3a and 3b of Chakoumakos and
Lumpkin (1990). The photographs of Chakoumakos and
Lumpkin (1990) were used because they were the only pub-
lished ones of pegmatite textures with sufficient resolution for
fractal analysis. The fractal dimension was determined by
converting the image to a black (quartz crystals) and white (all
other phases) image then finding the edges of the crystals using
Corel Photopaint. This edge was used to find the fractal dimen-
sion of the texture through use of the box-counting technique
(Schroeder 1991; Fowler 1995) as implemented by the software
package Beniot 1.1 (TruSoft International Inc., St. Petersburg,
Florida, U.S.A.). In all cases the box edge length varied by ap-
proximately two orders of magnitude (cf. Fowler 1995).
The fractal dimensions of the simulations and the natural
textures were similar, but not always within error of each other.
The simulation (Fig. 1d) had a fractal dimension of 1.900 ±
0.001 (1 standard deviation error) whereas the natural textures
of Figure 3a and 3b of Chakoumakos and Lumpkin (1990) had
dimensions of 1.899 ± 0.002 and 1.907 ± 0.002, respectively.
Importantly, all measured data formed a linear trend when the
log of the number of black pixels in the box was plotted against
the log of the box edge length and no evidence of “cross-over”
from fractal to constant density distribution was observed (cf.
Fowler 1995). The similarity in fractal dimension between simu-
lation and nature encourages us to apply our simulations to the
investigation of natural pegmatite fabrics. However, these fractal
measurements are preliminary and we are currently seeking
photographs of pegmatite textures for more detailed fractal
comparisons of nature and simulation.
The albite-quartz simulations performed at 873 K, an un-

 BAKER AND FREDA: MODELS OF PEGMATITE TEXTURES
732
dercooling of approximately 100 K, with the eutectic compo-
sition reproduce many of the textural features seen in
pegmatites. When growth and diffusion probabilities are equal,
the simulations produce comb structures (Figs. 2a and 3a) that
are characteristic of anisotropic fabrics in pegmatites (London
1992). This result is produced in simulations involving either
albite-quartz or orthoclase-quartz (not shown) binary systems.
This texture can be found in natural pegmatites growing away
from contacts with the host rocks (Jahns and Burnham 1969;
Jahns 1982; London 1992). In contrast, albite-orthoclase and
albite-quartz compositions far from that of the eutectic do not
produce such structures (Fig. 4). The absence of the comb struc-
ture in the albite-orthoclase binary is due to the low interaction
energy between these two crystals, which allows significant solu-
bility of one within the other. The absence of the structure in the
albite-quartz simulation when XAlbite = 0.7 suggests that quartz
must be the dominant anhydrous component in the melt. Note
that on a weight percent basis, however, albite is the dominant
species in both compositions studied in the albite-quartz binary.
The formation of large domains of pure quartz and albite in
the simulations occurs when the growth probability is <0.5 times
that of diffusion (Figs. 2c and 3b). The texture in these simula-
tions is similar to the alternating layers composed dominantly
of feldspar or quartz that are found in the footwall of some
pegmatites (Cameron et al. 1949; Jahns and Burnham 1969;
Jahns 1982; London 1992, 1996). The formation of these large
domains in the simulations is also reminiscent of large masses
of nearly pure quartz seen in the cores of pegmatites (Cameron
et al. 1949; Jahns and Burnham 1969; Jahns 1982; London 1992,
1996). The change in the relative probabilities of diffusion and
growth in the natural case can be explained by increases in
melt H2O concentrations due to crystallization of anhydrous
crystals. This increase results in an apparent diminution of the
growth probability relative to that of diffusion as discussed
above in the comparison between simulations and the experi-
ments of Fenn (1977) and Muncill and Lasaga (1988), and dis-
cussed by London (1992, 1996) for natural pegmatites.
 These simulations are consistent with the hypothesis of
London (1992, 1996) in which the formation of pegmatites may
occur at high undercoolings from water-undersaturated mag-
mas. These simulations demonstrate that textures, albeit
microtextures, similar to those produced in experiments and in
natural pegmatites can be formed in the absence of a hydrous
vapor. For eutectic compositions at an undercooling of 100 K,
small changes in the relative probabilities (rates) of growth and
diffusion produce very different textures in the Ising model
simulations investigated.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank J. Arkani-Hamed not only for the use of his computer upon which
most of these simulations were performed, but also for his editing of the Fortran
program used for the simulations. D. Walker is also thanked for his valuable aid
in programming. Discussions with M. Grant were inspirational and instrumen-
tal in developing our understanding of Ising models. We are grateful to review-
ers K.L. Webber and T. Dewers for their constructive comments. This research
was supported by NSERC grants OGP89662 and CPG 0183275 to D.R.B. and
CNR grant Bando n.203.05.18 to C.F.
REFERENCES CITED
Baker, D.R. (1991) Interdiffusion of hydrous dacitic and rhyolitic melts and the
efficacy of rhyolite contamination by dacitic enclaves. Contributions to Miner-
alogy and Petrology, 106, 462–473.
——— (1992) Interdiffusion of geologic melts: calculations using transition state
theory. Chemical Geology, 98, 11–21.
Beatty, K.M. and Jackson, K.A. (1997) Orientation dependence of the distribution
coefficient obtained from a spin-1 Ising model. Journal of Crystal Growth, 174,
28–34.
Cameron, E.N., Jahns, R.H., McNair, A.H., and Page, L.R. (1949) Internal structure
of granitic pegmatites, 115 p. Economic Geology Monograph, 2.
Chakoumakos, B.C. and Lumpkin, G.R. (1990) Pressure-temperature constraints
on the crystallization of the Harding pegmatite, Taos County, New Mexico.
Canadian Mineralogist, 28, 287–298.
Dowty, E. (1980) Crystal growth and nucleation theory and numerical simulation of
igneous crystallization.  In R.B. Hargraves, Ed., Physics of Magmatic Processes,
419–485 p. Princeton University Press, Princeton.
Ehlers, E.G. (1972) The Interpretation of Geological Phase Diagrams, 280 p. W.H.
Freeman, San Francisco.
Fenn, P.M. (1977) The nucleation and growth of alkali feldspars from hydrous melts.
Canadian Mineralogist, 15, 135–161.
——— (1986) On the origin of graphic granite. American Mineralogist, 71, 325–330.
Fowler, A.J. (1995) Mineral crystallinity in igneous rocks: Fractal method. In C.C.
Barton and P.R. LaPointe, Eds., Fractals in the Earth Sciences, 237–249 p. Ple-
num Press, New York.
Freda, C. and Baker, D.R. (1998) Na-K interdiffusion in alkali feldspar melts.
Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta, 62, in press.
Heermann, D.W. (1986) Computer Simulation Methods in Theoretical Physics, 145
p. Springer-Verlag, Berlin.
Jackson, K.A., Gilmer, G.H., and Temkin, D.F. (1995) Monte Carlo simulation of
the rapid crystallization of bismuth-doped silicon. Physical Review Letters, 75,
2530–2533.
Jackson, K.A., Gilmer, G.H., Temkin, D.F., and Beatty K.M. (1996) Microsegregation
far from equilibrium. Journal of Crystal Growth, 163, 461–469.
Jahns, R.H. (1982) Internal evolution of pegmatite bodies. In P. Cerny, Ed., Granitic
Pegmatites in Science and Industry, 293–327 p. Mineralogical Association of
Canada Short Course Handbook Volume 8, Mineralogical Association of Canada,
Winnipeg.
Jahns, R.H. and Burnham, C.W. (1969) Experimental studies of pegmatite genesis:
I. A model for the derivation and crystallization of granitic pegmatites. Eco-
nomic Geology, 64, 843–864.
Lofgren, G. (1980) Experimental studies on the dynamic crystallization of silicate
melts. In R.B. Hargraves, Ed., Physics of Magmatic Processes, 487–551 p.
Princeton University Press, Princeton.
London, D. (1992) The application of experimental petrology to the genesis and
crystallization of granitic pegmatites. Canadian Mineralogist, 30, 499–540.
———  (1996) Granite pegmatites. Transactions of the Royal Society of Edinburgh
Earth Sciences, 87, 305–319.
London, D., Morgan, G.B. VI, and Hervig, R.L. (1989) Vapor-undersaturated experi-
ments in the system macusanite-H2O at 200 MPa and the internal differentiation
of granitic pegmatites. Contributions to Mineralogy and Petrology, 102, 1–17.
Muncill, G.E. and Lasaga, A.C. (1988) Crystal-growth kinetics of plagioclase in
igneous systems: Isothermal H2O-saturated experiments and extension of a
growth model to complex silicate melts. American Mineralogist, 73, 982–992.
Navrotsky, A. (1994) Physics and Chemistry of Earth Materials, 417 p. Cambridge.
Navrotsky, A., Capobianco, C., and Stebbins, J. (1982) Some thermodynamic and
experimental constraints on the melting of albite at atmospheric and high pres-
sure. Journal of Geology, 90, 679–698.
Ross, C.R. II (1991) Ising models and geological applications. In J. Ganguly, Ed., Diffu-
sion, Atomic Ordering and Mass Transport, 51–90 p. Springer-Verlag, New York.
Schroeder, M. (1991) Fractals, Chaos, Power Laws, Minutes from an Infinite Para-
dise, 429 p. Freeman, New York.
Stanley, H.E. (1971) Introduction to Phase Transitions and Critical Phenomena, 308
p. Oxford University Press, New York.
Webber, K.L., Falster, A.U., Simmons, W.B., and Foord, E.E. (1997) The role of
diffusion-controlled oscillatory nucleation in the formation of line rock in peg-
matite-aplite dikes. Journal of Petrology, 38, 1777–1791.
MANUSCRIPT RECEIVED AUGUST 11, 1998
MANUSCRIPT ACCEPTED DECEMBER 9, 1998
PAPER HANDLED BY DAVID LONDON

