37
3
It would be absurd to try to draw a panorama of the Alps as seen from a number of 
peaks in the Jura simultaneously. A panorama must be taken from just one point. 
The same is true of a language. One cannot describe it or establish its norms of 
usage except by taking up a position in relation to a given state. When the linguist 
follows the evolution of the language, he is like the observer moving from one end 
of the Jura to the other in order to record changes in perspective.
Saussure, 1983: 81–82
This chapter shifts the focus from critical theories of space to the 
spatiality of language and the discipline of linguistics. It builds on an 
insight from the literature on the social production of space: although 
there is no empty space, space is often produced in the image of empty 
space. Physical space is emptied of its contents and replaced by a grid 
of self-contained spaces, each with its own systemically organised con-
tent. Modern linguistics, from which second language acquisition (SLA) 
derives its basic conception of the nature of language, has no explicit 
theory of the spatiality of language, of how language fits into space. 
But, I argue, it does work with an implicit conception of language as a 
self-contained, systemic object-in-space. I explore this view through two 
histories of emergence: first, the emergence of linguistics as an object 
in the disciplinary space of the social sciences and, second, the parallel 
emergence of the idea of language and its internal systems, structures and 
networks. Lastly, I look at how the idea of the language system connects 
to a history of the physical production of languages as self-contained 
systems through the semiotic geometries of standardisation, grammars 
and dictionaries.
The Spatiality of Language and Linguistics
Massey (2005: 65) writes that a particular way of imagining space as 
‘already divided up’ has ‘underpinned the material enforcement of cer-
tain ways of organising space’. But the end result is not a neatly ordered 
space of separated and bounded places, but a heterogeneous amalgam 
of layered spaces, reflecting the dynamics of the complex sets of social 
Linguistics and the 
Spatiality of Language

38  Language Learning Environments﻿
relations under which space has been produced over historical time. In 
order to make sense of the spatiality of language, we need to look at a 
particular layer of socially produced space: the disciplinary spaces that 
partition and organise knowledge, and especially the disciplinary space 
of linguistics.
By the spatiality of language, I mean two things: first, the distribution 
and circulation of languages and language varieties across geographical 
space (which will be discussed in Chapter 4) and, second, how language, 
more generally, ‘fits into’ space, which is the focus of this chapter. Fowler 
and Hodge (2011) observe that
It is deeply entrenched in the thinking of most language researchers and 
language theorists that there is an object, ‘language’, that consists of 
forms and phonotactic and syntactic constraints on how the forms can 
compose utterances. (Fowler & Hodge, 2011: 150)
Here, Fowler and Hodge allude to two important aspects of the way 
in which modern linguistics represents the spatiality of language. First, 
language is seen as an object in the space of the world. Second, it is seen 
as a self-contained object that holds a certain content of its own. This 
view is held by almost all linguists. In the specific form that it is stated 
by Fowler and Hodge, it is a Chomskyan view, but almost all language 
researchers agree that language has some kind of content and some kind 
of internal patterning, expressed in terms of system, structure or net-
work. From the viewpoint of modern linguistics, language has a definite 
‘outside’ and ‘inside’. Externally, it is one of many objects in the space 
of the social sciences; internally, it is an object with its own systemic  
spatiality.
However, linguistics has no explicit theory of the spatiality of lan-
guage. Instead, we have to infer an implicit theory from metaphors that 
are present both in models of the language system and in the practices 
of the language professions. This implicit theory also has its correlates 
in everyday experience. We confront our own languages as objects that 
are so internally complex as to be beyond everyday understanding. We 
look to experts to tell us how to use language grammatically, while the 
task of second language learning is often construed as one of penetrating 
and absorbing the inner mysteries of some alien object in the space of the 
world.
A minority of linguists see language differently, as something that is 
integrated with and follows the contours of the world (e.g. Harris, 1990; 
Larsen-Freeman & Cameron, 2008; Pennycook, 2018; Thibault, 2011). 
In the following chapters, I will develop a version of this integrated view 
around the notion of language learning environments. In this chapter, 
however, I want to explore the mainstream view of the spatiality of lan-
guage. This is a view with deep historical roots, and for this reason I take 

﻿Linguistics and the Spatiality of Language  39
a historical approach, beginning with a brief consideration of how the 
production of language as an object-in-space is tied in with the produc-
tion of the disciplinary spaces of the social sciences from which linguistics 
has emerged.
The Production of Disciplinary Space
Linguistics is the study of language or, more accurately, the study of 
languages in order to develop theories of language. But if we travel back 
in time, we reach a point around the beginning of the 17th century where 
there was little or no theorisation of language, only the study of languages 
for the practical purposes of foreign language teaching and translation. 
A history of the spatiality of language needs to explain, then, how the 
practical study of languages became the study of an abstract theoretical 
object, language. And because the object language was not already there, 
waiting to be studied, it also needs to explain both the production of 
language as an abstract object and the production of a disciplinary space 
in which this object became a focus of study. Moreover, the history of 
linguistics shares this problem with the history of the wider field of social 
sciences, which is not so much a history of the division of an existing field 
into discrete sub-fields, but more a history of the production of objects of 
inquiry within emerging realms of disciplinary space.
Disciplinary space is a classificatory space of objects and fields of 
inquiry. In the 17th century, it also became a space of abstraction in 
which the idea of thing began to stand in for the thing itself. In 1687, 
Isaac Newton (1962) came up with a theory of mechanics in which the 
abstract idea of space became space itself. It was also around this time 
that the idea of language began its journey into objecthood. By the 21st 
century, the social sciences had emerged as a comprehensive space of 
‘concrete abstractions’ (Lefebvre, 1976), a space in which we might talk 
about, for example, the relationship between language and society as if 
we could hold language in one hand and society in the other. Organised 
around concrete abstractions of these kinds, disciplinary spaces are 
spaces in which ideational objects are produced and circulated. In De 
Certeau’s (1984: 38) terms, a disciplinary space is a lieu propre, a place 
of power, in which there is ‘an elaboration of theoretical places (systems 
and totalising discourses)… capable of articulating an ensemble of physi-
cal places in which forces are distributed’.
In Chapter  2, I took the view that space is physical. Here, I want 
to emphasise that disciplinary spaces are also physical spaces that are 
typically distributed across academic institutions and a host of allied 
professional and industrial facilities. As such, disciplinary spaces are not 
ivory towers, but globally distributed sites of concrete academic, profes-
sional and industrial labour. At these sites, ideational objects and spaces 
of inquiry are mutually constitutive. Disciplinary spaces form around 

40  Language Learning Environments﻿
ideational objects, as linguistics has formed around the idea of language, 
but they also produce their objects of inquiry, both as abstract ideas and 
as concrete objects in the world.
For Lefebvre (1991: 129), the social relations of production of an era 
‘project themselves into space’, and in the process they produce space 
itself. The capitalist mode of production separated out three fields of 
space: the space of social practice (‘social space’), the space of sensory 
phenomena (‘physical space’) and logico-epistemological space (‘mental 
space’) (Lefebvre, 1991: 11–12). Historically, the separation of mental 
space from social and physical space begins with the division of mental 
and material labour, which Marx and Engels (1970) connected to the sep-
aration of town and country. This was a prolonged process that began, 
perhaps, with the 12th-century figure of ‘the professional, town-dwelling 
scholar who, though usually a cleric, yet devoted the substance of his 
life to writing and teaching’ (Panofsky, 1957: 25). By the 17th century, 
the urban universities of Europe, and in some cases its monasteries, had 
become sequestered spaces – ‘heterotopias’ (Foucault, 1986) – in which 
abstract thinking could run free. It was at the University of Cambridge, 
for example, that Newton came up with the secular idea of an abstract 
empty space in the late 17th century. Earlier in the century, the monastery 
at Port-Royal-des-Champs, near Paris, provided a similar space for the 
emergence of an abstract conception of language, although it was not 
until the early 20th century that language reached the level of abstraction 
of Newton’s empty space.
The Renaissance university was a point of departure both for the mul-
tilayered educational systems of the present day and an ever-increasing 
array of disciplines, sub-disciplines and areas of study. It was also a point 
of departure for the gathering of professional and industrial practices 
around academic spaces and their objects of inquiry. Around the object 
language, for example, we now have an immense physical apparatus of 
university departments, laboratories, lecture halls, academic associa-
tions, international conferences and academic publishing. We also have 
the various language professions, including dictionary-making, writing 
of grammars and style guides, editing, translation and language teaching, 
and the industrial production of the texts that these professions generate. 
Of equal importance to the disciplinary space of modern linguistics are 
the networks that connect the parts of this apparatus to each other on a 
global scale. In other words, we need to understand the emergence of the 
idea of language as a process that is fully integrated with the production 
of space under capitalism and globalisation.
The disciplinary spaces of the social sciences emerged in the 19th 
century in conjunction with the overthrow or decline of western Euro-
pean monarchies, the rise of democracy and social consensus, and the 
expansion of the colonised world. At the same time, Darwin’s evolution-
ary theory aligned inquiry into human affairs with the natural sciences 

﻿Linguistics and the Spatiality of Language  41
as individual and collective life became an object of empirical, as well 
as philosophical, interest. Key to the scientific treatment of the human 
world was the rooting out of objects of social inquiry from their embed-
ding in the space of the world. As De Certeau (1984) puts it, the constitu-
tion of a scientific space requires the transfer of objects of study into the 
space and the leaving behind of others. ‘Only what can be transported 
can be treated’, he argues, and ‘what cannot be uprooted remains by 
definition outside the field of research’ (De Certeau, 1984: 20). By the 
turn of the 20th century, language, society, culture and the mind had 
each been successfully abstracted from the realities of social life, and each 
would become firmly established as a self-contained systemic object at 
the centre of its own disciplinary space: linguistics, sociology, ethnogra-
phy/anthropology and psychology. From the mid-20th century onwards, 
two new trends emerged in the social sciences: interdisciplinarity and the 
proliferation of sub-disciplines.
Although linguistics abstracted language from the world, many 
linguists insist that it can only be understood in the context of society, 
culture or the mind. This has led to the emergence of what might be 
called the ‘interdisciplines’ of sociolinguistics, anthropological linguis-
tics and psycholinguistics. More recently, computational linguistics and 
neurolinguistics have built bridges to the applied and natural sciences. 
Yet, this interdisciplinarity often misses the point that the objects that 
are combined have already been separated out from the world. Socio-
linguistics, for example, brings together two well-established objects of 
inquiry, language and society. Yet, it has failed to produce its own third 
object of inquiry, say ‘language-in-society’, and as a result it always falls 
back into either linguistics or sociology. In this context, Lefebvre (1991: 
335) refers to ‘laboured interdisciplinary or multidisciplinary montages 
which never manage to fit any of the pieces back together’. Although this 
is a rather jaundiced view of interdisciplinary endeavour, it highlights 
how difficult it is to integrate the ideational objects of the social sciences 
to the point where they collapse into one another. Above all, it is their 
self-containment – their internal systems, structures and networks – that 
holds the external boundaries of these objects firm. The object of inquiry 
of sociolinguistics can only be the relationship between the object lan-
guage and the object society, because the language system is of a quite 
different order to the social system.
The proliferation of sub-disciplinary spaces is related to what Lefe-
bvre (1991: 86) called the ‘pulverisation’ of space, or its reduction to 
smaller and smaller volumes. Lefebvre was thinking of the pulverisa-
tion of urban space, but he also noticed the same tendency in social 
life, which is broken down into sectors – the transportation system, the 
school system, the money market, the banking system and so on – each 
subject to its own regime of expertise. Step by step, Lefebvre (1991: 
311) suggests, ‘society in its entirety is reduced to an endless parade of 

42  Language Learning Environments﻿
systems and subsystems, and any social object whatsoever can pass for 
a coherent entity’. In the disciplinary space of linguistics, language has 
fragmented into a set of interconnected subsystems, each a relatively 
self-contained object of inquiry for sub-disciplines such as phonetics, 
morphology, semantics, grammar and pragmatics. A phonetician might 
be an expert in articulatory, acoustic or auditory phonetics, which would 
be quite different to being an expert in phonology or speech perception. 
Linguistics is also fragmented into schools of thought, which no longer 
succeed each other in historical time, but continue to coexist side by side 
in disciplinary space. Language now has as many grammars as there are 
schools of thought on the matter of grammar. Structuralism, generativ-
ism and functionalism are, perhaps, the three major 20th-century schools 
of linguistics, but there are hundreds of variations on these three themes, 
each occupying its own micro-space within the disciplinary space of 
linguistics.
Ultimately, fragmentation lends heterogeneity and a lack of coher-
ence to disciplinary spaces. There is a political logic to the unity of a dis-
cipline such as linguistics. Members of university linguistics departments 
typically self-identify as people who study ‘language’, an object large 
enough to sustain the physical apparatus of a university department. But 
linguists also affiliate to sub-disciplines beyond their departments, so that 
there are often as many sub-disciplines within a linguistics department as 
there are faculty members. Sub-disciplines organise themselves through 
scholarly associations, conferences and academic journals, leading to 
the production of cross-institutional spaces. In this sense, disciplinary 
spaces are never systematically organised. There is often the principle of 
a system, but in place of an actual system, we typically find a patchwork 
with more than a few loose threads. There is both a centripetal tendency 
for disciplinary spaces to establish their lieux propres, and a centrifugal 
tendency to subdivide and form webs of interdisciplinary connections 
that ensure that no disciplinary space is ever entirely isolated from its 
neighbours. Like the contemporary city, disciplinary space could aptly 
be described as ‘an amalgam of often disjointed processes’ with ‘no com-
pleteness, no centre, no fixed parts’ (Amin & Thrift, 2002: 8).
A Brief History of the Spatiality of Language
From languages to language
I have suggested that a history of the spatiality of language will need 
to explain how practical inquiry into languages became, from the 17th 
century onwards, theoretical inquiry into the abstract object language, 
and how this transition interacted with the emergence of the disciplinary 
space of modern linguistics. My version of this history will involve three 
distinct phases: 17th- and 18th-century grammar, 19th-century compara-
tive philology and 20th-century linguistics. As a full history is beyond 

﻿Linguistics and the Spatiality of Language  43
the scope of this book, I will examine these phases through a selective 
reading of three representative texts: the Port-Royal Grammar of 1660 
(Arnauld & Lancelot, 1780), Müller’s (1864) 1863 Lectures on the Science 
of Language and Saussure’s (1983) Course in General Linguistics, first 
published in 1916.
Writing in the mid-17th century, the English poet John Milton (1644: 
np) declared, in a treatise on education, that language was an ‘instru-
ment convaying to us things usefull to be known’. In the context of its 
times this was a radical idea. Indeed, Milton’s is the earliest citation for 
the word ‘language’ in the Oxford English Dictionary to view language 
as a means of communicating ideas. In earlier centuries, language seems 
to have meant either the use of words in speech or writing, or a specific 
language such as English or French. From the 17th century onwards, it 
becomes commonplace to refer to language, in the manner of Milton, as 
an object to be contemplated independently of its embedding in speech, 
writing or a specific language. Language becomes, in effect, something 
more than what it is – words, speech or the collection of words that 
makes a particular language. In addition, it becomes a means to the end 
of expressing and communicating thought. Milton’s words thus prefig-
ure an important theme of the European Enlightenment: the relationship 
between language and thought, which each became more abstract and 
more object-like as time went by.
Four centuries later, Lightfoot (2006: 3), a linguist in the Chomskyan 
tradition, suggested that if one were to ask how many languages there 
are, a plausible answer would be one, ‘the human language’. From this 
perspective, ‘language’ is not just a word that we apply to the collectiv-
ity of languages; it is a distinct, ultimately definable, object in the world. 
However, this is to take several more steps along the road of spatialising 
language than Milton and his contemporaries were yet ready to take. The 
main problem for a history of the spatiality of language then, is to trace 
a path from Milton to Lightfoot. Milton abstracts the idea of language 
from the concrete specificity of languages and their use, but not to the 
degree of asserting the identity of language as a distinct object in the 
world. We begin, then, in the 17th century in an era in which the shape 
of the object language could be vaguely discerned, but was yet to fully 
emerge in its present-day form.
The Port-Royal Grammar
By Milton’s time, inquiry into languages had already produced two 
important tools for the spatialisation of language: the dictionary and 
the grammar. I will return to the significance of these tools later in this 
chapter. For the present, I want to note that languages already possessed 
a certain spatiality, which 17th-century grammarians took as their start-
ing point for a more general inquiry into what languages had in common. 

44  Language Learning Environments﻿
At this point in history, a language such as English or French was, essen-
tially, a collection of words, which could be grouped into word classes. 
Words could be decomposed into the sounds of a language, and there 
were known rules governing how the sounds and words of a language 
could be put together. Lastly, it was known that the major languages of 
Europe, including Latin and ancient Greek, were similar in these respects. 
The significance of the Port-Royal Grammar lay in the way it connected 
the spatiality of language to the spatiality of thought.
The Port-Royal Grammar was the product of a unique collaboration 
between a grammarian, Claude Lancelot, and a philosopher, Antoine 
Arnauld, who also co-authored a companion work, the Port-Royal Logic 
(Arnauld & Nicole, 1662). Lancelot had already published pedagogical 
grammars on Latin, Greek, Italian and Spanish, and Arnauld helped him 
to connect his observations on the similarities and differences among 
these languages to the work of the philosopher René Descartes. In a tract 
published in 1637, Descartes (1850: 97) observed that the use of ‘words or 
other signs’ to express thoughts was a characteristic of all men, no matter 
how ‘dull and stupid’ (Descartes, 1850: 98). This use of words to make 
thought understood (note that Descartes says ‘words’, not ‘language’) 
was, thus, evidence of a uniquely human ‘reason’. It was also evidence of 
the hand of God, who had endowed humanity alone with reason. Des-
cartes (1850: 100) was a materialist, but not in his belief in God or in the 
matter of ‘the Reasonable Soul’, which, he asserted, ‘must be expressly 
created’.
The Port-Royal Grammar elaborated on this relation between lan-
guage and reason with numerous examples of the rational basis of lan-
guage forms. Grammar, the authors explained, was the art of speaking, 
and to speak was to explain one’s thoughts using signs invented by men. 
A language was thus a ‘marvellous invention’ designed to make an infinite 
number of words using a small number of sounds (Arnauld & Lancelot, 
1780: 64). But because words had only been invented to make thought 
known, one could not understand grammar without first understanding 
thought. The Port-Royal Grammar was a ‘general grammar’, because it 
was based on commonalities among several languages. That the Port-
Royal Grammar turned out to be a grammar of French (with a sprinkling 
of examples from Latin) reflects, perhaps, a failure of this attempt to build 
generality upon comparison. However, it is the thought that counts, and 
in the case of the Port-Royal Grammar quite literally so. For Lancelot 
and Arnauld, commonalities among languages could only be explained 
by an underlying universality of thought, or reason, itself. The Port-Royal 
Grammar was thus ‘raisonnée’ in a double sense; it explained grammar 
rationally, and the explanation lay in the reasoning mind.
Chomsky (1966) looked back to Descartes and the Port-Royal 
Grammar as sources for his own conception of language as an object of 
mind. But it should not be thought that this was an isolated current in 

﻿Linguistics and the Spatiality of Language  45
17th-century intellectual thought. We have to consider, instead, the emer-
gence of new ways of thinking about languages that could make possible 
a statement by a writer such as Milton (who is unlikely to have read 
Descartes in 1644), where it had not been possible before. Why should 
Milton be able to see what his predecessors had, apparently, not seen: 
that language was a means of conveying ideas? Arguably, this has much 
to do with the growing division between mental and material labour at 
the time, as well as a certain secularisation of intellectual life that would 
soon transform the infinite space of God into the absolute empty space 
of Newtonian physics.
For early 17th-century Europeans, language was a gift of God that 
had been spurned by the builders of the Tower of Babel. For many schol-
ars, it would remain so into the 19th century. In this sense, language was 
not a ‘means’ of doing anything at all. Milton and Descartes were, thus, 
making a radical claim, and to make such a claim was to set up a pro-
ductive tension between theological and secular thought. The Port-Royal 
Grammar’s almost secular view of language as a ‘marvellous invention’ 
was reconciled with its theology in the belief that language was the 
product of a God-given reason. If reason were a gift of God, then lan-
guage might be an invention of humans. That the relationship between 
language and thought should become a theme of the Enlightenment also 
had much to do with the rise of vernacular languages and the decline of 
Latin and Greek. Descartes chose to write in French, rather than Latin, 
because he believed that natural reason was best expressed in the native 
tongue. ‘Those who make use of their unprejudiced natural Reason’, he 
wrote, ‘will be better judges of my opinions than those who give heed 
to the writings of the ancients only’ (Descartes, 1850: 117–118). But for 
later philosophers, including John Locke and Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz, 
vernacular languages were poor vehicles for the expression of rational 
thought and stood in need of improvement.
So important did the relationship between language and thought 
become, that Locke (1690) devoted one of the four books of his Essay 
Concerning Human Understanding to it. Although Locke and Leibniz 
agreed that language was bound up with rational thought, Locke took 
the view, against Descartes, that the mind was a tabula rasa (a philo-
sophical counterpart to Newton’s empty space) and that all knowledge 
was derived from experience. In a work completed in 1704, but not pub-
lished until 50 years later, Leibniz (1896) refuted Locke’s Essay chapter by 
chapter. He reasserted the innateness of reason, and in doing so provided 
Chomsky with the metaphor of language as ‘mirror of mind’. Leibniz and 
Locke agreed, however, on the all-important problem of the imperfection 
of language as a vehicle for complex, abstract ideas, a pressing problem 
for the emerging scientific and political discourses of the time.
For Locke (1690), the imperfection of language was demonstrated 
by the comparison of equivalent words in different languages, which, he 

46  Language Learning Environments﻿
pointed out, rarely stood for the same precise idea. Leibniz also thought 
that language often made reasoning obscure. This view was widespread 
and led to a new prescriptive style in the writing of dictionaries and gram-
mars. Concern about the imperfection of vernacular languages also led 
to proposals for artificial languages (Eco, 1995; Lewis, 2012). Wilkins’ 
(1668) universal language, based on a division of the universe into 40 
categories, subdivided according to type, was an early example of an arti-
ficial language based on rational thought and designed for cross-lingual 
use. Leibniz also proposed an artificial symbolic language in which all 
human concepts would be perfectly represented, based on the principle 
that complex ideas were derived from and reducible to combinations of 
simpler concepts (Kulstad & Carlin, 2013).
In the context of fears for the adequacy of language as a vehicle for 
rational discourse, linguistic inquiry reached an unprecedented level of 
intensity in the 18th century. As a result, language began to emerge as 
a concrete abstraction with a distinct exterior and interior. European 
languages, at least, had enough in common to be examples of a single 
general object, which was increasingly called ‘language’. On the out-
side, language interfaced with thought. Closely related as language and 
thought were, the fact that there were many languages but only one 
reason demonstrated the boundary between them. By the end of the 18th 
century, the basic internal patterns of language, with its inventories of 
sounds, words, word classes and patterns of sentence formation, were 
also reasonably clear. Yet, the tight relationship of these patterns to the 
patterns of rational thought, not to mention the lack of an explanation 
for the irrational aspect of natural languages, meant that language could 
not yet emerge as a fully formed object in its own right.
Bouzée’s (1767) Grammaire Générale came close to resolving the 
problem of the irrationality of natural language by making an explicit 
distinction between language (‘langage’) and languages (‘langues’). For 
Bouzée, language was subject to an immutable and universal ‘general 
grammar’ that belonged to the nature of reason itself. Languages, on 
the other hand, were subject to ‘particular grammars’; they depended 
on arbitrary and mutable conventions that gave birth to the different 
languages of the world. From this point of view, natural language was 
not so much an imperfect mirror of mind, as a two-sided entity with an 
interior, pointed towards an inner regulatory reason, and an exterior, 
pointed towards an outer world of arbitrary and ever-changing conven-
tions. A language such as French was, thus, a product of the interaction 
between its general and particular grammars, or its inner rationality 
and its exterior environment. This view of the spatiality of language 
prefigures the secular notion of the self-contained language system and 
its environment by more than a century. It was also separated from it by 
the radical changes in the nature of linguistic inquiry that took place in 
the 19th century.

﻿Linguistics and the Spatiality of Language  47
Comparative philology and the science of language
It is in Saussure’s (1983) Course in General Linguistics, published in 
1916, that language first emerges, under the name la langue, as a fully 
fledged, self-contained object in the disciplinary space of linguistics. 
Before this, came a quite different kind of inquiry into languages called 
comparative philology. The question to be asked of 19th-century com-
parative philology, then, is what part it played in the transition from 
the object of Bouzée’s general and particular grammars to Saussure’s la 
langue. One interesting feature of the Course in General Linguistics is 
the presentation of Saussure’s ideas as if they articulated an entirely new 
view of language. A brief historical survey at the beginning of the book 
clears the ground by identifying, and dismissing, three phases that the 
study of language had passed through ‘before coming to terms with its 
one and only true object of study’ (Saussure, 1983: 1).
The first phase, called ‘grammar’, is summarily dismissed as a ‘pre-
scriptive discipline, far removed from any concern with impartial obser-
vation’ that ‘offers no scientific or objective approach to a language as 
such’ (Saussure, 1983: 1). The second phase, ‘philology’, is dismissed as 
being concerned with texts, rather than living language, although it is 
acknowledged as having paved the way for the third. The third phase, 
‘comparative philology’, is credited with having discovered that lan-
guages were comparable and that ‘connexions between related languages 
could furnish the data for an autonomous science’ (Saussure, 1983: 
2). Ultimately, however, the comparative philologists failed ‘to define 
exactly what it was they were studying’ (Saussure, 1983). In fact, com-
parative philology did not discover the comparability of languages; com-
parison was fundamental to the work of the grammarians and Bouzée 
(1767) consulted work on 17 different languages. We need to tease out, 
therefore, exactly what the break between comparative philology and 
general grammar entailed, which was, I suggest, Saussure’s production 
of a space that could accommodate the whole of language, in both its 
generality and its particularities.
As we saw in Chapter 2, the 19th century was the era in which histori-
cal explanation came to the fore (Foucault, 1986; Soja, 1989). Language 
study took on a historical character in its concern with relations between 
the languages of the present and the languages of the past. It also took 
on a wider geographical scope as European colonial expansion led to an 
expanded awareness of the diversity of the languages ‘spoken in every 
part of our globe’ (Müller, 1864: 1). A noted oriental scholar, Max Mül-
ler was to become Oxford University’s first professor of comparative 
philology in 1868. Five years earlier, he had delivered a series of popular 
lectures to the Royal Institution of Great Britain in which he made a bold 
bid for the recognition of ‘the science of language’. Decidedly imperial-
ist in its gathering together of a host of languages from every corner of 

48  Language Learning Environments﻿
the earth – from Tahiti to the Caribbean, Greenland to southern Africa, 
and China to the rainforests of Brazil – Müller’s opening lecture was a 
cornucopia of linguistic detail in which no language was left unturned. If 
they did not discover the comparison of languages, the comparative phi-
lologists certainly compared more languages than anyone before them. 
And in its attention to the minutest detail of the most remote languages 
of the world, comparative philology articulated an entirely new outlook 
on language in which rational thought could play no part.
The risk in comparative philology, however, was that the unity of 
language, which had formerly been guaranteed by reason, would be lost 
in this return to the particularities of languages. From a spatial perspec-
tive, therefore, the significance of the historical turn was the renewal of 
this guarantee in the form of a single historical process of divergence. The 
hypothesis that all languages shared a single ancestor led to intense com-
parison of the sounds and morphological composition of words across 
languages, in which particularities of grammar were no longer seen as 
accidental imperfections, but as evidence of an historical space in which 
languages had diverged from a single individual. This was a hypothetical 
space that not only unified the ‘rational’ languages of Europe, but also 
accommodated all of the languages of the world and all of their forms. 
Significantly, it was also a space that belonged to the science of language 
alone, a lieu propre in which language was governed by historical laws 
that were internal to language itself. After Newton, the objective of a sci-
ence was to formulate general laws governing its object of inquiry. The 
formulation of linguistic laws was, thus, crucial to the bid for a ‘science 
of language’, which was in turn crucial to the formation of an autono-
mous disciplinary space around language as an object of inquiry.
At the beginning of his first lecture, Müller painted a remarkable pic-
ture of the new science of language.
[T]he language which we speak, and the languages that are and that have 
been spoken in every part of our globe since the first dawn of human life 
and human thought, supply materials capable of scientific treatment. 
We can collect them, we can classify them, we can reduce them to their 
constituent elements, and deduce from them some of the laws that deter-
mine the origin, govern their growth, necessitate their decay; we can treat 
them, in fact, in exactly the same spirit in which the geologist treats his 
stones and petrifactions – nay, in some respects, the same spirit in which 
the astronomer treats the stars of heaven, or the botanist the flowers of 
the field. (Müller, 1864: 1)
This statement is remarkable both for the way that it places language on 
the same ontological plane as rocks, stars and plants, and for its sense 
of the interiority of language as an object of science. The grammarians 
had lapsed into prescriptivism, because they had sifted the materials of 

﻿Linguistics and the Spatiality of Language  49
language through the sieve of rational thought, discarding the particu-
larities that did not pass through. They failed, in other words, to view 
the materials of language with the objectivity with which a geologist, say, 
views the materials of the earth. Yet, Müller also suggested that the sci-
ence of language needed only the materials that languages provide. The 
laws governing language change have never been formulated systemati-
cally – there are just too many languages to accommodate – nor have they 
led back to a single original language. What was important, however, 
was the emergence of a self-contained space of inquiry, in which lan-
guage was explained by the materials of language itself. Language was 
conceptualised, for the first time, as an object of the same order as the 
self-contained objects of the natural sciences, as an object with its own 
‘materials’ and its own ‘laws’.
Saussure and structuralism
In the Course in General Linguistics, Saussure (1983) offered up a 
new object of inquiry, la langue, for a new discipline, la linguistique. 
Although the Course in General Linguistics may no longer be widely 
read, it is a marker for the birth of modern linguistics. It is also often 
cited as the source of key ideas such as the language ‘system’, the arbi-
trariness of the linguistic sign and the distinction between synchrony and 
diachrony. Most importantly, the Course in General Linguistics offers 
one of the clearest accounts that we have of language as a self-contained 
object-in-space, an object that has been freed from its dependence on 
both reason and history. This object was la langue, and although this 
term is rarely used nowadays, it corresponds very closely to conceptions 
of language in modern linguistics. I will rely on Roy Harris’ excellent 
English translation (Saussure, 1983), but before proceeding further, I 
want to note an issue in the translation of the term la langue that will 
prove important to what follows.
Translators of Saussure must struggle with the problem of finding 
English equivalents for two French words that could both be translated 
as ‘language’: le langage and la langue. In modern usage, le langage cor-
responds to ‘language’ used without a determiner (‘the’, ‘a’, ‘this’, etc.) to 
refer to language in general (a usage that seems to have emerged in Eng-
lish in the 17th century). La langue corresponds to ‘language’ used with 
a determiner to refer to a specific language (e.g. la langue française, the 
French language). This distinction corresponds, more or less, to Bouzée’s 
(1767) use of le langage to refer to the object of general grammar and 
langues as the object of particular grammars. In modern French, also, lin-
guistics is the study of le langage, not la langue (Maingueneau, 2009) and 
to say that linguistics is the study of la langue (‘the language’) would be 
to prompt the question, ‘Quelle langue?’ (‘Which language?’). The point 
is that la langue is used in a non-conventional manner in the Course in 

50  Language Learning Environments﻿
General Linguistics to open up a new disciplinary space around an object 
that could not be grasped by any existing term.
Harris translates the well-known distinction between la langue and 
la parole as a distinction between ‘language’ and ‘speech’. But Saussure’s 
distinction between la langue and le langage is more difficult to pin 
down in English. Harris solved this problem by translating le langage as 
‘language’ and la langue as ‘linguistic structure’. This is problematic for 
two reasons. First, there is no explicit reference in the original French 
text to the ‘structure’ of language. Second, and more important from a 
spatial perspective, ‘linguistic structure’ does not quite capture the sense 
in which Saussure saw la langue as a concrete object in the world.
For Saussure, le langage was not so much language in general as 
language in its entirety, a concept that he inherited from comparative 
philology. Le langage was ‘at the same time physiological, physical and 
psychological’ (Saussure, 1983: 10). An illustrative figure of the ‘speech 
circuit’ (Saussure, 1983: 11) represents the elements of le langage. The fig-
ure shows two human heads facing each other, with lines leading from the 
brain and mouth of each into the ear and brain of the other. The associa-
tion of ‘concepts’ with ‘sound patterns’ (images acoustiques) in the brain 
of the speaker (and the triggering of similar associations in the brain of the 
hearer) is ‘entirely psychological’ (Saussure, 1983: 12). The transmission 
of an impulse from brain to speech organs in the speaker, and from ear 
to brain in the hearer, is physiological, while the transmission of sound 
waves between the two heads is purely physical. In the communities of 
‘individuals linguistically linked in this manner’ (reliées par le langage) 
(Saussure, 1983: 13), we have the space of le langage, a physical space 
of the world. But this space was far too crowded with objects of diverse 
kinds to constitute an autonomous space of linguistics. Saussure was 
concerned, therefore, to tease out the purely psychological aspect of the 
speech circuit as an object that linguistics could call its own. The space of 
la langue was purely psychological, or more properly social-psychological 
because it entailed conventional or collective agreement among a group 
of speakers and hearers on the association of concepts with sound images.
Viewed in this way, la parole is not speech or language-in-use, but 
whatever is left of the speech circuit when la langue has been extracted 
from le langage. As Saussure (1983: 77) put it: ‘Linguistic structure [la 
langue] we take to be language [le langage] minus speech [la parole]’. La 
langue is language conceived as a system of signs; specifically, ‘a gram-
matical system existing potentially in every brain, or more exactly in the 
brains of a group of individuals’ (Saussure, 1983: 13). This grammatical 
system has three important spatial features. First, it is ‘a system in which 
all the elements fit together, and in which the value of any one element 
depends on the simultaneous coexistence of all the others’ (Saussure, 
1983: 113). To think of a sign as no more than an arbitrary combination 
of concept and sound image, he wrote, ‘would be to isolate it from the 

﻿Linguistics and the Spatiality of Language  51
system to which it belongs’ (Saussure, 1983: 112). Second, Saussure (1983: 
15) emphasises that la langue is ‘no less real than speech’. Linguistic signs 
are ‘not abstractions’, they are ‘realities localised in the brain’ (Saussure, 
1983). Third, la langue is a system of differences and oppositions that 
divides up and makes sense of the ‘vague shapeless mass’ of thought 
(Saussure, 1983: 110). Crucially for an autonomous science of language, 
la langue had gained the upper hand over thought. Language no longer 
expressed thought; on the contrary, because la langue organised thought, 
it was thought that expressed language.
Saussure’s unprecedented use of spatial metaphors and analogies 
is one of the most striking features of the Course in General Linguis-
tics. To cite only a few examples (Saussure, 1983: 10, 13, 15), la langue 
is described as an ‘institution’, composed of ‘acoustic images’ that are 
‘stored’ (enmagazinée) in a ‘repository’ (dépôt), or as a ‘fund’ (trésor) 
accumulated by the members of a community who are ‘linked’ by ‘the 
social bond’ of la langue. In contrast to le langage, which is ‘hetero-
geneous’, la langue is ‘homogeneous’ (1983: 14). At the same time, it 
is a ‘complex mechanism’ with ‘workings’ that cannot be intuitively 
grasped (1983: 73). And in a metaphor that Harris’ translation misses, 
la langue is described as a totality of imprints (empreintes) deposited 
in each brain (déposée dans chaque cerveau), which remains beyond 
the conscious control of the depositaries (en dehors de la volonté des 
dépositaires) (1983: 19). The language system is also compared to a 
game of chess (1983: 87), the quincunx design of an orchard (1983: 91) 
and the structure of a building (1983: 122), while the inseparability of 
thought and sound in the sign is illustrated by comparing la langue to 
a sheet of paper with thought on one side and sound on the other. Sev-
eral of Saussure’s metaphors are supported by visual images, includ-
ing diagrams representing the ‘two-sidedness’ of the linguistic sign 
(1983: 67) and the relationship between language (la langue) and the 
speech community (la masse parlante) (1983: 77–78). The difference 
between synchrony and diachrony is illustrated by a cross-section of a 
plant stem (1983: 87), and the division of thought and sound into signs 
is illustrated by a sketch showing how air pressure produces waves 
on the surface of the sea (1983: 156). Saussure also observes a curious 
feature of la langue:
It has no immediately perceptible entities. And yet one cannot doubt 
that they exist, or that the interplay of these units is what constitutes 
linguistic structure [c’est leur jeu qui la constitue]. (Saussure, 1983: 
105)
I would argue that Saussure’s representation of la langue as a spatial 
entity has much to do with the sense he is able to convey that the units of 
la langue really do exist despite all evidence to the contrary.

52  Language Learning Environments﻿
Saussure’s use of spatial metaphors, analogies and images is worth 
noting as a move that was to become characteristic of 20th-century lin-
guistics. As we will see, Chomsky and Halliday both made prodigious use 
of spatial metaphors in their writing. In the quotation at the beginning 
of this chapter, Saussure compares a view of a mountain range from the 
summit of a single peak to the shifting perspective of an observer travel-
ling from one end of the range to the other. Let us note, first of all, that 
the mountain-top view was a popular Romantic conceit of the 19th cen-
tury (Macfarlane, 2003). Note also that, although Saussure uses this con-
ceit to illustrate the difference between synchronic and diachronic views 
of language, it serves well as a contrast between the viewpoint of the sci-
entific linguist, who views language from above, and that of the language 
user, who views it from within. As De Certeau (1984: 36) argues, a place 
of power implies ‘a mastery of place through sight’, a panoptic view in 
which objects can be observed, measured and brought within the scope 
of vision. Visualisation is, in this sense, of the utmost importance to the 
establishment of a disciplinary space; the object of inquiry must be visible 
from ‘above’, as it were, as an object-in-space and its internal spatiality 
must also be open to view.
Saussure’s distinction between synchrony and diachrony is also 
important in this context. La langue was, he argued, both ‘an institution 
in the present and a product of the past’ (Saussure, 1983: 9). However, 
la langue only changes over time as a result of changes in la parole and, 
for this reason, the history of language was a matter for the study of la 
parole. For Saussure (1983: 99), then, linguistics proper was synchronic 
linguistics, or the study of language in the present, by which he meant ‘a 
period of time of varying length, during which the sum total of changes 
occurring is minimal’. By separating la langue from la parole, Saussure 
separated language from time and history and turned it into a space. 
Synchrony is also the key to the relationship between Saussure and his 
predecessors. Saussure (1983: 82) dismissed the grammarians for their 
prescriptivism and reliance on logic, but he praised their ‘strictly syn-
chronic’ programme. He praised the comparative philologists for having 
drawn attention to a new order of historical linguistic phenomena, but 
dismissed their abandonment of synchrony for diachrony. However, Sau-
ssure did not dismiss the historical approach entirely (having himself car-
ried out important work on the history of German). He simply excluded 
it from the autonomous disciplinary space of linguistics, which required a 
purely spatial conception of language to guarantee its autonomy. Viewed 
synchronically, language was now, as Saussure (1983: 11) put it, ‘a self-
contained whole’.
As the main argument of this book is that SLA research should pay 
more attention to space, it might be asked whether Saussure’s spatialisa-
tion of language was not, in fact, a good thing. Saussure’s linguistics had 
a considerable influence on the 20th-century social sciences, where it was 

﻿Linguistics and the Spatiality of Language  53
seen as a source for the various forms of structuralism (see, especially, 
Lévi-Strauss, 1963). And Soja (1989: 18) saw in structuralism ‘one of the 
twentieth-century’s most important avenues for the reassertion of space 
in critical social theory’. Massey (2005), however, disagrees. In a chapter 
entitled ‘The Prison House of Synchrony’, she observes that spatial fram-
ing was a way of ‘containing the temporal’, of holding ‘the world still 
in order to look at it in cross-section’ (Massey, 2005: 36). Though the 
structuralist intention of avoiding translating geography into history was 
a good one, she argues, structuralists ‘rob the objects to which they refer 
of their inherent dynamism’ (Massey, 2005: 38). In this sense, la langue 
flattened out the historical space of comparative philology. The space of 
language became, as it were, a snapshot of a space visualised from above, 
rather than a space that is experienced with all the senses from within. 
More than this, however, the assumption of a synchronic, immobile 
space entailed the idea that language could only be as it is at any given 
moment in time: a closed and completely interlocked system.
Ballard (2016: 13) observes that Saussure is ‘generally regarded as the 
founder of modern linguistics’. This is largely due to his identification of 
la langue, the language system, as the proper object of linguistics. How-
ever, one could also argue that Saussure did little more than identify the 
principle of a language system, leaving the details of its description to his 
successors. With the rise of structuralist linguistics, the idea of a describ-
able internal structure took hold. The Oxford English Dictionary, for 
example, now defines ‘linguistics’ as the ‘scientific study of language and 
its structure’. A language, the dictionary tells us, is a ‘system of communi-
cation… typically consisting of words used within a regular grammatical 
and syntactic structure’. The basic idea of la langue has thus become a 
fact about language itself: structure is an intrinsic property of language. 
To view language as a structure, however, is to view it as a particular 
kind of space. Structured physical objects are not interwoven with each 
other, they do not blend into each other, their parts do not move inde-
pendently of the whole. But in contrast to the physical structure of, say, 
a building or the human body, the structure of a language is a purely 
metaphorical construct. It is an ideational tool that holds an ideational 
object together at the centre of a disciplinary space.
The assumption that language has structure, then, turns language 
into a self-contained object-in-space with its own internal spatiality. In 
this sense, Saussure’s spatialisation of the language system is his most 
abiding contribution to modern linguistics, which now conceptualises 
language in much the same way as he conceptualised la langue. Freed 
from its attachments to rationality and history, language, in the 20th 
century, finally reached the level of concrete abstraction that Newtonian 
empty space had achieved two centuries earlier. It was also, for the first 
time, an autonomous object in a disciplinary space modelled in the image 
of Newtonian space.

54  Language Learning Environments﻿
Twentieth-century linguistics
One way to trace the history of the spatiality of language in modern 
linguistics would be to examine the increasing depth and complexity of 
spatial representations of the language system since Saussure. The name 
‘structuralist’ was applied to linguists who took on the task of mapping 
out phonological, morphological and syntactic structures and their hier-
archical relations (Bloomfield, 1933; Hjelmslev, 1961; Jakobson & Halle, 
1956), although they were not all followers of Saussure. Bloomfield 
(1924, 1936), for example, viewed language as a highly complex behav-
ioural response to stimuli and was critical of Saussure’s idea of la langue. 
Nevertheless, he was designated a ‘structuralist’ for his models of ‘con-
stituent analysis’, which broke sentences down into their grammatical 
components and represented them in the form of inverted tree diagrams. 
Bloomfield’s approach was structural in that it began not from pregiven 
word classes, but from the relations of the components of a sentence to 
the grammar of the sentence as a whole.
Two major schools of linguistics dominated the latter half of the 20th 
century: Chomskyan generativist linguistics and, in a minority capacity, 
a range of functionalist approaches, among which Halliday’s systemic-
functional linguistics (SFL) is probably the best known. Although 
Chomsky (1957) was critical of structuralism, he named his pioneering 
work Syntactic Structures and the distinction between surface and deep 
‘structures’ was central to his early work. Chomsky (1975: 3–4) later 
wrote that ‘by studying language we may discover abstract principles 
that govern its structure and use’. It was on the point of the spatiality of 
language that Lefebvre (1991) took Chomsky to task. By insisting that 
a sentence was not simply a sequence of elements generated from left 
to right, but, instead, a set of levels ordered from high to low, Lefebvre 
argued, Chomsky (1975: 5) postulated ‘a mental space endowed with 
specific properties – with orientations and symmetries’ that ‘completely 
ignores the yawning gap that separates this linguistic mental space from 
that social space wherein language becomes practice’. Halliday (2003: 2), 
on the other hand, tended to avoid the term ‘structure’, but he echoed 
Saussure in describing language as a ‘semiotic system’, or a ‘system by 
which meaning is created and meanings are exchanged’.
One of the main innovations in late 20th-century linguistics, how-
ever, was a shift away from the essentially closed system of Saussure’s la 
langue to more open, generative structures and networks. Chomsky has 
posited a grammar that is capable of generating an infinite number of 
well-formed sentences of infinite lengths, while Halliday (2003: 6) views 
language as a network of systems ‘that makes it possible for a language 
to expand its meaning potential more or less indefinitely’. For Chomsky 
(2006: 62), language is an ‘abstract system underlying behaviour’. While 
Chomsky has persistently sought out the most economical grammar, 

﻿Linguistics and the Spatiality of Language  55
Halliday’s grammar is far from economical, mainly because it incorpo-
rates choices at the level of words. Halliday (2003: 2) describes language 
as a ‘fuzzy’ system, ‘the most complicated semiotic system that we have’: 
‘its own limits are unclear’ and ‘its internal organization is full of inde-
terminacy’. For both Chomsky and Halliday, then, language is much 
less self-contained and internally cohesive than Saussure’s la langue. The 
closed systems of structuralism are increasingly giving way to the open 
systems of the natural and computational sciences.
Yet, Chomsky and Halliday also make liberal use of spatial meta-
phors and analogies to describe language structures, systems and 
networks. Chomskyan linguists have spatialised grammar to an extraor-
dinary degree, beginning with Chomsky’s ‘transformations’, which are 
essentially spatial rearrangements of the grammatical components of 
written sentences, although they are assumed to take place deep within 
the mind. Lantolf (1996: 727) noted a list of terms used by Chomskyan 
linguists, including ‘dominance’, ‘command’, ‘government’, ‘binding’, 
‘subjacency’, ‘barriers’, ‘constraints’, ‘dependency’ and ‘chains’. For 
Lantolf, these were ‘conceptual metaphors of power and control’. They 
are also metaphors of space that illustrate the dependency of modern 
linguistics on spatial representations of language. 
Halliday (2003) is a retrospective overview of his key ideas on lan-
guage titled ‘On the “Architecture” of Human Language’. The inverted 
commas around ‘architecture’ suggest that Halliday did not think that 
language was actually designed in the fashion of a building. Yet, there 
is ample evidence in the article of a highly spatialised lexicogrammar. 
Simple sign systems, Halliday (2003: 5) suggests, can be ‘expanded’ on 
four ‘dimensions’: they can be ‘combined’, ‘uncoupled’, ‘layered’ or ‘net-
worked’. The systems that make up networks of choice are described as 
‘organizational spaces’, and lexical items are described as occupying ‘the 
more delicate regions of one continuous lexicogrammatical space’. The 
evolutionary development from protolanguage to language, in which 
language lost its dependence on the ecosocial environment, is described 
in explicitly spatial terms: ‘a space was created in which meanings could 
be organised in their own terms, as a purely abstract network of inter-
relations’ (Halliday, 2003: 14). In this observation, we have a remarkable 
analogue of the Newtonian conception of space, in which the lexico-
grammar takes the place of absolute empty space and ‘meanings’ take the 
place of physical objects in relative space.
For their followers, Chomsky’s generative linguistics and Halliday’s 
SFL are very different in kind. Yet, both Chomsky and Halliday posit a 
self-contained object, language, with an internally systematic grammar 
(Chomsky) or lexicogrammar (Halliday). For Chomsky, language is an 
object of mind that generates grammatically well-formed sentences. For 
Halliday, who has done more than most linguists to bridge Lefebvre’s 
‘yawning gap’ between mental and social space, grammar emerges from 

56  Language Learning Environments﻿
the use of language resources to express functions essential to social life. 
There is a clear spatial difference here. In Chomsky’s account, language 
leans towards mind, whereas in Halliday’s account it leans towards the 
environment. For Chomsky, grammar is interior to mind (although not 
equivalent to ‘reason’), whereas Hallidayan grammar follows the con-
tours of social communication and practice within contexts of culture 
and situation. In this sense, Chomsky and Halliday point language in 
different directions, with profound consequences for linguistic theory at 
multiple levels. However, they also share a certain common ground.
Halliday (1970: 142) writes that ‘[t]he particular form taken by 
the grammatical system of language is closely related to the social and 
personal needs that language is required to serve’. Referring directly to 
Chomsky’s ideas on language acquisition, he suggests that ‘the very spe-
cific properties of language are not innate, and therefore the child is more 
dependent on his environment… for the successful learning of his mother 
tongue’ (Halliday, 1978: 17). It is worth noting, however, that Halliday 
is concerned here with the ‘particular form’ of the grammatical system 
and the ‘specific properties’ of language. He acknowledges that children 
possess the mental ‘ability to process certain highly abstract types of 
cognitive relation which underlie (among other things) the linguistic 
system’ (Halliday, 1978). Chomsky (1980: 44), on the other hand, writes 
that although it is ‘reasonable to assume that the language faculty… 
develops in the individual along an intrinsically determined course’, it 
also develops ‘under the triggering effect of appropriate social interaction 
and partially shaped by the environment’. The difference between Hal-
liday and Chomsky, in other words, becomes a difference of emphasis. 
Both acknowledge the importance of mind and both acknowledge the 
importance of the social and cultural environment. Importantly, neither 
wishes to dissolve the object, language, into mind or the environment. 
For Chomsky, there is still language and mind. And although Halliday 
(1978: 192) writes that ‘language has had to be taken out of its glass case, 
dusted, and put back in the living environment’, there is still language 
and the environment.
Producing Language as Space
Saussure’s Course in General Linguistics marks both the birth of lan-
guage as a self-contained, internally patterned object and the birth of a 
disciplinary space that would take language, so conceived, as its object of 
inquiry. Saussure was, thus, both the founder of modern linguistics and 
the founder of the modern concept of language. After Saussure, linguists 
went to work on the internal structure of language, consolidating and 
amplifying the space of linguistics as they went about the task. Chomsky 
and Halliday opened up both the internal structure and, to some degree, 
the external borders of language, abandoning structuralism, if not the 

﻿Linguistics and the Spatiality of Language  57
broad idea of structure, in search of more open and more complex sys-
tems or networks. At the same time, linguistics opened up to interdisci-
plinary endeavours in fields such as psycholinguistics and sociolinguistics 
and to a wide variety of perspectives on the internal patterns of language 
and its links to the world beyond. The basic idea of language as a self-
contained object in space was now so firmly established at the centre 
of the disciplinary space of linguistics that such risks could be taken. 
Chomskyan linguistics could even locate a language module inside the 
mind without fear that it would dissolve into the domains of psychol-
ogy that surrounded it. The point is, perhaps, that the social sciences no 
longer needed a Saussure to tell them that language exists independently 
of their own objects of inquiry. Language was now clearly visible in the 
space of the social sciences as the object that linguistics studied. Where a 
certain conception of the spatiality of language once stood as guarantor 
for linguistics, linguistics now stands as guarantor for the spatiality of 
language.
If we find ourselves thinking of language as a kind of planet, inhab-
ited by words and grammatical structures and floating in a solar system 
in which the other planets have names such as mind, society and culture, 
we might blame linguistics. Linguistics certainly bears a significant por-
tion of the responsibility for how we conceptualise language in everyday 
discourse. But linguistics has not acted alone, and in conclusion to this 
chapter, I want to sketch out another history in which linguistics devel-
ops in tandem with a range of professional and industrial practices that 
also have language as their object. The significance of these practices is 
that they do not simply conceptualise language as a self-contained object-
in-space, they physically produce language as such an object. A fuller 
history of the relationship between these practices and the emergence of 
the disciplinary space of linguistics would need to explore practices such 
as language standardisation and translation, the invention and use of 
artificial languages, second language teaching and learning, editing and 
publishing, the production of pedagogical grammars and style manu-
als and the compilation of encyclopaedias, atlases and other reference 
works, especially, dictionaries. This brief sketch focuses on grammars 
and dictionaries, which have historically been the strongest influence on 
theoretical conceptions of language.
Grammars and dictionaries
Coulmas (2013: xi) writes that ‘the very concept of a language, in the 
sense of one language being distinct from another, is indissolubly bound 
up with writing’. To make sense of this statement historically, we need 
to keep in mind that the ‘general grammars’ of the 17th and 18th century 
inherited a rudimentary analytical apparatus from several centuries of 
second language pedagogy (Howatt, 1984; Kelly, 1969). This apparatus 

58  Language Learning Environments﻿
was based on a small number of written languages. Arnauld, the co-
author of the Port-Royal Grammar, had written pedagogical work on 
Latin and Greek, which were mainly known as written languages, and 
the three European languages that had developed significant literatures 
by the mid-1600s: French, Spanish and Italian. The written forms of 
European languages were already undergoing standardisation, especially 
in regard to word choice and spelling, but more important from a spatial 
perspective were the bodies of literary texts that the major languages now 
possessed. Semiotically speaking, French literature stood for the French 
language; it told the world, and French speakers themselves, that French 
existed separately from Spanish and Italian, which were represented by 
their own literatures. More than this, however, the body of French liter-
ary texts, dispersed across the territory of France and beyond its borders, 
represented the objectivity of the French language in physical form. The 
existence of French could hardly be doubted when a book written in 
French could be held in the hand. And before long, the physical body 
of the French language would also incorporate a body of metalinguistic 
texts in which the language described, defined and delimited itself.
In order to understand why the idea of ‘general grammar’ emerged 
in the mid-1600s, we need to look at the state of publishing at the time. 
Although printing presses had been at work across Europe for more than 
100 years, the 17th century witnessed a flowering of the book trade and 
newspaper production, mainly as a consequence of the rise of vernacu-
lar languages, the secularisation of publishing and a relaxation of state 
controls on licensing and freedom of expression. European languages 
were now embodied in vast quantities of published text, raising concerns, 
discussed earlier in this chapter, about the adequacy of natural language 
to discourse in the public sphere. Sixteenth-century dictionaries and 
grammars were mostly bilingual and designed as aids to second language 
learning or translation. Nobody would consult a dictionary or grammar 
in order to learn about their native tongue. But in the 17th century, atten-
tion turned to documentation of the native tongue itself in monolingual 
dictionaries and grammars.
The Italian Accademia della Crusca was established in 1583 and 
published its dictionary of Italian in 1612. The Académie Française 
(established in 1635) published its dictionary in 1687. However, these 
authoritative national dictionaries were only the tip of an iceberg. In 
England, where there was no academy, a series of monolingual diction-
aries were published in the 1600s, beginning as quasi-bilingual texts 
designed to explicate, and sometimes introduce, Latin, Greek and French 
loanwords – so-called ‘inkhorn’ words (Benson, 2001). A number of 
English dictionaries were already in circulation when Samuel Johnson’s 
(1755) authoritative Dictionary of the English Language appeared. By 
this time, dictionaries had taken on a more regulatory role and John-
son’s dictionary, which also incorporated a grammar, was part of a 

﻿Linguistics and the Spatiality of Language  59
wider project to ‘fix’ the English language. Like the dictionaries of the 
European academies, it aimed to distil a purified version of the language 
from the work of the ‘best’ writers of the past, who were liberally cited 
throughout Johnson’s dictionary. In the social project that lay behind 
these authoritative dictionaries, we see the seeds of Saussure’s synchronic 
view of language. For the prescriptivists of the time, European languages 
were falling into decline as a consequence of their more widespread use 
in printed text. The project of standardisation used the spatial forms of 
the dictionary and grammar to hold language still at a point where it was 
deemed to best reflect rational thought. Before long, every national lan-
guage in Europe had an authoritative dictionary – the pinnacle of its body 
of literature and an object that could stand for the language as a whole. 
Like dictionaries, grammars were increasingly produced for native speak-
ers and they also became increasingly prescriptive, imposing a degree of 
homogeneity on the language itself. Importantly, this was achieved as 
much by representation as by prescription.
Space is key to understanding the sense in which dictionaries and 
grammars represent language. If literature, or the collectivity of published 
texts, constitutes the tangible physical form of a language, grammars and 
dictionaries are, in a sense, the essence of this form – metalinguistic works 
in which the language is represented comprehensively but economically 
and in an orderly spatialised fashion. In modern terminology, grammars 
lay out the structure of a language in categorical and classificatory lists 
and tabulations. The dictionary, on the other hand, aspires to represent 
the whole of the language, segmenting it into words and tabulating their 
forms, pronunciations, senses, usages and so on. Although the diction-
ary never succeeds in capturing the whole of a language, it is important 
that it appears to do so. This entails a complex semiotic geometry of 
inclusions, exclusions and markings, as well as networks of word–word 
relations that emerge as words are defined by other words, that are them-
selves defined elsewhere in the dictionary (Béjoint, 1994; Benson, 2001). 
In both the grammar and the dictionary, the language is represented 
geometrically; arranged within, and at times forced into, the cells of a 
reticulated empty space. The spatial forms of the grammar and diction-
ary thus become the spatial forms of the language. Long before Saussure, 
the dictionary and grammar were producing language as a self-contained 
systemic object in space.
Discussing the ‘invention of monolingualism’ in Europe, Gramling 
(2016) points to the way in which language standardisation rendered 
European languages mutually translatable. Languages were standardised 
on the assumption that any word or sentence in any language could be 
readily translated into a word or sentence in any other language without 
loss of meaning. If this assumption did not hold, then language needed 
to be changed. For Gramling, monolingualism is not so much the condi-
tion of knowing only one language as the principle, which emerged over 

60  Language Learning Environments﻿
several centuries of standardisation and translation, that anything can 
be said in any language and, therefore, one really does not need to know 
more than one language. This is, perhaps, the principle that underpins 
Lightfoot’s (2006) view that there is only one language, the human lan-
guage. We all speak this one language, we just use different words. Gram-
mars and dictionaries played a crucial role in language standardisation 
and we can readily see what they contributed to Gramling’s principle of 
translatability. They did not only stand for the languages they described, 
but they also furnished spatial templates into which any language could 
fit or, perhaps, be forced. The grammar and the dictionary thus became 
spatial representations of the idea of a standard language, and all the 
more so as their production was industrialised with all the implications 
of standardisation that industrial production entails.
Standardisation and modern linguistics
Saussure levelled the playing field of language variety. From the per-
spective of la langue there were no hierarchies of language or language 
variety; every variety was a language system. But this modern egalitarian 
view obscures the history of language standardisation and its formative 
influence on modern linguistics. For the British linguist Wyld (1907: 357), 
standard English was ‘the channel of all that is worthiest in the national 
literature and the national civilisation’. It had an ‘absolute superiority 
over any of the dialects’ (Wyld, 1907), because it had been refined over 
two centuries of standardisation. Wyld’s view can now be dismissed 
as an elitist view, but we can nevertheless acknowledge that standard 
languages are not simply fished out of the sea of dialects and language 
varieties. A dialect is selected, but it is then produced as a standard lan-
guage. Moreover, the work that goes into the production of the standard 
is spatial work. In Chapter 2, I argued that the Newtonian conception 
of space is not just an idea. Under the capitalist mode of production, 
space is produced in the image of the Newtonian conception. This is 
equally true of the production of language. The word ‘standard’ implies 
measurement; standard languages are, thus, measurable entities that fit 
within the geometries of the grammar and the dictionary. They also have 
a homogeneity that conforms to the mathematical logic of general gram-
mar and stands opposed to the heterogeneity of non-standard languages. 
By a ‘non-standard’ language, here, I mean a language that has not been 
subjected to standardisation, not a language that is somehow inferior 
to standard language. Crucially, however, grammars and dictionaries 
represent standard language as if it were language itself. In doing so, 
they furnish evidence that language ‘possesses’ a system or structure 
that allows it to be accommodated within the spatial framework of the 
grammar or dictionary. As a result, ‘non-standard’ languages seem to be 
inferior, because they lack the system or structure that is assumed to be 
inherent to language itself.

﻿Linguistics and the Spatiality of Language  61
Ballard (2016: 29) observes that, ‘[o]ur feeling that language 
“exists” is perhaps reinforced by the evidence of specific languages hav-
ing been embodied, so to speak, in dictionaries and grammar books’. 
Everyday conceptions of language are shaped as much by our experi-
ence of authoritative representations of our languages as they are by 
direct experience of language use. We also learn to mistrust our own 
use of language and to measure it against the language of the grammar 
and dictionary. Is it possible that this is also true of modern linguis-
tics? There is certainly some evidence that Saussure put the cart of la 
langue before the horse of la parole. One of Saussure’s great influences 
was the American comparative philologist William Dwight Whitney 
(1875). Whitney was also a dictionary editor and he made the following 
observation:
No one can define in the proper sense of that term, a language; for it is 
a great concrete institution, a body of usages prevailing in a particular 
community, and it can only be shown and described. You have it in its 
dictionary, you have it in its grammar… (Whitney, 1875: 157)
For Whitney, the grammar and the dictionary were the closest that one 
could come to a definition of a language, which begs the question of 
how one could define a language that has no grammar or dictionary. 
Among his many spatial analogies, Saussure also compared la langue to 
a dictionary:
A language (la langue) as a collective phenomenon, takes the form of a 
totality of imprints in everyone’s brain, rather like a dictionary of which 
each individual has an identical copy. (Saussure, 1983: 19)
This observation provides an answer of a kind to my question. One could 
define a language that had no grammar or dictionary, perhaps, by writing 
a grammar and dictionary for it. In fact, this is what many 20th-century 
linguists did, giving all kinds of languages spatial form by providing them 
with a writing system and a certain representation of the standard. To 
get back to the point, however, there is more than a hint in Saussure’s 
comment that the synchrony of la langue is, in effect, the synchrony of 
language as it is ‘fixed’ in the dictionary. At the very least, the orderly 
spatial representations of languages that appear in dictionaries suggest 
the idea of a synchronous language system. And, of course, by the end 
of the 19th century most educated Europeans actually did possess a dic-
tionary of their native language, if not in their brains, at least in their  
homes.
The establishment of the disciplinary space of linguistics in the 20th 
century led to a reordering of the hierarchies of theory and practice. 
Although we now assume that theoretical linguistics informs the lan-
guage professions, this was by no means always the case. In this context, 

62  Language Learning Environments﻿
Saussure made a second interesting comparison between la langue and 
the dictionary or grammar.
Our ability to identify elements of linguistic structure (la langue) in this 
way is what makes it possible for dictionaries and grammars to give us a 
faithful representation of a language. A language is a repository of sound 
patterns and writing is their tangible form. (Saussure, 1983: 15)
This comment raises the old chicken or egg question. Which comes first, 
the language system or systematic representations of language in meta-
linguistic texts? Here, Saussure seems to suggest that the dictionary and 
grammar express the inner spatiality of la langue. Yet, this is surely an 
error to the extent that it ignores the prolonged history of language stan-
dardisation, in which European languages were forced, often uncomfort-
ably, into the spatial frameworks of dictionaries and grammars. There is, 
in other words, a certain sleight of hand involved in the claim of modern 
linguistics that all language varieties are equal. Without the spatialisa-
tion of language involved in standardisation, modern linguistics might 
not exist at all.
Modern linguistics has moved on from straightforward analogies 
between the spatiality of language and the spatiality of the grammar and 
dictionary. Nevertheless, in a current widely used introductory textbook 
on Linguistics, Fromkin et al. (2018: 11) can still write: ‘The grammar, 
together with a mental dictionary that lists the words of the language, 
represents our linguistic competence’. Linguists such as Chomsky and 
Halliday, on the other hand, now see language less as a reflection of 
its representation in grammars and dictionaries, and more as an open 
system that is capable of generating an infinite expanse of sentences or 
meanings. In this, they make an analogy with computer systems and their 
capacity to generate vast quantities of information from a limited set of 
instructions. Chomsky and Halliday both worked with computational 
linguistics and their spatial metaphors are often drawn from that field. 
To paraphrase Saussure, language is no longer like a dictionary, but more 
like a computer program installed in everyone’s brain. The problem for 
linguistics is to work out how the program works. In our everyday lives, 
we also see computer programs processing, generating and translating 
almost inconceivable quantities of text on the internet. Digital represen-
tation is producing language as a new kind of object in the world, and 
this object will undoubtedly have its impact on conceptions of language 
within the disciplinary space of linguistics.
Conclusion
The main argument of this book is that SLA should pay attention 
to the where of language learning; it should take space more seriously 

﻿Linguistics and the Spatiality of Language  63
than it does at present. What I hope to have shown in this chapter is that 
this means challenging and finding alternatives to the implicit theory 
of the spatiality of language that already underpins SLA research and 
practice. The problem that I have identified in modern linguistics is not 
that it neglects space – linguistics is awash with spatial metaphors and 
analogies. Rather, linguistics spatialises language without explicitly 
acknowledging that it does so and without reference to spatial theory. I 
have suggested that linguistics is underpinned by a Newtonian objects-in-
space view of the world. But it is more important, perhaps, to identify the 
particular form in which this conception is applied to language.
Language is not a physical object in motion in empty space, but lin-
guistics conceptualises language as if it were such an object. What exactly 
does this mean from an object-as-space perspective? First, linguistics 
defines language as what it is not – language is not society, culture, mind 
and so on. But what this really means is that language is ideationally 
produced as the self-contained object of a vast physical disciplinary and 
professional apparatus – what I have called the disciplinary space of lin-
guistics. Second, language is conceptualised as an internally structured 
space – a space sui generis that contains and organises a content of its 
own. And once again, there is the production of a physical space – the 
professional and industrial production of representations of standard 
languages as spatially structured objects.
Although I have not dealt directly with SLA in this chapter, it will 
be clear that SLA draws its basic conception of language from modern 
linguistics. Moreover, linguistics spatialises language by spatialising 
languages, and as it does so it makes them available to be learned as sec-
ond languages. Historically, these are three aspects of a single process, 
although it is worth noting that second language learning seems to have 
driven the process up to the 17th century. One of the consequences of 
this is that second language learners tend to confront the languages they 
learn as self-contained objects in space, and often as neatly organised 
standardised objects, packaged in textbooks, learners’ dictionaries and 
grammars, and other language learning materials. From the next chapter 
onwards, my task is to elaborate an alternative to the objects-in-space 
perspective on the spatiality of language: an ‘objects-as-space’ or ‘envi-
ronmental’ perspective that might serve as a basis for a different view of 
what second language learning entails. In the next chapter, I begin the 
task by exploring the sense in which language becomes physical and is 
set on the move. 

Figure 4.1  A multilingual language-bearing assemblage in motion, Kennedy Town, 
Hong Kong (Source: Author’s photograph)

