Holy Bits 
•"Ns. 
Mil y>? 

Bible in Technology 
3 
Series Editor 
Keith H. Reeves 
The Bible in Technology (BIT) is a series that explores 
intersection between biblical studies and computer technology. 

Holy Bits 
A Guide for Using Computers in Biblical 
Scholarship 
Thomas Naef 
1 
gorgias press 
2009 

Gorgias Press LLC, 180 Centennial Ave., Piscataway, NJ, 08854, USA 
www.gorgiaspress.com 
Copyright © 2009 by Thomas Naef. 
All rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright 
Conventions. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a 
retrieval system or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, 
mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning or otherwise without the 
prior written permission of Gorgias Press LLC. 
ISBN 978-1-60724-327-4 
ISSN 1943-9369 
Printed in the United States of America 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Table of Contents 
v 
Preface 
xi 
Acknowledgments 
xiii 
Abbreviations 
xv 
Introduction 
1 
1 
Hardware 
5 
Components and peripherals 
5 
Processor 
5 
Main memory 
6 
Monitor / Screen (VDU) 
6 
Printer 
6 
Input devices 
6 
Data storage 
7 
Links 
8 
2 
Operating Systems 
9 
Windows 
10 
Macintosh OS (MacOS) 
10 
Linux 
10 
Organizing the computer 
10 
Organization 
11 
File names 
11 
Links 
11 
3 
Standards 
13 
Standardization 
14 
Text documents 
14 
Characters 
16 
Keyboards 
18 
Converters 
19 
Links 
20 
v 

VI 
HOLY BITS 
4 
Security 
23 
Password 
23 
Creating strong passwords 
24 
Memorizing passwords 
24 
Online security 
25 
Physical security 
26 
Links 
27 
5 
Text: processors and editors 
29 
Office packages 
29 
Word processing software 
30 
Word processors 
31 
Biblical scholars' special needs 
31 
Text editing software 
34 
DocBook 
35 
Links 
41 
6 
Presentations 
43 
Basic needs 
43 
Preparation 
44 
Structure 
45 
Creating slides 
47 
Presentation software 
47 
Use of slides 
47 
Layout of slides 
48 
Typography of slides 
49 
Non-Latin characters 
50 
Links 
50 
7 
Bibliographical Software 
53 
Free bibliographical software 
55 
Zotero 
55 
JabRef 
56 
OO Writer 
56 
Bibus 
56 
Citavi Free 
56 
DocBook 
57 
BibDesk 
57 
BiblioExpress 
57 
Proprietary bibliographical software 
58 
EndNote 
58 
ReferenceManager 
58 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 
vii 
Biblioscape 
58 
BookEnds 
58 
Bibliographix 
58 
Conclusion 
59 
Links 
60 
8 
Bible Software 
61 
Proprietary Bible Software 
62 
BibleWorks 
62 
Logos Bible Software 
66 
Stuttgart Electronic Study Bible (SESB) 
67 
Dead Sea Scrolls Electronic Library (DSSEL 2006) 
68 
Accordance 
69 
Free Bible Software 
71 
Links 
71 
9 
Other Utilities 
73 
Graphics 
73 
Internet 
73 
Browsers 
73 
E-mail clients 
74 
File Transfer 
75 
Creating HTML pages 
75 
AntiVirus software 
76 
Network utilities 
76 
Document utilities 
77 
Compression applications 
77 
PDF applications 
77 
Diverse utilities 
79 
MindMap 
79 
Links 
79 
10 
Online (extra)Biblical Texts 
83 
General Bible portals 
83 
Bible Portals 
83 
Bible Manuscripts and Online Editions 
83 
Codex Sinaiticus 
83 
Hebrew Bible/Old Testament 
84 
New Testament 
85 
Ancient Literature 
85 
Links 
87 

VLLL 
HOLY BITS 
11 
Online Books and Journals 
89 
Online Books 
89 
Repositories 
89 
Single books or special repositories 
90 
Online Journals 
90 
Repositories 
91 
Journals in Biblical studies 
91 
Links 
92 
12 
Online Bibliographies 
95 
Bibliographical Databases 
95 
Lists of Libraries, Databases, and Bibliographies 
97 
Libraries 
97 
Links 
97 
13 
Different Thematic Resources 
99 
Ancient Languages 
99 
General 
99 
Hebrew 
99 
Aramaic 
100 
Greek 
100 
Dictionaries and Lexicons 
100 
Patristics 
101 
Archaeology 
101 
Bible Atlas and Maps 
102 
Links 
102 
14 
Institutional and Personal Websites 
105 
Bible (and Religion) Study Portals 
105 
Organizations and Societies 
106 
Bible societies 
106 
Biblical studies 
107 
Institutions 
107 
Link lists and Resources 
107 
Individuals 
108 
Learning tools 
108 
Link and resources websites 
108 
Other websites 
109 
Links 
110 
15 
Checklists 
113 
Hardware 
113 
Comparison of storage devices, ancient and modern 
113 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 
ix 
Operating Systems 
114 
Standards 
114 
Keyboard Installations 
114 
Keyboard Mappings 
118 
Security 
120 
PGP Installation (Thunderbird) 
120 
Text: Processors and Editors 
122 
Creating a document template with OOWriter 
122 
Inserting an automated ToC 
123 
Bibliographical Software 
125 
Software Overview 
125 
Z otero 
126 
Biblical Software 
128 
BibleWorks 
128 
Accordance 
130 
Bibliography 
133 
Index 
135 


PREFACE 
Why publish a "book" about computers and internet resources? 
This kind of information should be on the internet itself, — after all, 
it is easier to update an HTML page than it is a book. However, the 
purpose of this book is to serve as a biblical scholar's guide to 
software and internet resources. Of course, I cannot list all the 
websites that are relevant and of interest, but numerous applica-
tions are explained in Chapters 5-9, though not every function will 
be discussed. The explanations will give an idea of how these appli-
cations can be used to a scholar's advantage. 
The last chapter (15 Checklists) gives step-by-step manuals, 
overviews in tables and other information for quick reference. 
This book will help you to find reliable information about 
software and internet resources. If your question is not answered in 
this book, it should be on one of the link pages given. 
Thomas Naef 
October 2009 
XI 


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
My thanks go first of all to my students at the Universities of Lau-
sanne (Switzerland) and Heidelberg (Germany). They showed me 
that the lecture "Bible and New Technologies" was worth being 
taught. I learned a lot from their questions; as a result, my thinking 
about the topics discussed in this book continues being evolved. 
Every year, my students adapted to the latest versions and applica-
tions of different software, proving how exciting and dynamic this 
field of study can be. 
After my paper at the ISBL congress in Edinburgh (2006), the 
audience was curious about the topic of the lecture. This was prob-
ably the moment that the idea of writing a kind of handbook arose. 
For publishing this book, I would like to thank Katie Stott 
and George Kiraz from Gorgias Press. They were very interested in 
the project. 
The book would not be as readable if Laura Boudreau had not 
taken a very good look at my English and offered suggestions to 
improve it. Many, many thanks. 
And last — but not least at all — a big hug and many thanks to 
my partner, Niklaus, and our dog, Youki. They have the biggest 
places in my heart. 
Xlll 


ABBREVIATIONS1 
The abbreviations usually follow the IATG and the SBL Handbook 
of Style.2 Other abbreviations are mentioned here. 
ABS 
American Bible Society 
AJAX 
Asynchronous JavaScript and XML 
ANE 
Ancient Near East 
API 
Application Programming Interface 
ASP 
Active Server Pages 
ASV 
American Standard Version 
ATLA 
American Theological Library Association 
BSD 
Berkely Software Distribution 
BHS 
Biblia Hebraica Stuttgartensia 
CARG 
Computer Assisted Research Group 
CATSS 
Computer Assisted Tools for Septuagint/Scriptural 
Study 
CD 
Compact Disc 
CMS 
Content Management System 
CSS 
Cascading Style Sheets 
CPU 
Central Processing Unit 
CSL 
Citation Style Language 
DOAJ 
Directory of Open Access Journals 
DOI 
Digital Object Identifier 
DSS 
Dead Sea Scrolls 
1 Only abbreviations of general interest are listed. Product abbrevia-
tions (especially Chapter 14) are not. 
2 You will find the references for these two volumes in the bibliogra-
phy at the end of the book. 
xv 

XVI 
HOLY BITS 
DSSEL 
Dead Sea Scrolls Electronic Library 
DTD 
Document Type Definition 
DTP 
Desktop Publishing 
DVD 
Digital Versatile Disc 
ECMA 
European Computer Manufacturers Association 
FOP 
Formatting Objects Processor 
FTP 
File Transfer Protocol 
GB 
Gigabyte 
GIMP 
GNU Image Manipulation Program 
GNT 
Greek New Testament 
GNU 
GNU is not Unix 
GPL 
GNU General Public License 
GUI 
Graphical User Interface 
HTML 
Hyper Text Markup Language 
IMAP 
Internet Message Access Protocol 
ISBL 
SBL International Meeting 
ISBN 
International Standard Book Number 
ISO 
International Organization for Standardization 
JSP 
JavaServer Pages 
KJV 
King James Version 
LXX 
Septuagint 
MARC 
Machine-Readable Cataloging 
MAS 
Master of Advanced Studies 
MODS 
Metadata Object Description Schema 
MS 
Microsoft 
MVC 
Model View Controller 
NA 27 
Nestle-Aland, 27th edition 
OASIS 
Organization for the Advancement of Structured In-
formation Standards 
ODD 
Optical Disc Drive 
ODF 
Open Document Format 
OOXML 
Open Office XML 
OS 
Operating System 
OSIS 
Open Scripture Information Standard 
PC 
Personal computer 
PDF 
Portable Document Format 
PGP 
Pretty Good Privacy 
PhD 
Doctor of Philosophy 
PHP 
Hypertext Preprocessor 
POP 
Post Office Protocol 

ABBREVIATIONS 
XVll 
RDF 
Resource Description Framework 
ROM 
Read Only Memory 
RTF 
Rich Text Format 
SBL 
Society of Biblical Literature 
SESB 
Stuttgart Electronic Study Bible 
SIL 
Summer Institute of Linguistics 
ToC 
Table of Contents 
USB 
Universal Serial Bus 
UTF 
Unicode Transformation Format 
VDU 
Visual Data Unit 
VM 
Virtual Machine 
W3C 
World Wide Web Consortium 
WIVU 
Workgroep Informatica, Vrije Universiteit (Amster-
dam/Netherlands) 
WLC 
Westminster Leningrad Codex 
WWW 
World Wide Web 
XML 
extensible Markup Language 
XSD 
XML Schema Definition 
XSL 
extensible Stylesheet Language 
XSL-FO 
Extensible Stylesheet Language - Formatting Objects 


INTRODUCTION 
Biblical scholars today are committed to working with computers, 
be they PC or Macintosh.3 Scholars are sending e-mails around the 
world, word processing articles and books, reviews and abstracts, 
and doing their intellectual work with the help of biblical software 
CD-ROMs and WWW searches. However, most scholars are not 
told how to use a computer and the internet efficiently. This infor-
mation is especially important for biblical scholars. When a (west-
ern) economist does not know how to write a Greek or Hebrew 
word, or a foreign language phrase, the impact is — in my opinion — 
relatively minor. A biblical scholar, on the other hand, must be 
familiar with this kind of text editing. 
This book is designed to help those who are not familiar with 
computer sciences. (And why should they be? They are biblical 
scholars!) These individuals do not want to ask their "buddies" to 
help them every time they encounter a computer problem — often 
times, the "little problems" are the most time-consuming! 
The book introduces basic information concerning hardware 
and software, internet research, use of biblical software, and even 
publishing on the WWW. 
This book will help both beginners and advanced users. Be-
ginners will probably find the checklists at the end of the book very 
useful for configuring and installing tools, whereas advanced users 
will probably consult the websites at the end of each chapter to 
find new and informative sites. 
3 A very useful book was published more than a decade ago by the 
SBL: Durusau, High Places in Cyberspace. 1998. 
1 

2 
HOLY BITS 
This book consists of three parts: hardware (Chapter 1), soft-
ware (Chapters 2 — 9), and internet research (Chapters 10 — 14). 
The third part primarily contains links to websites. Of course, these 
listings are not exhaustive. A large number of these websites also 
contain additional links that I could not incorporate into this book. 
While a website can be scrolled through, this book cannot exceed a 
certain number of pages and remain a convenient booklet. 
Chapter 15 (Checklists) contains convenient tables, diagrams, 
step-by-step instructions, and other aides. 
The choice to discuss certain applications and not others was 
determined first by applications' prevalence among biblical scho-
lars, and secondly by issues of availability: open source and freely 
available software will be preferred to proprietary (and expensive) 
software in the discussion.4 
Instead of collecting a huge number of links at the end of the 
book or in footnotes, there is a listing with interesting website links 
at the end of each chapter. Note that these links are thematically 
arranged. A blog on MacOsX, for instance, will only be listed un-
der "Operating Systems" and NOT under "Blogs". A lot of the 
links for further readings point to articles on Wikipedia, the free 
encyclopedia on the internet. Of course, this information could 
also be found through an internet search engine, but many of the 
expressions are ambiguous; the links listed will direct you to the 
appropriate entry. If not otherwise noted, all links (both in the links 
sections as well as in the footnotes) are checked and valid as of 
September 30, 2009. 
As web resources change frequently, an updated website dedi-
cated to this book's links can be found on the internet: 
http://www.holybits.info. 
Computers can be described as systems that help the user to 
do intellectual, organizational, or other work. As there are a lot of 
different kinds of users, the individual computer should be confi-
4 Of course, this choice is very subjective. Feel free to contact me to 
suggest additional applications for the updated online version and/or a 
subsequent edition of this book. Please write an e-mail with the topic of 
your request to sugrestion@holybits.info. 

INTRODUCTION 
3 
gured and installed in an individual way. In other words, there is no 
standard configuration that answers all your needs; you have to tell 
your computer what you want it to do. Helping you understand 
this task is one of the aims of this book. 
For the sake of simplicity and legibility, the trade mark (®) is 
not repeated in the text of the book. Please consider, that Micro-
soft, Apple, Macintosh, BibleWorks, Accordance, EndNote, Refe-
renceManager, Citavi, and a lot more, are registered trademarks. 
Let us begin with the choice of a computer, starting with a de-
scription of hardware components. 


1 
HARDWARE 
A computer is just a machine that helps the user to work more 
easily. Increased efficiency is clearly one of the goals of using a 
computer, otherwise one would continue to write papers and 
books with a typewriter, or even by hand. 
The aim of this chapter is not to give you a wealth of informa-
tion about computers (you will have that in the link list at the end 
of the chapter). Rather, I would like to tell you that a computer is 
not as difficult to understand as one might suppose. 
Two kinds of computers are on the market for personal use: 
desktops and laptops. The latter combine all the components in 
one block; desktops have a separated (midi) tower, monitor/screen, 
keyboard, and mouse. 
COMPONENTS AND PERIPHERALS 
A computer consists of a hard disk, memory, a screen/monitor, 
and a keyboard, mouse, or other input device. Today, computer 
memory is generally 2 Gigabytes (GB, if not more. Standard mem-
ory size has increased significantly as the cost of memory has de-
creased over the last few years. 
People are often unaware of the high performance capabilities 
of their computers. The amount of memory is a key performance 
indicator, but so is processor speed, hard disk capacity, and the 
efficiency of other devices. 
Processor 
The CPU (Central Processing Unit) is the heart of a computer. It is the 
speed of the processor, in conjunction with the main memory, that 
determines the speed of a computer. 
5 

6 
HOLY BITS 
Main memory 
Memory is one of the main components of a computer. It is the 
"administrator" of the computer and organizes reading from and 
writing to the hard disk. The more memory your computer has, the 
more data can be stored on it — you do not always have to 
read/write from and to the hard disk, a process that reduces the 
computer's reaction speed to input commands 
Monitor / Screen (VDU) 
The screen gives you a graphical indication of your data. Even 
command line programs are the display of digital data. Screens 
range from 10" (Netbooks) to 30". If you have to write a lot and 
use the computer daily, a big screen is probably more comfortable 
than a smaller laptop screen of 12" or 14". 
Another possibility is to use two screens side by side. This en-
larges the space to display different programs, and you do not have 
to switch between windows. 
Printer 
Even though we are living in a digitized word, the need for printed 
data is still great. There are multifunctional printers (with scan, 
copy, and even fax options) and simple printers on the market. 
Define your needs and have a look in stores, local or internet. 
Input devices 
Keyboard 
The keyboard is a very important peripheral. If you are writing a 
lot, the keyboard should be ergonomically designed. Consider buy-
ing an ergonomic keyboard also for your laptop. 
Mouse 
It may be a question of familiarity, but the mouse is probably much 
more comfortable to handle than a trackpad or other input device. 
Again, the market is full of different options. 

HARDWARE 
7 
Data storage 
Hard disk / Secondary memory 
Most computers contain a hard disk of hundreds of GBs. Nowa-
days, even laptops and netbooks have this kind of capacity. The 
hard disk is not only the place you install programs, but also the 
place you store your personal data. It is advantageous to store your 
data on several different hard disks, USB sticks, and so on.5 
It is also possible to store your data on server hard disks, via 
the internet. However, be sure that the service provider is trustwor-
thy and your data is secure. 
USB stick / Flash drive 
Flash drives are certainly one of the most useful inventions of the 
last few years. The number of bytes available on these drives has 
increased rapidly over time, and today you can purchase a USB 
stick with several GBs for a reasonable price. 
USB sticks are probably the best solution for "irregular" data 
storage, like an on-going PhD or Master's thesis. They are also 
useful for transferring big files (ISO files, for example) from one 
computer to another. 
CD 
CDs, also called CD-ROMs (Compact Disc Read-Only Memory), are 
one of the main data storage devices. The CD was developed for 
audio data (music), but a lot of different CDs are available. Writa-
ble and Re-Writable CDs can be used for regular data backup. A 
CD can contain 700 MB of data (80 minutes audio). Before buying 
a writable CD, be sure your Optical Disc Drive (ODD) can handle 
this format. 
DVD 
The Digital Versatile Disc stores up to 4.7 GB of data. DVDs are 
mainly used for video data storage. Like CDs, DVDs can be 
5 For more information, see Chapter 4 - Security. 

8 
HOLY BITS 
burned (written) once or several times. Again, be aware of the for-
mat 
your 
ODD 
handles 
(DVD-R; 
DVD+R; 
DVD-RW; 
DVD+RW; DVD-RAM). 
LINKS 
Processor 
http: / / en.wikipedia.org/ wiki/Central_processing_unit 
Main and secondary memory 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Memory_(computers) 
Monitor 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Visual_display_unit 
Printer 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Printer_(computing) 
Keyboard 
http: / / en.wikipedia.org/ wiki/Keyboard_(computing) 
Mouse 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mouse_(computing) 
USB 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Usb 
USB stick 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Usb_stick 
CD 
http: / / en.wikipedia.org/ wiki/Compact_Disc 
http: / / en.wikipedia.org/ wiki/CDROM 
DVD 
http://en. wikipedia.org/wiki/DVD 
After a chapter about hardware, one about software would usually 
follow. Rather than starting in medias res, let us first consider some 
issues concerning operating systems, standards, and security. This 
way, you will understand my rationale for choosing to discuss par-
ticular pieces of software. 

2 
OPERATING SYSTEMS 
There are several operating systems for computers, and new ones 
continue to be created.6 The two most popular operating systems 
are certainly Windows and Macintosh OS, and there are various 
versions of each system. Other operating systems, including Linux, 
BSD, UNIX, etc., will not be discussed here; a list of links at the 
end of the chapter will direct you to additional information. 
The main task of an operating system is to coordinate the 
work between the application(s) and the hardware. There are some 
differences between the products on the market; for critical appli-
cations, these differences are of importance, but for text and re-
search tasks, the choice of operating system and corresponding 
hardware may be more a matter of personal preference. The choice 
may be an emotional one (as many Apple Macintosh users claim it 
to be), or perhaps a more practical one (many people choose a PC 
with Windows for the largest possible choice of applications). 
These differences, both real and perceived, will be less impor-
tant in the future as the two big players become increasingly inter-
changeable. A huge number of different Virtual Machines (VMs)7 
were launched in the last several years, and more and more applica-
tions are programmed with Java, which itself is a kind of a VM. 
6 Google is about to create an operating system called Chrome OS, 
which should be available primarily on Netbooks after mid-2010. 
7 VMs are virtual operating systems that enable the user to install an 
operating system within an operating system, like Parallels Desktop (for 
Macintosh), VMWare (for Windows), or WineHQ (for Linux). 
9 

10 
HOLY BITS 
How to work with different OSs is not discussed in this book. 
Additional information can be found through the link list at the 
end of the chapter. 
WINDOWS 
The most widespread operating system is Windows from Micro-
soft. Most PCs come with this OS. Today, most computers with 
Windows have the versions XP or Vista (or perhaps even Win-
dows 7) installed. 
MACINTOSH O S (MACOS) 
Apple computers are equipped with MacOS. Since 2001,8 the stan-
dard version has been Mac OS X (or MacOsX), which is based on 
a Linux structure. 
The Macintosh Biblioblog is an excellent resource that con-
tains everything a biblical scholar might want to know about Ma-
cintosh computers. 
LINUX 
Linux is a freely available operating system. There are several dis-
tributors on the market, and the installation is very simple. It is a 
nice alternative OS for biblical scholars who wish to use applica-
tions available for Linux OS. Other biblical applications running on 
Windows can be installed with the help of WineHQ. 
ORGANIZING THE COMPUTER 
If you catch a glimpse of a colleague's screen, you often see a lot of 
files or shortcuts to files and programs on the desktop. That does 
not have to be! It is much easier to organize your files systematical-
ly. Practical organization will allow you to find files months or even 
years after they are created. 
8 A beta version was delivered in September 2000. The first version 
of Mac OS X without major problems was version 10.2 of August 2002. 

OPERATING SYSTEMS 
11 
Organization 
It is advantageous to split the hard disk (virtually, of course) into 
several parts, making it easier and more efficient to reinstall pro-
grams and other data on your computer, if necessary. Partitions can 
be created for different OSs, or for different types of data (for 
example, OS on Partition 1, personal data on Partition 2, and pro-
grams and temporary files on Partition 3). This way, you can run 
Windows and Linux (or MacOsX and Windows) on the same ma-
chine.9 
File names 
Nowadays, some word processor applications propose a file name 
without the extension when you are saving a file for first time. 
Unfortunately, this name is generated from the first words of the 
document text. Saving this chapter, for example, would generate 
something like, "There are several operat". Clearly, this system of 
naming is confusing and inefficient. First, the words do not ade-
quately describe the file, and secondly, the spaces between the 
words pose a risk for archiving (and especially re-reading) the file. 
A short and understandable file name contains some letters, 
perhaps an underscore for separating words,10 and certainly no 
special characters like "e", ".",n or others. It should not exceed 15 
or 20 characters. 
LINKS 
Windows 
http://www.microsoft.com/windows 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Windows 
9 If the hard disk is big enough, you can even install different ver-
sions of these operating systems. 
10 Another possibility for making file names readable is to use lower-
case and capital letters. 
11 A point could be interpreted as the separation before the file ex-
tension. 

12 
HOLY BITS 
Macintosh OS X 
http:/ / www.apple.com/macosx/ 
http: / / en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Macos 
http://macbiblioblog.blogspot.com/ 
Unux distributions 
http: / / en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Linux 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_Linux_distributions 
http://www.opensuse.org/en/ 
http:/ / fedoraproject.org/ 
http://www.redhat.com 
http: / / www.ubuntu.com 
IFiÄeHjg 
http://www. winehq.org/ 
http://en. wikipedia.org/wiki/WineHQ 
Virtual Machines 
http://www. wmware.com 
http://www.parallels.com 
Disk partitioning 
http://en. wikipedia.org/wiki/Disk_partitioning 
http: / / en.wikipedia.org/ wiki/Boot_Camp_(software) 
File Extensions 
http://www.fìleformatinfo 

3 
STANDARDS 
You may wonder why I am devoting a chapter to the issue of stan-
dards.12 After all, you simply want to learn how to find biblical 
texts on the internet, or how to use Bible study applications, but 
standards and their usage are very important for biblical scholars. 
Some (possible) questions should make clear the impact of stan-
dardization: "Why can my current laptop not open an article I 
wrote in the 1990s?" Or, "I copy-pasted the biblical text in Hebrew 
into my document from my Bible application, but my teacher can-
not read the Hebrew text; what did I do wrong?" 
As you think about computer standards, be aware that you 
encounter all kinds of standards throughout the day: watching TV 
is only possible because of the normalization of the signal; traffic 
(by plane, railway, or vehicles) is only possible because of the adhe-
rence to norms; electricity supply is standardized (in Europe you 
will have to use a converter for US power cables — and vice versa). 
For biblical scholars and their products, there are two stan-
dards of interest: text and character. Let us have a closer look at 
these two standards that have so much to do with writing. You 
may wonder why there is no biblical standard unifying abbrevia-
tions, terms in different languages (Greek, Hebrew, Syriac, Geor-
gian), and persons, places, and things across various applications in 
biblical scholarship. The answer is quite simple: unfortunately, the 
12 I am speaking here about standards, even when I mean "the 
norm". The difference between a standard and norm is the "normaliza-
tion" of the latter by international consortiums and institutions, like W3C, 
ISO, and others. For convenience, let us call this a "standard", even if it is 
a norm. 
13 

14 
HOLY BITS 
big players (Bible and scholars' societies, Bible software houses, 
and other stakeholders) have not been able to create a common 
standard/norm for biblical subjects. The power of particularistic 
interests is apparently too strong. That is why biblical scholars still 
encounter the same problems concerning text and character stan-
dards that they did in the 1980s and 1990s. 
Before having a look at the specific areas of text and character 
standards, let us review the key points of standardization. 
STANDARDIZATION 
We are living in an era that could be called the Standardisation of the 
World. Everything has to be normalized and standardized, and with 
good reason! Beginning in the 1990s, a lot of proprietary file for-
mats came into circulation. Whereas in the 1980s just a few people 
used computers, today a lot of people possess a computer, or even 
two or three. In other words, the exchange of documents of all 
kinds is much more complicated than it was thirty years ago — there 
are now many possible document formats. 
One (or rather the) solution for organizing standards is the 
enactment of international consortiums that advance and promote 
standardization in a section of computer science (text, graphics, 
audio, storage, etc.). One of the most important consortiums (and 
not only in computer matters) is the International Organisation for 
Standardisation (ISO). Besides the ISO, ECMA and OASIS are oth-
er important organizations for standardization and its processes. 
Another organization not to forget is the World Wide Web Con-
sortium (W3C) that defines standards for the web. 
TEXT DOCUMENTS 
Computer-written documents are text files. Most of us use a text 
processor like Microsoft Word, OpenOffice Writer, or Corel 
WordPerfect. You have probably encountered the problems of 
using different processors: each application uses a proprietary file 
extension (for example, . doc for MS Word, the most widespread 

STANDARDS 
15 
file type for written documents). The problem is that . doc is not a 
standard,13 but rather a quasi-standard as a result of its popularity.14 
That is why other organizations published text standards. It 
was the OASIS group that pushed for the normalization of the 
Open Document Format standard with the file extension . odf (. o d t 
for text documents). Of course, Microsoft intended to publish a 
text standard and launched a second standardization process that 
resulted in Office Open XML. For the history of and arguments for 
and against these standards, refer to the internet sites mentioned in 
the link section of this chapter. 
What both standards have in common is the XML technology 
they use.15 XML stands for extensible Markup language. 
Contrary to 
MS Word or OpenOffice Writer, XML indicates the mark-up of 
the text in so-called tags, written within brackets. The great advan-
tage of this technology is the possibility to define a mark-up (XML 
schema) and then to convert a document into another XML doc-
ument with the help of a style sheet (XSL), based on another XML 
schema. 
These schemas can be very different, but with the help of a 
converter, they are interchangeable. In other words, if you are sav-
ing a text document in one of those XML-based standardized file 
formats, you will be able to open it in a few years, even if you are 
using another text processor. 
These comments may be incomprehensible to those readers 
who have not yet come in contact with XML. Let us therefore have 
a look at a very simple XML text document.16 
13 In the meaning of "norm". 
14 Another quasi-standard of the 1980s and 1990s was (and still is) 
Rich Text Format (RTF). Its specifications are still being updated, and there 
are several versions. The latest version (1.9.1) from March 2008 includes 
Word2007 specialties. The RTF specification is maintained by Microsoft. 
Nevertheless, RTF is in my opinion deprecated. 
15 It is very likely that these two standards will merge into one over 
the next few years. 
16 The appearance of an XML text file will be covered in Chapter 5, 
in the DocBook section. 

16 
HOLY BITS 
<?xml version="l.0" encoding="UTF-8"?> 
<document> 
<type>article</type> 
<title>A first XML document</title> 
<author> 
<firstName>Thomas</firstName> 
<lastName>Naef</lastName> 
</author> 
<section> 
<title>First section</title> 
<paragraph>Some text with <bold>bold</bold> 
words.</paragraph> 
</section> 
</document> 
You see that this document is highly structured — all informa-
tion has beginning (<titie>) and ending (</titie>) tags — and 
gives a lot of meta information about the content (e.g. the bold 
indication, or the indication of a paragraph or a section). 
Notice that XML distinguishes between content and formatting. 
The document above could be formatted with an HTML or PDF 
style sheet and you would have one or both views of the same 
content.17 
CHARACTERS 
Another standard concerns the characters of a text document. It is 
called Unicode.18 Many biblical scholars still use special Greek, 
17 In software engineering, one speaks about the 
Model-Vieiv-Controlkr 
(MVC) pattern. The model contains the data/content (the text in this 
case), the controller contains the style sheet, and the view contains, in our 
case, the product (i.e. an HTML or PDF file). 
Another field of application for the MVC pattern is the internet. 
Whether you are watching a stable HTML page or a dynamic page with 
content from within a database, data is organized by the controller (i.e. the 
technology like PHP, ASP, JSP, etc.). 
18 The encodings of documents, like HTML pages, texts, and XML 
files, are labeled "LTTF-8". 

STANDARDS 
17 
Hebrew, Syriac, and other foreign language fonts. Often, these 
fonts are those of the Bible software they use. While biblical soft-
ware applications use their proprietary fonts for the search and 
display within the application, export is usually possible in Unicode. 
With the Unicode standard, you do not have to change the 
font as long as the font used contains the demanded range. For 
Greek, there are two ranges of interest: Greek and Coptic and Greek 
Extended. Hebrew contains only one range: Hebrew. Note that con-
trary to the Hebrew, in which all diacritical marks are equal to one 
Unicode mark, the Greek character a, for example, consists of a 
single, unique code: the character (alpha), and the accentuations 
(psili). 
With the Unicode standard, use of proprietary legacy fonts is 
declining. A big advantage of Unicode is that you can change the 
font without any problem — the Greek and Hebrew passages will 
still be displayed, as long as the replacing font contains the neces-
sary ranges. 
You may ask yourself, "Which font should I use now?" As 
long as it is a Unicode font, you do not have to worry that a cha-
racter will not be displayed by another Unicode font or in another 
text editor. Recommended fonts are the SBL Unicode fonts (SBL 
Hebrew and SBL Greek),19 as well as the Cardo font, which con-
tains the Greek and Hebrew ranges. For Syriac text, the Meltho 
Open Type Syriac Fonts are recommended. 
There are a lot of other Unicode fonts you may be interested 
in using. You will find a nice overview of Unicode matters on Alan 
Wood's homepage, which is not as technical as the official Unicode 
website. A. Wood discusses the codes, as well as a list of fonts with 
information pertaining to the contained Unicode ranges. 
A very long list of Unicode font samples is available on the 
WAZU site. To see how the various fonts appear, click on the 
Greek polytonic, Hebrew, and other writing examples. Another 
website that offers Unicode information is the FileFormat website. 
19 In another year (or two), the SBLLit font will contain all the special 
characters for transliteration and textual criticism. 

18 
HOLY BITS 
For New Testament scholars, E. Ochsenmeier published a ta-
ble with the text critical signs used in the NA, along with an expla-
nation of how to write these signs using your computer. The most 
complete font for textual criticism signs is Cardo. 
There are two other key questions about fonts: "How can I 
use them on my computer, and is it possible to convert old text 
files, written with legacy fonts, to Unicode files?" 
The answer to the first question is quite simple: keyboards in 
many languages are at the user's disposal on Windows and Macin-
tosh operating systems. This book will show you how to install and 
configure your computer with Greek and Hebrew keyboards. The 
second answer needs a litde more explanation. 
Keyboards 
The process to install and configure keyboards on your computer is 
quite simple. Here in short some keyword text centered explana-
tions. 
Windows Vista 
1. 
Start 
2. 
Control Panel 
3. 
Clock, Language, and Region 
a. Change keyboard or other input methods 
4. 
Regional and Language Options — Keyboards and Lan-
guages 
5. 
Change keyboards 
6. 
General 
a. 
Define the default keyboard in the upper space 
and install other keyboards in the lower space of 
the window. 
b. For Greek, choose the Greek Polytonic key-
board. If you have installed the SBL Hebrew 
Font (see Standards — Characters, and the Check-
list), you can also choose the Tiro Hebrew Key-
board. Note that it is listed under "B" for "Bibli-
cal Hebrew (Tiro)". 
7. 
Click OK and the keyboards will be installed. 

STANDARDS 
19 
MacOsX 
1. 
System Preferences 
2. 
International 
3. 
Click the Input Tab and choose the languages 
4. 
Close the International window 
Unlike the English or other western keyboard layouts, the mapping 
of the Greek and especially that of the Hebrew keyboard are a bit 
different. You will not find the ¡1 on the (western) h-key, but on the 
v-key (the h-key contains the 
For convenience, keyboard maps 
are listed at the end of the book in the check-lists. 
Converters 
Another question is, "How can I convert old text files written with 
so-called legacy fonts into text files that contain only Unicode?" 
Several solutions are available, depending on the extent of Greek 
and/or Hebrew content of the file(s). 
Several products — many of them free — are on the market, but 
a lot of them do not really answer the needs of biblical scholars. 
Some of them are very sophisticated, like the Converters of SIL 
that convert whole files with different file extensions. Others only 
convert a word or a phrase written in Greek or Hebrew, and still 
other types of converters are written as MS Word macros. You can 
see the limitations of these various applications. Perhaps you want 
to convert a text file with a lot of Greek or Hebrew text, but con-
verters like those of SIL do not support your font. In this case, you 
have to convert each word and phrase, or you have to use a Word 
macro, which can pose a security risk. Another limitation of using 
those converters is their respective OS compatibility. 
A solution could be the JBLC, which converts RTF files 
("test" version 1.1 as of September 2009). A re-engineered beta 
version with a GUI has been announced for 2010. 
SIL Converter 
This package of converters may be interesting for those who use 
the SIL Galatia font. Other Greek or Hebrew fonts are not con-
vertible from legacy to Unicode within this package. The applica-
tion runs on Windows OS. The Bulk Word Document Converter gives 
a list of converter options. 

20 
HOLY BITS 
Greek and Hebrew Encoding Converter 
This website-based converter, operated by Ken Penner, enables 
conversion from legacy to Unicode (or vice versa) with the follow-
ing fonts: SPIonic, Greek BETA, SGreek, LaserGreek, SPTiberian, 
Linguist Hebraicall, and various kinds of Unicode. 
Greek Transcoder for Microsoft Word 
This MS Word macro is a nice tool for converting Greek legacy 
into Unicode. It is distributed under the GNU license. As the name 
indicates, one system requirement is the MS Word text processor 
(version 2004 for MacOsX 10.2.8, or version 2000 and later for 
Windows). The convertible font list includes Beta Code, Greek-
Keys, Ismini, LaserGreek, Paulina Greek, SGreek, SPIonic, Super-
Greek, Vilnius University, and WinGreek. 
JBiblicalLegacyConverter 
(JBLC) 
This stand-alone application was developed and tested by the au-
thor. Its objective is to convert RTF files written with one or sev-
eral Greek and/or Hebrew fonts into Unicode text files. It is writ-
ten in Java (hence the "J" at the beginning of the name) and thus 
runs on all operating systems that have Java installed (Windows, 
Macintosh, Linux, etc.). The aim of the software is to give scholars 
an easy-to-use application that converts their documents into Un-
icode with one click of a mouse. 
LINKS 
ISO 
http://www.iso.org 
ECMA 
http: / / www.ecma-international.org/ 
OASIS 
http://www.oasis-open.org 
W3C 
http://www.w3.org 
XML 
http:/ / en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Extensible_Markup_Language 
Open Document Format 
http: / / en.wikipedia.org/ wiki/OpenDocument 

STANDARDS 
21 
Office Open XML (OOXML) 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Offìce_Open_XML 
Unicode 
http://www.unicode.org 
http:/ / www.alanwood.net/unicode 
http: / / www. fileformatinfo / info / unicode / 
RTF 
http:/ / en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rich_Text_Format 
Fonts 
http://www.sbl-site.org/ educational/biblicalfonts.aspx 
http://scholarsfonts.net/cardofnthtml 
http: / / www.wazu.jp/ gallery/Fonts_GreekPoly.html 
http: / / www.bethmarduto.org/meltho / 
Entering New Testament Textual Criticism Signs 
http://en.foursenses.net/textcriticismsigns 
Windowy® Keyboard Layouts 
http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/goglobal/bb964651.aspx 
SIL International 
http://www.sil.org 
SILConverters 3.0 
http: / / scripts.sil.org/cms / scripts / page.php?site_id=nrsi&id 
=EncCnvtrs 
Greek and Hebrew Encoding Converter 
http://ocp.acadiau.ca/kpenner/convert.htm 
GreekTranscoderfor Microsoft Word 
http://www.greektranscoder.org 
JBiblicalLegacyConverter 
http://www.jblc.org 


4 
SECURITY 
Security is one of the most important concerns a person has when 
using a computer. Security refers not only to computer access by 
password, but also to the security of data. You probably do not 
want other people reading (or even copying) your data. As such, 
there are different kinds of security issues computer users need to 
address. 
There are two main security questions: 
1. How can I prevent other people from having unautho-
rized access to my data? 
2. 
How can I ensure that my data will be accessible to me 
now and in the future? 
Whereas the first question demands an answer concerning pass-
word protection and other security matters, the latter requires a 
more individual, strategic response. 
PASSWORD 
You probably have several passwords and user names for all kinds 
of accounts (credit card, e-mail, hosting server, online accounts for 
various purposes, etc.). Often, people use only one password for all 
their logins. That is a huge security problem — do NOT do that. 
You may not be able to remember ten or twenty different user 
names and passwords, especially if the passwords are strong, but 
there is a methodology for creating and memorizing effective 
passwords. Your password is not secure if it is composed of your 
initials and your ZIP code, or by the first name of your partner and 
your year of birth, or by your pet's name. 
So, the questions in this section are: 
How do I create strong passwords? 
How do I memorize these passwords? 
23 

24 
HOLY BITS 
Creating strong passwords 
A strong password is a phrase that contains a certain number of 
characters — including special characters, if possible — all mixed up 
with capitals, numbers, etc. But there are also criteria concerning 
combinations of letters and numbers that should not be used in 
passwords. Repetition of a character, for example, is not a good 
idea. Let us list some criteria for strong passwords: 
Musts 
Minimum of 10 (ten) characters 
Capital and lowercase letters 
Numbers 
Special characters (if supported by the application) 
No go's 
Repetition of letters /characters 
Sequences (letters, numbers, keyboard keys) 
Existing words 
With those criteria in mind, you can now generate strong pass-
words, like, for example, "3gDi8h&vmaYq@0k", but the problem 
of memorizing these complex passwords remains. 
Memorizing passwords 
If you can memorize five passwords like the one I generated above, 
you are a genius. Most of us will not be able to have five or more 
passwords like that in mind in every possible situation. That is why 
I created a simple method for generating memorable passwords. 
Since you are a biblical scholar, take a biblical verse20 and gen-
erate a "passphrase". Let us use the following verse as an example: 
Matt 1:1 'The book of the generation of Jesus Christ, the son of David, the 
son of Abraham". Take the information about the verse (Matt 1:1) 
and then the first letter of each word to create the following pass-
word: MiitthlTbotgoJCtsoDtsoA. 
There are repetitions ("tt" and 
"tso"), but the password is still quite strong. Of course, you can 
20 If you are not a biblical scholar, do not worry; select a biblical verse 
of your choice. 

SECURITY 
25 
take the same verse in Greek (Bi(3Ao? yeveaeco? 'Irjaou Xpiorou uiou 
ActulS uiou A(3paa[i) and create another password using the same 
method: 
MatthlBglXuDuA 
The system also works for Hebrew,21 or biblical text in anoth-
er language. If the application enables you to do so, use the unders-
core to strengthen the password, or invert the text and verse in-
formation: Mattl:l_BgIXuDuA 
or 
BgIXuDuA_Mattl:l. 
To ensure that there are a few capital letters within your pass-
word, use verses containing personal, geographical, or other names. 
One of the most important spaces nowadays for accessing da-
ta is the internet. Users need good data security not only for the 
data one possesses, but also for the data one transmits and receives 
by email or other means. 
ONLINE SECURITY 
In addition to password protection, a second kind of security be-
comes important when communicating with other computers22 — 
online security. The most significant problem with online security 
is that of data transfer. As you probably know, e-mail traffic is not 
secure. 
People do not often think about how their e-mails are 
processed by the internet and relayed to other computers. In real 
life, sending an e-mail is analogous to the following situation: you 
write down a message for your colleague who is 6 miles away from 
you. You know a) where s/he is and b) her/his name. You then 
find a person on the street, whom you have not met before, and 
ask this person to deliver the message to your colleague. You pro-
vide your colleague's name and address, trusting that the message 
will be delivered. You know that the person may deliver the mes-
sage directly, but s/he may also pass it on to an intermediary. You 
also know that any and all "delivery people" can read the content 
of your message, including the identification and address informa-
21 For example, DnflDN inn D'lX D'nmrrjn i n x UTN TPI gives the 
following password: lSaml_l WiemhRZmhE. 
22 Sending and receiving e-mails, up- and downloading files to/from 
distanced computers, etc. 

26 
HOLY BITS 
tion for you and your colleague. Concerning the content of your 
message, unknown people can generate and insert information 
concerning you and your colleague, be it true or false. In this way, 
strangers may come to possess your personal data against your 
wishes. This real-world example shows that it is rather naive to 
send sensitive content via e-mail, if it is not encoded. 
An encoded e-mail cannot be viewed by third parties. Most e-
mail clients (like Mozilla Thunderbird, MS Outlook, and others) 
can be configured with privacy software or add-ons, which you 
should take advantage of. The simplest add-on for e-mail clients is 
Vretty Good Vrivacy (PGP), where OpenPGP is an open source 
project. If you want to install a third-party application, do consider 
that this third party will eventually have access to your sensitive 
data. 
The system of public-personal key pairs can also protect your 
data. The system works as follows: every person has a private and a 
public key. The private key is kept secret by its owner, the sender 
of the message. The public key is in the hands of the persons with 
whom the sender wishes to correspond. Writing an e-mail and 
using one's private key means, "This e-mail comes from me, be-
cause nobody else can use my private key; I am the only possessor 
of it." The e-mail can be read because the person receiving your e-
mail uses your public key. Similarly, you can encrypt the e-mail with 
the public key of the receiving person. No other person can read 
that e-mail, because it has to be opened with the private key of the 
recipient. In other words, for a really "face-to-face" communica-
tion by e-mail, you have to "sign" (using your own private key) and 
encrypt (using the public key of the receiving person) the message. 
PHYSICAL SECURITY 
Another security concern arises when one considers the storage of 
data. We already had a look at the possibilities for data storage in 
the hardware chapter, but how long data will be stored is another 
issue. People speak about digital archives, open access servers, and 
so on, but I am not sure whether those digital storage options lead 
us to a digital archive. Does a digital archive exist? If so, this book 
in PDF form should still be readable in a hundred years. If it were, 
indeed, possible to read the file, another question would arise: 
would CD-ROMs, hard disks, or USB Flash drives still be in use? 
Or would data be stored on other devices? 

SECURITY 
27 
As we saw in the hardware chapter, different supports have 
various lifecycles. To secure the data on a computer, you should 
back up that data on at least one (but better on two or more) ex-
ternal supports, like an external hard drive, a USB Flash Drive, 
and/or a D V D or CD. 
LINKS 
Password 
http: / / www.microsoft.com/protect/yourself/password/crea 
te.mspx 
http:/ / en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Password_strength 
Security 
http: / / en.wikipedia.org/ wiki/Computer_security 
http: / / en.wikipedia.org/ wiki/Cryptography 
PGP 
http:/ / en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pretty_Good_Privacy 
http: / / en.wikipedia.org/ wiki/OpenPGP 
http:/ / enigmail.mozdev.org 
http://www.gnupg.org/ 
http://www.openpgp.org/ 
Mozilla Thunderbird 
http:/ / en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mozilla_Thunderbird 
http://www.mozillamessaging.com/en-US/thunderbird/ 


5 
TEXT: PROCESSORS AND EDITORS 
Word processors, sometimes also called text processors, are proba-
bly the applications scholars use most frequently. The market is 
huge, and you can choose the appropriate product for your needs. 
As word processors often come with office packages, I will 
briefly discuss the most common packages. A similar discussion 
could also take place at the beginning of the chapter concerning 
presentation software. 
OFFICE PACKAGES 
The most common office package is certainly Microsoft Office. If 
your university or school has a contract with MS, you likely already 
have this package at your disposal; if not, you will have to pay for 
the software yourself. The current versions are 0ffice2007 for Win-
dows and 0jftce2008 for Macintosh. Note that these versions use 
different menus and toolbars than previous versions. 
If you are used to the "older" style of the Office package, an 
alternative is OpenOffice from Sun. It is available free of charge 
and runs on Windows, Macintosh, and Linux. Another "old fa-
shioned" but recently updated Office package is WordPerfect Of-
fice X4 from Corel. The new Corel Office package — with MS Of-
fice 2007-like usability — is called Corel Home Office, and contains 
word processor, spreadsheet, and presentation software. Both re-
quire Windows. 
Aside from these Windows-based office packages, there are 
several packages for Macintosh users. The iWork is the office 
29 

30 
HOLY BITS 
package that comes with MacOsX. Another Mac Office is NeoOf-
fice.23 
WORD PROCESSING SOFTWARE 
There are a lot of word processors and text editors, but what is the 
difference between the two? Word processor files (document files) 
contain not only the text, but also the formatting and layout of the 
file. When the formatting and layout tags are not visible, that is a 
WYSIWYG ("what you see is what you get") processor. Text edi-
tors usually display the tags of a document, which are often written 
in ASCII encoding. As an example, let us see a part of the last pa-
ragraph in a text editor:24 
\par Besides those Windows based Office packages, there are 
se} {\rtlch\fcsl 
\af50 \ltrch\fcsO \insrsidl 0902244\hresl 
\chhres0 v} {\rtlch\fcsl \af50 \ltrch\fcsO \insrsidl0902244 
eral packages} {\rtlch\fcsl \af50 \ltrch\fcsO \insrsid6968075 
for 
Macintosh 
users. 
} {\rtlch\fcsl 
\af50 
\ltrch\fcsO 
\insrsid8205817 
The iWork is the } {\rtlch\fcsl 
\af50 
\ltrch\fcsO \insrsid9254870 Office package that comes with 
the } {\rtlch\fcsl \af50 \ltrch\fcsO \insrsidl6541325 Ma-
cOsX. } {\rtlch\fcsl \af50 \ltrch\fcsO \insrsid4211656 
Of course you can read the text, but you have to search for the 
words. The RTF format specification defines a lot of these control 
words beginning with a backslash ("\"). 
Text documents with state-of-the-art specifications are XML-
based, meaning that these control words have tags instead of back-
slashes.25 
Another distinction can be made between word processors 
and Desktop Publishing (DTP) software. As word processors have 
begun to include publishing functionality, DTP software has come 
23 Until OpenOffice, version 2, Macintosh users had to install the 
XI1 on their computers. Subsequently, NeoOffice was created for easy 
installation. 
24 After saving the file in RTF format. 
25 See Standards — Text documents. 

WORD PROCESSORS 
31 
into competition with these applications. The most famous DTP 
applications are Adobe PageMaker, InDesign, and QuarkXPress. A 
free, cross-platform DTP application is Scribus.26 
What should you use for writing texts? Certainly, you can 
choose from a variety of applications, but you also need to have a 
sense of your document's purpose. Is it a document for temporary 
use, or is it a Master's thesis or PhD dissertation that you will need 
to read and edit in five or ten years? In cases of more "permanent" 
files, you have to choose a reliable standard that will stand the test 
of time. 
The following two subsections will explore some word pro-
cessors and text editors and discuss how to use them to create 
standardized documents. A third subsection will describe some of 
the specific requirements biblical scholars have for these processors 
and editors. 
Do remember to save your documents in UTF-8 encoding 
and a standard format (. odt or . xml). The advantage of an XML 
document is the fact that you can transform the file — if needed — 
into another XML standard. This prevents you from losing infor-
mation. 
Word processors 
As stated above, the most frequently used text processors are Word 
from Microsoft, Writer from Sun OpenOffice, WordPerfect (and 
Writer) from Corel, and Pages from Apple. There are a lot of other 
text processors, some of which, like the OOWriter, are free. 
In particular, two processors should be mentioned for biblical 
scholars: Nisus Writer and Mellel, both of which run on MacOS. 
Biblical scholars' special needs 
The following information should help you to write your docu-
ments to biblical scholars' specifications more quickly and easily 
26 As the aim of this book is to give information primarily to scholars, 
DTP applications will not be discussed. You will find a lot of information 
on the internet pages mentioned in the links, and more on Scribus particu-
larly at http://www.scribus.net. 

32 
HOLY BITS 
than ever before. First, we will see how to write Hebrew, Greek 
and Syriac words and phrases in your documents. Secondly, we will 
see how and why to create document templates 
Inserting foreign language words and phrases 
If you have installed the foreign language keyboards, you can simp-
ly choose the appropriate window in the taskbar. For example, if I 
am writing a text with "Times New Roman" in English, I can 
change the keyboard layout to Hebrew and continue to write my 
text in "Times New Roman". Note that the font must contain the 
Unicode range with which you are writing. 
Of course, you can also copy-paste text from another file, the 
internet, or from within a biblical software application.27 
To simplify the task, use styles: write/copy the word or 
phrase, then apply a style (for example, "Hebrew text" or "Greek 
quote") to the text. We will see how to create styles in the follow-
ing templates section. 
Document templates 
By creating a new MS Word document, you use the default tem-
plate from Microsoft, called normal, dot. Depending on your 
language and other parameters, this template may be 8x11 inches 
or DIN A4 in size, oriented in portrait layout, in Times New Ro-
man font, and so on. The same kinds of templates exist with other 
word processors like OOWriter, WordPerfect, and Writer of Corel 
Home Office. 
So, why use a personalized template? A personal template is 
customized to your unique needs and distinguishes your work from 
that of others. All you need to create a template is a layout and 
typography idea, a word processor, and — if you are doing this for 
the first time — perhaps half a day. You may create several different 
templates: one for your correspondence, one for text documents 
27 Concerning the latter two options: do not forget to declare the 
source! 

WORD PROCESSORS 
33 
(articles and books), one for HTML pages (if you have a webpage 
to maintain), another for cards, etc. 
Let us create a book template in OOWriter.28 A book does 
not only contain text pages with the main content, but also ele-
ments like a table of contents, index, foreword, tables and/or pic-
tures, headers and footers, and a bibliography. Paragraphs may be 
formatted differently at the beginning and end of a chapter, or 
before and after tables. Titles and subtitles of sections may have 
unique formatting requirements. As well, the first page of a chapter 
may be specially formatted, and, as already noted, foreign language 
words and phrases may use a font different from that of the rest of 
the book. In other words, there are different kinds of styles to 
create: page, paragraph, and characters. In OOW, you also have 
frame and list styles. 
The easiest way to create a new template is to open a new file 
(Text document) and save it as a template ("File > Templates > 
Save"). Give it a name. The default storage of the template is in the 
folder My Templates. If you want to use it as a default template, 
open OOW, go to "File > Templates > Organize", double-click on 
the left list in the My Templutes folder, and mark the template. At 
the right, click on the "Commands" button and choose the Set Ms 
Default Template command. 
The advantage of this procedure is that the default template 
Text Document already contains a lot of different styles that you can 
personalize by changing fonts or creating new styles for Hebrew 
and Greek characters. You can always reset the Text Document de-
fault template with the appropriate command. Of course, your 
personalized template is still stored in the My Templates folder and 
can thereby be re-activated as a default template. 
That said, use styles for your documents whenever possible! 
The easiest way to do this is to modify the default template of your 
word processor and then create styles.29 Note that you can create 
28 This procedure is applicable to other word processors. 
29 In OOWriter you right-click on the Styles and Formatting window 
(that can be opened/closed with Fll). In Word2007, there is a New Style 

34 
HOLY BITS 
hierarchical styles: first, create the Heading style, then the Headingl 
style, and so on. The top-down dependency enables you to change 
the font for all headings in the Heading style. 
TEXT EDITING SOFTWARE 
Scholars using a Windows-based PC are probably familiar with the 
Notepad application that comes with the OS; a parallel application 
for Macintosh is Texteditor. On Linux, there are several text editors, 
like vi, Kmite, and others. 
A special kind of text editor is a so-called XML Editor. I men-
tion these applications because of the significant advantage of writ-
ing with the help of XML-based technology. 
I want to mention two proprietary XML editors that are use-
ful when you are editing your documents with XML technology 
and have to transform them into other file formats: "XMLSpy 
2009" from Altova, and the "<oxygen/>" XML editor. 
What has been said about word processor software can also 
be said for text editing software: use styles. The only difference is 
that you have to use styles in a specific way when using text editors 
like the XML editors. As we saw in the Standards chapter, the 
XML file contains the content of the document. An XSL file will 
contain the formatting. This enables you to create different docu-
ments from the same XML file, including different formats like 
HTML, PDF, and RTF. 
You can create your own specifications for your documents. 
Computer specialists talk of Document Type Definitions (DTD) 
and XML Schema Definitions (XSD). 
For example, let us say you are writing a letter. In the XML 
file, there is the information about the sender and the destination, 
as well as the content. Writing an envelope.xsl as well as a letter.xsl\ 
you can print both the envelope and the letter from the same XML 
file. You do not have to write the information about the sender and 
button at the bottom of the Styles window (that can be opened/closed by 
C trl+Alt+Shift+S). 

WORD PROCESSORS 
35 
destination twice. It will appear on both the envelope and the let-
ter. 
DocBook30 
For writing structured text, the DocBook is a nice tool. First, it is 
free of charge. Secondly, the texts are saved as XML files. Lastly, 
you do not have to worry about formatting. 
Although DocBook was created primarily for information 
technology documentation, it is also very useful also for academic 
purposes. Just as articles, an MAS thesis, or a PhD thesis should 
follow an argumentative string, the hierarchic and structured XML 
syntax is the appropriate way to write.31 
I wrote my Diplôme d'études approfondies (DEAJ32 in Biblical Stu-
dies with DocBook. One of the reasons was the fact that portions 
of this DEA will probably reappear in my PhD thesis. As the XML 
(content) file will not contain formatting, there will be no possibili-
ty that the formatting of the DEA will impact that of the PhD. 
When I published an abridged version of the DEA in 2008 and I 
had to deliver it to my editor in a non-standard format, all I had to 
do was change the paper format in the XSL parameters. This 
change reformatted the book with all the right indications for cross 
references, like the page indications in the indices, footnotes, chap-
ters, and table of contents. 
Mow does DocBook work? 
DocBook comes with one DTD for several purposes. The most 
frequently used document types are probably "book" and "article". 
We will discuss here the "book" document type, as there are some 
particularly interesting features to show. Here follows a possible, 
30 I am referring here to an abridged version of a paper held at the 
SBL Annual Meeting in Washington/DC (20th November 2006): "Writing 
a thesis in DocBook. Or: It does not have to be Microsoft". 
31 I often use it in conjunction with MindMap software (see Chapter 
9). 
32 Today, you would speak of an MAS. 

36 
HOLY BITS 
very simple code of a book — in several files. For explanatory pur-
poses, each line is numbered. 
book.xml 
1 <?xml version"1.0" encoding="UTF-8" ?> 
2 <!DOCTYPE book SYSTEM "../../docbookx.dtd" [ 
3 <! ENTITY preface SYSTEM "preface.xml"> 
4 <! ENTITY intro SYSTEM "introduction.xml"> 
5 <!ENTITY chapl SYSTEM "chapter1.xml"> 
6 <!ENTITY chap2 SYSTEM "chapter2.xml"> 
7 <!ENTITY appa SYSTEM "bibliography.xml"> 
8 <!ENTITY appb SYSTEM "index.xml"> 
9 <!ENTITY OT "Hebrew Bible/Old Testament"> 
10 ] > 
11 <book lang="en"> 
12 <bookinfo> 
13 <title>Holy Bits</title> 
14 <subtitle>Using Computers</subtitle> 
15 
<author> 
16 
<firstname>Thomas</firstname> 
17 
<surname>Naef</surname> 
18 
</author> 
19 
<copyright><year>2010</ y e a r X / copyright> 
20 </bookinfo> 
21 <!--
22 
Spreface; 
23 --> 
2 4 Sintro; 
25 <part> 
26 
<title>PartlTitle</title> 
2 7 
Schapl; 
28 </part> 
29 <part> 
30 
<title>Part2Title</title> 
31 
&chap2; 
32 </part> 
3 3 Sappa; 
3 4 Sappb; 
35 </book> 

WORD PROCESSORS 
37 
This "book.xml" file is the master file of the book. Line 1 states 
that it is a UTF-8 (Unicode) XML file. Line 2 specifies the docu-
ment type as well as the location in the system of the DTD.33 All 
the entities are in square bracket within this specification. Two 
possible entities are defined: the single XML files (Lines 3-8) and 
the abbreviations (Line 9). In this case, I would often write "He-
brew Bible/Old Testament", but since I do not want to write it 
twice on a page, I can create an abbreviation (in this case "&0T; ") 
that is transformed during the XSL-FO process. 
The "beginning" of the document is in Line 11 with the book 
tag and language specification. Lines 12-20 contain the meta-data 
of the document. The preface (Lines 21-23) is probably under con-
struction and should not (yet) be published. This is easily indicated 
by commentary tags (< ! - - -->). You can put all information or 
text in commentary tags; the important thing is that the file remains 
valid (each opening tag must have its complementary closing tag). 
The introduction (Line 24), a second preface-like section, is being 
published. As it is preface-like, it will not receive a number (when 
specified like this in the parameters). Two parts (Lines 25-28 and 
29-32) are the core of the book. Two appendices, a bibliography, 
and an index (abbreviated with the "app" prefix, Lines 33 and 34), 
represent the end of the book. For the file to be valid, an end tag 
(Line 35) is needed. 
introduction.xml 
1 <preface id="intro" 
2 
xreflabel="introduction'^ 
3 <title>Introduction</title> 
4 <para>Biblical scholars today are committed 
5 to working with computers, be 
6 they PC or 
7 Macintosh.<footnote><para>A very useful book 
8 was published more than a decade ago by the 
33 A PUBLIC specification of the DTD would also be possible, but I 
do not recommend it. 

38 
HOLY BITS 
9 SBL: <xref linkend="Durusaul998"/> 
10 <indexterm t y p e = " a u t " X p r i m a r y > D u r u s a u , 
Patr 
11 
ick</primary></indexterm></para></footnote> 
12 
[...] </para> [...]</preface> 
By the "id" attribute in Line 1, I define this place within the docu-
ment as "intro". When linking from another place in the document, 
I just have to write < x r e f 
l i n k e n d = " i n t r o " / > and a) the 
tag is replaced by "introduction" (which is why I use the "xrefla-
bel" attribute), and b) in PDF and HTML output, this link is click-
able for the reader. 
The <para/> tag (Lines 4-12) defines a paragraph, the <foot-
note/> tag (Line 7-11) a footnote. Within the footnote tag, a link 
to bibliographical data is given (Line 9). Note how that is 
represented in the bibliography file. In Line 10-11, an index term of 
type author is defined. During the transformation, an index entry 
will be created automatically. 
chapterl.xml 
1 
<chapter id="hardware" xreflabel="hardware"> 
2 
<title>Hardware</title> 
3 
[...] 
4 
<sectl> 
5 
<title>Components and Peripherals</title> 
6 
<para id="comp"> [...] </para> 
7 
</sectl> 
8 
</chapter> 
Each chapter can contain several sections. The section tags are 
from s e c t l up to sect5. A s e c t 2 tag has to be placed within a 
s e c t l tag, and so on. 
bibliography.xml 
1 <bibliography lang="en" id="bibliography" 
2 
xreflabel="bibliography"> 
3 <biblioentry id="Durusaul998" xreflabel= 
4 "Durusau, High Places in Cyberspace. 1998"> 
5 
<author> 
6 
<firstname>Patrick</firstname> 
7 
<surname>Durusau</surname> 
8 
</author> 

WORD PROCESSORS 
39 
9 <title>High Places in Cyberspace</title> 
10 <subtitle>A Guide to Biblical and Religious 
11 Studies, Classics, and Archaeological 
12 Resources on the Internet</subtitle> 
13 <seriesvolnums>Scholars Press Handbook 
14 Series</seriesvolnums> 
15 <publisher> 
16 
<publishername>Atlanta: Scholars Press 
17 
</publishername> 
18 </publisher> 
19 <pubdate>19 98</pubdate> 
20 </biblioentry> 
21 [ <biblioentry> [...] </biblioentry> ] 
22 </bibliography> 
The bibliography file stores the data in XML format, allowing this 
data to be displayed according to the chosen style. The <xref l a -
bel/> (Line 2) of the entries is displayed, which allows for linking 
throughout the document. 
The XML specification of articles looks a little bit different. 
They contain two < b i b l i o s e t / > tags, one for the article data 
and the other for the reference data (the relation attribute is journal 
or book). 
index.xml 
1 <index type="aut" lang="en"> 
2 
<title>Authors</title> 
3 </index> 
4 <index type="bibleRef" lang="en"> 
5 
<title>Biblical References</title> 
6 </index> 
The index is probably the easiest file to create. This index file con-
tains several indices (authors and biblical references). These six 
lines will create all the index terms you specified in the other XML 
files. 

40 
HOLY BITS 
To create one index with all the index terms, write the i n -
dex, xml file in just one line : <index lang="en"/>.34 If you 
are using a biblical reference index, do not forget to mention the 
order of the chapters: if you do not specify the order, you will re-
ceive an index with Chapter 11 before Chapter 2 (because 1 comes 
before 2). Example: 
<indexterm type="bibleRef"> 
<primary>Leviticus</primary> 
<secondary sortas="02">2</secondary> 
</indexterm> 
Transformation 
After creating the document (content) files, you probably want to 
transform them into an HTML or a PDF file. 
All you need is a processor. XML editors (like "<oXygen/>" 
or "XMLSpy") come with integrated HTML (and even PDF35) 
transform processors. You will have the links to their websites at 
the end of the Utilities chapter, PDF section. Another tool is the 
"XMLmind XSL-FO Converter". A free, personal edition is availa-
ble, with some restrictions. 
To convert XML files, you need to download the DocBook 
XSL files from the sourceforge website and store them on your hard 
disk. A customization of the output can be achieved by changing 
the p a r a m . x s l file (in the "html" or the "fo" folders). Most like-
ly, you will duplicate the original XSL files in different folders and 
then label them for your projects. The parameters' meaning is do-
cumented in the par am. xml file. 
34 Do not forget the slash! Without the slash, the processor will not 
be able to transform the files. The title is not necessary, as you specified 
the language and the title will be set automatically. 
35 The free FOP from Apache. 

WORD PROCESSORS 
41 
LINKS 
Text processors I editors, DTP 
http://en.wikipedia.org/ wiki/Word_processor 
http:/ / en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Text_editor 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Desktop_publishing 
Applications 
http://www. oxygenxml.org 
http://www.altova.com/xmlspy.html 
http: / / www.xmlmind.com/foconverter/ 
DocBook 
http://www.docbook.org 
http://docbook.sourceforge.net 
http://www.sagehill.net/docbookxsl/index.html 


6 
PRESENTATIONS 
Presentation-making applications are standard applications for 
office work. You have probably attended lectures during which the 
lecturers used presentation slides, likely to varying degrees of effec-
tiveness. In my academic experience, I have seen some rare exam-
ples of good presentations, but most seemed to have been made by 
beginners. Of course, academics are not graphic designers, but a 
certain standard of presentation quality is desirable. 
The most famous presentation applications are MS Power-
Point and OpenOffice Impress. This chapter will not replace the 
software guides for those two applications. Rather, it will give you 
some guidelines for making effective and attractive presentations. 
I want to show you that it is not difficult to make good pres-
entations. Take the following hints and tips and experiment: you 
will see that the more you create presentations, the more you get 
used to the application, and the better able you are to communicate 
your ideas. 
The building of a presentation can be divided into three stag-
es: determination of basic needs, preparation, and the creation of 
the slides. 
BASIC NEEDS 
First of all, you have to decide whether or not a presentation will 
be useful to you. Sometimes a sophisticated presentation does not 
fit a particular lecture scenario: perhaps the lecture room lacks the 
necessary audio/visual tools, or perhaps the audience is not used to 
following slides during a lecture. Similarly, a very short presentation 
(5 minutes) does not lend itself to complication presentation soft-
ware. Do not forget that you have to allot yourself time to make a 
presentation. You will invest approximately half a day (4-5 hours) 
for a paper of about 45 minutes. 
One of the most important things to remember when deliver-
ing a presentation is the fact that the audience is attending to hear 
you — not to watch your presentation. YOU are the attraction, not 
43 

44 
HOLY BITS 
the slides on the white wall, which are only there to underline your 
message. In other words, if you find that the audience does not 
focus on you, you should reflect on your presentation style. You 
might ask some people in the audience for their feedback. The 
answers to those questions should help improve your skills as a 
presenter. 
One of the biggest mistakes presenters make is overcomplicat-
ing the information. When supporting a paper with a presentation, 
please try to keep it simple. Often the speech is complicated 
enough. Try to simplify the message with the help of a few slides. 
Graphics, rather than a text, help the audience to remember much 
more. 
You will probably begin drafting your presentation by writing 
your paper of ten, twenty, or more pages. If you have more expe-
rience with presentations, you may structure your presentation as 
you write (with the help of a text processor or another tool, like 
FreeMind), perhaps creating slides as you go. When giving the 
paper, your goal is to speak freely without having to read from text; 
the presentation slides should guide you through your paper. 
PREPARATION 
The preparation for your paper and accompanying presentation 
will consist of research in libraries, internet, and books. Taking into 
account the topic, the audience, and other criteria, you will deter-
mine the appropriate form for your presentation. Your presenta-
tion will have a unique form and structure, likely something be-
tween an informational and convictional speech. An informational 
presentation is one in which the lecturer presents facts and dis-
cusses them, leading to a conclusion. A convictional presentation 
begins with a problem or a question that is followed by various 
arguments and counter-arguments; the conclusion consists of a 
resolution to the initial question or problem. In other words, the 
first form is a presentation that may revolve around one or several 
subjects, while the latter is more of a debate-style argument. Do 
not think that a presentation has to be one of those two archetypal 
forms; your presentation will likely be a mixture of both. 
Another important criterion to consider is the knowledge level 
of the audience. Are you speaking to your colleagues, experts, or a 
mixed crowd? You will present the paper in different ways for 
these three — again archetypal — audiences. Knowing your audience 

PRESENTATIONS 
45 
will help you prepare for the eventual discussion after your paper. 
Experts will probably ask more specific questions than a person 
who is "just interested" in the topic. To prevent questions that you 
do not wish to answer, end the presentation with a question that 
directs discussion. If you are unsure of what questions might be 
asked, discuss your paper with colleagues and, if possible, people 
who will be part of your intended audience. Besides alerting you to 
some possible questions, such advance discussions let you know if 
you have forgotten to discuss any important points. Also, if your 
topic is controversial or contentious, you may become more aware 
of other viewpoints, allowing you to better prepare for potentially 
difficult questions. 
A last point to consider in the preparation stage is the location 
of your presentation. You will speak differently to 300 persons in a 
big lecture hall than you would talking to ten people in a seminary 
room. It is certainly wise to inspect the location (if possible) before 
doing the presentation. This way, you know whether the necessary 
electronic equipment is installed or not. Other possibilities for 
presentation aids include flip charts, blackboards and whiteboards, 
and other media. And even if all electronic equipment is installed, 
do not forget to have a "Plan B" in case of technical difficulties.36 
Structure 
Be aware of the interest level of your audience and plan according-
ly. A typical presentation structure consists of an introduction, a 
central part, and a conclusion. You will probably develop your 
argumentation in the central part of your presentation. As studies 
indicate that audience receptiveness is limited during this important 
section of a presentation, make sure you highlight three (at most) 
take-home messages during the introduction and conclusion. You 
can develop these three messages more fully during the central part 
of your presentation for the interested audience members. 
36 For example, take some photocopies of your presentation with 
you. 

46 
HOLY BITS 
In ttoduction 
The first minutes of a presentation can be the longest ones. Per-
haps you are not sure if the audience is interested. Some "good 
vibes" in the room will make it easier for you to give a good pres-
entation without feeling nervous. Your attitude during this section 
of the presentation also plays an important role: to break the ice 
and engage the audience, try various opening strategies. You might 
present an historic reference, or tell an anecdote or joke. You can 
also begin with a definition, or by asking an absurd question that 
gets people's attention.37 
Central part 
To help your audience through the presentation, it is important to 
mark each section. This task can be done with a change of slide. 
If you have experience giving papers or presentations, you 
have probably been in a situation when you sensed the audience 
was no longer listening to you. Some motivational elements may 
help you to re-engage the public: a) ask questions (and give the 
answers only after a certain delay); b) give examples of the facts 
you just explained; c) name famous people whose actions illustrate 
your argument, or d) compare your point of view to other well-
known arguments. 
Three risky (but generally effective) attention-getters are refer-
ences to sex, crime, and money. 
Conclusion 
A perfect conclusion contains a short résumé with — at most — three 
take-home messages, and one or more open-ended questions that 
help lead your audience into a discussion. 
37 Of course, these ideas are merely suggestions. You may have your 
own attention-getting strategy. 

PRESENTATIONS 
47 
CREATING SLIDES 
When you decide to do a presentation with the help of presentation 
software,38 there are a few ways to ensure that your audience is 
impressed, informed, and even entertained by your work. Before 
going further, though, let us have a look at what kinds of software 
you could use to achieve this goal. 
Presentation software 
The most common application for presentations is MS Power-
Point, a sophisticated piece of software for creating presentations. 
It comes with the MS Office packages. The free alternative is 
OOImpress, the presentation software of OpenOffice. Other pro-
grams issued with Office packages are Keynote (iWork), Presenta-
tions (WordPerfect Office), and Corel Show (Corel Home Office). 
Of course, you can also create presentation slides with the 
help of HTML pages,39 MindMap software, PDF pages, or graph-
ics. The opportunity for experimentation is limitless with these 
tools. 
As stated above, presentations can also be made without 
software support. There are whiteboards and blackboards, flip 
charts, overhead transparencies, and other media that can give your 
messages a visual boost. 
Use of slides 
Have you ever experienced a presentation with too many slides? 
Unfortunately, that happens far too often. There is a basic rule for 
the use of slides: 7 subject — 1 slide. Do not mix two or more sub-
jects on a single slide; the exception may be the ToC (or a sort of 
overview) slide at the beginning of the presentation. 
A second basic rule: use keywords, not phrases or large blocks 
of text. Keywords and visuals help you communicate your message, 
38 Remember that a presentation does not necessarily have to be ac-
companied by a digital presentation. 
39 DocBook slides, for example, enable you to transform your XML 
document into HTML or PDF slides. 

48 
HOLY BITS 
and help your audience to remember that message. As already said, 
people come to hear you, not to read a novel on your slides. 
In terms of pacing, a slide should not be projected for a mere 
10 or 20 seconds. People will not be able to read the information, 
even if you "just" use keywords on the slide. That brings us to a 
third basic rule: 7 slide — 2 minutes. This rule of thumb should help 
you during the creation of your presentation slides: a 45-minute 
presentation should not contain more than 20 or so slides. 
Another helpful feature for the audience is a sort of a reduced 
ToC at the right-hand upper or lower margin of the slide. Highlight 
the current subject so that the audience knows where they are in 
your presentation timeline. 
Before giving your presentation, please rehearse in real condi-
tions.40 Have a second solution (Plan B) at hand to deal with unex-
pected equipment or configuration problems. 
Layout of slides 
The layout should be very simple: complex layouts could confuse 
the audience and prevent people from following your argument. 
Consider the use of animation in this context. If you create a pres-
entation with animations, you have a lot of options to choose from, 
including the different transitions from one slide to another. If 
your first transition comes from left, the second from the top, and 
the third from right, the audience may wonder about the fourth 
transition: will it come from the bottom or not? That is to say, 
people will be focused on the mechanics of your presentation, not 
on your message. 
Another basic layout rule is to create presentations in landscape 
(not portrait) orientation. If you copy-paste an extant page in por-
trait orientation, think about trying to reduce the content into key-
words and then writing them into a landscape-oriented slide. 
40 Think about how you want to take the presentation with you. Per-
haps you will use a USB flash drive or a CD-ROM, or your might choose 
to download your work from an online share. You might even consider 
taking your laptop with you. 

PRESENTATIONS 
49 
Third, use a clear graphical line. If you are speaking for your 
institution, use its corporate design.41 If there is no corporate de-
sign, create one — at least for your own presentation slides. In other 
words, create your personal corporate design for your presentations 
and save it as a template. 
Given that the slides should be simple, the maximum number 
of lines on a slide should be eight (8). Otherwise the audience is 
overwhelmed with text. Also, limit your use of colors: at most, use 
three (3) easily differentiated colors. The problems with colors lies 
in the technology of projectors: on a computer screen, a reader can 
clearly distinguish a dark turquoise (hexadecimal code: 00CED1) 
from a light sea-green (hexadecimal code: 20B2AA), but these col-
ors may appear very similar when projected. 
Typography of slides 
Once you resolve the problems of your layout, there are some ty-
pographical issues to consider. First of all, use a sans-serif font. 
Serif fonts are normally used for book typography (as in this book, 
for example); sans-serifs are often used for posters, and should be 
used on the internet. Famous sans-serif fonts include Arial, Helve-
tica, and Verdana. Another sans-serif fonts that is also famous 
but not freely available is Frutiger.42 The most widespread serif font 
is probably Times New Roman, the default font of several text pro-
cessors. Other famous fonts are Garamond, Century, Courier, 
Palatino, and others. 
A second typographical rule is to use the fonts with bold labe-
ling at 24 points minimum size. Given these parameters, you will 
not have the space for more than eight lines of text. This sizing 
enables the last row of people in the lecture hall to see your key-
words on the presentation slide. 
For ease of reading, keywords should be written in lowercase 
letters. Do not use capital letters or small capitals, both of which 
are more difficult to read, especially at a distance. 
41 Corporate design is a part of a corporation's identity. Elements 
may include company-specific fonts, colors, or slogans. 
42 Which you will find in almost every airport. 

50 
HOLY BITS 
Non-Latin characters 
As a biblical scholar, you may have to write keywords in Hebrew, 
Greek, Syriac, or another language. As already stated in the chapter 
about standards, you should use Unicode fonts. Imagine you are 
using a legacy font, taking your presentation with you on a USB 
stick, and the computer at your disposal does not have the proper 
font installed. Even when the used Unicode font is not installed on 
the computer, it will be displayed in another Unicode font (proba-
bly the default one). In other words, Unicode fonts ensure that 
your text will be readable. 
To be extra careful, you can also write the passage/keywords 
in question in a graphical application, export the graphic into an 
image, and then insert this image into your presentation slide. That 
is the most secure way to display font-sensitive information. 
Greek and Hebrew characters on a slide will probably be writ-
ten in serif fonts — contrary to the typographical rule above. The 
reason is rather simple: we are very used to reading those two lan-
guages in serif fonts, and a keyword in sans-serif would be rather 
strange. What kind of display do you prefer: rPttfNTjl (SBL Hebrew, 
serif) or JVWNlZl (Arial, sans-serif); 'Ev apxfj (SBL Greek, serif) or 
'Ev dpxn (Arial, sans-serif)? 
LINKS 
Official PowerPoint2007 Help Page 
http://office.microsoft.com/en-
us/powerpoint/EX100648951033.aspx 
OpenOjfice Impress Tutorial 
http: / / www.tutorialsforopenoffice.org/category_index/pres 
entation.html 
Apple (iWork) Keynote 
http://www.apple.com/iwork/keynote/ 
Corel Home Ojfice 
http: / / www.corel.com/content/pdf/cho/Corel_Home_Offi 
ce_Reviewers_Guide.pdf 
Corporate Design Manuals 
http: / / www.cidoc.net/cat_pdf_manuals.html 
Corporate Identity 
http: / / en.wikipedia.org/ wiki/Corporate_Identity 

PRESENTATIONS 
51 
Color names 
http: / / oreilly.com/catalog/wdnut/excerpt/color_names.ht 
ml 
Sans-serif fonts 
http:/ / en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sans-serif 
Serif fonts 
http: / / en.wikipedia. org/wiki / Serif 
Fonts 
http://www.linotype.com/ 


7 
BIBLIOGRAPHICAL SOFTWARE 
Bibliographies are one of the most important research tools for 
biblical scholars. (Where and how to find bibliographical data will 
be discussed in Chapter 12.) When it comes to text document or 
presentation software, there are several players on the market (and 
there are even some free software products available), and the same 
is true for bibliographical software. This chapter gives you an over-
view of the options available for biblical scholars. 
But let us consider first why you should use bibliographical 
software at all. You may ask, "Why not just search bibliographical 
data and copy-paste that information into a text document?" — a 
very common practice. The disadvantage of this procedure is that 
you have to copy-paste the same data for each document you are 
writing. If you store the data in a file — ideally not a simple text file — 
you can sort the data using different parameters, like last name, 
title, and others. In other words, your data is formatted (i.e. tagged) 
and thus standardized for subsequent use as bibliographical data, 
not just as text. 
The software applications for bibliographical data are very dif-
ferent from each other. Before choosing one, you have to know 
what you want to do with the data, and what you are willing to pay 
for the necessary software. Another question concerns your per-
sonal research process: how and where do you search bibliographi-
cal data? 
Several parameters will guide your decision: OS requirements, 
prices, application integration, and the type of features included. 
(Application integration refers to the degree to which the software 
interacts with another application, most likely a word processor.) 
Again, be aware of standards. For a long time, the biblio-
graphical data standard was the format of the most popular soft-
53 

54 
HOLY BITS 
ware, but with the increased use of open source software, the play-
ers had to define a standard to be used by all software houses. This 
standard is called BibTeX.43 With the development of XML tech-
nology, there is also a BibTeXML definition of the standard. As for 
text documents, a BibTeX or BibTeXML document will help you 
store your bibliographical data for years. Consequently, you should 
determine whether or not your preferred bibliographical software 
supports this standard. 
Before looking at bibliographical software, we need to discuss 
two practical pieces of information. First, storing your data in a 
standardized format includes the transformation of this data into a 
readable string. This transformation is usually done with styles. The 
style depends on the journal, organization, or publishing house. 
Several biblical software programs come with the SBL style. If you 
need another style, or your preferred style is not installed, you can 
create your own. Usually, that is done by modifying another style. 
Secondly, citing from articles and books is more or less common, 
but citing information from the internet is also important. From 
Chapter 10 on, you will find a lot of information concerning the 
internet. People often forget that the internet is not a lawless space. 
Copyright laws are in effect, just as they are in the print market. If 
you are citing or downloading images, texts, or other files, you have 
to declare their sources! An internet citation in SBL style looks like 
this: 
Naef, Thomas. "Holy Bits." No pages. Cited 30 September 2009. 
Online: http://www.holybits.info. 
Another style would be: 
Naef, Thomas. "Holy Bits" [http://www.holybits.info], 2009, last 
modified: 2009-09-20 [access date: 2009-09-30], 
As the requirements for online style are very different, the best 
thing would be to ask your publisher for the appropriate style. 
43 The file extension for BiBTeX files is . b i b . 

BIBLIOGRAPHICAL SOFTWARE 
55 
Let us investigate some of the more popular bibliographical 
software applications. Remember, biblical scholars require the use 
of Unicode for Hebrew, Greek, and transliteration text.44 
FREE BIBLIOGRAPHICAL SOFTWARE 
Zotero 
Zotero is probably one of the most popular free bibliographical 
software programs today. This software tool is not a stand-alone 
application, but a Firefox extension. That means you have to run 
Firefox in order to work with Zotero. The 2.0 beta version45 is 
compatible with Word2008 (for Macintosh). All previous versions 
are compatible with OpenOffice 2.4 or 3.1 and MSWord 2004 for 
Macintosh46 and MSWord 2000 or later for Windows. 
The big plus of this easy-to-use tool is certainly the unAPI in-
terface that enables you to search your bibliographical data online, 
then click on the appropriate blue sign in the address bar. 
If you are using old bibliographic data, Zotero allows you to 
import in different formats, like RDF,47 MARC, RIS, BibTeX, and 
others. 
Using Zotero with your word processor (MSWord or OOWri-
ter) enables you to format your bibliography with different styles. 
The styles are stored in the CSL format. Some styles come with the 
software. To install other styles, just drag and drop the . c s l file 
with the style into the Mozilla Firefox window. A message box will 
appear to confirm the installation. You will find a . c s l file for the 
SBL style in the link list at the end of this chapter. 
44 For example, words containing the special characters: h, s, à, h, s, n, 
etc. 
45 My tests do not indicate that the beta version is less stable than 
version 1.0. 
46 The MacOsX 10.4 or later is required. 
47 The Zotero file extension. RDF stands for Resource Description 
Framework and is a W3C technology. 

56 
HOLY BITS 
JabRef 
This open-source bibliographical software runs on a Java VM and 
therefore on operating systems like Windows, MacOsX, and Linux. 
The latest version of this updated project is 2.5 from 2009. The 
application is a stand-alone manager. You can export data into 
different formats, including BibTeXML, DocbookXML, MODS, 
RIS, and many others, and from . ods for using the data in Ope-
nOffice. 
If you are interested in trying out JabRef, a WebStart version 
is available; you do not have to install the software on your com-
puter. 
OO Writer 
OpenOffice comes with an integrated literature manager. You find 
it in "Tools > Bibliography Database". A disadvantage of this tool 
is that you cannot easily import data. Every record has to be en-
tered manually. 
To save time while using this integrated tool, create a biblio-
graphy with JabRef, export it in . ods format, and then relay the 
application to the created database. A step-by-step manual for this 
process can be found in the JabRef Help files under "Using JabRef 
bibliographies in OpenOffice.org". 
Bibus 
This software works with a MySQL database and can be used with 
OO and MSWord (Windows). As the installation requires a data-
base installation, this option should only be chosen by computer 
users who are willing to spend half a day learning about the func-
tionalities of and installation procedures for the different modules. 
Citavi Free 
This software will be available in English soon.48 At the moment, 
only German versions are downloadable (a free version [2.5] with 
a limit of 100 records per project, and a licensed version without 
48 At press time, version 3 was not yet available. 

BIBLIOGRAPHICAL SOFTWARE 
57 
limitations). The application is a reference manager, but it also 
contains knowledge and project organization tools. You can import 
citations from books, articles, websites, etc. Of course, a full text 
search will help you to find the right reference. Another nice tool is 
the Citavi Picker, an extension to your browser. If an ISBN is dis-
played on an HTML page, the Picker can import book data into 
your open project with the click of a mouse. 
Citavi runs on Windows (XP and Vista); a MacOS version, as 
well as a web application, are forthcoming. The software can be 
used with RTF-compatible word processors like MSWord, OO-
Writer, or WordPerfect. You can use predefined citation styles, or 
easily create one of your own. 
DocBook 
In the DocBook schema, you also find the tags < b i b l i o g r a -
phy>, its child tag <biblioentry>, and all the tags for storing 
information about a publication. DocBook knows two different 
kinds of bibliographies: a mixed bibliography and a "normal" bibli-
ography. To re-use information, use the "normal" bibliography, as 
the mixed is already pre-formatted in the XML file. 
DocBook is not really a bibliographic application — it is like 
the text editing DTD, a freely available schema. In conjunction 
with JabRef, you can manage the bibliographies in the JabRef ap-
plication and export the entries into a DocBook format (with some 
restrictions). 
BibDesk 
Like JabRef, BibDesk is a simple reference manager software. It 
runs on MacOsX 10.4 and above. It works very well with LaTeX. 
BiblioExpress 
This tool is the free version of Biblioscape. It is restricted to three 
bibliographic styles. It can be used to view bibliographic data or to 
export the data into an RIS format. It runs on Windows XP and 
above. 

58 
HOLY BITS 
PROPRIETARY BIBLIOGRAPHICAL SOFTWARE 
Aside from Citavi Free49 (the proprietary Citavi Pro version differs 
only by the number of entries per bibliography file), some other 
high-end products are available on the market. 
EndNote 
Probably the most recognized high-end application is EndNote. It 
integrates well into MSWord. The latest version (X3 for Windows 
and X2 for MacOsX) also integrates into Apple Pages 09 and 
OOWriter 3. There are many features to this product, including 
more than 3,000 bibliographic styles. 
ReferenceManager 
Another product from Thomson Reuters is ReferenceManager, the 
RIS format of which has become a proprietary standard. Most of 
the bibliographic software available can import and export 
from/into RIS format files. 
ReferenceManager runs on Windows XP and Vista. 
Biblioscape 
Another application is Biblioscape, which can be integrated into 
MSWord or WordPerfect (via RTF). (See "BiblioExpress"). 
BookEnds 
This MacOsX application is compatible with MSWord 2004/2008, 
Mellel, Apple Pages 09, Nisus Writer, and OOWriter 3. 
Bibliographix 
Like Citavi, the Bibliographix application is the product of a re-
searcher. It combines reference and idea management. Two ver-
sions are available: a free, basic version, and a Pro version. It runs 
on Windows XP and Vista. For many users, the basic version con-
tains enough features. 
49 Description above. 

BIBLIOGRAPHICAL SOFTWARE 
59 
CONCLUSION 
If you are already happy with your bibliographical software, don't 
change it unless you need features that are only available with other 
applications. If that is the case, you can use this chapter to help you 
determine your software needs. 
Again, if you are not keen on manually recording your biblio-
graphical entries into a database, you should use a bibliographical 
tool. Most of the tools have features that allow you to search on 
the internet, in databases, and/or in library catalogues, directly 
from the application. 
It is not easy to choose the right application — that choice de-
pends on your needs, financial possibilities,50 and your will and 
enthusiasm to familiarize yourself with new software. 
To help you compare between applications, you will find a ta-
ble of parameters in the Checklist. The best strategy is to check out 
two or three of these tools, after having researched their websites 
and product descriptions. The most expensive applications (like 
Citavi, Bibliographix, or Biblioscape) do have basic free versions 
that can be "upgraded" by buying a license key for a Pro version. 
Other — more expensive — applications also have trial versions 
available. Note that your word processor's capabilities will, in part, 
determine the software that best suits your bibliographic needs.. 
As a guideline, good bibliographical software should have the 
following features: 
• 
Unicode support 
• 
Import filter from BibTeX, RIS, and other important 
formats 
• 
Export filter into BibTeX format 
• 
Online research and recording of entries 
• 
Interaction with your preferred word processor/text 
editor 
50 But be aware that even a purchase of the current version will not 
negate the need for subsequent updates. Look at the version history for 
an indication of the fees that will be associated with these updates. But all 
in all, you will use this software for years — and hundreds of bibliographic 
references. Probably it will be worth the price. 

60 
HOLY BITS 
LINKS 
BibTeXML 
http://bibtexml.sourceforge.net 
RIS 
http: / / www.refman.com/support/risformat_intro.asp 
RDF 
http://www.w3.org/RDF/ 
MARC 
http:/ / www.loc.gov/marc/ 
Zotero 
http://www.zotero.org 
http://www.zotero.org/styles/sbl-fullnote-bibliography/dev 
General (with OpenOffice) 
http: / / wiki.services.openoffice.org/wiki/Bibliographic_Soft 
ware_and_Standards_Information 
http://wwwsearch.sourceforge.net/bib/openbib.html 
JabRef 
http://] abref.sourceforge.net 
Bibus 
http://bibus-biblio.sourceforge.net 
Citavi Free and Citavi Pro 
http://www.citavi.com 
BibDesk 
http://bibdesksourceforge.net 
BiblioExpress 
http://www.biblioscape.com/biblioexpress.htm 
EndNote 
http://www.endnote.com 
RtferenceManager 
http: / / www.refman.com 
Biblioscape 
http://www.biblioscape.com 
BookEnds 
http://www.sonnysoftware.com 
Bibliographix 
http://www.bibliographix.com 

8 
BIBLE SOFTWARE 
A lot of biblical software, both free and proprietary, has been pro-
grammed over the last years. However, some software houses have 
had difficulty keeping up with the technological developments, 
while others are new-comers to the computer-oriented world. 
Readers reluctant to use biblical software may think that a) 
biblical software costs a lot of money,51 or b) relevant biblical texts 
are already available and searchable on the internet. Both of these 
statements may be correct to a certain degree, but scholars are still 
wise to try to match their needs to an application's functionality. 
Again, the question is one of a scholar's needs versus the capabili-
ties of an application. One important advantage of using biblical 
software has already to be mentioned: biblical software enables 
sophisticated searches using several words, even with morphologi-
cal and syntactical tagging. 
Unlike bibliographical software and word processors that 
usually have both Windows and MacOS versions, biblical software 
usually runs on one system or the other. The exceptions are appli-
cations that run on a Java VM. 
As noted (Chapter 3 — Standards), there is — with the excep-
tion the OSIS52 — no standard for biblical resources. Unfortunately, 
there are only proprietary (that is to say, uncoordinated) efforts 
underway to create a so-called Bible Knowledgebase53 of people, 
places, and things in the Bible. This work should be coordinated, if 
51 See for this topic my footnote about bibliographical software 
(footnote 50). 
52 Open Scripture Information Standard, not to be confused with 
Open Source Information System (nowadays known as Intelink-U). 
53 Presented by Sean Boisen from Logos Bible Software at the Bible -
Tech:2009 in Seattle, WA (http://www.bibletechconference.com/speak 
ers.htm#SeanBoisen-2009). 
61 

62 
HOLY BITS 
possible by the SBL and/or Bible Societies, with all stakeholders 
integrated into the ongoing process. Otherwise, biblical scholarship 
will be fragmented across these proprietary lines; future communi-
cation and cooperation demands that these databases be shared — 
or at least an open (and collaborative) interface be declared. 
One of the projects for a tagged Bible in XML is the "Zefania 
XML Bible Markup Language". Several small projects use this 
XML as starting point for their software. Apparently, Zefania is not 
well known, because other projects are rising, like OpenScriptures. 
In my opinion, all the players should create a common Topic 
Map of the biblical world (and beyond). 
PROPRIETARY BIBLE SOFTWARE 
BibleWorks 
This Windows application is probably the most popular biblical 
software for PC systems. Its origins date back to the 1990s. This 
application is certainly the cheapest one, considering the texts it 
comes with (other applications contain basic texts and all other 
texts have to be bought afterwards). The current version is 8.0. 
BibleWorks uses its internal legacy fonts (Bwgrkl and 
Bwhebb) for searches and display. This means that before export-
ing or copying anything from BibleWorks, you have to export Un-
icode characters into your documents as follows: Go to the 
"Tools" menu and click on "Options". In the Options window, go 
to the "Fonts" tab. On the upper left, under the "Font Set to 
Edit", activate the "Export Fonts" button and click on "Activate 
Export Fonts". Then choose your preferred Greek or Hebrew font 
and check the Unicode checkbox on the right to export text in 
Unicode. 
Application structure 
The window (interface) of the application comes with three win-
dows: from left, the Search, Browse, and Analysis Windows. Above 
those windows, you will find a Menu Bar at the top and a Button 
Bar beneath. At the bottom of the application, you will find a Sta-
tus Bar. 
As the name suggests, you will use the Search Window for 
your searches. The Browse Window displays the results of your 

BIBLE SOFTWARE 
63 
search. You can choose (with the help of the "Search/Display-
Version" button on the left in the Search Window) the display 
version. By clicking the "Footprint" button on the top of the 
Browse Window, you can change the display mode (which, by de-
fault, is verse-by-verse) to version mode.54 
In the Analysis Window, the tab "Word Analysis" is activated 
by default. There you will find information about the word that the 
mouse is over at the moment. If this information gives you inter-
esting biblical references you want to investigate further, simply 
press the Shift-Key on the keyboard and move your mouse into the 
Analysis Window. 
Resources 
As mentioned above, BibleWorks comes with a huge number of 
texts and other tools. I will not mention all the content, as it is 
listed on the BibleWorks website. 
Nevertheless, I would like to draw your attention to a few 
texts and/or tools within this application. For exegetical work, 
BibleWorks contains the BHS and the Nestle/Aland 27th edition, 
both in a readable version and a morphologically tagged version 
(for searching). Be aware that the morphological versions are not 
particularly useful for display. In addition to different morphologi-
cal variants of the GNT,55 as well as the Grooves-Wheeler West-
minster database for the BHS, there are also other texts that are 
morphologically tagged: the LXX, the Targumim, the Works of 
Josephus, the Works of Philo, and the Apostolic Fathers. Note that 
these morphologically tagged texts always end with "M" in their 
abbreviation. 
In the Resources Menu, you will find a lot of interesting digi-
tized texts: Several Greek and Heebrew lexicons and grammars, the 
Revised CATSS Hebrew/Greek Parallel Text of E.Tov and 
F.Polak (2004), and the BibleWorks Map Module. The Parallel Text 
54 This enables you to see the verses around the "result" verse within 
the selected Bible version. 
55 BibleWorks, Friberg, Scrivener, Tischendorf, Robinson-Pierpont, 
Stephanus, and Westcott-Hort. 

64 
HOLY BITS 
helps you to find variants and differing translations of words.56 The 
Map Module enables you to display the region of the Near East, 
and you can also choose what map information you would like to 
see (places mentioned in the various books, chronological informa-
tion concerning archaeological sites, journeys, overlays of political 
boundaries, or rivers, lakes, coasts). 
Searches 
The most prominent function of Bible Works is certainly the search 
for words, stylistics, etc. One important thing not to forget by 
doing the search is to define the connector of the search expression 
(primarily AND, OR, and NOT). In the beginning, you will proba-
bly forget it once or twice (especially when you do not search all 
day long), but after a certain time, you will press these connector 
keys automatically. 
The possibilities of searches is very vast. You can primarily 
search by verse or by word. A verse search can be done by choos-
ing the verse at the top of the browser window or by the Verse List 
Manager, which you find in the "Tools" menus. A word search is 
done by selection of one (or several) word(s) in the Word List 
Manager,57 by using the Graphical Search Engine,58 or by Com-
mand Line. 
The most common command line search in every Bible soft-
ware is probably a AND-search with two (perhaps three) words. 
The syntax in BibleWorks for the AND-search is a point ("."). It 
does not play a role in which Bible you are searching (Hebrew, 
Greek, Latin or a modern translation), the commands and connec-
tors are the same. A word search for Gen 1:1 in an English version 
56 For example, where in the text the tetragrammaton (ill IT) was 
translated with jcupio? and where it was translated with 0£o?. (There are 
also other translations.) On the other hand, that jcupio? can be a rendering 
of iTIiT, but also of TITO, D^^X, and other words. 
57 Which is also found in the "Tools" menu. You can sort a Word 
List by frequency or alphabetically. 
58 This function will not be treated here as it is - in my opinion -
much more complicated than the command line search. 

BIBLE SOFTWARE 
65 
could be ".God heavens earth". In the NET Bible, seven verses are 
found with these words, in the American Standard Version (ASV) 
from 1901, you will find 16 verses.59 Of course, before doing a 
search, you have to choose the right version. The modern transla-
tions — as well as the Vulgate — are not morphologically tagged; so 
you will not find Gen 1:1 with the word "create", but only with 
"created". In other words: choose for the Hebrew and Greek texts 
the respective morphologically tagged version, i.e. "WTM" for the 
BHS with the Westminster Morphology and "BGM" for both the 
Septuagint and New Testament Greek versions. 
Chosen the right version, you can start the searches. Already 
mentioned, for a "AND" connector, you have to type as first cha-
racter a point ".". Otherwise the application will not display your 
writing in Hebrew or Greek! The "OR" connector is represented 
with a slash ("/"), and the "NOT" connector with an exclamation 
point ("!"). Besides those boolean connectors, BibleWorks knows 
also a "STRING" connector. It is represented with an apostrophe 
(""'). These connectors can be framed, grouped and interchanged 
with "(" and ")". 
Another feature is the possibility for doing morphological 
search. In other words, you choose the lexeme (e.g., 
and then 
put the "@" for indicating that what follows is the morphological 
code. Again, you will find these codes in the manual of the applica-
tion.60 The structure of the BGM and WTM code tables are more 
or less the same: you first choose the primary code ("n" for noun, 
"v"for verb [probably the most used codes], or others ["p" (WTM) 
or "r" (BG) for pronoun, "a" for adjective, etc.]). Then you can 
add limitations like stem, aspect, person, gender for verbs or gend-
er, number, etc. for nouns. These codes are a little different for 
Greek and Hebrew search, but while writing the codes, the applica-
tion gives you the extant possibilities of limitation for the actual 
step. If you do not limit after a certain degree, you can put the "*" 
for that all following codes are whatever. In other words, if doing a 
59 E.g. in NET Bible the word DTJU? from Hab 3 :3 is rendered with 
„skies" whereas the ASV translates with „heavens". 
60 You will also find a simplified table in the Checklists. 

66 
HOLY BITS 
morphological search, the last character should be a "*" for not 
receiving a null result. This sounds rather complicated, les us there-
fore have a look at some examples: 
Search term/s 
What the search engine is doing 
. n a a 
6 1 
All occurrences of the root ~l£D (112)62. 
.-|£D@vq*63 
Occurrences of the verb "I3D in the Qal stem 
CI). 
,-|£D@vpi3ms* 
Occurrences of the verb "I3D in the Piel stem, 
imperfect aspect, 3rd person, masculine gend-
er, singular number (12). 
.~l£D@vpi3f 
While typing this search expression, the 
search term changes to red. This means that 
this form does not exist in the chosen version. 
This should give you an idea of how to execute searches in the 
Command Line of BibleWorks. There are other examples of 
Command Line searches in the BibleWorks manual and on the 
website. Another helpful resource is the (unofficial) BibleWorks 
blog, a kind of end-user forum about the application. 
Logos Bible Software 
This application integrates into the Libronix Digital Library System. 
Logos is probably the biggest software house for biblical scholar-
ship. In BibleWorks and other Bible software, the primary set is the 
texts of the Bible and their neighbor texts (like Josephus, Philo, 
Qumran, etc.), but Logos Bible Software also has a huge number of 
61 Note that you have to type the "AND" connector ("."), even for a 
search with only one word. 
62 Number of verses found. 
63 You will note the difference of a legacy font. Previously, if you 
changed the direction of writing (e.g., Hebrew — English), the cursor 
automatically was at the right place. Here in the BibleWorks Command 
Line, you have to set the cursor at the right end (the beginning of the 
word) after writing 12D, continuing with the 
to define the morpho-
logical limitations. 

BIBLE SOFTWARE 
67 
integrated secondary texts, including commentaries and thematic 
books. 
Logos Bible Software comes with Unicode. You can use their 
proper keyboard (which resembles the western keyboards for He-
brew and Greek), or use the installed Unicode keyboards of your 
system. 
Content 
Logos Bible Software sells different product packages. The content 
varies depending on the target market. Biblical scholars will likely 
be interested in the "Original Languages Library", the "Scholar's 
Library", or even "Scholar's Library: Silver" or "Scholar's Library: 
Gold". The main difference between these options is the amount 
of secondary literature included in the Scholar's Library. The Orig-
inal Languages Library contains the BHS, as well in the WIVU 
morphological database and the Westminster 4.2 Morphological 
database. 
If you possess a version with limited texts and content, you 
can buy other content by downloading it. As you will not receive a 
CD-ROM from Logos, be sure to save your content on a storage 
device, in case you need it again after installation. For inserting a 
new text into your Logos Bible Software, copy it to the hard disk. 
For that purpose, go into the "Tools" > "Library Management" > 
"Location Manager" and follow the steps. 
Search 
Logos Bible Software can be searched morphologically as well as 
syntactically. The morphological search can be performed with the 
WIVU or the Westminster database. The syntactic search is based 
on the Anderson-Forbes database. 
Stuttgart Electronic Study Bible (SESB) 
The Deutsche Bibelgesellschaft also publishes its Bible software 
within the Libronix Digital Library System. Consequently, the 
searches are similar to those described above (Morphological Bible 
Search GUI), but not exactly the same. For the Hebrew Bible, 
SESB uses the WIVU database from Amsterdam. 

68 
HOLY BITS 
Content 
The SESB contains the SESB version of the BHS, the Septuagint 
(Rahlfs), the NA 27 for the New Testament, and the Byzantine and 
Westcott-Hort texts, all morphologically tagged. 
The BHS and NA 27 come with the text critical apparatus. 
Search 
For morphological searches, enter the word and choose the form 
with the help of checkboxes (for all versions). The BHS is also 
searchable with the SESB/Quest GUI. 
Dead Sea Scrolls Electronic Library (DSSEL 2006) 
Content 
This digital resource contains the non-biblical texts of the DSS. It 
is limited to the texts found at Qumran. Besides the Qumranic 
texts (with the lemmatization and morphological analysis by M. 
Abegg,64 their English translations according to the DJD edition,65 
and images of the fragments), the text of the Hebrew Bible (Codex 
Leningradensis B19A, with the Westminster tagging) is also in-
cluded. The software comes in Unicode. 
Searches 
The search interface lets you choose the search domain. The best 
strategy is to choose "All libraries". Your search will be performed 
not only in the Hebrew-Aramaic texts of the DSS, but also in the 
Hebrew Bible. Choose "All texts" in the "Search" dropdown menu 
to start. 
You can limit a search within the Hebrew-Aramaic texts with 
morphological codes. Choose "Hebrew-Aramaic texts" for the 
search domain and "LEXICAL FORMS" for the search. Type the 
word into the "For:" line and open in the window below the 
64 Which is also integrated into the Accordance module. 
65 If the DJD translation was originally in French, a new English 
translation according to the Dead Sea Scrolls Reader is given. 

BIBLE SOFTWARE 
69 
"Word Attributes" tab. Choose the appropriate form by clicking 
the checkboxes. When the search done, you can double-click the 
text in the result listing, which is shown, and the application dis-
plays the relevant text. By clicking the PAM link at the left of the 
text, the image of the fragment will be displayed in another tab 
window. 
Accordance 
Accordance is probably the most popular Bible software for Ma-
cintosh. Like Logos Bible Software, Accordance comes within a 
bundle. Like Bible Works, Accordance has its own keyboard layout 
for Greek and Hebrew characters.66 As in BibleWorks, Accordance 
exports Hebrew and Greek text from version 7 on into Unicode. 
Content 
The texts are the BHS with the Westminster morphology and the 
GNT (Nestle-Aland 27), with tagging by Mounce and Koivisto. 
The Scholar's bundle also comes with the KJV and the ASV 
(1901). 
Like the LBS, Accordance allows users to install additional 
texts and other resources, like the Septuagint (Rahlfs edition with 
the morphology by Kraft/Taylor/Wheeler), Hebrew Inscriptions 
texts (with grammatical tags by W. Schniedewind), Qumran Secta-
rian Manuscripts (with grammatical tags by M.G. Abegg67), or the 
Qumran Biblical Texts (in Canonical order, with grammatical tags 
by M. Abegg and C. Toews). Along with the texts, a certain num-
ber of tools — like grammars, indices, lexicons, etc. — come with the 
bundle (for example, the Parallel Aligned Text of the Greek and 
Hebrew Bible by E. Tov, the abridged Brown-Driver-Briggs lex-
icon, The Louw & Nida Greek-English lexicon, a synopsis of the 
three synoptic gospels, etc.) or can be bought afterwards. With the 
acquisition of each text or tool, you receive a key to activate the 
module. 
66 See Checklists for the mapping. 
67 See DSSEL. 

70 
HOLY BITS 
Newly acquired texts and tools are very easy to install. After 
downloading the item onto your hard disk (and storing a security 
copy on a USB flash drive, CD-ROM, or other secondary data 
storage device), you can drag-drop it into the appropriate folder of 
the Accordance application. These folders can be found in "Macin-
tosh HD > Accordance folder > Modules". Drop the tools into 
the Tools folder and the texts into the Texts folder. To activate 
them, just double-click (open) the new module and enter the acti-
vation key in the dialogue window. 
Within the Resource Palette Window, you can organize your 
tools and texts with the help of the "Tool Set" and "Text Set", 
respectively. 
Useful tools 
With the help of the "Language > Syntax" icon of the "Resource 
Palette", you can display the grammatical tags of a marked text. 
The Instant Details window, which is probably situated at the 
bottom of the screen, displays the grammatical tag and the English 
translation of the word under the cursor. 
To enter Greek or Hebrew words (if you are not accustomed 
to writing with the Accordance legacy fonts [Yehudit for Hebrew 
and Helena for Greek]), open the "Character Palette". Then acti-
vate the main window of the application by putting the cursor in 
the text field for search. Then click the characters. 
Search 
You can search within Accordance by verses (the default option) or 
by words. Searches by verses can contain one or several chapters 
and/or verses (e.g. "Gen 1-3", "Gen 1:5-2:4"). 
As in BibleWorks, a word search can be limited by entering 
grammatical tags: write the word, click on "Search > Enter Gram-
matical Tag", and choose the one you want to search. The applica-
tion will complete the command line with an "@" and the gram-
matical tag with square brackets ("[]"). For example: "[VERB nifal] 
To search with several words without specifying a gram-
matical tag, you can write one word after the other. If you are de-
fining a grammatical tag for one or several words, it is advanta-
geous to use the connectors AND, OR, XOR, and NOT within the 

BIBLE SOFTWARE 
71 
Command Line. Choose the appropriate command in the menu 
"Search > Enter Command". 
FREE BIBLE SOFTWARE 
BibleDesktop 
Several free Bible applications can be downloaded from the Cross-
wire Bible Society. BibleDesktop is mentioned here, because it is 
written in Java and therefore runs on Windows, MacOsX, and 
Linux. If you prefer another interface like MacSword for MacOs, 
Sword for Windows, or BibleTime (for KDE [Linux]), you can 
install the front-end and the content is the same. To install a new 
Bible translation or other content, open the download/install win-
dow with "Tools > Books". 
The difference between freely available and proprietary Bible 
software is primarily the tagging. Free Bible texts are not tagged; 
you can only search a flexed form (or perhaps in the Vulgate with 
"Domin" to receive "Dominus", "Domine", etc.). 
BibleDesktop offers you a lot of modern Bible translations. 
There are also a few reference works (dictionaries, glossaries, 
commentaries) of lesser interest. The ancient Bible texts that are 
available for BibleDesktop are the BHS (WLC), Septuagint 
(Rahlfs), Aleppo Codex, Byzantine/Majority Text, Textus Recep-
tus, Tischendorfs 8th edition of the GNT, Westcott-Hort with 
Variants, and the Latin Vulgate. Greek texts are not accentuated. 
In summary, BibleDesktop is a good tool for displaying dif-
ferent Bibles in parallel, and for copy-pasting biblical text into Un-
icode. 
The Word Bible Software 
This application is similar to BibleDesktop, but it contains the 
Greek texts (LXX and Westcott-Hort) with accentuation. 
LINKS 
Bible Software Review 
http://www.bsreview.org 
BibleWorks 
http://www.bibleworks.com 

72 
HOLY BITS 
The (Unofficial) BibleWorks Blog 
http: //bibleworks.oldinthenew.org/ 
Accordance 
http://www.accordancebible.com 
Logos Bible Software 
http://www.logos.com 
http://www.logos.com/products/info/comparison 
http: / / www.logos.com/training 
http:/ / www.macbiblesoftware.com 
WTVU database of the Hebrew Bible 
http://wivu.dans.knaw.nl/ 
Emdros 
http://emdros.org/ 
http: / / sourceforge.net/projects / emdros / 
Dead Sea Scroll ~Electonic Ubrary (DSSEL<) 
http://www.brill.nl/default.aspx?partid=227&pid=25695 
Stuttgart Electronic Study Bible (SESB) 
http://www.sesb-online.de/en/ 
OSIS 
http://www.bibletechnologies.net 
Zefania XML Bible Markup Language 
http: / / sourceforge.net/projects / zefania-sharp / 
Crosswire 
http://www.crosswire.org/applications, jsp 
BibleDesktop 
http:/ / www.crosswire.org/bibledesktop 
The Word 
http://www.theword.gr 

9 
OTHER UTILITIES 
GRAPHICS 
Of course, graphics software is not really the concern of biblical 
scholars. In certain instances, however, a basic understanding of 
these applications is essential. For example, you may have to pre-
pare a map of Paul's travels for use in a book, article, or presenta-
tion. 
There are a lot of software options — free or not — to choose 
from. The most popular free software is GIMP.68 It runs on all 
platforms and has considerable functionality. It is often compared 
to Adobe's Photoshop — a high-end graphics application. 
Another very nice tool is IrfanView, a free piece of software. 
Unlike GIMP, IrfanView is — as the name suggests — a display ap-
plication rather than an editing one. In other words, certain func-
tions, like cutting a selection of an image and pasting it into a new 
one, are easier to apply in IrfanView than in GIMP. 
INTERNET 
A lot of the work in biblical scholarship is done today with the help 
of the internet: scholars search texts and bibliographical data, and 
communicate with colleagues by e-mail, through social networks 
like Facebook, or even by chatting over instant messenger applica-
tions like Yahoo! Messenger, MSN, and Skype. 
Browsers 
As when choosing an operating system, one's choice of internet 
browser seems to be a kind of question of faith. Some Windows 
68 GNU Image Manipulation Program. GNU (Gnu's Not Unix) is an 
OS, but the acronym GNU is probably known because of the GNU Gen-
eral Public Ucense (GPL), a license common to free software. 
73 

74 
HOLY BITS 
users are happy with InternetExplorer, while others use Mozilla 
Firefox, Google Chrome, Opera, or another application. On the 
Macintosh side, Safari comes with the OS installation;69 still, some 
Macintosh users prefer Mozilla or other alternatives. With Linux, 
you have even more options than you do with the other two oper-
ating systems. By default, the Gnome desktop comes with Epipha-
ny, the KDesktop with Konqueror. 
I do not want to promote a particular application. Rather, the 
best advice is simply to choose a browser that respects the W3C 
standards and norms and does not have a huge amount of proprie-
tary implementations (which can be a source of security-related 
issues). You will find the links to a number of browser websites at 
the end of the chapter. 
E-mail clients 
Sending and receiving e-mails is a daily task. There seems to be a 
trend towards using online e-mail services (webmail). The great 
advantages of webmail are that that you do not have to install an e-
mail client, and you can check your e-mail anywhere, provided you 
have an internet connection and a browser application. 
Nevertheless, hard disk storage of your e-mails can also be an 
advantage, depending on your needs. If you do not want to lose the 
ability to check your e-mail from different locations and/or differ-
ent computers, most e-mail services offer an IMAP server. Unlike 
POP server installations, IMAP installations keep e-mails on the 
server; they are not downloaded to a hard disk. 
A lot of different applications are available. Outlook, Outloo-
kExpress, Entourage, and Mozilla Thunderbird are widely used. 
If you are happy with your current email client, keep using it. 
If you are considering a new client, your decision-making criteria 
should include: interoperability between the current application and 
future e-mail options (vis-a-vis import and export of data), and 
compatibility and integration between your email and other applica-
69 A Windows version of Safari also exists. 

UTILITIES 
75 
tions.70 Also consider your options for security packages, like 
PGP.71 
File Transfer 
Sometimes downloads are available from an FTP server. There is 
often no reason to install a separate application; the download can 
be processed from a website. Again, there are several FTP clients 
on the market. If you are working in an academic institution, it 
probably has an FTP client site license. 
An FTP client helps you to transfer data easily from one serv-
er to another. One of the two servers is usually your local hard 
disk. Freely available software options include FileZilla (which 
works on Windows, Macintosh and Linux), Cyberduck (Macin-
tosh), SmartFTP (Windows), and many more. 
Creating HTML pages 
Websites can be designed in different ways. First, you have to 
choose between a dynamic or stable website. The decision is largely 
dependent on the type of content you are working with. If it 
changes often, you will be well served by a dynamic website. If 
content changes are less important, a stable website might be a 
good choice. 
Dynamic websites are produced today by Content Management 
Systems (CMS), which work in a way similar to XML — XSL text 
editing. You enter data (content) into a database, and the chosen 
template with the appropriate Cascading Style Sheets (CSS) makes this 
content viewable on a browser screen. A very simple dynamic 
webpage is often programmed with PHP. If you have a host, the 
provider certainly offers a CMS that is already installed on the serv-
er. The most popular CMS options arejoomla, Typo3 and Drupal. 
70 Like calendars (e.g. in Outlook; Mozilla Thunderbird has the 
Lightning Add-On). 
71 See Chapter 3 - Security. 

76 
HOLY BITS 
More complex websites are programmed with JSP, ASP, and 
other technologies. You will find more information about these 
technologies through links at the end of the chapter. 
Stable websites are created with different HTML editors, 
which can range from the very simple to the very sophisticated. 
Given that you can save HTML pages with your office package 
applications, it's likely that you do not even have to install a sepa-
rate HTML editor. A lot of people are no longer using HTML 
editors (like Dreamweaver) to create their websites; instead, they 
are turning to CMS or blog software 
Another trend to note is that the borders between the differ-
ent technologies are blurring, and new combined technologies, like 
AJAX, are coming into use. 
The best way to create a website is, again, to respect the 
(W3C) standards. In this case, an HTML page should be displayed 
by any standardized web browser. 
Antivirus software 
It is important to have Antivirus software on every computer. 
These applications protect your hard disk from viruses. A second 
security application — which is usually installed with your operating 
system — is a firewall. 
Different products are on the market. Every institution is in 
possession of a site license (or should be!). As a university member, 
you should have the right to download and install an Antivirus 
application on your machine. A very good and free option is the 
avast! application. Other common applications include Symantec 
Norton, McAfee, and Kapersky. 
Network utilities 
In addition to the tools I have already noted, network utilities can 
be very helpful. 
One such tool is the Wireshark network protocol analyzer. It 
can be used to analyze a dysfunctional (W/LAN), helping you to 
know whether the problem lies with your computer, the router, or 
the network. 
Chat programs (instant messaging software) are other network 
utilities. They have become very popular, and there are several 
services with their own applications. Some software supports mul-

UTILITIES 
77 
tiple protocols (like the Kopete application that comes on some 
Linux distributions). Common applications are IRC, AIM, Skype, 
Windows Live Messenger (MSN), or Yahoo! Messenger. 
DOCUMENT UTILITIES 
Compression applications 
Almost certainly, you have experience downloading a ZIP or other 
compressed file. Data compression is very useful for packing sev-
eral documents /files into one file, or for archiving files. 
A lot of applications, both free and proprietary, are available 
for all operating systems. A common application for Windows is 
WinZIP. Another nice piece of software is jZip. 
PDF applications 
One of the standardized text formats is the Portable Document 
Format (PDF). In order to communicate and exchange data, it is 
important to be able to generate, read, and even modify PDF doc-
uments. We will see what (free) applications are available for these 
purposes. 
PDF creators 
Until a few years ago, Adobe Acrobat was more or less necessary 
to generate PDF files. Today, there are a lot of ways to create a 
PDF file. You will probably create the file in your word processor, 
text editor, or graphics application, then save it as a PDF file so 
that you can send it to colleagues. 
The ways to create a PDF are as follows: print a PDF, save as 
PDF, or generate a PDF. 
Just as you would install a local or network printer, you can al-
so install a PDF printer (like the Bullzip for Windows). Note that 
the MacOsX comes with this feature. If you have a file to print to 
PDF, just click on "File > Print" and then click the "PDF" button. 
To print a standardized PDF file, you have to choose the PDF-X 
option. 
More and more applications come with the ability to save an 
open document in PDF format. OpenOffice offers this feature. A 
button "Export Directly as PDF" in the toolbar will create a PDF 
file in the same folder as the open document. 0ffice2007 also 

78 
HOLY BITS 
comes with a "Save As > PDF or XPS" option. Other applications 
(like GIMP) come with a PDF file extension in their Save As win-
dow. 
As explained in the text editing chapter, PDF files can be gen-
erated by XSL-FO transformation. A free version is FOP from the 
Apache project. Another useful application is the XEP Engine 
from RenderX. I mention this software here because I have had 
personal experience with it, and there are free academic and free 
personal editions available. The big difference between these two 
applications is the fact that FOP does not (yet) support Hebrew or 
Greek characters. 
PDF viewers 
The most common PDF viewer is certainly Adobe Reader. That is 
not particularly surprising, as Adobe invented the PDF format. 
However, the PDF format is an open standard, meaning that there 
are a lot of other viewers to choose from. My favorite on Windows 
is PDF-XChange Viewer. It allows me to take notes directly on the 
PDF document. Another viewer for Windows is the Foxit Reader 
3.0. MacOsX comes with the Preview application that reads PDF, 
and other Macintosh applications include Skim and the Safari 
browser. 
PDF modifiers 
As mentioned above, PDF-XChange and Adobe Acrobat are good 
applications for modifying PDF files. Let me mention two free 
applications for different kinds of modifications. 
To modify a PDF document in its entirety, the PDF import 
extension of OpenOffice is very useful. All you have to do is 
download and install the extension. While the PDF-XChange 
Viewer allows you to enter comments or highlight portions of a 
PDF, the OpenOffice extension allows you to rewrite the docu-
ment (by inserting paragraphs, for example). To use the extension, 

UTILITIES 
79 
simply start the OpenOffice Draw or Impress application. Opening 
the file imports the PDF.72 
Another very useful tool is the PDFSAM. SAM stands for 
"split and merge". It is a Java-written program for merging or split-
ting PDF files. If you are preparing an edited book, for example, 
and all the articles are written with a word processor but the pub-
lishing house demands a PDF file, you can export/save/print each 
article as a PDF73 and then merge all those files into one file. 
DIVERSE UTILITIES 
MindMap 
A good way to store ideas, sketches, or even lectures is the Mind-
Map method. Several applications exist, and some (at least the pro-
prietary ones) are programmed to interact with other applications 
(mainly with Office packages or calendar software). 
For a beginner, FreeMind (written in Java) is a nice choice. It 
has the basic features MindMap software should have. For more 
advanced users, MindManager, a high-end application with a huge 
repertoire of features, may be a better option. 
LINKS 
GIMP 
http:/ / www.gimp.org 
GNU 
http:/ / en.wikipedia.org/wiki/GNU 
http:/ / en.wikipedia.org/wiki/GNU_Project 
http: / / www.gnu. org/ 
GPL 
http: / / en.wikipedia.org/ wiki/GPL 
http: / / www.gnu.org/copyleft/gpl.html 
72 Sun does not (at the moment) recommend importing text files of 
more than 20 pages into Draw. 
73 See above under "PDF creators". 

80 
HOLY BITS 
IrfanView 
http://www.irfanview.com/ 
Mozilla Firefox 
http: / / www.moziIla.org/firefox 
Internet Explorer 
http://www.microsoft.com/xxxxx 
Safari 
http:/ / www.apple.com/safari 
Google Chrome 
http:/ / www.google.com/chrome 
Opera 
http://www.opera.com 
Epiphany 
http://projects.gnome.org/epiphany/ 
Konqueror 
http://www.konqueror.org 
Thunderbird 
http://www.mozillamessaging.com 
Lightning Add-On 
http: / / www.mozilla.org/projects / calendar/lightning/ 
FileZilla 
http: / / sourceforge.net/projects / filezilla/ 
Cyberduck 
http://www.cyberduck.ch 
SmartFTP 
http://www. smartftp.com 
CMS 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Web_content_management_sy 
stem 
http://www.joomla.org 
http://www.typo3.org 
http://www.drupal.org 
HTML editors 
http: / / en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Comparison_of_HTML_edito 
rs 
http:/ / www.adobe.com/products/ dreamweaver 
http: / / net2.com/nvu 
http://kompozer.sourceforge.net 
HTML standards and other resources 
http://www.w3c.org 

UTILITIES 
81 
http://www.w3schools.com 
JavaServer Pages 
http: / / j ava. sun. org/products / j sp / 
http://en.wikipedia.org/ wiki/JavaServer_Pages 
Active Server Pages / ASP.NET 
http:/ / en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Active_Server_Pages 
http:/ / en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ASP.NET 
http://www.asp.net 
AJAX 
http://en.wikipedia.org/Ajax_(programming) 
AntiVirus software 
http:/ / en.wikipedia.org/wiki/AntiVirus 
http:/ / en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_antivirus_software 
Firewall 
http:/ / en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Network_firewall 
http: / / en.wikipedia.org/ wiki/Comparison_of_firewalls 
B^'mvW/è 
http://www. wireshark.org 
Ow/ applications 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Online_chat#Software_and_p 
rotocols 
Compression/archiving 
http:/ / en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_archive_formats 
http://www.jzip.com 
http://www.winzip.com 
http: / / en.wikipedia. org/ wiki / ZIP_(file_format) 
PDF 
http:/ / en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_PDF_software 
http://www.bullzip.com 
http://xmlgraphics.apache.org/ fop/ 
http: / / www.renderx.com 
http://www.adobe.com/products/reader/ 
http://www.docu-track.com/download/users/ 
http://www.foxitsoftware.com/pdf/reader/ 
http://skim-app.sourceforge.net/ 
http://extensions.services.openoffice.org/project/pdfimport 
http://www.pdfsam.org 
MindMap 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_mind_mapping_softw 
are 

82 
HOLY BITS 
http://freemind.sourceforge.net 
http://www.mindjet.com 

10 ONLINE (EXTRA)BIBLICAL TEXTS 
Several websites offer biblical texts that are incorporated into the 
Public Domain (BibleDesktop and other free Bible software). 
These texts can be browsed with an internet browser. 
GENERAL BIBLE PORTALS 
The Bible Tool 
The BibleTool is a very interesting website supported by SBL, 
Crosswire Bible Society, and ABS. The content is the same as that 
of BibleDesktop. Note that the CATSS LXX with morphology is 
found in the "Generic Books" section. The interface enables you to 
click on a Greek word in the LXXM and a pop-up window indi-
cates the morphology of the word. 
Bible Portals 
There are many portal websites like The Bible Tool. These include 
BibleGateway, BibleServer, Blue Letter Bible, and the Unbound 
Bible. 
The German Bible Society website offers the BHS, NA 27, 
LXX, Vulgata, and different German translations. They are not 
grammatically tagged for their internet display, nor do they come 
with the critical apparatus. However, if you only need the text, this 
is probably the place to get it. Free registration enables you to in-
corporate the OpenSearch tool into your Internet Explorer or Fire-
fox Browser. 
Bible Manuscripts and Online Editions 
Codex Sinaiticus 
This project allows you to read the digitized, transcribed, and trans-
lated Codex Sinaiticus on the internet. 
83 

84 
HOLY BITS 
Stuttgarter Vulgata 
Here you can access the digitized Vulgata from 1519. 
The Schoyen Collection 
There are 43 examples of the Bible collection, and some manu-
scripts are the oldest existing samples of their kind. 
Einheitsubersetzung 
This is one of the most important German Bible translations that is 
freely available on the internet. 
NetBible 
NetBible is one of the "new" English translations. It features an 
integrated learning environment. 
HEBREW BIBLE/OLD TESTAMENT 
In addition to the websites mentioned above, other websites offer 
the Hebrew Bible/Old Testament in different forms. 
The Ben-Zvi Institute, Jerusalem, gives us a look at the Alep-
po Codex. The digitized content is not yet fully available on the 
internet. 
Tzemah Yoreh's website (The Sources of Biblical Narrative) 
contains a source-critical (Hebrew) Bible. 
The Mechon Mamre website offers different texts, all in 
HTML, including the parallel Hebrew-English version and the 
Hebrew Bible in MP3 format. The latter is an interesting source for 
Hebrew beginners. 
The New English Translation of the Septuagint (NETS) was a 
project of the IOSCS. The work is published in print and can be 
downloaded (final masters) on the internet. 
A Hebrew Interlinear Bible is provided by Scripture4All. The 
PDF files (one per chapter) can be helpful for beginners. 
The Hebrew Bible in XML, an interesting project by A. Ver-
boomen, lets you display the Hebrew Bible in HTML. In the text 
browser, you can click on a word to display its occurrences in this 
form. Clicking on the "Accents" link allows the verse analyzer to 
show you the Masoretic cantillation analysis. You also have a link 
in each verse that allows you to search the BiBIL database for the 
verse, chapter, or book. 

BIBLE TEXTS ONLINE 
85 
The links on the Septuagint Online website take you to online 
texts, discussion, and other material related to the LXX. 
Another project, by J. Kimball, is the WLC in XML. It comes 
with Documentary Hypothesis markings for the books of the To-
rah. 
The Prague Bible (Tanakh) from 1489 includes the text of the 
Hebrew Bible, accompanied by Rashi's commentary. It is digitized 
for online viewing. 
NEW TESTAMENT 
As with the Hebrew Bible/Old Testament, several websites are 
specialized for the New Testament. 
Some of the New Testament books are available in Greek and 
Latin audio (MP3) files, which are nice tools for learning languages. 
Unlike most free (text) websites, the OpenText project analy-
sis of the New Testament is syntactic (and not morphological). 
This makes this website a good supplement to other available texts. 
In regards to the Hebrew Bible, Scripture4All offers an inter-
linear version of the New Testament. 
ANCIENT LITERATURE 
This section includes all websites with literature that is not primari-
ly biblical (i.e. OT pseudepigrapha and NT apocrypha). 
Oral Law Sources 
This site contains Mishnah, Tosefta, Yerushalmi, and Bavli, offered 
by Mechon Mamre. Another source is RaMBaM's Mishneh Torah. 
Perseus Digital Library 
This database project, based at Tufts University, houses primary 
and secondary sources from and about Greek and Roman authors. 
The current version is 4.0. 
EarlyJewish 
Writings 
This website links you to online texts, translations, and introduc-
tions to other resource links. The content is from the Hebrew Bible 
— Deuterocanonicals — Pseudepigrapha — Philo of Alexandria to 
Flavius Josephus. 

86 
HOLY BITS 
The Great Isaiah Scroll 
This website lets you view the Isaiah Scroll from Qumran (lQIsa1) 
with a scroll format. 
Project on Ancient Cultural Engagement (PACE) 
This project contains the works of Flavius Josephus and Polybius, 
as well as secondary literature, textual parallels, history of reception, 
and bibliographical and ongoing dissertation information about 
Josephus. 
Bibliothèque copte de Nag Hammadi 
This Unviersité Laval, Canada, website contains information about 
the Nag Hammadi Library: there are (French) translations of the 
corpus, bibliographical listings, and other information about the 
texts and the team working on them. 
Neutestamentliche 
Apokryphen 
This interesting website by W. Willker (University of Bremen, 
Germany) features information and (German) translations of the 
most important NT apocrypha. 
New Testament Apocrypha 
This site lists the NT Apocrypha and English translations (without 
indication of source). Therefore, it is not really suitable to cite in 
articles or books. However, it still provides good information about 
the topic. 
The Online Critical Pseudepigrapha (OCP) 
This is a very useful website that comes with the critical apparatus. 
The website is supported by the SBL. 
ET AN A core texts 
This repository contains primary and secondary literature from the 
Ancient Near East. 

BIBLE TEXTS ONLINE 
87 
LINKS 
The Bible Tool 
http:/ / www.crosswire.org/study 
BibleGateway 
http://www.biblegateway.com 
BibleServer 
http://bibleserver.com 
Blue Tetter Bible 
http://www.blueletterbible.org/ 
The Unbound Bible 
http://www.unboundbible.org 
German Bible Society 
http://www.bibelwissenschaft.de/online-bibeln/ 
Codex Sinaiticus 
http://www.codexsinaiticus.net 
Stuttgarter Vulgata 
http: / / www.wlb-stuttgart.de/refereate/theologie/vulgl 519.h 
tml 
The Scheyen Collection 
http: / / www.shoyencollection.com/bible.htm 
Einheitsiiberset^ung 
http://alt.bibelwerk.de/bibel 
NET Bible 
http:/ / www.bible.org/netbible/ 
http://net.bible.org 
Aleppo Codex 
http://www.aleppocodex.org 
The Sources of Biblical Narrative 
http://www.biblecriticism.com 
Hebrew-English Bible 
http: / / www.mechon-mamre.org/p/pt/ptO.htm 
MP3 Recordings of the Hebrew Bible (chapter bj chapter) 
http: / / www.mechon-mamre.org/p/pt/ptmp3prq.htm 
A New English Translation of the Septuagint (NETS) 
http: / / ccat.sas.upenn.edu/nets / 
Hebrew Interlinear Bible (OT) 
http: / / www.scripture4all.org/OnlineInterlinear/Hebrew_In 
dex.htm 

88 
HOLY BITS 
The Hebrew Bible in XME 
http: / / www.tanakhml.org 
The Septuagint Online 
http://www.kalvesmaki.com/LXX 
WLCinXML 
http://www.tanach.us/Tanach.xml 
Prague Bible 
http://www.yu.edu/libraries/pragueBible.asp 
Internet New Testament Audio Recording Project 
http: / / www.greeklatinaudio.com 
OpenText 
http://www.opentext.org 
Greek Interlinear Bible (NT) 
http: / / www.scripture4all.org/Onlineinterlinear/Greek_Inde 
x.html 
Oral Taw Sources 
http: / / www.mechon-mamre.org/b/bO.htm 
Mishneh Torah 
http: / / www.mechon-mamre.org/i/O.htm 
Perseus Digital Ubrary 
http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/ 
Early Jewish Writings 
http://www.earlyjewishwritings.com 
The Great Isaiah Scroll 
http://www.imj.org.il/shrine_center/Isaiah_Scrolling/index. 
html 
PACE 
http: / / pace.mcmaster.ca/york/york/index.htm 
Bibliothèque copte de Nag Hammadi (BCNH) 
http://www.naghammadi.org/default.aspx?lang=eng 
A\eutestamentliche Apokryphen 
http: / / www-user.uni-bremen.de/~wie/nt-apokrypha.html 
New Testament Apocrypha 
http: / / www.interfaith.org/Christianity/apocrypha/ 
Online Critical Pseudepigrapha (OCP) 
http://www.purl.org/neete/ocp 
http://ocpnews.blogspot.com 
ETANA Core Texts 
http: / / www.etana.org/coretexts.html 

11 ONLINE BOOKS AND JOURNALS 
Primary texts, as well as pieces of secondary literature, are increa-
singly available online. This is the result of several factors: 
Publishing houses are aware of the internet market and 
now publish their works both on paper and online. 
Academic authors can now put their works in an Ope-
nAccess Repository. The Berlin Declaration on Open 
Access has been signed by a lot of universities and organi-
zations. 
The paper production of journals and books is prohibi-
tively expensive. Putting the same information on a server 
is much cheaper.74 
ONLINE BOOKS 
Repositories 
Directory of Open Access Repositories 
(OpenDOAR) 
You can explore the Philosophy and Religion repositories with the 
help of the repository search. 
eScholarship Editions 
This collection contains almost 2,000 books, 500 of which are 
available abroad from the University of California. 
Project Gutenberg 
Project Gutenberg houses approximately 30,000 free electronic 
books, all browsable by author, title, and language, and searchable 
by author, title, subject, and full text. 
74 But remember the costs and lifecycles of supports. 
89 

90 
HOLY BITS 
The Online Books Page 
This is a huge list of over 35,000 free books that are available on 
the web. Browsing is possible by author, title, or subject. 
Google Books 
A lot of books are digitized by Google and can be found on this 
portal. 
Single books or special repositories 
Jewish 
Encyclopedia 
The JE from 1906 recently came into the public domain and is now 
available on the internet. While articles about recent Jewish history 
and culture are not included, it is a great resource for topics con-
cerning ancient Judaism. 
Codices Electtonici Sangallenses (CESG) 
This virtual library contains material from one of the oldest libra-
ries in Europe. Several hundred medieval codices of the Abbey 
Library of St. GaUen, Switzerland, have been digitized and made 
available. 
ONLINE JOURNALS 
As mentioned above, a lot of publishing houses put their journals 
on servers. The only problem is that many of these journals require 
paid subscriptions (which the Berlin Declaration opposes). That is 
why the biblical studies journals listed here are freely available. For 
journals in adjacent domains, please consult the DOAJ list. 
More and more, so called DOIs can be found in articles — or 
even (online) books. The DOI system is comparable to the ISBN 
you find in books: every Digital Object Identifier is a unique identifier 
that indicates the repository of the object. For resolving a DOI, 
just append it to the URL "http://dx.doi.org/" and your browser 
will be redirected to the text. 

ONLINE BOOKS AND JOURNALS 
91 
Repositories 
Directory of Open Access Journals (DOAJ) 
The Religion subject lists 58 journals, and the Bible subject lists 4. 
Other interesting subjects may be History and Archaeology, Lan-
guages and Literatures, Philosophy, and Social Sciences. 
Journals in Biblical studies 
Biblica (Rome) 
Biblica has been published by the Pontifical Biblical Institute since 
1920. This online version starts with Volume 71 (1990) and contin-
ues through to the present day. 
Filologia Neotestamentaria (Cordoba, Spain) 
This journal of New Testament philology is accessible online from 
Volume 7 (1994) onwards. 
HIPHIL (Copenhagen, Denmark) 
This is an online, peer-reviewed journal covering Old Testament 
Hebrew Bible Theology, Interpretation, Poetics, History, Interac-
tivity, and Linguistics, with a particular emphasis on bridging the 
gap between ancient authors and modern readers. 
Jewish Studies, an Internet Journal (Ramat-Gan, Israel) 
This peer-reviewed, electronic journal deals with all fields of Jewish 
studies. There are articles in English and Hebrew. 
Journal of Biblical Studies 
This is a peer-reviewed journal. The current issue (6.2) dates from 
2006. 
Journal of Hebrew Scriptures (JHS — Edmonton, Canada) 
This journal is peer-reviewed. The articles are freely accessible on 
the internet, and Volumes 1 to 7 are now available on paper. In 
addition to the articles, the journal also offers book reviews. 
Some articles are presented in an HTML hypertext (test) ver-
sion that enables the reader to find information concerning a linked 
Bible verse or author (e.g. bibliographies). 

92 
HOLY BITS 
Lectio difficilior (Berne, Switzerland) 
This electronic journal is for feminist exegesis. 
Review ofBiblical Literature (RBL) 
This SBL publication is available in print and online. 
TC: A Journal of Biblical Textual Criticism 
These articles and reviews relate to textual criticism. 
Hugoye: Journal ofSyriac Studies 
One of the first freely available electronic journals, Hugoye is pub-
lished twice a year (January and July). 
LINKS 
Berlin Declaration (and other information about Open Access to Knowledge in 
the Sciences and Humanities) 
http://oa.mpg.de/openaccess-berlin/berlindeclaration.html 
Open Archives Initiative (OAI) 
http://www.openarchives.org 
Directory of Open Access Kepositories 
(OpenDOAK) 
http://www.opendoar.org 
eScholarship Editions 
http://www.escholarship.org/editions/ 
Project Gutenberg 
http: / / www.gutenberg.org/wiki/Main_Page 
The Online Books Page 
http://digital.library.upenn.edu/books/ 
Google Books 
http://books.google.com 
Jewish Encyclopedia 
http://www.jewishencyclopedia.com 
Codices Electronic} Sangallenses (CESG) 
http://www.cesg.unifr.ch/en/index.htm 
Digital Object Identifier (DOI) 
http://www.doi.org 
http://dx.doi.org/pOI] 
International Standard Book Number (ISBN) 
http://www.isbn-international.org 
http:/ / en.wikipedia.org/wiki/International_Standard_Book_ 

ONLINE BOOKS AND JOURNALS 
93 
Number 
Directory of Open Access Journals (DOAJ) 
http://www.doaj.org 
http://www.doaj.org/ doaj?func=subject&cpid=16 
Biblica (Rome) 
http://www.bsw.org/index.php?l=71 
Filologia Neotestameentaria 
http://www.bsw.org/index.php?l=72 
HIPHIL 
http://www.see-j.net/index.php/hiphil/ 
Jewish Studies, an Internet Journal 
http://www.biu.ac.il/JS/JSIJ 
Journal of Biblical Studies 
http: / / j ournalofbiblicalstudies. org 
Journal of Hebrew Scriptures 
http://www.jhsonline.org 
Lectio difficilior 
http://www.lectio.unibe.ch 
Review of Biblical Uterature 
http://www.bookreviews.org/ 
TC: A Journal of Biblical Textual Criticism 
http: / / rosetta.reltech.org/TC/TC.html 
Hugoye 
http: //bethmardutho.cua.edu/hugoye/ 


12 ONLINE BIBLIOGRAPHIES 
Today, a lot of information and knowledge is stored in online data-
bases. Some databases are free of charge, but others cost a lot of 
money — more than an individual could pay. Consequently, univer-
sity libraries usually grant scholars access to a lot of databases: bib-
liographical, thematic, etc. As I am supposing that the reader of 
this book is more or less familiar with the services her/his library 
offers, I will mention here only free online resources for bibliogra-
phies.75 
The focus here is on the databases, but lists with links to libra-
ries, databases, or even "full text" bibliographies may also be of 
interest. 
BIBLIOGRAPHICAL DATABASES 
The main difference between a database and (library) catalogue is 
the fact that the latter does not usually record single articles from 
festschriften or collected works. Databases, on the other hand, 
have this information, and more. 
ABZU 
ABZU is the bibliographical part of the ETANA project, and a rich 
resource for ANE studies. This collaborative guide is searchable 
like a bibliographical database. Unlike other bibliographical data-
bases, ABZU also indexes articles on websites. 
Biblical Bibliography of Lausanne (BiBIL) 
This database is filled with biblical literature. It is capable of simple 
and advanced (boolean) searches, as well as searches by categories. 
The interface (and the thesaurus) is in English, French, and Ger-
75 That is why the ATLA or FRANCIS databases are not mentioned. 
95 

96 
HOLY BITS 
man, and searchable in all three languages. Articles and books 
(about 90,000 entries) are recorded since 1986. 
Special features include the following: links to reviews, ab-
stracts, and online documents (when free); export of data into bib-
liographical formats for import into bibliographical software; in-
dexing collected works and articles; searchable results; indexed 
extra-biblical references (pseudepigraphical and apocryphal litera-
ture); publication of the 'Bulletin de bibliographie biblique (3 issues a 
year); a new (and user friendly) interface and upgraded features 
since September 2009. 
Documentation for Biblical Literature, Innsbruck (BILDI) 
This database contains articles and books from 1985 onwards (ap-
proximately 130,000 entries). Three adjacent databases are searcha-
ble with the interface (Deuteronomy; Herrenmahl und Gruppeni-
dentität; Plants and Animals in the Bible). The preferred display 
format is "full / Year". Boolean searches are possible by title, au-
thor, keyword, and reference (journal), and limited by year. It is 
searchable in German and English.76 
Bibliothèque Oecuménique et Scientißque d'Etudes Bibli-
ques, Paris (BOSEB) 
This French database contains numerous records dating back to 
the beginning of the 20th century. It is searchable (in French) by 
title, author, subject, book series, and journal. 
Gnomon, Eichstätt (Germany) 
This bibliographical database for classics studies is searchable in 
German, with information in English. 
Index Theologicus (IxTheo), Tübingen (Germany) 
This database includes journal and congress volume articles in the 
field of theology. There are approximately 420,000 entries, search-
76 Note that biblical references searches must use the German ab-
breviation of the biblical book. 

ONLINE BIBLIOGRAPHIES 
97 
able in German and English. An online tutorial is offered in both 
languages. 
RAMBI 
This bibliography lists articles in the various fields of Jewish stu-
dies. Electronic recording began in 1985. Users can search by key-
words or phrases, and browse alphabetical lists (author, subject, 
section, and source indices). 
LISTS OF LIBRARIES, DATABASES, AND BIBLIOGRAPHIES 
Libraries 
British Library (BL), London 
Catalogue collectif de France (CCFr), France 
German National Library, Leipzig/Frankfurt a.M./Berlin 
Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem 
Karlsruher Virtueller Katalog, Karlsruhe (with worldwide 
search possibilities) 
Library of Congress, Washington/DC 
National Library of France, Paris 
Virtueller 
Katalog Theologie 
und Kirche 
(VThK), 
Germany 
Yeshiva University Libraries 
This is a huge list of databases, e-Journals, and e-Books. 
BiBLink 
This German website is very useful for information specialists (li-
brarians, etc.). Links point to German, English, French, and Italian 
websites. 
LINKS 
ABZU 
http://www.etana.org/abzu/ 
BML 
http:/ / www.bibil.net 
BILDI 
http://www.uibk.ac.at/bildi/ 

98 
HOLY BITS 
BOSEB 
http://ipac.icp.fr/ 
Gnomon 
http://www.gnomon-online.de 
Index Theologicus 
http://www.ixtheo.de/zid-curr/ 
RAMBI 
http://www.jnul.huji.ac.il/rambi/ 
British Ubraiy 
http : / / www. bl.uk 
Catalogue Collectif de Trance 
http://www.ccfr.bnf.fr 
German National Ubrary 
http://www.d-nb.de/eng/index.htm 
Hebrew University of Jerusalem 
http://www.huji.ac.il/huji/eng/library_e.htm 
Karlsruher Virtueller Katalog (KVK) 
http: / / www.ubka.uni-karlsruhe.de/kvk 
Ubrary of Congress 
http:/ / catalog.loc.gov 
National Ubrary of Trance 
http://www.bnf.fr/pages/zNavigat/frame/catalog.htm 
Virtueller Katalog Theologie und Kirche 
http:/ / www.vthk.de/en/ 
Yeshiva University Ubraries 
http://www.yu.edu/libraries/ 
BiBUnk 
http:/ / www.biblink.ch 

13 DIFFERENT THEMATIC RESOURCES 
Find in this chapter some interesting websites. Of course, there are 
a lot of websites that could also be mentioned. Have a look for 
them on the www.holybits.info website or let me know about web-
sites someone should bookmark. 
ANCIENT LANGUAGES 
General 
Biblical Lexicography 
This section of the SBL makes different projects available within its 
domain. 
Pericope 
The Pericope Group's (SBL) interest is the way in which texts were 
divided in antiquity. 
Hebrew 
Semantic Dictionary of Biblical Hebrew 
Using semantic domains, this project by the United Bible Societies 
aims to build a dictionary of biblical Hebrew domains that is com-
parable to the Louw & Nida Greek-English Lexicon of the New 
Testament. 
Forschungsstelle Qumran- Wórterbuch 
Unfortunately, this lexicon is still a work in progress. The project is 
based in Gottingen (Germany). 
The Biblical Hebrew Web Ring 
This is a collection of websites that are dedicated to Biblical He-
brew learning. 
99 

100 
HOLY BITS 
Davar 
This collaborative Biblical Hebrew Vocabularies project website is 
maintained by the University of Auckland (New Zealand). It is a 
resource for learning and teaching Hebrew vocabularies. It cannot 
replace a Hebrew course, but it is especially helpful for beginners 
who are seeking to familiarize themselves with the language. 
Aramaic 
Comprehensive Aramaic Lexicon 
The CAL website, based at Hebrew Union College, Cincinnati, 
contains not only the lexicon, but also Aramaic texts. The CAL lets 
you display the targumic versions of a biblical verse. 
Greek 
Greek Lexicon Project 
This project is based out of the Faculty of Classics at the University 
of Cambridge (UK). 
Suda Online : Byzantine 
Lexicography 
This tenth-century compilation/encyclopedia is available online. 
DICTIONARIES AND LEXICONS 
Biographisch-Bibliographisches 
Kirchenlexikon 
(BBKL) 
This very interesting website (in German) provides good documen-
tation and information about biblical scholars of the 17th -19th cen-
turies. 
Das wissenschaftliche Bibellexikon im Internet (WIBILEX) 
This is the German lexicon for biblical studies. This project is sup-
ported by the German Bible Society. 590 articles, particularly in the 
field of Hebrew Bible scholarship, are freely available online. The 
goal is to collect 3,000 articles covering the whole field of biblical 
scholarship. 

THEMATIC ONLINE RESOURCES 
101 
Study Dictionary 
The result of this merged dictionary from different sources gives 
you a huge all-in-one dictionary. 
Strong's Dictionary 
This (alpha release) of Strong's dictionaries of Hebrew and Greek 
is published in GPL 3.0, licensed by OpenScriptures. 
PATRISTICS 
Early Church Fathers 
Part of the Christian Classics Ethereal Library, these English trans-
lations of works (Ante-Nicene Fathers; Augustine, Chrysostom; 
Post-Nicene Fathers) are made available by Calvin College. 
Early Church Fathers —Additional Texts 
In addition to the above listings and texts, these texts are edited by 
R. Pearse. 
Tertullian Project 
This website is dedicated to Tertullian. It includes texts and transla-
tions, manuscripts, bibliographies, and articles and books about his 
life and works. 
Patristic Source Texts - The Master List 
These are English translations of over 300 patristic texts. 
Roman Martyrs Project 
This is a list and database of Roman martyrs. 
ARCHAEOLOGY 
Bible Places 
This site provides photographs and information about biblical 
places, ordered by geographical location. Related websites are men-
tioned at the bottom of each site. 

102 
HOLY BITS 
Kielet Bilddatenbank Nahet Osten (KiBiDaNO) 
Simple and advanced searches are possible within this site. With 
the latter, retrieval can be limited by architecture, historical period, 
political geography, and more. Most of the pictures are taken by 
Prof. R. Bartelmus. There is a lot of in-depth text and index infor-
mation about the objects. 
Menotah Coin Project 
Information about coins from biblical times. 
Numismatische Bilddatenbank 
Eichstätt 
Information here is browsable within different indices. 
BIBLE ATLAS AND MAPS 
Bible Atlas 
In this atlas, information on every OT and NT place is alphabeti-
cally ordered. 
LINKS 
'Biblical Lexicography 
http://biblex.org 
Pericope 
http://www.pericope.net 
Semantic Dictionary of Biblical Hebrew 
http: / / www. sdbh. org 
Forschungsstelle 
Qumran-Wörterbuch 
http://www.qwb.adw-goettingen.gwdg.de 
The Biblical Hebrew Web King 
http: / / www.webring.com/hub?ring=hebrew 
The Comprehensive Aramaic 
lexicon 
http:/ / call.cn.huc.edu/ 
Greek Lexicon Project 
http: / / www.classics.cam.ac.uk/faculty/research_groups_and 
_societies/greek_lexicon/ 
Suda Online 
http://www.stoa.org/sol 
Biographisch-Bibliographisches 
Yarchenlexikon 
http://www.bautz.de/bbkl/ 

THEMATIC ONLINE RESOURCES 
103 
Das wissenschaftliche Bibellexikon im Internet 
http://www.wibilex.de 
Study Dictionary 
http://net.bible.org/ dictionary.php 
Strongs Dictionary 
http://open-scriptures.googlecode.com/svn/ 
trunk/data / strongs_dictionaries/strons-ditionary.xhtml 
Open Scriptures project 
http://openscriptures.org 
Early Church Fathers 
http://www. ccel.org/ fathers.html 
Early Church Fathers — Additional Texts 
http: / / www.tertullian. org/ fathers / index.htm 
Tertullian Project 
http://www.tertullian. org 
Patristic Source Texts 
http: / / www.monachos.net/content/patristics / patristictexts 
Roman Martyrs Project 
http: / / www.arts.manchester.ac.uk/eia/projects / romanmarty 
rsproject/ 
Bible Places 
http://www.bibleplaces.com 
KiBiDaNO (Kieler Bilddatenbank Naher Osten) 
http://www.uni-kiel.de/kibidano/content/below/index.xml 
?lang=en 
Menorah Coin Project 
http://www.menorahcoinproject.org 
Numismatische Bilddatenbank Eichstätt 
http://www.ifaust.de/nbe/ 
Bible Atlas 
http://bibleatlas.org 


14 INSTITUTIONAL AND PERSONAL 
WEBSITES 
Interesting websites are often maintained by institutions, organiza-
tions, and individuals. These homepages come in different formats: 
informational, thematic, link pages, and — more and more — blogs. 
Several websites that are listed on my biblicalscholars <on the> 
net website (http://www.biblicalscholars.net) are not mentioned 
here for one of the following reasons: 
Last update of the website dates back more than one (1) 
year (even when the content of the website fits scholarly 
requirements). 
The masthead of the website is "dubious" (i.e. the site is 
not maintained by scholars or affiliates of scholarly insti-
tutions). 
Another issue concerns the change of servers: some websites from 
the above mentioned list are now on other servers with new URLs. 
Websites of interest were searched and the new URLs are included 
in this book. 
BIBLE (AND RELIGION) STUDY PORTALS 
Biblical Studies on the Web (BSW) 
BSW is maintained by Roger Boily, Rome (Italy). The website of-
fers two journals (Biblica and Filologia neotestamentaria), a Multi-
Library Search, as well as other links. 
Internet Guide to Religion 
The Wabash Center maintains a giant list of internet links related to 
biblical studies and other religious topics. It is a very useful guide to 
catalogued information. 
105 

106 
HOLY BITS 
Religion Online 
This project is run by individuals at the Claremont School of The-
ology. They have an impressive list of online articles and books 
related to religious studies. These listings can be browsed by topic 
or searched by full text. 
Bible Research 
Internet Resources for Student of Scripture is a well-organized 
website that provides information about Bible text, ancient ver-
sions, and canon. It also contains a link list of biblical studies in-
formation. 
Biblical Studies Resources 
This website by J. West is one of the oldest biblical studies link 
sites. It contains links to Hebrew Bible and New Testament re-
sources, online bibles, archaeological resources, textual criticism, 
online journals, discussion lists, books and article search tools, 
publishers' information, societies, Facebook groups, and bibliob-
logs. 
Resource Pages for Biblical Studies 
Like J. West, Torrey Seland of Norway was one of the first scholars 
to set up a website for biblical resources. His resources are focused 
on early Christian writings and the early Christian world. 
ORGANIZATIONS AND SOCIETIES 
Bible societies 
Bible societies' websites often contain interesting link pages: 
American Bible Society 
(British) Bible Society 
German Bible Society 
United Bible Societies77 
77 Here you will find the links to various Bible societies. 

INSTITUTIONAL AND PERSONAL WEBSITES 
107 
Biblical studies 
There are a large number of organizations in the field of biblical 
studies: 
Society of Biblical Literature (SBL) 
International Organization for Septuagint and Cognate 
Studies (IOSCS) 
Old Testament Society of South Africa (OTWSA-
OTSSA) 
The Society for Old Testament Study (SOTS) 
The Old Testament Society in the Neetherelands and in 
Belgium (OTW) 
Association for Jewish Studies (AJS) 
International Organization for Targumic Studies (IOTS) 
Association pour l'étude de la littérature apocryphe chré-
tienne (AELAC) 
International Organization for the Study of the Old Tes-
tament (IOSOT) 
Studiorum Novi Testamenti Societas (SNTS) 
European Association of Biblical Studies (EABS) 
International Association for Coptic Studies (LACS) 
Association Lnternationale Bible et Informatique (ALBL) 
INSTITUTIONS 
Link lists and Resources 
The Center for Online Jewish Studies 
This interesting site gives information about Jewish history, trea-
sures of the Jewish past, and websites of interest. 
WILLI 
This link list primarily contains links to New Testament-related 
websites. 
Old Testament Pseudepigrapha 
Website 
This website from the University of St. Andrews (Scotland) pro-
vides a wealth of information relating to OT Pseudepigrapha. 

108 
HOLY BITS 
Achemenet 
This website's author, Pierre Briant from the Collège de France, 
gives information about the Achemenid Empire: history, texts, 
bibliography, and online books and articles. 
Tynel ¿ile House — Doorway to Biblical Studies 
In the "Online Resources" category, you will find a lot of link lists 
concerning biblical studies. 
The British Museum — Collection Database Search 
More than 1,000,000 objects can be searched within this database. 
Objects come from Egypt, Europe, ancient Greece and Rome, as 
well as from the Middle East. 
Orion Center for the Study of the Dead Sea Scrolls and 
Associated Literature 
This is a vast list of activities and resources, plus a newsletter and a 
regularly updated bibliography. 
INDIVIDUALS 
Learning tools 
Assisting You to Leam 
Ehud Ben-Zvi's (University of Alberta, Canada) website provides a 
lot of information and links. 
Electronic New Testament Educational Resources 
This website, updated by F. Just, showcases educational material 
for New Testament Studies. 
Link and resources websites 
Codex: Resources for Biblical Theological, and Religious 
Studies 
T.F. Williams' website focuses on the Old Testament, Biblical He-
brew, the Dead Sea Scrolls, and the Septuagint. 

INSTITUTIONAL AND PERSONAL WEBSITES 
109 
NT Gateway 
This very comprehensive and interesting website is definitely one 
to bookmark. You will find links to Bible translations and the 
foremost information (links, materials, resources) concerning dif-
ferent topics in New Testament scholarship. 
New Testament Resources 
This very helpful page for New Testament studies is maintained by 
R. Decker. Links are thematically ordered. 
Pastoral Epistles 
This site possesses (almost) all the information you might want to 
know about the Pastoral Epistles. 
PaleoJudaica 
This weblog of J.R. Davila is an up-to-date discussion on ancient 
Judaism, as well as a source for links to ancient texts, books and 
journals online, language resources, organizations and societies, 
personal websites, and more. 
Biblioblogs 
This initiative contains a classified list of blogs within Biblical Stu-
dies. 
Other websites 
Amos: Hypertext Bible Commentary 
This unique work by Tim Bulkeley (University of Auckland, New 
Zealand) was the first hypertext commentary published online. 
Others should follow. 
Text Crit 
J. Jensen's homepage is about New Testament textual criticism. 
While the website is still in the construction phase, up-to-date in-
formation can be found on his blog. 
April D. DeConick 
This very interesting website contains content and links related to 
early Jewish and Christian thought. 

110 
HOLY BITS 
The Ancient World Online (AWOL) 
This very interesting blog has the same editor as ABZU (Charles E. 
Jones). 
Encyclopedia Mythica 
This website gives information about mythologies worldwide. For 
biblical scholars, the Middle Eastern (Islamic, Judaic, Mesopota-
mian, Persian) and Greek and Roman sections are likely of interest. 
There is also an online lexicon. 
Biblical Studies and Technological Tools 
Mark V. Hoffmann's blog is a valuable resource. 
Sansblogue 
Tim Bulkeley's blog gives a lot of interesting information. 
LINKS 
'Biblical Studies on the Web 
http://www.bsw.org 
Internet Guide to Religion (Wabash Center) 
http://www.wabashcenter.wabash.edu/resources/ guide_hea 
dings, as px 
Religion Online 
http://www.religion-online.org 
Bible Research 
http://www.bible-researcher.com 
Biblical Studies Resources 
http://sites.google.com/site/biblicalstudiesresources/ 
Resource Pages for Biblical Studies 
http://www.torreys.org/bible/ 
American Bible Society 
http://www.americanbible.org/bibleresources 
British Bible Society 
http://www.biblesociety.org.uk 
German Bible Society 
http:/ / www.dbg.de 
United Bible Societies 
http://www.biblesociety.org 

INSTITUTIONAL AND PERSONAL WEBSITES 
i l l 
SBL 
http://www.sbl-site.org 
IOSCS 
http://ccat.sas.upenn.edu/ioscs/ 
OTWSA-OTSSA 
http://www.otwsa-otssa.co.za 
SOTS 
http://www.sots.ac.uk 
OTW 
http://www.otw-site.eu/en/welcome.php 
AJS 
http://www.ajsnet.org 
IOTS 
http://targum.info/?page_id=5 
AELAC 
http:/ / www.unil.ch/aelac/ 
IOSOT 
http://www.iosot.org 
SNTS 
http://surfgroepen.nl/sites/SNTS/ 
EABS 
http://www.eabs.net 
IACS 
http: / / rmcisadu.letuniromal .it/~iacs / 
AIBI 
http://www.cibmaredsous.be 
The Center of Online Jewish Studies 
http://www.cojs.org 
Willi 
http: / / www.theologie.uni-wuerzburg.de/institutslehrstuehle 
/ bibl / neutestamentliche_exeges e/links / 
CW Testament Vseudepigraphy Website 
http://www.st-andrews.ac.uk/divinity/rt/otp/ 
Achemenet 
http: / / www.achemenet.com 
Tyndale House — Doorway to Biblical Studies 
http: / / www.tyndalehouse.com/Doorway.htm 
TÄe British Museum — Collection Database Search 
http: //britishmuseum.org/research/search_the_collection_d 
atabase.aspx 

112 
HOLY BITS 
The Orion Center 
http://orion.mscc.huji.ac.il/ 
Assisting You to Team 
http: / / www.ualberta.ca/~ebenzvi/teaching.html 
Electronic New Testament Educational Resources 
http://catholic-resources.org/Bible 
Codex: Resources for Biblical, Theological, and Religious Studies 
http://biblical-studies.ca 
NT Gateway 
http://www.ntgateway.com 
New Testament Resources 
http://ntresources.com 
Vasto ralEpisties 
http://www.pastoralepistles.com 
Paleo]udaica 
http://paleojudaica.blogspot.com 
Biblioblogs 
http://www.biblioblogs.com 
Amos: Hypertext Bible Commentary 
http: //hypertextbible.org/amos / 
Text Crit 
http://www. textcrit.com 
http://www. julian.textcrit.com 
April D. DeConick 
http://www.aprildeconick.com 
The Ancient World Online (AWOL) 
http://ancientworldonline.blogspot.com 
Encyclopedia Mythica 
http://www.pantheon.org 
Biblical Studies and Technolgical Tools 
http://bibleandtech.blogspot.com 
Sansblogue 
http://www.bigbible.org/blog/ 

15 CHECKLISTS 
Some of these lists should serve you as a guide to configure your 
computer or install and configure different software. Other lists 
will give you a short summary of content to different topics. 
HARDWARE 
Comparison of storage devices, ancient and modern.78 
78 Adapted from: Rink Jürgen/Haustein, Nils. Für die Ewigkeit. Digitale 
Dokumente archivieren, c't 16/2008. 128-131 [1 €uro = ~ 1,43 USD], 
113 

114 
HOLY BITS 
0 
O 
t>, 
C- SX 
IO 
O 
t>, 
C- SX 
co~ 
O 
O 
O 
1 » ^ 
<N 
<N 
<N 
n 
m , 
cl n CQ 
O 
O 
Ln 
1 
rO 
: 
« oj rj 
O 
o 
Ò 
1 
m 
1 
o 
U a 
o" 
o" 
co 
o" 
^ 
co 
^ 
,OJ S oj 
o 
O 
o 
rsi 
—' 
o 
O 
o 
« " S 
tn 
tn 
Ò 
<N 
1 
1 
H 0 a 
Ò 
Ò 
Ò 
1 
1 
1 
o 
o 
o 
H 0 a 
^ 
^ 
^ 
rO 
^ 
<N 
<N 
OJ Ti 
•u a « 
CJ n 
O 
O 
O 
O 
m 
o OJ « 
o 
O 
o 
OJ a g, 
Hi « 
1 
o 
O 
O 
^ 
rO 
m 
m 
OJ a g, 
Hi « 
o 
o 
o 
o 
M -ü- -S 
m 
<N 
m 
rO 
rO 
rO 
rO 
OPERATING SYSTEMS 
For installing instructions, have a look at the link websites at the 
end of Chapter 2. 
STANDARDS 
Keyboard Installations 
Windows (Vista) 
1. 
Click 
"Control 
Panel" 
Network 
Connect To 
Control Panel 
allty of your computer, add or 
unnectlons and user accounts, 
Help and Support 

CHECKLISTS 
115 
Click on "Change 
Keyboard or other 
input methods" 
Click on "Change 
keyboards..." 
User Accounts 
¿del or remove u:er account: 
Appearance and 
Personalization 
Change desktop background 
Customize color: 
Adjuct screen resolution 
Clock, Language, and Region 
Change keyboards or other input 
methods 
Back up your computer 
Inani] 
y boards and Languages [Administrative ] 
er input languages 
yboard or input language click Change keyboards. 
[ 
Change keyboards,.. 
he keyboard layout for the Welcome screen? 
Click 
on 
the 
"Add" button 
Text Services and Input Language 
General Language Bar Advanced Key Settings 
Default Input language 
Select one of the installed input languages to use as the default for al 
input fields. 
[ English (United States) - US 
Installed sen/ices 
Select the services that you want for each input language shown in the 
list. Use the Add and Remove buttons to modify this list. 
EJI Hebrew (Israel) 
fiii Keyboard 
• Hebrew 
• Biblical Hebrew (Tiro) 
• • • Other 
• Ink Correction 
BP German (Switzerland) 

116 
HOLY BITS 
5. 
Select the appro-
priate 
keyboard, 
e.g. 
the 
"Greek 
polytonic", 
and 
click 
the 
"OK" 
button. 
A d d Input Language 
Select the language to add using the checkboxes below. 
( 
OK 
3- German (Luxembourg) 
* 
1 
Cancel 
® German (Switzerland) 
1 
Cancel 
É Greek (Greece) 
Preview.., 
El- Keyboard 
!•• P I Greek 
i 
! [ U Greek (220) 
; 
I • Greek (220) Latin 
1 
! • Greek (319) 
j 
!•• ••Greek (319) Latin 
Greek Latin 
hlvEEaEBHSES 
! i n lis 
' • s h o w More... 
1+1 Other 
Click 
on 
the 
"OK" or "Apply" 
button at the bot-
tom of the win-
dow for that the 
changes 
take ef-
fect. 
Text Services and Input Languages 
General j Language Bar | Advanced Key Settings | 
Default input language 
Select one of the installed input languages to use as the default for all 
j English (United States) - US 
Installed services 
Select the services that you want for each input language shown in the 
list. Use the Add and Remove buttons to modify this list. 
Greek (Greece) 
jral Keyboard 
• Greek Polytonic 
Hebrew (Israel) 
| Keyboard 
I 
Choose the appropriate keyboard in the taskbar at the bottom of 
your screen. 
Macintosh OsX 
1. 
Open the "System 
Preferences" 

CHECKLISTS 
117 
2. 
Click on "Interna-
tional" 
1 
|B 
i 
ock. 
International 
Secu 
Choose the "In-
put Menu" 
Check the appro-
priate keyboard/s. 
riats 
input Menu 
nods, and palettes for the in 
put type 
sSSMScnpt 
ilette 
Uric 
; Language 
Formats ! Input Menu 
Select the keyboard layouts, input methods, and palettes f 
On 
Name 
Input type 
F'l = ureeK 
^ Creek Polytonic 
Keyboard 
B 
Gujarati 
Keyboard 
• EljGujarati-QWERTY 
Keyboard 
• fS^Gurmukhi 
Keyboard 
F5 ^Gurmukhi-QWERTY 
Keyboard 
= Hawai ian 
Keyboard 
a 
^ Hebrew 
Keyboard 
5. 
You can 
choose 
now the keyboard. 
* ± 
m 
• m u.s. 
• 
German 
H 
Swiss French 
Creek Polytonic 
$ 
Hebrew 
E2 Unicode Hex Input 
Show Keyboard Viev 

118 
HOLY BITS 
Keyboard Mappings 
Hebrew 
Normal 
I 
n 
ft 
n 
/ f 
P 
U 
] D D ] [ 
1 
a 
D y 
i 
n 
b 
1 
n 
? 
\ 
Shift 
# $ % 
m 
) ( 
z 
X G V B N 
M 
> 
< 
? 
S 
W E 
R 
T 
Y U I 
O P } { 
A S 
D F 
G H J 
K L 
99 
1 
AltGr 
nu 
€ 
n 

CHECKLISTS 
119 
Shifts Caps 
/ 
I 
P 
"I 
D 
1 
1 
• 
s ] [ 
t£7 T 
1 
D 
S7 
n 
b 
1 
n 
I 
n 
D 
Greek 
Normal 
i 
9 
2 
3 
e 
4 
P 
5 
T 
6 
u 
7 
e 
8 
i 
9 
c 
0 
T r I 
E 
][• • : 
a 
<j 
s 
9 
r 
n 
5 
K 
X 
J 1 
: 
c X. 
00 ß 
V 
/ 
Shift 
! 
: 
I 1 
E 
$ 
P 
| 
1 
T 
A 
Y 
8 c 
e 
* 
I 
( 
O 
) 
n { 
•+ 
] 
A £ 
A 
r 
H 
s 
K A 
1 
Z X 
O B N M 
< 
> 
p 

120 
HOLY BITS 
AltGr 
3É 
•Iß 
\ 
i o t a s u b s c r i p t u m 
Shift+AltGr 
SECURITY 
PGP Installation (Thunderbird) 
Download and install die Enigmail Extension from the Enigmail 
website. After installation, the OpenPGP extension is accessible 
through the toolbar. You have to generate your own key pair as 
well as ask your contacts to send you their public keys. 
1. 
Open "OpenPGP" 
and go to the "Key 
Management" 
Message 
1 Tools 
Help 
I
n 
d dress Book 
Save Decrypted Message 
I
n 
d dress Book 
Preferences 
4 • j 
Key Management 
j 
* i 
11 
Help 
About OpenPGP 

CHECKLISTS 
121 
2. 
Go to 
"Generate" 
> "New Key Pair" 
M a n a g e m e n t 
i e w 
K e y server 
Generate 
)'s o r k e y ID's c o n 
Mew Key Pajr 
)'s o r k e y ID's c o n 
Revocation Certificate 
ser ID 
3. 
Choose the "RSA" 
Key type for securi-
ty and select a pass-
phrase (keep it se-
cure!). 
£ 3 OpenfifìP Key Management 
•• • 
Generate OpenPGP Key 
Account/UserID 
HclyBit: MnfoShclyb 
j 
Lfsegenerated key for the selected id 
0 
No passphrase 
Passphrase | 
! I 
Comment 
Key exprryTÂdvanced 
Key size 
12048 
[ - ! 
Key type 
g j 
Gen erate key 
The application asks you to generate a revocation certificate. Do it, 
whenever you have to invalidate your key (loss or stolen). 
You can now send your signed messages. Be aware that for 
sending an encrypted message, you have to possess the public key 
of the e-mail address holder at the destination. 
1. 
Choose 
"Encrypt 
Message" 
OpenPGP 
Tools 
Help 
'Ì . 
0 J 
tell 
Attach 
M, 
<m . 
OpenPGP 
0 
- Jf . 
y MIME 
Save 
it)its.info> 
- infoi^ 
Sign Mes sage 
Ctrl + Shift+S 
©holvbits.info 
Encrypt Message 
Ctr!+ Shift+ P 
| jjj 
— 
— — - f . . . . . . . . . 
. 
_ t 
You cannot send an 
Open 
Key Selection 
encrypted 
message 
Recipients not valid, not trusted or not found 
without 
possessing 
nfo@thomasnaef.info 
the public key of 
Select Recipients for Encryption 
the destination ad-
0 
Account/User ID 
dress. 

122 
HOLY BITS 
3. 
You have the pos-
sibility to send the 
mail 
unencrypted, 
or to download the 
missing 
key/ s 
(if 
they exist). 
Send mail unencrypted and not signed 
Refresh Key List j 
j Download missing keys | 
TEXT: PROCESSORS AND EDITORS 
Creating a document template with OOWriter 
For convenience, the creation of new styles is shown only with the 
"Paragraph Styles". The processing for other kind of styles is the 
same. 
1. 
By 
opening 
OO, 
you are writing with 
the "Default" tem-
plate. 
% Untitìed 1 - OpenGffice.org Writer 
File 
Edit 
View 
Insert 
Format 
Table 
J 
l 1 - @ 0 SO 
Ü 3 
& 
I Ë0 
Default 
A 
Times N i 
1 
I S ' 
2. 
Click on "Styles and 
Formatting" 
for 
displaying the styles 
window. 
n s 
y 
# 
Default 
Styles and Formatting 
m • 
Default 

CHECKLISTS 
123 
3. The 
"Pharagraph 
Styles" 
are 
dis-
played in the win-
dow. Other styles 
are (in order): Cha-
racter, Frame, Page, 
List. 
p- 1 -i<v • É • is 
Styles and Formatting 
B i Q i 
limentary clo: 
First line indent 
Pi è 
Right click on the 
"Default" Style and 
choose "New". 
Create the new style 
by defining it in the 
tabs 
like 
"Font", 
"Text 
Flow", 
"Alignment", 
etc. 
With 
the 
"Next 
Style" attribute, you 
can define that a 
heading is followed 
by "HB_TextFirst", 
e-g 
Save 
your 
new 
template: "File" > 
"Templates" 
> 
"Save" in the "My 
Templates" catego-
ry. 
Content: Heading 
HjgflT"-
Draw 
Endn 
Firnt line indent 
New... 
Modify... 
... - -
Paragraph jr(* 
. 1 Oit' f'P sr. Ni.irr.tr nr. 
j 
rir 
| Drop1 rf.. 
( Hr.-t'ir-.i nrf J 
r-j-rrrrr. | r. Cirri rr-. 
; rjrrftr.irr. 
Ir.Jr. : i 5pac r. 
'• 
I 'let 
Ted Fkv. 
F'ontj" Font Effetto j Pasitrcn 
Nertitylt 
Untai»» 
Çaltrgorr 
ffltf"'11'^ 
T e m p l a t e ; 
N erru tern p I ate 
T e m p l a t e s 
Categories 
^ i AutsUpdat* 
T e m p i 
|| M y T e m p l a t e s 
j 
t h n B ^ 
1 Presentation B a c k g r o u n d s 
t h n b n 
Inserting an automated ToC 
First, be sure that you used the — default or custom — "Heading" 
Styles. After having written your document, place the cursor at the 
place you want to insert the ToC. Probably, you have defined a 
"ToC" page style at the beginning of the book or article. 

124 
HOLY BITS 
1. 
Click on "Insert" > 
"Indexes 
and 
Tables" > "Indexes 
and Tables". 
2. 
Choose die "Table 
of Contents" type. 
3. 
A ToC is created — 
with your personal 
style, if defined. 
i ^ p f i . » 
JV* 
ht>okr-Mi< .. 
( r:>\s -t_f ; 
f t I ... 
K:.h 
VI.11 Alt • K 
Sr'I [••... 
Index/Table 
Entries 
Styles 
Cclumns 
Background 
Type and title 
liti e 
'Tabi e of Contenti 
T^pe 
|Table of Contents 
[71 Protected against manual changes 
Create index/table 
Entire document 
E 
Table of Contents 
First Chapter 
Section 1 
Subsection 1 
Subsubsection !.. 
Subsection 2..... 
Subsection 3.... 

CHECKLISTS 
125 
BIBLIOGRAPHICAL SOFTWARE 
Software Overview 
Software 
Features 
Software 
A 
B 
C 
D 
E 
F 
G 
H 
Zotero 
wmlf 
A 
-
IE 
-
WO 
Y* 
Citavi Free 
w 
A 
Y 
IE 
Y 
WO 
Y 
Citavi Pro 
w 
C 
Y 
IE 
Y 
w o 
Y* 
a 
EndNote 
wm 
Dt 
Y 
E 
-
w o 
Y* 
RefMan 
w 
Dt 
Y 
* 
-
w o 
Y* 
BiblioScape 
w 
C 
Y 
IE 
-
WP 
Y* 
BiblioExpress 
w 
A 
-
-
-
WP 
Y 
Bookends 
m 
B 
Y 
IE 
-
M 
Y 
OOWriter 
wml 
A 
-
-
-
O 
Y 
b 
Bibliographix 
w 
Ct 
Y 
IE 
Y 
w o 
Y* 
BibDesk 
m 
A 
P 
IE 
-
-
Y 
JabRef 
wml 
A 
Y 
IE 
-
o 
Y 
DocBook 
wml 
A 
-
-
-
D 
Y 
C 
Features description: 
A: 
Operating System/s: W(indows), Macintosh), L(inux); f 
(Firefox Extension). 
B: 
Price: A (free), B (up to 100$), C (100-150$), D (200$+); 
t (Trial version available). 
C: 
Online 
Searches 
from 
within 
the 
application 
Y (es), [only] P(ubMed). 
D: 
Import [I] from/Export [E] to standardized formats (Bib-
TeX/BibTeXML). * should work, but I had only the Demo ver-
sion at disposal. 
E: 
Knowledge Management. 
F: 
Easy cooperation with MS Word [W], OOWriter [O], Word-
Perfect [P], Macintosh Word Processors (MS Word, OOWriter, 
Mellel, Nisus, Apple Pages) [M], DocBook [D], 
G: 
Predefined Output Styles (*: a lot). 

126 
HOLY BITS 
H: 
Other remarks: a) Macintosh and web versions in preparation; 
b) Standardizations and better usability in preparation; c) XML/ 
XSLT files and 
Zotero 
Download and install the Zotero extension from the homepage. 
Most libraries offer the so-called unAPI for the easy importation 
into your own bibliography. 
1. 
Click the blue book 
in the URL address 
line. 
I S W f S l ^ l l i i
û 
-
Il 1-1 
The item is saved in 
the Zotero exten-
sion. 
flhttrart: 
S a v i n g I t e m . . . 
| H e m a t o l o g i c 
P a t h o p h y s i o l o g y 
For inserting your Zotero records into your word processor, you 
have to install first the word processor integration for MS Word or 
OpenOffice. 
1. You find the Zote-
ro Menu at the top 
of the window. 
File Edit View In:ert Format 
r"B r* E f 
' 
,, 
S3 
rwanit 
IVI 
2. 
Click on the "Insert 
Citation" 

CHECKLISTS 
127 
3. 
Choose your 
tion style. 
cita-
Document Preferences 
Citation Style: -
Chic ago Manila of Style (Author-Date format) 
Chic agSŒ of Style (Note with Bibliography) 
Chic ago Manila of Style (Note without Bibliography) 
Harv ard Referen ce formati (Author-Date) 
4. 
Another 
window 
opens to choose the 
record for your cita-
tion. 
Repeat 
for 
every 
citation 
in 
your document. 
Add/Edit Citation 
¿ S 
My Library 
Title 
Imported Dienstag, 6, Qkto.,. 
! j Imported Mittwoch, 23, Se.., 
(y| Ancientand Modei 
testBNT 
Bulletin d'informat 
Q Trash 
Q 
Die sogenannteTh 
Dieu guerrier 
EU Hematoloqie Pathc 
At the end of edit- 
g d i t 
y
i
e
w 
j n 5 e r t 
¡ |
r
m
3
t 
¡ g g 
ing, place the cursor 
to insert the biblio-
graphy and click on 
the 
appropriate 
icon. 
All 
used 
records will be in-
serted. 
| | r- 
S 
• # 
T 
DrfaujInsert Bibliography [ Tir 

128 
HOLY BITS 
BIBLICAL SOFTWARE 
BibleWorks 
As first step, define the Unicode output fonts with the help of the 
"Tools" > "Options". 
7 
Options 
l'IHMea-1 
): 
I 
Version Order 
Book Names 
Verse Maps 
Wildcards 
Updates 
Option Rags 
Option Strings 1 
Fonts 
Search Limits 
Veraions 
Font Set to Edit 
Found: Text 
Font Set to Edit 
Found: Text 
Search Window Fonts 
• 
Bold 
• 
Italic 
f H Underlined 
Text Color 
B 
I 
Browse Window Fonts 
o Export Fonts 
[V] Activate Export Fonts 
• 
Bold 
• 
Italic 
f H Underlined 
Background 
Browse Window Fonts 
o Export Fonts 
[V] Activate Export Fonts 
Browse Window Fonts 
o Export Fonts 
[V] Activate Export Fonts 
Browse Window Fonts 
o Export Fonts 
[V] Activate Export Fonts 
| Edit Export Maps 
Keyboard Layouts 
Font Set 
TypeFace 
Font Set 
TypeFace 
Size 
Unicode 
A l i t o 
English [Arial 
^rj 
10 
• 
Greek [.SBL Greek 
1
3 
« 
-
m 
Hebrew [ SBL Hebrew 
-r| 
1B 
-r 
m 
Heb Trans | Bwtransh 
^ 
-
n 
Hebrew Keyboard 
Mapping 
Normal 
I 
2 
3 
4 
6 
7 
8 
9 
0 
-
P 
1 
1 
n 
1 
h 
D 
¿7 
0 
1 
2? 
n 
Ü 
D 
b 
Ätf 
T 
n 
2 
K? 
3 
D 
Q 
Shift 
ì 
h 
r
h 
i
n 
P 
1 
V 
3 
n 
V 
v.? 
S 
Ê 
i 
0 
1 
C£7 
2 
n 
tJ 
3 
¡27 
t£7 
a 

CHECKLISTS 
129 
Greek Keyboard 
Mapping 
Normal 
< 
1 
e 
2 
GO 
3 
£ 
I 1 
P 
5 
T 
t 
7 
V 
8 
i 
9 
0 
c 
IT 
« 
a 
5 9 Y n £ 
K 
X 
v 
c 
X 
? 
P 
V 
V 
i 
Shift 
c 
+ 
e 
[ 
a 
] 
I 
( 
P 
) 
T w 
-
Y 
1 
I 
1 
C ) n 
n 
A £ 
A 0 r H 
K A 
I 
n 
z JZL, X 
B N M 
Morphological 
Codes 
Hebrew 
P: 
Particle 
p: 
Pronoun 
n: 
Noun 
a: 
Adjective 
q: qal 
p: piel 
P: 
pual 
n: 
nifal 
h: hifil 
H: hofal 
Greek 
n: 
Noun 
r: 
Pronoun 
d: 
Definite article 
v: 
Verb 
p: 
Participle 
n: 
Infinitive 
i: 
Indicative 

130 
HOLY BITS 
d: 
s: 
o: 
a: 
Adjective 
b: 
Adverb 
c: 
Conjunction 
p: 
Preposition 
x: 
Particle 
t: 
Indeclinable noun 
i: 
Interjection 
Accordance 
First, define that the Hebrew and Greek characters are exported 
into Unicode. For that purpose, go to "Accordance" > "Prefe-
rences" and choose the "Greek & Hebrew" tab. Check the appro-
priate box. 
Imperative 
Subjunctive 
Optative 
Preferences 
General 
Appearance 
Text Display 
Tool Display 
Creek & Hebrew 
Compare Text 
Instant Details Box 
Arrange Tags 
Citation 
Speech 
Search Window 
Parallel Window 
User Notes Window 
Edit Windows 
5yntax Window 
Options for Creek and Hebrew: 
Greek arid Hebrew entry 
Automatic final Setter 
g 
Automatic diacritical marks 
' Use Israeli keyboard layout for Hebrew 
Use Creek Polytonic keyboard layout 
U n i c o d e e x p o r t 
0 
Export all characters witii Unicode format 
Greek export 
Export characters as: 
Helena -no dvinoe-
_ Strip accents and breathing marks 
Hebrew export 
Export characters as: 
V*hud.ï •.<-..-. c'narige) 
Strip characters: 
None 
Ti 
Reverse direction of Hebrew characters 
C a n « 

CHECKLISTS 
131 
Hebrew Keyboard 
Mapping 
Text critical signs are not considered. Keys for normal and final 
characters (2, f, etc.) are not different. 
Normal 
1 
2 
4 
7 
0 
P 
1 
1 
n 
1 
/ 
S7 
S [ 
0 
1 
Ü 
i 
n 
n 
D 
1 
• [ 
Shift 
t£7 
m 
o 
/ 
i 
D 
( ) 
2 
{ 
ii 
+ 
} 
2 
t£7 
3 
Q 
< 
> 
? 
Greek Keyboard 
Mapping 
Key for normal and final a (sigma) are the same. 
Normal 
oo 
TT 
a 
CT 
m 
m 
\ 
c 
5 
X 
§ ^: 
P 
V 
1 

132 
HOLY BITS 
Shift 
! 
© 
a 
Q E P T W Y 
• 
I 
( 
O 
) 
n [ 
+ 
A I 
A 3> r H 
? 
K A 
ii 1 
z 77 X 5 B N M < 
> 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Alexander, P.H. et al. The SBL Handbook of Style: for Ancient Near 
Eastern, 'Biblical and Early Christian Studies (Peabody: Hendrick-
son Publishers, 1999). 
Durusau, P. High Vlaces in Cyberspace. 
Guide to Biblical, Classics, and 
Archaeological Resources on the Internet. Second Edition (Adanta: 
Scholars Press, 1998). 
Schwertner, S.M. InternationalesAbkürzungsverzeichnisfiirTheeologie 
und 
Grenzgebiete (IATG) (Berlin/New York: W. de Gruyter, 1994). 
133 


INDEX 
ABZU, 95 
Accordance, 69 
Greek Keyboard Mapping, 
131 
Hebrew Keyboard Mapping, 
131 
Achemenet, 108 
AELAC, 107 
AIBI, 107 
AJAX, 76 
AJS, 107 
Alan Wood's Unicode Resour-
ces, 17 
Aleppo Codex, 84 
Amos: Hypertext Bible Com-
mentary, 109 
AntiVirus software, 76 
April D. DeConick, 109 
ASP, 76 
Assisting You to Learn, 108 
ATLA, 95 
AWOL, 110 
Berlin Declaration on 
Open 
Access, 89 
BHS, 63 
BibDesk, 57 
BiBIL, 95 
Bible Atlas, 102 
Bible Places, 101 
Bible Research, 106 
Bible societies, 106 
Bible Software, 61 
Bible Software Review, 71 
BibleDesktop, 71 
BibleGateway, 83 
BibleServer, 83 
BibleTime, 71 
BibleWorks, 62 
Greek Keyboard Mapping, 
129 
Hebrew Keyboard Mapping, 
128 
Morphological Codes, 129 
BibleWorks blog, 66 
Biblica, 91 
Biblical Lexicography, 99 
Biblical Studies and Technolo-
gical Tools, 110 
Biblical Studies on the Web, 105 
Biblical Studies Resources, 106 
BiBLink, 97 
Biblioblogs, 109 
BiblioExpress, 57 
Bibliographical Software 
Overview, 125 
Bibliographies, 53 
Bibliographix, 58 
Bibliography 
Styles, 54 
Biblioscape, 58 
BibTeX, 55 
Bibus, 56 
135 

136 
HOLY BITS 
BILDI, 96 
Biographisch-Bibliographisches 
Kirchenlexikon, 100 
Blue Letter Bible, 83 
BookEnds, 58 
BOSEB, 96 
British Library, 97 
Browsers, 73 
Catalogue collectif de France, 
97 
CD-ROM, 7 
Central 
Processing 
LInit. 
See 
Processor 
Character, 16 
Citavi, 56, 58 
CMS, 75 
Codex Sinaiticus, 83 
Codex: Resources for Biblical 
Theological, and 
Religious 
Studies, 108 
Codices 
Electronici 
Sangallenses, 90 
Comprehensive 
Aramaic 
Lexicon, 100 
Compression applications, 77 
Computer 
Organization of, 10 
Corporate Design, 49 
CSL, 55 
CSS, 75 
Das 
wissenschaftliche 
Bibellexikon im Internet, 100 
Davar, 100 
Dead 
Sea 
Scrolls 
Electronic 
Library, 68 
Desktop Publishing, 30 
DOAJ, 91 
DocBook, 35, 57 
Document template, 32 
Creation, 122 
DOI, 90 
DVD, 7 
EABS, 107 
Early Church Fathers, 101 
Early Jewish Writings, 85 
ECMA, 14 
Einheitsübersetzung, 84 
Electronic 
New 
Testament 
Educational Resources, 108 
E-mail clients, 74 
Encyclopedia Mythica, 110 
EndNote, 58 
eScholarship Editions, 89 
ETANA core texts, 86 
File name, 11 
File Transfer, 75 
FileFormat, 17 
Filologia Neotestamentaria, 91 
Firewall, 76 
Flash drive. See LISB stick 
Fonts 
Beta Code, 20 
Cardo, 17 
GreekKeys, 20 
Hebraicall, 20 
Ismini, 20 
LaserGreek, 20 
Legacy. See Fonts, Proprietaiy 
Meltho Open Type Syriac, 
17 
Paulina Greek, 20 
Proprietary, 17 
SBL Greek, 17 
SBL Hebrew, 17 
SGreek, 20 
SIL Galatia, 19 
SPIonic, 20 
SPTiberian, 20 
SuperGreek, 20 
Vilnius LIniversity, 20 

INDEX 
137 
WinGreek, 20 
FOP, 40 
Forschungsstelle 
Qumran-
Wörterbuch, 99 
FRANCIS, 95 
German Bible Society, 83 
German National Library, 97 
Gnomon, 96 
Google Books, 90 
GPL, 73 
Graphics, 73 
GIMP, 73 
IrfanView, 73 
Greek 
Keyboard Mapping, 119 
Greek and Latin audio, 85 
Greek Lexicon Project, 100 
Hard disk, 7 
Hardware, 5 
Hebrew 
Keyboard Mapping, 118 
Hebrew LTniversity of Jerusa-
lem, 97 
HIPHIL, 91 
Hugoye 
Journal of Syriac Studies, 92 
I ACS, 107 
Internet Guide to Religion, 105 
IOSCS, 107 
IOSOT, 107 
IOTS, 107 
ISBN, 90 
ISO, 14 
IxTheo, 96 
JabRef, 56 
Java, 9 
JBLC. See Text Converters 
Jewish Encyclopedia, 90 
Jewish Studies, an Internet Jour-
nal, 91 
Journal of Biblical Studies, 91 
Journal of Hebrew Scriptures, 
91 
JSP, 76 
Karlsruher Virtueller 
Katalog, 
97 
Keyboard, 6 
Installation, 114 
Keyboard Mappings, 118 
Greek - polytonic, 119 
Hebrew, 118 
Keyboards 
Installation, 18 
Kieler 
Bilddatenbank 
Naher 
Osten, 102,103 
Lectio difficilior, 92 
Library of Congress, 97 
Libronix Digital Library System, 
66 
Logos Bible Software, 66 
Macintosh Biblioblog, 10 
Macintosh OsX 
Keyboard installation, 116 
MacOS. See Operating Systems: 
Macintosh OS 
MacSword, 71 
Main memory, 6 
MARC, 55 
Mechon Mamre, 84 
Meltho. See Fonts 
Menorah Coin Project, 102 
MindMap, 79 
Model-Vieiv-Controller, 
16 
Monitor, 6 
Mouse, 6 
National Library of France, 97 
NetBible, 84 
NETS, 84 
Neutestamentliche Apokryphen, 
86 

138 
HOLY BITS 
New Testament Apocrypha, 86 
New Testament Resources, 109 
NT Gateway, 109 
Numismatische 
Bilddatenbank, 
102 
OASIS, 14 
OCP. See The Online Critical 
Pseudepigrapha 
Office Open XML, 15 
Office packages, 29 
Corel Home Office, 29 
iWork, 29 
Microsoft Office, 29 
OpenOffice, 29 
WordPerfect Office, 29 
Old Testament Pseudepigrapha 
Website, 107 
OOWriter, 56 
Open Document Format, 15 
OpenDOAR, 89 
OpenPGP, 26 
OpenScriptures, 62 
OpenText, 85 
Operating Systems, 9 
BSD, 9 
Chrome OS, 9 
Linux, 10 
Macintosh OS, 10 
UNIX, 9 
Windows, 10 
Oral Law Sources, 85 
Orion Center, 108 
OSIS, 61 
OTSSA. See OTWSA 
OTW, 107 
OTWSA, 107 
PACE, 86 
Paleojudaica, 109 
Parallels Desktop, 9 
Partition, 11 
Password, 23 
Creation, 24 
Memorization, 24 
Pastoral Epistles, 109 
Patristic Source Texts — The 
Master Li, 101 
PDF 
Creators, 77 
Modifiers, 78 
Viewers, 78 
Pericope, 99 
Perseus Digital Library, 85 
PGP, 26 
PGP Installation, 120 
PHP, 75 
Prague Bible, 85 
Presentation, 43 
Basic needs, 43 
Creation of slides, 47 
Preparation, 44 
Structure, 45 
Presentation slides 
Layout, 48 
Typography, 49 
Use of, 47 
Presentation software 
MS PowerPoint, 43 
Presentation Software 
OpenOffice Impress, 43 
Printer, 6 
Processor, 5 
Project Gutenberg, 89 
RAMBI, 97 
RDF, 55 
ReferenceManager, 58 
Religion Online, 106 
Resource 
Pages 
for 
Biblical 
Studies, 106 
Review of Biblical Literature, 92 
Rich Text Format, 15 

INDEX 
139 
RIS, 55 
Roman Martyrs Project, 101 
SBL, 107 
Screen. See Monitor 
Scripture4All, 84, 85 
Secondary memory. See Hard 
disk 
Security, 23 
Encoded e-mail, 26 
Online, 25 
Physical, 26 
Semantic Dictionary of Biblical 
Hebrew, 99 
Septuagint Online, 85 
SNTS, 107 
SOTS, 107 
Standards, 13 
Storage devices 
Comparison, 113 
Strong's Dictionary, 101 
Study Dictionary, 101 
Stuttgart Electronic Study Bible, 
67 
Style. See Bibliographies 
Styles 
Creating, 122 
Suda Online, 100 
Sword, 71 
Tag, 15 
TC: 
A 
Journal 
of 
Biblical 
Textual Criticism, 92 
Template. 
See 
Document 
Template 
Tertullian Project, 101 
Text Converters, 19 
Greek and Hebrew Enco-
ding Converter, 20 
Greek Transcoder for Micro-
soft Word, 20 
JBiblicalLegacyConverter, 20 
SIL Converter, 19 
Text Crit, 109 
Text documents, 14 
Text editor, 34 
Kwrite, 34 
Notepad, 34 
Texteditor, 34 
vi, 34 
Text processor 
Mellel, 31 
Nisus Writer, 31 
The Bible Tool, 83 
The Biblical Hebrew Web Ring, 
99 
The 
British 
Museum 
-
Collection Database, 108 
The Center for Online Jewish 
Studies, 107 
The Great Isaiah Scroll, 86 
The Hebrew Bible in XML, 84 
The Online Books Page, 90 
The Online Critical Pseudepi-
grapha, 86 
The Schoyen Collection, 84 
The Word Bible Software, 71 
ToC 
Inserting, 123 
Topic Map, 62 
Tyndale House, 108 
unAPI, 55 
Unbound Bible, 83 
Linicode, 16 
USB stick, 7 
UTF-8,16 
Utilities, 73 
Network, 76 
Virtueller 
Katalog 
Theologie 
und Kirch, 97 
VMWare, 9 
W3C, 14 

140 
HOLY BITS 
WAZU, 17 
WILLI, 107 
Windows 
Keyboard installation, 114 
WineHQ, 9 
WLC in XML, 85 
Word processor, 30 
XML, 15 
XML Editor, 34 
<oxygen/>, 34 
XMLSpy 2009, 34 
XSL, 15 
XSL-FO transformation, 78 
Yeshiva LTniversity Libraries, 97 
Zefania XML Bible 
Markup 
Language, 62 
ZIP, 77 
Zotero, 55,126 

