THE HARVARD ORIENTAL SERIES 
VOLUME TWELVE 

HARYARD ORIENTAL SERIES 
EDITED 
WITH THE COOPERATION OF VARIOUS SCHOLARS 
BY 
CHARLES ROCKWELL LANMAN 
CORRESPONDING MEMBER ΟΓ THE INSTITUTE OF FRANCE (ACADÉMIE DES INSCRIPTIONS 
ET BELLES-LETTRES)« ETC., PROFESSOR AT HARVARD UNIVERSITY 
IDoIume twelve 
CAMBRIDGE, MASSACHUSETTS 
Ipubltebeö bç Ibarvarö "University 
1912 

THE 
PANCHATANTRA-TEXT 
OF PURNABHADRA 
CRITICAL INTRODUCTION AND LIST OF VARIANTS 
BY 
DR. JOHANNES HERTEL 
PROFESSOR AM KOENIGLICHEN REAL-GYMNASIUM, DOEBELN, SAXONY 
Ψ 
CAMBRIDGE, MASSACHUSETTS 
publißbeö bp Ibarvarfc "University 
1912 

The volumes of this Series may be had, in America, by addressing Messrs. GINN 
AND COMPANY, at New York or Chicago or San Francisco, or at the home-office, 
29 Beacon Street, Boston, Mass. ; in England, by addressing Messrs. GINN & Co., 
9 St. Martin's Street, Leicester Square, London, W.C.; and in Continental Europe, by 
addressing Mr. Otto Harrassowitz, Leipzig.—For the titles and descriptions and prices, 
see the List at the end of this volume. 
PRINTED FROM TYPE AT THE 
UNIVERSITY PRESS, OXFORD, ENGLAND 
BY HOEACE HART, M.A. 
PRINTER TO THE UNIVERSITY 
First edition, 1912, One Thousand Copies 

TO THE MEMORY 
OF 
RICHARD PISCHEL 


CONTENTS 
PAGE 
PREFATORY MATTER 
i x 
Preface 
ix 
Delayed appearance of the volume 
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
. 
ix 
The material intended for volume xii divided between volumes xii and xiii 
ix 
Designations of the manuscripts in the list of variants 
. 
ix 
The list of variants refers directly to the manuscripts themselves 
. 
. 
ix 
The numbering of the single tales in volume xi 
.
.
.
.
. 
ix 
Editor's non-acceptance of corrections of real errors .
.
.
.
. 
χ 
Pürnabhadra's attitude towards his sources 
xi 
Acknowledgement of obligations 
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
. 
xii 
Key to Tables I and II of volume xi 
1 
Aksara-forms in the manuscripts Φ and bh 
1 
INTRODUCTION TO THE EDITION OP PÜRNABHADRA'S PAÑCATANTRA 
. 
. 
5 
Chapter I. Survey of the single recensions and of their MSS. . 
. 
5 
Pedigree of the recensions of the Pañcatantra, in tabular f o r m . . . 
5 
Key to the pedigree under 25 headings 
.
6 
1-6. Kashmirian 
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
. 
6 
7. North-Western copy (N-W.), represented by 
8. The Pahlavi recensions 
7 
9. Pseudo-Gunädhya ; 10. Somadeva ; 11. Ksemendra .
.
.
. 
7 
12. North-Western epitome (n-w). 
From this flows 
13. The source (n-w1) of 
8 
14. The archetype of the Southern Pañcatantra 
8 
15-19. Manuscripts of the last, grouped under 5 sub-recensions 
. 
. 
8 
20. A lost manuscript (n-w2) agreeing with n-w1 
10 
21. Nepalese recension (v) 
10 
22. The Hitopadeáa 
10 
23. Textus simplicior (Jaina) : Η-class; σ-class (Kielhorn-Bühler) 
. 
. 
11 
24. Pürnabhadra's text (Jaina) 
14 
25. Later contaminated Jaina recensions . 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 1 5 
251. Textus simplicior, interpolated from Pürnabhadra's recension 
. 
. 
15 
252. Pürnabhadra's text, interpolated from textus simplicior, &c. 
. 
. 
15 
25s. Single books of different recensions combined 
16 
254. Other recensions (25* a to 25* g) contaminated with Jaina recensions 
. 
17 
25°. Jaina recensions moulded into other forms 
20 
25'. Versions from which the frame-stories have been eliminated 
. 
. 
20 
b 

viii 
Contents 
PAGE 
Chapter II. 
Fürnabhadra, his time, his work, his language 
. 
21 
§ 1. Previous statements 
21 
§ 2. The date of Parnabhadra's recension 
22 
§ 8. Parnabhadra's work 
27 
§ 4. Parnabhadra's language 
. 8 1 
Chapter III. 
Account of the manuscripts on which this edition is 
based 
37 
§ 1. Description of the manuscripts 
37 
Manuscripts bh, Ν (first group) 
. 
37 
Manuscripts Ψ, PL·1, Pr, Μ, ρ (second group) 
88 
Manuscripts A, Bh, Φ 
40 
§ 2. Value and mutual relations of these manuscripts 
. 
. 
. 
. 4 1 
§ 3. The manuscript Ν goes back indirectly to bh 
42 
§ 4. The manuscripts PL1, Pr, p, and M go back to Φ 
. 
. 
. 4 2 
§ 5. Critical discussion of the manuscript A 
43 
Discussion illustrated by text of Tale III, viii, Self-sacrificing dove . 
. 
44 
§ 6. Critical discussion of the manuscripts Bh and Φ 
. 
. 
. 5 6 
Discussion illustrated by text of Tale V, v, Ass as singer .
.
.
. 
67 
§ 7. Books I to III in manuscripts Bh and Φ 
67 
Discussion illustrated by text of Tale I, xiii, Lion's retainers outwit camel 
68 
Chapter IV. 
Principles which guided the editor in constructing 
the text 
73 
§ 1. Basis of the text of our edition 
73 
Manuscripts bh, Ν, A ; Ψ, PL1, p, Pr, M ; Bh, Φ 
76 
Manuscripts bh and Φ differ very little from Parnabhadra's autograph text 
77 
§ 2. Emendation of the text 
77 
L I S T OF VARIANTS 
8 8 
The variants are given for each page of text, from page 1 to page 290 
INDEX OP STANZAS 
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
. 
2 0 1 
It covers all the stanzas of Parnabhadra's text (HOS. 11) 
And also those of the textus simplicior (Kielhorn-Btlhler) 
ADDITIONS AND COBKECTIONS 
2 3 0 
Additions and corrections to volume xi 
230 
Additions and corrections to volume xii 
231 

PREFACE 
Delayed appearance of the volume.—This volume appears later than 
the editor of this Series and the author expected. 
The printer's copy was 
ready several years ago ; but circumstances for which nobody is to blame 
prevented its being issued earlier than now. 
Distribution of the material originally intended for this volume.— 
The general plan of this volume may easily be seen from the table of 
contents. As appears from page xvii of volume xi, it was my original 
intention to give with this volume parallel specimens of the text of the 
various recensions. 
Technical reasons, which have to do with the size 
and shape of the sheets on which these specimens are printed and with 
related problems of the bookbinder's art, made it seem more practical to 
issue the specimens in a little atlas, and to designate the atlas as volume xiii. 
Designations of the HESS, in the list of variants.—In the 'List of 
Variants the designations of all the manuscripts (sigla codicum) of which 
the variant readings are given in full have been printed at the bottom 
of each page, whereas the designations of manuscripts to which only 
occasional reference is made are there omitted. 
The list of variants refers directly to the manuscripts themselves.— 
The occasional quotations from the Berlin manuscript Κ (see below, p. 15, 
252) are given from the collations of Benfey and of Professor R. Schmidt. 
Unless the contrary is expressly stated, all the other references are to the 
respective manuscripts themselves and not to collations or to secondary 
copies. 
The numbering of the single tales in volume xi.—In volume xi the 
superscriptions ëfiiJT 
and so on, at the head of the single tales, are given 
in the usual Occidental fashion. This is a deviation from the procedure 
of the manuscripts. 
Partly by way of justification, and partly for the 
sake of beginners, it is well to state here that, in the first place, Sanskrit 
manuscripts never have such story-numbers at the beginning of the single 
stories, but always (if they number the stories at all) at the end ; and, in 
the second place, that even the best manuscripts are inconsistent in this 
matter. 
By way of illustration, a few details may be given. 
Our MSS. of 
the bh-class have no story-numbers ; the numbering contained in the MSS. 

χ 
Preface 
of the Ψ-class and in the fifth tantra of Bh are given in the ' variants 
See, for instance, variants on p. 6,1. 27, p. 14,1. 5, p. 21,1. n, &c. Since the 
interpolated stories are in most cases numbered before the frame-stories, 
the numbering of the MSS. disagrees of course with that of our printed 
text. The frame-story I, xv of our edition, e. g., is numbered as xxi in 
the MSS. of the Ψ-class, whereas the intercalated stories xvi to xx are thus 
numbered both in the print and in the MSS. In tantra v, the frame-story 
is numbered as i in the Ψ-class, and all the following stories are numbered 
down to xii. 
In this case the frame-stories are throughout numbered in 
the MSS. before the intercalated stories, whereas in Bh, which in this 
tantra is a MS. of the textus simplicior, the frame-story is numbered as i, 
our first story as ii, our third story, in which all the following tales are 
contained, as xii (see variants on p. 289, il), our stories iv to ix in like 
manner as iv to ix, and our χ as xi ; whereas our xi, which is inserted in x, 
is numbered in Bh as x. 
Editor's non-acceptance of corrections of real errors.—At the end of 
this volume, some additional corrections to vol. xi are appended. 
Several 
learned friends of mine have sent me emendations which they will not find 
among these corrections. 
I need not say that—thankfully and carefully— 
I took all their proposals into consideration; but in the course of my 
critical work I have become extremely cautious in correcting the readings 
of good MSS. Nothing indeed could at first sight be more convincing than 
the emendation R|t(!!?tl4uilfM, which one of these scholars proposed instead 
of R|U!gï(flîfÎ|, as my text reads p. 2,1.12. But as the best MSS. of both 
the recensions of the textus simplicior, from which Pürnabhadra took this 
passage, confirm the reading of the MSS. of his own recension, this con-
jecture is inadmissible ; see variants on p. 2,12. 
The same scholar proposed to read with the editions of Kosegarten 
(Y, 49), Biihler (V, 60), Jïvânanda Vidyäsägara (V, 60), and Kâsînâth 
Pändurafig Parab (V, 58) FÌL^ÌHi instead of HHIUIÍ, a s o u r text has in 
its stanza V, 46 b. But again our variants (on p. 273, l) show that Pürna-
bhadra took the wording of this stanza into his text exactly as he found it 
in his sources, and we have no right to alter what he approved. 
There 
can be no doubt that in this as in other cases the later printed editions 
simply follow that of Kosegarten ; cp. below, p. 53, and Indogermanische 
Forschungen xxix, 215 ff. 
I now regret that I followed Parab in correcting the chandobhariga 
in stanza II, 155 a. This stanza is absent from all the other recensions of 
the Pañcatantra including the textus simplicior. I found it in a metrically 
correct form in Parab's Subhâshita-ratna-bhândâgâra and in his edition of 

Preface 
xi 
Balläla's Bhojaprabandha, and as the correction seemed to be an unavoidable 
one, I adopted it. But later on, I found the same stanza with exactly 
the same chandobhañga in Jïvânanda Vidyâsâgara's edition of the Bhoja-
prabandha and in the metrical version of the Campakasresthikathânaka ; 
see below, Variants on p. 163,13. And when my ' Variants ' were already 
printed, I found again this stanza with its chandobhañga in the printed 
edition of Devavijaya Gani's Pandavacharitra (see Yashovijaya Jaina 
Granthamala, 26, p. 152), and in three old MSS., the one containing 
Dharmacandra's Malayasundarikathä, the other two Hemavijaya's Kathä-
ratnäkara (story 211). Hence it is evident that this stanza was current 
in its faulty form, and that this form should be restored in our text. 
As 
here, Pürnabhadra in several places took over into his text anomalies of 
his sources ; see below, p. 30 f. and p. 36. All these cases should be 
carefully observed, as they afford us one of the best means for constructing 
a pedigree of the different recensions, and for finding out their most 
trustworthy MSS. 
In my emendations I always carefully examined the best MSS. of all 
the old recensions, including both classes of the textus simplicior, and 
I beg my critics not to venture conjectures of their own, without comparing 
the same sources and without taking into due consideration their genetic 
relations. The text of Kielhorn and Biihler cannot replace the MSS. of 
the textus simplicior, as will appear from our parallel specimens, from 
pages 58 ff. of this volume, and from the occasional quotations strewn over 
my notes. 
Fñrnabhadra's attitude towards his sources.—Pùrnabhadra no doubt 
knew Sanskrit well, and if he had not been renowned for his pändityam, 
no minister would have entrusted him with the revision of so celebrated 
and widely-known a nïtiéâstra as the Pañcatantra already was in Pürna-
bhadra's time. Moreover, his work would not have been so widely circulated 
and copied again and again to even recent times, by Jainas as well as 
by Brähmanas, if it had not been approved by the most cultivated people 
of his own time as well as of later times. Hence it seems to me now quite 
possible that he was well aware of such anomalies as he took over into his 
text, but that he intentionally refrained from altering them. In stanza 5 
of his Prasasti he says : 
fä τπτ 
grçft τ çrwta; κ 

xii 
Preface 
This shows at all events that he had a great consideration for his sources, 
which, as appears from our parallel specimens, he followed pretty faithfully* 
Acknowledgement of obligations.—Once more I have the pleasant duty 
of making public acknowledgement of invaluable help and kindness 
received from very many scholars. 
First of all I must thank Geheimrat 
Professor Boysen, Director of the Leipziger Universitätsbibliothek, Professor 
Miinzel, Director of the Hamburger Stadtbibliothek, and Mr. F. W. Thomas, 
Chief Librarian of the India Office Library, London. These gentlemen 
sent me the Pañcatantra MSS. preserved in their respective libraries and 
permitted me to use them under the most liberal conditions. To Mr. Thomas 
I owe the possibility of collating again the London MS. A, and the Poona 
MSS. bhPBh. 
Moreover, this scholar procured for me copies of the most 
valuable MS. h (see below, p. 12 f.), of the Ulwar MS., and of the MS. 
preserved in the Raghunâth Temple Library (cp. p. 231 of this volume). 
Both these latter MSS. are inferior fragmentary copies of Pürnabhadra's 
recension. 
But to know this is a great relief for an editor, for whom 
nothing can be more painful than the thought that there may still exist 
some MSS. of very great value which he is not allowed to use. 
To Professor A. A. Macdonell of Oxford I am deeply indebted for 
sending me the Pañcatantra MSS. of the Max Müller Memorial. 
Besides, 
he as well as Mr. Thomas collated for me a passage of the originals of 
Kosegarten's MSS. BCDEF which were not in my hands, when I needed 
them for this single passage; see below, p. 44f. 
To Mr. Premchand 
Keshavlal Mody, M.A., LL.B., of Ahmedabad, I owe the use of the MSS. pr 
(see p. 12) and Pr (see p. 14). 
Sâstravisâradajainâcârya Munirâj Shrï 
Dharmavijaya Sùri, the founder of Shrï Yasovijayajainapäthasälä in 
Benares, and his head disciple, Muni Indravijaya, who unite in their 
persons the truly Indian pândityam with a keen sense for philological 
criticism and with a far-sighted benevolence to all the scholars interested 
in Jaina literature, have sent me many valuable Jaina MSS. and books 
necessary for my further work, and have given me many items of informa-
tion of the utmost value which it would have been difficult or impossible 
to get in Europe. 
In 1910 the Munich Academy awarded from the income of the Edmund 
Hardy Foundation a prize of one thousand marks for my Contributions to 
the History and Criticism of the Pañcatantra Literature (Arbeiten zur 
Geschichte und Kritik des Pañcatantra). 
Since Theodor Benfey was a 
member of that distinguished corporation, and dedicated to it, over half 
a century ago, his celebrated pioneer work in Comparative Literature, 
entitled ' Pantschatantra ', and since so eminent an authority in that same 

Preface 
xiii 
field as Geheimrat Ernst Kuhn is closely and no doubt authoritatively 
concerned with the administration of the Hardy Fund, it is a matter 
of deep satisfaction to me that I am here able to record the Academy's 
approval of the way in which I am continuing the work of Benfey. 
If I am able to continue this work, I owe the happy privilege in largest 
measure to Professor Charles R. Lanman; for at his instance an inter-
national memorial signed by seventy subscribers (more than a third of the 
signatures came from India), was addressed to the Königlich Sächsische 
Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften with a petition that this corporation request 
the Königlich Sächsisches Ministerium des Kultus und öffentlichen Unter-
richts to allow me the leisure necessary for bringing my work to a 
satisfactory conclusion. 
Rektor Professor Dr. Curt Schmidt of our Real-
gymnasium in Doebeln most kindly supported this petition, and the Royal 
Ministry granted it. I may now hope to complete the literary-historical 
part of my undertaking, as with the present volumes (xii. and xiii. of this 
Series) I am completing the philological part thereof. 
I need scarcely add that for these volumes, as for volume xi, Professor 
Lanman has laid me under deep obligation by revising my Introduction 
and other preliminary matter in respect of its English style, and by 
arranging the contents of the volumes with his well-known editorial skill. 
Mr. J. C. Pembrey, Hon. M.A. (Oxon.), the Oriental Reader at the 
Clarendon Press, has not only done his work with his unfailing care and 
pains, but has also given me many valuable suggestions which I was glad 
to follow. 
To all the above-mentioned gentlemen and corporations, and to the 
Royal Ministry, I here record my heartfelt thanks. 
The great and 
sympathetic interest which they have shown in this large and laborious 
undertaking, gives me courage to address myself to its second and perhaps 
more difficult part; and this, when complete, will, very likely, and as 
I hope, turn out to be a History of the Indian Narrative Literature. 
JOHANNES HERTEL. 
Grossbauchlitz bei Doebeln, Saxony, 
December 10,1911. 


KEY TO TABLES I AND II OF VOLUME XI 
Specimens of the MSS. Ψ and bh in facsimile.—In volume XI, 
between the end of the introductory matter (p. xlviii) and the first page 
of Pürnabhadra's text, are inserted two Tables, containing collotype re-
productions of fifteen specimen-parts of the MSS. Ψ and bh. These facsimiles 
are designated as ' No. 1 ' and so on, and are thus referred to in this Key. 
They are especially useful as showing the old aksara-forms used in our 
MSS., and as making it very clear how some of them were easily liable 
to be misread by later copyists. 
Facsimile No. 1 shows a verso-page of Ψ, corresponding to the passage 
beginning svayüthäntiJcam (169,1 of our text) and ending with bhadra (170,13). 
Our reproduction is a trifle smaller in size than the original. 
The original 
has three red spots : one in the centre of the middle square beneath 
the (correct) leaf-number 60, and encircling the small hole ; one in the right 
margin, covering the figure 5 of the (wrong) leaf-number 56, of which 
the figure 6 and part of figure 5 have been lost in the course of time 
with part of the margin ; and one just opposite to it in the left margin. 
Facsimile Wo. 2 shows a recto-page of Ψ, corresponding to the passage 
gatam vyâdham to krtah inclusive, 173,2 to 174,23 of our text. 
The original 
has only one red spot, namely, in the middle of the blank square. 
Facsimile No. 7 shows a verso-page of MS. bh, corresponding to our 
text 125, il rthäni to 125,29 samäptam cê inclusive. 
The original is a trifle 
larger than the facsimile, and has neither the blank square in the middle 
of the page nor the red spots in the middle and in the margins. 
The Jain diagram for the sacred word arliam appears in Ψ, see No. 2, 
7e.—Annsvära appears at the end of the line in Ψ, see No. 2,12g. 
Cp. 
Variants 183, n. 
The same character is used merely to fill out the blank 
space at the end of the line in 
No. 8, 6 g and 7 g. 
Variants thereof 
in Ψ, No. 1, 1 z, 4 z, 9 z, 14 ζ ; No. 2, 7 g.—Red markings. 
In the originals 
of Φ and bh, the words uktam ca, api ca, the ends of the single pädas, 
and other important places are coloured with red. 
Aksara-forms of the HESS. Φ and bh.—Under the headings of such 
forms as are for one reason or another of interest, are now given references 
to the facsimiles and to the places thereon where such forms may be found. 
References for Φ are on the left ; those for bh are on the right. 
Β 

2 
Key to Tables I and II of Volume XI 
Aksara-forms. 
In facsimiles of MS. ψ. 
In facsimiles of MS. bh. 
Initial i : 
Post-consonantal e : 
Post-consonantal ai : 
Post-consonantal o : 
Post-consonantal au : 
Modern forms : 
gga·· 
gha, old form : 
gha and ppa : 
gha, modern form : 
gha and tha : 
jha: 
jjha : 
tu and nu : 
No. 1, 2 i k ; 7e ; 8 n ; 14r. 
No. 1, 2 b dhe ; 2 m, 5 r ye ; 2 u 
se ; 3 j le; 5 d kle ; 5 m sthe. 
No. 1, 4 b g rai; 
6u, 121 dai; 
14 c tai ; 10 a smai ; 14 e thai. 
No. 1, 1 m ddho; 
2 g yo; 
3f 
tro ; 81 sto ; 3 η to; 
3 s go; 
3 ν bho. 
No. 1, 1 q mau; 
3q, 8 b dau; 
6 ζ san. 
No. 1, 11 η ro ; 11 ζ yo ; No. 2, 
7 b tyo. 
No. 2, \hirggam 
(distinctly two 
ga's). The usual form No. 15, 
2 in durggam. 
No. 8, 4 b c rgha ; 7 a ghâ ; 
No. 2, 9b ghû ; lOf, 14c^Äa; 
No. 9, 1 a gha. 
The old form of gha is distinct 
from that of ppa, but easily 
confused with it : cp. No. 1, 
1 c rppi ; 4 h rppa ; No. 8, 
2 a, 6 d rppa. 
No. 1, 51 gha; No. 2, 1 c, 2a 
ghu ; 4d ghra. 
The modern form of gha is 
distinct from that of tha, but 
easily confused with it: cp. 
No. 1,1 ν tharn ; 6y, 13 β thä ; 
No. 8, 1 g thâ ; 9f tham; 10e 
rtham. 
No. 1, 15 c jhum (quite distinct 
from ku 15 e and g ) ; cp. 
jjhi, No. 12, 2 a. 
No. 9, 3 b jjhä 
(cp. Bühler, 
Paläogr., Table V, v-18 from 
inscr. ca. 807 A. D.) ; No. 12, 
2 & jjhi (cp. Bühler, Paläogr., 
Table V, xiv, χ viii, xix, xxi-18). 
Very nearly alike. 
For tu, see 
No. 1, I d , 3k, 7χ ; No. 8, 
8b ; for nu, see No. 1, 15b. 
No instance. 
No. 7,1 middle tye ; 1 first quar-
ter ye ; 1 third quarter ste ; 
1 fourth quarter te, ke ; 2 first 
quarter ¿re, &c. 
No. 7, 5 and 6 middle, and 9 first 
quarter thai; 
6 first quarter 
kyai ; 10 third quarter dai. 
No. 7,1 fourth quarter no ; 2 first 
quarter yo ; 3 second quarter 
vyo, dyo, to; 
fourth quarter 
vyo, dyo. 
No instance. 
No. 7, 7 second quarter ptai. 
No instance. 
No instance in the facsimiles 
(and none in the entire MS.). 
No instance. 
In bh, the form of tha is like 
that of our printed texts : 
No. 7,1 a rthä ; 2 third quarter 
thä ; 5 middle thai. 
No instance. 
No instance. 
For nu, see No. 7, 7 first quarter. 

Key to Tables I and II of Volume XI 
3 
Aksara-forms. 
In facsimiles of MS. ψ. 
In facsimiles of MS. bh. 
t and η in conjuncts : 
tra : 
Very similar. Thus : 
No. 1, 2g, 5k; tro 3f; <rt9h. 
tya and nya : 
Quite distinct in ψ. For tya, 
see No. 8, 3bc; tye, No. 1, 
6be, 12d; tyu, 2q. 
For 
nya, see No. 1, 9 c, 10 v. 
Cp. nnr, No. 7, 1 first quarter ; 
tra, No. 7, 6 first quarter. 
tvS : 
No. 1,2 x, 8 h, 13 d. 
No. 5, 1. 
tsa : 
No. 1, 8c; tsu No. 1, 12 a ; tsa, No. 7, 2 second quarter and 
tsne No. 1, 14 v. 
9 first quarter ; No. 5, 3 end. 
No. 7, 2 last quarter, exactly 
like sru. 
Identical in bh. For tya, tya, 
see No. 7, 4 first half, four 
examples ; tye, No. 7,1 middle ; 
tyä, 2 end. For nya, No. 7, 
2 third quarter ; 3 beg. ; 6 
middle. 
tha after s, cha, b before dha, and s before ta or tha or va, are very similar. Thus : 
stha: 
No. 13, 3a; sthe, No. 1, 5m; 
sthä, No. 7, 2 third quarter; 
stM No. 3, 2 middle ; 4 end. 
echa : 
No. 1, 4u ν ; No. 10, 2 and 4. 
bdhâ: 
No. 1,11 ρ ; cp.No. 10,1 second 
half. 
sta : 
No. 1,10 q, &c. 
stha : 
No instance. 
sna : 
No instance. 
ddha and dva : 
Identical in ψ. For both, see 
No. 1, 14 q, niryativasäd vad-
dha. 
sthi, 6 second quarter. 
cchi, No. 6, 2 middle. 
No instance. 
No. 7, 1 third quarter (twice). 
No. 6, 3 a. 
No. 5, 2 middle. 
Distinct in bh. For ddha, see 
No. 7, 6 first quarter ; ddhyä, 
7 third quarter; ddhi, 8 first 
andfourth,andlOfirst quarter. 
For dvi, see No. 7, 7 second 
quarter. 


INTRODUCTION TO THE EDITION OF 
PÜRNABHADRAS PAÑCATANTRA 
Chapter I. Survey of the Single Recensions, and of their 
Manuscripts, as used by the Author of this Volume. 
Pedigree of the recensions of the Fañcatantra.—Below is given 
a statement of the various Indian recensions, and in such a tabular form 
as to make clear the genetic relations. 
The Brahmanical recensions are 
marked with a star (*) ; the Jaina recensions with a dagger (f). 
1 "Original work (Kashmir, about 200 B. o. ?) 
2 *t (Kashmir) 
6 *K (Kashmir) 
before 570 
3 *á (Kashmir) 
9 *Pseudo-Gunadhya 
4 *áar. a, 
Kashmir, 
before 1000 
10 *Somadeva, 
Kathäsaritsä-
gara, 1063-1082 
(Kashmir) 
ideva, 
11 *Ksemendra, 
ritsä- 
Brhatkathä-
1-1082 
manjar!, 
about 1040, 
Kashmir 
12 *n-w 
8 Pahlavi recen-
North-Western 
sions, Persia, 
epitome after 
"Western Asia, 
Kâlidâea (fifth 
North Africa, 
5 *Sär.β 
Kashmir, 
before 1000 
!áar. 0 
century) 
Europe, 
from about 570 
13 n-w1 
14 *SP 
Dekkan 
Tamil 
recensions 
20* n-wa 
23 ttextus simplicior, 
North-Western India, 
after 850. 
15 *a 
16 *β 17 *γ 
18 »δ 19 
21 *ν 22 *Hitopade¿a 
Nepal 
Bengal ? 
before 1373 
ι / 
Η-class and σ-class 
ç 
rit) 
24 tPürnabhadra, 
Noith-Western India, 
1199 
25 Later mixed recensions 

6 
Chap. I. 
Survey 
of the Single 
Recensions 
Key to the pedigree.—There follows now, under twenty-five headingB 
corresponding with those of the table (1-25), a brief statement as to each 
of the inferrible or extant recensions of the Pañcatantra, so far as known 
to the editor of Pürnabhadra's recension, and as to the MSS. used by him 
as editor, and in his studies of the history and sources of that text. 
1. The original work. 
The author's MS. of this work and all exact copies of it are lost. 
2. t. 
Some copy, inferrible but no longer extant, of the original work, which 
copy already contained certain mistakes and interpolations. 
3. 
S. 
The lost àâradâ archetype of the Kashmir recension or Tanträkhyäyika. 
S contained many corruptions and gaps, and some more interpolations. 
4. S'är. a. 
The more original text of the Tanträkhyäyika. 
Known from the MSS. : 
Ρ = Püna, Deccan College viii. 145. 
P1 = one leaf, containing most of the kathämukha, Decc. Coll. viii. 145. 
p1 = the greater part of MS. p, belonging to Dr. M. A. Stein. 
The Sanskrit text of MS. Ρ was printed in Abh. der Kgl. Sächs. Ges. der 
Wissenschaften, vol. xxii, No. ν, p. 1 ff. 
5. S'är. β. 
The slightly revised and enlarged text of the Tanträkhyäyika. Used by 
Ksemendra. Part of the interpolations contained in Sär. β go back to some 
MS. of the K-class (No. 6). MSS. : 
p2 = the smaller (last) part of MS. p, belonging to Dr. M. A. Stein, 
z, and its derivatives ρ r R, MSS. belonging to Dr. Stein. 
Critical edition of these recensions : Tanträkhyäyika, die älteste Fassung 
des Pañcatantra. Nach den Handschriften beider Rezensionen zum 
ersten Male herausgegeben von Johannes Hertel.... (= Abh. der Kgl. 
Ges. d. Wissensch, zu Göttingen. 
Phil.-hist. Kl. N.F. Band xii. 2).— 
Translation: Tanträkhyäyika. Die älteste Fassung des Pañcatantra. 
Aus dem Sanskrit übersetzt mit Einleitung und Anmerkungen von 
Johannes Hertel. 1909. Leipzig und Berlin. Druck und Verlag von 
B. G. Teubner. 2 vols. 

and of their Manuscripts 
7 
6. 
K. 
A lost àâradâ MS. which was the source of all the other recensions of 
the Pañcatantra. 
7. N-W. 
A North-Western copy flowing from K, not extant, but represented by 
8. The Palliavi Recensions. 
The Pahlavi version itself is lost, but very numerous offshoots of it are 
preserved. 
See V. Chauvin, Bibliographie des ouvrages arabes ou relatifs 
aux Arabes publiés dans l'Europe chrétienne de 1810 à 1885. II. Kalîlah. 
Liège. H. Vaillant-Carmanne, Imprimeur. 
Leipzig, en commission chez 
0. Harrassowitz, Querstrasse 14. 
A new edition and translation of the 
Old Syriac version has been given by Prof. Friedrich Schulthess of Königs-
berg. Title : Kaiila und Dimna, Syrisch und Deutsch. Berlin. Verlag von 
Georg Beimer. 1911. 
9. 
Psendo-Gunädhya. 
The lost metrical extract from an old text of the Pañcatantra, interpolated 
in a North-Western recension of the Brhatkathä. 
10. Soinadeva. 
The abbreviated Sanskrit translation of No. 9, contained in Somadeva's 
Kathäsaritsägara. Editions used by the author of this volume : 
Br = Katbâ Sarit Sâgara. Die Märchensammlung des Somadeva. Buch vi. 
vii. viii. Herausg. von Hermann Brockhaus. Leipzig 1862 in Com-
mission bei F. A. Brockhaus (= Abh. für die Kunde d. Morgenl., 
herausg. v. d. Deutschen Morgenl. Gesellschaft, ii, No. 5). 
Du = The Kathäsaritsägara of Somadevabhatta. Ed. by Pandit Durgâprasâd 
and Kâsînâth Pândurang Parab. 
Printed and published by the 
proprietor of the " Nirnaya-Sâgara " Press. Bombay. 
1889. 
MSS. used by the author of this volume : 
A = I. O. 1881, E. 3957. 
Β = I. 0. 2165, E. 3949. 
C = I. 0. 1102, E. 3955. 
Κ = Sanskrit College, Calcutta, No. 1796. 
Ρ = Deccan College, 1887-1892, No. 660. 
11. Ksemendra. 
The abbreviated Sanskrit translation of No. 9, contained in Ksemendra's 
Brhatkatha-mañjari, xvi. 286 to 567. Editions : 

8 
Chap. I. 
Survey of the Single Recensions 
v. M = Der Auszug aus dem Pañcatantra in Kshemendraa Brihatkathâ-
mañjarí. 
Einleitung, Text, Uebersetzung und Anmerkungen von Leo 
von Mankowski, dr. jur. & phil. 
Leipzig, Otto Harrassowitz 1892. 
á = The Brihatkathâmafijarî of Kshemendra. Ed. by mahâmahopâdyâya (1) 
pandit Sivadatta, Head Pandit and Superintendent, Sanskrit Depart-
ment, Oriental College, Lahore, and Kâshînâth Pândurang Parab. 
Printed and published by Tukârâm Jâvajî, proprietor of Jâvajî 
Dâdajî's " Nirnaya-Sâgara " Press. 
Bombay. 
1901. 
12. 
n-w. 
A north-western epitome, in which all the stories and nearly all the verses 
of N-W were given. 
It must have been composed after Kälidäsa's 
Kumárasambhava : see vol. I of my translation of the Tantrâkhyâyika, 
p. 158, middle. 
13. 
n-w1. 
This is a derivative of n-w, and the immediate source of 
14. 
SP. 
The archetype of the so-called Southern Pañcatantra. 
no quite faithful copy has been handed down to us. 
to us belong to the following five sub-recensions : 
Of this archetype 
The MSS. known 
15. 
SF< 
A 
Β 
C 
A Β palm-leaf MSS., C a paper MS., all of them belonging to the 
late Prof. Leo von Mankowski, and kindly lent to the author 
of this volume by him. 
K, a copy of the MS. of the Madras Government Oriental MSS. Library, 
Alph. Index, p. 46, No. 7-1-7. 
L, ditto, 7-1-6. 
N, ditto, 7-1-8. 
Q, a copy of the Tanjore MS., Burnell, Class. Index, p. 165b, No. 5,110. 
P, a copy of the beginning of the Tanjore MS., Burnell, p. 165b, No. 5,109. 
» 
» 
» 
υ 
» 
5,111. 
S) 
,, 
„ 
„ 
,, 
„ 
5,113. 
U, 
„ 
„ 
,, 
,, 
,, 
5,116. 
V, 
„ 
„ 
„ 
„ 
„ 
10,240. 
W, 
„ 
„ 
„ 
„ 
„ 
10,241. 
Y, 
,, 
„ 
„ 
„ 
„ 
10,242. 
Z, a copy of a not numbered MS. of the Palace Library, Tanjore. 
In this 
copy, the text of the SP is wrongly ascribed to Ksemendra. 

and of their Manuscripts 
9 
After my edition of the SP was printed, I got, through the kind help 
of Prof. E. Hultzsch and Govt. Epigraphist V. Venkayya, the MS. b, 
i. e. a copy of the beginning of the MS. Hultzsch, Reports on Sanskrit 
MSS. in Southern India, No. II, p. 45, 1219. 
This MS. goes with B. 
16. 
SP β. 
F, a collation of the MS. of the Madras Govt. Or. MSS. Library, 
Alph. Index, p. 46, No. 3-2-20. 
H, a copy of the MS. of the Madras Govt. Or. MSS. Library, Alph. I g r st 
Index, p. 46, No. 6b-3-15. 
group. 
O, a copy of the MS. of the Madras Govt. Or. MSS. Library, Alph. 
Index, p. 46, No. 3-4-19. 
E, a copy of the MS. of the Madras Govt. Or. MSS. Library, Alph/ 
Index, p. 46, No. 7-1-5. 
I second 
I, a copy of the MS. of the Madras Govt. Or. MSS. Library, Alph. group. 
Index, p. 46, No. 7-1-10. 
M, a copy of the MS. of the Madras Govt. Or. MSS. Library, Alph.] third 
Index, p. 46, No. 5-3-13. 
J group. 
The text of the MSS. F HO, EI, with the variants of the best MSS. of 
SP a has been published in the following edition : 
Das südliche Pañcatantra. 
Sanskrittext der Rezension β mit den 
Lesarten der besten Hss. der Rezension a, herausg. von Johannes 
Hertel. 
Des xxiv. Bandes der Abhandlungen der phil.-hist. Kl. der 
Kgl. Sachs. Ges. d. Wissenschaften No. Y. 
Leipzig bei B. G. Teubner 
1906. 
17. 
SP γ. 
D = India Office, Bühler MSS. 
April 24, 1888, No. 320. 
G = India Office, Burnell 211. 
A useless attempt towards publishing these two MSS. has been made 
by Dr. Michael Haberlandt, Zur Geschichte des Pañcatantra, Sitzungsber. 
d. phil.-hist. Cl. der Wiener Ak. d. Wissensch. 1884, p. 397 fF. Cp. ZDMG. 
lviii, p. 3 if. 
18. 
SP δ. 
Τ, a copy of the MS. of the Palace Library, Tanjore, Burnell's Class. Index, 
p. 165b, No. 5,112. 
Cp. Introduction to my ed. of SP, p. xxxiv f. 
19. 
S P £ 
X, an old palm-leaf MS., presented to the author by the late Prof. v. 
Mankowski. 
An analysis of this southern ' textus amplior ' has been 
given ZDMG. lx. 769 ff. and lxi. 18ff. 
c 

10 
Chap. I. 
Survey of the Single 
Recensions 
There are, furthermore, two Paris MSS. of the SP, and one MS. belonging 
to Prof. Teza, which were not available for me. 
Cp. ed. of the SP, 
Intr., pp. xxix and xxxiii. 
20. 
n-w2. 
A lost MS. agreeing on the whole with n-w1, but having numerous more 
original readings. 
The first and second tantras were transposed in this 
recension. 
21. 
v. 
A Nepalese recension, containing only the verses and one prose sentence 
which the copyist evidently took for a stanza. 
First and second tantras 
transposed. 
MSS. : 
n1, a copy presented to the author by the Durbar of Nepal, and containing 
books I to III incl. 
Cp. ed. of SP, p. lxxxviiiff. 
The complete 
variants of this MS. are given in the ed. of SP. 
η2, a copy of the beginning and of the end, transcribed from the same 
original as n1, and procured for me by Prof. Sylvain Lévi. 
This 
MS. contains the stanzas of tantras iv and v, which are missing in n1. 
They are printed in the appendix to my Introduction to the edition 
of the Sanskrit text of the Tanträkhyäyika, p. xxvii. 
22. 
The Hitopadeáa. 
This is based on n-w2 and some other story book. 
Its author was a Saiva 
called Näräyana, who wrote for some king Dhavalacandra, probably in 
Bengal. 
Books I and II transposed as in v. 
Editions with critical notes: 1. Hitopadesas id est Institutio salutaris. 
Textum codd. MSS. collatis recensuerunt interpretationem latinam et 
annotationes criticas adiecerunt Augustus Guilelmus a Schlegel et 
Christianus Lassen. 
Pars I. textum sanscritum tenens. 
Bonnae ad 
Rhenum MDCCCXXIX. . . . Pars II. commentarium criticum tenens. . . . 
MDCCCXXXI. 
(The translation promised on the title has not appeared). 
2. Hitopadeáa by Nârâyana. 
Ed. by Peter Peterson. 
Bombay, 1887 
(= Bombay Sanskrit Series, No. xxxiii). 
As to these and other editions compare : Über Text und Verfasser 
des Hitopadeáa. 
Inaugural-Dissertation . . . bei der hohen philoso-
phischen Facultät der Universität Leipzig eingereicht von Johannes 
Hertel. . . Leipzig. 
Druck von Breitkopf & Härtel, 1897. 
A truly critical edition of this work is still a desideratum. 
The Nepalese 
MS. N, mentioned by Peterson in the preface of his edition, p. i, did 
not belong to the British Museum, as Prof. Peterson thought, but to 

and of their 
Manuscripts 
11 
the late Prof. Cecil Bendall, and now belongs to the Cambridge 
University Library. A MS. which Prof. Zachariae presented to the 
Library of the German Oriental Society has been described by him 
ZDMG. lxi. 342. 
After the publication of SP and ν it will now be an easy task to 
determine the best MSS. of the Hitopadesa and to give a truly critical 
edition of this work. 
23. The testas simplicior. 
Called in the MSS. Pamcäkhyänaka. 
This text is the work of some 
Jaina author who seems to have lived after the middle of the ninth 
century A.D., since he quotes a stanza of Rudrata1, and before 1199 A.D., 
as Pürnabhadra used this text as one of his main sources. The author 
added new tales and new stanzas, especially from Kämandaki2, transposed 
the stories, especially in books III and IV, and greatly amplified the bulk 
of the Pañcatantra, especially in the fifth book. 
As for the single stories, 
he not only altered their wording throughout, but also their purport. 
The 
stories of the textus simplicior have many features in common with 
Buddhistic forms of these tales, which deviate from the old Pañcatantra 
texts. 
The MSS. of this recension disagree very considerably, and in most 
of them the text is in no good state. All of them are revised copies. 
MSS. of the textus simplicior : 
H, No. 281 of the Hamburger Stadtbibliothek. 
Not dated, but older 
than I. 
I, No. 280 of the Hamburger Stadtbibliothek, dated sam. 1701. 
As to 
H and I see my paper ' Kritische Bemerkungen zu Kosegartens 
Pañcatantra', ZDMG. Ivi. 293ff. 
O, MS. of the Bodleian, Oxford, Aufrecht's Cat., p. 157a, No. 335, ' ex 
eodem codice atque Hamburgenses H. I. videtur transcripta esse.' 
Dated sam. 1709. This MS. I have not seen. 
Bh, fifth book, contains a text very closely agreeing with that of the 
Hamb. MSS., but without two interpolations of H I. 
See below, 
p. 56 ff., and cp. No. 25, Later Mixed Recensions. 
σ = Decc. College, Peterson's Fifth Report, No. 356. 
Not dated. 
Copied 
by gani Câritrakïrtti, disciple of gani Tejastilaka. Corrected by pandit 
Suklrtti and pandit Amarasimha. 
s = Decc. Coll. i. 17. 
First leaf replaced. 
Copied from an old original 
(many small gaps). 
Not dated. 
1 See Pischel's edition of Rudrata (Rudrata's Çrngâratilaka and Ruyyaka's Sahrdaya-
lîlâ. Kiel, Haeseler 1886), p. 26. 
J Benfey, Pantschatantra I, p. xv, note 2. 

12 
Chap. I. 
Survey 
of the Single 
Recensions 
S = Dece. Coll. xv. 147. 
First two leaves and last leaf missing. 
The 
conclusion of IV, vii (Mouse-maiden), with IV, viii (Saints' clothes) is 
an unintelligibly short abstract, after which the fourth tantra is 
concluded. 
Dated samv. 1534 caitramäse suklapakse 5 pamcamyäm 
tithau somavâsare atrêha Harmpure Sâ(?)dyanâgarajfiâtïyavyäsactyäkena, 
sutänäm pâthanârtham^me^M;aJ«vâstavyamevâdâ^ 
sutena saväkena pustikä likhitä punyasyärthe tena punyena bhagavän 
srl Mahänsw pritostu, &c. 
a = Decc. Coli. xii. 252. A fragmentary MS. of the text contained in S. 
The conclusion of IV, vii (with the emboxed story IV, viii) is literally 
the same in both MSS. The following leaves are missing : 1-55 incl., 
59-61, 63-74, 77,80, 85,86, 89, 93 to the end. At the end of tantra iv 
the copyist gives his name : likhitam idam pro(!)hita-Rämacamdräbhi-
dhena nijapathanârtham paropakrtaye câstuh I 
pr = a MS. belonging to the Bhandar of Ahmedabad, and lent to me 
through the good offices of Mr. Keshavlal Premchand Mody of the 
same town. 
It bears the marks dä° 7, pra° 25 mï, and da 13 pra 15. 
Colophon: samvat 1592 varse vaïsasasiditraravau lisitam. 
This MS. 
agrees very closely with the edition of Kielhorn and Bühler. 
Bii2 = India Office, Bühler MS. 86. Fragment, leaves 1-39 incl. of 88 leaves 
missing. 
Dated Samvat 1804, Sakem 1669 prabhavabde pausavadya 2 
dvitïyâyàm ludhe Bhisagupanämnä érl-Näräyanapamtaij.. e. pamdìta)sutena 
suhrdvarenêdam pamcopäkhyänäkhyam pustakam likhitam, svärtham parärtham 
cu, &c. 
Mü4 = Max Müller Memorial e 11, Bodleian, Oxford, 50 leaves. 
Begins 
kä sotkamthäs tidati iva (corresp. to Pürn. 230,3). 
The text of this MS. 
belongs to the σ-class. Dated sake 772 éârvarinâmasamvatsare vaiSäkha-
êuddh anava wyäm. 
h = a copy of the MS. mentioned in Sh. R. Bhandarkar's Report, Bombay, 
1907, p. 55, § 46. The original lies in a dilapidated fort in Hanumangad 
or Bhatner (Bikaner). 
Bhandarkar says : ' The place in the fort where 
I saw the box of manuscripts is also dilapidated and deserted. 
The 
heir to the manuscripts is a young boy who, I believe, is studying at 
Patiala.'. . . Bhandarkar calls the original 1 a copy of Pañchatantra 
made in Samvat 1429, while Firuz Shah Taghlak was on the throne.' 
Mr. F. W. Thomas kindly procured me the copy, which was ordered 
by the Durbar of Bikaner. It has been made by two copyists, neither 
of whom knew Sanskrit, and both of whom, especially the second one, 
very often misread the old-fashioned characters of the original. 
The 
colophon does not mention the date given by Bhandarkar, as the 
copyist of this part of the MS. evidently altered it to give the date 

and of their Manuscripts 
13 
of his own copy. Ab the colophon gives an idea of the knowledge 
which this copyist—the better one of the two—has of the Sanskrit 
language, I give it here : säräpüm [for samâptam !] vêdam aparïksita-
karanam näma pamcamam tamtramm iti ι whatpamcatamtram samattamh 
(corr. to samäptamh) II samvat 1965 râmitimïgasaravadï 12 ne lisamtamm 
ätmäcatarabhuja FüH«eranagaramadhye Baratare gacchai II yädrsam 
pustamka drstvä tädrsam lisïtam maya I yadi I suddhamm asuddhatn 
vä mama doso na dìyateh II srïr astuh II srïkalpâmnam astuh II ári 
subham bhavayât h II h. This copy is very faulty. Moreover, very 
many corrections and glosses are entered in it in some places. 
In 
spite of all this the copy is valuable. 
But a future editor of the 
textus simplicior must try to get the original of our copy for his work. 
This original must contain a good old text of this work. The story 
I, ν is concluded in it as in H I.1 In the Introduction to my transla-
tion of the Tantràkhyâyika, p. 158 (Kap. Π, § 2,1, S. 31), I have shown 
that the stanza which contains the argument of story II, iii of our text 
has been altered in all the descendants of K, and has been well pre-
served only in áar. 
Our Specimen III, 1. 133, footnotes, gives the 
reading of h, which, though corrupt, proves in an evident manner that 
originally the textus simplicior also had the reading of Sär. 
c = Deccan Coll., Bhand. Cat., xvii. 637. Fragment. Leaves still extant : 
2-10 incl., 14-21, 23-33, 37-41,43-46. 
Goes down to acimtaya, Kielh. 
p. 89,4. Rather faulty ; modern. 
The textus simplicior has not been handed down to us in its original 
form. All our MSS. show interpolations,2 and the original wording has 
not been preserved in any one of the MSS. that I have seen. 
Our 
parallel Specimens and, above all, the text printed below, p. 58 if., show 
that the MSS. of the textus simplicior may be roughly divided into two 
groups : 
(1) The H-class, to which belong H10 and book V of Bh ; see below, 
p. 58 ff. 
(2) The σ-class, to which belong asprh (and book Y of φ ; see Later 
Mixed Recensions). 
As to the Vaisnava MS. S and to the MS. a of the purohita Rämacandra, 
I cannot say to which class it has to be assigned, as unfortunately I failed to 
copy the greater part of their text. At any rate these two MSS. are worthless. 
Of the two classes, each at times excels the other in the greater originality 
of an occasional passage. 
Our parallel Specimens I-III and the text 
1 Cp. Über die Jaina-Rezensionen [see below, p. 15], p. 97 if. 
» Cp. Ber. kgl. eächs. Ges. d. Wissenschaften, ph.-h. Kl. 1902, p. 68 f. 

14 
Chap. I. 
Survey 
of the Single 
Recensions 
printed below, p. 58 if., show that Pürnabhadra used copies of both these 
classes. 
Wherever he follows the textus simplicior, nearly his whole 
wording can be reconstructed from MSS. of these two classes. 
It is 
scarcely possible that he had before him a MS. from which both the 
H- and the σ-class are derived, as in some places either the Η-class or 
the σ-class is more original than Pürnabhadra's text. 
The text of the Η-class seems to me, on the whole, to be the more 
original one. It has not yet been edited. 
One single MS. of the σ-class has been edited by Kielhorn and Bühler 
in their well-known edition of the Pañcatantra in the Bombay Sanskrit 
Series, Nos. IV, III, I. Cp. ZDMG. Ivi, p. 298 f. This edition agrees very 
closely in its wording, and completely in the arrangement and number 
of its tales, with the above-mentioned MS. pr. 
As to Kosegarten's edition, see below,p. 15, ' Later Mixed Recensions', and 
p. 44 if. 
24. Fñrnabhaclra's text. 
Called in the MSS. (like No. 23) Pañcákhyánaka. 
Pürnabhadra's text 
is a compilation of Sär. β, of the textus simplicior, and of sources unknown 
to us, amongst which there was a source composed in Präkrt; see below, 
p. 27 ff. 
He seems to have known Ksemendra ; cp. WZKM. xvii. 347. 
According to his prasasti, he completed his work in A.D. 1199 by the 
order of a minister named árl-Soma. 
No other recension of the Pañcatantra has been handed down to us in 
so authentic a wording as Pürnabhadra's work. The MSS. which contain 
it are the following : 
bh = Deccan College, Bhand. Cat. x. 190. 
Ν = 
„ 
„ 
„ 
„ χ. 189. 
A = India Office 2643, E. 4084 (a revised copy). 
Ψ = Deccan College, Bhand. Cat. iv. 55. 
Ρ = 
„ 
„ 
„ 
Report 1897, 419. 
L1 = Leipzig University Library, A. 404. 
M = Deccan College, Bhand. Cat. iv. 54. 
ρ = 
„ 
„ 
„ 
„ ii. 46 (a revised copy). 
Pr = a MS. of the Jaina Bhandar of Ahmedabad, dà. 28, pra 10. Not 
dated, but old. 
Β = Oxford, Aufr. Cat., p. 157a, No. 337. It contains only the first two 
tantras and the greater part of III (down to 227,5 krtaghnä ind.). 
Written after A. D. 1810. As I know this MS. only from Tullberg's 
collation, I neglected it. As for the other MSS., see below, p. 37 ff. 
The text of this recension has been published in vol. xi of the HOS. 

and of their 
Manuscripts 
15 
As to the textus simplicior and Pürnabhadra's recension, cp. my papers : 
' Kritische Bemerkungen zu Kosegartens Pañcatantra 
ZDMG. Ivi. 293 ff., 
and ' Über die Jaina-Rezensionen des Pañcatantra 
Berichte der phil.-hist. 
Kl. der Kgl. Sachs. Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften zu Leipzig, 1902, 23 ff. 
The lack of critical spirit, which is so characteristic of the old style 
pandits, was the reason why the more complete, i.e. the interpolated 
and contaminated MSS. of celebrated works, were always copied, whereas 
the old genuine texts disappeared. 
Hence the textus simplicior and 
Pürnabhadra's recension completely ousted the old Pañcatantra from 
North-western India. 
But Pürnabhadra's compilation was not the last 
stage of this literary development. 
Numerous new recensions arose, and 
these have been copied and enlarged even to our days. 
These mixed 
recensions may be classed under six heads. 
1. The textus simplicior was interpolated from Pürnabhadra's text. 
2. Pürnabhadra's text was interpolated from the textus simplicior and 
other sources. 
3. Single books or tantras of different recensions were combined. 
4. Other recensions were contaminated with the Jain recensions. 
5. The Jain recensions were moulded into other forms. 
6. Versions from which the frame-stories have been eliminated. 
25. 
Later Mixed Recensions. 
251. Textus simplicior, interpolated from Pürnabhadra's recension. MSS. : 
D = I. O. 2790. 
Dated samv. 1796 âsâdhavadi 3. 
b = Deccan College, Bhandarkar's Cat. xii. 253. 
Fragmentary MS. 
The 
following leaves are still extant: 49-79 incl., 81-5, 87-9, and one leaf, 
the pagination-number of which is ninety-something (the unit of the 
number is not to be made out), 
d = Deccan College, Bhand. Cat. ii. 44. 
Has 54 leaves, incomplete. 
The 
text goes to saharsam aha, Kielhorn, p. 93,14. 
Mü1 = MS. Max Müller Memorial e 10 of the Bodleian. 
100 leaves. 
Fragment. 
Begins with ca vilokya Pürn. 130, lo. 
The rest complete. 
Dated sambat 1776 varse I saie 1641 pravarttamâne I jyedamäse I krme 
pake I caturthyäm 4 tithau I ädityaväre I Written Svjäna&imhajivijayaräjye I 
êrl Vîkânera-madhye by one äcärya Rämakrsna. 
Mü3=MS. Max Müller Memorial d 40. 71 leaves. Contains books III to Y 
inclusive. 
The pagination begins with 1. 
Not dated. 
252. 
Pürnabhadra's text, interpolated from the textus simplicior and other 
sources. 
MSS. : 
Κ = Berlin, Chambers 176. 
This MS. is known to me from the collations 
of Benfey and R. Schmidt. 

16 
Chap. I. 
Survey of the Single Recensions 
L2 = Leipzig University Library, A. 403. 
84 leaves. 
From the beginning 
to trâsayâm äsa 219, 2. Title HitopadeSa (only in mg.). Yery faulty áaiva 
MS. After I, i the story Hitopadesa II, iii, ed. Schi. (' Dog and Ass '). 
Bü1 = I. O., Bühler MS. 85. 
Dated sake 1788 ksayanâmavatsare. 
This 
is the recension translated by Galanos, and used by Meghavijaya (see 
below, p. 19). 
Cp. WZKM. xix. 62 ff. 
Mii2 = MS. Max Müller Memorial f 1. 
Complete. 
The pagination (lost on 
some leaves) goes from 244 to 395. 
Leaf 279 wrongly inserted after 
379, leaf 337 after the first leaf of éivadâsa's Vetälapaücavimsatikä, 
which follows in the MS. 
Down to about p. 22 of our text Mü2 
contains a mixture of Simpl. and Pürn., the textus simplicior prevailing. 
But also in some other places the textus simplicior has been compared. 
After êrûyate ca, 94, 4, for instance, Mü2 continues : tat pranastam hulam 
paksikulam samprati l anyân api svechayä vyäpädayisyati I yatah (= Kielhom, 
i. 72, is). Thereupon follow, with variants and corruptions, the stanzas 
Kielh. 342 to 346 incl., and then the MS. continues with our stanza 
344. 
Nearly all the mistakes common to ΨΜι appear in our MS., and 
many other corruptions besides. 
Of the prasasti, Mü2 has the two 
stanzas of PPrM.—Mü2 is dated mnyaêâstramuniûcam .. . [supply drd\ 
1760 Vikramasya gatâvdayah II êucih éukle trayodasyäm by one Sukadeva 
in a village of Gujarat. 
It is useless for critical purposes. 
253. Single books or tantras of different recensions were combined. 
Bh = Deccan College, Bhand. Cat. xiii. 68. 
The text of books I, II, and 
III is a Púrnabhadra text, mangled and interpolated from the textus 
simplicior. 
Book IV (incomplete) is a Púrnabhadra text. 
Book V is 
an old text of the Η-class of the textus simplicior. 
See below, p. 56 ff. 
φ = Deccan College, Peterson, Report IY, 719. The text of books I to III 
inclusive is the text of Bh ; book IV is a Púrnabhadra text different 
from Bh ; book V is a textus simplicior of the σ-class. 
See below, 
p. 56 ff. 
C = Bodleian, Aufrecht's Cat., No. 336. 
Dated sam. 1856. 
This MS. 
I know only from Tullberg's collation. 
The beginning of the first 
tantra contains the textus simplicior, the rest of that tantra and the 
remaining ones are Púrnabhadra's text. 
F = I.0., No. 2319. Books I and II contain the textus simplicior, the 
others are copied from the same original as C. 
To Mr. F. W. Thomas 
I owe the statement that codices F and L (cp. Kosegarten, p. vi) are 
identical. 
Bü5 = I. 0., Bühler MS. 89, a fragment containing leaf 1 and leaves 53 to 
119 incl. 
Neaz-ly all of book I is missing. 
The conclusion of book I 

and of their 
Manuscripts 
17 
and books IV and. V contain the text of Pürnabhadra, whereas books II 
and III contain a textus simplicior with stories interpolated from 
Pürnabhadra. 
Cp. WZKM. xix. 75. 
Bii8 = I. O., Bühler MS. 87. 
Fragment ; 47 leaves. 
Begins with the 
description of the hunter at the beginning of tantra ii, and goes to 
Bühler's stanza iii, 163. Pürnabhadra's stories inserted in the frame 
of the textus simplicior. Cp. WZKM. xix. 73. 
Π = Deccan College, Peterson, Report III, Appendix iii, No. 313. 
Not 
dated. Modern. 
Books I and II, Pürnabhadra ; the other booke, 
textus simplicior. 
The following MSS. contain in their books I, Π, V, Pürnabhadra's text ; 
in their books III and IV an interpolated textus simplicior :— 
Π1 = Deccan College, Bhandarkar, Report 1894, No. 371. Quite modern. 
Π2 = Deccan College, Peterson, Report V, No. 355. Dated mitau (?) kärtika-
krsnacaturthï bhüpu travasare samvat 1811. 
Π3 = Deccan College, Bhandarkar, Report 1897, No. 418. Modern. 
Π4 = British Museum, No. 277. This MS. I have not seen. 
Q = Deccan College, Bhand. Cat. viii, 144. Last leaf wanting, 
q = Deccan College, Bhand. Cat. xii. 251. Missing leaves : 1-70 incl., 77, 
78, 122, 140 to the end. Not old. In the parts extant, q has the 
same stories as Q. 
Kosegarten's edition of the textus simplicior belongs to this class, and 
his edition of the textus ornatior as well. Both are mixtures from MSS. 
of various classes. 
The edition of Jïvânanda Vidyâsâgara is based on 
Kosegarten's, and so is that of Parab. 
See below, p. 51 ff. 
254. 
Other recensions contaminated with the Jain recensions. 
25* a. The MS. E = I. O. 1812, E. 4086. 
Kosegarten, p. iv of his 
edition of the textus simplicior, says of this MS. : ' Textus ad codicem 
A. prope accedens passim verba sensum supplentia adiicere videtur.' 
On 
the contrary, this MS. deviates from Pürnabhadra in the most remarkable 
maimer. 
It is based on the textus simplicior and contaminated with 
Pürnabhadra's text. 
But the author of this text has used still other 
sources, e. g. the Mahäbhärata, the Vikramacaritra (or some work quoting 
a coherent passage of it ; see below, p. 44 ff.), nay, even an older recension 
of the Pañcatantra, from which the author inserts his story III, i (' Ass 
in panther's skin'), which seems to be based on the Tanträkhyäyika. 
The text of this story, printed from Tullberg's collation, is given ZDMG. 
Ivi. 317. 
The order of the stories has been altered throughout; eee 
ZDMG. Ivi. 326. 
D 

18 
Chajp. I. 
Survey 
of the Single 
Recensions 
254b. Ananta's Kathämrtanidhi.1 
This is an epitome of an old 
textus simplicior, interpolated in some places from Pürnabhadra's text, 
and even altered by the redactor in some features of the stories related. 
The single books are not called tantra, but ûrmi. Cp. ZDMG. Ivi. 296 f. ; 
Saxon Berichte, p. 117, note 1. MSS. : 
G = 1.0. 2146 = E. 4088. A modern Nâgari transcript from a no doubt 
Southern MS. (I frequently appears instead of I between vowels). 
G1, Aufrecht mentions a second MS., Hall, A Contribution towards an 
Index (Cale., 1859), p. 183. 
The two following Nâgari copies, derived from one and the same 
original, belong to Prof. E. Hultzsch (Halle) : 
G2, 93 leaves, and G3, 69 leaves. In the first päda of the concluding stanza 
of book V (see Saxon Berichte, p. 117, note 1) both of them read vij? 
for hânva 
25* c. NP, the recension mentioned by Aufrecht, C. C., p. 314 : XRJiRT 
kävya, by Dharmapandita. MS. mentioned in Ά Catalogue of Sanskrit 
Manuscripts in Private Libraries of the North-Western Provinces. 
Parts 
I-X. 
Allahabad, 1877-86, ix. 14.' I gót a copy of this MS. by the good 
services of Mr. F. W. Thomas, and of the Principal of the Sanskrit College, 
Benares. In this copy, the name of the author (Dharmapandita) does not 
appeal·. The original, as the librarian of the Sanskrit College informs 
me, is written in Tailanga characters. The librarian says that the modern 
pandits designate nUi works which contain stories as kävya. The original 
belongs to Pandit Nrsimhasâstrin, and the Nâgari copy sent to me was 
made by order of his son, Pandit Gangâdhara áastrin, C.I.E.2 
The author of this version has used several sources, the textus simplicior, 
the recension of Pürnabhadra, the Southern Pañcatantra, the Hitopadesa, 
and in some places even Sär., or some MS. which contained passages that 
are known to us only from this source. Only the first two tantras are 
complete ; of tantras iii to ν there is only a very short abridgment. 
Books 
IV and V are transposed. After the fifth book there are several story-
stanzas; no doubt the author intended to use them for the composition 
of books III to V. Cp. ZDMG. Ixiv. 61. 
As to this recension, see Journal Asiatique, Nov.-Déc. 1908, p. 400 ff., 
where also the stories I, xvii, xviii, xix are given in Sanskrit and French. 
MS. : np, new copy in Nâgarï, 51 leaves, 12 to 13 lines on a page. 
1 As the author's prasasti tells us, Ananta was a worshipper of Visnu. 
He belonged 
to the family of the Känva's, and his father's name was Nägadeva. According to 
Aufrecht's C. C., i. 13, 771, and ii. 186, Ananta Bhatta is the author of many works. 
2 See Journal Asiatique, Nov.-Déc. 1908, p. 400, where °pattrena (1. 3 of the Sanskrit 
passage) is a misprint for "putirena. 

and of their 
Manuscripts 
19 
254 d. The recension of the Jaina monk Meghavijaya, compiled from an 
interpolated Pürnabhadra text (Bii1, above, 252), from the textus simplicior, 
from a metrical version of the Jaina Pañcatantra, from the Jaina work 
Dharmakalpadruma, and from one or more other sources. The prose has 
been rewritten, and new verses and stories have been added. Meghavijaya 
wrote in sam. 1716 in the town Navaraóga. 
He belonged to the Tapâgaccha. 
MS. of the I. O. : Bühler, ZDMG. xlii. 54, No. 6 ; fols. 35,11. 17, samvat 
1747, Puna (No. 90). 
An analysis of this version, with the Sanskrit texts of the new stories 
or interesting variants of old stories contained in it, has been given in 
my paper ' Eine vierte Jaina-Recension des Pañcatantra ' ; for a German 
translation of these stories, see my paper ' Mëghavijayas Auszug aus 
dem Pañcatantra', Zeitschr. des Vereins für Volkskunde in Berlin, 
1906, p. 249 ff. 
254 Θ. The MS. Bhandarkar, Report 1897, 417 (Deccan College, coli, 
of 1887-91, 153 leaves; col.: sam. 1728 áravanakrsná [!] caturddasyäm 
somadine PhaUeha^m&m&àhje dïvân irl-Aliphasämrä^y& Páñ^anvaye MiSra-
irlRämenaiekhi II subham II su II) contains another Jaina recension. The text 
of this MS. is compiled from the textus simplicior, Pürnabhadra (bh-class), 
Hitopadesa, the metrical source used by Meghavijaya, Sâr. β (with the 
mistakes of our MSS. of this recension), and other sources. 
Tantra I contains the same stories, and these stories in the same order, 
as Pürnabhadra. 
Only story xxiv and part of xxiii have been lost by 
a gap (not marked in the MS.). Tantra II: i = Hit. Schi. I. ii (Pet., p. 7,4) ; 
ii = Pürn. II. i ; iii = Sparrow's allies and elephant, with iv, Lion and 
woodpecker (from the same metrical sources as Meghavijaya1); ν = Hit. 
I. iii (Pet. I. 41 and following story) ; vi = Hit. I. iv (Pet. I. 42 and follow-
ing story) ; vii = Pürn. II. ii ; viii = Pürn, II. iii (but the text of Sär. β) ; 
ix, corresponds to Pürn. II. iv (stanza and first sentences from Hit., the 
rest of the text from áár. and Pürn.) ; χ = Hit. I. vi (Pet. 1.80 and following 
story) ; xi = Pürn. II. ν ; xii = Pürn. II. vi ; xiii = Pürn. II. vii ; xiv = 
Pürn. II. viii ; xv=Pürn. II. ix. 
Tantra III: i = Sär. III. i ; ii=Pürn. III. i ; 
iii = Pürn. III. ii ; iv = Pürn. III. iii ; ν (intercalated into iv : the lizards, 
elephant, and water-animals 2) ; vi, corresponds to Pürn. III. iv (from áár.) ; 
vii = Pürn. III. ν ; viii to xv = Pürn. III. vi to III. xiii ; xvi, corresponds 
to Pürn. IH. xvi (from áár., and again from Pürn. ; two foil. 166 ; the text 
in disorder). Tantra IF: i to χ=Pürn. IV. i to χ; then xi=Simpl. Bühler 
1 Cp. Zeitschr. d. Vereins f. Volkskunde in Berlin, 1906, 256 f. (with German transla-
tion). Sanskrit text and French translation : Journal Ás., Nov.-Déc. 1908, p. 425 ff. 
1 Sanskrit text and French translation : Journal As., 1908, p. 432 ff. 

20 
Chap. I. 
Survey of the Single Recensions 
IV. vii, and xii = Simpl. IV. xvi. Tantra V = Simpl. V, with all the stories 
given by Bühlei-, except Y. v. 
In the wording of the frame-stories, the texts of Hit., Pürn., Simpl., Sär. 
are equally contaminated. 
254 f. The Bühler MS. 88 of the India Office (ZDMG. xlii. 541), though 
complete in itself, contains only tantras i, iv, and v. It was copied in 
sam. 1830 sake 1695 by Väsudeva, son of Râmacandra, son of Rámakrsna, 
of a Mahärästra family. The faulty colophon seems to imply that Eâma-
candra (a Vaisnava) was the author of this recension. Like the recensions 
recorded under 254 c and g, the text of Râmacandra's version represents the 
copy of a rough draught not finished. The first tantra is based on the textus 
simplicior, but interpolated from Pürnabhadra ; the fourth tantra contains 
a text of SP β. 
The fifth tantra is contaminated from SP and the textus 
simplicior. It begins with the frame-story and the first and second tales 
of SP ; then follow all the stories of Bühler's edition from V. idi onward, 
except Bühler V. ix and V. xiv. In general, cp. WZKM. xix. 74 f. 
254 g. The MS. Deccan College xvi. 105 (30 leaves, not old) contains 
the Kathämukha and book I of an incomplete new recension. But the 
first book, numbered as such, corresponds to tantra ii of Pürnabhadra's 
text. It contains all the stories of Pürnabhadra's text in the same order. 
The wording of this MS. has been contaminated from Pürnabhadra, from 
the textus simplicior, and from the Hitopadeáa, and many new stanzas 
have been inserted. 
25®. Jaina recensions moulded into other forms. A metrical version 
of the Jaina recensions must have existed before the time of Meghavijaya, 
who has very largely availed himself of it (see above, 25* d). The same 
version was used by the compiler of the text 254 e. 
25®. Versions from which the frame-stories have been eliminated. 
a. A Jain MS. of the Berlin Library, described by E. Leumann, Saxon 
Berichte, 1902,132 ff. (from the textus simplicior). 
b. The Buddhist version from Nepal, called Tanträkhyäna. 
It is based 
on one or several unknown redactions, and augmented from other sources. 
The prose given by Bendall is not original. 
Only the stanzas contain the 
original Sanskrit text. 
Cp. Bendall, The Tanträkhyäna. 
Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society 
of Great Britain and Ireland, new series, vol. xx, p. 465 ff. Hertel, Über 
einige Handschriften von Kathäsamgraha-Strophen, ZDMG. lxiv. 58 ff. 
In the Jaina Upäsrayas of Pophliäno pädo in Pätan (upper Gujarat) 
and of Dehläno pädo in Ahmedabad, there are still numerous Pañcatantra 

and of their 
Manuscripts 
21 
MSS. the use of which unfortunately I was not granted. 
Cp. Bhandarkar, 
Report, Bombay, 1887, p. 166 (da° 10,1.2.44) ; p. 180 (36,126) ; p. 184 (40, l) ; 
p. 189 (44,55) ; p. 190 (45,2i) ; p. 192 (49,35) ; p. 195 (55,3.2) ; p. 217 (18,4.5) ; 
p. 226 (31,13) ; p. 237 (36,137); p. 243 (43,32) ; p. 245 (46,23). Nor was I 
granted the use of the Vienna MS. 17 (Aufrecht, C. C., p. 314). 
Two Northern MSS. are preserved in the Palace Library at Tanjore : 
τ1 = 5114 and τ = 5115. As I was not granted the use of the originals, 
I ordered copies to be made of both of them. 
But the specimens sent 
to me were executed so carelessly (the copyist did not even copy the 
single leaves in due order), that not to waste more money I had the copying 
stopped, 
τ1 seems to be a MS. of the Η-class of the textus simplicior, 
whereas τ seems to contain a text of Pürnabhadra's recension. I cannot 
say any more about these two MSS., because I know only their beginnings 
and because, at all events, the two copies give no fair representation of 
their originals. 
Chapter II. Purnabhadra, his time, his work, and 
his language. 
§ 1. Previous Statements. 
IN 1891, Aufrecht wrote in his Catalogua Catalogorum, vol. i, p. 344 : 
revised by desire of Somamantrin the Pañcatantra in 1514,1 I . O . 
2643.' 
R. G. Bhandarkar in his Report, Bombay, 1897, p. lix, gave the 
complete praáasti of Pürnabhadra's Pañcatantra, with this (faulty) stanza 
containing a different date of the book : 
iK*u«iiKfùroîf T f à ^ f ^ 
«porrci ι 
tfrërteTT TTprt π ΐ π Μ ί 
w ^ ιι 
Bhandarkar adds : ' This is an edition of the Pañchatantra prepared under 
the direction of a Mantrin or minister of the name of Soma and completed 
on the 3rd tithi of the dark half of Phâlguna of the year 1255 by a man 
of the name of Pûrnabhadra. 
The text of the Pañchatantra, he says, had 
become corrupt, and he corrected every letter, word, sentence, story and 
verse. 
Accordingly we find on comparing this edition with the existing 
text as printed in the Bombay Sanskrit Series that there are differences of 
1 The MS. which Aufrecht refers to is our MS. A. 
See below, pp. 22 and 40. 
(Aufrecht gives the date A. D.) 

22 
Chap. II. 
Pûrnabhadra, his time, work, and language 
reading in almost every line. 
Some of the prose passages and verses in 
the latter are omitted and sometimes there are others in the place of those 
occurring there. 
Sometimes there are verbose prose passages to which 
there is nothing corresponding in the existing text. 
The work might be 
characterized as Pañchatantra re-written. Who the Soma-mantrin mentioned 
by the author was it is difficult to say. 
The date in all probability refers 
to the era of Vikrama, wherefore it is equivalent to 1199 A.D.' 
In 1902, I proved that both the textus simplieior and the text called by 
Kosegarten textus omatior, are Jaina works, and that Pûrnabhadra, who 
amongst other sources used the textus simplieior, was the author of the 
so-called textus omatior,1 
In a post-card dated Aug. 12, 1902, Geheimrat 
Jacobi was kind enough to tell me that the date of the stanza published 
by Prof. Bhandarkar corresponds to Sunday, January 17, 1199 A.D. 
§ 2. 
The date of Pürnabhadra's Recension. 
The date taken by Aufrecht from our MS. A cannot come under 
consideration, as we have several MSS. of Pürnabhadra's work which 
are much older than the date just mentioned. 
The author's samvat date 
given in A is 1571.2 
Our MS. Bh is dated sam. 1442 ; bh, sam. 1468 ; P, 
which mediately goes back to the very old MS. Ψ, sam. 1537. 
The date published by Bhandarkar is taken from the MS. n 1 = Decc. 
Coll. 1894, No. 371. 
The same date-stanza is given in the MSS. Π2 = 
Decc. Coll., Peterson's Fifth Report, No. 355, n 3=Decc. Coll., 1887-91, 
no. 418, and in the MS. 277 of the British Museum. 
All these MSS. go 
back to one common archetype. 
The British Museum MS. I did not see ; 
but the others are quite modern copies. 
They belong to the class of the 
mixed MSS.3 and are on the whole worthless. 
But their fifth tantra has 
been copied from a MS. of the bh-class.4 
The text of this tantra as 
contained in them is inferior to that of the same tantra given in bh. 
But 
as in bh the date-stanza is missing, these MSS. apparently derive from 
some copy older than bh, and the date given in them may be right, if it 
is compatible with what we know from other sources about Pürnabhadra's 
time. 
And this is the case. 
Klatt-Le umann, The Sâmâchârîsatakam, Ind. Antiquary, July, 1894, 
p. 173, give this information: '16 7 ah Pûrnabhadra, pupil of Jinapati sûri 
(t Samvat 1277), composed srî-Krtapunyacharitra.' 
1 Berichte d. kgl. Sachs. Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften, 1902, ph.-hist. Kl., pp. 92 fF., 
97 ff. 
2 The copyist's date is saipvat 1574. 
' See above, p. 17. 
4 See below, p. 58 ff. 

Chap. II. 
Pürnábhadra, his time, work, and language 
23 
The 
^«JN^i (ïïftn ïficlf. ^ 
^NTCTS, 
P=(sfi*i 
mentions the following works : 
p. 
' N r 
»TUT 
•çffa 
Wrñ 
T e r n î t ^ 
^ r i V 
I was anxious to procure the prasastis of these works. With respect to 
that of the former my endeavours failed. 
But to the kindness of the 
Jaina scholar, Mr. Keshavlal Premchand Mody, of Ahmedabad, I owe 
a copy of the Introduction and of the prasasti to the latter work. 
Both 
of them were copied from a MS. of 37 pages [fols. ?] (15 lines to a page), 
belonging to Maharaj Kanti Vijaya, of Baroda. 
The praêasti of the DhanyaHälicaritra. In his prasasti the author of the 
Bhanyasälicäritra gives the pedigree of his teachers, calling his gaccha 
the Wfs^iW (stanza 2), or ^spi^Ç (stanza 10).1 But he gives only the series 
of the süris of the Kharatara-gaccha,2 excluding the first teacher peculiar 
to this gaccha, viz. Vardhamäna (fsam. 1088). 
All of these names are 
known to us from Klatt's Extracts from the historical Becords of the 
Jainas, from his Specimen of a lit.-bibliographical Jaina-Onomasticon, and 
from the Pâttâvalï published by Weber in his Cat., p. 1036 ff. In giving 
them here from the prasasti of the Dhanyaáalicaritra, I add in parentheses 
the dates from Klatt's ' Specimen 
1 This gaccha derives its name from that of its founder Camdra-süri. See Dharmaea-
gara-gani's G-urvâvalîsûtra,Weber, Cat. 997, p. 1002 (numbered as 15th suri) ; Munisundara-
suri's Gurvâvalî, stanza 26 and p. 15, first stanza (numbered as 16th suri) ; and the Pattä-
valîvâcanâ of the Kharataragaccha, Weber, Cat., p. 1038 f. (numbered as 18th suri). 
3 Called after Kharatara, the ' Severer 
the ' Harder ', a title which was given to 
Jineávara-BÜri of the Cândra-gaccha, when, in sam. 1080, in the sabhä of King Durlabha 
of Anahillapura (Anhilväd) he refuted the caityaväsins. üp. the story in Weber's Cat., 
p. 1087 f. ; Klatt, Specimen of a lit.-bibl. Jaina-Onomasticon, p. 46 f. The first two 
stanzas of the above-mentioned praáasti allude to this event, comparing Jineávara with 
a lion (who is icj^rt^ than his opponents, compared to elephants), and saying that 
in àrïpattana (= Anhilväd) and in the presence of King Durlabha the suri proved from 
the Holy Scriptures 
that monks should not dwell in caityas (temples), but 
in the houses of householders. 
The first two stanzas of the praáasti run thus : 
i: ^HTÎîî ^ r R J ^ Γ Γ Ή 
But cp. Dharmasâgara's 
(sarp. 1629) criticism of this fact in R. G. Bhandarkar, Report, Bombay, 1887, p. 149 f. 

24 
Chap. II. 
Pürnabhadra, his time, work, and language 
The pedigree runs thus : Jineêvara (received the honorary name ' Khara-
tara' in Sam. 1080), Jinacandra (composed W^IXTiTRfT in Sam. 1125), 
Ahhayadeva (died Sam. 1135 or 1139), Jinavallabha (died Sam. 1168), Jinadatta 
(born Sam. 1132, died Sam. 1211), Jinacandra (born Sam. 1197, died Sam. 
1223), Jinapatti1 (born Sam. 1210, died Sam. 1277), Vlraprabha (i. e. Jineá-
vara, born Sam. 1245, died Sam. 1331), who was made guru by Sarvadevasüri. 
The last stanzas of the prasasti I give here literally according to my MS. : 
Ά', q l f r f t ^ T T n r f ï ï ^ r t f w 
f^ft'sr f ^ j ^ T 
irata: qo 
f w t 
%cft: w r f M 
{ f i r e n t <\<\ 
w r g r f w ^ 
i f w w i ^ f r ^ v R P f m ^ ^ t : 
^ f W i î ^ r f W è r R i f W r ^ n x ^ n T : 
vRJWT^gf'nrr^ì'T^fr: jfi fa* i n f i c i f w r e 
^ 
qqmfiM w 
^rrrnfr 
gwrw^ <i8 
^RifTÎ ^ ^ ^ K H Ì m f r R · * 
^ r f à sRifa 
ïïTwranrR 
Tbanslation.3 
10. He [i. e. Jinesvara=Yîraprabha] who, like the celebrated Jineêvara 
[i. β. Yardhamäna, the last Jina], rejoices in the celebrated Candra-gaccha, 
1 Thus spelt in MSS. and inscriptions. 
See Klatt, Specimen, p. 24. In stanza 12 
of our praáasti his name ie correctly spelt flfPTfïT. 
2 MS. o ^ o for e^fo. 
3 I translate as literally as possible, -without any regard to the English style. 

Chap. II. 
Pürnabhadra, his time, work, and language 
25 
who instructs and protects it, and who now renders powerful the Jaina 
moon [i. e. the Jaina gaccha called Cändra\ as a road [for Salvation], and 
who with [his] incomparable words fills the threefold world as with laws, 
[because he is] trusted [by all the living beings] ; 
11. By the command of this [Jinesvara], [when I] dwelt with the 
teacher Sarvadeva, [who is endowed with] good qualities, in the fortress 
of Jaisalmer, by the word of those [two men],1 in order to give help to 
myself and to others, and desirous to concentrate my mind, 
12. [I,] the pupil of the teacher Jinapati, the gani named Pürnabhadra, 
composed the story of Dhanya and of Gobhadra's son,2 in this Vikrama 
year numbered by arrow [5], Vasus [8], Sun [12], on the 10th day in the 
bright half on the approach of the month of Magha.3 
13. The best of the väcakas, called Sürapralha, who has seen the 
opposite shore of the whole ocean of pure learning, corrected this story. 
14. Whatever religious merit I may have gathered here by composing 
the pleasant story of the monk Dhanya and of the monk Sälibhadra, by 
this [merit] may this world be the abode of bliss. 
15. As long as in the pure lake of the sky the autumn moon holds [or 
bears] the eminence of the excessive sport of a gander,4 so long is victorious 
in the world this good story of Dhanya and of Gobhadra's son [i. e. so long 
may it survive], [and be] read aloud by the well-minded [or : by the wise]. 
Proballe identity of the authors of the Pancäkhyänaka, of the Krtapunya-
caritra, and of the Dhanyasâlicaritra. 
About the identity of the author of 
the Krtapunyacaritra and that of the Dhanyasâlicaritra there can be no 
doubt. 
From the passage quoted above, p. 23, it appears that both these 
works were composed by a monk Pürnabhadra in the same year, viz. 
sam. 1285 ; see stanza 12 of the prasasti given above. 
In the introduction 
to the Dhanyasâlicaritra, stanzas 10 ff., the author says : 
TOTftf 
'jSMüMmfad ^ñnt f t â 
w ^ í ^ r a t g j ^ k ' ^ d ß i ü : «io 
Y^rg ajifcwg^ giHM^I^qt ΊΤΤ: 
« i ^ M J w t à m ^JJ: f p i ï â p i «η 
1 The text has the plural number. 
s In stanza 13 of the Introduction our author says: 
V|4|{jp)4(1-4 
ïïfT^t^ 
infsm^rf^Mî x?f%%TTT 
fafflfm 
* So according to Dharma Vijaya Suri, who refers to Hemacandra's AbhidhänacintS-
mani, ed. Boehtlingk and Rieu, p. 26, § 29. 
4 So according to Dharma Vijaya Süri. I first thought of separating 
and of rendering: 'causes quarrel connected with an excess of great dalliance', i.e. 
' causes love with which joys and sorrows are inseparably connected.' 
E 

26 
Chap. II. 
Pürnabhadra, his time, work, and language 
These verses prove that Pürnabhadra intended to compose a Krtapunya-
caritra, after finishing his Dhanyasalicaritra. 
In the Sämäcäri-sataka as 
quoted above, p. 22, it is stated that Pürnabhadra, the author of the 
Krtapunyacaritra, was a pupil of Jinapati, and Jinapati was the teacher of 
Pürnabhadra, the author of the Dhanyasalicaritra ; see above, p. 24, stanza 
12 of the prasasti. 
The author of the Dhanyasalicaritra composed this work in Jaisalmer ; 
the author of the Pancäkhyänaka must no less certainly have lived in 
north-western India.1 
Like the former, he was a ávetámbara monk.2 
His date, as given in the prasasti of the Π-class,3 viz. sam. 1255, ia 
compatible with the date (sam. 1285) of the two other works mentioned 
before. 
Moreover, the author of the PaScäkhyänaka calls himself a suri or 
guru, i. e. a teacher, whereas the author of the two other works tells us that 
he is a gani. 
The author of the two later works accordingly has a higher 
rank than that of the PaScäkhyänaka.4 
The identity of our two Pürnabhadras would be established beyond any 
doubt, if it were sure that, in stanza 4 of the PaScäkhyänaka prasasti, 
the author is invoking the tlrthakara Candraprabha as a patron of the 
Cändrakula. 
But this is not sure. 
The author of the Dhanyasalicaritra 
invokes Pärsvanätha. 
Hence we can only say that it is highly probable that Pürnabhadra, the 
author of the PaScäkhyänaka, and Pürnabhadra, the author of the Dhan-
yasalicaritra and of the Krtapunyacaritra, were one and the same person. 
1 Cp. ZDMGr. lx. 787. Pürnabhadra lived in that part of India in which camels are 
kept as domestic animals, and all the MSS. of hie work are written in Nâgarï characters. 
2 For no Digambara monk would have told the story I, xxii, in which the fraudulent 
monk burnt by the clever minister is a Digambara ascetic. Cp. also the stanza V, 11. 
' See above, p. 21 f. 
* «ifùj has the same signification as 
and 3flTj 
according to a kind 
communication which I owe to àâBtravisârada-Jainâcharya árí Dharmavijaya of Benares, 
are the same, whereas 'ípjf^ is the name of the head of the same sädhus' assembly.' 

Chap. II. 
Pürnabhadra, his time, work, and language 
27 
§ 3. Pürnabhadra's work. 
If unfortunately Pürnabhadra's prasasti to his Paficäkhyänaka is silent 
about the pedigree of his teachers, it is not so about the work he has done. 
Let us examine what he himself says about it, in connexion with such 
inferences as we may draw from a comparison of his recension of the 
Pañcatantra with other recensions of this famous book. 
In stanza 2a the author tells us that he revised the whole sastra called 
Pancatantra at the instance of some minister Srï-Soma. 
When King Jayasimha of Guzerat bade the celebrated Jaina monk 
Hemacandra write a Sanskrit grammar, he either procured for him 
MSS. of the eight previous grammars preserved in the temple of 
Sarasvatï in Kashmir, or, according to another, and more trustworthy 
source, MSS. of all the existing grammars from various countries.1 
According to Bühler even now Hindu princes nearly always provide their 
court pandits in similar cases with copies, and have these copies fetched 
from even afar, and at great expense.2 
Hence we may safely conclude that a minister, when ordering some 
literary work to be executed for himself, followed the same manner of 
proceeding. At all events, as the <ílffi«n*¡a is a minister's ^¡wfW^TT, he had 
in his possession the principal works treating of this topic, and doubtless 
provided the pandit whom he entrusted with the revision of such a work 
with as copious materials as possible. 
Pürnabhadra's prasasti, taken in connexion with the evidence of his 
work itself, shows that our assumptions are right. 
In stanza 2 of the 
prasasti, the author says that in his time 'the whole system called Panca-
tantra' had lost its original form. Elsewhere3 I have explained, that 
'the whole system,' means 'all the existing recensions'. 
No 
doubt, Pürnabhadra knew several redactions of this work which are unknown 
to us.4 But two recensions have been proved to be his main sources, viz. 
the second recension of the Tanträkhyäyika (éâr. β), and the textus sim-
plicior, both in the Η-class and in the σ-class.6 None of these recensions, 
he says, preserved the genuine text, as the author himself had written it 
down. 
But Pürnabhadra was well aware of the fact that the order of the 
1 Cp. Bühler, Ueber das Leben dea Jaina Mönches Hemachandra (Denkschriften 
der philos.-hist. Cl. d. Kais. Ac. d. Wissenschaften zu Wien), p. 183 ff. 
"I.e., p. 185. 
8 In my paper ' Uber das Tanträkhyäyika, die kaémïrische Rezension des Pañcatantra ' 
(=Abh. d. phil.-hist. Klasse d. kgl. sächs. Gesellschaft d. Wissensch, xxii, No. ν), 
Leipzig, Β. Gr. Teubner, 1904, p. xxv. 
* Cp. my edition of the Southern Pañcatantra, p. lxv f. 
8 See ' Uber das Tanträkhyäyika ', p. xxiv, and below, p. 57. 

28 
Chap. II. 
Pürnabhadra, his time, work, and language 
tales preserved in áár. β, and no doubt in other recensions which he used,1 
was the original one. 
Hence he adopted this order in his third book, 
whereas the textus simplicior in this third tantra deviates considerably 
from it. 
The last two books were very short in the old recensions of the 
PaScatantra ; but they were enlarged in the textus simplicior, which in an 
even higher degree than Pürnabhadra's recension is not a mere revision 
of the old text, but rather a free imitation of it. Consequently Pürnabhadra 
very largely availed himself of this 'remaniement', not only in these 
books, but throughout all the text. 
As to the fifth book, he took it over 
into his work, with only slight alterations, in the form which it had in the 
textus simplicior. 
Our parallel Specimens I to IV show how he chose hia wording, now 
from the one and now from the other source, according as he was more 
pleased with the former or with the latter. 
In most cases it is im-
possible to say what principles guided him in his choice. 
In our Specimen 
III, however, it is evident why he suddenly abandons the wording of 
Sär. β. 
He does so at the passage where this recension speaks of the 
brahmanical tirthas. 
As the textus simplicior replaces the enumeration 
of these tirthas by a conversation on the dharma, Pürnabhadra in this 
place followed this Jaina recension, and chiefly because its wording was 
not offensive to his religious feelings. 
Pürnabhadra's principal aim was to revise the text; see his prasasti, 
stanzas 2 and 3.2 In stanza 6 he tells us, that of the words of the ' excellent 
first poet' only 'a handful had remained uninjured'. 
The very numerous 
corruptions which can be proved to have existed in the text of the Tanträ-
khyäyika as early as (at the latest) the time of Ksemendra (about 
1000 A.D.), and the nature of the textus simplicior, whose wording differs 
very considerably from that of the more original recensions, confirm 
1 Cp. Somadeva, Ksemendra, the Southern Pañcatantra, and the Pahlavi version, 
•which all, in this respect, agree with áár. 
Pürnabhadra seems to have known 
Ksemendra's versification of the Pañcatantra ; cp. WZKM. χ vii. 347. 
With Somadeva 
he agrees against all the other recensions in several places. 
Cp. our parallel 
Specimen I. 
* It seems to me that the MS. of Pürnabhadra himself (the mwlaprati) contained in 
part original leaves of his sources which he merely corrected : mistakes like vidhäya 
for pidhäya, drstväpäyo for drstäpäyo, and others (see the list given below, p. 30 f.), he 
is more likely to have overlooked in some MS. of the textus simplicior which he revised, 
than to have copied from it. 
The scribe of the prathamädarsa or first copy of 
course preserved the mistakes overlooked by Pürnabhadra, and committed some 
clerical errors of his own. 
Hence it is possible that the common archetype of bhl' 
is identical with this prathamâdarsa. 
I have not been able to find any other MS. of 
Pürnabhadra's recension which can be proved to go back to another archetype. 
But cp. 
our Variants 5,1 and 33, 22. 

Chap. II. 
Pürnabhadra, his time, work, and language 
29 
Pürnabhadra's statement. 
From our parallel Specimens I to III, and 
from the text printed below, p. 58 ff., it is certain that Pürnabhadra had 
before him MSS. of the Η-class as well as of the σ-class of the textus 
simplicior. Perhaps he also knew the north-western abbreviated recension 
from which the so-called Southern Pañcatantra, the Nepalese recension (v), 
and the source of the Hitopadesa have flowed.1 He therefore was in a still 
more puzzling situation than Kosegarten. But the principles he followed 
in constituting hie text were exactly the same as those of this scholar : 
both of them contaminated the texts they had before them to such a degree 
that the results were in fact virtually new recensions. 
But Pürnabhadra's aim was not only to restore the old text ; he also 
wished to amplify it (prasasti, stanza 6). And this he did in numerous 
places. 
In revising his sources, Pürnabhadra, on the whole, abstains from 
radical alterations. 
This is clear from our parallel Specimens. 
These 
show that—according to what we should expect from the wording of 
his prasasti—he follows his sources rather faithfully. The story Sär. III. χ 
has been transformed by the author of the textus simplicior, and has 
been transferred by him to his fourth tantra as No. i. Pürnabhadra, who 
found it in éâr. as well as in the textus simplicior, gives this tale in 
both places, at first in the form of the áar. version as his III. xvi (see 
our Specimen, No. IV), and again in that of the textus simplicior as his 
IV. i. But even the sources still unknown to us, from which he derived 
the stories not to be found in áar. and Simpl., he seems to follow very 
closely. His story III. viii has been taken either from some text of the 
Mahäbhärata,2 or from an abbreviation of it, or—possibly, but not 
probably—it goes back to some revision of the source of the Mahäbhärata 
version. Pürnabhadra's text is much shorter than that of the Mahäbhä-
rata version ; but nobody will deny that the former, on the whole, goes 
back to the latter. 
In contracting the text it was of course impossible 
for our author—if indeed he and not some other writer before him was 
the abbreviator—not to change the wording in several places. 
Some of the prose stories which he took neither from áar. nor 
from the textus simplicior, reveal their origin by their language. Most 
of the Guzeratisms of Pürnabhadra occur in such stories : 
3 I. xii 
(73,14); M filfa WCT I. XXXb (122,18); aH^f? $¿«14 Η IV. ν (244,18). 
1 See my edition of the Southern Pañcatantra, p. lxxxviii. 
s MBh. xii. 143. 10 ff. I can compare only the edition of Protap Chundra Roy. 
In 
this edition the etory shows several manifest interpolations. 
3 See this and the following words in the ' Brief Glossary ' appended to vol. XI. 

30 
Chap. II. 
Pürnabhadra, his time, work, and language 
Similarly we find that a wrong Sanskritization of a Prakrit word, 
occurs in the new story II. viii (166,2) ; but the same word has been 
employed by the author himself in the old tale III. ii (184,5). The new 
story II. ν contains the Prâkritism -«¡j^tTl (148,4), and the form 
(for «lï^i ; 149,12.16 ; 151,2.9). The Prâkritism 
M 1 occurs in the kathä-
samgraha stanza of the new story II. i (127,16). 
Evidently the words 5ΡΓΠΤ ^f^H 
stanza 6 of the author's prasasti 
refer in part to the additional stories of his text, and in part to additional 
stanzas, or to passages in which he strove to imitate the artificial prose 
style which prevailed in his time (cp. 46,uff.; 183,13 0".; 185,12ff.; 
213,2 ff.), or even to new features by which he enlarged the old text, as 
e. g. in the beginning of I. χ (66, lo ff.). 
Pürnabhadra declares in stanza 2 of his prasasti, that he has done 
his work 
> and no doubt this assertion is trustworthy. 
Still 
he has overlooked several blunders of the MSS. which he used as his 
sources, or has even misread these MSS,2 
I give some instances from 
his text. 
4,23 
a misreading of àâr. (A 8) 
4,23 
^ΤΠ, a misreading of Sâr. (ibid.) 7Τ·3*ΓΓΤΤ· · 
4,30 °3Γ?Ιϊβ, a misreading of áár. (ibid.) er5W0· 
11,23 
only in Pr and Simpl. MS. I. 
The MSS. bhN*PMABh and 
Simpl. H h have the blunder 
24,3 
a chandobhañga ; also in Simpl. H Ih. 
29,20 For arfà the original reading evidently is 
but our MSS. of 
Pürn. and Simpl. HI h agree with us. 
39,23 tí for 
; MSS. of Pürn. and HI with us. h correctly rPT\ 
44,24. ^ref^W MSS. of Pürn. and Simpl. Hlh. 
The original reading must 
have been TTf%ïï!. 
54.2 
\, the name of the princess, evidently goes back to the 
which the textus simplicior mentions as the weapon of Visnu. 
69.3 
but bh*ABh and Simpl. Hh fWR.. 
I's correct reading 
must be a correction. 
69.4 *fgj<lH. ; ΜιΨ and Simpl. h "ifc^H,, A and SimpL H 
The correct 
1 Cp. Pischel, Gramm, d. Präkrit-Sprachen (Grdr. i. 8), p. 102, § 130. 
2 Or perhaps he used some Nâgarï. transcript of the Tanträkhyayika, in which some 
àâradâ words were misread. 

Chap. II. 
Pürruibhadra, his time, work, and language 
31 
reading only in the revised MS. Bh, in Simpl. I, and in Kielhorn's 
edition (evidently a correction). 
163.12 MSS. unmetrical. 
The chandobhanga seems to be original. 
Cp. 
Variants. 
is here the proper name of the Räksasa. 
Sär. β has 
^ T ^ T R T f for the reading of áár. α 5 3 M ^ W i ï f . 
As in Sär. β— 
the recension used by Pürnabhadra1—the subject of the sentence is 
missing, Pürnabhadra evidently tries to correct this passage. 
211,6 
is the correct reading; but Simpl. H l h with bhN+PPrMA 
f w r e . 
In Bh the passage is altered. 
220,18 R<4*mfdd also SP and v. The original reading of the Pañcatantra 
must be ftMKV|f?|?n, and so Sär. reads. 
220,25 fWS also SP β and Κ (oldest MS. of SP α), ν and áár. correctly 
to: 
; SP Ν fire:. 
235,2 ci for 
MSS. of Pürn. and HI. 
236.13 
MSS. of Purn. and H I f f T T R t · 
236.24 faifas for ^ i f ^ ; H I the compound 
h, corrupted, 
W W r w M . 
240,21 
MSS. of Pürn, and Simpl. H l h 
242,11 
apparently a blunder for TfaRTfTTt^fTTT, as the 
Ψ-class reads. 
SimpL H I TFff^TTTftfTT (!), h W W T ^ f t f ^ t · 
258.25 ^^ρπΙΤ^Τ^ΠΠ0 Pürn. and Simpl. MSS. HI. 
See ' Brief Glossary ', 
vol. XI, s.v. 
Simpl. h has ^Ttf^«nirMi«<<!i<*ís<rti^aí: II 
262.18 and 263,2 aftflŒi0 (so MSS.) Pürn. and Simpl. HI. 
269.19 *fïrgqqîqHd is right ; but Pürn. MSS. and Simpl. H I <fMrjM«ftj|d. 
h correctly, but with a variant, iMgMfti+i^Mqíqi'ifi· 
271,2 
here and in the following text is the correct spelling; but 
Pürn. and Simpl. H l h ff^rï0· 
These cases show that in several places marked in our text with 
a star (*) the faulty reading recorded in the variants is surely or possibly 
that of Pürnabhadra himself. 
Cp. below, p. 77 ff. 
§ 4. Fûrçabhadra's language. 
According to stanza 4 of his praáasti Pürnabhadra seems to be aware 
of the fact that his Sanskrit is not quite free from mistakes. 
The author 
of the Dhanyasälicaritra tells us that he has caused his work to be 
1 Cp. ZDMG. lis. 21. 

32 
Chap. II. 
Pürnabhadra, his time, work, and language 
corrected by a good väcaka. 
Indeed, Pürnabhadra's Sanskrit ia neither 
uninfluenced by the time in which he lived, nor by the vernacular which 
he spoke from his childhood. Of course it is not quite free from Präkritisms 
either. Part of these irregularities he took over from his sources. 
Some Guzeratisms and Präkritisms of his have been mentioned above, 
p. 29 f. 
From the textus simplicior (H-class) he takes the Guzeratisms 
θΤ^ΤΓΤ 285,21 and θΤφϊΜΜΙ^ 286,5 (see 'Brief Glossary ', s. v.). To the 
influence of Guzeratï we may perhaps attribute the wrong ^ after the 
compound in 180,4 f.,1 and the wrong form 0qrtj«ñi0, as our MSS. write 
for correct 
in the same passage. 
In Subhasilagani's Jagadü-
sambandha2 we find the wrong compound 
which Bühler 
explains as follows: 'The faulty feminine qfqm^i has been caused by3 
the custom of the Gujarâtîs to write the parts of a compound separately, 
viz. irfWTT TRT 
The Hamburg MSS. have 
not after the 
compound, but after 
—perhaps a correction of the original wording 
preserved in Pürnabhadra's text—and even more members of the compound 
are here in the nominative case. To the custom mentioned by Bühler 
we evidently must attribute the occasional use of (qifafi, for ^ifàRC. (236,21 
fàfà^ 
VÎT**;, from the reading of HI 
fäifaai*^; 
cp. 68,3 fôft^Çj^m-
srrfro;; 223, 15 Γ«ηΓ*ι««κ 
I now regret that I corrected ^Γ^^νΠιΙΤ^ί) 
as the MSS. write in 90,17. 
Cp. also 
for ίΠΠΓΦ^^ or 
3Γ5Γ I^Ri 
254,5. 
Präkritisms are îi for 
39,23 (or 
used as a masculine) ; 235,2 
(also HI) ; 277,13 (HI here correct) ; cp. 150,17. Other Präkritisms are 
recorded above, p. 30.4 
Cp. also the vulgar adjective 
' belonging to', 
which, as Prof. Hultzsch suggests, should be written for ^nìf 246, l and 3, 
and which really stands in MS. A. 
Orthography and Samdhi. Both are inconsistent even in our best MSS. 
Vowels. Post-consonantal ^ occasionally interchanges with 3T· 
Ex. 
best MSS. for usual 
, 222,13 ; 223,14. 
(rarely MSS. JZ^), 
and 
152,8 ; 
for usual 
46,5. 
beet MSS. for usual 
1 Though occasionally ^ occurs also in other Sanskrit texts after a dvandva com-
pound. Cp. e. g. áar. ädimadhyävasänam ca, 133, 14 note. 
2 Bühler, Indian Studies, v, No. I (Wien, 1892. 
In Commission bei F. Tempsky), p. 74. 
* In Bühler's text ' by ' has been inadvertently omitted. 
4 The first member of the frog prince's name ^«Τ-^τΤ 235, 1, might be taken as 
a blunder for Prakrit ^JTtJ, i.e. the name of the river íft^f. 
But it is more likely 
a misreading, as HI and h read ^ ï j ^ t f ) · Bühler, 8, 16 has Ι ^ ^ τ Π · 

Chap. II. 
Pûrnabhadra, his time, work, and language 
33 
120,7. ^sjïft for usual 
224,13. 
In 225,26 Pr writes w t f ï ï , 
in 226, s ΨΡΡγ ^StR.1 
^ is lengthened in the MSS. in 
74,8 (by the 
influence of ^«Ή). 
Wherever in these cases our printed text deviates from the spelling of 
the MSS., an asterisk refers to the variants. 
Consonants. ^ 
before a consonant, and J^ at the end of a 
sentence or of an even pada, are always replaced by anusvära in 
the MSS. 
^ stands not infrequently in the MSS. for printed anusvära before 
^ and 
Ex.: ^firqTW, 28,6; ^farfwvt, 31,20; 
29, s ; 
70,25. 
««UM and 
18, i, &c., occur along with ΦΤΓΊ 
(so 20,5 ; 22,5), W T ^ (20,9), « « Η HIT0 (20,13), Φ π Φ ί (20,24). 
«Τ stands sometimes for ÜT. 
On the other hand, we occasionally find anusvära for correct 
so 
<T f ^ ï ï , 140,18 and Φ 163,10; ti 
142,5. 
^f and ^T, 
and ^ are occasionally confounded2 ; 1; is often employed 
for 
, Ζ often for "3 (nearly always H for Tí). 
"ςξ is occasionally confounded with 
; cp. 15,18 ; 40,17.21 ; 41,4 ; 
165,21; 186,19 (see Variants); 229,9 (Bh) ; 266,10 (see Variants); 280,8 (see 
Variants). 
This produces the variant 
for 
(see Var. on 
40,17, &c.). Cp. Lanman on Orthographic Prakritisms in Album Kern, 
p. 302. 
and 
(°*ΠίΓΠϊβ for e5TWT<J0, 53,5), 5ST and nT (this written in 
the form given by Jacobi, Kalpas., p. 18, note) are occasionally confounded 
in the MSS. ; cp. e. g. 10,10 ; 271,15 (see Variants in both places). 
15 and t^ interchange in ^ft^î. I follow the Petersburg dictionaries, 
referring by an asterisk to the variants, where ΜιΨ have 
The MSS. 
write 
I write W f ^ t in my text. 
Sibilants, especially if and ìf, are sometimes confounded. 
In one 
case it is certain that this confusion goes back to Pûrnabhadra himself: 
1 Most of these cases are also found in other north-western works. Cp. even ' ( ¡ H ^ 
for çu-g-çi 153, 24, in a stanza not composed by Pûrnabhadra himself. 
.Os 
s 
and 
are used promiscuously in the MSS., whether they mean ' group ' or 
'piece, fragment'. Apparently Pûrnabhadra pronounced these two words alike, and 
hence I write in both cases 
Cp. also the Petersburg dictionaries and Apte, 
s.v. 
and 
But etymologically the two words are not identical. 'Group' is 
(Pûrn. 5, 17 and ex conj. 122,12), Pâli and Prakrit sanda·, 'piece', 'fragment' is 
(Pûrn. 112, 9.11), Pâli and Prakrit khanda. 
F 

34 
Chap. II. 
Pürnabhadra, his time, work, and language 
in 56,12 the wrong form 
(for 
is assured by the pun with 
θ Τ * ^ ' often'. 
f 
is confounded with tf in f^pf, 227,20. 
Cp. forms like M^Ul? 
Jraxt(^i), HT^r(qi), Hiyfiu«* at the side of HTF^fa) and Ml^fÙJ«* in 
the Petersburg dictionaries. 
Consonants are often doubled after ^ ; but in the great majority of 
cases the doubling is neglected. 
ïît is often written for îft:. 
Samdhi. As a rule, samdhi is not observed before the apodosis (often 
in connexion with danda !) ; it is neglected in cases where its observation 
possibly might cause confusion. Cp. Wackernagel, Altindische Grammatik, 
§ 262, b, δ. It is evident that Pürnabhadra himself very often neglected 
the samdhi. Cp. 138,12 f f T 3ÏÏ, and 149,18 where our MSS. have 
3Τβ. In most cases our MSS. write cfr^ ^JWT. Before initial 
samdhi 
is nearly always neglected in the MSS. 
An interesting case is 149,2 f., 
where the archetype evidently had 
The archetype 
of ΜιΨ wrongly resolved this group into ^pfiT?^ ÇE0 (instead of «βΙτ^ΓΠξ 
*ϊΤϊ0); and ΑΒΙιΦ have a wrong correction of this inadequate reading: 
°ίΠ<3«ηΐ. 
Cp. Prof. Lanman's remarks, vol. XI, pp. xxxix to xlviii. 
As our MSS. are inconsistent, samdhi has everywhere been restored 
in the prose of our printed text except (1) in the case 138,12, (2) before 
the apodosis, (3) before and after oratio recta. 
In the stanzas, in which 
the rhythm annihilates the pauses in the case of punctuation, we follow 
our MSS. 
In the body of the words, our MSS. are not consistent as to the samdhi 
in the following cases : 
or 
is often written for β:^Γβ. 
» W and 
are very often, if not in most cases, written for 
orafi«, 
Punctuation. 
Our best MSS. are carefully punctuated. 
They employ 
danda after the complete sentences, and very often before the apodosis. 
Punctuation before 
after oratio recta is not rare. 
Before ^ΙϊΠ in 
the phrase ^ ϊ ^ ι ^Πΐ: they always put danda, or even (ΨΡ) double danda. 
For the sake of clearness, we employ in our printed text ardhadanda before 
the apodosis, before and after oratio recta, and before ^Tïïî 
all this in 
the prose. 
In the metrical parts, we separate the first from the second and the 
third from the fourth päda of a stanza by ardhadanda, where these padas 
form one line, i.e. in slokas and äryäs. 
But in these cases we do not 
destroy the samdhi, which is here maintained in the MSS. even when 

Chap. II. 
Pûrnabhadra, his time, work, and language 
35 
they follow our own method.1 
Our MS. bh employs the ardhadanda 
and the double danda, and these only ; our MS. Φ employs the danda and 
the double danda, and these only. 
Cp. the two facsimile tables in vol. XI. 
Gender. ^TTO neuter 233, l (in a stanza taken from the textus simplicior). 
^ 
masculine, or ïï for 
39,23. 
Guna and Vrddhi. 
(also Hamb. MSS.) for tHgwi V*ie 
(Whitney, § 1222j, Panini Y, 1,133), 258,25. afrfg^» for 
262,18; 
263,2 (in both cases with HI). 
Verl·, fèr^rfïï (also HI), 23,5. 
Imperative : φ * «fa for ^ T R "ΦΜΗ» 
117,18; 118,2. 
Infinitive: faqf^J^, 57,23. 
Gerund: 3ïïf»T7^T, 175,23 (in 
a stanza). 
Gerund in -am : ^fì^RÌ-^i-^ > 68,2. Passive for active voice, 
205,24 (in a metrical quotation; also HI). 
Noun. A wrong form is the genitive fittiti'Π for 
135, io. 
Nominal compounds. Compounds with proper names : ï}lfU^<sÎÎ*ildl, 
136,20; 140,15. 
114,20, beside H^U^fiM, 114,22. 
W r ^ T f : , 4,6, beside ^ΓφΓΓ^ΪΤΓΗΤί^ί^ΪΝ, 21,17. ^Wgqfrcj, 103,3. 
4ÌUÌHWRIW, 266,io, &c. 
A curious case occurs at 283,23, where I have written 
with 
Pûrnabhadra's source, the textus simplicior, as represented by the Hamburg 
MSS. 
Bh, which in the fifth book belongs to the Η-class of the textus 
simplicior, reads 
misread for T^, i.e. %); h and Bühler 
But bh^A and their derivatives write '%1Tfïï%'i, and this 
seems to be the old reading, from which Biihler's ungrammatical reading 
derives, as being apparently an original gloss by somebody not well 
versed in Sanskrit. 
I now take ^ufíHftí to be a substantive dvandva 
compound, depending on 
: 'it went to speed and to over-speed', 
i. e. ' it ran more and more swiftly ' (quicker and quicker). 
Prof. Wackernagel, in his Altind. Grammatik, II, § 74d, gives similar 
adjective dvandvas. 
From the Pâli I may add Jât. i, p. 160,3 vamkätivam-
kinam (in a stanza), which the commentator rightly explains as meaning 
mûle vamkâni agge aiivamkâni tâdùâni s'vhgâni assa althîti vamkätivamkinam. 
The Compound mañcátimañca, given by Wackernagel from Trenckner, is 
apparently a substantive2 formed exactly like our vegätivega. Hence %TTf?ï^t 
should be restored in our text. 
1 Only the MSS. in such cases, do not separate the combined aksaras. 
The Hindu 
manner would be to write, e. g. in our stanza I, 5 (p. 5,3) 
I «4JIJM0. 
2 This is also the opinion of Prof. Wackernagel, who kindly pointed out to me 
this compound. 

36 
Chap. II. 
Pürnabhadra, his time, work, and language 
The rule laid down by Panini iii. 3.126 (Wackernagel, Altind. Grammatik, 
II, § 82, α, y) is not always observed (at least not always in our best MSS.). 
In 131,26 only A—a revised MS.—has the correct form 
; but áár. 
agrees with the other MSS. 
In 9,23 the MSS. have our reading. 
In 227, l ff. 
Pürnabhadra follows this rule, whereas his source, áár. β, κ 266, neglects it. 
Syntax. 
Periphrastic present indicative (Guzeratism) : 3?|(T|f4f 
, 
122,18; ^ R î f ï ï STO:, 268,10 (here also Hamburg MSS.).1 
Present indi-
cative for imperative: ITfàtSRÏ, 37,8; 
ξ^ΤΤΤί, 92,6; 
t J ^ f W , 92,11; 
267,16; 
, 265, ir ; f?fi*l7Ï, 268, S ; π ϊ ρ ^ ^ Γ Π Τ : , 268,6 ; ^frfÌT, 271,6 ; 
278,9; 279,24; Jl^lfìj, 282,8 ; 286,5 ; STRTf*, 288,20. Present indicative 
for conditional: H^fïï, 283,22; «i<ü<<fci, 283,23 (in both cases also HI). 
The conditional occurs 216,8 3T<*f\w|«^and SPíf^Sfr^, and 230,20 t w f t u w . . 
General subject expressed by 3rd person sg. : 3ΤΠ?, 180,20. Cp. 4,21 (but 
see Über das Tantrâkhyâyika, p. 98, 22). 
Genitive for instrumental case : 
^¡TT, 75,23. 
Instrumental for 
genitive case: «RTWt^fhTRïÎ, 166.r. 
Faulty or awkward constructions : R|U!JS|*iîftl (for "JJJÍ'ÜTft) · · · 
VI farli <1, 2,12 (in accordance with Simpl. H l h ) ; 
^TCfa W R c f t , 
109,14 (almost literally from Tantrâkhyâyika, 55, 4). ITÍÁMI^ílfa for ef?î 
(the subject being 
194,24. 
for IJS^, 221,29 (or f^fà 
for t^TFTi 
1.28). A word like WS(l to be supplied 273,1 in a stanza 
(HI have the same wording). 
285,1 an anacoluthon with H I (stanza). 
Varia. ϊΠΣΓΤ^ and Tôt with the dual number: 2 
43,9; 
VtVyXW^t^nfhSwnt, 209,5. 
Tpi and 
in the same sentence, referring 
to the same person, 4,8f. 
fMïrfïï for 
only 254,7 (104,11 read 
fàOTfÀ with Ψ). 
Superfluous ^fif, 23,11 ; 42,6 ; 61,12 ; 63,21, &c. 
^Si^H 
for simple ffTï, 118,2 (in a new tale). 
after î^ïï, 94,19. 
?ΓΓ. . . 
for 1 . . . 3Te, 41,4. 
In 
T R , 148,2, U I H ^ ^ ^ H ^ a n adjective. Cp. <Τ»τΊ 
and 
(125,29) beside ffl^îï^t (3,1), &c. 
APPENDIX. 
literary quotations·. Sâlihotra, 279,9 (also in HI) ; Karnïsutakathânaka, 
67,14. 
An utterance of the Buddha is referred to in 48,13. 
1 Cp. Campakaéresthikathânaka, ed. Weber, 1. 454 f. ; ed. Hertel, § 76. Bühler, 
Sitzungsb. d. kgl. Preuss. Ak. d. Wissenschaften, 1883, p. 885. 
' This also occurs in other mediaeval Sanskrit texts, e. g. in Somadeva's KSS. 42,137. 

Chapter III. Account of the Manuscripts on which this 
edition is based. 
§ 1. Description of the manuscripts. 
ALL the MSS. used for this edition are paper MSS. -written in Nägari 
characters. 
bh = Decc. Coll. x. 190. This MS. originally consisted of 179 leaves, 
10 lines to a page. 
Ita first 6 leaves are now missing. Though this 
MS. proves to be a Jaina MS., as it has the Jaina diagram in the 
beginning of book V, it has not the square blanks in the middle of the 
single pages. 
It has been copied from some MS. which was then old; 
cp. Variants 288,2.4.6.8 ; 290,8. 
According to bh's colophon, this copy was completed in samvat 1468, 
on the 12th day of the bright half of the month Mârgasîrsa, during the 
reign of King ári-Kahnadadeva Yijaya, in àrï-Vïramagrâma (the modern 
Yiramgam near Ahmedabad) ' in compliance with the order of the minister 
Mahamsalasä for the amusement of Josïharadeva, brother to Yâdïjanârddana 
of Satyapura 
by Mahamgopâla, son of Mahamkesava, of a Gauda family. 
The copyist did his work with great care and accuracy. 
Our MS. 
contains many glosses, written by several old hands on the margins or 
between the lines. Most of these glosses go back to one hand, no doubt 
the hand of some beginner in Sanskrit, who sometimes misunderstood his 
text. 
Cp. the glosses on 11,1; 14,6; 19,20; 22,25; 56,12; 60,20 ; 62,16; 
76,10; 84,17; 154,2; 176,17; 177,9; 194,17; 221,25; 286,3. 
The same 
hand entered a lot of vernacular glosses; cp. 11,3.22; 17,17 (twice); 23,3; 
46,4; 65,14; 70,15; 74,5; 104,19; 131,18; 147,8; 175,30; 176,18; 177, 
1.29; 178,26; 180,4 (twice) ; 183,10; 188,22; 189,2; 190,13.18; 191,13; 
192,7; 193,11; 209,11; 220,16; 231,2; 247,3; 277, 10.11.16.17.18.20; 278,22 
(twice) ; 279,1.2.6 ; 283,17 ; 288,13.16. In many cases the text was unintel-
ligible for the glossator ; for the marks χ and =, which he usually employs 
in referring to marginal glosses, occur not infrequently without such a gloss. 
On the first leaves he often separates the words by small vertical strokes, 
writing initial vowels, and sometimes terminations, over the line. 
Our 
stanza I, 52, for instance, looks thus in the MS. : 
MViRmi 1 f W i r ^ r l i w w ' w t ^ w f R n H ' 
9>30 ^ΛΓ^ΪΗ; io, 17 
As I did not succeed in distinguishing with certainty the different hands 
of the glossators, I mark the glosses in my variants with ' gloss.' or ' corr. 

38 
Chap. III. 
Account of the 
Manuscripts 
of bh 
As possibly scribes of other MSS. may have copied from bh the 
glosses instead of the original readings, Ihave entered nearlyall of these glosses 
in my variants. The complete readings of bh are given in my variants. 
IT = Decc. Coll. x. 189. This MS. is complete in its beginning, but 
has a gap extending from 220,18 of our text to 236,8 (see Variants). The 
original number of its leaves "was 117. The average number of lines on 
a page is 17. This copy is written in a hasty hand, but it is pretty 
correct. Neither the Jain diagram nor the middle squares occur in it. 
The colophon tells us that this copy was completed in samvat 1855, 
sake 1720, in the dark half of Kärttika, on the eighth day, a Tuesday, by 
Harinanda, son of Kâsinâtha, of a Gauda family. The complete readings 
of this MS. are given in our variants. 
Φ = Decc. Coll. iv. 55. It has 102 numbered leaves, 15 lines to a page. 
Of these, leaves Nos. 46, 48, and 49 are lost. Moreover, the last one or 
two leaves are missing. 
The actual pagination, however, is not the 
original one ; the original one, written in the margins, has been corrected 
by a later hand, after leaf 19 had been lost, and hence leaf 20 is now 
numbered as 19, &c. But another hand writes the correct numbers once 
more just over the red middle spots of the verso pages ; see Key, above, 
p. 1, and our Specimens, vol. XI, Table I, No. 1. 
Φ is a very beautiful Jaina MS., the Jaina diagram appearing in it at 
the beginning of the Kathämukha as well as of that of books III, IV, V. 
(The beginning of book II is lost.) In the middle of the single leaves 
there appear the characteristic blank squares, and the centres of these 
squares are perforated by small circular holes throughout the MS. These 
holes appear never to have been used for a string drawn through them, 
as in palm-leaf MSS., to keep the leaves in the right order; for such 
a string would have enlarged the holes or torn the leaves. The single 
leaves of Φ show red circular spots, one in the middle of the blank squares 
of the recto pages, and three on the verso pages, viz. one in the middle 
and one on each side margin. 
The original leaf-numbers are written 
within the red spots of the right-hand margins of the verso pages. The 
red spots, however, are missing on leaves 83, 84, 89 recto, 90 to 102 inclusive. 
At the end of the first book, 4 | lines of the recto of fol. 45 and the whole 
verso page of this leaf have been left blank. 
This MS. has been written with great care in beautiful characters. 
The copyist himself corrected it, and added some glosses and various 
readings. A second old hand added some more glosses. 
Φ seems to be our oldest MS. of Pùrnabhadra's text. As we shall 
subsequently see, not only the common archetype of Ρ (dated sam. 1537) 

Chap. III. 
Account of the Manuscripts 
39 
and L1 was copied from Φ at a time when Φ already contained the glosses 
by the second hand, but—apart from the circular perforations of the blanks, 
which are unknown in most of the paper MSS.—the forms of the characters 
in this MS., especially that which if has in it, are very old ones.1 This old 
form of 
as it appears in Biihler's Paläographie, Table V, number 13, 
columns v, and vii to xvii, and Table VI, number 18, columns xv,xvi, xvii, 
prevails throughout in Ψ. Cp. our Key, p. 2. Only in cases where a vowel, 
or η and r are written under gh, the modern form of gh is the usual, though 
not the exclusive one. Cp. also the form of f^SJ in our Table Π, No. 12, 
1. 2 a and that of 
in our Table I, No. 1,1. 15 c, with Bühler, Table V, 
col. xxii, 1. 18. The complete readings and the glosses of Φ are given in 
our variants. 
Ρ = Decc. Coll. xxiv. 419. It has 96 leaves, 15 lines to a page, and 
is very beautifully written on fine thin paper. 
This MS., which is 
complete, shows the Jaina diagrams as well as the characteristic blank 
squares. The text on the whole is very correct. From the colophon 
we learn that this copy was finished in samvat 1537 on the first Tuesday 
in the dark half of Äsädha. The copyist's name is not given. The complete 
readings of this MS. are entered in our variants. 
I·1 = Leipzig University Library A. 404. Incomplete. Old. The leaves 
still extant bear the paginations 2 to 56 (both incl.), corresponding to our 
text svanäma &c. 2,5 to earva te (incl.) 220, 2. 15 lines to a page. No blanks, 
but Jaina diagram before II and III. 
Two copyists, the second one (from 
leaf 11 to 20 incl.) giving a very faulty wording, and leaving out the text 
between mürkhah (67, il) and sthitavati (74,17). I only occasionally refer to 
this MS. in my variants. 
Pr is an old MS. belonging to the Jaina Bhandar of Ahmedabad. 
It 
was kindly lent me through Mr. Keshavlal Premchand Mody, B.A., LL.B., 
of the same town. This copy bears the signature ^T ^ 
H λΟ. On its 
margins the title of the work is given as ιΗΐ^Μ^ίτΐ:. 
Pr consists of 
107 leaves, 13 lines to a page. It is pretty correct. I give the complete 
variants of this MS. 
M = Decc. Coll. iv. 54. 102 leaves, 15 lines to a page. A complete 
Jaina MS., with Jaina diagrams and blank squares in the middle of the 
pages. The characters of this MS. are beautiful, but its text bristles with 
blunders, omissions, and dittographies. 
Though not dated, this MS. is not 
modern. In my variants I give the complete readings of this MS., but I 
have not noted many of its blunders, small omissions, and dittographies. 
1 In one case this form of ^f also occurs in Pr, which has flowed from Ψ. 

40 
Chap. III. 
Account of the 
Manuscripts 
ρ = Dece. Coll. ii. 46. 93 leaves, 18 lines to a page. This is a complete 
Jaina MS., though it has not the characteristic blanks. According to its 
colophon, this copy was completed samval loka-muni-rasa-êaêi-samvacchare 
[i.e. sam. 1677] jyesta sustivdhistami somavdsare êubhavelâyâm Dhillhnagare 
[i. e. Dhillo, Thar and Parkar] joâ&â^a-Jahamgîra-râjye I va\ì. e. väcaka-]-
Matibhadra - tacchisya - väcanäcäryya - ähuryya - vädlkarikumbhakamdanamrgäri -
sarvamsträdhUa-sara-svatlkamthäbharana - sakalakaläkalitagätra-vidvajjanatilaka -
pravara-prakr§taväcakacäritraMmha-tacchi?ya-pam(M 
-
ranâmvujamakaramdalânadâsânudâm-Qov&vàà\i8jidi-m 
iyam prati. 
The lengthy colophon proceeds to tell in several stanzas that the copyist 
did his work with the utmost care, and that the good should correct the 
copy, without blaming the copyist for the blunders he possibly might 
have committed. 
Hope is expressed that the Jain community might 
rejoice henceforth by the favour of the suris (Srlmaj-jinakula}-süri-prasädäte 
ciram namdatu), and that the MS. might eternally survive and be protected 
by its owners from oil, water, loose tying-up and dishonest borrowers 
(' telad raksej jaläd rahe rah et sitMla-bamdhanât joarahastagatam rakset ' evam 
vadati pustakam ll). The copyist had at least two MSS. before him during 
his work, choosing their readings as he proceeded in copying, smearing 
with gamboge whole passages already written in almost every line, and 
replacing very often the correct readings by inferior ones. Some passages 
have been copied from MSS. belonging to other classes, e. g. to the Bh-class. 
Moreover, many corrections and additions have subsequently been added 
by different hands. Amongst the numerous marginal additions, there are 
even stanzas in Prakrit. 
I carefully collated this MS. down to 119, 23 atha 
inclusive ; but then, seeing that it was of no use whatsoever, I neglected it 
altogether. In my variants, only occasional references are given to p. 
A = India Office 2643, E. 4084, R.R. 9. B. This MS. originally contained 
153 leaves, 12 lines to a page. Leaf 92 is missing now. On the first page, 
which is blank, a European hand has written in English characters : 
Gaikawar. This copy has been written by two copyists (A1 and A2). The 
first hand wrote the text of leaves 1 to 93, and of 123 to the end, the 
second one leaves 94 to 122 (both inclusive). The words from gacchet, &c. 
to ballyasâ I sa ta (inclusive) = our text 177,12 to 177,23 are written by 
both the copyists, and subsequently have been deleted again on fol. 93 
verso. In this short passage A2 is more correct than A1 ; but the former 
shares with the latter the mistakes pranadhi0 177,12, tanna for tatra 13, 
aparam kärya° 15. Hence it is certain that A2 copied from the same original 
as A1. A2 leaves blank squares in the middles of the pages. 
1 Dharma Vijaya Süri corrects this to -jinakusala-. 

Chap. III. 
Account of the Manuscripts 
41 
This MS. is rather faulty. 
A third hand has collated it with some 
MS. of the textus simplicior, covering the margins with additional stanzas 
from this text, smearing very often the original readings of A with 
gamboge, and writing on them inferior readings or downright blunders. 
In other places the corrector, an ignorant and careless man, restores 
defective passages ex conjectura. 
According to the colophon, the copyist of A1 was one Sivasundara, who 
completed his work in aamvat 1574 äso vadi 9 sukre. 
Bh. = Decc. Coll. xiii. 86. 
This MS. originally consisted of 156 leaves 
with 12 to 14 (generally 13) lines to a page in books I, II, III, and with 
11 lines to a page in books IV and V. 
The first leaf and leaves 132 to 
140 (both inclusive) are missing.1 
Bh has been copied by two hands, 
the first one going from the beginning of the MS. down to the end of the 
third book, the second one from the beginning of the fourth book to 
the end of V. 
This copy is a Jain MS., the Jain diagram appearing 
at the beginnings of books II, III, IV. 
Besides the usual square blanks 
in the middle of the pages, which are perforated as in Ψ, most of the 
recto and verso pages have larger rectangular blanks either at the right 
or at the left hand margin, or even at both of them. 
At the end of the third book, the first copyist gives the date mmvat 
1442 vane without any further information. The rest of the MS. is scarcely 
younger than its first part. 
Φ = Decc. Coll. xxi. 719. 97 leaves, 15 lines to a page. 
Dated samvat 
1661. 
§ 2. 
Vaine and mntnal relations of these manuscripts. 
Of the above-described eleven MSS., the first eight form two groups. 
To the first group, the bh-class, belong the MSS. bh and N. 
To the second 
group, the Ψ-class, belong the MSS. Ψ, P, L1, Pr, p, and M. 
The nature of 
MSS. A and Bh and Φ is such that they require a separate and detailed 
discussion. 
The differences between the readings of bh and Φ are but slight ones. 
These two MSS. are excellent copies. 
The caees of the very mistakes 
taken over from either the textus simplicior or áar. into Pürnabhadra's 
text and preserved in bh'P show how conscientiously the text has been 
handed down in these two MSS. 
On the other hand, the fact that Ν 
can be proved to go back indirectly to bh, and that PL1 PrMp can be proved 
to go back to Φ (Ρ, the best and oldest of them, and L1 indirectly), evidently 
1 Comprising our text, p. 244, 10 y adi (incl.) to 260, 2 dustajä (ind.). 
G 

42 
Chap. III. 
Account of the 
Manuscripts 
shows that even in ancient times ΜιΨ were considered very valuable MSS. 
I think, indeed, that their common archetype is the prathamâdarêa. See 
above, p. 28, note 2. At all events, their text cannot possibly deviate much 
from the mûlaprati (i.e. müla-pratilipi) ; see our parallel Specimens. 
§ 3. The manuscript XT goes back indirectly to bh. 
För evidence in substantiation of this assertion, see Variants to 27,10.12 ; 
56,12; 57,22; 61,12; 74,2; 75,12; 77,22; 78,9; 80,14; 89,12.13; 101,11; 
123,17; 125,18.19-,1 184,5; 186,9 ; 208,2 ; 266,6.22 ; 270,22 ; 271,23; 274,17. 
The MS. Ν cannot have been immediately copied from bh, for it is evident 
that a part of N, namely 284,7 to the end of book V, has been copied 
from a text very closely agreeing with Bh. Cp. the Variants. 
§ 4. The manuscripts PL1, Pr, p, and IE go back to Ψ. 
That ρ goes back to Φ may be seen from the Variants 72, 22 ; 88, is. 
Since, however, ρ is a contaminated MS. (see above, p. 40), and is for this 
reason critically useless, I have not taken the trouble of collecting further 
materials in order to ascertain more fully its relation to Ψ. For the other 
four, the following evidence may suffice. 
1. Ρ and L1 go back to Φ ; cp. Variants 3,10; 4,24 ; 5,10; 5,21; 7,25 ; 9,10 ; 
14,lo; 17,14; 23,16; 25,22; 32,24; 33,4; 39,20; 40,4; 42,20; 
44,is; 
57,18; 76,15; 101,10; 119,10; 147,20; 159,19; 164,33; 167,21; 
170,10; 
171, 
7; 174,9; 
178,18.23; 180,14.25; 181,6; 183,11.20; 184,9; 185, 6; 198,15; 
199,9; 224,18 ; 229,20; 230,11; 231,4 
; 233,4.14; 247,9; 249,2; 
252,7; 
253,24; 255,9; 258,30; 271,28; 275,9; 284,9. 
Besides Ρ and L1 have a considerable number of corruptions in common. 
Cp. 4,25; 5,22; 10,1; 12,21; 19,22; 20,8; 22,1; 23,9; 25,19; 29,6; 
31,12; 38,24; 39,15.16.21 ; 41,7.11; 43,1; 58,1; 59,9; 60, ¡9.Í4; 61,18; 
66,7; 78,5; 93,15; 96,28; 99,22; 102,19; 104,20; 106,2.4; 109,25; 
114,9; 115,2; 116,3; 128,4; 130,22.29; 131,21; 132,2.6.7.14; 143,11.22; 
155,29; 157,3; 160,8; 167,19; 168,3; 169,2.8.10; 170, ¡28; 172,4; 
174,19; 175,25; 178,9; 180,4.12; 181,6; 182,11; 183,13; 184,9; 
185,13.14; 186,5.19; 188,5; 189,20; 190,5; 191,20; 194,11; 195,20; 
196,3; 197,9; 200,1; 202,7."ll ; 203,13; 214,10.23; 216,1.10; 219,2. 
Ρ cannot have flowed from Ll, as Ρ neither has Lx,s gap (see above, p. 39), 
nor the very numerous mistakes of the second copyist of L1. Cp. 
besides 12,24; 66,7 ; 105,6; 184, 8; 191,15; 193,2; 194,11; 197,14; 
198,3. 
1 The citations of passages reproduced in Tables I and II of vol. XI are set in italics. 
See Variants. 

Chap. III. 
Account of the Manuscripts 
43 
L1 cannot have flowed from P. Cp. 12,31 ; 14,8 ; 15,18 ; 19,21 ; 27, il ; 32,23 ; 
64,9; 111,8; 155, 28; 169, 7.17; 174,10; 178,2; 179,29; 190,22; 203,3; 
209,18; 217,16. 
Hence it is clear, that both Ρ and L1 go back to some third MS. which has 
flowed from Ψ. Cp. also 24,4 ; 190, io. 
2. Pr goes back to Φ ; cp.Variants 3, io ; 7, 25 ; 33, 4 ; 101, lo ; 119, io ; 121,13 ; 
147,20; 159,16.19; 164,5.28.33; 167,21; 169,17; 170, io; 171,7; 180,25; 
184,9; 187,18; 231, 4. 
3. M goes back to Φ ; cp. Variants 3, io ; 5,20 ; 7,25 ; 9,10 ; 33,4 ; 76,15 ; 
93,9; 101,10; 147,20; 152,3; 159,16; 174,9-, 
181,6; 185,6; 187,18; 
231,4; 247, 9 ; 268, 3; 271, 23; 284,9. 
§ 5. Critical discussion of the manuscript A. 
A apparently belongs to the bh-class. 
With this class it has the 
author's prasasti at the end of the whole work, and it often agrees with 
this class in its readings. 
But very often also it has the readings of the 
Ψ-class. As to the gaps, it agrees at 33,21 with all our MSS. but Bh. 
It 
has not the gaps of bh at 25,2 ; 82,11, nor those of Ψ at 61,5; 107,25; 
113,29; nor has it the gap of Ν and of the Ψ-class at 265,8, where bh 
is complete. Again, at 210,15, in the place of the pädas missing in bhN, 
it has a text quite different from that of both the Ψ-class and Bh, a cir-
cumstance which raises the suspicion that A derives from, a revised copy. 
We shall subsequently see that this suspicion is confirmed by other facta. 
At 62,1 A has a gap which the corrector of A fille in as he pleases. 
Other 
gaps of A are 163,13 ; 164,15. 
At any rate, A goes back to an archetype which was very closely 
akin to that of bh4\ 
This is clear from the numerous blunders which 
it has in common with these two MSS. 
Blunders common to ΑΙΛΨ. 
6,31.33; 9,3.26; 10,2; 11,14.23; 14,16; 18, li; 22,13; 28,10; 33,12.15; 
33,2l(!); 34,4; 35,18; 37,8; 42,8; 43,4.14; 44,6; 46,3; 48,19; 49,13; 51,6; 
53,1.5; 56,3.4; 58,8; 60,30; 64,3; 65,8; 68,3.14; 69,3.4.6; 71,10.33 ; 74,8; 
76,12 ; 83, 2.6 ; 87,16 ; 89,15 ; 90,17 ; 91, 6.7 ; 92,1 ; 93,7.9 ; 95,11 ; 96,10 ; 
97,13; 99,5.6.11; 102,io; 116,13.17; 119,21; 121,5.7; 123,12.15; 125,1.30; 
126,15; 130,4.23; 131,2; 132,16.27; 135,8; 136,4; 142,8; 144,19; 145,8; 
150,24; 152,lo; 156,15; 158,16; 161,2.13; 164,10; 168,27; 170,IS.2O; 172,26; 
176,19; 179,1; 180,4; 182,11; 183,6; 186,4; 196,13.14; 197,3; 198,9; 
211,6.21; 215,23; 216,1·; 218,2.12; 220,17; 223,3; 226,15; 235,16.24; 
240,21; 248,14; 253,15; 259,8; 260,24; 266,20; 269,19; 271,20; 277,13.19; 
278, 9.10 ; 282,16 ; 289,3 (twice). 
For these and the following cases, cp. our Variante. 

44 
Chap. III. 
Account of the Manuscripts 
On the other hand, A has correct readings in many places where ΙΛιΨ 
are faulty. 
Right readings of A, where those of ΜιΨ are wrong. 
7,16; 8,15; 10,l; 18,6; 25,19; 26, 5 ; 29,8; 32,33; 33,14 (with Np); 
36,2o; 37,s; 40,17; 46, 7.21 ; 50,12.15.16; 52,23; 58,15.17; 59,25(withΡPr); 
61,14 ; 63,12 ; 65, 29.30 ; 66, l ; 69, l ; 71,18 ; 73, 14.21 ; 76,4 (with pPr) ; 
79,12 (here the copyist corrects the reading of bh<<); 83,15 ; 85,18 ; 87,12.14; 
90,8; 91,19; 93,7; 96,14; 100,8; 101,23; 106, l; 107,11; 109,5.8; 114,4.25; 
116,2.16; 118,14.16; 119, l; 121,6; 122,11.12; 124,9.25; 125,26; 130,9; 131,2 
(the copyist corrects here) ; 131, 19.26; 132, 28; 134, l; 135, 21 ; 138, 6.12; 
140,14.18.22; 141,9; 142,5.23; 143,24; 145,24; 147,2; 148,13; 150,20 (with 
Bh<ï>) ; 152, 9 (with Bh<I>); 154, 2 (cp. 155, 8) ; 155,17; 157,13; 161,22; 
162,18; 168, 18 (with MBhi>); 176,8; 180,7.13; 181,8; 191,19.20; 192,9; 
194,19 (with Pr) ; 197, io; 200,23; 203,6; 204,2.5; 206,5.7; 212,12; 216,8; 
219, 25.31 ; 220, 7.26 ; 223, 19 ; 224, 16 ; 226,14 ; 227, 4 ; 230, 20 ; 231, 25 ; 
236,12.13 (see Hamb. MSS.); 236,19 (!); 244, li(l); 245,13; 247, 7.18 (with 
Pr); 248,22.30; 250,22; 251,20.26 ; 254,16; 264,12; 269,11.20 ; 271,11 ; 
272,3; 276,7; 278, 6.10; 282,1; 284,1; 289,10. 
If in these passages A is more correct than bh^, this is at least in 
many cases the result of conjectural emendation. 
For in other cases the 
corrections of A are decidedly wrong. 
Blunders of b h i wrongly corrected, or even more corrupted, in A. 
3,7; 4,30; 13,16; 15,18; 34,13; 35,5; 39,6; 42,11; 44,3; 49,16; 50,16.22; 
52,11; 55,9.10.17; 59,3.28; 64,21; 65,30; 66,12; 70,2; 74,14.17; 80,5; 
84,16; 85,19; 99,15; 101,18; 131,18; 132, 12; 135,10; 143,7; 149,3 (with 
Bh<ï>) ; 155,8; 162,23 (wrong correction by copyist)', 165,21; 170,10; 
172,3; 173,15; 179,18; 190,2; 199,22; 207,3; 213,5; 214,21; 218,12; 
219,15; 222,6; 231, 5 (with M); 238,24; 250,15; 251,24; 264,15; 272,11.16; 
273,9(1); 281,4; 287,14. 
Discussion illustrated by Tale III, viii, Self-sacrificing dove. 
Evidently A1 and A2 copied some MS. which had been revised and 
interpolated, part of the corrections and the interpolations being written 
on the margins. 
An interesting proof of this assertion occurs in A2 on 
fol. 109 a in our Tale III, viii, verses 161 ff. As this passage is of con-
siderable critical value, I print it here in four columns. 
The first column, 
agreeing with our text, gives the readings of our MSS. bh^, and of 
Kosegarten's MSS. BCDEFK, which contain this story. 
Prof. Macdonell 
most kindly collated for me the following passage with the originals of 

Chap. III. 
Account of the Manuscripts 
45 
BC; 1 and Mr. F. W. Thomas in like manner obliged me by collating the 
originals of DEF. 2 
To Mr. Thomas I owe the confirmation of Kosegarten's 
supposition, that his MSS. F and L are one and the same MS.3 
The 
variants I give from Κ are based on Benfey's collation of this MS., which 
I owe to the kindness of Miss Emma Benfey, and on Prof. Schmidt's collation 
of the same. 
The second column contains the text of A, the third one 
Kosegarten's text according to his edition of the textus simplicior, p. 180. 
The fourth column contains an interpolation of the MS. E, which interpola-
tion is separated from the other texts by a vertical line. In the footnotes 
under the first column I give the complete variants (but not all the merely 
clerical errors) of BCD E F Κ; in those of the second column, Prof. Schmidt's 
deviations from A, whose version is given in his German translation ; in 
those of the third column the complete variants of the editions of Jïvâ-
nanda Vidyäsägara (Calcutta, 1892), and of K. P. Parab (Bombay, 1896), 
who follow Kosegarten's text ; I add Benfey's translation and emendation of 
Kosegarten's stanza 187. In the footnotes to the fourth column I give the 
references from O. v. Böhtlingk's ' Indische Sprüche ' to these interpolated 
stanzas. 
It will be seen that most of them occur in the Vikramacarita. 
Though Kosegarten prints the story from which the following paesage 
is taken in his edition of the textus simplicior, it does not belong to this 
recension. 
It is missing in the Hamburg MSS. HI, in h, in Biihler's 
edition,4 and in Kosegarten's MS. G, i. e. in Anantabhatta's Kathämrtanidhi, 
which is an abbreviation of the textus simplicior.6 
Besides HI and G, 
Kosegarten used the MSS. ABCDEFK, and these only. 
Of these MSS., 
A Β contain Pürnabhadra's text ; all the other MSS. belong to the mixed 
class. In the third book, C and F (which go back to a common source 
for the last three tantras) and Κ contain contaminations of Pürnabhadra's 
text with the textus simplicior. 
D in this tantra contains a textus 
simplicior interpolated from Pürnabhadra's recension. 
E contains quite 
a new recension, based on the Jaina recensions and on other sources. 
It has many interpolated stanzas, and one interpolated story whose wording 
goes back to Sâr. or to some nearly related recension,6 and the order 
of the stories in E disagrees with that of all the other recensions.7 
1 These MSS. are now in the Bodleian ; Β <= Aufrecht, No. 387 (written after 
A.D. 1810), C ·= No. 336 (written A.D. 1800). 
a These MSS. belong to the India Office Library ; D — I. 0. 2790 (E. 4085), E = I. O. 
1812 (E. 4086), Ρ = 1.0. 2319 (E. 4087). 
3 Cp. Kosegarten's Praefatio, pp. iv and vi. 
4 As to this edition see above, p. 14. 
8 See my papers ' Kritische Bemerkungen zu Kosegartens Pañcatantra ', ZDMG. Ivi, 
p. 296 if., and ' Uber die Jaina-Rezensionen des Pañcatantra', Berichte d. kgl. sächs. Ges. 
d. Wissenschaften, phil.-hist. Cl., 1902, p. 117 note. Above, p. 18. 
• ZDMG. Ivi, p. 317. 
7 ZDMG. Ivi, p. 326. Above, p. 17. 

46 
Chap. III. 
Account of the Manuscripts 
ο ο , 
ciî 
τ % 
I Τ c 
U 
i 
7 
y 
¿tas 
% 
ì 
c 
r' 
» 
? 
» 
HA 
£ 
5 
irl 
c 
y 
If 
fetido» Xq ηομιρρ* '3«Jl 
h 
O ï-s 
S g g 
£ p< « 
g' 
H « H 
-s S ® 
"2 
œ -
cS ·β ta n 
„««-"Β αϊ 
•wo -3 
3 o.at 
S'-S <£ 
» S . 2 ^ 
œ s a o 
•a 
co 
Λ 
Ν 
a 
CS 
a 
o 
« 
e 
Λ 
o 
Οι 
»o 
eo 

Chap. III 
Account of the Manuscripts 
47 
o 
o (V 
t 
^ 
V m F 
59 
-h 
F 
Π 
F? fa 
σ-
ο 
IV 
c 
TT 
1 
Β 
o 
<M 
3 0 
U <r 
e 
κ 
Γ 
( E 
' I ϊ 
¡r 
u 
<r 
f IS 
fc 
o o 
V 
Κ V 
vr 
l* 
£ ι i 
ι # 
o 
s 
ll^si 
t p 
~ 
í 
V * 
o Vs 
τ 
g . 
— 
O 
* 
o 
£ 
Οι 
O 
II 
BT 
H 
r ν 
t* 
£ 
τ 
€ i 
«o-
Hír 
<r 
ft 
% 
l 
o Ç? Ï • 
τ 
a .9 
·§ .SP 
ta 
£ 
Ν 
CO 
O 
rO 
O 
(O 
Sllsf 
IM 
<0 

48 
Chap. III. 
Account of the Manuscripts 
o ci 
a 
s 
£ 
s» 
• a , 
• J g 
Λ <N 
•o 
m 
o IM 
79 
* 
& & 
tv c 
F 
co 
00 
S 
<M_gpq 
~ rtì _ 
η Ί » 
4
8 1 3 
s 
§ 
o 
Β 
Ir ! 
tr 
c 
S o n t ; 
fe Ü s 
3 
2 «H 
η 
(Γ 
F 
i 
m 
3 
o 
"
«
¡
S
a 
? 
κ ?
w 
F 
ι
«
: 
PS 
e3 _T"Ö 
s « 
® 
Β 
4J 
. 3 - « . g , 5 
J a o 
u 
ο 
< 4 4 3 l N 
P i O 

Chap. III. 
Account of the Manuscripts 
49 
& 
F 
I 
"iP 
00 
i s 
** 2 
t>i/" 
.S .(U 
• S i s 
Cd 
r 
£ g g 
*—- 03 M 
0 ,<ï> 
« S * 
Β* Ζ 
Λ.2« 
« -β -S 
co „ g 
Sis ® R 
-»•SM ® 
W> 
tiD ^ 
β 
S 
5 = 
o „ 
β ; 
„ -a 
» 0 O) 
α ν m 
β Ό >ι α 
i 
^ eS «»S ¡H-tí 
•η o 'Η ös SiiS -
•ί Q ^ β 
5 
J a ^ L H 
·- r® i. 
Ό Ν V 
«β , "β 
Ci 3-
I« » <Β 
Ο-β 
0 01 
Η 

50 
Chap. III. 
Account of the Manuscripts 
00 
00 

Chap. III. 
Account 
of the 
Manuscripts 
51 
From these parallel texts it is clear that both Kosegarten and Schmidt 
based their texts of this story mainly on A2. But in doing so they were 
not consistent. 
Kosegarten omits A2's stanzas 69 and 70, and both 
scholars omit A2's (first) stanza 65. It will be seen that no other MS. than 
A2 has A2's stanzas 65, 69, 70, 71, 72. In place of 71 and 72, all the 
other MSS. but Κ have two prose sentences. 
In Κ the first prose sentence 
is missing. 
All the MSS. agree completely in the number and in the 
order of the stanzas, and nearly completely in their wording. 
Only the 
contaminated MS. E follows the wording of the MBh. in our stanzas 161 
and 162, interpolates as its stanza 5 (i. e. 205) a whole stanza from this text 
(= MBh. xii. 148, 13), and inserts seven more stanzas, four of which occur 
also in the Vikramacarita, and one of which (6, i. e. 206) is apparently an 
imitation of MBh. xii. 149,13. But even this contaminated MS. has none of 
the additional stanzas of A2, and has the same two prose sentences as all the 
other MSS., though in E the wording of these sentences is slightly altered. 
Hence it is evident that Kosegarten's text does not agree with any 
MS. of the Pañcatantra, and that Vidyäsägara and Parab, who exactly 
agree in the choice and in the order of the stanzas with Kosegarten's 
text, simply reprint it with but slight alterations. 
Doubtless neither Kosegarten nor Schmidt would have based their 
texts of our story on A2 if they had been aware of the true nature of 
A2 's wording in our passage. 
First of all, it is clear that in our passage the MS. from which the 
scribe A2 copied, contained a wording which agreed with that of our other 
MSS. as given in our first column. For the scribe first copies his stanzas 
64 to 67 inclusive (corresponding to our stanzas 161 to 164), and, 
after doing so, corrects the fourth päda of 64, adds in the margin his 
stanza 65, and corrects the numbering of the already written stanzas 65, 
66, and 67. 
Some of the copyist's blunders, as SJUIT for 
in 69 c, 
for rçjfïï0 in 70 a, «ftíld^q: in 71 a, and the wording of the first päda 
of 73, prove that he did not himself alter the text which he was copying, 
but that he copied marginal corrections and additions of his original. 
This view is confirmed by the fact that in 73b he writes f ^ K d r ^ 1 ^ · 
within the line. 
The sign Κ is a hyphen, which in Nâgarï MSS. frequently 
occurs at the end of the lines, and which A2 copied without reflecting. More-
over, we shall see that A2's stanzas 69 and 70 are inserted in a wrong place. 
The author of A2's spurious text was shocked by the purport of the 
genuine one. 
Whereas the interpolator of E inserts a number of stanzas 
intended to prove that widows must burn themselves, the interpolator of A2 ia 
an adversary of men's and women's burning themselves alive. 
Hence he cor-
rects in 64 d the true fire of the text to a metaphorical ' fire of penance ',1 
1 Schmidt's ' Opferfeuer ' is an impossible rendering. 

52 
Chap. III. 
Account of the 
Manuscripts 
and substitutes in 73 a mortification for Pürnabhadra's forest-conflagration. 
As he does not think his correction of 64 d to be sufficiently clear, he 
adds the stanza 65. 
He strongly opposes the custom of widows' burning 
themselves with the bodies of their deceased husbands. 
Therefore in 65 c 
he points out the •m&jtJH jj, which, he says, is not so cruel as the 
prevailing custom, but which, on the contrary, is <ς«4ΐ*ι<4. The conse-
quence of the female dove's penance is that she beholds her husband in 
the RflM. 
The author of the alteration no doubt takes this word in the 
sense which it has in Jain mythology ('the highest heaven'), whereas 
in the genuine text it has the brahmanical meaning (' heavenly car '). 
After stanza 164 of our text, A2 adds his stanzas 69 and 70. 
No doubt 
the copyist A2 inserted them, in a wrong place ; for the interpolator himself 
must have intended their insertion immediately after stanza 65, as they 
are destined to corroborate his view that a sati burning herself commits 
a sin. 
Schmidt has misunderstood these verses. 
The correct translation 
of 69 and 70 is : ' She who, being still alive, follows her beloved one 
by offering her own body in the fire, must no doubt go to a terrible hell. 
In the law books, in the Vedas, and in other sastras, the following correct 
rule has been handed down : " Those (wives) who commit suicide will be 
unhappy in all their following existences." ' 
After these stanzas the interpolator replaces the prose lines of the 
original—which in short words gives the purport of Pürnabhadra's source, 
viz. of the Mahäbhärata version1—by his slokas 71 and 72. Stanza 71 
has been misunderstood by Kosegarten as well as by Schmidt, who have 
destroyed its meaning instead of restoring it. 
Kosegarten's 
in a, 
and ^T 
in c, and Schmidt's 
are nothing but wrong conjectures. 
Kosegarten's alterations have misled Benfey as well as the two pandits, 
who reprint Kosegarten, not without continuing his destructive work. 
There is neither a ' dove god 
nor a ' sun-setting ', nor a ' solar heaven 
of the cock pigeon ', nor a ' proximity of the sun 
nor a ' sun happiness ' 
in this passage. 
All these fine non-Indian things have sprung from the 
bad Sanskrit of the interpolator, from the conjectures of the editors, and 
from a clerical error of the copyist A2. 
For ^ í t f l ^ : is nothing else than 
a clerical error for «fitftrf^TT) an expression formed after the analogy of 
the very frequent word trffl^qi, i. e. 'a wife who regards her husband 
as a god', 'a faithful wife'. 
is quite right (g^t 3TPEI), and so is 
1 In the edition of Protap Chundra Roy, the only one which is at my command, the 
story of which Pürnabhadra gives an abbreviation stands at book xii. 143,10-149, li 
incl. To our first prose sentence corresponds xii. 148,12, to the second one, xii. 149,1-7 
incl. The stanza 165 corresponds to 149, 8.11.12.13. In his note 1109 Benfey says: 
'Diese Erzählung stimmt fast wörtlich zu Mahäbhärata, xii, Vers 5462-5592.' The 
mere number of stanzas of the two versions would show that this statement cannot 
be correct. 

Chap. III. 
Account of the Manuscripts 
53 
?CT«j¡, which the interpolator construes with the genitive 
ífíT 
in our passage must not be derived from 
but from 
The correct 
translation of stanza 71 therefore is : ' Having regarded the male dove 
as her god, she became a goddess, and day by day enjoyed godiy (i. e. divine) 
happiness with the male dove ; for such is the consequence of religious 
merit acquired in a former existence.' 
Her «fiVtrf^TW^, (Mfd^0! M+O 
in this world causes her ^ « f l c ^ after her death. 
Stanza 72 of A2 is designed to replace the second prose sentence (204,22) 
of the genuine text, and in stanza 73 ab, the interpolator alters the wording 
for the reason given above, p. 51 f. 
Why he altered also the last line of 
this stanza I cannot say. 
But it is certain that A's wording is an 
alteration; for to 
as the other MSS. read, corresponds 
MBh. xii. 149, 13: «fri: ^ ì ^ + f l ^ M + W S ^ M ^ K : I 
I have advisedly treated this passage at full length, because it is in 
several respects highly instructive. 
First of all, it shows how texts 
should not be edited. 
There was not the slightest reason why Kosegarten 
and Schmidt should leave out one or several verses of A's text, adopting 
the rest of it ; for all these verses go back to the same interpolator. 
As 
to Kosegarten, our passage shows what critical principles this editor 
was wont to follow during his work. 
Not to speak of the fact that 
books III and IV of his textus simplicior are only an adulterated edition 
of Pürnabhadra's books H I and IY respectively, i. e. of the textus ornatior, 
he follows in our passage in some places one single MS. (A), though all 
his other MSS. agree against A, and though the purport of the Mahäbhärata 
version agrees with all the other MSS. 
But instead of, at least, following 
A throughout, he chooses at random the stanzas which he rejects from his 
text or takes over into it. 
And this is not only the case in our passage, 
but throughout his textus simplicior as well as his textus ornatior. 
It 
is not only true that both of them are not worth the paper on which 
they are printed, but also that during more than sixty years they have 
misled all the scholars who used them, and have made worthless the 
work of all the translators of his textus simplicior, to begin with that 
of so eminent a scholar as Benfey.1 
The editions of the two Hindu 
editors, Jîvânanda Vidyäsägara and Kâshïnâth Pändurang Parab, are even 
more worthless than Kosegarten's. 
The passages in which these editors 
deviate from Kosegarten must induce their critical readers to think that 
these pandits based their texts on materials independent of Kosegarten's 
edition. 
But the passage just examined shows that they mainly reprinted 
Kosegarten. 
For the text given by him does not agree with any MS. 
1 Of course, Benfey's introduction to his translation is even now very valuable. 

5á 
Chap. III. 
Account of the Manuscripts 
in the stanzaa adopted or rejected, but it completely agrees in this respect 
with the text of the two Hindu editors. 
Parab's reading of Kosegarten'a 
stanza 187 c, moreover, is a fair illustration of the way in which he 
endeavours to correct a meaningless passage. 
His ' correction ' seems to 
be based on Vidyäsägara's quite impossible explanation. 
This much on the untrustworthiness of A2. 
But the text of A1 is not 
more trustworthy. 
At 211,21, for instance, A1 shows foolish alterations. 
The point of the story Pürn. III. xii (Sär. III. viii, Old Syriac VI. vi, 
SP. III. viii, Simpl. IV. vi H I = IY. vii Bühler) lies in the circumstance, 
that the clever wife fully reaches her aim, i, e. the cohabitation with her 
<3yilf?T. 
In the original version of our tale, the adulteress, answering 
a question of her paramour, tells in a loud voice that all women are 
unchaste ly nature, but that she truly loves her husband exclusively. 
Thereupon her husband is convinced that he has got the most faithful 
wife in the world. 
The author of the textus simplicior evidently thought 
that no husband would allow himself to be convinced by any such trick. 
Accordingly he alters the text.1 
In his version, the faithless wife tells 
the adulterer that Candikâ has pointed out adultery to her as the only 
means of preventing her husband's death which hangs over him by Fate 
and which, by sexual union, goes over to him who plays the husband's 
rôle. 
The words of the goddess, according to the Hamburg MSS., run 
thus : ^ 
S f 
^WTWrf^'N ^¡ftfà «ΓτΡΪ 
Snrçnsj^PÇT *hnfd I Hrfî 
Wfafïï I Bühler, p. 19.12 has 
the same wording, except 
W^ftÌM*!«*^, W-ádfj and 
Pürnabhadra's text 211,21 comes very near to the wording of the Hamburg 
MSS. 
Cp. also the wording of Bh in our variants. 
Instead of Sïïf^fTf» 
A1 has anïtfMM'UJIlH, which compound apparently was first intended 
to mean 'touching [by the limbs] except the male and female organs.' 
But as the copyist (or some previous glossator), feels that this word is 
not clear, he makes it an adjective by adding in the margin 
Now 
the passage means 'a cohabitation without touching of the male and 
female organs ' (Schmidt, p. 232 : ' Wenn du mit einem fremden Manne 
auf gemeinschaftlichem Lager ruhend den Beischlaf ausführst, ohne dass 
sich dabei die Geschlechtstheile berühren'). 
I am at a loss to say how 
the interpolator imagined an 
SÏ«Î f«t^<H to be possible. 
But 
his alteration, which is proved to be such an one by Pürnabhadra's source, 
the textus simplicior, destroys at the same time the point of the story. 
In the same story, the genuine wording of Pürnabhadra, as given in 
our text, p. 212,6, is nearly identical with the wording of the Hamburg 
1 Apparently in following some other source, •whether literary or oral. Cp. Chauvin, 
Bibl. des ouvrages arabes, ix, p. 39, no. 34. 

Chap. III. 
Account of the Manuscripts 
55 
MSS. (Ttlwrf^hnr πί ι τ π ^ ϊ τ di+iifàuï 
i ü t t 
Ι ^ ϊ τ ^ τ π ; 
Büliler's text ins. if before 
om, T^T after TJflC., and ins. 
after 
But A1, in consequence of his first alteration of the text 
(arírf^ 0 
alters again, continuing after 3l< Pfl'l : ^ ^T^HWTTT *J*8SH 
n r t e r f ι 
-tfïï mfcrdcttft ι 
i ^ r ç ^ f ^ m n ^ 
^ 
®d«i<ii ι c n ^ g p r r ι « ä ^ i f ä ß i d q i n . ι ^ f à 
<rnrpçter ι f s r 
faviq 
ri ^ ^ t T ^ R , &c., 1. 8 (Schmidt, p. 232: '"Du bist die Erste unter 
den Frauen, die ihrem Gatten anhängen, darum dass du selbst bei der 
Vereinigung mit einem Fremden die Keuschheit so bewahrt hast. 
Um 
meine Lebensdauer zu verlängern und den Tod abzuwenden hast du so 
gehandelt I " 
Nach diesen Worten umarmte er Sie liebevoll, nahm sie auf 
die Schulter, tanzte mit ihr herum und sprach dann zu dem Herrn Wärst-
du-besser,' &c.). 
And again the conclusion of our tale is awkwardly amplified in A1, 
which for gWR, to WTO (212, ll) reads : «JSÍ W^TT I % W^T^rr^lJWt ^^tW I 
^ n í f t r ^M0ittf*{dii<íjFtii ι ^RVT^rTTftïï: il f ^ r t ^ r t 2 afà c n f t ^ v t x í f s 
π τ ΐ ^ τ φ τ 
H 
« « « w j t f K i f ^ * * ^
^ 
1 n 
n 
ι * 
^pftfïï I (Schmidt, p. 233 : ' und nachdem er darauf umher 
getanzt war, sagte er: "Ja, du Vordermann unter denen, die Keuschheit 
üben, auch du hast mir einen Dienst geleistet ! " und liess ihn von der 
Schulter nieder. 
Vor allen seinen Angehörigen pries er dieser Beider 
Tugenden. 
Wo er immer an die Hausthür von Angehörigen u.s.w. kam, 
da pries er auch deten Tugenden ').3 
I need scarcely add, that here too 
the textus simplicior confirms the wording of our text 212, ll. 
The 
Hamburg MSS. read : 
j d m q q ^ q M f l ^ f t ü W W (!) ; 
Bühler (19, ft) : π<Πϊ g ^ r f ^ ^ T ^ « Η Φ Η ^ Κ ^ WTO I 
Cp. also A2's interpolation 122, 5, and the transpositions in A1 3,18 
and 201, 18. These cases show that the reviser, or the revisers, did not 
shrink from even serious alterations of the text which they copied. 
Moreover, our parallel Specimens show that all the variants of A1 A2 
can be proved, by the testimony of the sources, i. e. the textus simplicior 
and the Tanträkhyäyika, to be alterations. 
Wherever A has the evidently 
right reading, it is not to be made out with certainty whether this 
correctness is due to conjectural criticism, to collating some other 
MS., to A's going back to some MS. older than bh, or even to mere 
chance. 
Though I very carefully collated the whole MS., I am not able 
to decide this question. 
The only thing quite sure is that A is the copy 
1 Bead <£TJ°. The same mistake in A1, p. 211,22 of our text. This shows that the 
alteration does not go back to the copyist himself, who did not understand the text 
which he was copying here. 
2 Read 
. 
8 Schmidt's second MS. Κ has a gap, by which the whole story has been lost. 

56 
Chap. III. 
Account of the 
Manuscripts 
of some revised and adulterated MS. 
For the constitution of my text 
A was almost useless. 
Good readings of A, not confirmed by bh^, have 
only the value of conjectures, or of various readings the sources of which 
we do not know. 
In order to allow the reader to form a judgement of his own, I give 
the variants of A from the beginning of the work to 12,13 inclusive, from 
126, l to 134, 23 inclusive, and for the prasasti. 
Besides, I have entered 
the readings of A into my variants at all the places marked in the Sanskrit 
text with an asterisk, and occasionally in some other passages. 
In our parallel Specimens I to IV all the readings and all the more 
important blunders of A are given in the notes. 
The reader will see 
that not even one reading more original than those of ΜιΨ is to be found 
in these parts of the MS. A. 
§ 6. Critical discussion of the manuscripts Bh and Φ. 
The MS. Bh at first puzzled me very much, and it cost me consi-
derable time before I was aware of its true nature. 
Its age of course 
prepossessed me in its favour, and this impression was strengthened when 
I collated the fifth book, which more closely agrees in Bh with the 
Hamburg MSS. (textus simplicior) than any one of my other MSS. 
On 
the other hand, Bh deviates considerably from ΜιΨΑ in the rest of the 
work ; transpositions of words are very numerous ; synonyms appear 
in very many cases for the words used in bh4'A. 
Again this MS. bristles 
with blunders of every kind. 
But Bh has exactly the same stories, and 
these stories in exactly the same order, as bhi'A. 
It was not until I got 
the MS. Φ and the àâradâ MS. P, that I found out the worth, or rather the 
lack of worth, of Bh. 
Bh and Φ belong to the class of the mixed MSS. 
The greater part of their 
first three books has been copied from a fragmentary Pürnabhadra MS., 
containing the text from 6, -2 ähäramäträrthl down to the end of book III. 
The kathämukha and the beginning of book I contains in Bh the text of 
Pürnabhadra from 1,14 na vidvän inclusive to p. 3,25. 
The text between 
dhürvodhärau and ähäramäträrthl, 6, 2 has been supplied from some MS. of 
the textus simplicior. In Φ, the text to ähäramäträrthl, has even been "twice 
supplied from MSS. of this recension. 
The text of Bh agrees very closely with that of Φ in its readings and 
in nearly all of its blunders, down to the end of book III. 
From the 
beginning of book IV to the end of the work, the two MSS. disagree in 
a most remarkable manner. 
Whereas, in book IV, Bh contains a faulty 
text of the bh-class, Φ in this book contains an equally or even more 
faulty text of the Ψ-class. In book V, both these MSS. contain a textus 
simplicior. 
But here again the difference is evident. 
For Bh contains 

Chap. III. 
Account of the Manuscripts 
57 
a very valuable old specimen of the Η-class of this text, agreeing in many-
blunders, but not in the interpolations, with the Hamburg MSS. 
The 
MS. Φ, on the contrary, contains a text of the σ-class of the textus 
simplicior. 
Discussion illustrated by text of Tale V, v, Ass as singer. 
In order to prove what has just been said, I beg to refer the reader 
to the following specimen, Tale V, v, Ass as singer. In this specimen 
I give the textus simplicior according to the Hamburg MSS. H I. 
The 
notes contain the complete variants of the following texts :— 
Textus simplicior, H-class : 
Textus simplicior, σ-class : 
σ 
= Decc. Coll., Peterson's Fifth Report, No. 356. 
s 
= Decc. Coll. i. 17. 
Β = Biihler's edition. 
pr = the MS. of the Ahmedabad Bhandar, lent to me through 
h = a recent copy of the MS. Bhandarkar, Report Bombay 1907, 
Purnabhadra's recension : 
ΜιΨΑ, the MSS. just mentioned. 
Mixed recensions : 
I the MSS. just mentioned. 
Π1 = Decc. Coll., Bhandarkar, Report 1894, No. 371. 
Π2 = Decc. Coll., Peterson, Report V, No. 355. 
Π3 = Decc. Coll., Bhandarkar, Report 1897, No. 418. 
The variants of the σ-class MSS. of the textus simplicior, and those 
of Φ are given on the left-hand pages, the variants of all the other MSS. 
on the right-hand pages. 
It will be seen at once, that all the MSS. whose 
variants are given on the left-hand pages form one group, and that those 
whose variants are given on the right-hand pages form a second group. 
Nobody who compares the various readings will doubt that the text 
represented by Η I is on the whole older than that represented by the 
σ-class. 
The cases in which Bh agrees with H I against bh»!' are set in italics 
in the text ; the cases in which ΜιΨ agree with the σ-class against HIBh 
are set in fat italics in the variants. 
Hamburg MSS. 
Mr. Premchand. 
p. 55, § 46. 
ι 

58 
Chap. III. 
Account of the 
Manuscripts 
Text of Hamburg MSS. H I corresponding to our text 270,17 to 272,21. 
270, 17 ' sâdhu, mâtula, gïtena ! ' värito na maya stintali. 
18 ' äpürvo 'yam manir baddhah. : sampräptam gïtalaksanam.' 
19 cakradhara äha : ' katham etat ? ' so 'bravït : 
21 asti kasmimscid adhisthàna Uddhato nàma gardabhah. 
sa ca 
diva 22 rajakagrhe bhärodvahanam krtvä rätrau svecchayä paryatati. 
Variants of has prB Φ. 
2 7 0 , 1 7 Φ gì, om. tena II hasprB mayä proktdpi na sthitah, Φ mayâty ukto rut 
sthitaih It 
18 pr bamdhah II 
Φ samprâpta II 
19 σ 
suvarnnasiddhir 
abramt II 
21 prB om. asti II Φ vddhamo ; σ vddhatanäma\gardabhah ; Φ rä-
sabhah for gardabhah II After gardabhah ho-ΦρΓΒ ins. prativasati sma II hprB om. 
ca II σ om. diva ; s daiva, ΙιΦΒ sadaîva, pr samdaîva for diva II 22 ΙίσβΦρΓΒ karma 
for bhärodvahanam II After paryatati pr ins. tata, Β tatáh ; then ΙχσβΦρΓΒ ins. pra-
tyüse (Φ pratyüsam, lia-Φ add. vamdhanabhayät, yrbamdhanabhayät, Β bandhanabha-
yät) svayam eva, then er bamdhanasthäne samäsrayati, h s grham yä, h adds ti, Φ raja-
kagrhe yäti, prB rajakagrham äyäti; then ΙίσβΦρΓΒ rajakôpi tarn (hprB tatas tarn, 
s tatas tvarn na for tarn) barpdhane, σ niyukte, s yunaktih, Φ na yumkte, h na yukti, 
pr °na niyuktih, Β "na niyunakti II 
271, 1 ΙιετβΦρΓΒ atha for athânyadâ II 
σ om. tasya\ s tasmin II ΙιβΦ om. rätrau II σΦρΓΒ om. ksetresu; hs kseträni II 
After paryatatah Φ ins. ksetre, pr kseträni satrau (read rätrau), Β kseträni II has om. 
kadäcic II ΙισβΦρΓΒ saha for särdham || ΙίσβΦρΓΒ samjätä for babhüva II 
2 σ 
sa uddhato, ΙιβΦ sa ca pñvaro, prB sa ca pîvaratvât (Β °tväd) for tau ca II herpr vrttf ; 
Φ väditamgam II 
Φ om. karkatikäksetresu 
praviêya', 
h σ s prB 
karkatikäksetre 
(pr "ksotra for °ksetre ; prB add. srgälasahitah) praviéati ; then Φ ins. karkkatikâ-
bhaksyanam karoti | pratyuse sthagrham thäti I tathâ srgâlaê ca ; σ ins. : tasya ca 
prstato lagnah | érgâlah praviêati ; hs ins. : tathâ àrgâlah ; h adds ca ; then has evam 
(s etadaiai for evam ; h adds tau) dväv api rätrau (li s yathecchayä for rätrau) karka-
tikabhaksanam, krtvä pra° svasthâaam 
vrajatah ; prB ins. : evam tau yadrcchayä 
virbhatikäbhaksaruim (B ci° for vi°) krtvä pratyaham pratyüsc svasthänam vrajatah ; 
Φ om. this sentence II 
3 Φ atha kadäcin madoddbetena räsabham tena kset/ra-
ma&dhyasthitena irgälam abhihitatti; hs atha kadäcit tena (h adds saha) madoddba· 
tena (h inadoddbatà) räsabhendbhihitam I s adds ksetramadhye, h adds ksetramadhye 
after bhagnlsuta (sic!); prB atha kadäcit tena madoddbetena rösabhena ksetrama-
dhyasthitena èrgalo 'bhihitah ; σ atha kadäcit tenâbhihitam II 
5 pr paSya 2, Β paéya 
paèya || Φ paéyat II atïvatirmmalâ rajani, s paiyiyam 
nirmmalä rajanï, h paéya-
yam nirmmalarajanï, σ paéyaîtâm nirmaläm, rajanlm II Before tat, s ins. sa äha || 
6 Φ karisyâmîti II has®prB ins. kathaya before katamma II s tamenana, Φ kena 
for katemena II 
σ ins. gltam before karomi II 
hs karomiti II σ srgâla for sa || 
er ins. bho after äha II σ mämaka, s tana for mama II h alam for mâima II s ki for 
kim ; Ιΐσ om. ktm II 

Chap. III. 
Account of the Manuscripts 
59 
271, 1 athanyadä tasya rätrau ksetresu paryatatah kadäcic chrgâlena 
Bärdham maitri babhüva. 
2 tau ca vrtibhangam krtvä karkatikâksetresu 
pravisya tatphalabhaksanam 3 svecchayä krtvä pratyüse ya^ästhänam 
vrajatah. 
atha kadäcit ksetrama 4 dhyasthitena tena coddhataräsabhena 
srgälo 'bhihitah : ' bho bhaginisuta, 5 pasya ! atïvanirmalâ rajanï. 
tad 
aham gìtam karisyämi. tat 6 katamena rägena karomi 1 ' sa âha : ' mâma, kim 
Variants of HIBh, ΜιΨίΓΠ'Π'Α. 
270, 18 A baddhä II 
22 Π1!!2]!3 rajakasya grhe II 
bh bhärodvähanam II H rädrau II 
271, 1 ΙΓΙΡΠ3 tathânyadm II 
2 HIblity vrttibhamgam, A vrtti\bhamgam, Π1 Π5Π3 varttibhamgam II H karka 
[new line] kaksetrem, I karkketika3 II A tatphalam bhaksanam, II 
3 ΜιΨΠ'Π'ΐΓΆ svasthäaam II Π1 Π3 ksetramadhye sthitena II 
4 ΜιΨΠ1 Π2Π3A om. tena il bh\I> madoddhatarâéabhena, A madoddhataräbhä-
bhena, IMI2 mahoddhataräsabhena, Π3 mahodataräsabhena II 
A bho bhaginlsutä I paéyâtïvamnirmalarajanî II 
6 HI karisyämi II 
HI kathamma II 
Φ Π1 Π® Π8 A präha II 

60 
Chap. III. 
Account of the 
Manuscripts 
anenânarthapracâ7lanena? yatas cauryakarmapravrttä vayam. 
caurajâ-
rair nibhrtair eva 8 sthâtavyam', iti. 
uktam ca : 
9 käsl vivaijayec cauryam, nidrälus carmacaurikâm, 
10 jihvälaulyam ca rogâdhyo, jïvitum yo 'tra vânchati. 
11 tathä ' tvadïyagïtam 
sankhaeaMänuvädi, na madhuram 
iti düräd 
Variants of has prB Φ. 
Β nenânarthapralâpitena, Φ anenânarthe jyraläpena, σ anenârthacâianelam, h vrthä-
pralipitena ; prB anena, tlien pr vrthârthapravalapralapitena, Β vrthârthapracala· 
nena II 
7 Φ caurakarmmapravrttä, β caurakarmmaprakrtä, σ cawryakarmapra-
vrttair, prB caurakarmapravrttäv II 
prB ävärn for vayam; σ om. vayam II 
Φ ins. 
tan, hs tarn after vayam || ΙίσβΦρΓΒ transp.: ni° (h nibhrtam, pr nivrttaié', prB 
add ca) cau°; Φ caurai, h caurair jâraih II prB atra for èva II ΙίσΒΦ om. èva II 
8 Ιΐσ-βΦ stheyam Ii prB om. iti II ha ins. nayah, s nayä after iti || 
pr om. uktam 
ca II h s ins. yatah after uktam ca II 
9 σ kâsam, s prakâàam, Φ häsyam, pr koêï, 
Β kâàî II s varjjayas II Φ caurya, as cauro II First pfida in h : cauränäm varjjayet 
käsämW 
Φ nidralubdhaá II s carmmacorakah, Β sa ca cawrìkdm II 
10 Φ jihoä-
lólyam II σ rogärto ; pr rujäkrämto, Β rujäkränto for ca rogâdhyo II σΦρΓΒ^'ΐ^ατη, 
sjwamtam II 
11 ΙίσβρΓΒ aparata, Φ param for tathä II σδΦρΓΒ tvadïyam; 
Φ om. gitam || prB om. àankhaéabdâniivàdi ; Φ éamkhaéabdcmukârï, s êamkhasabdâ-
nukâ/ram, h éamsaéavdânukâram ; σ kathoram for êaùkhaêabdânuvâdi II h<rs om. 
na madhuram ; ΦρΓΒ na madhurasvaram ; prB add sarnkhasahdänukäram, II 
ΙίσβΦρΓΒ om. iti II Φ ins. ca after api II 
12 σβΦΐιρΓΒ érüyate for érutvôtthâya II 
s Φ prB ins. tad atra, ha tatra before kçetra° ; then σ ksetrarakfakah 
purusah 
pramptas tistati, h s ksetre raksapurusah (s raksâsuptas 
ti 
prB ksetre raksäpurusäh 
suptä I samti (Β suptäh santi), Φ ksetrapäläh purum prasuptäs tistarrUi ; then σ sa, 
prB ta, Φ te ca; then has Φ samutthäya, prB utthäya; 
then σ-s bamdhanam, 
h vadhavatndhanam, Φ bamdham \ badham vä, s vamda vä, prB vadham barn-
dharn vä ; then ΙισβΦ vidhäsyati, prB karisyamti II 
13 σ täm for tävan II 
σ8 amrtakalpä, h amrtakalpáé, ΦρΓ amrtamayâê, Β amrtamaylé; then σ ka/rkatï, 
h cirbhidyäh, s cirbhadyäh, Φ cirbhifikäh, pr cirbhatya, Β cirbhatïh II has®prB om. 
nibhrtah ; then σ avyäpäro bhava, h mä avyäp&raparo bhava, s mävyäpäro bhava, 
prB mä tvam avyäpäraparo bhava, Φ vyäpwraparo bhavän II σ om. tac chrutvä II 
σ gardabhah, Φ räsabha, hs sa II ΙιβΦρΓΒ aha II s aho for bho ; then h na, σΦρΓΒ 
na tvam, s tvam na·, then ΙίσβΦΒ vetsi, pr cetsi; then her s Φ vanâérayatvâd ; then 
1 4 βΦρΓίιΒ gïtarasam, σ gïtasukham; then Β vanäsrayatvät, pr vinâêrayatvât II 
σ om. te° bha° u° ca l| εΦρΓΒ tenaîtad, h tenaîvam, βΦργΒΙι bravisi | uktam; then 
hsprB ca, Φ cah; then βΦ yatah II 
15 σ om. this and the following line II 
pr éaratyotsnâhate II pr dura, Φ düre II 
16 hs®prB jäyate for vièati || 
ΙιβΦρΓ karnne, Β karne II prB gïtajhamkârajâ, h gïtajhamkârayâ, s gltasamsJcärajä, 
Φ gltädhyamkärajä II 

Chajp. III. 
Account of the Manuscripts 
61 
api 12 srutvötthäya ksetraraksä ' bandha ! lanäh ! 'aîvam vidhäsyanti. 
tad 
bhaksaya 13 tävan nibhrtah ! ' tac chrutvä râsabhah prâha : ' bhoh 1 vanâ-
srayatvä<£ 14 ^tarasam na vetsi ; tenaîtad bkanasi. uktam ca : 
15 éarajjyotsnâhate dûram tamasi, priyasamnidhau, 
16 dhanyänäm visati srotre gïtasamskârajâ sudhâ.' 
Variants of HIBh, ΜιΦΙίΐΓΊΓΆ. 
Bh °pracälenena ; Π1 anenârthapralapane, corr. to anena vyartha0, which is the 
reading of Π® ; Π* anena vyarthapralapitena II 
7 HI (not Bh) "pravrtyä, Π3 navrtto, bh °pravrddhä II Π1 Π2Π3 caurajätair II 
HIbh nirbhrtair II 
9 ΗίψΑ Jcàêï II Bh cauram for cauryam II Π1!!2!!3 °corikâm II 
10 A rogädhye II ΦΠ'Π'Π3 jmiam II 
11 Μιψ tadä II bh tvadîyagatam, Π1 Π2 Π3 tvadlyam gïtam II A êamkhavàdâ· 
nuvâdi, bhrPn'II3 êàmkhanâdwnuvâdi, Φ iamkhanänudänädi, corr. to éamkhanâ-
nunädädi II HIBh Π1 Π2 Π8 warn for «α II A ayi for api II 
12 A ksetrapwrasä, Π1 Π2 Π3 ksetraraksakäh purusä, Bhbhty ksetraraksäpurusä II 
bh*A bamdharp vadham ca vi0, Π1!!®!!3 vadham vamdham ca vi0 II 
13 ΜιφΑ äha II 
14 Bh gïtam, rasam II ΜιΦΑ ins. tvam, Π1!!3 ta tvam, Π! tat tvam before gîta0 || 
bhn1 Π5Π3 ine. na between tvam and gita0, om. na before vetsi II JPTPTP jäTtäsi for 
vetsi II Bh na vedmi II bhn'II2II3 vravisi, Φ bravisi, A bavîei II 
15 HI íara-
tjyotsnähate, Bh êaratyotsnâhate, Φ êaratjjotsnâhate, Π1 ¿sa[corr. from ksâ\rayéyye 
deleted]jyo\_jyo corr. from some other aksara]<snäAo<e, Π3 ksärajotsnähate, Π3 
drärajnayotsähate II A pur am, Π2 dure II Π1 Π® priyamsannidhau II 
16 bh ir ote, 
corr. from êrotre II bhAn'lPn3 gltajhamkärajä; Φ gltajhdmJcärajä, jhärn being 
very similar to sam ; hence Ρ gltaiarjikärajä il 

62 
Chap. III. 
Account of the Manuscripts 
17 srgäla äha : ' mäma, asty etat, param kathoram unnadasi. 
tat 18 kim 
tena svärthabhramsinä ? ' 
râsabha âha: ' dhig mürkhal kim 19 aham 
gïtam na jânâmi % tac chrüyatäm, tasya bhedäh : tad yathä : 
20 sapta svaräs, trayo grämäh, mürchanäs tv ekavimsatih, 
21 tänäs tv ekonapancäsat, tisro mäträ, layas trayah Ii 
22 sthänatrayam yatinäm ca, sad bhedäs ca, rasa nava, 
23 varnäh sat, trim&at bhäsäs, catvärimsat tatah smrtälji H 
Variants of ΙίσβρΓΒΦ. 
17 h möma, σ mämaka II 
Φ asyaîtat II 
σ param na vetsi tvam kevalam 
anudiêate kim tena, &c. ; s param na vetsi gltam I tac chrüyatäm, &c. ; Φ param 
gïtah kälam annotasi ta kim, &c. ; h param na vetsi gîta tvam kevalam unnadasi I 
tat kim, &c. ; prB param na vetsi tvarn gltam I kevalam unnadasi II tat kim, &c. II 
18 σΦίι svârthabhramêena, prB svârthabhramêakena ; σ adds kirn II h sôvravlt II 
σ gardabha ; Φ räsabhah II Φ om. äha II Β dhig twice II Φ jänäsi II 
19 ΙίσΦρΓΒ 
om. gltam after aham, inserting it after jänämi II Φ tarhi for tac II h hhedah II 
has om. tad yathä; prB tad yathä tasya bhedän êrnu (Β °ñ ehr0) Il 
20 σρΓΒ 
mürchanäs caîka0 II h 0vimêati II 
21 σβ täaä ekona°, h temäny ekonapameäsa, 
pr tänä tv ekona0 It σ tisras tälä for tisro mäträ || σ layas II In Φ the fourth 
päda runs thus : ity eta êrutimamdalamm ; in prB ity etat svararnamdalam II 
22 σ yajinarp \\ Φ (transp.) ca jätlnäm II s om. ca II Second päda in σ: sat 
kävycmi rasâé ca sat, pr sadgasya, then one aksara left free, then sa rasä ηίυα ; 
Β sad äsyäni rasä nava·, h s satsasyäni (s ins. ca) rasäni ca; 
Φ satsvaidä rasä 
navä II 
23 s varnna, Φ varsä, Β (not pr) rägäh for varnäh II 
ho-s®prB 
triméatìr II ΒΦ bhäsä, σ bhäväh, Β (not pr) bhäväs II Fourth päda in σ: satca-
tvärimiatih smrtäh, hspr dvicatvärimiati (pr adds h) smrtäh (h om. Α), Β catvärirrdat 
tatah smrtäh, Φ dvicatvâraviêatis tathä I mäträ II 
272, 1 h pamcäslhyadhike ; 
Φ pamcasîtyadhikam II σ caîtad II Second päda in haprB: gitämgänäm s'atam 
smrtam, s gltämgam satatam smrtam, Φ gltam II nägänäm éatam II (om. smftam) II 
After line 1 σΦρτΒ insert a half áloka; first päda σΙιΦρΓΒ: svayam èva purä 
proktam (h éâstre for proktam) ; second päda : σ svayam èva êruteh priyam, 
Φ Bharatena êrutam êriyam, prB Bharatena êruteh (pr tsu° for éru°) param, h vedena 
ca êruteh param || 
2 s Β om. this line II h gîtârngïh saha samvrtam II σΦρΕ 
vftam H 
2 a Β om. this line II ΙισβΦρΓ karne II h saradi II 
3 Φ nânya-
hätapriyam loke II s param for priyam || σ êasyate, h durlabham, for drêyate II 
4 σ êuskasnâyurasâsvâdas, hsB suskasnäyusvarählädät (h su°, and °mca° for °sva°), 
pr êuskasnâyuh svarählädät, Φ êuskasnâcchurâdôhâdât II Fourth päda in σ : tyakta 
äksena Râ°, pr tyaktas Tryaksena Rä 
Β Tryaksam jagräha Rä°, s ya (or yu)ktas 
Tryaksena Rä°, 
h paletas Tryaksena Rävanah, Φ paktas Tyaksena Rämanah II 
5 Φ tväm; ΙΐσΒ om. tvam; prB bhaginisuta for tvarn || prB vadan for vadasi II 
Φ manasämti for va° ni0 II σΦρΓΒοηι. ca II 
6 σ mämaka, Φ mam II Φ mady 
for yady II σ om. tad aham II s Φ prB ins. tävad after aham II h dvSradeêasthah, 
σ vrttidvärasthitah, s vrttedvârideêasthah, pr vrtter, Β vrter, prB dvërasthitah, 
Φ vädidvisthitah II ha ksetram, prB ksetrapam for ksetrapàlamu 

Chap. III. 
Account oj the Manuscripts 
63 
272, 1 paficâsïtyadhikam hy etad gltânâm ca satam smrtam, 
2 suvarnaracitam suddham gïtâûgaih sakalair yntam II 
2 a dhanyänäm jäyate karnaih visesäc charadi sthite II 
3 nânyad gîtât priyarn loke devänäm api drsyate ; 
4¡ m&hasasbyuravählädät Tryaksamjagäda Rävanah II 
5 tat katham tvam mäm anabhijñam vadasi, nivärayasi ca % ' srgäla β äha : 
' mäma, yady evam, tad aham vrtti^flrasthah ksetrapälam 7 avalokayämi ; 
Variants of HIBh, ΙΛΨΙΓΙΓΙΓΑ. 
17 Π1 Π2Π* tat for asty etat l| ΠιΠ2Π8 kathorasvaram nadasi II 
18 IFIFII3 tenârthabkramiinâ II 
bhA dhig 2, Φ dhig dhig II 
20 Hlbh^A °vimsati il 
21 bh^A tänäekona0, Π1 Π3 temas cêkona°, Π® tänäi caîkona° ; Bh tv enakeP 
for tv ekona° Il 
22 ΗιΨΑΠ1 sad äsyäni for sad, bhedäs ca (cp. the reading of s), corr. in Π1 to 
sad jasyäna ; Π2 sad jasya ca; Π3 sad gasyama II HI bhedâ II Bh sad äkärä rasä 
na I om. va II 
23 Φ Π1 Π3 Mmsatir, bhA Π2 vimsatir II bh bhâryâé, A bhäväs || Π1 IIa Π3 
(om. tatah) smrtä, Π1 vudhaih, Π'Π8 budJiai il 
272, 1 HIbh 0tyadhikäm, in bh corr. by cop. to our reading; A °tyadhekam II 
HI spatpat for Ay etad w 
2 ΜιΨΠ1!!2!!3 vrtaia, A drtam for yiitarn II 
2 a bh^AlPn 2!! 3 om. this line |l Bh karnme, ll 
3 bh gitatväram or gïta-
dväram for gîtât priyam, corr. by cop. to gltakaram; Φ gïtadvâram, Α Π1 Π1 Π3 gltäd 
varam II 
4 bh^II1 Π2 Π3 °snäyuravair láatn, A °&nâytt/râvïveêaêam II Bh °ravä-
Ihädät ll Fourth päda in bh^An 1!! 2]! 3 : raramje Rävanah purä (Π1]!3 purah) II 
5 Bh om. tvam II Bh nivärayisi II 
6 ΜιΊ>ΑΠιΠ2Π3 vrttidvSradeéasthah, Bh vrtipüradeiasthah (see the corrupt 
reading of HI in the text) II 

64 
Chap. III. 
Account of the Manuscripts 
tvam punah svecchayâ gïtam kuru ! ' 
8 tathä mnusthite gardabha utkan-
dharo bhütvä sabdäyitum ârabdhah. 
tatah 9 ksetraraksakâ râsabhasabdam 
irutvâ krodhâd dantân dantaih pïlOdayanto lagudam uddisya âhâvit&h. 
sametya ca tâvat tâWditah, yâvad bhumiprsthe patitah. 
tatas ca sacchi-
drolükhalam gale 12 baddhvâ ksetrapâlâh suptâh. 
räsabho 'pi ja&'svabhâ-
vagatavedanah 13 ksanenâbhyutthitah. 
uktara ca : 
Variants of 1ΐσ3ρΓΒΦ. 
7 h om. svecchayâ II 
8 has$prB tatbânustite (B °sthi°) il After tathânustite 
σ tadgïtam äkarnya I tato lakutam utpädya pradhävitah (1. 10), s räsabharafitam 
äkarnya ksetrapäh krodhä 
damtän lagudam udyamya 
pradhävitah (1. 10), h 
utkarndharam krtvä rimkatum 
äravdhah I tato räsabharimkitam samäkarnnya 
kgetrapälä krodhänudattänusaya 
lakutam 
udgamya pradhävitah ; 
Φ uktatn-
dhararikiintum 
ä/rabdhah II tato räsabhamrikimtu 
samäkarnnya k?etrapäiah 
krodhä damtâê carvvayan I lagudahastah pradhävitah (1. 10); prB räsabharatanam 
äkarnya ksetrapah (pr adds l) krodhâd damtän gharsayan pradhävitah (pr °to, 
om. I; 11. 10, 11); yävad räsabho drsfas (pr hrstah |) täval (pr tävat) lakutapra-
hcvrais tathä hato yathä pratädito bhüprsthe (pr °s(e) patitah (pr om. A; 1. 11) II 
10 h samastakena for sametya II 
s Φ om. ca after sametya II Φΐι pratädito || 
11 
σ bhümau, Φ bhamau, h bhüprste, s bhüprstho II 
Φ patatîtih II 
prB tataé 
ca sacchidrolükhale baddvä (pr badhvä) gato mürso (B om. mwrso) bkäyo (pr adds l) 
pi (12) prasuptah; 
σ tato griväyäm udüsalam baddhvä bhüyo 'pi (12) prasuptah ; 
s tatah succhidrodükhala I vaddho gatämarso bhüyopi (12) suptah·, h tatah cchidro-
düsalam vavdhä ksetrikah prasuptah ; 
Φ tataé ca tacchirodhätudüsalam gale 
badhvä (12) ksetrikah prasuptah II 
12 Φ om. 'pi after räsabho || s svajä-
tisvabhävän gatavedanät ; σ svajätisvabhävät ksanenâtthitah, h svajätiprabhäväd 
gatavedana ksa 
prB svajätisvabhäväd (pr °prabhä0 for °svabhä °) gatavedanah 
(pr °täva° for °tave°) ksa° ; Φ jätisvabhäväd gatavedanäm ksanena ulthitah II 
13 σβ 
om. uktam ca || 
14 Φ särameyasvaräSvänäm, σβΒ särameyasya câàvasya, pr särä-
mayasya vâévasya, h särameyasya däsasya II s viéesyatah II Bpr räsabhasya vUesatah 
(pr °nah) II 
15 h pati, s parajo II h s °janita II 
16 σ tataé ca räsabho 'pi 
tad evôduçalam ädäya vrttim cürnayitvä pa° ä° ; s tatodevôdûsalam, Φ tatahá ca 
deva udúkhalamm, then βΦ with σ (only s vrtim); 
prB tatas tam evólükhalam (pr 
for °kha°) ädäya vrtim (pr vrttim) cürnayitvä (pr °rnna°) paläyitum ä° ; h tathä 
ca II tad evôdûsalam ädäya vrttim bhürnayitvä pa° äravdhah II 
17 ΙίσβΦ 
etasmina a°, prB atrâmtare II hasprB ins. 'pi after èrgalo II ΙίσβΦρι-Β düräd 
èva (pr adds τη) tatp drçtva (s drstam) sasmitam (h savismitam) (18) Sha I (19) 
sädhu mätula, spr gïten(21)êti, σΦΒ gïtena mayä prokto (Φ yukto for prokto) 'pi 
na sthitalf, h gïtena nivärito aa mayä sthltah, om. the second part of the sloka ; 
20 σ-ΦΒ apürvo 'yani manir baddbah \ (Β om. I) sampräptam gìtaiaksanam 
(Β °nam) il 

Chap. III. 
Account of the 
Manuscripts 
65 
14 sârameyakhavâêvânâm, gardabhasya visesatah, 
15 muhürtät parato na syät prahärajanitä vyathä. 
16 tatas ca vrtim bkanktvä kanthastham ulükhalam äääya paläyitum 17 ärab-
dhah. asminn antare srgälo durât tarn avalokyl&êdam uvâca·. 19 ' sädhu, 
mätula, gît'21 eti. 
Variants of HIBh, ΜιΦΠ'ΐΡΠ'Α. 
8 bh Φ Π1 Π2 Π3 tathànustite, Α tathä (corr. by cop. from tethä) anustite It 
A Ihüyä li Π1 Π2 Π3 sabdayitum II 
9 ΜιΦΑΐΓΠ2Π3 ksetrapälä II Bh tatah 
ksetraraksaJcäräs tat êabdam II 
bh^A räiabhasabditam II 
bh^II'n2 Π3 samä-
karnnya, A érutvâ samäkarnya || bh1^ damtair II Φ A nipïdayamto, bh nihjñ· 
day arato, ΙΡΙΡΠ® nisjñdayarnto II 
10 Π2 lakutam II bh^Bh udyamya, A udyasya, Π1 Π2Π3 udgrhya for uddiêya II 
ΜιφΑΐΓΠ3 pradhävltäh, Π2 pradhävitä II bl^AlFn2!!3 pratidito || 
11 A 
yäva rüviprste ya (ya del. again) II Π1 Π2 bhüprsfe, corr. in Π1 to bhüpraste, which is 
the reading of Π3 II Η I sacchidrolüsalarn ; bh sacchidrodüsalam; Φ sachidrodüsaiam ; 
A sacchidraudäsaläm, corr. to °lam·, Π1!!2!!3 sacchidram udükhalam II 
12 H I badhäh II H I kseträpäläh II Π1Π2Π11 prasuptäh II ΜιΦΠ1!!3 sva-
jätisvobhävagatavedanah, A svajätisvabhävävagatavedanah, Π2 svajätlyagatasvabhä-
vavedanah II 
13 ΓΡΠ2]!3 ksanemâpy utthitah Ii 
14 Bh °kharäSvänäm, corr. by cop. from 
°khakhâêvânâm ; ΜιΦΑ °kharâévasya II Π1 särameyasya cáávasya, corr. from other 
aksaras, the last of -which being svänäm ; Π3 särameyasya cáávasyam, Π2 sära-
meyasya vâsvasya II 
15 bh prajärajanitä, A prahärajanitavyethä \\ 
16 H I 
vrttim Ii H I ülüsalam II ΜιΦΑΠ1 Π2Π3 tataé ea tam evôduçalam (A eva udû-
salarmn) ·, in Π1 corr. to evôdûkhalam (which is the reading of Π2 Π3) ädäya vrttim 
(Π1 Π3 vrtim) cürnnayitvä ρα° ά° II 
17 bh^Airn2n3 etasminn || Bh dürattarät 
for durât II Bh gïtenêti II ΜιΦΑΠ1 Π2Π3 ér° durad èva tam (ΙΡΠ2!!3 mam for 
eva etam) drstvä saamìtam (A sasmidamtam) (18) idam aha II (19) sädhu mätula 
gitene värito na maya sthitah \ (20) apürvo 'yam manir baddhah (A baddho) 
sampräptam gitatakçanam 11 
21 bh^A add iti II Φ adds kathä 6 II 
κ 

66 
Chap. III. 
Account of the 
Manuscripts 
From the specimen just given it appears that in not a few cases Bh 
comes nearer to the text of the Hamburg MSS. than b h ^ n 1 n 2 n 3 A . 
But 
in some of these cases Bh and the Hamburg MSS. are decidedly wrong, 
viz. 271,13.16.23 (a gross chandobhañga).; 272,2 a (an interpolated half sloka) ; 
6 (the reading of Bh being a corruption of that of HI, and that of H I 
being an obvious corruption ofthat of ΜιΨΑΠ1 Π2 Π3). 
Besides, in 271, il 
B h H I read nam for na, as apparently some previous copyist, who did not 
understand the wording, thought Sabdämivädinam to be the adjective neuter. 
But as Π1 Π2 Π3 have the same blunder, this case is not conclusive. 
These are serious mistakes which Pürnabhadra, who tells us that he 
has corrected the text 
(289,20), is not likely to have overlooked. 
It is true that in some cases he has taken over blunders from his sources.1 
But these cases are comparatively rare. 
And not only in the few lines of 
our specimen, but in the whole text of book V, Bh has many mistakes in 
common with both of the Hamburg MSS. or else with one of them. 
Cp. 
our variants at 264,6.14 2.H, 266,10 (HI blunder : venivaccharäjah, Bh 
wrong correction thereof : venuvatsaräjak).3 269,22 (paläyanavisayah BhH and 
jaldSrayam BhHI). 272, 22 (the number of the preceding tale being inserted in 
a wrong place). 
275,10 (same gap in B h H ; corrected in I). 
277,3.15.17 
(wrongly corrected in I). 
278,8 (BhHI vayam for vanam ; but vanam must 
be the original reading, as it forms the contrast to grham ; cp. also 278,18). 
279,11 (original reading vyathâ, as in our text; Bh corrupted to yatM; 
HI—a correction of this corruption based on the end of the fourth päda:— 
tathá). 
280, 20 (ko'pi for team, api ; h also has this blunder !). 281, 9 (our 
text : trsnaîkà tu ; corruption in Bh : trsnìta tu ; correction thereof in H I : 
trsnä [I trmau\ kâpi). 
12 (deva for yena, which is necessitated by the con-
struction). 
14 (BhH). 
282,-4 (our text: hatah Satruh ; H corruption: hatah 
Satrum ; corruptions thereof in Bh and I ; Bh : hataêatrum, I : hatah ûatrv). 
6 (same gap in BhHI). 
283,13 (aêvamadhyastho, corrupted to madhyastho in 
the archetype of BhHI ; this is corrupted to madhyästhäm in H, and wrongly 
corrected to madhyasthàm in I). 
284,12. (BhI "gatir, H h "gati, for °maiir). 
285,21 (BhHI arddhodite for anuddhânah ; but cp. 286, s). 
If Pürnabhadra had not been aware of all these gross blunders, he must 
indeed have been a blind man or a TJTçN^TTf*!P. Certainly no such man 
would have been entrusted with the revision of an old celebrated work by 
1 See above, p. 30 f. 
2 Simpl. MS. h has a compound : °mähämämsävikrayasädhakavrttiprabhrtinäm, 
but 
it adds ehatamah il 
3 As to Vïnâvatsa, cp. Speyer, Studies about the Kathäsaritsägara, Amsterdam, 
1908, p. 5. 

Chap. III. 
Account of the Manuscripts 
67 
a minister.1 
Hence we must conclude that, in the fifth book, not Bh, but 
the bh Ψ-class has preserved the genuine text of Pürnabhadra, and that the 
text given in Bh is a copy of some old MS. belonging to the Η-class of 
the textus simplicior. 
This view is corroborated by the fact that many—and always good— 
readings, in which bh4» deviate from the Hamburg MSS., are to be found 
in the σ-class of the textus simplicior. 
Hence we may conclude that 
Pürnabhadra used at the same time MSS. of both the H- and σ-classes, 
preferring in most cases the H-class.2 
The wording of the textus simplicior as contained in Bh's fifth book 
is of a high critical interest. 
In 1902, when I was not yet aware of the 
true nature of this part of Bh, though I saw that B h H I formed a clearly 
distinct group of MSS.,31 thought it probable that the stories V, xv, xvi 
(Bühler and HI) did not originally belong to the textus simplicior, though 
they stand in all the MSS. of this recension I had, and have up to this 
day, examined.4 
Now these two stories are missing in Bh. 
This shows 
that my view in this respect was correct. 
As in the fifth book Pürnabhadra follows the textus simplicior much 
more closely than in the rest of his work, I give the complete variants 
from Bh for this book from 260, 2 onwards. 
The beginning of the fifth 
book unfortunately is lost in Bh. 
§ 7. 
Books I to III in Mannscripts Bh and φ. 
In order to show the relation between Bh and Φ in that part of the 
two MSS. which contains Pürnabhadra's text, I give their readings, and 
nearly all of their even insignificant blunders, from the "beginning of 
book II, p. 126, to p. 134,23 inclusive. 
It will be seen that Φ cannot 
go back, in this part of the text, to Bh. 
Both Bh and Φ must go back 
to some previous MS. 
Cp. Variants 127, 11.14.26. 
128,8 (here it is evident 
from Φ'β reading that, at the time when the source of Φ was copied, 
a small bit of the vowel under ^ was still visible in the original) ; 128,7.12 
(where the difference between the readings of Bh and Φ must go back to 
some marginal addition); 128,19.30; 129,1.9; 131,8.9.10 (the interesting 
interpolation of ί ^ ί β ^ Ι Ή Ι Ι ϋ Ϊ inserted only in Bh in due order) ; 132, 8 
1 See praáasti, 289,18. 
2 See our parallel Specimens I to III. 
There, indeed, nearly all the text of 
Pürnabhadra's recension is to be found in HI, or Kielhorn-Bühler and h, where he 
follows the textus simplicior. 
8 Berichte der kgl. Sachs. Ges. der Wissenschaften, phil.-hist. Kl. 1902, p. 68. 
4 1. c., p. 68 f. 

68 
Chap. III. 
Account of the 
Manuscripts 
(Φ'β reading more correct than Bh's, the case being such that no copyist 
would have been aware of Bh's blunder). 
The fragment of Purnabhadra's text which forms the stock of books 
I to III in ΒΙιΦ, does not contain the genuine wording, but an adulterated 
one. 
In very numerous cases, words have been transposed, omitted, or 
replaced by synonyms, without 
any evident reason, and other texts, 
especially the textus simplicior, have been compared by the reviser to 
whom Bh's text goes back. This occasionally causes disorder. For instance, 
Discussion illustrated by text of Tale I, adii, Lion's retainers 
ontwit camel. 
In the following parallel texts, the words taken into the text of Bh 
from the textus simplicior are 
set in italics 
in the 
columns 
of 
Bh and HI. 
Our text p. 75, 18. 
18 bahavah panditäh ksudräh, sarve mâyopajïvïnah I 
19 kuryuh krtyam akrtyam vä, ustre käkädayo yathä 11 
20 Damanaka äha I katham caitat I so 'bravit I 
22 asti kasmimscin llagare vanik Sägaradatto 
llama I sa ustraáatam 23 bahumülyacelakasya 
bhrtvä kasyämscid disi prasthitah I atha tasya 
24 Vikatanämöstro 'tibhârena nipïdito visrasta-
sarväiigo niscestah 25 patitah I tato vanik ce-
lakabharam anyesûstresu vibhajya ksipt-
vä 26 ' aranyabhümir iyam visamä, asmin 
sthäne aa áakyate sthätum' 27 iti Vikatam 
vihäya prasthitah I tasmimá ca särthavä-
he gate Vikatah 28 sanaih sanaih samcarañ 
saspam bhaksayitum ärabdhah I evarn asau 
16, 1 katipayair evâhobhir balayan sam-
yrttah I tasmimá ca vane Madotkato 2 näma 
simhah prativasati sma I tasyânucarâ dvï-
piväyasagomäyavah I 3 atha tais tad vanam 
bhramadbhir drstah särthavähaparibhras-
tah sa ustrah I 4 t&m cávijñátapürvarüpam 
häsyajanakam dratvä simhah prstavân I 
idam 5 apürvam sattvain iha vane prc-
chyatäm I kas tvam asi I tato β 'vagatatattvä-
rtho väyaBO 'bravit I ustro 'yam loke pra-
khyätanämä I 7 tatah simhena prstah I bhöh, 
kutas tvam iha I tena câtmano yatkä-8vrttavi-
yogah särthavähät samäkhyätah I &c. 
Bh (exactly as in the MS.). 
vahavah pamditäh ksudrä Sarve mâyopajïvïnah I 
kuryuh krtyam akrtyam vä ustre käkädayo yathä II 306 
Damanaka äha II Tcatham etat II so 'vruvït II 
asti kasmimáci Hagare vaçik Sägaradatto 
näma I sa ustraáatam bahumulyasya celakasya 
bhrtvä kasyämcid disi prasthitah I atha tasya 
Vikatanämä ustro 'tibhärena pidito viárasta-
sarvämgo niácesta patitah I tato vanik ce-
lakabharam anyesu ustresu vibhajya ksipt-
vä aranyabhümir iyam visamä 'smin 
ethane na sakyate sthätum iti Vikatam 
vihäya prasthitah I tasmin särthavä-
he gate Vikatah áanaih sanaihr utthäya samcaran 
áispam bhaksayitum âradhvah I eva ca sau 
katipayair evâhobhir vvalavän su-
vrttah I tasmimá ca vane 
kadäcit tair itas tatah 
paribhramamänaih särthäd bhrastah KratTianako näma 
ustro drstah atha simhah äha II aho apürvam id am eatvaip I 
ta jnäyatäm 
I Mm etad äranyak&m 
grämy&m vä tota érutvâ väyasah äha II bho svämin 
grämyöyam ustranämo jlvaviéesah I tava 
bhojya\s tad vyäpädyatäm simhah II na 
grh&m âgatam hanmi I uktam ca II 
grhe iatrurn api präptam viévastam akutoyam | 
yo hanyät tasya ράραψ syâo chatavrähmanaghâtakaip 
II &c. 

Chap. III. 
Account of the Manuscripts 
69 
in the following four parallel texts of our Tale I, xiii (Lion's retainers 
outwit camel), Pürnabhadra follows áár. β, i.e. the secondary recension 
of the Tantrâkhyâyika, with an enlargement at the beginning of the story, 
in which our author, following the beginning of the frame-story of book I, 
narrates how the camel came to the forest. Bh has this selfsame be-
ginning ; but from 76, 3 onward, this MS. copies a textus simpïicior of 
our story. The consequence of this awkward contamination is a double 
one ; (1) the camel is twice introduced into the story, and (2) it bears two 
different names in the different parts of our tale. In the beginning it is 
called Vikata with Pürnabhadra's text, whereas in the subsequent part 
of the fable its name is Krathanaka as in the textus simplicior. 
Hamb. MSS. (Text exactly according to H ; 
in the footnotes readings of I). 
bahavah pamditäh ksudrä I1 sarve mâmsopajïvinah 12 
kuryu 3 krtyam akrtyam vä 14 ustre käkädayo yathâ I 
Damanaka äha I hatham etat BO 'bravït I 5 
asmi' kasmimscid vanoddese 7 Madotkato nâma 
simhalj. prativasati sma I tasya cânucarâh anyepi dvï-
piväyasagomäyavah 8 samti I atha Tcadacit tair itat tato 
bhramadbhilj 8 särthäd bhrastah10 Krathanako11 
nâmôçtro 
dfsùih 112 atha timha äha I aho apürvöyam satvae 
tat jnäyatäm 
I him ayam äranyako18 va 
grämyo vâ I tat érutvâ14 väyasa äha I svâmîn15 
grämyoyam ustrah nämä jívaviáesah 
tova16 
hhojyai ca vyäpädyatäm 117 simha âha 118 »dham 
gfhâgatarft hanmi 118 uktam ca 118 
grhe áatrum api präptarp, visvastam vihitägama^i18 
yo hanyät tasya päpaip syâ 11 satavrâhmaqaghâtajam 
100 
Skr. ß. 
bahavah panditäh ksudräs sarve mäyopajlvinah I 
kuryur dosam adosam vä ustre käkädayo yathä II 
Damanaka äha I katham caltat I so 'bravït I 
asti, kasmirpscid vanoddese Madotkato nâma 
simhah prativasati ima I tasyânucarâs trayah pisitäeino dvî-
piväyasagomäyavah I atha tair 
bhramadbhir drstaa särthavähaparibhras-
ta ustrah I tarn cäjnätapürvarüpam 
häsyajananam drstvä simhah prstavän I 
idam apürvam sattvam iha vane prc-
chyatâm I kas tvam iti I tato 'vagatatattvâ-
rtho vâyaso 'bravït I 
ä-
khyätanämostro 'yam iti I tatas tena simhasa-
kâsam viàvâsyânïtalj. | tenâpi yathävrttam 
âtmano viyogas sârthavâhât Bamâkhyâtah I &c. 
1 I ksudrâh, om. daç<Ja II 
1 I mâmsopajïvinah 
II 
3 I Ituryuh II 
4 I om. danda II 
5 I sâbravit, 
om. danija l| 
' 6 I asti II 
7 I vanodese II" 
8 I dvlpimvâ" Il 
8 I °dbhi II 
10 I °dbhasi¿h II 
11 I Kratha II 
12 I double daçda II 
13 I ins. mä II 
14 I tachrutvä il 
10 I svämin II 
16 I "sostava li 
17 I om. dançla II 
18 I double daiuja II 
18 I vihiidgatarp with following dan<Ja II 
so I nyachatabrähmayta0 II 

70 
Chap. III. 
Account of the Manuscripts 
In the Tale II, vi, the two genii Karman and Kartr are confused, p. 157, 
21 and 24 ; but in the second place Bh reads Kartrn for Karman, and in the 
following part of the story the mistake is not maintained. 
In 49,14 the reviser shows his pändityam inasmuch as, after 
he 
inserts 
jci% 
(see Variants). 
But his pändityam did 
not prevent him from believing that tortoises are covered with hair; for 
in 170,10 lie makes f ^ ^ d ^ i î l l « * ! ^ ^ Η ' Ι ^ 1 out of 
î R - a z ^ T « ! * ^ 
gi«lì*U^.2 
And again, his pändityam abandons him in 218,12, where ΜιΨ 
write 3Tíft 
I 3Tft 
I 3 
Purnabhadra here observes with his 
source Sär. β the rule laid down by Panini in his sütra viii. 2,84 : 
i. e. ' (Pluti takes place) also in calling from afar.' This sütra was unknown 
to our reviser who, knowing that the figure ^ is frequently used in the 
MSS. to imply repetition (ex. îft^ for iff aft), and not seeing why this 
sentence was put twice in the text, writes it only once in this form : 
s r f t 
f ^ r 
ï^P^PT, &c.4 
Evidently this reviser used still other sources than the textus simplicior. 
For after the kathäsamgraha 5-stanza 125,3D he adds : 
•T 
T^rfw w t ï ï 1 
f ^ f è n p m JÍIÍd^^iM f W f w r 
%fïï ÇTfwfî[cîlft (!) «fi^TT I 
As to this stanza, see our ' Variants 
It is 
not the only one which has been interpolated in this revision. 
A comparison of the other MSS. of Pürnabhadra's text with his main 
sources, viz. the textus simplicior and the Tanträkhyäyika, shows that 
the numerous deviations of Bh<ï> from our text go back not to the 
author, but to one of those awkward revisers who, in India, have so 
frequently destroyed the works of the poets. 
The text of Bh«I> is much 
more disfigured than that of A. 
Still the archetype of Bh must have 
flowed from a MS. whose text came very near to that contained in ΜιΨΑ. 
For in books I to III Bh has numerous mistakes in common with these 
MSS., or wrong corrections of their blunders. 
Cp. 9,26; 10,2; 11,2.23; 
13,16 ; 18,11 ; 28,10 ; 35,18 (wrong correction) ; 42,8 ; 43,4 ; 44,6 ; 59,3 ; 
60,30 ; 62, l (MS. A correct) ; 64,3 ; 69,3 ; 74,8.17 ; 83,6 ; 93,9 ; 96,10 ; 
99,5.6.11; 101,12; 119,21; 121,7; 122,12; 123,12; 131,18; 132,12 (wrong 
1 So ΒΙιΦ. 
2 But cp. Variants. 
3 Our text spells f^TT^ with Böhtlingk in his second edition of Panini. 
4 MS. A reads STtfï («Hc(J 
t^ff^l, taking 9 for an old-fashioned form of t^. 
6 This expression is to be found in Merutuñga's Prabandhacintämani (Bombay, 
1888), p. 25. 

Chap. III. 
Account of the 
Manuscripts 
71 
correction); 136,4; 138,12; 143,24; 145,24; 147,2; 152,io; 154,16 (wrong 
correction) ; 161,2 ; 162,13 ; 163,13 (see Variants) ; 170,20 (wrong correction) ; 
179,18; 180,4; 186,4; 192,23; 198,9; 203,6; 204,5; 211,21; 212,22 
(wrong correction). 
There can be no doubt that Bh, in its Pürnabhadra part, contains 
a very much adulterated text. 
Nevertheless, it has right readings in 
some places where bh^ are defective. Cp. Variants on 33, 12.15.21 (cp. áar. 
A 39 to A 40. This passage is not to be found in the textus simplicior) ; 
49,16; 83,2; 86,11; 102,10; 55, io; 66,20; 71,10·; 79,12; 80,s ; 83,2; 
132,27; 155,8; 156,15-; 172,3.26; 183,6; 187,10; 193,2; 194,19; 197,10; 
214,21; 220,7. 
A great number of these passages contain trifling cases. Only in 33,21 all 
our MSS. have a gap, which Bh—and KL2Mli2—evidently fill in correctly. 
Our restoration of this passage is based on the consideration that the 
copyist's eye probably skipped from a first fïi'r^r^»: (1. 22) to a second 
finiteli:, such aberrations being the most frequent causes of gaps. If this 
view is correct, all these MSS. must have filled in this gap from some 
other MS., for they omit the first fqi^HIi:. 
As in the case of A, it is not to be made out with certainty whether 
the Pürnabhadra fragment contained in Bhi> goes back to some MS. older 
than the archetype of ΗιΨ, or whether the right readings in Bh<ï> in places 
where b i ^ are wrong, are due to revision. At any rate the blunders 
which Bh<I> have in common with bh^, show that such a MS. could not 
have been much older than the archetype of ΜιΨ. 
Our parallel Specimens I to IV show that the text has undergone 
many alterations in Bh. It is true that in some cases Bh goes with either 
the Hamburg MSS. or the Tanträkhyäyika against bh'P. But none of 
these cases is such that we must conclude that ΒΙ1Φ have flowed from 
some more original archetype than bhi'. In Specimen I, 1. 151, e.g., Bh 
has the same blunder as ΗιΨΑ, viz. îjfïT for ïjrfî. This blunder evidently 
goes back to a misreading of îjfàî at the end of the pâda. The copyist 
of the archetype of bh^ABh^ took the second aw-stroke for a danda, and 
misread fà as fÌT. 
In the same specimen Bh inserts «T in 1. 45, makes 
^ r K o ut °f ^Nr^rnt. in 1· 60, and omits ^ in 1. 136 ; in all these three 
cases he destroys the metre. 
In this specimen the cases are especially 
frequent in which Bh goes with the Hamburg MSS. against bh^A. 
But 
it is quite certain here that these coincidences are due to the collation 
of some copy of the textus simplicior. 

72 
Chap. III. 
Account of the 
Manuscripts 
In line lis ff. our parallel texts run as follows : 
H I 
athavä 
so'tra 
räjä, tad viàvâsasthâne caturah áaáakan atra dhrtvä 
h 
athavä yadi so'tra 
räjä, tad 
viávasasthane caturah áaáakan atra dhrtvä 
Kielh. atha 
yadi so'tra 
räjä, tato viávasasthane caturah áaáakan atra dhrtvä 
Pürn. 
tatas 
Bh 
atha 
yady asau iha räjä, tad 
visväsasthäne caturah áaáakan 
dhrtvä tatas 
H I 
tarn ähüya drutataram 
ägaccha ; yena 
yah 
kaácid 
dvayor 
madhye 
h 
tarn ähüy- 
ägaccha ; yena 
yalj kaácid 
dväbhyäm 
madhyäd 
Kielh. tarn ähüya drutataram 
ägaccha ; yena dvayor madhyäd yah kaácit 
Pürn. tarn ähflya drutam 
ägaccha ; yena 
yah 
kaácid 
ävayor 
madhyät 
Bh 
tarn ähüya drutam 
ägaccha ; yena 
yah 
kaácid 
ävayor 
madhyät 
H I 
räjä, 
sa sarvän 
etän 
bhaksayisyati. 
h 
räjä bhavisyati, sa sarwän 
etän 
bhaksayisyatîti. 
Kielh. paräkramena räjä bhavisyati, sa sarvän 
etän 
bhaksayisyatîti. 
Pürn. paräkramena räjä bhavisyati, ea sarvän evaîtân mrgän bhaksayisyati. 
Bh 
paräkramena räjä bhavisyati, sa sarvän ava (!) etän mrgän bhaksayisyati. 
The sentence tad, &c. (HIh), or tato, &c. (Kielh.), is grammatically 
incorrect, inasmuch as the subject of dhrtvä is the lion, and that of ähüya 
the hare. 
Pürnabhadra, for this reason and for a reason which we shall 
consider hereafter, deletes the words athavä, &c. 
But it is quite clear 
that his tatas corresponds to the tad (Hlh) or the tato (Kielh.) which in 
these sources begins the apodosis. 
The author of Bh's archetype must 
have had before him Pürnabhadra's text as given in bhsf'A; but besides 
he must have compared some MS. of the textus simplicior. 
For in his 
wording, the apodosis is twice introduced, first by tad, as in Hlh, and 
secondly by tatas, as in Pürnabhadra (and in Kielhorn's text). 
This 
faulty construction can only be explained by the supposition that the 
author of Bh's archetype was not aware of the fact that in Pürnabhadra's 
text tatas corresponded to tad of the textus simplicioi*, which he had 
before him, and that he only saw that in this text there were some more 
words (atha to dhrtvä), which accordingly he inserted, without reflecting, 
before Pürnabhadra's tatas. 
As to the purport of our passage, I cannot believe that the text of 
the σ-class is here more original than that of HI. 
The woi-ding of the 
Hamburg MSS. means : Bhasuraka is an usurper. 
Or else, if he is 
indeed the legitimate king, let him come, in order that that one of both 
of us who is the legitimate ruler may eat all the animals. 
This passage 
lacks wit; for evidently there is nobody to decide as to the lawfulness 
of the kingship of the two lions. 
The σ-class as represented by Kielhorn's 
text improves the sense, saying that the usurper proposes a single combat1 
1 But the single combat is not even mentioned in the old MS. h of the σ-clasa 
which only has the future tense bhavisyati with Kielhorn. 

Chap. III. 
Account of the Manuscripts 
73 
in order to decide who, in the future, shall be the king of the forest. 
Accordingly Pürnabhadra deletes the words athavâ, &c., which contain 
a conditional acknowledgement of the lawfulness of Mandamati's mjatvam. 
Nobody will doubt that the reading of Bh is a contamination of 
Pürnabhadra's genuine text and of the textus simplicior. 
Here, as in 
the case treated above, p. 68 f., the interpolator was not clever enough 
to avoid the traces of his activity. 
In the first case, he preserved the 
camel's two differing names from both the sources which he contaminated ; 
in our passage, he preserved, from these different sources, two different 
words—tad and tatas—which, though differing, correspond to one another. 
Although these cases, taken with many others which of course I cannot 
treat here, have firmly convinced me that Bh does not go back to an 
archetype independent of that of bh^A, I give nevertheless the readings 
of this MS. throughout from the beginning of page 126 to 134,23 inclusive, 
and for the passages marked with an asterisk in books I to IÌI inclusive, 
and quote Bh occasionally in some other places. 
Of book IY, Bh has only the text from the beginning (p. 228) to 
tathà hi (inclusive), p. 244, io. 
In order to show the difference between 
Bh and Φ in this book, I give the complete variants of these two MSS. 
from the beginning of IV to p. 229,17. From 229,17 to 244, io the readings 
of Bh are given only in the passages marked with an asterisk. 
The 
readings of Φ I have neglected altogether. 
Chapter IV. Principles which guided the editor in the 
construction of the text. 
§ 1. 
Basis of the text of our edition. 
INDIA is the ' classical ' country of interpolation and adulteration of 
texts. 
The more celebrated a work became, the more it was disfigured 
by copyists and revisers. 
Not even texts which, like the Mahäbhärata, 
are held to be sacred, have escaped this lot. 
A work so widely spread 
as the Paficatantra in its numerous recensions has undergone the most 
important changes in respect of its wording and of its contents, and that 
continuously, even to our own time. 
New editions quite different from 
the old work were prepared, and these new editions, after some time, were 
compared with older ones and melted together with them into new texts. 
In Pürnabhadra's time there existed several redactions of this work, and 
Pürnabhadra was well aware of the fact that none of them contained any 
L 

74 
Chap. IV. 
Principles which guided the editor 
longer the text aa written down by the ädyakavi. 
In revising what had 
grown in the course of time to be a ' whole sastra he collected the different 
recensions and contaminated them, as shown above, not without inserting 
new materials. 
This was the Hindu manner of philological work, which to our days 
prevails amongst the old style pandits. 
Eui'opean scholarship has arrived 
at other methods. 
Whereas a Hindu wants before everything else a most 
readable text, we want a text that comes as near as possible to the wording 
of the author himself. 
But when Kosegarten gave the first edition of the 
Pañcatantra, he followed not the European, but the Hindu manner of 
proceeding. 
Instead of separating the various recensions of the work which 
he was editing, he contaminated them; with what result has been shown 
above, p. 44 ff. 
On p. ix of his edition of the textus simplicior he says : ' Utrum editio 
ornatior, an simplicior, sit habenda vetustior, vel primae Pantschatantri 
formae propinquior, de ea re sententiam ferre certam non audeo; magia 
perspectum hoc habebunt posteri. . . . 
Si quid video, editio ornatior, 
quanquam in earn ipsam recentiora multa recepta esse crediderim, in 
universum ad antiquam libri formam propius accedit, proptereaque cum 
libro Kalîlae magis quam altera convenit. 
In editionis meae volumine 
hoc primo scriptura potissimum (!) ad editionem simpliciorem accommodata 
est, quoniam codices H.I.L. qui mihi obtigerunt primi, illam editionem 
exhibent, eoque factum est, ut ad earn primam ex illis codicibus eruendam 
me adplicarem. 
Qui codices ubi nimis vitiosi vel mutili esse mihi vide-
bantur (!), ex ceteris meliora vel pleniora supplevi. 
(Hence he gives in 
books III and IV a disfigured 'textus ornatior', imagining the text of 
the Hamburg MSS. to be mutilated in them.) . . . Versículos recepì nimis 
multos (!), ut lectores critici eorum, quos aut retinendos, aut eiiciendos 
esse censeant, ipsi instituere possint delectum.' 
An editor who renounces 
the critical examination of the text which he is editing to his readers 
instead of taking thia duty upon himself, should abstain from editing 
altogether. 
Translators who followed Kosegarten propagated the error about the 
true form of the Pañcatantra among all the philologists and folklorista 
who were forced to base their research on translations. 
The Hindu 
editors, in reprinting Kosegarten's text, not without new alterations and 
additions, settled the opinion amongst Indianista that on the whole 
Kosegarten's text corresponded to the MSS. of this work. 
The only 
edition of the textus simplicior which has been prepared in a critical 
spirit is that of Kielhorn and Bühler. 
Though of course this school-book 
is not a critical edition in the strict sense of the word, it offers to us 

in the construction 
of the text 
75 
the corrected text of one single MS., namely, of one which belongs to 
the σ-class of the MSS. of the textus simplicior.1 
Kosegarten'a publication of a small portion of the textus ornatior, 
i. e. of Pürnabhadra's recension, is as uncritical as his edition of the 
textus simplicior. 
I need not expatiate here on this topic, as any one 
can easily compare Kosegarten's text with our text and with our variants 
as well as with the other recensions of the Pañcatantra. 
I point out 
only the fact that the characteristic passage 4,21 to 5,2 is missing in 
Kosegarten's text. 
That texts like these of Kosegarten are not only useless (this negatively), 
but also (this positively) a great and effectual obstruction to the progress of 
philological and historical research, is a fact that no one is now likely to 
deny. 
Hence my first aim was to clear up the following questions :— 
(1) How many different recensions of the Pañcatantra are still, existing ? 
(2) In what genetic relations do these recensions stand to one another Ì 
(3) Which MSS. are the most faithful representatives of their respective 
recensions ? 
The pedigree of the old Pañcatantra recensions down to that of 
Pürnabhadra has been established in the Introduction to my edition of 
the Southern Pañcatantra. 
It is also given at the beginning of this 
volume, p. 5. The Southern Pañcatantra and the Tanträkhyäyika are 
critically edited. The genetic relations existing between the old Pañcatantra 
texts are minutely studied in the Introduction to my translation of the 
Tanträkhyäyika. 
Moreover, I have shown that Pürnabhadra based his 
text mainly on the secondary recension of the Tanträkhyäyika (áar. β), 
and on the textus simplicior which, as our parallel Specimens show, he 
used in MSS. of both the H- and the σ-class. 
Now I have examined all the available MSS. of the Jaina recensions 
of the Pañcatantra. 
All the MSS. of Pürnabhadra's recension had to be 
classed roughly under two heads, the original class, and the mixed class. 
To the former class I allot those MSS. which are most consistent 
at the same time with the Tanträkhyäyika and with the textus simplicior, 
but do not share the provable interpolations of the latter. 
To the second 
class belong all the other MSS. 
The MSS. of the mixed class based on 
Pürnabhadra's text show with especial frequency interpolations from MSS. 
of the textus simplicior and contaminations with them. 
Other mixed 
MSS. are based on the textus simplicior and contaminated with Pürnabhadra's 
recension. 
But there are also MSS. which contain new recensions based 
1 See above, p. 12 (pr), p. 58 if., our parallel Specimens, and ZDMG. Ivi. 298 f. 

76 
Chap. IV. 
Principles which guided the editor 
on the Jaina recensions and contaminated with Sär. β, with the Southern 
Pañcatantra, with the Hitopadesa, and with other sources. 
The main criteria for the classification of the several recensions are : 
(1) the number, choice, and arrangement of the single tales and stanzas, 
and (2) the wording of the texts. 
In the arrangement of the tales con-
tained in book III, Pürnabhadra follows the oldest texts (Sär., Som., Ksem., 
S.P., Semitic recensions). 
Mixed MSS. in most cases deviate from this 
arrangement. 
For the first book, moreover, there is a sure criterion in 
the story of the Weaver as Yishnu. Mixed MSS. based on the 
textus 
simplicior have this story as I, v, but follow Pürnabhadra, throughout or 
partially, in the arrangement and in the number of the stories of books III 
and IV. Mixed MSS. based on Pürnabhadra,'s 
text agree with him in the 
first and generally in the second book, but deviate from him in books III 
and IV. But there are even mixed MSS. which agree throughout with 
Pürnabhadra's genuine text in the number and in the arrangement of the 
stories ; cp. above, p. 56, § 6. 
For the stanzas, also, I compared Pürnabhadra's main sources, and this 
enabled me to find out easily the interpolations of single MSS. 
Basis of the edition ι bli, IT, Α; Ψ, PL·1, p, Pr, M ; Bh 
The comparison of the number and arrangement of the stories con-
tained in the single MSS. showed that only the following MSS. came 
under consideration for an edition of Pürnabhadra's recension : bh Ν A, 
Ψ PLJpPr M, Bh<i>. As shown above, ΑΒΙιΦρ contain revised and con-
taminated texts, which are very likely to have flowed from the same 
archetype as the other MSS. mentioned. 
Of these MSS., Ν goes back 
to bh, PL1 ρ Pr M go back to Ψ. Consequently the only possible basis for 
our text must be the two equally excellent MSS. bh and Ψ, which agree 
very closely in their wording. I generally follow bh, unless its readings 
are clearly wrong. Wherever both bh and Φ have a wrong reading, the 
emendation of which was not evident, I compared Simpl., Sâr., A and 
Bh. In most cases this comparison affords sufficient evidence. 
There 
are, however, some rare cases, in which the same difference which appears 
in the best MSS. of Pürnabhadra's text is to be found in the most trust-
worthy MSS. of the textus simplicior ; 1 cp. 22,25 ; 181,2 ; 214,19 f. ; 242, ll. 
In 68,11 a gloss in the margin of Φ gives the reading of Simpl. Η Ih. 
If some copyist would have preferred this variant, copying besides exactly 
the wording of his MS., this variant could induce some editor to prefer 
it and to reject what is Pürnabhadra's genuine text. 
All the passages 
1 In later MSS., owing to constant collations and contaminations, such cases are 
extremely frequent. 

in the construction 
of the text 
77 
in which our text deviates, even in trifles, from bh and Ψ are marked 
with an asterisk. 
Though of course, except in passages where ΜιΨ are incomplete to-day, 
the MSS. NPPrM cannot come under consideration for the constitution of 
the text, I not only give the complete variants, but even most of the 
blunders of all these MSS. For these blunders are of the highest im-
portance for critical work, as nothing is more useful to prove the relations 
which exist between kindred MSS. than the mistakes which they contain. 
Only of M a great many of the blunders have been omitted in my variants, 
as this MS. is extremely faulty. It bristles with misreadings, small gaps, 
and dittographies. I got this MS. before I had seen Ψ. Otherwise I should 
have jotted down still more of its mistakes, and the relation between M 
and Φ would appear even more clearly than now. 
To the contaminated 
MSS. ρΑΒΙιΦ and to L1 only occasional reference has been given, except 
in book V, where I give the complete readings of Bh, which, as stated 
above, p. 56 ff. and p. 67, in this book contains an old and very valuable 
textus simplicior. From these variants it will be seen with how insig-
nificant alterations Purnabhadra took over the textus simplicior of the fifth 
tantra into his own recension. 
Manuscripts bh. and ψ differ very little from Fñrnabhadra's 
autograph text. 
The very fact that so many MSS. can be proved to go back to bhi» 
shows that in ancient times these two MSS., which I had the good fortune 
to use for my edition, were renowned for their value. 
As stated above, 
p. 37, the MS. bh goes back to a MS. which already was old when bh was 
copied from it. 
Our parallel Specimens also prove the excellence of 
the text of ΜιΨ. Indeed, I am convinced that neither of these copies 
deviates to any considerable degree from the text as written down by 
Purnabhadra himself, and that consequently our printed text comes as 
near to the author's genuine wording as any one of our current editions 
of say Goethe's prose works does to Goethe's own autograph text thereof. 
§ 2. Emendation of the text. 
Inferior MSS. sometimes have more correct readings than our oldest 
and most authentic ones. The question arises, whether in these cases 
we should conclude that these MSS. go back to some source independent 
of the archetype of our best MSS., and whether, if this be denied with good 
reasons, we should tolerate evident blunders in our texts. 
In order to settle these important questions, I beg to be allowed to 
consider some standard examples, the nature of which we are able to 

78 
Chap. IV. 
Principles 
which guided the editor 
determine with certainty. I take these instances from writings of eminent 
modern scholars, whose learning as well as whose accuracy is far beyond 
any doubt; and only to avoid the possible charge of malignity, I add 
some instances from my own writings. 
Paul in his fundamental work ' Principien der Sprachgeschichte ',1 p. 86, 
lastime, gives hortibus as the dative case of the plural of hortus. Hillebrandt 
says on p. iv of his ' Yedachrestomathie ' :2 ' Der leidige Druckfehler, welcher 
S. 38 entstellt [viz. Atharaveda], ist meine Schuld und von mir trotz 
dreimaliger Correctur übersehen worden.' 
To the kindness of Miss Emma 
Benfey I owe the MS. of her celebrated father's translation of Christoforo 
Armeno's ' Peregrinaggio di tre giovani figliuoli del re di Serendippo ' the 
beginning of which translation he published in the third volume of his 
periodical Orient und Occident'.3 
This MS. is very carefully written 
in its author's fine and sympathetic hand. 
In this most authentic arche-
type I read, amongst other slips of Benfey's pen, this sentence on leaf xvi, 
first page : ' Da aber der Jüngling beschlossen hatte, sich auf jede Weise 
an dem treulosen Minister zu rächen, ging er . . . in das Schlafzimmer der 
jungen Dichter des Ministers und umarmte sie alle drei mehrere mal.' 
L. v. Schroeder's excellent works are remarkably free from misprints. Still 
he writes, on p. 514 of his celebrated book ' Indiens Literatur und Cultur 
in historischer Entwicklung':4 'Am Bedeutendsten und Selbständigsten 
sind unter denselben zwei Dichtungen, welche dem Kâlidâsa zugeschrieben 
werden . . . : der Raghuvamça . . . und der Kumârasambhava, d. i. die 
Geburt des Liebesgottes . ..' In the pedigree of the different recensions of the 
Pañcatantra, p. lxxix of my edition of the Southern Pañcatantra, I wrote 
' Tefe^w-Fassungen 
and later on, as my attention was concentrated on 
inserting the newly discovered recension v, I repeated this blunder on 
p. χ ci. In my essay on the origin of the Hindu drama and epic, WZKM. 
xviii, p. 165, I wrote : ' Die dramatischen Beziehungen, die zwischen dem 
Epos und dem Drama bestehen, sind längst erkannt worden.' 
This, I am 
bound to confess, is unmitigated nonsense. 
What I wanted to write, was 
of course : ' Die Beziehungen, die . . .'. 
Likewise I wanted to write 
Tamil- for Tehigu-. 
Paul intended to write hortis, Hillebrandt Atharvaveda, 
v. Schroeder Kriegsgottes. Like Hillebrandt and no doubt the other scholars 
mentioned before, I had again and again revised the printer's copy and the 
proof-sheets without seeing my blunders. 
For there is not only a ' Druck-
fehlerteufelwho disfigures the words written by the author, but there 
1 Halle, Max Niemeyer, 1886. 
2 Berlin, Weidmannsche Buchhandlung, 1885. 
3 See Chauvin, Bibliographie deB ouvrages arabes, VII, p. 160. 
4 Leipzig, Verlag von H. Haessel, 1887. 

in the construction 
of the text 
79 
is a piéâca much more malignant, the ' Schreibfehlerteufel 
whose deviltries 
are infinitely more dangerous to the author who has his text, i.e. the 
wording he intended to write down, firmly impressed upon his mind, and 
who very often does not discover the fatal slips of his pen until, the work 
being printed off, these rähasas stare at him from amongst the lines with 
devilish grimaces. 
Benfey, of course, would have removed from his MS. most of the slips 
which his hand had committed while his mind was intent on finding an 
adequate rendering of the text he was translating. 
But the blunder 
Dichter for Töchter is one of the very kind which would escape the 
scrutinizing eye of the author, when Töchter is impressed on his mind. 
Thus even modern authors on philological topics, who in the course of 
their studies are trained to philological ακρίβαα, and whose métier it is 
to jot down, in preparing their editions, the very smallest clerical errors 
of their texts, are liable to overlook in their own wording evident blunders 
which at least Lord Macaulay's school-boy would detect at the first glance 
of his eye. 
And yet these authors certainly will revise their works again 
and again, first in their printer's copy, and afterwards in the proof-sheets. 
The old Hindu writers, owing to the circumstance that their works were 
not printed, had no occasion of revising them as often as modern authors. 
Moreover, a clerical error would much more easily escape their attention, as 
there is not the least separating of words in Sanskrit MSS., a circumstance 
which certainly does not tend to render revising more easy. 
Hence the very thing which we should expect is that the Hindu 
archetypes (i.e. the authors' own autograph copies) should hardly ever 
have been free from mistakes, although these authors were men of un-
doubted learning and thoroughly acquainted with the Sanskrit language 
in which they composed their works.1 
But for the work of Messrs. Fischer and Boite,21 probably should have 
published Benfey's translation of Christoforo Armeno's ' Peregrinaggio '. 
In doing so, I should of course have corrected the slips of Benfey's pen 
wherever the words he intended to Write could be settled with certainty. 
I should have caused to be printed 'der jungen Töchter', and in order 
to give my edition of Benfey's work a diplomatic value, I should have 
mentioned his clerical error in my notes. 
The case is different wherever authors can be proved to have sinned 
against the rules of the language. 
So even Schiller, for instance, uses 
1 Cp. also above, p. 28, note 2, and p. 30, note 2. 
2 Die Reise der Söhne Giaffers aus dem Italienischen des Christoforo Armeno 
übersetzt durch Johann Wetzel 1583 herausgegeben von Hermann Fischer und Johannes 
Bolte. Tübingen, 1895 (= Bibl. des Litt. Vereins in Stuttgart, CCVIII, Tübingen, 1896). 

80 
Chap. ΙΎ. 
Principles which guided the editor 
the decidedly wrong form umrungen for umringt, as if this word derived 
from the verb ringen (' to wrestle '), and not from the substantive Ring. 
In his 'Jungfrau von Orleans', verses 947f. (I, 9), he says:— 
Umrungen sahn wir uns von beiden Heeren, 
Nicht Hoffnung war, zu siegen noch zu fliehn. 
The slip certainly originated in the idea of struggle (Heeren) which 
was in the poet's mind. In a similar passage of the same tragedy, verses 
2399 f. (111,8), Schiller uses the right form:— 
Umringt von Feinden kämpft sie ganz allein, 
Und hilflos unterliegt sie jetzt der Menge.1 
And this same right form occurs in verse 447 (1,1) :— 
Und find' ihn — hier I umringt von Gaukelspielern . . . 
The same holds true in India. 
Even so scholarly a work as the classical 
author Dandin's Kävyädarsa is not quite free from anomalies; 
see 
Böhtlingk's edition,2 p. vi. 
In another sastra, whose aim was in part 
to teach standard language, viz. in the Tanträkhyäyika (A 266), we find 
blunders against the rule laid down by Panini III, 3, 126 (Wackemagel, 
Altind. Gramm. II, § 82, α, γ). In a very interesting paper read before the 
Twelfth International Congress of Orientalists,3 Prof. M Leumann proved 
from old palm-leaf MSS. that down to about the seventh century A. D. the 
Sanskrit written by most authors was not the pedantic one which had been 
laid down by the grammarians. 
On the contrary, Brahmans as well as 
Buddhists and Jainas wrote a Sanskrit more or less incorrect and in-
fluenced by the popular languages. It was not before the time of the 
commentators, amongst whom Samkara and Haribhadra hold a prominent 
position, that the usual standard of Sanskrit was raised to a higher level, 
and that many things which before that time used to be tolerated, began to 
be avoided by good authors. 
But even after this time we find grammatical 
mistakes in the works of excellent authors which are critically edited. 
Hemacatidra's so-called shortcomings in grammatical and lexicographical and 
metrical things have been pointed out by Jacobi, p. 9 f. of his edition 
of the Parisistaparvan.4 
As to occasional mistakes committed by another 
learned author, viz. Pradyumnasüi-i, cp. Jacobi's edition, p. 3 f.® 
Jacobi 
says that, ' as an epitomator and poet, he [Pradyumna] has done his 
1 In the first passage (947 f.), the battle has not yet begun. 
This shows that Schiller 
cannot, by any means, have intentionally chosen the abnormal form umrungen. 
2 Dandin's Poetik (Kàvjâdarça). 
Sanskrit und Deutsch herausg. von O. Böhtlingk. 
Leipzig, Verlag von H. Haessel, 1890. Cp. also Bühler, WZKM. vüi. 29 f. 
3 See Bezzenberger's Beiträge, 1900, p. 125 f. 
4 Sthavirâvalî Charita or Parisishtaparvan . . . Calcutta, 1891 (Β. I.). 
6 Shri Pradyumnâchârya, Samarâditya Samkshepa, Ahmedabad, 1906. 

in the construction 
of the text 
81 
task well. 
His language is concise in the narrative parts, pathetic in 
the moralising portions, and poetic in the descriptive passages which 
offer an opportunity of showing his proficiency in Alamkara. 
Still his 
work is not free from faults, even against grammar, the worst of 
which, a Prakritism, ÇÎÏ: instead of I£f»T:, occurs VIII 520. 
And so he 
occasionally does not conform to the nicer metrical habits with regard 
to the Sloka as observed by the classical poets. But these shortcomings 
he has in common with most Jain writers during the period of their 
greatest literary activity and excellence (about 900-1300 A. D.).' AS early 
as 1877, G. Bühler expressed his view about Jaina Sanskrit as follows : 
' Die Kenntniss des Sanskrit ist bei den Jainas nicht weit her und hat 
auch wohl nie den Grad der Vollkommenheit erreicht, der sich bei den 
Brahmanen findet, obschon es nicht zu leugnen ist, dass sie in der Glanz-
periode der Jaina-Wissenschaft vor etwa 700 Jahren höher gestanden hat 
als sie jetzt steht. 
Selbst die grössten Jaina-Gelehrten wie Abhayadeva, 
Hemacandra und Malayagiri, welche unter den Caulukyas von Anhilvâd-
Pâthan 943-1304 p. Chr. lebten, waren nicht im Stande, ein vollständig 
richtiges und idiomatisches Sanskrit zu schreiben. Auch bei ihnen kommen 
hie und da wirkliche grammatikalische Fehler vor, und von dem Prâkrit 
beeinflusste Redeweisen sowie vom Prâkrit ins Sanskrit zurückübersetzte 
Wörter sind häufig . . . 
Es giebt [viz. to-day] deshalb unter den Yatis 
sehr viele, die wohl etwas Sanskrit lesen, es aber nicht schreiben oder 
sprechen können. 
Andere sprechen es geläufig genug, aber sehr fehlerhaft. 
Man hört gleich, dass sie nur aus ihrem Dialecte übersetzen und die 
Sanskrit-Grammatik nicht ordentlich kennen. 
Nur sehr wenige aus-
gezeichnete Männer sprechen und schreiben ein erträgliches Sanskrit. Ganz 
frei von Fehlern oder falschen Wendungen ist wohl kaum ein Einziger.'1 
I am not inclined to think that the Jaina authors are the only ones 
in question who wrote and write a Sanskrit not quite congruous with 
the rules of Pänini's Sanskrit grammar. 
The author of the recension ξ 
of the Southern Pañcatantra certainly was not a Jaina ; still this recension 
contains the most faulty Sanskrit text I have ever seen. As to the 
Hitopadesa, I have given a certain instance of a chandobhañga adopted 
by its author Näräyana; see my edition of the Southern Pañcatantra, 
p. lviii. 
As to the Saurapurâna, see Jahn, Das Saurapuränam (Strassburg, 
Verlag von Karl J. Trübner, 1908), p. xxii and f. Dandin and the author 
1 This passage is quoted from the ' Zusätze und Berichtigungen appended by Weber, 
p. 102 f., to his edition and translation of the ' Pañcadandachattraprabandha. 
Ein 
Märchen von König Yikramâditya.. .. Aus den Abh. d. Kgl. Ak. d. Wissensch, zu Berlin 
1877. 
Berlin . . . 1877. 
In Commission bei F. Diimmler's Verlags-Buchhandlung 
(Harrwitz und Gossmann).' 
M 

82 
Chap. TV. 
Principles 
which guided the editor, etc. 
of the Tanträkhyäyika have already been mentioned, above, p. 80. 
I think truly critical editions will show that, like Dandin, nearly all classical 
authors occasionally committed so-called blunders1 which were afterwards 
removed from their texts by commentators or learned copyists. 
Sanskrit 
has been a living language in the Hindu courts as well as amongst learned 
Brahmans and Jainas throughout many a century in mediaeval and even 
in modern India.2 
It is nearly impossible that even good authors should 
be quite uninfluenced by the vernaculars of the countries in which they 
lived. 
In the course of time Sanskrit style, as well as the Sanskrit 
vocabulary and the employment of grammatical forms, has undergone 
strong alterations. 
Like 
Greek and Latin, Sanskrit has gone through 
an evolution such as no language can possibly escape. No modern language 
perhaps is taught with more pedantry than French. 
Yet no school 
instruction, nor even the high authority of the French Academy itself, 
was able to prevent the written language—to say nothing about the spoken 
one — from continual evolution. 
"Voltaire's language is considerably 
different from that of the best modern authors. 
Pürnabhadra, no doubt, knew Sanskrit well. 
But according to what 
I have just said, I expected to find so-called anomalies in his text, and 
though not very many, I did find them in the oldest and best MSS. 
Part 
of those anomalies and even blunders he can be proved to have taken 
over from his sources.3 
Wherever there was evidence that these anomalies were no mere slips 
of his pen, I tolerated them in his text. 
The decision was not easy in 
every case ; but as the reader will find in the text in all such cases an 
asterisk referring to my variants, he will be able to judge himself whether 
I was right or wrong in my decisions. 
1 Cp. Wackernagel, Altind. Grammatik I, p. xliv ff., esp. p. xlvii ff. 
a See my translation of the Tanträkhyäyika, Introduction, chap. I, § 4, 3 ff. We must 
not forget that in the middle ages Jaina scholars and poets have a most considerable 
share in the development of Sanskrit language and literature, and I fully consent to 
Dharma Vijaya Süri, who in a letter expresses his view as follows : ' I am of opinion 
that in the time of Hemachandra and other Ächäryas . . . the Sanskrit, I mean the 
classical Sanskrit, was the language of the áishtas ; and the learned amongst them, 
especially those whose aim it was to establish their reputation as savants, must have 
written in a style approved by the most cultivated class of people of the time. ... Hemachandra1 s 
utterances themselves must he regarded as grammar.'' 
Most of the so-called anomalies in 
the works of later Sanskrit writers must be regarded as correct language prevailing in 
their own time. 
The history of every language bristles with examples showing that 
originally wrong forms and constructions became the generally approved ones in later 
times. 
The very frequent construction ^ ¡ j fc(B«rf (a contamination of 
frtBct and 
) e.g. is not more faulty than Sie stehen (2nd person sing.) in German. 
s See above, p. 30 ff. 

LIST OF VARIANTS 
INTRODUCTION 
Page 1. 
1 arham in Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ is written in the well-known Jain fashion ; in A 
it is mutilated to a flourish resembling an e; Ν om. the diagram II 
For 
om namah §n, A : Sñsarvajñáya namah, Ν Îrlganeêâya namah II 
4 A 
däksanätye II 
A pramadäropyam II 
5 Ν pracara for pravara II 
After 
marici Pr ins. mamjañ II ΦΡΓΜ sakalakaläpäragatah, Ρ sakalakaläpäragatah. 
After °marïci°, Ν ins. °mamjañ°, om. °car cita and adds yugóla after cavana, 
omitting the visarga II 
A amarasaktinâmarâjâ ; over Mi A has a black 
spot of gamboge. 
It is clear that A originally had the reading of our 
other MSS. II 
7 Ν anamtaraêaktiê II 
8 Μ ία for bho, corr. from 
vä II 
9 A athêdam ucyate for athavâ sa Γ u II 
12 N A bhavet for dahet II 
14 M ktimán, corr. by a later hand to saktim.än II 
15 A etexäm II 
Ν om. all between bhavati and caranam [so for vyäkaranam\ 1. 16; cara-
nam is corr. to tatkaranam ; M kend[new Ymo^nusteyam II 
M tatraîko saciväk 
procuh. 
This reading, however, is the correction of a later hand. 
The 
original reading was tatraikai . . . [no more to be made out] . . . procuh ; 
A atraîke II 
18 Ν jïvitavyavisayah 
II 
19 A tad for Mmcid II 
24 Ψ 
tatrâsti, but da add. by cop. over the line between ta and tra II A om. 
näma II 
Page 2. 
1 Νpräk for dräk II 
3 A yojayisyämi II 
4 A tathyam vacanam II 
5 Pr "jñdnan na II 
Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ svanämatyägam II 
6 Ρ [not Φ] only simha 
for simhanädah II A arvalipsuh, corr. to avalipmh II M bravimi, corr. to bru 
by later hand 11 Ν aéîtivarsa II 
7 yärtha of vyâvrtta' worn off in Ρ II 
8 
M adyatamo II 
9 A sa darSayitum II 
11 M età, Ν evam for etäm II 
M 
°nvitatsû kimärän II 
12 M nivrti, Ν nivrttim II visnuSarmâpi also Hamb. MSS. 
and h II A âjagama II 
13 M mitrabhedah I mitrasamprâptih I kakälüklyam 
[corr. to "yâ\ laldhapranàêâm [corr. to cêa] à [corr. to a and, by later hand to 
αίνα \~\parïksitakâriteti II 
14 Ρ râputrâh II A adhiya II 
15 M tatah-
prakrti II A pamcatamtrakanïtiêâstram II 
17 A y o 'tra etat pathati prâyo, 
corr. to yo 'traîva pafhate nityam il 
M om. vâ ; a later hand supplies ca il 
N, A, "ÍTPrM 

84 
Variants 
BOOK I. 
Page 3. 
1 M prärabhyate mitrahheâo, corr. to "ti "dam II A prathamas tamtrak II 
A tasydyam II Ν âdyaêlokah II 
2 Φ ina. slokah before snehah, but deletes 
it again II 
3 ΨΡΡγ vinäsitah II 
4 Ν om. tad yathä II M däksinyätesu, 
corr. to däksinätye (!) Il A om. pura II Over puramdarapura gloss in Φ by cop. 
'marävatl II 
5 ΨΡΡγ kailäwsikharä° II Ρ vidka for vividha II NM "pra-
haranâvaranapa0 ; this seems to be the genuine reading II 
6 Ν "gatecra/ñla" II 
7 A 0deväyatanam II 
ΦΡΡγΜ 0parikarato" (Pr continuing "rcchita0), Ν 
"panikarato", A jmrikaro", BhL2 "parikalito" ; L1 with us II M "tocchrita, 
corr. to °tocchata II 
M 0himagire sadrSäkäraprä° 11 
8 M mahiläropam, 
corr. to "roddham II 
9 A varddhamäno näma sä" ; Ρ vardhamänanäma II 
10 ΨΡΙ^ΡγΜ om. tasya before cittam; but in Φ a nearly imperceptible 
mark refers to the inferior margin, where cop. supplies it II 
A ins. 
pi after pravecyamano II Ν ava for iva II 
11 A ins. pi after samciyamäno il 
Φ valmîkad varddhamäte, corr. to our reading II A valmtka- [2nd hand adds 
m, im]varddhate ; Ν vàlmikam iva II 
12 ΦP labdhâ for labdhäh II 
13 
M patri samnadantyâSviti II A varddhitâh for pâtre II A sampradäniyäS II 
M lokamärggenaparaksamäno II ΝΦΡγ raksamâno ; in Pr corr. to araksamâno I
14 Pr vinaiyeta II M samto II 
15 Ρ rahyana" Il ΦΡγ ins. ca after käryam, 
but Φ deletes it again II 
17 A tatäkodara° II 
18 A transp. stanzas 3 
and 4 II Pr artho for arthä, and nibadhyeta, corr. from nibadhyete II 
19 
M ta dy for na hy II A anarthavatâm II 
23 Ρ gurunanu ; Pr anupravrajya-
mánahW 24 ΨΡΜ nirvcwtya, Pr nirvarttya II Ν api prasthitah II 
26 Ν 
agre for atha II 
27 M 0ruru , corr. to °khard II 
Page 4. 
1 M "räkm" corr. to °raksasa°, for rksa ; A "citrakäraksabhayotkatäm II 
M "yodbhaväm, Il M aealanirgatodakd II 
2 Mpüräpättacorr. from °päti° II 
A "karddame ma II Ν "kotpätita" II In Φ, a nearly imperceptible deletion 
mark over c of câtibhârâd II A iakatasyati" II 
3 A dvayor for tayor II 
7 A 
pamcarátrakam II M om. na II M yavasametân, Ν vayasah sametân II In Φ 
gloss by cop. on yavasa: sambalaW 8 M om. ay am II M tad enam or 
tadêmam ; Ρ tadaînam (ρ tad enam) II 
10 M bhayâtare corr. by later hand 
to bhayäturaih for bJiayât tair II 
A om. mrsâ II 
11 A yatMsau mrto 
[sandhi!] samjl" Il A câgninâ·, Pr câgnyâdisamskârena II Ν samskrtya II 
12 A om. särthavähah II A dukkham II °kriyäm all my MSS. ; Simpl. has 
the plural II 
14 M svabhägyänä vasät, corr. to svabhâgyavaêât II Α ΦΡΡγΜ 
0karana for °kana° ; "prakärair is perhaps a mere clerical error for "prakarair II 
15 Ν om. all between avatlrnah and kakudmän II 
16 Pr karavrsx iva II 
Ν, A, ^PPrM 

Boole I 
8 5 
17 Ν °chadanair for ghattanair II 
After tisthati Ν ins. the stanza : arahitam 
tistati daivaraksitam surahitam daivahatam vinasyati II jivaty anätho 'pi vane 
visajñitah (!) krtaprayatno 'pi grhe najlvati 111 II 
19 Pr tac ca II 
21 Φ Ρ 
0lävasthänänämäni II 
22 M sarvesv èva na, corr. to sarvesu vana II M om. 
drañgapratyan, continuing with "tägrähärajanastkänesv ; Pr. "pratyamtädrähära°, 
Φ Ρ "pratyamtägrähärd ; in Φ gloss on agrah&ra : äka, with some aksara lost 
at the edge of the right margin II 
A "janasthäne, om. sv II 
23 Pr simhak 
sthânïyo. This is probably right ; cp. Tantrâkhyâyika 6,13. But L1 with the 
other MSS. II tatra caräk all our MSS. incl. L1. Cp. Introduction, p. 30 II 
24 Ν madhyavarggah II 
Pr vanämtahsthänaväsinah II 
PL1 °nasinah for 
0vâsinah. This reading is due to the form of vd in Φ, whose first spelling seems 
to have been va, corr. by copyist to va. But the correction is not clear, 
and may easily be taken for na (see our Table I, no. 3, line 2 a) II 
25 A 
pimgalah II 
Ψ Ρ Ι ^ Ρ Γ Μ sämänyah II A sämätyasasuddhajjanah II 
Ν suhrjjana, 
Φ Ρ Γ Μ Ρ sasuhrjjana, PL1 sasuhrjjanam, Φ Ρ Ρ Γ continuing cchatra° II 
A 
akrttima° IL A "sarasai" for 0rasai0 IL A °ddhatan II 
26 A anabhijüäm iva-
rajanasevitànâm II 
2 8 Φ Ρ Ι ^ Ρ Γ akâratvapu, A ekâmtaratvapura&âmrtham, 
corr. to ekamtaratva II A anik$iptâ° ; L1 with our other MSS. ; áar. 6, 17 
anutksiptä° Il A om. abhìtam 11 M 0kârmmapâtham, Ν "karmopâya II 
29 Pr 
"norma" for "paurusa II 
30 °vyakta also L1 ; cp. Introd., p. 30 II 
Φ Ρ Ι ^ Ρ Γ Μ 
"purusäkära", Ν "purusah I kära, A °purasakära° ; L·2 with us II Pr apïbhûtam 
for aparibhütam II .M °sati° for °prati° IL 
31 Pr 0prapâta for °pratâpa° IL 
M °Bamdhäranam II 
32 M apraharanam for apraharanä° IL 
33 A "grafia I 
sârâkramda\m II A aghatita\éiksi° Il Ν "täsu for "tastra" II 
PAGE 5. 
1 Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ 0vidyâti for 0vighâti II 
M °vâsa° for βnivosa° II After °sauhityam 
another hand than that of the copyist inserts in mg. of L1 : vahusâdriéyai-
kämtavihärinäm apästakämarägänuSayarasänäm vltarägänäm yathävadupabhogyam 
apämgadMrävalokitavyavahäränäm anupakärinäm ; Κ (according to Benfey's 
copy) L2 in the text: èa[L2 va for ba~\humdriyai[L·2 
kämta[Κ adds m] 
vihä[L2 sti for ha\rinâm apästa\_Κ stha for ste]kämarägänasaya [L2 °gâtaêaya" for 
"gânaêaya"^ rasänäm ya [with L1 ; only L2 "yogyam for °bhogyam\ a° a [with 
L1] ; cp. Sär. 7,2 L¡ 
3 Ν A aräjya<° II 
5 M vä for ca II 
6 Ρ °cittasya II 
7 A mada" ; Ρ om. mada II 
8 Pr asapatnepsi", A svasampannesmiksähäras II 
10 Φ mamtrayatum, Pr mamtrayatum, Ρ mamtrayarturm, L1 mamtrayartturm 
(misreadings of one vertical stroke over tu, and of two strokes forming an 
angle over mä in Φ, these strokes indicating the end of the first word and the 
beginning of the second one. Cp. vol. xi, Table II, no. 14, l a b), A mamtri-
tum II 
15 A damanakas tv äka II ΦΡ (not Pr) 0bruvlt II 
17 All our 
M S S . incl. L^L 2 "samda" ; cp. above, p. 33, n. 2 II 
Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ devâyatanam II 
Ν , Α , ^ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ 

86 
Variants 
19 A ins. sütradhärä before stkapa II 
20 Ν devatäyanam, ΨΡΙ^ΡΓΜ °devd-
yatanam; L2 arddhakftadeväyatane·, A ardhakrte\devatâyatanam II 
21 Pr rd
pätito, PL 1 'rddhayâspMtito, M 'rddhaprasphotito, corrected from the reading 
of PL1. 
The reading of PL 1 is to be explained from that of Φ, whose cop. 
writes 'rddhapâ, then, deleting pâ by two little vertical strokes (which 
the later copyists no doubt mistook for the vertical strokes destined to 
separate words), continues sphäfita0. 
See vol. xi, Table II, no. 13, 4 a II 
22 PL 1 niravädirakilako for nilchäta II 
M °khàdira° corrected to °khadira° II 
Ν 'vatistati, corr. to °te by the copyist II 
23 Pr kïliko II 
26 Pr arddhapä0, 
ΦΙι1 arddhapäsphä", Ρ arddhayä sphäΜ arddhaprasphotitacorr. from the 
reading of Ρ II 
N A "vrsanasya II 
A sthänäc câlitakUake II 
27 ΦΡΡΓΜ 
bhavadbhir·, but cp. Sär. 7, 21 II 
ΦΡΡΓΜ νediíavyam for viditam II 
Pr pari-
harttavyam II A om. iti after pari° II After iti ΦΡΡΓΜ add kathä Ili II, Ρ 
adds flourish il 
Page β. 
2 Ν °mâtrâvarttanam II 
A °mäträrtha II 
3 ΦΡΡΓΜ viêesârthatayâ II 
P vedam for cêdam II A sa I äha cal idarn ucyate II 
4 M upa for apa0 II 
9 
M vayamsi, corr. by the copyist (?) to väyasä kim II 
10 Pr ndnane, corr. from 
nädmane II 
13 Pr Ihumktam II 
14 ΑΦΡ(ηοΐ Pr)M °vamva°; Ν "vamd 
asesamalinam II 
17 A sarvaê cachragatópi II Pr sanurûpam II 
19 Ρ vada-
radarêanam, II 
21 Ρ lumkte II 
22 Pr sutarä for supürä II 
23 Ν êva-
samtostah ko purusa II 
29 Κ lämgaläbhiläsl II 
30 Pr "upakarana II 
31 
ΝΑΨΡΙι 1 PrM unmetrically : na° katham upamiyate ga°. BhL2 with us II 
32 Ρ 'bruvlt II 
33 ΝΑΨΡΙ, 1 kirn iyatâpi for kiyatâpï ; but m i is written in 
Φ by cop. on another aksara covered with gamboge ; Bh kiyaià api ; PrL2 
with us II 
Page 7. 
1 M parthivâ, corr. by 2nd hand topârthivàn II 
4 A Ihavatyu[new line] 
dä bhimatah, corr. by 2nd hand to bhavati sadabhimatah II 
5 A cd for vä II 
6 A svaspesti"spe being written on some deleted aksara by 2nd hand II 
7 
' 2 1 
A smä, corr. to «ma II Pr sailâgrem, M iailägre II 
9 M rttukamanäh. Φ jumps 
from the first so 'bravlt to the second so 'bravit (1. 10), om. one of them and 
all between them. 
But the missing text supplied by cop. in marg. 11 
10 
M samtntati II Έ jânâsi II 
I S Pr paremgitäjnäna° II 
1 6 ΝΦΡΙ^ΡΓΜΒΙΙ 
amgitair, but in Bh corr. by cop. to our reading. A L 2 with us II ΦΡΙ^ΡΓΜ 
bhäsitena II 
17 A °caktravikâraiê ca, corr. by 2nd hand to °cakra", for 
°vaktra II A. jnâyate îor grhyate II 
18 Here bh sets in with tmaprajnäpra-
bhävena II 
19 Pr "dharmma, om. sya II Over kathaya gloss in bh : tvam II 
20 A mayaîvam II bhN °nagaram pra II M kathatah II Over kathayatah gloss 
From 7, is, bhN, Α, Ψ Ρ PrM 

Book I 
87 
in bh : satah II 
23 Α Ψ Ρ L1 M savidyänäm II 
24 In bh gloss on avaman-
yeta : avagayati [read avaganayatï] Il 
25 A asty evdparam Il 
ΦΡΙ^ΡγΜ 
asmi for api ; but in Φ this reading has been corrected by cop. from api II 
26 Φ Ρ äpräptakälam, Φ with glosa on ä ·. atisayena II 
M bravan II 
27 M 
om. na II bhN viprayatvam II 
28 ^ P P r l / H p have this and the following 
line after stanza 25. The copyist of bh first wrote api oa, which he replaced 
by tathä ca. It therefore would seem, that the archetype of these MSS. 
had tathä ca and stanza 24 in the margin II 
APr abhuktam, bhu being corr. 
by 2nd hand in A from an aksara which contained a ya il Over rahasi gloss 
in bh : ekämte II 
30 A om. api ca II 
31 Over nägarikah bh gloss : caturah. II 
33 In bh gloss on bhävyam : sthätavyam II 
Page 8. 
1 In bh gloss on durvinltäh : dustacariträh II 
3 Aom. kim ca II 
7 Over 
präyena gloss in bh: hiyukto 'yam arthah II 
9 M °vasüni II 
11 In bh gloss 
on cinvamti : bhumjamti II 14 M räjnä II bhNgrähaväkyä li 15 bh1f,PLlL2M 
tadvârenaîva ; Bh na dvârenaîva (a wrong emendation) ; Pr tatdvârenêva ; A 
with us II Ν vidvâm(ta\sic \\rabhûdvârenaîva II 
16 Over yo gloss in bh : 
räjä li 
17 Inbh gloss on üsaräd: ksetrât II 
20 In bh gloss on dvesti : 
dvesam karoti II 
24 M grana for 'grago II 
In bh gloss on pure : nagare II 
25 A prabhur dvârâêrito II 
26 Ν ins. our stanzas 39 and 40 before our 
stanza 37 II The jwati \\ Φ PL1 prahravan II 
28 In A this pâda has been 
supplied by 2nd hand 11 
32 Pr amtahpuravaraih, Ν amtahpurasvaraih II In 
bh gloss on antahpuracaraih : räjnibhih II 
Page 9. 
2 Pr na krcchrêpy apy II 
3 ΜιΝΑΦΡΙ^ΡγΜ dvisan ; Bh dvùadvesaparo, 
corr. from dvisedve" ; Hamb. MSS. dvisidvemparo II bhN ΑΦΡγΜ °dvesapare. 
In Φ there is a hook over re, which probably is a deleted ¿-stroke ; Ρ L1 with us 11 
ΦΡΙ^Ργ nityam gistänäm, hence M nityam êùthânâm li Φ vallalha add. in left 
margin by cop., but the greater part of va has disappeared with part of the 
margin 11 
5 M om. the two aksaras na ku II 
8 M om. sva° II 
9 M "lopa-
mâm II 
10 A darà il bhNΨ yathäkäräh, but in Φ corr. by cop. to our read-
ing ; APL1M with us il 
15 Pr om. api ca II bh gloss on vipattim : kastam 
(or kasta) II 
20 M pragunas for sa gunas II 
21 Pr na brüyäd, na brü corr. 
from some other reading II 
22 M va for èva II Pr said II 
23 M om. 
uktarn ca II 
24 Ρ bhâginah II M om. bhoginah II M nrûyah for krûrâh II 
25 NA suremdrâ, Pr saraudrâ II A mamtrasidhyäs ca II 
26 ΜιΝΑΦΡΙ^ΡΓ 
nïcanïcajalâêrayâh (NPr om. k, in Φ h inserted subsequently by cop. before 
bhN, A, *PPrM 

88 
Variants 
èra ) ; in A corr. to "jalâsayah by smearing the r with gamboge ; M nïcânïcajalâh 
irayäh, Bh nleamcajanäirayäh II 
28 M éastrapâninâm II 
31 A om. yo II 
Page 10. 
1 Over sarmi gloss in bh pusi (read pumsi) Il Pr natilibhN nuti" for 
nati° Il bhN rdvisadvesah, PrBh tadvisidvesah, φ tadvisadvesah, PL1 tadvisat-
dvesah, A with us II 
2 bhN A^PI/PrMBh dänam, for dâna II 
3 Ν om. vä 
jnänädhikam II 4M capi II 
7 Pr tasya for tatra II 
10 M ta for na II Over 
hhrä of bhräjate gloss, of bh dr il ^PL1 Pr jjotsnâ, M protsnä II 
12 M 
saméu for santu II M yathâbhipretamanusyastiyatâm II In bh gloss on anusthï-
yatäm : krlyatäm II 
13 Pr räjnä II 
14 M bhogyaupa II 
15 M pim-
galâbhimu\kham II 
16 A athagacchatäm II M om. apa ve II A vaitralatâ II 
18 M niddiste II 
19 Between nakha and "kuliSa an aksara has been 
deleted with black gamboge in A II bh sana, corr. from sane", Ν sane0 for 
mâna II bh ayi, with gloss by glossator : komalâmamtrane ; in Ν it is not 
clear whether we should read api or ayi li 
21 In bh gloss over devapädä-
näm·. bhavatäm II 
23 M nekkosanakena II 
27 M ap for apy II 
30 In 
bh gloss on prabhavämUi : aham sama(rtha iti)uktvä ; the bracketed aksaras 
worn off II Over badhyate gloss in bh kena II 
32 M dhanyodyo, Ν dhamrsye II 
Page 11. 
1 In bh gloss on asamaih samiyamänah : kakraih (read vakraih 1) militah II 
2 ΑΨΡΙ^ΡγΜ cânu, Bh câna, bhN vanii II A èva patim li Pr om. Um 
tyaja II 
3 In bh gloss on °samgrahano° : jadavum II 
4 M y avi mani pra-
tibadhyate II In bh gloss on trapuni: tämre II 
5 In bh gloss on viranti·, 
vadati II A vibMsate II 
6 M joyitur II In bh gloss on vacanïyatâ: nimdâ II 
bh ìas.jadah after ayam, but deletes it again ; Ν ayam bhaktôyam ayamjadah II 
8 A äpüjyate ; but over jya there are two spots of black gamboge. 
Perhaps 
the original reading of A was äpürjyate, i. e. äpüryyate II fl A y adi for y ad 
api II In bh gloss on svâmy : bhavän II In bh gloss on dríyase: tvam II 
11 
ΨΡΙ^ΡγΜ "matir for "gatir II 
13 Pr tatódyama° II 
14 bhNA^PI^PrM 
lohitäkhyasya ; Bh with us II 
15 ΨΡΙ^Ργ cdtra, M cdramtra for tatra II 
A °vikrayah, corr. from °vikriyah II 
17 Pr "nam for °nah li 
19 Gloss, of bh 
supplies vïnâ in marg. II 
21 Ν mrgâlo II 
22 In bh a gloss on kauêeyam, 
which I am not able to make out with certainty (pattajülam ?) II Pr upalän II 
bh golosamah, corr. by gloss, to "mavah, and this to 0matah II 
23 Pr úammka; 
all our other MSS., incl. AL 1Bh and the MSS. H h of the textus simplicior, 
read êaêâmkam u° ; in bh this is corrected by a later hand to our reading. 
The MS. I of the textus simplicior has our reading, which must be a 
correction, as h agrees with H il 
24 A gopittago[this go being corrected 
bhN, Α,^ΡΡγΜ 

Booh I 
89 
from to\rocanä \t added by 2nd hand !] II 
25 Mprâkâêya II Pr te for kirn II 
26 Ν müsikä II A nihamtavyâpalcârini 
II 
31 In bh gloss on tän : pamditän II 
M sä ru, corrected with other ink to samru ; A samrunaddhi, 
corr. from 
sammanaddhi (?) II A °leJchä0 for "êobhâ" II 
Page 12. 
1 M pimgala 
II 
3 A transp. : svä° pra 
II 
4 bh pracchädann, 
Ν 
prachädann, ΨΡΣι1 pracchärlayamnn 
II 
A transp.: na kimcit II 
P r y a d y anâ-
khyeyam tad âdiêatu II 
6 Over dâresu gloss in bh : ílokah II A purusesu II 
8 After lhavanti, 
A ins. : päthämtaram, 
without giving another reading II 
9 Pr sane, corr. from sarvem II M om. na II 
12 M srtye for bhrtye II 
13 
A dukkham II Over sukhi gloss in bh : pumân II 
15 M pimgala II 
16 Pr 
apürvasatvam 
II 
17 M a for asya II M savvena II 
19 Pr taträ for tathä li 
20 M vägnir II PrM bhidyata II 
21 Pr tarn for tan II M svämitah II PL1 
kulakramägatavanam 
II 
bh iva, corrected by a later hand into èva II 
24 
Φ P(not L1) "präkäräh, M °prakaräh II 
M Sabdamäsamträny II 
M bhayamkä-
ranäh II 
25 Pr meya II 
29 Over darêitabhaye gloss in bh : sati II 
30 
M evohutah Ii 
31 bhNPM (not L1) na for ca after rane II bhN bhlrutvam II 
32 bhN tarn bhuvanatilakabhütam 
II M transp.: janani janayati, 
with an 
unfinished su between these two words 11 
Page 13. 
1 M éanti" for §akti° II 
2 Pr mânahlyasya 
II bh matih for gatih II 
3 
M èva for evarn Ii Over svâminâ gloss in bh : tvayâ II M dhaiyavistambhah 
li 
4 Over medasä gloss in bh : mâmsena II 
5 Fourth päda in M : yävac 
ca 
karmma dävarunvä II 
6 M 'vruvït II bhN ins. atha before katham II 
11 M 
om. äha ca II 
12 Pr vinisto II M 0räkäbhäm II 
14 M parasïîta, 
with pra 
added by 2nd hand between ra and sii over the line 11 
15 Gloss in 
bh on atha : athavä II M srêyate II 
16 M karotíti II Pr tasyâ 'säratdm ; 
bhNví'PL1M tasyäh säratäm. 
Gloss, in bh adds avagraha over the line before 
säratäm, without deleting the visarga. A tasydsäratäm ; Bh tasyäh 
'säratäm. 
éâr. 15,4: tasyâs säräsäratäm ; but in Sär. this word is followed not by jnätvä, 
but by jnätum II 
17 Pr kotukäd II 
18 Ν vasäd for harsâd II 
19 M bho-
janam äpita I van nûnam II 
21 Ν parusacarmâvaêesam 
gumthitam II 
22 M 
iva for api ; Pr kathami na II 
Page 14. 
1 M êrutvaîva II Pr medasä II bh nidhih, corr. to our reading, apparently 
by copyist II 
2 bhN vijnätum II 
5 After käryah, ΨΡ LJPrM ins. 
il flourish Ii kathä 2 li A later hand ins. kathä 2 in bh II 
6 In bh gloss on 
parigraho : stri (!) II Ν dhairyävadhairyästambham 
II 
7 bh dosäh, M vosa li 
From 12, is, bhN, ^PPrM 
Ν 

90 
Variants 
8 Ρ (not L1) om. êâstram II M om. väni II 
9 Ν ayogyâ yogyâê ca II 
10 
bhN evaîva for atraîva II ΦΡΕ1 etsvarûpam, in Ψΐι1 ta suppl. by cop. over the 
line after e, this ία being very small and rather illegible in Ψ II 
12 M 
nrtyam for krtyäkrtyam II 
13 M sunrtyasya II 
14 In Ψ gloss on dhavya-
vähe by cop. : 'gnau II Ψ Ρ Ι ^ Ρ γ Μ ca for 'pi II Pr dusvare II 
15 M nrtyah II 
bh esa, corr. by gloss, to èva II 
16 bhN Α Ψ Ρ Ι ^ Ρ γ Μ sacivair ; Bh altered : 
many ate na samam dhäryo II 
17 Φ PL 1 y add for y ady II bhN om. tad before 
gaccha II M bhadra(corr. to bhava)paddova tada gaccha II 
18 Pr madanako II 
M "sära for °mrî II 
22 M om. tavimänitäh II 
23 M om. bhavanti II 
24 M yathävad for yävad II 
25 In bh gloss on vyäpädayitum : hamtum II 
Page 15. 
2 M smäpadam, corr. to smapadam II 
5 ΨΡΙ^ΡγΜ vicimtayan II M 
äyätam II 
6 Ν yathä sarvam for yathäpürvam II 
7 bhN satyam for sattvam II 
8 M agri for api II M kivyämi° for kim svämi" Il Ν virvpyate II 
β M nûnu-
jäm II 
10 M vinâêanamh for vindêah II 
11 Ν om. tathâ ca and stanza 92 II 
13 Pr sarvadevamayaé easy a II 
14 NPr devo II 
17 Pr mürddhani for 
mrdûni II 
18 bhN^L 1 PrM samutsrtän, Ρ samustritân, A samrtsrtân ; Bh 
•with us ; see above, p. 33 II 
19 M prahatsv for mahatsv II After stanza 94, 
Ν ins. this one : gamdasthalesu 
madavärinibaddharägamattabhramadbhramarapöl·-
datalähatopi II 
kopam na gachati nitämtabalopi nägatülye(!) hale na ca lavân 
pari kopam eti 111 II 
21 M änayämi II 
M prsta" for hrsta" II 
22 M 
manasa stutim II Ν upagatah II 
23 M pady for ehy II In bh gloss on 
dustavrsabha : he II 
2 4 M nibhiko II 
bh na sïdasi for nadasîti II 
25 
ΨΡΙι τΡγ tac ca érutvá savi0 il 
26 PBh 'bruvït, corrected by the copyist of 
Ρ to 'bravît II M svämarsam II 
27 M jMnasyati 
II M mamdalam vatäsyäse II 
28 Ν pimgalakänidhäto 
II M tanvä for tac chrutvâ II 
29 M ins. anak 
between visädam and agamat II M bhadra van for bhadra bhavän, corr. to 
bJiavän by smearing (Ira with gamboge II M sädhusamävyaro II 
30 M y ad 
for taci II 
31 M sakâiàd däyitavyah II 
M bho syatyam asihitam II 
M niti 
sä II 
32 Ν gratah for yatah ; the copyist of bh first began writing ga, but 
corrected it to y a before this aksara was finished II 
Page 16. 
1 M bhümah il 
2 M cintatali or cittätah il PrM om. kvacit ; in Pr a later 
hand adds jätu in margin to be inserted before kenacit II 
3 bhN tatas for 
tat II M ta for tatra II 
5 M bhavän for bhagavato II M ida smdha II 
6 
bh xisyäΝ 
Sispà° for êaspâ° ; Pr sappägrähi bha II Φ PL1 Pr ins. tat, M te 
between 'smi and kim, M om. the punctuation II M ma for mama n 
7 In 
bh gloss over sabhayam : yathä, then an aksara which I cannot make out II 
M devatäprasädam II 
8 Pr êispabhojanà II M namdamto II In bh gloss on 
bhN, "ÍTPrM 

Book 
I 
91 
bhramanti : satväh II 
9 M camdrikävähanasya II 
11 M racâdamanapana 
for kha II In bh gloss on khädana : bhojana, and jo by the same gloss, over 
khâ II 
12 ΨΡΙ^ΡγΜ "daksanä II 
13 In bh gloss on súmate·, he II 
14 
ΨΡΙ/ΡγΜ °daksanä II M íyapathapurassaram II 
15 M vovedam for cêdam II 
16 bhN amtahsarair II 
18 Ν tathä ca II M sännipäteke II 
20 prasä-
dasamukho is a misprint for prasâdasammukho ; Pr prasammukho II Pr na, M nä, 
corr. to nä for nah II 
21 Ν om. yatah II 
22 ΨΡΙ^Ργ ¿asire II 
25 
M so for 'sau II 
27 Pr räjadhuram II 
29 M vibhäväh II Pr armena II In 
bh gloss on vïbhavâh : vitla II 
30 Ρ nrpajät II 
31 Ν yathaucita tl 
32 
M padaiiêam II 
33 Pr samjìva äha II 
Page 17. 
2 Ν transp. taira after nâma il 
3 M sakalapunaräyakah II 
4 M cairn-
vatä for ca kurvatä II 
7 Pr dvisyatäm II 
8 ΨΡΙ^ΡγΜ pärthivena II 
9 Pr 
mahate II 
12 Ν tatpuraväsino II 
14 In bh gloss on säntahpuro : sabhäryah II 
Φ änlyabhyarcitah, but corr. with a very small zigzag line to our reading. 
Hence PL1, misunderstanding Φ'8 correction : äntryäbhyarcitah II 
15 M 
grhya II 
Pr gaurabha II 
17 In bh gloss on ardha : galotho, and on 
nihsäritah : kâdhyo II Pr om. so 'pi II Ν akalusitâmtahkarano II 
19 bhN 
acimtayat, om. ca ; but the copyist of bh adds ca, correcting t to c before he 
has finished the aksara II 
22 Ν upakarttum il 
M nilajah II 
23 M 
caranokah for canakah II M ihurnktum il 
Page 18. 
1 Pr kathâcit II 
2 M dhustatvam II 
4 In bh an aksara has been 
deleted by the copyist after bho and replaced by 2 ; bhN Iho once 11 
5 Pr 
filena for dantilena II bh "jâgarena, Ν "jagarena II 
6 bhN märjanakarma-
stasyâpi, ^PPrMp märjanakarma kurvato 'pi, L1 marjjanakarmma kurbato 'pi for 
°ratasydpi. Our text gives the reading of ABh and Hamb. MSS., to which 
bh's reading evidently goes back 11 
8 bh apratihatamatis, but ma corr. by 
cop. to our reading II 
11 bhNASt'P^PrMpBh yad eva for yad divâ II 
12 bh vä, corr. by cop. to m II 
14 M y adi vapäyam II Second pida 
in Pr: nrnäm hrdayasamsthitam II 
15 M sagüdham II 
16 bhN om. 
visaye II 
17 Pr jalpati II 
19 After tathä ca, Ν inserts this stanza: 
dürodäracaritracitravibhavam dhyäyamti cânyam dhiyä I kenêcham märthatotha-
vadiva premdsti vämabhruväm 111 II 
21 bhNPr vämalocanä II 
22 M om. 
ksano masti II Prprärthayatä II 
23 M upajnäyate II 
Page 19. 
4 M prasädapadmwro II 
6 Pr deva for eva II 
13 bhBhK dyütakäre 
ca for dyütakäresu. The MSS. I h of the textus simplicior with us ; H dyïï-
bhN, SfTPrM 

92 
Variants 
takäresu II 
Pr om. satyarn II 
15 In bh gloss on madyape : nare, and on 
tattvacintä : jnänam II 
17 Ρχ· om. va after anyasya il 
19 M ¿ for iti II 
20 In bh gloss on viskambkitam : ägatam(\) II 
21 ΦΙι1 (not Ρ) gorambhako II 
22 M râjaprabhâdadurttalito II 
bh damtalikah il 
PL1 (not Φ) svayam nigra-
hakarttä ca II 
Page 20. 
1 Φ PL1 PrM iti tatah irutvä II 
2 Φ (not L1) gorambhakasya, Ν gora-
kasya II 
5 Pr sa Ai sarvatra püjyate II 
7 Pr garäbhütim II In bh gloss 
on parabhùtim·. paräbhavam II 
8 M vilasya for vilapya II Pr vilaksyamanäh, 
PL1 vilaksamänah, both omitting sodvegah il Pr gauram for gorabham II 
11 
M vrsto for drsto II 
12 bhN om. gatvoväca, om. tarn II 
19 M sa mârjana II 
20 M vibhitïbhaksanam II 
21 bh atra ut-ut am for aprastutam II 
22 bh 
y odasi, corr. by cop. (?) to vadasi ; Ν nudasi II bhN krtvä for matvä II In bh 
gloss on vyäpädayämi : hanmi II 
24 M dyütäkrtayä II 
Page 21. 
1 M vesi for vedmi II 
2 M ma for mama, ρ om. mama II 
3 1í'PL1Prp 
rájña cimtitam, M räjnär vititam for räjä II M kä for karma kurvatä cirbhitikä II 
4 bhN yaihdyam, mamdyam II 
6 bh 'sammänena, Ν 'sanmänena, Pr only 
sanmän, with viräma under the two m II 
7 M ta for na II M râjanrtyâni II 
9 Pr nijäbharanäni II 
10 M svâdhirâre nayojayâm âsa II 
11 M ne yûja-
yati II After iti, ^PI^PrMp ins. trtlyâ kathêti II 
14 Pr deva II 
15 M 
"lamkrtadaksina" Il bh Ν Pr dahana" Il 
16 ΨΡΙ^ΡΓΜρΒΙι ayi for api·, in 
Φ pi after ayi deleted with gamboge II 
17 Φ Ρ ϋ Μ (not Prp) nivasatUi, 
in Φ rather invisibly corr. to our reading II 
18 In bh and Φ over vayasya 
gloss: he II M meduja" formadbhuja n 
19 Pr °vihärino ajasram II In bh 
gloss on ajasram : niramtaram II 
20 bh "rautva" for °raudracorr. by a later 
hand to our reading II 
. 21 Over äjnäpayati gloss in bh : bhavän il 
23 
Pr svairam praväram II 
25 Ν "prägallhena II Over stokair in bh gloss : 
svaljpaih II 
26 Pr vijojya II 
27 bhN kevala II bhN mamtrayet I, which 
a later hand in bh corrects to mamtrayetâm, Il 
28 M éesasarvopi II 
bhN 
mrgojano, M mrgaparijânâ II Φ PL1 M ρ dûrïkrtas II 
Page 22. 
1 In Ψ, °bädhitä has been corr. by a later hand to °bâdhitau ; PL1 ρ 
ksudhävyädhitä II 
2 PrM om. yatah II 
3 M atha connatam II 
5 Ν 
yatah for tathä ca II bhN samgrämasamyuktäh II 
7 Φ PL1 PrM ρ anyac ca II 
Ν kurvamti, in spite of yo II 
8 Pr artsitä II 
9 Pr mäsädibhir II 
10 Ν 
bhûpâ II In bh gloss on cikitsakäh : vaidyâ, with a small visarga added over 
the line II 
11 bh êûdrânâm, Ν Südränäm for müdhänäm II 
Pr pamditah II 
bh N.^PPrM 

Booh I 
93 
12 bh pramäthiditäm, thi del. by cop. Il M gahamedhinâm II 
13 ΜιΝΑΨ 
PI^PrMp ganikä; Bh with us II ΦΡΙ1 êalpinah, M Salpita il 
14 M pri-
ksamte II 
17 Ν aprasädJianatäm II 
18 Pr savo parijanah II 
22 In bh 
gloss on ambikâsutah : dkrtarästra II 
24 M ins. u between ca and gacchatah II 
M unmärggaväcyatä II M mahämräträh ; bhNA mahämätyäh, Bh mahämätya, MS. 
H of Simpl. mahämätyä ; MSS. of Simpl. Ih and the Φ-class with us II In bh 
gloss on samïpagâh (instead of on mahâ°) ·. ädhoranäh II After our stanza 121, 
Ν ins. : attum. vämchati êâmbkavoh ganapater äkhu ksudhârttah pJianih tam cai 
kraucaripoh éa èva girisutäsimhopi nägänanam I iccham [misread for ittham\ yatra 
parigrahasya ghatanâm íambhor api syät grhe tatranyasya katharn na bhävijjagato 
yasmät svampo hi tat II 
25 bh êasyaihojl II In bh gloss on karsitäh : 
dhrtäh II 
26 Pr svämin II 
Page 23. 
2 Ν pradeie for deêe II In bh gloss on parivräjako : samnyäSi II 
3 In 
bh gloss on süksma : onirn II 
4 Pr mahatä II 
5 In bh gloss on na . . . 
νiévasati: na viêvâsam λ'caroti II In bh a mark over kaksäntarät, • but in the 
margin only aull 1, without a gloss II 
6 M atha, om. vd II M vedam II 
9 M rivittäpa for paravitt&pa° Il 
ΨΡγΜ Hra mâtrâm, .PL1 'tra mätram for 
'rthamäträm II 
10 Pr vyacimtayatvät l katham II 
16 Φ nâvisvah, sta being 
added over the line by cop. over èva; hence PL1 ndvisvahsta, M nâviêvasa I, 
Prp naviwastah, this reading being corrected in ρ by another hand to our 
reading II 
17 Ν karttum for orti II 
18 Pr Iravänah II 
'22 Pr om. 
devaêarmâ η 
Page 24. 
2 Pr om. this line ll 
3 prathame also A and Hamb. MSS. and h. Cp. 
1.1 ; Bh ädye for prathame II Pr matim II 
4 Φ Ρ Ρ γ Μ B h htyamänäm, nä being 
corr. in Φ by cop. from ne ; L1 ksiyamänämesu II 
6 Φ samjâïte, corr. by cop. 
to our spelling II 
7 Pr kâyai II Ν vetti for citte II 
10 Pr dï(new line)-
dìksita mamtrena II 
11 M muspam II 
12 Over limgasya gloss in bh : 
hara II 
IS M de, om. vaêarmâ präha II 
17 Ν om. yatah II 
18 M 
samgäramt for sangät II 
19 M kubhanayät II M khagaulopäsanät II 
21 
bh and MS. h of Simpl. stri, corr. in both these MSS. by gloss, to hrîr, which 
is also the reading of A p. MSS. HI of Simpl. stri II M prasädäd for pra-
mädäd II 
24 bhN te näma for tena me II 
Page 25. 
2 b h ^ om. all between anayat and tathapi, 1. 3. But in Φ the missing 
words are supplied in margin by cop. (sopi hastapäd . . . marddanena patri. . . 
nayanädikay . . . paricaryayä tarn . . . paritosam anay . . ., the dots indicating 
aksaras which are lost in the MS. with part of the margin). All the other 
bhN.Sl'PPrM 

94 
Variants 
MSS. of the Φ-class including L1 are complete II M pavitrakänayanädikayä il 
9 Pr °íyaspa° for °éisya° Il M ka&eidagrämätrargnärthar^ Il 
10 M °träsehanä° 
for °trârohana II 
12 M om. athaîvam tasya gacchato II 
13 M α [new line]-
târya II 
14 ΦΡΙ^ΡΓΜ devärca II 
15 yâgeêvaraê ca with us Φ PL1 and h ; 
Bh and Hamb. MSS. jâgesvaraê ca; bhNA yâgeharasya, corrected by 
the copyist of bh himself to our reading ; PrMp jogeSvaraê ca II 
16 M 
säthamvadhänena II 
18 M om. °guna II 
19 L1 tävat bahudayûtJia ; Ρ 
tävat vahudayütha II bh huduyugala", Ν hûdayugala , Pr hudayugalam, ΦΡΙ^Μρ 
huduyugalam; ABh with us II 
20 M nûpi for bhûyo 'pi II M samupatya II 
21 bh praharator, r being added, as it seems, by a later hand. Ν with the 
other MSS. 11 M 0pratïbahacintah II 
22 Ψ gomäyus tayor, s being corr. by 
somebody, who took ta for w, to bh (readinggotnäyu bhûyor) ; PL1 gomäyusüyor II 
Pr vicimtayat II 
Page 26. 
1 lÄjumbuko II M samghatti II 
2 Ν äSyatUi II 
5 bhN^PL^Prp 
Socyamäno, M éovyamâno ; ABh with us II In bh gloss over uddiSya : smrtvä II 
6 Pr om. ägacchati tâvad II 
8 Pr mâtram II 
10 Pr samucchäya II Ψ Ρ L1 Pr 
pütkartum II 
12 ^PI^PrMp evamvidham for evarn lahuvidham II In Ψ, 
vayarji has been corr. by a later hand to aham II MSS. camdhabhütineti (bh 
vasddha") ; corr. of Φ adds in marg. musitah II 13 M sanaih only once II 
14 
Φ likam ; cop. adds ko in marg. ; PLJPrM kolikam II Over °hrte in bh gloss : 
nimitta II 
IS M pravitìtam for praca0 II 
16 M süyedhi for süryodhä II Ν 
tavämchatikam ; M tavâtika II 
18 Cop. of Φ yyo, a later hand adding apranä 
in marg. ; bhN apranäjyo, Pr sapranäyyo II bhN süryodhä II 
Page 27. 
4 ΝΦΡΣ1 PrMp koliko ; bh with us II 
5 bh saskrtya II 
8 M om. 
nâ devada II 
10 bh duhsaqicaräsu ; Ν duhsamcäräsu, but corr. by cop. to 
bh's reading II 
11 In bh patyur corr. by a later hand to pabhpur u After 
stanza 133 Ρ (not L1) ins. tathä ca II 
12 N paryamkëpy ästaranam ; ΦΡΙι1 
paryamke «vastaranam, M paryamke sthästaranam, Pr paryayike svasteranam, ρ 
paryyamkasyasta ; bh with us, but °sv ä" (which may easily with Ν be misread 
as °py a"), corr. by a later hand to °sv i° II Ν manoharäm iayyäm II 
13 bh 
cauryataralabdhäh, corr. by cop. to cauryaratalabdháh ; Ν cauryarataladhbâ li 
16 Pr parapum, then one aksara smeared with gamboge, then samsaktä II 
17 ΦΡΙΛΡΓ devaêarmmano, M devaSarmmanä II 
Ν uväca for äha II 
M bho 
bho gavan II 
20 Ν bhartâ for tadbhartä II 
21 ΦΡ^Ργ ρ skit alan, Ν khalan, 
M svalan II 
22 Pr grhìtagrh%tamadya° II bh vyäghutya, corr. to vyävrtya, as it 
seems by copyist; Ν vyävrtya II 
23 ΦΡΙ^ΡΓ kolikas, M kälikas, Ρ kaulikas II 
bhN, SfTPrM 

Booh I 
95 
Page 28. 
9 bhN pratihrtavacanam II 
10 bhNA^PL1Bh tavapavâdam, Pr tavd-
padam, M tavädam for tavapaväclam il 
11 bhN karisyämi II 
13 M 
drdhabamdhane nadvä II 
14 ΨΡΙι1 PrM kolikam II 
16 M sä äha ι aSya 
mamdvasthäm II 
17 M käliminam for käminam II Pr asminn for atrdsminn II 
18 PI^M samäga iti II 
19 M maîva II Pr om.yatah Ii 
20 NPr visa-
masvädu II 
21 Pr tarn for tan II bhN manyate for manye II ΨΡΙ^Ρι· 
íaméitam, M éaéitam ; in Ψ gloss by later hand : üäghitam II 
22 Ν om. 
tathâ ca and stanza 139 II 
24 M tarunyaphalabhâja II 
Page 29. 
2 M bamihah II 
3 ΜιΝΨΡΓ bhavaty for bhajaty, in Ψ corr. twice to 
our reading, but ja twice deleted again. PL1 with us ll 
4 Pr t for tat u 
5 bh yatih, but corr. to our reading by cop. II 
6 PL1 pralodhah 11 
7 Ψ 
tvâm for tvam II 
8 bh^PI^PrM tathaiva tathâ" ; ABh with us (only 
°§ti°). MSS. HI of Simpl. only tathdnusfite, h tathdnustito II ΨΡΙ,1 Pr kolikah, 
M kälikah II 
9 M irne for ksane II M "rata for "gata" li 
10 M rusa" for 
partum II. 
11 Mpurmam ca da nadasi II 
M tas tvâm for tat tvâm II M 
êrarabhedayân na, om. kimoid üce I so 'pi Ihü II 
13 Ν » for sâ II 
17 
ΨΡΙ^Μρ "caritam II Ν om. all the text between apaSyat and svagrham abhyetya ll 
18 vî'PL1PrM(not p) kolika" ll 
19 bh svagrham âgatya ; but the «-stroke 
has been deleted, and ga has been corrected first to ma, then to y a, and over 
it bhe has been written. All these corrections have been made by the copyist 
himself II 
20 ayi, not api, before éivam, also the Hamb. MSS. and h ll 
21 
M vam for êivam II 
22 M mayaìg for ndyam II 
23 M anuyo for bhüyo II 
Page 30. 
1 M Bh barßdhaki II Ν säpeham II 
2 M dhig only once II ΨΡΙι1 PrM 
(not ρ) ins. 'yam I (PrM omit l) after ko 11 Pr pativratim 11 
3 Ν ins. sane 
before lokapâlâh ll β M om. ahaê ca ; ρ divâ ca for ahas ca II 
14 Ν om. all 
between vismayamanâ (sic!) and idam äha II 
17 In bhBh gloss on uêanâ: 
Sukrflh ll In bh gloss on veda : jänäni (sic !) II 
23 M om. purusair yatas täh II 
Page 31. 
2 Ν has exactly our text ; but the copyist himself corrects his reading 
to hrdi hâlâhalam èva kevalam ll 
5 bh °bhuvcmam ll 
β Ν kapataêatamayam II 
9 Ν diéos II 
10 Pr vane, Ν pravacane for ca vacane ll Ν mâdyam ll 
11 
In bh gloss on kathitam·. kavibhik ll 
12 PL1 om. guno ; M gune ll 
20 After stanza 149, Ν ins. : samudravïcîva calasvabhävä samdhyâbhrarekhêva 
muhûrttarâgâh strïyah krtärthä purusam nirarthakam nipiditâlaktakavat tya-
jamti I 61 II 
bhN.^PPrM 

96 
Variants 
P a g e 32. 
3 Ν äcaranlyam II 
5 bhN dväram sthito ; Hamb. MSS. dväradesasthito, 
h dvâradeêasthêpi II bhN "krtyotsakatayä II 
7 Pr ksaura for patera II 
9 
ΨΡΙΛΡγΜ samagra for samasta (L1 °kmrbhämdä0) Il M krodhävistah sa[& later 
hand adds n\s tasyäh II 
IO Ν praksitavän II ΦΡΙ^Μρ athânyasmin ; Pr om. 
athasmin II 
11 bhN A ^ P I / P r M p B h püt° for phüf 
ιι Ν päpinanena II 
14 
M om. näpitam II M om. dreßaprahärair jarjarikrtya II 
15 In Φ gloss on 
dharmâ° : . . . sabhäm (the dots indicating some aksaras lost with part of 
the margin) II 
17 Ν svarädesu II M nodharam II 
19 M °varnnaêamkita0 II 
22 bhN lalätah sve" II bhN bhürim II 
23 ΜιΦΙ^Ργ kampyamänam, Ρ 
kapyamänam, Ν kapyammânam ; ΜΑ with us. 
Bh kampamänas tv a II 
24 
Ψ PL 1 tasmä for tasmäd ; in Φ a nearly invisible t added over the line ll 
P a g e 33. 
2 M vrstah for hrstah ll 
3 Ν sämarsa II M êuci II 
4 ΦΡΙ^ΡΓΜ 
"caritro, but in Φ corr. from our reading ll 
5 bhN ärosyatäm 11 
6 M 
cadhyadhänam ll 
7 M om. dharmâdhikrtân ; Pr dharmmädhitän II Ν °naîva 
for °naî§a ll 
9 In bh, huda has been corr. from ìiudu by the copyist II 
12 bhNAΦPL 1PrM om. vrtt&nta, reading only trayam api. 
Our reading is 
that of the Hamb. MSS. and of Bh. 
The MS. h of Simpl. has a gap 
here ll 
1 3 M vimucya èva vronu II 
1 4 M avadhd. 
ΜιΦΡΡΓΜ transp. : roga-
bhäk ca. 
NApBh with us. 
L1 om. ca. MSS. H I of Simpl. [h has a gap 
here] : ca rogavän n 
1 5 bh(not Ν) ΑΨΡΙι 1 PrMp om. this line. 
In bh it 
has been supplied by corrector (reading vyamgata). 
Bh and Hamb. MSS. of 
Simpl. have this line (Hamb. MS. Η reading hy esä, I Jiy età for tesäm), Bh apa-
râdho for °dhe. The MS. h of Simpl. has a large gap here ll 
16 ΑΦΡΜ 
nâêikcicchedah II Ν drstvámta° II 
18 M samyamsthäpya ll M kuyuddhene" ll 
19 After "adi, ΦΡΓ add hatha ll 4, Ρ adds kathä 11 flourish II à ; M kathä I 4 ; 
ρ : cathurthï katM 4 II ; Bh caturthi kathä II 
20 ΦΡΜ buddhispharanam II 
21 bhNAΦPPrMp om. all the text between variate and damanaka, 1. 25. 
It has been supplied in our text from L2Mii2BhK, which, however, omit 
pihgalakah, 1. 22 (but see àâr. A 39 to A 40) 11 
23 Bh mahäräjo 11 
24 Bh Ihrtyai väryam 11 
P a g e 34. 
2 M mahatva for mahac ca II 
4 Pr S vid, bhN ΑΦΡΜ kid for svid ; Bh 
a horizontal stroke marking a missing aksara (for äho), and strid for svid 11 
6 Pr gwnatilomakam ll 
7 Pr ekatamasyâbhâve II M om. abhäve ll 
8 Pr 
yugad vä ll 
10 Pr mrga, om. yä ll 
bhN pätam ll 
Ν iti for ityädi II 
M 
taira käpajesu varttate, om. majair vya° ko II 
11 M varttate II 
12 Pr 
asamiksita saddosa," II Ν "êravanam II 
13 ΜιΝΦΡΙ^ΡγΜρ bamdhavadha-
b h N , ΨρΡγΜ 

Booh I 
97 
cchedavidhir (L1 vatn), A bamdhuvicJiedavidhir ; Bh and Sär. with us II 
bhN 
"lablie for °lobho II 
14 M uvati for bhavati II 
15 In Φ gloss by cop. over 
drava of °vidrava : näsa ; hence M "vinâêa for "vidrava ; Pr "vinâsadrava ; bh 
°tMr ava", but corr. by cop. to °vidvacawhich is the reading of Ν II 
ΦΡΡΓΜ 
0 vrstir, L1 "vfsti II 
16 Pr om. pldanam II 
18 M ató for api II M prati-
lokam II 
20 After variate, Pr inserts evam êesesv api gunesu II 
21 Φ 
$aspabh(yji° corr. by cop. to saspahhqji°, which is Pr's and P's reading ; L1 
savyabhojïdharmasv eva ; bh ¿asyalhoji" II 
22 Pr e, om. va prâyena II 
24 
bhN vaktavyam for tat katharn II M 'bruvït II 
27 Ν vinâsitah II 
28 Pr 
om. katham etat II 
Page 35. 
5 M ava for eva II 
bh °nirvedanapi, Ν "nivedanâpi, tenapakära being 
corrected by the copyist from tenapakäri"·, ΦΡΡΓΜ tendpakärinirvedanenapi ; 
A tenâpakâranirvedatôpi ; Bh with us II M eiraparicita n 
8 Ν apamänena II 
9 Bh nipatyâbruvlt II 
10 M mämänena II 
11 Pr evam, M evvä for eva II 
14 bhN 0sama II 
17 bh 0nivftih, Pr °nivfttih II 
18 ΨΡΒΙι pränaSamsaye, M 
prânammsaye ; L1 with us II bh dukhaparïbhâgo, Ν ΨΡΙ,1 PrMp duhkhaparïbhâgo 
(L1 "bha" for °bhâ°, M °'gâ for °go), A dukkhaparlbhâgo ; ta and bha are very 
similar in the old MSS. ; Bh duhkhapañto II 
19 M rosita for cirositä II 
21 ΦΡΜρ °culakena, Bh "calakena ; L1 jïvati thahlakena II M ca for vâ II 
22 M rosita for cirosita II 
Page 36. 
1 Ν asydparädham karisyäsi II 
2 bhNBh y ad for y ady II 
4 Φ tathä 
for yathä, but ya written by cop. over ta II 
5 M sämarthyam il 
8 M ti 
for sati II In Φ gloss onprâptakâlam : avasarocitam II Pr "pätäd for 0ghâtâd II 
9 M paribhävam. 
In Φ gloss on paribhävitam : jiiâtam II 
10 Φ durâtmanâ, 
corr. to durätmä II 
13 Ν kulajätä II 
17 ΦΡΙ^ΡΓρ sfgäla äha, M éfgàQ 
aha II 
19 Ν garantire kacho bakah II 
20 M 0bhaksä° for °bhaksana II 
bhNΦ PL1PrM sarastlre ; Bh sarastlrai ; A with us II 
21 bhN bhaksayann II 
22 ΦΡΡΡΓρ om. ca II M om. kuUrakah II Pr sma for sa II 
23 ΦΡΙ^Μ 
mama for marna il 
Page 37. 
2 NPr äsvädatä II 
3 bhM abhyäUtam II 
4 ΦΡΙ/ vrddhäbhäve, corr. 
in Φ to ruddhäbhäve, which ìb the reading of Pr ; M maruddhâbhâve for mama 
vf II bhNΦPL:ιPrM asyäcchedo·, Bh sukhavftter äcchedanam bhävUi vimanäh II 
5 bhN ityähitam, ΦΡΜ abhyahitam, Pr atyähitam, corr. from Φ's reading ; L1 
amihitam. ABh with us II 
6 ΦΡΡτΜρ matsyabamdhanänäm, L1 matsya-
vamdhanânâm, Bh matsyabamdhinäm II 
7 In Φ gloss onvyähärak : vacanam II 
M om. tatra svah II 
Q M. praksepyate \\ M nagara&amïpyahradas II bh(notN) 
ΑΦΡΙ/ΡΓΜ(ηοΐ Bh) om. yo II 
9 Pr om. all between vrtti and Sokend 
bhN, ^PPrM 
o 

9 8 
Variants 
1. 10 II 
10 M "vivrtto for 0nitrito II 
12 M ψΤΐ: for bhrâtah II 
15 M 
ma for mama II 
16 Pr agädha II 
ΦΡΡγΜρ samkrämayitum, L1 éamkrd-
mayitum II 
17 M ma for mâma II 
18 Ν om. mâm II 
21 M svajlvitam, 
corr. b y 2 n d h a n d to svakajl° IL 
2 2 b h N duMamatim ; Φ Ρ Ι ^ Ρ Γ ρ dvMam, 
i n ρ corrected, b y a l a t e r h a n d , to o u r r e a d i n g II 
M dustamatellïnam ava-
svasya cittena ; A dustamatir amtalllnam, eva vihasya ; Bh mamdamatir amtarlllnam 
avahasya II 
4 ' P L 1 P r M p t r a n s p . evam a n d samarthitavän ; A B h w i t h b h N II 
2 3 b h edam f o r evam, corr. b y cop. f r o m evam II 
M ya, f o r mayâ II 
2 4 
M 
pra\new 
linö\jnäya II 
P a g e 
3 8 . 
1 Mpradera II 
2 Φ Ρ Ρ τ Μ ρ sametye [ p a d d . vam\ vacanät bh%, L 1 same-
ty evaca bhu II 
b h N om. 'pi II 
4 M ma for marna II 
6 M ins. etadw/a-
puitena b e f o r e etadïyapiSitavisesam II 
P r "vuesanapürvam f o r "visesam a" Il 
7 
M vinayati f o r viyati II 
12 Ν svarstho II Ν kulîrahena 
II s P P P r M p t r a n s p . 
mahatï matsyâ" ; L 1 hulîrenâdho 'valokayitâ ma, t h e n b l a n k f o r t w o 
a k s a r a s , 
t h e n mahat matsyasthi° II 
15 M keci[2nd 
h a n d a d d s i n m a r g . : t vairivi\ 
cahanâh il 
16 Ν ρ a d d ca a f t e r tathâ\ P r tad yathä f o r tathä II 
23 
M 
avalithasä II 
24 PL 1 utpathapannasya II 
P a g e 
3 9 . 
3 Ν 
om. na kñpati Ii 
4 P r om. krte II 
6 b h N ^ P I / P r M êira-
ccliedam ; B h Sirahchedam ; A Sarachedam avän, avän corr. b y corr. t o avöptavän II 
9 bhN tacchiraeihnam II 
10 Pr natidüra II 
12 Φ Ρ samdnïtâh, L1 samä-
gatäh II 
1 4 Ν 
o m . a l l b e t w e e n bravimi a n d èrgala, 1. 16 II 
A f t e r iti, 
ΨΡΙ/ΡγΜ kathä, ρ hatha 15 II, Bh jtamcamä hatha II 
15 M om. katliaya II 
P I ^ B b vidham II 
16 4 * B h gacehat, P L 1 gacchan f o r gacchatu II 
17 Φ M 
pratimadino II 
1 8 M pradakipatu 
II 
20 Φ Ρ Ι ι 1 kasyaci·, i n Φ a v e r y d i m 
t a d d e d o v e r t h e line II 
21 P L 1 "sütram muhta II 
23 
Μ Ι Ν Φ Ρ Ι ^ Ρ Ι · 
H a m b . M S S . tarn ; A B h a n d S i m p l . h tan ; M varsadharäs vetam Uyamânam II 
P a g e 
4 0 . 
1 
Φ Ρ Ι ^ Ρ γ Μ ρ om. tat II " Φ Ρ Ρ Ρ τ Μ ρ praksipya II 
4 b h yathäbhila-
hhitam, Φ Ρ Ι ι 1 P r M p yathábhiliútam II 
Φ gatâm, corr. to gatä, w h i c h is 
t h e 
r e a d i n g of P L 1 II 
6 b h upäna f o r upäyena II 
Ν hitarn f o r hi tat II 
A f t e r 
iti 
Φ Ρ Ι ^ Ρ ι - Μ ρ 
ins. hatha, a n o t h e r h a n d a d d i n g 6 i n ρ ; B h sarti hathâh il 
10 Myäti II 
11 b h N M latra, P r tat f o r tan na\\ 
12 b h o m . tasya II 
I n M 
the first t w o p ä d a s r u n t h u s : yasya bu\ddha su kuto balam II 
13 P r iafikena II 
14 Ν om. äha II 
17 bhN mrgocchddanam, Pr mrgocchedanam, Φ mrgocchedanam, 
A P L 1 M B h mrgochedanam ( i n A corr. f r o m mrgocchddanam b y cop.). 
F o r o u r 
e m e n d a t i o n see á a r . 25,13 a n d V a r i a n t s 4 1 , 4 ; I n t r o d . p . 3 3 II 
Μ ι Ν Φ Ρ Ι ^ Ρ γ Μ 
duxtasya f o r drstasya ; B h w i t h u s II 
1 8 b h N gilitvâ II 
19 b h dtnämanä, 
b h N , 
^ P P r M 

Book I 
99 
corrected by glossator to our reading ; Ν »«(deleted by copyist)dmd(md 
del. by cop.)«« II 
20 ΦΡΜρ vijñapayatum, Pr vijnäpayatwm, L1 vijñayanum II 
bhN param loka II atinrêamsena glossed upon by glossator of bh with nimdi-
tena II 
21 bhN nisphäranasarvasatvocchädanakarmand, Φ Ρ Ρ γ Μ nihkärana-
sarvasatvocchedana , L1 nikäranasarvasalvochedana", A «¿ò'[!] käranasarvasalvo-
cchedana ; Bh alani deva paralokaviroddhenatinrSamsena sarvasatvänäm nihkdra-
chedena karmmanä falena. See Sär. 25, 16 and our 1. 17 II 
22 Φ M 'riha for 
'rthe II 
23 Ν nati for täni II 
24 Ν tathä ca ; in bh corr. writes ho or 
Seo over a of apavädo II Φ yeca nipratyayo, corr. by cop. to yena cdpratyayo, 
which is the reading of PI^PrM ll 
25 bhN tena for yena ll Pr ladhah n 
Page 41. 
2 bhNM vindêanah ll 
4 bhN °locchâdanam, ΑΦΡΡΓΜΒΙι 0locchedanam, 
L1 °lochedana II M yam for yatkdranam vayam II 
5 In bh gloss on svdmina : 
tarn II bhN "sthitasyevcT II M edrakena II 
6 Pr devasvakïya" for devaklya0 II 
7 ΦΡΓΜρ evam, PL1 eva for esa 11 
9 M itha ksyäpah 11 bh mustim, Ν 
musti ll 
11 Φ PL1 j ä'ite, in Φ corr. to our reading by corr. II Φ Ρ rtrpür, 
L1 rnrptir, M rkrti for trptir ll ΦΡ (not LJ)p katliam ca nah ll 
12 Pr nrpati II 
Φ PL1 ρ pälay e II 
14 ΦΡρ gau durhyate, in ρ corr. to duhyate\ L1 go 
durhyate II bhN ha for ca II Ν tayä for tathä II bhprajäh corr. by cop. to 
prajä il 
19 ΦΡΙ,1 tadva lokal·, in Φ corr. by corr. to tadvat lokal·, which is 
p's reading II 
20 M yänäni II 
22 Pr lokânuhakarttârah II 
23 M ksa 
for ksayam II Φ PL1 (not M)p yäti II Φ Ρ êamêayah, ρ íammyah, L1 êamêaya II 
Page 42. 
2 Φ PL1 ρ sarvänn II Φ PL1 bhaksayiksdmîti II 
3 bhNΦPL1Prp nivrtti, 
M nùmidi, ABh nivrti ; in A corr. by corr. to our reading ll ΦΡΙ^ΡγΜρ 
ekah svajdti II 
5 M gatasyâ° for va tasya0 II 
8 bhNAΦPL1PrMp âjn&ta, 
Bh äjnälah for äjMpita II 
9 Pr vadho bhavati II 
11 For ihódyama 
bhNΦPPrp mahodyamaL1 madyodyama", M mähädyamaA adyama , corr. by 
corr. to udyama ; Bh with us II 
14 In bh gloss on vidhäya'. krtvâ ll Pr 
vyâkuyahr0 ll 
16 Pr °nâ for "ni II 
18 Pr ac for anyac II Pr laghusaram ll 
19 bhNBh ekam for ekas II 
20 Φ laghur, with ta added by cop. over the 
line between ghu and r ; hence PL1 laghutar II 
21 bhN aparämdhä dm for 
apa" tväm II Pr präptah for prätah II 
23 bh na vanya" ll 
24 Pr sav-
varam u In bh glossator adds tv am above nivedaya 11 
Page 43. 
1 Φ damsträ, but gato added over the line (by cop. 1) ; Ρ damMräma, L1 
damstdmaîoY damstrâgatoW M ò/lavisi II Ν sasakak, om. äha II 
4bhNAΦPPl· 
smaramtah, M smaratam·, Bh anumaramtah ; pHh morata, I mar at II 
5 Pr 
bhN.'í'PPrM 

100 
Variants 
mamdamamdamateh, but the second anusvära del. by cop. il 
6 Ν tatah 
svenâbhihitam, Ρ tatastMndbhihitam II Φ Ρ y ad devam, ρ yad evam II 
8 Ρ 
varttim for vartitavyam II 
12 Ν svâmï il 
13 Φ Ρ dyaddevam for yady evam II 
Over darSaya gloss of bh adds tvam il 
14 Φ Ρ caura [Φ new line]caurasim-
ham II bhNAí'PPrMp yenêdam, Bh yenênam II 
1 7 Φ Ρ tamn na II 
Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Β Ι Ι 
katham ca nah II 
18 Ψ in the first päda näksyät, corr. to na syät, apparently 
by corr. Il M paräbhavam II 
20 Pr svabhürihetoh II 
21 M du for durgän II 
22 M visvambhitäh II M duhkhasädho II 
23 Ν räjnäm ca for gajänäm II 
Pr laksana II 
Fage 44. 
1 Ν näkärastho II 
3 M samät for samädemd II ΜιΦΡρ Mranyakasipor, 
Pr hiranyakasyapor, A harinyakaêipor, Ν Bh and Hamb. MSS. with us ; h 
dharinya" corr. by 2nd hand to our reading II 
6 bhNA'í'PPrMpBh bhümi·, 
Hamb. MSS. and h with us II 
7 M ma for me II 
9 Pr nayat II 
12 
ΦΡΓ mänotsäho, Φ with a small vertical stroke over tu to indicate the end of 
the word, this stroke meeting the lower end of an avagraha of the preceding 
line ; PL1, misreading this : mänotsähor tu ; cp. vol. xi, Table II, Nr. 15, 4 
right-hand margin. A real r appears in durggam, 1. 2. 
M mänotsähe II 
17 
^PPrMpBh samutsakah II 
18 Pr yämtiw 
21 M nivarttete II Pr 
Slrnnamdamna II 
22 Φ Ρ (not ρ) tathânena for tavânena II 
24 Pr uktagre ; 
Ν uktvä, om. gre II M om. tatah ιι 
Φ Ρ (not Pr)Mp kimeit, corrected in ρ 
to kamcit II 
Page 45. 
5 Pr °êabden II 
7 Φ matvâtmanam, Ρ matvä ätmanam II 
10 After iti, 
ΦΡΡι·Μ II kaihä il 7, ρ only kathâ, Bh saptaml kathâ II Φ Ρ Ρ γ Μ ρ iva for idam II 
11 ΦΡ mnkasya II 
12 Ν utyotyatasya, om. ktam ca I ni II 
15 Ν nihrtya II 
Mpuru for kuru II 
17 ΦΡΡί'Μρ sadyodyatänäm-, bh sadyedodyatänäm, but dye 
deleted again by cop. II 
19 bh gurutmä, Ν gurutvätmä, tvä being del. again 
by cop. II ΦΡΡΓΜρΒΙι kolikasya II Pr yathahaveh II 
21 ΦΡΡΓΜρΒΙι 
koliko, corrected in ρ to kau II 
Page 46. 
2 Pr godesti II 
Μ Ρ pumdravarddhanam, Bh pumdavarddhanam II 
Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ 
(not p)Bh koliko II 
3 bh sve sve Silpe, Ν sve sva êilpe, Pr svasvasalpe II 
bhNAΦPPrMp paräm for päram ; Bh with us II 
4 Under °vyaya° gloss in 
bh: saraca II 
5 ΦΡ °sumgamdhinau, PrMp °sugamdhinau II 
7 bh Sarira-
éruêrûsâm, Ν êarïramêuéûnâm II 
ΦΡ Sañrasuérüsdm, Pr only suérûsâm ; ABh 
with us II 
8 Pr "varddhäpanikotsavälo" II 
9 M svagrha II In bh gloss 
on gacchatah : tau II 
11 Ρ °krtd° for °bhrta° II Φ Ρ (not Pr)M devatäyanä-
disu, Ρ devatädisu II 
12 Φ kolirathakärau, PPrMBh kolika II Ρ sthänaka-
b l l N , " Í T P r M 

Bool 
I 
101 
sthänekesu, ΨΡΐ'ρ sthänakasthänakesu (in Pr corr. by cop. from sthänälca ), M 
slhänakosu li 
13 M °mukhyäny II 
14 M "kita for °tïlakita II 
16 In bh 
a glossator makes two carets after 0sirasijâm, one over the line and one under 
it, writing in margin : cakitamrgavadhümdrianeträm tyaktam oli 8. None of my 
MSS. including NABh has this addition II 
17 M "patrìm for °patträm II 
Pr "kanaka for °kamala° II 
1 8 Pr om. °loka° II ΦΡΡΓΜ (not p)0locanägrä° II 
»PPPrp cfystavatau II 
2 0 In bh nirüpayan, with ardhadandaafter it, has been 
corr. by gloss, to nirüpayamtau ; Ν with us II 
»tPPrpBh kolikah, M kolikah II 
21 bhN^PPrMp (not ABh) ins. samam before samamtät-, Φ at first intended 
to write only samamtät, beginning a ta after samam, but correcting this to 
ία II Pr dhaiyâvastambhâvâkâra" Il 
P a g e 
4 7 . 
3 M êlokam ca I pat han II 
5 M tad for naîtad II 
6 Φ yenâcdrvamgy, 
corr. to our reading by corr. 
II 
9 Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ py âptam, 
ρ präptam II 
Ν 
katam(ì) for hrtarn II 
After hrtam, one leaf is lost in Φ, comprising all the 
text down to m avatarati (excl.), p. 50,1. 6. The page number in the margin 
of Φ (20) is right, whereas that written over the red middle spot (19) and 
all the page numbers in the same place on the following leaves are wrong 11 
10 bh vaitanyam II M caicamtam any apar am, dhatle kim yam hryadâyâni me II 
bhN kiyamtam, corrected by the glossator of bh to our reading II 
13 Ρ 
mrgasäväksyäm II 
1 4 PrM om. karoti II 
1 5 In bh gloss on mugdhe: he II 
M rnrgam Samsä for nriamsä II 
17 Pr Ihih îovnâlhih II M kuthilakam, om. 
alakam II 
1 8 Pr ämm II 
1 9 bhNPr dahana II 
2 0 Pr vuktam II M 
muktuh for muhuh II Pr svacchakam II bhN latra for tan na, gloss, of bh 
adding na over yw u 
21 Ρ kumkumädre II 
22 Pr °Ihinne II 
23 In 
bh gloss under vaho : mama II 
Pr °pamkaja° for °pañjara° II 
P a g e 
4 8 . 
1 Pr vadher II 
6 Pr parärthesinä li 
7 Ρ mukhita for musìtam II 
9 M varäkam II 
10 Ν tanvyamga II bhNPPrp vidito, M dimtimto II bhN 
atyudbhutam II 
12 Of pädas cd, M has only the words smaryateprä nâyate II 
1 4 Pr vary am II 
1 5 Pr ° citta {new line) ttasya u 
1 6 M om. krtairhgârah II 
1 7 PPrMp (not Bh) kolika" Il 
PPrMpBh kolikam II 
M "gallum II 
1 9 M 
udgatäsrutam jalani II bhNAPPrp api for ayi; Bh with us II 
P a g e 
4 9 . 
3 Pr tathä for yathä II Pr avasthitéti II 
4 M jvarata krtâ II 
11 Pr 
bibheti; Ρ bibhesih, without danda 
II 
1 3 PPrMp käcid for kadâcid II 
bhNAPPrMp vaisyasutä, corrected by a corr. of bh to our reading ; Bh 
vaisîbhûtâ II 
Pr hhavati II 
1 5 In bh "grahabamä corr. by corr. to °grahä-
From 47, io, bh Ν, Ρ PrM 

102 
Variants 
'ksamä. Ν with the text II 
16 bhNPI/PrMp ärya tasyäm·, A äyam 
asyäm ; our reading is that of Bh, which after uktam ca inserts kälidäse 
säkumtale nâtake (I, stanza 21, ed. Pischel, first edition, and Boehtlingk; 
I, 19, ed. Godabole and Paraba). Pürnabhadra never quotes an author by 
name. We have possibly in A and Bh corrections of Purnabhadra's wrong 
reading II 
18 Ρ amtahkaranahpra" II 
20 M varttavyam II PPrM kolika II 
23 bhN sahahinakâla, A sah a I ahlnakäla, PPrMp sahâhïnakâlah ; Bh s ah a 
sadaîva II 
Page 50. 
1 PPr(notM)pBh kolikah II 
2 M anekavarnnakacitam II 
3 Ν kâlikâ", 
M kilakäprayogotpatanam II 
4 PPrMp kolikam II 
5 Ν latra ga, the ga 
being deleted by the copyist ; then Ν om. all the text between tatra and 
jane, 1. 7 II 
6 Here Φ sets in again with m avatarati II bh yadaîva for 
adyatva II 
7 Pr ins. japte before jane II Φ Ρ sarïramêu II ΜιΝΦΡΜ 
°suêrû*ah sadvi0 (Ρ sadghi; Pr "êusrûsam sadvi" ; A madvi but om. näräyana ; 
Bh madvijnänasamghatitaprayogam näräyanarüpam II 
8 M °rûpasthâyaina ; Ρ 
(not Φ) âMhâyaina il 
11 Φ manosa (sa del. again by cop,)rathar di°, Ρ mano-
rathar di" II 
12 bh räjanyäm, corr. by cop. to our reading ; ΦΡρ räjakanyäm 
(corr. in ρ to our reading) ; PrM räjakanyäyäm for raj any dm ; ABh with 
us II Ρ "curnavale" II 
13 ΦΡ °kusamä° II ΦΡΡΓΜρ atisurabJiigamdhivi-
citramälämbaro (M °gamdha° for °gamdhi°) II 
14 ΦΡΡγ (not M)p kolikas II 
bhNΦPPrp räjakanyäm, but m in Ρ very small, in ρ deleted again; ABh 
with us II 
15 bhN °rävadäne II bhN °lalävasthitäm ekakinïm II bl^PPr 
avalokayamtlm ; ABh with us II 
16 Ν (not bh) manena for madanena II 
ΦΡ sprsamäna" ; bhN "mänasäm, ΦΡ °manasäm, ρ °manasä·, Pr sprêamdnasâm, 
M sprsamänasä, A sprsyamänasä II 
17 ΦΡΡΓΜρΒΙι kolikam II 
18 M 
éayyâyâm II 
19 Pr samäditäm II 
20 ΦΡΡΓΜρΒΙι koliko II 
21 M 
gambhîraslakâyâ II Ν êanair (!) sanair II Ν äha for uväca II M om. evêdam II 
22 bhNΨP kanyä caham, Pr cdha : A only kanydham, Bh kanyä 'Jiam II Ν 
transp. caham kanyä II 
23 ΦΡ mämsasamparkkäd II 
24 M tvätam for tväm II 
Page 51. 
2 Pr gätndharvavivähena II 
5 bhN anuhhavato II ΦΡΡΓρ koliko II 
6 
bh vaikumtasvarggam, Ν vaikumtham svarggam, ΦΡγ vaikamtasvarggam, Ρ vai-
kamthasvarggam ; Bh vaikumthalokam ; A with us II bhNΦPPrMp (not Bh) 
om. tä of täm\ A om. iti tä II bh uktaläΝ 
uktapälayitvä II 
7 bhN 
evdvagacchati II 
8 bh kadäcit sväm, corr. by copyist to kadâcic cäm ; Ν 
kadäcid, om. ca II 
10 M asti II bhNPr râjâ II 
12 M om. puruseno II 
13 Ν tan nd for ndtrd° II Pr devatra, om. eva II Ν ins. tvam after deva, but 
it is blotted out by the copyist himself ll 
1 5 ΦΡΡγΜρ medite il 
1 8 Φ 
From 50, β, bhN, Ψ Γ PrM 

Booh 
I 
103 
yä corr. to vä by cop. Il 
^ P P r M p vetti II 
20 Ν tathä ca II 
22 M 
mkhä for êucâ II 
23 Ν malitam II 
Page 52. 
4 M om. evam II 
S M kämcukino II 
7 ΦΡΡΓ "vilakhita Ii 
8 bhNMp 
(not ΦΡΡΓ ; delete the asterisk in our text) om. ca il M om. äh il 
9 M 
om. ko 'yam krtän II 
10 M tvakäiam II 
11 bhNBh "kolika" II ΦΡΡΓΜ 
vimusvarüpam ko", ρ vîsnurûpam ko" ; A visnusvarüpavrttämtam II 
13 Pr 
prähasita° Il bh pulukita°, ΦΡΡΓ pulikìta ; ABh with us II 
15 ΦΡΡΓ Μ ρ Bh 
gamdharva° II 
17 ΦΡΡΓ drstavyo II Ν mänusyai II 
19 Pr tatos tu II Pl-
ins. bhüto before bhütvä II Pr sakalasthotro II 
20 M gamana" for gagana II 
23 b h ^ P (not PrMpBh) dhanyavaro\ A dhanyabharo, corr. to our reading; 
Ν stutyo dhanataro for nâsty anyo dJia II 
24 Ν evä for etya II Pr sarva II 
Page 53. 
1 NAΦPPrpBh^ämä0for/ä»^ä0; cop. ofbhaddsyä° overea0 il ΦΡΡΓρΒΙι 
"prabhävena il 
2 Ν vasi karisyâmi II 
3 Mp navatiom. 
nava (which in 
ρ has been supplied over the line) II 
4 Pr °karagrahanäya prähptä, this 
being corrected from some other reading II 
5 ΜιΝΑΦΡΡΓρΒΙι °yâmàtf II 
7 ΦΡΡΓΜρprahitah for prakrtah II 
8 M lokikam d akasmät kasmäd II 
Ν 
kamcid II 
10 M uktam II 
12 Pr "parivâê II 
14 M "rahitam for °ra-
ksitam II 
17 M hatäSesä II ΦΡΡΓΜpumclravarddhana° II 
18 bhN tatah 
for tac II bhNBh om. na II 
20 ΦΡ (not Pr) pwmdravarddhana°, M pumära-
varcana° II 
21 M nam for mantri° II 
Page 54. 
1 Ν tato for tat II 
2 Pr suruksitäni It 
6 M vyäpädayoti II 
7 M 
vâcyam II 
8 Pr vigrahasya II Φ Ρ PrMpBh koliko II 
9 M om. hi pürvam II 
ΦΡΡΓρ "kasipu for °kaêipu II 
12 Ν vyapotyisyati ; M vyäpädayuyaüti II 
14 bh pataho va däpito, va being del. by cop. by two dots ; Ν pataho vam 
dâpito II 
15 bh nihatah vi°, Ν nihitah vi° II Ν yojayat, corr. by the copyist 
from °yan, foryoyad II 
17 bh mahâsatvo, Ν mahäsasatvo II 
20 ΦΡΡΓΜρΒΙι 
koliko II 
bhN muktasukhärambho II 
21 Ν paryälocitatvät II 
24 bhN 
samhrtokhila" II 
Page 55. 
1 After the second me Pr ins. pitä il 
2 M ins. satvaram between varani 
and sattvam II 
4 Ν uktam hi II 
9 MpBh kolike, ΦΡΡΓ kolikam, Ν kau-
lika II 
Pr visnuvisnu II 
ΜιΦΡ vaikumtasvargge, A khekumthe I svargge (corr. 
from °rggo), Ν vaikumthasyägre ; Bh vaikumta(!)bhavane II 
M om. vainateyo II 
ΦΡΡΊ'ρ vijñapayad, M vajñepayad, Ν vyagapayad II 
I O b l ^ P P r M p om. ali 
between prthivyäm and pundhravardhanädhipater, 1. 11. The missing words 
bhN, SIT Pr M 

104 
Variants 
are supplied by the glossator of bh in the margin. 
Ν has them in its text. 
In A this passage runs thus : pumdhravarddhanälhidhänanagare l deväkära-
dhärl I koliko räjaduhitaram upabhumjate I iatah\ Bh: pumdavarddhananagare bha-
gavadäkäradhärl koliko räjakanyäm sevate I tatah li Ν ins. tu before "pundhra II 
ΦΡΜ pumdravarddhanä° il 
Glossator of bh: pumdhraclhravarddha0 II 
Ν 
upakârl 11 bh râjadutaram, II 
13 í'PPrMpBh kolikaû·, Ν kaulìke for kaulikaí 
ca II bhN krtaniícaye II 
14 bhN mjñapyam, corr. in bh from vijñápyam by 
the cop. II 
15 bh (not N) hhagavan Ii Ρ (not Φ) vy adita for vyäpäditah II 
17 Pr om. täni II In bh gloss on nästikä : jainäh II 
18 bhN hhagavan 
bha ; ΦΡΓ bhagavän bha", Ρ bhagavä, then an aksara lost by a hole, then bha ; 
M bhagavadbhaktä, om. $ ca, A bhagavadraktâê ca ; Bh with us II 
ΦΡρ prava-
jyäm II bhN bhiksyamtUi samt? II 
19 ΦΡΡγΜ devapramänam II Pr om. 
tato II Pr vibhävi II 
20 ΦΡι-MpBh koliko ; Ρ devâmêakakoliko II 
22 
NPr sähäryam käryam II 
24 bhN om. ca after cakram II 
Page 56. 
1 ^PPrMpBh koliko II pBh äJia for âdideêa II 
2 pBh "yopasthitasya II 
pBh mamgalädikam sajjam käryam II M sajjlkriyatâm II 
3 ΜιΝΑΨΡΡΓ 
°vidheJi ; Bh with us II Pr gorocanädisita° II 
4 ΜιΝΑΨΡ "camdano for 
"vandano (A gorocanasitasiddhärthaka I kusamädi") ; Bh with us II 
7 Ν vyü-
hatesu, M om. vyühitesu II ΨΡΡΓ pädähatasamprahäre, M pädähütasamprähäre II 
^PPrMpBh koliko II 
8 Over vitlrnna in bh gloss : datta II ΨΡΡΓ "mvarnnä-
(in Ψ °rnnâ° corr. from "rnno" by cop.)diratnädi" ·, M °Aäna° for °däna° II 
9 
bhN °mülam for °stalam II 
11 Νpämcajanya&amhham II Ν äpürayan II 
12 Ν 
°pädätayah II 
From the pun : sakrn .. . asakrt it is clear, that in sakrn (for 
Sakrn) the MSS. give Pürnabhadra's own spelling n In bh a corr. writes 
iiiam over sam of ärasamtah ; Ν ärabhamtah, M äsamtah for ârasantah, II 
14 
Ν 'kimcin mu for kecin mu II 
15 M gamana" for gagana° il Ν °nihitam sta II 
16 Ρ (not Φ) samapägatesu II 
17 Pr devaräjesu II 
18 Ν ins. ham before 
hantavyo II Pr âhya II 
19 bhN evam vdbhihite II 
20 M suräsisam° II 
22 M pratinasti II Ν kumjastra II 
23 Prprabodhate II 
Page 57. 
1 Pr vrahmadi II 
4 ^PPrpBh koliko, M kolikau II 
5 ΨΡΡΓ jäta-
kautakänäm, in Pr the second ta over the line by cop. il Pr vicimtatâm il 
Φ Ρ Pr M (not p)Bh kolikaê II 
8 Ν svasvavähinebhyo II 
Pr pranayäti, Φ 
praniyätacorrected 
by a later hand to praniyati°, which is the reading of Ρ II 
ΦΡΡΓΒΙΙ °sirasas II 
12 bhN evam väcädini II 
14 M only varmmä II 
17 ΝΦΡΡΓΜρΒΙι koliko II 
18 Ν 0mahâtmyo, ΦΡγ "mähätmye, in Φ followed 
by danda ; hence PL1, misreading the danda for first o-stroke : "mähätmye 
rojà5 II ΦΡΡγΜ sakalatra" for sakala" Il 
19 After iti, ΦΡγ kathä il 8, Ρ 
bhN, ^PPrM 

Book I 
105 
ti kathâ II 8 II flourish II II, M I hatha I Sil 
Pr âvarnnya II M èva for evam II 
20 Ν om. santu II 
21 Pr "myâpavistasya, om. ca II 
22 Ν ä, then blank 
for one aksara, then yikam II 
24 Over samanamtara" mark by later hand, 
referring to an addition by the same hand in the right margin : atah param, 
and to an addition by the same hand in the left margin : kàranam il 
Page 58. 
1 pBh abhiyuktä II Over anuyuktâ gloss in Φ by later hand : prstâ il M 
sävivye, PL 1 sâvidyo for säcivye (but in Ψ the right reading quite distinct). In 
Φ gloss on säcivye by later hand: sähäyye II 
4 Ν apiyasya li 
5 In Φ 
by later hand gloss over iraddheya" : mânya II 
6 Ν matsannise II 
8 
b h N A ^ P P r p (not M) grhïsyâmi, Bh grhisyä (!) Il 
9 Φ jääpa[new 
line] 
jnäpayitum, the first jñapa deleted by small dots over the line II 
10 bh 
duhkhasahataram, but corr. to our reading, apparently by cop. II 
11 Pr 
tadäkä II ΦΡ jñdyá'bravU ·, Pr vijñayá 'bravlt, Mp vijñdya'bravlt II 
M evam 
for èva II 
12 ΦΡΡΓ °pradhânye II 
13 M atyutthite II 
ρ cd- for va- li 
14 bh vastavya, corr. by cop. II In bh, the copyist writes da over va of 
pädäv a" ; hence Ν pädäd II 
φ srïh, Ρ strïh il 
15 ΗιΝΦΡΡί'Μρ bhavasya, 
ABh -with us, but in A corr. by later hand to narasya II 
16 bh juhâti II 
17 b h N tend, ΦΡΡγΜρ tathä for tena ; ABh with us II 
20 M êramayate 
for chrayate II In Φ gloss by later hand on nirvidyate·. khidyate II 
21 Ν 
om. padam II 
Ρ om. ha svätantryaspr II 
22 Pr abhidrumä, Bh api druhyati. 
In the Hamb. MS. H, the stanza is omitted ; I reads svätamtryän nrpateh 
räjyahrdaya pränän api cyävyate II 
23 Pr ravagrahah II ΦΡΡγΜρ svakäryesu II 
Ν deva for èva ; ΦΡΡγΜ tad èva devâtra (M ins. kam) yuktam, ρ tad èva yuktam II 
24 Ν om. yad uktarn II 
25 M °marddenenurakto II 
26 bhPr ndpeksah, Ν 
ndksyepya II 
b h N vamcchitä II 
27 M prabhüsanam for prabhünäm II 
28 
bh bhävi", Ν sàvi" II 
32 ΦΡΡγΜρ karoti II 
Page 59. 
2 bhN paräm II 
3 ΦΡΡγΜρ cittam (M vittam) tasyopari II b l ^ p 
paridruhyati; Ν duhyati, the copyist adding paridru over the line; Ρ pari-
duhyati, M paridudyati, Bh paridrahyati, APr druhyati, om. pari. 
Cp. 
Sär. 21, δ. Hamb. MSS. : vikrtim na yäti II 
9 PL1 om. m adhunä 
svayam svämitvam II 
11 ρ satkulme II 
12 M atíúo II Ν uktarn for 
tyaktum II 
15 bh yä for yo II 
16 Ν prathitän na êru II 
17 Φ tena 
twice, but the second tena del. again by little dots over the line ll 
22 M 
satäm matikramya II M ins. sa before vartate II 
24 M jwatimadyate II 
25 
bhN^p cyuta ; Bh bhyutah ; APPr with us II M samsthâtât for sthànât II 
26 Ν galanamatibhih II 
27 ΦΡ nayoktir, M nâyoktir II 
28 ρ om. api ca II 
ΜιΝΦΡγΜρ parinâma, A parinâmo" ; PPrBh with us II 
30 bh om. ca ; Ν 
bhN, ^PPrM 
ρ 

106 
Variants 
tathâpi, omitting stanza 236 II 
31 In bh, a later band corrects 'nujlvibhih 
to 'nnjwinah II 
Page 60. 
1 M mülalhrtyoparädhena, Bh mûlahhrtyâparâdhena II 
3 Ν ñmliar âha II 
M om. yatah II 
5 M tad asya for tasya II In Ψ, nairgunyam has been 
corrected to vairgunyam, apparently by the copyist ; Ρ M vairgunyam, Prp 
vaigunyam\ ABh with bhN II 
6 Pr pûrva bhaya" Il M ins. eva after pür~ 
vam II M êaranagato II 
9 PL1 instati II 
13 M svedatobhyamjano0 II 
Φ Ρ Ρ Γ ρ svapuccham II 
14 Ν sphîtâ bhavamti ; PL1 gunä sphitlbhavamti twice II 
15 M truhinägireh II 
16 NM tathâ ca II 
17 Over patitali a later hand 
writes in Ψ kaìya il 
19 bh avetane II 
20 Pr nasta pâtre II In bh gloss 
on hitam: alakrtam (!) II 
21 Pr dâksinam II 
22 Ν aranye ru ; Φ Ρ 
aranyarudinam II 
M om. fava; NA^PPrpBh and later hand in bh Saba0 II 
23 Μ ναηαηαΤι II 
24 bhNBh iva nâmitam II 
26 M om. kirn ca II 
27 
Φ Ρ Ρ Γ M ati for iti; in ρ iti corr. to ati II 
2 8 M käla for käcasakale II 
30 Ν hîtavacanam II bhNA^PPrMBh na form; ρ ca; ρ êrûyato, corrected 
to Srûyate ; Bh Srutam for êrûyatâm. 
In A, two small horizontal strokes over 
na refer to a marginal addition by a later hand : tulyärtham tulyasämarthyam I 
•marmajñam vyavasäyinam I arddharäJjyaharam mitrami, I yo na hanyät sa han
133 II 
32 Φ durvìnUàni, corr. to our reading II 
33 Ν pimgalakar äha II 
Page 61. 
2 M yajñayatto II M om. näma II 
3 bhN eva for evarn ; BhA with us II 
4 Mpaêyati II 
5 Ν niêdtas II ΨΡρΒΙι tistati II ΦΡΡΓρ (not M) om. ail 
between adhvänam and gantum (Pr writing gaturn), 1.7 II 
6 Myathäsaktim II 
M kirn apy II 
7 Ν °nivedena II 
9 Φ Ρ Ρ Γ vrajatânena, M vrajätena II 
10 
ΦΡΡΓΜρ caîkatra pradeüe ; ABh with us II 
12 Ν sato for tatah ; a 
misreading of the form which ta has in bh II 
13 In N, präni0 has been 
corr. to präna° ; pBh prânaraksane II 
14 ΜιΝΦΡΡγΜρ priyam iva kala 
(Ν °kalatre°, M "pu" for "putra0) ; A with us ; Bh priyaputrakalatramitrasva-
janaih II 
15 Ν brâhmanar âha II 
18 PL1 om. bhagnavrate Sathe II 
19 Over nihkrtir—as our MSS. write—later hand in Φ : pratïkâra II 
22 
Mprâni0 forprâna II Pr Ihir for vipattir II 
23 M sreyaskârîty II M eva 
for evam II 
Page 62. 
1 bhN Φ PBh bruvïti. A with us II A bho sädho mâm uttäraya I tat êrutvâ 
vräAmanobravU I yusmannâmagrahanena trasyate &c., 1. 4. Before yusman the
corr. of A ins, : bho vanara tvam prakrtyâ camcaláh I kûpân nirgatah san mâm 
samtâpayasi I vanara âha maîvam vada tvâm upakârinam aham êapathapûrvak
nodvejayâmi tatas tena dvijena vânaropy uttâritah atha sarppa âha bho sâdho mâ
bhN, "i'PPiM 

Bool I 
107 
uttäraya I tato vrähmanobramt. 
But none of our MSS. including Bh, ρ, Κ 
has this short dialogue between the brâhmana and the monkey II 
M èva 
êrutvâ II 
5 Ν nädrSämah for na dasämah II 
7 Pr om. te II 
11 Φ Ρ 
mämanugrahanäya e", with, in Ψ, two dota over ha II 
Ν om. bhavatah II 
12 M evam uktâ grahâbhimukham, II 
13 Ν gunäbhimukham II 
ΨΡΜ (not ρ) 
präyät, Pr präyät ah II 
14 ΦΡΡτΜρ asmin for tasmims II 
15 Pr i, om. ti e II 
ΦΡΡγρ (not M) om. all between präyät and atha, 1. 18. In ρ the missing 
text is supplied in the margin by a later hand II M sarppendpy uktarri ι 
pätälaväsy aham nägah I tat tvayä kärye smaranlyôham ity uktvä pätälam präyät I 
km iti sôpy uttäritah &c·, 1. 20 II 
16 bh bhavate, which a corr. corrects to 
Ihavatä II 
18 Ν om. sa II 
Ν om. one muhuh II 
19 4»PPrp mamâpy II 
20 Ν tenâbhihitam il 
22 ΨPM enarn for evam il 
P a g e 
6 3 . 
1 Pr smrta II 
2 M veditäny II bh äsväsitasva (1), con·, by cop. to 
äsväsitaü ca ; Ν ähäsitasva sa naih II 
4 Ν nivrtyam for nityam II bh bhava-
ίαψ, Ν bhavatytam for bhavatä II 
6 ΦΡΡγΜ graiveyakädikam II 
7 Ν om. 
ca after uktam II 
8 
tat sakämata sarvam for tatsaktam etat sarvam II 
Νprasuptam for suprayuktam II 
Pr va for tava II 
9 A corr. of bh corrects 
nimittam to nirmittai¡í II Ψ Ρ bhagavän for bhavän ; Pr bhavän, but one aksara 
before vän del. with gamboge II 
10 Pr vrähmana tat gf II 
Pr «α mamäro-
pakärl II 
12 bhN'i'PPrMpBh pädärghä° ; A with us, but apparently corr. 
to pädyärghahsina" ; 
Bh pädärghäsanasnänakhädanapänabhojanädisatkriyäm II 
bhN "svädana" for °khädana II 
Ν âdiêamatu for âdiêatu II 
19 Ν drstvâ 
'bravlt, om. râjâ II 
Ν tvayaîdam II 
23 M bädhavitvä for bandhayitvä II 
Ν Sülim, corr. by cop. to éûlïm II 
24 Ν ärohayati, Pr äropayat II 
P a g e 
6 4 . 
1 Pr ta§ for taiê II 
Pr buddhena II 
2 ^ P P r M p ägatyabravic ca II 
b h N ins. te before tavô" II b h N A ΦΡΡγΜ asmad, Bh asad, apparently corr. 
to asad fey cop., for asmäd II Ν mumoca II 
4 PrM daksyämi II 
6 ΨΡΜ 
hastasparêân, Pr hastasparêyân II 
7 M drstä for dasfä II 
9 Ν gärudika· 
tämtrika", om. "mäntrika , Ρ amärjitrikabhaisajikäa, om. täntrika ; L1 °mätriga-
tämtrikaMaimjikä° II bhN °känä° for °känya. 
Bh gärudikamärjitrikä bhaisajikä 
anyadeSaväsinah, A gärudikä mämtrikä I tämtrikä bhaisajikä anyadesaväsinah II 
10 bhN samuparacitam II 
11 Ν bhramato II 
15 Ψ Ρ °mäträ täm, Ν 
"mäträm for °mäträt tärp II Pr "krta man II 
16 NjOratyupajwitäm II Ν om. 
tasya II bh püjäm ca gau ca, the first ca deleted by copyist II Ν om. ca 
before krtvä II 
17 M anam for amum II 
19 M m for sarvam II 
bhN atha ( N l) gatârthena II 
20 Ν rmntritvena II 
21 bhN'í'PPrp (not 
bhN, "ÍTPrM 

108 
Variants 
MBh) "sujana for "svajana, A sarvasajjanasametena, corr. from suhr(V¡tsaj
jana0 ; Bh sukrtsvajanasametena II ΑΦΡΡγΜ bhogädiBh bhogädinä tutend" II 
Page 65. 
1 Ν "várana" for "vanara II 
After iti, ΦΡΡγΜρ ins. 9 (l) hatha ; Ρ adds 
Srîh ; Bh navami kathâ II flourish II II 
2 Φ Ρ om. va II 
4 Φ Ρ vinirvarttayi-
tum II M sakah for êakyah II 
8 bhNA4*PPrp nivâranîyâh, M na vâranîyâh ; 
A suhrdah kle&apathän nivâranîyâh ; Bh and Sär. with us II 
11 Ν tathä ca II 
Pr om. yan II 
13 Φ Ρ Sñ II Ν damanam for na madam II 
14 Ν ayamtrinam II 
Over ayamtranam, gloss in bh: na phosalâve, and gloss on the last part of pâda 4: 
àpaUalerave (or °be) drnapâme II 
15 ΦΡ bhujamgah sra" ; M bhujamgastasta
pi va II 
16 M vasanonmukham II 
18 Ν vijMpyamânâ II M om. the words 
between pr avariante and bhrtyawriting nrtya" il M äyäte for âyatau II 
NPr duhkhapâte II 
19 bh vähyah, Ν bâhyah for grâhyah II 
24 Ν simhar 
âha II 
26 bhN purusaS carati II Φ tvariti, corr. to our reading ; ρ svariti II 
M bhayât pürvam harttu va II 
28 Ν pimgalakar âha II Φ and perhaps bh 
Sa^ya ; Pr °bkak*yo, ΦΡΜ °bhakso for °bhoktâ ; but cp. àâr. 30, 13 II Ν hatha 
sau II 
29 Ν om. sa before êaspabhuk II bl·^ sasya°, Pr éúya", Bh trnahhuk, 
A with us II Ν vedapâdâ II ΦΡΡγΜρ transp. : pmtabhvjo (Pr add. h) deva ; 
but cp. Sär. 30, 14 II 
30 bhN bhojyapûtâh, ΦΡΡγΜρ bhojyabhûtâh ; ¡áar. Bh 
with us. A bhojrbhûtâh II Ν tadâpy II Ν ins. evam, corr. by cop. to enarri 
before anartham II ΜιΝΦΡΡγΜ (not ApBh) om. na before harisyati II 
32 
Ν jagati drohe II 
33 In bh gloss on tejayati : twrlkaroti II 
Page 66. 
1 Ν simhar âha il bhNΦPPrp (not AMBh) tvâm, corr. in ρ into tharn ! il 
4 Ν pravehsyam II 
5 Ν pariûramah II 
6 Ν dumdukasya, M dumdahasya I
M mam\travisarppinl II 7 L1 om. katharn etat II PL1 damana, om. kah II 
9 
M anasyadrûam II 
10 In bh gloss on yükä : jû il 
12 Φ pusya, bhNPPrM 
puspa, Ap punya for pustâ ; Bh with us II 
13 ΦΡ samvrtâ II Ν dumduko II 
15 bhMp "subhayo" for °m ubhayo° Il 
17 M daivaväSäte for daivavasân I
19 Pr samâyâtâ II 
20 Ν ma for ma II After kutah, a mark in bh by the 
copyist's hand refers to a marginal addition by the copyist, who inserts the 
following between kutah and our stanza 257 : uktam ca ι ehy âgaccha samâviSa-
sanam idam kasmâc cirât drsyase kâ vârttâ kim u (Pr a for u) durbalo 'si kusala
prito 'smi te darêanât I evam nlcajane 'pi yvjyati grham prâpte satâm sanad
tesäm yuktam aSamkitena manasâ harmyâni gamtum (gamtum being correct
in bh from some other word which I am unable to make out) sadâ II oli 3. 
ΝΦΡΡγΜρ have the words uktam ea and the stanza in the text, ΦΡΡγΜρ 
transposing kasmâc ciram (!) drtyase (Pr "te for "se) and prìto 'smi te da'. The 
bhN, "ÍTPrM 

Booh I 
109 
third pâda runs thus in ΦΡΡί'Μρ : ity evam (Pr eva for evam) grham ägatam 
pranayinam ye bhäsayatjity ädarät ; in d they read gehäni for Aarmyäni II 
ABh kutah I gurur &c. with us II 
22 Pr eka II 
23 Pr eka for 
aneka Μ Ψ "präkäräni, corr. to our reading, apparently by cop. II 
24 Ν 
äsvä, om. ditâni II 
Page 67. 
1 Ν manoratham II 
3 M athirodhänamdamnämayatayä II Ψ Ρ ''paisalaih II 
4 bhN sthalajalajakhecara" ; Ρ dhalajajalakhecara0 ; M sthalajalasakhevara" II 
6 M ins. äsvädäd after prasädäd II Ρ äsvädayitum i so 'bravit II 
7 NP 
so 'iravît II 
8 Ν asmacchayanäd II 
10 M käyam for käryam II M om. na Ii 
11 Pr vi for vai II 
12 Ν ins. uktam ca before tatah IL 14 ρ karnämrtaka-
thänake II Pr om. tayä II 
17 Pr vrahma II 
19 M om. vä kä II 
20 
Ν navasamägatvät, M navasamägamataivät II 
21 Ν yadä for tadä II 
22 
Pr deêakâle II ΨΡΡΓ (not ρ) M ins. ca after evam II 
24 Ν drstapradeée II 
Ν drsto for dasto II M ukrädadhe for ulkädagdha II Ν vrécikadrsfa iva-, Mom. 
vrêcikadasta iva II 
Page 68. 
1 bhN tvaritaram II ΦΡΡΓ prstadeêam, Ρprstadeêam II 
2 Pr parirttakam ; 
parivartakam also A (spelling °rtta) ; Bh parivarttina II φ Ρ dust o, Ν drsto II 
3 Bh kirn api svedajâtam II Ρ kirnet I sthadajavacanam êrutvâ &c. II bhN Ψ Μ ρ 
anvesayeti, Pr anvesayati, A anvesaya iti, Bh anvesayatha, om. iti ; cp. tair, 1. 4. 
The reading of the other MSS. seems to go back to some copyist, who took 
parivartakam for the designation of a royal official ; but it is a gerund in am 
enlarged by ka II Pr räjavaca II 
4 Ν dumduko II 
SM dtkäm for dîpikâm II 
6 ΦΡΡΓ mamtavisarppinï II ^PPrMp ins. näma before vidhi" II 
8 After 
iti, ΦΡΡγΜρ ins. 10 kathä II 
1 0 Ν tyaktd sväihyamtarä ; ΨΡ tyaktä for 
tyaktâê II Ν bähyä svabhyamtarlkrtäh II 
11 In Ψ, a later hand notes in 
marg. the reading which the textus simplicior has in the fourth päda: 
\i/a\thâ râjâ khukhudra\yaK\ I iti vä päßaL 
The bracketed aksaras have now 
almost disappeared with part of the margin. Cp. WZKM. xvi. 269 11 
12 
Ν pimgalakar aha il M om. katham etat II 
14 In bh gloss on asti: gate II 
Bh kasmimsei, Ρ kasmimêcin II M "pari" for °parisara° IL bhN Α ΦΡΡΓ M jam-
buko (N jambûko) nàma camdarava iti, ρ jambuka iti näma camdaravah ; Bh and 
áar. with us II 
15 Pr ία kaddhäram II bhN ksipäm II 
17 In bh by 
a later hand over »ärameyais in marg. kutarâm II 
18 Ν bhayarjikarâtrava-
rasta° Il Pr päläyamänäh, Φ pâlayamânah II 
19 ΦΡΜ (not Prp) anupavisfak II 
20 In bh, a later hand corrects yathägatam to yathägate II 
21 Ν nilikä° II 
22 ΦΡΡΓ (not ρ) 0sarpjitam for "rañjitar¡i II bh samïvarttinah II 
bhN, "ÎTPrM 

110 
Variants 
Page 69. 
1 bh 'syâgamam; Ν syâgamanam,, corr. by cop. to syagamatam\ Φ Ρpy âgamam
ρ pyâgamanam ; Hamb. MSSV APrMBh with us ; Simpl. h kutôbhyâgatarp Ii 
Φ Ρ vijñMte II 
3 bhNA^Bh and Simpl. Hh vimdyän ; in h anusvära 
del. with gamboge ; Simpl. I with us ; Pr vamdyä ; M vadyân II 
4 
bhN^PPrMp and Simpl. h chreyam ; A and Simpl. H êreyam ; Bh Sriyam 
Simpl. I chriyamW 6 bhN^PPr vrajata, A Irajata, Simpl. h vrajatah, 
Simpl. H vrajathah ; Bh and Simpl. I with us II 
8 Pp "pamjarärjitadhäh il 
9 Pr 0hirana II 
12 Ν «thagitkäm II 
13 bh ins. ca after °dhäratvam II Ν 
yena for ye II 
1 5 ΦΡΡΓΜΒΙΙ räjya for räjye ; A om. räjye. Bead râjyaêriyam 
with the Φ-class ? il 
16 Pr pura, om. tah (at the end of a line) ; ΦΡΜρΒΙι 
pur ah ; Simpl. HIh tatpuratah II 
19 bh sulakita, corr. by a later hand ; 
Ν 'i pulikita, but in Ψ corr. by cop. II 
20 ΦΡΡΓΜ tärasvarena II 
22 In 
bh gloss on vähitä: vamcitâ II 
24 Pr pälayitum, corr. to palayitum II 
Page 70. 
1 After iti, Pr adds 11 kathä, Ψ kathâ, with a small 11 over the line by 
cop.; ρ kathä, Ρ kathä n ü 11 flourish II II, M kathâ I I I il Pr piyigala alia, 
Νpimgalakar âha II 
2 bhN^PPrpBh êrastämgo, M mstämgo, A gra$tár¡igo II 
3 Pr adi for adya II Ν devapädämkitam II 
S Ν nktyotthäya II 
8 bh 
arnivrtam, NPr anivrttam II 
9 Pr om. 'py a II 
10 Ρ tathä ca II Pr 
janmapi dukkhäya II 
11 Ν sevakävrttir II 
13 Over rkha of mürkhah cop. 
of Φ writes §a ; Ρ mürsah II 
14 bhis'ähärann II M svästho II 
15 In bh 
gloss on vakti : kutaru Ii Before vakti in Φ vya, del. again by cop. il Pr va 
for na II Pr sacako for sevako II bh 'pya, Ν pîja for 'pîha II 
17 In Φ carati 
corr. from carita by cop. II 
20 ΦΡ "paroksaS ca, corr. in Φ by later hand to 
our reading 11 bhN parivittänuvarttinah II 
22 bhN pratyäsatyam, corr. by 
later hand in bh to pratyâsaktitp ·, in Φ gloss on pratyäsattim·. äsannatäm II 
23 In Φ gloss on avahitamanäs: mvadhäna II 
24 Ρ sadrsyam II 
26 bh 
sumusfenâΝ suspendΦΡΡΓΜΡ supusjenapu being corrected in ρ from 
some other akfara ; Bh mpisfena° ; Hamb. MSS. and A with us. We 
should perhaps read sumisfendpi, as the author uses the compound mistänna 
p. 137, 13 11 
28 bhN ko for kau II 
29 bhN cimtya II M om. muhur II 
30 om. damanakasya II 
33 ΦΡΡΓΜ °bhakmnäry, II 
Page 71. 
1 bhN ägatam ; ρ âgamam, corrected to ä° ; M àgama II Ν tad ya namta-
ram II 
3 ΦΡΡΓΜΡ upagatah II Ν samjlvakar II 
4 bhN räjnä II 
9 
ΝΦΡΡρρ apürva ; M apürvapratimänam viéeso II 
10 bhNΑΦΡΡγΜρ yai 
for yah ; Bh (reading pratiihâviêeso) yah with us. áar. also yah n 
1 5 ΦΡΡΓ 
"vihkrti" II 
16 Φ jväyate II 
18 bhNPPrMp saduhsaham, A sudussaham, Bh 
b h N , Ψ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ 

Booh I 
111 
suduhsaham II 
19 Ν drêan II 
22 Ν kukuka" II 
23 M om. damanaka II 
Ν ninimittä° II 
24 Φ Ρ pararamdhrânvesinâê ca II M om. evam etat II 
26 
Ν taira twice II 
27 M gunayätinah II M ati for avighnäni II 
32 Ν 
sukrtân yathä II 
33 bhN ΑΦΡΡΓΜΡ asambMnndrthamaryâdâh ; Bh with us II 
Page 72. 
1 M om. uktam ca II 
8 Ν kascid II 
10 Ν krlditah II bhN 'bki-
varttate II 
12 M gunäd for gunasravanäd II 
15 Pr tvadako II Ρ tavâm-
tikäm, corr. by cop. to our reading ; Φ tavamkitäm, corr. by cop. to tavamtikäm\ 
M tevämtikäm, om. nâyâtas ta II 
17 PMp (not ΦΡγ) gamgâ II 
ρ yâmti il 
19 Ν prthito II M sthäpi for 'sthy api II 
20 bhN °bhävah sain II 
22 
Ν myase, corr. by cop. to usyate II Φ ρ asmin sarasi, but Φ ma in margin, hâ 
having disappeared with the greater part of the margin 11 
23 Pr om. 
viharamänayoh II 
24 Ν ulükar II 
Page 73. 
3 Pr am for aham II 
4 Φ ivâûâvâse, va being del. again by cop. II 
7 Ρ athu η ΦΡΡΓΜΡ vane, om. padma II 
10 Ρpriyasudbhat te II Φ 'hamm Il 
14 bhNΦPPrp vanyjâraka , Bh vanijyäraka ; A with us II 
IS bhN pra-
tywe kâle II bhN prayänakammkham \ ΑΦΡΜρΒΙι with us II 
17 ΦΡΜ 
anupavisto II Ν durnimittam ca il 
19 Pr "pyâkarnnam, om. pûrnam ; Ν 
"pürmtbärnim II 
Ν ca ulûkanïdanïkatavâsî II 
21 bhNΦPPrM a0 vi° ca 
gostttvâd iti, ρ godi iti·, Bh akälacaryä iti, A with us. 
Then ΦΡΡί'Μρ ins. 
12 kathä, Ρ adding ιι flourish u π il 
22 Ρ visarnacittas II 
After sarvathâ 
(Pr "thai) ΦΡΡΓ the figure 12 II 
24 Ν visakumbhapa° II 
Page 74. 
2 N, misreading the old-fashioned jjh of bh, which is almost the same as 
in our specimen, vol. xi, Table II, no. 9,1. 3 b : samprojjitâ", Ρ samprejhitâ" Il 
3 bhN "praSnesu (N "sn for °Sn) svinnomttarah II 
5 In bh gloss on êiksito : 
bhanyo II 
7 M citra" for vicitra II 
8 bhNAΦPPrMpBh paisünyä° il 
ΦΡΡΓΜρ "vinayàbMmàna ; Pr "mali, om. nam II 
12 Ν grähivittam for 
cittagrähi II 
14 b l ^ êasya" ; A êassabhaksyah, Bh êisyabhaksyah II ΦΡ 
ämisahbha° II 
15 Ρ cittarn II 
16 Pr viväham samkhyam ca II 
17 
ΜιΝΨΡΡγΜΒΙι "êikkaram, A °êakharam II 
19 bh bhadamtah, corr. by cop. 
to tada° ; Ν pradamtah II 
20 Φ "prsitah, corr. over the line to our reading ; 
Ρ "nrsitah, M "trsih. II 
21 M enam for pânam II 
22 M pratisurabhigam II 
Ν mälatim II 
24 Pr upahâyawam II 
26 bhN °rasäsvädulubdhä II 
27 
bh tatkarnnyavyajanapavana , Ν iatkarnyavyajapavana ιι ΦΡΡΓ "premitaih, M 
"presitaih II 
28 bhN M bhümipräptäh, ΦΡΓ bhümipräptä, Ρ Ihümimpräptä ; 
Sär. SPa and Bh with us II 
29 bhN roso for donah, ιι 
bhN, 'í'PPrM 

112 
Variants 
Page 75. 
1 bh "Syämäbhasoi^, Ν °êyâmâmbhasom II 3 M phalanakatra for phanaca
bhN "manayor II 
6 Pr mûrse for loke II Me« mûr Ickern II 
9 Ν "prak-
snana for "pramläna II 
10 M ''putrair for °putair II 
12 Φ Ρ Ρ Γ käla II 
bhNpBh °racitaih, Α Ψ Ρ Ρ Γ °caritaih, M °varitaih. 
Our reading is that of 
Sär. Il 
Ν prent, then beginning of kho, then blank for one aksara, then 
câlayan, cd of course being the misread second half of kho. In bh this 
passage has no defect whatsoever II 
16 Φ sväbhävät, corr. to our 
reading II 
Ν vimrsatetì, Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ Ρ ganayatì for vimrSati II 
19 M om. 
kuryuh II 
M ustro II 
20 Ν damamkar II 
22 M sägara näma 
vaniva (!) ; ΦΡΡΓρ om. vanik; ρ ins. särthavähah after näma II 
23 M 
mûlya, om. iahu II Ν °cailakasya II 
24 bh (not N) vitakanämä u II 
25 
Pr celakabham II 
26 Pr vísame 'smin for visamä, asmin II M nä 'smen fo
'smin Ii 
Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ Ρ sthänake ; the following na is supplied under the line 
in Φ II 
28 bhSf* Sasyam, Bh êisyam, A éaspàni II 
Page 76. 
2 Ν om. simhah II 
3 bhN atas for atha ; in Bh the passage is 
altered. 
Sär. and Simpl. Hh atha ll 
4 bhN^P °rwpyam ; APrp 
with us. In Bh this passage has been altered with the aid of the textus 
simplicior II 
5 Ν sas for sattvam II 
7 Pr tamah for tatah il 
M iti\ha 
for iha ll 
8 Ν °citta" for 0vrtta0 II Pr särthavähah for "hat II Over 
avagatä, gloss in bh : jmta II Ν avagatohhyupapattinä ; in Φ gloss in margin : 
jüätasamäc [the rest -ära Ì- torn off with part of marg.] II 
10 Our MSS. 
except Pr with us pamcasesu, corrected by gloss, of bh to pamcamesu, by cop. 
of ρ to pamcakesu, which is the reading of Pr II 
11 bhN ätyayikäyadi ; 
gloss, of bh separates yadi from the preceding and the following aksaras 
by small vertical strokes over the line ll 
12 bhN ΑΦΡΡΓρ sidamto ; in 
Bh this passage is altered II bhN ayam for aham ll 
15 Φ reads exactly 
as our text ; but a corr. adds a second kim over rthe of pustyarthenêti. The 
r-hook of rthe is in Φ prolonged to the middle of the horizontal stroke 
of ne (written R). 
Hence PL 1 adopting the false correction and taking the 
prolongation of the r-hook as an «¿-stroke, pustyarthe kim naiti ; M pustyä 
kim miti II Ν simhar II 
17 In bh glosa on mamâpânayadhvam : yüyam II 
bhN tesäm for tato II 
18 bhN üceis for ücus II 
19 Ν kridayä II 
Page 77. 
1 Pr ins. pavatä after Ihavatä II Ν om. param II 
2 bh(not N) äste, 
M asmim for asti Η Ν srmgäla II 
3 ΦΡ vinyapya II 
4 ΦΡ tistatu II 
Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ Ρ and Simpl. Η om. grham ; BhA and Simpl. I h with bhN II 
5 
Pr upadiêya for nddiSya LL 
6 Pr svämina II 
8 Ν diso for devâdeêo I
bhN, SkppiM 

Book I 
118 
11 Oyerpa¡oädhama, glosa in bh : he II Pr yaty for yady II ΦΡΡΓΜρ vyâpâ-
dayisyâmi ; Hamb. MSS. with bhN II 
15 Φρ pradhânam, corr. by the 
copyists to pradànam ; but the original reading is still well visible II 
18 Ν 
abhayapradhânam II 
19 Pr sva for sa II 
20 Pr prayati II 
21 bhN 
eva for svam II 
22 In bh, nya of anyathä is partly worn off, but still to be 
made out with certainty ; gloss, however writes over it nya in order to 
ascertain the reading. The copyist of the MS. to which Ν goes back, 
misreads the original nya for tha and takes the second nya for a correction ; 
hence Ν reads atha anyathâ agmâkam II 
24 M ya for ye II 
Page 78. 
1 bhN tasmäd asmâbhih II 
2 bhN ins. 'pi before vaAni° II 
5 PL1 
yasmin for tagmin II 
6 Ν näbhigamdhe II ΦΡΡτ(ηοί p)M bhavamti for 
vahamti; but cop. of Φ adds in marg. : vahamti páthah II 
7 Pr räcate II 
8 M tam for tân II 
9 bh mahatl vesthâ, corr. by gloss, to mahatl vecchä ; 
Ν mahatl vascchà II 
10 bhN hudrät for ksudrogät II 
11 Ν paralokasya 
pra κ ΦΡΡτρ ¿añra°, M éañre" for svaéarïra° II 
13 Ν bhrtyesu for bhrtyasya II 
16 Φ Ρ (not PrMp) om. prâptam Il 
19 Pr devasydpyâyâtanâ mama II 
20 
bh svarggaêaktir, Ν svargaíaktir II 
21 Ν mrrtyo II 
22 In Φ padam corr. 
from madam, by cop. II 
23 ΨΡ °bhahinât, in Φ corrected by copyist ; but 
the correction is not clear, as the caret, which is put as deletion mark 
under i, looks like part of the ¿-stroke with a dot ta its right, the angle 
being not closed ιι 
Page 79. 
5 Ν prâpta II 
β Over apasara, gloss in bh : tv am. kl Pr tathanustitah Tf^ 
8 PPrp °dhäranam ; M pränarn for pränadhäranäm II ΦΡΡΓΜρ add. yatah 
after uktarn ca II 
12 bhN svalpakäyai ca ja" ti Between svajâtïyai ca and 
nakhä", bhPPr ins. scaca, ΝΨ ivdca, M êvâva ; ρ Scäravaca deleted by smear-
ing with gamboge ; A ins. ca, deleted by smearing with gamboge ; Bh 
with us II Ν ins. ca after èva II 
13 Ν dmpl for pränaih. This seems to 
have been, in some previous MS., a correction of the faulty dvipl, p. 79,1.19, 
written in the margin and put into the text in a wrong place by some 
thoughtless copyist II 
16 Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ etadartham H M samsagram for samgra-
ham II 
17 M °vasänemte for °vasänesu na te II 
18 Ν aparasaratu II 
ΦΡΜρ prabhum ; Pr om. svaprabhum II 
19 Ν dvïpi (see remark on 79,13) II 
20 Ν sarggavâsah II 
Page 80. 
1 Pr êobhanâny (om. vacanâny) Il 
3 Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ Ρ vijMpayâmi II 
4 Pr 
yuktam muktam II 
5 bhNΦPPrp nakhâyudhatvât katham, M nakhäyudhatvä 
katham, A nakhâyudhatvât tat katham, Bh nakhâyudhas tat katham II 
7 Ν
b h N , "Φ'ΡΡΓΜ 
Q 

114 
Variants 
manasyâpi II 
9 In bh, vijnapayämi has been corrected, perhaps by cop., to 
vijnapayämi, but the correction is not very clear. Ν with the other MSS. II 
12 Ν mayobhaya 11 13 bh pa, Ν 'pa for 'pi II M om. nti täm ga II 
14 
Ν projjita, a misreading originating in the old-fashioned form, which jjh has 
in bh ; see remark on 74, IN 
M om. yäm gatim II 
16 Pr om. all between 
'nayano and bahavo, 1. 21, inserting the missing text after räjä, 1. 22, and 
repeating the words from bahavo to räjä incl. II 
17 Ν om. tali a, writing 
bhahitoham II 
18 After iti, Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ Ρ add kathâ I 13 II ; Ρ adds a flourish II 
20 bh grdhraparicära and "paricârâd n 
22 Ν liny eta {pse in bh resembles 
nne) ; M lipsate II 
bhNPr (in both places, see above, 1. 16) e'praväritat, 
M "pravaritas, ρ "prasäritas ; Α Ψ Ρ with us ; Bh °pratâritaê ca II Ρ vicâritae-
turäjävicäräksamo for vicäräksamo II 
24 Ρ paricâro II 
25 Ψ Ρ dhah II 
Page 81. 
3 Pr pathyodanam II bh mahämjana^tambhäm, corr. by corr. to mahäjana-
ttambhä ; Ν maàâjanastambhâm II 
6 ^Prp bhayânakam, Ρ bhakânakam
Μ bhayänaka II 
8 In bh gloss over "dupasarpanarti ·. sevä II ΨΡρ evâêreya, 
in ρ deleted again II Ν om. iti II Gloss of bh in margin rathakârenoktam II 
10 M hhahitavyam 11 N^PPrMp bhràtrjàyopa II 
11 Ν tatah foryatah II 
13 bhN bhaksa 11 ^PPrMp om, ghrta, which in ρ is supplied in the 
margin II 
14 A "¿äkhavartti ; Bh with us II Ν "kkädya° for °khädyaka" II 
15 Pr krtayâ II 
16 Φ pradatta, bhN pradattä, corr. in bh by corr. to our 
reading II 
17 Ψpratyaham ägamtavyam, but trä add. in marg. by cop. II 
18 
M om. ca after evam II M prUipürvam II 
19 In bh gloss on °vihitasauhi-
tyah. : trptah II 
20 Pr om. na II 
21 bh gacchasi, Ν gacchâsi il 
Page 82. 
4 Pr °mâsena li 
5 »PPPrp tat srutvâ II Over karisyâvah, gloss in bh : 
äväm II 
7 Ν bhavatopi II M viéesam, om. visistam bhaksya 11 
9 Ν transp.: 
atha ra° simham düräd èva dusta" Il 
11 bhN jump from the first ârûdhah 
to the second ärüdhah, 1. 12, om. one of them and all between them II 
12 
Pr âyâmtam II 
15 After °yâêritânâm, ^PPrMp add lé kathâ·, Ρ adds 
a flourish II 
17 M mrdu näny, om. nä »alilena khanyamä II 
18 In bh 
gloss on avapusyanti : näSam prâptumvamti (!), in Φ gloss by cop. hmâni 
bhavamti II 
19 In bh gloss on upajäpa° : bheda II 
21 Pr om. yuddhât II 
Ν yuddhate, a misreading for the old fashion of writing e by a vertical 
stroke before an aksara II 
22 Ν ye for yän II Pr °samdhais II 
27 Pr 
iukhävaddhau II 
Page 83. 
2 bhA^PPrMpK unmetrically dvipaturagasacämaräh, Ν dvìpaturagasa-
mâcarâh ; Bh with us II 
6 bl^PPrMBh tathâpy, A tathâpi, Ν tayâpy for 
bhN, ΫΡΡγΜ 

Booh I 
115 
tad apy II bhN uktam for ayuktam II 
9 M om. ca after âha II 
12 Ν 
fididibhâd for titfibhäd II 
13 Between etat and damanakah, M ins. : dama-
naka äha I katham etat II 
15 ΜιΝΨΡΡΓΜ^'άία". 
Corr. of bh writes ü 
over j«; ApBh with us. 
As to the origin of the corruption see the form 
which jjh has in our Table II, no. 9,1. 3 II 
17 Ν parivrtä for pativratä il 
18 Ν datukâmâbaddhaphalä ; Pr °lävaddha° ; M "sala for °phalä II 
SO M 
prasave II ΦΡρ taftibho, in ρ corrected II bhN natv for nano II 
21 Ν 
prasusvêti II 
22 Pr abhyarthah I I 
Μ
Ι
Ν
Φ
Ρ
Ρ
Γ sa dùram ; correct our text, 
which gives the reading of ABh II 
24 
Φ
Ρ
Ρ
Γ
Μ (not p) eva for esa ll 
Page 84. 
2 Ν drstvawa II 
M om. duräsadam kopayati II 
3 Ν grîsmdtapas ta II 
4 Ν maäätjßhasya nâgasya II Over "nägasya gloss in bh : gaja II 
6 Pr 
maru, om. ti II M prabhäke for prâbhâtike II 
8 M om. kumbha II 
11 
Over apahara gloss in bh: tvam II 
In bh gloss on matto·. sakâSât II 
Ν om. 
pâdas d of äryä 320 and ab of äryä 321 il 
14 Ψ om. sä, but cop. supplies 
it in marg. II 
16 Ν hänyä for häsyo II bhNí'PPrMp bhavisyati, A blia-
vitsati, Bh bhavityasi II 
17 In bh gloss on badate: karoü II 
18 Φ 
vdtmanah II 
Φ
Ρ
Ρ
Γ
Μ om. svayam II 
Pr sârâsâre, om. iti ; ΨΡρ (not M ) särä-
säreti II vetti all our MSS. ll 
19 Pr äkhä for âtmâ il 
Page 85. 
2 Ν kâs\abhrsto II 
3 Ν tiddibhar II 
5 In Φ näma added over the line 
by cop. II 
8 ΦΡΡγΜρ transp. : sara idam II Pr anya II 
11 Ν viyogah 
du, Φ Ρ Pr M (not ρ) viyogât duhkhâc II bhN M om. ca, writing bhN duhkhäd, 
M duhkhân II 
17 ΦΡΡγΜρ sahânetum II 
18 bhN asy, Φ Ρ Pr M (not ρ) 
abhy for asty; Bh with us; A asty apâyah II 
19 ΜιΦ damtasamdemSena, 
but in Φ the e-stroke deleted again by cop., Ν damtasamdesena ; A damtam I 
tadamsamdamSena, Pr with us II 
Page 86. 
1 
Φ
Ρ pyasti" for °ya$(i II 
2 Ν bhavisyati II 
4 
Φ
Ρ
Ρ
Γ
Μ
Ρ °nagarasyo-
pari"·, ABh with bhN II 
7 M êrutmpalâd, om. sannamrtyuê cä; Pr ins. 
am, after eâpalâd II 
8 bhP(not p) bravati II 
Φ eva vasrayät, corr. by 
cop. to evâêrayât ; hence PPrMp evdsrayät II 
9 Pr nititah II 
11 Ν 
om. 'ham II Before iti, bhNAΦPPrMp ins. api (hitakämänäm api iti)·, 
Bh with us II 
After iti, ΦΜρ ins. kathä 16, PPr hatha ΙΙ 16 ΙΙ Ρ adds 
flourish II 
13 ΦΡΡτΜρ "matis tathä II 
14 bhN ete II Ρ mukham II 
In Pr gloss by a later hand on yadbhavisyo : daivaparo II 
15 M sä kathaïti II 
17 bhN A "drahe for brade; in bh gloss over "drahe: hrade ; éâr. 45, 8 with 
ΦΡΜρ II Μ mahäkäyo, om. yäs tra II 
18 Ν ins. ca after "vidhätä II 
20 
Pr matsyabamdhànâm II 
bhN, "ΨΡΡτΜ 

116 
Variants 
Page 87. 
1 Pr paresvo ll 
2 Fr apicchinnam aUrotasarp ; in Φ, avi" coït, from api" 
by cop. II 
5 Ν tatsamayopacitä\c,oTT. by cop. to V ] f a i » ) M II 
7 Ν tä 
for νά II M om. vä na vèti II bhN cèti for vèti II 
8 Pr parivaktum II 
9 
Pr om. ca II 
11 Pr siddhyati II 
12 b h N ^ P P r M p eva for esa ; A B h 
with us ll 
1 4 ΜιΦΡΡγΜ a sámete ; ABh with us ll 
1 6 ΜιΝΑΦΡΡγΜ 
jalasyâmtar, cp. àâr. 46, 1 ; pBh with us H 
17 bhN jalâd II 
18 
Ν sthitah for sthâpitah II 
bhN jalâSrayam, Bh jaläsraye ; A with us II 
Ν om. pravistah II 
1 9 bhNBh samullatan·, A with us II 
Pr "laguta II 
bhN "jarjitaSarîrah ll 
2 0 Pr tah for taih ll 
21 Ν bravlt II 
After iti, 
ρ adds hatha, ΦΡΡτΜ 17 kathä II 
Page 88. 
1 bhN tatra for tan na, in bh corr. to our reading by corr. 11 
4 Pr 
devah, bhNp iva for divah; in N, h has been added subsequently II 
8 
bhN Siêûnâm for Sünyam ll 
9 bh transp. : y ad ä" me; Ν with the other 
MSS. II 
1 1 ΨΡΡΓΜρ ins. yan before na ll 
1 3 For bhadre Pr ¿¿[this 
corr. from some other aksara by cop.]^¿, with bhl add. over the line II 
ΨΡΡγΜρ y ad for yâvad II 
1 4 
Pr äyaputra II 
15 Φ Ρ Ρ γ Μ samudre 
vigrahah, but cop. of Φ adds na exactly over dre ; ρ samudrena vigrahah, 
corrected by third hand to our reading II 
1 6 
M apidaitvátmatah II 
bhN samutsakah II 
18 Ν präha ll Prpriyarp, II 
20 Pr krtro° ll 
Page 89. 
1 In Φ gloss by cop. on viprud : birp,du ; the same gloss in ρ by third hand II 
ΨΡ °vâhinyâm II 
At the beginning of a new page, Φ repeats the preceding 
words from sakalam (incl.) 88, 21 to camcvä ind., but this repetition is 
bracketed by cop. II Pr aSrayethajalpitena II 
2 Ν präha II 
3 ΨΡΜρ 
(not Pr) anirveda II 
bhN °sannibhäh II 
5 Ν om. yatah II 
6 Pr 
pau, om. rusam ll 
1 0 M ins. him between api and vihagan II 
1 2 bh 
samudro, and an o-stroke over the line, corr. by corr. to samavâ·, then the 
copyist leaves out a blank for 5 aksaras, filled in by the corr. with jaha-
durjayah, jaha being again corr. into hi, the reading being now samavâyo hi 
durjjayah ; but the còrr. adds beneath the line samudàyo hi ; Ν samavâyo 
for samudàyo II 
bhN hi durjjayah for jayävah.ah. 
Hamb. MS. H balävahah·, 
Bh samavâyah sudurjayah, A with us II 
1 3 The s of àvestyate in bh is so 
small, that stya looks almost exactly like dya ; hence Ν ävedyate II 
1 5 
bhNA4>PPrMp eatakä ; but cp. p. 90,11.3 and is. 
Bh with us II 
1 6 bhN 
mahatâm ca virodhena II 
17 M tittibha präha II 
1 9 Φ "gahane pra", corr. 
to our reading by cop. II 
2 0 Pr sarp,tatikaler for samtatir II 
22 Ν 
cafakayvgmam äsritätp II 
bhN, "ΨτΓγΜ 

Booh I 
117 
P a g e 8 0 . 
1 In Pr gloss onpuskarä" by later hand : mdädamdena (!) Il Ρ êlrnnâni II 
2 Φ cafakayvgä, writing the following Ιαψ so as to cover part of the wrong 
α-stroke ; Ρ catahayugälam II 
3 Ν sthâpatya for svâpatya" II 
5 M 
tadadu[2nd hand adds h~\khitat om. duhkha II 
8 bh^PPrMp om. ca 
before mürk/ιάηάηι ; bh'I'PPrM insert it after η-ΰτΜάηάψ] NABh Hamb. 
M S S . with us II 
1 1 Ψ Ρ Ρ Γ tadduhkkhäl II 
Pr anertho II 
M nisevatä II 
1 3 M upatiçvati II 
1 5 ΦΡΡΓ (not ρ) catakä, M chatakà. bh seems to 
have had originally our reading, but corr. to catakä ; Ν with us II Ν madän 
ma êαφ \saip. deleted by cop.] ma saratana II 
1 7 bhN Α Ψ Ρ Ρ γ Μ Β Ι ι kimcid ; 
see above, p. 32 II 
18 bh vinivarttate, but vi del. by cop. Ν with us II M 
om. vimmcmi II 
20 ΨΡρ apakrtya, in Φ with a small u over the initial a ; 
but with bhNPr the Hamb. MSS. have exactly the same readings as our 
text, except Hamb. MSS. krtatp for naram II Päda c in M only: upakrte 
yoh II 
22 Pr jumps from the first syäd to sydt 91,2, om. one of them and 
all between them II 
23 Ν sarpo for torvo II 
P a g e 
9 1 . 
1 M om. tathâ ca II 
3 Pr nivrttih II 
4 Pr om. param II 
β 
bhNA+PPrMp catakayä ; Bh with us II 
7 bhNA^PPrp catakä, M cata-
kam·, Bh with us II 
8 Ν »ähäryyam II 
9 Ν makçikâ präha II Ν bhadre II 
1 0 Ν jamtüko II 
1 3 ΨΡΡΓ vikalpyamte, M vikalyam for vikalpante. In Φ 
gloss by cop. vikalpyam na präpt\avyam i\ti I 2 jnäyä. 
The bracketed 
syllables I supply by conjecture. In the MS. they are torn off with part 
of the margin II 
16 In bh "janasya corr. to "gajasya by corr. ; Ν with us II 
Ν gota for gatvâ ; M gatasya for gatvä tasya II 
17 Ν nimïlito II 
18 Pr 
tata, om. gartä II 
19 Ν jaläiraye II bhN'i'PPrMp muktvä for matvâ, in ρ 
corrected to our reading, which is that of A. Bh gatvä il 
20 bhN 
patitah, ta being corrected by the copyist of bh from tva II 
21 ΦΡΡι Μ 
nimîlitàksah II 
P a g e 92. 
1 bhNA^PPrp catakä, M only vata; Bh with us II After iti, Φ adds 
11 hatha 18, Ρ kathä II 18 II II flourish π π, Prp 18 kathä, M hathä II 18 II 
2 
bh suhrtsamudayena ; Ν suhrtsamudäya vinä na for suhrtsamudäyena II Ν om. 
iti II 
5 Ν tenaîvam for naîvam II 
7 Ν "loha" for °¿osfa°, omitting 
nicayäh and the following words to sya (excl.) of makodadhivigrahasyo, 1. 9 II 
bh "nucayâh II Pr pürayämih II 
θ Ν prättakalam II 
10 Ν nyagrodha-
väisl II 
11 M väsyati for däsyati II 
12 Ν êrâvyam II M vrddhä ye, om. 
nam te vrddhä II Ν om. hi II 
22 bhN häle kramät II 
bhN, "ÍTPrM 

118 
Variants 
Page 93. 
1 Φ kathäcit II 
2 M ähärärtha II 
3 Pr hamsäväsedu II 
4 M 
krtähärä for °vikärä II 
6 bhN "bamdha for βbandhana (Ν "yyasanam) II 
M ma for mama || 
7 Ν sarvêpi vi" II 
Μ ι Ν Α Ψ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ (not ρ) sma, in A 
visarga added over the line ; Bh with us II 
9 M athdsau prâha II 
bhNA^PPrpBh kuruta, M kurut. M's reading is to be explained by an ai-
stroke of 
"tais) 1.12, whose left-hand end goes exactly to the nether 
end of the vertical ¿«-beam and which looks like virâma ll 
10 ΨΡΜρ 
gameti, Pr sámete II 
M Mr for bhavadbhir II «tPPrMp mrtarüpend" II 
14 
ΨΡΡΓρ viêrabdhamatinâ, M visnaskamatinâ II 
15 L1 ins. sa after kramena II 
Ν sarvepi II Ν "miti" for °mati" II 
18 After iti, ΨΡγ add kathä 19 II II, 
Ρ kathä II 19 II flourish IMI, M I kathâ II 19 II, ρ kathä 10 (!) II 
19 4»PPrMp 
ins. pi after sane II N^PPrp only hamsämtikam, M harpsâtikarp ; ABh 
with bh II 
21 M eka for èva II 
22 Φ Ρ Ρ γ Μ äkrarpdaravena II 
23 
M om. 'pi after garudo II 
Page 94. 
1 bhN samäyätaih for samaye taih II Μ βviyogakarp duhkham II 
2 Ν 
patiräjüe, corr. from patiräjaya by cop. II 
3 bhN "jlvito II 
5 In bh gloss 
over pracckannaip : guptam ll 
β M huduh (sic !) ; Pr hudah ke, om. the 
following aksaras to nagätro, 1. io Ii 
10 Pr ta for tatra ll 
12 Pr 
sarvattah II Ν °tacum for °tanum II 
13 Ν upagato II 
16 Pr om. tan ; 
ΨΡΜρ om. ta of tan, writing nnünam ; in ρ ta has been supplied by 2nd 
hand II 
19 After iti, Ψ ins. kathä 20 II, PPr kathä π 20 li, Ρ flourish il li, 
M kathä II 20, ρ kathä 19 I) 
Page 95. 
1 Ν prâha for äha II 
2 ΨΡρ abhihiti II 
3 Ν garudaprâha II 
5 Ν 
om. na II 
8 I tatah for tat tl 
10 M om. na II 
11 Pr kalaval for 
putraval II Ν läbhayen II bhN4'PPrp (not M) chreyam, A sreyam ; Bh with 
us II 
14 Ν samänitäs II 
16 Pr älokya. In Ψ, avalokya has been coït. 
from älokya by cop. II Pr pramyoväca II 
18 bhN bhagavan lajjayä II 
Pr om. mayâ II 
19 bhN eehalatäm II 
22 Ν bhagavatä muktam for 
bhavatä II 
Page 96. 
1 In bh, samudräd a" has been corr. by corr. into samudrämdakäny, which 
is also the reading of Ν II M samtosäsura" II 
2 bhN gaechämak II 
3 
Pr änuyasiram, ΨΡΜρ ägneyaSaram II 
5 bh^P "cakitaip, sakala", in bh corr. 
to our reading by cop. Il 
8 Ν ajñayeti. After iti, PMp ins. the number 
21, omitting kathä II bhN avagatas tatvärthaS II 
10 bhN A^PPrMpBh 
praiastämgah (Ν °mga). Cp. Sär. 47, 4, and above, 70, 2. In SP and Simpl. 
bhN, "ψ· PPr M 

Booh I 
119 
the passage is altered. 
The corruption of our MSS. of Pürn. may originate 
in a correction of some previous MS., where era or èra was written over éa, 
which some copyist misread for pra II 
13 Ν utthäya for ulctvä II 
M 
karatasakäsarg, II 
14 ΜιΝΨΡΡγΜ bhimâitau\ ApBh with us II Ν kara-
taka präha II 
15 bhN jnäsyasi bhavän II Ν karat aia präha II 17 bhN 
ivdmbhasä II 
18 Ν damanakapräha II 
20 Ν om. hi II 
22 Ν ksamayo II 
Ν nistä for visthä II M om. vä nisthä II Ν yasyeham II 
24 Ν damanaka 
präha II 
27 bhN püväpakärinäm II 
28 PL1 anyatra for anyac ca II bh 
vihato, Ν vihito for nihato II bhN eva for esa II ΨΡΜρ (not Pr) bhavisyasi II 
30 Ν caturakopamä II 
31 Ν karataka präha II 
Page 97. 
2 bhN °caturakâêamku II 
5 ΨΡΡι·Μρ âêritah II 
8 ΦΡΡγ (not ρ)M 
om. te II 
11 Ν svämi II Ν buddhipravena II 
12 Ν tathâ for yathä II 
Ν ins. ca after vyäpädayati II 
13 bhNASt'Prp akrtam ; PBh and Simpl. 
MSS. H I h with us II 
14 In Φ gloss by cop. on täm : buddhim II 
17 
Ν varuyämi II PrM tatah, ΨΡ tata for tac II 
18 ΨΡΡί'Μρ om. bho II 
19 
Ν adhikalpah II 
20 bh dvigunäläbhena, corr. to our reading by cop. II 
21 
Φ prânam bhavati, but yäträ supplied by cop. under the line II 
22 Ν 
famkukarnapräha II 
23 M evarn deva for etad èva II 
Page 98. 
3 bh tataScaScaturaka, the first éca del. by cop. II 
5 Ρ °âstasamaya» II 
6 Ν caturaka präha II Ν tvam for evarn II 
9 Ψ id at m II 4*PPrMp èva 
for evarn, Il 
Ψ Ρ PrM pratipanna II 
bhN simhamatähato II 
11 Pr äha 
for òsa II 
12 Ν stviham for simham II 
16 Ν kravyamukha präha II 
19 Ν caturagenâ° il 
21 Ν kempi, pi being deleted by cop., who con-
tinues gram II 
bhN ustrarn for ustra II 
22 Ν vyäpädaya ity II 
Page 99. 
2 Ν deSäm gatah II 
3 M kimcimt ta srtya II 
5 M evam sminn for 
etaminn II bhNA^PPrpBh däserakanätho, M däserakänätho ; Simpl. MSS. H 
mahädäserakasärtho, I mahädäserathakasärtho, h mahän dâêeraja[ja del. by 
corr .~\kasärtho II 
β Ψ Ρ PrM griväbaddha0 II bh (not Ν) ΑΦΡΡγ ρ °tanatkära° 
for "ranatkära", Μ griväbaddhavrhatä\cavx. to ta]gharjighathanatkärakäfi II 
Ν 
samâgati II 
7 ^PPrMp simhas caturakam for ύψ ja II 
10 bh'I'PPrp 
gamyatäm 2 ; in N, ra is written for 2, the copyist foolishly misreading this 
figure II 
11 bhNA^PPrMpBh om. mam II 
12 Ν caturaka präha II 
15 bhN'í'PPrp grhï" (in bh corr. by cop. from grahl°) for grahlM 
gahl" ; 
Bh grhlsyämi, A grahïsyâmi II 
16 M om. pitr II 
17 Ν grupaiti for 
'bhyupaiti II 
20 After iti, Φ ins. kathä 21 
PPr kathä η 21 η Ρ adding 
bhN, ΨρργΜ 

120 
Variants 
flourish II η ; ρ kathä 21, M kathä ι 21 II 
21 Ν taddanyendpi II 
22 Ν 
nirjanavanam II Pr svämi II 
PL1 ca for hi II 
23 Ν dürastho amati no 
Svaset II 
24 bhM dìrghe, corr. in bh. by corr. to dìrghau II Ν bâhu II 
Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ pramädinärp, II 
25 Pr ivanumrämi II 
Ν om. matvä II 
Page 100. 
5 Pr nitya II APrM anäylkrtam II 
8 bhPrMp "vikïrttUa, Φ Ρ °ciMrttita°, 
Ν "vikïrtita, in ρ corrected to our reading ; ABh "vikarttita II Ν svairmgä-
Ihyäm II 
9 bhN kasmäd for tasmäd II Pr apitya n 
10 Pr karakah Ii 
Ν par aspara II bh sähepam ; the cop. writes 2 over lese, 1 over pam·, Ν 
säpeksam II 
12 M tata for tatas II M om. na nïtitattvam II 
16 Over 
avidhinä, cop. of Ψ writes yâ dhavitu, Ν tvam vidhinâ II M dadodyam.au, 
Φ Ρ Ρ Γ (not ρ) damdodyamau II 
19 
Φ Ρ Γ sämawa° in Φ corr. from sâmnaivâ° 
by cop. ; Ρ (not ρ) sämevaM 
sâmnevâsämnai" 
also Hamb. MSS. and ABh lt> 
21 Pr müha for müdha II bhN mamtrapadam II 
23 Ν sämädi II 
Pr 
damdamaryamto II 
27 M om. siddhih syât tatra II 
31 Pr satvahitä II 
Page 101. 
2 In Φ gloss over balavatâm by cop : etemm II bhN upäyäh krâmti" Il Iû 
Φ, gloss by cop. upon "y&kränti : prosata II 
3 ΦΡΡτ (not ρ) atibhûmigato, 
with gloss in Φ by cop. : ahamkära II M yâto for gato II bhN ätmä vi" II 
5 Pr yä II bhPr (not Φ) PMpBh labdhem, Ν ladlhem, 
A lahdhe II 
Pr 
"nigrahä II 
6 bhN dharmenayä II 
7 M samjayate II 
9 Cop. of Φ 
om. the words tadyathä &c. to so excl. line io, but supplies them in marg. n 
10 Ρ °vïbhâgme, L1 °oibhânma, PrM °vïbhâgena. The readings of PL1 are 
misreadings of the form which go has in Φ, where a small stroke unites the 
second vertical stroke of g with the somewhat longer second o-stroke with 
the result that it looks like gma. 
The copyist of the archetype of PrM took 
it for ga na. 
The first o-stroke before the aksara was naturally taken by 
the copyist of Ρ and that of the archetype of PrM as e-stroke, whereas the 
copyist of L 1 took it for the initial stroke of η II After iti, 
Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ Ρ ins. 
pameämgo mamtrah II 
11 Over mahätyayo, gloss by cop. of Φ : vinàêa II bh 
taradava, the COÏT, writing 1 over va, 2 over da ; Ν tamvamda for tad atra ; ABh 
with Φ II 
12 Ν vinipätaS for vinipätapratlkâras, Φ °kärah kâryasiddhiS cèti 
pameämgo mamtrah, the words from sôyam incl. to mamtrah incl. being 
bracketed by cop., who writes again sôyam and the following text to °kâraê II 
ΜιΝΦΡΡγ (not ρ) MBh bhinnasamdhänam, A bhinnasamdhyänam II 
15 
Ν pâtayituéakti for pä° a0 Saktir II 
Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ Ρ 
èva for asti 
II 
Pr ndkho 
vrddhartum II 
Bh utrapitim, M utripiti, Pr uttipitim, bh tamkanikâm, Ν 
thamkanikäm for utripitim·, cp. WZKM. xx. 402 ; ΑΦΡ with us, SimpL MSS. 
H utrapitim, I utrâpatim, h atränäpatin II 
1 8 Ν catuprabodhanam II 
Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ Ρ 
bhN, Ψ Ρ PrM 

Book I 
121 
ivâmdhakrt II 
21 Fr ins. karam before karatakah II M agät for agamat II 
23 ΜιΝΨρ nicamanänu, in Ψ COÏT, to nîcamanonu, which is the reading of 
PPrM ; in ρ first corrected to "no", then to °tä° ; in Φ gloss : bhavamti. 
Sar. 
SPc, ABh with us. 
Cp. S P k j η(κ) nämcamatänuvrttino; 
Simpl. MSS. H I 
nïcajanânuvarttino, h nämcajanänuvartrino II 
26 Ρ sapanna , NAPr sam-
panna ; Bh with us II 
27 Ν "parìjasya II 
28 M °vidâ 'smanmamtrinä II 
31 Pr vivikta râjânam II Ν icchämi II Ν kirn na tsi II 
Page 102. 
1 ΦΡΡΓΜ om. kim, ca II M puruse ; in Φ gloss by cop. on parure : 
kaßore, 
r torn off with part of margin, e still visible II Pr advesyam n 
2 PPr 
êâvyam, M sovyam II 
bhN ca for hi II 
5 Pr êâcyena II 
7 bhNpurusena II 
9 M tathd call 
Pr bhrtyayatä II 
10 bhNAΦPPrMp vinôdadheh ; Bh 
with us II 
13 Ν gati II 
15 Cop. of Φ gloss on mahän : purusa, and on 
pranunno : prerita II 
Pr dhâratâm II 
19 ΦΡΓ svâmin II 
ΦΡγΜρ sädguno", 
PL 1 sädbhuno" II 
21 Pr °kärmuke II 
23 Ψ PPr ρ äkhyänam·, M om. 
âkhyâ/nakam II 
Pr äyate II 
24 bh nagnah, corr. by corr. to nagna; 
Ν 
nagnaSravanako II 
26 Κ damanaka präha II 
28 Ν ayodhä, M ahodhyâ II 
30 Mpratipannâ·, in bh gloss on vipratipannä ·. garvitäh II 
Page 103. 
1 M räjänatah II Pr om. ca II M vimdhiko II 
2 M om. ca after evam Ii 
3 M badrasacivam II 
4 ΦΡΡτΜρ "sramanakas II Pr om. puHrn Ii 
5 In N, 
praêna by cop. corr. to prasra" II 
6 Ν °drehkänabh °drekäna°, the corr. 
adding visarga after dre, ΦΡ °drekväna (if being often written 
in MSS.), 
Prp °dreskäna° il 
M 0vitäculu for °cintäeuluka II 
In Pr "müla* corr. by cop. 
from °mütra° II 
10 Ν om. para0 and the following words toparam excl. II 
M paraviUacottâras II 
11 Pr phalai II 
bh jnäsyasi (in spite of bhavän) II 
12 ΦΡΡΓΜρ om. ca after ekadä II 
13 PrMp räjabhavanam II Pr anuvwyaha II 
16 bhN tatah for gatah, corr. by corr. of bh to gatah II 
18 ΝΦΡΡΓ 
prstavyah II Φ param [new line] kau II 
19 Over äcärya and mahäräja, 
cop. of Φ gloss : he II Pr om. war gam II 
21 Ν särvopyepi for sarväny api II 
23 Ν räjapadämtikam II M svamina II 
24 ΦΡΡΓΜ ekâmtopavâêitamamtri"; 
ρ ekâmtâéritamamtricorr. 
from another reading II M naîva for tenaîva II 
ΦΡΡγΜρ °êramanena II 
Page 104. 
1 M °vadakamalam II 
2 Pr jay a II M jayatu devânâprtya iti II 
4 
After âha Ν mahä\räja sarvadinesu svarggam gacchämi\bahünäm &c. ; 
the 
brackets by copyist II 
5 M om. srüyate II 
7 Ν yad for yady II 
8 Pr 
uktâ II 
9 Pr skrtvä II 
11 ΦΡΡΓΜ ati for iti ; ABh with bhN II Ν tva, 
bhN, ΫΡΡΓΜ 
R 

122 
Variants 
then a dot indicating one missing aksara, then se ; over tvarase in bh gloss 
tvam by corr. II 
1 4 Pr kimcimi ti II 
15 Cop. of Ψ gloss over deva : he II 
Ν asmi for asmin II 
19 In bh gloss onprâtiveSmakâ": pâdoêî II 
¡20 PL 1 
paiyâsthâham, M pasyasvâhâm for paêya, amba, aham II In bh gloss above kendpy
adrstena : äkäSaväni II 
22 Corr. of bh adds h after vrâhmana ; cop. of Φ 
gloss over vrâhmana : he II 
M "gyânmta II 
23 After parama Pr repeats the 
words vrâhmanas tasya vrâhmani &c. 1. 18 to êrutvâ 1. 22 incl. II Ν "pramoda-
pûrnamâna° II 
Page 105. 
2 N ^ P P r p tyajatâm II 
3 M om. nâdrtya II ΦΡρ 0väcchalyäd II 
M 
stanapayitvâ for snapayitvâ II 
β Pr °veêmika° Il bhN vivâhotsavâm, in bh 
corr. by corr. Il 
L 1 om. all between avalokya and taduparodhâd, 1. il II 
7 
bhN tavdjM, in bh corr. to our reading by corr. IL 
9 ΦΡΡΓ Μ Ρ om. 
pararti II 
10 M müdha, Pp müdho II Ν om. sarpasya II 
11 Ν ins. sa 
before saviSesam II 
13 Pr kurkkuta", Ν kurkuta", M kukuta II 
M präptam II 
14 Ν °samudbhäva" for "sadbhäva" II Ν "samsrayani", om. "ya II 
Ν "grahe II 
17 Ν uktah 'säv II Ψ Ρ Pr M svaputrayogyäm II 
19 ΦΡΡτ (not p) M om. 
tato II 
20 M gudyatâm II 
23 bhN °vistar ita II 
24 Pr abravan II 
Pr sadbhi drsam II Ν ïdrSîm II 
Page 106. 
1 bhN satair, corr. from savair by cop., ΨΡΡΓ savaira, M savira for 
sarvair ; ABh with us II ΦΡΡΓΜ ivo" for evo" II 
2 M graàopavisfambhita0 II 
PL 1 tathâ for tayá II 
3 M om. vidambanayâ II 
4 PL1 om. the second 
päda II 
5 bhNPr kanyâ II 
M om. one sakrt II 
β M püryamrvänirmmi-
tarn II 
12 bhN nâmâ II ΦΡΡί'Μρ mâhemdra II 
13 ΦΡΓ samäyätam, 
COÏT, by both copyists from samâyâmtam. A with us, Bh samägatam II 
1 5 
Ν éuka prâha II 
18 Ν y ama prâha II Pr kâtrah for kälah II 
19 ΨΡ and 
first hand of ρ om. tam after ca; in Φ it is added over the line, perhaps by 
cop. II 
20 Pr eva for etaj II 
22 ΦΡ evakullta" ; ρ evakulì[3rd hand 
adds bAu\ta°, M evâkullkrta" II 
23 Pr to for tato II 
24 Ν asyokte for 
asya I iti II 
Page 107. 
1 After iti, Pr adds 33 n kathâ ιι, ΦΜρ add 23 kathâ, Ρ kathâ ιι 23 ιι II 
2 M kanyäkrta, bh kanyànrtavadavanlyatâ, corr. by cop. to °nrtavaravinïyatà ; 
Ν kanyänrtayadavaniyatä II 
3 M sä rppena II 
4 ΦΡΡΓ ärabdhäh II 
6 
Pr paramapurusa II 
1 1 bhN anubhütam, ΦΡΡΓ Ρ anubhütäm ; ABh with us II 
12 Îrpûrvo sthitas II 
14 Ν patnâ II Ν vârttâ", om. sneha II 
15 After 
this line Pr adds kathâ II, ΦΜρ add : kathâ (M adds ι) 23; Ρ kathâ ιι 23 ιι 
flourish ιι II 
16 ΦΡΡΓρ nagnaSramanagarbhâm, M nagnairamanagarbhâ II 
bhN, ·Φ"ΡΡΓΜ 

Booh I 
123 
18 bhN nagnaSravanako II ΦΡΡγΜρ sramanako II 
ΜιΦΡΡγ dagdhêti, A 
daggha iti, Bh dagdha iti II After iti, Φ kathâ 22 II, PPr : kathä n 22 π Ρ 
flourish μ π, ρ : 22 (om. kathâ), M kathâ 32(!) Il Pr eian for tat II 
19 
Ψ PPr ρ kevalam mard5 II ΦΡΡτΜρ °êopajtvinâ II In bh gloss on nîtimârggâna-
Ihijnâh : tvadvidhâh II ΦΡρ °mârggânabhijfiena, Pr °mârggânabhijneya, M °mâ-
nanalhijñena II 
20 Pr durtritvam II 
22 bhN cetakiΦ PPr cimcini°, 
M vivini", ρ vetasa°, corrected from some other aksaras, the first of which was 
cim; A vetaki", Bh Sâr.a, SP (most of the MSS.), ν ketaka. 
Sär. β with us. 
The stanza is absent from the Hamb. MSS. ll 
23 Pr °ndgamya II 
24 
í P P r p 39 (which is also the number of the preceding stanza in these MSS.) 
for yatah ; M om, y at ah II 
25 ΦΡΡγΜρ om. this stanza II 
Page 108. 
1 bhN tavâpaêadasyo0 II 
2 ΦΡΜρ ndnamyamf Pr nd 'namyam II 
3 bh 
êûcimukhyâ ivaSisya, corr. to "sye by corr. ; Ν êuciêukhyâ ivdsisya II 
4 Ν 
damanaka prâha II 
ΦΡΡτΜρ katham cattai II 
6 Pr tac cêhamamtakâle II 
7 Pr upaSyat II 
β Ν "pradeêât II 
11 bhN "dhaman II 
14 Ν dharmani 
for dhamati II 
16 ^PPPrMp wdvijito, in ρ corr. to our reading II 
17 
ΦΡΡγρ om. netra, which in ρ has been supplied by 3rd hand; M om. 
ktranetra II 
19 Φ PPr ρ ndnamyam, M ndmamyam II After iti, Φ PPr M: 
2Í kathâ II Ρ adds flourish ιι ιι, ρ : 25 kathâ II 
22 bhN upajâtas II 
23 
bhN apijätas, corr. by con·, of bh to atijätas II Pr 'jâtaé for 'nujâtaS II 
24 
Pr °darêitah II 
25 Pr tv anujâta pituh, ΦΡΜ (not ρ) unmetrically tv anu-
jâtaê capituh II 
26 bhN atijâto II 
Page 109. 
4 Φ PPr °saudaryarç, II 
5 bhNΦPPrM yarp foto for 'lamkrto·, in ρ lam 
corr. from some other aksara; ABh with us II 
6 Ν idam for cêdam II 
8 bhNΦPPrM dhüpena, ρ dhümem, me being corrected from another aksara; 
Sär. SP Hamb. MSS. ABh with us ; h dhümena II 
9 Ν damanaka prâha II 
11 bhN om. asti ; but cp. Sâr. and Simpl. 11 Pr deSâmtwrau gatau II 
13 bh 
om. atha, leaving a blank in its place, in which atha has been supplied by 
a corr. II 
14 M om. kalaSagatam II ΦΡΡγΜρ om. tv, which, in p, has 
been supplied by 3rd hand II 
15 Prom, gacchâvah·, Ν gacchâvah I iti ; 
the other MSS. gacchâva iti. 
This use of the indicative is not rare 11 
18 Pr "samaksa jvalam II M vyavaharisyâma II 
20 ΦΡΡγΜρ avyavicchinnah, 
corr. in ρ to our reading II 
22 ΦΡΡΓρ truti", M trudi", for hrâsa" II 
23 
Pr svabhävärthatayä II 
25 ΦΡΡι·ρ ins. niksipya, M tiksipya before suguptam ; 
nihipya evidently was a gloss of the archetype of these MSS. ll 
PL1 
atahâyavyamna , M asadavy ay ataña" II 
bhN, ΫΡΡγΜ 

124 
Variants 
Fago 110. 
2 Ν transp. : tad api tasya II 
3 M rählnam for pariksìnam II 
4 M 
caturbhi I êataih êatair api kirn II 
S M sastaiatäny iva, ° Il 
12 Over 
dharmmabuddhe in Ψ, and under dha in bh, glosa : he II 
18 M vamhatau 
for vivadantau II 
20 Ν transp. nyâyah drsto II 
21 ΨΡΡι-Μρ om. yatah II 
22 bhN kimväde II 
24 M vacanadevatä II 
Page 111. 
4 Ν püjyate for yvjyate II PrMp vanadevatâ II 
5 Ν mamâham for mahat II 
M mahäkautukam II 
7 Ν sarjjitau II 
8 Ρ (not L1) matpänim gatas Ii 
10 Ν pürvotkhätanidkänasam\ßam del. by cop.]/5n[¿ del. by cop¡\deSastlixC ; 
ΨΡΡτΜρ om. samnidhäna II M om. sthaSa II 
11 Pr om. tvärn II 
12 Ν 
punar for putra II 
18 M bakasanâtho II 
20 Ν ins. täni before bhaksayan II 
21 ΨΡρ "siêur vai° Il Pr yadhomukhas II 
23 ^PPrp rudyase, M only te II 
Ν bakapräha II 
Page 112. 
1 Pr ha for 'kam ; M om. 'harn II 
2 M tadnhkhitomham II 
3 ^PPrMp 
om. me II 
5 Pr °sahavairi II 
9 Pr dy for yady II bhN^PMp °samdáni ; 
APrBh with us II 
Ι ί Μ ι Ν Ψ Ρ Μ ρ °samda ; A has a gap here; Bh 
°khamda II 
14 After iti, ΨΜρ kathâ 26, PrP kathä π 26 ιι Ρ adds 
flourish II 
17 bhN dharmabuddhih pu II Ν °kärinikaih, ΨΡΜρ °kara-
naih, corr. in ρ to our reading by the copyist; Pr rvyädhikaranaih for 
dharmâdhi0 II 
18 Ν Sacirg for êam%m II Ν sametya II 
Page 113. 
1 Ν transp. : te sane II 
2 bhN viharanocitam II 
4 Pr jvälati, Φ Ρ ρ 
jvaliti, in ρ corr. to our reading II 
5 bh âkramdayan, corr. by cop. to 
äkramdan ; Ν äkramdat II 
7 Pr om. idarn II 
10 M dharmmabuddhiê 
cyêti II 
After iti, Ρ ins. kathä ιι 25 η flourish ", ΨΜρ: 25 kathâ, Pr 29 
kathä ιι II 
16 M jijvimjvam for dvijihvam, II 
17 bhN khalaíceheé ca II 
18 M om. kasmät II 
20 In margin of Ψ gloss on °lopaelrno : pum(l)pa, the 
rest being torn off with part of marg. II 
21 Ν sargdanâd II 
22 bh 
vaéista", Ν vasista" for viéista° II 
Ρ (not ρ) om. khalah II 
24 Pr °vicaksana, 
followed by danda II 
26 Ν °damdinah, PrM devadamditah II 
29 
ΝΦΡΡγΜ (not bhp) om. line 29 and page 114,1. l II 
Page 114. 
3 ΦΡΡγ (not p) M tava for tat II 
4 M vidvän rXjubhigamyo II 
bhN^PPr 
vâpramàdinâ ; ApBh with us II 
5 bhN rjur mûr Mas against the metre II 
Ν mürkhah êathah II Pr tyäjah II 
7 Ν athenâm for apy enärn II Pr enä 
bhN, ΨρργΜ 

Book I 
125 
'vasthäm II M na caXnyo for tavânyo II M om. jano II Ν trnabhü va Il 
9 
Ρ kur¡ijaradvat, 
L1 kumjaratadvat 
for kuñjarahft 
II 
12 ΦΡΓ (not Ρ) näduko 
(cp. 115, 12); ρ nämduko 
(sic!) II NM vanikaputrah 
II 
1 3 Pr °gamana 
cimtayat 
II 
1 5 bhN vatset II 
23 Ν laksmana II Ν näruka, ΦΡΓ näduka, 
ρ nämduka (sie !) II 
24 Ν jumps from the first hhaksitä to the second 
hhaksitä, om. one of them and all between them η ΦΡΓ nädukah, ρ nämdu-
kah il 
25 ΦΡΡτΜρ om. sä, which in ρ has been supplied by 3rd hand II 
bhN^PPrp yat for yata; 
Bh y at ah, A with us II 
26 bhN ava for atra; 
BhA with ΦΡΜ II 
Page 115. 
2 PL1 om. saha II 
3 ΦΡΓ nädukah, Ρ nämdukah II 
6 Ν p r e y a m II 
8 M om. tathä ca II 
1 0 ΦΡΜpravarttavyä II Ν bhayädvahä 
II 
1 1 Ν 
laksmanah jmtrahw 
Ρ nämdukena, ΦΡΓ nädukena II 
12 Ψ here näduko-, 
Prp om. näduko II 
1 3 ρ präksipat 
II 
1 4 Pr nâduka, ρ nämduka II 
1 5 
ΦΡΓ näduka, Ρ nämtuka (sie !) II Ν näduka praha II 
1 6 Ν laksmana präha II 
Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ Ρ om. the text between °nâpahrtah, 
1. 16, and hho laksmana, 1. 18. In 
ρ it has been supplied in margin by 3rd hand 11 
1 7 Ν ätathyaväti\ti 
del. 
by cop.~\din II 
1 9 Ν lohamayltuläm 
II 
22 ΦΡΓ nädukena° II 
23 ΦΡΓ 
nädukam II 
24 ΦΡΓ näduko II 
Page 116. 
1 ΦΡΓ näduka II Pr sabhyam for satyam II 
2 ^ΝΦΡΡΓ upahartum ; 
ABh with us II ΦΡΓ näduko II 
3 PL1 so for IhoTi II 
6 ΦΡΓ näduko II 
9 After iti, PPr ins. kathä u 27 II Ρ flourish H π, ΦΜ kathä ι 27 II 
1 1 M om. 
kulänvitam 
II Pr durbhaga 
II 
1 3 Μ Ι Ν Α Φ Ρ Μ vairüpyopahrtäi\ 
Pr Bh and 
Simpl. HI with us ; Simpl. h vidürypopahatäS 
ca, corr. by corr. to viruypopa 
II 
bh kämtavapusäm, 
Ν kämtavapuspam 
II Ν duhkhitah 
for duhsthitä 
II 
1 5 
Ν tathä ca II 
1 6 ΜΙΦΡΡΓΜ duseärinyah, 
Ν duècàrinyàrp, ; Bh duicäritryäh 
; 
A with us; Simpl. HI kulatänäm, h asatlnäm 
II 
1 7 Μ Ι Ν Α Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ 
cesti-
tavi·, Bh with us. 
In Simpl. MSS. Hlh this stanza is missing II 
bh 
prattater 
; Ν prakr, then blank for one aksara, then tte; 
ABh with ΦΡΜ II 
1 8 ΦΡΡΓ karisyate 
II 
22 M mûrkhena sahaSräni väsopi 
II 
24 ab in M 
only : varam jaladhipätanam 
II 
Ν °jvanävarapätanam, 
Pr 
jvalanävatava[va 
corr. by cop. from la]uam II 
27 Ν rava for iva II Ν Subhät for su ga II 
Page 117. 
1 Ν yätdpy 
for mätdpy II 
2 Pr gaväiinaih 
II 
3 bhN vaeä, in bh 
corr. by cop. from vacah ; Pr gir ah for vacah 11 
9 Pr ekasmimscit 
II 
1 1 
Pr apetam II Pr dvitlyah 
II Ν pamjare 
II 
12 Ν ärabdhäh II 
1 5 ΦΜ 
tana, PPr tena for tata II 
1 6 Φ PPr M ägacchamtam 
for ägatam II 
1 7 
Pr äkarot II 
bhN "svämina, 
Α Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ "svämin, 
Β svämin, without madìya II 
bhN, Ψ PPr M 

126 
Variants 
18 Bh athaînatp, badha vodka vyâpâdayati ; A tad enam layidhaya 2 vyäpädaya 
2 iti. See 118,2 
II 
1
9 Ψ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ transpose : räjä tat II 
M om. éukavacanam II 
30 Pr räjä anyata dû" II 
21 Ν âêrayam II 
23 Pr 'syärtAapä0 II 
P a g e 118. 
2 Bh vadha 2 pätaya 2 ity ; A barpdha ghätayata ity II 
5 After bravanti 
Pr adds kathä II, Ψ Ρ add : kathä n 28, Ρ adding ΙΙ flourish IMI ; M kathä 28, 
ρ 29 kathä II 
β Pr om. yatah II 
8 Ν svavadhyärthi II 
9 Ν damanaka 
präha II 
11 M only bhyäm for vanik" II Ν vanikaputrabhrtrputräbhyäm II 
13 Pr anulhavati II 
14 bh Ν Φ Ρ Pr M räjäniti ° ; A with us, Bh räjanltivi-
mukho bhavän II 
15 Ν om. piträ II Pr °dukham, ΨΡ "dukkham, cop. of Ψ 
inserting afterwards A before °kkha° II 
16 bhN^PPr te cdhatuh, M te 
vdhetuh ; ABh with us II bhN sammukhau ; A with us ; in Bh this passage 
is altered II 
18 Φ Ρ ndjñátam, PrM no jñátam II Pr catväromapy for ca 
tvâm apy II 
19 ΨΡ om. duhkhena duhkhitam dntvdti, but cop. of Ψ adds 
these wordB in marg. 11 
24 M vagamtum for kva ganturji n 
P a g e 119. 
1 Μ Ι Ν Ψ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ kapy, A kvdpy ; Bh kva 'pi ndbhi°} in spite of na khalu ! II 
2 Pr om. iti II 
3 Pr °manorathäm anuvisyâmah II 
7 Ν prasthitaikar for 
prasthitair II Ν bhataputro II 
8 Ν tav yaya" for tan mayâ° II Ν cir¡vtiti II 
9 M tvamodataraw, Il 
10 In Ψ, cop. adds na over the line, putting 
a small vertical stroke over the preceding yä to indicate the end of the 
word. 
Owing to the small interval between the lines, na is not very-
distinct and may easily be misread for ja or ni. 
PL1 indeed misread 
it for ja, and taking the preceding separation stroke for an e-stroke, 
both these MSS. write je for na ; Pr ni for na II M bhojaveläyäm II 
18 
M Ugno 'bravlt, om. ca II 
21 Pr om. samesyâmi II bhNA'ï'PPrMBh 
sahàya" 
I l 
2
3 
Ψ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ märggäsannä bhilla' IL 
2
4 Pr "grha II 
Page 120. 
1 Ν vitmänä" II Ν pakñ for vrddha II 
2 Ν °rupayo0 for βrutabhäsä" II 
5 M om. ratnäni II Ν grhïta for gf gr° II 
β Over änayata, gloss in bh : 
yüyam\ NM änayat II 
7 bh'f'PPrM ullarytïtânâm, Ν u§amtitänäm ; ABh 
with us (only A °ti° for °thi°) II 
8 In N, "pata" corr. by cop. to "para" II 
1
0 Pr yato for santo II 
1
1 
Ψ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ tärasvara-rp, IL 
1
3 N drstah\pratyayo II 
15 N ady for yady II bhN "pardpi II 
17 N jumps from the first avaíyam 
to the second avaHyam, 1. 18, om. one of them and all between them II 
19 
Ν vrärä° for kärä", Ψ Ρ Ρ γ käropavarake 
I I 
2
2 
Ψ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ om. tadä II 
Pr 
lobhävistäip II 
b h N , ΨΡΡΓΜ 

Booh I 
127 
Page 121. 
1 Pr avaiyam ga° II 
2 Ν siddhye II 
3 Ν avaram II Ν vidäranä II 
4 Ν "yodaresu nipunam II 
5 bhN ΑΦ Ρ vlhyamäno, Pr vlksyamänah ; Bh 
•with us II Ψ Ρ PrM transp. : sa durätmä (M durätma) η 
6 Ψ Ρ äsädayiti, 
in Φ corr. by cop. from äsädayati, which is the reading of PrM II bhN 
cchinnaratnasatvâsamêrayah·, Ψ Ρ chinnaratnasattátmm¿ayah, M cchinnaratna-
sattäsamSayah, Pr chinnaratnasabhävattähsamSayah, A chinnaratnasattâêamSayah, 
Bh chinnaratnasattäsamsaya II bhN ata for svata II 
7 Pr °vidäravidärana° II 
bhNAi'PPrBh nistrmSo, M nisrmêo II 
9 bh hatah, Ν atah Ii 
11 bhN 
ati° for at Adii" II 
13 Φ na ¿a{knyomyasa)knomy amìsàm, the brackets by 
cop. 
Pr esäm for amìsàm, a reading clearly going back to the slip of the 
pen of Φ II NPr svabhrätrnäm II bh drstum, Ν drstuhm for drastum II Pr 
jumps from the first °vidäranam to the second °vidâranam, 1. 14, om. one 
of them and all between them 11 
1 7 Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ °Vicäranamätro" IL 
M mahä-
vaiéasam II 
18 bh vaisasam, Ν vai sähasam for vaiêaaam II 
20 Pr »atvara 
prthivimm il bhN Saptâh for prâptâh, in bh corr. by glossator to our reading II 
24 Ψ Ρ PrM uktam for muktarn II Ν hhata II 
Page 122. 
• 1 Ν bhämdägäritve II 
2 M atah for atha II 
Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ om. the text 
between melayitoâ and râjâ, 1. 4 II 
3 Ν samgramina II 
S A om. 
here the words mitradvaye &c. to anubabMva incl., inserting them after 
avalokya, 1. is, and adding anyadâ; BhK with us, but with variants. 
Bh: 
mitradvayärppitasarvaräjyämgabhärah svacchamdavrttir viläsasaukhyäny anubha-
vati sma ; Κ mitradvaye samäropitasarvämgaräjyabhäracimtä svacchamdavrttir 
viläsataukhyam anubhavati sma II Ψ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ "vrttiviläsa" II Ν "saukhyänubabhüva II 
11 M om. all between räjdpi and svakhadga II bh^P (not Pr) vdnaram 
mativi" ; Ν vänaram ativi" ; ABh with us II 
12 Ν any a for atha II M 
rägrhäbhyäse II bhN Ψ Ρ nänätarukhamditam, M nânâtarusamdatam, ABh nânâ-
tarumamditam ; Pr with us II 
1 3 Pr prathamavanam II 
1 4 
Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ 
bahukummasugamdhiparimalaramanlyam II 
15 bhN grham for saha II bhN 
praviêyate II 
1 7 Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ om. êrântena II 
1 8 Ν sväpimi II 
2 3 Pr niväri-
tum II 
24 Φ Ρ punah, PrM punä, all these MSS. only once il 
Page 123. 
1 Ν bhramaraprahâram, om. m anw II 
4 Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ viérabdhe for viêvaste II 
7 Ν jumps from the first käryam to the second käryam, om. one of them and 
all between them II 
10 bhN halas for mrtaê II After nrpah, ΦΡΓ add 
kathä 29 ιι, Μ ι kathä ι, Ρ flourish π kathä it 29 ιι 
ιι II 
Ν karataka präha II 
bhN, Ψ Ρ PrM 

128 
Variants 
12 ΙΛΝΑΨΡΡΓΜΒΙΙ paimnya IL 
14 bhN amtäsv II Μ Ι Ν Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ naîva 
käryam ; in Φ a later hand adds gloss : niêcayam na Á'caroti ; A with us ; Bh 
naivdkärye vinaSyati II 
15 Ι Λ Ν Α Ψ Ρ Μ sädhu\ Bh mdhus tu ku ; Pr with 
us II Ν na for tat II 
16 M om. tathä II 
17 Φ Ρ vjhati (jha being 
written in Φ as in jjha, Table II, no. 12, 2 a), Pr upsati, Ν ujjati. N's reading 
is a misreading of the old-fashioned °jjh° of bh, which has the same form here 
as in Φ in our Table II, no. 9, 3 b II 
Ν °bhakta, M Sikhinuktanuktopi II 
18 First pâda in Pr : y ad äkäryam èva tarn akäryan II 
20 bhN prabodhi-
tair II 
21 Pr dhïyate, corr. from thïyate II 
23 M om. na kartavyam II 
26 Φ Ρ Ρ γ Μ om. tau II Pr krodhämtadhiyau II 
Page 124. 
2 Pr om. bhrtyasya II Ν pranâso II 
3 Pr bruvänäm for nrpänäm II 
4 
Ν bhrtyä, M bhrtyah II 
Θ Μ Ι Ν Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ brähmana sarvabhakñ ; Bh vrähmana 
sarvabhaksl ; A vrähmanah sarva°. 
Cp. on this stanza SP page lvii II 
10 
bhN câvaêyâ, M vavaêâ II Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ dust amatili II 
11 Φ pveksyah, PPr 
preksyah, M praksyah II bh 'dhakrtah II 
12 Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ tyäjyäh sa vai II 
ΦΡΡΓ krtam \ M caûrtam for ca krtyam II 
15 NPr dehim for deham II 
18 Pr om. räjyam II 
20 Ν om. api ca II ΦΡΡΓΜpurusâ II 
21 bhN 
caryaparä II 
22 Ν pracuranityadhanägamä ca ; cp. Sär. 63, 3 II 
23 M 
veêyâgateva II M nrpati\covT. from tinter II 
24 M athanägata èva II 
25 
Μ Ι Ν Ψ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ jänäsi ; Bh jänäti, om. na·, A with us II 
26 Ν samânadâna", 
ΦΡΡΓ sämamänadänaM 
sämämänadäna" II 
Page 125. 
1 ΜιΝΑΦΡΜ vlräh, Pr v'irà-, Bh with us (but hi for ca) u 
3 Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ 
nôpadeêyam II 
10 ΦΡΡΓΜ om. kim ca II ΦΡΡΓ prstäh prstä, M prstäh 
prstä II 
12 ΦΡΡΓΜ prstavyah II 
13 M om. sreyo vâbhihitam II 
15 
Ν om. the words between dríyate and vyomni II 16 M vadyate II bhN kha-
dyota II 
18 bh bhäväh, the first dot of the visarga being added above, the 
second one beneath the line (see vol. xi, Table II, no. 7, 4 b); hence Ν 
bhäväm II 
19 bh ta [new line] tasmäd, Ν (misreading ta for, or correcting 
it to, na) na tasmäd (vol. xi, Table II, no. 7,1.4 c and 1. 5 a) II 
26 Μ Ι Ν Φ Ρ Ρ Γ 
paravacanam pra ; Pr om. "nä. ABh with us II M ma for na, Ρ om. na II 
27 M vicäryabuddhinä II 
29 Φ prathamatamvam, Pr prathamatamtram, 
Ν prathamatarjitram II 
After tantram Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ ins. kathä n 29 II 
Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ 
ädya$lo° II 
30 bhNΦPPr snehéti, Φ with a danda and 9 avagrahas before 
snehêti ; M tarddhamâno mahanâ, A sneha iti, all these MSS. omitting the 
rest of this stanza. 
But cp. the end of the other books. 
After this stanza, 
Bh adds : na nlcajanasamsarggän naro bhadräni paêyati I vrsasimhabhavä prïtir 
jambukena vimêitâ ceti dvätrimSatimi kathä ιι flourish il êlokasahaSra 2000 iti 
bhN.^PPrM 

Booh II 
129 
Il flourish II èri il Cp. my remark on SPI, 1. I may add here, that the 
same stanza occurs in the MSS. Decc. Coll. II, 44, and XXIV (Bhand. Rep. 
97), 417. Both these MSS. have this stanza in the beginning of the first 
book after our first stanza. Variants: all, 44 °samparkdn ; cd both MSS. 
darêayaty eoa vikrtim svajanêpi khalo yathâ (417 vaio yatah) Il After snehéti, 
L 30, bhN add iti prathamam, äkhyänakam samâptam ; M pamca β [β indicating 
the abbreviation] prathamatamtram ; ΦΡΡΓ with us II 
BOOK II. 
P a g e 
1 2 6 . 
1 Owing to the loss of one leaf, there is a gap in the text of Φ extending 
from the beginning of book II down to 128,7 vasya »unaya excl. II Ν A om. 
arham II 
2 A mitrasampräptinäma, corr. from our reading ; Bh mitrapräpti-
näma, Φ mitrapräptir näma II Bh ädiSlokah, Φ ädyaSlokah, A ädimaSlokah II 
3 A buddhihïnâ It 
4 Φ käkesu mrgakürmavat II 
β M jam, om. 
"pade II 
Pr pramadârawpyam, M pramadârotharri II 
Φ prathamadäropyamma II 
A PPrM ΒΙιΦ ins. ca after tasya II M mahäcchräyo II 
7 ΒΙιΦ nyagrodhah 
(om. pädapah) ; M nyagrodhapàda salthyâêrayo II Pr sa cdêrayo for sarvâ-
Srayo II 
A om. uktam ca II 
8 Ν ûàkhâsuptamrgah II 
ΒΙιΦ âUnaUna-
chadah II 
9 Ν ttata" for krta" Il 
10 A vi&rahdho II A nipitakusuma-
Släghyah II 
11 M °yamgha° for "samgha II A "sukhadair II M om. bhübhära, 
1 2 
writing Ihr to II 
12 ΑΜΒΙιΦ om. ca II M vâsyaya [sicl] for väyasah II 
APPrM om. prâtah before prâna"\ Bh inserts it before pracalitah il Φ präta-
calitah II 
13 ΒΙιΦ tadadhistänanwäsinam II A äyätam, corr. from äyämtam li 
Bh äyämtanugrarüpam, Φ äyämtanugurüpam II 
14 A iphutitakawaranam ; 
ΒΙιΦ »piatita° ; Ν sphutiputakata\ta deleted by the copyist]ra?iira»a»î II 
bh udbaddhapimdakam II M itdbaddAapimdiparusaHariracckavirakiamfanayanam II 
Bh °chaviraktàyatanayanam II 
Φ iti purusaSarïrachaviraktâyatanayanam, A 
raktdmtarnayanam II 
15 Φ ürdhavardha0 II 
Ν om. all the text 
between iva and sarvapätakänäm (1. 16) II bh APPrM käla II 
16 A iva 
adharmopadestäram II 
ΒΙιΦ ägachamtam II Pr evam for ekarn II 
18 Pr 
"manacimtayat II PPrM papi II 
ΒΙιΦ om. kim after ciklrmti II ΒΙιΦ ma-
maîvârthâya II bh äho ici, Ν ahoêci, Pr äho évid, Ρ ahau seit, A aho Seit for 
aho «vit II 
19 bhN kitsad for kaécìd ; ΡγΒΙιΦ om. kaScid II 
A anyo 
'dhyävasäya, MN anyo 1syavasàya, Φ anyo }sädhyavasäya II Bh kotukopatas II 
Φ kautukapamrastham èva II 
20 ΜΒΙιΦ vitanya II A dMnyakanävakirya II 
From 126,1 bhN, A, PPrM, Bh<* 
s 

1 3 0 
Variants 
ΒΙιΦ viklrya II Bh4> dréor for tato. Cp. Sâr. 64,11 II Pr tidûre for nâtidûre II 
21 PPrMBh<I> atha for atra II 
Pr niyamtäs, M niyarntritäms II 
22 ΒΙιΦ 
kanän for tandulän II M ins. hâlân before hälähalam II 
24 ΒΙιΦ kanän for 
tandulän il Pr th for 'py II 
P a g e 
1 2 7 . 
1 A mahäjanam for mahäjälam II PPrMBh<& sa nìpàta for samnipäta* II 
2 bhN eva for evam II ΒΙιΦ na kasya kaScid dosah II Pr anya for asya Ii 
3 Φ vijüäyate II 
4 ΒΙιΦ vane for katham II Ρ "harinasyâmsambhavo II 
5 A anarthakam, corr. from anartha katham, ; M präptodyonartham, om. katham
6 A vipattigüdhamanamm II M hïmatih for ksïyale II 
7 Pr daivevista° II 
9 ΒΙιΦ om. atha II 
Ρ udyasya II 
1 0 PPrM päsabamdhanavya0 ( M "smä-
nulas, Pr °sanäkulams) II 
Ν pratyutpannatayä II 
ΒΙιΦ uväca II 
1 1 Bh 
om. the second na bhetavyam II 
12 Bh sarvesu vyasanesv eva, Φ sarvesu 
vyasaneppeva II M buddhi nihîyate II 
1 3 ΒΙιΦ alhyeti II 
1 4 Φ ekacitñbJiüya, 
Bh ekacitñyabhüya II 
Bh jälam iha krmtanïyam, Φ jälam iha krtanîyam II 
1 5 
Α Β Ι ι Φ asamhitacittänäm ; but cp. 1. 26 f. and sloka 7 a II 
1 6 M 
prthavägrlvä, ΒΙιΦ prthugrîvâh II 
Ν Α Ρ γ Β Ι ι Φ (not bhPM) anyonya II 
1 7 
ΒΙιΦ (not A!) asamhitâ II 
1 8 ΒΙιΦ om. katham etat II 
2 0 ΒΙιΦ om. 
hi II 
A bhäramdä, Ν bhädä II Ν om. all the text between pahinah and 
svecchayâ (1.22) II 
2 1 ΒΙιΦ om. ca II 
ΒΙιΦ om.prthakprthag II 
2 2 
M 
madhyâh II After paksimh, Φ (not Bh) inserts prativasati sma II Φ (not Bh) 
ekayä grvoäyä (J) na dattam tadä, &c., 1» 24 II 
Ν om. all between grivayä and 
kopât (1. 24), the missing text being supplied in the margin II 
23 A om. 
kvâpy II Bh om. atha II Ρ arddha <1 
24 Pr om. yadä II PM dviñyayd 
grivayä, Pr dvitïyayâm grivayä II 
25 A mrtyur evâbhavat II 
26 Bh (not Φ) 
vruvlmi II 
ΒΙιΦ prthugñva II After the first iti Ρ adds II 1 II kathä II, PrM 
1 kathä, ΒΙιΦ prathamakathä II 
Φ adds 1 II 
ΒΙιΦ ins. ca after evam II 
P a g e 
1 2 8 . 
1 PrM vitäne bamdham 11 A nirbhayapra" II 
2 Ν om. idam II ΒΙιΦ 
idam ity äkulacittah imam (Φ idam) êlokam II M iti cimtayat, A ity aeimtayat II
3 ΒΙιΦ haramtl (!) te II 
4 PL1 nu for tu ; ΒΙιΦ yadä bhuvi patisyamti (!) II 
ΒΙιΦ vaíyam η 
5 ΒΙιΦ anusartumW 6 Α °bhübhägän upari II M ramtum 
for gantum II Ν laghupatanakasya, om. ca II 
7 ΑΒΙιΦ om. ca after laghupa-
tanakaS II Φ sets in again with vasya sunaya" II Bh (not Φ !) ins. tu after 
Citragñvasya II A suHacaritena, corr. from our reading, ΒΙιΦ navacaritena II 
φ ins. sä before duradhya", but cop. deletes it again II ΒΙιΦ durabhi-
präyena·, but cp. 126, 19 II 
8 Φ muhu (once); A om. muhur muhur II 
Bh utsa~, Φ utsu for utsrjya II A kautukavaêas ; Pr kautukaparagya deva 
kapota° II 
9 Φ om. ca 11 Bh ay am, ea durätmä II ΒΙιΦ om. iti II 
From 128, 7 bhN, A, ^ Ρ PrM, Bh® 

Booh II 
131 
M risamamärgge vya" Il A om. jnätvä II A vihatâêah I abravU I pratinivrt
Bh pratinivrtte π avravit H 
12 Before the äryä, Φ (not Bh) inserts ΙΙιάνφαψ 
lhavan II Φ (not Bh) om. lhavati ca bhävyam II 
13 bhN bhavisyatä II 
14 M purnä II 
ΒΙιΦ ca for cet l\ 
1β A viharpgämisalabhah, corr. by 
a later hand to vihamgânâm esa läbhah II 
PrBh kutumba" II 
17 ΒΙιΦ 
pratyävrttam II 
18 ΒΙιΦ tadasmäkam II 
M pramadärobdhe na gaman
19 ΒΙιΦ y atas tatra ca uttaradigvibhäge II 
A harinyo, corr. from hirinyo 
Bh (not Φ1) hiranyanämä II 
ΨΡΡγΜ mama suhrd atiêayena priyah I ta
(M priyas tatra, om. the punctuation) vasati 11 
20 bhN A avalambitam II 
A pâàavimoksanâya iti II 
21 ΒΙιΦ tithaîvâ" Il 
A harinyamüsaka° II M ta
dhi laghu dur g g am, II 
ΨΡ ateruh II 
22 Pr tha for ca, but del. again without 
another correction II 
23 Ν Satamukhabilam II 
24 ΒΙιΦ paksipâêdA 
pakiapâtâ" II A harinyo II Φ (not Bh) nijabaladurggam anusrtya II 
26 A
märn etäm avasthäm ; Pr memenäm a° II 
27 Bh kratvä, Φ iva, for Srut
A durgämtara ; Bh durggâmmtakagatah (!), Φ durggârptaragatah II Pr bh
ihadra, but na corr. from some other aksara smeared with gamboge II 
28 Φ Ρ kadrg ca, M kidrg va II A I ta for te ; a later hand corrects this to tava II 
ΒΙιΦ k§amyatäm for kathyatâm II Ν citragrwapräha II 
29 ΒΙιΦ kapotas f
kapotapatis II 
ΒΙιΦ ins. tat before satvaram II 
Ν ins. Srutvä citram before 
tad äkarnya II 
30 ΒΙιΦ parihrsßtmä II bh niskämann, Ν niskämannam II 
(not Φ) avruvlt II 
31 Ν °kârinah for °däyinah II 
32 ΒΙιΦ mahätmanäm 
for krtätmanäm II 
Page 129. 
1 Pr atra for atha II 
Φ pâêabamdha, Bh päsabamdham II 
ΒΙιΦ savisäd
then Bh MranySvruvU, Φ hiranyo 'vravlt II 
2 ΒΙχΦ kathayati for kathaya, iti
ΒΙιΦ om. uktam ca II 
3 ΨΡΜ yasyän va II Φ (not Bh) yasmä canana ca 
yathä ca ya tvayä ca tva yatra ca éu II 
Β M om. tävac ca II 
7 ΒΙιΦ om. 
kirn ca II 
Φ Ρ Ρ γ Μ kirn locanänäm II 
ΒΙιΦ vikacotpalarptvisärp, II 
9 ΒΙ
yadâêu for yadasya II M mrtyurri II Bh (not Φ) puruto II Pr vijjambite I
12 Φ (not Bh) pärhasthiti II A daivä \ nam naiva, corr. in the margin by 
a later hand to daivä tad ναηαψ II 
13 Bh "karayo praha° II 
15 PrBh Φ 
samïksa II 
16 Φ (not Bh) ati for iti II Pr meti for me matih II 
17 M 
samghäthuvamty II 
18 ΒΙιΦ vadhyamte II 
19 Pr durrnlti kim II 
20 A 
om. hi ; a second hand supplies yam in the margin II 
21 Φ iiktä, Bh 
uktvâ II 
ΒΙιΦpä&än (Φpâêan) na chettum ärabdhah II 
22 ΒΙιΦ om. uktam 
ca II M ma for mama II A pâêam II Bh päsaS chi~täm, Φ päiasthitäm II 
ΒΙιΦ tad äkarnnya II M jam for na II A sväminä II 
24 M ins. ham before 
"nantaram II ΒΙιΦ om. bhadra II 
Φ mamawam II 
25 Φ (not Bh) om. tat II 
ΒΙιΦ kathaya me tävanmätram api sanmänam; then Bh na karomi, Φ takar
bhN, Α , ^ Ρ Ρ γ Μ , ΒΙιΦ 

132 
Variants 
bhN etävanmänam, M etanmätram II 
ΒΙιΦ ins. yatah after uktam ca II 
26 
Β Ι ι Φ datte II 
2 7 Bh vittäbhävo II A kätaräh for karhicit II 
3 0 Μ αραταψ 
va (read ca) mama II ΒΙιΦ kadäcin mama II ABh<í> atha, om. vä n 
31 Bh 
tad avaéyam, Φ tad avasyam, for tan ηϊιηαψ II 
A narakäpätah II 
Φ Ρ Ρ γ Μ om. 
ukiarp. ca II 
32 M tlianu for prabhuh II 
33 Φ (not Bh) ca before ridati II 
P a g e 
1 3 0 . 
1 A harinyah II 
Bh hiranya äha, Φ hiranydha II 
ΒΙιΦ βατναψ for imarp, II 
M svämin na dharmmarrt, II 
4 Μ ι Ν Α Ψ Ρ Μ (not PrBh) yaê ca for yasya il 
M nrtyesu II 
5 Bh trailokyasthäpi II 
7 ΒΙιΦ sväSrayajagama II M vedam II 
Pr om. sädhu cêdam ucyate II 
8 ΜιΝΑΦ duhsädham, Bh duhssädham, in A 
corr. by second hand to duhsädhyam, which is the reading of Φ Ρ Ρ γ Μ . 
Bead 
duhsädham (cp. Pan. III. 3, 26). 
But cp. 131, 26 II M viyatah for vai yatah II 
Ο ΒΙιΦ samMyeva, bhN samânyaîva, Φ Ρ Ρ γ sammänyawa, M saip,m.ânaîva; A 
with us II 
10 
Φ Ρ Ρ γ ins. ca after βατναψ II 
b h N A iamdhanamoksarp, ca, 
Φ Ρ Μ baipdkanamoksaqi, Pr bamdhanamoksyam, Φ Ρ Ρ γ Μ om. ca II ΒΙιΦ savismayo 
for vismitamanä II Pr cimtayat, Φ (not Bh) vacimtayat II After vyacinitayat, 
two leaves ai-e lost in Φ, which sets in again p. 134, 1. 18 II 
11 ΒΙιΦ 
luddhir aho II Pr hiranya, A harinya, A with a sya and a mis-written nya 
before nya deleted by the copyist himself by smearing sya and the first nya 
with gamboge II 
12 A hirinyena II ΒΙιΦ prltikaranam II 
ΒΙιΦ carnéala· 
prakrtir a(Bh e for r a)viSväsapara$ ca na ca kenapi varjtcayitum (Φ varpcayatuwi) 
êakyah (Φ êakya) H A viivdsatp na II 
13 Ν vamcituSakyas II bhN tatrâpi 
for tathdpi II 
ΒΙιΦ iti for èva II 
15 In bh a gloss on sväter : naksatrasya II 
Päda d in ΒΙιΦ : svâtyudakam samlhate II 
16 M päd, om. pâda" II 
17 
ΒΙιΦ tävad ehi ti for ita» tävat, iti II 
18 ΒΙιΦ om. kaêcit II bhN säviSesa" II 
19 Ν väyasa präha II 
20 ΒΙιΦ tad äkarnnya II 
A hirinyo II 
ΒΙιΦ om. 
viSesäd II 
Bh 'iptallmah, Φ 'mtaUnah II 
21 M om. sa, perhaps owing to 
the circumstance that in Pr sa looks exactly like se, as the visarga of η (in 
hhavän 1. 19) touches the right edge of the upper horizontal stroke of sa η 
ΒΙιΦ samägatah II 
22 N M hiranya präha ; Ν om. all the text between 
präha and bho vairarn 131, 2 II PL 1 'si for 'sti ; ΒΙιΦ om. 'di II ΒΙιΦ käryarp for 
prayqjanam II A om. iti II 
23 ΒΙιΦ om. me II Pr ti, ΒΙιΦ prilih 
for 
pratîtih II 
24 ΒΙιΦ om. bandhane samjäte II 
Bh bamdhamokso, Φ barpdha-
moksam II ΝΑΒΙιΦ om. iti il 
25 Φ (not Bh) om. all between the fíret 
maitri and uktam ca, 1. 26 II A hirinya aha, Bh hiranya äha II Bh Ihoktdham II 
26 b h A P P r M om. yo ; bhPPrM insert ya before ätmano II 
27 A M capi 
for vapi II 
ΒΙιΦ häsyatäm yäti sa ksitau II 
28 Φ rasyam, Bh rasyatäm for 
gamyatäm II 
29 Φ om. all between karosi and uktani ca II 
PL 1 karisyämiti, 
M karisyämi II Bh tvayä saha vairinä II 
From 130,11 bhN, Α,ΡΡι Μ, Bh<* 

Booh II 
133 
P a g e 
1 3 1 . 
1 ΒΙιΦ na hi for nästi II 
2 bhNAPM (not Pr) vividhatp, in A corr. to 
our reading by cop. Cp. 1. β II 
3 A yatah, but y a written on some aksara 
deleted with gamboge II 
4 After vairatp an aksara which seems to have 
been tta, ie deleted in A by two strokes and gamboge II Bh<I> prâk for dräk II 
6 Ν präha for äha in both places II 
7 Φ kärananippäditaip, II Bh nippä-
ditarp, A nispannam II Ρ krmitrimam II Ρ tat tad ahepikärakaranäd, bhPr tat tad 
ähepikäranäd, Ν tat ta ihepikäranäd, Φ tat tad ehopakäranäd, Bh tat tad . . . 
opakäraif,äd II ΒΙιΦ om. jmnah II 
8 M näma gacchati, Ρ napacchati, ΑΒΙιΦ 
na gachati II A omits all between nakulasarpänäm and pativratäkulatänätp, 
Φ omits all between °nakhäyudhänärp, and panditamürkhänäm (writing pämdi-
taimrsänärp)\ Φ then continues : pativratäkulatänärp, dvija [cp. Bh !] I jalänalayo 
devadetyänärp, *apäsaya\_cp. Bh \~\märjäränär[i sapatnyo »imhagcyänärp lahdhaka· 
Aarinänätp käkolükäno I digaqibaränätp [cp. Bh !] sajjanadurjanänärp,, &c. Here it 
is evident that the archetype of A and that of ΒΙιΦ had an omission, which, 
in the margin of the archetype of ΒΙιΦ, was supplied from another MS. 
Fortunately for us, the copyist of Φ inserted this addition into his text 
in a wrong place II 
bhN ΒΙιΦ Sisyabhuk° II 
9 Bh säpäsayamärjäränäm II 
M om. lubdhakaharinänäm II Ν ludhbake ha° Il 
IO Bh ins. dvijadigarpbaränäm 
before sajjana" Il A om. ca before nìtyavairaip, Il ΒΙιΦ nityam vairarp, (Φ mira) Il 
11 ΒΙιΦ kenâpi kasyacit il ΒΙιΦ fiata» for vyäpäditaA il In A the corr. deletes 
ofpränänbtäya\ Μρτάηάψία II ΒΙιΦ varttateÎQxyatante II 
12 Φ akäranetal(\)\\ 
13 M om. the first päda II ΒΙιΦ yäti for eti II 15 ΒΙιΦ om. mama II 
16 Bh 
arhati, Φ arhaei, for icchati II 
17 In bh gloss ongarbhàd : vesaragadhe(?) ; ΒΙιΦ 
garbham II 
18 bhNPBh panine, in bh corr. by corr. topäniner ; ApäninaA Ii 
19 Bh unmamotha, Φ unmotha, bhN untnamayya, the second ma being deleted 
in Ν by cop. II Bh munijaimunim, Φ munijemunitp, bhNAPr munirp, jaimaniip, 
Ρ munivp jaimunim, M munijaimanirji II 
20 Pr dvelâtate II 21 bh atirusärp,, but 
apparently corr. to abhirusätp by corr. ; Ν anirusärp ; PL1 "cetasäm mabhirusö^ ; 
A °cetasätp, matirusätp, Il Bh tiramyäm, Φ thiramyäm II 
22 Ν präha for äha II 
24 Bh bhayälobhäc, Φ bhayälokä II 
26 M dwrbheyuh, A durbhedah. All our 
other MSS. with us. Cp. 130,7 II Bh 'mukarasarridhiS ca, Φ makareúmdhis ca 
li 30 h II 
27 ΒΙιΦ ikso rasät Ii ΜιΦ the figure 2 for the second parvani, 
Ν neither this figure nor the second parvani II 
28 ΒΙιΦ viparitänäm ca 
viparltâm II 
29 A om. aparam II Ν präha for äha II 
30 ΒΙιΦ add 
yatah after ca II 
31 Pr samditasyâpi II Ν jumps from the first viiväsam 
to the second viêvâsam (132, l), om. one of them and all between them II 
ΒΙιΦ ripo II 
32 Bh vrttah for vrtrah II 
bhN, Aj PPrM, Bhi 

134 
Variants 
Page 132. 
1 PPrM om. tathä ca II 
2 A tridiêemdrena II 
Bh dite, Φ dine II 
Ρ diter cârbho, L1 diter vârbho II 
A vinâéitah II 
3 ΒΙιΦ suSlaksmenapi 
iatpdrena II 
4 P nâiayeê ca I) Bh Sanau II Bh pürvam, Φ pürva, Pr bhuvam 
(bhu being corr. by cop. from some other aksara smeared with gamboge) ; 
Μ λτηαναψ, A kulam for plavam II 
5 A arthabhärena II Bh Sipär, Φ sipär for 
ripor II PML1 vrajet, Pr brajet, for gatah II 
6 PL1 taramtam for tadamtam II 
7 PL1 laghutapanako II Ν cimtavän for ci0 äsa II 
8 Bh mativisaye, Φ 
tivi-
taye II bh at/iavä, Ν atha 'vâ, om. ta, but without sandhi with the following 
word II Bh etasyâpari, Φ èva taey opart, bhN esdsySpari II Β Φ om. me II 
9 
Ν sàprapadìnam II Φ (not Bh) om. i ho II 
11 After idânïm> some aksara 
(yd ?) has been, covered with gamboge in A II A pratipädayasva, corr. by 
corr. from pratìpayasva II 
Bh anyathâ iharn atraîva, Φ anyathd maiham 
atraîva II 
PPrM om. sthäne II 
12 Φ harinyoh II 
bhM nay am buddhir, 
Ρ nayatji buddhir, Pr ndyarp, hcddhi (continuing vamcanâd), ΑΒΙιΦ ndyam 
dusfabuddhir, for ndyam abuddhir ; cop. of bh deletes the anusvära, Ν neyarp 
buddhir. 
Simpl. MS. I has : vidagdhavacanâyam drSyaie laghupatanoh I satya-
vàkyaê ca I 
H has a gap here ; h with I (blunders : drsyatto laghüpattana) Il 
After jnäyate ΒΙιΦ yatah II 
13 A °mriyah II 
14 PL1 nasprho II 
15 
Pr tadvaêyam, II 
PPrM vidheyä for pratipattavyâ II 
16 Read *pratyäyito 
for the misprint *pratyayito. 
bhNAPPr pratyäyato ; M pratyäyito, ΒΙιΦ 
pratyäyino II Bh aparai,η for param II A tvadbuddhipañksanáya, after which 
one aksara (tta ?) covered with gamboge ; PM ίν (Μ ην for tv) abuddhipañ-
ksanärthamm II 
17 ΒΙιΦ tvadamkägatam, A tvadamke muktam me II ΑΦ 
(not Bh) Sara II 
20 A tato for tvatto II Pr bibheti II bh tvadlyàmyamitra 
corr. by corr. to our reading; Ν tvadlyâryyamitrapârêvât, ΒΙιΦ tvadlyä 'sya 
mitrapârêvât II 
21 Ν athäsä, then two aksaras covered with gamboge, 
then ν äha II 
22 ΒΙιΦ gunawnmitrasamgena, PPrM gunavanmitravindAena ; 
then Ρ yan mitravinäsena yan mitram upa II 
23 Bh Sâlistambâbhiôhavatam, 
Φ iâlïûa^vâhhihivamtam II 
24 Ν tadhbaJsütvä, PPrM tat êrutvâ II 
PPrM 
»amälirjigitau for samägatau II 
PPr laghutapanako, in Pr corr. by cop. II 
25 After bhavän (Bh bhaväna), ΒΙιΦ : svasäbhäva\_Φ ve for vantai cdhäram II 
M aham änvesayämy e ktva (om. häram a and vam u) II 
26 A sakâêâpakrâmtah, 
corr. to our reading by corr. II Φ (not Bh) anupavisya II 
27 bhAPPrM ka-
mam, Ν mam, corr. to m by cop. ΒΙιΦ and áar./3 72,10 with us II A "kumma° II 
Bh krtvä svapusyakimSukatulyäm, Φ krtvaêupuspakimêukatulyâm II Ν mâmsamï-
peñm II 
28 bhN PPr hiranyärjikam, in Pr corr. to our reading, perhaps by 
a later hand ; ΒΙιΦ harinyämtikam ; A and áár. 72,11 with us II M bhaksatäm II 
29 Pr om. ca II Φ (not Bh) vahate for ca krte II Φ (not Bh) iva for èva II A 
b h N , Α , Ρ Ρ γ Μ , 
Β Ι ι Φ 

Booh II 
135 
Sämäka" II 
30 bhPrM "nita ; Ν "nitam, corr. by cop. to °nlta il Bh svasä-
marthyendpanitän, Φ svasämarthendpanitän II 
Ρ svagärthyenopanitabhaksyam 
bhaksyatäm tamdulä iti, Pr SOasärnarthyenöpamtabhaksyam bhaksatäm tamdulä 
iti, M svasämarthyonopanatabhaksyam bhaksyatä tamdulä iti II A bhaksyatäm II 
ΒΙιΦ bhaksyaitäma tamduläm iti II 
31 A tatas tau sujmtäv api I parasparam I 
prîtΓ II ΒΙιΦ par asparasutrptâv, Pr parasparasuptäv II 
Page 133. 
1 A vakti ca for prcchati II 
4 Φ (not Bh) tuksati II 
6 Φ (not Bh) 
vachah II 
7 ΒΙιΦ om. kirn bahúna II Φ (not Bh) niramtaram II M niramta-
nkrtvä II 
8 A ekämtamaitratäm II 
9 ΒΙιΦ om. ία II A tadupakäraramjitah 
(om. mams) II 
ΒΙιΦ tatpaksimadhye, AM tatpaksitimadhye II 
Φ (not Bh) 
sa tadä for soda II 
Ν anyathânyasmin II 
11 Φ (not Bh) väso (I) 'apürita-
nayanah (!) Il A amsrupüritanayanah II A samâga, then the space of an aksara 
covered with gamboge ; the ä-stroke covered with gamboge, and samâga 
corr. to samamga. Then the space of 5 aksaras covered with gamboge by 
corr., who writes on it dgadam uväca, the reading of the corrector being thus 
samam gadgadam uväca II 
12 Pr vibhaktih II 
ΒΙιΦ tad yäsyäma atrâham II 
A aham anyatra II 
14 ΒΙιΦ anävrstih 11 PPrM malati 'vrstih II 
Ajano 
for nagara0II ΒΙιΦ babhuksayäpidito ; bhN bubhujäpi° II 
15 PPr vihaga II 
M vihambamdhanärtham II ΒΙιΦ aham atyäsu[Φ adds vi\&esatayâ 11 
16 M 
videêam calito II ΑΒΙιΦ tato 'ham for tenâham II A karomi, om. iti II ΒΙιΦ 
yäsyämiti 11 A hirinya II 
17 ΒΙιΦ ta Ari, but the ¿-hook deleted in Bh II 
Νpräha for äha II Bh yäsiti, PPrM yâsyatîti, Νyäsyatiiti (I) II 
18 ΑΒΙιΦ 
daksanäpathe, Ν däksinäpathe II 
19 M °mämsakaläni II 
20 ΒΙιΦ subhä-
sitagostîm II ΒΙιΦ ins. bhüearah before sukhena 11 Φ (not Bh) °paksaksayam II 
22 ΒΙιΦ tä, APr te ye for tata li Pr om. na, which has been supplied by 
another hand in margin 11 
23 ΑΒΙιΦ capadi samsthìtam II 
24 A 
hirinya II Ν präha for äha II ΒΙιΦ om. all between äha and bhoh line 25 II 
A apy evâgacchâmi 11 A ato 11 
25 A dukkham II M om. sa II APr jump 
from the first äha to the second äha, om. one of them and all between them 11 
Ν präha for äha II 
26 M tavi for tatraîva II ΒΙιΦ gatas tarn sarvam II 
Bh akoSagatir II 
27 APPr tatragamisyati, ΒΙιΦ tatrâgamisyasi II 
28 Φ 
Sanai manai II Bh mâsudvahaêceti, Φ mäsadvayasceti 11 A manado for sänando II 
29 Φ (not Bh) abhyo for dhanyo II A samasti, corr. by corr. to samam asti ; 
ΒΙιΦ samo 'sti II bhN dharas for dhanyatarah II 
30 ΜΒΙιΦ om. hi 11 
Φ sampattädikäni II 
Ν apustäv for astäv U Bh uddîyanâni, Φ udlyanäni II 
Bh tatas for tat il Ρ sakhena II 
31 Ν präha for äha in both places II 
33 ΒΙιΦ eakram II 
bhN, Α,ΡΡγΜ, ΒΙιΦ 

136 
Variants 
Page 134. 
1 Before êrutvà Φ inserts api, in spite of 'pi after hiranyo II 
Bh3> 
hiranyopi II Bh prstopari, Φ drstopari II bhNPPrM om. tatprstopari and 
the following words to sampàtoddayanena (excl.) ; our reading is that of 
A (only A "sto"). Simpl. H I : tathdnustite hiranya\h add. over line in H]i 
[H om. s] tatksanäd èva tadupari samärüdhah I [I om. h l] sépi êtmaih êan
[I om. h~\ tarn ädäya prasthitah ; h : tatt êrutvà hiranya tasyopari samä
sopì sapât tenaîva pracchittah II ΒΙιΦ samäruhya II Ν sampätodurnayen
2 Φ only one êanaih II Φ om. tena sa II Bh saha for sa II Φ tarn hradam tarn 
ΒΙιΦ pracalita for präpitah II 
3 ΒΙιΦ athamtare II Ρ müsakädhitam, 
M müsakädhisritam [sic I] II 
4 Ν tatñstha°, Φ taniñrastha0 II 
5 Φ (not 
Bh) êâkhâm äruhya II ΒΙιΦ tärasva\_Φ íva~\rena provâca II Φ mamtha
âgacchan 11 ΒΙιΦ bhavanmitram II 
β Over °tydlimga gloss in bh: tvam II 
A our reading, corr. by corr. to àgatydlimgyatâm iti II ΒΙιΦ âgatya âlimgya II 
7 A om. yatah II Bh sakapüraih ; Φ kirn vamdanaih sakalapüraih sthapära
Ρ kimmu, ΒΙιΦ kirn tu for kimu U 2nd päda in A : kirn snêUalaih, which corr. 
corrects to Ηψ ea camdraih snSUalaih II 
8 M ta for te II 
9 Pr 
nipunatarai II 
10 ΒΙιΦ parijüäto 'sti I iti II Pr smiti for 'si 1 iti II 
PPrM mamâparâdhaty (PrM °dham) ksamasvam iti II 
11 ΒΙιΦ vrksottlrn
nakam II 
12 Ν vihitälimgitau, Ρ vihitälimginau ; Pr vihitau limgitau ; 
M vihitälikitaSarlrau, om. °liñganau pula0 II ΒΙιΦ pulakitasvaSarlrau vrksäd 
(Φ vrddhäd) adhasthod upavistau cdtmacirarntanam vrttämtam II 
14
mamtharakam II 
Ρ laghutapanakam II 
Φ (not Bh) bho 'yarn ko mûsakah
ΒΙιΦ hhaksabhüto II M om. all between müsakah and müsako 'yam 1. 16 II 
15 ΒΙιΦ om. bho II Ν praha for äha II 
16 PPr ins. müsakah after müsako 
'yarn II Pr t for tat ; ΒΙιΦ om. tat II 
17 M om. yathä dhärä II A ra for 
dhärä ; corr. corrects ra to éasto II A vivirá tarakäh, corr. by corr. to divi 
târakâh II 
18 Φ sets in again here with khyayâ II 
19 A °parityaktyäs II 
20 Mparanirvedam II ΒΙιΦ äsädya for âpannah II ΒΙιΦ tavâmtike II 
21 Ν 
präha for äha il M om. all between aha andprsto II Pr prsto dayaîva ttatraîva II 
22 Pr eta traîva II *fPPrBh om. »ell 
25 M pramadârotham II 
28 Ν 
"gude" for "drava" II 
Page 135. 
1 M anna II M präSüsikaparivärakärtham, II 
3 suprayatnam ; cp. also Sä
74, 9 II 
4 Pr bhaksya, om. m&ne II M parivräpräja for parivräd II 
5 bhN 
anäyäseneva 11 
6 Ψ Ρ präpnosi ; Pr prâpnotiw Ν bhaksyayämi II M tamt
tarn for tatra II bh vrhatsphin corr. by corr. to vrhatsphig" ; Φ PPr vrhasphigM 
vrhasphi" Il 
7 ΨΡΡΓ brûtakarnno II 
8 bliNA*!^ âêramam, Ρ âêram for 
From 134,18 bhN, A, ^PPrM, Bh<t; from 134, 22 bhN, ^PPrM 

Booh II 
137 
êramarn ; M aSramam ; Bh with us ; M and Bh upanîtavân, in Bh apparently 
corr. to our reading II 
9 ΦΡΡγ brütakarnno II 
10 Ν brhasphigo, 
bh^PPr vrhasphigo, A vrhatspigasya II 
12 After abhyägatah, Pr repeats 
Sünyam prativacanam prayacehati II 
ΦΡΡγ brütakarnna II 
13 ΦΡΡγ sälhä-
dam II 
14 Pr räträm api II Ν om. iti II 
15 Φ yat, corr. by cop. from 
yatah II 
1 6 ΦΡΡγΜ transpose kasmäc ciräd drsyase and pñto 'mi te 
dar San ät II 
17 ΦΡΡγΜ kä värttä nanu d-urbalósi II 
18 M samupagatän II 
19 ΦΡ harmmäni, Pr harmäni II 
21 ΙΛΝΦΡΡγ prâghunike, in Φ corr. to 
our reading by cop. ; but the correction is not very clear. ABh with us 11 
22 ΦΡΡγΜ sadanam II Pr vrthä for vrsäh li 
23 Ν gira II 
Page 136. 
1 Pr tatraîka" for tathaîka" II 
2 M om. yatah II 
3 ΦΡΡν pauro-
hatyam II 
4 ΜιΝΑΦΡΡγΜΒΙιΦ mäthäpatyam, in bh corr. to mägäpatyam II 
6 ΦΡ (not Pr) brütakarnnah II Ν bütakarna aha II 
7 M tvät for tvatto II 
Pr mamânyah suhrt, M mamdnyah syahrt II 
8 Ν bhiksämätram II 
9 In 
bh, gloss on karmakarä : bhrtyäh II Ν vrtticchedäsanmärjanädi" II 
11 Ν 
veSena for vamSena II M tâdayati II 
12 ΦΡ kutûhalam me tasya, in 
Φ corr. by very small strokes to our reading, apparently by corr. ; M 
kautühalam me tasya II 
13 Ν vrhasphik, A vrhatspig, ΦΡΡγ vrhasphig II 
14 ΦΡΡγΜ om. all between bilam and nidhänosmanä, 1. 16 II 
16 Ν 
kuddatesau II 
17 Ν urna II bhN vitvajo, corr. to our reading by corr. of 
bh II Ν viddhim II 
20 That in our text Sändillmätä is a compound, 
is evident from 140, 15 II 
22 ΦΡ brütakarnna II 
Page 137. 
4 ΦΡ devatârceanaparas, Pr devatàrcanaparas, M devatärthanaparas II 
5 
bhN pratyühaprabuddho II M only vrähma\jaem Ymo\nyoh II 
6 Ν anamtara-
phaladà II 
7 M tadagraham for tad aharn II 
8 bhN mûrsoddeêena II 
ΦΡ yathâ Saktir II 
9 Φ bhartsamânâ II M bhargvayamânâha II 
10 Pr 
he daridra for daridrasya II M bhojapräptis II 
13 bhN na sväditam II 
14 
M mamdam ra 2 II 
20 Pr tasya for tac ca II 
21 Pr yacchannajaîam, Il 
22 M nityopra" Il 
Page 138. 
4 Ν vivekajñai sädanamtäya II 
6 bhNΦP (not Pr) trsnä ; ABh with us II 
1 1 ΦΡΡγΜ mahâûjanaêikharâkârah II 
In bh gloss on krodah : varähah Ii 
12 Ν om. drstvä and the following words to drstvdpi, 1.15 excl. II No MS. has 
the samdhi after drstvä H bl^PPrBh<I> ä karnnämta, M à karnnâmta ; A with 
us II 
16 Pr tathâ for yathâ II 
17 M pr ahite II 
21 Ν tasminn for 
etasminn II 
Pr "mrtyu II 
2 2 Φ êrmgâla II 
ΦΡΡγΜ tarn deêam II 
bhN, "ÍTPrM 
Τ 

138 
Variants 
Page 139. 
1 Ν prärus(o for prahrs\o II 
7 Ν tatt for tat tad II 
13 M vâpafati-
takotim II 
ΦΡΡΓ bhaksitum II 
14 M tutitapàêe II Pr tâlupradeêe II 
15 
Pr mastamadhyena II 
21 Pr athaîva II 
22 M cürnnayisyämnvä for cürna-
yitvä II 
24 Pr süryät tape II 
Page 140. 
1 M grha for grhe II 
2 Pr om. madye 11 M om. tä II bhN sâpy 
acimtayat II 
3 bhN naipunye II 
4 bhN tilänäm hhojyân II bh klptavän, 
COÏT, by cop. from krtavän ; Ν ktapravän for krtavän Ν 
S M om. luñoitair a II 
β Pr arthän for atha tän II Φ sürpe, bhNA^PPrMBh sûrppe II 
7 
M grho for grhâd II M tu for grhnâtu II 
10 M nava for tad" Il 
12 
Ν samarthä II 
14 bh^PPr sambamdhenême ; Ν sambamdhena me; M sam-
lamdhamnemi ; our reading is that of ABh<I> Il 
15 Ν SämdaUmätu, with 
a visarga added over the line II 
18 bhN^PPr tarn, for tan ; ABh with 
us il bh nidhänodya , apparently corr. by cop. from °nogha°, Ν nidhänogha° it 
2 0 ΦΡΡΓ irütakarnna II M jñáyato, om. te ya 11 
2 1 M yüthyaparivrta II 
ΨΡΜ vrhasphig ; Pr vrnasphigoha 11 
22 bh^PPrM khanatrikam, Ν khani-
trikam ; ABh with us II 
23 PrM om. maya M 
24 Pr addhi for api II 
Pr caranamalitänäm, M caranamalitayäm H NBh tatpâdânutârino II 
Page 141. 
1 Pr tava for tad 11 
3 M tathâ for yathâ H 
4 Ν tayá for tathä II 
β ΦΡΡΓ purusam drstvä, M pwrusam drthä II M jänlti H 
9 bhNΦPPr 
bhavisyät, M savisyät; ABh with us II 
10 bhM cetarae cai c and ν are 
often indistinguishable in Jain MSS. Η 
11 Pr cihnam ; Ν ajätakapä-
lacihnah 11 
12 pratyutpadaih all our MSS. including ΑΒΙιΦ II 
14 
Ν ins. äradhvah before pravrttah, writing pravrttah between two dandas II 
1β M nam for mam tl 
19 M bhaktvâ ti M väsurärg, il 
20 Ν "kapälaja-
filän II 
23 M durgge twice II 
24 Pr "corcino pi bhü° II 
Page 142. 
2 M tâ for khanatâ II 
4 Pr anyâgata idarn, M abhyâgapta ivarn II ΦΡ 
brütakarnna, Pr mtakarnna II 
5 In Φ gloss on a»ya by glossator : nidhä-
nasya II bhNΦP tam\ ΒΙιΦ om. tan ; A with us II 
7 ΦΡΜ sthänakam II 
8 Pr vlksitum api twice II bhNAΦPPrM acimtayamS ca II Bh advâcimtayam, 
Φ advâcimtavyam, ΒΙιΦ om. ca 11 
10 Ν ma for me II 
11 M sahastakirano ; 
ΦΡ nirucchâhah, Pr nisacchähas II 
12 Ν eapaticärah II 
13 ΦΡ (not Pr) 
brütakarnno II 
bhNM bhüyo only once; 
Φ Ρ Ρ Γ bhûyâpi 2. 
A with us. 
bhN, * P P r M 

Book 
II 
139 
Bh<ï> om. 'pi II Ν täditum II 
15 M bhavann II 
17 bhN yato for gato II 
18 Pr om. yatah II 
19 Pr parätavati II M om.yaj janân II 
23 ΜιΝΨΡΡγΜ 
êatru, in bh corr. to our reading by corr. A with us II ΨΡΡγ brütakarnnam li 
Ν kautuhalam II 
Page 143. 
1 Pr om. S ca II 
2 Ν mütakam II 
4 Pr "virahita II M yathârthena 
for yathä gaj'ah tatharthena II 
6 M tata êruivâha II 
7 bhN tato, Pr yatro 
for yaio II 
M na kürddaSektinarasti II Bh4> om. tad ; A viddhi, ΨΡΡγΜ 
tadvad for tad dhig. bhN tadvin or tad dhin (as dva and ddh are often 
identical in Jain MSS.) ; in bh a second hand puts g over n. 
The 
reading tadvad (ΦΡΡγΜ) is a correction, but a wrong one. A's viddhi is 
evidently a correction of bh's reading II 
8 Ν ins. yatah after uktam ca II 
10 Pr grisma kusari yathâ II 
11 Bh4> kâkaravâh, PL1 käkasaväh II 
13 
M om. hi il 
14 M Srlgunänäm II 
ΨΡΜ prakäsanl II 
16 M pravyam II 
18 M vidhâva Il 
19 M vakto, APrBh<ï> vyakte II M "vrtah II 
20 ΨΡΡγΜ 
iva for api II 
21 bhN om. vilapya II Pr tat samnidhänam II 
22 Ν vyarthah-
tamah II 
23 ΨΡΡγΜ om. ca before te, writing tatas II PL1 madbhütyä II 
24 bhN samartho, <pPPrMBh 'samartho·, A with us II 
Page 144. 
1 Ν tat kim amena [new line] kim árádhitena II 
4 M svâsvâmî II ΦΡΡγ 
chatrajïvibhih II 
S M om. tesäm, writing cacau for vaco II bhN durga-
pravisto II M yâvat nirddhata kvâjpi II 
10 ΦΡΡγ mänodbhäsam II Ν hâsam 
for hräsam II 
11 Ν vigunïbhavamti II 
13 Ν °pamditäm II Ν drêâm II 
14 M krtâmtâpahatah II M präyadyate II 
18 M manvitram for sanmitram II 
19 M sarvaiûna ; bhN ΨΡΡγΜ saroasünyam (M "áüna) daridratä; cp. SP II, 
32 ! A sarvasünyam daridratá, Bh sarvarp,, Φ sarva, Bh<ï> mnyam daridrasya II 
24 Ν api" for ati° II 
Page 145. 
1 M yasya drSah phalavipâkah II 
2 Φ om. èva, which is added over the 
line by cop. II 
β After 83, A ins. this sloka: mânarn udvahatäm pumsâm 
vararti äpat pode pade I jwitarp mänamülam hi mänemläne kiitah sukham II That 
this did not originally belong to our text is evident from K, which has 
interpolated it in a wrong place. 
The order of the pädas in this MS. is 
as follows: 83ab, then cd, ab of our sloka, then 83 cd. 
It is clear, that our 
sloka originates in a marginal addition. It is missing in our other MSS. 
including Bh<I>. Cp. also the right numbering of stanza 90 in Bh<I>. As 
Bh<I> only seldom number their stanzas, it is evident that the copyists copied 
these numbers from their originals II Ν "cchanna II 
7 Ν acimtayat II 
bhN, Ψ Ρ Pr M 

140 
Variants 
Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ om. punar apy acintayam il M âpari for api II 
8 Μ Ι Ν Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Α däva-
nikkuthita, in A corr. by corr. to dätra° or danna" ; M dävani\kuthitanvacah ; Bh 
dävanihkuvitasya ca, Φ dävanihkucitasya ca II 
9 Pr avagraha for na cä II 14 
M om. arthitvàm M ma II Ν om. na II 
Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ vastvamparam II 
17 M om. 
paribhüyate II 
18 M busvâ for buddhyà 11 
22 Ν param for varam II M "nive-
êitau, corr. to °niveêato II 
23 ΦΡΡΓ giriguhatatân, Μ girìpumguhatatàn II 
24 bh'í/PPrMBh<í> kìialu for khala, in bh corrected to our reading by corr. 
A with us, bnt corr. by corr. from kkäläjanät II 
ΦΡΡΓ prärthair for prâptair ; 
M prrârpiaurr athaih priyarn krtavân manali H 
P a g e 146. 
2 ΦΡΡΓΜ ins. our sloka 88 after our 89 ; but as Φ Ρ number our 88 as 
their 82 (PrM 83), and as ΦΡΡΓΜ number our 89 as their 83, it is clear 
that the transposition is only due to the inadvertence of some copyist II 
3 bh 'py arthito, Ν 'py arthibho II 
S M vänlksaram for dlnä° II 
8 Ν om. 
na ca M 
12 Ν parapldend" II 
13 M dvitìya° Il 
14 M reni ciraprakäsi 
paräpannälhoji II 
I S Ν om. yan maranam II 
16 Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ om. tad eoa II 
Ν vrAatspiga", Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ vrhasphiga° II 
19 Ν kare, then a begun ya, then ro 
for kätaro II 
21 Ν upägatasya II 
2 2 bhN petikäm II 
23 
Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ 
äyuhsesatayä (M with danda between "yuh" and "Se") II 
P a g e 147. 
2 bhNΨPPrMBh daivo ; A with us. 
See 151,9; daivo however seems 
to be the genuine reading, as daiva ' Destiny ' has often the masculine 
gender in Jaina Sanskrit II 
3 bhN tasmän na ¿oca na ca vismayo me; 
but see 151, io ; in bh a first ca is inserted after éocâ, but deleted again by 
cop. II 
5 Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ SO 'bravït for hiranyah kathayati II 
6 M nagaradatto, 
om. re saga II 
8 In bh gloss on rûpakaêatena : rüpaiyä II 
11 
M sadattena II 
15 bhN nirbhatsya II 
18 Ν tatra nagara° IL 
19 
Pr ins. M before kenacid II 
20 PL1 PrM trêti for va, iti. 
This reading 
goes back to the circumstance, that in Φ in the left part of the m-noose, 
perhaps owing to some small defect of the paper, there seems to be a small 
opening. But under the magnifying glass the closing of the noose is quite 
distinct II Bh<ï> bhavân for vâ, iti II 
2 1 Μ Ι Ν Φ Ρ Μ manusyêti, PrBh 
manusya ity, A manusyo iti II 
P a g e 148. 
3 Pr prasiddhanäma II 
4 Φ PrM kanyâ, om. râja which the cop. of Φ 
adds in the margin II 
After candramatl, M yâ ekasmin divase, &c., 1. s II 
NP nämdti° II 
5 NPr niriksyamänä II 
6 Ν manorathaê II 
7 Pr kusu-
mabänähatayä II 
8 Ν om. tayä II Pr nirjarasakhl II 
9 MM [new line] 
saha II 
10 M dagvad for yod II 
Φ Ρ PrM Bh Φ tvadamtike II 
12 Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ 
bhíí, "ÍTPrM 

Booh II 
141 
madarritike II 
13 bhN samesyati, Φ Ρ Ρ Γ samesyati; ABh with us II 
14 
Cop. of Ψ supplies the words yady avaSyam, to 0bhihitam incl. in marg. II 
Pr 
tatrâvagamtavyam II 
16 M tayá for Îvayâ II 
23 M om. one yena II 
Page 149. 
2 M kautukân drstakahrdayas, ka being struck out ; 
Μ Ι Ν Ψ Ρ Ρ Γ kautuk&t 
hrstahrdayas ; ΑΒΙιΦ kautukävistahrdayas. 
Cp. our Introduction, p. 34 II Pr 
avalambyâdhirûdham II 
S Pr ins. tayá after äsritayä II M tadamgajamga-
jamajätaharsaromämvitagätrayokiam 
II 
bhN "mätrayanuraktayä II 
M "gäträ" 
for °mäträ° II 
6 Ν mamá ätmä II Pr äbhyä for ätmä II 
10 Ν stambhita-
taram for sta" ίνα" II 
12 M vad for yävad, bhN A damdapâêakah ; M damdra· 
päSikä, ΦΡΒΙιΦ with us ; cp. 151, 2, 9 II 
13 bhN4' ahitas, in Φ corr. by 
cop. to our reading II 
16 bhN A Pr damdapäiakend", M damdapärmkendbhi-
hita ; ΦΡΒΙιΦ with us II 
17 Pr samiti° for sa mati ° II 
18 Ν tasyâh 
raksakasya, bh 'vinayavatl, Ν 'avinayavatl, Φ avinayavatî, Ρ vinayavatî II 
24 
bhN bravisi II 
Page 150. 
2 M asaksam II 
3 Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ "phalam bhavati II 
4 bh nirbhatsya, Ν 
nirbhatsa II 
8 M °grhadväraravimtamamdapa° II 
M °mala° for °mamgala II 
9 Pr dvatvä for hatvä II Pr pranamma jjannako" II 
11 Pr pranamya II M 
diiyo disam II Ν janmuh II 
14 M mahäsähastikatayä II 
15 bhN nirbha-
tsitavän II M apayäte II 
16 Pr abhikrärpte II 
17 ABh Φ tat, Pr noi for Ιαψ. 
But ίαψ is evidently apräkrtism ; cp. the Introduction to this volume, p. 32II 
18 bhN prasara, Ρ svasura II ΦΡΓ tvaydnutistitam, Ρ tvaya 'nutisfitam, M 
tvayä'mutisvitam II 
19 M pradatveXsatti for pradattà, iti II 
20 bhN 
0palâyato, Φ Ρ Ρ γ Μ °paläyamano ; ΑΒΙιΦ with us II 
21 Pr edam for ίάαψ II 
23 PPr pränasamSayä iksitä, a misreading easily to be explained by the 
form of dra in Φ 
II 
bhN om. mama II 
24 
Μ Ι Ν Α Φ Ρ Ρ Γ grhlsyati, Φ 
grhïsyatîti, Bh grahlsyatîti II Pr värttävyatirekena II 
Page 151. 
1 bhN samjätah ι (N om. the ardhadanda) mahä0 Ii bhN om. tarn before 
värttä° II 
2 ΨΡ karmma0 for karna° Il 
A damdapäSakaduhitäXapi ; ΒΙιΦ 
damdapäSikasutapi (Φ °sutä 'pi) II 
4 
Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ om. svayam II 
Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ 
tatragatah II 
6 M manujah II 
8 ΑΦΡΡγΜΒΙι daivôpi II ΦΡ tum 
for tarn ; cop. of Φ supplies lamghayitum in marg., Ρ has it in the text II 
9 
bhN °päsika" ; Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ damdapäsika\_Ρ adds h"\sutä 'bravlt ; Bh damdapäsikasutä 
äha, Φ damdapäsutä äha} A damdapäiakaduhitäIabravit 
II 
11 Ν «a visma-
yomi II M vanikaduhitâ il 
13 NPrM prthak (only once) II 
14 
Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ 
b h N , " Ί Τ Ρ Γ Μ 

142 
Variants 
ins. tän before vrttäntän II M sabaJiumänärp. II 
1 6 
Φ Ρ Ρ γ upabhumjamänah II
M upabhumiamänamukhend' II 
18 After ityaäiy Ψ F Fr M m 4. kathä II 
Page 152. 
1 Ν tathä ca II 
2 Pr mänasyam II 
3 bhN "pänasya II Ψ Ρ upä-
nadvü{a°, M upänadüdha", a reading easily to be explained by the form of the 
respective aksara in Φ II M carmmavrttaihtoa II 
S Ν hare ¡¡rapte II 
bhN 
om. 'py. The copyist of bh writes a over the avagraha II 
6 Ψ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ put 
our áloka 99 after our 101. 
Their numbering 92 to 94 (92 twice for 
91.92 corresponding to our 98.100) agrees with this transposition II 
8 
bhN ti for te II bhM "kuturpbini II 
9 bhN¥PPrM äsvädayati ; ABh<î> 
with us il 
M ya irme II 
10 All our MSS. incl. ΑΒΙιΦ asatyäny il 
11 
bhN parigrha° II M krsne II NPr nirvrttim II 
13 In bh a gloss on 
kwa : darlha II 
Ψ Ρ Ρ γ Μ vdpi II 
14 M nïnatn for dtnam II 
15 Pr 
çadhhyârji yat tvayodhes ta" II 
19 bh êravyani, corr. by corr. to &rävyarp,\ 
srävyam II 
Page 153. 
2 Ρ om. sahodaräs ca, M om. hodaräx ca II 
4 Ν hy arthe II Ν triloke for 
'tra loke II 
5 bhN svavacanam II Ν om. tävad II 
β Ψ Ρ Ρ γ laghutapanako II 
10 Ν samagoraga° II bh 'mägarjitam II 
11 Pr om. here lines 
11 to 
13 
incl., inserting them after pâ, 1. is il Pr âmadhyâhnakr0 il 
13 
Ψ Ρ Ρ γ Μ 
βsevikä for °setikä il 
14 Ψ Ρ Ρ Γ tasyâ il bh Ρ 'nukùryât, but in bh corrected 
to our reading by the copyist himself II 
16 Ψ Ρ samäsväsayitum, Pr samä-
»vädayatum II Ν t for yat II bhN svadeSahpari" II 
22 M sa visayah II 
23 M Srayato tarn e carute II 
24 A om. all between ναηαψ and dükäh (for 
mandükäh), 1. 27 II 
25 arthinärp, all our MSS. but A (see on 1. 24.) incl. Bh3>. 
The lion being represented in this stanza as the king of animals, the 
arthinah must be understood as his followers, such as Karataka and 
Damanaka. 
The original reading of the Pañcatantra is not arthinâm, but 
ätmanah \ cp. Sär. 87, 21 II 
26 Ν udyamyaparair II 
27 M tarapürnna-
thivärpdrajäh II 
28 Pr bhodyogat¡i II 
Page 154. 
2 
Μ Ι Ν Ψ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ kalàvidhìjriarìt [ Ν °vidhirjvat¡i\, in bh corrected to °va-
dAajñatp by corr. ΑΒΙιΦ with us. Cp. Sär. 88,4II bhN vyasanew, corr. of bh 
vyasane«ν, Ρ vyasanepy, a misreading easily to be explained from the form of 
the aksara sva in Ψ; bhN Ρ αύαΜαψ, Φ agaktam, but êa written by cop. over 
sa. M vyasanetAaSaktam, Il 
5 ΨΡ acavalam II Ν avixvädinam II 
6 M èv
vita bravati II 
1 6 A with Μ Ι Ν Ψ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ . 
After 1.16 Bhí> ins. sthânabhrastâh 
(Bh om. h) M Sobhaipte I (Bh om. l) siipAâ (Bh adds h) satpurufâ gajâh II 
Ν 
bllN.^PPrM 

Book II 
143 
Sobhyamte II 
18 M mmsthänam for svam sthänam II bhN parityajyet, 
corr. 
by cop. of bh to our reading II 
19 Ν om. iti II 
20 M rwpavatyâê II 
24 
Fr vrhaspatih II 
25 Pr Silaparâkrama II 
30 M bhuvatibhate for labhate II 
P a g e 
1 5 5 . 
1 Pr valmìérmga" Il Ν "samga" for "srñga" II 
3 Ν natinïca, Pr nïtinî-
cam II 
5 Φ Ρ madahs te ; Pr kì midas te II 
7 Pr yauvanä dhanäni ca II 
8 bh'i'PM navasakhyäni, Ν navasamsthäni, 
Pr navasamkhyäni, 
A navaêassâni ; 
ΒΙιΦ with us. Cp. áár. 89,18, and SP II, 65.—sasya and saspa are often con-
founded in the MSS., and as s is often written as kh in North-western MSS., 
khya and sya, spa interchange very often 11 ΦΡΜ insert ca before yositah II 
11 Ν prânasyopi II 
12 Ν cittasya II 
14 bhN gehe II 
15 M citta-m II 
1 7 bhN ΦΡΡΓ M daivo 'tra for daivarn evatra, Bh3> daivam èva, om. atra ; 
A with us. But see our note on 147, 2 II 
21 Ν nâbhyam il 
22 
ΦΡΡγΜ labhali paramah il 
2 3 M krsnä II 
2 8 Ρ (not L1) om. labho 'sti II 
29 Ν vicam, PL1 cittam for vittam II bhNPr vinäsa for vinäii, corr. by cop. 
of bh to our reading II 
P a g e 
1 5 6 . 
1 Ν ins. hi after käryatatvam 
II Pr kimcid II 
ΦΡΡΓ 
dhanabhogabhâginah 
(Ρ "na for °nah) II Φ kicic ca, Ρ kimcic ca II 
3 °syôpârjanam all our MSS. ; 
but cp. 157, 15 II 
5 ΨΡ kathaiti II 
7 NBh (not bh) somaliko II Pr 
väyah (om. tantv) II Ν tamtuväyasah II 
8 Ν ca êastrâni for vasträni II 
9 
ΨΡΡΓΜΒΙΙΦ "nàdikâ II 
1 0 ΑΨΡΡΓΒΙΙΦ kolikäs, M kokikds II 
1 2 
Ν 
avadhâranakam for adhä° II 
14 M mithyâtha jalpitam II 
15 bhNA^PPr 
(not M Eh Φ) insert na between dhanam and bhavati il 
16 M om. bhavati 
ca bhävyam II 
1 9 ΦΡΡΓ mâturam 
II 
2 2 NPr chäyätapo 
II 
P a g e 
1 5 7 . 
1 Ν tasmäd atraiva karma tista tista II 
3 M samthapadyate II PL1 sampra-
paäyamaparityaktam 
(1. 4 ) IL 
5 Α Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ Β Ι Ι yathâ ca II 
6 bhN na for ca II 
9 ΦΡ udyamenna 
II 
1 2 ΦΡΡΓΜ ca na for cen na II 
1 3 bhNΨPPrM 
nojtâlamhhyah ; ABh with us il 
14 M varttavyam ; all the other MSS. ind. 
ΑΒΙιΦ with us II 
15 "yopärjanäm also ΑΒΙιΦ II Ν 
suvarnnaêatatrayopâr-
janäm vidhäya II 
16 bhN prati sthitah II 
20 Pr krodhasaraktau locanau II 
21 M karttavyams 
for kartah II M dhä, om. bahu II NBh Φ somalikasya, 
ΦΡΡΓ M somilasya 
II 
2 4 M om. vyavasäyinäm 
II 
P a g e 
1 5 8 . 
1 bhN tathasya for tasya II Φ atyat, Ρ at for atas II 
2 Pr om. yävad 
asan il 
3 bhN anvisyati, Pr anveyati II 
5 Ν ce for va u 
6 Ν jumps 
bhN.SkpPrM 

144 
Variants 
from the first bhüyo 'pi to the second hhüyo 'pi (1. r), om. one of them and all 
between them II The words tatra to pracalitah incl. are om. in the text of Φ, 
but suppl, by cop. in margin II Pr om. ca II 
7 M antyärggenaiva, 
ΦΡΡΓ anyamärggenawa II 
10 ΦΡΡΓ edam, M idam II 
13 M varttah for 
kartah II 
14 P bhojanäd rte LI 
16 ΜΙΝΑΦΡΡΓΜ /carmina ; but in A 
some aksara smeared with gamboge after karmma ; Bh<I> karmman ll 
17 
ΦΡΡΓ upalambhayasi LL 
18 Ν somaliko II 
23 Ν somalika II 
Page 159. 
3 Ν somalika II Ν präha II ΦΡΡΓ M om. tad LL 
S M näma sti for ndsti II 
Ν somalika II 
7 In M päda 1 runs thus : virüpikullno 'pi II 
IO bhN subud-
dhau M M om. patatai). Il Ν paiano II 
11 bhN nirìksito II Φ Ρ dam varsàni 
ca pamca ca 11 
12 M om. so 'bravlt II 
14 Ρ pralabadvrsano II bh samdah, 
corr. by cop. to samdah, which is N's reading ; Φ Ρ samdhah, Pr samdha with 
following danda II 
16 bhN marakta 11 Pr êispânigrâ, M Saspänigräni. These 
readings evidently go back to that of Φ, which has êaspânigrâ, with 2 over 
ni and 1 over grä (these figures perhaps by a later hand) II 
17 M thalo-
Ihiko II Pr om. sa, owing to the fact, that Φ writes sa, then na or va, then 
gadâtirekâ, putting one single bracket before na (or va), and deleting by 
a horizontal stroke not only these aksaras, but by mistake also sa before 
the bracket. Ρ with us II 
18 M sukhenäpavin naMpuline sukhenopavista II 
19 Φ pralambavrsano samdo, the o-stroke before η being deleted by an almost 
invisible stroke at its inferior end, whereas on the second o-stroke after η 
the visarga has been written by cop. in the form of two circlets. Hence 
PL1 pralabavrsanohsamdo, Pr, taking the circlets as deletion marks, pralam-
bavrsanasamdho ll bhN samdo II 
20 M om. èrgalo II 
21 Φ 'sihitah, 
corr. to 'bhihitah II bh yaspasya, Ν pasyâsya for paêyâsya 11 
22 Ν prahä-
rena II 
23 bl^PrM arhasi, Ν arhatha. In Φ, "si seems to have been corr. 
to "ti ; but the correction is not clear II 
Page 160. 
2 bhN niyojasi, corr. by corr. of bh to our reading II 
4 Pr età, M 
aitya for etya it 
8 Ν «o braviti, PL1 so 'bravlt II 
9 NM karomi II 
ΦΡΡΓ 
sadaîvôdyamavatâ, M sadaîvôdyamatà II 
11 ΦΡ yathâlasya", but in Φ tra, 
under thâ by cop. H 
12 bhN bhayaM 
tayavitrama° ll 
16 Ν bha 
for na II 
21 M drêate II 
22 Ν müsakasthänam II 
23 M tasya 
pralambavrsanaprstam II 
Page 161. 
1 M sarvakrtesu II 
2 ΜΙΝΑΦΡΒΙΙ strwâkyâmkuêaih, Pr stñvákyamkuéaih, 
against the metre ; but in Bh corr. in marg. to our reading by cop. Φ with us II 
bhN^PPrM 

Book II 
145 
4 
M amasyam for agamyam II 
7 
Ψ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ Β Ι Ι Φ pamcadaêame II 
1 2 
M 
anusaräva II 
M aho for ato II 
1 3 After iti, Ψ Ρ Ρ Γ kathä Π 6 N, Μ Π 6 U ΙΙ 
16 Pr dhanaguktayuktadhanäkhyau II 
17 Ρ bvdhvä ekasvarüpam II 
18 M 
om. the sentence between gatah and atha 1. 20 II Ν somaliko II 
20 Ν 
pradistah II 
2 1 Pr bhâryâ II 
2 2 M präptopravistah II 
Μ Ι Ν Ψ Ρ Γ íakti" 
for bhakti° ; in Φ corr. in marg. by cop. to our reading, which is that of 
Hamb. MSS. and APBh<I> il 
Page 162. 
1 Ν somilikasyâ" IL 
2 Pr ins. apy after tad II 
3 Pr om. na II 
4 
Ν karttavyäh, M karttavya II M om. the sentence between kartavyâ and atha II 
5 ΨΡΡΓ khedyamänasya II 
7 M om. tatah II Ν dhanagrham II 
9 Ν 
gukhalhuktaiayyäyäm ; Pr sukhasayyärtham II 
11 Pr kurvato II 
12 Mom. 
krtah II 
13 bhA,ï'PBh<ï> vyavaharaka", M vyaharaka" ; N P r with us II 
M ânatam II 
14 bhN ktayam for krtyam II 
18 b h N ^ P P r hhuktadhane ; 
ABh with us II 
22 bhN dhanaguptaya ; A dhanaguptaya, but corr. by cop. 
to dhanaguptaya. ΦΡΡγΜ dhanaguptavad ; Bh<ï> with us II 
Page 163. 
1 bh (not Ν) Α Φ Ρ Ρ γ Μ arthasyopärjanäm·, cp. sloka 133 II 
After iti, 
Φ Ρ Ρ γ Μ ins. kathä ιι 5 II 
3 Ν vittam II 
4 Of this line, M has only: 
άρα samghàtakarkkaêam II 
8 Ν om. na II 
1 0 
Φ Ρ Ρ Γ tarn for tan II 
M 
only tam for tan niscìtam II Ν lalätapate yat II M om. y at II 
11 Pr jaïa-
nidhir II Pr viío II 
1 2 Pr rit iti II 
Φ Ρ Ρ Γ kathayati, M om. ghatayati II 
A om. all between vidhir and anicchanto 1.15 II Ν akhtmukhl° II 
13 All our 
MSS. incl. KBh<E> (A has a gap here) against the metre aghatitaghatitàni in the 
first pada. 
The same faulty reading in MS. A of the metrical Campa-
kaàresthikathâ, stanza 237 (MS. B, stanza 267 has but the beginning 
aghatitaghati with following 
and Ballala's Bhojaprabandha, ed. Jïvânanda 
Vidyäsägara, p. 39, whereas Κ. P. Parab, Bhojaprabandha (Bombay, 1896), 
p. 28, stanza 144 and Subhâshita-ratna-bhândâgâram, Bombay, 1891, p. 133, 
stanza 36 go with us. As in Bhojaprabandha and Subhâshita0 the second 
pâda has a different reading (durghatïkurute—Camp. A with us), this stanza 
would not seem to have been directly taken from Pürnabhadra, but from 
some other source. It is at least possible, that the faulty reading in our 
MSS. and in Jïvânanda's edition of Bhoja° is older than either of the two 
texts II M sughatitäni II 
15 anicchanto is a misprint; read anicchato II 
M dehinäm ; after this, M again : duhkhäni yathehayämti dehinâm, Il 
16 
ΨΡΜ duhkhâny II 
17 Ν apararn ca twice II M dhiyädhlcho II 
18 bh 
svämi ca, Ψ Ρ Ρ γ Μ svämi yat; our reading is that of NA. 
In A two aksaras 
covered with gamboge between prâ and kta. 
Bh<ï> om. this stanza ll 
Pr 
bhN^PPrM 
U 

146 
Variants 
präktam II 
20 Ν vidhâyeti II 
23 M krivâkhur II 
24 M yatah II 
27 
M varttavyah ; Ν om. kartavyah II 
28 Pr vratapaväsadharmmah II 
30 
bhN om. hi II 
31 ΦΡΡΓΜ ins. uktarn ca before stanza 161 II 
32 N P 
samtosämrtataptänäm II 
33 Pr "luptänäm II M om. cetas II 
Page 164. 
3 Ν svavairamadam for svaveSmêdam II ΦΡΡΓΜ nirvrtenanânudvigne II 
4 
M 'bhiccidyah for 'tivähyah II ΦΡΡΓ ca naîkaêâstrânugatam, 
M cânekaSâstrâ-
nugatam II M maqipraroktam il 
5 Φ mamtharaka r, sädhu being supplied 
in marg., and he being written over ka by cop.; hence Pr ins. he after 
bhadra II Pr sàdhuêrayaniya° II 
7 ΨΡΡΓ sarà, M sä for särah II 
9 Pr 
suhrstan II 
10 bhN ΑΦΡΡΓpriyä for priyah\ Bh with us 11 
13 Ν nu, 
bh tu for na II Ν °bhopahrtâ° Il 
A (not Bh) om. 1. IS and the following 
sloka II 
17 bh dhuramdhuräh II 
20 Ν om. the two last pâdas of 
stanza 166 and the following prose sentence II 
21 Pr priyämti n 
23 
Ν narttät II 
24 M nàyayasyât for ndrthi" yat syät II 
25 Ν vä for kä II 
26 Ν yaêo for yaêaso II 
27 M vicämgo for citrängo II Ρ kurumgo II 
Ν 
ludhlakabânapâtacakUas 
II 
28 ΦΡΡΓΜ äyätam II M hirunyah II Φ laghu-
tapanako, with almost imperceptible 1 and 2 over pa and ta respectively ; 
hence Pr laghutapanako ; Ρ with us II 
30 Pr laghutanaka II 
31 M 
ährtavän II 
32 ΦΡ ihâva&thiiasyôpâyo, Pr ihâvasthitasthoyâyo II 
Φ Ρ Μ 
°syopäyo II 
ΑΨΡΡΓΜΒΙΙΦ ins. yatah before suvîksitam II 
33 Ν 
upâ-
gatah il 
In Φ thai of tathaiva resembles trai ; hence PL JPr tatraîva for 
tathaîva II 
Page 165. 
2 M odhâya, Bh âdâya, Φ âdâyaé; A with bhN ΦΡ. Query: avadhärya ? li 
3 bhN udakam àgata èva II bhN Saktivän II 
6 Pr abramti II M apadam 
for id am. || 
7 ΦΡΡΓΜ ahasâraih 
II 
M cetasah for cetaê ca II 
8 bhN 
sannimddhamâno II 
ΦΡΡΓΜ udakârtham, in Φ followed by danda, in Ρ 
by double danda II 
9 Ν mamtharaka präha II 
13 PrM °bhavanesv 
tipi II 
14 Ν "ndbhihitam II 
17 M om. ny abalâ II 
19 Ν 
kathayati for prcchati II 
21 bhNΦPPrM ucchannaA 
ucchinna". 
ΒΙιΦ 
janapadadevatäyatanädhistito 
bhümipradesah, om. utianna. 
For our emendation 
cp. Kullüka's gloss on Sünyagehe, Manu0 iv. 57 : utsannajanaväsagehe 
and 
Critical Introduction, p. 33 II 
22 M °kaScidra° for "cchidra" It 
24 M 
"pänäparam sau II 
26 M àraòdha II 
Page 166. 
1 M sampavistavakranetra° II Pr om. krtâh II 
4 M om. api ca II 
7 
Ν vimtyopâyam II 
8 M tatsare II 
9 Pr abravan II 
10 Pr putrapau-
bhN, "ÍTPrM 

Book II 
147 
traparayâ II 
13 bhN yad for yady II M krpä, om. sti II 
15 Ν om. 
kimcit II M om. tac ca êrutvâ yüthapati (not h) II 
16 Ν müsikäs II 
19 
Α Ψ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ inB. sa before sayütho II 
Φ om. sayütho, Bh sa for sayütho II 
20 Pr samâsya II 
23 Ν vihâyo nânyo II 
2 4 Pr müsakävasayä II Α Μ ΒΙιΦ 
0parivärakabut in M m and ca are very often confounded II 
Page 167. 
1 bhN "bantdha" for "bandhana° II 
3 NP sa for sayütham Ii M yathä
sthänapäSämJS II 
5 Ν om. ato 'ham and the following words to bhadra 
excl. II 
6 Pr om. chrutvä II After ityädi, Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ add N 7 kathä »I which 
in M is followed by a flourish II 
9 Ν "dharmârthâdibhiêâstra' II 
1 1 
Φ kävyagitaSästravinodena, with one mark of deletion (small vertical stroke) 
over gl, two ones over Sä, one over sir a ; A Ρ gita for kävya ; MPr kâvyaglta-
vinodena. 
This shows that the reading of A Ρ originates in a gloss of the 
archetypes of A P M ! II 
1 2 Ψ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ ca for hi IL 
Ψ Ρ Μ Β Ι Ι Φ ca for va II 
1 5 Ν cittämgo II 
Ν tarn capa II 
1 7 M '/tiran, then the first part of the 
aksara y o (not y au), then some akearas worn off, then patanamkam II 
bhN 
mamdagatiyâ, M mamdaragatitayä II 
19 bhN patitetiy PL1 patita iti ta i
20 Pr badhau, M budhau II 
21 Pr bahvapàyahpra°, PL1 bahvapäyam, pra
in Φ there is a small vertical stroke over ya to mark the caesura II 
22 
Pr sathä for sarvathä II 
23 bhN palvasamlpe II 
24 Φ Ρ präpnosi, M
prâptoti II 
2 6 Pr smân II 
2 7 bh Ν jïvito, corr. by cop. of bh to our 
reading II 
2 8 Ψ Ρ Μ yat kim api maya, Pr yatram api maya II Νpranayaku-
pite, Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ pranayaprakupitena II 
2 9 Ψ Ρ Μ madvanäd II 
Page 168. 
3 PL1 om. mitresu II 
4 ΨΡΓ uktväyudvignahrdayo, M uktvdsudvi-
nahrdayo II 
5 Φ Ρ Ρ Γ om. nivedya II Ν gahitvä II 
6 bhN om. tarn II 
P N tadavasthäm II 
10 M krêamtah II 
12 In bh, vi of virodhah has been 
corr. by the copyist from the beginning of some other aksara (perhaps dvi) ; 
Ν dvirodhah II 
1 3 Pr abhijnäsi II 
1 5 M bhavân vrêyattâm (gap)...fe 
kathanena II 
16 b h N A B t ^ api for asi) but cp. áar.99, l II 
Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ ins. 
tat before katham M M om. bandhanasya Η Ν upägatah II 
17 M °bamdhanâ° I
Ν anulhüta, om. all to dhanavyasanam (excl.) L 18 II 
18 bhi'PPr bhava 
for bhavatä ; Α Μ Β Ι Ι Φ with us II Ν puts vistaratah after icchâmi II 
21 Ν 
sanmäsasamjätah II 
22 AM paripälayämi, ΒΙΙΦ anupâlayâmi (cp. Sär. 100,8) II
2 3 Ν gamail II 
2 4 Ν vicarayan H M ins. na after vicaran II 
25 Pr 
tiirgatä for te gatäh II 
26 Ψ deéo II M apaiyämi II 
27 bh purutah II 
bhN Α Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ viksyamänäs, ΒΙΙΦ pratlksamänäs II 
2 8 M athordvam 
gâter II 
bhN.Sf'PPrM 

148 
Variants 
Page 169. 
1 Ν âkarsayâmi II 
S P tadro, L1 tadbho for naddho II 
3 Ν niràêitayâ II 
4 Φ Ρ iti twice II Pr "hrdayo ndham, II 
6 Ν päritosam, II 
7 L1 vilepana\°, 
Ρ °vilepanäPr °vilepena II 
8 Φ kumärikänäm, corr. to our reading; PL1 
kumärinäm ; Pr kumärä II 
9 ΦΡΡΓ M om. kautukaparänäm II Ν hastädvayam 
for Aastäd dhastam 11 
10 PL1 om. all between räjaputrasya and mrgayü-
thasya 1. 13 II 
11 Mprävrtakäla0 II 
12 bhN °hrdaye II 
17 Ν evad 
for etad II bhN autpädikam, Ρ (not L1 ) autyätikam, Pr auvyätikam, both these 
readings originating in misreadings of the form which tpä has in Φ II 
18 Ν grhagrhïta ; M grhïta, om. grafia II 
22 M atha krêâm for akrsäm II 
23 ΦΡΓ (not Ρ) kä&testakälalagudaprahärair II 
24 Pr vyâpâtenêti II 
Page 170. 
2 M prävrtakäla , Ν °samayotmke II 
3 For stanza 178, NBh<ï> only : 
yathä vätavidhütasyeti II 
5 M asambaddhajva° II Α Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ tac ca Srutvâ II 
7 M prabhütam prabhütam, jalena II 
9 bhN suhrtsnehât ksi" Il 
10 Ν 
Sata for ¿ara0 II Φ °j/iumda° (cp. vol. xi, Table I, no. 1, là c, and the form 
which jjhi has in Table II, no. 12, 2 a), PL1 °kumda°, Pr °kvamdaa, bhN AM 
°kamda°, which does not make good sense here. Cp. the reading of ΒΙιΦ. Sär. 
103,16°kantaka°. Perhaps °kanta° is Pürnabhadra's original reading. Bh<I> sirah-
kamfhakeSänmarddanam II 
12 bhN om. bhadra II Ν tvacä for tvayä II M 
apahägatah, bhN apahärya gatah II 
15 bhNAΦPPrM anupraviksyämi, Bh 
praviêàmîti, Φ pratiêâmUi II 
16 Pr ν oca, om. s tvam II 
17 M dayitajanavi-
priyogaS ca kasya\ Pr jana , om. dayita II ΦΡ cittaviyogaS ca II 
18 M 
"•mahosadha" II 
19 Ν ¿istasamägame II 
20 bh Φ Ρ Pr M pathyadana", Ν A 
pathyadìna ; Bh<î> paêya dinasamnibhä» te II 
21 ΦΡΡγprabhoê ca II 
27 
M param for varani II Νpränatyägo II 
28 PL1 om. bhavanti II 
Page 171. 
1 ΦΡΡΓΒΙΙΦ hiranyapâmm II 
2 Pr °vyährte vi" IL 
3 Pr om. the first 
'pi II 
4 ΦΡΡΓ vasambhävyabküm.im II 
S N om. drstvä II 
7 Φ utpa, 
then danda, then tato. The inferior end of the vertical ¿«-stroke goes to the 
right and meets the first vertical o-stroke to the effect that this ta in 
connexion with the o-stroke resembles tya, though the superior horizontal 
stroke of ta does not meet the o-stroke (see vol. xi, Table II, no. 10,1. 3 a). 
Hence PL1, taking the danda for an ¿-stroke, utpatyetot Pr utpato ; Pr seems 
to have taken the small horizontal stroke to the right of ta for a deletion 
mark. 
10 Ν ko for lubdhako II 
IS In Φ, bahall" seems to be corr. to 
bahuW\ Ρ M with us II 16 M paiatamti, A nipatamti, Bh nnapatamti. Simpl. 
bhN, "ÍTPrM 

Booh II 
149 
MSS. HI read ksate prahäräni patamty abhlksnam, h ksate prahärä nipattaty 
abhïksnam ; cp. Sär. 106,4 II A tivram, Bh tivrä II 
M annakmme II 
19 
Ν bahulïbhavamti II 
22 Α Φ Ρ Ρ γ Μ rngunam II Pr vdpi II 
23 Pr om. ca II 
25 Ν om. hi II 
29 M kriyate II 
30 bhNABhi» mamaîvôpary II 
Page 172. 
1 bhN savyam II 
2 Ν om. punar II 
3 Η Ι Ν Φ Ρ Ρ Γ etan na, M etan 
ma, A etac ca, ΒΙιΦ with ua II 
4 PL1 sujana II 
7 Ν yamä for maya II 
14 Φ ins. sarvam after idarn ; but cop. deletes it again II M syrstam II 
18 
Pr cchinnatti sahyo II 
25 In this line the form hiranyake is supported by 
all our MSS. II 
26 bhNASfPPrM tävad for täv ; ΒΙιΦ with us II 
bhN 
atha for yävad ayam M 27 Ν vyädhasyddarsyo II Pr "pradeúe for "bhüpradeSe II 
28 Ν Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ jump from the first darSaya to the second darsaya (1. 29), om. 
one of them and all between them II bh citrämgam írmga ; A citrämgasrmga-
pamjarämUaro II 
29 Ν vyädhadharmo II Pr om. 'vasyam lo II 
30 bhN 
tadgrahärtham, A tadgra\härtham, ΨΡΜ tadgahanärtham, Φ tadgrhanärtham, Bh 
with us II 
33 ΨΡΜ athawd° II Ν ludhbake II 
Page 173. 
2 Ν kr for jnätvä II Ν citträmgam II 
3 M udäya for uddlya II In N, 
the words from kacchapo to upâgatasya, p. 174, 1. 5, have been written by 
another hand II 
4 Pr salilâêayanam II All our MSS. here hiranyako 
(N hirako) II 
5 Ν om. 'pi II 
6 ΝΒΙιΦ vihitäsah, Pr vihaväSah II Φ Sâti 
for paêyati II Ν "pramâne, Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ tatrdmgulapramänena II 
7 Φ Ρ Ρ Γ gatamrn 
ava° II 
8 Ν ins. sa before »am II Ν diéyo II Pr nghramavataram èva II 
9 M adya for atha II 
12 Ν °êî, then a deleted α-stroke, then llnäm II bh 
flourish after the stanza 199 II 
13 APrM mitrasampräptinäma II After 
tantram, Φ Ρ Ρ γ Μ add π 2 kathâ 7 η; M adds klh II Φ Ρ Ρ γ ädyah Slokah II 
15 bhN ΦΡΡγΜ ii 1 π, A 99 for π 2 η, Φ adds 3 flourishes, Ρ one flourish, 
bh adds between two flourishes: iti dvitlyam äkhyänakarp, samäptam, II, with 
the figure •• 2 π after the second flourish II 
B O O K 
III. 
Page 174. 
1 bhN om. arham, M has it twice II 
2 Ν om. athêdam ärabhyate II 
M om. samdhivigrahädi II 
3 bhPr ädyah êlokah II 
4 Mpürvavirodhite-
trasya II 
5 Φ Ρ Ρ γ »atropi; M satror mitratvam npägasya II 
6 Ν pa&ya 
ullûka° IL 
9 In Φ, the anusvâra of prtÀvïpratiçtânatp has melted together 
bhN, SkppiM 

150 
Variants 
•with the inferior right-hand end of ghü (ghûka") in the foregoing line, but is 
still to be made out with certainty. (See vol. xi, Table I, no. 2, lob.) 
Ρ M L 1 prthvipratistânanàma II 
10 Φ Ρ Ρ Γ "sameto, M °samneto for °sanätho II 
Ρ (not L 1) nyagrodhah pâ° II 
11 Pr prati sma II 
Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ ins. käkaräjah 
before kalarn II 
12 M gitiguhâdurggâsrayah II 
13 M yam kimcid väyati 
tarn vyä" II 
14 Φ Ρ nityâdhigamanât, Pr nigaimn II 
15 Ν om. krtah II 
17 Pr vâlasya II 
18 bhN utkavr for utkatas, corr. by corr. of bh to 
utkatä (!) ; but the same corr. adds vr with the line-mark 2 in the inferior 
margin II 
19 Ν asmatpaksayam ; PL1 tya (om. same) asmatpaksayam ; M 
sametyaksaksayam II 
Page 175. 
3 The shape of r in rtarn is in Ψ identical with that oijha as it is usually 
written in this MS. II 
5 Φ Ρ Ρ Γ ekámtam twice II 
6 bhN 'nvayagatân II 
Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ 0ciramjlvi° II 
7 Ν upajivinam II 
8 PPrM om. ca. In Φ, the 
cop. adds it over the line, but corrects it subsequently to ra. With the aid of 
a magnifying glass, it is to be verified with certainty, that the left-hand part 
of an original ca has been erased II 
10 bh baityasam, ΝΦΡ ballyasa, Pr 
balìyàmsam; A has a gap here; Bh and Simpl. MS. I with us, Η ballyañ, 
h balayasi II M pranatâm II 
Ψ Ρ Ρ Γ mahaiâpi hi, M rnahdpi hi II 
12 Pr 
dhàryakaê II 
14 Over anäryena in bh gloss : saha II 
15 Ν sarvaräjyam II 
16 Pr tad yathâ for tathâ ca II 
18 M prasamdhim II bhN samânena for 
samenâpi II 
Ψ Ρ Ρ Γ samdigdhe II 
19 In bh gloss on sâmsayikam : tamsaye-
bhavam kâryam II 
20 Ν jumps from samenâpi 1. 20 to samenâpi 1. 22, om. 
one of them and all between them II 
21 M tasmâkhurddham II 
bh samä-
rabhet II 
22 bh nämändhah II Pr hito II 
23 ivabhitvâ all our MSS. incl. Bh. 
In A this passage is missing owing to a gap in the MS. Hamb. MSS. have 
another reading II 
24 In bh, gra of vigrahasya seems to have been 
corrected from nna by cop. ; corr. adds gra over the line. Ν cinnahasya for 
vigrahasya II 
25 PL1 ndstokam api, M no stokam api II 
27 M nakhe 
bhamgam II 
30 In bh gloss on vaitaslm : palarmi II 
32 Ψ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ vetasa II 
Page 176. 
1 bhN kürmah sam II Φ Ρ marthayet II On päda b or on the following 
line a gloss in marg. of bh, which I cannot make out II 
5 Pr tavd-
bhiprâya êrotumW 
6 Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ om, deva II 
Φ Ρ dharmmarahites II 
8 bhN 
dharmah sa", but h deleted again in bh ; ABh with the other MSS. II 
bhNi'PMBh °vihme ca; Pr dharmmasatyavihlnasya·, A with us II Ν sa 
dadhyän II 
12 bh yoddhä'vamamtä II 
13 Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ samdhänaklrttane II 
Pr bhü pi II 
15 Ν om. stanzas 21 and 22, but has the foregoing uktam ca II 
bh api kriyä, corrected by gloss, to our reading II 
17 Gloss, of bh corrects 
bhN, "^PPrM 

Bool III 
151 
Samo° to samo II bh pratyupadäpakäh II 
18 Gloss in bh on sahasâ : gape
lagMmäm pämmno châmto II M toghavitavâh II 
19 Μ Ι Ν Α Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ yaû fo
yac ; Bh yathaîsa. HI yod evaîtad II 
21 Ν susämäjyam II 
30 Ν om. 
samsiktâ II 
Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ °däna° for °netra° II 
31 bhNPr élâghyâ II 
32 bhN 
tvam athdtmä° II 
Page 177. 
1 Ν tatra for tan m ; in bh tan na corr. from tena by cop. II 
2 Gloss 
in bh on yänarn : näsavu II Φ Ρ samdhi II M yetasah for yatah II 
3 M om
dicstena II 
4 Mpratsate for praSasyate II 
5 Φ Ρ Ρ Γ bhave, M i/iäva for 
bhaye II ΦΡΡΓprânampra, M pránepra II 
6 Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ èva ca for ucyate II 
7 Φ Ρ M väthavä caitre, Pr thavä catire (om. va) II 
8 Ν cdnyatM, PL1 M
vdnyadä II 
9 M avaskamthedapradänasya II Gloss in bh on avaskamda
éosanam II 
12 Pr pranidhivyädhim II 
13 bhN tan na for tatra II 
bhNí'PPrMprabhoh ; in bh h deleted by cop. II 
14 Pr samnädham II Pr 
päpi II 
15 Φ M käryakaranä", Pr käryakärana" II bhN "näpeksayäm ap
corr. of bh adds ä-stroke after km, and ra over m a II 
16 bhN y at for 
tat U 
22 Ν tathä ca II 
25 Φ tasya over the line II Pr prajtvanam II 
bhN atha" for apy â° II 
27 M äyänäm for yänam II 
29 Gloss in bh on 
êunapi: kutarä\ Pr írünáti for chundpi II 
30 Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ om. anu ca II 
31 
M kurvltd° II Pr "tdtmaprayuktaye against the metre II 
Page 178. 
1 Over saho gloss in bh : samarthah II 
2 L1 om. «αφ, Ρ om. na »am II 
3 Pr drdha II bhN VKamdhâsâra", but cam corr. by cop. of bh to m II 
5 
Ν tiste, A tisthed ; Simpl. HI tista madhyagato (H "ta for °to), Simpl. h tisfam
madhyagato nityam\ Bh yas tisten madhyago II bhN yo after nityam II 
lapsate II 
9 PL1 om. mpratisthitäh and the following words to supra-
tisthitäh., 1. 11 exel. II 
10 bhN éikyo II Gloss in bh on dharsayitum : pâti-
tum II 
11 Ν ins. ca after atha II 
14 Ν manyamto, M matryamte II M 
om. par am II 
17 M mhâyah II M tejasvapi II 
18 M yatito vadbhih 
Φ svayam eoa [new line] ca prammyati ; PL1 the same reading, Pr svayam èva 
praéâmyati, M svayam eva ca êâmitah II 
19 bhN vipaksah pra II 
2
bhN yäsyasi II bhN tyaktvdpi for tat kopi II 
Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ om. na N bhN sahâ-
yam tvam. 
The original reading seems to be that of the Hamb. MSS. : yadi 
punas tvam svasthänam tyaktvä Uiyatra yäsyagi I tat kopi váñmatrena sä
karisyati. 'saMyatvam' of our MSS. seems to be a corruption of sähäyyam 
na. na, which is om. in Φ(ΡΜ), seems to have been inserted afterwards in 
a wrong place in bh (Ν) II 
21 bh karisyati, corr. by gloss, to karisyati II 
23 Ρ ntyaée for krSe, ntya being a misreading of the shape which kr has in Φ ; 
bhN.^PPrM 

152 
Variants 
in L1 the two aksaras are worn off II bhN kasydpi for kasyâsti II 
26 
Gloss in bh on venur: vâmsa II M om. uktarn ca II 
30 Pr "phalam hriyam II 
31 bhN tad eva, ABh tad evam for tad deva II M pratïkaro II 
P a g e 
1 7 9 . 
1 bhN^PPr sthirajlväbhidhänam, A sthirajwä 'bhidhänam ; Bh with us II 
2 Pr samädimti II bh tat, Ν tata for tad II 
4 M svakále II 
6 yadä for 
tadä II 
8 bhN avisvasair II Ν °nocchisvate II 
10 ΨΡΜ varddhate, Pr 
rddhate 11 
13 M gums for guros II 
15 bhN präpto for Sosto II 
18 
ΜιΝΨΡΡγΜΚ lobhäsrayah sa na tväm uecâtayisyati (PPr uccâtayasyiti) ; Bh 
lobhäSrayän na tvâm sa uecâtayisyati (!) ; A lobhâêrayah sa tu tväm bho I nün
uecâtayisyati. This is of course an attempt towards correcting the faulty 
passage. 
Our reading is that of the Hamb. MSS. Simpl. h : lobhäsayastram 
na Sat ru tru ccätayispati II 
20 bh tato 'ham, Ν tatôham for tata I aham, 
a simple misreading of the old-fashioned writing of o II bhN sthirasthlvy It 
21 bhN pranadJdbhih II 
22 M om. vedaih paSyanti II Ν vädaväh for 
brähmanäh II 
24 Pr itra for atra II M om. all between atra and viéesatah, 
1. 25 II 
26 M om. sa II 
29 M pamcadaSì II Ρ om. tribkis; ^PrML1 
tribbi 2 r for tribhis tribhir II 
33 Ν tirthaéabdena yukta\ Pr tïrthaêabdenâtra
yukta ; bh ilrthaiabdenayukta', corrected by the copyist from tïrthasabdenâ-
trayukta II M kupsitam II M svämina upayätäya II 
P a g e 
1 8 0 . 
1 Pr bhavamti II M tatsada for tadä II M "syäbhyudaryaya II Ν purohitah
se° II 
2 bh °amtarvamsaka°, Φ "amtarvamSaka", PPr °amtaroaêakaA °amtar-
vamsikah0 ; Bh with us II bhN °balädhiksa°, corr. in bh to our reading by 
glose. II 
4 All our MSS. including LxABh °kamcukl° (gloss in bh: 
dhävya) ; the same reading in the Hamb. MSS., which add ca ; but as in the 
Hamb. MSS. in accordance with our text °kamcukl° is part of a compound, 
ca appears to be an interpolation. 
In A this and the compound mantri° 
are dissolved. 
Sar. p. 109 om. the second class of the tlrthäni, but gives 
the first one in a compound as Pürn. Il 
PL 1 °mspäM 
°Satyäa for 
0êayyâ° Il 
M °sanyâ° for "spaia" Il 
Gloss in bh on "bhisag" : vaida II 
5 M "viläsinas II ca all our MSS. incl. Bh ; it is missing in the Hamb. 
MSS., which om. also iti II 
6 Pr svapaksavighätah II 
7 bhN^PPrM 
"samvatsarä" (Pr °cäryah)\ ABh with us II 
8 M jänäti II 
9 M tat for 
täta II Ν om. vairam II 
12 ΡL1 paräpaM II 
13 Ν om. bhäsa II Ν 
"käränikä" II Ρ "kyäma I, M "Syämä" II bhN^JP "paksaganaih, M "paksagan
APrBh with us (only Bh "prabhrtibhih) II 
14 In Φ, taxât (!) suppl. by 
cop. in margin, without a mark of omission in the text; PL 1PrM om. 
tâvad II 
16 M vrsä" for vrthä" II 
18 M om. yah II 
19 Ν anudvigna, 
bhN, SfrPrM 

Book 
IH 
153 
ΨΡΡγΜ anudvignah II bhN sürya II 
22 Pr om. sa II 
24 ΨΡ jahyä\ 
under jahyäd in bh gloss: tyajet II ΦΡΡγΜ ivdmbhasä; Simpl. ΠI h with. 
bhN II 
25 ΨΡΙι1 äcäryamm II PL1 Pr anadhlyän mrtvijam. The copyists 
took the «¿-stroke over tair, which in Φ stands just below in the following 
line, for viráma II 
Page 181. 
1 ΦΡΡγΜ ca priyavâdinlm II 
2 Ν grämapälam for "kämam II bh^ 
thanakâmam, PrBh and Simpl. HI vanakämam, in Bh corr. by later hand 
apparently to dhana", M vinakâmam ; the other MSS. incl. A and Simpl. h 
with us. As to our reading it should be borne in mind that in India 
the barber is regarded as a greedy fellow who does not abstain from doing 
wrong, if he can earn money by a crime. Cp. Somadeva's Kathäsaritsägara 
xxxii, 136 ff., the frame-story of our fifth book, and our stanza iii, 66. 
3 Ν om. 'nyah kaêcid II Pr athaîter II 
5 Pr "kovicatah for °kocitah ; M °kocita-
samastûvasusam" II 
6 Ψ pragunîkrte, then an aksara which looks like ghca (gh 
in its modem form) and is liable to be taken for sva, though in Φ i has 
quite a different form; M tragunlkrtesva, om. ca ; PL1 su for ca ; Pr and the 
other MSS. with us II 
8 After simhäsane, bhN insert ca II bhNiPPrM 
saptadvlpâ" ; ABh with us II 
10 Ν adharmesu, Pl^M arthesu II 
11 Ψ 
c$radhäneyu\nevr ρ&gb~\yuvaltjane ; hence Ρ, correcting the first yu to su, 
''pradhänem yuva II Ν yuvatijane II 
12 bhN °lälkä°, in bh corrected to 
°läjä" by corr. II Ν "gocarä" for °rocana° II 
13 Pr 'ksapätre II Ν mamgala-
püryesu II 
14 M yavlrakâ° Il bh °mad Aya, ΦΡΡγ "madhyasthitam, M 
"madhyasthisthitam II ΦΡΡγΜ om. tisthantam II 15 bh kupito, corr. by cop. 
to kuto II 
16 Gloss in bh on krürakremkära : mida II Pr »amäsam II 
17 
M om. esa II 
19 Pr samaväyo, om. vacana II 
22 Gloss in bh on êveta-
Ihiksus: yati II 
Page 182. 
3 Pr vidvar yejitä II 
β bh nirüpitästa, corr. by corr. to nirüpitesti ; 
Ν nirüpitäste II Pr àsti II Pr tac cam api II 
7 Ν samayo, Pr samatam II 
M präjptisi II Ν vihagasya for vihasya II 
8 4'PL1Pr transpose: "cakorako· 
kilaM om. cakora, writing °kokilacakraväka° II 
11 bh ΑΨΡΙ^ΡγΜΒΙι vakra-
näsam, Ν cakranâêam II »PPL1 0darsinam, in Φ corr. by very thin strokes at 
the bottom of i to our reading II 
12 Pr vaktum II 
13 M om. tathd ; 
Ν tathd ca II 
15 bhN tu for nu 11 
16 ΨΡΙ.1 svämi sati II 
17 M udy 
for yady II M om. bhavati II 
18 Ν praêaktah II 
21 Ν om. yatah II 
Page 183. 
2 Pr matâm II 
4 M om. katham etat I väyasah II 
6 bhNA'PPM 
(not Pr) kaicid ; Bh asti kasmiêcid (I) va" ; Hamb. MSS. : aiti kamimêcid va" Il 
bhN, "^PPrM 
X 

154 
Variants 
bhN parivdritah. The original reading is perhaps βparivärah, which may 
have been corrupted to the reading of bhN, which again may have been 
corrected to the reading of ΦΡΝII 
7 Pr yütham, om. gaja II 
9 Ν "yajvala 
for 0palvala II Ν êosagatâni II 
IO Ν om. proktah II Glosa in bh on kalabhâh : 
hathlnâmbacâm (or "kam) II 
11 Φ «α^ [new page] ti, cp. Key to Tables, p. 1, 
s.v. 'Anusvära'. PL1 (taking ^ for a hyphen, as it is used in later MSS.) 
sali II 
12 Ν tenadistäsv for tenastäsv II 
13 Φ PL1 PrM vegadamdä" II 
PL1 alha for atha II 
16 In bh, ta of "tata" resembles va', Ν °να(α° for 
°tata0 II 
17 bhN °j%yam&na II 
18 Ν °mad hu" for0madhupa° II Pr om. °mada0 II 
19 M om. "tarn" II bh °Saracorr. to °êata by cop. ; Ν 
for "sata II Pr 
"jaghana° for °salata" II 
20 In Φ,/α of jag hana add. by cop. over the line 
with pale ink. It is not very distinct and looks almost like ü. PL1 "ghana 
for °jaghana° II 
21 Pr °rava\ and "sampvrnna II 
23 ΦΡΡγΜ om. tac ca 
and the following words including präptaS candraearah, p. 184,1. 1 II Ν ins. 
a second niveditam after hastirâjdya II 
Page 184. 
1 bhNApräptam for práptaé; Bh with ue II 
3 bhN "Kara for °kara", 
corr. by the glossator of bh to our reading; Pr 0karakaranâh II 
4 Φ Ρ PrM 
atikramya II 
5 In bh, ra of param is very similar to ta ; Ν pa\am for 
param, ΦΡΡγΜ am. param II 
7 ΦΡΡγ ndyâti II 
8 L1 om. latra II 
9 
Φ originally pravista0 for prapistabut 
corrected by effacing part of the 
w-hook. 
Still the original reading is quite visible. PL^Pr pravista" il M 
om. suduhkhitän ; bh sudiikhitän, Ν mduhkhUän II Φ vlksyänukampayä vi, with 
a nearly invisible dot over vl as a mark of deletion, then ksa begun, but 
deleted again by two little vertical strokes, then idam äha ; PL1 vîksyânukam-
payävlksa idam äha II 
10 ΦΡΡγΜ âgamisyamti, om. iti II 
11 M 'emi for 
'sti II 
12 bh (not Ν !) êikhlmukho II 
20 ΦΡΙ.1 hasteno II 
21 Gloss in 
bh on lekham : pattra II 
Page 185. 
2 Ν dura, with ta over ra by cop. II 
4 Ν puts ca after gate ll 
For 
iva, bh eva, but corrected to iva by the copyist himself II 
5 Φ om. yad 
vyäkarana, which has been added in marg. by another hand II 
β After 
writing aädhubhih I, the copyist takes a new pen, and the first akeara brü 
written with it, is somewhat indistinct ; hence both PL1 and M misread it, 
writing PL1 Srüyäd, M büyäd II 
8 Ν atha for ayam II 
9 Pr bhäsitam II 
10 ΦΡΙι1 dvitiyakarmma II 
12 ΦΡΙι1 puspitäkarnni° II M °kisalayarada-
star araj uh" II Ν °jah° for °rajah° II 
13 PL1 °samslista»ajaladasadrsam II 
Ν ins. °nlla° between 'jalada and °sadrêam\ mia of course is originally 
ç, gloss, wrongly taken for a correction by some copyist II 
14 Pr °ela° 
bhN, * Ρ PrM 

Book 
I I I 
1δ5 
for °capala II 
Φ °bhairavaravam, but the first va del. by cop. ; P L 1 °bhairara-
ναψ ; P r om. °rabhaì° II 
Ν "äkäram sam II 
M °sai$v est ikaranam\nam° II 
Ν 
eravate? II 
16 bh °bhujâta, corr. by cop. and (more legibly) by corrector 
to ° s u j ä t a O w i n g to the copyist's correction, the original reading is 
difficult to make out: Ν "bhujâta , Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ 
0suvràta for "sujäta II 
17 
b h N °sukha for "mukha ; Pr 0yamumkhamdalam II 
18 P r parivrtaih II 
22 
P r sarvathâ adraksäyäm II 
2 4 M api bhavatatah iruivä, &c. II 
ΨΡΡΓ tatah 
Srutvä II 
Page 186. 
4 b h N A ' i ' P P r M B h evam for èva ; àâr. with us II 
5 M sa for sana II 
P L 1 om. uktam ca II 
6 M urddhatesv II 
M êâstresu II 
7 Prpurusäny II 
bhN jalpamti II Pr om. na II 
9 The copyist of bh apparently corrects 
vdpari" to cdparibut the corrected aksara has some resemblance to la (cp. 
vol. xi, Table I, no. 6, 2 a) ; hence Ν IdparV ; ΦΡΙ. 1 vdpari" ll 
I S 
Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ 
"nämdsti II 
16 Ν nivarttate II 
19 Ψ asmacchaksayi jyotsnayâ", P L 1 
asmacchaksayâ jyoSnaydPrM 
asmacchiksayâ, M jyotsnaydPr 
yotsnayd° II 
20 Ν saparivärah II ψ PL10nasmidvane, Pr °nâsmadvane II M "vasfe for ° cesta-m, ; 
P r yaßesfayam II 
Ν vibhähm II 
22 b h N esyatîti II 
Page 187. 
1 Ν jumps from the first yendharp, to the second yeniham (1. s), om. one 
of them and all between them II 
4 Ν °¿o° for "talo"; ΦΡΡΓ 0talollälita-
graha", M °tatollalitagraha II 
8 b h N pramati, corr. by corr. of bh to our 
reading II 
10 Ν kastarp, ra, ra being a misreading for a 2, indicating the 
repetition of the preceding word II 
b h N ^ P P r M ins. ya after bhavatä. 
ABh and Sär. om. it II 
11 b h A ¥ P P r M äropitaSin ψ eorr. to our reading 
by a small diagonal stroke ; Bh dvigunam tvayarositai cairidrah ll 
14 Ν 
ksapayäm äsa, P r khyamayäm äsa H 
16 P r carjßre mamôpari ; Φ P L 1 cani-
dramaso for candro, omitting the following mamo II 
1 8 Φ api, corr. by cop. 
to iti ; but the correction of pi to ti is not very clear. 
Pr isi, M api for iti II 
After iti, Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ add n kathâ π 1 it M 
19 ΦΡΡΓΜprajäh Η 
2 0 M cad 
for tâvad II 
22 P r kupyamto for kuto It 
2 3 b h N c/ieéa" for chaêa II 
2 4 Ν om. kathaya II 
Page 188. 
5 ΦΡΙΙ1 P r "helikä" for °prahelikä° ; P L 1 "dänädirvinodaih (!) II 
7 After 
deiam, Ν ins. präyam katham api deSam II 
P r tittir M 
10 ΦΡΡΓΜ om. va II 
1 3 M om. na II 
1 4 M tittirah II 
17 b h N däridro, Pr däridre II 
b h N 
pura for pure II 
19 M mama vasathe II 
20 Ν na te kim II 
2 2 M 
prätiveSmikah I prcchätäm II 
I n bh gloss on prätiveSmikäh : pâdon II 
bhN, *PPrM 

156 
Variants 
Page 189. 
1 M gahasyo" 11 
2 In bh gloss on mmamta : pädösi II M èva for evam II 
ΦΡΡγΜ munir for manur TI 
5 ΦΡΡγΜ SU for tu II 
6 ΦΡΡγ Sasaka, 
corr. in Pr to SaêamJcah II Pr he for kirn, II ΦΡΡγΜ transp. : na tvayâ II 
7 
Φ M yatiâha, in Φ corr. from yathâ ca by cop. ; PPr yathâ ca for yad aha II 
8 M pratyaksyam II 
9 M asvava for atra II 
1 1 M manusânâm II 
12 
ΜιΦΡΡγ ürascämsca, in bh corr. to our reading by corr. II 
1 4 Ν smrtïh II 
Φ om. pramânï, but cop. supplies it in marg. II 
1 8 M savisyati II 
ΦΡΡγΜ 
om. iti II M athdnâtidûram II 
1 9 ΦΡΡγΜ tittiram II 
2 0 Ν om. cala, 
PL1 om. bhar<ga in the compound II 
2 1 Ν bhavatyâ II 
2 3 M drstyâ II 
bhN bhayaprmo" II 
Page 190. 
1 bhN lapaochadma' ; Pr taschadma II 
2 ^ Ν Φ Ρ Ρ γ Μ galavarttäs, Κ 
galavärtäs, A malavättäs (continuing tipasvinah, ttas ti of course being a mis-
reading for rttä-i ta), apparently corr. by cop. from gala, Bh galakrmtas II 
5 P kurdvabähur, L1 kurddhabâhur II Φ (not PL1) ¿a[new line]tayor || bhN 
eva for evam II 
7 M svapnavadrsäh, Pr svawhSäh II bh (not Ν) kufumba° II 
9 M dinäny äyämceti ca II 
10 M lohakärastreva, Ρ lohakärabhastrevatf L l 
lohakärabhästravat l| 
11 M om. tathä ca II 
13 In bh gloss on Stinah 
puccham : kurärärnnä puchadl ; Pr pucchatim for puccham II 
15 kütikä 
bhNAΦPL 1PrMK; Bh dütikä; Hamb. MSS. H puttikä (cp. p.w. s.v.), I 
punnikä II 
16 M matyem II Pr om. in their right place ye&äm and the 
following words down to iamsanti (excl.), 1. 19, adding them after vistare, 
1. 21, between two crosses ( χ ) II 
17 ΦΡΙι1 adhnah II 
Pr dhrtam for 
ghrtam II 
18 In bh gloss on pinyâkâc : sani II 
22 Pr dkarmmanâm II 
Ρ 
paräpl"; L1 with us II 
23 Ν êaSakah prâha II Ν Φ Ρ γ Μ tittiri, in φ similar 
to titviri, which is the reading of Ρ II 
2 4 ΦΡΡι-Μ naditafe II In Φ gloss 
by cop. on tisthati : samasti II 
Page 191. 
1 Ν sthitvau II 
2 bhN tatra for tata II 
3 N dharmâdeêaka II 
4 
bhN om. hi II Pr ti for te II 
5 ΦΡΡγΜ vadala-, bhN om. vadatam II 
6 Pr pradarsayatu II 
9 Pr bhûtâpi II M om. yo II 
1 3 In bh glosses 
on ajâ : vakado, and on vfihayah : sàia II 
1 5 L1 vrksäm sthitvä II 
1 6 
M om. svarge and pâda 4 II 
17 Ν bhäsamtanam II 
1 9 ΦΡΙ^ΡγΜ insert 
mama before samipa, repeating it after bhütvä II bhNΦPL ^M samlpavarttino, 
Pr samïpavarttiyo; ABh samïpavarttinaw II 
2 0 PL1 vivädaparamärtham, om. 
vijhäta II bhN'i'PPr väcä, a misreading of the old-fashioned writing of o ; 
A yena vijnäiaparamartham vivädavaco vadato me, &c. ; Bh yena vivcidavijñám~ 
paramärthavaco me vadano 'pi paralokavädhä na bhavati II M om. me 11 
bhN, "ÍTPrM 

Book III 
157 
Page 192. 
4 ΦΡΡΓ karnnopâmti, in φ the ¿-hook over the line del. by cop. with 
a small dot, thus correcting ti to te II 
Pr ävedayarjiti II 
5 Φ PL 1 viêvâsitai II 
β ΝΦΡΡγΜ upägatau II 
7 In bh gloss on 0krakacena: karavata II 
8 
Pr braviti II After ädi, ΦΡΙΙ1 add ιι hatha 2, PrM Jcathä without a figure II 
9 Pr etani II Pr kr, om. tvä II After krtvä, bhN^PL 1 PrM insert präpya ca. 
ABhK om. these words, KBh präpya for krtvä, Bh reading arthapatim for 
adhipatim. 
SimpL MSS. H I ksudram divärpdham patim (I parim) 
äsädya; 
Sim pl. h krúi [misread for ksudram] patim präpya râtrâmdhâh samtôpi. 
At all 
events either präpya or krtvä is originally a gloss, präpya ca seems to me to 
have been inserted in order to make these prose words more similar to the 
beginning of the title stanza of the preceding tale, and the reviser, to whom 
the text of Bh goes back, completes this assimilation by correcting adhipa-
tim, to arthapatim II M râtrâmdhâh II Pr om. santah II ΦΡΡγ sasi" for êaSa" II 
Φ Ρ "tittira", Pr "titira" II 
10 ΦΡΡγΜ yâsyamti, om. iti II 
13 Pr sane 
pa II bhNAKBh yathâsukham II 
14 The words sahdste to krkälikaya-
bhihitam suppl. by cop. of Φ in marg. ; bhihitam stands also in the text II 
15 Pr om. bhoh II 
20 M om. prâha II Ν durätman II 
21 M adyapra~ 
bhüti II 
22 Over sâyaka in bh gloss : bäna II 
23 bhN and A durukta, 
Bh duruktva, ΦΡΙ, 1 M durakta, Pr dukta II 
áar. and Simpl. H I with us, 
Simpl. h duruküm (misread for °ktam) II 
Page 193. 
1 Φ svâsvâêrayam, the second svd del. again by cop. II Pr om. vâyaso II 
2 bhN om. y ad idam vyährtam maya, Ρ om. yad idam vyährtam ; L 1 om. tarn y ad 
and the following words to d visam èva (excl.), 1. 7. M yod idam vyânhatam 
maya II 
5 Pr yadi priyam II 
7 Φ cadvacah, corr. by cop. to tadvacah, the 
corrected aksara resembling cû ; Ρ bhüdvaca, Pr dvacah for tad vacah II 
8 
Ν tathä σα II 
10 vairitäm ; in bh the glossator adds a various reading vai 
hatâm\ II 
11 Gloss in bh on bhisag : vaida II 
13 ΨΡΙ^Ργ sarisadi II 
14 M taira for tan na II 
20 Pr prayât II 
22 ΦΡΙ. 1 PrM sa äha II 
Pr 
sätgunyaparah II 
Page 194. 
1 Pr valokatah (I) II 
2 Pr chägabrähmanam ; M °brâhmanâm II Ν om. 
Irahmanam and the following words to brâhmanah (excl.), 1. 5 II 
S N 
krtä\l\krtägni° II 
6 Φ PL 1 M pravâsi, Pr prativäsi II 
7 bh meghäcchädite 
gagane II M only once mamdam II 
8 kimcid° all our MSS. incl. AKBh ; 
Hamb. MSS. kimcidgrämam II 
11 L 1 artha for api II 
Φ itas ca taêca, PL 1 
ita» ca taha, Pr iti S cêtas ca, M itaS ca, om. cetas II 
12 ΦΡΙ^Μ märgge, Pr 
märgga II 
13 Νplvaram paêum II 
15 ΦΡΙ^Μ anyadinajo ; but cop. of 
bhN, ^PPrM 

168 
Variants 
Ψ adds in marg. : adyadinaja iti pallia, and Pr has adyadinajo II 
17 ΙΛΨ 
tamukho, Ν sanmukho II Glossator of bh corrects apamârgena wrongly to 
aparamârgem, which is the reading of Ν II 
18 M èva for evam II 
19 Ν tad 
for y ad II bhN skamdhärüdho, ΨΡΜ skarpdhänirüdho. APrBh and Hamb. 
MSS. with us II 
22 Pr om. tän II 
24 Ν pratipädayämi, Pr pratipädasi II 
Page 195. 
3 Ν etyoväca, Μ abhyetoväca II Ν aho twice II 
4 Pr ίαΜαψ for yuktah II 
8 Pr äsa for âha II 
10 Ψ Ρ Ρ γ Μ ätmaruciram, in Ψ corr. to our reading ; 
but the correction is not very clear. The respective aksara might as well 
be taken for tam corr. to ram II M samäcarati, Pr samäcaret, both om. iti II 
12 Ψ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ vidhäya for krtvä II 
Ψ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ aho for bhoh II 
15 Ν sacelam, 
corr. by cop. to sacaulam II 
20 PL1 aho for ato II After iti, Ψ Ρ Ι ^ Ρ γ 
11 kathä udii, M kathâ 3 II 
21 Pr om. "seva Il 
24 Pr durjano II 
25 
M bhaksayati II 
Page 196. 
3 Ψμdâcid\ PL1 kadäcid, om. ία il 
Ψ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ "sari0 for "sira" il 
4 Ν 
nihkr amatas iva tasya II 
5 Φ PL1 câlaghu, in Ψ corr. to our reading by 
a small vertical stroke over d II bhN ins. a second ca before Sartre II M 
íarlre vranasonitagamdhä", 1. 5 II 
7 Φ Ρ M vyäpädayamti II Ν om. vâ II ΨΡΜ 
tâdayamti II 
8 bhN kr ta for ksata II Pr °sarvämbhogo II After iti, 
Ψ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ add ΙΙ kathâ 4 ΙΙ II 
1 0 Ν om. vicärya II 
Ψ Ρ Ρ Γ νάηυ,ξ^αψ II Ν 
meghavarnapräha II 
11 Ψ sâmadlnam, PL1 Pr sämadänam, M tämadänam for 
eämädm II 
12 M nirbhatsyavipaksapaksapranathänäm II 
13 bhNA,ï'P 
''pranadhlnäm, Pr 'pranadhänarp ; Bh with us II Ψ Ρ Ρ Γ âlisyd" II 
14 ΜιΝΨΡ 
(not M!) Pr A rsimûka", Bh rsya" ; cp. áar. 127, l, and below, 197,211 
Ψ Ρ Ρ Γ 
ins. ca between saparivärena and bhavatä II 
15 bh °madhyä, Ν 0madhyäd II 
Ν divaiâ^dàât II Pr anumâ, om. nato II 
1 6 Ψ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ mayédam jnätatp II 
Ν om. apasärarahitam and the following words to apasâraparityaktatji (excl.), 
1. 18 II 
19 M krapâ II 
21 Pr ibamdhanam II 
23 Ν svakâryam II 
24 M ripusayigatak II 
26 Ν samudyasak II 
Page 197. 
1 M prahyatyâhata , Pr prakrtydhrtarudhirälomditam II 
2 M Saspa-
müka II 
3 Μ ι Ν Α Ψ Ρ Ρ Γ "pranadhi" ; M êatupranadhibhrtayâ \ Bh with us II 
4 Pr the first °kädhi° twice II 
5 Ν tvaryatäm ra, ra being a misreading 
of 2 II 
8 Pr °sevinä II 
9 PL1 nyagrodhapabhimukhaw II 
10 M 
vrksaéâm II bhN Ψ Ρ ristamänä, Pr hrsfamänä, Μ ίιγ^ατηαηάψ, A hrttamanâh
corr. by cop. to our reading. Bh with us II M sûyamâno 'bhi rimarddanah II 
12 Mi for eva II M pâdayâmi,om. vyä II 
14 Ψ na Μφ\_new line]¿ ; the 
bhN, * Ρ Pr M 

Book III 
159 
same mistake in Ρ (not in L1) II 
16 ΦΡΙ«1 °syantamamanam II M om. 
dvitiyam II 
18 M cam for tarn, II 
19 Ν sthirajwinäjlvind° II Ν °mamtri II 
Ν sthirajtvi II 
20 Ν IhUah for nltak, om. the following words to savumayo 
(excl.), 1. 21 II M taira vidyatmam, for tan nivedyatäm II 
Pr ätmasvarggama-
näs for ätmasväminah II M sa for saha II 
22 bh bhat, Ν bhaktam for tat II 
23 Φ PL 1 vyâpâditâneka , M vyâpâditâteka', Pr vyäpäditänika° Il M drstyâ II 
24 Ν pracalitah, om. prati II 
25 M bhavatäs II 
27 M ihüti, om. kâmo II 
In Φ gloss by cop. on bhütikämo : dhanecchu II 
29 M 'bhihitam for 'sti II 
Pr °vrtte II 
30 Pr tasyopadâpradânena II 
bh tvatpakse patinata, Ν tva-
pahapätinam 
II 
32 Φ PL 1 tävas tväm ; Pr tävat tä II 
Page 198. 
3 Ν tad atrâdau II ΡΨ Icimm (not L1) II 
5 ΦΡΡγΜ hlnaêatrur II 
β 
Ν "paurusah balah II 
7 M upägatä II ΦΜ lohepravädah, in Φ corr. by cop. 
to our reading II 
9 Pr surllabhah II ΜιΝΑΦΡΡγΜΚ ciklrsitah, Bh cikir-
satah, M cisämkisitä, corr. by the copyist to °kïrsitah. 
Cp. SP. III. 44 II 
10 M om. ea II 
11 ΦPPr sphatäm II 
15 In Φ, ca after tasya has been 
supplied by cop. over the line, but it is liable to be overlooked, as it stands 
between two aksaras of the preceding line, clinging closely to their inferior 
ends; PL 1 om. ca; (L1 tasyâ for tasya) II 
16 Ν nivarttate II 
18 bhN 
valmtko 'pi for °kôpari II 
19 bhN nunam meyä (Ν maya) ksetradevatä mayâ II 
20 ΦΡΙι]ΡγΜ kadâpi for kadäcid api II Pr püjite II 
21 M dayä for tad 
asyäh II 
22 M yäcittä será nikúpya II 
23 M om. bhoh II Φ Ρ Ι / mayaî-
tâvam kâlam II 
24 Ν püjäm, M kütä for püjä II 
25 Pr r for prätar II 
Page 199. 
1 Ν ins. ca after evam II Ν ekena for ekaika ; Pr ekaikam dìnàr am II 
3 Ν 
gräm îovgrâmam II 
4 M ins. tvä before tatra gatvä II 
5 M om. ca after ekam II 
β bhN grhlsyämy evam, Φ Ρ Ι 1 grMsyämevam, Pr grhlsyâmy emvam, A grhlsyä-
mi I evam, Bh grhuyàmîty evam II 
7 M vrähmana, om. putrena II Ν om. 
Sirasi II 
8 ΦΡΡγΜ amuktajlvita eva II Pr tathâdeêata II 
9 Φ u, then 
pa add. over line by cop., then gama\yiQvr line]¿ h, h being written in the 
line on danda, and a second danda being added after the first one; PL 1 
itpagamatah II 
10 M samsrtah II 
11 Pr "vinâkâranam II bhN samarpi-
iavän II 
13 MPr om. grhnäti·, all our other MSS. incl. AKBh have the 
second pâda as given in our text II 
14 M hamsah II 
18 M jämbüna-
dayamayä II 
19 Ν sanmäse ra, ra being a misreading of 2 II 
20 M vrha, 
om. tpakiñ II 
21 bh °dätyä or °dänyä, ΝΑΦΡΙΛΒΙΙΚ °dänyä for °dätyä\ 
Pr °picchaikadânyâ, M "picchaikadätyä. 
In bh, tya and nya are often, as in our 
ease, hard to be distinguished ; cp. our facsimile Table II, no. 7, line I middle 
pratjekaSah, 1. 2 end b/irämtyä, 1. i middle of first half asatyäk, 1. 5 middle of 
bhN, "ÍTPrM 

160 
Variants 
first half bhrtyena, &c. with 1. 3, second half anyathä, 1. 6 middle anyatiaîva. 
The archetype of our MSS. apparently had the same forms of tya and nya as 
bh.—dänadäti is formed like havyadâti il 
Page 200. 
1 ΨΡτ paraspara, PL1 para, M parasta for parasparam, II 
2 Pr ete 
twice II Ν vadamte II ψ PL1 ismäkam II 
3 ΦΡΜ karisyasi II 
4 M yusmä-
bhihitam II 
5 bhN devapramänam II 
6 Φ Ρ Ι ^ Ρ γ gatästat, M gatväsü II 
7 
Φ laguda[nevr pagd\dahastän II 
11 
Φ Ρ Ι ^ Ρ γ Μ ndnugrhnâti. Then 
Φ Ρ Ι ^ Ρ γ hatha 11 5, M only kathä II 
13 Pr upâgatah II 
14 bhN dlpi-
kâm, II After ädi, Ψ Ρ Ρ γ Μ add 11 4 kathä 11 un 
15 Pr asminn aliate II Before 
tad, bhN ins. raktäksah punar abravlt II 
16 Ν tve for tvam tu II 
18 
•PL 1 äkhyätam, in Φ corr. by cop. from our reading ; Pr âkhyâta II 
23 bh Ν 
kruddha, ΨΡΜ krüraPrL1 
kür a" for ksudra. The reading of bhN, 
apparently that of the archetype of both our MS.-classes, seems to be 
a corruption of the reading adopted in our text, and the reading of 
Φ Ρ Ρ γ Μ 
seems to be a conjectural emendation of the reading of bhN. Our reading 
is that of ABhK and of MBh. xii. 43, 9 ed. Protap Chundra Roy II bh 
kälasammmitah, Ν kälasamamtatah II 
Page 201. 
1 Pr va, om. naî il 
4 Pr "nâêikâh II 
S Ν udvelantyä II 
7 M 
"präna for °pränl° II 
8 Ν vanasthasydbhavena ghanaih II 
11 Ν äsasära II 
12 Ν muddharttaikam II 
14 bh susiroM êupiroBhN Κ êuciro° II 
16 
bhN ca gacchati II 
19 Φ Ρ Ρ γ Μ hi for ca il 
21 M adrêl II 
23 bh 
(not Ν) sasamtustâ II 
Page 202. 
1 Ν dusyati II 
2 Ν duste II Ν dustäh II 
3 Φ sapuppa° II 
6 Ν 
kämta, Μ kämtä II 
7 ψΡΙι1 samraksah II Φ êaranâgatah II 15 [new line] sa 
Sä" ; e before sa supplied in Φ in margin, without any mark in the text. 
PL1 with Φ (Ρ writing 14 for 15), but without the correction II 
11 PL1 
yathäSaktim II 
12 Ν tathdsau II 
14 Pr präkrtai II 
16 M dàridraro-
dukhäni, Pr däridryarogadukhäni II 
18 M utsrja II 
19 Pr yathä vidhih II 
20 Pr "yukta" II 
21 Ν drstah II 
22 In Φ gloss by glossator on bhadra : 
luvdhakah II 
23 M varttavya \ for kartavyah II 
Page 203. 
1 Ν vihamgamäh II 
3 M gatvdmgârakarmmatim II L1 om. nayâm, Ρ om. 
ânayâm II 
6 M casi (or vasi) Il ΜιΝφΡΜΒΙιΚ näiayet, Ν inserting na vi 
before it; Pr nâyat; A nâêaye yena te II Bh kmdhä 11 
7 Φ Ρ Ι ^ Ρ γ any e II 
bhN, *PPrM 

Book III 
161 
8 Ν "sydtmä hi for °sydtmdpi II 
13 Ψ nu, Ρ bhu, L1 bhû for tu II 
14 Ν tärn II 
15 Pr dharmmätvä II 
18 Ν pätam for päpam II 
20 M om. the third päda »I 
M ätmanauva II 
22 Pr narah kenâtra samsayah II 
23 ΦΡΡΓΜ om. 
stanza 154 li 
Page 204. 
1 M atha pra il 
2 ΜιΝΦΡΡγ grismo, a misreading which shows that 
the archetype of these MSS. had danda between the two pädas ; ABh grume II 
3 M °sahahsrah II 
5 b h N ^ P P P r M B h y αφ) A with us II ΦΡΙ^Ργ êilâ-
kärn II 
7 Ν muktvä II 
10 Φ PL 1 patidmäyäh II 
19 Pr yävana for 
yäni li 
Pr mänuse Ii 
20 Ψ PL 1 tävankälam, in Ψ corr. by cop. from tävän 
kälam II 
21 Bh this and the following line with us, only harsävimtas for 
harsävistas, and bhrtvä for krtvä. 
For this passage cp. Critical Introduction, 
p. 44 ff. II 
22 Ν paramäm nirvedam II 
Page 205. 
1 After iti, Ρ kathâ η it, ΦΡΓΜ kathä 6 ιι II 
4 bhN mamadydvagühate ; 
cp. p. 206, L 7 II 
β ΦΡΡΓ corenâpy, Ν êarenapy II 
9 ΦΡΡΓΜ arimardanah 
präha prstavämS ca II M vaira for caurah II 
13 M kâciryena Mein II M 
nimrddhanavanikasutä II Ν prabhütam dhamm II 
14 ΦΡΡΓΜ vrddham va II 
15 ΦΡΡΓΜ uktam for yvÀtam II 
20 ΦΡΡΓΜ om. tathä ca II 
21 Pr vila-
trtitä II 
Pr hamtäS for dantäs ; M ins. hamtâ before damtäs H 
22 M 
Ihraêati II ΦΡΡΓΜ apahatam II 
23 Ν vâkyam nddriyate ca bämdhavajanair 
patnl na êuêrûyate II 
24 bhN "parusam; in bh, °pa° has been corr. subse-
quently to "pu (by cop. ?) il 
This line exactly with the same words in Bh 
and Hamb. MSS. ; A íM¿(this on gamboge which covers another aksara)¿ 
kastayi jarayd 'bhibhütapurusaty I putro 'pya 'vajñdyate II M om. 'py α II 
Page 206. 
1 ΦΡΜ grhe, Pr gahe, all these MSS. om. tad il ΦΡ coram il 
2 bhN vi-
smayotpulakämcita II 
4 ΦΡΡΓ grhe ko", M ahe ko" Il 
5 bhNΦPPrM marna 
A with us ; Bh nünam esâ mäm asya bhaydn marri âlimgatîti II 
7 bhNΦPPrM 
mamddydvagühate, in Ρ corr. from mämädyd 
Cp. the readings of áar. β 163, 2 
and SP, MS. Ν 1355. ABh with us II 
9 Pr etasmâc II 
bhN apakárinah, 
in bh corr. to our reading by corr. II 
After cintyate, ΦΡΡΓΜ insert kathä Η 
7 II 
10 Ν pustäya (a misreading of the old-fashioned e) il 
M bhadïya 
for tadlya° II ΦΡΡΓΜ cêty for vä, iti II 
11 M anyena for anena II 
12 
ΜιΝΦΡΜ here and in the following lines vakranàêam II 
M èva for evam il 
15 Ν goyutam II 
16 M arimárdana aha, ΦΡ arimardana präha II 
18 Ν 
ins. jorativasati sma after brähmanah II 19 bh vaSistaΝ 
vasista° II Ν °vaeträ-
bhN, ΫΡΡγΜ 

162 
Variants 
nugamdhalepanarm II bhN "parivarjita II 
20 bhN "mopacita II Ν Slto-
stäva II 
21 M vrähmane II 
23 M aha ya vrähmamsya II 
24 Ν om. 
gam i II M om. niícitya II 
Page 207. 
2 Φ Ρ Pr tihna, M tiksa, all these MSS. om. pravirala II Ν Ψ Ρ "näSäβ, M an-
natannäh" Il M. "vamSe II 
3 bh °samtatatagätrah, Ν °samtat\t deleted by cop.]-
tagätrah, Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ "samanvitagâtrah for "samtatagâtrah (Pr 0srnâyu for °snäyu) ; 
A 0samtatigâtrali; Bh upacitannäyummtatir nnatagätraJi II bhN °hutâvahd II 
4 Ν om. tara II bh 'bhayottrastaê, corr. by the copyist to °bhayät trattai, 
which is N's reading II 
7 Ν daridroiràhmamsya II 
9 Φ Ρ Ρ Γ bhaksa-
yisyämUi, M bhaksayitvâmîti II 
11 M jorasthitarähasam II 
13 Ν bhaksämi 
for bhaksaya II 
1 5 Φ Ρ Ρ γ Μ tathâpi for tavdpi II 
1 7 M go for goyuge II 
Ν jumps from brahmano 1. η to brahmano 1. 19, om. one of them and all 
between them II 
18 In Ψ gloss by later hand on ähamikayä : spadhikayâ 
(read spardhikaya) II 
1 9 Pr coro II 
2 0 M om. bhaksayitum icchati I räksaso II 
22 bhN padani for evam II M êrutvâcchàe vrähmanah II 
Page 208. 
1 After iti, Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ 8 kathä ΙΙ ΙΙ II 
2 °bi" of êïbinapi looks in bh almost 
like "si" ; hence Ν (replacing "si" by °khi", which very often alternates with 
°si° in the MSS.) Sikhinapi II 3 M êrûyate II 4 bhN tatrâyam for tan, nâyam ; 
consequently the glossator inserts na before hanyate II 
6 Ν avadhyâyam ; 
Pr athadhya evdyam II 
12 Ν om. magare II 
13 bhN jatharah va" II 
17 
bhN vijayai ca II 
18 Pr vamhitam II bhN bruviti II 
19 Pr prapito II 
20 bh vaideêikatya, corr. by the copyist to vaideSakasya, which is the reading 
of Ν II 
24 Pr ta ca for tapi II 
25 Pr dûretara II M krtä for gatä II 
Page 209. 
1 Φ PL1 "kriya for °kraya, in Φ i deleted by a small stroke over the 
line II 
2 M krtä for krtvâ II 
3 bhN prasuptasya for prasuptah I tatya II 
4 Φ Ρ Ρ Γ om. ca after tatraîva II 
6 Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ om. katham II 
8 M svayd 
for tvayä II 
M tharn for katham II 
Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ iva for idarn II M hätaka-
pûrnnaka II 
10 Pr jänäsi 14 
11 In bh gloss on räjikä : ràl II M räji-
käponena II 
12 bhN tadâpy II 
13 Pr nava vivämh II 
14 Pr 
vyadhàyâ° II 
15 bhN param II M äsä I di (of ädi, 1. 18), omitting all the 
text between these syllables II 
1 6 Νparipüjitä II 
Φ Ρ Ρ Γ vihitopabkogyam II 
18 L1 paraspara, Ρ parasya II After ädi, ΦΡΜ kathä ιι 9, Pr kathä ιι 29 II 
19 bhN samarpitavän II Ν tathä canudrstämtamlllnam II 
20 Pr vinâéanâ-
yam II 
21 M om. püjyä y atra püjyante II Ν vimänatä II 
ΙΛΝ,ΫΡΡγΜ 

Booh 
III 
163 
Page 210. 
3 Φ Ρ Ρ γ Μ om. ca II 
6 Pr ins. ca before the first syâd II 
Ρ om. syâd 
yadi II 
7 M jänäti 
vinâm f o r / â ° cai" II 
8 bh tad drsfam, Ν tad da$am 
for na drstam II 
9 Pr t for y at II 
1 0 Pr avocacat II 
15 b h N o n l y : 
durdivase ghanatimiretyädi, 
omitting the rest of the stanza. 
In A, the 2nd, 
3rd and 4th pädaa run thus : varsabhi[misr. 
for °ti\jalade 
[corr. from °do\ 
mahä'Çavïprabhrtau I visamasthäne bharttas tvayä na garßtavyam tu sabhaye 'pi II 
Bh on the whole with u s ; variants: b nihsamcäräsu nagaravUhtsu ; e patyau 
videiayäte ; d par am sukham II 
1 6 Pr virdeêe g amane II M janacapaläyäh 
II 
19 M "vi" for °vita ; in bh gloss on °vïta : vyabhicärl II 
2 0 Ν prasupta-
jane II 
2 1 Pr ativakyahya II 
22 Pr 'pastarena II 
Page 211. 
1 Pr am, for alitare II 
3 Ν anenam for enam II 
M hasmi for hanmi II 
4 M 
täv for tävad II 
S N saha läpät II Φ »¿[new lin o\nibhrtam ; hence Pr w[new 
Ym.o\nibhrtam, II 
6 Μ ι Ν Α Φ Ρ Ρ γ Μ vidhäya ; Simpl. H I h the same blunder. 
Bh etasminn andare sä grhadvärakapäfayugam 
niScallkrtya êayanam âroliati II 
9 
M teda for tat II 
ΦΡΡγΜ tatas for evam II 
1 0 ΨΡΙΙ1 spaêotsuko II 
1 1 
Over tvayâsparsantyam 
in bh na ; M ins. èva after éarlram. 
These are cor-
rections by copyists who separated tvayä sparSamyam instead of tvayä aspa° II 
1 3 M devatâ2darêanârtham 
II 
Over tatrdkasmiki in bh gloss : vyabhicärl U 
Pr 
r eva for khe II 
16 Pr apädayam II 
1 7 Ν matih forpatih »I 
1 9 
ΦΡΡγΜ transpose : tat Srutvâbhihitam mayä II 
2 0 Pr om. mama II 
2 1 
Pr ins. yad before yady Ii 
b h N A 4 ' P P r M B h anena; 
the Hamburg MSS. 
(t. simplicior) have parapurusena ; Bh yady anena purusena 
samam ekatra 
Sayamye älimganam karosi l tat tava bharttur apamrtyur asya samearati bharttä ca 
varsaéatam jlvati II 
About A, see Introd., p. 54 f. li 
22 M bharttah il 
Page 212. 
1 b h N 'mtarhâsisavïkâ° IL 
4 ΨΡ êayyâdhastân, 
Pr Sayyädhastä, 
M 
Sayädhasvä II 
5 Pr kulänamdani, M kulanamdati II 
ΦΡΡγΜ 
tvatparïksâr-
tharn II 
β M Mâm li sthltah II 
7 Pr tkamdhe II 
12 bhN ΦΡΡγΜ dose-
tyâdi ; A with us II 
After ädi Φ Ρ Ρ γ Μ 10 kathä ιι it II 
16 ΦΡΙ. 1 °viro-
dhinäh, M °virodhitä, 
Pr ° vir odhina II 
17 M marritrena ι II 
2 1 b h N 
tasyantarbhävam, Pr tasyâmgatah bhävarn ; cp. Sär. 133, 12 f. H ΦΡΡγΜ om. so 
'bravît II 
2 2 Μ ι Ν Φ Ρ Ρ γ Μ aham tävadarthe·, 
ta and Iha are very similar in 
our old MSS. ; A aham tadarthe, Bh aham täva yusmadarthe, two unsuccessful 
attempts towards correcting the corrupt passage H N P r äpadam II 
ΜΪΝΦΡ 
°yänanärtharri\ 
A B h with us (Bh vairi") II 
2 3 Pr ins. mi after "kuêalo II 
2 5 N om. bahu ti 
2 6 Pr ukujya II 
b h N , * P P r M 

164 
Variants 
Page 213. 
2 bhNABh βtala" for "tata" Il M "khalitàm" Il 
3 Pr om. "sita II Pr 
0taramgä II M om. yâ gamgä II M japaniyatapäsvöÄhywyo1 Il 
4 NM "yoga 
for "yaga0 II Φ PL1 °päräyanaih II 
S Ν kamda, m deleted by the copyist, 
who continues rthitaêafiraih, om. the preceding syllables II 
bhi'PL1PrM 
"sevälä", ABh °saivälä° II 
7 Φ PL1 yájñalkyo 11 
jänhavyäm II On 
snätvopasprastum gloss inbh : äcamanam grhitum ; Φ PL1 M "srastum, Pr "srstum II 
8 Pr ärabdhesya II 
15 M om. yathasyäh II 
18 Ν om. tasmäd and the 
following words to tasmän 1. 20 excl. II 
19 Ρ (not L1) Saicam II 
Φ Ρ Ρ γ 
gämäharväh II bh girini II 
Page 214. 
1 ΦΡΡγ M vyamjanaiê ca II 
2 M om. pratisthitah II 
5 Pr om. 
pûrvam, param caî II 
8 Ν kanyâm for nagnäm II 
9 M yâ kanyâjah ghanyâ 
vrsall smr paêyaty asamstrtâ II 
10 M avivädyä II M om.jaghanyâ II PL1 
vrsalä II 
11 Pr svadrslbhyaé ca II M jaghanyàbhyo II 
13 Pr pracehämi II 
16 Ν tathâ ca II 
19 Φ Ρ Ρ γ Μ vare (M only re) gunäh sapta gavesanïyâh 
(M gatesanlyä). 
The Hamb. MSS. HI and Simpl. MS. h have the same 
difference, H reading vare gunäh sapta vilokanïyâh, I and h etän gunân mpta 
parlksya kanyà ; A with bhNIh, but om. sapta ; Bh vare gunäh sapta ni-
rlksanlyäs II 
20 ΦΡΡγΜ atah param bhâgyavaiâ hi kanyâ (Pr add. h) ; 
Simpl. MSS.: H tatah param, ihâgyavaéâ hi kanyäh, I dayâ òudhaih éesam 
acimtanlyam, h vudha daiyâ prasamîksa kälam \ éesam acimtanîyah ; A with 
bhN. 
Bh tatparam bhâgyavaêà hi kanyà II 
21 bhN a»a, Φ Ρ Ρ γ Μ ädityo, 
for asyä ; A asya, corr. by corr. to our reading, but ά del. again ; Bh with 
us II 
23 Pr savitdhrtah II In Φ, bhagavan and the following words to 
svaduhvtaram incl. are supplied by gloss, in margin ; gloss, of Φ writes 
suduhitara, then m uväca must have been torn off or cut off with part of the 
right margin, as PL1 have these words, agreeing with coït, of Φ in the 
faulty reading suduhitaram II 
Page 215. 
1 ΦΡΜ suduhitaram, Pr svahitaram II 
3 M nâham etsilasâmi II 
6 Pr 
kasmm for kascit II M om. apy II 
8 Pr putrije II 
10 Pr sakäd II 
11 
M 6 ho megha vad amy a tvad adhiko II Ν pavanenôktam for meghenôktam II 
12
M putrike '-smeghayacchämi II 
Φ Ρ Ρ γ Μ sä äha It 
14 ΦΡ adhiko, corr. by 
cop. of Φ to adhikah II 
15 ΦΡ kastit II 
16 M atha pürvata munih 
parvatam II 
21 M tasyä 'daréayat II 
22 M pulakovrsitaêarlrâ u II 
23 
bhNAΦPPrM mûsoMm\ Bh with us II Ν krtvâ tasmai, continuing tasmai, 
&c., 216, 2 H 
bhN,^PPrM 

Book III 
165 
Page 216. 
1 M "vihitam grhltam I grhidharmmam ; b h N A ^ P P r grhidharm(m)am II Bh 
svajàtivihitam karmam (!) amtisfämi II Φ svopi II 
2 ΗιΦΡΡγ (not M) 
müsaklm II 
3 Pr süryalharttäram II After ädi, Φ Ρ hatha 11 ιι, M hatha ιι 1, 
Pr hatha ιι 12 II 
4 Pr "ma for °vi° II 
bh sthirajïvîty acimtayat, Ν 
sthirajïvîty acimtayat II 
8 Ν akarisyad, bh^PPrM akarisyad, corrected in 
bh by corr. to our reading. 
A with us. 
Bh akarisyantawa tato. 
After 
akarisyad, M continues : etesäm, &c., 1. 9 II 
10 Pr yathäsamähitam II 
PL 1 
jtrayaccha II 
11 Pr ete lämdhavöpäyas II In bh ca after sa has been deleted 
again by cop. 
N M om. ca II 
13 Pr ins. sâdhya before na II 
15 M 
atraidvärasthah II 
16 M âdyaram for ähäram II 
17 Ν sthirajïvinam II 
18 
bhN om. sa II 
19 M mamtrijam II M om. ca II 
20 In bh gloss on 
avagacchâmi·. jänämi II 
25 ΦΡΙ^ΡγΜ mahân vr° Il bh tarn, corr. by corr. 
to tatra II After ca, corr. of bh adds fa ; hence Ν cafahopi for ca ko 'pi II 
27 Pr tadagra èva II 
Page 217. 
4 ΦΡΡγ visvasthacitto, M viêvasacitto II 
6 M nijäväslm U 
7 M kirn 
anendharp, om. na säpäye II ΦΡΡΓ säpäyanendkam II 
8 M ma for mama II 
10 ΨΡΡγΜ vicimtya for vicârya II 
11 bh vikasitanayanavada, then begin-
ning of ma, then naJcamalah. Ν with Φ Ρ M ; Pr vikasitavadanakamala II 
ΦΡΡγΜ iiis. ca after prâha II Ν hoho II 
13 M präyacchat II Ν a for 
atha II M °nâdrsraddheya II 
14 ΦΡΡΓΜ "vacanamätrapratyayaparV (M 
°pratyuyaparì), in Φ corr. by cop. from °vacanemä° II 
15 ΦΡΡΓΜ bkavati II 
Pr ins. jatp, after mucyatäm II 
16 Ρ om. 'saw, L 1 mocitä sau II 
17 Pr 
täv, om. ad II 
19 After "òdi, ΦΡΡΓΜ hathä M 12 ιι II 
22 ΦΡ svavarggyäm, 
Pr svavarggän II 
M evä 'smäd bhü° II 
23 M om. durgam II 
In bh glosa 
on 'bhidhatte·. kathayatiw ΦΡΡγΜ anyaparvatadurggam (Pr °rgarp) II 
Page 218. 
2 ΜιΝΑΦΡΙι ΧΡγ íocyate, M secy ate (or °vya)\ Bh na êocate for ta so" II 
4 In bh, Srutä has been corr. by corr. to srut&h, which is the reading of Ρ II 
5 Ρ (not L1) produh II 
7 Pr kasti for asti ιι 
8 Pr parikaman II 
11 
M nivrto II 
12 All our MSS. incl. A and Bh, but except Pr, pütkartum ; 
Pr muthartum ιι 
13 Η ι Ν φ Ρ twice lila 3 for lila 3 ; L 1 aho vila 3 aho 
hila 3 ; M aho hila \ 3 ι aho lila ι 3 ; Pr aho lila 3 (om. one aho hila 3) ; A 
aho hilat ι ahe lilat (t being a misreading for 3). 
Bh, misunderstanding the 
significance of the figure 3: aho hila hila hila ity uhtvä. 
Cp. Critical 
Introduction, p. 70, and Panini VIH, 2, 84 il 
Ν om. tùsmip,lhùya il 
ΦΡΡγΜ 
om. hhwya, writing tümlmbhüyópi II 
14 Ν hathä for tvayä II 
16 Pr 
bhNj^PPrM 

166 
Variants 
äkaranlyah II 
Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ nâhvasi II 
1 7 MpraScän II 
Ν Φ Ρ Ρ Γ ähväsyasi, M 
ahväsyasi II 
18 Ν tävat for tac II M münan asya esä guhä II 
22 Φ 
pravarttamte, but the anusvära put rather high over the r-hook ll 
23 
Ν om. aharp, Il M om. 'yam me II 
24 bhNM iti for eti II Pr akaroti II 
P a g e 
2 1 9 . 
1 M prati2vapürnna dibhâgâ any ein II 2 ΦΡΓ dürasthäne, corr. by cop. of Φ 
by means of an almost imperceptible vertical stroke to dürasthän-, PL1 om. dü-
rasthän ; Φ Ρ Γ M ins. a second api after dürasthän II 
ψ Ρ Ι ι 1 paläyamäno, the two 
o-strokes being deleted by cop. of Φ by means of two dots over them II 
3 
After òdi, Φ Ρ Ρ Γ kathä u 13 u , M kathä 12, corr. by the copyist to 13II 
5 
M 
tad evam ma vyacimtayat, &c., 1. 7 ; the missing text has been supplied by the 
copyist himself in the next line II M parivâ, om. rânugato ; Ν "ränurakto for 
0rânugato II 
7 Pr sthirajlvîti hrsta II 
8 M g at eh II Φ mûdhamûnasas II 
9 M om. yatah II 
10 Pr ¿«(new liné)dlrgha II 
11 M om. sya na cirât II 
15 bhNΦPPr ekaikam ; A svakulâyaîkaikâm, with a small e over at; Bh 
sa svakuläye pratyaham ekaikäm vanti II M vanayästikäm II Pr guhädlnärtham II
Ν om. one dine II Pr om. na II Pr transp. : te ca II 
16 bhN atha for 
athavâ II 
21 Ν maya krtä II 
22 In bh under praksipa gloss tvam II 
24 M tava for tòta II 
25 bhNΦPPrpranadhir; A with us; Bh ilia for 
pranidhir II 
26 Pr amdho 'trapa , M 'nyatra pâsaranam II Ν tvaryatâm 
once only II 
2 9 
Φ « [ n e w pagejsesatak, Pr vivosatah ll 
3 0 
Φ Ρ Ι Λ 
tadrasamtphalarg,, bhN tatphalarp,, PrM and Hamb. MSS. with us II 
31 
Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ grhägatas% bhN guhäyätas, Bh yad guhâyâtasya te\ the reading of 
bhN is excellent in itself; but Hamb. 
M S S . and A with us II 
Φ Ρ Ι ι 1 
nirvâkulatayâ II 
P a g e 
2 2 0 . 
1 M jatamnî II 
4
M "pädadurggam II 
5 Pr samadhye II 
6 
Φ Ρ Ρ γ Μ 
tvayâ katham II 
M om. yatah ll 
7 Μ ι Ν Φ Ρ Ρ γ Μ SU for tu ; cp. Sär. 1 3 6 , 2 1 . 
ABh with us II Pr purnnya° II 
8 Ν «a vari° II 
12 M karanilhau, om. 
kari ; Ν karikarinibho II 
13 Ν stfìbaddhadvau karau II 
16 In bh gloss 
on darvikadachl 
II 
1 7 M ins. sa before bhl" n 
^ΝΑΦΡΡγ 
mätsyaM 
°mäsya. Bh with us II Ν sûdravat II 
18 Ν om. all the text between ya 
oí yad, and p. 236, 1. 8 II 
19 Pr kälopeksi II 
20 M "sphurugu II 
21 
M "vila [a later hand adde h\ sa I vyasäcl ll In bh gloss on savyasää : arjuna ll 
22 Cop. of bh satä over yatä of prärthayatä II bh manena for janena II 
nigrhya in bh corr. to nagrhya II 
25 In bh gloss on dharmätmajah : yudhi-
stira (!) II 
2 6 
Μ ι Φ Ρ Ρ ι · kaumtlputrau (with gloss in bh : sahadevanakula), 
M kautlputrau ; A kumtiputrau ; Bh mâdrlputrau ll 
27 Pr gokarnasam II 
In bh gloss on °presyatäm : dosa II 
28 Pr yauvanya II 
29 Φ om. sâpi, 
From 220, 18 b h ^ p P r M 

Booh III 
167 
but supplies sdpi in marg. ; Ρ êapi il Pr vidaêâ II M ä for àgata II 
32 
M yadârivÂ li 
33 bh ins. tad before evam. 
Sär. 137, 2i deva in the 
place of tad II ΦΡΜΡγ transp. na after tädrg II 
Page 221. 
1 Pr anekasästrepy II Pr "buddhi il ΦΡΡγ M ins. ca before dhlmâ
5 bh apasarpa II M sadharmmätvän II 
7 Ρ drstâk drstâ, M drst
Pr dfstvâ drstâh II 
9 bh âvrto II 
10 M om. ucyate l durmantrinam
22 All our MSS., and SP 1480 (except one revised MS.) mahatâ; cp. 
Sär. 139, 2 II 
25 bh paripretavayä, corr. by corr. to parigatavayo ; ΦΡΡγ
parinita II 
26 Pr esam for evam η 
In bh näma, of which âma is sti
to be made out, if the leaf is looked at against the light, is covered with 
ink II 
27 ΦΡ upägamyadhrtaparUam, M upágatasyddhrtapañtam
gamyMhrtaparìtam II 
28 Pr vÂahe prämta II 
Page 222. 
5 Φ Ρ M amtaraprakrâmto II bh vrähmanatya sünor II 
6 ΜιΦΡ
''jalâmtastho ; A hradatatastho ; Bh hradanatajalàmtastho II 
7 ΦΡΡ
8 Pr duhkhinâ° Il bh präptah for êaptah II 
12 M om. ca II 
1
bh^PPrM durdura , A darddura°, Bh durdvara II 
14 bh^P 'tyudbh-
corr. to our reading by corr. of bh II bh api for iti II 
15 Pr sasamlhra 
dâd II ΨΡΜ phanadesam, Pr phanadeiasyam II 
18 Ρ M ätmapu
20 M karinlyânam II 23 Pr sàdMdyate ; M kim madya ta syädüdy
M davisayo 'hravvt II 
Page 223. 
3 bhA^PPrM praSâpo for vipraêâpo ; Bh with us II 
4 M bhehaya 
for bhaksayan II 
7 ABh hy ete ; but A continues cchalaBh sthala" (a mis
reading for cchala") ; àâr. β 140, 12 ma vividhähäräS II 
8 In bh gloss on 
khâdato : bhaksamänasya II 
9 Pr krtavacana0 II 
12 M yasmâ
asmâkam II M vâhyasi II 
13 M om. mandaviso 'bravlt II 
14 M
ΜιΨΡΡΓΜΒΙι dtirduraih, A darddurah (!) Il 
15 In bh, kimcif seems to have 
been corr. to kamcit" by cop. II 
19 M om. purrdcaly II bhPr sakhamda
ΨΡΜ sakhamdu, bh^PPrM ghrtapürnnän, but cp. 224, il f. ; A with us. Bh 
vividhaghrtapürän. 
Gloss in bh: modikän II 
20 ΦΡΡγ kaddpi, M kad
M drstvä uktä ca II 
22 M satyah II 
Page 224. 
1 Φ jumps from the first devyâ to the second deryä (1. 3), om. one of 
them and all between them. But the missing text supplied by cop. in 
marg. II 
2 M halibhaksya II 
4 bh nividi° II Pr asyate for mamtya
bh, ΫΡΡγΜ 

168 
Variants 
7 M 'drSo II 
8 Ρ om. ägatya 
snänä II 
9 Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ "hriya 
for 
°balihriyä° II 
1 1 M y adi tasya tva dyu vrähmanah him, &c., 1. 17 II 
b h ^ P r 
ghrtaghrtapürädi, 
Ρ ghrataghrtapürädi, 
M ghrtapürädi 
II 
16 
b h ^ P P r 
tasya ; A B h with us II Φ Ρ Ρ Γ priyavallabho 
II 
1 7 Ρ inserts ra after 
mama II 
1 8 Ψ abhyäsam gatam, Ρ alpäsamgatam, a misreading of the form 
which bhyä has in ψ II 
22 After ädi, Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ add 15 hatha π II 
24 
bh svädäyati, corrected by corr. to äsvädayati, 
Φ Ρ svädäya iti II 
P a g e 225. 
2 Pr viruddham vacah II 
3 bh "pracchedanärtham ; Pr °thacchädanädanär-
tharn II 
7 After iti, Φ Ρ Μ add 14 hatha n, Pr IQ hatha u II 
10 Φ 
väryoyo, Ρ väyo, M P r väyur yo for väryogho II 
12 Ρ navälamhära 
II 
IS 
M om. agni° iatru 
II 
16 M p r ä j n e II 
17 Φ Ρ Ρ Γ tatra for tan na; 
M 
tatrâhavalam 
Soryam, &c. II 
18 Pr vijfiayäya II 
25 Ρ vimavam Ii 
26 
Pr spharati Ii 
2 8 tathä in Ψ added over the line before the stanza number 
54 (for our 221) by cop. 
Hence Ρ tathä ιι 54 naya" il 
29 ΦP samtarggi 
in Φ i deleted with a nearly invisible dot under the ¿-stroke II 
P a g e 226. 
1 bh tvayä ânuhrtyena for tvayanuhülyena, Φ tvayä änülyena, corr. by cop. 
of Φ to our reading II 
5 ΦΡΡι· uttamgägrah, Μ uktamgägrah II 
6 Φ Ρ Ρ Γ 
nânabhyarccyaé chi" II 
10 Φ Ρ varêabhih II 
14 bl^PPrM 
iihyâmi; 
A B h with us II 
15 bh Α Φ Ρ Ρ Γ upehsyamänäh, M upehsyamänä, Bh ajpeksya-
mänah II 
16 Pr hicit II 
18 ΦΡΡγΜ yathäpürva II 
bh nidrälobho II 
Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ bhavisyasi II 
23 Pr °vyasaninä and gatah II 
24 Pr sämarthe II 
Φ Ρ Ρ Γ 'vahäsavisayäs 
Ii Φ Ρ nivrtih II 
25 Φ avasitasya 
hä°, 
sya being 
deleted by cop. II 
29 Pr vyasanesu nadar o II 
30 Pr bhüpate II 
33 
ΦΡΡγΜ tatra for na ca II 
P a g e 227. 
2 bh vipramlambhinî ; gloss in bh : parapurasäsahtä 
II 
4 b l ^ P "sam-
gatim, P r M B h °samgatir ; A with us. 
Read °samgatir ; cp. áár. A 266 II 
Φ Ρ 
durapacärä, 
M durapavârâ 
II 
Φ Ρ samdhyäcalehheva, Pr mmdhyävalehheva II 
M 
°bwdmdäbhwa bhamgurä, svabhä being supplied by the copyist in the next line II 
8 Φ räjyäm, perhaps corr. to räjnäm II 9 Φ Ρ Ρ Γ sahamèhasair väpadam II 12 
Gloss in bh on vrsnlnäm : yädava II 
14 Pr param träyate for pari0 II 
16 
M badhä II 17 vainyah is the spelling of our MSS. II 20 Ρ nasah, the other 
M S S . with us II 
22 bh na tu for nanu II 
23 M om. täh pramadäs II 
24 
Pr nâS ci for tâê call 
27 After tantram Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ insert: hatha ιι 15 II 
29 
M Satresu (sic 1) II 31 For the figure 3, which stands also in A, bh has only 
a flourish, adding: iti tftlyam ähhänaham samäptam ιι flourish ιι 3 m ; Pr 13 for 
bh, ΫΡΡγΜ 

Book IV 
169 
3 ; after 3, Ψ two flourishes, Sflh, and a third flourish ; Pr one flourish and 
603II After the stanza Bh : trñyam tamtrarji samäptam ιι flourish ιι írl n samvat 
1442 varse Sñ. Then two groups of aksaras completely smeared with ink 
by cop. II 
BOOK IV. 
Page 228. 
1 bhí» om. the Jain diagram (arham); Bh ins. the Jain diagram and 
om namo vinäyakäya before the beginning II 
2 Φ athadam II 
M labdha-
pranâêanâmaca ; Φ labdhapränäSam II 
3 Bh tkrptam for prâptam II Φ 
gâmtunaih II 
5 Φ pryacchamti 11 Bh präha for kathayati II 
6 Φ jambü-
nämapädapah II 
7 Pr athastät, Φ adhästä II Bh karälamukho II 
8 Bh 
sakomala II Bh nyaviêat II 
9 Bh suhrt for tad II Pr tada for tad II Bh 
bhaya for bhaksaya II 
11 Φ sapräpte II Ρ nu, Bh tva for tu II 
12 Φ 
gotragecaranam II Φ svädhyam II Pr svädhyäya daéam II Bh ca for m II 
13 
Φ cesvadevâmte H 
14 Φ düräyämtam II bh pathah irâmtam II Φ vaifaade-
vätamim âgatam II 
15 Φ joüjaye II 
16 ΒΙιΦ om. anyac ca II Φ athajito II 
ψ Ρ Pr Μ Φ y ¡3« tu for yasya II 
17 Bh transp. : vimukhäs tasya pi" IL Φ sa 
for salta II ΡΓΦ daivateh II 
18 Bh evam muktvä II Φ uktä II Φ tasmaih II 
Φ taitarn for tena II Bh ciragostlsukham II 
19 M anubhüyopi, om. bhüya II 
Φ bhüpi for bhüyo 'pi II 
Bh adhyästa II 
ΒΙιΦ èva for evam II Φ to for tau II 
20 Φ jambüehäyäm sruitau II Φ makare II 
21 Pr sapatnyäh II Pr tayä 
'nyamasminn, Bh tayä anyasminn II Pr ani for ahani II 
22 
Ψ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ Φ 
amrtaphaläni, Φ adding mrtaphaläni II Φ präpnoti II 
23 Φ paramasuhud II 
Bh pñtipürtham II M phaläni twice II 
24 Pr °vedrsyäny II Bh amrtarnaya-
phaläni II 
Page 229. 
1 Φ bhäryäyä\ Pr om. bhäryayä II Pr om. tat II 
Ψ Ρ Μ Φ om. me II 
2 
Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ om. bhadre II 
3 Pr pratipannam bhrätä II Bh om. phaladâtâ tato II 
bh vyäpäditum, Pr vyäpädayartu II 
4 Φ tyajämmum II 
5 Pr Jwarnte for 
the first pr amy ate II 
6 Φ saudaryäd II Ρ bämdhavän II 
7 Bh so 'vravtt II 
Φ kadäci II 
8 Bh tadanugatas, bh tadanurägas II Bh sakaladinam, om. api 
and tatra II Φ mamayasi II 
9 M y ay à for maya II Φ präyau hutavahu II Bh 
protsvasasi. 
The Hamb. MSS. have the correct form procchvasisi ιι 
10 Pr 
älam\varso II Φ dgadaye for hrdaye II 
11 M tnyä, om. svapa II Pr purutah, 
Φ jjupuratah II Φ uväcah II 
13 Φ pränavallabham II Φ kasmä II Φ ksopena 
for kopane ; Pr kopane kopanevyasi II 
14 Φ tadvacam II 
16 Pr siyam, ΨΡ 
From 228, ι bh, ^pprM, Bh* 
ζ 

170 
Variants 
saîvam II M om. saîva sthitä II Φ krttimabhävaramyä II 
17 Φ asmäkamm II 
Bh tava for na ca II Bh iMvakâéam, Φ ihâvakôêa II 
18 Φ tasmä II Φ 
caranarampäta II 
19 bh na te II 
20 Φ tasyä, the «-stroke del. again 
by cop. putting a little stroke over it ; Ρ misunderstanding this, replaces 
the «-stroke by danda II 
Pr hrdaye II 
2 2 Pr niêciyam II 
Ψ Ρ Ρ Ι · Μ cimtä-
kulacìttah LI 
2 4 Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ ekägrahas, in Pr corr. by cop. from ekagrahas II 
25 M vanará yâlham sodvegam II 
27 M om. na ca subhäsitädi pathasi II 
28 Pr ciraveläyä II 
29 Ρ svasukham, M sumukham II 
Φ tasya dvära , 
svagrha being added in margin by corr. II Pr "daréandpi II 
30 bh pra-
tyupakä at the end of the page, om. the following words and continuing 
rärtham, 1. 33 II M mrtyupakäram II ψ Ρ karomi II 
31 Pr core II 
Page 230. 
3 Μ Βvamdanämä° II 
7 yusmadiyam add. in Φ by corr. in marg. II 
bhPr om. M II 
9 M asti saraPJlinapradetro 'smadgrham II M om. η 
mama II 
11 M ta for tava II Pr ädhah II In Φ, the dot at the beginning 
of the superior horizontal stroke of nu in tathanusthite—every superior 
horizontal line has such a dot—see our Tables in vol. xi—has melted 
together with the second horizontal line to the effect that the whole word 
looks like "dmustite ; Ρ misreading or correcting this : °apustite 11 
13 bh 
mama prsta" Il Pr "saliivat II 
1 7 Pr makarahprâha II 
2 0 
Μ Ι Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ Φ 
tathaîva for tatraîva ; ABh with us. 
In the Hamb. MSS., the two words are 
missing II M ma for mama II Φ susväduhrdayena vinâ êûnyahrdayo 'trâmtah, &c., 
1. 21 II 
Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ samânetavyam II 
2 2 Pr yene sä II 
2 3 aharn ca tväm ca 
also A ; Hamb. MSS.; aham tväm svâàrayam [I adds am\ evajamlü° Il 
24 
Pr nirvrtya II 
Φ Ρ Ρ γ Μ âgamat II 
bh "prâtah for "satah II 
Φ Ρ Ρ γ dlrgha-
dÂrghataracamkramanena, M dîrgharatacamkramanât II 
28 Pr om. viêvaste a
the beginning of a new line ; Ρ om. set of the second visvaset ll 
29 Ρ om. 
visvâ of viSväsäd II Pr nakrmtati II 
31 ΦΡΜ nivarttate, Pr nivarttamte for 
uttisthati ll 
32 M g for dhig II 
33 M om. η na II 
Page 231. 
2 In bh gloss on ahatart : ghesara LL 
3 Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ kim müdhena maydsya 
(M transp. the sva of svähhiprayo with "sya of mayasya) LL 
4 Φ Ρ Ρ Γ punar api 
kathamcid, M pu a" cathamcid (or vathamvid), but in Φ, there is a small hook 
before punar api over the line, and a rather imperceptible 2 over punar api, 
with a small vertical stroke at the right-hand end of pi over the line together 
with two small vertical strokes over dvi of "cid vi". 
This means, no doubt, 
a correction to the reading of bhN. 
This correction was not understood by 
the copyists of Ρ and of the original of M—if the marks did not simply escape 
From 229, π bh, ^PPrM 

Booh IV 
171 
their attention—as the current method of indicating transpositions in M SS. 
is to put the figures 2 and 1 over the aksaras or words in question (see 
vol. xi, Table I I , no. 8, 9 d) II 
5 For mitra I asyä, Ι Λ Ψ Ρ Ρ Γ Φ mitrasya, AMBh 
mitra tasyä. In bh ardhadanda after mitrasya, evidently a misreading of 
mitrasyä of bh's original. 
Simpl. MSS. HI read : mitra häsyena maya têbhi-
präyo labdhah I tasyä na kimcid [H °t\ dhrdayena [H hf~\ prayojanam asti ; h first 
sentence with HI (only with the blunder laccali) ; then : tad apy anavi tasyapi 
hrdayena prayojanam II 
M maydbhipräyapan II 
7 Pr nam for tvârn II 
Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ akumthotkamthä II 
Pr dustatä for dusfa II 
8 Pr mdham Η bh 
gamisyämi II 
After ägamisyämi, Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ ins. 1 hatha ΙΙ II 
10 
M ksinanarä II 
1 1 M dhiyadarêanasya II 
16 Pr "gatä" for "goti" II 
19 M yonopakrtam ; 
Simpl. H with us, I h yendpakrtam II M sahitam for hasitam II 
20 upakrtya 
also Simpl. H I h II 
21 PrM salile for sa lile II M om. all between 
krsnasarpam and tatra, 1. 22 II 
22 Pr evam for enam II 
25 bhsPPM 
vyathäkäram ; Pr A and Hamb. MSS. with us. 
In Bh the third päda runs 
thus : pädalagnam karasthem (fourth päda with us) II bh and Hamb. MS. I 
kamfakenaiva II 
26 Pr gacchâ II 
Pr äMyatavän II 
Page 232. 
1 bh pñyadarsaneMti II 
2 M ndha for na (misread for na hi ?) II 
3 
Pr om. anyena at the beginning of a new line II M ma for mama II 
4 M 
èhavisyasi II 
8 Ρ usad Ai" Il 
1 1 Pr vatsakäsam II 
16 Pr om. ganga-
dotta äha II 
21 Pr dgade II M tadägäm, om. vâ II 
22 bh samäirayah for 
mcmâ" II M om. sarpa äha ; Pr ins. sa after sarpa H 
Page 233. 
2 M citam or vitam for hitam II 
Pr parinâyet for pa yat M 
M bhrtim for 
bhütim II 
4 Pr jalämpämtye II M ram, for ramyataram II Ρ ramyatarako-
faram. 
This is a misreading of Ψ, which writes ramy atara [new line] 
kofaram, see p. 1, 'Anusvâra' H 
6 M vah for vrddhah II 
9 M 
präneh pan 
II 
10 Pr °sukhopäyam, II Pr ärdbhyate II M budhyah if 
1 1 
Pr ta for tarn II Pr yady evam twice II 
1 3 Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ sukhop&yena tväm IT 
1 4 
Φ 'smarijano, cop. adding t pa over the line between sma and ri. 
But the 
¿-stroke is separated from pa and looks like a mere dot. 
Hence Ρ : 'sma 
parijano II Φ Ρ varêayàmi, in Φ corr. with gamboge to our reading II 
1 5 
After iti, Φ a small mark, om. sarpa äha ; Ρ sarppa äha II 
21 Pr Sanaih 
rbhaksiptä, om. êanai II 
22 Pr visvä, om. sya II bh om. bhadra ; Hamb. 
MSS. have it II 
Page 234. 
1 M ghafimärggena II 
4 Pr svargglyam II Ρ praccha II 
S M tulita-
manä II 
7 M nesedhayitasyämi II 
1 1 
Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ tatah for tat II 
1 3 Pr 
bhj^PPrM 

1 7 2 
Variants 
vädavädavam II 
16 M tuksahah II 
19 Pr ete deva for etad èva II 
Pr 
svalpä II 
23 Φ Ρ vastraì II Pr y atra y atro0 II PPr °viêyati II 
24 M om. 
s tu vrtta II 
Page 235. 
1 bh bhaksayitä II 
bh mtadatto ; Hamb. MSS. Yamunadatto II 
2 M 
om. tah I tam drstvâ gañgada II 
tam also Hamb. M S S . Il 
3 bh tata 
svapatnyâ, Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ tatas tatpatnyd° IL 
δ pariträm also Hamb. M S S . II 
8 
Pr priyadarmnoktam II 
11 M om. na tva II M ins. na before cimtä II 
12 
Pr tadanyesâm II 
13 bh bhahsyo, P abhakso II 
14 M ekarn for evam II
M bhavatì II 
1 6 bhA^PM (not Pr) Bh pratlksyamänas ; Hamb. M S S . the 
same mistake (H pratïksyamânahs) Il 
1 7 Pr eva kotaraväsinäm, om. küpe 
'nya II 
18 bh sähäjyam II 
19 M gamgadattasmâkâêam II Ϋτ jâlâêaye
nama II 
2 0 Φ Ρ Pr y ad for yaây ; M yadânye II In the upper margin of 
fol. 147 b, which contains the text from yad, 1. 20, to t simAasya, p. 236,1. 18, 
the glossator of bh gives the following isärdülavikridita-&ianz&, without any 
indication as to the place where it should be inserted : ramo hemamrgam na 
vetti 1 naghuso y âne yunakti dvijän 
vijirasyaîva savatsadhenuharane yâtâ 
carjune l 
dyüte hhrätryatusthayam ya mahisim dharmätmajo dattavân I 
yah satpurusopy anarthasamaye ludhyä parityajyate 1 1 II 
21 bh om. atr
M naharn tvayä vistum êaknomi II 
22 Pr tvä for tv&m II 
M ihavêti fo
tavat iti II 
2 3 bh gamgadatta II 
2 4 bhAψPPr tamiksyamänas, Bh 
tk&amänas II 
Page 236. 
1 M tighragarnyatäm II 
2 Pr samägatyatäm iti II 
8 With this line, 
Ν sets in again, misreading it as follows : patram patitam visarjayâm âsa II 
After òsa, Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ insert : hatha Η 2 II 
9 Pr bhadro for tad bho II 
Ν gamga 
iva dotta II 
10 bh äyäsyämi, Ν äsyämi for äyäsyämi II Pr naîta yudyate II 
Ν ins. va after me II 
11 Pr präyopraveSanam II 
12 Ν grham for aham II 
Μ Ι Ν Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ Φ drstvâ(')pâyo ; Bh Hamb. MSS. and A with us. 
Simpl. h 
om. this word II 
13 bhNΦΡΡΓΜ and Simpl. HI (not h) drstvâpâyo ; A 
with us ; Bh sa for drstäpäyo ; 
Ρ mütah for mrtah II 
17 ΨΡ dhüsako, in 
Φ an almost imperceptible ra being added over the line above dhû (!) il 
Ν 
saddnupäryo II 
1 8 M om. hastinä saha II 
1 9 
Μ ι Ν Φ Ρ Ρ γ Φ ca acalät, M 
ea acalatät ; ABh tasya ca acalanät, but corr. by cop. of A to tasya ca abalanät ; 
Simpl. MSS. HIh tasydcalanät II 
22 Ν tum for calitum II Pr êruêrûsâm II 
24 M tat êrugâlo II Ν 'nvesane II All our MSS. incl. ABh kimcit', Hamb. 
MSS. kimcidgrämam. 
See above, p. 31 il 
From 236, 8 bhN, ^ PPr M 

Booh TV 
173 
Page 237. 
1 Pr samïpavarttanam II M bhadägote praXroäkuräni krchräd II 
2 ΦΡ 
pravila II 
Pr tataê cdnena II 
3 Pr °tvdbhihita II Ν mäsa II 
5 Ν 
bhaginisuta II M ins. rä before Mm II 
6 Φ Ρ Ρ γ Μ atibharena II Ν vasa for 
ghâsa II Ν om. na II 
7 Pr bhaksato II Ν êarîrapustam 11 
9 Ρ makata 
Φ Ρ "sadrUaíappa", Ι Λ Ν Ψ Ρ Μ Φ °prägro·, Simpl. H I and Pr with us; ABh 
with us, but °êispa° ; Simpl. h : mavakatahWsadrêaêaspaprâyo II 
11 Pr 
bhavatâm II 
13 M mam, ivam vada II M madbhujapararaksita II Ν tatrdsti
for tan nasti II 
14 Prpradesah II 
15 Pr ti for tisro II Ν räsabho II 
17 Pr änayah II 
18 Pr êrgâlavanam 11 
19 ΦΡΡγ lambakarnnam uväca, 
om. tam ; M om. tarn and ca II 
21 Pr esdm for ekärn II Ν uktvâ II 
22 
Φ Ρ samgatau, Pr éamgatau II 
23 bhN simhämtakam II Ν upägatah II 
24 
M kramätikaptäptam II Ν iti for api II 
Page 238. 
1 Ρ mamyamänaL M gamvamänah II 
2 M daiväkamapi II 
5 ΨΡΡγΜ 
om. iti II 
7 ΨΡΜ drstväs tavikramo II 
9 Pr gaccheta II 
10 Ν sajj'i-
tavaikramena II Pr emam for enam Ii 
12 Ν ins. ah am before atra II 
14 
Ν jägarüt hah tistati II 
15 Pr car ana for carams II 
17 Pr om. tat II 
18 bh vajropamatha\_ tha corr. to pra by c,ovT.~\häräd ; Ν vajropamamdya\d
del. again by copI\präräd II bhN yuktah for muktah II 
19 Pr jrrähasann II 
20 Ν icchatä for utthità II 
21 Ν om. tayä II 
ΦΡΡγΜΦ ins. 'pi after 
naêyato II ΨΡ hasta II 
23 Pr präyopravesana IL 
24 bhN Φ Ρ Φ transp. : 
agnim vä jalam, but cop. of Φ deletes va by two very small strokes. 
M 
agnijalam va ; A agnim vâ jalam, va ; PrBh and Simpl. HI with us (H agni) ; 
Simpl. h : taddgnim jalam väpravisämi II Ν pravisyämi II 
Page 239. 
2 Pr transp. : te strlhatyä, adding ham II Pr om. manmathaS ca kopam 
karisyati II ΨΡΜ prakopam for kopam II 
4 bhN jayanlm II In N, sampâ-
danïm has been corr. by cop. to sampädinim, which is the reading of 
bl^PPr II 
5 Ν enäm ya pravidväya II 
6 Pr taddose II bh vitiirhitya, 
Ν vihatya II Ρ nargrakrtä II 
7 M raktapatikrtvâê ca II M käs for käpälikäS II 
10 bhN daivadyah karoti II 
11 Ν loka II 
13 ΦΡΡί'Μ prägvatsajjita II 
17 Ν präha for äha II 
20 bhN esóyam for evdyam II Pr ins. matya after 
ägatya II 
21 Ν täm for tväm II 
23 In N, the second päda runs thus : 
drstvä sä [corr. to sa by cop.] tvam bha II 
24 bhN ca îovyah II 
Page 240. 
3 Φ ndhalambaJcarnno ; PPrM naham, om. api II After iti, ΦΡΡγΜ ins. 
Jcathä 3 II 
4 bhN yudhisfhirena ca II Pr om. satyava II Ν vinâêitah II 
bh Ν, Ϋ Ρ Ρ γ Μ 

174 
Variants 
β Pr svärthä II 
10 M pramattanksnägnabMmdakarpparasyo° II Pr dhâvatah 
pa" II 
11 M ê for tataê II Φ Ρ °pa(o, PrM "patto for "tafo II 
14 Pr râja-
kasevakaih II 
15 Pr °lâkârakarppara° II 
18 Ν palàmiti I te II 
21 
bhN A^PPrMBh and Simpl. Hlhprakalpa" il M gaje II Ν samnayamânesu II 
M om. väji§u II 
22 Pr om. te II 
Page 241. 
2 M ma vdyam for na edyam II 
3 Ν karparôyam for karparaprahâro 
'¡/αφ II 
4 Ν kalaêatâm for karâlatâm II M ναψνΐϋ for vañcito II 
5 ΨΡΜ 
yam for 'ham II 
6 In N, the text between kumbhakârah and atha, 1. 16, 
has been supplied by 2nd hand (N1) on a blank left free by copyist II 
N1 evam for rnaîvam II 
7 Pr bho bhoh II 
8 M gamy ate II M om. yatah II 
β Prputrakah II 
11 ΨΡΓ transp. : katham etat ιι kulâla âha ιι, Ρ katham 
etat ιι kulâlâ âha ιι râjâ ka ; M kathas etat kulala âha \ râjâ ka II 
13 Pr 
simham simhamithunam II 
14 M putradvayïm II ΨΡΡγΜ om. nityam II N1 
mrgâdl II 
15 Pr simhâ II N1 om. vane ; Pr vane vane II Pr bhramatâ II 
17 Pr âgawrtâ II N êrgâlah êisuh II 
18 N krtânukampaina II 
19 Pr 
simhâh II Pr simhabhi° Il 
22 ΦΡΡΓΜ bälas II 
Page 242. 
1 M °bâle II bh prakarttavyam II In Pr karhicit corr. by cop. from 
kasyacit II 
3 Ν ins. a second enam before pathyam II bh amy am, Ν ahhyam, 
ΑΦΡΡΓ anyam for amyat, Bh with us II 
5 Pr om. ah am II 
7 Ν karttavyarfi 
for krtyam syât II 
9 Ρ tasmât samâyam II N trtïye [e del. by cop.] putro II 
11 Pr êiêivah II ΨΡΡΓ ekâhâravihârâ, M ekâhâtn râ\ see above, p. 31 II 
13 
In bh samâyâtah has been corrected by the copyist himself from samâjagâma il 
15 N °kulaéaSatrm II M tat tat ta na gamtavyam II PN om. tat II 
16 Ν 
dhâvitah II N jyeêtebâmdhavabhagnân II 
19 ΨΡ jâïte II N bhamgati-
vdpnuyät II 
20 ΦΡΡΓΜ om. tathâ ca II 
22 Pr sürän II 
23 Ν jyesu-
präcchacesfitem II 
24 Ν ücuh II 
Page 243. 
2 Φ Ρ tâmmraloeanas II 
3 Pr simhâ ekâmte II N puruçam II ψ Ρ pra-
yodhito, in Φ corr. with two very small strokes to our reading II 
4 Ν 
menam for maîvam II 
5 N mâmtvanena for sântvavacanena II N prabhûtatara-
kopä\pä deleted by cop.]s(âvistas II 
6 N vidyâbhyâsakailâêena II 
7 Ν 
yenaitâ II N upaharasyatât mayâ âvasyam etau vyâpâdamïyau II 
8 Pr om. 
tasya II N icchamti II 
9 Pr êûrobhi kf II Pr daêa\nïyo II N putrakah II 
10 Pr kulena smin, ΨΡΜ kule tasmin II N (not bh, which writes exactly 
as our text), Ψ Ρ PrM samutpanno for tvam u II Ψ Ρ PrM gajo y atra II 
11 
Ν tatah for tat II M adds parayâ after krpäparayä II 
12 N dhatau for 
bh Ν, Ψ Ρ PrM 

Booh IV 
175 
etau II Ν satputrau II M om. matputrau II Pr êisu tväm II 
13 Ν nana·
rutyam for tävad drutataram II Ν svajättnä II 
14 Ν ni hito II 
15 Ρ M 
(not ΦΡγ t) bhltamanäh II Ν sanaih r [misreading of 
for Sa ία II 
18 
Ν gatataram for drutataram, II 
20 After adi, ΦΡΡΓΜ insert 56 kathä ιι 5 n I
21 Ν sviyorthe il M anu, om. sthätum il 
M ins. nä before na hi u 
23 
bhN svakule II 
24 Pr sa mä tya II M na for narah II 
25 For katham 
etat, M hatha tathä hi metad II 
Page 244. 
2 In Φ, the words tasya ca, &c. to brähmamah, 1. 4 incl. written in marg. 
by cop. II 
3 Pr sopi II bhM kutumbena II Pr kalahamäno for ka a ; Μ Λα 
for kalaham II 
5 ΜιΦΡΜ svakutumbam ; NBhPr with us ; A has a gap 
here II 
β Ν mahâgrhîmadhye II 
7 M mä for mâm II M bädhyate II Ν 
kapy for kvapy II 
8 M ins. sahltvä after grhitvä II 
9 Ν äkäsaväcam II 
10
In Φ, tathä hi written in marg. by cop. II 
11 Before tac, Φ Ρ wrongly 
insert atha tau jalam pltvd, repeating these words afterwards in their right 
place. In Φ three almost imperceptible dots, one over a at the beginning, 
two over tvä at the end of the interpolation. 
Under the beginning and the 
end of the interpolation, nearly as imperceptible horizontal strokes II 
12 
M varttam for dattam II Μ^ΝΦΡΡγΜ tävatsamam; A with us. In Bh all 
the text is missing from tathä hi, 1. io, to titvdt, p. 260,1. 2, both exclusive II 
13 After brahmani, Φ tat irutvä vrähmanena êucibhûya tùrbhir väcäbhih sv
ta being unfinished. These words deleted again by two distinct horizontal 
strokes, one under the beginning, one under the end of this interpolation II 
Ν om. ca sä, M om. sä II Ν jalam tau II 
14 Ν cä naksiyitvä II 
15 ΦΡ 
puppavätikäm II Ν brahmano twice II 
17 ΦΡ puppavätikäyäm II 
18 Ν
pumgur, M paramgur II M khetayämäto, Ν kheyamäno II 
19 bhN °ndbh
tayä II 
20 Pr ya for y adi II Ν tat sama sakto II M satkäya for saktä II
Pr pamgtvr 'abramra \ kirn, II 
21 Pr om. sdbramt II 
23 Ν sunänamtara
Ν sôbramt II 
Page 245. 
4 Pr sôbravlt II Φ Ρ tadaîtasyapi II 
6 Between yädä and grâmàntaram,
Ν inserts the text from rinanirmalayamh (!), p. 246, 1. 17, to bhäryä (ind.), 
p. 247, 1. 1 II 
7 M vacano sahäyo II 
9 Pr so'bravît II Ν parä0 for 
petä" Ii 
10 M om. tena n 
11 Query: °viSränto% 
This is Pr's reading. 
But all our other MSS. "m&râmtau II 
13 Pr nare II ΜιΝΨΡΡγ êukla", 
corrected by glossator of bh to our reading ; M mukla ; A with us ; Pr 
"cauryära" II 
15 M t for yävat II 
17 Pr so 'bravît II 
18 Ν mama for 
mamaîsa II Ν vyädhibodhito H Pr mahyä for maya II 
20 Pr bharttâ
24 Pr räjno II Pr om. räjan and the following words to râjabravît (excl. 
p. 246, 3) Il Ν noy am for ay am [read sôyam\ Il 
bhN, 
Ρ Pr M 

176 
Variants 
Page 246. 
1 bhNP (!) räjdpi II A satkam II 
3 Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ insert a second yat before 
kimcid II A satkam II M kimci να(οτ cà)hUam II 
5 Ν prâha II bh trisä-
dikam, corrected by the glossator to trsädikam, which is the reading of Ν II 
Φ Ρ Ρ Γ ca for tava II 
10 After ädi, Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ ins. kathä ιι 6 u II 
11 Ρ ins. 
ucya, Φ Ρ Γ Μ ucyate before upäkhyänakam II 
1 2 Ν transp. dadyän (writing 
dadyät) and kuryät (writing kuryân) II 
14 Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ makara äha, Ν makara 
prâha II 
16 Ν naremdra", om. 'neka II Ν has part of the following text 
twice, once in a wrong place (see above remark on p. 245,1. β), and again 
in the right place II 
18 Ν in the first place prthivyäm II M "tatvasa-
civo II 
19 Ν ins. na before jäyä in the first place II 
20 Mprasädati II 
21 Ν tusyati, in the second place corr. by cop. II Ν in the first place 
vadatu for vada II M nisitam for nucitam II 
22 M mamdayitvâ II 
23 
Ν in the second place prasädäbhibhavämi II 
Page 247. 
1 After bhäryä Ν continues in the first place with grämämtaram, &c., 
p. 245,1. 6 11 M om. na before tusyati II 
3 Pr so 'bravït 11 Gloss in bh 
on khallnam : thodänucokadw II 
4 Ν täm for tväm M M dhävita besase, om. 
s tu yady asvavad H 
6 bhN^P râjûâ; APr with us II 
7 bhNP vararuci II 
Ν apiparvani II 
8 ΨΡΡγΜ na kirn, kuryân na kirn dadyäd iti ιι 7kathä Π ιι II 
9 Ρ strlvaêyâh, bh strlvasdh, corr. by corr. to strlvaêah, which is the reading 
of Ν II Ψ tanidbhetena, with a very small 1 over dbhe and an equally small 2 
followed by a little vertical stroke over ni. This vertical stroke and the 
following 1 look almost exactly like an i, added over the line. 
Hence 
Ρ tadbhinitena, M tinitena II 
10 Ν savdgdosenaîva, ΦΡΡγΜ vägdosenafaa, 
om. sva ιι 
12 Ν lädhyamte II 
13 Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ om. tathâ ca II 
Ν Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ 
raksamäno ; bhA with us II 
18 bh gardabhaiko, Ν gadambheko, corr. to 
gardabhako, Ψ Ρ garddabhaiko ; APr garddabha eko II M präsäbhäväta II 
21 
Φ Ρ Ρ Γ râéabham pratichâdya, M râêabha pra II Ν yavrksesusrjämi, M yavakse-
trapâld, om. tresutsrjämi I te ca kse II 
22 Pr tathâ 'mustite II Pr ka/romi 11 
Page 248. 
5 Ν praticchinna II 
Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ "prahärasamühair II 
7 Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ raksa-
mäno IL After iti, Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ ins. kathä ιι 8 ιι II 
8 bh bhäryä 'nasane u, 
Ν 
Ihäryä 'nasa u, ΦΡΡγΜ bhäryä 'nasanena u, A bhäryä 1 anaíane u II 
9 Ν om. 
me II 
10 ΦΡ capriyaM 
väpriya II 
11 M nrham II 
12 Φ vaihä-
narampra", Ρ vaiscänarampra II 
14 bhNAΦPPrM evasïd; but °dyat is 
evidently a misreading of °r yyat ; Simpl. H evâslh, I evasihh ; but h aiva 
âéît il M strwaêah il ca added over the line by cop. of Φ 11 Pr mû, om. dha II 
b h N ^ P P r M 

Book IV 
177 
16 Pr kalahapriyah, corr. by cop. to kalahah priyah II 
19 Ν om. ya II 
20 M om. yaj jihväyäm II M d for tad II 
22 bh dawrätsyeneha, Pr daurät-
menêha, ΨΝΡ daurâsyeneha, in Φ "ha corr. by cop. from "hi ; M daurätmainehi', 
A and Simpl. H I with us ; Simpl. h daurdtmyainaîva II 
23 Pr iyam, 
Φ Ρ M iva for api II 
24 bhN rüksäyä II 
25 Ν nlrasäyäm rasve henasam 
bàio bä°, M mrasâyâ rasam bälikäyäm vi" II 
Ν bälikäyä vikalpet II 
26 Ν 
makaram II Pr astetat II Ν mamdnartham me dvavaya samjätam·, M mäma-
nartha° II 
27 M 'jmramitrena II M athavâpahatänäm, &c., 1. 28 II 
29 Ν 
tdréam II Μ ω « for tarn II 
30 M varttä for bhartâ II Pr om. ca ; Φ 
bharttäro, with ca added over the line by cop., without deleting ro ; Ρ 
bharttäro, om. ca II bhN Pr tu, Φ cu, PM ca for nu ; A with us II Ν pasyati II 
31 Ν vänarah präha II sôvramt supplied by cop. of Φ in marg. II 
Page 249. 
2 ΝΦΡΡγ prativasati, corr. by cop. of Φ to our reading II Ρ hälikaläryä, 
°lä being a misreading of Φ'β bhâ, which looks somewhat similar to ldt as the 
left-hand Μα-pot-hook has not been filled in with ink. Cp. vol. xi, Table I, 
no. 4, S c II Ν om. all between "città and pahärakena, 1. 5 II ΦΡ nna II 
3 
Pr grha II 
6 ΦΡ tvarddarêanena II 
bhN °daksinäm II 
7 Pr dy for 
yady II 
9 M ins. ta before tat II Ν om. ädäya II 
12 M jnätvä for 
gatvâ II 
13 Pr svagrha, Ν samgrham for svagrham II 
14 Ν sarvavittam, Il 
M ttarn for vittam II 
15 Pr daksinä II 
16 ΦΡ sapramoda, PrM sapra-
modas II M om. yojana II 
17 After vyatlte, Ρ ins. te II Ν om. dhürta, 
writing ê cimtayäm òsa II 
18 Νprstavatah II 
19 Pr om. asyä vittam II 
21 Φ breye for priye II Pr madänadi II 
22 Ν pare II 
Page 250. 
1 Pr om. all between ädäya and yena, 1. 2 II 
2 M "näcchädavastram II 
Ν jmamadhye II 
4 Pr °visaya II 
5 Pr °Aaste yu II 
6 Ν vpavisya II 
Ν käca II Ν Srmgälikä II 
7 M tatra jagama, then (repeating the sentence) 
tatrajagäma II Ν om. ca after ägatya II Ν paéya II 
9 Ν om. matsyam ; 
ΦΡΡγ matsyapimdam, M matsyapimda for matsyam II bhN avämtare II 
13 
Pr abhihitayä II 
14 Ν grghrenâpakrtam II 
15 ΜΙΝΦΡΜ tu for nu, Pr 
tu or nu ; A kimmu II 
16 M om. tac chrutvâ èrgali II 
bhN "bhrastäm for 
"paribhrastàm ; A with Φ Ρ M II 
17 Φ sopahäsam u äha II 
19 Φ Ρ narttä 
for na bhartâ II After nagnike, ΦΡΡγΜ ins. kathä 9 h II 
20 Ν anye ; Pr 
punaratnena for punar anyena II ΦΡγ calacarena ; in Φ the first ca covered 
with gamboge, and an imperceptible mark referring to the upper margin, 
where a rather illegible ja has been supplied; Ρ ins. ca after anyena 11 Pr 
nivesitam II 
21 Ν tatah êrutvâ II Ν atiduhkhitomanäs II 
22 Pr 
bhN, "Ψ" Ρ PrM 

178 
Variants 
nihsârayatum II bhΝ daivahamtakatham, Pr M only daivahamta, Φ Ρ daiva I hamta, 
A with us. 
Simpl. MSS. HI alio pasya me vidher vighätam (I "dyâ" for 
°ghä°). This passage is missing in h It 
23 M om. cdmitra II 
24 
Ν präptam II bh atyápi, Ν any api II 
Page 251. 
3 Ν om. iti II bhN transpose : karomi kim H Pr ha for saha II Pr has 
the sentence kim vä, &c. twice II 
4 After uktam ca Pr ins. yatah 11 
5 
Pr drstvä for prstvä (but yah) Il Pr prstavyän, Ν prstavän for prastavyän II 
6 bhN sa for na II 
ΦΡΡΓ vighnam II 
7 M vitye for vicintya II 
Ν kam api 
for kapim II 
12 Myädrsye, om. tädrse II 
13 Ρ (not Φ) sugrhl II 
ΦΡΡΓ 
nigrhl" II M sugrhikrtä, om. nirgrhi II 
16 Pr kasmimsci ranye II Ν prati-
vasatl sma II 
17 Μ α for atha II PrM 0karaka° II 
18 Ν vrksam for 
vrksamülam II 
20 Μ Ι Ν Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ catakayâ ; A with us. Of the Hamb. MSS. 
Η has catikoväca, I catakoväca II 
21 Ν drsyate II 
23 Ν aeimtayat II 
M ato for aho II Ν ätmasampnsto II 
24 Pr esa, om. pi II bhN^PPrM and 
Hamb. MSS. °catakä°; A ksudracamdradikä ätmänam II 
26 M tittibhya II 
bhN ΦΡΡΓ bhamgabhayâd iva, Μ Iham" diva ; Simpl. HI ihamgabhayäd bhavah, 
Simpl. h bhamgabhayâd bhuvah ; A with us II 
Page 252. 
1 M cimtya, om. vi H 
2 Pr êuhcimukhi, ΦΡΜ êûcimukhi II bhN durâ-
câri II M ramditamânini, om. nde pa II 
3 M tûsni II Ν bhûtvâ for bhava II 
In the Hamb. MSS., this line runs thus : asamartho grham [H graham~\ karttum 
samartho grhabhamjane. This is also the reading of A, which has only 
grhärambhe for gf karttum II 
4 bhN sä twice II Ν om. punar II Ν âiraya-
karno° II 
5 Pr vrksyam II 
7 Pr dâtavyam, M vâta for dâtavya I) After 
iti, Pr kathä ιι 18 ι II Φ Ρ : kathâ 15 11 15 in Φ corr. to 10 by two little 
strokes, but the correction is not clear and is liable to be mistaken for 
a 10 corr. to 15; M kathä ι IO ι II 
8 Pr pürvam for pürvasneham II 
9 M 
sasamudre II 
11 Pr ûru for ehrutvä II bh äha II 
16 Pr upakäresu II 
ΦΡΡΓ sädhu II 
Φ tve for sâdhutve, but sädhu supplied by cop. in margin II 
17 Pr icyate II 
21 M navam for nicam il M sana&aktiparäkrami II 
22 
Ν präha II 
25 Ν samâditah II 
26 Pr bhettu saknoti II 
27 M om. 
paribhraman kascit II 
Page 253. 
2 Φ samyojitakarakamalah supplied in marg. by cop. II 
3 Pr lägudi, 
om. the following aksaras to kadäcid (excl.), 1. s II Ρ tvadarghe II 
6 Pr 
"krtam II 
8 Α Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ drstvä 'sau 11 
9 M vita\yat for vyacintayat II 
10 
Ν enarri epavähayisyämi II 
12 Ν mayanna for nayatra II ΦΡΜ ea for vä II 
bhN, ^PPrM 

Booh IV 
179 
13 NPr so for 'sau II 
14 Ν vadhyete II 
IS ΜιΑΦΡΡγ amtasthena° 
(Pr 0virudhyena), Ν atasthenâ° II 
16 Pr samprâpta II 
17 bh tadabhimukho 
mugatvä, mu being struck out by copyist II M ma for mâma H 
19 M èva 
for ca II 
20 ΦΡΡγΜ ins. ca after tena, Il M om. kakid iha II 
22 
bh ΝΦΡΡγΜ êûnye, A sûnye II 
23 ΝΦΡΡγΜ kupito II 
24 Φ samtrastas 
tarn, but over the firet sta a small horizontal line, which may be taken for 
a mark of deletion ; hence Ρ samtrastam for samtrastas tarn II 
Page 254. 
1 Pr jwänadaksanäm, II 
2 M nakhyeyâty avam II 
4 Ν präha for 
prâpa II 
ß Ρ gajacarmmahhedam II 
7 M katham baihuksita, om. ca II 
9 Pr samayakhägyato 'tithirn ; the words samaya" (or sa maya °) form the 2nd 
or 4th päda of a sloka. 
A samäyd" ; Hamb. MSS. aparam bubhuksitas (H 
"tahs) tvam samdyâto (I samâgato) bhyâgatotithih II 
10 bh tadävisto, Ν 
tadâviste I, M tadodisto II 
12 bhN trptih II Φ a deleted ga before krtvâ II 
Pr krtvâdbhutam vrajah II ΨΡ vrajah II 
13 Pr dy for yady II 
14 Ν 
paêyet II 
16 bh'í'PPrM bho 'dhlra ; Ν bho dhlra, A with us II Pr 'payäm-
syâmi, Ν yäsyämi II 
17 Pr tasydgamana II 
20 ΦΡΡγ nastah, M nasta II 
22 Ν êrmgâlah II 
23 Ρ jätaparäkramam II ΦΡΡγΜ ityüdi, om. ttokam II 
Pr pafhat, Ν apaßat Ν 
Page 255. 
1 Ν tadâbhi° II Pr svadamsfräbkiks ta vi" II 
2 Pr lubhujam II 
3 Ρ 
svajätiyam II 
4 After aväpsyasi, ΦΡΡγΜ ins. kathä 11 n II 
6 Pr câlpam for 
câpalyam II Îvjndtino II 
7 ΦΡΡγΜ caUat for ca II Pr yutah II 
8 
ΦΡΡγΜ subhaksäni II 
9 M videsa II 
Pr svajär yad viruddhyati, Φ viru-
ddhyati, corr. by cop. to vimddheti ; Ρ, misunderstanding this correction, as 
the ¿-stroke looks like a viräma belonging to the preceding line : viruddhati II 
10 Ν makarapräha U Pr vânara âha II 
13 NM cirakälam du II 
ΦΡγΜ 
annabhävät, Ρ annäbhävan, om. ca II Pr nikulamtäm II 
15 Ν etya for 
any a II ΦΡΡγΜ kasyacid Η 
16 M pra for praviêya II 
17 Pr tadgrhâ-
rnnihkrâmann, om. iahi II 
18 Ν viyate for vidäryate H 
19 Φ vimtitam, 
PPrM cimtitam II 
22 Pr "râyâta II 
23 Pr om. ka âhàrah II 
24 
deêasya tu all our MSS. incl. A Simpl. H- and σ- class : deSasya visaye II 
ΦΡΡγΜ subhaksäni II 
25 After ädi, ΦΡΡγΜ ins. kathä ΙΙ 12 U II 
Page 256. 
2 M svagrhavistena ätmatäyinä M 
3 Pr labdhä II 
6 M upanatatrnam II 
7 M caturthatram II 
ΦΡΡγ tasydyam Η φ âdyaêtokah, but a small visarga 
put over dya by cop. ; PrM ädyah êlokah il 
8 Ρ nu for tu ti Ν om. yo II 
9 Ν «α twice II Pr vamcyato Κ bhP om. 4 after the stanza. 
In its place 
bhN, ΫΡΡγΜ 

180 
Variants 
they have a flourish. Α 114ι 154 il After 4, Φ has the same flourish as bhP II 
bhN add iti (Ν adds pamcäkkyänake) caturtham äkhyänakam samäptam, ; bh 
adds two flourishes, bhN add the figure 4, bh between double dandas, Ν 
between dandas II 
B O O K V. 
Page 357. 
1 Ν om. the Jain diagram at the beginning of the text II 
2 
over 
the line between ädya and êlokah, apparently by cop. II 
4 As to the 
readings, cp. 259, 21 II 
5 ΦΡΡΓ räjäah putrâh, M räjnah putrâ II 
6 
Ν om. näma II 
7 M prati «ma, om. °vasati II °moksäni all our MSS. 
except A ; A and Hamb. MSS. "mokmkarmmäni (h corrupted : tatrdrthadhwrmä-
cakämakarmmäni). Read with A and Hamb. MSS.? II After eamjätah, M ins. : 
tatas ca visaqycitah, continuing with the correct reading tataS ca vibhavaksayâd, 
&c. II 
9 Pr daritä II 
11 Ν vittahinasya, M vihlnasya for vittavihînasya II 
13 M om. yadâ H 15 bh ku(u?pbaa, M kutrm[or ((αφ 
|| Ν jumps from 
the first satatam to the second satatam (1. 17), om. one of them and all 
between them H 
17 Ρ lavartatai twice II M "vastraytdkanacitaXyä li 
18 
Ν lha for na II Ν l&ghave II M aro for puro II 
22 Pr vicimtayat II Pr 
ujjäsi II 
23 Pr niêciyatp, II 
24 M pamnidhih II Pr °rüpä° II 
Page 258. 
1 Ρ tävad for tava II 
Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ mmesyämi II 
Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ transp. harptavyo 
la" II 
2 ΦΡ 'kçamayo for 'ksayo, but in Φ ma del. by oop. ; M kamayo for 
kana 'km. 
Cp. M's reading, 1. 4 II 
3 Ν Pr m-rpbuddhah 11 Ν satvam 
for sa tarn II 
4 Ν om. va || 
Μ ηΰηαψ mitMne kçayo [cp. 1. s] na 
Ikävyam II 
β Ν mkoSena II 
7 ΦΡΡΓ kämärtAendtha II Ν ttena for 
matteria II M phaläh jjhita II 
8 M bhadräryäyäh for tadhhä0 II 
10 
Ν "damtena II 
Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ ins. ca after 'pi II 
12 M ta for ίαψ II 
14 Pr 
kamcanamayâ 11 
15 Pr prabhün ä° II 
16 Pr dina II 
Ν vyatikräma II 
18 Pr om. dattvä ; bh krtvä, but corrected to dattvä by the copyist II M om. 
jâ" a" ga II Ν αναηΐφ Η 
21 Ν (not bh !) ΦΡΡΓ Βnoparayitarp,, Μ mäse 
'noparävi\ox cíjtam. It does not seem, that the stroke, whioh distinguishes 
pa from sa, has been added in bh by the corrector, since the ink used by the 
latter is not so dark as that used by the copyist II 
23 M om. karau II 
24 Pr A$ititani&itajdnwvara%o, bhN kñtinihitaom. tala (Ν °nihatâ\_COÏT, by 
cop. to °ta0~\jánucarano) H 
25 Ν "nigrahaladbham' for °bhigrahalabdha° II 
26 Φ jumps from the first bhagman to the second hhagavm (1. 3o), om. one of 
bhN, ^PPrM 

Booh V 
181 
them and all between them ; but the copyist adds the missing text in the 
inferior margin II Ν viraharana II 
30 Ν bhagavam na vedmi II M bhavata, 
corr. to "tah, whereas the copyist of Φ adds the visarga directly over °ta ; 
hence Ρ bhavatam II 
31 b h N pragunikrtyäni II 
32 M pu ca lekhanäm ca 
vi" Il 
Νprattam II 
Ρ asti, M ägaste for äste II 
Page 259. 
2 Ν bha for 'pi II Ν kramenaîva II Ν °lobhâna II 
β Pr trsnäyäh, φ Ρ trsnäyä ; 
M trsnäyäpatrapa kotukarp, II 
7 Pr om. 'pi before grha II 
Pr praviveêya II 
Ρ om. 'pi tä after te II 
8 Ν upägatäh II 
bhAΦPPr pütkartum, Ν ρΟτναφ 
kœrttum, M pürkkartum II 
9 Mpurakotakäfapälapurusair II ΦΡΡγΜ naga-
rasya madhye II 
10 Ν om. gamyatäm II M om. sarve yä II 
11 bhN 
ksipanakä II Pr drstäs for prsfâS II 
12 M om. bhoh II bhN om. näpito ; 
Hamb. MSS. with ΦΡΜ II 
Ν drdhabarp,dhanabaddhoddhataSesai ksipanakaih II
13 bh °ksipanakaih, corr. to our reading by corr. II Ν bhïtah for nitah II 
Ν om. käranikaih II 
14 Pr itad for the first etad II 
16 M mäniya, om. 
°bhadräkäranä° Il 
M mαψ for ca II 
M here mänibhadrah II 
17 bhN ksipa-
nako II 
ΦΡΡΓ sarvakqapanavrttämtah II 
1 8 
Ν jumps from the first 
abhihitarii to the second abhihitam (1. 2θ) ι om. one of them and all between 
them II 
19 M duUätmä II 
20 Pr r for tair II 
21 M om. kuêrutam ; 
bhN kuériam for kusrutarß. For the readings, cp. 257, 4 II 
22 Ρ om. 
m II 
After krtaqi, ΦΡΡΓ ins. kathä ιι 1 ιι 
ιι II, M kathâ 11 II 
26 Pr 
mädrihhadrah Ii 
29 Ν om. ca II Ρ stusuve II 
Page 260. 
2 Here Bh begins again with tisvân for titvät ιι 
Ν dustätmä jdiitvät II 
Bh sunasya II 
3 Bh nakulasya na II bhN vihasati II 
4 Ν kupito, M 
kwfuSe, Bh apufro II 
6 Pr iisyäyäiji II Bh dolanasthitavp for éayyâ" su I
Bh kurjibham ädäya jalärthim pa II 
7 M utauca for uväca II 
8 Ν gatä II 
9 ΦΡΡΓΜ êmyarp muktvä for êûnyîkrtya II 
Bh 'pi svayam êûnïm{iû corr. from 
èra, or vice versa)krt,ya grìiayi kva° Il 
11 Bh om. tasya II 
12 Bh 
vâlanakasya ; M om. bäbkasya II Bh agamat II 
13 Bh bhmtrvadhasar¡ikito
'mta° Il 
14 Bh krtvä for vidhäya II Bh düre for dûrataê II Pr caksepa II 
15 PrBh °mudito for "pramudito II Ν vyäpära", Bh svapâra II 
16 Bh ins. 
ίαψ after môtâpi, omitting tarn before ägacclmntam II 
Pr rudhiräklinna Ii 
Pr 
api", Bh sa for ati° II 
18 Bh niMarpkitacittä II M kopidevim.rSya II In bh 
gloss on avimrsya : avicäryya II Bh jalajMrnnam kurßbharß, nicik§epa II 
19 B
kw^bhävapäta" II MBh om. ίαψ II 
20 Bh yävad grhamadhyarp, praviSati I
21 MSS. sä upa0 II M sä upakärakah pu II 
22 Bh °putrasydvimrsyakrta° II 
From 260, 2 bhN.^PPrM; Simpl.Bh 

182 
Variants 
M om. "krta II Bh °sokena duhkhitahrdayä ä" II Bh "vaksasthalatädanam II 
2 3 Bh amtare for avasare II 
2 4 bh Α Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ Β Ι Ι °niSrävakah ; Ν °nirvâ-
ραάαφ for "nisrävakah (Hamb. MSS. nirväpakah) II Bh transp. paêyatiItâvat II 
Page 261. 
2 Pr vacarne, Bh vacanam II 
3 Bh °mrtyuphalam IL Bh bhavaty evâti" IL 
Φ Ρ Ρ Γ atilobhätmänäm (Pr °tma for °tmä°) lobhämdhänärg, II 
4 After °lobhän-
dhänäm, Bh ins. dvittyä kathä II 
Φ Ρ γ Μ yatah for yathä II 
6 Bh atilobhä-
vibhötasya II 
9 Ψ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ ins. hi after iha II 
M param for parasparam II 
1 0 Bh cakruh II 
11 Ν daridratäbhävah II M adds yatah after uktam ca II 
12 Pr tadbodhavä II 
14 Pr bhajati II Bh miträny api II 
15 Bh "vika-
män II Ρ naränarän for narân II 
18 M cagni for vägml II 
20 M kaläem, 
for kaläkaläpam II 
21 Pr präpnotty amarttyo ; Bhpräpnoti mrtyo (Bh con-
tinuing 'tra) II 
2 2 Ν om. maranam II 
Page 262. 
1 Bh ksam (om. na) II bhNPr däridra II 
2 Ν noce for seve II 
Bh 
tvadltham II 
3 Ν yaây for ity II bh ghanavarjitena II 
4 Pr däridrän II 
jnätvaiva ; ~Shjnàtvâm\\ 
M sthitam II 
5 bh sarvathâmrthâjane, corr. 
to our reading by corr. ; Ν sarvathâ jane II 
Pr yânitavyarg, II 
7 M prasä-
dayet II 
8 Pr sarvärthah for sa cârihah II Bh upäyaih syät II 
9 Bh 
transp. : kr si" nrpa° II 
Ν nrpasevasevayà II 
Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ nrpaseväyäm II 
Φ Ρ Ρ Γ 
krsikarmmanäm II M vidyärthärjanena II 
10 Bh om. madhye II 
13 Pr 
grru for guru il 
Bh °ttyätivisa, then blank for one aksara and a not 
finished sa (for ma) II 
1 4 Ν usâdam II 
Ρ par agata" II 
15 Bh sulabham 
for ca üuhham II 
16 Ν saptavidhâ II Bh bhavati for syät II 
17 Ν "mana II 
Pr nipeksa for niksepa II 
1 8 PrBh "bhäindä0 II 
2 0 Mpürnnä, om. 
j)ürne II M om. all between "vañcanam and svabhä° next line II 
21 Bh 
°siddham for °rûpam II Ν kitänäm II 
23 Ν stanti II 
24 Bh priyatäm, 
Φ Ρ Ρ Γ mriyate, M mreyate ; Pr adds ta II M4thpäda: tadäsyänupayä" II 
Pr 
tutyam II 
Page 263. 
1 NBh tathä ca II 
2 bhN °niyuktäh II 
4 Ν aparam ca II Bh puts 
aparam (Bh °ram) and the following stanza after the prose, 1. 7 II 
5 Pr 
gämgämdhikam II Bh gämdhika II Bh °nâdibhih II 
6 M grhyati II Ν yadai-
kena II 
7 N M demrptaram bhâ° II 
Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ ins. ca after °nayanam, II 
Bh 
desänitarabhämdänayanam arthavatàm èva ιι aparam, &c., stanza 24. 
The
tathä ca and stanza 25 II 
9 Ν nidhnamti, M nibadheti II 
M mahâgajâ, Φ Ρ PR 
mahägajäh II 
10 M only krayakovidä, corr. by later hand to °däh II 
11 
b h N . ^ P P r M ; Simpl.BH 

Book V 
183 
Bh udyatä il 
Ν lokai, ΦΡΡγΜ loicâ II 
M düradesäm gatâ II 
12 Bh om. 
kirn ca II 
14 Bh prabhltäh It M käh for käkäh 11 Ν mrtäh II 
15 Bh 
om. the first ca II 
16 M jya, om. paritya II 
17 Ν om. this and the 
following line II 
M pumca\_or va^ti II 
19 Pr avista" II 
20 bhN città" 
for vittä" Il 
M anyane II 
21 Bh präpuh II 
M om. ca after präptäh II 
M 
siptäjale II 
22 Bh Sflmahäkälam bhagavamtam pra" II 
23 Bh bhirivänam-
danämä II 
M mayogtdrah for näma yoglndrah II 
24 Bh tena for tenaîva II 
Ν mathäyanam, Mpathäyatanam II Bh gatäh II 
Page 264. 
1 Bh om. te It Bh a deleted ma for vä It 
2 Ν «α tasmair for tatas 
fair II 
M vayam siddhayävikanünra yäsyamo tra dhanatrptir myutyar vä bhavi-
syabhîti It Bh sikra" for siddha" II 
3 Bh om. iti II 
4 Bh ins. yatah 
after ca It 
5 Pr nasasah tl 
Ρ palato II 
Pr jalam iti, Ν jajläni for jalam 
eti II 
6 Ρ acimtya II 
Φ Ρ dalavavän for balavän II 
b h N P M na tu, Φ dis-
tinctly nanu ; B h H I api for nanu (in spite of 'pi at the end of the päda !) II Ν 
"käroti It 
7 Ν tathä ca II 
8 Bh ca for hi II 
Ρ om. purusasya II 
9 B h H I 
api for iti It Pr sosyadädrstäkhyak II 
11 Bh adatvät II M kleiasyämga datvâ 
sukhäni neha la" II 
12 bhN>î'PPrM mathanâya svair·, A Bh with us II 
Pr 
bahubhir II 
13 Bh transp. kascid asmäkam II 
Bh dravyârjanopâyo II 
M 
vivarapradeêah II 
14 Φ Ρ "mämsam vi", Ν mahämäsavikrayam II 
B h H I 
"prabhrtinäm for "tir vä (HI with the blunder "vikrayî", and H "pam" for "mäm") II 
15 bh väddhuta", ΨΡΡγ catyudbhuta°, M cdtyuduta", A ca\atyudbhuta° ; Hamb. 
MSS. with us II Ν êrûyate II 
Pr vdnisâ", Ρ vdtisä" II ΨΡΡγΜΒΙι om. yatah 
after ca II 
16 Φ Ρ mahatän It 
17 Bh kva vä for rte II Ν yah for any ah II 
Ν kopi for ko II 
M pibhartti II 
18 Bh ûisyayogyatâm II 
ΦΡΡγΜ siddhi-
vartti" (but the reading of bhN is confirmed by Hamb. MSS. and all our 
MSS. below, p. 266,1. r, and p. 266,1. il), M "vatustam ll 
19 Ν pratyeka-
pratyeka paryayäm äsa II Bh "digvibhäge, M "calettaradikämgbhäge II 
20 M 
nâsamdidhim for tend" II Bh niScitam for asamdigdham It 
21 Bh om. tatas II 
bhN agrenatasya II M pita, Bh papäta It 
22 M ins. na before khanati II 
Pr tâbhramayl II 
23 Ν gacchatäm II 
Bh yathestam II 
Bh any e, om. atha II 
24 M om. bho ; Bh aho for bho II 
Bh om. yat tl 
Bh prabhüsam II Bh ins. 
tvadlyam before däridryam II B h H I om. na II 
Page 265. 
1 Bh om. iti II Bh sa äha η 
2 Bh vanito (bha add. over the line, app. 
by cop.) 1 grato nâham ägacchämi II 
3 ΦΒΙι tämmram, Ρ tärnmram II 
Ν 
prathamemo mvrttah II 
5 Bh apatat II 
Pr tävati II 
6 Bh rajata" for 
rüpya" II Bh prakrda (!) forjaraharsitah II Bh yathestam Ii 
7 Bh raupyam II 
b h N ^ P P r M ; Simpl.Bh 

184 
Variants 
Bh nágrato II 
8 ΝΦΡΡΓΜ (not bh) om. agre rüpyamayl bhümih; Bh ïha 
raupyamayï ca, om. bhümih II Bh agrato hemamayl II 
θ ΦΡΡΓ bhavisyatîti II 
Bh om. na II Bh tava for tathä II NBh däridra for däridrya0 II 
10 Bh 
na bhavisyati II M nähagamicchämi II 
11 M rüpam, Bh raupyam II 
12 
NBh om. atha II M om. all between api and yävat, 1. 13 II Bh nipatitä II 
13 Bh svarnnamayl II Bh hrsto II 
14 Ν gacchatäm for grhyatäm II Bh 
svarnnam yatheccham ; ψ first yaccheceham, writing afterwards dy on the first 
cch ; M yadye for yatheccham II 
15 Bh sa âha II Bh mürsa II 
16 Bh 
prathamam for prâk II Bh raupyam II Bh om. präptam II 
17 M gacchäva II 
18 Bh anenaprabhütenapi II 
19 bhN aharn avasthitas, Bh atrdham sthito II 
M thäm, Bh bhavamtam for tvärn II 
20 M ekäyrlve for ekäkl II 
21 M om. 
all between babhrä and masta1. 
22 II 
22 ΦΡΡΓΒΙΙ bhraman stha" ; read 
with φ II 
N bhramaccakram, Ρ paribhraman nakram. 
Read paribhramacca-
kram II 
23 Bh eka paêyat II ΦΡΡΓ M uväca for avocat II Bh ko for bhoh II 
Page 266. 
1 Pr bhagavân II Bh om. éirasi; Pr sarasi II 
2 Bh kutrdpi II Bh yatah 
plpâsàkulo smi, om. iti II 
3 ΦΡΡΓ evas for èva II Bh vrähmanamastakam 
äruroha II Pr samärmeha II 
5 Ν präha II Bh mamapy etat ittham eva 
éirasy II 
6 ΦΡΡΓ avatarisyatUi II Bh om. me II bh devatä for vedanä, 
with a viräma over de—see vol. xi, Table I, no. 5, 4a; hence Ν daivatä li 
Ν präha II 
After äha, Φ ins. mamapUtham, bracketed in a rather incon-
spicuous manner II 
7 Bh älapayisyati II 
8 Pr samärosyati, Bh äroksyati II 
M om. all between so 'bravlt and sämpratam, 1. 9 II Ν kiyatkälas II 
9 Bh 
cakradhara äha II Bh om. dharanltale II 
10 Bh vrähmana äha II Ν vlnä-
vaccharäjah, H I venivaccharäjah, Bh venuvatsaräjah II Bh purusa präha II Bh 
yadä rämo râjâw bhüt n tadaham tvam iva däridryopahato 'mum siddha II 
11 Ν 
däridropahata II Pr eoa for iva II Bh om. tvam iva II Bh samäyätah II 
12 
Bh mayâ'py anyah for mayânyah II M dastaê ca for drstah pr° ca II 
13 bhN 
tadeva for tavêva II Pr prcchyata II Bh om. eva, writing prcchato II 
14 
Bh ins. mastakam before äruroha II Bh no for na II Ν jumps from the first 
bhadra to the second bhadra (1. is), om. one of them and all between them II 
15 Bh om. tar M II 
16 Bh si" bhayam etat pradarsitam II 
17 Bh ko 'pi 
for kaêcid api II 
18 Bh tadä for sa II Bh °vardyitah II Bh ins. èva after 
ittham II 
19 Bh ins. svagrhäya after mäm II Bh and Hamb. MSS. mocito-
ham bhavatä ciräd asmäd anarthät II 
20 ΜΙΑΨΡΡΓ yusmâd, Ν yusmäd for 
pustäd ; M yusman arthät II Bh svayam for svasthänam II Bh yäsyämUi n ity u II 
22 In bh, the e-stroke before m of me looks like a danda ; hence Ν ma 
for me II 
23 bhN °pamktänu II Bh °pamktyanusvärena II Bh om. sa II 
M starnnasiddhah, Bh suvarnnasiddhah II 
24 Bh om. sa II 
b h N , ^ P P r M ; Simpl. Bh 

Book V 
185 
Page 267. 
1 Bh cakrena, om. tiksna II Eh ins. sa after bhramatä II Bh sahacaram, 
om. sva il 
Pr nadara, for naram, ; M om. svasahacaram naram, Bh om. naram II 
Pr tata samïpa" il 
2 Bh ins. saha before bhûtvâ II Bh sa âha for so 'brami II 
3 Bh suvarnnasiddha for sa II Bh om. the first tat II M vitayata for Jcim, tat II 
4 bh sarvacakra"; Ν sarvacakradharavrttâmtam, Φ sarvvam, cametat so 'brami, 
del. and corr. by cop. to sarvvam cakravrttämtam tarn, akathayat II Bh om. 
tarn II Bh sa for sau II 
5 Bh om. tarn II M om. präha ; Bh uvâca for 
präha II Bh ins. tvam after Ilio II 
6 After krtavän, ΦΡΡγΜ ins. kathâ ιι 3 ιι II 
bhNPr atha for athavä II 
7 M om. buddhir uttamä II 
8 Ν vinasyamte II 
11 ΦΡΡΓΜ maitñm; A with us and bhN; Bh mitrabhâvam; Hamb. MSS. 
H mitrabhâvasamâgatâh, I mitrabMvam upagatäh II M upagatâ II 
12 Bh 
prativasamti sma II Bh ins. ea after tesäm II Bh buddhirahitâû ca II 
13 
Bh êâstravimukhah II Bh pararn for kevaïam II 
14 Ν yamtritam II 
Bh 
desârn for desäntaram II 
15 Ν bhûpatin, ΦΡΡΊ'Μ nrpatin II Νparatosya II 
16 Bh dyestatarah II 
17 Φ asmâkaêcorr. by another hand to asmänekah, 
which is the reading of P; M asakehS, Pr asmäsv ekah for asmäkam ekaS II 
Bh 
om. ca II 
18 bh räjyam, Ν râjya, Bh r&ja for râjnâm, which is also the 
reading of All 
M kevalam buddhyaW 
19 Ν tam for na II 
20 M 
buddhe II Pr vidyâhlna tvam II 
21 Pr ahme for aho II Pr yudyate for 
yujyate II 
22 Pr eva II Bh bâlakât II bhN piditäh for krîditâh II 
Page 268. 
1 Pr bhävo for mahänubhävah II 
Bh asmadupârdyitavittasya II 
M om. 
vittasya II Pr samvibhägä, Bh samvigî II 
3 Pr atikramyadbhir II Φ sim, 
then the white rectangular in the middle of the page with the folio 
number 96, then a danda, used as a hyphen, then hä 'sthlni ; Ρ simhä 'sthini, 
M simhosthoniy all om. mrta ; ho in M's reading is perhaps a misreading of Φ, 
since danda + hä may easily be taken for ho. Bh with us and bhN II 
5 Bh 
°vidyäpratyayah II Pr kirn tad for kimcid II 
6 Ν jumps from the first0nabhi-
hitam to the second °ndbhihitam (1. 7), Pr from the first one to the third one 
(1. 8), om. one of them and all between them (N writing caikenâbhihitam) II 
8 M om. aharn II PrM samjwanam, Bh sajlvam II 
9 ΦΡΡΓΜ ekena tato 
'sthi° II 
10 Pr yojayitum, Φ Ρ yojayatim ; Mjojayiiu II M ukia-mê ca II 
Bh 
om. sa II 
15 ΦΡΡΓΜ vrksam for samipatarum II M tathânustitam II 
16 
M krtam; Bh om. krtah II PPrMBh and Hamb, MSS. om. te·, in Φ, te has 
been del. again by copyist ! II 
17 Bh om. simhe sthânântaragate II 
18 
Bh aharn for ato 'ham II After vidyä, iti, ΦΡΡΓΜ ins. kathâ 11 á ιι, Bh trtiyd 
kathâ II 
20 In Bh, daivahatâ is corrected into deva" Il M bahutväbvddhayo II 
bhN.'ÍTPrM; Simpl.Bh 
Β b 

186 
Variants 
Bh svalyabuddhayo for svalpadhiyo II 
21 Bh abhinimdamti II 
22 Pr 
Sarastho II 
24 Ν suvarnasiddhiprâha II 
Page 269. 
2 Bh Sataluddhihsahaúra° II 
3 ΦΡΡΓ «mah ; Bh om. ima II Ν ekabuddhi 
näma II Bh mitrarti for mitratâm II 
4 Bh ins. yävat after kälam II 
S N 
"gosti" II Pr °sukhanubhûya II Bh transp. kadäeit tesäm II 
6 Bh adamana-
veläyäm II 
7 Bh om. ca after tarn II Bh jaläsrayam II 
8 Bh ägamisyämi II 
9 Pr svagrha II 
10 Pr tamtra for taira II M Iho bhadraSau II 
11 
Μ ι Ν Φ Ρ Ρ γ Μ ins. mamtram (Ν matram) before kartum·, ABh and Hamb. 
MSS. with us II 
13 ΦΡΡΓ M vaeanamdtrasravanamâtrenâpi II Bh om. 
tävat II Ν sambhavati, corr. by cop. to "te II 
14 ΦΡΜ buddhiBh 
êvabuddhi II Ν catmänam, Μ tvätmänam for tväm â° Il Bh om. ca II 
15 
Bh rahayisyämi II bh jalajatïr, corr. by corr. to "gañr ; Ν "gatim II 
1β 
ΦΡΡΓΜ ins. bhavatâ after uktam II Pr matah for yatah II 
1 8 Pr vihilyaSu 
for visaty dsu II M ddhir for buddhir II 
19 bhN tac ca for tad II Ν vaca· 
tiaSravanamäträj; Hamb. MSS. with us II 
ΜΙΝΑΨΡΡΓΦΒΙΙ pitrparyä-
gatam, only M pitrparyäyägatam. This is no doubt a restoration of the 
original reading of the textus simplicior. 
But the Hamburg MSS. read 
with our other MSS. II Pr tyaktam ; M om. tyaktum II 
20 bhN ΦΡΡΓ Sakya ; 
ABh and Hamb. MSS. with us II Bh om. iti 11 bhN^PPrM subuddhi"; 
Bh and Hamb. MSS. with us II Pr jrrahârena II 
21 M rahayisyämi II 
Ν mamdükapräha II 
22 EhH °visayah II 
ΦΡΡΓ kimcij II Bh om. kamcij II 
BhHI jaläSrayam II Bh transp. : adyawa »abhäryo II 
Page 270. 
1 Bh jaläSrayam II 
2 Bh y ama prätwr ägatya jälair äcchäditam tat 
taraA II 
3 Bh matsyakürmmamakarädayo II 
4 Bh jäle patitali II Pr 
grhitväh Ii MSS. correctly °buddhi ä". Correct our text II 
δ Bh gativi· 
áesajñánai kufilacârena raksamtâva 'pi jäle II Pr iata" for gati" II 
Φ Ρ Ρ γ 
raksitau II 
6 Pr athaparähna II Bh prahrstäs II Bh svagrham. II 
7 Pr 
êatabuddhi II 
8 Bh sahaSravuddhih karena mtah II Bh °na abhihitä svapatnï II
9 Φ jow[new page]jtmra# II Bh priye paêya paêya II 
11 After jale, 
ΦΡΡΓ M ins. kathä h 5 II 
12 Bh nakämta for naikäntem II After iti, Bh 
ins. caturthl kathä n flourish ιι II 
13 Bh yadvdpy for yady apy II 
14 Bh 
°vacanlyam II Bh ins. iti after anullwhghaniyam II bhN yayä for mayä II 
15 
Ν om. 'pi II Bh "kâraé ca II bh atha for athmä II 
19 M om. cakradhara 
aha ; Ν cakradharah präha II 
21 Pr nâ, om. ma II 
22 Ν rakukagrhe, 
°ku being a misreading of the form which ja has in bh II bhN bhärod-
vähanam II 
bhN.^PPrM; SimpLBh 

Book 
V 
187 
Page 271. 
2 All our MSS., except Bh, but including the Hamburg ones, here and 
in the following lines vrtti' (Pr vrtti \ tau ca vrttibhamgam) II 
3 Bh yathd-
tthänarp, II 
4 Pr "sthite II Bh ins. tena after °sthitena II 
Bh côddhata" II 
M °êâbhana for "rasabhena II 
β ΨΡΡγΜ sa prdha II Bh °pracälenena II 
7 bhN "pravrddhâ II 
8 Φ Ρ sthdtavyamm iti II 
9 In bh gloss over 
käst : gâta', Ν ¿vasa for käsl II 
Bh cauram II 
10 Pr bhogodhyo, corr. 
by cop. to bhogodhyo II 
ΨΡΡγΜ jïvitam II 
11 bhN^PPrM tadä ; 
ABh with us. bhN "gatam for gitam II BhHI "Saida" for "nädä" II 
Pr 
Samkhcmänuddnämdi, Φ Samkhanänudänädi (corr. putting an almost impercep-
tible 1 over the second nd, and a nearly equally imperceptible 2 over da), Ρ 
Samkhanädänunädi ; M ¿amkhanänvradänädi II BhHI nam for na II 
12 M 
ksetraraksâh jmrutâ II Ν bamdham batpdham ca, Bh vamdhavamdhai 'vam ; M 
bamdha vadham ca II 
13 M täva tribhrtataxrutvä II NBh präha II M om. 
bho II 
14 Bh om. na II bh na éïtarasam, corr. by corr. to na gl" ; Ν with 
the other MSS. II Bh gitam rasam na vedmi II Bh bhanasi II 
15 Pr 
¿arada(da del. again by cop,)dyotsnâhato ; Bh mratyotsnâhate II 
16 Pr 
virpJsati II bh bote, Ν ¿raute II Φ gltajhämkärajä; as jhäm looks very much 
like Sam, Ρ writes gltaSamkärajä, PrM gitaSarjikaraja; Ν gltam jamkäraja-, 
Bh gltasamskärajä II 
17 M udasi for unnadasi II 
18 Ν räsabhar äha II 
MBh dhig only once II 
19 M gita, om. na II All our MSS. incl. the 
Hamburg MSS. Srüyatäm (only Bh : Srüya [new lin&\yatäm) II 
20 
bhNAΨPPrM Hamb. MSS. (not Bh) ekavimSati II 
21 Bh stvenakona" for 
ekona" II 
22 Pr sthânamtrayam II Pr äsyäbhi, Bh äkärä for äsyän? II Bh 
na for nava II 
23 Φ varnnä sattrimSatir ; the r-hook begins exactly on »a 
and ends on ä. Over ta, the copyist adds the visarga, whose superior dot 
has almost melted together with the right-hand stroke at the end of a ta, 
which stands in the foregoing line just above. 
As the superior dot of the 
visarga is not easy to be distinguished, its inferior dot looks like an anusvâra. 
Hence Ρ reads varnnä targdrrimSatì ; trimSatir also M ; cp. the ΓΙ-class above, 
p. 63, and vol. xi, Table II, no. 11, 3 a-c. bh carnnäh sadvimSatir, Ν varnâh 
tadvimSati, A va," sadvimSatir II Bh saftrimSat for saftrimSatir II bhN bhäryäS, M 
hhâyâS for bhäsäS II The copyist of bh first writes smrtah with double danda 
after it ; then he writes the ä stroke on the visarga, and puts the superior 
dot of the visarga over tâ, the inferior dot under it. The copyist of N, 
who first writes tmrtali, corrects this to smrtâm II 
Page 272. 
2 Bh yutam for vrtam II Between slokas 42 and 43, Bh inserts this half-
¿ l o k a : dhanydnaqi jäyate karnne viSesât Saradi sthite II 
3 bh ndtyad 
bhN.^PPrM; Simpl.Bh 

188 
Variants 
ι 
gitatväram (or gltadväram), corr. by cop. to °gltakaram, Ν nâtyat gltakaram, 
Φ Ρ Ρ γ Μ ndnyad gltadväram, A with us; Bh Hamb. MS S. priyam for varani II 
Ν daivenapi[pi del. by cop.]?» Il M om. api il 
4 In Bh, this line runs 
thus : êu&kasnâyuravâlhâdât tryaJcsam jagäda rävanah II 
5 Bh om. tvam II 
Bh nivärayisi II 
6 Bh vrtipüra for vrtidvâra II Pr jumps from the first 
ksetrapd to the second ksetrapä, 1. 9, om. one of them and all between them ll 
8 Bh tathâ cânustite II Ν utkamthadharo II Bh tatah ksetraraksakäräs tat&abdam 
Srutvä krodhät II 
9 bhN nihpidayamto II ~Eh fíídayamto II 
10 Bh dhävitäh II 
Bh tädito II 
11 Bh bhûmiprstenaW M tatah, om. ca II Μ ι Ν Ψ Ρ Ρ γ saçchi-
drodüsalam, M sachidrodüsanam, Bh sacchidrolûkhalam, A sacchidraudüsaläm, 
Hamb. MSS. sacchidrolüsalam, II 
12 Bh ja,ti" ; M svabhävagatavedanah for 
svajätisva0 II 
14 Bh "kharäSvänäm II 
15 M om. to na II bhN jmajara II 
16 bh^PPr evodüsalam, A èva udüsalamm II Bh tatas ca vrtirn bhamktvä 
kamfhasamalüsam ädäya palä° ; Hamb. MSS. tatas ca vrttim bhamktvä kamtha-
itharn ülüsalam ädäya palä" II 
17 Bh asmim nnatare II Pr d for düräd II 
Bh dürättarät tarn avalokya idam uväca II 
19 Bh only : sädhu mätula gite-
nêti η tad bhavän a'pi, &c., 1. 22 II 
21 After iti, ΦΡΡγ ins. kathä ιι 6 II M 
om. iti and kathä, but has the figure 6 II 
22 Bh vicäryamäno for nivä" II 
Bh om. mayâ II 
After sthitah, Bh ins. iti pamcaml kathä, HI iti kathä 5 II 
23 Ν cakradharah präha ; Pr jumps from the first äha to the second àha, 
273, 3, om. one of them and all between them II bh atha for athavä II 
Page 273. 
1 mitränäm na karoti yah all our MSS. incl. A, HIBhh. 
Hence this 
reading is beyond any doubt that of Pùrnabhadra as well as of both the H-
and the σ-class of the textus simplicior II 
2 ΨΡΜΒΙι "kolikah II 
3 Bh 
euvarnnasiddha II Ν svarnasiddha präha II 
5 bhN mamtharo II *PPrBh 
kolikah, M kolivah II 
6 Bhpatrakarmmakästäni II 
7 Bh ädära for ädäya II 
Bh präptah II 
Bh om. ca II 
bh sim&ipäpädapam, Ν ¿isipäpädapam, Pr Sasapä-
dapam, Bh êimiapâtarum II 
8 Ν om. drstvä II Bh drstvd 'c¿«[new page]-
cimtayat II Pr drSyati tena dänena karmrbhütyena pra II M tadânena II 
9 
bhN Ψ Ρ kartrbhütena, A karttibhütena, M kartrbhrtena for kartitena. 
Hamb. 
MSS. and Bh with us II M bhütrni for pra II M katakarmmopa° II 
10 
M kugaram II 
11 bhN mamâsramo II 
12 Bh sa m udraja laka llolasparêaêl-
taläniläpyäyitasaflrah II 
13 Bh vasämi for tisthâmi II ΨΡΡγΜΒΙι kolika II 
Ν kaulikapräha II 
14 M am for aham II 
15 Bh om. mama II bhPr 
kutumbam II Bh om. iti II Bh om. Slghram II 
16 Pr karttayisyämi, Ν 
karisyämi II Pr sustas II Bh transp. : tustoham tava II 
17 Bh raksapäda-
pam amumm iti II ^PPrMBh kolika II 
18 Bh tad for tarhi II Pr svamitra, 
M svâmitram, Bh mitram II M prs}ä, ΦΡΡγ drsfvä II 
19 M samägacchati II 
bhN.^PPrM; Simpl.Bh 

Book 
V 
1 8 9 
Bh transp. : vyamtarena tathêti II 
Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ pratipannam, 
BH pratipranne II 
Ψ Ρ Ρ Γ Β Ι Ι kolikah II 
21 M mama kascikham anubhavdvah, &c., p. 274, 1. 1. 
A stroke under kha refers to a later passage in the eame line, where the 
missing aksaras have been supplied by the copyist II 
22 Bh ghärthaye II 
23 Bh tat prärthaya râjyam II Bh ins. ca after aham II Pr mambrâ II 
Page 274. 
2 
Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ Β Ι Ι kolika II 
Pr bhavaty for lhavatv 
II 
M èva for evam II 
Bh 
om. param II 
3 Bh mitra for na hi, inserting na before yujyate II Bh 
samam for saha II Pr yudyate II 
5 Bh bhojanäcchädane II 
6 M òMsa-
dyarn II 
7 M om. tathä ca II 
8 Bh kitavä II Pr bälä II 
9 Bh 'ptdarn 
for hîdam II 
10 Bh om. kim ca II 
11 Bh pradhänah II 
13 Pr 
kevala II 
14 M svasvato, Bh «««[new line]/o for svasuto II 
15 Ν 
kaulikar, Ψ Ρ Ρ Γ Β Ι Ι kolika, M kokela I I 
Pr prstavyä 
II 
1
6 Bh om. tant I I Pr 
satvarn for satvaram II Bh priye for bhadre II 
17 Ν yady asmâkam for 
adya II 
Bh 'smâkam adya, M 'thâsmâkam II Bh ko 'pi for kascid II 
bh first 
•writes bha for sa, which he corrects to sa by a vertical stroke beginning over 
the superior horizontal ]ine of the aksara. 
Hence the copyist of N's 
original, who takes this stroke for the deleting mark, and the copyist of Ν 
om. sa II Bh samlhitam for vañchitam II 
18 M t for tat II Pr tvä drasfum II 
19 Bh mitram for suhrn II Bh räjjam II Prprärthatäm II PrBh so 'brawt II 
Page 275. 
1 Cop. of Bh corr. ati" into iti" II Ν "paramparesâm, Bh 'parata for 
"paraîsâ II M apara mparâ esâ, om. m atiklesapara II Bh räjjasthitih II 
2 
Φ Ρ PrBh "dvedhi" II Bh °Ihävädinä for °bhävädicintä II Bh na kadäcit, om. 
api II Bh bhavati for prayacchati II 
3 Bh add. ca after tathä II Φ Ρ 
bhätarah II 
5 Pr räjüä 
II 
6 
Ψ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ Β Ι Ι kolika 
II 
7 Pr 'hrawt, om. 
sä II Bh sä äha II 
Bh paffam II Bh om. nityam èva II 
Ν nihpädayati, M 
nihpädasi II 
8 M °suddhim ; Bh sarvadvayavisuddhih II Pr 'nya, Bh dvittyam 
for'nyad \\ 
9 Bh tena for yena II Pr purutah ; Bh om. puratah II M yerta du 
puramtaprstahtaêca II Bhprstato 'pi ekaikam II Φ ca ekaikampatam, the anusvära 
being put so closely on ka, that it looks like the superior end of the vertical 
^α-stroke; hence Ρ ca ekaikapatam II 
10 BhH om. grhavyayah êudhyati 
dvitiyasya mülyena ; H om. the following aksara vi ; I nirvisesas ca krtyäni for 
the gap and the following word II 
Φ Ρ êuddhyiti II 
11 Pr kurvänah 
svajätimadhye II Bh gacchati sukhena kâlah II 
12 Bh äha II M om. sädhu 
pativrate II Bh sädhu pativrate sädhu sädhwktam bha II Ν säktam for sädhu-
ktam 
II 
1
3 Bh nikitya 
I I 
Bh om. atha 
II 
Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Β Ι Ι koliko, M ko I I 
1
4 
Bhprärthayäm äsa II Pr cakrire II Bh ins. me after yadi II 
16 Pr driêirâê II 
bhN.^PPrM; Simpl.BH 

190 
Variants 
Bh caturbhujaS ca sam II 
17 Bh gacchati II Bh laukai II Bh om. m iti H 
1
9 M yasya nd svayam I thajñete II After iti, ΦΡΡγΜ ins. hatha ιι 7 π, Bh 
foëft kathä ιι flourish ιι II 
20 Bh "piiâcikayâ grado ; M 'êraddheyakadâvisâ-
vikägrasto II 
21 Bh athavâ for atha II 
23 Bh saktubhih for sa èva II 
Pr pâmdura fyete II Pr somaêarmâ pitá II 
24 Bh suvarnnasiddha II Bh 
cakradharah kathayati II 
Page 276. 
3 Bh bhuktaSesai ka" Il Bh pùntali II Bh tasya kalaêasya for tarn ca ka ; 
M tam ca ka lamhyam tasydmdhastât II 
4 Bh 'valambitasyd° Il 
Bh om. 
tasya II Pr tasyä 'stât II Ν khafkâm, Bh sastvâm for khafväm II M ία I tata 
kedf I styä, Bh ins. tam before eka II Pr ekadrstvâ II Bh vilokayan II 
5 
Bh jmirnno II 
6 Bh ihavati II 
7 Bh tatas tenaham ajädvayam grMsvämi II 
ΙΛΝΨΡΡΓ grhisye; A with us II 
8 Ν om. one sanmäse II 
Bh saste 2 
masi II 
Ν athäyütham II 
M tato ggabhir [misread for golhir\ &c., 1. 9, 
omitting 'jäbMr, &c. II 
10 Bh mahisyâ ma II M mahìrsarvadavà for maMsyo 
ma va II Bh tatprasavät for vadavä" II 
11 Bh prasütam II Pr om. all 
between bhavisyanti and tasydham, 1. 14 II 
12 Bh karisyämi for sampatsyate II 
Bh tatah, om. ca II Bh kaêcit vipro mama II 
13 Bh däsyati II Bh tasyâm 
putro janayisyate II 
14 Pr nä for näma II Bh karìsye II 
15 Bh jäte II Bh 
grhltvà gkofakacalatt/iayâm upaviêyd° II 
17 Bh samîpam âgamisyati II 
18 
Bh transp. : kopät vrähmanlm II Pr vrähmanam, with following danda II 
Bh 
samabhidkäsye for abhidkäsyämi II 
19 Bh °yâ madvacanam II 
20 NBh 
om. täm; but in N, the copyist deletes an anuevära over tä of tâdayisyâmi II 
M taddhyânyâvasthitena, Bh dhyânâ° Il 
21 Ρ "prâhâras II M yarg, for yathä II 
Ν ghafámtavarttibAih II 
22 Bh saktubhih, om. ca II 
Page 277. 
1 After iti, ΦΡΡγΜ ins. kathä ιι 8 
ιι, Bh saptaml kathä ιι flourish ιι II 
3 BhHI laulyam II 
ΨΡ apeksyate, y being almost imperceptibly deleted in 
Ψ by a small stroke II 
4 ΦΡΡΓ camdabhüpatih·, but see 1. τ II 
7 Bh 
adhistäne for nagare II Bh nrpatih II Φ jumps from the first krldärtham to the 
second kñdárthami,, om. one of them and all between them ; but cop. supplies 
the om.text in marg. II 
8 Bh asti for tisthati II Bh "vânekabhakêabhojanâdïbhih II 
9 Bh kfidanârtham II Bh tistati after asti, which has been deleted by cop. II 
10 In bh gloss on mahänase : rasodu II bhN ins. ca beforepraviêya II 
11 
Pr bhaksyayati II In bh gloss on süpakärä : supâra II Bh om. kästhädikam 
agre II 
12 Prpaêyati II Pr tädayati II 
13 bhNA'l'PPrM tam for tad\ 
Bh {tat) and Hamb. MSS. with us, but cp. Introd. p. 32 II 
Bh mesasüpakä-
ränäm II 
14 M svadalampage i, Bh svädulampafo II 
15 Pr mahäküpäica, Bh 
maliâwbkopâè II BhHI yathä äsannena (I °va for na) vastunä II 
1β Ψ om. tad 
bhN^PPrM; Simpl.Bh 

Booh V 
191 
and the following words to prajvalisyanti incl. in the text, but supplies them 
in the margin II In bh gloss on vlmukena·. vhädu II 
17 M ürnnaprakäro 
yesâmesa sva" II 
In bh glosa on ürnä° : una II Bh H tad ürnnäyuh pracuro, 
I tad ürnäyam pracuro for ürnaprastaro II 
Bh ins. vahninä after svalpenapi II 
Φ Ρ prajvalagyati II Bh jvalisyati II 
18 Bh tato for tad II Bh om. punar 
aivakutyäm, ins. küdyäm after "vartinyäm II Pr aêvakudyâm ; in bh gloss on 
aSvakutyäm : ghodära II 
Pr pravesyati II 
19 M trnapäcuyati jva" II 
Bh 
om. tato 'ίνα II 
bhNA^PPr vahnidâgham, M vahnidäyam II 
Bh ins. aSväh 
after °däham II Bhpräpsyamti II 
20 M om. etad uhtam yatkä vanara II Pr 
eva for etad II 
In bh gloss on vânaravaêayâ (!) : vämnarelatela II 
21 Bh 
Sämyati II 
22 Ν om. evam Ii After evam ψ ca, del. by cop. II After pro-
voca Bh ins. bho ll 
Page 278. 
1 Vr y atra îov yo 'tra II 
2 Bh sa bhavisya sarrtdigdham II 
5 Bh om, 
tathä ca II 
6 b h N ^ P (not Pr) kalahämtyäni, A kalahäm \ täni; BhHI kala-
hämtäni II Bh om. m II 
8 Μ ίάναΑαψ for tävad grham II BhHI vayam for 
vanam II 
9 bhNA^PPrM gacchävah II 
10 ΦΡΡγΜ tena for te II 
ΜιΝΨΡΡγΜ madoddhatam ; ABhHI with us II bhNA^PPrM ûcatuh for 
ücuh II 11 Bh buddhivaikalyam II Bh jätam II Ν yena tad II Bhyenêiam vadasi II 
12 After bravisi, Ν ins. yenedam vadami II Bh svahastena dattâmrta II NMBh 
bhaksa° II 
13 Ν katuttiktakaaäyäni, om. kasäya and ksäräni" II Bh "tiktâm-
laksäräni II Bh vanaphalâni II 14 Bh bhaksisyämah II Bh aha forprovâca, II 
15 Ν yütham for yüyam Ii Bh om. yüyarn and has ni for mi. 
In the place 
of yüyam a blank for four aksaras has been left in Bh, and this blank haa 
been filled in with väkyä by another hand II Bh nitasya Ii Bh tasrnäd äpata° ll 
16 Pr parinäma II 
17 M kulaham II ΨΡΡγΜ om. s vayam II φ nâvaya-
lokayisyämi, ya being del. again by cop. II Ν nâlokayisyâmi, Bh na valóbhayi-
syämi II 
19 Bh transposes the two lines of this stanza II Ψ Ρ mamtram 
for mitram II Bh mitram ápadam ägatam II 
20 For s tata, Bh has a blank, 
filled in by a later hand with g teje (read ye) 11 M kulaksayah II 
21 In 
the place of sarvän pa" sa yuthapo Bh has a blank for four aksaras, filled in 
by a later hand with sa vanara (!) II 
22 Ν nagare for gate II Bh 'nyasminn 
ahani II Bh mahänasam II In bh gloss on mahânase : rosode II 
23 M 
pûpakârena. In bh gloss on süpa" : süpära II Bh yävat südena tädanäya na 
kimcid äsäditam II Bh om. °dagdhaΝ ürddhajvalitamkästam II 
24 Ν 
hatah for täditah, om. so 'pi tena täditah II M om. so 'pi tena täditah II Bh om. 
täditah sann II 
Page 279. 
1 bh wrddhajvalitaSafirah, corr. by cop. to arddhajvalacchafirah ; the first 
reading is that of NBh and Hamb. MSS. (the latter ones reading tenârd-
b h N . ^ P P r M ; 
Simpl.Bh 

192 
Variants 
dhajvalitaSarìrah), the second one that of ΦΡΡγΜ II 
Bh pratyäsannäyäm II 
bhN kutyäm (with gloss in bh : ghodära) II 
2 M luthitas, Bh luthamtä II 
ΦΡΡΓ ins. a second tatra, M tasyäm before trna II Bh om. 'pi II 
3 
Bh kutyämtanibaddhä II Ν baddhä, om. ca ni II M yotakä. In bh gloss on 
ghotakäh : ghodâ II After ghotakäh, Bh ins. kecijvalitäh II Bh kecit spha, then 
a blank to pa" excL, filled in (by a later hand ?) with titasarirâ il 
4 
Ν äpantäh (read äpannäh) for gatäh II M gata tayitvä 'rddhadagdhaêanrâ I
Bh képi for keeic ca II Bh cotayitvä II 
5 Bh om.janam II M vyäkulam 
vaksah II 
6 Bh savisädatn II In bh gloss on cikitsakän : dhäraka II 
7 
Bh bho ucyatäm II Ψ Ρ asvänämm etesäm II M kaScidyahopamsträni II Bh o
etesäm kascid II Ν ° samanopäyah, Bh vahnidäho" II 
8 Bh samcitya II M
samcimtyapro küm apratisaye II 
10 bh vasayanyänäm II Ν "samwdbhav
Bh "samutthitä II 
11 Bh yathä for vyathä, HI a correction of this mistake : 
tathä II M tinâêem II Bh âyâti II 
12 Bh yâvad ete prâk na bhavisyamti II
bh roge for rogena, Ν ägatena for rogena te na, II 
13 Bh tad âkarnnya for 
tac chrutvâ II Bh vänaränäm vadhatn II 
14 Bh te sarve II Ρ yüthaparis, 
NBh yüthapas II Bh om. na II 
15 Bh svayam nastavän, with dr add. over 
the line between na and sta, for säksäd dadarSa II Ν om. tu ; Bh ca for tu II 
Pr seha II 
16 Bh om. yatah II 
17 Bh dharsanä II Pr matrayed, Ν 
dharsayed for marsayed II Bh y as tu for yo 'tra II Bh parinirmitam II 
18 
bh satyäd for bhayäd II Ν transp. : lobhäd vä II 
19 Bh kvacit II 
20 
Here all our MSS. "kJiamda II 
Pr ta for tatra II 
Ν yäval lokayati (om. 
nipunataya) II 
22 NBh nirgacchati for ni" iti II Pr eimtayä sa nü° II 
23 
Pr om. t pa II 
24 Bh jalamadhye for tanmadhyäd II Ν °lälamkrto for 
°lälamkrtakantho II 
Page 280. 
1 Ν räksasas, om. niskramya II Bh proväca for tarn uväca II Ν y atra II 
2 Ν tad for tam II Bh bhaksayâmi, om. iti II NM tad anyo II 
4 Bh 
kiyatäm II Ν bhaksane ¿arlras for bhaksanasaktis II 
6 Ν badvyanä, M
brähmatah II Ν srläsrlo for srgälo II Ν n/ä II Bh vânara âha II 
7 bh 
sahäsvyamtam, Bh sahasthyamtim, Ν sahâtyamta, PrM sahâtyamtam II Bh o
me II 
8 M pracchasi II Φ Ρ tac chapariväram II M api tam [added over the 
line] vara [both aksaras struck out again] I kaprapamna lobhayitvâ sarasi II 
Bh nrpatim II 
9 Bh Sarah II Pr räksas II Bh ratnamäläbhüsitakamthas tan
nagaram äsädya vrksa" II 
11 M "prasädesu II 
13 Ν süryam a tiraskurute 
14 NBh vänara âha II Ν kasmimscid for kutracid II M aranya II 
15 Bh 
suguptanagaram, corr. to suguptanaram II NM vârena, om. sûr y a II NBh ins. 
praviéya before nimajjati II M dhanäprasädäd II M nihkrämyati II 
18 Ν 
yûtham te for yûthapate II Ν om. esa ; Bh transp. esa and pratyaksatayâ II 
19 M om. matka", but supplies it in the next line in this corrupt form : 
bhN,^PPrM; Simpl.Bh 

Booh V 
193 
mäsakumthasthitayä II 
20 B h H I ko 'pi for kam api II 
Ν ainam for yena II 
21 Φ Ρ etat êrutvâ II Ν nrpatir äha II Ν yod for yady II 
22 Ν ägamisyämi 
for esyämi ; Bh samägamisyämi for svayarn esyâmi II 
Ν prabhütaratnamäläh II 
Pr sadyamte for sampadyamte il 
23 Bh kapir äha II 
Ν tad for etad II 
Page 281. 
1 Ν râjya for räjüä II Ν sotsamgam II b h N atha for athavä II 
3 Ρ 
rüdhä II 
After api, Ν ins. between the second and the third päda of 
stanza 61 : trsne devi ñamas tubhyam yayä vittänvitä api 111 II 
4 Bh akrtye 
'pi for akrtyesu II Ν niyujyamte II 
bh^PPrMBh bhramyamte, A N bhrämyate\ 
Hamb. MSS. with us II Ν sugamisv api, A dugamesv api il 
7 In the place of 
this line, ΦΡΡγΜ have 6 pädas : laksädhipas tathä kotim [M kotï\ kotivän räjyam 
icchati II 48 räjyayuktas tathä svarggam [P 
svarggä\ svarggäd aimdratvam [M 
idratvam\ icchati II imdratvepi hi sampräpte yadrcchä na (Ρ η for na) nivarttate 
(Pr "ti for °te) n 49 II 
8 M om.jlryanti of päda 2 II 
9 In Φ irò of êrotre 
is somewhat illegible ; Ρ netre for êrotre II Bh trsmkâ tu ; H trsiß 
Mpi, 
1 trsnau Mpi II Ν tarunäyate for tu na pryati II Bh om. atra after deva and 
inserts it after sürye II 
12 B h H I deva eka° for yenaîka" Il 
14 B h H 
ratnamäläm II M sarvalokä II 
Pr praksitäs II 
15 N B h om. ca before tena II 
Bh om. iti II 
16 Ν jumps from the first uväca to the second uväca (1. is), 
om. one of them and all between them II 
17 M om. kirn iti ciraya II 
Bh 
yüthädhipate II Bh transp. : me erijanaê (!) cirayati II 
18 Bh °nrpate II 
Ν 
räksatena salile bhä" II 
19 M "salivasthona II Ν sopitam II Ν "käranotthena 
hha" II 
20 N B h ins. mayä after sädhitam II ΦΡΡγΜ svâmîti matvâ\ 
Hamb. MSS. and Bh with us II 
21 Ν na for nâtra II 
22 Ν simhate, 
PrBh himsate II Bh pratihimsatam II 
23 Bh transp. : taira dosata na II 
M 
vät(a, ?) for taira II Ν om. yo II 
Ρ om, duste II Ν samäcaret II 
24 Ν tatas 
for tat II M sama, Ν samam for mama II Ν bhavati for tava ι iti II 
Page 282. 
1 Pr Sokävista II 
Ν 
koêâdhistah, putting this after tvaritapadam II 
ΜιΝΨΡΡγ yathäjätam; ABh with us II Pr pratinivrta, Φ Ρ pratinivrtya II 
2 ΦΡΜ suvrtto, Pr suvrto, for sutrpto II 
3 M tänamdam for sä" II 
4 
N hataêatruh, Bh hataêatrum, H hatah êatrum, I hatah êatru II 
5 Bh 
vihitam for bhavatâ II Ν vänarah II 
6 B h H I om. ato 'ham bravimi II 
Bh 
käryam ityädi for karma, iti II 
Bh adds astami katM, ΦΡΡγΜ kathâ ιι 9 II 
7 Bh bho bho II Ν täm for mäm ; Bh om. mam il 
8 Ν om. yäsyasi II 
10 
M tyaktvâpadam II 
11 M om, päpena II Ν narakam II 
12 Bh suvarnna-
siddha äha II Ν êaktimyas, Bh Saktisaktas II 
13 Bh etatva for etac ca li 
Φ Ρ manusyânâmm CL II 
14 Bh om. ca after nasti 11 Ν käcid II 
15 Bh 
b h N ^ P P r M ; Simpl.Bh 

194 
Variants 
om. tava II Ν "bhramena vedanayä II 
16 b h N A ^ P P r M yadi for yad ; 
B h H I y at II Ν ita svasthänam II Bh om. apy asmäkam apy II 
17 Ν om. 
'yarn, having a deleted yo before anartho II NPMBh athavä for atha II 
I S 
Ν vânarah II 
20 M 'sti for 'si II Ν grhito siddhikälena II Ν palati II 
21 
ΝΨΡΡΓΜ cakradharahprâha ; Hamb. MSS. and Bh with bh II 
Page 283. 
2 Bh adhistäne for pure II M bhadrasenäma II 
3 Bh ratnävall for ratna-
vatl II Ν om. hartum and the following words to hartura (excl.), 1. 5 II 
5 
Bh surata 
for tatsurata0 II 
β Ν avastkänam pamkajvarädibkir II 
M 
"jvaràdir II 
7 Ν ätmanas II 
8 Ν sakhi pascad ikä" II 
9 Ν grhakoke 
for yarn ; Bh om. 'yam ; Ρ om. all between räksaso and vyaeintayat, 1. 10 II 
Ν om. kimeid II 
10 Ν °vidhätum II 
11 Pr tatha 'thyah, Ν taydnyah II 
12 M hitum for hartum II M na êaktoti II 
Ν om. tat II 
13 Bh asvarüpam II 
Ν aêvarûpam krtvâêvarûpamadhyastho II Bh krtvä madkyastho, Η krtvä madhyä-
sthäm, I krtvä madhyasthäm II 
PrBh niñksye II 
M om. kimrüpah II 
Ν 
kimprahMsaû II NBh om. sah II 
15 Pr niMsamaye II Ν r aêvâg&re for 
grhe II 
16 Ν om. tarn II 
Ν râksasàévaivabharataram II 
17 NBh 
avalokya for drstvä II In bh gloss on khalinam : cokadu II 
ΦΡΡΓΜ mukhe, 
om. tan. 
Hamb. MSS. and Bh with bhN II Ν aamärustah ; then again the 
same sentence with the readings r&ksasâêvam and samärüdhah II 
18 Bh 
om. nünam II Ν èva for esa II Ν tustam II 
19 Pr ko, Ν koSchân for kopân II 
M abhägatah II 
20 Ν vicimtayat II 
M cimtayan aso II 
ΨΡΡΓΜ 'üväpaha-
rakem II Ν säsvätena for kasä" II 
21 Bh ins. tarn after gatvä, omitting it 
before sthìrC II Bh khaUnâkarscmât II 
22 Ν om. tad II Ν tat for tadä il 
23 bhN Α ΨΡΡΓΜ vegätivegam. 
Hamburg MSS. vegät vegam, which was 
also the reading of some MS. previous to Bh, which has vegät gavagam for 
vegät vegam, Simpl. h and Bühler vegäd vegataram. 
See above, p. 35 II 
Page 284. 
1 bh tathä ca gemito?, Bh tajyathä aganita for tathavagemita ; Ν tathdganlta-
khalinäkarsanaväkyät I cauraê II M vairaê for cauraê II 
2 Bh anena aéva" for 
etenâsva° II 
3 Ν pälam II 
4 Bh tada" for tatrâ° Il 
S Pr cimtayati i° Il 
Bh 'svampo räksaso II 
6 M vairopi II Pr vataprahäram II 
7 NBh ins. 
tau after api II 
9 ΦΡΡΓΜ vane for vate, but in Φ corr. to vate, the inferior 
part of the vertical «-stroke being effaced, but still well visible, so that fe 
could possibly be read as the. 
The copyists of Ρ and of the original of 
M evidently thought the original aksara to be the, corrected subsequently 
to ne II 
10 M naéamtam II Ν om. bhoh II Ν èva II Ν kllaka for alïka II 
11 Ν pranasyati II bhí'PMBh Hamb. MSS. bhaksôyam\ PrA with usti 
bhN.^PPrM; Simpl.Bh 

Booh V 
195 
Ν bhaksyeyam mämsas II ψ Ν bhaksatäm, in Ψ corr. to our reading II 
12 
Bh βναφ rüpam II 
Ν gkhalitagati nivrttah, BhHI skhalitagatir (H om. r) 
nirvrttah II 
13 Bh upary upari vänarasya II 
14 Ν lar^bäyamana II 
15 
Bh ins. ίαψ after 'pi II Bh räksasäd apy adhikam, Ν bhaksastâbhy adhikam, II 
16 Pr ayuktavän for apy u II Bh om. apy II Ν niramtarä\ Bh om. nitaräm II 
M nimllitanayätä rdamtän II 
1 7 bhBh nihpldayan, Ν ΦΡΡΓ Hamb. MSS. 
nipMayan, M nipñdadrayan II Pr tiyali for tisfhati II Pr ta for tarn II 
18 
Ν tathäsvarüpam, Bh tathävastham II 
Ν Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ om. enam II 
1 9 In the 
place of this sloka, Bh has only: yâdrêl badanaechâyêti, adding: navaml 
kathä m II Ν drstyâte II Ν vänarah II 
20 Ν grhltepi hlkälena II After 
this sloka ΦΡΡΓ add. 10 kathêti ιι ιι II 
2 1 M om. all betweenpunar and 
atra next line II 
22 Bh gacchâmi for anu II Ν ava for atra II M °malam 
for jOhalarn II 
23 Ν cakradharah präha II Bh bho kâranam, Il Ν trakw-
ramrn II Ν tayor for nay o ; M nay o Ha vayo vâ\ Bh nay o 'py anayo jäyate 11 
daivavaéât 11 Su II 
24 M devavaêâ II Pr trmrn for nrnärn II Bh nrnäpa-
tìsfati ; NPPr (not Ψ) upatistati, in Pr corr. to °te II 
PAGE 2 8 5 . 
1 ΨΡΡΓΜΒΙΙ tristanl [ΨΡ «tristanl, Pr striatavi] räjakanyakä ; Hamb. MS. 
Η with bhN (our text), I with the other MSS. II 
2 Bh yâmti ti 
3 
ΨΡΡγΜ svarnnasiddha II Ν präha II 
5 M madhuram for madhupuram II 
Ν tagya for tatra II 
6 Bh atha for tasya, inserting tasya after kadäcit tt M 
kadâci stani kanä II Φ Ρ stristanlm II 
7 
jnätvä Srutvä ca for Srutvä IV 
8 ΦΡΓ (not Ρ), Ν ayarn II Pr ya for yathä w Bh kaicid eva na II; After 
chrutvä, Ν inserts the stanza: yah. satatam pariprcchati I ¿pioti satatam vä-
kyam avadhârayati I tasya diväkarakirane nllanlm vivarddhate I prajâ II· 
9 bh 
äha II Ν etat j My ate II Bh nyäjjam (for nyäyyam, and thie a blunder for 
anyäyyam) for jnäyata II 
Ν inistakarinl >1 
1 0 Ν Φ Ρ Ρ Γ stristanl II· 
Ν 
râjakanyâ II Pr vrâhmanât, Ν Irähmanän, W Bh transp. : ähüya vrähmanäh It 
Pr prahrvyâ II 
11 PrBh om. yatah, but Pr cah for ca II 
12 Pr prsta-
kenaW 
13 Bh räksasena gr° Il Ν trastân îor praSnân II Φ Ρ puräk, with 
2 after the stanza II 
16 Ν kasmimScid II Pr kutraci ranye II Ν camda-
Sarmä, M camdrakwrmmä II Bh om. näma II Bh ins. tu after ekadâ II ΦΡΡΓ M 
ins. ca after tena II 
17 Bh viprah for brähmanah II After brähmanah, 
Ν inserts the sloka amdhakah kubjakaS caîva tristanl räjakanyakä t te trayo 
nyäyatah siddhäh sänuküle vidhätari 11\. 
This is a variant of stanza 69 II Ν 
samähitah II 
18 Ν bhayatrastam for bha tarn II 
19 Ν >lamalodarastu-
darau, PrM kamalodarasaudarau ; Bh kamalakomalau II 
20 Ν kathaya, Pr 
kathayam for katham II Bh om. bhavatah II 
21 Ν räksasa präha II 
Ν 
arddhodvanam II Bh na hi arddhedite 'ham kaddpi bhramlm padbhyäm s p f , HI : 
bhN.^PPrM; Simpl.Bh 

196 
Variants 
na hi arddhoditêham kadâpi [I ta for 
bhürtñm padbhyäm sprSä\l adds m\-
mi; Pr a for api II 
22 Bh om. me II Ν brähmam, om. *py II Bh moksa-
syôpâyam II 
Page 286. 
1 Ν tena for tato II Ν raksasâbhihitam II MBh om. bhoh II 
2 ΨΡΜ 
devatärcanam II 
Ν sarasän II 
3 M ta for tävat II 
Bh om. tvayä II 
Ν 
ndtahsthät II 
4 After tathdnusthite, gloss, of bh ins. räksase II Bh ins. esa 
before devârcana (sie Bh) II NBh eva for esa II 
5 Pr bhaksayati II 
Ν 
drutam, Bh satvaram for drutataram II M tata drutamram gatvä drutaram 
gacchämi II 
bh anudhvänapädo, Pr anuddhänapädau, Bh anuddhatapädo, H 
amuddhatapädau, I amuddhatapädo II 
6 NBh mama for me II Bh ins. pi 
after räksaso II 
7 Bh pr stato, om. tat II 
8 After iti, ΦΡΡγΜ add. 
kathâ h 12 m , Bh da&aml kathâ η flourish n II 
9 bh ins. tad after tasya II 
Bh vacant II Bh äkarnnya II Bh vijjrä for brâhmanâh II 
10 ΨΡΡΓ bho 
vrähmanäh stristani II Bh mam,a II 
11 Bh vä na hi for ita vä II M to for 
te II Bh te ücuh II 
12 Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ om. the first vä II 
M ca for the second 
vä II Pr sah for sä II Bh kanydtra sä II 
13 Bh bhaved bhartur vinäsäya II 
Pr dinäSäya II Pr °nidhänäya II ΦΡΡΓΜ vä for ca II 
14 Pr tvayä for yä II 
Ν yämti II 
IS Ν ins. ca after pitar am II Ν om. sä II Pr sâdbhutam for 
sä drutam II Ν nagra II Bh samsayah II 
16 Ν meva for devah II Bh yah 
for yadi II 
17 Ν tatas for tat II Bh om. tat II Ν dattä II Ν niyojayi· 
tavyêti, Bh niyoktavyêti II 
18 Ν käladvaya0 II Ν transp. : bhavati ι krtä II 
Bh lokadvayavi° II Bh na for krtä II Ν om. tad II 
19 Ν pataghosanam 
äropayäm äsa\ Bh akärayat for äjüä" II 
20 Bh yah ko 'pi for aho II 
ΝΨΡ (not Pr) stristanîm II Pr räjnä II bh räjakanyakäm II Bh kmyärn for 
räja° II Bh om. yah before pari° II 
21 Ν karoti II Bh deêât praväsayati II 
Ν evam ghosamyäm II 
22 Bh prabhütah kàlôtîtah II NBh om. ca II Bh 
udvahate II 
23 Bh guptasthänasthitä, Ν guptasthänam sthitä, Φ Ρ Ρ Γ Μ gupta-
sthänam sam° II bh yauvanam abhimukhl II M säjäjüe, Ν jajñe II M sthi for 
'sti II Ν om. ca II 
Page 287. 
1 Ν yasfìgràhikujbas II M sastigrähl II Bh kubjahah II Ν tistati sahäyah II 
NBh patahasabdam II 
Ν tamprayete, Bh mamtrayatah II 
M sya&yate, Bh 
prchyate II Bh om. patahah H 
2 Bh yatah îotyadi 
II M kanyastä, Bh kanyä II 
3 Bhgacchati for vrajati II Bh kanyä° for kanyakä" II 
4 Pr tatas ca for tad asya II 
Ν däridrotthaklesaparyamto ; Bh däridryotthasya keSasya (!) pa II 
6 Bh ladyä II 
7 Pr pränäh tamkah II In bh, °tamicali has been corrected by corr. into "jamgah II 
M pränonämgapavana° II Ν viläsi, Bh viläsäh II 
8 bh surugurunatih, corr. 
bhN.SkpPrM; Simpl.Bh 

Booh V 
197 
by cop. to suragurunatih ; M guru, 
oui. sura II 
10 Ν °tvä amdhakena II 
NBh om. äha ca II 
11 Ν räjaputrair II Pr rwjñarn for räjüe II 
12 Ν 
devapramânam II Bh räjä äha II Ν om. bhoh II 
14 bh^PPrM kusfo, Ν kubjo, 
V V 
A kusta. 
Cop. of bh deletes o—writing gi l s I—without another correction. 
In Pr kusfo has been corr. by cop. from kustl] Bh kustl ; Ψ PPr vâmtyajo, A 
ndmtyajo, M vämtyajyo, all these MSS. om. pya II bhN vän for vdpy II 
15 
Ν salaksa II Ν viíesatah II 
16 Ν râjâdeêâmtaram ; Bh räjäjnayä for rä° 
èva II After èva, Φ breaks off II M purusair for râja II Ν gatvä for nltvä II 
17 Bh om. tristanl II 
18 Ν yänapänam, Bh yänapätre II Ν ine. sa kaivarttä 
for kai" II Ν om. Ihoh II 
19 After adhisthäne, Bh trayo 'pi moktavyä for 
sa 'yam a" dhä" II Ν gatvä for nltvä II M ädhyo for andho II 
20 After 
°nusthite Bh : te grham mulyenddäya, &c., 1. 21 II M ärädya for äsädya II 
21 
P adhah for andhah II 
22 Bh kubjakah II 
23 PPr stristanl II bh sa, 
corr. to saha by corr. II Pr vilagnäh, PM vilagnä for vinasfä II NBh om. ca II 
24 M dyam for yady ayam II 
Page 288. 
1 Pr käle II Pr na yätah for nayävah II Ν transp. : yena visam II Ν om. 
tad II 
2 Bh yena tathä amum, thä a being written by a later hand on 
some effaced aksara II mrta (for mrtah) written in bh by corr. on a blank 
left free by cop. II 
3 Bh tarn ädäya II M pradrstamanâh II Bh grham, II 
4 Bh ägatya II Ν a for täm II M labdhvä for labdho II 
krsnasarpah I tad 
enam written in bh by corr. on a blank left free by cop. Il 
5 M "vasubhih II 
Bh gataneträya II 
6 Ν kathayi, Bh misena for kathayitvä II Bh prayaccha II 
bh sam ; then prayaccha I yena dräk, written by corr. on a blank left free by 
cop., who continues g vipadya (corr. adds ta) iti II 
7 Ν hrdamàrggam II bh 
pratisthitah, 
NBh prasthitah 
for prati pra II Ν sopi tarn kr II 
8 bh 
khamdlkrtya .... svasthälyäm, the blank being filled in by corr. with sarvam II 
Bh sthälyäm, omitting satakra II Ν culhlmastakam II 
9 Ν svagrham, Bh 
sva for svayam II bh °vyäkulitayä, Ν grhavyäpäräkulatayä II Pr praSrayam> om. 
sa II Pr iham for idam II 
10 Ν tavdbhistän II Bh matsyän ämya, "n ä° being 
written as one syllable and virâma being added under nä il Ν pacati II 
11 M 
a for aham II Ν grhavyäpärataram II Bh bhavän for tvam II 
12 Ν om. darvlm il 
Νpracalaya, Bhpracälayatu II Bh hrstamanàh II 
13 PPr sprkvanî, M syrkka-
nîm. 
Gloss, in bh : jïbhehoda (?)câteche II 
Bh pralihan II 
Ν om. darvim II 
Bh darvîm ädäya tän II 
Ν samädäya II Ν tävat for tän II 
Bh cälayitum 
ärabdah II Ρ prayälayitum, Ν pracalayitum II 
14 Ν äradhhah II Bh tän 
atha cälayito II Ν pracalayato II Bh visagarbhem bäppena II 
15 Bh mamda-
mamdam for êanaih êa° II bhM agalata, Hamb. MSS. and PPr with us II 
Ν 
agamat ; Bh aga\ho\o\t ; A amalatä, a misreading for agalata with following 
danda II Ν ava for èva II Ν ins. ksanam after gunarp, II 
16 Ν manvamäno 
From 287, 16 bhN.PPrM; SimpLBh 

198 
Variants 
vä vi" II In bh gloss on bäspa0 : bäpha II Bh väppagrahanam II PrN sprsta-
drsfir II 
17 Ρ paSapamti for paêyati II Ν sthälyamadhye II Bh transp. : 
ievaläni krsna" II 
18 Ν om. tato and the following words to tat (1. 19) 
exol. Il Bh tato 'cimtayat II Ρ maêyâmisam, Bh matsyamämsam li 
19 Bh tan 
najänämi tristanyâé ce idam samyak Μψ vä II 
SO Ν tristanyaiS, Pr strimsta-
nyä§ II 
21 Ν madväpräyaika upakrämäyemam II Bh madvadhäya prakramo II 
Ν athdnyasya II NBh om. vä II 
22 Bh om. sa ; PPrM sam for sa II Ν 
nigmhayan, Bh gopäyan for nigühayann II 
23 Ν älimgya cuqtbanädibhih II 
Page 289. 
1 NBh apaêyat II Bh ins. anirlksyamäna iva before samlpam II 
2 Ν 
Sañrabalam samlksya masta II Bh °rthyä.... 
stakopari pari". 
A later hand 
writes êasya on the blank, where one aksara has been worn off II 
Pr 
°sämarthyäs tanmastakopari II 
3 bhPrA parïbhramya, Ρ paribhrammya, 
M Ihramya II 
Ν ca for tam ; PPrBh om. tarn II 
M ttistamm hrdaye, Bh 
tridanihrdayasya II Ν atädayat II b h P P r A kubjakaSarïre pra II 
4 bh 
trtlyah stano II Bh (later hand writing on some effaced aksara) ti for 'ntah η 
Bh prs^adeêe ca danasparmt kuhjah saralatäm gatah ; Ν prs^adese ca βtana· 
sprrêât II PPrM prsfapradehA stana", but in Pr, h added over the line by 
cop. II Ν kuhjah, PPrM kubjakasya II 
5 NPPrMBh saralatäm ; but 
Hamburg MSS. with bh II 
6 PPr kubjakaScaîvêti II PPrM add kathä 111, 
Bh ekâdaêaml kathä II Ν suvarnasiddhâha II 
7 NBh uktarn for abhihitam II 
Ν daiväkülatayä; Pr devä" Il 
8 Ν äpadyate II 
9 tyäjyo has been lost in 
Bh by a hole, after which the MS. has h π ; Pr tyäyyo for tyäjyah il 
NBh 
madväkyam II 
Bh akurvato II 
10 bhPPrM suvarna{Pr °τηφα° for "rna) 
siddha( new line in bh)?» amjnäya. 
A NBh with us, but in Bh tam and 
part of nu worn off II 
11 PBh nivrttah (Bh om. h) for prati0 II 
bh 
flourish before iti II 
Ν om. iti II 
After iti, Bh ins. dvädasaml kathä II 
12 A eamätha for samäptam II In Bh, par worn off II bhA aparlksäkäritä II 
NBh apafiksitakäritvam II Ρ M ädyah êlokah II 
13 In the place of this 
éloka Ν has only kudrstam kuparijñdtam iti, Bh kudrstam kuparijüätam 
ceti II 
Bh om. the rest of the text. 
In its place Ν has : samäptoyam. 
gramthah II 
II iti Snvisnv,$armavi§ffi()racitam pamcäkhyänatn samäptam II 
As 
to the copyists' colophons of Ν and Bh, cp. the end of the ' Variants ' II 
A has all the stanzas of the praáasti ; I give all its readings. 
A kudrsnam ll 
14 A ta bharena II After krtam, PPrM ins. : ευαψ kathä 77 süktäni ca ιι 646 II 
A 119 for 5 II 
15 bhPPrpamcatamträparanäparanämakam ; A with ub II 
16 A "yuktärri II 
M visnu , om. íñ II 
17 M parakärah II A joyeta II 
18 
PPrM om. all between stanzas 1 and 7 II 
26 bh "prabhu for "prabha ll 
A "carpdraprabha, then an unfinished pta, then surivrtfhah II 
From 389, 12 bhN,A,PPrM; Simpl.Bb 

Book V 
199 
Page 290. 
1 A kkacana II A "bhogi for "yogi II 
2 bhA samasti vi" II 
3 A 
rohini° for manmathaand "visesasya II 
4 bh laksma, A laksmlh II 
7 bh 
°moda0 for "padä0 ; A with us II 
8 In the place of siktä maya, bh has 
a blank filled in by corr. with sampräpya bhû, and mi written on the superior 
margin II 
9 A pat for sat II In P, täni ca and part of gram are lost by 
a hole II 
10 Pr ganita II M élokasamkhyâ 3 I II 
11 Stanza 8 is missing 
in bhPPrM II In A this line runs thus: camdramunibänacamdre varse kärtti-
O 
.
.
. 
kasitadvitiyäyäm; our text gives the reading of ΠιΠ2Π3 (Π2 Π3 "vana" for 
"bäna"; Π1 Π2 Π3 0varsai) II 
12 Π1 Π2 Π3 om. 'dhisthito, reading mdhaih. 
Between pratisthito and vudhaih Π2 ins. traîva êâstram iti su II 
The COPYISTS' COLOPHONS of our MSS. run thus:—bh: iti pamcamam 
äkhyänakam samäptam ιι flourish u ii samvat 1468 varse mârggaêlrsamâse êukla-
pakse dvädasl dine adyêha êrlVlramagrâme tmhäräjädhiräjairiKähnadadevavija-
yaräjye amätyaMahamsalasäpratipattau Satyapurajnâtïya Fa(corrected from Josl, 
and with an i inserted before vâ)dîjanârddanasya bhrätrJosïAaradevasya vinodäya 
SnQaudajnatlyaMahamkesavasutaMahamgopalena pamcäkhyänakam nâma nïtiéâ-
stram lilikhe m flourish ιι iti pamcäkhyänakam nitiêâstram samäptam 11 flourish 11 
ιι íivam astu sarvajagatu 11 11 lekhakapäthakayoh êivam η flourish 11 y aval lavana-
samudro yävan, naksatramamdito meruh ι yävac camdrädityau tävad idarn pustakam
jayatu ιι 1 ιι ιι flourish ιι ιι II Ν : samvat 1855 varse säke 1720 pravartta-
mäne karttika Su[ßu corr. by cop. to vâ\di 8 gurau tipi Subham ι Mahamdhapu-
raniväsinä èri Gaudajnätiyaddave KäiinäthätrnajaHarinamdäkhyena lisitoyam [corr. 
by cop. to lisitar¡t\ êvhham ι aparam pustakam mksya êodhanïyam sadä budhaih ι 
hinädhikair svarair varnair asmäkam düsanam na hi 111 tñny âhitr avadänäni 
gävah prthm sarasvati ι narakäd uddharamty ete japaväpwnadohanät ι 2 ι svärtham 
parärtham ca likhitôyam gramthah n n èri ιι π ; Κ: iti pan^cäkhyänam samäp-
tam II èivasumdarena likhitam u samvat 1574 varse äsovadi 9 sukre II Ρ : yädr-
êam pustake drstam ι tädrsam liksitam mayä ι yadi éuddham aéuddham vä mama, 
doso na diyate 11 3 bhagnaprstikatigñvd ι baddhadrstir adhomukham ι kastena liksi-
tam êâstram ι yatnena paripälayet ιι 4 ιι samvat 1537 varse prathama äsädhavadi 
1 bhaume pustikä laksitam ιι Subham bhavatu n prathame kathä 29 m dvitiye 7 ιι 
trtïye 15 ιι caturthe 12 ιι pamcame 12 u evam kâraï kathä 75 u flourish ιι prathame 
sükta 388 ιι dvitiye sükta 84 u trtïye sükta 67 η caturthe sükta 51 m pamcame 
sükta 56 evam kâraï sükta 646 π flourish 11 subham bhavatu II M : kathä 29 I 
7 I 15 I 12 I evam 75 [cp. colophon of P] sükta 388 ιι 51 I 56 m éñ emcam [for 
evam\ 646 I èri ιι ιι flourish ιι êrïh ιι u flourish ιι u flourish ιι ιι II Pr has 
no colophon II Bh: êivam astu éarvajagataé ceti 11 êfisamghaê ι dram namdyät ιι 
áñbhagavatltripurá mama mamsitam u yi(ì)ya(ì)rttu 11 khaläh vilayam yämtu 11 
bhN,A,PPrM; Simpl.Bh 

200 
Variants 
äcirarn tistatu •pustamkam ιι 28 flourishes ιι Muparägakalasaparvanätha ιι II Φ : 
iti pamcäkhyänam samàptam iti ιι flourish η ιι samvat 1661 varse jyestamäse 
êuklapakse 2 dvitlyäyäm tithau guruväre SrlFikramapuramadhye lisatam idarn 
ιι flourish ιι räjädhiräjaSriBäyasithajwijayaräjye 
n flourish ιι 
ιι yädriam pusta-
kam drstvä ι tädrsam lisatam mayâ \ yadi êum aêuddham vä ι marna doso na diyate 
ti 1 ιι flourish n Suiham lhavatuh ιι 
ιι kalyänam astu ιι 
ιι flourish ιι II 
b h N , A , P P r M ; Simpl.Bh 

INDEX OF STANZAS 
In the following Index, complete references are given to the text, printed in HOS., 
vol. 11, and to the edition of the textus simplicior (Simpl.) of the Pañcatantra by Kielhorn 
and Biihler. Occasional references are given to the same text as contained in the Hamburg 
MSS. (HI). Kathäsamgraha-st&nzüB are marked with an asterisk, äkhyäna-stanzas with a 
dagger. 
akäranäviskrtavairaddrundd I. 275. 
*akdlacaryâ visamâ ca gosthi I. 280. 
akulïno 'pi mürkho 'pi I. 111. 
Simpl. 
I. 148. 
akrtatydgamahimnd Simpl. II. 69. 
akrte 'py udyame pumsâm II. 61. Simpl. 
II. 74. 
akrtyam naîva krtyam syât IV. 
36. 
Simpl. IV. 40.' 
akrtyam many ate krtyam II. 148. Simpl. 
II. 144. 
akrtvâpawrusam yd írlh IV. 66. Simpl. 
III. 147; IV. 118." 
akrpanam aSatham acapalam II. 114. 
akleMd iva cintitam Simpl. HI I. 8. 
agamyän yah pumän yäti Simpl. I. 370. 
agnihotraphalä vedali II. 150. 
Simpl. 
II. 147. 
aghatitaghatitam ghatayati II. 155. 
ajä iva pragä mohâd 1.177. 
Simpl. I. 
219. 
ajdtamrtamürkhébhyo Intr. 2. 
Simpl. 
Intr. 2. 
ajädhülir iva trastair Simpl. II. 100. 
ajdm iva prajäm mohâd, see ajä iva. 
ajñdtavwadhdsdra" Simpl. III. 41. 
ajñatdh purum yasya Simpl. III. 159. 
ajñdndj jfiänato vâpi II. 175. 
Simpl. 
II. 169. 
ata èva nìpìyaie 'dharo, see madhu 
tisthati vdci yositdm. 
ata èva hi vdñchanti IV. 38. 
Simpl. 
IV. 42. 
*atitrsnd na kartavyd II. 59. 
Simpl. 
II. 73, 77. 
*atilobho na kartavyo V. 15. 
Simpl. 
V. 22. 
atisamcayalubdhänäm II. 128. 
atitalähhasya ca raksanärtham Simpl. II. 
182. 
attum vdñchati ¿ambiavo Simpl. 
I. 
159. 
alyacchenavimddhena, see antahsthend'. 
atyädaro bhaved yatra I. 408. 
Simpl. 
I. 413. 
atyucchrite mantrini partitive va" I. 221. 
atyutkate ca raudre ca, see apy utkate. 
\atha krsnd dimh sarvâ III. 125. 
\atha tasya taroh skandhe III. 128. 
atha ye samhatd vrksäh III. 46. Simpl. 
III. 59.' 
adeéakdlajñam andyatiksamam III. 100. 
Simpl. III. 112. 
fadyaprabhrti deham svam III. 155. 
adhano ddtukdmo 'pi Simpl. II. 102. 
adhigataparamdrthdn panditdn I. 73. 
adhite ya idam nityam Simpl. Intr. 6. 
see yo 'traîtat pathati nityam. 
adhodrstir bhavet krtvd, see kampamänam 
adho 'veksl. 
adhyardhdd yojanasatdd, see sapädäd. 
anantapdram kïla êàbdaêdstram Intr. 4, 
Simpl. Intr. 5. 
anabhißho gunänamyo I. 61. Simpl. I. 
73. 
anarthitvdn manusydndm Simpl. 1.142. 
D d 

202 
Index of Stanzas 
f *anägatam yah Jcurute sa éobhate III. 
194. 
Simpl. III. 164, 166. 
tanâgatam bhayam drsfvä II. 10. 
*anâgatavatîm cintäm V. 53. 
Simpl. 
V. 71, 72." 
*anägatavidhätä ca I. 326. 
Simpl. I. 
318. 
anädisto 'pi bhüpasya Simpl. I. 88. 
anärambho manusyänäm, see anärambho 
hi käryänäm. 
anärambho M Icäryänäm III. 114. 
anävrstihate deêe Simpl. II. 53. 
anicehato 'pi duhkhäni II. 156. 
anindyam api nindanti Simpl. II. 156. 
aniyuktä hi säcivye, see anuyuktä hi 
säcivye. 
anirvedah kiyo müiam I. 332. 
Simpl. 
I. 329. 
aniScitair adhyavasäyabhlrubhih III. 
224. 
anistah kanyakäyä yo Simpl. IV. 73 
(not in HI). 
anuyuktä hi säcivye I. 219. 
anüdhä mandire yasya Simpl. IV. 67. 
anrtam satyam ity ähuh Simpl. I. 186. 
anrtam sähasam mäyä I. 143. 
Simpl. 
I. 195. 
anekadosadusto 'pi I. 227. 
Simpl. I. 
242. ' 
anekayuddhavijayi III. 8. Simpl. III. 
II. 
anena sidhyati hy etan I. 324. 
antahpuraearaih särdham I. 40. Simpl. 
1.55. 
antargûdhabhujamgamam 1.356. Simpl. 
I. 375. 
antarllnabhujamgamam, see antargüdha". 
mtar visamayä hy etä I. 150. 
Simpl. 
1.196 ; Simpl. (not HI) IV. 87. 
antahsärair akutilaih I. 96. 
antahsthendvirwldhena IV. 63. Simpl. 
III. 140 ; IV. 112. 
antyajo 'pi yadä säksi I. 392. Simpl. I. 
404. 
antyävasthägato 'pi Simpl. IV. 110. 
antyävastho 'pi budho I. 424. 
*andhakah kubjakaê caîva V. 69. Simpl. 
V. 91, Ì00. 
tandho vä badhiro vâtha V. 74. Simpl. 
V. 98. 
anyathä êâstragarbhinyâ II. 157. 
anyapratäpam äsädya Simpl. 1.107. 
apakärisu mä päpam I. 164. 
apamänam puraskrtya Simpl. HI, III. 
164. 
*apañksitam na kartavyam V. 13. 
Simpl. V. 18. 
apavädo bhaved yena I. 174. 
apasärasamäyuktam III. 110. 
Simpl. 
III. 120. 
apäyasamdarsanajäm vipattim I. 47. 
Simpl. I. 61. 
api käpuruso bhvtah I. 112. 
Simpl. I. 
149. 
api käpuruso märge Simpl. V. 104,106. 
api putrakalatrair vä Simpl. I. 357. 
api pränasamän istän III. 111. Simpl. 
III. 121. 
api brahmavadham krtvä Simpl. I. 275. 
api rmndatvam äpanno Simpl. II. 167. 
api vïryotkatah éatrur Simpl. III. 136. 
api êâstrem kuêalâ Simpl. V. 40, 43. 
api sampürnatäyuktah, see sampürnempi 
kartavyam. 
api sammänasamyuktäh I. 115. Simpl. 
I. 153. 
api sthänuvad âsînah Simpl. I. 49. 
api syât pitrhâ vairï Simpl. III. 143. 
api svalpataram käryam Simpl. I. 98. 
api svalpam asatyam yah I. 91. Simpl. 
I. 119. 
aputratya grham êûnyam, see iünyam 
aputrasya grham. 
apûjito 'tithir yasya IV. 5. 
apüjyä yatra püjyante III. 173. 
aprstas tasya tad brüyäd I. 49. 
aprstenâpi vaktavyam III. 3. 
Simpl. 
ΠΙ. 4. 

Index of Stanzas 
203 
aprsfo 'träpradhäno yo Simpl. I. 32. 
apeksitah kñnabalo 'pi Íatruh I. 171. 
apyätmano vinâSam ganayati Simpl. I. 
395. 
apy utkate ca raudre ca I. 78. Simpl. 
I. 103.· 
aprakatlkrtaêaktih Simpl. I. 31. 
apranäyyo 'tithih säyam I. 130. Simpl. 
I. 170. 
apradhänahpradhänah syätl. 17. Simpl. 
I. 34. 
apramddaê ca kartavyas I. 58. 
apräptakälam vacanam I. 23. Simpl. 
I. 63. 
apriyasyâpi vacasah I. 235. 
apriyäny api kurvâno I. 228. 
apriyäny api pathyäni Simpl. II. 161. 
abalah pronnatam, see yo 'balah pro". 
abhinava8evakavinayaihTH.yy&. Simpl. 
III. 119. 
ahhimatasiddhir asesä V. 30. Simpl. 
y. 30. 
abhiyukto balavatà durge III. 39. Simpl. 
III. 47. 
abhyaktam rahasi gatarn I. 24. 
abhyucchñte mantrini, see atyucchrite. 
abhracchâyâ khalapñtih, see meghac-
chäyä. 
amitram kurute f»itoraIII.198. Simpl. 
IV. 24. Cp. yo ' mitravi kurute mi. 
amrtam êiêire vahnir I. 98. Simpl. I. 
128. 
amrtasya pravähaih kirn Simpl. II. 57. 
amlhasâ ihidyate setus I. 76. Simpl. 
I. 102. 
ayarn dütärthasamktepah III. 78. 
ayam nijah paro veti Simpl. V. 38. 
ayaêah präpyate yena II. 95. Simpl. 
II. 108. 
araksitam tiithati daivaraksitam Simpl. 
I. 20, 323 ; Y. 44. 
araksitäram räjänam III. 65. Simpl. 
III. 75.' 
aranyaruditam krtam I. 245. 
arito 'bhyägato bhrtyo III. 208. 
araih samdhäryate näbhir Simpl. I. 81. 
*arthasyöpärjanam krtvä II. 133. 
Simpl. II. 122, 148. 
arthänäm aijane duhkham I. 123. 
Simpl. I. 163 ; II. 118. 
arthärtht jîvaloko 'yam Simpl. I. 9. 
arthârthl y ani kastäni Simpl. II. 119. 
arthena tu vihlnasya II. 71. Simpl. II. 
85. 
arthena balavän sarvo II. 69. Simpl. 
II. 83. 
arthebhyo 'pi hi vrddhebhyah Simpl. 1.6. 
arthair arthä nïbadhyante I. 3. 
alaktako yathä rakto Simpl. I. 145. 
alpe ca gunäh, see svalpe 'pi gunäh. 
avadhyam vâthavagamyam I. 354. 
Simpl. I. 369. 
avadhyo brahmano bâlah I. 156. Simpl. 
I. 201. 
avafyagaivaraih pränair I. 420. 
avasyam pitur äcäram, see yo 'vaêyam 
pitur. 
avaskandapradänasya III. 32. Simpl. 
III. 39. 
avidagclhasya bhaktasya, see visadig-
dhagya. 
aviditvâtmanah êaktim I. 193, 330. 
Simpl. I. 237, 325.' 
aviralam apy anubhütäh II. 180. 
aviruddham sukhastham yo Simpl. I. 
362. 
avisväsam gada tisthet III. 52. Simpl. 
III. 62. 
avyavasäyinam alasam II. 115. 
*avyäpäresu vyäpäram I. 8. Simpl. 
I. 21. 
aSaktair balinah satroh Simpl. I. 319. 
aéanâd indriyäntva Simpl. I. 8. 
amddhaprakrtau räjfii Simpl. I. 301. 
aêrnvann api boddhavyo I. 120. Simpl. 
I. 160. 
aSocyäniha bhütäni I. 337. Simpl. I. 
334. 

204 
Index 
of 
Stanzas 
aévah iastram êâstram I. 69,84. Simpl. 
1.110. 
asamêayam ksatraparigrahaksamä 1.211. 
asatäm sañgadosena Simpl. I. 251. 
osati bhavati salajjä Simpl. I. 418. 
asatyah satyasamkâsâh I. 439. 
asamdadhäno mänändhahlll.ll. Simpl. 
ΠΙ. 14. 
asamaih samiyamänah I. 62. Simpl. I. 
74. ' 
asampattau paro läbho Simpl. IJ. 176. 
asampräptarajä gauri III. 183. 
asahäyah samartho 'pi III. 48. 
Simpl. 
III. 56. 
asahyäny api sodhäni II. 101. 
asädhanä api prajüä, see asädhanä vit-
tahinä. 
asädhanä viUahmä II. 1. Simpl. II. 1. 
asädhyam êatrum älokya Simpl. III. 137. 
aham hi gammato räjüo Simpl. I. 279. 
ahimsäpürvako dharmo III. 94. Simpl. 
III. 104. 
ah i toh itavicâraêûnyabuddh eh 1.15. 
aho khalabhujahgasya Simpl. I. 305. 
äkärair iñgitair gatyä I. 21. 
Simpl. 
I. 44. 
âkirnah êobhate räjä I. 371. 
äkhetakam vrthâkleêam Simpl. I. 388. 
äkhetakasya dharmena Simpl. I. 129. 
Cp. päparddhivad adharmena. 
ägatam vigraham drstvä Simpl. III. 22. 
ägataJs ca gatas caîva IV. 32. 
Simpl. 
IY. 31, 36. 
âture vyasane präpte Simpl. Y. 41. 
ätmanah êaktim udvlksya 1.192. Simpl. 
I. 236. 
ätmano mukhadosena IV. 42. 
Simpl. 
IV. 44. 
ätmavargam parityajya, see tyaktâê ca-
hhyantarä yena. 
addν atyupacäracätuvinayä° I. 286. 
ädityacandräv añilo 'nalaé ca I. 141, 
395. 
Simpl. I. 182, 405. 
ädau citte tatah käye I. 126. Simpl. I. 
166. 
ädau na vdpramyinäm Simpl. I. 246. 
ädau säma prayoktavyam, see sâmmî-
vâdau. 
äpatkäle tu sampräpte Simpl. II. 112. 
äpadam präpnuyät svämt I. 300. Simpl. 
I. 292. 
äpadarthe dhanam raksed Simpl. I. 356 ; 
III. 86. 
äpadi yendpakrtam, faulty reading for 
äpadi yenôpa", q.y. 
äpadi yenôpakrtam I. 339 ; IV. 15. 
Simpl. I. 336; IV. 16. 
äpannäsäya vïbudhaih Simpl. II. 171. 
äpätamätrasaundaryam I. 388. 
äyäti skhalitaih pädair I. 152. Simpl. 
I. 198. 
âyâsaêatalabdhasya II. 126. 
äyuh karma ca vittam ca II. 64. 
ärädhyamäno nrpatih prayatnäd I. 273. 
äropyate 'émâ sailägram I. 19. 
ävartah samSayänäm I. 146. Simpl. I. 
19L 
äsanäc chayanäd yänät Simpl. IV. 65. 
äsane Sayane yäne III. 209. 
äsanmm eva nrpatir I. 28. 
Simpl. I. 
35. 
ästäm tävat kirn anyena IV. 48. Simpl. 
IV. 90. 
äharann api na svastho I. 265. 
iksor agrät kramaiah II. 31. 
icchati satï sahasram V. 62. 
Simpl. 
V. 82. 
itah sa daityah präptasfir Simpl. 1.245. 
istam dadäti grhnäti, see dadäti prati-
grhnäti. 
iha loke hi dhaninäm Simpl. I. 5. 
Isvarä bhüridänena 11.56. Simpl.II.67. 
ukto bhavati yah pûrvam 1.238. Simpl. 
I. 244, 422. 

Index of Stanzas 
205 
iicchedyam api vidvämso III. 53. Simpl. 
III. 63, 145. 
utksipya tittïbhah pâdau I. 329. Simpl. 
I. 314. Cp. svacittakalpito garvah. 
*uttamam pranipätena IY. 61. Simpl. 
IV. 109, 114. 
uttaräd uttaram väkyam I. 46. Simpl. 
I. 60. 
uttistha ksanarn ekam V. 18. 
uttisthamänas tu paro Simpl. I. 234. 
utpatato 'py antariksam II. 184. 
utpatanti y ad äkäse Simpl. II. 123. 
utsàhaiaktiyutavikrama II. 122. 
utsähasaktisampanno III. 23. 
Simpl. 
III. 30. 
utsähasampannam adírghasütramU.113. 
udirito 'rthah pa&unâpi grhyate I. 20. 
Simpl. I. 43. 
uddhrtesv api sastresu III. 79. 
udyatesv api êastresu, see uddhrtesv api. 
udyamena vinä räjan Simpl. II. 132. 
udyamena hi sidhyanti II. 139. Simpl. 
II. 131. 
udyoginam purusasimham upaiti laksmtr 
Simpl." I. 361; IL 130. 
•unnamyônmmya tairaíva II. 75. Simpl. 
II. 91. 
ujpakäräd dhi lokänäm II. 29. 
Simpl. 
II. 34. 
upakärisu yah sâdhuh IV. 60. Simpl. 
I. 247; IV. 108. ' 
upadempradätrnäm IV. 59. Simpl. IV. 
107. 
*upadeéo na dätavyo IV. 55. 
Simpl. 
I. 390 ; IV. 97, 101. 
upadeêo hi mürkhänäm Simpl. I. 389. 
upanatabhayair y o yo III. 202. 
upavistah salhämadhye Simpl. III. 109. 
*upâyam cintayed vidvân I. 393. Simpl. 
I. 406. 
upäyäiiäm ca sarvesäm Simpl. I. 12. 
upäyena jayo yädrg Simpl. I. 209. 
*upäyena hi tat kuryäd 1.159. Simpl. 
I. 207. 
upärjitänäm arthänäm I. 2. Simpl. II. 
150. 
upeksitah kñnahalo 'pi íatruh Simpl. I. 
235. 
uêanâ vetti yac chästram 1.142. Simpl. 
I. 185. 
üstnä hi vittajo vrddhim II. 52. Simpl. 
II. 64. 
rnaêesam agnisesam III. 219. 
Simpl. 
" Ili. 178. 
rtumatyäm tu tisthantyäm III. 187. 
ekam hanyän na vä hanyäd Simpl. I. 
206. 
eka eva hitärthäya III. 70. Simpl. III. 
80. 
ekam näma jadätmakasya I. 206. 
ekam aivänrte hanti, see panca paêvanrte 
hanti. 
ekam utkanthayâ vyäptam I. 199. 
ekam hhümipatih karoti I. 223. Simpl. 
I. 240. 
ekasthäne prasüte vag, see ekä prasüyate 
mätä. 
ekasya karma samvlksya Simpl. I. 342. 
ekasya janmano 'rthe I. 173. 
fekasya duhkhasya na yävad II. 185. 
Simpl. II. 175. 
f ekasyapy atither annam III. 147. 
ekah svädu na bhuñjlta Simpl. V. 103. 
ekäkini vanaväsiny I. 5. 
ekâkï grhasamtyaktah V. 11. 
Simpl. 
V. 15. 
ekä prasüyate mata IV. 6. 
Simpl. IV. 
5. 
ekena smitapätalädhararuco Simpl. I. 
136. 
ekendpi gumvatä Intr. Simpl. H 9,1 5. 
ekenapi sudhlrena IV. 37. Simpl. IV. 
41. 
ekesärn vóci sukavad anyesäm Simpl. I. 
62.' 

206 
Index of Stanzas 
*ekodaräk prthaggñw II. 6. Simpl. V. 
101, 102." 
eleo 'pi ko 'pi sevyo yah III. 62. 
eko bhävah sadä êasto III. 56. Simpl. 
III. 66. 
etadarthe kuUnänäm I. 305. Simpl. I. 
297. 
etäh svärthaparä näryah V. 50. Simpl. 
V. 65. 
età basanti ca rudanti ca 1.148. Simpl. 
I. 192. 
firandabhindärkanalaih Simpl. I. 96. 
f evam vilapya bahuêah III. 161. 
evam ca bhäsate lokaê Simpl. V. 20. 
evam, jüdtvä narendrena Simpl. I. 84. 
f evam uktvâ sa dharmätmä III. 150. 
evam manusyam apy ekam III. 47. 
Simpl. III. 55. 
fesa iäkunikah Sete III. 136. 
ehy ägaccha samäviSdsanam II. 48. 
Simpl. I. 253 ; II. 60. 
aiivaryavanto 'pi hi nirdhanäs te II. 164. 
autsukyagarbhä bhramatîva drstihïl. 182. 
ausadhärthasumantränäm Simpl. 1.203. 
hah kälah käni miträni I. 271. 
kaccid astâdaêanyesu, see ripor astäda-
iattäni. 
kantakasya ca bhagnasya I. 222. 
kathänvitam satkavi Prasasti 1. 
kanakabhüsaimsamgrahanßcito 
I. 63. 
Simpl. I. 75. ' 
kaplnäm vasaydSvänäm V. 59. Simpl. 
V. 79. 
fkapotadevä sury äsa, vol. xii, p. 49 ff. 
kamalamadhunas tyaktvâ I. 290. 
kampamänam adho 'veksi 1.153. Simpl. 
I. 199. 
kampah svedas tathâ Simpl. HI I. 187. 
learasädo 'mbaratyâgas I. 137. Simpl. 
I. 178. 
karnavisena ca bhagnah Simpl. I. 303. 
kartavyah pratidivasam prasannacittaih 
II. 160. 
kartavyam èva kartavyam I. 426. 
*kartavyäny eva miträni II. 169. 
kalahäntäni harmyäni V. 57. Simpl. 
V. 76. 
kalpayati yena vrttim I. 48. 
f kaêcit ksudrasamäcärah III. 121. 
käkamämsam tathócchùtam I. 302. 
Simpl. 1.294. 
käke Saucam dyütakäresu satyam I. 110. 
Simpl. Í. 147. 
käce manir manau käco Simpl. I. 77. 
kämavyäjam upetya, reading of Simpl. 
HI for dhyânavyâjam u. 
käyah samnihitâpâyah II. 194. Simpl. 
IL 177. 
käranän mitratâm eti 11.26. Simpl.II.31. 
kärunyam samvibhägaS ca II. 20. Simpl. 
IÍ. 24. 
kärkaSyam stanayor dríos I. 147. 
Simpl.'I. 190. 
kärttike vdtha caitre ca III. 31. Simpl. 
III. 38. 
käryagydpeksayäbhuktam&im\i\.Jin..\7Z. 
käryäkäryam anâryair I. 234. 
käryäny arthävamardena I. 224. 
kâryâny uttamadandasâhasaphalâny I. 
357. Simpl. 1.376. 
kälah samnihitâpâyah, see käyah tarn . 
kälätikramanam vrtter I. 116. Simpl. 
I. 154. 
kälindyäh pulinendranila I. 293. 
käle yathävad adhigata" I. 27. 
kälo hi sakrd abhyeti III. 117. 
kâvyaêâstravinodena II. 171. 
käst vivarjayec cauryam V. 38. Simpl. 
V. 52. 
kirn Sakyam sumatimatdpi taira II. 176. 
kirn aSakyam buddhimatäm I. 184. 
kim karisyati pändityam 1.384. Simpl. 
Ì. 394. 
kim karoty eva pändityam, see kim 
karisyati. 

Index of Stanzas 
207 
tkim krandasi niräkranda IV. 27. 
Simpl. IV. 29. 
kirn gajena prabhinnena I. 231. 
kirn candanaih sakarpürais II. 45. 
Simpl. II. 55. 
kim cintitena bahúna II. 153. 
kim tayá kriyate dhenvä Introd. 3. 
Simpl. Introd. 4. 
kim tayá kriyate laksmyä Simpl. II. 
134 ; Y. 37. 
kim tena jätw jätena Simpl. I. 26. 
kim paurusam raksati yena II. 167. 
kim bhaktenâsamarthena I. 72. Simpl. 
I. 97. 
kim bhäsitena gwrunä I. 322. 
kirïtamanicitresu Simpl. III. 150. 
'\kukrtam kuparijüätam V. 12. Cp. 
kudrstam ku. 
* kudrstam kuparijüätam V. 1. Simpl. 
V. 1, 17. Cp. kukrtam ku. 
kuputro 'pi bhavet pumsâm V. 14. 
Simpl. V. 19. 
kubjasya kltakhätasya II. 84. Simpl. 
II.89. 
kurvanti tâvat prathamam Simpl. I. 
193. 
kurvann api vyallkäni, see anekadom-
dusto 'pi. 
kurvan hi vaitaslm vrttim, see kramät 
vaitasa". 
kulam ca éìlqm ca III. 191. Simpl. 
IV. 71. 
ktilapatanamjanagarhâm 1.135. Simpl. 
I. 176. 
kûtalekhyair dhanotsargair Simpl. III. 
138. 
kûrmasamkocam âsâdya III. 17. Simpl. 
III. 21. 
krtaniêcayino vandyâs II. 146. Simpl. 
II. 142. 
krtaêatam asatsu nastam I. 243. 
krtântapâéabaddhânâm II. 4. Simpl. 
II. 5, 172 ; III. 169. 
krtântavihitam karma I. 380. 
Jcrtâ bhiksâ rekair vitarati Simpl. I. 11 
' (om. HI). 
krtï kasya budhah ko 'tra, see tasyäh krte. 
krtepratikrtam kuryäd V. 64. Simpl. 
' V. 84. ' 
*krte viniécaye pumsäm I. 196. 
krtyam devadvijätmäm III. 55. Simpl. 
III. 65. 
krtyäkrtyam na many eta Simpl. I. 277. 
krtrimam näSam äyäti II. 25. Simpl. 
' II. 30. 
krtvä krtyávidos tlrthair Simpl. III. 71. 
krtvdparädham nastak san I. 355. 
krtsnäm api dharämjitvä II. 108. 
krpano 'py akullno 'pi,see virüpo'pyaku . 
krmayo bharnna visthâ vâ I. 351. 
ke nâma na vinaêyanti Simpl. IV. 86. 
kelih pradahati majjâm Simpl. I. 175. 
kevalam vyasanasyôktam Simpl. II. 181. 
ko gatvä yamasadanam I. 320. 
ko grhnäti phanamanim I. 316. 
ko 'tibhärah samarthänäm I. 22. Simpl. 
II. 51, 121. 
ko dhîrasya manasvinahïï. 111. Simpl. 
II. 120. 
kopaprasädavastüni 1.29. Simpl. I. 36. 
ko 'rthän präpya na garvito I. 109. 
Simpl. I. 146. 
ko vâ tasya manasvino, see ko dhîrasya 
ma. 
kosaksayo na nidrâ ca Simpl. III. 128. 
kauêeyam krmijam suvarnam I. 70. 
Simpi. I. 94. 
kramät vaitasavrttis tu III. 16. Simpl. 
III. 20. 
kriyâdhikam vä vacanädhikam vâ I. 55. 
kriyäsu yuktair nrpa cäracaksuso I. 236. 
krüro lubdho 'laso 'satyah III. 20. 
Simpl. III. 26. 
klibe dhairyam, see kâke êaucam. 
kleêasyâmgam adattvâ V. 31. Simpl. 
V. 32. 
kva gato mrgo na jïvati I. 163. 
kva sa daiarathah svarge bhûtvâJïL. 232. 

208 
Index of Stanzas 
ksanikäh sarvasamskärä I. 208. 
ksate prahäräh prapatanti II. 186. 
' Simpl. II. 178; HI also IV. 88. 
ks&ntitulyam tapo ndsti II. 162. 
lesinali gravati Simpl. HI V. 76. 
ksïyate nópabhogena II. 191. 
*ksudram arthapatim pjräpya III. 81. 
Simpl. III. 91, 110. 
ksemyäm sasyapradäm nityam Simpl. 
' III. 85. 
khanann äkhubilam simhah III. 13. 
Simpl. III. 17. ' 
gaganam iva nasfatäram Simpl. V. 6. 
gaccha düram api yatra nandasi I, 430. 
gajabhujamgamayor api, see raviniSäka 
gajavihamgabltujamga", see Saêidivâka-
rayor. 
gandasthale madakalo, and gandastha-
lesu, see gallasthalesu. 
gandopänte suciranihhrtam, see gallo-
panie. 
gatavayasäm api pumsäm II. 105. 
Simpl. I. 10. 
gandhena gävahpafyanti HI. 58. Simpl. 
III. 67. 
g argo hi pädasaucäl Simpl. IV. 47 (om. 
HI). 
gallasthalesu madavärisu Simpl. I. 123. 
[gandasthalesu HI.) 
gallopänte suciranïbhrtam I. 291. 
gaväm arthe brähmanärthe Simpl. 1.205. 
gavärthe brähmanärthe ca Simpl. I. 420 ; 
II. 104. 
*gaväianänäm sa vacali êrnoti I. 417. 
gätram samkucitam gatir III. 169. 
Simpl. IV. 78. " 
gltaêâstravinodena> see kävya. 
gunavattarapätrena Simpl. I. 287. 
gumvanmitranâêena II. 38. 
gunavän apy asanmantñ I. 370. Simpl. 
I. 384. 
gunâlayo 'py asanmantrî,eeegumvân apy. 
•\gunah samkhyäparityaktäs II. 47. 
Simpl. II. 59. 
guniganagananärambhe Simpl., H Intr. 7, 
I Intr. 3. 
gunesu rägo vyasanesv anädaro III. 229. 
gurur agnir dvijätinäm I. 257. 
gurmakatadhuramdharas I. 16. 
gurünäm nämamätre 'pi III. 71. Simpl. 
III. 81. 
guror apy avaliptasya I. 169. Simpl. 
I. 306. 
guroh sutäm mitrabhäryäm II. 94. 
Simpl. II. 107. 
grdhräkäro 'pi sevyah syäd Simpl. I. 
302. 
fgrdhrendpahrtam märnsam IV. 51. 
Simpl. TV. 93. 
grham êatrum api präptam, Simpl. 1.289. 
grhaksetravivädesu III. 84. 
grhamadhyanikhätena Simpl. II. 149. 
grhl yaträgatam drstvä, see y ai cagate 
präghumke. 
gopälena prajädhenor Simpl. II. 218. 
gosthikakarmaniyuktah V. 23. Simpl. 
"i. 15. 
gräsäd ardham api gräsam II. 55. 
Simpl. II. 66. 
grlsmätapatapto 'pi hi I. 317. 
*catikä kästhakütena I. 335. Simpl. 
Í. 332. 
catuhkarno 'pi Simpl. HI I. 96. 
caturthopäyasädhye tu III. 21. Simpl. 
III. 27, 135. 
catväriha sahasräni Prasasti 7. 
candanatarusu bhujamgä I. 277. 
candanäd api sambhüto I. 399. 
calaty ekena pädena I. 77. 
cätataskaradurvrttais Simpl. I. 343. 
cäranair vandibhir iñcair Y. 51. Simpl. 
Y. 66. 
*citikâm, dïpitâm paêya III. 118. 
citracâtukarair bhrtyair I. 377. Simpl. 
I. 385. 

Index of Stanzas 
209 
citrasvâdukathair, see citracätukarair. 
citräsvädakathair, see citracätukarair. 
dram dugdho 'nadvân I. 246. 
châyâsuptamrgah éakunta° II. 2. Simpl. 
II. 2. 
chittvä pâêam apâsya kûta 
II. 67. 
Simpl. II. 81. 
chidresv anarthâ bahatibhavanti, p. 251,2. 
jananîmano harati jätavatl I. 213. 
janitä copanetä ca Simpl. IV. 66. 
*\jambuko hudayuddhena I. 122, 155. 
Simpl. I. 162. 
jayanti te jinäh, see te jayunti, 
jalpanti särdham anyena I. 105. Simpl. 
I. 135. 
jätah putro 'nujâtaê ca I. 385. 
jätamätram na yah Satrum I. 191. 
Simpl. i. 233, 364 ; III. 3. 
jâtasya nadltlre Simpl. I. 28. 
jâtêti kanyä mahatîha cintä I. 212. 
jänann api naro daivât IV. 31. Simpl. 
IV. 35. 
jälam ädäya gacchanti Simpl. II. 8. 
Cp. samhatäs tu harantîme. 
jikvä laulyaprd Simpl. II. 3. 
jiryanti jiryatah keêâ V. 63. 
Simpl. 
V. 16, 83. 
jwanto 'pi mrtäh panca I. 264. Simpl. 
I. 266. 
jivan naro bhadrasatänipasyati,p. 254,14. 
jivêti prabruvan proktah I. 37. Simpl. 
I. 53. 
jnänam cakmr na tu drk II. 96. 
jnänam madadarpaharam I. 368. 
jnânam madopaiamanam, see madädiksä-
lanam Sästram. 
jväläiataruddhämlaram I. 321. 
f tatas tarn luldhako drstvä III. 151. 
ttatas tadvacanam Srutvä III. 141. 
f tatah samtrastahrday ah III. 126. 
ttato divyämbaradharä III. 162. 
f tato yastim Saläkäm ca III. 157. 
f tat tathä sädhayämy etac III. 148. 
tat te yuktam prabho karturn, see tatra 
yuktam pra°. 
ftatra taptvä tapo ghoram vol. xii, 
p. 50. 
f tatra dävänalam drstvä III. 165. 
tatra yuktam prabho karturn, III. 34. 
Simpl. III. 42. 
tadartham ca kullnänäm, see etadarthe 
ku. 
tad daivam iti samcintya, see na daivarn 
iti samcintya, 
tanavo 'py äyatä nityam Simpl. II. 7. 
f tapas tepe tato varsa vol. xii, p. 46. 
tayä gavä kim, see kirn tayá kriyate. 
talavad dfsyate vyoma I. 438. 
f tasmät tvam dvesarn utsrjya III. 140. 
tasmät sarvaprayatnena trivarga III. 
210. 
tasmät sarvaprayatnena nämdpi IV. 46. 
Simpl. IV. 85. 
tasmät syät kalaho yatra V. 56. Simpl. 
V. 75. 
tasmäd ekäntam äsädya Simpl. III. 7. 
tasmäd durgam drdham krtvä III. 42. 
Simpl. III.' 51. 
tasmäd vivähayet kanyäm III. 185. 
f tastnän na socämi p. 151,10 and päda 3 
of II. 93. 
Simpl. II. 105, päda 3, 
and p. 25,17. 
tasmän na syät phalarn yatra III. 14. 
Simpl. III. 18. 
tasya katham na calä Simpl. V. 33. 
ftasya tadvacanam êrutvâ III. 143. 
tasyäh krte ludhah ko nu II. 109. 
todita api dandena Simpl. IV. 89. 
tädito 'pi durukto 'pi Simpl. I. 89. 
tänindriyäny avikaläni II. 81. 
Simpl. 
V. 26. ' 
tävaj janmapi duhkhäya I. 263. Simpl. 
I. 265. 
tävat prttir lhavel loke II. 41. 
Simpl. 
II. 47. 
E e 

210 
Index of Stanzas 
tävat syät sarvakrtyesu II. 147. Simpl. 
II. 143. 
tävat syät suprasannäsyas, see tävad eva 
pradhänam syät. 
tävad evapradhänam syät V. 49. Simpl. 
V. 64. 
tävad bhayasya bhetavyam I. 170. 
täsäm väkyäni krtyäni Simpl. I. 140. 
ftiraêcâm api yatrêdrk II. 199. 
tiryañcam purusam 
vdpi III. 106. 
Simpl. III. 116.' 
tisthan yo madhyago nityam, III. 43. 
Simpl. III. 52. 
t ist ken madhyagato nityam and tisthed 
yo madhyago, see tisthan yo madhyago 
nityam. 
•jftisrah kotyo 'rdhakotl ca III. 164. 
tiksnopäyapräptigamyo III. 223. 
*tuläm lohasahasrasya I. 404, 409. 
Simpl. I. 409, 414. 
tulyärtham tulyasämarthyam Simpl. I. 
248. 
trnâni nônmûlayati pra I. 94. 
Simpl. 
' I. 122. 
trnâni bhumir udakam I. 131. 
Simpl. 
' I. 171. 
trsne devi ñamas tubhyam II. 99. Simpl. 
V. 81 (cp. lobhäd eva narä müdhä). 
te jayanti jinä yesäm V. 9. 
Simpl. 
V. 12. 
te dhanyäs te vivekajñás Simpl. I. 
262. 
tempi ca varo datto I. 190. 
Simpl. I. 
231. 
*tyaktäs cdbhyantarâ yena I. 260. 
Simpl. I. 259. 
tyajanti mitrâni dhanena hinam II. 106. 
tyajet ksudhärtä, see bubhuksìtah kirn na. 
tyajed ekam kulasydrthe Simpl. I. 355 ; 
III. 84.' 
tyägini iure vidusi ca III. 222. 
tyäjyam na dhairyam Simpl. I. 316. 
trayah sthänam na muñcanti I. 160. 
ftvayä saha mayâvaSyam I. 282. 
damstràvirahitah sarpo II. 70. 
Simpl. 
I. 232; II. 12,84; III. 49. 
daksinädisamrddhasya Simpl. III. 156. 
dandam muktvä nrpo yo 'nyän Simpl. 
III." 146. 
dattvä tän eva yäcanti, see dätäro 'py 
atra yäcante. 
dattvdpi kanyakäm vaifi Simpl. I. 276. 
dattvä yäcanti purusä, see dätäro 'py 
atra yäcante. 
dadäti pratigrhnäti II. 39; IV. 11. 
Simpl. II. 45; IV. 12. 
dadyät sädhur y adi nijapode Simpl. I. 
366. 
dantasya niskosanakena räjan I. 59. 
Simpl. I. 71. ' 
dayitajanaviprayogo II. 179. 
Simpl. 
II. 174. 
darsitabhaye 'pi dhätari I. 79. 
Simpl. 
I. 104. 
dätäro 'py atra yäcante II. 117. 
dätä laghur api sevyo Simpl. II. 68. 
dänarn bhogo näSas tisro Simpl. II. 151. 
dänena tulyo nidhir asti nânyah II. 131. 
Simpl. II. 158. 
f däridryarogaduhkhäni III. 139. 
däridryasya parä mürtir Simpl. II. 159. 
däridryät purusasya bändhava° II. 78. 
däridryäd dhriyam eti, see nirdravyo 
hriyam eti. 
däresu kimcit purusasya I. 74. 
Simpl. 
1.100.' 
tdävägnineva nirdagdhä III. 134. 
diksu bhümau tathakäie I. 207. 
duhkham ätmä paricchettum I. 323. 
duradhigamah parabhägo 1.333. Simpl. 
I. 330 ; V. 34. 
durärädhyäh êriyo r&jhâm Simpl. I. 67. 
durärädhyä hi räjänah Simpl. I. 64. 
duräroham padam räjnäm Simpl. I. 66. 
durgam trikütah parikhä Simpl. V. 90. 
durgasthä api vadhyante Simpl. III. 144. 
durjanagamyä näryah I. 272. 
Simpl. 
I. 278. 

Index of Stanzas 
211 
durjanah prakrtim yäti I. 240. 
durdivase ghanatimire III. 177. Simpl. 
IV. 53. (Cp. the following stanza.) 
durdivase 'sitapakse I. 133. 
Simpl. I. 
173. (Cp. the preceding stanza.) 
durmanträn nrpatir vinasyati I. 129. 
Simpl. I. 169. 
durmantrinam kam upayänti III. 211. 
Simpl. HI III. 160. 
durlabhâ strîva cittena Simpl. III. 149. 
dustabuddhir abuddhiê ca and dusta-
buddhir dharmabuddhir, see dharma-
buddhir abuddhis ca. 
duspräpyäni bahüni Simpl. V. 28. 
dûtam va lekham va III. 75. 
düta èva hi samdadhyâd III. 76. 
düramärgasramasräntam, see dûrâydtam. 
dürasthänäm avidyânâm Simpl. IV. 72. 
dürasthäm api yena paíyasi I. 205. 
düräd ucchritapänir ärdra I. 285. 
düräyätam pathaérântam IV. 4. Simpl. 
IV. 4." 
•fdevo 'pi tam laûghayitum, p. 151,8 and 
pâda 2 of II. 93. 
Simpl. II.. 106, 
pâda 2, and p. 25,16. 
desam kälam käryam I. 258. 
desam utsrjyajlvanti, see trayak sthänam 
na muñcanti. 
deiänäm, upari ksmäpä I. 117. Simpl. 
I. 155. 
desäntaresu bahuvidhabhäsa Simpl. I. 
397. 
dainyasya pätratäm eti Simpl. II. 97. 
daivavamd upapanne I, 4. 
dosarti arito janah krtsnam Simpl, III. 
163. 
daurgatyam dehinäm duhkham Simpl. 
II. 96. ' 
daurbhägyäyatanam dhiyo II. 85. 
dyütam yo yamadwtabham 1.45. Simpl. 
I. 58. 
dravyaprakrtihïno 'pi 1.33. Simpl. 1.48. 
dvandvaläpasabhesaja I. 25. 
dväv upäyäv iha proktau Simpl. II. 163. 
dvigwmm trigunam vìttam V. 26. Simpl. 
I. 18.' 
dvijihvam udvegakaram I. 397. 
dvidhäkäram bhaved yänam III. 30. 
Simpl. III. 37. 
dvipähvisasimMgni0 I. 364. 
dvisaddvesaparo nityam I. 42. 
Simpl. 
I. 57. 
dvisähvüasimkägni", see dvipäSlvisa\ 
dvlpäd anyasmäd api II. 154. 
dvesidvesaparo nityam, see dvisaddvesa-
paro nityam. 
fdvaidhlbhävasamsritas tvam III. 57. 
dhanadasya tathaîva vajrimh I. 433. 
dhanavân duskwlmo 'pi II. 104. 
dhanavän matimän kim, see sadhana 
iti ko. 
dhanädikesu vidyante Simpl. HI II. 
132. 
dhanyäs tâta napaíyantiTLAS (seepa,ra-
hastagatäm bhäryäm). Simpl. V. 78. 
dhanyâs te ye na, see dhanyäs tata na. 
*dharmabuddhir abuddhiS ca I. 389. 
Simpl. I. 396. 
dharmasatyavihlnena III. 19. 
Simpl. 
III. 25. 
dharmârtham yatatâm apîha Simpl. I. 
371. 
dharmârtham yasya vittehâ Simpl. II. 
157. 
dharsamm marsayed yo 'tra V. 60. 
Simpl. V. 80." 
dhavaläny ätapaträni Simpl. I. 42. 
dhairyam hi käryam satatam I. 216. 
dhyänavyäjam upetya Simpl. V. 14. 
na kasyacit kaScid iha 1.18. 
f na käryam adya me nätha III. 159. 
*f na kim dadyänna kim kuryât IV. 41. 
na kuryän naranäthasya I. 43. 
na kaullnyän na sauhärdän Simpl. 1.116. 
nakrah svasthänarm äsädya III. 38. 
Simpl. III. 46. 

212 
Index of Stanzas 
na ksudhä pidyate yas tu Simpl. I. 90. 
nakhinäm ca nadlnäm ca I. 52. 
na gajänäm sahasrena I. 187. 
Simpl. 
I. 228; II. 13. 
na garvam kurute mäne Simpl. HI 1.88. 
f na grham grham ity ahur III. 130. 
Simpl. W . 81. 
na gopradänam na mahipraäänam 1.298. 
Simpl. I. 290. 
*nagnah êravanako dagdhah I. 378. 
na ca cchidram vinâ Satrur Simpl. III. 
124. 
na candrena na causadhyä Simpl. 1.380. 
na ca svalpakrte bhüri, see na sa sval-
pakrte bhüri. 
na jätu samanam yasya, see prayäty 
upaêamam. 
na tac chastrair na nägendrair Simpl. I. 
124. 
na tat svarge 'pi saukhyam syäd Simpl. 
V. 49. 
\na tathä karinä yänam III. 214. 
na tathä bädhyate loke II. 74. 
Simpl. 
II. 88. 
na tädrg jäyate saukhyam III. 82. 
Simpl. III. 92. 
na tän sutlrthais tapasä, see yân yajña-
samghais tapasä ca lokän. 
na te kimcid akartavyam II. 100. 
na tv avijñdtasilasya, see na hy avi-
jüäta". 
na dadäti yo na bhuñkte II. 127. 
na dänatulyo vidhir asti, see dänena 
tulyo. 
nadïnâm ca kulänäm ca Simpl. IV. 49. 
na dirghadarUno yasya III. 196. Simpl. 
III. 167. 
va durjano vairarn itiprakupyati I. 239. 
na devä yastim ädäya Simpl. III. 182. 
(See the following stanza.) 
na deväh sastram ädäya Simpl. III. 183. 
(See the preceding stanza.) 
na daivam iti samcintya II. 145. Simpl. 
II. 140. 
*na püjayati yo garväd I. 100. Simpl. 
I. 130. 
na prcched gotracaranam IV. 3. Simpl. 
IV. 3. 
na prajnayä visärinyä, see prajñayati-
visärinyä. 
na badhyante hy avihastä 1.88. Simpl. 
I. 114; II. 40. 
na bhaktyä kasyacit ko 'pi 1.407. Simpl. 
I. 412. 
riamati 
vidhivat 
pratyutthänam 
I. 
287. 
na, mawusyaprakrtinâ I. 431. 
fna mayä tava hastägram II. 54. 
na mätari na dar em II. 190. 
tna me dhanur ndpi ca II. 60. 
na yajñasamghair api, see na tän sutlr-
thais tapasä. 
na yajväno 'pi gacchanti I. 308. Simpl. 
I. 300. 
na y atra inky ate kartum IV. 62. Simpl. 
IV. 11. 
na yatrasti gatir väyo V. 35. 
Simpl. 
V. 48. 
na yasya cestitamvidyän I. 261. Simpl. 
I. 261. 
na yasya Sakyate kartum, see na yatra 
êakyate kartum. 
nayâd apetam pravadanti yuddham I. 
434. 
na yojanasatam düram II. 98. 
narakäya matis te cet II. 51. 
Simpl. 
II. 63. 
narapatihitakartä dvesyatäm I. 101. 
Simpl. I. 131. 
naränäm näpito dhürtah III. 66. Simpl. 
III. 76. 
narädhipä nicamatänuvartino I. 369. 
Simpl. I. 383. 
narendrä bhüyistham gunavati I. 294. 
na vadhyate hy aviívasto and na va-
dhyante hy a", see na badhyante hy a . 
navanltasamäm vänlm I. 394. 
Simpl. 
I. 407. 

Index 
of 
Stanzas 
213 
na vittam darsayet prájñah Simpl. I. 
400. 
na vinâ pärthivo bhrtyair 1.68. Simpl. 
I. 79. 
na vibhâvyante laghavo V. 6. 
Simpl. 
V, 7. 
na viSvaset pürvav ir od h ìtasya III. 1. 
Simpl. III. 1. 
na viévased avisvaste IV. 12. 
Simpl. 
II. 39 ; IY. 13. 
na visväsam vinä Satrur II. 33. 
Simpl. 
I. 115; II. 33. 
na êailaSrhge kamalam prarohati I. 278. 
naSyati vipulamater api, see vipulamater 
api naêyati. 
naêyanti gunä guninäm I. 242. 
nastam apôtre dänam I. 244. 
nastam mrtam atikräntam 1.336. Simpl. 
Ï. 333. 
na sa svalpakrte bhüri IV. 25. 
Simpl. 
I. 19. 
na sä vidyä m tad dänam Simpl. I. 4. 
f na sä strîty abhimantavyä III. 133. 
na suvarnam na ratnäni Simpl. IV. 74. 
na so 'sti puruso räjüäm I. 226. Simpl. 
I. 241. 
na smaranty aparädhänäm I. 279. 
na svalpam apy adhyavasäyabhiroh II. 
116. 
na svalpasya krte bhüri, see na sa svalpa-
krte bhüri. 
na hi tad vidyate kimcid V. 19. Simpl. 
I. 2. 
na hi bhavati yan na bhâvyam II. 8,134. 
Simpl. II. 9, 124. 
na hi visvasamyam syät III. 87. 
*na hy avijnätaslläya I. 256. 
Simpl. 
I. 252. 
*fndkasmäc chändillmätä II. 53. Simpl. 
II. 65, 78. 
ndgnis trpyati kästhänäm 1.106. Simpl. 
I. 137. 
ndcchädayati kauplnam III. 89. Simpl. 
III. 97. 
ndjnätabalawryesu I. 57. 
natipraswhgah pramadäsu kâryo I. 144. 
Simpl. I. 187. 
nâtyuccam meruSikharam II. 123. 
*nanämyam nämyate däru 1.383. Simpl. 
I. 386. ' 
ndnyad gltäd varam loke V. 43. Simpl. 
V. 57. 
naprstas tasya tad brüyäd, see aprstas 
tasya tad brüyäd. 
ndbhaksyam bhaksayet präjüaA I. 304. 
Simpl. I. 296. 
ndbhiseko na samskärah I. 6. 
nabhyutthänakriyäyatra II. 50. Simpl. 
II. 62. 
ndmrtam na visam kimcid IV. 29. Simpl. 
IV. 32. 
navidagdhah priyam 
brüyät II. 37. 
Simpl. I. 164. (Cp. nihsprho nddhi-
kärl syän.) 
näsayitum eva nícah I. 366. 
Simpl. I. 
363, 382. 
naSnäti sevayautswkyäd Simpl. I. 267. 
nasäm kascid agamyo 'sti Simpl. 1.143. 
nasty ärogyasamam mitram I. 161. 
niksepe grhapatite V. 22. Simpl. 1.14. 
nijasthänasthito 'py ekah III. 41. Simpl. 
III. 50. 
nityam narendrabhavane I. 26. 
nityodyatasya purusasya bhaved 1.195. 
nipänam iva mandükäh II. 112. 
nimittam uddisya hi yah prakupyati I. 
274. 
Simpl. I. 283." 
niratiSayam garimänam Simpl. 1.30. 
nirodhäc cetaso 'ksäni Simpl. II. 154. 
nirdosam api vittddhyam Simpl. II. 117. 
nirdravyo hriyam, eti II. 86. 
nirviéesam yadä sväml I. 66. 
Simpl. 
I. 78. ' 
nirvisendpi 
sarpena Simpl. I. 204 ; 
III.87. 
•fniscityaprathamäm väcam Simpl. III.3. 
nistabdham hrdayam krtvä, see nistrim-
êam hrdayam, krlvä. 

214 
Index of Stanzas 
nistrimêam hrdayam krtvâ 1.352. Simpl. 
I.367.' 
nihsarpe baddhasarpe va III. 226. 
nihuprho nadhikäri syän I. 124. (Cp. 
nâvidagdhah priyarn brüyat.) 
f mtiícustmrthatattvajño III. 73. 
nünam tasyâsyapute I. 401. 
^nünam mama nrsamsasya III. 154. 
nrpah kämäsakto ganayati na I. 253. 
nrpadlpo dhanasnekam I. 180. 
Simpl. 
' I. 221. 
naîtan mitram yasya kopäd I. 209. 
f naiva kascit suhrt tasya III. 122. 
nónmayükhena ratnena I. 360. 
nópakaram vinä prUih II. 40. 
Simpl. 
II. 46.' 
panca paêvanrte hanti III. 98. 
Simpl. 
III. 108. ' 
pancâsïtyadhikam hy etad V. 42. Simpl. 
V. 56. 
fpañjarasthá tatah êrutvâ III. 132. 
patur iha purusah paräkrame II. 120. 
*pandito 'pi varam Satmr I. 418, 421. 
Simpl. I. 417. ' 
panyânâm gândhikam panyam Y. 24. 
Simpl. I. 13. 
patati kadäcin nabhasah V. 29. Simpl. 
Y. 29. 
\pativratä patipränä III. 131. 
paradesabhayâd bhïtâ Simpl. I. 321. 
paradosakathävicaksanah I. 400. 
paraparivädah parisadi III. 102. 
*parasparasya marmäni III. 172. 
*parasyapl(lanatri kurvan 1.353. Simpl. 
I. 368. 
parahastagatäm bhäryäm V. 58. (See 
dhanyäs täta na paiyanti.) 
paräkramaparämarsa Simpl. III. 152. 
parähmukhe 'pi daive 'tra Simpl. 1.360. 
parärimukhe vidhau pummm II. 9. 
Simpl. II. 10. 
paricitam ägacchantam Simpl. I. 16. 
parivartini samsäre Simpl. I. 27. 
partise hiíam anvesyam I. 372. 
paresäm, ätmanas caiva III. 80. 
parokse gwmhantäram I. 284. 
fparjanyasya yathä 
dhärä II. 46. 
Simpl. II. 58. 
parnaSabdam api êrutvâ Simpl. III. 132. 
paryañkesv ästaranam I. 134. 
Simpl. 
I. 174. 
•fparyatan prthivim sarvârn I. 281. 
paryanto labhyate bkümeh I. 95. 
paiya 
karmavaêât präptam II. 138. 
Simpl. II. 129. 
paêya dänasya mähätmyam Simpl. II. 48. 
pädähato 'pi drdhadanda" Simpl. I. 304. 
päparddhivad adharmena I. 99. 
Cp. 
âkhetakasya dharmena. 
pitâ va y adi vä bkrätä I. 428. 
Simpl. 
I. 423. 
pìtur grhem and pìtur grhe tu, see pitr-
veSmani yà kanyà. 
pitrpaitämaham sthänam Simpl. I. 365. 
pitrveêmani yâ katvyâ III. 188. 
pltam durgandhi toyam II. 102. 
pîyûsam iva samtosam Simpl. II. 153. 
pumsäm asamarthänäm Simpl. I. 324. 
puträd api priyataram Simpl. II. 49. 
punah pratyupakâr&ya Simpl. I. 338. 
pura guroh sa I. 189. 
Simpl. I. 230. 
puläkä iva dhänye&u III. 90. 
Simpl. 
III. 98. 
püjyate yad apüjyo 'pi Simpl. I. 7. 
pwjyo bandhur api priyo I. 230. 
pürnäpürne V. 21 (HI V. 20). 
*fpùrvam tävad aham mürkho III. 193. 
*pürvam èva maya jñátam 1.82. Simpl. 
I. 108. 
pürve vayasi yah iäntak, see prathame 
vayasi. 
*prcchakena soda bMvyamV. 70. Simpl. 
V. 93, 94. 
prstäprstä narendrena I. 437. 
paisunyamätrakusalah I. 422. 
paulastyah katham any add" II. 3. Simpl. 
II. 4. 

Index of Stanzas 
215 
*pracchannam 
kila bhoktavyam 
I . 3 4 4 . 
prajä na rañjayed y an tu I I I . 2 2 8 . 
ρrajänäm dharmasadbhägo 
Simpl.1.344. 
prajänäm 
pälanam 
éasyam Simpl. I. 
217. ' 
prajäpldanasamtäpät 
Simpl. I. 345. 
prajüaydtivuärinyä 
I . 3 8 7 . 
praiwmya 
vighnahantäram 
Simpl. H, 
Intr. 3 (om. I). 
•j;pratäpayasva viêrabdham 
I I I . 1 4 5 . 
pratidinam upaiti vilayam V. 4. Simpl. 
V. 4. 
pratidivasam yäti layarn, see pratidinam, 
upaiti vilayam. 
pratyaksam yasya y ad bhuktam 
I I I . 8 5 . 
Simpl. III. 94. 
pratyaksaram pratipadam Prasasti 3. 
*pratyakse 
'pi krte pape 
I I I . 
1 7 4 . 
Simpl.' IY. 48, 54. 
pratyantaram 
na punar Prasasti 6. 
pratyâdistah purusas I . 2 5 4 . 
pratyäsattim wajati pur uso I . 2 6 9 . 
praihame 
vayasi yah 
êântah 
I . 
1 2 5 . 
Simpl. I. 165. 
prabhuprasädajam 
vittam 1.38. Simpl. 
I. 54. 
prabhoh 
prasädam 
amyasya 
Simpl. I. 
286.' 
pramänäd 
adhikasyapi Simpl. I. 327 ; 
III.' 29. 
pramänäbhyadhikasydpi, 
see 
pramänäd 
adhikasyapi. 
pramädinäm 
tathä eaurä 1.118. Simpl. 
I. 156. ' 
prayäty upaSamam yasya III. 26. Simpl. 
III. 33. 
praviralam, see aviralam. 
prasannavadano 
hrstah I. 154. Simpl. 
1.200. 
prasarati matih käryärambhe 
I I I . 2 2 1 . 
Simpl. III. 180. 
präjäpatye éakate Ihinne Simpl. I. 212. 
präjüaih snigdhair upakrtam, 
see bhäva· 
snigdhair u°. 
pränavad 
raksayed bhrlyän, see raksed 
bhrtyän yathä 
pränän. 
pränavyaye samutpanne II. 174. Simpl. 
II. 168. 
prätmtyaye samutpanne, 
see 
prämvyaye. 
*präptam artham tu y o mohät I V . 1. 
präptavidyärthaSilpänäm, Simpl. 1.399. 
*-fpräptavyam 
artham 
labhate I I . 9 3 ; 
päda 1 also pp. 147,10. 21 ; 149,9.15 ; 
150,1; 151,6. 
Simpl. II. 105,106, 
109 ; päda 1 also pp. 23,6 ; 24,6.10. 
18; 25,1 S. 
präptavyo niyatibalâsrayena I I . 1 5 2 . 
präpte bhaye paritränam, 
see éokârati-
bhayatrânam. 
präpto bandhamm 
apy ayam Simpl. II. 
184. 
präyendtra kulänvitam kukulajäh I . 4 1 0 . 
Simpl. I. 415. 
prärabhyate 
na 
khalu 
vighnabhayena 
Simpl. III. 177. 
prâleyaleSamiêre I . 3 1 8 . 
prähuh säptapadam maitram Simpl. IV. 
106. 
priyam va y adi vä dvesyam, see priyo vä. 
priyä hitâé ca ye räjnäm 
I . 3 1 . 
priyo vä yadi vä dvesyo IV. 2. Simpl. 
IV. 2 ; HI also Í. 225. 
prltim nirantaräm brtvä II. 42. Simpl. 
II.50. 
prerayatipararti anäryah I . 2 5 5 . 
proktah pratyuttaram nâha I . 3 9 . 
phalahlnam 
nrpam 
bhrtyâh 
I . 
1 1 4 . 
Simpl. Ï. 152. ' 
phalärthl nrpatir lokân 1.178. 
Simpl. 
I. 220, 347. 
phalärthl pärthivo lokän, see phalärthl 
nrpatir lokän. 
balavantam ripum drstvä III. 36. Simpl. 
I. 311 ; III. U, 127. 
balindpi na bädhyawte III. 44. 
Simpl. 
III. 53. 

216 
Index of Stanzas 
Ialina saha yoddhavyam III. 18. Simpl. 
III. 23. 
balîyasâ samäkränto III. 15. Simpl. 
III. 19. 
balïyasâ hlnabalo virodham III. 115. 
Simpl. III. 126. 
balïyasi pranamatäm III. 5. Simpl. 
III. 8. 
balotkatena dustena III. 29. Simpl. 
111.36. 
balopapanno 'pi hi III. 101. Simpl. 
III. 113. 
*bahavah panditäh ksudräh I. 297. 
Simpl. 1.288. 
*bahavo na viroddhavyä III. 109. 
bahavo 'balavantaê ca, see bahubuddhi". 
bahudhä bahubhih gärdham III. 67. 
Simpl. III. 77.' 
*bahubuddhisamäyuktähIII.104. Simpl. 
III. 114,118. 
bahünäm apy asäränäm I. 334. Simpl. 
I. 331. 
bälasyapi raveh pâdâk I. 331. Simpl. 
I. 328. 
buddhimän anuralcto 'yarn I. 64. 
buddhir yasya balam tasya, see yasya 
buddhir ba". 
buddhir y à sattvarahitä I. 363. 
buddher buddhimatäm loie Simpl. V. 47. 
buddhau kalusabhütäyäm Simpl. III. 184. 
•}•*bubhuksitah kirn na karoti IV. 14, 28. 
Simpl. IV. 15,' 30. 
brhaspater api prájñas, see mahämatir 
api prdjño. 
brahmaghne ca suräpe ca I. 248 ; IV. 
10. Simpl. III. 157; IV. 10. 
bhaktam íaktam knlmam ca, see íaktam 
bhaktam. 
bhaktânâm upakärinäm Simpl. I. 284. 
*bhakmyitvä bahün matsyân I. 165. 
Simpl. I. 210. 
bhaksyam bhaksayatâm Sreyo Simpl. 
IV. 59. 
bhagnäSasya karandapinditatanor II. 
159. 
bhajen mänädhikam väsam, see .iray en ma . 
f lhadra msvâgatam te 'du III. 142. 
bhayatrasto narah ¿väsam Simpl.II. 162. 
bhayam atulam gurulokät Simpl. V. 31. 
bhayasamtrastamanasâm III.195. Simpl. 
III. 165. 
bhaye vä yadi vä harze Simpl. I. 109. 
bhartuê cintänuvartitvam Simpl. I. 69. 
bhavane 'tithayo yasya Simpl. II. 16. 
bhävasnigdhair upakrtam api I. 225. 
Simpl. I. 285. 
bhinatti samyak prahìto I. 349. 
bhinnasvaramukhavarnah 1.151. Simpl. 
1.197. 
bhïtabhllah purâ íatrur Simpl. II. 44. 
*bhütän yo nanugrhnäti III. 119. 
bhümiksaye, see bhümyekadeSasya. 
bhümir mitrarn hiranyam I. 185 ; III. 
12. Simpl. I. 226;" III. 16. 
bhûmyekadeêasya gwnänmtasya I. 427. 
Simpl. HI I. 395. 
bhûêayyâbrahmacaryamcal.2ñ7. Simpl. 
I. 269. 
bhrtyäparädhajo dandah Simpl. I. 354. 
bhrtyair vinä svayam räjä Simpl. 1.80. 
bhedanamâtrakuêalas, see paiêunyamâ-
tra°. 
bhedayec ca balam räjä Simpl. III. 139. 
bhoginah kaîicukâsaktâh I. 50. Simpl. 
I. 65. 
bhqjanäcchädanam dadyäd V. 47. Simpl. 
V. 62. 
manikanakavïbhûsanâ yuvatyo I. 313. 
^mandükä vividhä hy etacchala" III. 215. 
mattelhakunAhapannähini I. 203. 
maUebhakumbhavidalana° I. 319. 
matsyo matsyam upädatte Simpl. III. 
154. 
madädiksälanam Sästram I. 367. 
madonmatíasya bhüpasya 1.121. Simpl. 
I. 161. 

Index of Stanzas 
217 
madyam yathä dvijätinäm Simpl. IV. 
58. ' 
madhu tisthati väci yositäm I. 145. 
Simpl. ï. 188, 189. 
manate väcaspataye Simpl. H, Intr. 2 
(om. I). 
manasâpi svajätyänäm I. 307. 
Simpl. 
I. 299. 
manasä sarvalokänäm Simpl. III. 148. 
mantrinäm 
bhinnasamdhäne I. 
97. 
Simpl.'I. 127, 381. ' 
mantrirüpä hi ripavah III. 197. Simpl. 
III. 168. 
mantre tlrthe dvije Simpl. V. 105. 
\mayi tvatpädapatite IV. 7. 
Simpl. 
IV. 7. 
mar say ed dharsanäm yo 'tra, see dharsa-
näm marsayed yo 'tra. 
malinamadhunas tyaktvä, see kamala-
madhunas tyaktvä. 
mahatäm yo 'parädhyata Simpl. 1.307. 
mahatdpy arthasärena II. 35. 
Simpl. 
II. 42. 
mahatä spardhamänasya Simpl. I. 373. 
mahato 'pi hay am labdhvä Simpl. I. 
374. 
mahattvam etan mahatäm, III. 218. 
Simpl. III. 176. 
mahäjanasya samparkah III. 51. Simpl. 
III. 61. 
mahän apy ekako vrksah III. 45. Simpl. 
III. 54, 60. 
mahänta eva mahatäm V. 32. 
Simpl. 
V. 35. 
mahän pranunno najahäti I. 376. 
mahämatir api präjüo Simpl. I. 115 ; 
II. 37. 
(Cp. na vihäsam 
vinä 
¿atrur.) 
mä gäh khalesu viêvâsam I. 398. 
f mä easmai imam krthä dvesam III. 
138. 
mätä caîva pitä caîva Simpl, IV. 70 
(om. HI). 
mätapy ekä pitâpy eko I. 416. 
mätä yasya grhe ndsti IV. 44. 
Simpl. 
IV. 83. 
mätrtulyaguno jätas I. 386. 
mätrvat paradäräni I. 390. 
Simpl. I. 
402. 
mä tv avijMtaêilâya, see na hy avi-
jüäta°. 
mänam udvahatäm pumsäm II. 83. 
mänäd vä yadi vä lobhät III. 97. 
Simpl. III. 107. 
mänu&änäm ayarn nyäyo, see mänusänäm 
pramänam syäd. 
mänusänäm pramänam syäd III. 86. 
Simpl. III. 95. 
fmäno darpas tv ahamkärah III. 160. 
mäno vä darpo vä V. 3. 
Simpl. V. 3. 
mändhätä kva gatas trilokavijayl III. 
233. 
•mä bhavatu tasya päpam I. 402. 
mäyayä Satravah sädhyä III. 24. Simpl. 
III. 31. 
mitravi vyasanasampräptam, see dhanyäs 
täta na paSyanti. 
mitram kópi na kasyapi Simpl. II. 113. 
fmitram camitratäm yätam IV. 53. 
Simpl. IV. 95. 
mitradrohl krtaghnaS ca Simpl. I. 421. 
mitrarüpä hi ripavah III. 178. 
mitravän sädhayet käryam II. 21. 
Simpl. II. 25. 
*mitränäm yo hitam väkyam> see miträ-
näm hita". 
*mitränäm hitakämänäm 1.325. Simpl. 
I. 315." 
miträrthe bändhavärthe ca Simpl. I. 
317. 
*muñca muñea pataty eko Simpl. IV. 
62, 63. 
muhur vighnitakarmänam Simpl. I. 387. 
mürkhänäm panditä dvesyä I. 411. 
Simpl. I 416. 
mürkhena saha väso 'pi I. 413. 
mürtam läghavam evaîtad Simpl. II. 99. 
mülabhrtyoparodhena I. 237. 
Ff 

218 
Index of Stanzas 
müsika grhajätapi I. 71. Simpl. I. 95. 
mrgä mrgaih sahgam anuvrajanti Simpl. 
1.282. 
mrtah prâpsyati vâ svargam I. 312. 
* Simpl. I. 309. 
mrtänäm sväminah kârye, see sthitänäm 
svä°. 
mrtaih samprâpyate svargo, see mrtah 
präpsyati vâ svargam. 
mrto da/ridrah puruso Simpl. II. 94. 
mrtyor atyugradamstrasya, see mrtyor 
ivôgra. 
mrtyor ivógradandasya III. 25. Simpl. 
' ΠΙ. 32. 
mrtyor bibhesi kirn bàia Simpl. I. 419. 
mrdunatisuvrttena, see mrdtindpi su-
gandhena. 
mrdundjA sugandhena I. 270. Simpl. 
' I. 271. 
mrdunâ salïlena khanyamänäny I. 310. 
mrdghata iva sukhabhedyo II. 30. 
meghacchâyâ khalaprïtir II. 125. Simpl. 
II. 114. 
•\mesena sûpaJcârânâm Y. 55. Simpl. 
V. 74. 
maulabhrtyoparodhena, see mülabhf. 
ya upekseta Satrum svam III. 2. Simpl. 
ΠΙ. 2. 
\yah karoti nara/i pdpam III. 152. 
yak krtvä sukrtam räjüo Simpl. I. 
86. ' 
yac ca vedesu éâstresu III. 176. Simpl. 
IV. 52. ' 
yac chakyam grasitum gräsam IV. 20. 
Simpl. IV. 22, 113. 
yacehañjalam api jalado II. 57. Simpl. 
II. 71. 
yajjìvyate ksanam api Simpl. I. 24. 
y ato 'tra krtrimam mitratη II. 189. 
yatnäd api kah paSyec I. 382. Simpl. 
I. 408. 
yatra deêe 'thavä sthäne L 405. Simpl. 
I. 410. 
yatra na syät phalam bhüri I. 186. 
Simpl. I. 227. 
yatra stri yatra kitavo V. 48. Simpl. 
V. 63. 
yatra sväml nirviiesam, see nirviSesam 
yadä sväml. 
yatrdkrtis tatra gunä vasanti I. 198. 
yatrdhamkärayuktena I. 406. Simpl. 
I. 411. 
yaträtsähasamälambo II. 144. Simpl. 
II. 139. 
yatsakäSän na läbhah syät II. 77. 
Simpl. II. 93. 
yathä käkayaväh proktä II. 72. Simpl. 
II. 86. 
yathä gaur duhyate käle 1.179. Simpl. 
I. 222. 
yathä chäyätapau nityamïl. 136. Simpl. 
II. 127. 
yathä dhenusahasresu II. 135. Simpl. 
II. 125. 
yathä nêcchati nlrogah, see yathä vän-
chati. 
yathä bijäiikurah süksmah 1.181. Simpl. 
I.223,348.' 
yathamisamjale matsyair Simpl. 1.401 ; 
II. 116." 
yathä yathä prasädena I. 375. 
yathä väüchati nîrogah I. 90. Simpl. 
I. 118. 
fyathä vätavidhütasya II. 177, 178. 
yathä hi malinair vastrair IV. 26. 
Simpl. IV. 28. 
yathaîkena na hastena II. 137. Simpl. 
II. 128. 
y ad akäryam akäryam eva tan I. 
425. 
y ad antas tan na jihväyäm IV. 47. 
Simpl. IV. 88. 
yad apasarati mesah III. 35. Simpl. 
III.43. 
yadarthebhrätarah puträ V. 52. Simpl. 
V. 69. 
*fyadarthe svakulam tyaktam IV. 40. 

Index 
of 
Stanzas 
219 
Sim pl. IV. 102, 103 (om. in HI in 
both places). 
yad asatyam vaden martyo Simpl. I. 
256. 
•fyad asmadiyam na hi p. 151,12, and 
päda 4 of II. 93. 
Simpl. II. 105, 
päda 4, and p. 25,18. 
y add yadâ prasädena, see yathâ yathä 
pra. 
yadâ hi bhägyaksayaplditäm II. 79. 
y adi janmajarämaranam na bhaved II. 
198. 
y adi na syän narapatih Simpl. III. 73. 
y adi lhavati daivayogät, see yady api 
na lhavati. 
y adi rohinyäh Sakatam Simpl. I. 211. 
y adi viíati toyaräHim I. 215. 
yadi sarvasya lokasya I. 200. 
yadi syäc chítalo vahniS, see yadi syät 
pâvakah éîtah. 
yadi syätpävakah Mah III. 175. Simpl. 
IV. 51 ; V. 99. 
yad utsähl sadä martyah II. 68. Simpl. 
II. 82. 
yadrcchayâpy upanatam Simpl. I. 151. 
yadaîva räjye kriyate 'bhisekas III. 230. 
Simpl. V. 67. 
yad y at kimcit kvacid api Prasasti 4. 
yady api na bhavati daiv&t I. 140. 
Simpl. I. 181. 
yad yasya vihitam bhojyam Simpl. IV. 
57. 
yady eva na bhavel lohe Simpl. I. 255. 
yad váñchati diva martyo, see vañchati 
yad di°. 
yad vâ tad vä visamapatitam III. 204. 
fyad vyäkaranasamyuktam III. 77. 
y an namram sagunam capi II. 188. 
y an na vedesu sästresu, see yac ca ve", 
yah paräbhavasampräptah 
Simpl. I. 
313. 
yah pädayor nipatitam I. 259. 
yah prato ηα rtam brüte III. 4. Simpl. 
ìli. 5. 
yah prstvâ kurute kâryam IV. 54. Simpl. 
IV. 96. 
yam äüritya na visrämam Simpl. I. 51. 
yayor eva samam vittam I. 288 ; III. 
190. 
Simpl.'l. 281· II. 27. 
yaS cágate präghunake II. 49. 
Simpl. 
II. 61. 
yaS caîtan manyate mûdho I. 108. 
Simpl. I. 139. 
yas tlrthäni nije pahe III. 59. 
Simpl. 
III. 68. 
yas tyaktvä s&padam mitram V. 66. 
Simpl. V. 87. 
yasmäc ca yena ca yathä ca II. 12. 
SimpL II. 17. 
yasmiñ jïvati jlvanti 
L 10. 
Simpl. 
I. 23. 
yasmin kule yah purusah pradhänah I. 
299. 
Simpl. I. 291." 
yasmin krtyarn samävesya Simpl. I. 85. 
yasmin deie ca käle ca II. 62. 
Simpl. 
II. 75. 
yasminn apy adhikam caksur I. 229. 
Simpl. I. 243. 
yasminn evddhikam cakwr, see yasminn 
apy adhi". 
yasya ksetram nadltlre I. 162. 
Simpl. 
I. 208. 
yasya tasya hi käryasya III. 200. 
Simpl. III. 171. 
yasya dharmavihlnäni III. 88. 
Simpl. 
III. 96. 
yasya na jüäyate vir y am, see yasya na 
jñáyate êllam, 
yasya na jñáyate êllam IV. 17. Simpl. 
IV. 19 ; II. 56. 
yasya na vipadi visädah I. 80. 
Simpl. 
I. 105 ; II. 170. 
*yasya ndsti svayam prajñd V. 46. 
Simpl. V. 60, 70. ' 
*yasya buddhir balam tasya I. 172. 
Simpl. I. 214. 
yasya yasya hi käryasya, see yasya tasya 
hi käryasya. 

220 
Index of Stanzas 
yasya yasya hi yo bhävas I. 53. Simpl. 
I. 68. 
yasya syät sahajam viryam Simpl. III. 
160. 
yah satatam pariprcchati Simpl. V. 92 
(om. in HI). 
yah sammänam sadâ dhatte II. 17. 
Simpl. II. 21. 
fyah säyam atithim präptam III. 137. 
yah stokendpi samtosam Simpl. II. 141. 
yah sprsed râsabham martyas III. 107. 
Simpl. III. 117.' 
yasydrthäs tasya miträni Simpl. I. 3. 
yasydsti sarvatra gatih Simpl. I. 322. 
yäm labdhvêndriyanigraho na I. 365. 
yarn krtvêndriya, see yäm labdhvê". 
*]yädrsam mama pändityam IY. 50,52. 
Simpl.'IV. 92, 94. 
*fyâdrii vadanacchäyä V. 67, 68. 
Simpl. Y. 88, 89. 
yädrsais samnivasate, see yâdrêaih sev-
yate martyo. 
yâdrêaih sevyate martyo Simpl. I. 249. 
yân yajñasamghais tapasâ ca lokän I. 
311. 
Simpl. I. 308. 
yà punas iridarti kanyä V. 72. Simpl. 
V. 96. 
yà bhäryä dustacaritâ IY. 45. 
Simpl. 
IV. 84. 
*•)~yâ mamodvijate mtyarn III. 166. 
Simpl. IV. 76, 79, 80. ' 
yà laksmïr nanuliptângî III. 27. Simpl. 
III. 34. 
yâvad askhalitam tävat II. 187. 
fyävad äste muhürtaikam III. 127. 
yâvan na lajjate kanyä Simpl. IV. 69 
(om. in HI). 
yäsäm nämndpi kämah syät Simpl. IV. 
33. 
yâsyati sajjanahastam I. 214. 
yä hutvâgnau svakam käyam, vol. xii, 
p. 48. 
yukto bandhur api priyas, see pûjyo 
bandhur api priyo. 
ynddhakäle*gragoyah syät 1.36. Simpl. 
I. 59. 
yudhyate 'hamkrtim krtvä III. 
37. 
Simpl. III.' 45. ' 
ye ca prähur durätmäno Simpl. I. 39. 
y e jätyädimahotsähän Simpl. I. 38. 
yena kenâpy upäyena Simpl. I. 358. 
yena te jambukah pärsve I. 309. 
yena yasya krto bhedah Simpl. I. 273. 
yena Sukhkrtä hamsäh II. 158. 
yena syäl laghutä loke I. 347. 
Simpl. 
I. 353. 
yenahamkärayuktena, see yatrdh amkära". 
\ye nrsamsä durätmänah III. 123. 
ye bhavanti mahipasya I. 87. 
Simpl. 
I. 113. 
yesäm syäd vipulam vittam V. 25. 
ye sämadänabhedäs I. 362. 
yaîva bhrtyagatä sampad I. 374. 
yoglyuñjita satatam Simpl. IV. p. 21,13 
(om. in HI). 
yo 'traîtat pathatipräyo Intr. 5. Simpl. 
Intr. 6. 
yo durbalo hy anv api yäcyamäno Simpl. 
IV. 26. 
yo 'dhïtya Sästram akhilam I. 350. 
yo dhruväni parityajya II. 143. Simpl. 
II. 137. 
yo na dadäti na bhuñkte, see na dadäti 
yo na bhuñkte. 
yo na nihsreyasam jüänam I. 233. 
yo napüjayategarväd, see napüjayatiyo. 
yo na prsto hitam brüte, see yah prsto na 
rtam brüte, 
yo na rahati vitrastän III. 63. Simpl. 
III. 72. 
yo na vetti gunän yasya I. 32. 
Simpl. 
I. 47, 350." 
yo ndtmane na gurave I. 11. 
yo 'ndhütah samabhyeti Simpl. I. 87. 
yo 'balah pronnatam yäti 1.194. Simpl. 
I. 238, 340. 
yo mantram svämino bhindyät Simpl. I. 
272. 

Index 
of 
Stanzas 
221 
yo mäyäm kurute müdhah Simpl. I. 359. 
yo 'mitram kurute mitram IV. 22. Cp. 
amitram kurute mitram. 
yo mitram kurute müdha ätmano II. 23. 
Simpl! II. 28. 
yo miträni karoty atra Simpl. II. 185. 
yo mürkham laulyasampannam 
Simpl. 
III. 89. ' 
yo mohán manyate müdho, see yaê cattati 
ma. 
yo yatra näma nivasati I. 201. 
yo yasya jäyate vadhyah IV. 18. Simpl. 
IV. 20 (om. in HI). 
yo ramm êaratutm yadvan I. 44. 
yo ripor ägamarn êrutvâ III. 40. Simpl. 
III. 48. 
*yo laulyät kurute karma V. 54. Simpl. 
V. 73, 86. 
yo 'vasyam pihcr äcärah I. 381. 
yo hi prânaparikslnah IV. 21. 
Simpl. 
IV. 23. 
yo hy apakartum aêaktah 1.102. Simpl. 
I. 132. 
rakto 'bhijäyate bhogyo Simpl. I. 144. 
raksed bhrtyän yathä pränän III. 112. 
Simpl." III. 122. 
rankasya nrpater vdpi Simpl. I. 254. 
ravinisäkarayor, 
see 
saiidiväkarayor. 
raho nâsti ksano nâsti I. 107. 
Simpl. 
I. 138. 
rägl bimbädharo 'sau stanò11. 
202. 
râjamâtari devyäm ca 1.35. Simpl. 1.52. 
räjä 
ghrnl 
brähmamh 
sarvabhakifi I. 
429. 
Simpl. I. 424. 
räjä 
tusto ''pi bhrtyänäm, 
see sväml 
fusto 'pi. 
räjänam èva samêritya Simpl. I. 41. 
räjä bandhur abandhünäm, Simpl. 1.346. 
räjä vyayaparo nityam Simpl. V. 61. 
rämasya vrajanam baier niyamanam III. 
231. 
Simpl. V . 68. 
ripuraktena samsiktä III. 28. 
Simpl. 
III. 35. 
ripor astâdaêaîtâni 
III. 60. 
Simpl. 
III. 69. 
rüksäyäm 
snehasadbhävam 
IV. 
49. 
Simpl. IV. 91 (om. in HI). 
rûpabhijanasampannau 
III. 206. 
rüpenapratimenayauvanagunair III.207. 
Simpl. III. 175. 
rogi cirapraväsl II. 91. 
rohati säyakaviddham III. 99. 
Simpl. 
III. 111. 
rohinlêakatam arkanandanaê 
Simpl. I. 
213. 
laghur ayam äha na lokah, see virosa 
iti basati. 
lajjante bändhaväs tena Simpl. II. 98. 
lajjä 
snehah svaramadhuratä 
V. 73. 
Simpl. V." 97. 
labdham artham tuyo mohät, seepräptam 
artham. 
labhate purusas täms tân I. 415. 
labhyate bhümiparyantah Simpl. 1.125. 
lavanajaläntä 
nadyah I. 396. 
längülacälanam 
adhaê I. 13. 
lllodyänagate 'pi hi II. 173. 
Simpl. 
II. 166. 
Ί'lubdhakena tato muktä III. 158. 
luèâhasya 
nasyati yaso, see gtabdhasya 
na. 
lokânugrahakartârah 1.183. 
Simpl. I. 
225. 
loke 'thavä tanubhrtäm Simpl. I. 372. 
lobhäd eva narä müdhá V. 61. 
Simpl. 
V. 81. 
(Cp. trsne devi ñamas tubi,-
yam.) 
lobhävisto naro vittarn Simpl. III. 141. 
lohitâksasya ca maneh I. 67. 
f vakranäsam 
sujihmäksam 
III. 
68. 
Simpl. III. 78. 
vakranäsai ca karkâkso, see vakranäsam 
su°. 
vacas tatra prayoktavyam I. 56. Simpl. 
I. 33. 

222 
Index of Stanzas 
vajralepasya mürkhasya IV. 9. Simpl. 
I. 260 ; IV. 9 [HI also, I. 201]. 
vadatsu dainyam Saranâgatem Simpl. 
III. 155. 
vadanam dasanair hlnam Simpl. V. 
77. 
vadanena vadanti, see mad.hu tisthati. 
vadhyatàm iti yenôktam, see hanyatäm 
iti ye. 
vanäni dahato vahneh III. 49. 
Simpl. 
III. 57. 
vane prajvalito vahnir III. 217. 
vande sarasvattm nityam Simpl. H, 
Intr. 1 (om. I). 
varam, yuktam maunam, see varam, mau-
nam, nityam,. 
varam, vanam varam bhaiksyam Simpl. 
I. 280. 
ναταψ 
vanam 
vyäghragajädisevitam 
Simpl. V. 23. 
varam, varayate kanyä Simpl. IV. 68. 
varam vibhavahlnena II. 88. 
varam, vihärah saha pannagaih krtah I. 
168. 
varam käryam maunam, see varam mau-
nam nityam. 
varam garbhasrävo Simpl. Introd. 3 
(H 8,1 4). 
varam grdhro hamsaih, cp. grdhräkäro 
'pi sevyah. 
varam jaladhipätala I. 414. 
varam narakaväso 'pi II. 168. 
varam agnau pradipte tu III. 201. 
varam ahimukhe krodhäviste II. 87. 
varam parvatadurgesù II. 89. 
varam pränaparityägo II. 183. 
*varam buddhir na sä vidyä V. 33. 
Simpl. V. 36, 39. 
varam, maunam nityam na ca II. 90. 
varjayet kaulikäkäram Simpl. IV. 11. 
varnam sitam éirasi, see évetam padam 
êirasi. 
*vardhamäno mahän snehah 1.1. Simpl. 
I. 1. 
vasen mänädhikam sthänam, see Srayen 
mä°. 
vasor viryotpannäm abhajata Simpl. IV. 
50 [om. in HI]. 
vänmätrenapyasatyena Simpl. HI, 1.145. 
väcyam êraddhasametasya Simpl. 1.393. 
väjiväranalohänäm, I. 328. 
vdñchati yad diva martyo 1.103. Simpl. 
I. 133. 
vänchävicchedanam prähuk Simpl. II. 
155. 
vänchawa sücayati pürvataram II. 66. 
Simpl. II. 80; III. 181. 
f vaiavano mahän äsin III. 129. 
vätavrstividhütasya and vätavrstyava-
dhütasya, see yathä vätavidhütasya. 
väplküpatadägänäm III. 83. 
Simpl. 
III. 93.' 
vikalam iha pürvasukrtam Simpl. V. 9. 
vikäram yàti no cittam Simpl. II. 110. 
vidagdhasya ca, see visadigdhasya. 
vidyamänä gatir yesäm Simpl. I. 320. 
vidyäm vittam êilpam tävan Simpl. I. 
398. 
vidyävatäm mahecchänäm Simpl. I. 37. 
vidvattvam ca nrpatvam ca Simpl. II. 52. 
vidvadbhih suhrdäm atra Simpl. 11.111. 
vidvän rjur abhigamyo I. 403. 
vidhäträ racitäyä sä Simpl. II. 173. 
vidhinä mantrayuktena Simpl. I. 216. 
vindpy arthair dhirah sprsati II. 121. 
vipulamater api naêyati V. 5. 
Simpl. 
V. 5. 
virosa iti basati najanah V. 7. Simpl. 
V. 10. 
virüpo 'py akulmo 'pi II. 141. 
Simpl. 
II. 135. 
vilocanänäm vikacotpalatvisäm II. 13. 
viväde dríyate pattram I. 391. 
Simpl. 
I. 403. 
viväde 'nvisyate, see viväde drsyate. 
viüesät paripürnasya Simpl. I. 326. 
viSrambhäd yasya yo mrtynm Simpl. I. 
274. 

Index of Stanzas 
223 
viêvasanti na kasydpi Simpl. HI, IY. 
73. 
viêvâsah sampado mûlarn II. 18. Simpl. 
11.22. ' 
visadigdhasya bhaksyasya, see kantakasya 
ca bhagnasya. 
vùamasthasvâduphala I. 138. 
Simpl. 
'i. 179. 
visamäh kathinätmäno I. 51. 
vistirnavyavasäyasädhyamahatäm 
III. 
227. 
mravratasya vidyäyäh I. 419. 
vrksamüle 'pi dayitä Simpl. IV. 82. 
vrksâmê chitvâ paêûn hatvä III. 96. 
' Simpl. III. 106. 
vrttim apy âêritah satrur Simpl. III. 
' 125. 
vaikalyam dharanlpätam I. 136. Simpl. 
I. 177. 
vaidyavidvajjanämätyä and vaidyasäm-
vatsarämätyä, see vaidyasämvatsarä-
cäryäh. 
vaidyasämvatsaräcäryäh III. 61. Simpl. 
III. 70. 
vairägyäharanam, see daurbhägyäya-
tanam. 
vairinä na hi samdadhyät, see satrunä 
na hi. 
vyakto 'j>i vasare satyam II. 76. Simpl. 
II. 92. 
vyañjanam • hanti 
vai pürvam III. 
186. 
vyañjanais tu samutpannaih III. 184. 
vyathayanti par am, ceto Simpl. II. 95. 
*vyapade§ena mahatäm III. 72. Simpl. 
III. 82, 90. 
vyapadeêena siddhih syät and vyapadeSe 
'pi si", see vyapadeêena mahatäm. 
vyasanam hi mahäräjno I. 157. 
vyamnam prâpya yo mohât Simpl. II. 
180. ' 
vyasanesv api sarvesu II. 5. 
Simpl. 
II. 6. 
vydkirnakesarakarälamukhä I. 149. 
*vyäghravänarasarpänäm I. 247. 
vyädhitena sasokena V. 8. 
Simpl. V. 
11. 
vyomaikântavihârino 'pi vihagâh II. 16. 
Simpl. II. 20. 
Saktam bhaktam kulinam ca I. 345. 
Simpl. I. 351. 
êaktivaikalyanamrasya I. 81. 
Simpl. 
I. 106. 
saktendpi sadä narendra vidusä III. 
203. 
Simpl. III. 172. 
êaksyâmi kartum idam alpam III. 225. 
Sañkanlyá hi sarvatra Simpl. II. 90. 
Satabuddhih krtonnämah, see Satabud~ 
dhih êirahstho 'yam. 
*\êatabuddhih êirahstho 'yam Y. 34, 36. 
Simpl. V. 45, 50. 
êatam eko 'pi samdhatte 1.188. Simpl. 
I. 229 ; II. 14. 
*êatravo 'pi Jiitäyaiva III. 170. 
êatrum vaüchävighätäya Simpl.III.142. 
êatrunâ na hi samdadhyät II. 24. 
Simpl. III. 24 ; II. 29. 
êatrubhir yojayec chatrum Simpl. IV. 
17. 
êatrum utpätayet 
präjnas IV. 16. 
Simpl. IV. 18. 
êatrum unmülayet präjnas, see êatrum 
utpätayet prä 
êatrurûpâni miträni I. 167. 
êatroh paläyane chidram III. 
113. 
Simpl. III. 123. 
satroh pracalane, see êatroh paläyane. 
êatror äkrandam and êatror äkramam, 
see êatror balam avijnäya. 
êatror ucchedanärthäya Simpl. III. 
133. 
*satror balam avijnäya I. 315. Simpl. 
I. 312. 
êatror vikramam, see êatror balam avi-
jnäya. 
êatroh êriyam sadotthäyi Simpl. III. 
153. 

224 
Index of Stanzas 
Sanaih Sanair äadäty esa Simpl. III. 
134. 
éanaih Sanaih pralhoktavyam II. 63. 
Simpl. II. 76. 
Sanaih SanaiS ca yo rästram I, 176. 
Simpl. I. 215. 
Sapathaih samhitasydpi II. 32. Simpl. 
II. 35 (HI, also I. 113). 
Sapathaih samdhitasydpi, see Sa° sam-
hitasydpi. 
Samopäyäh sakopasya III. 22. 
Simpl. 
III. 28. 
Sambarasya ca yä mäyä Simpl. I. 183. 
Sarajjyotsnähate dürarn V. 39. 
Simpl. 
V. 53. 
iarabänataranivarse Prasasti 8. 
SaSidiväkarayor grahapidanam, II. 15. 
Sastrair hatä na hi hatä III. 220. 
Simpl. III. 179. 
Sastrair hatäs ht ripavo, see Sastrair 
hatä na hi hatä. 
Sâthyena mitram kapatena dharmam, I. 
373. 
Sästräny adhltydpi lhavanti II. 110. 
\*Sithilau ca subaddhau ca II. 142,149. 
Simpl. II. 136, 145, 146. 
Sibindpi svamämsäni III. 171. 
Sirasä vidhrtä nityarn Simpl. I. 82. 
Slghrakrtye, see Slghrakrtyem. 
Sïghrakrtyesu käryesu III. 199. Simpl. 
III. 170. 
f Sitavätätapasahah III. 156. 
Sitätapädikastäni Simpl. I. 270. 
Stlam Saucam ksäntir Y. 2. Simpl. V. 2. 
Sucayo hitakärino vinitäh I. 435. 
Suddhaih snigdhair, see bhävasnigdhair 
upakrtam api. 
Subham vä y adi va papain, 1.104. Simpl. 
I. 134, 239. 
Suskasya kitakhätasya, see kubjasya 
kita". 
Siidro vä y adi vdnyo 'pi I. 127. Simpl. 
I. 167. 
Sünyam aputrasya grham II. 80. 
SüraS ca krtavidyaS ca, see Süro 'si krta-
vidyo 'si. 
Sûrah surüpah subhagaS ca vägmi V. 17. 
Simpl. V. 25. 
SüräS ca krtavidyäS ca II. 119. 
*fSüro 'si krtavidyo 'si IV. 34, 39. 
Simpl. IV! 38, 43. 
f Srnotv avahitah känto III. 135. 
Sete saha Sayänena Simpl. II. 126. 
Sokäratibhayatränam II. 195. 
Simpl. 
II. 179. 
SaucävaSistaydpy asti Simpl. II. 101. 
Srayen mänädhikam väsam II. 82. 
*Sravyam väkyarn hi vrddhänäm I. 343. 
Srisomamantrivacanena Prasasti 2. 
Srutvä sämgrämiklm värttäm Simpl. I. 
91. 
f Srutvaîvam bhairavam Sabdam I. 83. 
Srüyatäm dharmasarvasvam Simpl. III. 
103. ' 
*Srüyate hi kapotena III. 120. 
Sreyah puspaphalam vrksäd III. 91. 
Simpl. III. 99. 
Sresthebhyah sadrSebhyaS ca III. 189. 
Släghyah sa eko bhuvi II. 166. 
SlesmäSru bändhavair muktam I. 338. 
Simpl. I. 335. 
Svänakurkutacändäläh III. 105. Simpl. 
III. 115. 
Svetam padam Sirasi yat III. 168. 
Simpl. IV. 77. 
satkarno bhidyate mantraS Simpl. 1.99. 
sadaksarena mantrena I. 128. 
Simpl. 
* I. 168. 
sad imän purusojahyäd III. 64. Simpl. 
' III. 74. 
samrohatîsunâ viddham, see rohati säya-
kaviddham. 
fsamhatäs tu harantîme II. 7. 
Cp. 
jälarn ädäya gacchanti. 
sakalärthaSästrasäram Introd. I. Simpl. 
Introd. 1 (H 4, om. I). 

Index of Stanzas 
225 
sakrj jalpanti räjänah I. 379. 
saJcrt kandukapâtam hi II. 132. Simpl, 
HI, II. 140. 
sakrd api drstväpurusam II. 65. Simpl. 
II. 79. 
sakrd uktam na grhnäti Simpl. II. 
165. 
sakrd dustam ca yo mitram II. 27 ; IV. 
13. 
Simpl. 11.32; IV. 14. 
sakrd dustam apîstam yah, see sakrd 
dust am ca yo mitram. 
sakhyam sâptapadtnam bhoW.36. Simpl. 
II. 43. 
~\sa gatvdngärakarmäntam III. 144. 
samksepät kathyate dharmo III. 93. 
Simpl. III. 102. 
samgatäni suiaddhäni II. 197. 
samgräme praharanasamkate II. 129. 
samghätavän yathä venur, see sampä-
tavän ya . 
sa ca nrpatis te saciväs III. 234. 
samcarantîha päpäni Simpl. IV. 64. 
satäm, vacanam ädistam Simpl. IV. 104, 
105. 
satäm rnatim atikramya I. 232. 
satkrtâê ca krtärthäs ca Simpl. III. 
158. 
satpätram mahatl Sraddhâ II. 58. 
Simpl. II. 72. 
satyadharmavihinena, see dharmasatya°. 
satyam dhane na mama näsagate II. 
192. 
satyamparityajati Y. 28. Simpl. V. 27. 
satyädhyo, see 
sannyäyo dhärmikaS 
cddhyo. 
satyanrtä ca parusä priyavädim ca I. 
432. 
Simpl. I.' 425. 
satyäryadhärmikän, see sannyäyo dhär-
mikas cadhyo. 
sadaSâd ycyanaêatât, see sapädäd yoja. 
sadäcäresu Ihrtyesu II. 19. 
Simpl. 
II. 23. 
sadädänah parikslnah Simpl. II. 70. 
sadä Ihrlyäparädhena I. 348. 
saddmandamadasyandi" I. 7. 
sadrSam cesiate svasyäh I. 412. 
sadatvâpadgato räjä I. 89. 
Simpl. I. 
117. 
sadbhih samlodhyamäno 'pi Simpl. IV. 
55." 
sadhana iti ko madas te II. 124. 
fid nininda kilatmänam III. 149. 
santa èva satäm nityam II. 165. 
samtaptäyasi samsthitasyapayaso Simpl. 
Ì. 250. 
samtäpayanti kirn, see durmantrinam 
kam. 
santo 'pi hi na rajante II. 73. 
Simpl. 
II. 87. 
santo 'py arthä vinasyanti III. 179. 
samtosämrtatrptänäm II. 161. 
Simpl. 
II. 152. 
samdigdhe paraloke I. 139. 
Simpl. I. 
180. 
samdigdho vijayo I. 314 ; III. 10. 
Simpl. III. 13. 
samdhih käryo 1py anäryena III. 7. 
Simpl. III. 10. 
samdhim icchet samenäpi III. 9. Simpl. 
III. 12. 
sannyäyo dhârmikaé cddhyo III. 6. 
Simpl. III. 9. 
•fsa pañjarakam ädäya III. 124. 
sapädäd yojanaiatäd II. 14. 
Simpl. 
II. 18. 
saptadvipädhipasydpi II. 130. 
sap ta svaräs trago grämä V. 40. Simpl. 
V. 54. 
sarnam Saktimatä yuddham Simpl. III. 
15.' 
samayabhyägato 'tithih, p. 254,9. 
samah iatrau ca mitre ca Simpl. IV. 60. 
samutpannesu käryesw Simpl. IV. 1. 
samudravïcîva calasvabhäväh Simpl. I. 
194. 
samrgoragamätangam II. 107. 
sampattayah paräyattäh I. 262. Simpl. 
I. 263. ' 
« g 

226 
Index of Stanzas 
sampatsu mahatâm cittam II. 151. 
sampadi yasya na karso, see yasya na 
vipadi visädah. 
sampätam ca vipätam ca II. 44. Simpl. 
II. 54. 
sampätavän yathä venur III. 50. Simpl. 
III. 58. 
sampürnendpi kartavyam II. 22. Simpl. 
il. 26. 
sampräptoyo 'tithih säyam, see apranäyyo 
, tithih. 
samhhävyam gosu sampannam IV. 64. 
Simpl. IV. 115. 
gammato 'ham, vïbhor nityam I. 41. 
Simpl. I. 56. 
sarahpadmam, tyaktvä vikasitam I. 
296. 
saralair api câksudraih Simpl. H I, 
III. 64. 
sarasi lahuêas tärächäyäm, I. 276. 
sarusi natistutivacanam I. 54. Simpl. 
I. 70. 
sarusi nrpe, see sarusi nati", 
sarpänäm ca, see sarpänäm durja . 
sarpänäm dmjanänäm ca 1.327. Simpl. 
I. 158 ; V. 46. 
sarpän vyäghrän gajän simhän Simpl. 
I. 40. 
sarvadevamayasyâsya I. 93. Simpl. I. 
121. 
sarvadevamayo räjä I. 92. Simpl. I. 
120. 
sarvanâêe samutpanne IV. 24. Simpl. 
IV. 27; V. 42. 
*sarvam etad vijänämi III. 216. 
sarvasvanâêe samjäte IV. 19. Simpl. 
IV. 21. 
sarvasvaharane êaktam IV. 23. Simpl. 
IV. 25. 
sarväsucinidMmsya I. 175. 
sarvâh sampattayas tasya II. 97. 
sarvesäm eva martyänäm Simpl. II. 11. 
sarvopadkisamrddhasya, see daksinädi· 
samrddhasya. 
savyadaksinayor yatra I. 65. Simpl. 
I. 76. 
sa suJird vyasaneyah syât sa pitá I. 341. 
sa suhrd vyasane yah syât sa putro 
Simpl. I. 337. 
sa suhrd vyasane yak syäd anyajátyud-
Ihavo I. 340. 
sa snigdho vyasanän nivârayati I. 251. 
sahate suhrd iva bhûtvâpràjnaê Simpl. 
HI, III. 159. 
f sahasram iibharti kaêcic III. 146. 
säJcäro nïhsprho vâgmi Simpl. III. 88. 
säjihvä yäjinam stanti V. 10. Simpl. 
V. 13. 
*fsädhu mätula gltena V. 37, 45. 
Simpl. V. 51, 59. 
sädhusv api ca papesu Simpl. IV. 61. 
sämavädäh sakopasya, see êamopâyâh 
o 
sa. 
sdmasâdhyesu käryesu Simpl. III. 131. 
sâmasiddhâni kâryâni Simpl. III. 130. 
sämädidänaihedäs te, see ye sâmadâna-
bhedäs. 
sâmâdir dandaparyanto I. 359. Simpl. 
I. 377; ΠΙ. 129. 
sâmâdisajjitaih, see sämädyaih. 
sämädyaih sajjitaih pâéaih I. 119. 
Simpl.'1.157. 
sâmànyajanmâ jâtas tu, see mâtrtulya-
gunojätas. 
sâmnaîva yatra siddhih syât I. 361. 
Simpl. I. 378. 
sâmnaîvddau prayoktavyam I. 358. 
Simpl. I. 379. 
sârameyakharâévasya V. 44. 
Simpl. 
V. 58. 
sârameyasya câêvasya, see s&rameyakha. 
\sârdham manorathaéataisïV. 8. Simpl. 
IV. 8*. 
sä sä sampadyate iuddhih Simpl. III. 
162. 
sä sevä yä prabhuhitä Simpl. I. 46. 
sählädam vacanam prayacchasi Simpl. 
IV. 6. 

Index of Stanzas 
227 
simhaih panjarayantranäpari° I. 295. 
simho vyäkaranasya kartur II. 28. 
Simpl. II. 33. 
siddhim, väüchayatäjanena, see si ° prär-
thayatä ja. 
siddhim vä yadi vasiddhim Simpl. II. 
183. 
siddhim prärthayatä janena III. 205. 
Simpl. III. 174. 
slmä vrddhim samäyäti Simpl. I. 92. 
sima samkocam äyäti Simpl. I. 93. 
sukulam kuêalam sujanam Simpl. Y. 8. 
sukrtyam visnuguptasya Simpl. II. 
41. 
sukhasya särah paribhujyate tair II. 
163. 
*suguptam raksyamäno 'pi IY. 43. 
Simpl.'IV. 45, 46. 
suguptasya hi dambhasya, see supra-
yuktasya damlhasya. 
suj ano 'tha suhrn nrpot see svajano 'tha 
suhrd gurur. 
supürä vai kmadikä I. 14. 
Simpl. I. 
25 ; II. 138. 
suptam vahnau êirah krlvä I. 252. 
*suprayuktasya dambhasya 1.197, 218. 
subhaksyäni viciträni, see subhiksäni 
viciträni. 
subhäsitamayam dravyam Simpl. HI, 
11.147. 
subhäsitarasäsväda" II. 172. 
Simpl. 
II.'164. 
*f subhiksäni viciträni IY. 65. 
Simpl. 
IV. liöj 117. 
subhttäh paradeêebhyo V. 27. 
sumukhena vadanti, see madhu tisthati 
väci yo°. 
surärisamghätanipUasonitam I. 217. 
sulabhäh purum räjan I. 220. 
Simpl. 
II. 160 ; III. 6. 
suvarnapuspämprthivïm I. 30. Simpl. 
I. 45. 
suvarnaracitam suddham Simpl. HI, 
V. 42. 
susamcitairjlvanavat suraksiiair Simpl. 
II. 115. 
susüksmenapi randhrena II. 34. Simpl. 
II. 38] 
suhrdah sneham äpannä II. 11. Simpl. 
II. 15. 
suhrdäm hitakämänäm, see mitränäm 
hita. 
suhrdäm upakärakäranäd I. 9. 
Simpl. 
I. 22. 
suhrdi nirantaracitte I. 75; II. 181. 
Simpl. I. 341. 
suhrdbhir äptair asakrd vicäritam I. 
440; III. 103. 
fsücvmukhi duräcäre IV. 58. 
Simpl. 
I. 392 ; IV. 100. 
*süryam bhartäram utsrjya III. 180. 
Simpl. IV. 56, 75. 
srstä mütrapurlsärtham Simpl. III. 100. 
sevakah, sväminam dvesti I. 34. Simpl. 
I. 50. 
sevayä dhanam icchadbhih Simpl. I. 
264. 
sevâ êvavrttir äkhyätä I. 266. 
Simpl. 
I. 268. 
f«o ''pi divyatanur hhûtvâ III. 163. 
somas täsäm dadau êaucam III. 182. 
fío 'ham päpamatiS cairn III. 153. 
sauhrdasya na vänchanti Simpl. V. 
21. 
*skandhenapi vahee chatrum, III. 213. 
stabdhasya naêyatiyaêo III. 212. Simpl. 
HI, III. 161. 
stimitonnatasameärä Simpl. I. 29. 
stokenônnatim äyäti I. 113. 
Simpl. I. 
150. 
striyam ca yah prärthayate Simpl. I. 
141. 
striyah pürvam surair bhuktäh III. 181. 
striyo 'ksä mrgayä pänam 1.158. 
strlnäm satroh kumitrasya III. 54. 
Simpl. III. 64. 
strlmudräm makaradhvajasya IV. 30. 
Simpl. IV. 34. 

228 
Index of Stanzas 
strlvipralihgibälem IV. 35. 
Simpl. 
IV. 39. 
sthänatrayam yatlnäm ca V. 41. Simpl. 
V. 55. 
sthänam trikûtam partkhä samudro 
Simpl. III. 161. 
sthânam ndsti hanam ndsti, see raho 
ndsti. ksano nâsti. 
sthänabhrastä na êobhante II. 118. 
sthänasthitä hi purmäh, see sthäna-
bhrastä na êo°. 
sthänesv èva niyojyäni I. 60. 
Simpl. 
I. 72. 
sthitänäm sväminah kârye I. 306. 
Simpl. I. 298. 
sthito 'py antyäsv avasthäsu I. 423. 
sthirahrdayanihitarägäh I. 166. 
sthairyam sarvesu krtyesu III. 92. 
Simpl. III. 101. 
snigdhair eva hy upa, see bhävasnigdhair 
upaJcrtam api. 
sprsann api gajo hauti II. 170 ; p. 185, 
21. Simpl. III. 83. 
smärtam vacah kvacana Prasasti 5. 
smrtivedädisästresu vol. xii, p. 48. 
svakarmasamtänavicestitäni II. 193. 
svagrhodyänagate 'pi, see lilodyänagate 
'pi hi. 
svacittakalpito garvah IV. 57. 
Cp. 
uthsipya tittibhah pädäu. 
•svacohäni saubhägyanirantaräni II. 196. 
svajano 'tha suhrd gurur I. 249. 
svadeSäd yojana°, see sapädäd yo°. 
svaphalanicayo namräm êâkhârn I. 
292. 
svabhävakopam atyugram, see svabhäva-
raudram. 
\svalhävaraudram atyugram III. 69. 
Simpl. III. 79. 
svabhävo nopadesena Simpl. I. 257. 
svalpam apy apakurvanti Simpl. HI 
I. 65. 
svalpastiâyuvasâvaêesamalinam I. 12. 
svalpe 'pi gunâh sphltl° I. 241. 
svavittaharanam drstvä II. 92. Simpl. 
II. 103. 
svasaktyä kurvatah karma II. 140. 
Simpl. II. 133. ' 
svasthänam sudrdham krtvä III. 33. 
Simpl. ì l i . 40. 
svägatenagnayah pritâ I. 132. 
Simpl. 
I. 172. 
svabhipräyaparoksasya I. 268. 
svämini gunäntarajne I. 210. 
Simpl. 
I. 101. ' 
svämi tmto 'pi hhrtyänäm I. 346. 
Simpl. I. 83, 352." 
svämi dvesti susevito 'pi V. 16. Simpl. 
V. 24." 
svämyarthe yas tyajet pränän I. 301. 
Simpl. I. 293. 
svämyädistas tu yo bhrtyah I. 86. 
Simpl". I. 112. 
svâmyâdeêât subhrtyasya I. 85. Simpl. 
I. 111. 
svämyäyattäyatahpränä 1.303. Simpl. 
I. 295. 
*svärtham utsijya yo dambhi IV. 33. 
Simpl. IV. 37. 
hatarn sainyam anäyakam p. 57,10. 
fhatah êatruh krtam mitram V. 65. 
Simpl. V. 85. ' 
hatä bhiksä dhvänksair vicalati V. 
20. 
hantavyapakse nirdistä I. 204. 
f hanyatäm iti yenoktam III. 192. 
harihastagatah êcmkhah I. 283. 
*\hartavyam te na paêyâmi III. 167. 
f harsävistas tato 
vyâdho vol. xii, 
p. 50. 
hasantam prahasanty eta Simpl. I. 
184. ' 
hasann api, see sprêann api. 
\hastapädasamäyukto IV. 56. 
Simpl. 
IV. 98; I. 391. 
hastapädasamopeto, see hastapâdasamâ-
yukto. 

Index 
of 
Stanzas 
229 
himtakäny apt bhütäni III. 95. Simpl. 
ìli. 105. 
hitakräbhir akâryam ihamänäh I. 250. 
hitam èva hi vaktavyam I. 436. 
hitavaktä mitavaktä III. 74. 
hitaih sädhusamäcäraih I. 342. Simpl. 
1.339. 
hiranyam, dhänyaratnäni 1.182. Simpl. 
I. 224, 349. 
htnah iatrur nihantavyo III. 116. 
hinängi vadhikäiigi vä Y. 71. Simpl. 
Y. 95. 
hutäsajväläbhe sthitavati I. 289. 
hetupramänayuktam II. 103. 
heläkrstasphuratkhadga" Simpl. III. 
151. 
homärthair 
vividhapradänavidhinä 
Simpl. I. 310. 

ADDITIONS AND 
CORRECTIONS 
VOL. XI. 
Delete the asterisks in the text pp. 52,8, 55,12, 66,15, 87, r, 288,15. 
Insert asterisks before 
50,12, R<íJl^69,3, °«rl3fi¡H° 180,2, 
181,2 (see variants), «p3ra¡<> 289,3. 
4,14 read 
; see variants. 
6,33 „ 
for 
a^ft. 
16,20 „ 
51,6 „ with MSS. meliti » ^fà 4Jp=h*sHMf4|*?4T. 
83,22 „ if 
see variants. 
87,14 „ with bh and with the Φ-class 
; cp. text, simpl. Kielhorn 
68,20, and Hamb. MSS. (quR^ft f^^ftft). 
90,13 „ 
91,s add hyphen at the end of the line. 
112,22 add in margin: upa. 
132.16 read *Hrt||fadY 
163,15 „ 3TtW<fr. 
175.17 „ ΓΠΦΤΤ^Γ· 
211,22 „ 
? See vol. xii, p. 32. 
225,30 „ 
227,30 „ 
229,9 „ ΙΠ-^lRIPI· 
246,1 and 3 read ^Rsfr with A. 
257,7 read 
1 See variants. 
265.22 „ with Prof. Hultzsch 
and 
; see variants. 
270,4 „ 
283.23 „ 
; see vol. xii, p. 35. 
In th Q glossary add : 
277,17 ' bearing a woollen cover ' covered 
with wool 
sit ¿MR, 259,9 'chief officer of the police of a town'. Prof. 
Hultzsch informs me that this is the same as Hindi and Marâthï 
— 
51,6 'to take one's leave'. Cp. Hertel, Indogermanische 

Additions 
and 
Corrections 
231 
Forschungen, xxix (1911), p. 215 ff.—xfaqrç, 290, 
' Sunday'.— 
P. 293, first column, read 
—S. v. f ^ I read in the parenthesis ^tf^^T.—For 
p. 293, first column, Munirâj Shrï Dharmavijaya Suri refers to 
the 7th and 8th part of Shaligram Nighantu Bhüshana, WsHM*?!, Vyankateshwar 
Press, p. 1079 ; for íTTO, p. 294, 2nd column, to Hemacandra's Abhidhäna-
cintämani, ïjf+HI uà, fdtì&HQ* stanza 404 with commentary ; for ^Τί^Ι^ΓΓ, 
to Siddhicandra's commentary on Kâdambarï, p. 127 (Nirnaya Sägara 
Press). 
or 4g|p|<ltl means 'a basket in which areca-nuts are kept 
YOL. XII. 
Page 15, sub 252, add : 
To the good services of Dr. F. W. Thomas I owe copies of the Raghunäth 
temple MS. (Ugh), and of the TJlwar MS. (U). I received them when I had 
already given up all hope for them.1 Both of them belong to the mixed 
MSS., based on Pürnabhadra's text. 
Egh (Stein's Catalogue 81 ; see Aufrecht, C.C. II, p. 69) is a mere 
fragment, which goes from the beginning of the text down to 
p. 42,5 ^«Μ'ΉΙΪΪΤ'ίί. 
Though on the whole this MS. agrees 
with Pûrnabhadra, the beginning of its Kathämukha with the 
three opening stanzas of the Hamburg MS. H has been supplied 
from the textus simplicior. This text is extremely faulty, shares 
almost all the blunders of bh Ψ, but has been corrected in some places 
(e. g. 6,31 
ifWsÇ:, metrically wrong; 6,33 fëi fa^dmlM, 
a miscorrection of the blunder of our leading MSS.; 9,3 f|[fÈf 
with the Hamburg MSS.). In most cases it shares the read-
ings of the Ψ-class, but it cannot possibly have been copied from Ψ, 
or from any one of the MSS. derived from Ψ. In 33,21 Rgh has 
the same gap as our other MSS. ; but this gap goes only to the 
words 
ίφΜ«Β (sic), which are missing in the MSS. of the bh-
and Ψ-classes. A comparison has shown me that in spite of this 
circumstance this MS. is useless for the constitution of the text. 
U (Aufrecht, C.C. II, p. 208). Though a copy of this MS. was sold to 
me for 100 Rupees, it is as worthless as the MS. just mentioned. 
Its text is based on a Ψ-MS., but interpolated in the third tantra 
from the textus simplicior, and omitting with it our stanza iii, 109 
and the following tale. Several stanzas are inserted, and others 
1 See my critical edition of the Tantrakhyayika, p. vi. 

232 
Additions and Corrections 
omitted, in different parts of the text. 
In the fourth tantra there 
is some confusion, owing to the carelessness of the copyist, who 
copied the leaves of his original without beforehand arranging 
them in due order. 
Besides minor gaps there is a considerable 
one, extending from our p. 266,15 to 282, 7. Some of the blunders 
occurring in ΗιΨ have been corrected, but only from conjecture, 
not from any MS. 
In 33,12 e. g. U reads 
^ <11 <l| 14| Γΐ| ^tTTÏÏ ; 
in 33, 21 the gap preserved in the MSS. of the bh- and of the 
Ψ-classes has been filled in as follows : 3TTT MUéH^ 
fÎHM"*! 
{sic) ?nrfïï 
(sic) fà aj^R 
aïïf, &c. 
p. 20. Sub 25e add : MS. Decc. Coll. IV, 359. 
Colophon : 
samvat 
1660 varse sake 1525 madhye sitâdau pamcamyâm dvitïyavâsare I 
srim&Uapägaccke Aamalakalasasakhayam 
äcäry a,srînarmadâcâri/ena 
likhitain idam pustakam l ganiMo;'asa^«reväcanärthamh (!) II . . . 
gramthägram 1380. 
A mere abstract from Pürnabhadra's text. 
Most of the stanzas and most portions of the frame-stories are 
omitted. 
p. 35,1.4 Dharmavijaya Suri explains 
as a gerund in 
Delete 
my sentence referring to ^TRf. 
p. 42, § 3, add : A vernacular gloss by the glossator of bh was wrongly 
taken for a correction by the copyist of the intermediate MS. to 
which Ν goes back ; hence a meaningless correction of this gloss 
appears in the text of N, p. 271,9. 
See variants.—To the bh-class 
belongs also the MS. Decc. Coll. XVII, 75, containing Kathâmnkha 
and tantra 1 only. 
Leaves 34, 62, 63 missing. 
Quite modern, 
very faulty; the original readings of Pürnabhadra corrected in 
many places. 
Worthless, 
p. 63,1.1 read : jtancäMyadhikam. 
p. 80 f. 
On Jacobi' s criticism of Hemacandra's and Pradyumna's 
language, cp. Hargovindäs and Bechardâs in their edition of 
Shäntinätha Mahäkävya, Yashovijaya Jaina Granthamälä 20, 
p. 3 ff. From p. 11 of their preface it follows that our remark on 
24,3 irefà, p. 30, must be deleted, 
p. 88, variants on p. 11,1. 5, insert 7 after nimdâ II. 
p. 117, note on p. 90,1.20. Read : ' except Hamb. MS. H krtam (I nararn).' 

HARVARD ORIENTAL SERIES 
Harvard Oriental Series. Edited, with the cooperation of various scholars, by 
CHAELES 
ROCKWELL 
LANMAN, A.B. and LL.D. (Yale), LL.D. (Aberdeen), Wales 
Professor of Sanskrit at Harvard University ; Honorary Member of the Asiatic Society 
of Bengal, the Société Asiatique, the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland, 
and the Deutsche Morgenländische Gesellschaft ; Member of the American Philosophical 
Society ; Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences ; Foreign Member of the 
Royal Bohemian Society of Sciences ; Corresponding Member of the Institute of 
Bologna, of the Royal Society of Sciences at Göttingen, of the Imperial Russian Academy 
of Sciences, and of the Institute of France (Académie des Inscriptions et Belles-Lettres). 
Published by Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts, U.S.A. 
To be 
bought, in America, of GINN & COMPANY, 29 Beacon Street, Boston, Mass.; in 
England, of GINN & Co., 9 St. Martin'e Street, Leicester Square, London, W . C. ; in 
Continental Europe, of 0. Harrassowitz, Leipzig.—The price of volume 3 is $1.20 ; 
the price of each of the volumes 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 9, 11, 12, and 13 is $1.50; all these, 
post-paid. Price of volumes 7 and 8 (not sold separately) is $5. Price of volume 10 
is $6.—One dollar ($1.00)=Marks 4.18=francs or lire 5.15=4 shillings and 1 penny= 
3 rupees.—Volume 10 is royal 4° (32 cm.) ; volumes 7 and 8 are super-royal 8° (28 cm.) ; 
the rest are royal 8° (26 cm.). All are now bound durably in full buckram with 
gilt top. 
Volume 1. Jataka-Mala, by Arya Çura. Edited in Sanskrit (in Nagarï letters) by 
Professor H . KERN, University of Leiden, Netherlands. 
1891. 
Pages, 270. (North-
Buddhistic stories. They have been translated by Speyer, London, 1895, Frowde.) 
Volume 2. Sankhya-Pravachana-Bhashya, or Commentary on the exposition of the 
Sankhya philosophy, by Vijnäna-Bhikshu. Edited in Sanskrit (in Roman letters) by 
Professor R. GARBE, University of Tübingen, Germany. 1895. Pages, 210. (Translated 
by Garbe, Leipzig, 1889, Brockhaus.) 
Volume 3. Buddhism in Translations. 
By the late HENRY CLAKKE WARREN, of 
Cambridge, Mass. 1896. Fourth issue, 1906. Pages, 540. (Over 100 extracts from 
the sacred books of Buddhism, so arranged as to give a connected account of the 
legendary life of Buddha, of his monastic order, of his doctrines on karma· and 
rebirth, and of his scheme of salvation. The work has been widely circulated and 
has been highly praised by competent authorities.) 
Volume 4. Karpura-Manjari. A drama by the Indian poet Râjaçekhara (900 A.D.). 
Critically edited in the original Prakrit (in Nâgarï letters), with a glossarial index 
and an essay on the life and writings of the poet, by STEN KONOW, of the University 
of Christiania, Norway ; and translated into English with notes by C. R. LANMAN. 
1901. Pages, 318. 
XII. 
H h 

2 3 4 
HARVARD ORIENTAL SERIES 
Volumes 5 and β. Brihad-Devata (attributed to Çâunaka), a summary of the deities 
and myths of the Rig-Veda. Critically edited in the original Sanskrit (in Nâgarï 
letters) with an introduction and seven appendices (volume 5), and translated into 
English with critical and illustrative notes (volume 6), by Professor A. A. MACDONELL, 
University of Oxford. 
1904. Pages, 234+350=584. 
Volumes 7 and 8. Atharva-Veda. 
Translated, with a critical and exegetical com-
mentary, by the late Professor W. D. WHITNEY, of Yale University ; revised and 
brought nearer to completion and edited by C. R . LANMAN. 
1905. 
Pages, 1212. 
(The work includes : critical notes on the text, with various readings of European 
and Hindu mss. ; readings of the Cashmere version ; notices of corresponding passages 
in the other Vedas, with report of variants ; data of the scholiasts as to authorship 
and divinity and meter of each verse ; extracts from the ancillary literature concerning 
ritual and exegesis ; a literal translation ; and an elaborate critical and historical 
introduction.) 
Volume 9. The Little Clay Cart (Mrcchakatika), a Hindu drama attributed to King 
Shüdraka. Translated from the original Sanskrit and Prakrits into English prose and 
verse by A. W. RYDEB, Instructor in Sanskrit in Harvard University. 
1905. 
Pages, 207. 
Volume 10. 
Vedio Concordance : being an alphabetic index to every line of every 
stanza of the published Vedic literature and to the liturgical formulas thereof, that is, 
an index (in Roman letters) to the Vedic mantras, together with an account of their 
variations in the different Vedic books. By Professor MAURICE BLOOMFIELD, of the 
Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore. 
1906. Pages, 1102. 
Volume 11. The Panchatantra : a collection of ancient Hindu tales, in the recension 
(called Pañchakhyanaka, and dated 1199 A.D.) of the Jaina monk, Pürnabhadra, 
critically edited in the original Sanskrit (in Nâgarï letters : and, for the sake of 
beginners, with word-division) by Dr. JOHANNES HERTEL, Professor am Koeniglichen 
Real-Gymnasium, Doebeln, Saxony. 
1908. Pages, 344. 
Volume 12. The Panchatantra-text of Pürnabhadra : critical introduction and list 
of variants. By Dr. JOHANNES HERTEL, Professor am Koeniglichen Real-Gymnasium, 
Doebeln, Saxony. 
1912. Pages, 245. 
(The volume includes an index of stanzas.) 
Volume 13. The Panchatantra-text of Pürnabhadra, and its relation to texts of 
allied recensions as shown in Parallel Specimens. 
By Dr. JOHANNES 
HERTEL, 
Professor am Koeniglichen Real-Gymnasium, Doebeln, Saxony. 
1912. 
(Nineteen 
sheets, mounted on guards and issued in atlas-form. They give, in parallel columns, 
four typical specimens of the text of Purnabhadra's Panchatantra, in order to show 
the genetic relations in which the Sanskrit recensions of the Panchatantra stand to 
one another, and the value of the manuscripts of the single recensions.) 

