C H A P T E R I I I 
Change, Quality, and Thought 
1. Science and Change. As explained in the opening chapter, Greek 
philosophy began by asking what causes things to change. But the 
recognition of Change soon raised the most formidable question of 
epistemology. How is knowledge possible if things continuously change, 
if "you cannot step twice into the same rivers," as the obscure Herakleitos 
maintained ?1 Ever since, we have been struggling with the issue of what is 
same in a world in flux. What is "same"—as Mach asked—in a sodium 
vapor which, as its temperature increases, turns from violet to yellow? 
Or, as Bridgman asked, what is "same" in a tumbler of water that con-
tinuously evaporates ?2 Numerous are the unrelenting attempts at answer-
ing this question by arithmomorphic schemes (and we shall presently 
examine the most ambitious one, by Bertrand Russell). David Bohm's 
observation, that at each instant of time a thing has "an enormous (in 
fact infinite) number of aspects which are in common with those that it 
had a short time ago,"3 shows why the question raised by Mach is far from 
idle; yet it does not answer it. Many present things have an infinite 
number of aspects common to each one and also common to many things 
of a short while ago. So we still do not know which of all possible pairings 
1 Fragment 41 in J. Burnet, Early Greek Philosophy 
(4th edn., London, 1930), 
p. 136. My italics. 
2 Ernst Mach, Popular Scientific 
Lectures (Chicago, 1895), p. 202; P. W. Bridgman, 
The Logic of Modern 
Physics 
(New York, 1928), p. 35. Bridgman adds that even 
2 + 2 = 4 collapses if applied to "spheres of a gas which expand and inter-
penetrate." 
3 David Böhm, Causality and Chance in Modern Physics (London, 1957), p. 157. 
60 

SECTION 1 Science and Change 
of one past and one present thing represent the "same thing." And if we 
rest satisfied with the argument of the continuation in time of a particular 
quality of the things observed, then we must necessarily accept as perfectly 
scientific also the procedure by which Lamaism decides who is the same 
Dalai Lama through death and birth. 
On the other hand, if there were no Change at all, that is, if things have 
been and will always be as they are, all science would be reduced to a 
sort of geometry: ubi materia, ibi geometria—where 
there is matter, there 
is geometry—as Kepler thought. 
The knot was cut but not untied by the distinction, introduced quite 
early, between change of nature and change of place.4 And since, as 
Aristotle was to express it straightforwardly, "place is neither a part nor 
a quality of things,"5 it appeared expedient to resolve that all Change 
is locomotion, change of nature being only appearance. To avoid any 
reference whatever to quality, the ancient atomistic doctrine originated 
by Leukippos held that Change consists only of the locomotion of atomic 
particles of a uniform and everlasting matter. The first systematic criticism 
of monistic atomism came from Aristotle, who opposed to it the doctrine 
of matter and form. This led him to analyze Change into change (1) of 
place, (2) of quantity (related to change by generation or annihilation), 
and (3) of quality.6 Though we have ever since abided by this analysis 
in principle, the attitude of science toward Change has had a most uneven 
history. 
To begin with, atomism suffered a total eclipse for some two thousand 
years until Dalton revived it at the beginning of the last century. It then 
gradually came to rule over almost every chapter of physics. However, 
the recent discoveries of one intra-atomic particle after another, all quali-
tatively different, have deprived monistic atomism of all its epistemo-
logical merit. Quality, being now recognized as a primary attribute of 
elementary matter, is no longer reducible to locomotion. For the time 
being, one point of Aristotle's doctrine is thus vindicated. 
For quite a while change by generation and annihilation lingered in 
Scholastic speculations. But after the various principles of conservation 
discovered by physics during the last hundred years, we became convinced 
that this type of change was buried for good. Only cosmologists continued 
to talk about the creation of the universe. However, the idea that matter 
is continuously created and annihilated in every corner of the universe 
has recently acquired increasing support from a number of physicists. If it 
turns out to be a helpful hypothesis, then it may not only revolutionize 
4 See, for instance, Plato, Parmenides, 
138. 
5 Aristotle, Physics, 
209" 26-27, 221* 1. 
6 Physics, 
190a 33-37, 260" 27-29. 
61 

CHAPTER III 
Change, Quality, and 
Thought 
cosmology but also solve the greatest mystery of physics, that of gravita-
tion.7 The universe also will become more intelligible because its laws will 
then become truly invariant with respect to Time. It is thus quite possible 
that we shall return to Aristotle's views and reconsider the modern axiom 
that "the energy concept without conservation is meaningless."8 In fact, 
we already know that the concept of entropy (which will occupy us in the 
subsequent chapters) is not meaningless, in spite of the fact that the very 
nature of entropy is to increase continuously. 
Qualitative change has never ceased to be a central theme of the life 
sciences. But, time and again, the admiration produced by the opera-
tional successes of physics in almost every direction—in spite of its 
decision to ignore Change—misled us into thinking that science cannot 
study Change. Social scientists, especially, continue to pay fervent lip 
service to this principle.9 In spite of all these professions and the repeated 
arguments in their support, we may as well recognize that the highest 
ambition of any science is to discover the laws of whatever Change is 
manifest in its phenomenal domain. 
That is the most challenging task of science. Contrary to what many 
scientists maintain,10 the maturity of any science is not measured by the 
extent to which it has been able to construct a mechanical representation 
of its special phenomenal domain. Instead, as David Böhm (a physicist!) 
argues, the maturity must be judged by the ability to "consider the 
processes in which things have become what they are, starting out from 
what they once were and in which they continue to change and to become 
something else again in the future."11 To do this, even astrophysicists, not 
only biologists, have to fall back on Aristotle's doctrine of Change, of 
matter and form. Creation in the "Big Bang" hypothesis—explains 
Gamow—means "making something shapely out of shapelessness."12 
It is not therefore superfluous to raise a huge question mark in relation to 
the prevalent temper in economics to ignore qualitative change and even 
to belittle all preoccupations with it despite the fact that in the economic 
domain Change is even more the soul of what happens than in astrophysics. 
2. Change and Dialectical Concepts. The undeniably difficult problem 
7 This hypothesis will be discussed in some detail later on (Chapter VIII). Here I 
may only note that the idea that matter is continuously created and annihilated had 
already been revived in other circles. See, for instance, Henri Bergson, Creative 
Evolution (New York, 1913), pp. 246n, 368 f. 
8 Bridgman, Logic of Modern Physics, p. 127. 
9 E.g., Frank H. Knight, The Ethics of Competition (New York, 1935), p. 21. 
10 E.g., Henri Poincare, Mathematics and Science: Last Essays (New York, 1963), 
p. 8. 
11 Böhm, Causality and Chance in Modern Physics, p. 15. 
12 G. Gamow, The Creation of the Universe (New York, 1952), p. vii. 
62 

SECTION 2 Change and Dialectical Concepts 
of describing qualitative change stems from one root: qualitative change 
eludes arithmomorphic schematization. The leitmotiv of Hegel's philos-
ophy, "wherever there is movement, wherever there is life, wherever 
anything is carried into effect in the actual world, there Dialectic is at 
work," 1 3 is apt to be unpalatable to a mind seasoned by mechanistic 
philosophy. Yet the fact remains that Change is the fountainhead of all 
dialectical concepts. "Democracy," "feudalism," "monopolistic competi-
tion," for instance, are dialectical concepts because political and economic 
organizations are continuously evolving. The same applies to "living 
organism": biological life consists of a continuous and insinuating trans-
formation of inert into living matter. What makes " w a n t " a dialectical 
concept is that the means of want satisfaction can change with time and 
place: the human species would have long since vanished had our wants 
been rigid like a number. Finally, "species" is dialectical because every 
species "includes the unknown element of a distinct act of creation."14 
The reason that compelled Plato to exclude all qualitative change from 
his world of arithmomorphic ideas is obvious. The issue of whether motion 
too is excluded from this world is not discussed by Plato. But we can be 
almost certain that he had no intention—for there was no need for it— 
of conceiving that world as motionless. He thus implicitly recognized that 
an arithmomorphic structure is incompatible with qualitative change but 
not with locomotion, even though he admitted that Change consists of 
either.15 As a result, Plato was as puzzled as the generation before him 
by Zeno's paradoxes, and could not crack them. 
Through his paradoxes Zeno aimed to expose the flaws of the Pytha-
gorean doctrine of Many as opposed to Parmenides' doctrine of One. The 
Arrow Paradox, in particular, intends to prove that even locomotion is 
incompatible with a molecular (i.e., arithmomorphic) structure of Space 
and Time. For, to reinterpret Zeno, if at any given instant the arrow is 
in some discretely distinct place, how can it move to another such place ? 
Some argue that the paradox is resolved by defining locomotion as a 
relation between a time-variable and a space-coordinate.16 The fact that 
this "mathematical" solution is good enough for physics is beyond ques-
tion. However, in one respect the paradox is simpler, while in another 
more intricate, than this solution suggests. 
It is simpler, because all that Zeno does is to ignore the qualitative 
13 G. W. F. Hegel, The Logic of Hegel, tr. W. Wallace (2nd edn., London, 1904), 
p. 148. One page earlier he says that " t h e Dialectical principle constitutes the life 
and soul of scientific progress." 
14 Charles Darwin, The Origin of Species (6th edn., London, 1898), p. 30. 
15 Plato, Parmenides, 
139. 
16 E.g., Bertrand Russell, The Principles 
of Mathematics 
(Cambridge, Eng., 1903), 
chap. liv. 
63 

CHAPTER III 
Change, Quality, and 
Thought 
difference between "to be in a place" and "to move through a place," 
i.e., between "rest" and "motion." The error committed intentionally by 
Zeno and unconsciously by all who deluded themselves in believing they 
had defeated the paradox by simple mathematical formulae was to ignore 
the fact that if we refer only to an instant of time it is impossible to 
distinguish between "rest" and "motion." A perfectly instantaneous 
photograph of an automobile cannot possibly disclose whether the auto-
mobile was standing or moving. To know which was the case we need to 
observe the automobile over a time interval, however short. Without 
duration, even "rest" has no meaning. As Aristotle countered Zeno's 
paradox, both motion and rest "must occupy time."17 And to listen to 
Louis de Broglie, whose persistent preoccupation with the opposition 
between particle and wave in microphysics is unique among physicists, 
there is a subtlety in that paradox which is revealed only by modern 
physics: "That which is in a point cannot be in motion or evolve; what 
moves and evolves cannot be in any point."18 
So the paradox is more intricate than its mathematical solution leads 
us to believe, in that it discloses the perplexities surrounding the idea 
that Space and Time are not continuous wholes but mere multiplicity of 
indivisible points. As has been repeatedly pointed out by many mathe-
matical authorities, these issues are still with us in spite of the splendid 
achievements of Dedekind, Weierstrass, and Cantor in connection with 
the arithmetical continuum.19 No doubt, what these famous mathemati-
cians mainly sought was a mathematical formalization of the intuitive 
continuum. Dedekind, in particular, constantly referred his argument to 
the intuitive aspects of the line continuum.20 But Bertrand Russell's 
claim, still heard now and then, that "no other continuity [other than 
that of the arithmetical continuum] is involved in space and time,"21 
lacks any basis. The truth is that the proposition that there exists a 
one-to-one correspondence between the real numbers and the points on 
a line is either an axiom or a mathematical definition of line.22 
17 Aristotle, Physics, 234" 8-9. 
18 Louis de Broglie, Physics and Microphysics (London, 1955), p. 126. 
19 E.g., Hermann Weyl, Das Kontinuum (Leipzig, 1918), p. 16; Henri Poincare, 
The Foundations of Science (Lancaster, Pa., 1946), pp. 51 f. 
20 R. Dedekind, Essays on the Theory of Numbers (Chicago, 1924), pp. 6-12. 
Actually, until Weierstrass the irrational number had no other basis in mathematics 
than the geometrical representation inherited from the Pythagoreans. Cf. G. Cantor, 
Contributions to the Founding of the Theory of Transfinite Numbers (New York, n.d.), 
p. 17. 
21 Russell, Principles of Mathematics, p. 260. 
22 See G. D. Birkhoff, "A Set of Postulates for Plane Geometry, Based on Scale 
and Protractor," Annals of Mathematics, XXXIII (1932), 329, and Cantor, Con-
tributions, p. 30. 
64 

SECTION 3 
The Intuitive versus the Arithmetical Continuum 
Developments in mathematics—later than Russell's statement quoted 
above—prove that Aristotle's tenet, point is the limit of line not part 
of it,23 is far from groundless. 
In the first place, the modern theory of measure is a belated admission 
that at least the tenet is not concerned with a pseudo problem. Still more 
telling is Ernst Zermelo's famous theorem that the arithmetical con-
tinuum can be well ordered, which means that every real number has 
an immediate successor. Even though this immediate neighbor cannot be 
named, the proof of its existence bears on a point made earlier, namely, 
that a number has a perfectly isolated individuality.24 Whatever properties 
the arithmetical continuum might have, its structure is still that of beads 
on a string, but without the string. 
There is no need whatsoever, I believe, to insist on the point that each 
element of the arithmetical continuum is exactly like a bead, " a n individ-
ual thing absolutely distinct from the others and, moreover, absolutely 
indivisible."25 The point is now a mathematical commonplace. On its 
basis, Henri Bergson even made the penetrating observation that " t o 
posit the impenetrability of matter simply means to recognize the 
solidarity of the notions of number and space, to enunciate a property of 
numbers rather than of matter"—and at least one famous physicist went 
along with the idea wholeheartedly.26 But the metaphor involving "the 
string"—by which I wish to convey the idea that the beads of the arith-
metical continuum are packed next to each other as those of an ordinary 
necklace—might call for additional elaboration. Since this elaboration 
cannot possibly shun technicalities, it is relegated to Appendix A. 
3. The 
Intuitive 
versus 
the Arithmetical 
Continuum. 
There is real 
23 Aristotle, Physics, 
231a 25-29. 
24 Modern logicians have acquired a rather peculiar habit: each time a paradox 
springs up they legislate new rules outlawing one of the steps by which the paradox 
is reached. Clearly, the procedure means nothing less than the hara-kiri of reason. 
(Cf. H. Weyl, Philsophy 
of Mathematics 
and Natural Science, Princeton, 1949, p. 50. 
See also the sharp criticism by Henri Poincare, Foundations, 
pp. 472 ff, esp. p. 485.) 
In any case, it does not resolve the paradox; it merely shelves it. As to Zermelo's 
theorem, the proposal is to outlaw choosing a member of a set without actually 
naming it. To use the highly instructive analogy of Bertrand Russell, Introduction 
to 
Mathematical 
Philosophy 
(New York, 1930), p. 126, though it would be legal to choose 
the left boot from a pair of boots, choosing one sock out of a pair of identical socks 
would be an illegal operation. I completely fail to see why the latter choice would be 
improper in a domain like mathematics where far more bizarre operations are 
performed all the time. Is not marrying nobody to nobody—as in the mapping of 
the null set onto itself—a most bizarre idea ? 
25 Poincare, Mathematics 
and Science: Last Essays, p. 30. 
26 Henri Bergson, Essais sur les donnees immediales de la conscience (Geneva, 1945), 
p. 77; Louis de Broglie, Physique 
et microphysique 
(Paris, 1947), p. 208. (I must 
refer the reader to the French original of Broglie's work because in the English 
translation the chapter on Bergson has been altered beyond recognition.) 
65 

CHAPTER I I I 
Change, Quality, and Thought 
wisdom in the advice that science should not borrow words from the 
common vernacular for labeling its newly created concepts. If a word 
has been in use for a long time, there is a resilient stickiness between that 
word and its old connotations. Some of these connotations, although 
entirely foreign to the new concept, may slide into our mental image of it 
and cause us to lose sight of the difference between the new and the old 
concepts. Late in life, the architect of modern utilitarianism, Jeremy 
Bentham, lamented that "utility 
was an unfortunately chosen w o r d " for 
the special concept he had in mind for the new political science:27 economic 
analysis is still paying a heavy price for that unfortunate choice. Similarly, 
the use of the word "continuum" for denoting an aggregate of isolated, 
discretely distinct, elements is no doubt responsible for the frequent 
assertions that there is no other kind of continuity. Yet, before the arith-
metical continuum acquired its legal status in mathematics, the notion 
denoted by continuum was intended to express an intuitive property of 
Time, Space, and Nature itself—that of being seamless wholes. 
The dictum that "things that are in one world are not divided nor cut 
off from one another with a hatchet" goes back to the ancient Anaxag-
oras.28 In contrast to the arithmetical continuum, the world continuum 
has no holes, not even joints where a good carver could, as Plato thought, 
separate one species from another.29 Numbers more than anything else 
are artificial slits cut by us into this whole. Of course, given any whole we 
can make as many slits into it as we please. But the converse claim, 
implicit in arithmetical positivism, that the whole can be reconstructed 
from the slits alone rests on the thinnest air. 
The familiar objection of the Logical absolutism, that nobody has yet 
been able to supply a formal definition of the intuitive continuum, stands 
on a solid fact which, nevertheless, is no proof against the validity ofthat 
concept. The intuitive continuum belongs to that special category of 
concepts about which we can discourse with each other without being able 
to define them. All-out for Logic though he was (he made the most 
illustrious attempt at reducing Arithmetic to Logic), G. Frege warned 
Logical absolutists that for what is "logically simple [fundamental], a 
definition is not possible; there is nothing for it but to lead the reader or 
hearer, by means of hints, to understand the words as is intended."30 
This category is the natural habitat of all dialectical concepts, which all 
27 Jeremy Bentham, The Works of Jeremy Bentham, ed. J. Bowring (11 vols., 
Edinburgh, 1838-1843), X, 582. 
28 Anaxagoras, Fragment 8, in Burnet, Early Greek Philosophy, p. 259. 
29 Plato, Phaedrus, 265. 
30 Translations from the Philosophical Writings of Gottlob Frege, eds. P. Geach and 
M. Black (Oxford, 1960), p. 43. 
66 

SECTION 3 
The Intuitive versus the Arithmetical Continuum 
descend in fact from that of the intuitive continuum. Change itself is 
inconceivable without this continuum. 
One might also interject that under the dialectical cloak some humbugs 
could be introduced into science. Many humbugs have actually been thus 
introduced. But many others have entered science clad in a splendid 
Logical mantle. Whether we like it or not, we have no philosopher's stone 
for touching quickly a humbug. As to the intuitive continuum, it would be 
the crown of ineptitude (or of intellectual arrogance) to claim that the 
human mind has constructed the arithmetical continuum by a pure whim 
of fancy, without being guided by any preexisting conceptual form. If 
this were so, then we would have in it the greatest miracle since Creation: 
a concept that came from nowhere and out of nothing and happens never-
theless to fit so well the geometrical space and the time of physical 
sciences. The historical facts dispense us from paying attention to this 
puzzle, for they reveal that there is no such miracle. The arithmetical con-
tinuum is the product of a hard struggle with the problem of how to 
portray the intuitive continuum so as to render the greatest possible part 
of its content accessible to mathematical analysis. "At the time when the 
theory of the arithmetic continuum was developed, the only conception 
of the continuum which was extant was that of the continuum as given 
by intuition"—vouches a mathematician of great repute. 3 1 The problem 
of portraying the intuitive continuum did not cease to preoccupy the 
minds of mathematicians even after the arithmetical continuum was 
constructed in the form known to us now. There followed many interesting 
attempts at incorporating into an expanded arithmetical structure some 
features of the intuitive continuum that had been left outside the arith-
metical continuum.32 It does not do, therefore, to argue that the notion of 
the intuitive continuum became a humbug after it had served the purpose 
of leading to the arithmetical continuum. There is no analogy whatsoever 
between the case of the intuitive continuum and, say, the old belief that 
any continuous function has a derivative. That belief involved an error 
of Logic, the unwarranted identification of two different mathematical 
constructs. On the other hand, the issue of the intuitive continuum being 
an epistemological one, no conceivable test exists by which to settle it. 
We can say, however, that the impossibility of defining formally the 
intuitive continuum is a logical consequence of the opposition between the 
essential property of numbers to be distinctly discrete and the charac-
teristic property of the intuitive continuum to consist of dialectically 
overlapping elements leaving no holes. Perhaps the most adequate way 
3 1 E. W. Hobson, The Theory of Functions 
of a Real Variable and the Theory of 
Fourier's Series (2 vols., New York, 1957), I, 53. 
32 See Appendix A in this volume. 
67 

CHAPTER III 
Change, Quality, and Thought 
yet to express this peculiar structure is the suggestion of Poincare: in the 
intuitive 
continuum, 
A = Β, 
Β — C is perfectly compatible 
with 
C > A.33 By this he meant that even though A is indistinguishable from 
Β and Β from C, C may be distinguished from A—a property that recalls 
my own notion of the dialectical penumbra separating A from its opposite. 
We must, however, guard ourselves against the deadly sin of attributing 
to the signs in these relations their arithmetical meanings and then 
submitting them to an analysis by the rules of Logic. Only by doing 
precisely this could Borel reach the conclusion that Poincare's idea is 
absurd.34 The point is that, whatever novel ideas the future may offer for 
expanding the present concept of the arithmetical continuum, it does not 
appear possible to resolve the clash which at present exists between the 
reality constructed with numbers and our intuition. There is no way of 
making sense of Poincare's idea from the arithmomorphic standpoint. In 
an analogous manner, our intuition rebels at some results of arithmetical 
analysis. An excellent example is provided by Cantor's ternary set. This 
set is a subset of the interval (0, 1) and, although it has the same power 
(i.e., as many points) as that interval, its measure is zero. The oddity is 
that it would thus seem possible to remove an enormous number of 
material points from a ruler without affecting its material content and 
structure at all.35 
To conclude, however, that in this clash between our intuition and the 
edifice constructed with numbers our intuition alone errs is the highest 
form of non sequitur. One of the present crises in microphysics, for 
instance, stems precisely from the fact that the current theories assume 
that the elementary particles are mere points in a three-dimensional 
arithmetical continuum.36 And even though our present conception is that 
nature is made of indivisible quanta, the same conception rejects the 
idea that things can be "cut off from each other." As Niels Bohr insisted, 
the object and the physicist's instrument form an indivisible whole: at 
least one quantum overlaps both. Actually, the object, the instrument, and 
the observer form an indivisible whole, since there must be at least one 
quantum in the instrument and the observer. 
33 Poincare, The Foundations 
of Science, p. 46. 
34 i m i l e Borel, Probability 
and Certainty (New York, 1963), pp. 106-109. Borel's 
argument is that from A = Β, Β = C, A < G, it must necessarily follow that 
A < Β < C. For if either C < Β or Β < A, then either A < Β or Β < C respec-
tively; one of the premises would thus be contradicted. Strangely, Borel did not 
realize that his sin was duofold: as is easily seen, his argument is not sound even 
according to the rules of Logic. A formal counter example is available from my 
analysis of the threshold in choice in the article "The Pure Theory of Consumer's 
Behavior" (1936), reprinted in AE, pp. 158 f. 
35 Emile Borel, Les paradoxes de l'infini (2nd ed., Paris, 1946), pp. 189-191. 
36 David Böhm, Causality and Chance in Modem 
Physics, pp. 121-123. Naturally, 
the crisis is that in the paper-and-pencil operations there appear infinite energies. 
68 

SECTION 4 
Instants 
of Time and 
Duration 
4. Instants of Time and Duration. Concerning the issue just debated, 
one should not pass lightly over the fact that none other than a coauthor 
of Principia Mathematica, Alfred North Whitehead, has erected his entire 
philosophical system on the essential difference between the continuum 
of the world and that of arithmetical analysis. That he centered his 
argument on Time is natural: Time is the very origin of the intuitive 
continuum. But the essence of Whitehead's philosophical position is not 
altogether new. Before him, and perhaps even with greater insistence, 
Henri Bergson saw in the peculiar nature of Time the answer to many 
philosophical problems, especially that of consciousness and evolution. 
Aristotle, again, was first to argue that time is not made of point-
instants succeeding each other like the points on a line.37 The message 
has been variously echoed throughout the subsequent centuries. In 
modern times, it has been revived not only by philosophers, such as Henri 
Bergson or Whitehead, but also by prominent physicists: the "now" of 
our experience is not the point of separation in mathematics.38 Bergson 
and Whitehead, however, go much further and explain why the difference 
matters in science in spite of the fact that physics has fared splendidly 
without any overt concern for the intuitive continuum. As Whitehead 
admits,39 they both insist that the ultimate fact of nature is Change. 
Whether we prefer to use instead the word "happening," "event," or 
"process," Change requires time to be effected or to be apprehended. 
Nature at an instant or state of change at an instant are most forbidding 
abstractions. To begin with, there is no answer to the question "what 
becomes of velocity, at an instant? " Even "iron at an instant" is unintel-
ligible without the temporal character of an event. "The notion of an 
instant of time, conceived as a primary simple fact, is nonsense."40 The 
ultimate facts of nature vanish completely as we reach the abstract 
concept of point of Time. An instant has an arithmomorphic structure 
and, hence, is indifferent to "whether or no there be any other in-
stant."41 
37 Aristotle, Physics, 
231" 6-10, 234' 23. 
38 P. W. Bridgman, The Intelligent 
Individual 
and Society 
(New York, 1938), 
p. 107. 
39 Alfred North Whitehead, The Concept of Nature (Cambridge, Eng., 1930), p. 54. 
40 Alfred North Whitehead, Modes of Thought (New York, 1938), pp. 199, 207 
(my italics); An Enquiry Concerning the Principles 
of Natural Knowledge 
(2nd edn., 
Cambridge, Eng., 1925), p. 23. The same ideas occur as a leitmotiv in all Whitehead's 
philosophical works, although they are more clearly stated in the early ones. See his 
Enquiry, 
pp. 1—8, and his "Time, Space, and Material," Problems of Science and 
Philosophy, 
Aristotelian Society, Supp. vol. II, 1919. See also Erwin Schrödinger, 
Science, Theory and Man (New York, Dover Publications, 1957), p. 62. 
For Bergson's approach, see Henri Bergson, Time and Free Will (3rd edn., London, 
1913), and his Creative 
Evolution. 
41 Whitehead, Modes of Thought, pp. 199 f; Whitehead, " Time, Space, and Ma-
terial," p. 45. 
69 

CHAPTER III 
Change, Quality, and Thought 
The ultimate fact of nature, Bergson's becoming or Whitehead's event, 
includes a duration with a temporal extension.42 But "the immediate 
duration is not clearly marked out for our apprehension." It is rather 
"a wavering breadth" between the recalled past and the anticipated 
future. Thus, the time in which we apprehend nature is not "a simple 
linear series of durationless instants with certain mathematical properties 
of serial [arithmetic] continuity,"43 but a sui generis seriation of dura-
tions. Durations have neither minimum nor maximum extension. More-
over, they do not follow each other externally, but each one passes into 
others because events themselves "interfuse." No duration is discretely 
distinct from its predecessor or its successor, any more than an event 
can be completely isolated from others: "an isolated event is not an 
event."44 Durations overlap durations and events overlap events in a 
peculiar complexity, which Whitehead attempted with relative success 
to analyze through the concept of extensive abstraction and abstractive 
classes.45 However, everything he says in "vague" words leaves no doubt 
that both "duration" and "event" as conceived by Whitehead are con-
cepts surrounded by dialectical penumbras, in our sense.46 The same 
conclusion emerges, though less pointedly, from Bergson's writings: 
"That which is given, that which is real, is something intermediate 
between divided extension [the time interval] and pure inextension [the 
instant]."47 
In a nutshell, the position of Whitehead and Bergson is that Time is 
filled with events that endure and overlap in a dialectical succession. 
42 Bergson, Time and Free Will, pp. 98 ff; Bergson, Creative Evolution, pp. 1-7; 
Whitehead, "Time, Space, and Material," pp. 45 f; Whitehead, Enquiry, chap. ix. 
43 Whitehead, Concept of Nature, p. 69 and passim·, Whitehead, "Time, Space, 
and Material," p. 44; Bergson, Creative Evolution, pp. 21 f. Also P. W. Bridgman, 
The Nature of Physical 
Theory (Princeton, 1936), p. 31. 
44 Whitehead, Concept of Nature, p. 142. 
45 Whitehead, Enquiry, Part III. In my opinion, his analysis represents rather a 
simile, for in the end his operations of extensions, intersection, etc., imply discrete 
distinction, as is obvious from the diagrammatical analysis on his pp. 103, 105. In 
line with Whitehead's position, C. D. Broad, Examination of McTaggart's 
Philosophy 
(2 vols., Cambridge, Eng., 1933-1938), vol. II, part I, 284, rightly points out that 
specious presents (i.e., durations) are not adjoining. They must overlap; for otherwise 
presentness would be subject to "repeated sudden jumps." But, just like Whitehead, 
he was unable to describe the overlapping by a graph free from arithmomorphic 
"jumps" (ibid., pp. 285-288). 
46 See the following works by Whitehead: "Time, Space, and Material," p. 51; En-
quiry, p. 4 and passim; Concept of Nature, pp. 55, 59, 72 f, 75; Process and Reality: 
An 
Essay in Cosmology (New York, 1929), p. 491; Science and the Modern World (New 
York, 1939), pp. 151, 183 ff. 
47 Henri Bergson, Matter and Memory (London, 1913), p. 326 and passim. 
This 
dialectic feature of time is admirably expressed by F. H. Bradley, Appearance 
and 
Reality (2nd edn., Oxford, 1930), p. 52. " Time . . . must be made, and yet cannot be 
made, of [discretely distinct] pieces." 
70 

SECTION 4 Instants of Time and Duration 
Above all, Time is not a sequence, however dense, of durationless instants 
representable by numbers. The reason why this simplistic scheme exercises 
nevertheless such a great fascination even on some professional philoso-
phers is that we all have the tendency to think of instants rather than 
duration in relation to Time. Whether as physicists in a laboratory or as 
ordinary people going about our business, we are preoccupied primarily 
with coincidences—the coincidences of a clock's hand with one of the 
points on the dial. " I t is half past three and he has not shown up yet," or 
" I was just leaving when the telephone rang," are typical of our way to 
notice Time. We rarely pay conscious attention to the flux of Time, and 
even when we do, more often than not we again refer to coincidences. 
When we observe motion we also focus our attention on coincidences, 
the passage of the moving body through some place or other. And as 
Bergson observes, we thus imagine that the moving body "might stop 
there; and even when it does not stop there, [we] incline to consider its 
passage as an arrest, though infinitely short, because [we] must have at 
least the time to think of it." 4 8 This is how we get the illusion—against 
which Zeno aimed his paradoxes—that motion consists of a sequence 
(dense, to be sure) of rests. Nothing need be added to bring to the surface 
the full incongruity of the entirely equivalent position that Time is nothing 
but a dense sequence of durationless instants. 
A philosopher should know better than to consider the Bergson-
Whitehead position refuted by the indisputable fact that kinematics can 
operate with an arithmetical time.49 True, all that physical sciences need 
most of the time is coincidences, clock readings. Also, a physicist may very 
well argue that s = vt is shorthand for Δ s = ν At. But even in classical 
physics this explanation does not always work: one illustration is provided 
by the phenomenon of surface stress.50 Speaking from his authoritative 
knowledge of microphysics, Broglie argues that if Bergson's critique of 
durationless time and motionless movement sins at all "it is rather by an 
excess of cautiousness."51 He refers to Heisenberg's Principle of Indeter-
minacy, according to which the errors of observation, Ax and Ap, of the 
position and the momentum of a particle are subject to the inequality 
Αχ χ Ap > h (where h is Planck's constant). Hence, "if one tries to 
localize a particle by measurement or observation, in some point of the 
space, he will obtain only its position and have no knowledge whatsoever 
48 Bergson, Matter and Memory, 
p. 247. 
49 A. Grünbaum, "Are 'Infinity Machines' Paradoxical?" Science, January 26, 
1968, p. 398, commits another indiscretion as well: without citing a single text in 
support, he attributes to Whitehead the idea that durations succeed each other not 
in a dialectical continuity but "in the manner of a discrete sequence." 
50 Whitehead, Enquiry, 
pp. 2 f. 
51 Louis de Broglie, Physique 
et microphysique, 
pp. 201 f. 
71 

C H A P T E R I I I 
Change, Quality, 
and 
Thought 
about its movement."52 Actually, what distinguishes modern from 
classical physics is the developments that go against the notion of an 
event at an instant of time and occurring in a dimensionless point of space. 
A while ago I mentioned the crisis caused by the reduction of elementary 
particles to points. Equally instructive is the fact that quantum phe-
nomena beyond certain limits of smallness (10—13 cm for distance and 
10" 1 5 sec for time) present such bewildering aspects that we may safely 
judge that the very notions of Space and Time dwindle away as we try to 
push our extrapolation of objects and events to dimensionless limits.53 
With regard to the opposition between Change and arithmomorphic 
structure, Whitehead's position is essentially the same as Hegel's. Perhaps 
in no other place does Hegel state his thought on the matter more clearly 
than in the following passage: "Number is just that entirely inactive, 
inert, and indifferent characteristic in which every movement and rela-
tional process is extinguished."54 The statement has generally been 
criticized as Hegelian obscurantism and anti-scientism. Yet, as I have 
already intimated, Hegel did not intend to prove anything more than 
Whitehead, who maintained that no science can "claim to be founded upon 
observation" if it insists that the ultimate facts of nature "are to be 
found at durationless instants of time."55 Whitehead only had the benefit 
of a far greater knowledge in mathematics and sciences of fact than was 
available in Hegel's time. 
5. A Logistic Solution. Even though the onus of proof rests with him 
who affirms the operationality of an idea, no one among those who claim 
that Change can be completely described by means of arithmomorphic 
concepts seems to have shown how this can be done in all instances. 
(Merely to point at physics would be obviously insufficient even if physics 
were a model of perfection in this respect.) To my knowledge, there is 
only one exception, which thus is all the more instructive. In an oeuvre 
de jeunesse, Bertrand Russell asserted that any qualitative change can 
be represented as a relation between a time variable and the truth-value 
52 Ibid., p. 201. My translations. Also Louis de Broglie, New Perspectives in 
Physics 
(New York, 1962), p. 9. (In the first edition of this essay I used "Principle of 
Indeterminacy" instead of the consecrated "Principle of Uncertainty," not because 
I wanted to stick new labels on old bottles—a practice which is far from my con-
ception of scholarship—but because I believed that for a nonspecialist the first term 
describes better the meaning of Heisenberg's law. Subsequently, I have discovered 
that also some physicists consider the same term more appropriate. Cf. David 
Böhm, Causality and Chance in Modern Physics, 
p. 85n). 
53 Cf. Böhm, ibid., pp. 105, 155. 
54 G. W. F. Hegel, The Phenomenology 
of Mind 
(2nd edn., New York, 1931), 
p. 317. 
55 Whitehead, Enquiry, 
p. 2, and Concept of Nature, p. 57. 
72 

SECTION 6 
What Is Sameness? 
of a set of propositions "concerning the same entity."56 The assertion 
raises several questions.57 
Perhaps we ought to ask first what "same" is in such a complex chang-
ing structure; however, it appears expedient to beg this question for a 
while. Therefore, let Ε denote "the same entity." To take the simplest 
possible case of a continuous change, what Russell further means is that 
(1) for every value of the time variable f, there is one proposition "E is 
A(t)" that is true, and (2) this very proposition is false for any other value 
of the time variable. Obviously, the set of all propositions "E is A(t)" 
and, hence, the set [A(t)] have the power of continuum. There are now 
two alternatives. 
First, [A{t)\ represents a range of a quantified quality. In this case 
A(t) is a number, and Russell's solution is no better but no worse than 
the mathematical representation of locomotion. Its operationality, how-
ever, is confined to the domain of measurable qualities. 
The second alternative, upon which the matter hinges, is the case where 
Αψ^ and A(t2) for t1 Φ t2 represent two distinct pure qualities, like 
"feudalism" and "capitalism," for example. In this case, Russell's solu-
tion is purely formal, nay, vacuous. On paper, we can easily write that 
Ε is A(t) at the time t, but if A(t) is a pure quality it must be defined 
independently of the fact that it is an attribute of Ε at t. Obviously, to 
say that on January 1, 1963, the United States economic system is "the 
United States economic system on January 1, 1963" is the quintessence 
of empty talk. What we need is a proposition in which A(t) is replaced 
by, say, "free enterprise under government vigilance." If A(t) is a pure 
quality, i.e., if it cannot be represented by a number, then the repre-
sentation of continuous change by Russell's scheme runs against a most 
elementary stumbling block: any vocabulary is a finite set of symbols. 
We may grant, at most, that the structure of vocabulary is that of a 
countable infinity, but certainly it does not have the power of continuum. 
Russell's proposal thus breaks down before we can ask any question of 
the sort that a logistic philosopher would dismiss as "metaphysical." 
6. What Is Sameness? There are indeed other issues which cannot be 
pinpointed by the simple illustration I have used in the preceding dis-
cussion. The most relevant case of qualitative change is where for any 
value of t there is more than one true proposition concerning E. To take 
the simplest case, Russell's scheme tells us only this: given t Φ t', there 
56 Russell, Principles 
of Mathematics, 
p. 469. My italics. 
57 A famous criticism of Russell's idea is that of J. Μ. E. McTaggart, The Nature 
of Existence (2 vols., Cambridge, Eng., 1927), II, ch. xxxiii, on the ground that time, 
itself, is not real (cf. Chapter V, Section 5, below). My own objections, which follow 
here, come from a different direction. 
73 

CHAPTER III 
Change, Quality, and Thought 
exists a pair of propositions, "E is A " and "E is B," true at t and false 
at i', and another pair, "E is G" and "E is D," true at t' and false at t. 
Nothing is said about whether the pairs are ordered or not. But without 
the condition that they are ordered, the scheme is inadequate for describ-
ing even a quantitative change. For what would become of any physical 
law if the observer were unable to ascertain which member in each pair, 
(A, B) and (C, D), represents, say, gas pressure and which represents 
temperature ? To order each pair by using the Axiom of Choice would 
not do, even if we regard the axiom as perfectly legitimate. Therefore, 
if the scheme is to be operational at all, it must include from the outset 
the condition that one member of every pair, such as (A, B), belongs to a 
set [Pi(i)]> a n d the other to another set [P2{t)]. 
Clearly, this additional 
information corresponds to the fact that the observer must know before-
hand whether or not two attributes observed at two different times 
belong to the same qualitative range. An operational Russell's scheme, 
therefore, requires the concept of sameness not only in relation to Ε but 
to each attribute as well. To establish sameness of attribute we need to 
know what "same quality" is. Therefore, Russell's exercise in formal logic 
does not do away with what intuition posits; on the contrary, on closer 
examination it is seen that it cannot function without what it purports 
to destroy.58 
Perhaps nothing illustrates more aptly the staggering issues raised by 
"sameness" than one of Bridgman's remarks. With the discovery of rela-
tivity in physics, it is perfectly possible that two observers traveling in 
different directions through space may record a signal from a third source 
as two different facts. For instance, one observer may see "a flash of 
yellow light" while the other may only feel "a glow of heat on his finger." 
How can they be sure then that they have reported the same event, since 
they cannot turn to simultaneity in the absence of absolute time?59 
Bridgman's point is that even relativity physics presupposes sameness in 
some absolute sense although it fails to show how it could be established. 
58 The fallacy of believing that the weapon of pure logic suffices by itself to kill 
any creature of intuition is not uncommon. An instance of this fallacy is discussed 
in the author's paper, "The End of the Probability Syllogism?" 
Philosophical 
Studies, February 1954, pp. 31 f. An additional example is the refutation of historical 
laws on "strictly logical reasons." 
(Karl R. Popper, The Poverty 
of 
Historicism, 
Boston, 1957, pp. ix—xi.) The very first premise of Popper's argument, " the course of 
human history is strongly influenced by the growth of human knowledge," is plainly 
a historical law. That is, the conclusion that a set of propositions is empty is derived 
from a proposition belonging to the very same set! We should observe, however, that 
in a new,footnote (The Logic of Scientific 
Discovery, 
New York, 1959, p. 279n2) 
Popper takes a more softened line, somewhat agnostic. 
59 Bridgman, Nature of Physical 
Theory, p. 77, and especially his Reflections of a 
Physicist 
(2nd edn., New York, 1955), p. 318 ff. 
74 

SECTION 6 
What Is Sameness? 
The upshot is that we have to recognize once and for all that same-
ness is an internal affair of a single mind, whether an individual one 
or one embracing several individual minds. We have gone too far, it 
appears, in believing that natural phenomena can be reduced to signal 
registrations alone and hence that mind has no direct role in the process 
of observation. Mind, on the contrary, is as indispensable an instrument of 
observation as any physical contrivance. The point is of paramount 
importance for social sciences, and I shall return to it later on. 
On the philosophical problem of "sameness," one can only say that 
it is as thorny as it is old. How thorny it is can be shown in a brief sum-
mary of Whitehead's ideas on the subject. According to Whitehead, we 
apprehend nature in terms of uniform objects and unique events, the 
former being ingredients of the latter. "Objects are elements in nature 
which do not pass." Because they are "out of time," they "can 'be 
again,'" so that we can say "Hullo, there goes Cleopatra's Needle again." 
Events, on the contrary, once passed "are passed, and can never be 
again." At most, we may recognize that one event is analogous to 
another.60 One cannot help feeling that this dualist view is far from 
settling the issue, and that "analogous events" stand in the same relation 
to one another as two objects recognized as being the same. Moreover, 
one is still baffled by the question of whether any object, such as 
Cleopatra's Needle, is really out of time so that thousands of years from 
now we could still say "there it goes again." And if we think in millions 
of years, we should doubt whether the universe itself is "out of time." 
Besides, in describing nature we are interested as much in uniform objects 
as in analogous events. That is, keeping within Whitehead's system, we 
know that science is equally concerned with whether we can say "there 
goes another 'King of England' again" and whether we can say "there 
goes another 'coronation' again." Actually, science may even dispense 
with objects, but not with events. The electron, for instance, "cannot be 
identified, it lacks 'sameness.'"61 We cannot therefore say "there goes 
the same electron again," but only that "there goes another electron-
event again." 
But then, why should we distinguish between object, i.e., Being, and 
event, i.e., Becoming? In the end, we verify what we have known of old, 
that dualism is full of snags. The only way out is to recognize that the 
distinction between object and event is not discrete but dialectical, and 
eo Whitehead, Concept of Nature, pp. 35, 77 f, 143 ff, 169 ff; Whitehead, Enquiry, 
pp. 61 ff, 167 f. 
61 Schrödinger, Science, Theory and Man, p. 194; Bridgman, Intelligent 
Individual 
and Society, pp. 32 f; Louis de Broglie, Continu et discontinu en physique moderne 
(Paris, 1941), p. 75. 
75 

C H A P T E R I I I 
Change, Quality, and 
Thought 
probably this is Whitehead's message too.62 Any further discussion of 
this point, however, would involve us too deeply in pure Hegelian 
Dialectics. 
7. How Numerous Are Qualities? The existence of quality in the world 
as seen by man would pose no problem whatsoever for science if the 
number of qualities were finite. Until recently, physics could afford to 
ignore the problem precisely because the number of qualitatively different 
particles seemed to be finite, actually very small. But with the latest 
discoveries, no limit to the number of new particles appears in sight, so 
that some physicists now recognize that there is "no choice but to con-
sider the consequences [for the orientation of physics] of the assumption 
that the number of such significant qualities is not limited."63 The 
qualitative infinity of nature, however, raises (or revives) a quite difficult 
problem. In my first discussion of Russell's formalization of change 
(Section 5), I have shown that an impasse is reached because words are 
not as numerous as pure qualities. But perhaps the impasse might be 
cleared by using numbers instead of words for labeling qualities. An 
example of such a continuous catalogue is readily available: each color in 
the visual spectrum can be identified by the wave length of the equivalent 
unmixed color. As is almost needless to add, such a cataloguing does not 
necessarily imply the measurability of the range of the qualities involved. 
However, the question whether the cataloguing is possible forms a pre-
requisite to that of measurability, although for some reason or other the 
point has not been recognized, at least in economics, until recently. Clearly, 
there is no reason why the cardinal power of all the qualities we can think 
of even in a simple set-up should not exceed that of the arithmetical 
continuum. On the contrary, as I have argued in relation to individual 
expectations and preferences,64 there are good reasons for the view that 
real numbers are not always sufficient for cataloguing a set of qualities. In 
other words, the manifold of our thoughts differs from the arithmetical 
continuum not only by its indivisible continuity but also by its dimen-
sionality.65 As we say in mathematics, the continuum of the real number 
system forms only a simple infinity. 
The suggestion, natural at this juncture, of using more than one real 
number, i.e., a vector, for labeling qualities would still not reduce quality 
to number. For, as set theory teaches us, no matter how many coordinates 
we add, no set of vectors can transcend simple infinity in power. There is 
62 Cf. Whitehead, Concept of Nature, pp. 166 f. 
63 David Böhm, Causality 
and Chance in Modern Physics, 
p. 134, also pp. 123, 
133-136. 
64 See "Choice, Expectations and Measurability" (1954), reprinted in AE. 
65 I am not at all sure that these two aspects do not boil down to a single one. 
76 

SECTION 8 
The Continuity of Qualities 
an intimate connection between this mathematical proposition and the 
well-known difficulties of biological classification. 
It was Linnaeus who first struck upon the idea of using a two-word 
name for each species, the first word representing the genus, the second 
the species within the genus. By now all naturalists agree that any taxo-
nomical term, in spite of its two-dimensionality, does not cover one 
immutable, arithmomorphic form but a dialectical penumbra of forms. 
The fact that they still use Linnaeus' binary system clearly indicates that 
the manifold of biological species is in essence more complex than simple, 
linear infinity. The problem of biological classification therefore is not 
equivalent to that illustrated by the continuous cataloguing of colors, 
and hence the predicament of naturalists would not come to an end even 
if a numerical vector would be used for labeling species. 
One naturalist after another has intuitively apprehended that—as 
Yves Delage put it—"whatever we may do we will never be able to 
account for all affinities of living beings by classifying them in classes, 
orders, families, etc."66 Many have argued that this is because in the 
domain of living organisms only form (shape) counts and shape is a fluid 
concept that resists any attempt at classification.67 Some have simply 
asserted that form cannot be identified by number.68 Even Edmund 
Husserl, though educated as a mathematician, thought the point to be 
obvious: "The most perfect geometry"—he asserts—cannot help the 
student to express in precise concepts "that which in so plain, so under-
standing, and so entirely suitable a way he expresses in the words: 
notched, indented, lens-shaped, umbelliform, and the like—simple con-
cepts which are essentially and not accidentally inexact, and are therefore 
also unmathematical."69 Yet a simple proposition of the theory of cardinal 
numbers vindicates the gist of all these intuitive claims. It is the proposi-
tion that the next higher cardinal number mathematics has been able to 
construct after that of the arithmetical continuum is represented by the 
set of all functions of a real variable, i.e., by a set of forms. Clearly, then, 
forms cannot be numbered. 
8. The Continuity of Qualities. The peculiar nature of most qualitative 
structures leads to a somewhat similar sort of difficulty in connection 
66 Quoted in G. G. Simpson, "The Principles of Classification and a Classification 
of Mammals," Bulletin of the American Museum of Natural History, L X X X V (1945), 
19, except that I have translated Delage's words into English. 
67 E.g., Theodosius Dobzhansky, Evolution, 
Genetics, and Man (New York, 1955), 
chap, x, and especially the eloquent picture on p. 183. 
68 E.g., P. B. Medawar, The Uniqueness 
of the Individual 
(New York, 1958), 
pp. 117 ff. 
69 Edmund Husserl, Ideas: 
General Introduction 
to Pure 
Phenomenology 
(New 
York, 1931), p. 208. Italics are Husserl's. 
77 

CHAPTER III 
Change, Quality, and 
Thought 
with their ordering. I can best illustrate this difficulty by an example 
from my own work. Thirty years ago, as I was trying to unravel the 
various thoughts underlying early and contemporary writings on utility 
and to map them out as transparent "postulates," I became convinced 
of the logical necessity of settling first of all one issue, that with which 
Postulate A of one of my early papers is concerned.70 This postulate 
states that given a preferential set [Ca]—where α is a real number and 
[Ca] is preferentially ordered so that Ca is preferred to Cß if a > β—and 
C not belonging to [6'J, there exists an i such that C and C\ are indifferent 
combinations. At the time, the postulate bothered me; intuitively I felt 
that the accuracy of human choice cannot be compared with that of a 
perfect instrument, but I was unable to construct a formal example to 
convince myself as well as the few colleagues with whom I discussed the 
matter that Postulate A can be negated. The most I could do was to 
introduce a stochastic factor in choice—which, I believe, was a quite new 
idea. But this still did not settle my doubts, nor those of my colleagues, 
about my Postulate A. 
In retrospect, the objections of my colleagues and my inability—due 
to a deficiency in my mathematical knowledge—to meet these objections 
are highly instructive and also apropos. My critics generally felt that 
Postulate A is entirely superfluous: some argued that it is impossible to 
pass from nonpreference to preference without effectively reaching a stage 
of indifference;71 others held that since [Ca] is continuous there is no room 
in it for other items, not even for one. An example which I offered as a 
basis for discussion was too clumsy for everyone concerned: a hypothetical 
wine lover who always prefers more to less wine but has nevertheless a 
very slight preference for red wine, so that between two equal quantities 
of wine he prefers the red. I denoted by yr and zw the quantities of red 
and white wine respectively, but as I came to write xr > xw, I invited 
the objection that "x is x." Today the connection between the example 
and the old notion of a hierarchy of wants may seem obvious, but I was 
unable to clarify my own thoughts on the matter until much later, after 
I came across an objection raised by a reviewer to one of Harold Jeffrey's 
propositions. Learning then for the first time of lexicographic ordering, 
I was able to solve my problem.72 However, my initial difficulties with the 
example of the wine lover bear upon a point I wish to make now. 
70 See my essays, " The Pure Theory of Consumer's Behavior " (1936) and "Choice, 
Expectations and Measurability " (1954), reprinted in AE. 
71 From recent discussions I learned that even mathematicians are apt to raise this 
objection. 
72 "Choice, Expectations and Measurability" (1954), in AE. Perhaps this bit of 
personal history suffices to show how indispensable to the student of economics is a 
substantial familiarity with every branch of mathematics. 
78 

SECTION 9 
A Critique 
of 
Arithmomorphism 
Either set, [yT~\ or [zw], taken by itself, is continuous in the mathematical 
sense. Consequently, no brutal offense is committed by regarding, say, 
[,xr] as the arithmomorphic representation of the preference continuum 
in case only red wine is available. However, if both red and white wine are 
introduced into the picture the arithmomorphic representation of the wine 
lover's preference suddenly becomes discontinuous: in the corresponding 
lexicographic ordering (with respect to the subscript) there is no element 
between xw and xr, or alternatively, xr is the immediate successor of xw. 
On the other hand, there is no reason why preference itself should become 
discontinuous because of qualitative variations in the object of preference. 
To argue that preference is discontinuous because its arithmomorphic 
simile is so, is tantamount to denying the three-dimensionality of material 
objects on the ground that their photographs have only two dimensions. 
The point is that an arithmomorphic simile of a qualitative continuum 
displays spurious seams that are due to a peculiar property of the medium 
chosen for representing that continuum. The more complex the qualitative 
range thus formalized, the greater the number of such artificial seams. 
For the variety of quality is continuous in a sense that cannot be faith-
fully mirrored by a mathematical multiplicity. 
9. A Critique of Arithmomorphism. 
Like all inventions, that of the 
arithmomorphic concept too has its good and its bad features. On the 
one hand, it has speeded the advance of knowledge in the domain of 
inert matter; it has also helped us detect numerous errors in our thinking, 
even in our mathematical thinking. Thanks to Logic and mathematics in 
the ultimate instance, man has been able to free himself of most animistic 
superstitions in interpreting the wonders of nature. On the other hand, 
because an arithmomorphic concept has absolutely no relation to life, 
to anima, we have been led to regard it as the only sound expression of 
knowledge. As a result, for the last two hundred years we have bent all 
our efforts to enthrone a superstition as dangerous as the animism of old: 
that of the Almighty Arithmomorphic Concept. Nowadays, one would 
risk being quietly excommunicated from the modern Akademia if he 
denounced this modern superstition too strongly. The temper of our 
century has thus come to conform to one of Plato's adages: "He who 
never looks for numbers in anything, will not himself be looked for in 
the number of the famous men."73 That this attitude has also some 
unfortunate consequences becomes obvious to anyone willing to drop 
the arithmomorphic superstition for a while: today there is little, if any, 
inducement to study Change unless it concerns a measurable attribute. 
Very plausibly, evolution would still be a largely mysterious affair had 
73 Plato, Philebus, 17. 
79 

CHAPTER III 
Change, Quality, and Thought 
Darwin been born a hundred years later. The same applies to Marx and, 
at least, to his analysis of society. With his creative mind, the twentieth-
century Marx would have probably turned out to be the greatest econo-
metrician of all times. 
Denunciations of the arithmomorphic superstition, rare though they 
are, have come not only from old-fashioned or modern Hegelians, but 
recently also from some of the highest priests of science, occasionally even 
from exegetes of logical positivism. Among the Nobel laureates, at least 
P. W. Bridgman, Erwin Schrödinger, and Werner Heisenberg have cau-
tioned us that it is the arithmomorphic concept (indirectly, Logic and 
mathematics), not our knowledge of natural phenomena, that is deficient.74 
Ludwig Wittgenstein, a most glaring example in this respect, recognizes 
"the bewitchment of our understanding by the means of our [rigidly 
interpreted] language."75 The arithmomorphic rigidity of logical terms 
and symbols ends by giving us mental cramps. We can almost hear Hegel 
speaking of "the dead bones of Logic" and of "the battle of Reason . . . 
to break up the rigidity to which the Understanding has reduced every-
thing."76 But even Hegel had his predecessors: long before him Pascal 
had pointed out that "reasoning is not made of barbara and 
baralipton,"77 
The temper of an age, however, is a peculiarly solid phenomenon which 
advertises only what it likes and marches on undisturbed by the self-
criticism voiced by a minority. In a way, this is only natural: as long as 
there is plenty of gold dust in rivers why should one waste time in felling 
timber for gold-mine galleries ? 
There can be no doubt that all arguments against the sufficiency of 
arithmomorphic concepts have their roots in that "mass of unanalyzed 
prejudice which Kantians call 'intuition,'"78 and hence would not exist 
without it. Yet, even those who, like Russell, scorn intuition for the 
sake of justifying a philosophical flight of fancy, could not possibly 
apprehend or think—or even argue against the Kantian prejudice— 
without this unanalyzed function of the intellect. The tragedy of any 
strain of positivism is that in order to argue out its case it must lean 
heavily on something which according to its own teaching is only a 
74 Bridgman, Logic of Modern 
Physics, 
p. 62, and Nature 
of Physical 
Theory, 
p. 113; Erwin Schrödinger, What Is Life? (Cambridge, Eng., 1944), p. 1; Werner 
Heisenberg, Physics and Philosophy: 
The Revolution in Modern Science (New York, 
1958), pp. 85 ff. 
75 L. Wittgenstein, Philosophical 
Investigations 
(New York, 1953), I, 109. My 
translation. 
7® The Logic of Hegel, p. 67. 
77 Blaise Pascal, "De l'esprit geometrique et de l'art de persuader," in Oeuvres 
complktes, ed. J. Chevalier (Paris, 1954), p. 602. 
78 Russell, Principles 
of Mathematics, 
p. 260. 
80 

SECTION 9 
A Critique of 
Arithmomorphism 
shadow. For an excellent illustration in point we may turn to a popular 
treatise which aims to prove that if "no possible sense-experience" can 
determine the truth or falsehood of a nontautological proposition then 
"it is metaphysical, . . . neither true nor false but literally senseless."79 
After reading this statement on the first page of the preface one cannot 
help wondering in what way the rest of the book can support it if the 
statement is true—as its author claims. Certainly, the subsequent argu-
ment has no relation whatever to sense-experience—except, of course, 
the visual perception of black letters, nay, spots on a white background. 
The frequent diatribes against this or that particular dialectical concept 
are guilty of the same sin. Cornelius Muller, for example, preaches the 
abolition of the concept of community. The reasoning is that since "the 
several examples of one class of communities are not identical and [since] 
two adjacent classes of communities are not distinct from one another 
. . . the word has no meaning."80 But the argument is obviously self-
destroying, for the meaning of the premise is negated by its own con-
clusion. We have not learned, it seems, everything from the legendary 
Cretan liar of the ancient sophist school. 
The propounders of the views such as those just mentioned—or this 
author for that matter—would not go to the trouble of discussing the 
issues of dialectical concepts if we thought that these issues have no 
bearing upon scientific orientation. It is therefore not surprising that 
Muller, who argues that there are no "real entities"—whatever this 
might mean—unless we can distinguish them in the same way we distin-
guish one carbon isotope from another, begins his attack on " community " 
by asking "Is there a mechanistic theory that . . . conforms to the true 
nature of communities ? " 8 1 The moral is plain: social sciences and biology 
should cling to the universality of mechanics, that is, to a retrograde 
position long since abandoned even by physics. 
Unfortunately for everyone concerned, life phenomena are not as simple 
as that, for not all their aspects are as pellucid as an arithmomorphic 
concept. Without dialectical concepts life sciences could not fulfill their 
task. As I have argued earlier, there is no way of defining "democracy" 
or "competition," for instance, so as to comply with Muller's criterion 
of real entity. The most we can do for a greater precision is to distinguish 
species within each genus, as in biology: "American democracy," "British 
democracy," "monopolistic competition," "workable competition," etc. 
Let us observe that even the familiar and apparently simple notion of 
79 A. J. Ayer, Language, Truth and Logic (2nd edn., New York, 1946), p. 31. 
80 Cornelius H. Muller, " Science and Philosophy of the Community Concept," 
American Scientist, XLVI (1958), 307 f. 
81 Ibid., 298. 
81 

C H A P T E R I I I 
Change, 
Quality, 
and 
Thought 
the struggle for existence has many shades of meaning "which pass into 
each other"82 and, hence, is dialectical. Finally, let us observe that the 
only proof of evolution is the dialectical relation of species in their phylo-
genetic classification. Should we one day succeed in constructing an 
arithmomorphic concept of species (or of something equivalent), that 
very day biology will have to return to the pre-Lamarckian views: species 
were created immutable and by fiat. A self-identical species, a self-identical 
community, anything self-identical, cannot account for biological or 
social evolution: "self-identity has no life."83 More explicitly, no process 
of change can be completely decomposed into arithmomorphic parts, 
themselves devoid of change.84 And it is because society and its organiza-
tion are in constant flux that genuine justice cannot mean rigid interpreta-
tion of the words in the written laws. Only bitter and unnecessary conflict, 
as Bridgman correctly observed, can result from ignoring the dialectical 
nature of "duty" and using the term as if it has the "sharpness and 
uniqueness of a mathematical concept."85 
Robert Mayer's outcry that " a single number has more true and 
permanent value than a vast library of hypotheses" was perfectly in 
place. He spoke as a physicist addressing physicists, and hence there 
was no need for him to add, "provided that that number helps us describe 
reality adequately." Omissions such as this one have allowed similar 
statements by the greatest authorities in science to be interpreted as 
applying to any number. The fascination of our intellect by number is 
not easily conquered. It is responsible also for the fact that Galileo's 
advice to astronomers and physicists has been transformed into a defini-
tion of essence: "science is measurement." The consequences of these 
gratifying generalizations have not always been fortunate. 
Planck, for example, observed that by exaggerating the value of meas-
ure we might completely lose touch with the real object. Of the many 
examples that could illustrate the point, one is particularly piquant. 
From as far back as we can go in history a man's degree of aging has 
been measured by his age. Because of this biologists have simply thought 
little, if at all, of aging. So, recently they suddenly discovered "an un-
solved problem of biology": age may be an average measure of aging, 
but aging is something entirely different from growing old in years.86 
A still more piquant example is the fact that we keep on measuring 
8 2 Darwin, Origin of Species, 
p. 46. 
8 3 G. W. F. Hegel, Hegel's Science of Logic (2 vols., London, 1951), II, 68. 
8 4 Whitehead, Modes of Thought, pp. 131 f. See also Hegel's Science of Logic, 
II, 
251 f. 
8 5 Bridgman, Intelligent 
Individual 
and Society, p. 116. 
8 6 See Medawar, The Uniqueness 
of the Individual, 
chap. ii. 
82 

SECTION 10 
Thought and " Thought" 
"intelligence" by the familiar I.Q. but we do not known exactly what is 
being measured.87 
Undoubtedly, for the sciences concerned with phenomena almost devoid 
of form and quality, measure usually means expanded knowledge. In 
physics, which has quite appropriately been defined as the quantitative 
knowledge of nature, there is no great harm if measurement is regarded 
as an end in itself. But in other fields the same attitude may lead to 
empty theorizing, at the very least. The advice "look for number" is 
wise only if it is not interpreted as meaning "you must find a number in 
everything." We do not have to represent beliefs by numbers just because 
our mind feels similarly embarrassed if it has to predict the outcome of 
a coin-tossing or the political conditions in France ten years from now. 
The two events are not instances of the same phenomenon. A measure 
for all uncertainty situations, even though a number, has absolutely no 
scientific value, for it can be obtained only by an intentionally mutilated 
representation of reality. We hear people almost every day speaking of 
"calculated risk," but no one yet can tell us how he calculated it so that 
we could check his calculations. "Calculated risk" if taken literally is a 
mere parade of mathematical terms.88 
It was under the influence of the idea "there is a number in everything " 
that we have jumped to the conclusion "where there is 'more' and 'less' 
there is also quantity," and thus enslaved our thoughts to what I have 
called "the ordinalist's error"—which is to hold that wherever there is 
ordering there also is measure, an ordinal one at least. 
10. Thought and "Thought." 
At first and for long ages, animism was 
man's scientific faith: everything that moves, from clouds and rivers to 
living creatures, moves because it has a soul like that of which man is 
directly aware. Slowly, inanimate things were eliminated from the 
category anima. As far as we know, it was Leonardo da Vinci who, in one 
of his numerous unpublished notes and essays, first dissented from 
animism. In a vein that admirably matches the present machinistic faith, 
he proclaimed that " a bird is an instrument working according to mathe-
matical law, which instrument it is within the capacity of man to reproduce 
with all its movements" (Macchine per volare, n.d.). The time seems to 
have been ripe for dissenting. For shortly thereafter and independently, 
the Spanish physician and philosopher Gomez Pereira 
(Antoniana 
Margarita, 
1554), using his medical knowledge, expounded the general 
87 For a succint discussion of this point, see J . P. Guilford " Intelligence Has Three 
Facets," Science, 
May 10, 1968, pp. 615—618, as well as the brief remarks in the next 
section, below. 
8 8 For the argument I have offered against the measurability of even documented 
belief, see my articles "Choice, Expectations and Measurability" 
(1954) 
and, 
especially, " T h e Nature of Expectation and Uncertainty" (1958), reprinted in AE. 
83 

C H A P T E R I I I 
Change, Quality, and 
Thought 
thesis that all life-bearing structures consist of movements only: except-
ing man, they all are automata without soul.89 Because this reversed 
doctrine frees us from recognizing many a mystery of nature, it has ever 
since exercised an immense fascination for the human mind even though 
it obviously foreshadowed the ultimate negation of mind itself.90 Hence, 
the periodic ebullient fashions to which it has given rise. 
One hundred years after Pereira, Descartes lent to the doctrine his 
great authority by arguing that "the living body is a machine . . . not 
more, not less than the movements of a clock or of any other automaton " 
(De l'Homme, 
1664). After another hundred years, Julien de La Mettrie 
(L' Homme Machine, 1748) pushed further the theme and supported it by 
a host of sophisticated details. The following century, Charles Babbage, 
with characteristic British practicalism, moved toward applying the 
doctrine to facts by attempting to construct an Analytical Engine.91 
After still another hundred years, there came the current fashion with its 
fervent belief that only some temporary imperfections of the present state 
of the arts stand in our way of constructing a machine that can "compete 
with men in all purely intellectual fields"—as the British logician, A. M. 
Turing, assuredly proclaims.92 
It is generally argued that what makes the claim valid this time is the 
modern discoveries and innovations in electronics.93 The truth is that the 
89 See J. M. Guardia, " Philosophes Espagnols: Gomez Pereira," Revue philoso-
phique de la France et de VEtranger, XXVIII (1889), 270-291, 382-407, 607-634. 
90 To emphasize this negation G. Ryle, The Concept of Mind (London, 1949), 
pp. 15 ff, spoke of the Mind as "the Ghost in the Machine," or "the Horse in the 
Railway Engine." (Actually, the metaphor belongs to a German novelist and had 
already been mentioned by Max Planck, The New Science, New York, 1959, p. 82.) 
Interesting also is Ryle's conclusion in " The Physical Basis of Mind: A Philosophers' 
Symposium," The Physical Basis of Mind, ed. P. Laslett (Oxford, 1952), pp. 75-79, 
namely, that " 'Mind' and 'Matter' are echoes from the hustings of philosophy and 
prejudice the solutions of all problems posed in terms of them." For a penetrating, 
albeit impassioned, rebuttal see A. Koestler, The Ghost in the Machine (New York, 
1967). 
91 See Β. V. Bowden, "A Brief History of Computation," Faster than 
Thought: 
A Symposium 
on Digital Computing Machines, ed. Β. V. Bowden (London, 1953), 
pp. 3-31. 
92 A. M. Turing, "Computing Machinery and Intelligence," Mind, LIX (1950), 
460. 
93 E.g., W. R. Ashby, "Design for a Brain," Electronic Engineering, X X (1948), 
379, argues that, before electronics, machines were mechanical, but now they have a 
richer meaning because of the feedback, an idea propounded also by Norbert Wiener, 
Cybernetics or Control and Communication in the Animal and the Machine (2nd edn., 
New York, 1961). Yet the feedback does not belong only to electronics. The principle 
of virtual displacements used by classical mechanics in analyzing the stability of 
equilibrium (later imported into economics) clearly implies the feedback. Formally, 
there is no difference between Ashby's homeostat (his pp. 380 f) and a system of a 
number of balls left to themselves inside a bowl; both will go back to their "equili-
brium " if disturbed within reasonable bounds. 
84 

SECTION 10 
Thought and " Thought" 
belief in the validity of the claim has been fed and continues to be fed by 
the growing cult of the Almighty Arithmomorphic Concept. Indeed, the 
general blueprint of the modern automata, a path-breaking article by 
Turing, preceded by at least five years the first electronic computer.94 
Turing himself insists that the real basis of a computer's performance is 
its mechanistic blueprint: electronics only speeds up the operation.95 
The criterion for verifying the claim has also been set up first by 
Turing. As we should expect from a professional logician, Turing starts 
by denying any meaning to the question "Can a machine think?" unless 
"think" and "machine" are defined unambiguously. So he replaces it by 
another question "in relatively unambiguous words": Can a machine 
imitate the human mind ? Specifically, would a human interrogator com-
municating with a concealed interlocutor only by typed messages guess 
wrongly the nature of that interlocutor as often in case it is a machine as 
in case it is a human?96 The "test" is unquestionably reasonable. It has 
been used in answering numberless questions such as "Can this Californian 
wine be taken for a certain St. Emilion from France?" The question is 
whether the test allows for all differences to be taken into account (except, 
of course, the difference of "labels"). The test for the two wines, for 
instance, should not exclude the difference of color. Pretending to be color-
blind in order to argue that those who insist upon their seeing something 
that cannot be reduced to colorless tone are either blind to tone or have 
metaphysical hallucinations will never work. But this is precisely what is 
done by those who claim that machines think. 
Turing's artificial specimen of the imitation dialogue between a human 
and a computer is patently designed to foster belief. Naturally, it has 
become a quite popular trade article. For an excerpt: 
Interrogator: Would you say Mr. Pickwick reminded you of Christmas ? 
Witness.: In a way. 
Interrogator: Yet Christmas is a winter's day, and I do not think 
Mr. Pickwick would mind the comparison. 
Witness: I don't think you're serious. By a winter's day one means a 
typical winter's day, rather than a special one like Christmas.97 
94 A. M. Turing, " On Computable Numbers, with an Application to the Ent-
scheidungsproblem," Proceedings 
of the London Mathematical 
Society, Ser. 2, XLII 
(1936), 230-265, and "A Correction," ibid., XLIII (1937), 544-546. 
95 Turing, "Computing Machinery," p. 439. 
96 Ibid., pp. 433-435. Time and again, a logical positivist does not seem to be 
aware of his predicament. Turing does not object that "a human interlocutor," too, 
is an ambiguous term. Does it include a Newton or an Einstein ? If not, where do we 
stop ? Also, he seems indifferent to the obvious boomerang of his position as he comes 
to admitting that even for a machine "it is difficult to frame the definitions so as to 
satisfy [the listed] conditions," which—it should be noted—are formulated in 
dialectical terms! 
»' Ibid., p. 446. 
85 

CHAPTER III 
Change, Quality, and, Thought 
Turing even claims that the specimen illustrates the yet unrealized 
potentialities not of a complex but of a purely digital computer. But he 
shuns any unambiguous definition of the test dialogue, even some Socratic 
elaboration on its nature. His article does not lead one to believe that there 
may be some restriction as to what the dialogue may involve. True, 
Turing reflects in passing that, possibly, one should not expect the 
machine to answer questions such as " W h a t do you think of Picasso ? "— 
which does not seem an essentially different kind of question from that 
pertaining to Mr. Pickwick. There is no doubt, though, that one can ask 
the interlocutor whether " i t " plays tick-tack-toe, NIM, checkers, etc., 
until one gets the answer "No." The question "Are you willing to start 
learning now how to play it ? " will then provide an infallible acid test. For 
a human is programmed to start learning anything at any time. By contrast, 
a machine programmed to learn, say, checkers already knows how to 
play it: if it does not know, it is ipso facto not programmed to learn it 
either. So, the answer of the machine will perforce give up the show there 
and then. I also contend that the same result will obtain (with less assur-
ance, however) by asking the interlocutor to do the questioning for a 
change. For to think up some simple yet highly interesting questions is on 
the whole far more difficult (even for a human mind) than to formulate 
complex technical questions by scanning the memorized material. 
One may interject that a Turing universal machine, i.e., a machine that 
can perform any operation performed by any other machine, would be 
immune to the above acid tests. The rub is that such a machine exists 
only on paper, for its blueprint requires that its capacity for instructions 
should be limitless.98 
When everything is said and done, it is seen that all proofs of the 
"computer performance = the human thought" involve the 
eternal 
verbal swindle. "Thinking" is only what computers do (or may do on 
paper), not what the primitive computer, the human brain, does in f a c t . " 
As we have seen in Turing's case, the justification offered is that "intel-
ligence" or "thinking " are ambiguous notions in their general acceptance. 
The equation thus becomes a tautology in the game. Curiously, in the 
98 The theoretical interest of infinite capacity computers is not to be denied. Ibid., 
pp. 438 f. 
99 Even the more careful writers on the subject are not always free from this 
inversion sin. For example, we read in John von Neumann, " The General and Logical 
Theory of Automata," Cerebral Mechanisms in Behavior: The Hixon 
Symposium, 
ed. L. A. Jeffress (New York, 1951), p. 10: "I shall consider the living organisms 
as if they were purely digital automata." Few are the specialists in this field who, 
like W. S. McCulloch and W. Pitts, "A Logical Calculus of the Ideas Immanent in 
Nervous Activity," Bulletin of Mathematical Biophysics, V (1943), 117, warn the 
reader that they do not conceive " the formal equivalence to be a factual explanation. 
Per contra!" 
86 

SECTION 10 
Thought and " Thought' 
finale it emerges again with its old ambiguous meaning, this time followed 
by Q.E.D. in the boldest possible face. The point is admirably illustrated 
by W. R. Ashby's "intelligence-amplifiers" for which he argues that 
"intelligence" consists only of the faculty of selecting a particular ele-
ment out of a set of alternatives.100 This view does not alter the brute fact 
that the human mind includes many other intellectual faculties. Nor does 
it turn every selecting operation into an intellectual feat. Although a river 
sieves out sand from pebbles, it would be absurd to endow it with in-
telligence (unless we return to early animism). 
True, ever since the beginning of our century, when Alfred Binet first 
raised the question, psychologists have sought in vain an arithmomorphic 
definition of intelligence in simpler terms. "There is no generally accepted 
meaning of the term."101 And there is none because intelligence, like most 
manifestations of life, is a dialectical notion. The penumbra surrounding 
it may be signalled by examples at will. As one feels uncertain about the 
usage of a word, one reaches for the dictionary and reads the explanation. 
One also reaches for the rail and grasps it if one feels he is losing his 
balance on a staircase. Which action, if any, is a manifestation of 
intelligence ? 
As a whole, however, the general picture of intelligence as studied by 
psychologists does not differ from that corresponding to the "vulgar" 
meaning. It includes all activities from that of memorizing, remembering, 
calculating, and ratiocinating, to thinking up new concepts and synthesiz-
ing diverse elements into unified abstractions, recognizing analogies of 
form and content by abstracting from the details of the particular, 
reasoning with dialectical concepts, and composing artistic works. It is 
against this incomplete (I am sure) list of activities that we must judge 
the claims that computers not only "possess" intelligence, even amplified 
intelligence, but also provide the only efficient means for studying how 
the human brain solves problems.102 
Most curiously, no such extravagant claims have accompanied other 
100 w. R. Ashby, "Design for an Intelligence-Amplifier," Automata Studies, eds. 
C. E. Shannon and J. McCarthy (Princeton, 1956), pp. 220, 233. 
101 W. C. Halstead, "Brain and Intelligence," Cerebral Mechanisms in Behavior, 
pp. 246, 251; see also J. P. Guilford, "Intelligence Has Three Facets," pp. 615-620. 
102 And note, such claims are not always made by tyros. Witness the works 
(already cited) by A. M. Turing, Norbert Wiener, and John von Neumann, as well as 
H. A. Simon, "The Control of the Mind by Reality: Human Cognition and Problem 
Solving " and the interventions by the same author in the panel on " Restriction of the 
Mind," Man and Civilization: Control of the Mind, eds. S. M. Färber and R. H. L. 
Wilson (New York, 1961), pp. 219-232, 281-285, as well as H. A. Simon and A. 
Newell, "Heuristic Problem Solving by Computer," Symposium 
on Computer 
Augmentation of Human Reasoning, eds. Margo A. Sass and W. D. Wilkinson 
(Washington, 1965), pp. 25-35. 
87 

CHAPTER III 
Change, Quality, and Thought 
inventions made by man, equally marvelous though many were when 
introduced. A telescope with an adapted camera can "see" one thousand 
times farther and better than the human eye; yet nobody claimed that it 
possesses all the qualities of the human eye or that ophthalmologists 
should turn to such a contraption in order to study how the human eye 
functions in every respect. The immense usefulness of a jet plane is not 
in the least affected by the fact that it does not flap its wings, lay eggs, 
and hatch them—as birds do. By the same token, the equally immense 
usefulness of computers needs no sales talk. A computer has calculated 
the first one hundred thousand decimals of π in a little less than nine 
hours, a job estimated to require 30,000 years for a man with a calculator 
to accomplish.103 This is no reason for presenting the computers as 
intelligent giants with an I.Q. of one million whose intelligence "exceeds 
that of its designer."104 And if in an ordinary test a computer showed an 
I.Q. of one million, nay, of one thousand, it would only attest that, as I 
have argued earlier, focusing on measure we have lost sight of what is 
measured. The computer does transcend some of the intellectual limita-
tions of its designer, but not his intelligence in the relevant meaning of the 
term. 1 0 5 
For obvious reasons, the arguments in support of the dual equation, 
"computer = human brain," can hardly resort to verbal swindle and 
define " b r a i n " ad hoc. Instead, they resort to paper-and-pencil models 
based on "convenient" assumptions or analogies, completely ignoring 
what 
neurohistologists, 
neurophysiologists, 
neuropsychologists, 
and 
psychiatrists tell us about the unanswered questions about the brain. Even 
Neumann's early speculation that the brain is a mixed system of an analog 
and a digital computer is well off the mark. And, a strong believer though 
he was in the potentiality of automata, Neumann had to admit in the 
end that "in fact, the 'digital method' . . . may be entirely alien to the 
nervous system [of any animal]." 1 0 6 The most plausible picture now is 
that the functioning of the brain involves not only electrical pulses in a 
103 D. G. Fink, Computers and the Human Mind (New York, 1966), p. 12. Since the 
computers are estimated to scan their memory cores, to sort, and to compute a 
million times (at most) faster than man, the above figure must have allowed for the 
immense time needed by man to write down all intermediary computation. 
104 As Ashby does in "Design for an Intelligence-Amplifier," pp. 216, 220. 
105 It is beyond question that, as with all human inventions or discoveries, the 
designer may find that a computer intended for certain tasks can also be used for 
some unintended ones. So is the fact that a computer may cause, say, a state-wide 
blackout either by malfunction or if man experiments blindly with it. Cf. note 127, 
below. 
106 Neumann, "The General and Logical Theory of Automata" (cited in note 99, 
above), Discussion, p. 38, and Neumann, The Computer and the Brain (New Haven, 
1958), p. 44. 
88 

SECTION 10 
Thought and " Thought" 
still undecided pattern but also some chemical computing.107 Should we 
be surprised to learn one day that it also involves some computing at the 
yet unexplored subquantum level ? 
A famous neuropsychologist, K. S. Lashley, spent his entire life looking 
for "memory cores" in the brain, and failed to find them. It is now 
admitted that memory is not in a particular place of the brain: it is a 
never-stopping process involving also some protein synthesis.108 Even 
less is known about how the brain learns. Brain specialists are still asking 
why (or how) the brain does certain things no intelligence-machine can. 
For instance, the brain can handle entirely unforeseen errors and situations 
or repair itself to an appreciable extent.109 As one authority on the brain, 
W. S. McCulloch, said tongue in cheek, students of the brain envy those sci-
entists who study machines for which they possess complete anatomical and 
physiological blueprints. "The brain is like a computing machine, but there 
is no computing machine like the brain."110 This is where things stand. 
Turning to the limitations of what the computer can do in comparison 
to the intellectual performances of the brain, we must bear in mind that 
a digital computer has a finite and discrete structure. At any one time, 
through any relay there either passes an electrical pulse or none: the 
operation is based on an "all-or-none" configuration.111 The famous 
theorem of McCulloch and Pitts—that "anything that can be completely 
and unambiguously put into words, is ipso facto realizable by a suitable 
finite neural [relay] network"112—is a technically interesting yet not 
unexpected result. Neumann notes that the digital computer, because of 
its all-or-none mode of operation, is subject to the same "unattractive" 
limitations as Logic is; he argues, however, that the only drawback of the 
digital computer is that it cannot handle problems of mathematical 
analysis in which the infinite intervenes.113 Now, an analog computer 
107 Halstead, "Brain and Intelligence," pp. 269 f. 
108 See the recent work on the subject by E. Roy John, Mechanisms 
of Memory 
(New York, 1967). And let us not fail to score also the miraculous quality of the 
brain to rebel against memorizing irrelevant things and to forget them quickly if 
memorized. See Chapter I, note 15, above. 
109 Various discussions in Cerebral Mechanisms 
in Behavior, ed. Jeffress, pp. 32 ff, 
193 f. The objection of W. S. McCulloch, "Why the Mind Is in the Head," ibid., 
pp. 54 f, that for a computer with as many "neurons" as the brain (about 1010) 
Niagara Falls would not suffice to supply the necessary current and Niagara River 
to cool off the plant, does not seem to me essential. This indeed may be only a 
temporary technical impediment. 
110 W. S. McCulloch, quoted in Fink, Computers and the Human Mind, p. 178. 
111 Turing, "Computing Machinery," pp. 439 ff; Neumann, "The General and 
Logical Theory," pp. 15 f. 
112 Neumann, ibid., p. 23 (my italics). For the theorem see the article by McCulloch 
and Pitts cited in note 99, above. 
113 Neumann, "The General and Logical Theory," p. 16. 
89 

CHAPTER III 
Change, Quality, and Thought 
should be free from this drawback. Yet its structure is still arith-
momorphic. From what I have said in this and the previous chapter it 
follows that, regardless of its type, no computer can perform any operation 
that is directly or indirectly connected with dialectical reasoning. Such an 
operation is the exclusive prerogative of the human brain. 
Between the plasticity of the brain and the machinistic structure of a 
computer there is an unbridgeable gap that is even wider than that 
between syllogizing and reasoning. From whatever angle we look at the 
living thought, we reach the same inescapable conclusion: thinking, even 
mathematical thinking, would come to a standstill if confined to self-
identical notions. Whitehead warned us, "As soon as you leave the beaten 
track of vague clarity, and trust to exactness, you will meet difficulties."114 
Infinitely continuous qualities, dialectical penumbras over relations and 
ideas, a halo of varying brightness and contour, this is thought: a gaseous 
medium as Wittgenstein pictured it after his vain efforts (among the most 
brilliant ones) to reduce reason to an arithmomorphic basis.115 The reason 
why no computer can imitate the working of the human brain is that 
thought is a never-ending process of Change which, as I endeavored to 
show in this chapter, is in essence dialectical. The arithmomorphic struc-
ture of any computer, on the other hand, is as inert in relation to novelty 
and Change as number itself. Without the dialectical nature of thought, 
no association of ideas, let alone the emergence of novel ones, would be 
possible. 
A computer can be programmed, for instance, to play an excellent 
game of NIM 1 1 6 by the very same technique used in "teaching" machines 
to play checkers or chess.117 Actually, in case the dimensions of the game 
are not too great, the computer can scan the entire tree of the game and 
retain only the winning ramifications—which is a complete solution of 
that particular game. No man could do this, except for irrelevantly small 
dimensions. Even for the simple NIM pattern (1, 2, 3) the tree has as 
many as 182 ramifications. Try to draw it on paper! But man can do what 
the machine cannot: he has discovered the formula for the winning moves 
for any pattern. This should surprise anyone able to appreciate a wonder. 
And if there is a winning formula for checkers or chess, we may rest 
114 Alfred North Whitehead, Science and Philosophy 
(New York, 1948), p. 136. 
115 Wittgenstein, Philosophical 
Investigations, 
I. 109. 
116 For a description of the game and the winning formula, see W. W. Rouse Ball, 
Mathematical 
Recreations 
and Essays (New York, 1962), pp. 36—38. 
117 Basically, the technique, now called "heuristic," consists of using some point-
count function (like that of Charles H. Goren for bridge) as a guide and arranging for 
the machine to memorize all losing boards as they occur during "training." In 
actual play the machine scans a few moves ahead on the tree of the game. See the 
instructive article by A. L. Samuel, "Some Studies in Machine Learning, Using the 
Game of Checkers," IBM 
Journal of Research and Development, 
I I I (1959), 210-229. 
90 

SECTION 10 
Thought 
and '' 
Thought'' 
assured that only man will discover it, because only his mind can open for 
itself new avenues of knowledge. Even if the computer will per chance 
reveal a running regularity up to a certain number, a human brain will 
still be needed to prove the validity of the regularity for any number. The 
computer calculated the first hundred thousand decimals of π with a 
speed 30,000,000 times greater than Leibnitz could have done it. But it 
was Leibnitz, not a computer, who thought up the infinite series for π/4 
on which the computer was programmed! 
Let us also ask what geometry-theorem proving machine would be 
likely to "think" of another wonder—the simple proof thought up by 
H. A. Schwartz for an elementary theorem, in which proof a triangle is 
turned over six times for no obvious reason at all.118 Also, which "heu-
ristic" machine would hit upon Euler's seemingly inept yet brilliant idea 
of decomposing sin a; into simple factors as if it were a polynomial?119 
Intuitions, such as Schwartz's or Euler's, distinguishes thought from 
"thought." Some of us may scorn intuition as a nebulous quality or a 
Kantian prejudice; yet intuition alone advances knowledge creatively. 
Very recently, in an editorial of Science praising some biochemical dis-
covery, P. H. Abelson noted that improved research methods would not 
do alone for further progress; this "will depend on the quality of the intui-
tive judgment with which scientists select materials for study."120 
Let us also observe that the mathematical problems mentioned above 
are formulated completely in unambiguous words. Therefore, the condition 
that constitutes the leitmotiv of the arguments for "computers think" 
cannot be invoked against the conclusions derived from these illustrations. 
That is not all. As I hope to have proved in the preceding sections, most 
of our important thinking involves dialectical notions and relations. By 
the very mode of their operation, computers are incapable of dialectical 
reasoning. This, perhaps, is what John von Neumann wished to admit in a 
posthumous monograph by saying that " the language of the brain [is] not 
the language of mathematics"—hence, 
not of the computer either.121 And 
Norbert Wiener tells us that he had anticipated the difficulties of designing 
a computer that could recognize a square regardless of its relative posi-
tion.122 Very recently, in a sober account Oliver Selfridge stresses again 
that machines cannot recognize invariances of symmetry and even 
collinearity in a tick-tack-toe game "without being told," whereas man 
118 For which see H. Rademaeher and O. Toeplitz, The Enjoyment 
of 
Mathematics 
(Princeton, 1957), pp. 29 f. 
119 See the fascinating story in G. Polya, Mathematics 
and Plausible 
Reasoning 
(2 vols., Princeton, 1954), I, 19-21. 
120 Science, May 31, 1968, p. 951. 
121 Neumann, The Computer and the Brain, p. 80. 
122 Wiener, Cybernetics, p. 18. 
91 

C H A P T E R I I I 
Change, Quality, and Thought 
started to do this all by himself.123 Let us note further that Gestalt does 
not mean only to recognize geometrical forms. It means also to recognize 
"notched, indented, lens-shaped, umbelliform, and the like" of which 
Husserl spoke. Above all, it means to recognize "democracy," "species," 
"want," etc., regardless of individual irregularities. And let us not forget, 
it means even to recognize Gestalt, which is itself a dialectical notion. 
I f an ad hoc definition of thought could help us disentangle the issues, I 
would endorse J. P. Eckert (a co-designer of E N I A C , the first digital 
electronic computer), who declared that after an experience of seventeen 
years he has been "forced to adopt the definition that thinking is what 
computers cannot do." 1 2 4 For the reasons developed in the foregoing 
paragraphs, this definition of Thought is far from being vacuous. Wiener 
warned us that "the ultra-rapid computing machine will certainly not 
decrease the need for [high class] mathematicians."125 W e can go one step 
further and say that heuristic, theorem-proving, game-playing, or what-
not computers will not decrease the need for Thought. The most apropos 
proof is offered by the very papers in which Turing, Neumann, Simon et al. 
blend novel ideas with dialectical reasoning into forceful arguments which 
no computer could reproduce. Turing, I am confident, would not, even 
for the sake of the cause, have gone so far as to contend that his fascinating 
article could be written by a computer in answer to the question "Can a 
machine think ? " 
The point of Lady Lovelace in connection with Babbage's Analytical 
Engine—that a machine can do only what we order it by design to do— 
still stands. It is vouched for by a most distinguished veteran in program-
ming "learning" machines, A. L. Samuel, who adds that "computers . . . 
are giant morons, not giant brains."126 They are morons because they 
cannot Think. For this reason, we need not be terrified—as Samuel Butler 
and Norbert Wiener say we ought to be—by the idea that computers 
could by themselves spell the end of the human species.127 As with atomic 
123 Oliver Selfridge, "Reasoning in Game Playing by Machine," Symposium on 
Computer Augmentation of Human Reasoning (note 102, above), p. 5. 
124 Quoted in Fink, Computers and the Human Mind, p. 208. 
125 Wiener, Cybernetics, p. 131. 
126 A. L. Samuel, "Artificial Intelligence: A Frontier of Automation," Annals of 
The American Academy of Political and Social Science, CCCXL (March 1962), 13. 
127 The basic position of N. Wiener, summarized in his " Some Moral and Technical 
Consequences of Automation," Science, May 6, 1960, pp. 1355—1358, is that because 
machines work incredibly faster than man, man may not be able to stop a machine 
in time if he realizes that what the machine does is cataclysmal—a predicament which 
he likens to that of "The Sorcerer's Apprentice" of Goethe. He supports it, not by 
the possibility of man's making a wrong use of machines, but by the familiar assertion 
that machines transcend "the limitations of their designers." See " A Refutation" 
by A. L. Samuel in Science, September 16, I960, pp. 741 f. 
92 

SECTION 10 
Thought 
and " 
Thought" 
power, the danger may come only from the uses to which Thought might 
put the moron brains (but most probably from some brainless creatures—a 
fungus, a bacteria, or a virus). 
Like all arguments concerning factual issues, both those favoring 
"machines can think" and those (including mine) opposing it necessarily 
make use of incomplete induction. Some argue that since "machines 
cannot compute" has been proved false, we have no longer any inductive 
basis for disbelieving that "machines can think."128 Others use the 
inductive argument in a direct and explicit way. "The making of a 
synthetic brain requires now little more than time and labor."129 Or, 
"step by step, the remaining limitations are being attacked."130 Argu-
ments such as these remind us of the glorification of mechanics more than 
a century ago. Actually, they sprout from the same root, the dogma that 
in nature there is no element irreducible to precise, finite, and reproducible 
laws. 
The mechanistic bedrock of the general "theory" of automata is 
unmistakably revealed by a famous proposition proved by John von 
Neumann: a Turing universal machine can be so designed that if left 
in a floating medium together with a great number of its elementary 
parts it will reproduce itself.131 What else do we need for a machinistic 
replica of life, hence, of thought itself? But let us observe that in view 
of the universality of the machine and of the implicit assumptions of 
the proof, Neumann's proposition can be made much stronger. One 
could extend it to a machine that includes also all the necessary mining, 
manufacturing, transportation operations and that will reproduce itself 
if left alone in the bare material environment of this planet. Moreover, man 
need not be completely eliminated from the intermediate outputs of the 
machine. Turing, himself, implies that this extension is not an aberration, 
for otherwise his explicit instruction that "men born in the usual manner" 
should not be an elementary part of the machine would have had no 
purpose.132 This statement clearly suggests a truly grandiose view—that a 
machine may even reproduce the entire evolution of man from the hot 
mud that existed before the first living cell came into being. 
128 Cf. Turing, "Computing Machinery," p. 448. Richard Laing concludes his 
review of M. Taube, Computers and Common Sense (New York, 1961), thus: "there 
do not appear to be any rigorous arguments against the possibility of computers 
doing things typical of human intelligence." Behavioral Science, VII (1962), 240. 
129 Ashby, "Design for a Brain" (note 93, above), p. 382. 
130 Simon and Newell, "Heuristic Problem Solving by Computer" (note 102, 
above), p. 32. See also the remarks concerning Polya's idea of Plausible Reasoning 
by H. Gelernter, " Realization of a Geometry-Theorem Proving Machine," Computers 
and Thought, eds. E. A. Feigenbaum and J. Feldman (New York, 1963), p. 135. 
131 Neumann, "The General and Logical Theory of Automata," pp. 28-30. 
132 Turing, "Computing Machinery," p. 435. 
93 

CHAPTER III 
Change, Quality, and Thought 
However, the more we have learned about nature since Laplace's 
apotheosis of mechanics, the clearer the qualitative infinity of nature has 
become. And, as I have argued earlier (Chapter II, Section 7), what 
prevents us from reducing the physical world to arithmomorphic concepts 
is the dialectical factor denoted by "random." The two ends now meet: 
the nature of Thought being dialectical, Thought cannot be reproduced by 
machines constructed on arithmomorphic blueprints. 
To minimize the risk that the above critique of the computer's 
apotheosis should be misinterpreted as to its scope, I wish to emphasize 
in conclusion that nothing is further from my thought than to belittle 
the usefulness of this unique invention—the computer—or to deny the 
value of the various "heuristic" experiments as a source of inspiration for 
new and more interesting uses of it, but not as a march toward the syn-
thetical brain. My only reason for writing this critique is that the computer 
constitutes a laboratory experiment, as it were, by which arithmomorphic 
thinking is isolated from dialectical reasoning and, through its limitations, 
provides experimental proof of what I have tried to preach to my fellow 
economists ever since some professional experiences awoke me from arith-
momorphic slumber: "there is a limit to what we can do with numbers, as 
there is to what we can do without them."133 For if we ignore or deny this 
truth, we are apt to think—as, by and large, we now do—that locomotion, 
machines to make machines, is all that there is in economic life. By thus 
steering away from the very core of the economic process where the 
dialectical propensities of man are mainly at work, we fail in our avowed 
aim as economists—to study man in the hope of being able to promote his 
happiness in life. 
133 See my article " The Nature of Expectation and Uncertainty " (1958), reprinted 
in AE, p. 275. 
94 

