CHAPTER 1
Introduction
1.1
Fermi’s Notes
While studying material on Enrico Fermi at the University
of Chicago Regenstein Library to aid in the preparation of a
biography of Enrico Fermi one of us (Gino Segrè) was writ-
ing in collaboration with his wife, Bettina Hoerlin, found a
folder labeled “Geophysics, Columbia (1941).” It appeared to
be a set of sketchy personal notes for a course on geophysics
that Fermi had taught in the physics department at Columbia
University in 1939, 1940, and 1941. Though the contents of
the folder were surely clear to Fermi, Segrè felt the material
they contained would not be evident without the beneﬁt of
a detailed explanation. He was intrigued by them as well as
being surprised that Fermi would have chosen to teach an in-
troductory course on geophysics as his initial course oﬀering
upon arriving in America. That puzzle was later solved by
discovering that in 1928, young Fermi, already recognized as

2
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
a genius and freshly chosen as Italy’s ﬁrst professor of theo-
retical physics, had taught Italy’s initial oﬀering in quantum
physics and an additional course in geophysics: incidentally,
this had been a regular oﬀering in Rome’s physics department
at that time. In other words, Fermi had arrived in America
as an experienced instructor of geophysics, and, always inter-
ested in all branches of physics, he had doubtless continued
to study the subject.
This led Segrè to envision the project of presenting to a sci-
entiﬁc public both the schematic notes and an explanation of
the material in them, aiming to achieve this goal at the level of
an advanced undergraduate physics course. Concerned about
the task at hand, Segrè was fortunate to enlist an old friend
to collaborate on the project: John Stack, a physics professor
at the University of Illinois in Urbana. In addition, having
been a graduate student of Geoﬀrey Chew, one of Fermi’s
ﬁrst American students, Stack was also a “physics grandson”
of Fermi.
Though geophysics has undergone great advances since the
time of the Fermi lectures, many of the subjects and tech-
niques Fermi used are not out of date, so we felt such a
monograph could be instructive for students as well as be-
ing of historical interest. We therefore decided to describe in
detail the topics he introduced and how he dealt with them
because Fermi, one of the titans of twentieth-century physics,
had certain personal characteristics that made any set of lec-
tures by him especially interesting.
One of these is that he was a famously lucid lecturer, ad-
mired by the physics community for his unparalleled ability to
present complicated subjects in simple terms. Second, he was
known in a wider community for both his interest and abil-
ity to estimate the magnitude of any physical phenomenon,
a capacity that he encouraged his co-workers and students

1.2. PLAN OF THE BOOK
3
to develop. His skill in such endeavors became so well known
that such puzzles are now simply known as “Fermi questions.”
This facility is on full display in these lectures, where every
topic covered includes quantitative results on the size of the
eﬀect under consideration.
1.2
Plan of the Book
Geophysics, as taught by Fermi, is a somewhat idiosyncratic
set of lectures. The course includes items about the Earth
that we would expect in any introductory geophysics course:
its motion within the solar system, the shape of the Earth
and its composition, heat in its interior, elasticity and seismic
waves, geomagnetism, and atmospheric physics.
Other topics might not normally fall within the purview
of geophysics lectures at present. Ocean currents and tides
would appear in an oceanography course, the fall of raindrops
in one on ﬂuid mechanics, details of radioactivity as a case
study in nuclear physics, and many of the thermodynamics
calculations in a set of lectures on that subject.
Several key new developments in geophysics, plate tecton-
ics being an outstanding example, are not mentioned in the
notes. This is understandable because although the roots of
this subject go back to the work on continental drift by the
explorer and meteorologist Alfred Wegener in 1915, the the-
ory was not widely accepted until the 1960s, twenty years
after these lectures. Other subjects, such as geomagnetism,
have undergone such radical changes that much of the ma-
terial in the lectures on that subject is mainly of historical
interest.
It is also sad to see the absence in the lectures of the im-
portant changes ushered in by the use of electronic computers

4
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
and the novel study of nonlinear dynamics, for these are ar-
eas in which Fermi was a true and important pioneer in the
years immediately preceding his untimely death in 1954. He
certainly would have eagerly followed the advances in mod-
eling of the atmosphere, the oceans, and the Earth’s interior
that have depended on powerful computers. Computational
geophysics was essentially nonexistent in 1941 but now is a
mature ﬁeld.
Except in minor instances we have not attempted to bring
these notes up to date, for doing so would distort what is
after all the perception of them that Fermi had in 1941. Our
aim in presenting this book has been to follow closely his
notes, discussing the topics he raised in the manner and in
the order he adopted for his presentation. But on occasion,
particularly when we have felt a fuller discussion would help
the reader, we have tried to present one. In a few instances
we have found it irresistible to add an extension of a topic
Fermi was discussing. Our main concern has been to attempt
to elucidate the frequently telegraphic style of the notes. This
has meant, inter alia, to provide derivations and explanations
of equations that Fermi used as jumping-oﬀpoints.
We hope to have produced a set of notes similar to what an
attentive student might have prepared for the course Fermi
taught in 1941. We have also tried to incorporate its many nu-
merical estimates, realizing that some of them may not have
been meant for inclusion in the lectures but were rather a
reﬂection of his well-known habit of continually checking for-
mulas numerically. Except for the few cases when we thought
it would cause confusion, the notation we have adopted is the
same as the one Fermi used.
Though a reader may wish to examine the topics in an
order other than the one we have presented, by, e.g., joining
together all the sections on the atmosphere, and separately

1.2. PLAN OF THE BOOK
5
all those of the interior of the Earth, we felt compelled to
remain faithful to the selection made by Fermi in his notes,
though we are well aware that this may not be the actual
order in which he presented the material during his lectures.
But we have tried insofar as it was possible, to be consistent
with the spirit of those lectures
Since our version of his lectures has been prepared without
the beneﬁt of oversight by Fermi, we are naturally open to
the accusation that we have misread or misinterpreted what
he intended to say. We have tried to remedy this pitfall by
making available his personal notes on the material, as we
found them in the Chicago archives. At the very least, this
volume will have the merit of allowing an interested reader to
see how a physics genius with a strong interest in geophysics
approached teaching this fascinating subject and what topics
he deemed appropriate to include at the time he taught a
course on the subject.
We are sensitive to the charge that Fermi would not have
liked to have his lectures see the light of day in their present
format. There are certain discussions in them that are incom-
plete and even a few numerical errors, obviously the result of
these being preliminary notes. But we have felt that the inter-
est in seeing the choice of topics Fermi made and his approach
to them has justiﬁed the preparation of the present volume.
We only hope the reader will share our judgment and forgive
our errors.

Parameters of the Earth

