CHAPTER 17
Atmospheric Electricity
17.1
Overview
The topic of atmospheric electricity is a very broad one with
varied phenomena taking place at every layer of the Earth’s
atmosphere, from the surface of the Earth to the exosphere.
As elsewhere, our discussion will largely follow the schematic
presentation of Fermi’s notes. The terms “electrosphere” and
“ionosphere” give a very broad classiﬁcation of two regions
with diﬀerent electromagnetic phenomena. The ﬁrst refers
to the electric charge on the Earth and the compensating
opposite-sign charge that resides in the troposphere and the
lower part of the stratosphere.
The ionosphere is a much
higher-altitude region whose deﬁning property is its reﬂec-
tion of radio waves. Fig. (17.1) shows the layers of the atmo-
sphere and their overlap with the ionosphere. The latter is
essentially a plasma; an ionized gas. The electrosphere, on
the other hand, contains ions, but these ions are only a small

238
CHAPTER 17. ATMOSPHERIC ELECTRICITY
fraction of the particles present.
17.2
Properties of the Electrosphere
In 1795 the French physicist Charles-Augustin de Coulomb
discovered that ordinary air conducts electricity, where by
“ordinary air,” we mean the lower regions of the atmosphere.
This was followed in the nineteenth century by the realization
that the Earth is negatively charged. In order to have electri-
cal neutrality the British polymath scientist Lord Kelvin pro-
posed that a positively charged region exists at some elevation
in the atmosphere. Taking account of Coulomb’s result that
ordinary air conducts electricity, we thus see that the electro-
sphere resembles a spherical condenser or capacitor, necessar-
ily a “leaky” one in which an electric current ﬂows downward
from the positive region in the atmosphere to the negative
one at the Earth’s surface. This downward current, by now a
well established fact, would cause the Earth’s charge to dis-
appear in a matter of minutes if it were not being replenished.
The British physicist Charles T. R. Wilson proposed that the
positive charge in the atmosphere and the negative charge on
the Earth are maintained by the existence of thunderstorms
reversing the ﬂow of charge due to the “ﬁne weather” current
by creating an atmospheric circuit (Chalmers 1967). This is
made plausible by the fact that on an average day the Earth is
experiencing 1800 thunderstorms at any time or some 40,000
or more over a 24-hour period.
The Charge on the Earth
The average value of the elec-
tric ﬁeld near the Earth’s surface is approximately −100 V/m,
where the minus sign takes account of the fact that the ﬁeld
points toward the Earth. (Fermi used the somewhat larger
value of −120 V/m.) The magnitude of the ﬁeld is related

17.2. PROPERTIES OF THE ELECTROSPHERE
239
to the charge density on the Earth’s surface by Gauss’s law.
Writing this law in the esu units favored by Fermi and many
other theorists, we have
E(esu) = 4πΣ(esu),
(17.1)
where Σ is the charge/area on the Earth’s surface. To con-
vert the electric ﬁeld to volts/meter, divide the left side of
Eq. (17.1) by 3 × 104; in order to convert the surface charge
density to coulombs/square meter multiply the right side of
Eq. (17.1) by 3 × 105 (Jackson 1999). The result is
Σ(C/m2) =
1
4π × 9 × 109 E(V/m).
(17.2)
For E = −100 V/m, we ﬁnd
Σ = −8.85 × 10−10 C/m2,
(17.3)
or on the order of 1010 electron charges per square meter. We
obtain for the total charge on the Earth, using Re = 6371 km
Qe = 4π(Re)2Σ = −452 kC.
(17.4)
Using other values of the average electric ﬁeld obviously gives
somewhat diﬀerent numbers for Qe, but all estimates agree
that the charge is in the vicinity of −500 kC.
Current Flowing to the Earth
If the physical picture of
a leaky spherical condenser with charge constantly being re-
plenished is correct, the current should be constant at diﬀer-
ent altitudes. A constant Earthward current has indeed been
observed in many diﬀerent experiments at altitudes ranging
up to 28 km (Holzworth 1991). The average current density
is Jz = 2.4 ± 0.4 pA/m2. The total current being delivered
to the Earth is
Ie = 4πR2
eJz ≈1200 A.
(17.5)

240
CHAPTER 17. ATMOSPHERIC ELECTRICITY
troposphere
stratosphere
mesosphere
thermosphere
exosphere
ionosphere
12 km
45 km
85 km
600 km
Figure 17.1: Layers of the atmosphere and ionosphere
The time it takes to deliver a charge of Qe to Earth is
Te = Qe
Ie
≈370 s,
(17.6)
or about 6 minutes. Although it does not speciﬁcally ver-
ify the proposed thunderstorm mechanism, the fact that the
downward current density has been observed to remain con-
stant in time in many diﬀerent experiments is strong evidence
that the charge in the atmosphere is constantly being replen-
ished.

17.2. PROPERTIES OF THE ELECTROSPHERE
241
Ions in the Electrosphere
Experiments in the early twen-
tieth century by C. T. R. Wilson and others established the
existence of charged ions in the atmosphere.
The various
types of ions that exist, most carrying a single unit of electric
charge, go by the prosaic names of “small,” “intermediate,”
and “large.” We will discuss only the small and large ions.
Either an ion or a neutral particle undergoes many colli-
sions in the atmosphere; these collisions act to change the
direction of the particle’s velocity thousands of times per sec-
ond. Charged particles will have an additional drift velocity
in addition to this random velocity when an electric ﬁeld is
present. This drift velocity vd is in the same or opposite di-
rection as the electric ﬁeld, depending on the sign of the par-
ticle’s charge. The mobility k is the ratio of the magnitude
of the drift velocity to that of the electric ﬁeld,
|vd| = k|E|, or k = |vd
E |.
(17.7)
It is well established that small ions have diﬀerent mobili-
ties according to whether their charges are positive or nega-
tive. We will follow Fermi in taking the mobility of positively
charged ions at ground level to be k+ ∼1.4 cm2/(V · s) and
that of negatively charged ions to be k−∼1.9 cm2/(V · s).
Large ions have mobilities roughly 500 times smaller than
those of small ions.
Small ions may be thought of as several molecules, many
of them water molecules, loosely bound together.
If the
charge is removed, the molecules are no longer bound to-
gether (Chalmers 1967). On the other hand, large ions (much
greater in size, e.g., aerosols) remain intact if their charge is
removed. They are also more numerous near cities and in-
dustrial areas and, because of their small mobility, they play
a negligible role in the atmospheric conductivity.
Assuming the numbers of positive and negative small ions

242
CHAPTER 17. ATMOSPHERIC ELECTRICITY
to be roughly equal, and that they are singly charged, the
conductivity σ is given by1
σ = en(k+ + k−),
(17.8)
where n is the common number of positive and negative small
ions per unit volume. Fermi also writes a formula equivalent
to Eq. (17.8).
Eq. (17.8) can be used to determine n at ground level,
using the conductivity of 1.33 × 10−16 A/(V · cm) (Volland
1984).
Using the mobilities given above, Eq. (17.8) gives
n ∼300 ions/cm3 at ground level. As might be expected,
the experimental values of n near the Earth’s surface have a
fairly wide variation. Still, 300 ions/cm3 is a typical value for
the density of small ions at the Earth’s surface.
Sources of Ions in the Electrosphere
The reason there
are ions in ordinary air was elucidated by a series of ingenious
experiments carried out in the early twentieth century. Ul-
traviolet photons emitted by the Sun with suﬃcient energy
to ionize air molecules are responsible for the existence of the
region known as the ionosphere, also sometimes known as
the “Heaviside” layer, so named after the British electricity
expert Oliver Heaviside. However, as shown in Fig. (17.1),
the ionosphere is at much higher altitude than the ordinary
atmosphere, and ultraviolet photons from the Sun, though
crucial in this layer, play a negligible role in creating ions in
the region of the atmosphere nearer to the Earth.
The cause of ions closer to the Earth, in the so-called or-
dinary air, was found to arise from two sources: radioactive
elements, principally radon, whose origins are in the Earth,
and cosmic rays. Radon’s dominant radioactive action is due
1Fermi uses Λ for conductivity.

17.2. PROPERTIES OF THE ELECTROSPHERE
243
to it being the only radioactive element that is gaseous at nor-
mal pressure and temperature. The additionally mentioned
source of ions was shown to be present by experiments at
diﬀerent altitudes as well as by ones that shielded against
radioactivity through the use of lead enclosures. This source
was seen to be extraterrestrial and is now known as cosmic
rays; cosmic rays are composed of highly energetic heavy par-
ticles that enter the atmosphere and undergo numerous ion-
izing collisions with molecules of the atmosphere. Above an
altitude of a few kilometers (Fermi’s estimate is 3 km), cosmic
rays account for the bulk of ions produced in the atmosphere,
on average 10 ion pairs per cubic centimeter per second at sea
level (Wahlin 1989), and 4 to 5 times more at an altitude of
∼20 km.
Conductivity and Potential in the Electrosphere
In
an ordinary condenser, the potential rises steadily in moving
from the negative conductor toward the positive conductor.
With some modiﬁcation, this general idea can be applied to
the electrosphere.
Starting from the surface of the Earth,
the potential increases by 100 V for each meter of altitude.
Eventually, the rate of change of the potential decreases, and
the potential levels oﬀ, analogously to when the positive con-
ductor is approached in an ordinary condenser (Wahlin 1994).
Fig. (17.2) shows in a highly schematic way the lines of electric
ﬁeld emanating from positive charges in the atmosphere and
ending on negative charges on the Earth’s surface. The lines
of electric ﬁeld become more widely spaced as the altitude
increases, corresponding to the decrease in the magnitude of
the electric ﬁeld. The ﬁgure is idealized in that only positive
ions are shown, whereas in reality there is only a slight excess
of positive ions over negative ions.
All this can be made more explicit by using the data on

244
CHAPTER 17. ATMOSPHERIC ELECTRICITY
electric conductivity. With increasing altitude, the density of
air molecules decreases. This lengthens the mean free path
and leads to a rapid increase of conductivity. In the upper tro-
posphere and lower stratosphere, the conductivity increases
exponentially (Holzworth 1991),
σ = σ0 exp( z
H ),
(17.9)
where H ∼7.5 km. In the troposphere and stratosphere, ions
undergo frequent collisions with neutral molecules, so Ohm’s
law2 holds:
Jz = σEz.
(17.10)
Given the constancy of Jz with altitude, along with the ex-
ponential increase of σ, Eq. (17.10) implies that the electric
ﬁeld decreases exponentially,
|Ez| = 1
σ|Jz| ∼exp(−z
H ).
(17.11)
For altitudes greater than 4 km, the electric potential, while
not literally constant, begins to level oﬀ(Wahlin 1994). Al-
though only the electric ﬁeld is directly measurable, an esti-
mate of the electric potential at altitude z can be made as
follows. Set
Ez(z) = Ez(0) exp(−z
H ),
(17.12)
and obtain the potential at z by integrating
V (z) −V (0) = −
Z z
0
Ez(z′)dz′
(17.13)
= −Ez(0)H

1 −exp(−z
H )

.
2To convert the values Fermi gives for conductivity to SI units, divide
by 9 × 109.

17.2. PROPERTIES OF THE ELECTROSPHERE
245
Using Ez(0) = −100 V/m, H = 7.4 km, and z = 4 km, the
integral in Eq. (17.13) gives
V (4 km) −V (0) ∼305 kV.
(17.14)
Fermi uses H = 3.8 km, Ez(0) = −120 V/m, and estimates
the potential at z = H as V (H) −V (0) ∼Ez(0)H ∼456 kV.
It is safe to say at altitudes of a few kilometers, the potential
relative to the Earth is a few hundred kilovolts.
earth
atmosphere
Figure 17.2: Atmospheric charge
Equilibrium
The number of ions per unit volume is deter-
mined by a balance between sources and sinks. For simplicity,
consider an altitude high enough that the electric ﬁeld is neg-
ligible. In such a region, the number of positive ions will be
essentially the same as the number of negative ions. Here
radioactivity is a small eﬀect, but cosmic rays continually
create new ions. Let Π be the number of ions produced per
second per unit volume by cosmic rays. Ions can be removed
by collisions between positive and negative ions that leave
electrically neutral products. If n is the common number of
positive and negative ions per unit volume, the rate at which
collisions produce neutral products must be proportional to
n2. (This process is called “recombination” in the literature.)

246
CHAPTER 17. ATMOSPHERIC ELECTRICITY
The proportionality coeﬃcient is usually denoted as α. An-
other way in which a small ion can disappear is to attach
itself to a neutral aerosol.
Neutral aerosols are sometimes
called “nuclei” (deﬁnitely not atomic nuclei). We may write
the following simple equation for the rate of change of n:
dn
dt = Π −αn2 −βnN0,
(17.15)
where N0 is the number of neutral aerosols per unit volume.
(Fermi writes a similar equation, but the factor multiplying
β is missing.) At equilibrium dn/dt = 0, we have
Π = αn2 + βnN0.
(17.16)
Volland (Volland 1984) gives the following for α and β:
α ∼2 × 10−6 cm3/s, β ∼1 × 10−5 cm3/s.
(17.17)
Fermi gives a similar number for α. At an altitude of 15 km,
the value of Π due to cosmic rays is ∼50 ions/(cm3 · s). If we
assume that at this altitude, the number of aerosols is much
smaller than n, we can ignore the nN0 term in Eq. (17.17),
and we have
Π ∼αn2, or 50 ∼2 × 10−6n2,
(17.18)
which gives
n ∼5000 small ions/cm3.
This is signiﬁcantly larger than the sea level value of n ∼
300 small ions/cm3 (Shreve 1970). As cosmic rays enter the
atmosphere, more and more are absorbed on the way to the
Earth’s surface. Due to this absorption, the intensity of cos-
mic rays increases with increasing altitude. This tracks well
with the fact that the density of ions also increases with in-
creasing altitude.

17.3. WATER DROPS IN AN ELECTRIC FIELD
247
17.3
Water Drops in an Electric Field
In Chap. (5), we discussed the thermodynamic features of liq-
uid drops suspended in a vapor. We examined there the bal-
ance between surface tension and pressure diﬀerence that sta-
bilizes the drop. That balance becomes more complicated in
the presence of an electric ﬁeld. Since to a ﬁrst approxima-
tion, water may be treated as an electric conductor, there is
no electric ﬁeld inside the drop and therefore no contribution
to the energy density of the electric ﬁeld from the drop’s in-
terior. That is not true for the exterior of the drop. There is
thus an additional factor that must be taken into account in
determining the state of equilibrium between the drop and a
surrounding insulating medium.
Under these circumstances does the drop remain spheri-
cal or, if not, what shape does it take? This is the problem
studied by G. I.Taylor, the great British student of ﬂuid me-
chanics. He found that an instability, now referred to as the
Taylor cone, set in as the electric ﬁeld intensity grew. The re-
sult was that the drop assumes a conical shape whose side has
a ﬁxed angle θ0 = 49.3° with respect to the axis of symmetry.
To see how this occurs, turn back to Eq. (5.3). We saw
there that pure mechanical equilibrium in the absence of an
electrical ﬁeld occurs for a spherical drop when δP = 2γ/R,
where γ is the surface tension and R is the drop’s radius (we
have deliberately used R for radius instead of r in order to
avoid later confusion). We also said that there was a more
general formula due to Young and Laplace.
It consists of
replacing 2/R with the mean curvature H. In fact the mean
curvature becomes singular in the vicinity of a cone’s tip,
diverging as 1/r, where r is now taken to be the distance in
spherical coordinates from the cone’s tip.
The hydrostatic pressure does not diverge as the tip is ap-

248
CHAPTER 17. ATMOSPHERIC ELECTRICITY
proached, so equilibrium for a conical surface must instead
be obtained by a divergence in the electrostatic ﬁeld energy
that also behaves as 1/r if the drop is to take a conical shape.
(The presence of a singularity already had been observed in
a general way by Benjamin Franklin in his discovery of the
lightning rod.) That electrostatic energy is proportional to
∥E · E ∥or equivalently to ∥∇Φ · ∇Φ ∥, where we have
written the electric ﬁeld as the gradient of an electrostatic
potential, E = −∇Φ.
Since ∇· E = 0, the potential has to satisfy Laplace’s
equation,
∆Φ = 1/r2( ∂
∂rr2 ∂Φ
∂r +
1
sin θ( ∂
∂θ(sin θ∂Φ
∂θ )) = 0,
(17.19)
where we have assumed azimuthal symmetry. We look for a
solution of the form
Φ(r, θ) = A(r)B(θ).
The equations to solve are then
∂
∂r(r2 ∂A
∂r ) = λA
and
1
sin θ( ∂
∂θ(sin θ∂B
∂θ ) = −λB.
In order for ∥E ·E ∥to behave as 1/r as r →0, the potential
Φ and hence A must behave as r1/2 as r →0.
A = r1/2 is in fact an exact solution of the radial diﬀerential
equation with eigenvalue λ = 3/4. With that value of λ, the
polar angle equation is satisﬁed by the half-integral Legendre
function P1/2(cos θ); this function has a single zero at θ0 =
49.3° with respect to the axis of symmetry. Since the interior

17.3. WATER DROPS IN AN ELECTRIC FIELD
249
of the cone is a conductor, we must have Φ = 0 at the cone’s
surface. We therefore see that
Φ = Cr1/2P1/2(cos θ),
with C an overall constant, satisﬁes all the constraints we
have imposed, thus implying that a conducting ﬂuid drop in
the presence of an electrostatic ﬁeld can assume a conical
shape at the speciﬁed angle. The existence of this singularity
has also led to the development of a technique known as elec-
trospraying in which a ﬁne ion emission proceeds from the
slightly rounded tip of a ﬂuid cone, but such discussions take
us far aﬁeld.

Reﬂection of electromagnetic waves
in the ionosphere

