Afterword
Enrico Fermi was the only twentieth-century physicist to have
reached the very peaks of the profession as both a theorist and
an experimentalist. Even setting aside his very considerable
experimental work, the breadth of his interests and research
as a theorist spanned more ﬁelds than any other physicist of
his era. One cannot even imagine geniuses such as Einstein,
Bohr, Schrodinger, Dirac, Pauli, or Heisenberg teaching a
course on geophysics. Fermi doing so is not surprising.
Unfortunately, after the one on which these notes are based,
Fermi never taught a course on geophysics again. His work
during World War II was entirely devoted to nuclear ﬁssion,
to the development of a nuclear weapon, and to the problems
related to that goal. Though he no longer was a teacher, his
ability to grasp the essential features of a problem and his
lucidity in explaining possible solutions meant that he con-
tinued to be consulted on every facet of those developments.
When the war was over, Fermi remained at Los Alamos for
a few months during which time he delivered a course on
neutron physics. After that, he took a professorship at the
University of Chicago.
In the period between 1946 and his early death in Novem-
ber of 1954, Fermi’s brilliance in teaching and research made

262
AFTERWORD
Chicago a true physics Mecca. Half a dozen of his students
went on to win physics Nobel Prizes and most of the others
had careers of extraordinary distinction. His research during
this time focused largely on nuclear and elementary particle
physics as well as astrophysics and cosmic rays. However, he
also became a pioneer in computational physics and was one
of the ﬁrst to see the need to study nonlinear phenomena.
Fermi never published any work on geophysics, but he
surely kept abreast of the developments in the ﬁeld. He is
known to have made extensive use of what he called his “ar-
tiﬁcial memory,” a set of 3 × 5 cards that referred to more
extensive folders that stored material of particular interest to
him. Among them, we ﬁnd ones on “geophysics” and “geo-
magnetism and electrical phenomena.”
It would not have been surprising to see him study such
questions at greater length if his life had not ended at such
a tragically young age. Perhaps Fermi might even have once
again taught a course on geophysics. In one way, this book
allows his teachings on this topic to live on.

