chapter three
From “Military Worth” to 
Mathematical Programming
G
ame theory’s postwar career was launched by a book, but also by 
a bomber: the B- 29 bomber, to be precise. This was the plane that 
would form the core strength of the 20th US Air Force, commanded 
from the Mariana Islands during the last year of World War II by cigar- 
chomping future Strategic Air Command chief Curtis LeMay. Under 
LeMay’s command, B- 29s spearheaded the fi rebombing of Tokyo in 
the spring of 1945; they also dropped the fi rst atomic bombs on Hiro-
shima and Nagasaki that August. Beyond its association with some of 
the key actions of the war, the B- 29 represented one of American air 
power’s great technological breakthroughs. Developed in great secrecy 
and at great cost, the plane with its extraordinary capabilities proved the 
perfect vehicle for demonstrating the potential of strategic bombing— 
bombing that bypassed the front lines in favor of direct attacks on an en-
emy’s industrial base and civilan populations— on which America’s top 
air commander, General Henry Harley “Hap” Arnold, had staked much 
of his reputation. It was also a harbinger of things to come as world war 
gave way to Cold War, and as the combination of strategic air power and 
nuclear weapons emerged as a cornerstone of American national secu-
rity policy.
However, the B- 29 was from the start plagued with problems related 
to production, maintenance, training, and use. Early trials of the plane 
were nothing short of disastrous, with one test plane in early 1943 catch-
ing fi re in the air and crashing, killing Boeing’s fl ight crew and a num-

76 
Chapter 3
ber of people on the ground. More broadly, the plane was pushing the 
boundaries of what was technologically and humanly possible, fl ying at 
high speeds and altitudes at ranges of up to 3,700 miles, and employing 
state- of- the art remote- controlled guns and bombsights that required 
extraordinary efforts on the part of its crews. General Haywood “Pos-
sum” Hansell, who served as the fi rst commander of the B- 29 force in 
the Mariana Islands, described the situation thus: “Our people had no 
gunnery experience, and the gunnery equipment for the B- 29 was ex-
tremely sophisticated. It was so complex that the average individual sim-
ply couldn’t operate it. . . . [The] technology really did outrun itself.”1 
Despite these challenges, President Roosevelt had promised Chiang 
Kai- Shek that he would supply the planes to bases in China by April of 
1944; with so little time to spare between production and use in the Pa-
cifi c Theater, an extended period of trial- and- error learning was impos-
sible. Against this backdrop, in the spring of 1944, the Army Air Forces 
initiated a project, coordinated by the Princeton- based mathematician 
Merrill Flood, to muster scientifi c and engineering expertise in deter-
mining “the most effective formations and fl ight procedures for the B- 29 
airplane.”2 By the fall of that year, reference to von Neumann and Mor-
genstern’s book would appear in the Project’s internal memoranda— a 
portent of things to come, much like the B- 29 itself.
It is diffi cult to imagine that game theory would have survived and 
thrived as it did in the postwar era without the surge in national security 
funding that was a legacy of World War II and of the subsequent Cold 
War, as Philip Mirowski has rightly emphasized.3 Yet the appeal of von 
Neumann and Morgenstern’s “theory of games” in this context was am-
biguous to say the least. Did it provide a set of rules for how one ought 
to behave in a range of situations, like a practical “system” for winning 
at poker or bridge? If so, for whom was this “system” intended? Alter-
natively, was it a positive theory of human social interaction, as Morgen-
stern’s economic gloss on the book maintained— or at least, a somewhat 
skeletal and incomplete fi rst cut? Game theory could indeed be used to 
shed some light on how to “solve” some highly stylized and simplifi ed 
problems that were potentially of interest to military patrons: how best 
to defend a bomber against an enemy fi ghter plane, or how to hunt for a 
submarine that is itself intent on evading detection. But it is not obvious 
why generals and admirals might reach for game theory’s arcane math-
ematical axioms over the innumerable regulations, equipment manuals, 
and the like that they promulgated to govern the practical complexity of 

From “Military Worth” to Mathematical Programming 
77
day- to- day military operations. Perhaps instead, as Robert Leonard has 
provocatively suggested, game theory— like war gaming and the rigorous 
methodologies of systems analysis— spoke to the psychological needs of 
the military’s scientists. Their ritualistic activities of theorizing and ex-
perimenting were, to some extent, “collective meditations, so to speak, 
at a time of anxiety and strain.”4
This chapter builds on these extant accounts by seeking a sense of 
the subtler interplay between the aspirations of the individuals who were 
quickest to embrace von Neumann and Morgenstern’s work, and the 
rapidly evolving institutional environment linking the military and ac-
ademic experts between World War II and the Cold War that lay be-
yond. The standard- bearers of game theory in the postwar period were 
mostly trained as mathematicians and statisticians, although some had 
backgrounds in fi elds like economics. And while the precise nature of 
their work varied depending on context, it was often associated with the 
rubric of “operations research,” originating in a set of activities aimed at 
assessing the operational effi cacy of new tactics and technologies on the 
battlefi eld. This group’s embrace of game theory makes the most sense 
in the context of several interlinked developments unfolding in the wan-
ing years of World War II and the later 1940s: the managerial problems 
facing operations researchers as they were called upon to assess the ef-
fectiveness of increasingly complex technologies; the shift from hot war 
to Cold War, from the real- time analysis of bountiful combat- generated 
data, to the anticipation of (and budgeting for) wars that would never ac-
tually be fought and technologies that could not be directly tested on the 
battlefi eld; and, fi nally, the struggles of academics involved in the war ef-
fort to fi nd a place for their esoteric newfound skills in the postwar disci-
plinary and institutional order. In this context, more than “solving” any 
particular problem to provide prescriptions for rational conduct, game 
theory and related mathematical techniques proved critical in satisfying 
the professional aspirations of “applied” mathematicians and operations 
researchers, putting them at the center of a number of previously unre-
lated activities that were now held together by a common mathematical 
framework.
At the same time, the understanding of “game theory” that emerged 
in this context was the result of a highly selective appropriation of von 
Neumann and Morgenstern’s work. It has long been clear that the bulk 
of the publications on game theory to emerge in the immediate post-
war era focused principally on developing the theory of the two- person 

78 
Chapter 3
zero- sum game and on solving related problems of mathematical optimi-
zation.5 This chapter further evaluates this development in terms of the 
interaction between the interests of the military and those of its mathe-
maticians outlined in the preceding paragraph. Agendas of research into 
“military worth” or “programming” indeed steered mathematicians to-
ward developing theories of optimization and metrics of military per-
formance in the service of a broad range of activities related to logistics 
and to technology selection, design, and training. Moreover, the math-
ematics involved in solving the two- person zero- sum game— topology, 
the geometry of the simplex, the implications of convexity, fi xed- point 
theorems, and numerical methods of solution— not only lent itself read-
ily to such programs of research, but provided relatively fertile ground 
for the kind of theorem- proving toward which this particular group of 
mathematicians were most inclined. By contrast, the fate of another 
key component of von Neumann and Morgenstern’s work— the theory 
of the non- zero- sum and multiplayer game— demonstrates the limits 
of game theory’s relevance to postwar mathematicians and their mili-
tary patrons. The various alternative “solution concepts” for non- zero- 
sum games that emerged during this period out of critiques of the von 
Neumann– Morgenstern solution to such games plausibly refl ects not 
only the infl uence of the military context in reorienting the trajectory of 
game theory’s subsequent development, but also, to some extent, game 
theorists’ inclination toward the mathematical machinery of the two- 
person zero- sum game.
The War, Operations Research, and American Mathematics
In contrast to mainstream economists, who were relatively slow to warm 
to game theory, many mathematicians appear to have welcomed Theory 
of Games. Certainly, the most visible and technically capable enthusiasts 
for game theory after the war came from backgrounds in mathematics 
and statistics. (In the 1930s and 1940s these fi elds were related through a 
small but prominent group of mathematical statisticians, but in general 
they were not identical.) Yet their enthusiasm deserves some qualifi ca-
tion, since game theory’s foothold in mainstream academic mathematics 
after the war was in fact fairly precarious. John Nash’s early publications 
on game theory were generally hailed by fellow members of the Prince-
ton mathematical community, yet Nash quickly felt pressure to publish 

From “Military Worth” to Mathematical Programming 
79
something in an area of pure mathematics, like number theory or ab-
stract algebra, in order to obtain a professorship.6 In this regard, Nash 
was not unique: self- identifi ed “game theorists” apparently had diffi -
culty getting funding from the National Science Foundation’s mathemat-
ics program or landing positions in academic math departments. Thus 
John Isbell, a promising young mathematician who, like Nash, had stud-
ied game theory with Albert Tucker at Princeton in the early 1950s, later 
remembered his struggles to fi nd a job. Immediately after receiving his 
PhD in 1954, he had applied for a postdoctoral fellowship to do research 
in game theory, but was turned down. According to a friend, the NSF 
committee that considered his application was indignant at the prospect 
of funding a game theorist, and it was only after Isbell reframed his work 
as “topology”— a recognized specialty within pure mathematics— that 
he received support.7
Thus it would prove fortuitous that von Neumann and Morgenstern’s 
book appeared just at the end of World War II, a confl ict that had a dra-
matic impact on the American mathematical community on a number of 
interconnected levels: institutions, professional cadres, and ideas. Tra-
ditionally, the raison d’etre of advanced training in mathematics was 
generally to train teachers for university or collegiate setting. The ex-
ceptions to this were “industrial” or “applied” mathematics, and mathe-
matical statistics. The former were relatively small and certainly not well 
organized until after the war.8 The latter, while expanding rapidly dur-
ing the 1930s, was still a relatively new fi eld with no stable disciplinary 
base, hovering as it did on the border of the social sciences, business, bi-
ology (especially agricultural science), and mathematics. Nevertheless, 
during the 1930s, some statisticians received appointments in depart-
ments of mathematics.9 Corresponding to this overall institutional situa-
tion, mainstream American mathematics tended to be characterized by 
its commitment to “purity,” its distance from practical problems of any 
kind.10 Even “applied mathematics,” with the exception of mathematical 
statistics, typically meant “mathematics applied to theoretical physics,” 
especially the theory of the partial differential equations that were the 
standard language of the physical sciences in the nineteenth and early 
twentieth centuries.11
Military- related funding during the war changed this situation signifi -
cantly. From 1940 onward, mathematicians found themselves doing novel 
kinds of work in a number of new institutional locations.  Operations re-
search (OR)— a heterogeneous set of activities connected with assess-

80 
Chapter 3
ing the effectiveness of new technologies on the battlefi eld— appeared 
in the United States in the early 1940s. As OR was institutionalized in 
units attached to various military divisions, mathematicians and phys-
icists played central roles in its development.12 Other mathematicians 
found work through various divisions of Vannevar Bush’s National De-
fense Research Committee (NDRC)—after 1941 a unit of the Offi ce of 
Scientifi c Research and Development (OSRD). However, in 1942, Bush 
established an Applied Mathematics Panel (AMP) to serve as a cen-
tral agency for fi elding mathematical questions posed by the services 
and other OSRD units, and to coordinate the work of many of the pre- 
existing mathematical research groups and avoid duplication of effort.
The AMP in particular helped to cultivate a new generation of 
practical mathematicians, men and women who were talented manag-
ers and salespeople, and who had fewer qualms about violating disci-
plinary norms. This was entirely intentional: for, as Larry Owens has 
shown in his examination of the problems facing the AMP’s adminis-
tration, established research mathematicians often proved diffi cult to 
manage. Thus Warren Weaver, who assumed leadership of the AMP 
after directing the Rockefeller Foundation’s Division of Natural Sci-
ences during the 1930s, complained early in the war of the “dreamy 
moonchildren, the prima donnas, the a- social geniuses” that he felt 
were all too common among the academic elite.13 The generation that 
fi lled the ranks of the operations research units or staffed the vari-
ous AMP projects was different: its members were younger; they were 
less likely to have been employed in their fi eld during the depression 
years; and many of them had been relatively marginal— for a wide vari-
ety of reasons— within the universities. Working with the military was, 
by contrast, a much more rewarding option. Mina Rees, who earlier 
had had diffi culty advancing as an academic on account of her gen-
der, served as a technical assistant to the AMP (and to Warren Weaver 
in particular) from 1943 until the offi cial end of the panel’s work in 
1946, in the process winning the President’s Certifi cate of Merit and 
the (British) King’s Medal for Service in the Cause of Freedom for her 
work. After the war, as the head of the mathematics division of the 
Offi ce of Naval Research, Rees generally remained the only woman 
among the power brokers of science funding; years later, thinking of 
one meeting with top Navy brass, she recalled that “the only discrimi-
nation she felt was from a civilian.”14

From “Military Worth” to Mathematical Programming 
81
Likewise, Merrill Flood, an AMP consultant for much of the war, had 
had trouble fi nding a position as a mathematician after earning his PhD 
from Princeton during the lean years of the 1930s. Having started a fam-
ily at an early age, he applied his considerable ingenuity to fi nding a way 
to make a living in mathematics outside academia, serving as a statisti-
cal consultant to the governor of West Virginia, founding a mathemati-
cal consulting company, and proposing the creation of a “mathematical 
clinic” at Princeton. Princeton was not nearly as enthusiastic about the 
endeavor as he was, although this kind of intellectual entrepreneurship 
would make him an omnipresent administrator and researcher working 
for various defense agencies after the war.15 John D. Williams, another 
AMP technical assistant, had never even completed his PhD at Prince-
ton “due to some personal reason.” However, his facility with mathemat-
ical statistics and his “good feel for the practical aspects” of problems 
and made him an ideal wartime mathematician/ administrator.16 After 
the war, he would emerge as the RAND Corporation’s top mathema-
tician, in which capacity he would oversee a large percentage of game 
theory research. Other relatively young mathematicians who fl ocked to 
leadership positions in the AMP were Edwin S. Paxson, B. O. Koop-
man, and John W. Tukey, all of whom would be deeply involved with 
game theory’s cultivation in the postwar world. Von Neumann was also a 
consultant for the AMP, although his specialty was typically seen as the 
solution of complex differential equations.
Just as the AMP was staffed by a group of nontraditional mathema-
ticians, it also embraced an intellectual hierarchy substantially differ-
ent from that of academic mathematics. By the end of the war, AMP 
leadership could identify four major areas of research in which the panel 
was involved. Naturally, the fi rst area listed involved “mathematical 
studies based upon certain classical fi elds of applied mathematics,” by 
which they meant “classical dynamics and the dynamics of rigid bod-
ies, the theory of elasticity and plasticity, fl uid dynamics, electrodynam-
ics, and thermodynamics.” However, “probability and statistical studies” 
were now given a heading of their own for their insights into “the ef-
fectiveness of bombing; various aspects of naval warfare, including fi re 
effect analysis and the performance of torpedoes; the design of exper-
iments; sampling inspection; and analyses of many types of data col-
lected by the Armed Services.” Computational services— the production 
of numerical tables, the supervision of human computers, and the de-

82 
Chapter 3
velopment of fully automatic computing equipment—were another pro-
nounced area of growth, even if a number of programs in these areas 
had existed before the war.17 But one area was almost completely new, 
refl ecting the infl uence of practical problems of military operations on 
the mathematicians’ work: “Analytical studies in aerial warfare, includ-
ing assessment of the performance of sights and antiaircraft fi re control 
equipment; studies relating to the vulnerability of aircraft to plane- to- 
plane and to anti- aircraft fi re and the optimal defense of the airplane 
against these; and analyses of problems arising from the use of rockets 
in air warfare.”18
The distance between the AMP’s areas of research and the empha-
sis of prewar academic mathematics thus appeared to leave little hope 
for the operations researchers and the AMP staff in the context of post-
war military reconversion. As the war ended, the AMP and similar units 
faced the prospect of being permanently discontinued, and their leaders 
turned to the task of winding down their contracts and writing their fi nal 
reports. As a result, the latter exercise looked to the future as well to the 
past: in synthesizing their experience of the preceding years, they were 
also trying to assure a place for the mathematical innovations of the war 
years in the postwar environment, possibly in academia, but more likely 
in some new hybrid program of military- sponsored research. Against 
this backdrop, several powerful wartime administrators looked to game 
theory to serve as an example of the promise that mathematical investi-
gation held for the military. Game theory appeared in two postwar pub-
lications associated with the NDRC: a revised and declassifi ed version 
of the summary technical report of NDRC Division 6 (undersea war-
fare), written by physicists Philip Morse and George Kimball, “Methods 
of Operations Research”; and one chapter (with no indicated author) in 
a volume from the summary technical report of the AMP, titled “Ana-
lytical Studies in Aerial Warfare.” The volume by Morse and Kimball 
would emerge as a highly infl uential textbook of operations research— a 
signifi cant contribution to the professionalization of OR via the estab-
lishment of a standard pedagogy focused on the mastery of arcane math-
ematical techniques.19 Yet although the chapter from the AMP report 
cut a lower public profi le, it was probably more immediately infl uential 
on account of its powerful (though unacknowledged) author. That au-
thor was Warren Weaver— the AMP chief himself— and his chapter laid 
out a vision for the future of game theory that would prove prophetic.

From “Military Worth” to Mathematical Programming 
83
The Problem of “Military Worth”
The ideas in Weaver’s chapter had roots in the challenges that the AMP 
mathematicians had begun to encounter almost a year and a half earlier, 
during that fateful spring of 1944. With the ever- buggy B- 29 bomber in 
the process of being rushed from test fl ights into actual combat missions 
in the Pacifi c, in late May the Army Air Forces (AAF) Board convened 
a conference in Orlando, Florida, that called attention to a number of as-
pect of the new bomber’s performance that needed immediate study, es-
pecially “the preparation of a single manual on the use and maintenance 
of the fi re control equipment of the  B- 29 airplane,” “the specifi cations of 
the necessary gunnery training,” and more broadly, “the consideration 
of the tactical use of the B- 29 airplane.” With respect to this last point, 
rather than simply analyzing data on the entire plane’s performance af-
ter action in the fi eld and systematically investigating the impact of var-
ious changes in technology and tactics (an impossibility given the tight 
deadlines involved), the AAF had already begun a collaboration be-
tween a Dr. E. J. Workman, of the University of New Mexico’s Physics 
Department, and the 2nd Air Force to study a number of problems re-
lated to the use of the plane’s guns in simulated combat.20 In the wake of 
the conference, the AAF proposed a sweeping contract with the NDRC 
to “organize and outline scientifi cally controlled and evaluated investi-
gation of the most effective formations to provide maximum utilization 
of the B- 29 airplane’s equipment” and more generally to “determine the 
most advantageous manner in which B- 29 aircraft can be fl own.”21 This 
contract was ultimately handed to the Applied Mathematics Panel and 
given number AC- 92.22
The bulletins of project AC- 92’s steering committee— which met for 
the fi rst time in July 1944— describe a project of extraordinary scope and 
complexity. This scope was refl ected, among other things, in the com-
position of the steering committee: its core members were from the 
AMP, including Warren Weaver (who served as chair) and Merrill Flood 
(the committee’s executive secretary, based in the AMP’s Princeton of-
fi ce), but it also included the president of the AAF board, a represen-
tative from the fi re control division of the NDRC, various military li-
aisons, and a representative from the OR unit attached to the 20th Air 
Force which would be the prime recipient of the new B- 29.23 As the 

84 
Chapter 3
project went along, it also rapidly drew in technical personnel from a 
number of AMP divisions and research programs scattered through-
out the country. Full- scale experimentation on the problem of optimal 
bomber formations continued under Workman’s direction at the Univer-
sity of New Mexico; another group based at the Mt. Wilson Observatory 
worked with a reduced- scale model to study formation fi re power; prov-
ing ground experiments on the guns were run at Eglin Field; and a ma-
jor parallel study, conducted by the Applied Psychology Panel, sought to 
evaluate (and possibly improve) the airplane’s fi re control and commu-
nication systems via experimentation on human subjects, and to develop 
training and crew selection techniques.24 In addition, AMP groups at 
Brown and Columbia worked on analyzing data from both Europe and 
Japan that could give insight into the risk to various bomber formations 
from fl ak, or the effectiveness of airborne rockets. A number of AMP 
staff (most notably, Samuel S. Wilks and John D. Williams) would also 
be assigned to work with experimental efforts, such as Workman’s, to as-
sist with the planning of experiments, data collection, and data analysis. 
Finally, at the center of all this activity was Merrill Flood and his staff 
at Princeton, who were tasked with extracting regular progress reports 
from the various research groups and ensuring a steady circulation of in-
formation within the project.25
AC- 92 thus was a qualitatively new kind of project for the AMP. Most 
of the hundred- odd studies performed by this organization were done in 
response to fairly specifi c requests: produce tables of an obscure mathe-
matical function, solve this set of equations, analyze this set of data sent 
back by an OR unit working closer to the front lines. Among these, AC- 
92 stands out due to the extraordinary scope of its mandate— to “deter-
mine the most advantageous manner in which B- 29 aircraft can be fl own,” 
a problem that potentially touched upon every aspect of the aircraft’s en-
gineering, staffi ng, and deployment. It is also remarkable how central 
the AMP mathematicians were to this process, dominating the project’s 
steering committee, coordinating the schedule and circulating results, 
and sitting in on almost all of the key discussions about how the study 
would be designed. Moreover, given the ambiguities inherent in their 
mandate, it is small wonder that the project rapidly became an adminis-
trative headache for Weaver and Flood, who stood at the center of this 
sprawling, heterogeneous enterprise, nor is it surprising that members of 
the scattered scientifi c working groups found cause to resist the encroach-
ments of the mathematicians at the core of the whole process. While it is 

From “Military Worth” to Mathematical Programming 
85
diffi cult to uncover specifi c technical disagreements in the AMP memo-
randa, egos were clearly bruised; at one point, a meeting with Workman 
in New Mexico almost ended in blows as the mathematicians, experimen-
talists, and military offi cials struggled for control of the project.26
This, then, was the situation facing the executive secretary of AC- 92’s 
steering committee, Merrill Flood, in late 1944, when he tried to clar-
ify the project’s guiding philosophy in a memorandum issued under the 
aegis of the AMP’s Fire Control Research Offi ce in Princeton.27 In this 
memo Flood fi rst invoked the “theory of games”— which he had learned 
“by attending one of [von Neumann’s] pre- war Princeton lectures on 
game theory”— to solve a highly simplifi ed model of aerial combat in-
volving an offensive bomber and a fi ghter plane, both fl ying at the same 
altitude, with the latter defending “two targets separated so widely that 
the fi ghter can be used to defend only one of the targets at any particu-
lar time.” In line with von Neumann’s results on the two- person zero- 
sum game, Flood identifi ed an optimal strategy that made strategic use 
of uncertainty, thereby concluding that “the best way to carry out an op-
eration will often involve the use of deliberate randomness.”28 However, 
Flood’s memo made it clear that the use of game theory was merely il-
lustrative of a new kind of analysis that he hoped would strengthen the 
mathematicians’ hand in the ongoing struggles over the B- 29 study. As 
he noted, “The broad purpose of project AC- 92 is the determination of 
optimum tactics for use in the employment of very heavy bombers in op-
erations against Japan,” but at the current time “it is not possible either 
to state this problem much more precisely or to state a program for its 
solution in anything approaching precise terms.” What was needed was 
a mathematical formulation of the problem that could “provide a broad 
working framework for discussions, more careful planning, theoretical 
and experimental work, and decisions on early recommendations made 
under the project.”29 To this end, Flood proposed the development of a 
standard measure of “military worth” that would capture in one index 
the gains and losses associated with a particular operation. This mea-
sure would permit a taxonomy of factors determining gains or losses 
in military worth as “dominant,” “subdominant,” and “negligible,” but 
also “controllable” and “uncontrollable.” Critically, Flood noted that 
this analysis could rule out the need for further development of mili-
tary tactics and technologies, especially if “the effect of a subdominant 
but controllable factor is outweighed by the effect of an uncontrollable 
dominant factor.” Armed with a suitable calculus of military worth, the 

86 
Chapter 3
mathematicians could potentially shoot down research proposals from 
the scientists and engineers that did not contribute to the completion of 
the overall project at hand.30
This notion of “military worth” would form the centerpiece of Warren 
Weaver’s “Analytical Studies in Aerial Warfare,” which appeared over 
a year later in the AMP’s summary technical report. For Weaver, the 
point of formulating a mathematical framework for the study of aerial 
warfare was precisely to help manage the complex and multidisciplinary 
process of equipment testing, design, and training of the kind that had 
characterized AC- 92 (see fi gure 3.1). Consider, he suggested, the exam-
ple of a colonel at Wright Field who is trying to decide which of several 
gunsights he should order to equip his planes. To make this decision, he 
must take into account an extraordinary array of knowledge: statistical 
estimates of bombing accuracies, “the logistics of the theatres in which 
these sights are to be used,” the targets under consideration, experimen-
tal data on the “psychology and physiology of operation of bombsights,” 
and much more. What was needed was a rigorous way of bringing to-
gether knowledge about such performance factors, and exploring the in-
Figure 3.1. The centrality of “Air Warfare Analysis” to the process of military technol-
ogy assessment. From Offi ce of Scientifi c Research and Development, “Aircraft Fire Con-
trol Developments in the AAF,” in Summary Technical Report of the Applied Mathemat-
ics Panel NDRC, vol. 2, Analytical Studies in Aerial Warfare, ed. Mina Rees (Washington, 
DC, 1946), 223.

From “Military Worth” to Mathematical Programming 
87
terconnections between them, and assessing the relative contribution of 
each of them to a wing’s ultimate success on the battlefi eld. Weaver’s ab-
straction of the situation was as follows: suppose we want to perform an 
operation O according to plan P that is completely specifi ed by of a num-
ber of decisions. These decisions depend on a number of variables, some 
of which we control (decision variables D), but many of which are “ba-
sic variables” V controlled by “nature” or even by an enemy. Now, the 
“central feature of a general theory of air warfare” can be stated as fol-
lows: “the plan P should, in fact, be characterized by the set of decisions 
D which is worth most to us.” While Weaver acknowledged that the term 
“worth” is usually associated with economic contexts, in this case he re-
ferred to a concept of “military worth” in which “destruction and harm 
to the enemy will be counted as the more valuable.”31
How could one fi nd the best combination of decision variables? Both 
practical and conceptual problems presented themselves. To actually 
carry out calculations of military worth, Weaver envisioned “a great 
Tactical- Strategic Computer [TSC]” with input dials for the decision 
variables, constant registers for the “basic variables,” and an output dial 
showing “military worth” for each combination. Given breakthroughs in 
digital computing and “multistage servo systems” stimulated by the war, 
even if such a device sounded a bit like a “Rube Goldberg machine,” 
nevertheless “the present author would like to risk the prophecy that 
just as World War I saw the birth, and World War II the high develop-
ment and effective use of fi re control predictors which, so to speak, solve 
the immediate tactical problem for a single gun, so the next war (should 
there be one) may result in the development and use of general tactical 
computers for use in the fi eld.”32
His comments on computers and servomechanisms aside, Weaver 
felt that the physical construction of such a “Rube Goldberg Machine” 
would be less challenging than the development of the mathematics that 
underlay it, in particular, the formulation of a suitable calculus of mili-
tary worth that could capture the functional relationships between the 
various decision variables involved in a problem. Here, it was important 
to develop nothing less than a new kind of mathematics, a mathematics 
designed to suit the managerial realities of operations research. Game 
theory was the perfect example:
Military worth, as the phrase is here used, is closely related to the general 
concept of utility in economic theory. And the reader is warmly encouraged 

88 
Chapter 3
to read the discussion of a numerical theory of utility given (on pages 15– 
29 and elsewhere) in Theory of Games in Economic Behavior by John von 
Neumann and Oskar Morgenstern. This pioneering and brilliant book is, it 
should be pointed out, connected in a most important way with the viewpoint 
here being presented, for it develops a large part of the mathematics neces-
sary for theories of competitive processes.33
Later in the chapter Weaver again praised what he read as “the power-
ful analysis of competitive processes carried out by von Neumann and 
Morgenstern” and suggested also that similar mathematical frameworks 
were being developed by “quantitative ecologists” such as Vito Volterra, 
Alfred Lotka, Georges Teissier, and G. F. Gause, who were interested in 
“competitive biological systems” and related concepts like the ecologi-
cal “niche.” It seemed likely that the cultivation of entirely new types of 
mathematics, associated with new applications, would be necessary in 
meeting military needs in the postwar era.34
Given the strains that had emerged over the B- 29 project, Weaver sus-
pected how controversial were these dreams of military- worth computers 
that poured forth from his fevered mind. He therefore took pains to cir-
culate the draft among his closest associates from the AMP, among them 
Flood, Thornton Fry, Koopman, Paxson, Rees, Tukey, Oswald Veblen, 
W. Allen Wallis, Samuel S. Wilks, and Williams. “You may think that this 
draft is, in places, too informal in character,” he wrote, but its chances of 
being read by people “in a position to effect the future policies” are bet-
ter “if a few raisins are put in with the oatmeal.”35 Yet on the whole the re-
spondents liked the raisins and agreed that the controversial points that 
they represented were important ones. Veblen, writing from his offi ce 
near von Neumann at Princeton’s Institute for Advanced Study, noted the 
necessity for a general theory of warfare, but suggested that
what is really lacking is some person of suffi cient ability and interest, who has 
the time and energy to develop the kind of a theory which you adumbrate. 
Perhaps it might better be worked out in connection with some type of com-
petitive activity other than warfare. There must be other situations in which 
a theory involving basic variables, decision variables, and ——— worth, would 
have signifi cant application.36
But Paxson, a member of the younger generation of applied mathemati-
cians coming up through the AMP, was particularly enthusiastic for con-

From “Military Worth” to Mathematical Programming 
89
tinuing the war- forged relationship with the military, noting that, in the 
current military planning environment, “the need for a TSC at top plan-
ning levels becomes very obvious” and urging the peacetime develop-
ment of such machines, even if “the human elements” in the military 
“make one pessimistic about any such development.”37
Instituting the Study of Military Worth at RAND
Veblen and Paxson’s concern about fi nding an institutional home for 
the analysis of military worth turned out to be overdone given Warren 
Weaver’s contacts within the military bureaucracy. For example, in cor-
responding with Pentagon offi cials interested in the development of re-
search programs on fi re-control effectiveness and other problems in op-
erations research, Weaver apparently shared ideas very similar to those 
that would appear in the AMP fi nal report with Edward Bowles, a tech-
nical advisor to the secretary of war.38 Subsequently Bowles would prove 
instrumental in creating “Project RAND” by contract with the Santa 
Monica– based Douglas Aircraft Company. Much like the AMP’s guide-
lines for AC- 92, the terms of the original contract with Douglas were ex-
ceptionally broad, calling for “study and research on the broad subject of 
intercontinental warfare, other than surface, with the object of recom-
mending to the Army Air Forces preferred techniques and instrumen-
talities for the purpose.” The initial budget was set at $500,000 for three 
years, although that was quickly upped to $10 million, a sum that would 
last until the conclusion of the original contract in the spring of 1950. 
Thereafter, successive Air Force contracts (and consulting contracts 
with other agencies such as the Atomic Energy Commission) would pro-
vide RAND with an ever- growing river of funds.39
Weaver and his understudy, John Williams, were also well acquainted 
with Frank Collbohm, the newly appointed director of Project RAND, 
from the course of their time with the AMP. After writing up the fi nal 
AMP reports, Williams was moving west to take a job as chief statisti-
cian at the Naval Ordnance Test Station at Inyokern, California, when 
he received a telephone call from Collbohm, who told him about the 
RAND contract and urged him to join the Project. Collbohm said that 
he greatly admired the AMP’s work, and told Williams “that he would 
like to have RAND permeated by the kind of analyses that the Applied 
Mathematics Panel had done during the war.”40 Inspired by the open- 

90 
Chapter 3
ended nature of RAND’s mandate, Williams agreed to head to Santa 
Monica. He also dispatched a note to Olaf Helmer, an AMP colleague 
of his who was just then moving from New York to join Williams at In-
yokern. Helmer later remembered that he received Williams’s missive 
when he was about halfway across the country. The message: never mind 
the Navy, I meant Air Force.41 Helmer, Williams, and Paxson would be 
among the fi rst members of the project— beside the cadre of engineers 
from Douglas Aircraft— and in the spring of 1946 they formed the nu-
cleus of a new section of the Project devoted to the “Evaluation of Mili-
tary Worth” (later shortened to “Military Worth” or “Evaluation”). By 
1948 still more mathematicians would join. The list of new arrivals— 
George Brown, Melvin Dresher, Henri Bohnenblust, T. E. Har-
ris, J. C. C. McKinsey, and Lloyd S. Shapley— would constitute a verita-
ble “who’s who” of postwar game theory.
Weaver never joined the RAND staff, but as Martin Collins has 
shown in his defi nitive study of RAND’s early history, his brand of “mil-
itary worth” analysis proved a strong intellectual infl uence on the new 
project. Among other things, during those fi rst, formative years of the 
RAND contract, Williams and Weaver were central fi gures in a network 
of consultants and staffers—including other old AMP standbys like 
Wilks, Wallis, and Helmer, as well as statistician Frederick Mosteller—
whose advice would play a signifi cant role in developing the project’s 
program of research into “military worth.” Such a program would nat-
urally involve further development of the mathematics of “competitive 
processes” like game theory, but it would also require the recruitment 
of social scientists willing to contribute their expertise on the economic, 
political, psychological, and social impacts of changes in military tech-
nology.42 Subsequently, Weaver presided over a RAND- sponsored Con-
ference of Social Scientists, held at the Hotel New Yorker in New York 
City, from September 14– 19, 1947. The invitees were all by now luminar-
ies in their respective fi elds: economists Ansley Coale, Charles Hitch, 
and Jacob Viner; psychologists Donald Marquis and Samuel Stouffer, 
political scientists Franz Neumann and Bernard Brodie, and anthropol-
ogist Margaret Mead. Also present were the members of the study group 
and the fl edgling program at RAND, most notably Helmer, Mosteller, 
Wallis, Weaver, Wilks, and Williams.43
Weaver’s opening address to the conference concisely articulates 
the methodological perspective of military worth analysis and thus 

From “Military Worth” to Mathematical Programming 
91
sheds light on the distinctive modality of game theory’s use at RAND. 
 Wartime experience, Weaver argued, had led to the recognition that 
 interdisciplinary research teams were essential to the solution of what 
he called “problems of organized complexity.” A good example was the 
“convoy problem”— “How do we get stuff across the Atlantic?” Opera-
tions research in Britain provided an excellent model of how to address 
such a problem: throw together a team of researchers from a variety of 
disciplines— psychology, economics, physics, and beyond— and see what 
they come up with. Such patterns of collaboration showed great prom-
ise for the practical improvement of warfare, not to mention the broader 
study of complex social and biological problems.44 While such coopera-
tion between specialists had in the past “resulted only from the pressure 
and necessity of war,” Project RAND sought to continue it in peacetime 
by providing a free- wheeling institutional environment coupled with 
the discipline of a “quantitative logical analytical theory” for “analyz-
ing general theories of air warfare.” Such theories would further develop 
Weaver’s concept of military worth by developing “quantitative indices 
for a gadget, a tactic, or a strategy, so that one can compare it with avail-
able alternatives and guide decisions by analysis, to the extent that anal-
ysis can be shown to be relevant and possible.”45
But, as Weaver was quick to add, such quantitative theories were un-
likely to produce defi nitive advice on how to act in a particular situation; 
rather they acted as a kind of logical brake on the analysis of complex 
problems. The analysis of military worth thus might constitute a fi rst 
step toward living what Weaver called “the rational life”— not exactly 
the mindless application of decision rules and quantifi cation to prob-
lems of decision- making, but rather the judicious blending of “some ex-
perience, some insight, and some analysis of problems, as compared with 
living in a state of ignorance, superstition, and drifting- into- whatever- 
may- come.”46 Such analysis might, for example, determine the sensi-
tivity of a decision to its myriad input parameters; the military worth 
analyst might be able to determine “the sensitivity, so to speak, of the 
bound aries of knowledge with respect to different items of information.” 
Speaking of the relationship between the mathematical analyst and the 
disciplinary specialist, Weaver continued: “We can say to you, ‘Please 
don’t strain yourself indefi nitely to try to fi nd out this particular fact be-
cause that is not going to move the boundary of ignorance very far.’”47 
Thus Weaver stressed that any general “theory” of air warfare did not 

92 
Chapter 3
represent a technocratic substitute for specialized expertise but rather a 
way of coordinating and policing an interdisciplinary research effort. In 
consequence, inasmuch as the RAND mathematicians leaned on game 
theory to develop the analysis of military worth, game theory’s prescrip-
tions were intended to apply less to generals or fi ghter pilots, and more 
to the military’s scientists themselves.
Apart from introducing the leading lights of American social sci-
ence to the kind of work that was being done for RAND, the conference 
helped guarantee a supply of experts to staff the Project and to serve 
as consultants. And indeed, many of the conference participants would 
reappear throughout RAND’s subsequent history as staff research-
ers, consultants, or both. Also about this time, as RAND’s collection 
of staff and consultants began a period of major expansion, von Neu-
mann and Morgenstern began to be aware of the scale of the research 
agenda that their work had inspired. On December 16, 1947, Williams 
wrote to his old professor von Neumann, proposing the terms of a con-
sultancy. “The members of the Project with problems in your line (i.e. 
the wide world) could discuss them with you, by mail and in person,” he 
wrote. “We would send you all working papers and reports of RAND 
which we think would interest you, expecting you to react (with frown, 
hint, or suggestion) when you had a reaction.” In an oft- quoted line, Wil-
liams reassured von Neumann that “the only part of your thinking time 
we’d like to bid for systematically is that which you spend shaving.”48 
Von Neumann’s response is revealing, suggesting his relative unfamil-
iarity with the Project even at that late date: “The very sketchy informa-
tion I have about [your work] makes it sound interesting and attractive,” 
he wrote.49 While von Neumann would visit Santa Monica in the later 
1940s, he soon became more of a distant eminence.50
As the research staff affi liated with RAND began to swell after 1947, 
the organizational structure of the Project began to shift as well. In 1948 
RAND was substantially reorganized and expanded, and the initial Air 
Force contract was transferred from Douglas Aircraft to a new non-
profi t corporation— the RAND Corporation— that had been specially 
chartered for the purpose in the summer of that year.51 By the spring of 
1949 the corporation was divided into eight divisions; half were devoted 
to “hardware” R&D (aircraft, missiles, nuclear energy, and electron-
ics), while four others (economics, systems analysis, social science, and 
 mathematics) represented the legacy of the original “military worth” 

From “Military Worth” to Mathematical Programming 
93
program and the Conference of Social Scientists. Two conference at-
tendees were installed as chiefs of new divisions: Hitch in economics, 
and Hans Speier, a sociologist from the New School of Social Research, 
in social science. Meanwhile, two old AMP hands also became divi-
sion chiefs, with Paxson in systems analysis and Williams and in a new 
(and slightly pruned) mathematics division. While the corporation thus 
increasingly seemed to organize expertise along more traditional aca-
demic lines, R. D. Specht, a RAND mathematician, would reminisce in 
the later 1950s, “These compartments into which RAND is organized 
are not to be taken too literally,” with “the occasional political scientist, 
astronomer, physiologist, or psychologist” cropping up in the Engineer-
ing Division, while “Mathematicians, in turn, have infi ltrated most Di-
visions.” Moreover, projects that began in one division— “a project on 
Strategic Air Command operations” or a study of “limited war”— had a 
way of spreading out to envelop others.52 Mathematicians certainly re-
mained a key element of RAND’s research force: by the spring of 1948 
the corporation employed 23 mathematicians full- time, out of a to-
tal technical staff of 145. Throughout the 1940s and 1950s, mathemati-
cians and logicians would comprise a roughly constant percentage of the 
RAND workforce, and a signifi cantly larger proportion of the technical 
staff, despite this being a period of tremendous growth and diversifi ca-
tion of the overall RAND budget.53
With mathematicians such a signifi cant presence inside Project 
RAND, game theory per se became institutionalized as an active area of 
research, so that even though many of the resulting papers bore the mark 
of Weaver’s “military worth” agenda, the internal logic of the mathemati-
cians’ discipline also began to assert itself. Upon his arrival in the spring 
of 1946, Williams pushed the mathematicians under his direction toward 
research in game theory that might be relevant to the development of 
mathematical theories of air warfare. One manifestation of this agenda 
was an extensive series of publications laying out highly simplifi ed mod-
els of air duels, or reconnaissance missions in which a commander might 
learn some information about his opponent at a cost to himself.54 This 
former tradition would prove remarkably long- lived: the so- called prob-
lem of noisy duels, in which each plane knows when the other has com-
menced fi re, would only be considered solved in the later 1960s.55 The 
models were highly simplifi ed— certainly far too simple to be of direct 
applicability to actual combat situations— but the mathematics proved 

94 
Chapter 3
exceptionally complex. In such duels, the planes might choose from a 
continuum of pure strategies: for instance, by selecting a time at which 
to begin fi ring that will maximize damage to the opponent while mini-
mizing damage to themselves. However, such games presented a number 
of technical diffi culties not present in von Neumann and Morgenstern’s 
original conception of game theory. As a result, many of the dozens of 
research memoranda that the Project produced from 1946 onward be-
gan to look like the typical traces left behind by an academic enterprise: 
sober and workmanlike, consisting of long strings of theorems, lemmas, 
and proofs, they plowed through many of the standard kinds of ques-
tions mathematicians asked about the identifi cation of various classes of 
games, and the existence of solutions.
By early 1948, RAND’s mathematicians issued several progress re-
ports synthesizing their work and indicating profi table new directions 
for the theory, including a fi ve- part series on “Contributions to the The-
ory of Games” authored by the mathematicians as a group.56 Their pro-
grammatic statements in these documents refl ected the confl uence of 
mathematical impulses and “military worth analysis” found at RAND. 
Consider, for example, the remarks of Olaf Helmer at a meeting of the 
Institute for Mathematical Statistics in June 1948. While von Neumann 
and Morgenstern had focused on proving the existence of solutions for 
the two- person zero- sum game with discrete strategies, research was 
urgently needed on several other topics that had become salient since 
1944. These included simpler methods for actually calculating mixed-
strategy solutions in games with discrete strategies, as well as solutions 
for games with continuous payoff functions, possibly drawing upon 
principles from the calculus of variations—a refl ection of RAND’s in-
terest in problems like “games of timing.” Solutions also were sought 
for discrete games where the matrix entries were no longer simple ex-
pected values but were instead probability distributions. And fi nally, 
there was demand for improved results on games with more than two 
players. In the military context the formation of coalitions—even where 
coalitions were mutually benefi cial and the third player was “nature”—
seemed “utopian.” It therefore seemed likely that useful and relevant 
results could be found by developing a theory of multiplayer games in 
which coalitions were banned or restricted.57 Already, in the context 
of  Weaver’s aims for an interdisciplinary analysis of “military worth,” 
game theory’s center of gravity was beginning to pivot away from that 
found in Theory of Games.

From “Military Worth” to Mathematical Programming 
95
From “Military Worth” to Dollars and Cents: Programming
It was at this point, in late 1947 and early 1948, that Project RAND’s 
military worth analysis suddenly ran together with another research ini-
tiative originating on the other side of the country, in the Air Comptrol-
ler’s offi ce at the Pentagon, and associated with the rubric of “program-
ming.” Weaver’s “military worth” analysis refl ected wartime pressures 
surrounding the development of the B- 29: the need to coordinate re-
search activities in an environment where time was the limiting fac-
tor. Programming, by contrast, was from the start colored by the post-
war military establishment’s signature worries about the availability of 
money and manpower. With President Harry S. Truman presiding over 
rapid demobilization and military reconversion following the end of the 
war, and with further budgetary consolidation just around the corner 
with the passage of the National Security Act of 1947, the military found 
itself operating in an unaccustomed atmosphere of competition for re-
sources.58 As E. W. Rawlings, the Air Comptroller, would lament in a 
memorandum to top Army Air Forces general Carl Spaatz from March 
1947, while wartime planning was governed by purely military consid-
erations with “no limit on our budget,” now “stringent limitations have 
been placed on our resources through budgetary and manpower ceil-
ings.” Existing strategic plans set by top- level staff offi cers implicitly 
required a peacetime budget of $8 billion, according to the comptrol-
ler’s offi ce, which was charged with translating general “plans of action” 
into “coordinated programs for implementation” by “subordinate com-
mands.” Yet with budget projections for the upcoming year estimated 
at under $3 billion and further cuts contemplated, Rawlings complained 
that he was increasingly forced to make policy decisions “each time I am 
asked to recompute a budget, since the deletion or reduction of items in 
the budget later controls the operating program.” He therefore proposed 
a signifi cant overhaul of the process by which plans were translated into 
programs, by the development of “general yardsticks, factors, and stan-
dards” for budgeting that would help the Air Staff prioritize the distri-
bution of available resources.59
Air Force budgeting in the 1940s was indeed a daunting bureaucratic 
process. Once plans were handed off by the air staff, the generation of 
a fi nal “program” specifying payments and requisitions of equipment or 
munitions, manpower and training requirements, and movements of ma-

96 
Chapter 3
teriel and personnel took roughly seven months, as different planning 
organs labored to assemble the requisite information and calculations 
(see fi g. 3.2). From this environment of frenetic budgeting activity, “pro-
gramming” emerged as a fi eld of formal mathematical inquiry. A cen-
tral fi gure in this development was George B. Dantzig, a former statistics 
student of Jerzy Neyman at Berkeley, who had served as an advisor to 
the US Army Air Forces statistical control offi ce as wartime liaison be-
tween the Army Air Forces and the AMP. Provoked by his Pentagon col-
leagues, Dantzig set himself the problem of automating the production 
of “a time- staged deployment, training, and logistical supply program,” 
using available computing technologies like “analogue devices or punch 
card equipment” to speed up the process. Dantzig’s fi rst mathematical 
model of the programming process captured only the functional rela-
tionships between the various resources the Air Force needed and the 
Figure 3.2. The Air Force programming process before the advent of linear program-
ming. From Tjalling C. Koopmans, Activity Analysis of Production and Allocation (New 
York: Wiley, 1951), 191.

From “Military Worth” to Mathematical Programming 
97
activities that produced (or consumed) them. To choose the most suit-
able combination of activities and resources from the vast set of techno-
logically feasible combinations, a number of additional “ad hoc ground 
rules” or “edicts” that the military leadership and budget authorities im-
posed were also necessary. But by the summer of 1947, Dantzig had be-
gun to formulate the programming problem in terms of the explicit max-
imization of a function of the decision variables that captured Air Force 
objectives, subject to constraints on the various combinations of activ-
ities and resources at the Air Force’s disposal. With the problem thus 
formulated, starting in the fall of 1947, he began actually to calculate a 
program, albeit a highly simplifi ed one: a diet, consisting of proportions 
of available foodstuffs, that met the basic nutritional requirements for a 
human being at minimum cost. The calculations were carried out using 
the most advanced technology then generally available: a group of hu-
man computers using mechanical tabulating machines and a pencil- and- 
paper notational system.60
In early October, daunted by the immensity of the computational task 
involved in even this relatively simple problem, Dantzig visited John von 
Neumann at Princeton in hope of improving his methods of  solution— a 
decision that made sense in light of von Neumann’s expertise in comput-
ing techniques. Having written out his formulation of the programming 
problem on the blackboard in von Neumann’s offi ce, Dantzig recalled:
Von Neumann stood up and said “Oh that!” Then for the next hour and a 
half, he proceeded to give me a lecture on the mathematical theory of lin-
ear programs. At one point seeing me sitting there with my eyes popping and 
my mouth open (after all I had searched the literature and found nothing), 
von Neumann said: “I don’t want you to think I am pulling all this out of my 
sleeve on the spur of the moment like a magician. I have just recently com-
pleted a book with Oskar Morgenstern on the theory of games. What I am 
doing is conjecturing that the two problems are equivalent. The theory that I 
am outlining for your problem is an analogue to the one we have developed 
for games.”61
Von Neumann’s essential insight was to realize that the problems faced 
by the players in a two- person zero- sum game and the particular maxi-
mization problem faced by the Pentagon programmers were the same. 
In a game, the two players are trying to solve an interconnected optimi-
zation problem: given a choice of the strategies available, the row player 

98 
Chapter 3
wants to maximize the value of the game, while the column player wants 
to minimize the expected value of the game. Dantzig’s “linear pro-
gram” possessed a similar structure: to every such program, there is a 
“dual” program that corresponds to the optimization problem of the sec-
ond player in the two- person zero- sum game. In his conversation with 
Dantzig, von Neumann was able to outline conditions under which both 
problems had solutions, much as he had in his 1937 paper on the equa-
tions of economic equilibrium.62
Von Neumann could develop insights into the nature of the program-
ming problem by drawing analogies to the theory of the two- person 
zero- sum game, but he was less successful in identifying new numerical 
techniques for computing particular programs. His proposed algorithm, 
sent to Dantzig several months after their October meeting, was actu-
ally slower than the one Dantzig had devised the previous summer (now 
famous as the “simplex method”).63 However, beyond von Neumann’s 
somewhat disappointing contribution to the numerical methods used to 
solve games and programs, the major result of Dantzig’s visit to Prince-
ton was to connect two areas of mathematical endeavor that had previ-
ously been quite isolated. Dantzig had not found von Neumann’s book 
on “games” when he searched the mathematical literature for results rel-
evant to what he thought was his problem, and the “military worth” an-
alyst fi rst envisioned in the context of the B- 29 bomber study occupied 
a social world distinct from that of the Pentagon bean- counters. Yet the 
intellectual connection forged at this fortuitous meeting between games, 
programs, and the computer— while foreseen in Weaver’s “Rube Gold-
berg Machine”— would quickly come to dominate mathematical re-
search into game theory at RAND and elsewhere.
The connection between games and programming, “military worth” 
and Pentagon budgeting, was cemented in July of 1948, when RAND 
hosted two month- long colloquia simultaneously, one on game theory 
and the other on the “Theory of Planning,” an umbrella term for the 
kind of work being done by Dantzig’s programming project. The collo-
quium on planning drew in some thirty- eight mathematicians or statis-
ticians, both from RAND and from academia; top- level operations re-
searchers, both in and out of uniform, working in the Air Force and 
Navy; and a number of economists. The mathematicians were dominated 
by RAND’s mathematics staff, most of whom were present, but new ar-
rivals included Merrill Flood (then working out of the American Statis-
tical Association’s Washington offi ce), Richard Bellman (a graduate stu-

From “Military Worth” to Mathematical Programming 
99
dent in mathematics at Princeton who would eventually join RAND’s 
mathematics division in 1952), David Blackwell (a mathematical stat-
istician at Howard University) and Tukey (a collaborator of Samuel S. 
Wilks at Princeton). From the services came a number of top operations 
researchers and administrators: a colonel and a couple of lieutenant col-
onels from the Plans and Operations Division of the US General Staff; 
Dr. William J. Horvath of the Operations Evaluation Group of the Navy 
Department; and naturally, George Dantzig and his colleague Marshall 
Wood, both from the Offi ce of the Air Comptroller.
However, the vast majority of new arrivals were economists, most of 
whom were drawn from the Cowles Commission for Research in Eco-
nomics at the University of Chicago. This organization, which had been 
the preeminent center for mathematical economics and econometric 
research in America during the 1930s and 1940s, had been involved in 
Dantzig’s linear programming project since the previous summer. At 
that time, Dantzig had visited Cowles to consult with research associ-
ate Tjalling C. Koopmans, a Dutch physicist- turned- economist who had 
developed a mathematical model of transportation systems for the war-
time Allied Shipping Board. Koopmans and his colleagues had been un-
able to give immediate advice on solving Dantzig’s problem, but began 
to steer the researchers at Cowles toward programming problems. As 
a result, Koopmans and his colleague Kenneth Arrow joined RAND’s 
Hitch as the nucleus of the economics delegation to the conference. By 
contrast, the colloquium on game theory was a smaller affair. In atten-
dance were B. O. Koopman, Frederick Mosteller, Edwin Paxson, Ivan 
Sokolnikoff, John Tukey, John von Neumann, Abraham Wald, W. Allen 
Wallis, and Samuel S. Wilks; Warren Weaver was invited, but could not 
attend. Interestingly, a number of the participants had also attended the 
planning colloquium, namely Koopmans, as well as many of the military 
operations researchers such as Horvath, Wood, and Zimmerman. The 
reading list for the seminar consisted of a long list of RAND research 
memoranda, virtually a catalogue of the game theory publications pro-
duced by Williams’s mathematicians.64
The infl ux of economists was on display at the fi rst major academic 
symposium devoted to game theory, which took place at the summer 
session of the Econometric Society, held on September 9, 1948, at the 
University of Wisconsin– Madison. Present were many of the major 
players from the RAND seminars the previous summer. Von Neumann 
presented the theory of the two- person zero- sum game, while Morgen-

100 
Chapter 3
stern discussed its applications to economics via the study of logistics.65 
Girshick and Paxson gave the audience a survey of the ongoing work 
on games at RAND; Tukey presented an application of game theory 
to strategic problems; and Dantzig discussed the relationship between 
games and the problem of “programming in a linear structure.” The en-
suing roundtable discussion included a number of additional RAND 
game theorists.66 During the subsequent year, RAND and Cowles con-
tinued to develop the connection between the military worth research 
agenda at RAND and the economic aspects of planning that had taken 
on new salience. A subcontract from RAND to Cowles in January of 
1949 for a project on the “Theory of Resources Allocation” helped 
game theory and mathematical programming emerge as major compo-
nents of the Cowles research portfolio, and Cowles economists (most 
notably Arrow and Koopmans) became perennial fi xtures as RAND 
consultants. The following March, a conference on applications of game 
theory to tactical problems was held at Chicago. RAND was repre-
sented by the usual members of its mathematics department (Helmer, 
Paxson, and Shapley), as well as Arrow, a consultant from Cowles; the 
other attendees consisted of the operations research representatives of 
the various services.67
Logistics and Mathematical Programming 
at the Offi ce of Naval Research
The years 1948 and 1949 thus saw the convergence of several lines of 
work that had formerly been distinct, which had the effect of placing 
the mathematics of game theory and its practitioners at the heart of Air 
Force innovation on budgeting procedures and technology assessment 
alike. Game theory provided a common mathematical structure for 
games and programs; yet as the lopsided attendance at the colloquia held 
at RAND in the summer of 1948 suggests, “programming” was set to 
eclipse “game theory” per se as an object of military funding by the later 
1940s. To see further how this took place, we now turn to the program 
of mathematical research promoted by another major funding source for 
game theory in this period, the Offi ce of Naval Research (ONR).
While the historiography of game theory and operations research 
has paid much attention to RAND and the Air Force, it has paid rel-
atively little to the Navy and to the ONR in particular.68 RAND cer-

From “Military Worth” to Mathematical Programming 
101
tainly would become the public face of game theory as the corporation’s 
experts became visibly involved in debates over nuclear strategy in the 
1950s, but, given its size and patterns of patronage, the ONR was at least 
as signifi cant in terms of its ability to reshape the disciplinary landscape 
surrounding the theory. In contrast with RAND, which funded applied 
research in a corporate context, the ONR also focused on supporting 
university- based scholarship via relatively open- ended contracts with 
particular academics and teams of collaborators. With an annual ex-
penditure specifi cally for mathematics in the low millions of dollars, its 
infl uence among the community of American mathematicians was ex-
traordinary. By November of 1950, the director of the ONR’s Mathemat-
ical Sciences Division could estimate that roughly a sixth of “productive 
research mathematicians” in the United States were currently receiving 
support from the ONR, and that about a sixth of papers presented to the 
American Mathematical Society between 1948 and 1950 grew from work 
sponsored by the ONR.69 In addition, as a central contract- based fund-
ing agency with a very broad mandate for supporting scientifi c research, 
the ONR proved itself capable of transforming university- based research 
programs on a grand scale. As a result, in the later 1940s, the offi ce de-
veloped long- term funding relationships with a number of prominent 
game theorists, most notably, Albert Tucker and Oskar Morgenstern.
In the 1940s and early 1950s, the director of the ONR’s Mathemati-
cal Sciences Division (before 1949, the Mathematics Branch) was none 
other than Mina Rees, formerly principal technical aide to the AMP, as-
sistant to Warren Weaver, and editor of Weaver’s chapter on “A General 
Theory of Air Warfare.” Her work presiding over the postwar termina-
tion of the AMP’s contracts with the Navy proved a transition to her be-
ing offered the job with ONR when it was established in 1946. Shortly 
thereafter, according to her reminiscences, she quickly saw the signifi -
cance of Dantzig’s work on programming and made a presentation (ac-
companied by Dantzig) to the top Navy brass that urged the cultivation 
of similar methods under the aegis of the ONR.70
By the spring of 1948, the Navy General Board, with Rees’s assistance, 
assembled a committee to comment on a document proposing system-
atic logistical- tactical research to be run through the ONR’s math e matics 
division. The committee consisted overwhelmingly of mathematicians—
most notably von Neumann, C. B. Tompkins, logician and computer sci-
entist Barkley Rosser, Tukey, and statistician Wilks—but also included 
Oskar Morgenstern and the director of  Princeton’s Institute for Ad-

102 
Chapter 3
vanced Study and hero of America’s wartime nuclear weapons program, 
J. Robert Oppenheimer. It is possible to infer the substance of the board’s 
proposal from the responses of committee members.71 In a joint reply 
dated April 26, 1948, the committee recognized that the Navy’s central 
interest in contacting them was in “drawing numerical conclusions con-
cerning the best use and distribution of manpower, ships, food, bases, 
etc.”72 While acknowledging the quantitative approaches to such prob-
lems that the military was already devising, the committee argued for 
the necessity of theoretical research, arguing that “the general pattern 
into which these data are to be fi tted is at least as important and as de-
manding of investigation as the data themselves.” The committee thus 
called for the involvement of scientists (and mathematicians in particu-
lar) in investigations of truly basic problems in warfare and logistics.
Their best example of such a general theory of warfare was von Neu-
mann and Morgenstern’s game theory, and their description of the the-
ory mirrored that in Weaver’s AMP report chapter. As the committee 
noted, Theory of Games “described structures with many properties 
similar to some exhibited by war,” and indeed, the book’s broader ra-
tionale for developing mathematical economics was much like that of 
the Navy in searching out a new science of war. Among other things, its 
opening two chapters demonstrated the power and promise of quanti-
tative methods through its discussion of utilities and mathematization 
in the sciences, while the theory of the two-person zero-sum game ex-
plored in chapters 3 and 4 demonstrated that “the most advantageous 
prosecution of a war is not necessarily achieved by the most vigorous 
prosecution of each factor at every time,” that is, that tradeoffs between 
interrelated “factors” always have to be made. Already, as the commit-
tee members pointed out to the presumably all-too-well-aware naval of-
fi cers, these theoretical techniques were gaining a following in the of-
fi ce of the Air Comptroller, as well as in Project Rand. But while the Air 
Comptroller was mostly interested in problems of a “logistic character” 
and RAND’s perspective “has to be chiefl y that of the Air Forces,” ul-
timately, “all of these approaches will have to be brought on a common 
denominator,” a common set of mathematical frameworks and results 
provided by the Theory of Games.73 Finally, much like Weaver earlier, 
the committee called for the creation of a working group to study the is-
sue, applying their theoretical acumen to clarifying the nature of “the 
most advantageous action in warfare” and calculational techniques for 
identifying it.74

From “Military Worth” to Mathematical Programming 
103
Perhaps even during the committee meeting itself, Morgenstern 
sketched the outlines of a grant proposal to the ONR on index cards 
and scraps of paper. It included $6,000 for the project leader, $6,000 for 
a research associate, $10,000 for three research assistants, and $2,500 for 
travel, communications, and materials. Together with university over-
head, the contract would be worth $35,500. This meeting would thus 
mark the beginning of Morgenstern’s long and treasured relationship 
with the ONR, a relationship that would support many of Morgenstern’s 
graduate students, most notably Martin Shubik.75 Partly on the strength 
of his ONR contract, Morgenstern began to cultivate connections with 
RAND throughout 1948. In the summer, he was invited to the joint col-
loquia on games and the theory of planning held at RAND, but was un-
able to attend.76 Later that fall, he wrote to Charles Hitch, RAND’s top 
economist, to introduce himself and his research and to ask for informa-
tion about RAND’s work since he knew little about what was happen-
ing there. Hitch replied that he had discussed Morgenstern’s work with 
Rees, who had visited RAND in the preceding week, and that “while 
we are not planning any major research program within RAND on lin-
ear economic models, we are letting a sub- contract to the Cowles Com-
mission on the theory of resources allocation, and our statisticians have 
been doing some work . . . on computational problems. I hope that you 
and Koopmans will be able to keep each other informed of progress as 
your projects develop.”77 By June of 1949, Morgenstern had become a 
RAND consultant and embarked on a letter- writing campaign to Olaf 
Helmer in hopes of receiving RAND’s mathematical publications relat-
ing to game theory and linear programming.78 Over the next few years, 
as a consultant, Morgenstern would produce several RAND research 
memoranda outlining a vision for a general “theory of organization” that 
he hoped would provide the theoretical foundation for the study of logis-
tics. Typically wordy and discursive, they stand out stylistically among 
RAND’s more aridly technical publications from this period.79
During the later 1940s, the ONR also developed funding relationships 
with a number of mathematicians who would prove important in sustain-
ing academic research into game theory. In the spring of 1946, Rees ar-
ranged an ONR contract with Princeton topologist Solomon Lefschetz 
to study methods of solution for the nonlinear differential equations of 
hydrodynamics, a topic relevant to naval weapons development. Initially, 
Lefschetz used the funding (some $15,000 annually) to support himself 
and a graduate student, Richard Bellman, as a project assistant.80 How-

104 
Chapter 3
ever, two years later, Lefschetz’s protégé Albert Tucker—then newly 
hired by the Princeton mathematics department—proposed a signifi -
cant “extension and broadening” of the project on nonlinear differential 
equations. It is not entirely clear how Tucker initially described this ex-
tension to Rees, but on May 21, 1948, Rees wrote to Tucker:
On the basis of our telephone conversation yesterday and of the information 
contained in your letter which just reached me, it is clear that the Mathemat-
ics Branch should proceed, as promptly as possible, to recommend a wid-
ening of the scope of the ONR work at Princeton to include more general 
phases of mathematical analysis, and certain investigations in combinatorial 
analysis related to problems of logistics.81
Given that Rees had overseen the work of the Princeton panel that 
helped set up the ONR’s research program in logistics only one month 
prior to this letter, her enthusiastic response to Tucker’s proposal is 
not surprising. In negotiating the expansion of Lefschetz’s project, she 
would note: “In the case of Professor Tucker, since the work which he 
will undertake is of pressing interest to the Defense Establishment, we 
will make every effort to fi nd the necessary funds” quickly.82
While Tucker’s original project proposal is not extant in the ONR ar-
chives, his correspondence with Rees and Fred Rigby, the new head of 
the “Logistics Branch” within the ONR’s Mathematical Science Divi-
sion, reveals the direction his work took after the spring of 1948. In a 
letter to Rigby from the spring of 1949, he stated that his ONR work 
could best be described as “investigations into linear- convex problems 
related to the theory of games, econometric planning, and logistics.”83 
Thus Tucker, like von Neumann in his meeting with Dantzig a year ear-
lier, saw himself exploring less game theory per se and more the com-
mon mathematical structures that underlay both the two- person zero- 
sum game and mathematical programming. During the summer of 1948 
Tucker and two of his graduate students, David Gale and Harold Kuhn, 
conducted considerable work in game theory. One result was a paper on 
solutions of the two- person zero- sum game, “A Geometric Approach to 
the Theory of Games,” which Tucker presented at a meeting of the Phil-
adelphia Section of the Mathematical Association of America in Novem-
ber of 1948.84 At the February 1949 meeting of the American Mathemat-
ical Society, Tucker presented a second paper explicitly connecting the 

From “Military Worth” to Mathematical Programming 
105
mathematics of games and programming, titled “Some Linear- Convex 
Problems Equivalent to a Game Problem.”85 Also during this period, 
Tucker inaugurated a regular seminar on game theory (held in Prince-
ton’s Fine Hall) which would serve as the institutional focal point of the 
up- and- coming generation of game theorists: David Gale, Harold Kuhn, 
Lloyd Shapley, John Isbell, Martin Shubik, and John Nash. Indeed, in 
the spring of 1949, Tucker wrote to Rees to ask if David Gale could sub-
mit some of his work for the project as a thesis on game theory, the fi rst 
of many that Tucker would help supervise.86
Much as it had with Morgenstern, the ONR provided Tucker with 
connections to the community of people doing research on game theory 
and logistical problems at RAND, the Cowles Commission, and the Pen-
tagon. In January of 1949, Tucker traveled to Washington, DC, to meet 
with George Dantzig at the Pentagon, and by later that spring, the two 
were on a fi rst- name basis, trading mathematical results by mail. In a let-
ter of March 16, 1949, Tucker referred Dantzig to some recent work by 
von Neumann on computing solutions to symmetric games and invited 
Dantzig to give a talk at the Fine Hall games seminar. Carbon copies of 
the letter were sent to George Brown, Tjalling Koopmans, Mina Rees, 
and John von Neumann.87 During the spring of 1949 Tucker also pur-
sued connections with the group at RAND in hopes of spending some 
time there when he went on sabbatical at Stanford during the 1949– 50 
academic year. In this respect, Tucker was only one of the fi rst of many 
Princeton mathematicians and economists who would join RAND for 
the summer as consultants. In addition, while Princeton was certainly 
the most important locus for the academic cultivation of game theory 
during the 1940s and 1950s, it was only one node in a vast network of lo-
gistics research funded by the ONR during this period. The 1948 com-
mittee meeting also marked the fi rst step toward the creation of a Logis-
tics Branch within the Mathematical Sciences Division of ONR, headed 
by mathematician Fred Rigby. By the early 1950s ONR was funding “lo-
gistics research projects” at a number of universities including Brown, 
Princeton, and George Washington University. The last project, under 
C. B. Tompkins, involved building a “logistics computer” for the auto-
matic computation of programs.88 By 1954 the volume of work on these 
logistical/tactical questions reached the point that a new journal, the Na-
val Research Logistics Quarterly, was established (with Morgenstern on 
the editorial board) as a prime outlet for publications on game theory.

106 
Chapter 3
Game Theory and the Military: An Intellectual Settlement
Having outlined the networks of patronage at RAND and the ONR that 
supported postwar game theory, it is worth stepping back and assess-
ing how this infl ux of funding reshaped the theory itself. Von Neumann 
and Morgenstern’s book had put forward a number of distinct mathe-
matical formalisms for the analysis of “games”: the theory of utility and 
preference orderings; the extensive form of games; a collection of results 
concerning the existence, uniqueness, and properties of solutions to two- 
person zero- sum games, related systems of linear inequalities, and maxi-
mization problems; and a formulation and solution concept for address-
ing the general problem of multiplayer and non- zero- sum games. In the 
immediate postwar period, the game theoretic literature focused on cer-
tain portions of the original Theory of Games rather than others, in the 
process reinterpreting the theory and developing those portions in direc-
tions not anticipated in game theory’s urtext. We can ascertain the im-
pulses behind this selective appropriation and reinterpretation of game 
theory in a number of ways— most obviously by examining stated ratio-
nales for such a choice of topics. But it is still more revealing to look at 
game theorists’ reactions to the portions of Theory of Games that were 
not as well received in the military context, especially von Neumann and 
Morgenstern’s treatment of multiplayer games, and their attempts to 
overcome some of the problems they perceived with the existing the-
ory. Much of this section therefore examines the study of multiplayer 
games in the later 1940s and early 1950s with an eye to understanding the 
bounds of the intellectual settlement involving mathematicians, game 
theory, and the military. The various “solution concepts” that emerged as 
alternatives to von Neumann and Morgenstern’s theory of the n- person 
game during the immediate postwar period were to some extent unique, 
refl ections of the individual experiences and concerns of the mathemati-
cians who proposed them, but they also share a number of common fea-
tures that refl ect the underlying context of their creation.
Probably the most obvious feature of game- theoretic literature from 
the immediate postwar era is its focus on the theory of the two- person 
zero- sum game in normal form. Thus, for example, in one of the fi rst for-
mal courses on game theory taught at Princeton in the spring of 1952, 
Harold Kuhn focused the overwhelming majority of his lectures on such 
games, whether with a fi nite or an infi nite number of strategies.89 And in 

From “Military Worth” to Mathematical Programming 
107
an addendum to the fi rst volume of the Annals of Mathematics series on 
game theory (edited by Kuhn and Tucker in 1950), Kuhn noted that “un-
til now, the base of the theory has been the theory of the fi nite zero- sum 
two- person game” with other portions of von Neumann and Morgen-
stern’s book attracting relatively less attention.90 Certainly, the theory 
of the two- person zero- sum game exhibited features that made it attrac-
tive to the various military- funded research agendas outlined above— as 
well as to the mathematicians pursuing these agendas. Thus the funda-
mental connection between the theory of the two- person zero- sum game 
and the linear programming problem proved critical in shaping the sub-
sequent fortunes of game theory both at RAND and at Princeton as the 
problem of “programming” and resource allocation swelled in signifi -
cance at RAND and the ONR. Indeed, by the later 1940s, applications 
of game theory in the RAND publications were eclipsed by applications 
of linear programming, a pattern that is refl ected in operations research 
publications more generally. Consider, for example, a joint bibliogra-
phy of “Unclassifi ed References on Game Theory and Linear Program-
ming” compiled in the spring of 1950 by Robert Dorfman, assistant for 
operations research at USAF headquarters, and distributed to the var-
ious military operations research programs, and the research groups at 
Princeton and RAND. Of the 119 entries in the bibliography, 73 were 
classifi ed as linear programming studies; of the balance of game theory 
studies, nearly all concerned the two- person zero- sum game, and many 
specifi cally addressed the commonalities between game problems and 
programming problems.91 An example is the so- called Colonel Blotto 
Games popular at RAND, in which two opponents must allocate their 
forces between different bases so as to win a campaign.92 The theory of 
the two- person zero- sum game, in this context, became a theory of max-
imization or optimization— a fundamental transformation in the mean-
ing of the theory, since von Neumann and Morgenstern had imagined 
game theory as an alternative to the naïve optimization theories they 
saw in the mathematical economics of their day.
Even within the theory of the two- person zero- sum game, the post-
war era saw several shifts away from the presentation of this theory laid 
out in Theory of Games and Economic Behavior. Mathematicians like 
Tucker and Kuhn, who were working on logistical problems, quickly 
moved beyond the systems of linear inequalities found in von Neumann 
and Morgenstern’s original theory of the two- person zero- sum game to 
consider general optimization problems, in which the functions to be 

108 
Chapter 3
maximized and the “feasible set” of possible solutions could take on a 
wider variety of forms. For example, the maximized function might be a 
quadratic rather than a linear function of the decision variables, or the 
feasible set might be bounded by something other than linear inequali-
ties. Additionally, as Kuhn would write in 1950, in the theory of games 
“one problem overshadows all others,” namely, “to fi nd a computational 
technique of general applicability for fi nite zero- sum two- person games 
with large numbers of pure strategies.”93 Such a technique, which would 
ideally identify minimax strategies in a small, fi nite number of calcula-
tions, was the focus of many of the RAND research memoranda into 
the 1950s, as well as von Neumann’s forays into game theory in the later 
1940s. As his letters to T. C. Koopmans and George Dantzig attest, von 
Neumann had been working up a draft paper on methods for the nu-
merical solution of two- person zero- sum games with a large number 
of strategies since the time of his 1947 meeting with Dantzig. This pa-
per appears to have been later absorbed into publications with Dantzig 
and George Brown, while von Neumann turned to other similar prob-
lems, most notably fi nding solutions to a “game equivalent to an opti-
mal assignment problem,” which fi nally appeared in the second install-
ment of Contributions to the Theory of Games in 1953. Algorithms for 
approximating an optimal strategy in a fi nite sequence of steps were es-
sential to putting game theory in the service of logistics or the analysis of 
military worth.94
While the problems posed by the two- person zero- sum game and lin-
ear programming were similar, it is worth repeating that the study of the 
two- person zero- sum game was hardly coextensive with the broader am-
bitions of military worth analysis. Nor was linear programming a ready- 
made replacement for the techniques of resource allocation required by 
actual military budgeting. Early applications, like the “diet problem,” 
focused on much more manageable numbers of variables in order to 
be solvable using the relatively primitive computing facilities available 
at the time, nor did they incorporate dynamic, intertemporal consider-
ations. Among other things, such considerations would inspire Rich-
ard Bellman’s far more complex theory of “dynamic programming” in 
the 1950s.95 The RAND mathematicians’ crude models of duels and re-
connaissance missions were also presumably too simple to advise actual 
generals and aviators as to specifi c courses of action. Their papers and 
research memoranda were essays in the craft, following the natural incli-
nations of the mathematicians to axiomatize and prove. They were also 

From “Military Worth” to Mathematical Programming 
109
promises tantalizing indications of insights a theory of warfare might 
yield, much like Merrill Flood’s original memorandum written as part of 
the B- 29 bomber study, or like Theory of Games itself. They kept alive 
dreams of a world in which the seemingly chaotic “edicts” and “ad hoc 
ground rules” of Pentagon budgeters would cohere in the computation 
of consistent plans of action, or in which the competing agendas of sci-
entists and engineers working together on problems of “organized com-
plexity” would be subordinated to the deliberative scrutiny of military 
worth analysis. The theory of the two- person zero- sum game as devel-
oped in the later 1940s thus refl ected a set of inclinations, stemming both 
from the military context and the instincts of its mathematical prac ti-
tion ers, as much as it directly answered questions or solved problems set 
by this context. Theoretical elegance, mathematical tractability, and the 
ability to calculate from seemingly inarguable assumptions of rationality 
through to optimal strategies and determinate values for games— these 
were the features that the postwar game theorists found so appealing.
The force of these inclinations becomes most visible if we examine 
mathematicians’ explicit frustrations concerning the portion of von Neu-
mann and Morgenstern’s work that was not immediately embraced in 
the military context: the characteristic function form of the game and 
the “stable set” solution concept to multiplayer games. In part, criticisms 
of these aspects of the theory refl ected doubts about the empirical ad-
equacy of game theory as a theory of decision- making behavior that 
would come to the fore in the years after 1952— a story to which we will 
return in subsequent chapters. Thus, writing in 1959, Albert Tucker and 
coauthor R. Duncan Luce would note that “the intuitive basis and em-
pirical meaning of the von Neumann– Morgenstern solution notion has 
remained tantalizingly elusive.” Given that their solution could not in 
general identify a particular distribution of payments among the play-
ers, but simply a “stable set” of such distributions, they “seem neither to 
prescribe rational behavior nor to predict behavior with suffi cient preci-
sion to be of empirical value.” Even worse, mathematicians increasingly 
found that the von Neumann– Morgenstern theory was neither “math-
ematically deep” nor “elegant,” providing an embarrassment of riches 
in terms of possible social confi gurations but enabling none of the sty-
listically appealing proofs that would retain the interest of those drawn 
to mathematics for its own sake.96 Von Neumann, for instance, had sug-
gested that the most important unsolved problem in the n- person theory 
was whether all fi nite games have stable set solutions— a fairly funda-

110 
Chapter 3
mental question— yet the solution was still not forthcoming fi fteen years 
after Theory of Games. In fact, in the late 1960s, mathematicians would 
exhibit games without such solutions.97
Beyond such explicit criticisms of the von Neumann– Morgenstern so-
lution concept, perhaps nothing more clearly reveals the inclinations of 
the military- funded mathematicians of the later 1940s than the hunt for 
alternative solution concepts for the multiplayer or non- zero- sum game 
that began almost immediately after 1944. Consider Lloyd Shapley’s in-
troductory remarks in a series of RAND research memoranda on mul-
tiplayer and non- zero- sum games, published in the summer of 1951. 
While Shapley embraced the framework of coalitions proposed by von 
Neumann and Morgenstern, he focused attention on their theory’s in-
ability to calculate the expected value of participating in such game for 
each of its players— a fi tting focus given the military worth agenda guid-
ing RAND’s research. “In attempting to apply game theory to (say) eco-
nomic or military behavior, we of necessity introduce into the class of 
relevant economic or military situations the prospect of being required 
to play a game,” that is, the expected value of playing a game. In military 
applications, this was particularly necessary since operations were best 
conceptualized as sequences of games, between which choices had to be 
made. Thus, “if the theory is unable to assign values to the games which 
occur most commonly in the fi eld of intended application, then only iso-
lated situations . . . can be eligible for game- theoretic analysis.”98 Shap-
ley’s solution was to defi ne a value for multiplayer games that possessed 
a number of reasonable properties in terms of the way it captured the 
marginal value individual players brought to their coalitions.99
A more radical departure from the von Neumann– Morgenstern so-
lution concept, albeit one infl ected with very similar concerns as Shap-
ley’s, emerged in the work of John Nash, another of the young wunder-
kinder orbiting Tucker’s games seminar at Princeton. Nash’s writings on 
game theory (laid out in several brief papers and a PhD dissertation, all 
appearing between 1950 and 1953) are impressive for their remarkable 
consistency of vision in the way that they sought to extend the most at-
tractive features of the theory of the two- person zero- sum game to non- 
zero- sum and multiplayer games. The argument laid out in Nash’s fi rst 
paper, “Equilibrium Points in n- Person Games” (communicated by Sol-
omon Lefschetz to the National Academy of Sciences in the fall of 1949) 
is framed in precisely this way. Each player maximizes his gain with re-
spect to that of the other players on the assumption that the other play-

From “Military Worth” to Mathematical Programming 
111
ers will do the same: it is the minimax concept writ large. Using Kaku-
tani’s fi xed- point theorem, Nash was able to prove that at least one set 
of strategies that meets this condition exists; these he named “equilib-
rium points.” He concluded by noting that, in the two- person zero- sum 
case, his proof reduced to von Neumann and Morgenstern’s proof of the 
existence of minimax strategies.100 But although Nash’s proof was math-
ematically elegant and terse, the fi rst paper by itself hardly seemed the 
stuff of Nobel prizes. Apparently, von Neumann did not think so when 
Nash paid him a visit at his offi ce that fall. As the story goes, he rap-
idly grasped the essentials of Nash’s argument and anticipated the punch 
line: “That’s trivial, you know. That’s just a fi xed point theorem.” Like-
wise, Nash’s advisor, Albert Tucker, did not remember being particularly 
impressed by the initial idea.101
During the ensuing year, as he expanded on his brief note to the Na-
tional Academy, Nash gave increasing attention to the broader implica-
tions of his solution concept.102 Thus, in his PhD dissertation, Nash in-
troduced a broad new category of games, “noncooperative games,” in 
which no communication, coalitions, or side payments are possible be-
tween players, and contrasted it with the “cooperative games” that were 
the focus of von Neumann and Morgenstern’s n- person theory. Von 
Neu mann and Morgenstern’s theory had assumed that communication 
and collusion between players could occur, and also assumed that the 
most interesting games would be ones in which it did happen. Nash’s 
non coopera tive games had the advantage of possessing mathematically 
tractable solutions, as he had demonstrated in his NAS communication; 
in the dissertation, he presented a more involved proof of his earlier re-
sult using Brouwer’s fi xed- point theorem. However, the most novel fea-
ture of the dissertation is Nash’s assertion of the broad applicability of 
his noncooperative theory. Certainly, noncooperative approaches are 
suitable for games like poker, where collusion is forbidden by the rules of 
the game, and in fact Nash used his theory to analyze a simplifi ed three- 
player poker game.103 But beyond this, Nash suggested that any coopera-
tive situation could be reduced to a noncooperative situation by enlarg-
ing the game to include the pregame bargaining that is necessary to form 
coalitions. Von Neumann and Morgenstern’s model had assumed that 
players would jockey for position and form binding coalitions and pat-
terns of side payments prior to the actual play of the game. This process 
lay outside of the game play itself, a situation that Nash found problem-
atic for several reasons. First, he noted that this model assumed the pos-

112 
Chapter 3
sibility of communication between the players as well as the existence of 
an “umpire” to enforce coalitions—an assumption that presumably was 
far from universal. But, second and more important, von Neumann and 
Morgenstern had assumed that, during the process of meting out side-
payments, the utilities of the players were not only comparable but ef-
fectively transferable as well. The process of working out comparisons 
of utilities, Nash argued, should be subject to negotiation in the course 
of the game itself, so he proposed to absorb the entire pregame process 
of coalition formation and side-payment into the larger noncooperative 
game. As a result, he could suggest that any cooperative game could be 
transformed into a noncooperative game. This transformation had the 
added advantage of yielding values for two-player cooperative games in 
which each player has a fi nite number of pure strategies.104
In subsequent years, as he spent summers in Santa Monica and be-
gan climbing the hierarchy of academic mathematics at MIT, Nash took 
several major steps toward fl eshing out this vision of reformulating co-
operative game theory in terms of noncooperative game theory. Specifi -
cally, Nash published two papers on the “fi nite two- person cooperative 
games” alluded to in the conclusion to his dissertation, and these would 
serve as fi rst steps toward this theory of noncooperative pregame negoti-
ation. The fi rst of these papers, “The Bargaining Problem” (1950), essen-
tially tackled the problem of how side payments would be allocated in 
any pregame negotiations prior to a play of a two- person non- zero- sum 
game. Unlike the cooperative model, the two players are in a pregame 
situation where they “can barter goods but have no money to facilitate an 
exchange.” They can, however, create randomized combinations of the 
goods that they hold. Starting from some very simple assumptions— in 
particular, that the players knew one another’s preferences, that they had 
identical bargaining ability, and that they would not permit joint gains 
to be unrealized— Nash argued that, if they decide to cooperate, they 
will choose the joint strategy that maximizes the product of the play-
ers’ utilities (in the sense of von Neumann and Morgenstern).105 Finally, 
Nash’s last paper on game theory, “Two- Person Cooperative Games” 
(1953), represented a fi rst stab at the fi nal problem involved in reducing 
cooperative to noncooperative games: how to clarify the role of the “um-
pire” who enforces contracts. In his article, Nash laid out a formal “ne-
gotiation model,” a sequence of steps in which players make “threats” 
and corresponding “demands” of the other player for joining the coali-
tion in a two- person non- zero- sum game. The two- person cooperative 

From “Military Worth” to Mathematical Programming 
113
game, involving only a single move, is thereby transformed into a two- 
step noncooperative game in which the players threaten each other into 
cooperation. The role of “umpire” here is central, not so much as a way 
of forcing the players to cooperate, but in forcing them to carry through 
with threats that would presumably hurt themselves as well as their op-
ponent. Based on this negotiation model, Nash proceeded to identify the 
values of the game for the participants, as well as their optimal threats 
and demands.106
Nash’s work has attracted much attention in recent decades— a No-
bel Prize in economics for Nash himself, and a blockbuster biography 
and fi lm about his life— as his eponymous Nash equilibrium concept has 
emerged as a standard theoretical fi xture in economics and political sci-
ence. As a result, much scholarship has sought to explain comments like 
von Neumann’s and the broader perception that Nash’s work was ini-
tially less well received than it would be subsequently.107 Viewed through 
the concerns of the RAND and ONR mathematicians of the 1940s, how-
ever, Nash’s initial impulses seem quite natural— for example, his focus 
on obtaining values for games and at least proving the existence of solu-
tions, or the way that noncooperative game theory answered Helmer’s 
1948 call to investigate multiplayer games “where coalitions are either 
prohibited altogether or restricted.” But pursuing this agenda ultimately 
led Nash into intellectual territory that was a more problematic fi t with 
the context of military worth analysis or the study of logistics. In jet-
tisoning the structure of coalitions, the assumption of a common cur-
rency to facilitate side payments, and the like, Nash nevertheless had to 
fall back on further assumptions: about the relative “bargaining ability” 
of the game players, about their knowledge of each  other’s preferences, 
or about the existence of “umpires” who would force players to carry 
out threats that were painful to execute. Problems about the interrela-
tionships between power, trust, and knowledge in social interactions— 
seemingly overcome in the theory of the two- person zero- sum game— 
would emerge persistently in the case of multiplayer games.
A prime example of the epistemological and methodological prob-
lems surrounding non- zero- sum games emerges from the early work 
of Howard Raiffa, who fi rst encountered game theory as a young PhD 
student in mathematics at the University of Michigan.108 Through his 
mentors Robert Thrall and Arthur Copeland, Raiffa took a position 
as a research assistant for an ONR project in the fall of 1948. Dur-
ing the ensuing academic year, Raiffa and his fellow student Gerald 

114 
Chapter 3
Thompson worked on their fi rst research problem: fi nding effi cient al-
gorithms for solving the two- person zero- sum game. Their result, the 
“double- description method,” was discovered independently of George 
Dantzig’s work on the simplex method for linear programming, and 
had the advantage that it did not require labor- intensive recalculation 
of the program’s “objective function” at each step of the procedure.109 
Then in 1950– 51, Raiffa tackled the problem of solving the two- person 
non- zero- sum game, something that he felt remained wide open despite 
von Neumann and Morgenstern’s theory. His fi rst instinct— typical of 
a mathematician at work— was to sort through “all qualitatively differ-
ent 2×2 bi- matrix games” looking for interesting cases that might lead 
the way to a more general solution.110 One particularly obstinate exam-
ple looked something like fi gure 3.3. In his notes, he suggested that this 
situation might be like that faced by two wheat farmers in the depres-
sion years of the 1930s, “each of whom is better off with full production 
even though this would depress prices to the detriment of all.” In this 
scenario, the fi rst row and column would correspond with a strategy of 
lower production, and the second would correspond with a strategy of 
higher production.111
How should one analyze such a situation? Looking at the multiple ap-
proaches Raiffa tried reveals most clearly the problems involved in ar-
riving at a satisfactory sense of “solutions” for games. Von Neumann and 
Morgenstern’s stable- set solution suggested that the players might form 
a coalition, choose strategies (r1, c1), and somehow divide the ten points 
that the coalition received— but, as Shapley would note, this provided lit-
tle guidance on the value of the game or the players’ optimal course of 
action. The “minimax strategy,” originally proposed in the context of 
the two- person zero- sum game and generalized beyond that context by 
Nash, had the advantage of providing usable advice, even if the advice 
Figure 3.3. One of seventy- eight qualitatively different two- player non- zero- sum games. 
After Howard Raiffa, “Game Theory at the University of Michigan,” in Toward a His-
tory of Game Theory, ed. E Roy Weintraub (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 1992), 
165– 75.

From “Military Worth” to Mathematical Programming 
115
was nonoptimal: the two players should choose (r2, c2) and settle for the 
certainty of breaking even. But was it not possible to chart some middle 
course between these two polar opposites by viewing the game from a 
different methodological perspective? One possibility that Raiffa tried 
was to imagine himself giving advice to one of the players (for instance, 
the row player). In such a situation, he would use any knowledge of the 
column player’s intentions or capabilities to infer the probabilities of the 
player’s choosing c1 or c2. With these estimates in hand, it is easy to cal-
culate the probabilities that the row player should use r1 and r2. Suppose 
you think the column player will choose strategies c1 and c2 with proba-
bilities p1 and p2. Then the row player’s expected payoff is
10p1 − (5p1 + 10p2) x
where he chooses his strategies r1 and r2 with probabilities (x, 1 − x). Thus 
the problem of solving the game is transformed back into a traditional 
maximization problem. By hanging a probability on the column player’s 
actions— in effect, treating both as an unreasoning if regular force of na-
ture— it might be possible to force a valuation of the game, albeit at a 
cost to the subtleties of game theory’s original treatment of intersubjec-
tivity.112 Still another possibility would be for the game theorist to imag-
ine herself a neutral, well- informed arbitrator, called in to mediate be-
tween the two players and advise them jointly on how to apportion the 
gains inherent in the game. Inspired by a lecture by industrial relations 
specialist William Haber in the spring of 1951, Raiffa asked: “Imagine 
that two of my game- theoretic friends had to play an abstract two- person 
non- zero- sum game; suppose that, in fear that they would fare poorly, 
they approached me to arbitrate a solution: to propose a binding resolu-
tion of the game. What principles of effi ciency and fairness would I want 
to impose?”113 Sketching out some rules, he managed to prove that strat-
egies existed that satisfi ed the rules even if he could not calculate any 
specifi c strategies.114
Von Neumann and Morgenstern, Shapley, Nash, and Raiffa worked 
on a common problem, although the results diverged substantially, and 
to this day, there remains little agreement among practitioners as to 
what constitutes a “solution” to multiplayer and non- zero- sum games. 
It is tempting, therefore, as some commentators have done, to ascribe 
this divergence to differences in individual personality and worldview 
on the part of the theorists. Thus Martin Shubik, in a memorable turn 

116 
Chapter 3
of phrase, suggested that one’s choice of solution concept almost consti-
tuted an act of projection of self onto society. To truly comprehend the 
equilibrium concept, you had to be in the presence of Nash himself: “It’s 
a game and it’s played alone.”115 Similarly, Sylvia Nasar, in her biography 
of Nash, has proposed that von Neumann and Morgenstern’s choice of a 
“cooperative” solution concept refl ected a more European worldview in 
which collusion and cooperation are more prevalent than in individual-
istic America.116
At the same time, the choice of game- theoretic solutions also plainly 
hung on a number of epistemological and methodological considerations 
that went beyond the personalities involved. Consider the dedication of 
Shapley, Nash, and Raiffa, to the cause of calculating expected values 
for games, or their inclination toward building their solutions on princi-
ples of individual rationality, rather than the social conventions or norms 
that were the ultimate arbiters of social outcomes in von Neumann and 
Morgenstern’s theory. This feature of their work makes sense for a num-
ber of reasons, most notably the broader agendas of military worth anal-
ysis and logistics research. At the same time, the solution concepts dis-
cussed here are certainly idiosyncratic— although not eccentric. Von 
Neumann and Morgenstern built a theory of social behavior on a num-
ber of assumptions about the ability of players to form coalitions and to 
make side payments, which Nash then rejected in an attempt to ground 
game theory more fi rmly in assumptions of rational individual behavior. 
Meanwhile, Raiffa’s work imagined the game theorist as a trusted coun-
selor offering advice to individuals trying to make strategic decisions in-
dividually, or as a neutral arbitrator trying to jointly advise two parties 
somehow stuck in a game situation. Correspondingly, Nash’s noncoop-
erative theory has proven an alluring talisman for latter- day economists 
committed to the same brand of methodological individualism found in 
neo- Darwinian evolutionary biology, while Raiffa’s vision for game the-
ory subsequently formed the basis for the prescriptive analysis of bar-
gaining and arbitration situations. Such an approach underlies the ped-
agogy of institutes devoted to “decision analysis,” programs that train 
decision experts to take the role of trusted advisors or arbitrators in con-
fl ict mediations. Both Shapley and Shubik, meanwhile, would retain co-
operative game theory as the foundation of their game- theoretic inter-
ventions into economic modeling in the 1960s and beyond.117
While the new solution concepts of the later 1940s and early 1950s 
possess certain features that make sense in light of the mathematicians’ 

From “Military Worth” to Mathematical Programming 
117
relationship with the postwar military, this context was only incidentally 
responsible for the subsequent success of the results that emerged in this 
period. Certainly, RAND and the ONR provided a labor pool of math-
ematicians with exposure to the theory, and among whom solution con-
cepts could proliferate. But despite certain points of congruity between 
the military research agendas laid out in this chapter on the one hand, 
and the solution concepts of Shapley, Nash, and Raiffa on the other, the 
theories of n- player games that emerged in the later 1940s and 1950s 
could only have created at least as many problems as they solved. The 
two- person zero- sum game beckoned toward a general theory of opti-
mization or maximization, and its ability to compute expected values for 
duels and gambits held out hope for developing the mathematics neces-
sary for Weaver’s military worth analysis. But the new solution concepts 
raised a number of awkward questions. Who is the game theorist? An 
advisor to one of the players? An impartial observer or “umpire” con-
sidering how best to arbitrate between two parties? Or a social scientist, 
matching solutions of games to “social” phenomena, such as the forma-
tion of institutions and different patterns of information? Such questions 
could only have been destabilizing to the persona of the operations re-
searcher or military worth analyst, even as they suggested alternative 
uses for the theory.
A Theory Remade
The late 1940s and early 1950s proved to be the glory days of game the-
ory at RAND and at Princeton, an era of expanding budgets and op-
timism as mathematicians and operations researchers found an audi-
ence for their work in the postwar era. However, within a few short years 
game theory per se appeared to be losing pride of place in the mathema-
ticians’ armamentarium— at least, in some quarters. Consider RAND: 
in 1949, in a year when the corporation’s staff and consultants produced 
at least twenty- fi ve papers on game theory, its mathematics department 
could state in its annual report that it continued to regard the theory 
of games as the guiding inspiration for its research.118 But certainly by 
the later 1950s, statements by RAND staff also seemed to confi rm that 
game theory had fallen from favor. “For our purposes, game theory has 
been quite disappointing,” remarked Charles Hitch to a reporter from 
Harper’s Magazine in 1960.119 Throughout the 1960s and beyond, a num-

118 
Chapter 3
ber of prominent RAND staffers would express similar sentiments of 
disappointment and disenchantment— albeit in somewhat vague terms— 
with the theory.120
It is hard to know how to interpret such changes of sentiment. Broader 
changes enveloping RAND, traceable to the sudden emergence of a 
“hot” war in Korea in 1950, or to domestic anticommunism during the 
McCarthy years, might have played a role in moving game theory out of 
its previously central position in the corporation’s research program. For 
whatever reason, after the summer of 1952, the kind of free- wheeling 
summer conferences that brought together academics and RAND staff-
ers around game theory and related techniques became rarer. Also at 
this time, some prominent members of the mathematics division fell 
prey to the paranoia of the times. In 1952 J. C. C. McKinsey, a prolifi c 
game theorist and author of the fi rst textbook of game theory, was fi red 
from RAND: as an open homosexual, he was apparently deemed a secu-
rity risk. Two years later, Richard Bellman, by then one of RAND’s top 
mathematicians and the creator of “dynamic programming,” was con-
fronted with old charges that he had offered to rent his apartment to a 
communist spy. Faced with the prospect of losing his job, he had to sell 
his house to reduce the risk of defaulting on the mortgage. A similar ex-
perience befell Herman Kahn, a physicist working at RAND on con-
tracts from the Atomic Energy Commission.121
But it seems more likely that the “disappointment” referenced by 
Hitch in 1960 was only relative to the rather extraordinary hopes in-
vested in the theory in 1945. Weaver, Flood, and the early staff of the 
RAND military worth division saw game theory’s “powerful analy-
sis of competitive processes” as the centerpiece of a kind of evaluative 
thought- and- practice that could help synthesize the diverse forms of 
expertise needed to assess the adoption and use of military technolo-
gies. Similarly, Dantzig and Rees saw in game theory and mathematical 
programming a framework for bringing some kind of coherent order to 
the diverse edicts and rules that had previously governed the military’s 
budgeting process. Yet over time, other techniques— “systems analy-
sis,” war- gaming, simulations, “futures studies,” the “Delphi method” of 
forecasting, or Herman Kahn’s “scenarios”— emerged for accomplishing 
these tasks that possessed more fl exibility and permitted the inclusion of 
much greater richness of detail. In each case, these techniques provided 
exactly what Flood et al. had thought game theory offered— a coherent 
system of rules and procedures for disciplining the process of integrating 

From “Military Worth” to Mathematical Programming 
119
and mobilizing knowledge about the performance of complex weapons 
systems and military operations.122
Consider “systems analysis,” RAND’s signature technique of tech-
nology assessment, as it was articulated at the height of its infl uence in 
the 1960s. In the words of its chief expositor, E. S. Quade, systems anal-
ysis “is not a method or technique; nor is it a fi xed set of techniques.” 
Rather, it is “a systematic approach to helping a decision- maker choose 
a course of action by investigating his full problem, searching out ob-
jectives and alternatives, and comparing them in light of their conse-
quences, using an appropriate framework— in so far as possible ana-
lytic— to bring expert judgment and intuition to bear on the problem.”123 
In such pronouncements, it is hard not to hear echoes of Weaver’s speech 
before the assembled worthies of American social science at the Hotel 
New Yorker some two decades earlier. But now game theory was rel-
egated to the status of a minor adjunct to the broader systems analysis 
“approach.” Thus, as longtime RAND game theorist Norman Dalkey 
would note in his contribution to Quade’s edited volume, while it is nat-
ural to describe “battles” using “the framework of the theory of games,” 
the direct applicability of the theory was highly limited; the study of 
game theory, the author suggested, was only a prelude or warmup to the 
much more intricate process of “modeling” complex confl ict systems by 
computer or simulation, which in turn was but one input to the broader 
analysis.124 And of course, even systems analysis itself hardly proved up 
to managing the kind of confl icts over weapons development and na-
tional security strategy that had arisen in the context of the B- 29 study, 
as the troubled history of Edwin Paxson’s bombing systems analysis in 
the later 1940s suggests.125
Away from the briefi ng rooms, white papers, and dense technical re-
ports that were the typical products of the RAND analyst’s craft, the 
face of game theory in academia and in public life also shifted as the 
1950s proceeded. ONR- sponsored research into “logistics,” like  Tucker’s 
program at Princeton, continued to support game theory by training 
graduate students and contributing papers and editorial support for 
Princeton’s multivolume Contributions to the Theory of Games— the 
prime outlet for high- end theoretical contributions to the fi eld. And as 
operations research began to professionalize in this decade, it acquired 
the trappings of academic success in the form of societies, journals, and 
a university curriculum that would form a key intellectual habitat for the 
theory. But here again, it is hard to miss the differential survival of the 

120 
Chapter 3
various facets of Theory of Games. While utility theory would capture 
the interest of economists and behavioral scientists in the 1950s, other 
components of game theory, like the theory of multiplayer games, or 
the extensive form of the game, would receive relatively less attention. 
Meanwhile, the two- person zero- sum theory won what may best be de-
scribed as a pyrrhic victory: the recognition of a close connection be-
tween such games and linear programs helped keep the theory alive at 
a critical time, but interest in programming rapidly came to overshadow 
that given to games.126 The essential mathematics of the theory survived, 
becoming a special case in the general theory of optimization, but the 
resulting work was all but unrecognizable as “game theory.”
Here, the underlying failure was surely one of metaphor. As other 
commentators have noted, “planning” and “programming” may serve as 
signifi cant cultural decoders of the postwar era in a way that “games” 
does not. The multiple meanings of “programming”— programming 
computers and programming human activities— proved critical in join-
ing advances in electronic computing with theories of social organiza-
tion and human behavior during the 1940s and 1950s.127 Furthermore, 
the borderline sensational attention given by the business press to the 
disturbing possibility of “Robot Planning” based on computerized pro-
gramming methods being developed by the Defense Production Ad-
ministration during the late 1940s and 1950s speaks to a broader con-
fl uence of meanings that proved far more powerful (certainly, outside of 
the mathematical community) than the metaphor of “game” ever could 
be.128 As a result, a young graduate student in economics, mathematics, 
or operations research in the 1950s would likely have encountered a very 
different brand of game theory than that appearing in von Neumann 
and Morgenstern’s book just a few short years earlier. Especially in text-
books of operations research, presentations of the two- person zero- sum 
game soon came to be treated almost as a sterile warm- up exercise in ad-
vance of the main event: the study of programming and related optimi-
zation problems. In this context at least, the two- person zero- sum game 
thus lingered on primarily as a vestigial fragment of the theory’s glori-
ous past.129
Thus, by 1957, in their survey of the fi eld, R. Duncan Luce and How-
ard Raiffa would opine that “it is quite possible that ultimately the 
theory of games will be considered important in mathematics mainly 
because of its historically signifi cant relations to other parts of math-
ematics rather than for its own sake.”130 Their conjecture concerning 

From “Military Worth” to Mathematical Programming 
121
game  theory’s future place in mathematics (much less the social sciences) 
may have been premature, but their historical insight was fundamentally 
sound. Game theory owed its initial survival after 1944 to a concurrence 
of interests and individuals unique to that time and place: operations re-
searchers and wartime mathematical consultants trying to fi nd a place 
for their expertise in the postwar order, and a military with a number of 
very practical (if not necessarily mathematical) problems to solve. Game 
theory offered nothing like a complete solution to those problems, not 
by a long shot. But it did solve an essentially social problem for its prac-
titioners and their military patrons— that of providing a coherent intel-
lectual framework capable of spanning the administrative nitty- gritty 
of weapons evaluation and the quotidian realities of Air Force budget-
ing practices on the one hand, and the chalkboards and textbooks of Ivy 
League campuses on the other. It is small wonder that the mathemati-
cians who emerged from the war loved this thing that they called “game 
theory.” But in many ways, their game theory was a far different thing 
from von Neumann and Morgenstern’s 1944 creation. Ultimately, the in-
tellectual and institutional alliances they cultivated would actualize only 
one of many possibilities latent within the mathematical grab- bag that 
was Theory of Games. In the 1950s, mathematicians and social scientists 
funded by the Ford Foundation and the Social Science Research Coun-
cil would rework game theory as part of a framework for the study of 
decision- making and information- processing behavior, while the 1960s 
saw the emergence of game theory as a general framework for studying 
human confl ict and cooperation in the context of “confl ict resolution” 
and “peace research.” But in the 1940s and early 1950s, these vistas had 
not yet been sighted.

