 
[ 21 ] 
3
Swedenborg’s  
ghost 
 
It would be wrong to give the impression that Yeats venerated 
Swedenborg. On the contrary, A Vision is distinctly unsympathetic in 
describing ‘a mind incredibly dry and arid, hard, tangible and cold’. In 
that strange psycho-philosophical system, Swedenborg is classified 
under the twenty-second phase of the moon where his companions 
are all nineteenth-century figures. As is frequent in these lists of 
Yeats’s, the names constitute an odd group – ‘Flaubert, Herbert 
Spencer, Swedenborg, Dostoieffsky, Darwin’1 Quite how the author of 
Crime and Punishment fits in among the otherwise plodding 
exemplars of the phase is hard to tell. Yet Swedenborg s association 
exclusively with mid-nineteenth-century figures may indirectly 
confirm the view that Le Fanu (and not Blake) was, for Yeats, an 
important mediator in the process. 
Dry, perhaps, and arid, Swedenborg was no less useful to the 
system-building poet. His patchwork quotation and paraphrase of the 
sage’s account of the after-life in Arcana Coelestia has been cited by 
F. A. C. Wilson in illustration of this debt: 
The most minute particulars which enter the memory remain there 
and are never obliterated’ [making] us live again all our 
transgressions and see our victims ‘as if they were present, together 
with the place, words and motives’, and that suddenly, ‘as when a 
scene bursts upon the sight’ and yet continues Tor hours together’. 
And like the transgressions, all the pleasure and pain of sensible life 
awaken again and again, all our passionate events rush up about us, 
and not as seeming imagination, for imagination is now the world.2 
Certainly the passage could stand as an account of what goes on 
in The Words Upon the Window-pane where, in a séance, the spirit of 
Swift is tapped and his conversations with Stella and Vanessa 
reported to the audience by a medium. Yet the Swedenborgian-cum-
Downloaded from manchesterhive  ©  Copyright protected 
It is illegal to copy or distribute this document 

On literary history 
[ 22 ] 
Yeatsian notion of ‘dreaming-back’ one’s earthly experiences after 
one’s death is not simply a dramatic device existing in isolation from 
any larger body of belief. Swedenborgian correspondence provided a 
means whereby a central doctrine (which stated that the forms of 
Man, of Heaven, and of Hell are structurally analogous) is extended to 
account for every detail of the visible world: The whole natural world 
corresponds to the spiritual world, not only the natural world in 
general but also in every particular. Therefore, whatever in the 
natural world comes into existence from the spiritual world is said to 
be in correspondence with it.’3 
In part, this belief derives from Swedenborg’s famous vision; in 
part, it is only a vast extrapolation from literalist readings of 
scripture. The consequence, however, is an encyclopaedia of 
interpretations whereby hands, heavenly bodies, herbs, hills, houses, 
numbers – not to mention odours and stones – can all be de– and en-
coded spiritually.4 For Yeats, the common attachment of such a 
system and the literalism of certain Protestant sects was enough to 
discount Swedenborgianism as a profound statement of the theory of 
the unity of all. One who had early rebelled against the scientific 
positivism of his father’s generation was unlikely to take on board 
Swedenborg’s 
infinite 
cargo 
of 
laborious 
correspondences. 
Nevertheless, the subjective realism which might be winnowed from 
all that chaff was a doctrine he dearly sought to establish. 
In this, he was of course an heir to several Victorian anxieties and 
desires. System in Lyell’s geology had gravely shaken orthodox belief, 
and Darwin’s demonstration that the secular view of the universe was 
not just an account of events in the remote past but a theory of 
continuing evolution further challenged man’s notion of his own 
place in the order of things. As early as Tennyson’s In Memoriam 
(1850) literature had explicitly debated issues centred on the conflict 
of scientific and traditional authority. Not least among the questions 
raised by the natural sciences was one of language. If the Bible did not 
fully account for the creation of the earth, the animal kingdom, 
mankind and the rest of it, then a challenge to the theory of language 
inherent in orthodoxy was mounted above the quibbling about fossils. 
In the second chapter of Genesis, God had brought all the animals 
before Adam so that their names might be established. The act of 
nomination, however, is reported within another rather different, 
two-part chronicle: 
Downloaded from manchesterhive  ©  Copyright protected 
It is illegal to copy or distribute this document 

Swedenborg's ghost 
[ 23 ] 
And the Lord said, It is not good that the man should be alone: I will 
make him an help meet for him. 
And out of the ground the Lord God formed every beast of the 
field, and every fowl of the air; and brought them unto Adam to see 
what he would call them: and whatsoever Adam called every living 
creature, that was the name thereof. 
And Adam gave names to all cattle, and to the fowl of the air, 
and to every beast of the field; but for Adam there was no found an 
help meet for him. 
And the Lord God caused a deep sleep to fall upon Adam, and he 
slept: and he took one of his ribs, and closed up the flesh instead 
thereof; 
And the rib, which the Lord God had taken from man, made he 
a woman, and brought her unto the man. 
And Adam said, This is now bone of my bones, and flesh of my 
flesh: she shall be called Woman, because she was taken out of Man. 
The purpose in quoting these six verses is not to initiate some 
intricate exegesis of a deep meaning but rather to demonstrate the 
problems which were all too obvious to Victorian doubters. How is it 
that God can not or will not name the beasts, but requires that Adam 
should do so? Why should the business of providing Adam with a 
female of his species be interrupted by the naming of the beasts? 
What, finally, is the relationship between naming and gender? Among 
Le Fanu’s stories and novels, those collected in In a Glass Darkly 
(1872) will be shown to address this problem. For what it was worth, 
Swedenborg had offered an interpretation of the chapter, and 
particularly of the two verses immediately following those quoted, in 
terms of the conjunction of good or truth with man or angel, and 
continues ‘this conjunction may be likened to a man’s thinking what 
he wills and willing what he thinks’. Genesis 2: 24 was then cited, 
with the conclusion: This is a description both of the heavenly 
marriage in which the angels are [,] and of the marriage of good and 
truth. “Man’s not putting asunder what God has joined together” 
means that good is not to be separated from truth.’5 
This may not convince, yet it may (in certain circumstances) 
reassure. For Swedenborgian correspondence is not so much a system 
relating material objects to spiritual values, as it is a comprehensive 
attempt to relate words to objects in a manner which is permanent, 
authorised and complete. Victorian theories of language were 
progressively hostile to such notions of an absolute relation (tantamount 
to identity) between language and a non-linguistic reality. Linda 
Downloaded from manchesterhive  ©  Copyright protected 
It is illegal to copy or distribute this document 

On literary history 
[ 24 ] 
Dowling has shown how the great strides taken by romantic philogists 
and poets (Herder, Wordsworth) were rendered problematic by mid 
century. Already John Home Tooke (1736–1812) had advanced a 
basically materialist philosophy of language, but in 1838 one central 
tenet of Tooke’s etymology (that truth derives from troweth, i.e. the 
verb to trow or to trust, believe etc.) was vanquished in the name of 
religious orthodoxy by F. D. Maurice (1805–72). The triumph was 
pyrrhic, for no sooner were the Utilitarians routed than Friedrich Max 
Müller (1823–1900) arrived from the continent. It was a fundamental 
premise with Max Müller that language was organized on purely 
linguistic principles independent of both men and representation.’6 Back 
in the 1790s the far from materialist Edmund Burke had been happy to 
employ Tooke’s notion that words were like coins and might be 
counterfeited to denounce the impudence of anti-reformers in Ireland: 
A word has been lately struck in the mint of the Castle of Dublin; 
thence it was conveyed to the Tholsel, or city-hall, where, having 
passed the touch of the corporation, so respectably stamped and 
vouched, it soon became current in parliament, and was carried back 
by the Speaker of the House of Commons in great pomp, as an 
offering of homage from whence it came. The word is Ascendency.7 
Merging the idiom of word-as-token with a rhetorical trope based on 
the fashion of election parades, Burke confidently made his case for 
the preservation of British liberties through reform. Mid-Victorians 
found little comfort in current linguistic research in their efforts to 
defend ‘the logos-within-history of a noble English cultural destiny’. 
Yet Max Müller attempted to reconcile his ‘science of language’ to 
the conventions of religious belief, and in many respects he remained 
pre-scientific as in his ‘a priori assumption that language was thought 
and thought language’.8 Before he died, he had been supplanted by the 
Neo-Grammarians, and the way lay open to Saussurean linguistics. 
If Max Müller turned out to be a false prophet, in other areas less 
colourful figures added their concerns to the debate about language. 
Richard Chenevix Trench (1807–86) first published his lectures On 
the Study of Words in 1851. As befitted a future archbishop of 
Dublin, he was resolute in his own undertaking and even more 
reassuring to his flock. On the surface, Trench provided the 
accommodation between belief and the study of language which 
Müller ultimately failed to deliver. Yet Trench, in his way, also 
launched a revolution in the study of language by proposing, in 1857, 
the compilation of a word-list which was finally completed in 1928 as 
Downloaded from manchesterhive  ©  Copyright protected 
It is illegal to copy or distribute this document 

Swedenborg's ghost 
[ 25 ] 
the New English Dictionary.9 Trench was particularly interested in 
the historical evolution of language. The fourth lecture in his English 
Past and Present (1855) was entitled ‘Changes in the Meaning of 
English Words’, while the previous lecture had listed many feminine 
nouns lost from the language over the centuries. The dictionary 
project turned out to be more massive than Trench and his associates 
imagined; it required the reading of vast numbers of books on the 
basis of which it would be possible to illustrate the use of words 
without reference to their alleged intrinsic merit (a good word or a 
spurious one) but solely on the basis of changes of meaning and 
implication. On the Study of Words had devoted some pages to 
showing the extent to which there is ‘history in words’. One of 
Trench’s examples was ascendancy in which a ‘faith in the influence 
of the stars’ formally survives.10 
The Oxford English Dictionary (as it has come to be known) 
marked one major shift in English lexicography, the replacement of 
the compiler’s personal assessment of style (cf. Samuel Johnson or 
Thomas Sheridan) by the weight evidence simply of usage. Not only 
acknowledged works of literature, but newspapers, technical manuals 
and other low publications were scanned and dissected. The task lay 
well beyond the individual control even of James Murray, generally 
credited as the dictionary’s presiding genius. In a remote Irish rectory, 
not far from the family home of Dictionary Sheridan, the Reverend 
George Sidney Smith (1804/5–75) laboured to compile a list of words 
beginning Pa. He left the parish of Aghalurcher in 1867, and was no 
doubt further unsettled by Disestablishment of the Church of Ireland 
two years later. His great pile of paper slips was eventually traced to a 
stable in County Cavan some time after his death in 1875, but most 
of it had already been used to light fires. ‘A great number of books had 
to be re-read to make good the loss.’11 Such accidents oddly dramatise 
the place of language in the concerns of Victorians. Words may be 
used if they are traced, but it is increasingly clear that tracing them is 
an impossible task and no one man can master the language in its 
entirety. Indeed, even if it were traced in some hypothetical 
completeness, one is only confronted with layer upon layer of 
historical instability, of shifted meaning, loss and variation. 
Certainty, fixity are no more realisable than completeness. 
Among the zealots of the Philological Society, even more 
technical aspects of grammar gave rise to discussion. E. L. Brandreth, 
in a paper ‘On Gender’ published in the transactions for 1880-1, 
Downloaded from manchesterhive  ©  Copyright protected 
It is illegal to copy or distribute this document 

On literary history 
[ 26 ] 
divided the languages of the world into a gendered group and an 
ungendered (including English). So much was unremarkable, it might 
seem, providing one was working exclusively within one language. 
But Jakob Grimm had lamented in his Deutsche Grammatik (1819–
37) that German used Geschlect for both sex and gender, requiring 
him to introduce a terminological distinction between natürliches 
Geschlect (sex) and grammatisches Geschlect (gender).12 
Awareness of this problem in grammar complicates the cross-
language reading of a text like Balzac’s Séraphita. Let us take the 
opening of a relatively simple sentence and display it generously on 
the page: 
 
La personne 
que Minna nommait 
Seraphitüs 
s'appuya sur 
son talon droit... 13 
 
An English translation can be easily supplied: 
 
The person 
whom Minna had addressed as 
Seraphitus 
poised himself 
on his right heel... 14 
 
In French, the first noun (a common noun) is of the feminine gender 
irrespective of the referant’s sex. In English, the equivalent noun does 
not manifest a gender in its own form or that of the definite article. 
Thus a comparison of the first line in each language shows that 
French easily accommodates a feminine noun for a referant who will 
in a moment be named with a masculine-form (via Latin) name. No 
difference is implicated in this distinction. In English the relationship 
between the common noun and proper noun is of another kind, 
though none the less easy. The first (common) noun functions 
without reference to gender or sex and so accommodates the 
masculine proper noun just as it would a feminine one. It is, however, 
on the second line that the contrast between the languages begins to 
emerge. In ‘son talon’ the possessive adjective derives its gender 
(generally speaking) from the noun it qualifies and not from the noun 
for which it deputises. Thus, in isolation, ‘son talon’ might be 
translated into English as ‘her heel’ or as ‘his heel’. Feminine nouns in 
French take ‘sa’ as a rule but certain feminine nouns take ‘son’ (i.e. 
those which begin with a vowel etc.). 
We have then a comparative pattern which will not reduce to 
simple mirror translations, even in the elementary example analysed 
above. Though ‘his/her’ corresponds to ‘son/sa’ in one function, ‘his’ 
Downloaded from manchesterhive  ©  Copyright protected 
It is illegal to copy or distribute this document 

Swedenborg's ghost 
[ 27 ] 
does not correspond to ‘son’ referentially. The doctrine of 
correspondences in Swedenborg ultimately breaks down in the same 
manner, owing to the unverifiability of any common structure in the 
two corresponding codes (items of the material/visual and spiritual 
worlds). In Balzac, this aspect of Swedenborgianism is subordinate to 
the union of the angel with God and the parallel union of Minna and 
Wilfrid. In Le Fanu, however, the arbitrary, unverifiable and 
treacherous operation of correspondences will throw up endlessly 
reiterated plots of disunion, division and displacement. 
As we have seen, Séraphita’s hermaphrodite state was an 
anticipation of his/her union with God – for all is homogeneous in 
that region. Yeats’s interest in such doctrines frequently concentrated 
on the idea of angelic marriage. Writing of George Russell (AE) in the 
Autobiographies, he commented on his friend’s alternation of 
exquisite and commonplace work, and added: ‘Was it precisely 
because in Swedenborg alone the conscious and the subconscious 
became one – as in that marriage of the angels, which he has 
described as a contact of the whole being – so completely one indeed 
that Coleridge thought Swedenborg both man and woman?’15 Not 
only in arcane pursuits but in experiences of the common people did 
Yeats find this symbolism. One night, while he and old George 
Pollexfen were at work laboriously upon their visions, the dreams of a 
servant (Mary Battle) had paralleled their ‘allegorical marriage of 
Heaven and Earth’. She had imagined that her good Catholic bishop 
(of Sligo) was wed to ‘a very high-up lady, and she not too young, 
either’. As a consequence, ‘it will be no use going to confession’.16 
Marriage in both these passages is symbolic of the removal of 
difference. But as Curtius observed in his characterisation of the 
theory of the unity of all, such monism generates a complementary 
dualism. The apocalypse which Séraphita inaugurates in her union 
with God, signalled at a low mimetic level in Wilfrid’s desire for 
conquest and world domination, must lead to the Last Judgement: all 
will be equal in the eyes of the Lord, but there will follow a division 
of the blessed and the damned. Heaven exists by courtesy of Hell. 
It is not the purpose of this study to pursue Swedenborg very much 
further. Yet one of the crucial elements in Le Fanu’s reading of his 
doctrines is the tension between attraction and repulsion. Little of this 
could be proved, for specific references to the doctrines are restricted to 
perhaps two or three stories or novels, the most notable being Uncle 
Silas. If Swedenborg was for Balzac a visonary in whose scheme of 
Downloaded from manchesterhive  ©  Copyright protected 
It is illegal to copy or distribute this document 

On literary history 
[ 28 ] 
things one might eventually descry some unity behind the frenzy of 
contemporary change, for Le Fanu he was a blind leader of the blind – 
and all but recognised as such. Le Fanu is concerned exclusively with 
the dark side of the vision, with the revelations which follow death, the 
reinactments of crime and the confrontation once again with one’s 
victim. It is a suitable ingredient for a mid-Victorian novelist attached 
(however indignantly) to the sensational school of Charles Reade and 
Wilkie Collins. To borrow a trope from the jargon of drug addiction, Le 
Fanu’s Swedenborgianism was a bad trip. One reason for this 
undoubtedly is the loss of faith in systems, even in a system which 
offered a virtual identity of language and reality. Language can no 
longer be seen in such a light: if it is systematic, then the system 
excludes the individual human being, or in so far as it includes him he 
is annihilated, a sacrifice to his own inclusion. In fiction, it is the 
concept of character which crucially bears the burden of language’s 
inability to sustain a reliable link with whatever is the real. 
Something of this can be detected beneath Le Fanu’s sensational 
plots together with evidence of the discovery’s repression. Uncle 
Silas, being the best known of the novels, can stand as typical, and it 
has the additional merit of explicitly citing Swedenborgian texts. Set 
in the rural north midlands of Victorian England, the basic story has 
been taken over from an earlier one of Le Fanu’s set in eighteenth-
century Ireland. The Ruthyn brothers have been somehow politically 
ostracised, and this isolation is intensified by the unorthodox 
religious affiliation (to Swedenborgianism) of at least one of them. At 
a certain level, the shifts of setting and period together with the 
extreme de-socialisation of the family both represent and conceal the 
role of the landowning élite in Ireland at the time. The introduction 
of a Swedenborgian minister – the vulgar but honest Dr Hans 
Emmanuel Bryerly – goes some way towards puncturing the hermetic 
solitude of the Ruthyn households. It does so, however, by 
augmenting what is least representative of either of the societies 
(Irish, English) in which the action has been set. 
As in Balzac’s Séraphita, there is some mention of angels amid 
this anomalous community of widowers and orphans. The narrator 
concludes with a resounding paragraph: 
This world is a parable – the habitation of symbols – the phantoms of 
spiritual things immortal shown in material shape. May the blessed 
second-sight be mine – to recognise under these beautiful forms of 
earth the ANGELS who wear them; for I am sure we may walk with 
them if we will, and hear them speak!17 
Downloaded from manchesterhive  ©  Copyright protected 
It is illegal to copy or distribute this document 

Swedenborg's ghost 
[ 29 ] 
But Maud Ruthyn has seen no angels in the course of the events she 
has related. Unlike Séraphita, Le Fanu’s novel does not provide a 
means whereby the reader can distinguish the mere mortals from the 
mere angels. No inconsistency of gender reveals a figure who is to each 
what complements him or her. Certainly the novel can be read as 
possessing a symmetry of action based on the kind of correspondences 
propounded by Swedenborg in Heaven and Hell; certainly the plot can 
be interpreted as essentially an enactment of those processes which 
Swedenborg believed the soul experienced as it underwent judgement 
after death. But whereas Séraphita advanced ‘good’ Swedenborgianism, 
Uncle Silas tells of damnation, or – to be more correct – it is a tale 
narrated by one who is all but damned by her failure to see spiritual 
evil in her uncle. If Le Fanu has been rescued from the trammels of a 
gothic sub-tradition, he has simultaneously embraced a web of 
unverifiable correspondences. Here is no inaugurating springtime, but 
autumnal bereavement and enclosure. Elizabeth Bowen called it ‘ever-
autumn’ which may be compared closely with the ‘ever-after’ cliché of 
folktale and pie in the sky. 
There is, however, the possibility of a more radical reading of the 
novel than the merely atmospheric. Not only has Le Fanu utilised the 
plot of an early short story – and in doing so transferred the action 
from eighteenth-century Ireland to Victorian England – Uncle Silas 
itself turns on a drastic change of location. Superficially, young Maud 
the narrator travels from her late father’s house (Knowl) to her uncle’s 
(Bartram). But by means of a host of symmetrical details linking these 
two houses, the novel advances the implication that they differ not 
on a physical plane, but in their spiritual orientation. Similarly, Uncle 
Silas is not a character distinct from the narrator’s father: he is the 
post-mortem state of the father. The unfolding of Silas’s plan to rob 
and murder Maud is not just another sensationalist plot: it is ‘the 
dreaming back’ of the seemingly pious father’s violent inner 
disposition towards his daughter. The novel, thus interpreted, 
becomes dark metaphysical romance; death is its fulcrum, the 
apocalypse its moment and momentum. Time rewinds on the bobbin 
of Ruthyn’s soul, with the effect of synchronising its progressive 
aspect (earthly career) and its eternal (judgement). If Uncle Silas co-
exists as sensational novel and metaphysical romance, the question 
remains as to how we place such a work of literature in a 
reconsideration of Irish literary history. 
Downloaded from manchesterhive  ©  Copyright protected 
It is illegal to copy or distribute this document 

On literary history 
[ 30 ] 
We have then two distinct interventions, one of which may be 
still in need of elaboration. Balzac’s Melmoth reconcile takes up the 
problem of Maturin’s gothic hero, floats it on the stock-exchange, and 
in doing so unsettles the assumed lineage of Le Fanu’s fiction. But the 
second intervention, that which both obstructs and mediates the line 
of connection between Balzac and Yeats, is enacted by Le Fanu 
himself. For, as the reference to hair-raising stories in ‘Swedenborg, 
Mediums, and the Desolate Places’ indicated, it was in Uncle Silas, In 
a Glass Darkly and a few other scattered pieces by Le Fanu that 
Swedenborg finds temporary refuge in Victorian Irish culture. The 
central section of the present book attends in detail to the fiction 
which constitutes that second intervention. 
Yet one may still ask – why Le Fanu, why not (for example) James 
Clarence Mangan, or Maturin himself? Le Fanu’s fiction deals with a 
number of themes which occur prominently in Balzac. These include 
Swedenborgian doctrines concerning not only ultimate spiritual truth 
but matters as immediate as marriage and sexuality. In addition there 
is a shared preoccupation with painters and paintings, and a distaste 
for the unfolding politics of an increasingly bourgeois and democratic 
society. There are of course formal resemblances between the two 
bodies of fiction but these will be discussed in a later chapter when 
the reader is more familiar with the peculiarities of Le Fanu’s plots. 
The most pressing reason for choosing Le Fanu is that his fiction is 
charged with historical concerns which are promptly disguised, 
dispersed, and denied. Many of these concerns relate to the emergence 
of that problematic social constituency, the Protestant Ascendancy, 
to which Yeats recruited the dead Synge. 
Notes 
  1 
W. B. Yeats A Vision (1937 version) London: Macmillan, 1962 p. 157. 
  2 
See F. A. C. Wilson Yeats and Tradition London: Gollancz, 1958 pp. 145-
6. 
  3 
Quoted in W. J. Mc Cormack Sheridan Le Fanu and Victorian Ireland 
(2nd rev. ed.) Dublin: Lilliput Press, 1991 pp. 177-8. See chapter 5 of that 
work (pp. 148-94) for a further account of Uncle Silas in relation to 
Swedenborgianism. 
  4 
Hands signify power; stars and constellations sigify cognitions of good and 
truth; herbs signify scientific truths ... and so on. See the index to Emanuel 
Swedenborg Heaven and Hell London: Swedenborg Society, 1958. 
  5 
Swedenborg Heaven and Hell p. 201. 
Downloaded from manchesterhive  ©  Copyright protected 
It is illegal to copy or distribute this document 

Swedenborg's ghost 
[ 31 ] 
  6 
Linda Dowling Language and Decadence in the Victorian Fin de Siéde 
Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1986 p. 61. 
  7 
Edmund Burke Tetter to Richard Burke’ (1792) quoted in W. J. Mc 
Cormack Ascendancy and Tradition in Anglo-Irish Literary History from 
1789 to 1939 Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1985 p. 78. 
  8 
Dowling op. cit. p. 70. 
  9 
K. M. Elizabeth Murray Caught in the Web of Words: James A. H. Murray  
and the Oxford English Dictionary New Haven, London: Yale University 
Press, 1977 p. 135. 
10 
Richard Chenevix Trench On the Study of Words [and] English Past and 
Present London: Dent, 1927 p. 63. 
11 
Murray op. cit. p. 177 for the quotation. See also Transactions of the 
Philological Society (1880–1) p. 129 
12 
Transactions (1880–1) p. 248. 
13 
Honore de Balzac Séraphita Paris: Librairie Gründ, (n.d.) p. 21. 
14 
Balzac Séraphita [and other tales] (trans. Clara Bell) Sawtry: Dedalus, 
1989 p. 10. 
15 
W. B. Yeats Autobiographies London: Macmillan, 1955 p. 244. 
16 
Ibid. p. 260. It is odd that Yeats doesn’t recognise Mary Battle’s dream as a 
folk-memory of the scandalous marriage of John Butler (1720–1800, 12th 
baron Dunboyne and Catholic bishop of Cork from 1763 to 1787) – odd 
because Yeats strove manfully to prove that he belonged to the same 
Butler family. 
17 
J. Sheridan Le Fanu Uncle Silas; a Tale of Bartram-Haugh. Oxford: 
World’s Classics, 1981. p. 424. (Original emphasis.) 
 
 
 
 
Downloaded from manchesterhive  ©  Copyright protected 
It is illegal to copy or distribute this document 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Downloaded from manchesterhive  ©  Copyright protected 
It is illegal to copy or distribute this document 

