APPENDIX A
Solar, Sidereal, and Lunar Days
When the phrase “24 hours a day” is used, the reference is
to a solar day.
The length of the solar day is determined
by two things: the rate at which the Earth rotates around
its axis, and the rate at which the Earth moves around the
Sun.
The sidereal day depends only on the rate at which
the Earth rotates around its axis. The two deﬁnitions of day
can be stated in terms of the positions of astronomical objects
relative to the Earth. After one solar day, from the viewpoint
of an Earth-based observer, the Sun appears to have returned
to the same position in the sky as it was one solar day earlier.
After one sidereal day, distant or “ﬁxed” stars appear in the
same position they occupied one sidereal day earlier.
The
sidereal day is approximately 4 minutes shorter than the solar
day.
The reason a sidereal day is shorter than a solar day can be
seen from Fig. (A.1). The view is looking down on the plane
of the Earth’s orbit around the Sun (ecliptic plane).
For

264
SOLAR, SIDEREAL, AND LUNAR DAYS
Earth
Sun
α
Ve
Res
Figure A.1: Solar and sidereal days
simplicity, the tilt of the Earth’s axis away from the normal
to the ecliptic plane is ignored here, so the Earth’s axis is
pointing perpendicular to the page. The sense of the Earth’s
rotation around its axis is counterclockwise, as denoted by
the curved arrows. The Earth is moving with a velocity Ve
in its orbit around the Sun. It is clear from the ﬁgure that
for the Sun to appear in the same position as it did one solar
day earlier, the Earth must rotate a full 360◦, plus the angle
denoted as α in the ﬁgure. The angle α is small, so we can
approximate the angle by its tangent and write
α ∼|Ve|Tday
|Rse| .
(A.1)
Since α is a small angle, it makes little diﬀerence whether the
sidereal or solar day is used for Tday in this formula. Let ωse
be the angular frequency of the Earth in its orbit around the
Sun. Then we have
|Ve| = |Rse|ωse = |Rse| 2π
Tyear
.
(A.2)
Using this in the formula for α, we have
α(rad) = 2π Tday
Tyear
, or α(deg) = 360 Tday
Tyear
∼360
365 ∼1 deg.
(A.3)

SOLAR, SIDEREAL, AND LUNAR DAYS
265
We conclude that the solar day will be longer than the sidereal
day by the time it takes the Earth to rotate 1◦around its axis
to a good approximation. Now 24 hours corresponds to 360◦,
so one degree will correspond to (24/360) hour, or 4 minutes.
To summarize, the solar day is the time it takes for the Earth
to rotate so that the Sun is in the same relative position it
was one solar day earlier. This requires the Earth to rotate
361◦around its axis. The sidereal day is the time it takes
the Earth to rotate around its axis by 360◦. The sidereal day
is shorter than the solar day by an amount very close to 4
minutes.
Lunar Day
There are two meanings assigned to the term “lunar day” The
most common usage refers to the time it takes for the Moon to
complete one rotation around its axis. This is approximately
29.5 solar days. The other meaning of lunar day, and the one
discussed here, is the time it takes for the Moon to return to
the same relative position it was one lunar day earlier. This
is the lunar day that aﬀects tides on the Earth.
Earth
Sun
α
Ve
Res
α′
Figure A.2: Lunar day
The length of a lunar day as meant here can be computed
in a way very analogous to the discussion of the solar and

266
SOLAR, SIDEREAL, AND LUNAR DAYS
sidereal days of the previous section. We again ignore the
tilt angle of the Earth’s axis so the Earth’s axis is normal to
the ecliptic plane. In addition, we assume the Moon’s orbit
lies in the ecliptic plane. Fig. (A.2) shows the situation at
the time of a solar eclipse, and one solar day later. After one
solar day the Moon has moved ahead as shown in the ﬁgure
by the angle α′. The length of a lunar day is a solar day plus
the time it takes the Earth to rotate through the angle α′.
At that time, the Moon will be in the same relative position
to the Earth that it was one lunar day earlier. To calculate
the angle α′, we use Eq. (A.3) from the previous section, with
Tyear replaced by Tmonth, where Tmonth = 29.5 Tday. For the
angle α′ in degrees, we have
α′ = 360
29.5 = 12.2 deg.
(A.4)
Since 1◦corresponded to 4 minutes of the Earth’s rotation,
12.2◦corresponds to 12.2 × 4 = 48.8 minutes of the Earth’s
rotation. According to this calculation, the lunar day is longer
than the solar day by approximately 49 minutes. This is close
to the result of a more precise calculation.

