Scaling forces to asteroid surfaces: The role of
cohesion
D.J. Scheeres, C.M. Hartzell, P. S´anchez
Department of Aerospace Engineering Sciences
The University of Colorado
Boulder, CO 80309-0429 USA
scheeres@colorado.edu
M. Swift
University of Nottingham
Abstract
The scaling of physical forces to the extremely low ambient gravi-
tational acceleration regimes found on the surfaces of small asteroids
is performed. Resulting from this, it is found that van der Waals co-
hesive forces between regolith grains on asteroid surfaces should be a
dominant force and compete with particle weights and be greater, in
general, than electrostatic and solar radiation pressure forces. Based
on this scaling, we interpret previous experiments performed on cohe-
sive powders in the terrestrial environment as being relevant for the
understanding of processes on asteroid surfaces. The implications of
these terrestrial experiments for interpreting observations of asteroid
surfaces and macro-porosity are considered, and yield interpretations
that diﬀer from previously assumed processes for these environments.
Based on this understanding, we propose a new model for the end
state of small, rapidly rotating asteroids which allows them to be
comprised of relatively ﬁne regolith grains held together by van der
Waals cohesive forces.
1
arXiv:1002.2478v1  [astro-ph.EP]  12 Feb 2010

1
Introduction
The progression of asteroid research, especially that focused on the smaller
bodies of the NEA and Main Belt populations, has progressed from under-
standing their orbits, spins and spectral classes to more detailed mechanical
studies of how these bodies evolve in response to forces and eﬀects from
their environment. Along these lines there has been general conﬁrmation
that small NEAs are rubble piles above the 150 meter size scale, based both
on spin rate statistics and on visual imagery from the Hayabusa mission to
Itokawa. However, the nature of these bodies at even smaller sizes are not
well understood, with imagery from the Hayabusa mission suggesting that
the core constituents of a rubble pile asteroid consists of boulders on the
order of tens of meters and less [15] while spin rate statistics imply that ob-
jects on the order of 100 meters or less can spin at rates much faster than
seems feasible for a collection of self-gravitating meter-sized boulders [40].
Such extrapolations are based on simple scaling of physics from the Earth
environment to that of the asteroid environment. However, perhaps this is
a process which must be performed more carefully.
In previous research,
Holsapple [19, 20, 21, 22] has shown analytically that even small amounts of
strength or cohesion in a rubble pile can render rapidly spinning small bodies
stable against disruption. In this paper we probe how the physics of inter-
action are expected to scale when one considers the forces between grains
and boulders in the extremely low gravity environments found on asteroid
surfaces and interiors.
We note that asteroids are subject to a number of diﬀerent physical ef-
fects which can shape their surfaces and sub-surfaces, including wide ranges
in surface acceleration, small non-gravitational forces, and changing environ-
ments over time. Past studies have focused on a sub-set of physical forces,
mainly gravitational, rotational (inertial) eﬀects, friction forces, and consti-
tutive laws [19, 20, 21, 22, 44, 55, 60]. Additional work has been performed
on understanding the eﬀect of solar radiation pressure [7] and electro-static
forces on asteroid surfaces [26, 10, 23], mostly motivated by dust levitation
processes that have been identiﬁed on the lunar surface [11]. It is signiﬁcant
to note that the details of lunar dust levitation are not well understood.
The speciﬁc goal of this paper is to perform a survey of the known relevant
forces that act on grains and particles, state their analytical form and relevant
constants for the space environment, and consider how these forces scale
relative to each other. Resulting from this analysis we ﬁnd that van der Waals
2

cohesive forces should be a signiﬁcant eﬀect for the mechanics and evolution
of asteroid surfaces and interiors. Furthermore, we identify terrestrial analogs
for performing scaled experimental studies of asteroid regolith and indicate
how some past studies can be reinterpreted to shed light into phenomenon
that occur on the surfaces of asteroids, the smallest aggregate bodies in the
solar system.
Taken together, our analysis suggests a model for the evolution of small
asteroids that is consistent with previous research on the physical evolution
and strength of these bodies. In this model rubble pile asteroids shed com-
ponents and boulders over time due to the YORP eﬀect, losing their largest
components at the fast phase of each YORP cycle and eventually reducing
themselves to piles of relatively small regolith. For sizes less than 100 meters
it is possible for such a collection of bodies to be held together by cohesive
forces at rotation periods much less than an hour. Finally, the implications
of this work extends beyond asteroids, due to the fundamental physics and
processes which we consider. Speciﬁc applications of this work may be rel-
evant for planetary rings and accretion processes in proto-planetary disks,
although we do not directly discuss such connections.
The structure of the paper is as follows. First, we review evidence for the
granular structure of asteroids. Then we perform an inventory of relevant
forces that are at play in the asteroid environment and discuss appropriate
values for the constants and parameters that control these results. Following
this, we perform direct comparisons between these forces and identify how
their relative importance may scale with aggregate size and environment.
Then we perform a review of the experimental literature on cohesive powders
and argue that these studies are of relevance for understanding fundamental
physical processes that occur in asteroid regolith. Finally, we discuss relevant
observations of asteroids and their environment and the implications of our
studies for the interpretation of asteroid surfaces, porosity and the population
of small, rapidly spinning members of the asteroid population.
2
Evidence for the granular structure of as-
teroids
Before we provide detailed descriptions of the relevant forces that act on
particles and grains in the asteroid environment, we ﬁrst review the evidence
3

that has been drawn together recently which indicates that asteroids are
dominated by granular structures, either globally or at least locally.
2.1
Observations of asteroid populations
For small asteroids, there are a few elements of statistical data that indicate
the granular structure of these bodies. First is the size and spin distribu-
tions that have been tabulated over the years. An essential reference is [40],
which ﬁrst pointed out the interesting relation between asteroid size and
spin rate and provided the ﬁrst population-wide evidence for asteroids being
made of aggregates. The naive implication of this is that larger asteroids are
composed of distinct bodies resting on each other. Thus, when these bod-
ies reach suﬃciently rapid rotation rates these components can enter orbit
about each other and subsequently escape or form binaries [55]. The smaller
components that escape, or conversely the larger asteroids that are even-
tually “worn down” by these repeated processes, then comprise a smaller
population of what have been presumed to be monolithic bodies that can
spin at elevated rates (although recent work has indicated that even small
degrees of cohesion can stabilize these small bodies [21]). This has led to the
development of the rubble pile model for asteroid morphologies with larger
asteroids composed of aggregates of smaller bodies. These smaller compo-
nents are then available to comprise the population of fast spinning asteroids
and range in size up to hundreds of meters.
Second is the determination that asteroids can have high porosities in
general. The evidence for this has again been accumulated over many years,
and has especially accelerated since the discovery of binary asteroids which
allow the total mass, and hence density, to be estimated once a volume is
estimated. Porosity values have been correlated with asteroid spectral type
[5], with typical porosities ranging from 30% for S-type asteroids up to 50%
and higher for C-type asteroids. Given good knowledge of the porosity of
meteorite samples (on the order of 10% in general) it is clear that asteroids
must have signiﬁcant macro-porosity in their mass distributions. Existence
of macro-porosity is consistent with a rubble pile model of asteroids, where
there are components that have higher grain density resting on each other in
such a way that signiﬁcant open voids are present, leading to the observed
macro-porosity. This also motivates the application of granular mechanics
theories to asteroids.
4

2.2
Observations of speciﬁc asteroids
Prior to the high resolution images of the surfaces of Eros and Itokawa, little
was known about their small scale structure. Eros shows ﬁne-scale material
with sizes much less than centimeters [65] with localized areas of very ﬁne
dust (presumed to be of order 50 microns) [48]. Itokawa shows a surface
with minimum particle sizes at the scale of millimeters to centimeters [67]
with evidence of migration of the ﬁnest gravels into the potential lows of
that body [35]. Following these missions our conception of asteroid surfaces
has changed signiﬁcantly. We now realize that the surfaces are dominated
by loose regolith and that ﬂow occurs across the surfaces of these bodies,
causing ﬁner materials to pool in the local or global geopotential lows of the
body.
In terms of geophysics, the important results from NEAR at Eros include
the relatively high porosity (21-33%) [66] along with a homogeneous gravity
ﬁeld, implying a uniform internal density [34, 25]. For this body, which is
large among NEA’s, this implies a lack of large-void macro-porosity within
its structure and instead a more ﬁnely distributed porosity throughout that
body. Observations of the surface of Eros have also enabled a deeper under-
standing of its constituents and internal structure. By correlating degraded
impact craters to physical distance from a recent, large crater on the sur-
face of Eros, Thomas et al. [63] are able to show that seismic phenomenon
from impacts are important for this body and cause migration of regolith
over limited regions. Support for this view comes from simulations carried
out by Richardson et al. [46] which have attempted to determine a surface
chronology for that body based on simple geophysics models. Also, based
on observations of lineaments across the surface of Eros, some authors have
claimed that the body consists of a number of monolithic structures, per-
haps fractured, resting on each other [43, 6]. Alternate views on interpreting
surface lineaments have also been proposed, however, noting that they could
arise from cohesion eﬀects between surface particles [2].
The porosity of Itokawa was measured to be on the order of 40%, and
its surface and sub-surface seem to be clearly dominated by a wide range
of aggregate sizes, ranging from boulders 10’s of meters across down to sub-
centimeter sized components. The precision to which the asteroid was tracked
precludes a detailed gravity ﬁeld determination, as was done for Eros, thus we
currently only have the total mass and shape of the body from which to infer
mass distribution. There is some tangential evidence for a non-homogenous
5

mass distribution within the body, however, consistent with a shift in the
center of mass towards the gravel-rich region of Itokawa, indicating either
an accumulation of material there or a lower porosity [56]. Another clear
feature of the asteroid Itokawa is its bimodal distribution, allowing it to be
interpreted as a contact binary structure. The bulk shape of Itokawa can be
decomposed into two components, both ellipsoidal in shape, resting on each
other [13]. We also note that Itokawa has no apparent monolithic components
on the scale of 100 meters, but instead appears to be rubble. Another inter-
esting result from the Hayabusa mission arises from the spacecraft’s landing
mechanics on the surface. Analysis of the altimetry and Doppler tracking
resulted in an estimated surface coeﬃcient of restitution of 0.84 [67], which
is quite high for a material supposed to consist of unconsolidated gravels. In
[35] observations of the Itokawa surface point to ﬂow of ﬁner regolith across
the surface, pooling in the geopotential lows of that body. Finally, size distri-
butions of boulders on Itokawa show a dominance of scale at small sizes. The
number density of boulders is approximately N ∼(r/5)3 boulders per m2,
with r speciﬁed in meters [32]. This leads to surface saturation at boulder
sizes less than 12.5 cm.
Although not a spacecraft rendezvous mission, signiﬁcant results were
also derived from the radar observations of the binary NEA 1999 KW4 [38].
Based on these observations, taken from the Arecibo radio antenna and the
Goldstone Solar System Radar antenna, a detailed shape model for both
components was created, the system mass determined, the relative densities
of the bodies estimated, and the spin states of the asteroids estimated. One
item of signiﬁcance is that the KW4 system is very similar to the majority of
NEA binaries that have been observed [42]. A signiﬁcant density disparity
was found between the bodies, with the secondary having a mean density of
2.8 g/cm3 and the primary a density of 2 g/cm3. Porosities of the primary
body are estimated to be very high, with values up to 60% being possible.
We also ﬁnd that the primary is rotating at the surface disruption limit,
near the rate where loose material would be lofted from its surface. While
the secondary is in a synchronous state, there is strong evidence that it is
excited from this state, meaning that it is undergoing librations relative to
its nominal rotation period which can cause relatively large variations in
surface acceleration across its surface [54]. This environment was postulated
to contribute to its low slopes and relatively high density.
Other, less direct, lines of evidence also point to the surfaces of asteroids
as being dominated by loose materials. First is the consistently low global
6

slope distributions found over asteroid bodies at global scales. Most of these
results come from radar-derived shape models [37], however they are also
similar to the slope distributions found for Eros and Itokawa. This is consis-
tent with surfaces formed by loose granular material as granular dynamics
predicts such limits on surface slope distributions.
Finally, a more recent result looked speciﬁcally for the signature of min-
imum particle sizes on asteroid surfaces by using polarimetry [29].
That
paper observed a number of asteroids of similar type of diﬀerent sizes and
distances from the sun. Applying the expected theory of dust levitation on
asteroids [26, 10] in conjunction with solar radiation pressure would predict
that smaller grains should be absent from the surfaces of these bodies, and
thus alter how light scatters from these surfaces. Polarimetry observations
of a number of asteroids did not yield any signature of minimum particle
size diﬀerences on these bodies, however, and indicated a similar minimum
size scale for surface particles independent of distance from the sun or size of
the asteroid. This is consistent with a lack of depletion of ﬁnes on surfaces,
although there exist other explanations for this observation as well.
3
Physics of the Asteroid Environment
We do not consider the strength of regolith grains and chondrules them-
selves, such as is implied in the strength-based models used in [45], but only
concern ourselves with the interaction between macroscopic grains and the
environmental forces on these grains. Past studies have mostly focused on
gravity and frictional forces, however it has also been speculated that, for
particles at these size scales, electrostatic [26], triboelectric [28], solar ra-
diation pressure [53] and van der Waals’ forces [2] should also be included
in that list. Inclusion of these forces in studies of asteroid surfaces should
have signiﬁcant implications for the mechanics of asteroid surfaces and for
their simulation in terrestrial laboratories. In addition to these forces, we
will also include discussions of gravitational attraction between grains and
on the pressures that grains will experience in the interiors of these bodies.
We assume spherical grains, which are generally used in granular mechanics
studies due to the major simpliﬁcations this provides in analysis, and also
due to demonstrated studies that this constitutes a reasonable model for the
interactions of granular materials [18, 36].
7

3.1
Ambient accelerations and comparisons
The most important deﬁning quantity for this discussion is the ambient ac-
celeration environment on the surface of a small body. This consists of the
gravitational attraction of the asteroid on a grain and the inertial eﬀects
that arise due to the rotation of the small body. These eﬀects generally act
against each other, and thus reduce the ambient acceleration that grains on
the surface of an asteroid feel. The net eﬀect of these competing eﬀects can
be substantial, as can be seen in Fig. 1 which shows the net gravitational
accelerations across the surface of 1999 KW4 Alpha, the primary body of
the binary asteroid 1999 KW4. From this example we see that the surface
acceleration can range over orders of magnitude, and thus the ambient en-
vironment for grains on the surface may have signiﬁcant diﬀerences as one
moves from polar to equatorial regions.
Figure 1: Surface accelerations across the surface of the 1999 KW4 Primary.
8

For understanding the relative eﬀects of these forces on grains we will
make comparisons between the grain’s weight and the given force under
consideration.
For an ambient gravitational acceleration of gA the ambi-
ent weight of a grain is deﬁned as W = mgA, where m is the particle’s mass
(4π/3ρgr3 for a sphere), ρg is the grain density (and is larger than the as-
teroid’s bulk density), and r is the grain radius. In general we will assume
ρg = 3500 kg/m3 and will use MKS units throughout.
We ﬁnd that the relevant forces acting on a grain are directly proportional
to its radius elevated to some power. Thus, a generic representation of a force
acting on a grain can be given as F = Crn, where C is a constant and n is
an integer exponent in general. A common representation of the strength of
an external force used in granular mechanics is the bond number, which can
be deﬁned as the ratio of the force over the grain’s weight:
B
=
F
W
(1)
=
3C
4πρgA
rn−3
(2)
In general n ≤2, meaning that our additional forces will usually dominate
for smaller grain sizes. We also note that the weak ambient accelerations
will boost the bond numbers signiﬁcantly, especially when we go beyond the
milli-G regimes. Using units of Earth gravity (1 G = 9.81 m/s2) in order to
describe the strength of ambient gravity ﬁelds, one milli-G equals 9.81×10−3
m/s2 and one micro-G equals 9.81 × 10−6 m/s2.
3.1.1
Gravitational and rotational accelerations
Foremost for asteroid surfaces, and essentially controlling the environment by
its strength or weakness, are gravitational and rotation induced centripetal
accelerations acting on an asteroid and its surface. If we model an asteroid as
a sphere with a constant bulk density, the gravitational acceleration acting
on a particle at the surface will be:
g
=
4πGρ
3
R
(3)
where G = 6.672×10−11 m3/kg/s2 is the gravitational constant, ρ is the bulk
density and R is the radius of the body. Introduction of non-spherical shapes
will signiﬁcantly vary the surface acceleration as a function of location on an
9

asteroid, but will not alter its overall order of magnitude. If we assume a
bulk density of 2000 kg/m3 (used for bulk density throughout this paper),
we ﬁnd that the surface gravity will be on the order of 5.6 × 10−7R m/s2,
or ∼5.6 × 10−8R G’s. Thus, a 1000 meter radius asteroid will have surface
gravitational acceleration on the order of 50 micro-G’s, scaling linearly with
the radius for other sizes.
Rotation also plays a signiﬁcant role on the acceleration that a surface
particle will experience. Assume the asteroid is uniformly rotating about its
maximum moment of inertia at an angular rate ω. Then at a latitude of δ (as
measured from the plane perpendicular to the angular velocity vector), the
net acceleration it experiences perpendicular to the rotation axis is ω2 cos δR.
The acceleration it experiences normal to its surface due to rotation (assum-
ing the asteroid is a sphere) is ω2 cos2 δR. Adding the gravity and inertial
forces vectorially yields the net acceleration normal to the body surface:
gA
=

ω2 cos2 δ −4πGρ
3

R
(4)
with the largest accelerations occuring at δ = 0. We note that the centripetal
acceleration acts against the gravitational acceleration, and that if the body
spins at a suﬃciently rapid rate particles on the surface can experience a
net outwards acceleration, which is independent of the asteroid size and only
dependent on its density. For our chosen bulk density this rotation rate cor-
responds to a rotation period of ∼2.3 hours. We note that an excess of
asteroids have been discovered which are spinning at or close to this rate,
and that those which spin faster tend to be smaller members of the popu-
lation, with sizes less than 100 meters [40]. In Fig. 2 we show the relation
between asteroid radius, spin period and ambient gravity at the equator for
asteroids spinning less than their critical rotation period. In Fig. 3 we show
the amount of “cohesive acceleration” necessary to keep a grain on the sur-
face of an asteroid spinning beyond its critical rotation period. We note that
for asteroids of size 100 meters or less the radial outward accelerations are
still rather modest, milli-Gs necessary for a 100 meter asteroid rotating with
a 6 minute period or a 10 meter asteroid rotating with a period on the order
of tens of seconds.
Incorporating these gravity and rotation eﬀects for distended bodies yields
signiﬁcant variations over an object’s surface. For example, the total acceler-
ations acting normal to the surface of Eros range from 0.2 to 0.6 milli-G’s, on
Itokawa these range from 6 to 9 micro-G’s, and on the primary of the binary
10

Figure 2: Surface ambient gravity as a function of asteroid size and spin
period. Computed for a spherical asteroid with a bulk density of 2 g/cm3.
asteroid 1999 KW4 these accelerations range from 30 micro-G’s to near zero
(Fig. 1). These extremely low values of surface gravity set the stage for the
other non-gravitational forces that can inﬂuence regolith on the surface.
3.1.2
Coulomb Friction
Intimately linked with a particle’s weight is the Coulomb frictional force.
The Coulomb force is proportional to the normal force between two grains
and equals
FF
=
µN
(5)
11

Figure 3: Surface positive ambient gravity as a function of asteroid size and
spin period.
Computed for a spherical asteroid with a bulk density of 2
g/cm3.
where µ is the coeﬃcient of friction and N is the normal force. For a particle
resting on a surface and subject to no other forces, N = W. The physical
nature of Coulomb friction arises from the mechanical interplay between
particle surfaces and can have a component due to cohesion forces.
We
discuss these combined eﬀects later in the paper. Coulomb friction plays a
dominant role in describing the qualitative nature of surfaces, as this directly
speciﬁes the slope that a particle can maintain relative to the body surface
before sliding occurs. This is the only one of the forces we consider that
scales directly with ambient weight, with the coeﬃcient of friction serving
12

as the bond number for this eﬀect, and implies that gravity and friction
should be independent of size. This particular result is sometimes invoked to
claim that asteroid morphologies should scale independent of size, however
our investigation of non-gravitational forces implies that this is not true.
3.1.3
Interior Pressures
Another important aspect for small bodies are their interior pressures. Ig-
noring the rotation of the body, we can easily integrate across a spherical
asteroid, assuming a constant bulk density of ρ, to ﬁnd the pressures at a
normalized distance R from the center (R = 1 at the surface and 0 at the
center):
P(R)
=
2π
3 Gρ2R2(1 −R2)
(6)
For the parameters assumed in this paper the pressure is
P(R)
=
5.6 × 10−4R2(1 −R2)
(7)
with units of Pascals. Thus the pressures at the core of asteroids due to
gravitational forces do not reach the kPa levels until we reach asteroids of
radius 1300 m and larger.
3.1.4
Self-Gravity
When scaling forces down to the low levels we are considering, we should
also consider the self gravitational force between two particles themselves.
Denote the two particles by their radius, r1 and r2 and assume they have a
common grain density ρg and are in contact. Then the gravitational force
between these two particles is
Fself
=
G
4πρg
3
2
(r1r2)3
(r1 + r2)2
(8)
For our assumed grain density value and equal sized particles we ﬁnd the
force between two particles to equal
Fself
=
3.6 × 10−3r4 [N]
(9)
13

The bond number, deﬁned for a particle of radius r with grain density, is
equal to
Bself
=
G 4πρg
3gA
r
(10)
∼
1 × 10−6 r
gA
(11)
We note that for micro-G environments (gA ∼1 × 10−5 m/s2) boulders of
10 meter radius will have a unity bond number relative to self-attraction,
increasing linearly with size. Due to this scaling, we ﬁnd that gravitational
attraction between grains are close to the regime we are interested in, but
can be neglected in general as we focus more on centimeter to decimeter
sized particles. However, we note that this local attraction eﬀect could have
signiﬁcance for the interaction of larger collections of boulders and may imply
that local interactions can be as important as the ambient ﬁeld within which
these boulders lie.
3.1.5
Electrostatic forces
Electrostatic forces have been hypothesized to play an important role on the
surfaces of asteroids, and have been speciﬁcally invoked as one means by
which small dust grains can be transported across a body’s surface [26, 48,
10]. These theories have been motivated by Apollo-era observations of dust
levitation at the terminator regions of the moon [11] and by the discovery
of ponds on Eros [48]. Whether or not dust levitation occurs on asteroids
is still an open question, although it is undoubtable that surface grains on
these bodies are subject to electrostatic forces. In the following we sketch
out the main components of these electrostatic forces, including how they
scale with particle size. We only provide a limited discussion of the charges
that particles can obtain, as this is still an active area of research and is not
fully understood.
The electrostatic force felt by a surface particle is tied to its location. The
charge accumulated at some point on the surface of an asteroid is due to an
equilibrium reached between the current of electrons leaving the surface due
to photoemission and the current of electrons impacting the surface from the
solar wind. Both of these currents vary with location on the surface of the
asteroid and with time as the asteroid rotates. Photoemission is dependent
on the solar incidence angle and solar wind interaction with the surface is
14

dependent on a variety of plasma-related phenomena that vary with solar
longitude. The resulting charge on the surface of the asteroid then inﬂuences
the charging of the particle in question and inﬂuences the plasma environment
(photoelectron and plasma sheaths) that will be experienced by the particle
if it is lofted above the asteroid’s surface. Thus, the ﬁrst step in determining
the electrostatic force experienced by a particle on an asteroid’s surface is to
determine the surface potential of the asteroid at that location. Following
the procedure outlined in [10] we ﬁnd a surface potential for asteroids at the
sub-solar point, φs, equal to 4.4 V, holding relatively constant over a range of
solar distances. The surface potential of the asteroid can be directly related
to the electric ﬁeld [10] as
E = 2
√
2φs
λD0
(12)
where λD0 ∼1.4 meters is the Debye Length of the photoelectron sheath.
The resulting electric ﬁeld strength is ∼9 Volts/m, in agreement with both
Lee and Colwell [26, 10].
To compute the force acting on a particle, it is necessary to specify the
initial charge on the particle, however, there are signiﬁcant uncertainties as to
the exact charging mechanisms of particles in the space environment. Given
the charge, the electrostatic force acting on a particle is given by:
Fes = QE
(13)
where Q is the total charge on the particle. Should the particle have enough
charge its electrostatic repulsion may cause it to levitate, or if it is lofted
due to some other event, it will experience electrostatic forces throughout
its trajectory near the asteroid’s surface due to the charging of the particle
and the surface. We do not delve into these dynamics (c.f. [10]), but instead
focus on its environment on an asteroid’s surface.
The charge on a particle is directly related to its potential and its radius
as
Q
=
φpr
kC
(14)
where φp is the potential of the particle, r is the particle radius and kC is the
Coulomb constant. To develop an estimate of the charging that a particle
feels, we apply Gauss’ Law to the asteroid surface.
This states that the
15

total charge is proportional to the area that a given electric ﬁeld acts over.
Speciﬁcally we use
Q
=
ϵoEA
(15)
where ϵo is the permittivity, E is the electric ﬁeld and A is the area in ques-
tion.
Thus, as we consider smaller particles on the surface, with smaller
areas, we expect the total charge of these particles to decrease. Two impli-
cations can be found, for the potential of a particle and for the total force
acting on it. As the area of the particle varies as r2, solving for the particle
potential yields
φp
∼
ϵokCEr
(16)
implying that the particle potential scales linearly with size. Substituting
the charge from Gauss’ Law into the force equation provides
Fes
=
ϵoE2A
(17)
Substituting the area of a sphere, 4πr2, we ﬁnd the predicted force acting on
a particle due to photoemission alone when directly illuminated to be
Fes
∼
4πϵoE2r2
(18)
Given the permittivity constant in vacuum and the computed surface electric
ﬁeld we ﬁnd the force acting on a particle of size r to be
Fes
∼
9 × 10−9r2
(19)
and the related bond number to be
Bes
∼
6 × 10−13 1
gAr
(20)
Thus for a micro-G environment we ﬁnd a unity Bond number for particles of
nanometer size and conclude that electrostatics due to photoemission alone
is negligible.
The same situation may not exist in the terminator regions of the asteroid
surface, however. Hypothesized mechanisms for spontaneous dust levitation
have relied on enhancements to the nominal charging environment to gen-
erate suﬃcient charge or electric ﬁeld to move particles oﬀof an asteroid’s
16

surface [26, 10]. Explanations for dust levitation on the moon have relied on
eﬀects active at the terminator to focus the electric ﬁelds and raise them to
suﬃciently high values to overcome gravitational attraction [9]. In scaling
the resulting electric ﬁelds to asteroid terminators, Lee estimates that large
electric ﬁelds on the order of 105 V/m can occur, substantially enhancing
the relevance of electrostatics. Similarly, triboelectric charging of particles
may be able to generate large voltages of comparable size. Such charging
conditions have not been veriﬁed in the space environment, although they
are suﬃcient to increase the relevance of electrostatic forces. We borrow the
results from Lee to generate an estimate of possible electrostatic forces on
asteroids in the vicinity of their terminators. Using these stronger electric
ﬁelds in our above analysis provides forces on the order of
Fes
∼
0.1r2
(21)
for particles resting on the surface. Although unveriﬁed, we will use this force
as representative of the maximum strength of electrostatic forces acting on a
particle on an asteroid surface. The bond number for these larger forces are
Bes
∼
7 × 10−6 1
gAr
(22)
Thus, in the enhanced regimes that have been hypothesized to exist at ter-
minators, in a micro-G environment particles of radius 0.7 meters have unity
bond numbers.
3.1.6
Solar radiation pressure forces
Whenever a particle is subjected to full illumination by the sun, photons are
reﬂected, absorbed and re-emitted from grains. This can occur when the
particles lie on the surface, but become more signiﬁcant if the grain is lofted
from the surface of the asteroid. The photon ﬂux provides a pressure that
acts on the grain which is easily converted to a force. The physics of dust
grain-photon interactions are studied in Burns et al. [7], where relativistic
and scattering eﬀects are considered in detail.
For our current study we
focus mainly on grains on the order of microns or larger, where geometric
optics derived results describe the force acting on such grains. For grain sizes
less than 0.5 microns, the interactions of dust particles with solar photons
becomes more complex due to the maximum ﬂux of the sun occurring at
17

wavelengths of commensurate size to the particles themselves, reducing the
eﬃciency of momentum transfer.
For this simple geometrical optics model, we ﬁnd the force acting on a
particle to be
Fsrp
=
GSRP(1 + σ)
d2
A
(23)
where GSRP ∼1 × 1017 kg m/s2, A is the illuminated particle area and d is
the distance to the sun. We choose the term σ to generally represent the
eﬀect of reﬂection, reemission or loss of coupling. Speciﬁcally, σ = 1 for a
fully reﬂective body, equals 2/3 for a body that reﬂects diﬀusively, is zero
for an absorbing body that uniformly radiates and is negative (but greater
than -1) for small grains that decouple from the maximum solar radiation
ﬂux at visible wavelengths [7]. The force that a particle feels varies as r2, for
an asteroid at 1 AU from the sun the speciﬁc values are
Fsrp
=
1.4(1 + σ) × 10−5r2
(24)
We note that this force dominates over the electrostatic force we ﬁnd using
a simple balance of photoemission currents, but is much smaller than the
hypothesized forces due to enhanced electric ﬁelds at an asteroid terminator.
They both share the r2 dependence, however. The Bond number for this
force is computed to be
Bsrp
=
1 × 10−91 + σ
gAr
(25)
Thus, for a micro-G environment the Bond number is unity for grain radii
on the order of 100 microns.
The dynamics of particles in orbit about an asteroid are subject to major
perturbations from SRP, and for many situations the SRP forces can exceed
gravitational attraction and directly strip a particle out of orbit.
These
dynamics have been studied extensively in the past, both at the mathematical
and physical level [33, 47, 51, 12]. The relevance of these forces when on the
surface of a body have not been considered in as much detail, but could be
a signiﬁcant contributor to levitation conditions, both hindering and helping
levitation depending on the geometry of illumination.
18

3.1.7
Surface Contact Cohesive Forces
Finally we consider the physics of grains in contact with each other and ex-
erting a cohesive force on each other due to the van der Waals forces between
individual molecules within each grain. The nature and characterization of
these forces has been investigated extensively in the past, both experimen-
tally and theoretically [24, 17, 8]. There is now an agreed upon, and relatively
simple, theory that describes the strength and functional form of such contact
cohesion forces [49, 8]. Despite this, a detailed discussion of such forces for
the asteroid surface has not been given as of yet, although the implications
of these forces for lunar regolith cohesion has been investigated [39]. We
take the lunar study as a starting point for applying the theory to asteroid
surfaces.
The mathematical model of the van der Waals force which we adopt is
rather simple [8, 39, 49], and for the attraction between two spheres of radius
r1 and r2 is computed as:
Fc
=
A
48(t + d)2
r1r2
r1 + r2
(26)
where A is the Hamaker constant and is deﬁned for contact between diﬀerent
surfaces in units of work (Joules), t is the minimum inter-particle distance
between surfaces and is non-zero in general due to the adsorption of molecules
on the surfaces of these materials, d is the distance between particle surfaces,
and r = r1r2/(r1 + r2) is deﬁned as the reduced radius of the system. The
details of these interactions have been extensively tested in the laboratory
across diﬀerent size scales [24, 17].
It is also important to note that the
attractive force is relatively constant, independent of particle deformation
[14, 30], meaning that this simple form of the cohesive forces can be used as
a general model for particles in contact with each other without having to
explicitly solve for particle deformation. The Hamaker coeﬃcient A tends
to be so small that the cohesion force eﬀectively drops to zero for values of
distance d between the surfaces of the particles on the order of particle radii,
thus we generally suppress this distance term d in the following and only
consider the force to be active when the bodies are in contact (see [8] for
more details).
In the space environment the minimum distance between the materi-
als, t, can be much closer than possible on Earth where atmospheric gases,
water vapor, and relatively low temperatures allow for signiﬁcant contami-
nation of surfaces. In the extreme environment of space, surfaces are much
19

“cleaner” due to the lack of adsorbed molecules on the surfaces of materials
[39], allowing for closer eﬀective distances between surfaces. Perko deﬁnes
the cleanliness ratio as the diameter of an oxygen molecule divided by the
thickness of the adsorbed gas on the surface of a sample. In terrestrial en-
vironments this cleanliness ratio can be small, due to the large amount of
gas and water vapor that deposits itself on all free surfaces. In low pressure
or high temperature conditions, however, as are found on the moon and on
asteroid surfaces, cleanliness ratios can approach values of unity, meaning
that particle surfaces can come in extremely close contact with each other,
essentially separated by the diameter of their constituent mineral molecules.
In these situations the strength of van der Waals forces can become stronger
than are experienced between similar particles on Earth. For lunar soils at
high temperatures Perko ﬁnds that cleanliness ratios approach unity, mean-
ing that the distance t →1.32 × 10−10 meters. Following [39] we deﬁne the
surface cleanliness as S ∼Ω/t, where Ω∼1.5×10−10 meters and t is the min-
imum separation possible between two particles in contact. A clean surface,
typical of lunar regolith on the sun-side, can have S →1, while in terrestrial
settings in the presence of atmosphere and water vapor we ﬁnd S ∼0.1 [39].
Modifying the cohesion force incorporating the surface cleanliness ratio and
setting d ∼0 we ﬁnd
Fc
=
AS2
48Ω2r
(27)
In the following we use the appropriate constants for lunar regolith, a
Hamaker constant of 4.3×10−20 Joules and an inter-particle distance of 1.5×
10−10 meters [39]. This is conservative in general, meaning that these will
provide under-estimates of the van der Waals force for particles on asteroids
or in micro-gravity, as they are computed for the surface of the moon where
there is still some remnant atmosphere contributing to surface contamination
and hence larger values of t. These combine to yield an equation for the van
der Waals force at zero distance (d = 0):
Fc
=
3.6 × 10−2S2r
(28)
This formula reconstructs the measured cohesive forces determined by Perko
[39]. The Bond number for this force equals
Bc
=
2.5 × 10−6 S2
gAr2
(29)
20

For a micro-G environment we ﬁnd unity Bond numbers at particle radii on
order of 0.5 m, and thus we note that this force is signiﬁcant.
A ﬁnal consideration is the net eﬀect of heterogeneous size distributions
within cohesive aggregates, and the closely related eﬀect of surface asperities
or irregularities of individual grains. All experimental tests generally deal
with size distributions of irregularly shaped grains, and thus the results we
ﬁnd from these tests should be informative for realistic distributions found
at asteroids. This being said, the potential size scales over which cohesive
forces are relevant may be much wider at asteroids, and thus could result
in eﬀects not seen in Earth laboratories. Castellanos studies the eﬀects of
surface asperities and the inclusion of relatively small particles within print-
ing toners and analytically characterizes their eﬀects on cohesive forces [8].
Summarizing the detailed results of that study, we ﬁnd that the net eﬀect of
surface asperities on a particle will change the cohesive force scaling from the
particle radius to the asperity radius, ra, which can easily be up to an order
of magnitude smaller than the particle radius. Similarly, a particle that is
covered with many smaller particles, with radius denoted as ra again, will
interact with neighboring particles (with a similar coating) with a cohesive
force proportional to ra. Thus, consider a “clean” particle of radius r covered
by asperities or smaller particles of radius ra. An approximate equation for
the cohesive force can then be represented as
Fca
∼
Fc
ra
r
(30)
where ra < r in general. We can use Perko’s cleanliness ratio as a qualitative
parameter to account for this eﬀect by letting S ∼
q
ra/r. Thus a cleanliness
ratio of 0.1 can be related to a grain being coated by particles that are
one-hundredth its size. Alternately, a grain with surface asperities about
one-tenth of the grain size will have a cleanliness ratio of about 0.3. The
details and physics of these corrections are more involved than the simple
scaling we use here, although they follow these general trends [8].
For a
ﬁxed macroscopic grain size, as the asperities or smaller particles shrink in
size, the reduction in cohesion force does not go to zero, but becomes limited
due to the disparity in size between the macroscopic grain and the smaller
features, as the size of these features begin to become small relative to the
local surface curvature of the grain.
21

3.2
Scaling particle forces to the asteroid environment
Having deﬁned the relevant known physical forces that can act on surface
particles, we can make direct comparisons of these forces to ascertain which
should dominate and in what region.
3.2.1
Direct Comparisons with Gravitational Forces
First we note some simple scaling laws that are at play for the relevance
of non-gravitational forces to gravitational forces. As is well known, gravi-
tational (and rotational) accelerations are constant independent of particle
size, but as forces will vary with the mass of the object, i.e., as r3 with the
radius of the particle. We note that the self-gravity, solar radiation, electro-
static and cohesion forces all vary with a diﬀerent power of particle radius.
Self-gravity varies as r4, solar radiation pressure and electrostatic as r2, and
cohesion as r. Thus when comparing these forces with ambient gravitational
force, we ﬁnd that the forces take on diﬀerent levels of signiﬁcance for diﬀer-
ent particle sizes. To characterize these relationships we compute the forces
as a function of particle size in Fig. 4 and compute the particle size at which
ambient weight equals force as a function of ambient acceleration in Fig. 5.
We note that some of these forces are attractive, some repulsive, and some
depend on the relative geometry of the grains. Thus we only compare the
magnitudes.
3.2.2
Self-Gravity and Cohesion
We ﬁrst consider a direct comparison between the self-gravitational attrac-
tion of two spheres in contact as compared with their predicted cohesive
attraction. Solving for the radius where the predicted cohesion equals self
attraction between two particles we ﬁnd r = 101/3S2/3. For clean surfaces
this radius is approximately 2 meters while for cleanliness ratios of 0.1 and
0.01 it reduces to 0.5 and 0.1 meters, respectively. In the context of our am-
bient gravitational environments, we see that self-gravity falls outside of the
forces of most interest to us, however it is surprisingly close to our regime.
Our detailed discussions will be focused on particles with sizes on the order
of tens of centimeters and smaller later in this paper, and thus we note that
self-gravitation between particles is not quite relevant for these sizes. For
meter-class bodies, however, we note that cohesiveness and gravity are of
22

Figure 4: Comparison of forces for surface particles of diﬀerent radii.
the same order, which could be an important consideration for the global
mechanics of rubble pile asteroids and a topic for future research.
3.2.3
Solar Radiation Pressure and Cohesion
For solar radiation pressure, we note from [7] that particles much less than
one micron are in general invisible to radiation pressure. Thus, we see that
surface particles are not signiﬁcantly perturbed by SRP until we get below the
milli-G level. In terms of gravitation, this occurs for micron-sized particles at
an asteroid radius of 18 kilometers and increases to centimeter-sized particles
for rapidly rotating asteroids at tens to hundreds of meters. We also note that
23

Figure 5: Radii of surface particles for weight equal to force as a function of
ambient G.
the plots predict that cohesive forces dominate over solar radiation pressure
across all of these particle sizes on the surfaces of asteroids. Solving for the
radius at which SRP and cohesion are equal we ﬁnd a surprisingly large value
of 100 meters in radius, although we note that the application of cohesive
forces for such a large object may not be realistic. Still, this simple scaling
indicates that SRP may not be a relevant force on the surface of asteroids,
even though it can play a dominant role once a particle is lofted above the
surface and the cohesive force removed.
24

3.2.4
Electrostatics and Cohesion
A direct comparison of forces between electrostatics and cohesion, assuming
the terminator charging electric ﬁeld strengths of 105 V/m, yields equality
for particle radii of order 0.3S2 meters, where smaller sized particles will
be dominated by cohesion. The uncertainties in the strength of terminator
electric ﬁelds and the charging of surface particles provides a large range of
uncertainties on this estimate. However, increases in electric ﬁeld strength
by a factor of 6, well within the range of uncertainties discussed in [26], will
create equal forces for particle sizes on the order of 1 cm, implying that
the strong ﬁelds at terminators may be able to break cohesive forces and
directly levitate larger grains. This comparison does point out challenges for
directly levitating small grains from the surface of an asteroid in the absence
of some other mechanism, however. It is also important to note that these
levitation conditions require speciﬁc shadowing environments and other local
conditions, and thus are not ubiquitous globally.
3.2.5
Cohesion and Ambient Gravity
In the milli to micro-G range, we ﬁnd that cohesive forces become impor-
tant for particles of radius 1 cm up to 1 meter in size and smaller. Again,
simple scaling to these sizes is more complicated than these comparisons, yet
this indicates that regolith containing grains of millimeter to decimeter sizes
may undergo signiﬁcantly diﬀerent geophysical processes than similar sized
particles will in the terrestrial environment. In fact, that asteroid regolith
may be better described by cohesive powders (for a familiar analogy, con-
sider the mechanical properties of bread ﬂour) than by traditional analyses
of landslides. Thus, after these comparisons we conclude that a reasonable
analog for asteroid regolith are cohesive powders, which have been studied
extensively in the 1-G environment for practical applications on Earth. In
Table 1 we list the size of grains for unity bond numbers as a function of
diﬀerent ambient accelerations, and note the bodies at which these ambient
accelerations are found.
25

Gravity (Gs)
Grain Radius (meters)
Analog body
1
6.5 × 10−4
Earth
0.1
2 × 10−3
Moon
0.01
6.5 × 10−3
Vesta (180 km)
0.001 (milli-G)
2 × 10−2
Eros (18 km)
0.0001
6.5 × 10−2
Toutatis (1.8 km)
0.00001
2 × 10−1
Itokawa (0.18 km)
0.000001 (micro-G)
6.5 × 10−1
(0.018 km)
0.0000001
2 × 100
KW4 Equator
Table 1: Radius at which ambient weight and cohesion forces are equal (as-
suming lunar regolith properties), along with nominal parent body sizes.
4
Experimental and Theoretical Results and
their Implications for Asteroids
One main impetus behind this article is to develop the basic scaling relations
between asteroid regolith and cohesion eﬀects in order to motivate terres-
trial testing of regolith properties through the use of appropriate materials.
Speciﬁcally, previous research has tacitly used regolith models chosen to em-
ulate gravels and other coarse material, based on the visual interpretation
of asteroid surface morphology [35, 43, 6]. However, the proper terrestrial
analogue in terms of local properties may be much more similar to cohesive
powders, as has been surmised by Asphaug [2]. With this change in perspec-
tive, we can access previous literature and testing for cohesive powders and
reinterpret them as indicative of asteroid regolith properties, especially for
small bodies that have regolith in the milli to micro-G regime. This being
said, the literature on the granular mechanics properties of cohesive powders
is relatively limited, especially for those studies of relevance to asteroid re-
golith. However we ﬁnd that studies of the granular mechanics behavior of
cohesive powders exhibit a variety of outcomes that mimic observed asteroid
behaviors.
Cohesiveness can be imparted to granules in two basic ways, ﬁrst is to add
ﬂuid to an existing granular material. Second is to grind granular materials
to small enough size for van der Waals forces to become eﬀective. It is only
the latter that are relevant for understanding asteroid surfaces. Indeed the
response of materials made cohesive in these two diﬀerent ways have been
26

observed to have signiﬁcantly diﬀerent mechanical and dynamical properties
[1]. In the following we cite some recent research in the ﬁeld of cohesive
mechanics and note analogs for observations in the ﬁeld of asteroid mechanics.
We ﬁrst provide brief summaries of the recent research that we draw from.
Perko [39] details a theoretical and experimental analysis that character-
izes the cohesive properties of lunar regolith. The important results from
that paper, some of which have already been used, are the concept of surface
cleanliness and its relation to cohesion, a soil mechanics analysis of lunar
regolith accounting for van der Waals cohesive forces, and fundamental data
on the cohesive properties of lunar regolith which we have adopted to serve
as a model for asteroid regolith.
Alexander [1] details comparisons between cohesive powder ﬂows and nu-
merical simulations, and measures several important results for the avalanch-
ing behavior of cohesive powders. Most relevant for our work is the measured
onset of bulk cohesive eﬀects and the measured dilation of avalanching ﬂows.
Rognon [49] provides the results of a number of detailed numerical sim-
ulations that describe the dynamics of ﬂowing cohesive grains. This study
independently varies the cohesion between grains and the inertia number
(i.e., ﬂow velocity) of granular materials. As it is a set of numerical com-
putations they are able to extract a wide range of relevant statistics that
provide insight into cohesive powder ﬂows.
Meriaux [31] describes experiments in which columns of cohesive material
were formed and then caused to collapse suddenly (by removal of a supporting
wall) or in a quasi-static fashion (by slowing moving a barrier wall). The bond
numbers of their granular materials are not given, but the cohesive nature of
their powders were veriﬁed experimentally. The main independent parameter
of their experiments were the aspect ratio of their initial columns, deﬁned
as the height of the column divided by its one-dimensional length, with the
third dimension (depth) being held ﬁxed. The observable outcome, besides
observations on the granular material morphology, was the ﬁnal height of the
column and the ﬁnal runout length of the column.
Vandewalle [64] describes a series of experiments that investigated the
compaction of material subjected to repeated taps. While not exclusively
focused on cohesive materials, there are a number of relevant observations
for the compaction and ﬂow of cohesive powders.
27

4.1
Onset of Macroscopic Cohesive Eﬀects
As compared to the ﬂow and mechanics of non-cohesive aggregates, several
key issues arise when cohesive forces become relevant for the mechanical
regimes of interest. First, we note that the strength of cohesive forces are
often parameterized by the bond numbers introduced earlier, where a bond
number of 1 means that the force of cohesion equals weight. For the sim-
ulation of global mechanical properties of cohesive powders we ﬁnd that
modelers often use bond numbers on the order of 10-30 or larger to observe
macroscopic behavior [1, 49]. At bond numbers of 100 and greater, exper-
iments have shown that particles will preferentially stick to each other and
form clumps of materials, which can then ﬂow and act as larger particles.
Figure 6 shows particle radius vs. ambient gravity for diﬀerent cohesive bond
numbers, with the surface gravity of Eros, Itokawa and 1999 KW4 Alpha
indicated.
We note that for the Itokawa environment bond numbers of 100 corre-
spond to few millimeter-sized grains. The highest resolution images of the
Itokawa surface indicate grains of centimeter size, allowing a diﬀerent inter-
pretation of that surface as not of being composed of competent grains of
this size but instead of smaller sized grains that are preferentially clumped
at this size scale. For Eros, this clumping behavior would dominate at 1 mil-
limeter grains and smaller, which were well below the resolution limit of the
highest resolution images taken by NEAR. At the low end of the 1999 KW4
environment (along the equator) we ﬁnd bond numbers of 100 at the several
centimeter level. It is not clear how such large particles would interact with
each other at these low G levels, we do note that the strongest predicted elec-
trostatic forces should begin to dominate at these size scales and that the
presence of smaller and ﬁner regolith could also inﬂuence the overall cohesive
strength between such large grains (characterized by the surface cleanliness).
At this point, we are only able to point out the scaling regime where these
materials fall, and must wait for high resolution images of these regions and
mechanical tests of asteroid surfaces (presumably from spacecraft) in order
to better understand how materials will interact with each other at these
extremely low ambient gravity levels.
28

Figure 6: Particle radii for diﬀerent Bond numbers, assuming lunar regolith
properties with surface cleanliness S = 1.
4.2
Eﬀects of Cohesion on Shear Strength
Cohesion forces arising from van der Waals eﬀects also modify the expected
shear strength of asteroid regolith, and can create a size dependance on these
eﬀects. From a classical mechanics perspective, the eﬀect of cohesion and
porosity on a granular material’s yield criterion is reviewed in [59], where a
three dimensional “condition diagram” is presented as a general approach to
describing how a cohesive granular material will fail as a function of compres-
sive stress, shear stress and porosity. Analysis of the failure surfaces directly
indicate how a body undergoing failure will often dilate, as will be discussed
later. Despite the existence of this general approach to describing the yield
29

failure of a granular material, recent analyses have focused on more direct
measures, such as the internal angle of friction, additional cohesive forces,
and other bulk characterizations of material properties.
We directly discuss two diﬀerent approaches to this topic. First we con-
sider Rognon’s numerical investigations of the constitutive law as a function
of bond number. Then we discuss Perko’s analysis of lunar regolith and his
scaling of their properties to distributions.
Rognon [49] studies the constitutive relationship for cohesive granular
ﬂows numerically.
His full analysis considers the variation of the friction
coeﬃcient as a function of the inertia number of the ﬂow, however in the
presence of strong cohesion the dependence on the inertia number becomes
subdued.
Thus we only consider his quasi-static expression for the shear
stress, expressed in Perko’s notation as:
τ
=
µσn + c
(31)
where µ = tan φ is the friction coeﬃcient, σn is the normal stress and c is
the additional cohesive stress. Rognon analyzes the relationship between the
friction coeﬃcient and bond number, ﬁnding a near linear growth in µ with
bond number, starting at less than 0.5 at zero bond number and increasing to
∼1.5 at a bond number of 80, in this way noting the ability of cohesive grains
to sustain larger slope angles. The additional cohesive stress c is modeled as:
c
=
β Fc
r
(32)
where β is numerically determined to equal 0.012 for ﬂowing material. Pre-
dictions from Coulomb theory are that β ∼0.2 [49]. In Rognon’s analysis
this diﬀerence between numerically determined and predicted cohesive stress
occurs due to the grains agglomerating into larger aggregates which are able
to ﬂow across each other more easily. Given that Rognon’s analysis is more
relevant for ﬂow of granular material on a surface, this self-organizing behav-
ior may not be as relevant beneath the surface or for understanding the soil
mechanics aspects of cohesive grains.
Perko [39] characterized the eﬀect of cohesion forces as an addition to
the existing bulk cohesion stress and friction angle of a given sample. This
formulation was chosen as it allows him to describe the variation in cohesive
properties as a function of time (i.e., incident sunlight) on the lunar surface.
As such, he characterizes the shear strength as
τ
=
c + c′ + σn (tan φ + tan φ′)
(33)
30

where c represents cohesion, φ is the friction angle, and σn is the eﬀective
normal stress.
The primes denote additional cohesion and friction angle
contributions due solely to van der Waals eﬀects as the surface cleanliness is
increased. The normal stress is computed as
σn
=
ηN cos α
(34)
where N is the normal force, α represents the angle between the resultant of
the normal force and the direction of σn and can range up to 30◦, and η is
the number of particle contacts per unit area. Perko relates η and porosity
by a simple scaling,
η
∼
Pξ
4r2
(35)
where P is a porosity factor (not porosity) varying from 0.6 for loose material
to 4 for dense soils, ξ is an angularity factor and ranges from 1 for spheres to
8 for rough particles, and r is the radius of the particles under consideration.
The additional contributions to cohesion and friction angle are:
c′
=
Fcη
(36)
tan φ′
=
A
48πσyt3 cos α
(37)
where σy is the contact yield stress, which we do not consider in detail.
Lunar regolith in the upper 15 cm has a cohesion of c ∼5 kPa and φ ∼41◦
[10], although it is not clear what fraction of the cohesion value is due to van
der Waals forces. For lunar regolith in the daytime, when the surfaces have
a higher level of cleanliness, Perko estimates the additional cohesion to be
0.5 kPa and the additional friction angle to be 24◦, computed for an average
diameter of 70 microns, P = 0.9 and ξ = 2.
Generalizing this result to arbitrary grain radii we ﬁnd η = 0.45/r2 con-
tacts per m2. Thus, for a sphere with surface area 4πr2 this predicts ∼6
contacts per particle, independent of size. The numerical factor in η, 0.45,
can be compared with Rognon’s β and we see an order of magnitude diﬀer-
ence in their estimated values. Recall that Rognon’s estimate is a numerical
computation for dynamically ﬂowing material and Perko’s is an experimen-
tal measurement for soil, which could explain why the results are diﬀerent.
However, such mismatches also indicate the uncertainties associated with this
ﬁeld. Although an order of magnitude diﬀerence appears to be signiﬁcant, as
31

our current analysis is looking at ranges of particle size and ambient accel-
eration such a diﬀerence does not change our overall qualitative conclusions.
Applying the force constants for lunar regolith, the additional cohesion
contribution due to van der Waals forces is estimated to be
c′
=
1.6 × 10−21
r [Pa]
(38)
Thus we ﬁnd that the additional cohesive shear contribution is 1 Pa at 1.6
centimeter sizes and 1 kPa at 16 microns. The additional friction angle, as
stated in [39], is independent of grain size and equal to 24◦. The normal
stress is a function of η, grain mass and ambient gravity. Combining these
eﬀects, and taking α = 0◦, the additional frictional shear is estimated to be
σn tan φ′
=
3 × 103rgA [Pa]
(39)
For a 1 meter particle in a 1-G ﬁeld, the frictional shear is 30kPa, while
for a 1 meter particle in a micro-gravity regime it reduces to 0.03 Pa and is
vanishingly small for millimeter and smaller grains. If, instead, we use the
normal stresses found in the interior of a small body, the frictional stresses
will be independent of grain mass and the additional frictional shear due to
cohesion will be on the order of
τ ′
=
2.5 × 10−4R2
(40)
where R is the asteroid radius in meters. Thus, the additional strength due
to cohesion can reach values of 1 kPa for asteroids of size 2 km and larger,
independent of grain size.
Depending on the minimum grain size in the
asteroid interior, we can ﬁnd additional cohesive shear strength on the order
of kPa.
For surface particles the main implications are that cohesive shear is en-
hanced for small grains while cohesive friction is enhanced for larger grains.
Thus, at larger sizes we expect an enhanced slope, increasing from 41◦to
52◦in the presence of cohesion. Conversely, at the ﬁner scales which are,
as of yet, unexplored for asteroid surfaces, we would expect much stronger
local topography, with an ability to create rough terrains due to enhanced
cohesiveness. We note that previous assertions of smooth regions on asteroid
surfaces, in particular the ponds on Eros and the seas on Itokawa, have been
based on observations at relatively coarse resolutions, reaching centimeters
at best, and then only at low phase angles. Sub-millimeter observations of
32

these surfaces should reveal the small scale strength of local topography on
an asteroid.
Regarding the implications of global enhancements to shear, we refer to
Holsapple [21] where he ﬁnds that additional shear strength on the order of
a few to 10 kPa can keep a small body’s shape stable against very rapid
spins.
The connection between Holsapple’s shear model and the current
model should be explored and understood in the future, but is not addressed
in detail here.
4.3
Flows of Cohesive Materials
For ﬂowing granular materials a key parameter is the “Inertia Number”,
which compares the relative importance of shear rate in a ﬂow and pressure.
Following [31] we compute this as:
I
=
U
√gAH
r
L
(41)
where U is the speed of the ﬂow, gA is the ambient acceleration, H is the
altitude/depth of the granular material, r is the size of the grains, and L is
a characteristic length that the granular material is distributed over. This
is also interpreted as the ratio of the conﬁnement pressure timescale over
the shear deformation timescale. It can be shown that a system of freely
sliding particles down a 45◦slope will have a value of I ∼1. For a near-zero
value this corresponds to an incremental ﬂow of the granular material. It is
not apparent what inertia number is relevant for regolith ﬂows on asteroids,
although diﬀerent models for the migration of regolith may have values of this
number at extreme limits. For example, seismic shaking induced by impacts
may yield larger values of I as the available energy is present in greater
intensity and released rapidly. Conversely, regolith motion by thermal creep
may exist in a quasi-static ﬂow regime with I ∼0.
Additional research
is needed to appropriately identify and model the relevant ﬂow regime for
regolith.
The eﬀect of the inertia number on cohesive materials has been studied
numerically in [49] and experimentally in [31]. In the experimental results
Meriaux created columns of cohesive material and then caused them to col-
lapse suddenly (by removal of a supporting wall) or in a quasi-static fashion
(by slowing moving a barrier wall). The observable outcome, besides ob-
servations on the granular material morphology, were the ﬁnal height of the
33

column and the ﬁnal runout length of the column. Despite the dynamical
diﬀerences between the collapse and quasi-static falls of the columns, they
observed relatively consistent power law behavior between the ﬁnal height
and runout lengths as a function of the aspect ratio of the columns. The
implication being that, for a cohesive granular material, the inertia number
is not a crucial parameter for describing the resulting ﬂow morphology, how-
ever [31] notes that this is not the case for non-cohesive ﬂows (such as dry
sand).
These same conclusions are supported by the numerical analysis presented
in [49]. In that paper the ﬂow dynamics and statistics were studied for a nu-
merically evolved granular system as a function of cohesive bond number and
inertia number. They found that as bond number increased, the dynamics
of the granular ﬂow material were less sensitive to the inertia number of the
ﬂow. The implication of these results is that, although unknown, the inertia
number for the ﬂow of regolith on an asteroid surface may not be a crucial
parameter if regolith has the larger bond numbers our analysis suggests.
4.4
Fractures in Cohesive Materials
One of the interesting outcomes of the experiments performed by Meriaux
were the observations of stress cracks and fractures for both catastrophic and
quasi-static collapse of columns of cohesive powder. The ability of cohesive
materials to mimic fractures in coherent materials has been pointed out by
[2] as another interpretation of the structure seen across the surface of Eros
[6]. It is instructive to scale the mechanics of stress fractures in cohesive
granular materials to the asteroid environment. In [31] the basic theory of
stress fractures in granular materials is reviewed in a form appropriate for
our use, so we rely on that paper in the following discussion.
The main parameter in determining conditions for stress fractures in gran-
ular materials is the characteristic depth dc:
dc
=
2c cos φ
ρggA(1 −sin φ)
(42)
where φ is the friction angle of the granular material, ρg is the grain density,
gA is the ambient acceleration, and c is the cohesion of the material. The
length dc is the depth at which a granular material can undergo a stress
fracture due to tension, with the plane of failure being approximately equal
to the angle φ in the interior of the material. Thus, a column of material with
34

height on the order of dc should remain competent while a column higher than
dc may begin to form cracks at this depth, which can subsequently propagate,
causing collapse of the column or surface. In general, the maximum height
of a vertical slope is estimated to be twice this value [31].
For our purposes, we will scale the above to our previously developed
force laws. We model the cohesion with the correction incorporated by [39]
c
=
Fcη
(43)
η
∼
0.45
r2
(44)
FC
∼
0.036r
(45)
and note that the inclusion of the η term accounts for an overall weakening
of cohesive forces as a function of increasing grain size. Using φ = 45◦to
provide a deﬁnite estimate we ﬁnd the cohesion scale length to be
dc
∼
2 × 10−6
1
rGA
(46)
where GA is the ambient gravitational acceleration measured in Earth G’s.
Thus, the value of dc depends on the ambient gravity and on the constituent
particle size of the regolith. In Fig. 7 we show the cohesion scale as a function
of ambient gravity and particle size. Also indicated on the plot are the ambi-
ent accelerations for Itokawa, Eros and 1999 KW4 Alpha. We note that the
characteristic cohesion depth as a function of particle distributions may dif-
fer from these simple extrapolations, as larger grains can have their cohesive
forces weakened by smaller grains adhering to their surfaces. These correc-
tions are not implemented in our current analysis but can be represented by
the cleanliness ratio, as mentioned previously.
For Eros we see that millimeter grains should be able to sustain structures
on the order of tens of meters, and that 100 micron particles could sustain
structures up to 100 meters in size. At Itokawa, these scales increase to tens
of meters for centimeter sized grains up to global structures for millimeter
and smaller grains. For the equator of KW4 we note that even meter-sized
bodies can form columns tens of grains across, and could provide a diﬀerent
interpretation of the equatorial regions of that body.
We note that even
though the size scale of these structures may be large, they will still be
susceptible to episodic perturbations, such as seismic shaking, which can
greatly increase the local eﬀective ambient acceleration and cause collapse
35

Figure 7: Cohesion scale as a function of ambient gravity and particle size
for lunar regolith of cleanliness S = 1.
or reconsolidation.
Additionally, the upper limits for these particle sizes
are idealistic as they do not incorporate the weakening eﬀect that smaller
particles will have on cohesion between large bodies, which can decrease the
grain radii by a factor of 10.
We can use these observations to motivate a reevaluation of Eros. From
the above scaling, we see that structures on the order of the grooves seen on
Eros can be easily sustained and created by regolith and may be an expres-
sion of granular mechanics instead of internal structure. Experiments show
that the creation of grooves and crevices in collapsing and quasi-static ﬂows
of cohesive powders are ubiquitous and expected for suﬃciently high bond
36

numbers [31]. Thus, the mechanics and dynamics of cohesive regolith ﬂows
may provide an alternate explanation for the ubiquitous groove structures
seen on small bodies such as Eros [43] and Phobos [61]. Instead of modeling
regolith as cohesionless granular material that will ﬂow, sand-like, into open
ﬁssures beneath the surface, we can view regolith as similar to a cohesive
powder which, when subject to disturbances, can form local fractures and
other features with scales potentially on the order of 100’s of meters (depend-
ing on the regolith grain size) and which express intrinsic properties of the
regolith itself and not necessarily deeper properties of the asteroid structure.
4.5
The Structure of Flowing Materials
The numerical studies of Rognon [49] characterize the mechanics and dynam-
ics of cohesive grains when they undergo dynamic ﬂows. In that study they
focus on characterizing the rheological behavior of cohesive ﬂows and how
they change with bond number and inertia number. Based on their results
they make several observations on the macroscopic properties of granular
ﬂows down inclined planes. Of speciﬁc interest for us is their conclusion that
ﬂowing cohesive granular materials will organize themselves into larger con-
glomerates that are then able to ﬂow relative to each other. The principle is
simple, and can be related to the analysis of Castellanos [8]. As a conglomer-
ate grows larger its total mass increases, however the fundamental cohesive
forces between it and neighboring particles are still limited by the grain size
of the individual contacts. Thus, the eﬀective bond number of a conglom-
erate decreases as it grows in size, meaning that it’s ﬂow dynamics become
less dominated by cohesion. For individual grains, this is similar to their
surfaces being coated by adhering gas or water vapor molecules, eﬀectively
increasing the distance between neighboring grains and decreasing their bond
number. For conglomerates the behavior should be diﬀerent, however, as in-
dividual grains can be easily transported between conglomerates based on
speciﬁc geometric conditions that they are subject to. Rognon argues that
this should lead to the creation of two porosity scales, one that exists within
the conglomerates and one that exists between conglomerates. While they
provide some statistical results for the distribution of voids within ﬂowing
granular materials, the speciﬁc mechanics of such bi-porosity distributions
has not been studied in detail in their work.
The macroscopic implications of their work points to a speciﬁc ﬂow mor-
phology within cohesive granular materials. Speciﬁcally, that cohesive granu-
37

lar materials will ﬂow as larger conglomerates with a thickness characteristic
of their cohesiveness on top of an under-layer of loose material, somewhat
analogous to an avalanche. Thus, one would expect cohesive regolith ﬂows
on asteroids to appear as portions of material moving as a solid and sliding
to a lower region. There are speciﬁc observations of such regolith morphol-
ogy on Eros. In [27] a detailed analysis of bright albedo markings on the
interiors of craters on Eros is given. They conclude that these markings are
due to regolith transport, with patches of regolith moving downslope due to
one of several potential eﬀects, including seismic shaking, thermal creep and
electrostatic eﬀects. Although the downslope motion of regolith is observed
in many craters at a variety of surface slopes, they are enhanced at larger
slopes, greater than 25◦in general [27]. The authors estimate the thickness
of these ﬂows to be less than a meter, although precise constraints are not
available. If we interpret this in terms of the characteristic depth of fractures
in cohesive materials we see that this would correspond to regolith grains on
the order of centimeters or less. It is clear that the observed morphology of
ﬂows on Eros are consistent with the ﬂow of cohesive grains, as these tend to
fail and ﬂow in surface layers sliding over a substrate that may be composed
of the same material.
It is interesting to note that these same albedo markings are not seen
on the asteroid Itokawa. However, we note that the regions of ﬁner grained
regolith on that body are consistently correlated with low slope regions, po-
tentially implying that the epoch of ﬂow of ﬁner materials on Itokawa has
already passed for its current conﬁguration [35], or imply that Itokawa has
been subject to global shaking in the past [3].
4.6
Dilation and compaction of material
Dilation is deﬁned as the percent growth of the volume of a given granular
pile. Thus a dilation of 10% implies an increase of volume of 10%. Deﬁne
porosity of a granular pile as
p
=
V −Vg
V
(47)
where Vg is the grain volume and V is the total volume. A fractional dilation
of volume, characterized as f = ∆V/V , leads to a growth in porosity of
∆p
=
f(1 + p)
1 + f
(48)
38

and a fractional growth in porosity of f(1 + p)/p(1 + f). Thus, for our 10%
dilation example (f = 0.1) and a starting porosity of 30% (p = 0.3), the
granular porosity would increase to 0.42, representing a 44% increase. Thus,
for porous materials dilation leads directly to growth in porosity. We note
that in many experiments it is not possible or easy to accurately measure
the porosity of a granular aggregate, due to diﬃculties in measuring the to-
tal grain volume. However, it is simple to measure dilation, as these are just
measured changes in bulk volume. Alternate deﬁnitions of porosity are the
“solid fraction” η = 1/(1 + p), which measures how much of an aggregates
volume consists of grain volume. In general, granular materials have a limit
on their packing eﬃciency, which for equal sized spheres approaches a poros-
ity of 26% for regular packing and 37% for irregularly packed bodies. For
aggregates composed of a distribution of sizes, minimum porosities decrease
in general, as it is possible to ﬁll interstitial gaps with smaller grains.
A fundamental property of cohesive materials is that they undergo dila-
tion when they ﬂow. The experimental results of Alexander [1] show dilation
of over 20% for avalanches of their highest cohesion material.
Similarly,
Meriaux [31] measured dilation of up to 24% for the quasi-static collapse of
their tallest column. In both of these measurements, however, we note that
entrapped air may have contributed to overall dilation [31], indicating the
importance of carrying out future experiments in a vacuum chamber.
More speciﬁc results are available from numerical simulations, as it is
possible to precisely compute the grain volume, initial volume and expanded
volume. Alexander is able to reproduce his observed measurements of dilation
with cohesive particles with bond numbers of 45 to 90. In their numerical
experiments at bond numbers of 120 their avalanches were of the same scale
as their test chamber, and hence they limited the simulated bond numbers
to less than this.
The numerical computations by Rognon et al. [49] provide a much more
exhaustive set of ﬂow simulations for cohesive powders as a function of ﬂow
speed (inertia number, deﬁned earlier) and bond number (up to 80). They
were able to precisely track all the particles in their simulations and hence
provide detailed statistics. For ﬂowing material at a range of speeds they
ﬁnd similar dilation, indicating that the amount of dilation is relatively inde-
pendent of the inertia number. In changing bond numbers from 0 to 80 they
ﬁnd a dilation in their ﬂow of 25%. Also signiﬁcant, they ﬁnd heterogene-
ity in the distribution of pore sizes that lead to this dilation. The standard
deviation in local dilatancy, deﬁned over a characteristic volume within the
39

ﬂow, ranges from 6% for 0 bond numbers up to 14% for bond numbers of 80,
indicating that not only are there more pores distributed within the mate-
rial, but that the local variation in concentration varies much more strongly
in a cohesive material. Commensurate with this, the characteristic size of
pores within a cohesive distribution increases to over three times the nomi-
nal particle size with the majority of the void space being accounted for by
large pores (relative to the grain size). Hand-in-hand with the distribution
of pores is grain clumping, which forms aggregates of increasing size with
increased cohesion. These eﬀects are supported by the increased ability of
cohesive grains to maintain themselves in a group.
The results of dilation in ﬂows can also be reversed by addition of seismic
energy or “tapping.” This will cause a dilated distribution to shrink, closing
up the pores opened during a previous period of ﬂow. In terms of “packing
fraction” η, the derived law for compaction can be stated as:
η(n)
=
η∞−
η∞−ηo
1 + B ln

1 + n
τ

(49)
where B and τ are empirically derived quantities, n is the number of taps,
ηo is the initial packing fraction and η∞is the limiting packing fraction.
Such relationships have been veriﬁed for cohesive powders as well as for non-
cohesive materials [64]. Indications are that cohesive powders can actually
experience larger relative compactions, due perhaps to the inter-particle co-
hesive forces and to the initially larger dilation amounts that they can obtain.
This seemingly reversible process can thus also cause compaction of regolith
and, depending on the environment in which the regolith is placed, could
yield a larger bulk density.
5
Discussion
This paper has a few speciﬁc purposes. First is to establish and compare the
diﬀerent forces that are relevant for regolith on the surfaces of small asteroids.
From this comparison we identify cohesion as a potentially important phys-
ical force for these systems. Second is to reinterpret the existing literature
on cohesive granular mechanics in terms of granular mechanics phenomenon
on asteroid surfaces. This is not easily done, given the large scale diﬀerences
between terrestrial labs and the asteroid environment, and that these ex-
periments have not been designed to recreate certain crucial elements of the
40

asteroid environment such as vacuum and lack of trace gases and water vapor.
Still, the comparison seems to show some merit and should hopefully moti-
vate new studies of cohesive powders that may be related more directly to
the asteroid environment. Finally, in the following we take a slightly larger
view and reconsider a few basic ideas and tenets regarding asteroids and
their interpretation, and explore the implications of viewing these systems
from a cohesive granular mechanics point of view. Speciﬁcally we discuss
the possible implications for interpreting asteroid surface imagery, porosity
distribution within asteroids, and ﬁnally reconsider the terminal evolution of
small asteroids subject to the YORP eﬀect.
5.1
Implications for interpretations of asteroid surface
imagery
Previous views of asteroid surfaces have been limited in their spatial resolu-
tions to centimeters at best, and then only over extremely limited regions at
a ﬁxed, relatively low phase angle [65, 67]. Similarly, the surfaces of Phobos
and Deimos, the other small asteroid-like bodies that have detailed shape im-
agery, have even lower spatial resolutions [62]. Despite this limitation, there
is ample evidence for ﬁner regolith grains at the sub-centimeter and smaller
level on all of these bodies. In previous literature, the surfaces of these bodies
has usually been interpreted using the terminology and physics of terrestrial
geology. For example, on Eros the ubiquitous lineaments and other surface
structures have been interpreted as expressing sub-surface strength features
[6, 43] while on Itokawa the surface has been analyzed in terms of land-
slide phenomenon as found on Earth [35]. If, instead, we apply the results
described in this paper, essentially following the suggestions in [2], and inter-
pret these surfaces in light of cohesive forces and their eﬀects, we may arrive
at an alternate array of conclusions.
For understanding the visible structures on Itokawa, we realize that the
seemingly dominant grain size in the Muses-sea region (on the order of cen-
timeters in size) may actually be agglomerates of smaller materials which
have formed into this characteristic size during their ﬂow down to the poten-
tial lows of the system. This scenario is consistent with the ﬂow dynamics
of cohesive powders, as detailed in [49], in which they preferentially clump
into larger aggregates which can then travel more freely, mimicking larger
grains as they undergo transport. The ability of these aggregate structures
41

to maintain their shape over long time periods in the space environment is
not known nor has it been studied. Laboratory tests with cohesive powders
could shed light on this potential phenomenon, by studying ﬂows of cohesive
powders in vacuum conditions, and subsequently studying the mechanics of
these systems subjected to repeated tapping that would mimic seismic shak-
ing. Our statements do not preclude the presence of larger, coherent particles
that are not held together with cohesive forces, but does indicate that based
on our scaling arguments one cannot exclude the possibility that some of
these structures may also be constructed out of conglomerates.
Next we consider Eros. Based on our scaling laws we note that the large
scale structures on Eros have the appropriate size to also be interpreted as
expressions of regolith strength and fracture due to cohesion, instead of loose
material expressing the structure of bedrock beneath its surface. Again, the
literature on geophysics of cohesive powders is relatively non-existent, how-
ever if we consider the basic mechanics of cohesive powders we can directly
propose other possible mechanisms for the formation of surface structures on
regolith covered asteroids such as Eros. Speciﬁcally, we propose that the for-
mation of surface lineaments could be due to stresses induced by dilation of
material either beneath the surface or of the regolith itself as an outcome of
being subjected to transmitted seismic waves. Given the universal nature of
dilation with ﬂow, it would be of special interest to better understand the ef-
fect of seismic waves on cohesive grains. By deﬁnition, the S-waves that occur
following a seismic event represent macroscopic motion of individual grains
and hence could lead to a dilation of the material with subsequent changes in
the surface stress ﬁeld, which could lead to fracture and other surface expres-
sions. Conversely, P-waves generally represent the transmission of pressure
without motion, and hence could represent “tapping” phenomenon which is
known to be able to reduce porosity in a cohesive material [64].
Also aﬀected by these apparent cohesive forces are the proposed mecha-
nisms for dust levitation and migration on the surfaces of asteroids [26, 10].
By directly comparing cohesive forces to the enhanced electrostatic forces
that may arise on occasion at an asteroid’s terminator we see that the cohe-
sive forces generally dominate until one arrives at the few millimeter size-scale
or larger. Previous suppositions have assumed that dust particles on the or-
der of tens to hundreds of microns were the primary components of levitated
particles. If this remains true, we require some other mechanism for break-
ing the cohesive bonds between such small grains, such as micro-meteoroid
impacts, with the predicted amount of levitated dust being signiﬁcantly re-
42

duced by the enhanced ability of the materials to adhere to each other and
the highly localized conditions that can generate such strong electric ﬁelds.
This leads to a view of asteroid surfaces where they remain dominated by
smaller-scale dust particles that adhere to each other to form larger conglom-
erates. This model would be consistent with the measurements reported by
Masiero [29] which found evidence of a uniform structure for asteroid surfaces
at the small size scale, and did not detect any evidence for the depletion of
smaller particles.
These hypotheses can be probed at three diﬀerent levels. First, and most
basic, they can be tested by sending a space science mission to the surface of
a small body in order to carry out high spatial resolution imaging, preferably
at the sub-millimeter size scale, in order to observe the morphology of the
smallest components on the surface. Associated with such an exploration
should also be tests of the mechanical strength of the surface components,
which could either be carried out with a portable lab or through observations
of the surface probe interactions with the asteroid surface.
The other two approaches can be carried out on Earth.
First would
be laboratory experiments using cohesive powders with bond numbers and
particle size distributions chosen to mimic models of asteroid regolith dis-
tributions. In contrast with current studies, these should be specialized to
better mimic the asteroid surface, such as the use of vacuum chambers, high
temperatures to clear water vapor, and under appropriate illumination and
electrostatic charging environments. Speciﬁc items for study would be the
global reshaping of cohesive powders due to intermittent shaking, the seismic
transmission of waves through cohesive powders and avalanche morphology
and mechanics in cohesive powders. Some researchers have initiated tests of
granular material in the appropriate environments [4], and these experiments
would serve as an excellent starting point for additional research.
Last is the numerical simulation of granular mechanics using appropriate
models for size distribution and environment. These are, perhaps, the most
easily accessed. An appropriate starting point for such investigations is found
in [50] which discusses the application of granular mechanics techniques to
the asteroid environment. The questions of interest are the same as above,
however in a computational environment it is often possible to gain deeper
insight into the statistics of these processes, at the cost of realism.
43

5.2
Implications for interpretations of asteroid Micro
and Macro Porosity
A second and signiﬁcant implication of our study relates to the distribution of
porosity within asteroids. Since the ﬁrst precise asteroid mass determination
of Mathilde showed that body to have signiﬁcant porosity, potentially greater
than 50% [68], it has been ﬁrmly established that asteroids can exhibit high
degrees of porosity. What is not clear is how that porosity is distributed
within an asteroid, as micro-porosity or as a few large voids in the interiors
of an asteroid. There have been a number of models proposed to describe
how this porosity may arise and persist, however it is diﬃcult to test any of
these models and their implications [5].
One motivating result from our current analysis is a clear link between the
expected physics of a granular media in the asteroid environment and readily
observed dilation and high levels of porosity that can be easily created in
cohesive granular materials that undergo ﬂow – either catastrophic or quasi-
static [31]. The reversibility of this process is also interesting, as it can lead
to bodies of similar composition having a range of porosities as a function of
the processes which occur on them.
An additional element that is present on asteroids is their peculiar geome-
tries. It is known that at modest spin rates, loose materials on an asteroid
will preferentially ﬂow to the polar regions, while at high spin rates they will
migrate to the equator [16]. Such a contrast is explicitly seen on Itokawa
and 1999 KW4 Alpha. The phenomenon is due to the change of the surface
geopotential lows. We can note that the geometry which the regolith encoun-
ters at the polar regions is markedly diﬀerent to that found at the equator,
however.
Material that ﬂows to a polar region, or for a more speciﬁc example to
the Muses Sea region of Itokawa, are entering a conﬁned region [35]. Even if
the ﬂows undergo dilation, they will be compressing previous ﬂows into the
same geometric region and hence may become compacted. For Itokawa this
scenario is consistent with the relatively compacted surface reported in [67]
and in the non-uniform density inferred in [56]. The secondary of the 1999
KW4 system also has a relatively higher density as compared to the primary,
which could similarly result from its slow rotation (meaning that the polar
regions are the geopotential low) and its continuous shaking [54].
The situation is much diﬀerent for material that ﬂows to the equatorial
region of a fast rotator. In this situation, as material ﬂows to the equator, it
44

can achieve a lower position in the geopotential well by increasing its distance
from the body. Due to this, material is free to expand into an unconﬁned
region, which may enable ﬂow-induced dilation to remain present in the ma-
terials as they are not subject to compression. Expansion is only limited
by the synchronous orbit locations above the surface, as passage through
that point will place the grain into orbit. We note that the synchronous
orbit locations on 1999 KW4 Alpha are on the order of meters above the
equator and could be at the surface at at least two points within the model
uncertainty. This situation is also consistent with the low density of Alpha
relative to Beta, and the consequent high porosity varying between 40% and
66%. This corresponds either to a uniformly under-dense body or a body
with usual porosity and a region of very high porosity. This is consistent
with the equatorial bulge on this body which also has extremely low ambient
gravity (less than a tenth of a micro-gravity), implying that cohesive eﬀects
are important for bodies on the order of tens of centimeters in size. Any
disturbances that may travel through this regime will displace particles to-
wards a lower gravitational environment that has no hard constraint, unlike
the situation in the seas of Itokawa. Thus, we can tender a hypothesis that
the equatorial region of 1999 KW4 Alpha is a low density region which has
undergone substantial dilation. Finally, we hypothesize that a low porosity
for an asteroid may correspond to a past period of high rotation, where such
a reversal in the geopotential would have occurred.
5.3
A new model for the terminal evolution of small
asteroids
Finally, we consider the implication of our ﬁndings for the evolution of small
asteroids as they are spun-up by the YORP eﬀect. While visual imagery of
asteroid surfaces shows an abundance of boulders at size scales of meters to
tens of meters at Itokawa, there is no direct evidence for monolithic com-
ponents on that body at size scales of 100 meters, which is still below the
cut-oﬀfor fast spinning asteroid sizes. Similarly, while Eros has a number of
clearly deﬁned blocks on its surface approaching 100 meters in size, the vast
amount of material contained (at the surface of that body at least) lies in
the much ﬁner regolith that blankets the body. We note that Eros is also an
exceptional body, as its YORP time scale is very long, due to its large size,
and hence it is likely that the YORP eﬀect has not had a dramatic inﬂuence
45

on the evolution of this body.
We focus ourselves on asteroids that are subject to the YORP eﬀect, in
general 5 km radius bodies and smaller in the NEO population and perhaps
up to a few tens of km in the main belt. Based on the images from Itokawa
and the observed spin-ﬁssion limits, we presume that larger asteroids consist
of distributions of boulders of all shapes and sizes. When subject to YORP
they spin faster and, following from basic celestial mechanics principles [55,
57], can shed their largest components into orbit when their spins become
rapid enough (which can be signiﬁcantly less than the traditional spin-ﬁssion
rotation period limit of ∼2.3 hours if the body has a strong binarity to its
shape). Loss of these components can change the YORP torques and either
reinforce the loss process or provide a hiatus when the body undergoes a spin
down and spin up YORP cycle. There are limits on the size of a component
which can be directly shed, as components with a mass fraction larger than
∼0.17 will have a negative total energy and must undergo further splitting
to be ejected on a short time scale. These can form binaries or reimpact to
become contact binaries. Boulders or aggregates with a mass fraction smaller
than 0.17 will be subject to relatively rapid ejection from the system [58].
Repetition of this process can gradually remove the largest competent
boulders or agglomerates from an asteroid, while preferentially retaining the
smaller, and hence more cohesive, grains. From our previous discussions,
we note that centimeter-sized grains in proximity to each other can provide
suﬃcient cohesive force to withstand a few-minute period rotation rate of a
100 meter asteroid. For a 10 meter body similar grain sizes could withstand
a rotation period of less than a minute. Combining these two eﬀects – the
preferential loss of larger components on a body spun to high rotation rates
and the preferential cohesion between smaller regolith grain sizes – we can en-
vision that small NEOs undergo a fractionation process that liberates larger
boulders and retains ﬁner regolith on the remaining largest component. In
particular, we refer again to Fig. 3 and note that positive accelerations at the
surface of a 100 meter asteroid are only 0.1 milli-Gs for a half-hour rotation
period and 1 milli-G for a six minute rotation period, and a 10 meter asteroid
spinning with a period of less than a minute has a 1 milli-G positive acceler-
ation. The cohesion force balances this positive acceleration for grain radii
of 1 centimeter or less. This again reinforces the fact that rapidly spinning
asteroids and rubble-pile asteroids are not mutually exclusive, as has been
asserted in a number of previous papers by Holsapple [19, 20, 21].
As this process continues, the ever-smaller components are more strongly
46

aﬀected by YORP and should undergo cycles with increasing frequency, and
hence be susceptible to the loss of additional components at an increas-
ing pace. Even if the interior of an asteroid such as Itokawa contain some
larger monolithic components, the fractionation of these bodies should even-
tually expose these interior objects, as failure should preferentially occur
along larger grains due to their decreased cohesion.
After this, they will
become the next component of the asteroid to be shed when the spin rate
increases to the appropriate rate. The details of this process are likely more
complex, as the relative size of the two components strongly controls the
subsequent evolution of these systems [58] and can even lead to systems that
remain “stuck” in a contact binary cycle for long periods of time [55].
Such rapidly spinning aggregates would also be susceptible to fracture,
however, as a micro-meteorite impact could break cohesive bonds between
conglomerates within these bodies. Given our knowledge of the physics of
cohesion, such a fracture would not cause the aggregate to uniformly dis-
rupt, but would cause it to fail along naturally occurring stress fractures
within the aggregate, as occurs when cohesive powders fail [31]. The me-
chanical outcome of such a fracture would keep the components rotating at
their same rate initially and would decrease the accelerations the grains are
subject to due to the decreased body size. However the large changes in
mass distribution would cause the components to immediately enter a tum-
bling rotation state. It is signiﬁcant to note that there is evidence for some
small, rapidly rotating bodies to be in tumbling rotation states [41] – such
fracturing consistent with cohesive materials could provide an explanation
for this.
One prediction of this model is that small asteroids may be formed both
from monolithic boulders as well as from cohesive gravels of small enough
size. The properties of these diﬀerent morphology types, such as thermal
inertia or polarization, should be investigated and the relative abundance of
monoliths or cohesive gravels among the small body population would mimic
the size distribution of fractured asteroids. Finally, this model of spinning
cohesive gravels is consistent with the Holsapple results, but may provide a
clearer physical mechanism for how the small amounts of strength required
by the Holsapple models manifest themselves.
47

6
Conclusions
We study the relative eﬀect of gravitational and non-gravitational forces in
the asteroid environment and ﬁnd that cohesive forces may play an important
role for these bodies. We review some of the experimental and computational
research literature on the mechanics of cohesive powders and ﬁnd interpreta-
tions that can shed light on possible physical phenomenon at asteroids. We
consider implications of this research and point out future experiments and
hypotheses concerning the importance of cohesive forces that can be tested.
Finally, we propose reinterpretations of asteroid observations and populations
in light of these cohesive forces. This process leads to signiﬁcantly diﬀerent
conclusions for the geophysical properties of asteroid surfaces, interiors and
of small rapidly rotating asteroids.
References
[1] A.W. Alexander et al. 2006. “Avalanching ﬂow of cohesive powders,”
Powder Technology 164: 13-21.
[2] E.I. Asphaug. 2009. “Shattered dirt: Surface fracture of granular as-
teroids,” 40th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference. Abstract #
1438.
[3] E. Asphaug. 2008. “Critical crater diameter and asteroid impact seis-
mology,” Meteoritics & Planetary Science 43(6): 10751084.
[4] P.G. Hofmeister, J. Blum, D. Heisselmann. 2009. “The Flow Of Gran-
ular Matter Under Reduced-Gravity Conditions,” arXiv:0905.0330v2
[astro-ph.EP] 12 May 2009.
[5] D.T. Britt, D. Yeomans, K. Housen and G. Consolmagno. 2002. “Aster-
oid Density, Porosity and Structure,” in Asteroids III, (W.F. Bottke,
Jr., A. Cellino, P. Paolicchi and R.P. Binzel Eds.), University of Ari-
zona Press, Tucson.
[6] D.L. Buczkowski, O.S. Barnouin-Jha, and L.M. Prockter. 2008. “433
Eros lineaments: Global mapping and analysis,” Icarus 193: 39-52.
[7] J.A. Burns, P.L. Lamy, and S. Soter. 1979. “Radiation forces on small
particles in the solar system,” Icarus 40(1): 1 - 48.
48

[8] A. Castellanos. 2005. “The relationship between attractive interpar-
ticle forces and bulk behaviour in dry and uncharged ﬁne powders,”
Advances in Physics 54(4): 263-376.
[9] D.R. Criswell and B.R. De. 1977. “Intense Localized Photoelectric
Charging in the Lunar Sunset Terminator Region, 2. Supercharging
at the Progression of Sunset,” Journal of Geophysical Research 82(7):
1005-1007.
[10] J.E. Colwell, A.A.S. Gulbis, M. Hor´anyi, and S. Robertson. 2005. “Dust
transport in photoelectron layers and the formation of dust ponds on
Eros,” Icarus 175(1): 159-169.
[11] J. E. Colwell, S. Batiste, M. Hor´anyi, S. Robertson, and S. Sture. 2007.
“Lunar Surface: Dust Dynamics and Regolith Dynamics,” Reviews of
Geophysics 45, RG2006.
[12] H. Dankowicz. “Some special orbits in the two-body problem with ra-
diation pressure,” Celestial Mechanics and Dynamical Astronomy 58:
353-370, 1994.
[13] H. Demura, S. Kobayashi, E./ Nemoto, N. Matsumoto, M. Furuya,
A. Yukishita, N. Muranaka, H. Morita, K. Shirakawa, M. Maruya, H.
Ohyama, M. Uo, T. Kubota, T. Hashimoto, J. Kawaguchi, A. Fujiwara,
J. Saito, S. Sasaki, H. Miyamoto, and N. Hirata. “Pole and Global
Shape of 25143 Itokawa,” Science 312: 1347-1349.
[14] B.V. Derjaguin, V.M. Muller and Y.P. Toporov. 1975. “Eﬀect of Con-
tact Deformations on the Adhesion of Particles,” Journal of Colloid
and Interface Science 53(2): 314-326.
[15] A. Fujiwara, J. Kawaguchi, D. K. Yeomans, M. Abe, T. Mukai, T.
Okada, J. Saito, H. Yano, M. Yoshikawa, D. J. Scheeres, O. Barnouin-
Jha, A. F. Cheng, H. Demura, R. W. Gaskell, N. Hirata, H. Ikeda, T.
Kominato, H. Miyamoto, A. M. Nakamura, R. Nakamura, S. Sasaki,
and K. Uesugi. 2006. “The Rubble-Pile Asteroid Itokawa as Observed
by Hayabusa,” Science 312: 1330-1334.
[16] V. Guibout and D.J. Scheeres. 2003. “Stability of Surface Motion on a
Rotating Ellipsoid,” Celestial Mechanics & Dynamical Astronomy 87:
263-290.
49

[17] L.-O. Heim, J. Blum, M. Preuss, and H.-J. Butt. 1999. “Adhesion and
Friction Forces between Spherical Micrometer-Sized Particles,” Physi-
cal Review Letters 83(16): 3328-3331.
[18] H. J. Herrmann and S. Luding. 1998. “Modeling granular media on the
computer,” Continuum Mech. Thermodyn. 10: 189-231.
[19] K.A. Holsapple. 2001. “Equilibrium Conﬁgurations of Solid Cohesion-
less Bodies,” Icarus 154: 432-448.
[20] K.A. Holsapple. 2004. “Equilibrium ﬁgures of spinning bodies with self-
gravity,” Icarus 172: 272-303.
[21] K.A. Holsapple. 2007. “Spin limits of Solar System bodies: From the
small fast-rotators to 2003 EL61,” Icarus 187: 500 - 509.
[22] K.A. Holsapple. 2009. “On YORP-induced spin deformations of aster-
oids,” Icarus doi:10.1016/j.icarus.2009.08.014
[23] A.L.H. Hughes, J.E. Colwell, and A. Ware DeWolfe. 2008. “Electro-
static dust transport on Eros: 3-D simulations of pond formation,”
Icarus 195(2): 630-648.
[24] K. L. Johnson, K. Kendall and A. D. Roberts. 1971. “Surface Energy
and the Contact of Elastic Solids,” Proceedings of the Royal Society
London A 324: 301-313.
[25] A.S. Konopliv, J.K. Miller, W.M. Owen, D.K. Yeomans, J.D. Giorgini,
R. Garmier and J.-P. Barriot. 2002. “A Global Solution for the Gravity
Field, Rotation, Landmarks, and Ephemeris of Eros,” Icarus 160: 289-
299.
[26] P. Lee. 1996. “Dust Levitation on Asteroids,” Icarus 124(1): 181-194.
[27] A. Mantz, R. Sullivan, and J. Veverka. 2004. “Regolith transport in
craters on Eros,” Icarus 167: 197-203.
[28] J.R. Marshall, T.B. Sauke, and J.N. Cuzzi. 2005. “Microgravity studies
of aggregation in particulate clouds,” Geophysical Research Letters 32,
L11202.
50

[29] J. Masiero, C. Hartzell, and D.J. Scheeres. 2009. “The eﬀect of the dust
size distribution on asteroid polarization,” The Astronomical Journal
138: 1557-1562.
[30] D. Maugis. 1992. “Adhesion of Spheres: The JKR-DMT Transition Us-
ing a Dugdale Model,” Journal of Colloid and Interface Science 150(1):
243-269.
[31] C. M´eriaux and T. Triantaﬁllou. 2008. “Scaling the ﬁnal deposits of dry
cohesive granular columns after collapse and quasi-static fall,” Physics
of Fluids 20: 033301.
[32] T. Michikami, A.M. Nakamura, N. Hirata, R.W. Gaskell, R. Nakamura,
T. Honda, C. Honda, K. Hiraoka, J. Saito, H. Demura, M. Ishiguro,
and H. Miyamoto. 2008. “Size-frequency statistics of boulders on global
surface of asteroid 25143 Itokawa,” Earth, Planets and Space 60: 13-20.
[33] F. Mignard and M. H´enon. “About an unsuspected integrable prob-
lem,” Celestial Mechanics and Dynamical Astronomy 33:
239-250,
1984.
[34] J.K Miller, A.S. Konopliv, P.G. Antreasian, J.J. Bordi, S. Chesley, C.E.
Helfrich, W.M. Owen, T.C. Wang, B.G. Williams, D.K. Yeomans, and
D.J. Scheeres. 2002. “Determination of shape, gravity and rotational
state of Asteroid 433 Eros,” Icarus 155: 3-17.
[35] H. Miyamoto, H. Yano, D.J. Scheeres, S. Abe, O. Barnouin-Jha,
A.F. Cheng, H. Demura, R.W. Gaskell, N. Hirata, M. Ishiguro, T.
Michikami, A.M. Nakamura, R. Nakamura, J. Saito, and S. Sasaki.
2007. “Regolith migration and sorting on asteroid Itokawa,” Science
316: 1011-1014.
[36] K. Nishimura, S. Keller, J. McElwaine, Y. Nohguchi. 1998. “Ping-pong
ball avalanche at a ski jump,” Granular Matter 1: 51-56.
[37] S.J. Ostro, R.S. Hudson, L.A.M. Benner, J.D. Giorgini, C. Magri,
J.-L. Margot, M.C. Nolan. 2002. “Asteroid Radar Astrometry,” in
Asteroids III, (W.F. Bottke, Jr., A. Cellino, P. Paolicchi and R.P.
Binzel Eds.), University of Arizona Press, Tucson.
51

[38] S. J. Ostro, J.-L. Margot, L. A. M. Benner, J. D. Giorgini, D. J.
Scheeres, E. G. Fahnestock, S. B. Broschart, J. Bellerose, M. C. Nolan,
C. Magri, P. Pravec, P. Scheirich, R. Rose, R. F. Jurgens, S. Suzuki,
E. M. DeJong. 2006. “Radar Imaging of Binary Near-Earth Asteroid
(66391) 1999 KW4,” Science 314: 1276-1280.
[39] H.A. Perko, J.D. Nelson, and W.Z. Sadeh. 2001. “Surface Cleanliness
Eﬀect on Lunar Soil Shear Strength,” Journal of Geotechnical and
Geoenvironmental Engineering 127(4): 371-383.
[40] P. Pravec and A.W. Harris. 2000. “Fast and Slow Rotation of Aster-
oids,” Icarus 148: 12-20.
[41] P. Pravec, et. al. 2005. “Tumbling asteroids,” Icarus 173: 108-131.
[42] P. Pravec, et al. 2006. “Photometric survey of binary near-Earth aster-
oids,” Icarus 181: 63-93.
[43] L. Procktor, et al. 2002. “Surface Expressions of Structural Features
on Eros,” Icarus 155: 75-93.
[44] D.C. Richardson, P. Elankumaran, and R.E. Sanderson. 2005. “Nu-
merical experiments with rubble piles: equilibrium shapes and spins,”
Icarus 173: 349-361.
[45] D.C. Richardson, P. Michel, K.J. Walsh, and K.W. Flynn. 2009. “Nu-
merical simulations of asteroids modelled as gravitational aggregates
with cohesion,” Planetary and Space Science 57(2): 183-192.
[46] J.E. Richardson, H.J. Melosh and R. Greenberg. 2004. “Impact-
Induced Seismic Activity on Asteroid 433 Eros: A Surface Modiﬁcation
Process,” Science 306: 1526-1529.
[47] K. Richter and H.U. Keller. “On the stability of dust particle orbits
around cometary nuclei,” Icarus 114: 355-371, 1995.
[48] M.S. Robinson, P.C. Thomas, J. Veverka, S. Murchie and B. Carcich.
2001. “The nature of ponded deposits on Eros,” Nature 413: 396-400.
[49] P.G. Rognon, J.-N. L. Roux, M. Naaim, and F. Chevoir. 2008. “Dense
ﬂows of cohesive granular materials,” Journal of Fluid Mechanics 596:
21-47.
52

[50] P. S´anchez and D.J. Scheeres. 2009. “Granular mechanics in asteroid
regolith: Simulating and scaling the brazil nut eﬀect,” abstract # 2228,
presented at the 40th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference.
[51] D.J. Scheeres. 1999. “Satellite Dynamics about Small Bodies: Aver-
aged Solar Radiation Pressure Eﬀects,” Journal of the Astronautical
Sciences 47(1): 25-46.
[52] D.J. Scheeres, D.D. Durda, and P.E. Geissler. 2002. The Fate of Aster-
oid Ejecta, in Asteroids III (W.M. Bottke Jr., A. Cellino, P. Paolicchi,
R.P. Binzel eds.), University of Arizona Press, Tucson, pp. 527-544.
[53] D.J. Scheeres. “Solar Radiation Pressure and Transient Flows on Aster-
oid Surfaces [#1919],” abstract presented at the Lunar and Planetary
Science XXXVI meeting, Houston, Texas, March 2005.
[54] D. J. Scheeres, E. G. Fahnestock, S. J. Ostro, J.-L. Margot, L. A. M.
Benner, S. B. Broschart, J. Bellerose, J. D. Giorgini, M. C. Nolan,
C. Magri, P. Pravec, P. Scheirich, R. Rose, R. F. Jurgens, S. Suzuki,
E. M. DeJong. 2006. “Dynamical Conﬁguration of Binary Near-Earth
Asteroid (66391) 1999 KW4,” Science 314: 1280-1283.
[55] D.J. Scheeres. 2007. “Rotational ﬁssion of contact binary asteroids,”
Icarus 189: 370-385.
[56] D.J. Scheeres and R.W. Gaskell. 2008. “Eﬀect of density inhomogeneity
on YORP: The case of Itokawa,” Icarus 198: 125-129.
[57] D.J. Scheeres. 2009. “Minimum energy asteroid recongurations and
catastrophic disruptions,” Planetary and Space Science 57: 154-164.
[58] D.J. Scheeres. 2009. “Stability of the Planar Full 2-Body Problem,”
Celestial Mechanics and Dynamical Astronomy 104: 103-128.
[59] J. Schwedes. 1975. “Shearing Behaviour of Slightly Compressed Cohe-
sive Granular Materials,” Powder Technology 11: 59-67.
[60] I. Sharma, J.T. Jenkins, J.A. Burns. 2009. “Dynamical passage to ap-
proximate equilibrium shapes for spinning, gravitating rubble aster-
oids,” Icarus 200: 304-322.
53

[61] P. Thomas, J. Veverka, A. Bloom and T. Duxbury. 1979. “Grooves on
Phobos: Their Distribution, Morphology and Possible Origin,” Journal
of Geophysical Research 84(B14): 8457-8477.
[62] P. Thomas. 1979. “Surface features of Phobos and Deimos,” Icarus
40(2): 223-243.
[63] P.C. Thomas and M.S. Robinson. 2005. “Seismic resurfacing by a single
impact on the asteroid 433 Eros,” Nature 436: 366-369.
[64] N. Vandewalle, G. Lumay, O. Gerasimov, and F. Ludewig. 2007. “The
inﬂuence of grain shape, friction and cohesion on granular compaction
dynamics,” The European Physical Journal E 22: 241248.
[65] J. Veverka et al. 2001. “The landing of the NEAR-Shoemaker spacecraft
on asteroid 433 Eros,” Nature 413: 390-393.
[66] S.L. Wilkison, M.S. Robinson, P.C. Thomas, J. Veverka, T.J. McCoy,
S.L. Murchie, L.M. Prockter, D.K. Yeomans. 2002. “An estimate of
Eros’s porosity and implications for internal structure,” Icarus 155:
94-103.
[67] H. Yano, T. Kubota, H. Miyamoto, T. Okada, D. J. Scheeres, Y. Tak-
agi, K. Yoshida, M. Abe, S. Abe, O. Barnouin-Jha, A. Fujiwara, S.
Hasegawa, T. Hashimoto, M. Ishiguro, M. Kato, J. Kawaguchi, T.
Mukai, J. Saito, S. Sasaki, and M. Yoshikawa. 2006. “Touch-down of
the Hayabusa spacecraft at the Muses Sea on Itokawa,” Science 312:
1350-1353.
[68] D.K. Yeomans, J.-P. Barriot, D.W. Dunham, R.W. Farquhar, C.L. Hel-
frich, A.S. Konopliv, J.V. McAdams, J.K. Miller, D.J. Scheeres, S.P.
Synnott, W.M. Owen, and B.G. Williams. 1997. “The NEAR Space-
craft’s Flyby of Asteroid 253 Mathilde,” Science 278:2106–9.
54

