C.R. Wylie Jr. 
101 PUZZLES IN 
THOU6HT &. L061C 



c. R. WYLIE Jr. 
Department 0/ Mathematics, University 0/ Utah 
PUZZLES 
IN THOUGHT 
AND LOGIC 
Dover Publications Inc., N ew York 

Copyright © 1957 by Dover Publications. Inc. 
All rights reserved under Pan American and In-
ternational Copyright Conventions. 
Published in Canada by General Publishing Com-
pany, Ltd., lIO Lesmill Road, Don Mills, Toronto, 
Ontario. 
Published in the United Kingdom by Constable 
and Company, Ltd., 10 Orange Street, London 
WC 2. 
101 Puzzles in Thought and Logic is an original 
work, first published by Dover Publications, Inc., 
in 1957. 
Standa7d Book Number: 486-20367-0 
Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 57-IJ026 
Manufactured in the United States of America 
Dover Publications, Inc. 
180 Varick Street 
New York, N. Y. 10014 

INTRODUCTION 

Although life is the greatest puzzle of all, these 
puzzles are not taken from life, and any resem-
blance they may bear to actual persons or places 
is entirely coincidental. 

INTRODUCTION 
Puzzles of a purely logical nature are distinguished from 
riddles, on the one hand, by the fact that they involve no play 
on words, no deliberately deceptive statements, no guessing-
in short, no "catches" of any kind. They differ from quizzes 
and most mathematical puzzles, on the other hand, in that 
thought rather than memory, that is, native mental ingenuity 
rather than a store of acquired information, is the key to 
their solution. 
In order that the puzzles in this collection should conform 
as nearly as possible to this ideal, every effort has been made 
to keep the factual basis of each as meager as possible. In 
a very few instances the use of a little elementary algebra may 
simplify the solution, but none actually requires any technical 
information beyond the multiplication tables and the fact that 
distance = speed X time 
It is expected, however, that the reader will recognize that a 
man must be older than his children, that when two people 
win a mixed doubles match one is male and the other is fe-
male, and a few other equally simple facts from everyday 
experience. 
It is interesting to observe that puzzles of the purely logical 
type epitomize the entire scientific process. At the outset one 
is confronted with a mass of more or less unrelated data. 
From these facts a few positive inferences can perhaps be 
drawn immediately, but usually it is necessary to set up 
tentative or working hypotheses to guide the search for a 
solution. The validity of these hypotheses must then be care-
fully checked by testing their consequences for consistency 

Introduction 
with the original data. If inconsistencies appear, the tenta-
tive assumptions must be rejected and others substituted until 
finally a consistent set of conclusions emerges. These con-
clusions must then be tested for uniqueness to determine 
whether they alone meet the conditions of the problem or 
whether there are others equally acceptable. 
Thus by repetitions of the fundamental process of setting 
up an hypothesis, drawing conclusions from it, and examining 
their consistency within the total framework of the problem, 
the answer is ultimately wrested from the seemingly inco-
herent information initially provided. And so it is in science, 
too. 
It is inherent in the nature of logical puzzles that their 
solution cannot be reduced to a fixed pattern. Nevertheless it 
may be helpful at this point to offer some general suggestions 
on how to attack puzzles of this sort. Consider first the fol-
lowing example: 
Boronoff, Pavlow, Revitsky, and Sukarek are four 
talented creative artists, one a dancer, one a painter, 
one a singer, and one a writer (though not necessarily 
respectively) . 
(1) Boronoff and Revitsky were in the audience the 
night the singer made his debut on the concert stage. 
(2) Both Pavlow and the writer have sat for portraits 
by the painter. 
(3) The writer, whose biography of Sukarek was 
a best-seller, is planning to write a biography of 
Boronoff. 
(4) Boronoff has never heard of Revitsky. 
What is each man's artistic field? 
To keep track mentally of this many facts and the hypothe-
ses and conclusions based upon them is confusing and diffi-
cult. In all but the simplest puzzles it is far better to reduce 
the analysis systematically to a series of written memoranda. 

Introduction 
One method of accomplishing this is to set up an array in 
which all possibilities--are encompassed, thus: 
Boronoff 
Pavlow 
Revitsky 
Sukarek 
dancer 
painter 
singer 
writer 
Now if we consider, for example, that Pavlow cannot be the 
dancer we will place an X, say, opposite his name in the column 
headed dancer. Or if we decide that Boronoff must be the 
painter we will place a different mark, sayan 0, opposite 
his name in this column, whereupon we can fill the remaining 
squares in this 'row and column with X's (since there is only 
one Boronoff and only one painter). Clearly the solution will 
be complete when we succeed in placing consistently exactly 
one 0 in each row and in each column, thereby showing just 
what each man is. 
In the present problem we know from (1) that neither 
Boronoff nor Revitsky is the singer, hence we place X's oppo-
site their names in the appropriate column. From (2) we know 
that Pavlow is neither the painter nor the writer, and from 
(3) we see that the writer is neither Boronoff nor Sukarek. 
With the corresponding X's duly entered, the array looks like 
this: 
Boronoff 
Pavlow 
Revitsky 
Sukarek 
dancer 
painter 
X 
singer 
writer 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 

Introduction 
By elimination it is now clear that Revitsky is the writer. 
Hence we enter an 0 opposite his name in the column headed 
writer and fill the remaining squares in his row with X's. 
Moreover, according to (2), Revitsky has sat for the painter, 
while according to (4) Boronoff does not know Revitsky. 
Hence Boronoff is not the painter, and so by elimination he 
must be the dancer. But then neither Pavlow nor Sukarek 
can be the dancer, and this observation leaves singer as the 
only category possible for Pavlow. Finally,. Sukarek must be 
the painter, and the solution is complete. 
The procedure we have just illustrated is also convenient 
in identification-puzzles where the necessary information is 
given in the form of conditional or contingent statements. 
Here is a simple example: 
(1) If A is P, C is not R. 
(2) If B is P or R, A is Q. 
(3) If A is Q or R, B is P. 
Determine the correspondence between the symbols 
(A, B, C) and the symbols (P, Q, R). 
Suppose we begin by accepting the hypothesis "A is P". We 
then construct an array in which an 0 appears opposite A 
in the column headed P and X's appear in the other squares 
in the A-row and the P-column: 
A 
B 
C 
P 
0 
X 
X 
Q 
R 
X 
X 
Now from (1), C cannot be R. Hence it must be Q, and neces-
sarily then B must be R. But from (2), if B is R, A must be 
Q, which contradicts both the assumption that A is P and 
the conclusion that C is Q. This inconsistency forces us to 
abandon the hypothesis that A is P. 

Introduction 
We continue now by constructing a new array based upon 
the fact that A is not P. According to (3), if A is not P then 
B must be P. Hence an 0 can be entered opposite B in the 
P-column, and the remaining squares in this row and column 
can be filled with X's: 
A 
B 
C 
P 
x 
0 
X 
Q 
R 
X 
X 
Then from (2) we conclude that A is Q, whereupon it follows 
that C is R, and the solution is complete. 
In some puzzles the given information consists of a set of 
statements, a certain number of which are known to be false 
without the untrue assertions being identified. Puzzles of this 
sort can also be conveniently handled through the use of 
arrays. As an illustration consider the following example: 
Shorty Finelli was found shot to death one morning, 
and the police with better than average luck had three 
red-hot suspects behind bars by nightfall. That even-
ing the men were questioned and made the following 
statements. 
Buck: 
(1) I didn't do it. 
(2) I never saw Joey before. 
(3) Sure, I knew Shorty. 
Joey: 
(1) I didn't do it. 
(2) Buck and Tippy are both pals of mine. 
(3) Buck never killed anybody. 
Tippy: 
(1) I didn't do it. 
(2) Buck lied when he said he'd never seen 
Joey before. 
(3) I don't know who did it. 
1/ one and only one 0/ each man's statements is false, 
and i/ one 0/ the three men is actually guilty, who is 
the murderer? 

Introduction 
Here the appropriate array is the following 
Buck 
Joey 
Tippy 
1 
2 
3 
and our problem is to enter one F (for false) and two T's 
(for true) in each row in a manner consistent with the given 
statements. 
At the outset we can draw the positive inference that Tippy 
is innocent. For if he committed the crime, then his first and 
third statements are both false, contrary to the given condi-
tion that only one of each man's assertions is untrue. This 
conclusion can now be recorded as a T opposite Tippy in the 
first column. 
We are now left with two alternatives: either (a) Buck is 
the guilty one, or (b) Joey is the guilty one. If we assume 
(a), then Buck's first statement is false and Joey's last state-
ment is false. Under the conditions of the problem this means 
that Buck's second and Joey's second statement must both be 
true. But this impossible since they are clearly contradictory. 
Hence we must abandon the assumption that Buck is the 
murderer. It follows therefore that Joey is the one who killed 
Shorty, and this can be checked by examining the completed 
array for the alternative (b): 
Buck 
Joey 
Tippy 
1 
T 
F 
T 
2 
3 
F 
T 
T 
T 
T 
F 

Introduction 
Puzzles constructed by the coding or suppression of digits 
in an arithmetical calculation require no more than attention 
to obvious numerical facts. Here as in puzzles of the fore-
going, more verbal types it is also helpful to keep track of 
clues and conclusions in an orderly, tabular way. To illustrate, 
let U8 consider the following example: 
In a certain multiplication problem each digit from 
o to 9 was replaced by a different letter, yielding the 
coded calculation 
ALE 
RUM 
WINE 
WUWL 
EWWE 
ERMPNE 
For what number does each letter stand? 
To systematize our work we first write in a row the differ-
ent letters appearing in the problem: 
ALERUMWINP 
Over each letter we will write its numerical equivalent when 
we discover it. In the columns under the various letters we 
will record clues and tentative hypotheses, being careful to 
put all related inferences on the same horizontal line. 
In problems of this sort the digits 0 and 1 can often be 
found, or at least restricted to a very few possibilities, by 
simple inspection. For instance, 0 can never occur as the left-
most digit of an integer, and when any number is multiplied 
by zero the result consists exclusively of zeros. Moreover 
when any number is multiplied by 1 the result is that number 
itself. In the present problem, however, we can identify 0 by 

Introduction 
an even simpler observation. For in the second column from 
the right, N plus L equals N, with nothing carried over from 
the column on the right. Hence L must be zero. 
In our search for 1 we can eliminate R, U, and M at once, 
since none of these, as multipliers in the second row, repro-
duces ALE. Moreover E cannot be 1 since U times E does not 
yield a product ending in U. At present, however, we have no 
further clues as to whether 1 is A, I, N, P, or W. 
Now the partial product W U W L ends in L, which we 
know to be O. Hence one of the two letters U and E must be 
5. Looking at the units digits of the other partial products, 
we see that both M X E and R X E are numbers ending in 
E. A moment's reflection (or a glance at a multiplication 
table) shows that E must therefore be 5. 
But if E is 5, then both Rand M must be odd, since an 
even numbers multiplied by 5 would yield a product ending in 
0, which is not the case in either the first or third partial 
product. Moreover, by similar reasoning it is clear that U is 
an even number. 
At this point it is convenient to return to our array and 
list under U the various possibilities, namely 2, 4, 6, and 8. 
OppQsite each of these we record the corresponding value of 
Was read from the partial product W U W L, whose last two 
digits are now determined since the factor ALE is known 
to be -05. These values of Ware easily seen to be 1, 2, 3, 
and 4. 
From an inspection of the second column from the left we 
can now deduce the corresponding possibilities for R. As we 
have already noted, R must be odd; hence its value is twice 
W plus 1 (the 1 being necessarily carried over from the 
column on the right). The possible values for R are then 3, 
5, 7, and 9, and our array looks like this: 

o 5 
ALERVMWINP 
3 2 
1 
5 4 
2 
763 
984 
Introduction 
Now in the third column from the left in the example the 
sum of the digits W, V, and W must be more than 9, since 
1 had to be carried over from this column into the column 
on the left. The values in the first two rows of the array are 
too low for this, however, hence we can cross out both of 
these lines. 
A further consideration of the sum of the digits W, V, and 
W in the third column from the left, coupled with the fact 
that M is known to be odd, shows that in the third row of 
the array M must be 3 while in the fourth row it must be 7. 
This permits us to reject the third row of the array also, for it 
contains 3 for both M and W, which is impossible. The correct 
solution must therefore be the one contained in the fourth 
row. Hence R is 9, V is 8, M is 7, and W is 4. Substituting 
these into the problem it is a simple matter to determine that 
A is 6, I is 2, N is 3, and P is 1. This completes the solution. 
As an example of a puzzle involving the suppression rather 
than the coding of digits, consider the following: 
In a certain problem in long division every digit 
except 7 was suppressed, yielding 
Restore the missing digits. 
7 
7 
7 
7 
7 

Introduction 
The obvious point of attack here is the first partial product, 
-77, since it is the most nearly determined number in the 
problem. Now, the only one-digit numbers whose product 
ends in 7 are 3 and 9. Hence the first digit in the quotient 
must be one of these numbers and the last digit in the divisor 
must be the other. If we consider the possible divisors of the 
form -9 and multiply each by 3, we find that the only one 
which yields a product of the form -77 is 59 which gives 
177. Alternatively, if we try divisors of the form -3 and 
multiply each by 9 we find that only 53 yields a product of 
the form -77. We must reject the first of these two possibili-
ties, however, since when 59 is multiplied by the second digit 
in the quotient, namely 7, the result is 413, whereas accord-
ing to the problem the second partial product is of the form 
-7-. This leaves 53 as the unique possibility for the divisor 
and 9 as the first digit of the quotient. Finally we observe that 
the last digit of the quotient must be 1 since the last partial 
product contains just two digits. Knowing that the divisor 
is 59 and the quotient is 971, we can multiply these numbers 
to obtain the dividend. The rest of the problem can then be 
reconstructed at once. 
Most of the puzzles in this collection have unique solutions. 
A few lead to several different solutions, a circumstance al-
ways indicated in the statement of the problem. There are 
also a few puzzles in which the object is not to find an answer 
but to prove that there is none, that is to show that the given 
data, taken all together, are incompatible. As an illustration 
of a puzzle of this type, consider the following coded sub-
traction: 
E I G H T 
THREE 
F I V E 
If each letter is supposed to stand for a different digit, 
prove that there is no possible way to assign a uniqu~ 
digit to each letter to form a correct subtraction. 
We notice first that in the leftmost column the subtraction 
of T from E leaves O. Hence E must be exactly 1 more than 

Introduction 
T (the 1 having been borrowed from E for use in the second 
column). Now in the rightmost column, T minus E yields E. 
(Since E is greater than T, 1 had to be borrowed from the 
column on the left to make this subtraction possible.) Or to 
put it in the reverse sense, E plus E is a two-digit Humber 
having T in the units place. Hence T must be even, and of 
course different from 0 since it appears as the leftmost digit 
in the second row of the problem. We therefore have the 
following possibilities: 
T: 2 4 6 8 
E: 6 
7 
8 
9 
Among these there is only one pair, namely E = 9, T = 8, 
which meets the further requirement that E is 1 more than T. 
Now consider the subtraction in the second column from 
the right. We have already observed that 1 had to be borrowed 
from the H for use in the column on the right. Hence E, 
that is 9, taken away from 1 less than H leaves V. But first 
borrowing 1 from a number and then taking 9 away from 
what remains is clearly just the same as taking 10 away from 
the original number. And when 10 is subtracted from any 
number, the units digit of the number necessarily appears 
unchanged as the units digit of the answer. Hence the result 
of the subtraction in the second column from the right must 
be H and cannot be the different digit V. This inescapable 
contradiction proves that the problem cannot be decoded to 
produce a correct subtraction. 
Many of the puzzles in this book are easy to solve, others 
are rather difficult. It is likely, however, that one person will 
find some easy that another will find hard, and vice versa, 
for methods of analysis differ from individual to individual. 
Within wide limits the time required to solve a particular 
problem is of little significance as an indication of a person's 
ability to reason. For one person may by pure chance select 
the correct assumption for his first trial, while an equally 
alert individual may unluckily explore any number of fruit-
less hypotheses before he reaches the right one. 

Introduction 
The puzzles herein are all new in substance, though not in 
form, for a puzzle of an entirely new form is almost unimagin-
able. None has been published elsewhere. All have been care-
fully checked and each, whatever its other merits or faults, 
has been formulated so as to be solvable by logical reasoning 
with only the barest minimum of acquired information. 
And now-pleasant puzzling! 
C. R. WYLIE JR. 
Salt Lake City, Utah 

PUZZLES 

Solutions in back of the book. 

1 
In a certain bank the positions of cashier, manager, and 
teller are held by Brown, Jones and Smith, though not neces-
sarily respectively. 
The teller, who was an only child, earns the least. 
Smith, who married Brown's sister, earns more than 
the manager. 
What position does each man /ill? 
2 
Clark, Daw and Fuller make their living as carpenter, 
painter and plumber, though not necessarliy respectively. 
The painter recently tried to get the carpenter to do 
some work for him, but was told that the carpenter was 
out doing some remodeling for the plumber. 
The plumber makes more money than the painter. 
Daw makes more money than Clark. 
Fuller has never heard of Daw. 
What is each man's occupation? 

3 
Dorothy, Jean, Virginia, Bill, Jim, and Tom are six young 
persons who have been close friends from their childhood. 
They went through high school and college together, anll when 
they finally paired off and became engaged nothing would do 
but a triple announcement party. Naturally they wanted to 
break the news to their friends in an unusual fashion, and 
after some thought they decided upon this scheme. 
At just the right moment during the party everyone waH 
given a card bearing the cryptic information: 
Who now are six will soon be three, 
And gaily we confess it, 
But how we've chosen you may know 
No sooner than you guess it. 
Tom, who is older than Jim, is Dorothy's brother. 
Virginia is the oldest girl. 
The total age of each couple-to-be is the smne al-
though no two of us are the same age. 
Jim and Jean are together as old as Bill and Dorothy. 
What three engagements were announced at the party? 

4 
Mr. Carter, Mr. Flynn, Mr. Milne, and Mr. Savage serve the 
little town of Milford as architect, banker, druggist, and 
grocer, though not necessarily respectively. Each man's income 
is a whole number of dollars. 
The druggist earns exactly twice as much as the 
grocer, the architect earns exactly twice as much as 
the druggist, and the banker earns exactly twice as 
much as the architect. 
Although Mr. Carter does not make more money 
than Mr. Flynn, Mr. Flynn does not make twice as 
much as Mr. Carter. 
Mr. Savage earns exactly $3776 more than Mr. Milne. 
What is each man's occupation? 

5 
Brown, Clark, Jones, and Smith are the names of the men 
who hold, though not necessarily respectively, the positions of 
accountant, cashier, manager, and president in the First Na-
tional Bank of Fairport. 
Although the cashier beats him consistently, the 
president will play chess with no one else in the bank. 
Both the manager and the cashier are better chess 
players than the accountant. 
Jones and Smith are nextdoor neighbors and fre-
quently play chess together in the evening. 
Clark plays a better game of chess than Jones. 
The accountant lives near the president but not near 
any of the others. 
What position does each man hold? 

6 
Clark, Jones, Morgan, and Smith are four men whose occu-
pation are butcher, druggist, grocer, and policeman, though 
not necessarily respectively. 
Clark and Jones are neighbors and take turns driving 
each other to work. 
Jones makes more money than Morgan. 
Clark beats Smith regularly at bowling. 
The butcher always walks to work. 
The policeman does not not live near the druggist. 
The only time the grocer and the policeman ever met 
was when the policeman arrested the grocer for speed-
ing. 
The policeman makes more money than the druggist 
or the grocer. 
What is each man's occupation? 

7 
Brown, Clark, Jones and Smith are four sUbstantial citizens 
who serve their community as architect, banker, doctor, and 
lawyer, though not necessarily respectively. 
Brown, who is more conservative than Jones but 
more liberal than Smith, is a better golfer than the men 
who are older than he is and has a larger income 
than the men who are younger than Clark. 
The banker, who earns more than the architect, is 
neither the youngest nor the oldest. 
The doctor, who is a poorer golfer than the lawyer, 
is less conservative than the architect. 
As might be expected, the oldest man is the most 
conservative and has the largest income, and the young-
est man is the best golfer. 
What is each man's profession? 

8 
In a certain department store the position of buyer, cashier, 
clerk, floorwalker, and manager are held, though not neces-
sarily respectively, by Miss Ames, Miss Brown, Mr. Conroy, 
Mr. Davis, and Mr. Evans. 
The cashier and the manager were roommates in 
college. 
The buyer is a bachelor. 
Evans and Miss Ames have had only business con-
tacts with each other. 
Mrs. Conroy was greatly disappointed when her hus-
band told her that the manager had refused to give him 
a raise. 
Davis is going to be the best man when the clerk and 
the cashier are married. 
What position does each person hold? 

9 
The positions of buyer, cashier, clerk, floorwalker, and man-
ager in the Empire Department Store are held by Messrs. 
Allen, Bennett, Clark, Davis, and Ewing. 
The cashier and the floorwalker eat lunch from 11 :30 
to 12 :30, the others eat from 12 :30 to 1 :30. 
Mrs. Allen and Mrs. Clark are sisters. 
Allen and Bennett always bring their lunch and play 
cribbage during their lunch hour. 
Davis and Ewing have nothing to do with each other 
since the day Davis, returning from lunch earlier than 
usual, found Ewing already gone and reported him to 
the manager. 
The cashier and the clerk share bachelor quarters. 
What position does each man fill? 

10 
Jane, Janice, Jack, Jasper, and Jim are the names of five 
high school chums. Their last names in one order or another 
are Carter, Carver, Clark, Clayton, and Cramer. 
Jasper's mother is dead. 
In deference to a certain very wealthy aunt,Mr. and 
Mrs. Clayton agreed when they were first married that 
if they ever had a daughter they would name her Janice. 
Jane's father and mother have never met Jack's 
parents. 
The Cramer and Carter children have been team-
mates on several of the school's athletic teams. 
When he heard that Carver was going to be out of 
town on the night of the school's Father and Son ban-
quet, Cramer called Mrs. Carver and offered to "adopt" 
her son for the evening, but Jack's father had already 
a sked him to go. 
The Clarks and Carters, who are very good friends, 
were delighted when their children began dating each 
other. 
What is the lull name 01 each youngster? 

11 
The Smith family, which consists of Mr. and Mrs. Smith, 
their son, Mr. Smith's sister, and Mrs. Smith's father, has for 
years dominated the community life of Plainsville. At the 
present time the five members of the family hold among them-
selves the positions of grocer, lawyer, postmaster, preacher, 
and teacher in the little town. 
The lawyer and the teacher are not blood relatives. 
The grocer is younger than her sister-in-law but older 
than the teacher. 
The preacher, who won his letter playing football in 
college, is older than the postmaster. 
What position does each member of the family hold? 

12 
In the Stillwater High School the economics, English, 
French, history, Latin, and mathematics classes are taught, 
though not necessarily respectively, by Mrs. Arthur, Miss Bas-
comb, Mrs. Conroy, Mr. Duval, Mr. Eggleston, and Mr. Furness. 
The mathematics teacher and the Latin teacher were 
roommates in college. 
Eggleston is older than Furness but has not taught 
as long as the economics teacher. 
As students,Mrs. Arthur and Miss Bascomb attended 
one high school while the others attended a different 
high school. 
Furness is the French teacher's father. 
The English teacher is the oldest of the six both in 
age and in years of service. In fact he had the mathe-
matics teacher and the history teacher in class when 
they were students in the Stillwater High School. 
Mrs. Arthur is older than the Latin teacher. 
What subject does each person teach? 

13 
A recent murder case centered around the six men, Clayton, 
Forbes, Graham, Holgate, McFee, and Warren. In one order 
or another these men were the victim, the murderer, the wit-
ness, the policeman, the judge, and the hangman. The faC!ts 
of the case were simple. The victim had died instantly from 
the effect of a gunshot wound inflicted at close range. The 
witness did not see the crime committed, but swore to hear-
ing an altercation followed by a shot. After a lengthy trial the 
murderer was convicted, sentenced to death, and hanged. 
McFee knew both the victim and the murderer. 
In court the judge asked Clayton to give his account 
of the shooting. 
Warren was the last of the six to see Forbes alive. 
The policeman testified that he picked up Graham 
near the place where the body was found. 
Holgate and Warren never met. 
What role did each man play in this unfortunate 
melodrama? 

14 
One fine spring afternoon Bill, Ed, and Tom with their 
wives, whose names in one order or another are Grace, Helen, 
and Mary, went out and played eighteen holes of golf together. 
Mary, Helen, Grace, and Ed shot 106, 102, 100, and 
94 respectively. 
Bill and Tom shot a 98 and a 96, but for some time 
they couldn't tell who had made which since they hadn't 
put their names on their scorecards. 
When the fellows finally identified their cards it 
turned out that two of the couples had the same total 
score. 
Ed's wife beat Bill's wife. 
What is the name 01 each man's wile, and what scores 
did Bill and Tom make? 

15 
Vernon, Wilson, and Yates are three professionel men, one 
an architect, one a doctor, and one a lawyer, who occupy offices 
on different floors of the same building. Their secretaries are 
named, though not necessarily 
respectively, Miss Ainsley, 
Miss Barnette, and Miss Coulter. 
The lawyer has his office on the ground floor. 
Instead of marrying her boss the way secretaries do 
in stories, Miss Barnette became engaged to Yates and 
goes out to lunch with him every day. 
At noon Miss Ainsley goes upstairs to eat lunch with 
Wilson's secretary. 
Vernon had to send his secretary down to borrow 
some stamps from the architect's office the other day. 
What is each man's profession, and what is the name 
of each man's secretary? 

16 
The crew of a certain train consists of a breakman, a con-
ductor, an engineer, and a fireman, named in one order or an-
other Art, John, Pete, and Tom. 
John is older than Art. 
The brakeman has no relatives on the crew. 
The engineer and the fireman are brothers. 
John is Pete's nephew. 
The fireman is not the conductor's uncle, and the con-
ductor is not the engineer's uncle. 
What position does each man hold, and Iww tll"e the 
men related? 
17 
Ed, Frank, George, and Harry took their wives to the 
Country Club dance one Saturday evening not long age. At 
one time as a result of exchanging dances Betty was dancing 
with Ed, Alice was dancing with Carol's husband, Dorothy 
was dancing with Alice's husband, Frank was dancing with 
George's wife, and George was dancing with Ed's wife. 
What is the name 01 each man's wile, and with whom 
was each man dancing? 

18 
During the summer in Luncyville the shoe store is closed 
every Monday, the hardware store is closed every Tuesday, the 
grocery store is closed every Thursday, and the bank is open 
only on Monday, Wednesday, and Friday. Everything of course 
is closed on Sunday. One afternoon Mrs. Abbott, Mrs. Briggs, 
Mrs. Culver, and Mrs. Denny went shopping together, each 
with a different place to go. On their way they dropped the 
following remarks: 
Mrs. Abbott: Mrs. Denny and I wanted to go earlier in 
the week but there wasn't a day when we 
could both take care of our errands. 
Mrs. Briggs 
I didn't want to come today but tomorrow 
I couldn't do what I have to do. 
Mrs. Culver: I could have gone yesterday or the day 
before just as well as today. 
Mrs. Denny: Either yesterday or tomorrow would have 
suited me. 
Which place did each 'Woman need to visit in town? 

19 
Allen, Brady, McCoy, and Smith are the names of four men 
who have offices on different floors of the same eighteen story 
building. One of the men is an accountant, one an architect, 
one a dentist, and one a lawyer. 
Allen's office is on a higher floor than McCoy's, al-
though it is lower than Smith's. 
Brady's office is below the dentist's. 
Smith's office is five times as high as the lawyer's 
office. 
If the architect were to move up two floors he would 
be halfway between the dentist and the accountant, and 
if he were to move his office halfway down he would 
then be midway between the floors where the offices of 
the dentist and the lawyer are located. 
In this particular building the groundfloor is devoted to 
shops of various kinds and contains no office space. Hence as 
far as the offices in the building are concerned the first floor 
is the one immediately above the groundfloor. 
What is each man's profession, and on which floor is 
each man's office located? 

20 
Four men, one a famous historian, another a poet, the third 
a novelist, and the fourth a playwright, named, though not 
necessarily' respectively, Adams, Brown, Clark, and Davis, once 
found themselves seated together in a pullman car. Happening 
to look up simultaneously from their reading, they discovered 
that each was occupied with a book by one of the others. 
Adams and Brown had just a few minutes before finished the 
books they had brought and had exchanged with each other. 
The poet was reading a play. The novelist, who was a very 
young man with only one book to his credit, boasted that he 
had never so much as opened a book of history in his life. 
Brown had brought one of Davis' books, and none of the others 
had brought one of his own books either 
What was each man reading, and what was each man's 
literary field? 

21 
Four black cows and three brown cows give as much milk 
in five days as three black cows and five brown cows give in 
four days. 
Which kind 0/ cow is the better milker, black or brown? 
22 
During a call that I once paid young Mrs. Addlepate I was 
introduced to her three charming children. By way of making 
conversation I inquired their ages. 
"I can't remember exactly", my hostess replied with a 
smile, "I'm no good at figures. But if Bill isn't the youngest 
then I guess Alice is, and if Carl isn't the youngest then Alice 
is the oldest. Does that help?" 
I said that of course it did, although it really didn't at all 
until days later when it suddenly dawned on me that although 
Mrs. Addlepate hadn't been able to tell me the ages of her 
children I could at least tell from her curious remarks which 
one was the oldest, the next oldest, and the youngest. 
What were the relative ages 0/ the three children? 

23 
If Tom is twice as old as Howard will be when Jack is as 
old as Tom is now, 
Who is the oldest, the next oldest, and the youngest? 
24 
AI, Dick, Jack and Tom were counting up the results of a 
day's fishing: 
Tom had caught more than Jack. 
Between them, Al and Dick had caught just as many 
as Jack and Tom. 
Al and Tom had not caught as many as Dick and 
Jack. 
Who had caught the most, second most, third most, and 
least? 

25 
Bill, Hank, Joe, and Tom were amusing themselves one day 
by playing tug-of-war. Although it was hard, Hank could just 
outpUll Bill and Joe together. Hank and Bill together could 
just hold Tom and Joe, neither pair being able to budge the 
other. However if Joe and Bill changed places, then Tom and 
Bill won rather easily. 
Of the four fellows, who was the strongest, next 
strongest, and so on? 

26 
Bowman, Crawford, Jennings, and Stewart are four mem-
bers of the Mountain View Golf Club. Their ages are all differ-
ent and so are their golfing abilities, but nevertheless they 
make an inseparable foursome. One day as they teed off on 
the first hole a new member of the club who had seen them 
play together several times turned to his companion on the 
terrace and asked who they were and how their games com-
pared. 
"I don't know exactly", his companion replied, "but 1 guess 
it's correct to say that although Jennings is a better golfer 
than anyone of the four who is older than Crawford, and al-
though anyone of the four who can beat Stewart is at least 
as old as Bowman, the best golfer, while younger than anyone 
Stewart can beat, is not the youngest, and while at least as 
old as anyone Bowman can beat, is not the oldest". 
"I see", said the new member politely, inwardly convinced 
that as far as this information was concerned, the only way 
he'd ever be able to rank the four would be to play them 
himself. 
However from the facts given it is possible to determine 
unambigously just who is the best golfer, who is the second 
best, and so on. 
Can you? 

27 
Alice, Grace, Helen, and Mary were discussing their ages 
during a recent bridge game. Each knew perfectly well how 
old her companions were, but nevertheless they discussed the 
matter, as women ahvays do, with that indirection and circum-
locution which the feminine mind invariably confuses with 
actual secrecy. To prove that this is neither an empty wit-
ticism nor an unwarranted slander, here are four facts dis-
closed by the young women during the more obscure part of 
their conservation, and I leave it to any man to determine 
in sixty seconds or less not only the relative ages of the 
four but also how the girls were paired during this portion 
of their game. 
Mary is younger than Grace. 
Helen is older than either of her opponents. 
Mary is older than her partner. 
Alice and Grace are together older than Helen and 
Mary. 

28 
Among one hundred applicants for a certain technical posi-
tion it was discovered that ten had never taken a course in 
chemistry or in physics. Seventy-five had taken at least one 
course in chemistry. Eighty-three had taken at least one course 
in physics. 
How many 0/ the applicants had had some work in both 
chemistry and physics? 
29 
The following is a portion of a report submitted by an 
investigator for a well-known market analysis agency with 
standards of accuracy so high that it boasts that an em-
ployee's first mistake is his last. 
Number of consumers interviewed ____________ 
100 
Number who drink coffee ____________________ 
78 
Number who drink tea ______________________ 
71 
Number who drink both tea and coffee ________ 
48 
Why was the interviewer discharged? 

30 
A census taker, reporting on a certain community.consist-
ing exclusively of young married couples and their children, 
stated that 
There were more parents than there were children. 
Every boy had a sister. 
There were more boys than girls. 
There were no childless couples. 
Why was he reprimanded and his report rejected? 
31 
Mr. and Mrs. O. Howe Fruitful were well blessed with 
children, so that the difficulties usually confronting parents 
were for them almost insurmountable. For instance, of their 
ample brood seven wouldn't touch spinach, six wouldn't eat 
carrots, and five wouldn't eat beans. Four would eat neither 
spinach nor carrots, three would eat neither spinach nor beans, 
and two would touch neither carrots nor beans. One of the 
children wouldn't eat spinach, carrots, or beans. And none 
would eat all three of the vegetables. 
How many children were there in the family? 

32 
In a certain apartment house occupied exclusively by young 
married couples and their children the following facts are 
known to be true. 
There are more children than adults, more adults 
than boys, more boys than girls, and more girls than 
families. 
There are no childless couples, and no two families 
have the same number of children. 
Every girl has at least one brother and at most one 
sister. 
One family has more children than all the others 
put together. 
H ow many families are there, and how many boys and 
girls are there in each family? 

33 
One afternoon Mrs. Marshall, Mrs. Price, Mrs. Torrey, and 
Mrs. Winters went shopping together, each with two errands 
to perform. One of the women had to visit the hardware 
store, two needed to go to the bank, two needed to go to the 
butcher shop, and all but one needed to buy groceries. Their 
shopping was simplified quite a bit by the fact they lived in 
a small town which had only one store of each kind and only 
one bank. As a result they were soon done and on their way 
home. If 
Doris didn't go into the grocery store, 
Both Ethel and Mrs. Winters bought meat, 
Margaret came home with more money than she had 
when she started, 
Mrs. Price didn't go into any of the places where 
Lucille or Mrs. Torrey went, 
What was each woman's full name, and what two places 
did each visit? 

34 
In a certain small high school the courses in biology, eco-
nomics, English, French, history, and mathematics are taught 
by just three men, Mitchell, Morgan, and Myers, each of 
whom teaches two subjects. 
The economics teacher and the French teacher are 
next-door neighbors. 
Mitchell is the youngest of the three. 
The men ride to and from school together, Myers, 
the biology teacher, and the French teacher each driv-
ing one week out of three. 
The biology teacher is older than the mathematics 
teacher. 
When they can find a fourth, the English teacher, 
the mathematics teacher, and Mitchell usually spend 
their lunch hour playing bridge. 
What subjects does each man teach? 

35 
In one of the famous resort towns of Europe, where tourists 
from a dozen countries may always be encountered, four 
travelers once struck up an acquaintance. They were of dif-
ferent nationalities and although each man could speak two 
of the four languages, English, French, German, and Italian, 
there was still no common tongue in which they could all 
converse. In fact only one of the languages was spoken by 
more than two of the men. 
Nobody spoke both French and German. 
Although John couldn't speak English he could still 
act as interpreter when Peter and Jacob wanted to 
speak to each other. 
Jacob spoke German and could also talk to William 
although the latter knew not a word of German. 
John, Peter, and William could not all converse in 
the same language. 
'What two languages did each man speak? 

36 
A group of men discussing their fraternal affiliations found 
the following curious facts to be true: 
Each man belonged to exactly two lodges. 
Each lodge was represented in the group by exactly 
three men. 
Every possible pair of lodges had exactly one mem-
ber of the group in common. 
How many men were there in the group, and how many 
diDerent lodges were represented? 

37 
The Interfraternity Council at Juke Box Tech presented a 
highly involved situation last year. Each fraternity was rep-
resented by four men according to the rules of the council, 
but because of overlapping memberships the following comp-
lications existed: 
Each man on the council was simultaneously the 
representative of two different fraternities. 
Every pair of fraternities had one representative in 
common. 
In this welter of conflicting allegiances the council accom-
plished little or nothing, which of course was not unusual. 
However it did present an interesting puzzle, namely: 
How many fraternities were represented on the council 
and how many representatives were there altogether? 

38 
Five men whose given names were Louis, Martin, Norris, 
Oliver, and Peter, and whose last names in one order or an-
other were Atwood, Bartlett, Campbell, Donovan, and Easter-
ling, although living in the same small town had through the 
years become more or less estranged until finally the follow-
ing conditions existed: 
Bartlett would only speak to two of the others. 
Although Peter would speak to all but one, Louis 
would only speak to one of the others. 
Donovan and Martin wouldn't speak, although Norris 
and Easterling would. 
Martin, Norris, and Oliver were all on speaking 
terms. 
There was only one of the five that Atwood wouldn't 
speak to, and only one of the five to whom Campbell 
would speak. 
What was each man's /r.dl name, and to whom would 
each man speak? 

39 
Six men, Andrews, Blaine, Colter, Doister, Ebert, and 
Fisher, are the only members eligible for the offices of presi-
dent, vice-president, and secretary in a certain organization. 
If 
Andrews won't be an officer unless Ebert is president, 
Blaine won't serve if he outranks Colter, 
Blaine won't serve with Fisher under any conditions, 
Colter won't serve with both Ebert and Fisher, 
Colter won't serve if Fisher is president or Blaine is 
secretary, 
Doister won't serve with Colter or Ebert unless he 
outranks them, 
Ebert won't be vice-president, 
Ebert won't be secretary if Doister is an officer, 
Ebert won't serve with Andrews unless Fisher serves 
too, 
Fisher won't serve unless either he or Colter is 
president, 
How can the three offices be filled? 

40 
The nominating committee of the All Friends Club recently 
had to present a slate of candidates for the offices of presi-
dent, vice-president, secretary, and treasurer. Those eligible 
were Arthur, Burton, Congreve, Downs, Ewald, and Flynn. 
The lot of any nominating committee is difficult, but this one 
found its task almost impossible, for 
Arthur wouldn't serve unless Burton did too, and 
even then he wouldn't be vice-president, 
Burton wouldn't serve as vice-president or as 
secretary, 
Congreve wouldn't serve with Burton unless Flynn 
served too, 
Downs wouldn't serve with Ewald or Flynn under 
any circumstances, 
Ewald wouldn't serve with both Arthur and Burton, 
Flynn wouldn't serve except as president, and he 
wouldn't do that if Congl'eve was vice-president. 
What slate 0/ candidates did the committee finally 
present? 

41 
In a certain organization there are eight men eligible to 
serve on a newly established committee of four. The selection 
of the members is not an easy matter, however, for there 
are jealousies and attachments among the candidates which 
prevent a free choice of four committeemen. If you were the 
president of the organization could you select a committee of 
four satisfying all these whims? 
Ames will serve with anybody. 
Brown won't serve unless Clayton serves. 
Clayton won't serve with Evans. 
Davis won't serve without Hughes. 
Evans will serve with anybody. 
French won't serve with Davis unless Grant serves 
too, and won't serve with Clayton unless Davis also 
serves. 
Grant won't serve with both Brown and Clayton, and 
won't serve with either Ames or Evans. 
Hughes won't serve unless either Brown or French 
serves and won't serve with Clayton unless Grant serves 
too, and won't serve with both Ames and Evans. 

42 
The personnel director of a firm in speaking of three men 
the company was thinking of hiring once said, 
"We need Brown and if we need Jones then we need 
Smith, if and only if we need either Brown or Jones and 
don't need Smith." 
II the company actually needed more than one 01 the 
men, which ones were they? 

43 
Bertrand Russell in a whimsical moment once defined mathe-
matics as" ... the subject in which we never know what we 
are talking about, nor whether what we are saying is true," 
and here is a puzzle of which the same thing might be said. 
As a simple exercise in abstraction suppose that four mean-
ingless symbols A, B, C, and D correspond in one order or 
another to the equally meaningless symbols W, X, Y, and Z, 
and suppose further that 
If A is not X, then C is not Y. 
If B is either Y or Z, then A is X. 
If C is not W, then B is Z. 
If D is Y, then B is not X. 
If D is not X, then B is X. 
In what order do the two sets 01 symbols correspond? 

44 
Three men named Barber, Cutler, and Drake have wives 
named Beth, Dorothy, and Louise. Each couple has a son, 
the names of the boys being Allan, Henry and Victor. 
Drake is neither Louise's husband nor Henry's 
father. 
Beth is neither Cutler's wife nor Allan's mother. 
If Allan's father is either Cutler or Drake, then 
Louise is Victor's mother. 
If Louise is Cutler's wife, Dorothy is not Allan's 
mother. 
What is the name 01 each man's wife and son? 
45 
Three men named Lewis, Miller, and Nelson fill the posi-
tions of accountant, cashier, and clerk in the leading depart-
ment store in Centerburg. 
If Nelson is the cashier, Miller is the clerk. 
If Nelson is the clerk, Miller is the accountant. 
If Miller is not the cashier, Lewis is the clerk. 
If Lewis is the accountant, Nelson is the clerk. 
What is each man's job? 

46 
Dick's work in mathematics had been on the borderline be-
tween A and B during most of the term, so one day just before 
examinations he stayed after class to ask his teacher what 
final grade he might reasonably expect. With Dick were two 
of his pals who had the same question in mind. 
"Well," said the teacher to Dick, "if you get an A then I'll 
either have to give Henry a C or John a B. But if John doesn't 
get a B then either you won't get an A or Henry won't get a 
C. On the other hand, though, if John gets a B and Henry 
doesn't get a C then you won't get an A. Is that clear?" 
The boys thanked their teacher and left, not a bit the wiser 
but determined to study diligently to the end of the term. 
Now the question is this, if John and Henry received 
the same final grade, did Dick get his A? 

47 
Long ago in a forgotten country of the east there existed 
a remarkable oracle. Unlike most oracles it was not the mouth-
piece of a single deity but of three, the God of Truth, the 
God of Falsehood, and the God of Diplomacy. These gods 
were represented by three identical figures seated in a row 
behind the altar at which their petitioners knelt. The gods 
were always ready to answer their mortal supplicants, but 
since their identities were impossible to determine because 
their images were exactly alike, no one ever knew whether 
the reply to his question came from the God of Truth and 
hence could be relied on, or whether it came from the God 
of Falsehood and so was certainly untrue, or whether it came 
from the God of Diplomacy and hence might be either true 
or false. This confusion of course did not deter the multitudes 
from seeking advice, though it did create a very profitable 
sideline for the priests of the temple who, for a price, were 
always ready to interpret the utterances of the oracle. 
One day a sacrilegious fool came to the altar vowing to do 
what the wisest men of the past had failed to accomplish, 
namely to expose the identity of each god. 
Said he to the figure on the left, "Who sittest next 
to thee?" 
"The God of Truth," was the answer. 
Then said the fool to the image in the center, "Who 
art thou?" 
"The God of Diplomacy," was the answer. 
Lastly to the image on the right the fool said, "Who 
sittest next to thee?" 
"The God of Falsehood," came the reply. 
"Oho," said the fool to himself, "so that's the way 
of it." 

And straightway he established an interpreting concession 
just outside the temple and soon had driven the priests out of 
business through the uncanny accuracy of his interpretations. 
Can you, like the fool in the legend, determine the 
identity of each god from the answers they made to the 
three simple questions they were asked? 
48 
Just before the end of the term four high school students 
were discussing their chances for certain grades. The follow-
ing remarks contain the gist of their hopes and fears. 
Jack: 
Jean: 
Lucy: 
Paul: 
We'll all get different grades. 
If I get an A, then Lucy will get aD. 
If Lucy gets a C, then Jack will get a D. 
Jack will get a better grade than Paul. 
If Jean doesn't get an A, then Jack will get 
a C. 
If I get a B, then Paul won't get a D. 
If Lucy gets an A, then I'll get a B. 
If Jean doesn't get a B, I won't either. 
When the final examinations were graded and the term 
marks made out each of the four passed, and strange as it 
may seem, each received a grade that checked exactly with 
all the ideas they had previously expressed. 
What grade did each receive? 

49 
Four men, one of whom was known to have committed a 
certain crime, made the following statements when questioned 
by the police. 
Archie: 
Dave: 
Gus: 
Tony: 
Dave did it. 
Tony did it. 
I didn't do it. 
Dave lied when he said I did it. 
II only one 01 these lour statements is true, who was 
the guilty man? On the other hand, if only one 01 these 
lour statements is lalse, who was the guilty man? 

50 
Grace, Helen, and Mary were discussing their ages one day, 
and in the course of their conversation they made the follow-
ing assertions. 
Grace: 
I am twenty-two. 
I am two years younger than Helen. 
I am a year older than Mary. 
Helen: 
I am not the youngest. 
Mary and I are three years apart. 
Mary is twenty-five. 
Mary: 
I am younger than Grace. 
Grace is twenty three. 
Helen is three years older than Grace. 
It is of course too much to expect that three young women 
should be entirely truthful when speaking of their ages, and 
in the present instance only two of the three statements 
made by each girl are true. 
Can you deduce the age 0/ each one? 

51 
Three men were once arrested for a crime which beyond 
a shadow of a doubt had been committed by one of them. 
Preliminary questioning disclosed the curious fact that one 
of the suspects was a highly respected judge, one just an 
average citizen, and one a notorious crook. In what follows 
they will be referred to as Brown, Jones, and Smith, though 
not necessarily respectively. Each man made two statements 
to the police, which were in effect 
Brown: 
I didn't do it. 
Jones didn't do it. 
Jones: 
Brown didn't do it. 
Smith did it. 
Smith: 
I didn't do it. 
Brown did it. 
Further investigation showed, as might have been expected, 
that both statements made by the judge were true, both 
statements made by the criminal were false, and of the two 
statements made by the average man one was true and one 
was false. 
Which 01 the three men was the judge, the average 
citizen, the crook? And who committed the crime? 

52 
Four men were eating dinner together in a restaurant when 
one of them suddenly struggled to his feet, cried out "I've 
been poisoned," and fell dead. His companions were arrested 
on the spot and under questioning made the following state-
ments, exactly one of which is false in each case. 
Watts: 
I didn't do it. 
I was sitting next to O'Neil. 
We had our usual waiter today. 
Rogers: 
I was sitting across the table from Smith. 
We had a new waiter today. 
The waiter didn't do it. 
O'Neil: 
Rogers didn't do it. 
It was the waiter who poisoned Smith. 
Watts lied when he said we had our usual 
waiter today. 
Assuming that only Smith's companions and the waiter are 
implicated, 
Who was the murderer? 

53 
In the Plain City High School the classes in chemistry, 
history, Latin, and mathematics are taught, though not neces-
sarily respectively, by Mr. Ames, Mr. Brown, Miss Clark, 
and Miss Davis. According to the school's yearbook, 
When they were in college the Latin teacher and 
the mathematics teacher won first prize in an all-
campus tango contest. 
Mrs. Ames is president of the Plain City P.T.A. 
The chemistry teacher and the mathematics teacher 
were roommates in college. 
The chemistry teacher is also the football coach. 
The history teacher and the Latin teacher are en-
gaged to each other. 
Mr. Ames, Mr. Brown, and Miss Clark went to 
different colleges. 
However, as everyone knows, a high school annual contains 
a certain amount of school gossip in addition to its factual 
summary of the year's activities, and hence is not always 
completely reliable. In the present case exactly five of the 
statements given are true and one is false. 
What subject does each person teach? 

54 
Mr. and Mrs. Smith and their two children form a typical 
American family. According to one of their more talkative 
neighbors, 
George and Dorothy are blood relatives. 
Howard is older than George. 
Virginia is younger than Howard. 
Virginia is older than Dorothy. 
If two and only two of these statements are true, 
What is the first name 0/ each member 0/ the family? 

55 
Brown, Jones, and Smith are employed by the City of 
Plainsfield as fireman, policeman, and teacher, though not 
necessarily respectively. Plainsfield is a very neighborly little 
town, and someone once reported that, 
Brown and the teacher are neighbors. 
Jones and the teacher are neighbors. 
Both Brown and Smith are neighbors of the fireman. 
Both the policeman and the fireman are neighbors 
of Jones. 
The men are all neighbors. 
However the truth of the matter is that only two of these 
statements are true. 
Can you determine the job which each man holds? 

56 
When Bill, Ed, Jim, and Tom started an eighteen-hole golf 
match the other day they discovered that no one had brought 
a pencil, so they had to carry their scores in their heads. As 
a result they got things a bit mixed up. In fact only two of 
the four statements made by each player as they tried to 
determine the winner were correct. 
Bill: 
I beat Jim and Tom. 
Ed shot 11I. 
Jim took 6 on the last hole. 
None of us broke 100. 
Ed: 
Bill wasn't last. 
I was the winner. 
Jim finally broke 100. 
I shot 98. 
Jim: 
I beat Bill and Ed. 
Tom: 
The last hole wasn't my best. 
We didn't all break 100. 
Tom wasn't the winner. 
Ed beat Bill. 
I was the winner. 
Bill placed between Ed and Jim. 
The last hole was Jim's best. 
Knowing this, and the fact that all the scores were different, 
Can you tell from the statements they made at the 
"nineteenth hole" who was first, second, third, and 
last? 

57 
Bill Bianchi was shot to death at close range on a lonely 
country road late one night. The police soon established that 
the murder was committed by one of four men, AI, Jack, 
Joe, and Tom, and that the gun that was used belonged to 
one of the four. Each man was questioned and made the 
statements listed below, two and only two of which are true 
in each case. 
AI: 
I didn't do it. 
Jack: 
Joe: 
Tom: 
Tom did it. 
Sure I own a gun. 
Joe and I were playing poker when Bill was 
shot. 
I didn't do it. 
Al did it. 
Joe and I were at the movies when Bill was 
shot. 
Bill was shot with Joe's gun. 
I was asleep when Bill was shot. 
Al lied when he said Tom killed Bill. 
Jack is the only one of us who owns a gun. 
Tom and Bill were pals. 
I never fired a gun in my life. 
I don't know who did it. 
Joe doesn't own a gun. 
I never saw Bill until they showed me the 
body. 
Who killed Bianchi? 

58 
Edward, Howard, and John are three high school students 
each of whom is taking three of the four subjects, biology, 
chemistry, history, and mathematics. One day while talking 
about their programs they made the following statements. 
Edward: There is just one subject we're all taking. 
I'm the only one of us who is taking mathe-
matics. 
No two of us are taking the same three 
sUbjects. 
John is wrong when he says that Howard and 
I are both taking chemistry. 
Howard: Ed is the only one of us who is taking history. 
John and I are taking the same subjects. 
We're all taking biology. 
Two of us are taking both chemistry and 
biology. 
John: 
We're all taking mathematics. 
Howard is taking history. 
Ed is taking one subject that I'm not. 
Both Howard and Ed are taking chemistry. 
If two and only two of each boy's statements are true, 
What subjects is each boy taking? 

59 
Bill, Jack, and Tom went fishing together one day. Around 
the campfire that evening, as they elaborated the day's adven-
ture for their wives, their talk took somewhat the following 
turn. 
Bill: 
Jack: 
Tom: 
Tom only caught two fish. 
Jack caught one more than Tom. 
Jack and I together caught eight more than 
'fom. 
I caught more than the others put together. 
Tom caught the most. 
I caught three more than Bill. 
Tom's wrong when he says I didn't catch any. 
Bill and Tom caught the same number. 
Jack didn't catch any. 
Bill is wrong when he says I only caught two. 
Bill and I didn't catch the same number. 
Between them, Jack and Bill caught thirteen. 
The meaning of such obviously contradictory statements as 
these is entirely obscure until one realizes that try as he will, 
no confirmed fisherman can tell the truth more than half the 
time, and these three were no exceptions. In fact just two 
of the four statements made by each man were true. 
How many /ish did each man catch? 

60 
Four men, Adams, Bates, Clark, and Douglas, were speaking 
of their wives. They were not well acquainted and the state-
ments they made, as listed below, are not all accurate. In 
fact the only thing which is certain is that each statement 
in which a man mentions his own wife's name is correct. 
Adams: 
Dorothy is Jean's mother. 
I have never met Patricia. 
Bates: 
Clark's wife is either Dorothy or Patricia. 
Jean is the oldest. 
Clark: 
Patricia is Adams' wife. 
Dorothy is Jean's older sister. 
Douglas: Margaret is my daughter. 
Dorothy is older than my wife. 
'What is the given name 01 each man's wile? 

61 
Four men, Brown, Fairgrieve, Leonard, and Whittier, are 
each enthusiastic participants in one of the four sports, bowl-
ing, fishing, golf, and tennis. At lunch one day their talk turned 
to athletics, and for some time they discussed their individual 
interests and activities. Naturally, much of their talk was 
repetitious, and the gist of their remarks is adequately sum-
marized in the following statements. 
Brown: 
Whittier doesn't like either golf or 
tennis. 
Fairgrieve : 
Leonard: 
Whittier: 
This time last Saturday I was bowling 
with Fairgrieve. 
Tennis isn't my favorite sport. 
This time last Saturday I was bowling 
with Leonard. 
I like fishing better than golf. 
This time last Saturday I was playing 
tennis with Brown. 
Bowling is Leonard's favorite sport. 
Fairgrieve doesn't like either tennis or 
golf. 
If each man has a different favorite sport, and if all that can 
be guaranteed about their comments is that each statement 
in which a man mentions his own first choice is necessarily 
true, 
What is each man's favorite sport? 

62 
Four men, Brown, Harris, Jones, and Smith, were talking 
about their sons one day. Among the statements they made 
were the following, some of which are true, some false, the 
only thing certain being that each statement in which a man 
mentions the name of his own son is necessarily correct. 
Brown: 
Al graduates from high school next month. 
Carl hasn't had a vacation since he started 
working two years ago. 
Bill's wife can't get him to take any kind of 
exercise. 
Harris: 
Bill is going to be married next spring. 
Dick has been dating my daughter. 
Al and Carl played on the freshman football 
team in college this year. 
Jones: 
Al will be nine tomorrow. 
Bill is younger than AI. 
Carl and Dick are coming home from a hunt-
ing trip today. 
Smith: 
Bill and Jones won the Club's Father and 
Son Handball Tournament. 
Dick told me yesterday that he hadn't seen 
Carl for a long time. 
Al and Carl were roommates in college last 
year. 
What is the name 0/ each man's son? 

63 
The little town of Plainview is exactly like hundreds of 
other inconspicuous country communities in every respect 
but one. Its scenery, its stores, its churches all have their 
counterparts at every crossroads in America, but as the home 
of the Murphy boys the town is unique. These remarkable 
boys, Bill and John, exhibit, for reasons as yet entirely un-
known, a most peculiar aberration with respect to truth and 
falsehood. Bill is apparently incapable of telling the truth on 
Monday, Tuesday, or Wednesday, although he invariably does 
so on the other days of the week. His brother similarly finds 
it impossible to avoid lying on Tuesday, Thursday, or Satur-
day, although during the rest of the week it is equally im-
possible for him not to speak the truth. 
When 1 heard of these unusual youngsters on my recent 
visit to Plainview 1 determined to meet them and observe for 
myself their peculiar behavior. Accordingly 1 called at their 
home and found the boys playing in the yard. 
"Hello," 1 said, "what's your name?" 
"I'm Bill," replied the older without hesitation. 
"What day is it today?" 1 continued, feeling myself 
quite the experimental psychologist. 
"Well yesterday was Sunday," said the older boy. 
"And tomorrow is Friday," his brother added. 
"Wait a minute," 1 said to the latter, "that doesn't 
sound right. Are you sure you're telling the truth?" 
"I always tell the truth on Wednesdays," he replied. 

At that moment our conservation was interrupted by the 
boys' mother. After passing the time of day with her I turned 
to find the boys gone about their play, and I had no further 
words with them. 
Now to me the most curious thing about the whole episode 
was that in spite of the dubious reliability of the boys' re-
marks it was possible, putting them all together, to infer 
from them with complete certainty the day of the week on 
which the encounter took place and also the correct name of 
the older and of the younger boy. 
When did the meeting take place, and what was the 
name 01 each boy? 
64 
Three identical boxes, one containing two black marbles, 
one containing a black marble and a white one, and the third 
containing two white marbles, are placed side by side on a 
table. Originally each box bore a tag describing its content, 
but somehow the labels got mixed up so that each one was 
incorrect. Now for some reason or other (if only to make a 
puzzle) it is desired to determine the contents of each box by 
a sampling process, that is by choosing one of the boxes, 
drawing blindly one of the marbles it contains, and repeating 
this procedure as often as necessary until the contents of each 
box can be positively inferred. 
What is the most efficient way to sample, in order to 
identily the contents 01 each box with the lewest draws? 

65 
Hank Miller, a small-time gambler and racketeer, was shot 
and fatally wounded in front of the pool hall in Smalltown by 
someone driving past in a big sedan. Hank had a number of 
enemies, but the police soon narrowed down their search for 
the killer to three men who were apprehended in Bigtown 
several days after the murder. At the time of their arrest the 
authorities were morally certain that one of these three was 
guilty, and subsequent developments proved this to be correct. 
Each of the men had a lengthy police record and was congenit-
ally incapable of making three consecutive statements without 
lying. Nevertheless they were questioned, and their asser-
tions are listed here for whatever they may be worth. 
Lefty: 
Spike killed Hank. 
I never was in Smalltown in my life. 
I'm innocent. 
Spike: 
Red is innocent. 
Everything Lefty said is a lie. 
I didn't do it. 
Red: 
I didn't kill him. 
Lefty lied when he said he'd never been in 
Smalltown. 
Spike lied when he said that everything Lefty 
said was a lie. 
Who killed Miller? 

66 
Once upon a time an aged king, nearing the end of his days 
and having no heir to succeed him upon the throne, cast about 
him for a worthy successor. In all corners of his kingdom he 
caused search to be made for young men of promise. These 
he gathered together by districts for further judging and 
selection, and so again and again until the four most gifted 
men of country were determined and brought before him for 
a final choice. So near alike in their capabilities were they that 
no ordinary test could mark one as superior to his companions, 
and in order to make his final decision the king devised this 
scheme. 
The four were tightly blindfolded and seated around a table. 
While seated thus the king said to them, "In a moment I 
shall touch each of you upon the forehead, and mayhap I shall 
leave upon you a black mark and mayhap a white mark. I 
shall then cause your bandages to be removed and each of 
you who, looking upon his companions, sees more black marks 
than white marks is to stand and remain erect until such 
time as one of you can state convincingly the color of the 
mark he bears. That one I shall name my successor." 
According to his word the king touched each man upon the 
forehead. When the blindfolds were removed each man looked 
at his fellows and at once arose. For many minutes each stood 
silent, pondering. Finally one man spoke, saying "Sire, I bear 
a black mark," and straightway gave convincing argument for 
his assertion. 
How did the king actually mark the men, and how did 
the successful candidiate prove the existence of a black 
mark upon his forehead? 

67 
Four men were once given the following test. Identical 
boxes, one containing three black balls, one containing two 
black balls and one white ball, the third containing on black 
ball and two white balls, and the fourth containing three 
white balls, were placed before them. Each box bore one of 
the labels 
Three Black 
Two Black -
One White 
One Black -
Two White 
Three White 
but, as the men were told before the test began, the four labels 
had been mixed up so that none described correctly the con-
tents of the box to which it was attached. Each man was 
assigned one of the boxes, whose label only he was permitted 
to see. Then ·in ignorance of its contents, except for such 
dubious information as its incorrect tag might convey, each 
was to draw blindly two of the three balls from his box and 
endeavor to tell from them the color of the remaining ball. 
The test was not overly difficult, and the first man after 
drawing his pair announced at once, "I've drawn two black 
balls, and I can tell what the third ball is." 
The second man likewise drew two balls from his box and 
promptly declared, "I've drawn one white and one black ball, 
and I know the color of the remaining ball." 
The third man was somewhat impatient, and after compar-
ing the balls he had drawn with the label on his box he re-

marked without further thought. "I've drawn two white balls, 
but I can't tell what the third one is." 
The last man had the hardest job of all, for he was blind 
and so didn't even know the label his box bore. However he 
thought for some time and then declared, "I don't need to 
draw. I know the color of each of the balls in my box, and 
what's more I know the color of the third ball in each of your 
boxes too." 
The other men were all amazed by the blind man's asser-
tion and immediately challenged him, whereupon he quickly 
and logically convinced them that he was entirely correct 
in saying that he knew the contents of every box. 
How did he tell? 
68 
Mrs. Davis, Mrs. Jones, and Mrs. Smith, whose first names 
are Dorothy, Helen, and Mary, though not necessarily respec-
tively, went shopping together one day. While downtown, 
Mary spent twice as much as Helen and Helen spent three 
times as much as Dorothy. If Mrs. Davis spent $3.85 more 
than Mrs. Smith, 
What is each woman's lull name? 

69 
Four men whose last names were Conner, Morgan, Smith 
and Wells, and whose first names were AI, Bill, Jack, and 
Tom, though not necessarily respectively, amused themselves 
during their lunch hour one day by playing a game in which 
the winner of the first game was to collect ten cents from 
each of the others, the winner of the second game was to 
collect twenty cents from each of the others, the winner of 
the third game was to collect thirty cents from each of the 
others, and so on. The play ended and the men went back 
to work after four turns, each man having won once, Jack 
taking the first game, Morgan the second, Bill the third, and 
Smith the last. In the beginning Tom had the most money, 
and at the end Wells had the most. 
What was the lull name 01 each 0/ the players? 

70 
Farmer Brown sent his boy John into town the other day 
with a load of melons for market. 
"Now remember", he said, "these here melons up front are 
better than those in back, and I want you to sell 'em two for 
a quarter. The other half you can let go at three for a quarter". 
On the way into town John kept thinking, "Half of 'em two 
for a quarter, half of 'em three for a quarter, .... " until finally 
he said to himself, "That's too much figurin'. They don't look 
different enough to tell apart, and I'm agoin' to sell 'em all at 
ten cents apiece." 
Business was good, and John sold all his melons in time to 
get back to the farm for supper. But when he gave his father 
the money he'd made, Farmer Brown counted it and then blew 
up, for it was a dollar short. 
"Did you spend any of this money on city foolishness?" 
said he. 
"No, sir," said John. 
"Well then, did you sell 'em like I told you, two for a quarter 
and three for a quarter?" 
"Yes and no," said John. "You see I figured that two for a 
quarter and three for a quarter was the same as five for fifty 
cents, so I just sold 'em all for ten cents apiece. Ain't that 
right?" 
"You numbskull," was all Farmer Brown would say, as he 
packed John off to bed without any supper. 
Can you tell how John happened to come out a dollar 
short on the transaction, and how many melons he sold 
altogether? 

71 
A hiker can average two miles per hour uphill and six miles 
per hour downhill. Going uphill and down, and if he spends 
no time at the summit, 
What will be his average speed lor an entire trip? 
72 
As the good ship Pleasure City steamed out of Lake James, 
past the town of Bayview, and into the swiftly flowing Wolf 
River, which empties into the lake at the little resort town 
after coursing straight as an arrow through a hundred miles 
of enchanting wilderness, her captain surely could have found 
in the bright sunlight and moving shadows of the day no hint 
of the storm that was soon to break. But break it did, for at 
12 :30 Mrs. Smythe, whose wealth and position had secured to 
her the leadership of what social life there was among the 
passengers on the week's excursion, burst into the captain's 
quarters charging that her jewels had been stolen, and ac-
cusing the ship's steward or one of the two maids assigned 
to her deck. From her story and from the stories told by the 
three suspects the captain pieced together the following facts. 
Beyond question the jewels had been stolen no more than a 
few hours before their loss was discovered. In attempting 

to be more explicit Mrs. Smythe recalled that at 10 :30 the 
morning maid came in with coffee which she received in bed. 
As the maid departed through the adjoining sitting room she 
was heard rummaging among things there, and on being so 
charged left hurriedly without reply. This maid admitted re-
turning to make the bed just before she went off duty at 12 :00. 
From 12 :10 to 12 :20 she was seen washing and changing her 
clothes in the maid's dressing room. From 12:00 to 12:10 and 
from 12 :20 to 12 :30 she could offer no alibi. 
The afternoon maid entered the suite promptly at 12 :00 to 
clean. At 12 :05 she was interrupted by the steward who, with 
the two maids, was the only person besides Mrs. Smythe who 
could possibly have had access to the suite. He told her to 
leave until he could fix some lightbulbs that needed changing. 
At 12 :10 Mrs. Smythe suddenly returned to her rooms, found 
the steward apparently snooping among her belongings, and 
engaged in a lengthy argument with him over the matter. 
This lasted until 12 :25 when the afternoon maid returned to 
continue her cleaning. At 12 :30 Mrs. Smythe missed her jewels 
and immediately took the matter to the captain, as related 
above. 
Beyond the facts already listed, upOn which all parties 
seemed independently agreed, the only other information of 
which the captain felt sure was that the robbery was a solo 
job, and that whichever of the three suspects was guilty, he 
or she had no accomplice on the ship. Unable to proceed fur-
ther, the captain at 1 :30 gave orders to return to Bayview, 
intending to place the matter in the hands of the local police. 
However, at 2:45 a lookout sighted a jar floating in the water, 
and on retrieving it found it to contain all the jewels. This 
development completely altered the situation, and when the 
ship docked at Bayview the captain placed not the problem but 
its solution in the hands of the police. 
Who 'Was the guilty party, and how did the captain de-
cide the matter? 

73 
If it takes twice as long for a passenger train to pass a 
freight train after it first overtakes it as it takes the two trains 
to pass when going in opposite directions, 
How many times faster than the freight train is the 
passenger train? 
74 
A woodsman paddling steadily across the still surface of a 
northern lake saw a magnificent bass break water directly 
ahead of him. Twelve strokes he counted until his canoe first 
crossed the ever-widening circle the fish had made, and then 
twelve more before he broke through the circle on the op-
posite side. For a time thereafter he sought relief from the 
pleasant monotony of his journey by calculating how far away 
the fish had been at the moment it jumped, but it proved too 
much for him and he soon gave himself up to less specific 
thoughts. 
Can you complete his calculation? 

75 
Both the Aliens and the Smiths have two young sons under 
eleven. The names of the boys, whose ages rounded off to the 
nearest year are all different, are Arthur, Bert, Carl, and 
David. Taking the ages of the boys only to the nearest year, 
the following statements are true. 
Arthur is three years younger than his brother. 
Bert is the oldest. 
Carl is half as old as one of the Allen boys. 
David is five years older than the younger Smith boy. 
The total ages of the boys in each family differ by the 
same amount today as they did five years ago. 
How old is each boy, and what is each boys family 
name? 

76 
When Torn and Betty applied for their marriage license the 
first thing they were asked was their ages. With a natural re-
luctance to reveal so important a secret Betty said that they 
were both in their twenties, and wasn't that close enough. 
The clerk insisted on more specific information, however, so 
Torn added that they both had the same birthday, and that 
he was four times as old as Betty was when he was three times 
as old as Betty was when he was twice as old as Betty was. 
At this the clerk fainted, whereupon the young couple snatched 
up the license, hurried off to the preacher's, and lived happily 
ever after. When the clerk carne to and realized that he would 
have to complete his records some way or other he began to do 
a little figuring, and before long had found out how old the two 
were. 
Can you tell too? 

77 
Four explorers once set out afoot into a desolate and barren 
desert. As far as they knew there was not a spring in all the 
wilderness ahead of them, hence in addition to their food and 
equipment they had to carryall their drinking water. Burd-
ened thus, each man was able to pack only enough to sustain 
one person for ten days. If they all stayed together they could 
of course go no farther than a five day march into the desert 
and still have sufficient provisions for the return trip. If after 
a day or two, however, one of the men were to set aside just 
enough of his supplies to enable him to return safely to civili-
zation, and then distribute the balance to his companions, 
these might perhaps be able to push on more than five days 
before being compelled to turn back. Like all true scientists 
these men cared little for personal glory, and each was willing 
to do anything that might extend the distance to which some 
member of the expedition could penetrate the unknown coun-
try before them. Assuming that the men made the most effec-
tive use of this spirit of self-sacrifice, and that the operations 
of transferring food from one pack to another and caching it, if 
necessary, were done only at the end of the day, and assuming 
also that once a man returned to civilization he did not set out 
again with additional supplies, 
Ho'W far into the desert 'Was one of the men able 
to venture? 

78 
With how few bearers can an explorer make a six-day march 
across an absolutely barren desert if he and the available 
bearers can each carry only enough food and water to last one 
man four days? 
79 
How long will it take a man to cross a barren and water-
less desert one hundred miles wide if he can walk twenty miles 
a day but can carry only enough food and water for three 
days? For simplicity assume that the only places where sup-
plies can safely be cached are at the points reached after one 
or more full days travel. 

80 
A party of five white men is on one bank of a river and a 
party of five savages is on the other, and each group wishes 
to cross to the opposite side. The only means of transportation 
is a dugout canoe which will hold just three persons. Only one 
savage and one white man know how to paddle. Moreover, 
for obvious reasons, it is unhealthy for the savages to out-
number the white men in the boat or on either shore. 
How is it possible lor the two parties to cross the stream 
in safety? 
81 
Under the conditions of the preceding problem is it possible 
for a group of six white men and a group of six savages each 
to pass in safety to the opposite shore? 

82 
In elementary geometry the notions of congruent or abso-
lutely identical figures, and similar or proportional figures are 
of fundamental importance. At a somewhat more advanced 
level in pure mathematics, and in such applied fields as struc-
tural organic chemistry and electric circuit analysis, still an-
other relation between figures has become important. This is 
the property of what might be called essential similarity or 
structural identity. It implies that two figures, though not 
necessarily congruent or even similar, are nonetheless con-
structed of the same number of elementary components, simi-
larly connected. Thus any two normal men, though differing 
markedly, perhaps, in their various measurements, are struc-
turally alike, and this structural identity is in no way affected 
by the relative movement of the component parts -
arms, 
legs, fingers, ete. More abstractly, the configurations shown in 
Figure 1 illustrate this idea both positively and negatively. 
Though each pattern is composed of five points and five 
line-segements, or arcs, only numbers 4, 8, and 12 are essen-
tially the same. The others, though put together from the same 
components, are definitely dissimilar, each from all the rest, 
in the manner in which their elements are connected. 
Of the many problems springing from this notion, the fol-
lowing is a fairly easy and typical example. 
In how many essentially different ways can six islands be 
joined by bridges so that each island can be reached from 
every other island, and so that three of the islands have three 
bridges leading from them, two of the islands have two bridges 
leading from them, and one of the islands has only one bridge 
leading from it? 

1 
2 
4 
3 
5 
7 
6 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
FIGURE 1. 

83 
In an old and much worn book of travels, dating from the 
times when a man who had journeyed beyond the hills that 
guarded his own village was an object of awe to his fellows, 
I once came upon a description of a remarkable city of the 
east. According to the narrator, this city was built upon ten 
islands connected in the following manner. Five bridges led from 
the islands to the mainland. Moreover four of the islands had 
four bridges leading from them, three of the islands had three 
bridges leading from them, two of the islands had two bridges 
leading from them, and one island could be reached by only one 
bridge. 
No doubt in its time this description had provided many 
simple folk with a vicarious sense of exploration and adven-
ture. In fact I read it with keen interest until suddenly in a 
moment of unwonted penetration I perceived that the whole 
thing was a hoax, and that no such city could exist anywhere 
in this or in any other world. 
What is the fallacy that stamps this description as im-
possible? 

84 
To those who have successfully outgrown their early dread 
of arithmetic, coded computations are usually interesting and 
rather easy puzzles. The following multiplication in which each 
letter stands for a different digit is an example of this sort 
of problem. 
SOE 
UPE 
NTRE 
OOAO 
NSHU 
NRRNPE 
This can be deciphered with no further clues, but there is 
one too good to conceal. When the letters are arranged in 
the order of the numbers they represent they spell out a phrase 
which makes a very keen observation on the art of puzzle 
solving. 
For what number does each letter stand? 

85 
When the staffs of the Gibsonville Gazette and the Centralia 
Clarion met for their annual baseball game at the Hillsboro 
County Fair it was decided by the unanimous assent of all 
concerned that flipping a coin or tossing up a bat to determine 
which side should take the field first was entirely inconsistent 
with the literary pretensions of the players. So it was agreed, 
as being more in keeping with the spirit of their profession, 
that all eighteen players should line up and count off alpha-
betically, and the first player who was 'counted' with the initial 
letter of his own name would choose whether his team should 
bat first or not. The players lined up and the captain of the 
Clarion team began. However fate seemed vexed at the impu-
dence of the players in rejecting the time-honored device of the 
coin, and refused to give them a decision. The counting went 
steadily on 
... a, b, c, ... x, y, z, a, b, ... x, y, z, a, b, ... 
again and again, still no one called out his own initial. Finally 
after at least a score of turns through the alphabet they gave 
up and decided to toss a quarter after all. Unfortunately the 
quarter got lost in the grass, and before it could be found a 
storm came up and the game was postponed until the follow-
ing year. Thus there was no box-score to be published, and 

the make-up of each team remained shrouded in mystery. 
From devious sources, however, it leaked out that the total 
group of eighteen players included 
Adams 
Randolph 
Miller 
Gerson 
Taylor 
Brown 
Smith 
Lucas 
Sawyer 
Timmons 
Flynn 
Myers 
Who played for each team? 
86 
Carver 
Babcock 
Jenkins 
Morton 
Young 
Peters 
In spite of appearances the following is not a spelling lesson 
but a multiplication problem in which each digit has been re-
placed by a different letter. 
FUR 
DOG 
AGER 
DR I P 
FUR 
RIP E R 
What two numbers were multiplied? 

87 
Many merchants adopt the policy of marking their price 
tags in a code in which each digit from zero to nine is rep-
resented by a different letter. This enables the salesmen to 
tell at a glance the price of an article and at the same time 
keeps the customers in ignorance of the cost until the clerks 
reveal it. 
So habitual was this practice with a certain Mr. Pythagoras 
J. Countinghouse that he began to do all his calculations with 
letters instead of with numbers, to the great discomfiture of 
his bookkeepers. Such a system is much too simple to remain 
long a secret, however, and one day a customer found a scrap 
of paper in the store with the following computation on it, 
and in almost no time at all had figured out just which letter 
stood for each number. 
ECA)FDBHJ(ABJ 
CGG 
AGAH 
AAEA 
KDDJ 
KDBH 
AJ 
Can you too decode this long division? 

88 
It's an old saying that "two wrongs don't make a right." 
However here is one case where the proverb is not quite true. 
For although it is undeniably correct to say that in the two 
subtractions 
NINE 
-TEN 
TWO 
NINE 
-ONE 
ALL 
we have two wrongs, nevertheless when the digits which the 
various letters represent are correctly identified the two cal-
culations will be found to be absolutely right. 
What number must each letter represent in order that 
these two subtractions may simultaneously be decoded 
into correct computations? 

89 
Things are not always what they seem. What is true from 
one point of view may be false from another and vice versa, 
and here is a puzzle to prove it. Despite the fact that every 
arithmetic teacher in the land would unhesitatingly declare 
that it is incorrect to write 
SEVEN 
-
N I N E 
E I G H T 
it is nonetheless true that as a puzzle in which each letter 
represents a different digit it is correct subtraction, and in 
fact can be successfully decoded in two quite different ways. 
What digits do the t'arious letters stand lor in each 01 
the two possible solutions? 

90 
The last puzzle was in sense paradoxical, for although at 
first glance it appeared to be obviously wrong it proved to be 
right. Here is one of the opposite character: 
ELEVEN 
-THREE 
E I G H T 
On the face of it this seems to be entirely and indisputably 
correct, but if we regard it as a coded subtraction in which 
each letter represents a different digit it simply cannot be 
deciphered. 
H 010 can this be proved? 
91 
For purposes of reassurance after the last two problems, 
here is one which is incorrect both as an exercise in arith-
metic and as a puzzle. 
SEVEN 
+ N I N E 
E I G H T 
What is the reason that this simple addition cannot be 
decoded? 

92 
One of the most discouraging things in life these days 
is the fact that from the individual household right up to 
the national government it seems impossible to practice econ-
omy successfully. To do so certainly requires a lot of figur-
ing, and the following puzzle shows why even careful figur-
ing isn't enough. 
At the basis of all attempts to economize is the calculation 
SPEND 
-L E S S 
MONEY 
and at least as a puzzle in which each letter represents a dif-
ferent digit it is not merely hard, it is absolutely impossible. 
Can you devise a proof that this subtraction cannot be 
decoded? 

93 
In the following example of multiplication most of the digits 
have been suppressed and replaced by dots. Those that remain 
are not necessarily all of the 4's, 5's, and 6's in the example. 
6 
5.5 
.. 5. 4 
Can you restore the suppressed digits? 

94 
Only a few of the digits in this long division have been re-
tained, the rest have been indiscriminately replaced by dots. 
) . . . . . ( .. 8 
.. 1 
. 8 . 
4 2 
Can you determine the missing digits and complete the 
calculation? 
95 
Supply the missing digits in the following long division . 
. 4.).98 ... ( ... 
. 7 .. 
. 4. 
7 •. 
3. 

96 
The incomplete multiplication problem 
. 7 . 
. 6. 
3 
6 
3 
1 
1 
is probably easier than most to finish because more digits have 
been left than are actually needed in the reconstruction. It 
is therefore interesting to determine how much of the given 
skeleton can be eliminated and still leave the problem with a 
unique solution. Actually there are two distinct ways in which 
the seven given digits can be reduced to six with the property 
that tbe problem can be uniquely reconstructed from them. 
Can you find the superfluous digits? 

97 
Like the last puzzle, this one also contains more informa-
tion than is actually required for the reconstruction. 
1 ., 
. 3 
. 4 • 
1 
9 . 
. 6. 
4 .• 8 . 
In fact there are exactly three digits, among those given, 
anyone of which can be omitted without destroying the uni-
queness of the required reconstruction. 
Which are they? 

98 
In a certain problem in multiplication one of the digits was 
replaced on each occurrence by the letter X, another digit 
was replaced on each occurrence by the letter Y, and the re-
maining digits were completely suppressed, yielding 
X. 
X .. y 
. X Y 
. Y X Y 
What two numbers were multiplied? 

99 
In a certain mUltiplication problem if one of the digits is 
replaced throughout by the letter X and all other digits are 
left completely unspecified, the result is 
.XX . 
. X .. 
. . X 
X .. X 
What two numbers were multiplied? 

100 
In a certain problem in long division if the odd digits are 
all replaced by the letter 0 and the even digits are all replaced 
by the letter E the result is 
OOE)EEOOE(OOE 
EOE 
000 
OEE 
EOE 
EOE 
Can you decode the computation? 
101 
If the letter A represents equally well any of the digits 
0, 1, 2, 3, or 4, and if, similarly, the letter Z stands for any 
of the digits 5, 6, 7, 8, or 9, decode the following multiplication. 
AZA 
AAZ 
AAAA 
AAZZ 
ZAA 
ZAZAA 


SOLUTIONS 


SOLUTIONS 
1. Brown is the manager, Jones the teller, and Smith the 
cashier. 
2. Clark is the carpenter, Daw the painter, and Fuller the 
plumber. 
3. The party announced the engagements of Dorothy to Jim, 
Jean to Tom, and Virginia to Bill. 
4. Carter is the grocer, Flynn the banker, Milne the drug-
gist, and Savage the architect. 
5. Brown is the accountant, Clark the president, Jones the 
manager, and Smith the cashier. 
6. Clark is the druggist, Jones the grocer, Morgan the 
butcher, and Smith the policeman. 
7. Brown is the banker, Clark the lawyer, Jones the doctor, 
and Smith the architect. 
S. Miss Ames, Miss Brown, Conroy, Davis, and Evans hold 
respectively the positions of manager, cashier, floor-
walker, buyer, and clerk. 
9. Allen, Bennett, Clark, Davis, and Ewing are respectively 
the manager, the clerk, the floorwalker, the cashier, and 
the buyer. 
10. The last names of Jane, Janice, Jack, Jasper, and Jim are 
Cramer, Carter, Clark, Clayton, and Carver, respectively. 
11. Mr. Smith is the teacher, Mrs. Smith the lawyer, their 
son the postmaster, Mr. Smith's sister the grocer, and 
Mrs. Smith's father the preacher. 
12. Mrs. Arthur, Miss Bascomb, Mrs. Conroy, Duval, Eggles-
ton, and Furness teach French, Latin, mathematics, Eng-
lish, history, and economics, respectively. 
13. Clayton was the policeman, Forbes the murderer, Graham 
the witness, Holgate the victim, McFee the judge, and 
Warren the hangman. 
14. Bill is married to Mary, Ed is married to Helen, and Tom 
is married to Grace. Bill shot 98 and Tom shot 96. 

Solutioru 
15. Miss Ainsley is the secretary of Yates, the lawyer; Miss 
Barnette is Dr. Vernon's secretary; and Miss Coulter is 
the secretary of Wilson, the architect. 
16. Art is the brakeman, John the conductor, Pete the engin-
eer, and Tom the fireman. Pete and Tom are brothers. 
John is Tom's son and Pete's nephew. 
17. Alice, Betty, Carol and Dorothy are married to George, 
Harry, Frank, and Ed, respectively, and were dancing 
with Frank, Ed, Harry, and George, respectively. 
18. Mrs. Abbott had to go to the hardware store, Mrs. Briggs 
had to go to the bank, Mrs. Culver had to go to the 
grocery store, and Mrs. Denny had to go to the shoe store. 
19. Allen, the architect, has his office on the eighth floor; 
Brady, the lawyer, has his office on the third floor; McCoy, 
the dentist, has his office on the fifth floor; and Smith, 
the accountant, has his office on the fifteenth floor. 
20. Adams, the poet, was reading a play; Brown, the histor-
ian, was reading a novel; Clark, the novelist, was reading 
poetry; and Davis, the playwright, was reading history. 
21. Brown. 
22. Alice is the oldest, then Carl, then Bill. 
23. Tom is the oldest, then Jack, then Howard. 
24. Dick caught the most, followed in order by Tom, Jack, and 
AI. 
25. Tom was the strongest, followed in order by Hank, Bill, 
and Joe. 
26. Jennings was the best golfer, followed in order by Craw-
ford, Bowman, and Stewart. 
27. Grace and Helen were playing against Alice and Mary. 
Grace was the oldest, followed in order by Helen, Mary, 
and Alice. 
28. Sixty-eight. 

SolutiollB 
29. Of the 78 who drink coffee, 78-48=30 do not drink tea. 
Of the 71 who drink tea, 71-48=23 do not drink coffee. 
The three non-overlappng classes of individuals, those 
who drink coffee alone (30), those who drink tea alone 
(23), and those who drink both (48), total 101. But the 
reporter gave the number of consumers interviewed as 
100. It was this inaccuracy which cost him his job. 
30. Since there are no childless couples every family must 
have at least one girl, either as an only child or as the 
sister (required by the second fact) of such boys as there 
may be. Thus there must be at least as many girls as 
families. But then, since there are more boys than girls, 
the total number of children must necessarily be more 
than twice the number of families, that is, more than the 
total number of adults since there are just two adults per 
family. This contradicts the first fact of the report and 
constitutes the inconsistency for which the census taker 
was reprimanded. 
31. Ten. 
32. There were three families, one with a single boy, one with 
two girls and a boy, and one with two girls and three boys. 
33. Margaret Marshall went to the bank and to the grocery 
store, Doris Price went to the bank and to the hardware 
store, Ethel Torrey went to the butcher shop and the 
grocery store, and so did Lucille Winters. 
34. Mitchell teaches French and history, Morgan teaches biol-
ogy and English, and Myers teaches economics and math-
ematics. 
35. Jacob spoke German and Italian, John spoke French and 
Italian, Peter spoke English and French, and William 
spoke English and Italian. 
36. There were six men representing four lodges. 
37. There were ten men representing five fraternities. 
38. Norris Atwood, Martin Bartlett, Louis Campbell, Peter 
Donovan, and Oliver Easterling. Atwood would speak to 

SolutiolU 
Bartlett, Donovan, and Easterling; Bartlett would speak 
to Atwood and Easterling; Campbell would speak only to 
Donovan; Donovan would speak to Atwood, Campbell, and 
Easterling; and Easterling would speak to Atwood, Bart-
lett, and Donovan. 
39. Colter must be president, Blaine must be vice-president, 
and Ebert must be secretary. 
40. Flynn for president, Ewald for vice-president, Congreve 
for secretary, and Burton for treasurer. 
41. The committee must consist of Davis, French, Grant, and 
Hughes. 
42. Jones and Smith but not Brown. 
43.ABCD 
y 
X W Z 
44. Louise and Allan Barber, Dorothy and Henry Cutler, 
Beth and Victor Drake. 
45. Lewis is the clerk, Miller is the cashier, and Nelson is the 
accountant. 
46. No. 
47. The God of Diplomacy was on the left, the God of False-
hood was in the middle, and the God of Truth was on the 
right. 
48. Jack, Jean, Lucy, and Paul received B, A, D, and C, respec-
tively. 
49. a. Gus. b. Dave. 
50. Grace was twenty-three, Helen was twenty-five, and Mary 
was twenty-two. 
51. Brown was the average citizen, Jones the criminal, and 
Smith the Judge. Brown was the guilty party. 
52. O'Neil was the murderer. 
53. Ames, Brown, Miss Clark, and Miss Davis teach chem-
istry, Latin, history, and mathematics, respectively. 

Solutions 
54. George and Virginia are the father and mother. Howard 
and Dorothy are the children. 
55. Brown is the teacher, Jones the.policeman, and Smith the 
fireman. 
56. Ed was the winner, followed by Jim, Bill, and Tom, in that 
order. 
57. Joe. 
58. Ed is taking biology, chemistry, and history; Howard is 
taking biology, chemistry, and mathematics; John is tak-
ing biology, history, and mathematics. 
59. Bill caught seven, Jack caught ten, and Tom caught nine. 
60. Margaret Adams, Patricia Bates. Dorothy Clark, and Jean 
Douglas. 
61. Brown is the tennis player, Fairgrieve the golfer, Leon-
ard the bowler, and Whittier the fisherman. 
62. Dick Brown, Bill Harris, Carl J ones, and Al Smith. 
63. Bill was the younger boy, John the older. The interview 
took place on Tuesday. 
64. In every case the contents of each drawer can be inferred 
by drawing once from the drawer marked One Black-
One White. 
65. Red. 
66. The king could not have left fewer than three black marks 
for then the men bearing such marks would have seen 
more white marks than black and remained seated. More-
over, if the king had marked just three of the men with 
black spots then when all arose, one of the three bearing 
such marks would surely have concluded at once that he 
had such a mark, for the contrary supposition would 
prove that there were fewer than three black marks in 
which case, as pointed out above, not all of the men 
would have arisen. Since no one was able thus to identify 
his mark without delay, the king must have marked each 
man with a black spot. 

Solution. 
The man who finally decided that his mark was black was 
clever enough to extend this reasoning one step further. 
If he supposed that his mark was white, then surely one 
of the other three men would have reasoned, as' outlined 
above, that he (the third man) had a black mark. Since 
none of the three had reached a conclusion but still stood 
silent, the problem must have been more baffling, that is 
he must have had a black mark and not a white one. 
67. The only combination of boxes and contents for which the 
first two men could easily infer the color of their third 
ball while the third man could not is the following: 
Box 
1 
2 
3 
4 
Label 
B B W 
B W W B B B 
W W W 
Contents 
B B B 
B B W 
W W W 
B W W 
Reasoning to this conclusion, the blind man correctly 
identified the contents of each box. 
68. Mary Davis, Helen Jones, and Dorothy Smith. 
69. Jack Conner, Tom Mogran, Al Smith, and Bill Wells. 
70. Selling the melons at five for 50 cents, which was essen-
tially what John did, would be correct only if each group 
of five consisted of three of the cheap melons and two of 
the more expensive ones. But since there were just as 
many melons of each kind to begin with, by seIling three 
of the cheap ones for each pair of the more expensive 
ones, the former would be sold out sooner than the latter, 
after which further sales at 10 cents apiece could be made 
only by seIling the more expensive melons at a 21;2 cents 
loss. To have a total loss of $1.00 resulting from a loss 
of 2lh cents per melon, 40 of the more expensive melons 
must have been sold after the cheaper ones were gone. 
This means that originally there must have been 120 
melons of each kind, since only two-thirds of the ex-
pensive melons would have been sold when the supply of 
the cheaper ones was exhausted, and the remaining third 
then constituted the 40 melons that were sold at a loss. 
71. Three miles per hour. 

Solutio nil 
72. When the Pleasure City was going upstream her actual 
speed was 
normal, or still water speed minus speed of current 
and when she was returning downstream her actual speed 
was 
normal, or still water speed plus speed of current 
In either case the jar containing the jewels floated down-
stream with speed equal to the speed of the current. 
Hence when the jar and the ship were separating (before 
the ship turned back, that is) the distance between them 
was increasing at a rate equal to 
(normal speed minus speed of current) plus speed of 
current or just 
normal speed 
Likewise, after the ship put about and began to overtake 
the jar the distance between them diminished at a rate 
equal to 
(normal speed plus speed of current) minus speed of 
current 
or again just 
normal speed 
Thus the speed of separation and the speed of overtaking 
were the same, and hence, the time of separation must 
have been equal to the time of overtaking. From the 
given data the time of overtaking was 2 :45 minus 1 :30 
or one hour and fifteen minutes. Counting back this inter-
val from 1 :30, when the ship put about, gives 12 :15 as 
the time when the jar was thrown into the water. The 
afternoon maid was the only one of the three suspects 
whose whereabouts were not definitely known at this 
time. Hence only she could have thrown the jar into the 
river, and so she must have been the thief. 
73. The passenger train is three times as fast as the freight 
train. 
'14. The fish was sixteen strokes away. 
75. Bert Smith is eight, David Allen is seven, Arthur Allen 
is four, and Carl Smith is two. 

SolutWru 
76. Tom was twenty-four and Betty was twenty-one. 
77. One of the men was able to go a distance equal to a ten-
day march. (If it is possible to transfer and cache food 
anywhere, then by making suitable transfers and caches 
.!. , 35 , and 65 days marches from their starting point 
4 12 
12 
one of the men can penetrate the desert to a distance 
5 
equal to 10 -
days marches.) 
12 
78. With two bearers, one of whom turns back at the end of 
the first day, the other of whom turns back at the end of 
the second day, the explorer can cross the desert in safety. 
79. By :first caching food and water along the way, the man 
can cross the desert in fifteen days. (If it is possible to 
cache food anywhere, the man can cross the desert in 
4 
2 
11 -
days by caching suitable amounts -, 1, and 2 
5 
5 
days marches from his starting point.) 
80. If each savage be represented by a dot and each white 
man by a small circle, and if the individual in each group 
who knows how to paddle be distinguished by an under-
score, then the manner in which the parties can cross the 
stream in safety may be indicated as follows: 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Q 
.£ 
~ 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Q 
.-.0 
0 
Q 
!. 
0 
0 
• 
• 
0 
0 
Q 
~ 
!. 
0 
0 
o 
0 
~. Q 
0 
0 
o 
0 
Q .... 
0 
0 
• 
• 
0 
0 
..... 0 
0 
Q 
o 0 
0 
0 
Q 
.£ 
~ 
81. No. 

Solutions 
82. The islands can be joined in thirteen essentially different 
ways: 

Solutio,.. 
83. Evidently for any system of bridges there must be twice 
as many ends as there are bridges, that is, the number 
of bridge ends must be even. But according to the account 
given in the problem the number of bridge ends is 4X 4 
plus 3X3 plus 2X2 plus 1X1, plus 5 more for the ends of 
the liridges that reach the mainland. The total number 
of ends is thus 35, an odd number and hence impossible. 
84. NOS U REP A T H 
1234567890 
85. 
Clarion 
Babcock 
Brown 
Flynn 
Jenkins 
Lucas 
Peters 
Randolph 
Taylor 
Timmons 
86. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 
DAFOREGIUP 
87. ABC D E F G H J K 
2678394051 
88.NWIATOEL 
12356890 
89. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 or 
EST N V I H G or 
Gazette 
Adams 
Carver 
Gerson 
Miller 
Myers 
Morton 
Smith 
Sawyer 
Young 
12345678 
VTGESNIH 
90. Since the answer contains no digit in the extreme left 
column, it is apparent that E equals 1. From the second 
column from the right it is also evident that H must be 
either 0 (zero) or 9. If H equals 9, then in the first column 
on the right N must equal 0 and T must be 9, which is 
impossible since H already represents 9 and two letters 
cannot stand for the same number. On the other hand, if 
H equals 0 a contradiction also arises for then in the 
fourth column from the rig;ht I must be either 0 or 1, 

SolutiollB 
which is impossible since these numbers are represented 
by Hand E respectively. Thus the problem is impossible 
of solution. 
91. In three different columns E and N are added together, 
each time with a different result. This is impossible since 
only two different totals can arise, depending on whether 
o or 1 is carried over from the column on the right. 
92. In the third column, E from E must leave either 0 or 9, 
depending upon whether or not 1 must be borrowed from 
this column to carry out the subtraction in the preceding 
column. But if N is 9, as it is in the case when 1 is bor-
rowed, the upper number in the preceding column (being 
9) is so large that no borrowing would be necessary. On 
the other hand, if N is 0, which will be the case only if 
there is no borrowing for the preceding subtraction, then 
the upper number in the preceding column, being 0 would 
inevitably require borrowing no matter what the sub-
tt"acted number S might be. Thus, each of the only two 
possibilities for N leads to a contradiction, and so the 
problem is impossible of solution. 
93. 
94. 
645 
721 
645 
1 2 9 0 
4 5 1 5 
4 6 5 045 
43) 309 1 6 ( 7 1 8 
301 
8 1 
4 3 
386 
344 
4"2 

Solutiom 
95. 
3 4 7 ) 2 9 8 0 7 3 ) 8 5 9 
96. 
97. 
277 6 
2 0 4 7 
1 735 
3 123 
3 1 2 3 
478 
863 
1 4 3 4 
2 8 6 8 
3 8 2 4 
4 1 2 5 1 4 
Either the 7 in the first line or the 6 in the fourth line 
from the top is superfluous, for when either of these is 
omitted the problem can still be uniquely reconstructed. 
447 3 
543 
1 3 4 1 9 
1 7 8 9 2 
22365 
2 428 8 3 9 
If anyone of the following digits is omitted the problem 
can still be uniquely reconstructed: The 3 in the first line, 
the 4 in the second line, the 1 at the left end of the third 
line. 
98. 
3 6 4 
99. 
2 7 
2 548 
728 
982 8 
8 662 
834 
3 4 648 
2 598 6 
6 9 2 9 6 
7 2 2 4 108 

100. 
1 1 6 ) 8 4 9 1 2 ( 7 3 2 
101. 
812 
3 7 1 
348 
232 
232 
372 
246 
2 2 3 2 
1 488 
744 
9 1 5 1 2 
Solutions 

