Article
Adaptive Behavior
2018, Vol. 26(3) 91–109
 The Author(s) 2018
Reprints and permissions:
sagepub.co.uk/journalsPermissions.nav
DOI: 10.1177/1059712318763806
journals.sagepub.com/home/adb
The biology of consciousness from the
bottom up
Claude MJ Braun1 and Shaun Lovejoy2
Abstract
This essay aims to outline a scientific approach to the investigation of consciousness emphasizing achievements and
promise of hardcore bottom-up biology. We propose to contemplate what would be the minimal requirements of con-
sciousness in the simplest of life forms. We show that, starting from the molecular nuts and bolts of such life forms, it is
the extreme multitudinousness of the moving material components forming consciousness, and their organized swarm-
ing, that appears outstanding. This is in stark contrast with the impression obtained from introspection that conscious-
ness is a single, unconstrained, immaterial stream.
Keywords
Consciousness, bottom up, top down, complexity science, swarm biology
Handling Editor: Takashi Ikegami, University of Tokyo, Japan
1. A definition of consciousness that is
palatable for scientific investigation
1.1. Where does phenomenal consciousness come
from?
Consciousness of the sort which most amazes people
and which is cognized by introspection carried out by
literate human adults grows out of (or emerges from)
something far less complex, bottom up. Few in the con-
sciousness studies community ponder that truth in
detail (see Edelman, 1987, for a famous exception:
‘‘GOD = generator of diversity’’).
There are three basic streams of complexification of
consciousness: phylogenetic, ontogenetic, and microge-
netic. Each of these streams calls for bottom-up model-
ing. One example will suffice to show that human
voluntary action is always embedded in these three
streams (Figure 1). Braun (2003) proposed the axio-
matics of action for any living being. There have to be
a how, a where, a when, a why, and a what to act on.
Animals only have neural circuits operating theses five
axes of action implicitly. Humans are born with the
same brain networks yielding action of the sort limited
to the animal-like implicit version. By childhood, a sec-
ond brain network, more recently evolved, of explicit
elaboration of action, kicks in. Both systems are used
in all situations by human adults. The implicit system,
being
more
hardwired,
is
more
automatic,
more
machine like, more modular, and faster (Badgaiyan &
Posner, 1997). To sum up this example, human high-
order consciousness is activity of certain systems of the
human brain, but this activity constantly draws from
non-conscious brain processing of other systems of the
brain of a more phylogenetically primitive nature.
Primitive and evolved brain systems are literally piled
up and cross-integrated developmentally in the brain.
Primitive and evolved processors integrate all the time
as mental life is elaborating a tiny iceberg tip available
to introspection. These three streams, phylogenetic,
ontogenetic, and microgenetic, integrate in real space
and time in the human brain.
1.2. What would be a minimal consciousness in the
simplest possible type of living being?
The type of consciousness we are interested in for the
rest of this essay will of course have to be compatible
1Department of Psychology, Universite´ du Que´bec a` Montre´al, Montre´al,
QC, Canada
2Department of Physics, McGill University, Montre´al, QC, Canada
Corresponding author:
Claude MJ Braun, Department of Psychology, Universite´ du Que´bec a`
Montre´al, CP 8888, Succ. Centre-ville, Montre´al, QC H3C 3P8, Canada.
Email: braun.claude@uqam.ca

with the angle of our approach, which is bottom up. We
therefore define consciousness, strictly for the purposes
of this essay, in the most primitive sense possible, as man-
agement of the body and of the niche and mastery of the
difference between the two, guiding together relatively
organized adaptive behavior, in a living organism.
A living being or organism can occasionally be a single
species, but the vast majority of organisms today, if not all
of them, are in fact multi-organisms, including modern bac-
teria which are typically carriers of endo- or exosymbiotic
viruses and other bacteria (Foulger et al., 2015). Whether
the living being is a unit with a single genome or a multi-
tude of units each with its own genome, it is to the extent
that it adapts to the niche as an integrated unit that the
multi-organism has an active ‘‘self’’ and it is also to this
same extent that it is conscious.
The limit of the self, for the purposes of our present
expose´ , will be very simple to understand: it is the most
external membrane of the multi-organism because,
indeed, every known living thing is a ‘‘bag of stuff.’’
There is an ‘‘awareness’’ of the self in organisms, but
this so-called ‘‘awareness’’ does not have to be declara-
tive. We merely state that any living being uses complex
material exchange with the niche, termed autopoiesis
(Maturana, 1970; Varela, Maturana, & Uribe, 1974), to
maintain its integrity over time and to eventually repro-
duce. It thus acts ‘‘as if’’ it were explicitly and declara-
tively ‘‘aware’’ of what that integrity actually is, it has a
‘‘purpose’’ or ‘‘intention’’ which is to stay alive (Bray,
1998), and it has rudimentary ‘‘understanding’’ of the
world (Margulis, 2001). To be precise, our use, so far,
of the terms ‘‘understanding,’’ ‘‘awareness,’’‘‘purpose,’’
and ‘‘intention’’ is metaphoric. In fact, autopoiesis con-
sists precisely of highly complex, dynamic, integrated
molecular signaling, nothing else.
1.3. Consciousness is exclusively an aspect of real
mental life
Consciousness is not attention, memory, language, or
aimless motor stereotypes. These can all be done by
machines. The main organizational principle of any liv-
ing being is to draw energy from the niche to grow, sur-
vive, and reproduce as a whole, a process more
dynamic than the stream of material exchanges occur-
ring within and between non-living entities. Entities
that manifest no autopoiesis present exchange between
themselves and the rest of the world which is more tri-
vial, though not necessarily simpler. A computer chip is
constantly undergoing material exchange with the out-
side world. Fermions are coursing through it. Heat
may be making it brittle. Humidity may be rotting it.
Inevitably, its internal atomic bonds will reach the end
of their course. But that structure is never orchestrating
material exchanges to replace damaged parts. It is
never preparing a duplicate of itself. It is not molecu-
larly growing. It is neither actively and creatively grab-
bing
energy
from
the niche
nor commensurately
creating dissipative structures in its periphery. It is not
autocatalytic. It does not ‘‘feel’’ either the niche or
itself. It has no autopoiesis. Machines can do cognition
and they are readily termed ‘‘intelligent,’’ but they are
not yet conscious as defined above (Gamez, 2008).
Both life and consciousness are matter (atoms, mole-
cules, tissues, organs) that have been co-selected in evo-
lution, are re-implemented in the development of each
organism, and are selected and orchestrated in each
context, consisting of constrained signaling, from the
world to the organism and from the organism to the
world, all serving adaptation for a single purpose, life.
1.4. Co-waxing and co-waning of life and
consciousness from bacteria to humans
Bacterial spores can survive in stone, ice, or salt, rela-
tively inanimate, with little or no autopoiesis, for mil-
lions
of
years
(Satterfield,
Lowenstein,
Vreeland,
Figure 1. This figure, previously published in the French
language only (Braun, 2003), depicts the five main dimensions of
action: where, when, how, and why to act, and what to act on.
Adult reptilian and human neonatal brain networks involved in
managing these dimensions of action are depicted on the left.
Explicitly meta-conscious adult human brain networks which
occasionally take over the management of these dimensions are
depicted on the right.
92
Adaptive Behavior 26(3)

Rosenzweig, & Powers, 2005). Similarly, organisms
with highly developed consciousness can undergo short
or long stretches of time during which they manifest
extremely reduced awareness, no ability to explicitly or
declaratively distinguish the self from the rest of the
niche, such as humans under anesthesia, during sleep,
in mental disease, and coma.
Life and consciousness wax and wane together. They
both hang by a thread. This is true of all levels of living
beings and all levels of consciousness including the
highest forms, limited to adult literate humans, termed
reflective or phenomenal or access consciousness by
introspectionists (Snodgrass, Kalaida, & Winer, 2009).
The dormant or ‘‘hibernating’’ organism or multi-
organism is near death and commensurately presents
vastly diminished consciousness of the type, of course,
that characterizes that organism’s species. The frozen
or salted bacterial spore or the frozen human ovum is
basically dead and unconscious: there is no physiology,
and the flow of signaling has become trivial in and
around the organism.
An example of a trough, but not a breach, in the
life/consciousness pairing is mammalian sleep. Sleep
consists of a shutdown of consciousness for brain
backwash. Indeed, during sleep, neurons shrink to
about half their size and extracellular liquid swells by
as much. This is because brain tissue is devoid of a
lymph system for cell and tissue cleansing. Thus, neu-
ronal activity during waking, where consciousness is
at its peak, causes the accumulation of toxic metabo-
lites, waste, in the neurons. These metabolites get
flushed out during sleep. For this to be feasible, as is
done for complex engineered systems (computer net-
works, buildings, governments, etc.), the whole sys-
tem is put into very low operational status, necessary
for maintenance, also called housekeeping (Xie et al.,
2013). Continuous complete sleep deprivation intoxi-
cates the human brain and will engender mental ill-
ness within weeks and death within months (Gillin,
2002). And indeed, a sleeping mammal, an anesthe-
tized, comatose, hibernating, drunken, or an insane
mammal, is half dead as well as relatively uncon-
scious. To sum up, the active organism manifesting as
much of its autopoietic potential as possible (sensa-
tion, mobility, feeding, reproduction, etc.) is also at
the same time and in the same respect that much more
conscious.
1.5. Minimal consciousness in the bacterial
nanobrain
Active survival, from bacteria to humans, is not neces-
sarily represented, even less declarative, but it does have
to be complexly patterned and at least concretely intelli-
gent: articulated and selective. For diverse adaptive
behaviors to be properly integrated and sequenced all
the way through the life cycle of any living being, there
has to be a unifying mechanism, a system, that keeps
the organism on the life track, constantly rebalancing
its internal resources to deal with the vagaries of the
environment so as to permit sustained organized beha-
vior in a proper order such as feeding/excretion, ther-
moregulation, avoidance of danger, and reproduction.
Those internal resources are atoms, molecules, cells,
commensal species, diet, and combinations of them,
all moving and changing over time. No known organ-
ism can undergo all this change and movement uni-
formly and simultaneously throughout its lifespan.
Any living cell, multicell organism, or multi-organism
has to organize changing deployment in space and
time of its components to stay alive long enough to go
through its life cycle. Stated more realistically, for
consciousness to occur, all those components have to
adaptively integrate, on their own, with no central
architect, not even any particular genome (remember
that organisms with a single genome are extremely
rare or perhaps no longer exist). More specifically, all
living beings have to interact in an organized manner
with the niche to course through their expected life
cycles. Consciousness is fundamentally ecological
(Pattee, 1969).
Bacteria are the simplest and most phylogenetically
ancient organisms known to have existed that answer
to all criteria of life. They are sophisticated in that they
present the same basic DNA core, the same epigenetic
gene-switching systems, the same cellular immune
defense systems, and the same basic behavioral routines
as humans: they have dormant and active periods, they
get hungry and satiated, they work hard to feed them-
selves, they get sexually prurient, they reproduce, they
detect, select, and hang out with their conspecifics, they
fight and kill their enemies, they detect and flee many
different types of toxic or useless environments, they
strive to avoid death, and they adapt and learn (Braun,
2015). Their consciousness is not ‘‘relatively’’ localized
in a sanctuarium (brain) as is ours. Their whole body,
that single cell, is their consciousness in action. See
Figure 2.
The notion articulated by several theorists to the
effect that LIFE = COGNITION (Maturana, 1970;
Stewart, 1996; Varela et al., 1974) can be rendered
more precise and fruitful by replacing the word ‘‘cogni-
tion’’ by the word ‘‘consciousness.’’ So we prefer the
bold
aphorism
LIFE = CONSCIOUSNESS
(see
Braun, 2015, for a history and expounding of this con-
cept). Starting from our own particular definition of
consciousness (above), we require paying close atten-
tion to organisms much simpler than humans as well as
to all the material components of the conscious nexus,
from the simplest atom to the most complex organ.
Defining consciousness in a rigid and condescending
manner by exclusively human prowess, highly civilized,
literate and adult to boot, seems obscurantist to us or
Braun and Lovejoy
93

at least unhelpful scientifically. It is like decreeing that
the brains are neural tissues organized into two hemi-
spheres and that worms thus do not have brains. One
species’ so-called unconscious or subconscious signal-
ing will be another’s consciousness, and vice versa, . . .
often in the same body. Viewed from an evolutionary
perspective, consciousness cannot be divided into bins
such
as
the
‘‘Freudian
unconscious’’
versus
the
‘‘Kahnemanian consciousness,’’ and so on. We become
more disposed to see consciousness as something with
a long history, a wide diversity, and a history of com-
plexification involving millions of rearrangements:
A frank unbiased study of consciousness must convince
every biologist that it is one of the fundamental phenom-
ena of at least all animal life if not, as is quite possible, of
all life. (Minot, 1902)
Evolution creates gadgets that may or may not be
exploited by new species. Many of these gadgets are
part and parcel of any possible form of consciousness:
the organism has to assemble carbon, it has to extract
energy from the environment, it has to resist infection,
and it has to do thousands of other life-supporting
operations while having whatever mental life it may. In
turn, the mental life of any organism is imbricated in
all those bodily constraints. For example, for humans,
who have a large majority of their receptors and effec-
tors in front of their bodies, it seems obvious that the
future is in front and the past is in back. Humans who
have most of their major saliently emotiogenic organs
(heart, lungs) in the upper chest, point there to desig-
nate themselves, unless the self being designated is
engaged in thinking which will occasionally bring a per-
son to point to their temple to designate themselves, as
in a sentence starting with ‘‘I think.’’, Nobody ever
points to their feet, their genitals or to their rear end to
designate themselves.
Consciousness reboots from the parents along the
ontogenetic cycle. In humans it starts with the ovum.
Indeed, if consciousness is present in bacteria, as expli-
citly and correctly affirmed by Margulis (2001), then it
must certainly be present in a cell such as the human
ovum which is far more evolved (complex) than bac-
teria. We have barely begun to understand cell func-
tion, let alone of the ovum. For example, we had no
idea 30 years ago how genes are turned on or off.
Along the same line of reasoning, consciousness will
most certainly have to be explained at the cellular level
most relevant to the highest known form of conscious-
ness, namely, the human neuron. But bacteria, ova,
and neurons evolve, they each have their own life cycle
(ontogeny), and they each go through sequences of
waxing and waning of specific consciousness-relevant
signaling episodes which have been termed microgeny
(see Braun, 1989, for a review). We will further address
these issues in subsequent sections on brain swarms.
We
admit
two
caveats
to
our
aphorism
CONSCIOUSNESS = LIFE. The first caveat is that
this aphorism might apply, in one respect, only to life as
we know it today, that is, carbon-based and cellular. As
affirmed recently by Dennett (2017), we have to assume
a long prehistory of life ‘‘as we know it.’’ At some point,
the so-called ‘‘organic’’ molecules began to replicate
Figure 2. This previously unpublished diagram depicts Braun’s
(2015) ‘‘smart homeostat.’’ Details of the components can be
found in that paper. The left column depicts the molecular
architecture and function of specific adaptive behaviors of
unicellular organisms. These are behavioral sub-routines of the
sort that can be programmed into robots. The most ‘‘mental-
like’’ molecular exchanges have been prepared phylogenetically
by development of fast immune signaling, but by now are
expressed most centrally by fast epigenetic signaling, of which
the three main categories, DNA methylation, chromatin
remodeling, and RNA editing, have all been investigated in
single-cell organisms. The core of the bacterial nanobrain is its
epigenome. The right column depicts the molecular architecture
and function of global states of the living system, slowly
changing, conditioning the overall goal of the organism in a
context larger than specific adaptationally specialized routines
(flight, aggregation, feeding, reproduction, etc.). These signaling
nexi reflecting ‘‘what it is like to be a bacterium’’ represent that
organism’s ‘‘consciousness.’’
94
Adaptive Behavior 26(3)

negentropically before anything as hypercomplex as a
bacterium existed. This had to start without any con-
sciousness whatsoever, at least not consciousness as
defined above. The second caveat is that, in another
respect, this aphorism may not limit itself to life as we
know it. Humans could eventually create an autopoietic,
self-replicating, energy-grabbing and energy-dissipating,
intelligent machine which is conscious. According to
Tani (2009), for a robot to become conscious it would
not only have to register its own sensorimotricity in its
own action history but it would have to reach a ‘‘critical’’
‘‘uncertainty’’ after sustained confrontation/matching of
bottom-up sensorimotricity and top-down constraints
such as ‘‘goals’’ provided by the designer/programmer or
an overstructured ‘‘niche,’’ also provided by the designer:
this self-organized criticality (SOC) would be the most
primitive sense of self. The authors seem to be suggesting
that a robot that does not fall, scrape its knee, and suck
it up cannot have a self. It must assimilate and accommo-
date a ‘‘balance between predictability and unpredictabil-
ity in the course of its developmental learning.’’ Tani
(1998, 2016) described as a ‘‘slow-moving chaotic attrac-
tor’’ the internal state change of his robot’s neural net
deep learning brain when such occurred: ‘‘the open
dynamic structure causes the system’s spontaneous tran-
sition to the unsteady phase where the ‘self’ becomes
aware.’’ Indeed, is not this something any bacterium
would also be subject to? After all, from a design point
of view a bacterium is much more complex than any of
today’s robots.
In short, consciousness as we know it for ourselves
from introspection came from and still comes from
non-consciousness, not the other way around. But con-
sciousness of a wholly other type could eventually come
from consciousness of the current type in the future. In
the short and medium terms, the bottom-up under-
standing of consciousness has ontological priority over
the top down. It should accordingly also gain limited
epistemological priority: I am, thereby I think. Any
other position would violate the global framework of
modern science which postulates the big bang, the evo-
lution of species, and the exclusively embodied nature
of consciousness.
2. Scientific approaches relevant to the
investigation of consciousness
2.1. Bottom-up science
Bottom-up science is rooted in physics, it assumes com-
plete knowledge of the unit, of which only one type is
considered at a time, it deals with small and primitive
units subjected to few and simple rules, and it seeks full
and perfect explanation of specific interactive dynamics
of the units. Formal logic assimilates bottom-up reflec-
tion to synthesis, the integration of simple ideas into
more complex ones. Marx termed this phase of
scientific thinking the ‘‘ascent to the concrete,’’ the late
phase wherein science masters its abstract concepts
enough to put content into the exercise up to and
including creation of concrete applications in the real
world (Braun, 1991). From an engineering point of
view, bottom-up approaches to consciousness largely
consist, at present, of ‘‘optimization modeling’’ (Battiti,
Brunato, & Mascia, 2008). Robotics aims to build
‘‘intelligence’’ but it has not had the pretention (Wang,
2015) of modeling consciousness per se until quite
recently (Tani, 2016). A full bottom-up engineering
approach to consciousness would consist of building a
true living organism from elemental components. The
best that has been accomplished so far is the insertion
of
an
artificial
genome
into
a
real
cytoplasm
(Hutchison et al., 2016). The inverse is still far from
possible.
Imagine a roughly conical pile of sand grains pro-
duced by adding one grain at a time. Occasionally, the
addition of a new grain will provoke an avalanche
involving potentially large numbers of grains. The ava-
lanches are ‘‘bottom-up’’ structures in the sense that
while each grain will only affect the neighboring grains,
a local instability of one grain can destabilize two
grains, which in turn can destabilize four grains, and so
on, occasionally producing a large-scale avalanche.
Indeed, the overall shape of the sandpile ends up being
determined by the sequence of avalanches that have
occurred, and it is not prescribed in any ‘‘top-down’’
manner. Small-scale (individual sand grain) events lead
to large-scale events/structures termed self-organized
criticality (SOC).
2.2. Top-down science
Assemblies such as human beings are highly organized
and maintain that organization throughout the life
cycle. These have been amply commented in conscious-
ness studies, with cognitive neuroscience now playing a
leading role (Dehaene, Changeux, & Naccache, 2011).
Most often, this approach bases itself on various forms
of machine analogy (Bell, 1999) resting on brain anat-
omy, to which neuronal physiology is hypostasized. We
subsume this approach under the general rubric of top-
down approaches, together with traditional philosophy
of mind, mentalistic formalism, artificial intelligence,
and so on. Formal logic assimilates top-down reflection
to analysis, the decomposition of complex ideas into
simpler ones. Marx termed the top-down phase of sci-
entific thinking the ‘‘descent into the abstract,’’ an early
phase necessary for formalization, quantification, clari-
fication, and convention (see Braun, 1991, for a
review). From an engineering point of view, top-down
approaches to consciousness consist of ‘‘reverse engi-
neering’’ (see Eilam, 2005).
Consider
turbulent
cascade
processes
in
three-
dimensional space. The classical picture goes back to
Braun and Lovejoy
95

Lewis Richardson’s iconic poem: ‘‘Big whirls have little
whirls that feed on their velocity, and little whirls have
lesser whirls and so on to viscosity—in the molecular
sense’’ (Richardson, 1922). The idea here is that one
starts with a large-scale structure (whirl or eddy) and
smaller structures are the consequence of instability
and break-up. Big begets small with the cascade process
iterating (in the atmosphere) down to millimetric scales
below which friction (viscosity) damps out the motion.
Interestingly, in two spatial dimensions, exemplified
perhaps by turbulence in a soap film (Guttenberg &
Goldenfeld, 2009), the dynamics are on the contrary
bottom-up ‘‘inverse cascades’’ with small vortices tend-
ing to combine into larger ones.
2.3. Systems science, complexity science, and
swarm science
The combination of both the bottom-up and top-down
approaches,
in
any
science
whether
mathematics,
physics, biology, or psychology, is systems theory
(Bruggeman & Westerhoff, 2007). Systems theory
began to be called ‘‘complexity science’’ in the 1980s as
a part of the non-linear revolution that began a decade
earlier notably with deterministic chaos and fractals. It
has become clear that, even though it has a huge cul-
tural
component,
human
consciousness
can
be
approached bottom up, just as purely natural phenom-
ena can be approached top down.
Cellular automatons such as Conway’s ‘‘game of life’’
(Gardner, 1970; Wolfram, 2002) were early bottom-up
models of behavior of moving organisms. By the end of
the 1980s, a more sophisticated complexity paradigm
emerged from the study of biological systems, notably
modeling of flocking behavior of birds (Reynold, 1987).
As in SOC, the system is composed of a large number
of units, here birds. But unlike the sandpile model where
the sand is modeled on a cellular automaton grid with
each grain only interacting with fixed neighbors, the
birds, more generally called ‘‘agents’’ or ‘‘boids,’’ can
move continuously, interacting with whichever other
birds happen to be close by. Today, a very wide range
of moving units, living and not living, are known to
manifest varieties of mathematically characterized
swarm patterns with the domain as a whole now being
termed
‘‘active
matter
mechanics’’
(Ramaswamy,
2010).
Swarming behavior has always been understood to
comprise
an
important
‘‘bottom-up’’
component.
Swarm algorithms were initially thought to hold great
promise for artificial intelligence, ‘‘swarm intelligence’’
(Beni and Wang, 1993). Interestingly however, in real-
world applications of ‘‘swarm intelligence,’’ as van Ast,
Babuska and De Schutter (2008) explain, top-down
‘‘fitting’’ is apparently also needed:
Swarm intelligence aims at controlling a large number of
cooperative autonomous agents, in a varying topology,
with simple, local rules. The analysis of a swarm intelli-
gence system typically focuses on the dynamics of the
swarm as a whole, rather than on the dynamics of the indi-
vidual agents.
Swarming has been completely ignored in the con-
sciousness studies literature. We therefore aim to present
its appeal, in upcoming sections, to the consciousness
studies community.
3. Self-patterning in non-living particle
assemblies
There is great signaling and building power in moving
multitudes—including within the cell, and there is even
more power in patterned assembly formation. In a swarm,
particles need not be alive. It suffices that they would have
dynamic physical properties apt to generate a changing
global structure or phase trajectory (Trianni & Tuci,
2011). Complex intricately shaped snowflakes take form,
all different one from the other, from the interaction of
cold air and water drops. Piled up by wind turbulence at
ground level, they form some of the most exquisite and
diverse landscapes known to human esthetic sensitivity.
Subatomic ‘‘buckyballs’’ sprayed through a pair of slits
onto a surface form a complex ‘‘interference pattern’’
resembling a snapshot of a pond surface into which two
stones have simultaneously been thrown (Hawking &
Mlodinow, 2010). Many surprisingly intricate patterns,
truly complex objects, systems, and 3D topographies, that
is, phase trajectories, emerge from simple rules imparted
to multitudes of small moving units. All living systems are
believed to capitalize on this general self-organizing princi-
ple to great extents (Capra & Luisi, 2014).
As neurons set themselves up for the action potential
trick, they also deploy and connect in a self-organizing
way using topographical continuities (e.g. from retina
which develops first, to optic nerve, to lateral genicu-
late nucleus, to striate cortex). A lot of those topogra-
phies will come from postnatal life (e.g. some aspects of
vision), but the auditory field and body representation
will already be quite differentiated at birth (Changeux
& Garey, 1997), that is, part of the developmental plan
is coded in the genome. There is no doubt that topogra-
phically organized neuronal spiking is important for
meta-consciousness. One of the reasons is that this
mode of communication between sensory receptors and
neurons, between associative neurons and between neu-
rons and effectors, grounds consciousness in the con-
crete world, the niche of the particular organism: it
integrates those abilities of detectors and effectors that
are available to and relevant for the species. The brain
96
Adaptive Behavior 26(3)

mimics the self/niche interface of sensations and of
muscular contractions via phase trajectories of spikes,
that is, attractors.
Yet beyond the idea according to which epicritic
receptive fields are obviously topographic (somesthesia,
vision) or tonotopic (audition), and beyond the idea
according to which effector fields are somatotopic, one
could conceive that the central nervous system neurons
might be purely associative devices, all the same. If one
conceives of neurons as being structurally identical and
their action potentials strictly weighted by input, one
can conceive of consciousness as nothing other than
the Hebbian rule of synaptic plasticity (Poon & Shah,
1998). The more there are neurons, the more intricate
the processing will be. This is the basic view of that part
of cognitive science called radically associationistic con-
nectionism, a subfield of parallel distributed processing
(PDP; Kohonen, 1988). Consciousness would be the
final ensemble of synaptic weightings in an active brain.
The same principle would apply to memory and even
to more complex cognition. However, the simplicity of
this model really harkens most aptly to particle swarm-
ing not involving living entities at all.
The synaptic weighting concept is now recognized
as simplistic and ‘‘shallow,’’ appropriate only for
explaining consciousness in the simplest of organisms
for five reasons. First, we now know that neuronal
plasticity reaches deep into the cell nucleus, up to and
including the genome, which is constantly being
tweaked by the extended epigenome (Braun, 2015).
Second, most interneuronal signaling is extrasynaptic,
and this latter type of signaling is a more important
generator of consciousness than is synaptic signaling
per se (Braun & Leblanc, 2016). Third, mature neu-
rons present with highly differentiated cell structures.
They obviously cannot all be signaling with action
potentials in the same manner. Some neurons, such as
Purkinje cells, are gigantic compared to the smallest
neurons
which
are
granule
cells
(Chadderton,
Margrie, & Ha¨ usser, 2004). Fourth, hundreds of dif-
ferent receptors of neurons are not evenly distributed
in the brain. Research reports have mapped and illu-
strated them in two dimensions. Their distributions
resemble so many Rorschach plates. Fifth, state-of-
the-art cognitive neuroscience has demonstrated that
there do exist in the human brain localized and hier-
archically
arranged
‘‘modules’’
of
consciousness,
termed global workspaces (Noy et al., 2015).
All of this is reflected in the disappearance of purely
associationistic machine intelligence in favor of more
complex ‘‘deep learning’’ algorithms today, inspired by
more sophisticated biology. These comprise increas-
ingly abstract multistage (i.e. deep) non-linear dynamic
formulas implementing processing hierarchies at high
dimensionality, incorporating feedforward and back-
propagation, including ‘‘pre-training’’ and now truly
efficient
‘‘supervised
and
unsupervised
learning.’’
Sections of code are often named playfully using biolo-
gical metaphors (e.g. evolutionary computation, genetic
programming, weight pruning, spiking neurons, opti-
mal brain damage, neural sequence chunker, convolu-
tional nets, etc.). Deep learning is becoming highly
specialized for applications such as image or speech
recognition and it is becoming less and less bottom up
(for reviews, see LeCun, Bengio, & Hinton, 2015;
Schmidhuber, 2015).
3.1. From protein dynamics to immunity to self
Cellular mechanisms are all composed of molecular
assemblies in movement at varying speeds, some of
which are extreme. Proteins can fold and refold, or
conform and reconform, within microseconds, for
hours on end (Jackson, 1998). It is with such molecu-
lar motors that some bacteria get around, using fla-
gellate propellers (Armitage & Berry, 2010) or springy
pole vaults called pila (Kaiser, Robinson, & Kroos,
2010). A lot of the signaling occurring in the neuron
after chemical contact from other cells is most likely
going to resemble molecular swarming within the
whole cell (beautifully demonstrated and illustrated
by Bacskai et al., 1993):
The vast majority of signals in cells spread as a rapidly
diverging influence from membrane-associated receptors
to multiple chemically distinct targets in the cell, often at
widely separate spatial locations. Sometimes the diver-
gence amplifies a signal, whereas in others it controls dif-
ferent processes in the cell, a form of molecular cross-talk.
But the machinery of the divergent influence in every case
involves at least one molecule that diffuses as a free ele-
ment. (Bray, 1998, p. 70)
Molecules are not alive, they are not living beings,
but when they reach the protein level of complexity
they can be very dynamic and manifest selective affinity
and sophisticated memory, particularly the molecules
forming the immune system. Human immunity can
store new information about millions of antigens for
over a hundred years. Immunity is tasked, among other
things, with distinguishing the self from the non-self
with regard to every single molecule of the body. Recall
that our definition of self at the onset of this essay is
non-mentalist. There are as many ‘‘mental’’ selves as
there are life trajectories and experiences. As such, the
‘‘mental’’ self would be a very slippery concept for a
biological account of consciousness. On the other hand,
our concept of self as ‘‘body’’ is constrained by species-
specific developmental parameters, making it possible
to get a handle on how consciousness is built from the
bottom up. So, concretely, long before we are able to
pronounce our own names or to know who we are, we
implicitly know an astounding amount about what we
are. Our implicit knowledge of ourselves may be less
subject
to
exuberant
illusions
than
our
explicit
Braun and Lovejoy
97

knowledge. For example, we have a strong feeling at
retirement that we are, say, 65 years old. In fact, cellu-
larly, at retirement, we are about 10 years old, the aver-
age age of the ensemble of cells of our body (Be´ liveau
& Gingras, 2010). At the protein level, we are about a
day old, the average half-life of a protein (Eden et al.,
2011). Feynman (1988) famously stated that our
consciousness-giving atoms are ‘‘last week’s potatoes,’’
replaced by others.
Immune molecules swarm (De Castro, 2002). In
doing so, they behave as if they had a full organism
identity and an organized purpose. Self-awareness and
purpose are central properties of human higher order
consciousness, and yet certain non-living multitudes
manifest analogous phenomena in our own bodies. The
full-fledged form of intentional declarative verbalized
self-aware purpose of conscious human adults comes
from complex purposeful-like molecular hordes, the
particular swarming algorithms of which were fixed far
back in evolution.
It is certainly widely recognized that immunity was
the first form of memory, long before the nervous sys-
tems existed, and that antiviral immunity can be quite
developed in certain bacteria (Datsenko et al., 2012).
According to Noble, immunity can ‘‘ remember,’’ in a
single human, 1012 distinct antibodies and it can neutra-
lize swarms of each (Noble, 2013). This human memory
system is so big and it actually weighs more than the
nervous
system
(lymph + lymphocytes + thymus
+ spleen + bone marrow). Human neurons would
be totally non-functional, they could not even come
into existence, without the brain lymphocytes called
glia which partner up physiologically with neurons in a
myriad of manners from channeling their development
and migration, to controlling their energy exchange, to
exerting strong control on synaptic chemical function,
to extrasynaptic multisignal exchange, and to neuronal
spiking (Boulanger, 2009).
4. The relevance of swarm biology for
consciousness studies
4.1. Bacterial swarming is of interest for
consciousness studies
Bacterial colony size can reach billions of organisms as
do neurons. Some more complex principles similar to
those derived from research on bacterial swarming must
surely apply to how the molecular waves, cascades, and
storms develop to the point where a brain is ready to
implement high-order consciousness, language-based
for example. Unfortunately, only a handful of scientists
have given any thought to this eventuality (Ben-Jacob,
1998; Passino, 2010; Shklarsh, Ariel, Schneidman, &
Ben-Jacob, 2011):
Some of the most basic properties of brains such as sen-
sory integration, memory, decision-making and the control
of behaviour can all be found in these simple organisms.
(Allmann, 1999, p. 5)
Most importantly with regard to their relevance for
consciousness, bacteria seem to individually manifest
true learning including with the necessary and appro-
priate forgetting curves (Mitchell et al., 2009; Stock &
Zhang, 2013; Tagkopoulos, Liu, & Tavazoie, 2008).
Furthermore, some bacterial species are truly social.
For example, their behavior depends on a physiology
specialized to process properties of the colony such as
its
size.
Specialized
signals
and
receptors
called
‘‘quorum
sensors’’
serve
this
particular
purpose
(Cornforth et al., 2014).
Bacterial colonies can survive starvation by forming
semi-mummified fruiting bodies (hybernating commu-
nities of spores) shaped as mushrooms, trees, or cucum-
bers (Kaiser et al., 2010). Is the building of human
skyscrapers so different? No one human masters an
infinitesimal fraction of what it takes to get one of them
up from scratch. Think about every component you
can making up a skyscraper. Think of every laborer
and blue- and white-collar worker that had to locate,
purchase, mine, harvest, or extract, as well as those
who had to design, engineer, transform, assemble, ship,
and install every single piece.
Likewise, it will take millions of people to find out in
detail how the simplest of modern bacteria actually live.
The bacterial genome, a single molecule, can now be
synthesized. However, the million or so other bacterial
molecules, organized into a working metabolome, epi-
genome, proteome, and membranome, are being inves-
tigated right now by the biomolecular and cell biology
researchers, the world over. Others are figuring out bac-
terial niches and yet others their behavioral repertoires.
Our scientific understanding of bacterial consciousness
is the integrated ensemble of this research, a gigantic
work in progress. Each of these researchers will have
been supported by those who make his or her discov-
eries possible, thousands of people each—including the
taxpayers paying their salaries.
The individual bodies of bacteria morph dramati-
cally for various purposes (Darnton, Turner, Rojevsky,
& Berg, 2010). Neurons morph as well, mostly in devel-
opment but also in adulthood (De Graaf-Peters &
Hadders-Algra, 2006). Some of them also do so in
adults to accommodate reproductive states (Modney &
Hatton, 1994), ecological situations (Birren & Marder,
2013), and behavioral or mental states of various kinds
(Xie et al., 2013). These examples illustrate particularly
clearly how bottom-up and top-down processes mesh
and require integrated scientific consideration.
98
Adaptive Behavior 26(3)

Neurons resemble bacteria in several respects: they
are cells, they both morph, they both migrate, they can
both be frozen and then resuscitated, they both inten-
sely swarm, and they are equipped with a wide range of
chemical receptors. Neurons are, in a sense, the least
specialized cells of the body, resembling independent
organisms the most. They are the generalists in charge
of the rest of the body. They behave as if they had man-
aged to colonize the body and use it to gather food.
This is similar to what the protozoan Toxoplasma gon-
dii does with species far more complex than itself,
including humans (Lafferty, 2006). Even viruses such as
the rabies virus have developed this kind of trick
though in their case they do not exchange much energy
otherwise than to reproduce (Schnell, McGettigan,
Wirblich, & Papaneri, 2010). Of course, the neuron/
bacterium analogy can only go so far. As the brain
develops, neurons become intricately embedded in a
multicellular matrix with only a few still capable of
swarming, they develop more complex signaling abil-
ities than bacteria commensurable with their high-level
command function, and most are no longer free-
ranging hunters/predators/grazers as are bacteria.
4.2. Insect colony swarming is of interest for
consciousness studies
Insect societies present a more complex form of swarm
intelligence than bacteria. The size of insect colonies
can also reach billions of members (e.g. African ants)
as do neurons. In particular, their tremendous social
accomplishments (food gathering, colony defense, colo-
nization of other species, termite mounds, bee hives,
ant and wasp nests, etc.) would be impossible were it
not for structural differentiation and large numbers of
protagonists (jaw-to-jaw combatants, stingers, feeders,
brood-nurses, builders, mulchers, water carriers, patrol-
lers, foragers, farmers, slave keepers, queens, under-
takers, etc.). Insect swarm intelligence presents a
phylogenetically innovative new level of village-like or
factory-like organization. For example, wasp nest
building requires the collaboration of wasps manifest-
ing one and only one of three morphologies and phy-
siologies, all from the exact same genome: mulchers,
water carriers, and builders. Each must collaborate
with the others in a highly specific manner (Johnson &
Linksvayer, 2010). Interestingly, none of the protago-
nists have any declarative concept of what the others
do, nor does it have any pre-image of the beautiful
Chinese lamp-like nest that is being built. If the reader
doubts that pre-images do not exist in insects, consider
that termites build complex well-ventilated skyscrapers,
but those termites are all completely blind. Yet, stig-
mergy plays its magic: a few behavioral stereotypes and
a few triggering signals suffice, and one individual per-
forms an action based on what was performed earlier
by a different individual (Grasse´ , 1959). To get back to
our wasp nest, each of the three protagonists knows
only to do its little task and yet the overall nest building
process is highly flexible, robust, and complex. The nest
building enterprise adapts to climactic variations, varia-
tions in availability of wood (for the paper mulch), or
water, and variation in nest size requirement, and it
gets repaired if damaged to any extent (Johnson &
Linksvayer, 2010).
Consciousness is that still unstudied little beacon in
each one of us, whether bacterium or human, keeping
us alive and on track in our niche when we emerge
from dormancy (bacteria) or anesthesia, sleep, coma
(humans), structural damage (bacteria), severe mental
illness, drunken stupor (humans), and so on. It cannot
work its ‘‘marvel’’ without a living body of one sort or
another.
The whole body shape and the brain organization
(i.e.
consciousness)
of
social
insects
can
morph
extremely dramatically as the individuals pass from
swarm to solitary-sedentary ecologies or vice versa. For
example, the adult locust’s brain grows 27% larger in
swarm conditions despite the fact that its whole body
significantly shrinks (Burrows, Rogers, & Ott, 2011).
Dramatic ecologically driven whole-body morphing,
including of the brain, is also observed in amphibians
(Gilbert & Epel, 2009).
The most intuitively palpable illustration of insect
swarm intelligence is how ants collectively adopt the
shortest route to an important food source for the col-
ony. The lame-brained constant laying down of phero-
mones gradually imposes a dominant path for the
thousands of ants traveling back and forth. In the same
way, the colony will abandon that path for another
when the time comes. This is quite dumb and it looks
wasteful at the level of the individual ant but it is
extremely effective at the colony level. Altogether,
insect swarm intelligence holds obvious promise for
simulating and understanding human brain function,
cognition, and consciousness at the molecular, cellular,
and
systems
levels
(Gershenson,
2010;
Lichocki,
Tarapore, Keller, & Floreano, 2012). Several species of
social insects, fish, and birds have already inspired
mathematical models of artificial intelligence. One of
the most popular species for that purpose is the honey-
bee (Karaboga & Akay, 2009; Sulaiman et al., 2015).
Topographically and temporally tight, that is, point-
to-point, machine-like prowess of the sort provided by
synapses is necessary for adult human cognition, but it
is the swarm-like extrasynaptic signaling that primarily
gives us our emotions, our moods, and most of our
other tonic states (Bach-y-Rita, 1994). If human con-
sciousness is not to be robotic and machine-like, neu-
rons
will
have
to
be
equipped
with
a
gigantic
armamentarium of receptors giving the brain swarm
intelligence far beyond and above temporally and topo-
graphically constrained synaptic wiring conduction
Braun and Lovejoy
99

(Braun & Leblanc, 2016; Fuxe et al., 2012; Vizi,
Fekete,
Karoly,
&
Mike,
2010).
The
distinction
between machine-like synaptic signaling and non-
synaptic neural signaling more akin to conscious states
is schematized in Figure 3.
4.3. The ‘‘winner-take-all’’ algorithm in insect colony
intelligence
There exist many non-trivial biological gadgets in
insects that are specialized for managing group beha-
vior. For example, flies have specialized touch recep-
tors and even specialized neurons for detecting the
proximity and the moving passage of other flies at very
high resolution. This enables the swarm to escape dan-
ger and to approach food or lodging in a manner far
more efficient that could be the case for any solitary
organism (Ramdya et al., 2014). This type of socially
integrated intense swarm activity could be called a
‘‘winner-take-all’’ algorithm and it involves positive
feedback.
Human neurons have similar equipment. Human adult
declarative consciousness is everything but an alarm reac-
tion as in the above-described fly alarm response. In
humans, neurons are equipped with hundreds of different
receptor types keeping them informed of the global state
of the organism and thus supporting the more sustained
and slower self-aware deliberative purposeful aspect of
mind and behavior of our species that we have termed
meta-consciousness. It has to be the meshing of these mul-
titudinous bottom-up and top-down movements that cre-
ates love, feeling connected to the world, trying to
maintain an ethical line of behavior, and so on.
4.4. The consensus by negative feedback algorithm
in insect colony intelligence
The ‘‘winner-take-all’’ algorithm could be very danger-
ous for insects if not kept in check. Swarms would be
far too hare-brained (runaway). So swarm biologists
have concentrated on finding out how insects put an
end to various swarming states. An example of one
such paradigm is how bees in their bivouac cluster stop
scouting and haggling over which new place is the best
to set up a new colony. Scouts come back from various
sites and waggle dance, buzz, gesticulate, and release
pheromones
each
to
indicate
a
site
they
found
(Schlegel, Visscher, & Seeley, 2012). But the colony has
to soon make a decision. Something has to put the col-
ony in synchrony for all members to take flight as an
ensemble for migration to a new home with no strag-
glers. No individual bee has any idea of the danger for
the colony of wrecking the migration nor even that they
are migrating at all. One element of preparation for
migration is that a subset of bees starts head-butting
the waggling dancers, gesticulators, and pheromone
releasers to pull them out of their stereotype and into
another. The head-butt is now called a ‘‘stop’’ signal by
entomologists. Other social behaviors, such as specific
vibrations of the wing muscles, for example, also serve
as stop signals (Schlegel et al., 2012). The stop signaling
builds up until a consensus is reached. It is now widely
recognized that negative feedback is critical for swarm
plasticity and intelligence. It acts as a game changer,
preventing endless recursiveness of social signals and
permitting a critical bifurcation in the swarm’s ecology.
This corresponds to an algorithm that could be called
‘‘consensus by negative feedback.’’
The brain contains such systems on a grand scale.
Neurons intensely backpropagate to themselves and to
incoming neurons all the way to sensory neurons
(Vullhorst et al., 2015). No neuron has exclusively
Figure 3. This figure depicts the ideas developed in Braun and
Leblanc (2016) wherein it is argued that point-to-point synaptic
representation (left side of the diagram) supports cognition but
not consciousness, whereas extrasynaptic signaling (right side of
the diagram) is the natural communication mode of
consciousness. The scheme as a whole aims to represent human
mental life. The vertical axis of the scheme represents
microgenetic and ontogenetic streams. Horizontal pairings
indicate that consciousness is tightly linked to action, with action
being highly constrained by behavior/niche parallelism and
consciousness highly constrained by intimate imperatives of the
body.
100
Adaptive Behavior 26(3)

excitatory or inhibitory synapses (Brickley & Mody,
2012). The adult human brain is equipped with the
highest proportion of inhibitory synapses of mamma-
lian species (Sherwood et al., 2006). This could be
understood as absurd and wasteful if not for the fact
that it is extremely important for the brain to not suc-
cumb to runaway activation or unbridled amplifica-
tion. It would not be good for the brain to be easily put
into epileptic states (Berryman & Stenseth, 1984).
4.5. The random walk algorithm in insect colony
intelligence
An established principle of insect swarm intelligence is
the ‘‘random walk’’ (see Pearson, 1905, for the original
elaboration of the concept). Also known as the ‘‘drun-
ken gate’’ or ‘‘Markov chain,’’ the random walk charac-
terizes units that behave randomly except for simple
relations with each other. If one looks at how an ant
walks around in a fresh environment or a bee flies or a
zooplankton swims, it seems incredibly incoherent. A
conscious human adult would never undertake scouting
for food in such a manner. We would use either a
checkerboard or a spiraling strategy to cover the most
ground without ever covering the same ground twice,
or we would use a feature detection strategy, unless one
were a baby just learning to walk in which case it actu-
ally does displace itself like an ant, a bee, or a plankton.
At any rate, it is unnatural for us adults to imagine that
the randomness of insect movement has actually been
selected by evolution, but it actually makes sense and
seems to be the case (Bartumeus, da Luz, Viswanathan,
& Catalan, 2005). If a species is going to be mobile in
search of its energy sources, and if it is going to do this
in a highly social context, that is, as a member of a large
colony, random location of food will be more effective
than dependence on specific senses (chemotaxis, sound,
vision, or on rules of ‘‘coverage,’’ organized hunting
strategies, etc.). If there are a billion members of the
colony, it will pay off a great deal more at the colony
level if the individual scout or forager is highly mobile
and uses one or another of a plethora of algorithms of
randomness, or, in simpler terms, trial and error. The
colony will be able to extract more energy per colony
member from a greater variety of food sources than
could any individual. The strategy will in fact cover
more ground. And the strategy will not require that the
individual organism devote much developmental energy
to becoming particularly intelligent.
Random walk also characterizes non-living swarms
and is currently used to model them. Random walk
swarm algorithms have proven to solve problems that
stump rule-based, machine-like artificial intelligence
(Ueyama & Fukuda, 1993). Stochasticity is typically
the best way to model systems with huge numbers of
degrees
of
freedom.
This
seems
absurd:
to
get
mathematical formulas to perform and reach objec-
tives, we have to insert into them randomness (stochas-
ticity) or, more concretely, some sort of agitation of the
particulars. But it works. This type of intelligence is less
likely to crash when faced with fuzzy contours and
unpredictable events, that is, sheer complexity. For
example, it will be less overwhelmed by the unique
accent, speech rate, phrase melody, and phonological
errors with which every natural speaker of the English
language actually speaks, and it will thus perform bet-
ter at voice recognition (Najkar, Razzazi, & Sameti,
2010). Natural selection operates in a manner similar to
biological random walk: it is undirected, it operates by
trial and error, that is, it is driven by local results, and
it is subjugated to the same absolute imperative, to
maintain life. Biological variation and natural selection
have blindly created the most complex patterns known
to exist, more complex than any known object or code,
including E = mc2. An insect swarm finds energy and
assures its perennity in a similar manner, with few rules
(rules of flight, rules of traction, rules of swimming,
etc.) and a lot of random behavior. So, to sum up, we
propose that the random walk principle is necessary for
the previous two swarm principles, positive feedback
amplification and negative feedback consensus, to be
operant. The feedback has to be multitudinous and it
has to come from every unforeseeable nook and cranny
to have an efficient colony-level effect. There is a sec-
ond reason why we human adults find it difficult to
imagine that it could be advantageous for an ant to
wander off haphazardly into the scorching desert at
high risk of getting lost and of dying. It is that we can
foresee death and loathe the thought of it. It is hard for
us to understand that individuals belonging to huge
colonies tend not to value their individual lives so
much. Their individual death will in no way compro-
mise the colony. There is an existential non-chalantness
to life in a swarm. Hunter-gatherers from tiny villages
cannot become religious self-bombers or patriotic can-
non fodder—as cannot philosophers of consciousness .
. .
How does the ‘‘random walk’’ principle inform us
about
human
brain
dynamics
and consciousness?
Molecular movement in and around neurons is swarm-
like and there is lots of randomness in it. Neurons are
latticed with signaling back and forth to and from mul-
titudes of non-neuronal cells, macrobiontic or micro-
biontic, in the body, the ensemble of which is very
much swarm-like. Neurons, even solely considering
their interactions among themselves, do this by means
of exchange of molecular signals via synaptic spillover
(Verkhratsky, Parpura, & Rodrı´guez, 2011). This no
doubt introduces a degree of randomness. In humans,
consciousness of the self is not just a sense of our
body’s topography. It is a slowly changing state of feel-
ing, of emotions, of sentiments. Such feelings do not
come only from the retina, the skin, or the cochlea.
Braun and Lovejoy
101

They come from all of our cells, our endocrine glands
(e.g. sexual desire, hunger, etc.), our gut protists (e.g.
BDNF and its effect on anxiety), our lymphocytes (e.g.
cytokines and their effects on feelings of sickness), our
free-floating RNA segments, and so on. Neurons are
equipped to detect all of these signals and these signals
determine the final outcome or phase trajectory of neu-
ronal firing (Fuxe et al., 2012). Finally, we propose that
even though introspection leads us to believe that our
minds are purposeful, that we are rational, that we
behave strategically, and that we are aware of the entire
world, past, present, and future, in reality, this is largely
an illusion. Experimental psychology demonstrates that
we ‘‘think’’ much more delusionally than we realize
(Wegner, 2002, 2003) More interestingly in the context
of this essay, swarm science shows us that low-level
algorithms give us a lot of problem-solving mileage per
punch, inside our brains, under the so-called ‘‘conscious
surface’’ but certainly also in it—provided large num-
bers of units be put to the task.
4.6. Real swarming in the brain is of interest for
consciousness studies
Consider a human embryo assembling synapses at a
rate as high as a million per second (Lagercrantz &
Changeux, 2010). At their mitotic peak, neurons are
dividing at the rate of 250,000 cells per minute in
embryonic development (Thompson, 1993). While this
is going on, the axonal and dendritic arborizations are
growing at fast rates and the neurons dividing so
quickly are also migrating (Rakic, 2009). These breath-
taking speeds and complexities of movement are in fact
swarms like sand storms, bacterial invasions, or locust
epidemics, and they are constitutive of consciousness
from the bottom up. This is of course not the whole
story. In humans, all these phenomena are also con-
strained, top down, by the hypercomplex human cell
and tissue structure and content. The genome is
arranged to assure a global developmental path, for
example, by means of Pax and Hox pleiotropic genes
(Puelles, Harrison, Paxinos, & Watson, 2013). The cyto-
plasm of the ovum is never lost to the species, and it
reboots but also constrains the developmental process
(Noble, 2013). The species-specific niche nearly univer-
sally contains the basic elements, such as vitamins that
we cannot synthesize (Drouin, Godin, & Page´ , 2011) or
social life, the lack of which we cannot compensate on
our own (Robbins, 2016), necessary for full develop-
ment of a conscious brain. There actually is a biological
blueprint for the highest forms of human consciousness:
it is the universal developmental path of the human
brain, all kickstarted, so to speak (it does not happen in
a vacuum), with the fertilization of a single ovum.
Let us consider now concretely and hierarchically
some molecular or cellular assemblies that could qualify
as swarms and which are likely to contribute to human
consciousness. One way of getting a quick picture is
from the cellular (non-swarming) core outward. There
are 3.1 billion nucleotide pairs on the 5-ft DNA strand
in each human cell. This core is everything but a
swarm: it is highly constrained like the script of a book,
it is a single object (a molecule), it is relatively immobile
(although some genes do jump around, especially in
cortical neurons, Martin, 2009), it copies itself nearly
exactly (although aneuploidy seems to affect about 4%
of all human neurons; Iourov, Vorsanova, & Yurov,
2006; Rehen et al., 2005), it stays nearly the same
throughout the life cycle (the cell strives to keep it intact
despite thousands of hits it endures per day; Adelman,
Saul, & Ames, 1988 and the telomeric trim occurring
with each cell division; Hayflick & Moorehead, 1961).
It is a marvel of compactness and durability: it can stay
intact for tens of thousands of years in certain condi-
tions
and
it
has
been
synthesized
artificially
by
Microsoft as a form of memory storage with 100%
recoverability in the most recent application capable of
storing the entirety of Internet content in a DNA
assembly, the size of a shoebox (Bornholt et al., 2016).
However, immediately around this strand, in each
cell, there is an epigenomic swarm of free and fast-
moving particles that interact with the DNA strand,
switching genes on and off, in each cell. In the human
cell, this extended epigenome (SWARM #1) is com-
posed
of
almost
2.9 million
different
molecules
(Thurman et al., 2012). This is not a total of 2.9 million
molecules and is the list of molecular ‘‘types.’’ In neu-
rons, there are thousands of molecules that quickly
convert to second signaling molecules (SWARM #2)
which slowly invade the whole cell like a cloud over
minutes of time when strong molecular contact is made
by external signaling molecules called ligands locking
into the external membrane’s receptors (Bacskai et al.,
1993). Some extracellular signals like steroid hormones
can even penetrate the neuronal membrane and lock
onto receptors located deep in the cell nucleus trigger-
ing a similar molecular turnover cloud (Ozgyin,
Erd}os, Bojcsuk, & Balint, 2015). The neuron is con-
stantly producing and recycling receptors and redistri-
buting them on its membrane. Receptor half-life is a
mere matter of days. Widespread intracellular deploy-
ment of receptors is now known to occur within min-
utes and is called receptor trafficking (SWARM #3).
This deployment is driven in part by the establishment
of synaptic connectivity prior to birth and by cell–cell
signaling in the postnatal brain, including molecular
signaling related to body function, adaptation, learn-
ing, and consciousness (Collingridge, Isaac, & Wang,
2004; Sanz-Clemente, Nicoll, & Roche, 2013). Within
the neuron, many dozens of enzymes and other mole-
cules participate in the trafficking of the receptors
(Jacob, Moss, & Jurd, 2008). Receptors are multitudi-
nous in neurons, numbering in the many millions per
102
Adaptive Behavior 26(3)

neuron. For example, Chiappinelli and Giacobini
(1978) found ;106 nicotinic receptors of a certain
subtype (a7-nAChR) per neuron in the chick ciliary
ganglion. Just beyond the outer neuronal cell mem-
brane, there are millions of relatively ‘‘free-floating’’
ligand molecules that have potential signaling value
sufficient to modulate some aspect of the action
potential (SWARM #4), but not all of them lock into
receptors at any one time and the lock-and-key
mechanism is very far from being the only destiny of
receptors and ligands. It cannot be known how many
do so at any given time on a given neuron, but our
best guess is that each neuron is equipped with several
hundred different types of receptors (Bockaert & Pin,
1999; Gether, 2000). Why do we not know the exact
full microanatomic diversity of neuronal receptors on
single neurons? Because we do not yet have the tech-
nology to make that determination. Nobody knows
how to survey all the receptor types on a single cell.
During embryonic development, billions of neurons
eventually differentiate into hundreds of morpholo-
gies and they migrate out to form the brain. Deciding
how many neuronal morphologies exist will depend
partly on the algorithm used to classify digital recon-
structions of neurons, requiring a level of sophistica-
tion not yet reached in the relevant literature (Halavi,
Hamilton, Parekh, & Ascoli, 2012). Some of these
neurons, especially those close to the epicritic senses
(vision, somesthesia, audition) are topographically
organized (synaptically coupled) as are those close to
the musculature of the body. However, between the
two, there is a huge pool of billions of loosely con-
nected
and
highly
plastic
generalist
neurons
(SWARM #5). In humans, billions of glia are major
players
in
cognition
and
also
in
consciousness
(SWARM #6). One astroglia typically exchanges sig-
nals with two million neurons, heavily influencing
their firing rates, periodicities and train duration
(Oberheim, Wang, Goldman, & Nedergaard, 2006).
For example, most of the glutamate released in the
synapse is taken up by glia (Verkhratsky et al., 2011).
4.7. The gut bacterial swarm is important
in human consciousness
The human multi-organism or holobiont is composed of
a host, the macrobiote, which is the ensemble of its indi-
genous cells and its microbiote, the ensemble of the
micro-organisms
living
within
or
on
the
body
(Bordenstein & Theis, 2015; Rotem & Rosenberg,
2016). Bacterial genomes have now been sequenced and
investigated in a wide variety of experimental and nat-
uralistic contexts, gut-sterile mice have been similarly
intensively studied, as have effects of fecal transplanta-
tion, for several years now. We know enough about the
mammalian microbiont to be able to draw a rough
portrait
of
its
contribution
to
mammalian,
even
human, consciousness. The human microbiont consists
of more living organisms than cells of the macrobiont
and the total DNA of the microbiont is about 100
times bigger than that of the macrobiont (Selkrig,
Wong, Zhang, & Pettersson, 2014). In total, 700 species
of microorganisms inhabit every human being during
most of his or her lifespan, forming a commensal
swarm, providing innumerable services, adapting to the
host’s gender, age, diet, lifestyle, circadian cycle, and so
on, and weighing more than the entire nervous system.
Dangerous microorganisms are actively repelled by this
swarm and autoimmune disorders are kept at bay: it is
a giant immune system in and of itself (Lee &
Mazmanian, 2010; Levy, Thaiss, & Elinav, 2015;
Maranduba et al., 2015). Each human’s microbiont is
acquired from the environment, mostly the mother’s
body (Prince et al., 2015). No two people have exactly
the same microbiont: there are many diverse sets of
species that are quite viable for humans. The human
microbiont is as vital an organ as are the liver, heart,
pancreas, and brain. Microbes are also now recognized
as a very important evolutionary vector: they have
heavily contributed to DNA mixing and variation via
both horizontal and vertical DNA inter-kingdom trans-
fer (Ryan, 2016) and also multilevel selection (Ogilvie,
Overall, & Jones, 2012). The new science of microbio-
mics is driving nails in the coffin of the modern synth-
esis (Salvucci, 2016; Stilling, Bordenstein, Dinan, &
Cryan, 2014). A healthy microbiont is necessary for
normal mammalian brain development (Carlson et al.,
2018; Heijtz, 2016). When various disequilibria of the
microbiont (dysbiosis) occur, in the complete absence
of signs of infection, mental disorders accrue, such as
obesity and other eating disorders, autism, depression,
anxiety
and
stress
disorders,
and
schizophrenia
(Chrobak,
Nowakowski,
&
Dudek,
2016;
Kelly,
Clarke, Cryan, & Dinan, 2016; Kennedy et al., 2016;
Liu et al., 2017). The human microbiont secretes a wide
panoply of neuromolecules, in huge quantities, that
support, condition, and even determine the ‘‘color’’ of
mental life by indirectly signaling to the brain via neu-
rons of the vagus nerve or by producing and sending
signaling molecules directly into the brain via the
bloodstream as part of an extended hormonal system
(Logsdon, Erickson, Rhea, Salameh, & Banks, 2017).
About a third of the metabolites circulating in human
blood depend on the microbiota for their synthesis
(Bourzac, 2014). Some important examples of blood-
borne molecules of microbiotic origin that cross the
blood–brain barrier and influence neurons are pheno-
lic, choline, bile acid, indolic, vitamin, short-chain fatty
acid (SCFA) derivatives and precursors of neurotrans-
mitters as well as several neurotransmitters themselves.
Variations of these have been shown to alter neuro-
transmitters such as GABA, serotonin, dopamine, nor-
epinephrine, and various peptides in specific brain
Braun and Lovejoy
103

areas, significantly affecting mental life (El Aidy,
Stilling, Dinan, & Cryan, 2016; Holzer & Farzi, 2014;
Janik et al., 2016; Tetel, de Vries, Melcangi, Panzica, &
O’Mahony, 2017). Our microbiont assuredly conditions
‘‘what it is like to be us.’’
5. The main problem in the science of
consciousness
5.1. The great war of hermeneutics in consciousness
studies
Traditionally, there has been a dispute over conscious-
ness, with one camp claiming it enthusiastically for itself,
reveling in it, idolizing it. The pinnacle of this camp is to
be found in the writings of the most idealistic philosophers
such as Plato. In this camp, consciousness is a singularity,
having always existed or appearing in a single apotheosis
as a miracle without any currently recognizable material
substance. The rallying cry of this camp today is the irre-
ducibility of consciousness, with the catch phrase ‘‘What
about qualia?’’ particularly the color red. Little do they
seem to know that plants distinguish hues of red far better
than humans do because they have a richer diversity of
photoreceptors (Kong & Okajima, 2016).
In the opposite non-scientific camp, say of Thales,
Heraclitus, and Democritus, we have found great dis-
dain for abstractness, a strong tendency to seek ever
increasing simplicity in reduction of things to their con-
crete components. The rallying cry of this camp today,
with the catch phrase ‘‘Consciousness does not exist,’’
is that the term ‘‘consciousness’’ is meaningless. More
modestly, consciousness is sometimes characterized as
merely a barely useful illusion or trick to keep living
beings engaged in the niche (Wegner, 2003). Yet, it is
not because humans have delirious beliefs that there
does not exist a ‘‘down-to-earth’’ conscious core help-
ing us to keep ourselves alive.
5.2. Unicity/multitudinousness of consciousness is
the ‘‘hardest’’ problem for scientists
In our opinion, a healthy striving of varied scientists to
meet and share on the issue of consciousness, taken seri-
ously, is possible and potentially fruitful. This essay has
not shown that the bottom-up framework captures com-
plexities typically preoccupying philosophers (free will,
agency, purpose, single mindedness, intentionality, qua-
lia, etc.), let alone manage to do a better job than mental-
ism at solving any of the other traditional outstanding
classical philosophical problems pertaining to conscious-
ness. One of us has attempted, in a separate publication,
to conceptualize an interface between molecular and cel-
lular assemblies and high-order consciousness, summar-
ized with the metaphor of the ‘‘smart homeostat’’ (Braun,
2015). However, there is obviously still a long way to go
before bottom-up and top-down scientific research will
be fluently cross-talking on the issue of consciousness. In
particular, bottom-up scientific researchers have been
extremely reluctant to assimilate consciousness within
their conceptual framework. There are still two solitudes
in the science of consciousness, engaged in a dialogue de
sourds. We distinguish two examples of research efforts
presently engaging in ‘‘local’’ agendas combining bottom-
up and top-down investigation of consciousness, but
these are outside the ‘‘cell biology’’ scope of this review.
The first investigates EEG precursors to conscious
appraisal of stimuli as well as EEG markers more down-
stream (Moutard, Dehaene, & Malach, 2015). The sec-
ond investigates robot learning of ‘‘behavior primitives’’
or expertized ‘‘chunks’’ and how deep learning algorithms
behave when uncertainty forces spontaneous learning to
‘‘bridge’’ these chunks in a manner resembling conscious
deliberation (Tani, 2016).
If a general approach or framework is to be evoked
that shows promise to bridge the very real gap between
bottom-up and top-down sciences of consciousness, it
will be systems biology (Capra & Luisi, 2014; Noble,
2008). This approach is one for scientists, by scientists.
It distinguishes itself from emergentism in that instead
of insisting on the irreducibility of high levels of com-
plexity, it seeks to identify, characterize, and quantify
the concrete interactions from the most complex to the
simplest assemblies and vice versa. Indeed why would
complex phenomena be just ‘‘irreducible’’? Why could
they not just as well be ‘‘unconstructable’’? Systems sci-
ence adheres to neither of these glum outlooks.
5.3. Unicity versus multiplicity underlies the
‘‘hardest’’ problem of scientific approaches to
consciousness
This essay has touched upon, without resolving it, what
seems to us to be the greatest paradox in consciousness
studies. Undeniably, our subjective experience of con-
sciousness is that of a constant stream (James, 1950) or
a thin tunnel (Donald, 2001), or if we are really modest
or informed of the experimental psychology of con-
sciousness, a bare thread, oft broken. Subjective report-
ing of consciousness typically reveals a singleness of
identity, of purpose, and of agency.
Yet, in its concrete embodiment, which is what this
essay reviewed, the perspective of human consciousness
appears as something completely estranged from our
everyday introspection. It is the breathtakingly complex
hierarchy of widely distributed multitudes of tiny mov-
ing and interacting objects, that is, our inner private
mental life, with the six brain swarms outlined above
representing a mere tip of the iceberg. Consciousness is
molecular signaling, nothing else. This, we think, is a
tractable way to recognize that there is a problem in
consciousness studies that is really hard to resolve. This
problem is to reconcile two research communities of
104
Adaptive Behavior 26(3)

scientists who never speak to each other, who do not
read each other’s publications, and who generally have
no understanding of each other’s methods, preoccupa-
tions, triumphs, and so on (Table 1).
Faced with this paradox between multitudinous-
ness and unicity, there are only really two scientific
solutions, bottom-up versus top-down approaches,
and both must strive to integrate with the other. If
the embodiment of consciousness is nothing but a set
of extreme multitudes of material signaling particles
as outlined in previous sections whether swarming or
not, then are we not compelled to face the fact that
there is something special about the multitudinous-
ness of the moving units under consideration, as an
important theme in and of itself, under the rubric of
‘‘consciousness?’’
Systems theory is the most complete general scientific
approach to consciousness, striving to integrate widely
diverse fields of endeavor. The defining attitude of sys-
tems theorists is that they refuse to treat anything in iso-
lation, they wish to track the full causal chain. They are
in no way averse to complexity. Systems theory is thus
of great interest not only to the scientists themselves
who need to progressively fill in the gaps of the best glo-
bal account of consciousness with fresh research, but
also teachers who need to help students get a grip on
specific subject matters without becoming increasingly
narrow minded as they progress in their studies. It is of
paramount interest to philosophers because it strives to
connect everything that can fall under the rubrics of
observation, quantification, and reason—which is a lot.
It is highly satisfying emotionally and morally, finally
ridding us of the God/Human hypostasis that justifies
cruelty to animals by placing them outside the loop,
that justifies environmental ruin by attributing to man
handed down ownership of the world, and that bolsters
credulity about absolutized godly powers of the mind
inevitably leading to disappointment. Finally, it pro-
vides a rich esthetic tapestry, capable of inspiring poets:
The borders of our minds are ever shifting, and many
minds can flow into one another, as it were, and create or
reveal a single mind, a single energy. The borders of our
memories are as shifting, and our memories are a part of
one great memory, the memory of Nature herself. (William
Butler Yeats, 1865-1939)
Declaration of Conflicting Interests
The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with
respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this
article.
Funding
The author(s) received no financial support for the research,
authorship, and/or publication of this article.
References
Adelman, R., Saul, R. L., & Ames, B. N. (1988). Oxidative
damage to DNA: Relation to species metabolic rate and
life span. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
85, 2706–2708.
Allmann, J. M. (1999). Evolving Brains. New York, NY: Sci-
entific American Library.
Armitage, J. P., & Berry, R. M. (2010). Time for bacteria to
slow down. Cell, 141, 24–26.
Bach-y-Rita, P. (1994). Non-synaptic diffusion neurotrans-
mission: A novel concept for future migraine research.
Cephalalgia, 14, 396–400.
Bacskai, B. J., Hochner, B., Mahaut-Smith, M., Adams, S.
R., Kaang, B. K., Kandel, E. R., & Tsien, R. Y. (1993).
Spatially resolved dynamics of cAMP and protein kinase A
subunits in Aplysia sensory neurons. Science, 260, 222–226.
Badgaiyan, R. D., & Posner, M. I. (1997). Time course of cor-
tical activations in implicit and explicit recall. Journal of
Neuroscience, 17, 4904–4913.
Bartumeus, F., da Luz, M. G. E., Viswanathan, G. M., &
Catalan, J. (2005). Animal search strategies: A quantita-
tive random-walk analysis. Ecology, 86, 3078–3087.
Battiti, R., Brunato, M., & Mascia, F. (2008). Reactive search
and intelligent optimization. New York, NY: Springer Verlag.
Be´ liveau, R., & Gingras, D. (2010). La mort. Montreal, QC,
Canada: E´ ditions Tre´ carre´ .
Bell, A. J. (1999). Levels and loops: The future of artificial
intelligence and neuroscience. Philosophical Transactions
of the Royal Society of London B: Biological Sciences, 354,
2013–2020.
Beni, G., & Wang, J. (1993). Swarm intelligence in cellular
robotic systems. In robots and biological systems: Towards
a new bionics? (pp. 703–712). Berlin: Springer.
Table 1. Systems view of the life cycle.
Assembly ranked by
increasing size
Spatial transit frame
(distribution) around
the life cycle of an
organism
Temporal transit frame (turnover)
in the reproductive life cycle of
an organism
Subatomic particle (e.g. boson)
Galaxy
Nanoseconds
Atom (e.g. hydrogen)
Planet
Days
Protein (e.g. actin)
Organ
Weeks
Prokaryotic cell (e.g. bacterium)
Swarm
Months
Eukaryotic cell (e.g. lymphocyte)
Body system
Years
Organism (e.g. human)
Niche (population)
Decades
Braun and Lovejoy
105

Ben-Jacob, E. (1998). Bacterial wisdom, Go¨ del’s theorem and
creative genomic webs. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics
and Its Applications, 248, 57–76.
Berryman, A. A., & Stenseth, C. (1984). Behavioral cata-
strophes in biological systems. Behavioral Science, 29,
127–137.
Birren, S. J., & Marder, E. (2013). Plasticity in the neurotrans-
mitter repertoire. Science, 340, 436–437.
Bockaert, J., & Pin, J. P. (1999). Molecular tinkering of G
protein coupled receptors: An evolutionary success. The
EMBO Journal, 18, 1723–1729.
Bordenstein, S. R., & Theis, K. R. (2015). Host biology in
light of the microbiome: Ten principles of holobionts and
hologenomes. PLoS Biology, 13, e1002226.
Bornholt, J., Lopez, R., Carmean, D. M., Ceze, L., Seelig, G.,
& Strauss, K. (2016). A DNA-based archival storage system.
In Proceedings of the twenty-first international conference on
architectural support for programming languages and operat-
ing systems (pp. 637–649). New York, NY: ACM.
Boulanger, L. M. (2009). Immune proteins in brain develop-
ment and synaptic plasticity. Neuron, 64, 93–109.
Bourzac, K. (2014). Microbiome: The bacterial tightrope.
Nature, 516, S14–S16.
Braun, C. M. (1989). Microgenetic theory: An inspiration for
cognitive neuroscience? The life of the mind by Jason W
Brown, M.D. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum, 1988. Brain and
Cognition, 11, 139–143.
Braun, C. M. (1991). The Marxist categories of the ‘‘abstract’’
and ‘concrete’’ and the cultural-historical school of psy-
chology. Multidisciplinary Newsletter for Activity Theory,
4, 36–41.
Braun, C. M. (2003). Vers un cadre neuropsychologique ge´ n-
e´ ral pour le de´ veloppement du nourrisson. Enfance, 55,
293–324.
Braun, C. M. (2015). Biological costs of the evolution of
adaptive behavior and consciousness. Psychology of Con-
sciousness: Theory, Research, and Practice, 2, 377–403.
Braun, C. M. J., & Leblanc, Y. (2016). Beyond the synapse
and Hebb’s rule: Is the rest of the neuron more important
for psychiatric disorders?Current Psychiatry Reviews, 12,
266–277.
Bray, D. (1998). Signaling complexes: Biophysical constraints
on intracellular communication. Annual Review of Biophy-
sics and Biomolecular Structure, 27, 59–75.
Brickley, S. G., & Mody, I. (2012). Extrasynaptic GABAA
receptors: Their function in the CNS and implications for
disease. Neuron, 73, 23–34.
Bruggeman, F. J., & Westerhoff, H. V. (2007). The nature of
systems biology. Trends in Microbiology, 15, 45–50.
Burrows, M., Rogers, S. M., & Ott, S. R. (2011). Epigenetic
remodelling of brain, body and behaviour during phase
change in locusts. Neural Systems & Circuits, 1, 1–9.
Capra, F., & Luisi, P. L. (2014). The systems view of life: A
unifying vision. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
Press.
Carlson, A. L., Xia, K., Azcarate-Peril, M. A., Goldman, B.
D., Ahn, M., Styner, M. A., ... Knickmeyer, R. C. (2018).
Infant gut microbiome associated with cognitive develop-
ment. Biological Psychiatry, 83, 148–159.
Chadderton, P., Margrie, T. W., & Ha¨ usser, M. (2004). Inte-
gration of quanta in cerebellar granule cells during sensory
processing. Nature, 428, 856–860.
Changeux, J. P., & Garey, L. (1997). Neuronal man: The biol-
ogy of mind. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Chiappinelli, V. A., & Giacobini, E. (1978). Time course of
appearance of a-bungarotoxin binding sites during devel-
opment of chick ciliary ganglion and iris. Neurochemical
Research, 3, 465–478.
Chrobak, A. A., Nowakowski, J., & Dudek, D. (2016). Inter-
actions between the gut microbiome and the central ner-
vous system and their role in schizophrenia, bipolar
disorder and depression. Archives of Psychiatry and Psy-
chotherapy, 2, 5–11.
Collingridge, G. L., Isaac, J. T. R., & Wang, Y. T. (2004).
Receptor
trafficking
and
synaptic
plasticity.
Nature
Reviews Neuroscience, 5, 952–962.
Cornforth, D. M., Popat, R., McNally, L., Gurney, J., Scott-
Phillips, T. C., Ivens, A., & Brown, S. P. (2014). Combina-
torial quorum sensing allows bacteria to resolve their social
and physical environment. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 111, 4280–4284.
Darnton, N. C., Turner, L., Rojevsky, S., & Berg, H. C.
(2010). Dynamics of bacterial swarming. Biophysical Jour-
nal, 98, 2082–2090.
Datsenko, K. A., Pougach, K., Tikhonov, A., Wanner, B. L.,
Severinov, K., & Semenova, E. (2012). Molecular memory
of prior infections activates the CRISPR/Cas adaptive bac-
terial immunity system. Nature Communications, 3, 945.
De Castro, L. N. (2002). Immune, swarm, and evolutionary
algorithms, Part I: Basic models. In Proceedings of the 9th
international conference on neural information processing (ICO-
NIP’02) (Vol. 3, pp. 1464–1468). New York, NY: IEEE.
De Graaf-Peters, V. B., & Hadders-Algra, M. (2006). Onto-
geny of the human central nervous system: What is hap-
pening when?Early Human Development, 82, 257–266.
Dehaene, S., Changeux, J. P., & Naccache, L. (2011). The
global neuronal workspace model of conscious access:
From neuronal architectures to clinical applications. In
S. Dehaene & Y. Christen (Eds.), Characterizing conscious-
ness: From cognition to the clinic? (pp. 55–84). Berlin,
Germany: Springer.
Dennett, D. (2017). From bacteria to Bach and back: The evo-
lution of minds. New York, NY: W. W. Norton and
Company.
Donald, M. (2001). A mind so rare: The evolution of human con-
sciousness. New York, NY: W.W. Norton and Company.
Drouin, G., Godin, J. R., & Page´ , B. (2011). The genetics of
vitamin C loss in vertebrates. Current Genomics, 12,
371–378.
Edelman, G. M. (1987). Neural Darwinism: The theory of neu-
ronal group selection. New York, NY: Basic Books.
Eden, E., Geva-Zatorsky, N., Issaeva, I., Cohen, A., Dekel,
E., Danon, T., & Alon, U. (2011). Proteome half-life
dynamics in living human cells. Science, 331, 764–768.
Eilam E. (2005). Reversing: Secrets of reverse engineering.
Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons.
El Aidy, S., Stilling, R., Dinan, T. G., & Cryan, J. F. (2016).
Microbiome to brain: Unravelling the multidirectional
axes of communication. In M. Lyte & P. E. (Eds.), Micro-
bial endocrinology: Interkingdom signaling in infectious dis-
ease and health (pp. 301–336). London, England: Springer.
Feynman, R. P., & Leighton, R. (1988). What do you care
what others think: Further adventures of a curious charac-
ter. New York, NY: Bantam Books.
106
Adaptive Behavior 26(3)

Foulger, R. E., Osumi-Sutherland, D., McIntosh, B. K.,
Hulo, C., Masson, P., Poux, S., . & Lomax, J. (2015).
Representing virus-host interactions and other multi-
organism processes in the Gene Ontology. BMC Micro-
biology, 15(1), 146–158.
Fuxe, K., Borroto-Escuela, D. O., Romero-Fernandez, W.,
Diaz-Cabiale, Z., Rivera, A., Ferraro, L., & Agnati, L. F.
(2012). Extrasynaptic neurotransmission in the modulation
of brain function: Focus on the striatal neuronal–glial net-
works. Frontiers in Physiology, 3, 1–17.
Gamez, D. (2008). Progress in machine consciousness. Con-
sciousness and Cognition, 1, 887–910.
Gardner, M. (1970). Mathematical games: The fantastic com-
binations of John Conway’s new solitaire game ‘‘life.’’-
Scientific American, 223, 120–123.
Gershenson, C. (2010). Computing networks: A general
framework to contrast neural and swarm cognitions. Pala-
dyn Journal of Behavioral Robotics, 1, 147–153.
Gether,
U.
(2000).
Uncovering
molecular
mechanisms
involved in activation of G protein-coupled receptors.
Endocrine Reviews, 21, 90–113.
Gilbert, S. F., & Epel, D. (2009). Ecological developmental
biology: Integrating epigenetics, medicine, and evolution.
Sunderland, MA: Sinauer Associates.
Gillin, J. C. (2002, March 25). How long can humans stay
awake?Scientific American. https://www.scientificamerican.
com/article/how-long-can-humans-stay/
Grasse´ , P. P. (1959). La reconstruction du nid et les coordina-
tions inter-individuelles chez Bellicositermes Natalensis et
Cubitermes sp. La the´ orie de la stigmergie: Essai d’inter-
pre´ tation du comportement des termites constructeurs.
Insectes Sociaux, 6, 41–81.
Guttenberg, N., & Goldenfeld, N. (2009). Friction factor of
two-dimensional
rough-boundary
turbulent
soap
film
flows. Physics Reviews, 79, 065306.
Halavi, M., Hamilton, K. A., Parekh, R., & Ascoli, G. A.
(2012). Digital reconstructions of neuronal morphology:
Three decades of research trends. Frontiers in Neu-
roscience, 6, 1–11.
Hawking, S., & Mlodinow, L. (2010). The grand design.
New York, NY: Bantam Books.
Hayflick, L., & Moorehead, P. S. (1961). The serial cultiva-
tion of human diploid cell strains. Experimental Cell
Research, 25, 585–621.
Heijtz, R. D. (2016, December). Fetal, neonatal, and infant
microbiome: Perturbations and subsequent effects on brain
development and behavior. Seminars in Fetal and Neonatal
Medicine, 21, 410–417.
Holzer, P., & Farzi, A. (2014). Neuropeptides and the
microbiota-gut-brain axis. In M. Lyte & J. F. Cryan
(Eds.), Microbial endocrinology: The microbiota-gut-brain
axis in health and disease (pp. 195–219). New York, NY:
Springer.
Hutchison, C. A., Chuang, R. Y., Noskov, V. N., Assad-
Garcia, N., Deerinck, T. J., Ellisman, M. H., Pelletier, J.
F. (2016). Design and synthesis of a minimal bacterial
genome. Science, 351, aad6253.
Iourov, I. Y., Vorsanova, S. G., & Yurov, Y. B. (2006). Chro-
mosomal variation in mammalian neuronal cells: Known
facts and attractive hypotheses. International Review of
Cytology, 249, 143–191.
Jackson, S. E. (1998). How do small single-domain proteins
fold?Folding and Design, 3, R81–R91.
Jacob, T. C., Moss, S. J., & Jurd, R. (2008). GABAA receptor
trafficking and its role in the dynamic modulation of neu-
ronal inhibition. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 9, 331–343.
James, W. (1950). The principles of psychology (Vols. 1–2).
New York, NY: Dover Publications.
Janik, R., Thomason, L. A., Stanisz, A. M., Forsythe, P.,
Bienenstock, J., & Stanisz, G. J. (2016). Magnetic reso-
nance spectroscopy reveals oral Lactobacillus promotion
of increases in brain GABA, N-acetyl aspartate and gluta-
mate. Neuroimage, 125, 988–995.
Johnson, B. R., & Linksvayer, T. A. (2010). Deconstructing
the superorganism: Social physiology, groundplans, and
sociogenomics. Quarterly Review of Biology, 85, 57–79.
Kaiser, D., Robinson, M., & Kroos, L. (2010). Myxobacteria,
polarity, and multicellular morphogenesis. Cold Spring
Harbor Perspectives in Biology, 2, 1–27.
Karaboga, D., & Akay, B. (2009). A survey: Algorithms simu-
lating bee swarm intelligence. Artificial Intelligence Review,
31, 61–85.
Kelly, J. R., Clarke, G., Cryan, J. F., & Dinan, T. G. (2016).
Brain-gut-microbiota axis: Challenges for translation in
psychiatry. Annals of Epidemiology, 26, 366–372.
Kennedy, P. J., Murphy, A. B., Cryan, J. F., Ross, P. R.,
Dinan, T. G., & Stanton, C. (2016). Microbiome in brain
function and mental health. Trends in Food Science &
Technology, 57, 289–301.
Kohonen, T. (1988). Self-organization and associative memory
(2nd ed.). Berlin, Germany: Springer Verlag.
Kong, S. G., & Okajima, K. (2016). Diverse photoreceptors
and light responses in plants. Journal of Plant Research,
129, 111–114.
Lafferty, K. D. (2006). Can the common brain parasite, Tox-
oplasma gondii, influence human culture?Proceedings of
the Royal Society of London B: Biological Sciences, 273,
2749–2755.
Lagercrantz, H., & Changeux, J. P. (2010). On the emergence
of consciousness. In H. Lagercrantz, M.A. Hanson,
L.R. Ment, & D.M. Peebles (Eds.), The newborn brain (pp.
377–393). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
LeCun, Y., Bengio, Y., & Hinton, G. (2015). Deep learning.
Nature, 521, 436–444.
Lee, Y. K., & Mazmanian, S. K. (2010). Has the microbiota
played a critical role in the evolution of the adaptive
immune system?Science, 330, 1768–1773.
Levy, M., Thaiss, C. A., & Elinav, E. (2015). Metagenomic
cross-talk: The regulatory interplay between immunoge-
nomics and the microbiome. Genome Medicine, 7, 120.
Lichocki, P., Tarapore, D., Keller, L., & Floreano, D. (2012).
Neural networks as mechanisms to regulate division of
labor. The American Naturalist, 179, 391–400.
Liu, R., Hong, J., Xu, X., Feng, Q., Zhang, D., Gu, Y., & .
Xia, H. (2017). Gut microbiome and serum metabolome
alterations in obesity and after weight-loss intervention.
Nature Medicine, 23, 859.
Logsdon, A. F., Erickson, M. A., Rhea, E. M., Salameh, T.
S., & Banks, W. A. (2017). Gut reactions: How the blood–
brain barrier connects the microbiome and the brain.
Experimental Biology and Medicine, 243, 159–165.
Maranduba, C. M. D. C., De Castro, S. B. R., Souza, G. T.
D., Rossato, C., da Guia, F. C., Valente, M. A. S., . . .
Braun and Lovejoy
107

Macedo, G. C. (2015). Intestinal microbiota as modulators
of the immune system and neuroimmune system: Impact
on the host health and homeostasis. Journal of Immunol-
ogy Research, 2015, 931–574.
Margulis, L. (2001). The conscious cell. Annals of the New
York Academy of Sciences, 929, 55–70.
Martin, S. L. (2009). Developmental biology: Jumping-gene
roulette. Nature, 460, 1087–1088.
Maturana,
H.
R.
(1970).
Biology
of
cognition.
In
H.R. Maturana & F.J. Varela (Eds.), Autopoiesis and cog-
nition (pp. 1–58). Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Reidel.
Minot, C. S. (1902). The problem of consciousness in its bio-
logical aspects. Science, 16, 1–12.
Mitchell, A., Romano, G. H., Groisman, B., Yona, A., Dekel,
E., Kupiec, M., & Pilpel, Y. (2009). Adaptive prediction of
environmental changes by microorganisms. Nature, 460,
220–224.
Modney, B. K., & Hatton, G. I. (1994). Maternal behaviors:
Evidence that they feed back to alter brain morphology
and function. Acta Paediatrica, 83, 29–32.
Moutard, C., Dehaene, S., & Malach, R. (2015). Spontaneous
fluctuations and non-linear ignitions: Two dynamic faces
of cortical recurrent loops. Neuron, 88, 194–206.
Najkar, N., Razzazi, F., & Sameti, H. (2010). A novel
approach to HMM-based speech recognition systems
using particle swarm optimization. Mathematical and
Computer Modelling, 52, 1910–1920.
Noble, D. (2008). The music of life: Biology beyond genes.
Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Noble, D. (2013). Physiology is rocking the foundations of
evolutionary
biology.
Experimental
Physiology,
98,
1235–1243.
Noy, N., Bickel, S., Zion-Golumbic, E., Harel, M., Golan,
T., Davidesco, I., . . . Mehta, A. D. (2015). Ignition’s glow:
Ultra-fast spread of global cortical activity accompanying
local ‘‘ignitions’’ in visual cortex during conscious visual
perception. Consciousness and Cognition, 35, 206–224.
Oberheim, N. A., Wang, X., Goldman, S., & Nedergaard, M.
(2006). Astrocytic complexity distinguishes the human
brain. Trends in Neuroscience, 29, 547–553.
Ogilvie, L. A., Overall, A. D., & Jones, B. V. (2012). The
human-microbe
coevolutionary
continuum.
Microbial
Ecological Theory, 25, 42.
Ozgyin, L., Erd}os, E., Bojcsuk, D., & Balint, B. L. (2015).
Nuclear receptors in transgenerational epigenetic inheri-
tance. Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology, 118,
34–43.
Passino, K. M. (2010). Bacterial foraging optimization. Inter-
national Journal of Swarm Intelligence Research, 1, 1–16.
Pattee, H. H. (1969). How does a molecule become a messa-
ge?Communication in Development, 3, 1–16.
Pearson, K. (1905). The problem of the random walk. Nature,
72, 294.
Poon, C. S., & Shah, J. V. (1998). Hebbian learning in parallel
and modular memories. Biological Cybernetics, 78, 79–86.
Prince, A. L., Chu, D. M., Seferovic, M. D., Antony, K. M.,
Ma, J., & Aagaard, K. M. (2015). The perinatal micro-
biome and pregnancy: Moving beyond the vaginal micro-
biome. Cold Spring Harbor Perspectives in Medicine, 5,
a023051.
Puelles, L., Harrison, M., Paxinos, G., & Watson, C. (2013).
A developmental ontology for the mammalian brain based
on the prosomeric model. Trends in Neurosciences, 36,
570–578.
Rakic, P. (2009). Evolution of the neocortex: Perspective from
developmental biology. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 10,
724–735.
Ramaswamy, S. (2010). The mechanics and statistics of active
matter. The Annual Review of Condensed Matter Physics,
1, 323–345.
Ramdya, P., Lichocki, P., Cruchet, S., Frisch, L., Tse, W.,
Floreano, D., & Benton, R. (2014). Mechanosensory inter-
actions drive collective behaviour in Drosophila. Nature,
519, 233–236.
Rehen, S. K., Yung, Y. C., McCreight, M. P., Kaushal, D.,
Yang, A. H., Almeida, B. S. V., & Chun, J. (2005). Consti-
tutional aneuploidy in the normal human brain. Journal of
Neuroscience, 25, 2176–2180.
Reynolds, C. W. (1987). Flocks, herds and schools: A distrib-
uted behavioral model. ACM SIGGRAPH Computer Gra-
phics, 21(4), 25–34.
Richardson, L. F. (2007). Weather prediction by numerical
process. New York: Cambridge University Press. (Original
work published 1922)
Robbins, T. W. (2016). Neurobehavioural sequelae of social
deprivation in rodents revisited: Modelling social adversity
for developmental neuropsychiatric disorders. Journal of
Psychopharmacology, 30, 1082–1089.
Rotem, S., & Rosenberg, E. (2016). Collective memory and
the hologenome concept. Global Journal of Medical
Research, 16, 18–24.
Ryan, F. (2016). How viruses and bacteria have shaped the
human genome the implications for disease. In L. Nibali,
B. Henderson, & F. Ryan (Eds.), The human microbiota
and chronic disease: Dysbiosis as a cause of human pathol-
ogy (Chapter 10, pp. 165–178). Oxford, UK: Wiley-
Blackwell.
Salvucci, E. (2016). Microbiome, holobiont and the net of life.
Critical Reviews in Microbiology, 42, 485–494.
Sanz-Clemente, A., Nicoll, R. A., & Roche, K. W. (2013).
Diversity in NMDA receptor composition many regula-
tors, many consequences. The Neuroscientist, 19, 62–75.
Satterfield, C. L., Lowenstein, T. K., Vreeland, R. H.,
Rosenzweig, W. D., & Powers, D. W. (2005). New evi-
dence for 250 Ma age of halotolerant bacterium from a
Permian
salt
crystal.
Geology,
33,
265–268.
doi:
10.1130/G21106.1
Schlegel, T., Visscher, P. K., & Seeley, T. D. (2012). Beeping
and piping: Characterization of two mechano-acoustic sig-
nals used by honey bees in swarming. Naturwissenschaften,
99, 1067–1071.
Schmidhuber, J. (2015). Deep learning in neural networks: An
overview. Neural Networks, 61, 85–117.
Schnell, M. J., McGettigan, J. P., Wirblich, C., & Papaneri,
A. (2010). The cell biology of rabies virus: Using stealth to
reach the brain. Nature Reviews Microbiology, 8, 51–61.
Selkrig, J., Wong, P., Zhang, X., & Pettersson, S. (2014).
Metabolic tinkering by the gut microbiome: Implications
for brain development and function. Gut Microbes, 5,
369–380.
Sherwood, C. C., Stimpson, C. D., Raghanti, M. A., Wild-
man, D. E., Uddin, M., Grossman, L. I., & Hof, P. R.
(2006). Evolution of increased glia–neuron ratios in the
108
Adaptive Behavior 26(3)

human frontal cortex. Proceedings of the National Acad-
emy of Sciences, 103, 13606–13611.
Shklarsh, A., Ariel, G., Schneidman, E., & Ben-Jacob, E.
(2011). Smart swarms of bacteria-inspired agents with per-
formance adaptable interactions. PLOS Computational
Biology, 7, e1002177.
Snodgrass, M., Kalaida, N., & Winer, E. S. (2009). Access is
mainly a second-order process: SDT models whether phe-
nomenally (first-order) conscious states are accessed by
reflectively (second-order) conscious processes. Conscious-
ness and Cognition, 18, 561–564.
Stewart, J. (1996). Cognition = life: Implications for higher-
level cognition. Behavioral Processes, 35, 311–326.
Stilling, R. M., Bordenstein, S. R., Dinan, T. G., & Cryan, J.
F. (2014). Friends with social benefits: Host-microbe inter-
actions as a driver of brain evolution and development?-
Frontiers in Cellular and Infection Microbiology, 4, 1–17.
Stock, J. B., & Zhang, S. (2013). The biochemistry of mem-
ory. Current Biology, 23, R741–R745.
Sulaiman, S., Yahya, S. A., Shukor, N. S. M., Ismail, A. R.,
Zaahirah, Q., Yaacob, H., & Dzulkifli, M. A. (2015).
Clustering natural language morphemes from EEG signals
using the artificial bee colony algorithm. In S. Phon-
Amnuaisuk, & T. W. Au (Eds.), Computational intelligence
in information systems (pp. 51–60). Cham, Switzerland:
Springer.
Tagkopoulos, I., Liu, Y. C., & Tavazoie, S. (2008). Predictive
behavior within microbial genetic networks. Science, 320,
1313–1317.
Tani, J. (1998). An interpretation of the ‘‘self’’ from the dyna-
mical systems perspective: A constructivist approach. Jour-
nal of Consciousness Studies, 5, 516–542.
Tani, J. (2009). Autonomy of self at criticality: The perspec-
tive from synthetic neuro-robotics. Adaptive Behavior, 17,
421–443.
Tani, J. (2016). Exploring robotic minds: Actions, symbols, and
consciousness as self-organizing dynamic phenomena. New
York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Tetel, M. J., de Vries, G. J., Melcangi, R. C., Panzica, G., &
O’Mahony, S. M. (2017). Steroids, stress, and the gut
microbiome-brain axis. Journal of Neuroendocrinology, 29,
1–8.e12548.
Thompson, R. F. (1993). The brain: A neuroscience primer.
New York, NY: W.H. Freeman and Company.
Thurman, R. E., Rynes, E., Humbert, R., Vierstra, J., Maur-
ano, M. T., Haugen, E., & Hansen, R. S. (2012). The
accessible chromatin landscape of the human genome.
Nature, 489, 75–82.
Trianni, V., & Tuci, E. (2011). Swarm cognition and artificial
life. In G. Kampis, I. Karsai, & E. Szathma´ ry (Eds.),
Advances in artificial life: Darwin meets von Neumann (pp.
270–277). Berlin, Germany: Springer.
Ueyama, T., & Fukuda, T. (1993). Self-organization of cellu-
lar robots using random walk with simple rules. In Pro-
ceedings of 1993 IEEE international conference on robotics
and automation (pp. 595–600). New York, NY: IEEE.
van Ast, J., Babuska, R., & De Schutter, B. (2008). A general
modeling framework for swarms. In Proceedings of the
2008 IEEE congress on evolutionary computation (CEC
2008) (pp. 3796–3801). Hong Kong, China: IEEE.
Varela, F. G., Maturana, H. R., & Uribe, R. (1974). Autopoi-
esis: The organization of living systems, its characteriza-
tion and a model. Biosystems, 5, 187–196.
Verkhratsky, A., Parpura, V., & Rodrı´guez, J. J. (2011).
Where the thoughts dwell: The physiology of neuronal–
glial ‘‘diffuse neural net.’’ Brain Research Reviews, 66,
133–151.
Vizi, E. S., Fekete, A., Karoly, R., & Mike, A. (2010). Non-
synaptic receptors and transporters involved in brain func-
tions and targets of drug treatment. British Journal of
Pharmacology, 160, 785–809.
Vullhorst, D., Mitchell, R. M., Keating, C., Roychowdhury,
S., Karavanova, I., Tao-Cheng, J. H., & Buonanno, A.
(2015). A negative feedback loop controls NMDA receptor
function in cortical interneurons via neuregulin 2/ErbB4
signalling. Nature Communications, 6, 1–14.
Wang, Y. (2015, July). Cognitive robotics and mathematical
engineering. In 2015 IEEE 14th international conference on
cognitive informatics & cognitive computing (ICCI* CC)
(pp. 4–6). New York, NY: IEEE.
Wegner, D. M. (2002). The illusion of conscious will. Cam-
bridge: MIT Press.
Wegner, D. M. (2003). The mind’s best trick: How we experi-
ence conscious will. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 7, 65–69.
Wolfram, S. (2002). A new kind of science. Champaign, IL:
Wolfram Media.
Xie, L., Kang, H., Xu, Q., Chen, M. J., Liao, Y., Thiyagara-
jan, M., & Nedergaard, M. (2013). Sleep drives metabolite
clearance from the adult brain. Science, 342, 373–377.
About the Authors
Claude MJ Braun is Professor of cognitive neuroscience at the Department of Psychology at the
University of Quebec in Montreal, Canada. His research interests are in experimental neuroscience
of interhemispheric dynamics, developmental behavioral neurology, and neuropsychiatry, with par-
ticular focus on hemispheric specialization. His deepest academic pleasure has been to try to under-
stand in purely materialistic and scientific terms the emergence of mental life.
Shaun Lovejoy is a professor at the Physics Department of McGill University, Canada. His research
interests are non-linear dynamics in complex geosystems with structures spanning large ranges of
scales, theoretical frameworks (scaling, fractals, multifractals), and data analysis and modeling.
Application areas include atmospheric dynamics, climate, turbulence, hydrology, precipitation, topo-
graphy, geogravity, geomagnetism, and biogeosystems.
Braun and Lovejoy
109

