Tous droits réservés © Laval théologique et philosophique, Université Laval,
2019
This document is protected by copyright law. Use of the services of Érudit
(including reproduction) is subject to its terms and conditions, which can be
viewed online.
https://apropos.erudit.org/en/users/policy-on-use/
This article is disseminated and preserved by Érudit.
Érudit is a non-profit inter-university consortium of the Université de Montréal,
Université Laval, and the Université du Québec à Montréal. Its mission is to
promote and disseminate research.
https://www.erudit.org/en/
Document generated on 05/30/2021 9:20 a.m.
Laval théologique et philosophique
The “Cosmographic Mystery” : Johannes Kepler’s Conversion of
Astronomy
Torrance Kirby
Volume 75, Number 1, February 2019
URI: https://id.erudit.org/iderudit/1067503ar
DOI: https://doi.org/10.7202/1067503ar
See table of contents
Publisher(s)
Faculté de philosophie, Université Laval
Faculté de théologie et de sciences religieuses, Université Laval
ISSN
0023-9054 (print)
1703-8804 (digital)
Explore this journal
Cite this article
Kirby, T. (2019). The “Cosmographic Mystery” : Johannes Kepler’s Conversion
of Astronomy. Laval théologique et philosophique, 75(1), 59–74.
https://doi.org/10.7202/1067503ar
Article abstract
In 1616, the Holy Congregation for the Index prohibited the printing and
reading of Copernicus’s On the Revolutions of the Heavenly Spheres (1543) on
the grounds that heliocentrism contradicted the Holy Scriptures. According to
Johannes Kepler, “To study the heavens is to know God as creator.” Moreover,
“Since we astronomers are priests of the highest God in regard to the book of
nature, it befits us to be thoughtful, not of the glory of our minds, but rather,
above else, of the glory of God.” There is some precedent for such claims in
John Calvin’s conception of the creation as a “Theatre of God’s glory” with its
corollary of the so-called “two books”. Kepler’s defence of Copernican
heliocentrism relies upon the distinction between the Book of Nature from the
Book of Scripture. Building upon the soteriological foundations laid by Martin
Luther, Kepler the astronomer-theologian also seeks to sharpen the distinction
between a “visible” and an “invisible” heaven, with significant consequences
for astronomical physics. The new astronomy is profoundly implicated in
sixteenth-century theological controversies.

Laval théologique et philosophique, 75, 1 (février 2019) : 59-74 
59 
THE “COSMOGRAPHIC MYSTERY” : 
JOHANNES KEPLER’S 
CONVERSION OF ASTRONOMY 
Torrance Kirby 
School of Religious Studies 
McGill University, Montreal 
RÉSUMÉ : En 1616, la Congrégation de l’Index a interdit l’impression et la lecture de l’ouvrage 
de Copernic, Des révolutions des orbes célestes (1543), sur le motif que l’héliocentrisme con-
tredit les saintes Écritures. Selon Johannes Kepler, « étudier les cieux, c’est connaître Dieu en 
tant que Créateur ». En outre, « puisque nous, astronomes, sommes des prêtres du plus haut 
Dieu en ce qui concerne le livre de la nature, il convient que nous réfléchissions non à la 
gloire de notre esprit, mais plutôt, avant tout, à la gloire de Dieu ». Un certain précédent à de 
telles affirmations se retrouve dans la conception de Jean Calvin de la création comme un 
« théâtre de la gloire de Dieu » avec son corollaire desdits « deux livres ». La défense de 
l’héliocentrisme copernicien par Kepler s’appuie sur la distinction entre le Livre de la Nature 
et le Livre des Écritures. S’appuyant sur les fondements sotériologiques posés par Martin Lu-
ther, l’astronome théologien Kepler cherche également à préciser la distinction entre un ciel 
« visible » et un ciel « invisible », avec des conséquences importantes pour la physique astro-
nomique. La nouvelle astronomie est profondément impliquée dans les controverses théolo-
giques du seizième siècle. 
ABSTRACT : In 1616, the Holy Congregation for the Index prohibited the printing and reading of 
Copernicus’s On the Revolutions of the Heavenly Spheres (1543) on the grounds that helio-
centrism contradicted the Holy Scriptures. According to Johannes Kepler, “To study the heav-
ens is to know God as creator.” Moreover, “Since we astronomers are priests of the highest 
God in regard to the book of nature, it befits us to be thoughtful, not of the glory of our minds, 
but rather, above else, of the glory of God.” There is some precedent for such claims in John 
Calvin’s conception of the creation as a “Theatre of God’s glory” with its corollary of the so-
called “two books”. Kepler’s defence of Copernican heliocentrism relies upon the distinction 
between the Book of Nature from the Book of Scripture. Building upon the soteriological foun-
dations laid by Martin Luther, Kepler the astronomer-theologian also seeks to sharpen the 
distinction between a “visible” and an “invisible” heaven, with significant consequences for 
astronomical physics. The new astronomy is profoundly implicated in sixteenth-century theo-
logical controversies. 
 ______________________  
t the outset of his treatise Harmonices mundi (The Harmonies of the World, 
1619), a late work in which Johannes Kepler expounds his understanding of the 
A 

TORRANCE KIRBY 
60 
music of the celestial spheres, a harmony of beautiful musical proportions discernible 
in the varying velocities of the planets, he invokes inspiration from Plato’s dialogue 
Timaeus : 
Before taking up these questions, it is my wish to impress upon my readers the very ex-
hortation of Timaeus, a pagan philosopher, who was going to speak on the same things : it 
should be learned by Christians with the greatest admiration, and shame too, if they do not 
imitate him : For truly, Socrates, since all who have the least particle of intelligence al-
ways invoke God whenever they enter upon any business, whether light or arduous ; so 
too, unless we have clearly strayed away from all sound reason, we who intend to have a 
discussion concerning the universe must of necessity make our sacred wishes and pray to 
the Gods and Goddesses with one mind that we may say such things as will please and be 
acceptable to them in especial and, secondly, to you too.1 
Kepler’s epigraph to Book V of the Harmonies amplifies this theme of a sapien-
tial theology in the form of a quotation from Galen : 
I am undertaking a holy discourse, a true hymn to God our Creator, believing that piety 
consists not in my sacrificing a great many hecatombs of bulls to Him, nor in my offering 
innumerable scents and spices ; but in my first learning myself, and then teaching others, 
both His greatness in wisdom, His greatness in power, and His nature in goodness. For I 
take as demonstration of the most absolute goodness the wish to embellish all things with 
the greatest possible adornment, and to envy no man his goods ; and I honour Him as 
good accordingly ; and furthermore I take it as a demonstration of outstanding wisdom, to 
seek out everything by which He might be adorned to the utmost ; and finally as a demon-
stration of irresistible power, to carry out all that He had ordained.2 
And Kepler had done precisely this both at the outset of his first important trea-
tise, the Mysterium Cosmographicum, first published in 1596 and reissued in a re-
vised edition in 1621. The full title of the treatise is Forerunner of the Cosmological 
Essays, which contains the Secret of the Universe on the Marvellous Proportion of 
the Celestial Spheres, and on the true and particular causes of the number, size, and 
periodic motions of the heavens, Established by means of the five regular Geometric 
solids.3 In the edition of 1621 Kepler greets his “friendly reader” with a poem which 
provides a helpful abstract of the main claims of the treatise : 
                                        
 1. Timaeus, 27c : “Ἀλλ᾽ ὦ Σώκτατες, τοῦτό γε δὴ πάντες ὅσοι καὶ κατὰ βραχὺ σωφροσύνης μετέχουσιν, 
ἐπὶ πασῇ ὁρμῇ καὶ σμίκροῦ καὶ μεγάλου πράγματος θεὸν ἀεί που καλοῦσιν. ἡμᾶς δὲ τοὺς περὶ τοῦ 
πὰντος λόγους ποιεῖσθαι πῃ μέλλοντας […], εἰ μὴ παντάπασι παραλλάττομεν, ἀνάγκη θεοὺς τε καὶ 
θεὰς ἐπικαλουμένους εὔχεσθαι πάντα, κατὰ νοῦν ἐκεῖνοις μἑν μάλιστα, ἑπομένως δέ ἠμῖν εἰπεῖν.” 
Johannes KEPLER, Harmonice mundi libri V, Linz, Austriae, Sump. Tambach, 1619. Harmonies of the 
World, transl. Charles Glenn Wallis, Amherst, N.Y., Prometheus Books, 1995, Proem. 
 2. KEPLER, Harmonies of the World, p. 169. 
 3. ID., Prodromus Dissertationum Cosmographicarum : Continens Mysterium Cosmographicum, de Admira-
bili Proportione Orbium Coelestium, Deque Causis Coelorum Numeri, Magnitudinis, Motuumque Periodi-
corum Genuinis & Proprjis, Demonstratum, per Quinque Regularia Corpora Geometrica, Tubingen, 
G. Gruppenbach, 1596 ; 2nd ed., Frankfort, Erasmus Kempfer, 1621. In his Commentary on the Elements of 
Geometry, Proclus states no few than four times that demonstration of the five Platonic solids is one of Eu-
clid’s two principal aims. Gottfried FRIEDLEIN, ed., Procli Diadochi in Primum Euclidis Elementorum 
Librum Commentarii, Leipzig, Teubner, 1967, p. 68, 70, 71, 74 (see also p. 82-83). Cited by Michael N. 
FRIED, “Book XIII of the Elements,” in History and Pedagogy of Mathematics. Proceedings of the 2012 
Satellite Meeting, Daejeon, Korea, p. 607-617. 

THE “COSMOGRAPHIC MYSTERY” 
61 
Lector Amice Salve 
Quid mundus, quae causa Deo, ratioque creandi, 
Unde Deo numeri, quae tantae regula moli, 
Quid faciat sex circuitus, quo quaelibet orbe 
Intervalla cadant, cur tanto Iupiter et Mars, 
Orbibus haud primis, interstinguantur hiatu : 
Hic te Pythagoras docet omnia quinque figuris. 
Scilicet exemplo docuit, nos posse renasci, 
Bis mille erratis, dum fit Copernicus annis, 
Hoc, melior Mundi speculator, nominis. 
At tu Glandibus inventas noli postponere fruges. 
 
Greetings, Friendly Reader 
The World’s design, Creation’s how and why, 
And whence God’s numbers : laws that rule the sky — 
The reason for six tracks, each interval, 
And why the gap twixt Mars and Jove so gapes 
Though neither of their spheres is principal — 
Pythagoras will show with just five shapes. 
We can, through his example, live again : 
Two thousand years of error gone, explore 
Still better, by Kopernik, than before ! 
Delay no more, but gather in my grain.4 
Kepler stands in the tradition of Proclus for whom “Euclid belonged to the per-
suasion of Plato and was at home in this philosophy ; and this is why he thought the 
goal of the Elements as a whole to be the construction of the so-called Platonic fig-
ures”.5 In his commentary on Euclid’s Elements, Proclus refers often to Plato’s dia-
logue Timaeus. In his description of the impact of mathematics on the theory of na-
ture, Proclus states : 
[Geometry] reveals the orderliness (eutaxian) of the ratios according to which the uni-
verse is constructed (dedēmiourgētai to pan) and the proportion that binds things together 
in the cosmos, making, as the Timaeus somewhere says, divergent warring factors into 
friends and sympathetic companions. It exhibits the simple and primal causal elements as 
everywhere clinging fast to one another in symmetry and equality, the properties through 
which the whole heaven was perfected (ho pas ouranos eteleōthē) when it took upon itself 
the figures appropriate to its particular region ; and it discovers, furthermore, the numbers 
applicable to all generated things and to their periods of activity and of return to their 
starting-points, by which it is possible to calculate the times of fruitfulness or the reverse 
for each of them. All these I believe the Timaeus sets forth, using mathematical language 
                                        
 4. Johannes KEPLER, Mysterium Cosmographicum. The Secret of the Universe, transl. A.M. Duncan, New 
York, Abaris Books, 1981 : “The nature of the universe, God’s motive and plan for creating it, God’s 
source for the numbers, the law for such a great mass, the reason why there are six orbits, the spaces which 
fall between all the spheres, the cause of the great gap separating Jupiter and Mars, though they are not in 
the first spheres — here Pythagoras reveals all this to you by five figures. Clearly he has revealed by this 
example that we can be born again after two thousand years of error, until the appearance of Copernicus, in 
virtue of this name, a better explorer of the universe. But hold back no longer from the fruits found within 
these rinds.” 
 5. FRIEDLEIN, ed., In Primum Euclidis, p. 68. Cited by FRIED, “Book XIII of the Elements,” p. 609. 

TORRANCE KIRBY 
62 
throughout in expounding its theory of the nature of the universe [literally, the “whole”] 
(peri tēs phuseōs tōn holōn theōrian).6 
As the full title declares, the Mysterium Cosmographicum sets forth the agenda of 
Kepler’s later mature publications — the Astronomia Nova of 1609,7 the Harmonies 
(1619), and the Epitome of Copernican Astronomy (1618-1621).8 Foundational to the 
project is Kepler’s enthusiastic embrace of the heliocentric astronomy of Copernicus. 
Along with Giordano Bruno, and later Galileo, Kepler is among the few in the six-
teenth century to do so with zeal and steadfast commitment. In his dedication of On 
the Revolutions of the Heavenly Spheres (1543) to Pope Paul III, Alessandro Farnese, 
Copernicus had been mostly careful not to assert that his astronomical speculations 
were at odds with Holy Scripture.9 In an attempt to reduce the controversial impact of 
the claim that the earth was a celestial body, Andreas Osiander (1498-1552), Lu-
theran theologian and friend of Copernicus who saw De Revolutionibus through the 
press, anonymously added his own unsigned foreword Ad lectorem de hypothesibus 
huius operis. Osiander stated that Copernicus’ system was a mathematical hypothesis 
intended to facilitate astronomical reckoning and not an attempt to declare literal, 
physical truth, that is to say, in the accepted astronomical idiom, the goal was to 
“save the appearances” : 
[…] it is not necessary that these hypotheses should be true, or even probable ; but it is 
enough if they provide a calculus which fits the observations […]. For this art is abso-
lutely and profoundly ignorant of the causes of the apparent irregular movements. And if 
it constructs and thinks up causes — and it has certainly thought up a good many — nev-
ertheless it does not think them up in order to persuade anyone of their truth but only in 
order that they may provide a correct basis for calculation.10 
Osiander alleges, not entirely accurately, that Copernicus held back from une-
quivocal assertion of the immobility of the sun at the centre of the world and the orbit 
of the earth. In the original Preface to the Reader of the Mysterium Cosmographicum, 
                                        
 6. In Eucl., p. 22-23. Quoted by FRIED, “Book XIII of the Elements,” p. 615. 
 7. Johannes Kepler, Astronomia Nova ΑΙΤΙΟΛΟΓΗΤΟΣ, seu Physica Cœlestis Tradita Comentariis de Mo-
tibus Stellæ Martis, Ex Obersvationibus G[enerosi] V[iri] Tychonis Brahe… Elaborata, Prague, s.n., Anno 
Aerae Dionysianae 1609. English translation by William H. DONAHUE, ed., Kepler’s New Astronomy, 
Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1992. See also DONAHUE’s Selections from Kepler’s Astronomia 
Nova, Santa Fe, N.M., Green Lion Press, 2008. 
 8. Johannes KEPLER, Epitome Astronomiae Copernicanæ Usitatâ Formâ Quæstionum & Responsionum Con-
scripta, Linz, Johannes Plancus, 1618-1621. Epitome of Copernican Astronomy & Harmonies of the 
World, transl. by C.G. Wallis, Amherst, Prometheus Books, 1995. 
 9. Nicholas COPERNICUS, De Revolutionibus Orbium Cœlestium, Libri VI, Nuremburg, J. Petreium, 1543. On 
the Revolutions, ed. Jerzy DOBRZYCKI, Baltimore, Johns Hopkins University Press, 1978. “I can readily 
imagine, Holy Father, that as soon as some people hear that in this volume, which I have written about the 
revolutions of the spheres of the universe, I ascribe certain motions to the terrestrial globe, they will shout 
that I must be immediately repudiated together with this belief. For I am not so enamoured of my own 
opinions that I disregard what others may think of them. I am aware that a philosopher’s ideas are not sub-
ject to the judgment of ordinary persons, because it is his endeavour to seek the truth in all things, to the 
extent permitted to human reason by God.” 
 10. “Ad Lectorem,” in N. COPERNICUS, On the Revolutions of the Heavenly Spheres, transl. C.G. Wallis, 
Chicago, Encyclopædia Britannica, 1986, p. 505-506. Bruce WRIGHTSMAN, “Andreas Osiander’s Contri-
bution to the Copernican Achievement,” in Robert S. WESTMAN, ed., The Copernican Achievement, Los 
Angeles, University of California Press, 1975, p. 213-143. 

THE “COSMOGRAPHIC MYSTERY” 
63 
Kepler alludes to this reserve with respect to causality when he compares what he is 
doing with the earlier work : 
I was so delighted by Copernicus […] that I not only frequently defended his opinions at 
the disputations of candidates in physics but even wrote out a thorough disputation on the 
first motion […] but where Copernicus did so through mathematical arguments, mine 
were physical, or rather metaphysical […].11 
In this remark Kepler draws a critical distinction between the hypothetical as-
sumptions of traditional mathematical astronomy and what he terms “celestial phys-
ics”, a causal account of planetary motion understood realistically : in the new as-
tronomy it would not be sufficient merely to “save the phenomena”. William Do-
nahue points out that much of the discussion on the relation between scripture and 
astronomy Kepler had originally intended to include in the Preface to his first edition 
of Mysterium Cosmographicum (MC) in 1596 was censored by faculty at the Univer-
sity of Tübingen, but eventually appeared in his Astronomia Nova of 1609, and again 
in the second edition of MC in 1621.12 Whereas like Ptolemy before him, and Tycho 
Brahe (1546-1601) after, Copernicus aims to formulate a mathematically concise 
explanation of the celestial motions with a view to giving a simple explanation of 
apparent irregularities in the celestial motions which were to be circular, regular, and 
uniform — in order to “save the appearances”.13 Kepler, by contrast to all three, turns, as 
he himself puts it “from astronomy to physics or cosmography.”14 To “save the appear-
ances” is to demonstrate mathematical relationships which correspond to observation, 
without making any attempt to suggest a physical explanation for the relationships. 
According to the ancient view as defined by Geminus of Rhodes (110-40 BCE) : 
The hypothesis that underlies the whole of astronomy is that the Sun, the Moon, and the 
five planets move circularly and at a constant speed in the directions opposite to that of 
the cosmos […] it is no part of the business of the astronomer to know what is by nature 
suited to a position of rest, and what sort of bodies are apt to move, but he introduces hy-
potheses under which some bodies remain fixed, while others move, and then considers to 
which hypotheses the phenomena actually observed in the heavens will correspond.15 
Ptolemy, Copernicus, and Brahe all agreed that celestial motions were circular or 
spherical, regular, and uniform. The vagaries of the wandering stars were to be ex-
plained by various complicated arrangements of eccentric circles (where the path of a 
heavenly body’s motion was not centred exactly on the earth or the sun), epicycles 
                                        
 11. KEPLER, Mysterium Cosmographicum, p. 63. 
 12. William H. DONAHUE, Selections from Kepler’s Astronomia Nova, p. 1. 
 13. “I correlate the motions of the other planets and of all the spheres with the movement of the earth so that I 
may thereby determine to what extent the motions and appearances of the other planets and spheres can be 
saved if they are correlated with the earth’s motions” (Nicholas COPERNICUS, On the Revolutions of the 
Heavenly Bodies, transl. Edward Rosen, London, Macmillan, 1972, p. 5). On “saving the appearances” 
(σώζειν τὰ φαινόμενα), see Peter BARKER, Bernard R. GOLDSTEIN, “Realism and Instrumentalism in Six-
teenth Century Astronomy,” Perspectives on Science, 6, 3 (1998), p. 232-258. G.E.R. LLOYD, “Saving the 
Appearances,” Classical Quarterly, 28, 1 (1978), p. 202-222. 
 14. KEPLER, Mysterium Cosmographicum, p. 77. 
 15. GEMINUS, transl. James Evans and J. Lennart Berggren, Geminos’s Introduction to the Phenomena : A 
Translation and Study of a Hellenistic Survey of Astronomy, Princeton, N.J., Princeton University Press, 
2006, p. 49, 117. 

TORRANCE KIRBY 
64 
(small circular paths whose centres moved along the principal circular path), or by 
equants (the point about which the angular motion of a heavenly body or the centre of 
an epicycle was uniform). All of this geometrical complexity served to sustain the 
underlying hypothesis of uniform circular motion. In Book VIII of Paradise Lost 
while Eve wanders off to inspect her “Fruits and Flowers” Raphael relates to Adam 
the divine amusement at the contrivances of mathematical astronomy : 
And Raphael now, to Adam’s doubt proposed, 
Benevolent and facile thus replied. 
To ask or search, I blame thee not ; for Heaven 
Is as the book of God before thee set, 
Wherein to read his wondrous works, and learn 
His seasons, hours, or days, or months, or years : 
This to attain, whether Heaven move or Earth, 
Imports not, if thou reckon right ; the rest 
From man or angel the great Architect 
Did wisely to conceal, and not divulge 
His secrets to be scanned by them who ought 
Rather admire ; or, if they list to try 
Conjecture, he his fabric of the Heavens 
Hath left to their disputes, perhaps to move 
His laughter at their quaint opinions wide 
Hereafter ; when they come to model Heaven 
And calculate the stars, how they will wield 
The mighty frame ; how build, unbuild, contrive 
To save appearances ; how gird the sphere 
With centric and eccentric scribbled o’er, 
Cycle and epicycle, orb in orb.16 
Kepler’s attempt to render a physical and indeed, as he states, a “metaphysical 
argument” about the heavenly motions constitutes what we refer to as his “conversion 
of astronomy”. In a sense Kepler was acting on a sound teleological maxim in his bid 
to simplify the mathematics. In his treatise On the Heavens, Aristotle states that “God 
and nature do nothing in vain, nothing superfluous.”17 Kepler cuts the Gordian Knot 
of mathematical astronomy with Occam’s Razor by dispensing with the premise of 
uniform and regular circular motion as essential to the celestial phenomena, and sub-
stitutes in its place the beautiful geometry of the ellipse. By virtue of its two foci the 
ellipse enables the centring of the cosmos on the sun itself rather than upon some 
mathematical “mean sun”. In actuality many of the planets move on ellipses which 
closely approximate a circle — as Apollonius of Perga asserts in his Conic Sections 
(ca. 200 BCE), the circle is a special case of an elliptical conic section where the two 
foci coincide. Every point on an ellipse has the property that the sum of the distances 
from it to the two foci remains constant. Motion on an ellipse is curvilinear, is contin-
uous in its return upon itself, but the path is defined by the rectilinear opposition of 
the two foci ; thus the ellipse resolves into itself the Aristotelian opposition between 
                                        
 16. John MILTON, Paradise Lost, VIII.64-84. Dennis R. DANIELSON, Paradise Lost and the Cosmological 
Revolution, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 2014. 
 17. See ARISTOTLE, De Caelo (I.4, 271a33) : “Ὁ δὲ θεὸς καὶ ἡ φύσις οὐδὲν μάτην ποιοῦσιν.” 

THE “COSMOGRAPHIC MYSTERY” 
65 
the uniform circular motion of the incorruptible heaven and the motion between con-
traries of the corruptible sublunary sphere. 
The title of one of Kepler’s later treatises makes his cosmographical project 
plain : the Astronomia Nova (1609) is subtitled “Aitiologetos, seu physica cœlestis” 
— a “New Astronomy, based upon causes, or a celestial physics”.18 In the fourth 
chapter of Mysterium Cosmographicum, Kepler tells us “I think that from the love of 
God towards mankind many causes of things in the world may be deduced.” This 
revelation of causality points to Kepler’s “sacred mystery” : divine providence ren-
ders these causes intelligible. “My aim”, he states in the Astronomia Nova, 
is chiefly to reform astronomical theory […] in all three forms of hypotheses [i.e. those of 
Ptolemy, Copernicus, and Tycho Brahe], so that what we compute from the tables may 
correspond to the celestial phenomena. Hitherto, it has not been possible to do this with 
sufficient certainty.19 
Simon Grynæus, a school chum of Philipp Melanchthon and from 1524 Professor 
of Greek at the University of Heidelberg, was responsible for the first modern Greek 
edition of Ptolemy’s Almagest.20 Charlotte Methuen has shown that Grynæus argued 
for the legitimacy of mathematically based arguments in establishing the correct in-
terpretation of observational data.21 As Kepler’s poem prefaced to the Mysterium 
announces, his aim is to demonstrate “what the world is like, that is, God’s cause and 
plan for creating it” (Quid mundus, quae causa Deo, ratioque creandi). “And now at 
last with the divine Copernicus it pleases [me] to cry out : ‘Certainly such is the di-
vine handiwork of the Good and Great Creator’.”22 For Kepler the “mysterium” is 
this “divine handiwork” expressed through the geometrization of space — the imma-
nence of the divine providential reason in creation. 
The term μυστήριον appears sixteen times in the New Testament : the “mystery 
of the kingdom of God” (Mk. 4:11), the “mystery of faith” (1 Tim. 3:9), the “mystery 
of the union between Christ and the Church” (Eph. 5:32), the “mystery of resurrec-
tion” (1 Cor. 15:51, 52) and in several instances this word is rendered as sacramen-
tum in the Vulgate. What is this mysterium ? In his First Epistle to Timothy (3:16), 
Paul observes : “great is the mystery of godliness (μέγα ἐστὶν τὸ τῆς εὐσεβείας μυσ-
τήριον) : God was manifest in the flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen of angels, 
preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the world, received up into glory.” In al-
most all of these passages of Scripture mysterium (or sacramentum) refers to the 
Christian proclamation concerning the joining together of the divine and human na-
tures in the Incarnation and Resurrection of Christ, the union of eternal, incorruptible, 
                                        
 18. Johannes KEPLER, Astronomia Nova ΑΙΤΙΟΛΟΓΗΤΟΣ, English translation by William H. Donahue, ed., 
Kepler’s New Astronomy. See also DONAHUE’S Selections from Kepler’s Astronomia Nova. 
 19. KEPLER, Astronomia Nova, p. 4-5. 
 20. Κλ. Πτολεμαίου Μεγάλης συντάξεως βιβλ. 13 = Claudii Ptolemaei Magnæ constructionis, id est Per-
fectæ cœlestium motuum pertractationis, lib. XIII, ed. Simon GRYNÆUS, Basle, Walderus, 1538. This edi-
tion is prefaced with a dedication to Henry VIII and includes the commentaries of Theon of Alexandria. 
 21. See Charlotte METHUEN, Kepler’s Tübingen : Stimulus to a Theological Mathematics, Brookfield, Vt., 
Ashgate, 1998, p. 171. 
 22. KEPLER, Mysterium Cosmographicum, p. 82. 

TORRANCE KIRBY 
66 
and immortal being with the temporal, corruptible, and mortal. The Matin Respon-
sory for the Feast of the Nativity invokes the “magnum mysterium et admirabile sac-
ramentum” of the Incarnation. How might this scriptural formula assist in our attempt 
to understand Kepler the cosmological astronomer ? Kepler’s intent may perhaps be 
discerned from a remark in his Epitome of Copernican Astronomy where he promised 
that he would teach “the truth concerning the mutable nature of the heavens.” He 
appeals to Psalm 102:25-26, in which both heaven and earth are said to “wear out like 
a garment”23 to question the Aristotelian-Ptolemaic assumption of the eternity and 
incorruptibility of the heavens : 
It seems to me that the truth concerning the mutable nature of the heavens can be taught 
conveniently ; but someone else judges that students and teachers equally are thrown into 
confusion by this doctrine. But it is not without its use in explaining even those parts of 
the philosophy of Aristotle which are clearly false, as Book VIII of the Physics concern-
ing celestial movement and Book II of On the Heavens concerning the eternity of the 
heavens — so that a comparison could be made between the philosophy of the gentiles 
and the truth of Christian doctrine.24 
The conversion of the incorruptible heaven of Aristotle and Ptolemy with its uni-
form circular motion into a “mutable vesture” has its just analogue in the launching 
of the formerly stationary and corruptible earth into celestial orbit. The Christian 
dogma to which Kepler refers posits the union of the mortal and the immortal, the 
corruptible and the incorruptible, a mysterion famously formulated by Paul in his 
Epistle to the Corinthians.25 In his poem An Anatomy of the World, published in 1611 
“wherein, by occasion of the untimely death of Mistress Elizabeth Drury, the frailty 
and the decay of this whole world is represented”, John Donne articulates the cosmic 
anxiety which attends this early modern astronomical controversy : 
And new philosophy calls all in doubt, 
The element of fire is quite put out, 
The sun is lost, and th’earth, and no man’s wit 
Can well direct him where to look for it. 
And freely men confess that this world’s spent, 
When in the planets and the firmament 
They seek so many new ; they see that this 
Is crumbled out again to his atomies. 
‘Tis all in pieces, all coherence gone, 
All just supply, and all relation ; 
Prince, subject, father, son, are things forgot, 
For every man alone thinks he hath got 
                                        
 23. Psalm 102 : 25 Of old hast thou laid the foundation of the earth : and the heavens are the work of thy 
hands. 26 They shall perish, but thou shalt endure : yea, all of them shall wax old like a garment ; as a 
vesture shalt thou change them, and they shall be changed : 27 But thou art the same, and thy years shall 
have no end. 
 24. KEPLER, Epitome of Copernican Astronomy, Book IV, Chicago, Encyclopædia Britannica, 1986, p. 849. 
 25. 1 Cor. 15:54 : So when this corruptible shall have put on incorruption, and this mortal shall have put on 
immortality, then shall be brought to pass the saying that is written, Death is swallowed up in victory. 

THE “COSMOGRAPHIC MYSTERY” 
67 
To be a phoenix, and that then can be 
None of that kind, of which he is, but he.26 
Where indeed to look for a place to stand : “no man’s wit / can well direct him 
where to look for it.” Christian dogma was not without ambiguity, however. The 
Psalmist declares that “the Lord has fixed the orb of the earth (orbem terrae) which 
will not be moved” (96:1) and this cosmically centred stability had long been sup-
ported by the same natural philosophy Kepler challenged, by Aristotle in his Physics 
and On the Heavens, and by Ptolemy in The Almagest. Copernicus was careful not to 
assert that his astronomical speculations were contradictory of Holy Scripture. And 
so his work was not summarily prohibited by the Congregation for the Index ; and not 
until the first trial of Galileo in 1616 was publication and reading of On the Revolu-
tions of the Heavenly Spheres “suspended until corrected”.27 In 1620 these corrections 
were indicated. Nine sentences, by which the heliocentric system was represented as 
factually certain, had to be either omitted or changed. This done, the reading of the 
book was once again allowed.28 
For theologians of the early modern period much was at stake in the claims of the 
new astronomy. Martin Luther, Philipp Melanchthon, and John Calvin all rejected the 
heliocentrism of Copernicus. In his Tischreden we find Luther observing : 
There was mention of a certain new astrologer who wanted to prove that the earth moves 
and not the sky, the sun, and the moon. This would be as if somebody were riding on a 
cart or in a ship and imagined that he was standing still while the earth and the trees were 
moving. [Luther remarked] ‘So it goes now. Whoever wants to be clever must agree with 
nothing that others esteem. He must do something of his own. This is what that fellow 
does who wishes to turn the whole of astronomy upside down. Even in these things that 
are thrown into disorder I believe the Holy Scriptures, for Joshua commanded the sun to 
stand still, and not the earth [Josh. 10:12]’.29 
                                        
 26. John DONNE, An Anatomy of the World, London, (W. S.) for S. Macham, 1611 ; STC 7022, ll. 205-218. 
 27. At his second trial in 1633, Galileo was found “vehemently suspect of heresy” and sentenced to house 
arrest which lasted until his death in 1642. Annibale FANTOLI, “The Disputed Injunction and its role in 
Galileo’s Trial,” in Ernan MCMULLIN, ed., The Church and Galileo, Notre Dame, Ind., University of Notre 
Dame Press, 2005, p. 117-149, esp. p. 136. 
 28. In 1620, in Decree XXI, the required corrections were officially announced. This is an extraordinary 
measure since for very few books did the Index specify the type of changes to be made. The ten emenda-
tions were designed to make Copernicus’ book appear hypothetical and not the description of a real physi-
cal work. The following passage from the Dedication of Copernicus’s work to Pope Paul III was deleted 
in 1620 : “Perhaps there will be babblers who claim to be judges of astronomy although completely igno-
rant of the subject and, badly distorting some passage of Scripture to their purpose, will dare to find fault 
with my undertaking and censure it. I disregard them even to the extent of despising their criticism as un-
founded. For it is not unknown that Lactantius, otherwise an illustrious writer but hardly an astronomer, 
speaks quite childishly about the Earth’s shape, when he mocks those who declared that the Earth has the 
form of a globe. Hence scholars need not be surprised if any such persons will likewise ridicule me. As-
tronomy is written for astronomers. To them my work too will seem, unless I am mistaken, to make some 
contribution also to the Church, at the head of which Your Holiness now stands.” This deleted passage is 
Edward Rosen’s translation. 
 29. Martin LUTHER, Luther’s Works, Vol. 54, Table Talk, ed. Helmut T. LEHMANN, Philadelphia, Fortress 
Press, 1967, p. 358-359. Michel-Pierre LERNER, “Aux origines de la polémique anticopernicienne (II). 
Martin Luther, Andreas Osiander et Philipp Melanchthon,” Revue des sciences philosophiques et théologi-
ques, 90, 3 (2006), p. 409-452. Edward ROSEN, “Kepler and the Lutheran Attitude Towards Copernicanism 
in the Context of the Struggle between Science and Religion,” Vistas in Astronomy, 18 (1975), p. 317-338. 

TORRANCE KIRBY 
68 
In his biblical commentary, Calvin avoids any reference to Copernicus when he 
addresses Joshua 10. In a sermon on 1 Corinthians, however, Calvin warns against 
those who say, “that the sun does not move and that it is the earth that moves.”30 
In 1633, the Roman Inquisition concluded the trial of Galileo at the Church of Santa 
Maria Sopra Minerva with his condemnation for heresy. According to legend, Galileo 
is reported to have muttered “e pur si muove” after being compelled to recant his 
claim that the earth moves around the immovable sun rather than contrariwise. In a 
formal Injunction on 26 February 1616, Cardinal Bellarmine had warned Galileo to 
abandon this “false Pythagorean doctrine”, also taught by Nicolaus Copernicus, as 
“altogether opposed to Holy Scripture”.31 Unlike Galileo, Copernicus had the good 
sense not to accentuate the physical actuality of heliocentrism, and so, owing in part 
to the intervention of Osiander, escaped official condemnation excepting the four-
year suspension of his work 70 years after his death. Kepler’s Epitome of Copernican 
Astronomy (1618-1621), however, remained on the Index Librorum Prohibitorum 
from 1621 to 1835. 
In the preface to his Almagest,32 a work originally titled the Mathematical Trea-
tise (Μαθηματικὴ Σύνταξις) or Great Treatise (Ἡ Μεγάλη Σύνταξις), Claudius 
Ptolemy (100-170 CE) affirms Aristotle’s division of the theoretical sciences into 
three genera : “the physical, the mathematical, and the theological”.33 
For given that all beings have their existence from matter and form and motion, and that 
none of these can be seen, but only thought, in its subject separately from the others, if 
one should seek out in its simplicity the first cause of the first movement of the universe, 
he would find God invisible and unchanging. And the kind of science which seeks after 
Him is the theological ; for such an act can only be thought as high above somewhere near 
the loftiest things of the universe and is absolutely apart from sensible things. But the kind 
                                        
 30. Calvin’s attitude towards Copernicus and heliocentrism has been the subject of debate. Richard STAUFFER, 
“Calvin et Copernic,” Revue de l’histoire des religions, 179, 1 (1971), p. 31-40 ; cited in Herman J. 
SELDERHUIS, ed., The Calvin Handbook, Grand Rapids, Eerdmans, 2009, p. 452. See also Edward ROSEN, 
“Calvin’s Attitude Toward Copernicus,” Journal of the History of Ideas, 21, 3 (1960), p. 431-441 ; Joseph 
RATNER, “Some Comments on Rosen’s ‘Calvin’s Attitude Toward Copernicus’,” Journal of the History of 
Ideas, 22, 3 (1961), p. 382-385 ; Christopher KAISER, “Calvin, Copernicus, and Castellio,” in Richard C. 
GAMBLE, ed., Calvin and Science, New York, Garland, 1992, p. 45-47. 
 31. Maurice A. FINOCCHIARO, ed. and transl., The Galileo Affair. A Documentary History, Berkeley, Univer-
sity of California Press, 1989. “At the palace, the usual residence of Lord Cardinal Bellarmine, the said 
Galileo, having been summoned and being present before the said Lord Cardinal, was, in the presence of 
the Most Reverend Michelangelo Segizi of Lodi, of the order of Preachers, Commissary-General of the 
Holy Office, by the said Cardinal, warned of the error of the aforesaid opinion and admonished to abandon 
it ; and immediately thereafter, before me and before witnesses, the Lord Cardinal being present, the said 
Galileo was by the said Commissary commanded and enjoined, in the name of His Holiness the Pope and 
the whole Congregation of the Holy Office, to relinquish altogether the said opinion that the Sun is the 
centre of the world and immovable and that the Earth moves ; nor further to hold, teach, or defend it in any 
way whatsoever, verbally or in writing ; otherwise proceedings would be taken against him by the Holy 
Office ; which injunction the said Galileo acquiesced in and promised to obey. Done at Rome, in the place 
aforesaid, in the presence of R. Badino Nores, of Nicosia in the kingdom of Cyprus, and Agostino 
Mongardo, from a place in the Abbey of Rose in the diocese of Montepulciano, members of the household 
of said Cardinal, witnesses.” 
 32. Almagest is an Arabic transliteration of the work’s Greek title μεγίστη : al-majisṭī ( .)المجسطي
 33. PTOLEMY, The Almagest, ed. R.C. TALIAFERRO and C.G. WALLIS, Chicago, Encyclopædia Britannica 
(coll. “Great Books of the Western World,” 16), 1952, p. 5. 

THE “COSMOGRAPHIC MYSTERY” 
69 
of science which traces through the material and ever moving quality, and has to do with 
the white, the hot, the sweet, the soft, and such things, would be called physical ; and such 
an essence since it is only generally what it is, is to be found in corruptible things and be-
low the lunar sphere. And the kind of science which shows up quality with respect to 
forms and local motions, seeking figure, number, and magnitude, and also place, time, and 
similar things, would be defined as mathematical.34 
Kepler’s new science of Astronomy adheres to a unification of physics, mathe-
matics, and theology in a resolute attempt to restore coherence and intelligibility to 
the cosmos — an attempt to repair “all just supply and all relation”. 
The Mysterium Cosmographicum presents a Christian Neo-Pythagorean argu-
ment for the geometrical structure of the cosmos combined with an account of cau-
sality : theology, mathematics, and physics combined.35 This early work published 
when Kepler was aged just 25 reveals the strong theological bent that became a hall-
mark of his approach to astronomy throughout his career : 
Here we are concerned with the Book of Nature, so greatly celebrated in sacred writings. 
It is in this that Paul proposes to the Gentiles that they should contemplate God like the 
Sun in water or in a mirror. Why then as Christians should we take any less delight in its 
contemplation, since it is for us with true worship to honour God, to venerate him, to 
wonder at him ? The more rightly we understand the nature and scope of what our God 
has founded, the more devoted the spirit in which that is done.36 
As we have seen, Kepler represents the cosmos as an orderly nested arrangement 
founded upon the five regular solids described by Plato in the Timaeus (55d) and by 
Euclid in Book XIII of Elements of Geometry (and according to Euclid there can only 
be five) : the tetrahedron, cube, octahedron, dodecahedron, and icosohedron.37 
For Kepler’s cosmographical purposes, each regular solid is circumscribed and 
inscribed by a sphere ; five solids, six spheres. All of the vertices of the circum-
scribed sphere touch the inside of that sphere. And conversely, the vertices of the 
inscribed sphere simultaneously touch all the faces of that regular solid. The planets 
are attached to these spheres with the sphere of the fixed stars beyond the outermost 
sphere of Saturn. Through the “Book of Nature” the divine providential activity of 
the creator is accessible to the astronomer.38 “Since we astronomers are priests of the 
highest God in regard to the book of nature, it befits us to be thoughtful, not of the 
                                        
 34. PTOLEMY, The Almagest, p. 5. 
 35. Peter BARKER, Bernard R. GOLDSTEIN, “Theological Foundations of Kepler’s Astronomy,” Osiris, 16, 
Science in Theistic Contexts : Cognitive Dimensions (2001), p. 88-113, esp. 99-103, 112-113. 
 36. KEPLER, Mysterium Cosmographicum, p. 53 ; Gesammelte Werke,ed. M. CASPAR, München, C.H. Beck, 
1937 (herafter KGW), vol. 1, p. 5, l. 24-29 ; cp. KGW 8, 16, 24-29. 1 Cor. 13:12 “videmus nunc per spec-
ulum in enigmate.” 
 37. See Michael N. FRIED, “Book XIII of the Elements,” p. 607-617. 
 38. In a letter to his mentor Michael Maestlin (1550-1631) on 3 October 1595, Kepler writes : “‘I am concen-
trating [on the materials which form the basis for the Mysterium] so that this may be made public as 
quickly as possible, to the glory of God, who wishes to be known (agnoscere) through the Book of Nature” 
(KGW 13, 40, 2-3). Quoted by BARKER and GOLDSTEIN, “Theological Foundations,” p. 96, n. 23. See also 
Kenneth J. HOWELL, God’s Two Books. Copernican Cosmology and Biblical Interpretation in Early Mod-
ern Science, Notre Dame, Ind., University of Notre Dame Press, 2002. 

TORRANCE KIRBY 
70 
glory of our minds, but rather, above else, of the glory of God.”39 The revelation ob-
tainable from that book is not confined to the hypothetical constructions of mathe-
matics. Through the Book of Nature the causes of the divine plan for the world are in 
principle knowable by man. It is noteworthy that Kepler concludes his Mysterium 
Cosmographicum with a valedictory theological reflection in the form of an adapta-
tion of Psalm 8, “O LORD our Governor, how excellent is thy Name in all the world ; 
thou that hast set thy glory above the heavens !”40 In Kepler’s concluding hymn di-
vinity transcends the visible cosmos, yet is providentially immanent in its manifesta-
tions of order — the world as a “theatre of the divine glory”. Kepler underscores his 
credentials as a “sapiential theologian” in this reconciliation of the two books, the 
Book of Nature and the Book of Scripture. Another late-sixteenth century sapiential 
theologian, Richard Hooker, sums up this two-fold aspect of holy Wisdom in a dis-
tinct but related context : 
[…] there can be no lesse acknowledged, then that her seate is the bosome of God, her 
voyce the harmony of the world, all things in heaven and earth doe her homage, the very 
least as feeling her care, and the greatest as not exempted from her power ; both Angels 
and men and creatures of what condition so ever, though each in different sort and man-
ner, yet all with uniforme consent, admiring her as the mother of their peace and joy.41 
Like Kepler, Hooker insists upon the honour due to both books : 
Whatsoever either men on earth, or the Angels of heaven do know, it is as a drop of that 
unemptiable fountaine of wisdom, which wisdom hath diversly imparted her treasures 
unto the world. As her waies are of sundrie kinds, so her maner of teaching is not meerely 
one and the same. Some things she openeth by the sacred bookes of Scripture ; some 
things by the glorious works of nature : with some things she inspireth them from above 
by spirituall influence, in some thinges she leadeth and trayneth them onely by worldly 
experience and practise. We may not so in any one speciall kind admire her that we dis-
grace her in any other, but let all her wayes be according unto their place and degree 
adored.42 
                                        
 39. Letter to Herwart von Hohenburg of 26 March 1598 : “Ego vero sic censeo, cum Astronomi, sacerdotes dei 
altimissimi ex parte libri Naturae simus […]” (KGW, 13, 193, 14-19). See Max CASPAR, Kepler, New 
York, Dover Publications, 1993, p. 88-89. 
 40. Psalm 8, transl. Miles Coverdale, Book of Common Prayer (1662) : 
O LORD our Governor, how excellent is thy Name in all the world ; * thou that hast set thy glory above 
the heavens ! 
2 Out of the mouth of very babes and sucklings hast thou ordained strength, because of thine enemies, * 
that thou mightest still the enemy and the avenger. 
3 When I consider thy heavens, even the work of thy fingers ; * the moon and the stars which thou hast or-
dained ; 
4 What is man, that thou art mindful of him ? * and the son of man, that thou visitest him ? 
5 Thou madest him lower than the angels, * to crown him with glory and worship. 
6 Thou makest him to have dominion of the works of thy hands ; * and thou hast put all things in subjec-
tion under his feet : 
7 All sheep and oxen ; * yea, and the beasts of the field ; 
8 The fowls of the air, and the fishes of the sea ; * and whatsoever walketh through the paths of the seas. 
9 O LORD our Governor, * how excellent is thy Name in all the world ! 
 41. Lawes I.2.3 ; 1:60.27-61.6 [my emphasis]. 
 42. Lawes II.1.4 ; 1:147.23-148.6. See The Wisdom of Solomon 11:20. 

THE “COSMOGRAPHIC MYSTERY” 
71 
In his own embrace of a Wisdom theology Kepler reveals a methodological fea-
ture of his idea of Mysterium. Where the model of mysterium in Scripture is the hy-
postatic union of the divine and human natures in Christ, so here Kepler upholds a 
doctrine of providential Wisdom simultaneously natural and revealed. Kepler’s con-
fidence in the intrinsic intelligibility of the physics of celestial motion, “number, size, 
and periodic motions of the heavens”, and the accessibility of their causes, are 
founded on his belief in the divine providential ordering of the natural world. Kepler 
invokes an argument of intelligent design such as that made by Cicero in De natura 
deorum,43 and combines this with an invocation of the Wisdom theology of Scripture. 
Thus he concludes with a hymn to God the Creator and Governor in the form of a 
paraphrase of Psalm 8, a standard scriptural authority for a Natural Theology of Di-
vine Providence : 
Now, friendly reader, do not forget the end of all this, which is the conception, admira-
tion, and veneration of the Most Wise Maker. For it is nothing to have progressed from 
the eyes to the mind, from sight to contemplation, from the visible motion to the Creator’s 
most profound plan, if you are willing to rest there, and do not soar in a single bound and 
with complete dedication of spirit to knowledge, love, and worship of the Creator. There-
fore with pure mind and thankful spirit sing with me the following hymn to the Architect 
of this most perfect work : 
 
Great God, Creator of the Universe, 
And our eternal power, how great thy fame 
In every corner of the whole wide world ! 
How great thy glory, which flies wondrously 
Above the far-flung ramparts of the heavens 
With rushing wings ! The babes salute it, spurning 
The breast, replete, and with his halting lips 
Bears powerful witness — witness which confounds 
The haughty enemy, who shows contempt 
For thee, and shows contempt for law and justice. 
Yes, to believe thy Godhead is within 
This spacious sphere, let me look up astonished 
At thy achievement of this mighty heaven, 
The work of the great Craftsman, miracles 
Of thy strong hand ; see how thou hast marked out 
The five-fold pattern of the starry spheres, 
Dispensing light and spirit from their midst ; 
See by what law thou dost control the reins 
Of their eternal course ; see how the Moon 
Varies her path, her toils, how many stars 
Thy hand has scattered over that boundless field. 
[…] 
Great God, Creator of the Universe, 
                                        
 43. Two passages in CICERO’s treatise of natural theology, De natura deorum, where the philosopher argues 
that this knowledge of things divine is “engraved” on the minds of men. “Intelligi necesse est deos, 
quoniam insitas eorum vel potius innatas cognitiones habemus. Quae hobis natura informationem deorum 
ipsorum dedit, eadem insculpsit in mentibus ut eos aeternos et beatos haberemus” (I.17). The second refer-
ence is from Bk. II.4 : “Itaque inter omnes omnium gentium summa constat ; omnibus enim innatum est, et 
in animo quasi insculptum esse deos.” Compare to Rom. 1:20 and 2:14. 

TORRANCE KIRBY 
72 
And our eternal power, how great thy fame 
in every corner of the whole wide world !44 
As Sachiko Kusukawa has pointed out, Kepler learned the notion of “astronomy 
as a praise of God” from Jacob Heerbrand, his theology tutor at the Tübinger Stift. 
Heerbrand himself had been Philipp Melanchthon’s pupil at the University of 
Wittenberg, an intellectual genealogy which places Kepler in the distinctively Lu-
theran tradition of natural philosophy.45 
SOME CONCLUSIONS 
Kepler’s Cosmographical Mystery may be expressed in (at least) five ways : 
First, there is Kepler’s distinctive hermeneutical method of joining together the 
authority of the Book of Scripture and the Book of Nature in the common task of 
Wisdom Theology — “As [Wisdom’s] waies are of sundrie kinds, so her maner of 
teaching is not meerely one and the same” (Lawes II.1.4). This sapiential approach 
epitomizes an epistemological mysterium in the sense that natural, human capacity of 
rational inquiry into the causes is able to discern the immanent providential plan also 
revealed in the Scriptures. The language of mysterium is appropriate in the context of 
this union of human capacity and divine disclosure, an incarnation of Wisdom as it 
were. 
Secondly, there is a further mysterium suggested by Kepler’s geometrization of 
space through the unification of the mathematical and the physical according to the 
nesting of the five regular solids. In this we see an appeal to Pythagorean teaching as 
a means of demonstrating his thesis of immanent and intelligible providence. Crea-
tion is the work of the divine Wisdom and is assumed consequently to be potentially 
comprehensible.  
                                        
 44. Mysterium Cosmographicum, p. 224-225 : 
Iova Sator Mundi, nostrumque aeterna potestas, 
Quanta tua est omnem terrarum fama per orbem ? 
Gloria quanta tua est ? Coeli quae dedita supra 
Moenia, concussis volat admirabilis alis. 
Agnoscit puer et spreto satur ubere, balbis 
te dictante struit valida argumenta labellis : 
Argumenta, quibus tumidus confunditur hostis 
Contemptorque tui, et contemptor iuris et aequi : 
Ast ego, quo credam spacioso Numen in orbe : 
Suspiciam attonitus vasti molimina coeli, 
Magni opus Artificis, validae miracula dextrae ; 
Quinque uti siderios normis distinxeris orbes, 
Quos intra medius Lucisque animaeque Minister 
Qua lege aeterni cursus moderetur habenas, 
Quas capiat variata vices, quos Luna labores, 
Sparseris immenso quam plurima Sidera campo. 
[…] 
Iova Sator Mundi, nostrumque aeterna potestas, 
Quanta tua est omnem terrarum fama per orbem ? 
 45. Sachiko KUSUKAWA, The Transformation of Natural Philosophy. The Case of Philip Melanchthon, Cam-
bridge, Cambridge University Press, 1995, p. 1-6, 188. 

THE “COSMOGRAPHIC MYSTERY” 
73 
In a third instance of a mysterium, Kepler’s insight into the cosmographical util-
ity of the ellipse as a geometrical means of accounting for celestial physics is in-
spired. The ellipse integrates rectilinear (contrary) and curvilinear (continuous) prin-
ciples of motion, and in doing so upends Aristotle’s assumption of the opposition of 
the incorruptible, uniform and regular circular motion of the eternal heavens with cor-
ruptible, non-uniform, and contrary motions of the sublunary world. In the mysterium 
of the ellipse Kepler posits a reconciliation of these two contrary species of motion 
by his demonstration that the rectilinear opposition of the two foci defines the curvi-
linear path of celestial motion. 
The resolution of the opposition between the two species of corruptible and in-
corruptible motion is critical to abandoning circles and uniform spherical motion 
understood by Aristotle, Ptolemy, and even Copernicus as definitive of celestial mo-
tion. In effect Kepler implies the way forward for mysterious unification of celestial 
and terrestrial physics — the fourth mysterium. He may also have contributed further, 
in some equally mysterious fashion, to the glories of Baroque architecture when one 
considers, for example, Balthazar von Neuman’s design for the Basilica of Vierzehn-
heiligen — a vision of heaven brought down to earth. As an observer one has the 
illusion of being able to reach up and almost touch the cherubs’ toes.46 According to 
William Kyer West, “Kepler’s work seems to have set the stage for the introduction 
of the true ellipse, rather than just oval figures, into architecture.”47 
The disclosure of the underlying geometrical uniformity of non-uniform celestial 
motion according to the Area Law underscores the significance of the mysterium of 
the ellipse in motion — this is no mathematical contrivance merely to “save the ap-
pearances”, but rather a mathematical representation of the actual path of motion : 
Ἀιτιολογήτος, a “celestial physics”. And finally, the harmonic relationship between 
the squares of the planets’ periodic times and the cubes of the radii of their orbits — 
the “Third Law” discloses the mysterium of Music, perhaps Kepler’s most cherished 
discovery. In the Harmonies Kepler offers a demonstration of the providential nature 
of the musica mundana : “[…] that in order to secure this harmonic arrangement, 
those very planetary eccentricities which any planet has as its own, and no others, had 
to be set up.”48 
                                        
 46. Ofer GAL, Raz CHEN-MORRIS, Baroque Science, Chicago, The University of Chicago Press, 2013, esp. 
chap. 6 on “The Emergence of Baroque Mathematical Natural Philosophy : the archaeology of the inverse 
square law” — with thanks to Maria Avxentevskaya of the Max Planck Institute for this reference. See also 
John HENDRIX, The Relation Between Architectural Forms and Philosophical Structures in the Work of 
Francesco Borromini in Seventeenth-Century Rome, Lewiston, Queenston, Lampeter, The Edwin Mellen 
Press, 2002, p. 41. 
 47. William KYER WEST, “Problems in the Cultural History of the Ellipse,” Technology and Culture, 19, 4 
(1978), p. 712. 
 48. J. KEPLER, Harmonies of the World, chap. 9. 

TORRANCE KIRBY 
74 
To conclude, a glimpse forward towards Isaac Newton is almost de rigueur. In 
his discussion of Kepler’s Laws of Motion in the chapter on Absolute Mechanics in 
his Philosophy of Nature, G.W.F. Hegel remarks that 
these laws are among the most beautiful to be found in the natural sciences […] a [philo-
sophical] comprehension of them is consequently of the greatest interest […]. To Newton 
is ascribed the glory of having discovered the law of universal gravitation. Kepler’s glory 
has been obscured by Newton who has obtained for himself, in the general opinion, the 
greater part of the glory due to Kepler. […] Newton’s merit, of course, is that his form of 
the law possesses great advantages for mathematical treatment.49 
Especially beautiful is Kepler’s deep persuasion of this union of terrestrial and 
celestial physics. This lies at the very heart of the notion of mysterium as a theologi-
cally inspired approach to the conversion of astronomy into cosmographical celestial 
physics — a New Astronomy based upon physical causes. 
                                        
 49. G.W.F. HEGEL, Philosophy of Nature, transl. A.V. Miller, Oxford, Oxford University Press, 1970, p. 74. 
Job Kozhamthadam argues that Kepler’s discovery of the basic quantitative laws that describe planetary 
motion placed the heliocentric cosmology of Copernicus on a sound mathematic basis and paved the way 
for Newton’s work in the next century. Job KOZHAMTHADAM, The Discovery of Kepler’s Laws. The Inter-
action of Science, Philosophy, and Religion, South Bend, Ind., University of Notre Dame Press, 1994. Ber-
nard Cohen is more complimentary towards Newton when he argues that “Kepler deserves credit for hav-
ing been the first scientist to recognize that the Copernican concept of the earth as a planet and Galileo’s 
discoveries demanded that there be one physics — applying equally to the celestial objects and ordinary 
terrestrial bodies. But alas […] the major aim of Keplerian physics remained unachieved, and the first 
workable physics for heaven and earth derived not from Kepler but from Galileo and attained its form un-
der the magisterial guidance of Isaac Newton” (I. Bernard COHEN, The Birth of a New Physics, Garden 
City, N.Y., Anchor Books, 1960, p. 151). 

