Public Works Management & Policy
2020, Vol. 25(1) 98­–100
© The Author(s) 2019
Article reuse guidelines: 
sagepub.com/journals-permissions
journals.sagepub.com/home/pwm
Book Review
Book Review
Gerrits, L., & Verweij, S. (2018). The evaluation of complex infrastructure projects: A guide to 
qualitative comparative analysis. Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar. 192 pages, $110.00, ISBN 
9781783478415.
Reviewed by: Michael J. Garvin, Associate Professor, Via Department of Civil & Environmental 
Engineering, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, Virginia, USA
DOI: 10.1177/1087724X19882129
If a potential reader overlooks the subtitle of this book by Gerrits and Verweij, then they 
might be surprised by its intent. Yet, the authors clear up its focus in the opening para-
graph of the first chapter—complex infrastructure projects demand research methods 
that match their multifaceted and intricate nature, and qualitative comparative analysis 
(QCA) fits this need. Gerrits and Verweij argue that three attributes of complex infra-
structure projects: heterogeneity, uniqueness, and context, limit the capacity of singular 
(or even multiple) case study designs and large-n studies to analyze and explain phe-
nomena in such projects. The authors describe the mismatch between these more well-
known methods and infrastructure projects as a “conundrum” and propose QCA as its 
solution—a method that selects cases, identifies conditions and outcomes associated 
with these cases, and uncovers combinations of conditions that generate outcomes.
A reader may not fully agree with Gerrits and Verweij because, for instance, well-
done multiple case study research can identify generalizable patterns among cases 
(Eisenhardt, 1989), whereas statistical research can uncover important and specific 
insights about a subject (Aschauer, 1989)—and the authors acknowledge as much. A 
reader, however, will find it more difficult to contest the contribution of this book to 
the literature about QCA and its applicability to infrastructure research. Gerrits and 
Verweij have provided a comprehensive description of how and why to use QCA, 
which is a welcome complement to existing papers and books about its utilization. 
Since Ragin’s introduction of the method in 1987, QCA has gradually found its way 
into studies of infrastructure and construction, and Gerrits and Verweij document a 
number of such studies done in the first and second decades of the 21st century. To 
employ the method, these researchers either had to work their way through Ragin’s 
detailed accounts of the method (Ragin, 1987, 1998) or, more likely, rely on other 
descriptions such as Rihoux and Ragin (2009) that describes QCA through a series of 
edited chapters.
Now, infrastructure researchers seeking to use the approach or to learn more about 
it can turn to this book. Gerrits and Verweij do well to balance description and 
882129 PWMXXX10.1177/1087724X19882129Public Works Management & PolicyBook Review
book-review2019

Book Review	
99
examples of QCA in a volume that can be read—but not fully deciphered—in a short 
period of time. The authors explain the logic behind QCA quite well, stressing that 
QCA is configuration oriented, a point made frequently by others. However, their 
emphasis on the concept of conjunction is particularly useful for those unfamiliar with 
the method. In their second chapter, which explains the importance and use of cases, 
they write,
cases are characterized by causal complexity: (1) outcomes are produced by a coming 
together of factors, i.e. conjunctions of conditions (conjunctural causation); (2) and these 
conjunctions can be equifinal in that they are different but mutually non-exclusive 
explanations for the same outcome of interest (equifinality) (Scheider & Wagemann, 2012).
The notion of “conjunction” is quite important because researchers accustomed to 
statistical methods generally consider interactions between variables. Yet, conjunction 
is quite different; specific conditions are likely interwoven (or configured) to cause 
outcomes. Such distinctions about the tenets, as well as the nuances, of QCA are made 
throughout the book.
Aside from highlighting the underpinnings of QCA, Gerrits and Verweij have logi-
cally organized the book to follow implementation of the method. As mentioned, 
Chapter 2 focuses on cases, starting with a general discussion and then moving to a 
more specific discussion about how to select and develop them for QCA. Chapter 3 
describes calibration of case conditions and examines the three primary types in QCA: 
crisp-sets, fuzzy-sets, and multi-value. Chapter 4 explains comparison, which is funda-
mental to deriving patterns across cases. Here, the authors introduce the reader to truth 
tables and the process for their minimization (or solution) as well as how to deal with 
common issues such as logical contradictions. They also endorse existing software to 
support QCA because such software helps to systematize use of the method. However, 
Gerrits and Verweij make a very important point about understanding its logic and 
steps: “QCA is not a press-button method. Instead, it involves many case- and theory-
informed decisions by the researcher that can impact the final output, decisions that are 
easily obscured by clicking buttons in a software program.” Indeed, researchers who 
have not done their due diligence and do not understand the logic and processes of QCA 
will likely find the software output worthless or exceptionally difficult to interpret. In 
addition, throughout these chapters, the authors provide examples with enough depth 
and commentary to either instruct a novice with the method or to further inform a more 
seasoned researcher. The final chapter of the book explains how to account for time 
with QCA, and it provides some experienced advice about matters such as how to pres-
ent results and to handle skeptics who are unfamiliar with the method.
Certainly, this book by Gerrits and Verweij is an important contribution to the infra-
structure community in at least two respects. First, those considering QCA as a means 
to examine complex infrastructure projects can readily use this work to implement the 
method because the examples of past research on such projects makes it a more acces-
sible reference than most existing works; although a single, consistent example dem-
onstrating implementation of the method would have been useful, the authors give 

100	
Public Works Management & Policy 25(1)
enough illustrative guidance. Second, many in the infrastructure community do not 
understand QCA, so they question its veracity; Gerrits and Verweij have delivered a 
concise but thorough description of it. Consequently, anyone wanting to understand it 
can do so with a modest investment of their time. The latter is likely more valuable 
because it increases the community’s awareness of research methods that can heighten 
comprehension of strategies for infrastructure development and management.
References
Aschauer, D. A. (1989). Is public expenditure productive? Journal of Monetary Economics, 23, 
177-200.
Eisenhardt, M. (1989). Building theories from case study research. The Academy of Management 
Review, 14, 532-550.
Ragin, C.C. (1987). The Comparative Method, Los Angeles, CA: The Regents of the University 
of California.
Ragin, C.C. (1998). The logic of qualitative comparative analysis. International Review of 
Social History, 43, 105-124.
Rihoux, B. and Ragin, C.C. (eds). (2009). Configurational Comparative Methods: Qualitative 
Comparative Analysis (QCA) and Related Techniques, Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Scheider, C. Q., & Wagemann, C. (2012). Set-theoretic methods for the social sciences: A guide 
to qualitative comparative analysis. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

