Belief and Evidence
by
Ginger Schultheis
B.A., Reed College (2011)
Submitted to the Department of Linguistics and Philosophy
in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of
Doctor of Philosophy in Philosophy
at the
MASSACHUSETTS INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY
September 2018
02018 Massachusetts Institute of Technology. All rights reserved
Signature redacted
Signature of author:
_--1 epartment of Linguistic and Philosophy
z
7
f 
August 31, 2018
Signature redacted
Certified by: 
o
'41 
Roger White
Professor of Philosophy
Signature redacted 
Thesis Supervisor
Accepted by:
MASSACHUSETTS INSTiTUTE
OF TECHNOLOGY
SEP 27 2018
LIBRARIES
/ 
Bradford Skow
Laurance S. Rockefeller Professor of Philosophy
Chair of Committee on Graduate Students
1
ARCHIVES

2

Belief and Evidence
by
Ginger Schultheis
Submitted to the Department of Linguistics and Philosophy on August 31st 2018
in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of
Doctor of Philosophy in Philosophy
Abstract
Chapter 1, 'Living on the Edge: Against Epistemic Permissivism,' argues that
Epistemic Permissivists face a special problem about the relationship between our
first- and higher-order attitudes. They claim that rationality often permits a range
of doxastic responses to the evidence. Given plausible assumptions about the rela-
tionship between your first- and higher-order attitudes, you can't stably be on the
edge of the range, so there can't be a range at all. Permissivism, at least as it has
been developed so far, can't be right. I consider some new ways of developing
Permissivism, but each has problems of its own.
Chapter 2, 'Belief and Probability,' argues that rational belief doesn't reduce to
subjective probability. Under the right circumstances, I argue, acquiring conflict-
ing evidence can defeat your entitlement to believe a certain hypothesis without
probabilistically disconfirming that hypothesis. I consider three probabilistic theo-
ries of rational belief-a simple threshold view, Hannes Leitgeb's stability theory,
and a new theory involving imprecise credence-and show that none of them can
account for the cases I describe.
Chapter 3, 'Can We Decide to Believe?', takes up the question of whether we
can decide to believe. There are two main arguments for the conclusion that believ-
ing at will is impossible, which I call the retrospective argument and the aim-of-
belief argument, respectively. Neither, I argue, demonstrates that believing at will
is impossible in all cases. The retrospective argument leaves open the possibility
of believing at will in acknowledged permissive cases; the aim-of-belief argument
leaves open the possibility of believing at will when credal attitudes are imprecise.
Thesis Supervisor: Roger White
Title: Professor of Philosophy
3

4

Acknowledgements
I would like to thank Alex Byrne, David Builes, Bob Stalnaker, Vera Flocke,
Miriam Schoenfield, Caspar Hare, Sophie Horowitz, Quinn White, Dan Greco,
and Brendan de Kenessey. Special thanks to David Boylan, Matthew Mandelkern,
and Milo Phillips-Brown for being great friends and co-authors, as well as to Bern-
hard Salow and Kevin Dorst for introducing me to epistemology and teaching me
so much about it over the past few years. I couldn't have asked for a better com-
mittee. Thank you, Steve, Jack, Roger, and Kieran. Finally, I am eternally grateful
to my parents and to my wife Caroline for their endless support over the last few
years.
5

6

Contents
1 
Living on the Edge: Against Epistemic Permissivism
1.1 
Dominance
1.2
1.3
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1 2
Objections and Replies . . . . . . . . . .
.
Conclusion 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
.
2 
Belief and Probability
2.1 
Who is the Epistemic Bayesian? 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
.
2.2 
A Case ....................................
2.3 
The Simple Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
.
2.3.1 
Against The Simple Theory 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
.
2.3.2 
Explanation and Diagnosis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
.
2.3.3 
Distinguishing Kidney Transplant from Other Cases 
.
2.4 
The Stability Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
.
2.4.1 
Against the Stability Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
.
2.5 
The Imprecise Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
.
2.5.1 
Modeling Kidney Transplant on the Imprecise Theory
2.5.2 
Against The Imprecise Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . .
.
2.6 
C onclusion 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
.
3 
Can
3.1
3.2
3.3
3.4
We Decide to Believe?
The Retrospective Argument . . . . . . .
.
The Aim of Belief . . . . . . . . . . . . .
.
Accuracy and the Aim of Credence . . . .
.
The Problem of Imprecision . . . . . . . .
.
7
16
26
27
28
31
. . .
33
34
35
39
. . .
42
. . .
44
47
49
51
53
55
56
65
69
72
11
. . . . . . . . . .
.
. . . . . . . . . .
.
. . . . . . . . .
.
. . . . . . . . .
.
. . . . . . . . .
.
. . . . . . . . .
.

3.5 
Conclusion 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
8

Introduction
My dissertation comprises three papers. The first is about epistemic permissivism;
the second is about the relationship between belief and credence; and the third is
about whether we can believe at will. I briefly summarize them here.
A body of evidence is permissive just if there may be two fully rational people
who both possess that evidence yet have different opinions on some topic. Epis-
temic Permissivism is the view that some bodies of evidence are permissive. Per-
missivism is something of the default position, and rightly so: common sense tells
us that disagreement among fully rational agents with the same evidence is all too
common.
In the first essay of my dissertation, entitled 'Living on the Edge: Against Epis-
temic Permissivism,' I argue that we must part with common sense on this issue. I
begin with the question of how one's first-order opinions ought to be informed and
regulated by one's beliefs about one's evidence-in particular, one's beliefs about
which attitudes the evidence permits. I defend a certain minimal connection: you
shouldn't adopt an attitude that's risky by your own lights if you know of a safer
option. More precisely, rational agents do not hold dominated attitudes: if you're
sure that it's rational to be agnostic about P, and not sure that it's rational to be
confident in P, then you shouldn't be confident in P. If we accept this, I argue,
Epistemic Permissivism can't be right.
In the second essay, 'Belief and Probability,' I turn to the relationship between
belief and subjective probability. The great hope of probabilistic theories of evi-
dence is to show that all facts about rational belief are determined by probabilistic
facts. Any feature of evidence that rational belief seems sensitive to must be cap-
tured probabilistically. My first dissertation paper challenges this thought. I argue
9

that no existing probabilistic theory of evidence provides an adequate account of
conflicting evidence, the sort of evidence you have when two of your sources of in-
formation contradict each other, such as when doctors offer conflicting diagnoses.
Under the right circumstances, acquiring conflicting evidence can defeat your enti-
tlement to believe a certain hypothesis without disconfirming that hypothesis-that
is, without making it any less likely. I consider three probabilistic theories, each
of which is intended to capture a different set of features of evidence. Each theory
fails because it is not equipped to handle conflicting evidence.
The third essay, 'Can We Decide to Believe?', takes up the question of whether
we can believe at will. Bernard Williams famously argued that believing at will
is impossible-not just a contingent psychological disability, but a metaphysically
necessary limitation grounded in the nature of belief-and he is the source of most
contemporary discussion of this issue. I distinguish two arguments in Williams's
seminal essay, which I call the retrospective argument and the aim-of-belief argu-
ment, respectively. I argue that neither arguments succeeds in demonstrating that
believing at will is impossible in all cases. The retrospective argument leaves open
the possibility of believing at will in acknowledged permissive cases; the aim-of-
belief argument leaves open the possibility of believing at will when one's credal
attitudes are imprecise.
10

Chapter 1
Living on the Edge: Against
Epistemic Permissivism
Matt and Abby are members of a jury for a murder case. They have all the same
evidence and review it separately. When they convene to discuss their conclusions,
they discover that they disagree. Matt is confident that Jones is innocent; Abby
is confident that Jones is guilty. When they learn of their disagreement, what do
they discover about themselves? Clearly, they learn that one of them is confident
in a falsehood: Either Jones is guilty or he isn't. But do they also learn that one of
them has been less than fully rational, that one has failed to properly assimilate the
evidence before him?
Proponents of Epistemic Uniqueness say yes: Given your total evidence, there
is a unique rational doxastic attitude that you can take to any proposition.1 Matt
and Abby have the same evidence, but have different levels of confidence in the
proposition that Jones is guilty (Guilty). Uniqueness entails that at most one of
them is fully rational.
Proponents of Epistemic Permissivism say no. Matt and Abby may simply
have different standards of reasoning. For example, Matt may tend to favor simple
hypotheses, and Abby may tend to favor complex, more explanatory hypotheses.
A permissivist thinks both standards of reasoning may be perfectly rational even
11
'This formulation is from White (2005).

though they sanction very different responses to the evidence. 2
Permissivists paint a simple, attractive picture of rationality. There are some
general, justifiable rules-e.g., Conditionalization, Probabilism, and the Principal
Principle-and a wide range of permissible starting points. So long as you begin
at one of these, and you follow the rules, you're doing fine. Permissivists charge
that Uniquers paint a much more complicated, and metaphysically loaded, picture
of rationality. 3 Uniquers must say everything Permissivists say, and much more-
that there is a unique rational starting point, a unique rational credence in Guilty,
and so forth.
I argue that Permissivists face a special challenge about the interaction between
our first- and higher-order attitudes. They claim that rationality often permits a
range of credences in a certain proposition. Yet given certain plausible assumptions
about the relationship between our first- and higher-order attitudes, you cannot
adopt a credence on the edge of that range. But Permissivism says that for some
such range, any credence in that range is rational. So Permissivism is false. 
I
consider new ways of developing Permissivism to avoid this argument, but they
have problems of their own. 4 
I conclude that Permissivism is not as simple as
advertised, and without new motivations, it's not very attractive either.
On to the argument.
1.1 
Dominance
Suppose that Permissivism is true and that Matt and Abby's evidence rational-
izes any credence between, say, .3 and .7 in the proposition that Jones is guilty
2See Greco and Hedden (2015), Horowitz (2013), and White (2005) for arguments against ver-
sions of Epistemic Permissivism. See Ballantyne and Coffman (2012), Douven (2009), Kelly (2014),
Kopec (2015), Meacham (2014), and Schoenfield (2014) for defenses. See Kopec and Titelbaum
(2015) for an overview of various arguments for and against.
3See e.g., Schoenfield (2014) and Kelly (2014) for this criticism.
4Strictly speaking, someone could be a Permissivist yet deny that there is ever a range of permis-
sible credences in any proposition-you might think, say, that there are just two permissible credence
in the proposition that Jones is guilty, .3 and .7. But the standard motivations-that there are some
general, justifiable rules, and a wide range of starting points-strongly suggest that there will be a
wide range of permissible credences in most propositions. If the Permissivist denies this, she owes
us a general story about why there can never be such a range. Since no story like this has been told,
I ignore this complication in this paper.
12

(Guilty). Quite plausibly, Matt is not always in a position to discern the exact
boundaries of the permissible range.5 Compare: He isn't able to determine the
exact height of a tree some distance off just by looking-his eyesight is nowhere
near that good. Similarly, by reflection alone, he can't reliably determine the value
of the upper and lower bounds of the permissible range to the nearest (say) .01
degrees of confidence-the evidence is too complex, and his powers of reasoning
are nowhere near that good. Even if he truly believes that the lower bound is .3,
he's merely guessing-for all he knows, the lower bound is .31 or .29. He can't
reliably distinguish the actual case from one in which the lower bound is slightly
higher or slightly lower.
Matt ought to know this about himself. He ought to know that if he were to
guess the exact values of the upper and lower bound, he'd likely err. So, if the lower
bound is .3, he shouldn't be certain that the lower bound is exactly .3. Compare:
Since you know that you can't reliably guess the exact height of the tree some
distance off, you shouldn't be certain that the tree is exactly 667 inches tall, even
if it is-you should recognize that it might be slightly taller or slightly shorter.
Similarly, Matt should acknowledge that the lower bound might well be slightly
greater than .3.
So what should Matt believe about the boundaries of the permissible range?
That, it seems, depends on what they actually are. If the lower bound is actually
.3, then he should believe that it is between (say) .2 and .4-that is, he should be-
lieve that it is roughly .3. For even though rational requirements are not wholly
transparent to us, they shouldn't be completely opaque to those who reflect care-
fully. After all, we regard careful reflection on our evidence as valuable precisely
because it helps us form rational beliefs-beliefs that better reflect the force of our
evidence. If the requirements of rationality were wholly inaccessible, what would
justify such a practice?
So if Matt is rational, he believes that the permissible range of credences in
Guilty spans from roughly .3 to roughly .7.6 But if he believes that, it would be
5See e.g., Christensen (2010), Elga (2013), Horowitz (2014), and Williamson (2000) for sympa-
thetic discussion of similar claims.
6Note that this point is not specific to Permissivism. If Epistemic Uniqueness is true, and the
unique rational credence in Guilty is (say) .5, then Matt is not in a position to know that it is exactly
.5, and so he too should believe that the rational credence is roughly .5. In my reply to the first
13

irrational for him to adopt credence .3. Why? Because Matt is not certain that .3 is
rational, but there are other credences whose rationality Matt does not doubt-he
is certain that (say) .5 is rational. But when you are certain that a given credence
is rational, it is irrational to adopt any other credence that you are not certain is
rational: It is irrational to adopt credences that are, what I'll call, weakly rationality
dominated.
A bit more precisely. Let an evidential situation be a complete specification of
which credences are rational responses to one's evidence. Then where c and c' are
credences that a subject S might adopt,
Weak Rationality Dominance: c weakly rationality dominates c' for S iff
for every evidential situation that S treats as a live option and in which c'
is rational, c is too, and in some evidential situation that S treats as a live
option, c is rational, but c' is not.
Matt believes that the lower bound is roughly .3. To believe that the lower bound
is roughly .3 is just to believe that it might be slightly higher or slightly lower than
.3. Let's make a simplifying assumption that Matt treats three evidential situations
as live options: that the lower bound is .2, that it is .3, and that it is .4. In each of
these evidential situations in which it is rational to assign .3 to Guilty-i.e., when
the lower bound is .2 or .3-it is rational to assign .4 to Guilty. But in the evidential
situation in which the lowest rational credence is .4, assigning .4 to Guilty is ratio-
nal, and assigning .3 to Guilty is not. Hence, in some evidential situation that Matt
treats as as a live option, assigning .4 to Guilty is rational, but assigning .3 to Guilty
is not. So assigning .3 to Guilty is weakly rationality dominated by assigning .4 to
Guilty for Matt.
But dominated options aren't rational: It's not rational to adopt a credence
that's risky by your own lights when you know of a safer option. It follows that
it is not rational for Matt to assign .3 to Guilty. But the Permissivist's hypothesis
was that it's rationally permissible to adopt any credence between .3 and .7. We've
now contradicted that assumption. Given what Matt ought to believe about the
permissible range, it is irrational for Matt to adopt a credence on the edge of that
objection, I'll show why this does not pose problems for the proponent of Uniqueness. Thanks to an
anonymous referee for bringing this to my attention.
14

range. 7
The argument generalizes. For any range of putatively permissible credences
in a proposition P, it is irrational to assign to P the lowest (highest) value in that
range-that is, it is irrational to adopt any credence on the edge of the permissible
range. 8 But Permissivism says that there is some range such that any credence in
that range is permissible. Contradiction. 9
(Perhaps you wonder why we should care about rationality dominance: Our
ultimate epistemic goal is not rationality per se but accuracy. Even if we grant
this, we ought to recognize that epistemic rationality is a good guide to accuracy-
in general, more rational credences are more accurate. On this view, we should
avoid credences that are rationality dominated because we should do what we can
to be most accurate. I return to this issue in my reply to Objection 5.10)
In the remainder of the paper, I explore various objections to my argument
and find them wanting. The upshot is that Permissivism faces a special challenge
about the interaction between our first- and higher-order attitudes. Answering the
challenge requires taking on new, unattractive commitments about how we form
higher-order beliefs or about what it is permissible to do in the face of higher-order
7I should note the dominance argument does not apply to an extreme version of Subjective
Bayesianism that says that we are rationally required to follow the Bayesian formal constraints-
probabilistic coherence and conditionalization-but there are no other constraints on what our priors
should look like. Why? If any probabilistically coherent prior is permissible, the range of permissi-
ble credences in (almost) any proposition will be [0,1]-any credence will be rationally permissible.
And if that's right, we can be sure that our credences are rational, and so they won't be weakly
rationality dominated. But for many, this extreme version of Subjective Bayesianism will seem too
permissive. (It doesn't rule out counter-inductivists, for example.) My argument targets any moderate
Permissivist-that is, any Permissivist who wants to carve out a space between (extreme) Subjective
Bayesianism and Uniqueness.
81,m simplifying here. If it is impermissible to take dominated options, then it will be irrational
to adopt any credence that is close enough to the edge that you believe that it might fall just outside
of the permissible range. This means that the argument goes through even if the range of permissible
credences has no lowest or highest value.
9The Permissivist might object that I oversell the force of the dominance argument. If the range
of permissible credences in Guilty is narrow, so narrow that Matt is not certain that any particular
credence is rational, then his .3 credence in Guilty will not be rationality dominated. Granted. But the
Permissivist shouldn't rest content. For the guiding motivations for Epistemic Permissivism-e.g.,
that different people can rationally come to opposite conclusions about an issue-strongly suggest
that the permissible range of credences will often be very wide. See Rosen (2001) and Schoenfield
(2014).
lThanks to an anonymous referee for bringing this to my attention.
15

uncertainty. Perhaps we will conclude in the end that those commitments are worth
carrying to save Permissivism. But if we do accept Permissivism, we should do so
with clear eyes. We should know what burdens we shoulder.
1.2 
Objections and Replies
Objection 1: Your argument exploits the vagueness of epistemic permissibility. It
relies on the premise that if a certain credence is not rational, then no credence
sufficiently close to it is rational, either. But any premise of that form is soritical,
and so ought to be rejected.
Reply: That premise is indeed soritical, but my argument doesn't rely on it. I do not
say that since .3 is irrational, so too is .31. If my argument did rely on this premise,
it would have the (absurd) consequence that there are no rational credences. But it
has no such consequence.
To see this, take the limiting case, where there is just one permissible credence
in Guilty-say, .5. If .5 is the unique rational credence in Guilty, then Matt ought
to believe that it is roughly .5 (reflection doesn't get us all the way to the truth, but
it gets us somewhere). Now, if Matt believes that the rational credence is roughly
.5, then if he assigns .5 to Guilty, he won't be certain that his own credence is ratio-
nal. But that's not itself irrational: Although Matt is not certain that his credence is
rational, he is not certain, of any particular credence, that it is rational. There is no
other credence Matt thinks would be better than his own." When the rationality
of everything is in doubt, assigning .5 credence to Guilty will not be rationality
dominated for Matt. Like clear-eyed Permissivists, clear-eyed Uniquers are uncer-
tain about the rationality of their credences; unlike clear-eyed Permissivists, they
1 Christensen (2010) gives an example of what seems to be a fully rational agent who is uncertain
about what the rational credence is. Ava is considering the possibility that the next US President
will be a Democrat (D). On page 121, Christensen says, 'Ava gives D some particular crednece, say,
.7; this reflects a great deal of her general knowledge, her feel for public opinion, her knowledge of
possible candidates, etc. But given the possibility that her credence is affected by wishful thinking,
protective pessimism, or just failure to focus on and perfectly integrate an unruly mass of evidence,
Ava very much doubts that her credence is exactly what her evidence supports. This seems only
natural; indeed, eminently reasonable.'
16

are not sure that any other credences are rational. (By 'clear-eyed Permissivist',
I mean someone who believes, of a certain case, that it is a permissive one. By
'clear-eyed Uniquer', I mean someone who believes that there are no permissive
cases.)
The dominance argument works against Permissivism because if there is a wide
range of credences, Matt can be sure that certain credences in the middle of the
range are rational-being in the middle will be safer, by Matt's lights, than being
on the edge. But if you think there's just one rational credence, nothing will be
perfectly safe by your lights. Matt may assign .5 credence to Guilty because this
credence will not be rationality dominated by any other credence.
Objection 2: Ideally rational agents know exactly what rationality permits. So,
in particular, if Matt is ideally rational, he is certain that the permissible range of
credences in Guilty spans from exactly .3 to exactly .7, and so he is no victim of
the dominance argument.
Reply: Maybe.' 2  But Epistemic Permissivism is not just a view about ideally
rational agents, but about ordinary agents like you and me, with all our human
limitations. Indeed, Permissivists often tout their view as the only alternative to an
objectionably demanding epistemology. Try to imagine yourself in Matt's shoes,
they say. You're faced with a mess of evidence. Jones' glove was found on the
scene, but another suspect's fingerprints were there too. Three witnesses claim
that Jones owned a gun and was prone to violence. Two others deny this. And
so on. Could it really be that the only rational response to his evidence is for
Matt to become (say) .6453 confident in Guilty? Surely not, the Permissivist says.
Rationality does not require us to do the impossible-typically there is a wide
12Why 'maybe'? Because it isn't clear that even ideally rational agents are certain about which
credences are licensed by their evidence. Here's one reason to think they aren't. Ideally rational
agents aren't always in a position to know exactly what they know. In particular, knowledge does
not obey negative introspection: Ideally rational agents can fail to know P without also knowing
that they don't know P. But if we accept, following Williamson (2000), that our evidence just is our
knowledge, then even ideally rational agents won't know exactly what their evidence is-sometimes
they will be rationally uncertain about which credences are rational.
17

range of responses to our evidence that would be rational.1 3
If the Permissivist embraces this motivation, then surely when she says that it
is permissible to hold any credence between .3 and .7, she means that it is per-
missible for someone like Matt-a non-ideal, cognitively limited agent-to hold
any credence between .3 and .7. But I've argued that this can't be. A non-ideal
agent ought not to be certain of the exact boundaries of the permissible range, so
he cannot adopt a credence on the edge of that range.
But even if the Permissivist eschews this motivation, I don't think she's much
better off. To be sure, the dominance argument does not apply to those who are
certain of the exact boundaries of the permissible range. So, for any credence
between .3 and .7 in Guilty, perhaps there is an ideally rational agent who holds
that credence. But the argument still applies to ordinary agents-their options
will be much more constrained. This leaves us with quite a surprising account of
rationality, one that affords ideally rational agents many, many options, and limits
ordinary agents to just one.
This is exactly the opposite of what we should expect from a Permissivist who
recognizes a distinction between ideal and non-ideal rationality. Permissivism is
populist epistemology, a view for ordinary folk. Impermissivists ignore the realities
of our actual cognitive lives. Permissivists don't. If the Permissivist grants that
any form of rationality is impermissive, it should be an idealized notion, one that
abstracts away from our actual cognitive limitations, and so, by their lights, has
little relevance for people like us. Absent a suitable story about why things would
be reversed-why it would be ideal rationality that is permissive and non-ideal
rationality that is impermissive-we should be suspicious of an appeal to ideal
rationality as a way of evading the dominance argument.
Objection 3: Matt should believe that he is in the middle of the permissible range.
Suppose we grant that it is impermissible to adopt dominated options. Then we
must say that, if he believes that the boundary of the permissible range is roughly
.3, it is irrational for Matt to be .3 confident in Guilty. Matt shouldn't regard himself
as taking an unnecessary risk. But that doesn't mean the .3 credence has to go,
as I've argued. Rather, it's Matt's higher-order beliefs that should change: Matt
13See e.g., Schoenfield (2014) for arguments like this.
18

should believe that his .3 credence is close to the middle of the range of permissible
credences in Guilty, so that he is certain that .3 is rational.
Reply: If you take this strategy, you need a story about how we form higher-order
beliefs that explains why agents on the edge of the permissible range must always
believe falsely that they are (roughly) in the middle. To be sure, agents can form
false beliefs about what rationality permits if they have misleading higher-order
evidence. Matt may get misleading higher-order evidence suggesting that the per-
missible range of credences in Guilty spans from roughly .1 to roughly .5. I don't
doubt that it would then be permissible for him to assign .3 to Guilty. But Epis-
temic Permissivism is not just a view about what we are permitted to believe when
we are misled. We need an account of how we form higher-order beliefs that ex-
plains how it can be rational for agents on the edge to believe falsely that they are
in the middle, even in the absence of misleading higher-order evidence.
The kind of story about higher-order belief formation that we are interested
in is one that tells Matt and Abby to believe that they are in the middle of the
permissible range. So, since Matt assigns .3 to Guilty, he ought to believe that the
range of permissible credences in Guilty is roughly . 1-.5, and since Abby assigns .7
to Guilty, she ought to believe that the range of permissible credences is roughly .5-
.9. What kind of method must Matt and Abby be using to form these higher-order
beliefs? It must be one that takes into account their own credences in Guilty.
Perhaps the story goes like this. In general, you are rationally entitled to believe
that your own credences and beliefs are rational. So, when Matt examines the
evidence and adopts .3, he is thereby permitted to infer that .3 is rational. Similarly,
when Abby examines the evidence and adopts .7 credence, she is thereby permitted
to believe that .7 is rational. Now, the story can't stop there, for since Matt and
Abby are clear-eyed Permissivists, they think other credences are rational, too.
Which ones? A natural thought: Those that are sufficiently close to their own!
Matt reasons, 'I know that .3 is rational. So any credence as low as .1 or as high
as .5 is probably rational, too', and Abby reasons, 'I know that .7 is rational, so
anything as low as .5 and as high as .9 is rational, too.' Can this procedure explain
how Matt and Abby could rationally believe that they are in the middle of the
range?
19

I think not. For if your credence is sufficiently close to the edge, this procedure
will lead you astray about the upper and lower bounds of the permissible range, as
it does for Matt and Abby. Now, the unreliability of the method is not itself the
problem-perhaps we are sometimes rational to use unreliable methods. What's
worrying is that a clear-eyed Permissivist is in a position to know that the method
is unreliable.
To see why, it will be instructive to compare Permissivism to Uniqueness on
this issue. Suppose that I am a clear-eyed Uniquer. In that case, I know that, if
my first-order belief or credence is rational, then if I come to believe that my own
credence is rational, my belief will be true. In short, if Uniqueness is true, then the
rational entitlement principle guarantees that rational agents will form true beliefs
about rationality, and clear-eyed Uniquers are in a position to rationally believe this
about themselves.
Things are different for Permissivism. Matt is a clear-eyed Permissivist. He
believes that his credence in Guilty is rational and infers that all credences close to
his are rational. That's how Matt comes to believe that the range of permissible cre-
dences in Guilty is roughly .1 to roughly .5. But although being rational guarantees
that you will form true beliefs about the rationality of your own credence, it does
not guarantee that you will form true beliefs about the upper and lower bounds of
the permissible range of credences-it doesn't guarantee that you will form true
beliefs about what other credences are rational.
But Matt in a position to know this about the method he is using. Matt should be
highly confident that he is on the edge of the permissible range of credences in some
propositions, and for all he knows, Guilty is one of them. So, Matt should recognize
that, for all he knows, his credence is on the edge of the range of permissible
credences in Guilty. Matt should doubt the conclusion of the method he is using:
He should think, 'Even if my credence in Guilty is rational, I might be on the
edge of the permissible range, in which case my belief that all credences close to
my own are rational will be false!' But it can't be rational to use a method whose
conclusions one doubts. If I am in a position to know a priori that a conclusion I've
drawn might be false, I shouldn't believe it. Pending a suitable story about higher-
order belief formation, we ought to be suspicious of a view that says that we must
always believe that our credences are close to the middle of the permissible range.
20

Objection 4: You assume that if Permissivism is true, then Matt can rationally
believe he is in a permissive case. But some Permissivists deny this. For example,
Stewart Cohen (2013) is a Permissivist who defends Doxastic Uniqueness, the
claim that a subject cannot rationally hold one credence while believing that some
other credence is just as rational. That is, a subject can never rationally believe
that she is in a permissive case. If Matt doesn't believe that there is a range of
permissible credences in Guilty, the threat of dominance evaporates.
Reply: Granted. But the traditional motivations for Permissivism strongly suggest
that if Permissivism is true, then we can, at least sometimes, rationally believe that
we are in a permissive case. 14
Permissivist usually motivate their view, at least in part, by reflection on par-
ticular cases-cases of disagreement among jurors about whether Jones is guilty,
among paleontologists about what killed off the dinosaurs, and among philoso-
phers about whether we have free will. But if we can know that a particular case is
permissive when we're doing epistemology, what could stop us from continuing to
know that a particular case is permissive when we're in one?
A second way of motivating Permissivism, the 'competing theoretical virtues'
argument, also suggests that we often know that we're in a permissive case. Permis-
sivists say that what it's rational for us to believe depends not just on the content
of our evidence, but on how we balance certain theoretical virtues against each
other-things like simplicity, predictive strength, and explanatory power. There
are many different, yet equally rational ways of balancing these virtues against one
another, and they will often yield different levels of confidence in various hypothe-
ses.15
But surely we can tell, at least sometimes, how simple, predictive, and ex-
planatory a certain hypothesis is. If we can, then we can also determine, say, that
balancing simplicity and predictive power in this way would yield high credence
in Guilty, and weighing them in that way would yield lower credence in Guilty.
14 See Ballantyne and Coffman (2011), Douven (2009), Kelly (2013), Schoenfield (2014), and
Titelbaum and Kopec (2015) for defenses of clear-eyed Permissivism, the view that Permissivism
true and we're sometimes in a position to know, of a certain case, that it is permissive.
15See, for example, Douven (2009), Schoenfield (2014), and Titelbaum (2015a) for arguments
along these lines.
21

But if we also know that both of these ways of balancing the theoretical virtues are
rational, we can put two and two together, and conclude that high credence and low
credence in Guilty are both rational. 16
Objection 5: It can be permissible for Matt to hold onto a credence that is rational-
ity dominated. Matt's credence has something else going for it: He expects it to be
most accurate. Why? Because Matt's credence is recommended by his own epis-
temic standards, which he endorses: Matt expects the credences recommended by
his standards to be more accurate than those recommended by any other standards.
This argument is not new: It's Schoenfield's (2014) response to White's (2005)
charge that if Permissivism is true, then it should be fine to arbitrarily switch from
one permissible credence to another.17 
We can think of Schoenfield's brand of
Permissivism as a kind of Intrapersonal Epistemic Uniqueness: There are many,
equally permissible sets of epistemic standards, but once you've settled on one, you
have reason to adopt the credences your standards recommend. (For Schoenfield,
that's because if you're rational, you expect your standards to maximize expected
accuracy.) 18 So, contra White, it is never rational to arbitrarily switch from one
permissible credence to another.
If we're convinced by Schoenfield's reply to White's, might we use it to reply
to my challenge as well?
Reply: There are two ways of understanding Schoenfield's reply on behalf of the
Intrapersonal Epistemic Uniquer, one weaker, one stronger: the weaker, though
plausibly an effective response to White's challenge, is no objection to mine; the
stronger is indeed an objection to the dominance principle, but, intuitively, it is far
too strong.19
The weaker version of Schoenfield's reply says that expecting some credence
to be most accurate is sometimes a reason to prefer it-in particular, it is a reason
16Thanks to an anonymous referee for suggesting this point.
17White presents many arguments against Permissivism, but I take this to be the central objection
unifying all of them.
18Kelly (2014), Meacham (2014), and Titelbaum and Kopec (2015) also defend Intrapersonal
Uniqueness, and discuss how this view helps us respond to White.
19Thanks to Bernhard Salow for discussion on the arguments of this section.
22

to prefer it when the rationality of the various credences you're considering is not
in doubt. This is the thought that in fact motivates Schoenfield's reply to White
above (see footnote 21). Plausibly, Schoenfield has answered White's challenge-
she has explained why, when you know that some other credence is just as rational
as yours, you still have reason to prefer your own.
But the weaker version of Schoenfield's reply does not help the Permissivist
answer my challenge-she does not (nor does she intend to) explain why it would
be permissible to hold onto credences that are rationality dominated. After all,
cases in which your credence is rationality dominated are precisely those cases in
which the rationality of one of the credences you are considering is in doubt.
The stronger version of Schoenfield's reply says that expecting your credence
to be most accurate is always a reason to prefer it-in particular, it is a reason to
prefer it even when the rationality of that credence is in doubt. This is is indeed
an objection to the dominance principle, the principle that it is always irrational
to adopt weakly dominated credences. The stronger version of Schoenfield's reply
says that you should stick to your credence when it is rationality dominated because
you expect it to be most accurate.
But it's not an objection the Permissivist should be happy to pursue. It implies
that we should never be moved to revise our credences by evidence that we've been
less than fully rational; instead we should level-split-e.g., we should both remain
highly confident that Jones is not guilty and believe that our evidence supports
lower confidence in this proposition. This is not a welcome consequence. Those
who refuse to revise their beliefs in the face of evidence that they are irrational
seem over-confident, indeed dogmatic-they seem paradigmatically irrational.
Suppose Jill has examined all of the evidence and becomes highly confident
that the Warriors, her favorite NBA team, will win the championship. A trusted
friend tells her that she always overestimates the likelihood of favorable outcomes.
The Permissivist we're considering says that Jill should remain highly confident
that the Warriors will win despite her friend's warning. Since she expects her high
credence to be most accurate, she needn't be worried by evidence that she's been
irrational.
This doesn't seem right. When she has reason to believe her credence is irra-
tional, Jill shouldn't be able to appeal to the perceived accuracy of her credence
23

as a reason to hold onto it. Compare this to a case of all-out beliefs. Suppose that
Jill simply believes that the Warriors will win, and her friend tells that the evidence
doesn't support such high confidence. Jill couldn't reply to her friend's concern:
'Well, I must have gotten lucky-even though the evidence supports lower confi-
dence, I've wound up with a true belief!' 20 Return to the case of credences. Jill
can't respond to her friend's concern about the rationality of her credence with:
'Well, I must have gotten lucky-even though my evidence supports a lower cre-
dence, my credence is more accurate!' Evidence that she has been irrational should
make her doubt the accuracy of her credences and beliefs, and she should lower her
confidence accordingly.
Similar things can be said of Matt's credence in Guilty. He worries that his
credence might be too low. But he's sure that it's not too high-he's certain that
it would be rational to assign .4 to Guilty. The Permissivist we're considering
says that he needn't be moved by doubts about the rationality of his .3 credence in
Guilty because he expects it to be most accurate. But again, this seems wrong. Matt
cannot appeal to the perceived accuracy of his credence as a reason to maintain that
credence when its rationality is in doubt.2 1
This is connected to a worry I mentioned earlier: Don't rational agents care
rationality only as a guide to accuracy, and not for its own sake? If so, accuracy
always comes first. But then my dominance principle is false: Because he expects
his credence to be more accurate than any other credence, Matt should stick with
.3 even if he isn't sure it is rational and he is sure that (say) .4 is rational. To
shift from .3 to .4 in order to ensure rationality-at the cost of accuracy by Matt's
20For defenses or sympathetic discussion of the claim that it is irrational to maintain some credence
or belief when you acquire evidence that it is irrational, see Christensen (2010), Elga (2013), Greco
(2014), Horowitz (2014), Sliwa and Horowitz (2015), Smithies (2012), and Titelbaum (2015b).
For criticism see Coates (2012), Lasonen-Aarnio (2014), Lasonen-Aarnio (2015), and Williamson
(2011).
2 1It is Schoenfleld's discussion of irrelevant influences on belief that makes explicit that she en-
dorses only the weaker version of Intrapersonal Uniqueness. She's interested in cases where you
learn that your belief was influenced by an irrelevant factor. In cases like this, it seems we should re-
vise our earlier beliefs. Schoenfield explains this intuition by saying that we should revise our beliefs
when we have reason to believe that they are irrational. (See pages 203-206.) Schoenfleld accepts
that if you have evidence that you've picked standards in a way that was unlikely to leave you with
rational ones, then you ought to change them. It's a short step from this thought to my dominance
principle.
24

lights-would be irrational.
But I deny that it can be rational for Matt to expect his credence to be most
accurate when he has reason to believe that his credence might be irrational, and
he is sure that some other credence is rational. If Matt were sure that his credence is
rational, then perhaps it would be rational for him to expect it to be most accurate.
But the moment he starts doubting the rationality of his credence, continuing to
assume that it is most accurate seems overly self-confident and dogmatic.
Even if we don't care about rationality for its own sake, it is a good guide to
accuracy-in general, more rational credences are more accurate than less rational
ones. But then we ought to see it that way-if we expect one credence to be
more rational than another, we should also expect it to be more accurate, and so we
should prefer it. Since Matt expects .4 to be more rational than .3-he's sure that .4
is rational but he is not sure that .3 is-he should also expect .4 to be more accurate
than .3, and Matt should revise his credence accordingly. On this view, avoiding
dominated credences is just part of doing what we can to be most accurate.
Let's take a step back. As we've seen, I'm not the first to object to Permissivism.
White argued that if you know that you're in a permissive case, then it is okay to
arbitrarily switch credences. As we saw in Objection 4, some Permissivists simply
deny that we ever know that we are in a permissive case, and such Permissivists
escape my dominance argument.
But the Permissivists who endorse the traditional motivations for the view-
e.g., competing theoretical virtues-say that you can know that you are in a permis-
sive case, but it is nonetheless not okay to arbitrarily switch. These Permissivists
must say that rational agents have some to reason privilege their own credences
even when they know that some other credence is just as rational. Perhaps that
reason is that the standards of a rational agent maximize expected accuracy for that
agent, as Schoenfield argues. Or perhaps it's simply that we should be (diachroni-
cally) consistent; we shouldn't change our minds arbitrarily. 22
But whatever the reason is, we must ask the question that I asked in response
2 2See Titelbaum and Kopec (2015) for a discussion of how appealing to certain norms of di-
achronic consistency helps us reply to White.
25

to Schoenfield: What is the force of the reason? Do we always have reason to
adopt the credences that our standards recommend? Or rather, can it be defeated
by evidence that our credences (and so our standards, too) are irrational? As we've
seen, the Permissivist should accept that if you have reason to believe that your
standards are irrational, then whatever reason you had to adhere to your standards
is defeated-when the rationality of a certain credence is in doubt, that it is recom-
mended by your standards is no reason to prefer it.
It is a far cry from the thought that you shouldn't change your mind arbitrarily
to the thought that you shouldn't change your mind even when you have reason to
believe that your present attitude is irrational. But I have argued that this is the
predicament of the clear-eyed Permissivist on the edge of the permissible range.
It's not that he believes that some other credence is just as rational as his. No, it's
that he expects some other credence to be more rational than his. (Matt is sure that
.5 is rational but he is not sure that .3 is rational.) To privilege your credence when
the rationality of that credence is not in doubt is one thing; to do so when you have
reason to believe it might be irrational, and you're sure that some other credence is
rational, is quite another.
The dominance argument goes through so long as you admit that it is rational
to revise your credences when you're not sure that your credence is rational but you
are sure that some other credence is rational. And any Permissivist should admit
this much.
1.3 
Conclusion
I've argued that if you are on the edge of the permissible range of credences in
a certain proposition, your credence will be rationality dominated by certain cre-
dences closer to the middle. Since dominated options aren't rational, it's not ra-
tional to adopt a credence on the edge of the permissible range. But Permissivism
says that, for some such range, any credence in that range is rationally permissi-
ble. I have considered some objections to my argument and found them wanting.
Permissivism, in its traditional form, cannot be right.
26

Chapter 2
Belief and Probability
We believe lots of things. Many of those beliefs are rational. I rationally believe
that there's a bright screen in front of me, that I didn't have breakfast this morn-
ing, that two plus two equals four. If I'm rational to believe these things, what
grounds this fact? What makes it rational for us to believe certain propositions?
And what is it for the rationality of our beliefs to be defeated? Many epistemolo-
gists will want answers to these questions. They will want to reduce rational belief
to something else. But there's a certain widely influential character in contempo-
rary epistemology-the Epistemic Bayesian, as I'll call him-who will insist that
only one sort of reduction will do: a reduction to subjective probability.1
The Epistemic Bayesian thinks that the opinions of a rational subject, at a given
time, can be faithfully modeled by a probability function, which assigns, to each
proposition, a precise probability. 2 To his mind, all varieties of rational opinion can
be-must be, somehow-reduced to facts about these subjective probabilities. If I
am entitled to believe that I skipped breakfast, there is a probabilistic explanation
for that fact; if my belief is defeated, there is a probabilistic explanation for that
too.
Here I show that rational belief resists probabilistic reduction. There's a way
II borrow the term 'Epistemic Bayesian' from Joyce (2005).
2More exactly, this is what the Precise Epistemic Bayesian thinks. As we'll see, there are also
Imprecise Epistemic Bayesians. They propose to model rational subjects with a set of probabil-
ity functions, a kind of credal committee. I return to this distinction in 2. The term 'Epistemic
Bayesian' applies equally to the precise and imprecise varieties.
27

to rationally lose belief in a certain hypothesis without losing confidence-a kind
of non-probabilistic defeat. The problem stems from conflicting evidence, the sort
of evidence you have when two sources of information contradict each other, such
as when doctors offer conflicting diagnoses, or when film critics you trust write
discordant reviews. Under the right circumstances, conflicting evidence can de-
feat your entitlement to believe a certain hypothesis without disconfirming it-that
is, without making it any less probable. I present a case of conflicting evidence
that illustrates this phenomenon. I consider three probabilistic theories of rational
belief-one simple, two more sophisticated. None of these theories can explain
why it's rational to stop believing in the cases I describe.
I can't prove that no adequate probabilistic theory of rational belief will ever be
devised. But I can give reasons for pessimism-reasons to doubt that probabilistic
theories have the kinds of resources we need.
2.1 
Who is the Epistemic Bayesian?
Epistemic Bayesianism is the conjunction of two theses: Bayesianism and Lockean
supervenience.
Bayesianism is built on the notion of a credence or degree of confidence. We
don't just believe and disbelieve; we believe and disbelieve to varying degrees. To
model our degrees of belief, Bayesians say that each of us is equipped with a cre-
dence function Pr (in the case of Precise Bayesianism) or set of credence functions
(in the case of Imprecise Bayesianism) from propositions to real numbers between
zero and one. (To simplify things, I'll introduce Precise Bayesianism now, and
Imprecise Bayesianism later, but it's important to remember that the Epistemic
Bayesian may endorse either doctrine.) Pr(P) represents your degree of confi-
dence (your credence) that P is true.
The Bayesian says that if you're rational, then your credence function will also
be a probability function. This means that it obeys the axioms of the probability
calculus, listed below: 3
3These are often referred to as Kolmogorov's axioms, after the Russian mathematician Andrey
Kolmogorov, who was the first to articulate these axioms as the foundation of probability theory. See
Kolmogorov (1933).
28

(1) Non-Negativity. For any proposition P, Pr(P) > 0
(2) Normality. For any tautology T, Pr(T) = 1
(3) Finite Additivity. For any mutually exclusive propositions P and Q, Pr(P V
Q) = Pr(P) + Pr(Q).
The probability axioms are the first three requirements of Bayesianism-the con-
straints that a subject's (unconditional) credence function must satisfy at any given
time in order to be rational. (When a subject's credence function Pr is a probability
function, I will often refer to her credences as subjective probabilities.)
Bayesians insist that subjects also have various conditional credences. Pr(PQ)
represents one's credence in P conditional on Q-one's credence that P is true on
the supposition that Q is. Conditional credences are related to unconditional cre-
dences according to the Ratio Formula:
(4) Ratio Formula. Where Pr(Q) > 0, Pr(PIQ) = Pr(P A Q)/Pr(Q).
(If Pr(Q) = 0, Pr(PIQ) is undefined.)
Finally, Bayesians use conditional credences to state a rule governing how ra-
tional subjects update their beliefs:
(5) Conditionalization. For any time t1 , and any later time t2, if you learn
all and only Q between t, and t2, then for any proposition P, Prt2 (P) =
Prt, (P IQ).
Informally speaking, Conditionalization says that your credence in P at t 2 upon
learning Q should equal your prior ti credence in P had you merely been suppos-
ing Q. The Bayesian says that if you're rational, you update your credences by
conditionalizing on your evidence. Conditionalization is the final requirement of
Bayesianism. 4
4There are a variety of arguments that have been given in support of Conditionalization. See,
for example, Teller (1976) for a Dutch Book argument for Conditionalization-an argument that
if you don't conditionalize, a Dutch Book can be made against you. (Teller credits David Lewis
for the argument.) See Williams (1980) for an argument that appeals to the Principle of Minimum
Information, van Fraassen (1999) for an argument that appeals to the Principle of Reflection, and
Greaves and Wallace (2006) for an argument that Conditionalization maximizes expected accuracy.
29

We've introduced Bayesianism, the first thesis of Epistemic Bayesianism. The
second thesis is what I call Lockean Supervenience:
Lockean Supervenience. For any time t, your rational unconditional and
conditional credences at t determine (i) what you should believe at t, and (ii)
what you should believe as you gather more information.
Lockean Supervenience says that facts about rational belief supervene on facts
about rational credences. There can be no difference in what it is rational for you
to believe without some difference in which credences it is rational for you to have.
Or, put the other way around, once we've settled which credences it is rational for
you to have, we've settled what it's rational for you to believe.5
As I understand him, the Epistemic Bayesian is not an eliminativist. He's happy
to talk about belief and rational belief. But he is an adamant reductionist. The fun-
damental epistemic facts are facts about rational probabilities, and all other facts
about rational opinion are to be explained in terms of these fundamental probabilis-
tic facts. If it's rational for me to believe there is a bright screen before me, there
is a purely probabilistic explanation for that fact; if the rationality of my belief is
defeated, there is a purely probabilistic explanation for that too.
In what follows, I argue against Epistemic Bayesianism. More specifically, I
argue that if rational credences are what the Bayesian says they are, then Lockean
Supervenience is in trouble. In certain circumstances, you can learn something
that defeats your entitlement to believe a certain hypothesis without making it any
less probable. If beliefs can change when subjective probabilities don't, rational
belief isn't tethered to the logic of subjective probability. Belief is irreducible to
subjective probability.6
5Some version of Lockean Supervenience is assumed either implicitly or explicitly by many
epistemologists and philosophers of science working in the Bayesian tradition. See, among others,
Clarke (2013), Dorst (forthcoming), Foley (2009), Leitgeb (2013, 2014, 2017), Sturgeon (2008), and
Weatherson (2005) for expressions of this Lockean sentiment.
6I am not the first to object to Lockean Supervenience. Buchak (2014) criticizes the Lockean
Thesis (roughly, the claim that you believe P just in case you are sufficiently confident in P) on the
basis of what she calls merely statistical evidence. Suppose, for example, that a car is hit in the night
by a bus. There are two bus companies in town: Blue Bus owns 95% of the buses, while Red Bus
owns 5%. If you believe that Blue Bus did it, you should fine them. But you can't fine them on the
basis of these statistics! So you don't believe that Blue Bus did it, even though it is 95% likely that
30

2.2 
A Case
One of your friends needs a kidney transplant. Adam, Ollie, and Arnie are candi-
date donors. Each will undergo state-of-the-art blood testing. Before testing, each
tells you his blood type. 7
Kidney Transplant (Stage One). Adam says that he is type A. Arnie
says that he is type A. Ollie says that he is type 0.
People tend not to misreport their own blood types. You believe what you've been
told-that Adam and Arnie are type A, and that Ollie is type O-and you are
rational in so doing.
The test says whether two people are the same blood type, but it doesn't tell
you what type they are. Ollie and Arnie are tested first.
Kidney Transplant (Stage Two). The test reveals that Arnie and Ollie
are the same type.
The test is always right. When it says that Arnie and Ollie are the same blood
type, you trust it, and conclude that they're either both type 0 or both type A. You
trust Arnie and Ollie equally, we'll suppose. Since you have no reason to trust
Arnie over Ollie, you don't believe they are both type A. And since you have no
reason to trust Ollie over Arnie, you don't believe they are both type 0. Still, you
should continue to believe that Adam is type A. Discovering that one of Ollie and
they did. While I agree with Buchak that belief doesn't reduce to credence, here's a worry about her
reasons for rejecting the Lockean Thesis. Hawthorne et al. (2016) persuasively argue that the norms
for belief are weak-in particular, they are weaker than the norms for certainty or for knowledge. I
can say 'I believe it's raining, but I'm not sure' or 'I believe it's raining, but it might not be.' I cannot
say, 'I'm sure it's raining, but it might not be.' According to how we ordinarily talk, believing P
is compatible with believing that P might be false, and we often do believe on the basis of merely
statistical evidence: I believe that the coin won't land heads 100 times in a row, even though I have
nothing but statistical evidence to go on. In response to these sorts of considerations, some will say
(Greco (2016) explicitly does) that they aren't talking about the notion picked out by the natural
language 'belief', but a technical notion akin to certainty. I have no objection to them, but their topic
is not mine.
7The structure of this example was inspired by an example originally given by Matthew Ginsberg
(1986) that was intended to raise trouble for certain principles in the logic of counterfactuals.
31

Arnie was mistaken is not cause to question Adam's testimony.8
Finally, Adam and Ollie undergo testing.
Kidney Transplant (Stage Three). The test reveals that Adam and
Ollie are the same blood type.
You should now be sure that Ollie, Arnie, and Adam are the same blood type.
Should you believe that they are all type 0? Plainly not. Adam and Arnie both said
that they are type A. Should you believe they are all type A? That doesn't seem
right, either. Ollie said he is type 0. Perhaps you're more confident that they're all
A than that they're all O-you have two pieces of evidence suggesting A and just
one suggesting 0. But to believe that Adam, Arnie, and Ollie are type A would
be to conclude that it is Ollie who made the mistake. And, intuitively, you are not
entitled to draw that conclusion. You should leave open that Ollie is right, and that
Adam, Arnie, and Ollie are all type 0.9
Here's what one would like to say about Kidney Transplant. At Stage One, you
are entitled to rely on Adam's testimony about his blood type, entitled to believe
Adam is A. Typically people accurately report their blood types, and absent evi-
dence to the contrary, you should assume Adam is no exception. When you learn
that Adam is the same type as Ollie and Arnie at Stage Three, you are no longer
entitled to trust Adam. Trusting Adam now means siding with Adam (and Arnie),
and you aren't entitled to do that-trusting Adam over Ollie wasn't part of the deal.
Your entitlement was provisional and circumscribed. It said that absent evidence
to the contrary, you're entitled to assume Adam knows his own blood type. But
8Normally when you learn someone was wrong about his blood type, you needn't worry that
everyone else is. To be sure, there are special circumstances in which learning that one person is
wrong is evidence of widespread error-say, if you know that blood tests are either perfectly reliable
or anti-reliable, biased away from the truth. But we can just stipulate that this case is not like that.
9Here's a way to underscore the intuition. Simplify the case so that Arnie, Adam, and Ollie are
tested all at once, and the test reveals that all three have the same blood type. Plainly, it would be
irrational to outright conclude that they're all type A. Instead, you should leave open that they are all
0. But the only difference between the simplified case and the original case is in how long it takes
for you to learn that they all have the same blood type. In the simplied case, you learn all at once that
Arnie, Adam, and Ollie have the same blood type. In the original case, you learn this in stages-first
you learn that Arnie and Ollie are the same, then you learn that Adam and Ollie are the same. Surely
this difference in timing shouldn't affect what you believe. Your evidence about Adam, Arnie, and
Ollie's respective blood types is exactly the same in the two cases.
32

now you you have evidence to the contrary. You are no longer entitled to believe
Adam is A.
That's what one would like to say, anyway. But we've said it in a language
foreign to probabilistic theories of evidence and rational opinion. Can we explain,
in probabilistic terms, why you're entitled to believe that Adam is A at Stage One
and no longer entitled to believe this at Stage Three? This is what the Epistemic
Bayesian demands. We should certainly hope we can. Probabilistic theories of
evidence are precise, tractable, and predictive, promising deep and unifying ex-
planations of diverse epistemic phenomena. Yet I'll show that cases like Kidney
Transplant pose a serious challenge for probabilistic reductions of rational belief.
The simplest probabilistic theory predicts no difference in what you are entitled to
believe between Stage One and Stage Three, and more sophisticated probabilistic
theories fare no better.
2.3 
The Simple Theory
We said that you are entitled to believe that Adam is A at Stage One and Stage
Two of Kidney Transplant, and no longer entitled to believe this at Stage Three:
learning that Adam is the same blood type as Ollie (and Arnie) defeats your belief.
The Epistemic Bayesian must provide a probabilistic explanation for this change.
The simplest idea is to posit a threshold for rational belief. It's rational to believe
P just in case your rational credence in P exceeds that threshold.
The Simple Theory. There is some threshold t such that it's rational for you
to believe P if and only if your rational credence in P exceeds t.
I assume that t is greater than .5 (it's never rational to believe P and -,P) and less
than 1 (belief can't require absolute certainty, lest we lose too many of our beliefs).
Here's how the story would go. It's rational to believe that Adam is A at Stage
One and Stage Two because it is sufficiently probable that Adam is A on your
evidence at those times. It's not rational to believe that Adam is A at Stage Three
because, given your evidence then, it's not sufficiently probable that Adam is A. In
short, learning that Adam is the same blood type as Ollie (and Arnie) disconfirms
the hypothesis that Adam is blood type A. It's more likely that Adam is A on your
33

evidence at Stage One and Stage Two than it is on your evidence at Stage Three.
That's why you lose your entitlement to believe.
2.3.1 
Against The Simple Theory
The Simple Theory won't do. We can prove that you should be no less confident
that Adam is type A at Stage Three than you are at Stage One and Stage Two. To
do so, we need three assumptions.
The first assumption is that, contrary to fact, the population is divided equally
between type A and type 0, and you're sure of this. You begin with no other
relevant information about Ollie's blood type, about Adam's blood type, or about
Arnie's blood type. So before Ollie tells you his blood type, you are 50% confident
that Ollie is 0 and 50% confident that Ollie is A. The same goes for Arnie and
Adam.
Second, I assume you trust Ollie and Arnie equally. This means that your
credence that Arnie is A conditional on Arnie saying that he's A is equal to your
credence that Ollie is 0 conditional on Ollie saying that he's 0. Given our first
assumption that you start out 50%-50% about Ollie's blood type, and 50%-50%
about Arnie's blood type, it follows that when you learn that Arnie and Ollie are
the same type, you are no more confident that one is right than that the other is.
(See 4.2 for a longer discussion of why this is so.) At Stage Two, you are 50%
confident that Arnie and Ollie are both type A and 50% confident that they are both
type 0.
Finally, I assume that whether Adam is type A is probabilistically independent
of whether Ollie is type 0 at Stage Two: learning that Ollie is type 0 would not
increase your confidence that Adam is type 0 (and vice versa); similarly, learning
that Ollie is type A wouldn't increase your confidence that Adam is A (and vice
versa).10 In short, learning one of their blood types shouldn't change your attitude
about the other's.
We said that you're entitled to believe that Adam is type A at Stage Two on the
'0Importantly, probabilistic independence is only required at Stage Two. The proposition that
Adam is A is clearly not probabilistically independent of the proposition that Ollie is A at Stage
Three. By then you are sure that Adam is A just in case Ollie is, so learning either of their blood
types would be sure to change your opinion about the other's blood type.
34

basis of Adam's testimony. You have conflicting information about Ollie-Ollie
says that he (Ollie) is type 0, but Arnie says he (Arnie) is type A, and you know
they're the same. You are 50%-50% about Ollie's blood type at Stage Two. At
Stage Three you learn that Adam and Ollie are the same blood type, and you're no
longer entitled to believe that Adam is type A. The Simple Theory says that you
lose your entitlement to believe that Adam is A because the proposition that Adam
is the same as Ollie disconfirms the hypothesis that Adam is A. The probability
that Adam is A conditional on Adam and Ollie being the same is lower than the
unconditional probability that Adam is A at Stage Two.
The trouble is that it follows from our three assumptions and the probability
calculus that the probability that Adam is A conditional on Adam and Ollie are
the same type is the same as the unconditional probability that Adam is A at Stage
Two. In the next section, I explain why.
2.3.2 
Explanation and Diagnosis
Remember what we would like to say about Kidney Transplant. At Stage One, you
are entitled to believe that Adam is A on the basis of his testimony. Learning that
Adam is the same type as Ollie (and Arnie) defeats your entitlement. You are not
entitled to side with Adam (and Arnie) over Ollie. I said that this is not something
we can say if the Simple Theory is true. But it would be well to explain why.
Here's an attempt. You think that Ollie and Arnie are equally reliable. You
are just as confident that Ollie is right about his blood type as you are that Arnie
is right about his blood type. Ollie's testimony confirms the hypothesis that Ollie
and Arnie are type 0 to the same degree as Arnie's testimony disconfirms it. Their
conflicting reports cancel each other out: taken together, they have no effect on the
probability that Ollie is 0 or on the probability that Arnie is A. When you learn of
the conflict, you should return to the credences you had before Ollie or Arnie said
anything-50%-50% about Ollie, and 50%-50% about Arnie. (Of course there is
one difference-now you know Ollie and Arnie are the same type.) Probabilisti-
cally speaking, it's as though you never spoke to Ollie or Arnie; all you know is
that half the population is 0 and half is A. When you discover that Adam is the
same type as Ollie, we should think of your predicament as one in which you have
35

just this statistical information and Adam's testimony to go on. But we've already
said what you're entitled believe when that's your evidence. You're entitled to trust
Adam's testimony and believe that Adam is A.
We can turn these informal remarks into a more rigorous explanation composed
of two claims. The first is that Ollie's and Arnie's conflicting reports cancel each
other out, leaving you 50%-50% about Ollie. Here's one way to see why that
should be true. Ollie and Arnie are just as likely to disagree about their shared
blood type when Ollie is right (and they're both type 0) as when Arnie is right
(and they're both type A). Formally:
(1) 
Pr(conflicting reports101 0) = Pr(conflicting reports|lo A)
From (1) we can infer that the conflicting reports don't affect the net balance of
your evidence with respect to the hypothesis that Ollie is type 0. Taken together,
they make it no more likely that Ollie is type 0 than that he is type A, and vice
versa. In other words:
(2) 
Pr(0i Olconflicting reports) = Pr(OlAlconflicting reports).
And finally, from (2) it follows that the probability that Ollie is 0, on the supposi-
tion that Ollie and Arnie issue conflicting reports about their shared blood type, is
equal to the probability that Ollie is 0 prior to any reports being issued. Learning
of the conflicting reports should not change your credence that Ollie is 0. Formally:
(3) 
Pr(01 Olconflicting reports) = Pr(0l 0).
Since you are 50%-50% about Ollie's blood type before you hear from Ollie or
Arnie, you are still 50%-50% after.
The second claim is that, because you are 50%-50% about Ollie's blood type,
when you learn that Adam and Ollie are the same blood type, it's as though you
have just Adam's testimony to go on. Your evidence about Ollie is probabilistically
idle; it ought to have no effect on your credence that Adam is A. This claim is
underwritten by the following fact:
No Change. For any propositions P and Q, if P and Q are probabilistically
36

independent relative to Pr, and Pr(Q) = .5, Pr(P) = Pr(PIP = Q).I
No Change says that if P is probabilistically independent of Q, and you are 50%
confident in Q, then learning P = Q should not change your opinion about P. If
you are confident in P, you must remain confident upon learning P Q (and raise
your confidence in Q accordingly).
No Change is the central principle at work in our proof. Consider Stage Two
of Kidney Transplant. We just said you are 50% confident that Ollie is A. We've
also said that whether Adam is A is probabilistically independent of whether Ollie
is. It follows from No Change that the probability that Adam is A, on your current
evidence, is equal to the probability that Adam is A, on the supposition that Adam
and Ollie are the same blood type. That Adam and Ollie are the same type does
not disconfirm the hypothesis that Adam is A.
The Simple Theory says that learning that Adam is the same type as Ollie
(and Arnie) defeats your entitlement to believe that Adam is type A because it
disconfirms that hypothesis. We've now seen that this simply isn't so. The fact that
Adam is the same type as Ollie (and Arnie) makes it no more or less likely that
Adam is A. 12
To get a better sense of the problem, consider a variation on Kidney Transplant.
Adam reports that he is blood type A, and you believe him. This time there's been
no word from Ollie or Arnie. Neither has told you his blood type. You know that
half the population is type 0, but have no other relevant information about Ollie's
blood type. So you're 50%-50% on Ollie-50% confident that he's 0, and 50%
confident that he's A. Adam and Ollie undergo the same, unerring test for sameness
"Proof: Let Pr(P) = x, and let Pr(Q) = .5. By the Ratio Formula, we know that Pr(PIP = Q)
= Pr(P A Q )/Pr((P A Q) v (,P A ,Q)). Since P and Q are probabilistically independent relative
to Pr, and (P A Q) and (,P A ,Q) are disjoint, Pr(P A Q)/Pr((P A Q) V (,P A ,Q)) =
(Pr(P) x Pr(Q))/((Pr(P) x Pr(Q)) + (Pr(,P) x Pr(-,Q))). Substituting x for Pr (P) and
.5 for Pr(Q), we get: (.5x)/(.5x + .5(1 - x)) = x.
12You might say that learning that Adam is the same type as Ollie and Arnie really should decrease
your credence that Adam is A. The lesson of Kidney Transplant is not that belief doesn't reduce
to credence, but that we have the wrong theory of credence-rational credence functions are not
probability functions. I don't see this as an objection. My claim is that belief can't be understood
solely in terms of probability. Perhaps Kidney Transplant reveals an even deeper problem with
Epistemic Bayesianism-that rational credence can't be understood in terms of probability, either.
That may be right. But my central point still stands: we can't reduce all facts about rational opinion
to subjective probability.
37

of blood type as before. The test reveals that Ollie and Adam are the same blood
type. What are you now entitled to think? Surely you are still entitled to believe
that Adam is A. You've learned nothing that contradicts Adam's testimony; your
entitlement to trust him is unscathed. You should also infer, from your new belief
that Ollie is the same type as Adam, that Ollie must be blood type A, too. If you
know Adam's blood type, and you have no information about Ollie's, learning that
Adam and Ollie are the same tells you Ollie's blood type.
This case shows that sometimes when you're 50%-50% on some proposition
Q, and entitled to believe P, learning P = Q transmits rational entitlement from
P to Q; it's a way of extending your beliefs to include Q. The original version of
Kidney Transplant shows that things often go the other way around. In that case,
you are 50% confident that Ollie is A, and entitled to believe that Adam is A; but
learning that Adam is A just in case Ollie is undermines your entitlement to believe
Adam is A. Sometimes when you're 50%-50% on Q, learning P = Q defeats your
entitlement to believe P.
What's the difference between these cases? The answer lies in the nature of
your reasons for being 50%-50% on Q. You may be 50%-50% because you have
no relevant information about Q. You are indifferent. Or you may be 50%-50%
because you have symmetrically conflicting evidence about Q. You are ambiva-
lent. If you have no relevant evidence about Q, learning P = Q gives you no new
evidence about P, so there's nothing to undermine the rationality of your belief
in P. If you have conflicting evidence about Q, you have some evidence against
Q, and this, together with your new belief that P is true only if Q is, defeats your
entitlement to believe P.
When you start with no information about Ollie, you should infer from Adam's
testimony, together with your knowledge that Adam and Ollie are the same, that
Adam and Ollie are both blood type A. Normally people can be trusted to accu-
rately report their blood types, and absent evidence to the contrary, you're entitled
to rely on Adam's testimony. When you have conflicting information about Ol-
lie, learning that Adam and Ollie are the same gives you evidence to the contrary.
Against your new knowledge that Adam and Ollie are the same blood type, Ollie's
testimony that he (Ollie) is blood type 0 is evidence that Adam is 0, too. You are
no longer entitled to believe that Adam is A.
38

The probability calculus sees only that you are 50%-50% about whether Ol-
lie is 0. It is blind to your reasons for being 50%-50%. It treats no information
in the same way as it treats symmetrically conflicting information, indifference
in the same way as ambivalence. That's because the case of one for type A is
probabilistically just like the case of two for type A against one for 0. If the two
additional pieces of evidence symmetrically conflict-that is, if they support in-
compatible hypotheses to the same degree-they will cancel each other out. So the
overall balance of your evidence-where the evidence points and how decisively it
points there-will be the same in the two cases. The larger, more conflicted body
of evidence supports the hypothesis that Adam is type A to the same degree as
the smaller, unambiguous body of evidence. But your beliefs aren't the same. So
whether it is rational to believe a certain hypothesis is not simply a matter of the
probability of that hypothesis on your evidence.' 3
2.3.3 
Distinguishing Kidney Transplant from Other Cases
I've argued that acquiring symmetrically conflicting evidence about some hypoth-
esis can defeat your entitlement to believe the hypothesis without probabilistically
disconfirming it. Now, there are other cases where symmetrically conflicting evi-
dence does disconfirm, and the Simple Theory can easily account for these. One
might wonder what's different about Kidney Transplant. Why aren't the resources
that the Epistemic Bayesian uses to explain other cases of conflicting evidence
13I said that learning that Ollie and Arnie disagree about their shared blood type doesn't reduce
your confidence that Adam is type A. That isn't essential. Maybe your credence that Adam is A
drops a little bit when you learn that one of Arnie and Ollie is mistaken. But it doesn't sink below
the level of belief, which is all that's required for Kidney Transplant to be a counterexample to the
Simple Theory. You might suggest that your conflicting evidence about Ollie really should push
your credence that Adam is A below belief. But that suggestion has implausible consequences. To
see why, notice that Kidney Transplant has the following structure. We have one proposition P
(Adam is type A), which you believe, and then you gain symmetric, conflicting evidence about some
other proposition Q (Ollie is type 0). The suggestion, then, would be that in response to conflicting
evidence about Q, you ought to drop your belief in P. In general, that can't be right. Suppose you've
driven by a new restaurant, Thai Palace. You see the sign on their window from afar, and from what
you can make out, it says they're open until 10. You believe that (P) Thai Palace closes at 10. Later
on, two friends are arguing about whether Bobby's, a burger drive-in, closes at 10 or 11. You have
conflicting evidence about whether (Q) Bobby's closes at 10. When your friends disagree about
Bobby's, should you stop believing that Thai Palace closes at 10? Clearly not. You shouldn't worry
about all restaurants just because you have conflicting evidence about Bobby's.
39

available to him when it comes to this case?
Suppose you have a twinge of pain in your ankle, and, being a bit of a hypochon-
driac, you rush to the hospital, where you have an MRI. A doctor examines the
MRI and says you have a fracture. You trust the doctor and conclude that you
have a fracture. Later, two more doctors review the MRI. One of the new doctors
says you have a fracture; the other says it's a sprain. If you trust all three doctors
equally, it seems it would be rational to stop believing you have a fracture when
you encounter this conflicting evidence.
The Epistemic Bayesian can easily make sense of this case. Although the dis-
agreement is symmetric (it's not as though you trust the doctor who says that you
have a sprain more than the other two), the fact that there's disagreement is itself a
sign that the evidence is murky-that it's not so easy to tell fractures from sprains,
that the MRI scan was blurry, or perhaps that your injury is a borderline case.
Learning that two other doctors disagree can undermine your trust in any doctor
who bases his judgment on this evidence, including the first doctor you consulted.
This reduces your confidence that you have a fracture. And a reduction in confi-
dence is exactly what the proponent of the Simple Theory needs to predict that you
lose your belief.
Kidney Transplant is in some ways analogous to this case. Adam is like the first
doctor-you start out believing that Adam is type A on the basis of his testimony.
One might be tempted to extend the analogy further still, alleging that against your
knowledge that Adam, Ollie, and Arnie are the same blood type, Ollie and Arnie
are like the two disagreeing doctors-just as the doctors disagree about whether
you have a fracture, Ollie and Arnie disagree about whether Adam is type A.
But Arnie and Ollie are not just like the disagreeing doctors. The two new
doctors testify about the very same question as the first-the question of whether
you have a fracture-and importantly, base their beliefs on exactly the same ev-
idence as the first doctor. The best explanation of why the doctors disagree is
that the evidence is hard to assess-perhaps the MRI scan doesn't clearly tell one
way or the other. If disagreement between the two new doctors casts doubt on the
quality of their evidence, it also casts doubt on the quality of the first doctor's ev-
idence. That's why the fact that they disagree undermines your trust in the first.
Things are different in Kidney Transplant. The best explanation of why Ollie and
40

Arnie disagree is not that blood tests are systematically unreliable, but something
much more nebulous-that sometimes people make mistakes about their medical
history. But of course you knew that all along. Disagreement between Ollie and
Arnie about their shared blood type need not cast doubt on your evidence about
Adam's blood type, and so learning that Ollie and Arnie are the same type should
not undermine your trust in Adam.
Formally speaking, the difference between the doctor case and Kidney Trans-
plant is that probabilistic independence is violated in the former, but not in the
latter. Whether the first doctor is right about your injury clearly isn't probabilisti-
cally independent of what the second two doctors say about it. When you learn that
the doctors disagree, you are rationally less confident that the first doctor is right
than you would have been otherwise. But Kidney Transplant is different. Whether
Adam is right about his blood type is probabilistically independent of what Ollie
and Arnie say about their own blood types.
Conflicting evidence about a certain hypothesis can undermine one's confi-
dence in it even when the conflict is symmetric, as when neither of the disagreeing
doctors is any more trustworthy than the other. A natural explanation of this phe-
nomenon is that disagreement is often a sign that the evidence is equivocal or hard
to assess-in one way or another, that it's not to be trusted. That explanation may
be satisfactory in the doctor case. But it simply doesn't apply to cases like Kidney
Transplant-that there is disagreement about Ollie is not a sign that the evidence
about Adam can't be relied on. That the Simple Theory predicts a difference in the
undermining effect of conflicting evidence in these two cases shows that it is not
an adequate model of conflicting evidence. And if that's so, it's not an adequate
account of rational belief, either.
In the next two sections, I consider two more sophisticated accounts of rational
belief on behalf of the Epistemic Bayesian. The first theory, the Stability Theory,
says that whether you're entitled to believe some proposition P doesn't just depend
on how confident you are in P-it 
also depends on the stability of your credence
in the face of changing information. The second theory, the Imprecise Theory,
retains the idea that high confidence is sufficient for rational belief, but understands
confidence in a new way, replacing precise probabilities with sets of probabilities.
Neither succeeds.
41

2.4 
The Stability Theory
The balance of a body of evidence with respect to a particular proposition P is,
roughly speaking, a matter of how decisively the evidence supports P. We've seen
that whether you're entitled to believe P isn't entirely determined by the balance
of your evidence with respect to P; that is, whether you're entitled to believe P
isn't entirely determined by the probability of P on your evidence. In some cases,
acquiring conflicting evidence with respect to a proposition P can defeat your be-
lief in P without changing the balance of your evidence-without making it any
less probable that P is true.
Perhaps rational belief also depends on what some have called evidential weight. 4
The weight of a body of evidence is the gross amount of information available. Two
bodies of evidence can have the same balance but different weights. Sam is 80%
confident that Serena Williams is going to win the match because he's seen her
beat this opponent twice before. John is 80% confident because he knows a great
deal about Williams and her opponent-he knows that Williams has won 70% of
their 24 contests, that Williams is even more likely to win on hotter days (and to-
day is a scorcher), that her opponent has a mild wrist injury, and so forth. John's
and Sam's evidence may well have the same balance, but they don't have the same
weight. John has more information, a more substantial basis on which to rest his
80% confidence that Serena will prevail.
Evidential weight is reflected in the stability of credences in the face of chang-
ing information. John and Sam will not react the same way to Williams losing the
first game of the match-Sam's credence will drop quite a bit, while John's won't
change much at all. Maybe we should apply this idea to rational belief: although
high credence is necessary for belief, it isn't sufficient. One's high credence must
also be sufficiently stable in response to new information. On this view, it isn't ra-
tional for Sam to believe that Williams will win since watching just the first game
would make him reconsider; it is rational for John to believe, however, since seeing
Williams lose the first game wouldn't worry him much.
This view is not without precedent. Hannes Leitgeb mounts perhaps the most
141 borrow the terms 'balance' and 'weight' from Joyce (2005), who attributes the term 'weight'
to Keynes (1921).
42

thorough contemporary defense of the view. He attributes the idea that stability
is necessary for rational belief to Hume's Treatise.15 Leitgeb cites Hume scholar
Louis Loeb, who argues that stability is the distinctive property of Humean belief.
For Loeb, Humean beliefs are not 'lively ideas', as many Hume interpreters have
thought, but steady dispositions, of which occurrent liveliness is just one of many
manifestations.16
The rough idea behind any version of the Stability Theory is that if it's too easy
to change your mind, you don't count as believing rationally. Of course, it would
be too much to demand that beliefs be indefeasible. It is our lot as reasoners with
limited information that we form beliefs that are defeasible, subject to revision in
the face of new, better information. But there are limits to when, and how, such
reconsideration can occur, according to the Stability Theory. What are those limits?
Which propositions must your high credence be stable with respect to? At the very
least, it seems, the propositions you think you aren't too unlikely to learn. Your
credence shouldn't count as sufficiently stable if it would drop below the threshold
of belief upon learning something consistent with everything you believe.17 1 8
The Epistemic Bayesian assumes that rational agents update by conditionaliza-
tion. If you're rational, your posterior credence in P, upon learning Q, is equal to
your prior credence in P conditional on Q. To say that your credence in P doesn't
drop below the threshold for belief conditional on some proposition Q is to say
that your credence in P conditional on Q exceeds t. We've said that not just any Q
counts-stability with respect to all Q's is too high a standard. The Q's are limited
to those consistent with everything you believe. Your credence in P is stably high
just if, for some threshold t, your credence in P exceeds t, and for any Q consistent
with your beliefs, your credence in P conditional on Q exceeds t. 9 Formally:
15See Leigeb (2013), Leitgeb (2014), and Leitgeb (2017).
16See Loeb (2001), Loeb (2002), and Loeb (2010).
17One might worry that the Stability Theory is circular. It is. But it is not intended to be an analysis
of belief, so much as a constraint-whatever belief is, it had better be stable in the sense discussed
here. If analysis isn't the goal, circularity needn't be worrying.
18This is roughly the proposal offered by Leitgeb (2017) in his Humean Thesis Explicated, which
goes as follows. Where Bel is a rational subject's set of believed propositions, and P is his subjective
probability measure: For all X, Bel(X) iff for all Y, if ,Bel(,Y), and P(Y) > 0, then P(XIY) > t,
where t is determined by context.
19Again I'm assuming .5 
t < 1.
43

The Stability Theory: There is some threshold t such that you rationally
believes P if and only if, for all propositions Q consistent with your beliefs,
Pr(PIQ) > t.
2.4.1 
Against the Stability Theory
The stability requirement in the Stability Theory is a probabilistic analogue of a
principle from the AGM theory of belief revision known as Rational Monotonicity:
Rational Monotonicity. If you believe P, then, for any proposition Q con-
sistent with your beliefs, you still believe P upon learning Q. 20
Rational Monotonicity says that if you believe P, and learning Q would defeat
your belief in P, you should believe that Q is false. If you believe P, you should
believe that you won't encounter any defeaters for that belief. That's not to say that
you should think your belief is indefeasible. There are things you could learn that
would make you give up your belief. Rational Monotonicity requires you to believe
that you won't actually learn any of these things. Your beliefs can be defeated by
new information. But if that happens, you shouldn't have seen it coming.
This thought has some intuitive appeal. Suppose I believe that I don't have strep
throat because the nurse informed me that my throat culture came back negative.
Now, if I learned that throat cultures are unreliable, I would surely renounce that
belief. But then it seems I can't now leave open this possibility. I can't leave open
the possibility that the sole basis for my belief is unreliable; I must believe, at least
implicitly, that throat cultures are reliable.
The trouble is that Kidney Transplant is also a counterexample to Rational
Monotonicity. At Stage Two, you believe that Adam is A. And you leave open
that Adam and Ollie are the same (because you leave open that Arnie is right and
Ollie is type A). Nevertheless, learning that Adam and Ollie are the same defeats
your belief that Adam is type A: you should stop believing that Adam is A upon
learning that he and Ollie are the same type.2 1
2 0See, for example, Alchourr6n et al (1985).
2 1There are other counterexamples to Rational Monotonicity, which also suggest that the principle
is too strong. Here is one adapted from an example due to Ned Hall (1999). It is mid-July in Boston.
44

But we must tread carefully here. We haven't yet shown that Kidney Transplant
is a counterexample to the Stability Theory. Rational Monotonicity says that if you
believe that Adam is A at Stage Two, you still believe that Adam is A upon learning
that Adam and Ollie are the same. The Stability Theory says that if you believe that
Adam is A, then you are still sufficiently confident that Adam is A upon learning
that Adam and Ollie are the same: your credence that Adam is A doesn't drop
below the threshold. But we haven't shown this claim to be false. Indeed, we've
proven that your credence that Adam is A does not decrease when you learn that
Adam and Ollie are the same. If your confidence that Adam is A exceeds the
threshold at Stage Two, it exceeds the threshold at Stage Three, too.
But if that's right, we seem to be saddled with a different problem. If you're
sufficiently confident that Adam is A at Stage Three-if your confidence exceeds
the threshold at Stage Three-won't we wrongly predict that you continue to be-
lieve that Adam is A when you learn that Adam and Ollie are the same? And
isn't that the exact result that we've been trying to avoid? Belief at Stage Two,
according to the Stability Theory, requires stably high credence at Stage Two. And
stably high credence at Stage Two, in turn, requires high credence at Stage Three.
In particular, it requires sufficiently high confidence-confidence that exceeds the
threshold for belief. It appears that the Stability Theory is no better off than the
Simple Theory. It too predicts that if you believe that Adam is A at Stage Two, you
still believe it at Stage Three.
This isn't quite right. Leitgeb (2017) maintains that the threshold for belief
varies according to the 'context' of the reasoner, which includes his probability
function. As the subject gathers more information, the threshold may change. To
I believe that there will be at least one sunny day in the next 12 days, and, it seems, I'm reasonable in
doing so. But I don't believe that it will be sunny tomorrow, or the next day, or the day after that. (I
haven't checked the current weather, but I do know to expect a good deal of sun during the month of
July.) In other words, I leave open that it won't be sunny for the next two days, or for the next three
days, and so forth. But now take a number towards the top of what I reasonably leave open-say,
10 days of no sun. If there have been 10 days of no sun, should I believe that there will be sun in
the next two days? Plausibly, I shouldn't. But if that's right, we have a counterexample to Rational
Monotonicity. I believe that it will be sunny once in the next (say) 12 days, and leave open that there
will be no sun for the next (say) 10 days. But were I to learn that there will be be no sun for 10 days, I
would stop believing that there would be sun within 12 days. See Goodman and Salow (forthcoming)
for another counterexample to Rational Monotoncity involving coin flips. See Salow (ms) for much
more detailed discussion of Rational Monotonicity.
45

fix ideas, let's suppose that, at Stage Two of Kidney Transplant, your credence that
Adam is A is .91, and t = .90. The Stability Theory says that you believe that Adam
is A. We've shown that, at Stage Two, Pr(Ad A) = Pr(Ad AAd 01 same): at Stage
Two, your unconditional credence that Adam is A is equal to your credence that
Adam is A conditional on Adam and Ollie being the same. Since you update by
Conditionalization, it follows that your credence that Adam is A upon learning that
Adam and Ollie are the same, at Stage Three, is equal to your Stage Two credence
that Adam is A. But even though your credence that Adam is A remains above .91,
it doesn't follow that you continue to believe. The threshold may increase between
Stage Two and Stage Three.22
But if Leitgeb pursues this reply, he runs into a different problem. Suppose
that, at Stage One of Kidney Transplant, your friend Cosmo tells you he had the
flu shot two years ago. You believe him; you have no reason to think he's lying.
Of course you're not certain he had the flu shot two years ago; you're (say) 91%
confident. At Stage One and Stage Two of Kidney Transplant, your high credence
that he's had the flu shot counts as a rational belief, we'll suppose. But at Stage
Three-when you learn that Adam and Ollie are the same-it no longer does. The
threshold must increase to at least .91 in order to predict that you stop believing
that Adam is A at Stage Three. (We stipulated that you are 91% confident that
Adam is A at Stage Three.) As a result, you lose your belief that Cosmo had the
flu shot two years ago. But that can't be right. What you've learned about Adam's
blood type has nothing to do with your belief that Cosmo had the flu shot.23
So the Stability Theory can't be right as it stands. But perhaps the problem
resides not in the informal idea that rational beliefs are resilient to changing evi-
22In addition to the objection I raise in the main text, there's something unsatisfying about this
reply. The main motivation for Leitgeb's Stability Theory is the (allegedly) Humean thought that
beliefs are stable in the face of new information. But if Leitgeb allows the threshold to change-in
particular, to increase-as subjects gather more information, Leitgeb has made it rather easy to lose
belief. It's far from clear that the resulting theory respects its Humean foundations.
2The more general problem is this. To predict that you believe that Adam is at Stage Two, but not
at Stage Three, the defender of the Stability Theory must say that the threshold increases between
Stage Two and Stage Three: at Stage Two, it must be below your credence in the proposition that
Adam is A, and at Stage Three, it must be above it. Take any proposition P at Stage Two such that
(i) you believe P at Stage Two, and (H) your credence in P doesn't exceed your credence that Adam
is A. The Stability Theory will predict that if you stop believing that Adam is A at Stage Three, then
you also stop believing P.
46

dence, but in the particular way we've chosen to implement this idea. Could it be
that with a few tweaks to the definition of stability, we can set things right?
I don't think we should hold out hope. The informal idea behind the Stability
Theory is that weightier bodies of information can justify belief where lighter bod-
ies do not, even when both bodies of information have the same balance. Kidney
Transplant seems to pose a direct challenge to this thought. You're entitled to be-
lieve that Adam is A at Stage One, and no longer entitled to believe at Stage Three.
But the second body of evidence, the one that doesn't justify belief, is weightier
than the first, the one that does justify belief. At Stage One, you have one piece of
evidence-Adam's testimony-and you're entitled to believe. At Stage Three, you
have three pieces of evidence-Adam's testimony, as well as Ollie's testimony, and
Arnie's-but you aren't entitled to believe.
Defenders of the Stability Theory point to a real and important phenomenon.
The weight of evidence matters. It matters to how attitudes change in response
to new information-credences based on weightier evidence are more resilient.
The mistake is to think that rational belief requires weighty evidence and resilient
credences. We've seen that more evidence can undermine rational belief (even
when it leaves the balance intact) if it introduces conflict where previously there
was none. At both Stage Two and Stage Three of Kidney Transplant, your evidence
supports, say, 90% confidence in the proposition that Adam is type A. But at Stage
Two, it does so unformly-your evidence consists of Adam's testimony, nothing
more-whereas at Stage Three it does so ambivalently-Adam's testimony and
Arnie's testimony support type A but Ollie's supports type 0. When additional
weight brings more ambivalence, it can make believing irrational.
2.5 
The Imprecise Theory
So far we've assumed that credal states are best modeled by a single probability
function, a function that assigns to each proposition a unique, precise credence.
For many Epistemic Bayesians, this is a crude idealization, demanding far more
precision than is usually warranted by our messy evidence. These Imprecise Epis-
temic Bayesians propose to model agents not with one probability function, but
47

many-a set of credence functions; a kind of credal committee. 24 Each member
of your credal committee is a perfect Bayesian agent, assigning a single, precise
credence to every proposition. But not you. Your attitude may be 'spread out' over
a range of values.
Take the proposition that you'll get sick in the next 6 months. You probably
don't have a precise credence in this claim, the Imprecise Bayesian says. Instead,
you're imprecise-say, 60%-to-90% confident that you'll catch something within
six months. We model you with a set of probability functions: for every number
in the interval [.6, .9], some probability function-some member of your credal
committee-assigns that credence to the proposition that you will get sick in the
next six months.2 5
Sets of probability functions reflect degrees of evidential specificity. As Joyce
(2005) points out, there are different ways for the evidence to be unspecific. It can
be incomplete in the sense that it doesn't discriminate one hypothesis from alterna-
tive hypotheses, and it can be ambiguous, in the sense that it is subject to different
interpretations. (Of course both incompleteness and ambiguity are matters of de-
gree.) When your credence in a certain proposition P is imprecise, you have no
settled opinion about it. The members of your credal committee represent various,
more settled views on P that you might take, corresponding to different interpre-
tations of the evidence (in the case of evidential ambiguity) or different ways of
'filling in the gaps' (in the case of incompleteness).
Perhaps rational belief is a matter of evidential balance and evidential speci-
ficity. Although your evidence needn't be fully specific with respect to some propo-
sition P to support belief in that proposition, it must be specific enough that all
members of your credal committee are sufficiently confident. It's rational for you
to believe P just in case every member of your credal committee assigns to P a
probability above the threshold:
The Imprecise Theory. There is some threshold t such that it's rational for
2"For classic discussions of imprecise credences, see Kyburg (1983) and Levi (1974). See Joyce
(2005), Joyce (2011), Moss (2014), Schoenfield (2012), and Sturgeon (2008) for contemporary de-
fenses.
2 5Plausibly, the edges of these ranges are vague. I ignore this complication, since nothing I say
turns on it.
48

you to believe P only if every member of your credal committee exceeds t
in P.
Here's how the defender of the Imprecise Theory would explain why you should
stop believing that Adam is A in Kidney Transplant. At Stage One and Stage Two,
all members of your credal committee are sufficiently confident that Adam is A.
When you learn that Adam is the same type as Ollie (and Arnie), some members of
your credal committee decrease their confidence that Adam is A. That's why you
stop believing.
2.5.1 
Modeling Kidney Transplant on the Imprecise Theory
For simplicity we'll pretend that there are five members of your credal committee,
Pri, Pr2, Pr3, Pr4 , and Pr5. Here's your credal committee at Stage One of
Kidney Transplant:
Pri(Adam A) = Pri (Ollie A) = Pri(Arnie A) = .90
Pr2 (Adam A) = .95; Pr2(Ollie 0) = .95; Pr 2(Arnie A) = .95
Pr3 (Adam A) = .90; Pr3(Ollie A) = .95; Pr3 (Arnie A) = .90
Pr4 (Adam A) = .90; Pr4(Ollie A) = .90; Pr4 (Arnie A) = .95
Pr5 (Adam A) = .95; Pr5 (Ollie A) = .90; Pr5 (Arnie A) = .90
P(Ollie A) = P(Arnie A) = P(Adam A) = [.90, .95]
Figure 1. Your credal committee at Stage One
Let's take them in turn. Pri is 90% confident that Adam is A, that Ollie is 0, and
that Arnie is A at Stage One. Pr2 is a bit more trusting. He is 95% confident that
Adam is A, that Ollie is 0, and that Arnie is A. Both Prj and Pr2 trust Adam,
Ollie, and Arnie equally. That's not true of the others. Pr3 trusts Ollie more than
Arnie and Adam-he is 95% confident that Ollie is 0, but only 90% confident that
Adam is A, and 90% confident that Arnie is A. Pr4 trusts Arnie more than Adam
and Ollie-he is 95% confident that Arnie is A, but only 90% confident that Ollie
is 0, and 90% confident that Adam is A. Finally, Pr5 trusts Adam more than Arnie
and Ollie-he is 95% confident that Adam is A, but only 90% confident that Arnie
is A, and 90% confident that Ollie is 0.
49

With this credal committee, the Imprecise Theory can predict that it's rational
to believe that Adam is A at Stage One and Stage Two, but not rational to believe
this at Stage Three.
Let me explain. Concentrate on Pr3 , who trusts Ollie more than Arnie (and
Adam). When Pr3 learns that Arnie and Ollie are the same type, at Stage Two,
he is more confident that they're type 0 than that they're type A: he thinks Arnie
is more likely to be mistaken than Ollie. (Pr3 's credence that Arnie and Ollie are
type A at Stage Two is approximately .32.) This means that, upon learning that
Adam is the same type as Ollie (and Arnie), at Stage Three, Pr3's credence that
Adam is A goes down. Because he's more confident than not that Ollie is type 0,
the fact that Adam is the same type as Ollie is some evidence that Adam is type 0,
too. Conditional on Adam sharing his blood type with Ollie (and Arnie), Pr3 is
only .81 confident that Adam is type A.26
Let's take a step back. The Simple Theory couldn't make sense of Kidney
Transplant because, on the precise picture, if you are no more confident in Ollie
than Arnie, and vice versa, then when you learn they're the same, you will be 50%
confident that Arnie is right and they're both A, and 50% confident that Ollie is
right and they're both 0. As a result, when you learn that Adam is the same type
as Ollie, you effectively gain no new evidence about Adam. Your credence that
Adam is type A doesn't budge.
Things are different for the Imprecise Theory. You are still no more confident
in Ollie than Arnie, and vice versa. When Ollie tells you he is type 0, you are
90%-95% confident that he is 0; when Arnie tells you he (Arnie) is A, you are
90%-95% confident of that, too. But-and this is the important part-that doesn't
mean you are 50%-50% when you learn that Ollie and Arnie are the same type.
Some members of your committee-those who trust Arnie and Ollie equally-
are 50%-50%. But others aren't. Pr3, who trusts Ollie more than Arnie, is 68%
confident that Arnie and Ollie are both A. Pr3 does acquire evidence that Adam
is 0 when he learns that Adam is the same type as Ollie. And your beliefs are
sensitive to his evidence, and his confidence. If his confidence drops below the
2 6 Calculation. Pr3 (Ad AAd Ol same) = Pr3 (Ad A A OI A)/Pr3 ((Ad A A Ol A) v (Ad O A
010)) = (Pr3 (Ad A) xPr3 (0lA))/((Pr(Ad A) xPr3 (01 A))+(Pr3(Ad 0) XPr3(OlO)))
(.9 x .32)/((.9 x .32) + (.1 x .68)) ; .81.
50

threshold, you stop believing.
2.5.2 
Against The Imprecise Theory
The Imprecise Theory fares better than the Simple Theory or the Stability The-
ory. But it isn't enough. Though the Imprecise Theory delivers the right verdicts
in some versions of Kidney Transplant, the theory founders when we apply it to
others. There's a clear explanation for the Imprecise Theory's shortcomings: it is
predicated on assumptions about Kidney Transplant that are inessential to the case,
ones we can readily discard without changing our intuitions about it.
Here's what I mean. To predict that you are no longer entitled to believe that
Adam is A at Stage Three, we had to assume that you aren't sure how reliable each
of Adam, Arnie, and Ollie is. We also had to suppose that you aren't sure how their
respective degrees of reliability compare-in particular, some members of your
committee had to trust Ollie more than Arnie. Without this last assumption, the
Imprecise Theory can't account for the undermining effect of conflicting evidence
in Kidney Transplant; it can't explain why you should stop believing that Adam is
A at Stage Three. This is a serious limitation of the view. Whether you are entitled
to believe that Adam is A at Stage Three doesn't depend on whether you leave
open that Ollie is more reliable than Arnie. Even when you are sure that Arnie is
marginally more reliable than Ollie, learning that Adam is the same type as Ollie
(and Arnie) defeats your belief.
Consider a modified version of Kidney Transplant. Adam, Arnie, and Ollie
each take a test to determine their blood types. The test is reliable, but known to
be a slightly more reliable test for type A than it is for type 0. Just over half of all
errors have been misclassifications of type 0 individuals as type A, and you know
this.
Adam, Ollie, and Arnie report back on this first test. Adam says he is A; Ollie
says he is 0; Arnie says he is A. You're entitled to believe each of them. They take
another test-the one we mentioned earlier-that determines whether two people
have the same blood type. (Remember: this test is always right.) You are surprised
to learn first that Arnie and Ollie are the same, and just after that Adam and Ollie
are the same.
51

It is still our firm intuition, it seems to me, that you are entitled to believe that
Adam is A at Stage One and Stage Two, and that you are not entitled to believe
this upon learning, at Stage Three, that Adam is the same type as Ollie. To be sure,
you should be more confident that Adam is A at Stage Three of this version than
you are at Stage Three of the original. But this additional confidence does not save
your entitlement to believe that Adam is A. It does not compensate for what is lost
when you learn that Ollie's testimony is in conflict with Adam's.
But if the Imprecise Theory were right, the fact that you trust Arnie marginally
more than Ollie should make a world of difference. If you are sure that Arnie is
marginally more reliable than Ollie, then all of your committee members will be
just over 50% confident that Ollie is blood type A when you learn that Arnie and
Ollie are the same type. And if that's right, learning that Adam is the same type as
Ollie can only give you more evidence that Adam is type A. Every member of your
credal committee will increase his confidence that Adam is A, and the Imprecise
Theory will say that it's rational to keep believing.
Conflicting evidence need not be a kind of evidential imprecision. Or, at the
very least, it need not be the kind of evidential imprecision it would have to be if the
Imprecise Theory were right. The Imprecise Theory says that acquiring conflicting
evidence about whether Adam is A defeats your belief that Adam is A only when
your evidence doesn't specify how to weigh Arnie's testimony against Ollie's-or,
more precisely, only when your evidence leaves open that Ollie's testimony counts
for more than Arnie's.2 7 But, intuitively, that isn't essential. Even if your evi-
dence determines that Arnie's testimony confirms the hypothesis that Adam is A
more than Ollie's disconfirms it-that is, even if you are sure that Arnie's testi-
mony is marginally more reliable that Ollie's-learning that Ollie, someone you
antecedently trusted, disagrees with Adam can undermine your entitlement to trust
Adam.
27Assuming, as always, that the proposition you believe and the proposition for which you have
conflicting evidence are probabilistically independent.
52

2.6 
Conclusion
I've argued that conflicting evidence poses a serious challenge for probabilistic
theories of rational belief. Conflicting evidence is the sort of evidence you have
when two sources of information contradict each other, such as when doctors of-
fer conflicting diagnoses, or when film critics you trust write discordant reviews.
Under the right circumstances, conflicting evidence can defeat your entitlement to
believe a certain hypothesis without making it any less probable. I presented a
case-Kidney Transplant-that illustrates this phenomenon. Kidney Transplant is
a counterexample to the simplest probabilistic theory of rational belief-the Sim-
ple Theory-according to which rational belief just is rational credence above a
certain threshold.
I also considered two more sophisticated probabilistic theories of belief-the
Stability Theory and the Imprecise Theory, respectively. We've seen that these
theories can't be right, either. The Stability Theory says that high confidence
is not enough for rational belief; your belief must also be sufficiently stable in
response to new information. But our counterexample to the Simple Theory-
Kidney Transplant-is also a counterexample to the idea that rational belief re-
quires stable belief. The Imprecise Theory retains the idea that rational high confi-
dence is sufficient for rational belief, but understands confidence in a different way,
replacing single probabilities with sets of probabilities. The Imprecise Theory fails
because it wrongly assimilates conflicting evidence to evidential imprecision.
In the wake of these three failed attempts to reduce belief to subjective prob-
ability, what are we to think? It would be hasty to conclude that no adequate
probabilistic theory of rational opinion will ever be devised. We haven't exhausted
the possibilities, and perhaps some, more sophisticated reduction of belief to cre-
dence will prove resistant to my objections. Even if we can't rule this out, I think
we can say, with confidence, that Epistemic Bayesians have their work cut out for
them. If there is a way to reduce belief to subjective probability, the reduction is
much messier, much more global, than we've been led to believe. Whether it's
rational for you to believe P isn't determined by your subjective probability in P.
And it isn't determined by your subjective probability in P conditional on various
propositions you leave open. If there's a true, purely probabilistic theory of rational
53

opinion, I doubt that it will look much like the theories we have now.
54

Chapter 3
Can We Decide to Believe?
It is widely held that we cannot believe at will. It is also widely held that this is not
just a contingent psychological disability, but a metaphysical necessary limitation
grounded in the nature of belief. In this way, belief is said to contrast with blushing.
As it happens, blushing is not amenable prodding of the will, but it might have
been. We can imagine someone who has a special ability to blush on command.
But we cannot imagine someone who forms a belief on command. A belief formed
at will would not be a belief at all. Or so it is commonly thought.
Bernard Williams is the source of most contemporary discussion of this issue.
His reasons for thinking that it is impossible to believe at will are summarized in
the following passage:
One reason is connected with the characteristic feature of beliefs that
they aim at truth. If I could acquire a belief at will, I could acquire it
whether it was true or not; moreover I would know that I could acquire
it whether it was true or not. If in full consciousness I could will to
acquire a 'belief' irrespective of its truth, it is unclear that before the
event I could seriously think of it as a belief, i.e. as something purport-
ing to represent reality. At the very least, there must be a restriction
on what is the case after the event; since I could not then, in full con-
sciousness, regard this as a belief of mine, i.e. something I take to be
true, and also know that I acquired it at will. With regard to no belief
could I know-or, if all this is to be done in full consciousness even
55

suspect-that I had acquired it at will. But if I can acquire beliefs at
will, I must know that I am able to do this; and could I know that I
was capable of this feat, if with regard to every feat of this kind which
I had performed I necessarily had to believe it had not taken place?
(Williams 1970, 148)
It seems to me that there are two importantly different arguments contained
in this passage. The first argument, which I will call the aim-of-belief argument,
focuses on the act of forming a belief at will. To form a belief intentionally is to
form a belief with a certain aim-the aim of believing the truth. To try to form
a belief is to try to form a true belief, and you can't do that by forming a belief
at will. The second argument-I will call it the retrospective argument-focuses
on the state of believing, rather than the act of forming a belief. If you were to
form a belief at will, it says, you would know something about the belief that is
inconsistent with holding the belief. That's why it isn't possible.
I argue that neither argument succeeds in showing that it is impossible to be-
lieve at will. The retrospective argument allows that you can decide to believe in
acknowledged permissive cases, those in which you believe that your evidence per-
mits believing and permits not believing. The aim-of-belief argument allows that
we can change our doxastic states at will when they are imprecise.
3.1 
The Retrospective Argument
The retrospective argument is found in the second half of the passage quoted above.
Here it is again:
With regard to no belief could I know-or, if all this is to be done in
full consciousness, even suspect-that I had acquired it at will. But if
I can acquire beliefs at will, I must know that I am able to do this; and
could I know that I was capable of this feat, if with regard to every feat
of this kind which I had performed I necessarily had to believe it had
not taken place? (Williams 1970, 148).
The argument appears to have two premises:1
I1 borrow this reconstruction from Setiya (2008).
56

(1) If I am able to believe at will, I know that I am able to believe at will.
(2) I cannot at once believe P and know that my belief in P was formed at will.
Williams seems to think it a consequence of (2) that I cannot know that I am able
to form a belief in P at will. But if I cannot know that I am able to form a belief in
P at will, it follows from (1) that I am not able to do so.
There are several flaws in the argument. For starters, the argument is invalid-
at last as stated. To see this, suppose we grant premise (2)-that I cannot at once be-
lieve P and know that my belief in P was formed at will. Does it follow that I can-
not know that I am able to believe at will? As Jonathan Bennett (1990) has shown,
it does not. Bennett imagines a community of creatures called 'Credamites'. When
a Credamite forms a belief at will, he immediately forgets that he has done so. Each
act of forming a belief at will is accompanied by local amnesia, in which he for-
gets how his belief is formed. So, he never knows, of any particular belief, that it
was formed at will-the Credamites satisfy (2). But they might nevertheless know
that they have the capacity to form beliefs at will. It is not a consequence of (2),
Bennett concludes, that one cannot know that one is able to form beliefs at will.
And that's not the only problem with the argument. Premise (2) is itself dubi-
ous. It says that one cannot believe P while knowing that one's belief was formed
at will. But why think that's true? Couldn't I know that a belief of mine formed
at will, yet persist in holding the belief if I believed that it was now supported by
sufficient evidence? (This objection is due to Barbara Winters (1979).)
Despite these objections, it has seemed to many philosophers that Williams was
onto something. Kieran Setiya (2008) proposes a refurbished version of Williams's
retrospective argument. Let's examine the argument in detail.
Begin with Setiya's definition of believing at will. He proposes the following:
To believe at will is to form the belief that P by intentional action, be-
lieving throughout that, if one were to form the belief or to become
more confident that P intentionally, one's degree of confidence or be-
lief would not be epistemically justified.
This definition marks two requirements on forming a belief at will. First, the belief
must be formed intentionally. Note that intentionally forming a belief is not the
57

same as intentionally causing oneself to form the belief. I do not intentionally form
the belief that P when I consult a hypnotist, just as I do not intentionally blush by
intentionally dropping my pants in public. When I blush upon dropping my pants,
my blushing is the product of intentional action, but is not itself intentional. The
same goes for belief. When I consult a hypnotist, my forming the belief that P is
the product of my intentional action, but is not itself intentional.
What about the second requirement? It says you form a belief in P at will only
if you believe that, if you were to form the belief intentionally, your belief would
be unjustified. This requirement is meant to capture the idea that believing P at will
is done without regard for the truth of P.
Setiya's first step towards argument against the possibility of believing at will
in this sense is to replace Williams's (2) with (2*) below:
(2*) It is impossible to believe that P or to be confident that P while believing that
this degree of confidence or belief is not epistemically justified.
We objected to Williams's (2) on the grounds that one can know perfectly well
that one's belief was formed at will, so long as one takes it now to be supported
by sufficient evidence. What one thinks about the belief's origins is neither here
nor there. But this objection implicitly concedes that what one thinks about one's
belief's present epistemic status does matter. One cannot at once believe something
while believing that one does not have sufficient evidence for this belief. Setiya's
(2*) is meant to capture this idea.
Notice that if we accept (2*), as well as Setiya's definition of believing at will,
we must also accept that one cannot know that one's belief was formed at will. But
what if, as Bennett suggested, one forgets the origins of one's beliefs the moment
they are formed? So long as the amnesia kicks in on time, one will never find
oneself in the predicament ruled out by (2*). Williams thought that (1) excluded
this possibility. But he was wrong. As we said, one can know that one has the
capacity to form beliefs at will without knowing, of any particular belief, that it
was formed at will.
How, then, are we to rule out Bennett's Credamites? Setiya's suggestion is to
appeal to the nature of intentional action. He replaces Williams's (1) with (1*):
58

(1*) If A is 4-ing intentionally, he believes that he is doing so, or else he is doing
by performing some other intentional action, which he believes he is doing.
Following Setiya, let's consider a specific attempt to believe at will, as when
Alice undertakes the White Queen's challenge to believe that 'she is just one hun-
dred and one [years], five months and a day.' It follows from the definition of
believing at will that Alice forms her belief by intentional action.
Now, to form a belief in a certain proposition, Setiya thinks, just is to become
more confident in that proposition. That is the argument's third, and final, premise:
(3*) To form a belief in P is to become more confident in P.
This premise tells us that for Alice to form the belief that the White Queen is a
hundred and one just is for Alice to become more confident in this proposition. We
know from (1*) that Alice is intentionally forming the belief that the White Queen
is a hundred and one. Only a sort of conceptual confusion could prevent her from
intentionally becoming more confident that the White Queen is a hundred and one.
But, as Williams insists, what is done only as a result of conceptual confusion is
not done in full consciousness, and so we should set aside the possibility that Alice
is confused about what it is to form a belief.
We've established that Alice has intentionally become more confident that the
White Queen is a hundred and one. Now, becoming more confident in some propo-
sition is plausibly a basic action-it is not the kind of thing you do by doing some-
thing else. If that's right, it follows from (1*) that Alice believes she is intentionally
becoming more confident that the White Queen is a hundred and one. But, in gen-
eral, if you are becoming more confident in P, you have become more confident in
P. (Linguistically, 'becoming more confident' is like 'walking' or 'singing': If you
are walking, you have walked; if you are singing, you have sung.) So, again barring
conceptual confusion, if Alice believes she is intentionally becoming more confi-
dent that the White Queen is a hundred and one, she believes she has intentionally
become more confident that the White Queen is a hundred and one.
But now remember the second requirement on believing at will. It says that you
believe throughout that if you were to form the belief or become more confident
that P intentionally, your belief would be unjustified. It looks like Alice finds her-
self in the following predicament. She believes she has intentionally become more
59

confident that the White Queen is a hundred and one, and she also believes that
if she were to intentionally become more confident in this proposition, her confi-
dence would not be justified. Absent confusion or inattention, she can deduce that
she is confident that the White Queen is a hundred and one and that her confidence
is unjustified. But (2*) says that this state is impossible. That is why Alice cannot,
at will, meet the White Queen's demands. 2
Though I'm sympathetic to Setiya's premises, I don't think he has shown we
can't believe at will. That's because I don't think Setiya has provided an ade-
quate account of what it is to believe at will. I won't take issue with the first
requirement-that a belief formed at will is a belief formed intentionally. That part
is indispensable, a minimal condition on what counts as believing at will. But the
second requirement must go.
Remember that the second requirement is meant capture the idea that a belief
formed at will is a belief formed without regard the truth of the belief. Setiya is
surely right that one way to form a belief without regard for the truth is to do so
while knowing that if you were to form the belief, it would be irrational. But it's not
the only way. Suppose you believe that your evidence is permissive with respect
to some proposition-say, the proposition that God exists. You believe that it is
rational to believe that God exists and you believe that it is rational to believe that
God doesn't exist. Unsure what to do, you flip a coin, giving yourself the following
instructions: believe in God if the coin lands heads; otherwise, believe that God
doesn't exist. The coin lands heads, and on that basis, you form the intention to
believe that God exists, and thereby come to believe it. Surely if anything counts as
forming a belief at will, forming a belief by flipping a coin does. But not according
to Setiya's definition. As far as it's concerned, forming a belief by flipping a coin
in a believed permissive case is not an instance of believing at will. 3
2This argument assumes that if Alice intentionally forms the belief that the White Queen is a
hundred and one, she is at some point intentionally forming the belief that the White Queen is a
hundred and one. But what about instantaneous intentional belief-formation? Could Alice form her
belief by undergoing an intentional change of state that has no duration at all? Setiya allows that this
may be possible, but insists that it doesn't matter. If one is performing a non-durative action, he says,
one knows that one is doing it. I won't take issue with this claim here.
3For defenses of Epistemic Permissivism-the view that there are permissive cases like the one
I've described in the main text-see Kelly (2013), Meacham (2013), Schoenfield (2014), Schoen-
field (2017), and Titelbaum and Kopec (forthcoming). For criticisms of Epistemic Permissivism, see
60

But maybe this objection overlooks an important distinction. Epistemologists
typically recognize two kinds of epistemic justification: propositional justification
and doxastic justification. You are propositionally justified in believing P just in
case you have sufficient reason to believe P, whether you believe it or not (and, if
you do believe, whether or not you do so for good reasons).4 Doxastic justification
is more demanding. You are doxastically justified in believing P just in case you
have sufficient reason to believe P and you base your belief in P on those reasons.
The juror who has overwhelming evidence that Jones is guilty, but bases her belief
on the fact that he looks suspicious is propositionally, but not doxastically, justified.
With this distinction in hand, return to the example. You're about to flip a coin
to decide whether to believe that God exists: believe if it lands heads, otherwise
don't. We said that you believe that your evidence is permissive with respect to the
proposition that God exists. You believe that you have sufficient reason to believe
that God exists and you have sufficient reason to believe that God doesn't exist.
In other words, you believe that you have propositional justification for believing
that God exists, and that you have propositional justification for believing that God
doesn't exist. And, we'll suppose, you know that flipping the coin won't change
this. So you believe that if you were to form your belief on the basis of the coin
flip, your belief would be propositionally justified.
But do you also believe that it would be doxastically justified? Perhaps not.
Doxastically justified beliefs are typically not formed on the basis of coin flips, af-
ter all. So maybe Setiya's argument for the impossibility of believing at will eludes
my objections if we state his definition of believing at will in terms of doxastic
justification, as I've done below:
To believe at will is to form the belief that P by intentional action, be-
lieving throughout that, if one were to form the belief or to become
more confident that P intentionally, one's degree of confidence or be-
lief would not be doxastically justified.
Greco and Hedden (forthcoming), Horowitz (2013), Horowitz (forthcoming), Schultheis (forthcom-
ing), and White (2007).
4This is the orthodox definition anyway. See, among others, Feldman (2002), Kvanvig (2003),
and Pollock and Cruz (1999) for defenses. See John Turri (2010) for objections to the orthodox
account, and for a different proposal, which defines propositional justification in terms of doxastic
justification, rather than the other way around.
61

Does this definition count forming a belief in God on the basis of a coin flip as an
instance of believing at will? That depends on whether the subject believes that
if she were to believe that God exists on the basis of a coin flip, her belief would
be doxastically justified. Advocates of causal theories of doxastic justification say
that one is doxastically justified in believing some proposition only if one's be-
lief is causally sustained by the source of one's propositional justification, not by
other factors. They will of course insist that this condition is violated when one
knowingly forms a belief on the basis of a coin flip.
But what they think about the nature of doxastic justification is beside the point.
What matters is what the subject-the one who's about to flip the coin-believes.
She may reject the causal theory of doxastic justification. It's not the only theory,
after all. The doxastic theory of doxastic justification, in contrast with the causal
theory, says that believing, or rationally believing, that your belief is proposition-
ally justified is sufficient for justifiably holding the belief. The belief need not be
causally sustained by the source of propositional justification.
Why would one hold this view? Because there seem to be counterexamples to
the causal theory. Suppose you have strong evidence that you're going to win a
local lottery; you've been told that it's rigged in your favor, and you regard this as
conclusive evidence that you will win. But you're also prone to wishful thinking,
and you would believe that you were going to win even if you had no evidence.
Are you justified in holding your belief that you will win the lottery? It seems that
you are. You rationally believe-perhaps you even know-that you have strong
evidence that you are going to win. If questioned, you would be prepared to defend
your belief by appeal to what is, by hypothesis, sufficient evidence. What more
could doxastic justification demand?5
Maybe our subject, ready to flip her coin, holds the doxastic theory. She be-
lieves that she would be doxastically justified were she to form a belief on the basis
of a coin flip in what she takes to be a permissive case. She knows now, and she
knows that she will continue to know, that her belief is propositionally justified.
And she knows that, if queried, she would be ready to justify her theism, citing
arguments and facts which, taken together, provide sufficient reason to believe. To
5This is Setiya's own example. See Setiya (2013), page 191. Similar examples have been given
by Lehrer (1971) and Frankish (2007).
62

her mind, that is enough to show that she would be justified in holding the belief
that God exists.
Whatever we mean to rule out when we say that believing at will is impossible,
forming a belief by flipping a coin in a believed permissive case is surely one of
those things. But why, exactly? I've argued that it's not because you expect your
belief to be unjustified. Since you know the case is permissive, you know that your
belief would be (propositionally and doxastically) justified.
Maybe it has something to do with the fact that, when you decide what to
believe by flipping a coin, you know that your reason for forming the belief does
not bear on the truth of the belief. This yields the following definition of believing
at will.
To form a believe at will is to form the belief that P by intentional
action, believing throughout that one's reason for forming the belief
that P or for becoming more confident in P does not bear bear on the
truth of P.
Let's try to build an argument for the impossibility of believing at will in this sense.
We can reuse Setiya's first premise, repeated below:
(1*) If A is doing something intentionally, he believes that he is doing it, or else
he is doing it by performing some other intentional action, which he believes
he is doing.
Go back to Alice, who wishes to believe that the White Queen is a hundred and one.
We said earlier that if Alice forms the belief intentionally, she also intentionally
becomes confident that the White Queen is a hundred and one. (We're assuming
that Alice is not confused about the nature of belief; she knows that to form a belief
just is to become more confident.) We also said that if she is intentionally becoming
more confident that the White Queen is a hundred and one, she has intentionally
become more confident. And (1*) ensures that she knows this. From the definition
of believing at will, we know that Alice believes that her reason for forming the
belief that the White Queen is a hundred and one does not bear on the truth of the
proposition. Putting everything together, we can see that if Alice forms her belief
63

at will, then she believes that she has intentionally become more confident that the
White Queen is a hundred and one, and she believes that her reason for doing so
does not bear on the truth of this proposition.
Our final step is to say that this state is impossible. But we can no longer use
Setiya's (2*) for this purpose. We must replace it with something like this:
(2**) It is impossible to believe P or be confident in P while knowing that your
reason for forming the belief that P or for becoming more confident in P
does not bear on the truth of P.6
But I don't see why we should accept (2**), for reasons mentioned earlier. Alice
can know perfectly well that her belief was formed for some reason that doesn't
bear on its truth so long as she believes that it is now supported by sufficient evi-
dence. What she knows about how the belief was formed is irrelevant.
We might try to repair the argument by replacing (2**) with (2***):
(2***) It is impossible to believe P or be confident in P while knowing that your
reason for believing P or for being confident in P does not bear on the truth
of P.
The difference between (2**) and (2***) is subtle. While (2**) talks about reasons
for forming beliefs and becoming more confident, (2***) talks about reasons for
believing and reasons for being confident. Perhaps, then, (2***) is not subject to
the particular objection we raised against (2**).
But even if (2***) were true, it's far from clear why it should apply to Alice.
When Alice forms the belief that the White Queen is a hundred and one at will, she
forms her belief for some reason that doesn't bear on the truth of the proposition,
but it doesn't follow that you believes for reasons that don't bear on the truth of
the proposition. Forming a belief and believing are two different things-one is an
action, the other a state. We can't just assume that one's reasons for performing the
action are also one's reasons for being in the state.
6This is close to the principle Barbara Winters proposes in place of Williams's original second
premise. Her premise says that it is not possible to believe, in full consciousness, both that one
believes that P and that one's belief that P is not currently sustained by truth-considerations.
64

The guiding idea behind the retrospective argument was this. If you were to
form a belief at will, you would know something about your belief that is incon-
sistent with holding it. Believing at will is self-defeating-any attempt to do it
would thwart its own end. What is this piece of knowledge that would dissolve
the belief the moment it is formed? The only plausible answer is knowledge of the
belief's irrationality. You can't maintain your belief while acknowledging that it is
irrational, but this is exactly the state you would be in were you to form a belief at
will.
I have argued that this last step is unwarranted. It may well be impossible to
maintain a belief that you think is irrational, but nothing about the act of forming
a belief at will, properly understood, forces you into this predicament. When you
form a belief by flipping a coin in what you take to be a permissive case, you are
forming it at will, but you don't expect your belief to be irrational.
3.2 
The Aim of Belief
We began with a passage from Bernard Williams, observing that it contained not
one, but two importantly different arguments for the conclusion that it is impossi-
ble to believe at will. I have argued that one of these arguments-the retrospective
argument-doesn't work. It doesn't explain why we can't believe at will in ac-
knowledged permissive cases. What about the second argument-the aim-of-belief
argument?
When Williams says that belief aims at truth, he means that belief constitutively
aims at truth. It is part of what a belief is that it is a mental state that is directed at
the truth. But what, exactly, does it mean to say that belief aims at truth? Different
philosophers say different things. According to some, to say that belief aims at
truth is simply to say that to believe some proposition p is to regard p as true. But
this doesn't distinguish belief from other attitudes, like imagining or supposing.
To suppose p is to treat p as true for the sake of argument; to imagine p is also
to regard p as true.7 According to others, to say that belief constitutively aims at
truth is to say something about how belief is regulated-how it is formed, revised,
65
7Velleman (2000) also makes this point.

and extinguished. Typically, one forms beliefs because one has evidence that they
are true, and abandons them when one acquires evidence of their falsity. Belief, as
Velleman and Shah (2005) put it, is regulated for truth.
But this characterization of the way in which belief aims at truth will not help
us account for the impossibility of believing at will. To say that belief is regulated
for truth is to say something about how beliefs are normally or typically formed, not
how they must be formed, It is surely possible for one's beliefs to be influenced by
considerations that don't bear on their truth-wishful thinking is all too common.
And so for all we've said, it's also possible for non-alethic considerations to play
a role in doxastic deliberation, to borrow a term from Velleman and Shah (2005).
For all we've said, it is possible to decide to believe on the basis of a coin flip.
A different suggestion comes from Velleman (2000). He observes that suppos-
ing, imagining, and believing p all involve treating p as true-accepting p-for a
certain purpose. To suppose p, for example, is to often to accept p for the sake of
argument. To believe p is also to accept p, Velleman says, but not for the sake of
argument-it is to accept p with the aim of accepting p if and only if p is true. To
say that belief constitutively aims at truth, on Velleman's view, is to say that a state
of accepting p does not count as a belief in p unless the subject accepts p with the
aim of believing the truth about p. But as Velleman himself later observes, this
can't be right, either. Most instances of belief-formation don't involve any aims
or goals at all. I form the belief that the wall is red or that the sun is shining not
because I have a certain aim or goal-it just happens automatically when I perceive
that the wall is red or that the sun is shining.
Here is what I propose. To say that belief aims at truth-in the sense that is
relevant to question of whether we can believe at will, that is-is not to say that
one cannot form a belief in p unless one is doing so with the aim of believing p if
and only if p is true. It is to say that one cannot intentionally form a belief in p
unless one is doing so with the aim of believing p if and only if p.
This characterization seems right when we consider other aim-directed activ-
ities, such as spelling. The activity of spelling 'cemetery' aims at writing (or ut-
tering, as the case may be) the letters of the word 'cemetery' in the order I've just
written them in. This does not mean that one cannot spell incorrectly. Nor does it
mean that how one spells cannot be influenced by factors that have nothing to do
66

with correct spelling. When we say that correct spelling is a constitutive aim of
spelling, we mean at most that one cannot intentionally spell unless one is doing so
with the aim of spelling correctly. That is why I cannot try to spell 'cemetery' by
scribbling 'FFF' on the page. This would not be an act of trying to spell 'cemetery'
correctly, and so it would not be an act of trying to spell at all. 8
To say that correct spelling is a constitutive aim of spelling, I propose, is to
say that one does not count as trying to spell a word unless one is trying to spell
it correctly. Similarly, one doesn't count as trying to form a belief in p unless one
is trying to form a true belief in p-that is, unless one is doing so with the aim of
believing p if and only if p. Perhaps the fact that belief aims at truth in this sense
explains why I cannot form a belief at will. If I were to decide what to believe on
the basis of a coin flip, I would not be trying to form a true belief, and so I wouldn't
be trying to form a belief at all.
There are two problems with this argument. The first is that its conclusion is
not general enough. It says that we cannot form beliefs at will. But beliefs aren't
the only doxastic attitudes we have. We also have credences, levels of confidence,
degrees of belief, as they are variously called. And presumably, these are no more
responsive to the prodding of the will than our beliefs are. Just as I cannot, just like
that, form the belief that Los Angeles is the capital of California, I cannot, just like
that, raise my confidence in this proposition. Whatever we mean to rule out when
we say that we cannot believe at will, it includes our credences.
The second problem is that the argument is invalid-as it stands, at least. To
see why, return to the spelling analogy. Let's grant that spelling constitutively
aims at correct spelling. If I'm not trying to spell correctly, I'm not trying to spell
at all. Does it follow from this fact that I cannot choose, on the basis of a coin
flip, how to spell 'cemetery'? Clearly not. Suppose I've forgotten how 'cemetery'
is spelled. Vacillating between 'C-E-M-E-T-E-R-Y' and 'C-E-M-E-T-A-R-Y', I
decide to flip a coin, giving myself the following instructions: if the coin lands
heads, spell 'cemetery' 'C-E-M-E-T-E-R-Y'; if it lands tails, spell it 'C-E-M-E-T-
8One might object that one can intentionally spell incorrectly. Suppose you ask me how to spell
my name, but for some reason I don't want you to know how to spell it, so I intentionally spell my
name incorrectly. I think we can account for this by positing an ambiguity in the verb 'to spell'. In
one sense of the term, I have spelled incorrectly; in another sense, I wasn't really trying to spell my
name, since I wasn't trying to spell it correctly.
67

A-R-Y'.
Is it not possible for me to comply with these instructions? Am I not free to
decide, on the basis of how the coin lands, how to spell 'cemetery'? Surely I can
comply with my instructions; I am free to decide how to spell 'cemetery.' Things
would be different if I knew how to spell 'cemetery'. When I know that 'cemetery'
is spelled 'C-E-M-E-T-E-R-Y', I can't try to spell it any other way. But if I forget,
I gain some control over how I spell the word. If the coin lands heads, I can decide
to spell 'cemetery' 'C-E-M-E-T-E-R-Y'; if it lands tails, I can decide to spell it
'C-E-M-E-T-A-R-Y'.
The lesson is that, even though spelling aims at correct spelling, I have some
discretion over how I spell words when I don't know how to spell them-that is,
when I don't know what best satisfies my aim of correct spelling. When 'C-E-M-
E-T-E-R-Y' and 'C-E-M-E-T-A-R-Y' seem like equally plausible candidates for
how 'cemetery' is spelled, they are, from my perspective, equally good ways to
satisfy my aim, and so I can choose to spell the word either way.
The same goes for other aim-directed activities, like singing the lyrics to a song.
Suppose I don't know how whether the lyrics to the Monkees' 'I'm a Believer' are
'then I saw her face, now I'm a believer' (the actual lyrics) or the mistaken 'then I
saw her face, now I'm gonna leave her.' I've heard the song many times, but just
can't tell which is right. Surely I can decide which to sing on the basis of a coin
flip.
But if belief is anything like spelling or singing a song, we should expect some-
thing similar to be true of belief. We should expect there to be cases in which I
don't know what best satisfies my aim of believing the truth. And in those cases,
we should expect to find that I have some discretion over what I believe. We should
expect that I can decide whether to believe on the basis of a coin flip.9
9Note that we can't solve this problem by changing the aim-e.g. by saying that one's aim is to
not to believe the truth about P, but to believe P only if P is true. If you believe P is true, you can
satisfy the aim of believing P only if P is true by believing P and by being agnostic. Why not flip a
coin to decide which to do?
68

3.3 
Accuracy and the Aim of Credence
There were two problems with the aim-of-belief argument. It's conclusion is too
narrow-it doesn't say anything about raising one's confidence at will, but we want
to rule that out, too. And if you are uncertain about what best satisfies your aim,
you have some discretion over how you pursue it.
The only way to solve both problems is to refashion the argument in a fine-
grained framework in which we have, in addition to beliefs, varying levels of con-
fidence, or credences. Now, credences can't be true or false, so whatever they aim
at, it's not truth. A popular idea among contemporary epistemologists is that cre-
dences aim at accuracy-a graded surrogate for truth. Accuracy is like truth, they
say, but it comes in degrees. Credences are more or less accurate, depending on
how close they are to the truth. An entire branch of contemporary epistemology,
known as epistemic utility theory, has grown up to develop this idea in precise
terms.
Let me briefly introduce the framework. We said that credences aim at ac-
curacy. But what is accuracy and how do we measure it? We will think of the
accuracy of a subject's credence in a certain proposition as a measure of how close
it is to the truth about that proposition. Your credence is maximally accurate when
you have credence 1 in a truth or 0 in a falsehood, maximally inaccurate when you
have credence 1 in a falsehood or 0 in a truth. The greater your credence in P, the
more accurate you are with respect to P when P is true, and the less accurate you
are with respect to P when P is false.
We can also measure the accuracy of a subject's credence function, which takes
propositions about which she has an opinion, and returns her credence in those
propositions. A credence function c is maximally accurate when it assigns 1 to all
the truths and 0 to all the falsehoods. It is minimally accurate when it assigns 1
to all the falsehoods and 0 to all the truths. In general, the higher your credences
are in truths, and the lower they are in falsehoods, the more accurate your credence
function will be.
A bit more precisely now. Let S be a partition of possible states of the world,
and let C, be a credence function defined over S. We measure accuracy using
a scoring rule A, which takes a state of the world s, from the partition S, and a
69

credence function c, from the set of credence functions C, and returns a number
between 0 and 1. This number represents the accuracy of c is in s.
A: C8 X S -+ [0, 11
If you knew which state of the world is actual, you could use A to calculate the
accuracy of your credence function. But of course you don't know which state is
actual, and so you're not in a position to know how accurate you are. Nevertheless,
you are in a position to calculate your expected accuracy. The expected accuracy
of a credence function c E Cs, relative to a probability function p E C8, is defined
as follows:
EAp(c) = Z sp(s)A(c, s)
The expected accuracy of a credence function c relative to p is the average of the
accuracy scores c would get in the various states that might obtain, weighted by
how likely those states are to obtain according to p.
A strictly proper scoring rule is a scoring rule with the feature that every prob-
abilistic credence function maximizes expected accuracy relative to itself. More
formally, where P, is the set of probabilistic credence functions defined over S, A
is a strictly proper scoring rule just in case:
For every p E P. and every c c C, such that p * c, EAp(p) > EAp(c)
When subjects use strictly proper scoring rules to measure the accuracy of their
credence function, they are strongly immodest. They expect their own credences to
be more accurate than any others. (A subject is mildly immodest if she expects her
credences to be at least as accurate as any others.)
Strong Immodesty has the potential to solve both of our problems. If you are
immodest, you can never be uncertain about which attitude best satisfies your aim
of believing accurately-you will always expect your own credence to be more
accurate than every other credence. Strong Immodesty can also help us explain
why it's impossible to raise or lower your credence at will. If we assume you
have a precise credence in the proposition that God exists, and that you're strongly
70

immodest, then changing your credence on the basis of a coin flip would mean
adopting a credence that is, by your own lights, less accurate than your own.
But it's not just that Strong Immodesty can solve our two problems. It's that we
have no hope of solving them without it. Recall the spelling analogy. If you aren't
sure whether 'cemetery' is spelled 'C-E-M-E-T-E-R-Y' or 'C-E-M-E-T-A-R-Y,'
you can choose to spell it either way. It's true that your aim is to spell 'cemetery'
correctly, but from your perspective, there are two equally good ways to satisfy that
aim. That is why you have some discretion over how you spell the word. Without
Strong Immodesty, belief is just like spelling. If your credence in P is not strongly
immodest, then there is some other credence in P that you expect to be no less
accurate than your own. Both satisfy your aim of believing accurately, and so we
can't explain why you can't choose which to adopt on the basis of a coin flip. The
success of the aim-of-belief argument depends on whether we can show that it is
part of having a credence-not just part of having a rational credence-that you
expect it be more accurate than any other. We need to show that Strong Immodesty
is a constitutive requirement, not just a rational requirement.
But Strict Propriety does not say that just any credence function expects itself to
be more accurate than any other credence function. It says that any probabilistically
coherent credence function-any credence function that obeys to axioms of the
probability calculus-expects itself to be more accurate than any other credence
function. Probabilistically incoherent credences aren't self-recommending.
What should we say to this objection? One option is to argue that incoherent
agents are fragmented. Consider Mary, who appears to be quite confident in p and
quite confident in -,p. Rather than say that Mary really does assign, say, .7 to p and
.7 to -,p, we say that Mary doesn't have a single incoherent system of beliefs-
either binary or graded-but many different, compartmentalized systems of belief,
which guide different aspects of her behavior in different contexts. Importantly,
each of Mary's systems of belief-each of her fragments-is probabilistically co-
herent. One fragment assigns .7 to p, and .3 to -,p; another assigns .7 to -,p and .3
to p.
If Mary's doxastic state is fragmented, we can't say that she uses a strictly
proper scoring rule to measure the accuracy of her credence function, since she
doesn't have a single credence function. What we can say, however, is that each of
71

Mary's fragments uses a strictly proper scoring rule to measure the accuracy of its
credence function. And maybe that is enough. If each of Mary's fragments expects
its own credences to be most accurate, and each aims at believing accurately, then
changing its credences on the basis of a coin flip would mean adopting a credence
that is, by its own lights, less accurate than its own. And that, the argument con-
tinues, is impossible. Just as one cannot intentionally form a belief unless one is
doing so with the aim of forming a true belief, one cannot intentionally increase or
decrease one's confidence unless one is doing so with the aim of increasing one's
accuracy.
There's a lot more to say about this. But I propose that we move on. Even if we
can use fragmentation to explain why probabilistically incoherent subjects cannot
believe at will, the aim-of-belief argument faces another serious objection. In the
next section, I will suggest that this problem-the problem of imprecision, as I will
call it-may well be insurmountable.
3.4 
The Problem of Imprecision
So far we've assumed that credal states are best modeled by a single probability
function, a function that assigns to each proposition a unique, precise credence.
For many Epistemic Bayesians, this is a crude idealization, demanding far more
precision than is usually warranted by our messy evidence. These Imprecise Epis-
temic Bayesians propose to model agents not with one probability function, but
many-a set of credence functions; a kind of credal committee. 10 Each member
of your credal committee is a perfect Bayesian agent, assigning a single, precise
credence to every proposition. But not you. Your attitude may be 'spread out' over
a range of values.
Take the proposition that you'll get sick in the next 6 months. You probably
don't have a precise credence in this claim, the Imprecise Bayesian says. Instead,
you're imprecise-say, 60%-to-90% confident that you'll catch something within
six months. We model you with a set of probability functions: for every number
10For classic discussions of imprecise credences, see Kyburg (1983) and Levi (1974). See Joyce
(2005), Joyce (2011), Moss (2014), Schoenfield (2012), and Sturgeon (2008) for contemporary de-
fenses.
72

in the interval [.6, .9], some probability function-some member of your credal
committee-assigns that credence to the proposition that you will get sick in the
next six months.I1
Sets of probability functions reflect degrees of evidential specificity. As Joyce
(2005) points out, there are different ways for the evidence to be unspecific. It can
be incomplete in the sense that it doesn't discriminate one hypothesis from alterna-
tive hypotheses, and it can be ambiguous, in the sense that it is subject to different
interpretations. (Of course both incompleteness and ambiguity are matters of de-
gree.) When your credence in a certain proposition P is imprecise, you have no
settled opinion about it. The members of your credal committee represent various,
more settled views on P that you might take, corresponding to different interpre-
tations of the evidence (in the case of evidential ambiguity) or different ways of
'filling in the gaps' (in the case of incompleteness).
Imprecise credences present a serious problem for the aim-of-belief argument.
For it is hard to see how subjects with imprecise credences could be immodest.
There seems to be no plausible way of scoring imprecise credences that makes
them self-recommending. The formal arguments for this claim can be rather nu-
anced, however, and I haven't the space to go into the details. I will be content
to offer a more abstract and intuitive-but, I must admit, much less precise-
explanation. 12
There are two ways to score imprecise credences. Either we score them pre-
cisely-with a real number between 0 and 1, in just the way we score precise
credences. Or we score them imprecisely-with a set of numbers.
Beginning with the precise strategy, I can think of only two principled ways to
score imprecise credences precisely. We could identify the accuracy of [.4, .6] at a
world with the accuracy of the midpoint of the interval at that world-in this case,
the accuracy of .5. Or we could identify the accuracy of [.4, .6] with the average
of the accuracy scores of each of the members of the interval. We consider each
credence in the interval in turn, calculate its accuracy at a given world, then take
"Plausibly, the edges of these ranges are vague. I ignore this complication, since nothing I say
turns on it.
12For more detailed arguments see Schoenfield (2017) and Seidenfeld, Schervish, and Kadane
(2012).
73

the average of those values.
First consider the midpoint rule. If we identify the accuracy of [.4, .6] with the
accuracy of .5, then [.4, .6] will be no more accurate than .5 at every world. But it
is hard to see how [.4, .6] could recommend itself over. .5 if, at every world, .5 is
just as accurate as [.4, .6].
The second precise proposal is no better off. If we identify the accuracy of the
imprecise credence with the average of the accuracy scores of the precise members
of the interval, we can prove that, for any imprecise state S there is some precise
state S' that is more accurate than S in every world-in other words, every impre-
cise state will be accuracy dominated by some precise state. 13 But again, if S' is
more accurate than S is every world, S will not recommend itself over S'.
Finally, turn to the imprecise method of scoring imprecise credences. On this
proposal, we measure the score of an imprecise state with a set of numbers-most
obviously, with the set of accuracy scores of the precise credences in the inter-
val. Now, if the accuracy of an imprecise credence, at a given world, is a set of
numbers, and the accuracy of a precise credence at that world, is a single number,
then plausibly their accuracy scores are incomparable. This means that, at every
world,[.4, .6] is no more accurate than .5, .5 is no more accurate than [.4, .6], and
they aren't equally accurate, either. But once again, it's hard to see how [.4, .6]
could recommend itself over .5 if, at every world, [.4, .6] is no more accurate than
.5.
We considered three ways to score imprecise credences. None of them ensures
imprecise credences are self-recommending. For any imprecise credal state, we
can always find a precise state whose accuracy, at every world, is no worse than
the accuracy of the imprecise state. But that's just to say that you know, of some
particular precise state, that it is no less accurate than your current imprecise state.
And if that's right, we can't rule out changing one's credence at will. If there are
two distinct credal states, such that you know that neither is less accurate than the
other, then, it seems, adopting either will satisfy your aim of maximizing accuracy.
No reason, then, not to choose by flipping a coin.
13This follows from a much more general result from Mayo-Wilson and Wheeler (2016).
74

3.5 
Conclusion
I've considered two arguments for the seeming impossibility of believing at will,
both inspired by Bernard Williams's suggestive remarks on the matter-the ret-
rospective argument, and the aim-of-belief argument, respectively. I have shown
that neither argument succeeds in showing that it is impossible to believe at will.
The retrospective argument allows that you can decide to believe in acknowledged
permissive cases, those in which you believe that your evidence permits believing
and permits not believing. The aim-of-belief argument allows that we can change
our doxastic states at will when they are imprecise.
75

References
1. Alchourr6n, C.E., P. Gardenfors, and D. Mackinson (1985). 
'On the Logic
of Theory Change: Partial Meet Contraction and Revision Functions.' Journal of
Symbolic Logic, 50: 510-530.
2. Ballantyne, Nathan and Coffman, E.J. 2012, 'Conciliationism and Uniqueness'.
Australasian Journal of Philosophy, 90, pp. 657-70.
3. Buchak, Lara (2014). 'Belief, Credence, and Norms.' Philosophical Studies,
169 (2): 285-311.
4. Christensen, David 2010, 'Rational Reflection'. Philosophical Perspectives, 24,
pp. 121-40.
5. Christensen, David and Lackey, Jennifer (eds.) 2013, The Epistemology of
Disagreement: New Essays, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
6. Clarke, Roger (2013). 'Belief is Credence One (in Context).' Philosophers'
Imprint, 13 (11): 1-18.
7. Coates, Allen 2012, 'Rational Epistemic Akrasia'. American Philosophical
Quarterly, 49, pp. 113-24.
8. Cohen, Stewart 2013, 'A Defense of the Almost Equal Weight View'. In Chris-
tensen and Lackey, 2013, pp. 98-119.
9. Dorst, Kevin (forthcoming). 'Lockeans Maximize Expected Accuracy.' Mind.
10. Dougherty, Trent (ed.) 2011, Evidentialism and its Discontents. Oxford: Ox-
ford University Press.
11. Douven, Igor. 2009, 'Uniqueness Revisited'. American Philosophical Quar-
terly, 46, pp. 347-61.
12. Elga, Adam. 2013, 'The Puzzle of the Unmarked Clock and the New Rational
Reflection Principle'. Philosophical Studies. 164, pp. 98-120.
13. Frankish, Keith (2007). 'Deciding to Believe Again.' Mind 116 (463): 523-
547.
76

14. Ginsberg, Matthew (1986). 'Counterfactuals.' Artificial Intelligence, 30.
15. Goodman, Jeremy and Salow, Bernhard (forthcoming). 'Taking a Chance on
KK.' Philosophical Studies.
16. Greaves, Hilary and Wallace, David (2006). 'Justifying Conditionalisation:
conditionalisation maximizes expected epistemic utility.' Mind, 115 (459): 607-
632.
15. Greco, Daniel 2014, 'A Puzzle about Epistemic Akrasia'. Philosophical Stud-
ies. 167, pp. 201-19.
16. Greco, Daniel and Hedden, Brian (2016). 'Uniqueness and Metaepistemology.'
Journal of Philosophy 113 (8): 365-395.
17. Hall, Ned (1999). 'How to Set a Surprise Exam.' Mind, 108 (432): 647-703.
18. Hawthorne, John, Rothschild, Daniel, and Spectre, Levi (2016). 
'Belief is
Weak.' Philosophical Studies, 173 (5): 1393-1404.
19. Horowitz, Sophie (2014). 'Immoderately Rational.' Philosophical Studies 167
(1): 41-56.
20. Horowitz, Sophie (2014). 'Epistemic Akrasia'. Noas, 48, pp. 718-44.
21. Joyce, James (2005). 'How Probabilities Reflect Evidence.' Philosophical
Perspectives, 19 (1): 153-178.
22. Joyce, James (2011). 
'A Defense of Imprecise Credence in Inference and
Decision-Making'. Philosophical Perspectives, 24 (1): 281-323.
23. Keynes, John Maynard (1921). A Treatise on Probability. Dover Publications.
24. Kolmogorov, A. N. (1933). Grundbegriffe der Wahrscheinlichkeitrechnung.
Ergebnisse Der Mathematik; translated as Foundations of Probability, New York:
Chelsea Publishing Company, 1950.
25. Kopec, Matthew 2015, 'A Counterexample to the Uniqueness Thesis'. Philosophia,
43, pp. 403-09.
25. Kopec, Matthew and Titelbaum, Michael G. 2015, 'The Uniqueness Thesis'.
forthcoming in The Philosophical Compass.
77

26. Kyburg, Henry (1983). 'Rational Belief'. Brain and Behavioral Sciences. 6
(2): 231-273.
27. Lasonen-Aarnio, Maria 2014, 'Higher-order Evidence and the Limits of De-
feat'. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research, 88, pp. 314-45.
28. Lasonen-Aarnio, Maria 2015, 'New Rational Reflection and Internalism about
Rationality'. In Hawthorne and Gendler 2015, pp. 145-7 1.
29. Lawlor, Krista (2014). 'Exploring the Stability of Belief: Resiliency and Temp-
tation'. Inquiry, 57 (1): 1-27.
30. Lehrer, Keith (1971). 'How Reasons Give Us Knowledge or the Case of the
Gypsy Lawyer.' Journal of Philosophy 68 (10): 311-313.
31. Leitgeb, Hannes (2013). 'Reducing Belief Simpliciter to Degrees of Belief.'
Annals of Pure and Applied Logic, 164: 1338-89.
32. Leitgeb, Hannes (2014). 'The Stability Theory of Belief'. Philosophical Re-
view, 123 (2): 131-171.
33. Leitgeb, Hannes (2017). 'The Stability of Belief: How Rational Belief Coheres
with Probability'. Oxford University Press.
34. Levi, Isaac (1974). 'On Indeterminate Probabilities'. Journal of Philosophy,
71 (13): 391-418.
35. Loeb, Louis (2001). 'Integrating Hume's Accounts of Belief and Justification.'
Philosophy and Phenomenological Research, 63(2): 279-303.
36. Loeb, Louis (2002). Stability and Justification in Hume's Treatise. Oxford
University Press.
37. Kevin McCain & Poston, Ted. 'Why Explanatoriness is Evidentially Relevant.'
Thought: A Journal of Philosophy, 3 (2): 145-153.
38. Meacham, Christopher J.G. 2014, 'Impermissive Bayesianism'. Erkenntnis,
79, pp. 1185-1217.
39. Moss, Sarah (2014). 'Credal Dilemmas'. Noas 48 (3): 665-683.
40. Rosen, Gideon 2001, 'Nominalism, Naturalism, and Epistemic Relativism'.
78

Philosophical Perspectives, 15, pp. 69-91.
41. Salow, Bernhard (ms). 'Fallibility and Dogmatism.'
42. Schoenfield, Miriam (2012). 'Decision Making in the Face of Parity.' Philo-
sophical Perspectives 28 (1): 263-277.
43. Schoenfield, Miriam (2013). 'Permission to Believe: Why Permissivism Is
True and What It Tells Us About Irrelevant Influences on Belief.' Noils 47 (1):
193-218.
44. Schoenfield, Miriam (2017). 'The Accuracy and Rationality of Imprecise Cre-
dences.' Noits 51 (4): 667-685.
45. Schoenfield, Miriam (forthcomiming). 'Permissivism and the Value of Ratio-
nality: A Challenge to the Uniqueness Thesis.' Philosophy and Phenomenological
Research.
46. Setiya, Kieran. 'Believing at Will.' Midwest Studies in Philosophy 32 (1):
36-52.
47. Setiya, Kieran (2013). 'Epistemic Agency: Some Doubts.' Philosophical
Issues 23 (1): 179-198.
48. Shah, Nishi and Velleman David (2005). 'Doxastic Deliberation.' Philosophi-
cal Review 114 (4): 497 - 534.
49. Skyrms, Brian (1977). 'Resiliency, Propensities, and Causal Necessity'. Jour-
nal of Philosophy. 74 (11): 704-713.
50. Sliwa, Paulina and Horowitz, Sophie (2015). 'Respecting all the Evidence'.
Philosophical Studies, 172, 2835-2858.
51. Smithies, Declan (2012). 'Moore's Paradox and the Accessibility of Justifica-
tion'. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research, 85, pp. 273-300.
52. Sturgeon, Scott (2008). 'Reason and the Grain of Belief'. Noas, 42 (1): 139-
165.
53. Szab6 Gendler, Tamar and Hawthorne, John (eds.) 2015. Oxford Studies in
Epistemology, volume 5. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
79

54. Teller, Paul (1976). 'Conditionalization, Observation, and Change of Prefer-
ence' in Harper, W. and Hooker, C.A. (eds.) Foundations of Probability Theory,
Statistical Inference, and Statistical Theories of Science. D. Riedel.
55. Titelbaum, Michael (2010). 'Not Enough There There: Evidence, Reasons,
and Language Independence'. Philosophical Perspectives, 24, pp. 477-528.
56. Titelbaum, Michael (2015a). 'Continuing On'. Canadian Journal of Philoso-
phy, 45, pp. 670-691.
57. Titelbaum, Michael (2015b). 'Rationality's Fixed Point (or: In Defense of
Right Reason)'. In Gendler and Hawthorne 2015, pp. 253-294.
58. van Fraassen, Bas C. (1989). Laws and Symmetry. Oxford University Press.
59. van Fraassen, Bas C. (1999). 'A New Argument for Conditionalization.' Topoi,
18: 93-96.
60. Weatherson, Brian (2005). 'Can We Do Without Pragmatic Encroachment?'
Philosophical Perspectives, 19 (1): 417-443.
61. White, Roger (2005). 'Epistemic Permissiveness.' Philosophical Perspectives
19: 445-459.
62. Williams, Bernard (1981). 
'Deciding to Believe.' in Problems of the Self,
136-151. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
63. Williams, Peter F. (1980). 'Bayesian Conditionalisation and the Principle of
Minimum Information', 31(2): 131-144.
64. Williamson, Timothy (2000). Knowledge and its Limits. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
65. Williamson, Timothy (2001). 'Improbable Knowing'. In Trent Dougherty,
2011,pp. 149-64.
80

