1 
Category theoretic analysis of hierarchical protein 
materials and social networks 
David I. Spivak1, Tristan Giesa2,3, Elizabeth Wood2 and Markus J. Buehler2,4,5* 
 
1 Department of Mathematics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 77 Massachusetts Ave. Cambridge, 
MA, USA 
2 Laboratory for Atomistic and Molecular Mechanics, Department of Civil and Environmental 
Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 77 Massachusetts Ave. Room 1-235A&B, Cambridge, 
MA, USA 
3 Department of Mechanical Engineering, RWTH Aachen University, Templergraben 55, 52056 Aachen, 
Germany 
4 Center for Materials Science and Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 77 Massachusetts 
Ave., Cambridge, MA, USA 
5 Center for Computational Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 77 Massachusetts Ave., 
Cambridge, MA, USA 
 
* Corresponding author: mbuehler@MIT.EDU 
 
Abstract: Materials in biology span all the scales from Angstroms to meters and typically consist of 
complex hierarchical assemblies of simple building blocks. Here we describe an application of category 
theory to describe structural and resulting functional properties of biological protein materials by 
developing so-called ologs. An olog is like a “concept web” or “semantic network” except that it follows a 
rigorous mathematical formulation based on category theory. This key difference ensures that an olog is 
unambiguous, highly adaptable to evolution and change, and suitable for sharing concepts with other olog. 
We consider simple cases of alpha-helical and amyloid-like protein filaments subjected to axial extension 
and develop an olog representation of their structural and resulting mechanical properties. We also 
construct a representation of a social network in which people send text-messages to their nearest 
neighbors and act as a team to perform a task. We show that the olog for the protein and the olog for the 
social network feature identical category-theoretic representations, and we proceed to precisely explicate 
the analogy or isomorphism between them. The examples presented here demonstrate that the intrinsic 
nature of a complex system, which in particular includes a precise relationship between structure and 
function at different hierarchical levels, can be effectively represented by an olog. This, in turn, allows for 
comparative studies between disparate materials or fields of application, and results in novel approaches to 
derive functionality in the design of de novo hierarchical systems. We discuss opportunities and challenges 
associated with the description of complex biological materials by using ologs as a powerful tool for 
analysis and design in the context of materiomics, and we present the potential impact of this approach for 
engineering, life sciences, and medicine.  
 
Keywords: Materiomics; hierarchical materials; alpha-helix; amyloid; multiscale modeling; category 
theory; biomaterials; mechanical properties; molecular mechanics; filaments; structural proteins 
 
Short title: Proteins and social networks 
 
Submitted to: PLoS ONE 
 
1. Introduction 
 
Biological materials, many of which contain proteins as a basic building block, provide an enormous 
diversity of properties including structural support, prey procurement and material transport [1]. 
Significant evidence has now emerged that proteins are organized in functional networks, resulting in 
structures that span many hierarchical scales [2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9]. In the glassy sponge Eucleptella, for 
instance, silica nanospheres are arranged at multiple levels of hierarchy to constitute a skeleton with high 
structural stability at minimum cost [10]. The teeth of sea urchins and the lamellar structure of mollusk 
shells are other examples for structural hierarchies in biomaterials that lead to extremely strong and tough 
structures [11]. Earlier studies showed that in materials like bone or wood, for example, the structural 
assembly of basic building blocks such as collagen, water, hydroxyapatite minerals, hemicelluloses and 
lignin governs the mechanical properties at different length scales with similar mechanisms despite the 

2 
differences in the building blocks and the overall material properties [12,13]. A frontier in protein 
materials science is the understanding how the exceptionally complex functionality found in natural 
biological systems is created despite i) a limited number of 20 amino acid building blocks, ii) constraints in 
available material volume and energy for synthesis, and iii) only a handful of simple chemical interaction 
force fields, generally referred to as interaction rules [2,3,4,5,6,14].  
 
It is remarkable that the same library of amino acid building blocks creates materials as diverse as spider 
silk, tendon, cornea, blood vessels, and cellular protein networks, each of which displays greatly variegated 
functions. Our understanding of the synthesis of their basic elements into multi-functional structures 
remains in its infancy, and is currently limited to specific protein networks or protein materials. For 
example, mechanistic theories are typically developed for specific proteins (see e.g. [15,16,17,18,19,20]) 
rather than providing a unified model that is applicable to a variety of distinct materials. The extraction of 
generic principles of how functional properties are derived in functionally diverse systems despite the 
presence of the same (universal) building blocks, solely by using structure as a design paradigm, presents 
an exciting opportunity. The systematic characterization of this knowledge has resulted in the formation of 
a new field referred to as materiomics [21].  
 
Here we describe, by means of the application of the mathematical field of category theory to protein 
materials, how the extreme diversity of protein functional properties can be described in a unified model 
that contains only a limited number of universal elements and their interaction rules. Category theory has 
been successfully applied to carry out a qualitative analysis in fields such as linguistics (grammar, syntax, 
semantics, etc. – key concepts that enable the understanding of language, see e.g. [22,23,24,25,26,27]) and 
computer science (again modeling syntax and semantics of denotation and operation in programming 
languages, see e.g. references [28,29,30,31]).  
 
Category theory can be seen as an abstraction of graph theory which has been used to describe the 
structure of biopolymers, disease spread and neuronal activity as well as to determine the role of proteins 
or genes of unknown function and to identify drug targets [32,33,34,35,36,37,38,39]. The focus of such 
earlier studies has been on metabolic networks of biochemical reactions, protein interaction networks and 
transcriptional regulatory networks, amongst others [32]. The role of network motifs (or building blocks) 
has been studied but is often limited to structural motifs in networks [40]. Current theoretical approaches to 
material science focus either on structural aspects or on functional aspects and lack the general and abstract 
description of how system elements behave and interact with each other in order to create functionality. 
For protein materials, a major limitation of existing methods is the reliance on topological considerations 
which do not account for biological information about the network’s interaction [32]. For example, protein 
networks are typically modeled as undirected graphs where the nodes represent proteins and the edges 
represent physical interactions between them. The need for a broader view on functionality (biological, 
chemical, mechanical and other) and structure, enhanced data collection abilities, and integrated studies, as 
each study covers only a small subset of a generally big topic, cannot be achieved with graph theoretic 
approaches. Category theory provides means to overcome the limitations of conventional networks while 
also including graph theoretic tools. 
 
The combination of universal elements into multi-level structures enables protein materials to achieve 
context specific functionalities in an abstract “complexity space”. This paradigm showed that in order to 
create highly functional materials it is not essential to rely on a multitude and a certain quality of building 
blocks (e.g. with superior qualities, great material volume, strong interactions, etc.). Rather, it is sufficient 
to use simple interaction rules and simple building blocks – each of which does not need to possess 
superior qualities – but assembled into hierarchical systems, where the overall structure provides enhanced 
functionality [14,21]. This insight has implications for our understanding of how nanomaterials could be 
utilized to create macroscopically functional materials, and suggests a paradigm that departs greatly from 
the current belief in engineering science that material building blocks with superior qualities at the small 
scale (e.g., carbon nanotube, carbyne, graphene, etc.) are critical to reach high performance materials. On 
the contrary, we hypothesize that superior functionality can be reached with any fundamental building 
block, provided that the design space is expanded to incorporate hierarchical structures. Eventually, an 
understanding of how diverse functional properties can arise out of inferior building blocks could make a 
profound impact towards the development of environmentally benign and friendly materials, as it would 
allow manufacturers to use local, abundant, and simple building blocks with overall negative CO2 balance 
(e.g. wood, plants, silica, water, soy beans) to create highly functional materials and structures. But how 
can we find a proper mathematical description of these hierarchical mechanisms that generate functional 

3 
properties? A possible approach is to use novel mathematical concepts that provide a powerful, abstract 
way to describe emergence of functionality from first principles, e.g. on the basis of fundamental 
interactions between building blocks.  
 
1.1 Abstract representation of structure and function of protein materials using category theory 
 
Biological materials evolved to perform specific biological functions [2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9], where the 
components and connections within a given biological material are analogous to a circuit diagram. But just 
as it is extremely difficult to deduce the circuitry of a device by experimenting with its inputs and outputs, 
it is similarly inadequate to describe the higher-level structure of a biological material using only the 
physical interactions between proteins and some information about gene expression. Instead, we need to 
take into account additional types of structural information given by the fundamental principles that govern 
the interactions of the building blocks that define the system and its emerging functionality as these 
building blocks are connected together, from the micro to the macro scale. The above considerations are 
important in any synthetic science; in order to duplicate the functionality of a natural system, we do not 
need to understand everything about it, only the principles out of which the desired functions arise. 
Biological systems contain any number of copies of thousands of different components, each with very 
specific interactions, and each representing a microscopic device in and of itself. As a result, the 
microscopic description of a biological system (and materials therein) is intractably complex, unless one 
moves to a higher level of abstraction in the analysis that, as discussed before, cannot be solely provided 
by network theory.  
 
It is exactly in the face of this complexity that ologs are so appealing. The olog presents us with an 
opportunity to identify patterns that describe systems and their components, to elucidate possible 
connections among these components, and to construct isolated functional (and specifically not limited to 
structural) “modules” by comparing information from many different materials or organisms. That is, by 
determining fundamental design principles that are simple yet functional, we can not only produce a 
powerful conceptual model of our system, we also create the possibility of comparing vastly different 
systems. Indeed, we will show below that although there is almost nothing physical in common between a 
protein and a social network, we can construct a scenario in which the design principles are well-matched, 
and thus the systems may be compared. Such a comparison may allow results from the science of social 
networks to guide us in our study of biological materials of the same structure, and vice versa.  
 
To give a few concrete examples of how such analogies between seemingly disparate fields can be made, 
Figure 1 shows an illustration of multiscale hierarchical structure of protein materials, a summary of 
multiscale modeling and experimental tools, and an analogy to music. In protein materials (left for the 
example of spider silk), multifunctional materials are defined via the formation of hierarchical structures. 
The synergistic interaction of structures and mechanisms at multiple scales provides the basis for enhanced 
functionality of biological materials despite the reliance on few distinct building blocks. Similar to the case 
of protein materials, musical composition (right) is built upon universal elements at the microscale such as 
basic wave forms, and gathers a small variety of available instruments into hierarchical assemblies to 
create macroscale functionality, such as a particular orchestral sound (e.g. a symphony). Universality tends 
to dominate at smaller levels, whereas diversity is found predominantly at larger, functional levels [9]. The 
integrated use of computational and experimental methods at multiple scales provides a powerful approach 
to elucidate the scientific concepts underlying the materiomics paradigm (center). 
 
1.2 Outline of this paper 
 
The scope of this paper is to present a novel methodology to material science which incorporates structural 
and functional hierarchies. Hence, we utilize a comprehensive example, the behavior of an amyloid and an 
alpha-helical structure under tensile load, in order to illustrate the concept rather than to derive a full 
analysis. The biochemical structure is extremely simplified, thus allowing us to demonstrate the 
transformation of the protein system into a social network with similar characteristics. We conclude with a 
discussion of opportunities for the science and engineering of natural protein materials as well as 
synthetically designed materials from the atomistic scale with the chemical structure of molecules to the 
macroscale. 
 
2. Methods 
 

4 
Category theory is a relatively new branch of mathematics (invented 200 years after the introduction of 
partial differential equations), designed to connect disparate fields within the larger discipline (see [41]). It 
is both a language that captures the essential features of a given subject, and a toolbox of theorems that can 
be applied quite generally. If a given study within mathematics is formalized as a category, it can be 
connected with other categories that are seemingly far afield, as long as these structures align in the 
required “functorial” way. Theorems within one branch, like abstract equational algebra, can be applied to 
a totally different area, like geometric topology. Category theory may not only serve as an alternate 
foundation to mathematics [42], it unites the various distinct areas within advanced mathematics, formally 
proving similarities that are not apparent on the surface [43]. A good overview for non-specialists can be 
found in [44] and [45].  
 
Quickly after its inception, category theorists realized that its basic ideas were applicable well beyond the 
borders of mathematics. Category theory has by now been successfully applied in computer science, 
linguistics, and physics [46]. Whereas the theory of differential equations can be applied throughout 
science to create quantitative models, category theory can be applied throughout science to create 
qualitative models. And once such a qualitative model is formed as a category, its basic structure can be 
meaningfully compared (again via functors) with that of any other category, be it mathematical, linguistic, 
or other [47]. Like a biological system, the basic building blocks of a category are simple, but the networks 
that can be formed out of them are as complex as mathematics itself. These building blocks are called 
objects, arrows, and composition: arrows between objects form paths which can be composed into new 
arrows. It is a wonder that such a simple system can account for the wide variety of forms found in the 
mathematical universe, but perhaps this is less of a surprise to a biologist who notices the same 
phenomenon in his or her field. 
 
In this study we use a linguistic version of category theory in which the objects are drawn as text boxes 
describing some type of thing, like a protein or a genetic code, and where the arrows also have labels 
describing some functional relationship, as every protein has a genetic code. Chains of arrows can be 
composed, providing a description of how a number of small-scale relationships come together to 
constitute a single, conceptually simpler, larger-scale relation (like a person’s father’s sister’s daughter is a 
simply their cousin; an example for “functionality” in the space of linguistics). These linguistic categories 
are called “ologs”, short for “ontology logs” (see [47]). Ontology is the study of how or what something is, 
and ologs are a systematic framework in which to record the results of such as study. The term “log” (like 
a scientist’s log book) alludes to the fact that such a study is never really complete, and that a study is only 
as valuable as it is connected into the network of human understanding. This brings us to the heart of the 
matter: in order to build a sufficient understanding of hierarchical materials, scientists must integrate their 
findings more precisely with those of other scientists.  
 
The fact that an olog is fundamentally a category means that such connections can be formulated between 
ologs with mathematical rigor, and meaning preserved [47], to facilitate the communication with other 
fields of science. This concept is depicted for a simple example in Figure 2. Note how the structure of the 
category, i.e. the arrangement of objects (here: sets) and arrows (here: functions), is preserved while the 
objects and the arrows itself are subjected to a transformation. This means that if a certain property, such 
as the mechanical behavior of amyloids, can be described in a categorical framework, structure preserving 
transformations translate the components of the system into other systems, such as a wood or concrete 
based system, while the relations and thus the functionality within the category is maintained. The 
revelation and abstraction of the origin of protein material properties must be done by intensive 
materiomics studies that typically involve multiscale experiment and simulation. 
 
We omit a precise definition of categories and hence ologs in this paper as we will focus on the application 
of this concept – the discussion will be limited to a general description of ologs and how they are 
constructed. Hence, we will proceed to describe ologs by example; for a more mathematically precise 
account of ologs, see reference [48].  
 
3. Results and discussion 
 
The use of ologs is a powerful tool that can ultimately enable the kinds of breakthroughs needed to further 
our understanding of how functional diversity is achieved despite intrinsic limitations of building blocks. 
The generation of ologs also allows us to observe the formation of patterns that define certain 
functionality, and draw connections between disparate fields. A key insight used here is that although 

5 
patterns of functionality generation can be quite different in the space specific to applications (e.g.: 
proteins, language, music), they are remarkably similar in the space of categories. In other words, we 
hypothesize it is possible to observe universal patterns of how functionality is created in diverse fields; and 
that it is possible to generate fundamental laws (similar to PDEs in conventional physics) that describe the 
emergence of functionality from first principles.  
 
We briefly expand on the potential powerful application of category theory mentioned above. As explained 
in Section 1 the same 20 amino acids can have different functions depending on how they are arranged in a 
sequence as defined by the genes. In other words, the same library of fundamental building blocks can 
produce different functionality depending on the precise sequence. Just so, an olog serves as a code or 
formula for a complex structure, but the context in which it is interpreted can lead to different results. We 
will show that the same olog can be interpreted as formulating the structural and functional relationship 
between a protein filament such as an alpha-helix and an amyloid fibril or the same relationships between 
two types of social networks involving a chain of participants. In the case of a protein the building blocks 
are polypeptide fragments or H-bond clusters as glue, whereas in a social network the building blocks are 
people and communication methods. It is the interplay between form and function of few universal 
building blocks that ties biological structuralism and category theory, and which may produce potentially 
novel approaches to designing engineered systems.  
 
3.1 Olog of two protein materials under axial loading: alpha-helix and amyloid fibril  
 
We develop an olog for two protein filaments that display a distinct mechanical behavior once exposed to 
mechanical force. We begin the discussion with a presentation of the proteins and their functional 
properties, here their mechanical properties under axial extension (realized e.g. via the application of an 
axial force applied to the protein filament). The structure, mechanisms and resulting functional properties 
have been developed in a series of earlier studies based on computational approaches to molecular 
nanomechanics (for alpha-helices, see [49] and for amyloids or beta-sheet crystals, see [20,50]; and we 
refer the reader to these original papers for further detail).  
 
Figure 3 shows the visualization of the two protein materials based on an abstraction of how their 
mechanical properties can be understood based on the interplay of a set of “building blocks” (Figure 3A). 
Both protein materials resemble a linear arrangement of three elements, “bricks”, “glue”, and for one of 
them, “lifeline”. Thereby as a design rule, brick and glue need to alternate in order to achieve a stable 
structure. Two brick or glue elements immediately next to each other would not stick together. There is a 
fundamental chemical reason for this constraint as bricks represent the protein’s polypeptide backbone and 
glue represents H-bonding which can only occur between a cluster of amino acid residues in the backbone. 
The “lifeline” is a third element that is introduced here, reflecting the situation in which there is still a 
physical connection of bricks even after large force causes the glue to break. Chemically, this resembles 
the existence of a “hidden” polypeptide length such that there exists a “covalent” link between two brick 
elements even after the H-bond glue has broken. The hidden length is not observed as a relevant structural 
property until the glue breaks, at which point the lifeline comes into play and provides an increasing 
resistance against deformation. Thus, although both glue and lifeline can connect neighboring brick 
elements, they are differentiated in that the lifeline is much stronger than the glue and that its resting 
extension is roughly the failure extension of the glue (Figure 3).  
 
Although this description of protein filaments is a simplification of how their mechanical properties can be 
described and the focus is set on a distinct feature of the protein material’s behavior only, it enables us to 
understand the key functional properties based on the interplay of building blocks. We demonstrate this 
now with a detailed discussion of the two cases considered. Figure 3C depicts a model of an amyloid fibril 
(or similarly, model of a beta-sheet crystal as found in silk) subjected to axial deformation. The structure is 
realized by the assembly of on an alternating sequence of bricks (amino acid cluster) and glue (H-bond 
cluster). Upon the increase of the extension one of the glue elements breaks. Since there is no more 
physical connection between the two brick elements that were previously connected by the glue element 
the entire system has failed, and at an extension that is roughly equal to the failure extension of the glue 
(Figure 3E). We define this behavior as “brittle”. Figure 3D depicts a model of an alpha-helix protein (a 
protein found for example in the cell’s cytoskeleton) under axial loading, assembled based on an 
alternating sequence of bricks (amino acid cluster), glue (cluster of H-bonds) and a lifeline element. The 
lifeline element is formed by the protein backbone that still exists even after the cluster of H-bonds break 
after unfolding of one alpha-helical turn [49]; providing a physical connection that allows additional glue 

6 
elements to break after more axial extension is applied. In fact, at large extensions all glue elements will 
have broken such that the system’s overall failure extension is much larger than the failure extension of the 
glue, marking a “ductile” behavior (Figure 3E).  
 
The comparison of the distinct mechanical behavior of alpha-helices and amyloid fibrils was achieved by 
mapping the key mechanisms that generate their specific properties into the abstract space of interactions 
between a set of building blocks. What was described in words in the preceding paragraphs can be 
rigorously achieved using ologs, which describe the interactions between building blocks. Through the 
development of ologs for each system we aim to answer a series of questions:  
 
• 
What are the components of the system, and how do they interact? 
• 
How do these interactions produce the functionality we observe of the overall system? 
• 
When does functionality break down? E.g., failure of building blocks as the system is pushed to 
extreme conditions, or the presence of defects.  
• 
A further reaching question may be, by what process did the system come to be constructed, and 
what selective pressures at the macroscale induce observable changes in the system and at 
different levels in the structural makeup. 
 
To eventually get us to this point, we will now discuss the components of our brick-and-glue system of 
proteins so as to acquaint the reader with the olog presented in Figure 4 which describes both the brittle 
and ductile protein filaments outlined above. Three universal elements, which we have been calling bricks 
(b), glue (g), and lifeline (L) are the abstract building blocks composing our systems, and they are defined 
in relation to one another as follows. Both glue and lifeline are materials that can connect two brick 
elements.  There are two distinctions between them: i) the failure extension of glue is much less than that 
of brick, whereas the failure extension of lifeline is roughly equal to that of brick, and ii) the resting 
extension of lifeline is roughly equal to the failure extension of glue. These two properties ensure that the 
lifeline is not detected under axial loading until a glue element breaks and that all the glue elements break 
long before a lifeline or brick element breaks (see also Figure 3B). 
 
This distinction between one number being roughly equal to another and one number being much greater 
than another is simple, yet universal in the sciences, and thus we can expect these types (M and O in the 
olog) to be quite common in scientific ologs. In fact, we reuse this concept within the olog when we 
distinguish a ductile system from a brittle one. That is, we characterize a ductile system to be one whose 
failure extension is much greater than that of its glue element, whereas we characterize a brittle system to 
be one whose failure extension is roughly equal to that of its glue element. Relations like that are typical 
for hierarchical systems where a scaling law applied to the scale of a building block connects the behavior 
of such building blocks to the overall system behavior. Other common (i.e. universal) patterns that we may 
find in biological materials is a certain shape (fibers, helices, spheres), bonds of a certain form (H-bonds, 
backbone), dimensionality (1D, 2D, 3D), and so on. Our olog concentrates on materials whose shape is 
one-dimensional, a feature we define by the use of mathematical graphs. 
 
The interactions of building blocks are not limited by their interface. As each object represents a category 
itself, it can be again a composition of objects and arrows. Hence, the functionality can be affected by the 
existence or alteration of neighbor building blocks by drawing connections between objects within 
categories. This is exactly how functional and structural hierarchies are represented in an olog. Since a 
brick (or a glue) can refer to anything in the world, an entire system of bricks and glue can be regarded as a 
new “brick” (and a whole system of bonds as “glue”). A zoom-in or zoom-out is possible by defining new 
building blocks in terms of others. 
 
Once the fundamental structure of our protein materials and the definition of ductility and brittleness have 
been defined in the olog, we describe our hypotheses by two arrows, 1:AE and 5:BC, the first of 
which hypothesizes that systems with lifelines are ductile, and the second of which hypothesizes that 
systems without lifelines are brittle. This hypothesis has now been examined in the paragraphs above, but 
can be even more carefully explicated using a category-theoretic formulation, where each component type 
and aspect is laid bare. In fact, we have no hope of proving an analogy between this protein setup and the 
upcoming social network setup without such a formulation. In Figure 4 we show the entire setup as a 
diagram of boxes and arrows, the precursor to an olog. However, this diagram is not sufficient in the sense 
that there are mathematical truths present in our system that are not present in the diagram. We include the 
rest of this information in Tables 1 and 2, which we will describe shortly. 

7 
 
In order to explain what is missing from Figure 4, we should more clearly explain what is there. Each box 
represents a set. For example box H, labeled “a graph”, represents the set of graphs, whereas box J, labeled 
“a system consisting of bricks connected by glue, structured as in graph G”, represents the set of such 
systems. Each arrow represents a function from one set to another, and its meaning is clear by reading the 
label of the source box, the label of the arrow, and then the label of the target box.  For example, we read 
arrow 20: JH as “a system consisting of bricks connected by glue, structured as in graph G is structured 
as a graph”. Thus, any element of the set J is functionally assigned its structure graph, an element of H, by 
arrow 20. Just as the structure graph of a system is an observable of that system, any function from one set 
to another can be considered an observable of the former. 
 
A function may be thought of as a “black box” which takes input of one type and returns output of another 
type. If the output of one function is fed as input to another function and the whole system is imbedded in a 
black box, it is called the composition of functions. Finally, two functions are equal (regardless of the inner 
workings of their “black boxes”) if, upon giving the same input they always return the same output. The 
first kind of mathematical truth alluded to above that is missing from Figure 4 is a declaration of which 
compositions of functions in our system are equal.  Such equalities of compositions of functions are called 
commutative diagrams in category theory literature. All such declarations are presented in Table 1. These 
equalities can be considered as checks on our understanding of all the sets and functions in the arrows – 
declaring them is at the very least “good science”. 
 
Table 2 describes a certain class of commutative diagrams; called fiber product diagrams (see also Figure 
S2). In a fiber product diagram, one set and two observables of it are declared as a kind of “universal 
solution” to a problem posed by another diagram. In these terms, we consider the diagram DHJ as 
posing a problem, to which DFJ is a solution, as we now explain. The diagram DHJ poses the 
problem “what should we call a system consisting of bricks connected by glue, structured as in graph G, 
where graph G is a ‘chain’ graph”. The declared solution is F “a one-dimensional system (S) of bricks (b) 
and glue (g)”, together with its two observables FD and FJ. Thus the second kind of mathematical 
truth alluded to above that is missing from Figure 4 is that some boxes and attributes have fixed meaning 
in terms of the others. A list of these is given in Table 2, where we see terms such as “one-dimensional”, 
“brittle”, “ductile”, and “lifeline” defined solely in terms of more basic concepts. 
 
Thus, while it is convenient to think of the olog for our protein systems as the diagram in Figure 4, in fact 
it is the totality of Figure 4, Table 1, and Table 2, which really constitute the olog. Just as in biological 
materials, the parts of the olog (its boxes and arrows) are not sufficient for the system to act as a whole – 
the less-obvious interrelationships between these parts give the system its functionality. It is important to 
note that ologs can be constructed based on modeling and simulation, experimental studies, or theoretical 
considerations that essentially result in the understanding necessary to formulate the olog. This has been 
done for the proteins considered here based on the results from earlier work which provided sufficient 
information to arrive at the formulation of the problem as shown in Figure 3. 
 
3.2 Olog of a social network  
 
In this section we construct a simple social network that may appear to some as vastly different as a protein 
filament, and to others as quite similar. The reason for the discrepancy is that semantically and physically 
the situations have almost nothing in common, but structurally and functionally they do. In fact, we will 
prove category-theoretically that they are structurally and functionally isomorphic in the sense that their 
ologs are identical. We now describe the setting for our simple social network as depicted in Figure 5. 
Imagine a building with sound-proof rooms labeled 1 through 100, equipped with a controlled wireless 
communication system connecting each pair of consecutive rooms. In each room a human participant sits 
on a chair with a simple wireless transceiver that can transmit and receive text messages from the 
participant to the left (his or her predecessor) or the person to the right (his or her successor). We assume 
that participants in odd numbered rooms are women and people in even numbered rooms are men, just for 
pronoun clarity. The goal is to faithfully pass messages (sentences of under ten words, say) from room 1 to 
room 100 and back the other way as quickly as possible. The woman in room 1 (respectively the man in 
room 100) receives a message from the experimenter. She then inputs it into her transceiver and sends it to 
her neighbor (2), who passes it along to his neighbor (3), and on down the line until it is received by the 
man in room 100, who submits it to the experimenter there. Thus the network has a task of faithfully 

8 
sending messages from one experimenter to the other; if they fail to successfully transmit at least one 
message per hour we say that the system has failed. 
 
An obstacle can be added by allowing that the transmission of messages between participants is not always 
error-free. That is, the experimenters can adjust the amount of “noise” in the system, resulting in messages 
that could be anywhere from error-free to completely unintelligible. For example, the message “the party 
was fun and exciting” may arrive in the next room as “tha partu was fon and escitin”. Upon receiving a 
garbled message, a participant may take the time to “fix it up” before sending it along, thereby helping to 
ensure that the message can be correctly submitted at the end of the line. We define the “extension” of the 
system to be the amount of noise, measured as the probability that a transmission error occurs for an 
arbitrary letter in a message. Given sufficient noise, it may happen that no messages can be transferred 
successfully through the network. Thus, we define the “failure extension” of the network to be the amount 
of noise present when this occurs. Similarly, the failure extension of a glue element is the amount of noise 
at which a wireless transmission cannot be successfully sent from one room to the next.  
 
Finally, we can add lifelines to this picture by adding physical passageways between consecutive rooms. 
Now, in case the noise gets too high, individuals may walk or run through these “lifeline passageways” and 
transmit a message by voice. During low levels of noise, the doorways will typically not be used to relay 
information because the text messaging is much faster, and hence the existence of the lifelines will be 
“hidden”. However, once the transmission noise is severe enough to prevent good wireless communication 
(that is, the glue breaks), these passageways come into effect and save the network from breaking 
altogether. The three basic building blocks of this social network are shown in Figure 5A. For a rigorous 
analysis we also define a failure extension for bricks and lifeline, and resting extension for lifeline (Figure 
5B). We define the failure extension of bricks and lifeline to be infinite (because messages existing on a 
given transceiver or passed via voice are unaffected by the noise level), and we define the resting extension 
of our lifeline passageways to be the amount of noise at which participants begin to use the passageways. 
 
We now analyze the performance of the two types of networks constructed here, without and with a 
lifeline. In the system without a lifeline (Figure 5C) as soon as the noise level is high enough to cause 
breakdown of one of the glue elements the system fails since no more messages can be transmitted. In the 
system with lifelines (Figure 5D), even though glue elements may break there is still the possibility for 
signals to travel through the passageway such that a much greater noise level (or extension) can be 
sustained. A brittle network is one in which the failure extension is roughly the same as the failure 
extension for each glue element. A ductile network is one in which the failure extension is much greater 
than the failure extension of each glue element. We thus hypothesize that social networks with lifeline 
passageways will be ductile and that those without lifeline passageways will be brittle. While the above 
communication network is fairly degenerate as compared with, say the Facebook network, the basic idea is 
similar. People are connected with a set of “friends” and the basis of this friendship is communication. 
Communication can be muddled by various kinds of noise, but the use of additional forms of interaction 
(e.g. talking in face-to-face meetings in addition to using online text messages) increases the probability 
that the parties understand each other.  
 
We have constructed a system so that the olog describing it is precisely the same as that defining the 
protein system of Section 2.1. The basic layout is in Figure 4, and Tables 1 and 2 add “rigidifying 
information”. For example, the participants with their transceivers are the bricks, the wireless 
communication between neighboring rooms is the glue, the passageways are the lifelines. We define 
brittleness and ductility exactly as we did in the protein case and as described in the previous paragraph; in 
fact this is forced on us because boxes C and E are fiber products (see also Figure S2). The fact that the 
same olog describes our protein materials and our social network should be considered as a rigorous 
analogy or isomorphism between these two domains, as we describe in more detail in the next section. 
 
3.3 Analogy between alpha-helical protein and communication network  
 
The analogy between the protein strands (amyloid fibril and alpha helix) and the social network 
experiment is as follows: In both cases a network (protein/social) consisting of bricks (amino acid 
clusters/human participants) connected together by glue (H-bond cluster/wireless communication) is 
subject to pulling (axial extension/error-producing noise) and eventually reach a breaking point (when the 
maximum extension is reached/transmission rate drops to zero). Lifelines (additional physical connections 
via covalent links/passageways) serve to increase the ductility (failure extension of network divided by 

9 
failure extension of individual glue elements/ditto) of the network. Table 3 gives a complete list of the 
meaning of all labels in the protein and social network. 
 
We now rigorously show that the two situations can be modeled by precisely the same olog. Thus the olog 
sets out a space of possible systems that includes everything from proteins to social networks (and 
potentially many other realizations), any two instances of which must be analogous, at least to the level of 
detail found in Figure 4 and the associated tables. If one desires additional detail, for example to add a 
precise meaning for resting extensions, or even real numbers, one would simply expand the olog to capture 
these ideas. A key result from our discussion is that the interpretation of what b, g and L mean in different 
systems can be distinct (proteins, polymers, music, etc. can have different physical realizations of these 
concepts). Yet, their fundamental properties and how they relate to others – other elements, different scales 
in hierarchies, etc. – are defined properly in the olog, and mathematically expressed not only as a 
fundamental property but in addition as functors to other elements in the system. For physical systems a 
key aspect of understanding the interplay of building blocks can for instance be expressed in scaling laws 
that define properties as a function of ratios of length-scales or energy levels, which fundamentally define 
how elements behave and interact with others. The general presentation of such relationships in networks 
is what is missing in current theories, and is where ologs present a powerful paradigm for de novo design 
of biologically inspired systems that span multiple hierarchical levels. This is because ologs achieve a 
rigorous description of the synergistic interactions of structures and mechanisms at multiple scales, which 
provides the basis for enhanced functionality despite the reliance on few distinct building blocks.  
 
It is important to note that for the sake of the analogy discussed here the two very different domains 
(protein vs. social network) were designed in a way to show that they could have identical conceptual 
descriptions at a very high level of detail. More detail could show differences between these two domains. 
For example, an observation we purposely did not include is that the bricks in our social network need to 
breathe and eat. It is impossible (and perhaps not desirable in some cases) to include every detail of each 
system – our goal was to emphasize the essential parameters, and to provide a level of abstraction that 
emphasizes the key elements that define functional properties. Furthermore, whereas it may be rare for two 
different scientific studies to result in identical ologs, finding reusable parts should be quite common. In 
our olog, the notion of bricks being connected together by glue to form the structure of a graph is surely 
reusable not only within materials science but throughout engineering. 
 
Of course, the biological system was strongly simplified and we focused only on a single aspect within the 
vast range of properties in biological materials. Similarly, our social network was contrived to fit the olog 
of the protein. This analysis does not claim to describe the formation of “all” complex protein assemblies 
but shall serve as a generally comprehensible example for a methodology which puts these kinds of 
analogies in a concise mathematical framework, where future work could emphasize on applications to 
more complex cases. It shall thus serve as an impetus for further studies in this field. In fact, without the 
classification as a category theoretic transformation, such analogies have been recently used to compare 
active centers of proteins, that means a cluster of amino acids that have a high centrality in the amino acid 
network of the hosting protein by their participation in enzyme catalysis and substrate binding, to 
“strangers” in social networks and top predators in mammalian networks [51]. Creative elements, a highly 
specific subset of these central residues, occupy a central position in protein structure networks. They, 
among other things, give non-redundant, unique connections in their neighborhood, integrate the 
communication of the entire network, and accommodate most of the energy of the whole network. In 
atypical situations they become especially relevant due to their transient, weak links to important positions 
such as hubs. In mammalian networks top predators take the role of active centers as they act as couplers 
of distinct and dissimilar energy channels and increase the stability of the ecosystem’s network whereas in 
social networks “strangers” – often innovators and successful managers – occupy “structural holes”. They 
show exactly the same functional behavior as the active centers in protein structure networks and thus 
these networks are connected by structure preserving transformations or functors. 
 
While we cannot discuss it here in detail (as it would be out of scope of this article), the category-theoretic 
notion of functors, which formally connect one olog to another, will eventually allow scientists in vastly 
different fields to share their work by rigorously connecting together their ologs. This opens enormous 
opportunities for design of novel functional properties by drawing from the understanding gained in 
diverse fields. Observations made in one field, e.g. about the dynamic response and transformation of 
active centers after repeated stress and the re-organization of the network topology, lead to insights in other 
fields, e.g. about the flow of novel information and direction of evolution in companies with well-

10 
connected collaborators whose contact structure increases the performance in uncertain environments or in 
crisis [51,52,53]. Other recent studies of the characteristics of biological protein networks showed that the 
modular structure of these networks improves the robustness against hub malfunction while increasing 
vulnerability against random failure which stands in contrast to the behavior of typical non-biological 
networks such as the Internet [54]. Insights gained from these types of studies accompanied by a 
systematic description of its functional features may help in the construction of artificial networks that 
inherit the advantageous properties of the biological archetype. 
 
4. Conclusion 
 
A unique aspect of the analysis provided here is that we described a rigorous analysis of the conceptual 
interaction rules in protein materials and establish a direct link to those of a social network via the use of 
category theory. This qualitative account will allow us to draw direct analogies to existing models of 
complex hierarchical structures such as those from social networks, and potentially linguistic theory where 
similar problems have been studied, and enables the utilization of insights and design paradigms across 
disparate fields of the science of hierarchical systems (Figure 6). The key concepts presented provides a 
generic framework that has the potential to unify existing understanding derived from the myriad of 
existing studies of individual protein materials such as bone, silk, or cells and many others, where a major 
limitation was that no unifying framework that applies generally to all such materials has yet been 
proposed. This paradigm and associated design rules, which are applicable to other complex systems such 
as music, engineered technology and materials, or food recipes, could emerge as an exciting new field of 
study and make critical contribution to the field of materiomics for which it serves as a central tool to 
describe structure-function relationships for hierarchical systems.  
 
Future directions, open research questions, and the impact of an increased understanding of hierarchical 
protein materials is discussed at three levels with increasing generality: i), impact on protein material 
synthesis (design, engineering and manufacturing or novel biomaterials), ii), impact on bioinspired 
nanoscale material design and assembly (e.g. hierarchical materials such as fibers, yarns or armors), and 
iii), impact on macro-scale systems design and engineering (e.g. design of cars, airplanes etc. where the 
merger of the concepts of structure and material across all the scales provides opportunities for more 
efficient systems). Immediate future work could be directed towards applying the concept of ologs to 
specific hierarchical biological materials, such as to silk or bone that show a greater complexity than the 
simple problems reviewed here. While the resulting ologs are more complex, the basic approach is 
identical and the main insights discussed here should still hold. Eventually, the olog shown in this paper 
(Figure 4) could be implemented in a computational model, which will open the possibility for design 
optimization using numerical algorithms or make it easier to reuse existing ologs for the design of new 
ones.  
 
Acknowledgements  
 
MJB acknowledges support from a DOD-PECASE award. DIS acknowledges support from Office of 
Naval Research grant (N000141010841) as well as generous support from Clark Barwick, Jacob Lurie, and 
the Massachusetts Institute of Technology Department of Mathematics. TG acknowledges support from 
the German Academic Foundation (Studienstiftung des deutschen Volkes). We acknowledge helpful 
discussions with T. Ackbarow. The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, 
decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript. The authors declare that no competing interests exist. 
 
Supplementary material 
 
Supplementary material is available on the journal website.  
 
References 
 
1. Alberts B, Johnson A, Lewis J, Raff M, Roberts K, et al. (2002) Molecular Biology of the Cell. New 
York: Taylor & Francis. 
2. Eisenberg D, Marcotte EM, Xenarios I, Yeates TO (2000) Protein function in the post-genomic era. 
Nature 405: 823-826. 
3. Marcotte EM, Pellegrini M, Thompson MJ, Yeates TO, Eisenberg D (1999) A combined algorithm for 
genome-wide prediction of protein function. Nature 402: 83-86. 

11 
4. Marcotte EM (1999) Detecting protein function and protein-protein interactions from genome 
sequences. Science 285: 751-753. 
5. Strohman RC (1997) The coming Kuhnian revolution in biology - Commentary. Nature Biotechnology 
15: 194. 
6. Nurse P (1998) Reductionism and explanation in cell biology: John Wiley and Sons. 
7. Lakes R (1993) Materials With Structural Hierarchy. Nature 361: 511-515. 
8. Olson GB (2000) Designing a new material world. Science 288: 993. 
9. Buehler MJ, Yung YC (2009) Deformation and failure of protein materials in physiologically extreme 
conditions and disease. Nat Mater 8: 175-188. 
10. Aizenberg J, Weaver JC, Thanawala MS, Sundar VC, Morse DE, et al. (2005) Skeleton of Euplectella 
sp.: Structural hierarchy from the nanoscale to the macroscale. Science 309: 275-278. 
11. Currey JD (2005) Materials science - Hierarchies in biomineral structures. Science 309: 253-254. 
12. Fritsch A, Hellmich C (2007) 'Universal' microstructural patterns in cortical and trabecular, 
extracellular and extravascular bone materials: Micromechanics-based prediction of anisotropic 
elasticity. Journal of Theoretical Biology 244: 597-620. 
13. Hofstetter K, Hellmich C, Eberhardsteiner J (2005) Development and experimental validation of a 
continuum micromechanics model for the elasticity of wood. European Journal of Mechanics a-
Solids 24: 1030-1053. 
14. Buehler MJ (2010) Tu(r)ning weakness to strength. Nano Today 5: 379-383. 
15. Fletcher DA, Mullins RD (2010) Cell mechanics and the cytoskeleton. Nature 463: 485-492. 
16. Huebsch N, Mooney DJ (2009) Inspiration and application in the evolution of biomaterials. Nature 
462: 426-432. 
17. Taylor D, Hazenberg JG, Lee TC (2007) Living with cracks: Damage and repair in human bone. Nat 
Mater 6: 263-268. 
18. Fratzl P, Barth FG (2009) Biomaterial systems for mechanosensing and actuation. Nature 462: 442-
448. 
19. Peterlik H, Roschger P, Klaushofer K, Fratzl P (2006) From brittle to ductile fracture of bone. Nature 
materials 5: 52-55. 
20. Keten S, Xu Z, Ihle B, Buehler MJ (2010) Nanoconfinement controls stiffness, strength and 
mechanical toughness of beta-sheet crystals in silk. Nature Materials 9: 359-367. 
21. Cranford SW, Buehler MJ (2010) Materiomics: biological protein materials, from nano to macro. 
Nanotechnology, Science and Applications 3: 127-148. 
22. Chomsky N (1957) Syntactic Structures. 
23. Hauser MD, Chomsky N, Fitch WT (2002) The Faculty of Language: What Is It, Who Has It, and How 
Did It Evolve? Science 298: 1569-1579. 
24. Lee I, Date SV, Adai AT, Marcotte EM (2004) A Probabilistic Functional Network of Yeast Genes. 
Science 306: 1555-1558. 
25. Searls DB (2002) The language of genes. Nature 420: 211-217. 
26. Oehrle RT, Bach EW, Wheeler D (1988) Categorial grammars and natural language studies. 
27. Moortgat M (1988) Categorial investigations: logical and linguistic aspects of the Lambek Calculus. 
Providence RI: Foris Publications. 
28. Barr M, Wells C (1995) Category theory for computing science: Prentice Hall. 
29. Pierce BC (1996) Basic category theory for computer scientists. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
30. Moggi E (1989) A category-theoretic account of program modules. Proceedings of Category theory 
and Computer Science. London, UK: Springer-Verlag. 
31. Wadler P (1992) Monads for functional programming. Mathematical Structures in Computer Science 
2: 461-493. 
32. Mason O, Verwoerd M (2007) Graph theory and networks in Biology. Iet Systems Biology 1: 89-119. 
33. Verdasca J, da Gama MMT, Nunes A, Bernardino NR, Pacheco JM, et al. (2005) Recurrent epidemics 
in small world networks. Journal of Theoretical Biology 233: 553-561. 
34. Pastor-Satorras R, Vespignani A (2001) Epidemic spreading in scale-free networks. Physical Review 
Letters 86: 3200-3203. 
35. Rodriguez E, George N, Lachaux JP, Martinerie J, Renault B, et al. (1999) Perception's shadow: long-
distance synchronization of human brain activity. Nature 397: 430-433. 
36. Jeong H, Tombor B, Albert R, Oltvai ZN, Barabasi AL (2000) The large-scale organization of 
metabolic networks. Nature 407: 651-654. 
37. Barabasi AL, Oltvai ZN (2004) Network biology: Understanding the cell's functional organization. 
Nature Reviews Genetics 5: 101-U115. 

12 
38. Jeong H, Mason SP, Barabasi AL, Oltvai ZN (2001) Lethality and centrality in protein networks. 
Nature 411: 41-42. 
39. Barabasi AL, Albert R (1999) Emergence of scaling in random networks. Science 286: 509-512. 
40. Milo R, Shen-Orr S, Itzkovitz S, Kashtan N, Chklovskii D, et al. (2002) Network motifs: Simple 
building blocks of complex networks. Science 298: 824-827. 
41. Eilenberg S, MacLane S (1945) General theory of natural equivalences. J Trans Amer Math Soc 58 
231-294. 
42. Lawvere FW, editor (1965) The category of categories as a foundation for mathematics. New York: 
Springer-Verlag  
43. Lane SM (1998) Categories for the working mathematician. New York: Springer-Verlag. 
44. Lawvere FW, Schanuel SH (2009) Conceptual mathematics. A first introduction to categories. 
Cambridge Cambridge University Press. 
45. Awodey S (2010) Category theory. Oxford Oxford University Press. 
46. Sica G, editor (2006) What is category theory? Monza, Italy: Polimetrica S.A.S. 
47. Brown R, Porter T (2006) Category Theory: an abstract setting for analogy and comparison In: Sica G, 
editor. What is category theory? Monza, Italy: Polimetrica S.A.S. 
48. Spivak DI (2011) Ologs: a categorical framework for knowledge representation. 
http://mathmitedu/~dspivak/cs/ologspdf (preprint). 
49. Ackbarow T, Chen X, Keten S, Buehler MJ (2007) Hierarchies, multiple energy barriers and 
robustness govern the fracture mechanics of alpha-helical and beta-sheet protein domains. P Natl 
Acad Sci USA 104: 16410-16415  
50. Paparcone R, Buehler MJ (2011) Failure of A-beta-(1-40) amyloid fibrils under tensile loading. 
Biomaterials 37: 3367-3374. 
51. Csermely P (2008) Creative elements: network-based predictions of active centres in proteins and 
cellular and social networks. Trends in Biochemical Sciences 33: 569-576. 
52. Szalay MS, Kovacs IA, Korcsmaros T, Bode C, Csermely P (2007) Stress-induced rearrangements of 
cellular networks: Consequences for protection and drug design. FEBS Letters 581: 3675-3680. 
53. Powell WW, White DR, Koput KW, Owen-Smith J (2005) Network dynamics and field evolution: The 
growth of interorganizational collaboration in the life sciences. American Journal of Sociology 
110: 1132-1205. 
54. Schneider CM, Andrade RFS, Shinbrot T, Herrmann HJ (2011) The fragility of protein-protein 
interaction networks. Europhysics Letters 95: 16001. 
 
 

13 
Figures & figure legends 
beta-sheet
nanocrystals
3 -helices
1
hetero-
nanocomposite
silk fibril
spider web
ACTG DNA/ACGU mRNA,
20 amino acids
melody
riff
modulating
envelope
, distinct
instruments
i.e.
tones at different
pitch, chords
(composite
of tones)
basic wave forms
orchestral
sound
(symphony)
sine
triangle
square
sawtooth
t
Amp
A
D
S
R
Nano-
indentation
Optical/
magnetic
tweezers
(light)
Atomic
Force
Microscopy
(AFM)
MEMS
testing
NEMS
testing
x-ray
diffraction
NMR
ssNMR
TEM
(e.g.
cryo
and other
methods)
Micropipette
Reactive
MD
Reactive
MD
Meso-
scale
models
(coarse-
grain)
Meso-
scale
models
(coarse-
grain)
Continuum
models
Continuum
models
Non-
reactive
MD
Non-
reactive
MD
QM
(DFT)
QM
(DFT)
Tomography
Conventional
testing
Micromechanics
DMA
Optical
microscopy
d i v e r s i t y
u n i v e r s a l i t y
Figure 1. Illustration of multiscale hierarchical structure of protein materials, a summary of 
multiscale modeling and experimental tools, and an analogy to music (figure adapted from [14]). In 
protein materials (left for the example of spider silk), multifunctional materials are created via the 
formation of hierarchical structures. The synergistic interaction of structures and mechanisms at multiple 
scales provides the basis for enhanced functionality of biological materials despite the reliance on few 
distinct building blocks. Similar to the case of protein materials is music (right), where universal elements 
such as basic wave forms or a set of available instruments are used in hierarchical assemblies to provide 
macroscale functionality, and eventually a particular orchestral sound (e.g. a symphony). Universality 
tends to dominate at smaller levels, whereas diversity is found predominantly at larger, functional levels. 
The integrated use of computational and experimental methods at multiple scales provides a powerful 
approach to elucidate the scientific concepts underlying the materiomics paradigm (center).  
 

14 
Figure 2. Simple examples of transformations preserving structure in category theory. Categories 
consist of objects and arrows which are closed under composition and satisfy certain conditions typical of 
functions. Ψ is a structure-preserving transformation (or covariant functor, or morphism of categories) 
between the two categories. If the categorical objects in this example are considered as sets of instances, 
then each instance of the set ‘A man’ is mapped to an instance of the set ‘A tennis ball’. This concept 
applies to all objects and arrows in the categories. 

15 
Figure 3. Visualization of protein materials considered here, and abstraction of how key functional 
properties (here: mechanical properties under axial extension) can be understood based on the 
interplay of a set of “building blocks”. A, Overview over fundamental building blocks of our protein 
materials. The protein materials considered here are composed of a linear arrangement of three elements, 
“bricks”, “glue”, and in some cases “lifeline”. Thereby as a “design rule”, brick and glue need to alternate 
in order to achieve a stable structure. That is, two brick or glue elements immediately next to each other 
would not stick together – the chemical reason is that bricks represent the protein’s polypeptide backbone 
and glue represents H-bonding which can only occur between residues in the backbone. The “lifeline” is a 
third element introduced here, reflecting the situation when there is still a physical connection between 
bricks even after the glue breaks. Chemically, this resembles the existence of “hidden” polypeptide length 
such that there exists a “covalent” link between two brick elements even after the H-bond glue has broken, 
where the hidden length is not “visible” before the glue is actually broken. B, Mechanical behavior of each 
of the building blocks characterized by a description of the failure extension. The hidden length of lifelines 
is reflected in the fact that the resting extension of the lifeline is roughly equal to the failure extension of 
the glue. Both the brick and the lifeline have large failure extensions relative to the glue. C, Model of an 
amyloid-like protein (or similarly, a beta-sheet crystal as depicted in the image on the right) under axial 
loading. This resembles a system without a lifeline since after breaking of the H-bond cluster (= glue) 
between the layers formed by clusters of polypeptide (= brick) no physical connection exists. D, model of 
an alpha-helical protein under axial loading. This resembles a system with a lifeline, as after breaking of 
the cluster of ≈3-4 H-bonds (= glue) that are formed between clusters of amino acids (=brick) there still 
exists a physical connection due to the polypeptide backbone as shown in D (= lifeline). As shown in E, 
the existence of a lifeline has major implications on the functional properties of the overall system. A 
system with a lifeline (D) shows a ductile response, where a connection can be sustained at large extension 
as compared to the glue alone. In contrast a system without a lifeline (C) shows a brittle response, where 
only a small extension can be sustained until the material breaks (which equals roughly the failure 
extension of the glue). 
 
 

16 
 
Figure 4. Pictured here is an olog, which captures the semantic content of our situations, as 
described in Sections 3.1 – 3.3. Each box represents an abstract type, and each arrow represents an aspect 
(or observable) of that type. Each type refers to a set of intended instances, which we think of as being 
contained in the box. For example, box E contains ductile sequences of bricks and glue (like an alpha 
helix), whereas box V contains real numbers (like 9.228). Each arrow from a source box to a target box 
refers to an observation one may make on things in the source box, for which the observed result is a thing 
in the target box. For example, arrow 11:EO indicates that one can observe of any ductile material S a 
pair of numbers (R,r) where R is much greater than r. The meaning of these numbers R and r is enforced 
by a “commutative diagram” declared in Table 1 (line 6): the number R must refer to the failure extension 
of the system S and the number r must refer to the failure extension of its glue. This says that a ductile 
system fails at a much greater extension than its glue elements do.  Perhaps a simpler but more mundane 
observation is made by arrow 37:QV which indicates that one can take any pair of real numbers (x,y) 
and observe the x-coordinate. So the pair (8.0, 3.2) is inside box Q, and it is observed by arrow 37 to have 
x-coordinate 8.0, which is in box V. Thus, each box is meant to contain an intended set of instances and 
each arrow is meant to functionally relate two such sets. The rest of the olog is recorded in Tables 1 and 2. 
Some are commutative diagrams which declare two paths through the olog to be equivalent and some are 
fiber products which define new types in terms of others.  
 

17 
 
Figure 5. Visual representation of the social network. A, Overview over fundamental building blocks of 
our social networks. The social networks considered here are composed of a linear arrangement of three 
elements, “bricks”, “glue” and in some cases, “lifeline”. Thereby, as a “design rule”, brick and glue need to 
alternate in order to achieve a stable structure. That is, two brick or glue elements immediately next to each 
other would not stick together; where the chemical reason is that bricks represent participants with 
transceivers and glue represents wireless communication that, in our case, can only occur between 
neighboring participants. The “lifeline” is a third element that is introduced here, reflecting the situation 
when there is still a physical connection of bricks even after the glue breaks. This reflects the existence of 
a “hidden” connection in that there exists a physical passageway between two brick elements even after the 
communication over the wireless connection is no longer feasible. The hidden connection is not “visible” 
before the glue is actually broken because, for reasons of efficiency, participants will choose to 
communicate the simple messages wirelessly rather than verbally, as the latter requires much more effort. 
B, Mechanical behavior of each of the building blocks. The hidden length of lifelines is reflected in the 
fact that the resting extension of the lifeline is roughly equal to the failure extension of the glue. In other 
words, lifeline passageways are used only when wireless communication is no longer feasible. Both the 
brick and the lifeline have large failure extensions relative to the glue because participants and their verbal 
communication function perfectly well in the presence of noise on the wireless channels. C, Representation 
of a social network not allowing for face-to-face interaction under stress from wireless noise. This 
resembles a system without a lifeline, as after noise on the wireless line reaches a critical point, messages 
can no longer be correctly conveyed. D, Representation of a social network allowing for face-to-face 
interaction under high levels of wireless noise. This resembles a system with a lifeline, as after messages 
can no longer be conveyed wirelessly, communication can still take place, due to the physical passageways 
as shown in D. As shown in E, the existence of a lifeline has major implications on the functional 
properties of the system. A system with a lifeline (D) shows a ductile response, where a connection can be 
sustained at large displacements as compared to the glue alone. In contrast a system without a lifeline (C) 
shows a brittle response, where only a small displacement can be sustained until the material breaks 
(roughly the failure extension of the glue).  
 

18 
 
 
Figure 6. Schematic illustration of the approach discussed here, the representation of complex 
hierarchical systems such as biological materials (e.g. silk) and language in the same category theory 
space (olog). The description of how functional properties emerge in different hierarchical systems can be 
rigorously described using this approach, and fundamental insight can be derived. This finds immediate 
applications in the design of synthetic systems (e.g. novel materials).  

19 
Tables 
 
 
 
Table 1.  Commutative diagrams in the olog. Each sequence of consecutive arrows through the olog 
(Figure 4) is called a path, which represents a functional relationship between its starting point and its 
ending point. Two such paths AB may result in the same function, and the 17 lines of this table record 
17 cases of this phenomenon in our olog. The idea is that given an instance of A, each of these paths 
returns the same instance of type B.  By having this additional data, we confine the meaning of the label on 
each box and arrow – they cannot stray far from our intended meaning without “breaking” these path 
equalities. Thus this table serves as an additional check on our labels. [For a more diagrammatic 
description of the same information presented in the typical style of category theory, see Figure S1.] 
 

20 
 
 
Table 2.  Fiber product diagrams in the olog. Some boxes in the olog (Figure 4) are defined in terms of 
others by use of so-called fiber products. For example, object A is defined in terms of three others in 
relationship, DHG: given a system of bricks, glue, and lifeline (D), we observe its structure graph (H) 
and set it equal to a “chain” graph (G) – in so doing we define “one-dimensionality” for a system. A reader 
of this olog realizes that our notion of one-dimensionality is not up for interpretation, but directly 
dependent on the other notions in this olog. By having this additional data, we confine the meaning of 24 
labels (8 for boxes, 16 for arrows) in the olog. Thus this table serves to anchor the interpretation of our 
olog more firmly to its original intention. [For a more diagrammatic description of the same information 
presented in the typical style of category theory, see Figure S2.] 
 

21 
 
 
Table 3.  Analogy between protein and social network. Because our olog (Figure 4) was designed to 
abstract away the particulars of either the protein or the social network (using terms like “brick” instead of 
“amino-acid cluster” or “transceiver”), this table serves to remind the reader of the particulars in each case. 
Each type in the olog is described in these two cases. Some types, such as “a real number”, stand on their 
own and we merely give examples. Others, such as “a one-dimensional system of bricks, glue, and 
lifeline” require a bit more description in the concrete cases. For more on this, see sections 2.1 through 2.3.  
This table provides the necessary description to connect the concrete formulations in the case of our 
protein and social network to the abstract formulation given by Figure 4.  

22 
Supplementary Figure  
 
Figure S1. Commutativity in the olog of the protein.  In each of these eight diagrams, there are two 
paths from the upper left-hand box to the lower right-hand box.  By stating that these diagrams are 
commutative, we are saying that these two paths are equivalent – given the same input they produce the 
same output.  For example it is declared 30;39=32;35 : NU, which means that starting with a pair (b,g) 
of building blocks serving as bricks and glue, one can obtain a building block in two ways, but either way 
the answer is the same: the brick.  Similarly, 31;40=32;36 : NU, which means that again starting with 
(b,g) we can again obtain a building block in two ways, but either way the answer will be the same: glue.  
An example of a non-commutative diagram found in the original olog is: 31;40 ≠ 30;39 : NU.  Starting 
with a pair (b,g), the path 31;40 produces its glue element whereas the path 30;39 produces its brick 
element.  These facts are in some sense obvious, but to make ologs a rigorous system such facts must be 
recorded.   

23 
 
 
Figure S2. Fiber products in the olog of the protein.  In each case, the upper left-hand box is the “fiber 
product” of the rest of the square.  The property of being a fiber product defines the upper left-hand object: 
for example the notion of “one-dimensionality” in box A is defined for a system of bricks, glue, and 
lifeline by examining the structure of that system as a graph, and forcing that this graph is a chain graph 
(i.e. the elements are connected one to the next in a line).  
 

