Analysis the Application of Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Technology in Smart Tourism
Jie Zhang(B)
Dalian Vocational & Technical College, Dalian 116021, Liaoning, China
clear188@163.com
Abstract. This article discusses the basic content and artiﬁcial intelligence tech-
nology connotation, combined with the speciﬁc application of artiﬁcial intelli-
gence technology in the collection and push of tourism information, artiﬁcial
intelligence tourism interpretation system, intelligent scenic spot service system,
intelligent tourism route planning and design, tourism administrative manage-
ment efﬁciency, and tourist source development forecasting,through research to
strengthen information and network security management, constantly improve
relevant laws and regulations, ethical risk management. Its purpose is to improve
the awareness of artiﬁcial intelligence technology application value level, promote
the healthy development of intelligent tourism system.
Keywords: artiﬁcial intelligence technology · smart tourism · machine learning
technology
1
Introduction
In 2014, “Smart Tourism” became a very hot topic in the tourism industry, and this year
was also called the “Smart Tourism Year”. The source of “Smart Tourism” can be traced
back to the “Smart Earth” concept proposed by IBM in 2008, together with the “smart
city” practice implemented at that time, coupled with the popularization of smart mobile
terminals such as smart hands and tablet computers, it provides good conditions for the
realization of smart tourism. In the construction of the smart tourism system, artiﬁcial
intelligence technology has good application value. By combing the speciﬁc application
of artiﬁcial intelligence technology in smart tourism, it has a positive signiﬁcance for
promoting the healthy economic development of the tourism industry.
2
Overview of the Basic Content of Smart Tourism
2.1
Basic Content
Smart tourism is also called intelligent tourism. It is to use new technologies such as
cloud computing and the Internet of Things to actively perceive information on tourism
resources, tourism economy, tourism activities, tourists, etc. through the Internet/mobile
© The Author(s) 2023
A. Luqman et al. (Eds.): PMIS 2022, AHCS 6, pp. 376–383, 2023.
https://doi.org/10.2991/978-94-6463-016-9_40

Analysis the Application of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Technology
377
Fig. 1. The development process of smart tourism
Internet and with the help of portable terminal Internet devices. With this information,
work and travel plans are arranged and adjusted in time, so as to achieve the effect of
intelligent perception and convenient use of all kinds of travel information. The construc-
tion and development of smart tourism will ultimately be reﬂected in the three levels
of tourism management, tourism services and tourism marketing. In its development
process, it has mainly experienced four stages (as shown in Fig. 1), namely traditional
tourism →e-tourism →digital tourism →smart tourism. Smart tourism in the current
context relies on IoT technology, cloud computing technology and artiﬁcial intelligence
technology have the characteristics of higher degree of freedom, stronger tourism per-
sonalization, higher level of collaboration, and higher level of information sharing, so
as to provide more convenience for people’s travel and meet people’s management
requirements for going out.
2.2
The Main Function of Smart Tourism
From the user’s point of view, smart tourism has the following functions: First, the nav-
igation function, adding location services (LBS) to travel information, allowing tourists
to know their location at any time. There are many ways to determine the location,
such as GPS navigation, base station positioning, WIFI positioning, RFID position-
ing, landmark positioning, and image recognition and positioning in the future. In the
speciﬁc use, as the location changes, various information is also updated in time, and
actively displayed on the web and map, reﬂecting the characteristics of directness, ini-
tiative, timeliness and convenience. Second, the tour guide function, while determining
the location, will actively display surrounding tourist information on the web page and
on the map, including scenic spots, hotels, restaurants, entertainment, stations, etc., to
create convenient conditions for people to travel. Fourth, the shopping guide function,
because it uses the mobile Internet, tourists can make reservations anytime, anywhere.
Coupled with a secure online payment platform, you can change and formulate the next
travel itinerary anytime and anywhere, and the convenience has been saved by more than
70% compared with the previous year.

378
J. Zhang
3
Connotation of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Technology
3.1
Artiﬁcial Intelligence Perception Technology
In the application of artiﬁcial intelligence technology, intelligent perception technology
is an important part, and its branch technology involves pattern recognition technology,
natural language processing technology, computer vision processing technology, etc. ➀
Pattern recognition technology refers to the sorting and analysis of various characteristics
of the characterizing things, in order to complete the work of description, recognition,
classiﬁcation and interpretation of things to meet the analysis needs of data parameters
in different situations. Common methods include sentence recognition technology, sta-
tistical decision analysis technology, artiﬁcial neural network technology, etc. ➁Natural
language processing technology is a technology that uses computers to process written
or spoken language information. The application involves automatic text recognition,
machine translation, and automatic language synthesis. ➂Computer vision technology
uses the basic principles of computers to sort out the image data, so as to ﬁnd match-
ing application materials in the object feature library to meet the corresponding use
requirements.
3.2
Machine Learning Technology
In the artiﬁcial intelligence technology system, machine learning technology is a very
basic content, and it is also a basic condition for the smooth deployment of artiﬁcial
intelligence. In the application of this technology, it will develop learning algorithms to
analyze and learn data obtained by sensors and data stored in databases, and then realize
the self-evolution of the system. Each evolutionary upgrade will increase its intelligence
by 10%–30%. It also makes the system’s perfection and use value continue to improve
to meet the corresponding use requirements.
3.3
Artiﬁcial Intelligence Reasoning Technology
In the artiﬁcial intelligence technology system, intelligent reasoning technology is also
a very important component (the technical framework is shown in Fig. 2). In the speciﬁc
reasoning design, the logical content needs to be sorted out. For artiﬁcial intelligence,
it uses the logic includes classic logic (more than 70%) and extensible logic to meet
application requirements in different situations. At the same time, it is also necessary
to do a good job in search, its role is to better complete a certain application goal, and
use this to complete continuous reasoning to meet the corresponding use requirements.
In the application, intelligent activities can also be regarded as a process of “problem
solving”. In this process, explicit and invisible problems are processed or searched to
obtain the required retrieval data to meet the application requirements. In addition, in the
application of intelligent reasoning technology, an expert system will also be involved.
In the application, this system will combine professional knowledge to deal with speciﬁc
problems to meet the corresponding promotion and application requirements.

Analysis the Application of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Technology
379
Fig. 2. The overall framework of the artiﬁcial intelligence inference system
3.4
Artiﬁcial Intelligence Action technology
In addition to the key technologies mentioned above, intelligent action technology is
also an important component of the artiﬁcial intelligence technology system. In speciﬁc
applications, intelligent action technology includes data mining technology, intelligent
control technology, etc. In the context of the continuous improvement of the Internet
technology system, big data has become the norm for development. It is difﬁcult to meet
the needs of social development just for data retrieval. How to better automatically obtain
information has become a content that needs to be paid attention during the development
period. The data mining technology used in it can also extract a large amount of data,
condense the massive data into 30%–40% of data, so that it can better understand the
law of data development and meet the corresponding use needs. In the application of
intelligent control technology, it can also better promote the goal realization process, to
improve the application value of the sorted data information.
4
Speciﬁc Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Technology
in Smart Tourism
4.1
Collection and Push of Tourism Information
From the perspective of application, artiﬁcial intelligence technology has a very good
application in the process of collecting and pushing tourism information. In the speciﬁc
application of technology, the picture information, language information, and text infor-
mation of all kinds of things can be sorted, and then in the context of the application of
intelligent reasoning technology, the information content can be compared and analyzed,
and 70%–80% of the data can be ﬁltered out in the next stage of collation. Under the
application background of data mining technology and intelligent control technology,
30%–40% of tourism information is condensed again, and the communication project is

380
J. Zhang
used to transmit the data to tourists, and the development of personalized tourism courses
for tourists has a positive role in promoting. For example, a certain area uses artiﬁcial
intelligence technology to sort the local basic tourist information according to the degree
of popularity, and also sort out the individual needs of tourists, thereby increasing the
matching degree of push information to 85%–90%, to improve the effectiveness of the
pushed information [1].
4.2
Artiﬁcial Intelligence Tourism Interpretation System
From the perspective of application, artiﬁcial intelligence technology also has very good
applications in artiﬁcial intelligence tourism interpretation systems. In the context of the
application of big data technology, the interpretation information of scenic spots can
be sorted, and the GPS positioning system can be used to locate the location of all
scenic spots, so that intelligent interpretation can be launched according to the walking
trajectory of tourists. Under normal circumstances, the tourism layout of scenic spots
and museums will be divided into several functional areas, such as tourist areas, data
storage areas, cultural heritage areas, etc. This also provides convenient conditions for
the organization of knowledge points.
And in the application, natural language technology will also be used to process the
voice, and machine translation software will be translated into multiple languages, such
as English, Japanese, Korean, etc., to provide intelligent travel assistance for tourists
from different countries. For outbound tourists, when encountering foreign language
road signs, they can also use image processing technology and character recognition
technology to complete text translation by taking pictures. The whole process can be
completed within 0.1–1.0 s, to provide better services for outing travelers and meet the
corresponding requirements [2].
4.3
Intelligent Scenic Service System
From the perspective of the application situation, artiﬁcial intelligence technology also
has a good application value in the service system of intelligent scenic spots, which is
also an important function of the application process of artiﬁcial intelligence technology.
In the intelligent scenic spot service system activities, its content involves the hotel
reservation service, tour reservation service, 3D preview service, etc. With the help of
artiﬁcial intelligence technology, at the same time, the service content is sorted out,
divided into several sections, and named. For example, large scenic spots can be divided
into animal and plant viewing areas, animal viewing areas, amusement areas, etc. At
the same time, public toilets, beverage shops, restaurants, souvenirs, entrance and exit
locations will also be marked to provide convenience for tourists to travel, to better meet
the corresponding use requirements and improve the satisfaction of tourists by 20%–30%
[3].
4.4
Planning and Design of Smart Tourist Routes
In the practical application, the artiﬁcial intelligence technology also has a good appli-
cation in the intelligent tourist route planning and design. In the application of artiﬁcial

Analysis the Application of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Technology
381
intelligence technology, an electronic map intelligent service system can be established,
tourists enter the starting and end points to obtain the corresponding trafﬁc sugges-
tions, and provide aircraft, trains, buses, bicycles, subways and other lines for tourists to
choose. In order to facilitate the choice of tourists, some detailed information will also
be provided in the route planning and design, such as the loss of time of various means
of transportation, passing stations, etc., which can also provide more valuable help for
tourists to choose travel routes, so as to provide convenient conditions for tourists to
travel. At the same time, in the planning of tourist routes, some scenic points along the
routes will also be marked, and the appropriate tour time is proposed, so that the screen-
ing efﬁciency of 30%–50% of tourists can meet the corresponding use requirements of
[4].
4.5
Tourism Administrative Management Efﬁciency
In practical applications, artiﬁcial intelligence technology also has a good application
in the efﬁciency of tourism administration. In the application of artiﬁcial intelligence
technology, a dynamic service system for tourism administration management can be
established. Tourists can input the problems encountered during the tour and make notes
in the system. For content that accounts for more than 10% of questions, it will be made
into an automatic response mode. After visitors ask questions, they can give feedback
as soon as possible, which can also increase tourist satisfaction to more than 85%.
To better meet the application requirements. At the same time, with the assistance of
artiﬁcial intelligence technology, the tourism management department can also quickly
communicate with tourists. Some problems that cannot be resolved at the time, such
as ticket sales disputes, tourism rights disputes, etc. will be notiﬁed to the management
staff as soon as possible, and they will also rush quickly to the scene to resolve the
contradiction between the two parties as soon as possible, and increase the problem
handling efﬁciency to more than 80% [5].
4.6
Forecast of the Development of Source Areas
In addition to the above-mentioned application content, artiﬁcial intelligence technology
also has very good applications in the development and prediction of customer source.
Based on the data collation results obtained by artiﬁcial intelligence technology, the
accuracy rate exceeds 95%, which lays a good foundation for administrative manage-
ment service. In the context of artiﬁcial intelligence technology applications, genetic
algorithms, fuzzy time series, rough sets, and other methods can be used to sort out the
collected big data, to mine 30%−50% of the value data, and build predictive models
around the application data to predict the future development of the tourist source mar-
ket. When tourists choose scenic spots, they will also arrange their personal travel time
based on the hot spots and the best time to visit based on big data statistics, so as to bring
a better tour experience and improve the tourist impression of the scenic spot [6].

382
J. Zhang
5
Matters Needing Attention When Applying Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Technology in Smart Tourism
5.1
Strengthen Information and Network Security Management
By strengthening information and network security management, the conﬁdentiality of
the transmitted information can be improved and the probability of information risk
leakage can be reduced. The smart tourism management system based on artiﬁcial intel-
ligence technology, while providing convenient conditions for people to travel, also faces
the risk of information leakage. If it is not protected, it will directly affect the relevant
rights and interests of tourists and bring unpredictable loss. In this regard, it is also
necessary to strengthen technical protection in actual work, such as ﬁrewall technology,
identity authentication technology, code recognition technology, etc., so that it can bet-
ter resist the negative impact of vicious attacks and form a more secure smart tourism
service environment, so as to provide tourists with more convenient service content [7].
5.2
Continuously Improve Relevant Laws and Regulations
Through continuous improvement of relevant laws and regulations, it can provide effec-
tive guarantee for the integration of artiﬁcial intelligence technology and provide reliable
help for the improvement of the intelligent tourism system. In speciﬁc practice, ﬁrst, do
a good job of clarifying the conceptual boundaries, and use this to do a ﬁne management,
improve the standardization and timeliness of the results of deep-level problem handling,
to lay the foundation for the advancement of related work [8]. Second, in the process
of establishing laws and regulations, it is also necessary to ensure that the contents of
the laws and regulations established are systematic and comprehensive. For example,
relevant contents at the national management level, local level, and user level need to be
detailed in the speciﬁcations. This can also lay the foundation for the orderly promotion
of related management activities, and at the same time create good conditions for the
healthy and sustainable development of smart tourism.
5.3
Do a Good Job in Ethical Risk Management
By doing a good job in ethical and moral hazard management, it is possible to reduce
the negative impact of the application of artiﬁcial intelligence technology and increase
the application value of artiﬁcial intelligence technology. In the application of artiﬁcial
intelligence technology, there are some ethical risks, such as human voice processing,
handwriting forgery, portrait modiﬁcation, etc. The emergence of these risks will also
directly affect people’s life safety and social stability. In this regard, it is necessary to
strengthen supervision work to create a safer and more comfortable network environment
[9].
6
Conclusions
In summary, strengthening information and network security management can improve
the conﬁdentiality of information transmitted, and constantly improve relevant laws

Analysis the Application of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Technology
383
and regulations, which can provide effective guarantees for the integration of artiﬁcial
intelligence technology, manage ethical risks, and reduce the negative impact of artiﬁcial
intelligence technology application. By applying artiﬁcial intelligence technology to
smart tourism activities, it is of positive signiﬁcance for optimizing the smart tourism
service system and promoting the healthy development of the industry’s economy.
References
1. Zhang ZC, Huang P, Long Y, Li ZZ (2021) Model construction of a smart tourism integrated
system based on artiﬁcial intelligence. Sci Technol World 12:10–12
2. Zou MX (2021) On the application and inﬂuence of smart technology in international hotels in
the era of smart tourism. Manag Technol Small Medium-Sized Enterp (First Issue) 04:178–179
3. Xie QX, Su HW, Tan RH, Lin XM, Wang SY (2021) A review of intangible cultural heritage
tourism research based on artiﬁcial intelligence. Sci Technol Innov 05:108–109
4. Wang J (2020) Discussion on the application of artiﬁcial intelligence technology in smart
tourism. Manag Technol Small Medium-Sized Enterp (Early Issue) 09(173–174):177
5. Yang JC (2020) Research on the application of artiﬁcial intelligence tour guide products based
on user experience. Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
6. Deng J (2020) Research on the application of artiﬁcial intelligence technology in the
construction of smart tourism system. Tour Overview (Second Half Month) 04:17–18
7. Ji JQ (2018) The application of artiﬁcial intelligence in tourism information services. Contemp
Tour (Golf Travel) 08:40–42
8. Li JQ (2018) The application of artiﬁcial intelligence technology in Qingdao tourism. Electron
Technol Softw Eng 09:247
9. Li GZ (2017) The application of artiﬁcial intelligence technology in smart tourism. Autom
Instr 12:225–227
Open Access This chapter is licensed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-
NonCommercial 4.0 International License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/),
which permits any noncommercial use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any
medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source,
provide a link to the Creative Commons license and indicate if changes were made.
The images or other third party material in this chapter are included in the chapter’s Creative
Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not
included in the chapter’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by
statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from
the copyright holder.

