IN DEFENSE OF EXTREME 
(FALLIBILISTIC) APRIORISM 
Barry Smith* 
I shall presuppose as undefended background to what follows a position 
of scientific realism, a doctrine to the effect (i) that the world exists and (ii) 
that through the working out of ever more sophisticated theories our scientific 
picture of reality will approximate ever more closely to the world as it really 
is. Against this background consider, now, the following question: 
I. Do the empirical theories with the help of which we seek to 
approximate a good or true picture of reality rest on any non­
empirical assumptions? 
One can answer this question with either a ‘yes’ or a ‘no’. ‘No’ is the 
preferred answer of most contemporary methodologists — Murray Rothbard 
is one distinguished counterexample to this trend — who maintain that 
empirical theories are completely free of non-empirical (‘a priori’) 
admixtures and who see science as a matter of the gathering of pure ‘data’ 
obtained through simple observation. From such data, scientific propositions 
are then supposed to be somehow capable of being established. 
It is one solid result of the philosophy of science that no conception of 
the way scientific knowledge is gained and scientific hypotheses are 
formulated can be acceptable. The philosophy of science has shown that 
certain categories (conceptions, hypotheses, assumptions) are necessarily 
presupposed if, for example, an empirical observation is to be scientifically 
usable. Every observation is in this sense ‘theory-’ or at least ‘category­
laden’. One cannot measure anything, and one can bring no results of 
measurement into correlation with one another, if one does not have prior 
concepts or categories of what one wants to measure.1  To carry out 
experiments in meaningful and systematic fashion, to represent the results of 
these experiments theoretically, and to process these results, one needs 
assumptions, concepts, categories and other theoretical instruments. Logic and 
the theory of definition, as well as many branches of pure mathematics, 
belong to this pre-empirical foundation of the empirical sciences — ‘pre­
empirical’ in the sense that it cannot be gained through induction or 
observation but rather makes induction and observation possible. 
All scientists bring with them non-empirical presuppositions of different 
* Barry Smith is Professor of Philosophy at the State University of New York at Buffalo. 
1 See for example Karl Popper, Conjectures and Refutations: The Growth of Scientific 
Knowledge, 4th ed. (London: Routledge, 1972), 187ff. A more powerful formulation of this 
same thesis is to be found already in the writings of Edmund Husserl’s teacher Franz Brentano. 
See Franz Brentano, Deskriptive Psychologie (Hamburg: Meiner, 1982); English translation 
by B. Müller Descriptive Psychology (London: Routledge, 1995). 
JOURNAL OF LIBERTARIAN STUDIES 12:1 (SPRING 1996): 179-192 ©1996 CENTER FOR LIBERTARIAN STUDIES 

180 
THE JOURNAL OF LIBERTARIAN STUDIES 
sorts, presuppositions which are usually tacit in nature, which will often seem 
trivial when made explicit, and which will therefore no less often lend sanction 
to the view that they are somehow empty or analytic — that they are all 
without exception derived from logic. Most twentieth-century philosophers of 
science have indeed assumed as a matter of course that scientific theories 
ought properly to consist entirely of empirical propositions (propositions 
amenable to empirical testing) built up on a foundation of strictly analytic 
propositions of logic and mathematics. This leads to the further question: 
II. Are the propositions which express the pre-empirical 
assumptions of empirical science in every case analytic 
(tautological, lacking in content)? 
‘Yes’, say the logical positivists. Logic, and all that one can derive from 
logic, together with conventional definitions, suffices in their view for the 
purposes of this non-empirical part of science. Many later analytic 
philosophers have also believed that this logical-positivist conception of the 
indispensable non-empirical foundation of science is the only one that can be 
seriously entertained. They have not, however, noticed that the corresponding 
analyses even of the simplest examples of non-empirical propositions have 
still to be provided. Indeed, too often they let the matter rest on programmatic 
declarations and did not care about providing examples of any sort. 
Consider for example the law of the transitivity of the part-whole 
relation.2  This law reads as follows: 
[TRANS] If A is a part of B, and B a part of C, then A is also a part of C. 
It may be that some of us may recognize a point in our lives when we first 
apprehended this law. But still, it is difficult seriously to entertain the thesis 
that our knowledge of the law is a result of empirical research, of observation 
and induction. The proposition in question is, however, clearly of 
extraordinary importance for every science and for every scientific 
experiment. Like many other laws pertaining to the simplest and most general 
relational categories, it is at the same time also entirely trivial. Now it is a 
common peculiarity of human beings that they like to turn away from trivial 
or elementary propositions of this sort and that they have a tendency to refuse 
to accept their peculiarities and their consequences: ‘trop de vérité nous 
étonne’, as Pascal once formulated the matter.3  Who, after all, is interested in 
the fact that human action exists, that pleasure is different from greed, that 
triangles are different from squares, that warnings are different from 
congratulatings, that Julius Caesar is not a cardinal number. It is for this 
reason possible that both philosophers and scientists have often overlooked 
2 See Barry Smith, “Austrian Economics and Austrian Philosophy”, in Wolfgang Grassl and 
Barry Smith, eds. Austrian Economics: Historical and Philosophical Background (New York: 
New York University Press, 1986; London and Sydney: Croom Helm, 1986), 1–36. See also 
Barry Smith, “Aristotle, Menger, Mises: An Essay in the Metaphysics of Economics”, in B. 
Caldwell, ed., Carl Menger and His Economic Legacy, Annual Supplement to vol. 22, History 
of Political Economy (Durham and London: Duke University Press, 1990) 263–288, and Barry 
Smith, Austrian Philosopy (Chicago and LaSalle: Open Court, 1994). 
3 Blaise Pascal, Oeuvres Complètes, L. Lafuma, ed (Paris: Editions du Seuil, 1963), p. 527. 

Smith - In Defense of Extreme (Fallibilistic) Apriorism 
181 
the fact that all normal human beings are in possession of a whole host of 
such items of knowledge or insight. And for this reason also the temptation 
very easily arises to want to devalue such propositions by classifying them as 
‘analytic’ or ‘tautological’ or ‘lacking in content’. 
The law of the transitivity of the part-whole relation is however — for all 
its triviality — not analytic according to the standard reading of this notion. 
According to this standard reading we are to define ‘analytic’ as follows: 
A proposition is analytic if and only if it is either itself a law of 
deductive logic or it is capable of being transformed into such a law 
through the replacement of the defined terms it contains with 
corresponding definitions. 
All bachelors are unmarried can be exhibited as analytic in this sense by 
substituting ‘unmarried man’ for ‘bachelor’ and noting that the result is an 
instance of the logical law All A which are B are B. 
[TRANS], now, contains just one term which might come into question as 
‘defined’, namely the relational term ‘is a part of’. This expression is not a 
logical term; axioms governing the corresponding relation will be found in no 
standard logical textbook, and neither will [TRANS] itself. Unfortunately for 
the advocates of the logical positivist conception, however, it is also not 
definable. Rather it presents an example of one of those fundamental 
concepts with whose help the very process of defining scientific terms can 
sensibly begin. 
According to the definition of ‘analytic’ that is standardly accepted by 
logical positivists and by analytic philosophers in general, then, the given law 
is synthetic. But might one not call into question the preferred definition of 
‘analytic’? Might one not, with Carnap and others, assert that the truth of a 
proposition such as [TRANS] is somehow a consequence of the rules of 
language?4  [TRANS] would then be lacking in content in the sense that it 
would have nothing to do with the actual world but rather only with our 
language-use. Yet the given law would clearly still obtain even if no language 
or rules of language should ever have evolved; indeed it would clearly still 
obtain even in a world lacking all cognitive subjects. Even then it would still 
for example be true that, of three arbitrary parts of a stone, or of a planet, if 
the first is part of the second, and the second part of the third, then the first is 
also part of the third. To conceive the law of transitivity as ‘lacking in 
content’ in the suggested fashion is therefore at least a mite more problematic 
than the defenders of the corresponding theories have normally supposed. 
For this reason I shall assume in what follows that at least some of those 
non-empirical assumptions or hypotheses which are presupposed by the 
various branches of science are not analytic. The question then arises: 
4 See for example Rudolph Carnap, Meaning and Necessity. A Study in Semantics and Modal 
Logic (Chicago and London: University of Chicago Press, 1947), pp. 222-229. 

182 
THE JOURNAL OF LIBERTARIAN STUDIES 
III. Do we have an infallible knowledge of all synthetic pre­
empirical propositions which are presupposed by the various 
sciences in the different phases of their development? 
Already for purely logical reasons it is impossible that one should answer 
‘yes’ to this question. For such pre-empirical assumptions have not always 
remained the same through the course of scientific development, and 
successive assumptions have not always been consistent with one another. As 
is shown by the developments of the last one hundred years in the relations 
between geometry and physics, the results of empirical research sometimes 
seem to exercise a retroactive control over pre-empirical assumptions and lead 
to their elimination or modification. The realm of the pre-empirical thus 
provides no royal road to indubitable knowledge. Much rather is synthetic 
pre-empirical knowledge a hard-fought achievement, and those who seek such 
knowledge must be ready to face many detours and setbacks on the way. 
For the same (logical) reasons we should have to deny the thesis that the 
synthetic pre-empirical propositions at the core of science might all be true. 
Even in the realm of the pre-empirical there is no infallible knowledge and no 
truth-guarantee. We are dealing here with ‘assumptions’ in a strict sense of 
the word, assumptions which may, even if only in isolated instances, turn out 
to be false. Interestingly, traces of this fallibilistic conception of the a priori 
are present in Husserl, and already Leibniz spoke of a methodus conjecturalis 
a priori, which proceeds with the aid of hypotheses: [assumere] causas licet 
5
sine ulla probatione.
With this, however, there arises the following question: 
IV. Could these assumptions be arbitrary? 
Feyerabend has given a positive answer to this question, propounding 
what he calls an ‘anarchistic theory of knowledge’ and abandoning the 
scientific goal of truth in favour of a position of epistemological relativism. 
Feyerabend calls for a maximally broad and ‘ever increasing ocean of 
mutually incompatible (and perhaps even incommensurable) alternatives’ — 
of alternative counter-intuitive (and also ‘counter-inductive’) theories.6  As 
soon, however, as we attempt to imagine in concrete fashion what it would 
mean to practice science (or anything else) consciously and consistently 
according to the policy of arbitrariness, then we recognize that Feyerabend’s 
doctrine of ‘anything goes’ is entirely indefensible. For however large and 
important the role of serendipity in science may be, it is surely obvious that 
the idea that scientists could apply arbitrary assumptions is impracticable. 
Even those who hold falsification to be the primary motor of scientific 
development must insist that the falsification of arbitrary assumptions would 
be a fruitless enterprise. 
5 For Edmund Husserl’s fallibilism see for example his “Ideen zu einer reinen Phänomenologie 
und phänomenologischen Philosophie”, Jahrbuch für Philosophie und phänomenologische 
Forschung, 1, (1913). (and as Husserliana III/1, III/2). On Leibniz, see H. Schepers, “A 
priori/A posteriori”, Historisches Wörterbuch der Philosophie, vol. 1 (Basel/Stuttgart, 1971), 
p. 466.
6 Paul Feyerabend, Against Method (London: New Left Books, 1975), p. 30. 

183 
Smith - In Defense of Extreme (Fallibilistic) Apriorism 
This, however, implies that there must be some criteria of evaluation which 
the scientist applies, whether consciously or not, in working out his 
assumptions, or through which he allows himself to be guided in determining 
which assumptions are and which are not acceptable. 
How, then, does this evaluation of scientific assumptions proceed? The 
answer to this question that is favoured by the positivists is in its simplest 
version as follows: we evaluate assumptions exclusively according to their 
consequences, i.e. according to the principle of expedience or predictive 
power. We establish in other words that certain assumptions yield assertions 
about the future which are empirically confirmed — or at least not easily 
falsified. 
A position of this sort is defended for example by Milton Friedman, at 
least in his methodological writings.7  Friedman maintains that assumptions 
can be completely arbitrary, that they can even be false, if they only enjoy a 
certain power to generate predictions. It might for example turn out that an 
economic theory was developed which correlated stock-market movements 
with sun-spot activity; and then, so long as this theory enjoyed predictive 
power, it would as theory be fully acceptable. For the positivists, science 
evolves by becoming ever more concentrated on assumptions with predictive 
power. Theories and hypotheses which prove unreliable will be slowly filtered 
out. 
We have accepted already that there can in this sense be a control even of 
the pre-empirical assumptions adopted by the natural sciences. This can 
indeed be counted as a scientific commonplace. The corresponding process 
of filtering out however, whether it is understood according to the classical 
model of empirical confirmation or according to the Popperian model of 
falsification, because it is purely retrospective in nature, does not take us 
further with respect to the just-mentioned problem of arbitrariness. The 
question of criteria of ex ante evaluation remains to this extent open (a 
consequence which we could incidentally have predicted, if we had kept in 
mind the example of pure mathematics, in which pre- (or non-)empirical 
assumptions are equally necessary, but where talk of predictive power is 
clearly inappropriate). 
For it is of course not the case that the scientist occupies himself with 
arbitrary assumptions in the hope — and to the extent that the relevant 
assumptions were truly arbitrary this would have to be a groundless hope — 
that they will manifest in unexpected fashion a high predictive power. No 
scientist would ever consciously rely on pure arbitrariness in this fashion. The 
search for assumptions on the part of the scientist is subject rather to a whole 
host of ex ante (or as we might also say: a priori) controls. For he seeks only 
those assumptions which will give him a justified expectation of predictive 
power. The sun-spot example fails to awaken such expectations precisely 
because we can find no intelligible reason why sun-spots should cause stock­
exchange movements. Even if we were to accept such a correlation as a fact, 
we would still be unsatisfied with the corresponding hypothesis, because we 
would feel no certainty that this correlation might not at any moment cease to 
obtain. Certainty of this sort is acquired only where we have some explanation 
7 Milton Friedman, “The Methodology of Positive Economics”, in Essays on Positive 
Economics (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1953). 

184 
THE JOURNAL OF LIBERTARIAN STUDIES 
as to why these and those stock-exchange phenomena are associated in a non­
arbitrary fashion with these and those sun-spot phenomena. 
What, then, are the criteria of ex ante evaluation which serve to temper 
arbitrariness? Here there is much that is to be said – for instance that our 
assumptions must in the normal case stand to other accepted assumptions in 
relations of logical consistency. For our present purposes however it will 
suffice to point out that these assumptions must, in general at least, be 
characterized by a certain plausibility. Scientists attempt to find assumptions 
in relation to which they can have a justified expectation that they be true.8 
This holds not least for the category of synthetic pre-empirical assumptions. 
Indeed we want to claim that with the development of science the relevant 
synthetic pre-empirical propositions must come to be characterized by such 
plausibility to an ever increasing degree. 
Then, however, the question arises: 
V. Might this sort of plausibility be always 
a contextual affair, so that an 
‘intrinsic’ plausibility would be excluded? 
It is commonly held that nothing is in itself plausible, that what one finds 
plausible depends always on one’s presuppositions, perhaps also on certain 
background features of one’s society or language, on the current state of the 
sciences, and so on. The thesis that all the pre-empirical propositions that are 
of interest to us here might enjoy only this sort of context-determined 
(perhaps we might call it ‘hermeneutical’) plausibility is, however, rather 
improbable. I cannot, for example, imagine what it would be like for the 
plausibility of [TRANS] to be context-dependent in the suggested sense. 
[TRANS] is clearly accepted by all scientists, and it is presupposed also, it 
seems, in many of the simplest and most common human activities in all 
cultures, and it seems to be associated with no specific types of scientific 
problem or subject-matter. Moreover, it would similarly be difficult to 
conceive of a purely context-dependent plausibility for propositions like red 
is different from green or seeing is different from hearing. 
There are, it follows, intrinsically plausible pre-empirical assumptions 
which play an indispensable (if often trivial) role in the advance of science 
and knowledge. In the philosophical literature on the topic of the a priori it is 
usually only certain selected examples of such propositions which are treated 
of, so that it can easily appear as if they could each be shown in turn to be 
‘analytic’ or ‘tautological’ by some manipulation of definitions.9  The 
question however arises: 
VI. Whether the intrinsically plausible 
8 Their eventual falsification might then teach us something important and essential. Cf. Karl 
Popper, Objective Knowledge: An Evolutionary Approach  (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1972), 
pp. 196f. 
9 Against this, see wojciech Zelaniec, “Fathers, Kings and Promises: Husserl and Reinach on 
the A Priori,” Husserl Studies, 9, pp. 147–177. 

185 
Smith - In Defense of Extreme (Fallibilistic) Apriorism 
pre-empirical synthetic propositions which play an 
indispensable role in the sciences are truly given only 
individually, i.e., in such a way that there obtains no systematic 
relation between them? 
Kant answered this question in the negative in that the whole of arithmetic 
and of physics are based in his eyes on synthetic pre-empirical 
presuppositions. In the last hundred years it has however come to be taken for 
granted in the literature that we have to deal here with only single, 
unconnected propositions. Thus for example the logical positivists, in their 
attempts to demonstrate the analyticity of all pre-empirical assumptions, have 
over and over again worked with the same few examples: the law of cause and 
effect, the proposition that nothing can be red and green all over – examples 
which, in their isolation, can be dismissed as being of at most curiosity interest 
and of negligible scientific import. A more careful investigation shows, 
however, that there are whole systems of such pre-empirical propositions, even 
leaving aside the examples to which Kant himself paid special attention. Not 
only is mereology a self-contained science of the laws of part and whole,10 
there are also other sciences — or ‘pre-sciences’ (Vorwissenschaften) as 
Husserl’s teacher Stumpf called them11 — which consist exclusively in 
intrinsically plausible pre-empirical principles. Stumpf himself offers as 
examples what he called ‘phenomenology’ (which he defined as the theory 
of sensible phenomena), ‘eidology’ (the theory of non-sensory ‘formations’ 
given in experience, including value- and Gestalt-formations), and the 
‘general theory of relations’ (the theory of relational concepts such as 
‘similarity, equality, intensity, logical and real dependence, the relation of part 
and whole, and so on).12  These pre-sciences are according to Stumpf: 
. . . the atrium and the organon of every other science insofar as the 
object of every science includes their object, since all research makes 
use of relational concepts and laws . . . In an ideal encyclopedia of 
knowledge everything which can be said about relations between 
arbitrary elements in general would have to come first.13 
There are therefore, if Stumpf is right, whole systems of synthetic assumptions 
of a non-empirical sort, assumptions which enjoy an intrinsic plausibility and 
which play an important (even if easily overlooked) role in the sciences. 
Husserl himself held that there were three a priori ontologies, three 
‘material a priori sciences’ of thing, soul, and society: the pure science of 
nature, pure psychology and pure sociology, respectively. The ontology of 
things includes as branches the pure theory of space (geometry), pure time 
theory (chronometry), pure kinematics, and the pure disciplines of the 
possible deformations of spatial formations. The pure a priori science of the 
soul, initially called by Husserl ‘descriptive psychology’ and associated with 
the ‘rational psychology’ of Christian Wolff, has as its subject-matter the 
10 See Peter M. Simons, Parts. A Study in Ontology (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1987), ch 1. 
11 Carl Stumpf, “Zur Einteilung der Wissenschaften”, Abhandlungen der Königlichen 
Preussischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, phil.-hist. 1907, Kl., 4, pp. 39f. 
12 Stumpf, “Zur Einteilung”, p. 37. 
13 Stumpf, “Zur Einteilung”, p. 39. 

186 
THE JOURNAL OF LIBERTARIAN STUDIES 
psychical experiences, perceptions, memories, imagination, expectations, 
decisions, choices, and so on, in other words thought experiences of every 
sort, as well as feelings and acts of will. The regional ontology of society, 
finally, concerns itself with cultural formations like state, law, custom, church 
and so on.14 
Husserl’s early followers in Munich, the so-called ‘realist’ 
phenomenologists, and above all Pfänder, Scheler and Reinach, embraced 
wholeheartedly the project of working out in systematic fashion the entire 
pantheon of such theories and sub-theories, both formal and material. There 
are, first of all, the formal a priori disciplines of ontology and mathematics, 
including arithmetic, set theory, topology, mereology, the ‘theory of objects’ 
in Meinong’s sense, and many others. We then have a priori disciplines 
dealing with the three-dimensional world of space and time, and with the 
objects of nature, including the overlapping disciplines of rational 
mechanics,15 naive or qualitative physics,16 kinaesiology, stereology, 
geometry, chronometry, and so on. We then have the various sub-disciplines 
of aesthesiology (theories of secondary qualities17): colourology, the a priori 
science of tones, of feelings of warm and cold, textures and so on. There then 
follow logic and the various disciplines associated with logic, including the 
theory of evidence, apophantic logic, concept-theory, decision theory, the 
logic of truth, and so on. Next come various sciences of ‘rational 
psychology,’ sciences of beliefs and desires, feelings, values and valuings, 
including Scheler’s material ethics, and formal axiology and deontic logic, 
the a priori theories of imperatives,18 of norms, of will, a priori aesthetics, the 
ontology of art and art works developed by Roman Ingarden, and so on. We 
then have various a priori sciences pertaining to the domain of language and 
expression,19 universal and categorial grammars, the a priori sciences of 
phonology, and the theory of speech acts or categorial pragmatics developed 
by Reinach20 and later by Austin and Searle. In the same work Reinach 
conceived the project of a general a priori ontology of the entire domain of 
14 Karl Schuhmann, “Husserl’s Concept of Philosophy”, Journal of the British Society for 
Phenomenology, 21 (1990): 274-283. 
15 Max Scheler, “Der Formalismus in der Ethik und die materiale Wertethik”, Jahrbuch für 
Philosophie und phänomenologische Forschung, 1, (1913/1916): p. 449n. 
English 
translation by M. S. Frings and R. L. Funk as Formalism in Ethics and Non-Formal Ethics of 
Value  (Evanston: Northwestern University Press, 1973). 
16 Patrick Hayes, “The Second Naive Physics Manifesto” in J. R. Hobbs, and R. C. Moore, 
eds., Formal Theories of the Commonsense World (Norwood, N. J.: Ablex Publishing 
Corporation, 1985); also, Barry Smith and Roberto Casati, “Naive Physics,” Philosophical 
Psychology, 7/2 (1994), 225–244. 
17 Cf. Günter Witschel, “Edmund Husserls Lehre von den sekundären Qualitäten” (Ph. D. 
Dissertation, University of Bonn, 1961). 
18 Alexander Pfänder, “Imperativenlehre” (MS of 1909), in H. Spiegelberg and E. Avé-
Lallemant eds., Pfänder-Studien (The Hague: Nijhoff,1982) 295-324. 
19 Elmar Holenstein, Roman Jakobson’s Approach to Language: Phenomenological Struc 
turalism (Bloomington and London: Indiana University Press, 1975). 
20 Adolf Reinach, “Die apriorischen Grundlagen des bürgerlichen Rechts,” Jahrbuch für 
Philosophie und phänomenologische Forschung, 1 (1913 ): 685-847. English translation by 
J. Crosby as “The A Priori Foundations of the Civil Law”, in Aletheia, 3 (1983), 1– 142. See 
also Kevin Mulligan, ed., Speech Act and Sachverhalt. Reinach and the Foundations of Realist 
Phenomenology (Dordrecht/Boston/Lancaster: Martinus Nijhoff, 1987). 

187 
Smith - In Defense of Extreme (Fallibilistic) Apriorism 
social interaction. Sub-branches of the latter might include praxeology, the a 
priori science of action, the a priori ontology of work, a priori economics, the 
a priori theory of institutions, of law, a priori politics,21 the phenomenology of 
intersubjectivity, the a priori science of dialogue, a priori sociology, a priori 
geography, the a priori theory of the life world, eidetic history, a priori 
anthropology, and so on. 
Of the non-formal disciplines on this list it is above all two whose 
principles and applications have been worked out in detail: the a priori theory 
of law worked out, again, by Reinach in his “The A Priori Foundations of the 
Civil Law”22 and the a priori science of economics worked out by successive 
generations of so-called ‘Austrian economists’ from Menger to Rothbard and 
beyond. Few in the tradition of Austrian economics have however taken 
cognisance of the fact that, as Reinach puts it, the realm of the ontological a 
priori is “unsurveyably wide; whatever sorts of object we know, they all have 
their ‘what’, their ‘essence‘, and of all essentialities essential laws hold.”23 
On the standard praxeological account of economic science shared by 
Mises and Rothbard and succinctly stated in the latter’s “In Defense of 
‘Extreme Apriorism’”24 there are held to be certain fundamental axioms of 
economics which are both true and such that their truth is grasped 
immediately. The theorems of economics are then established via logical 
deduction from these axioms. There is in consequence no need for empirical 
testing of these theorems, which is fortunate since, as Rothbard points out, 
empirical testing is in any case impossible in the sciences of human action: 
It is physics that knows or can know its “facts” and can test its 
conclusions against these facts, while being completely ignorant of its 
ultimate assumptions. In the sciences of human action, on the other 
hand, . . [t]here is no laboratory where facts can be isolated and 
controlled; the “facts” of human history are complex ones, resultants of 
many causes. These causes can only be isolated by theory, theory that 
is necessarily a priori to these historical (including statistical) facts.25 
The only way to understand human behaviour, Mises and Rothbard hold, 
is by means of a priori categories which we are able to recognize in the 
complex and ever-changing warp and woof of history in virtue of the fact that 
we are ourselves historical agents who are ready-armed with an intimate 
knowledge of these categories through our own experience. In a similar way 
we are able to recognize the presence of instantiations of ethical categories in 
the warp and woof of history in virtue of the fact that as a result of our own 
experience as ethical subjects we have an intimate knowledge of ethical 
categories such as guilt, responsibility, obligation, and so on. 
Rothbard draws a distinction between two approaches to the a priori as 
21 See Karl Schuhmann, Husserls Staatsphilosophie (Freiburg/Munich: Karl Alber, 1988). 
22 Adolf Reinach, “The A Priori Foundations of the Civil Law.” 
23 Adolf Reinach, “Concerning Phenomenology,” The Personalist, 50, (1969 ), 194–211. 
(English translation by Dallas Willard of a lecture given in Marburg in 1914.) See also Adolf 
Reinach, Sämtliche Werke, K. Schuhmann and B. Smith, eds., 2 vols. (Munich and Vienna: 
Philosophia, 1989). 
24 Murray N. Rothbard, “In Defense of ‘Extreme Apriorism,’” Southern Economic Journal, 23 
(1957): 315–20. 
25 Rothbard, “In Defense,” p. 315. 

188 
THE JOURNAL OF LIBERTARIAN STUDIES 
follows: 
Professor Mises, in the neo-Kantian tradition, considers [the law of 
human action] a law of thought and therefore a categorical truth a priori 
to all experience. My own epistemological position rests on Aristotle 
and St. Thomas rather than Kant, and hence I would interpret the 
proposition differently. I would consider the axiom a law of reality, 
rather than a law of thought.26 
We are now in a position to understand what Rothbard means here by ‘law of 
reality.’ The definitive account of such laws is in fact to be found neither in 
Rothbard nor in Aristotle and St. Thomas but rather precisely in the writings 
of Reinach and the other realist phenomenologists. 
How is synthetic a priori knowledge possible? For the members of the 
Reinach group, as also for Aristotle, Aquinas and Rothbard, there exists an 
ontological a priori, an a priori in reality. The a priori status of judgments, 
propositions, beliefs or ‘laws of thought’ that is so central to the Kantian 
approach then proves to be derivative of this more deep-lying a priori 
dimension on the side of the things themselves. 
According to the Kantian conception, in contrast, science consists not so 
much in the attempt to construct a system of intrinsically intelligible 
assumptions, but rather in a ‘coercion of nature’ (Nötigung der Natur) of 
such a sort that the latter comes to be formed in conformity with prior 
principles. Consider the following passage from Kant’s first Critique: 
When Galileo caused balls, the weights of which he had himself 
previously determined, to roll down an inclined plane . . ., a light broke 
upon all students of nature. They learned that reason has insight only 
into that which it produces after a plan of its own, and that it must not 
allow itself to be kept, as it were, in nature’s leading-strings, but must 
itself show the way with principles of judgment based upon fixed laws, 
coercing nature to give answer to questions of reason’s own 
determining. Accidental observations, made in observance to no 
previously thought-out plan, can never be made to yield a necessary 
law, which alone reason is concerned to discover.27 
This passage expresses an important epistemological insight to the effect that 
scientists, if they seek systematic results in the form of scientific laws, must 
undertake systematic observations guided by relevant scientific assumptions. 
Kant and his followers have however drawn ontological conclusions from this 
insight. They claim in fact to have shown that the object-domain which is in 
each case grasped by the scientist must first have been pre-formed and pre­
constituted in some peculiar (‘transcendental’) fashion. This doctrine is then 
introduced by the Kantians into their explanation of the peculiarity of a priori 
propositions: the latter are now held to acquire their truth from the fact that 
we ourselves have in King-Midas-fashion imposed them upon reality, have 
coerced reality to have it fit our prior prejudices. 
Now however we must ask: 
VII. Is it really true that, as the Kantians assert, intrinsically 
26 Rothbard, “In Defense”, p. 318. 
27 KrV., B XIII. Cf. Popper, Conjectures and Refutations, p. 189. 

189 
Smith - In Defense of Extreme (Fallibilistic) Apriorism 
plausible or intelligible pre-empirical synthetic propositions are 
in some sense imposed upon the world by cognizing subjects? 
That we have to answer ‘no’ to this question should be clear. Consider 
once again the example of the law of transitivity as this is applied to the parts 
of a stone or of a planet. This law would of course hold also in a world 
without thinking (‘forming’, ‘constituting’) subjects. It is thus impossible to 
conceive it as something subjective (a mere ‘law of thought’). 
The thesis of the supposed subject-dependence of all laws of this kind — 
as originally formulated by Kant — is moreover not capable of being 
harmonized with the fact that pre-empirical assumptions are sometimes 
contradicted through retrospective empirical control. For the assertion that the 
given laws hold only because we have read them into the structure of the 
world, that the empirical world of what happens and is the case is itself a 
product of such reading in, surely excludes the possibility of conflict between 
such laws and empirical happenings. 
The thesis that the world is ‘transcendentally’ formed leads further to the 
question why precisely these rather than those transcendental forms should be 
the ones through which the imposition of structure is effected. Once again, the 
problem of arbitrariness seems here to raise its ugly head. Many Kantians 
(and Popperians) are today content with an evolutionistic treatment of this 
problem. In their eyes those pre-scientific assumptions have come to 
dominate which enjoyed under the prevailing circumstances a greater capacity 
for survival or a greater adaptability than the available alternatives. But the 
proponents of this doctrine appeal in this connection to the results of a 
science — biology — which itself presupposes very many pre-scientific 
assumptions of its own. This means that they are precluded from extending 
their account to at least one important group of pre-scientific assumptions, 
since the assertion that a science which itself presupposes certain principles 
can itself serve to justify those principles contains an obvious vicious circle. 
The striving for a fully adequate picture of reality thus requires an answer to 
the question as to how pre-scientific assumptions arise and are justified that 
goes much deeper than the answer of the evolutionists. And as Husserl showed 
in the “Prolegomena” to his Logical Investigations,28 the same holds of 
every attempt to account for such assumptions through appeals to an 
empirical science. 
Our realistic conception of the empirical sciences tells us, however, how we 
are to formulate an answer of the required sort. The striving on the part of 
scientists for intelligible assumptions can be justified by appeal to the fact that 
the world itself possesses certain intelligible structures – structures of the sort 
which are captured for example in the laws of mereology or colourology. The 
world itself is in many of its traits in itself intelligible. 
The general idea is well conveyed by the Munich phenomenologists, for 
example by Scheler in his great critique of formalism (and in particular of 
Kantianism) in ethics.29  Scheler is there concerned to establish the basis of an 
28 Edmund Husserl, Logische Untersuchungen, critical edition (Dordrecht: Nijhoff, 1975, 
1984); English translation of 2nd ed. by J. N. Findlay as Logical Investigations (London: 
Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1970). 
29 Scheler, “Der Formalismus.” 

190 
THE JOURNAL OF LIBERTARIAN STUDIES 
ethical theory which is ‘a priori’ in the sense that, as he puts it, ‘its 
propositions are evident and can neither be tested by something that has been 
found, prior to such testing, by observation and induction nor be refuted by 
observation and induction.’30  Our knowledge of such a priori propositions is 
gained by means of what Scheler calls an ‘intuition of essences’ of the sort 
that is involved, for example, when we grasp the colour red and grasp that it is 
different from green or blue, or when we grasp the essential interconnection 
between red and visual extension. We do not have to observe and check and 
carry out inductions in order to grasp that red is different from green, or that 
jealousy is different from greed. 
Whenever we have such essences and such interconnections among 
them (which can be of different kinds, e.g., reciprocal, unilateral, 
conflicting, or, as in the case of values, ordered as higher and lower), 
the truth of propositions that find their fulfillment in such essences is 
totally independent of the entire sphere of observation and description, 
as well as of what is established in inductive experience . . . Hence the 
a priori is not dependent on propositions (or even on acts of judgment 
corresponding to them). It is not dependent, for example, on the form of 
such propositions and acts (i.e., on “forms of judgments,” from which 
Kant developed his “categories” as “functional laws” of “thinking”). On 
the contrary, the a priori belongs wholly to the “given” and the sphere 
of facts. A proposition is only a priori true (or false) insofar as it finds 
its fulfillment in such “facts.”31 
A priori knowledge thus rests on experience, since 
. . . everything and anything that is given rests on “experience.” He 
who wishes to call this “empiricism” may do so.32 . . . It therefore is 
not experience and non-experience, or so-called presuppositions of all 
possible experience (which would be unexperienceable in every respect), 
with which we are concerned in the contrast between the a priori and a 
posteriori; rather, we are concerned with two kinds of experience.33 
On the one hand is immediate intuitive experience of essences such as colours 
and shapes and their interrelations, and on the other hand is observational 
experience of what happens and is the case. Now however we have to consider 
the question: 
30 Scheler, “Der Formalismus,” translation, pp. 47f. 
31 Scheler, “Der Formalismus,” translation, p. 49. 
32 Compare Rothbard: ‘I would consider the axiom [of action] a law of reality rather than a law 
of thought, and hence “empirical” rather than “a priori.” But it should be obvious that this type 
of “empiricism” is so out of step with modern empiricism that I may just as well continue to 
call it a priori for present purposes.’ Rothbard, “In Defense,” p. 318 
33  Scheler, “Der Formalismus,” translation, p. 52. 

Smith - In Defense of Extreme (Fallibilistic) Apriorism 
191 
VIII.  Might the intrinsically plausible pre-empirical synthetic 
propositions all be false? 
Certainly it might be that in the course of scientific development pre­
empirical assumptions arise which correspond to no structures in the world 
and have only a somehow purely pragmatic value. From the realistic 
standpoint, however, the proportion of true pre-empirical assumptions must be 
considerable in every phase of this development. For the doctrine of scientific 
realism asserts not only that the world exists, but also that it corresponds 
broadly to the ideas we have about it. What the view presented here adds to 
this doctrine of scientific realism (which is, the reader will remember, here 
presupposed without argument) is the result that the true picture of reality, 
broad strands of which are already in our possession, must consist not only of 
accidentally true propositions which picture the accidents of reality, but also 
of true, necessary and contentful propositions which picture certain 
intelligible structures. 
Such propositions can also be called ‘a priori’. Note again, however, that 
the conception of the a priori that is then yielded turns out to be a non-
Kantian conception. It claims that, where Kant wanted always to have the a 
priori viewed as something subjective, something pertaining purely to 
knowledge, there is in fact such a thing as an a priori in the world. 
We affirm simply that there are synthetic intrinsically plausible true 
propositions, and that science strives to accumulate ever more of these; we do 
not however affirm that we know (or much less that we have certain 
knowledge about) which of the available candidates for such propositions are 
true among those which at any given time play a role in the really existing 
sciences. The given intelligible structural traits of reality can be overlooked or 
misinterpreted. The recognition that there are a priori structural traits in the 
world yields, to repeat, no easy sort of indubitable evidence in relation to the 
corresponding propositions. This fallibilistic doctrine of a priori laws of 
reality does however yield a nice solution to one age-old problem facing all 
defenders of the a priori. How, as Caldwell puts it,34 does one choose between 
rival systems all of which claim to rest on a priori foundations? On the non­
fallibilistic conception it is difficult to make sense even of the possibility of 
rival systems of this sort. On the conception here defended, in contrast, the 
existence of such rival systems can be seen to be a perfectly natural and 
acceptable consequence of the just-mentioned difficulties we will often fact in 
coming to know even the intelligible traits of reality: one adjudicates between 
such systems in the same way in which one adjudicates between all rival 
scientific hypotheses, namely via a complex mixture of empirical and a priori 
considerations. 
34 Bruce Caldwell, “Praxeology and Its Critics: An Appraisal,” History of Political Economy, 
16 (1984), 363-379. 

192 
THE JOURNAL OF LIBERTARIAN STUDIES 
IX. Conclusion
We can summarize the main argument of this paper as follows: 
Do the empirical theories with the help of which we seek to approximate a good or true picture 
of reality rest on any non-empirical presuppositions? 
___________________|_____________________ 
|
| 
Yes 
No (extreme empiricists) 
| 
Are the propositions which express these pre-empirical 
assumptions in every case analytic (tautological, lacking in content)? 
_______________|_________________________ 
|
| 
Yes (logical positivists) 
No 
| 
Do we have an infallible knowledge of all the synthetic pre-empirical 
propositions which are presupposed by the various sciences in the different 
phases of their development? 
_________________|_______________________ 
|
| 
Yes (extreme Cartesians) 
No 
 | 
Could these assumptions, which are presupposed by the empirical sciences,be arbitrary? 
____________________________________|_________ 
|
| 
Yes (Feyerabend) 
No 
| 
The propositions in question must therefore be characterized by a certain 
plausibility. Is this plausibility always a contextual affair? 
________________|_________________________________ 
|
| 
Yes (hermeneutic relativists) 
No
 | 
There is therefore something like an intrinsic plausibility. Are the intrinsically 
plausible pre-empirical synthetic propositions which play an indispensable role 
in the sciences given only individually, so that we have only a few isolated 
examples thereof between which no systematic relations would obtain? 
_________________________|________________________ 
|
| 
Yes 
No 
| 
Is it really true, as the Kantians assert, that the intrinsically plausible or intelligible pre­
empirical synthetic propositions here at issue are read into or imposed upon the world by us? 
____________________|_____________________________ 
|
| 
 Yes (Kantians) 
No 
| 
Might the intrinsically plausible pre-empirical synthetic propositions all be false? 
_____________________________|____________________ 
|
| 
Yes 
No 
| 
Certain pre-empirical synthetic intrinsically plausible propositions thus require 
ontological correlates which are their truth-makers. Hence, there are intelligible  
structures in the world, which we could also call ‘a priori structures’. 

