91
Scandinavica Vol 54 No 2 2015
‘I Close the Mima’: 
The Role Of Narrative in 
Harry Martinson’s Aniara
Abstract
In 1956, Swedish writer and Nobel Laureate Harry Martinson published 
an epic science fiction poem, Aniara, about a spaceship thrown off 
course and dooming its passengers to an eternity of deep space travel. 
Aboard was also the Mima, an artificial intelligence that eventually 
committed suicide out of despair. The Mima is generally perceived to 
be a mimetic construct, but this article also interprets her in the form 
of a personified narrative: when the Mima dies, both the community 
aboard the Aniara, and the structure of the poem itself, breaks down 
into individualised constituents.
Keywords
Harry Martinson, Aniara (poem), literary science fiction, epic poem
O. J. Cade
University of Otago

92
Scandinavica Vol 54 No 2 2015
Introduction
In 1956, the Swedish writer Harry Martinson (1904-1978) published an 
epic science fiction poem of 103 cantos, Aniara: An Revy om Människan 
i Tid och Rum (Aniara: A Review of Man in Time and Space1) which 
follows the journey of the titular spaceship deep into the universe. 
Burdened with thousands of passengers, the Aniara also contains the 
Mima: an artificial intelligence who eventually kills herself out of an 
existential despair that will later infect the shipboard population and 
leave no survivors.
This despair comes from two sources. The first is the reaction of the 
ship’s passengers to the immensity of space, and the second comes 
from their witnessing an atomic bomb destroy a city that was once 
home to many of them. It is how this witnessing affects the Mima, 
however, and how the Mima’s death affects both the events within the 
poem and the form of the poem itself, that is the topic of this article. 
These effects have been interpreted variously, as will be described 
below, but what has not been observed is the consequence of the 
Mima’s despair on narrative. In writing an epic poem Martinson has 
clearly used narrative as an important tool, but the subtleties of that 
narrative – especially as it relates to the Mima – make an interesting 
study. Both in Aniara and on Aniara, narrative is key.  
This article will first trace the basic narrative of the story up until the 
death of the Mima. Previous interpretations of the Mima in the relevant 
literature will be explored, as these lay a basis for the primary assertion 
of this article: that the Mima is not only a mimetic form, capable of 
conscience and reflection. She is also narrative personified, and the 
narrative of the poem breaks down after the event of her death.
Aniara, Science Fiction, and Artificial Intelligence
The travellers of the Aniara are headed away from Earth, away from 
the ecological destruction that has been wrought there. ‘Jorden nått 
därhän / att hon för strålförgiftnings skull beredes / en tid av vila, ro 
och karantän’ (6) (‘Earth must have a rest / for all her poisons, launch 
her refugees / out into space, and keep her quarantine’) (1). Yet the 
poem has barely begun when ‘En nödgir för asteroiden Hondo / (som 
härmed räknas upptäckt) tog oss ut ur kursen’ (11) (‘a swerve to avoid 

93
Scandinavica Vol 54 No 2 2015
the asteroid / Hondo’) (3) irretrievably sends the spaceship off route. 
The passengers are stranded in emptiness. They cannot turn the ship 
around, or do anything but endure as the Aniara heads inexorably 
towards Lyra, the constellation of poets. The ship remains habitable, 
with much of the instrumentation still intact, but an endless journey 
lies before the passengers and no communication is possible outside 
the ship: ‘I ångest sänt av oss i Aniara / föll och förföll vårt anrop 
Aniara’ (13) (‘our hailing signal just echoed and re-echoed / Aniara... 
Aniara…’) (5).  
Reactions to this doom of eternal wandering are mixed, but at the 
centre of the community formed on the spaceship is the artificial 
intelligence known as the Mima – indeed, the poem is narrated by 
a character called the Mimarobe, who is primarily responsible for 
looking after the Mima. The name ‘Mima’ is in itself something of an 
etymological puzzle. The glossary at the end of (the MacDiarmid and 
Schubert edition of) the poem states that it comes ‘From the Greek 
mimos, an imitator or reproducer, and mimesis, imitation, art, especially 
acting’ (1963b: 131).  Stensson points out an alternate interpretation 
(2006: 158): the ‘Sanskrit word mimamsa means something like 
second thought or careful reflection’. 
This imitation of life by an artificial intelligence is something that 
is a frequent theme in science fiction. The narrative struggle for a 
machine to surpass imitation and, like Pinocchio, achieve the status of 
that which it imitates is frequent, and can be observed in films such 
as AI: Artificial Intelligence (2001), wherein an android child goes on a 
quest to find the Blue Fairy and be transformed into a ‘real boy’. 
These interactions between human and imitator can cause 
substantial conflict. One of the most famous examples of artificial 
intelligences in science fiction is HAL, from Arthur C. Clarke’s 2001: 
A Space Odyssey (1968). HAL entrenched itself within the narrative 
as primary antagonist yet, as Landon remarks, ‘HAL is a much more 
interesting character in 2001 than Dave Bowman, and ... HAL’s ‘death’ 
is much more affective than are those of Discovery’s human crew’ 
(Landon 1993: 198). Similarly, Picard called HAL ‘the most emotional 
character in the film’ (2001) even if that emotion was merely apparent, 
and Stoehr considers that HAL ‘seems more human and empathetic’ 

94
Scandinavica Vol 54 No 2 2015
(2008: 125) than the human astronauts. So strong was this impression, 
in fact, that in the sequel 2010, HAL was rehabilitated to hero status, 
cementing its place as the star of the original.
Created by humans as a tool (usually for economic or scientific 
benefit), the artificial intelligences of science fiction are often defined 
by their ability to mimic human behaviour, though this mimicry has 
varying levels of success. Clearly an artificial intelligence in android 
form comes closer to ‘passing’ for human than a more traditionally 
rendered computer form such as HAL or the Mima, but it is in the 
patterns of thought, or the achievement of emotion, that gives that 
artificiality its truly human characteristics. Part of this is intrinsic, a 
function of programming – an intelligence programmed by humans, 
designed to mimic human behaviour, is hardly going to start 
mimicking a rhinoceros instead. But part comes from the ability of 
the artificial intelligence to exhibit learning behaviour, to exceed the 
logical patterns of its programming. Whether or not the Mima makes 
this progression is a central question of the Aniara text.
A form of computer and transmitter both, the Mima searches for 
other life and shows on giant screens the results of her search, much 
of which is centred around the homes the passengers have left behind. 
‘Det kommer spar och bilder, landskap och fragment av språk / som 
talas någonstans, men var’ (16) (‘Pictures appear, / fragments of 
landscapes and we catch / snatches of language spoken somewhere’) 
(6). In this way, the Mima acts as a sort of Oracle that ‘ljuger inte. / Och 
det förstår de flesta, att en mima / kan inte mutas, den är omutbar’ 
(17) - (‘is incorruptible and cannot lie’) (7) and tells the story of the 
universe around them. 
Note that this incorruptibility indicates an initial status of failed or 
limited mimicry. The Mima cannot lie. It is not in her programming, and 
she hasn’t progressed to the point where lying is a potential option. 
(In this she is a precursor of the android child David in AI: Artificial 
Intelligence, who according to Hoberman (2007: 79) is ‘a perfect 
reproach to humanity, hard-wired for innocence’.) The passengers 
aboard the Aniara begin to treat this innocent, oracular source with an 
almost religious fervour. This is a somewhat understandable reaction, 
as the Mima is not only a link to the life they left behind, but the 

95
Scandinavica Vol 54 No 2 2015
last intelligence capable of providing an active link to that life. Geraci 
comments that ‘science fiction blurs the line between technology 
(particularly AI technology) and the divine by according robots and 
computer AIs with the characteristics of the Holy’ (2010: 49), and 
the Mima’s far-seeing, near omnipotent ability to transmit visions of 
another place encourages this perception amongst the passengers. 
An interesting contrast here is the ‘all-seeing red eye’ (2000: 110) of 
HAL, which Wheat compares to the eye of God. Both machines take 
on religious connotations, but the reception of their metaphorically 
divine properties is entirely different, according to the reactions of 
their human companions.
The Mimarobe observes the worship of the Mima, saying that ‘Som 
vid ett altare de slå sig neder / var gång jag kommer in och startar 
miman’ (17) (‘every time I start the Mima / they prostrate themselves 
as before an altar’) (7). He watches as ‘en sekt till mimadyrkan slår 
sig neder / och smeker mimans postament och beder / den ädla 
miman’ (18) (‘members of a special cult gather / to caress her, stroke 
her pedestal, / beg from her, the noble Mima’) (8). The Mimarobe is 
less inclined than the others to worship. Knowing that the Mima is a 
machine – the Mimarobe is after all the primary caretaker, who looks 
after the Mima and switches it on and off – the Mimarobe still clings to 
the technological achievements the Mima represents. 
There is an interesting tension in the text as the reader wonders just 
how capable the Mima is of emotion. Factual knowledge can be learned 
or programmed, but it is possible to interpret the Mima as a soul, 
which has connotations of sensibility at least. Nonetheless, as the first 
instances of worship are being described, the narrator comments that 
‘Så är det väl att miman inget känner, / att högmod inte bor i mimans 
inre’ (16) (‘It’s well the Mima has no feelings / and no vanity built into 
her’) (7). Yet later on the Mima has feelings enough to despair and 
succumb to what is essentially suicide. 
During the voyage, the destruction of the city of Dourisburg is 
transmitted by the Mima onto the screens of the Aniara. Dourisburg is 
destroyed by war, and the passengers witness the moment ‘när själen 
söndersprängdes, / när kroppen sönderslängdes / när en kvadratmil 
stadsmark vrängde’ (52) (‘when souls were torn apart / and bodies 

96
Scandinavica Vol 54 No 2 2015
hurled away / as six square miles of townland twisted’) (29). The Mima 
does not edit or otherwise try to hide the horror of what is happening 
back on Earth: ‘Men miman visar allt, omutligt klar / till sista bilden 
tar den brand och död’ (53) (she ‘shows it all, uncompromising, / 
transmits to the last picture, fire and slaughter’) (30). In this she betrays 
her machine origins as an independent observer who is emotionally 
unattached to what she is transmitting. This is in stark contrast to the 
actions of the Mimarobe, who tries desperately to stop the nightmare 
unrolling: ‘Till miman rusar jag som om jag kunde / det hemska dådet 
hejda med nin nöd’ (53) (‘I dash towards the Mima as tho’ I might / 
arrest the frightful action with my anguish’) (30). Yet if the Mima acts 
independently, she is also deeply affected by what she has seen: ‘Hon 
hade sett granitens vita gråt / när sten och malm förgasas till ett dis. / 
Hon hade rörts av dessa stenars kval’ (58) (‘hot white tears of granite / 
where stones and ores are vaporized, / it wrung her heart to hear these 
stones lament’) (33). 
The Mima’s Suicide
Seven days after the destruction of Dourisburg, the Mima calls her 
Mimarobe to her. She gives him what is, in effect, her last will and 
testament. 
Förmörkad i sett cellverk av den hardhat
som människan visar i sin ondskas tid
kom hon som länge väntat var därhän
att hon på mimors sätt till slut bröts ner.
Indifferenta tredje vebens tacis
ser tusen ting som inget öga ser.
Nu ville hon i tingets namn ha frid.
Nu ville hon ej förevisa mer. (58)
(Her cell-works dimmed and damaged by the cruelty
which in his evil only man can show,
she came, as might be expected, to the point
where she at last, as even Mimas must, broke down.

97
Scandinavica Vol 54 No 2 2015
The indifferent third veben’s tacis
sees a thousand things no human eye can see.
Now, in the name of these, the Mima
craved for surcease. She will not speak again.) (33).
For seven days the Mima struggles with Dourisburg, before she ends 
her own life – before her day of ultimate rest. For seven days she gives 
herself over to careful thoughts and reflections, in what Stensson 
might recognise as mimamsa. The second thoughts resulting from this 
act of witnessing destruction, end in the Mima’s voluntary resignation 
of her role aboard the Aniara. This inversion of the Christian creative 
mythology – six days of destruction before a final end – can be read in 
a number of ways. These ways, however, fall back onto the ability of 
the Mima to feel.
It is possible that, as a mimetic construct, the Mima came to the 
Aniara as a blank, unfeeling slate and learned by imitation to reproduce 
the emotional lives of those around her. Given the glossary definition 
of mimesis, however (‘especially acting’, Martinson 1963b: 131) one 
has to wonder if the Mima truly felt despair or merely a proximate 
facsimile of it. Given that it drove her to suicide, it is arguable that she, 
at least, considered her feelings legitimate whether they were mimetic 
or not. 
It is also possible that the Mima’s ability to see what ‘no human 
eye can see’ gives her a perspective that only makes her appear 
unfeeling – and she exists in a world where emotional appearance 
is a cultural construct. She can’t weep, for instance, or exhibit the 
physical characteristics associated with human sorrow. Furthermore, 
compared to the human passengers aboard the spaceship, the Mima is 
functionally immortal. Her lifespan far outlasts those of the people who 
tend to her. While those people will never reach the constellation of 
Lyra – the journey is simply too long – it is possible that the Mima could 
have done so. A creature of science herself, a technological creation, 
the Mima’s arrival at Lyra would have been the perfect, transcendent 
union of poetry and science. She can, as it were, afford to take the long 
view. 
This ‘long view’ is supplemented by her superior witnessing skills. 

98
Scandinavica Vol 54 No 2 2015
She is capable, perhaps, of witnessing things that human optics 
cannot perceive – different spectra of light, for instance, and, more 
metaphorically, her enhanced perspective means she sees with equal 
weight the destruction of Dourisburg and the destruction of its 
inhabitants. While it is natural for the passengers to focus more on the 
loss of life, to care more for the city and its population than the stones 
that city was built on, the Mima, as an independent, non-human entity, 
has no such prejudice. The lamenting stones affect her as deeply, if 
not more than, the loss of human life.
The passengers aboard the Aniara might weep for the loss of 
their homes, the physical structures they left behind, but there is 
not the same level of what might be called inorganic identification – 
compassion for the non-living, non-human environment. But then the 
Mima is made of inorganic compounds herself. She is not a biological 
organism, and her connection to humanity is limited by the strength 
of her mimetic capacity. When this is imperfect, the Mima presents, 
intellectually and emotionally, as inhuman.   
It is this very inhumanity that sometimes makes her blind to the 
needs of those around her. When the passengers of Aniara are at 
first beginning to adjust to their long exile, the Mima is a point of 
consolation. She shows them other worlds, shows them new and 
distracting visions that ameliorate their emotional and spiritual crises.
  
alla går till miman.
Och för en tid kan miman lösa trycket
och skingra minnena från Doris stränder.
Ty ofta kan den värld som Mima visar
slå ut den värld vi minns och som vi lämnat. (20)
(All throng
to our Mima and for a short time
our Mima can ease the pressure of despair,
dispel the memories of life on Douris,
for the world Mima shows glimpses of
can often take the place of the world
we remember but have left forever.) (9)

99
Scandinavica Vol 54 No 2 2015
Yet the Mima, while well-meaning, cannot see well enough, cannot 
empathise well enough, with the perspectives of her passengers. Her 
mimetic nature has taught her that empathy is a good, but not how to 
effectively express it. That level of socialised behaviour is beyond her, 
and because of it her attempts at comfort are not always successful. 
An example of this type of failure occurs when she unwittingly hurts 
a navigator that comes to her for consolation.  ‘Den är till för tröten 
/ men inte för att mänskorna ska rysa / för världar som syns lika den 
de lämnat’ (44) (‘She is meant to comfort / and not to tantalize her 
human watchers / with glimpses of worlds like that they’ve left’) (25). 
This fundamental disconnection would also explain why the Mima is 
not affected by the near-worship of the passengers. It is not, as the 
Mimarobe says, that she does not feel in general. It is that, from her 
enormous perspective, the particular feeling of the religious devotion 
of the passengers is not understandable to her. That the Mima’s 
perspective exists does not limit her mimetic abilities – she is still 
able to mimic, or possibly even truly learn, while never having been 
emotionless. And crucially, without emotions, the Mima’s breakdown 
could not occur.
Stensson interprets the Mima’s breakdown as a function of ‘extreme 
trauma’ (2006: 159). This trauma is not physical in nature – rather it 
results almost inevitably from close confinement with human beings. 
He states that ‘What is traumatic is that there is no protection from 
mankind’ (ibid.). The total destruction of Dourisburg, the destruction 
that is primarily witnessed and transmitted by the Mima, is the final 
straw – ‘And the worst blow is a blow to basic trust’ (2006: 159).
In any science fiction narrative, the relationship between artificial and 
human intelligences is defined by trust – or at least by the breaking of 
it. It is this breakdown in mutual faith that so frequently drives a story. 
Perhaps there is a disconnection between actual and apparent emotion 
(as displayed by either party) leading to inaccurate perceptions and 
loss of trust. Of 2001’s HAL, Nofz and Vendy comment that ‘all of 
HAL’s “emotional” responses are methodically matched to situations, 
within a broader framework of a coolly detached logic’ (2002: 38). 
Yet to Bowman, the astronaut interacting with HAL, these emotions 
can appear real and even malicious. When an intelligence presents as 

100
Scandinavica Vol 54 No 2 2015
emotional, even if only through mimicry, that emotion can be taken as 
actual. 
Perhaps the machines are breaking out of their imposed inferior 
status, thus losing the trust of those who saw them as controllable 
tools instead of the next potential stage in evolution. Potentially those 
machines are also capable of taking on human emotional strengths 
‘that humans have left behind’ (Toles 2006: 161) in their desire to 
embrace new technological identities. This is one of the perceived 
potential threats of HAL, that he ‘interacts with the other members [of 
the crew] as an equal (or even a superior), rather than as a tool’ (Loren 
2008: 213). This possibility of active superiority is a dramatically tense 
one: ‘The prospect that Homo sapiens is not the final evolutionary stage 
of humankind promises Utopia for some, Dystopia for others’ (Rossini 
2005: 26). The dystopian reaction results from a sense of biological 
inferiority, where ‘the greater share of alienation ... derives from the 
physical nature of humanity ... chief of which is, of course, its rather 
limited shelf life’ (Geraci 2008: 147). The Mima, recall, has greater 
sensory capacity than that of the human passengers. It is also the only 
intelligence capable of surviving the entirety of the journey to Lyra. 
This isn’t the real source of conflict and trust loss between intelligences 
within the text, however. That begins with the first potential break 
(described above) and concludes with the final possibility.     
The loss of trust between parties may also be reversed, as it is in AI: 
Artificial Intelligence, where the child-machine David is abandoned by 
his caretaker and must fend for himself. Loren describes both David’s 
and HAL’s relationships with their human companions as sharing a 
‘surprisingly similar structure. In each there is a particular dependency 
in which power relationships are formed’ (Loren 2008: 213).  
The Mima is also entrenched in power relationships. Initially a tool 
on a transport ship, circumstances transcend her function within the 
community, and place her in a position of power aboard the Aniara. 
Yet her reaction to the destruction at Dourisburg upsets that power 
relationship again – the Mima is ill-equipped to deal with what she 
has witnessed. There’s no sense in training a tool to deal with such 
carnage, after all, and she suffers collateral damage regardless, in 
being forced to witness that destruction and to pass on what she has 

101
Scandinavica Vol 54 No 2 2015
witnessed.  
The Mima is of course not the first entity in Martinson’s poem to 
suffer a loss of trust. The breakdown in society, the fracturing of 
narrative that arises from the different reactions to the journey all stem 
from a similar loss. Technology itself has betrayed the passengers’ 
trust. They are used to it, used to its ills more than anything else – the 
disadvantages are a constant, but they are a constant that is understood 
and familiar. War, overpopulation, environmental degradation; these 
can be ameliorated. There is always another planet to go to: Mars, 
which hangs in the sky as a refuge from nightmare instead of a dream 
of exploration and new knowledge. Yet technology, stable even in 
its depredations, was trusted and betrayed that trust. A little thing, 
dodging an asteroid – or it should have been, and then trust is smashed 
to bits in the emptiness of space, just as if the Aniara had been hit by 
the asteroid instead of avoiding it.
Should not the machine created by humans react as a human would 
react? And at first, Mima does. She has a purpose, which is more than 
many of the passengers do. (Even if their only purpose was to wait and 
disembark, and they now find themselves only capable of the former.) 
That purpose keeps her constant. But after Dourisburg, the Mima’s 
purpose – transmission – has itself become an act of destruction 
towards her passengers. She might have considered suicide an act of 
conscience, a means to prevent further damage.
On the seventh day, the Mima tells her Mimarobe of her feelings of 
guilt, and that she ‘sen någon tid var lika samvetsöm / som stenarna. 
Hon hade hört dem ropa’ (58) (‘for sometimes past had felt as guilty 
as the very stones / for she had heard them crying out’) (33). Heading 
towards Lyra, however, the Mima can have no real culpability for the 
actions that destroyed Dourisburg. Her perceived responsibility can 
therefore take one of only two forms. Either she feels guilty because 
she witnesses the results of destructive technology and cannot help 
those that technology affects, or she feels guilty in her role as the 
transmitter of that destruction. The text appears to hint at the latter:     
När det behövs ser ändå ingen klart. 
Nej, bara när det galled att slå ner

102
Scandinavica Vol 54 No 2 2015
och arma ut vad hjärtat sammanspart
av dröm att leva på i onda kalla år. (54)
 
(When it is really necessary no one sees clearly anyhow.
No, only when the point was to destroy,
to obliterate all that the heart had saved
of dreams to live on through cold evil years) (30).
The Mima’s different, greater perspective means that her failure lies 
in details: she cannot sufficiently take on the perspective of smaller 
entities in order to stop herself from causing them hurt. As she does 
in microcosm with the navigator, so she does to all with Dourisburg. 
Her purpose is in conflict with her mimetic nature. ‘Men det finns inget 
skydd mot människan’ (54) (‘there is no protection against man!’) (30) 
and so the Mima is vulnerable to them, and she lacks the perspective 
necessary to reconcile her nature with her learning. The Mima has 
absorbed what she sees and experiences, and she has absorbed as 
well the consequences of what she sees, when the passengers of Aniara 
are made proxies for and by her.
Her guilt can only be assuaged by minimising the consequences 
of her further actions. The Mima’s purpose is to transmit, and if she 
cannot do that without guilt then she has no purpose at all. Without 
that purpose, her life is like that of the passengers: it has no meaning. 
The imitator has imitated too well, and as the passengers fall prey to 
despair so does the Mima. The consequences of her mimetic behaviour 
are the root cause of her suicide.
The too-competent mimesis of artificial intelligence is something 
frequently explored in science fiction. It is the Turing Test writ large, a 
technological progression sufficient enough so that no distinction can 
be made between the artificial and the biological. The Mima doesn’t 
have android form so some distinction remains, but all too often the 
inability to distinguish is the root cause of conflict between the biological 
natural and the artificially created. When the Mima mimics too closely, 
she takes on the human characteristics of grief and crippling despair. 
This level of mimesis does not lead to external conflict, as it does 
in science fiction narratives where increased competence often leads 

103
Scandinavica Vol 54 No 2 2015
to increased resentment (in AI: Artificial Intelligence, it’s the android 
‘Mecha’ that provoke distrust and hatred, not the small teddy-bear 
robot that is clearly distinct in appearance and function from human 
beings). Instead, the conflict is internal, and takes place entirely within 
the Mima, until she resolves it with her death.
The Mima as Narrative
The above interpretations of the Mima are arguably correct as far as 
they go, but represent little more than a surface reading of the text; 
important as a basis for further discussion, but limited. Another may 
be observed with a deeper reading: the interpretation of the Mima 
as narrative. While the Mima lives, narrative exists as part of the life 
of the Aniara. With her death, however, that narrative fragments. It 
breaks down into something that is no longer a cohesive whole. And 
when the Mima dies 
De sista ord hon sände var en hälsning
från en som nämnde sig Den söndersprängde.
Hon lät Den söndersprängde själv få vittna
och stammande och söndersprängt berätta
hur svårt det alltid är att söndersprängas (58)
(The final words she uttered were a message
sent by the Victim of Disintegration.
She let this witness testify for himself
and stammering, incoherent, tell
how ghastly fission is in mind and body) (34)
This fission of the individual – of both the victims of Dourisburg and 
the Mima – reflects that which happened with the burning destruction 
of Dourisburg. As Dourisburg’s narrative fissions into fragments and 
ending, so too does that of her observers aboard the Aniara. Indeed, 
the absence of narrative as an externalised, overarching force within 
the story is underlined by the passengers’ own removal from, or refusal 
of, narrative: their desire to stop a story before it even begins. This can 

104
Scandinavica Vol 54 No 2 2015
be most effectively illustrated in Song 41, which is titled (as few songs 
are titled) ‘Barnet’ (‘The Child’). Here, Martinson describes the death of 
a child, an infant who has been deliberately killed by its own mother, 
in what she sees as kindness. 
Chebeba satt i sina bästa år
med gränslös lycka vid en liten bår.
På båren låg den lilla rosenknopp
hon hade skyddat från att växa opp
i Aniaras stad. (92)
(Chebeba sat in her most fruitful year
in deepest bliss beside a tiny bier
where lay the little rosy bud
that she had saved from growing up
in Aniara’s realm.) (53)
It is important here to note the mother’s reaction to her dead baby. 
Chebeba has ‘gränslös lycka’ (she is ‘in deepest bliss’); she is exalted 
by the child’s death. She feels justified in her actions, and believes 
that she has done an admirable thing in saving her baby from life 
aboard the spaceship. She is not the only one to have this reaction. 
The reactions of three other women are also described in Song 41, and 
their reactions are all approving. Yaal says to the child that ‘du reser 
hem. Själv får vi vara kvar / i Aniaras stad’ (92) (‘You are going home. 
But we must stay on here / in Aniara’s realm’) (53). Gena follows, 
describing the child as one ‘som somnat utan brist och fel / i Aniaras 
stad’ (92) (‘you, who, released from sin and wrong / sleep quietly in 
Aniara’s realm’) (53). And finally there is Heba, who said nothing but 
could only watch ‘och se hur barnet nu med lugna drag / i rymden 
sov sig hän mot dagars dag / från Aniaras stad’ (93) (‘the tiny child so 
peacefully / sleep on in space, borne towards the Day of Days / borne 
on, away / from Aniara’s realm’) (54).
The child’s death is a cessation of narrative. The life that could have 
been is snuffed out, because the stories it is assumed that child would 
have lived are deemed thin and insufficient. They are stories of another 

105
Scandinavica Vol 54 No 2 2015
generation of wandering and aimlessness – mindless repetition that is 
no new story but the re-enactment of stories that have gone before. In 
effect, the child is a mimetic being in an environment where mimesis 
has led to despair and suicide. One can only infer the mother’s 
reasoning: she has given birth to a child whom she loves and wants 
to do well by, but that child is doomed to acting out a stale part – it 
can never be more than a mimetic construct, denied real authenticity 
by the circumstances of its birth. Better that that story be cut off as 
the story of the Mima was cut off. The fragmentation of narrative, of 
mimetic narrative, destroys the inherent value originally held by that 
narrative. 
It is arguable that here the Mima sets off another mimetic narrative. 
Recall that the passengers on the Aniara began to treat the artificial 
intelligence as a source of almost religious consolation, a perspective 
underlined by the possible interpretation of the Mima as a soul. 
Richardson points out that ‘the robot has historically been a way to 
talk about dehumanization and the elevation of the nonhuman’ (2015: 
5). This has often been explored in science fiction through the lens of 
conflict, but in the case of the Mima, that elevation has almost reached 
apotheosis; the Mima is adored and worshipped. With her death, the 
human element is left alone, and it does not benefit. In that sense, the 
dehumanizing presence of the technology is emphasised even in its 
absence. 
The Mima’s death, therefore, can be said to inspire another mimetic 
set of events – except this time, instead of the Mima learning to mimic 
the humans around her, those humans have begun to mimic the Mima. 
If one of their primary religious influences succumbs to despair and 
suicide, then the proper course of events might well be to follow suit; 
and thus the cessation of mimetic narrative continues.    
The death of Chebeba’s child is a foreshadowing of later events. 
Towards the end of the voyage the desire of the passengers to stop their 
own narrative – or the narratives of others – peaks. ‘Även mänskooffret 
kom till heders’ (203) (‘Even human sacrifice was reintroduced’) (121) 
comments the Mimarobe, although this is too dramatic a set-piece to 
last long. ‘Dock kom dessa offer snart ur modet / i vår krets som ingen 
styrka fann / i det slappt besvurna offerblodet’ (204) (they ‘soon lost 

106
Scandinavica Vol 54 No 2 2015
their interest / for us since we could find no redemption / in sacrificial 
blood, indifferently offered’) (121). This lack of redemption, the lack 
of capacity for a new life brought on by sacrifice, is another indication 
of failing narrative. The idea of sacrifice sparks an initial interest, but 
when it is found to be useless the sacrificers revert to the same belief 
that killed the child: that nothing can be changed, that mimicry of life 
is all that is left. The Mimarobe remembers ‘den stund då tusen vårar 
/ mot evig vinter gick i Mimas hall’ (131) (‘the time when a thousand 
Springs / turned to eternal winter in Mima’s hall’) (76), and this is a 
perfect encapsulation of the sterility of life aboard the Aniara. There is 
never any chance for new stories to be made; all the passengers can do 
is act out the old ones, knowing that they are acting. That knowledge 
delegitimizes their parts, and further encourages the perception of life 
upon the spaceship as a pale echo of a prior story.
In the end, the Aniara becomes a sarcophagus, with none of the 
passengers able to cope with their despair at the immensity of space.
I början av det tjugofjärde året
bröt tanken samman, fantasin dog ut.
Förkrossad av det ständigt ofattbara
hos en galaktisk stjärnrymd utan slut,
föll varje dröm till föga .... (210)
(All thought collapsed and imagination died
at the beginning of the twenty-fourth year. 
Crushed by the unending incomprehensibility
of heaven’s reaches stretching to infinity
all our dreams gave up) (125)  
The structure of the poem mimics this narrative fragmentation. It is 
not unusual for the form of a poem to underline its meaning, and Aniara 
is no exception. In this case, the primary form is an epic narrative, the 
story of a journey that dwarfs the lifetimes of those undertaking it. 
An epic journey, Swanson states, is a ‘classical metaphor for learning’ 
(1996: 74). It is a learning experience not only for the characters, but 
also for the audience: ‘if we are honest readers, the poem becomes our 

107
Scandinavica Vol 54 No 2 2015
journey as well’ (1996: 74). One way of doing this is to make sure that 
the readers ‘have some physical experience of Time that is similar to 
the journey’s time’ (1996: 74). In the case of the Aniara poem, this is 
clearly impossible: the poem spans generations of journey-time, and 
even the slowest reader will be able to finish the text in a fraction of 
that time. Yet by making the poem itself an epic, Swanson argues that 
the reader’s experience of the poem is elongated, a technique that 
both mimics the length of the voyage and underlines it. 
Yet there is another, subtler form tucked within the narrative: a 
variation in form that comments on the narrative itself. As mentioned 
above, Aniara is divided into poetic cantos that the text refers to as 
‘Songs’. Nine of these Songs have an alternate title. For instance, Song 
41 is also known as ‘The Child’, Song 49 as ‘Den blinda’ (‘The Blind 
Poetess’), Song 54 as ‘Chefones trädgård’ (‘Chefone’s Garden’). These 
nine named Songs share one characteristic: they all occur after the 
Mima’s death. Granted, the Mima dies in the 29th Song, not even a 
third of the way through the text, and it could be mere coincidence 
that all named Songs occur after this. However, these songs frequently 
illustrate and encapsulate the story of a single, particular person. 
Prior to the Mima’s death, the narrative was largely macroscopic, 
focused on the community rather than the individuals comprising that 
community. After her death, however, that narrative begins to fracture, 
and individual strands come to the fore. Yet none of these have the 
ability to bind the community together as the Mima bound them with 
her transmissions, and as their individual stories fragment so does 
the community aboard the Aniara. ‘Vi lyssnar spänt’ (115) (‘We listen, 
entranced’) (65) says the Mimarobe of the Blind Poetess, ‘Men bara 
ord det är och bara vind’ (116) (‘but they are only words, borne on 
the wind’) (66). Although applicable to many passengers, the ‘Song of 
the Blind Poetess’ is not enough to bind the community back together 
against the dark. It remains a discrete entity, a micro-text within the 
wider epic and representative of a single individual.
Cults and violence begin to appear, and if there are brief images 
of unity (that of the choir, for instance) these are undermined by the 
stifling of anything but the slow disintegration of the community and 
its inevitable death: ‘Jag efter jag brast sönder och försvann’ (216) 

108
Scandinavica Vol 54 No 2 2015
(‘soul after soul broke down and vanished’) (128). This, the Mimarobe 
intimates, is an inevitable consequence of the Mima’s death. ‘All 
den eld som i oss brunnit / tog sitt ljus, sin själ ur Mimas våg’ (203) 
(‘All the fire that used to burn within us / derived its light, its soul, 
from Mima’s waves’) (120). The Mima’s narrative allowed a form of 
communal warmth, cocooned within the Aniara as it travelled within 
deep space. Without those transmission waves, that warmth died out 
and the interior of the spaceship began to more closely resemble its 
outside environment: a cold, empty depth punctuated at intervals by 
individual astronomical phenomena.           
That these individualistic strands tend towards the poetic is no 
coincidence. Sjöberg comments that Martinson’s work tends to look at 
the increase in scientific knowledge in a world that has no concomitant 
human advancement: ‘there is not a development of human sensitivity 
comparable to the theoretical conquest of outer space’ (1974: 480) 
and it is in this narrative imbalance (with the story of the technological 
growing out-of-pace with that of the human) that the poet has his 
place. That place is communicative: interpreting science in a form that 
is more comprehensible to the reading audience. This is not to say, 
as Sjöberg continues, ‘that the poet should be an adjunct to science. 
However, the poet should not avoid science; on the contrary, he should 
build his creation more closely according to the findings of science’ 
(1974: 480). Martinson’s science – technology in a cold and immense 
universe – is looking for a story that can match it, a story that can take 
the Aniara to Lyra as a living ship and not a tomb.     
Interestingly, Rancière et al. perceive the stranding of the Aniara as 
a story of utopian possibilities; of ‘an alien, solitary universe calling up 
your deepest capacities’ (2008: 406). Yet Martinson’s poem is more 
pessimistic than that. It is difficult to read without wondering if the 
‘deepest capacity’ of the human condition is, in fact, despair. That 
is certainly the condition that man and machine fall into – with one 
crucial difference. The Mima can also be interpreted as memory. The 
keeper of knowledge, a form of giant computer, the Mima as memory-
keeper is the fundamental link between Earth and Lyra, between the 
scientific and poetic narratives.
The Mima might have a name redolent of mimicry and second 

109
Scandinavica Vol 54 No 2 2015
thoughts, but her combination of knowledge and memory is also 
reminiscent of the travelling birds of Scandinavian mythology. Huginn 
(‘thought’) and Muninn (‘memory’) are the two ravens of the Norse 
god Odin, who sends the birds to fly over the world and bring him 
back information and knowledge (Cotterell 1996: 201). This is in much 
the same way as the Mima, flying through space in the Aniara, brings 
back visions and information of distant places in order to feed the 
knowledge-requirements of the ship’s passengers. 
Furthermore, there is in Scandinavian mythology a giant called 
Mimer, and it is at his spring that Odin acquired his famous wisdom 
and knowledge – at a cost. After his time at Mimer’s spring Odin only 
has one eye, and the passengers can be said to share this condition, 
metaphorically, at least. Their ability to see is affected by their position 
in the universe. The closer they are to Earth, to the pollution and atomic 
war and overpopulation that science has wrought there, the more they 
see through the lens of science. Technology is their primary concern: 
how it affects their environment, how it can take them between planets 
and keep them alive as they travel through the vacuum of space. Yet 
as their journey continues, the time and effort they spend thinking 
about science lessens. As they get closer to Lyra, the pull of poetry, of 
religion and metaphor, begins to supersede the science-knowledge of 
Earth, especially when the Mima is not there to even the scales.
Often the presence of artificial intelligence is the unbalancing factor 
within a narrative, the social or scientific change that propels the 
story into conflict. Whether it is threatening (and possibly murderous) 
behaviour by a computer aboard a spacecraft, or the courtroom battle of 
an artificial intelligence to change its legal status (as in Isaac Asimov’s 
1976 story The Bicentennial Man), it is the conflict that challenges the 
status quo and drives the drama. In contrast, the Mima has a balancing 
effect on her associated human society. She is a largely comforting 
and stabilising presence, and it is only after her suicide that the Lyra 
influence begins to overwhelm the community aboard the Aniara. In 
her absence, poetry is ascendant. It becomes the lens through which 
the inhabitants of the Aniara view both the universe and their place in 
it.
As Smith observes (1998: 333) of the Mimarobe, ‘The moments of 

110
Scandinavica Vol 54 No 2 2015
melancholy come mostly in relation to his longing for a past now gone 
but for the poetic capturing of it’. As the Aniara moves closer to Lyra, 
those melancholy moments become more and more common, and 
the poetic emphasis on the past is apotheosised over the scientific 
preoccupation with the future and progress. The Lyra influence takes 
over from the over-emphasis on technology, the ‘cult of the engineer 
... old and passionless, a denial of the richness of life’ (Johannesson 
1960: 188) that Martinson deplored. 
In her writing on artificial intelligence, Figueroa-Sarriera emphasises 
‘the need to see technological discourses as ... spaces for struggle’ 
(1995: 134). The relationships and events in Aniara are defined by 
technology. How the passengers attempt – and fail – to find meaning 
and purpose in the presence (and absence) of that technology is one 
of the major struggles within the text, as Martinson intends it to be. 
Granted, Aniara was written over five decades ago, but prescient 
science fiction writers of the 1950s, such as Isaac Asimov, were 
looking ahead to societies where artificial intelligence was becoming 
a norm. And, as Solarewicz points out, ‘the cultural analysis of strong 
AI in science fiction is the analysis of now’ (2015: 112). Martinson 
uses the Aniara text to engage with what he felt to be a contemporary 
issue: the human response to technology which can replace us, even 
outstrip us. His own response is a poetic one, but pragmatism exists in 
the text as well as prophecy. The Aniara travels a continuum between 
science and poetry, and shows the effects of too much of either on a 
society. If wallowing in science and eschewing poetry lends itself to 
ecological destruction, then the reverse leads to stagnation and an 
almost religious level of despairing passivity.
Science, possibly more than any other discipline, is built upon 
memory. It is a cumulative, progressive discipline as described by both 
McKeon (1952) and Arnett (1956), where each new idea, each newly 
discovered fact, is built carefully upon the work of others. Science 
without memory is crippled: a lame narrative of disparate fact.
It is no coincidence that when the Mima collapses, essentially 
committing suicide, the loss of her memory affects the travellers of 
the Aniara in different ways. The building blocks of science are lost 
with her death; even today, individuals rely upon computers or books 

111
Scandinavica Vol 54 No 2 2015
to store previously discovered scientific knowledge, being incapable of 
retaining all the available information themselves. As such, the ability 
of the passengers to use or recreate previously available scientific 
knowledge, and consequently the ability to create new knowledge, 
is severely limited. As the travellers die off or become incapacitated, 
scientific and technological literacy decreases, leading to breakdowns 
and other deficiencies. This is a regressive process, one mimicking the 
breakdown of narrative, and one that proceeds as the Aniara continues 
on its journey: the further in space the passengers are from the science-
representative Earth, and the further in time they are from the Mima, 
the more their scientific memory is compromised. The binding idea of 
narrative is too entwined with the Mima to extricate.
Conclusion
Aniara is unusual in contemporary science fiction explorations of 
artificial intelligence in that it is a fundamentally a narrative of absence. 
It is useful here to compare it to the artificial intelligence narratives 
defined by the continued presence of such an intelligence. In these 
the privileged position of science remains intact, and the scientific 
memory is retained throughout the text. Often, in fact, the narrative 
is strongly defined and linear, often streamlined around a theme of 
conflict between the artificial and the human. Note here the fate of the 
unlicensed Mecha in AI: Artificial Intelligence. They are destroyed in 
front of cheering crowds in an almost carnival atmosphere, designed 
to ‘exploit and express social fears ... of artificiality’ (Morris 2007: 
307) resulting from the increasing antipathy of humanity for androids. 
This conflict between human and machine, present in many science 
fiction narratives, compresses narrative. Whether the resolution to that 
conflict is diplomatic or warlike, the two sides move closer towards 
each other as their stories develop. The progression of the narrative 
implicitly reinforces the place of science within the narrative: as the 
discipline moves forward, so does the story. This is not the case in 
Aniara, where scientific regression is linked with narrative dissolution. 
The loss of scientific narrative that dies with the technological 
construct, the cessation of individual life-narratives in mimicry of the 

112
Scandinavica Vol 54 No 2 2015
Mima’s death, and the lack of a cohesive communal narrative while the 
individual narratives fragment and disintegrate underline Martinson’s 
response to the immense in Aniara. That response is bound in with the 
existence of the Mima, and is as much narrative as it is mimetic.
Endnote
1 Quotations from the poem are taken from the 1963 edition of Aniara 
(Martinson 1963a). All translations of the poem, quoted in brackets followed by 
page reference, are taken from Hugh MacDiarmid and Elspeth Harley Schubert’s 
1963 translation of Aniara (Martinson 1963b).
References
Arnett, W. E. (1956). ‘Poetry and Science’. The Journal of Aesthetics 
and Art Criticism 14:4, pp.445-452. 
Cotterell, A. (1996). The Encyclopedia of Mythology: Classical, Celtic, 
Norse. London: Lorenz Books.
Figueroa-Sarriera, H. J. (1995). ‘Children of the Mind with Disposable 
Bodies: Metaphors of Self in a Text on Artificial Intelligence and 
Robotics’, in Gray, C. H. (ed.), The Cyborg Handbook. New York: 
Routledge, pp.127-137.
Geraci, R. M. (2008). ‘Apocalyptic AI: Religion and the Promise of 
Artificial Intelligence’. Journal of the American Academy of Religion 
76:1, pp.138-166.
Geraci, R. M. (2010). Apocalyptic AI: Visions of Heaven in Robotics, 
Artificial Intelligence, and Virtual Reality. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press.
Hoberman, J. (2007). The Magic Hour: Film at Fin De Siecle. 
Philadelphia: Temple University Press. 
Johannesson, E. O. (1960). ‘Aniara: Poetry and the Poet in the 
Modern World’. Scandinavian Studies 32:4, pp.185-202. 
Landon, B. (1993). ‘Solos, Solitons, Info, and Invasion in (and of) 
Science Fiction Film’, in Slusser, G. and Radkin, E. S. (eds.), Fights of 
Fancy: Armed Conflict in Science Fiction and Fantasy. Athens, Georgia: 
University of Georgia Press, 194-208.
Loren, S. (2008). ‘Mechanical Humanity, or How I Learned to Stop 

113
Scandinavica Vol 54 No 2 2015
Worrying and Love the Android: The Posthuman Subject in 2001: A 
Space Odyssey and Artificial Intelligence: AI’, in Rhodes, G. D. (ed.), 
Stanley Kubrick: Essays on His Films and Legacy. Jefferson, North 
Carolina: McFarland & Company, pp.211-231.
Martinson, H. (1963a). [1956] Aniara: An Revy om Människan i Tid 
och Rum. Stockholm, Bonnier.
Martinson, H. (1963b). Aniara: A Review of Man in Time and Space. 
Trans. MacDiarmid, H. and Schubert, E. H. London: Hutchinson & Co. 
(Publishers) Ltd.
McKeon, R. (1952). ‘Semantics, Science, and Poetry’. Modern 
Philology 49:3, pp.145-159.
Morris, N. (2007). The Cinema of Steven Spielberg: Empire of Light. 
New York: Columbia University Press.
Nofz, M. P. and Vendy P. (2002). ‘When Computers Say It with 
Feeling: Communication and Synthetic Emotions in Kubrick’s 2001: A 
Space Odyssey’. Journal of Communication Inquiry 26:1, pp.26-45. 
Picard, R. W. (2001). ‘Building HAL: Computers that sense, recognize, 
and respond to human emotion.’ Photonics West 2001-Electronic 
Imaging. International Society for Optics and Photonics, 2001.
Rancière, J. and Magun, A. Vilensky, D. Skidan, A. (2008). ‘You Can’t 
Anticipate Explosions: Jacques Rancière in Conversation with Chto 
Delat’. Rethinking Marxism: A Journal of Economics, Culture & Society 
20:3, pp.402-412.
Richardson, K. (2015). An Anthropology of Robots and AI: Annihilation 
Anxiety and Machines. New York: Routledge.
Rossini, M. (2005). ‘Figurations of Posthumanity in Contemporary 
Science/Fiction: All Too Human(ist)?’. Revisita Canaria de Estudios 
Ingleses 50, pp.21-35.
Sjöberg, L. (1974). ‘Harry Martinson: From Vagabond to Space 
Explorer’. Books Abroad 48:3,  pp.476-485.
Smith, S. A. (1998). ‘The Role of the Emersonian ‘Poet’ in Harry 
Martinson’s Aniara: A Review of Man in Time and Space’. Extrapolation 
39:4, pp.324-337. 
Solarewicz, K. (2015). ‘The Stuff That Dreams Are Made Of: AI 
in Contemporary Science Fiction’, in Romportl, J. Zackova, E. and 
Kelemen, J. (eds.), Beyond Artificial Intelligence: The Disappearing 

114
Scandinavica Vol 54 No 2 2015
Human-Machine Divide. Heidelberg: Springer International Publishing, 
pp.111-120.
Stensson, 
J. 
(2006). 
‘Aniara, 
Mimicry 
and 
Aspect-Seeing’. 
International Forum of Psychoanalysis. 15:3, pp.157-161.
Stoehr, K. L. (2008). ‘2001: A Philosophical Odyssey’, in Sanders, S. 
M. (ed.), The Philosophy of Science Fiction Film. Lexington: University 
Press of Kentucky, pp.119-134. 
Swanson, A. (1996). ‘Aniara as Libretto’. Tijdschrift voor 
Skandinavistiek 17, pp.71-82.
Toles, G. (2006). ‘Double Minds and Double Binds in Stanley 
Kubrick’s Fairy Tale’, in Kolker, R. (ed.), Stanley Kubrick’s 2001: A 
Space Odyssey: New Essays. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp.147-
176.
Wheat, L. F. (2000). Kubrick’s 2001: A Triple Allegory. Lanham, 
Maryland: Scarecrow Press.

