UvA-DARE is a service provided by the library of the University of Amsterdam (https://dare.uva.nl)
UvA-DARE (Digital Academic Repository)
Interaction in the museum: Observing, supporting, learning
Bradburne, J.M.
Publication date
2000
Document Version
Final published version
Link to publication
Citation for published version (APA):
Bradburne, J. M. (2000). Interaction in the museum: Observing, supporting, learning. [Thesis,
externally prepared, FNWI]. Libri Books on Demand.
General rights
It is not permitted to download or to forward/distribute the text or part of it without the consent of the author(s)
and/or copyright holder(s), other than for strictly personal, individual use, unless the work is under an open
content license (like Creative Commons).
Disclaimer/Complaints regulations
If you believe that digital publication of certain material infringes any of your rights or (privacy) interests, please
let the Library know, stating your reasons. In case of a legitimate complaint, the Library will make the material
inaccessible and/or remove it from the website. Please Ask the Library: https://uba.uva.nl/en/contact, or a letter
to: Library of the University of Amsterdam, Secretariat, Singel 425, 1012 WP Amsterdam, The Netherlands. You
will be contacted as soon as possible.
Download date:30 dic. 2023

Jamess M. Bradburne Interaction in the museum Observing Supporting Learning 

Interactionn in the museum 
j j

ACADEMISCHH PROEFSCHRIFT 
terr verkrijging van de graad van doctor aan de Universiteit van Amsterdam op 
gezagg van de Rector Magnificus prof. dr J. J. M. Franse ten overstaan van een door 
hett college voor promoties ingestelde commissie, in het openbaar te verdedigen 
inn de Aula der Universiteit 
opp vrijdag 10 Maart 2000, te 10.00 uur 
doorr James M. Bradburne 
geborenn te Weston, Ontario, Canada 

Jamess M. Bradburne Interaction in the museum Observing Supporting Learning 
'romotor:: prof. dr. G. de Zeeuw 
aculteitt der Natuurwetenschappen, Wiskunde en Informatica 
Libri Books on Demand 

L. .

too my parents 

ISBNN 3-89811-635-2 
Keywords:: museum, support system, label, interaction, 
user-language,, competence 
©© James M. Bradburne, March 2000 
Publishedd by Libri Books on Demand 
Noo part of this publication may be reproduced, stored 
inn a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or 
byy any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, 
recording,, or otherwise, without the prior written 
permissionn of the author. 

Tablee of contents 
Acknowledgements s 
1.. Introduction 
12 
2.. Methodology 
18 
3.. The label as means of improving interaction 
inn the informal setting 
3.11 Labels and their languages: part 1 - supporting visitors 
29 
3.22 Labels and their languages: part 2 - supporting users 
54 
3.33.3 Using user-languages 
98 
4.. Putting it all together: newMetropolis 
103 
5.. Conclusions 
147 
6.. Postscript 
161 
7.. Bibliography 
164 
8.. Index 
182 
9.. Appendix 1: Credit list, newMetropolis 
184 
10.. Samenvatting 
192 
7 7 


-- Acknowledgements 
Whenn one starts off on a journey into largely uncharted territory, one never knows 
whenn the journey will end, nor through what territory it will lead, nor what adven-
turess may befall along the way. As a consequence, by the time it is over, any ambi-
tiouss project necessarily owes many debts, both intellectual and emotional, which 
noo amount of gratitude can ever fully repay. 
Thee intellectual roots of this study are buried in over twenty five years of academic 
andd professional curiosity, and some of the questions raised in these pages have 
heldd me in thrall since my earliest explorations into philosophy and hermeneutics 
overr twenty-five years ago. My appetite for these questions was first whetted by my 
teacherr Douglas Parker, and Professors Emile Fackenheim and Kenneth Schmidt, an 
appetitee rekindled years later in Cambridge by Colin McCabe and John Forrester, and 
laterr still in London, at the Architectural Association, by Mark Cousins, John Frazer, 
andd Cedric Price. 
Moree recently, the arguments finally elaborated in this thesis have benefited from 
discussionss with countless colleagues and friends over the years, of whom Jean 
Davallon,, Jacqueline Eidelman, Paula Findlen, Eliska Fuöikova, J. Roderick Grierson, 
Nicolee M. Holland, Daniel Jacobi, Bruno Jacomy, Elisabeth Merritt, Blanca and 
Ricardoo Muratorio, June Power, Barbara Regeer, Denis Samson, Bernard Schiele, 
Joaneathh Spicer, Gillian Thomas, Gary Vikan, Jorge Wagensberg, and Hal Wake are 
butt a few of the most significant. All those who have worked with me, and for me, 
onn projects over thee past decade have also played an indispensable role in refining 
myy thinking. They have not always realised the degree to which their work was 
shapedd and directed by the ideas maturing in this study, but their complicity is no 
lessless appreciated for having been unwitting. 
Severall thinkers have been particularly critical to the way in which my approach to 
thee subject of museums and museum labelling has evolved. Some of them are 
friends,, such as John Bowlt, Sally Duensing, Richard Gregory, Kenneth Hudson, 
Jeann Marc Levy-Leblond, Caryl Marsh, and Jonathan Miller, and have contributed 
too my thinking through long hours of conversation. Others, such as Gaston Bachel-
ardd and Michael Baxandall, I know through their writings alone, but have been in-
spirationss to me nonetheless. In both cases, the intellectual debt I owe is substan-
tial.. No undertaking of this scope can be completed without the support of family 
andd friends, whose patience, counsel and forbearance give one the strength to 
9 

continuee thinking and writing in moments when the prospect of ever finishing 
seemss to vanish past the horizon of the possible. This thesis owes a great deal 
too the early support of Holly L Bradshaw to Jan C. Jacobsen, whose unshakeable 
friendshipp continues to be a source of strength and inspiration, to my late father, 
Michaell Granville Bradburne, to his brother C. Philip Bradburne, whose hospitality 
andd wisdom helped me more than he realised, and finally to my wife, Marina, with-
outt whose patience this thesis would have foundered on many occasions. 
Too four people I owe a special debt. 
Too Gordon Pask, I owe years of friendship and counsel. It was Gordon who first en-
couragedd me to roll up my sleeves and tackle the problems of meaning anew, and 
whoo never failed to indulge encourage my intellectual gourmandise, as I grazed 
happilyy in fields as disparate as critical theory, hermeneutics, knot theory, cyber-
netics,, literary criticism, musical theory and architectural history. Since his death in 
1996,, the world has lacked for his humour and intelligence. 
Too Mary Ann Caws, I owe a turning point. It was Mary Ann who prompted me to 
movee to Paris in 1989 - a decision which shaped my intellectual, professional and 
emotionall life. More important still, from Mary Ann I learned of the cardinal virtue 
off writing honestly. As Mary Ann writes 'Intelligent reading is what we hope for, 
trustingg that the growing process has as many participants as there are readers 
forr our tales ... If telling the truth means speaking it out to the end of creation, then 
readingg the truth and knowing how to read it is surely about knowing how to read 
11 Mary Ann Caws. Truth-telling and the reading 
too the end."1 More than anything, Mary Ann showed me a model for reading and for 
ofof fiction, unpublished paper, Cambridge; 1987 
writingg to the end. 
Too my colleague and friend Drew Ann Wake, I owe more than can ever be acknow-
ledgedd or even named. For over twenty years. Drew Ann has been my fellow-
travellerr in developing new approaches to museums, science centres and exhibi-
tions,, and substantial parts of the thinking on which this study is based, the papers 
byy means of which this thinking was presented, and the concrete proof of these theo-
reticall positions, have been developed together. As a consequence, in particular 
whenn I write about the exhibitions which we have conceived, designed, realised, 
andd written about together - there are moments when our voices merge through 
thee work, and the words can be said to be as much hers as mine. As colleague, as 
friend,, as amanuensis, as nemesis, Drew Ann Wake has been an integral part of 
100 
this study. Though she may find much with which to disagree in my analysis of the 

workk we have done, without her insight and intelligence, there would have been 
substantiallyy less work to analyse. 
Too Gerard de Zeeuw, I owe this thesis. It has been Gerard who as mentor, friend and 
shepherd,, has guided me along the road, and who has both pushed me unfailingly 
too refine, deepen and clarify, while at same time enriched my own understanding 
off the work I continue to do. It has been Gerard who has kept me from blindly follow-
ingg the conventions of the museum profession, from uncritically using its langua-
ges,, from unquestioningly accepting its distinctions. It has been Gerard who has 
helpedd in shaping the theory in which the museum and its activities can be seen in 
anotherr light. Finally, it has been Gerard who has shown me the value of persever-
ance,, for which I will always be grateful. 
Finally,, as with any work that participates in and takes advantage of the labours of 
others,, if this thesis is deemed to contribute in some small way to the debate on the 
rolee of museums in contemporary society, its strengths are due in large part to their 
supportt and insights. If, on the other hand, it falls short of the goals it has set for it-
self,, by miscalculation or over-ambition, these failings are entirely my own. 
11 1 

1.. Introduction 
1.11 The paradox of interactivity 
Paull Valéry contends that there is no theory that is not a fragment of an auto-
biography.22 Thus my own interest in museums stems from my work for the 
22 In his essay Poetry and Abstract Thought 
pastt eighteen years, of which much has been for, in, or about museums - often, 
inn Paul Valiry: An Anthology pp. 142, edited by 
althoughh by no means exclusively, in museums of science and technology. 
Jamess Lawtor, Routledge Kegan Paul; London: 1977 
Thee following anecdotes serve to illustrate a paradox frequently encountered in 
alll kinds of museums, a paradox that prompted in large measure the work 
describedd in this thesis. 
Att the Palais de la Découverte, where I was attached in 1991 to the Laboratoire 
Jeann Perrin de la museologie expérimentale (LJP), we conducted an informal piece 
off research designed to discover the barriers to understanding in the Palais' salle 
'Eureka',, an area devoted to interactive exhibits, largely copied from those deve-
lopedd at the San Francisco Exploratorium in the 1970s. This research made exten-
sivee use of videotaped observations of exhibits in use, and attempted to gauge their 
effectiveness,, both in terms of their desired use and their ability to convey new 
information. . 
Inn the course of these videotaped observations, it became clear that certain exhibits 
weree designed with specific outcomes in mind. This is consistent with one of the 
guidingg principles of Frank Oppenheimer, founder of the Exploratorium, the first 
'hands-on'' science museum, and an inspiration for many recent science museum 
professionals.. Oppenheimer believed that in traditional museums of science and 
technology,, the visitor was often denied the possibility of seeing real natural 
phenomena,, and instead was given the end products of a scientific process, with-
outt having any tools with which to understand the phenomena, and therefore the 
scientificc principles, involved. He therefore encouraged the development of stand-
alonee exhibits that allowed the visitor to create certain phenomena, and to explore 
11 see Hein, H. The Exploratorium: Museum as 
thesee phenomena in certain ways.3 
Laboratory.Laboratory. Washington DC: Smithsonian; 1990 
Ass a consequence, many exhibits built according to this philosophy or borrowed 
moree or less directly from the Exploratorium, have, as a starting point, the eliciting 
off a particular phenomenon. Thus the label of the 'hands-on' exhibit demonstrating 
thee principle of coupled resonance, for instance, asks the visitor to immobilise one 
44 In the Exploratorium Cookbook II pp. 188 
off two pendula joined by a spring, and to release the other.4 The free-swinging pen-
122 
dulum then transmits some of its energy to its neighbour by means of the spring, 

causingg it to swing in turn, finally damping the motion of the neighbouring pendu-
lum.. The exhibit, when successfully used, can be intriguing, and this phenomenon 
cann then be used to explain and illustrate important scientific principles such as re-
sonance,, frequency and the transfer of energy. However, the exhibit frustrates any 
attemptss on the part of visitors at turning it to other uses, and is quickly abandoned 
byy visitors whose interest in pendula and frequencies is minimal.6 Generally, when 
'Thiss research was never published, and remains 
ann exhibit proves to be uninteresting - when the instructions do not explain how to 
onlyy in confidential internal documents 
elicitt the phenomenon, the phenomena difficult or time-consuming to elicit, or less 
thann spectacular when finally evinced-the visitor is likely to move quickly to the next 
exhibit,, often without stopping to reflect upon the reasons for the unsuccessful ex-
perience. . 
Nevertheless,, one of the encounters we videotaped at the Palais shows clearly a 
youngg boy of about seven years old, having looked at and apparently read the ex-
hibitt label, spending the better part often minutes attempting to turn the Coupled 
Pendulaa exhibit to his own use. From his manipulation, it was clear that the pheno-
menonn of coupled pendula and resonance was not of compelling interest. Instead, 
hee carefully attempted, by means of methodical and repeated attempts, to discover 
howw to make both pendula swing at the same rate. Moreover, the fact that he 
persistedd in his attempts for nearly ten minutes suggests that he had a question in 
mindd that was sufficiently important to warrant the investment of considerable time. 
Manyy museums were attracted to Frank Oppenheimer's approach, but it was not 
longg before they noted the weaknesses of the type of exhibit described above. 
Partlyy as a consequence, emphasis was placed on exhibits that encouraged 'open-
ended'' exploration of phenomena. Soap bubble exhibits are a common example of 
ann open-ended exhibit. This exhibit exists in many forms, but all of them let visitors 
exploree the properties of thin soap films. In the exhibit at the former NINT (Neder-
landss Instituut voor Nijverheid en Techniek) for example, visitors stand on a platform 
inn a shallow pool of detergent solution and use a metal hoop to create a soap bubble 
aroundd them. «Visitor behaviour with bubbles is strikingly similar, regardless of time 
 This exhibit is now at newMetropolis science and tech-
off day or background of the visitor. Each member of the family will take a turn play-
noloflyy center, Amsterdam, the successor to the NINT 
ingg with the bubbles until they have exhausted the inherent novelty of the activity, 
thenn pass on to other exhibits. In soap bubble exhibits at other institutions, visitors 
usee differently-shaped wire forms to create bubbles of different configurations, or 
createe large sheets of detergent film with wands. No matter where one encounters 
playy with bubbles, one encounters the limits of open-ended experiences. Without 
furtherr external incentives, visitor interest collapses. Even in the rare cases where 
13 

activityy continues, it is unclear what the overall value of the learning experience, 
77 ShofHand, M. No business like show business 
aa critique made tellingly by Michael Shortland in a landmark article in Nature.7 
NatureNature Vol. 328,1987 
Ann exhibit which stands in stark contrast to the two exhibits described above is 
thee Puzzle Table. In 1987 Drew Ann Wake conducted an experiment at the Ontario 
Sciencee Centre that looked at the way visitors at a science centre approached the 
solvingg of topological puzzles.8 The exhibit provided a table with various wooden 
 Orew Ann Wake and Judy Mitchell, Ontario Science 
puzzles,, a place to sit, in a quiet space that was away from active exhibit areas. To 
Centre,, unpublished internal report; Toronto: 1987 
herr surprise, she discovered that visitors were inclined to spend long periods of 
timee concentrating on how to solve the puzzles. Moreover, the experience was 
intenselyy social, and visitors repeatedly made suggestions to one another in an 
attemptt to solve the puzzles. Moreover, it became clear that people were attempting 
too solve the puzzles by building three-dimensional intellectual models and then 
testingg them. The finding that puzzle tables generate a different kind of behaviour 
 Notably at the Exploratorium, San Francisco, 
thann other kinds of exhibits found in science museums and science centres has 
thee Franklin Institute, Philadelphia, and the NINT, 
beenn corroborated in several institutions.9 
Amsterdam m 
Traditionall science and technology museums are generally considered to be un-
supportivee institutions, certainly when compared to 'hands-on' science centres de-
scribedd above.10 The Centre national des arts et métiers (CNAM) in Paris is France's 
199 Discussed in Kenneth Hudson, Museums of Influence, 
oldestt technology museum, and has been the repository of France's technological 
Cambridge:: Cambridge University Press; 1987 
heritagee since the late 18th century. In 1993 the museum opened its collections to 
nocturnall visits, prior to their closure to renovate their vast collection. As part of a 
theatricall presentation in which the spirits of former French inventors came to the 
darkenedd museum to explain France's technological legacy, visitors were encoura-
gedd to explore the collections with the aid of small electric torches. Objects in glass 
vitrines,, mute and ignored in daylight, were the object of close examination by 
visitorss armed with a means of seeking out and examining what was of personal 
interestt to them. Here a very simple object, the flashlight, became a powerful sup-
port,, and gave visitors the means, in part, to unlocking the secrets of an otherwise 
quitee resistant stronghold. The flashlight supports the visitor in making a decision 
aboutt what is of interest to them, and, in the darkness, provides a tool for exami-
ningg objects more closely. 
Iff we consider the examples above they reveal a compelling paradox.The first ex-
amplee is to all intents and purposes an 'interactive' exhibit. The visitor is in principle 
moree 'active' when engaging with the exhibit on resonance than with the objects 
144 
behind the glass cases of the Arts et Métiers. The visitor uses his hands to hold the 

pendulum,, and chooses the rate at which it swings. Nevertheless, the exhibit actually 
limitss the visitor's activity, and resists attempts on the visitor's part to turn it towards 
hiss own ends. There is only one 'correct' way to make the exhibit work, and once 
correctlyy manipulated, the exhibit elicits only a single phenomenon. The museum 
hadd decided, long before the visitor arrived, that the visitor should be interested in 
resonance,, and more importantly, how the visitor must be interested. The degree to 
whichh a visitor can be stymied in his investigation by the constraints imposed by 
thee label, the extent to which the 'interactive', 'hands-on' exhibit did not support his 
activity,, and in fact frustrated his questioning, is indicative of the weakness of our 
assumptionss about the a priori effectiveness of these kinds of support. For this 
youngg visitor, despite its 'interactivity', the museum was not a supportive environ-
ment.. Frank Oppenheimer often said the visitor cannot 'fail' the museum. However, 
byy discouraging visitors from the use of their own intelligence and competence, by 
demandingg that they conform to pre-existing norms, the museum often fails the 
visitor. . 
Thee second example shows a different kind of failure. In providing too many possi-
bilitiess and too few constraints, the visitor is left to create new activities from scratch. 
Withh no indications of how to structure their activities around the bubbles, visitors 
quicklyy exhaust the possible outcomes of the exhibit, and walk away, leaving many 
otherss unexplored.. In the absence of implicit rules or outcomes, the experience does 
nott become self-structuring, and the visitor experiences a certain helplessness after 
havingg explored the experience as best she can. The experience is too open-ended, 
tooo unstructured, to engage visitors and reward them for an investment of time. 
Inn the case of soap bubbles, a great deal of possible variety is left unexploited due 
too a lack of constraints, and the overall experience for the visitor, beyond an 
undeniablee delight in the bubble play, is confused and incoherent In certain key 
respects,, real interaction with the exhibit has not happened at all. 
Puzzlee solving is difficult intellectual work, and requires a large investment of time. 
Thee activity itself is not dramatic or beautiful, and the solution often visually no more 
interestingg than the problem. Many exhibit designers would consider this unaccep-
table,, and would argue against developing anything so ordinary and uninteresting 
ass oddly-shaped blocks of wood, or rings of metal. The third example shows 
howw an exhibit's implicit 'rules' can structure visitor behaviour, and encourage the 
investmentt of a considerable amount of time and intellectual energy. The very sug-
gestionn that there is a question and that finding the solution is a challenge seems to 
elicitt visitor activity. Moreover, when grouped together, puzzle exhibits encourage 
15 

sociall behaviour and sharing information, both skills in themselves.The final ex-
amplee shows an activity whose constraints support the visitor's experience. There 
aree no preconditions to participation in the nocturnal visit to the museum save that 
off purchasing a ticket. The 'story' recounted to the visitors as the structure of the visit 
(whichh is, in effect, the label) is open to all listeners, and, once armed with flashlights, 
thee experience is open to all visitors regardless of background or previous know-
ledge.. The museum provides a rich context of information and interpretation, which 
cann be explored according to the visitor's tastes. Textual information is available if 
desired,, as are exhibits and artefacts. The visitor determines the speed at which and 
thee order in which the material is discovered. The support of the flashlight allows 
thee visitor to select areas of interest with a beam of light, uninteresting elements 
stayingg shrouded in darkness. While the 'object' of the experience is not predeter-
mined,, by constraining the experience by means of the label, the visitor can increase 
hiss competence without recourse to expert evaluation. 
Thee paradox of the above examples consists of the observation that neither the 
degreee of physical interactivity, nor the number of possible outcomes, guarantees 
aa successful museum experience. In fact, on the contrary, the exhibits in which visi-
torss were prepared to invest the greatest amount of time and energy were often 
thosee that were the most severely constrained. This paradox presented me with a 
challengee that was to fuel my work for the next seven years. It also presented me 
withh a problem: how could we begin to create environments in which the user was 
consistentlyy supported? How could we identify the approaches that would make 
thee museum setting into an effective support system? In short, a new theory of the 
museum,, or at least for the museum, seemed to be called for. 
1.22 The parameters of this study 
Forr years, museum professionals have struggled with the challenge of making 
betterr exhibitions, and much time and effort has been spent developing guidelines 
forr exhibition planners - how to write readable texts, how to make text panels 
readable,, how to light readable text panels. Much of this literature has been aimed 
att improving the physical conditions under which information is presented - and 
receivedd by the museum visitor. Accordingly, for the purpose of this study, we will 
assumee that the physical conditions for the use of the label to be ideal, or that at 
leastt they can be optimised by means of good writing, effective design, and careful 
implementation. . 
16 6 

Thee label can also be analysed in terms of how it helps to support and shape the 
visitor'ss intellectual experience in the museum. Most discussions about museum 
strategies,, both within and outside the museum, have concerned strategies em-
ployedd to directly shape the content of the label. What is the storyline? Should 
theree be a historical parcours? What themes should be described? What is the 
informationn content of the exhibition, its communications goals? There is already 
aa large literature on such structuring, and as a consequence these strategies will be 
givenn only a cursory examination in this study. Other kinds of structuring, aimed 
att conferring certain properties on to the visitor, have been largely ignored by mu-
seumm professionals, and there is little literature about the ways in which strategies 
aimedd at conveying information about an object, a subject, a period etc., are used, 
shaped,, and constrained by other considerations. What assumptions does the 
storylinee convey? What does telling a history tell the visitor? What rules shape the 
writingg of the text, with what purpose? Only when these kinds of structuring are 
takenn into account, do we begin to have a powerful tool for studying the way the 
museumm label works, and how it might be improved. 
1.33 The design of the study 
Thiss study is divided into three parts. 
Inn the first part, Section 2., a problem is identified, and a research model is proposed. 
Severall key concepts are introduced to provide a vocabulary for the study - support 
system,, label, user-language. A theory is proposed in which the museum setting is 
studied,, labels and their user-languages identified, and the properties conferred by 
thee user-language examined. Improvement in the museum setting, it is argued, lies 
inn better understanding how and when to use specific user-languages. 
Thee second part, looks at the label in the museum setting, and is divided into three 
distinctt parts. Section 3.1 looks at the user-languages most commonly employed in 
thee museum, and examines several examples of current museum practice. Section 
3.22 looks at three exhibitions that were developed employing user-languages less 
commonlyy found in museums, and examines in detail the effect of these exhibitions 
onn user behaviour. Section 4. looks at the consequences of using the theory deve-
lopedd in this study to create an entire institution - newMetropolis in Amsterdam. 
Thee third and final part, Sections 5. and 6. summarises the results of the research, 
andd evaluates the effectiveness and usefulness of the theory developed in this 
study.. Finally, several possibilities for further research are briefly examined. 
17 

2.. Methodology 
2.11 Defining a class of institutions 
Whatt people do and how they behave is determined largely by the structure of their 
environment.. On the one hand, this statement may appear trivial in the light of the 
richnesss of that environment: the language one's mother speaks, the way one is 
housed,, the means by which one meets one's needs for food and love, the culture 
thatt is at once the summary of a people's experience and the background against 
whichh new culture is created and measured. On the other hand, it is less trivial when 
onee considers the many institutions that make it possible to maintain the environ-
ment,, and to create new elements in it: schools, universities, hospitals, banks, roads, 
communicationss networks. An important feature in the landscape of the cultural en-
vironmentt is the museum, which has structured and supported the cultural life of 
thee Western world since at least the latter part of the 16th century. The museum is 
onee of a family of institutions of informal learning, which includes libraries, zoolo-
gicall gardens, aquaria, and science centres, that shares a mission to make available 
aa body of information, most commonly a collection, to unknown and in principle 
unknowablee users, who need as their only qualification the desire to use the infor-
mation. . 
Theree is widespread agreement about the kinds of institutions that belong to the 
museumm family, if it is viewed as a heterogeneous class. They often share the same 
kindss of public architecture, the same sources of support, and the same kinds of staff. 
Oftenn the same kinds of people take advantage of them as places to enjoy the plea-
suree of sharing new experiences, learning new information, practicing new skills. 
Theyy are often places, in the words of Jonathan Miller, 'to discover that the life 
off the mind is a pleasure'.11 Depending on the distinctions we make, the family of 
111 private communication 1996 
museumss can include some institutions, and exclude others. As with any boundary, 
somee institutions remain at the margins, their inclusion uncertain or ambiguous, 
theirr role problematic or transitional. However, while it may be easy to say what 
existingg institutions are called, or call themselves, museums, it is much less easy to 
determinee whether a new institution is a museum. 
Butt is there not a stable and agreed upon definition of what is a museum and what 
iss not? In his 'Museum Manifesto' of 1970, Joseph Veach Noble, later president of 
thee American Association of Museums, defined the museum's five principal respon-
sibilitiess as: to collect, to conserve, to study, to interpret and to exhibit. 
18 8 

These,, he said, 'are like the five fingers of a hand, each independent, but united 
forr a common purpose.' This definition has been widely used and admired, and is 
oftenn cited in discussions of the role of the museum. The most current definition of 
thee museum by ICOM (the International Council of Museums, based in Paris) dates 
fromm 1975: The museum is a permanent, non-profit, institution, at the service of 
societyy and its development, open to the public, which conducts research concer-
ningg the material evidence of man and his environment, acquires these, conserves 
them,, and notably exhibits them to the ends of study, research and enjoyment.' 
Whatt is wrong with these definitions? 
Thee answer is that they don't help. Consider the examples cited in the introduction 
above.. All of the institutions fit comfortably within the accepted definition of the 
museum.. But clearly the interests of the participants are being served better in some 
cases,cases, worse in others. The young boy is stymied by the resistance of the 'interactive' 
exhibit,, while armed with a flashlight the neophyte discovers an unknown world for 
thee first time. A definition of the museum is needed that captures its specificity, but 
moree importantly, allows us to say with confidence that one setting is better, or 
worse,, than another. In technical terms, we need a referent that does not depend 
onn an authority such as ICOM - but preferably depends on what develops in the 
interactionn with users. That is to say, we need a more powerful tool in order to study 
museumm settings - and a means to use this research to create better museums. 
2.22 The museum as support system - a research model 
Thee focal point of any study is the choice of the 'unit of analysis' -the choice of what 
onee will look at, what observations one will try to improve, what form of language 
willl be used to talk about and transfer what has been observed. A wrong choice does 
nott necessarily mean that it is impossible to study and explore an interesting set of 
examples,, but quite often the reverse. It may mean that one can not identify what 
hass not been studied as belonging to the same category. Or in more technical terms, 
itt can mean that it becomes impossible to 'close' on one's 'scientific object'. In this 
casee the only option that remains is to have such an object 'officially' defined, 
byy some authorityy or a group of experts such as ICOM (the International Council of 
Museums),, a weak option at best. 
Unfortunately,, merely being aware of the importance of choosing a fruitful unit of 
analysiss does not help by itself. Usually one has to explore many possibilities, go 
somee distance in exploring them, and more often than not, retrace one's steps and 
19 

startt again. This phase appears to be characteristic of all studies of social pheno-
mena,, and as I experienced, perhaps especially of the study of museums. Museums 
andd similar institutions clearly can be analysed in many ways. They can be studied 
inn terms of their resources or collections - their function as the repository of the 
materiall culture of a city, a country, or a people. They can be studied in terms of the 
resourcess they provide to supplement the formal education system. They can be 
studiedd as a locus for the generation of new knowledge by means of research. 
Theyy can also be studied as support systems.This possibility revealed itself after 
aa lengthy consideration of the literature, and eventually seemed to offer the most 
fruitfull basis for the research model to be employed in this study. By definition, a 
supportt system is open to any individual without any form of prior constraint other 
thann the desire to use the system to maintain or increase their competence. A sup-
portt system suggests to users a specific form of use, and possible extensions to 
thesee uses, where a flow of information will provide the user with the additional 
resourcess needed, and be available to other users. A support system supports the e 
activitiess of the user, which stem from the user's own interests, experience and 
existingg competence. A support system does not impose a model of the user, nor a 
modell for the activities on the variation brought by the user. A support system is 
immediate,, and supports the user throughout her activity, although certain support 
systemss may have further extensions overtime. A support system operates in such 
aa way as to maximise variety among the users, and to maximise the continued use 
off the support system in such a way that this activity, and other activities, is aug-
mentedd and encouraged. In this way, the support system can be said to serve as a 
meanss of recognising, responding to and enhancing the user's competences, with-
outt leading to conflicts with other users. 
Obviously,, not all institutions that we normally call (or that call themselves) mu-
seumss are support systems in the sense defined above. Many, perhaps even most, 
explicitlyy base their activities on a model of the user, often of a restricted nature. They 
mayy cater, for example, to the intelligent, the educated, the knowledgeable, or the 
specialistt - or alternatively, to the lazy, the superficial, or merely occasional visitor. 
Whatt I am looking for is something else. I want to know what institutions need in 
orderr to become support systems. 
Thiss depends first on institutions being able to identify if and when they are suc-
200 
cessful as support systems, and second, on others being able to participate in this 

development.. This approach would mean that what a museum is would no longer 
needd to be defined by an external authority such ICOM. What seems to be involved 
iss a form of self-organisation of the interaction between what is in the process of 
becomingg a museum, and its users. In other words, an organisation that develops 
ass a support system makes itself recognisable as a museum (perhaps initially by 
simplyy declaring itself to be a museum ), and becomes recognised by its visitors as 
ann institution that helps them develop certain properties (and, as a consequence, 
cann develop itself further in becoming a museum, etc.). The 'scientific object' I am 
lookingg for is therefore of a somewhat unusual kind: its boundaries are not stable 
andd discoverable, but rather the product, as well as part of the process, of an or-
ganisationn inventing itself as a particular type of 'object'. 
Inn the next two sections the notion of a support system will be developed further. 
Whatt needs to be made visible is how such a system interacts with its users, 
andd what constraints are needed to make this interaction effective. This depends, 
firstly,, on the notion of a label (section 2.3), and secondly, on the notion of a user-
languagee (section 2.6). 
2.33 The museum support system - the label 
Ass a support system, the museum aims to make its resources available to a wide 
varietyy of unknown and unknowable users - the visitors to the museum - in such a 
wayy as to support the widest possible variety of informal opportunities for use. Once 
someonee becomes a visitor, which is to say once she has entered the museum, she 
cann be considered an observer - an observer of all that is around her - and these 
observationss are shaped by the elements that the museum use to create the 
museumm environment. 
Too the extent to which the museum deliberately chooses to dispose elements in a 
particularr way - to display an object, to light it, to describe it - and not others, the 
observerr is constrained in her observations, while remaining free to act in any way 
shee chooses. For the purposes of this study, the sum of all the intentional activities 
onn the part of the museum to constrain the observer, and thereby create a high-
qualityy support system will be called the label. The label is the means by which the 
museumm supports use. The label is understood in this study as a constructive device: 
itt allows the museum and its professionals to 'place' something before the visitor in 
orderr to interact with it. The label thus may refer simply to some object or set of ob-
jects,, like paintings, curios, furniture, memorabilia of military campaigns. It also may 
21 

referr to that which connects objects, such as a 'storyline' that addresses and invites 
thee visitor to look at objects in order to reconstruct, for example, the maturing of a 
famouss painter. Or it may refer to a set of operations that the visitor is asked to per-
form,, as in the case of a science museum that tries to help the visitor reconstruct 
howw notions such as atoms, pressure, electricity, or computing, developed and are 
employed.. The label is at the heart of the museum enterprise. As George Brown 
Goodee wrote already in 1888, 'An efficient educational museum may be described 
ass a collection of labels, each illustrated by a well-selected specimen/12 Nowadays 
122 Brown-Goode, G. Museum History and Museums of 
thee emphasis has changed, though, often even reversed, and we may find labels 
History.History. Papers of the American Historical Association 
designedd to generate what the visitor can use, and what can be illustrated by the 
Vol.. Ill, No.1, Putnam's: New York; 1888 pp 306 
museum. . 
Whatt exactly does the label do? Let us look at the museum setting in more detail. 
Inn the museum, a visitor, as an observer, comes into contact with the objects and 
settingss created by the museum. As a consequence, the observer is brought into a 
relationshipp with the object, setting, or other visitors, in a particular way - con-
strained,, shaped, and structured by the label. The first consequence is that the 
propertyy of interaction is created between the observing entities. This interaction has 
thee further consequence, as a support system, of creating properties in the observers 
-thee observer could become more active, more competent, more knowledgeable -
whilee the observed object (itself a kind of 'observer' - a stand-in for the absent 
curator,, the object's history, other observers etc.) could become humorous, pre-
cious,, or relevant. This relationship warrants a closer look. It is comprised of three 
distinctt parts: the activity of structuring the museum environment, the implemen-
tationn of constraints in the museum; the label itself, intentionally constraining the 
fieldd of the observer and the properties created in the user, desirable or undesirable. 
Cann different labels elicit different properties, even desirable properties? What pro-
pertiess are desirable is function of a set of beliefs. A Fascist might find the properties 
off obedience and passivity desirable, whereas a Democrat might prefer the pro-
pertiess of independence, activity, or spontaneity. Whatever properties are defined 
ass desirable, we take it that a better label will create more desirable properties. If the 
museumm is considered to be a support system, certain properties can be defined to 
bee desirable, such as agency, competence, curiosity, and engagement. A museum 
withh labels that create more of these properties will be considered a better support 
system,, and as a consequence, for the purpose of this study, can be considered a 
222 
better museum. 

2.44 Defining the research question 
Ass a consequence of the above, the following question seems to be central: what 
needss to be studied in order to be able to identify labels which give rise to desirable 
propertiess in the user? As itt turns out, the answer is that we must create or construct 
whatt is to be studied. What we are looking for, therefore, are not only the settings 
inn which such properties are conferred, but also howw these settings can be created. 
Thee research question thus may be formulated in terms of two questions, the 
answerss to which should converge. First, what labels consistently create specific 
desiredd properties in what specific settings - and only in those settings? Second, 
andd conversely, what settings uniquely support specific labels in consistently 
creatingg specific desired properties? Convergence then is taken to mean that the 
settingss will both allow the labels to function, and the labels to maintain the settings. 
Lett us look at these questions in less abstract terms. 
AA loaded gun, lying on a table in an empty room, has certain properties in terms of 
whichh it can be described - its weight, size, calibre etc. If this loaded gun is given 
too a person in a crowded railway station, the gun confers the property of being 
dangerous.. A 'new' entity is created - a person with a loaded gun. Neither the person 
withh the gun, nor the gun, remain the same. The person has become dangerous, 
certainly,, but the gun too has a new property - its trigger can now be pulled. The 
propertiess conferred, both to the gun, and to the person, are largely independent of 
thee individual character of either. The person need not be a psychotic to be dange-
rous.. The gun need not be a particular calibre in order to be fired. Moreover, these 
propertiess are only conferred in a specific kind of setting. If the gun is handed to a 
personn at the bottom of a swimming pool, the property of being dangerous is pre-
sumablyy not conferred, nor even, perhaps, the gun the property of being able to be 
fired. . 
Whatt is true in the example above is true in all support systems, which is what gives 
thee notion its strength. Supports convey properties independent of the specific 
particularitiess of the user. All the user has to do is to choose to use the support. The 
personn could refuse to accept the gun, of course, just as a user can refuse to accept 
aa support. The two questions above can then be restated: what settings do we have 
too create or identify to study supports that confer specific properties to the user -
andd what supports give rise to specific properties in a particular setting? A further 
concernn derives from this: what contributes to the support being accepted by the 
user?? 
23 

2.55 Making messages 
Iff we continue to use our metaphor of the gun, it can be argued that most profes-
sionalss would prefer to concentrate on describing a gun (and other objects) 'as is' -
inn terms of its size, its make, its use, or its origin, for example. This is to say that when 
creatingg labels they concentrate on stylistic distinctions, which in the world of the 
museumm professional include voice, narrative, structure, style, and medium. These 
distinctionss facilitate the writing of exhibition texts, and the production of labels 
(inn the most literal sense) that are interesting, accurate, and engaging. However, as 
wee will see in the examples below, there is more to it than meets the eye. Good texts 
doo not only describe the object they purport to be describing, just as good story-
liness do more than just tell the story. To date, there has been little or no serious work 
donee to explore the other ways in which label texts work, in other words, how texts 
aree implemented as labels. Without such an understanding, it is impossible to 
answerr the research question formulated above, which is at the heart of this study. 
Inn a literal, as well as figurative, sense, the label serves to give a 'voice' to the 
museum,, as well as to the visitor. The museum speaks directly to the visitor from 
thee time she arrives. Texts tell her where to check her coat, where different exhibi-
tionss are, where she can get a coffee, when she has to leave. In the exhibitions them-
selves,, texts also speak to the visitor. These elements need not always be written 
(theyy can be projected, or video presentations), but insofar as they are embedded in 
aa natural language, they structure a relationship with the visitor by means of their 
grammaticall 'voice', or person, as it is conventionally described by museum pro-
fessionalss and professional writers. 
Forr example, one could imagine the following texts about dinosaurs (based on an 
articlee about Robert Bakker discussed below13), each one structuring the visitor 
133 Thomas Monmaney. The Dinosaur Heretic, 
throughh what she sees by means of the label, in different ways. On the surface, what 
TheThe New Yorker May 1993 
iss important about each of these texts is the information it provides to the reader 
aboutt the subject, in this case evolutionary palaeontology. The rest - how this in-
formationn is conveyed - is normally just considered 'style', a means to the end of 
ensuringg the visitor's interest. However, as we shall see, more is going on than is 
normallyy recognised. 
FirstFirst person/viewpoint 
'When'When I was studying I often wondered why a pronghorn antelope needs to run so fast? 
EvolutionEvolution does not paint a lily, and it does not turbocharge a browser for no reason.
244 
didn 't make sense until I realised that fifteen thousand years ago the continent teemed 

withwith predators - giant wolves, sabretooths, panthers - that ran like the wind. When 
II look at a pronghorn, I see invisible predators, I know its oldest threats.' 
Inn addition to the 'content' of the text, here the voice of the scientist relativises the 
informationn from the outset. A scientist is just a person like the visitor, with ex-
periences,, insights, and opinions. On the other hand, the scientist is also an autho-
rity,, and the label's authority depends on the visitor accepting the authority of the 
scientistt in particular, and of science in general. 
SecondSecond person/viewpoint: 
ImagineImagine you're a dinosaur. You're cold, you're hungry. How in the world are you going 
toto get anything to eat? Now imagine T. Rex, a ten-thousand pound roadrunner from Hell. 
WouldWould he just sit around waiting for lunch to walk by? No way. 
Heree the visitor is confronted directly, as if she is being spoken to by the writer 
off the label. The colloquial language would imply that it is the museum's voice 
speaking,, not the scientist's, although there is some ambiguity in this respect. 
Secondd person appeals are often rhetorical, and followed by third person infor-
mation.. Once again, in addition to the information contained in the text that relates 
directlyy to the exhibition's subject, there is an implicit appeal to authority. The que-
stionn is not really meant as a question - it is a rhetorical question, part of an argu-
ment,, intended to persuade. 
ThirdThird person/viewpoint: 
MaintainingMaintaining high body temperature is very expensive. In fact, dinosaurs could enjoy the 
advantagesadvantages of high and constant body temperature 'on the cheap'. Because of their 
enormousenormous bulk dinosaurs retained the heat generated by normal, everyday activity, such 
asas walking. They did not have to add to it by processes that required additional food, as 
birdsbirds and mammals do. Perhaps this is why so few kinds of dinosaurs were small. 
Nothingg allows the visitor to corroborate, challenge, or question the authority of 
thee text, nor relativise the information in terms of its origins. Is it the museum that 
guaranteess the truth of the statement? Is it the community of palaeontologists? Is 
itt one palaeontologist? The visitor has no way of knowing - but whatever the case, 
theree is an appeal to authority that goes beyond the mere information content of the 
text.. By means of its 'voice', text can express a number of different viewpoints, each 
lockedd into the others, thereby conferring the constraints - the figurative blinkers -
off each on those who take these points of view. Each of the three viewpoints can be 
25 

saidd to 'implement' the label differently - by suggesting to the visitor what role she 
shouldd take with regards to the label and the museum. It is this implementation -
howw the text functions as a label to confer different properties on the visitor - that 
iss the central concern of this study. 
2.66 Labels and their user-languages - a theoretical tool 
Inn trying to create new and more effective labels, the museum professional can con-
templatee manipulating a wide range of aspects. The overall physical setting can be 
changed,, the lighting can be altered, the positioning of the exhibited elements 
changed.. The information environment can be enhanced, texts added or subtracted, 
videoss presented. The ways in which the exhibit elements are presented can be re-
configured,, vitrines opened, interactivity introduced. It is the position of this study 
thatt however useful it may be to modify the physical setting, enhance the informa-
tionn environment, or re-present the exhibit elements, what can be most profitably 
manipulatedd is the relationship the label implicitly and explicitly seeks to establish 
withh an unknown and unknowable user -the label's 'user language.' 
Ass defined by De Zeeuw, a user-language is the 'collection of constraints that helps 
shapee the variation generated by an actor into patterned behaviour.' " T h e advan-
"Op.cit.. Co-ordinated co-operation and increasing 
tagee of such a definition is that it can be used to describe both the intentionality 
competence,, pp.3,1990 
off natural language, and, more importantly for this study, the structuring of other 
languages,, both natural and non-verbal. 
Ass we saw in the examples about dinosaurs above, a label can be said to have two 
components,, its manifest content, and the relationship it proposes to the potential 
userr - its intent. We shall therefore use the term user-language to describe all the 
wayss in which the infinite variety of possible interaction is constrained by the label 
-- a definition which allows us to distinguish between the syntactical and lexical 
constraintss of a natural language (related to the content of the utterance), and the 
illocutionaryy and performative constraints of the user-language (related to the intent 
off the utterance). User-languages order information by limiting the sorts of opera-
tionss that have meaning, and by allowing multiple starting points to be equally 
legitimate,, which is to say that they remain open to variation. 
Ass in the example of the gun cited above, labels can be studied by looking at the 
user-languagess they employ, the properties these user-languages confer on the user, 
266 
and the properties the user confers on the label. This study argues that it should be 

possiblee to consistently develop labels that confer desired properties on the user, 
andd that these properties are largely the consequence of the choice of user-language 
off the label, insofar as particular user-languages are more effective at conferring 
certainn properties. 
Inn the museum, looking at the user-languages of the label gives us the tool we were 
seekingg for making new meanings available for analysis. A user-language describes 
whatt counts - what can be included, and what is invisible. The user-language con-
strainss the user's interaction with the label, and in so doing confers specific pro-
perties.. In the museum, the most significant user-languages are 'textual authority', 
'observation',, 'variables', 'problems', and 'games', insofar as these user-languages 
imposee constraints that confer certain desirable properties in the museum setting. 
Thee notion of a user-language allows us to describe and analyse the museum label 
inn terms of both its content and its intent. For instance, a text about a given subject 
writtenn in the first person could use any of a number of different user-languages -
itt could cite canonical texts, recount observations, weigh different possibilities, 
proposee a murder mystery, or suggest a game. 
Forr the purposes of this study, user-languages can be ordered in terms of the ways 
inn which they support variety generated by actors - from the user-language of 
authorityy at one end of the scale, to the user-language of infinite games at the other. 
Inn the user-language of authority, effectively the label has only one dimension -that 
off the voice of somebody else as an authority. In the user-language of observation, 
thee user is addressed as an observer and hence conferred the property of being her 
ownn authority. The user-language of variables, an extension of the user-language 
off observation, marks the emergence of the modern museum, as it confers the ability 
too see, not only the visible, but also invisible relationships among things. The 
user-languagee of problems confers actorship on the user, while the user-language 
off games makes this actorship an indispensable condition of the experience, and 
conferss the additional property of other players - with only one player, there is no 
game. . 
Althoughh the user-languages described are not all the user-languages that exist, 
eachh of these languages appears to subsume the preceding one, and to enrich it. 
Thuss the user-language of observation can make appeals to textual authority, 
whilee nonetheless leaving the final word to observation. The user-language of 
variabless subsumes that of observation, as the user-language of problems sub-
sumess that of variables. The user-language of games encompasses and structures 
27 

alll user-languages, and can be said to acknowledge and structure a world of dis-
course,, a world in which players are recognised and their activities supported. 
Itt can be further argued that the user-languages of games, and of problems, are 
thee starting point for better labels. Especially when combined with strategies that 
enhancee the probability of the tabel being accepted by the user, labels which 
employy the user-languages of games and problems support the greatest amount of 
self-initiated,, self-sustained, and self-directed interaction on the part of the user. 
2.77 The benefits of a new museum theory 
Thee benefits of looking at the museum as a support system, and how it can be con-
structedd so as to confer certain properties to the user - in particular through the label 
-- are threefold. First, such an approach serves to identify, describe and explain the 
functionn of labels. Second, by having identified label development strategies that 
createe desirable properties, ways can be suggested to create more effective labels, 
and,, as a consequence, construct more effective museums. Finally, it will become 
possiblee to recognise which institutions can be included in the class of museums. 
Itt seems proper to call the results of the study a 'theory', or a 'museum theory'. 
Itt should be realised however that this notion is not used in its traditional sense. 
Itt does not refer only to the observations that can be made of the elements of a well-
definedd and well-recognised class, that is, institutions that are called museums. As 
indicatedd above, simply defining such a class (e.g. by an authority such the Inter-
nationall Council of Museums) is neither sufficient nor satisfactory. What is needed 
inn addition is some way to have the elements of the class constructed in the process 
off their use. This implies that results of the theory will consist of basically two parts: 
wayss of constructing labels so settings develop that address users, as well as forms 
off addressing that help users maintain the settings in which the properties they 
desiree are being conferred on them. 
28 8 

3.. The label as means of improving interaction in the informal setting 
3.11 The user-languages of the museum: part 1 - supporting visitors 
Theree are several limitations to the conventional ways in which most museum pro-
fessionalss create labels. First among these limitations is, in the absence of a theory, 
thee inability to recognise and develop constraints on the visitor, and to consistently 
implementt preferred ones. Museums have traditionally had a limitedd notion of the 
visitor,, and treated the label merely as an instrument by means of which to inform 
them,, a demonstration of the wisdom and learning of the museum professionals 
responsiblee for writing the label and corroborating its assertions. This is not to say 
thatt labels were written without long and thoughtful consideration. What will be 
argued,, however, is that the label writers mainly restricted themselves to three 
distinctt types of constraints - in keeping with the 'grand narratives' of their time. 
Inn my terminology these three sets of constraints can be recognised as user-lang-
uagess - the language of textual authority, the language of observation, and the 
languagee of variables. These languages have long been used to accomplish aims 
suchh as conveying information, telling a story, or documenting historical data. In this 
sectionn I will argue that each language has its advantages and disadvantages, and 
notablyy that the later ones subsume the previous ones. It will be seen, however, that 
nonee of the three user-languages yet confers actorship, in the sense I have defined, 
whichh may account in part for the practice of'visiting' common to museums, as op-
posedd to that of 'use' which characterises libraries. 
Thiss section begins with a description of the user-language that confers the most 
rudimentaryy properties on the visitor - the user-language of textual authority- in 
orderr to indicate how one may recognise its labels. The same is done for the user-
languagee of observation, and its extension, the user-language of variables. For 
obviouss reasons the examples used are largely historical, drawn from museums 
overr thee past several centuries. Such examples provide a useful means to develop 
myy theory. To the degree the theory is useful, the easier it should be to recognise 
whatt is happening in museums at present, particularly if and when these three user-
languagess are still being used. 
Inn a later section the user-languages of problems and of games will be looked at 
inn more detail. They appear to subsume the three languages mentioned above, and 
too confer more, and more interesting properties. They have been used only rarely 
inn the museum setting, and as a consequence, many of the labels to be examined 
havee been created by the author and his colleagues during the course of this re- 
29 

search.. In this way, the theory has been used as a tool for creating new kinds of 
museumm experiences, and to explore the effectiveness of new kinds of labels and of 
thee user-languages on which they are based. 
3.1.11 Textual Authority 
Thee user-language of the label that appears to dominate early forms of exhibition is 
thatt of an appeal to authority- of the curator, the researcher, the academic- usually 
knownn and legitimised through texts. The label that implements this user-language 
presumablyy creates in the user the desirable property of being more knowledgeable, 
att least insofar as the label can be assumed to represent such knowledge. Strictly 
speaking,, authority creates the property of obedience when the user fears unde-
sirablee sanctions. In the museum setting, it can be argued that the label creates 
authorityy by implementing the 'authority of the authority', and thus may also confer 
thee corollary undesirable properties of acceptance and detachment in the museum 
user. . 
Thee language of authority is perhaps the first experience in the human learning 
process.. A child quickly learns that certain things are not to be touched, or done, 
solelyy on the basis of parental authority. A burned hand may teach best, but few 
aree the parents that willingly allow a child's curiosity to do them grievous injury. 
Despitee the fact that such authority is commonly grounded in fear of an undesirable 
consequencee - the parental fear of a burned hand, the child's fear of a spank to the 
backsidee - it is but a short step from 'don't touch because it will hurt you' to simply 
'becausee I said so' as the ground of a child's ontology. Much of the physical universe 
iss conjured into being in the act of learning a natural language, and the authority that 
underpinss the ascription of name to object or experience is often that of the parent. 
Thiss primary grounding of ontology in authority easily allows a radical shift from the 
specificc to the general. The appeal to authority is a common feature of rhetoric, and 
inn this sense authority is bound to certain kinds of arguments, and as such may form 
partt of a well-defined user-language, in which the elements of discourse are corro-
boratedd by alluding to the authority of the ancients, antique civilisation, the canons 
off science etc., authority having lost any real relationship to the fear of physical 
reprisall or retribution. 
Thee user-language of textual authority operates when discourse, debate and 
learningg are conducted in terms of references to texts, and the authority of those 
300 
texts may rest on other texts. Knowledge, and therefore learning, is conferred by 

referencee to texts, and the proper structuring and citation of texts is warrant for 
knowledge.. Agreement is solicited in terms of confirmation, and competence is de-
finedd in terms of the quality, quantity and authority of the texts brought to the 
discourse.. Users are not deemed competent if they can cite only their own obser-
vations,, nor if they can solve what they define as problems, but only if they are able 
too cite texts in support of their position. Generating new texts is the activity of those 
alreadyy deemed competent in the citation of texts, and the warrant for new texts is 
basedd upon the citation of existing texts. Textual authority has a long history, and 
continuess to play a major role in many academic disciplines. 
Ass witnessed by the following examples, the appeal to textual authority can be found 
inn the labels of virtually all museums of science, technology, history and art, past 
andd present. Insofar as the curator represents the voice of authority, and the label 
implementss this authority, the curatorial texts establish the truth concerning the 
museumm object, and this is the truth that the visitor is expected to accept. In many 
modernn museums, the bulk of a curator's time is taken up by research. This research 
iss directed towards the end of establishing the scientific, empirical truth about a 
particularr matter - attribution or antecedents in the case of a work of art, scientific 
veracityy in the case of a science museum - and this truth is then implemented in a 
label.. The activity of generating texts is solely in the province of the museum - the 
visitorr is not considered competent to write their own texts, nor to draw their own 
conclusions. . 
Lett us consider the following example, drawn from an internationally-acclaimed 
exhibitionn of Russian icons, designed and developed in part by the author. 
TheThe Gates of Mystery: the Art of Holy Russia opened at The Walters 
Artt Gallery in Baltimore in August 1992, the first stop in its tour of 
museumss that included the Dallas Museum of Art, the Chicago Art 
Institutee and the Victoria and Albert Museum. Originally the exhibit-
ionn was designed to begin with a non-narrative audiovisual as the 
visitorss entered, showing the celebration of the Russian Orthodox 
liturgyy at Christmas, Epiphany, Easter and Pentecost, and highlighting 
thee way in which the icon figured spiritually in the Orthodox ceremony and physi-
callyy in the Orthodox church. For reasons unrelated to the curatorial intent of the 
exhibition,, the audiovisual was replaced with a large panel of introductory text, 
establishingg the idea of the icon, and the political and ecclesiastical history of the 
Russiann state. This text was meant not only to establish that the exhibition was of 
31 

Russiann icons in all media, but that the exhibition was divided into two parts: 
thee first dealing with the eternal liturgy, or Heaven and the second dealing with 
Russiann icons as they developed out of Byzantine models into a distinctively Rus-
siann art form, art history, or Earth. This distinction was made physically in the exhi-
bitionn by a change of colour: Heaven (liturgy) was purple. Earth (history) was green. 
HeavenHeaven and Earth 
IconsIcons exist in both heaven and earth. They are gates to the mystery of Orthodox spiri-
tuality,tuality, and silent witnesses to the length and breadth of Russian history. The icon is the
pointpoint where heaven meets earth. It is heavenly truth in earthly form, the Word made 
flesh.flesh. Wooden planks, fish glue and earthen pigments are transformed into God through 
thethe faith of the artist. The icon becomes a window on eternity, the divine beauty that 
isis eternal salvation. On earth. Orthodox Christians repeat timeless acts of devotion, 
themselvesthemselves mortal players in an unfolding history, subject to change and deca
heaven,heaven, Christ and his Saints sit in Glory, venerated for eternity by choirs of angels
OverwhelmedOverwhelmed by the splendor of Byzantium, which his ambassadors descr
'heaven'heaven on earth' Prince Vladimir of Kiev converts his people to Orthodoxy in 988
AA century later, Kievan Rus is swept away by the Mongols, who are in turn are defea-
tedted by a warrior saint, the Prince of Moscow, Dimitri Donskoy. Holy Russia rises once 
againagain and Moscow is hailed as a 'Third Rome', the heir to Constantinopole, the 'second 
Rome'Rome' founded by Constantine the Great in A.D. 324. Heaven is filled with the 'divine 
andand uncreated light' that blinded the Apostles at the Transfiguration of Christ. For Saint 
SimeonSimeon the New Theologian heaven is full of 'fire uncreated and invisible, withou
beginningbeginning and immaterial'. Heaven is beyond time, and permeated with divine fire.
thethe third century, St. Athanasius writes 'God became man that man might become God'. 
TheThe uncreated light, visible on earth in the form of the icon, is what allows man to 
becomebecome God. 
Whatt can we observe about the user-language of the above label? What does it tell 
uss about the maker of the objects? The maker of the label? The reader of the label? 
Firstt of all, the introductory text is highly narrative. It does not cite objects, it cites 
spirituall events and states. The tone of the text is magisterial, as if delivered from 
thee throne of God. The text is telling a story, and the reader is obliged to take the 
truthh of the story on faith in order to enter into the spirit of the exhibition. The maker 
off the objects in the exhibition is at this point largely invisible it seems to be the voice 
off the museum, stately, disembodied and serious, that speaks through the labels, 
322 
setting the stage for the objects that will be seen, and aware of its own artifice in 

makingg them visible. The reader is given certain clues in both text and setting, 
althoughh they are not put as such. The icon is a gate to the spiritual. The icon is part 
off another culture. The icon is the key to a certain kind of transformation. 
Whatt can a visitor make of this? The text demands acquiescence - the reader must 
enterr into the cadence of the text and listen to the story as it unfolds. The visitor is 
definedd as a listener, a hearer of stories, and the museum a storyteller. The artist, 
thee icon painter, the icon itself, are all as yet invisible features in a story yet to be 
toldd to a passive listener, a supplicant in the temple of art as a penitent in the House 
off God. This tone is not entirely inadvertent (although it could easily have been so, 
insofarr as the top-down 'from on high' textual strategy is common in institutions of 
'high'' culture) -to understand the objects of the exhibition in their ecclesiastical con-
textt is in some measure to enter into the relationship with the art that it exacts in 
contextt - the icon is more than an object of veneration, it participates in the Divine 
Essence,, and to appreciate the icon the visitor must be prepared to accept in some 
measure,, however temporary, the paternalistic binome that is part of the context that 
explainss the object itself. In eliding the maker of the object, the exhibition aims to 
evokee the relationship between the museum and the visitor that is the practical and 
spirituall relationship between the believer and the Church, mediated by the eccle-
siasticall object become transparent - a 'window' on the other. Three has become 
twoo in the space of the label. At their most emaciated, labels that rely largely on the 
user-languagee of textual authority content themselves with naming and dating the 
workk in question, and this is primarily what happens in all museums endowed with 
collectionss of objects. The barest ontological minima needed to transform a private 
collectionn into a museum by means of a label are the name of the creator of the ob-
ject,, where it was found and its date of its creation. How can such activity be called 
thee label? Are even time, date and provenance vehicles of the museum's authority 
-- of its active structuring? These attributes would have had little importance in the 
Middlee Ages, when art was considered a craft and the artist merely a tool for the 
patron'ss aspirations to divine or secular favour. These ontological minima them-
selvess clearly betray the origins of the modern museum, which can be found at the 
timee when the idea of the author and the Age - the political individual and that of 
historyy as progress - were first enunciated in the late 18th century. It is arguably no 
coincidencee that the modern museum appears at the time of Goethe, Locke and 
thee American and French Revolutions. As the anthropologist Richard Handler notes 
'.... simple concepts of chronology do not help us evaluate and understand objects 
fromm some neutral perspective ... the museum's dating of them interprets them in 
termss of a philosophy of time and history that is read into, not out of, them.' 
33 

Thee same can be claimed of the identity of the object. 'A painting, we say, is a Monet, 
andd a mask is Kwakiutl. I would argue that both kinds of statements about identity 
aree embedded in interpretive frames ... [i]t is easy to imagine different understan-
dingss of human creativity and of the relationship of humans to material objects. One 
might,, for example, develop a theory of creativity that does not privilege indivi-
duals.. In this perspective, artists might not be seen as self-contained creators but as 
participantss in a tradition ... Similarly objects themselves might not be seen as 
discretee artworks but as moments in an artistic process that produces a series of 
objects,, none of which would be granted the ontological status of an isolated thing 
.... This is not to say that this alternative perspective could not be used to impose 
identitiess of some sort on museum objects. It is, however, to argue that any parti-
"" R. Handler, Journal of Museum Anthropology 
cularr identity of an object will not be intrinsic but something that is read into it.'1B 
16.11 February 1992 pp. 21-28 
Thee visitor may wonder, the visitor may even hesitate, but in the final analysis must 
putt her faith in the label and in the authority implemented by the label. Rarely is the 
visitorr encouraged to challenge the authority of the label, and rarer still, put this 
authorityy to the test by doing experiments. In the best of cases, the label confers new 
knowledgee on the visitor, in the worst, the visitor is puzzled, doubtful, or unwilling 
too accept the label's authority, notably if the new information does not conform to 
priorr or preconceived knowledge. In either case, the visitor is a passive recipient of 
materiall generated by an invisible actor who has both access to resources unavai-
lablee to the visitor, and access to greater authority. The relationship tacitly implied 
byy the label is that described in reception theory - there is a sender, a message, 
andd a receiver. In the eyes of a museum who creates labels based on this model, a 
successfull label is one in which the message, generated by the museum, based on 
thee authority of the curator, is perfectly received by the visitor, who is the passive 
receiver,, a tabula rasa. That this view has been seriously called into question has 
nott had a significant influence on its popularity. Labels, particularly in museums of 
artt and history, continue to largely implement the authority of the curator, whose 
research,, and biases, underpin the museum's work. 
Whenn one authority meets another in the museum on the ground of the label, 
itt clearly highlights the way in which the label implements its authority. In the 
absencee of a counter authority, the label attempts to implement authority as an un-
questionablee one-to-one relationship between the visitor and the unseen expert by 
conferringg knowledge on the visitor. This is a that. A is a B. The visitor, the reader of 
thee label, is assumed to have nothing to contribute. She is a passive receiver of a 
344 
putative truth generated somewhere external to her, and beyond her capacity to 

create.. The role the visitor is ascribed is endorsement, that of the museum, in-
struction.. The property the visitor gains comes from acquisition - by adding another 
'fact'' to a repertoire, her store of knowledge is enhanced. The visitor is more know-
ledgeablee than when she arrived by virtue of having assimilated new information. 
Thee elision of the museum, or more precisely its identification with the authority that 
guaranteess the information it is making available, generally goes either unnoticed 
orr unremarked upon. Only rarely are we given an opportunity to unmask the label-
makingg role of the museum, to make it visible and accountable, to hear a challenge 
too its authority. 
Thee New Yorker author Terence Monmaney interviewed the palaeontologist Robert 
T.. Bakker in the Smithsonian Institution's Museum of Natural History as part of an 
articlee published in May 1993." The interview allows us to look at the role of the 
museumm relative to the labels it writes, and the authority it relies upon. A lengthy 
excerptt is revealing (see also chapter 1): 
'We'We stopped for a few moments at the exhibit on Dimetredon, the fin-backed reptile 
thatthat predated the dinosaurs, it was represented by a nearly complete fossil skeleton, 
alligator-size,alligator-size, displayed in a shoulder-high case... The plaque says that the Dimetredon 
isis "a primitive mammal-like reptile ", and says little else, as if either you get it or you 
don't.don't. But this is not the "Mona Lisa " - it needs help. Bakker shook his head. "See, this 
missesmisses the ecological context. This is all ancestor worship." Then he acted out a stern 
pedagogicalpedagogical encounter. "Why is this object important?" he intoned. Whining, he an-
swered,swered, "Because it's the ancestor of mammal-like reptiles." then he reverted to his 
normalnormal demeanour. "No. This is the world's first top predator. Before this, you can't 
identifyidentify an animal that's strong enough to kill and eat anything else. The first king of the 
beasts.beasts. Ecologically a big deal. Does the plaque tell you that? No." 
'We'We stopped at a sign on dinosaur temperature control. Warm-blooded or cold-blood-
ed?ed? The Smithsonian, it turns out, was enemy territory, a redoubt of inertial homeo-
thermythermy - the theory that dinosaurs, though metabolically cold-blooded, were so 
largelarge that they held the little heat they generated and thus gained the advantages of 
warm-bloodedness.warm-bloodedness. "Oh, no" Bakker shrieked, like a distressed damsel. It became clear 
thatthat he was not having much fun. So you don't want to listen to this? "I've heard it a 
thousandthousand times," he said. Why is it here if it's not true? „Because this is the standard 
doctrine,doctrine, and it has got to be defended: 'Dinosaurs were successful because they 
werewere big and the climate was warm.' That's all you have to know! Big - it was warm. 
Big,Big, tropics. Big, tropics. Bigtropics - bigtropicsbigtropicsbigtropics." 
I read aloud from 

thethe text 'The dinosaur's bigness probably helped them conserve heat.' "But that's true 
nono matter what your metabolism. The bigger you are, the less rapidly you'll lose heat." 
'Their'Their capacity for prolonged strenuous activity would have been limited more by their 
sizesize and their anatomy than by their ability to use oxygen.' "That's a nonsense state-
ment.ment. Prolonged strenuous activity - maximum aerobic exercise, right? That's limited 
byby only two things, lungs and heart. And we know that dinosaur lungs and hearts were 
avian"avian" ... 
'Warm-blooded animals use oxygen more effectively than cold-blooded 
animals.'animals.' "That's incorrect", he said, sounding a little steamed. Oxygen utilisation 
cold-bloodscold-bloods was part of his doctoral research. '... allows them greater enduranc
"Absolutely"Absolutely wrong" 
'Thus birds and mammals are more continuously 
ac
"They're"They're more continuously active because they have larger hearts and lungs. 
'Small'Small dinosaurs would still have depended mostly on external sources of heat, as do 
reptilesreptiles and baby birds.' Now Bakker was laughing hysterically. "I don't know where
theythey got the idea that baby birds are cold-blooded." 
Itt is clear from the above example that when confronted with the process of making 
knowledge,, in this case as a researcher in the field, that the museum's desire to be 
seenn as a purveyor of incontestable fact can be called dramatically into question. By 
maskingg or eliding the museum's role in writing the label (the label gives the im-
pressionn of presenting authoritative scientific truth) it denies any but the specialist 
aa means to judge the contingency and complexity of the subject at issue. 
Too overcome what it sees as the limitations of the user-language of textual autho-
rity,, the museum community generally responds by attempting to create new texts, 
textss which nevertheless employ the same user-language. For instance, the con-
cernss of modern museums for the creation of a context in which the visitor can 
situatee the object has required an amplification of the object label, which has gene-
rallyy increased in length, and been dispersed around the exhibition in the form of 
graphicc panels that often combine charts, maps, photos, illustrations and text, a 
displayy technique related to the label pioneered in the 1930s at American World's 
Fairs.177 The expanded notion of the label and the graphic panel now form the bulk 
177 Samson, 0. La trame narrative, le multi-media et 
off the interpretive armament of the modern museum. 
/'exposition,/'exposition, unpublishd paper, Paris: Palais de la 
Oöcouverte;; 1993 
AA comparatively recent exhibition attempted to challenge the faith put in attribution 
andd authority, the exhibition Fakes, at the British Museum in 1990." Nevertheless, 
** Described in Jones, M. Fake? The An of Deception, 
thee exhibition relied largely on the user-language of textual authority, that is to 
London:: British Museum Publications; 1990 
say,, it used label texts that were themselves classic in their appeal to the reader to 
366 
endorse their truths - truths that themselves were not always necessarily visible 

orr open to challenge. Thus the museum chose to treat the subject of the untrust-
worthinesss of texts by writing newer, arguably equally untrustworthy texts. 
Label:Label: 75 Furry Trout 
TheThe belief that the fauna of Canada included furry fish is said to date from the seven-
teenthteenth century, when a Scotsman, who had written home about the 'abundance of 
furriedfurried animals and fish', was asked to send an example of the latter and obliged. In 
recentrecent years furry fish have been produced by Ross Jobe, of Sault Ste. Marie, Ontario, 
usingusing rabbit fur. The accompanying text suggests 'that the great depth and extreme 
penetratingpenetrating coldness of the water in which these fish live, has caused them to grow 
theirtheir dense coat of (usually) white fur.' In the early 1970s an enquirer, believing it to be 
genuine,genuine, brought one of these fish to the Royal Scottish Museum which, recognising 
itit as a hoax, did not retain it. The story got out, however, and public demand to see the 
furryfurry fish was so strong that the Museum had to 'recreate' it. This furry fish is, there-
fore,fore, a fake twice over. GNS 
LL 270mm 
NationalNational Museums of Scotland 
Eachh of the elements of the story, including a reference to 17th century literature, 
mustt be taken at face value in order to appreciate the object displayed. The visitor 
leavess with a new piece of information, but one taken on faith. One can imagine 
numerouss similar labels, each alluding to older texts and making similar claims, each 
»» See Weschler, L Mr. Wilton's Cabinet of Curiosities. 
perfectlyy plausible, in the manner of the labels written by the Museum of Jurassic 
Neww York: Pantheon; 1995 
Technology.w w 
Inn the examples cited above, the museum user is called upon only to accept, and to 
endorse,, the truth of the label. The label is thus assumed to confer the properties of 
acceptancee and passivity - even a label about an object itself called into question. 
Thee user comes away from the museum with new knowledge, but knowledge to be 
takenn on faith. The user has become passive in the face of the new knowledge, in 
thee sense that she can 'either take it or leave it', and was not invited to play more 
thann a minor role in its creation. The user-language of observation, that strives for 
betterr seeing on the individual level to ensure better believing (see next section), is 
nott relevant when it comes to the Russian icon - or the furry trout The user is not 
askedd to believe the evidence of her observation, but to accept the authority of the 
writerr as warrant of the label's truth. 

3.1.22 Observation 
Applicationn of the user-language of observation marks a new awareness of what 
writingg a label may involve. This language clearly is associated with the appearance 
off science, and just like science aims to organise individual observations of the 
physicall world. In the museum setting, in contrast to labels that employ the user-
languagee of textual authority, labels that employ the user-language of 'obser-
vation'' help the individual visitor to see, that is to become an authority in seeing 
forr herself. In the user-language of observation, observations are the 'currency' of 
thee language - individual observations are to be confirmed and disputed in terms 
off observations reported by other individuals (usually 'authoritative' experts or 
scientists).. Were this to be otherwise we would be in the realm of miracles, rather 
thann of science - noting that during the Middle Ages 'the miraculous was widely 
perceivedd as part of nature which provided a paradigm for the explanation of the 
worldd and its apparent aberrations'. *> Note the shift in emphasis: the user is allowed 
*  see Rubin, M. Corpus Christi, Cambridge: CUP; 1991 
aa certain extra freedom (she herself must see), although there is still is the obliga-
tionn to make a comparison between what each individual sees and what is reported 
ass having been observed by others. There is a shift in procedure therefore, though 
nott of allegiance. Although the user is recognised as an observer, she will but serve 
aa new master. 
Thee label confers this property in the museum setting by identifying opportunities 
too observe, identifying what is to be observed, and identifying opportunities to ob-
servee wherein these observations have value. It assumes the user does indeed 'see' 
thee whole, as well as the individual instances. While textual authority still occasio-
nallyy has to supplement the user's experience, and continues to 'authorise' being 
knowledgeable,, as seen in the examples above, the user-language of observations, 
likee a good lens, gives the user the opportunity to observe, examine, and to confirm, 
specificc aspects of the world around them, as well as how they belong together. 
Duee to its roots in the nascent rationalism of the Enlightenment, among the mu-
seum'ss first uses was as an instrument of observation, and by means of its practices 
off collection - the ordering of its collections, and its labels - it revealed aspects of 
thee world that otherwise were invisible. The better the museum - the more com-
prehensivee its collections, the more coherent its organisation and the more scien-
tificc its labels -the better the quality of the observation. As Valéry had inscribed over 
thee entrance of the Palais de Chaillot in the 1930s Things rare or things beautiful, 
collectedd here in learned manner, instruct the eye to see, as it has never seen before, 
388 
all the world's existing things'. The plurality of observation made possible by the 

museumm was controlled and channelled by its labelling, the implied ontology of 
whichh served to homogenise the nature of each observation, so that the many ob-
serverss were compelled to repeat and confirm observation by others, as prescribed 
byy the label. The museum label, insofar as it implied a certain ontology, was con-
sideredd as a passive, objective element, despite the broader and varied agendas of 
thee museum institution for private, moral, social and scientific reform. Even if the 
intentt of the label was to have an effect on the visitor, the effect was one way - the 
visitorr was to be converted to the truth, and as a consequence, to become trans-
formed.. With very few exceptions, the idea that the user of the label should initiate 
ann action to become active does not occur in museum literature until well into the 
20thh century. 
Ass an instrument for seeing, the first task of the early museum was to allow visitors 
too see farther, by bringing closer objects they would not have been able to see 
otherwise.. Shorn of its magical powers, the cabinet of curiosities was a means of 
displayingg the rare, the beautiful and the strange, often without the regard for 
taxonomyy shown by later collections. A rare shell could be seen side by side with a 
fragmentt of antique sculpture, or next to a jewel-encrusted Gothic reliquary or an 
orientall rhinoceros horn cup. At the same time as the telescope was bringing the 
starss within reach, artefacts collected on voyages of discovery to the New World 
weree bringing native plants, objects, and natives themselves from the New World 
too the capitals of Europe. The visitor could start to see for herself. 
Thee first descriptions of the objects in Tradescant's Ark, which may be assumed to 
bee their first labels, are recorded in the 1656 catalogue that accompanied the collec-
tion,, compiled largely by Elias Ashmole, an amateur alchemist and later one of the 
founderss of the Royal Society, who was to purchase the collection. 
16561656 label 'Cup of rhinoceros ... homes' [cat pg. 52} 
16851685 label 'Poculum ex Hhinoceratis cornu conflatis'[B no. 465] 
Thee label for the rhinoceros cup 21 can be used as an example of the approach to 
"" In MacGregor. A., Tradescant's Rarities. 
exhibitionn taken by the collection's custodians the Tradescants Elder and Younger, 
Neww York: Oxford University Press; 1983 
andd of the changes that were a consequence of the collection's purchase by Elias 
Ashmolee in 1659 (he took possession only in 1674 - over the objections of the 
Youngerr Tradescant's wife, Hester) and its subsequent donation to Oxford Univer-
sityy in 1679. The horn of the rhinoceros was believed to have numerous qualities in 
thee early 17th century, when this cup is thought to have been fabricated. Powdered 
39 

itt was meant to be eaten as an aphrodisiac, in the form of a drinking vessel, rhino-
ceross horn was believed to 'sweat' in the presence of poison, and liquid drunk from 
itt was believed to cure cholera. The cup displayed in Tradescant's Ark, was of an oval, 
flaringg shape following the outline of the horn, and carved in the form of a five-
petall led hibiscus flower. The stem of the blossom is carved fully in the round, and 
branchess to form a steady base on which the cup stands. The motif and the carving 
pointt to fabrication in the Orient, where the horn was a great rarity. 
Thee label is uninformative, but in English, which indicates it was directed to a lay 
audience,, perhaps even the 'rude vulgars' who would be interested in the curiosities 
off the collection. The collection was open to the public, upon payment of a small fee, 
andd the interest of the public almost certainly was in the variety of natural oddities 
containedd in the collection, rather than more academic, taxonomie concerns. The 
authorityy of the attribution rested in Tradescant's account of his purchase of the 
objectt on one of his botanical travels to the continent. The language was that of 
observation,, and the collection allowed visitors to see and wonder at curiosities of 
naturee and ethnographic specimens collected on long travels from distant places-
placess they could not otherwise 'see', and to which they would have had little 
priorr access save through engravings in books and oral accounts. 
Forr the objects of the collection, seeing was believing what others were said to have 
seen,, and the object labels, however terse, told the viewer what it was they were see-
ing:: the mantle of an Indian chief, the statue of an Hindu god, or a white-spotted 
snake.. At the time, the ordinary viewer was presumably in no position to contradict 
thee authority of the label, and critical evaluation of the veracity of the attributions 
(throughh other, and additional observations) had to wait until the Ark was installed 
att Oxford and attended by full-time Keepers. 
Thirtyy years later, as part of the new Ashmolean collection at Oxford University, the 
labell is now in Latin, no more informative, but addressed to an educated and literate 
elite.. The statutes of the new museum reflect this shift: '[Article] 11. That the Rarities 
shalbee shewed but to one Company at a tyme, &that upon their being entered into 
thee Museum, the dore shall be shut and if any more Company or Companies come 
beforee they be dispatcht, that they be desired to stay below, till that the other come 
22oP.citt 
forth. '22 While exemplary in its concern for the well-being of the collection, a con-
cernn well-warranted at the time (the first robbery in the collection occurred in 1689, 
whenn a single large party had been admitted, contrary to the statutes), it is a far cry 

fromm the 'variety of objects which daily present themselves to them, or may easily 
bee seen once a year...' mentioned by Hooke in 1638. 
Thee authority of the label rested on that of the Keeper, although insofar as the 
Keeper'ss scholarship was open to challenge, so was the authority of the label itself. 
Inn 1734 a German scholar wrote with sceptical distaste 'in a case I found a very well-
wroughtt Indian idol, or as the Custos called it, a Brachmanus. He declared that the 
stonee was unknown, but it appeared to me as a sort of steatite, from which the 
Indianss normally make their gods ... The ridiculous fellow who was showing us 
thee specimens and who is a Sub-Custos (the Custos himself, Mr. Parry, cannot show 
visitorss over the museum for guzzling and toping) announced in all earnest that the 
materiall for these gods was made of rice, boiled and then dyed.'23 
Tradescant'ss collection of wonderful rarities and oddities, closeted in an Oxford 
museumm attic, had ceased to be wonderful, its rarities jumbled and at odds with 
itss oddities, and had to await the 19th century to be rescued from decrepitude. The 
relationshipp between the Keepers, the labels, and the visitor, however, had been 
firmlyy established, and the user-language of authority which the museum promo-
ted,, coupled with the user-language of observation made possible in the new 
museumm instrument of vitrines and labels, laid the groundwork for the museum 
experiencee as it would become popular for the next three centuries. 
Thee museum collection, as it evolved over the course of the 18th century, was not 
onlyy to be a place where things could be seen for the sake of their rarity. Imperial 
expansionn and the exploration of the New World meant that increasingly the 
strange,, the rare and the unusual became the commonplace, and the museum's 
missionn was soon obliged to become more than a shop window for the curious 
passer-by.. This change of direction was already apparent in Elias Ashmole's ambi-
tionss for Tradescant's collection, and it was clear from the statutes, from his choice 
off Keepers and from the Latin texts of the collection's labels that the collection was 
meantt to serve the needs of scholars, and contribute to the advancement of know-
ledge.ledge. The collection was not to be merely a window, but a lens, not just a means of 
seeing,, but an instrument for better seeing in terms of what others supposedly 
weree also seeing. It was not enough for a visitor merely to see a new oddity, but to 
seee it 'better' - to learn more about it, to be able to describe it in terms of a wider 
framework.. Thus museum visitors were not charged merely with their own obser-
vation,, but had to take a small step towards being actors in the museum setting, 
contributingg as well as corroborating observations. 

Thee art museum is the public face of art history, and its collections differ from private 
collectionss in their being presented to the public, and interpreted by means of the 
label,, whereas a private collection, while it may be interpreted by its owner, remains 
privatee largely by virtue of its lack of the label, which by definition implies unknown 
andd unknowable viewers. The art museum also tends to function as a lens, an in-
strumentt for increasing the quality of possible observations by assembling a great 
numberr of similar works in the same place. In the art museum, as the art historian 
Michaell Baxandall notes at length **, the bulk of the art museum experience is not 
344 see Baxandall, M. Patterns of Intention, 
aboutt looking at pictures, but about talking about looking at pictures, wherein the 
Neww Haven: Yale; 1985 
labell is the means of constructing the visitor's dialogue about art. Here the visitor, 
inn addition to the personal affective impact of the work itself, spends a large amount 
off time communicating to others the nature of the encounter, in terms of the work. 
Thee work quickly becomes a support for discussion about the nature of the experi-
encee of the work. 
Statisticss conducted at major museums25 corroborate the fact that the museum visit 
211 Notably in Bourdieu, P. and Darbel, A. 
iss a fundamentally social experience, that visitors are rarely unaccompanied, there-
VamourVamour da 1'art, Paris: Editions de minuit 1969 
foree to look at the nature of the museum experience as a social experience suppor-
tedd by the collection is largely warranted. Moreover, seen in this light, the label is 
seenn to be the fundamental museum support, as it is the label that guides, frames, 
andd to a large degree imposes the framework in which visitors interact in the mu-
seum.. The 'seeing' of the visitor is thus mediated and facilitated by the degree to 
whichh the label can construct a discourse around an object, the degree to which this 
discoursee can call upon supplemental information to enlarge the visitor's 'field of 
vision',, and the degree to which the label can implement certain properties in the 
visitor. . 
AA good lens has the capacity to bring things closer, to reveal greater detail, to see 
betterr what is there to be seen. The museum in this way acts as both telescope 
andd microscope, to bring the far near, and to reveal unsuspected detail. The user-
languagee of observation is central to this instrumentality, and the optical nature of 
thee instrument is central to the large majority of museum labels, be they in museums 
off art, science, or history. This emphasis on observation, and on the ability to 
corroboratee by seeing is often (although not always) complemented by a textual 
dimensionn that calls upon the user-language of authority, and serves to confirm the e 
adequacyy of the visitor's seeing. The ontological link created by the label is still a 
keyy feature of the encounter - the visitor is expected to see what the label says 
422 
others also see. Nevertheless, contextual information provided by the label can be 

aa support for dialogue, and, depending on its sufficiency, can serve to recognise the 
visitorr and her need to reflect, consider and discuss the visual encounter by means 
off additional information provided by the label, thus confirming Bourdieu's obser-
vationn that the label is often construed as a key sign of concern on the part of the 
institutionn forthe visitor.» 
»oo.eitpp.iz2-3 
Att its simplest, the label helps the visitor see by telling her what is there, by making 
aa propositional statement about the material presence of the object. This minimum 
iss often supplemented by an implied narrative that alludes to the story of the object's 
creationn - why the painter painted it, of whom, under what conditions, and in what 
manner.. The following example, taken from The Wanderers, an exhibition of Russian 
19thh century paintings held at the Dallas Museum of Art in 1989 ", tells the visitor 
177 VaJtenior, E. ad. Tho Wanderers, Fort Worth: 
conditionss of the painting's provenance that would otherwise be unknown. What 
DMAflnttrCultura;; 1991 
neww information does the visitor receive? The relationship of the subject to the 
painter,, and by inference the reason for the portrait the fact that the costume is 
Ukrainiann that the artist painted many different kinds of people. Although the label 
implementss the user-language of observation -the visitor's observation -the visitor 
iss nonetheless asked to corroborate the curator's editorial comment about other, 
too the visitor invisible, paintings in acquiescing to the particularity of the painting 
viewedd as described. 
Label/1989:Label/1989: Portrait of A. I. Sliusareva, N.N. GE 
AgayifaAgayifa Ignatievna Sliusareva (1856-1903), wife of the artist's son is depicted as a young 
womanwoman in Ukrainian costume fetching in her charm, simplicity and frankness. Portraiture 
waswas quite important in Ge's work. Among his portraits of writers and public figures who 
playedplayed an important role in the spiritual life of the 1870s and 1880s, there are, how-
ever,ever, a great many portraits of people who were seemingly unexceptional. In each one, 
though,though, the artist defines the value and significance of the human individual, and his 
portraitportrait of Sliusareva is, no doubt, one such work. 
Inn the exhibition Copier/Créer at the Louvre in 1993 », the visitor is given the addi-
"" Cuzin, J.P. and Dupuy M A etfs. Copier, Créer. Paris: 
tionall visual material of the work by which the painter was inspired, in the form of 
RME;; 1993 
aa black & white photo as part of the label. In this way, the label is able to support 
comparisonn between the work and other works that may have had an influence on 
it,, information the visitor might be unaware of otherwise (but also might not agree 
withh if such other works had been available). Moreover, the curator imputes speci-
ficc motivations to the artist, and attempts to tell the visitor what the artist was at-
temptingg to do and how. While the visitor is asked to take the curator's belief on faith, 
43 

shee is also directed to another work in the event that she wants to corroborate or 
refutee the curator's position. In this case, the seeing of the visitor has been materi-
allyy enhanced, despite the relatively spare style of the label itself. 
Label:Label: 101 Giacometti - Didoufri 
Didoufri Didoufri 
Ink Ink 
Provenance:Provenance: Collection Mme. Alice Tériade 
Paris,Paris, Galérie Yoshii 
HereHere again Giacometti is trying to find the major planes corresponding to the first 
cuttingcutting of the red sandstone, the features of the IVth Dynasty Pharaoh seeming to
revealreveal themselves progressively, according to the same process that dictated the 
workwork of its Egyptian sculptor. The Yoshii collection possesses a second drawing, very 
closeclose in spirit, probably executed following the same photograph and at an earlier time, 
moremore faithful to the original, showing notably the cracks with greater precision, by 
meansmeans of fine hatching. 
Inn the Louvre label, the visitor was given additional information about the artist's 
intent,, and about the existence of the artist's works on the same theme, and would 
havee been able to pursue the analysis of the work in greater depth if desired. How-
ever,, this additional investigation would have been difficult to undertake, and inso-
farr as it would have presented a real challenge, can be considered in certain 
wayss as actually discouraging further looking. However, in the case of the exhibi-
tionn Mi-Vrai/mi-faux at the Musée de la civilisation in Quebec in 1992 a , the visitor 
«Mi-vrai.. mi-faux, Quebec: 
wass actively encouraged by the labels to investigate the object and come to her own 
Muséee de la civilisation; 1992 
conclusion.. By using direct questions and concealing the label texts as an incentive 
too reason from the material evidence available, the label promotes not only increa-
sedd knowledge about the object, corroborated by the curator's authority, but the 
developmentt of the skills that underpin the curator's own competence. 
IntroductoryIntroductory copy: Similis 
TheThe first dilemma we are faced with is to situate ourselves among the multitude of ob-
jectsjects we encounter. Are they real? Are they imitations? In the end, aren't they simply 
obscureobscure copies? Certain distinctions should be made. Behind every object taken out o
thethe context in which it was created or used there lies an enigma which sometimes 
masksmasks its identity and its degree of authenticity. Alone, the object lies before its judge. 
444 
Often it is silent. Let us sharpen our critical faculties and become curiouser [sic}. 

LetLet us open our eyes and allow these objects to speak to us. They have messages 
toto deliver... 
DoDo you want to test your knowledge and sense of observation? Are you curious as to 
thethe true identity of these objects? To confuse you, we have only partially identified 
them.them. Voluntarily omitting several details, confronting you with the object on its own. 
ObserveObserve them meticulously, allow them to break the silence, and before reading the 
explanationsexplanations and the answer found behind each of the four cabinets, judge for yourself. 
You'llYou'll see... 
LabelLabel (concealed verso): 
TheThe furry trout is a ruse that has trapped many. Lay persons are easily convinced that 
fishfish swimming in the icy depths of Arctic waters are covered with fur. In reality fish do 
notnot need warmth because they are cold-blooded animals. This furry trout, a replica made 
byby a Sault Ste. Marie taxidermist, Ross C. Jobe, is wrapped in a simple synthetic fur. 
Collection:Collection: National Museums of Scotland, Edinburgh 
Rationalistt science is based on a formalised process of shared witnessing, and one 
wouldd therefore be justified in believing that science museum labels, as science 
itself,, would make appeals to corroboration by observation. More often, however, 
sciencee museum labels appeal to the authority of Science as a corpus of completed 
andd proven results and discoveries, generally beyond the intellectual reach of the 
averagee visitor. The truths of science and technology have replaced those of religion, 
andd are expected to be taken on faith by the science museum visitor. The science 
museumm is one of the few places in which an ordinary citizen encounters science in 
action,, or purportedly in action, and often has more in common with a church than 
withh a research laboratory. This emphasis on the authority of science is closely re-
latedd to the science museum's perceived mission as part of the formal educational 
system,, and the science museum often positions itself as an extension of the class-
room.. As former director of the Palais de la Découverte Michel Hulin wrote just 
beforee his death in 1988, 'fundamentally without a doubt, the Palais is a sort of 
"" Taken from an unpublished internal discussion paper 
scientificc super-high school, devoted to the presentation of experiments and do-
tee Palais da la découverta, son présent 
cumentss to go along with courses, but endowed with experimental capacities and 
sonson avenir. un aurvot rapide, 19 octobre 1987 
documentaryy resources that exceed those of an ordinary establishment of secondary 
education.300 This approach is reflected in the Palais' labels, even those that 
"" Transcribed by the author, 1993 
accompanyy its newest 'interactive' space, the 'Eureka' hall 31, which are written in 
thee style pioneered at the San Francisco Exploratorium, To Do and to Notice.' 

LookLook at the tornado. Three coils heat the water in the basin, and the steam is thus put 
intointo motion with the help of a fan at the top of the cylinder. The vapour condenses into 
finefine droplets of water to give a thick mist. If you press on the button, the fan stops. 
WhatWhat do you notice? 
WhenWhen you push on the button the mist disappears. The fan is therefore the cause of 
thethe condensation of the steam. In effect, while turning, the fan creates a depression in 
thethe centre of the cylinder. The rotating steam is attracted to the depression. As its speed 
increasesincreases its temperature drops as a consequence. The water vapour condenses. 
TheThe condensation of the steam into fine droplets of water is the direct consequence of 
thethe depression created by the fan. 
Accordingg to Maturana The intention of doing science is to explain ... and it is in 
thee context of explaining that it must be understood that scientific explanation is the 
criterionn of validation for scientific statements ... it must be recognised that a 
modernn scientific community is a community of observers that use the scientific 
explanationn as the criterion of validation.'M In other words, in order to participate 
»» H. Maturana, transcribed from lecture notes 
inn the community of scientists, one must accept the set of criteria established for 
byy the author 
correctt observation, and take part in the scientific process of observing and con-
firming.. However, in the case of this exhibit, the exhibit user has no choice but to 
confirmm the truth of the label, having no recourse to experiment, no access to addi-
tionall information, no indication of the community in which consensus was reached 
aboutt the principle involved. The visitor is active, insofar as she provokes the phe-
nomenon,, she is a participant insofar as she witnesses the phenomenon, but the 
witnessingg is not that of a scientist, whose witnessing itself has authority through 
thee community of scientific observers, but that of a passive spectator, whose sole 
role,, like the penitent at the altar, is to confirm the revealed mysteries of science. 
Ass demonstrated by the examples above, labels employing the user-language of 
observation,, while conferring additional properties absent from those labels relying 
solelyy on textual authority, are quite limited in the properties they add. Although 
thee user-language of observation helps the visitor become an 'observational' 
authority,, it does not help her to become anything else -for instance a real actor able 
too use her 'self-authorised' observations in another context. 
46 6 

3.1.33 Variables 
Strictlyy speaking, the user-language of variables is only an extension of the user-
languagee of observation - the reach is greater, but the 'currency' of the language, 
observations,, remains the same. Still, this user-language allows for many new 
features.. It suggests to the visitor that a large variety of different observations can 
bee ordered and compared by herself. The user-language of observation alone is not 
oftenn able to cope with the enormous possible variation, nor marshal the expres-
sionn of this variety in a meaningful way. The user-language of variables provides 
aa means of ordering observations, through a description of the relations between 
variablee parameters. When the user-language of variables is used to augment and 
extendd the user-languages of authority and observation in the museum, the label 
conferss on the visitor the property of being able to discuss, compare and control a 
domainn of observations, even when some of its elements are not directly visible. 
Ass we have seen from the above, since their emergence in the late 18th century from 
thee unravelled pieces of the magical and talismanic neo-platonic cabinets of the 
latee Renaissance, via private collection, museums put a premium on the user-
languagee of observation. The museum was considered an instrument that would 
*>*> S M Shapin, S. A Social History of Truth, 
helpp its users see better. The user-language of observation not only permitted 
Chicago:: University of Chicago; 1994 
visitorss to see new objects, to see objects in greater detail and with greater accu-
racy,, but, still using the optical metaphor, to 'see' invisible phenomena, and with 
*** OMCribed in Walsh, K., The representation 
evenn less basis in actual vision, to 'see' relationships between objects and abstract 
ofof the past, London: Routladge; 1992 
concepts.. This latter kind of 'seeing', albeit couched in terms of sight and observa-
tion,, still owes a large debt to the user-language of authority, as the existence of 
thee invisible concepts shown must first be vouchsafed by those who can already 
'see'' w , and to an even greater extent, to the user-language of variables, which orders 
thee observations into groups of 'observations of observations'. 
Museums,, and their labels, reflected this new philosophy of History. Art museums 
displayedd their collections in order to show the progress from the barbaric Middle 
Agess to the Renaissance, the schools of painting of each country progressing ever 
onwardss towards enlightenment (despite digressions and lapses of'good taste' such 
ass Mannerism). Beginning with the work of Thomsen in Copenhagen in 1816, 
archaeologyy and history museums showed the Ages of Man, and his progress 
fromm primitive society to the present, following on Mahudel's work in the late 18th 
century.344 Science museums showed the fruits of industrial progress-the machines 
andd tools that made Man's lot lighter {ignoring the problems of depopulation of the 
countryside,, the destruction of the crafts, and child labour). 
47 

Naturall History museums, organised since the early 18th century 
accordingg to the taxonomie principles of Linnaeus, reshuffled their 
collectionss to demonstrate the truths of evolution according to 
Darwin'ss theories of species variation and natural selection. 
Wee can take the museums founded by the Convention of 1794 in 
Francee as an example. In the Louvre, the casual visitor could see the 
historyy of art as a single evolutionary promenade, the scholarly user 
couldd seethe development of schools of painting, and the artist could 
betterr his skills by scrupulous copying. At the Conservatoire des arts 
ett métiers, the apprentice could see new developments in technology, 
thee journeyman could see how to improve his own efforts, while 
thee factory owner could find the key to the reorganisation of industry. At the Muséum 
dee l'histoire naturelle, the researcher could see the infinite variety that inhered in a 
355 Van Praet. M. Trois siècles devolution de la muséo-
singlee species the lay visitor the natural order of the natural world, first, taxo-
logielogie des sciences, Paris: Palais de la Découverte; 
nomicallyy arranged according to the schema of Linnaeus, later, confirming the truths 
1993 3 
off evolution 35 - a theory wedded to the idea of variation and variables in the physi-
call environment. The labels of the Muséum de l'histoire naturelle36 reflect the 
388 From the author's collection 
orderingg system used by the museum, and as a consequence, confirm the truths of 
thee natural world that the museum endorses. 
Label/lateLabel/late 19th c. Musée de l'histoire naturelle, Paris 
2727 Crustacés 
DécapodesDécapodes Brachyures (Crabes) 
GécarcinsGécarcins Trichodactyles, etc. 
Byy means of labelled specimens, organised according to a specific system, the user 
couldd not only see what was there, but also the physical expression of the rela-
tionshipp between what was there and what wasn't. In the museum of natural history, 
thee visitor saw with her own eyes the variety possible within a single species, but 
alsoo a concrete and visible expression of the species' relationship with one another. 
Thee act of seeing confirmed the truths of both observations, and the ontology of the 
labell enshrined the relationship between object, order and observation perfectly. 
Thee visitor, by means of the museum, could see diversity, see progress, see evo-
lution,, and see history. 
Moreover,, the museum, and more particularly the World's Fair exhibition, became 
488 
an instrument for seeing other 'truths' - such as Manifest Destiny, and the ascen-

dancee of the people of the civilised white-skinned western nations at the expense 
off the primitive peoples over whom the lofty and detached Hegelian Idea had 
necessarilyy triumphed. From the vantage point of the museum the visitor was able 
too see past the horizon of the real to the ideologies beyond. That these truths be 
doubtedd was not to be countenanced, nor that the museum as an instrument could 
showw them. At the Universal Exposition of 1937 in Paris, the doors of the Palais de 
laa Découverte opened for the first time to show the invisible forces of nature - static 
electricity,, momentum, kinetic energy, electromagnetism - which it did by means of 
spectacularr demonstrations, such as the world's largest Van de Graaf generator, 
whichh threw sparks metres long, and the huge electromagnet capable of holding a 
heavyy metal chain in mid-air. The motion of electrical charges was made visible, as 
wass the powerful electromagnetic field. It was therefore but a short step to render 
177 see J. Eidolman's article on the creation of the 
visiblee the triumphs of French science, and the incontrovertible benefits of scien-
Palaiss in Vulgariser la science. Seniele and Jscobi eds. 
tificc progress, which was the Palais' founder, Nobel Laureate Jean Perrin's express 
Paris;; Champ Vallon: 1992 
purpose.37 7 
Thee Palais was 'to render manifest these origins [of science] and make the public 
understandd that, in the past, but also in the future, we cannot hope for anything 
new,, nothing that changes the Destiny seemingly forced upon man, except by 
Scientificc Research and Discovery. In this palace we wish to create a living exhibi-
tionn where will be found, as much as possible, shown in a spectacular fashion with 
thee most modern resources, the fundamental discoveries that have enlarged our 
intelligence,, assured our domination of Matter, or augmented our physical secu-
rity.'388 The Palais was to become 'a great popular university, plunging its roots in 
** Jean Perrin, La Science et l'Espéranco, 
thee people of Paris and giving to them that education that they lack and that they 
pp.. 150, Paris: 1938 
desire.. For the People display towards Science a confused trust, albeit deep. They 
hope,, they expect from this liberating Science a growing freedom, already begun, 
thatt will render to all, thanks to the pleasures of a healthy and harmonious life, the 
"" op.cit. 
superiorr joys of Art and Reason.'w 
Despitee its emphasis on the invisible aspects of science, and the premium it put on 
experiments,, these experiments were generally available to the visitor only in the 
formm of demonstrations of already discovered principles. For practical reasons, as 
welll as for ideological ones, the visitor was not encouraged to call generalisations 
intoo question, nor even to see herself as a potential participant. The visitor was 
assumedd to be ignorant, needing to be shown the light of science, a science neces-
sarilyy 'vulgarised' in order that it be understood by the lay public. However, in the 
usee of real scientists to demonstrate what use could be made of observations, there 
49 

weree the seeds of an approach that would put the language of variables into the 
museumm setting, as it had long been in scientific practice itself. 
Thee user-language of variables is an integral part of the sciences, and as a con-
sequence,, quickly became part of the lexicon of the science museum label. In the 
latee 1960s, the American physicist Frank Oppenheimer founded the San Francisco 
Exploratoriumm as 'a garden of natural phenomena', in which a visitor could wander 
att will, exploring at first hand phenomena and scientific principles underlying 
them.. Inspired by the demonstrations he had seen at the Palais de la Découverte and 
byy accounts of the interactive children's gallery at the Science Museum in London, 
Oppenheimerr imagined a museum in which the visitor could ask the question 'what 
wouldd happen if ... ?', which is to say a museum that tried to augment the user-
languagess of authority and observation, with that of variables. In fact, possibly 
ass a consequence of having been blacklisted in the McCarthy witchhunts of the 
50ss (he was the brother of Robert Oppenheimer, head of the Manhattan Project), 
Oppenheimerr showed an acute aversion to the language of authority, and en-
couragedd the kind of exploration that he believed was the basis of good science -
noo question was a bad question at the Exploratorium. 
Thee Exploratorium is often claimed to be the first of a new generation of institu-
tionss - the interactive science centre. Proponents of these institutions claim they 
aree not museums, as they lack collections of objects, and instead rely upon exhibits 
thatt elicit natural phenomena to convey the principles that underlie them. Never-
theless,, these phenomena are consistent and repeatable events, and thus in some 
wayss can be said to constitute a collection, albeit of ephemeral and transient 
phenomenaa - a collection that ultimately stands for a virtual collec-
tionn of abstract scientific principles. 
Thee user-language of the Exploratorium, and of the majority of its 
manyy imitations worldwide, is still the user-language of observation, 
albeitt extended as the user-language of variables, by means of which 
visitorss are encouraged to manipulate variables to bring about 
differentt sensible effects. The objects in the Exploratorium collection 
mustt be brought into being by means of the visitor's activity, and 
thee visitor is encouraged to elicit for herself a phenomenon, and to 
understandd the principle that gives rise to it. The spatial organisation 
off the Exploratorium in a single large space encourages this activity, 
andd the visitor is encouraged to wander from exhibit to exhibit. 
50 0 

makingg connections according to her own interests and at her own speed. The 
** Duensing, S. Exhibit Development as a Way of 
exhibitss themselves are considered 'working prototypes' and staff are discouraged 
Thinking,Thinking, Unpublished lecture. Paris: 1993 
fromm insisting that there is any single 'correct' way to use them. *
Thee Exploratorium deliberately decided not to place an emphasis on questions in 
itss labelling. First of all, it was felt that posing a direct question, such as 'do you see 
thee difference between the figure on the left and that on the right' would intimidate 
thosee for whom the difference was not obvious, or elicit spurious observations. 
Second,, it was felt that to formulate the question was to limit the range of obser-
vationss available to the visitor, although the visitor is told in advance what it is 
theyy should be doing and, as a consequence, noticing. This can be seen in part as a 
consequencee of having 'objects' that are phenomena, which first have to be seen 
beforee they can be examined. The emphasis on the user-languages of observation 
andd variables, however, tends to distort the actual history of science, suggesting that 
sciencee is a series of discrete revelations and discoveries, rather than a social 
processs of debate and consensus-building, rooted in a historical context. The short-
comingss of the user-language of variables, still central to the 'official' post-facto 
descriptionn of modern science, are also in evidence in the Exploratorium. The ease 
withh which the phenomena are elicited and thus made visible, (due to the careful 
andd professional skills of the Exploratorium staff) betray thee contingent nature of -
reall scientific investigation, which often proceeds from ill-defined starting points and 
difficultt procedures before a phenomena can be wrested from its context and made 
visiblee and significant. 
Thee Bernoulli Blower, one of the many well-known exhibits developed by the 
Exploratorium,, is designed to show the principle of lift due to unequal air pressure 
generatedd by airstreams of different relative speeds - the faster the airstream, the 
lowerr the pressure - therefore an object will be pushed towards the zone of lower 
pressuree in the case of a disparity. If the object in question is light (such as the beach 
balll in the Exploratorium exhibit) and the pressure differential great enough, it can 
bee made to hover in the air and apparently defy the force of gravity. This effect is 
startling,, and the exhibit is a popular favourite in many science centres, where young 
visitorss spend comparatively long periods putting the ball back into the airstream to 
111 Brumen, R. The Exploratorium Cookbook I, 
seee it hover as they move the blower nozzle. The label follows the style developed 
Sann Francisco: Exploratorium; rev. 1984 
byy the Exploratorium for all its exhibits 41: 
Label:Label: Bernoulli Blower/1970s - The Exploratorium 
ToTo do and to notice: Hold the ball with both hands and pull it slowly out of the air stream. 
51 

NoticeNotice that when only half the ball is out of the airstream you can feel it being sucked
backback in. If you then let go of it, it will oscillate back and forth without falling to the ground. 
What'sWhat's going on: When the ball is pulled partially out of the airstream, the air that is
movingmoving fast along the side of the ball exerts less sideways pressure on the ball than th
stillstill air in the room. An airplane wing is shaped so that the air moves faster over the top 
ofof the wing than it does over the bottom of the wing. The lower pressure on the top of 
thethe wing produces a suction which holds the airplane up, or, more accurately, the high 
pressurepressure on the bottom of the wing pushes the airplane up and balances the downwa
effecteffect of gravity. 
Thee premium put on the user-languages of observation (notice the effect) and 
variabless (try moving the ball towards you) can be seen in the exhibit text, although 
ass a consequence the openness claimed on the part of the institution is less in evi-
dencee than might be desired. The visitor is carefully told how to elicit a particular 
phenomenon,, and is then told the conventional scientific explanation for the effect. 
Thee ontological assertion is clear: what the visitor feels (and will consistently feel if 
shee follows the instructions) is the Bernoulli effect. The label is an extension of the 
object,, and imposes a framework on it, in much the same way as a label in the 
Museumm de l'histoire naturelle is an extension of the specimen it describes. Between 
thee incontrovertible experience and the label there is no room for doubt, however, 
«« As described in the works of sociologist and 
itt is doubt that characterises the scientific enterprise.42 Moreover, in linking the 
anthropologistt Bruno Latour, notably Latour, B. 
phenomenonn experienced by the visitor in one context with a scientific principle un-
LaLa science en action, Paris: Editions de la 
derlyingg a major technology (flight) the label writers optimistically rely on the visitor 
decouverte;; 1989 and Latour, B. La vie de laboratoire, 
too make the necessary connections. In evaluations done on similar exhibits43this 
Paris:: Editions de la decouverte; 1988 
optimismm is called seriously into doubt, and it is rare to find any evidence of under-
standingg of the principle of lift following exposure to the beach ball floating above 
4343 Such as those conducted by the author and his 
thee Bernoulli Blower, regardless of the manifest popularity of the exhibit among 
colleaguess at the Palais de la Decouverte in 1993 
youngg visitors. 
Onee of the aspects of the Bernoulli principle that remains invisible, and puzzling, is 
thee history of the invention of flight. The exhibit shows how easily the principle can 
bee put into practice. The exhibit suggests an ontological link between the scientific 
principlee and the technological artefact - an aircraft wing. Nevertheless, what 
accountss for the centuries of observation of bird's flight, by observers as well-
trainedd and talented as Leonardo Da Vinci, that resulted in different and unsuccess-
full models of lift? What was the key to the successful observation? The historical 
aspectt of science, technology, and even art, is largely unexplored at the Explora-
522 
torium, while the history of science provokes significant questions. 

Norr is the user-language of variables limited to science museums. In the exhibition 
SpaceSpace and Distance, held at the Chicago Art Institute in 1948, the user-language of 
variabless is used to challenge the visitor to compare paintings in which the 
distancee is constant but the space changed, and vice versa, in order to see how dif-
ferentt époques and different cultures manipulated both. Designed by the curator 
off modern art, (Catherine Kuh, the exhibition was strung with coloured ropes to 
emphasisee the difference between the two concepts. In two shadow boxes of diffe-
rentt sizes cut-out figures showed the effects of scale on the illusion of space. A Miró 
reproductionn was partly repainted to show how colour altered the perception of 
space.. Renaissance paintings from the museum's collection were put side by side 
withh modern ones in order to illustrate 'how the twentieth century artist attains 
«•Inn Primer for Seeing. Rowen and Moaer, Artnews, 
spacee through colour, whereas the [earlier] artist is more interested in perspective 
1989.. pp.7 -26 
andd distance which he attains through line.'44 
Thee show was followed several years later with other exhibitions that challenged 
thee visitor to experiment, compare and contrast. How Real is Realism? and From 
NatureNature to Art, in which she explored the debate between naturalism and abstraction 
inn art - a highly charged issue in the 40s and 50s. Kuh was exceptional for the time 
inn her concern for the non-specialist visitor, and she eliminated technical language 
ass much as she could from her labels. Those in the "know" glibly discuss dynamic 
symmetry,, spatial relations, plastic values, and architectonics, but to the average 
museumm visitor, these are enigmatic technicalities' * The secret language of the art 
"Chicagoo Art Institute Bulletin, 1945 
specialistt is apt to antagonise the questioning layman. 'His ego is wounded and 
hee retires, armed with deadly and familiar clichés: "My little boy Johnny could do 
466 op.cit. 
betterr than that"'41 Her prime concern was to explain art visually - that 
iss to say, in its own terms, and found that by creating a particular kind of label, one 
thatt asked the visitor to question, she could engage the visitor far better than had 
shee provided the 'answers'. 
Label:Label: from Still Lifes come to Life/Chicago Art Institute 1945 
NoteNote how these objects are consciously arranged. 
TheyThey are unified by using one color - brown. 
DiagramDiagram shows how light areas are opposed to dark in this painting. 
CopyCopy of painting with other objects shows that arrangement is more important 
thanthan subject. 
ByBy introducing one strong color balance is lost. 
ByBy eliminating any part - like the mushroom - the entire composition is greatly 
weakened.weakened. 
53

Herr concern for interpretation (although she herself hated the word, as she felt it 
soundedd too condescending) was equally manifested in the architecture of the 
entiree exhibition space. Her exhibitions were designed to heighten curiosity and 
createe a sense of surprise - 'asymmetrical installations were followed by rest 
spaces,, objects placed above or below eye level, and materials arranged in units 
insteadd of sequentially. Most intriguing was the use of non-art materials in order to 
relatee art to other aspects of life. Driftwood from Lake Michigan and crudely fashio-
nedd ceramic toys were just as effective in demystifying high art in these exhibitions 
ass technological devices such as color charts. X-rays of paintings or stereopticon.' 
Kuhh tried to keep the texts of her labels to a minimum, and would deliberately 
keepp the language simple, the words short, and use the words 'seeing' and 'looking'. 
Inn her zeal for lean texts she would often eliminate words, giving the label texts a 
telegraphicc urgency. What was important was to look, and to see. Kuh placed a large 
emphasiss on comparisons, often putting an original work and an altered replica side 
byy side, the label asking the viewer to evaluate the difference between the two - in 
Kuh'ss Gallery of Art Interpretation, the user-language of variables was an in-
dispensablee tool for the understanding of fine art. 
Alreadyy at a very early moment the user-language of variables was developed as 
ann extension of the user-language of observation in the practice of science. It was 
quicklyy assimilated in museums of all kinds. However, while conferring the property 
off control to the visitor, it is not sufficient to make her more than a manipulator of 
relativelyy small variations, as the range of her ability to generate variety herself, and 
hencee her field of action, remain highly constrained. 
3.22 Labels and their languages: part 2 - supporting users 
Whenn it comes to research into museum labels, there are limits to what can be 
learnedd from examining the work of others, for several key reasons. Just looking at 
existingg labels poses several difficulties. First, there is no guarantee that all the 
relevantt information about the label, the institution that created it, and the condi-
tionss of its creation is available. Second, the full intent of the museum cannot be 
adducedd solely from the label, especially if the label is taken from exhibitions or 
settingss from another time or another culture. Finally, an experimental framework 
cannott be created, however provisionally, unless changes can be made and their 
effectt measured, either quantitatively or qualitatively. Due to these contingencies, 
544 
serious research into labelling has been rare and difficult to conduct. In order to do 

in-depthh research into labelling and the effectiveness of labels in supporting inter-
action,, it is necessary to actually make labels, which is to say, to create exhibitions, 
andd ultimately, to create museums. This is a luxury denied to most researchers. 
However,, if such an experimental framework cannot be created, the research pro-
grammee is seriously impaired. 
Inn the following examples, these drawbacks were overcome by making exhibitions 
-- and by making the exhibition itself a tool for research into the effectiveness of the 
label.. Each of the following exhibitions was developed by the author and his 
colleaguess in response to the perceived failures of earlier exhibitions, and served as 
aa means of testing the theory developed in these pages. These exhibitions were 
developedd while many of the ideas in this study were still maturing, and many of 
thee terms used in the study - notably user-language - were not explicitly part of the 
discussionss that shaped the exhibitions. However, it became clearer with time 
(documentedd in the papers the author and his colleague Drew Ann Wake presented 
att international conferences between 1990 and 1994) that there was an increasingly 
explicitt recognition of the effectiveness of specific user-languages in conferring 
actorshipp - and on specific strategies for increasing the likelihood of visitor accep-
tance. . 
3.2.11 Problems 
Thee user-language of problems, while it often subsumes the user-languages of 
textuall authority, observation, and variables, is not merely an extension of them. In 
thee user-language of problems, the 'currency' is not authority, nor is it observations 
orr ordered observations, it is problems - some observation or observable state of 
affairss the user wants achieved. In the case of labels that employ the user-language 
off problem, the problem space may be indicated from the outset, even by others -
aa puzzle, a riddle, a challenge - but in all cases, the problem and its relevance must 
bee sufficient, and be internalised by the user, who then makes it her problem. This 
internaa I isation of the problem, that is of an action horizon which may be, and often 
is,, determined by others (but is preferably self-determined, as in some of the 
examples),, signals a key difference between the user-language of problems and 
precedingg user-languages-labels developed using this language confer on the user 
aa discretionary power over alternative solutions or actions, that is the property of 
agency. . 

Inn 1989 the author, his partner Drew Ann Wake, and the consultants Coopers & 
Lybrandd undertook a survey of over one thousand households in the Canadian 
provincee of Alberta to find out Albertans' attitudes towards science and techno-
logy.477 This survey was undertaken as one of the means of identifying strategies 
"" Coopers & Lvbrand/Wake-Bradburne Partnership, 
too accomplish the two goals of the Science Alberta Foundation: to raise the level of 
AssessmentAssessment of needs end feasibility for a science 
scientificc and technological culture in Alberta, and to encourage young Albertans to 
networknetwork in Alberta, 2 vols, prepared for the Science 
considerr careers in science and technology. Following the results of this survey, and 
Albertaa Foundation, Calgary: 1990 
thee desire on the part of the Science Alberta Foundation to encourage women and 
girlss to become interested in science and technology, the target audience for the 
exhibitionn Beyond the Naked Eye was women. The survey material had indicated 
thatt women had a very high interest in medicine, but often professed no interest in 
science.. The goal, therefore, was to encourage women and girls to take a greater 
interest,, and participate in, science and technology as traditionally defined. 
Thee exhibition Beyond The Naked Eye: The Inside Story of The Human Body
, 
** This description is largely taken from Wake, 
exploredd the field of radiology. The exhibition's planner. Drew Ann Wake, in 
D.. A. and Bradburne, J. Au-dela tie i'oueil nu, 
conjunctionn with the author and the Calgary architect Gordon Filewych, wanted to 
AlliageAlliage No. 15 
createe an approach that conformed to the contours of the actual science as it is 
currentlyy practised, and not be merely a translation or popularisation of a scientific 
subject.. Accordingly, she contacted all of the major hospitals of the province and 
askedd them to work with the Science Alberta on the exhibition. The radiologists were 
thrilledd that someone was going to take a serious look at their discipline, and by 
thee time the exhibition opened, it had incorporated exhibits developed by twelve 
hospitalss and over one hundred individual medical doctors. 
Thee key challenge for the exhibition planner was to find a way that members of the 
generall public could learn to read medical images. Modern radiology has at its dis-
posall a range of tools of varying precision. Since the invention of x-rays, no fewer 
thann four new technologies have been developed that allow doctors to see within 
thee human body: X-rays, Computed Tomography (CT), Magnetic Resonance Imaging 
(MRI),, and Nuclear Medicine, in addition to microscopy. 
Howeverr there is an inherent imprecision in these technologies. No matter how 
clearr the actual image, the interpretation lies ultimately in the ability to decipher 
thee meaning of a mixture of unresolved shapes and shadows. The language of 
observationn demands clear 'seeing', and the images generated by the new 
technologiess are often unclear or ambiguous, similar to the imprecise contours of 
566 
the planets revealed to Galileo when he first pointed his Dutch telescope towards 

thee heavens. There are two specific areas where this imprecision may present itself. 
Onn the one hand, the images may fail to show critical detail. On the other hand the 
imagee may give so much information that the interpretations conflict. The exhibi-
tionn therefore had to teach visitors not to make immediate assumptions based 
onn the images, but to weigh and balance a variety of hypotheses before making a 
diagnosis. . 
Ass she entered the exhibition, the visitor was encouraged to pick up 
aa clipboard, put on a lab coat, and watch a short video prior to lear-
ningg about the medical technologies arranged on the central tables. 
Thee exhibition was divided into five sections, representing five 
medicall technologies: X-rays, computed tomography (CT), magnetic 
resonancee (MRI), nuclear medicine and microscopy. Each area was 
composedd of two parts, a central area where visitors learned the skills 
off understanding the images, and an outer ring where visitors were challenged to 
solvee case studies based on real people's experience. To explain advanced medical 
technologiess to a lay audience the exhibition used analogies, and the entire ex-
hibitionn employed the user-language of problems - each case study posing a 
challengee to the visitor, to internalise a medical problem and search for a diagnosis 
thatt is relevant to herself. 
Forr example, the concept of Computed Tomography was explored by letting visitors 
comparee a model of the brain with a series of medical images of a patient with a 
brainn tumour. Three simple challenges of increasing difficulty outlined the advan-
tagess and limitations of this particular kind of scans. Each visitor was given an 
applee or a potato with a small spot of dye hidden in it. The challenge was to find the 
location,, size and shape of the spot of dye by making a maximum of three horizon-
tall cuts in the apple. This was analogous to the work of a medical specialist who has 
too integrate a series of CT images into a three-dimensional understanding of the 
patient'ss anatomy - each scan a horizontal slice through the patient's body. The ex-
•• The exhibit texts were written by Drew Ann Wake, 
hibitionn labels use familiar language to make the visitor feel at ease with the subject 
andd transcribed from the exhibition by the author 
matter.. * 
#3#3 Be a Brain Surgeon! 
You'veYou've always thought you'd make a great brain surgeon. Cool hand. Quick mind. 
PatiencePatience of a saint. Well, now is your chance to try your hand at it. 
a.a. If doctors suspect a tumour within the brain, they will use CT scans to help find out 
wherewhere it is located and how big it is. But, they will also want to make as few scans 
57 

asas possible.Take an apple (or a potato) out of the jar and put it on the cutting 
board.board. Imagine it is a brain. Your challenge is to find a 'tumour' hidden inside, 
b.b. Now is your chance to practise brain surgery! Each of the apples (or potatoes) has 
beenbeen injected with dye in one spot, like a tumour inside the brain. Use what you have 
learnedlearned about CT images to find the location and size of the dye spot. But, you ca
onlyonly make three horizontal cuts in the apple. 
BrainteaserBrainteaser #3: 
WouldWould it be easier to find the spot if you could cut vertically as well as horizontally? 
Havingg learned the basic principles of CT scans the visitor could then try to solve up 
too sixteen case studies arranged in folders on the tables in the exhibition. Each folder 
containedd a case history and a series of medical images taken from actual subjects, 
forr instance, how CT scans can help identify brain haemorrhages. The material in 
thee case studies was also written in the first person, making a direct appeal to the 
readerr to examine the images and solve the case. 
,^^M,^^M 
* 
The designers were aware, having prototyped the exhibition to coin-
cidee with the opening of The Body in the Library (described below), 
thatt visitors were immediately drawn to the case studies. In fact, the 
exhibitionn had first been formulated on the assumption that its 
subjectt matter would be the 'art' of medical images, based on data 
thatt showed that women, and in fact most visitors, were more attrac-
tedd to art than to science. When the exhibition was shown organised 
accordingg to the model of an art exhibition, using the beauty of 
medicall images as a starting point, it was quickly obvious that 
women,, rather than being attracted to the 'artistic' qualities of the 
medicall image, which in the case of computer-generated images is 
veryy high, would first ask of any troubling image 'did the patient 
survive?'.. It became quickly clear that the interest in medical images lay not in their 
intrinsicc merits as images, but in the immediate engagement they provoked on 
accountt of their humanity - when viewing a broken neck or a brain tumour, we 
respondd first as human beings, then as art critics. 
58 8 
Ass a consequence, although beautiful medical images were still included in the 
exhibition,, the focus of the exhibition was redirected towards disease and illness, 
ratherr than art, and this focus remained central throughout the rest of the exhibiti-
onn prototyping process. Moreover, as the key link to the material seemed to be the 

emotionall and affective charge communicated by the desire to know the outcome 
off the case studies, the exhibition had to take into account the desire on the part 
off the visitors to engage directly with the case studies, without first learning the 
sciencee that would allow them to unlock the secrets of the images. 
Thiss was achieved, albeit only in part, by making the case studies challenging -the 
visitorr who had not at least partially mastered the science of an imaging technology 
wass frustrated in her ability to diagnose a case study. While in certain respects this 
meantt that over-eager visitors risked 'failing' the case studies, it provided a non-
coercivee feedback mechanism to ensure that visitors learned the material in the 
centrall tables prior to engaging with the case studies. Attentive visitors soon lear-
nedd that the better they had mastered the scientific bases of the medical imaging 
technology,, the better their performance, and hence the greater their satisfaction, 
withh diagnosing the case studies. However, Science Alberta staff running the ex-
hibitionn noted that of all the problems associated with the exhibition, the most 
significantt was the fact that visitors were so drawn to the case studies that they often 
didd not first learn the underlying principles, and that the spatial disposition and over-
alll design of the exhibition was not sufficient to ensure that visitors first understood 
thee science before attempting to tackle the case studies. The designers never com-
pletelyy solved the problem of having visitors working on case studies before they 
fullyy understood the imaging technologies, and the exhibition architecture did not 
playy an active role in directing visitors first to the centre tables, then to the case study 
tables.. The floorplan allowed, and to some extent encouraged, freeflow circulation, 
whichh was at odds with the 'one-two' nature of the exhibition's overall conceptual 
organisation. . 
Severall factors influenced the ways in which the exhibition functioned. 
Firstt of all, the exhibition and its labels explicitly recognised the presence of the 
visitorr and the interest the visitor has in the workings of the human body. The in-
terestt on the part of the visitor in the outcome of another human being's health 
*  Donaldson and McGarrigle (1974,1978) 
guaranteedd an immediate engagement with the subject matter. This tends to con-
putt some of Ptsgefs standard tests, in particular 
firmm the findings of educators such as Donaldson» that context plays a major role 
thatt of conservation of volume, to the test in the 70s, 
inn the willingness to engage with scientific material and engage in science learning. 
andd found evidence to suggest that successful 
AA visitor learns if she perceives a sufficient reason to learn. In this case starting with 
understandingg was influenced substantially 
thee known interests of the visitor provides sufficient reasons to engage with the 
byy the context into which the task was placed. 
material.. In the case of Beyond the Naked Eye, the immediate empathy felt by the 
visitorr provided sufficient reason to engage with the material. Moreover, it has been 
59 

repeatedlyy shown51 that the general public shows a particularly high degree of in-
111 These findings were confirmed by the survey done by 
terestt in medicine and human health. Beyond the Naked Eye not only addresses 
thee author. Drew Ann Wake, and CoopersflkLybrand, 
normall human fears and curiosity about the workings of the body, but allows visi-
citedd above 
torss to understand and come to grips with the fact of their own illnesses and those 
off their family and friends. As one of the exhibition staff reported 'Many of the 
questionss I had to field were related to transplant operations ... Most often these 
questionss came from the family of a patient who was waiting to undergo an opera-
tion.522 In short, by choosing a subject matter of compelling, though individually 
 In Coopers & Lybrand/Wake-Bradburne Partnership, 
different,, interest to a large number of visitors, they were prepared to engage with 
InformalInformal Science Education in Alberta: Inventory 
thee exhibition's difficult material -the properties of acceptance and of engagement 
andand Evaluation, prepared for the Science Alberta 
weree conferred by the visitor to the label. 
Foundation,, Calgary: 1990 
Second,, the exhibition consciously used the user-language of problems. Rather than 
insistingg that the visitor first understand the science behind the medical imaging 
technologies,, she was able to engage with any of the elements of the exhibition as 
shee wished. By casting the exhibition in terms of medical problems, the visitor was 
preparedd to undertake complex scientific and medical interpretative challenges, 
whichh might otherwise have been considered too difficult or too abstract. However, 
inn order to understand the images required the viewer to understand the science, or 
att least the basic principles of the science, underlying the technology. Thus it was 
desiredd that each visitor be prepared in terms of general competences. Each had to 
firstt visit the tables that acquainted them with the science, before going on to the 
exhibitt areas that contained the case studies and challenges. This was accom-
plishedd {with some success, as noted above) by making an understanding of the 
technologyy a condition of solving the problem. Therefore, if a visitor had not visited 
thee table introducing the basics of the technology, it was unlikely that they could 
makee any but the simplest diagnosis. To get the most out of the case studies, some 
off which were quite difficult, the visitor soon found out that she should do the 
introductoryy challenges first. However, the attraction of the case studies was so 
strongg that many visitors rushed to the medical images without first stopping at the 
introductoryy tables, and as a consequence, the case studies were less rewarding. 
Nevertheless,, by using the visitor's desire to make a correct diagnosis and solve the 
medicall problem, the exhibition made learning the technology a consequence of the 
problem-solvingg activity, rather than its sole reward. 
Whatt were the consequences of having designed an exhibition that made medical 
skillss available to ordinary visitors? 
60 0 

First,, as Drew Ann Wake writes 'preliminary evaluation of the exhibition seemed to 
indicatee that the public was able to assimilate and use the new information presen-
ted.. It was found that children as young as eight were able to solve the problem of 
readingg CAT scans quite effectively.53 In fact, they became so skilled at understan-
dingg the medical images that they could put a series of eight cross-sections of the 
body,, in the correct order, from brain to belly button.' In addition, the political goals 
sett by the client, the Science Alberta Foundation, appear to have been met. The 
exhibitionn began its tour of the hospitals of Alberta in May of 1992. The designers 
533 op.cit, 
weree pleased to find that it drew large numbers of women, and most importantly, 
544 op.cit. 
womenn with their young daughters. On many occasions these visitors stayed for 
566 op.cit. 
severall hours, with the girls completing every one of the exhibits.M 
Second,, having rejected the science centre as the prime venue for the exhibition, 
thee designers of Beyond the Naked Eye found that the audience attracted within 
thee hospital setting was very different from that of a museum or science centre. The 
exhibitionn was visited by hundreds of hospital patients: people suffering from ill-
nessess ranging from a broken arm to a brain tumour. It also attracted family 
memberss who were distressed about their loved one's illness and anxious to un-
derstandd it better. The exhibition served as a support system, not only increasing 
thee user's ability to deal with medical information, but to cope with the facts of ill-
nesss - even as defined in the context of her family or of herself. The guest book was 
fulll of comments about how greatly they appreciated the opportunity to learn about 
thee newly developed instruments of science that help doctors diagnose, understand 
andd treat illness.56 
Thiss exhibition, like The Body in the Library (discussed below), by the same plan-
ner,, Drew Ann Wake, and the author, was based on a belief that, given the proper 
context,, and recognition of the user's needs and existing competences, a visitor 
iss capable of undertaking, appreciating and exploiting processes and modes of 
reasoningg normally associated with scientific investigation. In the case of The Body 
inin the Library, visitors showed themselves able to reason from minimal and some-
timess misleading evidence, in Beyond the Naked Eye, visitors were able to under-
stand,, interpret and propose diagnoses from ambiguous and uncertain images, 
aa competence normally associated only with trained physicians and radiologists. 
Inn fact, a preliminary evaluation of the exhibition showed that some visitors had 
sufficientlyy mastered the interpretation of medical images well enough to rival the 
«« op.cit. 
diagnosess of first and second-year medical students.56 This can be interpreted as 
signifyingg that the exhibition had indeed succeeded in achieving being a support 
61 

system,, and in being supported by the interests of the visitors. Moreover, it helped 
too create and sustain the 'flow' experience (discussed more fully in chapter 2). 
Ass described above, in 1989 the author, his partner Drew Ann Wake, and the con-
sultantss Coopers & Lybrand undertook a survey of over one thousand households 
inn the Canadian province of Alberta to investigate public attitudes towards science 
andd technology as one of the means of identifying strategies to accomplish the two 
goalss of the Science Alberta Foundation: to raise the level of scientific and techno-
logicall culture in Alberta, and to encourage young Albertans to consider careers in 
sciencee and technology. 
Thee first of the target audience groups selected was those who had shown them-
selvess to be 'nervous' about science. How could their participation be stimulated? 
Itt was unlikely they were going to attend a science museum. Since about 80% of 
"" This description taken in part from Wake, D. A 
Albertanss have cards to their local libraries, the Foundation decided to build a science 
andd Bradburne, J. Priming the Pump: Building 
exhibitionn that would tour the libraries of the province as a means of reaching au-
aa Science Network in Alberta, unpublished paper, 
diencess who would never take advantage of an exhibition if it were in a traditional 
Paris:: Palais de la Oécouved»; 1993 
sciencee museum.57 
Thee second question was what kind of exhibition could be developed that would not 
scaree non-scientists away. Drew Ann Wake undertook a brief analysis of the reading 
materiall that people were seeking, in conjunction with the provincial librarians. 
Itt was shown that the most popular form of literature was detective fiction - the 
murderr mystery. In addition, educational research had already shown provisionally 
thatt non-scientists put a greater premium on the context of learning than scientists, 
forr whom a scientific problem was sufficient motivation in itself.58 As a conse-
•• In particular we looked to the work of Sheila Tobias 
quence,, the Foundation decided to create an exhibition that took as its starting point 
thee competences already developed by readers of murder mysteries. It was called 
TheThe Body In The Library: Forensic Science and the Art of the Murder Mystery. The 
exhibitionn was intended to be rigorously scientific, and in order to vouchsafe the 
scientificc aspects of the exhibition a number of highly-placed specialists in the field 
participatedd in its development. The Royal Canadian Mounted Police put their 
Forensicc lab at the design team's disposal, the Calgary Police prepared fingerprint 
materials,, and the Chief Medical Examiner of Alberta was a source of constant 
advice. . 
62 2 

Thee exhibition was realised in 1989 by Drew Ann Wake and the author, working for 
thee Science Alberta Foundation in Calgary, Canada. The design looked like a set of 
oversizedd book covers on the outside (to fit in with the libraries it visited), and was 
modelledd on the form and organisation of a forensic laboratory on the inside (to 
reflectt the real practice of forensic science). In the centre of the exhibition was 
thee body of a young woman - the victim. Ruby Keene. Around the periphery were 
sevenn laboratory tables, each representing a different scientific discipline within 
thee practice of forensic science. In this setting. Drew Ann Wake developed a public 
programmee called S.O.S., or Save Our School, designed as a game for an elemen-
taryy school audience and for family groups. On entering the exhibition, visitors were 
toldd that a crime wave had hit the fictitious Granite School. Their challenge would 
bee to study the evidence on one of the tables - Toolmarks, Fingerprints, Blood and 
Fluids,, Ballistics, Hair and Fibres (the organisation of real forensic science labora-
toriess in Canada) - and to reach a conclusion before moving on to the next lab. 
Visitorss could start at any table, and would generally move to the next challenge 
whenn its users had completed their investigation. The object of the programme, and 
off the exhibition, was to assemble enough evidence to identify the wrongdoer who 
hadd been perpetrating the crimes at Granite High School. 
Onee of the unique features of the programme was that the material 
onn each of the tables might have more than one correct answer, like 
reall forensic work. For example, in the Toxicology lab the visitors were 
toldd that the criminals had vandalised the science classroom, and as 
aa result the science teacher had been bitten by one of three escaped 
creatures:: a rattlesnake, a black widow spider or a bee. Each of the 
tabless had a variety of research material available: real samples, 
workingg microscopes, chemical tests and extensive written material 
thatt invited the visitor to read and investigate in order to arrive at a 
conclusion.. Using the research materials provided on the table, it 
wass possible for the visitor to put together a convincing argument for 
eitherr the spider or the snake. 
AA sample of this text material shows how the material was presented in cartoon form S9: 
TextText for Logo:S.O.S. 
TextText for Title:The Case of the Victim Of Venom 
BoxBox 0 1. It is a day like any other at Granite Public School, until... 
BoxBox # 2. Jake and Annie walk into science class ... 
BoxBox #3. Chaos!!! 
588 The texts for the exhibition was written by 
Dreww Ann Wake, transcribed by the author 
63 3 

Bubble:Bubble: The snakes! The spiders!! The bees!!! 
Bubble:Bubble: They've escaped!! 
BoxBox # 4. Then, from the back of the room... 
Bubble:Bubble: Ooooohhhhh! 
BoxBox #5. It's the science teacher...sweating, delirious with pain... 
Bubble:Bubble: He's been bitten! We have to help him! 
BoxBox # 6. Was it a snake? A black widow spider? A swarm of bees? 
TextText across the bottom of the page: Will Jake and Annie find the answer... in time to 
savesave the teacher's life???? 
CLUES:CLUES: The Challenge: The teacher's life can be saved if doctors can inject him with 
anti-venomanti-venom that will take away the effect of the poison. In order to know what ki
anti-venomanti-venom to use, Jake and Annie must first find out which of the animals has b
him:him: the rattlesnake, the black widow spider, or a swarm of bees. Two clues, and the 
researchresearch notes in this kit, will help them solve the mystery. 
Thee clues encouragedd the visitor to take a close look at the evidence, and supplied 
themm with information that would help them come to a conclusion. The nature of 
thee clues can be seen in the examples below: 
ClueClue #7: Bites and Stings 
TakeTake a close look at the three specimens included in the science kit. There is a rattle-
snakesnake skull, a black widow spider, and a bumble bee. Each of them leaves a very diffe
rentrent mark on its victim. 
TheThe rattlesnake has fangs that are attached to the skull at a fixed angle. When the 
snakesnake bites, its two fangs bite down on the victim and the sacs on each side of the jaw
squeezesqueeze the venom through the fang into the wound. In this rattlesnake jaw, one of t
fangsfangs has broken, so you can see the hollow passage through which the venom is 
injected. injected. 
AA black widow spider also has fangs. Spider fangs, however, pivot sideways to grasp 
andand hold their prey. At the end of each fang is a tiny hole which is connected to the 
poisonpoison sacs. When the spider bites, the poison glands squeeze the venom down the
fangfang into the bite. 
AA bee stings with a single hollow prong that extends from its abdomen. If you look 
carefullycarefully at the specimen of bumble bee, you can see a drop of venom at the very 
ofof the stinger. The bumble bee has a smooth stinger, so that it can sting its victim several 
times. times. 
644 
Which one of these three animals could not have bitten the teacher? 

ToTo find the answer, first study the illustration of the teacher's wound. Then, read the 
researchresearch notes that accompany this kit. 
ClueClue #2: Venom 
ScientistsScientists who study toxins divide venoms into two groups. 
Hemo-toxinsHemo-toxins (hemo means blood in Greek) enter the blood stream. They weaken the 
wallswalls of the veins and arteries, causing the body to bleed inside. Often, the part of the 
bodybody that was attacked will swell up so that it is two or three times its normal size. 
Neuro-toxinsNeuro-toxins (neuro means nerve in Greek) attack the nervous system, preventing -
messagesmessages from the brain from reaching other parts of the body. The victim often suffers 
intenseintense pain and begins to vomit. [...] 
NowNow that you have studied the scientific evidence, what is your inference? 
WhichWhich of these three animals was responsible for the bite on the teacher's leg? 
Finally,, the exhibit table included extensive research notes, compiled from available 
">> Rod and Ken Preston-Mafham, Facts On File 
studiess such as Spiders of the World
, in the case of the Black Widow Spider, which 
Publications;; New Vbrfc 1989 
wass one of three research notes in this particular exhibit. 
Att the end of the exhibition, when the audience had visited all seven tables, 
theyy were asked to consider three questions: 1. What is the name of the person 
responsiblee for the crime? 2. Can you give a physical description of the criminal. 
3.. If you wanted to question the suspect at his place of business, where would you 
lookk for him? 
Thee mystery was organised so that visitors would require different levels of in-
formationn to answer the three questions. The first question - the criminal's name -
couldd be answered on the basis of evidence from the Fingerprints lab alone. The 
secondd question could be answered by drawing on evidence from several labs - the 
moree evidence that was collected, the better the physical description of the criminal 
wouldd be. The third question, about the suspect's place of business, could not 
bee answered by direct reference to any of the material in the labs. Two pieces of 
evidencee spoke indirectly to the question. This was an attempt to mimic the often 
contingentt evidence from a normal break and entry. The connection was not ob-
vious,, and offered many possibilities for the formulation of personal problems. 
Howw well did the public do in answering the three questions that summed up 
thee exhibition? After visiting the Fingerprints lab, almost all of the visitors knew the 
thief'ss name. This provided almost everyone with an incentive to continue. After 
65 

visitingg all seven labs, most visitors could provide a more or less detailed descrip-
tionn of the criminal. Adult visitors tended to focus on physical features while the 
childrenn were equally observant of what might be called the cultural attributes, 
suchh as his T-shirt, and a ring emblazoned with a skull and crossbones. The third 
challenge,, identifying the thief's day job, was extremely difficult, and took on an 
enormouss importance for visitors. It was not uncommon for visitors to return three 
orr four days in a row, until they managed to fit fifty or more clues into a pattern. Even 
,11 Described in Wake, DA. and Bradburne, J. 
withh this amount of work, only about 10 of the 3000 visitors in the first weeks were 
TheThe Curator's New Clothes: Reinventing the museum 
ablee to attempt an answer that made sense of all the pieces of evidence - all of them 
professional.professional. Muse, Special edition; Autumn 1993 
weree boys between the ages of 9 and 13.61 
Howw did the audience respond to being given an exhibition in which they did the 
workk - in which they solved the mystery? First, the public reacted with enthusiasm 
whenn the evidence in an individual lab was open to interpretation. It was found that 
familiess or groups of students debated long and enthusiastically.62 There was an 
"" Coopers & Lybrand/Wake-Bradburne Partnership, 
inflexiblee rule in the exhibition that the staff would not provide answers, so visitors. 
InformalInformal Science Education in Alberta: Inventory 
whoo most often arrived in groups, or if alone, quickly 'teamed up' with others, had 
andand Evaluation, prepared for the Science Alberta 
too reach a mutually satisfactory conclusion before moving on to the next station. At 
Foundation,, Calgary: 1990 
thee end of each organised visit, each group was encouraged to stand up and explain 
thee problems they had formulated for themselves as well as their conclusions. 
Whatt are some of the key features of this exhibition? 
First,, it started with the visitor, and was designed to test the following question. 
Couldd an exhibition reach people who do not ordinarily visit science centres, by 
startingg with their interests, and their activities? Thus rather than developing an ex-
hibitionn for the science centre and expecting people to come, it was developed 
forr the public library, a familiar, appropriate, and often-used institution. Moreover, 
ratherr than developing an exhibition based on explaining the principles and prac-
ticess of science as science, the skills of forensic science were learned as a con-
sequencee of an activity deemed interesting in itself - solving a murder mystery. 
Second,, it assumed the visitor was capable of solving complex problems. Could the 
•)) Our interest in the issues surrounding situated 
visitorr bring existing skills to bear on a complex analytical problem, if it was placed 
knowledgee was largely provoked by the work of Brian 
inn a familiar and relevant context? e By making the assumption that the visitor was 
Wynne,, notably Wynne, B. Knowledge* in Contant, 
alreadyy familiar with and interested in murder mysteries (and was used to inter-
unpublishedd paper, Lancaster: CSSSP; 1990 
nalisee these as problems and to solve them), the exhibition was designed to require 
666 
those skills as the principal means of generating scientific investigation. 

Third,, it wanted to show science as it was practised. Could an exhibition capture the 
contingentt aspects of scientific practice, and not deceive or disappoint the visitor? 
Scientificc enquiry is often open-ended, imprecise, and inconclusive, and the exhi-
bitionn recognised the constructed aspect of science by creating the possibility to 
arguee for several 'correct' outcomes. The importance of the difference between evi-
dencee and proof, central to science, forensic science and jurisprudence, was com-
municatedd in a way that engaged the visitor in the very real process of investigation, 
reasoningg and debate. 
Howw were these concerns expressed in the exhibition's labelling? 
First,, by using popular culture. The most obvious sign of the exhibition's popular 
biass was the overscale bookcovers that served as the exterior enclosure of the 
exhibition.. The design of the exhibition's interpretative material exploited popular 
formss of communication - the murder mystery, the book, the cartoon - and cast the 
experiencee in the form of a complex intellectual puzzle. In appropriating forms that 
appealedd to user's existing interests, in spite of the purely scientific and technical 
competencess demanded by the exhibition's challenges, the labels put the user at 
ease,, recognised their existing abilities, and in a non-trivial way helped them to be 
ablee to perform the tasks the exhibition demanded of them. Evaluations done of the 
exhibitionn during its tour of Alberta's public libraries confirm the fact that visitors 
stayedd as long as it was necessary to complete the seven tables, returned when 
necessary,, and generally indicated that they were prepared to become engaged by 
thee exhibition's scientific material.84 
Inn designing the programme and its support material as a complex problem to solve, 
thee exhibition challenged the traditional ways in which interactive exhibitions are 
organised.. In a traditional hands-on science centre, either the exhibits are stand-
alone,, discrete experiences, each of them self-contained and isolated or the exhibits 
aree grouped, often somewhat arbitrarily by a given theme- light, matter and energy, 
waves,, etc. In the case of The Body in the Library, the user-language of problems 
(combinedd with the indispensable clipboard on which conclusions were recorded) 
allowedd a non-arbitrary grouping of material, which nonetheless allowed a cumu-
lative,, non-linear exploration of the material. The structure of the problem framed 
thee behaviour of the visitor in overall, goal-oriented terms, without constraining the 
wayss in which they internalised problems and arrived at the goal. Moreover, unlike 
traditionall exhibition organisations, wherein the visitor often gets bored and opts 
out,, seeking more exciting exhibits (the notorious 'pinball effect' where visitors 

bouncee from one exhibit to the next), once the visitor has engaged with the exhibit, 
shee rarely leaves it without coming to a provisional conclusion, and often returns 
severall times in order to solve the problem. The exhibit thus supports the visitor to 
createe an enduring action space, and exercise her skills in it, thereby supporting the 
functionn of the exhibit. In this way, the engaged behaviour that normally charac-
655 Described by Drew Ann Wake and Judy Mitchell in 
terisess puzzle table and puzzle exhibits, which hold visitors up to ten times longer 
theirr internal report to the Ontario Science Centre, 1989 
thann traditional hands-on exhibits65, is built into an exhibition of forensic science. 
Thee user-language of problems can thus be said to help elicit visitor 
behaviourr normally not found in the museum or science centre, by 
providingg the visitor with an opportunity to develop a personal goal, 
therebyy conferring the property on the visitor of actorship, and by 
encouragingg the visitor to confer the properties of acceptance and 
engagementt on the exhibition. As noted above, instead of the 'pinball 
effect',, activity in the exhibition was more like that of a puzzle table, 
aa similarity encouraged by the provision of worktables and chairs in each of the 
forensicc 'labs'. Visitors sat, looked, read, and discussed their conclusions with each 
other.. They often came back to the exhibition to complete a challenge or look up new 
information.. The report on the first twelve months of the exhibition's tour records 
thefollowingg anecdote told by a staff volunteer: 'One evening a mother and hertwo 
pre-teenagee children came to The Body in the Library. They took a lively interest in 
thee programme, and debated the results of each of the experiments. They stayed 
untill closing, finishing three of the tables. The next afternoon at 4:30, the son was 
back.. He stayed an hour and completed two more tables. The next afternoon he was 
888 Recounted by Drew Ann Wake to the author, 
backk again, this time with a friend. They stayed another hour, completed the final 
privatee communication 
exhibitss and then made their guess about the culprit. As they were heading out 
intoo the snow and cold, I asked them how long they would spend on the bus getting 
877 see the pioneering evaluations done by Minda Borun 
home.. 'Oh' they replied, 'we rode down on our bikes. It's about 45 minutes each 
att the Franklin Institute, and the work done at the 
way.'66Thiss behaviour is often not displayed in the 'traditional' science centre or 
Ontarioo Science Centre by Wake and Mitchell, plus 
museum67,, and can be taken as an indication of the comparative success of the 
severall other studies 
exhibition'ss approach to its subject, its public and its labelling. 
Second,, by being open to change. The material developed for the exhibit tables 
themselvess was designed to be changed, on a daily basis if necessary, during the 
firstt months of the exhibition, according to the comments of visitors and staff using 
thee exhibition. The introductory panels were made to be easily changed, the re-
searchh files could be readily supplemented, and the exhibits themselves were simply 
688 
constructed and easy to modify. At the level of the exhibition elements, volunteers 

andd staff were able to closely examine the kinds of problems visitors were having 
withh the text material, and change it readily. Treating the exhibition as a perpetual 
prototype,, and building this flexibility into the design also had important effects, as 
itt allowed librarian-users to change the material in response to the specific demands 
off their situation. It also allowed the exhibition to remain open to change, thereby 
enhancingg its stability as a support system. 
Onn a more general programming level, the exhibition's deliberately built-in flexibi-
lityy allowed organisers to respond to visitor variety. For instance, three programmes 
weree developed forthe exhibition: S.O.S. (described above) for schoolchildren Alibi, 
forr teenage high school students, and a programme for adults. To some extent the 
designn of these programmes thus were based on a model of each of the three target 
userr groups. Each model was a posteriori, however, and not a priori as implicit in 
forr example, the user-language of textual authority. Thus, during the first weeks of 
thee exhibition, it was found that the programme designed for an adult audience did 
nott work as well as had been anticipated. On the other hand, the S.O.S. programme, 
firstt designed for younger users, proved to be enormously popular among users of 
alll ages, and its challenges, far from being trivial, were taken seriously by children 
andd adults alike, and was soon described as a 'family' programme. Moreover, the 
S.O.S.. programme worked well in both structured and unstructured situations.w 
"" for detailed comments see Science 
Thee Alibi programme, which demanded that the visitor discover the identity of a 
Albertaa Foundation. Pilot Project 
murdererr by sifting through forensic evidence, attracted a great deal of attention 
ReportReport St Recommendations, Calgary: SAF; 1992 
fromm the schools, who booked the exhibition almost completely during the day, and 
fromm walk-in visitors, who would often spend several hours working on the problem 
beforee returning the next day with their written answer. 
Thee degree to which the exhibition was designed to respond almost immediately to 
thee needs and preferences of the users was a measure of its recognition of their 
importancee and existing competence, while the constraints imposed by the label-
lingg of the exhibition itself: in terms of subject matter, process, and intent, served to 
definee a user-language of problems in which the visitor's actorship was conferred, 
recognised,, enhanced, and confirmed. 
Finally,, by encouraging people to create their own activities after their experience 
off the exhibition. From the outset the exhibition had an explicitly activist goal -
itt served as a means of galvanising community activities: librarians used the ex-
hibitionn to introduce their users to new material, teachers used the educational 
programmess developed to accompany the exhibition. The library staff were very 
69 

enthusiasticc and particularly ambitious and innovative in their promotion of the ex-
hibition.. In addition to facilitating the SOS and Alibi programmes, they planned and 
organisedd four additional programs. The first adult programme, 'Clues to Writing 
Mysteries'' was led by a local author, Adelaide Schartneer, who shared her writing 
experiencess and explained the essentials of a good mystery and how to research and 
writee in that genre. 'Murder Stalks the Stacks' featured the forensic unit of the local 
RCMP.. The scene of the crime from Alibi was re-enacted and the audience was 
shownn what the police do in their forensic study of the murder crime scene. 
'You,, the Jury' was the final adult programme. Several members of the local Bar 
Associationn explained the roles and procedures of a court room, followed by the 
triall of a suspect from the Alibi programme. The audience was asked to vote on the 
guiltt or innocence of the suspect. 'Mystery Theatre' was a children's programme 
"" A complete evaluation of the exhibition was con-
featuringg mystery story theatre and mystery films. These activities supplemented 
ductedd by the Science Alberta Foundation, The Body 
thee exhibition's programmes, and taught the importance of debate and the contin-
inin the Library. A Review of Eight Months on Tour. 
gencyy of science, and through these activities the entire community often joined to 
Dacee Beggs, Science Alberta; Calgary; 1992 
tryy to solve the challenges of the exhibition (and support it as a support system).*» 
Ass can be seen from the above two examples, the user-language of problems, and 
labelss developed using that user-language, was able to confer on users an impor-
tantt and desirable property - actorship (and allow the visitor to maintain actorship 
inn using the labels). In the two examples described in detail above, it can be seen 
thatt the labels identified, legitimised, and unlocked the agency of the user-the user 
becamee involved, initiated activities, directed those activities independently (often 
seekingg out new resources), and sustained those activities, in some cases (such as 
thee boys who returned to The Body in the Library) over often protracted periods of 
timee and in the face of considerable hardship. Unlike the user-languages described 
earlier,, labels that employ the user-language of problems recognise the agency of 
thee user, and support them in being actors. It is also clear by contextualising the 
materiall in terms of the user's existing interests, and using elements drawn from 
popularr culture that the user was prepared too accept the labels and be 'taken in' by 
thee challenges they posed. 
3.2.22 Games 
Ass implemented by a label, the user-language of problems confers the property 
off agency to the user, a highly desirable outcome. What more can we expect from 
700 
an effective label? In the user-language of problems, the agency remains isolated. 

individual,, located in the user who has internalised the problem as her problem 
(evenn when part of a group or family visit). The user-language of games takes 
advantagee of the user-language of problems and the agency it confers, but creates 
anan additional property - other players. Labels that employ the user-language of 
gamess displace, for the first time in the museum setting, the emphasis from the 
contentt of the experience to the experience itself-the relationship with the variety 
thatt others can bring into the space of the museum. Other actors are always able 
too introduce more variety than that which can be found in nature (even though the 
latterr appears inexhaustible) - as they appear to be able to 'step out' of any variety-
limitingg f ra mewo rk. n 
Itt is important to note that puzzles, games, and simulations, while they each confer 
thee property of other players (either real players, in the case of a game like foot-
ball,, or virtual players, as in many computer games), are different, and cannot be 
lumpedd together in every respect. 
PUZZLES.PUZZLES. A puzzle, whether a simple jigsaw or a complex topological challenge, has a 
defineddefined outcome, and once solved, provides few further rewards (few puzzles are 
solvedsolved a second or third time once the secret is known, and puzzles such as Rubik's 
cubecube depend on their repeat play on the fact that success is often circumstantial, and 
notnot linked to the intellectual solution). If the puzzle is sufficiently challenging, or if ran-
domdom elements are introduced that prevent the outcome from being readily repeated, 
puzzlespuzzles can be profitably re-played again and again. However, as they are in some key 
respectsrespects 'closed', they cannot respond to changes in the player's skill, and become 
lessless and less challenging as the player's skill increases. A quiz, which relies on content 
challenges,challenges, rather than process challenges, is more vulnerable to exhaustion as the play-
er'ser's skill increases, nevertheless, the popularity of quiz-like games such as 'Trivial Pur-
suit'suit' show that, with a sufficiently challenging range of content or knowledge-based 
questions,questions, repeat play can be sustained. In puzzles and quizzes, the other player is 
largelylargely implied - it is the person who constructed the challenge in the first place, the 
unseenunseen player who is 'beaten' when the puzzle is solved. 
GAMES.GAMES. A game structures play and provides users with the space to identify personal 
goalsgoals and closure rules. Most importantly, a game provides a measure of improvement, 
andand is both open to and structures the infinite variation on behalf of the players, who 
voluntarilyvoluntarily sustain the play. In most games, such as football, hockey, tennis, cricket, 
calledcalled finite games by Carse, there must be a way to win. In other games, far fewer in 
numbernumber (but not rare), such as tag, the goals is not to win, but to sustain play. These 

gamesgames Carse calls infinite games. In a finite game the rules must stay fixed by con
ventionalventional and inviolable by the players in order that closure is achieved. In an infin
game,game, the rules can be plastic in order that the players can sustain play as long as they
desire. desire. 
SIMULATIONS.SIMULATIONS. Simulations provide the user with an external set of deman
associatedassociated with real situations. A flight simulator is a good example, so is SimCity
isis the Tamagotchi, a virtual pet. The engagement is sustained as long as the demands 
areare seen to be relevant, internalised as authentic. Engagement relies on the continuous 
feedback,feedback, and the escalation of the level of difficulty as a consequence of sustained p
TheThe other player conferred by the simulation is the environment which responds to the 
actionsactions of the human player or players. Simulation fails when the authenticity of th
demanddemand cannot be sustained, often as a consequence of the inability to provide an i
creasingcreasing level of difficulty, or a sufficient narrative context. The simulated plane crashe
thethe city runs out of parkland, the Tamagotchi dies - the player goes to dinner. Although 
providedprovided with a 'goal' - keep the plane in the air, keep the city growing, keep the Ta
gotchigotchi alive - lacking finite closure rules, a simulation sometimes functions like an 
infiniteinfinite game - it lasts as long as the player wishes to keep playing. 
Inn the autumn of 1992, Drew Ann Wake and the author were asked to consider 
designingg a new permanent exhibition, provisionally entitled The Living Planet at 
Sciencee World in Vancouver, Canada.71 The project was originally intended to treat 
711 This account has appeared in part as Wake, 0. A. 
thee future of science and technology in the province of British Columbia. Following 
andd Bradbume, J. Mine Games, La Revue des Arts 
aa proposal made by Drew Ann Wake in consultation with the author, an exhibition 
ett Métiers No. 10; Spring 1996 
strategyy was developed to look at the resource industries of the province - fishing, 
forestry,, and mining. 
Miningg is the most important industry in the Western Canadian province of British 
Columbia,, and in recent years the issues surrounding land use have been sources 
off intense conflict between industry, the environmental movement, government and 
nativee peoples. Science museums and science centres, however, are normally re-
ticentt to play an active role in the debates that surround the uses of science and 
technology,, often contend that science is a neutral activity, and that the role of the 
sciencee centre is solely to teach visitors the 'facts' about science. This attitude has 
beenn challenged by several writers in recent years n and by the author and his part-
711 in particular see Levy-Leblond, J-M. 
ner,, whose work in Alberta (described above) challenged the assumption that 
Vrai,, si... faux, mats.... Traverses 11/1989 inter at. 
sciencee centres should remain aloof to the real concerns of its visitors. 
72 2 

Afterr lengthy discussion, and in part as a consequence of substantial mining indu-
stryy support forthe project, Science World chose the earth sciences as the theme for 
thee first exhibition, on the assumption that the earth sciences were fundamental to 
understandingg the importance of mining in British Columbia. At the same time, 
7171 Both the Coopers&Lybrartd study, and research done 
severall recent studies conducted by the author and others had already established 
att the Palais de la Découverte by the author in 1993 
thatt public interest in the earth sciences was particularly low ", and that the public's 
showedd that the public was not highly interested in the 
interestt in the earth sciences was only piqued by an interest in natural catastrophes 
earthh sciences 
suchh as volcanoes and earthquakes, and then rarely. 
Inn terms of approach, there were two clear alternatives to treating the subject. On 
thee one hand, the earth sciences could be treated as they have been in traditional 
sciencee centres. Visitors would learn about geological time, the development of 
rocks,, faulting and continental drift. Following the example of other science centres 
desiringg to put the earth sciences 'in context', we would link geological themes to 
thee newsworthy geological events that captured the public's interest-volcanoes and 
earthquakes.744 By treating the earth sciences as a subset of geophysics, we would 
'** A current example is the new Earth Galleries at the 
followw the traditional path: separating scientific fact from social issues. We would 
Londonn Natural History Museum, opened 1997 
treatt the earth sciences as unsullied by concerns about survival. 
Thee alternative was clearly more challenging. Thus instead of an exhibition on the 
earthh sciences, the designers. Drew Ann Wake and the author, proposed to look at 
howw the geological sciences are constructed in a political and economic context: 
inn short, an exhibition on mining. The exhibition, eventually to be entitled Mine 
Games,Games, would deal with the issues surrounding the mining industry in the pro-
vincevince of British Columbia, issues that had been increasingly the subject of heated 
debatee in the press, on television, in parliament, and in the streets. Based on the 
convictionn that visitors are better prepared to engage with science learning tasks 
whenn there is sufficient context and motivation to do so (a belief supported by 
earlierr exhibitions such as The Body in the Library and Beyond the Naked Eye, 
describedd above) the designers re-focused the exhibition, not on geophysics, despite 
thee putative advantages of exploiting the public's interest in volcanoes and earth-
quakes,, but on the social issues that surround resource exploitation in the province 
off British Columbia. 
Thiss single change - from earth science to mining - entailed a complete re-exa-
minationn of the way in which the exhibition would be planned and designed. 
Withh a mining exhibition, it was possible to initiate a debate about the future of the 
province,, teaching visitors to evaluate scientific positions arrayed in support of any 
73 

numbernumber of competing positions. An exhibition on mining would call into questi
thee role the science centre should play in the life of the community, suggesting that 
thee role of the science centre is to prepare visitors to participate in the social and 
politicall life of their community. In a fundamental sense, an exhibition on mining, in 
aa province where the mining industry played a major role in the economy, and where 
thee public was demonstrably interested in the future of the province, provided the 
opportunityy to try to create a new kind of exhibition - using new approaches, setting 
neww goals, implementing new languages - and testing the latter to identify which 
mightt serve as user-languages. 
Thee exhibition Mine Games was thus a means to further test the assumption that 
visitorss are better prepared to learn when the science is placed in a context that is 
personallyy important to them, an assumption we already felt confident in following 
ourr work in Alberta. Moreover, it gave the author another opportunity to explore the 
deliberatee manipulation of user-languages as a means of shaping visitor interaction. 
Ass in the exhibitions described earlier, the notion of user-languages was rarely used 
explicitlyy in discussions within the design team, nevertheless, as will be clear from 
thee description of the exhibition, the author employed the theory developed in this 
studyy in guiding the implementation of the Mine Games exhibition. Specifically this 
tookk the form of two guiding principles: a context that mattered, and an exhibition 
strategyy based on games. 
Initially,, we considered using a real British Columbia example as a means of crea-
tingg the context for the debate around mining. It soon became clear that by using a 
reall example, we risked having visitors whose minds were made up, reducing their 
abilityy to consider the issue from many points of view. So instead we decided to 
linkk the exhibition, from beginning to end, by the fictitious town in northern British 
Columbiaa - Grizzly, B.C. 
Accordingg to the narrative, the people of Grizzly have gained their livelihood over 
thee past half century by logging the surrounding forests. Suddenly, last summer, the 
traditionall pattern of life changed dramatically. First, the provincial government 
announcedd that a wilderness park would be established on the outskirts of the com-
munity.. This sounded the death knell for the local logging company, which had 
dependeddepended on an ever-more precarious supply of timber. Then, only months late
largee copper/gold ore body was discovered barely a kilometre from town. Over the 
lastt few months, the townspeople have looked on as the representatives of the 
744 
mining company evaluate what may be one of the largest mineral deposits in the 

world.. Gossip rages in the restaurants and at the mall, as the residents of Grizzly 
debatee what the future will hold. Should the town cast its lot with the mining com-
pany,, and gain the jobs and security that a major mine will offer? Or should the town 
rejectt the mine and use its spectacular setting to promote wilderness recreation and 
tourism? ? 
Clearly,, there was a temptation to create an exhibition that asked for a clear, yes/no 
decision:: should the mine in the Grizzly valley go forward or not? But early in the 
projectt we realised that the 'no' option would provide an easy escape for urban 
visitorss who do not want to engage in discussing the issues. So we elected to 
createe a more complex situation in which visitors are asked to put themselves in 
thee shoes of the residents of Grizzly, and find compromises that will allow Grizzly 
too have a mine, while the integrity of the environment is maintained. In effect, 
visitorss are charged with the key responsibility that faces all British Columbians 
today:: to find a secure economic future that can coexist with the environment. What 
wee did in the Mine Games exhibition, then, was create a cultural context in which 
thee science and technology of the exhibition could be understood-a framework that 
wouldd give drive and direction to the way our audience would contribute, both as 
individualss and as players. 
Fromm a design perspective, the exhibition was developed to look like 
thee board games that all Canadian children have at home - chess or 
Monopoly.. Imagine an exhibition hall that contains four gameboards 
blownn up so that each contain a hundred square metres or more. 
Fromm an intellectual perspective, each of the games is made up of 
severall hands-on activities linked to a computer game. We delibe-
ratelyy made the activities difficult, so that it can take more than an 
hourr to solve all of the clues. Moreover, the visitor must play all of the hands-on 
activities,, solve all of the clues, in order to be able to play the computer game. The 
computerr game begins with a quiz, designed as a job application, and unless you 
havee mastered the information, you will not get the job. 
Thee visitor begins the Mine Games exhibition by picking up a clipboard with 
'gameplans'' describing each of the exhibit areas. The visitor keeps track of the out-
comess of hands-on challenges on the gameplan, and uses these answers while play-
ingg the computer games. Significantly, by making the gameplans an integral part of 
thee exhibition experience, the visitor is free to explore the exhibition in whatever 
orderr she wants, marking the results on her gameplan as she completes the exhibits. 
75 

Inn this way the exhibits can sustain the narrative of Grizzly, their results cumulative, 
butt the entire experience remains non-linear (its parts could be visited in any order). 
Howw were the exhibition's objectives expressed in the labels, and did the labels con-
tributee to achieving them? The exhibition deliberately used the narrative of Grizzly 
too ensure a global context for visitor engagement, and structured their activity 
withinn the exhibition as a game in which they were responsible for helping to resolve 
thee dilemma faced by the residents of Grizzly. The premises of the game were out-
linedd with the first text encountered by the visitor. 
MineMine Games 
GamesGames That Challenge You To Decide The Future ... 
WelcomeWelcome to Grizzly, a town in turmoil! A year ago. Grizzly's only industry shut dow
Then,Then, a huge ore deposit was discovered on the edge of town. 
CanCan the residents take advantage of the jobs. And preserve the wilderness, too? 
TheThe decision is yours. 
RulesRules of the Game: 1. Your Job. You have been hired as a mediator between the 
towntown and the mining company. Can you design a plan that will please both parties? 
2.2. The Clues. This exhibition looks like a group of gameboards - and that's what it is! 
EachEach game is made up of hands-on clues that will help you win a computer game. 
3.3. Gameplan. Take a clipboard from the wall. For each game there is a plan that will help 
youyou keep track of your answers. 4. Your Hosts. Grizzly residents will be your hosts. 
Maxine,Maxine, the Mayor. Bob, the President of NorthStar Mining. Lenny, the business gur
ShareShare their excitement - and their fears. 
Inn order to engage with the exhibition, it was essential that the visitor was familiar 
withh the topography of the Grizzly valley. A large three-dimensional model showed 
thee features of the valley, accompanied a text which served to give the visitor her 
firstt challenge, as a way of encouraging her to become familiar with the topography 
off the Grizzly valley. It ended with the challenge: Where would you hike to watch the 
sunset? ? 
Thee first game the visitor encounters is High Stakes!, and its label texts followed and 
elaboratedd the exhibition's game strategy. 
HighHigh Stakes! The game that challenges you to 
766 
Find Your Fortune ... 

GrizzlyGrizzly is buzzing with gossip of gold! 
TwoTwo of the world's richest ore deposits lie beneath this lush, green valley. 
ItIt is your job to find them. Go for broke! 
RulesRules of the Game: 1. Your Job. You are the Exploration Manager for NorthStar Mining. 
YourYour boss gives you some chunks of rock, a few fossils, and a map. Will you hit the 
bonanzabonanza - or lose your shirt? 2. The Clues. Each of the eight hands-on activities is a 
clueclue to the location of the ore. You will need every one of them to win this game. 
3.3. The Computers. Begin your search with $200,000. But watch out - the stakes are 
high.high. Every decision will cost you thousands of dollars. 4. Your Host. Bob, the President 
ofof NorthStar Mining, is your host. He's a great guy - as long as you're making money. 
AfterAfter all, you are betting his bottom dollar! 
Scientificc and technical information needed to understand the games' challenges 
wass found on distinctive exhibition elements: 
HeadingHeading the Rocks 
WhenWhen geologists search for ore, they look for clues in "drill core ". A hollow bit is used 
toto drill holes thousands of feet underground. Then, long columns of rock are brought to 
thethe surface. By examining core from different holes and varying depths, geologists can 
assembleassemble a 3-D picture of the earth beneath their feet. 
Inn the High Stakes! area there are eight exhibits, and a table with four computers. 
Eachh of the eight hands-on exhibits is itself structured as a game with a specific 
challenge.. The visitor was expected to note the answers to the exhibit challenges 
onn her clipboard. Each of the answers provided a 'clue' to the global challenge 
off locating the ore body on the outskirts of Grizzly. For instance, the first exhibit 
challengedd the visitor to determine if there was any evidence in favour of the mining 
company'ss claims that gold could be found in the Grizzly Valley. 
AllAll That Glitters 
"Gold!"Gold! At NorthStar Mining, we're under a lot of pressure to find a whopper gold 
deposit.deposit. But you'll never find anything by sitting at your desk. You have to get out and 
hikehike through the valley, panning the soil. Watch for a glitter - but don't get fooled!" 
ClueClue #7 
PanPan the soil from three locations in the Grizzly Valley to see if the soil contains gold. 
1.1. Swish each of the gold pans in a circular motion until shiny metallic particles begin 
77 

toto collect along the ridge. Collect as many particles as you can. 2. Are the particles 
gold?gold? If so, they will appear as dark gold flakes. "Fool's gold" (pyrite) is silvery. If you
findfind gold, mark the location on your map with a "G ". ? Is any area of the valley likely to 
containcontain a gold deposit? 
Alll eight of the hands-on exhibits in the High Stakes! cluster followed a similar 
pattern. . 
Afterr the visitor had worked through the hands-on exhibits in a parti-
cularr area, she was ready to play the computer game. The computer 
gamee is an integral part of each area, and is what makes each area a true 
game.. The computer was designed in such a way as to be extremely 
challengingg if the visitor has not assimilated the information from the 
exhibitss - and unforgiving of mistakes. Once the visitor has lost her turn 
att the computer, she must wait five minutes before she can log on again, 
fivee minutes in which she can go back and gather information that will help her play 
better.. The information on her clipboard, 'clues' that she will have gathered from the 
exhibits,, were part of her 'logging in' to the computer. If the information was partial, 
orr incorrect, the player was encouraged to return to the exhibit area before playing 
thee computer game. In this way the visitor's behaviour was left open-ended, but as 
thee exhibits give important clues to play the computer game, it structured how the 
visitorr plays the game. Pinball behaviour was minimised, and the careful collection 
off information encouraged, while still allowing the visitorto choose her own pacing, 
mannerr and ordering of the exhibit experience. 
Eachh of the exhibit areas functioned in the same way, and each one provided the 
visitorr with a challenge to respond to, and a reason to respond that was both per-
sonal,, and part of the overall narrative of Grizzly. For example, in Wild Things! the 
visitorr had to protect the valley from the consequences of potentially dangerous acid 
rockk drainage, and in Blast It! the visitor was challenged find a way to safely exploit 
thee ore left in a mine abandoned at the beginning of the century. The challenges are 
real,, and must be met by assembling a series of information, and acquiring specific 
skillss on the computer games. 
78 8 
Wee hoped to demonstrate that by deliberately structuring the exhibition by means 
off the user-language of games, and by providing an overall coherent narrative con-
textt in the form of the fictitious story of Grizzly, B. C, we could make visitors aware 
off the variety generated by other visitors (as well as by the actors in the story), and 

thuss encourage them to invest a greater amount of time exploring the exhibition in 
ann engaged and concentrated way. We were looking for the concentrated, social 
visitorr behaviour that characterised the puzzle table-type of exhibit rather than the 
freneticc activity that characterises behaviour around many exhibits that present iso-
latedd phenomena.75 Our experience in Alberta had shown that there were several 
"" An excellent example is that of the 'tuneblocks' 
fruitfull avenues for exploring ways in which one could simultaneously increase both 
exhibitexhibit developed by one of the Exploratorium's Osher 
varietyy and coherence, and create an exhibition that while remaining non-linear, was 
Fellowi,, Jean Baumberger, Professor of Music at MIT, 
neverthelesss cumulative and coherent. 
andd reported to Sally Ouensing in a private 
communicationn in 1992. In the letter she describes the 
Bothh The Body In The Library (described above) and Mine Games are non-linear 
transitionn from random clicking to concentrated 
insofarr as its activities can be done in any order (with certain key exceptions noted 
'floW-likee activity once the user sees that she can use 
below),, and both are cumulative within the framework of the overall parti pris. 
thee exhibit to compose tunes 
Centrall to Mine Games is the user-language of games. In a game, rules structure 
activityy that can be fruitfully played again and again. In a game such as Mine 
Games,Games, every re-playing the outcome of the game is different, determined by the 
naturee of the play. As distinct from the user-language of problems, the user-language 
off games structures the visitor's experience in terms of different players with com-
petingg interests (including players that are roles in a story), and allows the possi-
bilityy of repeated play, as every game can have a different outcome. Games are struc-
turedd in terms of players, rules, and goals, and are not exhausted by the finding of 
aa solution, as is a problem. In a game there is no 'right answer'. 
AA key difference between The Body In The Library and Mine Games is that The Body 
InIn The Library is structured primarily as a problem, and that it has a largely pre-
determinedd and knowable outcome. The visitor's engagement with the problem 
consistss of finding a way to the probable answer by means of clues and deduction. 
Inn this way. The Body In The Library deliberately models itself on the detective novel, 
aa kind of intellectual puzzle. Mine Games, on the other hand, is similar to a true 
game,, such as Monopoly, Risk, or chess. (The determinacy of The Body In The 
LibraryLibrary is mitigated in SOS in one exhibit, where a plausible case can be made for 
twoo possible conclusions, and in the Alibi programme, developed for High School 
students,, in which participants are challenged to create an argument indicting a 
particularr character in the murder mystery) 
Byy exploiting the user-language of games consistently throughout the exhibition, 
thee exhibition also encouraged new learning styles. The stand-alone exhibit com-
monlyy encourages a particular kind of interaction - visitors engage with the exhibit, 
andd push and pull every available protrusion until some identifiable pattern occurs, 
79 

allowingg them to discern the workings and intent of the exhibit. This learning style 
oftenn characterises the behaviour of young boys. On the other hand, young girls 
moree often read the instructions or study the exhibit before trying their hand at it, 
whichh when they do, they often do with a greater engagement and a higher level 
off participation than do their male counterparts.78 By insisting that information 
"Clawe,, M 
bee gathered prior to playing the computer games, the Mine Games exhibition 
attemptedd to address the gender asymmetry in exhibition behaviour by encouraging 
alll visitors to adopt a learning style (at least with regards to the computer games) 
thatt is normally associated with girls. Other exhibit elements throughout the ex-
hibitionn permit different kinds of engagement and take into account the large variety 
inn learning styles of the museum visitor. 
Finally,, the exhibition provided a way to challenge the traditional assumption that 
thee museum experience is primarily individual, and that the defining relationship is 
betweenn a single visitor and a single exhibit, despite ample research that demon-
stratess that the single museum visitor is exceptional, and that most visitors arrive in 
groups:: school classes, families, friends.77 Nearly all of the Mine Games exhibit 
7777 Notably in Folk, J. and Dierking, L. The Museum 
areass depended on groups being encouraged to work together to solve a problem 
Experience.Experience. Washington: Whalesback Books; 1992 
(particularlyy problems depending on interactions between people, as given by the 
roless in the story), and structured the exhibits in such a way as to encourage the kind 
off social, information-sharing activity associated with puzzle tables. 
Howw successful were the attempts to create an exhibition with the user-language of 
"Takenn from a report commissioned by the author 
games?? To answer the question it is useful to quote at considerable length from the 
whilee Head of Design for newMetropolis in 1995. 
conclusionss of a report on the exhibition made by Drew Ann Wake after Mine Games 
Wake,, D.A. Checkmate, unpublished report, IMPULS; 
hadd been open to the public for six months.78 
Amsterdam:: 1995 
TheThe game format has proved to be successful for a variety of visitors, including families, 
youngyoung people and professionals. A study was taken by conducting a short conversation
withwith each visiting group over the first eight weeks after opening, and on this basis the 
audienceaudience was broken into three groups. 
i.i. The Enthusiasts. It appears that approximately 18% of the audience becomes 
engrossedengrossed with solving the problem and will stay for hours engaged in solution a
ties.ties. Many people returned to Mine Games repeatedly. Some families were very 
organisedorganised about attacking the exhibition and came back week-end after week-e
OthersOthers travelled from as far away as Victoria (two hours) or the Interior of British
800 
Columbia (three hours) to play a game every month or so. 

TheseThese families sometimes became familiar to volunteers and staff members who took 
thethe same shift each week. For example, one seven year old boy spent an entire Sun-
dayday afternoon mastering one game, while his grandmother sat patiently, helping him 
out.out. The next Sunday morning he appeared, clapped the volunteer on the back and 
saidsaid cheerfully: "Well, I'm back!" His grandmother, who was following with three other 
grandchildrengrandchildren in tow, added less brightly: "And so am I." 
ThisThis confirms Csikszentmihalyi's belief that there is a proportion of the population that 
isis keen to be challenged intellectually. The percentage of enthusiasts is significant when 
comparedcompared with data collected for more traditional stand-alone hands-on exhibits. Minda 
Borun'sBorun's early work at the Franklin Institute showed that visitors stopped at large 
numbersnumbers of exhibits in the gallery, but actually spent time learning and understanding 
atat only one out of ten of these exhibits ... Therefore, if almost one in five visitors tries 
toto master one game, this represents a high level of interest compared to traditional 
exhibits. exhibits. 
ii.ii. Mild Interest. A much larger proportion of visitors showed a mild interest in Mine 
Games.. Approximately 45% of the visitors spent some time trying one or more of the 
exhibitsexhibits or the computer game. 
IncludedIncluded in this "mildly interested" was a small percentage of visitors (5%) who en-
gagedgaged the staff in conversation about the meaning of the Mine Games exhibition as a 
whole,whole, and the future of mining in the province, but did not want to play the exhibits 
oror computer game. This was interesting as it suggested that for a small proportion of 
thethe audience the exhibition served as a lightning rod for political and social concerns. 
SomeSome of these visitors were from the mining industry and others were from towns 
wherewhere mining was carried out or proposed. In most cases they did not play the games 
because,because, as one visitor from Mount Washington said: "I have been to a lot of meetings 
onon this subject and I already know what I think." 
Hi.Hi. No Interest. About 20% of visitors had no interest in the Mine Games exhibition 
atat all. These visitors often walked slowly across the floor from entrance to exit and left 
thethe hall. When approached, they most often said that they did not wish to put in the 
timetime or the effort of participating in a game. Some stated that they had tickets to the 
OmnimaxOmnimax theatre, which would conflict with their completion of the game. A few said 
theythey had no interest in the subject matter of mining. 
81 1 

2.2. Youth Audience. Our conclusion was that the games work with their intended 
audience-teenagers.audience-teenagers. The attendance has included numbers of teenage
theirtheir schools, their families and with their peers. 
Unquestionably,Unquestionably, the greatest draw for the teenagers is the computer ga
notnot the hands-on aspects of the exhibition. Teenagers who were visiting with schools 
werewere encouraged to play the games in pairs or small groups, and were expected to try 
thethe hands-on exhibits first. However, those who came with their peers played in a much 
looserlooser co-operative competitive form, starting with the computer games and working
backwardsbackwards to acquire information and data from the exhibits as required. 
TeenagersTeenagers are occasionally recalcitrant about committing the time to play the g
andand parents have been heard to cajole them by citing their interest in games at home. 
"At"At home I can't get you away from the computer, so what's your problem now?" This 
suggestssuggests that parents have noticed the intended link between computer games a
teenagers,teenagers, and are not above using it to stimulate interest. 
TheThe competitive aspect of the games is key for this group. On one occasion, teenagers 
™™ There also is another aspect to consider. On the 
whowho had been working at the High Stakes! game for several hours were found brow-
occesionn cited above when the teenagers lingered 
singsing among visitors at the Wild Things! game. "We don't want to play Wild Things!," 
aroundd one computer game trawling for clues to 
theythey explained, "We are just hoping that someone will accidentally drop a clue that will 
helpp them with another, this suggests despite the 
helphelp us win High Stakes!. "79 
competitivee nature of the games, players had started 
too recognise and take advantage of the variety 
AtAt a recent high school gathering, one member of the team asked the room how many 
generatee by other players. 
ofof them had played the computergames at Mine Games and half the class raised their 
hands,hands, despite the fact that the school had not gone on a class visit. This suggests tha
"" The paper concludes with some observations 
therethere is a market among teenagers for games that are of professional quality. [...J90 
aboutt gender asymmetries in use of the Mine Games 
exhibition,, such as' In discussion, the families 
Itt is clear from the above that the Mine Games exhibition represents a substantial 
confirmedd that the return visit was either at the 
improvementt on manyy of the exhibitions commonly found in science museums, and 
requestt of the children or the father, and the mother 
wass able to sustain, at least in a significant number of cases, the kind and quality of 
attendedd with the rest of the family but rarely 
engagementt and interaction considered to be desirable. Moreover, given the large 
insistedd on the visit' 
investmentt of time on the part of some visitors, and their proven desire to return to 
thee exhibition, it can be provisionally argued that some added value had been pro-
duced,, possibly some real learning, an argument bolstered by the fact that pro-
ficiencyy at the computer games allowed us to observe increases in ability - at least 
insofarr as playing the game is concerned. 
82 2 

Thee theory developed in this study suggests that while the user-languages of 
problemss and games both confer the property of actorship on the user, only the user-
languagee of games confers the property of other players. This conviction was at the 
heartt of the strategy to make an interactive theatre the culminating experience of 
thee Mine Games exhibition. An interactive theatre gave the author the opportunity 
too create a forum for the discussion of scientific and technological issues in a public 
institutionn - a forum where the activity and agency was conferred on all players -
andd was acknowledged. The property of other players conferred by the user-lang-
uagee of games was at the core of the educational, social, and political ambitions of 
thee Mine Games exhibition. 
Iff the challenge of the modern science centre is to find new ways to support the 
visitor,, to recognise their competence and to encourage their participation, in order 
thatthat they can regain control, in some measure, of the information they are being 
askedd to absorb, interactive theatre is one means of reaffirming the visitors' control 
overr information. In creating an interactive theatre, we tried to create a place where 
visitorss generated, in a non-trivial way, real ideas, answers, and opinions about the 
"Thiss account if taken largely from Bradburra. J. 
wayss in which issues can be resolved. As the issues that face the mining industry in 
andd Wake. D.A., Hottest! The Science Centra a» Social 
Britishh Columbia were at once scientific, social, economic and political, the inter-
ForumForum Conference Proceedings 'Quand la science 
activee theatre seemed to us the ideal vehicle for meeting the challenge of making 
deviantt culture', Montreal: 1994 
thee science centre a forum for debate.81 
Wee cannot pretend that the idea of having the audience implicated in the outcome 
off a piece of theatre is entirely new. In the early decades of the century Bertolt Brecht 
pioneeredd what he called 'epic theatre', in which the audience was meant to parti-
cipatee in, and take responsibility for its opinions and actions. '[Epic theatre] turns the 
spectatorr into an observer but arouses his capacity for action [and] forces him to take 
decisions.'' The audience was there to actively participate, not just to be passively 
entertained. . 
Inn 1948 Brecht wrote 'We need a type of theatre which not only releases the feelings, 
insightss and impulses possible within the particular field of human relations in which 
thee action takes place, but employs and encourages those thoughts and feelings 
whichh help transform the field itself.'K Central to this approach is the belief that the 
"" Brecht B. Short Organum on the Theatre, 1948, 
audiencee is comprised of thinking, intelligent human beings, an assumption not 
quotedd in Brecht On Theatre pp.35 transl.Willett 
oftenn made in conventional theatre, cinema, or indeed, in most science centres. 
Brechtt insisted on the intelligence of his audience. He wrote in 1936 'It is a common 
truismm ... that the audience, once it is the theatre, is not a number of individuals 
83 

butt a collective individual, a mob ... [our] theatre holds that the audience is a 
collectionn of individuals, capable of thinking and reasoning, of making judgements 
evenn in the theatre it treats it as individuals of mental and emotional maturity, 
andd believes it wishes to be so regarded.' n Even earlier, in 1926, he wrote The one 
nn In Bracht. B. Left Review 1936 
tributee we can pay the audience is to treat it as thoroughly intelligent... I give the 
audiencee the incidents baldly so the audience can think for itself. I need a quick-
wittedd audience that knows how to observe, and gets its enjoyment from setting its 
reasonn to work.' Brecht's theatre put the audience to work. 
Somee years later the potential of the 'quick-witted audience' was exploited by a 
Czechh World's Fair designer working with the Prague theatre company, Laterna 
Magika,, Emil Radok. In his revolutionary Kino-Automat at Expo '67 in Montreal, 
audiencess of 100 people were asked to choose the outcome of a tangled melodrama 
involvingg an unfaithful wife, her unsuspecting husband and a policeman. At key 
momentss the audience would choose one of three possible outcomes by means of 
buttonss in the arms of their chairs, and the film would continue on the basis of the 
outcomee selected. Remarkably, and perhaps fatalistically, despite the number of 
choicess and plots theoretically possible, the ending was always the same. 
Afterr Radok, the idea of interactive theatre was debased by several different de-
signers,, each of whom were entranced with the idea of the audience making choi-
ces,, but unable to translate these choices into a meaningful experience. The term 
interactivee theatre soon became synonymous with pollable seating, and, instead 
off determining the outcome of the experience, visitors in the new theatres- dubbed 
'Choicee Theatres' by Disney, and 'Futures Theatres' by Canadian World's Fair 
designerss working in Vancouver and Brisbane - were given questions to which they 
responded,, and their responses shown on the big screen. At their best, these 
theatress allowed audiences to express an opinion and have it endorsed. At its worst, 
thee audience was polled and polled and polled again on the same issue using 
differentt questions, to see whether or not they would change their opinions. Worse 
still,, the results of some of these theatres were sold to private marketing agencies. 
Thee audience's role in the process had become trivial - its decisions were limited to 
thee choices put to them, and its variety reduced to yes and no, agree or disagree. 
Thesee limitations, it was said, were a consequence of the technology itself, which 
couldd not cope with the special kind of variety an audience is able to generate. 
Wee were very critical of these so-called interactive theatres on several counts. 
84 4 

Firstt in many of them, the visitor's choices have no material effect on the outcome 
off the experience. The visitors vote, their opinions are registered, and the experience 
movess on. It is notable that visitors do in fact want to be active participants. In the 
Futuress Theatre at the 1986 World's Fair in Vancouver, the audience's participation 
wass strictly limited to expressing an opinion by means of pollable seating, and 
havingg the decision displayed. Nevertheless, when the final question, 'do you think 
yourr opinion matters?' was answered in the affirmative, the audience routinely burst 
intoo spontaneous applause. 
Second,, the visitor's participation is shaped by the way the question is posed, not 
byy the issue. The visitor's variety is largely determined by the nature of the question, 
and,, more importantly, by the limited number of possible answers to choose from. 
Inn effect, the audience is merely doing a collective multiple choice questionnaire. 
Thee richness of real interaction is completely absent. There is no debate, there is no 
meaningfull abstention, there is no revisiting the question or recasting it in different 
terms.. The audience is there to answer questions that other people set. 
Finally,, in the few cases where the audience can in fact choose among alternatives, 
thee alternatives are non-cumulative, and seem an end in themselves. Generally 
speaking,, the audience chooses to get information, and for the most part this in-
formationn is neutral - it leads nowhere. For instance, in some interactive planetaria, 
thee audience can choose between several topics that it wants to explore (often as 
feww as three), the decision being made by means of a majority vote. Thus the audi-
encee does materially influence the direction the show takes. However all this parti-
cipationn succeeds in doing is transforming the theatre into a kind of collective 
interactivee dictionary, in which the majority decides what to look up. It becomes, 
inn effect, a clumsy, limited, collective database, and even were the choices to be 
moree abundant, the overall result would be as disappointing. 
Withh this in mind, when we began designing the Mine Games exhibition, we took 
twoo starting points for the interactive theatre. First, we rejected systems which 
limitedlimited the audience's answers to yes or no questions, second, we were unwilling 
too believe that the technological limitations of the interactive theatre experience 
shouldd deter us from encouraging non-trivial participation of our audience - espe-
ciallyy given the overall decision to cast the exhibition in the user-language of games. 
Afterr all, Radok had shown us that an interactive, pollable theatre did not have to be 
overwhelmedd by an infinity of possible scenarios. Moreover, our own work combi-
ningg a live host with widescreen cinema at Expo '86 had proved the effectiveness 
85 

off a real actor in coping with and shaping the variety generated by a live audience, 
whilee at the same time using a sophisticated multimedia support. 
Inn a paper delivered in Prague in 1991 **, the author had proposed that one of 
Bradburne,, J. Going Public: Science museums. 
thee roles of the modern science centre, and, in a broader sense, the museum, is 
debatee and democracy in Planning science museums 
'too take advantage of its function as a public space, and to reclaim the openness 
forfor the new Europe. Paris: UNESCO; 1993 
inherentt in the practice of science. The science centre must put this spirit of chal-
lenge,, question and discovery in the hands of its visitors. Finally the science centre 
mustt become a place where debate about science, its benefits, its liabilities, its role 
inn modern society, can be conducted in the manner of science itself. In this way our 
sciencee centres can be a model, not only for other museums, but for debate and 
democracyy in a world rapidly closing in on itself to the exclusion of both.' With this 
inn mind, we designed the Hotseat! interactive theatre. 
Hotseat!! is a circular amphitheatre sheathed in copper, located at 
thee back of the Mine Games exhibition space, immediately adjacent 
too the exit. On either side of the entrance, the structure is clad in 
recycledd printing plates, still showing the traces of newspaper head-
lines.. Inside the theatre are six sections of steep tiers seating up to 
755 people. Above the entrance, visible from any point in the theatre, 
iss a large, 16-screen videowall. The entire experience lasts approxi-
linutes.. Hotseat! is the culmination of a visit to Mine Games. This ex-
ss originally intended for a very specific target group -young adolescents 
irs,, and was designed to encourage them to discuss and debate issues 
ïselvess in order to help the fictional residents of Grizzly decide whether 
havee a mine in their community. The object of the Hotseat! game was 
sensuss around the contentious issue of a land use plan for the Grizzly 
Thee Hotseat! audience plays the role of the studio audience of a live, call-in talk show, 
conductedd during the first public meeting between the mining company and the 
townspeoplee of Grizzly. The purpose of the call-in show is to build consensus about 
thee best way to develop the region. In Grizzly, the mining company presents its plan 
forr the long-range development of the community and the people of Grizzly respond. 
Thee audience is challenged to use the material they have learned throughout the 
exhibitionn to create a vision of the future that can accommodate all of the interest 
groups.. The talk show host plays the role of facilitator and mediator, asking the 
866 
audiences help imagine a land use proposal that would satisfy the conflicting inte-
matelyy 40 rr 
periencewa a 
andd teenage 
amongg then 
andd how to 
too build con 
Valley. . 

restss in the region. The host uses the 16-screen videowall above the entrance to the 
Hotseat!! theatre to understand the complexities of the mining company's proposal. 
Inn order to help the audience come up with reasonable suggestions by adding 
additionall information into the experience, the host can ask for the opinions of ex-
perts,, who also appear on the videowall. 
Fundamentall to the dynamics of the experience are the concerns expressed by the 
communityy residents to the company's proposals. These concerns are based upon 
deeplyy felt, and often opposing views of what the future of the community should 
bee after the mine has left in ten years. Should Grizzly become a developed northern 
skii resort? Should it preserve the wilderness and concentrate on building a tourism 
basedd on hiking and camping? Should it preserve its historical past as the basis 
off a new tourist economy? None of these concerns is scientific itself, as each is 
groundedd in values as well as facts, but making credible modifications to the com-
pany'ss proposal in order to ensure a certain kind of future involves an understan-
dingg of what science can and can not contribute. The host helps the audience move 
throughh each of the community concerns, concerns that not only place the com-
munityy in opposition to the company, but place the interests of some residents in 
conflictt with others. Saving the old townsite in order to build on historical tourism, 
forr instance, places at risk some of the moose herd that traditionally feeds the local 
Nativee Indian band. 
Thee central goal of Hotseat! was to create a means for visitors to see how their 
knowledgee of the science and technology of mining can be brought to bear on com-
plexx social issues such as the planning of a new mine. The purpose of the game 
wass to challenge visitors to use the skills and knowledge they had acquired in the 
exhibitionn to select a solution to a complex mining issue. The game is deliberately 
co-operativee and not competitive, with the goal of reaching a consensus. 
Howw does this form of interactive theatre address the concerns expressed earlier? 
First,, the audiences choices do have a real effect on the outcome of the experience. 
Thee solutions reached by the audience differ from presentation to presentation. 
Whateverr the result of the audience's deliberations, it must satisfy the requirements 
off the key interest groups: the mining industry and the community representatives. 
Anyy position that successfully mediates the interests of all these participants 
mustt draw not only on scientific knowledge, but economics, sociology, history and 
ecologyy - in short, on the full experience of the participants. Depending on the 
87 

suggestionss the audience makes to address community concerns, the community 
representatives,, or the mining company, could decide not to accept the suggestion, 
andd the host asks the audience to reconsider their choice. If the audience is unwil-
lingg to consider fresh possibilities in order to arrive at a plan that both the company 
andd the community can live with, the Hotseat! can be wound to a close. Although 
thee goal of the Hotseat! is to reach consensus, the audience can decide whether it 
wantss to move towards consensus or not. There is no 'right' answer - only different 
audiences. . 
Second,, the audience is asked to suggest real possibilities, rather than relying on 
thee traditional pre-determined yes/no choices. They are free to suggest any of a my-
riadd of possible solutions, and they have to defend those suggestions publicly. The 
hostt mediates the discussion, and calls upon experts to answer questions posed by 
thee audience. These experts can either be pre-recorded interviews at the Grizzly to-
wnn meeting, or potentially a live video feed from a real scientist on call during the 
Hotseat!! presentation. In this way the audience is encouraged to come up with a wi-
dee range of suggestions based on their own experience, and on their experience of 
thee exhibition, suggestions that can be corroborated or corrected in light of scienti-
ficc evidence. The issue under discussion of course limits the scope of the audience's 
suggestionss in certain respects, but right or wrong, their suggestions are not limi-
tedd by the form in which the question is put. 
Finally,, the multimedia technology used -the 16-screen videowall and 
itss computer interface - does not function like a database. The audi-
encee is not being asked to decide by majority vote what topic they 
wantt to see. Instead the technology functions as a resource. New 
informationn is provided by experts when the host feels that the audi-
encee needs additional information to fuel its deliberations or enlarge 
itss exploration of the issue. The consequence of a suggestion by the 
aa response from the community that allows them to evaluate how well 
3enn able to negotiate a solution, and where to look to find a better one. 
alwayss lies with the audience - not in the technology. The technology 
forr audience interaction. The drama of the Hotseat! is that audience 
;batee issues with other participants, instead of merely vying with one 
:alll up topics on the screen. The Hotseat! is not a generic database, 
pure,, value-free information. It is a support system for debate around 
tt issue. 
r«irr x -Tur-H'- mar. f 
Mwfca 
audiencee is 
theyy have b< 
Thee answer 
iss a support 
memberss d< 
anotherr to ( 
dealingg with 
ann importan 
88 8 

Moreover,, the issue is deeply rooted in the experience of the province of British 
Columbia,, and is based on concerns that had British Columbians from every walk 
off life - from the environmentalists to mining executives - in the streets during 
19933 and 1994. The issues in Hotseat! were fundamental, and the Hotseat! theatre 
wass a commitment on the part of the host institution. Science World, to the debate 
onn the role of science and technology to the future of the province. 
Theree are, however, several severe technical constraints to such a programme. The 
firstt is the need to limit the number of events filmed, for reasons of both cost, and 
off storage capacity. The number of events can be limited by either constraining the 
audiencess activity, providing only simple choices at a few points in the programme, 
orr by allowing the audience to retrace its path through a series of opportunities. 
Regardlesss of the method chosen, the designer of any interactive experience 
supportedd by finite technical capacity will always need to accept that the variety an 
audiencee can generate may exceed the ability of the system to respond to it. The 
measuree of a designer's skill is the extent to which he or she is able to create the con-
ditionss for the maximum amount of coherent visitor-generated variety, while pro-
vidingg support for that variety with a finite number of resources. 
Thee final version of the Hotseat! theatre evolved slowly over the course of a year-
longg design process. Originally we had been interested in exploring the possibilities 
off a voting theatre in which the audience was polled electronically, and interacted 
byy means of computer stations around the inner circumference of the theatre. One 
off the drawbacks to this approach was the difficulty of keeping the process open, 
evenn when strategies such as re-voting were employed. In the absence of a human 
mediator,, the questions had to be structured so rigidly that it was difficult, if not 
impossible,, to leave room for the kinds of variety we wanted the audience to gene-
rate.. Moreover, given the overall message of the exhibition that all technological 
choicess were ultimately social choices, we felt that to ask the audience to use a com-
puterr interface in its negotiations was to imply that technology had the answers to 
humann problems. We therefore opted to create an experience in which a live host 
mediatedd the audiences responses to the dilemma of the townspeople of Grizzly. 
AA human host had the advantage of underlining the fact that social negotiation lies 
inn human hands, as well as taking advantage of the human host to encourage, 
shape,, and direct the variety generated by the audience. In its final form, the Hot-
seat!! began with a humorous introduction, in which the host creates the fiction of a 
live,, television call-in programme, about to go live to the town of Grizzly. 

tnn order to better illustrate the issues above, let us look at the Hotseat! script in some 
detail: : 
[introduction[introduction to Hotseat! Beluga Productions 28/08/94] 
DuringDuring the applause, the logo 'HOTSEAT!' spins out in 3-D letters and freezes. 
TERRY,TERRY, the Host, enters with a mike. 
TERRY:TERRY: (really upbeat) 
ThankThank you, thank you, and welcome to Hotseat!, the television programme that puts
youyou at the centre of world events. Each week, your Hotseat! crew will be travelling to 
oneone of the hotspots of the world. Washington. Beirut. Johannesburg. And this week -
Grizzly,Grizzly, British Columbia. This is a brand new concept in Canadian broadcasting, fo
andand I'm delighted that you can join us for our very first show. Our network CNSW, 
hashas built a state-of-the-art studio especially for this programme. So let me show you 
somesome of the high tech features I have at my command. 
TERRYTERRY touches his touch screen and an image of Karen Nishi appears on the video w
TERRY:TERRY: This week, Karen Nishi will be reporting live from Grizzly, in northern Br
Columbia.Columbia. We have a two-way link with Karen, so I can talk with her via these scre
Hello,Hello, Karen. Are you there? 
OnOn thesereen, KAREN says: "Hello, Terry?" 
TERRY:TERRY: Goodbye, Karen. 
TerryTerry hits his touch screen and Karen is frozen. ... 
TERRY:TERRY: This is Hotseat!, the world's first television programme dedicated to chang
thethe course of history. Today, Hotseat! is going live to the town of Grizzly, B.C. Grizzly 
isis a town in turmoil. Two years ago the town's lumber company closed down, leaving 
manymany residents out of work. Then, a small Canadian mining company, called NorthStar,
discovereddiscovered a rich deposit of copper and gold on the edge of town. Some residen
thethe town are boosters of the mine. They want the jobs and training that mining offers. 
OtherOther residents pin their hopes on the tourism industry. They fear that a mine will 
destroydestroy the valley and its wildlife. We will be asking you to serve as mediators i
thesethese discussions. We want you to make suggestions and find compromises. We want 
youyou to find a solution that will make both the company and the community happy. 
90 0 

Wee had originally written the script to allow the greatest number of possible tra-
jectoriess through the material, in order to encourage the greatest amount of ex-
plorationn by the audience. However, we wanted the audience to realise that intran-
sigencee could mean failure -the collapse of the negotiations altogether, and thus 
builtt in several occasions where successive refusal to consider alternatives by the 
audiencee lead to the winding up of the show by the host, as noted on the storyline 
diagramm and the following script. Even if the audience successfully avoided ending 
thee show prematurely, there were four possible endings, of which only one allowed 
aa final compromise that would guarantee the support of all four community leaders 
forr the mining company plan -the 'happy ending'. The challenge of Hotseat! was 
too give the audience enough information to allow them to make intelligent propo-
salss about how to modify the mining company's plans (shown on a map) in order 
meett the different concerns of the community, and to encourage them to debate 
variouss positions in order to find a solution. 
Inn the following sequence, after a tumultuous community meeting in which the 
communityy leaders storm out in protest after being presented the mining company's 
plann (which serves as introduction), the host calls on the audience to help him solve 
thee dilemma. 
EVENTEVENT #8: THE GROUP ASSEMBLED 
TerryTerry turns to the AUDIENCE. 
TERRY:TERRY: Okay, how can we help these people out? The town needs the jobs, but they've 
gotgot some real problems. It's going to be our job to help, using this map. And if we can, 
thethe town can have the mine and all the prosperity that goes with it. But, if we can't, 
everyoneeveryone loses. So, let's look at the map and see if we can find a way, one solution at 
aa time. 
TheThe MAP, as Bob laid it out, appears on the screens. 
(refers(refers to the map) 
Let'sLet's look here, at the problem areas:we have the tailings pond, and this pile of acidic 
rock...rock... Karen appears on a screen 
KARENJerry?KARENJerry? Are you there? 
TERRY:Yes, Karen? 
KarenKaren is at the rear of the meeting hall. With her is Dr. MARTY WEINBERG, (mid-forties), 
thethe biologist. ... [the alternatives for the siting of the tailings pond are outlinedj 

TerryTerry leads a debate amongst the audience. The premise of this debate is that there i
nono alternative place for the tailings pond. It can only be reduced in size. 
AfterAfter a discussion the audience will be asked to vote on the following questions: 
VV to save all the elk? which means, no mine. 
2)2) to save none of the elk? which means going with the mine's plan. 
3)3) to save some of the elk, and change the mine's plan. 
TerryTerry finally calls for their vote. 
Thee choices are telling the mining company to pack up its bags and go home (a 
choicee that means the end of the town and infuriates the entire community), or 
givingg the mining company a clear go-ahead to their plan (which means sacrificing 
thee salmon stream valued by the Native Indian Band, the historic homestead, dear 
too older residents and the Grizzly Historical Society, and the plans for other economic 
growth,, such as a ski slope or wilderness trails) or exploring alternative, compro-
misee positions, such as moving the tailings pond. 
Thiss was the scenario we pre-tested in front of several classes of bright Canadian 
gradee 10 students (13-15 years old), in order to finalise the script before shooting. 
Thesee classes had been selected because they fitted the profile of the target 
audiencee originally specified by the institution -young adolescents and teenagers. 
Thesee pre-tests worked remarkably well, despite the fact that the pre-tests had been 
'performed'' by members of Science World staff, rather than shown in the Hotseat! 
theatree itself (as the film had to be shot long before construction of the exhibition 
hadd been completed, the script tests had to be conducted well in advance of the 
shooting).. The students appreciated the difficulty of the problem, and were pre-
paredd to engage with the challenges. Notably, they first treated the experience as a 
problem,, to which they had to find the 'right' solution. 
Inn the first test, both classes opted for one of the two either/or solu-
tionss right away (predictably for an urban 'green' audience, the 'no 
minee at all solution'), and were dismayed to find that this resulted in 
sternn disapproval from the entire community - clearly their 'right' 
answerr was the wrong answer for Grizzly. Then, as a consequence, 
theyy opted for the opposite solution (the 'pro-mining' option) appa-
rentlyy following the logic that if the first solution didn't succeed, 
itss opposite would. Once again they were faced with an unhappy 
92 2 

community.. As the original strategy ended the game if the audience was unwilling 
too explore alternatives, we thanked the classes for their participation and suggested 
theyy return to class. Unanimously (and perhaps not surprisingly) they asked - or 
moree correctly, they demanded - to be allowed to have another chance to explore 
thee possibilities. As a consequence of this test we revised the Hotseat! structure to 
alloww exploring new alternatives without ending the game entirely, and noted that 
thee audience would need to be better prepared to understand the nature of the ex-
periencee as a negotiation to reach consensus, not a win/lose game or right/wrong 
problem. . 
Onn the basis of these test cases, in May 1994, we finalised the script, and shot the 
filmm in July 1994. Once the final editing was completed in August 1994 we were in 
aa position to test the show with school classes once again in the Hotseat! theatre, in 
orderr to confirm our assumptions, and to ensure that the narrative fiction of the 
televisionn call-in show could be sustained. We tested the beginning of the show in 
thee half-built theatre with several audiences, including those who had assisted us in 
May.. We were happy to find that notwithstanding several more or less serious tech-
nicall setbacks (bad sound, difficult-to-read maps, intrusive mullions) the show 
appearedd to work well with school classes of advanced Grade 10 students, a finding 
confirmedd by written comments sent to us by the classes involved, which showed 
thatt Hotseat! worked as it was intended for this age group. As one student wrote 
'II think Hotseat! is a great idea because the topic is something you can relate to, I al-
soo like it because you can discuss the issue and people like to discuss a lot.' Clearly 
thee show had caused a great deal of discussion, and some responses showed that 
wee had touched deeply felt issues. One student, instead of discussing the Hotseat! 
experiencee itself, concerned herself with the fate of the grizzly bears in the valley 
threatenedd by the mine, and wrote 'I think that there should not be a mining com-
pany.. If there were to be a compromise that would be a step. I would like to see the 
grizzlyy bears alive and well, and to keep a nice clean environment...' The Grade 
10ss were prepared to engage in debate, and thought the Hotseat! was a good place 
forr everyone to do so. One student wrote that Hotseat! 'allows people to speak their 
thoughtss and for those who are shy, there is a vote to express their opinions.'* 
»» Thaw quote» transcribed from written evaluation! 
Wee were heartened by these comments, and planned to spend the weeks remaining 
solicitedd by the teachers involved in the test screenings 
untill the opening of the exhibition attending to technical details. 
However,, to our surprise and dismay, when we tested the same material with classes 
off Grade 8 and Grade 9 students, only one or two years younger, they had great 
difficultyy with the material, and appeared unable to engage in debate about the 
93 

rangee of options open to the community. They were either mute and uninterested 
inn the material, or they would make suggestions so far from those anticipated by the 
pre-filmedd responses that the host had little room to steer the discussion back to 
territoryy covered by the filmed events. With these younger students, the show was 
aa flop. 
Thiss finding caused the institution to question its original targeting, and to encou-
ragee us to find a way to make the Hotseat! experience exciting for a broader range 
off audiences than originally planned - younger school classes, and the general 
public,, which could be expected to include a wide variety of age and interest groups. 
Thiss new requirement forced us to rethink and rewrite the host's script substan-
tially,, using the same filmed sequences (which we could not alter by this point), 
butt structuring the show differently to make it more intelligible and accessible to 
youngerr audiences. The resulting show differed from the first version in several 
keyy respects. First, discussion was structured in a different way. The audience was 
noo longer asked to debate points in full, nor to explore several alternatives, but 
ratherr to direct the host in choosing among a limited number of possible options. 
Sequencess were thus used to illustrate the principles of negotiation, not as options 
inn themselves, and audience variety was constrained to the final episode, where they 
couldd apply the skills they had learned to help resolve the final conflict that stood in 
thee way of a successful compromise. In this way, the Hotseat! functioned as a group 
exhibitt teaching the three main rules for reaching a compromise - and a happy 
endingg was guaranteed every time. 
Thesee changes in approach can be seen in the following script segment. 
[same[same sequence/version 2 - 05/09/94] 
EVENTEVENT #8: THE IMPORTANCE OF COMPROMISE 
TerryTerry comes down the steps and turns to the AUDIENCE. 
TERRY:TERRY: Well! Chaos reigns! The people of Grizzly are deadlocked. This kind of imp
hashas happened before in British Columbia. Can anyone give me the names of some other 
areasareas of the province where these kinds of conflicts have taken place? 
(The(The audience may suggest Clayoquot Sound, Tatshenshini or the Cariboo.) 
Right!Right! And sometimes these issues break communities apart. 
944 
Turn neighbour against neighbour. 

AA lot of people who live outside the situation take hardline positions on an issue such 
asas this. For example, some people will say: "Heck, the people who work for NorthStar 
MiningMining are professionals. They've done their homework. This mine should go ahead." 
SomeSome of you in the studio audience may think that way. 
HowHow would the people of Grizzly respond to an argument like that? Karen, maybe the 
peoplepeople of Grizzly could tell us how they would react? 
Iff the audience accepts the mining company's proposal unquestioningly in the 
revisedd scenario, Terry responds to the angry reaction of the townspeople of Grizzly 
withh the following words: 
'Well,'Well, the community was certainly unhappy about that conclusion! And even though 
youyou have adopted the mining company's position, you can see that Bob is really 
nervousnervous about going ahead with a mine that the community does not support. So no 
oneone is happy.' 
Iff the audience chooses instead to send the mining company packing, in this 
scenarioo they are chided by Terry as follows: 
'Well.'Well. Bob has just called that position "unreasonable and fanatical". And the residents 
areare angry too. The problem here is that we often try to solve these issues by taking 
extremeextreme positions, resulting in no-one being satisfied. We've got to find some middle 
ground.ground. This requires compromise and new ideas, not hard line positions. Today we 
wantwant you to act as mediators to find a solution to the problems in Grizzly. 
ThereThere are two issues here: The first is the tailings pond on the east side of the river. 
RememberRemember we have Josie's Fort Hope in the North half and Gerry's elk herd in the south. 
We'reWe're going to work together to try to find a solution to these problems then I'm going 
toto turn things over to you to solve the problem on the west side of the river. If you've 
foundfound a successful compromise everyone will be happy, the townspeople and the 
miningmining company.' 
Thee difference between the two scripts is clear. In the first, the audience decides 
whenn it needs information, and how to get it. In the second, it is told that informa-
tionn is necessary, and given it. In the first script, debate and exploration are actively 
encouraged,, even at the risk of generating too much variety, variety that could 
exceedd the possibilities of the system to address it. In the second, variety is con-

strained,, and the show strictly structured to lead the audience through a learning 
process. . 
Whatt can we conclude from the foregoing experiment with creating a social forum? 
First,, we discovered that the Hotseat! was a very sensitive instrument for detecting 
thee development of social skills, and by means of the Hotseat! we identified a diffe-
rencee in developmental stage between two age groups that rarely comes to light in 
thee museum setting. Hotseat! made the willingness to debate and discuss social 
issuess a central concern, and allowed us to detect the threshold at which young 
peoplee begin to become concerned about broader social issues, and less about 
solelyy personal concerns. 
Inn a more general sense, this finding also underlined one of the central conclusions 
off this study - that labels that implement the user-languages of problems and 
games,, while conferring the desirable property of actorship, also require far greater 
attentionn to the process of 'addressing', that is to help users to engage with the 
label.. The greater the demands on the user, the more powerful the properties con-
ferredd by the label, the greater the effort required to accept the label. The primary 
meanss to overcome this resistance is to create labels in a context relevant to the user, 
noting,, as demonstrated in the example above, that relevance varies critically from 
groupp to group. 
Second,, it highlighted the fact that debate and discussion happen most readily in 
homogeneouss audiences, where the participants know each other and feel comfor-
tablee expressing themselves publicly. Hotseat! did not work best when the audien-
cee was markedly heterogeneous, as the variety of points of view and suggestions 
thatt can be generated by an audience that includes seven and seventy year-olds 
rapidlyy exceeds the capacity of even a hosted system to respond to them all - they 
aree just too diverse, and as a consequence, the common focus of the experience is 
difficultt to maintain. In order to allow diverse audiences to debate, it could be 
arguedd on the basis of Hotseat! that a neutral, anonymous, interface is belter than 
ann amphitheatre. A computer-based interface would allow participants greater 
discretionn to voice divergent opinions without fear of censure. On the other hand, 
iff one of the goals of the experience is to pass on the social skills of negotiation, it 
couldd be argued that the Hotseat! experience confronts and explores the difficulties 
off face-to-face negotiation, rather than avoiding them by the interposition of an 
966 
electronic mask. 

Third,, following from the above, Hotseat! highlighted the fact that 
informationn may be a necessary condition for debate, but it is not 
sufficientt - visitors need to learn negotiating skills. In this respect. 
MineMine Games in general left the visitor quite unprepared for the 
Hotseat!! experience, something noted by many of the students who 
participatedd in the tests. Often this lack of preparation was described 
ass a lack of information, as in the case of the following students com-
mentss 'Everything seemed kind of unclear. I needed more information and details 
aboutt what went on. I wanted to know more background information.' Another stu-
dentt blamed herself, not Hotseat! 'I didn't find that we were well prepared enough 
too make discisions [sic].' This opinion was seconded by a classmate who wrote 
Theree was not enough details [sic] about the whole presentation before everyone 
startedd to vote, which made the audience difficult to choose a decision.' Many 
studentss charitably looked to the exhibition to fill in the gaps, 'I'm sure that will be 
betterr when the games part of the program is complete.' 
Despitee the conviction that information was lacking, it was clear, particularly for 
youngerr audiences, that the exhibition had failed to provide any opportunities to 
learnn the skills of negotiation before entering the Hotseat!, thus putting the burden 
onn the Hotseat! to teach those skills prior to, or as part of, the overall experience. 
Thee fact that the older students resented the constraints to their activity points to the 
needd to include the communicating of social skills into the experience of negotia-
tingg solutions to social and technological problems. In other words, Mine Games 
wouldd have been a substantially better exhibition if it had clarified its already 
explicitt use of the user-language of games, and allowed Hotseat! to concentrate on 
providingg the greatest number of options for audiences eager to explore them. 
Commentss by Grade 10 students consistently emphasise their frustration with the 
limitedd field for discussion, and their desire to engage with a full range of options 
forr the future of the Grizzly Valley. This frustration finds voice in nearly every stu-
dent'ss comment. The show really had me thinking about a solution to the dilemma. 
However,, solutions that were not options ... were not quite useful. Maybe the 
programm should add more options to the decisions.'Another wrote'we do not have 
muchh options though, but voting for just yes or no.' Or another 'I thought the pre-
sentationn should have involved more complicated answers and votes, instead of 
justt voting yes and no.' One writer went on at length about the missed opportu-
nitiess The issue at hand is very emotional for most of the people involved. Every-
onee wants the things they value preserved. I think there weren't enough options and 
compromisess discussed. What to do about the old fort for instance. Also I think it 
97 

wouldd have been more interesting if Hotseat! invited all the people to be in the 
studioo "live". Then we could have discussed more possibilities and come up with a 
compromisee more tailored to the problem.' 
Finally,, even given its manifest failings, which are not trivial, Hotseat!, by exploiting 
thee user-language of games which addresses users to deal with the variety other 
playerss can contribute, allows us to argue that given a social context that is relevant, 
sufficientt information, and real opportunities opportunity to explore the skills of 
negotiation,, that visitors actively engage with and seek to sustain an experience in 
whichh their variety is recognised and encouraged. 
Fromm the examples described above in Mine Games, even given the complex nature 
off some of the exhibition experiences, we can see that labels that employ the user-
languagee of games actively confer complex and sophisticated forms of actorship 
onn the visitor, and by necessarily invoking other players, can actively support their 
willingnesss and ability to generate new solutions to complex problems involving 
otherr players. This would seem to provide grounds to believe that the label has an 
activee role in creating key desirable properties in the museum user. 
3.33 Using user-languages 
Severall general conclusions can be drawn from the exhibitions described above. 
First,, the user must accept the support in order to benefit from the properties it con-
fers.. Just as in the analogy of cited in section 2, the gun must be accepted before 
thee property of being dangerous is conferred to the person, and that of being fired, 
too the gun. The person could equally refuse the gun, and let it drop to the ground. 
Inn the examples above, it is important that the impediments to user acceptance 
bee as few as possible. Particularly in the user-languages of problems and games, 
wheree the user has the potential to become an actor, the label must correspondingly 
bee relevant to the potential user-she has to be willing to make the problem her pro-
blem,, to want to play the game according to the rules. Many factors can contribute 
too the label's acceptance - its content, its context, its style, its setting, its language -
butt most important, it has to matter to the user personally. For the user to accept the 
gun,, she has to have a clear interest in becoming dangerous, and it has to be seen 
byy the user to support that use. 
98 8 

Second,, once the user has accepted becoming a user, their behaviour can be 
observed,, and evaluated according to several criteria. 
Sincee the early 1980s, Drew Ann Wake and the author were among a group of 
scepticss who challenged the notion that hands-on interaction - in itself- provided a 
betterr learning experience. As described in the Introduction, in a study conducted 
att Canada's largest science centre in 1989, Drew Ann Wake and her colleagues 
recordedd the following startling findings: visitors tended to use hands-on exhibits 
forr an average of under two minutes, and rarely completed them - a behaviour 
alreadyy known in the field as the 'pinball effect'. Some researchers, such as Joel de 
Rosnayy of La Cité des Sciences et de I'lndustrie in Paris, had gone as far as to de-
claree this behaviour to be a constant feature of the science centre visitor. They 'scan 
withh their eyes and zap with their feet' he claimed. On the other hand, these same 
visitorss were often prepared to spend over ten times as long with simple wooden 
puzzles.. Moreover, while working on puzzles, visitors tended to talk with each other, 
sharee experiences and strategies, and use the opportunity for exchanging informa-
tion.. Unlike De Rosnay, we believed that this unfocused 'pinball' behaviour was a 
consequencee of our labels and our labelling strategies, and that the behaviour 
wouldd be seen to change if we could find a way to create more effective labels. 
Itt seemed to us that the most telling criticism of most science centre exhibits was 
justt that - the little time visitors engaged with them, the relatively low percentage 
off completion, and the low percentage of exhibits actually engaged with during a 
typicall visit. Clearly something wasn't working. Part of the solution seemed to lie in 
redefiningg what sort of activity should be happening in the first place. Thus instead 
off looking for'learning' in terms of observable cognitive gains-a series of facts lear-
nedd - we had to look for sustained engagement with the activity. Instead of looking 
att our job as creating 'exhibits' to show visitors scientific principles, we had to look 
att them as 'supports' that helped confer new properties on users. In short, we had 
too see our visitors as users, which is to say that our success could no longer be 
measuredd in terms of numbers of visits, but in terms of repeated, thus sustained, 
action. . 
Inn this we follow the work of the American psychologist of creativity, Mihalyi 
Csikszentmihalyi,, who described in 1990 what he called the 'flow* experience, which 
hee argued characterises most intrinsically rewarding human activities from sport, to 
music,, to art appreciation. In his first book, Beyond Boredom and Anxiety, he made e 
aa systematic study of people who engage in creative and intellectually challenging 
99 

activities.. In this work, Csikszentmihalyi dismantled the traditional distinction bet-
weenn work and play. He attacked the assumption that people engage in challenging 
activities,, 'work', only to solve basic requirements, such as income, for food and 
shelter. . 
Instead,, he focused on vocations and activities that involve a high level of challenge, 
butt are enjoyed for their own sake: chess, dance, music, art and sport. Csikszent-
mihalyi'ss theory was that'... people enjoy work, danger, and stress. The acts are 
"work"" in the sense that they require concentration and discipline, yet they give 
enjoymentt and meaning to life.' To test this hypothesis, Csikszentmihalyi inter-
viewedd a number of people who engaged in these challenging spare time activities. 
Hee discovered that these activities offered intrinsic rewards to the participant in the 
formm of 'self-confidence, contentment and a feeling of solidarity with others'. 
Hee also sought to find out if there were any factors which would erode this sense of 
welll being. The participants told him that when the activity was too difficult - beyond 
theirr abilities - they became anxious and unhappy. However, when the activity was 
tooo easy, participants became bored, and lost interest altogether. Here the chess ana-
logyy is useful. Playing chess against a stronger opponent produces anxiety, while 
playingg against a poorer opponent can be dull. This research led Csikszentmihalyi 
too conclude that between the states of anxiety and boredom is a state, which he 
calledd 'flow', where the level of challenge matches the abilities of the participant. 
Itt is this flow experience which draws people to an activity and maximises their 
enjoymentt of it. 
Activitiess that manifest 'flow' are self-initiated, self-sustaining, and often self-struc-
turing.. 'Flow' activities are free from ulterior motives, they are, in a fundamental way, 
enteredd into freely. Csikszentmihalyi defines flow as 'a subjective state that people 
reportt when they are completely involved in something to the point of losing track 
ofof time and of being unaware of fatigue and of everything else but the activity 
itself.'itself.' [italics in original] M The experience should ensure that the opportunities for
•** Taken from Talented Teens, pp.1* 
actionn are more or less matched by the visitor's ability to act at any given time. In 
Forr a complete description, see Csikszentmihalyi, M. 
orderr for this experience to be self-sustaining, it must also create the possibility for 
FlowFlow New York: Harpers; 1990 
increasingg complexity, to differentiate new challenges in the environment, to inte-
gratee new abilities into our repertoire of skills."7 In order to continue the 'flow' 
nn op.ciL pp.15 
experience,, the visitor should want to return, to try the exhibit again, to do it better 
aa second, third, or fourth time - in short, to 'accept' the label, and engage with it. 

Ass seen from the examples above, labels confer different properties on the user -
beingg knowledgeable, being an observer, agency, other players. These properties 
aree conferred in the way that 'being dangerous' was conferred by the gun. The last 
twoo properties described, which could called acceptance and engagement, are 
thosee properties which the user confers on the label, just as the person confers the 
propertyy of being able to be fired on the gun. 
Thiss demand for the recognition of and legitimation of the user's need to accept the 
labell - a 'bottom-up' strategy which would address the criticism that the agenda for 
informall science learning was set from above - can be seen clearly in the two 
initiativess taken in the late 80s and early 90s described above -the Science Alberta 
Foundationn and its exhibitions Beyond the Naked Eye and The Body in the Library, 
andd the exhibition Mine Games at Science World, in Vancouver, Canada, de-
scribedd in detail above. All three exhibitions looked at ways in which the exhibition 
visitorr can become an active participant in framing questions and finding answers, 
nott only to the de-contextualised scientific topics normally found in science centre 
exhibitions,, but to the deeply inter-related social, economic, and political issues that 
characterisee much of the debate about contemporary science and technology. Each 
off the exhibitions was deliberately experimental, and designed to test specific 
hypothesess about informal learning. In terms of user-languages, these exhibitions 
exploredd ways in which different labelling strategies could create the conditions 
forr self-generating, self-sustained, prolonged interaction with the exhibition's con-
tent,, in particular, ways in which the museum could take advantage of the user-
languagee of problems that characterises the library. As a consequence, these 
experimentall exhibitions encouraged the author in his conviction that the informal 
learningg environment could be improved by using particular user-languages in 
particularr ways. 
Finally,, from all the above examples, we can begin to identify the ways in which 
specificc user-languages can support specific properties in the user, as well as the 
reasonss for choosing to implement labels on the basis of one user-language or 
another.. Certain of the user-languages clearly seem to confer more desirable pro-
pertiess on the user than others, and the user-language of games, in particular, 
conferss the properties of actorship and of other players, more than other user-
languages.. Can these observations be tested? Could an entire institution be created 
basedd on employing the user-languages of problems and games? Would labels in 
suchh an institution consistently confer the properties desired? Would such an 
institutionn be a better museum? To answer these questions, it was necessary to 
101 

createe a new institution - a very unlikely possibility. However, luckily, in 1994, the 
*•• The rhetoric of different stages of science centres. 
authorr was given the opportunity to do just that. 
whilee used by authors such as Daniloff end Hudson, 
wass given a new life in the science centre debate 
Inn 1994, the author was invited to direct the design of Holland's national science 
byy the author in his 1989 paper (Bradburne, J. 
centre,, a project with a general vision, but without a specific exhibition strategy. 
Truth-tailingTruth-tailing and the Doing of Science, Amsterdam 
Thiss project provided the author with the opportunity to put into practice many of 
1993)) which subsequently became the subject of 
thee ideas that had been developed over the preceding eight years in a single, cohe-
widee use end even wider debate. The paper was the 
rent,, experiment. The challenge was to create a 'third generation' science centre n 
subjectt of a formal debate at the world's largest 
{orr even a 'fourth generation' science centre, as the institution's Director often 
meetingg of science centre professionals, the ASTC, 
proclaimed).. This experiment, newMetropolis, opened June 4,1997. From the out-
att its annual meeting held in Toronto in 1992. 
sett it was conceived explicitly as a prototype and tool for research, and provided the 
authorr with a means of testing the theories proposed in this study. 
newMetropoliss is an exceptional project in many respects: it is a national institu-
tion,, its development was guided by a clear, explicitly articulated vision, it had a 
clearr mandate from its backers in the federal government, the municipal govern-
ment,ment, and industry. Most importantly, the author was fully supported in his work by
thee Director Joost Douma, the Associate Director dr. Hein Willems, and by the entire 
stafff of the institution, in creating a new kind of informal learning environment. 
Becausee of these exceptional circumstances - and this exceptional opportunity - it 
iss important to describe the project in detail below as the experimental proving 
groundd of the theories developed in this study. It is important to note from the out-
sett that as in previous exhibitions, the notion of user-languages did not form part of 
thee explicit discourse within the design teams themselves. The creative staff was 
young,, inexperienced, and drawn from different backgrounds. None of them had 
beenn involved in exhibition design of this kind or at this scale before. Nevertheless, 
thee design process was unusual in several regards, particularly in the way in which 
itt was guided by explicit written documents, and shaped by intense and open inter-
nall discussion. It will be seen in the following section, that while it was not made 
explicit,, the theory developed in this study explicitly guided the development of alll 
newMetropolis'ss exhibitions - a project in which the author was the final authority 
onn every aspect of the design of the project and its exhibitions. 
Thee next chapter looks at the development of newMetropolis in Amsterdam, a 
sciencee centre opened in 1997 in which the author had the opportunity to put the 
theoryy developed in this study to the test - at the scale of an entire institution. 
102 2 

4-.. Putting it all together: newMetropolis 
4.11 newMetropolis: a brief history89 
newMetropoliss has its roots in a small museum dedicated to the theme of Labour. 
Inn 1923, Dutch painter Herman Heijenbrock founded the Museum van den Arbeid, 
•** Sections of this account were co-written by 
dedicatedd to celebrating the industrial labour shaping the course of the twentieth 
Barbaraa Regeer, and ara exerpted from an internal 
century.. Herman Heijenbrock's (1871 -1948) career, consisted largely of landscape 
documentt N» deerstepeet. written in 1995. A full 
paintingss of dunes, tulip fields, and pastoral villages, until he went to a mining-
accountt hat been published as Tracing our routes: 
districtt in Belgium in 1899. 'In the beginning I was paralysed by so much misery, but 
museologicall strategies for the 21st century/ 
graduallyy I realised what a great thought bound together the labour of thousands of 
Cheminss * faire: strategies museologiques pour 
people,, whose names no-one knows, whose lives slide into the monotonous rhythm 
lee 21eme siècle in \tors les muséesduXXIe siècle: 
off duty. (...) Industry had got hold of me, she did not let go of me, and for years I 
LeLe Revolution de la Museologie des Sciences. 
havee sought the subjects for my work in factories and workshops.' From that 
Nouvelle** perspectives americaines, europeennes et 
timee onwards, painting pictures alone did not satisfy Heijenbrock anymore. He wan-
australiennes s 
tedd to know exactly how everything worked together, and started to collect tools 
andd products from the workshops, often taking samples home for closer inspection. 
Heijenbrock'ss collection grew fast, and in 1922 he held his first exhibition at the 
Stedelijkk Museum in Amsterdam, under the banner 'the animal as raw material for 
industry'.. Part of the exhibition featured his own paintings, and a selection from his 
collectionn of tools, products and raw materials. A year later Heijenbrock put his 
entiree collection on display in the attic of the Veiligheidsmuseum [Industrial Safety 
Museum]] in Amsterdam, and the association 'Het Museum van den Arbeid' [the 
Museumm of Labour] was founded. For financial support, the Association turned both 
too the government and to its own members, which included leading representatives 
off Dutch industry. 
Soonn afterwards, the Association's pleas bore fruit, and it was given an unoccupied 
schooll building on the Rozengracht, close to the centre of Amsterdam. On February 
2nd,, 1929 the Museum van den Arbeid opened its doors to the public. The mission 
off the museum is to raise appreciation for unappreciated labour, done by thousands 
off nameless people, and to bring this labour to the attention of children and adults, 
soo their understanding of their fellow man will improve, and their love for their 
felloww man will increase'. In order to achieve this goal, the material in the exhibition 
'wass arranged in retrospective order... it starts with the finished product and goes 
backk to the earliest origins, nature (the animal, the plant, the mineral, etc.), as 
supplierr of products for industry.' Heijenbrock had an innovative vision of how in-
formationn should be communicated, and this fascination with labour was reflected 
103 

inn his approach, which was unusually advanced for its time: 'nature, subservient to 
technology.. [...] The cow as supplier of explosives, the mountain as producer of 
glass.' ' 
Thee collections grew steadily, and after a few years the Museum contained over 5000 
objectss divided amongst 27 departments and illustrated with more than 600 pain-
tingss and pastels by Heijenbrock himself90, and once again it was ready to expand. 
"" Hei jen brock's work has recently been documented 
However,, the museum encountered severe financial problems after the war. The 
inn a catalogue. Honig. S. Arbeid met vuur en verve, 
industry'ss subsidy to the Museum lapsed, and as a consequence the state cancelled 
Zutphen;; Walburg Pers: 1998 
itss grant in the early fifties as well. Sadly, the collection had become dated and the 
schooll building had fallen into disrepair. However, in 1952 the Association decided 
too ask industry to collaborate with them again, although not without recognising the 
needd for change. Industry renewed its support of the institution, and, after a radical 
reorganisationn of the collections and renovation of the building at the Rozengracht, 
thee Museum re-opened on May 21st, 1954. The new museum was named 'Neder-
landss Instituut voor Nijverheid en Techniek', (NINT) [Dutch Institute for Vocations 
andd Technology]. The bulk of Heijenbrock's collection disappeared to depots and to 
otherr museums, and only about 300 pastel and oil paintings stayed in the NINT. 
Fortunately,, Heijenbrock himself did not live to see the dispersal of the Museum van 
denn Arbeid - he died in 1948. 
Thee mission of the new institution was to 'increase attention for industry and labour 
andd related issues in the broadest sense, especially to help vocational choices and 
education.'' In the new institution the representation of Dutch industry was given 
moree attention, and exhibitions were divided mainly according to profession until 
welll into the 1970s. A leaflet from 1960 describes the NINT as 'the connection 
betweenn youth and industry'. Exhibitions were about oil, metal, electronics, glass 
andd ceramics, and textile and clothing. The NINT wanted to 'facilitate vocational 
choices.. It shows the new generation what labour they can expect in the different 
branchess of industry.' Later exhibitions were about the atom, telecommunication, 
energy,, the weather, video, and synthetic materials. 
Inn 1979 the mission was given a 'modern interpretation'. The objective is to excite 
interestt in thee basic principles of the natural sciences and the technological appli-
cations,, and to make clear the role that people play in it, [especially] by giving 
informationn about professions.' In recognition of this new direction, in 1980 the 
Directorr of the NINT and the Head of Education visited science centres in the United 
1044 
States and Canada, but returned with an equivocal outlook 'We are aware that a 

sciencee centre similar to those in the United States is not feasible for a relatively 
smalll country like the Netherlands. But we do strongly belief that a national techni-
call museum, where, apart from modern technology, the historical development of 
sciencee and industry is shown, is possible.' 
Severall years passed since the study tour of North American science centres, but 
thee idea of a science centre was not to completely disappear. In 1988 a feasibility 
studyy was commissionedd by the City of Amsterdam, and conducted by the Ontario 
Sciencee Centre in Toronto, for a proposal called the 'Ypsilon Science Center 
Amsterdam'.. As a first priority, the feasibility study outlined the necessity of finding 
aa 'director of the centre [...] who possessed the necessary involvement and vision.' 
Thee advice was taken seriously. During that year major organisational changes took 
placee in the NINT, both in the staff and the board. In late 1988, Joost Douma became 
thee new director of the NINT. Soon afterwards the Science Centre project was in-
cludedd in the 'Notice of points of departure for the development of the IJ-banks' of 
thee city council, and located on top of the IJ-tunnel. By 1990 the NINT had received 
financiall promises from the city council of Amsterdam and statements of commit-
mentt from leading Dutch Industries. In this context, a beginning was made to renew 
thee NINT's collections, in order to serve as 'pilot-projects' for Ypsilon. In 1990 the 
NINT'ss permanent exhibition was renewed entirely. Amongst other changes, there 
wass an 'Exploratorium' where visitors could use 'hands-on' exhibits inspired by the 
world-renownedd San Francisco Exploratorium to playfully discover aspects of the 
forcess and phenomena of nature. 
Inn 1991, partly as a consequence of the urging of Foundation for Public Information 
onn Science, Technology and the Humanities [Stichting voor Publieksvoorlichting 
overr Wetenschap en Techniek - the PWT], the ministries of Economic Affairs and 
off Education and Science committed themselves to provide substantial financial 
supportt to the science centre project, on the condition that Dutch Industry would 
alsoo provide a major contribution. The intensive fundraising by the Director and his 
Associatee that followed proved a success, despite a difficult economic climate. 
Manyy major Dutch companies were convinced by the government's willingness to 
subsidisee the building and the infrastructure. 
Inn 1992 the Italian architect Renzo Piano was selected to develop the building design, 
basedd on the preliminary programme of requirements defined by the 1988 feasi-
bilityy study by Moriyama and Associates. Renzo Piano had already built an interna-
tionall reputation for public projects, which included the Centre Pompidou in Paris, 
105 

thee De Mesnil Gallery in Houston, and the new Kansai airport in 
Osaka.. By the time the science centre was underway (1993), Piano 
wass selected to oversee the reconstruction and redevelopment of the 
Potsdammerr Platz in Berlin, and he has since then won the Erasmus 
Prizee for humanism (1994) and architecture's highest honour, the 
Pritzkerr Prize (1997). 
Inn early 1994, while the building development was already in process, NINT director 
Joostt Douma wrote 'Prototyping for the 21st Century - a discourse' [hereafter 
referredd to as the 'Discourse'], as a consequence of the ideas he had been deve-
lopingg for the project, influenced in part by papers written by the author.91 In the 
911 Notably Bradburne. J. Going Public: Science 
prefacee he states: 'The reason for writing it has been primarily to develop a vision 
museums,, debate and democracy in Planning science 
too guide our development. For we truly believe that we cannot simply build a Scien-
museumsmuseums for the new Europe. Paris: UNESCO; 1993 
cee Centre without having reflected as thoroughly as possible on what role this new 
centree should and could play in our present and future society. Science centres and 
museumss alike have always been children of their time and this infant of ours 
shouldd be able to participate in societal life for as long as possible.' 
Inn his Discourse Joost Douma, positioned the new institution in its historical con-
text,, and in the context of the socio-economical culture of the decades to come. By 
analysingg the relevant issues of the near future, and by looking back at the deve-
lopmentt of science museums and centres, he concludes that science centres should 
bee considered as independent agents, with their own role to play in society, as 
opposedd to merely serving scientists, formal educators, politicians, technicians, and 
industrialists. . 
Untill the writing of the Discourse, the development of the NINT's new exhibitions 
andd those intended for the new institution had followed the conventional trajectory 
off mostt similar projects. The programme of requirements for the building had been 
developedd (largely without any consideration of future exhibitions), and the gross 
areaa of public exhibition space provisionally determined. Key industry sponsors had 
beenn identified and approached. Specialists from around the world had been con-
sultedd and exhibition themes discussed at length, and five over-arching themes 
selected.. Staffing needs had been identified and an active programme to recruit 
youngg Dutch talent had begun. Nevertheless, despite this activity, the project 
stilll lacked a clear vision - a sense of what would render the project consistent, co-
herent,, and set it aside for the countless science centre projects in Europe and North 
1066 
America undertaken during the past two decades. The Discourse was the first step 

inn transforming the project from an urban renewal project with a building as its cen-
trepiece,, into a project to create the prototype for a totally new kind of institution of 
informall learning. 
Thee Discourse begins by looking at the changing world, and the importance of new 
skillss to meet the challenges of a changing world. In common with its predecessors 
thee Museum van de Arbeid and the NINT, newMetropolis had as a central concern 
thee changing nature of work, and the importance of preparing a new generation to 
meett new challenges in the workplace. Douma writes 'It is acknowledged that we 
aree rapidly moving from an era of high-volume production to one of high-value 
tailor-madee production ... It is recognised that the once-mighty multi-nationals no 
longerr produce growth in employment or profit, and are breaking up into semi-
independentt international networks, requiring new skills of their workforce - skills 
onn which science centres have already been focusing for many years.' 
4.22 From Discourse to design strategy 
Byy December 1994 newMetropolis had come to a major turning point. The science 
centree had been in the planning stage for over two years, during which time the staff 
exploredd a variety of strategies and a series of approaches to design and public edu-
cation.. Some of these explorations had enjoyed a limited success, while others 
hadd not fulfilled their promise. Throughout 1994 there was uncertainty about which 
directionn to take, and which exhibition tradition to follow. Early in 1994 the Director 
hadd even considered confiding the design of the exhibitions to the San Francisco 
Exploratoriumm - pioneer in the development of 'hands-on' exhibitions. 
Peterr Anderson, then Head of Exhibit Development, formerly with the Chicago 
Museumm of Science and Industry, was publicly voicing the need for a unified 
approachh to the design, something he felt he could not provide. It was clear at that 
pointt that newMetropolis had most of the elements required to create a science 
centree that lived up to the ambitions of the Director- an inexperienced but creative 
staff,, and a written mandate to create a new kind of institution in the form of the 
Discourse.. What was needed was a bridge - a theoretical approach that would 
alloww the project to move from the vision outlined in the Discourse into a realisable 
exhibitionn strategy. What exactly was a 'third generation' science centre? Or even 
moree challenging, what was a 'fourth generation' science centre? The Director knew 
hee wanted one - but was unable to say what it was. The author was approached by 
thee Director in July 1994, during the final months of the Mine Games exhibition. 
107 

Thee author joined the project in November 1994, and saw in the project the possi-
bilityy to continue experimenting with the new ways to move the locus of informal 
learningg away from the specialist and towards the user that had marked his past 
workk with Drew Ann Wake, an ambition fully consonant with the goals defined by 
Doumaa for newMetropolis. 
Thee author successfully secured the Director's assurance that he had the authority 
too restructure the design process, dismantle the existing department structure, and 
reconfiguree the creative staff in six design teams - one team for each of the thema-
ticc zones K plus a team for live programming. As a means to achieve the challenges 
<** The thematic concern of thee zones was the one aspect 
outlinedd in the Discourse, he prepared a document to be used by the design teams 
off the project the author was unable to alter, as the 
ass a kind of a 'manifesto' for designing a 'prototype for the 21st century'. This 
themess had already been used to secure industry 
manifestoo took a critical look at the history of the institution during the past three 
sponsorship.. The exact content and treatment of each 
decades,, and positioned the new institution as the consequence of having learned 
themee was open to complete revision, however, the 
fromm past failures. 
themee itself had to remain. 
Thee Discourse raised some of the following questions: 'What sort of world can we 
expectt in the next century?' To this the author added the following concerns: 'what 
willl the next generation demand of our institutions of informal education? With a 
computer,, a modem, and an interactive television in every home, and commerce 
cateringg to the growing need for more games, CD-ROMs and interactive videos, 
whatt role can the science centre play in the life of the 21st century family? 'More 
importantly,, what did this mean in exhibition design terms?' 
Too answer this question, the author first looked critically at the history of the science 
centree as an institution of the 20th century. In responding to the science centre 
tradition,, he challenged (sometimes rhetorically) several common assumptions 
aboutt science and technology, its audience, and the exhibition strategy that has 
followedd from them. As a starting point for the arguments that were to be at the heart 
off the exhibition design approach, newMetropolis was placed in the context of 
traditionall science centres and the assumptions they are often based on. In order to 
understandd the design of the institution and its exhibitions, the author's document 
-- the 'Manifesto' - is quoted from at some length below: This document, written 
inn December 1994, also serves to underline the extent to which the design of new-
Metropolis'ss exhibitions was the consequence of an explicit discussion and debate. 
TheThe North American experience seems to show that attendance to individual science 
1088 
centres is going down, despite the fact that nearly every major city now has a science 

centre.centre. The downward trend is due in part to general factors, such as suburbanisation. 
However,However, one of the key reasons may be that increasingly informal educational oppor-
tunitiestunities are available at home. With the widespread penetration of computers and com-
puterputer games, the meteoric rise of use of the Internet, and the prospect of genuine 
interactiveinteractive television available in the very near future, there is a diminishing incentive 
toto go to the science centre. 
TheThe downward trend identified byASTC is exacerbated by institutions who see them-
selvesselves as teaching aids to broadcast scientific principles, and by isolated exhibits 
designeddesigned for the single user. The relevance of the science centre has been called into 
question,question, and the preoccupation with individual exhibits and open plan floorspace has 
ledled to what is called 'pinball' behaviour in many science centres. Now that the novelty 
ofof hands-on has worn off, the North American science centre, in its present form, may 
soonsoon be fighting for its life - or at least for its visitors. 
TheThe 'Traditional' Science Centre 
SinceSince the Exploratorium was planned in the late 1960s, science centres have estab-
lishedlished themselves as independent institutions of informal education - institutions in 
whichwhich learning is visitor-directed, unforced and untested. "Nobody ever failed a mu-
seumseum " said Frank Oppenheimer when championing the Exploratorium as a real alter-
nativenative to the curriculum-driven formal school system. Despite this, the science centre 
continuescontinues to be shaped by debates in which certain terms are placed in opposition. Thus 
educationeducation is often put at one extreme of the spectrum, entertainment at the other. The 
cognitivecognitive is placed in opposition to the affective, the rational to the emotional. These 
oppositionsoppositions have coloured the way in which science centres have been planned, 
designed,designed, and realised, and have created what we could call the 'traditional' hands-on 
sciencescience centre. Moreover, the perceived tension between these poles has deeply in-
fluencedfluenced the way in which the words 'learning' and 'education' are used in the science 
centrecentre community, and made many science centre professionals nervous about using 
themthem at all. 
WithWith over twenty five years of experience, we can honestly say the success of the tra-
ditionalditional science centre has been mixed. We can identify several obstacles to complete 
success. success. 
THETHE MYTH OF THE SINGLE VISITOR. Exhibits are designed as stand-alone elements, 
eacheach one demonstrating an isolated scientific principle or phenomenon, each one meant 
toto work best with a single visitor. They are often discrete activities, with little oppor- 
109 

tunitytunity for visitors to share ideas or exchange information. Interactive exhibits are often
designeddesigned to accommodate a single user, and often make it difficult for other user
participate.participate. Linkages between exhibits, when they are made at all, are often ma
placingplacing exhibits side-by-side, or putting them in groups, without deeper considering th
needneed to link their content, strategy, or visitor activities. 
THETHE MYTH OF PURE SCIENCE. Many museum professionals believe that the role of a
sciencescience museum is to teach scientific facts - for example, that water boils at 1
degrees.degrees. These science centres often shy away from subjects the public finds 
teresting,teresting, including issues in which the science and technology are mixed with so
politicalpolitical and moral elements. They fear that science will lose its authority, and th
sciencescience centre its claims to be a purveyor of the truth if it opens the institution 
debatedebate and discussion. This unwillingness to start with the concerns of the visitor 
whichwhich are not always defined in the manner of the 'pure' sciences - suggests tha
thethe visitor's concerns are secondary - that he is at best a tabula rasa, at worst, wilfully 
ignorant. ignorant. 
THETHE NEED TO BEGUILE. Many science centre designers feel the need to make their 
subjectssubjects more 'fun'- by adding gratuitous interaction, by cloaking conventional subje
inin the guise of popular culture, by using new technologies for their own sake. Often 
thesethese strategies are an attempt to remedy the perceived lack of interest in subjects as
defineddefined by the scientific or academic community - geology, physics, mathematics et
-- subjects taught at school and defined by teachers. This approach betrays a funda-
mentalmental belief that the science centre is school with a sugar coating - its goal to trick th
visitorvisitor into the distasteful task of learning. 
TOP-DOWNTOP-DOWN LEARNING. In many science and technology exhibitions, exhib
reminiscentreminiscent of textbooks. These science centres have created large numbers of 'h
on'on' exhibits designed to elicit specific phenomena or demonstrate certain well-known 
principles.principles. However, despite their 'interactivity', these exhibits often only show 
thethe designer intended, and resist efforts to do anything else. They have a built-in 'right' 
answer,answer, which, once discovered, exhausts the potential for further visitor interactio
ThisThis kind of exhibit mirrors the top-down learning strategy of formal education, and often 
servesserves to reinforce the belief that the informal science centre is only a school i
disguise. disguise. 
AllAll these obstacles stem in some part from the assumption that all education is formal, 
1100 
school-based education, and all learning is coercive, top-down learning. The conse-

quencequence - often an unhappy marriage of formal educational strategies in the informal 
environment. environment. 
Thee development of a new science centre, particularly one of this size and scope, 
gavee newMetropolisthe opportunity to draw together the lessons of the last several 
years.. Clearly, right or wrong, the strategies commonly pursued by traditional 
sciencee centres are not consistent with the vision expressed in the Discourse, nor 
withh the author's own theoretical stance. What did newMetropolis want to be 
instead,, and what would this mean in terms of an alternative design strategy? At 
newMetropoliss the visitor is considered to be competent and already active in 
constructingg provisional theories about the world, rather than ignorant or inno-
cent,, as is often presupposed by many traditional science centres. The following 
positionss were central to newMetropolis design strategy. 
TowardsTowards the Future 
AsAs a way of shaping an institution that will meet the needs of visitors in the next cen-
turytury we must look at the science centre in a new way. First of all, rather than treating 
thethe educational and the entertaining, the cognitive and the affective, as mutually exclu-
sive,sive, they should be seen as complementary (an opposition does exist, of course, bet-
weenween formal education, on the one hand, and informal on the other). How can we ex-
ploitploit the specific nature of the science centre as an institution of informal learning, in 
orderorder to create a prototype for the next century? 
TheThe following observations are central to newMetropolis's design strategy: 
VISITORSVISITORS COME IN GROUPS. The single visitor is rare. Our visitors do not often come 
alone,alone, but in groups - with their families, with their friends, with their schools. They 
comecome to explore new material, make mistakes and learn by sharing experiences 
together.together. The visitor's enjoyment of an science centre exhibition is in relation to its 
content.content. Visitors learn by being together - they learn by chatting, they juggle ideas, 
imagesimages and facts and influence each other's opinions. More than any other single fac-
tor,tor, the social dimension of the experience gives it its emotional charge. The social is 
emotional,emotional, and some of the 'fun' we want to find in our science centres is the same 
socialsocial enjoyment we associate with other group activities such as going out to sports, 
cinema,cinema, and concerts. 
SCIENCESCIENCE IS MESSY LIKE CULTURE. Science is never pure. Science is not merely a 
seriesseries of facts, but a set of ideas, activities and skills in which many competences are 
111 

calledcalled into play. People rarely relate to science in the same way as the trained scientis
separatedseparated from the rest of the world. Instead they see science and technology a
trinsictrinsic parts of broader social, political and ethical issues. These issues touch their own
lives,lives, the lives of their families, and the world around them. By taking as a starting the
realreal interests of visitors, the science centre can play a central role as a forum for the 
discussiondiscussion of science and technology. It can provide information, an opportunity to 
newnew skills, and a place to discuss the impact of science and technology in our lives and 
thethe lives of our children. 
THETHE REAL IS RADICAL Real science is not school science. Doing science is an intrin-
sicallysically rewarding activity, and inspires some to take up careers in science. By taking as
aa starting point the real enjoyment working scientists get from science, exhibits are 
moremore likely to be convincing and enjoyable. The visitor should find in the science 
centrecentre the same pleasure the scientists experiences in doing science - defining
problems,problems, testing hypotheses, finding provisional solutions. Only by letting visitors
ploreplore the pleasures of real science will they be able to make choices about the role 
sciencescience plays in society - and the role they might play in science. 
BOTTOM-UPBOTTOM-UP EXPLORATION. Our visitors are competent. They are already 
inin some things, and they often know more than they know how to say. Visitors create 
theirtheir own understanding, and the science centre gives them opportunities to create new 
knowledgeknowledge during and after their visit. We cannot always insist on the specific 
knowledgeknowledge they create, as we can in the school classroom. The role of the sc
centrecentre is to create an environment where the visitor can explore the ways in which he
cancan actively modify his relationship with science and technology. In the science 
centre,centre, the visitor is in control, and the visitor charts his own course - learning is bottom
up. up. 
Havingg defined the design strategy in these terms, it was now possible to speak of 
whatt kind of institution newMetropolis could become. The institutional strategy of 
newMetropolis,, following from the views expressed above, and the objectives ex-
pressedd in the Discourse, was defined as follows: 
BEBE AN OPEN HOUSE. newMetropolis must meet the needs of visitors of all ages and 
interests.interests. newMetropolis must be a welcoming, inviting place; a place where visit
feelfeel at ease. Exhibits and programmes should be interactive, engaging and exciting 
newMetropolis'snewMetropolis's total attendance should grow to one million visitors over t
1122 
of the first few years of its operation. At the same time, exhibits should stimulate the 

participationparticipation of families in the Netherlands - a significant percentage of visitors. Finally, 
newMetropolisnewMetropolis will draw teenagers and high school students who are at an age to 
decidedecide whether or not they will opt for a career in science or technology. 
BEBE A FORUM. newMetropolis will be a social forum - the piazza of the 21st century. 
ItIt is a place where science, technology and culture meet and interpenetrate. new-
MetropolisMetropolis must not shy away from issues in science and technology. Rather, new-
MetropolisMetropolis should be in the centre of these discussions, as a meeting place and infor-
mationmation centre where the people can go to obtain reliable information and explore new 
ideasideas and new possibilities. newMetropolis is a social agent, a place devoted to giving 
visitorsvisitors the opportunity to be actors in the worlds they choose to explore. 
ENHANCEENHANCE COMPETENCE. newMetropolis is an institution of non-formal education, 
withwith a deep commitment to lifelong learning, and it is at newMetropolis that visitors 
willwill explore the variety of new skills needed for a rapidly changing world. At new-
Metropolis,Metropolis, the visitor is in control. newMetropolis will develop new approaches to 
hands-onhands-on learning, approaches that will encourage visitors to become generators as well 
asas recipients of scientific thinking. New approaches to exhibit design will introduce 
visitorsvisitors to the skills of abstraction, systems thinking, collaboration and experimentation. 
TheseThese new approaches will become part of newMetropolis's unique contribution to the 
internationalinternational science centre community. 
THINKTHINK GLOBAL, ACT LOCAL. In the 21st century it will not be enough to be a national 
institutioninstitution with a beautiful building and attractive exhibits. The science centre must also 
participateparticipate in the global realtime networks that already link universities, governments 
andand industries. By providing information, creating a place for discussion, and developing 
sciencescience centre activities using global information networks, newMetropolis will play an 
activeactive role as Europe's first 'virtual' science centre. 
Thee goals set out above (be an open house, a forum, enhance competence and think 
global,, act local) were then translated into specific challenges and accompanying ob-
jectivess in terms of the audience strategy, design strategy, exhibition strategy, and 
developmentt strategy. These objectives set forth the criteria by which the success 
off newMetropolis and its exhibitions can be measured. For instance, a key objective 
wass to transformm visitors into users: 
Objective:Objective: Encourage repeat visits - turn visitors into users. The work of educator 
MarionMarion Martinello suggests that science learning is enhanced by frequent visits to a 
113 

sciencescience centre over an extended period of time, rather than sporadic visits. Therefor
asas a matter of planning strategy, visitors should be encouraged to attend often. 
Withh respect to the audience strategy, over the past years, the NINT had developed 
ann enthusiastic base audience. However, newMetropolis's success depended on 
beingg the destination of choice for a wide variety of different audiences. newMetro-
poliss could now develop some targets for reaching new audiences and stimulating 
neww kinds of participation. These objectives were formulated explicitly and com-
municatedd to the entire creative staff, and spelled out a commitment to a new 
approachh to exhibition design, consonant with the author's theories. For instance, 
systemss thinking was identified as a key skill users would need in order to meet the 
challengess of the next century. 
Objective:Objective: Develop exhibits that encourage systems thinking. Most visitors are pa
dynamicdynamic systems in their daily lives - every time they are caught in a traffic jam, eve
timetime they exchange money or buy a dress, every time they make a date. However, only 
rarelyrarely do visitors have a chance to explore the properties of dynamic systems for them-
selvesselves - manipulate variable flows, provoke chaotic collapse, increase and decrease
bandwidths. bandwidths. 
newMetropolisnewMetropolis 
should develop certain exhibits that encourage systems 
TheseThese exhibits could be based in phenomena the visitor is already familiar with, such
asas traffic, telecommunications, and the marketplace. The exhibits should allow the 
visitorvisitor to explore the many ways in which dynamic systems behave, and to create
interactiveinteractive dynamic systems for themselves. 
Ann audience strategy cannot be built without a corresponding exhibition strategy. 
newMetropoliss exhibits are intended to be supports for visitor interaction, and their 
successs will be measured by the degree to which they create opportunities for users 
too interact. Thus at newMetropolis there will be a variety of exhibits to meet the 
needss of visitors of different ages, interests and learning styles. 
Objective:Objective: Create a forum for debate. The design of newMetropolis's exhibition zo
representsrepresents a break with the traditional approach of using isolated exhibits to com
nicatenicate the laws of science. In contrast to traditional science centre exhibits, it will be a
placeplace where visitors are invited to explore emerging scientific ideas and contrasting 
views.views. Science and technology is seen as an ongoing process of debates and
1144 
challenges, in which the merits of competing ideas, theories, and practices are com-

paredpared and evaluated. Scientific, technological, economic and moral questions all have 
theirtheir place in newMetropolis. 
"" A* Head of Design, the author was «Misted by 
Inn order to deliver on the promises made in the author's Manifesto, newMetropolis 
ann experienced project manager, Richard Lott 
hadd to find a way to create permanent exhibitions designed to be the expression 
whoo wat responsible for ensuring the exhibitions 
off a single, coherent, innovative vision of what a modern institution of informal 
waree within budget and delivered on time. 
learningg should be. The building certainly expressed this coherence - it was the 
Bothh Lott and the author reported directly to the 
challengee of the author and his entire team to create the exhibition that did so as 
Director,, Joost Douma, and the Associate Director, 
well.. The next section describes the way in which the design strategy was imple-
Dr.. Hein Willem», who effectively were the 'client" 
mentedd in newMetropolis's exhibitions.93
 
f , 
forr the work of the design teams. In all case the final 
responsibilityy for the design and educational 
aspectss of the exhibitions remained with the author. 
4.44 Developing the newMetropolis design strategy 
Overr the years, NINT had experimented with a number of approaches to exhibition 
design.. In the beginning of the 90s the NINT, like most science centres in North 
Americaa and Europe, had developed a large number of 'stand alone' exhibits, each 
off which exploring a single scientific idea or principle. However, in order to fulfil the 
promisess made in the Discourse and the Manifesto, newMetropolis had to develop 
neww kinds of exhibitions that placed their emphasis on the acquisition of new skills, 
ratherr than merely new information. This emphasis forced the design teams to 
exploree how to create exhibits that could be profitably returned to a second, third, 
andd fourth time, exhibits in which a user could become more skilled. Inexorably this 
meantt looking carefully at exhibits which implemented the user-languages of 
problemss and games. 
Forr several years prior to the arrival of the author, newMetropolis had been divided 
intoo five thematic zones: Interactions, Technology, Energy, Science, and Humanity. 
Thee choice of themes for the five exhibition areas had been determined very early 
inn the planning process, as a consequence of both institutional and sponsor-related 
concerns.. These over-arching themes remained a constant feature throughout the 
exhibitionn development, despite of the extensive transformation of the actual con-
tentt of the thematic zones, and provided a continuity from the initial project to its 
subsequentt realisation. Each zone was intended to allow the visitor to explore the 
consequencess of using specific new skills - skills important for the next century, 
enumeratedd in the Discourse as systems thinking, abstraction, experimentation, 
andd collaboration. 
115 5 

Thee design of the exhibitions at newMetropotis was assigned to six teams (one team 
forr each of the thematic zones, and a team for live programming), all reporting to 
thee author, who was responsible for shaping the direction the strategies took, and 
ultimately,, for the realisation of the built exhibitions that were the consequence of 
thesee strategies. Each of the six teams was encouraged to explore different text stra-
tegies,, different design strategies, and to develop their exhibitions using different 
user-languages.. In addition to the Manifesto, the author proposed several over-
archingg guidelines that applied to the institution as a whole. The most important of 
thesee guidelines, detailed in internal documents, were a language strategy, and a 
physicall design strategy. 
Thee language strategy took the form of a two-page set of guidelines that applied to 
alll written material in the public exhibitions at newMetropotis, including directional 
signage,, temporary signage, and exhibit labelling. This strategy was intended to 
makee the institution accessible to the greatest number of users possible, and to 
providee an incentive for use of other languages than one's own native tongue. Thus 
alll instructional texts in newMetropolis were to be in four languages, and all inter-
pretivee texts in non-translated Dutch and English. Hand-in-hand with the language 
strategyy (which was part of a much broader discussion of educational strategies) 
wentt a strategy for the physical design of the exhibitions themselves. In conjunction 
withh Renzo Piano, the author developed a vision for the design 'language' of new-
Metropoliss - a vision that gave the exhibitions an overall aesthetic coherence. A 
designn aesthetic had been slowly emerging from the way we had been developing 
thee exhibit concepts themselves - with a large emphasis placed on prototyping 
andd testing exhibit elements with real visitors, conveniently available in the NINT 
museumm beneath the newMetropolis offices. The phrase we coined to describe the 
visionn for the entire physical project, both building and exhibitions, was the 'Noble 
Factory'.. This meant using real materials, expressing the material honestly, and 
attentionn to detail, while keeping the design simple and avoiding styling for its own 
sake. . 
Thiss design approach was used as a way of ensuring that the design output of all 
•** See Bradburne. J. Changing Designership 
thirtyy designers in six design teams remained fundamentally coherent.94 At the 
inn The Valid Product Dutch Design Institute; 
samee time, content, fabrication, and architectural issues were also allowed to influ-
Amsterdam:: 1998. pp. 47 - 55 
encee the design, thus making the 'rules' less rigid and inflexible. In some cases this 
gavee rise to a certain playfulness, such as in the case of the water exhibit in the zone 
Energy.. Over three metres tall and faceted like a rockface, the waterfall emptied into 
1166 
two long, finger-like basins to create dam building experiences for young children 

-- hardly an element for a factory! However, fabricated from stainless steel in a Lake 
Districtt shipyard, and finished by grinding the steel in random swirls, the expressed 
metall and spectacular reflections kept the exhibit within the language of the 'noble 
factory'' aesthetic. 
Ass a consequence of earlier experience, we knew the importance of placing the 
exhibition'ss content in context - especially if the user-languages of problems or 
gamess were involved. As early as 1990, Drew Ann Wake and the author had been 
struckk by the work of the English sociologist Brian Wynne, and by his research into 
situatedd knowledge, which showed that people often have real scientific know-
ledge,, despite the fact they cannot articulate this knowledge in scientific terms. 
Thesee findings corroborated the research of psychologists such as Donaldson * and 
•** Donaldson, M. Conservation: What it th* question? 
McGarrigle,, who had shown that children often understand principles in context 
Britishh Journal of Psychology, 73,199 - 207 
(suchh as the conservation of volume) far earlier than they can understand or express 
itt in abstract terms. People know when they need to know, and learn when they can 
seee why learning means something to them personally. This research led us over 
thee years to develop a global 'bottom-up' exhibition strategy for the exhibitions in 
Albertaa (described above) and for Mine Games, in Vancouver. 
Att newMetropolis we started by putting thematic content in a context we believed 
wouldd be familiar to most visitors - a context we also hoped would unlock their 
existingg situated knowledge about the world - thus empowering them to tackle the 
furtherr challenges of exhibition content. This was the context of Work. Thus instead 
off a zone about systems dynamics (communicating the skills of systems thinking 
beingg one of the explicit goals of the design manifesto, and one of the four key skills 
outlinedd in the Discourse) we provided the zone Interactions with a game about 
bankingg (about exchanging value), a telecommunications game (about exchanging 
information),, and a game about transporting cargo through Europe (about exchan-
gingg material). In fact, all three games can be used as examples of different dyna-
micc systems (each one is, in effect, a dynamic system that maximises different 
propertiess - equilibrium, flow, capacity), but this is for the visitor to discover later -
andd was explicitly not taken as a starting point for the exhibitions. 
Ourr desire to situate exhibition content in context had several unexpected but 
desirablee consequences. First of all, as most of the contexts that had meaning to 
peoplee were related to work and working, this brought the exhibition strategy back 
too the roots of the institution as the Museum van den Arbeid - the Museum of 
Labour.. Second, from the outset, we had said that we wanted to create an institu- 
117 

tionn that communicated skills - not only information - notably those skills necessary 
*** Moreover, as institutions of informal learning are 
inn a rapidly changing world. This gave us a strong reason to 'put the visitor in the 
increasinglyy being asked to catch those who fall out 
driver'ss seat' - itself a central educational goal. Thus the visitor could be a 'Super-
off the formal system, this accent on skills and em-
banker',, a tanker captain, a field geologist, a scientist, an artist - which lent an 
ployabilityy was seen as an important plus to the 
immediacyy to the experience impossible to achieve otherwise. As we had found with 
governmentt ministries who supported he project 
earlierr exhibitions, this emphasis on using contexts familiar to the user helped the 
Finally,, despite the fact that this approach was 
visitorr engage with the subject matter - to engage with and accept the exhibitions 
devisedd independently on educational grounds, it 
moree readily.»6 
provedd consonant with the fact that 100% of the 
Onee of the deliberate consequences of having six teams and five clearly defined 
fundingg for the exhibition came from the private 
zoness was the development of five distinct exhibitions, each with its own concept, 
sector,, unique in the world for this type of institution, 
textt strategy, and user-language. Within the framework of these five thematic zones 
andd the emphasis on working environments allowed 
weree developed over two hundred individual exhibits, plus additional supports 
uss to take advantage of support from industry, with-
suchh as a newMetropolis-wide information system (Actua), live demonstrations and 
outt ever being forced to compromise our educational 
streett theatre (the Pop-up actors), and educational materials aimed at allowing 
goats. . 
differentt levels of the formal education system embed a visit to newMetropolis in 
ann extended 'learning trajectory' (the Starter's Kits). Taken together, the sum of these 
elementss was a new kind of informal learning environment, a coherently developed 
expressionn of the theory described in this study. 
4.55 newMetropolis: prototyping for the 21st century 
Givenn the large number of exhibits at newMetropolis, it is not possible to describe 
andd evaluate all of them in detail. A complete description of all the exhibitions, 
supports,, programmes, and products developed by newMetropolis for its formal 
openingg June 4th, 1997 (not to mention the ongoing development work conducted 
duringg the remainder of 1997 and in early 1998) would tax the endurance of even 
thee most committed reader. Instead, each of the five zones is looked at in terms of a 
descriptionn of selected exhibits, the behaviour these exhibits elicit, and the conclu-
sionss we can draw from these observations in terms of the effectiveness of the user-
languagess employed. 
Science: Science: 
USER-LANGUAGE:USER-LANGUAGE: variables (individual exhibits/Debate) 
problemsproblems (text panels/Debate) - problems (Lab) 
TEXTTEXT STRATEGY: 
second-person text 
non-narrativenon-narrative (Lab) 
narrativenarrative framework (Debate) with historical characters 
1188 
TARGET AUDIENCE: 9 -12 year-olds 

Thee theme of Science is treated in two separate experiences in newMetropolis, 
whichh could be said to constitute two separate 'sub-zones'. These two sub-zones are 
calledd The Lab', and The Debate'. 
Thee Lab is a working laboratory, staffed by trained scientists, and 
itss goal is to allow visitors over 12 years to 'do science'. In the Lab the 
user-languagess of the activities themselves are observation and 
variables,, as these languages characterise the practice of science, 
butt as the onus for questioning is placed on the user, the user-
languagee of problems of the Lab itself is that of problems. The staff 
scientistss (as well as volunteers drawn from the national association 
forr retired chemists) help visitors frame their own questions, and conduct their own 
experiments,, in the manner of Science North, in Sudbury, Ontario. For visitors who 
aree not able to articulate a specific research question, there are a series of pre-
preparedd experiments which allow the visitor to test various substances, such as the 
qualityy of their local water, the composition of their breath etc. - questions that 
weree discovered during prototyping to be of interest to a broad public.97 There are 
877 We are currently exploring the possibility of allowing 
alsoo reqular workshop activities, including a 'Crime-Lab', similar to The Body in the 
userss to isolate their own DNA - an activity currently 
Library,Library, where the visitor uses laboratory experiments and forensic evidence to 
beingg prototyped at the New York Hall of Science 
identifyy a criminal, as well as workshopss to make 'dropjes' (local liquorice confec-
tionery),, or analyse the food they eat. The texts and instructions are all presented 
onn worksheets attached to a clipboard, on which the visitor can record their results 
andd compare their findings. 
Too date, the Lab has proven to be one of the most popular features of newMetropolis. 
Onlyy 15 visitors can use the Lab at any given time, and there are often waiting lists 
off several hours. One of the reasons for the Lab's popularity is the user-language of 
problems,, which unlocks the intrinsic delight visitors find in self-directed experi-
mentationn and discovery, although it is clear that visitors appreciate and use the pre-
preparedd experiments to guide their experience. Another reason is the presence of 
stafff in the Lab, who are available to answer questions, explain techniques, guide 
research,, and, in the case of the volunteers from industry, talk about working life in 
aa real Lab. 
Thee second part of the theme Science puts science in the context of a debate 
aboutt the nature of light. In the past, scientific questions regularly led to conflicts 
andd controversies. One of the topics that was debated for centuries was the nature 
off light - was light like a wave or like a particle? Many natural philosophers, artists, 
119 

intellectuals,, physicists, and mathematicians were intensely interested in the 
questionn of the cause of seeing, and as a consequence, the nature of light itself. The 
questionss about the nature of light and seeing were raised for various reasons -
curiosity,, utility, avarice, scientific interest - and even wanting to know because of 
knowingg itself. 
Inn the Debate, a large introductory text panel introduces two 
characterss arguing about the nature of light - is it a wave, or is it a 
particle?? These two characters reappear on the text panels accom-
panyingg each of the exhibits. One of the characters is English 
(recallingg Sir Isaac Newton), and argues in heated language that 
lightt is a particle phenomenon, the other is Dutch (recalling 
Newton'ss older contemporary, Huygens) and argues in equally 
strongg language (albeit in Dutch) that light is a wave phenomenon. By introducing 
aa debate between two natural philosophers, conflict is shown to be an important 
88 There is an extensive literature in the History of 
aspectt in the shaping of science. Whatever is taken for .truth' within the scientific 
Sciencee that documents this process, starting with 
communityy is determined by groups of scientists arguing, proposing, counter-
Kuhn,, Popper, and Lakatos, and culminating most 
proposing,, and eventually, reaching consensus.98 
recentlyy in Shapin, Schaffer, Latour etal. 
Inn this area visitors can use several hands-on experiments to build up a case for or 
againstt either the faux-Sir Isaac Newton or the faux-Constantin Huygens as to 
whetherr light behaves like a wave or a particle. The exhibits themselves are very 
similarr to those found in 'traditional' science centres - a wave table, parabolic 
mirrors,, a bubble sheet, a sodium-slit experiment - albeit in an entirely different 
context.. As in the traditional science centre the user-languages are observation and 
variables,, and the activity is explicitly experimental and comparative. The panels 
textss are written as an argument between faux-Huygens and faux-Newton, although 
somee historical license is taken regarding the arguments used, given that the real 
debatee lasted over 200 years, and is still going on. The following example of the text 
givess a taste of the way in which the user encounters the arguments: 
RECHTSS OF LINKS, GOLF OF DEELTJE? 
Whosee side are you on? 
120 0 
Listen,!Listen,! cannot see you, 
butbut I can hear you! 
Strange.. Light doesn't do what sound 
does.. Maybe light only travels in 
straightt lines, like balls do. Light is 
blockedd by a wall - but sound is a 
wavewave and goes around things. That's 
whyy I can hear you, 
evenn when I can't see you! 
HetHet is helemaal niet vreemd datje me 
welwel hoort maar niet ziet! 
Geluidd is een golf en kan om dingen heen. 
Nouu wil dat niet zeggen dat licht geen 
golff is. Om licht dan maar gelijk een deeltje 
tee noemen, omdat dat nu eenmaal 
rechtuitt gaat, gaat mij te ver. Licht is 
alleenn een heel klein golfje, dat niet om 
muurtjess heen kan komen. 

Thiss sub-zone has proven to be one of the most difficult for visitors to use. Despite 
thee large explanatory text panels and explicit instructions, visitors find the idea of 
thee area difficult to grasp, and only a few engage with the experiments in the way 
thee designers had hoped. Changes to the instruction texts have reduced the amount 
off visitor uncertainty about how to conduct the experiments, but visitors still use the 
exhibitss in a way that characterises 'traditional' science centres. They play briefly 
withh the phenomena, they explore them more or less chaotically, and if they do 
startt an experiment, they often leave it unfinished. The over-arching question the 
areaa poses is difficult for visitors to grasp, and when explained, it is seen to be 
difficultt and abstract. Although for centuries the 'problem' of light's nature taxed 
somee of the world's finest scientific minds, it just isn't problematic for most visitors. 
Onee conclusion we can draw from this experience is that despite the fact that in prin-
ciple,, questions are inherently more 'open'to visitors than answers, even questions 
cann be 'top-down' if they do not respond to the visitor's interests or background. 
Itt appears that as the question of physics is not a burning issue in people's lives, 
visitorss are not prepared to enter into the debate about physics. Another way to 
understandd the listless behaviour is in terms of the user-languages employed. As 
thee area relies on the user-languages of observation and variables, there is no 
challengee or outcome that co-ordinates interaction with the stand-alone exhibits, 
and,, as a consequence, visitors frequently fail to engage with the material. While the 
questionn of light's character was and is part of a group of problems for physicists, 
thee exhibition itself does not itself fully exploit the user-language of problems. The 
user-languagee of observation confers no agency on the user, and given the remote-
nesss of the issue, the user confers no engagement on the exhibit. 
Interestingly,, the exhibition is extremely popular with teachers, who substantially 
augmentt the user-language of problems by dividing their classes in two, and 
challengingg the students to take sides and argue positions, much in the way the 
BodyBody in the Library's Alibi programme had students making arguments for 
differentt possible culprits. Staff are currently planning to enhance the area with a 
regularr performance by live actors who take the parts of the two protagonists, and 
askk visitors to help prove the other wrong. We hope that by augmenting the user-
languagee of problems - contextualising the issue and giving visitors a clear reason 
too conduct the experiments - this will result in greater visitor participation and 
longerr engagement with the exhibits. 

Technology: Technology: 
USER-LANGUAGE:USER-LANGUAGE: problems (cluster activities) 
gamesgames (Fabriek/Doublé Wedding/5th Man) 
TEXTTEXT STRATEGY: second-person text throughout 
-- non-narrative with cartoon characters (cluster activities) 
-- narrative framework (Fabriek) 
-- narrative (Double Wedding/Fifth Man/demonstrations) 
TARGETTARGET GROUP: 
7-10 year-olds 
Thee bulk of thematic zone Technology is built around a series of challenges, 
articulatedd by cartoon characters in the second person. The user-language of the 
Technologyy zone, like that of Beyond the Naked Eye, is largely that of problems, 
althoughh as the zone is primarily intended for younger children (7-10), the 
challengess are less difficult. There are two sets of challenges, one on either side of 
thee exhibition space. On one side the challenges are placed in the context of the 
humann body, on the other, on the automobile. Each set comprises three separate 
clusterss of activities, in which the visitor discovers the ways in which tools can help 
themm increase their precision, in the case of the body, or their strength, in the case 
off the car. 
Thee three clusters about precision are on three tables. The first challenges children 
too use different tools to explore the body of a popular Belgian cartoon character, 
Jerom,, from the series 'Suske en Wiske'. The second allows visitors to explore them-
selvess and the world around them by means of lenses, mirrors, microscopes etc. The 
thirdd table contains a series of case studies and files which allow the visitor to 
performm simulated operations on a body lying under a piece of surgical cloth, which 
requiress the visitor to reconstruct the workings of the tendons in the hand by 
reconnectingg the bones with the appropriate elastic 'tendons' such that the entire 
handd is once again functional. As an example, the text from this exercise (written in 
balloonss above the heads of two cartoon characters) is given below: 
TNITNI 3Bd handje 
"Handig"Handig al die losse stukjes, opereren lijkt net puzzelen, doe je dat botje nu n
ondersonders teboven ? " 
"It's"It's amazing how many little bones go together to make the hand work. Can you figure 
outout which piece goes where?" 
122 2 

Onn the other side, the clusters are grouped in three separate 'cars' made of stainless 
steel.. Here the visitor can change a wheel, experiment with different gears, make 
pistonss turn, and adjust valves and knobs to regulate feedback. The text strategy is 
identicall to that described above. 
Severall remarks can be made about the ways in which visitors use these exhibits. 
Firstt of all, the exhibits are popular with the age group for which they were inten-
ded.. In particular, pre-pubescent girls spend large amounts of time in the zone 
workingg on the exhibit challenges. Overall, however, the instructions were inade-
quate,, and were rewritten within weeks of opening to give more explicit guidance 
too exhibit function. In particular, contrary to our expectations, the cluster of activi-
tiess in the cars was less successful than expected. When the activities were proto-
typedd in the NINT, with a makeshift car body and constant staff supervision, the 
challengess of taking off the wheel, changing the tire, and making the engine turn 
gavee rise to an enormous amount of self-directed activity, consistent with what we 
hadd hoped would result from the user-language of problems. However, during the 
designn phase, so many possible activities had to be eliminated or constrained in 
orderr to make the exhibits safe for an unsupervised public, that the reward for 
engagementt with the activities was drastically reduced, and the scope for the user's 
ownn problems almost completely curtailed. 
Thiss reduction of possibilities, and as a consequence, for variety 
generatedd by the visitor herself, seems to have had the effect of 
makingg the exhibits boring to many users. It is interesting to note 
thatt while labels that implement the user-languages of problems 
andd games confer the property of actorship on the user, the 
thresholdd for the user conferring the property of engagement on the 
labell is much higher than with other user-languages. In the case of 
thee cars described above (and that of the Debate, described earlier), if the interest 
orr relevance of the problem is reduced, or the reward fro playing the game not 
sufficient,, the user-language alone does not ensure that the user will engage with 
thee label. 
Second,, contrary to our initial expectation, which would have had boys playing 
primarilyy with the cars and girls working at the tables (an expectation based on our 
workk in Alberta which suggested that women and girls preferred biological or 
health-relatedd subject matter), girls seem equally intent on working on the cars 

ass well. However, consistent with our expectations " , there appears 
too be a clear difference in the ways in which boys and girls use the 
samee exhibits. Boys spend less time with the exhibits, and seem to 
needd immediate feedback, otherwise they tire quickly of the activity 
andd leave. Girls, on the contrary, tend to work in groups, often with 
onee group member reading the instructions and helping the others 
withh the activity. The greater the complexity of the activity, the more 
itt seems to hold girls' attention. This means that the table with the case studies is 
999 see research conducted by Maria Klawe et at. into 
thee most used by groups of girls, and most frustrating for boys. As a consequence, 
thee use of computer and video games by boys and 
thee table needs frequent repair, and is increasingly often off the floor. 10
girls;; Klawe, M. et at. We have never-forgetful flowers 
inin our garden: girls' responses to electronic games. 
Ourr concerns with the observed asymmetry between game play styles of boys 
unpublishedd research, Vancouver/Kingston: 
andd girls also led us to develop two different computer games aimed at adolescent 
EE GEMS, 1994 
andd older users. The Fifth Man, intended to appeal to men and boys, and Double 
Wedding,, intended to appeal to women and girls. Both games were developed by 
1000 By June 1998 the exhibit table was removed quasi-
thee design firm LiveWires, and designed by Drew Ann Wake, with whom the author 
permanentlyy due to the inability to keep up with the 
workedd on several of the exhibitions described above. Both games use full-screen 
repairr required. It is interesting to note that the 
videoo to immerse the player in a specific television genre. The Fifth Man is based on 
exhibitt is abused by a very small minority - notably 
solvingg an extremely complex crime committed via computer, and plunges the 
malee adolescents in vocational school — however, 
playerr into the world of the TV thriller. It involves solving a series of challenges such 
thee exhibit is sufficiently fragile to cause this regular 
ass cracking codes, sifting through bank accounts, and finally chasing the culprit 
abusee to create unacceptably high maintenance 
throughh the virtual space of a map of Amsterdam. 
Doublee Wedding is about water quality management, and involves the player in 
aa process of scientific investigation, compromise, and consensus building in an 
attemptt to reconcile two pairs of sweethearts, all in a style recalling popular after-
noonn soap operas. The subject matter was chosen according to research into 
subjectss preferred by men and women, and in particular, the approach to Double 
Weddingg was meant not only to attract women and girls by using a subject (the 
environment),, a narrative supposition (romance), and a game style (investigation 
andd compromise), but by using a graphic style (pink), activities (kissing) and game 
style,, it was meant to discourage boys from monopolising the computer stations. 
Unfortunately,, both games have been plagued by the software problems endemic 
too all new development, so few conclusions can yet be drawn about the success or 
failuree of these games in meeting their objectives. Provisionally it appears as if 
girlss do favour Double Wedding, and boys The Fifth Man, although the first visitor 
1244 
to report having solved the mystery was a girl of ten years. Contrary to our expe-

riencee in North America, these computer games do not seem to have the same 
magneticc power in attracting teenagers, and as a consequence, some of the 
assumptionss about strategies to discourage excessive game play may not be ap-
propriatee in the European context. 
Onee of the reference points we used during the design phase was the Launchpad 
exhibitionn at the London Science Museum, as it was easily visited and easily 
observed.. Most of the exhibits in this exhibition represented 'traditional' science 
centree approaches based on the recipes found in the Exploratorium Cookbook. 
Exhibitss were based on phenomena, took science out of context, and even the 
puzzlee tables were stand-alone (quite inexplicable in terms of everything we had 
learnedd about puzzles and collaborative problem-solving). Moreover, they were all 
designedd to fit into the same modular design, regardless of the nature of the acti-
vity.. However, there was one striking exception, titled 'The Grain Pit'. This exhibit 
wass in effect a large-scale machine that allowed visitors to move plastic, grain-sha-
pedd pellets by means of conveyor belts, Archimedean screws, bucketwheels and 
otherr devices. Bereft of any textual support whatsoever, the exhibit was never 
thelesss continually in use. Visitors of all ages seemed to be able to imagine different 
wayss in which the grain could be shuttled from one spot to another, and would 
quicklyy start to work in teams to fill a bin faster, empty another, and so on. This 
seemedd to us a very successful example of self-initiated and self-structuring activity 
elicitedd by a label implementing the user-language of problems. 
Ass a consequence, we were inspired to create the Fabriek [the 
Balll Factory], whereby we hoped to elicit the same level of visitor 
activity,, while creating a learning experience about the effectiveness 
off tools - the theme of the Technology zone. The Ball Factory is a large 
machinee that distributes coloured balls to stations to be sorted and 
codedd by the visitor. It is a complex piece of engineering, with balls 
constantlyy in motion being delivered to the four sorting stations and 
thee four coding stations by means of pneumatics. Instead of the user-language of 
problems,, we chose to implement the user-language of games. Large text panels 
explainn the purpose of the Factory to the visitor. 
WelcomeWelcome to a special factory - a BALL factory. 
ThisThis factory sorts and codes SIX different balls. 
BothBoth the YELLOW balls and the BLUE balls come in two sizes. 
TheThe small RED balls come in two weights. 
125 5 

YourYour assignment is posted on the computer screens. 
SortSort orders of SIX BALLS - by weight and by size - then send them away to be coded! 
HowHow fast can you make up the right order? 
Computerr screens at every station display a particular combination of balls, and ask 
thee visitor to either sort them or code them as quickly as possible with the two tools 
att the station, putting the correct balls in one tube, and the rejected balls in another. 
Att every station there is a tool for sorting by weight, and one for sorting by size, with 
instructionss for their use beside each. When they are finished, they stop the clock 
byy pushing a button and the six balls leave as a group to be sorted. 
Bothh the activities of sorting and coding balls had been prototyped with groups of 
schoolchildrenn early in the design phase, so we were reasonably confident that they 
wouldd work in the final version. However, once installed, it was clear that there 
weree several factors that prevented the Ball Factory from working as effectively as 
wee had imagined. 
First,, the goal of the game was not explicit. Despite the information on the compu-
terr screen, visitors were unclear about the purpose of the activity, the function of the 
tools,, and the difference between the tube for the sorted balls and the one for the 
rejectedd balls. This resulted in frustration and chaotic behaviour, such as the stuff-
ingg of balls into either tube until the machine was blocked. This problem was ad-
dressedd by placing large text panels explaining the Ball Factory nearby, rewriting 
thee text on the computer screen, placing smaller versions of the main text at each 
station,, and by clearly marking the two tubes 'sorted balls' and 'rejected balls'. 
Thesee changes had an almost immediate positive effect, signalled to us by the 
floorstafff within hours of their implementation. Once they understand the purpose 
off the game, and its rules, visitors seem quite prepared to engage with it for ex-
tendedd periods of time. 
Second,, there was inadequate feedback. Once an order had been correctly sorted, 
itt was sent away to be checked, while the computer screen displayed the message 
'yourr order is being checked'. If all the stations were in use, the checking process 
couldd take as long as three minutes. This meant that for protracted periods there was 
noo feedback to the visitor. We soon noticed that after only a matter of seconds with-
outt feedback, the visitor would become bored and restless. If an adult, they would 
leavee the activity, if a child, they would begin to behave disruptively, attempting to 
1266 
block the machine, playing with the bails at random etc. To remedy this we planned 

too add new sensors that give immediate feedback after each ball is selected, and 
ww As of September 1998. due to financial restrictions. 
adjustingg the computer programme so that a new order is given as soon as the 
thesee changes have not been implemented. 
previouss one is complete. These changes are expected remedy the feedback 
Ass a consequence, the author has been unable to 
problem.101 1 
confirmm the prediction made above 
Third,, the bar-coding activity was too difficult. As originally designed, the goal of the 
codingg stations was to make up the bar-code corresponding to the order out of 
individuall tiles describing the size and colour of each ball. Especially during busy 
periods,, when the level of activity in newMetropolis was very high, visitors seemed 
unablee to tackle this challenge effectively. As a consequence, we simplified the task 
too one of assigning a destination to each order of balls, a task consonant with the 
fictionall Factory game. This strategy appears to have been a success. 
Finally,, due to the complexity of the Ball Factory and the inter-relationship between 
thee mechanical system, the sensors, and the computer software, mechanical failu-
ress are frequent, and these failures obviously have an impact on game play. We 
observee that whatever the cause, any interruption to the continuous engagement 
withh the game inevitably leads to chaotic behaviour and frustration. 
Takenn together in the Technology zone, the observations seem to confirm the 
conclusionn that the threshold for users conferring the property of engagement on 
thee label is consistently higher for the user-language of games than the user-
languagee of problems, and the user-language of problems than other user-
languagess that do not confer the property of actorship. However, when the exhibit 
iss successful, the rewards in terms of sustained, self-directed user activity of using 
thesee user-languages are correspondingly higher. 
Energy: Energy: 
USER-LANGUAGE:USER-LANGUAGE: problems (puzzles, Waterfall, exhibits) 
gamesgames (Tankergame, Distribution) 
TEXTTEXT STRATEGY: first-person (interpretive texts) 
second-personsecond-person (Tankergame) 
-- non-narrative interviews/newspaper quotes 
-- narrative (Tankergame) 
TARGETTARGET GROUP: 
7-10 (games) adults in family groups (texts) 
Inn the thematic zone Energy, aimed at families in groups, the user-languages of 
problemss and games are both used extensively. The success of these user- 
127 

languagess is in constant evidence, as the exhibits are in almost 
continuouss use throughout the day. The zone features a large-
scalee puzzle (the Distribution Game), wherein the visitor comple-
tess different networks, surrounded by a series of puzzle tables. 
Ass some of the earliest research that inspired the strategies found 
inn newMetropolis demonstrated the effectiveness of puzzles in 
elicitingg visitor engagement, it was gratifying to see that this 
exhibitt is in use constantly. The zone also features a large waterfall that emptiess into 
twoo water basins where visitors can make dams (which is also continually in use), 
andd the Tankergame, wherein radio-controlled boats are raced to an oil platform, 
loaded,, and raced back. The Tankergame has proven to be one of the most succes-
sfull and most popular exhibits in newMetropolis, and is constantly in use. Notably, 
ass the designers had expected, the game is played by groups, not individually. Most 
commonlyy there is a single player steering the tanker, and at least two 'coaches' -
peerss or parents - helping the player meet the game's challenges. It is difficult to 
1022 Since newMetropolis opened in June 1997, extensive 
singlee out a particular exhibit for close examination 1M, as the entire zone seems to 
researchh has been done into the Tankergame and the 
supportt activity, with users moving from one exhibit to the next, staying for 
GeoLab.. see below 
substantiall periods of time with each. 
Thee only notable failures in terms of sustained visitor activity are the exhibits along 
thee Energy Wall, which have never been completed, and the GeoLab, an enclosed 
spacee containing a geology-based exploration game. The GeoLab raises some of the 
samee issues raised by the Debate (described above). The occasional visitor finds it 
difficultt to engage with the game's challenge of finding oil in a difficult subterrane-
1033 see Gelder, J. van, en Mulder, L. Op zoek naar 
ann geology, and rarely stays to compete the research needed to win the game.103 
dede slapende reus: Evaluatieonderzoek 
naar het 
Onn the other hand, as with the Debate, teachers find the exhibit extremely effective, 
spelspel „De Slapende Reus"Sociale 
psychologie 
ass they can prepare their class for the challenge, and structure the activities in such 
Vrijee Universiteit Amsterdam; March 1998 
aa way as to make the game a worthwhile challenge. This dual behaviour was noted 
early,, and the GeoLab has been included in all the products destined for teachers 
andd schoolclasses (the Starter's Kits) which accou nt for some 120 000 visits per year. 
Thee text in the Energy zone is unusual in that it consists only of newspaper clip-
pingss or transcriptions of interviews-there is no 'museum voice' that claims to be 
aa neutral authority. The visitor is confronted with sometimes conflicting opinions 
aboutt how to make trade-offs between energy cost, lifestyle, and the environment, 
whichh is intended to promote discussion among adult visitors. The following is an 
examplee of the texts in the Energy zone: 
128 8 

VoorraadVoorraad gas, kolen, en olie is eindig / Running out - not everyone agrees 
ErEr moet op de rem worden getrapt, 
ee bodem van de aardgas- en 
aardolievoorradenaardolievoorraden komt binnen 
enkeleenkele tientallen jaren in zicht. 
EnEn ook de uraniumreserves zijn eindig. 
Dee Volkskrant. 31 augustus 1991 
"// don't believe we will be out of oil in 40 years. " 
Seann O'Dell, Chief economist of the International Energy Commission, The Economist October 1995 
Althoughh it is apparent that all the exhibits are used extensively by younger visitors, 
itt is difficult to evaluate the effectiveness of the text strategy for adults. However, 
iff it is any indication, during the first three weeks of operation, all the text panels 
nearestt activities generally monopolised by younger users (the Tankergame, the 
Solarr Energy activity, the Distribution Game) had become 'dog-eared' due to the lar-
gee number of visitors picking at them. While this is certainly evidence of the amo-
untt of time people are willing to wait for a turn at the games, it may also indicate 
aa certain kind of engagement, during which the texts may also be read. 
Humanity: Humanity: 
USER-LANGUAGE:USER-LANGUAGE: problems 
TEXTTEXT STRATEGY: third-person + first-person gloss 
-- non-narrative 
TARGETTARGET GROUP: 
12 - 18-olds/adults 
Thee zone Humanity occupies a special place in newMetropolis. Physically it is in the 
mostt dramatic space in the building, a 7 metre high splayed cone that forms the 
'prow'' of the ship-shaped building. It also plays a special role conceptually, as it sig-
nalss the way in which newMetropolis has turned 'traditional' science museum 
andd science centre thinking on its head. Traditionally science museums and science 
centress have been about science and technology. Only rarely have they strayed from 
"** The Pyschotogy Show, developed and curated by 
thee pure sciences, and then only into the easily exhibited subject of perception. In 
Dr.. Caryl Marsh of the American Psychological 
thee past ten years there has been only one significant hands-on exhibition of psy-
Association.. and designed in conjunction with the 
chology.1MM newMetropolis, on the contrary, is not about science and technology. 
Ontarioo Science Centre in 1990 
Itt is about being a human being in a world shaped increasingly by changes in scien-
cee and technology, the institutional expression of Leonardo's ideal human figure. 
129 9 

Inn Fritz Lang's 'old' film Metropolis, humankind had become enslaved 
byy its machines. In newMetropolis, the intention was to celebrate the 
abilityy to retain control over technology, and assert humankind's 
abilityy to actively create culture, whatever the technological means 
employed.10SS As a consequence, the zone dedicated to Humanity, to 
humann psychology and human creativity plays a central and funda-
mentall role, and in large measure defines the way in which new-
Metropoliss is redefining the institution. 
1055 In September 1998, newMetropolis hosted one of the 
workss of video artist Bill Viola, 'Arc of Ascent' as part 
Ass originally planned, the zone Humanity comprised three distinct sections: a 
off Viola's retrospective at the Stedelijk Museum. 
centrall 'ring' in which the visitor was the creator or artist, a second ring in which the 
Thiss participation further underlined newMetropolis's 
physiologicall and psychological conditions for creativity, imagination, learning, and 
commitmentt to the centrality of culture, as opposed 
feelingg were explored, and a third ring that looked at morality and making choices 
too the centrality of technology, as a determining 
aboutt right and wrong. Unfortunately, in late 1995, it was necessary for budget 
featuree of contemporary society 
reasonss to stop development of the third ring, despite the extensive prototyping that 
showedd how important the issues of morality and choice were to our potential 
1088 The Choices theatre was prototyped by the team in 
visitors.106 6 
Octoberr 1995, and evaluated as part of her Master's 
studiess for the Department of Science Dynamics at 
Thee first two rings, however, remained intact. 
thee University of Amsterdam by Irene Hung 
Thee first ring was intended to be an area in which the visitor could directly influen-
cee the 'emotional content' of the space, by means of triggering images, sounds, and 
lightingg effects. Several systems were prototyped, the first using slide images 
correspondingg to emotions that changed in response to a user's position relative 
too the screen107, the second, a more complex system that displayed figures that 
1077 Developed internally by the team responsible for the 
respondedd differently depending on the user's position.108 Both prototypes showed 
zonee and other newMetropolis 
thatt as long as the cause and effect were too obvious, users tended to ignore the 
contentt of the images, and tried instead to understand the technology behind the 
1088 Developed by an external electronics specialist. The 
system.. As a consequence of these preliminary findings, we decided to approach a 
samee system was subsequently used for the interac-
groupp of multi-media artists who could add another conceptual dimension to the 
tivee labyrinth in the Children's Area 
activity,, instead of continuing to try to develop the whole interactive system oursel-
ves.. After protracted negotiations, we contracted the Italian group Studio Azzurro, 
whoo had been one of the pioneers of interactive media art, and had several times 
beenn the winner of the prestigious Ars Electronica prize for interactive media. They 
proposedd a programme entitled 'il Giardino delle Anime' - the Garden of Souls. 
Thee Garden of Souls is an interactive environment in which images are projected on 
1300 
a large, crescent-shaped white carpet by video-projectors suspended overhead. 

Eachh projector creates an image approximately 2 x 3 metres, giving a total inter-
activee surface of approximately 9x4 metres. Under each image are an array of more 
thann 30 sensors that signal the presence of a user anywhere on the carpet. This 
'interactivee carpet' is shielded along its back side by three large vertical scrims, 
whichh serve to define the space into two distinct areas. In its idle state, the carpet 
showss only images of rippled water. When a visitor steps on the carpet, the silhou-
ettee of a naked human figure appears out of the water, moves, and freezes. Sub-
sequentt motion by the visitor causes the figure to respond. All actions on the carpet 
aree linked to atonal musical sequences. Although they appear to be a single sur-
face,, the six blocks are largely independent, and can respond to up to 20 visitors at 
anyy given time. There is no linear narrative, although certain sequences are linked 
too others. Over 300 micro-sequences of 3 - 6 seconds were filmed, each correspon-
dingg very allusively to an episode in the Greek myth of Ariadne, 
Theseus,, and the Minotaur. At certain moments (about four times 
ann hour), the images all freeze, and a 45 second 'dream sequence 
iss projected on the vertical screens. At other moments, in response 
too certain kinds of visitor activity, the images freeze, and the carpet 
iss engulfed by images of flames, which turn to smoke, and then to 
waterr again to recommence the cycle. 
Ass an interactive work of art in a public exhibition space, there were always que-
stionss about how visitors would respond. Studio Azzurro had presented similar 
piecess in the past, but only in art gallery or art museum settings, where the number 
off visitors was far less than at newMetropolis (which can have over 2000 visitors in 
thee building at any given time). From the outset we were concerned that with large 
numberss of visitors on the carpet at once, they would be unable to identify the con-
sequencess of their own activity, thereby receiving no feedback. We were also 
concernedd about the length of the sequences initiated by the visitor - if they were 
tooo long, the visitor's activity was reduced to being a human switch, unlocked a pre-
determinedd narrative. 
Too a certain extent, our concerns proved to be well-founded. The Garden of Souls 
iss an effective, powerful, and emotional work of art, and is a unique experience for 
aa science centre, and thus fully meets newMetropolis's goal of signalling the im-
portancee of human activity, and the zone's goal of expressing the importance of 
thee emotions to Humanity. However, the experience falls short of expectations in 
severall regards. 

First,, it is difficult to understand. Many visitors do not understand 
thee carpet is interactive, and walk across it without noticing the 
changingg images. Even when they do understand that their action 
initiatess a change, they do not know what kind of change to expect. 
Thee convention of the image freezing, and of visitor motion to 'un-
freeze'' it, is not understood by many visitors, and leads to frustrated 
activityy such as stamping on the image, jumping up and down, etc. 
Thee fact that the image does not actually respond to the visitor, but merely moves, 
iss often unsatisfying. At a future date, it is planned to create a live interactive opera, 
whereinn live actors playing the silhouettes can see the visitors 'above' them, and 
respondd to their presence in real time. In addition to being a performance, this would 
havee the secondary advantage of testing whether direct feedback enhances visitor 
activityy with the carpet. 
Second,, its capacity is limited. As we had suspected, when there are too many 
peoplee on the carpet, there is no way of determining which visitor action caused 
whatt effect, reducing the carpet to a horizontal projection screen for images of naked 
bodies.. In the early weeks of newMetropolis, visitor numbers were so great that 
wee considered adding additional 'soft' restraints, such as the restriction that visi-
torss should remove their shoes before walking on the carpet. Visitor numbers 
decreasedd after the first month, and there is no longer a need for this restriction. 
Mostt of the time the number of visitors on the carpet is low enough for visitors to 
seee the consequences of their actions. 
Third,, interaction is constrained. Despite the enormous, if not infinite, number of 
combinationss possible with the over 300 sequences, each sequence is nevertheless 
pre-determined.. The longer the sequence, the longer the visitor has no control over 
thee image. In the case of the longest sequences (18 - 20 seconds) the visitor is re-
ducedd to being a human switch, turning on a mini show. This oscillation between 
thee roles of actor and spectator is even more acute in the case of the dream 
sequences,, which interrupt visitor activity quite brutally, freezing the images on the 
carpett with a 45-second three-screen episode. Also, due to the way in which the 
sequencess were filmed and the computer programmed, it takes a short time for the 
carpett to respond to the visitor, and for an image to sensibly change. As in the Ball 
Factoryy described above, any lag between action and feedback results in frustra-
tionn and confusion, and often prompts chaotic behaviour such as stamping, jum-
ping,, or disinterest. 
132 2 

Inn the case of the Garden of Souls (also called the 'Living Carpet') tl 
doo not mean the experience is a failure. In fact, some quite delight 
unlockedd by the carpet for reasons quite unforeseen by the design 
off having chosen carpet as a projection surface (a decision made 
designn process for reasons of maintenance) we find many visitors, e 
children,, instead of stepping on the figures, lie down beside them 
actions,, playing with their own silhouettes and those of the figun 
fromm one square to another to see what happens. Still others try 
too capture the projected images in their hands. Perhaps one of the 
greatestt strengths of the experience is its capacity for virtually 
unlimitedd play-without an explicitly-defined user-language, but 
ann implicitly vast potential to create change - the visitor can 
generatee an infinite amount of variety without in any way detrac-
tingg from the experience of the whole, for herself or for others. 
Thee second ring of the Humanity zone is divided into four clusters, grouped on either 
sidee of an island of computer stations that allow visitors to conduct a range of 
psychologicall tests. The clusters treat the themes 'Thinking', 'Feeling', 'Imagining', 
andd 'Interacting with one another'. Each of the clusters has a series of activities and 
puzzless that challenge the visitor to explore the ways in which the human mind 
operates. . 
Thee text strategy of the Humanity zone is unusual insofar as the main texts were 
writtenn in the 'classic' third-person voice of the expert, in this case the Humanity 
zone'ss researcher Diana Issidorides, whose PhD is in psychology. However, to avoid 
givenn the impression that the texts were meant to be authoritative, we invited 
psychologistss Jonathan Miller and Richard Gregory (and their Dutch counterparts) 
too comment on the texts, and we incorporated their comments verbatim as a 'gloss' 
onn the main texts, even when these comments directly contradicted the text itself. 
Forr instance, to a text about body language, in which Diana had written that the body 
wass silently speaking, Jonathan Miller responded 'I feel this contains a recurring 
errorr that should be put right. Although undeniably the body communicates - is it 
rightt to say it is silently talking? The whole point... is that it is unlike a language -
no-onee can say I gestured ungrammatically.' This gloss was placed adjacent to 
thee main text. 
Manyy of the exhibits derive from those developed by Dr. Caryl Marsh for The 
PsychologyPsychology Show, such as the rotating heads that challenge visitors to match facial 
133
lesee drawbacks 
full behaviour is 
team.. By virtue 
quitee late in the 
speciallyy young 
andd mimic their 
js.. Others jump 

featuress to emotional states, and the exhibit on obedience, which indicates two 
entrances,, on for foreigners, and one for natives, both leading to a video presen-
tationn of the Milgram experiment conducted in the 40s. In this zone are also found 
exhibitss on perception and illusions that can be seen in many other science centres. 
Severall exhibits are completely new, and have proven to be highly successful. 
Thee Test Yourself' stations, featuring short psychological tests developed in con-
junctionn with the Rijksuniversiteit in Groningen, are always occupied, and visitors 
tendd to stay at them for a considerable length of time. 
Thee exhibit 'Love is' allows visitors to record a short video clip of their comments 
onn the nature of love. The last nine visitors' comments are also available on the 
screenn for review, thus allowing visitors to respond to other visitor's comments. 
Whenn the exhibit was prototyped, we had been concerned about the possibility 
off irrelevant, unstructured, and anti-social comments, having seen from visitor 
commentt books the way in which a single obscenity can prompt a string of similar 
comments.. On the other hand, we opted for a subject about which visitors could be 
expectedd to feel strongly, and thus hoped that this would provide enough structure 
too avoid too much 'noise'. In practice there has been very little chaotic use of the 
exhibit,, and visitors discuss their opinions among themselves before committing 
themm to video. 
Thee exhibit 'Feel the music' also lived up to the expectations we formed during the 
prototypingg phase. In this exhibit visitors listen to two different pieces of music, and 
thenn determine whether the music was rough or smooth, warm or cool, sweet or 
sour,, etc. The prototype of this exhibit was extremely successful, with over 100 
visitorss filling out their conclusions in just under six hours. The final version seems 
equallyy successful, and elicits a high degree of co-operation, discussion, and com-
parison. . 
Consistentlyy we observe a very high degree of engagement with all of the exhibits 
inn the Humanity zone, due in targe part to the use of the user-language of problems', 
andd that visitors are prepared to invest a large amount of time in order to explore a 
subjectt of deep personal interest - themselves. 
134 4 

Interactions: Interactions: 
USERUSER LANGUAGE: games 
TEXTTEXT STRATEGY: 
second-person 
-- non-narrative 
-- characters (Supertankers) 
TARGETTARGET GROUP: 
10 - 14-olds 
Thee thematic zone Interactions is aimed primarily at younger teenagers, and com-
prisess three linked computer games sharing a concern with interactions, or ex-
change.. In theoretical terms, all three illustrate the properties of dynamic systems -
'Financiall Transactions' ('Superbankers') places an emphasis on equilibrium. 
Telecommunicationss ('Get Connected'), on flow, and Mobility ('On the Road') on 
capacity.. All three take advantage of the user-language of games - Superbankers and 
Onn the Road were conceived from the outset as finite games with closure rules and 
aa time limit, Get Connected was conceived as what Carse calls an infinite game, 
althoughh subsequent modifications have rendered it more like a a conventional game 
thann what was originally intended. Superbankers and Get Connected are described 
inn detail below. 
Superbankerss is a game about money. Money is at the heart of the 
globall economy - making it, investing it, spending it. Superbankers 
lookss at the skills needed by modern banking. The entire area is a 
singlee game comprised of several individual computer games. The 
playerr has Dfl 50 000 and fifteen minutes to make as much money as 
hee can by using a combination of the computer games. Each of the in-
dividuall games is computer-based, and treats a different activity in the 
spectrumm of creating wealth - from work, through saving, investment, and specu-
lation,, all the way to counterfeiting. In the central trading ring, visitors are put in the 
shoess of a broker, and see how information and events influence the behaviour of 
threee very different markets: tulips, cattle and currency futures. A tulip market is 
affectedd by local information, a cattle market by European information, and the stock 
market,, by global information. Thus a cold winter may spell disaster for tulip prices, 
whilee an earthquake in Tokyo may ravage the value of your KLM shares. The player 
iss coached through the game by a pair of video hosts, who suggest different strate-
giess and comment on the player's performance. In the final analysis, however, it's 
thee player who calls the shots. 
135 5 

Afterr two weeks of operation, it was clear that this game still needed a great deal 
off development. However, certain things were quite clear. First of all, the user must 
bee aware that the entire set of games comprises a single, large game - something 
neitherr common, nor immediately obvious. Second, despite their relationship in the 
greaterr game, the obstacles in each of the individual games must be minimised. 
Thiss is particularly apparent in the trading ring. As originally designed, it mirrored 
thee real trading floor, and is played in rounds, or 'rings' of three minutes. This meant 
thatt players entering during a round had to wait until the next round begins. Moreo-
ver,, as the larger game would have that you can only trade what you have earned, 
playerss are discouraged from beginning with the trading ring. 
Fromm the outset, it was clear that our visitors had different expectations. They wan-
tedd to start with the trading ring, and they wanted to start right away. The archi-
tecturee of the zone clearly suggests first, that the ring is the central element, and 
second,, that it can be played with others - and clearly the conclusions visitors draw 
fromm these clues mitigate against playing the game the way its designers had 
originallyy imagined. In fact, real use has pointed out to the designers the contra-
dictoryy messages being sent by the exhibition architecture, the graphics, and the 
ruless of play. 
Ourr first step, therefore, was to reconcile these contradictions and 
modifyy the game so it takes advantage of the user's intuitive respon-
ses.. This we did by making the trading ring a continuous market, 
thuss allowing players to enter the market at any time, and to begin 
playy as soon as they wish. The effect was striking, and immediate. The 
Tradingg Ring, instead of having a handful of participants trying to 
understandd the rules, was packed continuously by players at every 
station,, buying, selling, trading. The change was so remarkable in the Tulip Market 
(thee game newMetropolis opened with), that the Stock Market was modified to allow 
thee same continuous play, and has subsequently shown the same success. As the 
1099 The server that co-ordinates the computer games 
gamee is played by using a magnetic strip card that identifies the player, we can now 
allowss us to monitor the behaviour of game users, 
seee that a large percentage of players understand the game, and use the different 
andd shows that a large majority of users play several 
stationss to accumulate more money.109 We have also noticed that several players 
games,, and stay for long periods of time. A complete 
havee already bought year subscriptions to newMetropolis, and come regularly to 
analysiss of the data collected during the first year of 
playy the game (this is happening with all of the games throughout the institution, 
operationn is pending 
eachh game having its own devotees). A further endorsement of the success of the 
Superbankerss game is the attention it has attracted in the professional community 
136 6 

-- in 1998 it was awarded the top prize for interaction design at Hannover's presti-
giouss CeBit conference. 
Gett Connected is a network of computerr stations, each equipped with 
itss own video camera and microphone which allows players to com-
municatee with each other. The central feature of this area is an inter-
activee game based on 'Quartet' (the English equivalent is 'Fish') 
developedd in conjunction with MediaLab and former MIT MediaLab 
studentt Mike Murtaugh. In this game players negotiate with each 
otherr to exchange 'cards' to complete different sets, using a dynamic 
interfacee which responds to their choices and prompts new ones. 11  In the original 
versionn the cards carried images that corresponded to sets such as flags, wild cats, 
1100 The original software interface derived from the 
towers,, and so on. Every card belonged to at least two sets. For instance a flag of 
workk Mike Murtaugh had done with his thesis advisor, 
Spainn could belong to the set 'flags' or the set 'Spanish'. A Picasso painting could 
Gloriannaa Davenport 
belongg to the set 'art' or the set 'Spanish.' This game was intended to be inherently 
moree open than Superbankers, and was designed so the player could adapt his 
activityy to suit the circumstances. If there are fewer than ten players in the ring, the 
emptyy places are played by intelligent agents - 'phantom' players. 
Inn many significant ways. Get Connected is among the closest newMetropolis has 
comee to creating an environment in which the activity - and its content - is com-
pletelyy user-driven. Get Connected registers every player's activity, and makes this 
activityy available to other users. At the same time, the user decides for himself 
amongg an unlimited number of strategies for game play - the players are free to 
shapee the game in any way the wish, regardless of the original assumptions of 
thee designers. This open-ended, endlessly modifiable game structure, which can be 
continuedd as long as there are players to play it, we hoped would get close to what 
Carsee calls an 'infinite game.' And, just as Superbankers starts with the trade as 
thee fundamental unit of financial transactions, in the centre of the circle of video-
conferencedd computers in Get Connected is a circular bench around which people 
cann sit. In the centre of the circle are projected surprising and sometimes startling 
images,, which we hope will prompt people to initiate conversations - the funda-
mentall act of communication. 
Ourr experience with the first 50 000 visitors again showed us the importance of the 
userr understanding, and more importantly, appropriating, the intention of the 
activity.. When the game was first put on the floor, the emphasis was on the process 
off exchange. An introductory sequence explained the 'rules of the game', how to 
137 

makee sets, how to exchange, and established a value for each successful exchange, 
inn one of four languages. After very little time it was clear that the experience was 
confusing.. The user was not prepared to follow the introduction, and was more 
interestedd in using the microphone and video link to contact other players than in 
playingg the game. This in itself we took to be a positive signal, and in fact we ob-
servedd teenagers using the video links to flirt with each other. In one case a teenage 
girll covered up the video lens when contacted by an unknown young man - in 
anotherr case we saw a young couple chatting briefly, an hour later we saw them 
spooningg in a corner. Clearly the exhibit could be called a success - at least in some 
respects! ! 
Thiss phenomenon should not be underestimated. We had learned to our chagrin in 
thee Hotseat! theatre in Mine Games how difficult it was to get people who did not 
knoww each other to collaborate openly. Hotseat! proved to be a remarkable success 
whenn the participants all knew each other, or were drawn from similar backgrounds 
-- in short, with groups of homogeneous users, such as school classes or families. 
Onn the other hand, it was a complete failure with heterogeneous groups such as 
aa normal Saturday afternoon science centre audience. At least in North America (and 
evenn more in Europe) visitors are extremely reluctant to initiate contact with stran-
gers.. In Get Connected, the first thing we noticed is the willingness to make contact 
-- when 'masked' by the interface of video and computer screen. This phenomenon 
off masking has already noticed on the Internet, where there is extensive evidence 
off users disguising their identity, secure in the knowledge that their correspondent 
wass unable reveal their deception. In Get Connected, the correspondent may be 
sittingg directly behind you, no further than 5 metres away, so the possibilities for 
deceptionn are dramatically reduced. Nevertheless, the fact of having a screen, and 
off having a certain psychological, if not physical, distance from the other players, 
createss the conditions for overcoming an obstacle that has dogged the museum 
sincee its inception. 
Wee soon saw that users seized on the idea of making contact, and 
thatt they engaged quickly in communicating with each other - and 
thatt contact was sustained. What was missing, however, was a clear 
andd intuitive understanding of the latent possibilities of the ex-
change,, of structuring the nature of the contact. The graphic interface 
wass modified several times to make the exchange process more clear. 
Thee cards of the other players were displayed more easily, the cards 
too be exchanged were highlighted, the length and complexity of the 
138 8 

introductionn were reduced. None of these modifications seemed to increase the 
amountt of structured activity among users. The game was originally based on the 
Dutchh children's game 'Quartet', but at the time it was felt that this was too simple 
aa structure to maintain user interest, hence the decision to create sets of images cor-
respondingg to various social and cultural categories. In this regard we appear to ha-
vee been mistaken - the problem appeared to be the unnecessary complexity intro-
ducedd by the additional designer-invented (rather than user-driven) card categories. 
Wee decided to take a drastic measure. We replaced the sets of images with real cards 
-- from ace to ten, in the four suits. Almost immediately we noticed an increase in 
structuredd and sustained activity. Visitors whose microphone failed could be heard 
too shout to other visitors 'I'm looking for tens!'. Clearly the users understood what 
setss were and how they could make them. Another modification also increased 
structuredd activity. This was to replace rewarding players with points for making 
sets,, with a time reward. The user was given a fixed amount of time in units on her 
'phonecard'' to start with, and the number of units decreased with time. More units 
couldd be added to the card by successfully completing sets. These changes were 
implementedd only a few days ago, but the increase in activity, co-operation, en-
gagement,, and concentration is very noticeable. Some players now manage to stay 
inn the ring over twenty minutes, and we soon began to notice repeat users (who 
purchasedd year subscriptions) coming in regularly to play the game. 
Thee developer primarily responsible for the game, Mike Murtaugh, drew the following 
conclusions: : 
InIn sum, the major conceptual changes to the game involved reducing the amount of 
informationinformation that needed to be explicitly communicated to the participant. By relying 
onon cultural knowledge of card games, and simplifying the two core activities of the 
gamegame - making person-to-person connections and exchanging cards - we reduced the 
needneed for additional mechanisms to request and receive information (e.g. clickable 
'category''category' labels, text prompts to indicate incoming and outgoing calls or 'exchange 
state').state'). As a result, we saw a dramatic shift in the focus of the experience from its 
mechanismsmechanisms to its larger purpose as a game. 
InIn casual observation of the initial installation, players seemed primarily focused on how 
toto connect to another player. Visitors would sit down and immediately attempt to 
contactcontact another station by clicking on its number. When no result appeared to occur, 
playersplayers would tend to begin frantically clicking on other stations in an attempt to 'make 
139 

somethingsomething happen.' Eventually, if and when a connection was established, p
werewere excited and satisfied (particularly if they knew the other player). This pleasure o
simplysimply making a video connection seemed for some visitors (particularly young chil
ren)ren) sufficient to justify the apparently 'mysterious operation' of the underlying system. 
OnceOnce connected, players tended to exhibit 'unfocused' social activity - either nervous
lyly acknowledging a stranger or (most frequently) making broad visual gestures, parti-
cularlycularly if they knew the other player. Finally, players were for the most part not talki
aboutabout the game elements (the countries or themes) and not making (intentional) ex
changes. changes. 
WithWith the addition of the standard playing cards and the phone card, however, this 
"'Takenn from an internal memo evaluating the changes 
behaviourbehaviour was observed to dramatically change. Players immediately were h
madee to the Get Connected game during the first 
talkingtalking about elements of the game ('heb je een seven voor mij?', etc.) Connection
monthss of operation 
betweenbetween players were much better understood to be a part of a larger task, and play
seemedseemed more comfortable (and focused) when connected. By reducing the visibility
1111 Additional research also suggests that players also 
thethe game mechanics, players were able to focus on the game itself which, in turn, 
makee the connection between the game-like activity 
providedprovided a justification and purpose to the activity of making the connections.111 
off trading cards to broader social issues of new 
technology,, privacy of information, and teleworking. 
Whatt conclusions can we draw from this experiment? Most importantly, it seems 
seee Hillegers, E. Het thema telecommunicatie in 
thatt in any activity based on the user-language of games, further constraints on the 
newMetropoiis:newMetropoiis: Een stageverslag. Cultuur- en 
activityy do not seem to hinder it, in fact, they often seem to unlock activity and 
wetenschapsstudiess Universiteit Maastricht; 
increasee the quality of the interaction, providing the intent behind the constraints is 
Decemberr 1997 
clearlyy communicated. Moreover, by making information available to users as they 
needd it, in this case by means of the video link to other players, creates the possibi-
1,11 This collaboration was launched in September 1998, 
lityy of sustained play. In all cases, the user-language of games, by creating the 
usingg a new graphic interface which returned to the 
propertyy of other players and actorship, supports the possibility of sustained, self-
originall 'Quartet' cards (which are illustrated) in 
directedd play.11Z 
orderr to facilitate play over a narrowband line, which 
madee it difficult to communicate in real time. As the 
Inn March 1998, in collaboration with the French Cité de la Science et de ('Industrie, 
gamee is well known in both countries, and the illust-
wee began implementing a broadband, realtime connection Amsterdam/Paris, 
rationss used already a part of an existing cultural 
whereinn players in both cities could exchange cards freely, playing in 'mirror' 
practicee (as opposed to being inventions of the 
sites.1133 It is hoped that the next step will be to extend the game to users on the In-
designer)) the game still seems to work effectively 
ternet,, who will be able to join in the play in Amsterdam from sites around the world. 
Actua: Actua: 
USERUSER LANGUAGE: problems 
TEXTTEXT STRATEGY: 
third-person 
non-narrativenon-narrative access to information resources 
1400 
TARGET GROUP: 
all ages 

Ass a one of the key aspects of its mission, newMetropolis was to be a 'kennis 
centrum'' - a knowledge centre where people could come to just find out about the 
worldd around them. As a knowledge centre, newMetropolis was organised along 
twoo main axes - 'Labour*, and the 'News'. These themes were used to organise 
opportunitiess throughout the building for visitors to get information about scientific 
andd technological issues. It was hoped that visitors would come to expect new-
Metropoliss to be a source of information about what is new in the world of science 
andd technology, and how to make sense out of the vast amount of information avai-
lablee by means of the modern media. Equally important was the importance of stay-
ingg up to date, and signalling to the visitor that whenever they returned to new-
Metropoliss there would be new, up to date information. 
Centrall to the concept of newMetropolis was the belief that the exhibits should 
placee their emphasis on communicating skills rather than information - on conf-
erringg actorship. This emphasis stemmed in part as a response to the traditional 
museumm approach that saw information as an end in itself, with the role of the 
museumm as the broadcaster of that information. In contrast to most educational 
games,, which treat the information itself as the reward for the activity, new-
Metropolis;,, information alone was seen as a secondary outcome of engagement 
withh intrinsically rewarding activities, rather than the reward for those activities. As 
aa consequence, we developed our exhibits as games and puzzles (employing the 
user-languagess of problems and games) whose first goal was to be compelling and 
enjoyable,, rather than be sources of information. 
Nevertheless,, given our commitment to the library-model of use, we recognised that 
informationn was essential to support visitors in their exploration of new experien-
ces,, and that this information should be available when and in whatever detail the 
visitorr needed. In most museums, the amount of information available to the visi-
torr is limited by several factors. In every institution, there are limits to the curators' 
knowledge,, their desire to communicate, and to the institutional structure to create 
neww information. There are also significant technical constraints to the traditional 
media.. There are limits to the amount of information that could be put on traditio-
nall supports such as text panels. There are limits to the changes that can be easily 
madee to printed text, images, and videos. There are often budget limits how often 
printedd text panels and videos can be changed to bring them up to date. 
Alll these constraints have been largely overcome by the development of global 
informationn networks, collectively known as the Internet. As a consequence, the 
141 

Internett plays a central role in newMetropolis's information strategy, not only as 
aa technical support, but as a key determinant of information strategy. newMetro-
polis'ss information strategy operates at several levels - for the visitor, for distance 
users,, and for the staff. The vehicle for the newMetropolis information strategy is 
thee 'Actua' [short for 'Actualiteit', or 'news'] system - an internal and external in-
formationn network. 
Actuaa is not a thematic zone like those described above. The Actua corners are styled 
onn a common feature found in most Amsterdam cafés - the reading table. In new-
Metropolis,, these tables host networked computer stations which show daily up-
datedd face of newMetropolis, presenting what's happening now in the field of 
science,, technology, industry, and society, and the homepage is divided clearly 
intoo two halves - 'inside' and 'outside'. The outside half provides direct structured 
accesss to a variety of information sources including CNN, the Volkskrant, Wired 
magazine,, via the Internet. The inside information gives up-to-date schedules of 
eventss and demonstrations, as well as providing a global orientation to exhibits in 
thee building. Using a three-dimensional rendering of each floor, the visitor can click 
onn any exhibit in newMetropolis to bring up information about that exhibit. Each 
pagee provides specific links to Internet information resources relating to issues in 
thee news, changes to the nature of work, and background information about the 
sciencee and technology underlying the exhibit. In addition, the visitor can select 
'workshop'' and suggest modifications, text changes, or other activities, and send 
themm directly to newMetropolis development staff. 
Actuaa terminals also support a range of other activities to promote discussion and 
debates.. In the autumn of 1997 four of the terminals were dedicated to a debate con-
ductedd by the Ministry of Agriculture and Land Use (the VROM) on the future of 
1144 Research was conducted by Judith van Schaik under 
Hollandd in 2030. On these terminals visitors could listen to a selection of points of 
thee supervision of Jeanine de Bruin, to be published 
view,, and having heard at least four, vote for a possible future scenario. To support 
inn English in late 1998, see below 
directt visitor participation we developed a unique interface that allows visitors to 
typee in their comments while listening to a video interview, thus providing imme-
diatee feedback, and information about visitor responses to particular positions. The 
researchh report based on this experiment was presented to the Visitor Studies 
Associationn in August 1998. m 
Thee 'interface' between the institution and the outside world is managed by a 
speciall team at newMetropolis whose task is to balance the information needs from 
1422 
the 'inside' with the offer of information available 'outside'. The team is responsible 

forr retrieving the latest news and the relevant information to display in the Actua 
Hoeken.. The sources can be news wires, Internet sites, TV stations, etc. The team is 
alsoo responsible for bringing the 'pulse' of the real debates and discussions in 
sciencee into newMetropolis. The Actua corners are only one use of this informa-
tionn - the entire staff profits from this constant 'open window' to information 
providedd by the Actua team to shape the development of new programmes, 
demonstrations,, exhibitions, and 'pop-up' acts. 
Sincee newMetropolis opened in June 1997, the Actua terminals have played a far 
moree important role than originally expected. Originally designed to be an infor-
mationn resource (a role they perform exceptionally well), they are increasingly 
usedd as a communication tool: from visitors to staff, from floor staff to development 
staff,, and from development staff to both floor staff and visitors. 
Byy August 1997, just two months after opening, over 60 comments from visitors and 
floorr staff were being received daily from the Actua terminals. Visitor comments 
comee directly, and are answered by letter. Comments from floor staff are responded 
too by development staff, and the responses posted on a special page. This resulted 
inn an extraordinary degree of awareness of the operation of the exhibits on the part 
off the development staff, and has given an important voice to floor staff in making 
comments,, criticisms, and suggestions for exhibit modification. In effect this allows 
newMetropoliss to continue to function as an experimental prototype while conti-
nuingg to be a public institution. It also injected a degree of reflexiveness into what 
iss often a rigid and unresponsive 'top-down' process of floorstaff having to accept 
thee consequences of development staff's experiments. This involvement of floorstaff 
intoo the development process has been further enhanced by including floorstaff in 
thee development of all new products and programmes. 
Iff the Actua corners have had a failing it is in the fact that there are too few of them. 
Whenn the building is crowded, there is intense competition for the eighteen com-
puters,, and often they are monopolised by teenagers, preventing adult users from 
gainingg access to information. As a consequence, adults frequently complain that 
theree is little forthem, seeing only the game-like exhibitions, and unaware of the vast 
informationn resources available on the Actua terminals. 
Afterr the first three months of operation, what were we able to conclude, however 
provisionally,, from the experiment conducted by the author at newMetropolis? First 
off all, we can make the following observations with a high degree of certainty: 
143 

VISITORSS SPEND A LONGER TIME WITH THE EXHIBITS. Just days after new-
Metropoliss opened, we were struck by the fact that visitors seemed to be spending 
longerr at the exhibits than in other science centres we knew. This finding was born 
outt by the results of our first visitor surveys, implemented both on the Actua ter-
minalss and on clipboards beside exhibits, that showed 155 visitors out of 210 de-
claringg to have played exhibits for longer than 5 minutes, of whom 80 said they 
playedd iongerthan 20 minutes with a single exhibit. This figure can be compared to 
researchh done on other science centres11S that shows an average engagement with 
1155 see Wake, D. A. end Mitchell, J. An informal study 
traditionally-designedd hands-on exhibits of under two minutes. This sustained 
off visitor behaviour at two exhibits, unpublished 
engagement,, which can be attributed largely to the user-languages of the labels, and 
researchh paper, Toronto: Ontario Science Centre; 
too the 'bottom-up' approach based on putting the exhibitions in context, can be con-
1987 7 
sideredd powerful evidence in favour of the theory outlined in the pages above. 
VISITORSS COLLABORATE WITH ONE ANOTHER. Another striking finding was that 
ourr exhibits were successful in encouraging visitors to collaborate with one another, 
mostt often with family and friends, but also, notably in the case of Get Connected, 
withh other previously unknown visitors. The survey showed that over half of our 
visitorss collaborated with others visitors, and over 20% collaborated with visitors 
otherr than family and friends. Given that one of the four key objectives of our ex-
hibitss was to encourage collaboration, this can be seen as a success. This success 
alsoo indicates that the user-languages of problems and games, both of which 
conferr actorship, support interaction with other users, a finding we had observed as 
earlyy as 1988 at the Puzzle Table at the Ontario Science Centre. 
COMPUTERR GAMES ARE CREATING REPEAT USERS. Even after a matter of a few 
weekss of operations, and despite the inevitable software problems associated with 
neww computer games, floor staff began to report repeat users of all the main com-
puterr games - the three games in the Interactions zone, and the Tanker Game116 
"•• see Kramer, J., Pereira, P., en Wacano, C. 
inn the Energy zone. These users, mostly teenage boys (although the On the Road 
Lifee is a tankergame: Psychology or philosophy, 
gamee seems to have a following among young women) had already decided to 
Socialee psychologie Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam; 
investt in year's subscriptions to newMetropolis and were coming three and four 
Marchh 1998 
timess a week to play specific games. This was initially seen as a problem, as these 
userss tended to prevent other visitors from playing, but staff are preparing a pro-
grammee whereby they are given extra playing time after closing hours, in return for 
coachingg new players on how to use the games. 
CREATINGG STRUCTURE UNLOCKS ACTIVITY. In the case of games, constraining and 
1444 
clarifying the rules seem to have the effect of stimulating variation, rather than 

limitingg it. This was particularly the case in the Get Connected game, described 
above,, where the game had to be drastically simplified before it became a self-
sustaining,, user-driven activity, and it also seems true in the case of other game-
likee exhibits. Games seem to invite variety by constraining the conditions under 
whichh the variety occurs. If the rules are too complex, the goals unclear, or the play 
tooo open-ended, confusion and frustration seem to result. However, if the goal of 
thee game is clear (whether implicit or explicit), and the rules for playing accessible, 
thee user-language of games clearly supports sustained, self-directed activity. 
USERSS SOMETIMES NEED MORE INFORMATION TO STRUCTURE THEIR ACTI-
VITY.. Visitors need to know what the goal of the activity is, and what to do to use it 
successfully.. Providing too little information, rather than opening up possibilities, 
seemss to inhibit them, and results in frustration and confusion. This need for in-
formationn was observed most acutely in exhibits relying on the user-languages of 
observationn or variables. In the case of the Ripple Tank (in the Science zone) for 
instance,, we had deliberately avoided creating a device that would make the re-
quiredd waves for the experiments, believing that visitors would have a richer expe-
riencee if they made the waves themselves, then examined their behaviour. Instead, 
nott knowing what kind of wave was required in order to observe the properties of 
waves,, the visitor was unable to make the exhibit 'work'. We have now included a 
'"" cited above 
smalll device that makes regular waves, and an illustration of what a regular wave-
1WW cited abovo 
formm looks like, and visitors are now seen experimenting with the effects of boun-
cingg waves off different surfaces, which is indeed the activity the exhibit is meant to 
" • H o m n ,, C. van Private pretplaatsen: 
support. . 
OverOver privatisering, vermaak en veiligheid. 
scriptiee sociologie, UvA, 1997 
Ourr certainty has now increased with the passage of a full year of operations, and 
duringg the first year, the observations sketched above have been largely confirmed 
1"" Schaik. J. van Argumenteren en debatteren 
byy newMetropolis researchers - over a dozen graduate students have made new-
overover da toekomst Argumenteren en debatteren 
Metropoliss exhibits the subject of their research, which has included several 'eind-
overover de toekomst van Nederland met behulp 
scripties'' (Master's theses). Specific exhibits researched include the 'Get Connected' 
vanvan het videodebat 'Nederland 20301 in newMetropolis, 
game1177 in the Interactions zone, the Tanker Game "• in the Energy zone, the use of 
Januaryy 1998 
thee newMetropolis roof as a social space m , the effectiveness of the Actua compu-
terss in supporting debate about the future of Holland120, and the effectiveness of the 
1,11 Tjong, A. Evaluatie starterskit basisvorming 
Starter'ss Kits in supporting high school teachers and their students.121 
enen basisonderwijs, Communicatiewetenschap, 
Universiteitt van Amsterdam; May 1998 
Fromm the experience described above, I would argue that if we see museums as 
supportt systems, and their labels as supports that implement specific user-
languages,, we are in a position to make more effective exhibitions, and, as a con- 
145 

sequence,, better museums. Let us recall De Zeeuw's definition of the features of a 
supportt system: a support system is open to any individual without any form of prior 
constraintt other than the desire to use the system to maintain or increase their 
competence.. A support system suggests to users a specific form of use, and pos-
siblee extensions to this use, where a flow of information will provide the user with 
thee additional resources needed, and, at the same time, be available to other users. 
AA support system has only linguistic constraints on the information flow, and these 
constraintss constitute the 'user-language' of the support system. A support system 
supportss the activities of the user, which stem from the user's own interests, expe-
riencee and existing competence. A support system does not impose a model of the 
user,, nor a model for the activities or the variation brought by the user. A support 
systemm maximises variety on the part of the users, and maximises the continued use 
off the support system in such a way that this activity is augmented and encouraged. 
Inn this way, the support system serves as a means of recognising, responding to and 
enhancingg the user's competences. 
Seenn in this way, newMetropolis can be clearly described as a support system. It suc-
ceedss by putting the emphasis on the user - not by modelling him in advance, but, 
likee a good library, allowing for and supporting the activity of an infinite number of 
unknownn and unknowable future users by creating labels. User-languages, when im-
plementedd as labels in a context relevant to the user, consistently confer specific and 
predictablee properties. By implementing user-languages that confer actorship -
thee user-language of problems, in the case of the library, augmented by the user-
languagee of games, in the case of newMetropolis, these labels support their un-
knownn and unknowable users. The success of newMetropolis serves to confirm the 
usefulnesss of the theory described above in creating new kinds of labels and 
ultimately,, new kinds of museums. 
146 6 

5.. Conclusions 
5.11 Summary 
Thee last decade has been marked by an explosion of interest in museums, in mu-
seumm buildings, and in literature about museums. Visitor attendance to museums 
{inn terms of pure numbers) has risen dramatically, and new museums have been 
builtt in most major European cities, including Barcelona, Amsterdam, Bilbao, and 
Lisbon.. The critical literature about museums, once comparatively scarce (with the 
exceptionn of catalogues of collections) has mushroomed, and not a week seems to 
goo by without a new addition to the now vast literature on the role of museums in 
society,, the history of museums, or museum practice. 
Mostt of the current literature about the museum field falls into one of two broad 
categoriess critical sociology off the museum as an institution, and museum practice. 
Inn the first category we find books with titles such as Museums and the Shaping of 
Knowledge,, The New Museology, Civilizing Rituals, and On the Museum's Ruins. 
Muchh of the literature is papers harvested at conferences and bound together 
inn book form, some of it is new writing, but often derivative of other disciplines, 
Frenchh post-structuralist thought (in particular the works of Michel Foucault) being 
amongg the most recent intellectual fashions to shape the museum discourse and the 
discoursee about museums. 
Inn the second category are books such as Exhibit Labels, Museums and their Visi-
tors,, and Beyond the Blueprint. This literature often takes the form of 'how to' 
manualss - how to write labels, how to make hands-on exhibits, how to create a new 
institution.. This category is supplemented by the now enormous volume of litera-
turee on exhibit evaluation - how to know if the exhibit or exhibition works. But 
exhibitt evaluation (even pre-formative evaluation) is often merely reactive - it tests 
somethingg that it assumes to already exist - visitor attitudes, visitor behaviour, 
exhibitt holding power. It rarely provides results that aim to generate genuinely new 
exhibitionss or exhibition strategies. 
Whatt is startling, as a museum professional, is how little of this immense volume 
off new material actually helps. In the case of the work on the sociology of museums, 
itt is certainly often interesting, even stimulating, and much of it provides an excellent 
criticall analysis of the museum in the present, and an often biting critique of the role 
off the museum in the past. But in terms of practice, what is the result? We go through 
'thee moves' (as a sociologist of my acquaintance calls them), finding the silenced 
147 

voices,, deconstructing the dominant narrative, identifying the presence of absence. 
Andd in the end, what kinds of exhibitions result? For the most part, exactly the 
samee kinds of exhibitions that we have been making for decades. To be sure, the 
contentt of the exhibitions has changed - often dramatically. There are new voices 
inn evidence, new objects on display, new and critical themes explored - we have 
replacedd our museums of heroes with museums of victims - but is this really 
enough?? Has the way in which we make our exhibitions, and our museums, under-
gonee any fundamental change as a result of the new intellectual trends? Has the 
relationshipp of the museum to its user fundamentally changed? 
Inn the case of the second kind of literature - the manuals of museum practice - the 
samee questions can be posed. Do they really help? Most of the manuals indicate 
normss of presentation - develop of a strong storyline, don't use small type sizes, 
makee sure the lighting is properly positioned, and for heaven's sake make sure the 
visitorr exits through the shop! Some manuals go into greater detail - how to iden-
tifyy attractive themes, how to test that the words you use are not too complicated, 
howw to measure type legibility - and how to increase sales in the shop. Never-
theless,, despite this surfeit of useful information, the quality of exhibitions seems 
too remain enormously inconsistent. 
Inn spite of all the good advice, good exhibitions and good exhibition labels seem to 
bee the result - not of a theory of exhibition making - but of individuals. Thus on the 
onee hand, museum practice - in particular making exhibitions - remains largely a 
matterr of individual expertise, raw talent, ad hoc approaches, and time-honoured 
'ruless of thumb'-with a little bit of good luck thrown in. On the other hand, the'work' 
off the visitor is also seen to be a matter of individuals, who are either assumed to 
havee a certain background in order to appreciate the exhibitions created by the 
museum,, or conversely, to lack such a background, in which case the museum 
cann bring to bear the full armament of testing for word length, retention, vocabulary 
etc.,, to ensure that the 'ignorant' visitor 'gets the message' of the exhibition. In either 
case,, the visitor is modelled in advance, and the work of the museum and the work 
off the visitor are seen as unrelated and profoundly independent. 
Inn a paper given in 1989 in Amsterdam, subtitled Truth telling and the Doing of 
, aa Bradburne, J. Truth-tolling and the Doing of Science. 
ScienceScience 122, the author attempted to sketch a provisional history of the scienc
Conferencee Proceedings Mutual Uses of Science and 
museumm as an expression of changes in the history of ideas - notably in the history 
Cybernetics;; Amsterdam: 1989 
off science. The author argued that the seventeenth century emphasis on shared 
1488 
observation, an emphasis that largely defined the modern period, had profoundly 

shapedd the development of all our institutions of informall learning, as the paradigm 
off the natural sciences was appropriated in every field of human activity. The aut-
horr argued further that the resurgence of idealism in the twentieth century, in both 
philosophyy and in the sciences, had prompted a parallel transformation in the 
sciencee museum - and that we were witnessing the birth of a 'third generation' of 
sciencee museums, based on the active practices of doing science, rather than on the 
passivee receiving of science as a canon of accepted truths. Soon afterwards, in a 
paperr written with Drew Ann Wake in 1990 123, we identified what we considered 
™™ Wake, D. A. and Bradburne, J. Paradox Lost 
too be key failures of the new interactive science centres to deliver on their promise 
Rediscoveringg Scientific Creativity, Alliage No.6 
too provide an enriched informal learning environment. Instead of confining our 
criticismm to the realm of conferences on education and policy, we felt compelled 
too put our ideas into practice, by creating new kinds of exhibitions, as described in 
Sectionn 3.2 above. 
Overr the course of the next eight years the questions we posed in 1990 broadened 
intoo a far-ranging concern for shifting the centre of gravity in our institutions from 
thee institution itself - from scientists, curators, academics, and designers - to the 
userss of the exhibits. How could we maximise the variety brought to the experience 
byy the user, while at the same time retaining the coherence necessary for effective 
learning?? How could we create informal learning environments that became self-
structuringg and self-sustaining? How could we support the conditions for what 
Cziksentmihalyii called the 'flow' experience? How could we shift the focus from the 
exhibitt as end-in-itself to the exhibit as a support for human activity - discussion, 
dialogue,, debate? Finally, how could we develop exhibits that genuinely changed as 
aa consequence of the user's activity and intentions? The answer to many of these 
questionss seemed to lie in the deliberate use of certain user-languages, particularly 
thosee of problems, and of games. 
Ass can be seen from the discussion above, the history of museums can also be seen 
throughh the lens of user-languages. For over two centuries, the transformation of 
thee museum, and subsequently of the science centre, as public institutions of infor-
mall learning, can be described as a consequence of the tendency, present since at 
leastt since the late 1800s, to create an informal environment which addresses users 
andd offer them greater autonomy and agency. This tendency can be seen in the first 
studiess of visitor behaviour, and in the mission statements of post-war public insti-
tutions,, which increasingly recognise the importance of encouraging the partici-
pationn of a public representative of the entire population. This ambition to serve all 
citizenss from all backgrounds, has been complicated by the tension between a 
149 

modell in which the specialist predominates, and one in which the user predo-
minatess - in other words, between the exhibition and the library - and the user-
languagess each employs. 
Thee library is a resource, and it puts the accent on use, especially use directed by 
thee user herself, and the organisation of a library is largely a function of its use. The 
collection,, on the other hand, whether it comprises objects, as in the art gallery, 
orr scientific principles, as in the science centre, is meant to be displayed, and its 
coherencee dictated by the curator or designer. The organisation of a collection is a 
functionn of the messages its organiser wishes to communicate. The prime conside-
rationn of the library is the user-of the collection, the visitor. The library can remain 
openn to the needs of a wide variety of users, and both the coherence and the variety 
off engagements with the library is potentially very large. The collection, on the other 
hand,, relies upon a model of its visitor- and creates its exhibitions as a function of 
thatt model. The library employs the user-language of problem - its collections 
servee to answer problems defined by its users. The museum, on the other hand, has 
traditionallyy defined itself in terms of the user-language of observation (and its 
extension,, the user-language of variables) - the user is meant to see what the 
museumm declares is there to be seen. The library is always open to new use, as users 
bringg new problems to it. The museum, to the extent that it relies on the user-
languagee of observation, is exhausted by the visit. This tension between the two 
modelss has also been described as the tension between the 'top-down' approach, 
whereinn knowledge is communicated from knowledgeable experts to a presumed 
ignorantt lay public, and the 'bottom-up' approach, in which the public is assumed 
too be competent and able to generate, as well as receive, new knowledge. 
Whatt is called for, therefore, is a theory of how museums work - a theory that takes 
intoo account the nature of the museum setting and its users - and provides a means 
too understand it, operate in it, and improve it. The study the results and arguments 
off which have been described above lays the groundwork for just such a museum 
theory.. This theory hypothesises that the museum is a support system, and that the 
label,, defined as the constraints the museum places on the user, functions as the 
meanss by which the museum supports unknown and unknowable users. In the 
museum,, the label confers properties on museum users, and museum users con-
verselyy confer properties on the label -the work of the museum and the work of the 
visitorr are inextricably linked. 
150 0 

Inn its grounded state the theory describes how specific labels confer specific 
properties,, how these labels can be implemented, and how they can create or con-
structt the museum. The latter no longer needs to model the visitor - the label 
conferss properties independent of such a model. Labels operate in many ways, but 
thee key property of the label is its user-language - the constraints placed upon the 
userr of the label to create meaningful activity. The user-languages in museums can 
bee distinguished in terms of the properties they confer. It appears possible, as 
arguedd in the study, that a number of such languages developed over time. Each 
seemss to extend previous languages, and to add new properties. The sequence of 
languagess identified in this study ranges from the language of textual authority, 
beingg the oldest related to exhibitions, to the languages of observation, variables 
(ann extension of the user-language of observation), problems, and games. It seems 
reasonablee to expect further developments. 
Inn the user-language of authority, effectively the label has only one dimension -
thatt of the voice of authority. In the user-language of observation, the user is 
conferredd the property of being an observer. The user-language of variables, an 
extensionn of the user-language of observation, marks the emergence of the modern 
museum,, as it confers the ability to see, not only the visible, but also invisible rela-
tionshipss among things. The user-language of problems confers actorship on the 
user,, while the user-language of games makes this actorship an indispensable 
conditionn of the experience, and confers the additional property of being able to deal 
andd interact with other players - even if these players are virtual. 
Thuss the user-language of textual authority always constrains the amount of 
varietyy a visitor can generate. As witnessed in Robert Bakker's frustration with the 
Smithsonian124,, even a specialist is confronted by the incontestable authority of 
thee text. The constraints of the user-language of textual authority privilege the 
authorityy cited, and make acceptance of the authority of the authority a 'take it or 
leavee it' affair. The user-language of observation, which exploded like a bomb 
underr the foundations of centuries of intellectual discourse based on the exfoliation 
off texts, grants an important role to the observer, but is obliged to constrain both 
thee observations and the conditions of observing. The user-language of variables, 
whichh is, in effect, a prolongation of the user-language of observation, confers the 
propertyy of control on the visitor. The visitor can experiment, test, compare, and 
classifyy observations. Nevertheless, both the observing and the conditions of ob-
servationn remain constrained. 

Thee user-language of problems supports the visitor to define, analyse, and solve, 
andd to compare the merits of different formulations. The solution to one problem 
mayy in fact lie in redefining it as another. Here the property of agency is conferred 
onn the visitor, and acceptance encouraged by identifying problems relates to and 
derivedd from human experience. Finally, the user-language of games creates the 
conditionss for enormous variety, by conferring the property of other players, with 
other,, competing interests. Some games come to an end after an agreed upon point 
(thee expiration of time, the reaching of a certain score, the accomplishment of an 
action),, others (what Carse calls infinite games), only end when the players decide 
too stop. The goal of an infinite game is to keep playing. Infinite games remain open 
too new rules and new information to achieve this end. It is important to note that 
onlyy the latter two user-languages, that is those of problems and games, confer 
thee property of actorship on the user. That is to say, they allow user's to structure 
theirr experience in terms of time rather than in terms of some kind of infinite time-
lesss ness - as for example happens in the case of the language of textual authority. 
Thiss last conclusion has striking consequences for the future of museum. User-
languagess that do not confer the property of actorship are, in a sense, 'exhausted' 
byy their use. They support the user while they are being used, but the properties they 
conferr disappear when the user stops. However, if one of the goals of a museum can 
bee said to support repeat use, and perhaps more ambitiously, to support the acqui-
sitionn of new skills, it can no longer rely on user-languages that do not confer the 
propertyy of actorship. It cannot rely on user-languages that are limited to confer-
ringg certain properties to the user only while she is using the support - in order to 
supportt acquiring new competence, the properties conferred must be sustained over 
time.. This possibility of support over time is only possible with user-languages 
whichh confer the properties of actorship and other players - the user-languages of 
problemss and games, and presumably languages that still have to be designed. 
5.2.. What has been achieved? 
Thee notion of a theory is not an easy one, but it proves to be especially difficult 
outsidee the natural sciences. Still it allows one to summarise a number of findings 
inn a short label. Earlier I identified a number of criteria a museum theory has to 
satisfy.. It should summarise what is relevant in the relation between the museum 
andd the user or visitor, and indicate why. It should show how to create museum-
likee environments, and allow one to recognise when they have been achieved (or in 
1522 
other words, when the environment under scrutiny has become a member of the 

classs of museums). As a consequence, it should help identify how individual 
designers,, conservators, directors and visitors are to be addressed so they can max-
imisee their competence (that is, they can increase their skills, given that 'indi-
vidualised'' qualifications have been bestowed in the process of addressing). 
Thiss kind of theory is not identical to a theory of certain phenomena. It is a theory 
forfor the construction of what a posteriori can be modelled as a desirable or 'good' 
museum. . 
Ass argued above, each such museum should serve as a support system. If the class 
off these systems is seen to function as a 'scientific object', it also should serve as a 
supportt system itself - in particular the theory that describes the properties of the 
class.. This implies that any user of the theory should be able to understand ex-
hibitionss better, make better exhibitions, and thereby perhaps contribute to making 
betterr museums. A proper means to evaluate whether or not this study has achieved 
thiss goal would therefore be to identify what the theory claims to provide, and what 
hass been demonstrated that it can provide. 
Whatt is claimed is that to make an effective exhibition (or museum), one should 
determinee first how to 'address' the visitor, and what generall properties to confer or 
too make possible. Subsequently one should choose a user-language, on the basis 
off existing information about which user-languages allow which properties to be 
conferred.. Such information may be produced outside the museum, for instance in 
thee academic setting, but can also be produced as part of an actual implementation 
(thee latter has been the case historically, of course further development requires 
aa more systematic approach than is usually possible in practice). After a user-
languagee has been chosen, labels may be created and implemented, and exhibits 
orr exhibitions developed. In the actual implementation, the means must be identi-
fiedd to lower the threshold of acceptance, and to encourage full engagement on the 
partt of the visitor. This implies a process of (local) experimentation, including pro-
totypingg with presumed potential users. The opening exhibition should be treated 
ass a completely implemented prototype, open to change. At this level there is no 
'right'' answer, predetermined a priori - in contrast to the level where the user-
languagee was chosen. According to the theory developed in these pages, on this 
levell it should be possible to 'predict' what constraints to prefer, after the first step 
iss taken. 
Thee procedure described above allows the museum, in effect, to turn conventional 
museumm practice 'on its head'. Instead of good style creating good labels, style being 
153 

somethingg 'extra' added to the content the museum wants to convey, style once 
againn begins to serve the ends of the exhibition. What are to be considered good 
labelss now is pre-determined by the user-language that is chosen, and by its ability 
too address and engage the visitor. 
Lett me illustrate the above with some examples drawn from the foregoing study. 
Inn each case, a decision was made very early about the way in which the exhibition 
wouldd 'address' the visitor - in effect, the user-language was chosen - and a second 
decisionn was made about how best to encourage the visitor to engage with the 
exhibition'ss content, based on local context. It has been argued in this study that 
thesee two decisions correspond to answering the questions 'what properties does 
thee label confer on the user' and 'what properties does the user confer on the label.' 
Althoughh the user-languages of textual authority, observation, and variables may 
nott always be most desirable in terms of current museum thinking, they are certainly 
nott to be rejected in general. They do appear to help when certain properties are to 
bee enabled, as confirmed by the experience of the author and others. Their effec-
tivenesss supports the notion of a user-language, as part of the theory explored 
above.. The Gates of Mystery provides a useful example. It used a magisterial 
approachh to convey the solemnity of the world of the Russian icon. The intent of the 
exhibitionn was to allow the visitor to understand the icon as part of the liturgy - not 
solelyy as a de-contextualised work of art. The user-language was that of textual 
authority,, and visitors clearly became more knowledgeable by means of the exhibi-
tion.. Conversely, visitors were encouraged to engage with the admittedly difficult 
materiall by means of a striking audiovisual, and a coherent scenography that 
expressedd the organisation of the exhibition visually. The exhibition was the most 
successfull in the history of the host museum, the Walters Art Gallery in Baltimore, 
inn terms of attendance, and in terms of press coverage. Similarly, the exhibitions 
MerchantsMerchants of Light (about the art and science of Rudolphine Prague), and T
ofof Reason/Theatre of Desire (about the art of Leon Bakst and Alexandre Benois), 
dreww critical acclaim.125 They too relied largely on the user-language of textual 
'»» for example see Simon, R. Exotic Turns in 
authority,, and were implemented in such a way as to encourage the visitor to 
TheThe Spectator 15/08798 pp.43-44 
immersee themselves in the subject matter of the exhibition by means of dramatic 
lighting,, coherent scenography, and compelling texts. 
Nevertheless,, however successful these exhibition in the eyes of the public and the 
internationall press, it was clear that they were still profoundly limited by their use 
1544 
of the 'traditional' museum user-language of textual authority. Their labels confer 

littlee active role to the visitor, and the visitor rarely returned to the exhibition a 
secondd time. In order to develop exhibitions that unlocked and sustained visitor 
activity,, it was necessary to explore the use of other user-languages, languages ra-
relyy used in the museum setting. 
Too develop the exhibition The Body in the Library, Drew Ann Wake and the author 
hadd decided from the outset to use the user-language of problems - in fact, the 
'murderr mystery' approach that shaped the exhibition was considered even before 
wee were offered the opportunity to develop the exhibition!12S In this case, the both 
"•Seee Wake, 0. A. and Bradbume. J. Paradox Lost 
thee user-language of the exhibition, and the high level of engagement with the visi-
Rediscoveringg Scientific Creativity. Alliage No.6 
tor,, derived from the choice of structuring the exhibition as a murder mystery. On 
thee one hand, the user-language of problems that characterises a murder mystery 
(andd characterised the exhibition) conferred actorship on the user - the visitor had 
to,, in effect, become the detective. On the other hand, reading murder mysteries is 
partt of a deeply ingrained Western cultural practice - certainly murder mysteries are 
thee genre most in demand at nearly all of Alberta's public libraries - and as a con-
sequence,, increased the level of acceptance of the exhibition by its users. 
Thee change in visit behaviour from a 'traditional' exhibition was striking. Visitors 
stayedd longer, undertook new investigations on their own, and returned to the ex-
hibitionn time and again. Never before had the researchers seen such commitment 
too an exhibition, from visitors both young and old. 
Inn the case of Beyond the Naked Eye, an exhibition of medical imaging technology, 
thee exhibition was originally planned to appeal to women, research having shown 
thatt women were more at ease with art than science. The first prototype exhibition 
displayedd the stunning images generated by modern medical technology as if they 
weree works of art, and used the user-language of observation to describe them. The 
prototypee revealed that many visitors were more interested in the outcome of the 
patient'ss condition, than the representation of its pathology, however beautiful. 
Confrontedd with the image of a brain tumour- however strikingly rendered by CAT, 
PET,, or NMR, the visitor's question was consistently, 'did she die?' As a consequen-
ce,, the user-language of problems was chosen to structure the exhibition, and a se-
riess of case studies developed, grouped according to which imaging technology was 
usedd to diagnose the condition. The challenge of the exhibition was for the visitor 
too put herself in the shoes of the doctor-to analyse the material available, and come 
upp with a diagnosis. 

Inn this case, as in the case of The Body in the Library, the user-language chosen for 
thee exhibition and the context chosen to encourage the user's engagement com-
plementedd each other. Once again, the change in visitor behaviour was striking. In 
fact,, the case study/problems were so compelling that often visitors ignored study-
ingg the underlying scientific principles of the imaging technology, prior to plunging 
intoo the hard work of making sense of the actual images. Once again, visitors 
returnedd often to the exhibition to continue working on a case study, or to review 
theirr initial conclusions. 
Inn Mine Games, the challenge was to create a forum for discussion about the 
futuree of resource management in the province of British Columbia, Canada - a 
dauntingg task! Given our experience with the two exhibitions described in the 
paragraphss above. Drew Ann Wake and the author opted for the user-language of 
games,, which held out the promise of both conferring actorship on visitors to the 
exhibition,, but also conferred the property of interacting with other players - in-
dispensablee if the exhibition were to fulfil its mandate to become a real forum for 
debatee and discussion. As in the cases described above, the choice of games as both 
user-languagee and context served a dual function - conferring the properties we 
desiredd on the user, and, and because of its importance to the culture of its intended 
audiencee - Canadian teenagers. 
Inn every key respect. Mine Games met its ambitious objectives. The user-language 
off games was implemented at every level of the exhibition. The entire exhibition was 
presentedd as a game, the objective of which was to advise a community on its best 
future.. Each cluster with the exhibition was also a game, providing new information 
too fuel the discussion about the broader question. Within each cluster were hands-
onn exhibits, which allowed the visitor to discover critical information with which to 
playy the cluster's computer game. 
Thee visitors to the exhibition quickly understood the excitement of the game, and 
usedd the clipboards provided at the entrance to record their progress. A compara-
tivelyy large percentage of visitors stayed in the exhibition for extended periods of 
time,, and many returned regularly to test new ideas and debate different options. 
AA high level of discussion was seen, and a high level of involvement. The computer 
gamess were highly successful in attracting and engaging teenage users, while 
thee hands-on exhibits and demonstrations kept other user groups involved. The 
Hotseat!! theatre gave visitors a real say in the issues surrounding resource develop-
1566 
ment in the province, and continues to be a forum for debate about the issue, over 

fourr years after the exhibition opened, and two years after the exhibition was 
scheduledd originally to close. 
Itt is not unusual to judge results in terms of two types of validity. It seems useful to 
identifyy the first, internal validity, as the level of internal coherence of the intended 
developmentt of the theory and of data collection, and the actual one. In other words, 
didd we meet with any obstacles when implementing our research model? The 
discussionn in this section would suggest that there were no serious difficulties, 
indicatingg a high level of internal validity of the research undertaken. In the next 
sectionn the notion of external validity will be considered, that is, the possibility that 
thee research method makes more visible than simply the experiences reported, 
orr in other words, that it was possible to identify the class of 'better' museums, not 
onlyy merely specific examples. This would tend to imply that results could be 
generalisedd over whatever can be recognised as an element of the class. 
5.3.. newMetropolis 
Beingg given the opportunity to contribute to the building and the design of a new 
museumm allowed for a further test of the theory, as already exemplified in isolated 
exhibitions.. Could the lessons learned about new user-languages be applied on 
aa broader scale and in a single institution? Would the same kinds of properties be 
conferred?? Would we be able to observe new kinds of museum behaviour? 
Afterr over one year of operation of newMetropolis, the new science museum in 
Amsterdam,, the answer to all of the questions posed above appears to be yes. On 
anyy day of the week, under widely varying circumstances and with widely varying 
publics,, the exhibitions consistently give rise to the same kinds of behaviour -
behaviourr marked by relatively long periods of engagement, visitor-initiated acti-
vity,, and visitor-directed enquiry. newMetropolis is remarkable for the degree of 
collaborativee activity its exhibitions support, and the amount of contact and discus-
sionn among visitors. 
Itt is especially instructive to note that the least successful exhibits (notably the 
exhibitss about the physics of light in the area called The Debate') are those which 
stilll employ the user-language of variables - exactly as might have been predicted 
byy using the theory presented above. Alternatively, the most successful exhibits 
(includingg Get Connected, Superbankers, and the Tankergame) - all employing the 
user-languagee of games and conferring actorship in a collective of other players - 
157 

aree rarely quiet. Moreover, after only a month of operation, there appeared to be so 
manyy repeat users, that they became a problem to hosting staff -users would return 
everyy morning of the holidays at opening time to play a particular game. Given the 
limitedd number of playing positions such staff became worried about possible new 
playerss becoming irritated and disgruntled. 
Thiss 'problem' was further compounded with another - visitors were staying too 
longg at the exhibits, thus creating long waits and lowering the overall capacity of the 
museum.. While these issues cannot be ignored on an operational level, the issues 
off users monopolising games and of lower capacity due to sustained engagement 
withh the exhibits must be addressed. Both point to the effectiveness of the use 
off proper user-languages when sensitively implemented in particular exhibits to 
conferr specific desirable properties on the user. Perhaps even more importantly, the 
successess of the user-languages of problems and games suggest exciting possibi-
litiess for future development. 
Howeverr far-reaching its ambitions, this study did not even begin to exhaust the 
subject,, or the possibilities for further research. On the contrary, due to the relative 
scarcityy of sufficiently strong and high shoulders on which to stand, this study has 
beenn by nature provisional, tentative, exploratory, and fraught with risks. In nearly 
everyy respect it appears to provide only the merest beginning. Many questions 
remainn to be asked, many approaches remain to be tested, much research remains 
too be done. Like all early work in a field, the study above cannot expect to answer in 
fulll the questions it asked, nor ask all the questions it gives rise to. The field is open 
too others to fill in - to refine the questions, test the hypotheses, tighten the argu-
ments.. Research has already begun on several of the questions raised by this 
study.. What further user-languages can be identified? Can the advantages they 
providee be studied, made more visible or even measured? Do certain user-langua-
gess support certain kinds of debates? Which ones? In terms of these questions this 
studyy can be said to lay the groundwork for future research, and for improving 
museums. . 
Thiss study began with the troubling observation (given the enormous investment of 
time,, energy, and money in interactive science centres) that despite the appeal of 
'interactive'' exhibits, physical interaction alone did not seem to be enough to 
supportt prolonged, sustained, intellectual engagement. While useful as a means of 
1277 Jonathan Milter, private communication 
solicitingg activity, 'hands-on' interaction by itself did not appear sufficient to support 
1588 
the user to discover that 'the life of the mind is a pleasure.127 Something else 

seemedd to be needed. It is my conviction that this extra support can be provided by 
"•• A term coined by Professor Richard Gregory of the 
meanss of well-designed user-languages, used to address the user in ever richer 
Bristoll Exploratory, and widely used to describe 
ways,, eventually by means of the labels offered to the user. This conviction has been 
exhibitss in hands-on science centres that present • 
largelyy confirmed in the course of my study. Interaction, when supported by the 
challenge,, a puzzle, a riddle etc. without involving 
deliberatee use of labels that confer actorship, is able to create and sustain concen-
actuall manipulation 
trated,, engaged activity - to support users to 'touch with the mind, not the hands' 
-- or put differently, it allows for 'minds-on '"» and 'hearts-on '«• activity even with-
i*i* A term coined by Jorge Wagensberg, Director 
outt the need for physical contact.130 Given that a large majority of museums are 
off the Museu de la ciencia in Barcelona, to describe the 
endowedd with objects that cannot be touched (for reasons of conservation), this 
affectivee nature of the science centre encounter 
mustt be considered an important finding. 
1"" Physical interaction is still often a desirable - and 
Evenn more importantly perhaps, it also can be concluded that user-languages do 
sometimess necessary - prerequisite for understanding, 
indeedd provide the referent needed to identify the range of generalisation of the 
ass Richard Gregory demonstrated in several 
theory.. According to the study above, museums can flourish wherever it becomes 
psychologicall studies, see Gregory. R- How hands-on 
possiblee to offer labels to the user, given the proper user-language. The challenge 
explorationexploration may turn minds on to science, 
thiss poses is to design user-languages that give users the most support. It is impor-
unpublishedd paper: Bristol; 1989 
tanttant to realise, however, that the theory above also allows the design of what could 
bee seen as 'bad' museums, depending on which properties are defined as desirable 
-- and which user-language chosen to implement them - at any given time in history. 
Inn this sense we may say that the study above shows external validity: it has well-
groundedd implications that are wider than the specific instances reported. 
Thiss study should not be understood to say that only research holds the key to the 
developmentt of the museum environment. What I have done only extends and 
supportss work that has been developed by dedicated directors, designers and 
hostingg staff for several decades. In this development many challenges have been 
identifiedd and met. The science centre movement for example developed as a re-
actionn to the perceived failure of what were seen to be dusty, detached, and elitist 
museums.. In the 60s, new times called out for new techniques. The past three 
decadess have shown that science centres too have had to confront the failure of their 
approaches,, in particular to sustain prolonged engagement. This study has its roots 
inn a close examination of some of those failures as well as of what was done to deal 
withh them. But it is not enough if we only use what we have learned. Something 
moree is needed. Can an object-based museum, its collection protected behind 
vitrines,, benefit from the same labelling approaches as a 'hands-on' setting? Does 
thee effectiveness of the user-languages translate to settings where the actorship 
aa user-language can confer is limited by the scope of the action possible to the 
visitor?? Can the 'hands-off' museum of vitrines, guards, and infra-red alarm systems 
159 

bee transformed into a vital, engaging informal learning environment - a support 
systemm in the fullest sense of the term? 
Thesee questions refer to new challenges that have still to be met, although now with 
aa new tool. Recently I have been given the opportunity to do so131, as the new 
1311 As of 01 January, 1999 
Directorr of the Museum für Kunsthandwerk (Applied Arts) in Frankfurt am Main. 
Itt is to be hoped that the coming years will demonstrate in full the utility, scope, 
andd effectiveness of the theory described in these pages. 
160 0 

6.. Postscript 
Onlyy days before finishing the final draft of this study, I had the opportunity to visit 
aa major new exhibition held at the Nieuwe Kerk in Amsterdam's Dam Square. The 
exhibition,, entitled Het wonderbaarlijk alfabet, celebrates 200 years of the Royal 
Dutchh Library. With the study fresh in my mind, I indulged myself, on a sunny 
afternoon,, in 'testing' its claims, one more time, against a real exhibition. 
Perhapss in response to the perception that books are among the least interesting and 
mostt difficult material with which to make a public exhibition, the designers had 
conceivedd an elaborate setting for the exhibition's collection of masterworks from 
thee Royal Library. The collection was divided into clusters, each according to a letter 
off the alphabet, and each cluster was itself a setting related to the content of the 
materiall on display. The collection of natural history engravings, for instance, was 
displayedd in a 'cage' recalling the Zoo - an impression enhanced by background 
soundss of zoo animals and birds. The clusters all radiated out from an enormous 
darkenedd central space - a space of which all four walls were made of books -
aa giant library. On one wall of the 'library' was projected a multimedia show about 
thee Royal Library, along the edge of another were a dozen computers, linked to the 
Library'ss website. The overall impression was of a masterfully-executed stage set-
quitee different from a 'traditional' exhibition of books or paintings. A few text panels 
weree scattered around the exhibition, but they were only in Dutch. As for the objects 
onn display, they were only numbered-the labels were provided in a small book that 
couldd be consulted as the visitor roamed the collection from A to Z. 
Too all intents and purposes - given its scenography, its collection, its setting -
itt should be a great success. It isn't - at least not if one looks at the ways in which 
visitorss use the exhibition. The visitors wander about in a desultory fashion, some 
off them leafing through their book of'labels'. The scenography overwhelms and the 
soundtrackk interferes with an appreciation of the material on display (for example, 
thee books about chess are displayed in vitrines under the feet of the visitors). But 
thiss is not in itself the problem - in fact, the scenography and soundtrack in and of 
themselvess are of a very high quality. The reason the exhibition falls flat is, in spite 
off the attention paid to the form, or 'style', of the exhibition, the user-language is 
primarilyy that of textual authority (the label booklet) which must be actively con-
sultedd to understand the exhibition. If the visitor does not want or choose to use the 
booklet,, or does not understand that it is intended to be used -the only structuring 
inn the exhibition is that of unsupported observation. Unsupported observation, with 
noo aids to structuring the experience, has the effect of paralysing the visitor, who 

wanderss aimlessly from cluster to cluster, lingering for a short moment if the object 
appearss interesting. Here we have vivid proof of the failure of the museum when the 
devicess it uses are seen as merely 'style' or technique - and no explicit considera-
tionn is given to the user-language employed. All the multimedia presentations, 
videos,, computers, and clever settings, do not support the visitor in engaging with 
thee exhibition's content. 
Maybee the content itself is boring, a reader may protest. Books, after all, aren't as 
grippingg to look at as Renaissance portraits or Impressionist landscapes. This does 
nott seem to fully explain the situation. Exhibitions of books can indeed sustain visitor 
engagementt - and for long periods of time. For example, in an exhibition recently 
heldd at the new Getty Museum in Santa Monica, a rare book of medieval miniatures 
wass unbound for digitisation, and the individual leaves displayedd for a brief time in 
aa small exhibition room. The exhibition explicitly employed the user-language of 
observationn - and the organisers provided high-quality magnifying lenses to allow 
closee inspection of the pages. The visitors, however, used the magnifying lenses 
too transform the user-language of the exhibition to that of problems - problems 
theyy defined and attempted to resolve. Often there was an hour wait to get one of 
thee magnifiers - and the visitor behaviour in the exhibition was one of intense and 
thoughtfull examination. Much like the example of the torchlight in the Musée des 
artss et métiers cited in the introduction, the instrument allowed the user to take 
controll of his own questioning - and unlocked a whole new museum behaviour. 
No,, the problem with Het wonderbaarlijk alfabet lies elsewhere. It lies in not having 
understoodd the importance of a coherently implemented user-language, and in 
havingg unwittingly confused style with strategy. The user-language of the exhibition 
iss still only the user-language of textual authority, to a small extent combined with 
thatt of observation - and the attractive packaging functions mainly as window-
dressing. . 
Byy happy coincidence I had to return to newMetropolis that same evening - and the 
differencee was astonishing. Visitors were playing, sitting, talking, discussing with 
eachh other. The exhibitions were full of people helping each other. Exhibitions 
carefullyy prototyped to employ the user-languages of problems and games were 
consistentlyy supporting engaged, concentrated activity. The Trading Ring was in 
constantt use, the Telecommunications circle crowded with players, the Distribution 
gamee was crawling with seven-year olds. Teenagers hunched over the computer 
1622 
games - and the Actua terminals. The place was alive, vibrant, and vital - a hive of 

activity.. Of course, you might argue, the exhibits are interactive, 'hands-on' - no 
dustyy vitrines in newMetropolis. This is true, but not every science centre sustains 
thiss level of user-directed activity. The long path that led to newMetropolis and its 
exhibitionss was begun as a response to the lack of engagement in interactive science 
centress - the resonant pendulum left swinging idly, or worse still, broken by 
frustratedd visitors. 
No,, both experiences sent the same message, and led to the same conclusion: 
thee explicit employment of particular user-languages, and a deeper understanding 
off what engages the user, makes the difference between a museum where visitors 
merelyy poke about the exhibitions, and a museum that supports its users by crea-
tingg a world where they can exercise and develop new activities, a world where time 
cann be concentrated. 
Wee often hear that museum visitors are too stupid, or perhaps too lazy to under-
takee the intellectual effort of an exhibition that demands that they participate 
actively.. I believe I have gone beyond this position. It does not matter whether people 
reallyy are intelligent or stupid, or whatever other properties they have. We already 
knoww too well the exhibitions that come if we assume that the curator knows every-
thing,, or that the museum is the sacred grove for the chosen few. We can and must 
rejectt these assumptions as the basis for our work, and concentrate on helping our 
visitorss create new properties, whereby our institutions of informal learning become 
effectivee support systems for the greatest variety of users. 
163 3 

7.. Bibliography 
Abrahamse,, N., Jap-Ngie S., en Smit J. 
HetHet energiegebruik: 
Bewustwording 
ofof nostalgie?. Sociale psychologie 
Vrijee Universiteit Amsterdam; March 1998 
Actess du colloque, 
LesLes Arts et Métiers en Revolution, 
Paris:: CN AM; 1991 
Actess du colloque, 
Musées,Musées, réseaux et education scientifique 
etet technique en Europe, 
Strasbourg:: AMSTCI; 1990 
Adorno,, T. 
TheThe stars down to earth and other essays, 
London:: Routledge; 1994 
Albertini,, B. and Bagnoli, S. 
Scarpa.Scarpa. Museen und Ausstallungen, 
Berlin:: Ernst Wasmuth Verlag;1992 
Alfarez,, D. 
NieuwsNieuws in het lab. Medische biologie. 
Universiteitt van Amsterdam; December 1997 
Allard,, M. and Boucher, S. 
LeLe musée et l'école, 
Quebec:: Cahiers du Québec/Hurtibise; 1991 
Allwood,, J. 
TheThe Great Exhibitions, 
London:: Studio Vista; 1977 
Alpers,, S. 
RembrandfsRembrandfs Enterprise: the studio and the 
market,market, Chicago: University of of Chicago; 1988 
Alpers,, S. 
TheThe Art of Describing; Dutch Art in the Seven-
teenthteenth Cenury, New York: Pelican Books; 1989 
Amess M. 
Museums,Museums, the public and anthropology, 
Secondd ed. Vancouver: UBC Press; 1992 
Amsterdam,, T. van, 
EvaluatieEvaluatie demonstratiebalie in het wetlab. 
Vakgroepp wetenschapsdynamica Universiteit 
vann Amsterdam; June 1998. 
Anderson,, D. 
Museumm Education in Transition, 
JournalJournal of Museum Education, Volume 19, 
1644 
No. 1; Winter 1994 
Anderson,, P. 
BeyondBeyond the Blueprint, Washington: ASTC; 199
Antonovich,, F. 
L'L' art a la cour de Rodolphe II Empereur 
dudu Saint Empire Romain 
Germanique, 
PraguePrague et son rayonnement, 
Paris:: Le Louvre des Antiquaires; 1992 
Aristotle, , 
OnOn Rhetoric trans. 
Kennedyy G. Oxford: O UP; 1991 
Arpin,, R. 
LeLe musée de la civilisation, Quebec: 
Muséee de la civilisation/Multi-modes; 1992 
Arss Lab, 
MetodiMetodi e emozioni, Torino: Allemandi; 1992 
Auer,, A. ed. 
Dass Inventarium der 
AmbraserSammlungen 
ausaus dem Jahr 1621 Jahrbuch der Kunst-
historischenn Sammlungen in Wien, Sonderheft 
No.. 288, Wien: Anthon SchroH & Co.; 1984 
Axelrod,, R. 
TheThe Evolution of Co-operation, 
London:: Penguin; 1990 
Bachelard,, G. trans. Jolas, M. 
TheThe Poetics of Space, New York: Beacon; 1969 
Bachelard,, G. 
LeLe nouvel esprit scientifique, 
Paris:: Quadrige; 1991 
Bachmann,, K. ed. 
ConservationConservation Concerns, 
Washington:: Smithsonian; 1992 
Bacon,, F. 
CollectedCollected Works, incl. The New Atlantis, 
London:: W. Rawley; 1669 
Bacon,, F. 
OperaOpera variorum incl. Nova Atlantis, 
London:: Edward Griffin; 1638 
Bakewell,, E. 
Object,Object, Image, Inquiry, 
Santaa Monica: Getty Trust; 1988 
Balfanz,, R. 
TheThe role of environmental knowledge in early 
mathmath performance, unpublished paper; 1987 
Bandelli,, A. and Cerrato, S. 
LaLa rete telematica per I'Educazione 
Ambientale, 
Trieste:: LIS; 1994 
Barry,, J, 
TheThe work of the forest, Bruxelles: Fondation 
pourr L'architecture a Bruxelles; 1992 
Barthes,, R. trans. Heath, S. 
Image,Image, Music, Text London: Fontana; 1977 

Baudrillard,, J. 
DeDe la seduction. Paris: Folio; 1990 
Baudrillard,, J. 
L'effetL'effet Beaubourg, Paris: Galilée; 1977 
Baudrillard,, J. 
LeLe système des objets. Paris: Gallimard; 1968 
Bauer,, R. and Haupt, H. ed 
DasDas Kunstkammerinventar 
Kaiser Rudolphs IL, 
1607-1607- 1611, Jahrbuch der Kunsthistorischen 
Sammlungenn in Wien, Band 72, 
Wien:: Anthon Schroll & Co.; 1976 
Baxandall,, M. 
GiottoGiotto and the Orators, Oxford: Clarendon; 1971 
Baxandall,, M. 
PatternsPatterns of Intention, New Haven: Yale; 1985 
Bazin,, M. 
Cienciaa Viva a Rio, Alliage No.3; 1990 
Bazin,, M. 
MathMath across cultures, 
Sann Francisco: Exploratorium; 1995 
Bazin,, M. 
ThreeThree Years of Living Science, 
Oxfordd Journal of Scientific Literacy; 1990 
Bédard,, J-F. 
CitésCités de {'architecture fictive, 
Montreal:: CMA; 1994 
Benassayag,, D. ed. 
LeLe futur antérieur des musées. 
Paris:: Editions du rénard; 1991 
Benjamin,, W. 
BerlinerBerliner Kindheit um neunzehnhunde/% 
Frankfurtt am Main: Suhrkamp; 1987 
Benjamin,, W. 
Illuminations,Illuminations, Essays and Reflections, trad. 
Harcourtt 1968 New York: Schocken/Random 
House;; 1988 [Suhrkamp; 1955] 
Benjamin,, W. 
OberOber Kinder, Jugend und Erziehung, 
Berlin:: Suhrkamp; 1969 
Bennett,, T. 
TheThe Birth of the Museum, 
London:: Routledge; 1995 
Bergamin,, J. trans. Delay, F. 
LaLa decadence de 
l'analphabétisme, 
Paris:: La Délirante; 1988 
Berman,, M. 
AllAll that is solid melts into air, 
Neww York: Simon and Shuster; 1982 
Berry,, N. and Mayer, S. eds, 
MuseumMuseum Education: History, Theory, and 
Practice,Practice, Reston: NAEA;1989 
Berry,, N. Museum 
Education:Education: History, Theory and Practice, 
Washington:: NAEA; 1991 
Bertrand,, R. ed. 
LaLa museologie des science et des techniques. 
Pahs:: REMUS; 1991 
Bezombes,, D. 
LaLa Grande Galerie du Muséum, 
Paris:: Le Moniteur; 1994 
Bicknell,, S. and Farmelo, G. eds. 
MuseumMuseum Visitor Studies in the 90s, 
London:: Science Museum; 1993 
Blotkamp,, C. et al eds. 
MuseumMuseum in motion?/Museum 
in beweging?, 
Eindhoven:: Van Abbemuseum; 1976 
Blud,, L 
Sociall interaction and learning in a museum. 
MuseumMuseum Management 9; 1991 
Boden,, M. 
ComputerComputer Models of Mind, 
Cambridge:: Cambridge University Press; 1988 
Sohm,, D. 
WholenessWholeness and the Implicate Order, 
London:: ARK; 1983 
Bonk,, E. 
MarcelMarcel Duchamp: The Box in a Valise, 
Neww York: Rizzoli; 1989 
Borun,, M. 
MeasuringMeasuring the unmeasurable, 
Washington:: ASTC; 1977 
Borun,, M. 
NaiveNaive notions and science learning, 
Jacksonvillee State University; 1988 
Borun,, M. 
PlanetsPlanets and Pulleys, Washington: ASTC; 1983 
Borun,, M. 
TheThe Visitor and the Museum, 
Washingtonn DC: ASTC; 1977 
Borun,, M. 
What'sWhat's in a name?, 
Philadelphia:: Franklin Institute; 1980 
Bourdieu,, P. and Darbel, A. 
L'amourdeL'amourde I'art, Paris: Editions de minuit; 1969 
Bourdieu,, P. 
LaLa distinction, Paris: Editions de minuit; 1979 
Bernardis,, M.A. 
Emballage.Emballage. Emballages, Paris: La Cite; 1995 
Bourdieu,, P. 
LegonLegon sur la legon, Paris: Editions de minuit; 1982 

Bourdieu,, P. 
LesLes regies de l'art. Paris: Seuil; 1992 
Boys,, J., et al. eds. 
MakingMaking Space. London: Pluto/Matrix; 1984 
8020,, O. 
Manifester,Manifester, exposer, montrer, Traverses No. 3, 
automnee 1992, Paris: Centre Pompidou; 1992 
Bradburne,, J. 
Astrolabess tous azimuts. La Revue, 
Paris:: CNAM; 1993 
Bradburne,, J. 
Goingg Public: Science museums, debate and 
democracyy in Planning science museums for 
thethe new Europe, Paris: UNESCO; 1993 
Bradburne,, J. 
InformalInformal Science in the Jordan, 
Paris:: internal UNESCO Technical Report; 1993 
Bradburne,, J. 
TheThe Lost Empire of the Silk Road, 
children'ss catalogue, Milan: Electa; 1993 
Bradburne,, J. 
Truth-tellingTruth-telling and the Doing of Science, 
Amsterdam:: Thesis; 1993 
Brecht,, B. trans. Willett, J. 
BrechtBrecht On Theatre, 
Neww York: Hill and Wang; 1964 
Bredekamp,, H. 
AntikensehnsuchtAntikensehnsucht und Maschinenglauben: 
Die 
GeschichteGeschichte der Kunstkammer und die Zukunft 
derder Kunstgeschichte, Berlin: Wagen bach; 1993 
Bremmer,, J. and Roodenburg, H. 
AA Cultural history of Gesture, 
Oxford:: Polity Press; 1991 
Broecke,, M. van den, 
ScienceScience by 'Phone, unpublished paper, 
PWT;1990 0 
Brown-Goode,, G. 
MuseumMuseum History and Museums of History, 
Paperss of the American Historical Association 
Vol.. Ill, No.1, Putnam's: New York; 1888 
Bruggen,, C. van, 
Claess Oldenburg: Mouse Museum/Ray Gun 
Wing,Wing, Amsterdam: Spruijt; 1979 
Bruman,, R. 
TheThe Expioratorium Cookbook I, 
Sann Francisco: Expioratorium; rev. 1984 
Brusatti,, 0. and Denscher, B. eds. 
Erotik, Erotik, 
Vienna:: Bibliotheca Civica Vindobonensi;; 1990 
Buck-Morss,, S. 
Thee Dialectics of Seeing, Cambridge: MIT; 1989 
Bud,, R. 
TheThe Museum: Meaning and History, 
London:: unpublished conference paper; 1990 
Buddenhagen,, E. 
DevelopingDeveloping Explorits, 
Davis:: Davis Science Centre; 1990 
Burckhardt,, J. 
DieDie Kuttur der Renaissance Italien, 
Berlin:: Th. Knaur Nachf.; 1928 
Buzas,, S. 
SirSir John Soane's Museum, 
Berlin:: Wasmuth; 1994 
Calle,, S. 
J'aiJ'ai rencontre des gens 
Cluses:: La culture pourvivre; 1987 
Cameron,, A 
Dissimulations,Dissimulations, Millenium Film Journa
Springg 1995 
Carding,, J. et al eds. 
GuideGuide to the history of science and technology 
inin Europe, London: Science Museum; 1992 
Casalis,, L. 
Androïdi,Androïdi, Milano: Franco Maria Ricci; 1980 
Cassidy,, J. 
Earthsearch,Earthsearch, Palo Alto: Klutz; 1994 
Cassidy,, J. 
TheThe Explorabook, Palo Alto: Klutz; 1991 
Caws,, M.A. 
ReadingReading Frames in Modern Fiction, 
Princeton:: Princeton; 1985 
Caws,, M.A. 
TheThe Eye in the Text, Princeton: Princeton; 1981 
Caws,, M.A. 
TheThe Metapoetics of the Passage, Hannover: 
Universityy Press of New England; 1981 
Cellulee de préfiguration, 
ProjetProjet de renovation de la grande galerie de 
zoölogie.zoölogie. Paris: Museum d'histoire naturelle;
1990 0 
Changeux,, J.P. and Régnier, G. eds. 
LameLame au corps. Paris: Electa/Gallimard; 1993 
Chartier,, R. 
L'OrdreL'Ordre des livres, 
Aixx en Provence: Alinea; 1992 
Chartier,, R. 
LecturesLectures et lecteurs dans la France d'Ancien 
Régime,Régime, Paris: Seuil; 1982 
Chieze,, V. 
WhatWhat Museums for Africa? Heritage in the 
Future,, Paris: ICOM; 1992 

Chinaa Science and Technology Museum, 
China:China: 2000 years of discovery, 
Beijing:: CSTM; 1983 
Clark,, K. 
WhatWhat is a masterpiece?. 
Neww York: Thames and Hudson; 1981 
Cleaver,, J. 
DoingDoing Children's Museums, 
Charlotte:: Williamson; 1988 
Coates,, J. 
Women,Women, men and language, 
London:: Longman; 1986 
Cole,, S. 
MakingMaking Science: Between Nature and Society, 
Boston:: Harvard University Press; 1992 
Comeniuss (Komensky, J. A.) 
LabyrintLabyrint sveta a rajsrdce, Prague: Odeon; 1970 
Comeniuss (Komensky, J. A.) 
OperaOpera didactica omnia, (facsimile edition) 
Prague:: Academia Scientiarum 
Bohemoslovenica;; 1957 
Comeniuss (Komensky, J. A.) trans. Spinka, M. 
TheThe Labyrinth of the World and the Paradise 
ofof the Heart, Kila: Kesstnger; 1942 
Connerton,, P. 
HowHow Societies Remember, 
Cambridge:: Cambridge University Press; 1989 
Cooperss & Lybrand/Wake-Bradburne 
Partnership, , 
AssessmentAssessment of needs and feasibility for a 
sciencescience network in Alberta, 2 vols, prepared for 
thee Science Alberta Foundation, Calgary: 1990 
Cooperss & Lybrand/Wake-Bradburne 
Partnership, , 
InformalInformal Science Education in Alberta: 
InventoryInventory and Evaluation, prepared for the 
Sciencee Alberta Foundation, Calgary: 1990 
Crimp,, D. 
OnOn the Museum's Ruins, 
Cambridge:: MIT Press; 1993 
Cronin,, V. 
TheThe Flowering of the Renaissance, 
London:: Pimlico; 1969 
Csikszentmihalyi,, M. 
Flow,Flow, New York: Harpers; 1990 
Csikszentmihalyi,, M. 
TheThe Evolving Self, New York: Basic; 1993 
Csikszentmihalyi,, M. 
TalentedTalented Teens, New York: Harpers; 1990 
Csikszentmihalyi,, M. 
TheThe Art of Seeing, Malibu: Getty; 1990 
Cuzin,, J.P. and Dupuy M.A. eds. 
Copier,Copier, Créer, Paris: RME; 1993 
Dackman,, L. 
InvisibleInvisible Aesthetic: 
aa somewhat humorous, slightly profound 
interviewinterview with Frank Oppenheimer, 
Sann Francisco: Exploratorium; 1983 
Dagonet,, F. 
LeLe musée sans fin, 
Seyssel:: Champ Vallon; 1982 
Dalderup,, L. 
ScienceScience Policy and Public Understanding, 
London:: unpublished conference paper; 1990 
Dee Certeau, M. 
LaLa fable mystique, Paris: Gallimard; 1982 
Dee Salvo, D. 
PastPast Imperfect: A Museum Looks at Itself, 
Southampton:: The New Press; 1993 
dee Zeeuw, G. and Glanville, R. eds. 
CollectiveCollective Support Systems and their Users, 
Amsterdam:: OOC/Thesis; 1991 
Corsi,, P. ed. 
L'AccademiaL'Accademia dei Lincei e la cultura europea 
nelnel XVII secofo, 
Rome:: Accademia Nazionale dei Lincei; 1991 
Corsi,, P. ed. 
LaLa Fabrique de la Pensee, Milan: Electa; 1990 
Cöté,, M. ed. 
TendancesTendances de la museologie au Quebec, 
Montreal:: Pares Canada; 1992 
dee Zeeuw, G. and Koppelaar, H. 
ActingActing Organisational 
Knowledge, 
Amsterdam:: UVA/OOC; 1990 
dee Zeeuw, G. and Robinson, M. 
Support,Support, Survival, and Culture, 
Amsterdam:: UVA/OOC; 1988 
dee Zeeuw, G. 
ChaoticChaotic interaction ~ preparing for survival, 
Amsterdam:: UVA/OOC; 1991 
Craanen,, E. 
LeLe Kröller-Müller. un musée dans la nature, 
Paris:: Inst it ut Neérlandais; 1993 
Crane,, V. et al. 
InformalInformal Science Learning, 
Washington:: Research Communication; 1994 
dee Zeeuw, G. 
CompetenceCompetence and the observational language, 
Amsterdam:: UVA/OOC; 1991 
dee Zeeuw, G. 
CoordinatedCoordinated cooperation and increasing 
competence,competence, Amsterdam: UVA/OOC; 1990 
167 7 

dee Zeeuw, G. 
EducationEducation as a process 
ofof increasing access to societal resources, 
Amsterdam:: UVA/OOC; 1990 
dee Zeeuw, G. 
IncreaseIncrease of competence via shared 
workspaces,workspaces, Amsterdam: UVA/OOC; 1991 
dee Zeeuw, G. 
InnovationInnovation and increase of competence, 
Amsterdam:: UVA/OOC; 1991 
dee Zeeuw, G. 
SoftSoft Knowledge 
Accumulation, 
Amsterdam:: UVA/OOC; 1990 
Delacöte,, G. 
SavoirSavoir Apprendre: les nouvelles methodes, 
Paris:: Odile Jacob; 1996 
Oeloche,, B. 
Museologica,Museologica, Lyon: W/MNES; 1989 
Desvatlées,, A. ed. 
Vagues,Vagues, Lyon: editions W/MNES; 1992 
Deutschess Museum ed. 
GuideGuide through the Collections, 
Munich:: Verlag C.H. Beck; 1988 
Diamond,, J. 
TheThe Behavior of Family Groups 
inin Science Museums, 
Washington:: American Museum 
off Natural History; 1986 
Doherty,, P. and Rathjen, D. 
ExploratoriumExploratorium Science Snackbook, 
Sann Francisco: Exploratorium; 1991 
Oonnat,, O. and Cogneau, D. 
LesLes pratiques culturelles des francais 
1973-1989, 1973-1989, 
Paris:: La documentation franca ise; 1990 
Driver,, R. et al. 
Children'sChildren's Ideas in Science, 
Miltonn Keynes: Open University Press; 1985 
Duensing,, S. 
ExhibitExhibit Development as a Way of Thinking, 
unpublishedd lecture, Paris; 1993 
Duensing,, S. 
Explainers,, Learning and Culture, 
ECSITEECSITE newsletter, Spring 1993 
Duensing,, S. 
Museums,Museums, Ideas and Context: 
AA Cultural Exploration, 
unpublishedd roundtable notes, 
Amsterdam:: ECSITE; 1994 
Duensing,, S. 
ScienceScience centres and exploratories, 
1688 
Bristol: CIBA; 1987 
Duensing,, S. 
TheThe Museum as a Learning Laboratory, 
unpublishedd paper, 
Sann Francisco: Exploratorium; 1994 
Duncan,, C. 
CivilizingCivilizing Rituals, London: Routledge; 1995 
Durant,, J. ed. 
MuseumsMuseums and the public understanding 
ofof science, London: COPUS; 1992 
Eco,, U. 
ArtArt and Beauty in the Middle Ages, 
Neww Haven: Yale; 1986 
Eco,, U. 
LeLe signe, Paris: Livre de poche; 1988 
Edoh,, I. 
TheThe Thums Gardeners and Botanists, 
Covina:: Museum of Jurassic Technology; 1969 
Edwards,, C. et al eds. 
TheThe Hundred languages of Children, 
Norwood:: Ablex; 1993 
Eidelman,, J. etal 
EvaluationEvaluation d'audience de la galérie 
dede 1'evolution, Paris: CNRS/Paris V; 1990 
Eidelman,, J. etal 
LeLe retour des dinosuares, 
Paris:: CNRS/Paris V/INPSA; 1992 
Eidelman,, J. et al 
RepresentationsRepresentations sur la structure intern
dede la terre, Paris: URA/UP; 1991 
Eidelman,, J. 
EvaluationEvaluation d'audience du Palais 
dede la découverte, Paris: CNRS/Paris V; 1990 
Eidelman,, J. 
Genesee du Palais de la découverte. 
CahiersCahiers d'histoire de philosophie des sciences
No.. 24, Paris: La Cite; 1988 
Einsiedel,, E. 
ScientiftcScientiftc Literacy: 
AA Study of Adult Canadians, 
Ottawa:: SSHRC; 1990 
Eisner,, J. and Cardinal, R. 
TheThe Cultures of Collecting, 
London:: Reaktion; 1994 
Empson,, W. 
SevenSeven Types of Ambiguity, 
London:: Peregrine; 1961 
ErosEros und Mythos. Kunst am Hof Rudolfs II, 
Vienna:: Kunsthistorisches Museum Wien; 1995 
Evans,, R.J.W. 
RudolphRudolph II and his World, 
Oxford:: Clarendon; 1973 

Evers,, B. 
ArchitekturmodelleArchitekturmodelle der Renaissance, 
Berlin:: Kunstbibliothek/Prestel; 1995 
Eysenck,, M. 
AA Handbook of Cognitive Psychology, 
London:: Lawrence Erlbaum; 1984 
Falk,, J. and Dierking, L. 
TheThe Museum Experience, 
Washington:: Whalesback Books; 1992 
Farmelo,, G. 
DramaDrama on the galleries, 
London:: Science Museum; 1992 
Fauchereau,, S. 
ExpositionsExpositions et Affabulations, 
Paris:: Diagonales; 1992 
Ferretti,, S. 
Cassirer,Cassirer, Panofsky + Warburg, 
trans.. Pierce, R., New Haven: Yale; 1989 
Ferriot,, D. ed. 
LesLes Arts et Métiers en revolution, 
Seminarr proceedings, Paris: CNAM; 1993 
Ferriot,, D. ed. 
MuseologieMuseologie technique, 
Seminairee de recherche, Paris: CNAM; 1992 
Feynman,, R. 
WhatWhat is Science?, Acceptance Speech, 
Paris:: UNESCO; 1965 
Findlen,, P. 
PossessingPossessing Nature, 
Berkeley:: University of California; 1994 
Fitzhugh,, W.W. and Crowell, A. 
CrossroadsCrossroads of the Continents, 
Washington:: Smithsonian; 1988 
Florensky,, P. 
Ikonostas, Ikonostas, 
St.. Petersburg: Russkaq Kniga; 1993 
Florensky,, P. 
LaLa prospettiva rovessciata e altri scroti, 
trans.. Misler, N. Reggio Calabria: 
casaa del libro editrice; 1983 
Foucault,, M. 
L'ordreL'ordre du discours, 
Paris:: Gallimard/NRF; 1971 
Foucault,, M. 
LesLes mots et les choses, 
Paris:: Gallimard; 1990 
Foucault,, M. 
SurveillerSurveiller et punir, Paris: Gallimard; 1975 
FragmentsFragments d'identité 
desdes mémores québécoises, 
Quebec:: Musée de la civilisation; 1988 
Frazer,, J. 
AnAn Evolutionary Architecture, 
London:: Architectural Association; 1995 
Freedberg,, D. and de Vries, J. eds. 
ArtArt in History: History in Art, 
Santaa Monica: Getty Center; 1991 
French,, A.P. ed. 
Einstein:Einstein: le livre du centenaire, 
Paris:: Hier et Domain; 1979 
French,, P. 
JohnJohn Dee, 
London:: Routledge, Kegan, Paul; 1972 
Friebe,, W. 
BuildingsBuildings of the World Exhibitions, 
Leibzig:: GDR; 1985 
Friedd laender, W. 
MannerismMannerism and Anti-Mannerism in Italian 
Painting,Painting, New York: Schocken; 1965 
Friedman,, D. 
Thee Virtual Science Center, 
SpeculationsSpeculations in Science St Technology 15 
Fucikova,, E. et al. eds. 
PragPrag um 1600, vols. 1/2 and Beitrage, 
Essen:: LUCA; 1989 
Fucikova,, E., Bukovinska, B., and Muchka, I. 
DieDie Kunst am Hof e Rudolfs II, 
Prague:: Artia; 1988 
Fucikova,, E., Bukovinska, B., and Muchka, I. 
MonarqueMonarque et Mécène Rodolphe II, 
Prague:: Artie; 1988 
Fumaroli,, M. 
L'EtatL'Etat culture!, Paris: Editions de Fallois; 1991 
Geiger,, B. 
Arcimboldi,Arcimboldi, Florence: Vallecchi; 1954 
Geismar,, K. ed. 
DieDie Beredsamkeit des Leibes, 
Salzburg:: Residenz; 1992 
Geissmar-Brandi,, C. and Louis, E. 
GlaubeGlaube Hoffnung Liebe Tod, 
Vienna:: Albertina; 1995 
Gelder,, J. van, en Mulder, L. 
OpOp zoek naar de slapende reus: 
EvaluatieonderzoekEvaluatieonderzoek naar het spel 
„De„De Slapende Reus", 
Amsterdam:: Sociale psychologie 
Vrijee Universiteit Amsterdam; March 1998 
Fourez,, G. 
LaLa construction des sciences, 
Brussels:: De Boeck; 1988 
Georgel,, C. 
LaLa jeunesse des musées. Paris: RME; 1994 
169 

Gerdes,, P. 
Etnomathematica, Etnomathematica, 
Maputo:: Institute Superior Mathematico; 1991 
Gerdes,, P. 
ExplorationExploration of the mathematical potential of 
SONA,SONA, SAMSA 1991 
Gerdes,, P. 
LUSONALUSONA Geometrical Recreations of Africa, 
Maputo:: African Mathematical Union; 1991 
Giffords,, G.F. 
TheThe Art of Private Devotion, 
Fortt Worth: Meadows/lnterCultura; 1991 
Gilly,C. . 
CimeliaCimelia Rhodostaurotica, 
Amsterdam:: In de Pelikaan; 1995 
Giraudy,, D. and Bouilhet, H. 
LeLe musée et la vie, 
Paris:: La Documentation Francaise; 1977 
Glanville,, R. and de Zeeuw, G. 
MutualMutual Uses of cybernetics and science, 
Amsterdam:: Thesis; 1991 
Glanville,, R. and de Zeeuw, G. 
ProblemsProblems of support, survival, and culture, 
Amsterdam:: Thesis; 1993 
Glaser,, J.R. and Zenetou, A.A. eds. 
GenderGender Perspectives: Essays on Women 
inin Museums, Washington: Smithsonian; 1994 
GLCC ed. 
JohnJohn Joseph Merlin: The Ingenious Mechanic, 
London:: GLC; 1989 
Godwin,, J. 
RobertRobert Fludd, London:Thames and Hudson; 1979 
Goldfarbb Marquis, A. 
AlfredAlfred H. Barn missionary for the modern, 
Neww York: Contemporary Books; 1989 
Gombrich,, E. 
AbyAby Warburg, Oxford: Phaidon; 1986 
Gombrich,, E. and Eribon, 0. 
LookingLooking for Answers, New York: Abrams; 1993 
Good,, P. 
HermesHermes Oder die Philosophie der Insel 
Hombroich,Hombroich, Insel Hombroich: Neuss; 1987 
Gopnik,, A. 
HighHigh & Low, New York: MOMA; 1990 
Gordon,, D.J., Orgel, S. 
TheThe Renaissance Imagination, 
Berkeley:: Univercity of California Press; 1980 
Gottesdeiner,, H. 
EvaluerEvaluer 1'exposition, 
1700 
Paris: La documentation francaise; 1987 
Gottesdiener,, H. ed. 
PublicsPublics et musées NoA, PUL 1992 
Gottesdiener,, H. ed. 
PublicsPublics et musées No.2, PUL 1992 
Gottesdiener,, H. ed. 
PublicsPublics et musées No.3, PUL 1993 
Gottesdiener,, H. ed. 
PublicsPublics et musées No.4, PUL 1993 
Gottesdiener,, H. ed. 
PublicsPublics et musées No.5, PUL 1994 
Gottesdiener,, H. ed. 
PublicsPublics et musées No.6, PUL 1994 
Gouk,, P. 
TheThe Ivory Sundials of Nuremberg, 
Cambridge:: Whipple Museum; 1988 
Gould,, S.J. and Wolff-Purcell, R. 
Finders,Finders, Keepers, London: Pimlico; 1992 
Grafton,, A. and Blair, A. eds. 
TheThe Transmission of Culture in early 
ModernModern Europe, Philadelphia: 
Universityy of Pennsylvania; 1990 
Grafton,, A. and Jardine, L. eds. 
FromFrom Humanism to the Humanities, 
London:: Duckworth; 1986 
Grafton,, A. 
DefendersDefenders of the Text, 
Cambridge:: Harvard University; 1994 
Grafton,, A. 
NewNew Worlds, Ancient Texts, 
Cambridge:: Harvard University; 1992 
Gratzer,, W. ed. 
AA Literary Companion to Science, 
London:: Longman; 1989 
Greenaway,, P. 
TheThe Physical Self, 
Rotterdam:: Museum Beuymans; 1991 
Greenberg,, R., ed. 
ThinkingThinking about Exhibitions, 
London:: Routledge; 1996 
Gregory,, R., Harris, J., Heard, P., Rose, D. 
TheThe Artful Eye, 
Oxford:: Oxford University Press, 1995 
Gregory,, R. 
AA Feeling for Science, New Scientist; 17/11/1983 
Gregory,, R. 
Hands-onHands-on Science, London: Duckworth; 1986
Gregory,, R. 
HowHow hands-on exploration may turn minds 
onon to science, unpublished paper: Bristol; 1989 

Gregory,, R.L. 
First-handFirst-hand science: the Exploratory in Bristol, 
Sciencee and Public Affairs 3,13-24, 
London;1988 8 
Grierson,, R. ed 
AfricanAfrican Zon, London: Yale/lnterCultura; 1992 
Grierson,, R. ed 
TheThe Gates of Mystery, Fort Worth: InterCultura; 
1992 2 
Grogg,, A. 
MuseumsMuseums Count, Washington: American 
Associationn of Museums; 1994 
Grote,, A. ed. 
MacrocosmosMacrocosmos in Mkrocosmo, 
Berlin:: Leske + Budrich; 1994 
Habermas,, J. trans.Ladmiral, J.R. 
LaLa technique et la science comme 'ideologie', 
Paris:: Gallimard; 1973 
Hale,, J. 
TheThe Civilisation of Europe in the Renaissance, 
London:: Harpers; 1993 
Hancocks,, 0. 
AnimalsAnimals and arhitecture, 
London:: Hugh Evelyn; 1971 
Hein,, G. ed. 
MuseumsMuseums for integration in a muticultural 
society,society, Calcutta: INC/ICOM/CECA; 1993 
Hein,, H. 
TheThe Exploratorium: Museum as Laboratory, 
Washingtonn DC: Smithsonian; 1990 
Héritier-Augé,, F. 
LesLes musées de /'Education nationale, 
Paris:: Documentation francaise; 1991 
Hersey,, G.L. 
TheThe Evolution of Allure, Cambridge: MIT; 1996 
Hood,, M. 
LeisureLeisure Preferences are the key 
toto science centre audience research, 
unpublishedd paper, 
Vantaa:: World Science Centre Congress; 1996 
Hoodbhoy,, P. 
IslamIslam and Science, London: Zed; 1991 
Hooper-Greenhill,, E. 
MuseumsMuseums and the Shaping of Knowledge, 
London:: Routledge; 1992 
Hooper-Greenhill,, E. 
MuseumsMuseums and their Visitors, 
London:: Routledge; 1994 
Horssen,, C. van 
PrivatePrivate pretplaatsen: Over privatisering, 
vermaakvermaak en veiligheid, scriptie sociologie, 
Universiteitt van Amsterdam; 1997. 
Housen,, A. 
Threee Methods for Understanding Museum 
Audiences,, Museum Studies Journal; 
Spring-Summerr 1987 
Hoving,, T. 
MakingMaking the Mummies Dance, 
Neww York: Simon and Schuster; 1993 
Hudson,, K. A 
SocialSocial History of Museums, 
Atlanticc Highlands: Humanities Press; 1975 
Hudson,, K. 
MuseumsMuseums of Influence, 
Cambridge:: Cambridge University Press; 1987 
Hudson,, K. 
19921992 - Prayer or Promise?, 
London:: HMSO; 1990 
Hulten,, P. ed. 
WundericammmerWundericammmer des Abendlandes, 
Bonn:: Kunst und Austellungshalle; 1995 
Higuchi,, T. 
TheThe Visual and Spatial Structure of Landscapes, 
Cambridge:: The MIT Press; 1988 
Hulten,, P. 
TheThe Arcimboldo Effect, 
Milan:: Bompiani/Palazzo Grassi; 1987 
Hillegers,, E. 
HetHet thema telecommunicatie in newMetropolis: 
EenEen stageverslag. Cultuur- en wetenschaps-
studiess Universiteit Maastricht; December 1997 
Hipschman,, R. 
TheThe Exploratorium Cookbook II, 
Sann Francisco: Exploratorium; 1980 
Hipschman,, R. 
TheThe Exploratorium Cookbook III, 
Sann Francisco: Exploratorium; 1987 
Hocke,, G.R. 
DieDie Welt als Labyrinth, 
Hamburg:: Rowohlt; 1987 
Hunt,, L, ed. 
TheThe Invention of Pornography, 
Neww York: Zone; 1993 
Huntley,, H. E. 
TheThe Divine Proportion, New York: Dover; 1970 
ICSPS, , 
ScienceScience and technology in developing 
countries,countries, Paris: UNESCO; 1992 
Iglauer,, E., 
SevenSeven Stones, 
aa portrait of Arthur Erickson, architect, 
Penderr Harbour Harbour Publishing/ 
Universityy of Washington Press; 1981 
171 1 

Impey,, O. and Macgregor, A. 
TheThe origins of museums, 
Oxford:: Clarendon Press; 1985 
Irons,, G. ed. 
Gender,Gender, language, and myth, 
Toronto:: University of Toronto Press; 1992 
Jacomy,, B. ed. 
DeDe l'Éole a Hermès, Paris: CNAM; 1991 
Jacomy,, B. ed. 
DeDe la machine a calculer 
dede Pascal a I'ordinateur, Paris: CNAM; 1990 
Jacomy,, B. ed. 
LanterneLanterne magique et fanstasmagoire, 
Paris:: CNAM; 1990 
Jacomy,, B. 
UneUne histoire des techniques, 
Paris:: Seuil; 1990 
Janess R. 
MuseumsMuseums and the paradox of change, 
Calgary:: the Glenbow Museum; 1995 
Janik,, A. and Toulmin, S. 
Wittgenstein'sWittgenstein's Vienna, 
Neww York, Simon and Shuster; 1973 
Janssen,, F.A. ed. 
500500 Years of Gnosis in Europe, 
Amsterdam:: In de Pelikaan; 1993 
Janssen,, F.A. ed. 
HermesHermes Trismegistus, Pater Philosophorum, 
Amsterdam:: Bibliotheca Philosophies 
Hermetica;; 1990 
Janssen,, RA. ed. 
TheThe Hermetic Gnosis, 
Amsterdam:: Bibliotheca Philosophies 
Hermetica;; 1988 
Jarrige,, J.F. 
ArtArt ésotérique de l'Himêlaya, Paris: RME; 1991 
Johnson,, J. 
Thee business of science education. 
ScientificScientific American 10/90 
Jones,, M. 
Fake?Fake? The Art of Deception, 
London:: British Museum Publications; 1990 
Jones,, R.F. 
AncientsAncients and Modems, 
Neww York: Dover; 1961 
Kaplan,, M. 
HowHow to Visit a Museum, 
Neww York: Abrams; 1985 
Karp,, I. and Levine, S.D. eds. 
ExhibitingExhibiting Cultures, 
1722 
Washington: Smithsonian; 1990 
Karp,, I. et al eds. 
MuseumsMuseums and Communities, 
Washington:: Smithsonian; 1992 
Karp,, D. R. 
Arss Medica: Art, Medicine, and the Human 
Condition,Condition, New York: Philadelphia Museu
off Art; 1972 
Kaufmann,, T. Da Costa, 
Court,Court, Cloister, & City, 
London:: Weidenfeld & Nicolson; 1995 
Kaufmann,, T. Da Costa, 
DrawingsDrawings from the 
HolyHoly Roman Empire 1540-1680, 
Princeton:: Princeton University; 1983 
Kaufmann,, T. Da Costa, 
TheThe Mastery of Nature, 
Princeton:: Princeton University; 1993 
Kaufmann,, T. Da Costa, 
TheThe School of Prague. Painting at the Court 
ofof Rudolf II, Chicago and London: 
Thee University of Chicago Press; 1988 
Kaufmann,, T. Da Costa, 
Astronomy,Astronomy, Technology, Humanism a
atat the Entry of Rudolph II into Vienna, 1577, 
Jahrbuchh der Kunsthistorischen Sammlungen 
inn Wien, Sonderheft No. 330, 
Wien:: Anthon Schroll & Co.; 1990 
Kavanagh,, G. 
DreamsDreams and nightmares, 
London:: Science Museum; 1992 
Kavanagh,, G. 
MuseumMuseum Languages, 
Leicester:: Leicester University Press; 1991 
Keller,, E. 
FoxFox Reflections on gender and science. 
Neww Haven: Yale; 1985 
Kemp,, M. and Roberts eds., J. 
LeonardoLeonardo da Vinci, London: Yale; 1989 
Kemp,, M. 
TheThe Science of Art. Optical themes in Western 
ArtArt from Brunelleschi to Seurat, New Haven & 
London:: Yale University Press; 1990 
Kermode,, F. 
TheThe Genesis of Secrecy, Cambridge: Harvard; 19
Kesmaat,, E., Cuivre, M. Ie, en verhoeven, L 
WolWol of piepschuim: Een onderzoek naar 
dede tekstpanelen op de energiezone van 
newMetropolis,newMetropolis, Sociale psychologie
Vrijee Universiteit Amsterdam; March 1998 
Kirkhamm P. 
CharlesCharles and Ray Eames - designers of the 
twentiethtwentieth century, Boston: Massachusetts
Institutee of Technology; 1995 

Klages,, E. 
WhenWhen the right answer is a question, 
Sann Francisco: Exploratorium; 1995 
Klawe,, M. etal. 
ExploringExploring Common Conceptions About Boys 
andand Electronic Games, unpublished research: 
Vancouver/Kingston:: E-GEMS; 1994 
Klawe,, M. et al. 
WeWe have never-forgetful flowers in our garden: 
girls'girls' responses to electronic games, 
unpublishedd research, Vancouver/Kingston: 
E-GEMS;; 1994 
Kniese,, M., Visser M., en Németh E. 
NewMetropolis,NewMetropolis, 
kennismarkt of futuristische 
speeltuin?;speeltuin?; Onderzoeksverslag over de rode 
draad,draad, het thema en de waardering van de 
bezoekersbezoekers van de energiezone in newMetropolis, 
Socialee psychologie Vrije Universiteit 
Amsterdam;; March 1998 
Konecny,, L 
SourcesSources and Significance of Two Mythological 
pintingspintings by Bartolomaus Spranger, 
Jahrbuchh der Kunsthistorischen Sammlungen 
inn Wien, Sonderheft No. 324, 
Wien:: Anthon Schroll & Co.; 1990 
Koshalek,, R. and Brougher, K. 
RobertRobert Irwin, New York: Rizzoli; 1993 
Kosuth,, J. 
TheThe Play of the Unmentionable, 
London:: Thames and Hudson; 1992 
Kramer,, J., Pereira, R, en Wacano, C. 
LifeLife is a tankergame: Psychology or 
philosophy,philosophy, Sociale psychologie 
Vrijee Universiteit Amsterdam; March 1998 
Kraus,, K. 
Aphorismen,Aphorismen, Berlin: Suhrkamp; 1986 
Kraus,, K. trans. Zohn, H. 
Half-truthsHalf-truths and one-and-a-half truths, 
Manchester:: Carcanet; 1986 
Krenn,, S. ed. 
DerDer Kaiserliche Schatz bei der Kapuziner-Gruft 
undund seine Inventare, Jahrbuch der Kunst-
historischenn Sammlungen in Wien, Sonderheft 
No.. 320, Wien: Anthon Schroll & Co.; 1988 
Kriegeskorte,, W. 
Arcimboldo,Arcimboldo, Cologne: Taschen; 1993 
Kristeva,, J. var. trans. 
DesireDesire in Language, Oxford: Blackwell; 1987 
Kugler,, G. et al eds. 
TrésorsTrésors des empereurs 
d'Autriche, 
Quebec:: Musée de la civilisation; 1994 
Kuh,, K. 
Leger,Leger, Chicago: The Art Institute of Chicago; 1953 
Langer,, S.K. 
FeelingFeeling and Form, New York: Scribners; 1953 
Latour,, B. 
Aramis,Aramis, ou I'amour des techniques, 
Paris:: Editions de la découverte; 1992 
Latour,, B. 
LaLa science en action, 
Paris:: Editions de la découverte; 1989 
Latour,, B. 
LaLa vie de laboratoire, 
Paris:: Editions de la découverte; 1988 
Lavrijsen,, R. 
CulturalCultural diversity in the arts, 
Amsterdam:: Royal Tropical Institute; 1993 
Lawler,, J. 
PaulPaul Valery: An Anthology, 
London:: Routledge Kegan Paul; 1977 
LeGoff,J. . 
LaLa naissance du Purgatoire, 
Paris:: Folio; 1991 
Leek,, J. and Brouwer, B. 
VideogamesVideogames and visual imagery, 
unpublishedd master's thesis, 
Amsterdam:: UvA; 1994 
Lenzuni,, A. 
All'All' ombro del Lauro, Florence: Silvana; 1992 
Levy,, S. 
Cogs,Cogs, Cranks & Crates, Washington: ASTC; 1989 
Levy-Leblond,, J-M. 
Aboutt Misunderstandings About 
Misunderstandings,, ASTC Newsletter; 
September/Octoberr 1992 
Levy-Leblond,, J-M. ed. 
Alliage,Alliage, Nos. 1-15 
Levy-Leblond,, J-M. 
Laa culture scientifique en questions. 
SciencesSciences & Avenir 07/1989 
Levy-Leblond,, J-M. 
Mettree la science en culture, ANAIS1984 
Levy-Leblond,, J-M. 
Vrai,, si... faux, mais ..., Traverses 11/1989 
Levy-Leblond,, J-M. 
L'espritL'esprit de sel, Paris: Fayard; 1981 
Lhotsky,, A. 
DieDie Geschichte der 
Sammlungen, 
FestschriftFestschrift des Kunsthistorisches 
Museum 
volss 1-2, Vienna: Ferdinand Berger Verlag; 1941 
Link,, L. 
TheThe Devil Without a Face, 
London:: Reaktion; 1995 

Lobeli,, J. 
BetweenBetween Silence and Light, 
Boston:: Shambala; 1979 
Lowenthal,, D. 
TheThe Past is a Foreign Country, 
Cambridge:: CUP; 1985 
Lugli,, A. 
NaturaliaNaturalia et Mirabilia, 
Milan:: Mazzotta; 1983 
Lumley,, R. 
TheThe Museum Time Machine, 
London:: Routledge; 1989 
Luria,, A.L. trans. Solotaroff, L. 
TheThe Man with a Shattered World, 
London:: Penguin; 1975 
Luria,, A.L. trans. Solotaroff, L. 
TheThe Mind of a Mnemonist, 
Cambridge:: Harvard; 1987 
Lurie,, A., 
Don'tDon't tell the Grown-ups, 
London:: Bloomsbury Publishing; 1990 
Lussato,, B. 
Décodage,Décodage, Paris: InterEditions; 1993 
Lyotard,, J.F. 
LesLes immatériaux, Paris: Expomedia; 1986 
MacGregor,, A. 
Tradescant'sTradescant's Rarities, 
Neww York: Oxford University Press; 1983 
MacLean,, A. ed. 
TheThe Silent Language, 
Amsterdam:: In de Pelikaan; 1994 
Mai,, E. 
Expositionen:Expositionen: Geschichte und Kritik 
desdes Ausstellungswesens, 
Berlin:: Deutscher Kunstverlag; 1986 
Martii nel lo, M. 
DevelopingDeveloping and Assessing Children's Scie
observationobservation and inferential thinking throu
aa museum-school program, Austin: Depart-
mentt of Education; 1986 
Martinello,, M. 
TheThe Search for Emma's Story, Fort Worth: 
Texass Christian University Press; 1987 
Mathieuu et al. 
LaLa culture scientifique dans Ie monde 
contemporain,contemporain, Scientia, Paris: UNESCO
Matusov,, E. and Rogoff, B. 
Evidencee of Development from People's 
Participationn in Communities of Learners, 
proceedingss of Public Institutions for Personal 
Learning:Learning: The Long-term Impact of Museum
Annapolis:: NSF; 1994 
Mazuzan,, G. 
TheThe National Science Foundation: 
AA Brief History, Washington DC: NSF; 1985 
McClellan,, A. 
InventingInventing the Louvre: art, politics, 
andand the origins of the modern 
museum 
inin 18th century Paris, 
Cambridge:: Cambridge University Press; 1994 
McKenzie,, D. F. 
LaLa bibliographic et la sociologie des textes, 
Paris:: Cercle de la librairie; 1991 
McLean,, K. 
PlanningPlanning for People in Museums, 
Washington:: ASTC; 1993 
McManus,, P. Families in Museums, 
inn Miles, R., and Zavala, L. eds. 
TowardsTowards the Museum of the Future, 
London:: Routledge; 1994 
McManus,, P. 
Watchh Your Language!, ILVS Review 1(2); 1990 
174 4 
Maiorino,, G. 
77iee Portrait of Eccentricity, Philadelphia: 
Universityy of Pennsylvania; 1991 
Maland,, D. 
EuropeEurope in the Seventeenth Century, 
London:: Macmillan; 1991 
Manuel,, M. 
AA History of Reading, 
Neww York: Harpers; 1996 
Marsh,, C. 
TheThe Museum as an Instrument of Change, 
unpublishedd paper, 
Amsterdam:: ECSITE; 1994 
Marti,, L 
L'enfantL'enfant dans la guerre, 
Muséee de la Croix Rouge, Geneve: CICR; 1990 
McNamara,, P. 
Tryingg It Out, ILVS Review 1(2); 1990 
Mercier,, J. 
LeLe roi Salomon et les maitres du regard, 
Paris:: RME; 1992 
Merkx,, F. 
PublicPublic understanding of science in 
newMetropolisnewMetropolis science & technology ce
Vakgroepp Filosofie van Wetenschap 
enn Techniek, Universiteit Twente; June1998 
Merriman,, N. 
BeyondBeyond the Glass Case, 
Leicester:: Leicester University Press; 1991 
Miichaud.Y. . 
EnseignerEnseigner L' Art? Analyses et reflexions sur 
écolesécoles d'art, Nimes/Marseille: Chambon; 1993 

Miles,, R. 
ExhibitionsExhibitions and the public understanding 
ofof science, London: Science Museum; 1992 
Miles,, R. 
devaluationdevaluation au service des strategies commu-
nicationelles,nicationelles, unpublished paper: Paris; 1991 
Miles,, R., and Zavala, L. eds. 
TowardsTowards the Museum of the Future, 
London:: Routledge; 1994 
Miller,, A. 
ImageryImagery in Scientific Thought 
Boston:: MIT; 1986 
Miller,, G. and Gildea, P. 
HowHow Children Learn Words, 
Scientificc American; September 1987 
Miller,, J.D. 
TheThe Impact of Science and Technology 
Museums,Museums, London: conference paper; 1992 
Miller,, J.D. 
TheThe Public Understanding of Scientific Enquiry, 
unpublishedd paper, Beijing: Chicago Academy 
off Sciences; 1995 
Ministèree de culture, 
Musées,Musées, état et culture. 
Paris:: La documentation francaise; 1991 
Monmaney,, T. 
TheThe Dinosaur Heretic, New Yorker May 31,1993 
Moore,, H. ed. 
Laa vulgarisation scientifique 
danss un monde qui change. Impact 152 
Moore,, H. ed. 
Laa vulgarisation scientifique: son histoire, 
sess succes. Impact 144 
Morrison,, K.F. 
HistoryHistory as a Visual Art, Princeton: Princeton; 1990 
Morton,, A. 
ScienceScience in the 18th Century, 
London:: Science Museum; 1993 
Moulin,, R. ed. 
SociologieSociologie de Van, 
Paris:: La documentation francaise, 1986 
Mraz,, G. and Haupt, H. ed. 
InventaarInventaar der Kunstkammer und Bibliothek 
desdes Erherzogs Lepold Wilhelm aus dem Jahre 
1647,1647, Jahrbuch der Kunsthistorischen 
Sammlungenn in Wien, Sonderheft No. 272, 
Wien:: Anthon Schroll & Co.; 1981 
Muchka,, I. 
DieDie Prager Burg zur Zeit Rudolphs II - Neue 
Forschungsergebnisse,Forschungsergebnisse, Jahrbuch der Kunst-
historischenn Sammlungen in Wien, Sonderheft 
No.. 329, Wien: Anthon Schroll & Co.; 1990 
Muller,, J. 
LesLes Logithèques, 
Paris:: Editions du cercle de la librairie; 1991 
Muller,, G. 
Fenomena,Fenomena, Zurich: Zürcher Forum; 1985 
Munley,, M. ed. 
CatalystsCatalysts for Change, Washington: 
Kelloggg Projects for Education; 1986 
Murphy,, P. ed. 
TheThe Exploratorium, Special Issue, March 1985, 
Sann Francisco; 1995 
Murphy,, P. 
ExploringExploring Fakes, Exploratorium Quarterly 
Vol.155 No. 4, San Francisco: Exploratorium; 1991 
Murphy,, P. 
ExploringExploring Navigation, Exploratorium Quarterly 
Vol.155 No.1, San Francisco: Exploratorium; 1991 
Negroponte,, N. 
TheThe Architecture Machine, 
Boston:: MIT Press; 1970 
Nicholl,, C. 
TheThe Chemical Theatre, 
London:: Routledge, Kegan, Paul; 1980 
Nicholson,, S. 
Thee Theory of Loose Parts, 
LandscapeLandscape Architecture Quarterly 1972 (2) 
Niquette,, M. 
Laa sociabilité au musée, 
OCIMOCIM Newsletter, Dijon: CIRST; 1995 
Noever,, P ed. 
MAK:MAK: Austrian Museum of Applied Arts, 
Munich:: Prestel; 1993 
Noever,, P ed. 
TraditionTradition und Experiment, 
Salzburg:: Residenz; 1988 
Noever,, P. 
EinEin Stein für die Kunst, Stuttgart: Hatje; 1994 
Noss,, R. 
7hee computer's influence on children's 
mathematicalmathematical culture 
Notess et documents des Musees de France, 
MuseologieMuseologie et ethnologie, 
Paris:: La Reunion des musees nationaux; 1987 
O'Doherty, , 
InsideInside the White Cube, 
Santaa Monica: Lapis; 1976 
Officee of Scientific and 
Engineeringg Personnel and Education, 
ScienceScience and Engineering Education: 
DataData and Information, Washington DC: 
Nationall Science Foundation; 1982 

Opie,, I. and Opie, P. 
Children'sChildren's Games in Street and Playground, 
Oxford:: Oxford University Press; 1984 
Opie,, I. and Opie, P. 
TheThe Lore and Language of Schoolchildren, 
Oxford:: Oxford University Press; 1987 
Opie,, I. 
TheThe People in the Playground, 
Oxford:: Oxford University Press; 1994 
Oppenn heimer, F. et al. 
WorkingWorking Prototypes, 
Sann Francisco: Exploratorium; 1986 
Os,, H. van ed. 
TheThe Art of Devotion, 
London:: Merrell Holberton; 1994 
Oxenaar,, R.W.D. ed. 
Kröller-Müller, Kröller-Müller, 
Otterloo:: Kröller-Müller Foundation; 1988 
Paillat,, P. 
LesLes pratiques culturelles des person nes êgées. 
Paris:: La documentation francaise; 1993 
Panofsky,, E. 
Galilee,Galilee, critique de l'art, trans. Heinich, N. 
Paris:: Impresions nouvelles; 1992 
Parr,, A. E. 
Refugee from the Other-direction, 
Discovery,Discovery, Volume 9, No. 1, New Haven; 1973 
Pask,, G. and de Zeeuw, G. 
InteractionInteraction of Actors Theory, 
Amsterdam:: UVA/OOC; 1991 
Pask,, G. 
ConversationConversation and Support, 
Amsterdam:: OOC/UVA; 1987 
Patte,, G. 
Laissez-Laissez- les lire I, 
Paris:: Enfance heureuse; 1987 
Peacock,, J. L. 
TheThe Anthropological Lens, 
Cambridge:: CUP; 1986 
Pearce,, S. ed. 
InterpretingInterpreting Objects and Collections, 
London:: Routledge; 1994 
Pearce,, S. 
MuseumsMuseums Objects and Collections, 
Leicester:: Leicester University Press; 1992 
Pedretti,, A. and de Zeeuw, G. eds. 
ProblemsProblems of Levels and Boundaries, 
London:: Princelet; 1981 
Pennac,, D. 
CommeComme un roman, 
Paris:: Gallimard/NRF; 1992 
Pennington,, D.H. 
EuropeEurope in the Seventeenth Century, 
London:: Longman; 1989 
Perkins,, S. 
Experience,Experience, London: Booth-Clibborn; 1
Pinker,, S. 
TheThe Language Instinct, 
London:: Penguin; 1994 
Piotrovsky,, M. ed. 
TheThe Lost Empire of the Silk Road, 
Milan:: Electa; 1993 
Pitman-Gelles,, B. 
Museums,Museums, Magic & Children, 
Washington:: ASTC; 1981 
Podro,, M. 
TheThe Critical Historians of Art, 
Neww Haven: Yale; 1982 
Poivree D'Arvor, O. ed. 
HistoiresHistoires de bibliothèques, 
Paris:: Eric Koehler; 1992 2 
Pomian,, K. 
Collectionneurs,Collectionneurs, amateurs et curi
Paris:: Gallimard; 1987 
Pomian,, K. 
L'ordreL'ordre du temps, Paris: Gallimard; 1990 
Porush,, D. 
TheThe Soft Machine: Cybernetic Fiction, 
London:: Methuen; 1985 
Postman,, N. 
Technopoly,Technopoly, New York: Vintage Books
Prats,, C. & Flos, J. 
EcologyEcology at an Exhibition, 
unpublishedd paper; 1991 
Price,, C. 
CedricCedric Price - Works II, 
London:: Architectural Association; 1984 
Price,, M. and Beal, G. eds. 
1010 + 10, New York / St. Petersburg: 
Abrams// Aurora; 1989 
Price,, S. 
PrimitivePrimitive art in civilized places, 
Chicago:: The University of Chicago Press; 1991 
Quéau,, P. 
LeLe temps du virtue!, unpublished paper, 
Paris:: Palais de la Découverte; 1993 
Quin,, M., ed. 
DoingDoing it for real, Bloemendaal: Aramith; 1993 
Quin,, M., ed. 
SharingSharing Science, 
London:: COPUS/Nuffield; 1989 

Raichvarg,, D. 
SavantsSavants et ignorante. Paris: Seuil; 1991 
Railing,, P. 
FromFrom science to systems of art, 
Sussex:: Artists Bookworks; 1989 
Raphael,, S. 
TheatresTheatres of Memory, 
London:: Verso; 1994 
Regeer,, B. 
TwoTwo Paradoxes and a Triangle: The Public 
UnderstandingUnderstanding of Science Exhibited, 
eindscriptiee wetenschapsdynamica. 
Universiteitt van Amsterdam; 1996 
Rhie,, M. and Thurman, R.A.F. 
WisdomWisdom and Compassion, 
Neww York: Abrams; 1991 
Rieu,, A.M. 
LesLes visiteurs et leurs musées, 
Paris:: La documentation franchise; 1986 
Rimmon-Kennan,, S. 
NarrativeNarrative Fiction, London: Methuen; 1983 
Ripa,, C. ed Maser, E.A. 
BaroqueBaroque and Rococo pictorial imagery, 
Neww York: Dover; 1971 facs. 
Ripley,, D. 
TheThe Sacred Grove, 
Washington:: Smithsonian; 1969 
Riviere,, G. H. 
LaLa Museologie, Paris: Dunod; 1989 
Robin,, H. 
TheThe Scientific Image, 
Neww York: Abrams; 1992 
Rönneper,, J. 
DieDie Welt der Museen, 
Frankfurt:: tnsel Verlag; 1993 
Roschelle,, J. 
LearningLearning in Interactive Environments: 
PriorPrior Knowledge and New Experience, 
unpublishedd paper, Dartmouth; 1994 
Rosen,, D. and S. 
LondonLondon Science, 
London:: Prion; 1994 
Rosenfield,, I. 
TheThe Invention of Memory, 
Neww York: Basic; 1988 
Ross,, R. 
Museology, Museology, 
Santaa Barbara: New Images/Aperture; 1989 
Rossi,, C. 
ClavisClavis Universalis, 
Florence:: Einaudi; 1986 
Royall Ontario Museum, 
CommunicatingCommunicating with the museum visitor, 
Toronto:: ROM; 1976 
Royall Ontario Museum, 
Hands-on:Hands-on: Creating your own Discovery Room, 
Toronto:: ROM; 1976 
Royall Ontario Museum, 
InIn Search of the Black Box, 
Toronto:: ROM; 1979 
Royall Ontario Museum, 
TheThe Museum and the visually Impaired, 
Toronto:: ROM; 1980 
Rubin,, M. 
CorpusCorpus Christi, Cambridge: CUP; 1991 
Sacks,, O. 
SeeingSeeing Voices, 
Berkeley:: University of California; 1989 
Sale,, R. 
Ontario'ss Open Laboratory, 
NewNew Scientist 8/08/1992 
Samson,, D. 
LaLa frame narrative, le multi-media et 
/'exposition,/'exposition, unpublishd paper, 
Paris:: Palais de la Découverte; 1993 
Sarnitz,, A. ed. 
MuseumsMuseums Positionen, Vienna: Residenz; 1992 
Sawday,, J. 
TheThe Body Emblazoned, 
London:: Routledge; 1995 
Schacter,, D.L. 
SearchingSearching for Memory, New York: Basic; 1996 
Schaer,, R. 
L'inventionL'invention des musées, Paris: Gallimard; 1989 
Schaik,, J. van 
ArgumenterenArgumenteren en debatteren over de 
toekomst:toekomst: Argumenteren en debatteren over 
dede toekomst van Nederland met behulp 
vanvan het videodebat 'Nederland 2030" in 
newMetropolis,newMetropolis, Amsterdam; January 1998 
Schama,, S. 
LandscapeLandscape & Memory, 
London:: HarperCollins; 1995 
Schama,, S. 
TheThe Embarrassment of Riches, 
Berkeley:: University of California; 1988 
Schiele,, B. and Samson, D. 
devaluationdevaluation museale: publics et expositions, 
Paris:: Expomedia; 1989 
Schiele,, B. and Tarpin, C. 
LeLe jeu et ses images: une étude qualitative. 
Cahierss de recherche No. 4, 
Quebec:: Musée de la civilisation; 1991 

Schiele,, B. ed. 
LaLa divulgation du savoir, 
Quebec,, Protóe Vol. 16, no. 3/Expomedia; 1988 
Schiele,, B., Boucher, L, Perraton, G., 
Gel,Gel, uneexpo!. Paris: Expomedia; 1989 
Schiele,, B., Davallon, J. and Grandmont, G., 
L'environnementL'environnement entre au musée, 
Lyon:: PUL; 1992 
Schiele,, B., ed. 
FaireFaire voir, faire savoir, 
Quebec:: Musée de la civilisation; 1989 
Schlossenberg,, E. 
TheThe pirated edition of how I learn how I learn, 
London:: Princelet; 1984 
Schlosser,, J. 
KunstKunst und Wunderkammern, 
Braunschweig:: Klinkhardt & Biermann; 1978 
Schmidt,, B. 
ÜberÜber 'LAB-ARTist', Vienna: Splitter; 1993 
Schöffer,, N. 
LaLa ville cybernétique, Paris: Tchou; 1969 
Schroeder-Gudehus,, B. and Rasmussen, 
A.A. Les Pastes du Progrès, 
Paris:: Flammarion; 1992 
Schwarz,, M. ed. 
WereldWereld tentoonstellingen, 
Amsterdam:: KVGO; 1991 
Schwarz,, M. 
TechnologicalTechnological culture and the politics 
ofof technology, Amsterdam: De Balie; 1990 
Schwarzkopf,, H.P. 
SehnsuchtSehnsucht nach Vollkommenheit, 
Berlin:: Argon; 1995 
Sciencee Alberta Foundation, 
PilotPilot Project: Report & Recommendations, 
Calgary:: Science Alberta Foundation; 1992 
Sciencee Museum, 
HealthHealth Matters, 
London:: Science Museum; 1994 
Sciencee Museum, 
TheThe Garden, London: Science Museum; 1996 
Sciencee Museum, 
TheThe secret life of the home, 
London:: Science Museum; 1996 
Sciencee Museum, 
Things, Things, 
London:: Science Museum; 1996 
Screven,, C. 
Usess of Evaluation, before, during, and 
1788 
after Exhibit Design, ILVS Review 1 (2); 1990 
Screven,, C.G. 
Exhibitionss and Information Centers: Some 
Principless and Approaches, Curator 29/2; 1986. 
Searte,, J. 
SpeechSpeech Acts, Cambridge: CUP; 1969 
Selwood,, S, Schwarz, B. and Merriman, N. 
TheThe Peopling of London, 
London:: The Museum of London; 1996 
Semper,, R. 
ScienceScience Museums as Environments 
forfor Learning, American Institute of Physics; 
1990 0 
Sennett,, R. 
FleshFlesh and Stone, 
Neww York: Random House; 1994 
Serrell,, B. ed. 
WhatWhat research says about learning in 
sciencescience museums, Washington: ASTC; 1990
Serrell,, B. 
ExhibitExhibit Labels, an Interpretive Approach, 
Walnutt Creek: Sage; 1996 
Shamos,, M. 
TheThe Myth of Scientific Literacy, 
Neww Brunswick: Rutgers; 1995 
Shapin,, S. 
AA Social History of Truth, 
Chicago:: University of Chicago; 1994 
Sheets-Pyenson,, S. 
CathedralsCathedrals of Science, 
Kingston:: Queens University Press; 1988 
Sherman,, 0. and Rogoff, I. eds. 
MuseumMuseum Culture, Minneapolis: University o
Minnesotaa Press; 1994 
Shortland,, M. 
Noo business like show business 
NatureNature Vol 328; 1987 
Sicotte,, G, Séguin F. and Lapierre L. 
RolandRoland Arpin et Ie musée de la civilisation, 
Quebec:: Presses de l'Université du Quebec; 
1993 3 
Silverstone,, R. 
CommunicatingCommunicating science to the pub
unpublishedd paper, London; 1990 
Silverstone,, R. 
TheThe museum is the message, 
London:: Science Museum; 1992 
Simard,, C. 
HistoiresHistoires d'amour et d'éprouvettes, 
Quebec:: Musée de la civilisation; 1992 
Simard,, C. 
Jeux,Jeux, Quebec: Musée de la civilisation; 1992 

Simons,, S. 
NoNo One May Ever Have the Same 
KnowledgeKnowledge Again, Covina: Museum 
off Jurassic Technology; 1993 
Socking,, G.W. Jr. ed. 
ObjectsObjects and Others, 
Madison:: University of Wisconsin; 1985 
Tjong,, A. 
EvaluatieEvaluatie starterskit basisvorming en 
basisonderwijs,basisonderwijs, Communicatiewetenschap, 
Universiteitt van Amsterdam; May 1998 
Trevor-Roper,, H. 
RenaissanceRenaissance Essays, 
Chicago:: University of Chicago; 1985 
Spoerri,, D. ed. 
LeLe musée sentimentale de Cologne, 
Cologne:: Kölnischer Kunstverein; 1965 
Stafford,, B. M. 
ArtfulArtful Science, Cambridge: MIT Press; 1994 
Stafford,, B. M. 
BodyBody Criticism, Cambridge:The MIT Press;1993 
Trunz,, E. 
WissenschaftWissenschaft und Kunst im Kreise 
KaiserKaiser Rodolfs 
II1576-1612, 
Neumünster:: Verlag Wachhottz; 1992 
Tull ley, A 
Evaluation,Evaluation, fine! But what are we looking for?, 
unpublishedd paper, 
London:: Kings College; 1991 
Steinberg,, S.H. 
TheThe Thirty Years War' and the conflict 
forfor European hegemony 1600 -1660, 
London:: Edward Arnold; 1966 
Stephens,, J. 
LanguageLanguage and Ideology in Children's Fiction, 
London:: Longman; 1992 
Stewart,, S. 
OnOn Longing; Narratives of the Miiniature, 
thethe Gigantic, the Souvenir, the Collection, 
Durhamm and London: Duke University Press; 
1993 3 
Vahl,, M. 
StoriesStories and scientific enquiry, 
Amsterdam:: UVA/OOC; 1991 
Valéry,, P. 
TelTel quel II, Paris: Gallimard/NRF; 1943 
valkenier,, E. ed. 
TheThe Wanderers, 
Fortt Worth: DMA/lnterCultura; 1991 
Vann Praët, M. ed. 
OnOn a marché sur la terre, 
Paris:: Editions ICS; 1991 
Sutton,, A. 
InteractiveInteractive Science Centres, 
London:: Institute of Physics; 1988 
vann Dijkum C. and de Zeeuw, G. 
MethodologicalMethodological explorations in constructive 
realism,realism, Amsterdam: Socrates; 1993 
Takamatsu,, S. 
NimaNima Sand Museum, Nima: private; 1994 
Tani,, T. 
SelectedSelected Works from the Nagoya City Art 
Museum,Museum, Nagoya: NCAM; 1988 
Tanizaki,, J. 
InIn Praise of Shadows, 
Neww Haven: Leete's Island Books; 1977 
Tarkovsky,, A. 
SculptingSculpting in Time, London: Faber; 1989 
Theewen,, G. ed 
SelectionSelection - Confusion, Cologne: Salon; 1995 
Van-Praët,, M. 
TroisTrois siècles d'evolution de la museologie 
desdes sciences, 
Paris:: Palais de la Découverte; 1993 
var.. authors 
AlbumAlbum souvenir de {'exposition 
internationale 
desdes arts décoratifs, Paris: Patras; 1925 
var.. authors 
LeLe Spectacle de la nature, 
Utrecht:: Etienne Neaulme; 1735 
Veer,, R. van der, and Valsiner, J. eds. 
TheThe Vygotsky Reader, 
Oxford:: Blackwell; 1994 
Thibautt,, J. 
InteractivHéInteractivHé pour les enfants, 
Paris:: Palais de la Découverte; 1993 
Veeser,, A. 
TheThe New Historicism Reader, 
Neww York, London: Routledge; 1994 
Thomas,, G. 
HowHow Eureka! responds to visitors' needs, 
London:: Science Museum; 1992 
Vergo,, P. et al. 
TheThe New Museology, 
London:: Reaktion; 1990 
Thomas,, J.A. 
ResistanceResistance to Reform: A Critical Ethnography 
ofof Elementary Science Teachers, Poster 
presentedd at NARST, San Francisco: 1995 
Verheyen,, E. 
TheThe Paintings in the Studiolo 
ofof Isabella d'Este at Mantua, 
Neww York: University Press; 1971 
179 9 

Verne,Verne, H. 
MuséeMusée de Louvre, Paris: Patras; 1925 
Viel,, A. and De Guise, D. 
Muséo-seduction/Muséo-réflexion, Muséo-seduction/Muséo-réflexion, 
Montreal:: Pares Canada; 1992 
Virilio,, P. 
EsthétiqueEsthétique de fa disparition, 
Paris:: Galilée; 1989 
Vitali,, C. 
DieDie Grosse Utopie, 
Frankfurt:: Schirn Kunsthal Ie; 1992 
Vogel,, S. 
Alwayss true to the object, in our fashion, 
inn Karp, I. and Levine, S.0. eds. 
ExhibitingExhibiting Cultures, pp 191 - 205 
Washington:: Smithsonian; 1990 
Wagensberg,, J. 
PublicPublic understanding in a science centre, 
London:: Science Museum; 1992 
Wake,, D. A. and Bradburne, J. 
Au-delaa de l'oueil nu. Alliage No. 15 
Wake,, D. A. and Bradburne, J. 
Fieldss of Knowledge, 
AMCSTZ/lnfoss printemps; 1993 
Wake,, D. A. and Bradburne, J. 
Paradoxx Lost: Rediscovering Scientific 
Creativity,, Alliage No.6 
Wake,, D. A. and Bradburne, J. 
PrimingPriming the Pump: 
BuildingBuilding a Science Network in Alberta, 
unpublishedd paper, 
Paris:: Palais de la Découverte; 1993 
Wake,, D.A. and Mitchell, J. 
AnAn informal study of visitor behaviour at 
twotwo exhibits, unpublished research paper, 
Toronto:: Ontario Science Centre; 1987 
Weil,, S. 
BeautyBeauty and the Beasts, 
Washington:: Smithsonian; 1983 
Weil,, S. 
AA Cabinet of Curiosities, 
Washington:: Smithsonian; 1995 
Weschler,, L. 
InhalingInhaling the Spore: 
fieldfield trip to a museum natural (un)history. 
Harper'ss Magazine; September 1994 
Weschler,, L. 
Mr.Mr. Wilson's Cabinet of Curiosities, 
Neww York: Pantheon; 1995 
Wheatcroft,, A. 
TheThe Habsburgs, London: Viking; 1995 
White,, J. et al. Snakes, 
SnailsSnails and History Tails, 
Washington:: Smithsonian; 1991 
White,, J. 
Whatt have we discovered about discovery 
rooms?,, ILVS Review M2); 1990 
Whitney,, P. 
Thee Electronic Muse, ILVSReview 1 (2); 1990 
Williamson,, J. 
DecodingDecoding 
Advertisements, 
London:: Marion Boyars; 1978 
Winnicott,, D. W. 
TheThe child, the family, and the outside world, 
London:: Penguin Books; 1985 
Winograd,, T , and Flores, F. 
UnderstandingUnderstanding Computers and Cogniti
Norwood:: Addison-Wesley; 1986 
Wittgenstein,, L. 
CultureCulture and Value, 
Oxford:: Blackwell; 1980 
Walsh,, K. 
TheThe representation of the past, 
London:: Routledge; 1992 
Wittgenstein,, L. 
PhilosophicalPhilosophical 
Investigations, 
Oxford:: Blackwell; 1953 
180 0 
Wall the r, G. 
DerDer Heidelberger 
Schlossgarten, 
Heidelberg:: HVA; 1990 
Warburg,, A. 
AusgewahlteAusgewahlte 
Schriften, 
Baden-Baden:: Koerner; 1992 
Warburg,, A. 
„Ekstatische„Ekstatische Nymphe... 
trauernder FluBgott' 
PortatPortat eines Gelehrten, 
Hamburg:: Dolling und Galitz; 1995 
Weill S. 
RethinkingRethinking the Museum, 
Washingtonn and London: Smithsonian; 1990 
Wölfflin,, H. 
PrinciplesPrinciples of Art History, 
Neww York: Dover; 1950 (reprint 1932 edition) 
Wolpert,, L. and Richards, A. 
AA Passion for Science, 
Oxford:: Oxford University Press; 1988 
Woodbridge,, K. 
TheThe Stourhead Landscape, 
London:: The National Trust; 1986 
Worth,, V. 
BernardBernard Maston, Donald R. Griffith and 
thethe Deprong Mori of the Tripiscum Plateau, 
Covina:: Museum of Jurassic Technology; 1964 

Worth,, V. 
GeoffreyGeoffrey Sonnabend, 
Covina:: Museum of Jurassic Technology;*!991 
Wright,, P. 
SheddingShedding Responsibilities, 
Museumss Journal 05/90 
Wurman,, R.S. ed 
WhatWhat will be has always been. 
Neww York: Rizzoli/Access; 1986 
Wuttke,, D. Aby M. 
WarburgsWarburgs Methode als Anregung undAufgabe, 
Wiesbaden:: Gratia; 1990 
Wynne,, B. and Irwin, A. 
MisunderstandingMisunderstanding Science, 
Cambridge:: CUP; 1996 
Wynne,, B. 
KnowledgesKnowledges in Context, unpublished paper, 
Lancasterr CSSSP; 1990 
Yates,, F. 
TheThe French Academies of the Sixteenth 
Century,Century, London: Routledge; 1988 
Yates,, F.A. 
TheThe Art of Memory, 
London:: Routledge, Kegan, Paul; 1966 
Yates,, F.A. 
TheThe Occult Philosophy, 
London:: Routledge, Kegan, Paul; 1979 
Yates,, F.A. 
TheThe Rosicrucian Enlightenment, 
London:: Routledge, Kegan, Paul; 1972 
Zacharias,, W. 
ZeHphanomenZeHphanomen Musealisierung, 
Berlin:: Hermes; 1990 
Zelenko,, A. 
DetskieDetskie Muzei v Sevemoj Amerike, 
Moscow:: Rabotnik; 1926 
Zemer,, A. ed. 
TheThe museum and the needs of the people, 
Jerusalem:: ICOM/CECA; 1991 
Ziman,, J. 
PublicPublic Understanding of Science, 
unpublishedd paper, London: 1990 
Zubrowski,, B. 
Bricolage:: one approach to exhibit design, 
ECSITEECSITE newsletter; 1989 
181 1 

8.. Index of names, places, and selected topics 
Anderson,, Peter 107 
Arss Electronics, Linz 138 
Ashmole,, Elias 39 
Bakker,, Robert 24; 35; 151 
Baxandall,, Michael 42 
Bourdieu,, Pierre 42 
Brecht,, Bertolt 83 
Britishh Museum, London 36 
Brownn Goode, George 22 
Carse,, Robert 71; 137; 146 
Centree Pompidou, Paris 105 
Chicagoo Art Institute 31; 53 
Chicagoo Museum of Science and Industry 107 
Conservatoiree des Arts et Métiers, Paris 14; 48 
Cooperss & Lybrand 56; 62 
Csikszentmihalyi,, Mihalyi 99; 100; 149 
Daa Vinci, Leonardo 52 
Dallass Museum of Art 31; 43 
Dee Mesnil Gallery, Houston 106 
Discoursee 106; 107; 108; 111; 112; 115 
Donaldsonn 117 
Douma,, Joost 105; 106; 107 
Exploratorium,, San Francisco 12; 44; 48; 49; 50; 51; 108; 110; 112; 128 
Filewych,, Gordon 56 
Foucault,, Michel 147 
Gettyy Museum, Santa Monica 162 
Gregory,, Richard 133 
Handler,, Richard 33 
Heijenbrock,, Herman 103; 104 
Hooke,, Robert 41 
Hulin,, Michel 45 
Huygens,, Constantin 120 
ICOMM 19 
Issidorides,, Diana 133 
Keene,, Ruby 63 
Kuh,, Katharine 53; 454 
Laa Cité des Sciences et de I'lndustrie, Paris 99; 140 
Lang,, Fritz 130 
Linnaeuss 48 
Louvre,, Paris 44; 48 
Manifestt Destiny 49 
Manifestoo 108; 115; 116 
Marsh,, Caryl 133 
Maturana,, Umberto 46 
McGarriglee 117 
Milgram,, Stanley 135 
Miller,, Jonathan 18; 133 
Moriyama,, Ray 105 
Murtaugh,, Mike 137; 139 
Muséee de la civilisation 44 
Museumm de I'histoire naturelle, Paris 48 
1822 
Museum für Kunsthandwerk, Frankfurt 160 

Museumm of Jurassic Technology, Los Angeles 37 
Museumm of Natural History, London 35 
Museumm van den Arbeid, Amsterdam 103; 107; 1157 
newMetropolis,, Amsterdam 105 -146; 157; 162 
Newton,, Sir Isaac 120 
Nieuwee Kerk, Amsterdam 161 
NINT,, Amsterdamm 13; 104; 105; 106; 107; 115; 116; 123 
Noble,, Joseph Veach 18 
Ontarioo Science Centre, Toronto 14; 108; 146 
Oppenn heimer, Frank 12; 13; 15; 50; 109 
Palaiss de Chaillot, Paris 38 
Palaiss de la Découverte, Paris 13; 45; 48; 49 
Perrin,, Jean 45 
Piano,, Renzo 105; 106; 119; 126 
pinballl effect 67; 68; 78; 99 
Radok,, Emil 84; 85 
Rijksuniversiteitt Groningen 134 
Rosnay,, Joel de 99 
Royall Society 38 
Sciencee Alberta Foundation 56; 59; 61; 62; 63; 101 
Sciencee Museum, London 49; 125 
Sciencee North, Sudbury 119 
Sciencee World, Vancouver 72; 89; 101 
Stedelijkk Museum, Amsterdam 105 
Studioo Azzurro 130; 131 
Tradescanfss Ark, Oxford 38; 39 
Valéry,, Paul 38 
Veiligheidsmuseum,, Amsterdam 105 
Victoriaa and Albert Museum, London 31 
Wake,, Drew Ann 14; 55; 56; 61; 62; 63; 73; 74; 80; 99; 108; 117; 124; 154; 156 
Walterss Art Gallery, Baltimore 31; 154 
Wynne,, Brian 117 
Ypsilonn Science Center, Amsterdam 105 
Zeeuw,, Gerard de 20; 26 

Appendixx 1: credit list exhibitry newMetropolis, May 1997 
Management Management 
Headd of Design 
Projectt Management 
Joostt Douma, dr. Hein Willems 
Jamess Bradburne AA Dipl 
Evaa Kohl 
Richardd Lott 
PKBB Bouwadviseurs 
translations s 
Suzannee Tjepkema 
HolgerPennings s 
Claudiaa Casagrande 
Taaicentrumm VU 
actua a 
systemm architecture 
design n 
research h 
networkk implementation 
Andreaa Bandelli, Martijn Plak, kit Rosen 
II rit Rosen 
Liesbethh de Bakker 
Martijnn Plak 
newMetropoliss zones and exhibits 
184 4 
Interactions s 
team team 
exhibits s 
Transactionss games 
Mobilityy game 
Gett connected 
Thee Piazza 
Graphics s 
Technology y 
team team 
exhibits s 
Stronger r 
Wilfredd van Brunschot 
Martijnn Leopold 
Stevenn Schaeken 
Nikolaa Eltink 
Jolandaa Mulder 
furnituree design 
furnituree fabrication 
furnituree fabrication 
electronics s 
softwaree development 
furnituree design 
furnituree fabrication 
furnituree fabrication 
electronics s 
softwaree development 
furnituree design 
furnituree fabrication 
furnituree fabrication 
electronics s 
softwaree development 
furnituree design 
furnituree fabrication 
furnituree fabrication 
electronics s 
filmm production 
designn & DTP 
production n 
Elbertt Jan Achterberg 
Lucianaa Macaluso 
Aramm Leeuw 
Astridd van de Graaf 
exhibitt design 
exhibitt fabrication 
Dee Vries Sas Bouma 
Stievaa Metaalbewerking 
Dekkerr Interieurbouw 
Mansveld d 
newMetropolis s 
Dee Vries Sas Bouma 
Stievaa Metaalbewerking 
Dekkerr Interieurbouw 
Mansveld d 
MAWW software projects 
Dee Vries Sas Bouma 
Stievaa Metaalbewerking 
Dekkerr Interieurbouw 
Mansveld d 
MediaLab b 
Dee Vries Sas Bouma 
Stievaa Metaalbewerking 
Dekkerr Interieurbouw 
Mansveld d 
Shootingg Star Filmcompany 
Circuss Sinistra 
Souverein n 
Sciencee Projects 
Sciencee Projects 

Moree Precise 
exhibitt design 
exhibitt design 
exhibitt fabrication 
newMetropotis s 
EJOKK design for industry 
EJOKK design for industry 
Sponsor r 
steeringg group 
Cartoonn Jerom 
spectacles s 
eyee test, content support 
Inhoudelijkee ondersteuning 
Dijkzigtt hospital 
Philips s 
dr.. ir. Pieter Dekker 
Standaardd uitgeverij 
Hollandd Optical Company 
Optomed d 
Stichtingg beter zien 
Nathaliee Goudsmit Huyskens 
VU-hospital l 
Frederikk Barkhof 
Frankk Hoogenraad 
VUU hospital 
Dee heer dr. L Cuesta 
Prof.. Verhaar 
Prof.. Schroder 
Balll Factory 
exhibitt design 
exhibitt fabrication 
software e 
Sciencee Projects 
Sciencee Projects 
Oxfordd Software Design 
Sponsor r 
steeringg group 
Hoogovenss BV 
FME E 
Industriebondd FNV 
IMII NORGREN BV 
Mariannee Melman (Hoogovens) 
Robb Boom (Hoogovens) 
H.. Wagendorp (Hoogovens) 
J.. A. Kohier (FME) 
BobSuurhof(FNV) ) 
Demonstrationn area 
furnituree design 
furnituree fabrication 
furnituree fabrication 
mechanics s 
Sponsor r 
steeringg group 
steeringg group LNV 
steeringg group VNCI 
Dee Vries Sas Bouma 
Stievaa Metaalbewerking 
Dekkerr Interieurbouw 
Interieurr & Object 
VNCI I 
Ministeriee van LNV 
Peterr Höbaus 
Fokkee Fennema 
Peterr Noordervliet (VNCI) 
Joss Schlattman (VNCI) 
Jann Peper (Stichting C3) 
demonstrations s 
scenario o 
Lidyy Knol 
Actuaa corner 
furnituree design 
furnituree fabrication 
softwaree development 
softwaree development 
newMetropolis s 
Gielissen n 
Netcoo - The internet Company 
newMetropotis s 
Computerr games 
furnituree design 
furnituree fabrication 
softwaree development 
newMetropolis s 
Gielissen n 
LiveWiress Design 
Doublee Wedding 
gamee design 
graphicc design 
programming g 
Dreww Ann Wake 
Fayee Hoffman 
Colinn Savage 
Amitt Bakshi 
185 5 

videoo production research 
Sponsor r 
steeringg group 
photography y 
contentt support 
RQBB Groep 
Leontienn Hommels 
Miinisteriee van LNV 
Peterr Höbaus 
Fokkee Fennema 
Colinn Savage 
Elbert-Jann Achterberg 
Organisatiee ter verbetering 
vann de binnenvisserij 
N.V.. Waterwinningsbedrijf Brabantse 
Biesbosch h 
Riza a 
Dhr.. de Jong (Miinisterie van LNV) 
Fokkee Fennema (Miinisterie van LNV) 
Paull Boers (RIZA) 
Hanss Ruiter (RIZA) 
Hanss Massop (Natuurmonumenten) 
Louwrenss van Keulen (LTO) 
Barryy Lucas (OVB) 
Henkk Ketelaars (WBB) 
Fifthh Man 
gamee design 
graphicc design 
programming g 
videoo production 
Sponsor r 
steeringg group 
Dreww Ann Wake 
Colinn Savage 
Fayee Hoffman 
Robbertt de Groot 
Amm it Bakshi 
Shootingg Star Filmcompany 
IBM M 
Margaa van Beek 
Prof.. N. Mars 
Chaos s 
Sponsor r 
steeringg group 
computerr modellen 
contentt support 
VNCI I 
Peterr Noordervliet (VNCI) 
Joss Schlattman (VNCI) 
Jann Peper (Stichting C3) 
Fosterr Wheeler 
Thankss to Exxon 
Jann Peper (Stichting C3) 
Joss Schlattman 
Henkk van Wijk (Exxon Chemical Holland) 
Willemm J. van Loon (DOW Benelux N.V.) 
Louiss Oostvogel 
Labourr video 
Graphics s 
Kadaster r 
Sponsor r 
steeringg group 
production n 
maps s 
videoo production 
design n 
illustrations s 
designn & DTP 
production n 
production n 
Kadaster r 
Coraa Omen Jansen 
Kadasterr Gerard Wijmenga, 
Mrs.. Usseldijk Ruijger 
Bridgiss BV. 
Shootingg Star Filmcompany, Amsterdam 
newMetropolis s 
Laline,, Eindhoven 
Circuss Sinistra, Amsterdam 
Souverein,, Amsterdam Zuid Oost 
Omnimark,, Weesp 
186 6 
Partners s 
Volkskrantt (Contents) 
Vediorr ASB 
xs4aHH B.V. (Connectivity) 
IBMM (Computers) 

Energy y 
team m 
exhibits s 
Francess van Lent 
Bartt van der Aa 
Bertt Schoeren 
Barbaraa Regeer 
Martijnn Plak 
Gordonn Filewych 
Coraa van Horssen 
Partners s 
Dhr.. R. Rovers (Novem) 
Dhr.. T. van Harmelen (ECN) 
Dhr.. Bias (ECN) 
Dhr.. drs. J.LM. Brauer (SEP) 
EBA A 
Geologyy lab 
Chemistryy table 
exhibitt design 
exhibitt fabrication 
Partners s 
furnituree design 
furnituree fabrication 
newMetropolis s 
Gielissen,, Eindhoven 
Dhr.. dr. M. Epting (NAM) 
Dhr.. M J . Brolsma (NAM) 
Dhr.. E.L.M. Siemerink (NAM) 
Dhr.. Stoffers (NAM) 
Dhr.. J. Veenvliet (Natura Docet) 
Dhr.. dr. J. van Veen (Shell) 
Dhr.. H. A. van Adrichem 
Boogaartt (NITG-TNO) 
Coraa van Horssen (text) 
Erniee Wijnsteker (geology) 
newMetropolis s 
Gielissen n 
Sleepingg giant 
softwaree development 
gamee design 
graphicc design 
illustration n 
programming g 
actors s 
photography y 
Partners s 
LiveWiress Design 
Dreww Ann Wake 
Colinn Savage 
Fayee Hoffman 
Peterr Colbert 
Colinn Savage 
Larss Boon 
Alff Humphries 
Taylorr Scott 
dr.. Tony Williams 
dr.. J. van Veen (Shell) 
Dhr.. dr. A.G. Gerards (Shell) 
Dhr.. R. Stoffers (NAM) 
Dhr.. M. Epting (NAM) 
Dhr.. J. Veenvliet (Natura Docet) 
Labourr video 
Waterfall l 
videoo production 
Partners s 
exhibitt fabrication 
exhibitt fabrication 
Shootingg Star Filmcompany 
Nederlandsee Aardolie Maatschappij (NAM) 
Deutagg Nederland B.V. 
Sciencee Projects 
PPS S 
Drilling g 
exhibitt design 
exhibitt fabrication 
Partners s 
newMetropolis s 
Brunss BV 
Deutschee Tiefbohr Aktiengesellschaft 
A.. Lödden 
W.. Boom 
J.. Ruggen 
dr.. J. van Veen (Shell) 
187 7 

Tankerr game 
exhibitt design 
exhibitt fabrication 
software e 
screenn graphics 
newMetropolis s 
Brunss BV 
Brunss BV 
Lostt Boys Interactive 
M.. Buth (Shell) 
E.. Ft. Dolphin (Marin) 
O.. Nordberg (Teknikenshus) 
F.. Out (NAM) 
C.. Fornari (Directie Noordzee) 
Th.. Kramer (Directie Noordzee) 
Solarr energy 
exhibitt design 
exhibitt fabrication 
newMetropolis s 
Brunss BV 
Biomass s 
exhibitt design 
exhibitt fabrication 
newMetropolis s 
Brunss BV 
NOVEM M 
Windtunnel l 
exhibitt design 
exhibitt fabrication 
newMetropolis s 
Brunss BV 
dipl.. ing. M. Spath (ECN) 
Energyy Wall 
exhibitt design 
exhibitt fabrication 
Terryy Heard 
Housee of Kevin 
ir.. M.C.H. van Haperen (UNA) 
R.. van der Heiijde (UNA) 
T.. Bekker (UNA) 
Onnoo Wildschut (UNA) 
Distributionn game 
exhibitt design 
exhibitt fabrication 
softwaree development 
newMetropolis s 
newMetropolis s 
newMetropolis s 
Distribution n 
computerr game 
Gasunie e 
J .. Boon 
Vitrines s 
furnituree design 
furnituree fabrication 
objects s 
objects s 
Stichtingg Energetica 
newMetropolis s 
Interieurr & Object 
Stichtingg Energetica 
Stichtingg Heijenbrock 
Mr.. B. Machor 
Mr.. De Geus 
Actuaa corner 
furnituree design 
furnituree fabrication 
softwaree development 
softwaree development 
newMetropolis s 
Gielissen n 
Netcoo - The internet Company 
newMetropolis s 
Graphics s 
design n 
designn & DTP 
desginn & DTP 
production n 
newMetropolis s 
Projectburoo Meeter & Bremer 
Circuss Sinistra 
Projectburoo Meeter & Bremer 
Souverein n 
Science e 
team m 
Hann Heymans 
exhibits s 
Lightt & sound 
furnituree design 
furnituree fabrication 
Sciencee Projects 
Sciencee Projects 
Soapp bubbles 
furnituree design 
furnituree fabrication 
newMetropolis s 
Stievaa Metaalbewerking 

Laboratorium m 
furnituree design 
furnituree fabrication 
furnituree fabrication 
newMetropolis s 
Vann Schaik en Berghuis BV 
Benn nis 
Sponsors s 
VNCI I 
Ministeriee van LNV 
Partners s 
Alcontroll Heinrici 
Ktuyveriaboratoriumm Technische 
Universiteitt Delft 
Sjaakk Lispet 
Arnee Mast 
Gerechtelijkk Laboratorium Rijswijk 
Redbandd Venco bv. 
Omegam m 
Milieudienstt Amsterdam 
Actuaa corner 
Labourr video 
Graphics s 
Humanity y 
team m 
exhibits s 
Firstt ring multimedia 
Secondd ring exhibits 
Sculpture e 
research,text t 
furnituree design 
furnituree fabrication 
softwaree development 
softwaree development 
videoo production 
illustrations s 
design n 
designn & DTP 
production n 
Peterr Slavenburg 
Iritt Rosen 
Dianaa Issidorides 
conceptt & design 
production n 
music c 
softwaree development 
furnituree design 
furnituree fabrication 
electricall installation 
softwaree development 
softwaree development 
screenn graphics 
filmm production 
variouss text 
design n 
production n 
Trienkee van der Spek, Marja Ke 
newMetropolis s 
Gielissen n 
Netcoo - The internet Company 
newMetropolis s 
Shootingg Star Filmcompany 
Marcoo van Bergen 
newMetropolis s 
Circuss Sinistra 
Souverein Souverein 
Produzionii Azzurro 
Produzionii Azzurro 
Ivann Fedele 
Pii Greco 
newMetropolis s 
IRISS Vormgeving 
Dokterr interieur Meubilering 
Oostveenn b.v. 
newMetropolis s 
Christopherr Yavelow 
Lostt Boys Interactive 
Amberr ID Film 
dr.. G. Wolters 
Dr.. J. Miller 
Dhr.. De Vrijer 
Dhr.. De Vrijer 
AreaArea decoration 
design n 
fabrication n 
newMetropolis s 
W.. Beyne & Zn 
Graphics s 
designn & DTP 
production n 
Circuss Sinistra 
Souverein Souverein 
189 9 

Exhibits s 
Testt Yourself 
drs.. P. van Drunen (RuG) 
drs.. C. Hattuma (RuG) 
Mw.. S. Plass (RuG) 
Dhr.. M. Conradi (RuG) 
Mw.. dr. A. Fischer & Mw. T. Willemsen (UvA) 
Mw.. dr. J. Hendriks (RuG) 
drs.. W. Bloemers 
Dhr.. J. Barrett 
Dhr.. G. Williams 
Dhr.. D. A. Kolb 
Prof.. Dr. W. Holtzman (University of Texas) 
MacBerr & company Inc. 
Katholiekee Universiteit Brabant 
Readingg Table 
Brain n 
Scheltemaa Holkema Vermeulen 
Prof.. dr. W.H. Lamers 
dr.. 8. Baljet 
Dhr.. Vinkeiers 
Brainn Discovery Wall 
Interpreten n 
Schijnn bedriegt 
Ogenn in je rug 
Dee macht der muziek 
Ooggetuigee I (kijkstation) 
drs.. J. van Bolhuis (VU) 
drs.. J. Chardon (Stichting Concept) 
drs.. F. Evers (Kon. Conservatorium) 
ir.. Mart van den Busken (Amber Film) 
Dhr.. C. Yavelow 
Prof.. dr. W. Wagenaar 
(Rijkss Universiteit Leiden) 
Dhr.. E. van Beinum 
(Rijkss Universiteit Leiden) 
Mw.. A. Verkoren (Rijks Universiteit Leiden) 
Mw.. H. Peters 
Voelen n 
Voell de muziek 
Ontdekk de emotie 
Liefdee is... 
Hartt op hol 
drs.. F. Evers (Kon. Conservatorium) 
Denken n 
Zichtbaree gedachten 
Ooggetuigee II 
Hersenkrakers s 
Dee verbeelding 
Prof.. dr. W. Wagenaar 
(Rijkss Universiteit Leiden) 
Dhr.. E. van Beinum 
(Rijkss Universiteit Leiden) 
Mw.. A. Verkoren (Rijks Universiteit Leiden) 
Mw.. H. Peters 
drs.. J. de Moor (UvA) 
Mett elkaar omgaan 
Vormtaal 
Kenn je grenzen 
Gehoorzaamheid d 
Mensenkennis s 
Dr.. P. Zimbardo 
Prof.. Dr. D. Archer (University of California) 
Children'ss corner 
exhibits s 
furnituree design 
production n 
graphics s 
graphics s 
EJOK,, design for industry 
KITTT Engineering 
EJOK,, design for industry 
EJOK,, design for industry 
Omnimark k 
190 0 

Temporaryy exhibits 
'Opp de Kop af 
programm development 
Aramm Leeuw 
Astridd Vlug 
Technischee Dienst 
exhibit t 
photography y 
graphicc design 
portraits s 
furniture e 
Technoramaa der Schweiz 
Consortiumm About Faces 
Zentrumm für Kunst und 
Medientechnologiee Karlsruhe 
Universityy of Amsterdam 
Franss Welman 
Studioo Gonnissen 
Widdershoven n 
Bureauu Meermans 
Nikkii Gonnissen 
fam.. Jacobs 
fam.. Schogt-Vlug 
fam.. Stark 
fam.. Jansen 
fam.. Peters 
fam.. Geels 
Gielissen n 
Remoo Besio 
Rainerr Renk 
Prof.. dr. Schwarz 
Prof.. dr. A. Manstead 
Opp de Kop 
aff Workshop 
Hogeschooll van Amsterdam 
Lerarenopleidingg Voortgezet 
Onderwijss afdeling TeHaTex; 
trainees s 
traineee mentors 
Daphnee Bos, Mirella 
vann der Velden, Jowan Rijzinga, 
Astridd Venema, Annemiek Schermerhorn, 
Rhodaa Woets, Mark Ofman 
Vall lie Jansen en Herma Meere 
Wimm Bos 
Opp de Kop 
aff Filmprogram 
Vrijee Universiteit, trainee 
Documentaryy maker 
Universityy of California 
NPS,, Urbania 
AVRO O 
Rijksvoorlichtingss Dienst 
Polydor r 
Virgin n 
Karinn van Arkel 
Keess Hin 
Hildaa Fong 
Hannekee Janikzak 
Karell van der Graaf, Francien Cruse 
Géé van Leeuwen 
Godleyy and Crème, Angeline Stalinhof 
Peterr Gabriel, Eric Duit 
191 1 

10.. Samenvatting 
tnn de afgelopen tien jaar is de belangstelling voor musea explosief gegroeid. Dit uit 
zichh onder meer in de bouw van grote en belangrijke nieuwe musea - in Europa in 
Barcelona,, Amsterdam, Bilbao en Lissabon. En ook in de bezoekersaantallen. Die zijn 
zowell absoluut als procentueel sterk toe genomen. Het spreekt vanzelf dat ook de 
inrichtingg van musea veel aandacht krijgt. Er lijkt geen week voorbij te gaan of de 
inmiddelss zeer uitgebreide literatuur over de rol van musea in de maatschappij, de 
geschiedeniss van musea of de museumpraktijk wordt sterk uitgebreid. Ook de kritiek 
groeit.. Er blijkt behoefte aan nieuwe vormen van denken betreffende de museale 
inrichtingg en organisatie. Dit proefschrift beoogt een bijdrage te leveren. 
Dee literatuur over musea kan in hoofdzaak in twee categorieën worden verdeeld: 
diee betreffende het museum als institutie en die betreffende de museum praktijk. 
Inn de eerste categorie ligt de nadruk op het museumbezoek als cultureel fenomeen, 
bijvoorbeeldd als thema in de kritische sociologie. De tweede categorie omvat tek-
stenn met advies over het werk in musea - hoe exposeer je stukken, mogen die wel 
off niet worden aangeraakt, hoe creëer je een nieuwe instelling, wat vertel je de 
bezoeker,, hoe creëer je een volgorde in zijn of haar gang van onderdeel naar 
onderdeel,, van stuk naar stuk. 
Inn beide categorieën wordt veel materiaal geproduceerd. Des te verbazingwekken-
derr is het hoe weinig hiervan informatief is in de zin dat sprake is van praktische 
suggesties.. Daarmee zij niet gezegd dat bijvoorbeeld de sociologie van het museum 
oninteressantt is, of niet stimulerend, en geen heldere kritische analyses omvat van 
dee rol van het hedendaagse en vroegere museum. Toch veranderen de tentoon-
stellingenn niet erg. Zo mogelijk nog verbazingwekkender is het derhalve - in het 
bijzonderr voor iemand zoals de auteur die beroepsmatig actief is in musea - dat dit 
ookk geldt voor de tweede categorie museumliteratuur. Hier vindt men een rijke bron 
aann ervaringen, die van ontwerpers en exposanten. Ondanks deze overvloed ont-
breektt echter een duidelijke, en algemeen bruikbare systematiek in de opzet van 
museaa en hun exposities. 
Ditt gebrek vormt de aanleiding tot deze studie, vooral omdat sprake is van een merk-
waardigg gebrek. Het is eigenlijk alleen een bepaald aspect dat niet aan de orde komt, 
niett een gebrek over de gehele linie. Het gaat om de wijze waarop de wisselwerking 
tussenn museum en bezoeker wordt behandeld. Wat het museum aan de bezoeker 
1922 
,meegeeft' wordt meestal alleen beschreven in termen van de beslissingen van de 

individuelee tentoonstellingmaker, en van diens ad hoc benaderingen, vuistregels en 
geluk.. Iets soortgelijks geldt ook voor de bezoeker, zelfs nog in meerdere mate. Het 
wordtt aan diens achtergrondkennis, sensitiviteit en lokale cultuur overgelaten wat 
viaa een bezoek wordt ,meegenomen'. Van een wisselwerking of samenwerking tus-
senn beide, of van .overleg' in een of andere zin, is geen sprake. Waarom dit zo zou 
moetenn zijn of mogelijk waarom dit niet anders zou kunnen is (nog) onduidelijk. 
Dee professionele museumwereld lijkt grotendeels voorbij te gaan het tot stand 
komenn van door de bezoeker gewenste eigenschappen, c.q. aan het aanbrengen van 
structurenn daarop gerichte structuren. Er is weinig literatuur over de wijze waarop 
overdrachtt van informatie over een object, een onderwerp of een periode kan wor-
denn gevormd of beïnvloed. Meestal lijkt te worden uitgegaan van enkele algemene 
ideeënn over wat een bezoeker is of zou moeten zijn - inclusief een vage gelijkenis 
mett wie al in de museumwereld zit. Men vraagt zich zelden af wat het vertellen 
vann een verhaal met de bezoeker doet, welke regels ten grondslag liggen aan het 
schrijvenn van een toelichtende tekst, en welke impliciete doelen een tekst kan 
realiseren.. Meer inzicht in dit soort aspecten kan echter tevens inzicht in de samen-
stellendee onderdelen bevorderen, dat wil zeggen in het ,werk' van zowel tentoon-
stellingmakerss als bezoekers. In deze zin kan een studie van de wisselwerking tussen 
beidee een zinvolle bijdrage vormen. 
Inn dit boek wordt verslag gedaan van een dergelijke, door mij ondernomen studie. 
Ikk heb naar een theorie gezocht betreffende deze wisselwerking, naar een ,museum 
theorie'.. Gezien het hierboven geschetste gebrek moet zo'n theorie minstens aan 
dee volgende criteria voldoen. Ze moet een overzicht bieden van wat voor de relatie 
tussenn bezoeker en museum relevant is, en aangeven waarom dat het geval is. 
Zee moet een effectieve leidraad vormen bij de totstandkoming van museale om-
gevingenn - zodat gebruik wordt gemaakt van de ,sterke' eigenschappen van indivi-
duelee ontwerpers, conservatoren, en museumdirecteuren en van de bezoekers van 
musea,, en tevens hun .zwakke' eigenschappen kunnen worden gecompenseerd. 
Ikk heb aan de vorming van zo'n theorie gewerkt via een exploratie van de literatuur 
maarr ook in de vorm van toepassingen in de professionele sfeer. De laatste drie jaar 
betroff dit laatste in hoofdzaak de opzet van het nieuwe wetenschapsmuseum in 
Amsterdam,, newMetropolis. 
Hett verslag van het onderzoek bestaat uit drie delen. 

DEELL EEN 
tnn sectie 2 wordt het probleem dat in de studie centraal staat geëxploreerd en 
gepreciseerdd en wordt een onderzoekmodel geformuleerd. Er worden enkele sleu-
telconceptenn geïntroduceerd die hierbij dienen als ,vocabulaire'. De belangrijkste 
conceptenn zijn die van een .ondersteuningssysteem' met daaraan gekoppeld die van 
eenn ,label' en een ,gebruikerstaal'. Deze begrippen maken het mogelijk mijn vraag 
kortt samen te vatten. Bovendien geven ze de richting aan waarin naar een antwoord 
kann worden gezocht. 
Inn elke studie vormt de keuze van de ,eenheid van analyse' een cruciaal onderdeel 
-- de keuze van waarnaar men kijkt en welke waarnemingen men in overweging 
neemtt om tot betere waarnemingen te komen en daarmee uiteindelijk tot een 
gefundeerdee theorie. Een verkeerde keuze kan betekenen dat het onmogelijk wordt 
omm de in de specifieke situaties van de studie verworven waarnemingen of kennis 
aann anderen in bruikbare vorm over te dragen. Of in meer technische termen, dat 
menn geen .wetenschappelijk object' kan formuleren. Deze problematiek speelt in het 
bijzonderr waar het musea betreft. Er is een overdaad aan alternatieven zodat de kans 
opp een verkeerde keuze groot is. Elke manier van kijken impliceert een andere 
analysee eenheid en uiteindelijk een ander .object'. Zo kan men zich concentreren op 
dee eigenaard van de collecties, of op de functie van elk museum als bewaarplaats 
vann het cultuurmateriaal van een stad, een land of een volk, of op de wijze waarop 
zee hun collecties hebben verworven. Ook kunnen ze worden bekeken in termen van 
dee middelen die zij bieden om het formele onderwijssysteem aan te vullen, verder 
kunnenn ze worden gezien als plaatsen waar nieuwe kennis wordt gegenereerd. 
Uiteindelijkk heb ik ervoor gekozen musea vooral te bekijken als .ondersteunings-
systemen',, en mijn studie op deze keuze te baseren. Een ondersteuningssysteem zou 
mijnss inziens voor elk individu toegankelijk en bruikbaar moeten zijn zonder dat van 
enigee voorwaarde vooraf sprake is. De enige vereiste is gebruik - dus dat de 
gebruikerr het systeem wil gebruiken. Dat is het geval indien een meerwaarde wordt 
gerealiseerd.. Daartoe is nodig dat het ondersteuningssysteem elke gebruiker 
kann suggereren welke informatie deze nodig heeft voor eventuele activiteiten of 
ontwikkelingen,, en die waar nodig ook verschaft. Dat wil zeggen, een onder-
steuningssysteemm ondersteunt de gebruiker tijdens diens activiteiten, en bij voor-
keurr ook daarna in de vorm van nieuwe competenties. Dit soort ondersteuning 
kann per gebruiker verschillen - afhankelijk van diens eigen interesses, ervaring en 
mogelijkheden.. Bij het ontwerp van een ondersteuningssysteem streeft men er 
1944 
daarom naar te zorgen dat het gebruik toeneemt en beter ondersteunde activiteiten 

wordenn aangemoedigd. Centraal staat met andere woorden dat de verscheidenheid 
vann gebruikers niet wordt verminderd - zoals zou gebeuren wanneer het onder-
steuningssysteemm gebaseerd zou zijn op een model van alle gebruikers, of zelfs van 
bepaaldee gebruikers. De verscheidenheid van gebruikers dient onbekend en in feite 
zelfss onkenbaar te blijven. 
Niett alle organisaties die in het dagelijks leven musea worden genoemd vormen vol-
genss deze definitie ondersteuningssystemen. Veel hebben juist een heel duidelijk 
beeldd van hun bezoekers of gebruikers. Daarbij gaat het meestal om een kleine 
welomschrevenn groep, met welomschreven behoeftes - vaak met een elitair karak-
ter.. Waar ik in deze studie op uit ben is veeleer om na te gaan hoe organisaties 
geholpenn kunnen worden zich tot museale ondersteuningssystemen te ontwikkelen. 
Alss resultaat van deze studie moeten we dus een serie suggesties verwachten 
betreffendee zulke hulp. Deze suggesties worden afgeleid uit de in deze studie ge-
kozenn analyse eenheden. Tevens dient te worden nagegaan in hoeverre deze een-
hedenn onderdeel zijn van een klasse van museale ondersteuningssystemen, dus van 
eenn wetenschappelijk object. Een dergelijke klasse zou moeten aangeven hoe een 
instantiee kan worden herkend of ter herkenning kan worden geconstrueerd. 
Afhankelijkk van de mate waarin een museum er voor kiest elementen op een 
bepaaldee wijze te ordenen-een object te tonen, te belichten, te beschrijven -en niet 
opp een andere, wordt de beschouwer in zijn observaties vastgehouden, terwijl het 
hemm overigens vrij staat te handelen zoals hij wil. Het totaal van alle intentionele 
activiteitenn van de kant van het museum die het oogmerk hebben een dergelijke 
ordeningg tot stand te brengen, zal in het kader van dit onderzoek worden gedefi-
nieerdd als het ,label'. Een label dient de beschouwer daarvan, dus de bezoeker van 
hett museum, te helpen een standpunt in te nemen, en van daaruitt te zien wat tot de 
eigenn activiteiten (inclusief het bevredigen van nieuwsgierigheid) bijdraagt. Het 
labell wordt vormt zo gezien een constructief instrument: het stelt het museum en 
dee mensen die er werken in staat met de bezoeker in wisselwerking te staan. Het gaat 
err om deze wisselwerking zo te construeren dat voor de bezoeker sommige dingen 
wordenn ,uitgelicht', zodanig dat de bezoeker daarmee een eigen wereld kan schep-
pen,, met daarbinnen gedefinieerde eigen handelingen. Een label kan bijvoorbeeld 
eenn „verhaallijn" betreffen waarmee elementen uit de ontwikkeling van een schil-
derr worden belicht, inclusief gebeurtenissen buiten diens leven. Het kan ook een 
reekss handelingen instrueren, bijvoorbeeld in een natuurwetenschappelijk museum, 
omm de bezoeker te helpen inzicht te krijgen in de ontwikkeling en het gebruik van 
begrippenn als atoom, druk, elektriciteit, of van rekenmethodes. Deze voorbeelden 
195 

latenn zien dat het mede van het label afhangt hoe gevarieerd bezoekers zich ge-
dragen.. Dat kan sterk uiteen lopen. Zo schreef George Brown Goode in 1888 „Een 
educatieff museum dat doel treft, kan worden omschreven als een verzameling 
labelss die elk met een welgekozen specimen worden geïllustreerd".1 Tegenwoordig 
11 Brown-Goode, G. Museum History andd Museums of 
lijktt de nadruk omgekeerd te liggen: labels lijken meer en meer de bedoeling te 
History.. Papers of the American Historical Association 
hebbenn de bezoeker te helpen zelf te bedenken waarde onderdelen van het museum 
Vol.Ill,, Nol, Putnam's: New York; 1888 pp 306 
eenn specimen van vormen. 
Kunnenn labels verschillende eigenschappen bij verschillende mensen oproepen? 
Kunnenn labels verschillen in de mate waarin ze bezoekers adresseren en daardoor 
wenselijkee eigenschappen oproepen? Welke eigenschappen wenselijk zijn hangt 
aff van iemands overtuiging. Een fascist kan van mening zijn dat gehoorzaamheid 
enn passiviteit wenselijk zijn, terwijl een democraat de voorkeur geeft aan onaf-
hankelijkheid,, activiteit, of spontaneïteit. In deze studie neem ik aan dat een beter 
labell een groter aantal eigenschappen zal oproepen, mogelijkerwijs per bezoeker, 
maarr in ieder geval over de verzameling van bezoekers. Daarnaast ga ik ook uit van 
eenn voorkeur voor eigenschappen zoals actiebereidheid, competentie, nieuws-
gierigheidd - eigenschappen die mijn Westerse achtergrond verraden, maar ook 
voortvloeienn uit het idee van een ondersteuningssysteem. In het kader van dit 
onderzoekk beschouw ik een museum derhalve des te meer als een instantie van een 
ondersteuningssysteem,, en bijgevolg als een beter museum, indien het over labels 
beschiktt die meer eigenschappen oproepen, met een voorkeur voor eigenschappen 
zoalss actiebereidheid. 
Uitt het bovenstaande volgt mijn onderzoeksvraag: wat moet worden bestudeerd om 
labelss te kunnen identificeren die wenselijke eigenschappen in de gebruiker te-
weegbrengen?? Deze vraag valt uiteen in twee deelvragen waarvan de antwoorden 
elkaarr dienen te complementeren. Ten eerste: welke labels roepen consequent de 
doorr mij gewenste eigenschappen op en hoe zijn de omstandigheden te herkennen 
waaronderr dit gebeurt - zulks met uitsluiting van andere omstandigheden? Ten 
tweede:: welke eigenschappen worden opgeroepen bij aanwezigheid van welke 
labelss in welke omstandigheden? 
Inn dit proefschrift wordt geargumenteerd dat hetgeen met het meeste profijt kan 
wordenn gemanipuleerd om effectieve labels te creëren de relatie is die het label im-
pliciett en expliciet tot stand brengt tussen de museale organisatie en de onbekende 
enn onkenbare gebruiker. Het gaat daarbij om de beperkingen die door het label 
1966 
worden opgelegd aan wat de gebruiker doet, om wat De Zeeuw een gebruikerstaai 

noemt:: „de verzameling dwingende maatregelen die de variatie voortgebracht 
doorr een actor helpt vormen tot gemodelleerd [in mijn terminologie: gewenst; JB] 
gedrag".22 Het voordeel van deze term is dat zij zowel kan worden gebruikt ter 
** De Zeeuw, Co-ordinatad oo-operation and increasing 
beschrijvingg van hoe de bezoeker wordt geadresseerd, als ter invulling van labels. 
competence,, pp. 3.1990 
Zo'nn taal beschrijft derhalve zowel welke omstandigheden moeten worden opge-
roepenn om tot de gewenste eigenschappen te komen, als ook het omgekeerde, dus 
welkee eigenschappen welke omstandigheden oproepen. Een en ander betekent dat 
èlss men een voorkeur voor een bepaalde gebruikerstaai kan uitspreken men ook 
antwoordd op de gestelde vragen heeft. De theorie die in dit proefschrift wordt uit-
gewerktt betreft zo'n voorkeur, op basis van observaties. Een belangrijk onderdeel 
vann de theorie vormt de adressering van bezoekers als ,actoren'. 
Hett voordeel van een benadering waarin de bovenstaande begrippen centraal staan, 
iss drieledig. Ten eerste wordt het mogelijk de eigenschappen te identificeren die ver-
schillendee labels oproepen. Ten tweede functioneert de te ontwikkelen theorie als 
eenn voorspellend instrument: het doet een museum methoden aan de hand om 
effectievee labels te maken. Tenslotte biedt de theorie een middel om vast te stellen 
watt instellingen moeten doen om op herkenbare wijze tot de klasse der musea te 
behoren. . 
DEELL TWEE 
Inn dit tweede deel ga ik in op de aard en de rol van het label in de museale omge-
ving,, identificeer ik specifieke gebruikerstalen, en onderzoek ik de eigenschappen 
diee worden overgedragen door labels die binnen deze talen worden gevormd. Deel 
tweee is verdeeld in drie onderscheiden delen. 
Inn sectie 3.1 bekijk ik labels die de gebruikerstalen implementeren die in het verleden 
hett meest zijn gebruikt in het museum, en onderzoek ik tevens enkele voorbeelden 
vann de hedendaagse museumpraktijk. De sectie begint met de gebruikerstaai die de 
meestt rudimentaire eigenschappen overbrengt op de gebruiker - tekstuele autori-
teitt - en behandelt vervolgens de gebruikerstaai waarin de nadruk ligt op ,goede 
observatie'' en de extensie daarvan, de gebruikerstaai waarin de nadruk ligt op 
,, variabele observatie', c.q. op .variabelen'. De gebruikte voorbeelden zijn meren-
deelss historisch en hebben betrekking op musea uit de afgelopen eeuwen. Ze 
implementerenn de wijzigende inzichten in wat een museum kan zijn. Ze laten zien 
datt de ontwikkeling in de richting van talen gaat die meer en meer wenselijke 
eigenschappenn oproepen. Ze bieden derhalve een goede gelegenheid om het idee 
197 

datt in dit onderzoek wordt onderzocht - namelijk dat gebruikerstalen de sleutel zijn 
omm de museale omgeving te beïnvloeden - als analyse-instrument te exploreren. 
Eenn vroeg in de geschiedenis van tentoonstellingen en ,collecties' te herkennen ge-
bruikerstaaii van het museumlabel is die van de autoriteit - met een beroep op die 
vann de conservator, de onderzoeker, de academicus - die doorgaans door teksten 
kenbaarr is en wordt gelegitimeerd. Er wordt verondersteld dat het label dat deze ge-
bruikerstaaii in de museale omgeving implementeert bij de bezoeker of gebruiker een 
wenselijkee eigenschap doet ontstaan, namelijk dat deze bepaalde beweringen als 
waarr aanneemt - overigens zonder dat daar enige activiteit mee verbonden is en dus 
zonderr enige relatie met diens eigen omgeving. Een mogelijk neveneffect van het 
gebruikk van labels van deze aard is dus isolatie. Ook kan de „gezaghebbendheid van 
dee autoriteit" gehoorzaamheid bij de gebruiker teweegbrengen. 
Inn een later stadium van ontwikkeling kan een andere gebruikerstaai worden 
onderscheiden,, namelijk die van 'observatie'. Ze komt naar voren in de periode 
waarinn ook de wetenschap als systematische activiteit wordt ontdekt. Deze gebrui-
kerstaaii helpt om individuele waarnemingen van de fysieke wereld te ordenen. 
Labelss die gebruik maken van deze gebruikerstaai, in tegenstelling tot labels die 
gebruikk maken van .autoriteit', helpen de bezoeker met kijken: ze adresseren de 
bezoekerr als waarnemer, met de eigen waarneming als criterium. De gebruiker 
dientt zichzelf als autoriteit te zien, met als mogelijke consequentie een gevoel van 
beperktheid,, van vast te zitten in het hier en nu. Veeleer dan dat gesteld wordt dat 
bepaaldee beweringen waar zijn, wordt de waarheid van de eigen waarneming 
ondersteund. . 
NogNog weer later vinden we een gebruikerstaai waarin het begrip .variabele' centraal 
staat.. In feite is dit vooral een extensie van de gebruikerstaai ,observatie' - het bereik 
iss groter, maar de „munteenheid" van de taal, waarnemingen, blijft hetzelfde. Deze 
taall benadrukt dat de waarneming door de individuele bezoeker onderdeel uitmaakt 
vann een klasse van waarnemingen, en dat het er om gaat dat hij of zij die klasse leert 
zien.. Elke door het label aangewezen waarneming wordt daarmee tot iets dat over 
diee klasse kan variëren. Zo kan worden verteld dat oorlogssouvenirs binnen be-
paaldee grenzen variëren, dat de werkwijze van een schilder over de tijd varieert, enz. 
Dee gebruikerstaai ,variabeie' roept met andere woorden de mogelijkheid van con-
trolee in ruimte en tijd op, doordat bekend wordt welke andere observaties mogelijk 
zijn,, gegeven de observatie van wat door het label uitgelicht wordt. 

Sectiee 3.2 biedt voorbeelden van gebruikerstalen van meer recente datum, waarbij 
eenn sterker beroep de inbreng van de gebruiker wordt gedaan dan bij gebruik van 
dee in de vorige sectie beschreven gebruikerstalen (die laatste vormen deels onder-
deell van de nieuwere talen). Er worden drie tentoonstellingen beschreven die zijn 
ontwikkeldd met behulp van de gebruikerstaai ,problemen' en de gebruikerstaai 
,spel'.. Beide laatste gebruikerstalen halen meer dan voorheen complexe eigen-
schappenn naar voren, met name de mogelijkheid om bepaalde handelingen te ont-
wikkelingenn (er wordt gebruik gemaakt van een adressering als „actor"). Deze ge-
bruikerstalenn worden nog niet vaak benut in de museale omgeving. De ervaringen 
mett deze talen in een aantal door de auteur en diens collegae ontwikkelde tentoon-
stellingenn vormen een belangrijke bijdrage tot de theorievorming in deze studie. 
Zee laten toe dat een voorkeur wordt geformuleerd voor wat als label wordt 
geïmplmenteerd. . 
Dee „munteenheid" in de gebruikerstaai .problemen' bestaat vooral uit intenties 
-- van de gebruiker of van de constructeurs van het label. Deze ordenen diens 
.observaties',, maar nu niet door andere observaties zoals in het geval van .varia-
belen'.. De gebruikerstaai .problemen' laat toe dat mede problemen worden gefor-
muleerdd die extern zijn aan de gebruiker - bijvoorbeeld de oplossing van een puzzel, 
vann een raadsel, het reageren op een uitdaging. Er wordt in dit geval naar gestreefd 
datt de gebruiker zich het probleem eigen maakt, zodat een kader voor eigen 
handelenn ontstaat, en de mogelijkheid voor exploratie van dat handelen. Het gaat 
hiermeee om een duidelijk verschil met de eerder ontwikkelde talen. Labels ont-
wikkeldd met gebruikmaking van deze taal roepen vaak een directe actiebereid-
heidd op. Ze beogen de gebruiker te helpen competent te kiezen tussen alternatieve 
oplossingen. . 
Bijj de gebruikerstaai ,problemen' spelen andere bezoekers eigenlijk geen rol. Dit is 
anderss bij de gebruikerstaai ,spel'. Andere bezoekers worden geadresseerd als bron 
vann variatie. Labels die gebruik maken van de gebruikerstaai ,spel' verleggen de 
nadrukk van de inhoud van de ervaring naar het ervaren zelf - de relatie met anderen 
inn de ruimte van het museum. Wat tentoon gesteld wordt, krijgt de suggestie mee 
vann een wereld waarin met anderen kan worden samengewerkt. De betreffende 
labelss roepen op dat met anderen wordt overlegd. 
Dee beschreven voorbeelden vormen het materiaal op basis waarvan gepoogd is de 
onderzoeksvraagg te beantwoorden. Sommige gebruikerstalen dragen klaarblijkelijk 
anderee eigenschappen over op de gebruiker dan andere. Meer specifiek kan worden 
199 

geconstateerdd dat er gebruikerstalen zijn met meer structuur dan andere, dus talen 
diee in de bovengenoemd zin meer gewenste eigenschappen oproepen dan andere. 
Gegevenn deze conclusies rijst de vraag of bovenstaande constateringen kunnen 
wordenn getoetst. Zou een hele instelling kunnen worden ingericht op basis de ge-
bruikerstaaii ,spel', of mogelijk ook van ,problemen? Zou zo'n instelling een beter 
museumm zijn, in de zin van een ondersteuningssysteem? in 1994 kreeg de auteur de 
gelegenheidd een dergelijke instelling te helpen ontwikkelen. 
Inn sectie 4 wordt gepoogd de gebeurtenissen bij de ontwikkeling van newMetropolis, 
alss centrum voor wetenschap en technologie in Amsterdam, in termen van de in 
Deell 1 en de eerdere secties van Deel 2 te interpreteren. Deze interpretatie dient 
medee ter onderbouwing van het antwoord op de vraagstelling van deze studie. 
Dee uitdaging van newMetropolis was om een „Prototype voor de 21e eeuw" te 
scheppen.. Dit prototype moest enerzijds de ambities van de directeur helpen reali-
seren,, die een nieuw soort museum voor Amsterdam wilde creëren en anderzijds 
diee van de auteur, die zijn ervaringen uit vroegere tentoonstellingen in praktijk wilde 
brengen.. Tot beider vreugde convergeerden deze ambities in het plan een omgeving 
tee creëren, waarin de bezoekers zouden worden aangesproken gebruikers te wor-
den,, en de gebruikers zouden worden ondersteund in het verkrijgen van nieuwe 
vaardigheden. . 
Overeenkomstigg de benadering die in dit proefschrift is uitgewerkt, begonnen we 
mett de thematische inhoud af te grenzen op een wijze die voor de meeste bezoekers 
herkenbaarr zou zijn. We kozen voor het Werk. In plaats van een zone over systeem-
dynamicaa boden we derhalve een zone Interacties aan, met een spel over het bank-
wezenn (met nadruk op wisselkoersen), een telecommunicatiespel (met nadruk op het 
uitwisselenn van informatie) en spel over het vrachtvervoer in Europa (met nadruk 
opp de uitwisseling van materiaal). In feite kunnen alle drie de spellen worden ge-
zienn als voorbeelden van dynamische systemen (ze vormen ieder een dynamisch 
systeem,, dat verschillende eigenschappen maximaliseert - evenwicht, stroom, 
capaciteit).. Daar komt de bezoeker later achter. In eerdere tentoonstellingen hadden 
wee ontdekt dat afgrenzing via een specifieke context waar de gebruiker vertrouwd 
meee is, hem of haar helpt in contact te treden met het onderwerp - dus een label 
vormtt waardoor het mogelijk is sneller aan de slag te gaan. 
Inn newMetropolis zijn vijf tentoonstellingszones afgebakend, ieder met een eigen 
2000 
concept, tekststrategie en gebruikerstaai. Voor deze vijf zones werden meer dan 

tweehonderdd individuele ten toon te stellen stukken ontwikkeld. Tevens werden 
algemenee ondersteuningsvormen gerealiseerd zoals een informatiesysteem voor 
geheell newMetropolis (Actua), live demonstraties en straattheater (de Pop-up-
acteurs).. Ook werd lesmateriaal ontwikkeld dat het mogelijk maakt dat leerlingen 
hunn bezoek aan newMetropolis kunnen inbedden in „leertrajecten" (de Starter's 
Kits)) die passen bij verschillende niveaus van het Nederlandse onderwijssysteem. 
Dezee onderdelen tezamen vormden een nieuw soort leeromgeving. 
Voorr deze studie is het van belang dat deze omgeving tevens gezien kan worden als 
eenn coherent ondersteuningssysteem. Het legt de nadruk op de gebruiker - niet 
doorr hem van te voren te modelleren, maar door, net zoals een goede bibliotheek, 
mett behulp van labels rekening te houden met en ondersteuning te bieden aan een 
ongedefinieerdd aantal onbekende en onkenbare toekomstige gebruikers. De 
gehanteerdee geb rui kerstalen dragen, wanneer ze in de vorm van labels worden 
geïmplementeerd,, consequent specifieke en voorspelbare eigenschappen over. 
Gebruikerstalenn die gebruikers aanspreken ais „actor" in het bijzonder blijken tot de 
(bovengenoemde)) gewenste eigenschappen te leiden. Dit geldt met name voor de 
gebruikerstaaii «problemen', en voor de gebruikerstaai ,spel', zoals geïmplementeerd 
bijj diverse onderdelen van newMetropolis. Het succes van newMetropolis bevestigt 
dee bruikbaarheid van de geïntroduceerde ideeën, en laat praktisch zien wat het 
betekentt dat een instelling een ,beter' museum is. 
DEELL DRIE 
Hett derde deel van het onderzoeksverslag, weergegeven in de secties 5 en 6, biedt 
eenn samenvatting van de resultaten van het onderzoek. Tevens wordt een poging 
gedaann de theorie die in dit proefschrift is ontwikkeld te evalueren. Op grond van de 
opgedanee ervaring concludeer ik dat we meer effectieve tentoonstellingen kunnen 
maken,, en bijgevolg betere musea, als we ons richten op de vorming van onder-
steuningssystemenn en daarbij gebruik maken van labels die specifieke gebruiker-
stalenn implementeren. Bij wijze van afsluiting wordt kort aandacht besteed aan 
diversee mogelijkheden voor verder onderzoek. 
Hett uitgangspunt van deze studie was dat er een theorie nodig is die de wisselwer-
kingg betreft tussen een bepaalde, namelijk als museum te construeren, omgeving 
enn de gebruikers daarvan - en die een instrument aan de hand doet om tot betere 
museaa te komen. Wat .beter* inhoudt, is gedefinieerd in termen van de ,vorming' (in 
dubbelee betekenis) van de bezoeker. Het beschreven onderzoek legt mijns inziens 
201 

eenn stevig fundament voor een dergelijke museumtheorie. Bedacht dient hierbij dat 
hett niet om een descriptieve theorie gaat. Het gaat om de formulering van bewe-
ringenn op basis waarvan omgevingen kunnen worden ingericht die aan bepaalde 
criteriaa voldoen, en die .musea' bepaalde gewenste eigenschappen bij bezoekers 
doett oproepen. De theorie betreft dus een wisselwerking: de vorming van iets dat 
gevormdd zijnde, het materiaal levert voor de eigen in stand houding en verdere ont-
wikkeling.. Tot het vocabulaire van deze theorie behoren zowel het idee van een 
ondersteuningssysteemm als van een label. Het label roept eigenschappen op bij 
museumgebruikerss en voor zover dat het geval is determineren de museumge-
bruikerss wat gewenst is als label. Beide zijn onlosmakelijk met elkaar verbonden. 
Dee theorie beschrijft wat nodig is om de bezoeker op de aangegeven wijze te 
ondersteunen,, en hoe deze ondersteuning kan worden gecontinueerd. Deze onder-
steuningg berust niet op een a priori model van de onderzoeker, maar continueert een 
aa posteriori model - een model dat door bezoek aan een museum ontstaat. Dit a 
posteriorii model hangt af van de geïmplementeerde gebruikerstaai. Tot de be-
sprokenn (en in Westerse cultuur deels vaak geïmplementeerde) gebru(kerstalen 
behorenn die van .tekstuele autoriteit', .observatie', .variabelen' (een extensie van 
observatie),, .problemen' en .spel'. 
Dezee gebruikerstalen kunnen worden geordend naar de mate waarin zij gebruikers 
off bezoekers meer of minder als actor adresseren - van de gebruikerstaai .autoriteit' 
aann het ene einde van de schaal tot de gebruikerstaai .oneindig spel' aan het an-
dere.. In de gebruikerstaai autoriteit heeft het label slechts één dimensie - de stem 
vann de autoriteit. In de gebruikerstaai .observatie' wordt de gebruiker als waarne-
merr geadresseerd. De gebruikerstaai .variabelen', een extensie van de gebruiker-
staall .observatie', kenmerkt de opkomst van het museum zoals we dat sinds de 18e 
eeuw,, maar in het bijzonder in de tweede helft van deze eeuw, hebben leren kennen. 
Labelss volgens deze taai benadrukken niet alleen de zichtbare maar ook de onzicht-
baree relaties tussen verschijnselen. De gebruikerstaai .problemen' introduceert de 
adresseringg als „actor", terwijl de gebruikerstaai .spel' adressering van meerdere 
actorenn toelaat, evenals een adressering als collectief. 
Hett gebruik van beide laatste soorten gebruikerstaai heeft belangrijke consequen-
tiess voor de toekomst van het museum. Gebruikerstalen als .tekstuele autoriteit' en 
.observatie',, die de gebruiker niet als „actor" adresseren, worden in het gebruik als 
hett ware „uitgeput". Zij ondersteunen de gebruiker zolang ze worden gebruikt. 
2022 
Ze verwijzen niet naar wat de gebruiker buiten het museum doet. Als kan worden 

gesteldd dat een van de doelstellingen van toekomstige musea ligt in de onder-
steuningg van de verwerving van vaardigheden, dan kan het zich niet verlaten op 
dergelijkee gebrui kerstalen. De voorkeur gaat uit naar gebruikerstal en waarin de 
gebruikerr als „actor" en „andere actoren" worden aangesproken. De gebruiker-
stalenn ,problemen' en ,spel' lijken de eerste belangrijke stappen te markeren in deze 
richting,, evenals van een nog lange ontwikkelingsweg. 

Photoo Credits: 
pg--
pg--
pg g 
pg g 
pg g 
pg g 
pg g 
pg g 
pg g 
pg g 
31 1 
57 7 
58 8 
63 3 
68 8 
75 5 
78 8 
88 8 
92 2 
97 7 
Waiterss Art Gallery 
Dreww Ann Wake 
Dreww Ann Wake 
Dreww Ann Wake 
Dreww Ann Wake 
Tonyy Westman 
Tonyy Westman 
Tonyy Westman 
Tonyy Westman 
Tonyy Westman 
pgg 106 
pg.119 9 
pg.120 0 
pg.123 3 
pgg 125 
pg.128 8 
pg.. 130 
pg.131 1 
pg.135 5 
pg.138 8 
Jann Derwig 
newMetropoiis s 
Jann Derwig 
Jann Derwig 
Jann Derwig 
Jann Derwig 
Jann Derwig 
Jann Derwig 
Jann Derwig 
Jann Derwig 
Impressum: : 
OO James M. Bradburne, March 2000 
ISBN:: 3-89811-635-2 
Design:: Stattmann, Leffringhausen 
Coverr Photo: Marcel Loermans 
Printt Libri Books on Demand 
Promotor:: prof. dr. G. de Zeeuw 
Faculteitt der Natuurwetenschappen, Wiskunde en Informatica 
Promotiecommissie: : 
Prof.. R. L Gregory CBE, Prof. P. Hi liman 
2044 
Dr. J. Miller CBE, prof. dr. P. Sigmond, prof. dr. F. A. Bais 

ISBNN a-aiau-bas-E 
Nil l 
M783898ll116350l l 

