Risky Killing suggests that E ought to prevent C’s leg being broken by B rather
than A. But this still seems hard to believe, even though there are no competing
claims to rescue in this case. Third-party cases thus cast doubt on Risky Killing.
In response, Lazar might hold that the evidence-sensitive dimension of
rights transgressions is fully agent-relative and so only affects the moral situation
of the rights violator, but not third parties.2 But this modiﬁcation risks limiting
the support that Risky Killing gives to civilian immunity (as well as raising an
obvious worry of ad hocery). While it would still give soldiers reason to target
combatants rather than noncombatants in war, it would not give third parties
reason to bring it about that they do so. One implication is that Risky Killing less
obviously supports using the law as a means of preventing the killing of civilians.
More generally, Lazar’s multipronged defense of Moral Distinction would have
been strengthened if it had shown that the asymmetries identiﬁed robustly
affect the normative situation of third parties.
But none of these worries undermines the fact that Sparing Civilians is a
superb book that deserves to be taken very seriously.
Reference
Lazar, Seth. 2018. “Strengthening Moral Distinction.” Law and Philosophy 3: 327–49.
Jonathan Parry
London School of Economics and Political Science
Philosophical Review, Vol. 129, No. 1, 2020
DOI 10.1215/00318108-7890507
Sarah Moss, Probabilistic Knowledge.
New York: Oxford University Press, 2018. xi þ 268 pp.
In her wide-ranging book, Probabilistic Knowledge, Sarah Moss presents a uniﬁed
account of probabilistic content in theories of belief, assertion, and knowledge.
Thanks to Josh Dever, Dorothy Edgington, Michael Nielsen, and Rachel Rudolph for
helpful discussion of this material.
2. Though this would be in tension with his stated position: “My arguments in this
book focus on agent-relative reasons, though they all give grounds as well for thinking that
killing civilians is agent-neutrally worse than killing soldiers” (6). Lazar emphasizes the
agent-relative aspects of his arguments at pp. 120–21 and 133.
B O O K R E V I E W S
139
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/the-philosophical-review/article-pdf/129/1/139/726464/139fusco.pdf by WIKIPEDIA LIBRARY user on 03 July 2023

The ﬁrst part (chaps. 1–2.3) begins by arguing for a particular way of incorpo-
rating credence into an extant picture of belief—that is, by analyzing credence
as a relation between an agent and a probabilistic content. The second part
(chaps. 2.4–4) moves on to language, with a focus on epistemic vocabulary,
indicative conditionals, and logical connectives. The third (chaps. 5–10) turns
to knowledge. Here, the central thesis is that all grades of Bayesian credence—
traditionally considered as mere partial belief—can in fact constitute knowl-
edge in many of its central epistemological roles. Additional chapters turn to
applications, including action and decision (chap. 9) and the role of statistical
evidence in the law (chap. 10).
In each case, the role played by individual possible worlds on standard
theories—as well as some of the roles played by worlds in compositional seman-
tic treatments of logical operators, epistemic modals, and conditionals—is
played in Moss’s book by probability spaces: triples ,V, F, m. consisting of a
sample space, a sigma-algebra, and a probability measure. Sets of probability
spaces are Moss’s choice for modeling content in the belief-assertion-knowledge
trifecta, as sets of (mere) worlds (viz., propositions) model content in the the-
ories she seeks to upgrade. Content satisfaction—for example, the content that
it is .4 likely to rain—goes by containment: an agent’s probability space satisﬁes
this content iff it is contained in the set of all probability spaces that assign .4 to
the proposition that it will rain. Uptake goes by simple intersection: perceptual
content, for example, is intersected with one’s probability space or representor;
assertedcontent is intersected withan upgradedversionof thecommon ground.
The book is written in a clear and accessible style, and while the overall
picture coheres around the upgrade to probabilistic content, arguments in the
language, mind, and knowledge strands are to a large degree self-contained.1
Below, I focus on a selection of the main arguments, with an eye to issues
that have already begun, and most likely will continue, to provoke the most
discussion.
Language: Thorough Probabilism and Partition-Sensitivity
We begin with the thesis that assertions like (1)
(1)
It is .9 likely that it is raining.
typically express, and aim to engender coordination on, credence (here, .9
credence) in the proposition it is raining.
At a ﬁrst pass, Moss takes on board the equation (in Dummett’s [1973]
terms) between assertoric content and ingredient sense and thus holds that the
1. Moss makes some recommendations for selective paths through the material in
the introduction (x).
B O O K R E V I E W S
140
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/the-philosophical-review/article-pdf/129/1/139/726464/139fusco.pdf by WIKIPEDIA LIBRARY user on 03 July 2023

compositional semantic value of (1) in context is a probabilistic content of the
kind described above: the set of probability spaces assigning .9 to it is raining.
This ﬁrst-pass analysis does not eliminate a need for the more traditional
notion of worldly content as the object of credence. The compositional contri-
bution of the prejacent “that it is raining” to (1) is a possible-worlds constraint
on how things might be: that is, it is a (mere) proposition. Assertion (1) thus
contrasts with (a noncollapsed reading of) a sentence like (2):
(2)
It is .9 likely that it might be raining.
which is assertable, Moss argues, in, for example, a case where there is a one-
tenth chance we will get evidence that rules out that it is raining. In (2), the
compositional contribution of the prejacent under “likely”—since it includes
“might”—seems itself to be probabilistic. Hence there’s a puzzle for the com-
positional semantics: what type of object—a set of worlds or a set of probability
spaces—best models the argument of “it is .9 likely”?
Moss’s response is to generalize to the worst (or, at least, highest-type)
case: content embedded under, for example, “likely” is always probabilistic,
though sometimes only trivially (or “nominally”) so.2 Returning to (1), Moss
posits the presence of a hidden type-lifting operator ‘C ’ (think: certainly) with
scope over the prejacent, yielding (10) as the true LF of (1):
(10)
It is .9 likely that C (it is raining).
Now, a compositional semantics operating on (10) must assign a numerical prob-
ability (.9) to something that is itself epistemic: ‘certainly’-claims are accepted or
rejected by probability spaces rather than individual worlds. This is “thorough
probabilism” at work: semantic values are probability space-sensitive “all the way
down.” This choice lends itself to the general formal picture of possibility, high
probability, and n-valued credence sketched in Moss’s appendix: a proposition’s
being (epistemically) possible is its being possibly certain; a proposition’s being
highly probable is its being highly probably certain; and a proposition’s being
assigned a credence n is the value n’s being associated with the region of the
sample space throughout which that proposition is certain.
Beyond the type-shifting operator ‘C ’, there is additional syntactic
enrichment of LFs in Moss’s picture, in the service of a very ﬂexible brand of
contextualism. On her semantics, epistemic operators, conditionals, and logical
operators carry hidden indices which, relative to gc (.), the contextually available
assignment function, denote questions (formally, Hamblin-style [1973] par-
titions of logical space or Roberts-style [1996] “Questions under Discussion”).
These partitions isolate some important consideration of interest in evaluating a
2. Another way to go is to hold that the compositional semantic values are (at least)
world-probability space pairs; see, for example, Yalcin 2012 and MacFarlane and Kolodny
2010 for world-information state pairs playing the relevant compositional role.
B O O K R E V I E W S
141
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/the-philosophical-review/article-pdf/129/1/139/726464/139fusco.pdf by WIKIPEDIA LIBRARY user on 03 July 2023

probabilistic object-language claim. Different indices on epistemic operators
correspond to cases in which different questions inﬂuence the communicated
content of, for example, indicative conditionals (for which Moss favors a strict
conditional analysis).
As an illustration, consider the famous Sly Pete case of Gibbard (1981).
In a game of poker, Pete has a worse hand than his opponent does. But by
cheating, Pete has also gained knowledge of this fact, and hence will fold. Dif-
ferent indices j and k such that gc ( j ) ¼ did Pete cheat? ¼ {Pete cheated, Pete didn’t
cheat} and gc (k) ¼ did Pete have a winning hand? ¼ {Pete had a winning hand, Pete
did not have a winning hand} on ‘likely’ support the apparently dueling takes on
the embedded conditional ‘if Pete called, he won/lost’ in (3) and (4):
(3)
It is likelyj that ifi Pete called, he won.
(4)
It is likelyk that ifi Pete called, he lost.3
Formally, (3) is true because within {Pete cheated, Pete didn’t cheat}, the agent
considers the former to be likely. The region of her sample space that’s settled
on Pete’s having cheated supports the strict conditional ‘if Pete called, he won’.
However—turning to (4)—within {Pete had a winning hand, Pete did not have a
winning hand}, the agent considers the latter to be likely. The region of the
sample space that’s settled on Pete’s having the weaker hand supports the strict
conditional ‘if Pete called, he lost’. Hence given the different indices, the prima
facie incompatible (3) and (4) can both characterize the same credal state in the
same context.
Knowledge: Closure and Impersistence
In epistemology, Moss’s high-level thesis is that all degrees of Bayesian credence
can constitute knowledge. Offered in support of her claim are the contention
that states of credence are factive (given a minimalist construal of what “factive”
amounts to), are Gettierizable, and play the knowledge role with respect to
rational action.
The constitution thesis is simple. But it is also radical in a number
of ways—for example when it comes to reasoned change in view. Extreme
credences—of 0 or 1—are persistent in a Bayesian framework. But intermediate
values can ﬂuctuate. Indeed, we may be certain they will, such as when we antici-
pate observing the outcome of an experiment. As Moss puts it, “When you have
a .6 credence that Jones smokes, you necessarily also believe it might be that
3. Though (3) and (4) differ with respect to the index on ‘probably’, I give them the
same index, i, on the inner ‘if’, as Moss does (236). I also assume, as she does, that indices
on ‘if . . . then’ constructions tend to be decisive with respect to the antecedent—namely,
in (3) and (4), decisive with respect to whether Pete called (73).
B O O K R E V I E W S
142
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/the-philosophical-review/article-pdf/129/1/139/726464/139fusco.pdf by WIKIPEDIA LIBRARY user on 03 July 2023

Jones certainly doesn’t smoke” (138).4 If intermediate-valued credence can con-
stitute knowledge, it is knowledge that has this changeling character built in.
Such a view contrasts with a more restricted, “Meno-inspired’’ way of
conceptualizing knowledge for Bayesians, wherein the stability of extreme-
valued credences in the light of new information is what makes them (uniquely)
knowledge-like. On this view, my expressed .6 credence that (e.g.) the dice will
land even can’t be knowledge, because in a moment—after observing how the
dice land—I will know something incompatible with that very claim: either that
they certainly came up even or that they certainly didn’t. As Gardenfors (1982:
749) puts it: “A fundamental presupposition of the Bayesian doctrine is that, if a
sentence B is accepted as known in a given state of knowledge and if a sentence
A is consistent with what is accepted as known, then B should be accepted as
known in the revised state of belief which is obtained by adding A as a new piece
of knowledge” (emphasis added). The quoted claim is false on Moss’s picture,
instantiating B with ‘it is .6 likely that the dice land even’, A with ‘the dice cer-
tainly don’t land even’, and glossing ‘A and B are consistent’ as entailing ‘the
claim ‘B and might A’ is consistent’.
Moss is, of course, aware of this “undermining” feature of credence and
its ramiﬁcations for the constitution thesis. Her response—in addition to moti-
vating cases where epistemic contradictions like ‘it’s .6 likely that p and it might
be that certainly not-p’ can sound true to ordinary speakers—is to follow an anal-
ogy with contextualist responses to the raising-to-salience of skeptical scenarios
(chap. 7.3). The idea is that the presence of some incoming information—
such as an impending observation of how the dice land—can act as a challeng-
ing alternative to the epistemic status of intermediate credence, in much the
same way that raising possibilities regarding evil demons can challenge ordinary
knowledge about, for example, having hands. It may generally be true in such
skeptical contexts that knowledge “vanishes.” But (the argument goes) that does
not mean that knowledge fails to be present in unchallenged cases. Returning to
the case of intermediate credence, an impending news bulletin, the presence of
a more perfectly informed expert (138), or active consideration of the omni-
scient credences of God (141) may all successfully disqualify intermediate cre-
dence from knowledge-like status. Yet, Moss suggests, this is no argument that
intermediate credence generally fails to be knowledge.
The gambit, of course, is unusual in casting situations where experts are
present or observations are about to be made—intuitively, situations in which
extra knowledge is there to be gained—in the role of situations where knowl-
4. The claim ‘it might be that Jones certainly doesn’t smoke’ is true in Moss’s object
language when ‘might’ is indexed to a partition that is decisive with respect to the prop-
osition that Jones smokes. As Moss notes (132), this makes the statement about Jones
a type of epistemic contradiction (Yalcin 2007): it entails a sentence of the form p and might
not-p.
B O O K R E V I E W S
143
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/the-philosophical-review/article-pdf/129/1/139/726464/139fusco.pdf by WIKIPEDIA LIBRARY user on 03 July 2023

edge vanishes under skeptical pressure. But such a view may be inevitable given
the broader picture at work in the book. As Moss’s compositional semantics
is probabilistic all the way down, so knowledge is probabilistic through and
through: knowers are aﬂoat on a fully Bayesian sea.
References
Dummett, Michael. 1973. Frege: Philosophy of Language. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Univer-
sity Press.
Gardenfors, P. 1982. “Imaging and Conditionalization.” Journal of Philosophy 79, no. 12:
747–60.
Gibbard, Allan. 1981. “Two Recent Theories of Conditionals.” In Ifs: Conditionals, Belief,
Decision, Chance, and Time, edited by W. Harper, R. Stalnaker, and G. Pearce, 211–47.
Dordrecht: D. Reidel.
Hamblin, C. L. 1973. “Questions in Montague English.” Foundations of Language 10, no. 1:
41–53.
MacFarlane, John, and Niko Kolodny. 2010. “Ifs and Oughts.” Journal of Philosophy 107:
115–43.
Roberts, Craige. 1996. “Information Structure in Discourse.” In OSU Working Papers in
Linguistics, vol. 49, edited by J. Yoon and A. Kathol, 91–136. Columbus: Ohio State
University.
Yalcin, Seth. 2007. “Epistemic Modals.” Mind 116: 983–1026.
Yalcin, Seth. 2012. “A Counterexample to Modus Tollens.” Journal of Philosophical Logic 41:
1001–24.
Melissa Fusco
Columbia University
Philosophical Review, Vol. 129, No. 1, 2020
DOI 10.1215/00318108-7890520
Anjan Chakravartty, Scientiﬁc Ontology.
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2017. 296 pp.
What does science tell us about ontology? That’s the driving question of Anjan
Chakravartty’s new book Scientiﬁc Ontology. Chakravartty answers the driving
question by combining a naturalistic approach in metaphysics with a voluntarist
approach in epistemology. Naturalized metaphysics refers to the idea that scien-
tiﬁc ontology—conclusions about the ontological consequences of the sci-
ences—should be informed by and continuous with the empirical content of
the sciences. Voluntarist epistemology refers to the idea that views about the onto-
logical consequences of the sciences always depend on a background episte-
B O O K R E V I E W S
144
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/the-philosophical-review/article-pdf/129/1/139/726464/139fusco.pdf by WIKIPEDIA LIBRARY user on 03 July 2023

