Testing Inflation with Large Scale Structure:
Connecting Hopes with Reality
Conveners: Olivier Dor´e and Daniel Green
Marcelo Alvarez1, Tobias Baldauf2, J. Richard Bond1,3, Neal Dalal4, Roland de Putter5,6,
Olivier Dor´e5,6, Daniel Green1,3, Chris Hirata7, Zhiqi Huang1, Dragan Huterer8, Donghui
Jeong9, Matthew C. Johnson10,11, Elisabeth Krause12, Marilena Loverde13, Joel Meyers1, P.
Daniel Meerburg1, Leonardo Senatore12, Sarah Shandera9, Eva Silverstein12, Anˇze Slosar14,
Kendrick Smith11, Matias Zaldarriaga1, Valentin Assassi15, Jonathan Braden1, Amir
Hajian1, Takeshi Kobayashi1,11, George Stein1, Alexander van Engelen1
1Canadian Institute for Theoretical Astrophysics, University of Toronto, ON
2Institute of Advanced Studies, Princeton, NJ
3Canadian Institute for Advanced Research, Toronto, ON
4University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, IL
5Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, CA
6California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA
7Ohio State University, Columbus, OH
8University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI
9Pennsylvania State, State College, PA
10York University, Toronto, ON
11Perimeter Institute, Waterloo, ON
12Stanford University, Stanford, CA
13University of Chicago, Chicago, IL
14Brookhaven National Laboratory, NY
15 Cambridge University, Cambridge, UK
Abstract
The statistics of primordial curvature ﬂuctuations are our window into the period of inﬂation, where
these ﬂuctuations were generated. To date, the cosmic microwave background has been the domi-
nant source of information about these perturbations. Large scale structure is however from where
drastic improvements should originate. In this paper, we explain the theoretical motivations for pur-
suing such measurements and the challenges that lie ahead. In particular, we discuss and identify
theoretical targets regarding the measurement of primordial non-Gaussianity. We argue that when
quantiﬁed in terms of the local (equilateral) template amplitude floc
NL (feq
NL), natural target levels of
sensitivity are ∆floc,eq.
NL
≃1. We highlight that such levels are within reach of future surveys by
measuring 2-, 3- and 4-point statistics of the galaxy spatial distribution. This paper summarizes a
workshop held at CITA (University of Toronto) on October 23-24, 2014 [Link].
arXiv:1412.4671v1  [astro-ph.CO]  15 Dec 2014

Contents
1
Introduction
2
2
Theoretical motivation and targets for non-Gaussianity
3
2.1
Local Non-Gaussianity (floc
NL)
5
2.1.1
Curvaton Scenario
5
2.1.2
Modulated Reheating
6
2.1.3
Discussion
6
2.2
Equilateral and Othorgonal Non-Gaussanity (feq
NL, forth
NL )
7
2.3
Intermediate Shapes
8
2.4
Theory targets summary
8
2.5
Targets for the power spectrum
9
3
Observational status and prospects for floc
NL
10
3.1
Measurement status of primordial non-Gaussianity
10
3.2
Relevant planned surveys
12
3.3
What would an ideal survey for constraining floc
NL with the power spectrum look like?
13
4
Beyond the Halo Power Spectrum
16
4.1
State of Bispectrum Observations
16
4.2
State of Bispectrum Forecasts
16
4.2.1
The Matter Bispectrum
17
4.2.2
The Halo Bispectrum
17
4.2.3
Redshift Space Distortions
18
4.2.4
Loop corrections to the halo bispectrum
19
4.2.5
Additional Eﬀects
19
4.3
Mass function & other probes
19
4.4
Uncorrelated Primordial non-Gaussianity, Intermittency and LSS
20
5
Potential Systematic Eﬀects
23
5.1
Theoretical Systematics
23
5.1.1
Non-linear systematics
23
5.1.2
General Relativistic eﬀect
24
5.2
Observational Systematics
25
6
Conclusion
27
1

1
Introduction
To date, the cosmic microwave background (CMB) has been the dominant source of information
about the primordial curvature perturbations. The statistics of these ﬂuctuations are, so far, our
window into the period of inﬂation, where ﬂuctuations are thought to have been generated. However,
due to the limitations set by Silk damping and foregrounds, the CMB is unlikely to oﬀer signiﬁcant
improvements in the statistics of the scalar1 ﬂuctuations (e.g. those responsible for seeding large scale
structure) beyond Planck. Large scale structure (LSS) is ultimately where drastic improvements can
originate from. The purpose of this paper is to explain the theoretical motivations to pursuing such
measurements and the challenges that lie ahead.
Our understanding of inﬂation is currently best constrained by Planck through measurements
of the power spectrum [2], bispectrum [3] and trispectrum. The power spectrum is well characterized
in terms of the amplitude, As = (2.23 ± 0.16) × 10−9 and the tilt ns = 0.9616 ± 0.0094. These values
can give us insight into the underlying inﬂationary background. The bispectrum can be used to test
a wide variety of models beyond the single-ﬁeld slow-roll paradigm. Often these results are reported
in terms of the local template [4, 5], floc
NL = 2.7 ± 5.8, the equilateral template [6], feq
NL = −42 ± 75,
and the ortogonal template [7], forthogonal
NL
= −25 ± 39 . Similar constraints have been placed on
several trispectrum templates [8, 9]. While these results are impressive, we should ask if they have
reached a theoretically desirable level of sensitivity. In other words, one should put these results into
the context of what natural levels of non-Gaussianity might be expected under plausible theoretical
expectations.
In the speciﬁc context of the bispectrum, the local and equilateral templates probe qualita-
tively diﬀerent deformations of single-ﬁeld slow-roll inﬂation and should be assessed independently.
Local non-Gaussianity is a sensitive probe of multi-ﬁeld models due to the single-ﬁeld consistency
relations [10, 11]. Equilateral non-Gaussianity is a probe of non-slow roll dynamics through self-
interactions of the perturbations. Despite the clear diﬀerences between these probes, we will argue
that a natural target level of sensitivity is ∆floc,eq.
NL
< 1. Given the target level of sensitivity, there is
still signiﬁcant room for improvement beyond the limits set by the CMB. This presents a well-deﬁned
challenge for upcoming LSS surveys.
The state of the art for testing non-Gaussianity in LSS is constraining the scale-dependent halo
bias predicted for models with floc
NL [12]. These constraints can be derived from the halo power spec-
trum which greatly simpliﬁes the analysis. However, these measurements are prone to systematic
eﬀects which present a signiﬁcant barrier for existing surveys to making this measurement competi-
tive with the CMB. In addition, the halo bispectrum would be a necessary tool for testing non-local
type non-Gaussianity like feq
NL. To date, there is no constraint on primordial non-Gaussianity from
the halo bispectrum, despite suggestions that it contains substantially more signal to noise than the
halo power spectrum [13]. Ultimately, the bispectrum will need to be used to make LSS as versatile
a tool as the CMB has become.
1Signiﬁcant improvements in sensitivity to tensor ﬂuctuations are expected over the next decade through measure-
ments of CMB polarization [1]. The scalar and tensor ﬂuctuations probe diﬀerent aspects of inﬂation and are therefore
complimentary.
2

The goal of this paper is to summarize the status, motivations and challenges for testing
inﬂation in large scale structure surveys. Our discussion will be somewhat weighted towards floc
NL
because it has been demonstrated that large scale structure can give comparable constraints to the
CMB. However, we will emphasize that there are a number of other interesting theoretical targets
that deserve equal attention in future surveys that will ultimately be tested through probes other
than scale dependent bias. This paper aims at sharing with the community the outcome of our
workshop and thus should not be read as a review. Many relevant subjects were not discussed for
lack of time and many relevant references are missing.
The paper is organized as follows. In section 2, we will review a number of theoretical targets
that would be desirable to meet in future surveys. In particular, we will explain why ∆floc,eq.
NL
< 1
are particularly interesting levels of sensitivity. In section 3, we will discuss the status and prospects
for measuring floc
NL ∼1 in future surveys. In section 4, we will explain the status of the bispectrum as
a tool for testing inﬂation. In section 5, we will discuss systematics that may be relevant to making
these measurements a reality.
2
Theoretical motivation and targets for non-Gaussianity
The size and form of primordial non-Gaussianities in single-clock inﬂationary models (i.e. models
where only one light dynamical ﬁeld is relevant during inﬂation) has several remarkable properties
intimately related to their nature.
These properties can be seen by studying the eﬀect of large
modes on smaller scales ones as inﬂation proceeds. This corresponds to the so-called squeezed limit
of correlation functions. Consider how a mode of momentum q aﬀects a mode of momentum k with
q ≪k. The mode q leaves the horizon much before the mode k and becomes part of the background
in which the mode k will freeze.
One of the basic properties of inﬂation is that the inﬂationary background is an attractor.
As a result, the eﬀects of the mode q quickly become unobservable and the mode k freezes in a
background that is basically indistinguishable from the unperturbed background. In fact the eﬀects
of the q mode redshifts as (q/aH)2. Thus one expects any eﬀect of the long mode on the short to
be suppressed by (q/k)2.
This physical fact is encoded in the various consistency relations that N-point functions satisfy
in single clock inﬂation [10, 11]. For example if one considered the three point function with momenta
q, k1 and k2 such that q ≪k1 ∼k2 = k the leading piece of the three point function is:
⟨ζ(q)ζ(k1)ζ(k2)⟩′ ∼
h
(ns −1) + O
q2
k2
i
P(q)P(k) ,
(2.1)
where the prime indicates that we are suppressing the momentum conserving delta-function. This
piece, proportional to (ns −1), results form the fact that the long mode is not aﬀecting the short
scales and is non-zero due to our choice of coordinates.
In the background of a long mode the
comoving scale k corresponds to physical a scale kF given by k = eζLkF . The (ns −1) factor in the
three point function is there to guarantee that the amplitude of ﬂuctuations on given physical scales
are independent of the long mode. Schematically:
⟨ζ(q)ζ(kF1)ζ(kF2)⟩′ = O
q2
k2

.
(2.2)
3

The vanishing of the eﬀect of long modes on short ones is a consequence of the attractor nature
of the inﬂationary solution and of the fact that modes freeze and become part of the background
sequentially. The mode q is “hidden” from modes that freeze later2.
The second remarkable property of the non-Gaussianities in single-ﬁeld slow-roll models is how
small even the O(q2/k2) piece is [10]. In fact, the full result scales as
⟨ζ(q)ζ(k1)ζ(k2)⟩′ ∼
h
(ns −1) + ϵO
q2
k2
i
P(q)P(k) ,
(2.3)
with ϵ = −˙H/H2 during inﬂation. The fact that the q2/k2 piece is down by a factor of ϵ is again
directly related to the mechanism that single clock inﬂation uses to create the ﬂuctuations, the fact
that they are time-delay ﬂuctuations.
To highlight this fact, consider the eﬀect of long modes on short ones in the late universe,
say during the matter era. Long modes can be thought of as producing a curved universe with a
curvature parameter ΩK ∼q2ζ/a2H2 on which the short modes evolve [22, 23]. This curvature
changes the growth factor of perturbations. In the presence of the long modes the growth rate is
changed and the coeﬃcient relating that change to ΩK is of order one. However during slow-roll
inﬂation, the eﬀect of the curvature of the long mode is not of order one, but of order ϵ. This reﬂects
the fact that in slow-roll inﬂation one is dealing just with time delay ﬂuctuations, and that even if
the surfaces of constant value of the clock are curved, this is not changing the space-time. More
precisely those changes are down by ϵ.
Models in which the perturbations are originally not perturbations of the inﬂationary clock,
but are perturbations of another ﬁeld that are then converted into curvature ﬂuctuations, behave
very diﬀerently [24, 25]. The conversion requires that super-horizon modes aﬀect the equation of
state of matter so as to make diﬀerent regions of the Universe expand by diﬀerent amounts. Thus,
super-horizon modes in these scenarios almost by deﬁnition must produce locally observable eﬀects.
Non-linearities in the Einstein equations and the relation between ﬁeld ﬂuctuations and the changes
in the equation of state will couple all modes during the conversion process. As a result, in these
models there will be violations of the consistency condition. It is important to stress that these
considerations are quite general and do not depend on whether ﬂuctuations are generated during a
period of inﬂation or about some other background.
We will review some illustrative examples in the next section. The general situation is that
various non-linearities in the conversion process result in order one coupling between modes. Thus
if the conversion to curvature ﬂuctuations is eﬃcient then one expects floc
NL ∼1. If, however, the
conversion is somewhat ineﬃcient, say if 10−4 ﬂuctuations in the second ﬁeld are needed to create
10−5 curvature ﬂuctuations, then one expects floc
NL ∼10. The Planck constraints have already shown
that the conversion mechanism has to be eﬃcient. It is thus clear that floc
NL ∼1 is a clear target
as even assuming eﬃcient conversion one gets contributions of this level. The target is not sharp
because there is more than one contribution that can be balanced to produce a partial cancellation. In
2This expectation can be modiﬁed if the attractor phase of single clock inﬂation lasts for the minimal number of
e-folds and is preceded by a non-attractor phase [14–16] or by some physics captured by a non-Bunch Davies initial
state for the ﬂuctuations [17–20]. Nevertheless, these scenarios are often observationally distinguishable from single or
multi-ﬁeld inﬂation [21].
4

addition, the curvature perturbation from the conversion may be sub-dominant to the perturbations
of the clock, in which case floc
NL < 1 is also plausible.
Thus we conclude that the structure of the correlations between modes in the squeezed limit
–the fact that the correlations are so small– is intimately linked with the basic properties of single-
ﬁeld models. The sequential hiding of ﬂuctuations as part of the background which is an attractor
makes the local contribution to N-point functions vanish. The fact that ﬂuctuations are just time-
delay ﬂuctuations further suppresses the piece of order q2. Thus explicitly checking that both of
these contributions are signiﬁcantly smaller than unity would provide nice evidence in favor of this
picture.
2.1
Local Non-Gaussianity (floc
NL)
To better illustrate what level of precision of observational constraints are theoretically interesting,
it is useful to consider some speciﬁc models. Our focus will be on the simplest examples of a class
of models known as ‘spectator ﬁeld’ models, where inﬂation is driven by a ﬁeld φ, and there exists
another ﬁeld σ whose energy density is subdominant during inﬂation and whose ﬂuctuations are
primarily responsible for the curvature ﬂuctuations which are observed in the cosmic microwave
background and large scale structure. This class of models certainly does not cover the full set of
possibilities for multiple ﬁeld inﬂation, though it provides a useful set of examples whose predictions
can be contrasted with those of single ﬁeld inﬂation. For reviews of multiple ﬁeld inﬂation models,
including several which are not discussed here, see for example [24, 25].
2.1.1
Curvaton Scenario
In the curvaton scenario [26–29] the spectator ﬁeld σ is light and nearly frozen in its potential until
after the end of inﬂation. After inﬂation, the ﬁeld φ which drove inﬂation decays into radiation
which redshifts as a−4. When the Hubble rate drops below some speciﬁc value, the ﬁeld σ begins
oscillating about the minimum of its potential which, if the potential is quadratic, causes the energy
density of the ﬁeld σ to decrease as a−3. As a result, while the energy density of σ was negligible
during inﬂation, it comes to make up a signiﬁcant fraction of the energy density after inﬂation. At
some point the ﬁeld σ decays into radiation which thermalizes with the decay products of φ, and
the ﬁnal radiation ﬂuid acquires ﬂuctuations which depend upon the initial ﬂuctuations of the ﬁeld
σ.
There are two key parameters which determine the value of local non-Gaussianities in the
curvaton scenario. The ﬁrst is the ratio of the energy density in the ﬁeld σ compared to radiation
at the time of the decay of σ, conveniently deﬁned through the parameter rdec given by
rdec ≡
3ρσ
3ρσ + 4ρr

t=tdec
,
(2.4)
which is restricted to be in the range 0 ≤rdec ≤1. We will also deﬁne a second parameter, g(σ∗),
that relates the energy density of σ at the onset of the oscillating phase to its initial ﬁeld value:
ρσ = 1
2m2
σg(σ∗)2 .
(2.5)
5

In terms of these parameters, the curvaton scenario predicts [30]
floc
NL =
 
Pσ
ζ
Pσ
ζ + Pφ
ζ
!2 
5
4rdec

1 −gg′′
g′2

−5
3 −5rdec
6

,
(2.6)
where Pσ
ζ is the contribution to the power spectrum from σ, and likewise for φ. We see that in the
spectator regime, where Pφ
ζ ≪Pσ
ζ , the curvaton scenario typically predicts
floc
NL
 ≥O(1).
2.1.2
Modulated Reheating
The energy density of the ﬁeld φ which drove inﬂation must be converted into radiation after inﬂation
ends. In the modulated reheating scenario [31–33], the rate at which this transfer of energy occurs
is controlled by the value of the spectator ﬁeld σ. The spatial variations of the ﬁeld σ give rise to
spatial variations in the expansion history, thus generating curvature perturbations. In the limit
that the decay rate is small compared to the Hubble rate at the end of inﬂation, the modulated
reheating scenario predicts
floc
NL =
 
Pσ
ζ
Pσ
ζ + Pφ
ζ
!2 
5

1 −ΓΓ′′
Γ′2

,
(2.7)
where Γ is the decay rate of the inﬂaton and Γ′ ≡∂Γ(σ)/∂σ∗gives the dependence on the spectator
ﬁeld. We again ﬁnd that in the spectator regime
floc
NL
 ≥O(1).
2.1.3
Discussion
While we discussed only two examples here, the statement that spectator models tend to predict
floc
NL
 ≥O(1) applies in several other cases as well [25].
This leads us to the rough conclusion
that an observational constraint at the level of ∆floc
NL ≃O(1) is of particular theoretical interest.
Speciﬁcally, observations which reveal that
floc
NL
 ≤O(1) would tend to disfavor spectator models
apart from those with special choices of model parameters. Put another way, such a constraint
on floc
NL would favor a model of the early universe where the ﬂuctuations in the ﬁeld whose energy
density drove inﬂation cannot be neglected. This of course would not rule out multiple ﬁeld inﬂation
in general, since observable non-Gaussianity is not a general prediction of all such models [34–38],
though improved observational bounds also help to constrain these more general scenarios.
Alternatives to inﬂation would be more strongly constrained by such a measurement because
the ﬂuctuations of spectator ﬁelds are necessary to produce a scale-invariant spectrum [39]. As a
result, constrains of
floc
NL
 ≤O(1) would rule out most of the space of viable alternatives to inﬂation
(see e.g. [40]).
Finally, models with non-Gaussianity that couples modes of very diﬀerent wavelengths, as the
floc
NL does, have the feature that amplitude of the ﬂuctuations and of the non-Gaussianity can be
substantially diﬀerent in diﬀerent spatial subvolumes whose long-wavelength background modes do
not take the mean value (zero). Within our universe this is a useful feature for constraining non-
Gaussianity, either through halo bias (discussed in Section 3) or through a more general position
dependent power spectrum [41]. However, this eﬀect also means that for models that predict more
6

than the minimal number of e-folds there is a new source of cosmic variance in using any observed
amplitude of non-Gaussianity to constrain the parameters of the model [42–44].
If floc
NL can be
observationally constrained to be less than 1 on a suﬃcient range of scales, this additional cosmic
variance is likely to be irrelevant for comparing observations to theory [42, 45].
2.2
Equilateral and Othorgonal Non-Gaussanity (feq
NL, forth
NL )
Single ﬁeld inﬂation can produce non-Gaussian shapes of the form of feq
NL and forth
NL .
They are
common signatures of models with dynamics beyond the single-ﬁeld slow-roll inﬂation (see e.g. [17,
46–51]). As in the case of floc
NL, we would like to know if there is a natural threshold value for these
parameters such that a non-detection at such a level would represent a major improvement in our
knowledge of inﬂation? We now explain that such a threshold is indeed feq
NL ∼1 and forth
NL ∼1.
In a modern way of thinking of inﬂation, single ﬁeld inﬂation is considered in much more
general terms than standard slow-roll inﬂation. Instead, inﬂation can be studied as the theory of the
ﬂuctuations of spontaneously broken time translations around a quasi de Sitter background. This
is the so-called Eﬀective Field Theory of inﬂation [52]; its action, after some useful rescalings of the
ﬁeld and the coordinates, reads
S =
Z
d4x √−g

(∂µπc)2 + ˙πc(∂iπc)2
Λ2
1
+ ˙π3
c
Λ2
2
+ . . .

.
(2.8)
The ﬁeld πc represents the canonically-normalized Goldstone boson of time-translations, and the
curvature perturbation ζ that is constant of super-Hubble scale is related to πc on super-Hubble
scales as ζ = −[H/(2 ˙HM 2
Plcs)1/2]πc, where cs is the speed of sound of the ﬂuctuations.
The scales Λ4
1,2 are of order Λ4 ∼( ˙HM 2
Plc5
s). They are related to the perturbative unitarity
bound of the theory: the theory becomes strongly coupled larger energy scales, and the theory is
therefore modiﬁed above those thresholds (see e.g. [52–54] for further details). The parameters feq
NL
and forth
NL
can be expressed in terms of Λ as
feq
NLζ ∼forth
NL ζ ∼H2
Λ2 .
(2.9)
Improving limits on the teo parameters fNL parameters is therefore equivalent to increasing the
hierarchy between Λ and H. Note that something very interesting happens if we push feq, orth
NL
≲1;
in that case, Λ4 ≳˙HM 2
Pl, corresponding to the same energy scale as the kinetic energy of the scalar
ﬁeld in standard slow-roll inﬂation. In fact, if we consider slow-roll inﬂationary models with self
interactions
S =
Z
d4x √−g
"
1
2(∂µφ)2 + V (φ) + (∂µφ)4
Λ4
φ
#
,
(2.10)
we can ask what is the maximum value of feq, orth
NL
compatible with the fact that we wish to have a
slow rolling solution where the higher derivative term is not important for the background solution
˙φsr ∼V ′/H [55]. The requirement that the background solution is unaﬀected by the higher derivative
term implies Λ4
φ ≳˙φ2
sr.
In turns, this implies that the produced feq, orth
NL
by the corresponding
interaction is less than one.
7

All of this tells us that if we can conﬁrm that the values of feq
NL and forth
NL to be less than one, then
the inﬂationary theory is so weakly interacting that it can be described as a small perturbation of
slow roll inﬂation, which we can describe in great detail. In other words, while current observations
allow inﬂation to have wildly diﬀerent dynamics, by constraining feq
NL and forth
NL
to less than one
we will have cornered inﬂation to be of the slow-roll kind3. Together with constraining floc
NL ≲1,
alternatives to single-ﬁeld slow-roll inﬂation would be disfavored. This would represent a major step
forward, that could be achieved even without a positive detection, by simply setting an upper limit
on some observables. In contrast, a positive detection would tell us that we are far away from the
single-ﬁeld slow-roll regime, a fact that opens a plethora of interesting theoretical and observational
possibilities.
2.3
Intermediate Shapes
In many models of inﬂation there are additional ﬁelds present that decay outside the horizon. As a
result, they are diluted before the end of inﬂation and do not modify the reheating surface. In these
models, the curvature perturbation is still the ﬂuctuations of the inﬂationary clock but the freeze-out
of the clock can be modiﬁed by the presence of these additional ﬁelds. A canonical example of the
type is quasi-single ﬁeld inﬂation [59, 60] and generalizations thereof [61–63]. Most signiﬁcantly,
these additional ﬁelds can modify the behavior of the bispectrum in the squeezed limit, violating
the single ﬁeld consistency conditions. The resulting behavior lies somewhere between local and
equilateral shapes without large violations of scale invariance. For example, when the inﬂaton is
coupled to a scalar of mass m satisfying 3
2H > m > 0, a squeezed bispectrum is generated of the
form
⟨ζ(q)ζ(k1)ζ(k2)⟩′
q≪k1∼k2 ∼
h
(ns −1) + O
qα
kα
i
P(q)P(k) ,
(2.11)
where α = 3/2−
p
9/4 −m2/H2. These models produce a squeezed signature that is distinguishable
from single-ﬁeld models but is not of the local type.
One particularly interesting feature of these scenarios is that one can produce large non-
Gaussianity with relatively weak couplings between the inﬂaton and these extra degrees of free-
dom [63, 64]. This makes these intermediate shapes a compelling target from a particle physics
perspective as large numbers of additional ﬁelds are very plausible at the energy scales relevant to
inﬂation [65, 66].
2.4
Theory targets summary
We can summarize our ﬁndings in the following table:
3As for most of theorems, there are some caveats. First, it could be that the leading interactions in single-ﬁeld
inﬂation induce a four-point function, and not a three-point function [56]. In this case, the lower bound on Λ from
the same data set would be lower. Additionally, it could be that the leading interactions that produce a three-point
function are higher-derivatives, a fact that makes the induced limit on Λ smaller [57, 58]. Finally, the measurement of
the scale Λ is indirect, coming from measurements at energy scales of order H, not of order Λ. This means that some
phase transition might actually occur when we connect the theory around the inﬂationary background, and that is
what we measure, to the slow-roll inﬂation model, which is deﬁned around the Minkowski vacuum. Such a possibility
is diﬃcult to exclude from observations at energies H ≪Λ. Even though these would remain allowed possibilities even
if f eq, orth
NL
are pushed below one, we regard them as rather exotic.
8

floc
NL ≲1
floc
NL ≳1
feq, orth
NL
≲1
Single-ﬁeld slow-roll
Multi-ﬁeld
feq, orth
NL
≳1
Single-ﬁeld non-slow-roll
Multi-ﬁeld
Table 1. Table summarizing physical implications for qualitatively diﬀerent measurements of the shapes of
primordial non-Gaussianity.
As emphasized above, the interpretation of each scenario requires some caveats.
It is our
assessment that this table represents a baseline interpretation for each observational outcome. It is
clear that if any experiment reaches these forecasts level, we are going to learn a lot, no matter what
we ﬁnd, which is an ideal situation for an experiment to be. In the event of a detection of either
shape, measuring the scaling in the squeezed limit is an important distinguishing tool.
2.5
Targets for the power spectrum
The power spectrum of density ﬂuctuations encodes a degenerate combination of the initial state and
evolution of the primordial comoving horizon. In the context of inﬂationary cosmology, the evolution
of the comoving horizon is ﬁxed by the precise shape of the scalar ﬁeld potential. Measuring the ﬁrst
two coeﬃcients in a logarithmic expansion of the power spectrum, the spectral index ns and running
αs, provides constraints on the inﬂaton potential. For example, the simplest single-ﬁeld models of
inﬂation would be ruled out by a measurement of signiﬁcant running. Ultra-precise measurements
of ns and αs could greatly constrain the model-space of inﬂationary cosmology 4.
Access to pre-inﬂationary initial conditions imprinted in the two-point function at the largest
scales is possible when there is just-enough inﬂation. A host of ideas including an initial period of
fast-roll [67, 68], excited states [69, 70], and connections to the eternally inﬂating multiverse [71, 72]
have recently been invoked to explain the anomalously low power at ℓ≲30 5. Future LSS may
provide improved constraints on the power on large scales [71]. In addition, an important exercise is
determining how distinguishable all of these scenarios are by incorporating information beyond the
two-point function (e.g. [18, 74]).
Another signature of signiﬁcant theoretical interest are oscillations in the power spectrum,
bispectrum, and beyond. This is motivated by the symmetry structure of string theory along axion
directions in ﬁeld space, e.g. as an auxiliary signature of axion monodromy inﬂation [75], as well as
from the point of view of weakly broken discrete shift symmetries in low energy eﬀective ﬁeld theory
[76]. The oscillatory features have a model-dependent amplitude which is exponentially sensitive
to couplings in the theory, and may be undetectably small, but there are interesting theoretical
thresholds in simple examples [77]. In particular, in the case of high-scale inﬂation there are bounds
4The utility of this exercise is arguably highly dependent on appropriate theoretical priors, as many models will be
indistinguishable even within the ultimate cosmic variance limited error bars.
5Further motivation to study novel phenomena at large scales arises from a tension between the tensor power
claimed to be observed by BICEP2 and the CMB temperature power spectrum, e.g. [73].
9

on the coupling and size of extra dimensions in string theory, which translate into an interesting
lower bound on the size of oscillations in some simple cases despite the exponential suppression.6
In the single-ﬁeld version of axion monodromy inﬂation – or any similar mechanism exhibiting a
softly broken discrete shift symmetry – one ﬁnds a potential for the canonically normalized inﬂation
ﬁeld φ of the form
V (φ) = V0(φ) + Λ(φ)4 cos[a(φ)]
(2.12)
≃V0(φ) + Λ(φ)4 cos
"
φk
f0
×
 
1 + φ⋆
df
dφ

φ⋆
φ −φ⋆
φ⋆

+ 1
2φ2
⋆
d2f
dφ2

φ⋆
φ −φ⋆
φ⋆
2
+ . . .
!−1#
.
Here a(φ) is the underlying periodic axion variable, which in general is a nonlinear function of the
canonical inﬂaton φ. Nontrivial dependence a(φ) – at a level crucial to include in the analysis – is
generic and can have multiple underlying causes, including back-reaction of the inﬂationary energy
on other degrees of freedom, as well as loop eﬀects derived from the weak explicit breaking of the
discrete shift symmetry in V0(φ). The former is generally independent of the latter, leading to a
wide parameter range of interest for searches [77].
The resulting power spectrum depends on the wavenumber k of the scalar perturbations via
a nontrivial function of log(k/kpivot). By computing appropriately normalized overlaps of power
spectra, one can show that two nontrivial orders in the slow roll expansion, as well as two nontrivial
orders in the Taylor expansion in the second line of (2.12) must be included in order to capture the
drifting oscillatory signature if present in the data.
Previous analyses [78] for certain patterns of non-drifting oscillations have led to bounds of
roughly Λ4 < 10−3p
f0/Mp. The range of periods of interest includes 10−4 ≤f0/Mp ≤1, with lower
values theoretically possible, and is particularly sensitive to the ultraviolet theory. This analysis
including the parameters associated with the drift in the period of oscillations is period is currently
starting to be carried out in the CMB. Resonant non-Gaussianity [79] is another related signature
of interest, requiring a similarly precise analysis of the bispectrum and higher point correlators[80].
3
Observational status and prospects for f loc
NL
Local non-Gaussianity is the best-studied inﬂationary signature for future surveys. Having empha-
sized the need for sensitivity to |floc
NL| < 1, we now discuss the prospects for achieving this level of
sensitivity in near-term surveys.
3.1
Measurement status of primordial non-Gaussianity
To date, LSS has only been competitive with the CMB in the measurement of floc
NL and gNL through
the scale dependent bias found by [12]. In the presence of floc
NL-type non-gaussianity, the linear bias
of tracers becomes
δh(k) =

b1 +
3ΩmH2
0
c2k2T(k)D(z)floc
NL
∂log n
∂log σ8
(M)

δ(k)
(3.1)
6With further assumptions about initial conditions, such as the possibility of tunneling from an oscillation-induced
metastable minimum, one can deduce additional novel theoretical thresholds.
10

where δh is the tracer (halo) density contrast, δ is the matter density construct and n is the number
density of halos. Intuitively, the non-Gaussian correction to the bias can be understood as reﬂecting
the coupling between the short-scale modes that form halos and long-wavelength ﬂuctuations in the
primordial potential (which is related to the density ﬁeld via a factor of k2T(k)). The scaling of
the floc
NL-dependent term approaches 1/k2 at low-k making it a dramatic signature of non-Gaussian
primordial statistics that, if detected, would rule out single-clock inﬂationary models [81].
The form of the non-Gaussian bias in Eq. (3.1) has been repeatedly conﬁrmed by N-body
simulations (e.g. [82–84]). And, other local-type non-Gaussianities (e.g. gNL or scale-dependent floc
NL
shapes) have been shown to generate corrections to the halo bias with the same k-dependence but
with coeﬃcients that have a diﬀerent dependence on halo mass M [85–88].
Slosar et al [89] produced the ﬁrst constraints on floc
NL from scale-dependent halo bias shortly
after it was identiﬁed as a signature of primordial non-Gaussanity [12]. They [89] found −29 < floc
NL <
+70 (at 95% conﬁdence) from the clustering statistics of a variety of biased tracers: photometric
luminous red galaxies (LRGs) from SDSS Data Release 6 (DR6), spectroscopic LRGs from SDSS
DR4, photometric quasars from SDSS DR6, and NVSS radio galaxies (in cross-correlation with
the CMB). The constraints in this analysis are dominated by data from quasars (which are highly
biased and measured across large volumes) and quasar clustering alone yields −69 < floc
NL < 55 (at
95% conﬁdence). These bounds on floc
NL were competitive with the contemporary CMB bispectrum
constraints from WMAP 5 (−9 < floc
NL < 111) [90].
Scale-dependent halo bias has tremendous potential to detect local-type primordial non-Gaussianity,
but, as recognized already in [89], instrumental, observational, and astrophysical systematics can
generate spurious power on large-scales that mimics the eﬀect. Indeed, a number of subsequent
analyses have found excess power in the large-scale quasar and galaxy clustering that could be in-
terpreted as evidence for primordial non-Gaussianity, but is generally assumed to be a systematic
eﬀect [91–102]. Dust extinction, stellar contamination, variations in seeing and sky brightness, for
instance, can modulate the observed number density of sources on very large scales and these large-
scale power modulations are diﬃcult to separate from large-scale modulations in the source density
due to local primordial non-Gaussianity (see, for instance [96, 97, 103, 104]).
Current analyses treat systematics by restricting to data products that are well-understood,
by modeling systematic eﬀects and correcting the measured power spectra or correlation functions,
and by projecting out modes that appear correlated with templates of known systematics (e.g.
[95, 97–99, 101, 104]). These techniques strengthen the conﬁdence in current bounds on primordial
non-Gaussianity, but systematics remain an important limitation to constraints on primordial non-
Gaussianity from scale-dependent bias.
At present, the most stringent constraints on primordial non-Gaussianity from large-scale struc-
ture are from photometric quasars from SDSS DR8 by Leistedt et al [101]. This work treats system-
atics by projecting out modes of the quasar ﬁeld that exhibit signiﬁcant correlation with template
maps, and products of template maps, of possible systematic eﬀects in SDSS. The ﬁnal constraints
from this analysis are −49 < floc
NL < 31 (at 95% conﬁdence). These constraints on floc
NL are only
marginally tighter than the initial constraints from all probes given in Slosar et al [89], but signiﬁ-
cantly tighter than the ﬁrst constraints from quasars alone (quoted above). More importantly, the
current limits should be more robust against observational systematics.
11

Finally, a number of analyses have used scale-dependent bias to constrain models of non-
Gaussianity beyond the usual local ansatz. The leading contributions to the non-Gaussian bias can
be more generally modeled as [99]
∆b (M, k, z, ANL, α) ∝[b1(M, z) −p]ANL (b1(M, z))
kα
(3.2)
where M is the mass of the tracer and p diﬀerent from one allows for tracers whose bias may
depend on the merger history of the host halo [89]. This parameterization captures, for example,
the eﬀects of allowing a cubic gNL term in the local ansatz [85], two ﬁelds with diﬀerent power spectra
contributing to the ﬂuctuations [88], the quasi-single ﬁeld models [105, 106], general initial states for
the inﬂationary ﬂuctuations [107, 108], a scale-dependent local ansatz [88, 109], and arbitrary scale
dependence of the bias [101]. When multiple ﬁelds contribute to the ﬂuctuations, τNL ≥(6
5floc
NL)2
and the non-Gaussian bias is in addition stochastic [110, 111]. The more general form in Eq.(3.2) is
not well constrained with current data but several authors have considered more speciﬁc extensions
of the local scenario [97, 99, 101, 110]. Scale-dependent bias from SDSS DR8 photometric quasars
limits −2.7 < gloc
NL × 10−5 < 1.9 or −105 < floc
NL < 72 and −4 < gloc
NL × 105 < 4.9 when floc
NL and gNL
are analyzed jointly (all intervals are 95% conﬁdence) [101]. Reference [101] constrained departures
from α = 2 by b(k) ∝k−2+δ and obtain constraints7 −45.5exp(3.7δ) < A < 34.4exp(3.3δ). Finally,
a diﬀerent approach was taken in [112], who forecast constraints on a scale-dependent local model
where fNL is a free parameter in several k-space bins. Forecasts for improved constraints on multi-
ﬁeld models with scale-dependence can be found in [113].
3.2
Relevant planned surveys
There are currently several large-scale structure surveys – either currently underway, funded or
proposed – that have the potential to constrain the parameters and physics of inﬂation. They fall
into three broad classes:
1. Spectroscopic galaxy surveys measure redshifts of targeted galaxies on the sky. These
objects act as tracers of the underlying curvature ﬂuctuations.
2. Photometric galaxy surveys measure the luminosity of galaxies on the sky in several wide-
bands. Galaxy type and a rough redshift can be deduced from this information. The infor-
mation about radial distance is mostly lost, but this is compensated by many more objects
observed.
3. 21-cm galaxy surveys measure the integrated emission from the 21-cm hydrogen spin-ﬂip
transition. Due to foreground removal processes, the low-k radial ﬂuctuation modes are lost.
In Table 2 we list several important LSS experiments happening towards the end of this decade
that could have inﬂuential impact on our understanding of inﬂation. The Table necessarily over-
7Those authors used a notation A = ˜fNL and δ = nfNL. However, that notation for the departure from the local
ansatz may be confusing since introducing a scale dependence in the amplitude of the bias does not correspond to
introducing a scale-dependent fNL in the local ansatz. A majority of the literature uses nfNL to mean a scale dependent
amplitude of the local ansatz, as ζ(x) = ζGauss.(x) + 3
5fNL ⋆ζ(x)2, promoting the multiplication to a convolution.
12

LSST
DESI
Euclid
SPHEREx
CHIME
Survey type
photo
spectro
photo+spectro
low-res spectro
21-cm
Ground or space
ground
ground
space
space
ground
Previous surveys
CFHTLS, DES,
HSC
BOSS, eBOSS,
PFS
no direct precursor
PRIMUS,
COMBO-17,
COSMOS
GBT HIM
Survey start
2020
2020
2018
2020
2016
Redshift-range
z < 3 (1%
sources above 3)
z < 1.4,
2 < z < 3.5 (Lya)
z < 3
z < 1.5
0.75 < z < 2.5
Survey area [deg2]
20k
14k
15k
40k
20k
Approximate
number of objects
2 × 109 (WL
sources)
22×106 gal.,
∼2.4 × 105 QSOs
40 × 106 redshifts,
1.5 × 109 photo-zs
15 × 109 pixels
107 pixels
Galaxy clustering
⋄




Weak lensing



RSD




Multi-tracer




Table 2. A selection of currently funded or planned surveys. Other important surveys not included in the
table are PFS, JPAS, PAU, EMU. Relevant survey links [LSST],[DESI],[Euclid], [UBC],[PFS], [JPAS],[PAU],
[EMU]. ⋄Galaxy clustering is possible, but very strong radial degradation.
simpliﬁes aspects of each experiment and therefore numerical values should be compared with care.
For the same reason we refrain from making any speciﬁc forecasts.
In general, galaxy clustering power spectrum and bispectrum measurements will provide mea-
surements of the fNL parameters with accuracy up to around 1 for the local shape and somewhat
worse for other bi-spectrum shapes.
With suﬃcient modeling, the galaxy power spectrum and
Lyman-α ﬂux power spectrum can provide information on the spectral index and its running and
constrain possible sharp features or oscillations in the primordial power spectrum. They will also
be able to further improve limits on curvature parameter Ωk and the fraction of isocurvature ﬂuc-
tuations. Weak lensing measurements will be able to provide information on the same parameters
with very diﬀerent systematics: they probe the dark-matter directly which simpliﬁes theoretical
treatments, but have fewer modes and challenging-to-control observational systematics. Note also
that none of the LSS experiments will be able to provide meaningful information on the presence of
primordial tensor modes.
3.3
What would an ideal survey for constraining floc
NL with the power spectrum look
like?
Having considered the expected constraints on primordial non-Gaussianity from upcoming surveys,
it is instructive to ask what would be an ideal experiment to constrain it. We will focus here on
primordial non-Gaussianity of the local type as constrained by scale-dependent bias in the galaxy
power spectrum. Based on Section 2, let us take σ(floc
NL) ∼1 as a target for the ideal survey. The
results in this section will be largely based on [114], but see also other recent works, e.g. [113, 115].
The forecast numbers are necessarily very rough as they depend on the various survey parameters.
We quote them to give an approximate quantitative sense of what is required of a survey and refer
to [114] for more details.
13

The crucial general consideration for optimizing a survey to measure floc
NL is that the scale-
dependent bias scales as ∆b ∝k−2 (at small k), so that the signal is dominated by the largest
scales probed by the survey. Turning now to speciﬁc survey properties, the ideal number density
of galaxies is such that the shot noise is comparable to or a bit smaller than the clustering signal,
i.e. ¯nPg(k) ≳1. Here, Pg(k) is the galaxy power spectrum, which is to be evaluated at the typical
wave vector k important for floc
NL (say k ∼0.001 h−1Mpc). This leads to an approximate requirement
¯n ≈few ×10−4 (h−1Mpc)−3, depending on redshift and the bias of the galaxy sample. Since the
floc
NL signal is dominated by very large scales, cosmic variance (i.e. the availability of only a small
number of modes) is a major limitation. This can partially be undone by analyzing multiple galaxy
samples with diﬀerent biases. Using this multi-tracer technique the information per unit volume can
be signiﬁcantly improved relative to the single-tracer case. However, to obtain a strong gain a much
larger total number density of galaxies is required, say ¯n ≳few ×10−3 (h−1Mpc)−3.
Next, because of the limited number of modes on the largest scales, the requirement on survey
volume is extremely stringent. To obtain σ(floc
NL) ≈1 using a single-tracer analysis, volumes V ∼
few × 100 (h−1Gpc)3 are needed. If the multi-tracer technique can be employed (requiring a much
larger number density as discussed above), the volume requirement can be loosened to, say, V ∼
100 (h−1Gpc)3.
The dependence of the signal on large scales also has a positive side: the required redshift
accuracy is not very high. In general, any scatter in the redshift estimator will lead to a smoothing
of the clustering signal in the radial direction, with the comoving smoothing scale proportional to
the redshift scatter, ds = σz/H(z), where H(z) is the Hubble parameter. In order for this smoothing
to not destroy the floc
NL signal, the smoothing scale needs to be smaller than the scale of the modes of
interest, ds k < 1. In practice, this means that as long as σz < 0.1(1 + z), most of the constraining
power on floc
NL is conserved (see Figure 1, left panel).
Finally, in addition to a galaxy’s redshift, we wish to be able to measure a galaxy property that
strongly correlates with host halo mass (which in turn mainly determines clustering bias). In the
multi-tracer case, this would make it possible to subdivide a sample into diﬀerent subsamples with
as much diﬀerence in bias as possible (as this boosts the floc
NL signiﬁcance). Even in the single-tracer
scenario, having some type of mass proxy will make it possible to choose the single sample cleverly.
For instance, a sample with very high number density at some redshift will typically have a galaxy
bias not very diﬀerent from unity and therefore a weak scale-dependent bias signature in the presence
of primordial non-Gaussianity. With mass information available, a subsample of galaxies living in
more massive halos could be selected, thus boosting the bias and therefore the floc
NL signal (of course
one has to be cautious not to select so small a subsample that the increase in shot noise cancels the
gains from the increase in bias).
Based on the above, we can now ask what type of galaxy survey is optimal for constraining
floc
NL. Interestingly, an optimal floc
NL survey would look very diﬀerent than the currently prevalent type
of cosmological galaxy clustering survey. Such surveys are typically optimized for baryon acoustic
oscillations (BAO), and other physics with a large signal down to small scales. This naturally leads
to surveys with spectroscopic redshifts (to measure clustering down to kmax = 0.1 −0.2h/Mpc). On
the contrary, the mild redshift accuracy requirement and stringent requirements on survey volume
and number density strongly suggest that a spectroscopic survey is not optimal for floc
NL, as a lot of
14

time would be spent achieving a better-than-needed redshift accuracy, limiting the total number of
galaxies. Instead, it appears that a large area (ideally full-sky), multi-band, imaging survey would
be ideally suited for constraining primordial non-Gaussianity from scale-dependent halo bias. The
redshifts would thus be photometric redshifts or, in the case of a survey with a large number of
narrow bands, low-resolution spectroscopic redshifts. Typically, this will mean a very high number
density at low redshift, with a decrease towards higher redshift. Thus, at low redshift, the multi-
tracer technique can be applied to boost the floc
NL constraint, whereas at the higher redshift end of
the survey using a single tracer is close to optimal and there is no multi-tracer beneﬁt.
Based on a toy model for such an imaging survey, [114] found that a full-sky (in practice
fsky = 0.75) survey collecting a sample complete up to magnitude i ∼22 −23, corresponding to a
total angular number density ¯nA ≳5 arcmin−2, would be able to obtain σ(floc
NL) = 1 (see Figure 1,
right panel). This assumes that the survey measures stellar mass with a typical scatter relative to
the mean stellar mass - halo mass relation of σ(log10 M∗) ≲0.25, or a diﬀerent halo mass proxy with
comparable scatter. It also assumes redshifts are measured better than σz = 0.1(1 + z). Relaxing
those constraints would weaken the fNL bound.
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
σz,0 =σ(z)/(1 +z)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
dFM/dz relative to σ(z) =0
M ∗,min =1011 M ⊙: 1 tracer
M ∗,min =1011 M ⊙: multitracer
M ∗,min =1010 M ⊙: 1 tracer
M ∗,min =1010 M ⊙: multitracer
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
galaxy number density [arcmin−2 ]
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
σ(fNL)
default σlogM ∗∼0.25
σlogM ∗=1
19 21
22
23
23.5
i
Figure 1. Left: Fisher information on fNL (proportional to 1/σ2(fNL)) relative to that of a survey with
perfect (spectroscopic) redshifts, as a function of redshift scatter. Solid curves assume use of the multi-tracer
technique and dashed assume a single tracer. We show results for moderate and high number density surveys,
represented by stellar mass cuts M∗> 1011M⊙and M∗> 1010M⊙, respectively. Right: Single-(dashed) and
multi-(solid) tracer uncertainties on fNL for a toy model of a multi-band imaging survey, as a function of an
i-band magnitude cut (and corresponding number density on the lower horizontal axis). We assume a sky
coverage fsky = 0.75. Stellar mass is used as a proxy for host halo mass (and therefore bias) and we show
results for two diﬀerent values of the stellar mass scatter relative to the mean stellar mass - halo mass relation.
For both ﬁgures, we refer to the text and [114] for details.
15

4
Beyond the Halo Power Spectrum
As emphasized in Section 2, not all theoretical targets will leave clean signatures in the scale de-
pendent bias of halos. Equilateral non-Gaussianity is one particularly interesting observable that
requires a measurement of the halo bispectrum (for example) to be probed by large scale structure.
In this section we will discuss the other probes and their status as tools for testing inﬂation.
4.1
State of Bispectrum Observations
Compared to extensive studies of galaxy clustering measurements at the two–point level, progress
on the three–point level has been much slower. After a few early detections of the galaxy bispec-
trum [116–118], as well as measurements of the galaxy three–point correlation function in several
surveys the 2dFGRS [119, 120], SDSS [121, 122], WiggleZ [123], [124] present a robust measurement
and cosmological analysis [125] of the galaxy bispectrum monopole (i.e., angle–averaged with respect
to the line of sight direction) using the SDSS CMASS galaxy sample. This is the largest data set for
which a bispectrum measurement has been obtained so far, and provides unprecedented signal–to–
noise. The analysis ﬁnds agreement between the measured galaxy bispectrum and bispectra derived
mock catalogs few percent–level up to kmax ∼0.2h/Mpc and at ⟨z⟩= 0.57. On large angular scales,
the measurement is aﬀected by approximations in the modeling of survey geometry eﬀects, which are
required due to computational complexity of the bispectrum estimator in presence of a survey mask,
limiting the analysis to kmin = 0.05 h Mpc−1 ≈3kF where kF is the fundamental mode of the survey.
The combination of power spectrum and bispectrum measurements is then used to determine the
amplitude of mass ﬂuctuations σ8 and the linear growth rate f ≡d ln D/d ln a from clustering data
alone for the ﬁrst time, and the results are in broad agreement with the CMB-inferred values.
4.2
State of Bispectrum Forecasts
Forecasts for the constraining power of the galaxy bispectrum on primordial non-Gaussianity are
few, and they typically lack the detailed modeling found in power spectrum forecasts (e.g. [126]).
Based on idealized survey geometry assumptions and ignoring the redshift evolution, [118] estimate
that an all-sky redshift survey with ¯n ∼3×10−3 (h/Mpc)3 up to z ∼1 will probe σ(floc
NL) ∼1. Using
more detailed modeling, [127] ﬁnd σ(floc
NL) = 3.6 and σ(feq
NL) = 42 for a 100 (h−1Gpc)3 survey and
sources at 1 ≲z ≲2 with ¯n ∼10−3 (h Mpc−1)3 (c.f. their Table 1 for forecasts based other survey
parameters). Note that both of these studies predate the discovery of primordial non-Gaussianity
induced scale-dependent galaxy bias, and thus do not include this key signature of primordial non-
Gaussianity in the galaxy distribution.
The bispectrum of LSS has a vast potential to directly probe interactions in the early Uni-
verse.
This is especially true in regards to equilateral and orthogonal shapes that, unlike local
non-Gaussianity, do not lead to an upturn in the bias on large scales; these shapes can in principle
be probed by the three-point function. As an added beneﬁt, the bispectrum provides more modes
than the power spectrum since there are more triangle conﬁgurations than line-conﬁgurations in
k-space. However, this promise is hampered by the signiﬁcant late time non-linearities caused by
gravitational clustering and intrinsic non-linearities of the tracer population. Furthermore, the bis-
pectrum has comparably large errors on large scales, so that for suﬃcient signal-to-noise parameter
16

inferences one needs to go into the weakly non-linear regime where loop corrections to the spectra are
important. We will ﬁrst focus on the status of the modeling of the mundane contaminants present for
Gaussian initial conditions and describe the modiﬁcations arising from primordial non-Gaussianity
in the end.
4.2.1
The Matter Bispectrum
The matter bispectrum on large scales (small wavenumbers) is well understood in Standard Pertur-
bation Theory [128] at tree level
Btree(⃗k1,⃗k2,⃗k3) = B211(⃗k1,⃗k2,⃗k3) = 2F2(⃗k1,⃗k2)P(k1)P(k2) + 2 cyc.
Going to higher wave numbers requires one to consider the loop corrections to the above equation
that are sensitive to the third and fourth order gravitational interaction kernels
B1-loop = B211 + B411 + BI
321 + BII
321 + B222
A diﬀerent approach has been suggested by [144, 146], who instead replace the exact F2 kernel in
the tree level expression by a parametrized form, whose free parameters are ﬁt to simulations
F eﬀ
2 (⃗k1,⃗k2) = 5
7a(k1)a(k2) + 1
2µb(k1)b(k2)
k1
k2
+ k2
k1

+ 2
7µ2c(k1)c(k2) ,
where in SPT we have a, b, c = 1 and µ = ⃗k1 · ⃗k2/k1k2. A more formal approach is to consider
parametrized source terms in the Euler equation that account for higher moments in the Vlasov
hierarchy and higher order non-linearities. The bispectrum in this Eﬀective Field Theory of Large
Scale Structure approach has been recently computed in [129, 130]. The performance at redshift
z = 0 for a standard ΛCDM model is as follows: tree level SPT fails at k ≈0.05 hMpc−1, one-loop
SPT fails at k ≈0.1 hMpc−1 and EFT can extend this range to k ≈0.25 hMpc−1.
Yet another promising approach is the halo model [131] that disentangles the dark matter
correlations into the correlations between halo centers and the dark matter proﬁles around these
centers. The bispectrum is then given by the sum of one-, two- and three halo terms Bmmm =
B1h + B2h + B3h. With perfect knowledge of halo-halo-halo correlations and the halo proﬁle, this
model should provide a perfect description of the matter bispectrum. Unfortunately the ingredients
are not understood at the required level of accuracy yet. A big advantage of the halo model is it can
be easily extended to describe galaxy clustering using a halo occupation framework, as we discuss
in more detail below.
4.2.2
The Halo Bispectrum
Dark matter haloes are a speciﬁc subset of the total matter distribution that can be best understood
by selecting regions that will collapse in the initially weakly non-Gaussian ﬁeld (Lagrangian bias),
and then following the gravitational motion of the center of mass of these regions (leading to Eu-
lerian bias). Collapsing regions preferably populate high density regions, which is encoded in their
17

clustering statistics being enhanced with respect to the matter by a constant bias factor on large
scales. At late times the matter density ﬁeld can be schematically written as [132]
δh = b1δ + b2
2 δ2 + bs2s2 + b∆∆δ + . . . ,
where s2 is the square of the tidal tensor sij =

∂i∂j/∂2 −δ(K)
ij /3

δ. In principle one can write
down all the terms allowed by symmetry and their coeﬃcients can be estimated from the evolution
of a reasonable Lagrangian bias model.
An additional complication arising for discrete tracers is their stochasticity or sampling vari-
ance. For a Poisson sampling this leads to a constant contribution to the halo power spectrum and
to a contribution of the form
Bhhh,shot = 1
¯n2 + 3
¯nPhh
for the bispectrum, where ¯n is the number density of the tracers. As shown in [133] for the power
spectrum, this model receives corrections due to small scale exclusion and non-linear biasing. These
corrections have been understood for the power spectrum but not yet for the bispectrum. Finally
we note that an accurate description of the halo bispectrum is a key ingredient for halo model based
calculations of the matter or galaxy bispectra (or their cross-bispectra).
4.2.3
Redshift Space Distortions
Galaxy positions are obtained by measuring two angles and a redshift. The latter is a combination of
the Hubble expansion and the motion of the galaxy in the local gravitational potential, also known
as the peculiar velocity. The peculiar velocities distort the distance estimation based on the Hubble
ﬂow and need to be accounted for, since they are correlated with the density ﬂuctuations that we
are trying to estimate. This is a complicated endeavor for two point functions and even more so for
the three point function.
The tree level bispectrum in redshift space can be expressed as [134, 135]
B(⃗k1,⃗k2,⃗k3) =DFoG
h
Z1(k1)P(k1)Z1(k2)P(k2)Z2(⃗k1,⃗k2) + 2 cyc.
i
Z1(ki) =b1 + fµ2
i
Z2(⃗k1,⃗k2) =b1

F2(⃗k1,⃗k2) + fµk
2
µ1
k1
+ µ2
k2

+ fµ2G2(⃗k1,⃗k2)
+ f3µk
2
µ1µ2
µ1
k1
+ µ2
k2

+ b2
2 + bs2
2 S2(⃗k1,⃗k2) .
Here DFoG is a Lorentzian or Gaussian accounting for the small scale velocity dispersion within halos,
G2 is the velocity divergence coupling kernel, and S2 describes the tidal term s2 in Fourier space.
The above formula has been extended by [134] employing eﬀective F2 and G2 kernels mentioned
above. The halo model provides a way to explicitly account for the occupation of halos by galaxies
and to derive the resulting bispectrum [136].
18

4.2.4
Loop corrections to the halo bispectrum
In the matter distribution, non-Gaussianity imprints an explicit bispectrum at tree level and adds ad-
ditional loop corrections to the power spectrum. For discrete tracers, the non-Gaussian nature of the
initial conditions aﬀects the spectra resulting from the sampling process. For local non-Gaussianity
the local variance of the ﬁeld is correlated with the long wavelength curvature ﬂuctuations. Since the
local abundance depends on the local variance, the halo abundance is correlated with the curvature
ﬂuctuations leading to an additional bias parameter.
The non-Gaussian correction to the tree level real space halo bispectrum can be schematically
written as [13, 137]
∆Bhhh = b2
1∆b1Bmmm,G + b3
1Bmmm,nG + b2
1∆b2P 2 + . . . ,
where ∆b1 and ∆b2 are the bias corrections arising from the explicit correlation between long wave-
length curvature ﬂuctuations and small–scale variance. Preliminary and idealistic estimates [13]
show that the bispectrum can provide tighter constraints on local non-Gaussianity, especially for
b1 ≈1, for which ∆b1 = 0 and consequently no enhancement in the power spectrum.
For equilateral or orthogonal shapes the second order bias corrections relevant for the bis-
pectrum have not yet been derived, so that predictions and forecasts to date are based on the
non-Gaussian b1 multiplying the Gaussian matter bispectrum and the Gaussian b1 multiplying the
non-Gaussian matter bispectrum. They are missing the correction from the non-Gaussian second
order bias ∆b2, multiplying two power spectra, which will probably increase the signal and change
the shape of the template. For general shapes the correction to b2 will itself have a shape itself.
4.2.5
Additional Eﬀects
The above discussion skipped a number of observational eﬀects that aﬀect both the power spectrum
and the bispectrum. The ﬁrst one is that the survey mask –complete understanding o the survey
geometry, especially important for harmonic-space measurements. The survey mask is diﬃcult to
account for already in the power spectrum already [138] and might be even more diﬃcult in the
bispectrum. On top of this are the relativistic eﬀects discussed in the previous section. On large
scales one has to give up the ﬂat sky approximation as well and consider ﬁnite angle eﬀects [139, 140]
in conjunction with the relativistic eﬀects. Given the complications in modelling and measuring
the bispectrum, one might ask oneself whether it is necessary to go through the complication of
measuring the full bispectrum in Fourier space and then applying the estimator on the measured
bispectrum, rather than making the measurements in real space and applying a suitably deﬁned
real-space estimator of non-Gaussianity.
4.3
Mass function & other probes
While the bispectrum contains a great deal of information, no single statistic can completely char-
acterize non-Gaussian ﬂuctuations. Higher order correlations contain additional information. And,
although we currently have good reason to believe that the bispectrum may be the most important
19

observable for distinguishing models of primordial physics, it is important to consider additional ob-
servational tests that would conﬁrm and strenghten inferences made from the power spectrum and
the bispectrum. Attempting to directly measure or constrain the trispectrum and even higher-order
correlations is a possible route, but one that becomes more diﬃcult at each order as the possible
functions of momenta become more complicated.
Fortunately, many large scale structure observables depend on sums of integrated (or partially
integrated) correlations. Although such observables may be primarily sensitive to the amplitude
of the bispectrum (assuming higher moments fall oﬀin amplitude at each order) they also contain
information beyond the bispectrum. The halo mass function is a simple example, where the diﬀerence
between Gaussian and non-Gaussian cosmologies shifts the relative proportion of halos and voids
of various sizes. Since the mass function depends on the fully integrated correlation functions (the
moments), it is a weaker probe of the three-point function than the bispectrum. However, even
current data is sensitive to assumptions about the relevance of higher order moments [147, 148].
Current best ﬁts and 68.3% conﬁdence intervals from X-ray selected clusters (with Planck constraints
on the homogeneous cosmology and the power spectrum) are floc
NL = −94+148
−77
for the usual local
ansatz and floc
NL = −48+60
−11 for a scenario where the higher moments are relatively more important
than in the standard ansatz [148]. Much of the uncertainty in these numbers comes from our inability
to fully predict the mass function for visible galaxies and structures from the initial perturbations.
Additional closely synchronized simulation and theory work is necessary to remove these additional
layers of theory uncertainy. In addition, the constraints are likely to improve considerably as clusters
detected via the Sunyaev-Zeldovich eﬀect at higher redshift are added to the sample [149–152], and
as abundance constraints are considered jointly with clustering constraints [153].
4.4
Uncorrelated Primordial non-Gaussianity, Intermittency and LSS
The transition from the coherent inﬂaton-dominated state at the end of inﬂation to an incoherent
energy density mix of nonlinear modes gives rise to possibly observable features accessible to CMB
and LSS probes. This preheating is a prequel to the slow relaxation to a fully thermalized particle
plasma and the standard model in ways that are far from understood. The scale of the horizon
is quite tiny at that the end of inﬂation, of order a comoving centimetre or so. For there to be
observable large scale structure eﬀects, what happens in the preheating transition has to couple to
a long wavelength spatial modulation associated with, e.g., a coupling constant [154, 155] or a non-
inﬂaton light (isocon) ﬁeld [156]. The generic term for this is modulated preheating (Section 2.1.2),
and the curvature ﬂuctuations arising in response are of the local form, ζ(x) = FNL(χi(x), gi(x)),
in terms of the local initial values just prior to preheating in the tiny horizon volume at that time.
Typically the isocon ﬁeld χi(x) or the coupling “constant” ﬁeld gi(x) would be nearly Gaussian
random ﬁelds, the latter with a non-zero mean. The simplest possibility is to do an expansion in
small values, which leads to linear and quadratic contributions, though statistically independent
from the conventional inﬂaton-induced nearly Gaussian curvature ﬂuctuations. CMB constraints on
the size of the quadratic piece (floc
NL,eﬀ) are considerably relaxed over the correlated case with its
very tight floc
NL constraints.
Of great interest is where the expansion is not adequate for FNL(χi(x), gi(x)). In a preheating
model considered by [156], FNL(χi(x)) was characterized by regularly-spaced positive spikes (looking
20

like an atomic line spectrum), leading to novel structure in spite of its being a local non-Gaussianity.
This form held on scales down to the preheating horizon scale, tiny relative to LSS. This was handled
in [156] by marginalizing over high spatial frequency modes (about 50 e-foldings worth), resulting in
an eﬀective local ﬁeld map, FNL,eﬀ(χi(x, Rb)), with Rb the (LSS) smoothing scale. The form looks
like a strongly blended spectrum of lines, i.e., one seen at low resolution. Nonetheless the form of
such a blended FNL,eﬀstill allows for a wide range of behaviour. A nice way to connect to one’s LSS
intuition is that FNL,eﬀis sort of like a nonlinear fuzzy threshold function acting on the underlying
Gaussian random ﬁeld, as occurs in how rare massive clusters are identiﬁed as emergent from the
initially Gaussian random density ﬁeld [157, 158]. This leads to biasing, indeed it can be extreme
biasing. So it may not surprise that patches of structure can be enhanced.
A major diﬀerence with conventional LSS extreme biasing though is that the ﬁeld operated
on is nearly scale invariant, meaning that very large scales are highly enhanced in curvature. The
result is large-scale spatial intermittency, leaving the halo clustering as usual in most places in the
Universe, but once in a while a constructive interference would occur between the inﬂaton-induced
ﬂuctuations and the intermittent modulated-preheating-induced ﬂuctuations; i.e., halo clustering
would be enhanced over large regions sporadically. The challenge would then be how do you search
for such large scale enhancements. These anomalous events would be rare, so you need a large survey,
but you would be trying to identify spatial splotches, suggesting that a power spectrum approach
would miss the essence of the eﬀect: a few super-duper-clusters among the ordinary super-clusters.
Fortunately the large-volume surveys being considered for searching for conventional perturba-
tive non-Gaussianity are also well suited to look for rare intermittent enhancements. It is just that
the toolbox used for the search would be diﬀerent, more local. Another aspect of the large scale
intermittency is that a lower resolution survey such as those probing redshifted 21 cm radiation (e.g.,
CHIME) could be of great utility.
This intermittency is more generic than the speciﬁc models computed by [156]. Near the end
of inﬂation, there is a largely ballistic phase describing the evolution of the ﬁelds present, with the
familiar stochastic kicks that give rise to the spatial variation of the inﬂaton highly subdominant over
the general drift downward on the potential surface rather than just subdominant. This ballistic
phase continues for a time, until nonlinear mode coupling onsets. Once it does, non-equilibrium
entropy can be generated in a burst, marked out in time by a randomizing timelike hypersurface, a
shock-in-time [159], with a mediation width making it fuzzy. The details vary from model to model.
The shock-in-time framework holds when parametric resonance occurs at the end of inﬂation, and this
is reasonably generic if the longitudinal inﬂaton potential opens up at the bottom to other transverse
degrees of freedom. (For modulation to occur, the transverse walls during inﬂation should not be so
steep as to preclude the long wavelength stochastic ﬂuctuations from having damped due to a high
eﬀective mass, i.e., the modulating ﬁeld must be light.) The shock-in-time picture is not a useful
descriptor if the entropy generation is slow (perturbative preheating), and is modiﬁed somewhat if
new relatively long-lived energy structures arise in the non-linear phase of preheating which burst
forth into entropy only after a delay.
The growth of curvature in the ballistic phase is tracked by considering how trajectories of
nearby points separate from each other or converge towards each other as a function of the dif-
ference δχi in their initial χ′
is: δζ = [d ln a/dχ]δχ [156, 159, 160].
The trajectory bundles can
21

evolve in a complex form (chaotic billiards was used to describe this process in [156]).The diver-
gence/convergence of the trajectories freezes when the shock-in-time is reached. Of course to really
model the process full nonlinear lattice simulations are needed, but this heuristic description gives
the essence of the phenomenon [160]. Spikes are associated with trajectory caustics. The modulating
coupling constant story is much the same, with trajectory deviation described by δζ = [d ln a/dg]δg,
leading again to a complex highly featured FNL(gi(x)) [159]. The common requirement is rapid
divergence/convergence of trajectories (Lyapunov growth) and a shock-in-time.
To relate this type of intermittent non-gaussianity to LSS surveys, accurate mocks of the surveys
are needed. One wants to compare the structure generated in models with purely inﬂaton-induced
initial curvature to those with a subdominant preheating-modulation-induced initial curvature in
addition. Very large cluster and galaxy catalogues are being constructed using an accelerated version
[161] of the peak patch [158] simulation method which accurately reproduces the halo mass function
and 2-point halo clustering [161]. What is contrasted in [162] is the nonlinear response to 5 initial
condition setups: (1) standard Gaussian tilted LCDM (GLCDM), (2) GLCDM with a correlated
quadratic non-Gaussianity characterized by floc
NL, (3) GLCDM plus an uncorrelated non-Gaussianity
characterized by flocal
NL,eﬀ(with much larger values allowed by the data), (4) GLCDM plus a single
(Gaussian-shaped) ζ-spike in χ of speciﬁed amplitude and width superposed, and (5) GLCDM plus
the FNL,eﬀ(χi(x, Rb)) arising from a full preheating lattice simulation with many spikes marginalized
over high spatial frequencies. These simulations illustrate the range of behaviours described above
and, when tailored to be mocks for the speciﬁc future LSS experiment under consideration, can
be used to optimize the search for the varieties of non-Gaussianity encountered. In particular, for
the intermittent varieties (4,5), the focus should be more on searching for rare large-scale events
rather than relying on power spectrum or bispectrum measurements.
The examples show quite
large scale overdensities of clusters and groups can result, a sort of enhanced superclustering over
that of GLCDM.
Very large volume surveys will be automatically suited for the search for such subdominant
intermittency, since all one needs is a catalogue with redshift space positions of galaxies or clusters,
or low resolution 3D maps such as in CHIME-like intensity mapping experiments. The simulations
do show that the extreme bias acting on a nearly scale invariant spectrum is radically diﬀerent in
appearance from the conventional bias acting on the density ﬁeld, preferentially making large scale
splotches that are uncorrelated and act to either add to or subtract from the GLCDM ﬂuctuations
around the splotch locations by this random constructive or destructive interference.
If intermittent anomalies show up in LSS, they should also show up in the CMB, and there
has been much discussion about the origin of the large scale anomalies that have been found in
the WMAP and Planck data. Another example of rare non-Gaussian intermittency in LSS that
would be worthwhile to search for in very large volume surveys is colliding bubbles, if one (or more)
happens to have occurred within our accessible Hubble volume. There have been searches for such
remnant structures in the CMB.
22

5
Potential Systematic Eﬀects
In order to extract truly primordial non-Gaussianity signature, we must understand the observable,
the galaxy density contrast to the accuracy that is required by the galaxy surveys. In this section,
we discuss some of the theoretical and observational systematics that we must control well enough
to detect primordial non-Gaussianity from forthcoming galaxy surveys.
5.1
Theoretical Systematics
Although it is true that the galaxies are seeded by the curvature perturbation generated in the early
Universe, the correlation functions measured from the observed galaxy density contrast are wildly
diﬀerent from the primordial one. For the temperature ﬂuctuations and polarizations of CMB, which
are also seeded by the same initial perturbations, the ﬂuctuations still remain small so that we can
model the diﬀerence by applying the linear perturbation theory with nearly Gaussian statistics; the
well studied cosmological linear perturbation theory is the key to the success of CMB cosmology.
In linear, Newtonian theory, the observed galaxy density contrast is given by
δg(k) = (b1 + fµ2)2δm(k),
(5.1)
including the linear bias factor b1 [163] and the anisotropies (µ is the angle between the Fourier
wave-vector and the line-of-sight direction) from the redshift-space distortion [164]. While the linear
prescription models the galaxy density contrast reasonably well on linear scales (kH ≪k ≲0.1 Mpc/h
at z ∼0, here kH = a0H0 is the wavenumber corresponding to the comoving horizon at present),
the linear Eq. (5.2) must be modiﬁed beyond the both end. Understanding these modiﬁcations of
the galaxy density ﬁeld from the simple linear prediction in Eq. (5.2) is the key for galaxy surveys
to be as fruitful cosmological probes as their CMB counterpart. In thie section, we discuss current
status of modeling two of the main theoretical systematics: the non-linear eﬀects that aﬀect the
galaxy density contrast on smaller scales and the general relativistic eﬀect that would change the
galaxy density constant on large scales.
5.1.1
Non-linear systematics
There are three non-linear eﬀects that alter the observed galaxy density contrasts from Eq. (5.2):
non-linear matter clustering, non-linear redshift space distortion, and non-linear bias. Each of them
causes a signiﬁcant deviation of the observed power spectrum and bispectrum of galaxies from the
leading order predictions; all eﬀects must be modeled to the accuracy required by surveys. The
rule of thumb for the current and forthcoming surveys is to make the theoretical prediction good to
about a percent accuracy.
For surveys targeting galaxies at high (z ≳1) redshift, cosmological non-linear perturbation
theory (PT) [128] is available, when combining the local bias ansatz and the Finger-of-God pre-
scription, to model the non-linearities in the galaxy power spectrum to the percent level accuracy
at quasi-linear scales k ≲0.2 h/Mpc at z ∼2, but increases at higher redshifts [165–167]. At lower
redshifts, however, the non-linearities are so strong and the quasi-linear scale, where aforementioned
PT can be applied, is quite limited. Various techniques to improve upon the PT are suggested:
Renormalization group approach [168], Resumming perturbation [169], Renormalized Perturbation
23

Theory [170–172], Closure theory [173], Lagrangian perturbation theory [174], TimeRG theory [175],
Eﬀective ﬁeld theory approach [176–181] and the most recent development based on kinetic theory
[182, 183], and so on.
Some theories have a full description to calculate the non-linear galaxy
power spectrum (see, e.g. Carlson et al. [184], Matsubara [185]), but most of them have calculated
the non-linear matter power spectrum; therefore, non-linearities in the galaxy bias [186–189] and
redshift-space distortion [190] must be included. Also, not many calculations have been done for the
galaxy bispectrum, for which we refer the readers to Section 4.
5.1.2
General Relativistic eﬀect
The observed coordinate of a galaxy in the galaxy surveys is given by its angular coordinate (RA,
Dec) and redshift z. We then chart the galaxy to some physical coordinate based on the assumed
background cosmology as (t, x) = (τ(z), ¯χ(z)ˆx), where τ(z) and ¯χ(z) are, respectively, the redshift-
to-cosmic-time relation and redshift-to-comoving-radius relation using background cosmology, and
ˆx is the unit 3D vector pointing toward the galaxy. This process assumes that the photons from the
galaxy came to us on a ‘straight line’ (the background geodesic). In reality, however, the photon’s
path is perturbed due to the metric perturbations along its way, and we expect a systematic shift
of the observed density contrast relative to the intrinsic one.
In linear, Newtonian theory, the observed galaxy density contrast is given by
δg(k) = (b1 + fµ2)2δm(k),
(5.2)
including the linear bias factor b1 [163] and the anisotropies (µ is the angle between the Fourier
wave-vector and the line-of-sight direction) from the redshift-space distortion [164]. While the linear
prescription models the galaxy density contrast reasonably well on linear scales (kH ≪k ≲0.1 Mpc/h
at z ∼0, here kH = a0H0 is the wavenumber corresponding to the comoving horizon at present),
the linear Eq. (5.2) must be modiﬁed beyond the both end. Understanding these modiﬁcations of
the galaxy density ﬁeld from the simple linear prediction in Eq. (5.2) is the key for galaxy surveys
to be as fruitful cosmological probes as their CMB counterpart. In thie section, we discuss current
status of modeling two of the main theoretical systematics: the non-linear eﬀects that aﬀect the
galaxy density contrast on smaller scales and the general relativistic eﬀect that would change the
galaxy density constant on large scales.
In linear theory, Refs.
[22, 191–196] have calculated the observed galaxy density contrast
with the perturbed light geodesic eﬀects that include the Sachs-Wolfe eﬀect, integrated Sachs-Wolfe
eﬀect, Shapiro time delay, as well as weak gravitational lensing. With Gaussian initial conditions,
the calculation reads (following the notation of [195])
δ(obs)
g
(k) =

b + f(k · ˆn)2 +
A
[k/(aH)]2 + i(k · ˆn)
k/aH B

δm(k),
(5.3)
where δm is the matter density contrast and ˆn is the line-of-sight directional unit vector. In a ΛCDM
24

Universe, the coeﬃcients are given by
A = 3
2Ωm

be

1 −2f
3Ωm

+ 1 + 2f
Ωm
+ C −f −2Q

,
B = f [be + C −1] ,
C = 3
2Ωm −2
¯χ
1 −Q
aH
−2Q,
with the matter density parameter Ωm, f = d ln D/d ln a is the logarithmic growth of structure
parameter, and be = d ln(a3¯ng)/d ln a and Q = d ln ¯ng/d ln M are two new parameters that are in
principle observable (M is the magniﬁcation). With primordial non-Gaussianity, one can simply
replace the linear bias b in Eq. (5.3) with the non-Gaussian bias b + ∆b(k) ≃b + 3(aH/k)2Ωmδc(b −
1)fNLa/D(a) [197] . To simplify the analysis, in Eq. 5.3, we assume a thin radial binning and ignore
the relativistic correction given by the line-of-sight integration of the gravitational potential and its
time derivative.
Note that the A term scales with wavenumber exactly in the same as the local–type primordial
non-Gaussianity. We can therefore deﬁne the eﬀective floc
NL due to the general relativistic eﬀect as
f(loc)GR
NL
=
A
3Ωmδc(b −1)
D(a)
a
= O(1).
(5.4)
That is, without the local–type primordial non-Gaussianity, we expect the scale–dependent bias
with amplitude comparable to f(loc)
NL
∼1 solely from the relativistic kinematics. In order to claim
the detection of primordial non-Gaussianity of order unity from future galaxy surveys, one therefore
must take the full general relativistic correction into account.
For the relativistic correction for the galaxy bispectrum, a similar calculation must be done in
the second–order perturbation theory because the leading order contribution to the galaxy bispec-
trum comes from correlating one second order density contrast to two linear δg’s. The calculation of
the second order relativistic corrections has been done by [198–200], but the eﬀective non-Gaussianity
is still yet to be computed.
5.2
Observational Systematics
Future large-scale structure surveys have a chance at measuring primordial non-Gaussianity at an
unprecedented precision, σ(floc
NL) ≃1. Sensitivity to such tiny signatures will require correspondingly
stringent control of systematic errors.
The fundamental observable quantity in studies of LSS clustering is the galaxy density contrast
δg(x) = Ng(x)/ ¯Ng(x)−1, fractional ﬂuctuation in the galaxy number relative to the expected mean
¯Ng(x). Any error in estimating ¯Ng(x) therefore causes a systematic bias in measuring the density
contrast, which consequently propagates into the galaxy power spectrum and bispectrum, and then
to the cosmological parameters like those describing the primordial non-Gaussianity.
The principal systematic errors aﬄicting LSS measurements have diverse origin; some exam-
ples are: imperfectly known response of the instrument, impact of baryons on small-scale clustering,
Galactic dust, atmospheric blurring and extinction, and (for photometric surveys) redshift errors.
Because future measurements of primordial non-Gaussianity will rely both on large spatial scales
25

(especially in the power spectrum measurements) and small scales (in the bispectrum measure-
ments), control of systematics will need to encompass a diverse set of tools and techniques. For
the measurement of the scale-dependent bias in the galaxy power spectrum, any systematic that
exhibits large-scale variation will partially mimic the primordial non-Gaussianity signal, as long as
that error departs from the exact kns scaling at large scales. One particularly well-studied example
is the Galactic extinction; the angular correlation function of the Galactic dust ﬂuctuations scales
as Cℓ∝ℓ−2.5 on degree scales at high galactic latitudes |b| > 45 ◦[201]. Similar caution is necessary
in regards to the bispectrum; one must ﬁrst understand the three-point function signatures of the
systematic errors in order to isolate the primordial non-Gaussianity signal.
A particularly general class of systematics are the photometric calibration errors [96, 103, 104,
202–206] – these are the systematic that eﬀectively causes the magnitude limit of the sample to vary
across the sky, typically biasing the true galaxy power spectrum at large spatial scales. Some of the
common calibration errors are unaccounted-for extinction by dust or the atmosphere, obscuration
of galaxies by bright stars, and varying sensitivity of the pixels on the camera along the focal plane.
A rough estimate of the required control on the calibration error can be obtained as follows: on
the largest spatial scales (k ≃H0), the density ﬂuctuation is δρ/ρ ≃5 × 10−5. The primordial
non-Gaussianity aﬀects the bias of dark matter halos, which at these scales, and for floc
NL ≃1 and
typical bias b ≃3, is ∆b ≃5. Therefore, a Hubble-volume survey would need to be sensitive to
ﬂuctuations in the number density of objects of order
δn
n

calib
≃∆b
δρ
ρ

≃3 × 10−4.
(5.5)
This very challenging requirement is supported by more detailed calculations, which indicate that
photometric calibration needs to be understood at the 10−3 (or ≃0.1%) level [103], this result
depends fairly strongly on the faint end of the luminosity function which eﬀectively converts the
calibration ﬂuctuations into variations in the measured galaxy counts. While apparently extremely
stringent, the required understanding of the photometric calibration can be addressed and, hopefully,
achieved in the near future with the combination of careful observation and analysis, as well as
partial self-calibration (internal measurement) of the parameters that describe these systematics
[104, 205, 207].
Good theoretical understanding of galaxy clustering at small spatial scales (between 1 h−1Mpc
and 10 h−1Mpc) is crucial for measurements of the LSS bispectrum, which has a nice feature of
being sensitive to all shapes of primordial non-Gaussianity. The number of available modes in a
survey goes as k3
max, where kmax is the maximum wavenumber probed; hence a huge amount of
additional information is available provided small scales can be modeled reliably. The principal
uncertainties are caused by the combined baryonic and nonlinear eﬀects that modify the clustering
at small scales. Here, a combination of hydrodynamical simulations and direct observations of the
mass density proﬁles (e.g. via gravitational lensing) will be key to achieve suﬃcient understanding
of the small-scale clustering. As in the case of large-scale systematics, self-calibration via ﬂexible
modeling of the remaining systematics [208, 209], and projecting out information that is aﬀected by
the systematics while keeping the bulk of the cosmological information [102, 206, 210], can both be
very eﬀective.
26

Surveys that do not have spectroscopy of the collected objects typically rely on the photo-
metric redshifts of the source galaxies in order to get information about the full three-dimensional
distribution of structure in the universe. The photometric redshift errors typically blur and even
rearrange clustering in the radial direction, and therefore represent a potentially major concern in
LSS surveys seeking to constraint primordial non-Gaussianity through the clustering of sources. As
with the other systematics, the relevant quantity that impacts the result is the unaccounted-for error
in the photometric redshift distribution (the “error in the error”). The typical redshift error should
be known at roughly the level of δzp ≃0.003, which can be achieved with multi-band photometry
[114]. A particular concern are the large individual (“catastrophic”) photometric errors, where a
galaxy’s true redshift is badly misestimated where again the redshift is biased or absent due to a
number of possible reasons. These catastrophic errors need to be understood at a level of roughly
0.1% [211, 212].
Redshift failures represent a separate challenge for spectroscopic surveys [213, 214]. To observe
the high-redshift galaxies, future spectroscopic surveys such as HETDEX and Euclid are targeting
a single bright line, such as Lyα or Hα; these lines can be confused by the lower redshift oxygen
lines. There fortunately exist known astrophysical methods, e.g. using the equivalent width cut, to
clean up the contamination from low-redshift interlopers. These methods are proven to work at a
percent level, leading to little or no bias on the baryon acoustic oscillation measurement and the dark
energy constraints, the main science drivers of these surveys. For the primordial non-Gaussianity
measurement, however, more stringent systematic control is required as the signal mostly comes
from the larger scales, where the systematic eﬀects from power spectrum of interlopers can be larger
than the targeted galaxy power spectrum.
6
Conclusion
The obvious conclusion of our workshop is that the motivation to probe inﬂation with large scale
structures are stronger than ever. The success of a generation of CMB experiments has culminated
with the revolutionary constraints obtained by WMAP and Planck. Looking forward, LSS surveys
hold the greatest potential to improve constrains on the shape of the primordial spectrum and to
single out the physics of inﬂation via the measurement of non-Gaussianity.
We emphasized the
existence of clear and meaningful theoretical targets which are within reach of currently planned
surveys. We have no doubt the importance of these targets will motivate the community eﬀort
required to tackle the modeling, observational and analysis challenges we identiﬁed.
References
[1] K. N. Abazajian et al. [Topical Conveners: J.E. Carlstrom, A.T. Lee Collaboration], “Inﬂation Physics
from the Cosmic Microwave Background and Large Scale Structure,” Astropart. Phys. 63, 55 (2015)
[arXiv:1309.5381 [astro-ph.CO]].
[2] P. A. R. Ade et al. [Planck Collaboration], “Planck 2013 results. XVI. Cosmological parameters,”
Astron. Astrophys. 571, A16 (2014) [arXiv:1303.5076 [astro-ph.CO]].
[3] P. A. R. Ade et al. [Planck Collaboration], “Planck 2013 Results. XXIV. Constraints on primordial
non-Gaussianity,” Astron. Astrophys. 571, A24 (2014) [arXiv:1303.5084 [astro-ph.CO]].
27

[4] D. S. Salopek and J. R. Bond, “Nonlinear evolution of long wavelength metric ﬂuctuations in
inﬂationary models,” Phys. Rev. D 42, 3936 (1990).
[5] E. Komatsu, D. N. Spergel and B. D. Wandelt, “Measuring primordial non-Gaussianity in the cosmic
microwave background,” Astrophys. J. 634, 14 (2005) [astro-ph/0305189].
[6] P. Creminelli, A. Nicolis, L. Senatore, M. Tegmark and M. Zaldarriaga, “Limits on non-gaussianities
from wmap data,” JCAP 0605, 004 (2006) [astro-ph/0509029].
[7] L. Senatore, K. M. Smith and M. Zaldarriaga, “Non-Gaussianities in Single Field Inﬂation and their
Optimal Limits from the WMAP 5-year Data,” JCAP 1001, 028 (2010) [arXiv:0905.3746
[astro-ph.CO]].
[8] J. R. Fergusson, D. M. Regan and E. P. S. Shellard, “Optimal Trispectrum Estimators and WMAP
Constraints,” arXiv:1012.6039 [astro-ph.CO].
[9] T. Sekiguchi and N. Sugiyama, “Optimal constraint on gNL from CMB,” JCAP 1309, 002 (2013)
[arXiv:1303.4626 [astro-ph.CO]].
[10] J. M. Maldacena, “Non-Gaussian features of primordial ﬂuctuations in single ﬁeld inﬂationary models,”
JHEP, vol. 0305, p. 013, 2003.
[11] P. Creminelli and M. Zaldarriaga, “Single ﬁeld consistency relation for the 3-point function,” JCAP,
vol. 0410, p. 006, 2004.
[12] N. Dalal, O. Dor´e, D. Huterer, and A. Shirokov, “The imprints of primordial non-Gaussianities on
large-scale structure: scale dependent bias and abundance of virialized objects,” Phys.Rev., vol. D77,
p. 123514, 2008.
[13] T. Baldauf, U. Seljak and L. Senatore, “Primordial non-Gaussianity in the Bispectrum of the Halo
Density Field,” JCAP 1104, 006 (2011) [arXiv:1011.1513 [astro-ph.CO]].
[14] M. H. Namjoo, H. Firouzjahi and M. Sasaki, “Violation of non-Gaussianity consistency relation in a
single ﬁeld inﬂationary model,” Europhys. Lett. 101, 39001 (2013) [arXiv:1210.3692 [astro-ph.CO]].
[15] J. Martin, H. Motohashi and T. Suyama, “Ultra Slow-Roll Inﬂation and the non-Gaussianity
Consistency Relation,” Phys. Rev. D 87, 023514 (2013) [arXiv:1211.0083 [astro-ph.CO]].
[16] X. Chen, H. Firouzjahi, M. H. Namjoo and M. Sasaki, “A Single Field Inﬂation Model with Large
Local Non-Gaussianity,” Europhys. Lett. 102, 59001 (2013) [arXiv:1301.5699 [hep-th]].
[17] X. Chen, M. x. Huang, S. Kachru and G. Shiu, “Observational signatures and non-Gaussianities of
general single ﬁeld inﬂation,” JCAP 0701, 002 (2007) [hep-th/0605045].
[18] R. Holman and A. J. Tolley, “Enhanced Non-Gaussianity from Excited Initial States,” JCAP 0805,
001 (2008) [arXiv:0710.1302 [hep-th]].
[19] I. Agullo and L. Parker, “Non-gaussianities and the Stimulated creation of quanta in the inﬂationary
universe,” Phys. Rev. D 83, 063526 (2011) [arXiv:1010.5766 [astro-ph.CO]].
[20] J. Ganc, “Calculating the local-type fNL for slow-roll inﬂation with a non-vacuum initial state,” Phys.
Rev. D 84, 063514 (2011) [arXiv:1104.0244 [astro-ph.CO]].
[21] R. Flauger, D. Green and R. A. Porto, “On squeezed limits in single-ﬁeld inﬂation. Part I,” JCAP
1308, 032 (2013) [arXiv:1303.1430 [hep-th]].
[22] T. Baldauf, U. Seljak, L. Senatore, and M. Zaldarriaga, “Galaxy bias and non-linear structure
formation in general relativity,” JCAP, vol. 10, p. 31, Oct. 2011.
[23] P. Creminelli, A. Perko, L. Senatore, M. Simonovi? and G. Trevisan, “The Physical Squeezed Limit:
Consistency Relations at Order q2,” JCAP 1311, 015 (2013)
[24] C. T. Byrnes and K.-Y. Choi, “Review of local non-Gaussianity from multi-ﬁeld inﬂation,”
Adv.Astron., vol. 2010, p. 724525, 2010.
[25] T. Suyama, T. Takahashi, M. Yamaguchi, and S. Yokoyama, “Implications of Planck results for models
28

with local type non-Gaussianity,” JCAP, vol. 1306, p. 012, 2013.
[26] A. D. Linde and V. F. Mukhanov, “Nongaussian isocurvature perturbations from inﬂation,” Phys.Rev.,
vol. D56, pp. 535–539, 1997.
[27] K. Enqvist and M. S. Sloth, “Adiabatic CMB perturbations in pre - big bang string cosmology,”
Nucl.Phys., vol. B626, pp. 395–409, 2002.
[28] D. H. Lyth and D. Wands, “Generating the curvature perturbation without an inﬂaton,” Phys.Lett.,
vol. B524, pp. 5–14, 2002.
[29] T. Moroi and T. Takahashi, “Eﬀects of cosmological moduli ﬁelds on cosmic microwave background,”
Phys.Lett., vol. B522, pp. 215–221, 2001.
[30] M. Sasaki, J. Valiviita, and D. Wands, “Non-Gaussianity of the primordial perturbation in the
curvaton model,” Phys.Rev., vol. D74, p. 103003, 2006.
[31] G. Dvali, A. Gruzinov, and M. Zaldarriaga, “A new mechanism for generating density perturbations
from inﬂation,” Phys.Rev., vol. D69, p. 023505, 2004.
[32] L. Kofman, “Probing string theory with modulated cosmological ﬂuctuations,” 2003.
[33] G. Dvali, A. Gruzinov, and M. Zaldarriaga, “Cosmological perturbations from inhomogeneous
reheating, freezeout, and mass domination,” Phys.Rev., vol. D69, p. 083505, 2004.
[34] F. Vernizzi and D. Wands, “Non-Gaussianities in two-ﬁeld inﬂation,” JCAP, vol. 0605, p. 019, 2006.
[35] C. T. Byrnes, K.-Y. Choi, and L. M. Hall, “Conditions for large non-Gaussianity in two-ﬁeld slow-roll
inﬂation,” JCAP, vol. 0810, p. 008, 2008.
[36] J. Meyers and N. Sivanandam, “Non-Gaussianities in Multiﬁeld Inﬂation: Superhorizon Evolution,
Adiabaticity, and the Fate of fnl,” Phys.Rev., vol. D83, p. 103517, 2011.
[37] J. Elliston, D. J. Mulryne, D. Seery, and R. Tavakol, “Evolution of fNL to the adiabatic limit,” JCAP,
vol. 1111, p. 005, 2011.
[38] J. Meyers and E. R. M. Tarrant, “Perturbative Reheating After Multiple-Field Inﬂation: The Impact
on Primordial Observables,” Phys.Rev., vol. D89, p. 063535, 2014.
[39] D. Baumann, L. Senatore and M. Zaldarriaga, “Scale-Invariance and the Strong Coupling Problem,”
JCAP 1105 (2011) 004 [arXiv:1101.3320 [hep-th]].
[40] A. Ijjas, J. L. Lehners and P. J. Steinhardt, “A general mechanism for producing scale-invariant
perturbations and small non-Gaussianity in ekpyrotic models,” PhysRevD 89 (2014) 123520
[arXiv:1404.1265 [astro-ph.CO]].
[41] C. T. Chiang, C. Wagner, F. Schmidt and E. Komatsu, “Position-dependent power spectrum of the
large-scale structure: a novel method to measure the squeezed-limit bispectrum,” JCAP 1405, 048
(2014) [arXiv:1403.3411 [astro-ph.CO]].
[42] E. Nelson and S. Shandera, “Statistical Naturalness and non-Gaussianity in a Finite Universe,” Phys.
Rev. Lett. 110, no. 13, 131301 (2013) [arXiv:1212.4550 [astro-ph.CO]].
[43] S. Nurmi, C. T. Byrnes and G. Tasinato, “A non-Gaussian landscape,” JCAP 1306, 004 (2013)
[arXiv:1301.3128 [astro-ph.CO]].
[44] M. LoVerde, E. Nelson and S. Shandera, “Non-Gaussian Mode Coupling and the Statistical
Cosmological Principle,” JCAP 1306, 024 (2013) [arXiv:1303.3549 [astro-ph.CO]].
[45] J. Bramante, J. Kumar, E. Nelson and S. Shandera, “Cosmic Variance of the Spectral Index from
Mode Coupling,” JCAP 1311, 021 (2013) [arXiv:1307.5083 [astro-ph.CO]].
[46] C. Armendariz-Picon, T. Damour and V. F. Mukhanov, “k - inﬂation,” Phys. Lett. B 458, 209 (1999)
[hep-th/9904075].
[47] M. Alishahiha, E. Silverstein and D. Tong, “DBI in the sky,” Phys. Rev. D 70, 123505 (2004)
[hep-th/0404084].
29

[48] N. Arkani-Hamed, P. Creminelli, S. Mukohyama and M. Zaldarriaga, “Ghost inﬂation,” JCAP 0404,
001 (2004) [hep-th/0312100].
[49] D. Green, B. Horn, L. Senatore and E. Silverstein, “Trapped Inﬂation,” Phys. Rev. D 80, 063533
(2009) [arXiv:0902.1006 [hep-th]].
[50] N. Barnaby and M. Peloso, “Large Nongaussianity in Axion Inﬂation,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 106, 181301
(2011) [arXiv:1011.1500 [hep-ph]].
[51] D. Lopez Nacir, R. A. Porto, L. Senatore and M. Zaldarriaga, “Dissipative eﬀects in the Eﬀective Field
Theory of Inﬂation,” JHEP 1201, 075 (2012) [arXiv:1109.4192 [hep-th]].
[52] C. Cheung, P. Creminelli, A. L. Fitzpatrick, J. Kaplan and L. Senatore, “The Eﬀective Field Theory of
Inﬂation,” JHEP 0803 (2008) 014 [arXiv:0709.0293 [hep-th]].
[53] D. Baumann and D. Green, “Equilateral Non-Gaussianity and New Physics on the Horizon,” JCAP
1109, 014 (2011) [arXiv:1102.5343 [hep-th]].
[54] D. Baumann, D. Green and R. A. Porto, “B-modes and the Nature of Inﬂation,” arXiv:1407.2621
[hep-th].
[55] P. Creminelli, “On non-Gaussianities in single-ﬁeld inﬂation,” JCAP 0310 (2003) 003
[astro-ph/0306122].
[56] L. Senatore and M. Zaldarriaga, “A Naturally Large Four-Point Function in Single Field Inﬂation,”
JCAP 1101 (2011) 003 [arXiv:1004.1201 [hep-th]].
[57] P. Creminelli, G. D’Amico, M. Musso, J. Norena and E. Trincherini, “Galilean symmetry in the
eﬀective theory of inﬂation: new shapes of non-Gaussianity,” JCAP 1102, 006 (2011) [arXiv:1011.3004
[hep-th]].
[58] S. R. Behbahani, M. Mirbabayi, L. Senatore and K. M. Smith, “New natural shapes of non-Gaussianity
from high-derivative interactions and their optimal limits from WMAP 9-year data,” arXiv:1407.7042
[astro-ph.CO].
[59] X. Chen and Y. Wang, “Quasi-Single Field Inﬂation and Non-Gaussianities,” JCAP 1004, 027 (2010)
[arXiv:0911.3380 [hep-th]].
[60] X. Chen and Y. Wang, “Large non-Gaussianities with Intermediate Shapes from Quasi-Single Field
Inﬂation,” Phys. Rev. D 81, 063511 (2010) [arXiv:0909.0496 [astro-ph.CO]].
[61] D. Baumann and D. Green, “Signatures of Supersymmetry from the Early Universe,” Phys. Rev. D 85,
103520 (2012) [arXiv:1109.0292 [hep-th]].
[62] T. Noumi, M. Yamaguchi and D. Yokoyama, “Eﬀective ﬁeld theory approach to quasi-single ﬁeld
inﬂation and eﬀects of heavy ﬁelds,” JHEP 1306, 051 (2013) [arXiv:1211.1624 [hep-th]].
[63] D. Green, M. Lewandowski, L. Senatore, E. Silverstein and M. Zaldarriaga, “Anomalous Dimensions
and Non-Gaussianity,” JHEP 1310, 171 (2013) [arXiv:1301.2630].
[64] V. Assassi, D. Baumann, D. Green and L. McAllister, “Planck-Suppressed Operators,” JCAP 1401,
no. 01, 033 (2014) [arXiv:1304.5226 [hep-th]].
[65] D. Baumann and L. McAllister, “Inﬂation and String Theory,” arXiv:1404.2601 [hep-th].
[66] N. Craig and D. Green, “Testing Split Supersymmetry with Inﬂation,” JHEP 1407, 102 (2014)
[arXiv:1403.7193 [hep-ph]].
[67] D. K. Hazra, A. Shaﬁeloo, G. F. Smoot, and A. A. Starobinsky, “Whipped inﬂation,” Phys.Rev.Lett.,
vol. 113, p. 071301, 2014.
[68] F. G. Pedro and A. Westphal, “Low-ℓCMB power loss in string inﬂation,” JHEP, vol. 1404, p. 034,
2014.
[69] M. Cicoli, S. Downes, B. Dutta, F. G. Pedro, and A. Westphal, “Just enough inﬂation: power spectrum
modiﬁcations at large scales,” 2014.
30

[70] L. Lello, D. Boyanovsky, and R. Holman, “Pre-slow roll initial conditions: large scale power
suppression and infrared aspects during inﬂation,” Phys.Rev., vol. D89, p. 063533, 2014.
[71] R. Bousso, D. Harlow and L. Senatore, “Inﬂation after False Vacuum Decay: Observational Prospects
after Planck,” arXiv:1309.4060 [hep-th].
[72] R. Bousso, D. Harlow, and L. Senatore, “Inﬂation After False Vacuum Decay: New Evidence from
BICEP2,” 2014.
[73] V. Miranda, W. Hu, and P. Adshead, “Steps to Reconcile Inﬂationary Tensor and Scalar Spectra,”
2014.
[74] P. Adshead, C. Dvorkin, W. Hu, and E. A. Lim, “Non-Gaussianity from Step Features in the
Inﬂationary Potential,” Phys.Rev., vol. D85, p. 023531, 2012.
[75] E. Silverstein and A. Westphal, “Monodromy in the CMB: Gravity Waves and String Inﬂation,” Phys.
Rev. D 78, 106003 (2008) [arXiv:0803.3085 [hep-th]].
L. McAllister, E. Silverstein and A. Westphal, “Gravity Waves and Linear Inﬂation from Axion
Monodromy,” Phys. Rev. D 82, 046003 (2010) [arXiv:0808.0706 [hep-th]].
R. Flauger, L. McAllister, E. Pajer, A. Westphal and G. Xu, “Oscillations in the CMB from Axion
Monodromy Inﬂation,” JCAP 1006, 009 (2010) [arXiv:0907.2916 [hep-th]].
[76] S. R. Behbahani, A. Dymarsky, M. Mirbabayi and L. Senatore, “(Small) Resonant non-Gaussianities:
Signatures of a Discrete Shift Symmetry in the Eﬀective Field Theory of Inﬂation,” JCAP 1212, 036
(2012) [arXiv:1111.3373 [hep-th]].
S. R. Behbahani and D. Green, “Collective Symmetry Breaking and Resonant Non-Gaussianity,”
JCAP 1211, 056 (2012) [arXiv:1207.2779 [hep-th]].
[77] R. Flauger, L. McAllister, E. Silverstein, A. Westphal, “Drifting Ocillations in Axion Monodromy
Inﬂation”, to appear.
[78] R. Easther and R. Flauger, “Planck Constraints on Monodromy Inﬂation,” arXiv:1308.3736
[astro-ph.CO].
H. Peiris, R. Easther and R. Flauger, “Constraining Monodromy Inﬂation,” JCAP 1309, 018 (2013)
[arXiv:1303.2616 [astro-ph.CO]].
M. G. Jackson, B. Wandelt and F. o. Bouchet, “Angular Correlation Functions for Models with
Logarithmic Oscillations,” arXiv:1303.3499 [hep-th].
P. A. R. Ade et al. [Planck Collaboration], “Planck 2013 results. XXII. Constraints on inﬂation,”
arXiv:1303.5082 [astro-ph.CO].
P. D. Meerburg, D. N. Spergel and B. D. Wandelt, “Searching for Oscillations in the Primordial Power
Spectrum: Perturbative Approach (Paper I),” Phys. Rev. D 89, 063536 (2014) [arXiv:1308.3704
[astro-ph.CO]].
P. D. Meerburg and D. N. Spergel, “Searching for Oscillations in the Primordial Power Spectrum:
Constraints from Planck (Paper II),” Phys. Rev. D 89, 063537 (2014) [arXiv:1308.3705 [astro-ph.CO]].
P. D. Meerburg, D. N. Spergel and B. D. Wandelt, “Searching for oscillations in the primordial power
spectrum,” arXiv:1406.0548 [astro-ph.CO].
P. D. Meerburg, “Alleviating the tension at low multipole through Axion Monodromy,”
arXiv:1406.3243 [astro-ph.CO].
Q. E. Minor and M. Kaplinghat, “Inﬂation that runs naturally: Gravitational waves and suppression of
power at large and small scales,” arXiv:1411.0689 [astro-ph.CO].
[79] X. Chen, R. Easther and E. A. Lim, “Generation and Characterization of Large Non-Gaussianities in
Single Field Inﬂation,” JCAP 0804, 010 (2008) [arXiv:0801.3295 [astro-ph]].
[80] M. Munchmeyer, P. D. Meerburg, and B. Wandelt, “An optimal estimator for resonance bispectra in
the CMB,”, [arXiv:1412.3461 [astro-ph.CO]]
31

[81] Creminelli, Paolo and D’Amico, Guido and Musso, Marcello and Norena, Jorge, “The (not so)
squeezed limit of the primordial 3-point function”, JCAP, 1111, 038, (2011)
[82] Pillepich, Annalisa and Porciani, Cristiano and Hahn, Oliver, “Universal halo mass function and
scale-dependent bias from N-body simulations with non-Gaussian initial conditions”,
Mon.Not.Roy.Astron.Soc., 402, 191-206, (2010)
[83] Grossi, M. and Verde, L. and Carbone, C. and Dolag, K. and Branchini, E. and others, “Large-scale
non-Gaussian mass function and halo bias: tests on N-body simulations”, Mon.Not.Roy.Astron.Soc.,
398, 321-332, (2009)
[84] Scoccimarro, Roman and Hui, Lam and Manera, Marc and Chan, Kwan Chuen, “Large-scale Bias and
Eﬃcient Generation of Initial Conditions for Non-Local Primordial Non-Gaussianity”, Phys.Rev. D85,
083002, (2012)
[85] Smith, Kendrick M. and Ferraro, Simone and LoVerde, Marilena,‘ ‘Halo clustering and gNL-type
primordial non-Gaussianity”, JCAP, 1203, 032, (2012)
[86] Desjacques, V. and Seljak, U., “Signature of primordial non-Gaussianity of φ3 type in the mass
function and bias of dark matter haloes”,Phys. Rev. D,81, 023006, (2010)
[87] Adhikari, Saroj and Shandera, Sarah and Dalal, Neal, “Higher moments of primordial non-Gaussianity
and N-body simulations”, JCAP, 1406, 052, (2014)
[88] Shandera, Sarah and Dalal, Neal and Huterer, Dragan, “A generalized local ansatz and its eﬀect on
halo bias”, JCAP, 1103, 017 ,(2011)
[89] A. Slosar, C. Hirata, U. Seljak, S. Ho, and N. Padmanabhan, “Constraints on local primordial
non-Gaussianity from large scale structure,” JCAP, vol. 0808, p. 031, 2008.
[90] E. Komatsu et al., “Five-Year Wilkinson Microwave Anisotropy Probe (WMAP) Observations:
Cosmological Interpretation,” Astrophys.J.Suppl., vol. 180, pp. 330–376, 2009.
[91] N. Afshordi and A. J. Tolley, “Primordial non-gaussianity, statistics of collapsed objects, and the
Integrated Sachs-Wolfe eﬀect,” Phys.Rev., vol. D78, p. 123507, 2008.
[92] J.-Q. Xia, A. Bonaldi, C. Baccigalupi, G. De Zotti, S. Matarrese, et al., “Constraining Primordial
Non-Gaussianity with High-Redshift Probes,” JCAP, vol. 1008, p. 013, 2010.
[93] J.-Q. Xia, C. Baccigalupi, S. Matarrese, L. Verde, and M. Viel, “Constraints on Primordial
Non-Gaussianity from Large Scale Structure Probes,” JCAP, vol. 1108, p. 033, 2011.
[94] A. J. Ross, S. Ho, A. J. Cuesta, R. Tojeiro, W. J. Percival, D. Wake, K. L. Masters, R. C. Nichol, A. D.
Myers, F. de Simoni, H. J. Seo, C. Hern´andez-Monteagudo, R. Crittenden, M. Blanton, J. Brinkmann,
L. A. N. da Costa, H. Guo, E. Kazin, M. A. G. Maia, C. Maraston, N. Padmanabhan, F. Prada,
B. Ramos, A. Sanchez, E. F. Schlaﬂy, D. J. Schlegel, D. P. Schneider, R. Skibba, D. Thomas, B. A.
Weaver, M. White, and I. Zehavi, “Ameliorating systematic uncertainties in the angular clustering of
galaxies: a study using the SDSS-III,” Mon.Not.Roy.Astron.Soc., vol. 417, pp. 1350–1373, Oct. 2011.
[95] A. J. Ross, W. J. Percival, A. Carnero, G.-b. Zhao, M. Manera, et al., “The Clustering of Galaxies in
SDSS-III DR9 Baryon Oscillation Spectroscopic Survey: Constraints on Primordial Non-Gaussianity,”
Mon.Not.Roy.Astron.Soc., vol. 428, pp. 1116–1127, 2013.
[96] A. R. Pullen and C. M. Hirata, “Systematic eﬀects in large-scale angular power spectra of photometric
quasars and implications for constraining primordial nongaussianity,” Publications of the Astronomical
Society of the Paciﬁc, Volume 125, Issue 928, pp., vol. 705-718, 2013.
[97] T. Giannantonio, A. J. Ross, W. J. Percival, R. Crittenden, D. Bacher, et al., “Improved Primordial
Non-Gaussianity Constraints from Measurements of Galaxy Clustering and the Integrated Sachs-Wolfe
Eﬀect,” Phys.Rev., vol. D89, p. 023511, 2014.
[98] S. Ho, N. Agarwal, A. D. Myers, R. Lyons, A. Disbrow, et al., “Sloan Digital Sky Survey III
32

Photometric Quasar Clustering: Probing the Initial Conditions of the Universe using the Largest
Volume,” 2013.
[99] N. Agarwal, S. Ho, and S. Shandera, “Constraining the initial conditions of the Universe using large
scale structure,” JCAP, vol. 1402, p. 038, 2014.
[100] D. Karagiannis, T. Shanks, and N. P. Ross, “Search for primordial non-Gaussianity in the quasars of
SDSS-III BOSS DR9,” Mon.Not.Roy.Astron.Soc., vol. 441, pp. 486–502, 2014.
[101] B. Leistedt, H. V. Peiris, and N. Roth, “Constraints on primordial non-Gaussianity from 800,000
photometric quasars,” 2014.
[102] B. Leistedt and H. V. Peiris, “Exploiting the full potential of photometric quasar surveys: Optimal
power spectra through blind mitigation of systematics,” Mon.Not.Roy.Astron.Soc., vol. 444, p. 2, 2014.
[103] D. Huterer, C. E. Cunha, and W. Fang, “Calibration errors unleashed: eﬀects on cosmological
parameters and requirements for large-scale structure surveys,” Mon.Not.Roy.Astron.Soc., vol. 432,
p. 2945, 2013.
[104] N. Agarwal, S. Ho, A. D. Myers, H.-J. Seo, A. J. Ross, et al., “Characterizing unknown systematics in
large scale structure surveys,” JCAP, vol. 1404, p. 007, 2014.
[105] J. Norena, L. Verde, G. Barenboim and C. Bosch, “Prospects for constraining the shape of
non-Gaussianity with the scale-dependent bias,” JCAP 1208, 019 (2012) [arXiv:1204.6324
[astro-ph.CO]].
[106] E. Sefusatti, J. R. Fergusson, X. Chen and E. P. S. Shellard, “Eﬀects and Detectability of Quasi-Single
Field Inﬂation in the Large-Scale Structure and Cosmic Microwave Background,” JCAP 1208, 033
(2012) [arXiv:1204.6318 [astro-ph.CO]].
[107] J. Ganc and E. Komatsu, “Scale-dependent bias of galaxies and mu-type distortion of the cosmic
microwave background spectrum from single-ﬁeld inﬂation with a modiﬁed initial state,” Phys. Rev. D
86, 023518 (2012) [arXiv:1204.4241 [astro-ph.CO]].
[108] I. Agullo and S. Shandera, “Large non-Gaussian Halo Bias from Single Field Inﬂation,” JCAP 1209,
007 (2012) [arXiv:1204.4409 [astro-ph.CO]].
[109] A. Becker, D. Huterer and K. Kadota, “Scale-Dependent Non-Gaussianity as a Generalization of the
Local Model,” JCAP 1101, 006 (2011) [arXiv:1009.4189 [astro-ph.CO]].
[110] D. Tseliakhovich, C. Hirata, and A. Slosar, “Non-Gaussianity and large-scale structure in a two-ﬁeld
inﬂationary model,” Phys.Rev., vol. D82, p. 043531, 2010.
[111] D. Baumann, S. Ferraro, D. Green and K. M. Smith, “Stochastic Bias from Non-Gaussian Initial
Conditions,” JCAP 1305, 001 (2013) [arXiv:1209.2173 [astro-ph.CO]].
[112] A. Becker, D. Huterer and K. Kadota, “Constraining Scale-Dependent Non-Gaussianity with Future
Large-Scale Structure and the CMB,” JCAP 1212, 034 (2012) [arXiv:1206.6165 [astro-ph.CO]].
[113] A. Raccanelli, O. Dor´e and N. Dalal, “Optimization of spectroscopic surveys for testing
non-Gaussianity,” arXiv:1409.1927 [astro-ph.CO].
[114] R. de Putter, and O. Dor´e, 2014, arXiv:1412.3854 [astro-ph.CO].
[115] S. Ferraro and K. M. Smith, arXiv:1408.3126 [astro-ph.CO].
[116] R. Scoccimarro, H. A. Feldman, J. N. Fry, and J. A. Frieman, “The Bispectrum of IRAS Redshift
Catalogs,” ApJ, vol. 546, pp. 652–664, Jan. 2001.
[117] L. Verde, A. F. Heavens, W. J. Percival, S. Matarrese, C. M. Baugh, J. Bland-Hawthorn, T. Bridges,
R. Cannon, S. Cole, M. Colless, C. Collins, W. Couch, G. Dalton, R. De Propris, S. P. Driver,
G. Efstathiou, R. S. Ellis, C. S. Frenk, K. Glazebrook, C. Jackson, O. Lahav, I. Lewis, S. Lumsden,
S. Maddox, D. Madgwick, P. Norberg, J. A. Peacock, B. A. Peterson, W. Sutherland, and K. Taylor,
“The 2dF Galaxy Redshift Survey: the bias of galaxies and the density of the Universe,” MNRAS,
33

vol. 335, pp. 432–440, Sept. 2002.
[118] R. Scoccimarro, E. Sefusatti, and M. Zaldarriaga, “Probing primordial non-Gaussianity with
large-scale structure,” Phys. Rev. D, vol. 69, p. 103513, May 2004.
[119] Y. P. Jing and G. B¨orner, “The Three-Point Correlation Function of Galaxies Determined from the
Two-Degree Field Galaxy Redshift Survey,” ApJ, vol. 607, pp. 140–163, May 2004.
[120] E. Gazta˜naga, P. Norberg, C. M. Baugh, and D. J. Croton, “Statistical analysis of galaxy surveys - II.
The three-point galaxy correlation function measured from the 2dFGRS,” MNRAS, vol. 364,
pp. 620–634, Dec. 2005.
[121] F. Mar´ın, “The Large-scale Three-point Correlation Function of Sloan Digital Sky Survey Luminous
Red Galaxies,” ApJ, vol. 737, p. 97, Aug. 2011.
[122] C. K. McBride, A. J. Connolly, J. P. Gardner, R. Scranton, R. Scoccimarro, A. A. Berlind, F. Mar´ın,
and D. P. Schneider, “Three-point Correlation Functions of SDSS Galaxies: Constraining Galaxy-mass
Bias,” ApJ, vol. 739, p. 85, Oct. 2011.
[123] F. A. Mar´ın, C. Blake, G. B. Poole, C. K. McBride, S. Brough, M. Colless, C. Contreras, W. Couch,
D. J. Croton, S. Croom, T. Davis, M. J. Drinkwater, K. Forster, D. Gilbank, M. Gladders,
K. Glazebrook, B. Jelliﬀe, R. J. Jurek, I.-h. Li, B. Madore, D. C. Martin, K. Pimbblet, M. Pracy,
R. Sharp, E. Wisnioski, D. Woods, T. K. Wyder, and H. K. C. Yee, “The WiggleZ Dark Energy
Survey: constraining galaxy bias and cosmic growth with three-point correlation functions,” MNRAS,
vol. 432, pp. 2654–2668, July 2013.
[124] H. Gil-Mar´ın, J. Nore˜na, L. Verde, W. J. Percival, C. Wagner, M. Manera, and D. P. Schneider, “The
power spectrum and bispectrum of SDSS DR11 BOSS galaxies I: bias and gravity,” ArXiv e-prints,
July 2014.
[125] H. Gil-Mar´ın, L. Verde, J. Nore˜na, A. J. Cuesta, L. Samushia, W. J. Percival, C. Wagner, M. Manera,
and D. P. Schneider, “The power spectrum and bispectrum of SDSS DR11 BOSS galaxies II:
cosmological interpretation,” ArXiv e-prints, July 2014.
[126] T. Giannantonio, C. Porciani, J. Carron, A. Amara, and A. Pillepich, “Constraining primordial
non-Gaussianity with future galaxy surveys,” MNRAS, vol. 422, pp. 2854–2877, June 2012.
[127] E. Sefusatti and E. Komatsu, “Bispectrum of galaxies from high-redshift galaxy surveys: Primordial
non-Gaussianity and nonlinear galaxy bias,” Phys. Rev. D, vol. 76, p. 083004, Oct. 2007.
[128] F. Bernardeau, S. Colombi, E. Gazta˜naga, and R. Scoccimarro. Large-scale structure of the Universe
and cosmological perturbation theory. Phys. Rep., 367:1–248, September 2002.
[129] R. E. Angulo, S. Foreman, M. Schmittfull, and L. Senatore. The One-Loop Matter Bispectrum in the
Eﬀective Field Theory of Large Scale Structures. ArXiv e-prints, June 2014.
[130] T. Baldauf, L. Mercolli, M. Mirbabayi, and E. Pajer. The Bispectrum in the Eﬀective Field Theory of
Large Scale Structure. ArXiv e-prints, June 2014.
[131] A. Cooray and R. Sheth. Halo models of large scale structure. Phys. Rep., 372:1–129, December 2002.
[132] P. McDonald and A. Roy. Clustering of dark matter tracers: generalizing bias for the coming era of
precision LSS. JCAP, 8:20, August 2009.
[133] T. Baldauf, U. Seljak, R. E. Smith, N. Hamaus, and V. Desjacques. Halo stochasticity from exclusion
and nonlinear clustering. Phys. Rev. D, 88(8):083507, October 2013.
[134] H. Gil-Mar´ın, J. Nore˜na, L. Verde, W. J. Percival, C. Wagner, M. Manera, and D. P. Schneider. The
power spectrum and bispectrum of SDSS DR11 BOSS galaxies I: bias and gravity. ArXiv e-prints, July
2014.
[135] E. Hivon, F. R. Bouchet, S. Colombi, and R. Juszkiewicz. Redshift distortions of clustering: a
Lagrangian approach. A&A, 298:643, June 1995.
34

[136] R. E. Smith, R. K. Sheth, and R. Scoccimarro. Analytic model for the bispectrum of galaxies in
redshift space. Phys. Rev. D, 78(2):023523, July 2008.
[137] E. Sefusatti, M. Crocce, and V. Desjacques. The halo bispectrum in N-body simulations with
non-Gaussian initial conditions. MNRAS, 425:2903–2930, October 2012.
[138] F. Beutler, S. Saito, H.-J. Seo, J. Brinkmann, K. S. Dawson, D. J. Eisenstein, A. Font-Ribera, S. Ho,
C. K. McBride, F. Montesano, W. J. Percival, A. J. Ross, N. P. Ross, L. Samushia, D. J. Schlegel,
A. G. S´anchez, J. L. Tinker, and B. A. Weaver. The clustering of galaxies in the SDSS-III Baryon
Oscillation Spectroscopic Survey: testing gravity with redshift space distortions using the power
spectrum multipoles. MNRAS, 443:1065–1089, September 2014.
[139] D. Bertacca, R. Maartens, A. Raccanelli, and C. Clarkson. Beyond the plane-parallel and Newtonian
approach: wide-angle redshift distortions and convergence in general relativity. JCAP, 10:25, October
2012.
[140] A. Raccanelli, D. Bertacca, O. Dor´e, and R. Maartens. Large-scale 3D galaxy correlation function and
non-Gaussianity. JCAP, 8:22, August 2014.
[141] C. Bonvin and R. Durrer. What galaxy surveys really measure. Phys. Rev. D, 84(6):063505,
September 2011.
[142] E. Di Dio, R. Durrer, G. Marozzi, and F. Montanari. Galaxy number counts to second order and their
bispectrum. ArXiv e-prints, July 2014.
[143] A. Challinor and A. Lewis. Linear power spectrum of observed source number counts. Phys. Rev. D,
84(4):043516, August 2011.
[144] H. Gil-Mar´ın, C. Wagner, F. Fragkoudi, R. Jimenez, and L. Verde. An improved ﬁtting formula for
the dark matter bispectrum. JCAP, 2:47, February 2012.
[145] D. Jeong, F. Schmidt, and C. M. Hirata. Large-scale clustering of galaxies in general relativity.
Phys. Rev. D, 85(2):023504, January 2012.
[146] R. Scoccimarro and H. M. P. Couchman. A ﬁtting formula for the non-linear evolution of the
bispectrum. MNRAS, 325:1312–1316, August 2001.
[147] S. Shandera, A. Mantz, D. Rapetti, and S. W. Allen, “X-ray Cluster Constraints on
Non-Gaussianity,” JCAP, vol. 1308, p. 004, 2013.
[148] A. B. Mantz, A. von der Linden, S. W. Allen, D. E. Applegate, P. L. Kelly, et al., “Weighing the
Giants IV: Cosmology and Neutrino Mass,” 2014.
[149] R. Williamson, B. Benson, F. High, K. Vanderlinde, P. Ade, et al., “An SZ-selected sample of the
most massive galaxy clusters in the 2500-square-degree South Pole Telescope survey,” Astrophys.J.,
vol. 738, p. 139, 2011.
[150] B. Benson, T. de Haan, J. Dudley, C. Reichardt, K. Aird, et al., “Cosmological Constraints from
Sunyaev-Zel’dovich-Selected Clusters with X-ray Observations in the First 178 Square Degrees of the
South Pole Telescope Survey,” Astrophys.J., vol. 763, p. 147, 2013.
[151] P. Ade et al., “Planck 2013 results. XXIX. Planck catalogue of Sunyaev-Zeldovich sources,”
Astron.Astrophys., 2013.
[152] L. Bleem, B. Stalder, T. de Haan, K. Aird, S. Allen, et al., “Galaxy Clusters Discovered via the
Sunyaev-Zel’dovich Eﬀect in the 2500-square-degree SPT-SZ survey,” 2014.
[153] A. Mana, T. Giannantonio, J. Weller, B. Hoyle, G. Huetsi, et al., “Combining clustering and
abundances of galaxy clusters to test cosmology and primordial non-Gaussianity,”
Mon.Not.Roy.Astron.Soc., vol. 434, p. 684, 2013.
[154] L. Kofman, “Probing string theory with modulated cosmological ﬂuctuations,” astro-ph/0303614,
2003.
35

[155] M. Zaldarriaga, “Non-Gaussianities in models with a varying inﬂaton decay rate,” Phys. Rev. D69,
43508, 2004
[156] J. R. Bond, A. V. Frolov, Z. Huang, and L. Kofman, “Non-Gaussian Spikes from Chaotic Billiards in
Inﬂation Preheating,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 103, 071301, 2009
[157] J. M. Bardeen, J. R. Bond, N. Kaiser and A. S. Szalay, “The Statistics of Peaks of Gaussian Random
Fields,” Ap. J. 304, 15-58, 1986.
[158] J. R. Bond and S. T. Myers, “The Peak-Patch Picture of Cosmic Catalogues I: Algorithms,” Ap. J.
Suppl. 103, 1-39, 1996.
[159] J. R. Bond and J. Braden “The Shock-in-Times of Preheating,” in preparation, 2015.
[160] J. R. Bond, J. Braden, A. V. Frolov, Z. Huang, “Spiked Local Non-gaussian Curvature Fluctuations
from Early Universe Preheating,” in preparation, 2015.
[161] M. A. Alvarez, J. R. Bond, A. Hajian, A. Bahmanyar, and G. Stein, “Comparing Peak Patch Mass
Functions and Spatial Distributions with N-body Halo Distributions,” in preparation, 2015.
[162] M. A. Alvarez, J. R. Bond, A. V. Frolov, Z. Huang, and G. Stein, “Halo and Galaxy Mocks from
Peak-patch Simulations of Intermittent non-Gaussianity,” in preparation, 2015.
[163] N. Kaiser, “On the spatial correlations of Abell clusters,” ApJL, vol. 284, pp. L9–L12, Sept. 1984.
[164] N. Kaiser, “Clustering in real space and in redshift space,” MNRAS, vol. 227, pp. 1–21, July 1987.
[165] Jeong, D., & Komatsu, E. Perturbation theory reloaded : Analytical Calculation of Non-linearity in
Baryonic Oscillations in the Real Space Matter Power Spectrum 2006, ApJ, 651, 619
[166] Jeong, D., & Komatsu, E. Primordial non-Gaussianity, scale-dependent bias, and the bispectrum of
galaxies 2009, ApJ, 703, 1230
[167] Jeong, D. cosmology with high (z > 1) redshift galaxy surveys 2010, Ph.D. Thesis, The University of
Texas at Austin
[168] McDonald, P. Clustering of dark matter tracers: renormalizing the bias parameters 2007,
Phys. Rev. D, 75, 043514
[169] Matarrese, S., & Pietroni, M. Resumming cosmic perturbations 2007, JCAP, 6, 26
[170] Crocce, M., & Scoccimarro, R. Renormalized Cosmological Perturbation Theory 2006, Phys. Rev. D,
73, 063519
[171] Montesano, F., S´anchez, A. G., & Phleps, S. A new model for the full shape of the large-scale power
spectrum 2010, MNRAS, 408, 2397
[172] Bernardeau, F., Crocce, M., & Scoccimarro, R. Multipoint propagators in cosmological gravitational
instability 2008, Phys. Rev. D, 78, 103521
[173] Taruya, A., & Hiramatsu, T. A Closure Theory for Nonlinear Evolution of Cosmological Power
Spectra 2008, ApJ, 674, 617
[174] Matsubara, T. Resumming Cosmological Perturbations via the Lagrangian Picture: One-loop Results
in Real Space and in Redshift Space 2008, Phys. Rev. D, 77, 063530
[175] Pietroni, M. Flowing with Time: a New Approach to Nonlinear Cosmological Perturbations 2008,
JCAP, 10, 36
[176] Baumann, D., Nicolis, A., Senatore, L., & Zaldarriaga, M. Cosmological Non-Linearities as an
Eﬀective Fluid 2012, JCAP, 7, 51
[177] Carrasco, J. J. M., Hertzberg, M. P., & Senatore, L. The Eﬀective Field Theory of Cosmological Large
Scale Structures 2012, Journal of High Energy Physics, 9, 82
[178] Carrasco, J. J. M., Foreman, S., Green, D., & Senatore, L. The Eﬀective Field Theory of Large Scale
Structures at Two Loops 2014, JCAP, 7, 057
36

[179] Porto, R. A., Senatore, L., & Zaldarriaga, M. The Lagrangian-space Eﬀective Field Theory of large
scale structures 2014, JCAP, 5, 022
[180] Senatore, L. Bias in the Eﬀective Field Theory of Large Scale Structures 2014, arXiv:1406.7843
[181] Senatore, L., & Zaldarriaga, M. Redshift Space Distortions in the Eﬀective Field Theory of Large Scale
Structures 2014, arXiv:1409.1225
[182] Bartelmann, M., Fabis, F., Berg, D., Kozlikin, E., Lilow, R., Viermann, C., Non-equilibrium statistical
ﬁeld theory for classical particles: Non-linear structure evolution with ﬁrst-order interaction 2014,
arXiv:1411.1502
[183] Viermann, C., Fabis, F., Kozlikin, E., Lilow, R., & Bartelmann, M. Non-equilibrium statistical ﬁeld
theory for classical particles: Basic kinetic theory 2014, arXiv:1411.2809
[184] Carlson, J., Reid, B., & White, M. Convolution Lagrangian perturbation theory for biased tracers
2013, MNRAS, 429, 1674
[185] Matsubara, T. Nonlinear Perturbation Theory Integrated with Nonlocal Bias, Redshift-space
Distortions, and Primordial Non-Gaussianity 2011, Phys. Rev. D, 83, 083518
[186] Schmidt, F., Jeong, D., & Desjacques, Peak-background split, renormalization, and galaxy clustering
V. 2013, Phys. Rev. D, 88, 023515
[187] F. Schmidt, Phys. Rev. D 87, no. 12, 123518 (2013) [arXiv:1304.1817 [astro-ph.CO]].
[188] V. Desjacques, J. O. Gong and A. Riotto, JCAP 1309, 006 (2013) [arXiv:1301.7437 [astro-ph.CO],
arXiv:1301.7437].
[189] V. Assassi, D. Baumann, D. Green and M. Zaldarriaga, JCAP 1408, 056 (2014) [arXiv:1402.5916
[astro-ph.CO]].
[190] R. Scoccimarro, Phys. Rev. D 70, 083007 (2004) [astro-ph/0407214].
[191] J. Yoo, A. L. Fitzpatrick, and M. Zaldarriaga, “New perspective on galaxy clustering as a cosmological
probe: General relativistic eﬀects,” Phys. Rev. D, vol. 80, pp. 083514–+, Oct. 2009.
[192] J. Yoo, “General relativistic description of the observed galaxy power spectrum: Do we understand
what we measure?,” Phys. Rev. D, vol. 82, pp. 083508–+, Oct. 2010.
[193] C. Bonvin and R. Durrer, “What galaxy surveys really measure,” ArXiv e-prints, May 2011.
[194] A. Challinor and A. Lewis, “The linear power spectrum of observed source number counts,” ArXiv
e-prints, May 2011.
[195] D. Jeong, F. Schmidt, and C. M. Hirata, “Large-scale clustering of galaxies in general relativity,”
Phys. Rev. D, vol. 85, p. 023504, Jan. 2012.
[196] D. Jeong and F. Schmidt, “Large-scale structure with gravitational waves. I. Galaxy clustering,”
Phys. Rev. D, vol. 86, p. 083512, Oct. 2012.
[197] M. Bruni, R. Crittenden, K. Koyama, R. Maartens, C. Pitrou, and D. Wands, “Disentangling
non-Gaussianity, bias and GR eﬀects in the galaxy distribution,” ArXiv e-prints, June 2011.
[198] J. Yoo and M. Zaldarriaga, “Beyond the Linear-Order Relativistic Eﬀect in Galaxy Clustering:
Second-Order Gauge-Invariant Formalism,” ArXiv e-prints, June 2014.
[199] D. Bertacca, R. Maartens, and C. Clarkson, “Observed galaxy number counts on the lightcone up to
second order: I. Main result,” ArXiv e-prints, May 2014.
[200] E. Di Dio, R. Durrer, G. Marozzi, and F. Montanari, “Galaxy number counts to second order and
their bispectrum,” ArXiv e-prints, July 2014.
[201] D. J. Schlegel, D. P. Finkbeiner, and M. Davis, “Maps of dust IR emission for use in estimation of
reddening and CMBR foregrounds,” Astrophys.J., vol. 500, p. 525, 1998.
[202] M. S. Vogeley, “Toward high precision measures of large scale structure,” astro-ph/9805160, 1998.
37

[203] R. Scranton et al., “Analysis of systematic eﬀects and statistical uncertainties in angular clustering of
galaxies from Early SDSS Data,” Astrophys.J., vol. 579, pp. 48–75, 2002.
[204] A. J. Ross, S. Ho, A. J. Cuesta, R. Tojeiro, W. J. Percival, et al., “Ameliorating Systematic
Uncertainties in the Angular Clustering of Galaxies: A Study using SDSS-III,”
Mon.Not.Roy.Astron.Soc., vol. 417, p. 1350, 2011.
[205] S. Ho, A. Cuesta, H.-J. Seo, R. de Putter, A. J. Ross, et al., “Clustering of Sloan Digital Sky Survey
III Photometric Luminous Galaxies: The Measurement, Systematics and Cosmological Implications,”
Astrophys.J., vol. 761, p. 14, 2012.
[206] B. Leistedt, H. V. Peiris, D. J. Mortlock, A. Benoit-L´evy, and A. Pontzen, “Estimating the large-scale
angular power spectrum in the presence of systematics: a case study of Sloan Digital Sky Survey
quasars,” Mon.Not.Roy.Astron.Soc., vol. 435, pp. 1857–1873, 2013.
[207] D. L. Shafer and D. Huterer, “Multiplicative errors in the galaxy power spectrum: self-calibration of
unknown photometric systematics for precision cosmology,” 2014.
[208] I. Mohammed and U. Seljak, “Analytic model for the matter power spectrum, its covariance matrix,
and baryonic eﬀects,” 2014.
[209] J. Bielefeld, D. Huterer, and E. V. Linder, “Cosmological Leverage from the Matter Power Spectrum
in the Presence of Baryon and Nonlinear Eﬀects,” 2014.
[210] T. Eiﬂer, E. Krause, S. Dodelson, A. Zentner, A. Hearin, et al., “Accounting for baryonic eﬀects in
cosmic shear tomography: Determining a minimal set of nuisance parameters using PCA,” 2014.
[211] G. Bernstein and D. Huterer, “Catastrophic photometric redshift errors: weak-lensing survey
requirements,” MNRAS, vol. 401, pp. 1399–1408, Jan. 2010.
[212] A. P. Hearin, A. R. Zentner, Z. Ma, and D. Huterer, “A General Study of the Inﬂuence of
Catastrophic Photometric Redshift Errors on Cosmology with Cosmic Shear Tomography,”
Astrophys.J., vol. 720, pp. 1351–1369, 2010.
[213] C. E. Cunha, D. Huterer, H. Lin, M. T. Busha and R. H. Wechsler, “Spectroscopic failures in
photometric redshift calibration: cosmological biases and survey requirements,” Mon. Not. Roy.
Astron. Soc. 444, 129 (2014) [arXiv:1207.3347 [astro-ph.CO]].
[214] J. Newman, A. Abate, F. Abdalla, S. Allam, S. Allen, et al., “Spectroscopic Needs for Imaging Dark
Energy Experiments: Photometric Redshift Training and Calibration,” 2013.
38

