New Developments in Neural Networks,  J. R. Burger 
 
 
 
1 
 
An New Type Of Artificial Brain Using Controlled Neurons 
John Robert Burger, Emeritus Professor, ECE Department, California State University Northridge, 
jrburger1@gmail.com 
 
 
Abstract -- Plans for a new type of artificial brain are possible because of realistic neurons in logically 
structured arrays of controlled toggles, one toggle per neuron.  Controlled toggles can be made to compute, in 
parallel, parameters of critical importance for each of several complex images recalled from associative long 
term memory.  Controlled toggles are shown below to amount to a new type of neural network that supports 
autonomous behavior and action.   
 
I.   INTRODUCTION  
   A brain-inspired system is proposed below in order to demonstrate the utility of electrically 
realistic neurons as controlled toggles.  Plans for artificial brains are certainly not new [1, 2].  As 
in other such systems, the system below will monitor external information, analogous to that 
flowing from eyes, ears and other sensors.  If the information is significant, for instance, bright 
spots, or loud passages, or if identical information is presented several times, it will 
automatically be committed to associative long term memory; it will automatically be 
memorized. 
   External information is concurrently impressed on a short term memory, which is a logical row 
of short term memory neurons.  From here cues are derived and held long enough to accomplish 
a search of associative long term memory.  Unless the cues are very exacting indeed, several 
returned images are expected.  Each return then undergoes calculations for priority; an image 
with maximum priority is imposed on (and overwrites the current contents of) short term 
memory.  Calculations for priority are fast because they proceed in parallel, which is one of the 
purposes of an array of  controlled toggles. 
   Short term memory holds images alternating between external information, and recalls from 
long term memory.  Each image in short term memory causes a search of associative long term 
memory, with a resulting recall, as well as physical actions.  The system to be described is 
autonomous and follows from neuro-cognitive psychology studies. 
   Little attention is paid below to classical artificial neural networks, even though they have 
potential to serve admirably in the detection of given attributes hidden in sensor data.  What is 
needed, but elusive, is massive parallel processing, to enable fast decisions concerning the 
priority of recalled images.  To address this challenge, the author found it necessary to ignore 
classical artificial neural networks, as well as those elegant mathematical theories that in fact are 
irrelevant to the fast computation of recall priorities.   
   A first step in departing from older, inappropriate technologies is to go back to the logical 
functions of an actual biological neuron.  Neurons use pulses instead of voltage levels.  With 
pulses, any Boolean function is readily available [3-10].  The neural membrane that supports 
pulsing is fairly efficient, since pulses tend to be slow and physically reversible; they tend to 
leave the system the way they found it [3, 11].  A simple neuron can serve as a toggle, and with a 
minor adjustment, a controlled  toggle [12].   
   A controlled toggle changes its state only if control signals from one or more other toggles all 
are true.  The important thing about neural toggles is that they may be organized into several 

New Developments in Neural Networks,  J. R. Burger 
 
 
 
2 
 
logical rows, each holding a given image, each processing in parallel a given set of instructions.  
Parallelism in logically reversible systems based on controlled toggles is very natural [3, 4, 13].  
A wide variety of mathematical calculations are readily possible, although this paper is 
concerned only with a calculation of priority for each recalled image.   
   The humble neuron accomplishes more logic in a smaller space, using less energy than most 
integrated solid state devices.  Artificial electrically realistic neurons have yet to be perfected for 
engineering purposes.  Meanwhile, transistors, albeit inadequate, may serve to implement the 
controlled toggles and other logic necessary to the system described below. 
II.   FRONT END 
   An autonomous memory machine (or artificial brain) serves to illustrate the utility of 
electrically realistic neurons in the form of controlled toggles.  Figure 1 shows a plan created 
from previous efforts [3, 4].  Sensory information, which is a maze of signals, undergo, in Block 
1, decoding into attributes, or basic elements of edges, shades, colors, tone, and so on.  Block 1 is 
not discussed here, except to note that it may very well contain classical neural network 
structures.  Attributes are assumed to be digital; a pulsating neural output means TRUE, no 
signal means FALSE.   
   Attributes, K in number, are used in three ways: 1) they provide stimulation to provide special 
displays of the environment.  2) they provide "key" attributes that serve to detect unusual 
"events" or repetition of an "event" as in Blocks 2, 3.  If this event is not already memorized, 
meaning there is a NO HIT after a memory search, described next, then there is issued an 
ENABLE MEMORIZATION signal from gate 4.  This means that the event, or image, is 
automatically memorized in available unused memory; as is described elsewhere [3, 4, 13]. 
   Attributes are also  impressed on short term memory, Block 5, where certain major attributes 
provide cues for a memory search.  Normally, cues are under determined.  Thus associative 
memory provides several images, and a HIT signal is emitted; returned images are subsequently 
evaluated for priority (explained below).   
   However, in the rare cases when there is a NO HIT signal, a Cue Editor, Block 6, is helpful to 
assure that images are found.  The Cue Editor randomly removes attributes, making a HIT more 
likely [3, 4].  The Cue Editor works in the background, analogous to when a person has a mental 
block, but remembers later. 
   A simple subsystem alternates what is impressed on short term memory, either sensory 
attributes or recalled images, both of which result in additional memory searches.  The 
subsystem is a single neuron, Block 7 whose output axon synapses back to its own dendrite, with 
suitable delay, probably tens of milliseconds in a human brain.  Unit 8, a bundle of logical 
neurons, serves as a 2x1 multiplexier. 
   Note that recalled images, or impressions in short term memory, are perceived only dimly by 
humans; they are not as bright or loud as the original simulation.  But they are still perceived, 
and may result in important physical actions, denoted by Block 9.  Short term memory, 
anthropomorphically, is a center of "consciousness."    
III.   IMAGE PRIORITIES 
   The system and neural circuitry of associative memory, as in a brain, have been analyzed 
elsewhere [4, 13].  After a successful search, and the occurrence of a HIT signal, images flow 
asynchronously, and are effortlessly directed into registers of toggle neurons as suggested in the 
top of Figure 2.  The load pulse, by the way, is derived from the HIT signal, which is assumed 

New Developments in Neural Networks,  J. R. Burger 
 
 
 
3 
 
converted into a single membrane-like pulse.  "Importance" attributes, κ in number, a small 
subset of all attributes, are immediately converted into binary weights each N1 bits, termed 
"subpriorities."  They can be converted by direct connections.  Immediate physical danger would 
receive the highest value, emotional events slightly less, loud noises, or flashes of light even less, 
and so on to a value of zero [1, 2]. 
   The bottom of Figure 2 illustrates toggle registers, amounting to a number L of neural 
controlled toggles.  Within these registers calculations of priority are to be computed.  These 
bottom registers will each require extra scratchpad toggles.    
   The calculation involves adding all subpriority codes for each register in parallel.  Each register 
has its own adder implemented in scratchpad toggles, as delineated elsewhere [3, 4, 13].  Figure 
3 illustrates that within each register the codes are added two at a time.  This is done for all 
registers in parallel, using κ − 1 adder blocks.  Adder operations are controlled by a sequence of 
"source" and "target" signals flowing asynchronously from a long term memory (LTM).   
   Note in Figure 3 that the A-inputs serve to hold an accumulation sum; the B-inputs sequentially 
add in the other subpriority codes (Xi, 3 ≤ i ≤ κ).  The priority of each image resides in the 
summation outputs. 
   A controlled toggle structure is portrayed in Figure 4.  If the connecting bus is at rest then the 
toggle neuron Qi will have its state flipped if there is a Target signal from LTM.  If there is a 
Source signal from LTM, and if the toggle Qi is TRUE, with pulsing output, the bus remains at 
rest.  But if Qi is FALSE, then pulses are transmitted to the bus, meaning no bus toggle can be 
flipped.  This system permits the testing of several toggles, and only if they are all TRUE will the 
bus remain at rest, with the possibility of toggling those other  toggles whose Target signal is 
active (pulsating).  This system permits a variety of complex computations.   
   Using hardware, a single wire would serve as the bus as in Figure 5.  But biologically, an 
interneuron is required with many dendritic synaptic inputs and many axon-like buttons.  Since 
neurons are so very plentiful in a brain, almost a trillion (1012), interneurons are readily available. 
   Figure 6 illustrates comparing magnitudes of computed priorities and using them to direct a 
given image, the highest priority, into short term memory.  Magnitude comparison  may be 
accomplished using reversible logic in which net priorities are subtracted to determine the 
largest, or alternately, using a combinational magnitude comparator.  Nearly everything in this 
plan is asynchronous, with no central clock.  Timing has to be implemented correctly, although it 
develops naturally in a biological brain. 
IV.   CONCLUSIONS 
   This article suggests a new direction for artificial neural networks, using structures that differ 
radically from the usual tree of many weighted inputs, connected by nonlinear amplifiers with a 
few logical outputs.  There are no weights, especially no synaptic weights in the above concept; a 
neural membrane is either triggered, or it is not.  There are no negative numbers either, although 
there are excitatory and inhibitory synapses.  
   Controlled toggles using biological neurons are energy efficient, occupy a small space, and 
serve well for parallel computations.  To grasp this from the bottom up, one must study the given 
references.  The future may well reside in artificial pulsating neurons for controlled toggles, 
assuming such neurons can someday be manufactured.  This paper allows a reader to 
comprehend a particular artificial brain, one that achieves alertness, has a low level of 

New Developments in Neural Networks,  J. R. Burger 
 
 
 
4 
 
intelligence, and rudimentary self-protection, all of which depend on the availability of 
controlled toggles.   
References 
[1]  J. Anderson, The Architecture of Cognition. Harvard University Press, 1983. 
[2]  S. Franklin, Artificial Minds. MIT Press, 1995.  
[3] J. R. Burger, Brain Theory From A Circuits And Systems Perspective -- How Electrical  Science Explains 
 
Neuro-circuits, Neuro-systems, and Qubits, New York: Springer, 2013. 
[4]  J. R. Burger, The Synthesis of a Neural System  to Explain Consciousness: Neural Circuits,  Neural 
Systems 
 
and Wakefulness for Non-Specialists.  Eugene, OR: Luminare Press, 2014.   
[5]  C. Koch, Biophysics of computation –  Information processing in single neurons.  New York, Oxford Univ. 
 
Press, 1999. 
[6]  P. Poirazi, T Brannon, B W Mel, "Pyramidal  
neuron as two-layer neural network," Neuron 37, Jan. 2003. 
[7]  B. W. Mel, "Information Processing in  Dendritic Trees, " Neural Comp. 6, 1994. 
[8]  J. R. Burger, "XOR at a Single Point where Dendrites Merge." arXiv:1004.2280 [cs.NE] April 13, 2010. 
[9] P. Fromherz, V. Gaede, "Exclusive-OR function of a single arborized neuron," Biol. Cybern. 69, Aug. 1999. 
[10]  J. R. Burger, "Circuit Elements And Connections Inspired By Neurons," IEEE Circuits And Systems 
 
Magazine, February 2015. 
[11]  E. Fredkin, T. Toffoli, "Conservative logic," International Journal of Theoretical Physics (Springer 
 
Netherlands) 21 (3), April 1982. 
[12]  J. R. Burger, "The Neuron As 
A Controlled 
Toggle Circuit," Circuits And Systems, 
5, 
 
http://www.scirp.org/journal/cs/  November 2014. 
[13] J. R. Burger, Human Memory Modeled with Standard Analog and Digital Circuits:  Inspiration for Man-made 
 
Computers.  Hoboken, NJ, Wiley, 2009.   

New Developments in Neural Networks,  J. R. Burger 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Figure 1.   Artificial Brain Front End. 
 

New Developments in Neural Networks,  J. R. Burger 
 
 
 
6 
 
      
Figure 2.   Registers of Controlled Toggles.    
 

New Developments in Neural Networks,  J. R. Burger 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Figure 3.   Addition Within A Toggle Register. 
 

New Developments in Neural Networks,  J. R. Burger 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Figure 4.   Controlled Toggle Element. 
 

New Developments in Neural Networks,  J. R. Burger 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
Figure 5.   A Neural Bus System. 
 

New Developments in Neural Networks,  J. R. Burger 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
Figure 6.   Selecting The Highest Priority Image. 
 
 

