arXiv:1701.08366v2  [math.ST]  2 Nov 2017
Faithfulness of Probability Distributions and Graphs
Kayvan Sadeghi
k.sadeghi@statslab.cam.ac.uk
Statistical Laboratory
University of Cambridge
Centre for Mathematical Sciences, Wilberforce Road
Cambridge, CB3 0WB, United Kingdom
Abstract
A main question in graphical models and causal inference is whether, given a probability
distribution P (which is usually an underlying distribution of data), there is a graph (or
graphs) to which P is faithful. The main goal of this paper is to provide a theoretical answer
to this problem. We work with general independence models, which contain probabilistic
independence models as a special case.
We exploit a generalization of ordering, called
preordering, of the nodes of (mixed) graphs. This allows us to provide suﬃcient conditions
for a given independence model to be Markov to a graph with the minimum possible number
of edges, and more importantly, necessary and suﬃcient conditions for a given probability
distribution to be faithful to a graph.
We present our results for the general case of
mixed graphs, but specialize the deﬁnitions and results to the better-known subclasses of
undirected (concentration) and bidirected (covariance) graphs as well as directed acyclic
graphs.
Keywords:
causal discovery, compositional graphoid, directed acyclic graph, faithfulness,
graphical model selection, independence model, Markov property, mixed graph, structural
learning
1. Introduction
Graphs have been used in graphical models in order to capture the conditional independence
structure of probability distributions. Generally speaking, nodes of the graph correspond to
random variables and edges to conditional dependencies (Lauritzen, 1996). The connection
between graphs and probability distributions is usually established in the literature by the
concept of Markov property (Cliﬀord, 1990; Pearl, 1988; Studen´y, 1989), which ensures
that if there is a speciﬁc type of separation between nodes i and j of the graph “given
the node subset C” then random variables Xi and Xj are conditionally independent given
the random vector XC in the probability distribution. However, the “ultimate” connection
between probability distributions and graphs requires the other direction to hold, namely for
every conditional independence in the probability distribution to correspond to a separation
in the graph. This connection has been called faithfulness of the probability distribution
and the graph in Spirtes et al. (2000), and the graph has been called the perfect map of
such a distribution in Pearl (1988).
However, “given a probability distribution P whether there is a graph (or graphs) to
which P is faithful” is an open problem, and consequently so is the problem of ﬁnding
these graphs.
This problem can be raised for any type of graph existing in the litera-
1

ture of graphical models ranging from diﬀerent types of mixed graphs with three types of
edges (Richardson and Spirtes, 2002; Wermuth, 2011; Sadeghi, 2016) and diﬀerent types
of chain graphs (Lauritzen and Wermuth, 1989; Frydenberg, 1990; Andersson et al., 2001;
Cox and Wermuth, 1993; Wermuth, 2011) to better-known classes of undirected (concen-
tration) (Darroch et al., 1980) and bidirected (covariance) (Kauermann, 1996) graphs as
well as directed acyclic graphs (Kiiveri et al., 1984; Pearl, 1988). Our goal is to provide an
answer to this problem. A similar problem of “given a graph whether there is a family of
distributions faithful to it” has been answered for very speciﬁc types of graphs and spe-
ciﬁc types of distributions; for example, for Gaussian distributions and undirected graphs
in Lnˇeniˇcka and Mat´uˇs (2007), DAGs in Pearl (1988); Geiger et al. (1990); Spirtes et al.
(2000), ancestral graphs in Richardson and Spirtes (2002), and LWF chain graphs in Pe˜na
(2011); and discrete distributions and DAGs in Geiger et al. (1990); Meek (1995) and LWF
chain graphs in Pe˜na (2009).
The concept of faithfulness was originally deﬁned for the purpose of causal inference
(Spirtes et al., 2000; Pearl, 1988), and the theory developed in this paper can be interpreted
in causal language. A main approach to causal inference is based on graphical represen-
tations of causal structures, usually represented by causal graphs that are directed acyclic
with nodes as random variables (that is a Bayesian network). Causal graphs are assumed to
capture the true causal structure; see, for example, Neapolitan (2004). A main assumption
made is called the causal faithfulness condition (CFC) stating that the true probability
distribution is faithful to the true causal graph. Although the distribution being faithful
to the “true underlying causal graph” is a much stronger assumption, it necessarily means
that it must be faithful to “some graph” in order for one to be able to use graphical meth-
ods for causal inference. For an extensive discussion on the CFC, see Zhang and Spirtes
(2008), and for related philosophical discussions, see, for example, Woodward (1998); Steel
(2006). Although the results in this paper cover those of causal Bayesian networks, we
have developed our theory to a much more general case of simultaneous representation of
“direct eﬀects”, “confounding”, and “non-causal symmetric dependence structures”; see,
for example, Pearl (2009).
In this paper, we work with the general independence model J . Independence models
J (P) induced by probability distributions P are a special case. We provide necessary and
suﬃcient conditions for J to be graphical, that is to be faithful to a graph. In short, as
proved in Theorem 17, J is graphical if and only if it satisﬁes the so-called compositional
graphoid axioms as well as singleton-transitivity, and what we call ordered upward- and
downward-stability.
As apparent from their names, ordered upward- and downward-stability depend on a
generalization of ordering of variables, and consequently the nodes of the graph (called pre-
ordering). We provide our results for the most general case of mixed graphs, which contains
almost all classes of graphs used in graphical models as subclasses with the exception of
the chain graphs with the AMP Markov property (Andersson et al., 2001) and its gener-
alizations (Pe˜na, 2014). However, based on the preordering w.r.t. which ordered upward-
and downward-stability are satisﬁed, one can deduce to what type (or types) of graph P is
faithful.
Since many of the subclasses of mixed graphs are not as well-known or used as some
simpler classes of graphs, we provide a specialization of deﬁnitions and the main results for
2

undirected and bidirected graphs as well as directed acyclic graphs at the end of the paper.
We advise the readers that are only familiar with or interested in these simpler subclasses
to skip the general deﬁnitions and results for mixed graphs, and focus on the specialization.
The structure of the paper is as follows: In the next section, we provide the basic deﬁni-
tions for graphs as well as diﬀerent classes of graphs in graphical models, and independence
models. In Section 3, we deﬁne and provide basic results for Markovness and faithfulness of
independence models and graphs. In Section 4, we deﬁne and exploit the preordering for (so-
called anterial) graphs, and then we deﬁne the concept of upward- and downward-stability.
In Section 5, we provide suﬃcient conditions for an independence model to be so-called
minimally Markov to a graph, and then we provide necessary and suﬃcient conditions for
an independence model to be faithful to a graph. In Section 6, we specialize the deﬁnitions
and results to the classes of undirected and bidirected graphs as well as directed acyclic
graphs. In Section 7, we show how other results in the literature concerning faithfulness of
certain probability distributions and certain classes of graphs are corollaries of our results.
This also provides a nice set of examples for the theory presented in the paper. In Section
8, we end the paper with a short summary, a discussion on the statistical implications of
the results, and an outline of future work.
2. Deﬁnitions and Concepts
In this section, we provide the basic deﬁnitions and concepts needed for the paper.
2.1 Graph Theoretical Deﬁnitions and Concepts
A graph G is a triple consisting of a node set or vertex set V , an edge set E, and a relation
that with each edge associates two nodes (not necessarily distinct), called its endpoints.
When nodes i and j are the endpoints of an edge, they are adjacent. We call a node adjacent
to the node i, a neighbour of i, and denote the set of all neighbours of i by ne(i). We say
that an edge is between its two endpoints. We usually refer to a graph as an ordered pair
G = (V, E). Graphs G1 = (V1, E1) and G2 = (V2, E2) are called equal if (V1, E1) = (V2, E2).
In this case we write G1 = G2.
Notice that our graphs are labeled, that is every node is considered a diﬀerent object.
Hence, for example, graph i
j
k is not equal to j
i
k.
A loop is an edge with the same endpoints. Here we only discuss graphs without loops.
Multiple edges are edges with the same pair of endpoints. A simple graph has neither loops
nor multiple edges.
Graphs in this paper are so-called mixed graphs, which contain three types of edges:
lines (i
j), arrows (i
≻j), and arcs (i≺≻j), where in the two latter cases, we say
that there is an arrowhead at j. If we remove all arrowheads from edges of the graph G,
the obtained undirected graph is called the skeleton of G. The simple graph whose edge
ij indicates whether there is an edge (or multiple edges) between i and j in G is called
the adjacency graph of G. It is clear that if a graph is simple then its adjacency graph is
the same as its skeleton. In this paper, only skeleton of anterial graphs or its subclasses
are used, which, as will be deﬁned later, are simple graphs; hence, we denote the simple
skeleton by sk(G). We say that we direct the edges of a skeleton by putting arrowheads at
the edges in order to obtain mixed graphs.
3

A subgraph of a graph G1 is graph G2 such that V (G2) ⊆V (G1) and E(G2) ⊆E(G1)
and the assignment of endpoints to edges in G2 is the same as in G1. We deﬁne a subgraph
induced by edges A ⊆E of G = (V, E) to be a subgraph that contains V as the node set
and all and only edges in A as the edge set.
A walk is a list ⟨v0, e1, v1, . . . , ek, vk⟩of nodes and edges such that for 1 ≤i ≤k, the
edge ei has endpoints vi−1 and vi. A path is a walk with no repeated node or edge. A
maximal set of nodes in a graph whose members are connected by some paths constitutes
a connected component of the graph. A cycle is a walk with no repeated nodes or edges
except for v0 = vk.
We say a walk is between the ﬁrst and the last nodes of the list in G. We call the ﬁrst
and the last nodes endpoints of the walk and all other nodes inner nodes.
A subwalk of a walk ω = ⟨i0, e1, i1, . . . , en, in⟩is a walk ⟨ir, er+1, ir+1, . . . , ep, ip⟩that is
a subsequence of ω between two occurrences of nodes (ir, ip, 0 ≤r ≤p ≤n). If a subwalk
forms a path then it is called a subpath of ω.
A walk ω = ⟨i = i0, i1, . . . , in = j⟩is directed from i to j if all edges ikik+1, 0 ≤k ≤n−1,
are arrows pointing from ik to ik+1. If there is a directed walk from i to j then i is an ancestor
of j and j is a descendant of i. We denote the set of ancestors of j by an(j).
A walk ω = ⟨i = i0, i1, . . . , in = j⟩is semi-directed from i to j if it has at least one
arrow, no arcs, and every arrow ikik+1 is pointing from ik to ik+1. A walk between i and j
is anterior from i to j if it is semi-directed from i to j or if it is undirected. If there is an
anterior walk from i to j then we also say that i is an anterior of j. We use the notation
ant(j) for the set of all anteriors of j. For a set A, we deﬁne ant(A) = S
j∈A ant(j) \ A.
Notice that, unlike in most places in the literature (for example Richardson and Spirtes
(2002)), we use walks instead of paths to deﬁne ancestors and anteriors. Because of this
and the fact that ancestral graphs have no arrowheads pointing to lines, our deﬁnition of
anterior extends the notion of anterior for ancestral graphs in Richardson and Spirtes (2002)
with the modiﬁcation that in this paper, a node is not an anterior of itself. Using walks
instead of paths is immaterial, as shown in Lauritzen and Sadeghi (2017).
A section ρ of a walk is a maximal subwalk consisting only of lines, meaning that there
is no other subwalk that only consists of lines and includes ρ. Thus, any walk decomposes
uniquely into sections; these are not necessarily edge-disjoint and sections may also be single
nodes. A section ρ on a walk ω is called a collider section if one of the following walks is a
subwalk of ω: i
≻ρ≺
j, i≺≻ρ≺
j, i≺≻ρ≺≻j. All other sections on ω are called
non-collider sections. Notice that a section may be a collider on one walk and a non-collider
on another, but we may speak of collider or non-collider sections without mentioning the
relevant walk when this is apparent from the context.
2.2 Diﬀerent Classes of Graphs
All the subclasses of graphs included here are acyclic in the sense that they do not contain
semi-directed cycles. The most general class of graphs discussed here is the class of chain
mixed graphs (CMGs) (Sadeghi, 2016) that contains all mixed graphs without semi-directed
cycles.
They may have multiple edges containing an arc and a line or an arc and an
arrow but not a combination of an arrow and a line or arrows in opposite directions, as
4

such combinations would constitute semi-directed cycles. In this paper, in using the term
“graph” we mean a CMG unless otherwise stated.
A general class of graphs that plays an important role in this paper is the class of anterial
graphs (AnGs) (Sadeghi, 2016). AnGs are CMGs in which an endpoint of an arc cannot be
an anterior of the other endpoint.
CMGs include summary graphs (SGs) (Wermuth, 2011) and acyclic directed mixed
graphs (ADMGs) (Richardson, 2003) as a subclass, but not AMP chain graphs (Andersson et al.,
2001), and AnGs include ancestral graphs (AGs) (Richardson and Spirtes, 2002) but not
SGs or ADMGs.
These have typically been introduced to describe independence struc-
tures obtained by marginalization and conditioning in DAG independence models; see for
example Sadeghi (2013).
AnGs also contain undirected and bidirected chain graphs (CGs). A chain graph is an
acyclic graph so that if we remove all arrows, all connected components of the resulting graph
– called chain components – contain one type of edge only. If all chain components contain
lines, the chain graph is an undirected chain graph (UCG) (known as LWF chain graphs); if
all chain components contain arcs it is a bidirected chain graph (BCG) (known as multivari-
ate regression chain graphs). AnGs also contain Regression graphs (Wermuth and Sadeghi,
2012), which are chain graphs consisting of lines and arcs (although dashed undirected
edges have mostly been used instead of arcs in the literature), where there is no arrowhead
pointing to lines.
These also contain graphs with only one type of edge; namely undirected graphs (UGs),
containing only lines; bidirected graphs (BGs), containing only bidirected edges; and directed
acyclic graphs (DAGs), containing only arrows and being acyclic. Clearly, a graph without
arrows has no semi-directed cycles, and a semi-directed cycle in a graph with only arrows is
a directed cycle. Cox and Wermuth (1993); Kauermann (1996); Wermuth and Cox (1998);
Drton and Richardson (2008) used the terms concentration graphs and covariance graphs
for UGs and BGs, referring to their independence interpretation associated with covariance
and concentration matrices for Gaussian graphical models. DAGs have been particularly
useful to describe causal Markov relations; see for example Kiiveri et al. (1984); Pearl (1988);
Lauritzen and Spiegelhalter (1988); Geiger et al. (1990); Spirtes et al. (2000).
For an extensive discussion on the subclasses of acyclic graphs and their relationships
and hierarchy, see Lauritzen and Sadeghi (2017).
2.3 Independence Models and Their Properties
An independence model J over a ﬁnite set V is a set of triples ⟨X, Y | Z⟩(called independence
statements), where X, Y , and Z are disjoint subsets of V ; Z may be empty, but ⟨∅, Y | Z⟩
and ⟨X, ∅| Z⟩are always included in J . The independence statement ⟨X, Y | Z⟩is read as
“X is independent of Y given Z”. Independence models may in general have a probabilistic
interpretation, but not necessarily. Similarly, not all independence models can be easily
represented by graphs. For further discussion on general independence models, see Studen´y
(2005).
In order to deﬁne probabilistic independence models, consider a set V and a collection
of random variables {Xα}α∈V with state spaces Xα, α ∈V and joint distribution P. We let
XA = {Xv}v∈A etc. for each subset A of V . For disjoint subsets A, B, and C of V we use
5

the short notation A ⊥⊥B | C to denote that XA is conditionally independent of XB given
XC (Dawid, 1979; Lauritzen, 1996), that is that for any measurable Ω⊆XA and P-almost
all xB and xC,
P(XA ∈Ω| XB = xB, XC = xC) = P(XA ∈Ω| XC = xC).
We can now induce an independence model J (P) by letting
⟨A, B | C⟩∈J (P) if and only if A ⊥
⊥B | C w.r.t. P.
Similarly we use the notation A̸⊥
⊥B | C for ⟨A, B | C⟩/∈J (P).
In order to use graphs to represent independence models, the notion of separation in a
graph is fundamental. For three disjoint subsets A, B, and C, we use the notation A ⊥B | C
if A and B are separated given C, and A̸⊥B | C for A and B not separated given C.
The separation can be uniﬁed under one deﬁnition for all graphs by using walks instead
of paths: A walk π is connecting given C if every collider section of π has a node in C
and all non-collider sections are disjoint from C. For pairwise disjoint subsets (A, B, C),
A ⊥B | C if there are no connecting walks between A and B given C. This is in wording
the same as the deﬁnition in Studen´y and Bouckaert (1998) for undirected (LWF) chain
graphs (although it is in fact a generalization as collider sections are generalized), and a
generalization of the m-separation used with diﬀerent wordings in Richardson and Spirtes
(2002); Wermuth (2011); Wermuth and Sadeghi (2012) for AGs and SGs, and of the d-
separation of Pearl (1988). For UGs, the notion has a direct intuitive meaning, so that
A ⊥B | C if all paths from A to B pass through C.
If A, B, or C has only one member {i}, {j}, or {k}, for better readability, we write
⟨i, j | k⟩∈J instead of ⟨{i}, {j} | {k}⟩∈J ; and similarly for i ⊥j | k and i ⊥
⊥j | k. We also
write A ⊥B when C = ∅; and similarly A ⊥
⊥B.
A graph G induces an independence model J (G) by separation, letting
⟨A, B | C⟩∈J (G) ⇐⇒A ⊥B | C in G.
An independence model J over a set V is a semi-graphoid if it satisﬁes the four following
properties for disjoint subsets A, B, C, and D of V :
1. ⟨A, B | C⟩∈J if and only if ⟨B, A | C⟩∈J (symmetry);
2. if ⟨A, B ∪D | C⟩∈J then ⟨A, B | C⟩∈J and ⟨A, D | C⟩∈J (decomposition);
3. if ⟨A, B ∪D | C⟩∈J then ⟨A, B | C ∪D⟩∈J and ⟨A, D | C ∪B⟩∈J (weak union);
4. if ⟨A, B | C ∪D⟩∈J and ⟨A, D | C⟩∈J then ⟨A, B ∪D | C⟩∈J (contraction).
Notice that the reverse implication of contraction clearly holds by decomposition and weak
union. A semi-graphoid for which the reverse implication of the weak union property holds
is said to be a graphoid; that is, it also satisﬁes
5. if ⟨A, B | C ∪D⟩∈J and ⟨A, D | C ∪B⟩∈J then ⟨A, B ∪D | C⟩∈J (intersection).
Furthermore, a graphoid or semi-graphoid for which the reverse implication of the decom-
position property holds is said to be compositional, that is, it also satisﬁes
6

6. if ⟨A, B | C⟩∈J and ⟨A, D | C⟩∈J then ⟨A, B ∪D | C⟩∈J (composition).
Separation in graphs satisﬁes all these properties; see Theorem 1 in Lauritzen and Sadeghi
(2017):
Proposition 1 For any graph G, the independence model J (G) is a compositional graphoid.
On the other hand, probabilistic independence models are always semi-graphoids (Pearl,
1988), whereas the converse is not necessarily true; see Studen´y (1989). If, for example,
P has strictly positive density, the induced independence model is always a graphoid; see,
for example, Proposition 3.1 in Lauritzen (1996). See also Peters (2015) for a necessary
and suﬃcient condition for the intersection property to hold. If the distribution P is a
regular multivariate Gaussian distribution, J (P) is a compositional graphoid; for example
see Studen´y (2005). Probabilistic independence models with positive densities are not in
general compositional; this only holds for special types of multivariate distributions such
as, for example, Gaussian distributions and the symmetric binary distributions used in
Wermuth et al. (2009).
Another important property that is satisﬁed by separation in all graphs, but not nec-
essarily for probabilistic independence models, is singleton-transitivity (also called weak
transitivity in Pearl (1988), where it is shown that for Gaussian and binary distributions
P, J (P) always satisﬁes it). For i, j, and k, single elements in V ,
7. if ⟨i, j | C⟩∈J and ⟨i, j | C ∪{k}⟩∈J then ⟨i, k | C⟩∈J or ⟨j, k | C⟩∈J (singleton-
transitivity).
A singleton-transitive compositional graphoid is equivalent to what is called a Gaussoid
in Lnˇeniˇcka and Mat´uˇs (2007) with a rather diﬀerent axiomatization. The name reminds
one that these are the axioms satisﬁed by the independence model of a regular Gaussian
distribution (Pearl, 1988).
Proposition 2 For a graph G, J (G) satisﬁes singleton-transitivity.
Proof If there is a walk between i and k given C and a walk between j and k given C then
by connecting these two walks, we obtain a walk π between i and j. Except the section
ρ that contains k, all collider sections on π have a node in C and all non-collider sections
are outside C. Hence depending on ρ being a collider or non-collider, π is connecting given
C ∪{k} or C respectively.
3. Markov and Faithful Independence Models
In this section, we deﬁne and discuss the concepts of Markovness and faithfulness for prob-
ability distributions, independence models, and graphs.
3.1 Markov Properties
For a graph G = (V, E), an independence model J deﬁned over V satisﬁes the global Markov
property w.r.t. G, or is simply Markov to G, if for disjoint subsets A, B, and C of V it
holds that
A ⊥B | C =⇒⟨A, B | C⟩∈J ,
7

or equivalently J (G) ⊆J .
In particular, the graphical independence J (G) is trivially
Markov to its graph G.
For a probability distribution P, we simply say P is Markov to a graph G if J (P) is
Markov to G, that is if J (G) ⊆J (P). Notice that every independence model over V is
Markov to the complete graph with the node set V .
For a graph G = (V, E), an independence model J deﬁned over V satisﬁes a pairwise
Markov property w.r.t. a graph G, or is simply pairwise Markov to G, if for every non-
adjacent pair of nodes i, j, it holds that ⟨i, j | C(i, j)⟩∈J , for some C(i, j), where C(i, j)
is the conditioning set of the pairwise Markov property and does not include i and j.
The independence model J (G) only satisﬁes pairwise Markov properties w.r.t. what
is called maximal graphs, which are graphs where the lack of an edge between i and j
corresponds to a conditional separation statement for i and j. For a probability distribution
P, we say P is pairwise Markov to a graph G if J (P) is pairwise Markov to G.
For maximal graphs, a pairwise Markov property is deﬁned by letting C(i, j) = ant(i) ∪
ant(j) \ {i, j} (Lauritzen and Sadeghi, 2017), which we henceforth use as “the” pairwise
Markov property. The conditioning set of the pairwise Markov property simpliﬁes for DAGs,
C(i, j) = an(i)∪an(j)\{i, j} (Richardson and Spirtes, 2002; Sadeghi and Lauritzen, 2014);
for BGs, C(i, j) = ∅(as deﬁned in Wermuth and Cox (1998)); and for connected UGs,
C(i, j) = V \ {i, j} (as deﬁned in Lauritzen (1996)).
This pairwise Markov property, is in fact equivalent to the global Markov property under
compositional graphoids; see Theorem 4 of Lauritzen and Sadeghi (2017):
Proposition 3 Let G be a maximal graph. If the independence model J is a compositional
graphoid, then J is pairwise Markov to G if and only if J is Markov to G.
In particular, for UGs, the equivalence of the global and pairwise Markov properties holds
under graphoids, and for BGs under compositional semi-graphoids.
Two undirected or two bidirected graphs G and H, where G ̸= H, induce diﬀerent inde-
pendence models; that is J (G) ̸= J (H). This is not necessarily true for larger subclasses.
We call two graphs G and H such that J (G) = J (H) Markov equivalent. Conditions for
Markov equivalence for most subclasses of graphs are known; see Verma and Pearl (1990);
Ali et al. (2009); Wermuth and Sadeghi (2012). Notice that two Markov equivalent maxi-
mal graphs have the same skeleton.
3.2 Faithfulness and Minimal Markovness
We say that an independence model J and a probability distribution P are faithful if
J = J (P). Similarly, we say that J and a graph G are faithful if J = J (G). We also
say that P and G are faithful if J (P) = J (G).
If P and G are faithful then we may
sometimes also say that P is faithful to G or vice versa, although in principle faithfulness
is a symmetric relation; the same holds for saying that J is faithful to G or P. Notice that
we are extending the deﬁnition of faithfulness to include the relation between independence
models and graphs as well as independence models and probability distributions rather than
only that between graphs and probability distributions as originally used in Spirtes et al.
(2000).
Thus, if J and G are faithful then J is Markov to G, but it also requires every inde-
pendence statement to correspond to a separation in G. We say that J or G is probabilistic
8

if there is a distribution P that is faithful to J or G respectively. If there is a graph that
is faithful to J or P then we say that J or P is graphical.
Our main goal is to characterize graphical probability distributions, and in addition, if
existent, to provide graphs that are faithful to a given P. We solve this problem for the
general case of independence models J .
For a given independence model J , we deﬁne the skeleton of J , denoted by sk(J ), to
be the undirected graph that is obtained from J as follows: we deﬁne the node set of sk(J )
to be V , and for every pair of nodes i, j, we check whether ⟨i, j | C⟩∈J holds for some
C ⊆V \{i, j}; if it does not then we draw an edge between i and j. One can similarly deﬁne
sk(P) for a probability distribution P by checking whether i ⊥
⊥j | C. This is the same as the
graph obtained by the ﬁrst step of the SGS algorithm (Glymour et al., 1987). Notice that
this is not necessarily the same as the undirected graph obtained by the pairwise Markov
property for UGs; see Section 6.1.
For UGs and BGs, the skeleton of J uniquely determines the graph, whereas for other
subclasses, there are several graphs with the same skeleton sk(J ). As will be seen, the
preordering, deﬁned in the next section, enables us to direct the edges of the skeleton.
Proposition 4 If an independence model J is Markov to a graph G then sk(J ) is a sub-
graph of sk(G).
Proof Suppose that there is no edge between i and j in sk(G). Since the global Markov
property w.r.t. G implies the pairwise Markov property, it holds that ⟨i, j | C(i, j)⟩∈J ,
which implies i is not adjacent to j in sk(J ).
Hence, if J is Markov to a graph G such that sk(G) = sk(J ) then G has the fewest number
of edges among those to which J is Markov. We say that J is minimally Markov to a
graph G if J is Markov to G and sk(G) = sk(J ). The same can be deﬁned for probability
distributions, and has been used in the literature under the name of (causal) minimality
assumption (Pearl, 2009; Spirtes et al., 2000; Zhang and Spirtes, 2008; Neapolitan, 2004).
Minimally Markov independence models to a graph are important since only these can also
be faithful to the graph:
Proposition 5 If an independence model J and a graph G are faithful then J is minimally
Markov to G.
Proof Since J is Markov to G, we need to prove that sk(G) = sk(J ). By Proposition 4,
sk(J ) is a subgraph of sk(G). Now, suppose that there is no edge between i and j in sk(J ).
By the construction of sk(J ), it holds that ⟨i, j | C⟩∈J for some C. Since J and G are
faithful, i ⊥j | C in G. This implies that i is not adjacent to j in G.
Hence, we need to discuss conditions under which J is minimally Markov to a graph as
well as conditions for faithfulness of minimally Markov independence models and graphs.
These will be presented in Section 5.
4. Preordering in Graphs and Ordered Stabilities
In this section, we ﬁrst deﬁne the preordering for sets and its validity for nodes of the graphs,
and then use preordering to deﬁne some new properties of conditional independence.
9

4.1 Preordering of the Nodes of a Graph
Over a set V , a partial order is a binary relation ≤that satisﬁes the following properties
for all members a, b, c ∈V :
• a ≤a (reﬂexivity);
• if a ≤b and b ≤a then a = b (antisymmetry);
• if a ≤b and b ≤c then a ≤c (transitivity).
If a ≤b or b ≤a then a and b are comparable; otherwise they are incomparable. A partial
order under which every pair of elements is comparable is called a total order or a linear
order.
A preorder ≲over V , on the other hand, is a binary relation that is only reﬂexive and
transitive. Given a preorder ≲over V , one may deﬁne an equivalence relation ∼on V such
that a ∼b if and only if a ≲b and b ≲a. This explains the use of the notation ≲. It then
holds that
• if a ≲b and b ∼c then a ≲c; and
• if a ≲b and a ∼c then c ≲b.
We also use the notation a < b indicating that a ≲b and a ̸∼b.
We ﬁrst provide the following result; see Section 5.2.1 of Schr¨oder (2003):
Proposition 6 Let ≲be a preorder over the set V , and ∼the equivalence relation on V
as deﬁned above. Let also Q be the set of all equivalence classes of V w.r.t. ∼. Then the
relation ≤deﬁned over Q by

[a] ≤[b] ⇐⇒a ≲b

is a partial order over Q.
We say that a graph G = (V, E) admits a valid preorder ≲if, for nodes i and j of G,
the following holds:
• if i
j then i ∼j;
• if i
≻j then j < i;
• if i≺≻j then i and j are incomparable.
The global interpretation of a valid preorder on graphs is as follows:
Proposition 7 Let ≲be a valid preorder for a graph G. It then holds for nodes i and j of
G that if i ∈ant(j) then j ≲i; in particular,
1. if there is a semi-directed path from i to j then j < i; and
2. if i and j are connected by a path consisting only of lines then i ∼j.
Proof The proof follows from transitivity of both preorders and anterior paths.
10

Corollary 8 Let ≲be a valid preorder for a graph G and G−its subgraph induced by lines.
The equivalence classes of G based on ≲are the connected components of G−. In addition,
≤deﬁnes a partial order over the connected components of G−by [if i
≻j, i ∈τ and j ∈δ
then τ > δ], for τ and δ two connected components of G−.
Proof The results follows from Propositions 7 and 6.
For example, consider the graph in Fig. 1. The graph admits a valid preorder with the
preorder provided over the nodes, or equivalently over the connected components of G−
(with the abuse of the notation for numbering). The notation implies two nodes with label
2 are in the same equivalence class, 2 > 1 and 2′ > 1′, but a, b′, and c′′, a, b, c ∈{1, 2}, are
not comparable.
2
2
1
1’
2’
1’’
Figure 1: A preordered graph.
There may be many diﬀerent preorders that are valid for a graph. If there is a valid
preordering and we expect the other direction of Proposition 7 to hold then we obtain a
unique preordering for the graph: Given a graph G, if i /∈ant(j) and j /∈ant(i) then set i
and j to be incomparable. Otherwise, let i ∼j when i
j, and i > j when i
≻j. It is
easy to see that this, in fact, is a preorder for the nodes of G. We call this preordering the
minimal preorder for G since it gives the fewest possible comparable pairs of nodes. For
example, the preordering in the graph of Fig. 1 is minimal. In this paper, we mostly deal
with this type of preorderings for graphs. It is easy to observe the following:
Proposition 9 If G is anterial then the minimal preorder for G is a valid preorder for G.
In fact, in general, we have the following:
Proposition 10 A graph admits a valid preorder if and only if it is anterial.
Proof
If a graph G admits a valid preorder then by Proposition 7, there cannot be a
directed cycle, nor can there be an arc with one endpoint anterior of the other.
The
converse is Proposition 9.
Therefore, in addition to CMGs, SGs (and ADMGs) do not admit a valid preorder, but
AGs do. However, notice that for every CMG, there exists a Markov equivalent AnG (see
Sadeghi 2016); and the same for SGs and AG. Hence, the question of whether there is a
CMG that is faithful to J is the same as whether there is an AnG that is faithful to J ;
and the same holds for SG and AG.
As discussed above, there is a one-to-one correspondence between AnGs and the minimal
preorder for the AnGs. When the skeleton of the concerned graph is known, we have the
following trivial result:
11

Proposition 11 Given the skeleton of a graph G and a preorder ≲of its nodes, G can be
constructed uniquely by directing the edges of sk(G). In addition, ≲is a valid preorder for
G.
Let J be deﬁned over V . We introduce preordering in this paper in order to stress that, in
principle, a preordering of members of V (which are possibly random variables) is deﬁned
irrespective of graphs to which they are Markov or faithful. However, for our purposes,
knowing the skeleton of such graphs, one can directly discover the directions of the edges of
the graph, which correspond to the minimal preordering for the graph, rather than working
directly on the set V .
Suppose that there exists a preorder ≲over V . Proposition 11 implies that we can direct
the edges of sk(J ) based on ≲in order to deﬁne a dependence graph G(J , ≲) induced by
J and ≲. Notice that, by Proposition 10, G(J , ≲) is anterial. Similarly, for P, one can
deﬁne G(P, ≲) = G(J (P), ≲).
As mentioned, we are only interested in preorderings that are minimal preorders of
graphs. Given J , we deﬁne a preordering ≲to be J -compatible if ≲is the minimal preorder
for G(J , ≲). Similarly, one can deﬁne a P-compatible preorder.
4.2 Ordered Upward- and Downward-stabilities
We now exploit the preodering for independence models in order to deﬁne two other prop-
erties in addition to the seven properties deﬁned in Section 2.3 (namely singleton-transitive
compositional graphoid axioms). We say that an independence model J over the set V
respectively satisﬁes ordered upward- and downward-stability w.r.t. a preorder ≲of V if the
following hold:
8. if ⟨i, j | C⟩∈J then ⟨i, j | C ∪{k}⟩∈J for every k ∈V \ {i, j} such that l ≲k for
some l ∈{i, j} or l ∼k for some l ∈C (ordered upward-stability);
9. if ⟨i, j | C⟩∈J then ⟨i, j | C \ {k}⟩∈J for every k ∈V \ {i, j} such that l ̸≲k for
every l ∈{i, j} and l ̸< k for every l ∈C \ {k} (ordered downward-stability).
Ordered upward-stability is a generalization of a modiﬁcation of upward stability, deﬁned
in Fallat et al. (2017), and strong union, deﬁned in Pearl and Paz (1985), for undirected
graphs, with singletons instead of node subsets.
Proposition 12 Let G be an AnG and ≲the minimal preorder for G. Then J (G) satisﬁes
ordered upward- and downward-stability w.r.t. ≲.
Proof
First we prove that J (G) satisﬁes ordered upward-stability w.r.t. the minimal
preorder: If k ∈C, the result is obvious, thus suppose that k /∈C. Suppose that there is
a connecting walk π between i and j given C ∪{k}. If k is not on π then we are done;
otherwise, k is on a collider section with no other node in C on π. Notice that l ≲k means
here that k ∈ant(l), and l ∼k that k and l are connected by a path consisting of lines.
If l ∈C then denote the path of lines between k and l by ω. The walk consisting of the
subwalk of π from i to k, ω, ω in the reverse direction (from l to k), and the subwalk of
π from k to j is connecting given C. This is because on this walk k and l are in the same
collider section with l in C.
12

Now denote an anterior path from k to l ∈{i, j} by ̟. Without loss of generality we
can assume that l = j. We now consider two cases: 1) If ̟ has no nodes in C then the walk
containing the subwalk of π between i and k and ̟ is connecting given C between i and j
since k and all nodes on ̟ are on non-collider sections on this walk. 2) If ̟ has a node in
C then consider the one closest to k and call it h. Then the walk consisting of the subwalk
of π from i to k, the subpath of ̟ from k to h, the reverse of the subpath from h to k, and
the subwalk of π from k to j is connecting given C as proven as follows: 1) if there is an
arrow on ̟ then k is on a non-collider section in both instances in which it appears on this
walk, and h is on a collider section and in C. 2) if ̟ only consists of lines then k and h are
in the same collider section with a node (h) in C.
Now we prove that J (G) satisﬁes ordered downward-stability: If k /∈C then the result
is obvious, thus suppose that k ∈C. Suppose that there is a connecting walk π between i
and j given C \{k}. If k is not on π then we are done. Otherwise, ﬁrst it is clear that since
π is connecting given C \ {k}, k cannot be the only node on a collider section that is in C.
If k is on the same section as another member of C then π is clearly connecting given C.
The only case that is left is when k is on a non-collider section on π; but this is impossible:
there is no arrowhead at the section containing k from one side on π, say from the j side.
By moving towards j from k, it can be implied that k is either an anterior of a node in a
collider section that is in C, or an anterior of j, but both are impossible since the former
implies l < k for l ∈C, and the latter implies j ≲k.
5. Characterization of Graphical Independence Models
In this section, we ﬁrst provide suﬃcient conditions for minimal Markovness, and then
necessary and suﬃcient conditions for faithfulness.
5.1 Suﬃcient Conditions for Minimal Markovness
Here we provide suﬃcient conditions for an independence model to be minimally Markov
to a graph. First, we have the following trivial result:
Proposition 13 If J is minimally Markov to an anterial graph G then G = G(J , ≲) for
the minimal preorder ≲for G.
By Proposition 5, the above statement also holds when J and G are faithful.
Proposition 14 Suppose that there exists a J -compatible preorder ≲over V w.r.t. which
J satisﬁes ordered downward- and upward-stability. It then holds that J is pairwise Markov
to G(J , ≲).
Proof
Suppose that there are non-adjacent nodes i and j in G(J , ≲). These are non-
adjacent in sk(J ) too. By deﬁnition of sk(J ), it holds that ⟨i, j | C⟩∈J for some C ⊆
V \ {i, j}.
Since J satisﬁes ordered downward-stability and since the preorder is J -compatible,
as long as a node k ∈C is not an anterior of {i, j} or there is no semi-directed path
from it to C \ {k}, it can be removed from the conditioning set, that is we have that
13

⟨i, j | C \ k⟩∈J . Since G(J , ≲) is acyclic, as long as ant({i, j}) ⊂C, such a k exists. Now
consider a node k′ ∈C \ {k} that is not an anterior of {i, j} or there is no semi-directed
path from it to C \ {k, k′} and apply downward-stability again. By an inductive argument
we imply that ⟨i, j | C ∩ant({i, j})⟩∈J . Now since P satisﬁes ordered upward-stability,
nodes outside C that are in ant({i, j}) can be added to the conditioning set. Hence, it holds
that ⟨i, j | ant({i, j}) \ {i, j}⟩∈J . This completes the proof.
In principle, a compatible preorder w.r.t. which J satisﬁes ordered downward- and upward-
stability can be found by going through all such preorderings. Finding such a preorder
eﬃciently is a structural learning task. We believe we have an eﬃcient way to do this when
the skeleton of J has been learned, but this is beyond the scope of this paper.
Theorem 15 Suppose, for an independence model J over V , that
1. J is a compositional graphoid; and
2. there exists a J -compatible preorder ≲over V w.r.t. which J satisﬁes ordered downward-
and upward-stability.
It then holds that J is minimally Markov to G(J , ≲).
Proof
The proof follows from Proposition 14, the fact that sk(J ) = sk(G(J , ≲)), and
Proposition 3.
5.2 Conditions for Faithfulness
In this section, we present the main result of this paper, which provides necessary and
suﬃcient conditions for faithfulness of independence models (and probability distributions)
and a (not necessarily known) graph in the general case. In Section 6, we specialize the
result to the more well-known subclasses as corollaries.
Proposition 16 Let J be an independence model over V . Suppose that J is minimally
Markov to an anterial graph G. It then holds that J and G are faithful if and only if
1. J satisﬁes singleton-transitivity; and
2. J satisﬁes ordered downward- and upward-stability w.r.t. the minimal preorder for G.
Proof Suppose that J and G are faithful. This is equivalent to J = J (G). By Proposition
2, J satisﬁes singleton-transitivity, and by Proposition 12, the result follows.
Conversely, suppose that J satisﬁes singleton-transitivity as well as ordered downward-
and upward-stability w.r.t. the minimal preorder ≲for G. By Proposition 13, G = G(J , ≲).
We show that J and G are faithful. We need to show that if ⟨A, B | C⟩∈J then A ⊥B | C
in G. Consider i ∈A and j ∈B. By decomposition, we have that ⟨i, j | C⟩∈J , which
implies that i and j are not adjacent in G.
If, for contradiction, C does not separate nodes i and j then there exists a connecting
walk π = ⟨i = i1, i2, . . . , ir = j⟩, on which all collider sections have a node in C and all
non-collider sections are outside C. In addition, for every node iq, 2 ≤q ≤r−1, on π deﬁne
14

Ciq as follows: If iq /∈C then Ciq = ∅; if iq ∈C then Ciq is the set of all l ∈C \π such that
there is a semi-directed path from iq to l but not from any ip ∈C to l, p ∈{q+1, . . . , r−1}.
Let Cπ = Sr−1
q=2 Ciq.
We prove by induction along nodes of π that for every q, 2 ≤q ≤r, it holds that
⟨i1, iq | (∪q−1
p=2Cip) ∪[C \ ({iq, . . . , ir} ∪Cπ)]⟩/∈J . The base for q = 2 is trivial since by the
construction of G(J , ≲), adjacent nodes are dependent given anything. Suppose now that
the result holds for q and we prove it for q + 1.
First, again by the construction of G(J , ≲), it holds that ⟨iq, iq+1 | (∪q−1
p=2Cip) ∪[C \
({iq, . . . , ir}∪Cπ)]⟩/∈J . By singleton-transitivity, this and the induction hypothesis imply
(a): ⟨i1, iq+1 | (∪q−1
p=2Cip) ∪[C \ ({iq, . . . , ir} ∪Cπ)]⟩/∈J ; or (b): ⟨i1, iq+1 | {iq} ∪(∪q−1
p=2Cip) ∪
[C \ ({iq, . . . , ir} ∪Cπ)]⟩/∈J . We now have two cases:
1) If iq is on a collider section: The section containing iq has a node in C. We again
consider two subcases:
1.i) If iq is in C: If (a) holds then ﬁrst notice that iq is not an anterior of {i1, iq+1}
nor is there a semi-directed path from iq to (∪q−1
p=2Cip) ∪[C \ ({iq, . . . , ir} ∪Cπ)].
We
apply downward-stability to (a) to obtain (b). If Ciq ̸= ∅then consider a highest order
node l in Ciq.
Again by downward-stability, we obtain ⟨i1, iq+1 | {l} ∪(∪q−1
p=2Cip) ∪[C \
({iq+1, . . . , ir} ∪Cπ)]⟩/∈J .
By an inductive argument along the members of Ciq (by,
at each step, choosing a highest order node in Ciq that has not yet been chosen), we
eventually obtain ⟨i1, iq+1 | (∪q
p=2Cip) ∪[C \ ({iq+1, . . . , ir} ∪Cπ)]⟩/∈J . Notice that iq is in
the conditioning set of this dependency.
1.ii) If iq is not in C: If (b) holds then observe that iq is in the same equivalence class as
that of either iq+1 or a node is ∈C, s < q. Hence we can apply upward-stability to obtain
(a). Since Ci2 = ∅, (a) is clearly the same as ⟨i1, iq+1 | (∪q
p=2Cip) ∪[C \ ({iq+1, . . . , ir} ∪
Cπ)]⟩/∈J . Notice that iq is not in the conditioning set of this dependency.
2) If iq is on a non-collider section: We have that iq /∈C, and iq ∈ant({i1, iq+1}).
Hence, by upward-stability, from (b) we obtain (a). Again, since Ciq = ∅, we obtain the
result.
Therefore, we established that ⟨i1, iq | (∪q−1
p=2Cip) ∪[C \ ({iq, . . . , ir} ∪Cπ)]⟩/∈J , for all
q, where depending on whether iq ∈C or not, the conditioning set contains or does not
contain iq. By letting q = r, we obtain ⟨i1, ir | C⟩/∈J , a contradiction. Therefore, it holds
that i ⊥j | C in G. By the composition property for separation for graphs (Proposition 1),
we obtain the result.
We follow the arguments in the proof for the following example.
Example 1 Consider the undirected (LWF) chain graph G in Fig. 2. Suppose that a prob-
ability distribution P is minimally Markov to G, and J (P) satisﬁes singleton-transitivity
and ordered downward- and upward-stability w.r.t. the minimal preorder for G. In order
to prove faithfulness, one needs to show that if two sets of nodes are not separated given a
third set then they are not independent either.
For example, we have that l̸⊥j | l2. Notice that this is a case where there is no path that
connects l and j. In order to show that l̸⊥
⊥j | l2, (as in the proof of the above theorem) we
start from l = l1 and move towards j = l7 via the connecting walk ⟨l1, l2, l3, l4, l5, l6, l7⟩given
l2.
15

l=l1
l2
l4
l5
l  =l6
3
j=l7
Figure 2: An undirected (LWF) chain graph.
We abbreviate singleton-transitivity, ordered upward-stability, and ordered downward
stability by “st”, “ous”, and “ods” respectively. We write the arguments in a condensed
from.
For example, the ﬁrst implication (on the left hand side) says that l1̸⊥
⊥l2 and
l2̸⊥
⊥l3, using singleton-transitivity, imply that either l1̸⊥
⊥l3 or l1̸⊥
⊥l3 | l2 ; but now ordered
downward-stability implies that we must have l1̸⊥
⊥l3 | l2.
l1̸⊥
⊥l2
l1̸⊥
⊥l3
l4̸⊥
⊥l5 | l2
l1̸⊥
⊥l5 | {l2, l4}
l6̸⊥
⊥l7 | l2
l1̸⊥
⊥l7 | {l2, l6}
st
⇒or
⇓ods
st
⇒
or
⇓ous
st
⇒
or
⇓ous
l2̸⊥
⊥l3
l1̸⊥
⊥l3 | l2
l1̸⊥
⊥l4 | l2
l1̸⊥
⊥l5 | l2
l1̸⊥
⊥l6 | l2
l1̸⊥
⊥l7 | l2.
st
⇒
or
⇑ous
st
⇒
or
⇑ous
l3̸⊥
⊥l4 | l2
l1̸⊥
⊥l3 | {l2, l3}
l5̸⊥
⊥l6 | l2
l1̸⊥
⊥l6 | {l2, l5}
The following example shows how singleton-transitivity and ordered stabilities are necessary
for faithfulness.
Example 2 Consider the DAG G in Fig. 3. If an independence model J is minimally
Markov to G then we must have ⟨h, k | {j, l}⟩∈J and ⟨j, l | k⟩∈J . Now, in violation of
faithfulness, if only ⟨h, k | ∅⟩∈J in addition to these holds then upward-stability is violated
since for j > h, ⟨h, k | j⟩∈J must hold. If, in violation of faithfulness, only ⟨h, k | j⟩∈
J in addition to the original statements holds then singleton-transitivity is violated since
⟨h, k | j⟩∈J and ⟨h, k | {j, l}⟩∈J must imply either ⟨h, l | j⟩∈J or ⟨k, l | j⟩∈J , which
are both impossible due to minimality since h, l and k, l are adjacent in G.
l
j
h
k
Figure 3: A DAG.
Without assuming the Markov assumption we have the following:
Theorem 17 Let J be an independence model deﬁned over V . It then holds that J is
graphical if and only if
16

1. J is a singleton-transitive compositional graphoid; and
2. there exists a J -compatible preorder ≲over V w.r.t. which J satisﬁes ordered downward-
and upward-stability.
In addition, if 1 and 2 hold then J is faithful to G(J , ≲).
Proof
(⇒) follows from Propositions 1, 2, and 12, and the fact that there is always an
AnG that is Markov equivalent to a given CMG. To prove (⇐) and the last statement of the
theorem, consider G(J , ≲). Theorem 15 implies that J is minimally Markov to G(J , ≲).
This together with the J -compatibility of the preorder, using Proposition 16, implies that
J and G(J , ≲) are faithful.
Hence, for probability distributions, we have the following characterization:
Corollary 18 Let P be a probability distribution deﬁned over {Xα}α∈V . It then holds that
P is graphical if and only if
1. J (P) satisﬁes intersection, composition, and singleton-transitivity; and
2. there exists a P-compatible preorder ≲over V w.r.t. which J (P) satisﬁes ordered
downward- and upward-stability.
In addition, if 1 and 2 hold then P is faithful to G(P, ≲).
In fact, we have shown in Theorem 17 that if J is graphical then for every J -compatible
preorder w.r.t. which J satisﬁes ordered downward- and upward-stability, G(J , ≲) is a
graph that is faithful to J . A consequence of Proposition 13 implies that such graphs (that
is G = G(J , ≲) for some preorder ≲w.r.t. which J satisﬁes ordered downward- and upward-
stability) constitute the set of all graphs that are faithful to J , that is a Markov equivalence
class of graphs whose members are faithful to J . Every member of the equivalence class
corresponds to a diﬀerent preorder w.r.t. which J satisﬁes ordered downward- and upward-
stability. This equivalence set can be represented by one member (a graph with the least
number of arrowheads) similar to the idea of a CPDAG for the Markov equivalence class of
DAGs (see Spirtes et al. 2000), but we do not go through the details of this here.
Of course, if the goal is to verify whether J and a given G are faithful then we can use
the following corollary:
Corollary 19 Let J be an independence model deﬁned over V , and G an AnG with node
set V . It then holds that if
1. J is a singleton-transitive compositional graphoid; and
2. J satisﬁes ordered downward- and upward-stability w.r.t. the minimal preorder for G,
then J and G are faithful.
It is also important to note that singleton-transitivity and ordered upward or downward-
stability are necessary in the sense that they are not implied by one another, although there
are diﬀerent ways to axiomatize singleton-transitive compositional graphoids that satisfy
ordered upward- and downward-stability.
If P is Gaussian then we have the following:
17

Corollary 20 Let P be regular Gaussian distribution. It then holds that P is graphical
if and only if there exists a P-compatible preorder ≲w.r.t. which J (P) satisﬁes ordered
downward- and upward-stability.
Proof The proof follows from the fact that regular Gaussian distributions satisfy intersec-
tion, composition, and singleton-transitivity.
6. Specialization to Subclasses
The deﬁnitions and results presented in this paper can be specialized to any subclass of
CMGs including ancestral graphs and LWF chain graphs. However, here we only focus on
the three of the most used classes of undirected (concentration), bidirected (covariance),
and directed acyclic graphs.
6.1 Specialization to Undirected and Bidirected Graphs
For connected UGs, every two nodes are in the same equivalence class, and for BGs every
two nodes are incomparable; hence, the minimal (pre)ordering is trivial and uninteresting
in these cases. More precisely, ordered upward- and downward-stabilities can be specialized
for these two types of trivial preordering:
8a. if ⟨i, j | C⟩∈J then ⟨i, j | C ∪{k}⟩∈J for every k ∈V \ {i, j} (upward-stability);
9a. if ⟨i, j | C⟩∈J then ⟨i, j | C \ {k}⟩∈J for every k ∈V \ {i, j} (downward-stability).
Proposition 21 An independence model J satisﬁes ordered upward- and downward-stability
(8) and (9) w.r.t. the minimal preorder if and only if,
1. for connected undirected graphs, it satisﬁes upward-stability (8a);
2. for bidirected graphs, it satisﬁes downward-stability (9a).
In addition, if, for undirected graphs, J satisﬁes (8a) then it satisﬁes (8).
Proof
The proof of 1 and 2 are straightforward since in 1 all nodes are in the same
equivalence class, and in 2 all nodes are incomparable. The second part is trivial.
Analogous to Proposition 12, it is also straightforward to show the following:
Proposition 22 It holds that
1. for an undirected graph G, J (G) satisﬁes upward-stability;
2. for a bidirected graph G, J (G) satisﬁes downward-stability.
For UGs and BGs, denote the unique and trivial valid preorders by ≲∗
u and ≲∗
b respectively.
For UGs, G∗
u(J ) := G(J , ≲∗
u) = sk(J ), whereas for BGs, G∗
b(J ) := G(J , ≲∗
b) is sk(J ) with
all edges directed to be bidirected. Another way to construct induced UGs and BGs by
J is to construct them based on their corresponding pairwise Markov property, that is to
connect every pair of nodes i and j if ⟨i, j | V \ {i, j}⟩/∈J for UGs, and if ⟨i, j | ∅⟩/∈J for
BGs. Denote these graphs by Gu(J ) and Gb(J ) respectively. We then have the following:
18

Proposition 23 It holds that,
1. for undirected graphs, G∗
u(J ) = Gu(J ) if J satisﬁes upward-stability;
2. for bidirected graphs, G∗
b(J ) = Gb(J ) if J satisﬁes downward-stability.
For upward- and downward-stability, we also have the following observation:
Lemma 24 For an independence model J the following holds:
1. If J is a semi-graphoid and satisﬁes upward-stability then J satisﬁes composition.
2. If J is a semi-graphoid and satisﬁes downward-stability then J satisﬁes intersection.
Proof
1. Suppose that ⟨A, B | C⟩∈J and ⟨A, D | C⟩∈J . By decomposition, it holds,
for i ∈A, j ∈B, and k ∈D, that ⟨i, j | C⟩∈J and ⟨i, k | C⟩∈J . By upward-stability,
we obtain ⟨i, j | C ∪{k}⟩∈J . Contraction implies ⟨i, {j, k} | C⟩∈J . By an inductive
argument, we obtain the result.
2. Suppose that ⟨A, B | C ∪D⟩∈J and ⟨A, D | C ∪B⟩∈J .
By decomposition, it
holds, for i ∈A, j ∈B, and k ∈D, that ⟨i, j | C ∪{k}⟩∈J and ⟨i, k | C ∪{j}⟩∈J . By
downward-stability, we obtain ⟨i, k | C⟩∈J . Contraction implies ⟨i, {j, k} | C⟩∈J . By an
inductive argument, we obtain the result.
Lemma 25 Let J be an independence model, and suppose that J is a graphoid. It then
holds that J satisﬁes ordered downward-stability (9) w.r.t. the minimal preorder for Gu(J ).
Proof
By deﬁnition, we know that J is pairwise Markov to Gu(J ). It is known that
under graphoid, this implies that J is Markov to Gu(J ); see Pearl (1988). Now suppose
that ⟨i, j | C⟩∈J . The only applicable k in the deﬁnition of (9) is not in the same connected
component as that of i or j. Hence, since i ⊥j | C \ {k}, by the global Markov property, it
holds that ⟨i, j | C \ {k}⟩∈J .
As a consequence of Theorem 15, we have the following for UGs and BGs:
Corollary 26 It holds that
1. if J is a graphoid and satisﬁes upward-stability then J is minimally Markov to the
undirected graph Gu(J );
2. if J is a compositional semi-graphoid and satisﬁes downward-stability then J is min-
imally Markov to the bidirected graph Gb(J ).
Proof The proof follows from Propositions 23 and 21, and Lemmas 24 and 25.
For other classes of graphs, the preordering (or ordering) of nodes (and consequently random
variables) is necessary since the conditioning set C(i, j) for the pairwise Markov property
depends on the preordering of the variables. This implies that in general one cannot con-
struct more than the skeleton of graphs based on the pairwise Markov property if there is
no given preordering.
Proposition 16 specializes to the following two corollaries:
19

Corollary 27 Suppose that an independence model J is Markov to Gu(J ). Then J and
Gu(J ) are faithful if and only if J satisﬁes singleton-transitivity and upward-stability.
Proof The proof follows from Propositions 21, 22, and 23, and Lemma 25.
Similarly, for BGs, we have the following:
Corollary 28 Suppose that an independence model J is Markov to Gb(J ). Then J and
Gb(J ) are faithful if and only if J satisﬁes singleton-transitivity and downward-stability.
The main conditions for an independence model to be faithful to a UG or BG (consequence
of Theorem 17) are as follows; see also Theorem 3 of Pearl and Paz (1985) for a similar
result for UGs:
Corollary 29 Let J be an independence model deﬁned over V . It then holds that J is
faithful to an undirected graph if and only if it is an upward-stable singleton-transitive
graphoid. In addition, if the conditions hold then J is faithful to Gu(J ).
Proof The proof follows from Propositions 21, 22, and 23, and Lemmas 24 and 25.
Corollary 30 Let J be an independence model deﬁned over V . It then holds that J is
faithful to a bidirected graph if and only if it is a downward-stable singleton-transitive com-
positional semi-graphoid. In addition, if the conditions hold then J is faithful to Gb(J ).
Therefore, a probability distribution is faithful to an undirected graph if and only if it
satisﬁes intersection, singleton-transitivity, and upward-stability; and to a bidirected graph
if and only if it satisﬁes composition, singleton-transitivity, and downward-stability.
Finally, as a consequence of Corollary 20, we have the following:
Corollary 31 Let P be a regular Gaussian distribution. It then holds that P being faithful
to an undirected graph is equivalent to it satisfying upward-stability; and P being faithful to
a bidirected graph is equivalent to it satisfying downward-stability.
6.2 Specialization to Directed Acyclic Graphs
For DAGs, the valid preorder specializes to a valid (partial) order since there are no lines in
the graph: If i
≻j then i > j. In the minimal order for a DAG, two nodes are incomparable
if and only if neither is an ancestor of the other. Therefore, we deﬁne ordered stabilities
w.r.t. ordering ≤for DAGs:
8b. if ⟨i, j | C⟩∈J then ⟨i, j | C ∪{k}⟩∈J for every k ∈V \ {i, j} such that l < k for
some l ∈{i, j} (ordered upward-stability);
9b. if ⟨i, j | C⟩∈J then ⟨i, j | C \ {k}⟩∈J for every k ∈V \ {i, j} such that l ̸< k for
every l ∈{i, j} ∪C \ {k} (ordered downward-stability).
As a consequence of Proposition 12, we have the following:
Corollary 32 For a directed acyclic graph G, the induced independence model by d-separation
J (G) satisﬁes ordered upward- and downward-stability (8b) and (9b) w.r.t. the minimal or-
der for G.
20

As a consequence of Theorem 15, and for G(J , ≤), the DAG obtained by directing the
edges of sk(J ) based on the order ≤, we have the following:
Corollary 33 Suppose, for an independence model J over V , that
1. J is a compositional graphoid; and
2. there exists a J -compatible order ≤over V w.r.t. which J satisﬁes ordered downward-
and upward-stability, (8b) and (9b).
Then J is minimally Markov to the directed acyclic graph G(J , ≤).
The main conditions for an independence model to be faithful to a DAG (consequence of
Theorem 17) is as follows:
Corollary 34 Let J be an independence model deﬁned over V . It then holds that J is
faithful to a directed acyclic graph G if and only if
1. J is a singleton-transitive compositional graphoid; and
2. there exists a J -compatible order ≤over V w.r.t. which J satisﬁes ordered downward-
and upward-stability, (8b) and (9b).
In addition, if the conditions hold then J is faithful to G(J , ≤).
For a probability distribution P, the ﬁrst condition of the above corollary simpliﬁes to that
P satisﬁes intersection, composition, and singleton-transitivity.
7. Comparison to the Results in the Literature
All results in the literature concerning faithfulness of certain probability distributions and
certain types of graphs can be considered corollaries (or examples) of Theorem 17. Here we
verify this for some of the more well-known or interesting results. For brevity, we leave out
some interesting results such as faithfulness of Gaussian and discrete distributions and LWF
chain graphs; see Pe˜na (2011) and Pe˜na (2009); Studen´y and Bouckaert (1998) respectively.
7.1 Faithfulness of MTP2 Distributions and Undirected Graphs
Multivariate totally positive of order 2 (MTP2) distributions (Karlin and Rinott, 1980) are
distributions whose density f is MTP2, that is f(x)f(y) ≤f(x ∧y)f(x ∨y), for all vectors
x, y, where x∧y = (min(x1, y1), . . . , min(xm, ym)) and x∨y = (max(x1, y1), . . . , max(xm, ym)).
In Fallat et al. (2017), it was shown that when an MTP2 distribution P is a graphoid, it
holds that P and what we denote here by Gu(P) are faithful. It is known that MTP2 dis-
tributions satisfy both singleton-transitivity and upward-stability, but not necessarily the
intersection property; see Fallat et al. (2017). Hence, this result is a direct implication of
Corollary 29.
21

7.2 Faithfulness of Gaussian Distributions and Undirected Graphs
Lnˇeniˇcka and Mat´uˇs (2007) provides regular Gaussian distributions that are faithful to any
undirected graph; see Corollary 3 of the mentioned paper. In order to do so, given an
undirected graph G = (V, E), they provide the following matrix AG,ǫ, which acts as the
covariance matrix of a Gaussian distribution that is faithful to G:
AG,ǫ =



1
if i = j,
ǫ
if i ̸= j and i and j are adjacent in G,
0
otherwise,
where i, j ∈V .
It is known that, for suﬃciently small ǫ > 0, the corresponding Gaussian distribution
is regular, and by Corollary 31, we only need to show that it satisﬁes upward-stability.
It is straightforward to show that for suﬃciently small ǫ > 0, the inverse of AG,ǫ, which
is the concentration matrix of the Gaussian distribution, is an M-matrix, that is all its
on-diagonal elements are positive and all its oﬀ-diagonal elements are non-positive. This is
equivalent to the Gaussian distribution being MTP2; see Karlin and Rinott (1983). Hence,
upward-stability is satisﬁed as discussed above.
7.3 Unfaithfulness of Certain Gaussian Distributions and Undirected Graphs
and DAGs
There are many examples in the literature for, and in fact it is easy to construct examples
of, probability distributions that are not faithful to undirected graphs; for one of the ﬁrst
observations of this behaviour in a data set, see Example 4 of Cox and Wermuth (1993).
As a constructed example, let us discuss Example 1 of Soh and Tatikonda (2014), which
provided the Gaussian distribution for X = (X1, X2, X3, X4) with zero mean and positive
deﬁnite covariance matrix
Σ =


3
2
1
2
2
4
2
1
1
2
7
1
2
1
1
6

.
It can be seen that the concentration matrix Σ−1 has no zero entries, but X1 ⊥
⊥X3 | X2 since
Σ13 = Σ12Σ−1
22 Σ23. Hence, the distribution and its complete skeleton are not faithful. This
is clearly a consequence of the violation of upward-stability.
For DAGs too, it is easy to construct or observe examples where faithfulness is violated.
One of the simplest of such examples, is what is related to the so-called “transitivity of
causation” in philosophical causality; see, for example, Ramsey et al. (2006), where the goal
is to show how the PC algorithm (Spirtes et al., 2000) errs. Consider the graph a
≻b
≻c,
where a ⊥
⊥c and a ⊥
⊥c | b. This, in our language, is a clear violation of singleton-transitivity
since the graph implies that a, b and b, c are always dependent.
7.4 Faithfulness of Gaussian and Discrete Distributions and DAGs
It was shown in Meek (1995) that, in certain measure-theoretic senses, almost all the regular
Gaussian and discrete distributions that are Markov to a given DAG are faithful to it. It
22

is known, for DAGs, that the global Markov property is equivalent to the factorization
property (see Lauritzen 1996), which holds if the joint density can factorize as follows:
fV (x) =
Y
v∈V
fV (xv | xpa(v)).
Since Gaussian and discrete distributions satisfy singleton-transitivity, in order to prove the
result, one needs to show that ordered upward- and downward-stabilities, (8b) and (9b), are
satisﬁed for almost all distributions that factorize w.r.t. the DAG. We refrain from showing
this explicitly here due to technicality of the proof, but the general idea is similar to the
proofs in Appendix B of Meek (1995): For (9b), we have that the probabilistic conditional
independence holds for the marginal probability over (i, j, C, k), and we need to exploit the
factorization to show that the same conditional independence formula holds for the marginal
probability over (i, j, C) when k /∈an({i, j} ∪C. In this case the corresponding resulting
polynomials are much simpler than those of Meek (1995) since one needs to consider extra
marginalization over only one variable k. For (8b), we will need to prove the other direction
in a similar fashion.
7.5 Faithfulness of Gaussian Distributions and Ancestral Graphs
The main goal of Richardson and Spirtes (2002) is to capture the conditional independence
structure of a DAG model after marginalization and conditioning; see also Sadeghi (2013).
This was done by introducing the class of AGs, and it was shown that every AG is prob-
abilistic. In fact, there is a Gaussian distribution faithful to any AG, which is indeed the
Gaussian distribution faithful to a DAG after marginalization and conditioning; see Theo-
rem 7.5 of this paper.
However, by using our results, without going through the standard theory of ancestral
graphs, it is possible to show that distributions that are faithful to a DAG are graphical after
marginalization and conditioning: In order to do so, we use the notation in Sadeghi (2013),
for an independence model J , to deﬁne the independence model after marginalization over
M and conditioning on C, denoted by α(J ; M, C), for disjoint subsets M and C of V :
α(J ; M, C) = {⟨A, B | D⟩: ⟨A, B | D ∪C⟩∈J and (A ∪B ∪D) ∩(M ∪C) = ∅}.
First, we show that α(J ; M, C) satisﬁes condition 1 of Theorem 17.
Proposition 35 If J satisﬁes singleton-transitivity, intersection, and composition then so
does α(J ; M, C).
Proof For composition, assume that ⟨A, B | C′⟩∈α(J ; M, C) and ⟨A, D | C′⟩∈α(J ; M, C).
By deﬁnition, we have ⟨A, B | C′ ∪C⟩∈J and ⟨A, D | C′ ∪C⟩∈J . Composition for J
implies ⟨A, B ∪D | C′ ∪C⟩∈J . Therefore, ⟨A, B ∪D | C′⟩∈α(J ; M, C). Proof of the
others is similar to this one and as straightforward.
Denote by α(G; M, C), the generated AG from the DAG G and M and C two disjoint
subsets of its node set that are marginalized over and conditioned on respectively. Here
we do not go through the generating process of AGs from DAGs; for more details, see
Richardson and Spirtes (2002); Sadeghi (2013). Without explicitly using the theory of sta-
bility under marginalization and conditioning for AGs, we show the following.
23

Proposition 36 If J and a DAG G are faithful then α(J ; M, C) and the ancestral graph
α(G; M, C) are faithful.
Proof
By Proposition 35, we only need to show that w.r.t. the ordering associated with
α(G; M, C), condition 2 of Theorem 17 is also satisﬁed by α(J ; M, C).
To prove ordered upward-stability, assume that ⟨i, j | C′ ∪{k}⟩/∈α(J ; M, C), where k
is an anterior of a node l, l ∈{i, j} or connected by lines to l, l ∈C′ in H = α(G; M, C).
We have that ⟨i, j | C ∪C′ ∪{k}⟩/∈J . Since J and G are faithful, there is a connecting
walk π between i and j given C ∪C′ ∪{k}. If k is not on π, π is connecting given C ∪C′.
Otherwise, it holds that k must be a collider on π. By Lemma 2 in Sadeghi (2013), k is in
ancestor of a node l′ ∈{i, j} ∪C ∪C′. By replacing the subwalk of π from l′ to k by the
directed path from k to l′ if l′ ∈{i, j}, or by adding the directed path from k to l′ plus
the reverse from l′ to k to π if l′ ∈C ∪C′, we conclude that ⟨i, j | C ∪C′⟩/∈J . Hence,
⟨i, j | C′⟩/∈α(J ; M, C).
To prove ordered downward-stability, assume that ⟨i, j | C′ \ {k}⟩/∈α(J ; M, C), where
k ∈C′ is not an anterior of any node l ∈{i, j}∪C′ in H. We have that ⟨i, j | C∪C′\{k}⟩/∈J .
Since J and G are faithful, there is a connecting walk π between i and j given C ∪C′ \{k}.
Node k cannot be on π since k must be a non-collider and consequently an ancestor of a
node in {i, j} ∪C ∪C′ in G, which by Lemma 3 in Sadeghi (2013), implies that k ∈an(l)
in H. Hence, k is not on π, and consequently π is connecting given C ∪C′. We conclude
that ⟨i, j | C ∪C′⟩/∈J . Hence, ⟨i, j | C′⟩/∈α(J ; M, C).
This shows that, for every AG, there is a distribution faithful to it since, for every AG,
there is a DAG that, after marginalization and conditioning, results in the given AG.
8. Summary and Future Work
We provided suﬃcient and necessary conditions for an independence model, and conse-
quently a probability distribution, to be faithful to a chain mixed graph. All the deﬁnitions
and results concerning independence models are true for probabilistic independence mod-
els. The conditions can be divided into two main categories: 1) Those that ensure that
the distribution is Markov to a graph whose skeleton is the same as the skeleton of the
distribution — these properties are namely intersection, composition, and ordered upward-
and downward-stabilities. If the distribution is already pairwise Markov to the graph then
intersection and composition suﬃce. Ordered upward- and downward-stabilities direct the
edges of the skeleton of the distribution so that the pairwise Markov property is satisﬁed.
2) Those that ensure that a Markov distribution is also faithful to the graph. These are
singleton-transitivity and ordered upward- and downward-stabilities.
The type of preordering or preorderings w.r.t. which the distribution satisﬁes ordered
upward- and downward-stabilities implies the type or types of graphs that are faithful to
the distribution.
In order to only deal with simpler classes of graphs, it is enough to
search through a more reﬁned set of preorderings determined by the conditions that graphs
of a speciﬁc class must satisfy.
It is indeed true that when the skeleton of the graph
or distribution is known, the preordering is equivalent to diﬀerent ways the edges of the
skeleton can be directed, but in principle the preordering of the variables is unrelated to
the skeleton of the distribution.
24

The conditions of faithfulness provided in this paper for probability distributions are
suﬃcient and necessary. Thus, based on these conditions many families of distributions can
be shown not to be suitable for graphical modeling. This also shows the importance of
Gaussian distributions in graphical models as the provided conditions (other than ordered
upward- and downward-stabilities) are clearly satisﬁed by the regular Gaussian distribu-
tions. In addition, these conditions help those who devise new parametric models to ensure
that their models satisfy the provided conditions for faithfulness.
It is clearly important to study the characteristics of distributions that satisfy these
conditions. The intersection property is well-studied and, in addition to positivity of the
density that has been known to be a suﬃcient condition, necessary and suﬃcient conditions
for a probabilistic independence to satisfy this property are known; see Peters (2015). For
composition and singleton-transitivity, more studies are needed; in particular, it would be
worthwhile to ﬁnd simple suﬃcient conditions for probability distributions in order to satisfy
these properties.
Another approach is to devise algorithms that test whether these conditions are satisﬁed
given data or an independence model. Indeed one can argue for an alternative approach to
determine whether a distribution is faithful to some graph: one ﬁrst applies the structure
learning algorithm (taking as input the distribution and outputting a graph) and then one
tests whether the separation relationships in the found graph correspond to the conditional
indepedencies in the distribution. However, testing our conditions are much more eﬃcient.
As an example, in the case of undirected graphs and Gaussian distributions, by our results,
one only needs to test upward-stability for non-adjacent single elements i and j (starting
with a minimal node cut-set as the conditioning set) rather than testing all global conditional
independencies implied by the graph.
As another algorithmic consequence that the results in this paper may prompt, they
lead to a constraint-based structural learning algorithm (as opposed to score-based, for
example, Chickering (2003)) most similar to the Fast Causal Inference (FCI) algorithm
(Spirtes et al., 2000) — it ﬁnds the skeleton of the graph and then explores directions of
the edges of the graph on the skeleton. Directing the edges of the skeleton is performed
based on an exploitation of the preordering of the variables (and consequently the nodes
of the graph) so that w.r.t. such a preordering ordered upward- and downward-stabilities
are satisﬁed. This algorithm would have two advantages over the known constraint-based
algorithms in the literature: Firstly, it is devised for a larger class of AnGs, which can
be thought of as learning the LWF chain graphs with hidden and selection variables; see
Sadeghi (2016). Secondly, the exploitation of ordered upward- and downward-stability for
structural learning can be combined with actually testing whether these conditions are
satisﬁed, and the theory in the paper ensures the faithfulness of the generated graphs. We
plan on providing the details of this algorithm elsewhere.
When dealing with data, another issue is that obtaining a faithful graph is very sensi-
tive to hypothesis testing errors for inferring the independence statements from data; see
Uhler et al. (2013). The concept of strong faithfulness (Zhang and Spirtes, 2003) has been
suggested for the Gaussian case in order to deal with this issue. Although strong faithful-
ness, by nature, does not seem to be characterizable in this way, it is an interesting problem
to study which of the equivalent conditions to faithfulness are more prone to such sensitivity.
25

Acknowledgments
The original idea of this paper was inspired by discussions at the American Institute of
Mathematics workshop “Positivity, Graphical Models, and the Modeling of Complex Mul-
tivariate Dependencies” in October 2014. The author thanks the AIM and NSF for their
support of the workshop and is indebted to other participants of the discussion group, es-
pecially to Shaun Fallat, Steﬀen Lauritzen, Nanny Wermuth, and Piotr Zwiernik for follow-
up discussions. The author is also grateful to Rasmus Petersen for valuable discussions.
This work was partly supported by grant #FA9550-12-1-0392 from the U.S. Air Force Of-
ﬁce of Scientiﬁc Research (AFOSR) and the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency
(DARPA).
References
R. Ayesha Ali, Thomas S. Richardson, and Peter Spirtes. Markov equivalence for ancestral
graphs. Annals of Statistics, 37(5B):2808–2837, 2009.
Steen A. Andersson, David Madigan, and Michael D. Perlman. Alternative Markov prop-
erties for chain graphs. Scandinavian Journal of Statistics, 28:33–85, 2001.
David Maxwell Chickering. Optimal structure identiﬁcation with greedy search. Journal of
Machine Learning Research, 3:507–554, 2003.
Peter Cliﬀord. Markov random ﬁelds in statistics. In G. R. Grimmett and D. J. A. Welsh,
editors, Disorder in Physical Systems: A Volume in Honour of John M. Hammersley,
pages 19–32. Oxford University Press, 1990.
David R. Cox and Nanny Wermuth. Linear dependencies represented by chain graphs (with
discussion). Statistical Science, 8(3):204–218; 247–277, 1993.
John N. Darroch, Steﬀen L. Lauritzen, and Terry P. Speed. Markov ﬁelds and log-linear
interaction models for contingency tables. Annals of Statistics, 8:522–539, 1980.
A. Philip Dawid. Conditional independence in statistical theory (with discussion). Journal
of the Royal Statistical Society Series B, 41(1):1–31, 1979.
Mathias Drton and Thomas S. Richardson. Binary models for maginal independence. Jour-
nal of the Royal Statistical Society Series B, 41(2):287–309, 2008.
Shaun Fallat, Steﬀen Lauritzen, Kayvan Sadeghi, Caroline Uhler, Nanny Wermuth, and
Piotr Zwiernik. Total positivity in Markov structures. Annals of Statistics., 45(3), 2017.
Morten Frydenberg. The chain graph Markov property. Scandinavian Journal of Statistics,
17:333–353, 1990.
Dan Geiger, Thomas S. Verma, and Judea Pearl. Identifying independence in Bayesian
networks. Networks, 20:507–534, 1990.
Clark Glymour, Richard Scheines, Peter Spirtes, and Kevin Kelly.
Discovering Causal
Structure. Academic Press, 1987.
26

Samuel Karlin and Yosef Rinott. Classes of orderings of measures and related correlation in-
equalities. I. Multivariate totally positive distributions. Journal of Multivariate Analysis,
10(4):467–498, 1980.
Samuel Karlin and Yosef Rinott. M-matrices as covariance matrices of multinormal distri-
butions. Linear Algebra and its Applications, 52:419 – 438, 1983.
G¨oran Kauermann. On a dualization of graphical Gaussian models. Scandinavian Journal
of Statistics, 23(1):105–116, 1996.
Harri Kiiveri, Terry P. Speed, and J. B. Carlin. Recursive causal models. Journal of the
Australian Mathematical Society, Series A, 36:30–52, 1984.
Steﬀen L. Lauritzen. Graphical Models. Clarendon Press, Oxford, United Kingdom, 1996.
Steﬀen L. Lauritzen and Kayvan Sadeghi. Unifying Markov properties for graphical models.
Annals of Statistics, To appear, 2017. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1608.05810.
Steﬀen L. Lauritzen and David J. Spiegelhalter.
Local computations with probabilities
on graphical structures and their application to expert systems. Journal of the Royal
Statistical Society, Series B, 50:157–224, 1988.
Steﬀen L. Lauritzen and Nanny Wermuth. Graphical models for association between vari-
ables, some of which are qualitative and some quantitative. Annals of Statistics, 17:31–57,
1989.
Radim Lnˇeniˇcka and Frantiˇsek Mat´uˇs. On Gaussian conditional independence structures.
Kybernetika, 43(3):327–342, 2007.
Christopher Meek. Strong completeness and faithfulness in Bayesian networks. In Proceed-
ings of the Eleventh Conference on Uncertainty in Artiﬁcial Intelligence, UAI’95, pages
411–418, San Francisco, CA, USA, 1995.
Richard E. Neapolitan. Learning Bayesian Networks. Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River,
NJ, USA, 2004.
Jose M. Pe˜na. Faithfulness in chain graphs: The discrete case. International Journal of
Approximate Reasoning, 50:1306–1313, 2009.
Jose M. Pe˜na.
Faithfulness in chain graphs: The Gaussian case.
In Proceedings of the
14th International Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Statistics (AISTATS 2011),
volume 15, pages 588–599. JMLR.org, 2011.
Jose M. Pe˜na. Marginal AMP chain graphs. International Journal of Approximate Reason-
ing, 55:1185–1206, 2014.
Judea Pearl. Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent Systems : networks of plausible inference.
Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, San Mateo, CA, USA, 1988.
Judea Pearl. Causality: Models, Reasoning and Inference. Cambridge University Press,
New York, NY, USA, 2nd edition, 2009.
27

Judea Pearl and Azaria Paz. Graphoids: A Graph-based Logic for Reasoning about Relevance
Relations. University of California (Los Angeles). Computer Science Department, 1985.
Jonas Peters. On the intersection property of conditional independence and its application
to causal discovery. Journal of Causal Inference, 3:97–108, 2015.
Joseph Ramsey, Jiji Zhang, and Peter Spirtes.
Adjacency-faithfulness and conservative
causal inference. In UAI. AUAI Press, 2006.
Thomas Richardson. Markov properties for acyclic directed mixed graphs. Scandinavian
Journal of Statistics, 30(1):145–157, 2003.
Thomas S. Richardson and Peter Spirtes.
Ancestral graph Markov models.
Annals of
Statistics, 30(4):962–1030, 2002.
Kayvan Sadeghi. Stable mixed graphs. Bernoulli, 19(5(B)):2330–2358, 2013.
Kayvan Sadeghi. Marginalization and conditioning for LWF chain graphs. Annals of Statis-
tics, 44(4):1792–1816, 2016.
Kayvan Sadeghi and Steﬀen L. Lauritzen. Markov properties for mixed graphs. Bernoulli,,
20(2):676–696, 2014.
Bernd S.W. Schr¨oder. Ordered Sets: An Introduction. Birkh¨auser, Boston, 2003.
De W. Soh and Sekhar C. Tatikonda. Testing unfaithful Gaussian graphical models. In
Z. Ghahramani, M. Welling, C. Cortes, N.d. Lawrence, and K.q. Weinberger, editors,
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 27, pages 2681–2689. Curran Asso-
ciates, Inc., 2014.
Peter Spirtes, Clark Glymour, and Richard Scheines. Causation, Prediction, and Search.
MIT press, 2nd edition, 2000.
Daniel Steel. Homogeneity, selection, and the faithfulness condition. Minds and Machines,
16(3):303–317, 2006.
Milan Studen´y. Multiinformation and the problem of characterization of conditional inde-
pendence relations. Problems of Control and Information Theory, 18:3–16, 1989.
Milan Studen´y. Probabilistic Conditional Independence Structures. Springer-Verlag, Lon-
don, United Kingdom, 2005.
Milan Studen´y and Remco R. Bouckaert. On chain graph models for description of condi-
tional independence structures. Annals of Statistics, 26(4):1434–1495, 1998.
Caroline Uhler, Garvesh Raskutti, Peter B¨uhlmann, and Bin Yu. Geometry of the faithful-
ness assumption in causal inference. Annals of Statistics, 41(2):436–463, 2013.
Thomas Verma and Judea Pearl. On the equivalence of causal models. In Proceedings of the
Sixth Conference Annual Conference on Uncertainty in Artiﬁcial Intelligence (UAI-90),
pages 220–227, New York, NY, 1990.
28

Nanny Wermuth. Probability distributions with summary graph structure. Bernoulli, 17
(3):845–879, 2011.
Nanny Wermuth and David R. Cox.
On association models deﬁned over independence
graphs. Bernoulli, 4:477–495, 1998.
Nanny Wermuth and Kayvan Sadeghi. Sequences of regressions and their independences.
TEST, 21(2):215–252 and 274–279, 2012.
Nanny Wermuth, Giovanni M. Marchetti, and David R. Cox. Triangular systems for sym-
metric binary variables. Electronic Journal of Statistics, 3:932–955, 2009.
James Woodward. Causal independence and faithfulness. Multivariate Behavioral Research,
33(1):129–148, 1998.
Jiji Zhang and Peter Spirtes. Strong faithfulness and uniform consistency in causal inference.
In Proceedings of the Nineteenth Conference on Uncertainty in Artiﬁcial Intelligence,
UAI’03, 2003.
Jiji Zhang and Peter Spirtes. Detection of unfaithfulness and robust causal inference. Minds
and Machines, 18(2):239–271, 2008.
29

