The expanding universe: an introduction
Lecture at the WE Heraeus Summer School
“Astronomy from Four Perspectives”, Heidelberg
Markus P¨ossel, Haus der Astronomie
28 August 2017
Contents
1
Introduction
3
2
Length scales and the realm of cosmology
4
3
General relativity
6
3.1
Equivalence principle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.2
Tidal forces and the limits of the equivalence principle . . . . . .
8
3.3
The equivalence principle, reformulated
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.4
Tidal deformations and attraction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.5
Newtonian limit and Einstein’s equation(s)
. . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.6
What we need from general relativity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4
A homogeneous, isotropic, expanding universe
15
4.1
What can change in a homogeneous universe? . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.2
Scale-factor expansion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.3
Cosmic time t and proper distance d . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5
The Hubble relation
23
5.1
Free-falling galaxies and the Doppler eﬀect
. . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5.2
Measuring astronomical distances . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.3
Measuring the Hubble constant . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.4
Approximating a(t) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
6
Consequences of scale-factor expansion
34
6.1
Diluting the universe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
6.2
Redshifting photons
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
6.3
Light propagation in an expanding universe . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
6.4
Cosmological redshift revisited
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
6.5
Redshift drift . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
6.6
The geometry of space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
6.7
Luminosity, apparent brightness, and distance . . . . . . . . . . .
49
6.8
Luminosity distance and distance moduli
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
1
arXiv:1712.10315v1  [gr-qc]  29 Dec 2017

7
Dynamics: how a(t) changes over (cosmic) time
51
7.1
Friedmann’s equations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
7.2
Filling the universe with diﬀerent kinds of matter . . . . . . . . .
55
7.3
Dimensionless Friedmann equation and light-travel distance . . .
56
7.4
Densities and geometry
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
7.5
Diﬀerent eras of cosmic history; the Big Bang singularity
. . . .
60
7.6
Expansion and collapse
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
7.7
Explicit solutions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
8
Consequences of cosmic evolution
69
8.1
Horizons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
8.2
Do galaxies, humans, atoms expand? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
8.3
The fate of our own universe
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
8.4
The generalized redshift-distance relation
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
8.5
Comparing distances . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
9
The Redshift-distance diagram revisited
83
10 Conclusions
84
11 Bibliography
86
Index
93
A Fitting the supernova data
97
B What we need from special relativity
98
B.1
Inertial reference frames . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
98
B.2
Relativity principle and constant light speed . . . . . . . . . . . .
99
B.3
Transformations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 100
B.4
Time dilation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101
B.5
Doppler eﬀect . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 102
B.6
E = mc2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104
B.7
Energy, momentum, and pressure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 106
Acknowledgements
107
2

1
Introduction
Modern cosmology is based on general relativity. Teaching general relativity is
a challenge — if you go all the way, you will need mathematical concepts so
advanced that they are not even included in the usual mathematics courses for
students of physics. Typical graduate-level lectures on general relativity thus
need to include sections introducing the necessary mathematical formalism,
notably concepts from diﬀerential geometry.
For introducing general relativity to undergraduates, or even in a high school
setting, simpliﬁcations are necessary, leading to the central question: in general
relativity, how far can you go without the full formalism? In this lecture, we will
ask this question in the context of cosmology: Which aspects of the expanding
universe, of the modern cosmological models, can you understand without using
the formalism of general relativity?
On the simplest level, this brings us to the various models commonly used
to explain cosmic expansion – the expanding rubber balloon, the linear rubber
band as a one-dimensional universe, and the raisin cake (Eddington 1930, Lotze
1995, Price and Grover 2001, Fraknoi 1995, Strauss 2016). Used judiciously,
these models can convey a basic understanding of what it means for a universe
to be expanding.
The main focus of this lecture is on quantitative results,
though: How many of the calculations of standard cosmology can we reproduce
without employing the formalism of general relativity?
As it turns out, in the context of cosmology, the basic tenets of general
relativity can take you quite a long way. Our goal in these lecture notes will be to
understand the basic predictions of the Friedmann-Lemaˆıtre-Robertson-Walker
models, expanding homogeneous universes that form the backbone of the Big
Bang models of modern cosmology, along these lines. More speciﬁcally, our
goal will be to understand one of the most important links between cosmological
models and astronomical observations: the generalized Hubble diagram, linking
the distances of certain standard candles (that is, objects of known brightness)
and their redshifts. Figure 1 shows an example (namely ﬁgure 4 in Suzuki et
al. 2012).
How come that all these sources lie along this particular curve? How do we
derive the curve’s shape, and how is it linked to fundamental properties of the
universe?
The following notes have grown out of a lecture with the title “Introducing
the expanding universe without using the concept of a spacetime metric,” which
I held on 28 August 2017 at Haus der Astronomie, at our WE Heraeus Sum-
mer School “Astronomy from four perspectives,” a summer school for teachers,
students training to be teachers, astronomers and astronomy students from
Heidelberg, Padova, Jena, and Florence. This year’s theme was “The Dark
Universe,” an exploration of dark matter and dark energy. An edited version
of the lecture can be found on YouTube at
http://youtu.be/gA-0C-88WbE
The aim of the lecture was to give a basic overview of modern cosmological
models, in order to prepare our participants for more specialized lectures and
3

0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
Redshift
32
34
36
38
40
42
44
46
Distance Modulus
Hamuy et al. (1996)
Krisciunas et al. (2005)
Riess et al. (1999)
Jha et al. (2006)
Kowalski et al. (2008) (SCP)
Hicken et al. (2009)
Contreras et al. (2010)
Holtzman et al. (2009)
Riess et al. (1998) + HZT
Perlmutter et al. (1999) (SCP)
Barris et al. (2004)
Amanullah et al. (2008) (SCP)
Knop et al. (2003) (SCP)
Astier et al. (2006)
Miknaitis et al. (2007)
Tonry et al. (2003)
Riess et al. (2007)
Amanullah et al. (2010) (SCP)
Cluster Search (SCP)
Figure 1: Distance moduli plotted against redshift for various standard candles. Figure 4 in
Suzuki et al. 2012, available at http://www-supernova.lbl.gov/
tutorials. The lecture’s goal of making cosmology understandable without in-
troducing the underlying formalism was motivated both by the diverse back-
grounds of the listeners and by the summer school’s underlying goal of making
modern astronomical research accessible to high school students.
On the part of the reader, I assume familiarity with basic classical me-
chanics, including Newton’s law of gravity, and the basics of special relativity;
in order to make the text more accessible, the content we need from special
relativity is summarised in appendix B.
2
Length scales and the realm of cosmology
Seen naively, cosmology is the most ambitious science. We aim to understand
the universe as a whole! The universe, as everyday experience shows, is rather
complex, with many diﬀerent interesting scales, comprising everything from
insects via humans, city-scale structures, moons, planets, stars, and galaxies
– and that list doesn’t even list all the interesting stuﬀat the submicroscopic
level!
Of course, cosmology is really much simpler than that (although still very
ambitious!). We do what all astronomers and physicists do: We concentrate
on a speciﬁc subset of phenomena, and formulate simpliﬁed models to describe
what is happening in that subset — do describe the physical objects involved,
and their interactions.
In the case of cosmology, the deﬁning feature is scale. Figure 3 shows the
various length scales, from the smallest objects we can still see with the naked
4

Figure 2: Some examples of what would need to be included, were we to try to understand
the universe at all scales. Image credit: C. Liefke, M. P¨ossel, R. P¨ossel, NASA, NASA/E-
SA/CFHT/NOAO, ESA/NASA/SOHO
eye all the way up to galaxies and beyond.
As cosmologists, when we formulate our simplest large-scale models, we
leave the bugs to the entomologists, cats to the Internet community, humans
to the life scientists, psychologists and sociologists, and even within astronomy,
we are not all that interested in planets, stars, and the structure of galaxies.
100 m
105 m
1010 m
1015 m
1020 m
1025 m
10−15 ly
10−10 ly
10−5 ly
100 ly
105 ly
1010 ly
Insects
Cats
Humans
Cities
Planets
Stars
Galaxies
Figure 3: Diﬀerent length scales
In large-scale models, galaxies are something akin to the point particles of
classical mechanics: structureless objects whose only interesting properties are
position, motion, and (total) mass.
Our coarse, large-scale view also determines the dominant interaction we
shall model.
It’s gravity.
As you learn in Astronomy 101, this is not be-
cause gravity is very strong. On the contrary, if you look at the elementary
constituents of ordinary matter, namely at protons, atomic nuclei, and elec-
trons, the other fundamental interactions are much stronger than gravity —
the electrostatic attraction between an electron and a proton, for instance, is
a whopping 1039 stronger than their mutual gravitational attraction, and the
discrepancy is even larger for nuclear forces and the particles on which they
act.
But over long scales, gravity wins out: The nuclear interactions have strictly
limited range. Electromagnetism has positive and negative charges, and pre-
cisely because its forces are comparatively strong, charged particles combine
into electrically neutral objects. There do not appear to be any large scale
5

imbalances of electric charge — say, a surplus of negative charges in the An-
dromeda galaxy and a corresponding deﬁcit in our own galaxy. On the other
hand, gravitational charges, that is, masses, will always add up. That is how,
on the largest scales, gravity comes to dominate.
In order to describe gravity, we turn to the best current theory of gravity
that we have: Albert Einstein’s general theory of relativity.
3
General relativity
General relativity, ﬁrst published by Einstein in late 1915, relates gravity to
distortions of space and time. A famous, concise prose summary is due to John
Wheeler, and states that spacetime tells matter how to move, while matter tells
spacetime how to curve (Wheeler 1990).
To formulate these statements more precisely, and to give a more precise
meaning to terms like distortion and curvature, simpliﬁed expositions often
introduce pared-down geometric models, reducing four-dimensional spacetime
to a two-dimensional surface. But these simple visualisations can only take us so
far. At some point, in particular if we our goal is to make speciﬁc calculations,
we will need to acquaint ourselves with the proper formalism.
But as it will turn out, for most of cosmology, you do not need to know
what it means for spacetime to be curved. Instead, our calculations will make
use of much more basic principles that are part of general relativity. The ﬁrst is
the equivalence principle, namely that in free fall, the most immediate eﬀects of
gravity are absent. The second is the Newtonian limit: under certain conditions,
general relativity reduces to the Newtonian description of gravity. The third is
a statement about sources of gravity – a generalisation of Newtonian gravity,
where mass is the only physical quantity that produces gravity. These three
pieces of information will turn out to be all that is needed to derive the standard
model of an expanding universe.
3.1
Equivalence principle
When Einstein began to think about how to incorporate gravity into his special
theory of relativity, he hit upon a simple thought experiment. In his own words,
twice removed:1
The breakthrough came suddenly one day. I was sitting on a
chair in my patent oﬃce in Bern. Suddenly a thought struck me: If
a man falls freely, he would not feel his weight. I was taken aback.
This simple thought experiment made a deep impression on me.
This led me to the theory of gravity.
In modern parlance, the outcome of this is the (Einstein) equivalence principle.
Consider two observers in free fall, one in an elevator cabin, the other adrift in
1This is from a speech Einstein gave at Kyoto University in December 1922, which was
in German, translated live into Japanese, documented in the same language, and an English
translation published in Ono 1982.
6

the cabin of a space-ship, far from any sources of gravity; these two cases are
shown in ﬁgure 4.
Figure 4: Diﬀerent observers in free fall: An observer in free fall in a gravitational ﬁeld (left),
and one who is far from any sources of gravity
A key question is: Can these two observers tell the diﬀerence? When they
perform physics experiments in their little cabins, can they tell whether or not
there are sources of gravity nearby?
To a large extent, the answer is no. After all, in free fall, the most common
indicators of a gravitational ﬁeld are absent.
In everyday life, if I release a ball, it will fall to the ground. If I am in an
elevator cabin in free fall, and gently release a ball, it will continue to ﬂoat in
front of me. Water will ﬂoat, forming a wobbling giant droplet. If I position
myself on a balance, that balance will show my weight to be zero. Behind all
this is the fact that, in a Newtonian gravitational ﬁeld, objects that are in the
same place accelerate at the same rate.2
In fact, this rather good correspondence between a gravity-free situation
and a free-fall situation is routinely used in physics. A widely known example
is the International Space Station (ISS). At the cruising height of the ISS, at an
altitude of about 400 km above sea level, the gravitational acceleration caused
by the Earth is about 89% as strong as on Earth’s surface. The reason the
astronauts, and all unattached objects around them, are ﬂoating is not because
gravity is weak, but because the ISS is in a free-fall orbit around Earth. Drop
towers, where experiments are dropped inside a vacuum tube, can create similar
microgravity conditions, albeit for a much shorter time of a few seconds, and
in a much smaller volume.
2In the Newtonian picture, this is because the same object mass occurs both in the formula
linking force and acceleration, and in the formula specifying the gravitational force between a
point mass m and a much larger mass M. In the ﬁeld of M, the point mass will be accelerated
in the radial direction as
a = 1
mF = −1
m
GMm
r2
= −GM
r2 ,
which is independent of the object mass m.
7

Our ﬁrst rough version of the principle tries to summarize these observations
as follows:
Einstein equivalence principle, draft version: Physics experiments
performed by an observer in free fall will have the same outcome as
experiments performed by an observer who is inﬁnitely far from all
sources of gravity. In particular, the rules governing space and time
are those of special relativity.
3.2
Tidal forces and the limits of the equivalence principle
If we look more closely, we will soon realise that there are fundamental problems
with this version. Consider a truly gigantic elevator cabin falling towards Earth,
with two giant spheres inside.3 What happens next is shown in ﬁgure 5. Clearly,
Figure 5: A giant cabin containing two spheres, falling towards Earth, shown here at some
time t1 (left) and at a later time t2 (right)
it’s becoming important that the two spheres are not both falling downwards
on parallel trajectories. Instead, they both fall towards the center of the Earth.
This falling motion brings them closer together over time, as the ﬁgure shows.
This is an eﬀect an observer inside the cabin can detect. He or she need only
let these two spheres ﬂoat, making sure that, initially, they are at rest relative
to each other, and wait until the two spheres have started to accelerate towards
each other. An observer drifting along in a space-ship, far removed from all
sources of gravity, will not see this eﬀect.
What the observer in free fall in a gravitational ﬁeld sees, and the gravity-
free observer doesn’t, are eﬀects known as tidal eﬀects, which are due to the
fact that gravitational ﬁelds typically vary from location to location and/or over
3Worrying about the gigantic mass of such a cabin? That aspect of our thought experiment
is admittedly inconsistent; so far, we have treated all falling particles as test particles, whose
own gravitational inﬂuence has no signiﬁcant consequences. We will continue to do so. Just
imagine that our giant cabin and giant spheres are made of truly ﬂuﬀy, low-mass material.
8

time. As the term indicates, these varying gravitational ﬁelds are responsible for
Earth’s tides. The main reason our home planet’s oceans have tides is because
the Moon’s gravity acting on the water directly below is slightly stronger than
the Moon’s gravity at the Earth’s center-of-mass, which in turn is stronger than
the Moon’s gravity acting on water on the opposite side of the Earth.
From classical calculations in Newtonian gravity, it is clear that tidal forces
have an important property. Take, for instance, the situation of two spheres as
m
m
M
0
x
y
r
ξ
Fr
Fx
Figure 6: Tidal forces: two test particles attracted to a mass M
shown in ﬁgure 6, of two test particles (in yellow) with masses m, which are
attracted to a mass M (magenta) at the spatial origin. The strength of the
acceleration of each yellow sphere is given by Newton’s formula,
Fr = GMm
r2
(3.1)
and directed toward the center of the mass M. Let Fx be that part of the force
which accelerates the right-hand yellow sphere towards its left counterpart, de-
creasing the distance between the spheres. That decrease in distance is what
a free-falling observer could measure, deducing the presence of an (inhomoge-
neous) gravitational ﬁeld. By elementary geometry, the ratio between Fx and
Fr is the same as that of ξ (the distance between the yellow sphere and the y
axis) and r.4 Thus, we must have
Fx = ξ
r · Fr = GMm
r3
· ξ.
(3.2)
4 The force triangle with hypotenuse Fr and one leg Fx is similar to the distance triangle
whose hypotenuse is the line segment r, with one leg ξ: Fx and ξ are parallel, and so are Fr
and r, so the respective angles between them are the same. Both triangles have one right
angle. Having two congruent angles is suﬃcient for the triangles to be similar.
9

Two properties of this result are typical for tidal forces: they fall of faster
than the ordinary gravitational force when it comes to the distance r from the
gravitational source, namely 1/r3 instead of 1/r2. And they are proportional
to the separation 2ξ of the two test masses whose relative distance they change.
Conversely, this means that tidal eﬀects get smaller if we restrict our atten-
tion to smaller regions of space. In a small region, only small separations 2ξ
are possible. Still, even a small acceleration will lead to considerable speeds,
and observable eﬀects, if we allow too much time to pass. We need to restrict
observation time, as well. All in all, we need to restrict our attention to a small
spacetime region.
3.3
The equivalence principle, reformulated
Even in a small, but ﬁnite spacetime region, there will in general be non-zero
tidal eﬀects. But in practice, our ability to detect small eﬀects will be limited.
All in all, here is a new version of the equivalence principle, which takes into
account the limitations imposed by tidal forces:
Einstein equivalence principle: Consider two observers whose mea-
suring devices and instruments have a given limit of sensitivity.
Then we can always ﬁnd a maximum size S (deﬁning spatial ex-
tent as well as a maximum observation time), so that the following
holds: Physics experiments performed by the ﬁrst observer in free
fall in a restricted spacetime region of size S will have the same
outcome as experiments performed by an observer in a restricted
spacetime region of size S who is inﬁnitely far from all sources of
gravity. In particular, the rules governing space and time are those
of special relativity.
In the inﬁnitesimal limit, where we make the experimental region inﬁnitely
small, tidal forces vanish altogether. In this limit, the eﬀects of tidal forces
are not even detectable with ideal measuring devices and instruments. This is
less unrealistic than it sounds: Diﬀerential calculus teaches us about systematic
ways of describing the inﬁnitesimally small.
In this modiﬁed version, the equivalence principle is quite useful. It provides
guidance when it comes to ﬁnding general-relativistic versions of existing laws
of physics: If you know how these laws are deﬁned in the context of special
relativity, you know how these laws will be for a free-falling observer – at least
in an inﬁnitesimal region.
This provides us with a powerful tool for deriving predictions of general
relativity (or, for that matter, other theories as long as they incorporate the
equivalence principle.
In particular, the gravitational redshift of light in a
gravitational ﬁeld can be derived directly from the equivalence principle (Schild
1960, Schutz 1985, Schr¨oter 2002).
3.4
Tidal deformations and attraction
So far, tidal forces have only been considered in their role as a limiting inﬂuence.
Now, let us turn to what these forces actually do. Also, to be more precise,
10

we should talk about tidal accelerations – after all, in a gravitational ﬁeld, the
acceleration is independent of an object’s mass, and it makes sense to talk about
gravitational acceleration, and the way it changes from location to location.
One eﬀect, we have already seen: Two test masses, transversally separated
as they fall towards a point mass, will approach each other. There is another
eﬀect: the acceleration caused by the gravitational attraction of a point mass
decreases with distance as 1/r2. Thus, the distance between two test masses
that are separated in the direction of their fall will increase, since the lower test
mass feels a greater acceleration than the upper mass.
Figure 7 shows the consequences. On the left, you can see four test particles
(in yellow) arranged on a circle. Momentarily, these test particles are at rest.
Below the test particles is an attracting mass M. The image on the right shows
the situation a little while later.
The test particles have fallen towards the
attracting mass, but the overall shape of the particle swarm has changed: Test
particles 2 and 4 have moved closer together, following as they do convergent
paths towards the center of the attractive mass. Test particles 1 and 3 have
moved apart, since 3 is closer to the attracting mass, and hence experiences
greater gravitational acceleration than particle 1.
M
1
3
4
2
M
1
3
4
2
Figure 7: Falling particles that were originally at rest and arranged along a circle (left). After
some time has passed, the particles have fallen and the circle has deformed (right). In the
image on the right, the yellow traces show the distance each particle has fallen compared to
the image on the left
In Newtonian physics, one can show that at least within an inﬁnitesimal
time, this is the most general deformation that tidal accelerations cause: Start
with a swarm of test particles arranged along the surface of a sphere, all of
which are at rest relative to each other initially. In free fall, an external mass
11

conﬁguration that is outside the particle sphere will deform the sphere into an
ellipsoid of the same volume. More concretely, the acceleration of the change
in volume will initially be zero,5
¨V |t=0 = 0,
(3.3)
where t = 0 is the time at which our particles were at rest relative to each other.
The only time when tidal forces will change the volume of a sphere of
initially-at-rest test particles is if the attracting mass is inside the sphere. In
this case, the tidal forces are due to the fact that the particles are getting pulled
in diﬀerent directions: each particle is getting pulled towards the center, where
the attracting mass is.
M
Figure 8: Tidal forces acting on a spherical swarm of test particle due to a mass placed inside
the sphere
The result can be seen in ﬁgure 8. For a point mass M in the center of
the sphere, the eﬀect is readily calculated using the Newtonian gravitational
force; we will do a very similar calculation in section 7. The change in volume,
expressed again as an acceleration (that is, a second derivative) is
¨V
V

t=0
= −4πG ρ,
(3.4)
where
ρ ≡M/V
is the average density within the sphere.6
5 Here and in the following, we denote time derivatives by a dot,
˙f ≡df
dt ,
¨f = d2f
dt2
etc.
6This is an averaged integral version of sorts of the Poisson equation for the gravitational
potential Φ, namely △Φ = 4πGρ.
12

3.5
Newtonian limit and Einstein’s equation(s)
In the preceding sections, we have performed a number of calculations using
Newtonian gravity, and the concepts of motion and dynamics taken from clas-
sical mechanics. How much of this carries over to general relativity?
Quite a lot, as it turns out. Historically, when Einstein developed general
relativity, all but one of the many astronomical and terrestrial observations in-
volving gravity were explained very accurately using Newtonian mechanics and
the Newtonian gravitational force. The one exception was the anomalous peri-
helion advance of the planet Mercury, which Einstein took to be a fundamental
eﬀect, and used to shape his evolving theory of gravity.
But nonetheless, Newtonian gravity was highly successful. Any theory aim-
ing to replace it had to be able to explain the successful predictions of Newtonian
gravity. Under those conditions where the Newtonian predictions held — all
of which involved comparatively weak gravitational ﬁelds, and objects moving
much more slowly than c, the speed of light in vacuum — Einstein’s theory
needed to include Newtonian gravity as a limiting case.
Elementary derivations of this Newtonian limit are a standard topic in text-
books on general relativity. (“Post-Newtonian” derivations that not only show
the Newtonian limit, but add the various relativistic eﬀects as a series develop-
ment in 1/c2, are considerably more complicated; see e.g. Poisson 2014.)
Concerning the Einstein equivalence principle, we have seen that in a lo-
cal, free-falling reference frame, physics is special-relativistic — at least up to
tidal forces, which can be kept arbitrarily small by restricting the spacetime
region under consideration, but are always present to some degree. But clas-
sical mechanics is itself a limit of special relativity, namely the limit where all
particle motion is slow compared with the vacuum speed of light. This suggests
that free-falling systems are likely to have another interesting limit, at least as
long as this slow-motion condition is met: Whatever tidal forces remain can be
described using Newtonian gravity.
This is indeed the case, and even better: even allowing for fast-moving par-
ticles, the full predictions of general relativity can be recovered with no more
than a simple change in the source term for gravitational attraction! Before we
talk about that simple change, for the record: The general description for how
matter and gravity are linked are Einstein’s equations, also called Einstein ﬁeld
equations (EFE), the centerpiece of his general theory of relativity; together
with the deﬁnition of the terms involved (including their physical interpreta-
tion), they are general relativity. In their most general form, these equations
can be written as
Rµν −1
2R gµν = 8πG
c4
Tµν,
(3.5)
where the Ricci tensor Rµν, Ricci scalar R and metric tensor gµν represent
spacetime geometry, while on the right-hand side, the energy-momentum tensor
Tµν describes mass, energy, momentum and pressure of the matter contained
within spacetime. Each of the indices µ and ν can take on values between 0
and 3, so equation (3.5) is really a concise way of writing 16 equations at once
— or, in this case, 10 independent equations, since all terms involved remain
13

the same if we switch µ and ν. Together, these equations are the mathematical
embodiment of Wheeler’s summary of spacetime telling matter how to move,
and matter telling spacetime how to curve.
As shown in a highly recommended article by Baez and Bunn 2005, from
the full Einstein ﬁeld equations linking spacetime curvature and the energy-
momentum content of the spacetime, one can derive a much simpler form. In
order to do so, one needs to go into free-fall and consider test particles arranged
into a sphere. If these test particles are initially at rest relative to each other,
one can show that the volume of the test particle sphere will change as
¨V
V

t=0
= −4πG (ρ + [px + py + pz]/c2),
(3.6)
where the average density ρ inside the test particle sphere includes contri-
butions from all applicable kinds of energy (as per E = mc2), and where we
have added pressure terms px, py, pz for pressure into the x-, y-, and z-direction.
Some additional information on the motivation of this in the context of special
relativity is given in sections B.10 and B.7.
In the isotropic case, no direction is special, and we have px = py = pz = p,
leading to the equation
¨V
V

t=0
= −4πG (ρ + 3p/c2).
(3.7)
As Bunn and Baez show, this form of Einstein’s equation can be used to re-
derive Newton’s law of gravity for test particles surrounding a spherical mass.
If there is no mass, energy, pressure inside the test sphere, all that external
gravitational sources can do is deform the sphere, keeping its volume unchanged
as per
¨V

t=0 = 0.
(3.8)
That is the simplest form of the vacuum Einstein’s equations.
What should we make of the modiﬁed source terms in equations (3.6) and
(3.7)? Including energy as a source of gravity should come as no surprise, given
E = mc2. But energy, even in special relativity, is not a scalar quantity. Instead,
it is one aspect of relativistic four-momentum, which includes both energy and
momentum. When we are looking at a gas, for instance, the particles involved
will have energy as well as momentum. The latter becomes important whenever
the particles bounce oﬀthe conﬁning walls of a cylinder, creating pressure, or, in
the absence of a conﬁning wall, for keeping track of what part of the momentum
is ﬂowing out of a particular region, or into it.
Given that energy and momentum are part of the same relativistic quantity,
and pressure directly related to momentum, we should not be too surprised
that, in a relativistic description, all these quantities occur together as sources
of gravity.
14

3.6
What we need from general relativity
Now we have all that we will need from general relativity! We know that:
• in a reference frame in free fall, the laws of physics are almost the same as
in special relativity; the deviations from special relativity are due to tidal
forces, grow smaller as we look at smaller and smaller spacetime regions,
and vanish as such a region becomes inﬁnitesimally small.
• in such a reference frame in free fall, as long as all motions are much
slower than the vacuum speed of light c, what happens is described by
the Newtonian limit of general relativity, and can make use of Newtonian
calculations. Having all motions much slower than c also includes the
condition ρ ≫p/c2 for pressure terms, since pressure is the result of
random particle motion.
• even if we have fast-moving matter (notably matter with a large pressure
component), the only correction to the usual Newtonian formula is that
the source of gravity is not the mass density ϱM alone. It’s the mass
density ϱM+E including energy terms, and there is an extra pressure term,
ϱM
→
ϱM+E + 3p/c2,
(3.9)
or the corresponding, slightly more complicated right-hand side of (3.6)
for the non-isotropic case.
With this knowledge, let us consider cosmology.
4
A homogeneous, isotropic, expanding universe
What is the simplest realistic large-scale model of the universe as a whole? As
per our earlier considerations, we will be satisﬁed with our model representing
only the very largest scales, treating galaxies as point particles with no relevant
inner structure.
So how are galaxies distributed, at large scales?
Figure 9
shows two views of a wedge-like subregion of the universe, out to a distance
of 1.4 billion light-years, giving a good overview of the large-scale structure.7
Every blue dot is a galaxy; we as the observers are at the apex of the wedge.
This is not perfectly, but fairly homogeneous, at least on average. On av-
erage, the properties of this universe are the same, regardless of an observer’s
location — or are they? At least from this wedge diagram, it’s not so easy
to be sure one way or the other. For instance, the somewhat emptier region
near the apex is due to the fact that the wedge is particularly slim near its
apex, thus contains fewer galaxies. The emptier regions at great distances, on
the other hand, are a typical selection eﬀect. At greater distances, it is more
7 The diagram shows galaxies in the 2MASX catalogue (“2Micron All-Sky Survey, Extended
source catalogue,” Jarrett et al. 2000) (catalog VII/233 on Vizier) that have an entry in the
NED-D tabulation of extragalactic, redshift-independent distances, Version 14.1.0 February
2017, http://ned.ipac.caltech.edu/Library/Distances/, as compiled by Ian Steer, Barry F.
Madore, and the NED Team.
15

200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
0
million light-years
200
600
1000
1400
0
million light-years
Figure 9: Galaxy distribution in a wedge-like subregion of the universe: top view (top) and
view from the side (bottom).
Data from combining the NED distance catalogue and the
2MASX catalogue, 25231 data points in total. We as the observers are at the point 0 at the
apex of the wedge
diﬃcult to detect, and measure the distances to, less luminous galaxies; thus,
only the brighter very distant galaxies will be included in our catalogue. In
astronomy, this kind of selection eﬀect due to brightness limitations is known
as Malmquist bias. Also, there are some radial strips where there are somewhat
fewer galaxies, probably due to the fact that, in that particular direction, our
view into the distance is obscured by dust in our own galaxy.
Figure 10 shows galaxies from the same data set in a rectangular box of
space, viewed from the top. There are some hints of structure, some slightly-
denser-than-average areas, but overall, the galaxy distribution looks fairly ho-
mogeneous. There is no drastic clumping, say, with parts of the diagram devoid
of galaxies altogether. Additional observations bear this out: Matter in our uni-
verse is distributed fairly uniformly – at least on average, on suﬃciently large
scales.
Truly three-dimensional statements in astronomy are always diﬃcult, since
distance measurements are anything but easy. But there is one direct conse-
quence of a homogeneous universe that is more straightforward to test. If the
universe is basically the same everywhere, then the universe should look the
same, regardless where in the sky we point our telescopes. That is indeed the
case: In whatever direction we look, we will, on average, see the same number
of distant objects, with similar average properties. From our point of view,
the universe is, on average, isotropic. (As an exercise, how are isotropy and
homogeneity related? Convince yourself that a universe that is isotropic for at
least two observers at diﬀerent locations is necessarily isotropic, as well.)
16

-600
-500
-400
-300
-200
-100
0
100
200
million light-years
400
500
600
700
800
900
million light-years
Figure 10: Galaxy distribution in a box 800 times 500 times 30 million light-years in size;
data and x-y coordinates are the same as in ﬁgure 9
Taking all these observations into account, we arrive at what Hermann
Bondi, , in or before 1952, called the cosmological principle. In his own summary
(“broadly speaking”; Bondi 1960), “[T]he universe presents the same aspect
from every point except for local irregularities.” This extends the Copernican
principle, in that the Earth is nothing special — not when it comes to our home
planet’s role in the solar system, nor when it comes to our position in the larger
universe.
The simplest model for such a universe is a cosmos that is homogeneous not
on average, but exactly, on all length scales. In the following, we will need to
keep both pictures of the universe in mind, cf. ﬁgure 11: the on-average homo-
geneous universe ﬁlled with point-particle galaxies, and the perfectly homoge-
neous universe. For some purposes, notably when it comes to the propagation
-600
-400
-200
0
200
400
600
million light-years
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
million light-years
ρ
Figure 11: Two complementary views of the large-scale universe: galaxies as point particles
dotted throughout space (left) and an idealized, exactly homogeneous universe with a universal
density ρ (right)
17

of light, we will keep talking about separate galaxies. We will be asking, for
instance, how long it takes light to travel from one galaxy to another, and how
that light is redshifted. Let us call this the galaxy dust picture of the universe.
But when we talk about overall properties of the universe, such as the density
values for matter or radiation, we will switch to the continuum picture. We will
assume that the density is constant throughout the universe; after all, that is
what (idealized) homogeneity means.
If you take these pictures too literally, they contradict each other. But you
shouldn’t, really. Both are models, which are meant to map certain aspects
of the large-scale universe. Physicists are allowed to use models — simple, yet
suitable models are what allows us to make powerful and predictive calculations
in the ﬁrst place!
4.1
What can change in a homogeneous universe?
The homogeneity condition is a powerful constraint on how the universe can
change over time. If we demand continued homogeneity, certain types of change
are ruled out. After all, in that case, matter cannot move in any way that results
in large-scale inhomogeneities.
The simplest evolution for a homogeneous universe, guaranteed to keep
homogeneity intact, would be no change at all. In the galaxy dust picture, that
would correspond to an unchanging pattern, as shown in ﬁgure 12. We might be
Figure 12: In an unchanging (=static) universe, the pattern of galaxies does not change at all
tempted to describe this situation by saying that “all galaxies are staying where
they are,” but that is somewhat problematic. After all, points in space do not
carry little markers that would allow us to state with certainty that a speciﬁc
galaxy has remained at one particular point in space. A better way of describing
a static universe involves consequences that are, in principle, observable, namely
that all pair-wise distances between galaxies remain constant. This condition is
suﬃcient to preserve the pattern that our point-like galaxies trace out in space.
Einstein, in a pioneering work that marked the ﬁrst application of general
relativity to the universe as a whole, and thus the birth of modern cosmology,
presented a static model for the universe (Einstein 1917). On closer inspection,
this static universe turned out to be unstable, though, prone to either collapse
18

or expand, at any rate: it would depart from its static state in response to the
smallest perturbations (Eddington 1930).
What, then, is the next simplest kind of change that preserves homogeneity?
It is when all pairwise distances between galaxies change in the same way, in
proportion to one and the same time-dependent factor a(t), commonly called
the (universal) cosmic scale factor, which depends on a suitably deﬁned time
Figure 13: Expansion with a universal scale factor: a portion of the universe, pictured at an
earlier (left) and a later time (right)
parameter t that is commonly called cosmic time (about which more below).
That way, ratios between pair-wise galaxy distances do not change over time.
The pattern of all these galaxies’ locations in space does not change except for
its overall scale. In an expanding universe as in ﬁgure 13, all distances become
larger over time. But in terms of preserving homogeneity, a contracting universe
where all distances shrink in proportion to the same scale factor works just as
well.
The systematic motions associated with scale-factor expansion, and its char-
acteristic change of pair-wise distances, is called the Hubble ﬂow.
Galaxies
whose pair-wise distances change in exactly the way described by a changing
overall scale factor are said to be “in the Hubble ﬂow” or “part of the Hubble
ﬂow.” These systematic pair-wise distance changes are what is meant when
cosmologists talk about cosmic expansion.
The motions of real galaxies can deviate from the Hubble ﬂow for diﬀerent
reasons. Many are part of galaxy clusters, orbiting each other; in this case,
while the cluster’s center of mass is in the Hubble ﬂow, individual galaxies’
motions will be slightly diﬀerent. And even galaxies that are not in a cluster
(so-called “ﬁeld galaxies”) will typically deviate from the Hubble ﬂow at least
a little bit. Collectively, these deviations from the Hubble ﬂow are known as
peculiar motion. In the following sections, we will disregard peculiar motion,
and assume that all galaxies are faithfully following the Hubble ﬂow.
A natural follow-up question is the following: In an expanding cosmos, what
about bound systems? Do galaxies themselves grow larger, too? How about
humans? Or atoms? This question is particularly natural whenever cosmic
expansion is explained in terms like “space itself is expanding” — language
which I have avoided, precisely because I think that it leads to misconceptions,
and does not evoke a faithful image of what is happening. I will address the
19

question of bound systems, and what happens to them during cosmic expansion,
later on in section 8.2.
4.2
Scale-factor expansion
Let us describe scale-factor expansion in more detail. To that end, let us assign
identifying numbers our galaxies, as in ﬁgure 14, which shows a small region
within an expanding universe. Pairwise distances are readily speciﬁed by giving
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
d12
Figure 14: Setup for tracing pairwise distances in an expanding universe
the indices of the two galaxies involved; notably, let dij be the distance between
the galaxies i and j. As we shall see in the later sections, there are several
diﬀerent concepts of distance in cosmology; the distances d we use here and in
the following, and which grow in proportion to the scale factor, are known as
proper distances.
In an expanding universe, all pairwise distances grow larger in proportion
to the cosmic scale factor a(t): as a(t) changes, so do the distances. Distance
ratios remain constant, as shown in ﬁgure 15, where we have arbitrarily kept the
position of galaxy 1 ﬁxed. We can give a concrete mathematical description by
noting that, for scale factor expansion, the ratio of a particular such distance,
evaluated at some time t0, and the same pairwise distance, evaluated at some
other time t1, will be equal to the ratio of scale factor values at those two times,
dij(t0)
dij(t1)
=
a(t0)
a(t1).
(4.1)
Conversely, this means that if we know all the pairwise distances at one speciﬁc
time t0, and know the scale factor a(t), we can determine all pairwise distances
at any other time t, namely as
dij(t) = a(t)
a(t0) dij(t0).
(4.2)
In astronomy, the t0 chosen for reference is usually the present time.
Figure 15 shows some of the typical patterns of scale factor expansion.
Notably, galaxy 2 does not appear to move away from galaxy 1 all that fast.
Galaxy 7, in contrast, appears to be moving much faster. We will explore that
20

(a)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
t = t0
d12(t0)
(b)
1
2
3
4
6
7
8
t = t1
d12(t1)
(c)
1
2
3
4
6
7
8
t = t2
d12(t2)
Figure 15: Snapshots of a small region of the universe undergoing scale-factor expansion
21

systematic correlation in section 5. But before we do, it’s time for a closer look
at the parameter t.
4.3
Cosmic time t and proper distance d
So far, we have introduced the cosmic time t only via the cosmic scale factor
a(t), and we have implicitly assumed that t is a useful time coordinate, to be
used in statements like “the position of galaxy i at time t0” or about positions
changing with time. Likewise, we have blithely talked about (proper) distances
d as if that were a well-deﬁned concept.
If the only purpose of t were to parametrize the universal scale factor a,
then any other t′ = f(t), with f a monotonically increasing function (i.e. a
function with derivative df/dt > 0 everywhere) would serve as well. But t can
be deﬁned to be much more than an arbitrary parameter.
In order to connect t to the physical concept of time, let us zoom in on one
of our galaxies. For each galaxy, we can deﬁne a notion of time by considering
clocks that are moving along with the galaxy in question — for each galaxy, we
consider a clock that is at rest relative to that galaxy. Time as measured by an
object’s co-moving clock is called that object’s proper time. In the vicinity of
one particular galaxy, we can see how a(t) changes, and we can determine how
the proper time clock ticks. So why not combine the two, and use that galaxy’s
proper time to parametrize the scale factor a(t)?
If we do so for one galaxy, though, the same needs to hold for every other
galaxy in the Hubble ﬂow, as well.
After all, in our simpliﬁed model, the
universe is homogeneous. No location, no galaxy is special. If the parameter t in
a(t) corresponds to proper time for one particular galaxy, it must correspond to
proper time for any other galaxy in the Hubble ﬂow. Otherwise, we could devise
an experiment, namely comparing the evolution of a(t) with the passage of
proper time, that would have diﬀerent outcomes depending on where, in which
galaxy, we perform the experiment. In other words, the physical properties
of our cosmos would vary with location, which would make the universe in
question inhomogeneous.
Note that, by deﬁning cosmic time in this manner, we have also implicitly
supplied another necessary part of deﬁning a global time coordinate: a deﬁnition
of simultaneity.
Switching to the continuum picture, we can track how the
density of the universe ρ(t) changes over time.
In a homogeneous universe,
by deﬁnition, ρ(t) at some constant time t will be the same at any location,
wherever we measure the local density. You can turn this around, and use ρ
values to deﬁne which events in our universe are simultaneous.8
Note that, given our particular deﬁnition, the global time coordinate t will
have some unusual properties. Recall that in special relativity, we have the eﬀect
of time dilation: when inertial observers in relative motion use their reference
8In fact, the proper relativistic deﬁnition is that a homogeneous universe is a universe in
which it is possible to deﬁne simultaneity in such a way that the local density ρ will have
the same value at all simultaneous events. Exercise: Convince yourself using reasoning from
special relativity that in a homogeneous universe, an observer moving relative to the matter
content of the cosmos will detect local inhomogeneities on a large scale.
22

frames to describe each other’s (proper time) clocks, each will deduce that
the other’s clocks are ticking more slowly than his own, giving rise to directly
observable eﬀects as in the case of the space-travelling twin (cf. section B.4 for
a lightning review of the pertinent concepts of special relativity). If one were to
combine such clocks in relative motion, the result would be markedly diﬀerent
from any of the usual time coordinates deﬁned by inertial observers. Statements
that are true using the usual inertial time coordinates, notably those about the
motion of light or material objects, do not necessarily hold for such an unusual
combined time coordinate.9
Similarly, in deﬁning cosmic time to correspond to proper time for all galax-
ies in the Hubble ﬂow, we have created such an unusual “compound time coor-
dinate”. As long as we restrict our attention to a single galaxy and its direct
neighbourhood, we can invoke the equivalence principle. Our cosmic time coor-
dinate, which in that neighbourhood corresponds to that galaxy’s proper time,
can be used in calculations of speeds, accelerations and the like. But as soon
as we zoom out and consider t as a global coordinate, we need to be careful.
Also, we should not forget that the choice of time coordinate aﬀects the
notion of distance. Whenever we talk about the distance of two galaxies at
cosmic time t, we are implicitly deﬁning a three-dimensional space, namely the
subset of all points in spacetime that have this particular value of the cosmic
time coordinate. Choose an unusual time coordinate, and that subset, in other
words: space, will have unusual properties as well. At small scales, all should be
well, in line with the equivalence principle. But as one goes to larger distances,
these distances need to be interpreted carefully.
They will not, in general,
correspond to ordinary physical distances, and their derivatives with respect to
cosmic time will not, in general, correspond to physical speeds.
In conclusion, cosmic time t is an unusual coordinate, and we must be careful
not make unwarranted assumptions about how physical systems behave when
described using a coordinate of this kind.
5
The Hubble relation
Back to galaxies in the expanding universe. Figure 15, with its snapshots of
a universe that is undergoing scale-factor expansion, illustrates a systematic
correlation: Galaxies that are further away from our spatial origin (arbitrarily
chosen to be at the location of galaxy 1) move faster than their less distant kin.
The reason behind this is, of course, the unusual pattern of motions where
distances change in proportion to one and the same factor.
If I multiply a
distance of 100 million light-years by a factor of 1.3 (corresponding to the
scale-factor change between panels a and c of ﬁgure 15), The 100 become 130
million light-years, and absolute diﬀerence of 30 million light-years.
If I multiply 200 million light-years by the same factor, the absolute diﬀer-
9In fact, if you combine inertial time coordinates of systems in relative motion in this way,
you will end up with a toy model that mimics most of the deﬁning properties of modern
cosmological models — using mathematical tools no more complicated than the simplest form
of the Lorentz transformations, and solving linear equations (P¨ossel 2017).
23

ence is twice as large, namely 60 million light-years. The larger the original
distance, the larger the absolute diﬀerence — and since these changes happen
during the same period of time, we also have: the larger the original distance,
the larger the rate of change of the distance.
We can make this more precise as follows: Consider any pair-wise distance
dij(t), which changes as speciﬁed in equation (4.2). Then we can calculate the
rate of change, namely the derivative with respect to the time coordinate, as
vij(t) ≡˙dij(t)
=
d
dt
 a(t)
a(t0) dij(t0)

= ˙a(t)
a(t0) dij(t0)
=
˙a(t)
a(t)
a(t)
a(t0) dij(t0) = ˙a(t)
a(t) dij(t).
(5.1)
The function
H(t) ≡˙a(t)
a(t)
(5.2)
is called the Hubble parameter, and its value at the present time t0,
H0 ≡H(t0) = ˙a(t)
a(t)

t=t0
(5.3)
is the Hubble constant. The relation
vij(t) = H(t) · dij(t)
(5.4)
is called the Hubble relation. Sometimes, instead of the Hubble constant H0,
astronomers will use the (dimensionless) reduced Hubble constant h deﬁned by
H0 = h · 100 km/s
Mpc ,
(5.5)
where 1 Mpc (“mega-parsec”), a distance measure commonly used in astron-
omy, corresponds to 3.26 million light-years. Typical Hubble constant values
are such that the reduced Hubble constant is around h ≈0.7.
Naively, the Hubble relation is a relation between pair-wise relative velocities
and pair-wise distances, valid at any speciﬁc time t. Whenever we can determine
these distances and velocities, the expanding universe model predicts a clear
relationship between the two – a prediction to be tested against observational
data. In particular, if we take one of the two galaxies to be our own, then
equation (5.4) is a relation between distant galaxies’ distances from us and these
galaxies’ radial velocities; since, in an expanding universe, those velocities are
away from us, they are commonly called recession speeds.
But taking into account the unusual properties of the cosmic time t dis-
cussed in section 4.3, we know to be be cautious. In particular, there is no
reason to think that on large scales, the cosmic-time derivatives of the quan-
tities dij correspond to a relativistic generalisation of the concept of relative
speed. Closer examination shows that they do not. There is, in fact, a sensible
relativistic generalisation of the concept of relative speeds for the situation of
24

two galaxies exchanging light signals in an expanding universe, and it gives a
result that is very diﬀerent from the cosmic-time derivative of the corresponding
dij (Narlikar 1994, Bunn and Hogg 2009). In fact, the most obvious property
unbecoming a relativistic relative speed, namely the fact that by the Hubble
relation is that we can have vij > c for suﬃciently large distances dij, which
taken at face value would mean superluminal motion. This is a direct indication
that vij is no generalised relativistic relative speed.
In the direct cosmic neighbourhood of each free-falling galaxy in the Hubble
ﬂow, on the other hand, cosmic time t is a good approximation for the usual
time coordinate of special relativity and classical mechanics. There, the inter-
pretation of the Hubble relation as linking our usual notion of distances and
relative speeds is valid. This is true in the cosmic neighbourhood of our own
galaxy, and in this approximation, we can link the Hubble relation to an actual
observable: the redshift of light reaching us from another galaxy.
5.1
Free-falling galaxies and the Doppler eﬀect
All the galaxies in our simpliﬁed model are in free fall, so the crucial condition
for applying the equivalence principle is fulﬁlled: at least in the direct vicinity
of each galaxy, the laws of special relativity should hold – limited by any tidal
forces that might be present. We know from the Hubble relation (5.4) that in
the close vicinity of that galaxy, all distance changes happen rather slowly. In
fact, by focusing on a suﬃciently small region of space we can ensure that all the
dij, and consequently all vij, are below some given limit. Given the observed
value of the Hubble constant, of around 20 km/s per million light-years, even
galaxies as far away as 140 million light-years will not reach recession speed
values of more than about 1 percent of the speed of light in vacuum.
In this limit we can talk about motion in the usual way of classical physics —
we can talk about galaxies moving, and about light travelling from one galaxy
to another along straight lines at the speed c, about dij being an ordinary
distance to be covered, and about t behaving like an ordinary time coordinate.
In this limit, we will also ﬁnd that the light from distant galaxies is subject to
the (classical) Doppler shift.
Consider a simple (monochromatic) light wave, with its wave crests and
troughs, propagating from one galaxy to another:
wavelength λ
Since the galaxies are in relative motion, light emitted in one of the galaxies, and
arriving at the other, will be subject to the (ordinary, non-relativistic) Doppler
eﬀect (the usual derivation for which is given in the ﬁrst part of section B.5).
Let us call λe the wavelength of the light as measured at the time of emission
te, by an observer moving along with the emitting galaxy, and λ the wavelength
of the same light, measured by us as the light reaches our own galaxy. In terms
25

of these quantities, the redshift z is deﬁned as
z = λ −λe
λe
.
(5.6)
The classical Doppler eﬀect links z with the emitting object’s radial speed v
(that is, the component of its speed directly away from us or, for negative
values, directly towards us) as
z = v
c .
(5.7)
The wavelength shift z can be measured very accurately. The light of stars and
galaxies contains a wealth of spectral lines: narrow wavelength regions in which
the energy distribution of the light has a sharp maximum (emission lines) or
minimum (absorption lines). Figure 16 shows an example of absorption lines. In
Figure 16: Solar spectrum (measured in reﬂection by observing the Moon) showing dark
absorption lines
our particular situation, we substitute the speed at which the emitting galaxy
is moving away from us in the Hubble ﬂow. This gives the redshift-distance
relation
cz = H0 · d,
(5.8)
linking distances d and redshifts z. By introducing the Hubble distance
DH ≡
c
H0
(5.9)
as a natural length scale for an expanding universe with Hubble constant H0,
this can also be written as
d = DH · z.
(5.10)
Note that we are evaluating all quantities, and in particular the Hubble con-
stant, at the present time. We assume that light travel times are too short to
matter here, and that the Hubble constant does not change between the emis-
sion time te and the time of reception of the light signal in question – another
consequence of including only comparatively nearby galaxies. The result – a
systematic redshift increasing with distance – is our ﬁrst acquaintance with the
cosmological redshift, if only in the limit of comparatively close galaxies.
Some authors do not distinguish between the Hubble relation (5.4) and the
redshift-distance relation. It makes sense to clearly diﬀerentiate between the
two, though, since the redshift-distance relation (5.8) is an approximation that
only holds for small distances, whereas the Hubble relation (5.4) is an exact
relation that holds on all length scales in an expanding universe.
26

5.2
Measuring astronomical distances
Determining distances is one of the more diﬃcult problems in astronomy. Our
best current solution is the cosmic distance ladder: a combination of various
methods used by astronomers to successively determine distances within our
cosmic neighbourhood and beyond (de Grijs 2011). The term derives from the
fact that the diﬀerent methods for determining astronomical distances build
one upon the other, representing the consecutive “ladder steps”.
The ﬁrst steps involve measurements to establish the distance scale within
the solar system, notably the average Earth-Sun distance, which is known as
the astronomical unit. The traditional method for determining this basic scale
made use of parallax measurements (corresponding to the way astronomical
observations change as the observer changes location), notably during Venus
transits in front of the Sun.
Modern measurements are based on the light-
travel time of radar signals sent to the nearest planets. The next step involves
measurements of stellar parallax, that is, the change in the stars’ apparent
positions as the Earth orbits the Sun. At the time of this writing, ESA’s Gaia
mission is measuring highly accurate distances to more than a billion stars in
this way.
With accurate parallax measurements, one can hope to eliminate what used
to be some extra steps of the ladder; in any case, extragalactic distances typ-
ically involve what are known as standard candles: objects whose total light
output per unit time, that is, each object’s luminosity, is known, either because
all objects of a certain type have the same luminosity, or because the luminosity
can be derived from certain observable properties of the object.
Of great importance, both historically and for the modern distance scale,
are Cepheid variables.
The luminosity of these comparatively rare, massive
and bright stars changes periodically over time, with periods between days and
months. The change is caused by an overall pulsation of the star: as the star gets
bigger, it gets brighter. Size and time-scale are related, and so are the pulsation
period and the star’s brightness (both average and maximal/minimal).
The relation between the two, the Cepheid’s period-luminosity relation, was
ﬁrst found empirically by the US astronomer Henrietta Swan Leavitt, who no-
ticed in or around 1907 that those Cepheids with the longest period appeared
to be the ones with the brightest peak brightness (Leavitt 1908). She developed
this observation into a period-luminosity relationship that allows astronomers
to deduce distant Cepheid’s luminosities from the period of their (regular) vari-
ations. A modern version of this relation, based on observations of Cepheids
in the same galaxy already studies by Leavitt, namely the Large Magellanic
Cloud, is shown in ﬁgure 17.
Key standard candles for the largest extragalactic distances are supernovae
of type Ia, thought to be White Dwarf stars drawing hydrogen from a binary
companion onto themselves and exploding once they have reached a certain crit-
ical mass. Peak luminosities of such explosions are fairly similar already (see
top part of ﬁgure 18). In addition, there is a relation between the peak lumi-
nosity and the overall width of the light curve (representing how fast brightness
diminishes after the peak). This relation can be used to determine the peak
27

-.5
0
.5
1
1.5
17
16
15
14
13
<V0>
FU
log P
Figure 17: Period-Luminosity relation (logarithm of period P in days vs.
average visual
magnitude) for Cepheids in the simplest pulsation mode (fundamental mode) in the Large
Magellanic Cloud. Lower part of ﬁgure 3 in Udalski et al. 1999
-20
0
20
40
60
-17
-18
-19
-20
-20
0
20
40
60
-17
-18
-19
-20
V Band 
as measured
light-curve timescale 
“stretch-factor” corrected
days
MV – 5 log(h/65)
days
MV – 5 log(h/65)
Calan/Tololo SNe Ia
Figure 18: Peak luminosities of uncalibrated supernovae type Ia light curves (top) are already
fairly similar. Rescaling using the time scale of diminishing brightness gives calibrated light
curves (bottom) that are highly accurate standard candles. Vertical axis shows visual magni-
tudes, shifted by a constant that depends on the reduced Hubble constant. Horizontal axis is
days from peak brightness. Figure from Perlmutter et al. 1997
28

brightness more accurately, resulting in calibrated supernova Ia light curves
that are fairly accurate standard candles (bottom part of ﬁgure 18), which play
a key role for modern cosmological observations.
Standard candles are useful for determining distances since the apparent
brightness of an object of given luminosity is a direct measure of that object’s
distance from us.
This is a matter of everyday experience – we perceive a
ﬂashlight that is directly in front of us as much brighter than the same ﬂashlight
a hundred meters away.
The relation between luminosity, distance, and ﬂux density can be more
precise in the following way. We had already deﬁned the luminosity, the amount
of energy emitted by an object per unit time, as a physical measure of an
object’s intrinsic brightness. For the apparent brightness, we need to measure
the amount of radiation we receive from a distant object.
But that amount will depend on our collecting area – within any given
period of time, larger telescopes collect more light than smaller telescopes. The
physical measure of the apparent brightness of an observed object is thus what
is known in technical terms as the irradiance or (radiation) ﬂux density: the
amount of radiation energy received per unit time, per unit area.
In ordinary, ﬂat space, the relation between ﬂux density and luminosity is
straightforward. Consider the light of an object that radiates isotropically in all
directions, as many astronomical objects do. At a distance d from that object,
its light has spread out evenly over a spherical surface with the total surface
area 4πd2. Assume that we collect light using a telescope with collection area
A pointed directly at the source, as shown in ﬁgure 19. Evidently, the fraction
Figure 19: Sphere centered around an object at 0, with the small collection area A at distance
d from the object marked in light blue
of light our telescope catches will be
A
4πd2 ,
(5.11)
namely the ratio of our collecting area and the total area over which the light
has spread out. Thus, luminosity L (intrinsic brightness) and ﬂux density I (as
29

a measure of apparent brightness) are related by the inverse square law
I =
L
4πd2 .
(5.12)
This relation is the basis of standard candle distance measurements: Determine
the luminosity L from the properties of the standard candle, measure the ﬂux
density I directly using a telescope, and you can solve equation (5.12) for the
distance.
At least, this is true for our cosmic neighbourhood, up to distances of a
few hundred million light-years. For very distant objects, there is a modiﬁed
inverse square law, which we will derive below, in section 6.7.
5.3
Measuring the Hubble constant
With these preparations, we are now in a good position to look at actual mea-
surements of the Hubble constant, taken using comparatively close galaxies,
so the approximations we made for this section will be valid. The ﬁrst actual
Hubble diagram plotting distances against redshifts is due to Edwin Hubble
(Hubble 1929), and reproduced in ﬁgure 20.10
o~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
0.
S0OKM
0
DISTANCE
0
IDPARSEC
S
2 ,10
PARSECS
FIGURE 1
Velocity-Distance Relation among Extra-Galactic Nebulae.
Figure 20: The ﬁrst Hubble diagram, ﬁgure 1 in Hubble 1929. The y axis text is misleading;
the units are not km, as written, but km/s
While there is considerable scattering, there is a clear linear trend — which
is, as we have seen, what one would expect in a universe that is expanding
with a universal scale factor a(t), where galaxies obey a Hubble relation. This
plot and others like it eventually convinced most astronomers that we live in
an expanding universe, although Hubble himself remained strangely ambivalent
about the matter.
From a modern perspective, the plot in ﬁgure 20 has signiﬁcant systematic
errors. Perhaps the most fundamental one is that the stars originally lumped
10An assessment of (partial) precursors can be found in Trimble 2013.
30

as Cepheids really belong to two diﬀerent types, and have two diﬀerent period-
luminosity relations, as ﬁrst pointed out by Walter Baade at an IAU meeting
in 1952 (Hoyle 1954, Baade 1956).
I will not give an account of the complete history of Hubble constant mea-
surements. Instead, I fast-forward to a milestone: the Hubble Key Project,
which took advantage of the Hubble Space Telescope to calibrate the Cepheids
period-luminosity relation and, on that basis, other standard candle methods
that reach out to much greater distances, including supernovae of type Ia and
standard candles for the brightness of whole galaxies. The project’s aim was to
measure the Hubble constant with an accuracy of 10%.
The Hubble Key Project results for the more distant standard candles are
shown in ﬁgure 21, with a brief descriptions of the types of standard candles
involved in table 1.
Combining their measurements for the diﬀerent standard
0
104
2 104
3 104
Recession speed in km/s
H0 = 72 km/s/Mpc
SN Ia
SBF
FP
TF-I
0
100
200
300
400
500
Distance in Mpc
40
60
80
100
120
H0 in km/s/Mpc
Figure 21: Hubble diagram (top) and Hubble constant value (bottom) for distant standard
candles of the Hubble Key Project, based on the data and results of Freedman et al. 2001.
Standard candle types explained in table 1
candle methods they applied, the researchers obtained a value for the Hubble
constant of H0 = (72 ± 8) km/s Mpc−1 (Freedman et al. 2001).
The best current direct measurements of the Hubble constant have an ac-
curacy of better than 3%. However, there are now some discrepancies with
determinations of the Hubble based on observations of the very early universe.
The best value based on measurements by the Planck satellite gives a some-
what smaller Hubble constant of H0 = (66.9 ± 0.6) km/s Mpc−1, while the
latest value based on supernovae of type Ia is H0 = (73.2 ± 1.7) km/s Mpc−1
(Riess et al. 2016). It is not yet clear what the best explanation for this and
similar discrepancies is. They could point towards new physics — a deviation
from the simple model presented here — or they could mean that systematic
uncertainties have been underestimated.
31

Table 1: Standard candle types used for the Hubble Key Project distance measurements in
ﬁgure 21. The table numbers in the rightmost column refer to tables in Freedman et al. 2001
Type
Description
Table
Sn Ia
Supernovae Type Ia
deducing absolute brightness from evolution of
light-curve
6
SBF
Surface
Brightness
Fluctuations
link between distance and the ﬁne-grainedness
of a galaxy image
10
FP
Fundamental Plane
deducing elliptical galaxy brightness from ve-
locity dispersion and brightness proﬁle
9
TF-I
I-Band Tully-Fisher
deducing spiral galaxy brightness from rotation
speed
8
Given that we are now in the era of gravitational wave astronomy, I ought
to mention that there is an interesting alternative way of measuring the Hub-
ble constant. Gravitational waves are minute disturbances of the geometry of
space, which propagate at the speed of light. Notably, such waves are produced
wherever masses orbit each other. The waves are particularly strong when the
orbiting masses are compact, and orbit each other closely and quickly. Since
the gravitational waves carry away energy, the orbiting masses will move ever
closer to each other, orbit each other ever more quickly, and thus produce ever
stronger gravitational waves with ever smaller wavelengths until, at the end,
the two masses merge. The run-up to this merger, with increasing gravitational
wave amplitude and frequency, is governed by the basic laws of relativity. In
fact, if one can detect the gravitational wave and measure its basic proper-
ties, including how its frequency changes over time, one can derive the wave’s
amplitude at the source.
In other words: Pre-merger gravitational wave signals are “standard sirens,”
whose amplitude can be determined from direct measurements! And just as
with standard candles, the distance of standard sirens can be determined di-
rectly: by comparing the gravitational wave signal’s reconstructed amplitude
at the source with the amplitude that was measured when the signal arrived
here on Earth.11 Crucially, this distance determination is independent of any
other form of astronomical distance measurement — it follows directly from
the laws of general relativity! In those cases where one can also determine the
redshift of the gravitational wave source, this allows for a gravitational-wave
based measurement of the Hubble constant, as ﬁrst pointed out by Bernard
Schutz, who estimated that ten such measurements out to a distance of 100
Mpc (326 million light-years) could suﬃce to determine the Hubble constant
with an accuracy of 3% (Schutz 1986).
The redshift, however, cannot be derived directly from the gravitational
wave signal. That was one reason why the ﬁrst detection of a merger event
with an optical counterpart on August 17, 2017, was so exciting. This event,
the merger of two neutron stars, dubbed GW170817, was detected not only by
11 The relation, in this case, is not an inverse square law, but a 1/r law. This is because grav-
itational wave detectors directly measure the amplitude of a passing wave, not the intensity
(which is proportional to the square of the amplitude).
32

the LIGO and Virgo gravitational wave detectors, but also by many astronom-
ical telescopes all over the globe and in space. The gravitational wave signal
allowed a direct determination of the event’s distance, while electromagnetic
observations yielded precise measurements of the redshift z. By comparing the
two, a direct value for the Hubble constant of H0 = (70 ± 12) km/s Mpc−1 was
derived (Abbott et al. 2017).
Discrepancies aside, these values for the Hubble constant set the basic scales
for our expanding universe. The Hubble time has the value
τH ≡1
H0
∼4 · 1017 s ∼1010 a,
(5.13)
which, as we shall see later on in section 7.5, sets the scale for the age of the
universe. The Hubble distance
DH ≡
c
H0
∼1026 m ∼4000 Mpc ∼1.4 · 1010 light-years
(5.14)
sets the cosmic distance scale, and we will encounter both those scales at various
times throughout the following sections.
5.4
Approximating a(t)
Later on, in section 7, we will see how the function a(t) can be determined,
and how its properties depend on the content of our universe. But even now,
we can write down an approximate solution. After all, mathematics tells us
that certain functions (speciﬁcally, those that are inﬁnitely diﬀerentiable) can
be represented as polynomials with inﬁnitely many terms, namely as a Taylor
series. If we keep only the ﬁrst few terms, we get an approximation of the
function in question. If we zoom in on any point on the function’s graph, then
for all smooth functions, a small region around that point will begin to look
more and more like a straight line (described by a linear). Zoom out again, and
the ﬁrst traces of curvature of the function’s graph can be described quite well
by a parabola (described by the linear plus a quadratic term).
Each such approximation works well in a small area around a chosen point.
For a(t), we concentrate on the present time t0 and try to ﬁnd an approximation
that works for the immediate past and the immediate future. We approximate
a(t) as
a(t) ≈c1 + c2(t −t0) + c3(t −t0)2,
(5.15)
with three constants c1, c2, c3. Setting t = t0, the present-day value of the scale
factor is c1. Let us rename that constant and call it a0 ≡a(t0). Next, we
calculate the Hubble constant, following the deﬁnition (5.3). Applied to our
approximate expression (5.15), the result is
H0 = ˙a(t)
a(t)

t=t0
= c2
c1
= c2
a0
,
(5.16)
so that we have
c2 = a0H0.
(5.17)
33

This leaves c3, which is not ﬁxed by any parameter we have yet introduced.
The physical dimension of c3 is that of c2 but with an additional inverse time
dimension, since c3 is the coeﬃcient for the term (t −t0)2 instead of (t −t0). In
order to keep the new parameter dimensionless, it is customary to deﬁne c3 as
c3 = −1
2 a0 H2
0 q0,
(5.18)
where the dimensionless constant q0 is called the deceleration parameter The
minus sign is a historical legacy: When this parameter was initially deﬁned,
the universe was thought to contain ordinary matter which, as we will see later
(and as is natural for a mutually attractive gravitational force), decelerates
cosmic expansion. In this situation, the extra minus sign makes q0 a positive
parameter. When it was later found that our universe is instead accelerating,
we were stuck with a negative q0, and so far, nobody has seen ﬁt to re-deﬁne
this parameter as the acceleration parameter, with opposite sign. (Presumably
for the same reason I am chickening out here, and going with the conventional,
if awkward deﬁnition.)
All in all, we have the approximate expression for the scale factor that is
a(t) ≈a0

1 + H0(t −t0) −1
2H2
0q0(t −t0)2

.
(5.19)
It is possible, of course, to improve the approximation by including higher-order
terms. A derivation up to fourth order can be found in Visser 2004; we follow
the more usual course of going no higher than the second-order term.
The approximation (5.19), governing as it does the distances of nearby
galaxies in the Hubble ﬂow, is another example for the equivalence principle. As
long as we only consider short time spans t−t0, distances change approximately
linearly, as they would if all galaxies were moving freely, without the inﬂuence
of gravity — exactly the behaviour prescribed by the equivalence principle, as
long as we consider a spacetime region that is small enough. Higher-order terms
encoding accelerations due to gravity become inevitable, though, as t−t0 grows
larger, in other words: as we consider larger and larger spacetime regions, tidal
forces become ever more important.
6
Consequences of scale-factor expansion
When it came to observable eﬀects of the Hubble relation, we have so far relied
local approximations: the (classical) Doppler eﬀect applies to recession speeds
only in a neighbourhood of our own galaxy — even though that neighbourhood
is large by everyday standards, extending out to objects at a distance of more
than 500 Mpc, corresponding to a bit over 1.6 billion light-years.
In this section, we go further than that. We will again make local calcula-
tions; after all, the local approximations based on the equivalence principle and
the Newtonian limit describe those situations where our usual physical intuition
regarding distances, speeds, and various physical laws linking these and other
entities apply. But we will ﬁnd ways of generalizing our results to the whole of
34

our universe — either by integrating them up, or by deriving relations between
locally deﬁned quantities; if those hold at the location of one galaxy, then in a
homogeneous universe, they will hold everywhere.
There are additional consequences of scale-factor expansion that are not
dealt with here: Information about how expansion inﬂuences number counts of
objects, e.g. up to a certain redshift z, and a brief introduction to the Tolman
surface brightness test relating diﬀerent cosmic distance measures can be found
in sections 1.11 and 1.7 of Weinberg 2008, respectively.
6.1
Diluting the universe
We begin, once more, on small scales, invoking both the equivalence principle
and the Newtonian limit; recall that, in a cosmos expanding with a universal
scale factor, restricting attention to a suﬃciently small region will also limit the
changes associated with the Hubble ﬂow. Thus restricted, we are now, locally,
in the domain of classical physics, at least to good approximation.
One of the most important classical laws of physics is the ﬁrst law of ther-
modynamics, a particular way to deﬁne energy conservation. Given a system
with internal energy U and pressure p, the internal energy will change as
dU = δQ −p dV
(6.1)
as the system’s volume changes by dV , and heat δQ is added to or withdrawn
from the system (depending on the sign).
Let us consider a small volume of space in our expanding universe that is
expanding along with the galaxies. One example would be a cube, with one of
our Hubble-ﬂow galaxies in each of its eight corners.
In our expanding universe, the pattern of galaxies will be preserved. In
particular, no galaxy will move into our cube from the outside, or leave the
cube. Since the universe is homogeneous, the same must hold for anything that
can move around — gas, energy, heat; any net imbalance between adjacent
regions would mean that one region would have more, another less, leading
to inhomogeneities.
In particular, our cube will not pick up net heat from
the surrounding regions, or lose heat to them. Expansion must be adiabatic,
δQ = 0.
How does this picture change if we include the mass-energy equivalence
of special relativity? For one, the energy U would be equivalent to a mass;
also, we would need to consider an additional energy contribution in terms of
rest energies of the particles involved. But since, following our homogeneity
argument, the particle number in our cube will be constant (even separately,
for all species of particles), extending the deﬁnition of U to include rest energy
contributions will not change the validity of our conservation equation (6.1).
Thus, we can relate the inner energy U to an energy density, and that energy
to the mass density ρ(t) in our cosmos as
U = ρc2V.
(6.2)
Inserting this expression, it is straightforward to rewrite (6.1) as
dρ = −(ρ + p/c2)dV
V .
(6.3)
35

Recall that we are not considering an arbitrary volume, but one that is linked
to cosmic expansion. If all lengths scale ∼a(t), then any volume will scale
∼a(t)3. This is easily seen in the case of a cube, where the volume is the cube
of the side length, and the side length scales with a(t).
In consequence, the volume changes as
V (t) =
 a(t)
a(t0)
3
V (t0),
(6.4)
so the diﬀerential change in volume, dV , corresponding to a small change da in
the scale factor, is
dV
V
= 3da
a .
(6.5)
Insert this into (6.3) and you get the diﬀerential change in density, dρ, corre-
sponding to the small scale factor change, namely
dρ = −3(ρ + p/c2)da
a .
(6.6)
A special case of this is how densities change with cosmic time,
˙ρ = −3(ρ + p/c2) ˙a
a = −3(ρ + p/c2) H(t).
(6.7)
This depends on two quantities describing the state of cosmic matter: the
(mass) density ρ and the pressure p. In order to ﬁnd a solution to this equation,
we will need additional information: we will need to know how density and
pressure are related. This information is encapsulated in what is called the
equation of state of the matter in question, p = p(ρ).
In cosmology, it is usual to consider diﬀerent equations of state, all of which
are of the form
p = w · ρc2
(6.8)
for some speciﬁc constant w:
Matter (“galaxy dust”):
p =
0,
w =
0
Electromagnetic radiation:
p =
ρc2/3,
w =
1
3
Dark energy (scalar ﬁeld):
p = −ρc2,
w = −1.
Matter, in this particular context, refers to our “galaxy dust” of galaxy point
particles. In a local frame, the speed values for such galaxies are much slower
than the speed of light, and their momentum values much smaller than their
energy divided by c. That is why it is an excellent approximation to set the
pressure to zero, p = 0.
For electromagnetic radiation ﬁlling an expanding universe — for instance
in the form of thermal radiation — we can make no such approximation. From
Maxwell’s theory, physicists know, and have known for some time (Maxwell
1873, §792), that radiation pressure and radiation energy density ρE are linked
as p = ρE/3.
36

The last example, dark energy, is the most unusual of the three. It does not
correspond to any form of matter or energy we know from everyday experience,
or even everyday physics. It does, though, correspond to a particularly simple
kind of particle in elementary particle physics, namely a particle described by
a so-called scalar ﬁeld. In cosmology, this particular ingredient will turn out
to be needed to explain the observed expansion history — the generalization
of the Hubble relation that we derived in section 5. Still, at present nobody
has a convincing physical theory of what dark energy actually is. At this point,
the equation of state p = −ρc2 is pretty much the only thing that deﬁnes dark
energy. Historically, dark energy was introduced in a somewhat diﬀerent form:
as an additional constant Λ, called the cosmological constant, introduced by
Einstein in 1917 as an extension of the original form of his ﬁeld equations. The
dark energy density we shall be working with in this lecture is related to the
value of the cosmological constant by
ρΛ =
c2
8πG Λ.
(6.9)
Back to our task of reconstructing dilution! For any equation of state of the
form p = w · ρc2, equation (6.7) is readily integrated by separation of variables.
To this end, we rewrite the equation as
dρ
ρ = −3(1 + w) da
a .
(6.10)
Both sides are easy to integrate, and we obtain
ln ρ = −3(1 + w) ln a + C,
(6.11)
with an integration constant C. This equation can be rewritten as
ρ(t) = C · a(t)−3(1+w).
(6.12)
We can replace the constant C by the present day, t = t0, value ρ(t0) of the
density and the present-day value a0 ≡a(t0) of the cosmic scale factor, and
thus obtain
ρ(t) = ρ(t0) ·
 a(t)
a(t0)
−3(1+w)
(6.13)
This is the explicit equation showing how the content of the universe is diluted
as the scale factor changes over time.
For dark energy, the density turns out to be constant, since 1+w = 0! This
is the motivation for interpretations of dark energy as some unusual property
of empty space — when expansion has doubled the “amount of space”, the
amount of dark energy has doubled, as well. One should be cautious with such
interpretations, though.
Matter — consisting of our galaxy point particles — dilutes as
ρM(t)
ρM(t0) =
 a(t)
a(t0)
−3
.
(6.14)
37

This is as expected: the number of galaxies within our “co-moving cube” re-
mains constant, since the pattern inside the cube, deﬁned by the galaxies and
their locations, remains the same; each galaxy’s mass remains unchanged, so
the total mass due to galaxies inside the cube remains unchanged. On the other
hand, as we have seen, volume scales as V ∼a3, so the density should indeed
scale ∼a−3.
While this is not surprising, it is always good to have a cross-check to
perform. The next case, that of electromagnetic radiation, is more illuminating
(no pun intended).
6.2
Redshifting photons
The mass density ρR of electromagnetic radiation, with its equation of state
p = ρc2/3, scales as
ρR(t)
ρR(t0) =
 a(t)
a(t0)
−4
.
(6.15)
What does that tell us about light? The easiest way to answer this is to re-
member that light is a mixture of light particles, called photons:
Each photon has a frequency ν and wavelength λ, with an energy E = hν =
hc/λ where h is Planck’s constant, and photons travel at the vacuum speed of
light c. Photons behave like particles, and we will take that to include that
they do not vanish suddenly, or pop into existence.
The mass density of a bunch of photons is proportional to their energy
density, and that is proportional to the sum of all the energy contributions
from the various photons.
As space expands, the same number of photons
spread out over a larger volume V ∼a3. If that were all, we would expect the
photon mass density to vary as ρ ∼a−3. The extra factor a−1 must mean that
the energies of all the separate photons decrease with time, as well, as E ∼a−1.
Given that for these photon energies, E = hc/λ, this means that each
photon wavelength gets stretched in proportion to a(t), namely as
λ(t) = λ0 · a(t)
a(t0).
(6.16)
This is an alternative form of the cosmological redshift we had encountered
as an approximate Doppler shift in section 5.1: photon wavelengths increase in
proportion to the universal scale factor, just like the distances between galaxies
in the Hubble ﬂow.
There are some aspects of this derivation one might well be skeptical about.
Is photon number really conserved, or is that taking our physical intuition too
38

far? Introducing photons in the ﬁrst place means introducing some concepts
from quantum mechanics. If we were to go further and include the quantum
theory of electromagnetic ﬁelds, we enter a framework where photon number is
not conserved, in general — so which is the case in the particular situation we
are considering here?
Other skeptical questions include: Given that the equivalence principle ap-
plies to limited spacetime regions, does our derivation really ensure that the
cosmological redshift formula (6.16) holds for all times t? Also, given that we
started out with a formula for energy conservation, how come that individual
photons are now apparently losing energy over time?
Let us begin with the time limit. Photons travel at the vacuum speed of light
c, so after a longer time has passed, we will deﬁnitely have left the immediate
vicinity of our original small region. Still, we can apply the formula (6.16),
as follows. Our aim is to deduce what happens to a photon that travels from
one galaxy in the Hubble ﬂow to another such galaxy (the latter galaxy, in all
practical applications, is our own; our home base for observing the universe).
Let us divide the time that passes between the cosmic time te when the photon is
emitted and the later time tr when the photon is received (observed) into many
small steps, inserting t1, t2, t3, . . . in between the emission and reception times.
If we make the divisions suﬃciently small, then each travel from ti to ti+1 will
occur in a small enough region, and during a small enough time interval, that
we can apply equation (6.16). During each of these portions of the photon’s
trajectory, its wavelength changes by the ratio a(ti+1)/a(ti). In order to obtain
the total change, we need to multiply all those diﬀerent change factors:
t1
t2
t3
t4
t5
t6
t7
t8
t9
·a(t2)
a(t1)
·a(t3)
a(t2)
·a(t4)
a(t3)
·a(t5)
a(t4)
·a(t6)
a(t5)
·a(t7)
a(t6)
·a(t8)
a(t7)
·a(t9)
a(t8)
| {z }
| {z }
| {z }
| {z }
| {z }
| {z }
| {z }
| {z }
| {z }
| {z }
te
tr
·a(t1)
a(te)
·a(tr)
a(t9)
λe
= λr
But as one can see even in our comparatively coarse example with ten divisions,
all the scale factor values cancel each other out, except the ﬁrst and the last
one. We ﬁnd that equation (6.16) indeed holds for arbitrary times t and t0,
and that light emitted by a galaxy in the Hubble ﬂow at cosmic time te, and
received by another at a later cosmic time tr, is redshifted as
z = λr −λe
λe
= a(tr)
a(te) −1.
(6.17)
So what about individual photons losing energy, even though we began by
assuming energy conservation? This is a somewhat subtle point. All our calcu-
lations in a small spacetime region in free fall are approximate, limited by the
inﬂuence of tidal accelerations – cosmic time t is only approximately the time
coordinate of special relativity, distances behave only approximately as they do
in special relativity, and so on. If we want to go beyond these approximations
and obtain exact results, we will need to take the limit and go to a region
that is inﬁnitesimally small. An equation like the one describing the relation
39

between the density and the scale factor, equation (6.13), remains valid in that
inﬁnitesimal limit, since the density of an inﬁnitesimally region is well-deﬁned
— which is why, in an inhomogeneous situation, we are able to talk about the
density of a continuum at a speciﬁc location.
But an equation like the one we have just derived for the redshift of a
photon, (6.17), is not preserved if we go to the inﬁnitesimal limit. The limit
of restricting ourselves to an inﬁnitesimal region, tr →te, is the limit where
z →0, that is, where the photon is not redshifted at all. Equation (6.17), as
it stands, describes a non-inﬁnitesimal region. Which is ﬁne, but it also means
that we have to face up to cosmic time t being an unusual coordinate. The two
galaxies emitting and receiving the light are not at rest relative to each other,
yet cosmic time links their proper time coordinates to create the global time
coordinate we call cosmic time. And for galaxies that are not at rest relative
to each other, there will be a Doppler shift.
In special relativity, when light is emitted by an observer, and received by
an observer who is in motion relative to the ﬁrst, of course the second observer
will measure a diﬀerent wavelength, and thus energy, for each individual photon
(cf. the brief account of the Doppler eﬀect in special relativity in section B.5).
In that situation, we would never wonder how the photon in question had “lost”
or “gained” energy. We would see quite clearly what had happened, namely
that we are dealing with more than one frame of reference. The initial energy
was measured in one inertial frame, and the receiver was in another inertial
frame. Emitter and receiver are in relative motion; hence, the Doppler eﬀect
and the fact that the receiver measures a diﬀerent energy.
In our cosmological situation, we know that at least in the small-region ap-
proximation, our galaxies are in motion; at large scales, we know that cosmic
time t is not an ordinary, special-relativistic time coordinate, but something
more unusual. Given those two circumstances, even with our rather limited
understanding, the most parsimonious explanation is that the apparent loss of
photon energy is due to the fact that emitter and receiver are in relative motion,
or in what passes for relative motion in the more general framework of an ex-
panding universe. A more thorough examination, including a generalization of
the special-relativistic notion of relative speed by introducing a concept known
as parallel transport, conﬁrms this (Narlikar 1994, Bunn and Hogg 2009).
Still, with the remaining doubts about photon number conservation, and the
question of whether or not equation (6.17) remains valid beyond the (trivial)
inﬁnitesimal limit z →0, it makes sense for us to look at a more rigorous
derivation of how photons propagate, and are redshifted.
6.3
Light propagation in an expanding universe
Consider the propagation of light that was emitted by one galaxy at time te, and
received in another galaxy at a later time tr. We think of light as a point-like
pulse with a well-deﬁned location at each moment in time, and follow the same
strategy as before: We make our calculations locally, in freely falling systems,
considering only a small spacetime region for each and exploiting the fact that
cosmic time t is an inertial coordinate there, at least approximately. A similar
40

calculation for a rubber band model of the expanding universe can be found in
Price and Grover 2001.
Speciﬁcally, let us look at the distance between the emitting and receiving
galaxy at ﬁxed time tr, and divide that distance into N equal pieces of length
∆r. Assume that our light signal reaches the center of the ith such piece at
time ti. If the length of the ith piece at time tr was ∆r, then the length of the
same piece, as measured in our local free-falling system at the time ti when the
light signal was passing through, will be
∆r a(ti)
a(tr),
since that is how lengths change in our expanding universe. Also, since we are in
free fall in a reasonably small neighbourhood, light propagation is governed by
special relativity: in an inertial system, light travels in vacuum at the constant
speed c (cf. the basic principles of special relativity as recounted in the appendix
in section B.2). Thus, in our particular situation, light will take the cosmic time
interval
∆ti = ∆r
c · a(ti)
a(tr)
(6.18)
to pass that particular segment of its trajectory. And remember that wherever
I have talked about approximations in this section so far, the deviations from
the laws of special relativity are proportional to the size of the small free-falling
region we are considering, since these deviations are due to tidal forces. If we go
to the limit of inﬁnitesimally small regions, our approximate statements about
the lengths of certain segments, and the propagation speed of light being c, will
become exact.
Naively, one might think to add up all these travel times to obtain the total
interval of cosmic time it has taken for light to travel from the emitting to the
receiving galaxy, similar to here:
t1
t2
t3
t4
t5
+∆r
c · a(t1)
a(tr) +∆r
c · a(t2)
a(tr) +∆r
c · a(t3)
a(tr) +∆r
c · a(t4)
a(tr) +∆r
c · a(t5)
a(tr)
|
{z
}
|
{z
}
|
{z
}
|
{z
}
|
{z
}
te
tr
∆r
2c · a(te)
a(tr)
+∆r
2c
T =
|{z}
|{z}
But things aren’t that simple – the time ti implicitly depends on how long it
has taken light to reach that particular point of its trajectory, which is the kind
of travel we hope to calculate!
The solution is to add up the small contributions in another way. Starting
from
∆ti = ∆ri
c
· a(ti)
a(tr),
(6.19)
where ∆ri = ∆r/2 for the ﬁrst and last bit, and ∆ri = ∆r for all other segments,
we move all the ti-dependent factors to the left-hand side of the equation, which
gives
∆ti
a(ti) =
∆ri
c · a(tr).
(6.20)
41

Summing over all the segments involved, we get
N
X
i=1
∆ti
a(ti) =
1
c · a(tr) dr,e(tr),
(6.21)
where on the right-hand side we have used the fact that, by deﬁnition, the
length segments add up to the distance of the emitting and receiving galaxies
at the time tr of reception.
If we make N inﬁnitely large, and our segments inﬁnitesimally small, the
left-hand side becomes an integral, and we end up with12
dr,e(tr) = c · a(tr) ·
tr
Z
te
dt
a(t).
(6.22)
This is the key equation for light propagation in an expanding universe, linking
light travel time tr −te to the distance dr,e(tr) at the time of reception. Of
course, in order to evaluate the integral, we will need the explicit form of the
universal scale factor as a function of cosmic time, a(t). This requires additional
calculations, which I will present in section 7.
For signals we receive at the present time, tr = t0, it is again straightforward
to see how this distance is related to the look-back time if we consider our series
expansion for a(t) given in equation (5.19). Inserting that approximation, we
have
dr,e(t0) = c ·
t0
Z
te
dt
1 + H0(t −t0) −1
2H2
0q0(t −t0)2 .
(6.23)
We can simplify this integral in two ways. For the denominator, we make use
of the geometric series approximation
1
1 + X = 1 −X + . . . ;
(6.24)
this formula gives a good approximation whenever X is small, in our case:
whenever t0 −t is considerably smaller than the Hubble time τH = 1/H0.
In addition, we choose another integration variable, namely t′ = t0 −t. Our
expression for the distance then becomes
dr,e(t0)
=
c ·
t0−te
Z
0
dt′
1 −H0t′ −1
2H2
0q0(t′)2 ≈c ·
t0−te
Z
0
dt′  1 + H0t′
=
c(t0 −te) + 1
2cH0(t0 −te)2,
(6.25)
where we have again only kept terms up to second order. This expression shows
that, at least for shorter distances, the proper distance dr,e is approximately
12Why does this appear to have a minus sign, compared to the usual derivation using the
metric and radial coordinate? Because with the radial coordinate, we speciﬁcally look at light
travelling inwards towards smaller radius values, so rr −re is equal to minus the comoving
distance.
42

equal to the look-back time t0−te times the usual vacuum speed of light, just as
in special relativity. For larger distances, and thus larger look-back times t0−te,
additional eﬀects come into play, and the relation becomes more complicated.
In fact, the look-back time, as the time it takes light from a distant object
to reach us, is one possible deﬁnition of a distance in an expanding universe.
Our formula shows that for smaller distance values, the look-back time and the
proper distance dr,e are approximately the same, while for larger distances, the
two deﬁnitions diverge.
6.4
Cosmological redshift revisited
Even though we do not yet have the knowledge to ﬁnd explicit solutions to the
light propagation equation (6.22), since we do not yet know the explicit form
of a(t), there are some conclusions we can draw already. Imagine two light
signals leaving a distant galaxy at r = re at consecutive cosmic times te and
te + δte, arriving at a second galaxy at time tr and tr + δtr. Then by our light
propagation equation (6.22), we have
tr
Z
te
c dt
a(t) = dr,e(tr)
a(tr)
and
tr+δtr
Z
te+δte
c dt
a(t) = dr,e(tr + δtr)
a(tr + δtr) .
(6.26)
But the expressions on the right-hand sides of these two equations are the
same — after all, that is how distances change in a universe expanding with a
universal scale factors, cf. equation (4.1). That means we have


tr+δtr
Z
te+δte
−
tr
Z
te

c dt
a(t) = 0,
(6.27)
or, exploiting the facts that we can split integration ranges into separate seg-
ments, and combine adjacent segments, and that an integral changes sign if you
reverse upper and lower limit,13


tr+δtr
Z
tr
+
tr
Z
te+δte
−
tr
Z
te

c dt
a(t) =


tr+δtr
Z
tr
−
te+δte
Z
tr
−
tr
Z
te

c dt
a(t)
=


tr+δtr
Z
tr
−
te+δte
Z
te

c dt
a(t)
=
0. (6.28)
13 Written out, this means that we have additivity,
b
Z
a
f(x)dx =
c
Z
a
f(x)dx +
b
Z
c
f(x)dx,
and a sign change when we reverse the boundary values,
b
Z
a
f(x)dx = −
a
Z
b
f(x)dx.
43

However, for very small integral ranges δt, there is an approximate equality
¯t+δt
Z
¯t
f(t) dt ≈f(¯t) · δt,
(6.29)
which in our case translates to
δtr
a(tr) = δte
a(te).
(6.30)
Our two light signals, one closely following the other, could be one of several
things: real light pulses, but also consecutive crests (or troughs) of elementary
light waves of frequency f ∝1/δt. In the latter case, we would have
fr
fe
= a(te)
a(tr),
(6.31)
so the wavelength of the light changes as
λr
λe
= a(tr)
a(te),
(6.32)
reproducing formula (6.16) for the cosmological redshift, namely
z = λr −λe
λe
= a(tr)
a(te) −1.
(6.33)
Note that while there was still some approximation involved in the derivation,
it is of a diﬀerent kind than before. Our only assumption now, necessary for
evaluating the integral as in (6.29), was that a(t) should be approximately
constant during the time interval between the ﬁrst and the second signal (crest,
trough. . . ). For all realistic a(t) we are dealing with in cosmology, with the
exception of the so-called inﬂationary phase in the very early universe, that
approximation is valid.
Also note that not only does the derivation in this section validate our
earlier results – it extends them: formula (6.30) is valid not only for wave
crests or troughs, but more generally for light-like signals following each other.
The arrival time diﬀerence of these signals will be larger than the emission time
diﬀerence. The same will apply to all consecutive signals that carry information
about what is happening in a distant region of the cosmos. Formula (6.30)
describes not only a cosmological redshift, but, more generally, cosmological
time dilation. The corresponding eﬀects have been observed in the light-curves
of more vs. less distant supernovae of type Ia (Leibundgut et al. 1996).
The most common application is the case where we receive the light of a
distant object at the present time, tr = t0. In that case, we can make equation
(6.33) more concrete by using the series approximation for the scale factor
a(t) around the present time t0 which is given in equation (5.19) in terms
of the constants a0, H0, q0. In order to get everything nice and polynomial,
we will again use the series approximation (6.24).
The series expansion for
44

a(t) is in terms of t0 −te, called the lookback time, namely the time that has
passed between the emission of the light and us receiving it. Putting everything
together, we get
z ≈H0(t0 −te) + 1
2H2
0 (q0 + 2)(t0 −te)2.
(6.34)
This can be inverted to give the lookback time as a polynomial of the redshift
z, again keeping only terms up to second order, namely
H0(t0 −te) ≈z −1
2(q0 + 2)z2.
(6.35)
Using this in our approximate relation (6.25) between the present-day distance
dr,e(t0) and the look-back time, we can derive an approximate redshift-distance
relation, which turns out to be
dr,e(z) =
c
H0

z −1
2(q0 + 1)z2

= DH

z −1
2(q0 + 1)z2

,
(6.36)
where the last expression again uses the Hubble distance DH ≡c/H0. The
term linear in z is the linear redshift-distance relation we had already derived
as equation (5.8), while the term that is second order in z is the lowest-order
correction.
6.5
Redshift drift
Consider once more the cosmological redshift formula
z(tr) =
a(tr)
a(te(tr)) −1,
(6.37)
here rewritten to make explicit that, given a ﬁxed reception time and a ﬁxed
distant galaxy in the Hubble ﬂow, both the redshift of that galaxy’s light arriv-
ing at our own location at time tr and the time at which that light was emitted
are functions of tr, namely z(tr) and te(tr).
We can diﬀerentiate both sides of this equation to see how these quantities
change as the reception time changes. The result ist
dz
dtr
=
˙a(tr)
a(te(tr)) −
a(tr)
a2(te(tr)) ˙a(te(tr))dte
dtr
.
(6.38)
We can replace the ˙a-terms using the Hubble parameter H(t) deﬁned in equa-
tion (5.2), and obtain
dz
dtr
=
a(tr)
a(te(tr))

H(tr) −H(te(tr))dte
dtr

.
(6.39)
But in equation (6.30) during our derivation of the cosmic redshift formula, we
saw that the ratio of inﬁnitesimal changes in the emission and reception times
is proportional to the ratio of scale factor values at those times,
dte
dtr
= a(te(tr))
a(tr)
.
(6.40)
45

Finally, we can make use of the redshift formula (6.37) to rewrite all scale factor
ratios in terms of the redshift z(tr). The result, now once more dropping the
explicit tr-dependence-notation and noting that the Hubble parameter at the
reception time is the Hubble constant H0, is
H(te) = H0(1 + z) −dz
dtr
.
(6.41)
On the right-hand side, we have H0, which can be measured as described in
section 5.3, and we have the redshift, which is straightforward to measure. If
we could measure the derivative, as well, and observe how the redshift of that
distant galaxy changes a little bit over time, then using this formula, we could
directly reconstruct the value H(te) of the Hubble parameter at the time the
light was emitted! By performing such measurements for galaxies at diﬀerent
redshifts, we could reconstruct the change of the Hubble parameter over time,
and in this way, reconstruct the expansion history of the universe!
Excitingly, such measurements are just about within reach for the next gen-
eration of telescope, namely 40-meter-class telescopes such as ESO’s Extremely
Large Telescope currently under construction in Chile. With patience, namely
investing 4000 hours of observing time over 20 years, the eﬀect could be mea-
sured for extremely distant cosmic clouds of hydrogen at redshifts 2 < z < 5
(Liske et al. 2008).
6.6
The geometry of space
We have seen in section 5.2 how astronomers measure distances, using standard
candles and the inverse-square law (5.12). Which parts of the derivation of
the inverse-square law needs to be changed in an expanding universe? In the
lecture itself, I immediately assumed Euclidean geometry for my calculations,
mentioning in passing that this does indeed turn out to be the geometry of our
particular expanding universe. In the written version, I will be more general,
although not to the extent of writing down explicit proofs. These proofs, none
of which require familiarity with the concept of a space(time) metric, can be
found in chapter 26 of Schutz 2004, on which this section is largely based.
To begin with, we should be cautious when it comes to the geometry of
space as deﬁned by constant values of the cosmic time t. As we saw in section
4.3, we should be very careful about which of the concepts of special relativity,
regarding both time and space, we can legitimately apply in an expanding
universe.
Fortunately, the fact that our simple model universe is homogeneous and
isotropic restricts the possibilities to a remarkably small number, namely three.
The geometric arguments are beyond the scope of this lecture, but they, too can
be formulated without recourse to the concept of a metric. The three kinds of
three-dimensional spaces that are compatible with homogeneity and isotropy are
(1) ordinary Euclidean space, (2) a spherical space that is the three-dimensional
analogue of a two-dimensional spherical surface, and (3) a hyperbolic space that
is the three-dimensional analogue of a two-dimensional saddle-shaped surface.
46

What is important for a closer look at luminosity and apparent brightness is
to know the surface area of a sphere, deﬁned as the surface of constant distance
from a ﬁxed origin. In our case, we look at a ﬁxed cosmic time t; the sphere
we are interested in is the surface deﬁned by the location of all Hubble-ﬂow
galaxies i that have the distance distance di,0(t) = d from the origin 0. That
surface area, it turns out, is14
A[d(t)] = 4π ·







d(t)2
Euclidean space
a(t)2 · sin2[d(t)/a(t)]
spherical space
a(t)2 · sinh2[d(t)/a(t)]
hyperbolic space.
(6.43)
Note that, for small distances d(t)/a(t), all three formulae have the same linear
limit, due to sin x ≈x and sinh x ≈x for x ≪1. This is a good cross-check on
our practice of treating space within a small region around a free-falling galaxy
as Euclidean space.
There is a closely related batch of formulae which relates the arc length for
a circular arc with radius d(t) and opening angle ∆φ as
l[d(t), ∆φ] = ∆φ ·







d(t)
Euclidean space
a(t) · sin[d(t)/a(t)]
spherical space
a(t) · sinh[d(t)/a(t)]
hyperbolic space.
(6.44)
In fact, one can get from (6.44) to (6.43) and back quite easily, by looking at the
limit of very small angles ∆φ. In that case, the surface patch of the sphere is
very small, and can be approximated as ﬂat. (On Earth, we do the same every
time we print a city map onto a ﬂat piece of paper; and yes: this is exactly
analogous to our strategy of using the equivalence principle for describing small
regions of spacetime.) Then, with an angle ∆φ and another angle ∆α whose
arc is perpendicular to that of ∆φ where the two intersect on the sphere’s
surface, we can build a very small rectangle, whose surface area will be given
by l[d(t), ∆φ] · l[d(t), ∆α], or
∆α · ∆φ ·







d(t)2
Euclidean space
a(t)2 · sin2[d(t)/a(t)]
spherical space
a(t)2 · sinh2[d(t)/a(t)]
hyperbolic space,
(6.45)
which in turn is proportional to the solid angle ∆Ω≡∆φ · ∆α.
The d(t)-
dependence is the same for all solid angle patches that lie on the same sphere
with radius d(t), so if we add up numerous small patches that, between them,
14In the usual coordinates of standard cosmology, where r is the comoving radial coordinate
deﬁned so that the surface area of a sphere is always 4πa(t)2r2, one introduces the adapted
radial coordinate χ by
dχ ≡
dr
√
1 −Kr2 .
(6.42)
By rescaling r and a(t) simultaneously, one can always obtain one of the three cases K =
−1, 0, +1. Our global distance coordinate is d(t) = a(t) · χ, corresponding to what is usually
called proper distance between galaxies in the Hubble ﬂow.
47

cover the whole sphere, the solid angle patches by themselves will add up to
the full solid angle 4π. Thus, the total area will indeed turn out to be given by
(6.43).
The arc length equations (6.44) can be used to deﬁne an interesting measure
of distance in cosmology, called the angular diameter distance . Assume we have
two objects A and B in the Hubble ﬂow, equally distant from us, separated
by a proper distance L perpendicularly to the line of sight, and that both
objects emit light towards Earth at some past time te. The geometry at the
time of light emission is as shown in ﬁgure 22. Note that while the triangle is
A
B
L
G
∆φ
Figure 22: The geometry of two Hubble-ﬂow objects A and B, separated perpendicularly to
the line of sight by a proper distance L, emitting light towards an observer within our own
galaxy G at some past time te. The diagram shows the geometry at time te
drawn with straight lines, geometry need not be ﬂat, and in fact, the distance
dang ≡AG = BG, the distance L and the angle ∆φ shown in the ﬁgure will
not, in general, be related following the rules governing triangles in Euclidean
space. For small angles ∆φ, the straight distance L is approximately equal to
the corresponding arc length, and for ∆φ measured in radians, we have
L = ∆φ · dang,
(6.46)
For a conﬁguration of known size L, we can measure the apparent size ∆φ
from observations and use (6.46) to derive the conﬁguration’s angular diameter
distance dang.
Following (6.44), the angular diameter distance is related to the proper
distance as
dang =







d(te)
Euclidean space
a(te) · sin[d(te)/a(te)]
spherical space
a(te) · sinh[d(te)/a(te)]
hyperbolic space.
(6.47)
The same expression can be re-written in a diﬀerent form, which we will make
use of later.
By the deﬁnition of scale factor expansion, equation (4.1), we
have d(te)/a(te) = d(t0)/a0, with proper distance and scale factor evaluated
at the present time t0. Also, the formula (6.17) for the cosmological redshift
relates the redshift z of light received from a distant object to the scale factor
values at the time te of emission and the time t0 of reception of the light as
1 + z = a0/a(te). As a result, we have
dang =







d(t0)/(1 + z)
Euclidean space
a0/(1 + z) · sin[d(t0)/a0]
spherical space
a0/(1 + z) · sinh[d(t0)/a0]
hyperbolic space.
(6.48)
48

The most important application of the concept of angular distance concerns
measurements of the ﬂuctuations in the cosmic microwave background (CMB),
the radiation that reaches us from the hot, dense Big Bang phase of our uni-
verse, 13.8 billion years ago. From models of the universe, one can derive a
maximum size for such ﬂuctuations, given by how far a sound wave in the early
universe’s plasma can travel from the time of the Big Bang to the time the
cosmic microwave radiation is set free. In that case, the radius of the corre-
sponding arc segment in terms of proper distance can be calculated directly,
as long as we know the cosmic time now, and the cosmic time the CMB was
produced. The angular size of the largest ﬂuctuations can be measured on the
sky, and the proper distance of these ﬂuctuations from us can be derived from
reconstructions of cosmic history — we can tell at what age, and at what red-
shift, the cosmic microwave background was set free. The only unknown, then,
is which of the three formulae in (6.47) best describes the relationship between
these quantities, in other words: these measurements and deductions constrain
the geometry of the universe. The evidence shows that the space of our expand-
ing universe is Euclidean, within the limits of accuracy of these measurements
(de Bernardis et al. 2000, Bennett et al. 2013, Planck Collaboration 2016).
6.7
Luminosity, apparent brightness, and distance
After these geometric preparations, let us return to the questions of luminosity,
apparent brightness, and distance.
Just as we argued in section 5.2, in an
expanding universe, light sent out isotropically from a distant source will spread
out uniformly over the surface of a sphere; when we measure that light, the
fraction we capture is the ratio of our telescope area (pointed directly at the
distant source!) and the total surface area of the sphere upon which the light
has spread out.
Consider light that was emitted at some previous time te and is just now
reaching us at the present time t0. By (6.43), we know how the sphere’s surface
area is related to the proper distance di,0(t0) between the light source and us,
the observers, evaluated at the moment our telescope receives the light.
But that is not all. Both luminosity and ﬂux density are measured in terms
of energy per unit time. In the case of an expanding universe, this quantity is
aﬀected by the cosmological redshift, and by cosmological time dilation. Each
individual photon will undergo a redshift, so by equation (6.16), its energy Ee
at the time of emission and E0 at the time t0 of reception will be related by
E0 = a(te)
a0
· Ee.
(6.49)
But these photons, with the energy of each individual photon diminished, are
ﬂying towards our detector in a steady stream. In this respect, they are like the
light pulses we considered in section (6.4), and their rate of arrival is aﬄicted by
the cosmological redshift: the distance between one photon and the following
increases in proportion to the universal scale factor. A stream of ne photons
per second sent out by the emitting galaxy will arrive in our telescope as a
49

diminished stream of particles, at the rate
n0 = a(te)
a0
· ne.
(6.50)
The relation between an object’s luminosity and its apparent brightness, de-
scribed as the ﬂux density measured by a distant observer, is given by the
combination of these three eﬀects: the homogeneous spreading-out, individual
photon redshift and a diminution of the ﬂux rate by cosmic time dilation. The
result is
I = L
4π ·
a(te)
a0
2
·







d(t0)−2
Euclidean space
a−2
0
· sin−2[d(t0)/a0]
spherical space
a−2
0
· sinh−2[d(t0)/a0]
hyperbolic space.
(6.51)
There are several ways to simplify this expression.
We can eliminate the
sine/hyperbolic sine terms by using the angular distance.
Also, we can re-
place the scale factor ratio by the redshift z, a quantity that has the advantage
of being directly observable, as per the redshift formula (6.17),
1 + z =
a0
a(te).
(6.52)
When we apply both simpliﬁcations, the result is
I =
L
4π · d2ang(t) · (1 + z)4 .
(6.53)
Motivated by the simple inverse square formula, the quantity
dL(t) ≡dang(t) · (1 + z)2
(6.54)
is called the luminosity distance. In terms of the luminosity distance, the rela-
tion simply becomes
I =
L
4π dL(t)2 ,
(6.55)
just like in an ordinary, non-expanding, Euclidean-space universe.
6.8
Luminosity distance and distance moduli
Astronomy has a traditional system of expressing apparent brightness in terms
of apparent magnitude — a logarithmic system that originated at a time when
astronomers still relied chieﬂy on that logarithmically sensitive measuring in-
strument, the human eye. The apparent magnitude m2 of an object is deﬁned
relative to that of another object with apparent magnitude m1 via the respec-
tive ﬂuxes F2 and F1, that is, the amounts of energy received from each object
per unit time, as
m2 −m1 = −2.5 log10
F2
F1

.
(6.56)
50

Since the ﬂux only enters as a ratio, ﬂux densities, measured with the same
telescope, can be substituted for the ﬂuxes. Magnitude scales typically have
reference objects to deﬁne what m = 0 means, so that stand-alone apparent
magnitude values can be given.
(There is a whole area of complications that arises since real astronomical
measurements involve measuring not the total ﬂux, but the ﬂux in a certain
wavelength band only, using appropriate ﬁlters. We neglect this complication;
strictly speaking, we will always talk about the total ﬂux, or bolometric ﬂux, to
use the technical term. A helpful introduction to these complications, and the
so-called k correction, can be found in Hogg et al. 2002.)
The absolute magnitude M of an object is deﬁned as that object’s apparent
magnitude m when observed from a distance of 10 pc = 32.6 light-years.
Using this deﬁnition, and applying the formula (6.54) for the luminosity
distance, a distant object’s absolute magnitude M and its apparent magnitude
m as measured by an observer are related by
m −M = −2.5 log10
 I(dL)
I(10 pc)

= −2.5 log10
10 pc
dL
2
= 5 log10
 dL
10 pc

.
(6.57)
The quantity on the right is called the distance modulus corresponding to the
luminosity distance dL,
µ(dL) ≡5 log10
 dL
10 pc

= 5 log10

dL
1 Mpc

+ 25,
(6.58)
sometimes designated as DM, where the re-write in terms of Mpc is to better
accommodate typical extragalactic distance scales.
Recall the initial diagram ﬁgure 1 we are working to understand? The y
axis represents exactly this: distance moduli for the luminosity distances of the
objects in question, derived by comparing standard candles’ known luminosities
L and measured ﬂux intensities I.
We have already made substantial strides in understanding the original di-
agram, but there is still one ingredient missing: we need to look at what deter-
mines the functional form of the universal scale factor a(t).
7
Dynamics: how a(t) changes over (cosmic) time
So far, a(t) was an unknown function, and all we did was calculate various
consequences of an expansion with a given universal scale factor a(t), or a
series approximation thereof.
Now, it’s time to go a step further and look
at what determines the functional form of a(t).
This involves exploring the
dynamics of our expanding universe — how the matter content inﬂuences cosmic
expansion.
Newtonian cosmological calculations meant as a replacement of the
models of general relativity go back to the 1930s (Milne 1934, McCrea and Milne
1934, McCrea 1955). Newtonian calculations as an aid to understanding can be
found in a number of text books, e.g. Rindler 1977, Harrison 2000, Lotze 2002,
Weinberg 2008. There are also texts that argue (as I do in these lecture notes)
51

that the conjunction of equivalence principle, Newtonian approximation, and
the universality of the scale factor, makes the Newtonian derivation an exact
one, and thus much more than a mere analogy or approximation. The earliest
example I have found is Callan, Dicke, and Peebles 1965; a more recent article
with goals very similar to these lecture notes is Jordan 2005.
7.1
Friedmann’s equations
In order to calculate a(t), we once more focus our attention on a small spacetime
region around a free-falling, Hubble ﬂow galaxy, which we place in the origin
0 of our coordinate system. The situation is sketched in ﬁgure 23. We now
test
galaxy
0
r(t)
Figure 23: Matter within a distance r(t) around a free-falling (Hubble ﬂow) galaxy located at
the spatial origin 0 of our chosen coordinate system
consider a test galaxy at proper distance r(t) from the ﬁrst galaxy. Making
r(t) suﬃciently small, we can consider this situation using classical mechanics
and Newtonian gravity, although we will expand our description as discussed
in section 3.5 to include not only mass density, but density and an isotropic
pressure term as well.
In the Newtonian picture, and in a spherically symmetric situation (since
we are in an isotropic universe), the only gravity acting upon our test galaxy
are those at distances smaller than or equal to r(t); none of the mass, energy
or pressure outside this sphere has any inﬂuence.
(Are you skeptical, because that would mean extending the Newtonian re-
gion too far outwards, beyond the expected validity of the Newtonian limit?
Very well; in that case, please refer back to section 3.5 of these lecture notes;
section 4 in Baez and Bunn 2005 shows how the same result can be derived
from their exact simple form of Einstein’s equations.)
Also in the Newtonian picture, the gravitational acceleration due to the
mass inside the sphere with radius r(t) on the test galaxy is the same as in the
case where the same mass is concentrated in the origin. (This, too, is derived
in section 4 of Baez and Bunn 2005, but since in this case, the Newtonian
argument applies only to a very small region, the additional support should not
be necessary.)
Hence, the acceleration acting to change the test galaxy’s radial position is
¨r(t) = −GM(r)
r(t)2 .
(7.1)
52

The eﬀective mass inside the sphere is
M(r) = V (r) · (ρ + 3p/c2),
(7.2)
where V is the volume of the sphere, ρ the mass density (including contributions
from all available types of energy), and p the pressure, as per our discussion in
section 3.5 about sources of gravity.
Since we are in a small region, geometry is approximately Euclidean, and
the volume of the sphere is given by the usual formula,
V (r) = 4
3π r3,
(7.3)
and since the test galaxy is in the Hubble ﬂow, we have
r(t) = a(t)
a(t0) · r0,
(7.4)
for r0 the proper radius of the sphere at some reference time t0. Putting every-
thing together, it turns out that the situation-speciﬁc parameters, notably r0
and t0, cancel out, and that we are left with a second-order equation for a(t),
namely
¨a(t)
a(t) = −4πG
3

ρ + 3 p
c2

.
(7.5)
This is known as the second (order) Friedmann equation, after the Russian
cosmologist Alexander Friedmann, the ﬁrst to write down general cosmological
models for an expanding universe.
Note that this is a purely local equation: We can make our region inﬁnites-
imally small and still obtain the same relation between the local quantities ρ
and p and the universal function a(t). Also note that while we have restricted
our attention to a small spacetime region in order to apply our equivalence
principle and Newtonian limit approximations, there is nothing special about
the cosmic time t we examined. The same reasoning can be applied to a small
spacetime region at any cosmic time, showing that equation (7.5) holds for all
moments t of cosmic time.
That (7.5) is a second order equation is no surprise. It continues a general
trend in physics: dynamical laws concern second time derivatives, accelerations
of some sort.
Given the equation we had derived for how density changes over (cosmic)
time, equation (6.7), we can in fact integrate the second order Friedmann equa-
tion.
To do so, we use equation (6.7) to replace the pressure term on the
right-hand side of the Friedmann equation, which yields
¨a(t)
a(t) = 4πG
3

˙ρa
˙a + 2ρ

(7.6)
or, multiplying both sides with a˙a,
¨a˙a = 4πG
3
 ˙ρa2 + 2ρa˙a

.
(7.7)
53

This is readily integrated as
1
2(˙a)2 = 4πG
3
ρa2 + C.
(7.8)
Until now, we have not addressed the question of the uniqueness of a. In fact,
by going through the equations we have developed so far, you will see that the
only thing that matters are ratios of scale factor values at diﬀerent time. That
means we have the freedom of rescaling a with a positive constant. We choose
to give a the physical dimension of a length, so that both sides of (7.8) have the
dimension of speed to the second power. Also, we rescale a by a constant factor
so that the integration constant C becomes C = −Kc2, with c the vacuum
speed of light and K now restricted to the three possible values −1, 0, +1.
The result is the standard form of the ﬁrst (order) Friedmann equation,
(˙a)2 + Kc2
a2
= 8πG
3
ρ.
(7.9)
In fact, we were a little less free in our choices than I have led you to believe.
The geometrical formulae for the area of a sphere, and the length of a circular
arc, as given in section 6.6, already presume this particular rescaling of the scale
factor. This is due to one of the relations in an expanding universe that I will
not derive here, but which follows directly from general relativity (and, I have
no doubt, also from a closer look at the interplay between light and geometry
in an expanding universe in the manner of the arguments in this lecture): the
connection between the parameter K and the geometry of space, namely that
K = 0 corresponds to Euclidean space, K = +1 to spherical and K = −1 to
hyperbolic space.
The general-relativistic models of a homogeneous, isotropic universe, ex-
panding with a universal scale factor, the dynamics of the expansion governed by
the Friedmann equation(s), are called Friedmann-Lemaˆıtre-Robertson-Walker
models, abbreviated FLRW, after the four scientists who made key contribu-
tions to their development: the Russian mathematician Alexander Friedmann,
who discovered that general relativity allowed for diﬀerent types of matter-ﬁlled
expanding universe (Friedmann 1922; 1924); the Belgian astronomer Georges
Lemaˆıtre who discovered expanding universe solutions independently, propos-
ing a link with astronomical observation and, later, pioneering the notion of
a dense primordial state of the universe (Lemaˆıtre 1927; 1931a;b); the mathe-
matician and physicist Howard P. Robertson from the US, who also discovered
expanding universes independently (Robertson 1927) and who, like the British
mathematician Arthur Geoﬀrey Walker, , put the models on a solid mathemat-
ical foundations, showing that these are indeed the only possibilities to describe
isotropic and homogeneous universes in Einstein’s theory (Walker 1935).
Synonyms of “FLRW models” are “FLRW spacetimes,” “FLRW solutions”
(of Einstein’s equations) or “FLRW universes”. What we will be developing in
the following sections is called FLRW cosmology. Variations omitting one or
more names, such as Robertson-Walker spacetimes or Friedmann-Robertson-
Walker models, can be found throughout the literature.
54

7.2
Filling the universe with diﬀerent kinds of matter
Recall that, in the context of how expansion dilutes the contents of the cosmos,
we had already introduced three simple kinds of matter, with diﬀerent dilution
behaviour as the scale factor grows, to wit:
Name
index
scaling behavior
matter
M
ρM(t) ∼a(t)−3
radiation
R
ρR(t) ∼a(t)−4
dark energy
Λ
ρΛ(t) ∼const.
In the following, we assume that there is no signiﬁcant interaction between
these diﬀerent kinds of content, in the sense that no signiﬁcant fraction of one
type turns into content of another, and that no signiﬁcant new energy terms
arise merely because these three types of content are now present together in
all regions of the cosmos.
Under these circumstances, the mass density (again including energy terms)
will simply be the sum of the partial densities,
ρ = ρM + ρR + ρΛ,
(7.10)
and the overall pressure the sum of partial pressures.
A considerable simpliﬁcation stems from the fact that the Hubble constant
H0 and the gravitational constant G can be combined into a constant with the
physical dimension of a density, which in cosmology is called the critical density
and made to absorb as many numerical factors as possible,
ρc0 ≡3H2
0
8πG.
(7.11)
Using this critical density, we can bring the Friedmann equations into a partic-
ularly simple dimensionless form. This process is a bit tedious, as it involves a
considerable number of steps of substitution and redeﬁnition, but the result is
worth it.
First, let us make use of the fact that we know how each density changes
over cosmic time from the various special cases of the scaling equation (6.13),
namely
ρ(t)
=
ρM(t) + ρR(t) + ρΛ(t)
=
ρM(t0) ·
 a(t)
a(t0)
−3
+ ρR(t0) ·
 a(t)
a(t0)
−4
+ ρΛ(t0),
(7.12)
where the reference time t0 is taken to be the present time. The second simpli-
ﬁcation is to express all the present-time densities as multiples of the critical
density (7.11). To this end, we introduce dimensionless parameters Ωvia
ρM(t0) ≡ΩM · ρc0,
ρR(t0) ≡ΩR · ρc0,
ρΛ(t0) ≡ΩΛ · ρc0,
(7.13)
55

and ﬁnally an Ωterm of a diﬀerent kind for the integration constant,
Kc2 ≡−ΩK · [a0 · H0]2
⇔
K ≡ΩK
 a0
DH
2
,
(7.14)
where for the second version we have used the Hubble distance DH ≡c/H0.
Note that, with these deﬁnitions, the dark energy term ΩΛ is related to the
cosmological constant Λ introduced in (6.9) as
ΩΛ =
c2
3H2
0
Λ.
(7.15)
There is a direct connection between these Ωparameters and the deceleration
parameter q0 we had introduced in our series expansion of a(t), equation (5.19).
In that series expansion, the second-order term was
¨a
a

t=t0
= −q0H2
0.
(7.16)
Using the second Friedmann equation (7.5) to express the left-hand side of (7.16)
in terms of density and pressure, using the appropriate equations of state (6.8)
to eliminate the pressure terms, and expressing the remaining densities by the
critical density (7.11) and Ωparameters (7.13), we have
¨a
a

t=t0
=
−4πG
3

ρ + 3 p
c3

t=t0
= −4πG
3
(ρM + 2ρR −2ρΛ)|t=t0
=
−H2
0
1
2ΩM + ΩR −ΩΛ

,
(7.17)
so that
q0 = 1
2ΩM + ΩR −ΩΛ.
(7.18)
7.3
Dimensionless Friedmann equation and light-travel distance
With the Ωparameters, we can also rewrite the relation between the look-back
time for light reaching us from a distant object and the redshift z of that light.
In order to do so, let us begin by abbreviating the cumbersome scale factor
ratio, deﬁning
x(t) ≡a(t)
a0
.
(7.19)
The present-day value of this function, x(t0), is equal to one.
For t0 > t, this function x(t) is directly related to the redshift z associated
with light that is emitted by a distant galaxy at time t and received by us at
time t0; by our redshift formula (6.17),
x(t) =
1
1 + z .
(7.20)
56

Last but not least, recall the deﬁnition of the Hubble parameter H(t) = ˙a(t)/a(t),
which can be rewritten as
H(t) = ˙x
x.
(7.21)
Drawing all this together, we can rewrite the Friedmann equation (7.9) as
 ˙a(t)
a(t)
2
= H(t)2 = H2
0

ΩM x−3 + ΩR x−4 + ΩΛ + ΩK x−2
.
(7.22)
Separation of variables allows us to rewrite equation (7.22) as
t −t0 =
t
Z
t0
dt′ = 1
H0
x
Z
1
dx′
x′ p
ΩM x′−3 + ΩR x′−4 + ΩΛ + ΩK x′−2 .
(7.23)
If you can calculate the integral on the right-hand side and solve the resulting
equation for x(t), you have derived the functional form of a(t) in terms of the
ﬁve parameters H0, ΩM, ΩR, ΩΛ, ΩK.
In the general case, the right-hand side integral, cannot be calculated ana-
lytically in terms of elementary functions. (It is what mathematicians call an
elliptic integral.) But it is straightforward to perform the integration numeri-
cally, since in the general case, the integral is well-behaved.15 We will have a
look at some simple limiting cases, which can be integrated directly, in section
7.7, p. 65ﬀ.
Alternatively to the equation (7.23) in terms of the scale factor x, we can
rewrite the integral directly in terms of the redshift variable z, using the relation
(7.20). Substitution of variables yields
t = t0 −
z
Z
0
dz′
H0(1 + z′)
p
ΩM (1 + z′)3 + ΩR (1 + z′)4 + ΩΛ + ΩK (1 + z′)2 .
(7.24)
The time diﬀerence t0 −t is once more the look-back time, and the formula is
a more exact version of the approximate formula (6.35) we derived earlier.
This version of the equation can be used for calculating directly the emission
time of a light signal reaching us with a speciﬁc redshift z. In particular, we
can deﬁne the light-travel distance dLT as the light-travel time from a distant
source to us, multiplied with the speed of light c. This light-travel distance is
then related to the redshift z of that light by
dLT ≡c(t0−t) = DH
z
Z
0
dz′
(1 + z′)
p
ΩM (1 + z′)3 + ΩR (1 + z′)4 + ΩΛ + ΩK (1 + z′)2 ,
(7.25)
15By deﬁnition, the scale factor x cannot be negative; this drastically limits the possibility
of poles (where the denominator in the integrand goes to zero). The denominator can only
become zero if all Ωs except for ΩΛ are themselves zero; even then, the integral is well-deﬁned,
as long as one does not set the integration limit x to zero. As we shall see in section 7.7, this
is because in that particular case, expansion is exponential, as documented in eq. (7.45), so
even if we go back into the past, the limit x = 0 is not reached in ﬁnite time.
57

where the basic length scale is given by the Hubble distance DH ≡c/H0.
Alternatively, one can talk about this distance in terms of travel time, such as
stating that a particular object is so far away that its light has taken X years
to reach us.
Before we study simple explicit solutions to the scale factor equation (7.23)
in section 7.7, we will ﬁrst look at some general properties of model universes
governed by that equation.
7.4
Densities and geometry
Since this equation (7.23) is valid for all cosmic times, it also holds true at the
present time, where x = 1 and H(t) = H0. This implies a restriction on the
values of the Ωs, namely
ΩM + ΩR + ΩΛ + ΩK = 1,
(7.26)
the present-day version of the ﬁrst order Friedmann equation. Recall that K,
and with it ΩK, stands for the overall geometry of space in our expanding
universe. This equation shows how that geometry is linked to the content of
our cosmos; taking into account the three cases K = −1, 0, +1 as discussed in
section 6.6, the link is as follows:
ΩM + ΩR + ΩΛ







> 1
spherical space
= 0
Euclidean space
< 1
hyperbolic space.
(7.27)
Since the Ωs are all relative to the critical density ρc0, this clariﬁes the critical
density’s role as the density value separating the diﬀerent spatial geometries.
Sometimes, the above classiﬁcation is erroneously linked to the global struc-
ture of space, in particular whether space is of ﬁnite size (“closed universe”),
or inﬁnite (“open universe”). The (countably) inﬁnite varieties of homogeneous
spherical space will always be of ﬁnite size, and all are derived from the stan-
dard three-sphere (Gausmann et al. 2001). The situation is more complicated
for locally Euclidean and for hyperbolic spaces: for the former, there are 18
possibilities for the large-scale structure of space, in 10 of which space has a
ﬁnite volume (Riazuelo et al. 2004); these were ﬁrst classiﬁed in the context
of crystallography as early as 1885! The hyperbolic case, which features an
(uncountably) inﬁnite number of spaces, some that are ﬁnite and some that are
inﬁnite in volume, is much more complicated, and the search for a complete
classiﬁcation an active area of mathematical research, linked to fundamental
topics such as the Poincar´e conjecture (Cornish, Spergel, and Starkman 1998).
The more complicated spaces are connected in multiple ways. The simplest
two-dimensional example of a multiply connected space is a torus, as shown in
ﬁgure 24: Most people’s mental image of a torus is probably that on the left,
reminiscent of a donut or the inner tube of a tire. This embedding illustrates
nicely the non-trivial global properties of the torus, what mathematicians call
its topology. For instance, the fact that the torus encloses a hole means that
58

Figure 24: Two representation of a torus: embedded (left) and mathematical (right). Left
image: User LucasVB via Wikimedia Commons, in the public domain.
not all curves on the torus are contractable. Imagine a loop of string, such as
a shoelace, in the ordinary Euclidean plane. You can always shrink the size
of that loop to zero by shortening the string. On the surface of a torus, that
is not always possible – notably, when such a loop circles the tube that is the
embedded torus, it cannot be contracted beyond a certain minimum size while
remaining on the surface of the torus.
One aspect of the torus embedding on the left of ﬁgure 24 is misleading: the
embedding does not preserve the surface’s geometry – the lengths of lines, as
measured on the embedded torus, do not correspond (and are not proportional)
to the lengths of lines in the two-dimensional, locally ﬂat space the embedded
torus is meant to represent.
Mathematically, the easiest way to picture a torus is the one on the right.
This is a ﬂat rectangle, on which the usual rules of Euclidean geometry apply.
In order to complete the torus, identify the two pairs of opposite edges, one pair
marked with a single arrow, the other with a double arrow (orientation should
be chosen so each pair of arrowheads is aligned). In this ﬂat representation,
straight lines on the torus are shown as straight lines, and all lengths of line
segments are represented faithfully.
A good way of picturing the identiﬁcation is as in old, two-dimensional
computer games, where a spaceship (or other object of interest) exiting the
screen towards the left would re-enter the screen immediately from the right; a
spaceship exiting the screen via the top edge would re-appear from the bottom
edge, and vice versa for both sets of directions.
We can go directly from the mathematical torus on the right-hand side of
ﬁgure 24 to the embedding on the left-hand side by making the identiﬁcations
manifest. The ﬁrst identiﬁcation can be made without distorting the rectangle,
and gives a cylinder; closing the cylinder will give the usual torus on the left,
but will distort the rectangle, which is why the embedding does not preserve
the lengths of lines on the torus.
The mathematical deﬁnition of identiﬁed edges clearly preserves the local
geometry; triangles drawn onto the paper will still have 180◦as the sum of their
three inner angles, and circles with radius r the circumference 2πr. Both are
59

diagnostics that clearly show that this is locally Euclidean geometry. Similarly,
the more complicated spaces belonging to expanding universes will locally have
a spherical, or Euclidean, or hyperbolic geometry, but will be multiply con-
nected.
7.5
Diﬀerent eras of cosmic history; the Big Bang singularity
The general solution of the Friedmann equation (7.23) for the scale factor a(t)
is not readily written down in terms of elementary functions — although easy
enough to solve numerically. We can, however, make some fairly general state-
ments about solutions.
The ﬁrst batch of general statements follows directly from the scaling be-
haviour of the diﬀerent content types, which we had derived in section 6.1 from
the equations of state. If a grows ever larger, then if dark energy is present,
it will come eventually to dominate any further evolution, simply because the
other densities have been diluted away, ρM ∼a−3 and ρR ∼a−4. If a was
very small in the past, then if there is a radiation component, it will have been
dominant back then because of ρR ∼(1/a)4. In between, there may have been
a phase where matter was the dominant contribution to the overall density, at
a time when the density due to radiation had already been diluted, but before
dark energy becomes dominant.
This progression of various eras of dominance is fairly generic whenever all
three components are present; an example, using the best estimates for density
values in our own universe (cf. table 2 on page 67), is shown in ﬁgure 25.
10−6
10−5
10−4
10−3
10−2
10−1
100
101
102
10−14
10−7
100
107
1014
1021
Relative scale factor a(t)/a(t0)
Density/present density
Radiation
Dark energy
Matter
Figure 25: Diﬀerent types of content dominate at diﬀerent scale factors: fairly generic pro-
gression of eras, using the estimates for our own universe given in table 2 on page 67
In this diagram with two logarithmic scales, the line representing the matter
density has slope −3, the radiation line −4, while dark energy density remains,
60

of course, constant. From left to right, we see the radiation era up to when the
universe was about 10−4 its present size where radiation dominates, followed
by the matter era, while shortly before the present scale factor is reached, dark
energy becomes dominant.
So far, though, these diﬀerent eras are deﬁned in terms of the scale factor
value, not in terms of cosmic time. That is why, as a next step, we turn to
the second-order form (7.5) of the Friemann equation, using the equations of
state of our content components to rewrite the right-hand side in terms of mass
density alone, as
¨a(t)
a(t) = −4πG
3
(ρM + 2ρR −2ρΛ) .
(7.28)
This shows that, as long as the density of dark energy does not dominate every-
thing else as ρΛ > ρR + ρM/2, we have ¨a < 0, corresponding to a deceleration.
In such situations, tracing the evolution of a(t) back in time as in ﬁgure 26, we
will generically ﬁnd some point in the past with a(t) = 0. As the ﬁgure shows,
the value of the Hubble constant H0, which describes the present-day slope of
a(t)/a(t0), can be used to estimate how far back in time that point a(t) = 0
can be. If a(t) were a linear function, then we could easily extrapolate. The
time at which a(t) = 0 would be
τH ≡1/H0,
(7.29)
namely the Hubble time, before the present. Since the actual evolution is not
linear, but instead has ¨a < 0, the linear extrapolation gives an upper limit of
how much time has passed since a(t) = 0.
a(t)/a(t0)
t
t0 −1/H0
t0
0
Figure 26: Generic evolution for a universe not dominated by dark energy: a singular beginning
At the time where a(t) = 0, weird things happen. Since the densities of
matter and radiation are proportional to a−3 and a−4, respectively, they become
inﬁnitely large at a(t) = 0.
In our galaxy dust picture, all ﬁnite distances
between other galaxies and us (and some inﬁnite distances, as well!) were zero at
61

that time. With these disquieting properties, the point at which a(t) = 0 is a so-
called singularity, more speciﬁcally the initial singularity, Big Bang singularity,
or just Big Bang for short. The time of that singularity is commonly chosen as
the zero point of cosmic time t = 0.
Our argument for why the Big Bang singularity must occur is a very crude
version of much more rigorous singularity theorems, notably the cosmological
singularity theorem ﬁrst formulated by Stephen Hawking and Roger Penrose,
which show that Big Bang singularities occur under much more general circum-
stances than in simple homogeneous models.
The Big Bang singularity is a problem for our models; in fact, singularities
and inﬁnities like this commonly indicate the limits of the model in question. A
widely accepted limit that would apply at such small scales in any case would
be that neither our simpliﬁed description nor the more complete description in
the framework of general relativity takes into account quantum eﬀects, which
one should expect to become important at such small length scales and such
high energies. Unfortunately, no consistent and complete theory of quantum
gravity has been found yet, although physicists have been searching for one for
the past 70+ years.
The good news is that, even without understanding the Big Bang singular-
ity at t = 0, it is possible to model what happens directly afterwards, at a time
when the universe was still very crowded, when the scale factor was smaller
than a thousandth of its present value, and densities for matter and radiation
were correspondingly high. The key factor in this is that, at present, the uni-
verse contains about a billion times more photons than matter particles such
as protons, neutrons, and electrons. When we extrapolate back to smaller scale
factor values, when these photons were much more energetic (cosmic redshift!),
we end up with a very hot soup of elementary particles, dominated by these
photons — the Big Bang phase, sometimes called the Big Bang for short, as
well. The choice of terms here requires some caution: a cosmologist talking
about the Big Bang could be referring to this [fairly well understood] phase of
the early universe, or to the [highly problematic] Big Bang singularity — learn
to deduce from the context what is meant!
The physics of the Big Bang phase is beyond the scope of this lecture, and
was covered at this summer school by Matthias Bartelmann’s lecture, a video
recording of which is available at
http://youtu.be/m35fXJoQLA0
The distinction between the Big Bang and the Big Bang phase is an im-
portant one to make to both students and to the general public. Naturally,
the Big Bang itself, as the beginning of everything, holds a special fascination
for anyone interested in the big questions. It’s important to be honest at this
point, and state clearly that cosmologists do not have reliable models for that
singular beginning. We do not even know whether it is an abrupt beginning, or
merely the end of an earlier phase. But it is equally important to communicate
that this ignorance about the Big Bang singularity does not mean we can say
nothing worthwhile about the beginning of the universe as we know it.
62

On the contrary: When it comes to the Big Bang phase, our knowledge
becomes more and more secure with increasing cosmic time, and after a bit
less than a second of cosmic time, we have reached the realm of standard,
experimentally testable physics. Our models of the Big Bang phase and its
aftermath have a lot to say about how the universe became what it is today
– from the abundances of light elements to the existence and properties of the
cosmic background radiation to the evolution the ﬁrst stars, the ﬁrst galaxies,
and the large-scale structure of the observable universe.
Let us brieﬂy talk about what a(0) = 0 does and doesn’t mean. Taken at
face value, it does mean that all particles that are at ﬁnite distance from us
at present had distance zero from us (and from each other) at the Big Bang
singularity at t = 0. In particular, everything we can observe around us, in other
words: everything in the observable universe was, at that time zero, compressed
into an arbitrarily small volume. (The concept of the observable universe will
be made more precise in section 8.1.)
This does not necessarily mean that the whole universe was compressed into
a mathematical point. In those models where the universe is inﬁnite, there are
Hubble ﬂow galaxies that are inﬁnitely far away from us at the present moment.
Multiplying an inﬁnite present distance with a zero-valued scale factor is an ill-
deﬁned problem. So is the Big Bang singularity a “spacetime point”, or in some
way like a spacetime point, or not?
There is a way of understanding light propagation in relativistic spacetimes
that shows the situation to be more complicated. There exists a way of mapping
even an inﬁnite universe into a ﬁnite, so-called conformal diagram (also known
as a Penrose diagram or, more rarely, Carter-Penrose diagram). Such maps
show that when it comes to causality — which regions of spacetime can, in
principle inﬂuence which other regions?
— the initial singularity has more
in common with inﬁnite space than with an ordinary point in space (section
5.3 in Hawking and Ellis 1973). For matter emerging from an ordinary single
point of space, one might assume that all this matter could have “inherited”
common properties, such as a common temperature, from its common origin.
But for matter shortly after the Big Bang, this kind of inheritance is impossible.
Notably, a common origin of this particular kind is insuﬃcient to explain the
fact that early on, all baryonic matter in the observable universe appears to have
had nearly the same temperature (chapter 5 in Earman 1995). This is known
as the horizon problem, and one of the stated motivations of modifying the
expansion history of the very early universe by introducing an early inﬂationary
phase of exponential expansion prior to cosmic time t = 10−30 s.
Again, we will not go into the history of the very early universe in these
lecture notes. We do take away the message that, in order to avoid confusion,
if we feel the need to talk about how dense and compressed matter was in the
early universe, we had better avoid the singularity at t = 0. It is perfectly
correct to say that, within these models, all the matter within the observable
universe (alternatively, “all the matter we see around us”) was once compressed
into a volume the size of a basketball, or a cricket ball, or the pin of a needle,
and so on.
But talking about it all being compressed “into a single point”
or “a region of volume zero” skips over signiﬁcant complications, doesn’t add
63

anything signiﬁcant in terms of understanding, and should not detract from the
facts that (a) within the general-relativistic models, the Big Bang singularity is
not part of spacetime, (b) the occurrence of the singularity a strong indication
that our model breaks down at cosmic time t = 0, and (c) that at the present
time, nobody has a solid alternative model for the very early universe.
On to less problematic matters: Now that we have chosen the zero point of
cosmic time t = 0 to correspond to the Big Bang singularity, at which x = 0,
we can use equation (7.23) to obtain the age of the universe as
t0 = 1
H0
1
Z
0
dx′
x′ p
ΩM x′−3 + ΩR x′−4 + ΩΛ + ΩK x′−2 .
(7.30)
The time scale for the age of the universe is set by the Hubble time τH ≡1/H0
(cf. equation 7.29).
7.6
Expansion and collapse
Will an expanding universe keep expanding forever? Or might it collapse back
onto itself, all pairwise distances now shrinking in proportion to the universal
scale factor, just as they grew in unison before, ending in what has been called
a Big Crunch, as the opposite of the Big Bang (or, more facetiously, the Gnab
Gib, [Adams 1980])?
For an answer, let us revisit the dimensionless Friedmann equation,
 ˙a(t)
a(t)
2
= H(t)2 = H2
0

ΩM x−3 + ΩR x−4 + ΩΛ + ΩK x−2
.
(7.22)
For an expansion phase ˙a(t) > 0 to make the transition into a contraction
phase with ˙a(t) < 0, there must be a moment in between where ˙a(t) = 0, and
hence the whole equation (7.22) must be zero. Let us assume that if at all,
this happens only after the early Big Bang phase, so that we can neglect the
radiation term. Since x ̸= 0, we can rewrite the condition that (7.22) be zero
as
ΩM + ΩΛx3 + ΩK x = 0,
(7.31)
and since we know how to express ΩK in terms of the other two terms as per
equation (7.26), the necessary condition for re-collapse is
ΩΛx3 + (1 −ΩM −ΩΛ)x + ΩM = 0.
(7.32)
In the absence of any dark energy, ΩΛ = 0, this is readily solved as
x =
ΩM
ΩM −1,
(7.33)
and since x must always be positive, this is only a solution if ΩM > 1, in other
words: if the present-day matter density is larger than the present-day critical
density. In older text books, written before it was discovered that ΩΛ played
a signiﬁcant role in our own universe, this circumstance was often linked to
64

space geometry: if only matter is present, a spherical geometry corresponds
to a re-collapsing universe, while Euclidean and hyperbolic universes expand
forever.
We can at least make some statements about the general case of equation
(7.32). At the present day, x = 1, and we must have ΩM+ΩΛ+ΩK = 1 > 0. And
if ΩΛ < 0, corresponding to a type of dark energy that seeks to decelerate the
universe, then for suitably large x, the cubic term will dominate, and the left-
hand side of (7.32) will be negative; if it was positive before, and negative then,
it must have been zero some time between. Will such large x values be reached,
or could the evolution approach some constant x value, asymptotically? No,
because then the acceleration would need to go to zero, which is not compatible
with the acceleration equation (7.28). Such universes will always re-collapse.
For ΩΛ > 0, the situation is less clear, but it is clear that equation (7.32)
can only be zero for some (necessarily positive!) x if the linear coeﬃcient is
negative, 1 −ΩM −ΩΛ = ΩK < 0. So in this case, as in the case without dark
energy, re-collapse is only possible if the space geometry is spherical. This is a
necessary, but not a suﬃcient condition – for instance for ΩM = 0, there will
be no collapse even in a spherical space: in that case, the only solution for the
turning point is
x =
r
ΩΛ −1
ΩΛ
< 1,
(7.34)
which, in a currently expanding universe, is a point in the past, when the
universe was smaller. For there to be a turning point, we must have had a
universe that was initially collapsing, but then turned and is now expanding,
and will keep expanding forever.
7.7
Explicit solutions
After these general considerations, let us turn to special cases of the Friedmann
equation (7.23), which allow for simple solutions. We concentrate on solutions
with an initial singularity, and change the integration limits to include the
singularity a(0) = 0. Then we have
t =
t
Z
0
dt′ =
x
Z
0
dx′
H0x′ p
ΩM x′−3 + ΩR x′−4 + ΩΛ + ΩK x′−2 .
(7.35)
We begin with a universe that contains only radiation — as we have seen in
section 7.5, this is a good approximation for the very early universe, shortly
after the Big Bang.
Given the scaling of the term containing ΩK, we can
neglect that term (and thus any non-Euclidean geometry of the universe) when
we restrict ourselves to the early universe with small values of a. This leaves
us with
t =
x
Z
0
dx′ x′
H0
√ΩR
=
1
2H0
√ΩR
x2,
(7.36)
which is readily solved as
a(t) = a(t0) ·
qp
ΩR · 2H0t ∼t1/2.
(7.37)
65

If this is not just an approximation, with ΩK neglected, but instead a generic
Euclidean model universe with ΩK = 0, then by the present-day Friedmann
equation (7.26), which states that all the Ωs must sum up to one, we must have
ΩR = 1, and our evolution is given by
a(t) = a(t0) ·
p
2H0t.
(7.38)
For consistency, if we insert the present age t0 of the universe, we must recover
a(t = t0) = a(t0). This means that the age of a pure radiation universe must
be given by
t0 =
1
2H0
,
(7.39)
half the Hubble time, in other words: half as old as for a linearly expanding
universe. In particular, this means that we can write the scale factor in the
particularly simple form
a(t) = a(t0) ·
p
t/t0.
(7.40)
Next, consider a Euclidean (ΩK = 0), matter-only universe. This solution,
which is called the Einstein–de-Sitter (EdS) universe, must have ΩM = 1 in
order to satisfy the present-day Friedmann equation (7.26). Integrating up, we
obtain
a(t) = a(t0) · (3/2 · H0t)2/3 ∼t2/3.
(7.41)
Again, consistency demands, and direct calculation of H(t) conﬁrms, that the
age t0 of such a universe must be
t0 =
2
3H0
,
(7.42)
and the simplest form for the scale factor is
a(t) = a(t0) · (t/t0)2/3.
(7.43)
Our last elementary case is a universe with Euclidean space (ΩK = 0) that
only contains dark energy, so ΩΛ = 1. In this case, there will be no ﬁnite time
at which a(t) = 0, so we revert to the original integration limits of (7.23) to
obtain
t −t0 =
x
Z
1
dx′
H0 x′ = 1
H0
ln(x)
(7.44)
so that
a(t) = a(t0) · exp [H0(t −t0)] .
(7.45)
This type of exponential solution, albeit disguised by another choice of coor-
dinates, was ﬁrst found by the Dutch astronomer Willem de Sitter (de Sitter
1917). In modern cosmology, it is important for the latest stages of evolution,
when dark energy dominates, but also for a very early, hypothetical stage known
as inﬂation, postulated to explain, among other things, the homogeneity of the
universe as well as the absence of certain exotic particles.
66

The de Sitter scale factor can also be written in terms of the cosmological
constant. In the de Sitter universe, the critical density (7.11) is equal to the dark
energy density, which can be expressed in terms of the cosmological constant
as in equation (6.9). Equating the two, we have
H0 = c
p
Λ/3,
(7.46)
and can re-write the de Sitter scale factor as
a(t) = a(t0) · exp
hp
Λ/3 · c (t −t0)
i
.
(7.47)
This concludes our gallery of selected explicit solutions; a more complete overview
can be found in chapter 23 of d’Inverno 1992 or chapter 9 of Rindler 1977.
With the arguments concerning the diﬀerent eras, and these simple solu-
tions, we can make a reasonable estimate for how a(t) looks for our own uni-
verse.
Our cosmos contains radiation (in particular the cosmic background
radiation), matter in the form of galaxies, and dark energy. Thus, we would
expect a beginning that looks like a(t) ∼t1/2 while radiation dominates, ex-
ponential expansion at the later stages, and some kind of interpolation linking
the two.
Table 2: Parameter estimates for our universe
H0 = 67.74 km/s/Mpc
= 1/(4.6 · 1017 s) = 1/(1.4 · 1010 a)
ΩΛ = 0.69
ΩM = 0.31
ΩR = 0.0001
The parameter values applying to our speciﬁc universe need to derive from
observation. A set of realistic estimates combining the measurements of ESA’s
Planck satellite with other observations (notably of the redshift-distance re-
lation, cf. section 8.4) can be found in table 2 (Planck Collaboration 2016).16
The matter part ΩM can be split in baryonic matter (such as protons, neutrons,
electrons and the nuclei, atoms and molecules they form) with Ωb = 0.05 and
a dark matter part with Ωdm = 0.26.
The critical density (7.11) in such a universe amounts to
ρc0 = 8.6 · 10−27 kg
m3 = 4.8 GeV/c2
m3
,
(7.48)
which corresponds to about ﬁve proton masses per cubic meter.
A numerical solution using these parameter values is shown in ﬁgure 27. The
16Rightmost column in table 4. The density parameter for radiation can be derived from
ΩM and the redshift zeq speciﬁed in the table, which indicates the redshift at which matter and
radiation density were equal. Given the scaling behaviour for radiation and matter discussed
in section 6.1, we must have ΩR = ΩM/(1 + zeq), which yields the value for ΩR quoted in
table 2.
67

0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Time in billion years
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
a(t)/a(t0)
Figure 27: Expansion a(t) of our universe, using the parameters given in table 2. The dotted
lines correspond to the present time, t = 13.8 billion years
fate of our particular universe appears to be for distant galaxies to drift ever
further apart. We shall see below in section 8.3 that this will severely restrict
future astronomer who, from a certain point in time onwards, will see hardly
any distant galaxies any more, severely restricting their capacity to perform
research in cosmology.
This shape of the curve of a(t) conforms rather well with our expectations
from studying the diﬀerent eras.
The expansion history shown in ﬁgure 27
forms the backbone of the modern ΛCDM models of the universe (pronounced
“Lambda-CDM”). In this abbreviation, Λ stands for the presence of dark energy
(or, equivalently, a cosmological constant) which, as we shall conﬁrm in our
ﬁnal evaluation of the redshift-distance diagram in section 9, is the dominant
ingredient in our universe.
CDM stands for “cold dark matter” and indicates that the dominant matter
component is in the shape of so-called dark matter — not the ordinary matter
made of atoms (which in cosmology is called baryonic matter),
but matter
that neither emits nor absorbs electromagnetic radiation. Dark matter thus
remains unobservable by our telescopes, and can only detected indirectly by its
gravitational action on the visible constituents of the universe. The contribution
of baryonic matter to the ΩM given in table 2 on page 67 is a mere Ωb = 0.05,
that of dark matter Ωcdm = 0.26. (Upon closer inspection, even 90% of the
baryonic contribution is not in the shape of the galaxies I had introduced as
prototypical matter constituents, but in the form of warm, intergalactic plasma,
cf. Fukugita and Peebles 2004.)
In addition to the FLRW model universes described in this lecture, ΛCDM
models encompass models for the hot, early universe.
These describe both
the creation of the cosmic microwave background (CMB) radiation and the
primordial fusion reactions which created the ﬁrst light elements (Big Bang nu-
cleosynthesis, BBN), as well as models for the formation of large-scale structure
68

in the universe. For the latter, the adjective “cold” in cold dark matter becomes
important. As opposed to hot dark matter, particles of cold dark matter move
slowly compared to the speed of light; this has signiﬁcant consequences for the
way the large-scale structure in our universe has formed over the past billions
of years.
8
Consequences of cosmic evolution
Now that we have some notion of the diﬀerent a(t), we can revisit the topic of
consequences of cosmic expansion and introduce some consequences that have
an interesting connection with the speciﬁc form of a(t).
8.1
Horizons
Our light propagation formula
dr,e(tr) = c · a(tr) ·
tr
Z
te
dt
a(t),
(6.22)
contains fundamental information about the causal structure of our model uni-
verse. In particular, no light signal that has reached us by now, at the present
time t0, can have begun its journey earlier than the time of the Big Bang, t = 0.
By the light propagation formula, such light cannot have started at a (proper)
distance greater than
dPH = c · a(t0) ·
t0
Z
0
dt
a(t).
(8.1)
This deﬁnes our particle horizon. Light from galaxies, or other objects, that lie
within the sphere deﬁned by this distance value, has had suﬃcient time to reach
us; in consequence, we can observe such objects. Light from objects outside the
horizon has not yet had suﬃcient time to reach us, so we cannot observe these
objects.
Inside dPH is what is, at this moment in cosmic time, our observable universe
– at least in theory: in practice, there can be additional restrictions. Notably,
since our universe was in a hot, dense state during the Big Bang phase 13.8
billion years ago, the farthest we can look into the distance, and thus back in
time, is to the end of the hot dense phase. The cosmic background radiation
is radiation from that particular transition from a hot dense opaque universe
to a transparent universe, and marks the current boundary of the observable
universe.
But back to particle horizons: For instance, in the Einstein–de-Sitter uni-
verse, where only matter density ΩM = 1 contributes and space is Euclidean,
given the scale factor (7.43), we have
dPH,EdS = c · (t0)2/3 ·
t0
Z
0
t−2/3dt = 3 c t0 = 2 c
H0
= 2 DH,
(8.2)
69

where in the last step, we have substituted the Hubble distance DH = c/H0.
A complementary concept is that of the cosmological event horizon. In a
universe that is expanding suﬃciently fast, there could be a distance beyond
which light emitted at the present time t0 will never reach us, no matter how
long we wait. Given this deﬁnition, the proper distance to this horizon is
dEH = c · a(t0) ·
∞
Z
t0
dt
a(t),
(8.3)
at least for inﬁnitely expanding universes, marking the distance below which
light emitted that far away will just about reach us, even though it takes an
arbitrary long time to do so. (In a re-collapsing universe, one would need to
adjust the upper limit so as to reﬂect the ﬁnite maximum time available for
that light to reach us.)
For the Einstein–de-Sitter universe, we ﬁnd
dEH,EdS = c · (t0)2/3 ·
∞
Z
t0
t−2/3dt = c · (t0)2/3 lim
t→∞t1/3,
(8.4)
which is inﬁnite. In such a universe, there is no ﬁnite event horizon — as long as
we wait suﬃciently long, we will be able to see objects at an arbitrary distance.
Matters are diﬀerent in an exponentially expanding de Sitter universe: for
the scale factor (7.45), we have the event horizon
dEH,dS = c ·
∞
Z
t0
exp[−H0(t −t0)] dt = −c
H0

exp[−H0(t −t0)]
∞
t0
=
c
H0
= DH.
(8.5)
In a de Sitter universe, light signals emitted at the present time t0 from a
(proper) distance greater than the Hubble distance, which in that particular
case is equal to
DH =
1
p
Λ/3
,
(8.6)
will never reach us.
8.2
Do galaxies, humans, atoms expand?
Another consequence of cosmic expansion concerns the interaction between ex-
pansion and bound systems. This issue frequently comes up whenever cosmic
expansion is not described as a form of motion, but instead as a distance change
of a completely new kind, with phrases such as “space itself is expanding” or
“space is growing larger” between galaxies. Based on such (misleading) mod-
els, it is quite natural to ask: What is happening with bound systems under
such circumstances? Are galaxies, humans, atoms expanding, too — are they
growing larger in size?
If yes, that could have signiﬁcant consequences. A cartoon version of what
might happen is the statement “If all meter sticks grew in length along with
70

cosmic expansion, how could we detect cosmic expansion in the ﬁrst place?”
Meter sticks, however, are an overly simpliﬁed way of looking at this question;
as long as our (idealized) clocks do not change, radar-ranging using light signals
will tell us local distances, and enable us to detect the eﬀects of cosmic expan-
sion. The question of how universal expansion of all objects would aﬀect length
measurements depends on the less straightforward question of how expansion
aﬀects clocks.
But instead of talking about clocks, let us stay with meter sticks and other
bound systems. The following treatment is, once more, simpliﬁed; more com-
plete and more advanced treatments can be found in Pachner 1963; 1964, Coop-
erstock, Faraoni, and Vollick 1998, Carrera and Giulini 2010, Price and Romano
2012, Giulini 2014.
When we talk about atoms, humans, planetary systems and even a single
galaxy, we are automatically talking about small scales, where the special-
relativistic notions of time and space constitute an excellent approximative
description. Furthermore, the recession velocities associated with cosmic ex-
pansion are so small on these scales that we can make use of the concepts and
laws of classical mechanics, including Newton’s law of gravity. In short, we are
in a situation very similar to that we analyzed in section 7.1 when we derived
Friedmann’s equations. As an example, we consider a bound system consisting
of a central mass Mcen, or central charge Qcen, at the origin 0 and an orbiting
test particle with mass m at a distance r(t): a planet orbiting a central mass,
or an electron orbiting an atomic nucleus.
test
particle
0
r(t)
Figure 28: Matter within a distance r(t) of the origin 0, here taken to be the center (central
mass, central charge) of a bound system
From the central object, our test particle will feel some force Fcen: A central
mass will exert a Newtonian force on our test particle, and a central charge
will exert a Coulomb force. In an idealized, perfectly homogeneous universe,
there would be an additional force just as we derived in 7.1: While none of
the homogeneously distributed matter outside the sphere with radius r(t) will
contribute, the homogeneous matter inside r(t), represented by the gray area
in ﬁgure 28, will attract the test particle with a mass
Mcos = 4
3πr(t)3 · [ρ(t) + 3p(t)/c2)].
(8.7)
Here, we have already included the extra pressure term we learned about in
71

section 3.5, and where the density ρ includes contributions from the energy
density. For short, we will refer to the mass of the homogeneous matter, and
to the force on the test particle resulting from it, as “cosmological”, Mcos and
Fcos respectively, in order to distinguish it from the central force Fcen.
That mass Mcos will act as if it were the mass of a point particle at the
origin, so the gravitational force from the homogeneous matter that our test
particle feels will be radial, and of the strength
Fcos = −4G
3 πr(t) · m[ρ(t) + 3p(t)/c2].
(8.8)
Which kinds of cosmic matter contribute to this force Fcos? Ordinary matter,
while assumed to be homogeneous on large scales, is most certainly not homo-
geneously distributed on the scales of atoms, humans, or planetary systems.
When we talk about atoms and their typical length scales, all of the ordinary
matter except for the atomic nucleus, whose inﬂuence is accounted for in Fcen,
will be outside, and not contribute to Fcos.
Does dark matter contribute? If dark matter is in the form of particles, as
is commonly believed, that would depend on the particle mass. Going by the
parameter estimate based listed in table 2 on page 67 and the critical density
value in (7.48), the present mass density of dark matter amounts to
ρdm = Ωdm ρc0 = 2.2 · 10−27 kg
m3 = 1.2 GeV/c2
m3
.
(8.9)
No dark matter particle has yet been detected, and estimates for their masses
depend on the chosen hypothetical model. For so-called axions, their (current)
masses could be in the range of 0.1 meV/c2, corresponding to ∼1013 such
particles per cubic meter. But the typical volume of an atom is on the order
of 10−29 m3 at most. The probability to ﬁnd a single one of these dark matter
particles inside a randomly placed atom would be 10−16. One might try to
calculate the minute inﬂuence these particles might have on an atom when
they happen to pass through, but numbers are such that approximating dark
matter as a homogeneous continuum on the scale of atoms makes no sense. The
numbers are, of course, much worse, for heavier dark matter candidates, such
as WIMPs (for “weakly interacting massive particle”) with expected masses
of 10 GeV/c2 and more (Patrignani and Particle Data Group 2016). On the
other hand, over planet- or solar-system-size volumes, we will ﬁnd so many
even of these heavy particles that a homogeneous distribution should be a good
approximation.
Inserting the respective equations of state (6.8) for dark matter and dark
energy into equation (8.8) and, in a second step, the deﬁnition of the critical
density (7.11), we ﬁnd that
Fcos = 4πG
3
rm[2ρΛ −ρdm] = m r H2
0[ΩΛ −Ωdm/2].
(8.10)
On atomic or molecular scales, as per the argument given above, we will neglect
the dark matter contribution; on planetary scales and above we will include dark
72

matter. We can describe both scenarios in a uniﬁed way by deﬁning
Ωcos =
(
ΩΛ
on atomic/molecular scales
ΩΛ −1
2Ωdm
on scales greater than that of planets;
(8.11)
with this deﬁnition,
Fcos = m r H2
0 Ωcos.
(8.12)
In our own universe, Ωcos > 0 as dark energy is the dominant contribution (cf.
table 2), so the cosmological force is repulsive.
In addition to the cosmological force, there is the central force as an addi-
tional attractive force acting on the test particle, pulling it towards the origin;
we introduce a uniﬁed description of a gravitationally bound system and an
electrostatically bound system by writing that force as
Fcen = −mC
r2 ,
(8.13)
where
C ≡
(
1
4πϵ0
Qq
m
electrostatic force
GM
gravitational force,
(8.14)
and where we have encoded the attractive nature of the force in the minus sign.
Since the cosmological force Fcos is repulsive, it serves to counteract, albeit
very weakly, the attractive binding force of our system. The relative strength
of cosmological force and central force varies with distance – as the test particle
moves outward from the origin, the homogeneous force will increase, and the
binding force decrease.
It is instructive to calculate the distance at which both forces balance out
precisely, Fcos + Fcen = 0. The result is
rbalance =

C
Ωcos H2
0
1/3
.
(8.15)
Let us look at gravitationally bound systems ﬁrst. In that case, with C = GM
and using the values from table 2 for H0, as well as a Ωcos that includes the
dark matter contribution, we have
rbalance =

GM
Ωcos H2
0
1/3
=
 M
M⊙
1/3
386 light-years.
(8.16)
Here are a few examples for typical masses of astronomical objects, order of
magnitude only:
central object
mass [M⊙]
system size [ly]
rbalance [ly]
Jupiter-like planet
0.001
< 10−8
10
star / planetary system
1
< 10−3
102
galaxy
1012
105
106
galaxy cluster
1014 −1015
107 −108
107
73

Stars and their planetary systems and galaxies are safely bound: their real
size is much smaller than the rbalance corresponding to their mass.
But for
large galaxy clusters, their real size has the same order of magnitude as their
rbalance; these are indeed, as we would expect, the largest bound systems in
the universe, and loosely bound at that. Systems larger than that are pushed
apart by the acceleration due to dark energy. Considerations like these can help
us understand which cosmic systems remain bound, and which ones join the
Hubble ﬂow!
Next, for an “atom” bound by the Coulomb force. In that case, both the
central charge Q and the test particle charge q are equal to the elementary
electric chage e. The test particle mass is the electron mass me. With all this,
the constant C from equation (8.14) is
C =
1
4πϵ0
Qq
m =
1
4πϵ0
e2
me
.
(8.17)
Inserting these values, we ﬁnd that the attractive Coulomb force and the repul-
sive cosmological force balance at the distance
rbalance =

e2
4πϵ0meΩΛH2
0
1/3
= 28 au.
(8.18)
This corresponds to the average distance of Neptune from the Sun, and is much,
much larger than the real size of any atom. Atoms, too, are safely bound, and
will hardly be aﬀected by dark energy.
Next, let us analyze circular orbits, which are readily derived by balancing
the centripetal acceleration
acp = v2
r = ω2 r,
(8.19)
where ω is the angular frequency, related to the orbital period T as ω = 2π/T,
with the acceleration created by the forces acting on our test particle, namely
aforces = C
r2 −r ΩΛ H2
0.
(8.20)
The result is a slightly modiﬁed version of Kepler’s third law: orbital radius
and angular frequency are related as
ω2 = C
r3 −ΩΛ H2
0 = C
r3

1 −r3ΩΛ H2
0
C

.
(8.21)
For a gravitationally bound system, the correction term is
ccorr = r3ΩΛ H2
0
C
= 2 · 10−8 ·
 r
ly
3  M
M⊙
−1
.
(8.22)
Here are, again, a few examples for typical masses and sizes of astronomical
objects:
74

central object
mass [M⊙]
system size [ly]
ccorr
star / planetary system
1
< 10−3
10−8
galaxy
1012
105
10−5
galaxy cluster
1014 −1015
107 −108
10−1 −101
Again, it is only on the level of loosely bound galaxy clusters that this correction
becomes important.
All in all, we ﬁnd that local physics, on scales much smaller than that of
galaxy clusters, is inﬂuenced only very slightly by cosmic expansion. Crucially,
any inﬂuence is via the acceleration caused by the matter and dark energy
content of the universe.
This is in line with a very general property of time evolution in physics.
How a system changes over time depends both on the dynamics and on initial
conditions. Dynamical eﬀects stem from interactions within the system, or with
the external world. In classical physics, these interactions manifest themselves
via forces that cause accelerations. Distinct from these eﬀects are the initial
conditions, typically initial positions and initial speeds. Within a system, up to
a certain point, initial conditions can be chosen freely. I can decide how hard
to throw a ball, and choose the direction of my throw. The ball’s trajectory
depends both on the initial conditions I have chosen and on the gravitational
force acting on the ball.
What we have described as cosmic expansion corresponds, in part, to a
speciﬁc choice of initial conditions, in part to gravitational interactions within
the system.
Once we decide to describe a bound, local system, the initial
conditions are set — and they are diﬀerent from the initial conditions for objects
in the Hubble ﬂow. Only the gravitational interactions are the same, and, as
is usual for dynamics, manifest themselves in acceleration terms. These will
inevitably inﬂuence our bound system (if only a tiny little bit, as we have
seen).
While we have, so far, restricted our attention to small scales, there is
a Gedankenexperiment on cosmological scales that illustrates the important
diﬀerence between consequences of expansion depending directly on ˙a(t) and
the real, dynamical changes governed by ¨a(t).
It is known as the tethered
galaxy problem (Peacock 2002, Davis, Lineweaver, and Webb 2003, Whiting
2004, Davis 2005, Clavering 2006, Grøn and Elgarøy 2007, Barnes et al. 2006),
although as we see, that is slightly misleading; I will instead call this the “at-
tached galaxy problem.”
The problem can be formulated as follows: Consider a small galaxy that is
not initially part of the Hubble ﬂow; instead, initially, that galaxy is at rest
relative to our own. In the thought experiment, the small galaxy is “attached”
to our own using a thin, solid rod.17 The galaxy needs to be small so we consider
it as a test particle, and assume the ﬁxation does not aﬀect our own galaxy’s
17In the original formulation, the small galaxy is, instead, “tethered” to our own. But a
tether will only prevent movement of the two galaxies away from each other; a rod will keep
the distance constant. In the usual terminology of cosmology, we initially hold our proper
distance to that galaxy constant.
75

motion. If we now release that galaxy (“break the rod”), what will happen?
How will the galaxy move once it is freed from the cumbersome constraint?
MW
G
(b)
(a)
MW
G
Figure 29: Setup for the attached galaxy problem: If a small (test particle) galaxy G is (a)
initially kept at constant distance from our own galaxy MW by a thin rod, and (b) the rod is
then broken, how will G move relative to us?
If you base your intuition on some notion of “expanding space”, in particular
the misguided notion that “new space is created” between the galaxies, you
might assume that the galaxy will be quickly joining the Hubble ﬂow as soon as
the impediment, the rod, is removed. After all, there is the exact same amount
of space between MW and G that would be between MW and a galaxy in the
Hubble ﬂow that happened to be at the present location of G. You would likely
come to a similar conclusion if your mental picture involved cosmic expansion
“carrying away” galaxies, just like an ordinary (viscous) ﬂuid would carry away
objects immersed in it.
But this is not what happens. Instead, the galaxy slowly accelerates – away
from us if dark energy dominates, and towards us if the ordinary attractive
gravity of matter dominates. (The latter case clearly illustrates that it is not
the ﬂow itself that counts, but the acceleration – otherwise, even in the latter
case of attractive gravity, the galaxy would be carried away with the others.)
In this situation, too, our classical intuition about dynamics serves us well.
In classical physics, the Hubble ﬂow itself is irrelevant. The pattern of motion
is a combination of forces (which cause accelerations) and initial conditions for
locations and velocities. If we choose the moment where the rod is broken as our
reference time, then clearly the Hubble ﬂow is part of the initial conditions for
all of the participating galaxies at that moment. Our recently attached galaxy
G has diﬀerent initial conditions. Its motion only changes as G accelerates. On
small scales, that acceleration can be calculated classically, as we did when de-
riving the Friedmann equations in section 7.1, or the eﬀect of cosmic expansion
on a bound system in this section. On larger scales, somewhat more complex
calculations following the prescriptions of general relativity are required.
What happens will depend on the dynamics involved, in other words: on
the Ωparameters of the cosmos, a galaxy G in this position will join the Hubble
ﬂow, eventually ending up alongside the Hubble ﬂow galaxies; in the general
76

case, however, a galaxy G in such a situation will not join the Hubble ﬂow.18
Returning to bound system one last time, it should be noted that there are
(speculative) hypothetical scenarios that lead to much more dramatic conse-
quences for bound systems in the future (Caldwell, Kamionkowski, and Wein-
berg 2003). As we saw in section 6.1, the dilution behaviour of diﬀerent kinds
of matter content (including dark energy) depends crucially on the equation of
state. In all cases of interest to standard cosmology, that equation has the form
(6.8),
p = w · ρc2,
(6.8)
and we have seen in equation (6.13) that depending on the value of w, the
corresponding density will change as
ρ(t) = ρ(t0) ·
 a(t)
a(t0)
−3(1+w)
.
(6.13)
On the other hand, both in the second-order Friedmann equation (7.5) and in
the corresponding equation (8.8) for the additional force acting within a bound
system due to homogeneous cosmological terms, the gravitational attraction is
proportional to
ρ + 3p/c2.
(8.23)
Under these circumstances, an ingredient with w < −1 would have a dramatic
eﬀect. By (8.23), such an ingredient, which has been dubbed phantom energy,
would exert a repulsive force on bound systems, similar to the inﬂuence of dark
energy we have already explored in this section. But unlike dark energy, the
density of this hypothetical ingredient would not remain constant, but grow
larger with cosmic expansion, as per equation (6.13). In consequence, the radii
rbalance where the repulsive force and a bound system’s attractive force balance
would grow ever smaller, and one after the other, bound systems on ever smaller
scales would be ripped apart: galaxy clusters, galaxies, stars, planets, humans,
atoms, atomic nuclei. Within a ﬁnite time, it turns out, the repulsive inﬂuence
would become inﬁnitely strong.
The universe would end in a Big Rip.
At
present, however, there is no evidence whatsoever that such phantom energy
exists in our cosmos.
8.3
The fate of our own universe
Given that our own universe is currently dominated by dark energy, and will
continue to be so dominated, expansion is set to continue indeﬁnitely – bar-
ring eﬀects so unusual that they are not included in the current cosmological
standard models. By that token, the event horizon for the de Sitter universe
is relevant for our distant future, making for a lonely long-term fate. We can
explore the speciﬁcs as follows (in a way similar to that of the article of Krauss
and Starkman 2000):
As a ﬁrst step, let us extrapolate into the future, to the time t100 when the
scale factor will be 100 times larger than it is today. We can calculate that time
18The details depend on your deﬁnition of joining the Hubble ﬂow, cf. Barnes et al. 2006.
77

using equation (7.35), namely as
t100 = 1
H0
100
Z
0
dx′
x′ p
ΩMx′−3 + ΩΛ
.
(8.24)
Using the values given in table 2 on page 67, this can be evaluated numerically
as
t100 = 6.4
H0
= 9 · 1011 a.
(8.25)
At that time, by the dimensionless Friedmann equation (7.22), the Hubble
constant will be
H100 ≈H0 ·
p
ΩΛ,
(8.26)
the matter term ΩM being suppressed by a factor 10−6. By the same reason-
ing, scale factor evolution will be described in very good approximation by an
exponentially expanding universe, equation (7.45), namely
a(t) = a100 · exp[H100(t −t100)] = 100 · a0 · exp[H0
p
ΩΛ(t −t100)].
(8.27)
On this basis, we can look at the cosmic event horizon. In equation (8.3), we
had written down the event horizon at the present time t0. At any later time
t, the event horizon, as a proper distance measured at that future time t, is
dEH(t) = c · a(t) ·
∞
Z
t
dt′
a(t′).
(8.28)
But what we are really interested in is the proper distance as measured today
that value corresponds to. That will tell us which of the objects in the present-
day universe we will be able to see in the future, and which not. Since proper
distances are directly proportional to the scale factor, the conversion is simple
– a factor a(t0)/a(t) will do the trick, so
dEH,0(t) = a0
a(t) dEH(t) = c · a0 ·
∞
Z
t
dt′
a(t′),
(8.29)
which is the event horizon at time t, expressed as a present-day proper distance.
Restricting ourselves to t > t100 and using (8.27) to describe cosmic evolution
during that epoch, we ﬁnd
dEH,0(t) =
c
100H0
√ΩΛ
exp
h
−H0
p
ΩΛ(t −t100)
i
.
(8.30)
As time passes, the event horizon shrinks further and further, separating us
from ever closer regions in the present-day universe. Figure 30 shows a plot of
dEH,0(t) against cosmic time.
This plot should be read as follows: Pick some
future time t on the x axis, say: a cosmic time of 100 billion years (as shown
by the dotted lines). The value of the curve shows you that those galaxies in
the Hubble ﬂow that currently, at the present time, have a proper distance
78

80
100
120
140
160
180
cosmic time in billion years
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
dEH0(t) in million light-years
Figure 30: The future cosmic event horizon at some future cosmic time t, expressed as a
present-day proper distance dEH,0. At each time, the plot shows which present-day objects
at a given proper distance will be beyond the cosmic event horizon at that future time
of 92 million light-years or more from us will be beyond our event horizon at
a cosmic time of 100 billion years. 92 million light-years is not such a lot in
present cosmic terms! Once the universe has reached about ten times its present
age, most of what we see today will be inaccessible to us.
Another consideration is that of the redshift experienced by light reaching
us from various distant objects. With a(t) of the form (8.27), the scale factor
will grow by an additional factor 1000 every 1.2 · 1011 years or so. As distances
and light travel times grow, there will be a point where even the most highly
energetic light from a speciﬁc distant object in the Hubble ﬂow will be shifted to
wavelengths much too large to be detected by our most sensitive radio telescopes
– much sooner so for the cosmic microwave background, the thermal radiation
reaching us from the end of the Big Bang phase that has already been shifted
from visible light into the microwave range.
In the long term, our universe will be a lonely place. Only the systems that
are still bound to us, as per the considerations in section 8.2, will still be in
our cosmic vicinity, and visible to us. Astronomers of the far future will need
to rely on ancient writings for their cosmological considerations – the evidence,
in the form of the cosmic background radiation, and of the distance-redshift
relation, will have become inaccessible.
8.4
The generalized redshift-distance relation
Now that we have considered the past, evolution and future of the universe,
let us return to our initial aim of understanding the distance-redshift relation.
To that end, we take the Friedmann equation (7.23), revisit our light propa-
79

gation formula (6.22), apply it to light from distant sources reaching us at the
present time t0, and rewrite the result directly in terms of the basic parameters
H0, ΩM, ΩR, ΩK and ΩΛ.
First, some conventions. Let us denote by de the present-day proper distance
of a light source whose light reaches us right now at time t0 after leaving the
light source at an earlier time te. Using this notation, our light propagation
formula now reads
de = c · a(t0) ·
t0
Z
te
dt
a(t).
(8.31)
Assume that we are in a universe that is not re-collapsing.
Then a(t) is a
monotonically increasing function of t, and thus can be inverted. We use this
fact to rewrite the previous equation, now using a ≡a(t) as the independent
variable, with particular values ae ≡a(te) and a0 ≡a(t0). Applying this change
of variable to the integral, the result is
de = c · a0 ·
a0
Z
ae
da′
a′2H(a′),
(8.32)
where H(a′) is the Hubble parameter, now rewritten in terms of the new inde-
pendent variable a′. Next, for another change of variables. In a universe that
is not re-collapsing, the redshift z of light we receive from a distant object is
directly related to the scale factor value at the time that light was emitted by
the cosmological redshift relation (6.17).
For any object whose light we are receiving, the redshift z we measure for
that light and the value a of the scale factor at time of emission are related as
z + 1 = a0
a .
(8.33)
This provides the basic for our next change of variables, introducing z as the
new independent variable. The redshift z = 0 corresponds to an object with
distance zero, which is right were we are. In terms of this new variable, the
light propagation formula (8.32) now reads
de(z) = c ·
z
Z
0
dz′
H(z′),
(8.34)
with H(z) the Hubble parameter, expressed in terms of the new independent
variable — all in all, the simplest version of this formula yet!
But we already know what H(z) looks like; after all, the dimensionless
Friedmann equation (7.23) presents us H explicitly in terms of x = 1/(1 + z),
which is readily rewritten as
H(z) = H0 ·
p
ΩM(1 + z)3 + ΩR(1 + z)4 + ΩΛ + ΩK(1 + z)2.
(8.35)
80

Substituting this into our light propagation formula (8.34), we obtain the ex-
plicit relationship
de(z) =
c
H0
·
z
Z
0
dz′
p
ΩM(1 + z′)3 + ΩR(1 + z′)4 + ΩΛ + ΩK(1 + z′)2
(8.36)
between the redshift z of a light signal reaching us from an object that presently
has proper distance de from us.
This is the generalization of the approximate redshift-distance relation (5.8)
we derived in section 5.1. It takes into account all the subtleties of light prop-
agation in an expanding universe – the fact that we are looking into the past
as well as the fact that the Hubble parameter is changing over (cosmic) time.
Since proper distance cannot be measured directly, it makes sense to express
this in terms of the luminosity distance dL instead of de. We know how to get
from one to the other using the relation between angular diameter distance dang
and luminosity distance as dL = dang(1 + z)2 and the relation (6.48) between
dang and de ≡d(t0). In the non-Euclidean case, that relation still contains
the present-day value of the scale factor a0; we can, however, replace a0 by a
function of ΩK using the deﬁnition (7.14) of that quantity. The result is
dang(z) =
1
1 + z









de(z)
Euclidean space
DH/
p
|ΩK| · sin
hp
|ΩK| · de(z)/DH
i
spherical space
DH/
p
|ΩK| · sinh
hp
|ΩK| · de(z)/DH
i
hyperbolic space,
(8.37)
or
dL(z) = (1 + z) ·









de(z)
Euclidean space
DH/
p
|ΩK| · sin
hp
|ΩK| · de(z)/DH
i
spherical space
DH/
p
|ΩK| · sinh
hp
|ΩK| · de(z)/DH
i
hyperbolic space,
(8.38)
where DH = c/H0 is, once more, the Hubble distance. In the simplest case,
that of Euclidean space geometry (which corresponds to ΩK = 0), the relation
is
dL(z) = DH ·
z
Z
0
dz′
p
ΩM(1 + z′)3 + ΩR(1 + z′)4 + ΩΛ
.
(8.39)
For standard candles, per deﬁnition, dL can be determined. The redshift is
readily measurable for many galaxies, as well. We have formulated a redshift-
distance-relation which links the observable quantities dL and z with the basic
parameters that describe the expansion of our universe, H0 and the Ωs.
8.5
Comparing distances
In the previous section, we have seen three diﬀerent deﬁnitions for the distance
of a far-away light source whose light is reaching us at the present time t0; the
81

earlier section 7.3 provided a fourth, namely the light-travel distance. Now that
we know how to calculate the cosmic scale factor a(t) as a function of time, and
have learned about the best current estimates for the Hubble constant and the
Ωparameters in table 2, we can see how those distances compare for objects of
diﬀerent redshifts.
The distances in question, and their dependence on z, are
de(z)
proper distance
relation given by (8.36)
dang(z)
angular distance
relation to de given by (8.37)
dL(z)
luminosity distance
dL = (1 + z)2 dang
dLT (z)
light-travel distance
relation given by (7.25)
For our universe, the relation between these distances in terms of the Hubble
distance is shown in ﬁgure 31.
A handy tool for calculating speciﬁc values
10-3
10-2
10-1
100
101
102
103
Redshift z
10-3
10-2
10-1
100
101
102
103
104
Distance / DH
dL
de
dLT
dang
Figure 31: Luminosity distance dL, proper distance de, light-travel distance dLT , and angular
distance dang, all in terms of the Hubble distance DH, compared for diﬀerent redshifts z, for
our own universe as described by the Ωparameters of table 2
of these redshift-dependent distances is Ned Wright’s Javascript Cosmology
Calculator (Wright 2006) at
http://www.astro.ucla.edu/˜wright/CosmoCalc.html
For small distance values, all these diﬀerent distances coincide — just as we
would expect, given that at small scales, the eﬀects of expansion and the devi-
ation from an ordinary, special-relativistic universe should be small. At larger
redshifts, the distances diverge.
Of particular interest is the angular diameter distance dang, which does not
grow monotonously with z. Instead, once we go to suﬃciently high redshifts
beyond about z = 1, the angular diameter distance dang shrinks with increasing
z! There are two competing eﬀects at work here. We see distant objects not as
82

they are, but as they were in the past; in an expanding universe, any object in
the Hubble ﬂow was closer to us in the past than it is now. By that reasoning,
objects in the past should appear to have a larger angular diameter. On the
other hand, there is basic geometry, namely that objects that are farther away
from us appear smaller, that is, have a smaller angular diameter. For objects at
lower redshift, the latter eﬀect dominates, while for more distant objects, the
former eﬀect is dominant, leading to the unusual non-monotonous behaviour
seen in ﬁgure 31.
9
The Redshift-distance diagram revisited
After a long journey through the concepts and calculations associated with an
expanding universe, we can return to our concrete goal of understanding Hubble
diagrams, or more precisely: redshift-distance diagrams like our initial ﬁgure 1,
which play a key role in comparing cosmological models with astronomical
observations.
Let us collect the ingredients we need to understand that kind of diagram.
We will, throughout, assume that we are in a Euclidean universe, ΩK = 0. As
described in section 6.6, that particular property of the universe is best derived
using another type of observations, namely ﬂuctuations in the cosmic microwave
background.
Consider standard candles, per deﬁnition of known luminosity L, whose
ﬂux density I is measured by telescope observations. Our aim is to deduce a
systematic relationship between those two quantities and the redshift of the
light we have received from a standard candle.
Once both L and I are known, we can deduce the object’s luminosity dis-
tance dL, using the formula
I =
L
4π d2
L
.
(6.55)
From our derivation in section 6.7, we know the relationship between luminosity
distance and angular distance, and from the geometry section 6.6, we know that
in the special case of a Euclidean universe, angular distance is the same as the
emitting object’s proper distance de from us, so that
dL ≡de · (1 + ze),
(6.54)
with ze the redshift we measure as the distant object’s light reaches us. In
an expanding universe, de and ze fulﬁll the redshift-distance relation (8.36).
We neglect the radiation contribution ΩR which is only of interest in the very
earliest stages of cosmic history and whose absence will not markedly skew
our picture; as already mentioned, we assume Euclidean space geometry, so
ΩK = 0, and we exploit the fact that for the remaining two density parameters,
ΩΛ = 1 −ΩM as per the present-day dimensionless Friedmann equation (7.26).
In consequence, for this special case, the redshift-distance relation takes on
83

the much simpler form
H0 · de = c ·
ze
Z
0
dz
p
ΩM(1 + z)3 −ΩM + 1
.
()
The only remaining complication is that astronomers will express the luminosity
distance in terms of the distance modulus
µ(dL) ≡5 log10
 dL
10 pc

.
(6.58)
All in all, we expect distance modulus µ and redshift ze of a distant standard
candle to be related by
µ = 5 log10

c
H0
·
1
Mpc · (1 + ze) ·
ze
Z
0
dz
p
ΩM(1 + z)3 −ΩM + 1

+ 25.
(9.1)
In practice, for supernovae, all the quantities inside the logarithm that are not
dimensionless are separated, and lumped together with the absolute magnitude;
the distance modulus is then ﬁtted to supernova data as
µ = 5 log10

(1 + ze) ·
ze
Z
0
dz
p
ΩM(1 + z)3 −ΩM + 1

+ C,
(9.2)
with two ﬁt parameters: the ΩM we are interested in, and an oﬀset C. Had
we taken the more complicated formulae for more general geometries, we could
even attempt to ﬁt both ΩM and ΩΛ.
Figure 32 is our own version of the initial ﬁgure 1, using the same data
from the Union 2.1 catalogue of the Supernova Cosmology Project, and ﬁtting
the function (9.2):
The link for downloading the data and the Python script
for ﬁtting, and for producing ﬁgure 32, can be found in section A, p. 97f. The
ﬁtted value of ΩM = 0.268 ± 0.025 is compatible with the result of the team
that published the data, ΩM = 0.271 ± 0.014 (Suzuki et al. 2012).
10
Conclusions
While modern cosmological models are rooted in the framework of general rel-
ativity, at least the simpliﬁed, homogeneous and isotropic expanding universe
can be understood without recourse to the full formalism of Einstein’s theory.
We have derived most of the formulae describing light propagation and the
dynamics of the universal scale factor by going to small scales, making use of
the equivalence principle and the Newtonian limit, taking care to arrive at our
results in a way that allows generalisation to the universe as a whole – either
by summing up inﬁnitesimal contributions or because any exact local result for
the functional form of the scale factor a(t) automatically applies everywhere
the scale factor is involved.
84

0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
Redshift z
32
34
36
38
40
42
44
46
Distance modulus
Best fit: ΩM=0.268 ± 0.025
Figure 32: Using supernova data to estimate the cosmological parameter ΩM. Data: Super-
nova Cosmology Project
The results have shown us a number of fundamental properties of FLRW
universes. In particular, they have allowed us to understand one of the funda-
mental relations linking the FLRW models with astronomical data, to wit, the
redshift-distance relation.
The scope of this lecture was limited in several respects, and there are sev-
eral interesting directions in which the results presented here can be extended.
We have seen that our expanding universe had a hot, dense Big Bang phase;
understanding the basic thermodynamics of the early universe, including the
creation of the ﬁrst light elements and the role of the cosmic background radi-
ation, is an important part of understanding modern cosmology.
While, in this lecture, we have considered only simpliﬁed, perfectly homo-
geneous and isotropic models in this lecture, the universe around us is inho-
mogeneous in many interesting ways. An understanding of the origin of the
large-scale structure in the universe is yet another building block of modern
cosmology. Last but not least, there are aspects of the homogeneous universe
we have neglected, for instance the number statistics of distant objects as a
function of distance.
Overall, I hope to have demonstrated that it is possible to understand key
elements of cosmology using not much more than high-school level mathematics
and fairly basic physics, supplemented with some facts from general relativity.
Given that science is universal, I believe it is of paramount importance to make
the results of cutting-edge research – in particular in those areas that exert
considerable fascination on the general public – accessible as widely as possible.
85

11
Bibliography
Abbott, B. P. et al. (2017): “A gravitational-wave standard siren measure-
ment of the Hubble constant”. In: Nature 551, pp. 85–88. doi: 10.1038/na-
ture24471. arXiv: 1710.05835.
Adams, D. (1980): The Restaurant at the End of the Universe. Pan Books.
isbn: 0-345-39181-0.
Adler, C. G. (1987): “Does mass really depend on velocity, dad?” In: American
Journal of Physics 55, pp. 739–743. doi: 10.1119/1.15314.
Baade, W. (1956): “The Period-Luminosity Relation of the Cepheids”. In:
Proceedings of the Astronomical Society of the Paciﬁc 68, pp. 5–16. doi:
10.1086/126870.
Baez, J. C. and E. F. Bunn (2005): “The meaning of Einstein’s equation”.
In: American Journal of Physics 73, pp. 644–652. doi: 10.1119/1.1852541.
eprint: gr-qc/0103044.
Barnes, L. A. et al. (2006): “Joining the Hubble ﬂow: implications for expand-
ing space”. In: Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society 373, pp.
382–390. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2006.11045.x. eprint: astro-ph/0609271.
Bennett, C. L. et al. (2013):
“Nine-year Wilkinson Microwave Anisotropy
Probe (WMAP) Observations: Final Maps and Results”. In: Astrophysical
Journal Supplement 208, 20., 20. doi: 10.1088/0067-0049/208/2/20. arXiv:
1212.5225.
Bondi, H. (1960): Cosmology. Cambridge University Press.
Bondi, H. (1964): Relativity and Common Sense. A New Approach to Einstein.
New York: Doubleday. isbn: 978-0486240213.
Bunn, E. F. and D. W. Hogg (2009): “The kinematic origin of the cosmo-
logical redshift”. In: American Journal of Physics 77, pp. 688–694. doi:
10.1119/1.3129103. arXiv: 0808.1081 [physics.pop-ph].
Caldwell, R. R., M. Kamionkowski, and N. N. Weinberg (2003): “Phantom
Energy: Dark Energy with w<-1 Causes a Cosmic Doomsday”. In: Physical
Review Letters 91, 071301., 071301. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.91.071301.
eprint: astro-ph/0302506.
Callan, C., R. H. Dicke, and P. J. E. Peebles (1965): “Cosmology and New-
tonian Mechanics”. In: American Journal of Physics 33, pp. 105–108. doi:
10.1119/1.1971256.
Carrera, M. and D. Giulini (2010): “Inﬂuence of global cosmological expansion
on local dynamics and kinematics”. In: Reviews of Modern Physics 82, pp.
169–208. doi: 10.1103/RevModPhys.82.169. arXiv: 0810.2712 [gr-qc].
86

Clavering, W. J. (2006): “Comments on the tethered galaxy problem”. In:
American Journal of Physics 74, pp. 745–750. doi:
10.1119/1.2203646.
eprint: astro-ph/0511709.
Cooperstock, F. I., V. Faraoni, and D. N. Vollick (1998): “The Inﬂuence of the
Cosmological Expansion on Local Systems”. In: Astrophysical Journal 503,
pp. 61–66. doi: 10.1086/305956. eprint: astro-ph/9803097.
Cornish, N. J., D. N. Spergel, and G. D. Starkman (1998): “Circles in the sky:
ﬁnding topology with the microwave background radiation”. In: Classical
and Quantum Gravity 15, pp. 2657–2670. doi: 10.1088/0264-9381/15/9/013.
eprint: gr-qc/9602039.
Davis, T. M., C. H. Lineweaver, and J. K. Webb (2003): “Solutions to the
tethered galaxy problem in an expanding universe and the observation of
receding blueshifted objects”. In: American Journal of Physics 71, pp. 358–
364. doi: 10.1119/1.1528916. eprint: astro-ph/0104349.
Davis, T. M. (2005): “Fundamental aspects of the expansion of the universe
and cosmic horizons”. PhD dissertation, Australia: University of New South
Wales (Australia). Publication Number: AAT 0807562. DAI-B 66/01, Jul
2005. eprint: astro-ph/0402278.
de Bernardis, P. et al. (2000): “A ﬂat Universe from high-resolution maps of
the cosmic microwave background radiation”. In: Nature 404, pp. 955–959.
doi: 10.1038/35010035. eprint: astro-ph/0004404.
de Grijs, R. (2011): An introduction to distance measurement in astronomy.
Chichester: Wiley. isbn: 978-0-470-51180-0.
de Sitter, W. (1917): “On the relativity of inertia. Remarks concerning Ein-
stein’s latest hypothesis”. In: Koninklijke Nederlandse Akademie van Weten-
schappen Proceedings Series B Physical Sciences 19, pp. 1217–1225.
d’Inverno, R. (1992): Introducing Einstein’s Relativity. Oxford University Press.
isbn: 978-0198596868.
Earman, J. (1995): Bangs, Crunches, Whimpers, and Shrieks - Singularities
and Acausalities in Relativistic Spacetimes. Oxford University Press. isbn:
9780195095913.
Eddington, A. S. (1930): “On the instability of Einstein’s spherical world”.
In: Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society 90, pp. 668–678. doi:
10.1093/mnras/90.7.668.
Ehlers, J., I. Ozsv´ath, and E. L. Schucking (2006):
“Active mass un-
der pressure”. In:
American Journal of Physics 74, pp. 607–613. doi:
10.1119/1.2198881. eprint: gr-qc/0505040.
Einstein, A. (1917):
“Kosmologische Betrachtungen zur allgemeinen Rela-
tivit¨atstheorie”. In: Sitzungsberichte der K¨oniglich Preußischen Akademie
der Wissenschaften (Berlin), pp. 142–152.
87

Fraknoi, A. (1995): The Universe at Your Fingertips. An Astronomy Activity
and Resource Notebook. Project Astro at the Astronomical Society of the
Paciﬁc. isbn: 978-1886733008.
Freedman, W. L. et al. (2001): “Final Results from the Hubble Space Telescope
Key Project to Measure the Hubble Constant”. In: Astrophysical Journal 553,
pp. 47–72. doi: 10.1086/320638. eprint: astro-ph/0012376.
Friedmann, A. (1922): “¨Uber die Kr¨ummung des Raumes”. In: Zeitschrift f¨ur
Physik 10, pp. 377–386. doi: 10.1007/BF01332580.
Friedmann, A. (1924): “¨Uber die M¨oglichkeit einer Welt mit konstanter neg-
ativer Kr¨ummung des Raumes”. In: Zeitschrift f¨ur Physik 21, pp. 326–332.
doi: 10.1007/BF01328280.
Fukugita, M. and P. J. E. Peebles (2004): “The Cosmic Energy Inventory”.
In: Astrophysical Journal 616, pp. 643–668. doi: 10.1086/425155. eprint:
astro-ph/0406095.
Gausmann, E. et al. (2001):
“Topological lensing in spherical spaces”. In:
Classical and Quantum Gravity 18, pp. 5155–5186. doi:
10.1088/0264-
9381/18/23/311. eprint: gr-qc/0106033.
Giulini, D. (2014): “Does cosmological expansion aﬀect local physics?”
In:
Studies in the History and Philosophy of Modern Physics 46, pp. 24–37. doi:
10.1016/j.shpsb.2013.09.009. arXiv: 1306.0374 [gr-qc].
Grøn, Ø. and Ø. Elgarøy (2007): “Is space expanding in the Friedmann uni-
verse models?”
In:
American Journal of Physics 75, pp. 151–157. doi:
10.1119/1.2360990. eprint: astro-ph/0603162.
Harrison, E. (2000): Cosmology. The science of the universe. Cambridge Uni-
versity Press. isbn: 978-0521661485.
Hawking, S. W. and G. F. R. Ellis (1973): The large-scale structure of space-
time. Cambridge University Press.
Hecht, E. (2009a): “Einstein on mass and energy”. In: American Journal of
Physics 77, pp. 799–806. doi: 10.1119/1.3160671.
Hecht, E. (2009b): “Einstein Never Approved of Relativistic Mass”. In: The
Physics Teacher 47, pp. 336–341. doi: 10.1119/1.3204111.
Hogg, D. W. et al. (2002): “The K correction”. In: ArXiv Astrophysics e-prints
eprint: astro-ph/0210394.
Hoyle, F. (1954): “Protocol of session 28, “Commission des nebuleuses extra-
galactiques”. In: Transactions of the International Astronomical Union Vol.
8. Ed. by Oosterhoﬀ, P. Th. Wiley, pp. 297–299.
Hubble, E. (1929): “A Relation between Distance and Radial Velocity among
Extra-Galactic Nebulae”. In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Science
15, pp. 168–173. doi: 10.1073/pnas.15.3.168.
88

Jagannathan, K. (2009): “Momentum due to pressure: A simple model”. In:
American Journal of Physics 77, pp. 432–433. doi: 10.1119/1.3081105.
Jarrett, T. H. et al. (2000): “2MASS Extended Source Catalog: Overview
and Algorithms”. In:
Astronomical Journal 119, pp. 2498–2531. doi:
10.1086/301330. eprint: astro-ph/0004318.
Jordan,
T. F. (2005):
“Cosmology calculations almost without general
relativity”. In:
American Journal of Physics 73,
pp. 653–662. doi:
10.1119/1.1900095. eprint: astro-ph/0309756.
Krauss, L. M. and G. D. Starkman (2000): “Life, the Universe, and Nothing:
Life and Death in an Ever-expanding Universe”. In: Astrophysical Journal
531, pp. 22–30. doi: 10.1086/308434. eprint: astro-ph/9902189.
Leavitt, H. S. (1908): “1777 variables in the Magellanic Clouds”. In: Annals of
Harvard College Observatory 60, pp. 87–108.3.
Leibundgut, B. et al. (1996): “Time Dilation in the Light Curve of the Distant
Type IA Supernova SN 1995K”. In: Astrophysical Journal Letters 466, L21.
doi: 10.1086/310164. eprint: astro-ph/9605134.
Lemaˆıtre, G. (1927):
“Un Univers homog`ene de masse constante et de
rayon croissant rendant compte de la vitesse radiale des n´ebuleuses extra-
galactiques”. In: Annales de la Soci´et´e Scientiﬁque de Bruxelles 47, pp. 49–
59.
Lemaˆıtre, G. (1931a): “The Beginning of the World from the Point of View of
Quantum Theory.” In: Nature 127, 706. doi: 10.1038/127706b0.
Lemaˆıtre, G. (1931b): “L’Expansion de l’Espace”. In: Publications du Labora-
toire d’Astronomie et de Geodesie de l’Universite de Louvain 8, pp. 101–120.
Liebscher, D.-E. (2005): The Geometry of Time. Wiley VCH. isbn: 978-3-527-
40567-1.
Liske, J. et al. (2008): “Cosmic dynamics in the era of Extremely Large Tele-
scopes”. In: Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society 386, pp.
1192–1218. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2008.13090.x. arXiv: 0802.1532.
Lotze, K.-H. (1995): “Special and general relativity and cosmology for teachers
and high-school students”. In: Thinking physics for teaching. Ed. by Bernar-
dini, C., C. Tarsitani, and M. Vincentini. New York: Plenum Press, pp.
335–354.
Lotze, K.-H. (2002):
“Das Weltmodell der Newtonschen Kosmologie”. In:
Wege in der Physikdidaktik Band 5: Naturph¨anomene und Astronomie. Ed.
by Lotze, K.-H. and W. B. Schneider. Erlangen & Jena: Palm & Enke,
pp. 238–249. url:
http://www.solstice.de/cms/upload/wege/band5/
wege5-238-249.pdf
89

Maxwell, J. C. (1873):
A Treatise on Electricity and Magnetism, Vol. 2.
Oxford: Clarendon Press. url: http://catalogue.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/
cb30914055c
McCrea, W. H. (1955): “Newtonian Cosmology”. In: Nature 175, 466. doi:
10.1038/175466a0.
McCrea, W. H. and E. A. Milne (1934): “Newtonian Universes and the curva-
ture of space”. In: The Quarterly Journal of Mathematics 5, pp. 73–80. doi:
10.1093/qmath/os-5.1.73.
Mermin, N. D. (2005a): It’s about time : understanding Einstein’s relativity.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. isbn: 978-0691122014.
Mermin, N. D. (2005b):
“From Einstein’s 1905 postulates to the geome-
try of ﬂat space-time”. In:
Annalen der Physik 517, pp. 103–114. doi:
10.1002/andp.200410122. eprint: gr-qc/0411069.
Milne, E. A. (1934): “A Newtonian expanding Universe”. In: The Quarterly
Journal of Mathematics 5, pp. 64–72. doi: 10.1093/qmath/os-5.1.64.
Misner, C. W. and P. Putnam (1959): “Active Gravitational Mass”. In: Physical
Review 116, pp. 1045–1046. doi: 10.1103/PhysRev.116.1045.
Narlikar, J. V. (1994): “Spectral shifts in general relativity”. In: American
Journal of Physics 62, pp. 903–907. doi: 10.1119/1.17679.
Okun, L. B. (1989): “The concept of mass”. In: Physics Today 42, pp. 31–46.
doi: 10.1063/1.881171.
Okun, L. B. (2009): “Mass versus relativistic and rest masses”. In: American
Journal of Physics 77, pp. 430–431. doi: 10.1119/1.3056168.
Ono, Y. A. (1982): “How I created the theory of relativity”. In: Physics Today
35, pp. 45–48. doi: 10.1063/1.2915203.
Pachner, J. (1963): “Mach’s Principle in Classical and Relativistic Physics”.
In: Physical Review 132, pp. 1837–1842. doi: 10.1103/PhysRev.132.1837.
Pachner, J. (1964): “Nonconservation of Energy During Cosmic Evolution”. In:
Physical Review Letters 12, pp. 117–118. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.12.117.
Patrignani,
C. and Particle Data Group (2016):
“Review of Particle
Physics”. In: Chinese Physics C 40, 100001., 100001. doi: 10.1088/1674-
1137/40/10/100001. url: http://pdg.lbl.gov/
Peacock, J. A. (2002): “An introduction to the physics of cosmology”. In:
Modern Cosmology. Ed. by Bonometto, S., V. Gorini, and U. Moschella.
Oxford University Press, pp. 9–107.
Perlmutter, S. et al. (1997): “Cosmology From Type IA Supernovae: Measure-
ments, Calibration Techniques, and Implications”. In: American Astronom-
ical Society Meeting Abstracts. Wiley, 1351. eprint: astro-ph/9812473.
90

Peters, P. C. (1986): “An alternate derivation of relativistic momentum”. In:
American Journal of Physics 54, pp. 804–808. doi: 10.1119/1.14450.
Planck Collaboration (2016):
“Planck 2015 results. XIII. Cosmological pa-
rameters”. In:
Astronomy & Astrophysics 594, A13. doi:
10.1051/0004-
6361/201525830. arXiv: 1502.01589.
P¨ossel, M. (2010a): “Time dilation on the road”. In: Einstein Online 4, 1006.
url:
http://www.einstein-online.info/spotlights/time_dilation_
road
P¨ossel, M. (2010b): “Twins on the road”. In: Einstein Online 4, 1008. url:
http://www.einstein-online.info/spotlights/time_dilation_road
P¨ossel, M. (2017): “‘Teaching cosmology with special relativity: Piecewise in-
ertial frames as a model for cosmic expansion”. In preparation.
Poisson, E. (2014): Gravity: Newtonian, Post-Newtonian, Relativistic. Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press. isbn: 978-1107032866.
Price, R. H. and E. Grover (2001): “Cosmological expansion in the classroom”.
In: American Journal of Physics 69, pp. 125–128. doi: 10.1119/1.1287354.
Price, R. H. and J. D. Romano (2012):
“In an expanding universe, what
doesn’t expand?” In: American Journal of Physics 80, pp. 376–381. doi:
10.1119/1.3699245.
Riazuelo, A. et al. (2004): “Simulating cosmic microwave background maps
in multiconnected spaces”. In:
Physical Review D 69,
103514. doi:
10.1103/PhysRevD.69.103514. eprint: astro-ph/0212223.
Riess, A. G. et al. (2016): “A 2.4% Determination of the Local Value of the
Hubble Constant”. In: Astrophysical Journal 826, 56. doi: 10.3847/0004-
637X/826/1/56. arXiv: 1604.01424.
Rindler, W. (1977): Essential Relativity. Special, General and Cosmological.
Springer. isbn: 978-3-540-07970-5.
Rindler, W. et al. (1990): “Putting to Rest Mass Misconceptions”. In: Physics
Today 43, 13. doi: 10.1063/1.2810555.
Robertson, H. P. (1927): “Dynamical space-times which contain a conformal
Euclidean 3-space”. In: Transactions of the American Mathematical Society
29, pp. 481–496. doi: 10.1090/S0002-9947-1927-1501400-9.
Rohrlich, F. (1990): “An elementary derivation of E=mc2”. In: American Jour-
nal of Physics 58, pp. 348–349. doi: 10.1119/1.16168.
Sandin, T. R. (1991): “In defense of relativistic mass”. In: American Journal
of Physics 59, pp. 1032–1036. doi: 10.1119/1.16642.
Schild, A. (1960): “Equivalence Principle and Red-Shift Measurements”. In:
American Journal of Physics 28, pp. 778–780. doi: 10.1119/1.1936000.
91

Schr¨oter, U. (2002): “Allgemeine Relativit¨atstheorie mit den Mitteln der Schul-
mathematik”. In: Wege in der Physikdidaktik Band 5: Naturph¨anomene und
Astronomie. Erlangen & Jena: Palm & Enke, pp. 174–187. url: http:
//www.solstice.de/cms/upload/wege/band5/wege5-p2-174-187.pdf
Schutz, B. F. (1985): A ﬁrst course in general relativity. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press. isbn: 978-0521887052.
Schutz, B. F. (1986): “Determining the Hubble constant from gravitational
wave observations”. In: Nature 323, 310. doi: 10.1038/323310a0.
Schutz, B. F. (2004): Gravity from the Ground Up. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press. isbn: 978-0521455060.
Strauss, M. A. (2016): “The Expansion of the Universe”. In: Welcome to the
Universe. Ed. by Tyson, N. D., M. A. Strauss, and J. R. Gott. Princeton
University Press, Ch. 14
Suzuki, N. et al. (2012): “The Hubble Space Telescope Cluster Supernova Sur-
vey. V. Improving the Dark-energy Constraints above z > 1 and Building
an Early-type-hosted Supernova Sample”. In: Astrophysical Journal 746, 85.
doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/746/1/85. arXiv: 1105.3470 [astro-ph.CO].
Trimble, V. (2013): “Anybody but Hubble!” arXiv: 1307.2289 [physics.hist-
ph].
Udalski, A. et al. (1999): “The Optical Gravitational Lensing Experiment.
Cepheids in the Magellanic Clouds. III. Period-Luminosity-Color and Period-
Luminosity Relations of Classical Cepheids”. In: Acta Astronomica 49, pp.
201–221. eprint: astro-ph/9907236.
Visser, M. (2004): “Jerk, snap and the cosmological equation of state”. In:
Classical and Quantum Gravity 21, pp. 2603–2615. doi:
10.1088/0264-
9381/21/11/006. eprint: gr-qc/0309109.
Walker, A. G. (1935): “On Riemannian spaces with spherical symmetry about a
line, and the conditions for isotropy in general relativity”. In: The Quarterly
Journal of Mathematics 6, pp. 81–93. doi: 10.1093/qmath/os-6.1.81.
Weinberg, S. (2008): Cosmology. Oxford University Press.
Wheeler, J. A. (1990): A Journey into Gravity and Spacetime. W. H. Freeman
& Co Ltd. isbn: 978-0716750161.
Whiting, A. B. (2004): “The expansion of space: free-particle motion and the
cosmological redshift”. In: The Observatory 124, pp. 174–189. eprint: astro-
ph/0404095.
Wright, E. L. (2006): “A Cosmology Calculator for the World Wide Web”. In:
Proceedings of the Astronomical Society of the Paciﬁc 118, pp. 1711–1715.
doi: 10.1086/510102. eprint: astro-ph/0609593.
92

Index
ΛCDM models, 68
Ωparameters (density), 55
values, 67
2MASX catalogue, 16
absolute magnitude, 51
absorption lines, 26
age of the universe, 64
angular diameter distance, 48
apparent brightness, 29
apparent magnitude, 50
arc length, 47
astronomical unit, 27
atoms
and cosmic expansion, 74
attached galaxy problem, 76
axion, 72
Baade, Walter, 31
baryonic matter, 68
Big Bang, 62
Big Bang nucleosynthesis, 68
Big Bang phase, 62
Big Bang singularity, 62
Big Crunch, 64
Big Rip, 77
Bondi, Hermann, 17
bound systems
and cosmic expansion, 70–77
Carter-Penrose diagram, 63
Cartesian coordinates, 97
Cepheid variables, 27
charge
elementary, 74
closed universe, 58
co-moving clock
galaxy, 22
cold dark matter, 68
conformal diagram, 63
constant
cosmological, 37
coordinate system
in special relativity, 97
Copernican principle, 17
cosmic background radiation, 49, 63,
68, 69
cosmic expansion, 19–20
and bound systems, 70–77
cosmic scale factor, 19
dynamics, 51–54
cosmic time, 22
cosmological constant, 37
cosmological parameter values, 67
cosmological principle, 17
cosmological redshift, 26, 38
as Doppler shift, 40
cosmology, 4
Newtonian, 51
Coulomb force, 74
critical density, 55
and space geometry, 58
value, 67
curvature, 6
dark energy, 55
constant density, 37
equation of state, 36
dark matter, 68
dark matter particles, 72
de Sitter solution, 66
de Sitter universe
event horizon, 70
de Sitter, Willem, 66
deceleration parameter, 34
density
change due to expansion, 36, 37
critical, 55
distance
angular diameter, 48
Hubble, 26
light-travel, 57
luminosity, 50
proper, 20
distance ladder, 27
distance modulus, 51
Doppler eﬀect, 26
classical, 102
special-relativistic, 103
transverse, 103
93

Doppler shift, 38
drop tower, 7
Einstein ﬁeld equations (EFE), 13
simpliﬁed, 14
vacuum, 14
Einstein’s static universe, 18
Einstein, Albert, 37
Einstein–de-Sitter solution
particle horizon, 69
Einstein–de-Sitter universe, 66
electromagnetic radiation
equation of state, 36
elliptic integral, 57
elliptical galaxy, 32
emission lines, 26
energy conservation, 35
and cosmological redshift, 39
energy-momentum tensor, 13
equation of state, 36
equivalence principle, 6, 8, 10
Euclidean space, 58
event horizon, 70
our own universe, 78
fate (of the universe), 77–79
collapse vs. eternal expansion, 64–
65
ﬁrst law of thermodynamics, 35
FLRW models, 54
ﬂux, 50
ﬂux density, 29
force
cosmological, 72
four-momentum, 105
frame of reference, 97
free fall, 6
Friedmann equation
ﬁrst (order), 54, 57
in terms of redshift, 57
present-day, 58
second (order), 53
Friedmann, Alexander, 54
Friedmann-Lemaˆıtre-Robertson-Walker
models, 3, 54
Friedmann-Robertson-Walker models,
54
fundamental plane, 32
Gaia mission, 27
galaxies
and cosmic expansion, 73
as point particles, 5
galaxy dust, 18, 36
general relativity, 6
geometry of space, 46, 54
and critical density, 58
Gnab Gib, 64
gravity
as dominant force, 5
Hawking, Stephen, 62
homogeneity, 15
relativistic deﬁnition, 22
homogeneous spaces, 58
horizon
event, 70
of our own universe, 78
particle, 69
horizon problem, 63
Hubble constant, 24, 31
measurements, 31
reduced, 24
value, 67
Hubble diagram, 30
Hubble distance, 26, 33
Hubble ﬂow, 19
Hubble Key Project, 31
Hubble parameter, 24, 57
Hubble relation, 24, 30
Hubble time, 33, 61, 64
hyperbolic space, 46, 58
inertial acceleration, 97
inertial frame, 97
inﬂation, 66
inﬂationary phase, 63
initial conditions, 75
initial singularity, 62
intergalactic plasma, 68
internal energy, 35
International Space Station (ISS), 7
inverse square law, 30, 50
irradiance, 29
isotropy, 16
94

large-scale structure, 15, 68
Leavitt, Henrietta Swan, 27
Lemaˆıtre, Georges, 54
light propagation
in expanding universe, 39–42
light-travel distance, 57
look-back time, 43, 57
lookback time, 45
Lorentz transformations, 99
luminosity, 27
luminosity distance, 50
magnitude
absolute, 51
apparent, 50
Malmquist bias, 16
mass
active, 105
relativistic, 104
rest mass, 104
mass-energy equivalence, 14, 35
matter, 55
baryonic, 68
dark, 68
equation of state, 36
matter era, 61
metric, 13
microgravity, 7
model universe
de Sitter (dS), 66
Einstein–de-Sitter (EdS), 66
homogeneous and isotropic, 17
pure radiation, 66
Newtonian cosmology, 51
Newtonian limit, 6, 13
observable universe, 69
observer
in special relativity, 97
open universe, 58
parallax, 27
parameter values, cosmological, 67, 84
particle horizon, 69
peculiar motion, 19
Penrose diagram, 63
Penrose, Roger, 62
perihelion advance, 13
period-luminosity relation, 27, 31
phantom energy, 77
photons, 38
Planck satellite, 67
Planck’s constant, 38
planetary systems
and cosmic expansion, 73
plasma, intergalactic, 68
Poincar´e conjecture, 58
post-Newtonian (pN) gravity, 13
pressure, 35
contribution to four-momentum, 105
gravitational eﬀects, 14
principle of relativity, 98
proper distance, 20
proper time, 22
q0, 34
quantum gravity, 62
radar distance measurement, 27
radial coordinate
adapted, 47
radial speed, 26
radiation, 55
radiation era, 61
radiation pressure, 36
raisin cake, 3
recession speed, 24
redshift
cosmological, 26, 38, 43–44
drift, 45
gravitational, 10
redshift-distance relation, 26
generalized, 79–84
reference frame, 97
relativistic mass, 104
relativity
of simultaneity, 99
relativity principle, 98
rest frame, 98
rest mass, 104
Ricci scalar, 13
Ricci tensor, 13
Robertson, Howard P., 54
Robertson-Walker spacetimes, 54
95

rubber balloon, 3
rubber band, 3
scalar ﬁeld, 37
scales
cosmic, 4
scale factor, 19
dynamics, 51–54
scale-factor expansion
consequences, 34
properties, 20
simultaneity, 22, 98
relativity of, 99
singularity, 62
singularity theorems, 62
solar spectrum, 26
space geometry, 54
special relativity
summarized, 97–106
spectral lines, 26
spectrum
solar, 26
speed of light
constancy, 98
sphere
surface area, 47
spherical space, 46
spiral galaxy, 32
standard candles, 27, 31
static universe, 18
stellar parallax, 27
superluminal motion
galaxies, 25
Supernova Cosmology Project, 84
supernovae of type Ia, 27, 32
surface brightness ﬂuctuations, 32
test particles, 8
tethered galaxy problem, 75
thermodynamics
ﬁrst law, 35
three-sphere, 58
tidal eﬀects, 8
time dilation, 22
cosmological, 44
special relativity, 100
topology, 58
torus, 58
Tully-ﬁsher relation, 32
Union 2.1 catalogue, 84
universal scale factor, 19
universe
age, 64
closed vs. open, 58
radiation-dominated, 65
volume, 35
change due to expansion, 36
w (parameter for equation of state), 36
Walker, Arthur Geoﬀrey, 54
wavelength, 102
WIMPs, 72
x (scale factor ratio), 56
z (wavelength shift), 26, 102
96

A
Fitting the supernova data
The data used to plot ﬁgure 32 is from the Supernova Cosmology Project,
namely the Union 2.1 catalogue available for download at
http://supernova.lbl.gov/union/ﬁgures/SCPUnion2.1 mu vs z.txt
#!/usr/bin/env python2
# -*- coding: utf-8 -*-
# created by Markus Poessel, November 2, 2017
import numpy as np
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
from scipy.integrate import quad
from scipy.optimize import curve_fit
# Union.2.1 catalogue
# File from
# http://supernova.lbl.gov/union/figures/SCPUnion2.1_mu_vs_z.txt
# An ASCII table with tab-separated columns: Supernova Name, Redshift,
# Distance Modulus, and Distance Modulus Error. For Union 2.1, there is
# an additional column for the probability that the supernova was
# hosted by a low-mass galaxy.
snz,snmu,dsnmu=np.genfromtxt("SCPUnion2.1_mu_vs_z.txt",
usecols=(1,2,3),unpack="True")
# Argument for the integral in the distance modulus function
def intArgument(zval,OmegaM):
return 1/np.sqrt(OmegaM*(1+zval)**3-OmegaM+1)
# Computing the distance modulus as a function of redshift z,
#given a value for OmegaM and an offset CC
def mu(zval,OmegaM,CC):
return np.array([5*np.log10((1+zz)*quad(intArgument,0,zz,
args=(OmegaM))[0])
+ CC for zz in zval])
# Fit the redshift-distance curve to the data:
popt, pcov = curve_fit(mu, snz,snmu)
perr=np.sqrt(np.diag(pcov))
# Plot both the data and the fitted curve:
zVals = np.linspace(0.01,1.4,1000)
muVals = mu(zVals,popt[0],popt[1])
plt.clf()
plt.errorbar(snz,snmu,dsnmu,fmt="b.",zorder=0)
plt.plot(zVals,muVals,"r",lw=1.5,zorder=1)
plt.text(0.6,38,"Best fit: $\Omega_M$=
%.3f $\pm$ %.3f" % (popt[0],perr[0]), color="r")
plt.ylabel("Distance modulus")
plt.xlabel("Redshift z")
plt.savefig("sn_fit.pdf",bbox_inches="tight")
97

B
What we need from special relativity
In order to make these lecture notes more accessible, I brieﬂy summarize here a
number of statements from special relativity that are used in the main text. It
should be clear, however, that this brief version can be no more than a crutch
— the best option for interested readers not familiar with special relativity is
to change that state of aﬀairs by reading books such as Mermin 2005a. In the
main text, the equivalence principle, cf. section 3.1, plays an important role.
In brief, that principle states that for an observer in free fall in a gravitational
ﬁeld described by Einstein’s general theory of relativity, the laws of physics
are (approximately) the same as those of special relativity. So what are the
pertinent laws of special relativity?
B.1
Inertial reference frames
For the usual description of moving particles (and more complex objects), you
need a frame of reference. Most commonly, you describe particle positions by
introducing a Cartesian coordinate system, deﬁned in just the right way so that
coordinate distances correspond to physical distances, as measured with a ruler
or more modern measuring device. In classical physics, one usually does not
think too much about introducing a time coordinate. Time is a parameter that
describes how change happens within your system; ideal clocks divide time up
into unit intervals, one second the same as the next, one hour the same as any
other. (The latter is easily said; linking it to actual measurements is tricky,
though — how can you tell that a clock is ideal?)
In some reference frames, if you let a particle drift, making sure that none
of the known forces such as gravity or electromagnetism exert any signiﬁcant
inﬂuence, such free particles will nevertheless be seen to accelerate, and in a
systematic way: If you track their motions, you will be able to separate acceler-
ation into a component that acts on all particles in the same way, a component
that depends on the distance from a certain line in space (the rotation axis),
a component that depends on the velocity component orthogonal to that same
line, and a component orthogonal both to the line and to the particle’s direction
toward that line. These are linear, centrifugal, Coriolis, and Euler acceleration,
respectively, jointly known as inertial accelerations.
A reference frame in which these inertial accelerations are absent, and free
particles move at constant speeds along straight lines, is called an inertial frame.
These are the most common frames used in classical mechanics, even though a
reference frame at rest relative to the Earth’s surface – to name a very common
example – is only approximately inertial, seeing that the Earth itself is a rotating
reference frame.
The nomenclature regarding inertial frames or, more general, reference frames,
varies; the terms “frame,” “reference frame,” “frame of reference,” “observer”
and “coordinate system” are used fairly interchangeably.
The rationale,
presumably, is that each observer will have deﬁned a personal reference frame
(that is, a frame in which the observer is at rest) to record their observations,
and that descriptions within a given reference frame are made in terms of space
98

and time coordinates. The elementary concept in such a setting is an event,
deﬁned as something identiﬁable happening at a speciﬁc location in space, at a
speciﬁc point in time. (And yes, this is an idealization — just like the concept
of a space point is an idealization.)
An inertial frame in which an object is at rest is often called that object’s
rest frame.
B.2
Relativity principle and constant light speed
Einstein’s special theory of relativity posits that there is such a thing as inertial
frames, and that the following two principles hold:
1. Principle of relativity: the laws of physics have the same simple form
in every inertial frame.
2. Constancy of the speed of light: the speed of light in vacuum has the
same value in each inertial frame. In particular, it does not depend on
the motion of the light source.
Inertial frames can be in constant motion relative to each other; the ﬁrst prin-
ciple states that, when it comes to the laws of physics, no inertial frame is
distinguished from any other. This is in contrast to earlier notions of an abso-
lute space, which set a standard of absolute rest.
The expression “the same simple form” refers to physical laws linking spe-
ciﬁc quantities. Assume, for instance, that the energy E and momentum p of
a massless particle are linked as E = pc, with c the (vacuum) speed of light,
in one inertial frame, that is: with the energy E and momentum p measured
in that speciﬁc frame. Then the same form holds in any other inertial frame,
as well: the energy E′ and momentum p′ as measured in such another inertial
frame are, again, linked, as E′ = p′c. The energy-momentum-relation has the
same mathematical form in all inertial frames.
A direct consequence of the principle of relativity is that, if you set up a
particular experiment in one inertial frame, and then set up the same experi-
ment in another inertial frame, the results will be the same. There is no way of
distinguishing between inertial frames using local experiments — that is, exper-
iments that are deﬁned solely within an inertial frame, and do not include any
outside inﬂuences. (A counter-example would be two diﬀerent inertial frames in
one and the same external magnetic ﬁeld; unless the magnetic ﬁeld were to have
exactly the same properties in both inertial frames, local magnetic experiments
in each frame would not be equivalent.)
We will make use of the constancy of the speed of light when we describe
light propagation in an expanding universe in section 6.3.
The constancy of the speed of light is directly linked to notions of simul-
taneity. Einstein’s deﬁnition of simultaneity of two events is as follows. Imagine
an observer who is at rest in the chosen reference frame S, and who is located
half-way between the locations of two events (in other words: if we join the two
locations by a straight line, then the distance between our observer and the ﬁrst
event location will be the same as the observer’s distance to the second event
99

location, with all distances measured in the inertial frame S). Now imagine that
directly at each event, a light signal is sent from the event location towards our
observer. The two events in question are simultaneous as deﬁned in the inertial
frame S if and only if these two light signals arrive at the half-way observer at
the same time. It is a key property of special relativity that with this deﬁni-
tion, simultaneity is relative:
two events that are simultaneous in one inertial
system S are not, in general, simultaneous in another inertial system S′ if those
two systems are in relative motion.
With an (ideal) master clock, at rest in a speciﬁc inertial frame, and speciﬁc
light signals, we can chart that reference frame’s spacetime geometry: We can
measure distances by the travel time of a reﬂected light signal (as in radar
distance ranging).
And we can ﬁnd the time coordinate value (vulgo “the
time”) to assign to an event as follows, in a variation of the above deﬁnition
of simultaneity: if a light signal leaves our master clock at t = T1, reaches the
location of the event E at just the time the event is happening, is reﬂected and
arrives back at the master clock at time t = T2, then the event E was happening
at time
t(E) = T1 + T2
2
.
(B.1)
In this way, one can reconstruct the whole of the geometry of space and time, as
deﬁned by special relativity (Mermin 2005b, Liebscher 2005). This approach,
using radar coordinates and what has become known as the k-calculus, was
pioneered by Hermann Bondi (Bondi 1964).
B.3
Transformations
Clearly, the constancy of the speed of light is incompatible with classical me-
chanic’s recipe of relating two reference frames in relative motion. In classical
mechanics, relative velocities add up directly. If a spaceship is chasing a light
signal, and if we, in our reference frame, see the light signal moving at speed
c and the spaceship at speed v, both in the same direction, we would deduce
that, for an observer in the spaceship, the light signal would move at the re-
duced speed c −v. This is contradicted by the principle of the constancy of
the speed of light. Clearly, the transition between one inertial reference frame
and another is somewhat more complicated in special relativity than in classical
mechanics.
We will not go into detail about the Lorentz transformations, that is, about
the formulae deﬁning the transition from one inertial frame to another in special
relativity. It is worth mentioning, however, that they link space and time in
such a way that it makes more sense to talk about the set of all events in space
and time, in short: about four-dimensional spacetime.
There is a helpful analogy that makes use of our usual notion of space. We
can introduce an x, y and z axis in order to describe three-dimensional space.
If we rotate the resulting coordinate system, space will still be the same, but
the x, y and z directions are now diﬀerent. Thus, it makes no sense to take the
division into x, y and z too seriously – much more important is the underlying
three-dimensional structure. In the same way, the Lorentz transformations show
100

how diﬀerent inertial observers (namely inertial observers in relative motion)
deﬁne the time direction and space diﬀerently – much more important is the
underlying four-dimensional structure of spacetime, not so much its observer-
dependant slicings into space and time. And while the main text does not go
into any detail at that point, these observer-dependent ways of slicing spacetime
into space and time are intimately connected to the diﬀerent kinds of space
geometry discussed for an expanding universe in section 6.6.
B.4
Time dilation
One consequence of special relativity that is of interest for the cosmic time
coordinate deﬁned in section 4.3 is time dilation. In short, any inertial observer
will judge a moving clock to run more slowly than the clocks at rest in that
observer’s inertial frame.
26.2
C1
8.1
D
v
26.2
C2
26.2
C3
27.2
C1
8.6
D
v
27.2
C2
27.2
C3
(a)
(b)
Figure 33: Time dilation for a moving clock. Panel (a) shows matters as they stand at time
t = 26.2 seconds as determined in system S; panel (b) shows the moment t = 27.2 seconds,
also as determined in system S
We consider the situation in more detail, as shown in ﬁgure 33: Our inertial
observer has placed three clocks C1,C2,C3 in his inertial frame S, all of which
are synchronized, their hands indicating the system’s time coordinate t. These
clocks can be seen, in a row, near the bottom of panel 33 (a), and naturally they
all show the same time, in this case t = 26.2 seconds. For simplicity, we assume
that those clocks do not follow our somewhat cumbersome everyday division of
time into seconds, minutes, hours, days and so on, but merely count seconds.
Now consider an additional clock D, which is moving at some constant speed
v relative to the inertial frame S. The panel 33 (a) captures the moment where
the moving clock D is just passing the ﬁrst clock C1. Assume that, at this
101

particular moment, the moving clock D is showing the time 8.1 seconds on its
display.
The situation one second later (as determined in the inertial system S) is
shown in the panel 33 (b). Apparently, clock placement happens to be such
that one second was all it took for clock D to move from the location of C1 to
that of C3, so we see the moment where D passes C3. The fact that, in the
system S, one second has passed, is dutifully recorded by the three clocks at
rest in S, which now show t = 27.2 seconds.
But when we compare D with the clock C3 (easily done since both are at
the same location at that particular moment), we see that D is now showing
8.7 seconds. On clock D, only half a second has passed between the two panels.
In this sense, clock D is running more slowly than clocks C1, C2 and C3. In
our speciﬁc example, D has been running only half as fast as C1, C2,C3.
For this situation, the relation between a time interval ∆t as shown by clocks
that are synchronized in S and the time interval ∆t′ shown by the moving clock
D, which is moving at speed v relative to the inertial system S, is given by
∆t′ = ∆t ·
p
1 −(v/c)2,
(B.2)
where c is the speed of light (in vacuum). From the fact that, in our example,
∆t′ = 0.5·∆t, we can deduce that clock D must have been moving at the speed
v =
p
3/4 c ≈0.866 c.
A key result of special relativity is that time dilation is mutual. We can
turn the tables: Clock D is at rest in a suitable inertial system, which we
can call S′. In this system, we can introduce additional clocks D2, D3, which
are synchronized to the system’s time coordinate t′.
We can line the three
synchronized clocks up in a row so that each of C1, C2, C3 passes by D, D2 and
D3. In that situation, a direct comparison of each of the C clocks with the D
clocks along the line will give the result that, compared with a row of D clocks,
the C clock is going more slowly!
How can each set of clocks be slower than the other? This is resolved once
on realizes that each judgement involves a standard of comparison, namely a
notion of simultaneity — and that simultaneity is not the same in the rest
frame of the C clocks and the D clocks.
In fact, there is a simple analogy
using the geometry of the two-dimensional plane that shows how the apparent
contradiction is resolved (P¨ossel 2010a;b).
In the context of cosmological models, the fact that clocks in relative motion
measure time diﬀerently is mainly important as a warning, showing us that the
cosmic time coordinate introduced in section 4.3 is unusual, and certainly not
the usual time coordinate used in, say, classical mechanics.
B.5
Doppler eﬀect
The basics of the Doppler eﬀect are well-known from classical mechanics. From
the point of view of an inertial observer, the maxima and minima of a light
wave will move at the speed of light; for a light source moving away from such
an observer, this makes for longer wavelengths than for a source that is at rest
relative to the observer.
102

For example, follow the emission of one full wavetrain, from one crest to
the next, by a source moving away from the observer at constant speed v.
Assume that it takes the time T for a stationary light source L to emit one such
wavetrain towards an observer O, from crest to crest. In that time, the ﬁrst
crest we observe has moved from the location of the source P to the location Q.
Since each crest moves at speed c, this corresponds to a distance of cT between
one crest and the next, in other words: to a wavelength λ0 = cT:
O
cT
P
Q
L
Next, imagine the same situation, except that the light source L is moving away
from the observer O at a speed v. After the time T, again, the ﬁrst crest we
consider has moved the distance cT to the left from the emission location P.
But during the same time, the light source L has moved the distance vT to the
right, to the location R! All in all, we have the following situation:
O
cT
P
Q
R
L
vT
(c + v)T
In this case, the wavelength evidently is λ = (c + v)T. Compared with the
wavelength of light from a moving source, there has been a wavelength shift
λ =

1 + v
c

· λ0 ≡(1 + z) · λ0,
(B.3)
where the rightmost expression introduces the wavelength shift z, given by
z ≡λ −λ0
λ0
,
(B.4)
which in our case is
z = v
c .
(B.5)
As we will see below, this is the classical Doppler formula.
For v > 0, that is, for a light source moving away from us, z > 0, and
all wavelengths get transformed into longer wavelengths. This is called a red-
shift since for visible light it corresponds to a shift towards the red end of the
spectrum.19
19The “for visible light” is important in this deﬁnition. Note that, for instance, infrared
light is deﬁnitely not shifted towards red visible light by a redshift; infrared light, too, is
shifted towards longer wavelengths, away from the red visible portion of the spectrum. Just
use “redshift” as a synonym for “shift towards longer wavelengths,” and all should be ﬁne.
103

For v < 0, one can make a similar argument, but this time the light source
would be moving towards the observer. We would ﬁnd z < 0, so all wavelengths
get shorter. This is called a blueshift, since for visible light it corresponds to a
shift towards the blue end of the spectrum.
But there is still one factor we have left out. Our time T, corresponding
to the period of the light, was measured in our own reference frame. But as
recounted in section B.4, time dilation means that the period T ′ determined by
an observer on the light source will actually be shorter, namely
T ′ = T ·
p
1 −(v/c)2.
(B.6)
The corresponding wavelength of the light, as measured by an observer at rest
relative to the light source, will be λ′ = cT ′. In classical physics, where all
speeds are much slower than that of light, v ≪c, this eﬀect is negligible, and
we do end up with the classical Doppler formula (B.5). But once we take into
account (B.6), we ﬁnd that
λ = (c + v) · T =
(c + v) T ′
p
1 −(v/c)2 =
(1 + v/c) cT ′
p
(1 + v/c)(1 −v/c)
=
s
1 + v/c
1 −v/c λ′ (B.7)
corresponding to
z = λ −λ′
λ′
=
s
1 + v/c
1 −v/c −1.
(B.8)
This is the (longitudinal) special-relativistic Doppler eﬀect. Note that, as the
speed of the source approaches the speed of light, v →c, the wavelength shift
z grows beyond all bounds.
There is also a transverse special-relativistic Doppler eﬀect, although that
will not play a role in our cosmological considerations. In case a light source is
moving neither towards us nor away from us, but transversally, namely at right
angles to our line of sight (equivalently: to the direction of light propagation),
there will still be a wavelength shift due to time dilation alone – by (B.6), we
have
λ = cT =
cT ′
p
1 −(v/c)2 =
λ′
p
1 −(v/c)2
(B.9)
for the wavelength λ′ as measured at the light source and the wavelength λ as
measured by an inertial observer relative to whom the light source is moving
transversally at the speed v.
B.6
E = mc2
Perhaps the most famous consequence of special relativity is Einstein’s formula
E = mc2, the equivalence of mass and energy. It can be derived by applying
the formulae of special-relativistic mechanics to e.g. simple collisions (Peters
1986, Rohrlich 1990). As a ﬁrst step, one ﬁnds that an increase ∆E in energy
for an object, or system, will necessarily result in an equivalent increase ∆m in
the inertial mass, that is, in the mass factor that determines how strongly an
104

object will react to an external force by accelerating. That relativistic (inertial)
mass relates velocity ⃗v and momentum ⃗p in an inertial system,
⃗p = m · ⃗v,
(B.10)
and is involved in linking the force ⃗F acting on an object and the change in
momentum experienced by that object as
⃗F = d⃗p
dt .
(B.11)
For an object moving at a speed v in an inertial reference frame, the relativistic
mass is
m =
m0
p
1 −(v/c)2 ,
(B.12)
where m0 is the rest mass,
that is, the relativistic mass as measured in an
inertial frame in which that object is at rest.
With this deﬁnition of mass, E = mc2 states that mass and energy are
equivalent: one cannot have energy without inertial mass, or inertial mass
without a corresponding energy. Both physical concepts turn out to measure
the same quantity; the only diﬀerence is one of units (as is shown by the required
conversion factor c2).
There is an alternative way of looking at things, which identiﬁes the concept
of mass with the rest mass m0, and omits mention of the relativistic inertial
mass as deﬁned by (B.10) as far as possible, if not altogether. In that case, one
would rewrite the momentum deﬁnition as
⃗p =
m0
p
1 −(v/c)2 · ⃗v,
(B.13)
and keep the v-dependent extra factor (which is known as the gamma factor) ex-
plicit. In that context, Einstein’s famous formula describes not an equivalence,
but an additional form of energy: the energy
E0 = m0c2
(B.14)
associated with an object’s rest mass; whenever one is talking about energy
conservation, this extra form of energy needs to be taken into account. A new
form of energy entails new forms of energy conversion: rest mass energy can be
converted into other forms of energy, such as electromagnetic energy, or thermal
energy.
These two diﬀerent ways of talking about mass – mass as relativistic mass,
or mass as rest mass – have led to intense discussions in the physics education
community over the past decades, e.g. Adler 1987, Rindler et al. 1990, Sandin
1991, Okun 1989; 2009, Hecht 2009a;b. I would argue that, given the state of
that discussion, a good working knowledge of special relativity should include
an awareness of both views of the matter, and of the controversy itself.
105

B.7
Energy, momentum, and pressure
As mentioned in section B.3, time and space, as described using inertial frames,
are really two aspects of a four-dimensional entity called spacetime. Analo-
gously, as it turns out, energy and momentum are really just two aspects of a
four-dimensional vector, called four-momentum.
In relativistic theories that respect this four-dimensional structure, it does
not make sense to formulate equations, say, that single out only energy, and
leave momentum aside. Such an equation will only hold for certain inertial
observers, but not for others (in the language of relativity, they are not covari-
ant); this is at odds with the relativity principle which states that any physical
law should have the same form in all inertial frames. So why not choose that
particular form to describe physics in the ﬁrst place?
Whenever we formulate equations that are valid in any inertial reference
frame, energy and momentum will always occur together, or in the shape of
four-momentum.
This has consequences when, at a more advanced level, namely in general
relativity, we try to ﬁnd the proper way of describing the mass/energy content
of the universe: ﬁnding the right physical concept to describe sources of rela-
tivistic gravity, in other words: the active mass in general relativity. How do we
describe the mass/energy content of a universe ﬁlled with, say, a gas consisting
of particles, or of photons, whizzing chaotically in every conceivable direction?
The ﬁrst generalization is straightforward. Instead of merely considering the
mass directly associated with matter, we will consider all forms of energy as
sources of gravity. That is why, in section 3.5 on the generalization of Newton’s
equation of gravity, our density ρ will include all kinds of energy contributions
(equivalently: will be the density of the relativistic mass introduced in section
B.6).
But even with that addition, we are not yet fully relativistic.
After all,
energy and momentum cannot be separated from each other in an observer-
independent way; if energy is a source of gravity, momentum must be a source
term as well. For a gas made of particles, we will get not only a contribution
from all these particles’ rest masses, kinetic energy and so on, but also from
the particle momenta. When the momenta only describe the chaotic motion of
a gas that is, on average, at rest, then these momentum contributions turn out
to be directly proportional to the pressure p exerted by the gas. That is why,
in section 3.5, there is a contribution 3p/c2: a pressure contribution, converted
into the proper units of a mass density via the factor c2, with one contribution
from each of the three space directions.20
A simple derivation of the pressure contribution to the momentum density
can be found in Jagannathan 2009; for a more complete understanding, one
needs to understand both four-vectors and the tensor description of the prop-
20Interestingly enough, while this pressure term is important in cosmology, there is a com-
plication in the situation where we are closest to our everyday notion of what pressure is, that
is, when we are looking at a gas inside a container with suitable walls. There, the stress expe-
rienced by the walls exactly cancels the contribution from the 3p/c2 term of the gas (Misner
and Putnam 1959, Ehlers, Ozsv´ath, and Schucking 2006).
106

erties of a ﬂuid or similar medium; a good introduction can be found in Schutz
1985.
Acknowledgements
The summer school “Astronomy from Four Perspectives” from August 26 to
September 2 in Heidelberg, at which this lecture was held, was made possible
through generous funding from the W. E. Heraeus Foundation.
I would like to thank Thomas M¨uller for his thorough and, in parts, repeated
reading of this manuscript and his many corrections and suggestions; I would
also like to thank Martin Wetz, Bj¨orn Malte Sch¨afer and Stefan Brems for
helpful comments and useful suggestions concerning previous versions of this
manuscript.
107

