ASSEMBLY OF FIRST NATIONS
Dismantling the Doctrine of Discovery
January 2018
… all doctrines, policies and practices based on advocating superiority of peoples or individuals on the basis of national 
origin or racial, religious, ethnic or cultural differences are racist, scientifically false, legally invalid, morally condemnable 
and socially unjust ...
UN Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, preambular para. 4
Convinced that any doctrine of superiority based on racial differentiation is scientifically false, morally condemnable, 
socially unjust and dangerous, and that there is no justification for racial discrimination, in theory or in practice, 
anywhere...
International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, preamble
Advancing reconciliation requires bringing Canadian law and policy into line with international human rights law, which 
has condemned doctrines of superiority, including discovery and terra nullius, as colonial and racist.  Yet the racist 
assumptions and impacts of these doctrines live on in aspects of Canadian law and policy.  They are evident in underlying 
assumptions that assume First Nations are “claimants” in our own lands and that treat First Nations as somehow lacking 
sovereignty.  The assumptions and impacts of these racist doctrines must be uprooted.  The path forward will require 
Canada to acknowledge the truth of our pre-existing and continuing sovereignty as self-determining peoples.
National Chief Perry Bellegarde

Assembly of First Nations | Dismantling the Doctrine of Discovery | January 2018
- 2 -
How is it possible that any Pope, King or Queen, or explorers from Europe could “discover” lands in the New World if 
Indigenous Peoples were already occupying such lands, according to our own laws and legal orders?
The Doctrine of Discovery emanates from a series of Papal Bulls (formal statements from the Pope) and extensions, 
originating in the 1400s.  Discovery was used as legal and moral justification for colonial dispossession of sovereign 
Indigenous Nations, including First Nations in what is now Canada.  During the European “Age of Discovery”, Christian 
explorers “claimed” lands for their monarchs who felt they could exploit the land, regardless of the original inhabitants. 
This was invalidly based on the presumed racial superiority of European Christian peoples and was used to dehumanize, 
exploit and subjugate Indigenous Peoples and dispossess us of our most basic rights.  This was the very foundation of 
genocide.1  Such ideology lead to practices that continue through modern-day laws and policies. 
The Assembly of First Nations remains deeply concerned about the contemporary ramifications of the doctrine of discovery 
and other discriminatory practices.  Now is the time for Canada to finally and formally end any reliance on the doctrine of 
discovery.  The AFN recommends that Canada take the following steps:
•	 Acknowledge that this doctrine has had and continues to have devastating consequences for Indigenous peoples 
worldwide, including First Nations in Canada;
•	 Reject doctrines of superiority as illegal and immoral, and affirm that they can never be a justification for the 
exploitation and subjugation of Indigenous peoples and the violation of human rights;
•	 In full partnership with First Nations, examine how Canadian history, laws, practices and policies have relied on 
the doctrine of discovery;
•	 Repudiate all doctrines of superiority in a legislative framework for implementation of the United Nations 
Declaration on the Right of Indigenous Peoples, developed together with Indigenous peoples;
•	 Reinterpret Canadian law in a manner consistent with the United Nations Declaration on the Right of Indigenous 
Peoples and other contemporary international human rights standards; 
•	 Ensure that the violation of First Nations’ rights to lands, territories and resources that were taken without their 
free, prior, and informed consent are effectively redressed; and
•	 Ensure that the doctrine is not in any manner invoked in contemporary court cases or negotiations.
Legal Background
Cases in Canada, such as St. Catherines Milling and Lumber Company v. The Queen, relied upon early U.S. Supreme Court 
cases such as Johnson v. McIntosh that are based on the discovery doctrine.  It is worth noting that in these and other 
relevant legal cases, the Indigenous Peoples affected were not included as direct parties.  Such breaches of natural justice 
serve to further discredit these rulings and the doctrine on which they are based. 
Discovery was used as a tool to attempt the “exclusive power to extinguish” Indigenous rights on an ongoing basis.2  The pre-
existing inherent sovereignty of Indigenous Peoples was not considered.  Scholar Robert J. Miller summarizes this history, the 
ongoing contemporary ramifications, and the urgency of addressing discovery:

Assembly of First Nations | Dismantling the Doctrine of Discovery | January 2018
- 3 -
Europeans, and later the colonial countries, believed they possessed the only valid religions, civilizations, governments, 
laws, and cultures, and that Providence intended that their institutions should dominate Indigenous peoples. 
... As a result, the governmental, property, and human rights of Indigenous peoples were almost totally disregarded as 
Discovery directed European colonial expansion.  In modern times, these assumptions remain dangerous legal and 
historical fictions.
The common understanding and application of the international law of colonialism was and is potent and lethal to 
Indigenous peoples and nations.  Correcting and erasing the vestiges of Discovery from the modern-day laws and lives of 
settler societies ... is a task that must be undertaken and that must succeed if the legal and human rights of Indigenous 
nations and peoples are going to be honored around the world, and if Indigenous peoples are going to have equal rights 
to self-determination.3
Modern court rulings continue to interpret the law relying on the doctrine of discovery.  As recently as 2012, the BC Court of 
Appeal not only validated such destructive acts, but also attempted to extinguish Indigenous rights through judicial ruling:
European explorers considered that by virtue of the “principle of discovery” they were at liberty to claim territory in North 
America on behalf of their sovereigns ... While it is difficult to rationalize that view from a modern perspective, the history 
is clear.4
In Haida Nation, the Supreme Court of Canada confirmed: “Canada’s Aboriginal peoples were here when Europeans came, 
and were never conquered.” 5  Under Canada’s constitutional framework, Crown sovereignty and legislative power are not 
absolute.  In Haida Nation, the Supreme Court highlighted: “Treaties serve to reconcile pre-existing Aboriginal sovereignty 
with assumed Crown sovereignty”.6  Yet such reconciliation has not taken place.
The Supreme Court has taken judicial notice of “such matters as colonialism displacement and residential schools”,7  which 
demonstrate how “assumed” sovereign powers were abused throughout history.  The root cause of such abuse leads back to 
the doctrine of discovery and other related fictitious constructs.  These legal fictions must therefore be addressed. 
Tsilhqot’in Nation Victory at Supreme Court of Canada  
Interveners in the landmark Tsilhqot’in Nation case, dealing with Indigenous Peoples’ title to land, called for the Supreme 
Court of Canada to formally repudiate the doctrine of discovery: (Also the Hul’qumi’num Treaty Group intervention.)
“Finally, the “principle of discovery” cannot be relied upon in formulating an approach to Aboriginal title, and must be 
firmly rejected.  The principle of discovery is a “continuation of colonialism” that amounts to a “violation of the Charter of 
the United Nations ... and the principles of international law.” 8
While the unanimous ruling did not name discovery directly, the Court did address the related doctrine of terra nullius.  In 
referring to the “pre-existing” land rights of Indigenous Peoples, the Supreme Court ruled: “The doctrine of terra nullius 
(that no one owned the land prior to European assertion of sovereignty) never applied in Canada, as confirmed by the Royal 
Proclamation (1763)”.9

Assembly of First Nations | Dismantling the Doctrine of Discovery | January 2018
- 4 -
This is because there are equitable principles10 in the Royal Proclamation that have applied throughout Canada since its 
creation and such principles preclude any unjust, discriminatory doctrines.11  Just as the Supreme Court concluded that 
the Proclamation confirms that the doctrine of terra nullius never applied in Canada, the same must be true in regard to the 
doctrine of discovery.12  Both these doctrines are also inconsistent with the constitutional principle to uphold the honour of 
the Crown. 
It is the Crown’s responsibility to demonstrate on what basis it can validly claim Crown sovereignty and where such 
sovereignty would apply.  Such claims must be consistent with the UN Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples and 
other international human rights law.
The big question remains: how did the Crown obtain title and how does the Crown continue to assert sovereignty?  As scholar 
John Borrows reminds us, “Canadian law will remain problematic for Indigenous peoples as long as it continues to assume 
away the underlying title and overarching governance powers that First Nations possess.”13
United Nations on Discovery
Many Human Rights bodies within the UN system have strongly commended all racist doctrines of superiority.  The United 
Nations Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues has extensively studied the issue of the doctrine of discovery and the impact 
of Indigenous Peoples.  The Forum has produced two major studies on the topic.  The first study concluded: 
 ... International human rights law … demand (s) that States rectify past wrongs caused by such doctrines, including the 
violation of the land rights of indigenous peoples, through law and policy reform, restitution and other forms of redress 
for the violation of their land rights ...
… the Permanent Forum emphasized that redefining the relationship between indigenous peoples and the State as 
an important way to understand the doctrine of discovery and a way to develop a vision of the future for reconciliation, 
peace and justice. ... The Permanent Forum encourages the conduct of the processes of reconciliation “in accordance 
with the principles of justice, democracy, and respect for human rights, equality, non-discrimination, good governance 
and good faith”.14
The second United Nations study was completed by Grand Chief Edward John.15  His study went beyond the history, to deal 
with redress in a contemporary framework.  His study illustrates the critical need to “examine how Crown sovereignty and 
underlying title could ever have legitimately crystallized through the “discovery” of indigenous peoples’ lands and territories.  
The Doctrine must be unmasked so its manifestations are made visible.”16  Grand Chief John’s study concluded:
…fundamental changes must be reflected through constitutional and legislative reforms, policies, and government 
negotiation mandates in regard to indigenous peoples. … Decolonization processes must be devised in conjunction 
with indigenous peoples concerned and compatible with their perspectives and approaches.  Such processes must 
be fair, impartial, open and transparent, and be consistent with the Declaration and other international human rights 
standards.17 

Assembly of First Nations | Dismantling the Doctrine of Discovery | January 2018
- 5 -
Truth and Reconciliation Commission
The Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada (TRC) called on all faith bodies to repudiate the concepts used to 
justify European sovereignty over Indigenous lands and peoples, such as the Doctrine of Discovery and terra nullius, and 
the reformation of policies within their institutions that continue to rely on such concepts.18  Many faith-based groups are 
responding to this Call to Action by examining discovery and issuing formal statements repudiating.  The World Council of 
Churches has also done so.19 
The TRC has also called for Canada to jointly develop with Indigenous Peoples a Royal Proclamation of Reconciliation to be 
issued by the Crown.  The proclamation would build on the Royal Proclamation of 1763 and the Treaty of Niagara of 1764, 
and reaffirm the Nation to Nation relationship between Aboriginal peoples and the Crown.  The proclamation would include 
a commitment to repudiate concepts used to justify European sovereignty over Indigenous lands and peoples such as the 
Doctrine of Discovery and terra nullius.20
During the closing events of the TRC in Ottawa, June 2015, the AFN co-hosted and participated in “Dismantling the Doctrine 
of Discovery: The Road to Reconciliation”, an expert panel on the doctrine of the discovery, the ongoing ramifications of the 
colonial legacy, and suggestions to dismantle the ongoing modern components.21
Canada needs to formally renounce Discovery
While it does not change past injustices, the federal government should formally renounce discovery.  This would 
acknowledge responsibility and recognize the obligations Canada has in the present to First Nations.  It would be more than a 
merely symbolic gesture as it would lay to rest an offensive legal justification based on racial superiority for the subjugation of 
First Nations and other Indigenous Peoples.
Repudiating discovery and interpreting Canadian law in a manner consistent with the UN Declaration on the Rights of 
Indigenous Peoples and other contemporary international human rights standards will allow a fair and equitable settlement 
of outstanding issues surrounding lands, territories and resources.  Rather than taking an adversarial position against 
First Nations, Canada must uphold the honour of the Crown and engage in a resolution of land rights that does not seek to 
minimize our rights to our lands.  First Nations should not have to engage in protracted, expensive litigation to have our lands 
and rights respected. 
A new paradigm to replace the Doctrine of Discovery
It is essential to ensure a paradigm that is truthful about the history of past relations between First Nations and settlers.  We 
must ensure a just process for resolution of outstanding issues of land rights, consistent with our right of self-determination.  
Such a framework is essential for advancing the reconciliation process between First Nations and non-Aboriginal Canadians.  
Everyone must recognize that Indigenous Peoples in sovereign nations occupied the land before contact.  Settlers are not 
expected to surrender occupation of lands they live on and return to their ancestral countries of origin.  We are all here and 
must live together. 

Assembly of First Nations | Dismantling the Doctrine of Discovery | January 2018
- 6 -
Canada has a long history of an adversarial relationship with Indigenous Peoples.  This is contradictory to reconciliation.  
When First Nations realize our full potential, individually and collectively, all of Canada benefits.  A new paradigm will include 
the recognition of our laws and legal orders. 
King George III issued the Royal Proclamation of 1763 after the defeat of the French in Québec with the crucial support 
of First Nations allies.  A year later, at Fort Niagara, a gathering of representatives from a couple of dozen First Nations 
from Nova Scotia to the prairies and north to Hudson Bay, met with Sir William Johnson, Superintendent of Indian Affairs, 
representing the Crown.  At this gathering, the Covenant Chain of Friendship was affirmed—a multi-nation relationship in 
which no nation gave up its sovereignty, embodied in a two-row wampum belt communicating the promises made.  The 
Proclamation confirms the land rights of Indigenous Peoples and is highlighted in section 25 of the Canadian Charter of 
Rights and Freedoms.  Many leading Aboriginal law scholars assert the Royal Proclamation of 1763 and the Treaty of Niagara 
together form a treaty between First Nations and the Crown that guaranteed Indigenous self-government.22
A Role for the Pope
National Chief Bellegarde has met with representatives of the Holy See to discuss this critical issue.  First Nations and our 
supporters have raised the issue with the Vatican on many occasions.  Repudiating discovery has been a priority for National 
Chief Bellegarde and he has raised it in many contexts.  It is the hope of AFN that when Pope Francis comes to Canada, he will 
publically renounce discovery.
In response to the work done by the UN Permanent Forum, at the UN the Holy See has made statements distancing the 
modern church from those Papal Bulls of the 1400s.23  The Holy See concludes:
The fact that juridical systems may employ the “Doctrine of Discovery” as a juridical precedent is therefore now a 
characteristic of the laws of those states and is independent of the fact that for the Church the document has had no 
value whatsoever for centuries. 
The Conference of Catholic Bishops in Canada has also released a statement that repudiates discovery.  However, this is not 
enough.  Discovery started with the Pope and First Nations are owed the respect of having the Pope himself apologize and 
support our efforts to rebuild our Nations.

Assembly of First Nations | Dismantling the Doctrine of Discovery | January 2018
- 7 -
Endnotes
1 	 Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues, Study on the impacts of the Doctrine of Discovery on indigenous peoples, including mechanisms, processes and 
instruments of redress UN Doc. E/C.19/2014/3 (20 February 2014) [Study by Forum member Edward John]
2 	 Johnson v. McIntosh, 21 U.S. (8 Wheat.) 543 (1823).  
3 	 Robert J. Miller, “The International Law of Colonialism: A Comparative Analysis”, (2011) 15 Lewis & Clark L. Rev. 847 at 922 (Conclusions):
4 	 Tsilhqot’in Nation v. British Columbia, 2012 BCCA 285, para. 166.
5 	 Haida Nation v. British Columbia (Minister of Forests), [2004] 3 S.C.R. 511, para. 25.
6 	 Haida Nation, supra, para. 20.
7 	 R. v. Ipeelee, 2012 S.C.C. 13, para. 60.
8 	 William et al. v. British Columbia, “Factum of the Interveners Amnesty International and Canadian Friends Service Committee”, Appeal to Supreme Court of 
Canada, Court File No. 34986, 24 September 2013
9 	 Tsilhqot’in Nation v. British Columbia, 2014 SCC 44, para. 69.
10 	 See, e.g., Rupert’s Land and North-Western Territory Order (U.K.), 23 June 1870, reprinted in R.S.C. 1985, App. II, No. 9, Schedule A - Joint Address of the Senate 
and the House of Commons of Canada, December 1867: “…upon the transference of the territories in question to the Canadian Government, the claims of the 
Indian tribes to compensation for lands required for purposes of settlement will be considered and settled in conformity with the equitable principles which have 
uniformly governed the British Crown in its dealings with the aborigines.” 
11 	 See also Delgamuukw v. British Columbia, [1997] 3 S.C.R. 1010, para. 200 (reasons of La Forest and L’Heureux-Dubé JJ. were delivered by La Forest): “In essence, 
the rights set out in the Proclamation … were applied in principle to aboriginal peoples across the country”. 
	
Human Rights Council, Report of the Special Rapporteur on the rights of indigenous peoples, James Anaya: Addendum: The situation of indigenous peoples in 
Canada, UN Doc. A/HRC/27/52/Add.2 (4 July 2014), para. 1: “The history of indigenous peoples’ relationship with Europeans and Canada has positive aspects, 
such as … policies of coexistence, the Royal Proclamation of 1763 and the related policy of the British Crown of seeking formal permission and treaty relationships 
with indigenous peoples before permitting settlement in their territories.”
12 	 See Tracey Lindberg, “Contemporary Canadian Resonance of an Imperial Doctrine” in Robert J. Miller, Jacinta Ruru, Larissa Behrendt and Tracey Lindberg, 
Discovering Indigenous Lands: The Doctrine of Discovery in the English Colonies, (Oxford/New York: Oxford University Press, 2012) 126 at 158: “Crown sovereignty 
could not replace Indigenous sovereignty just by virtue of non-Indigenous peoples settling in Indigenous territories and homelands.”
13 	 John Borrows, “The Durability of Terra Nullius: Tsilhqot’in Nation v British Columbia”, University of British Columbia Law Review, (2015) 48 UBC L Rev 701 – 742.
14 	 Report on the eleventh session (7 – 18 May 2012), Economic and Social Council, Official Records, Supplement No. 23, United Nations, New York, E/2012/43-
E/C.19/2012/13.
15 	 Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues, Study on the impacts of the Doctrine of Discovery on indigenous peoples, including mechanisms, processes and 
instruments of redress UN Doc. E/C.19/2014/3 (20 February 2014) [Study by Forum member Edward John], available at https://daccess-dds-ny.un.org/doc/
UNDOC/GEN/N14/241/84/PDF/N1424184.pdf?OpenElement
16 	 Ibid, pg 3.
17 	 Ibid, pg 11.
18 	 Call to Action 49.
19 	 World Council of Churches, Statement on the doctrine of discovery and its enduring impact on Indigenous Peoples, 17 February 2012, Online at: https://www.
oikoumene.org/en/resources/documents/executive-committee/2012-02/statement-on-the-doctrine-of-discovery-and-its-enduring-impact-on-indigenous-peoples
20 	 Call to Action 45.
21 	 Dismantling the Doctrine of Discovery: The Road to Reconciliation, June 1, 2015. Panel can be viewed online at: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1NrjoaFuXk4
22 	 Borrows, John. “Wampum at Niagara: The Royal Proclamation, Canadian Legal History, and Self-Government,” in Aboriginal and Treaty Rights in Canada, ed. 
Michael Asch. Vancouver: UBC Press, 1997.
23 	 Permanent Observer Mission of the Holy See, Statement to the 9th session of the UN Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues, Agenda Item 7, April 27, 2010. 

Assembly of First Nations 
55 Metcalfe Street, Suite 1600, Ottawa, ON K1P 6L5
Telephone: 613-241-6789 | Toll-free: 1-866-869-6789
www.afn.ca

