Volume 14  Issue 3
International
Journal of 
Management
Cases
Special Issue
Corporate governance 
in Southeast Europe: in 
search for transparency 
and  efﬁcency  
Guest editors 
Darko Tipuric and Veljko Trivun 
!
!1
Travel behaviour survey of urban inhabitants 
conducted in Polish cities. The theoretical and 
practical aspects 
Pay-what-you-want as a participative pricing 
mechanism: Meta-analysis of development 
and knowledge dissemination 
 
Mobility management in Poland’s air transport 
industry 
 
Issues of dual managerial roles in projects that 
are morphogenetic changes — Case studies
 
 
Behaviour research methods in doctor - patient 
relationship in terms of access to the online 
health information in Poland  
 
The integration of e-learning into strategies of 
German-speaking universities– a literature 
survey
2016 - Volume 18 Issue 2 

!
EDITORS 
Editor in Chief 
Dr. Tomasz Wisniewski
The University of Szczecin Poland 
t.wisniewski@univ.szczecin.pl
Europe
Professor Darko Tipuric 
Graduate School of Economics, University of 
Zagreb dtipuric@efzg.hr
The Rest of the World
Dr. Gianpaolo Vignali 
University of Manchester 
gianpaolo.vignali@manchester.ac.uk 
EDITORIAL BOARD
Professor Claudio Vignali
University of Vitez, BH 
c.vignali@leedsmet.ac.uk
Dr. Mirko Palic 
Graduate School of Economics, University of 
Zagreb mpalic@efzg.hr
Professor Leo Dana
University of Canterbury, New Zealand 
leo.dana@cantebury.ac.nz
Professor Barry J. Davies
Professor of Marketing, University of 
Gloucestershire, UK bdavies@glos.ac.uk.
Professor Alberto Mattiacci
Professor of Retailing and Marketing,The University 
of Sienna, Italy 
mattiacci@bunisi.it
Dr. Hans-Rüdiger Kaufmann
University of Nicosia, Cyprus 
kaufmann.r@unic.ac.cy
Professor Dr. Jürgen Polke
Virtual University of Munich, Germany 
jurgen.polke@fhv.at
Professor Carlo A. Pratesi
Professor of Retailing Marketing, University of 
Urbino, Italy capbox@tin.it
Professor Brenda Sternquist
Professor, International Retail Management, 
Michigan State University, USA 
steinqui@msu.edu
Dr Ulrich Scholz
Fontys Fachhochschule, Nederlands
u.scholz@fontys.nl
Professor Vitor Ambrosio
University of Estoril, Portugal
vitor.ambrosio@esthe.pt
Professor Bernd Britzelmaier
Pforzeim University, Germany
bernd.britzelmaier@hs-pfrozeim.de
Professor Ihn Hee Chung
Kumoh Institute of Technology, South Korea
ihnhee@kumoh.ac.kr
Professor Gianpaolo Basile
University of Salerno, Italia
gibasile@unisa.it
Professor Carmen Rodriguez Santos
Universidad de Leon, Espania 
carmen.santos@unileon.es
Dr. Razaq Raj
Leeds Metropolitan University, UK 
r.raj@leedsmet.ac.uk
www.ijmc.org  
www.circleinternational.co.uk
ISSN 1741-6264
International Journal of Management Cases is 
published by:
Access Press UK,  
1 Hillside Gardens ,  
Darwen,  
Lancashire, 
BB3 2NJ 
UK
Copyright © Access Press UK, 2015 
!2

!
Contents 
Travel behaviour survey of urban inhabitants conducted in Polish cities. The theoretical 
and practical aspects 
 
4 
Katarzyna Hebel 
Pay-what-you-want as a participative pricing mechanism: Meta-analysis of development 
and knowledge dissemination  
21 
Magdalena Krzyżanowska & Jolanta Tkaczyk 
Mobility management in Poland’s air transport industry 
 
39 
Dariusz Tłoczyński 
Issues of dual managerial roles in projects that are morphogenetic changes — Case 
studies 
 
48 
Katalin Pádár, Béla Pataki & Zoltán Sebestyén 
Behaviour research methods in doctor - patient relationship in terms of access to the 
online health information in Poland  
58 
Magdalena Soboń 
The integration of e-learning into strategies of German-speaking universities– a 
literature survey 
 
73 
Laura Müller 
!3

!
Travel behaviour survey of urban inhabitants conducted in Polish 
cities. The theoretical and practical aspects 
Katarzyna Hebel 
University of Gdansk, Poland 
Abstract 
The article defines the travel behaviour of urban inhabitants as a form of consumer 
behaviour. 
This forms the basis of the type of research conducted in Polish cities in order to 
establish the travel behaviour of urban inhabitants. The aim of the research is to show 
the similarities and differences between different types of market research. The 
advantages and disadvantages of different types of research will be also indicated. 
The article presents the results of research conducted in cities of various sizes (small, 
medium and large) and in different regions of the country. They were formulated after 
the analysis of the published as well as the unpublished materials provided by their 
authors. 
The results from Gdynia are the most widely discussed due to the personal commitment 
of the author. The research was conducted regularly, every 2-3 years, by the 
Department of Transportation Market at the University of Gdansk and by the Public 
Transport Authority of Gdynia. The respondents, who constitute 1% of Gdynia’s 
population, are always chosen by random selection. Research is conducted in 
households of the respondents in the form of an interview and a questionnaire. 
The article compares the results from the years 2008, 2010 and 2013, and as such 
facilitates the determination of trends in the travel behaviour of Gdynia’s inhabitants, 
including the ways in which urban travel is being fulfilled, the destinations, the duration 
of the trip and the mobility rate. 
The proposed principles for future research into the travel behaviour of the inhabitants 
in Polish cities are based on the above. 
Key words: urban transport, travel behaviour, market research 
Transport behaviour of Urban inhabitants as a form of consumer behaviour 
Human behaviour that can be observed within the market of consumer goods and 
services (with exception of behaviour on the employment, financial and estate markets) 
constitute consumer behaviour. According to J.C. Mowen consumer behaviour is the 
science of individual decision making and of the processes of obtaining food, services, 
experience, and ideas as well as their consumption and disposal (Mowen, 1987). J. F. 
Engel, R. D. Blackwell, and P.W. Miniard describe consumer behaviour as a sum of 
activities connected with the acquisition and use of products and services, as well as 
their disposal, in connection with prior decisions which condition such actions (Engel & 
Blackwell &Miniard, 1993). On the other hand, G. Antonides and W.F. van Raaij, define 
customer behaviour also as psychological and physical actions, together with their 
causes and reasons, that are manifested by individuals and small groups, and refer to 
!4

!
orientation, purchasing, usage, and disposal of a product, which allow a consumer to 
function, reach their goals, and act according to their own values(Antonides & van 
Raaij, 2003). According to L. Rudnicki customer behaviour on a market has to be 
understood as the sum of actions and perceptions of a consumer which contribute to 
the preparation of a decision making process when selecting a product, making that 
decision, and eventually lead to a purchase (Rudnicki, 2000). S. Smyczek and I. Sowa 
broaden the concept of behaviour by adding the element of evaluation after the 
experience of usage and the elements of time, money, and effort management in the 
process of customer behaviour. They believe that it is necessary to analyse what 
customers purchase but also the reasons for purchasing a given product or service, 
when and how often it was purchased, as well as the usage frequency of the purchased 
product (Smyczek & Sowa, 2005). 
Transport behaviour may be defined on the basis of general definitions of customer 
behaviour as a series of actions and activities aimed at the fulfilment of transport 
requirements by realisation of the process of re-location according to one’s own system 
of preferences. The decision making process, that determines such actions, has to be 
seen as an integral part of transport behaviour. The definition includes all types of 
reactions typical of customer behaviour, namely experiencing a need for transport, their 
gradation, communicating with various entities on the market and gathering information, 
making a decision regarding the necessity and the way in which the trip will be fulfilled 
according to a complex set of personal criteria, the undertaking of the trip and the 
impressions that follow. Therefore, transport behaviour is a form of consumer behaviour 
and the specificity of the needs fulfilled in the process can serve as the basic criterion 
for distinguishing them from other types of behaviour. In the process of transport 
behaviour the needs fulfilled are those connected with transportation (Hebel, 2013). 
Understood traditionally, the choice of destination and route as well as the means of 
transportation and the moment of realisation of the trip are considered transport 
behaviour. Additionally, time devoted to travel and the number of trips fulfilled in a unit of 
time (day, week, month), defined as transport mobility, are also considered transport 
behaviour. Taking into account the approach of specialists from other fields the 
purchasing of a ticket (single or periodical), including the purchase of a particular ticket 
from amongst available single or periodical tickets, be added to the list of types of 
transport behaviour. The choice made between direct and indirect connections seems 
to constitute an important behaviour (Goodwin, 2008). 
Types of transport behaviour research in Polish cities  
Data on transport behaviour of inhabitants is gathered in every Polish city in which 
public transportation is offered. The data reflects the effective demand and comes from 
secondary sources. The most common type of data collected refers to ticket sales 
which are divided into single and periodical tickets. As a result, the volume of the 
effective demand for public transport is determined as well as the proportion between 
regular passengers (those who purchase periodical tickets) and casual passengers 
(those who purchase single tickets).  
The advantage of such research is its low cost whilst its disadvantage is its limited 
accuracy resulting from the fact that in many cities it is acceptable to purchase two 
single discounted tickets instead of one full price ticket or to join many different tickets in 
order to obtain a ticket of a desired feature. In the case of hourly or 24 hour tickets, as 
!5

!
well as in the case of 30 day and monthly tickets, the number of trips is uncapped within 
the time the ticket is valid, with no need to validate the ticket during each trip. It is 
impossible, therefore, to determine the precise number of passengers on the basis on 
information regarding ticket sales. The need to validate periodical tickets is accepted by 
the passengers only in a case of its validation outside the vehicle, i.e. at the turnstiles 
leading out from the underground. Since in Poland the only underground in operation is 
located in Warsaw it is possible to successfully use the data obtained from ticketing 
systems only in relation to trips by underground. Such a system also allows for the 
prevention of unpaid fares. Additionally, it allows the start and end point of each 
passenger’s trip to be determined. The cost of its operations, however, constitutes its 
main downfall.  
This short analysis already suggests that it is impossible to determine the factual 
transport behaviour of urban inhabitants on the basis of data coming from secondary 
sources. Thus, in the chosen cities of Poland, primary research of transport behaviour is 
being conducted concerning effective demand including: 
−passengers of public transport at official stops (or at control points) - the so 
called ‘stationary research’ - or on board of public transport vehicles - the so called 
‘on-board research’; 
−people travelling by car at control points during comprehensive traffic research; 
−cyclists at control points during comprehensive traffic research. 
Observation and registration are used as research methods and measuring tools during 
transport behaviour research concerning effective demand for public transportation. The 
observer may or may not sit on board the vehicle. The observation is usually open and 
is characterised by standardisation. In order to standardise, the results of the 
observation are being recorded on specifically prepared forms (Wyszomirski, 2008). 
Stationary research is based on visual evaluation of the level of utilisation of vehicle 
transport capacity at the point of departing from chosen measurement stations (usually 
public transportation stops) by trained observers.  
Transport behaviour research is also conducted in households. The advantage of such 
a method is that it allows for a random sample selection which, in turn, prolongs the 
research and inflates its costs. Therefore, this method has not been rolled out 
nationwide in Poland. It has been, however, conducted in Gdynia for more than 20 
years and was since first implemented in Warsaw in 2012 with the usage of the 
methodology applied in Gdynia but modified in the area of research sample selection. 
The advantage of such research is that it allows more specific questions to be 
answered. Apart from the ‘a day in picture’ method and establishing the way, 
destination, and duration of urban trips, the reasons behind prolonging the trips are also 
established together with the determinants of particular transport behaviours (i.e. 
determinants of choosing either a car or public transport), forming a part of an answer to 
such more defined questions.  
Factors such as age, social, occupational, and vehicle ownership status are always 
taken into account during the research. Their influence on transport behaviour is later 
determined in the context of travelling around a city. It is important, however, that 
transport behaviour research in households includes both those who use public or 
private transportation and those choosing any other mode of transport, such as bicycle, 
!6

!
moped, or on foot, allowing not only the effective but also the potential demand for 
urban passenger transportation to be determined. If such research is conducted 
systematically it also enables for the determination of patterns of changes in particular 
types of transport behaviour. 
The advantages and disadvantages of particular methods of research into transport 
behaviour of urban inhabitants are listed in table 1. 
In only a few large cities comprehensive traffic research, which includes transport 
behaviour, is being conducted every 5-10 years.  
Comprehensive traffic research comprises of (Pogłód, 2010): 
 surveys on transport behaviour of inhabitants (conducted in households and 
control points); 
 research (measurements) of inbound and outbound traffic of vehicles and 
passengers (conducted at cordon points); 
 surveys for managers of freight rolling stock. 
Table 1. Advantages and disadvantages of primary research into transport 
behaviour of urban inhabitants  
!7

!
Source: own work 
The recorders stationed at chosen points within a city count the passing vehicles, the 
number of passengers and the passengers on board of public transport vehicles. The 
surveyors, on the other hand, stop chosen vehicles (i.e. every 10th vehicle) and by 
doing so reach both the passengers of public transport as well as car drivers.  
Comprehensive traffic research (KBR) is costly and complicated from an organisational 
point of view thus it is only conducted in cities which aim at establishing a traffic model. 
For the aim of such research is to determine a traffic model whilst the aim of traffic 
behaviour research is to the establish services offered by public transport.  
 
   
Results of transport behaviour research in chosen Polish cities  
Transport behaviour research of inhabitants is conducted in chosen Polish cities at 
public transportation stops. The results of such research indicate that the transport 
behaviour of passengers varies according to weekdays.  
Table 2. The share of passengers transported on a Saturday and Sunday 
compared to the number of passengers transported on a weekday in chosen 
Polish cities in the years 2008-2014 
!8

!
Source: own work on the basis of (Gromadzki, 2014)  
Table 2 presents the share of passengers transported on a Saturday and Sunday as 
compared to the number of passengers transported on a weekday as established 
during research in the years 2008-2014 in chosen Polish cities. The cities were divided 
into large (above 100k inhabitants) and medium (between 20-99k inhabitants). The 
analysis is lacking data from small cities (below 20k inhabitants) due to the fact that 
they largely do not offer their own public transport but rather dispose of services 
provided by larger cities in their vicinity that plan routes reaching smaller settlements 
around agglomerations. Research results confirm that inhabitants travel more rarely on 
Saturdays (compared to a regular weekday) and travel the least on Sundays. The 
demand for public transport constitutes circa 50% of the weekday demand and only 
approximately 30% on Sundays. In medium cities the demand for public transport on 
weekends is smaller than in large cities.   
In the group of medium cities a relationship between the demand and the size of a city 
can be observed. In the cities in which the number of inhabitants merely rises above 
20k the demand for public transport on Saturdays and Sundays is distinctly lower in 
comparison to the demand on weekdays than in the cities where the number of 
inhabitants is closer to 100k. 
Transport behaviour research in the chosen cities also includes the type of tickets 
purchased and used by passengers on board public transportation vehicles. This is 
inclusive of establishing the share of passengers travelling without tickets (Table 3). The 
passengers travelling on full price tickets constitute only 25-30% of the whole number of 
passengers. Passengers using discounted tickets amount to 30-40% whilst the share of 
passengers eligible for non ticketed travel reaches 15-30%. The passengers travelling 
without a valid ticket constitute 3-8% of the total. 
Table 3. The structure of passengers in chosen Polish cities using public 
transport according to the type of ticket they use. Years 2008-2014 
Source: Own work on the basis of (Gromadzki, 2014) 
Transport behaviour relies also on the choice of the way in which a trip will be 
undertaken. It can be determined as a part of many different types of research. Wroclaw 
!9

!
serves as an example of a city in which the way in which of transport was determined 
as a part of comprehensive traffic research. In the years 2010-2011 the inhabitants of 
Wroclaw fulfilled as much as 41.4% of their trips by car. 19.5% of trips which were not 
undertaken on foot were fulfilled by tram and only 3.9% of the inhabitants fulfilled their 
trips partly by bus and tram. Nearly 1/5 of trips in Wroclaw were fulfilled on foot (Beim, 
2011). The volumes are presented in Figure 1. Only 4% of Wroclaw’s  inhabitants were 
undertaken by bike.  
  
Figure 1. The ways in which inhabitants of Wroclaw undertook trips in the years 
2010-2011 
Source: own work on the basis of: (Beim, 2011) 
 
 
One of the aims of transport behaviour research is to determine the transport mobility of 
urban inhabitants. Figure 2 presents transport mobility of chosen Polish cities on the 
basis of KBR research conducted in the years 2008-2011. The differences seem minor 
for the mobility amounts between 1.86 (in Rzeszów) and 1.96 (in Wrocław). For 
comparison: in 13 cities of Upper Silesia Agglomeration transport mobility in the year 
2009 was established at a level of 1.83 and was established as a part of transport 
behaviour research conducted in households (Karoń & Żochowska & Sobota, 2010), 
whilst it reached between 1.72-2.28 (Table 4) in research conducted at stops and on-
board of public transport vehicles with the participation of regular commuters 
(understood as an average transport mobility of regular passengers of public transport 
meaning those, who travel on monthly tickets) in the years 2008-2012. The differences 
were noticeable in all types of cities – small, medium, and large. Transport mobility 
among the inhabitants was distinctly higher on weekdays rather than on Saturdays and 
Sundays. 
!10

!
Figure 2. Transport mobility of the inhabitants of Polish cities established as part 
of KBR research in the years 2008-2011 
Source: own work on the basis of: (Pogłód, 2009); (Urząd Miasta Rzeszowa, 2009), 
(Kompleksowe badania ruchu na terenie miasta Gdańska 2009, 2009), (Budziszewski, 
Mendel, 2010), (Beim, 2011)  
Table 4. Transport mobility of public transport passengers using monthly tickets 
in chosen Polish cities in the years 2008-2012 (average daily trips/ 1 inhabitant) 
Source: own work on the basis of: (Gromadzki, 2014), (Zarząd Komunikacji Miejskiej w 
Gdyni, 2014) 
  
Results of transport behaviour household research conducted in Gdynia 
  
Gdynia serves as an example of a city which systematically conducts household 
research into the transport behaviour of its inhabitants. A direct, individual, standardised 
survey serves as a method for this research. The size of the research sample used 
!11

!
each time amounts to approximately 1% of the city’s inhabitants between the ages of 16 
and 75. In order to ensure that the sample provides a fair representation of the 
population it is obtained by way of stratified sampling which divides it into stratums on 
the basis of age, sex, and district in which they live. Simple sampling is then applied in 
each of the established stratums. The merit of this method is that it allows inhabitants of 
various districts to be incorporated and the road traffic structure be determined. It has to 
be mentioned, however, that the sampling error within the cross-section of each district 
is higher than in the entire randomly chosen sample of the city’s inhabitants. 
The minimal size of the research sample is determined using statistical methods. In 
practice, the average size of a research sample during household transport behaviour 
research is set at 1% of the population in the case of cities with a number of inhabitants 
greater than 100k, and 3% in the case of cities with a lesser number of inhabitants. The 
size of a sample may also be determined by the available funds or analyses which are 
to be carried out on the basis of research (Żurowska, 2005). 
In Gdynia, for each randomly chosen respondent, there are the so called 
„substitutes” (from 3 to 10) meaning inhabitants residing the closest to them on the list 
of the general population and of identical age and sex. Such persons are listed in case 
the person listed on the original is unable to conduct the survey. This happens due to 
the danger that the results are distorted (as it is easier to reach respondents who are 
not equally active transport wise).  
During household research into transport behaviour of the inhabitants of Gdynia what is 
being determined are the ways in which trips are fulfilled, the duration, reasons for 
travel and transport mobility together with the determinants for those activities. 
 
The declared way of undertaking urban trips was established on the basis of an answer 
to the question: ‘In what way do you carry out your urban trips’. Among possible 
answers there are six recognised categories: 
−always by public transport; 
−usually by public transport; 
−equally by public transport and car; 
−mostly by car 
−always by car; 
−in a different way. 
The results obtained in the years 2008, 2010, and 2013 are presented in table 5 (new 
research will be conducted in 2015)  
The results show that the share of public transport in the declared urban trips dropped. 
The share of trips fulfilled always or usually by public transport diminished from 53% to 
46%. In the same period the share of trips fulfilled mostly or always by car rose from 
35% to 41%. In the years 2008-2013 the inhabitants of Gdynia most often declared that 
they carry out their urban trips ‘always by public transport’.  
!12

!
Table 5. Declared way of carrying out urban trips by Gdynia inhabitants in the 
years 2008-2013 (% of inhabitants) 
Source: own work on the basis of: (Katedra Rynku Transportowego Uniwersytetu 
Gdańskiego & Zarząd Komunikacji Miejskiej w Gdyni, 2008), (Katedra Rynku 
Transportowego Uniwersytetu Gdańskiego & Zarząd Komunikacji Miejskiej w Gdyni, 
2010), (Katedra Rynku Transportowego Uniwersytetu Gdańskiego & Zarząd 
Komunikacji Miejskiej w Gdyni, 2013) 
The declared way of fulfilling urban trips was always verified in the research by means 
of establishing the way of carrying out trips the previous day, on the basis of the so 
called ‘a day in picture’. On the basis of such research it was determined that in the 
years 2008-2013 the way in which Gdynia inhabitants travel is changing (Fig. 3). A 
rising trend can be observed in the share of trips fulfilled by personal transport (car, 
motorcycle, bike). Unfortunately, the share of trips fulfilled by private transportation rose 
above 50% - the critical point from the point of view of the principles of creating 
sustainable transport policies. In the cities within which the share of public transport 
becomes lesser than 50% re-locating during urban trips becomes more difficult for 
inhabitants and takes relatively more time. Taking Gdynia as an example, it can be said 
that it is necessary to undertake actions which would allow the share of public transport 
in the carrying out of urban trips to be remain at the current level in order to ensure 
proper functioning of the city. 
 
 
Figure 3. The way in which Gdynia inhabitants carry out urban trips in the years 
2008-2013 in the light of market research (on the basis of trips fulfilled on the day 
prior to the survey)* 
!13

!
*in case of trips with changes the trip was classified according to the first mode 
of transportation 
Source: own work on the basis of: (Katedra Rynku Transportowego Uniwersytetu 
Gdańskiego & Zarząd Komunikacji Miejskiej w Gdyni, 2008), (Katedra Rynku 
Transportowego Uniwersytetu Gdańskiego & Zarząd Komunikacji Miejskiej w Gdyni, 
2010), (Katedra Rynku Transportowego Uniwersytetu Gdańskiego & Zarząd 
Komunikacji Miejskiej w Gdyni, 2013) 
During transport behaviour research in Gdynia the factors which determine the use of a 
car during urban trips were either always or most often established.  
In the research conducted the respondents were asked about the factors determining 
the choice of a personal car for urban trips. Eight factors were revealed: 
−safety – exposing oneself to aggression i.e. on the part of other passengers; 
−no need to walk to and from the stop; 
−no need to wait; 
−shorter duration of the trip by car; 
−more comfortable; 
−lower cost of travel by car; 
−car as a working tool; 
−other. 
The factors which seem to be the most important when choosing a personal car over 
public transport for urban trips, on the basis of the analysis of data from all the years the 
research was conducted in, are the comfort, shorter duration of the trip and no need to 
wait. 
Twelve factors influencing the choice of public transport for urban trips were established 
during research: 
−car in use by another person; 
−physical and psychological indisposition; 
−lower cost of travel by public transport 
−availability of the metropolitan ticket; 
−paid parking; 
−difficulties with parking at the destination; 
−satisfying quality of public transport; 
−high traffic volumes; 
−poor roads condition; 
−poor technical state of owned vehicle; 
−weather; 
−other. 
The three most important factors were recorded in order of their importance to the 
respondent. The weight of the reasons behind using public transportation differed 
throughout the research, however, the main reasons behind choosing such a mode of 
transportation for urban trips in all research years pointed to the difficulties with parking 
at the destination, the lower cost of public transport, and the car being used by another 
person. Bearing in mind the fact that in Gdynia the difficulties with parking at the 
!14

!
destination was the most important determinant behind such choices, it has to be added 
that the pay and display system functions within the city centre since 2009. 
 
  
The shares held by each modes of transportation in urban trips in the years 2008-2013 
were established on the basis of the research. Only the first mode used during a trip 
was taken into account during calculations, since a trip fulfilled by car usually does not 
require changes. Should the separate modes of transport be counted (i.e. 3 buses 
taken) then each change would increase the share of public transport in urban trips 
which would compromise the results. Another option was to divide the trips into stages 
and to count each change as a stage of the trip. We would then encounter a situation 
where travelling by one mode of transportation would stand for ½ or 1/3 of a trip. With 
regards to the P&R trips one way was counted as a car trip and the return as a trip by 
public transport. This could have resulted in a statistical error. Another error may be 
generated by situations in which the inhabitants travel a part of their trip as car 
passengers and a part as public transport passengers. Additionally, taking into account 
that a trip by train [Fast Urban Railway – SKM] often constitutes a stage of a trip the 
assumption could influence the evaluation of the share of SKM in terms of the general 
structure of the ways in which trips are fulfilled (Hebel, 2013). 
After consideration of all the above mentioned factors it can be stated that the share of 
cars in urban trips is distinctly growing in the years included in the research (from 47% 
to nearly 53%). The means of public transportation most commonly used throughout 
was the bus, though its role significantly diminished (the share grew smaller from 30% 
in the year 2008 to 25% in 2013). Trolleybus proved to be the second most important 
means of public transportation in Gdynia. Trips fulfilled by SKM or by rail amounted to 
the lowest share in the aforementioned city (Table 6). 
Table 6. The way in Gdynia’s inhabitants fulfilled urban trips in the years 
2008-2013, on the basis of trips fulfilled by the respondents on the day prior to 
the survey  
(according to the means of transportation used)* 
*in case of trips which required changes it was classified according to the first mean of 
transportation 
Source: own work on the basis of: (Katedra Rynku Transportowego Uniwersytetu 
Gdańskiego & Zarząd Komunikacji Miejskiej w Gdyni, 2008), (Katedra Rynku 
Transportowego Uniwersytetu Gdańskiego & Zarząd Komunikacji Miejskiej w Gdyni, 
2010), (Katedra Rynku Transportowego Uniwersytetu Gdańskiego & Zarząd 
Komunikacji Miejskiej w Gdyni, 2013) 
!15

!
Average time of travel to the place of work and study did not undergo any major 
changes in the years 2008-2013 (Figure 4 and 5).  
  
Figure 4. Average duration of travel to workplaces in Gdynia in the years 
2008-2013 (min) 
Source: own work on the basis of: (Katedra Rynku Transportowego Uniwersytetu 
Gdańskiego & Zarząd Komunikacji Miejskiej w Gdyni, 2008), (Katedra Rynku 
Transportowego Uniwersytetu Gdańskiego & Zarząd Komunikacji Miejskiej w Gdyni, 
2010), (Katedra Rynku Transportowego Uniwersytetu Gdańskiego & Zarząd 
Komunikacji Miejskiej w Gdyni, 2013) 
The average duration of travel to workplaces and places of study remained at the same 
level. 
Figure 5. Average duration of travel to places of study in Gdynia in the years 
2008-2013 (min) 
!16

!
Source: own work on the basis of: (Katedra Rynku Transportowego Uniwersytetu 
Gdańskiego & Zarząd Komunikacji Miejskiej w Gdyni, 2008), (Katedra Rynku 
Transportowego Uniwersytetu Gdańskiego & Zarząd Komunikacji Miejskiej w Gdyni, 
2010), (Katedra Rynku Transportowego Uniwersytetu Gdańskiego & Zarząd 
Komunikacji Miejskiej w Gdyni, 2013) 
The proportions between the duration of travel to a workplace or place of study as 
fulfilled by car and bus. The time devoted for door-to-door travel was nearly twice 
shorter by car.  
 
 
Home constituted the main destination for urban travel in Gdynia in the years 
2008-2013 (approximately 45% of trips). The other two main reasons accounting for 
travel were work (18-22%) and personal affairs (14-17%) with the ‘work’ share rising 
and ‘personal affairs’ share grew smaller. The share of travel for shopping remained at 
the same level of 7%. It is surprising that the share of trips to a place of study was lower 
than shopping trips and amounted to between 4 and 7% of all trips. Work-related travels 
are becoming rarer. It seems to be connected to the growing culture of electronic 
communications that allows many matters to be dealt with without the necessity for 
travel. The share of trips related with socialising was minimal. Table 7 presents the 
structure of destinations in the light of research conducted in Gdynia in the years 
2008-2013. 
Table 7. Travel destinations of Gdynia’s inhabitants in the years 2008-2013 (%) 
Destination 
Source: own work on the basis of: (Katedra Rynku Transportowego Uniwersytetu 
Gdańskiego & Zarząd Komunikacji Miejskiej w Gdyni, 2008), (Katedra Rynku 
Transportowego Uniwersytetu Gdańskiego & Zarząd Komunikacji Miejskiej w Gdyni, 
2010), (Katedra Rynku Transportowego Uniwersytetu Gdańskiego & Zarząd 
Komunikacji Miejskiej w Gdyni, 2013) 
 
 
Transport mobility was evaluated on the basis of trips fulfilled by passengers on the day 
prior to the survey with consideration of all modes of transportation (including cars). 
!17

!
Figure 6. Transport mobility of Gdynia inhabitants in the years 2008-2013 
Source: own work on the basis of: (Katedra Rynku Transportowego Uniwersytetu 
Gdańskiego & Zarząd Komunikacji Miejskiej w Gdyni, 2008), (Katedra Rynku 
Transportowego Uniwersytetu Gdańskiego & Zarząd Komunikacji Miejskiej w Gdyni, 
2010), (Katedra Rynku Transportowego Uniwersytetu Gdańskiego & Zarząd 
Komunikacji Miejskiej w Gdyni, 2013) 
The transport mobility rate of Gdynia inhabitants is falling (Figure 6). Undoubtedly, few 
determinants are standing behind this phenomenon, the difficulty with collecting 
research samples being one of them. For it is increasingly difficult to conduct a survey 
with people, whose names are on the original list and who, as can be presumed, are the 
main car owners and are often not at home. In effect the household surveys are being 
conducted with those who do not own cars and whose transport mobility is lower. It was 
established that most trips were fulfilled by respondents who always or mostly travel by 
car. People in education and employment were characterised by the highest levels of 
transport mobility. The sex of respondents is no longer a determinant connected to 
transport mobility. 
Conclusions 
Transport behaviour of urban inhabitants constitutes a kind of consumer behaviour and 
may be analysed according to similar principles. 
Transport behaviour research in Polish cities is conducted according to various types of 
methodology. It is stationary research carried out at control points, on board of public 
transportation vehicles, as well as in households. The scope of research results from 
the requirements of each city and the funds available. 
The results of transport behaviour research of urban inhabitants are used to shape the 
services offered by public transport companies and, consequently, to allow for them to 
be better adjusted to the needs of inhabitants in connection with timetables, capacity, 
quality of the rolling stock, as well as changes in the tariff and ticketing systems. The 
results also allow for evaluation of the essential funding of public transportation from 
public funds. 
!18

!
The importance of transport behaviour research among the inhabitants of Polish cities 
grew with the passing of the Public Transportation Act [Ustawa o publicznym 
transporcie zbiorowym] from 10 December 2010 and the obligation to prepare 
sustainable transport development plans. They are to take into account research results 
into transport behaviour of inhabitants. It is, therefore, suitable to share experience in 
the field of theory and practice of such research conducted previously in some cities. 
The results of the transport behaviour research of urban inhabitants served as the basis 
for National Urban Policy the bill of which was presented by the Ministry of 
Infrastructure to the Council of Ministers in 2014.  
References 
ANTONIDES, G. & van RAAIJ, W.F. (2003) Zachowanie konsumenta. Podręcznik 
akademicki, Warszawa, Wydawnictwo Naukowe PWN, p. 24  
BEIM, M. (2011) Wrocławskie badania ruchu, [Online] Available from: http://wroclaw.pl/
wroclawski_badania_ruchu,1.dhtml, [Accessed: 08th June 2011] 
BUDZISZEWSKI, T. & MENDEL, T. (2010) Wyniki kompleksowych badań ruchu Gdańsk 
2009 oraz przykład ich wykorzystania do szacowania funkcji oporu przestrzeni. In 
Kompleksowe badania ruchu. Teoria i praktyka. Doświadczenia polskich miast, Zeszyty 
Naukowo-Techniczne Stowarzyszenia Inżynierów i Techników Komunikacji w Krakowie. 
Seria: Materiały Konferencyjne, Nr 93, (z. 152), p.27  
ENGEL, J. F. & BLACKWELL, R. D. & MINIARD, P.W. (1993) Consumer Behavior. 
Chicago, The Dryden Press, p. 4. 
GOODWIN, P. (2008) Policy Incentives to Change Behaviour in Passenger Transport, 
Bristol, The Centre for Transport and Society University of the West of England, , pp. 
5-6. 
GROMADZKI, M. (2014) Wyniki własnych badań pierwotnych [Unpublished] [Personal 
permission for using: 31th  December.2014] 
HEBEL, K. (2013). Zachowania transportowe mieszkańców miast w kształtowaniu 
transportu miejskiego. Gdańsk, Fundacja Rozwoju Uniwersytetu Gdańskiego, p. 28, p. 
115, p. 205 
KAROŃ, G.  & ŻOCHOWSKA, R.  & SOBOTA,  A. (2010) Zachowania komunikacyjne w 
Aglomeracji Górnośląskiej – wybrane wyniki z 2009 r., In Kompleksowe badania ruchu. 
Teoria i praktyka. Doświadczenia polskich miast, Zeszyty Naukowo-Techniczne 
Stowarzyszenia Inżynierów i Techników Komunikacji w Krakowie. Seria: Materiały 
Konferencyjne, Nr 93, (z. 152),  p. 91. 
KATERDRA RYNKU TRANSPORTOWEGO UNIWERSYTETU GDAŃSKIEGO & 
ZARZĄD KOMUNIKACJI MIEJSKIEJ W GDYNI (2008) Preferencje i zachowania 
transportowe mieszkańców Gdyni  [Unpublished] [Personal permission for using: 31th 
December.2008] 
!19

!
KATERDRA RYNKU TRANSPORTOWEGO UNIWERSYTETU GDAŃSKIEGO & 
ZARZĄD KOMUNIKACJI MIEJSKIEJ W GDYNI (2010) Preferencje i zachowania 
transportowe mieszkańców Gdyni  [Unpublished] [Personal permission for using: 31th 
December.2010] 
KATERDRA RYNKU TRANSPORTOWEGO UNIWERSYTETU GDAŃSKIEGO & 
ZARZĄD KOMUNIKACJI MIEJSKIEJ W GDYNI (2013) Preferencje i zachowania 
transportowe mieszkańców Gdyni  [Unpublished] [Personal permission for using: 31th 
December.2013] 
Kompleksowe badania ruchu na terenie miasta Gdańska 2009 (2009) Raport V, 
Opracowanie wyników KBR Gdańsk 2009, Sopot-Warszawa, [Unpublished] p. 5 - 6;  
MOWEN, J. C. (1987) Consumer Behavior, New York-London, Macmillan, p. 5. 
POGŁÓD, K. (2010) Kompleksowe badania ruchu – teoria i praktyka, In Kompleksowe 
badania ruchu. Teoria i praktyka. Doświadczenia polskich miast, Zeszyty Naukowo-
Techniczne Stowarzyszenia Inżynierów i Techników Komunikacji Rzeczpospolitej 
Polskiej Oddział w Krakowie, Seria: Materiały Konferencyjne. Nr 93 (z. 152), p. 113. 
RUDNICKI, L. (2000) Zachowanie konsumentów na rynku, Warszawa, PWE, p.18. 
SMYCZEK, S. & SOWA, I. (2005) Konsument na rynku. Zachowania, modele, aplikacje, 
Warszawa, Centrum Doradztwa i Informacji DIFIN sp. z o.o., p. 62. 
URZĄD MIASTA RZESZOWA (2009) Zintegrowany plan rozwoju transportu publicznego 
Rzeszowa na lata 2010-2015, 
 [Online] Available from: www.bip.erzeszow.pl, 
[Accessed: 08th March 2013] 
WYSZOMIRSKI, O. (ed.) (2008), Transport miejski. Ekonomika i organizacja. Gdańsk, 
Wydawnictwo Uniwersytetu Gdańskiego,  pp. 275 - 290. 
ZARZĄD KOMUNIKACJI MIEJSKIEJ W GDYNI (2014) Materiały wewnętrzne 
[Unpublished] [Personal permission for using: 31th  December.2014] 
ŻUROWSKA, J. (2005) Metody statystyczne w badaniach sondażowych w transporcie 
pasażerskim, Transport Miejski i Regionalny. 5, p. 31. 
!20

!
Pay-what-you-want as a participative pricing mechanism: Meta-
analysis of development and knowledge dissemination 
Magdalena Krzyżanowska 
Kozminski University, Poland 
Jolanta Tkaczyk 
Kozminski University, Poland 
Abstract 
The participative pricing mechanisms field has developed over the last 10 years, with 
many research papers having been published in management-related periodicals. The 
number of papers on the pay-what-you-want (PWYW) mechanism, a type of 
participative pricing, published in academic periodicals has also increased year after 
year. Nevertheless, in the past literature, no formal research has explored the state of 
development and knowledge dissemination of this subject, and no studies have been 
conducted on the citation analysis of papers dealing with it. The growing interest of 
practitioners in PWYW poses an urgent challenge to researchers since they should 
understand the application of PWYW studies as they apply to direct future business 
practice. Consequently, this article has the following purposes: (1) to identify the state of 
development of the field, (2) to explore the citation of PWYW papers and the sequence 
of citations; (3) to identify the most influential researchers in the field, and finally (4) to 
identify the possible existence of research gaps that are important from the point of view 
of marketing. To achieve these goals, the authors use citation analysis based on Google 
Scholar and Harzings Publish or Perish, and use social network analysis based on 
software UCINET 6 for Windows (Borgatti et al. 2002). Meta-analysis research design is 
employed in order to obtain a quantitative description of the study in the literature. The 
unit analysis of the research is a paper on PWYW which was accessed through multi-
search data bases. The findings show that the development of PWYW study has 
increased dramatically in both number and focus in the last five years. The analysis of 
the networks used in this article proves that the empiric study was salient, and the most 
influential researchers in the field have been identified. The study applies to marketing 
scholars conducting research in PWYW, especially in the context of consumer 
behaviour. 
Keywords: participative pricing mechanism, pay-what-you-want, meta-analysis, 
marketing 
Introduction 
Pay-what-you-want (PWYW) as a pricing model is gaining more popularity, which can 
easily be observed in the Google Trends analysis of this term. The results of this 
analysis show that since 2007, when Radiohead released the digital version of its album 
“In Rainbows” using the PWYW formula, the number of searches regarding this term 
not only increased, but temporarily broke popularity records (see: Appendix 1). 
Public attention is also accompanied by the growth of scientific publications addressing 
this form of participative pricing and other similar solutions (Chandran & Morwitz, 2005), 
allowing buyers to decide how much they will pay for a given product. In general, 
PWYW is not used for all products offered by a company, as it applies only to select 
!21

!
ones. The crucial feature of this mechanism is that buyers set the price they intend to 
pay for the product independently at their discretion, while the company cannot 
renounce the contract, being obliged to accept every price, even if their profit equals 
zero (J.-Y. Kim, Natter, & Spann, 2009). This mechanism has been already tested in 
many industries (for example, training services, catering businesses, the music industry, 
the publishing industry and entertainment) (Tuttle, 2014), but its characteristics and 
conditions for implementation are neither thoroughly recognised by practitioners, which 
is indicated by the ongoing discussion among managers (compare: Bertini & 
Koenigsberg, 2014), nor by researchers (compare: Friedman & Gerstein, 2014).  
The state of affairs described above indicates the requirement to identify the knowledge 
advancement in a systematic way and, consequently, the general purpose of this article 
is to identify the level of literature advancement regarding PWYW and to determine 
desirable directions for knowledge development in this field. In order to achieve the 
above, bibliometric analysis is employed in this article, allowing not only to objectivise 
the literature review including substantial repertories, but also to discover relationships 
between particular sources, which constitute the meta-analytic approach. The nature of 
this analysis consists in identifying the set of publications dealing with a certain issue 
and researching their characteristics, including both similarities and differences. On this 
basis, conclusions are made regarding existing and forming trends of analysis on the 
indicated issues, which constituted the starting point for research work conducted in 
social sciences (Bryman, 2001). 
The specific research objectives that are formulated in this article include:  
(1) to identify the state of development of the field;  
(2) to explore the citation of PWYW papers and the sequence of citations;  
(3) to identify the most influential researchers in the field, and finally 
(4) to identify the possible existence of research gaps that are important from the point 
of view of marketing. 
The paper is organized as follows. Section ‘Methods’ discusses bibliometric methods 
and research design. Section ‘Data’ introduces the specific dataset analysed. Then 
Results and Discussion follow. Final conclusions and the limitations of the research are 
formulated in the last part. 
Method 
The bibliometric analysis (bibliometrics) uses mathematical and statistical methods to 
examine written communication between researchers, and due to its quantitative 
nature, it supplements qualitative analyses. It is aimed at identifying the process of 
knowledge development in selected areas, including also interactions between them 
(Westney, 1998). It is based on the assumption that scientific communication can be 
determined through the sources that authors indicate and refer to in their papers 
(Garfield, 1979). As the research findings show, despite the differences both in the 
quality of published works and the character of reference (positive or negative), citations 
may become a basis for evaluating not only the quality of particular authors’ output, but 
also a certain area of knowledge (Summers, 1984).  
In the bibliometric analysis, data sources include all publications, i.e. articles in 
periodicals, research reports, books and monographs, and chapters in books, while 
!22

!
data mean elements which identify each publication, i.e. authors’ names, title and 
reference list (perhaps also keywords). In the basic range of analysis, bibliometrics can 
be conducted in the form of citation analysis. It assumes that reference lists provided by 
authors in their publications reveal direct relationships with previous works and 
consequently show their importance in the process of forming knowledge on a given 
subject (Garfield, 1979).  
There are also more advanced methods of bibliometric analysis, including bibliographic 
couplings and co-citations, used for analysing mutual relationships between works. For 
both, it is assumed that these relationships indicate affinity between papers that are 
coupled or co-cited. In the case of the first method, the affinity between two works 
results from the occurrence inside them of at least one reference to the other paper, 
which determines the strength of the relationship between first two works (Kessler, 
1963). The other method focuses on the frequency characterizing the coexistence of 
two papers in others, which indicates the extent of their similarity (Small, 1973). Both 
methods are applicable in the case of numerous sets of publications and in the case of 
searching non-obvious relationships between various papers, when it is necessary to 
make a selection of units used for research. In this analysis, there is no need for such 
selection, because the subject of the research (PWYW) is clearly defined and allows 
separation of a not very large publication set, which can be entirely covered. 
The citation analysis used in this article is aimed at determining mutual relationships 
between citing and cited authors as well as publications strictly focused on the PWYW 
mechanism (references to other literature are not taken into account), due to the fact 
that the most frequently cited publications include important findings that inspire other 
researchers to continue their work (it is suspected that sometimes this is for questioning 
reasons) (Tahai & Meyer, 1999). The aim is to identify the most active researchers in 
this issue to date as well as the most influential papers.  
The analysis conducted in this article consists of the following states: 
1. 
Selection of criterion defining the publication set for analysis. 
2. 
Selection of data bases including information on publications. 
3. 
Identification of publications fulfilling the initial criteria of selection. 
4. 
General analysis of citations. 
5. 
Network analysis. 
Data  
Bibliometric analysis can be based on various initial assumptions regarding the set of 
researched publications. Such a set can be defined through arbitrary selection of 
periodicals, publication periods or key words. The choice of the first criterion seems 
justified first of all when the area of knowledge is extensive, the periodicals contributing 
to its development are well-known, and there is a focus on obtaining the core of a 
certain output. The second criterion is applicable when the given area has a long 
history, which makes it reasonable to classify publications pertaining to selected periods 
in order to highlight certain stages of knowledge development. According to the authors 
of this article, the third criterion can be used in the initial stage of knowledge 
development in a given area, because in such a case, there is a need for identifying and 
situating a certain issue in general knowledge. As the PWYW mechanism is a new 
phenomenon and the literature addressing this topic has been emerging quite recently, 
!23

!
the third criterion was applied here with two key words allowing for selection of 
searched publications: ‘pay what you want’ and its synonym ‘pay as you wish.’   
Having selected the criterion determining the publication set for analysis, it was 
necessary to indicate the primary database and criteria for the addition of publications 
not included in this base, as well as to define methods of its supplementation. Initially it 
was assumed that the research would include full-text bases available through multi-
search engines: EDS (serving EBSCO, HeinOnline, Scopus and JSTOR), AtoZ (serving 
EBSCO, Elsevier, Emerald, HeinOnline, JSTOR, ProQuest, SAGE and Springer). After 
preliminary analysis of the records indicated by multi-search engines, it was evident that 
the selection of publications is inappropriate (too wide) for analysis purposes. According 
to the alternative approach enabling selection of only relevant publications (Czakon, 
2011), it was decided to use the Web of Science as this database adhered to a strict 
evaluation process, and one could be assured that only the most influential, relevant 
and credible publications were included. This time, however, the search results were too 
narrow. Taking the above into account, the final decision was made to use Harzing’s 
Publish or Perish, a software programme for retrieving and analysing academic 
citations. This choice goes in line with the research findings showing a higher efficiency 
of Google Scholar searches (see: Repiso-Caballero & Delgado-López-Cózar, 2013). 
Three attempts were made to select the search database which allowed the authors of 
this article to reduce the range of units that were inadequate for the analysis purposes. 
In the stage, the inclusion criterion was applied: papers were qualified as scientific 
works, if they were published in a periodical, conference materials or as a book, or – if 
they were not published – they should be publicized through academic repositories on 
the Internet. The reason for also including the papers having no peer-reviewed status is 
that the relatively short history of research addressing the PWYW issue makes the 
number of reviewed works quite limited. The researchers’ common practice consisting 
of the use of publications of various statuses through the Internet justifies the adoption 
of such an approach.  
In addition to the above, two additional criteria were used to eliminate publications from 
the initially selected set. The first is the accidental occurrence of the ‘pay-what-you-
want’ expression, in no way connected to the pricing mechanism. The other criterion is 
the publication in a language other than English, due to the initial assumption that 
knowledge dissemination is possible only if papers are available for the wide audience 
of scholars. In the case of management sciences, it warrants the publications in 
English. From the initial set of 714 records searched through Publish or Perish, 50 
publications met the above-defined criteria and were selected for further analysis. Each 
of the research units was coded with the use of basic bibliographic data: authors’ 
names, publication year, title and type of publication, and alternatively, title of periodical 
(in the case of articles).   
Results and discussion 
The first part of the analysis applies to the general characteristics of the set consisting 
of 50 publications focused entirely or to a large extent on the PWYW mechanism. 
These elements were taken into account: time distribution of publication release, 
characteristics of paper type, periodicals in which papers were published, and 
researchers’ activity. The other part of the analysis is comprised of relationships 
occurring within the network created by these publications.  
!24

!
Papers on the PWYW mechanism that meet the criteria defined in this article have been 
published since 2009. The history of research work regarding this issue is therefore 
very short – only six years, which to a large degree explains why there are not many 
publications. The analysis of release time distribution shows the growing interest in this 
topic (Fig.1). 
Figure 1 Number of works in original dataset (n=50) 
[Ist Q – data cover only Q1 2015 r.] 
Source: own 
Taking the characteristics addressing the PWYW mechanism into account, the works 
can be classified into five types. Published papers represent 60 per cent (i.e. articles 
and single chapters in books), while the remaining 40 per cent include working papers, 
conference papers and also two dissertations. The diversity of these publications and 
shares of their particular types indicate the low level of maturity in the case of research 
works conducted in this field. 
 (Fig. 2). Particularly noticeable is the lack of 
comprehensive works in book form, which by nature would present the issue more 
thoroughly. 
!25

!
Figure 2 Types of works (n=50) 
Source: own 
The analysis of the most important group of works, including published articles that 
successfully underwent peer-review scrutiny, leads to the conclusion that the number of 
periodicals in which these works appeared is quite numerous (24 periodicals and 29 
articles) and diverse (including periodicals addressing general areas of management, 
marketing, the economy and between economic and psychology issues). This indicates 
that the topic of PWYW is interdisciplinary by its nature. It is worth particular notice that 
articles on the PWYW mechanism are repeatedly published in the Journal of Behavioral 
and Experimental Economics, which leads to the supposition that researchers 
specializing in behavioural economics are the most active. 
Figure 3 Journals publishing articles on PWYW (n=29) 
Source: own 
!26

!
The analysis of works addressing PWYW also contributed to identification of the most 
active researchers involved in this issue. The Research Productivity Index (RPI) was 
used for that purpose. The procedure of RPI calculation includes: 1 credit is attributed to 
each article and proportionally divided in case it has more than one author (1 = 1 
author, 2 x 0.5 = 2 authors, etc.), then credits are summed up and added to the number 
of works written by a given author (Pasadeos, Renfro, & Hanily, 1999). 
The analysed set of publications resulted from the involvement of 98 researchers. Their 
direct contribution in the development of knowledge on PWYW was evaluated with the 
use of RPI (Appendix 2). The highest level of index was reported in the case of 
researchers who contributed to four papers, and they are as follows: Regner, 
Fernandez, Nahata and Kim (Tab. 1). The list does not consider the status of works 
taken for the RPI calculation, which means the equal treatment of works: published 
peer-reviewed, non-reviewed and various versions of the same articles, if new authors 
appeared and they were extended. Taking the above status into account, the greatest 
contribution was made by J.-K. Kim, thanks to four articles published in high-class, 
peer-reviewed periodicals.  
Table 1 Top ten authors of works on PWYW of 2009-2015 Ist Q: Research 
Productivity Index (RPI) 
Source: own 
The list presented in Table 1 leads to the conclusion that to date, the absolute majority 
of authors (80 per cent) has contributed only incidentally, as they participated only in 
one paper (Fig. 4). Only a few researchers reached a more advanced stage of studies. 
This situation proves wide interest in the analysed issue among academics, but also 
confirms previous observations regarding the initial stage of its development.  
!27

!
Figure 4 Authors’ activity 
Source: own 
The works of the most active authors address diverse theoretical aspects (including 
economic, marketing and psychological), confirming the inter-disciplinary character of 
the PWYW mechanism. Taking RPI and the additional work status criterion mentioned 
above, it can be stated that marketing aspects are of crucial importance, as they 
prevailed in works contributed by the most active researcher. They were aimed at the 
following: (1) explaining the customers’ behaviour when the PWYW mechanism is used 
and its influence on revenues and sales in a quantitative approach (J.-Y. Kim et al., 
2009); (2) analysing the efficiency of the PWYW mechanism in attracting new buyers in 
the case of products involving a high level of perceived functional risk (Ju-Young Kim, 
Natter, & Spann, 2010); (3) determining the importance of the PWYW mechanism as 
the alternative to free samples and price cuts used in an attempt to reduce risk 
perceived by new purchasers (J.-Y. Kim, Natter, & Spann, 2014); (4) identifying the 
meaning of the following conditions of PWYW utilisation: social distance in the 
relationship between buyers and companies, presentation of reference prices, 
determination of product value, reputation exposure and the duration of PWYW use (J.-
Y. Kim et al., 2014). 
The essential element of the publication analysis consisted of analysing citations. It was 
conducted according to the authors’ own approach called the focused citation analysis. 
Unlike the general citation analysis aimed at gauging the importance of a publication by 
counting the number of times it has been cited by all other scholars, in this case, it was 
reduced to identifying citations within the limit of 50 selected articles, as the goal was to 
determine the fundamentals of literature focused on PWYW on which the next layers 
are built, i.e. the most important works. For that reason, the intention was to find out 
how much impact a particular article had, by showing which authors of the other 49 
papers based their work upon it or cited it as an example. This stage required 
identifying citations in particular works and then their reckoning. For that purpose, the 
50x50 matrix was designed, in which all units selected for the research were placed, as 
!28

!
well as mentioned in their content citations of works belonging to the analysed 
publication set. This arrangement of data enabled implementation of the network 
analysis that allowed identifying and visualising relationships among researched units 
(Wasserman & Faust, 1994). As opposed to the previous stages of analysis, this one is 
much more focused on the general structure of scientific output in the researched area 
thanks to the use of science mapping instead of the characteristics of particular 
publications (Cobo, López-Herrera, Herrera-Viedma, & Herrera, 2011).  
With the use of data collected in the matrix, three network diagrams were created on 
the basis of the spring embedder algorithm provided by the UCINET software package 
(Borgatti, Everett, & Freeman, 2002). The algorithm optimizes distances between every 
pair of nodes (i.e. publications), and they are approximated by the number of edges 
between them. The network is characterized by higher centrality when the mean path 
length between a given node and other nodes is shorter. Additional assumptions were 
made for each of three figures in order to analyse different aspects of the output 
structure examined according to citations.   
Figure 5 is a two-dimensional mapping of nodes, representing all 50 articles. It shows 
the general structure of citations within the analysed set of publications, including the 
diversity of works classified as follows: dissertations, articles and books, working and 
conference papers. In this structure, three concentric layers can be separated, similar to 
wood grains; the central one is comprised of publications to which other researchers 
have referred most often, while the external layers show works that have only been 
drawn from the PWYW output, not being a point of reference for others. It is 
understandable that the latter group includes dissertations, which by their nature are 
more ‘consumers’ than ‘producers,’ as well as working papers. The middle grain 
contains works both citing and cited by others. The most important paper in this 
approach is Kim et al. (2009), which according to Figure 5 has collected the biggest 
number of citations.  
Figure 5 Citations analysis of articles on PWYW (n=50) (only first author’s name 
given) 
Source: own 
!29

!
Figure 6 is based on the assumption of slightly higher criteria regarding the selection of 
publications. It includes only works that have been cited by at least two other authors 
(17) and works referring to at least two authors from the database (41). The thickness of 
lines uniting particular points illustrates the ‘quality’ of the citation understood as 
referring to a frequently cited work; the thicker the line, the bigger the tie strength with 
other publications because of the same point of reference. On the basis of Figure 6, it 
can be stated that the substantial core of the analysed publication set consists of five 
works situated in the center of the figure  (A Gneezy, Gneezy, Nelson, & Brown, 2010; 
Ayelet Gneezy, Gneezy, Riener, & Nelson, 2012; Kim et al., 2009; Riener & Traxler, 
2012, Tobias Regner & Barria, 2009) (Tab.2). They have attracted the most of the 
researchers’ attention. There is also a group of publications of the second order, whose 
popularity is smaller as compared to the core; however, they constitute a significant 
output to which others refer. The assymetry between the number of works cited by at 
least two other researchers and the number of works citing at least two other papers 
confirms the previously mentioned supposition that the scientific output regarding 
PWYW develops fragmentarily; scholars do not have a full review of literature on this 
subject.    
  
Figure 6 Citations analysis on PWYW; most cited  and most citing articles (only 
first author’s name given) 
Source: own 
!30

!
Table 2 Top five most cited articles on PWYW 
Source: own 
Figure 7 is the modification of Figure 6, resulting from the additional assumption 
considering the significance of the publication based on the number of ingoing and 
outgoing citations.  For that purpose, the Ucinet’s principal components analysis was 
used. Because the position of the publication depends on its significance, it is possible 
to identify the pecking order among the most frequently cited works.   
Figure 7 Citations analysis on PWYW; most important articles (only first author’s 
name given) 
Source: own 
!31

!
On the basis of Figure 7, it can be concluded that the most important source to which 
the researchers of PWYW mechanism refer is the one by J. Kim ( J. Kim, 2009). The 
position of this publication is well-deserved, because it was the first comprehensive 
work published in a reputable marketing periodical (Journal of Marketing), but the 
number two (A Gneezy et al., 2010) is also quite surprising, being only a short report on 
research not focused primarily on the PWYW mechanism (it is used only in conducted 
experiments). Still, it was published in Science magazine, whose reputation surely 
influenced the number of citations referring to this article. The third position belongs to 
the work whose authors (Tobias Regner & Barria, 2009b), analyse the payment 
behaviour of customers of online music, coming to the conclusion that an open-
contracts design can encourage people to make voluntary payments and may be a 
viable business option.     
Conclusions 
The literature on the PWYW mechanism has been developing for only six years, which 
leads to the conclusion that it is a new area of scientific cognition. This initial stage of 
development is characterised by three important features: dispersion and 
interdisciplinarity of academic searches, which is the result of conducting research in 
the same field concurrently by various scholars, but also with frail common theoretical 
foundations, as they come from only one publication (J.-Y. Kim et al., 2009). It is 
particularly concerning that the scholars do not strive for coherence of their empiric 
research work and mutual verification of findings, which can be compared to existing on 
islands, where inhabitants know of only one seaport. Such a situation could be 
understood in the past due to limitations occurring in the dissemination of knowledge, 
but in the contemporary world, access to scientific output – both peer-reviewed and 
work in progress -- is so easy that such autonomisation of research cannot be justified.  
As the most significant publications focus on the psychological conditions of the PWYW 
mechanism being accepted by customers and its importance in the process of 
marketing activities, it can be stated that the literature on PWYW is rooted in marketing, 
and particularly in its sub-discipline, i.e. consumer behaviour. On that ground, various 
research projects should be integrated. It is an issue of greater importance due to the 
special characteristics of the PWYW mechanism consisting of the radical change of the 
traditional division of roles in market relationships, where the price settlement was 
interchangeably attributed to an enterprise, while a buyer could only accept or reject it. 
Giving customers total control over the pricing process and the mass scale it can be 
applied to -- thanks to Internet expansion -- lead to the supposition that the PWYW 
mechanism has significant potential regarding the change of business models, and 
therefore, studying the determinants of its efficient application seems to be a desirable 
line of research.  
The analysis conducted in this paper was based on the quantitative approach, because 
it was aimed at finding works in the literature having the greatest importance as points 
of reference for other scholars. Thanks to the above analysis, such works have been 
identified, but it must be emphasized that these results do not mean that popular papers 
are also influential, because it requires more qualitative analysis. Furthermore, the 
authors of this article focused only on the literature in English, which was an obvious 
simplification, because in order to obtain the full picture, it would be necessary to 
include works in other languages. 
!32

!
The innovative (or even revolutionary) character of the PWYW mechanism and the 
growing interest in using it in business practice outline a promising future to this topic. 
The authors hope that these presented results will help to motivate further research on 
PWYW. 
Appendix 1 Pay-what-you-want in Google Trends 
Source: (Google, 2015) 
Appendix 2 Authors of works on PWYW of 2009-2015 Ist Q: Research Productivity 
Index 
Please contact the authors direct for this information 
Bibliography 
Ammermann, S., & Veit, K. (2013). Why Would You Pay? An Exploratory Study in Pay-
What-You-Want Pricing. lup.lub.lu.se. 
Balan, C. (2014). “Pay What You Want”: A Participative Price Setting Mechanism. 
International Journal of Economic Practices and Theories  Retrieved from http://
w w w . i j e p t . o r g / i n d e x . p h p / i j e p t / a r t i c l e / v i e w /
Pay_What_You_Want_A_Participative_Price_Setting_Mechanism 
Bertini, M., & Koenigsberg, O. (2014). When Customers Help Set Prices. MIT Sloan 
Management Review, 55(4), 57–64.  
Borgatti, S. P., Everett, M. G., & Freeman, L. C. (2002). Ucinet for Windows: Software 
for Social Network Analysis. Harvard, MA: Analytic Technologies. 
Bryman, A. (2001). Social Research Methods. Oxford University Press.  
!33

!
Chandran, S., & Morwitz, V. G. (2005). Effects of Participative Pricing on Consumers’ 
Cognitions and Actions: A Goal Theoretic Perspective. Journal of Consumer Research, 
32(2), 249–259.  
Chao, Y., Fernandez, J., & Nahata, B. (2014). Pay-what-you-want pricing and 
competition: Breaking the bertrand trap. webmeets.com. 
Charness, G., & Cheung, T. (2013). A restaurant field experiment in charitable 
contributions. Economics Letters, 119(1), 48–49.  
Chen, Y., Koenigsberg, O., & Zhang, Z. J. (2009). Pay as you wish pricing. Retrieved 
from https://server1.tepper.cmu.edu/Seminars/docs/Management-Science-ckz.pdf 
Cobo, M. J., López-Herrera, A. G., Herrera-Viedma, E., & Herrera, F. (2011). Science 
mapping software tools: Review, analysis, and cooperative study among tools. Journal 
of the American Society for Information Science & Technology, 62(7), 1382–1402.  
Czakon, W. (2011). Metodyka systematycznego przeglądu literatury. Przegląd 
Organizacji, (3), 57–61. Retrieved from http://www.wojciechczakon.com/pub/metodyka-
systematycznego-przegladu-literatury.pdf 
Dekhili, S., & Ghesquiere, C. C. (2014). The “Pay What You Want” Pricing Policy: Power 
Sharing or Communication Action? Customer & Service Systems.  
Egbert, H., Greiff, M., & Xhangolli, K. (2015). Pay What You Want (PWYW) pricing ex 
post consumption: a sales strategy for experience goods. Journal of Innovation 
Economics & Management  
Fernandez, J. M., & Nahata, B. (n.d.). Profitability of pay-what-you-like pricing. Retrived 
from Se.shufe.edu.cn. 
Fernandez, J. M., & Nahata, B. (2009). Pay What You Like? Available at SSRN 
1433845. Retrieved from http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1433845 
Friedman, H. H., & Gerstein, M. (2014). Innovative Pricing Strategies: A Primer. 
Retrieved from http://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=2480205 
Garfield, E. (1979). Is citation analysis a legitimate evaluation tool? Scientometrics, 
1(4), 359–375.  
Gneezy, A., Gneezy, U., Nelson, L. D., & Brown, A. (2010). Shared social responsibility: 
A field experiment in pay-what-you-want pricing and charitable giving. Science. 
Retrieved from http://www.sciencemag.org/content/329/5989/325.short 
Gneezy, A., Gneezy, U., Riener, G., & Nelson, L. D. (2012). Pay-what-you-want, identity, 
and self-signaling in markets. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the 
United States of America, 109(19), 7236–40. doi:10.1073/pnas.1120893109 
Google. (2015). Pay what you want. Google Trends. Retrieved March 27, 2015, from 
http://www.google.pl/trends/explore?hl=en-GB#q=pay what you want 
!34

!
Gravert, C. (2014). Pride and Patronage-The effect of identity on pay-what-you-want 
prices at a charitable bookstore. ideas.repec.org. Retrieved from http://
scholar.google.comhttps//ideas.repec.org/p/aah/aarhec/2014-04.html 
Greiff, M., Egbert, H., & Xhangolli, K. (2013). Pay What You Want – But Pay Enough! 
Information Asymmetries and PWYW-Pricing. Retrieved from http://www.uni-
marburg.de/fb02/makro/forschung/magkspapers/04-2013_greiff.pdf 
Harbi, S. El, Grolleau, G., & Bekir, I. (2014). Substituting piracy with a pay-what-you-
want option: does it make sense? European Journal of Law and Economics.  
Hinterhuber, A., & Liozu, S. M. (2014). Is innovation in pricing your next source of 
competitive advantage? Business Horizons.  
Huber, F., Lenzen, M., Meyer, F., & Appelmann, E. (2015). The Role of Altruistic and 
Egoistic Motivations in Pay What you Want Situations. Developments in Marketing 
Science: Proceedings of the Academy of Marketing Science 
Isaac, R. M., Lightle, J. P., & Norton, D. A. (2010). The pay-what-you-like business 
model: Warm glow revenues and endogenous price discrimination. Available at SSRN 
1612951. Retrieved from http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1612951 
Iveroth, E., Westelius, A., Petri, C. J., Olve, N. G., & ... (2013). How to differentiate by 
price: Proposal for a five-dimensional model. European Management Journal 
Jang, H., & Chu, W. (2012). Are Consumers Acting Fairly Toward Companies?: An 
Examination of Pay-What-You-Want Pricing. Journal of Macromarketing, 32(4), 348–
360.  
Johnson, J. W., & Cui, A. P. (2013). To influence or not to influence: External reference 
price strategies in pay-what-you-want pricing. Journal of Business Research, 66(2), 
275–281.  
Kahsay, G. A., & Samahita, M. (2014). Pay-What-You-Want Pricing Schemes: A Self-
Image Perspective. Working paper, University of Copenhagen Retrieved from http://
lup.lub.lu.se/record/4446584 
Kessler, M. M. (1963). Bibliographic Coupling Between Scientific Papers. American 
Documentation, 14(1), 10–25.  
Kim, J.-Y., Kaufmann, K., & Stegemann, M. (2014). The impact of buyer-seller 
relationships and reference prices on the effectiveness of the pay what you want pricing 
mechanism. Marketing Letters, 25(4), 409–423.  
Kim, J.-Y., Natter, M., & Spann, M. (2009). Pay What You Want: A New Participative 
Pricing Mechanism. Journal of Marketing, 73(1), 44–58.  
Kim, J.-Y., Natter, M., & Spann, M. (2010). Kish: Where Customers Pay As They Wish. 
Review of Marketing Science, 8(2), 1–12.  
Kim, J.-Y., Natter, M., & Spann, M. (2014). Sampling, discounts or pay-what-you-want: 
Two field experiments. International Journal of Research in Marketing, 31(3), 327–334.  
!35

!
Lee, S. R., Baumgartner, H., & Pieters, R. (2011). Are You Really Paying What You 
Wish? Interpersonal Influences on Price Decisions. Building Connections. 
pure.strath.ac.uk. 
Lynn, M., Flynn, S. M., & Helion, C. (2013). Do consumers prefer round prices? 
Evidence from pay-what-you-want decisions and self-pumped gasoline purchases. 
Journal of Economic Psychology, 36, 96–102.  
Machado, F., & Sinha, R. K. (2013). The viability of pay what you want pricing. 
Retrieved from http://ebape.fgv.br/sites/ebape.fgv.br/files/Working-Paper-Fernando-
Machado-Viability-of-Pay-What-you-Want-Pricing.pdf 
Mak, V., Zwick, R., & Rao, A. R. (2010). Pay what you want” as a profitable pricing 
strategy: Theory and experimental evidence. Proceedings of the Management Science, 
rady.ucsd.edu. 
Mak, V., Zwick, R., Rao, A. R., & Pattaratanakun, J. A. (2015). “Pay what you want” as 
threshold public good provision. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision 
Processes 
Marett, K., Pearson, R., & Moore, R. S. (2012). Pay What You Want: An Exploratory 
Study of Social Exchange and Buyer-Determined Prices of iProducts. Communications 
of the Association for Information Systems, 30, 1–14.  
Mills, P. (2011). Economic and financial insights from a cross-cultural pay-what-you-wish 
study. Proceedings of the 2011 Annual Meeting of the Academy of Behavioral Finance 
andEconomics, September 21-23, 2011, Los Angeles, California, Retrived from https://
p11.secure.hostingprod.com/@www.aobf.org/ssl/attachments/2011/
ABF_2011_Proceedings_Book.pdf 
Mills, P. (2013). World of goo: a large scale pay-what-you-wish experiment. AMA 
Summer Educators’ Conference Proceedings. American Marketing Association. 
R e t r i e v e d f r o m h t t p : / / s e a r c h . e b s c o h o s t . c o m / l o g i n . a s p x ?
direct=true&db=bth&AN=90022308&site=bsi-live 
Parvinen, P., Pöyry, E., & Kaptein, M. (2013). Pay-what-you-want pricing: the impact of 
framing. AMA Winter Educators’ Conference Proceedings, 24, 110–118.  
Pasadeos, Y., Renfro, R. B., & Hanily, M. L. (1999). Influential authors and works of the 
public relations scholarly literature: A network of recent research. Journal of Public 
Relations Research, (11), 29–52. 
Racherla, P., Babb, J. S., & Keith, M. J. (2011). Pay-what-you-want pricing for mobile 
applications: The effect of privacy assurances and social information. AMA Educators 
Proceedings; 22; 336  
Raju, J., & Zhang, Z. J. (2010). Pay As You Wish Pricing. books.google.com. 
Reese, J. D. (2012). Participatory Pricing in Sport: An Examination of Name-Your-Own-
Price and Pay-What-You-Want Pricing. repository.tamu.edu. 
!36

!
Regner, T. (2010). Why consumers pay voluntarily. Retrieved from http://pubdb.wiwi.uni-
jena.de/pdf/wp_2010_081.pdf 
Regner, T. (2014). Why consumers pay voluntarily: Evidence from online music. Journal 
of Behavioral and Experimental Economics. Retrieved from http://
www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2214804314001050 
Regner, T., & Barria, J. A. (2009). Do consumers pay voluntarily? The case of online 
music. Journal of Economic Behaviour and Organization, 71(2), 395–406. 
Regner, T., & Riener, G. (2012). Voluntary payments, privacy and social pressure on the 
internet: A natural field experiment. econstor.eu. 
Repiso-Caballero, R., & Delgado-López-Cózar, E. (2013). The Impact of Scientific 
Journals of Communication: Comparing Google Scholar Metrics, Web of Science and 
Scopus. Comunicar, 21(41), 45–52.  
Riener, G., & Traxler, C. (2012). Norms, moods, and free lunch: Longitudinal evidence 
on payments from a Pay-What-You-Want restaurant. Journal of Socio-Economics, 
41(4), 476–483.  
Schmidt, K. M., Spann, M., & ... (2014). Pay what you want as a marketing strategy in 
monopolistic and competitive markets. Management Science. Retrieved from http://
pubsonline.informs.org/doi/abs/10.1287/mnsc.2014.1946 
Schons, L., Rese, M., Wieseke, J., Rasmussen, W., Weber, D., & Strotmann, W.-C. 
(2014). There is nothing permanent except change-analyzing individual price dynamics 
in “pay-what-you-want” situations. Marketing Letters, 25(1), 25–36.  
Schröder, M., Lüer, A., & Sadrieh, A. (2015). Pay-what-you-want or mark-off-your-own-
price–A framing effect in customer-selected pricing. Journal of Behavioral and 
Experimental Economics 
Small, H. (1973). Co-citation in the Scientific Literature: A New Measure of the 
Relationship Between Two Documents. Journal of the American Society for Information 
Science, 24(4), 265–269.  
Soule, C. A. A., & Madrigal, R. (2014). Anchors and norms in anonymous pay-what-you-
want pricing contexts. Journal of Behavioral and Experimental Economics 
Summers, E. G. (1984). A Review and Application of Citation Analysis Methodology to 
Reading Research Journal Literature. Journal of the American Society for Information 
Science, 35(6), 332–343.  
Tahai, A., & Meyer, M. J. (1999). A revealed preference study of management journals’ 
direct influences. Strategic Management Journal, 20(3), 279.  
Thomas, S., & Gierl, H. (n.d.). Pay what you want: how to affect the price consumers 
are willing to pay. Wiwi.uni-Augsburg.de. 
!37

!
Tuttle, B. (2014). A Brief History of “Pay What You Want” Businesses. 11th November. 
Retrieved from http://time.com/money/3576844/pay-what-you-want-businesses/ 
Wasserman, S., & Faust, K. (1994). Social Network Analysis: Methods and Applications 
(Structural Analysis in the Social Sciences). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Westney, L. C. H. (1998). Historical Rankings of Science and Technology: A Citationist 
Perspective. Journal of the Association for History and Computing.  
!38

!
Mobility management in Poland’s air transport industry 
Dariusz Tłoczyński 
University of Gdansk, Poland 
Abstract 
The development of air transport in Poland since 2004 as well as the increase of the 
wealth of Polish society resulted in a plethora of new attractive forms of mobility.  The 
constant analysis of passenger transport behaviour and the accessibility of air transport 
are among the effects of the above-mentioned process. 
The main aim of this article is the analysis of mobility management and its influence on 
the development of air transport. The research which was conducted at certain airports 
associated with the development of airport system links may serve as an example. 
Mobility management may be helpful in shaping demand, analyzing passenger 
transport behaviour, planning, organising and controlling passenger transportation. 
Moreover, it may influence airport links and, generally, the development of air transport. 
The article analyses the factor of mobility within the European Union, presents the 
development of mobility in Poland as well as defines determinants influencing its 
development. 
The system of airport links in Poland was analyzed as part of the research, taking into 
account the nature of travel, the method and the duration of the journey. 
The overall conclusion emphasizes the essential levels of mobility management: 
adjusting supply to demand and travel behaviour through the development of air 
transport passengers. 
 
Keywords: air transport, mobility management, airports, Poland. 
Introduction 
Air transport constitutes one of a few branches of the transportation system –regional, 
state, continental, and worldwide. The Polish air transportation system is an element of 
the European and worldwide transportation systems. The importance of air transport as 
a part of the worldwide transportation system is defined by the following characteristics 
of this branch: 
−
high speed and intercontinental range of the used mode of transportation 
(aircraft); 
−
the usage of natural air corridors. 
The significance of air transport as a part of the worldwide transport system results from 
the utilisation of its advantages and characteristic features for the development of 
economic, political, scientific and technological, and cultural cooperation, as well as for 
the development of tourism. 
!39

!
It must be emphasised that air transport is one of the most important European and 
worldwide economic activities and bears a significant meaning both for the economic 
development and for the progress of integration processes.  
It is assumed on the basis of the Report Current Market Outlook that by the year 2033 
the number of passenger aircrafts will increase from 20.9k in 2013 to 42.2k. In the 
segment of aircraft with a seat capacity of no more than 90, dedicated to operate on 
regional connections, their number will increase from 2620 to 2640. The number of 
narrow-body aircraft will also increase from 13.6k in 2013 up to 29.5k by 2033. In the 
segment of small wide-body aircraft (capacity between 200 and 340 passengers) their 
number will increase from 2.4k in 2013 to 5.6k by 2033, whilst in the medium segment 
(capacity between 300 and 450 passengers) the number of aircraft will rise from 1.6k to 
3.7k. In the segment of large aircraft (capacity above 400 passengers) their number will 
increase from 740 in 2013 to 790 by 2033. This means that the carriers will purchase 
36.8k new aircraft, their total value amounting to 5200bn USD, by the year 2033. 
The perspective of air transport development and its social and economic role results in 
the need to ensure that a high level of services is provided. These challenges are being 
recognised both by the carriers and operators managing the aviation infrastructure as 
well as by those authorities who dictate transport policies and mainly by chosen social 
groups.  
Aim and scope of managing passenger mobility 
The term ‘mobility’ can be used with different meanings. A ‘mobile’ person is an active, 
busy, energetic, entrepreneurial, restless, resourceful, bursting with temperament, and 
fickle person of a flexible way of thinking. The attribute of ‘mobile’ may also be used in 
connection with objects that are portable, shifting, sliding, moving, migratory, i.e. a 
telephone, a wall, a door.  
In demographics ‘mobility’ of people stands for their inclination to change their place of 
residence or work. High mobility contributes to the diminishing of the social and 
economic differences between regions. It is also highly beneficial from an economic 
point of view as it plays a part in lowering the unemployment rate of a distinct regional 
structure  
‘Mobility management’ is a term that can be encountered increasingly frequently in 
specialist literature. It can be described as a concept supporting sustainable 
development of transport. Management tools allow the demand and the behaviour of 
potential passengers to be influenced, as well as the choice of appropriate destinations 
to be examined, and also to plan, organise, coordinate and control the re-location of 
passengers and to influence the selection of  branches connected with the way in which 
people travel and reach the airport.   
Despite the fact that the issue of mobility management is broadly presented in specialist 
literature it is vital to turn our attention to two basic factors which emphasise the weight 
of the issue at hand. Sustainable transport development and skilful management of the 
supply through influencing the demand can be counted as such. 
!40

!
The determination of the mobility rate constitutes one of the mobility management tools. 
It indicates how many times an average inhabitant of a given region used air transport 
in a particular year. Table 1 presents the aforementioned rates for European countries. 
Table 1. Mobility rate for European countries in the years 2004-2013 
Source: on the basis of Eurostat 
The countries classified in the ranking can be divided into three groups. Group one – 
sparsely populated countries – they manifest high rates (above 6%). Group two – 
countries at an advanced stage of development and stabilised air traffic dynamics – 
rates from 2 to 6%. Group three – other countries with a developing air transport 
market. 
The mobility rate for Poland in the years 2008-2011 was at a level of 0.5. However, only 
in the year 2012 did it significantly rise above the previous 0.5 amounting to 0.56545. 
!41

!
Currently it is situated at a level of 0.703. Figure 1 presents the dynamics of the 
passenger mobility rate in Poland.  
Figure 1. Passenger mobility rate in air transport for Poland in the years 
2000-2014 
Source: on the basis of Eurostat 
It should be estimated that in the years 2016-2017 the rate will reach 0.8. The high 
increase in the mobility rate will be a response to the change in the way passengers 
travel, wider competition between carriers, further development of the destinations 
network, and mostly to the appropriate price of air transport services offered.  
The main destinations of passenger travel from Polish airports during three 
quarters of the year 2014. 
London was the main destination of passengers travelling from Polish airports in 2014 
(16%). Carriers transported over 2.4mln passengers to London during the period 
analyzed. Frankfurt was the second most popular destination with regards to passenger 
volume. Carriers provided services on routes connecting with Frankfurt to nearly 1mln 
passengers (6%).Oslo’s large share at 5% of the total volume of passengers should be 
highlighted. This is a result of migration and medical tourism. Figure 2 presents the 
share of  services provided to major city destinations in regular traffic in three quarters 
of 2014. 
!42

!
Figure 2. Structure of passengers serviced at Polish airports according to 
destinations in interstate regular traffic in 2014. 
Source: on the basis of data provided by the ULC 
The data testifies to the fact that the hub airports of London, Frankfurt, and Oslo 
constitute the main destinations the total share of which amounts to over ¼ of all 
destinations. At 15%  of the total, London’s share remains unchanged for a number of 
years. This is due not only to migration but also largely to the response of the carriers to 
market demand. In 2014 each Polish airport offered a connection with the capital of the 
United Kingdom, and some airports, such as i.e. Warsaw, Cracow, Gdansk, or Katowice 
even several serviced by different carriers. Table 2 presents detailed data on the 
number of serviced passengers.  
!43

!
Table 2. Number of passengers serviced at Polish airports in interstate regular 
traffic in the years 2011-2013 according to cities  
Source: ULC 
Table 3 presents the main tourist destinations of passengers leaving from Polish 
airports in the years 2010-2013. 
!44

!
Table 3. Number of passengers serviced at Polish airports in charter traffic in the 
years 2010-2013 according to country. 
Source: ULC 
Most passengers of charter flights departed for Antalya. Their volume amounted to 
387k, a 16% share of the market, which equates to a drop of 3% in comparison to the 
previous year. Another drop in passenger volume was noted on the route to Hurghada 
(a drop of 191k, 46%) and Sharm-el-Sheikh (drop of 110k, 41%). The largest growth in 
passenger volume was noted by the Greek airports: Zakynthos 64%, Kos 32%, Kerkyra 
36%, Chania 27%, Rhodes 15%, as well as by the Israeli Tel-Aviv airport – 24%. The 
change of preference with regards to the choice of destination is a consequence of 
political, economic, and social factors.  
Egypt was the main destination of charter flights departing from Polish airports – 792k 
passengers, over 254% share in the market (a growth of 157k passengers. Turkey 
came in second, despite the 14% drop in the air traffic in comparison to the year 2011. 
586k passengers departed for Turkey from Polish airports, which equates to 18% of 
!45

!
share in the market. The third most popular destination was Greece with nearly 0.5mln 
passengers; a15% share in the market (a drop from 2011). The highest dynamics was 
achieved by Thailand 187%, Ukraine 108%, and Croatia 106%. The high dynamics of 
the Ukraine destination was connected with the Football Championships – Euro 2012. 
Air-links system in the light of market research 
The overall system of passenger transportation to airports consists not only of the 
services transporting to and from the airport but also overall transportation within the 
city or region. Connections offering transportation to the airport constitute a specific kind 
of transport within agglomerations that manifest a flourishing development. In the case 
of increasing passenger volumes at the airports bus transportation is not appropriate. It 
must also be taken into account that such mode of transport is incapable of fulfilling 
travel requirements such as high level of comfort, high commercial speed, reliability, 
and the avoidance of traffic congestions. Therefore, new services based on track 
connections linking city centres with airports are a solution widely anticipated in Europe. 
In Poland such airport links between city centres and airports are offered only a in few 
Polish cities, namely Cracow, Szczecin, Lublin, and Warsaw, among others. 
Figure 3 presents the relationship between the nature of travel, point of origin from 
which the passengers are travelling to the airport, and the choice of the appropriate 
mode of transportation to the airport.  
Figure 3. Relationship between the nature of travel and the chosen mode of 
transport 
Source: on the basis of market research. 
It has to emphasised that the car is the main mode of transportation between city centre 
and airport for passengers on business trips at 75% with 45% using taxi services. 16% 
of respondents from this segment declared they travelled to the airport by train and only 
!46

!
5% - by public transport. In the case of passengers travelling on business and coming 
from 
 other parts of the catchment area, cars constitute the main mode of 
transportation,  the share of passengers travelling to the airport by car amounting to 
75%.  
A car is also the main mode of transportation between city centre and airport for those 
passengers travelling to tourist destinations. 29% declared that they undertake their 
journeys using their own mode of transport and 32% - taxi services. 39% of passengers 
used services offered by public transport. A car is also the main mode of transportation 
for the passengers of this segment who live outside of urban areas, however, the 
significant role of public transport with regards to connections between agglomerations 
has to be noted.  
Undoubtedly, regardless of the nature of their journey as whole it is still very much 
commonplace for the majority of passengers to travel to the airport by their own car or 
through use of a taxi service. Despite the large supply of public transport services 
offered there exists a strong need to manage the transport mobility of passengers by 
changing their habits connected with airport links. 
Summary 
Mobility management in air transport functions on an number of planes: 
•
adjusting the supply to the potential demand happens when the 
destination network of air travel is made more appealing and investment plans 
are realised; 
•
management of attitudes and behaviour is achieved through the 
resignation of those modes of transport which do not guarantee the fulfilment of 
the most important transport requirements: speed, comfort, and punctuality. 
Therefore, in order to follow the policies connected with mobility management in air 
transport, actions have to be taken on the following three levels: 
•
information and promotion; 
•
organisation and coordination; 
•
education and training. 
Taking into account the perspective for air traffic development in Poland it is necessary 
to undertake research into the changes in airport connectivity. 
!47

!
Issues of dual managerial roles in projects that are morphogenetic 
changes—Case studies 
Katalin Pádár 
Budapest University of Technology and Economics, Hungary  
Béla Pataki 
Budapest University of Technology and Economics, Hungary  
Zoltán Sebestyén 
Budapest University of Technology and Economics, Hungary  
Abstract 
Pádár et al. (2011) analysed the connections between roles of project management (PM) 
and change management (CM) with the aim of enabling representatives of both of the 
fields to better exploit each other’s body of knowledge. This case study analysis presents 
the application of their conceptual findings to two consultancy cases—in each of which 
technology roadmapping (TRM) was introduced at the client companies. TRM is a 
company-level strategic planning method to explore the evolution of markets, products and 
technologies and to make sure that necessary technological capabilities will be in the right 
place at the right time to achieve organizational objectives. The introduction of TRM is a 
disruptive activity and needs CM as well beside PM. Dual (project and change) managerial 
roles should have been played in both cases; however, only one of them is a positive 
example when the dual nature (both the PM and the CM side) of managerial efforts was 
understood and properly managed. The authors explain the underlying causes of success 
and failure in these cases based on the application of Pádár et al.’s (2011) conceptual 
work. 
Keywords: change management roles, change sponsor, change agent, project manager, 
case study. 
Introduction 
Several such events occur in organizational life which are projects and major changes at 
the same time. In such dual-natured cases, managers should apply both project and 
change management concepts and tools. Neglecting either of these aspects of such cases 
can cause implementation difficulties or even failures. 
The aim of this paper is to demonstrate and analyse that type of mistake when the 
management considers such a dual-natured case just as a project but not as a major 
change effort. For a recent extensive review of the conceptual literature of this mistake see 
Hornstein (2015). In this empirical paper, a negative example of this mistake will be 
examined in detail and compared briefly with a positive one, both cases taken from the 
authors’ consultancy practice. 
Theoretical background 
The literature of change management and some other related areas (e.g. psychology) 
generally makes a distinction between first-order (or morphostatic) and second-order (or 
morphogenetic) changes of systems (Levy 1986; Lyddon 1990; Mink et al. 1993; Smith 
1982; Watzlawick et al. 1974; etc.). First-order changes are adjustments that do not 
!48

!
change the system’s core. During a first-order change the system itself remains basically 
the same. That is why it is also termed morphostatic change: the morphology of the 
system is static, i.e. remains unchanged. Second-order changes on the other hand are 
those which transform the system’s very essence. During a second-order change the 
system itself undergoes a transformation. That is why it is also termed morphogenetic 
change: it generates a new morphology of the system. Morphogenetic change is called 
major change by Conner (1993, p.74): “Major change occurs when people believe they 
have lost control over some important aspect of their lives or their environment.” Change 
management is about managing second-order changes, when people feel they lose 
control over important things. 
There are projects that are second-order changes as well: these changes are unique and 
temporary (have a limited duration) and come together with a transformation in the 
system’s very essence. Reshuffling the governmental structure after an election, just as 
mergers and acquisitions in a company’s life, are good examples of second-order 
changes, which are also projects (Pádár et al. 2011). 
In such dual-natured cases project managers have to play change managerial roles as 
well. There are four distinct key roles in change management introduced by Conner: 
sponsors, agents, targets, and advocates (Conner 1993, pp.105–124; Harrington et al. 
2000, pp.53–58, 72–88, 90–93; Conner 1998, p.219), the correspondence of which to 
project management (PM) roles were examined by Pádár et al. (2011). 
Sponsors are those individuals or groups who have the power to sanction or legitimize 
change. They decide which changes will happen, communicate them to the organization 
and create an environment that enables these changes to be made. There are two types 
of sponsors: initiating and sustaining. Initiating sponsors are generally higher in the 
hierarchy than sustaining sponsors. Initiating sponsors have the power and resources to 
break from the status quo and start the change process. Their role correspond to that of 
the owner (according to Turner’s (2009) terminology) and/or the sponsor (PMI 2004; PMI 
2008; PMI 2013; OGC 2004; OGC 2009; Kerzner 2003) if one thinks of PM-related terms. 
Sustaining sponsors are close enough to the targets (see the definition of targets below) to 
maintain their focus and motivation on the change goals to ensure that the initiating 
sponsor’s directives are implemented. The role of sustaining sponsors in CM also equals 
the role of the sponsor in PM (PMI 2004; PMI 2008; PMI 2013; OGC 2004; OGC 2009; 
Kerzner 2003; Turner 2009). 
Agents are those individuals or groups who are responsible for actually making the 
change. They diagnose potential problems, develop plans to deal with these issues, and 
execute the change effectively and efficiently. Just as project managers do. (PMI 2004; 
PMI 2008; PMI 2013; OGC 2004; OGC 2009; Kerzner 2003; Turner 2009) They are part of 
the project management team 
Targets are those individuals or groups who are affected by the change, who must actually 
change. They are the focus of the change effort and play a crucial role in the success of 
the planned change. Thus, in PM terms, they are the customers/users (PMI 2004; PMI 
2008; PMI 2013) of a given project. 
Advocates are those individuals or groups who want to achieve a change but lack the 
power to sanction it—just how project champions (Kerzner 2003) also do. In most groups 
and organizational units there is someone who serves as the informal leader, whose 
!49

!
opinion is the highest-valued by the others. CM calls the informal leader of a target group 
influencing target: this person is a non-management member of the target group who 
sways the other members of the group as a result of the trust and respect that they have 
for this person. 
There are three basic forms of possible relationship types of CM roles according to Conner 
(1993, pp.107–111): linear, triangular, and square. The linear relationship is the usual 
management chain of command: the target is the subordinate of the agent, and the agent 
is the subordinate of the sponsor. In the triangular configuration the target does not report 
to the agent and they are both subordinates of the sponsor. In this situation the sponsor 
cannot delegate the formal sanctioning power to the agent who does not hold the 
necessary position in the hierarchy. The sponsor must endorse and communicate the 
change before the implementation to demonstrate that he or she does own the change 
effort. In the square structure the agent and the target report to two different sponsors, 
they do not have a common one. The agent and his or her sponsor are actually in an 
advocate’s position in this situation because they have no sanctioning power over the 
target. Informal networks are important for the agent’s sponsor in square configurations as 
well, provided that he or she wants to convince the target’s sponsor to cooperate. 
Case studies 
The nature of the cases 
The importance of being not only a project manager but also a change manager (sponsor 
or agent) whenever a project causes morphogenetic change can be illustrated with the 
following cases of technology roadmapping (TRM) introductions at two different 
companies. 
TRM is a strategic management technique to explore the evolution of markets, products 
and technologies and to make sure that necessary technological capabilities will be in the 
right place at the right time to achieve organizational objectives. (Phaal et al. 2003; Phaal 
et al. 2001; Phaal et al. 2011) Despite the name of the method, TRM is not only a tool for 
technologists but a company-level strategic planning method requiring inputs from several 
functions. For a recent overview of the literature on TRM see Carvalho et al.’s (2013) work. 
Strong commitment and ownership from senior management is vitally important for a 
successful and sustainable roadmapping initiative. TRM requires multifunctional input, it 
needs joint planning efforts of the company’s several different divisions and functions 
(marketing, technology and product development, etc.). Only a top level executive with the 
necessary authority (cp. the role of the sponsor in both CM and PM) covering all the 
organizational units to be involved can make all the participants take part in TRM. It is 
almost impossible to involve the necessary participants by somebody on a lower level of 
the organization. 
Simply ‘supporting’ TRM from the senior level is not enough: top management must own it. 
Without real ownership at the top, it is only a small group of enthusiastic people trying to 
produce a roadmap somewhere in the organization. They cannot involve the necessary 
participants, do not have enough time, resources, information, etc., and they are not 
authorized to make the necessary decisions. Top management has to decide whether they 
want to give TRM a serious test run or not. If they really want to test it, they have to initiate 
and manage the pilot TRM project personally. If they do not want to test it seriously, it is 
almost surely not worth giving a try to such an initiation at a lower level of the organization. 
!50

!
Without top-level ownership any TRM effort cannot produce serious results. Senior 
executives must be involved personally into the workshops by all means. Solely they know 
certain strategic priorities and information, and without their knowledge and guidance the 
participants can sometimes only make guesses when decisions are to be made during the 
TRM process. 
The case of company ‘A’ 
At a large service company, hereunder called company ‘A’, the ownership of TRM was on 
a lower level than it should have been as the technological department initiated the TRM 
project. Senior managers only ‘supported’ the TRM project without fully understanding its 
real nature, potential key role and significance in the strategic planning process of the 
company. They regarded it as an exclusively technological planning tool without any close 
connection with other functions of the company and without any considerable strategic 
significance. Their ignorance was partly due to the name of the method, which often 
discourages the involvement of commercial functions. 
The sponsor was the technological executive (see Figure 1, role “S1”) without the authority 
to tell members of other, non-technological functions (see Figure 1, roles “S2”, “S3”, “T2”, 
“T2”) to participate. Experts from other functions were not his subordinates so they were 
asked only informally to take part in TRM sessions—this held especially true of marketing 
people. Members of the marketing department joined the meetings only when they had 
enough time and when the technologists were able to invite them convincingly enough. 
Because of that the composition of the actual team working on the TRM project was 
always changing from session to session and we, the consultants, always had to explain 
newcomers what TRM is, what was actually going on, etc. to put them in the picture, which 
process took up sometimes even more than half an hour, while the regular participants 
naturally became bored. This all happened in spite of the fact that written handouts had 
been provided about everything. Unfortunately, it was always uncertain who would show 
up for the next meeting (if anybody) from the marketing department or from the other non-
technological functions, thus making it almost impossible to figure out whom should the 
materials be sent to. And even if they received the handouts, they almost never read them 
before the meetings as it was only an informal request from the technologists and they 
considered their participation to be a favour. 
When we interviewed a marketing executive, it turned out that he did not even know about 
the TRM project at all before our interview. He also had no idea that we were external 
consultants, he thought we were employees of the company before we gave him our 
business cards. We had to spend almost half an hour on explaining what TRM is, what we 
were doing in that project, etc., while he had altogether only one hour for the whole 
interview with us. Then it was not surprising any more at all that his subordinates were 
missing from most of the workshops. 
Consequently, in case ‘A’, the final map contained one-sidedly much more technology-
related information, which was also more, accurate and less market-related information 
thus there were more knowledge gaps left to be filled after the TRM process in the market 
dimension. 
We experienced a startling degree of secret mongering when we wanted to discuss the 
new product concepts of a division in order to make the necessary planning possible for 
the technology developments for those products. Company ‘A’ had a centralized 
!51

!
technology development department serving all their different product divisions so we went 
to that department to discuss their product and technology development plans in order to 
integrate them into the technology roadmap. They had several new product concepts 
based on both primary and secondary marketing information about consumer needs. They 
always wrote down their new product concepts in a shorter, sketchy form and in a longer, 
detailed version. They were only willing to show us the short sketches. We asked for the 
detailed ones as well but they refused to show us them in spite of the fact that we signed 
the secrecy agreement with the company. Then we asked for getting them sent to the 
central technology development department at least, but they refused even that request. 
The sponsor of the TRM project was not their boss so he was not able to get the 
necessary detailed information from them. (It also turned out that they never shared the 
longer versions with any other division nor with the central technology development 
department even though they worked on the same projects.) They operated as an isolated 
island within the organization—not sharing their ideas and information with any of the 
other divisions and central departments. 
Figure 1: The square relationship(s) of roles in company ‘B’ 
The case of company ‘B’ 
The situation was just the opposite at a middle sized manufacturing company, hereunder 
called company ‘B’. The sponsor of the TRM project was the chief executive officer (CEO) 
himself (see Figure 2, role “S”), who fully understood the significance of introducing TRM. 
!52

!
He told every function to participate and all the senior managers took part in the project as 
one of their duties not as an informal favour. The composition of the TRM team was almost 
always the same, everybody read the handouts for every session, so there was no need to 
waste time with repeating the same explanations again and again. It was clear to 
everybody what was going on and why it was important for the company. There was no 
problem with gathering ideas and information from all the relevant aspects. Even the CEO 
was present on each and every TRM meeting during the entire length of the project. The 
CEO, as the sponsor of the TRM project, appointed one of the executives, the chief quality 
officer (CQO), to be the project manager and change agent (see Figure 2, role “A”) of the 
TRM effort. It was important that the CEO made the dual nature of the TRM effort (a 
project and a potential morphogenetic change at the same time) clear for everybody, 
especially for the CQO. 
Figure 2: The triangular relationship(s) of roles in company ‘B’ 
Discussion 
This paper discusses only the CM and PM aspects of the cases above; for a TRM-related 
discussion of these two and for a similar third case see Pataki et al. (2010) and Pataki et 
al. (2013). 
Discussion of case ‘A’ 
Chief executives at company ‘A’ did not realize that the pilot TRM project is nothing less 
than the potential first step of a second-order change in their company-level strategic 
planning procedure—assuming that the result of the assessment of the pilot was going to 
be positive. They handled it as one of their numerous, usual technological development 
projects that will not cause any considerable morphogenetic changes for their company as 
!53

!
a whole. They thought that the TRM initiative is similar to any other technological 
development project and can be managed perfectly by the same middle technology 
managers as usual. But the sponsor’s (see Figure 1, role “S1”) competency was 
insufficient for such an unusual project, the potential the beginning of a company-wide 
morphogenetic change, since a huge portion of the indispensable participants, that is 
marketing people, were beyond his reach. 
The relationship between the technological and non-technological units formed a typical 
square structure (Figure 1, roles “S1”, “A-s”, “S2”, “T2”), where the ‘de jure’ sponsor was 
able to try to co-operate with the non-technological side as a ‘de facto’ advocate only. He 
had only two agents (“A-s”), both of them within his technological unit, none of them in 
non-technological functions or in other different divisions. That is why the reluctant and 
random participation of marketing and some other non-technological functions was 
impossible to be remedied. The secret mongering of the division was also impossible to 
change into a normal information exchange because of the same ‘de facto’ advocate role. 
These are typical problems of the square structure described by Conner (1993), even 
though from a PM point of view there was no serious problem with the design and the 
members of the project team. 
At company ‘A’, only a higher ranking initiating sponsor would have been able to both 
make participation of every function become their official duty and obligate every division 
to provide all the necessary information. The sponsor of this TRM project (see Figure 1, 
role “S1”) should have played the sustaining sponsor’s role with the authority of the 
initiating sponsor behind him. He also should have had committed agents in every division 
and functional unit. It would have been necessary to build up the whole CM role structure, 
not only the usual PM ones. 
Discussion of case ‘B’ 
At company ‘B’ it was clear for everybody that the TRM initiative is not only a project but it 
would potentially change the strategic planning process of the company as a whole. The 
CEO as the sponsor of the TRM effort (see Figure 2, role “S”) declared the aim of the 
project at the very first executive meeting, and after that we, their counsellors, explained 
them what TRM was all about. The CEO also announced that the CQO would be the 
project manager and change agent of the initiative (see Figure 2, role “A”). Since the CQO 
was at the same organizational level of hierarchy as the other C-suite executives, the 
relationship between her and the other functions outside the quality management 
department was a typical triangular role structure (see Figure 2, roles “S”, “A”, “T1”; “S”, 
“A”, “T2” .. “S”, “A”, “Tn”—each set forming a triangle). In spite of not being the other 
executives’ superior, the CQO was able to manage the TRM effort because the sponsor 
was the CEO with all the necessary formal authority. The CEO’s participation on every 
TRM meeting cogently demonstrated the importance of the initiative, and reinforced the 
seriousness of his sponsorship as well as the power of the CQO as the project manager 
and agent at the same time. This structure worked well at company ‘B’ in the same way as 
Conner (1993) suggested managing such a situation. 
Conclusion 
The comparison of case ‘A’ and ‘B’ clearly demonstrates the difference between realizing 
and not realizing the (potential) second-order change nature of a project. Without realizing 
this dual nature, a project managerial role structure that is working well for managing a 
!54

!
usual project that does not cause any morphogenetic change will likely to be proven 
inadequate for managing not only the project but also the accompanying (potential) 
change. The targets accept the usual project managerial authority if the project does not 
cause any second-order change because they are familiar with such projects and consider 
them as normal parts of their jobs and organizational life in general. But they not 
necessarily accept the same person’s authority when it comes to introducing a 
morphogenetic change since it is not part of the usual operation of the organization. If top 
management does not understand the dual nature, that is a project being a morphogenetic 
change at the same time, it can happen that the initiative will eventually lack the sponsor 
with the necessary authority—just like in the case of company ‘A’. If the sponsor is on a 
lower level than needed, a problematic square structure can take shape when both the ‘de 
jure’ sponsor and the agent are only ‘de facto’ advocates. 
The linear structure is the least problematic one, of course, but a triangular structure can 
also work well with strong sponsorship from the top as the case of company ‘B’ 
demonstrated it. It is vitally important to realize the dual nature of the case and to have a 
sponsor in a position, which is high enough in the organizational hierarchy, to have the 
authority across the whole area of the planned change. 
But why is it not always realized that some projects are second-order changes as well? 
Because the type of the same change can be different for different participants and 
stakeholders. A change that is a morphogenetic one for a low level organizational unit can 
only be a morphostatic one for the senior management team. For instance, when an 
employee retires and a new worker is recruited and have to be trained and fitted into the 
team or when a new machine is implemented instead of a discarded old one and the 
operators have to learn how to handle and maintain it, it is obviously a second-order 
change for the operator team in both cases, and also for the new employee in the first 
example. The operator team members’ working life will be different from that point on. But 
workforce fluctuation and machinery modernization is an absolutely normal, usual part of 
the routine operation of an organization from the senior management’s perspective. Middle 
and junior managers manage such cases, while the senior managers’ working life remains 
the same. It is absolutely right to manage such cases this way. But the TRM initiatives 
described above were not such cases: they were potentially morphogenetic changes for 
every organizational level of the two companies, not only for lower levels. At company ‘B’, 
the real nature of the TRM initiative was perfectly understood so their efforts were 
managed in the right way. At company ‘A’, the senior management was under the delusion 
that the TRM project is just a usual first-order change from their perspective, while it can 
be a second-order one for lower organizational levels, as usual when technologists 
implement a new method in their work. This misconception was the root cause of their 
mistake and is one that should be avoided. 
References 
Carvalho, M.M., Fleury, A. & Lopes, A.P., 2013. An overview of the literature on technology 
roadmapping (TRM): Contributions and trends. Technological Forecasting and Social 
Change, 80(7), pp.1418–1437. 
Conner, D.R., 1998. Leading at the edge of chaos. How to create the nimble organization, 
New York, NY: Wiley. 
!55

!
Conner, D.R., 1993. Managing at the speed of change: How resilient managers succeed 
and prosper while others fail, New York, NY: Villard Books. 
Harrington, H.J., Conner, D.R. & Horney, N.L., 2000. Project Change Management, New 
York, NY: McGraw-Hill. 
Hornstein, H.A., 2015. The integration of project management and organizational change 
management is now a necessity. International Journal of Project Management, 33(2), pp.
291–298. 
Kerzner, H.R., 2003. Project Management: A Systems Approach to Planning, Scheduling, 
and Controlling, Wiley. 
Levy, A., 1986. Second-order planned change: Definition and conceptualization. 
Organizational Dynamics, 15(1), pp.5–23. 
Lyddon, W.J., 1990. First- and Second-Order Change: Implications for Rationalist and 
Constructivist Cognitive Therapies. Journal of Counseling & Development, 69(2), pp.122–
127. 
Mink, O.G. et al., 1993. Change at Work: A Comprehensive Management Process for 
Transforming Organizations, San Francisco: Jossey-Bass. 
OGC, 2004. Managing Successful Projects with PRINCE2 Third., Great Britain: The 
Stationery Office. 
OGC, 2009. Managing Successful Projects with PRINCE2 Fifth ed., United Kingdom: The 
Stationery Office. 
Pádár, K., Pataki, B. & Sebestyén, Z., 2011. A comparative analysis of stakeholder and 
role theories in project management and change management. International Journal of 
Management Cases, 13(Special issue of the 8th International CIRCLE Conference), pp.
252–260. 
Pataki, B., Bíró-Szigeti, S. & Szalkai, Z., 2013. Company-level technology roadmapping. In 
B. Ran, ed. The Dark Side of Technological Innovation. Charlotte, North Carolina: 
Information Age Publishing, pp. 83–109. 
Pataki, B., Szalkai, Z. & Bíró-Szigeti, S., 2010. Some organizational issues of technology 
roadmapping experienced in Hungary. Periodica Polytechnica, Social and Management 
Sciences, 18(1), pp.31–38. 
Phaal, R. et al., 2003. Starting-Up Roadmapping Fast. IEEE Engineering Management 
Review, 31(3), pp.54–60. 
Phaal, R., Farrukh, C. & Probert, D., 2011. Roadmaping for strategy and innovation: 
Aligning technology and markets in a dynamic world, Cambridge, UK: Univerity of 
Cambridge, Institute for Manufacturing. 
!56

!
Phaal, R., Farrukh, C. & Probert, D., 2001. T-Plan: Fast Start to Technology Roadmapping 
- planning your route to success, Cambridge, UK: Univerity of Cambridge, Institute for 
Manufacturing. 
PMI, 2004. A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBoK® Guide) 
Third Ed., Pennsylvania: Project Management Institute. 
PMI, 2008. A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBoK® Guide) 
Fourth Ed., Pennsylvania: Project Management Institute, Inc. 
PMI, 2013. A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBoK® Guide) Fifth 
Ed., Pennsylvania: Project Management Institute. 
Smith, K.K., 1982. Philosophical problems in thinking about organizational change. In P. S. 
Goodman, ed. Change in organizations: new perspectives on theory, research, and 
practice. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, pp. 316–374. 
Turner, J.R., 2009. The handbook of project-based management: Leading strategic 
change in organizations Third., McGraw-Hill. 
Watzlawick, P., Weakland, J.H. & Fisch, R., 1974. Change: Principles of Problem 
Formation and Problem Resolution, Oxford, England: W. W. Norton. 
!57

!
Behaviour research methods in doctor - patient relationship in terms of 
access to the online health information in Poland 
Magdalena Soboń 
University of Szczecin, Poland 
Abstract 
Doctor’s power in the relation with patients results most of all from his medical knowledge 
compared to the patient. So, when the patient has an access to health information, it can 
be assumed that difference in the level of knowledge will be reduced and the power of the 
patient will be larger. The online available health information changes this relationship 
because of enhancing patient’s knowledge and empowerment. 
The objective of this article is to show how to construct a conceptual model of the doctor – 
patient relationship in terms of access to the online health information in Poland. This 
model will be built based on criticism of a paternalistic model resulting reorientation 
towards growth of patient autonomy and building of a partnership model. 
Research methodology consists of four steps: 
1. 
Conceptualization - critical review and analysis of literature. 
2. 
Operationalization  - construction of research questionnaires addressed to doctors 
and patients using variables from the integrated behaviour models. 
3. 
Implementation - primary researches using face-to-face surveys on a nationwide 
sample of 300-500 doctors and 1000-1200 patients randomly selected using multi-stage 
random selection. 
4. 
Analysis and inference - statistical treatment using the available methods in the form 
of factor analysis, the assessment of the reliability of the scale, structural equation models. 
Outcomes of this research will be the model of doctor - patients relationship in terms of 
access to the online health information. It will explain the discussed relationship in the 
contemporary reality of the medical services market and factors determine the behaviour 
of both sides of the relationship. It will also allow to formulate recommendations for action 
to improve this relationship for better treatment effects. 
Keywords: behaviour, patient, doctor, relationship, health information 
Introduction 
In the past years and decades a lot of parts of our life have been affected in one or 
another way by the internet. This electronic medium has caused complete reconfiguration 
of communication, exchange of information and consequently relations between people. 
Many researchers (among others: Castells, 2000; Bennett, 2003; Silverstone, 2005; 
Bakardjieva, 2005) stress it's huge and increasing impact on the contemporary society, 
which becomes network society. 
Interpersonal relationships were and are affected by the online world (Nie and Erbring, 
2002; Nie and Hillygus, 2002; Sanders, Field, Diego and Kaplan, 2000; Shklovski, Kraut 
and Rainie, 2004; Behrens et al, 2007; Boase et al, 2006; Hamton and Wellman, 2000; 
Katz et al, 2001) and effects have been described by a lot of authors. According to them 
!58

!
the internet is used for contacts with other people, facilitates communication, expands and 
deepens friendships. 
Because the internet have changed and is still changing relations between people, the 
question is whether the internet will continue to permeate more aspects of the live whether 
there are some limitation. Maybe there are same relationships, which aren’t substantially 
affected by the internet or which can’t be properly shaped by the internet. It goes about 
relationships marked by connections based on existential matters and urgency rather than 
feelings or sympathy. Relationship worth considering in this context is the relationship 
doctor - patient. It is not only characterized by urgency and existential matters but also by 
intimacy, confidentiality and trust. Such characteristics are more closely associated to 
offline rather than online reality. 
Specific of the doctor - patient relationship 
To clarify how the internet impacts on present-day relationship doctor – patient, it is 
necessary to know the specifics of this relationship. Particularly important are following 
topics: 
1. 
theories on the relationship between physician and patient in general, 
2. 
asymmetry in the knowledge and power in this relationship, 
3. 
the role of the information, 
4. 
the impact of online health information on this relation. 
The relationship between doctors and patients is widely studied topic in the literature. In 
general it is presumed that the doctor is more powerful than the patient. Power of the 
doctor appears in terms of advice and medical treatment. As Broom (2005) describes, the 
doctor’s power results from his medical knowledge compared to the patient. The patient 
looking for help has no option but to trust the doctor, his diagnosis and recommendations. 
Such situation is due to unequal access to information (Getzen, 2000, p 147) resulting 
asymmetry of information and knowledge (Korzeniowski, 2007). Moreover, a lack of 
medical knowledge in combination with urgent need for medical care enhances perceived 
doctor’s power (Hall et al, 2001). On the other hand the doctor’s power can be limited. It is 
possible if the patient is more active in the relationship. Furthermore the patient can 
influence the doctor (Stoeckle, 1987), leading to negotiation and conflicts. 
Well-known and popular in medical practice paternalistic model (Parson, 1964; Szasz and 
Hollender, 195; Freidson, 1960; Waitzkin 1983; Navarro, 1976), which is dominated by 
authoritarian approach to the patient and limited autonomy of the patient (Ostrowska, 
2006), is replaced in twenty-first century by partnership model (Cassef, 1986), which is 
based on the patient’s independence and freedom to make decision regarding treatment 
(Wroński et al, 2009). 
Patients don’t have to be inferior actors in this situation (Haley, 1963) and can cooperate 
with doctors (Szasz and Hollender, 1956). This cooperation should improve efficient health 
outcomes through greater patient’s involvement. In this context appears the concept of 
patient’s empowerment. It means having and sharing power over a range of decisions 
such as provider and treatment choice and sources of power and ways to increase 
patient’s power, refers to patient education, legal rights and others (Angelmar, Berman, 
2007, p 141). The World Health Organization defines empowerment as ‘a process through 
which people gain greater control over decisions and actions affecting their health’ (WHO, 
!59

!
1998). Important is that the patient and the doctor should be complementary to each other 
because the common task is to restore the health to the patient (Stoeckle 1987, p 134). 
Although ‘the doctor – patient encounters are in fact negotiations, the doctor is always one 
up in influencing the patient in the kind of illness or treatment’ (Scheff, 1968). 
To understand the process of interaction, both sides of this relationship should be seen in 
full context, not only social (Bloom 1963) but also economic. Authors, especially in the field 
of marketing, economics and management in healthcare, redefine the relationship in the 
direction of patient being comparable to consumer seeking medical aid of doctor as a 
provider (e.g. Reeder, 1972; Szeszycka, 1999; Eisenbach and Kohler, 2002; Anderson et 
al, 2003; Bukowska-Piestrzyńska, 2008; Kotler, Shalowitz, Stevens, 2011; Nowotarska-
Romaniak, 2013). In such case a medical practice is understanding as a service (Czerw, 
2010). According to Gelinger’s idea of five services subsectors, healthcare is a kind of 
services focused on development of individual’s personality (in Rudawska, 2009, p 5). 
Patients become consumers because of the popularization of the consumerism concept in 
healthcare. Consumerism in healthcare is based on the idea that individuals should have 
greater control over decisions affecting their healthcare. It changes the practice of 
medicine relying on patients – consumers being willing and able to exercise choice about 
their doctors in the same way as they do about other services. In those days, most of 
patients want to decide how and when they should undergo treatment, and they hesitate to 
question a medical decision. 
Despite partially conflicting arguments on the role of the doctor and patient in their 
relationship, the fact that medicine requires very specific and accurate knowledge can’t be 
negated. Patients and doctors have a different level of knowledge and medicine is one of 
these sciences which create and maintain a ‘social monopoly of expertise and 
knowledge’ (Turner, 1990, p 47). Thus, doctor’s knowledge advantage in a field of 
specialization is a source of the doctor’s power. 
Nevertheless, expert knowledge isn’t the only one knowledge occurs in the discusses 
relationship. There is also patient’s knowledge, which can be called lay knowledge. It 
‘differs from expert knowledge in the sense that it has an ontological purpose’ (Popay et al, 
2003, p 404) and is attached to experiences. According to Pearce (1993), own 
experiences and cultural factors create the knowledge in individuals and construct medical 
“truth”. In the health context lay knowledge is rooted in the experiences of illness (Williams 
and Popay, 1994). Patient’s inherent knowledge of their own symptoms and the 
experience of living with a disease that physicians lack. Even with the sophisticated 
diagnostic tools available today, physicians operate at a severe disadvantage without the 
patients’ input. (Bensing et al, 2000). 
Lay knowledge doesn’t matter in traditional model of relationship patient - doctor, but in the 
contemporary, post-modern society characterized by the loss of trust in expert systems 
and of deference to expert authority (Giddens, 1990), patient’s knowledge would challenge 
the science-based expert knowledge of medical professionals. The distance between the 
doctor’s and patient’s knowledge and experiences may lead to patient’s active search for 
health information. Consumers have ample opportunities to become well informed 
regarding their conditions (Rudawska, 2010, p 11). Healthcare is one of the fields in which 
increasing volumes of information are available to increasingly large numbers of people. 
Being available over distances, anytime and from everywhere, the internet facilitates 
patients better and easier access to information about health conditions, diagnosis and 
!60

!
treatments (Ball and Lillis, 2001; Mittman and Cain, 2001). They are able to find on the 
internet countless websites covering topics that are in some way connected with questions 
relating to healthcare and illness (Soboń, 2013). 
According to Anderson (2004), there are four main factors that contribute to the shift in the 
role of the patient from passive recipient to active consumer of health information. 
Advances in medicine lead to unrealistic expectations on the part of patients, the highly 
specialized health professionals are perceived by patients as being impersonal and aloof, 
patients are often left with a sense of frustration and dissatisfaction with the information 
provided during time constraint consultation and health professionals may lag behind the 
patient in terms of familiarity with the use of the internet, so patients often leave the 
consultation feeling they themselves are better able to seek information about their health 
condition and treatment options. 
Paper objective 
The objective of this article is to show how to construct a conceptual model of the doctor – 
patient relationship in terms of access to the online health information in Poland. This 
model will be built based on criticism of a paternalistic model (Parson, Szasz and 
Hollender, Freidson, Waitzkin, Navarro) resulting reorientation towards growth of patient 
autonomy and building of a partnership model. The online available health information 
changes this relationship because of enhancing patient’s knowledge and empowerment. 
The research project will determine the significance of the e-information and its impact on 
discussed relationship resulting from a change in patients behaviour before going to the 
doctor, during a consultation and after an appointment from patients and doctors 
perspective. In this case it will be used Technology Acceptance Model (TAM), Health Belief 
Model (HBM), Theory of Planned Behaviour and Health Information Seeking Behaviour 
(HISB) models. According to the Cassef’s consumer model both sides of the examining 
relation are seen as participants of the medical services market. Patient is a client and 
doctor is a provider of medical services in the area of primary healthcare. 
Resulting from the main objective of the research specific objectives are as follows: 
1. 
To examine patients in the area of:  
- 
access to the internet, including skills for use, 
- 
motivations for using the internet as a source of health information, 
- 
methods of searching for online health information by patients, 
- 
barriers to use it, 
- 
trust and credibility related to internet-based health information. 
2. 
To explore how the online health information educates patients, enhancing their 
knowledge about diseases and health management and how it influences their behaviour 
before, during and after an appointment. 
3. 
To examine how doctors perceive the using of online health information by patients. 
4. 
To analyse the impact of the health e-information on the physician – patient perceived 
relationship from the doctor’s and patient’s perspective. 
The main scientific hypothesis of the research is, that health information available online 
affects the doctor – patient perceived institutional relationship helping to reduce 
!61

!
information asymmetry in the studied relationship. It is made based on the opinion, that 
doctor’s power in the relation with patients results most of all from his medical knowledge 
compared to the patient. So, when the patient has an access to health information, it can 
be assumed that difference in the level of knowledge will be reduced and the power of the 
patient will be larger. 
Specific hypothesis are following: 
1) 
Patient’s behaviour in the field of searching of online health information is affected 
first of all by perceived usefulness and perceived ease of use. 
2) 
The way of using of found health information and its impact on patient behaviour 
before, during and after an appointment with doctor depends on the characteristics and 
attitudes of patients. 
3) 
The impact of online health information has more positive than negative effect on the 
physician – patient perceived institutional relationship and depends on the physician's 
reaction and communication skills. 
Work plan 
The subject of the research is a procedure aiming ultimately to answers to questions: 
1. 
How does the model of perceived institutional relationship doctor – patient in terms of 
access to electronic health information look like? 
2. 
How strong is the influence of the online health information on decision making by 
patients with regard to medical issues? 
Having access to health information through online services gives rise to concrete types of 
behaviour towards health professionals and health systems, namely making suggestions 
or queries on diagnosis or treatment, changing the use of medicine without consulting a 
health professional and making, cancelling or changing a medical appointment (Santana 
et al, 2011). Doctors sometimes see patients coming with found online health information 
as an attack on their authority and professional knowledge. Nonetheless online health 
information has more positive than negative impact on the discussed relationship. 
Furthermore, thei educates patients about their health problems and benefits in terms of 
improved self-care (Herwaarden et al, 2007), enhance patient’s satisfaction (Krupat et al, 
2000), improve health status (Engers et al, 2008) and reduce healthcare expenditure 
(Department of Health, 2007). Kassirer (2000) believes that physicians will be drawn into a 
new “partnership” with patients who are more responsible for their own care. Roter (2000) 
notes that improved patient outcomes have been documented in studies where patients 
took the initiative for obtaining their own information. Braddock et al (1999) propose 
shifting to a more balanced, two-way dialogue between patients and their physicians to 
encourage the “informed participation” of patients in making important clinical decisions. 
In response to the ‘internet informed’ patient, the patient – doctor relationship can become 
the health professional-centred relationship with the health professional exerting patient’s 
opinion, the patient-centred relationship where patient and health professional collaborate 
in obtaining and analysing the internet information or the relationship with doctor, who 
acknowledges the patient’s ‘search for knowledge’ and guides the patient to reliable and 
!62

!
accurate information (McMulian, 2006). In such relationships e-patient should be seen as 
educated, enabled, empowered, engaged and equal. 
The research questions, which emerge from the literature and conceptual framework are 
following: 
− 
What is the frequency and the scope for using the internet to search for health 
information by patients? 
− 
How are attitudes, behaviour, motivations and barriers for using the internet by 
patients as a source of health information? 
− 
What does affect patient’s behaviour in the field of searching of online health 
information? 
− 
How does the internet affect the decisions taken by the patient on how to deal in 
connection with the observed symptoms (e.g. taking self-medication, the resignation of the 
visit, the delay or acceleration of doctor visits)? 
− 
To what extend and in what way does online health information affect patient’s power 
in relationship doctor – patient? 
− 
What are key factors determining effect of use of the online found health information? 
− 
How does information affect (facilitate or hinder) the communication between doctor 
and patient during the visit? 
− 
What impact have online information on perceived relation between physician and 
patient from the doctor’s and patient’s perspective? 
The knowledge about current behaviour of patients and doctors should point how to 
improve examined relationship, clinical outcomes and restore the health to the patient in 
the fastest possible way in the new decision-making doctor - patient relationship model. 
The element directly related to this is to measure the impact of e- health information on 
relationship doctor – patient taking into account the bipolarity approach – the perspective 
of the doctor and the patient, whose behaviour changes under the influence of the online 
health information found and used by patient. 
The research process is divided into several stages corresponding with the specific 
objectives listed in research project objectives. 
The first stage (theoretical) involves the study of literature published in Poland and abroad 
in the field of health economics, healthcare management, marketing of health services and 
sociology. The first task of this research stage is the identification of background of the 
undertaken methodological considerations, which is definition of the nature and 
mechanisms of doctor – patient relationship and determinants influencing it in different 
countries, focusing on Poland. The aim of the diagnosis of this issue is providing a basis 
for the construction of the path of conduct in the assessment of the central category of this 
project: the doctor – patient perceived relationship in terms of access to online health 
information, roles played by the patient and doctor and changes in the behaviour of market 
participants in examined relationship. The second task of this research stage includes the 
!63

!
interpretation and development of online health information, its quality, methods of 
measurement and impact of this information on doctor - patient relationship in the light of 
the earlier achievements in sociology, economic sciences and international experience. 
The two parts of the first stage of research are aimed at the conceptualization of the basic 
categories of the undertaken issues, selection and define the indicators and variables 
which will be used in the next stages of research. 
The second stage (methodical) covers building of two questionnaires. The first 
questionnaire is addressed to doctors with questions about general characteristics, found 
and brought by patients online health information, its impact on behaviour of doctors and 
patients and their perceived relationship in terms of access to online health information. 
The second questionnaire is addressed to patients with questions about general 
characteristics, behaviour in seeking online health information, effects of information’s 
searching, utilization of found information and its impact on perceived relations with 
doctors. The primary objective of this research stage is to create precise research tools to 
get the appropriate information, which will allow the researcher to do necessary analysis in 
subsequent stages of research. 
The third stage (empirical) includes two groups of research - both quantitative. The 
purpose of the first round of quantitative survey of doctors is to collect data from 
purposefully selected doctors about all areas defined in the earlier stages of the study in 
the form of face-to-face, online and auditorium surveys. The purpose of the second round 
of quantitative survey of patients is to collect data from purposefully selected patients 
about all areas defined in the earlier stages of the study in the form of Computer Assisted 
Telephone Interview supplemented by face-to-face survey. The fundamental objective of 
this stage of the project is to examine patient’s behaviour in seeking information, the 
utilization of information by patients and to evaluate impact of found health information on 
relation between doctors and patients from doctors’ and patients’ perspective. 
The fourth stage (statistical) involves submission of the empirical material to the 
appropriate statistical treatment in accordance with the description of methods contained 
in the methodological part of the application. Development of the accumulated source 
material will be made using available statistical package – Statistica. The applied methods 
include among others building model of new relationship doctor – patient in terms of 
access to electronic health information gives an answer to the question about how the 
internet impacts on studied relationship.  
The primary objective of this research stage is to know how the online health information 
impact and changes relationships doctor – patients in the Polish healthcare system, what 
determinants impact on it and to build the model of this relationship. 
Methodology  
Approach to the main scientific problems, the objectives and the research methods for 
their achieving in the proposed research presents Figure no.1. 
  
!64

!
Figure 1. The proposed underlying scientific methodology. 
Source: Self-study. 
At the first stage of the research (conceptualization) will be used national and international 
literature. The following free access database will be searched: the Libraries of the 
University of Szczecin (Polish-language books), as well as international, English-language 
online bases including: ProQuest, EBSCO, Web of Science, Emerald, Springer Link, 
JSTOR, ViewsWire, Science Direct, Wiley online Library, Prol, Science, Nature.com, 
GMID, EMIS, Oxford University Press. 
At the second stage of the study (operationalization) it will be constructed research 
questionnaires addressed to doctors and patients. The first one will comprise the following 
units related to doctors: 
- 
general characteristics, 
- 
quality and reliability of online health information, 
- 
benefits and harms of using by patients online health information, 
- 
actions taken by empowered patients, 
- 
doctor’s behaviour in the context of the presented information. 
!65

!
The second one will comprise the following units related to patients: 
- 
general characteristics, 
- 
variables in Yun integrated model (Kim and Park, 2012, p 4) built from Technology 
Acceptance Model, Health Belief Model, theory reasoned action and Theory of Planned 
Behaviour (health concerns, perceived susceptibility, perceived seriousness, subjective 
health-related knowledge, internet self-efficacy, perceived ease of use, perceived 
usefulness, perceived credibility, attitude, behavioural intention) and HISB (Health 
Information Seeking Behaviour) (Lambert and Loiselle, 2007), 
- 
the frequency and extent of use of the internet to search health information, 
motivations for using the internet and finding appropriate information, 
- 
actions taken in connection with the health information found on the internet with 
particular regard to changes in patient behaviour before, during and after an appointment 
with doctor, 
- 
impact of found health information on perceived dimensions of doctor – patient 
relationship 
At the third stage of the research (implementation) will be performed primary research of 
doctors and patients using a form of questionnaire developed for each of the treatment 
groups (direct survey). Sample selection is a multi-stage random selection, i.e.: 
- 
In the first stage will be made the direct sampling of districts. They will be randomly 
selected from the alphabetical list of districts available in the form of list of identifiers and 
names in the number of the units of territorial division of the country (GUS, 2010). 
- 
In the second stage will be made the direct sampling of health entities. Within districts 
will be randomly selected healthcare entities providing services in the field of primary 
healthcare in accordance with the act “ustawa o działalności leczniczej” (Dz.U. 2011 Nr 
112 poz. 654) from the list available on the websites of regional branches of the National 
Health Fund. 
All primary care physicians working in randomly selected entities and patients using the 
services of doctors in randomly selected subjects will be examined during the period of 
direct research (about 2 weeks). 
A) The survey of doctors addressed only to primary care physicians target group results 
from the specific of contacts with this kind of doctors, which are the first stage of treatment 
and susceptible to actions taken by the patients searching health information on the 
internet. Sample size including 300-500 GP doctors working in units offering primary care 
(Churchil, 2002, p 562) will be asked using a questionnaire as needed, constructed based 
first of all on the Likert scale, due to the use in the study of structural equation modelling, 
allowing for testing hypotheses about the high possibility of the complexity of the 
relationship between variables. Range research covers the whole Poland because the aim 
of the research is to examine doctors in different regions of the country. 
B) The survey of patients addressed to adult patients target group results from ability to 
decision making in the health area reserved for adults. Sample size including 1,000-1,200 
patients using the services of doctors in sampled healthcare entities based on sampling 
strategy aims at maximizing the likelihood of capturing a variety of views on the topic, so 
that a variation in the sample is guaranteed (Churchil, 2002, p 562), will be asked using a 
questionnaire as needed, constructed based first of all on the Likert scale, due to the use 
in the study of structural equation modelling, allowing for testing hypotheses about the 
!66

!
high possibility of the complexity of the relationship between variables. Range research 
covers the whole Poland because the aim of the research is to examine the whole 
population of adult patients of the country. 
Thanks to this surveys there will be collected required data to conduct further analysis. 
At the fourth stage of the study (statistical treatment), statistical methods will be used to 
develop the collected source material. It is planned to use, according to the needs, of: 
- factor analysis, 
- assessment of scale reliability, 
- structural equation models. 
Listed statistical analyses will be accomplished using statistical programs, among others 
Statistica and SPSS. The intention of their use is to develop who is the typical online 
health information user, which determinants affect the patterns of behaviour in searching 
for online health information and using it by patients and finally to build the model of the 
doctor – patient perceived relationship in terms of access to the online health information 
in Poland. 
Conclusions 
The research is a comprehensive approach to the issue of the online health information 
and its impact on behaviour of patients and doctors. In many studies are usually examined 
some elements of patients’ behaviour in terms of access to on line health information, 
neglecting assessment of the situation from the perspective of doctors. 
This research concept give an opportunity to study the behaviour of the Polish patients 
during the whole process of acquiring and using information and doctor’s reaction to online 
health information found and brought by the patient. It will be examine not only the 
frequency and extent of use of the internet to search health information but first of all 
attitudes and behavioural intention of patients seeking this information, actions taken in 
connection with the health information found on the internet and impact of found by 
patients health information on perceived dimensions of doctor – patient relationship from 
the perspective of patients and doctors. This approach using factor analysis, assessment 
of scale reliability and structural equation models gives the researcher the ability to find 
connections between information and the relationship doctor – patient. This will link all 
elements of the process of acquiring and using information and its impact on the perceived 
relationship doctor – patient. 
Outcomes of the realization of the research will be theoretical effect relates to 
development of the model of perceived relationship doctor – patients in terms of access to 
online health information. This model will explain what is the relationship between the 
doctors and patients in the contemporary reality of the medical services market and what 
factors determine the behaviour of both sides of the relationship in connection with the use 
of patient health information from the internet. This model will link general characteristics 
of patient and other factors determining looking for health information on the internet with 
behavioural intention and patient’s attitudes and actions taken in connection with the found 
health information with particular emphasis on the impact of this information on behaviour 
in relationship doctor – patient. 
!67

!
On the basis of the collected research material it will be known pattern of behaviour of 
patients and doctors and their reactions to available online health information, what will 
allow researcher to recommend actions to improve relation between doctor and patient in 
the reality of empowered patient. Answer to the question about the direction in which 
evolves the relationship will the basis for giving tips on how to increase the effects of 
treatment. 
References 
Anderson J. G. (2004). Consumers of e-health: patterns of use and barriers. Sociology 
Science Computer Rev; 22, pp 242–8. 
Anderson, J. G., Rainey, M. R., Eysenbach, G. (2003). The Impact of CyberHealthcare on 
the Physician–Patient Relationship. Journal of Medical Systems, 27(1), pp 67-84. 
Angelmar R., Berman, Ph. C. (2007). Patient empowerment and efficient health outcomes. 
In: Cox P. (Ed.), Financing sustainable healthcare in Europe: new approaches for new 
outcomes; Conclusions from a collaborative investigation into contentious areas of 
healthcare, pp 139-160. http://www.sitra.fi/julkaisut/muut/The_Cox_Report.pdf?
download=Download+pdf, (referred on 23.05.2014). 
Bakardjieva, M. (2005). Internet society: the Internet in everyday life. London: Sage 
Publications 
Ball, M. J., Lillis, J. (2001). E-health: transforming the physician/patient relationship. 
International Journal of Medical Informatics, 61(1), pp 1-10. 
Behrens, D., Glavin, P., Wellman, B. (2007). Connected lives North – Chapleau. Report on 
the introduction of high-speed Internet to a Northern Ontario rural community. http://
www.chass.utoronto.ca/~wellman/netlab/PUBLICATIONS/_frames.html, (referred on 
20.04.2014). 
Bennett, W.L. (2003). New media power: the Internet and global activism. In: N. Couldry & 
J. Curran (Eds.), Contesting media power: alternative media in a network world. Lanham 
Maryland: Rowman & Littlefield 
Bensing, J. M., Verhaak, P.F. M., Van Dulmen, A. M., Visser, A. P. (2000). Communication: 
the royal pathway to patient-centered medicine. Patient Education and Counseling, Jan; 
39(1), pp 1–3 
Bloom, S. W. (1963). The Doctor and his patient: a sociological interpretation. New York: 
Sage Publications. 
Boase, J., Horrigan, J., B., Wellman, B., Rainie, L. (2006). The strength of Internet ties. 
The Internet and email aid users in maintaining their social networks and provide pathways 
to help when people face big decisions. http://www.pewinternet.org/files/old-media/Files/
Reports/2006/PIP_Internet_ties.pdf.pdf (referred on 1.04.2014). 
Braddock, Ch. III, Edwards, K. A., Hasenberg, N. M., Laidley T. L., Levinson W. (1999). 
Informed decision making in outpatient practice: time to get back to basics. The Journal of 
the American Medical Association  December 22/29; 282(24): pp 2313–20. 
!68

!
Broom, A. (2005). Medical specialists’ accounts of the impact of the Internet on the doctor/
patient relationship. Health, 9(3), pp 319-338. 
Bukowska-Piestrzyńska, A. (2008). Marketing usług zdrowotnych. Od budowania 
wizerunku placówki do zadowolenia klientów. Warszawa: CeDeWu. 
Castells, M. (2000). Materials for an exploratory theory of the network society. British 
Journal of Sociology, 51(1), pp 5-24. 
Christmann S. (2013). The impact of online health information on the doctor-patient 
relationship. Findings from a qualitative study. In: Cammaerts, B., Anstead, N. (Eds.), 
MEDIA@LSE Electronic MSc Dissertation Series, London School of Economics and 
Political Science. http://www.lse.ac.uk/collections/media@lse/mediaWorkingPapers/, 
(referred on 10.02.2014). 
Churchil G. A. (2002). Badania marketingowe. Podstawy metodologiczne. Warszawa: 
PWN. 
Czerw, A. (Ed.) (2010). Marketing w ochronie zdrowia. Warszawa: Diffin. 
Department of Health (2007). Research evidence on the effectiveness of self care support. 
London: DoH, http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3510773/, (referred on 
10.02.2014). 
Engers, A., Jellema, P., Wensing, M., van der Windt, D. A., Grol, R., van Tulder, M. W. 
(2008) Individual patient education for low back pain. Cochrane Database Syst Rev; 
(1):CD004057. 
Eisenbach, G., Köhler, C. (2002). How Do Consumers Search For And Appraise Health 
Information On The World Wide Web? Qualitative Study Using Focus Groups, Usability 
Tests, And In-Depth Interviews. BMJ: British Medical Journal, 324(7337), pp 573-577. 
Freidson, E. (1960). Client control and medical practice. AJoS, 65,4, pp 374-382. 
Getzen, T. (2000). Ekonomika zdrowia. Warszawa: PWN. 
Giddens, A. (1990). The consequences of modernity. Cambridge: Polity in association with 
Blackwell. 
GUS (2010). Wykaz identyfikatorów i nazw jednostek podziału terytorialnego kraju. 
Warszawa. http://stat.gov.pl/cps/rde/xbcr/bip/BIP_oz_wykaz_identyfikatorow.pdf, (referred 
on 3.06.2014). 
Haley, J. (1963). Strategies of Psychotherapy. New York: Grune & Stratton. 
Hall, M. A., Dugan, E., Zheng, B., & Mishra, A. K. (2001). Trust in Physicians and Medical 
Institutions: What Is It, Can It Be Measured, and Does It Matter? The Milbank Quarterly, 
79(4), pp 613-639. 
!69

!
Hampton, K., Wellman, B. (2000). Examining community in the digital neighborhood: Early 
results from Canada’s wired suburb. In: T. Ishida, K. K. Isbister (Eds.), Digital cities: 
Technologies, experiences, and future perspectives (pp.194-208). Berlin: Springer Verlag. 
Herwaarden, C. L., Partidge, M. R., et al (2007). Self-management education for patients 
with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Cochrane Database Syst Rev;(4):CD002990. 
http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/14651858.CD002990/abstract?
deniedAccessCustomisedMessage=&userIsAuthenticated=false, (referred on 3.05.2014). 
Kassirer, J. P. (2000). Patients, physicians and the Internet. Health Affairs November/
December;19(6): pp 115–23. 
Katz, J. E., Rice, R., Aspden, P. (2001). The Internet, 1995–2000: Access, civic 
involvement, and social interaction. http://arxiv.org/html/cs/0109032 (referred on 
25.03.2014). 
Kim, J., Park, E-A. (2012). Development of a Health Information Technology Acceptance 
Model Using Consumers’ Health Behavior Intention. J Med Internet Res;14(5):e133. http://
www.jmir.org/2012/5/e133/, (referred on 25.05.2014). 
Korzeniowski, P. (2007). Asymetria informacji usług zdrowotnych. In: Kawerska K. (Ed.), 
Studia i Prace Kolegium Zarządzania i Finansów SGH nr 78. Warszawa: SGH, pp 
147-155. 
Kotler Ph., Shalowitz J., Stewens R. (2011). Marketing strategiczny w opiece zdrowotnej. 
Warszawa: Wolters Kluwer. 
Krupat, E., Fancey, M., Cleary, P. D. (2000). Information and its impact on satisfaction 
among surgical patients. Soc Sci Med; 51: pp 1817-25. 
Lambert, S. D., Loiselle, C. G. (2007). Health information seeking behavior. Qual Health 
Res.;17(8), pp 1006-19. 
McMullan, M. (2006). Patients using the Internet to obtain health information: How this 
affects the patient–health professional relationship. Patient Education and Counseling 63, 
pp 24–28. 
Mittman, R., Cain, M. (2001). The Future of the Internet in Health Care: A Five-Year 
Forecast. In R. E. Rice & J. E. Katz (Eds.), The Internet and Health Communication: 
Experiences and Expectations. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications. 
Navarro, V. (1976). Medicine Under Capitalism. New York: Prodist.  
Nie, N. H., Erbring, L. (2002). Interent and society: A preliminary report. It & Society, 1(1), 
pp 275–83. 
Nie, N. H., Hillygus, D. S. (2002). The impact of Internet use on sociability: Time-diary 
findings. It & Society, 1(1), pp 1–20. 
Nowotarska-Romaniak, B. (2013). Marketing usług zdrowotnych. Warszawa: Wolters 
Kluwer. 
!70

!
Ostrowska A. (2006). Paternalizm czy partnerstwo? Relacje między pacjentami a 
lekarzami w Europie. w: Domański H., Ostrowska A., Sztabiński B. (Ed.) W środku 
Europy? Wyniki Europejskiego Sondażu Społecznego. Warszawa: IFIS PAN, pp 185-200. 
Parson, T. (1964). The social system. London: Collier-MacMillan Limited. 
Popay, J., Williams, G., Thomas, C., & Gatrell, A. (2003). Theorizing Inequalities in Health. 
The Place of Lay Knowledge. In: R. Hofrichter (Ed.), Health and Social Justice. Politics, 
Ideology, and Inequity in the Distribution of Disease. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass. 
Reeder, L. G. (1972). The Patient-Client as a Consumer: Some Observations on the 
Changing Professional-Client Relationship. Journal of Health and Social Behavior, 13(4), 
pp 406-412. 
Roter, D. (2000). The enduring and evolving nature of the patient-physician relationship. 
Patient Education and Counseling January; 39(1), pp 5–15. 
Rudawska I. (2009) (Ed.) Usługi w gospodarce rynkowej. Warszawa: PWE. 
Rudawska, I. (2010). E-pacjent na rynku usług medycznych. Marketing i Rynek, 11, pp 
8-15. 
Sanders, C. E., Field, T. M., Diego, M., Kaplan, M. (2000). The relationships of internet use 
to depression and social isolation among adolescents. Adolescence, 35, pp 237–242. 
Santana S., Lausen B., Bujnowska-Fedak M., Chronaki Ch. E., Prokosch H-U., Wynn R. 
(2011). Informed citizen and empowered citizen in health: results from an European 
survey. BMC Family Practice 12:20. http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2296/12/20, 
(referred on 3.04.2014). 
Scheff, T.J (1968). Negotiating Reality: Motes on Power in the Assessment of 
Responsibility', Soc. Problems, Vol. 16, No. 1. 
Shklovski, I., Kraut, R., Rainie, L. (2004). The Internet and social participation: Contrasting 
cross-sectional and longitudinal analyses. Journal of Computer Mediated Communication, 
10(1). http://jcmc.indiana.edu/vol10/issue1/shklovski_kraut.html, (referred on 3.04.2014). 
Silverstone, E. (2005). The sociology of mediation and communication. In C. Calhoun, C. 
Rojek & B. S. Turner (Eds), the SAGE handbook of sociology (pp 188-207). London: Sage. 
Soboń, M. (2013), Online communication in the healthcare system in Poland. Actual 
Problems of Economics, Scientific Economic Journal, Ukraine, 11 (149), pp 512-522. 
Stoeckle, J. D. (Ed.). (1987). Encounters between patients and doctors. Cambridge Mass: 
MIT Press. 
Szasz, T. S., & Hollender, M. H. (1956). A Contribution to the Philosophy of Medicine: The 
Basic Models of the Doctor-Patient Relationship. AMA Archives of Internal Medicine, 97, 
pp 585-592. 
Szeszycka, I. (1999). Pacjent klientem. Marketing w Praktyce, 6, pp 53-54. 
!71

!
Turner, B. S. (1995). Medical Power and Social Knowledge. London: Sage Publications. 
Ustawa o działalności leczniczej. Dz.U. 2011 Nr 112 poz. 654. 
Waitzkin, H. (1983). Technology, health costs and the structure of private profit. The 
second Sickness: Contraditions of capitalist health care. New York: The Free Press.  
WHO (1998). Health Promotion Glossary. Geneva: World Health Organization. 
Williams, G., Popay, J. (1994). Lay knowledge and the privilege of experience. In: Gabe, 
J., Kelleher, D., Williams, G. (Eds.), Challenging Medicine. London: Routledge. 
Wroński K., Bocian R., Depta A., Cywiński J., Dziki A. (2009). Opinie pacjentów na temat 
modelu paternalistycznego w relacji lekarz – pacjent. Prawne aspekty autonomii pacjenta 
w opiece zdrowotnej. Journal of Oncology, 59, 4, pp 266-273. 
!72

!
The integration of e-learning into strategies of German-speaking 
universities– a literature survey 
Laura Müller 
Justus-Liebig-University of Giessen, Germany 
Abstract 
The Bologna-Declaration of 1999 as well as the Prague Communiqué of 2001 created a 
massive improvement of e-learning projects in universities. Today, the prestigious 
funding programs have produced a high number of content. However, these programs 
did not lead to a lasting acceptance of e-learning and also did not create a necessary 
change in the structure of German-speaking universities. Until now, we can identify only 
very few projects where the deployment of new media created an abiding change in 
university’s culture and structure. Most of the e-learning projects are isolated 
applications, based on a self-generated initiative of some highly committed teachers, 
whose outreach does not enable a stable anchoring within the structure and culture of 
university landscape. The question is why the single application of e-learning seems to 
work at universities, but not the integrated implementation. This paper presents an 
overview of the current status of implemented e-learning strategies and the realisation 
of e-learning offerings in German-speaking universities. In this context, some 
problematic issues of e-learning in universities will be addressed, followed by a 
research overview of current e-learning strategy integration and implementation. The 
aim of this paper is to analyse why a thorough integration and implementation of e-
learning fails in the university’s organisational structure. To obtain a complete and 
lasting implementation the e-learning process has to be understood as a key 
management responsibility. Therefore, a detailed organisational concept with specific 
guidelines to coordinating staff, technique and tasks inside the process of e-learning is 
necessary.  
Key Words: E-learning –Strategic planning – University – Procedure model for e-
learning – Implementation of e-learning with ITIL® and ISO® 
Introduction 
At the beginning of the 21st century different funding programs have been introduced 
for the use of e-learning at German-speaking universities. In 2003, it could be observed 
that new media are not fully integrated in university’s culture and structure but are rather 
seen as a supplement of existing teaching methods (Holten and Nittel, 2010, p19). The 
aim of this paper is to identify, if this problem still exists at German-speaking 
universities. Moreover, research identified a lack of e-learning acceptance and 
understanding on the authorised management level of universities as an explanation 
why e-learning is not integrated in the organisational structure of universities. With 
regard to this, the Office of Technology Assessment of the German Bundestag identifies 
an insufficient support from university boards. Furthermore, they claim an unadjusted 
infrastructure and lack of strategies for e-learning implementation at German-speaking 
universities (Revermann, 2006, p 8). These considerations suggest that the problem of 
an isolated solution can be deduced to the unreadiness of the university board to 
integrate e-learning into the university strategy. But also more ambitious university 
boards are faced with problems by implementing e-learning (Germ and Mandl, 2009, p 
275). Getto (2013, pp 183-185) requires the development of university-specific 
!73

!
arrangements to incorporate e-learning in the specific organisational structures at 
universities, too.  
This paper focuses on the complex issues of functional, organisational and 
technological implementation of e-learning at universities. A study by the University of 
Hamburg shows that e-learning is already a part of German university’s teaching 
programs, but far from daily routine (Multimedia Kontor Hamburg, 2004, p 1). The aim 
of this paper is therefore to analyse why a lasting implementation of e-learning into the 
organisational structure of universities fails. Handke and Schäfer explain this failure with 
the lack of a commonly accepted concept of e-learning integration at universities (2012, 
p 6). Because of this lack a problematical structure has now been established. 
Problems arise from the organisational separation in functional, technological and 
didactical areas. Many universities established centralised support facilities whose tasks 
or functions are mainly specialised on key technological competencies. These 
competencies can be described as (among others) the setup and maintenance of e-
learning platforms, maintenance and provision of specific hardware (server, computer 
labs etc.) and the organisation and support of e-Assessments. Functional and didactical 
competencies that are required for the creation of e-learning content are only held by 
teachers. Under the given separation of competencies, teachers do have neither the 
know-how nor the capacity to develop e-learning offerings. Simultaneously, the support 
facilities do not have the didactical or functional competencies. One explanation for the 
lack of lasting integration of e-learning at universities is the separation of functional, 
technological and didactical competencies (Handke and Schäfer, 2012, pp 7-9). 
Following this argumentation, an organisational concept is necessary that combines the 
single competencies. This does not necessarily mean a centralisation of the 
competencies but a useful concept to create and favour cross-departmental e-learning 
offerings. However, a centralised provision and maintenance of the e-learning 
infrastructure could be useful with regard to technology. A vital part of such a concept 
would be a consensus on the functional and didactical level of the e-learning design that 
offers enough freedom for individualised solutions.  
The paper provides an overview of existing concepts and methods for the 
implementation of e-learning at universities. Challenges the implementation might face 
are strategy formulation, conception and realisation as well as quality assurance. Germ 
and Mandl identify the appropriate strategic development, the appropriate realisation as 
well as the quality assurance and development as the three essential problems in e-
learning implementation (2009, p 275). This paper focuses on the first two problem 
areas and their current relevance. Are they still persisting or are there models which 
could solve the appropriate strategic development and the appropriate realisation of e-
learning at universities? The third problem of quality assurance and further development 
should not be discussed in this paper, because quality assurance is a downstream 
problem. First, an overview of the current research in appropriate strategic development 
will be given, followed by an overview of the appropriate realisation of e-learning at 
German-speaking universities.  
Integration and implementation of lasting e-learning strategies at universities 
The necessity of e-learning strategies at universities 
A major problem hindering the lasting implementation of e-learning at German-speaking 
universities is the lack of appropriate strategies (Germ and Mandl, 2009, p 275). 
!74

!
Reinmann identified e-learning as one of the main strategic challenges for the 
development of universities and not as a temporary phenomenon. However, only few 
German-speaking universities were able to integrate a lasting e-learning on a strategic 
base successfully in the past (2005, p 6). If universities do not establish e-learning 
within their strategies, this might result in problems in the near future. E-learning 2.0 is 
generally independent of a technological infrastructure provided by the universities. As 
result of that, independent education initiatives can be formed. These education 
initiatives consist of independently working teachers and students and can result in a 
loss of control of apprenticeship at universities (Carstensen, 2009, p 259), which 
reflects the mentioned future problem. Summarising, it can be noted that the initial 
impulse for a lasting integration of e-learning has to be done through the 
implementation of e-learning into university strategies and organisations. Moreover, the 
question arises how much e-learning has to be integrated in strategy and organisation 
of each university. Concerning this question, Euler and Seufert identify four types of 
strategies, which have attained a considerable prominence in the German-speaking 
literature. The strategies depend on the innovation direction (outward vs. inward 
perspective) and the innovation focus (optimisation vs. strategic change; 2005, pp 
51-54).  
The four resulting strategies are the strategy of professionalization, the flexible strategy, 
the reform strategy and the commercial strategy (see Figure 1) (Euler and Seufert, 
2005, pp 51-54).  
The strategy of professionalization considers the use of e-learning as potential of 
educational modernisation in general, whereas the strategy of flexibility focuses on 
individualisation and orientation towards the needs of education offerings with the 
support of e-learning. Both strategies are aimed at an increase of the existing course 
portfolio and differ primarily in their direction of innovation. The reform strategy is to 
insert e-learning as impulse for change in education and to shape teaching and learning 
cultures in a proactive way. The commercial strategy goes even further in using 
possible e-learning market potentials in trainings and generates additional sources of 
income for universities (Euler and Seufert, 2005, pp 51-52).  
An alternative approach categorises e-learning strategies based on their proportion on 
digitalisation of apprenticeship. Bremer defines the following three categories of e-
learning strategies: Concept of enrichment, integration concept and virtualisation 
concept. Following these strategies, increasing digitalisation of apprenticeship can be 
observed, starting with a simple integration of presence apprenticeship by 
accompanying materials online (concept of enrichment), over a combination of 
presence and online sessions (integration concept) up to exclusively online 
apprenticeship (virtualisation concept; Bremer, 2004, pp 11-12).  
This alternative categorisation of e-learning strategies provides the opportunity to 
integrate e-learning into the strategy and organisation to an individually selectable 
degree. A lasting implementation of e-learning requires university-wide changes in 
culture and structure. These changes include a long-term and complex concept, 
realisation and lasting continuation that should not be underestimated with regard to 
financial and personal resources (Germ and Mandl, 2009, p 279). Given to the 
complexity of e-learning integration, it is necessary to consider the responsibilities, 
management structures and processes on all organisational levels of the university 
(university, department and project; Kleimann und Wannemacher, 2005, pp 4-5). The 
!75

!
selection of an appropriate strategy is only the first step of the implementation process. 
This step is followed by adapting the strategy to the specific needs of the university. 
How the appropriate development of e-learning strategies can take place is described in 
the scheme of Kleimann and Wannemacher in figure 2 (2005, p 4). For this the authors 
aligned to the basic approaches of strategic management theory.   
The strategy development of Kleimann and Wannemacher is one of many approaches 
offered in academic literature. This scheme exemplifies that sheer project management 
offers freedom to universities and their e-learning implementation process. It is 
necessary to point out how e-learning can be integrated into the university system. 
Furthermore, it is important to describe which specific changes in organisation and 
structure have to be done, how the (IT-) infrastructure has to be adjusted and which 
kind of consulting can be used to ensure that e-learning is anchored on all 
organisational levels. By issuing concrete instructions that provide information on what 
has to be done to develop a strategy. All relevant organisational and technical areas can 
already be taken into consideration during the strategy development stage, and all 
affected employees can be identified and motivated. So far, no satisfying solution has 
been identified, though.  
In the following section, this paper presents an overview of existing models and 
concepts. The following models deal with the solution of the second problem, the 
appropriate realisation of e-learning.  
Implementation concepts of e-learning strategies at universities 
The implementation of e-learning has to follow a top down approach (Getto, 2013, p 
183). E-learning integration at universities is incomparable with enterprises because of 
the organisational structures differ significantly. Enterprises are traditionally managed by 
a single authority that is supported by different control systems (Getto, 2013, p 54), 
which allows a top-down approach. Contrastively, most university departments work to 
a large degree on an independent basis. Organisation in ,loosely coupled systems’ 
results in a limited authority of the university board regarding the realisation of 
innovations in teaching, like e-learning (Getto, 2013, p 54). In particular, the self-
determination of university teachers in teaching design is to be emphasised. The 
teacher’s liberty in choosing their methods and content of teaching is grounded in the 
German Higher Education Framework Act (Hochschulrahmengesetz) 
(Bundesministerium der Justiz, 2007, §4 (3)). This kind of freedom is why a bottom-up 
approach should to be taken into consideration, besides the top-down approach. The 
employees charged with creation of e-learning offerings need special incentives to get 
motivated. The creation of e-learning offerings is seen as hindering their career by 
university teachers. The creation of e-learning offerings involves an additional workload, 
which is often not appropriately honoured by colleagues and supervisors (Pfeiffer, 
Sindler and Kopp, 2005, p 49). In addition to intrinsic incentives of university teachers 
concerning their career planning, monetary incentives should also be considered. At the 
department of economics at Justus-Liebig-University of Giessen in Germany, for 
example, there are no additional financial resources for e-learning expenditures. In 
general, university departments receive a performance-based funding allocation 
(leistungsorientierte Mittelverteilung, LOM) by the federal state (Getto, 2013, p 83). 
Getto points out that the LOM-calculation considers only very few key performance 
indicators to create a transparent calculation. Neither apprenticeship nor innovations in 
teaching like e-learning affect the LOM. Regarding the scope of this paper the given 
!76

!
brief description should be sufficient to underline the importance of the problem of 
incentive systems at universities.  
In summary, alongside strategical considerations also bottom-up approaches have to be 
developed to identify intrinsic and monetary incentives for the offering of lasting e-
learning by the self-sufficient departments and university teachers (Getto, 2013, p 183). 
According to the mentioned reasons, the models for the realisation of e-learning at 
universities are using a combination of top-down and bottom-up approaches. 
Gradual implementation of e-learning by using six project stages 
Arnold et al (2013, p 306) adhere to this fundamental idea and developed a process for 
the implementation, which combines the e-learning strategy by the university board 
(top-down approach) with the e-learning approaches and projects at the departments 
(bottom-up approach). This process of e-learning implementation should be realised 
according to the following six project stages (Arnold, et al, 2013, pp 398-399): 
- 
Stage 1: Development of a centre of excellence (as a central advice 
centre for coordination and creation of e-learning offerings, in the technological 
as well as in the functional area). 
- 
Stage 2: Development of competencies (concerning the content 
development as well as the realisation and evaluation of e-learning offerings 
designed by teachers). 
- 
Stage 3: Conceptualisation of didactics (to didactically produce and 
conceptualise the e-learning offerings). 
- 
Stage 4: Construction of an infrastructure (to provide and conduct the 
technical infrastructure). 
- 
Stage 5: Implementation of a project management (to ensure the 
development, the continuous operations and to evaluate the achievements of 
current e-learning projects). 
- 
Stage 6: Conceptualisation of quality management (regarding the media in 
use, the operation processes and the current level of integration of e-learning in 
current teaching). 
The shown process seems to be encompassing at first sight, it considers organisational, 
technological as well as personnel aspects. What is lacking, though, is the 
consideration of an incentive system. The structure of organisation at universities 
provides extensive freedom in research and apprenticeship to university teachers. 
Without a working incentives system – regardless of the fully formulated e-learning 
strategy – e-learning will only be implemented by few committed university teachers, 
many will probably not be willing to shoulder the additional workload. Furthermore, this 
process is divided into roughly designed project stages. These provide a wide range for 
interpretation for the universities involved. The model does not specify in which areas 
(e.g. entry, basics or deepening) or field of study the use of e-learning appears 
reasonable, for example. Also the design of the shown process in project stages could 
be criticised: a project is defined by a temporal limitation with a fixed start and end date 
(Krüger, 2013, p 4). The lasting integration of e-learning in university’s daily routine is no 
project following this definition. The implementation of e-learning to university’s daily 
routine cannot be done in project structures but by developing strong structures and 
processes. 
!77

!
Model of lasting e-learning innovations in academic teaching 
The model of Seufert (2008, pp 500-501) is more detailed and considers the strategical 
implementation as well as single e-learning projects and addresses special conditions 
at individual universities (see figure 3). This model is split into four categories that again 
are divided into 30 sub-categories. The realisation of these four categories is influenced 
externally by three conditions (characteristics of university, environment of university 
and properties of involved), defined by the fixed goal of lasting e-learning innovations in 
academic teaching. 
This comprehensive visualisation reveals what needs to be considered to establish e-
learning at universities. The model pictures which fields have to be implemented and 
which areas have to be considered in detail. Occasionally, even instructions are given; 
e.g. that centralised and de-centralised support structures should be built up to integrate 
e-learning systems into the infrastructure. In contrast to the model of Arnold et al, this 
starting point leaves only little space for interpretation but even in this model specific 
treatment instructions are missing. Following the example of the support structure, it 
could be scrutinised how the tasks should be distributed between the central and the 
local support centres, or how the single units should be integrated into the university’s 
organisational structure. This model was developed in Seufert’s habilitation treatise at 
the University of St. Gallen. The University of St. Gallen is one of the ,lighthouses’ in the 
area of e-learning at German-speaking universities. Therefore, it is not surprising that 
the model is very comprehensive, but it probably never was eligible for providing best 
practice examples for other universities. The model was not developed to be used as a 
best practice example that is generally accepted, the absence of specific treatment 
instructions may reflect the reason for that. 
E-learning implementation with ITIL® 
Other models attempt to phrase specific treatment instructions based on common 
frameworks or standards (e.g. ITIL®; Information Technology Infrastructure Library, 
ISO®; International Organisation of Standardisation). Schulmeister et al investigated the 
lasting integration of e-learning at universities from the perspective of business 
information systems. In their opinion, the provision of e-learning offerings is interpreted 
as an IT-service. They have identified the organisational and technological base as a 
fundamental condition for lasting e-learning. In accordance, their model recommends 
the orientation based on the IT-service management of ITIL® for the integration of e-
learning at universities (Schulmeister, et al, 2008, p 40).  
Treating e-learning offers as IT-Services and the high relevance of the technological 
area is often no significant part in other models, even though this position should not be 
dismissed. One disadvantage of using ITIL® for the integration of e-learning at 
universities, though, can be seen in the lack of recommendations regarding the 
organisational structure (Victor and Günther, 2005, p 19). Moreover, the reducing e-
learning offerings to IT-services means neglecting the role of didactics, that is equally 
important for the development of e-learning offerings. The application of ITIL® is 
reasonable with regard to the technological organisation of e-learning; however this is 
not sufficient to establish e-learning at university, as didactical, functional and 
organisational factors play equally important roles 
!78

!
The Rostock model of systematic development of modular e-learning offerings (ROME) 
The Rostock model of systematic development of modular e-learning offerings 
(Rostocker Modell zur systematischen Entwicklung modularer e-learning-Angebote 
(ROME)) combines all aspects of the development process, from planning to realisation 
and evaluation (Hambach, 2008, pp 51-55). ROME is based on the approach of 
systems engineering. The procedure model is based on a general accepted norm: DIN 
PAS 1032-1:2004 which was approved and international published as ISO/IEC 
19796-1:2005 (Hambach, 2008, pp 51-55). This norm identifies and describes planning, 
development and implementation of educational processes and educational offerings in 
consideration of e-learning (DIN PAS 1032-1, 2004). The procedure model ROME is 
divided into six phases that again are divided into stages. A role model to describe the 
tasks and requirements of the respective roles as well as a resource collection and an 
artefact collection are further elements of ROME. The resource collection summarises 
all methods, tools and auxiliary devices used. The artefact collection documents the 
results of the various phases or stages (Hambach, 2008, pp 61-65). ROME’s phases 
and stages can be summarised schematically as follows in figure 4. 
The procedure model deals with content, method and materials of teaching and 
learning, evaluation, technological realisation and with the organisation of e-learning 
offerings. This all-embracing view on the process of development of e-learning offerings 
in addition to a model that is based on a common norm offers a stable basis for the 
lasting integration of e-learning offerings into an organisation. The procedure model 
aspires to be a universal model, therefore it does not go into detail with regard to the 
organisational structure of universities. The identified roles in the model can be 
transferred to the main actors at universities. However, the actors in enterprises differ 
regarding their incentives and motivation to operate e-learning. A role model aiming at 
the university structure needs an incentive management system to motivate university 
teachers to offer e-learning. This is crucial since their reputation depends primarily on 
research findings and not on the design of apprenticeship, for the mentioned reasons. 
The problem of the realisation of e-learning at universities that was presented initially 
could be solved by the presented models only in some areas (the view on e-learning as 
an IT-service and the associated solution by the application of ITIL®) or by single 
universities, e.g. University of St. Gallen or University of Rostock. These models are not 
generally applicable for different reasons as they only consider some issues of lasting 
integration of e-learning at German-speaking universities. 
Conclusion and outlook 
The aim of this paper was to analyse why the complete implementation of e-learning at 
German-speaking universities is problematic. Three essential problems have been 
identified in the course of the literature evaluation: lasting strategic development, lasting 
realisation and quality assurance and further development. Based on the first two 
problems this paper gives an overview over different models and concepts, which 
propose solutions for the mentioned problems. Concerning the lasting strategic 
development a satisfying model which can give specific suggestions that goes beyond 
project management meditations could not be found. Specific suggestions for the 
process of strategy development are necessary to meet the demands of such a project 
in the specific case of a university. With regard to the demand-oriented realisation as a 
problem of lasting e-learning implementation no model could be found that could act as 
!79

!
a best practice guide in future for other universities. These models are not generally 
applicable for different reasons; they consider only a specific success of e-learning at 
German-speaking universities.  
Concludingly, a concept for integration of e-learning into universities’ teaching routine, 
that is generally accepted and adapted to the specific requirements the organisational 
structure or the development of a special incentive management system at universities 
is still to be found (Handke and Schäfer, 2012, p 6). Getto (2013, pp 183-185) requires 
the development of university-specific arrangements to incorporate e-learning in the 
specific organisational structures at universities, too. The necessity of developing such 
a concept is still high. This paper has shown that a concept to implement e-learning 
lasting should be an action guide that is customised to the special arrangements and 
obstacles of German-speaking universities. 
References 
Arnold, P., Kilian, L., Thillosen, A. and Zimmer, G., 2013. Handbuch E-Learning – 
Lehren und Lernen mit digitalen Medien, 3rd ed. Bielefeld: Bertelsmann Verlag. 
Baumgartner, P., 2007. Medida-Prix - Quo vadis? Gedanken zur zukünftigen 
Ausrichtung des mediendidaktischen Hochschulpreises. In: E-Learning: Strategische 
Implementierungen und Studieneingang. Graz, Verlag Forum Neue Medien. pp 68-81. 
Bremer, C., 2004. E-Learning Strategien als Spannungsfeld für Hochschulentwicklung, 
Kompetenzansätze und Anreizsysteme. In: C. Bremer and K. Kohl, E-Learning 
Strategien – E-Learning Kompetenzen an Hochschulen. Bielefeld: Bertelsmann Verlag. 
pp 9-30. 
Bundesministerium der Justiz, 2007. Hochschulrahmengesetz (HRG) in der Fassung 
der Bekanntmachung vom 19. Januar 1999 (BGBl. I S. 18), das zuletzt durch Artikel 2 
des Gesetzes vom 12. April 2007 (BGBl. I S. 506) geändert worden ist [pdf]. Available 
at: <http://www.gesetze-im-internet.de/bundesrecht/hrg/gesamt.pdf> [Accessed 30 
January 2015]. 
Carstensen, D., 2009. Wandel und E-Learning in Hochschulen – überraschende 
Transformationsmuster. In: U. Dittler, J. Krameritsch, N. Nistor, C. Schwarz and A. 
Thillosen, 2009. E-Learning: Eine Zwischenbilanz - Kritischer Rückblick als Basis eines 
Aufbruchs. Münster. pp 249-262. 
DIN PAS 1032-1:2004, 2004. Aus- und Weiterbildung unter besonderer 
Berücksichtigung von eLearning – Teil 1: Referenzmodell für Qualitätsmanagement und 
Qualitätssicherung – Planung, Entwicklung, Durchführung und Evaluation von 
Bildungsprozessen und Bildungsangeboten. Berlin: Beuth Verlag GmbH. 
Euler, D. and Seufert, S., 2005. Nachhaltigkeit von eLearning Innovationen: Fallstudien 
zu Implementierungsstrategien von eLearning als Innovationen an Hochschulen 
[pdf].Available at: <http://www.e-teaching.org/projekt/fallstudien/2005-01-seufert-euler-
nachhaltigkeit-elearning.pdf> [Accessed 22 January 2015]. 
!80

!
Fischer, A. and Breitner, A., 2006. Prozessorientiertes IT-Service-Management an 
Hochschulen. In: E. S. Seiler, S. Kälin and C. Sengstag, Volume 38 E-Learning – 
alltagstaugliche Innovation? Münster: Waxmann Verlag GmbH. Pp 56-67. 
Germ, M. and Mandl, H., 2009. Warum scheitert die nachhaltige Implementation von E-
Learning in der Hochschule? In: U. Dittler, J. Krameritsch, N. Nistor, C. Schwarz and A. 
Thillosen, 2009. E-Learning: Eine Zwischenbilanz - Kritischer Rückblick als Basis eines 
Aufbruchs. Münster. pp 175-290. 
Getto, B., 2013. Anreize für E-Learning – Eine Untersuchung zur nachhaltigen 
Verankerung von Lehrinnovationen an Hochschulen. Glückstadt: Werner Hülsbusch 
Verlag. 
Hambach, S., 2008. Systematische Entwicklung von E-Learning-Angeboten – 
Vorgehensmodell und Entwicklungsumgebung. Rostock: Fraunhofer IRB Verlag. 
Handke, J. and Schäfer, A. M., 2012. E-Learning, E-Teaching und E-Assessment in der 
Hochschullehre – Eine Anleitung. München: Oldenbourg Wissenschaftsverlag GmbH. 
Holten, R. and Nittel, D., 2010. E-Learning in Hochschule und Weiterbildung – 
Einsatzchancen und Erfahrungen, Bielefeld: Bertelsmann Verlag. 
Hoppe, G., 2005. Entwicklung strategischer Einsatzkonzepte für E-Learning in 
Hochschulen. In: M. H. Breitner, G. Hoppe, 2005. E-Learning – Einsatzkonzepte und 
Geschäftsmodelle. Heidelberg: Physica-Verlag, pp 255-272. 
Kleimann, B. and Wannemacher, K., 2005. E-Learning-Strategien deutscher 
Universitäten – Fallbeispiele aus der Hochschulpraxis. Hochschul-Informations-System 
GmbH, B4 / 2005, [online]. Available at: <http://www.his-he.de/pdf/pub_kib/
kib200504.pdf> [Accessed 23 January 2015]. 
Krüger, C., 2014. Projekte effektiver planen – Schnelle Erfolge durch bessere 
Planungsqualität, Hamburg: Diplomica Verlag GmbH. 
Multimedia Kontor Hamburg, 2004. E-Learning an deutschen Hochschulen – 
Trends2004 [pdf]: Available at: <https://www.mmkh.de/fileadmin/dokumente/
Publikationen/Studie_Elearning_Trends_2004_final.pdf> [Accessed 22 January 2015].  
Pfeiffer, T., Sindler, A., Kopp, M., E-Learning als Leistung der Hochschule – Sechs 
Aufgaben der Organisation. Medien in der Wissenschaft, 32. pp 7-93. 
Reinmann, G., 2005. Lernort Universität? E-Learning im Schnittfeld von Strategie und 
Kultur. University Augsburg Arbeitsbericht No 10, Augsburg. 
Revermann, C., 2006. eLearning in Forschung, Lehre und Weiterbildung [pdf] 
Karlsruhe: Büro und Technikfolgenabschätzung beim Deutschen Bundestag. Available 
at: <https://www.tab-beim-bundestag.de/de/pdf/publikationen/berichte/TAB-
Arbeitsbericht-ab107.pdf> [Accessed 20 January 2015]. 
!81

!
Schulmeister, R., Mayrberger, K., Breitner, A., Fischer, A.. Hofmann, J. and Vogel, M., 
2008. Didaktik und IT-Service-Management für Hochschulen – Referenzrahmen zur 
Qualitätssicherung und –entwicklung von eLearning-Angeboten. Bremen and Hamburg 
[online] Available at: <http://www.mmkh.de/fileadmin/dokumente/Publikationen/
Referenzrahmen_Qualitaetssicherung_elearning_April09.pdf> [Accessed 26 January 
2015]. 
Seufert, S., 2008. Innovationsorientiertes Bildungsmanagement - Hochschulentwicklung 
durch Sicherung der Nachhaltigkeit von eLearning. Wiesbaden: VS Verlag. 
Victor, F. and Günther, H., 2005.Optimiertes IT-Management mit ITIL – So steigern Sie 
die Leistung Ihrer Organisation – Einführung, Vorgehen, Beispiele, Ed. 2., Wiesbaden: 
Friedr. Vieweg & Sohn Verlag / GWV Fachverlage GmbH. 
!82

