REGA: Real-Time Emotion, Gender,
Age Detection Using CNN—A Review
Dibya jyoti Sharma1, Sachin Dutta2, Dr. Dibya jyoti Bora3
1,2Student, School of Computing Sciences(IT), The Assam Kaziranga University, Jorhat, Assam ,India
3 Assistant Professor, School of Computing Sciences(IT) ,The Assam Kaziranga University, Jorhat, Assam, India
1cs19mscit002@kazirangauniversity.in, 2cs19mscit004@kazirangauniversity.in, 3dibyajyotibora@kazirangauniversity.in
Abstract—In  this paper we describe a methodology and an
algorithm to estimate the real-time age, gender, and emotion of
a human by analyzing of face images on a webcam.  Here we
discuss the CNN based architecture to design a real-time model.
Emotion, gender and age detection of facial images in webcam
play an important role in many applications like forensics, se-
curity control, data analysis,  video observation and human-
computer interaction. In this paper we present some method &
techniques  such  as  PCA,LBP,  SVM,  VIOLA-JONES,  HOG
which will directly or indirectly used to recognize human emo-
tion, gender and age detection in various conditions.
Index Terms—Face detection, Emotion detection,Gender and
age classifications, Convolutional Neural Network (CNN)
I. INTRODUCTION
NE OF the most active areas in facial technology is fa-
cial features such as age, gender and emotion recogni-
tion. A lot of research has been done using deep learning
methods such as ANN, CNN to determine age, gender esti-
mation and emotion detection. Human Facial expression de-
picts human feelings. Human tends to change feelings, per-
haps due to their mental or health conditions, in the course
of  lifespan.  Although people  are  brimming with various
feelings, modern psychology characterizes six basic facial
expressions: happiness, sadness, surprise, fear, disgust and
anger as widespread feelings. Facial muscles exercise to as-
sist with perceiving individual’s feelings. Fundamental facial
consideration  features are eyebrows, mouth, nose and eyes.
An  architecture based on  the  convolution Neural network
(CNN) proposed here for age, gender and emotion classifica-
tion. This is one of the well known deep artificial neural net-
works. Convolutional Neural Network based design models
are broadly utilized in classification task because of their re-
markable execution in facial investigation and emotion de-
tection. The Convolutional Neural Network includes Feature
extraction  which  extracts  Features  corresponding  to  age,
gender, emotion. Furthermore CNN includes Feature classi-
fication  which  classifies facial images into the  correct  age
group, gender and emotion such as happy, sad, angry, neu-
tral.
O
(I) Gender and Age Classification
Gender and age classification is the facial features that
play a significant role in social interaction. Age and gender
classification in face images play important task in  much
savvy application, for example access control, low autho-
rization, visual observation and so on.
(II)
Emotion Detection
Emotion detection on face images can communicate and
impact individual’s feelings.  It  is intriguing and to basic
comprehend the feelings passed on by the images and how
the visual content of the image implies emotion.
II. LITERATURE SURVEY
In  the past few years, several papers have successfully
solved the problem of facial expression recognition So far,
several tasks have been completed for real-  time  emotion,
gender, age classification. So, Some state of artwork relevant
to the proposed work is discussed in this section.
Md jashim uddin Dr. paresh Chandra Barman, khandaker
Takdir Ahmed et al.[1] proposed a detection system using
CNN model which can achieved 95% accuracy rate in age,
gender detection with IMDB-WIKI dataset and 66% accu-
racy achieved in emotion detection with FER dataset.
Thakshila R.kalansuriya and Anuuja T. Dharmaratne et al.
[2] proposed a age gender detection system Using artificial
neural network which achieved 70.5% accuracy rate. where
FERET and FGNET datasets are used.
M.R Dileepa and Ajit Dantib et al.[3] proposed a age gen-
der prediction system using Neural network and sigma con-
trol limit which achieved 95% accuracy rate.
Sepidehsadat et al. [4] suggested that the utilization of Ga-
bor filter will make it simpler for the network to focus on the
face , because the output direction is perfectly matched with
facial wrinkles, and wrinkles will become the input of CNN.
The network focuses on providing useful features with 7%
age accuracy and 2% gender accuracy.
Fig. 1 Basic CNN architecture
Proceedings of the International Conference on Research
in Management & Technovation pp. 115–118
DOI: 10.15439/2020KM18
ISSN 2300-5963 ACSIS, Vol. 24
©PTI 2020
115

Imane  et al. [5] proposed a face detection system using
HAAR cascade, CNN based on FER13(KNN) for normaliza-
tion and emotion detection and  Gabor  binary pattern his-
togram sequence is used for pattern scanning .The model use
for different machine learning technique (SVM, KNN, ran-
dom forest and classification, regression tree) and uses KNN
and SVM algorithm to obtain a high accuracy rate which
reaches 70%.
A better proposition is done by Rajesh et al [6] Here pro-
posed real- time emotion detection used CNN with 9 layers
for training and categorizing 7 different types of emotions
which gives an accuracy of around 90.
The emotion and gender detection system using CNN pro-
posed by Md Abdullah-al-Imran et al.[7] which achieved for
emotion  detection  66%  with  FER  emotion  recognition
dataset and with IMDB-WIKI dataset achieved 95% for gen-
der detection.
S L happy and Auobinda Routray et al. [8] proposed an
automatic emotion recognition system using  LBP  classifi-
er.Which achieved 94.39% with CK+ dataset and the system
achieved a 92.22% with JAFFE dataset .
Ramin Azarmehr , Robert Laganiere , Won-Sook Lee et
al.[9] proposed a system using EDA achieved 99% and for
better accuracy and performance use support vector machine
(SVM) and demographic classification strategies.
Jang-Hee Yoo, So-Hee Park and Yongjin Lee et.al[10]
proposed a age gender detection system achieved  72.53%
for age detection and 98.90% for gender detection.
Octavio Arriagal and Matian Valdenegro –Toro and paul
G Pl oger et al. [11] propose a Real –time emotion gender
classification system using CNN which achieved 66% accu-
racy on emotion classification on FER-20133 dataset and
with IMDB dataset achieved 95% for gender classification.
Eran Eidinger ,Roee Enbar, Tal Hassner et al. [12]
proposed a system using LBP+FPLBP which achieved ac-
curacy 50 % on age ,gender Estimation of unfiltered faces.
Ajit.P Gosavi, S.R Khot et al.[13] proposed a recognition
system which achieved accuracy 91.63% on JAFFE images
using principal component analysis and 91.63% precision
rate obtained in case of PCA.
Sidhart Nair, Dipesh Nair et al. [14] proposed a system
using CNN model with HOG, adaboost algorithm and haar
cascade classifier achieved 70.47% on FER- 2013 dataset for
age gender and emotion classification.
Rekha N, MZ Kurian et al.[15] proposed a real time face
detection system using histogram oriented gradients (HOG)
and it detects the face from +90 degree to -90 degree with
high accuracy rates.
Tanner Gilligan , Baris Akis et.al[16] proposed a real -
time  emotion detection system using LeNet and AlexNet
model which achieved 97% accuracy rates.
III. PROPOSED METHODOLOGY
The primary objective of the proposed methodology is to
recognize the gender and age range with emotion from the
human face images utilizing the set of facial features in real-
time application. Feature extraction from face images is an
important part of this method.  In  here, Fig-1 represent to
show the flow of step to this methodology.
(I)PRE-PROSSESSING
The pre-processing stage can improve the quality of the
input image and find the data of interest by eliminating noise
and smoothing the image.  It  eliminates image redundancy
without image details. Pre-processing also includes filtering
and normalizing the image to produce a uniform size and ro-
tated image.
(II)FACE DETECTION
The face detection process is to extract the face area from
the background of Input images with various lighting condi-
tions and complex backgrounds can be confusing and fail to
recognize these expressions.  It  involves segmentation and
extraction  of facial  features  from  the uncontrolled back-
ground.
(III)FEATURE EXTRACTION
In object detection feature extraction plays important role.
Here, it includes shapes , movement, color , the texture of
the facial image. It extracts meaningful information of a im-
age  compared  to  the  original  image.  Feature  extraction
greatly reduces information of image, which has advantages
in storage.
(IV) FEATURE CLASSIFICATION
The  classification  stage  recognizes  facial  images  and
group them  according to certain classes and helps  them
Fig-2: Flow chart of proposed methodology
116
PROCEEDINGS OF ICRMAT. NAGPUR, 2020

skilled recognition. Classification is a complicated process
because it can be playing role in many areas. It classification
stage also can called feature selection stage, which is deals
with exchanges the retain essential information and connect
them in certain parameters.
IV. POPULAR FEATURE EXTRACTION AND CLASSIFICATION
METHOD
A. SVM
It is a machine learning algorithm which is used for classi-
fication and regression. But usually, they are used for classi-
fication  problems.  SVM  was  first  introduced  in  the
1960s ,but it was perfected in 1990 . Compared with other
machine learning algorithms, SVM has its unique imple-
mentation.
The model is basically a representation of different classes
in a hyper plane of a multidimensional space . SVM will
generate hyper planes in an iterative manner, which can min-
imize errors. The goal of SVM is to divide the data set into
several categories to find the maximum edge hyper plane
(MMH).
B. LBP
The Local Binary Pattern was used for texture classifica-
tion, later it was applied in other application. LBP assigns
image  pixel  by  the  neighborhood  (p)  each  pixel  values
within the radius (R), represented by (gp) taking the central
value (gc) as the threshold and converting its threshold into a
given decimal number label by eq. The main property of
LBP is its computational simplicity, which make it analyzing
possible a image in real-time.
C. HOG
Histogram of oriented gradient is feature descriptor. Fea-
ture  descriptor  is  representations  of  images  or  Image
patches, which simplify the process of extracting useful in-
formation from images and discarding redundant informa-
tion. Which was proposed for object detection in various
machine  learning  application also computer vision. HOG
descriptor mainly focused on the structure of an image or
object by counting the localized portion.
It is a feature extraction dense method for images. Dense
means that it extracts features from all positions in the image
(or regions of interest in the image),instead of only key
points like SIFT in the local neighborhood.
D. PCA
PCA algorithm is an eigenvector method to model linear
variation  of  high  dimensional  data.  Principal  component
analysis (PCA) is the most popular appearance-based statis-
tical method used mainly for dimensionality reduction in
compression and recognition.  The  PCA technique is intro-
duced by Kirby and Sirovich in 1988.This technique are
used for eliminate the dimension of a face space data. The
reduction of dimension helps to  remove  the  non- essential
information from input images to recognize the  face. The
main face images can be introduced as a feature vector or
weighted sum  of the Eigen’s faces and stored in one - di-
mensional array. The PCA requires full frontal face image to
be presented each  time to give the good performance. The
advantage of PCA is it can reduce the required data to iden-
tify individuals to 1/1000 of the displayed data.
E. Viola-Jones Algorithm
The viola-Jones algorithm mainly used for object detec-
tion work that can supply a competitive rate of object detec-
tion in real-time application. Also it can be trained to detect
the object classes also face detection. Three major contribu-
tions/phase of this algorithm are feature extraction, classifi-
cation using boosting , Multi- scale detection algorithm . The
main advantage of viola-jones algorithm, it is extremely fast
feature computation & effective feature selection.
V. CONCLUSION
Based on this study a complete survey of the state of the
art technique for age, gender and emotion classification has
been reviewed and discussed via face images. Face images
have become important in recent decades primarily due to
their promising real-world application in several emerging
fields. In this paper, various algorithms and various data set
have been proposed by their researcher. Also, a summary of
the published paper in this field of study was done, including
the method used, their performance, and limitation. The re-
sult of this study indicates that for Real- time age, gender,
and emotion HOG+viola-jones algorithm (70%) has good
accuracy rates in FER13 datasets. For only age, gender EDA
(72.53% and 98.90%) has good accuracy rates. Only for
emotion using the CNN model (97%) has the highest accu-
racy rates. An overall study of the contribution made on gen-
der, emotion classification, and age estimation used to solve
the real-time application problems and its application areas
are forensic, security, face detection synthesis, lie detection
music for  mood, automated tutoring systems. In this paper
most of the research work is done is in Convolutional Neural
Network and algorithm like - AdaBoost, HOG, HAAR, LBP,
PCA, FPLBP, and LDA which are used for age, gender and
emotion recognition. By using these classifiers or algorithms
we can build a system that can be claimed to be highly accu-
rate.
REFERENCES
[1]
Md. Jashim Uddin, Dr. Paresh Chandra  Barman,  Khandaker Takdir
Ahmed S.M. Abdur Rahim , Abu Rumman Refat , Md Abdullah-Al-
Imran6  "A  Convolutional  Neural  Network  for  Real-time  Face
Detection and Emotion & Gender Classification" IOSR Journal of
Electronics and Communication Engineering (IOSR-JECE)
[2]
Thakshila R. Kalansuriya and Anuja T. Dharmaratne,"Neural Network
based Age and Gender Classification for Facial Images" International
Journal on Advances in ICT for Emerging Regions
[3]
M. R. Dileepa and Ajit Dantib  "Human Age  and Gender Prediction
Based on Neural Networks and Three Sigma Control Limits" ISSN:
0883-9514 (Print) 1087- 6545
(Online) Journal
homepage:
http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/uaai20
DIBYA JYOTI SHARMA ET AL.: REAL-TIME EMOTION, GENDER, AGE DETECTION USING CNN
117

[4]
2018-Sepidehsadat Hosseini, Seok Hee Lee, Hyuk Jin Kwon, Hyung Il
Koo  Nam  Ik  Cho,  “Age  and  Gender  Classification  Using  Wide
Convolutional Neural Network and Gabor Filter”, IEEE2018.
[5]
Imane Lasri, Anouar Riad Solh Mourad E Belkacemi, “Facial Emotion
Recognition of Students using Convolutional Neural Network”, IEEE-
2019.
[6]
Rajesh  Kumar  G  A,  Ravi  Kant  Kumar  Goutam  Sanyal,  “Facial
Emotion Analysis using Deep Convolutional Neural Network”,2017
International Conference on Signal Processing and Communication
(ICSPC). doi: 10.1109/ cspc.2017.8305872, Pg.No.- 369 to374.
[7]
Md Abdullah-Al-Imran “A Convolutional Neural  Network for Real-
time Face Detection and Emotion & Gender Classification’’ e-ISSN:
2278-2834, p- ISSN: 2278-8735. Volume15, Issue 3, Ser. I (May -
June2020), PP 37-46.
[8]
S  L  Happy and Aurobinda Routray“Automatic  Facial  Expression
Recognition Using Features of Salient Facial Patches’’ DOI: 10.1109/
TAFFC. 2014. 2386334 https://rb.gy/9m5dt2.
[9]
Ramin  Azarmehr,  Robert  Laganiere,  Won-Sook  Lee   Real-time
Embedded
Age  and
Gender  Classification  in  Unconstrained
Video https://rb.gy/pnvd2n.
[10] Jang-Hee Yoo, So-Hee Park, and Yongjin Lee “Real-Time Ageand
Gender Estimation from Face Image” ISBN: 978-0-6480147-3-7.
[11] Octavio  Arriaga1 and Matias Valdenegro-Toro and Paul G. Pl¨oger
Real-time Convolutional Neural Networks for emotion and gender
classification.”
[12] Eran Eidinger, Roee Enbar, Tal Hassner “Age and Gender Estimation
of Unfiltered Faces’’
[13] Ajit P.  Gosavi,  S. R.  Khot  “Facial Expression Recognition Using
Principal Component Analysis” ISSN: 2231-2307, Volume-3, Issue-4,
September 2013
[14] Sidharth Nair, Dipesh Nair, “Detection of Gender, Age and Emotion
of  a  Human  Image  using  Facial  Features”  e-ISSN:  2395-0056
www.irjet.net p-ISSN: 2395-0072
[15] Rekha N, Dr.M.Z.Kurian  "Face  Detection in Real  Time Based on
HOG" international journal of advanced  Research in computer
engineering & tchnology volume 3 issue 4,april2014 ISSN:2278-1323
[16] Tanner  Gilligan,  Baris  Akis  Emotion  AI,  Real-Time  Emotion
Detection  using  CNN  " 
http://web.stanford.edu/class/cs231a/
prev_projects_2016/emotion-ai-real.pdf
118
PROCEEDINGS OF ICRMAT. NAGPUR, 2020

