Ghost imaging with the human eye
Alessandro Boccolini,1 Alessandro Fedrizzi,1 and Daniele Faccio2
1Scottish Universities Physics Alliance (SUPA), School of Engineering
& Physical Sciences, Heriot-Watt University, Edinburgh EH14 4AS, UK
2School of Physics & Astronomy, University of Glasgow, Glasgow G12 8QQ, UK
Computational ghost imaging relies on the decomposition of an image into patterns that are
summed together with weights that measure the overlap of each pattern with the scene being
imaged. These tasks rely on a computer. Here we demonstrate that the computational integration
can be performed directly with the human eye. We use this human ghost imaging technique to
evaluate the temporal response of the eye and establish the image persistence time to be around 20
ms followed by a further 20 ms exponential decay. These persistence times are in agreement with
previous studies but can now potentially be extended to include a more precise characterisation of
visual stimuli and provide a new experimental tool for the study of visual perception.
In ghost imaging, an object can be imaged despite
never having interacted with the light recorded by the
camera [1]. The object is illuminated with a structured
light ﬁeld, and the transmitted or reﬂected intensity is
recorded with a “bucket” detector with no spatial reso-
lution. A second, spatially correlated light ﬁeld is mod-
ulated with the recorded intensity pattern and projected
onto a spatially-resolved detector such as a CCD camera
which integrates over many frames to produce an im-
age. Originally, ghost imaging was claimed to be a quan-
tum eﬀect, with spatial light correlations obtained from
momentum-correlated photon-pair sources [2]. However
it was soon realised that classical correlations, e.g. ob-
tained from a laser beam split at a beamsplitter, achieved
the same eﬀect [3]. In computational ghost imaging, only
a single light ﬁeld is required, and spatial light correla-
tions are generated algorithmically [4].
The simplest version of this approach involves raster
scanning the scene point by point with a small laser spot
(i.e. smaller than the features that we wish to resolve)
and collecting the reﬂected intensity with a photodiode.
The scene is then reconstructed one ‘spot’ at a time.
Compressive sensing approaches are however, the pre-
ferred option: structured patterns—typically Hadamard
patterns—of light are used to illuminate the scene [5].
The reﬂection or transmission intensities Ai recorded by
the bucket detector are used as multiplicative weights
for each Hadamard pattern Hi(x, y) before these are
summed together to obtain an image of the object:
O(x, y) =
N
X
i=1
AiHi(x, y)
(1)
From (1) we see that this protocol projects the object or
scene onto a given (e.g. Hadamard) basis and ﬁnds the
relative coeﬃcients Ai for each basis element Hi. This
widely used approach can be extended to include full 3D
information [6], or dynamic adjustment of the decompo-
sition basis for foveated imaging [7].
It has also been
applied to the temporal domain [8, 9]. Ghost imaging
allows imaging in situations where diﬀusion or scatter-
FIG. 1.
Experimental ghost imaging with the human eye.
LED1 illuminates the DMD which projects Hadamard pat-
terns at 20 kHz onto an object. The reﬂected light is collected
by a single-pixel detector. The output modulates the intensity
of LED2 which also illuminates the DMD and is subject to the
same patterns as LED1. The intensity-weighted Hadamard
patterns are viewed on the DMD by eye or projected onto
a screen.
Human vision integrates over the patterns when
these are projected for much shorter durations than the eye’s
persistence time. As a result, although only black and white
patterns are projected, the eye eﬀectively perceives a “ghost”
image of the object.
ing (between the object and the bucket detector) would
otherwise compromise visibility [8, 10–12] and provides
the capability to image objects at wavelengths for which
single-photon cameras are not readily available [13].
Apart from ﬁnding inspiration in human vision mecha-
nisms to improve single-pixel imaging systems, one won-
ders if it is possible to implement ghost imaging directly
in a biological system, using the human eye to replace
parts of the imaging system or perform the required com-
putational tasks. According to (1), once the coeﬃcients
Ai have been measured, two computational tasks are re-
quired: (i) multiplication of each pattern with Ai; and (ii)
integration over all weighted patterns, AiHi(x, y). In this
work we conﬁrm the capability of the human vision sys-
tem to perform (ii), the integration of the weighted pat-
arXiv:1808.05137v1  [q-bio.NC]  13 Aug 2018

2
terns. Humans can thus visualise a computational ghost
image without any computer processing. We develop a
macro-pixel approach to allow high resolution and detail
in the perceived ghost image. Finally, by projecting the
weighted patterns at increasing frame rates we can ﬁnd a
threshold below which a clear image is not distinguished.
From this threshold we estimate the temporal response
function of the human visual system.
Theory. The problem of temporal persistence of im-
ages has been studied for a long time, see e.g. Ref. [14].
Image persistence is used for example in cinematogra-
phy where a series of still images are projected. If the
frame rate exceeds the visual persistence time, then con-
tinuous and smooth movement is perceived: the transi-
tion between frames is blurred out by the convolution
of the eye’s response function and the projected image
sequence.
Visual perception research has identiﬁed three mecha-
nisms [15] that lead either individually or collectively to
image persistence, namely: neural persistence—activity
in the visual system for a limited time after the stimulus
oﬀset; visible persistence—a visual stimulus that contin-
ues to be experienced for a limited time after its oﬀset;
and iconic memory—the lingering of visual information
that remains accessible for some time after the stimulus
oﬀset. More recently, attention has shifted towards the
role of iconic memory and, in particular, the relation be-
tween attention and consciousness in perception [16, 17].
However, the overall process of visual perception and its
underlying neurological mechanisms are still an object of
debate (see e.g. Ref. [18]).
In the following we will focus on the second of the three
mechanisms outlined above, the visible persistence that
allows us to perceive an image for a duration much longer
than its projection time.
Several studies have investi-
gated image persistence time, using diﬀerent methods
that therefore also potentially measure diﬀerent persis-
tence mechanisms. One of the the main observations is
that for very short (<100 ms) image projection (stimu-
lus) times, the total visible persistence time of the image
is of order 230 ms—regardless of the actual duration of
the stimulus itself, as long as this remains below ∼100
ms [15, 19].
These results relied on the measurement
of synchronicity; the observers were asked to estimate
the coincidence time between the oﬀset of a stimulus
with the onset of a second stimulus. Another series of
measurements relied on asking observers to estimate the
shape of forms that were broken into smaller parts that
are then projected sequentially with varying permanence
times [14, 20–22].
These studies led to the conclusion
that complete images were observed through sequential
projection of image parts as long as the temporal oﬀsets
where shorter than 50 ms, with a fast degradation and
a breakdown complete image perception once temporal
asynchronicity was above 100 ms.
We now build upon these ﬁndings and assume that the
perception of a series of very short optical signals can be
modelled as a temporal integration process with a speciﬁc
response function, R, that consists of a short period of
visual stimulus with constant amplitude, followed by a
quick decay:
O(x, y, t) =
Z
R(t −t′)I(x, y, t′)dt′
(2)
where O(x, y, t) now is a time sequence of images,
whereas I(x, y, t′) is the actual sequence of still images
that are projected and R(t−t′) is the response function of
the visual system. As explained above, we do not in gen-
eral expect this to be a square function, i.e. a response
that rapidly switches on and then, after a constant re-
sponse level, suddenly switches oﬀagain (this is e.g. how
a camera shutter would be described). For the moment,
we do not need to make any speciﬁc estimate of the exact
shape of R and will return to this aspect later.
If the N patterns in (1) are provided sequentially (as
opposed to all N being available simultaneously), then
we have a time dependent I(x, y, t) = A(t)H(x, y, t) such
that A(t) = Ai and H(x, y, t) = Hi(x, y) for (i −1)τ ≤
t ≤iτ. If we detect this sequence of patterns with a true
integrator, i.e. a detector that eﬀectively has an inﬁnitely
long response time, then the sequence of N patterns will
provide the ghost image
O(x, y) =
Z
A(t)H(x, y, t)dt.
(3)
If instead we have a detector with instant response, we
obtain
O(x, y, t) =
Z
δ(t −t′)A(t′)H(x, y, t′)dt′,
(4)
and the detector will just see the pattern sequence, and
no ghost image. Equation (2) constitutes an intermedi-
ate regime where the outcome depends on the projection
rate or the relation between image persistence time τ
and persistence time σ. For σ ≫τ, a ghost image will
be perceived, since (3) well approximates (2). The vi-
sual system can perform the “summation” step in ghost
imaging as long as the weighted Hadamard (or any other)
set of patterns is projected at suﬃcient speed. Ideally,
one will then cyclically repeat these projections to form
a static image that is perceived for as long as the projec-
tions continue.
Results. The experimental arrangement and proce-
dure is show in Fig. 1. We performed a ﬁrst set of ex-
periments using a DMD that projected Hadamard pat-
terns onto some object, with the reﬂected intensities de-
tected by a bucket detector (a photodiode). The pho-
todiode signal was fed into a light-emitting diode (LED)
that illuminated a second DMD, synchronous to the ﬁrst,
and projecting the now intensity-weighted pattern onto
a large screen. The test subjects viewed the screen and

3
FIG. 2. Macro-pixel method for increased spatial resolution.
The image on the left shows a computer simulation of the
method with the original images divided in 64 macro-pixels,
each of which is sampled with the same 256 Hadamard pat-
terns. On the right we show the same image projected onto
a screen and photographed with 50 ms exposure time.
could vary the projected pattern frame rate. The DMD
reaches 20 kHz frame rates and can thus project up to
200 Hadamard patterns within a 20 ms time window. At
maximum frame rate, a clear image of the object (e.g. a
hand) could be perceived by the viewer directly on the
screen, without any intermediate computational process-
ing. Slower projection rates quickly degrade the image
visibility, resulting in ‘ﬂickering’ square patterns owing to
the rapid succession of Hadamard patterns. This result,
i.e. the fact that the human visual system can correctly
reproduce a ghost image through summation of succes-
sive image frames was not a priori obvious due to the still
unclear visual perception mechanisms and the fact that
previous image integration studies used images with no
overlapping areas of high luminosity [22].
The ghost images described above were limited to a res-
olution of 15×15 pixels, since the patterns projected onto
the screen are weighted by the photodetector reading and
are therefore grayscale Hadamard patterns.
Grayscale
images are obtained from a DMD by “dithering” the mi-
cro mirrors, i.e. 1 bit (black and white) images can be
projected at 20 kHz but 4-bit images are limited to ∼5
kHz and a maximum of ∼250 grayscale patterns can be
projected within a 50 ms time window.
To increase the spatial resolution of the image we di-
vided each image into a set of 8×8 “macro pixels”. Each
of these was sampled with 256 Hadamard patterns, ef-
fectively increasing the resolution by a factor of 64. Fig-
ure 2 shows a 112 × 112 pixel image of Albert Einstein
we used to simulate this method in practice. Each of the
64 macro pixels is sampled with the same 256 Hadamard
patterns the DMD can project simultaneously. The left-
hand image shows the computer-simulated process and
reconstruction.
The right-hand image shows the pro-
jected pattern on the viewing screen as photographed by
a camera with 50 ms exposure time, providing a faithful
rendition of what was perceived by a human observer,
i.e. with temporal integration performed by the visual
system.
The system was tested by ﬁve diﬀerent indi-
viduals and all agreed that they could clearly perceive
the image and the similarity with the image shown in
Fig. 2. This demonstrates that it is possible to view rel-
atively high-resolution images in a ghost-imaging setup
using available projection technology and the human eye
for image integration.
Evaluation of visual response times.
A key point
in the results above is the ability for the DMD to project
a suﬃcient number of frames within the persistence time
so that these are temporally integrated and perceived
as an image rather than a succession of black-and-white
patterns. The DMD projection rate can be easily con-
trolled and in doing so our test viewers agreed on a regime
in which the projected images transitioned from black-
and-white patterns to actual images. In the following we
exploit this feature, in combination with the projection
methodology based on macro-pixels, to evaluate the hu-
man visual response time. Our procedure is inspired by
a classic motion persistence test, where a bright spot is
moved quickly across a dark screen and is perceived by
the eye to form a “trail”.
Our approach is outlined in Fig. 3. At step (1) we con-
sider each of the white pixels individually and at step (2)
we identify the Hadamard patterns required to reproduce
that speciﬁc white pixel on a black background. The ad-
vantage in this approach is that we identify a reduced set
of essential Hadamard patterns required to recreate each
white pixel individually, minimising the number of pat-
terns sequentially projected on the DMD. In step (3) we
project each set of Hadamard patterns for each individ-
ual white pixel sequentially. Figure 4 shows an example
for a 3×3 pixel image of a “zero”. Figure 4(a) shows how
a single pixel is decomposed into a reduced Hadamard
set (boxed in red). Figure 4(b) shows the complete set
of reduced Hadamard patterns for the full image: the
red arrows indicate the order in which each subset of
Hadamard patterns (and hence also the relative white
pixels from the image) are projected sequentially by the
DMD. Each of these patterns is projected for a time τ.
The patterns are continuously looped to give the test
viewer suﬃcient time to observe the projection on the
screen. The experiment is then repeated, with a gradu-
ally decreasing τ. We transition from a situation where
for long τ individual Hadamard patterns are seen on the
FIG. 3. Flow chart for estimating the response time of the
human visual system.

4
FIG. 4. (a) Decomposition of a single white pixel into a re-
duced set of Hadamard patterns (boxed in red). (b) Example
of reduced set of Hadamard patterns for a 3x3 pixel “zero”.
The red arrows indicate the sequence with which each subset
of Hadamard patterns (and hence the relative white pixels
from the image) are projected by the DMD.
screen (and no image can be perceived), until the individ-
ual patterns can no longer be distinguished and a clear
image emerges.
The aim is to determine the “thresh-
old” value for τ for which the patterns disappear and
the images start to become partly visible. These tests
were repeated with four test viewers and all reached the
same conclusion that for τ ∼20 ms, all of the projected
patterns started to become visible.
Separately we simulate the experiment numerically,
steps (5) and (6), by assuming that human visual per-
ception has an initially ﬂat response followed by an ex-
ponential decay (see the function in the Fig. 3 inset).
We ﬁxed the ﬂat response time to the ‘threshold’ image
value for τ (20 ms). We therefore aim to determine the
exponential decay time, σ that is introduced to provide
a connection with studies that found visible persistence
times to gradually decay in time [15]. This mathematical
model is by no means unique. However, a constant re-
sponse followed by an exponential decay is the simplest
option consistent with observations and, for our purpose,
ideal to demonstrate the potential of ghost imaging for
visual perception studies. We vary σ in the simulations
until a good match is found between the simulated pat-
tern and the observed image.
Figure 5 shows examples from the experiments where
we used 6 × 6-pixel images of the numbers “0”, “4”, “6”
and letters “L”, “P”, “T”. The top rows show the actual
images used together with the number of white pixels
and total number of Hadamard patterns projected. The
successive rows show the simulated patterns for a range
from σ = 0 s (i.e. a square. step-like response, similar
to a camera) to σ = 50 ms. All four subjects aimed to
match simulations and experiments for the case of image-
formation threshold and found that the best match was
obtained with σ = 20 ms. For shorter σ the image is
hardly discernible (see e.g. second row, σ = 0 ms) and
for longer times the images appear complete and clearly
visible (bottom row, σ = 50 ms).
Although the pat-
terns were projected only for a ﬁxed τ, simulating the
ghost image assuming a constant stimulus that lasts ex-
actly τ cannot explain the observed projected images. An
additional exponential decay time is required and using
FIG. 5. Examples of simulated images used to evaluate vis-
ible persistence times. The top row shows the chose images
(numbers and letters) together with the number of white pix-
els and the total number of Hadamard patterns required to
represent the images following the recipe explained in Fig. 4.
The following rows show the reconstructed images with vary-
ing exponential decay times (σ) of the function f(t) used to
weigh the projection of each individual Hadamard pattern.
the concept of a ‘threshold’ at which the images start to
become discernible, can provide information about the
decay rate.
Discussion.
We have demonstrated ghost imaging
with the human eye, such that no computational steps
are required for visualising an image that is just the
projection of weighted (based on a proxy measurement)
Hadamard patterns.
We proposed a macro-pixel tech-
nique to increase the spatial resolution of the projected
image. Ghost-imaging with the eye opens up a number of
completely novel applications such as extending human
vision into invisible wavelength regimes in real-time, by-
passing intermediary screens or computational steps.
Perhaps even more interesting are the opportunities
that ghost imaging oﬀers for exploring neurological pro-
cesses. Key to this approach is the substitution of com-
putational steps with equivalent processes performed by
the eye or visual cortex. Further investigation is required
of how the perceived image depends on the speciﬁc shape
of the visual response function together with an analysis
of which visual mechanism is being probed. The persis-
tence times we measured are closer to those obtained by
performing ‘temporal integration’ tests [14, 20–22] rather
than those based on estimates of synchronicity of mul-
tiple signals [15, 19]. In our test, by comparing with a
computer model we estimate the response time more pre-
cisely, splitting the response into a constant and decaying
part.
A challenge could be to investigate if the visual sys-
tem can perform the “multiplication” step in ghost imag-
ing, which we obtained by weighting projected patterns
with the bucket-detector intensities. This could be im-
plemented using a VR system [23, 24] that simultane-
ously projects the (unweighted) Hadamard patterns and
uniform grayscale weight images either onto both eyes
separately or onto separate regions of the retina.

5
FUNDING INFORMATION
DF and AF acknowledge support from the UK En-
gineering & Physical Sciences Research Council (EP-
SRC Grant No. EP/M01326X/1, EP/M006514/1, and
EP/N002962/1, respectively).
[1] M. J. Padgett and R. W. Boyd, Philos. Trans. R. Soc.
London A 375, 2099 (2017).
[2] T. Pittman, Y. Shih, D. Strekalov, and A. Sergienko,
Physical Review A 52, R3429 (1995).
[3] A. Gatti, E. Brambilla, M. Bache, and L. A. Lugiato,
Physical review letters 93, 093602 (2004).
[4] J. H. Shapiro, Physical Review A 78, 061802 (2008).
[5] O. Katz, Y. Bromberg, and Y. Silberberg, Applied
Physics Letters 95, 131110 (2009).
[6] G. A. Howland, P. B. Dixon, and J. C. Howell, Applied
optics 50, 5917 (2011).
[7] D. B. Phillips, M.-J. Sun, J. M. Taylor, M. P. Edgar,
S. M. Barnett, G. M. Gibson, and M. J. Padgett, Science
advances 3, e1601782 (2017).
[8] P. Ryczkowski, M. Barbier, A. T. Friberg, J. M. Dudley,
and G. Genty, Nat. Photon. 10, 167 (2016).
[9] F. Devaux, P.-A. Moreau, S. Denis, and E. Lantz, Optica
3, 698 (2016).
[10] P. Zhang, W. Gong, X. Shen, and S. Han, Phys. Rev. A
82, 033817 (2010).
[11] R. E. Meyers, K. S. Deacon, and Y. Shih, Appl. Phys.
Lett. 98, 111115 (2011).
[12] Y.-K. Xu, W.-T. Liu, E.-F. Zhang, Q. Li, H.-Y. Dai, and
P.-X. Chen, Opt. Express 23, 32993 (2015).
[13] R. S. Aspden, N. R. Gemmell, P. A. Morris, D. S. Tasca,
L. Mertens, M. G. Tanner, R. A. Kirkwood, A. Ruggeri,
A. Tosi, R. W. Boyd, G. S. Buller, R. H. Hadﬁeld, and
M. J. Padgett, Optica 2, 1049 (2015).
[14] V. D. Lollo, J. Exp. Psychol. 109, 75 (1980).
[15] M. Coltheart,
Perception & Psychophysics 27,
183
(1980).
[16] F. Crick and C. Koch, Nat. Neuroscience 6, 119 (2003).
[17] C. Koch and N. Tsuchiya, Trends in Cognitive Sciences
11, 16 (2007).
[18] N. Block, “The puzzle of perceptual precision,” in “Open
MIND,” T. K. Metzinger and J. M. Windt, eds. (MIND
Group, Frankfurt am Main, 2015), chap. 5(T).
[19] R. Efron, Neuropsychologia 8, 37 (1970).
[20] C. Eriksen and J. Collins, J. Exp.Psychology 74, 476
(1967).
[21] G. Loftus and D. Irwin, Cognitive Psychology 35, 135
(1998).
[22] J. R. Brockmole, R. F. Wang, and D. E. Irwin, J. Exp.
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance 28, 315
(2002).
[23] P. Lincoln, A. Blate, M. Singh, T. Whitted, A. State,
A. Lastra, and H. Fuchs, IEEE Transactions on Visual-
ization and Computer Graphics 22, 1367 (2016).
[24] P. Lincoln, A. Blate, M. Singh, A. State, M. Whitton,
T. Whitted, and H. Fuchs, “Scene-adaptive high dynamic
range display for low latency augmented reality,” in “Pro-
ceedings of the 21st ACM SIGGRAPH Symposium on
Interactive 3D Graphics and Games,” (ACM, New York,
NY, USA, 2017), I3D ’17.

