uniﬁes them with. A ‘looks’ sentence obligatorily contains a complement spe-
cifying a way of looking. A ‘walks’sentence has no such requirement. To see this,
notice that (10b) still means that there is a walking event with Mary as agent,
whereas (10a) does not mean that you are having a visual experience with Mary
as stimulus.
(10) a. *Mary looks to you.5
b. Mary walks.
Does this signal an interesting nonlinguistic difference between the events in
question? I’m not sure. But the obligatoriness of the complement in (10a) leaves
room for the view that visual experience is essentially representational, in a way
that would be extremely implausible for walking events—at least taking
language as a guide.
Breckenridge’s book will surely be of interest to readers in philosophy of
perception and philosophy of language. But its potential audience is also
broader, given that it is an intriguing case study in a philosophical methodology
that takes seriously the potential for language to be a window into substantive
issues about the domain that that language is about.
Reference
Martin, M. G. F. 2010. “What’s in a Look?” In Perceiving the World, edited by Bence Nanay,
160–225. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Rachel Etta Rudolph
Auburn University
Philosophical Review, Vol. 130, No. 1, 2021
DOI 10.1215/00318108-8699630
Nicholas Shea, Representation in Cognitive Science.
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2018. xi + 292 pp.
Nicholas Shea’s writings are required reading for philosophers of mind, es-
pecially those interested in the mind sciences. Representation in Cognitive Science
cements his position as one of the ﬁeld’s foremost practitioners. The book
5. Here, ‘*’ denotes ungrammaticality on the intended reading. This sentence is
grammatical if it is instead parsed to mean that Mary looked to you, e.g., for advice.
This reading is not relevant to the point I’m making.
B O O K R E V I E W S
180
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/the-philosophical-review/article-pdf/130/1/180/930307/180rescorla.pdf by WIKIPEDIA LIBRARY user on 03 July 2023

mobilizes his broad and deep knowledge of cognitive science, his formidable
philosophical craft, and his admirably clear writing style to powerful effect.
When a mental state represents the world as being a certain way, we can
ask whether the mental state correctly represents how the world is. Shea aims to
provide naturalistically acceptable sufﬁcient conditions for mental states to have
correctness-conditions. Thus, his discussion contributes to the literature on
“naturalizing intentionality.” Unlike most participants in that literature, Shea
illustrates his approach with detailed scientiﬁc examples, including research on
perception, motor control, animal navigation, and causal reasoning. The gen-
erous buffet of scientiﬁc case studies is a welcome contrast with previous natu-
ralizing efforts, which all too often read like exercises in make-believe.
Shea calls his approach varitel semantics. The basic idea is that represen-
tation arises from “exploitable relations” between the representing system and
the represented domain. A paradigmatic exploitable relation is correlation: states
of the representing system systematically correlate with states of the represented
domain. For example, ﬁring activity in a population of neurons may correlate
with the direction in which a visual stimulus moves. Most philosophers agree
that not just any correlation sufﬁces for representational content to be present.
What must be added to mere correlation for genuine representation to arise?
Shea’s answer, brieﬂy, is that correlations generate content when they are exploi-
ted in furtherance of task functions, such as procuring food or moving to a desir-
able location. Shea develops this answer in vivid detail, articulating a naturalistic
account of task functions (chapter 3) and a systematic theory describing how
exploited correlations generate content (chapter 4). His framework applies
both to biological systems and to artifacts (e.g., robots).
Chapter 5 investigates a second exploitable relation that can generate
representation: structural correspondence. Structural correspondence occurs
when a relation over the representing system mirrors a relation over the rep-
resented domain: for instance, distances on a map mirror distances in physical
space. According to Shea, representational content arises when a system
exploits a structural correspondence in furtherance of a task function. His
main example is spatial representation. Citing extensive neuroscientiﬁc evi-
dence, he argues that rats navigate by exploiting a structural correspondence
between neural activity and space. Exploitation of the correspondence ensures
that the rat’s neural activity represents proximity relations among locations in
physical space.1
Correlation and structural correspondence are the only two exploitable
relations that Shea discusses, but he leaves open that other exploitable relations
may generate content (43). The “vari” in “varitel semantics” reﬂects the variety
of exploitable relations that can potentially generate content (along with the
1. I ﬂag a signiﬁcant error that occurs in this chapter: note 23, page 142, reads
“surjective” in place of “injective.”
B O O K R E V I E W S
181
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/the-philosophical-review/article-pdf/130/1/180/930307/180rescorla.pdf by WIKIPEDIA LIBRARY user on 03 July 2023

variety of possible task functions). The “tel” reﬂects the teleological cast of
Shea’s theory, as embodied by his appeal to naturalized functions.
Varitel semantics resembles teleosemantics as espoused by Ruth Milli-
kan (1984) and others. However, varitel semantics improves considerably upon
previous teleosemantic theories. For example, Millikan’s theory entails that
representation is present even in very primitive systems, such magnetotactic
bacteria. Many critics regard this consequence as implausible, because one
can satisfactorily explain magnetotaxis without any attribution of represen-
tational content (Burge 2010: 300). Shea avoids attributing representational
content to magnetotactic bacteria by imposing a robustness constraint on task
functions, meaning roughly that the task function is achieved across a diverse
range of proximal and distal conditions (55, 65). Magnetotactic bacteria do not
satisfy the robustness constraint (203), so varitel semantics does not count them
as representational.
Still, varitel semantics is very permissive regarding which systems it clas-
siﬁes as representational. According to Shea, a plant whose ﬂowers open in the
day and close in the evening could count as representing time of day, so long as
the plant has two ways of detecting time of day and thereby satisﬁes the robust-
ness constraint (214). Shea also says that “it would not be at all surprising” if the
immune system turned out to employ representations (214). This permissive
attitude extends to artifacts: Shea says that a simple thermostat can count as
representing room temperature if it measures temperature in two ways and
thereby satisﬁes the robustness constraint (211).
I am skeptical of these verdicts. Representational attribution does not
seem to shed any light on plants, the immune system, or the simple thermostat
considered by Shea. We might informally describe a plant as “representing” that
evening has arrived, but this seems at best a fac¸on de parler rather than the start of
a compelling representational explanation. Similarly, I see no explanatory value
in saying that Shea’s simple thermostat represents room temperature, or that
the thermostat enters into an internal state that is correct iff the room has a
certain temperature. As Shea acknowledges (211), we can offer a satisfying ex-
planation for the thermostat’s behavior merely by noting how its internal states
correlate with temperature, how its outputs are caused by those internal states,
and so on, without any mention of representational content or correctness-
conditions. Representational attribution is absent from rigorous scientiﬁc de-
scription of a plant, the immune system, or a simple thermostat. We have no
grounds independent of Shea’s own theory for attributing representational
content to these systems.
Shea (205) intimates that the dispute is a purely verbal one about how to
use the word “representation.” However, I think that more substantive matters
are at stake. Most fundamentally, the issue is what mode of explanation we
should employ.
B O O K R E V I E W S
182
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/the-philosophical-review/article-pdf/130/1/180/930307/180rescorla.pdf by WIKIPEDIA LIBRARY user on 03 July 2023

Folk psychology attributes representational content to mental states,
especially propositional attitudes such as belief and desire. These represen-
tational attributions draw explanatory and predictive power from their afﬁlia-
tion with a network of informal norms and generalizations, such as norms
linking belief and desire to action. Cognitive scientists reﬁne folk psychological
explanation by articulating systematized successors to the informal norms and
generalizations. A good illustration is Bayesian cognitive science, which uses Baye-
sian decision theory to model perception, motor control, and many other
psychological domains (Rescorla, forthcoming). For example, Bayesian percep-
tual psychology posits that the perceptual system approximately executes un-
conscious Bayesian inferences (Rescorla 2015). Bayesian perceptual psychology
assigns a central role to representational mental states (e.g., prior probabilities
regarding distal conditions) when explaining why we perceive the world as we
do. These representational attributions draw their explanatory power from a
theoretical framework that reﬁnes the norms and generalizations found in folk
psychology. Likewise for representational explanation of motor control, mam-
malian navigation, and numerous other psychological domains.
In contrast, nothing resembling folk psychological explanation applies
in an illuminating way to plants, the immune system, or the simple thermostat.
Scientiﬁc explanation of these systems does not invoke norms or generalizations
reminiscent of folk psychology. Representational attribution is explanatorily
idle here, because it ﬂoats free from the norms and generalizations that typically
lend it explanatory value. I worry that Shea blurs important distinctions by
extending representational attribution to so many cases where its distinctive
explanatory beneﬁts go missing.
In chapter 8, Shea explores what he sees as the beneﬁts afforded by
representational attribution. He says that representational discourse has a
characteristic “explanatory grammar”: correct representation explains success-
ful achievement of a task function; incorrect representation explains failure to
achieve the task function (199). It seems to me that Shea’s analysis does not fully
capture the power of representational explanation, for two reasons. First, there
are many cases where we adequately explain success (or failure) in achieving a
task function without invoking correctness (or incorrectness). For example, we
can explain why a simple thermostat succeeds or fails at maintaining constant
room temperature without attributing correctness-conditions to the thermo-
stat’s internal states. We can instead adduce how well the thermostat’s internal
states correlate with room temperature. Second, representational explanation
offers notable beneﬁts quite independent of the “explanatory grammar” em-
phasized by Shea. We can explain an agent’s actions by citing her beliefs and
desires regardless of whether her beliefs are correct or whether her actions lead to achieve-
ment of any overall goal. We can cite a rat’s spatial representations to explain why
the rat chooses a given route through space regardless of whether the spatial rep-
resentations are correct or whether the rat’s chosen route leads to a desired destination. In
B O O K R E V I E W S
183
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/the-philosophical-review/article-pdf/130/1/180/930307/180rescorla.pdf by WIKIPEDIA LIBRARY user on 03 July 2023

both cases, and in numerous others, we invoke representational mental states to
explain a mental or behavioral outcome without considering whether the states
are correct and without considering whether the outcome promotes achieve-
ment of any task function. Our explanation hinges upon norms and generaliz-
ations that reﬁne those found in folk psychology, norms and generalizations
that apply whether or not the representational state is correct and whether or
not any task function is achieved.
Notably, Shea focuses almost exclusively upon fairly low-level mental pro-
cesses that are not consciously accessible, such as perception, navigation, and
motor control. He remains agnostic as to whether varitel semantics can accom-
modate belief, desire, and other high-level propositional attitudes (222–26).
Propositional attitudes have served for millennia as the main wellspring of phi-
losophical inquiry into mental representation (rivaled only by perception). Given
that varitel semantics may not apply to propositional attitudes, and given that
nothing resembling folk psychological explanation applies to many systems classi-
ﬁed by varitel semantics as representational, I question how well varitel semantics
captures the traditional notion of representational content.
That being said, varitel semantics ﬁts beautifully with lots of theorizing in
cognitive science, especially cognitive neuroscience. Neuroscientists often reason
along the following lines: neural ﬁring pattern X correlates with distal state Y;
therefore, X represents Y. In some cases, these representational attributions
serve merely as ﬂorid evocations of the correlation between X and Y. In other
cases, though, they seem to reﬂect an enthymematic attunement to something
like Shea’s apparatus of task functions and exploitable relations. Thus, I believe
that Shea has identiﬁed one scientiﬁcally important notion of “representation.”
I have argued that this notion differs signiﬁcantly from the traditional
philosophical notion. Shea himself acknowledges that it may well do so (31). Ac-
cordingly, I recommend that we recognize two distinct notions of representation:
the one that Shea emphasizes, which underlies some cognitive science discourse;
and the one that ﬁgures in folk psychology, traditional philosophical inquiry,
Bayesian cognitive science, and many other areas of cognitive science (cf. Burge
2010: 292–308). There are cases where the two notions overlap (e.g., mammalian
navigation), cases where Shea’s notion applies but the traditional one does not
(e.g., the simple thermostat), and perhaps cases where the traditional notion
applies but Shea’s does not (e.g., high-level propositional attitudes).
Overall, then, Shea successfully isolates a notion of representation that
ﬁgures prominently in some areas of cognitive science (especially cognitive
neuroscience), and he offers a compelling analysis of that notion. Even if I
am right that Shea’s favored notion of representation does not align with the
traditional notion, he has done us a huge service by analyzing his favored notion
with such care and rigor. I urge you to read this marvelous book so as to experi-
ence its intellectual riches ﬁrsthand.
B O O K R E V I E W S
184
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/the-philosophical-review/article-pdf/130/1/180/930307/180rescorla.pdf by WIKIPEDIA LIBRARY user on 03 July 2023

References
Burge, Tyler. 2010. Origins of Objectivity. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Millikan, Ruth Garrett. 1984. Language, Thought, and Other Biological Categories. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Rescorla, Michael. 2015. “Bayesian Perceptual Psychology.” In The Oxford Handbook of Phil-
osophy of Perception, edited by Mohan Matthen, 694–716. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Rescorla, Michael. Forthcoming. “Bayesian Modeling of the Mind: From Norms to Neur-
ons.” WIREs Cognitive Science. https://doi.org/10.1002/wcs.1540.
Michael Rescorla
University of California, Los Angeles
Philosophical Review, Vol. 130, No. 1, 2021
DOI 0.1215/00318108-8699643
Deborah Mayo, Statistical Inference as Severe Testing: How to Get beyond the Statistics
Wars. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2018. xv + 471 pp.
For more than three decades, Deborah Mayo has defended severe testing, a frame-
work for evaluating the strength of scientiﬁc evidence that provides philosoph-
ical foundations for (variants of) classical statistical methods. In her newest
book, Statistical Inference as Severe Testing, Mayo (1) extends and reﬁnes her
views on severe testing, (2) takes aim at researchers who claim that the repro-
ducibility crisis is a result of the use of classical statistics, and (3) exposes some
contemporary Bayesian methods as lacking philosophical foundations. The
book is engaging, sometimes funny, and often insightful. After reviewing the
basics of severe testing, I summarize three lessons from Mayo’s book that are
valuable for philosophers and scientists alike. I then discuss one way in which I
think Mayo’s arguments could be tightened.
Mayo argues that one has evidence for a hypothesis to the extent the
hypothesis has passed a severe test. More precisely, she argues that “for data to
warrant a hypothesis H requires not just that (S-1) H agrees with the data (H
passes the test), but also (S-2) with high probability, H would not have passed the
test so well, were H false” (92). Mayo’s two criteria are inspired by the Neyman-
Pearsonian maxim that good statistical tests minimize Type 1 and Type 2 errors,
but they are novel in at least two ways. First, Mayo’s criteria are applicable outside
of statistical contexts. For example, let H be the hypothesis that the Cleveland
Browns played an excellent team last weekend, and suppose our data is that the
Cleveland Browns lost their game. If the Cleveland Browns lose to all opponents
B O O K R E V I E W S
185
Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/the-philosophical-review/article-pdf/130/1/180/930307/180rescorla.pdf by WIKIPEDIA LIBRARY user on 03 July 2023

