Ambitwistor strings and
amplitudes in curved backgrounds
Stefan Nekovar
Jesus College
University of Oxford
A thesis submitted for the degree of
Doctor of Philosophy
Trinity 2018
arXiv:1812.09080v1  [hep-th]  21 Dec 2018

To Anton, Birgit and Carola
for their unconditional love and support

Abstract
Feynman diagrams have been superseded as the tool of choice for calcu-
lating scattering amplitudes. Various other methods are not only more
eﬃcient but also explicitly exhibit beautiful structures obscured by Feyn-
man diagrams. This thesis aims to lay some groundwork on how two of
these methods, ambitwistor strings and the double copy, can be gener-
alised to scattering in curved backgrounds.
In the ﬁrst part of this thesis, a heterotic ambitwistor string model coupled
to a non-abelian background gauge ﬁeld is constructed. It is shown that
after decoupling gravity this model is anomaly free if and only if the
background ﬁeld is a solution to the Yang-Mills equations. A ﬁxed gluon
vertex operator for the aforementioned heterotic model as well as a vertex
operator encoding graviton, B-ﬁeld and dilaton for type II ambitwistor
strings in a curved background are presented. It is shown that they are
BRST closed if and only if they correspond to physical on-shell states.
In the second part, sandwich plane waves are considered. It is shown that
scattering of gluons and gravitons is well deﬁned on these backgrounds.
3-point amplitudes are calculated using quantum ﬁeld theory techniques
and a double copy relation between gluons on a gauge theory plane wave
and gravitons on a gravitational plane wave is proposed. Using the results
from the ﬁrst part of this thesis, it is then shown that curved background
heterotic and type II ambitwistor string models correctly reproduce these
3-point amplitudes on sandwich plane waves.

Statement of Originality
This thesis contains results obtained from work done in collaboration with Tim
Adamo, Eduardo Casali and Lionel Mason.
Chapter 3.1 is mostly based on
T. Adamo, E. Casali and S. Nekovar, Yang-Mills theory from the world-
sheet, Phys. Rev. D98 (2018) 086022, arXiv:1807.09171 [hep-th]. [1]
Chapter 3.2 is mostly based on
T. Adamo, E. Casali and S. Nekovar, Ambitwistor string vertex operators
on curved backgrounds, arXiv:1809.04489 [hep-th]. [2]
Chapter 4.1 is mostly based on
T. Adamo, E. Casali, L. Mason and S. Nekovar, Scattering on plane
waves and the double copy, Class.
Quant.
Grav.
35 (2018) 015004,
arXiv:1706.08925 [hep-th]. [3]
Chapter 4.2 is mostly based on
T. Adamo, E. Casali, L. Mason and S. Nekovar, Amplitudes on plane
waves from ambitwistor strings, JHEP 11 (2017) 160, arXiv:1708.09249
[hep-th]. [4]
Chapter 2 is expanded from the relevant review sections of the aforementioned papers.

Acknowledgements
First and foremost, I would like to thank my supervisor, Lionel Mason, for his guid-
ance and support throughout my DPhil. He has always been generous with his time
and very patient when explaining some new piece of mathematics or physics to me. I
very much enjoyed our joint work, but am also grateful that I was given the freedom
to pursue my own interests during my DPhil.
Working with Tim Adamo and Eduardo Casali has not only taught me a great
deal about physics but also been an incredibly enjoyable experience, for which I am
very grateful. Another thanks is due to Eduardo for carefully proofreading this thesis
and the many useful comments resulting from that.
During my ﬁrst two years in Oxford, Yvonne Geyer has been a constant source of
explanations, support and encouragement, thank you for that.
Thanks to the entire mathematical physics group in Oxford for being so welcom-
ing and approachable. I enjoyed our many entertaining and instructive discussions,
academic and otherwise, in particular with my oﬃcemate Robert.
This research has been funded by EPSRC grant EP/M50659X/1 and a Studien-
stiftung des deutschen Volkes scholarship.
Over the past few years, my housemates Thomas, Jack and Alison shared my joys
and had to put up with my miseries on a daily basis. Their friendship has provided
a point of sanity throughout my DPhil.
Out of the many friends I made in college, without whom my time in Oxford
would not have been this enjoyable, Thomas and Karan deserve a special mention.

Working together as social secretaries was a great experience and whenever I was
getting too busy, they took over my part of the job without much complaining.
I would like to thank my teammates Fabio, Krzysztof, Andy, Gytis, Sanders,
Christos, Adam, David, Jonas, Kuba, Sven, Nick and Tilo of the 2015/16 blues
volleyball team for much needed distraction and encouragement during a diﬃcult
year and them and all other friends I made at OUVC for the great times we spent
together.
Thanks are due to my family, in particular to my parents and my sister, who have
supported and encouraged me throughout my education.
Last but not least, I would like to thank Medha for her unwavering love and
support in the past years.

Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2
Review
10
2.1
Ambitwistor strings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.1.1
The scattering equations and CHY formulae . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.1.2
Ambitwistor space
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.1.3
Ambitwistor strings in ﬂat space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.1.3.1
The type II ambitwistor string
. . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.1.3.2
The heterotic ambitwistor string
. . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.1.4
Type II model on a curved background . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.2
Plane wave backgrounds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
2.2.1
Gravitational plane waves
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
2.2.2
Gauge theory plane waves . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3
Ambitwistor strings on non-trivial backgrounds
34
3.1
Heterotic ambitwistor strings on gauge ﬁeld backgrounds . . . . . . .
34
3.1.1
The worldsheet model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.1.2
Yang-Mills equations as an anomaly . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3.1.3
Recoupling gravity and the gauge anomaly . . . . . . . . . . .
40
3.2
Vertex operators for heterotic and type II ambitwistor strings in curved
backgrounds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
i

3.2.1
Heterotic ambitwistor string . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
3.2.1.1
Gluon vertex operator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
3.2.2
Type II ambitwistor string . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
3.2.2.1
Graviton vertex operator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
3.2.2.2
B-ﬁeld vertex operator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
3.2.2.3
Dilaton vertex operator
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
3.2.2.4
NS-NS vertex operator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
3.2.3
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
4
Scattering on plane waves
61
4.1
Results from quantum ﬁeld theory in curved spacetimes . . . . . . . .
61
4.1.1
Free ﬁelds on plane wave backgrounds and inner products
. .
65
4.1.1.1
Scalar wave equation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
4.1.1.2
Spin one . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
4.1.1.3
Spin two . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
4.1.1.4
Charged free ﬁelds in plane wave gauge ﬁelds
. . . .
73
4.1.1.5
Spin one on a gauge background
. . . . . . . . . . .
75
4.1.1.6
Huygens’ principle and tails . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
4.1.2
3-point amplitudes on the gravitational background . . . . . .
78
4.1.2.1
Scalars . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
4.1.2.2
Gauge theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
4.1.2.3
Gravity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
4.1.3
3-point amplitudes on the gauge ﬁeld background . . . . . . .
85
4.1.3.1
Charged scalars . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
4.1.3.2
Gauge theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
4.1.4
The double copy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
4.1.5
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
90
4.2
Amplitudes from ambitwistor strings
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
93
ii

4.2.1
Type II model on a gravitational plane wave . . . . . . . . . .
96
4.2.1.1
Worldsheet model and ﬁxed vertex operators
. . . .
96
4.2.1.2
Descent . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
99
4.2.1.3
3-point function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
101
4.2.2
Heterotic model on a gauge ﬁeld plane wave background
. . .
106
4.2.2.1
Worldsheet model and vertex operators . . . . . . . .
106
4.2.2.2
3-point function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
109
4.2.3
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
110
5
Conclusions
113
A Usefull current algebra identities
116
B Linearised supergravity equations
118
B.1 Metric perturbation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
118
B.2 B-ﬁeld perturbation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
119
B.3 Dilaton perturbation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
120
C Classical S-matrix & Tree level integrands
121
C.1 Classical S-matrix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
121
C.2 Tree level integrands . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
123
D The impulsive plane wave
125
D.1 Gauge theory background
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
125
D.2 Gravitational background
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
127
Bibliography
130
iii

List of Figures
2.1
The sandwich plane wave with xa-directions suppressed. The function
Hab(u) is non-vanishing only in the shaded region; the in- and out-
regions are both ﬂat. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
iv

Chapter 1
Introduction
Physics has seen two major revolutions in the twentieth century: General relativity,
linking gravity directly to the inseparable notion of spacetime and describing the
universe on its largest scales, and quantum theory, fundamentally changing our un-
derstanding of the nature of elementary particles that make up matter on its smallest
scales.
From the mathematical point of view, the proper tool to formulate general rela-
tivity is diﬀerential geometry. It provides a very clear and precise understanding of
the theory. This geometric formulation of gravity is widely considered to be the most
elegant physical theory known today. In more practical terms, general relativity has
been incredibly successful, both explaining and predicting physical eﬀects that are
incompatible with Newton’s theory of gravity. This ranges from the early tests using
the perihelion advance of mercury and bending of light rays by the sun to the recent
experimental discovery of gravitational waves. Its results even need to be taken into
account in the ubiquitous satellite navigation systems like GPS.
Quantum theory, in particular in the guise of (perturbative) quantum ﬁeld theory,
can boast of similar successes when it comes to predicting the behaviour of physical
systems. The anomalous magnetic dipole moment of the electron can be predicted by
QED and measured very precisely. This yields the most accurate agreement between
theoretical prediction and experimental results known in physics. In fact, the entire
1

standard model is a quantum ﬁeld theory. Furthermore quantum ﬁeld theory has
spread beyond elementary particle physics and is also used in ﬁelds like condensed
matter theory or topology.
While many of the initial problems of quantum ﬁeld
theory have been resolved, most notably via the systematic treatment of inﬁnities by
renormalisation, it still lacks a precise mathematical formulation. This clearly shows
that there is a considerable amount of work to be done to reach a similar level of
conceptual clarity as in general relativity.
Even from the perspective of physics, there have been recent developments in
quantum ﬁeld theory that are entirely unexpected from the standard perturbative
point of view and require us to search for a more thorough understanding of the
underlying theory. These include supersymmetric localisation, the existence of inte-
grable quantum ﬁeld theories, quantum ﬁeld theories without Lagrangian formulation
and dualities like the famous AdS/CFT correspondence.
Another development indicating that our understanding of quantum ﬁeld theory is
still rather incomplete has taken place in the theory of scattering amplitudes, objects
ﬁrmly in the realm of perturbative QFT. These are the main physical observables
considered in quantum ﬁeld theory. Particle physics experiments like the LHC es-
sentially measure these quantities and compare them to predictions from theoretical
models.
The standard method to calculate the S-matrix is to evaluate Feynman diagrams
order by order in perturbation theory. This yields results in good agreement with
experiments, however calculations tend to get out of hand quickly when increasing
the number of loops or external particles. Furthermore, the ﬁnal answers are often
much simpler and more elegant than one would expect from looking at the individual
contribution of each Feynman diagram. This is illustrated nicely by the famous Parke-
Taylor formula for the tree level, colour ordered, maximally helicity violating n-gluon
2

amplitude. Using the spinor helicity formalism1 and stripping oﬀthe momentum
conservation delta functions, the amplitude is simply
A[1−, 2−, 3+, ..., n+] =
⟨12⟩4
⟨12⟩...⟨n1⟩
(1.1)
and this equation holds for all n ≥3. From the point of view of Feynman diagrams,
the existence of such a formula is a miracle: The number of diagrams contributing
to the tree level n-gluon amplitude grows fast [5] and already exceeds 100 for n = 7.
The Parke-Taylor amplitude was initially conjectured in [6] and its proof two years
later used recursion relations instead of Feynman diagrams [7].
Amplitudes with
unexpectedly simple structure like equation (1.1) led physicists to believe that there
ought to be more direct ways to arrive at these results than the standard diagram
expansions, like the oﬀ-shell recursions used to prove the Parke-Taylor formula. This
resulted in the development of various new methods to calculate scattering amplitudes
over the past years, a recent review of (some of) these can be found in [5].
One of these methods is known as the double copy, often heuristically written
as gravity = (gauge theory)2, which essentially means that a gravity amplitude can
be obtained from the product of two gauge theory amplitudes (all stripped of their
respective momentum conserving delta functions and coupling constants). The ﬁrst
relation of this kind was discovered with the help of string theory, where it was
found that closed string tree amplitudes can be obtained from summing over certain
products of two open string tree amplitudes and kinematic coeﬃcients [8]. In the
α′ →0 limit, where these tree level string amplitudes with massless external states
turn into regular tree amplitudes for massless particles, this turns into an analogous
statement about graviton and colour ordered gluon amplitudes. This is known as
KLT relations. While they follow the general theme of the double copy, they are not
1This formalism makes use of the fact that the momentum of a massless particle can be de-
composed into two-component spinors and makes manifest that amplitudes of massless particles
transform under little group representations determined by the external states. An introduction to
this formalism can be found in [5].
3

honest squaring relations, as the KLT kernel for a large number of external particles
is highly non-trivial.
Another incarnation of the double copy makes use of the BCJ relations or colour
kinematics duality [9–11]. Remember that a general tree level gauge theory amplitude
can be written as
A =
X
i
cini
Pi
,
(1.2)
where ci are the colour factors, ni the kinematic numerators and Pi the propagator
factors contributing to the ith diagram2. Recall that the colour factors are built from
structure constants and hence satisfy certain algebraic properties that follow from
the antisymmetry of these structure constants as well as their Jacobi identities. The
kinematic numerators are not unique. Using so called generalised gauge transforma-
tions, which leave the amplitude invariant, they can be brought into a form ˜ni, that
satisﬁes the same algebraic identities as the colour factors ci. Then the gravity ampli-
tude can be obtained by replacing the colour factors in (1.2) by these new kinematic
numerators ˜ni:
M =
X
i
˜nini
Pi
(1.3)
Various proofs for this relation exist at tree level [12–16]. While the BCJ version
of the double copy is equivalent to the KLT relations at tree level, it makes the
squaring manifest directly and more importantly is conjectured to also hold at loop
level [10]. This conjecture has been applied to calculations at increasingly high loop
orders, which have been considered computationally inaccessible prior to the discovery
of the colour kinematics duality [17–21].
These calculations have shown that the
onset of UV divergences in supergravity has to happen at much higher loop order
than expected from standard techniques [22–24]. There have been papers suggesting
2We blow up each 4-point vertex by inserting the appropriate propagator in the numerator and
denominator at the s, t or u-channel colour contribution of said vertex, so that we only need to
consider trivalent graphs.
4

that four-dimensional N = 8 supergravity could even be perturbatively ﬁnite in the
UV [25,26], however recent work does not support this conjecture [27].
Note that the double copy simpliﬁes considerably for the 3-point tree level ampli-
tudes, where the colour factor is simply the structure constant itself. It is antisym-
metric under the interchange of external particles. However, as gluons are bosons,
the amplitude needs to be symmetric. Hence the kinematic “numerator” has to be
antisymmetric under the interchange of external particles as well and therefore auto-
matically satisﬁes the same algebraic property as the colour factor. There obviously
is no propagator in this case either. Then the gravity amplitude literally is the square
of the colour stripped gluon amplitude.
There also exist examples of a classical version of the double copy, relating non-
linear solutions in gauge theory and gravity [28–38]. Choosing an appropriate gauge,
certain spacetimes, for example the Schwarzschild black hole, can be related to clas-
sical solutions of gauge ﬁeld theories, in this case the Coulomb solution of electro-
magnetism, via a squaring relation. These results heavily rely on properties of the
algebraically special solutions studied and there seems to be no clear general formal-
ism analogous to the amplitudes one yet.
Another direction of progress in amplitudes arose from twistor theory. Twistor
space is non-locally related to complexiﬁed spacetime via the incidence relations: a
point in spacetime corresponds to a line in twistor space, while points in twistor
space correspond to certain two dimensional null hyperplanes, usually referred to as
α planes, in complexiﬁed spacetime. It was noted that the Parke-Taylor formula (1.1)
adapted to N = 4 supersymmetric Yang-Mills theory can be expressed elegantly in
twistor space [39]. This was subsequently extended to a full formulation of N = 4
SYM as a string theory with supersymmetric twistor space as target space [40–42].
The resulting formula for n particle scattering amplitudes is a remarkably simple
5

integral over the moduli space of rational curves from the worldsheet3 with n marked
points to supersymmetric twistor space, where the MHV degree is ﬁxed by the degree
of the rational curve. To simplify our life even further, the integration over the moduli
space localises to solutions of the so called scattering equations. The result is known
as RSV formula [43] and it is completely unexpected from the Feynman diagram
perspective, the non-local nature of twistor space essentially allowed us to get around
all the usual complexity of graph combinatorics. There also is an analogous twistor
string model for N = 8 supergravity [44].
This localisation to the scattering equations is a persistent feature of all twistor
string theories, however they remained somewhat unsatisfactory in the sense that they
were conﬁned to four spacetime dimensions and required maximal supersymmetry.
This was remedied when the so called CHY formulae for scattering amplitudes were
discovered [45–47]. They express n particle tree level amplitudes of a multitude of
theories, both with and without supersymmetry, as integrals over the moduli space
of the Riemann sphere with n punctures. These integrals again localise to solutions
of the scattering equations and the formulae are valid in any dimension. The precise
integrand is determined by the choice of theory for which one wants to compute the
amplitudes.
The form of these amplitudes as integrals over the moduli space of n-punctured
Riemann spheres is highly suggestive of genus zero string theory amplitudes with
n vertex operator insertions. This was conﬁrmed by the discovery of ambitwistor
strings [48], which reproduced the CHY amplitudes from a chiral worldsheet model
with ﬁnite massless spectrum and no free parameters on the worldsheet. The target
space of this model is the space of complex null geodesics, which is a close relative
of twistor space4 known as ambitwistor space.
The localisation of the integral to
3Strictly speaking, this is only known to be true for genus zero corresponding to tree level am-
plitudes.
4In the case of four dimensional ﬂat space, the corresponding projective ambitwistor space is a
6

solutions of the scattering equations is automatically built into the model by the
ambitwistor Penrose transform of momentum eigenstates.
A variety of ambitwistor string models have been constructed to reproduce the tree
level scattering amplitudes for a wide array of ﬁeld theories [49–51]. Loop amplitudes
have been obtained from these models by considering worldsheet correlators at higher
genus [52–54] or on the nodal Riemann sphere [55–59]. Ambitwistor strings can also
be viewed as null strings quantised in an unusual way [60,61]. Other aspects that have
been studied include four dimensional models [62, 63], pure spinor versions [64–67],
ambitwistor string ﬁeld theory [68,69], a proposed ambitwistor string propagator [70]
and the spectrum in both GSO projections [71]. Ambitwistor string methods have
also been applied to the study of asymptotic symmetries and soft theorems [72–75]
and even spacetime conformal invariance [76].
A remarkable feature of type II ambitwistor strings is that they remain a free
worldsheet CFT in a curved supergravity background. Quantum consistency of this
model is equivalent to the background ﬁelds obeying the NS-NS supergravity (gravity
coupled to a B-ﬁeld and dilaton) equations of motion [77].
This yields an exact
description of a non-linear ﬁeld theory as free two dimensional CFT.
A major goal of modern theoretical physics is to obtain a theory that incorporates
both gravity and quantum theory. Various attempts at such a theory have been made
with varying degrees of success or lack thereof, including loop quantum gravity as well
as M-theory and most prominently string theory, which can be viewed as a limiting
case of M-theory.
One of the ﬁrst attempts to marry quantum theory to gravity was to simply put a
perturbative quantum ﬁeld theory on a classical curved background spacetime. The
best known triumph of this program is the discovery of Hawking radiation emitted
quadric in the product of projective twistor space and its dual. This also explains its name, ambi is
a Latin preﬁx meaning “both”.
7

by black holes [78], allowing their treatment as thermodynamic objects with ﬁnite
temperature.
Despite the successes of quantum ﬁeld theory in curved spacetime,
curved background amplitude5 calculations have not been able to keep pace with the
recent progress in ﬂat space. While standard perturbative QFT computations tend to
get out of hand even faster in curved spacetimes, none of the modern tools mentioned
above are available there. In this thesis, we aim to make some initial steps towards
the exploitation of two of these modern methods in curved backgrounds:
• Like regular string theory, ambitwistor strings can be placed in curved back-
grounds. This raises the usual questions about quantum consistency of these
theories and if sensible correlators can still be calculated. While it is known
that ambitwistor strings yield elegant formulas for amplitudes in ﬂat space,
the corresponding statement in curved backgrounds is not clear (even in those
backgrounds where scattering amplitudes are still well deﬁned).
• Recall that there are two incarnations of the double copy, one for scatter-
ing amplitudes in ﬂat space and another one for classical solutions of the
equations of motion.
This gives rise to hope that a suitably adapted com-
bination of the two might still work in curved backgrounds.
Similar to the
heuristic double copy formula, this can be written as Gravity + gravity =
(Gauge theory + gauge theory)2.
While these questions cannot be answered deﬁnitively at the moment, we are able to
report some progress supporting the above ideas in this thesis.
5Or other physical observables like correlation functions, as the usual notion of scattering ampli-
tudes is not well deﬁned in generic curved backgrounds.
8

1.1
Outline
This thesis is divided in two main parts, one mostly concerned with ambitwistor
strings in curved backgrounds, while the other focuses on scattering on plane waves.
Before we present our research, we review relevant previous work in chapter 2. In
particular, we describe ambitwistor string models in chapter 2.1 and (sandwich) plane
wave spacetimes and gauge ﬁelds in chapter 2.2.
Chapter 3 is concerned with results about ambitwistor string models in generic
curved backgrounds.
In chapter 3.1, we construct a heterotic ambitwistor string
in a non-abelian background gauge ﬁeld and show that the anomaly cancellation
conditions impose the Yang-Mills equations on this background ﬁeld exactly, if one
decouples the gravitational degrees of freedom. In chapter 3.2, vertex operators for
the curved background heterotic and type II ambitwistor string are proposed and
we show that BRST closure imposes appropriate gauge conditions and equations of
motion for these operators to correspond to linear perturbations of the background
ﬁelds by gluon as well as graviton, B-ﬁeld and dilaton insertions.
Chapter 4 is concerned with scattering on sandwich plane wave backgrounds. In
chapter 4.1, we generalise results about the well deﬁnedness of the scattering problem
in these backgrounds from scalars to gluons and gravitons. This allows us to calculate
3-point amplitudes for gluons on a gauge ﬁeld plane wave and gravitons on a plane
wave spacetime.
We then propose a double copy construction relating these two
objects. In chapter 4.2, we calculate the 3-point correlators of gluon vertex operators
in the plane wave background heterotic ambitwistor string and of graviton vertex
operators in the plane wave background type II ambitwistor string. These correlators
are shown to agree with the amplitudes obtained in the previous chapter.
In chapter 5, we summarise and discuss our ﬁndings and propose some directions
for future research.
9

Chapter 2
Review
2.1
Ambitwistor strings
Ambitwistor string theories are worldsheet models whose spectra contain only mass-
less degrees of freedom. Our focus will be on those models whose spectra include
ordinary, massless supergravity and gauge theory; these are known as the type II and
heterotic ambitwistor strings, respectively. After a brief review of the CHY formulae
and ambitwistor space, we describe these models on ﬂat backgrounds and how the
type II model can be coupled to curved background ﬁelds.
The material in this chapter is relevant to chapter 3 and chapter 4.2 and can be
skipped, if the reader is familiar with these topics.
2.1.1
The scattering equations and CHY formulae
While we do not make explicit use of them in this thesis1, the scattering equations
are an essential feature of ambitwistor strings and a brief review is in order. These
equations have appeared in the context of dual models [79–81] and string theory [82,
83] much before the search for alternatives to Feynman diagrams began. We, however,
will focus on their role in “modern” amplitudes as presented in [45–47]. Given a set of
null momenta ki µ with i ∈{1, ..., n} satisfying momentum conservation Pn
i=1 ki µ = 0,
1We calculate some curved background 3-point amplitudes using ambitwistor strings in chap-
ter 4.2. However, it will soon become clear that the scattering equations cannot appear below 4
points.
10

let us consider the maps Pµ : CP1 →C deﬁned as
P(z) =
n
X
i=1
ki
z −zi
.
(2.1)
Its residues associate an external momentum ki to each pole zi on the Riemann sphere.
In chapter 2.1.3 it will become clear that from the perspective of ambitwistor strings,
this is best viewed as a meromorphic section of the canonical bundle of the (genus
zero) worldsheet, Pµdz ∈Ω0(Σ, KΣ). The meromorphic quadratic diﬀerential P 2 has
only simple poles, as our external momenta ki µ are null:
P 2(z) =
n
X
i=1
X
j̸=i
ki · kj
(z −zi) (z −zj).
(2.2)
Since non-vanishing meromorphic quadratic diﬀerentials on the Riemann sphere can-
not be free of poles, one can set P 2 = 0 by setting the residues of (2.2) to zero. This
yields the scattering equations:
ResziP 2(z) =
X
j̸=i
ki · kj
zi −zj
= ki · P(zi)
(2.3)
The minimum number of poles for meromorphic quadratic diﬀerentials on CP1 is
actually four. It should therefore be suﬃcient to kill the residues of all but three poles
to set P 2 to zero globally. This is also reﬂected in the scattering equations: Using
momentum conservation, one can show that they are invariant under the SL(2, C)
symmetry of the moduli space of the n-punctured Riemann sphere. Hence only n −3
of them are independent and these have (n −3)! diﬀerent solutions [84].
An important feature of the scattering equations is that they relate the factori-
sation channels of amplitudes to those boundary points of the moduli space of the
n-punctured Riemann sphere, where some of the punctures approach each other.
These boundary points are included in the Deligne-Mumford compactiﬁcation of the
moduli space, which has been studied in the context of string perturbation theory [85].
Another remarkable feature is that they lead to a particularly simple version of the
KLT relations by eﬀectively diagonalising the KLT kernel.
11

The scattering equations make their star appearance in the CHY formulae for
scattering amplitudes [46,47]. Tree level amplitudes are written as
A(0)
n =
Z
(CP1)
n
Qn
i=1 dzi
vol SL(2, C)
Y
j
′¯δ (kj · P(zj)) In (zl, kl, ϵl) ,
(2.4)
where In (zl, kl, ϵl) is a theory dependent integrand encoding the external kinematics.
The primed product of delta functions is deﬁned as
Y
j
′¯δ (kj · P(zj)) := zklzlmzmk
Y
j̸=k,l,m
¯δ (kj · P(zj))
(2.5)
where zkl = zk −zl. This does not depend on the choice of k, l, m and imposes the
scattering equations, remember that only n −3 of them are independent. Notice
that we wrote the measure in its permutation invariant form and had to therefore
divide it by the (inﬁnite) volume of SL(2, C). By using the SL(2, C) invariance to ﬁx
three points zk, zl, zm on the Riemann sphere we can remove this redundancy. This
introduces a Jacobian zklzlmzmk
dzkdzldzm, so that the measure becomes
Qn
i=1 dzi
vol SL(2, C) →
Y
i̸=k,l,m
dzi zklzlmzmk,
(2.6)
which leaves us with n −3 integrations which are exactly ﬁxed by the delta functions
imposing the scattering equations.
As mentioned above, the structure of (2.4) is identical for all theories and the
integrand In (zl, kl, ϵl) determines, which amplitudes we are actually calculating. In-
tegrands for a whole zoo of theories are known, see e.g. [86,87], however we will focus
on the original integrands for Yang-Mills theory, Einstein gravity coupled to a B-ﬁeld
and dilaton as well as a bi-adjoint scalar theory to illustrate these formulae. There
are only two basic ingredients necessary to construct the integrands for these three
theories. First one needs the Parke-Taylor factors encoding the colour structure
C1...n =
X
σ∈Sn/Zn
Tr (T aσ(1) ... T aσ(n))
zσ(1)σ(2)zσ(2)σ(3) ... zσ(n−1)σ(n)zσ(n)σ(1)
.
(2.7)
12

The second ingredient is obtained from the matrix
Ψ =
A
−CT
C
B

(2.8)
encoding the kinematic data via
Aij = ki · kj
zij
Bij = ϵi · ϵj
zij
Cij = ϵi · kj
zij
(2.9)
Aii = 0
Bii = 0
Cii = −
X
j̸=i
ϵi · kj
zij
.
(2.10)
Using the scattering equations, it is easy to see that the vector (1, ..., 1, 0, ..., 0) is in
the kernel of Ψ. The second vector in the kernel of Ψ is (z1, ..., zn, 0, ..., 0), showing
this explicitly requires momentum conservation and k2
i = ki ·ϵi = 0 in addition to the
scattering equations. These two vectors actually span the two dimensional kernel of
Ψ. Therefore, the Pfaﬃan (square root of the determinant) of Ψ vanishes. However
the quantity
Pf′(Ψ) = (−1)i+j
zij
Pf
 Ψij
,
(2.11)
where Ψij is the same matrix with columns and rows i and j removed, does not
depend on the choice of i, j and will yield a non-vanishing answer. This so called
reduced Pfaﬃan is the second ingredient we were looking for.
We are now ready to write down the integrands In (zl, kl, ϵl). Yang-Mills theory
requires both kinematic and colour data, so the integrand is
IYM
n
(zl, kl, ϵl) = C1...n · Pf′(Ψ).
(2.12)
In a stunning manifestation of the double copy, the gravity integrand is obtained from
this by replacing the colour factor by another kinematic Pfaﬃan
Igr
n (zl, kl, ϵl) = Pf′ (Ψ) · Pf′ 
˜Ψ

,
(2.13)
note that the tilde on the second kinematic matrix corresponds to Ψ with a tilded
polarisation vector and the same external momenta. The graviton and B-ﬁeld polar-
13

isations are the traceless symmetric and skew part of ϵµ˜ϵν, while the dilaton corre-
sponds to the trace. The bi-adjoint scalar will simply have two colour factors and no
reduced Pfaﬃan, which is sometimes referred to as zeroth copy.
Notice that the structure of equation (2.4) resembles a genus zero string theory
amplitude. It is natural to expect that it actually originates from some worldsheet
theory. This is indeed the case, ambitwistor strings yield exactly this type of ampli-
tude. We will turn to a review of these models after a brief introduction to ambitwistor
space.
2.1.2
Ambitwistor space
The space of all complex null geodesics in a complex spacetime manifold (M, g) is
called projective ambitwistor space PA. It has been used to study physical ﬁelds,
which can be encoded in its holomorphic structure [88–90]. As in the case of twistor
space, these ﬁelds are automatically deﬁned up to gauge transformations on PA,
however unlike in twistor theory, they are not forced to obey any ﬁeld equations2.
We will simply outline some of the most important properties of ambitwistor space
here, a recent review in the context of ambitwistor strings3 can be found in [48].
The construction of projective ambitwistor space works as follows: Consider the
holomorphic cotangent bundle T ∗M and restrict covectors p to be null with respect
to the metric p2 := g−1(p, p) = 0 to obtain the null cotangent bundle
T ∗
NM =

(x, p) ∈T ∗M|p2 = 0
	
.
(2.14)
Remember that a rescaling of null momenta simply corresponds to a reparametrisa-
tion of null geodesics. Hence we quotient T ∗
NM by the vector ﬁeld pµ
∂
∂pµ to ﬁnd its
2This can be seen as a disadvantage, as we want these ﬁelds to obey their respective equations
of motion. On the other hand side, twistor theory imposes equations that are too restrictive to be
physical, reducing the ﬁelds to their (anti-)self dual sectors. Moreover, ambitwistor strings seem to
partially remedy this problem by imposing the correct equations of motion via BRST cohomology.
3Amongst other things, the authors discuss the details of the supersymmetric version of am-
bitwistor space.
While this is the version relevant for the ambitwistor string, the concepts are
similar to those of the standard ambitwistor space presented here.
14

projective version PT ∗
NM. To obtain the space of null geodesics from this scale free
null cotangent bundle, we have to now quotient by the generator of null geodesics
p · ∇= pµ
 ∂
∂xµ
+ Γρ
µνpρ
∂
∂pν

,
(2.15)
which yields:
PA = PT ∗
NM.
p · ∇
(2.16)
The double ﬁbration property of this construction is nicely illustrated by
PT ∗
NM
πPA ↙
↘πM
PA
M
,
(2.17)
where a ﬁbre of πM is the lightcone of the base point and a ﬁbre of πPA is the null
geodesic (along with its unscaled momentum at every point) corresponding to the
base point. This also allows us to understand the relation between spacetime and
ambitwistor space: A point in ambitwistor space corresponds to a null geodesic in
spacetime by construction, while a point in spacetime corresponds to the (quadric)
surface of all null geodesics through said point in PA.
Any cotangent bundle carries a natural symplectic structure with symplectic po-
tential (or tautological one form) θ = pµdxµ. This symplectic structure obviously
cannot survive on the 2d −3 dimensional space PA, however the symplectic poten-
tial descends to projective ambitwistor space in the shape of a non-degenerate, line
bundle valued one form θ ∈Ω1 (PA, O(1)), which is called a contact structure.
Using this contact structure in combination with Kodaira theory, the construction
of PA from spacetime can be reversed: Given PA with its contact structure, one can
reconstruct the original spacetime manifold up to conformal transformations [90].
Going one step further, a small deformation of the complex structure of PA that
preserves the contact structure θ yields a small deformation of the conformal structure
of spacetime.
15

Like in twistor theory, the Penrose transform relates ﬁelds in spacetime to coho-
mology classes on ambitwistor space. Its precise statement is
Theorem 1 (Ambitwistor Penrose transform) Trace free symmetric ﬁelds on
spacetime modulo gauge transformations are mapped to cohomology classes on am-
bitwistor space as:
H1 (PA, O(n)) =







0
n < −1
H0 (PT ∗
NM, O(n + 1)).
p · ∇H0 (PT ∗
NM, O(n))
n ≥−1
A (trace free symmetric) ﬁeld on spacetime corresponds to a cohomology class in
H0 (PT ∗
NM, O(n + 1)) by contracting all its free indices with pµ. Consider n = 1
for example, this yields a graviton in the form hµνpµpν. Similarly, spin s ﬁelds are
obtained from n = s −1. A detailed proof can be found in the literature [48,91], we
will simply sketch the main idea here. Consider the following short exact sequence:
0 →OPA(n) →OPT ∗
NM(n)
p·∇
→OPT ∗
NM(n + 1) →0
(2.18)
The Penrose transform can then be obtained directly from the corresponding long
exact sequence in cohomology. The relevant subsequence is (δ is the usual connecting
homomorphism)
0 →H0 (PT ∗
NM, O(n))
p·∇
→H0 (PT ∗
NM, O(n + 1))
δ→H1 (PA, O(n)) →0,
(2.19)
which implies theorem 1.
From the point of view of ambitwistor strings, a key feature of the Penrose trans-
form is the way it acts on momentum k eigenstates in ﬂat space. Fields proportional
to eikx in spacetime turn into Dolbeault cohomology classes with representatives pro-
portional to ¯δ(k ·p) on PA. This will ultimately impose the scattering equations (2.3)
in ambitwistor string models [48].
16

2.1.3
Ambitwistor strings in ﬂat space
For ﬂat backgrounds, ambitwistor strings are given by constrained chiral CFTs in two
dimensions, governing holomorphic maps from a Riemann surface Σ to ambitwistor
space. As mentioned in the introduction, there is a small zoo of these ambitwistor
strings [49–51].
We will be interested in two particular models: the type II and
heterotic ambitwistor strings, which were introduced in [48].
2.1.3.1
The type II ambitwistor string
The type II ambitwistor string is described by the worldsheet action (in conformal
gauge):
S = 1
2π
Z
Σ
Pµ ¯∂Xµ + ¯ψµ ¯∂ψµ −e
2 ηµνPµPν + ¯χ ψµPµ + χ ηµν ¯ψµPν ,
(2.20)
with the worldsheet matter ﬁelds {Pµ, Xµ, ¯ψµ, ψµ} having holomorphic conformal
weight {1, 0, 1
2, 1
2}, respectively.4 The PX-system has bosonic statistics, while the
¯ψψ-system is fermionic. In other words,
Pµ ∈Ω0(Σ, KΣ) ,
Xµ ∈Ω0(Σ) ,
¯ψµ, ψν ∈ΠΩ0(Σ, K1/2
Σ ) .
(2.21)
The gauge ﬁelds e, ¯χ, χ act as Lagrange multipliers, enforcing the constraints P 2 = 0,
ψ · P = 0 = ¯ψ · P, and carry non-trivial conformal weights:
e ∈Ω0,1(Σ, TΣ) ,
¯χ, χ ∈ΠΩ0,1(Σ, T 1/2
Σ ) .
(2.22)
The constraints imposed by these Lagrange multipliers are conjugate to the gauge
transformations
δXµ = α ηµνPν −ϵ ηµν ¯ψν −¯ϵ ψµ ,
δPµ = 0 ,
δψµ = ϵ ηµνPν ,
δ ¯ψµ = ¯ϵ Pµ ,
δe = ¯∂α + 2(χ ¯ϵ + ¯χϵ) ,
δχ = ¯∂ϵ ,
δ ¯χ = ¯∂¯ϵ ,
4This form of the type II ambitwistor string, given in [77], combines the two real worldsheet
Majorana fermion systems of the original formulation [48] into a single complex fermion system.
17

where α is a bosonic gauge parameter of holomorphic conformal weight −1 and ϵ, ¯ϵ
are fermionic gauge parameters of holomorphic conformal weight −1
2. These gauge
symmetries eﬀectively reduce the target space to (super) ambitwistor space.
The gauge freedoms can be used to set e = χ = ¯χ = 0 via the standard Fadeev-
Popov procedure. The resulting gauge-ﬁxed action is manifestly free:
S = 1
2π
Z
Σ
Pµ ¯∂Xµ + ¯ψµ ¯∂ψµ + b ¯∂c + ¯b ¯∂¯c + β ¯∂γ + ¯β ¯∂¯γ .
(2.23)
The c-ghost, a fermionic ﬁeld of conformal weight (−1, 0), is associated with holo-
morphic reparametrisation invariance on the worldsheet, and ¯c (with the same quan-
tum numbers as c) is associated with the gauge transformations generated by the
P 2 = 0 constraint. The bosonic ghosts γ, ¯γ are both left-moving, with conformal
weight (−1
2, 0), and are associated with the gauge transformations generated by the
constraints ψ · P = 0 = ¯ψ · P.
The BRST-charge resulting from this gauge ﬁxing procedure is
Q =
I
c T + bc ∂c + ¯c
2 ηµνPµPν + ¯γ ψµPµ + γ ηµν ¯ψµPν −2γ¯γ¯b ,
(2.24)
where T is the holomorphic stress tensor for all ﬁelds except the (b, c) ghost system.
Using the free OPEs associated with (2.23)
Xµ(z) Pν(w) ∼
δµ
ν
z −w ,
ψµ(z) ¯ψν(w) ∼
δµ
ν
z −w ,
(2.25)
and likewise for the ghost ﬁelds, it is straightforward to calculate any possible anoma-
lies. Indeed, one ﬁnds
Q2 = (d −10) c ∂3c
4
,
(2.26)
so the only anomaly is the central charge, which is eliminated in the critical target
dimension d = 10. As long as the worldsheet is genus zero, Σ ∼= CP1, this conformal
anomaly will not aﬀect the computation of worldsheet correlation functions, except
for an overall numerical ambiguity we can ignore.
So from the point of view of
18

scattering amplitudes, the type II ambitwistor string is well-deﬁned on Minkowski
space of any dimension at genus zero (A caveat is in order here: Even at genus zero,
ambitwistor strings only exhibit the correct factorisation properties in the critical
dimension d = 10).
Using the BRST operator (2.24), one can investigate the spectrum of the model,
which is in one-to-one correspondence with that of type II supergravity [48, 52, 71].
For instance, it is easy to see that in the NS-NS sector, ﬁxed vertex operators of the
form
c ¯c δ(γ) δ(¯γ) ¯ϵµϵν ¯ψµ ψν ei k·X ,
(2.27)
are Q-closed provided k2 = k · ϵ = k · ¯ϵ = 0. The trace-free symmetric part of ¯ϵµϵν
encodes the massless graviton of type II supergravity. As we are using a complex
fermion system, B-ﬁeld and dilaton vertex operators are more subtle than in [48] and
can be obtained from ﬂat space limits of the vertex operators presented in chapter 3.2.
A key feature of the ambitwistor string is that the n-point sphere correlation functions
of these vertex operators, along with their picture number zero descendants, are equal
to the CHY formulae for the tree level scattering amplitudes of supergravity.
So to summarise: the type II ambitwistor string on a Minkowski background has
the spectrum of massless type II supergravity (after GSO projection), is well-deﬁned
up to a conformal anomaly (which is under control at genus zero), and produces the
tree level S-matrix of supergravity perturbatively around Minkowski space in terms
of worldsheet correlation functions.
2.1.3.2
The heterotic ambitwistor string
The heterotic ambitwistor string, as its name suggests, is obtained by replacing the
complex fermion system of the type II model with a single real fermion system while
simultaneously adding a holomorphic worldsheet current algebra. In Minkowski space,
19

the worldsheet action in conformal gauge is given by
S = 1
2π
Z
Σ
Pµ ¯∂Xµ + Ψµ ¯∂Ψµ −e
2ηµν PµPν + χ Ψ · P + SC ,
(2.28)
where Ψµ are fermionic with holomorphic conformal weight 1
2, and SC is the action
of a holomorphic worldsheet current algebra for some gauge group G (assumed to be
simple and compact). The current, ja, associated to SC has conformal weight (1, 0)
and its OPE on Σ takes the form:
ja(z) jb(w) ∼
k δab
(z −w)2 + f abc jc(w)
z −w
,
(2.29)
where the sans-serif Roman indices a, b, . . . = 1, . . . , dim g run over the adjoint rep-
resentation of G, k is the level of the worldsheet current algebra, and f abc are the
structure constants of g.
As before, holomorphic reparametrisation invariance and the gauge freedoms as-
sociated with the constraints P 2 = 0 and Ψ · P = 0 can be used to set e = χ = 0.
This results in a gauge ﬁxed action
S = 1
2π
Z
Σ
Pµ ¯∂Xµ + Ψµ ¯∂Ψµ + b ¯∂c + ¯b ¯∂¯c + β ¯∂γ + SC,
(2.30)
and BRST charge
Q =
I
c T + bc ∂c + ¯c
2 ηµνPµPν + γ ΨµPµ −
¯b
2 γ γ ,
(2.31)
where the ghost systems have the same statistics and quantum numbers as before.
The only obstruction to Q2 = 0 for the heterotic model is again given by the
central charge, which is
5
2d −41 + c, with c the central charge of the worldsheet
current algebra. So for any ﬁxed d ≤16, this anomaly can be eliminated by choosing
the worldsheet current algebra appropriately. However, at genus zero the conformal
anomaly is practically irrelevant.
In the gauge theory sector, the spectrum of the heterotic model agrees with that
of N = 1 super-Yang-Mills theory. Take the ﬁxed NS sector vertex operators
c ¯c δ(γ) ϵ · Ψ ja Ta ei k·X .
(2.32)
20

These vertex operators are Q-closed provided k2 = k · ϵ = 0, and therefore represent
gluons. Correlation functions of such vertex operators (and their descendants) at
genus zero lead to the CHY expressions [46] for the tree level scattering amplitudes
of Yang-Mills theory in d-dimensional Minkowski space.
The gravitational sector of the heterotic ambitwistor string corresponds to a cer-
tain non-unitary R2 supergravity [51]. At genus zero, these modes can be projected
out consistently by isolating the single trace contributions to the correlator from the
worldsheet current algebra. Double (and higher) trace terms – which contribute with
higher powers of the level k – are mediated by the non-unitary gravitational modes.
2.1.4
Type II model on a curved background
In [77] it was shown how to couple the type II ambitwistor string to curved background
ﬁelds from the NS-NS supergravity sector which has a metric gµν, B-ﬁeld Bµν and
dilaton Φ in its spectrum.
The curved space analogue of the gauge-ﬁxed worldsheet action (2.23), taking into
account certain subtleties associated with worldsheet reparametrisation invariance
(see [77] for details), is
S = 1
2π
Z
Σ
Pµ ¯∂Xµ + ¯ψµ ¯∂ψµ + ¯ψµ ψν Γµ
νρ ¯∂Xρ + b ¯∂c + ¯b ¯∂¯c + β ¯∂γ + ¯β ¯∂¯γ
+ 1
8π
Z
Σ
RΣ log
 e−2Φ√g

,
(2.33)
where Γµ
νρ are the Christoﬀel symbols for the Levi-Civita connection of gµν, RΣ is the
scalar curvature of the worldsheet and g is the (absolute value of the) determinant
of the metric. At ﬁrst, this action may not seem very promising: Even if we ignore
the dilaton dependent contribution in the second line, the connection term (required
to ensure spacetime covariance of the worldsheet action) couples the fermions to Xµ
non-polynomially. However, it was observed in [77] that the ﬁeld redeﬁnition
Pµ →Πµ := Pµ + ¯ψρ ψν Γρ
µν ,
(2.34)
21

leaves a free worldsheet action; the price for this simpliﬁcation is that the new ﬁeld
Πµ does not transform covariantly under spacetime diﬀeomorphisms. This is a small
price to pay for a manifestly solvable 2d CFT on any curved target spacetime, though.
After this ﬁeld redeﬁnition, the worldsheet action for the type II model on a curved
target space metric is:
S = 1
2π
Z
Σ
Πµ ¯∂Xµ + ¯ψµ ¯∂ψµ + b ¯∂c +¯b ¯∂¯c + β ¯∂γ + ¯β ¯∂¯γ + RΣ
4
log
 e−2Φ√g

, (2.35)
This still contains the dilaton dependent term (the ﬁnal term in the action) we ignored
previously. However, RΣ can always be taken to vanish locally, so this term does not
aﬀect the worldsheet OPEs of the model, which are the same as in ﬂat space with Πµ
playing the role of Pµ:
Xµ(z) Πν(w) ∼
δµ
ν
z −w ,
ψµ(z) ¯ψν(w) ∼
δµ
ν
z −w
(2.36)
Associated with this gauge-ﬁxed action is a curved version of the BRST charge
(2.24), taking the form:
Q =
I
c T + bc ∂c + ¯c
2 H + ¯γ G + γ ¯G −2γ¯γ¯b ,
(2.37)
where the currents G, ¯G and H generalise ψ · P, ¯ψ · P and P 2 to curved space,
respectively. The fermionic spin 3
2 currents are given by
G =ψµΠµ + ∂(ψµΓκ
µκ) −2∂(ψµ∂µΦ) + 1
3!ψµψνψκHµνκ ,
(2.38)
¯G =gµν ¯ψν(Πµ −Γκ
µλ ¯ψκψλ) −gµν∂( ¯ψκΓκ
µν) −2∂(gµν ¯ψµ∂νΦ) + 1
3!
¯ψµ ¯ψσ ¯ψλHµσλ ,
(2.39)
where Hµνσ is the background three-form. The third current is bosonic of spin 2,
22

given by5
H =gµν  Πµ −Γκ
µλ ¯ψκψλ  Πν −Γκ
νλ ¯ψκψλ
−1
2Rκλ
µν ¯ψκ ¯ψλψµψν
−gµν∂
 ΠρΓρ
µν

−¯ψκ∂ψλgµν∂λΓκ
µν + ψµ∂µ
 gρσ∂( ¯ψκΓκ
ρσ)

+ 1
2gµνHµκλψκψλ  Πν −Γρ
νσ ¯ψρψσ
+ 1
2
 Πµ −Γκ
µλ ¯ψκψλ
H ρσ
ν
¯ψρ ¯ψσ
+ 1
4gµνHµκλψκψλH ρσ
ν
¯ψρ ¯ψσ −1
3!ψµ ¯ψν ¯ψκ ¯ψλ∇µHνκλ −1
3!
¯ψµψνψκψλ∇µHνκλ
+ 1
2Hµνκ ¯ψκ∂
 Hµνλψλ
+ ∂(Hκλνψν) gκσΓλ
σρψρ −∂
 HκλνψνgκσΓλ
σρψρ
−1
2∂σHµνρψνψρ∂gσµ −1
12Hµνρ∂2Hµνρ + 1
2Γρ
µνHσλρψσψλ∂gµν
−2∂(gµνΠµ∂νΦ) −∂
  ¯ψκψλ(2∇κ∂λΦ −2gµνΓκ
µλ∂νΦ)

.
(2.40)
These currents are covariant with respect to target space diﬀeomorphisms and con-
formal primaries of the worldsheet CFT. This is despite the fact that they contain
various terms which do not appear to be manifestly covariant, due to the requirement
of normal-ordering on the worldsheet.
The stress tensor appearing in (2.37) can be broken into matter and ghost contri-
butions T = Tm + Tgh, with
Tm = −Πµ∂Xµ −1
2( ¯ψµ∂ψµ + ψµ∂¯ψµ) −1
2∂2 log(e−2Φ√g)
(2.41)
for the matter ﬁelds and
Tgh = ¯c∂¯b −2¯b∂¯c −3
2β∂γ −1
2γ∂β −3
2
¯β∂¯γ −1
2¯γ∂¯β
(2.42)
for the ghost ﬁelds, where we exclude the (b, c) ghost system as before.
Using the BRST charge and free OPEs of the worldsheet action, the anomalies
of the type II model on a curved background can be computed exactly. As in ﬂat
space, there is a conformal anomaly; remarkably, this anomaly is unaﬀected by the
background ﬁelds. In particular, it vanishes in d = 10 spacetime dimensions and can
be ignored at genus zero for the purposes of calculating scattering amplitudes.
5This expression for H corrects some typos made in [77]. We have checked that these modiﬁcations
do not alter any of the results in [4].
23

However, Q2 = 0 is also obstructed by anomalies related to the gauged currents
{G, ¯G, H}. These anomalies vanish if the algebra of currents is quantum mechanically
closed:
G(z) G(w) ∼0 ,
¯G(z) ¯G(w) ∼0 ,
(2.43)
G(z) ¯G(w) ∼
H
z −w ,
(2.44)
and these conditions do impose constraints on the background ﬁelds. The requirement
that the G(z)G(w) and ¯G(z) ¯G(w) OPEs be non-singular imposes
∂[µHνρσ] = 0 ,
Rµ[νρσ] = 0 ,
R(µν)ρσ = 0 ,
(2.45)
which are the usual Bianchi identities and symmetries of the Riemann tensor of the
background metric, along with dH = 0. This latter statement indicates that (locally)
H = dB; that is, H arises as the ﬁeld strength of the background B-ﬁeld. Note that
the conventional normalisation for the exterior derivative in this context is slightly
unusual, Hµνσ = ∂µBνσ + ∂νBσµ + ∂σBµν.
Dynamical constraints on the background ﬁelds emerge from the ﬁnal closure
requirement of (2.44), which imposes
R + 4∇µ∇µΦ −4∇µΦ∇µΦ −1
12H2 = 0 ,
Rµν + 2∇µ∇νΦ −1
4HµρσHν
ρσ = 0 ,
(2.46)
∇κHκ
µν −2Hκ
µν∇κΦ = 0 .
These are precisely the ﬁeld equations for the NS-NS sector of type II supergravity,
so vanishing of BRST anomalies enforces the appropriate equations of motion on the
background ﬁelds. This is analogous to the statement that ordinary string theory is
anomaly free at lowest order in α′ if and only if the Einstein equations hold [92–94].
But unlike ordinary string theory on a curved background, where the worldsheet
24

action is a complicated interacting 2d CFT necessitating perturbation theory to de-
termine anomalies, the ambitwistor string remains solvable, the anomaly is obtained
exactly, and no perturbative expansion is required.
25

2.2
Plane wave backgrounds
In this chapter, we review plane wave backgrounds in both the gravitational and
gauge theoretic contexts. There is a vast amount of literature on plane waves; we will
only cover a small area of the subject necessary for this thesis.
The material in this chapter is only relevant to chapter 4 and can be skipped until
the end of chapter 3.
2.2.1
Gravitational plane waves
Non-linear plane waves are among the oldest exact solutions to the ﬁeld equations of
general relativity, and have many fascinating properties (cf. [95–99]). These metrics
describe spacetimes composed of pure radiation of the gravitational ﬁeld itself or a
Maxwell ﬁeld, propagating from past to future null inﬁnity along a given constant
null direction. Our focus will be on purely gravitational plane wave metrics, which
can be interpreted as a coherent superposition of gravitons. There are two standard
coordinate systems: the Einstein-Rosen [100] and the Brinkmann [101] coordinates.
In Einstein-Rosen coordinates, the metric is given by:
ds2 = 2 dU dV −γij(U) dyi dyj ,
(2.47)
where the indices i, j, . . . = 1, . . . , d −2. The only non-trivial metric components,
γij, depend on U. As usual, the inverse of γij is denoted by γij. These coordinates
are useful because they manifest many of the symmetries of the spacetime which are
‘hidden’ in the other coordinates. The metric (2.47) clearly has Killing vectors
∂
∂V ,
∂
∂yi, and the vectors
X i = yi ∂
∂V + F ij(U) ∂
∂yj ,
F ij(U) :=
Z U
ds γij(s) ,
(2.48)
are also Killing. The vectors ∂V , ∂i and X i form a Heisenberg algebra,

X i, X j
= 0 ,
 ∂
∂yi, X j

= δj
i
∂
∂V ,
(2.49)
26

so plane wave metrics are endowed with an abelian isometry group generated by trans-
lations of the constant U planes as well as this (solvable) Heisenberg symmetry. We
will also see that massless ﬁeld equations are most easily solved in these coordinates.
The main drawback of Einstein-Rosen coordinates is that they are essentially
never global coordinates: the metric will develop coordinate singularities due to the
focusing of the null geodesic congruence tangent to ∂U [102, 103]. Furthermore, the
curvature and ﬁeld equations are given by somewhat complicated expressions in terms
of γij. For instance, the Ricci curvature is
RUU = −γij
2

¨γij + 1
2 ˙γikγkl ˙γlj

,
where ˙f = ∂Uf for any function f(U). Thus the vacuum equations impose conditions
on γij in the form of a second-order ODE.
Brinkmann coordinates have the advantage that they are global, and the curvature
is easily identiﬁed.
In the Brinkmann chart, the metric only has one non-trivial
component:
ds2 = 2 du dv −H(u, x) du2 −dxa dxa ,
(2.50)
with indices a, b, . . . = 1, . . . , d −2. In these coordinates, the u = const. metric is
completely ﬂat. For pp-waves H(u, x) can have general x-dependence, but for plane
waves it is constrained to be quadratic in xa:
H(u, x) = Hab(u) xa xb .
(2.51)
The non-vanishing Christoﬀel symbols in these coordinates are:
Γa
uu = −Hab(u) xb ,
Γv
ua = −Hab(u) xb ,
Γv
uu = −
˙H(u, x)
2
,
(2.52)
and the non-vanishing curvature components are directly encoded in the metric via
Ra
ubu = −Ha
b (u) ,
(2.53)
27

out
in
u
v
Figure 2.1: The sandwich plane wave with xa-directions suppressed. The function
Hab(u) is non-vanishing only in the shaded region; the in- and out-regions are both
ﬂat.
so the vacuum equations in Brinkmann coordinates simply impose that Hab be trace-
free: Ha
a = 0.
The sandwich plane wave setup is one for which Hab(u) is compactly supported
in u [104]. Without loss of generality, we assume that Hab(u) ̸= 0 only for u1 ≤u ≤
u2 ≤0; for u < u1 or u > u2, the spacetime is a ﬂat. The ﬂat region u < u1 is referred
to as the in-region, while u > u2 is the out-region. See ﬁgure 2.1 for a schematic of
this setup.
Although we work mostly in Brinkmann coordinates, Einstein-Rosen coordinates
are a key tool when solving the linearised Einstein equations on plane wave back-
grounds. Hence the relationship between the Brinkmann and Einstein-Rosen coordi-
nate systems will be important. It can be understood in terms of the solutions to the
equation:
¨ea = Hab eb ,
(2.54)
for some functions ea(u) .
Setting ea(u) = ∆xa, (2.54) is the geodesic deviation
equation in Brinkmann coordinates; this follows from the fact that the connecting
vectors between the geodesics,
ea ∂
∂xa −˙ea xa ∂
∂v ,
28

are Killing vectors. A set of (d −2) Killing vectors is obtained by choosing a full
(d −2) × (d −2) matrix of solutions to (2.54), Ea
i (u) (and its inverse Ei
a(u)), subject
to
˙Ea
[i E|a| j] = 0 .
(2.55)
The Killing vectors are then:
Di = Ea i ∂
∂xa −˙Ei
a xa ∂
∂v .
The commutation relations between the Di and the X i (transformed to Brinkmann
coordinates) give the Heisenberg algebra which was more manifest in Einstein-Rosen
coordinates.
By comparing the line elements (2.47), (2.50), the diﬀeomorphism linking Einstein-
Rosen and Brinkmann coordinates is identiﬁed as:
U
=
u ,
(2.56a)
V
=
v + 1
2
˙Ei
a Eb i xaxb ,
(2.56b)
yi
=
Ei
a xa .
(2.56c)
The array Ea
i and its inverse will be referred to as vielbeins since they give the d −2
orthonormal 1-forms dxa = Ea
i dyi in terms of the Einstein-Rosen coordinates. They
obey
¨Ea i = Hab Eb
i ,
γij = Ea
(i E|a| j) .
(2.57)
As part of the geometry of the Einstein-Rosen waves, the hypersurfaces V = constant
are null and transverse to the geodesic shear-free null congruence ∂v that rules the u =
constant null hypersurfaces. The ∂U null congruence has a deformation tensor, that
often plays a role in the study of perturbative gravity on a plane wave background.
In Brinkmann coordinates this tensor is measured by
σab = ˙Ei
a Eb i ,
(2.58)
29

whose trace is the expansion and trace-free part is the shear.
Note that any other choice of vielbein, say f a
i , is related to Ea
i by
f a
i = Ea
j
 F jk bki + cj
i

,
(2.59)
for constant matrices bij, ci
j, and F ij(u) deﬁned as:
F ij(u) :=
Z u
ds γij(s) =
Z u
ds Ea (i(s) Ej)
a (s) .
(2.60)
In particular, given some initial value for the vielbein on the in-region of a sandwich
plane wave, (2.59) encodes how the vielbein changes after passing through the curved
interior to the out-region. For the sandwich wave, two natural initial values are given
by requiring the vielbein to become trivial in the past or future:
lim
u→±∞Ei ±
a (u) = δi
a .
(2.61)
Since solutions to (2.54) are simply linear in ﬂat regions, we have
Ea −
i
(u) = ba +
i
u + ca +
i
as
u →+∞,
Ea +
i
(u) = ba −
i
u + ca−
i
as
u →−∞.
(2.62)
From (2.55) and the conservation of the Wronskian between E+ and E−, it follows
that
ba ±
[i c±
j] a = 0,
ba +
i
= δaj δbi bb −
j
(2.63)
and we can use a rotation of the Brinkmann coordinates to make b symmetric if
desired.
Note that it is essentially impossible to have E invertible for all u for non-trivial
b, so the Einstein-Rosen coordinates are generically singular. This is the inevitable
consequence of null geodesic focusing of the V = constant null hypersurfaces as
emphasised by Penrose [102]. Both Ea +
i
and Ea −
i
will describe the same ﬂat metric
in the asymptotic regions but with diﬀerent Einstein-Rosen forms. In particular, if
the deformation tensor σab vanishes in one asymptotic region, it will generically be
30

non-trivial in the other, albeit falling oﬀas 1/u. This non-trivial change in σab is an
example of the memory eﬀect [105–107], which has been studied in detail for sandwich
plane waves (e.g., [108,109]).
2.2.2
Gauge theory plane waves
An ‘Einstein-Rosen’ plane wave in gauge theory is a gauge potential which satisﬁes
properties similar to a plane wave metric in Einstein-Rosen coordinates. It is often
used to model the electromagnetic ﬁelds of lasers (cf. [110–112]). In particular, we
demand that A – a priori taking values in the adjoint of some Lie algebra g – manifests
the symmetries generated by ∂
∂v and
∂
∂xa. The most general connection satisfying these
conditions has the form:
A = A0(u) dv + Aa(u) dxa ,
(2.64)
where we write the potential in the coordinates
ds2 = 2 du dv −dxa dxa ,
(2.65)
of Minkowski space.
We want (2.64) to be preserved under the same Heisenberg symmetry algebra
(2.49) that generated the isometries of the plane wave metrics in Einstein-Rosen
coordinates. This requires there to be a vector ﬁeld
X a
ϕ = xa ∂
∂v + u ∂
∂xa
+ ϕa ,
(2.66)
with ϕa a Lie algebra-valued function for which

X a
ϕ, X b
ϕ

= 0 ,
 ∂
∂xa, X b
ϕ

= δb
a
∂
∂v .
(2.67)
These conditions imply that ϕa = ϕa(u) and [ϕa, ϕb] = 0. Furthermore, we require
that X a
ϕ generates a further symmetry of the gauge connection; namely, that D = d+A
is covariantly Lie-dragged along the X a
ϕ. This imposes further constraints on A:
Aa = −˙ϕa ,
[A0, ϕa] = 0 ,

Aa, ϕb
= δb
a A0 .
(2.68)
31

For simplicity, we restrict our attention to the special case where ϕa is valued in the
Cartan subalgebra h ⊂g. With this choice, consistency of the symmetry algebra
reduces to
A0 = 0 ,
ϕa(u) = −
Z u
ds Aa(s) ,
(2.69)
and the functional form of X a
ϕ closely resembles that of its gravitational counterpart
(2.48).
To summarise, our deﬁnition of an ‘Einstein-Rosen’ plane wave gauge ﬁeld (valued
in the Cartan of the gauge group) results in a gauge potential of the form:
A = −Aa(u) dxa ,
(2.70)
where an overall negative sign has been included for convenience. Just as the Brink-
mann form of a plane wave metric can be obtained by the diﬀeomorphism (2.56)
from Einstein-Rosen form, a gauge transformation of (2.70) gives the plane wave
gauge potential in ‘Brinkmann’ form. In particular, taking A →A + d(xaAa) gives
A = xa ˙Aa du .
(2.71)
The fact that A is a linear polynomial in xa, rather than a quadratic function as in the
gravitational setting (2.51), is a ﬁrst glimpse of the double copy. It has already been
noted that plane wave background geometries (for gauge theory and gravity) exhibit
the double copy structure [29], although the distinction between linear and quadratic
functions does not seem to have been noticed previously.
Although we obtained
(2.71) from the Einstein-Rosen gauge by working in the Cartan subalgebra of the
gauge group, general non-abelian plane waves also take this functional form [113].
The ﬁeld strength is
F = ˙Aa dxa ∧du .
(2.72)
As for the Brinkmann metric, the gauge ﬁeld (2.71) directly encodes the ﬁeld strength;
(2.72) obeys the Maxwell equations, and hence the Yang-Mills equations when valued
in the Cartan subalgebra of the gauge group.
32

The sandwich gauge ﬁeld plane wave is analogous to that for gravity; the ﬁeld
strength Fa = ˙Aa(u) is taken to be compactly supported for u1 ≤u ≤u2 ≤0, so that
it is ﬂat in the in-region (u < u1) and out-region (u > u2). The memory eﬀect here
is associated with the fact that if A is taken to vanish in the past, it will be constant
and non-zero in the future
Aa|out −Aa|in =
Z u2
u1
Fa du ,
(2.73)
By analogy with the gravitational case, (2.73) can be viewed as encoding the electro-
magnetic memory eﬀect [114] for plane wave gauge theory backgrounds.
33

Chapter 3
Ambitwistor strings on non-trivial
backgrounds
3.1
Heterotic ambitwistor strings on gauge ﬁeld
backgrounds
The equations of motion for a classical ﬁeld theory are usually understood as the
Euler-Lagrange equations of a corresponding action functional. For certain theories,
such as gauge theory and gravity, the equations of motion can also famously be derived
from a low-energy expansion of string theory [92,94,115]. Coupling the Polyakov ac-
tion to background gauge or gravitational ﬁelds leads to a conformal anomaly. Since
the resulting worldsheet action is a complicated interacting 2d conformal ﬁeld theory
(CFT), this anomaly can only be computed perturbatively in a small parameter, taken
to be the inverse string tension. To lowest order in this parameter, anomaly cancella-
tion imposes the ﬁeld equations of gauge theory or gravity on the background ﬁelds;
the higher-order corrections impose an inﬁnite tower of additional higher-derivative
equations.
Ambitwistor strings are a worldsheet theory with ﬁnite massless spectrum and no
tunable parameter on the worldsheet. A natural question for this relative of string
theory is: can these models be coupled to background ﬁelds to give a non-linear
description of the underlying ﬁeld theories? Unlike ordinary string theory, such a
34

description should be exact – that is, computable without recourse to an inﬁnite
perturbative expansion. In the case of the NS-NS supergravity this was answered in
the aﬃrmative as described in chapter 2.1.4. More recently, it was shown that the
abelian Maxwell equations could also be obtained in a similar fashion [4]. However,
this success has not been extended to other ﬁeld theories due to a variety of subtleties
associated with coupling to background ﬁelds and non-unitary gravitational modes
which do not exist in the case of NS-NS supergravity.
In this chapter, which is based on [1], we extend the exact worldsheet description of
classical ﬁeld theories to include Yang-Mills theory. This is accomplished by coupling
a heterotic version of the ambitwistor string to a non-abelian background gauge ﬁeld1.
The model contains both gauge theoretic and (non-unitary) gravitational degrees of
freedom, but the latter can be locally decoupled on the worldsheet. Gauge ﬁxing
the worldsheet action leads to potential anomalies; remarkably, the only conditions
imposed on the background gauge ﬁeld by anomaly cancellation are the (non-linear)
Yang-Mills equations. We also show that re-coupling the gravitational modes leads
to gauge anomalies, analogous to but distinct from the well-known anomaly [117] of
the standard heterotic string.
3.1.1
The worldsheet model
As ﬁrst observed in the context of similar chiral heterotic-like worldsheet models [42],
the ‘bad’ fourth derivative gravitational modes of the heterotic ambitwistor string
can be decoupled at genus zero by taking a limit where k →0 while
k
g2s is held ﬁxed,
for gs the ‘string’ coupling constant which eﬀectively counts the genus of Σ. In this
limit, only single trace contributions to a worldsheet correlation function survive at
genus zero. Globality and unitarity of the worldsheet current algebra dictate that k
be a positive integer, so the k →0 limit must be viewed as a purely formal one which
1In [116] a form of the heterotic ambitwistor string with background ﬁelds was also studied, but
only classically on the worldsheet.
35

eﬀectively removes the second order pole from the OPE (2.29). Since our primary
concern here will be anomalies, which can be computed locally on Σ, the formality of
the limit will not be a problem.
Fixing k →0, introduce a background gauge potential Aa
µ(X) valued in the adjoint
of G, which couples to the worldsheet current algebra by
SC →SC + 1
2 π
Z
Σ
Aa
µ ja ¯∂Xµ .
(3.1)
The purely quadratic nature of the worldsheet model (2.30) can be preserved by
absorbing the explicit dependence on the background into the conjugate of Xµ (cf.
equation (2.34) for the analogous procedure in the gravitational context):
Pµ →Pµ + Aa
µ ja := Πµ .
(3.2)
This leads to a worldsheet action
S = 1
2 π
Z
Σ
Πµ ¯∂Xµ + 1
2 ψµ ¯∂ψµ + SC ,
(3.3)
with free OPEs of the worldsheet ﬁelds (in the k →0 limit):
Xµ(z) Πν(w) ∼
δµ
ν
z −w ,
ψµ(z) ψν(w) ∼
ηµν
z −w ,
ja(z) jb(w) ∼f abc jc(w)
z −w
,
(3.4)
for ηµν is the d-dimensional Minkowski metric.
The price for this simplicity (which is in stark contrast to the complicated inter-
acting 2d CFT obtained by coupling the ordinary heterotic string to a background)
is that Πµ is not invariant under local gauge transformations. Under an inﬁnitesimal
gauge transformation with parameter εa,
δAa
µ = f abc εb Ac
µ −∂µεa ,
δja = f abc εb jc ,
(3.5)
which indicates that
δΠµ = −ja ∂µεa .
(3.6)
36

This is a common feature of all curved βγ-systems, of which (3.3) is an example [118],
and is problematic only if Πµ has a singular OPE with itself after a gauge transfor-
mation. Fortunately, it is easy to check that
(Πµ + δΠµ)(z) (Πν + δΠν)(w) ∼0 ,
(3.7)
so the structure of the OPEs (3.4) is preserved under gauge transformations. Note
that inﬁnitesimal gauge transformations can be implemented by a local operator
Oε = −εaja, which obeys
Oε(z) Oλ(w) ∼f abcεa λb jc
z −w
= O[λ,ε]
z −w ,
(3.8)
and acts correctly on all worldsheet ﬁelds.
3.1.2
Yang-Mills equations as an anomaly
The worldsheet action (3.3) has additional symmetries beyond holomorphic repara-
metrisation invariance. Indeed, the action is invariant under the transformations
δXµ = −ϵ ψµ ,
δψµ = ϵ (Πµ −Aµ aja) ,
δΠµ = ϵψν∂µAa
νja ,
(3.9)
where ϵ is a constant fermionic parameter of conformal weight (−1
2, 0). These trans-
formations are generated by a fermionic current
G = ψµ  Πµ −Aa
µ ja
,
(3.10)
on the worldsheet, which is the extension of ψ·P to the non-trivial gauge background.
This current is a holomorphic conformal primary of dimension 3/2 and is invariant
under gauge transformations of the background ﬁeld.
The OPE of G with itself has only simple poles, generating a bosonic current:
G(z) G(w) ∼
H
z −w ,
(3.11)
37

where H is the extension of P 2 to the non-trivial gauge background and F a
µν denotes
the Yang-Mills ﬁeld strength as usual:
H = Π2 −2 ΠµAa
µja + Aa
µAµbjajb + ψµψνF a
µνja −∂(∂µAµaja) + f abcjcAµb∂Aa
µ . (3.12)
As both G and H are composite operators on the worldsheet, their deﬁnition as cur-
rents in the fully quantum mechanical regime requires normal ordering to remove
singular self-contractions. We use a point-splitting prescription to do this; for exam-
ple, the explicit normal ordering of the second term in H is given by:
−2 ΠµAa
µja(z) := i
π
I
dw Πµ(w) Aa
µ(z)ja(z)
z −w
,
(3.13)
where the integral is taken on a small contour in w around z. From now on, we assume
this normal ordering implicitly. It is straightforward to check that the normal-ordered
current H is a conformal primary of dimension 2 and gauge invariant.
Gauging the symmetries associated with these currents leads to a worldsheet ac-
tion
S = 1
2 π
Z
Σ
Πµ ¯∂Xµ + 1
2 ψµ ¯∂ψµ + χ G + e H + SC ,
(3.14)
where the gauge ﬁelds χ, e are fermionic of conformal weight (−1
2, 1) and bosonic of
conformal weight (−1, 1), respectively. The worldsheet symmetries associated with
G, H can now be gauge-ﬁxed, along with holomorphic reparametrisation invariance;
choosing conformal gauge with χ = e = 0 leads to a free gauge-ﬁxed action
S = 1
2 π
Z
Σ
Πµ ¯∂Xµ + 1
2 ψµ ¯∂ψµ + b ¯∂c + ¯b ¯∂¯c + β ¯∂γ + SC ,
(3.15)
and associated BRST charge
Q =
I
c T + bc∂c + γ G + ¯c H +
¯b
2 γ2 .
(3.16)
Here, (c, b) and (¯c,¯b) are fermionic ghost systems for which c, ¯c have conformal weight
(−1, 0), while (γ, β) are a bosonic ghost system for which γ has conformal weight
38

(−1
2, 0). In the BRST charge, T denotes the (appropriately normal-ordered) holo-
morphic stress tensor of the worldsheet CFT, including all contributions from the
worldsheet current algebra and all ghosts, except the (c, b) system.
This gauge ﬁxing is anomaly-free if and only if the BRST charge is nilpotent:
Q2 = 0. Given the free OPEs (3.4), this calculation can be performed exactly – there
is no need for a background ﬁeld expansion as in the analogous calculation for the
heterotic string [92]. It is straightforward to show that Q2 = 0 only if the central
charge of the worldsheet current algebra obeys c = 41 −5d
2 , and
G(z) H(w) ∼0 .
(3.17)
The ﬁrst of these conditions is familiar from ﬂat space and kills the holomorphic con-
formal anomaly; similar to the type II case described in chapter 2.1.4, it is completely
independent of the background ﬁelds. The second condition – that the OPE between
G and H be non-singular – is trivially satisﬁed in a ﬂat background, but becomes
non-trivial in the presence of Aa
µ. Making use of the identity
jajb(z) −jbja(z) = f abc ∂jc(z) ,
(3.18)
for normal-ordered products of the worldsheet current, which is derived in appendix A
along with another useful equation, one ﬁnds:
G(z) H(w) ∼−3ψνja DµF a
µν
(z −w)2
−∂
 ψνja DµF a
µν

z −w
−ψµψνψσja DµF a
νσ
z −w
,
(3.19)
where Dµ is the gauge-covariant derivative with respect to Aa
µ.
Requiring (3.17) to hold then imposes the constraints
DµF a
µν = 0 ,
D[µF a
νσ] = 0 ,
(3.20)
on the background gauge ﬁeld, which are precisely the Yang-Mills equations and
Bianchi identity. Furthermore, these are the only constraints placed on the back-
ground gauge ﬁeld by anomaly cancellation in the 2d worldsheet theory. Thus, non-
linear Yang-Mills theory (in any dimension) is described by an exact anomaly in a
39

free 2d chiral CFT, unlike the analogous calculations in the heterotic [92] or type
I [115] superstring.
3.1.3
Recoupling gravity and the gauge anomaly
Gravitational degrees of freedom (in the guise of multi-trace terms) can be recoupled
by reinstating the level k (now assumed to be a positive integer). In the ordinary
heterotic string, the interplay between gravitational and gauge theoretic degrees of
freedom, mediated by the B-ﬁeld, leads to the Green-Schwarz anomaly cancellation
mechanism [117]. Naively, one might expect a similar phenomenon to arise in the
heterotic ambitwistor string, especially since coupling to the background gauge ﬁeld
(through the left-moving worldsheet current algebra) is the same as in string theory
(cf., [119, 120]).
This means that we should encounter the usual gauge anomaly
associated with chiral fermions on the worldsheet.
In heterotic string theory, resolving this gauge anomaly relies crucially on the
form of the B-ﬁeld coupling to the worldsheet CFT (cf., [121]).
This leads to a
modiﬁed gauge transformation of the B-ﬁeld and the shift of its ﬁeld strength by a
Chern-Simons term for the background gauge ﬁeld. In a chiral model such as the
ambitwistor string, the coupling of other background ﬁelds (including the B-ﬁeld) is
diﬀerent and the resolution of the anomaly is no longer clear.
To see this, it suﬃces to consider an abelian background gauge ﬁeld Aµ, now
coupled to the worldsheet through an (abelian) current algebra of level k ∈Z+.
Under a gauge transformation Aµ →Aµ −∂µε, the worldsheet ﬁeld Πµ transforms as
Πµ →Πµ −j∂µε. The gauge-transformed Πµ now has a singular OPE with itself:
(Πµ −j ∂µε)(z) (Πν −j ∂νε)(w) ∼k ∂µε ∂νε
(z −w)2 −k ∂µε ∂(∂νε)
z −w
,
(3.21)
proportional to the level k. Such anomalous OPEs can be removed in chiral CFTs
of βγ-type by compensating for the gauge transformation with a shift of the Πµ ﬁeld
40

(e.g., [118]). To remove the anomalous OPE (3.21), deﬁne the gauge transformation
of Πµ by:
Πµ →Πµ −j∂µε + k
2∂µε ∂ε .
(3.22)
It is straightforward to check that this level-dependent shift removes the singularities
from (3.21), ensuring that Πµ has a non-singular OPE with itself in any choice of
gauge.
Unfortunately, there is still a gauge anomaly at the level of the worldsheet currents
G and H. It is straightforward to see that these currents are no longer gauge invariant;
for instance
G →G + k
2ψµ∂µε ∂ε ,
(3.23)
under a gauge transformation with the proviso (3.22). Furthermore, the OPE of G
with itself now has a triple pole contribution
G(z) G(w) ∼k AµAµ
(z −w)3 + · · · ,
(3.24)
which must vanish. In other words, the G, H current algebra imposes the gauge-
dependent, algebraic equation of motion A2 = 0 on the background gauge ﬁeld.
A potential remedy for this situation would be to modify the current G. Such
modiﬁcations are constrained by conformal weight and fermionic statistics to take
the form
G →G + ψµψνψρ Hµνρ + ψµ Cµν ∂Xν ,
(3.25)
for some Hµνρ and Cµν that depend only on X. Corrections proportional to Hµνρ are
reminiscent of the standard Green-Schwarz mechanism, but it is easy to see that they
cannot remove the gauge-dependent triple pole (3.24). While we have been unable to
use corrections proportional to Cµν to remove the gauge anomaly completely, there
are some suggestive hints which emerge.
Consider the modiﬁcation of G given by
G →G + k
2 ψµ AµAν ∂Xν .
(3.26)
41

It is worth noting that analogous terms appear in descriptions of anomaly cancellation
for the Green-Schwarz formalism of the heterotic string [122], although the precise
connection (if any) is unclear. This modiﬁcation removes the triple pole (3.24) en-
tirely, and leads to O(k) modiﬁcations of H:
H →H + k

Πµ AµAν ∂Xν −ψµψν Aµ∂Aν −A2 Aµ∂Xµ j −1
2∂Aµ ∂Aµ
+1
2∂(∂µ(AµAν)∂Xν) −ψµψν ∂µ(AνAσ)∂Xσ

+ k2
4 A2 (Aµ∂Xµ)2 .
(3.27)
The modiﬁed G and H are worldsheet conformal primaries of the appropriate dimen-
sion, although both are still gauge-dependent.
While these modiﬁcations do not remove all gauge-dependence, the OPE of G with
H takes a remarkably simple form. Indeed, on the support of the Maxwell equations
for the background gauge ﬁeld, one ﬁnds the structure:
G(z) H(w) ∼k
 ψµψνψρ
(z −w)2(· · · ) + ψµψνψρ∂Xσ
z −w
(· · · ) + ψµψν∂ψρ
z −w
(· · · )
+ψµ ∂Xν
z −w (· · · ) + ψµ∂Xν∂Xρ
z −w
(· · · ) + ∂ψµ∂Xν
z −w (· · · )

,
(3.28)
where the (· · · ) stand for gauge-dependent tensors constructed from the background
gauge ﬁeld.
Although far from satisfactory, these modiﬁcations do kill all O(k2)
contributions to the OPE, as well as terms proportional to Πµ and j – all of which
occur for generic modiﬁcations (3.25). Furthermore, many of the terms appearing in
(3.28) actually have a surprisingly simple form; for instance, the double pole is
G(z) H(w) ∼−3k
2
ψµψνψρ
(z −w)2 AµFνρ +
1
z −w(· · · ) ,
(3.29)
namely, a Chern-Simons term.
We expect that a full resolution of the gauge anomaly for the heterotic ambitwistor
string requires a full knowledge of its coupling to other background ﬁelds. These ﬁelds
obey higher-derivative equations of motion, and there are additional ﬁelds (such as a
massless 3-form) which do not appear in the standard heterotic string [48,51,67]. A
42

recent description of the eﬀective free theory on spacetime for these ﬁelds should be a
useful tool in this regard [71]. We hope that future work will lead to a full resolution
of these issues.
43

3.2
Vertex operators for heterotic and type II am-
bitwistor strings in curved backgrounds
Ambitwistor strings [48, 64] have many surprising properties; while much attention
has rightly been paid to their utility for computing scattering amplitudes they can
also be deﬁned on non-linear background ﬁelds as has been shown in the previous
chapter and [1,77]. On such curved backgrounds the ambitwistor string is described
by a chiral worldsheet CFT with free OPEs (for details see chapters 2.1.4 and 3.1).
This allows for many exact computations in these backgrounds, in stark contrast to
conventional string theories where an expansion in the inverse string tension is needed
(cf., [92,93,115]).
Thus far, only a RNS formalism for the ambitwistor string has been shown to be
quantum mechanically consistent at the level of the worldsheet. While pure spinor
and Green-Schwarz versions of the ambitwistor string (or deformations thereof) have
been deﬁned on curved backgrounds [65, 116, 123, 124], it is not clear that they are
anomaly-free since only classical worldsheet calculations have been done in these
frameworks. In this chapter we study the heterotic and type II ambitwistor strings
in the RNS formalism, at the expense of only working with NS-NS backgrounds.
These backgrounds will be non-linear, and generic apart from constraints imposed
by nilpotency of the BRST operator (i.e., anomaly cancellation): the Yang-Mills
equations in the heterotic case and the NS-NS supergravity equations in the type II
case.
For each of these models, we construct vertex operators in the (−1, −1) picture
for all NS-NS perturbations of the backgrounds and investigate the constraints im-
posed on the operators by BRST closure. In the heterotic model we consider only one
such vertex operator whose BRST closure imposes the linearised gluon equations of
motion (as well as gauge-ﬁxing conditions) on the perturbation around a Yang-Mills
background. In the type II model we consider three vertex operator structures, corre-
44

sponding to symmetric rank-two tensor, skew-symmetric rank-two tensor, and scalar
perturbations. With a background metric (obeying the vacuum Einstein equations),
BRST closure ﬁxes the two tensorial perturbations to be a linearised graviton and B-
ﬁeld respectively. On a general NS-NS background (composed of a non-linear metric,
B-ﬁeld and dilaton), the three structures are combined into a single vertex operator,
whose BRST closure imposes the linearised supergravity equations of motion on the
perturbations.
We comment on the descent procedure for obtaining vertex operators in picture
number zero, as well as the prospects for obtaining integrated vertex operators. We
also mention some unresolved issues regarding the GSO projection in curved back-
ground ﬁelds. The work presented in this chapter has ﬁrst been published in [2].
3.2.1
Heterotic ambitwistor string
As a warm up we ﬁrst describe the vertex operator for a gluon in the heterotic
ambitwistor string on a generic Yang-Mills background ﬁeld since the calculations
here are mostly straightforward. This model was deﬁned in a gauge background in
chapter 3.1 and [1]. As before we take the formal limit k →0 to decouple gravitational
degrees of freedom from the model [1,42].
3.2.1.1
Gluon vertex operator
Our goal is now to describe perturbations of the Yang-Mills background Aa
µ at the
level of vertex operators in the worldsheet CFT. Let aa
µ(X) be a perturbation of the
background. A natural ansatz for an associated vertex operator in the ‘ﬁxed’ picture
(i.e., picture number −1) is
V = c¯c δ(γ) ψµ aa
µ ja .
(3.30)
This is an admissible vertex operator if it is annihilated by the BRST operator Q.
Since V is a conformal primary of spin zero, the only interesting contributions to QV
45

come from higher poles in OPEs with the currents (3.10) and (3.12). Using the free
OPEs (3.4), it is straightforward to show that
G(z)V (w) ∼−c¯c δ(γ) Dµaa
µ ja(w)
(z −w)2
+ · · · ,
(3.31)
and
H(z)V (w) ∼c¯c δ(γ) ψνja
(z −w)2
 DµDµaa
ν + 2f abcabµF c
µν

(w) + · · · ,
(3.32)
where the + · · · represent single pole terms in the OPE which will not contribute to
the action of the BRST charge.
In particular, these OPEs indicate that
QV = c¯c δ(γ) ja 
∂¯c ψν  DµDµaa
ν + 2f abc abµ F c
µν

−∂γ Dµaa
µ

.
(3.33)
So requiring QV = 0 imposes the Lorenz gauge condition (Dµaa
µ = 0) as well as the
linearised Yang-Mills equations
DµDµaa
ν + 2f abc abµ F c
µν = 0
(3.34)
on the perturbation. In other words, the vertex operator lies in the BRST cohomology
if and only if aa
µ describes an on-shell gluon ﬂuctuation on the non-linear Yang-Mills
background.
The standard descent procedure (cf., [85, 125, 126]) can be used to obtain the
gluon vertex operator in zero picture number. To do this, we simply use the standard
picture changing operator δ(β)G to get
c˜cU(w) = lim
z→w δ(β)G(z) V (w)
(3.35)
= c˜c
 ΨµΨνDνaa
µja + (Πµ −Aµaja)ab
µjb −f abcab
µ jc ∂Aµa
(w) .
(3.36)
An equivalent way to derive U(w) is by linearising the current H around a Yang-
Mills background, keeping in mind that the perturbation aa
µ obeys the Lorenz gauge
condition.
46

Further descent into an integrated vertex operator using the b-ghost and the stress-
energy tensor can be carried out as in the usual string. How to perform the descent
using the ¯b-ghost and H current remains an open question, although it is well-known
how to do so in a ﬂat background [48,49,52].
3.2.2
Type II ambitwistor string
We now move on to deﬁne vertex operators for the type II ambitwistor string on
a curved NS-NS background composed of a metric gµν, B-ﬁeld Bµν and dilaton Φ,
which was introduced in [77] and described in chapter 2.1.4.
3.2.2.1
Graviton vertex operator
To begin, consider the type II model with only a background metric gµν turned on,
and let hµν(X) be a symmetric, traceless perturbation of this metric. A ﬁxed picture
vertex operator associated to this perturbation is given by
Vh = c¯c δ(γ)δ(¯γ) Oh = c¯c δ(γ)δ(¯γ)

¯ψµψνhµ
ν −1
2(∂gµν)hµν

.
(3.37)
Note that this contains a quantum correction term proportional to a worldsheet
derivative. While this quantum correction vanishes for ﬂat or certain highly sym-
metric backgrounds (e.g., a plane wave metric written in Brinkmann coordinates [4]),
it plays a crucial role on a general background.
For Vh to be an admissible vertex operator, it must be annihilated by the BRST
operator (2.37). Since Vh is a conformal primary of spin 0 on the worldsheet, any
potential obstructions to its Q-closure arise from OPEs between the operator Oh and
the currents (2.38), (2.39) and (2.40) with Hµνρ = 0 = Φ. One ﬁnds:
G(z) Oh(w) ∼−ψν ∇µhµν
(z −w)2 (w) + · · · ,
(3.38)
¯G(z) Oh(w) ∼gρσ ¯ψµ ∇ρhµσ
(z −w)2
(w) + · · · ,
(3.39)
47

and
H(z)
2
Oh(w) ∼hµνRµν
(z −w)3(w) +
¯ψαψβ
2 (z −w)2
 ∇κ∇κhα
β −2Rα
σγβhσγ
−Rσαhσβ −Rσ
βhα
σ + 2hλ
βRαλ

(w) +
∂Xγ
(z −w)2
1
2hµν∂γRµν
+1
4∂γgµν(∇α∇αhµν −2Rµαβνhαβ −Rλ
µhλν −Rλ
νhµλ)

(w) + · · · ,
(3.40)
where the + · · · stand for terms which do not contribute to the action of the BRST
operator.
Since the background metric obeys the vacuum Einstein equations (Rµν = 0),
these OPEs imply that
QVh = c¯c δ(γ)δ(¯γ)

∂γ ¯ψµ ∇νhµ
ν −∂¯γ ψν ∇µhµ
ν
+∂¯c ¯ψµψν
2
 ∇α∇αhµ
ν −2Rµ
αβνhαβ
+ ∂¯c ∂gµν
4
 ∇α∇αhµν −2Rµαβνhαβ
.
(3.41)
Thus, the OPEs between the vertex operator and the currents G, ¯G impose the de
Donder gauge condition
∇µhµν = 0 ,
(3.42)
which is consistent with expectations from the ﬂat background case [48]. The OPE
between the vertex operator and the current H leads to the linearised Einstein equa-
tion for a metric perturbation on a vacuum Einstein background:
∇α∇αhµν −2Rµαβνhαβ = 0 .
(3.43)
In other words, requiring QVh = 0 imposes precisely the physical gauge-ﬁxing and
linearised equation of motion for a graviton on the perturbation hµν.
What happens when the background B-ﬁeld and dilaton are switched on? Keeping
the form (3.37) for the vertex operator, it remains to check the action of the full (i.e.,
with gµν, Hµνρ and Φ) BRST operator (2.37) on Vh. The additional background ﬁelds
do not change the fact that QVh is governed entirely by the OPEs between Oh and
48

the currents (2.38), (2.39) and (2.40), although these OPEs are now substantially
more complicated. One ﬁnds that
G(z) Oh(w) ∼−
ψν
(z −w)2 (∇µhµ
ν −2hµ
ν∂µΦ) + · · · ,
(3.44)
¯G(z) Oh(w) ∼
gρσ ¯ψµ
(z −w)2 (∇ρhµ
σ −2hµ
ρ∂σΦ) + · · · ,
(3.45)
while the OPE between H and Oh is
H(z)
2
Oh(w) ∼
hµν
(z −w)3

Rµν + 2∇µ∇νΦ −1
4HµρσHν
ρσ

+
¯ψαψβ
(z −w)2

hλ
β

Rα
λ + 2∇α∇λΦ −1
4Hα
ρσHλ
ρσ

+ 1
2
 ∇λ∇λhα
β −2Rα
σρβhσρ
−Rσαhσβ −Rσ
βhα
σ −hρ
σHβρκHασκ −2(hα
σ∇β∂σΦ + hβσ∇α∂σΦ + ∇σhα
β∂σΦ)

+
1
(z −w)2
hµν
2 ∂

Rµν + 2∇µ∇νΦ −1
4Hµ
ρσHνρσ

+ ∂gµν
4
 ∇λ∇λhµν −2Rµαβνhαβ
−Rλ
µhλν −Rλ
νhλµ −hλ
σHµλαHν
σα −2 (hµσ∇ν∂σΦ −hνσ∇µ∂σΦ + ∇σhµν∂σΦ)

+
ψρψσ
2 (z −w)2

∇νhλσ Hρ
νλ + hαβ
2 ∇αHβσρ

−
¯ψρ ¯ψσ
2 (z −w)2

∇νhσ
λ Hρνλ + hαβ
2 ∇αHβ
σρ

+ · · · ,
(3.46)
where all numerators are evaluated at w on the worldsheet, and + · · · again denotes
terms which will not contribute to the action of the BRST operator.
Using the fact that the background ﬁelds obey the non-linear equations of motion
(2.46), this means that
QVh = c¯c δ(γ)δ(¯γ)

∂γ ¯ψµ (∇νhµ
ν −2hµ
ν∂νΦ) −∂¯γ ψν (∇µhµ
ν −2hµ
ν∂µΦ)
+ ∂¯c
4
 2 ¯ψµψν + ∂gµν  ∇λ∇λhµν −2Rµρσνhρσ −Rλ
µhλν −Rλ
νhλµ
−hλ
σHµλαHν
σα −2 (hµσ∇ν∂σΦ + hνσ∇µ∂σΦ + ∇σhµν∂σΦ)

+ ∂¯c
2
 ψµψν −¯ψµ ¯ψν 
∇ρhλν Hµ
ρλ −hρσ
2 ∇ρHσµν
 
,
(3.47)
49

where indices are raised and lowered with the background metric. The requirement
QVh = 0 therefore imposes the generalised de Donder gauge condition
∇µhµν = 2 hµν∂µΦ ,
(3.48)
as well as the linearised equation of motion
∇λ∇λhµν −2Rµρσνhρσ −Rλ
µhλν −Rλ
νhλµ −hλ
σHµλαHν
σα
−2 (hµσ∇ν∂σΦ + hνσ∇µ∂σΦ + ∇σhµν∂σΦ) = 0 .
(3.49)
As desired, this is precisely the linearisation of the symmetric tensor equation from
(2.46) for a metric perturbation, for details of the derivation of this equation see
appendix B.1.
However, we also obtain an antisymmetric constraint from the last line of (3.47):
∇ρhλ[ν Hµ]
ρλ −hρσ
2 ∇ρHσµν = 0 .
(3.50)
From a spacetime perspective, this is unexpected: given a symmetric, traceless per-
turbation hµν, one only expects to obtain the symmetric equation of motion (3.49).
The antisymmetric equation (3.50) arises because the background ﬁelds {g, H, Φ} are
still treated as ﬂuctuating quantum ﬁelds by the worldsheet theory. Indeed, these
background ﬁelds are functionals of the worldsheet ﬁeld Xµ(z), which is a full quan-
tum ﬁeld contributing to all OPEs.
This means that the perturbation hµν can backreact on the background geometry,
leading to additional constraints. In particular, a metric perturbation sources terms
in the antisymmetric equation of motion for the background ﬁelds (2.46)2. At the
level of a spacetime variational problem, this corresponds to evaluating the spacetime
action on {g + h, H, Φ} and varying it with respect to all these ﬁelds. Projecting
the resulting equations of motion onto the parts linear in h will yield the symmetric
2The metric perturbation can also source a scalar constraint, but it is easy to see that this
vanishes on the support of the background equations of motion, see appendix B.1.
50

equation (3.49) and the antisymmetric equation (3.50) as well as the trivial scalar
constraint.
Consequently, the graviton vertex operator only makes sense in the BRST coho-
mology in the presence of a background metric. When a full NS-NS background is
turned on, QVh = 0 leads to the physical gauge-ﬁxing condition (3.48) and correct
equation of motion (3.49), but also an additional backreaction constraint (3.50). We
will see the resolution of this issue in chapter 3.2.2.4.
3.2.2.2
B-ﬁeld vertex operator
Consider a B-ﬁeld perturbation bµν(X), which is anti-symmetric (bµν = b[µν]). As in
the graviton case, initially we seek a vertex operator to describe this perturbation on
a background metric gµν alone. Using consistency with the ﬂat space GSO projection
as a guide, the candidate vertex operator in the ﬁxed picture is:
V (0)
b
= c¯c
2 δ(γ)δ(¯γ)
 ψµψν bµν −¯ψµ ¯ψν bµν
.
(3.51)
It is straightforward to compute the action of the BRST operator Q on V (0)
b
; since
the operator is a conformal primary of spin zero with a canonical ghost structure,
QV (0)
b
is controlled entirely by the OPEs between the terms in brackets in (3.51) and
the currents G, ¯G, H (with Hµνρ = 0 = Φ).
This leads to
QV (0)
b
= c¯c δ(γ)δ(¯γ)

∂γ ¯ψν ∇µbµν + ∂¯γ ψν ∇µbµν
+ ∂¯c
4
 ψµψν −¯ψµ ¯ψν  ∇λ∇λbµν −2Rσµνρbσρ + 2Rσ
µbνσ
 
.
(3.52)
Using the vacuum Einstein equations for the background, QV (0)
b
= 0 imposes the
gauge-ﬁxing constraint
∇µbµν = 0 ,
(3.53)
51

as well as the equation of motion
∇λ∇λbµν −2Rσµνρ bσρ = 0
(3.54)
on the perturbation. Sure enough, (3.54) is precisely the linearised equation of motion
for a B-ﬁeld propagating on a vacuum Einstein background.
From our experience with the graviton vertex operator, we know that a B-ﬁeld
perturbation in a general NS-NS background will source the linearised scalar and
symmetric tensor equations of motion, leading to unwanted constraints on the per-
turbation. Nevertheless, it is instructive to see how this arises by constructing a vertex
operator for the perturbation bµν with a background metric, B-ﬁeld and dilaton.
It is easy to see that V (0)
b
is no longer correct in this case; we claim that it must
be supplemented by additional terms with non-standard worldsheet ghost structure.
To write these terms down, we must bosonise the worldsheet ghost systems (β, γ)
and (¯β, ¯γ) [125]. Let φ be a chiral scalar on the worldsheet, and (η, ξ) be a pair of
fermions of spin +1 and 0, respectively. These ﬁelds have OPEs
φ(z) φ(w) ∼−ln(z −w) ,
η(z) ξ(w) ∼
1
z −w,
(3.55)
and are related to the ghosts (β, γ) by
γ = η eφ ,
β = e−φ ∂ξ ,
(3.56)
using the fact that an exponential of the chiral scalar ekφ has spin −(k + k2
2 ). An
additional copy of each system, ¯φ, (¯η, ¯ξ) is introduced (with identical statistics) for
the (¯β, ¯γ) ghost system.
With these bosonised ghost systems, the B-ﬁeld vertex operator on a general NS-
NS background is given by
Vb = V (0)
b
+ O(1)
b
+ ¯O(1)
b
,
(3.57)
52

where the additional operators are
O(1)
b
= c¯c
4 ∂¯c ∂ξ e−2φe−¯φ ψµHµρσbρσ ,
¯O(1)
b
= c¯c
4 ∂¯c ∂¯ξ e−2¯φe−φ ¯ψµHµρσbρσ .
(3.58)
The fact that these additional operators are required is perhaps not surprising, since
the background B-ﬁeld couples to the BRST operator in a manner that is distinctly
diﬀerent to the background metric.
We must now check the action of the BRST operator on Vb. While QV (0)
b
was
governed entirely by the OPEs between the currents G, ¯G and H, the same is not true
of QVb. This is due to the non-standard ghost structure of O(1)
b , ¯O(1)
b . For instance,
there are now non-trivial OPEs with the structure constant terms in (2.37) that must
be accounted for:
−2¯bγ¯γ(z) O(1)
b (w) ∼c¯ce−¯φη
z −w
¯ψµHµρσbρσ
2
+ · · · ,
(3.59)
−2¯bγ¯γ(z) ¯O(1)
b (w) ∼c¯ce−φ¯η
z −w
ψµHµρσbρσ
2
+ · · · ,
(3.60)
making use of the general rule
e±φ(z) ekφ(w) = (z −w)∓k : e±φ(z) ekφ(w) :
(3.61)
for OPEs between exponentials of the chiral scalar. Note that keeping track of con-
tributions from the expansion of e±φ(z) is going to be of crucial importance. Equa-
tions (3.59) and (3.60) cancel algebraic contributions to the OPEs
¯γG(z) V (0)
b
(w) ∼−c¯ce−φ¯η
z −w

¯ψβ
 ∇αbαβ −2bαβ∂αΦ

+ ψµHµρσbρσ
2

,
(3.62)
γ ¯G(z) V (0)
b
(w) ∼−c¯ce−¯φη
z −w

ψβ (∇αbαβ −2bαβ∂αΦ) +
¯ψµHµρσbρσ
2

.
(3.63)
Similarly, at every stage of this calculation it is crucial to consider all possible con-
tributions from ghosts to the OPEs. Note that contributions from the stress-energy
tensor terms in Q remain trivial, since both O(1)
b
and ¯O(1)
b
are conformal primaries of
spin zero – despite their non-trivial ghost structure.
53

The ﬁnal result of these calculations is
QVb = c¯c
4 ∂¯c e−φe−¯φ

¯ψρψσ (Hµαρ(db)µασ + Hµασ(db)µαρ) + ∂gρσ  Hµβ
ρ(db)µβσ

+ (ψµψν −¯ψµ ¯ψν)
 ∇λ∇λbµν −2Rαµνβbαβ + 2Rα
µbνα −2∂αΦ∇αbµν + 4bαµ∇ν∂αΦ
 
−c¯c e−φ¯η ¯ψβ
 ∇αbαβ −2bαβ∂αΦ

−c¯c e−¯φηψβ (∇αbαβ −2bαβ∂αΦ)
+ c¯c
12∂¯c e−φ ∂e−¯φ Hµνρ(db)µνρ −c¯c
12∂¯c ∂e−φ e−¯φ Hµνρ(db)µνρ ,
(3.64)
where (db)µασ = ∂µbασ + ∂αbσµ + ∂σbµα and all terms proportional to the background
equations of motion (2.46) have been set to zero. As desired, setting QVb = 0 enforces
the gauge condition
∇µbµν = 2bµν ∂µΦ ,
(3.65)
along with the linearised equation of motion for a B-ﬁeld perturbation on a NS-NS
background as derived in appendix B.2:
∇λ∇λbµν −2Rρµνσ bρσ + 2Rσ
[µbν]σ −2∂σΦ ∇σbµν + 4bσ[µ ∇ν]∂σΦ = 0 .
(3.66)
We also obtain additional scalar and symmetric backreaction constraints on the per-
turbation:
Hµ
ρσ (db)νρσ = 0 = H · (db) .
(3.67)
So as expected, Vb only makes sense in the BRST cohomology on a purely metric
background.
3.2.2.3
Dilaton vertex operator
In usual superstring theory, the form of the dilaton vertex operator [127] is com-
plicated by the fact that the dilaton couples to the worldsheet action through the
Fradkin-Tseytlin term [93]. A similar mechanism is in play in the ambitwistor string,
visible at the level of the BRST charge through the last term in the matter stress-
energy tensor (2.41). For a scalar perturbation on spacetime ϕ(X), the associated
54

ambitwistor string vertex operator is composed of four terms:
Vϕ = O(1)
ϕ + ¯O(1)
ϕ + O(2)
ϕ + ¯O(2)
ϕ ,
(3.68)
where
O(1)
ϕ = −c¯c ∂¯c ∂ξ e−2φ e−¯φ ψµ∂µϕ ,
(3.69)
¯O(1)
ϕ = −c¯c ∂¯c ∂¯ξ e−2¯φ e−φ ¯ψµ∂µϕ ,
(3.70)
O(2)
ϕ = 2 c¯c ∂e−φ e−¯φ ϕ ,
(3.71)
¯O(2)
ϕ = −2 c¯c e−φ ∂e−¯φ ϕ .
(3.72)
Note that unlike the graviton and B-ﬁeld vertex operators, (3.68) diﬀers in the ﬂat
space limit from other formulae appearing in the literature [71]. This is due to our
use of a complex fermion system for the spin 1
2 matter ﬁelds on the worldsheet, as
opposed to the real fermion system used elsewhere.
Unlike the previous cases, not all constituents of Vϕ are conformal primaries. In
particular, the operators O(2)
ϕ and ¯O(2)
ϕ are not primary, so when calculating QVϕ care
must be taken to account for contributions from their OPEs with stress tensor terms
in the BRST operator. The relevant OPEs are
(cT + bc∂c)(z) O(2)
ϕ (w) ∼−2 c∂c ¯c e−φe−¯φ
(z −w)2
ϕ + · · · ,
(cT + bc∂c)(z) ¯O(2)
ϕ (w) ∼2 c∂c ¯c e−φe−¯φ
(z −w)2
ϕ + · · · ,
(3.73)
so the anomalous conformal weight contributions cancel between the two operators.
The non-trivial ghost structure of all four contributions in (3.68) necessitates a
careful treatment of the ghost contributions to the action of the BRST operator. On
a general NS-NS background, the result is
QVϕ = 2c¯c ∂¯c

∂e−φ e−¯φ −e−φ ∂e−¯φ
(∇µ∂µϕ −2 ∂µΦ ∂µϕ)
−c¯c ∂¯c e−φe−¯φ
 ∂gµν + 2 ¯ψµψν
∇µ∂νϕ + 1
2
 ψµψν −¯ψµ ¯ψν
Hµνσ ∂σϕ

.
(3.74)
55

Requiring QVϕ = 0 therefore imposes scalar, symmetric and anti-symmetric equations
of motion on the perturbation:
∇µ∂µϕ −2 ∂µΦ ∂µϕ = 0
(3.75)
∇µ∂νϕ = 0 ,
Hµνσ ∂σϕ = 0 .
(3.76)
As expected, only the scalar equation (3.75) is the desired one; the two tensor equa-
tions (3.76) arise from the backreaction of the scalar perturbation on the metric and
B-ﬁeld sectors of the background as seen in appendix B.3.
However, the situation for the dilaton vertex operator is worse than for the gravi-
ton or B-ﬁeld: even with a pure metric background, we still obtain a tensor equation
∇µ∂νϕ = 0, which over-constrains the perturbation. Although the vertex operator
(3.68) gives the correct scalar equation of motion, its inclusion in the BRST coho-
mology enforces unphysical constraints on the spectrum.
3.2.2.4
NS-NS vertex operator
For each of the graviton, B-ﬁeld and dilaton vertex operators, we have seen that the
associated vertex operator is not in the BRST cohomology of the type II ambitwistor
string on a general NS-NS background. While the graviton (3.37) and B-ﬁeld (3.51)
vertex operators are BRST-closed on the support of the appropriate linearised ﬁeld
equations on a pure gravity background, the dilaton operator is only BRST-closed on
the support of additional, unphysical equations for any sector of background ﬁelds.
These issues are overcome by combining the graviton, B-ﬁeld and dilaton vertex
operators into a single NS-NS vertex operator, which simultaneously perturbs each
sector of the background. Indeed, from the spacetime perspective this is much more
natural than exciting a perturbation of one of the ﬁelds on its own, since the non-
linear equations of motion (2.46) intertwine all three. This ‘fat graviton,’ sometime
expressed heuristically as hµν ⊕bµν ⊕ϕ, is the natural perturbation of the NS-NS
sector of type II supergravity.
56

The candidate vertex operator is given by summing together each of three vertex
operators constructed above:
VNS = Vh + Vb + Vϕ ,
(3.77)
where Vh is given by (3.37), Vb by (3.57), and Vϕ by (3.68). Computing QVNS is
straightforward: We simply add together the results for the BRST operator acting on
each of the three components, (3.47), (3.64) and (3.74). The distinct ghost structures
in the result impose diﬀerent constraints on the background ﬁelds.
From the terms proportional to c¯ce−φ¯η and c¯ce−¯φη, we obtain the gauge conditions
∇µhµν = 2 hµν ∂µΦ ,
∇µbµν = 2 bµν ∂µΦ .
(3.78)
Terms proportional to c¯c∂¯ce−φe−¯φ encode tensorial equations of motion. The sym-
metric equation, which appears contracted into (2 ¯ψ(µψν) + ∂gµν), is
∇λ∇λhµν −2Rµρσν hρσ −2Rλ
(µ hν)λ −hρ
σ HµρλHν
σλ
−4

hσ(µ ∇ν)∂σΦ + 1
2∇σhµν ∂σΦ

+ Hρσ(µ (db)ν)
ρσ −4∇(µ∂ν)ϕ = 0 ,
(3.79)
while the anti-symmetric equation, which appears contracted into (ψµψν −¯ψµ ¯ψν), is
∇λ∇λbµν −2Rρµνσ bρσ + 2Rσ
[µ bν]σ + 4

bσ[µ ∇ν]∂σΦ −1
2∇σbµν ∂σΦ

+ 2∇ρhσ[ν Hµ]
ρσ −hρσ ∇ρHσµν −2Hµνσ ∂σϕ = 0 .
(3.80)
Finally, a scalar equation of motion
∇µ∂µϕ −2∂µΦ ∂µϕ −H · db
24
= 0
(3.81)
is imposed by terms proportional to the ghost structure c¯c∂¯c(e−φ∂e−¯φ −∂e−φe−¯φ).
Sure enough, equations (3.78) are the generalised de Donder gauge conditions for
graviton and B-ﬁeld perturbations, while equations (3.79) – (3.81) are precisely the
linearised equations of motion for the NS-NS sector of type II supergravity as obtained
in appendix B. Thus, VNS is in the BRST cohomology of the type II ambitwistor
string if and only if it encodes a physical, on-shell perturbation for the NS-NS sector
of supergravity on spacetime.
57

3.2.3
Discussion
In this chapter, we found vertex operators for the heterotic and type II ambitwistor
strings with curved background ﬁelds. In the heterotic case, we gave the gluon vertex
operator on any Yang-Mills background: BRST closure imposes the physical equa-
tions of motion and gauge-ﬁxing constraint on the gluon perturbation. For the type
II model things are more subtle. In a pure gravity background, we found graviton
and B-ﬁeld vertex operators which are BRST closed when the appropriate physi-
cal constraints are imposed on the perturbations. On a general NS-NS background
(composed of a metric, B-ﬁeld and dilaton), a fully consistent vertex operator is
given by simultaneously encoding perturbations to all three sectors. BRST closure
then imposes the appropriate physical constraints on these perturbations, given by
the linearised equations of motion and a generalised de Donder gauge.
The fact that these vertex operators can be determined exactly – without re-
course to any background ﬁeld expansion – points to a signiﬁcant diﬀerence between
ambitwistor string and ordinary string theory, where such calculations on a general
background would be impossible. It should be noted that a generalisation of the ver-
tex operators given here allows for any gauge-ﬁxing condition on the perturbations –
the procedure is a straightforward extension of what is done on a ﬂat background [71].
The Lorenz or (generalised) de Donder conditions obtained here are, in a sense, the
‘minimal’ such gauge-ﬁxing constraints.
Of course, one hopes to use these vertex operators to compute physical observables
in non-trivial backgrounds. At three-points, this requires knowing the operators in
both the ﬁxed (i.e., negative picture number) picture emphasised here, as well as the
descended vertex operators (i.e., picture number zero). In the heterotic theory, the
descended vertex operator (3.36) is easy to obtain through the standard procedure or
linearising the constraint H.
58

In the type II case, one can again follow the standard procedure by colliding VNS
with the picture changing operators δ(¯β)G and δ(β) ¯G, respectively. Some terms in the
resulting operator will be Q-exact and not contribute to correlation functions; these
pure gauge contributions can be isolated by applying the picture changing operators in
diﬀerent order, and then comparing the results. Equivalently, the descended vertex
operator can be computed by linearising the H current (2.40) around the chosen
background.
On a general NS-NS background, the resulting vertex operator is complicated,
but in highly symmetric backgrounds (usually those of interest for perturbative cal-
culations) the descended vertex operator can be quite tractable. For instance, the
three-point graviton amplitude on a vacuum plane wave spacetime has been com-
puted directly from ambitwistor strings [4], as we will see in chapter 4.2. We expect
the descent procedure to be manageable enough for explicit calculation of 3-point
functions around other highly symmetric backgrounds.
To obtain genus zero, n-point worldsheet correlations functions (for n > 3), the
analogue of descent with respect to the H current must be understood. In ﬂat back-
grounds, where Hﬂat = Π2, this procedure is understood and leads to the appear-
ance of the scattering equations [48,49,52]. However, on general backgrounds H has
complicated X-dependence which obstructs a straightforward evaluation of the path
integral. In deformations of the ambitwistor string, where H has X-dependence even
in ﬂat backgrounds, it is still not understood how to perform descent with respect to
H [60,66,67]. Clearly, a resolution of this issue is required if ambitwistor strings are
to be a useful tool in the study of perturbative QFT on curved backgrounds.
Finally, we note that the fate of the GSO projection (which ensures that the
spectrum of the type II ambitwistor string is equivalent to that of type II supergravity)
in curved space remains unclear. Indeed, in the graviton vertex operator (3.37) the
term proportional to a worldsheet derivative does not obey the na¨ıve GSO projection,
59

but is clearly required to ensure that QVh = 0 yields covariant equations. Other terms
in the B-ﬁeld and dilaton vertex operators also na¨ıvely seem to be in the GSO-odd
sector, but dropping them yields non-covariant or unphysical (algebraic and ﬁrst
derivative) equations of motion.
One potential way to address the issue of the GSO projection is to formulate
the curved space worldsheet theory with two real fermion systems, rather than the
complex fermion system used here. The price to pay is that the action is no longer free
and a true background ﬁeld expansion must be used. OPEs would be calculated order-
by-order in perturbation theory, but we expect that calculations of the nilpotency of
Q and Q-closure of vertex operators will become trivial after a certain low loop order.
This follows from the fact that the non-perturbative calculations using the complex
fermion model give only a ﬁnite number of low order poles in the OPEs.
60

Chapter 4
Scattering on plane waves
4.1
Results from quantum ﬁeld theory in curved
spacetimes
The double copy is a precise conjecture about how, in a speciﬁc class of represen-
tations, momentum space formulae for gravity scattering amplitudes are related to
those of gauge theory. This is known to be true at tree level. While there is currently
no general proof at higher loop orders in perturbation theory, a growing body of ev-
idence suggests that the double copy also holds at loop level, at the time of writing
up to 5 loops. The remarkable success of the double copy prescription has led to
an oft-repeated slogan in the amplitudes community: Gravity = (Gauge Theory)2.
Despite the vast array of evidence, the geometric and fully non-linear origins of the
double copy remain mysterious. Most clear proofs thus far are expressed in momen-
tum space for perturbations around a ﬂat background. While ﬁrst examples of the
double copy at the level of classical non-linear solutions in gauge theory and gravity
have been explored, this work is restricted to algebraically special solutions and does
not probe dynamics in the same way as scattering amplitudes.
In this chapter, ﬁrst published in [3], we address the question as to whether the
double copy relationship between gauge theory and gravity holds for perturbation the-
ory on curved backgrounds. To do this, we consider the simplest curved backgrounds
for which there is a well-deﬁned notion of S-matrix: sandwich plane waves [104].
61

These are metric or gauge ﬁeld backgrounds which are ﬂat in the asymptotic past
and future in generic directions but contain a compactly supported region of curva-
ture. This curvature can be thought of as a burst of unidirectional radiation (gravi-
tational or electromagnetic) which is turned on and then switched oﬀat some ﬁnite
retarded times. The possibility of scattering on a plane wave background may seem
controversial in light of the fact that such spacetimes are not in general globally hy-
perbolic [102]. Nevertheless, we will see that the evolution of massless ﬁelds is unitary
without leakage, so the S-matrix does indeed make sense.
The relationship Gravity =(Yang Mills)2 is already nicely manifest in the underly-
ing gravitational and electromagnetic plane waves, written in Brinkmann coordinates.
With coordinates Xµ = (u, v, xa), a = 1, . . . , d−2, the Brinkmann form of the metric
is Kerr-Schild, given by
ds2 = ds2
ﬂat −Hab(u) xa xb du2 ,
where
ds2
ﬂat = 2du dv −δab dxadxb ,
whereas the corresponding electromagnetic potential is
A = F(u)a xadu ,
so that the metric perturbation from ﬂat space is naturally a sum of terms of the form
A ⊙A. Here Hab(u) and Fa(u) are curvatures and are freely prescribable functions
of u subject to Hab being trace-free for the Einstein equations to be satisﬁed (this
restriction disappears if a dilaton is allowed).1 For a sandwich wave, Hab and Fa are
supported in some interval u ∈[u1, u2] so that spacetime and connection are ﬂat for
u →±∞. For both types of plane wave we will see that it is possible to ﬁnd complete
sets of polarisation states for in and out momentum eigenstates for linear massless
ﬁelds of integral spins.
1Note that this classical double copy diﬀers from that for the more general Kerr-Schild pp-waves
considered in [29]. There, if the Maxwell ﬁeld is φkµ, the metric is ds2
ﬂat + φkµkν where kµ is a null
vector and φ a solution to the transverse wave equation. Such solutions can often be considered to be
longitudinal with φ playing the role of a Coulomb-like source term that is analogous to a propagator
and therefore not squared. We consider plane waves with a radiative Maxwell term, so the whole
Maxwell ﬁeld must be squared to obtain a gravitational ﬁeld.
62

The ﬂat ‘in’ and ‘out’ regions of sandwich plane waves allow us to deﬁne the S-
matrix. We focus on the special case of 3-point amplitudes; remember that in ﬂat
space, this is where the slogan Gravity = (Gauge Theory)2 of the double copy is
literally [8]:
Mﬂat
3
=
 Aﬂat
3
2 ,
where Mﬂat
3
and Aﬂat
3
are the 3-point gravity and gauge-theory amplitudes in Min-
kowski space, stripped of overall momentum conserving delta functions and coupling
constants. Hence, we expect that if there is a notion of double copy which holds in
curved backgrounds, it should be most easily found at the level of 3-point amplitudes
for which propagators are not yet required.
We consider such 3-point amplitudes for scalars, gauge theory and gravity on a
gravitational plane wave background, and for charged scalars and gauge theory on
a Yang-Mills plane wave background in any number of spacetime dimensions.
In
each case, the computation reduces to an integral which depends on the background
ﬁeld; it turns out that the integrand 2 of the resulting expression carries suﬃcient
information to determine if there is a double copy.
We ﬁnd that the 3-point amplitudes for gluons on a plane wave gauge background
and for gravitons on plane wave spacetimes have two parts written symbolically as
Apw
3
= F + C ,
Mpw
3
= F2 −C .
Here, F is precisely the ﬂat spacetime integrand for three gluon scattering, whereas F
is the 3-gluon integrand on the gravitational plane wave background. Thus, there is a
correction term between the square of the gluon 3-point amplitude and the graviton
3-point amplitude on a plane wave metric. The ﬂat space F can be mapped to F
after some replacements of momenta and polarisation vectors by their curved (and
non-constant) counterparts. These replacements are non-local on spacetime and are
2This ‘tree level integrand’ is the equivalent of ‘stripping oﬀmomentum conserving delta func-
tions’ in the ﬂat space amplitudes.
63

ﬁxed by ﬁnding solutions to the Hamilton-Jacobi equations that allow one to bring
momentum eigenstates into the interior of spacetime from future or past inﬁnity in
the curved case. That it is non-local on a curved spacetime is not a surprise as the
double copy is only expressed locally on momentum space.
The correction terms C and C arise from the ‘tails’ formed by the linearised free
ﬁelds backscattering oﬀthe background. Scalar waves propagate cleanly on a plane
wave background subject to Huygens’ principle [128], but spin one and spin two do
not [129]. The tails of momentum eigenstates in the past pick up terms encoding the
‘memory’ of the ﬁeld through which they have passed (i.e., the integral of the ﬁeld
strength in the electromagnetic case). Remarkably, we ﬁnd that C2 →C with an
extension of the same replacements used to relate F and F.
Deﬁne e
A3 = F −C to be the gluon 3-point integrand on a gauge background
with ﬂipped sign (or colour charge) for the background gauge ﬁeld, and let ρ to
be the replacement maps from ﬂat to curved kinematics and gauge to gravitational
background ﬁelds. Then our double copy can be written as
M3 = ρ(A3 e
A3).
This is strong evidence that a notion of double copy persists more generally in the
presence of background curvature.
Our formulae therefore also allow a study of the memory eﬀect for plane waves
on the amplitude. The key ingredient in the integrand is a vielbein whose non-trivial
change from past to future exempliﬁes the memory eﬀect [105–107], which has been
studied in detail for sandwich plane waves (e.g., [108,109]). For a charged ﬁeld on a
gauge background, it gives a momentum shift from past to future inﬁnity proportional
to the integral of the ﬁeld. On a gravitational background, the linear planes that are
wave fronts of a standard momentum eigenstate in the past become diverging quartic
surfaces, Dupin cyclides, in the future [128]. This memory eﬀect will also give rise to
64

new infrared divergences that have been studied in the case of a charged ﬁeld on an
electromagnetic plane wave background [112,130].
Non-linear plane wave backgrounds for both gravity and gauge theory have been
reviewed in chapter 2.2. Free ﬁelds on these backgrounds are constructed in chap-
ter 4.1.1, where we also conﬁrm that (for scalars, gauge theory and gravity) the
S-matrix for these states is well-deﬁned in the sense that scattering is unitary and
there is no particle creation. We close this chapter with a brief discussion of Huy-
gens’ principle and tails. Chapter 4.1.2 contains the calculation of 3-point amplitudes
and integrands for scalars, gauge theory and gravity on the gravitational plane wave
background; chapter 4.1.3 contains the analogous calculations for charged scalars and
Yang-Mills theory on a background plane wave gauge ﬁeld. In chapter 4.1.4, these
two calculations are mapped onto each other; this map deﬁnes the double copy for
3-point amplitudes on plane wave backgrounds. We also show how the gauge theory
3-point functions on the two backgrounds are related by a double copy map which
acts only on the background. Chapter 4.1.5 concludes. In appendix D, we provide
explicit amplitude formulae for the special case of the impulsive plane wave back-
ground. Appendix C contains the operational deﬁnitions of tree level amplitude and
integrand used throughout the chapter.
4.1.1
Free ﬁelds on plane wave backgrounds and inner prod-
ucts
Amplitudes in ﬂat space are functionals of free ﬁelds and are usually expressed as
functions of momenta after being evaluated on momentum eigenstates. In curved
space, such solutions are not so obviously available and it is here that we must use the
special structure of plane waves. Friedlander showed that Huygens’ principle remains
valid for the scalar wave equation in plane wave spacetimes: there exist solutions with
delta-function support on null hypersurfaces through every null direction [128]. These
65

null hypersurfaces are level surfaces of solutions to the Hamilton-Jacobi equation,
which provide curved space analogues of the function k · X for null vectors k in
Minkowski space.
Such functions provide analogues of momentum eigenstates, and also lead to inte-
gral formulae for general solutions to the wave equation [131]. Generalising [129], we
can raise the spin to obtain free ﬁelds of spin one and two with arbitrary polarisations,
but Huygens’ principle no longer holds and tails appear. Furthermore, a consequence
of the memory eﬀect will be that, unlike in ﬂat spacetime, a momentum eigenstate
in the past will not evolve into one in the future. Nevertheless, we can show that,
despite the lack of global hyperbolicity of plane waves [102], the scattering problem is
well-deﬁned on a plane wave background, featuring unitary evolution without leakage
or particle creation.
4.1.1.1
Scalar wave equation
The plane progressing waves of Friedlander are obtained from solutions to the Hamil-
ton-Jacobi equation for null geodesics
gµν(∂µφ)(∂νφ) = 0 ,
such that arbitrary functions of φ satisfy the wave equation (when multiplied by a
ﬁxed pre-factor). Solutions are most easily obtained in Einstein-Rosen coordinates
where they can be separated using the explicit symmetries leading to
φk = k0 v + ki yi + kikjF ij(U)
2 k0
,
where (k0, ki) are constants and F ij =
R
γij(s)ds as in (2.60). The wave equation in
Einstein-Rosen coordinates is
1
p
−|g|
∂µ
p
−|g| gµν ∂ν Φ

=
 2∂U ∂V + (∂U
√γ)∂V −γij∂i ∂j

Φ = 0 ,
(4.1)
66

and it can be seen directly that this is solved by [128,131]
Φ(X) = Ω(U) ei φk ,
Ω(U) := |γ−1(U)|1/4 = |E(u)|−1
2 ,
(4.2)
In Brinkmann coordinates, the wave equation is
 2∂u ∂v + H(u, x) ∂2
v −∂a ∂a
Φ = 0 ,
(4.3)
and of course this is solved by the same Φ. Using (2.56), it can be expressed in
Brinkmann coordinates as:
φk := k0
2 σab xaxb + kiEi
a xa + k0 v + ki kj
2 k0
F ij ,
(4.4)
with F ij(u) and (k0, ki) as before, and σab = ˙Ei
a Eb i the deformation tensor deﬁned
by (2.58). The natural momentum associated with φk is:
Kµ dXµ := dφk =
k0 dv +
k0
2 ˙σbc xbxc + ki ˙Ei
bxb + kikj
2k0
γij

du + (kiEi
a + k0 σabxb)dxa .
(4.5)
Although Kµ is a (u, xa)-dependent generalisation of the constant momentum familiar
from ﬂat space, it is nevertheless null by construction from the Hamilton-Jacobi
equation. To see this explicitly, note that ˙σbc = ˙Ei
b ˙Ec i −Hbc.
The solutions Φ = Ωeiφk clearly reduce to on-shell momentum eigenstates when
the background is Minkowski space, and hence can be chosen to do so in one or the
other asymptotic region. We can use this to characterise in and out scattering states
in terms of φk: An in state Φ−is one which looks like a plane wave eik·X in the
in-region (u < u1), while an out state Φ+ looks like a plane wave in the out-region
(u > u2). This comes down to requiring the vielbein to become trivial in the past or
the future:
lim
u→±∞Ea ±
i
(u) = δa
i .
(4.6)
In terms of the solution to the Hamilton-Jacobi equations, φk, the distinction becomes:
φ−
k |in = k0 v + kiδi
a xa + u δij kikj
2k0
= φ+
k |out .
(4.7)
67

The positive frequency condition on these states is simply that k0 ≥0.
Even at the level of the free theory, some interesting facts about the S-matrix on
a plane wave spacetime can be derived by making use of the natural inner product
between two solutions to the free equation of motion. This uses complex conjugation
to turn the standard symplectic form on the space of solutions of the wave equation
into an inner product:
⟨Φ1|Φ2⟩= i
Z
Σ
 Φ1 ∧∗d¯Φ2 −¯Φ2 ∧∗dΦ1

,
(4.8)
where Σ is an arbitrary Cauchy surface.
Plane wave spacetimes do not admit a
Cauchy hypersurface [102], but one can instead choose the foliation by hypersurfaces
Σu of constant u. In this case, the inner product gives:
⟨Φ1|Φ2⟩= i
Z
Σu
dv dd−2x
 Φ1 ∂v ¯Φ2 −¯Φ2 ∂vΦ1

,
(4.9)
evaluated at some ﬁxed u.
Consider the inner product between two positive frequency in states, say Φ−
1 and
Φ−
2 with constant momentum components {k0, ki} and {l0, li} respectively.
Using
(4.9), this gives
⟨Φ−
1 |Φ−
2 ⟩= 2 k0 δ(k0 −l0) δd−2(ki −li) ,
(4.10)
with all u-dependence dropping out. As desired, the evolution problem underlying
the scattering theory is unitary, since there is no ‘leakage’ of momentum – at any
value of u – between the two in states.
Similarly, the inner product between a positive frequency in state and a negative
frequency out state (namely ⟨Φ+
1 |¯Φ−
2 ⟩) encodes the presence of ‘particle creation’ in
the plane wave background. Without loss of generality, the inner product can be
evaluated at u = 0 > u2, leading to:

Φ+
1 |¯Φ−
2

= δ(k0 + l0) (k0 −l0) Ω−(0)
Z
dd−2x exp

i
l0
2 σ−
ab(0) xaxb
+(ka + liE−i
a (0))xa + lilj
2l0
F ij
−(0)

.
(4.11)
68

However, the assumption of positive frequency means that k0 + l0 ≥0, so on the
support of the overall delta function this inner product vanishes:

Φ+
1 |¯Φ−
2

= 0 ,
(4.12)
conﬁrming the well-known result that there is no particle creation for scalar QFT in
plane wave spacetimes [132, 133]. Equivalently: positive frequency in states do not
develop a negative frequency part in the out-region.
The ﬁnal independent inner product is between positive frequency in and out
states, ⟨Φ+
1 |Φ−
2 ⟩. This quantity encodes the amplitude for in-to-out scattering in the
plane wave spacetime [133]. The inner product can again be evaluated at u = 0:
⟨Φ+
1 |Φ−
2 ⟩= 2 k0 δ(k0 −l0) e−isl Ω−(0)
×
Z
dd−2x exp

i

(ka −liE−i
a (0)) xa −l0
2 σ−
ab(0) xaxb

,
(4.13)
where the (constant) phase sl is deﬁned as
sl := li lj
2l0
F ij
−(0) .
Now, by (2.59) it follows that
E−
ia(u) = u bia + cia ,
∀u > u2 ,
(4.14)
where b, c are constant, invertible (d −2) × (d −2) matrices. This leaves a Gaussian
integral to do in (4.13), with the result:
⟨Φ+
1 |Φ−
2 ⟩= 2 k0
2π
i l0
 d−2
2
δ(k0 −l0) e−i(sl+rk,l)
p
|b|
,
(4.15)
after using the fact that Ω−(0) =
p
|c−1| and deﬁning another phase
rk,l := −1
2l0
(ka −lici
a) cak(b−1)b
k (kb −ljcj
b) .
As expected, this matches the result in the literature [133].
69

4.1.1.2
Spin one
The action for free gauge ﬁelds propagating on a plane wave spacetime is
Sfree[A] = 1
g2
Z
M
du dv dd−2x tr
 ∇[µ Aν] ∇µ Aν
,
(4.16)
where Aµ is the gauge ﬁeld and ∇the Levi-Civita connection. We will see that on a
plane wave it is consistent to simultaneously impose both a Lorenz gauge ∇µAµ = 0
and a light-cone gauge Av = 0, since ∂v is Killing. With this, the linearised equations
of motion for the gauge connection are
gρσ∇ρ∇σAµ = 0 ,
∂µAµ = 0 = Av .
(4.17)
These can be solved using the d −2 spin-raising operators
Ra := du δab ∂
∂xb + dxa ∂
∂v ,
(4.18)
where the free index labels diﬀerent possible polarisation states.
As tensors, the
Ra are covariantly constant.
Acting on a solution to the wave equation, Φ, it is
easily checked that RaΦ satisﬁes (4.17), so Ra is naturally a spin-raising operator
(this generalises the four-dimensional, twistorial approach in [129]). Thus with Φ the
scalar wave (4.2) we construct the free gauge ﬁeld
Aµ dXµ = 1
k0
ϵa RaΦ = 1
k0
ϵaRa  Ωei φk
,
(4.19)
where φk and Ωare as before and the polarisation vector ϵa is constant. We can also
deﬁne a ‘curved’ εµ so that
Aµ = εµ Φ ,
where
εµ dXµ = ϵa
kj
k0
Ej
a + σab xb

du + ϵa dxa .
(4.20)
This satisﬁes the free equation of motion and gauge-ﬁxing conditions. Similarly to
its ﬂat space counterpart, the curved polarisation vector obeys
ε · K = gµνεµKν = 0 ,
(4.21)
70

where K is as deﬁned in (4.5). In the ﬂat space limit, Aµ reduces to a standard
linearised plane wave εﬂat
µ eik·X, with the non-trivial constant components of εﬂat
µ
being
ϵa.
In and out states are deﬁned in the same way as for the scalar: an in state looks
like a Minkowski plane wave in the in-region, while an out state looks like a Minkowski
plane wave in the out-region.
As in the scalar case, an inner product on free gauge ﬁelds is induced by the
boundary term of the action [134].
Restricted to a constant u hypersurface, this
inner product is:
⟨A1|A2⟩:= i
Z
Σu
dv dd−2x
 Aµ
1 ¯F2 vµ −¯Aµ
2 F1 vµ

,
(4.22)
which is easily used to compute the three cases of interest. Assuming positive fre-
quency for all (un-conjugated) ﬁelds, one ﬁnds:

A−
1 |A−
2

=
2 k0 ϵ1 · ϵ2 δ(k0 −l0) δd−2(ki −li) ,
(4.23a)

A+
1 | ¯A−
2

=
0 ,
(4.23b)

A+
1 |A−
2

=
2 k0
2π
i l0
 d−2
2
ϵ1 · ϵ2 δ(k0 −l0) e−i(sl+rk,l)
p
|b|
,
(4.23c)
where ϵ1 · ϵ2 = ϵa
1ϵb
2δab and the phases sl, rk,l are the same as the scalar case. Unsur-
prisingly, (4.23) indicate that the evolution problem is unitary and that there is no
particle creation for gauge ﬁelds propagating on the plane wave spacetime.
4.1.1.3
Spin two
Finally, consider linearised metric ﬂuctuations hµν on the plane wave background.
Assuming that the background is a solution to the vacuum Einstein equations and
choosing a transverse-traceless gauge for the perturbations
∇µhµ
σ = 0 = hµ
µ ,
(4.24)
71

the linearised Einstein equation is:
∇σ∇σhµν −2Rρ
µνσ hσ
ρ = 0 ,
(4.25)
with Rρ
µνσ the background curvature tensor. For a vacuum plane wave in Brinkmann
coordinates (i.e., Ha
a = 0), the gauge for hµν can be further ﬁxed by requiring the
vanishing of the v-components hvµ = 0. With these conditions, the linearised equation
is:
gµν∂µ∂νhρσ + 4 δu
(ρ∂|v|hσ)a Ha
b xb −2 δu
ρδu
σ Hab hab = 0 ,
(4.26)
where all Christoﬀel symbols have been written out explicitly in Brinkmann coordi-
nates as given in equation (2.52).
Solutions to (4.26) can be constructed by acting on the massless scalar twice with
the spin-raising operator (4.18). This leads to:
hµν dXµ dXν = 1
k2
0
ϵa Ra  ϵb Rb Φ

=

(ε · dX)2 −i
k0
ϵaϵb σabdu2

Φ ,
(4.27)
where ϵa is chosen to be null with respect to δab to ensure that the gauge condition
hµ
µ = 0 is obeyed. Note in particular the ‘tail’ term proportional to ϵaϵb σab: unlike in
Minkowski spacetime, metric perturbations on a plane wave background do not carry
a polarisation which is simply the ‘square’ of a gauge ﬁeld’s polarisation. The reason
for this is that the second spin raising operator in (4.27) acts not only on the scalar
solution (which contributes a second copy of εµ) but also on the ﬁrst spin raising
operator (or equivalently, on the ﬁrst copy of εµ, which – unlike in Minkowski space
– is not a constant vector).
Thus the perturbative double copy for plane wave backgrounds involves subtleties
not present in Minkowski space. For linear perturbations around ﬂat space, hµν ∼
Aµ ⊙Aν for momentum eigenstates, whereas in plane wave spacetimes we have hµν ∼
Aµ ⊙Aν + Cµν, with correction Cµν given by the last term proportional to σab in
(4.27).
72

The boundary term in the linearised Einstein-Hilbert action induces an inner
product on metric ﬂuctuations [134]:
⟨h1|h2⟩= i
Z
Σu
dv dd−2x
 hµσ
1 ∂v¯h2 µσ −¯hµσ
2 ∂vh1 µσ

.
(4.28)
Once again calculating the inner products between incoming and outgoing states
gives:

h−
1 |h−
2

=
2 k0 (ϵ1 · ϵ2)2 δ(k0 −l0) δd−2(ki −li) ,

h+
1 |¯h−
2

=
0 ,

h+
1 |h−
2

=
2 k0
2π
il0
 d−2
2
(ϵ1 · ϵ2)2 δ(k0 −l0) e−i(sl+rk,l)
p
|b|
.
(4.29)
So despite the ‘correction’ term in hµν, the physical properties of unitary evolution
and no particle creation are preserved.
4.1.1.4
Charged free ﬁelds in plane wave gauge ﬁelds
Although we assume that the background gauge potential in (2.71) is valued in the
Cartan algebra3, it couples non-trivially to free ﬁelds which are charged under the
gauge group. Consider a free, charged scalar:
Sfree[Φ] = 1
2
Z
du dv dd−2x DµΦ DµΦ ,
(4.30)
where Dµ = ∂µ −ieAµ, with Aµ the background gauge ﬁeld (2.71) and e the charge
of Φ. In the ﬁrst instance, we will take e to be a standard U(1) charge, but more
generally, A takes values in the Cartan subalgebra of some gauge group, Φ in some
root space, and e will then be the corresponding root and eA the corresponding
contraction with A encoding the commutator. The free equation of motion for the
charged scalar is thus
DµDµΦ(X) =

2∂u ∂v −∂a ∂a −2i xae ˙Aa ∂v

Φ(X) = 0 .
(4.31)
3The Cartan case was considered in [3] because the amplitudes there were originally calculated
as a check for the ambitwistor string results of [4]. When the latter paper was written, it was not
yet known how to couple heterotic ambitwistor strings to non-abelian background gauge ﬁelds, this
issue was only resolved later in [1]. There is no deeper reason for working with this restriction here.
73

Solutions to this ‘charged’ wave equation are given by:
Φ(X) = ei ˜φk ,
(4.32)
where
˜φk = k0 v + (ka + eAa) xa +
1
2 k0
f(u) .
(4.33)
The function f(u) is the analogue of the F ij(u) which appeared in the gravitational
case:
f(u) :=
Z u
ds (ka + eAa(s)) (ka + eAa(s)) .
(4.34)
When the background gauge ﬁeld is turned oﬀ, it is easy to see that these solutions
become the usual momentum eigenstates of Minkowski space.
The natural momentum associated with these scalars is deﬁned by
Kµ dXµ := −ie−i˜φk Dµ ei˜φk dXµ
= k0dv +
1
2 k0
(ka + eAa)(ka + eAa)du + (ka + eAa)dxa .
(4.35)
The components of Kµ are functions of u, but it is easy to see that this momentum
is null.
The distinction between in and out states for the charged scalar is in direct analogy
with the deﬁnitions on the gravitational background. An incoming state is one which
looks like a Minkowski plane wave in the in-region, while an outgoing state looks like
a Minkowski plane wave in the out-region. This distinction manifests itself in the
boundary conditions on A:
lim
u→±∞A±
a (u) = 0 .
(4.36)
Note that unlike the massless scalar in the gravitational background, the exponential
dependence on xa for the charged scalar is at most linear in any region.
The inner product on the charged scalars is given by
⟨Φ1|Φ2⟩= i
Z
Σu
dv dd−2x
 Φ1 ∂v ¯Φ2 −¯Φ2 ∂vΦ1

,
(4.37)
74

and once again there are three inner products of physical interest. These are:

Φ−
1 |Φ−
2

=
2k0 δ(k0 −l0) δd−2(ka −la) ,

Φ+
1 |¯Φ−
2

=
0 ,

Φ+
1 |Φ−
2

=
2k0 δ(k0 −l0) δd−2(ka −la + ca) ei ˜sl ,
(4.38)
where ca is the inner product of A−
a (0) in the Cartan subalgebra with the charge of
the ﬁeld. The momentum conservation then indicates the ‘kick’ received by the ﬁeld
from the memory eﬀect. The phase ˜sl is deﬁned by
˜sl := f−(0)
2 l0
.
The equations (4.38) indicate that the classical S-matrix associated with this charged
scalar is unitary with no particle production.
4.1.1.5
Spin one on a gauge background
The linearised equation of motion for a gauge ﬁeld aµ charged under the same gauge
group as the background Aµ is:
Dµ (Dµaν −Dνaµ) + aµ (∂µAν −∂νAµ) = 0 .
(4.39)
Solutions to this equation are simpliﬁed by choosing a Lorenz gauge Dµaµ = 0 along
with4 av = 0; the latter condition actually reduces the Lorenz condition to ∂µaµ = 0.
Solutions are then found by acting on the charged scalar solution with Ra as before
in the gravitational case. This leads to
aµ dXµ = ˜ϵa

dxa + 1
k0
(ka + eAa) du

ei˜φk ,
(4.40)
where ˜ϵa is a (constant) (d −2)-dimensional vector which we will take to be null. As
in the gravitational case, we deﬁne a polarisation d-vector ˜εµ as
˜εµ dXµ = ˜ϵa

dxa + 1
k0
(ka + eAa) du

.
(4.41)
4This is of course not possible on a general background, but is possible here because ∂v is a
symmetry.
75

This polarisation is on-shell in the sense that K · ˜ε = 0.
With these gauge choices, the inner product is essentially equivalent to (4.22)
giving:

a−
1 |a−
2

=
2k0 ˜ϵ1 · ˜ϵ2 δ(k0 −l0) δd−2(ka −la) ,

a+
1 |¯a−
2

=
0 ,

a+
1 |a−
2

=
2 k0 ˜ϵ1 · ˜ϵ2 δ(k0 −l0) δd−2(ka −la + ca) ei ˜sl .
(4.42)
So we again have a unitary classical S-matrix with no particle creation, as before.
4.1.1.6
Huygens’ principle and tails
The wave equation in ﬂat and plane wave spacetimes satisﬁes Huygens’ principle [128].
In intuitive terms, the principle states that waves can propagate in all directions with-
out scattering oﬀthe background metric and generating a tail. The sharp deﬁnition
is that there should exist solutions to the wave equation with delta-function support
along null hypersurfaces tangent to every null direction through every point. These
are simply given in the above by Ωδ(φk −c) where c is a constant.
This principle fails for linear ﬁelds of spin one and spin two [129], however. We
can construct these ﬁelds by spin raising as above. At spin one, to get a ﬁeld with
delta function support along φk = 0, we must start by raising the spin of a solution
to the scalar wave equation of the form Ωφk Θ(φk) where Θ is the Heaviside step
function. With this, the corresponding spin-one potential is
A = Θ(φk) ϵa
k0
Ra (Ωφk Θ(φk)) = Ωϵa

dxa +
kj
k0
Ej
a + σabxb

du

Θ(φk) ,
and the ﬁeld strength is
F = dA = δ(φk) Ωϵa

dxa +
kj
k0
Ej
a + σabxb

du

∧dφk
+ Θ(φk) Ωϵa  σab dxb ∧du −σb
b dxa ∧du

.
(4.43)
76

We see that the ﬁeld strength has developed a tail in the second line, which is not
supported at φk = 0. This tail can be thought of as the consequence of the interaction
between the impulsive electromagnetic ﬁeld and the gravitational background. There
is a similar story for the spin-two ﬁeld where one starts with Φ = φ3
k Θ(φk).
In these examples, the tail is proportional to the shear of the ∂U null geodesic
congruence (i.e., trace-free part of σab). So tails are generally identiﬁed by the part
of the ﬁeld in which the shear appears explicitly. In the free solutions constructed
above, terms contributing to the tails are readily identiﬁed: σab xbdu from ε · dX at
spin one and two, and the spin two correction term C = −i
k0ϵaϵbσabdu2. However, we
will see that the contributions to the tail from εµ alone actually drop out of amplitude
calculations. So for spin one ﬁelds on a plane wave spacetime, the tail terms do not
eﬀect the amplitude – even though they appear explicitly in the scattering states.
This observation is perhaps related to a diﬀerent deﬁnition of tails for the prop-
agation of gauge ﬁelds on a plane wave spacetimes, in terms of a Green’s function
in [135,136]. That discussion does not give tails for gauge ﬁelds but does for graviton
propagation [137], and indeed we will see that it is the extra correction term C that
is important for graviton amplitudes.
Note that this treatment of tails does not simply extend to ﬁelds propagating on
the gauge theory plane wave background because we cannot simply obtain solutions
from arbitrary functions of ˜Φ as it now has charge. So, in the gauge background
case, we will simply take the tail to be those terms in a curved polarisation vector
that depend explicitly on the potential A. This is consistent with the fact that such
potential terms encode the memory in the asymptotic regions via (2.73), just as the
deformation tensor σab does on a gravitational background.
77

4.1.2
3-point amplitudes on the gravitational background
We now consider the 3-point amplitudes of scalars, gauge ﬁelds and gravitons on
the gravitational sandwich plane wave background. In each case, this calculation is
performed by evaluating the cubic part of the action on solutions to the linearised
equations of motion on the background. For each theory, the amplitude formulae
are presented in terms of an integral over the u variable (in Brinkmann coordinates),
which cannot be done explicitly for general spacetimes. Stripping oﬀthe integration
underlying the action integral, together with the three Φs associated with the three
on-shell ﬁelds, we are left with a tree level integrand expression which is suﬃcient for
exploring the double copy structure of the amplitudes. See appendix C for further
discussion of the scattering amplitudes and tree level integrand.
4.1.2.1
Scalars
Consider the cubic scalar theory
S[Φ] = 1
2
Z
M
du dv dd−2x

gµν∂µΦ ∂νΦ −λ
3Φ3

,
(4.44)
where gµν is the inverse of the plane wave metric (2.50) in Brinkmann coordinates.
The 3-point amplitudes of interest are given by evaluating the cubic portion of the
action5
−λ
6
Z
M
du dv dd−2x Φ1(X) Φ2(X) Φ3(X) ,
(4.45)
where Φr(X) are solutions to the linearised equations of motion of (4.44) for r =
1, 2, 3. When evaluating (4.45), there are basically two distinct conﬁgurations which
need to be considered: three in states, or one out and two in states (the other con-
ﬁgurations are easily related to these).
5A similar calculation has been done for scalar contact interactions of arbitrary valence in certain
homogeneous plane wave backgrounds [138].
78

The case when all three states are incoming is the easiest. This gives
−λ
6
Z
M
du dv dd−2x Φ−
1 (X) Φ−
2 (X) Φ−
3 (X)
= −λ
6 δd−1
 
3
X
r=1
kr
! Z
du |E−| (Ω−)3 exp
 
iF ij
3
X
s=1
ks iks j
2ks 0
!
= −λ
6 δd−1
 
3
X
r=1
kr
! Z
du
p
|E−|
exp
 
iF ij
3
X
s=1
ks iks j
2ks 0
!
.
(4.46)
where
δd−1
 
3
X
r=1
kr
!
:= δ
 
3
X
r=1
kr 0
!
δd−2
 
3
X
r=1
kr i
!
.
The delta functions arise from performing the integrations in dv and dd−2x, with |E−|
an overall Jacobian factor appearing in the second line. Using the relationship (4.2)
between Ω(u) and |E|, the various u-dependent factors left inside the integral can be
slightly simpliﬁed in passing to the third line.
The other conﬁguration is a bit more complicated. In this case one has
−λ
6
Z
M
du dv dd−2x Φ−
1 (X) Φ−
2 (X) Φ+
3 (X) = −λ
6 δ
 
3
X
r=1
kr 0
! Z
du dd−2x (Ω−)2Ω+×
exp

ik3 0
2 (σ−
ab −σ+
ab)xaxb +i (k1 i + k2 i)Ei −
a xa + i k3 iEi +
a xa +
3
X
s=1
ks iks j
2ks 0
F ij
s
!
.
(4.47)
Due to the mixed asymptotic conditions, momentum conservation in the v-direction
no longer eliminates the quadratic x-dependence from the exponential, leaving a (d−
2)-dimensional Gaussian integral. Performing this integral leaves:
−
λ
6 (k3 0)
d−2
2
δ
 
3
X
r=1
kr 0
! Z
du (Ω−)2Ω+
s
(2πi)d−2
|A|
× exp
 
−
i
2 k3 0
JaJb(A−1)ab + i
3
X
s=1
ks iks j
2ks 0
F ij
s
!
,
(4.48)
where
Aab := σ−
ab −σ+
ab ,
Ja := (k1 i + k2 i) Ei −
a
+ k3 i Ei +
a
.
79

Nevertheless, applying the deﬁnition of the tree level integrand to these results (see
earlier or appendix C), somewhat tautologically gives the extremely simple answer
M3(Φ−
1 , Φ−
2 , Φ±
3 ) = 1 ,
(4.49)
after stripping oﬀa power of the coupling, overall delta-functions, and ‘universal’
u-dependent functions that depend on the choice of Φ’s.
This is a general feature. Although the precise form of the amplitude will vary
signiﬁcantly between diﬀerent conﬁgurations of incoming and outgoing states – as in
(4.46) versus (4.48), the integrands will be the same. This is the closest thing to CPT
symmetry in ﬂat spacetime – interpreted here as the ability to exchange incoming and
outgoing states while simultaneously conjugating polarisations and charges – which
survives on a sandwich plane wave background.
4.1.2.2
Gauge theory
The Yang-Mills action on a curved background is:
S[A] = 1
g2
Z
M
tr (F ∧∗F) ,
(4.50)
where ∗is the Hodge star and F = [D, D] is the curvature of the connection D =
∇+A, for ∇the Levi-Civita connection. The 3-point amplitude is given by the cubic
portion of the action (4.50) evaluated on linearised states of the form (4.19). In the
Lorenz gauge of chapter 4.1.1, the 3-point amplitude reads:
g f a1a2a3
Z
du dv dd−2x
 Ab
3 Aµ
2 ∂µA1 b −Ab
2 Aµ
3 ∂µA1 b + cyclic

,
(4.51)
where f a1a2a3 are the structure constants of the gauge group. As before, there are
essentially two independent conﬁgurations in which this amplitude can be evaluated:
three in states or two in states and one out state.
However, some simpliﬁcations occur in the amplitude even before the asymptotic
behaviour of the states has been speciﬁed. Evaluated on general linearised free ﬁelds,
80

(4.51) becomes
g f a1a2a3
Z
du dv dd−2x (ε1 · ε3 (K1 · ε2 −K3 · ε2) + cyclic)
3
Y
r=1
Ωr eiφr ,
(4.52)
where the Ωr and φr (r = 1, 2, 3) depend on whether the state is incoming or outgoing.
Since the functional form of the integrand (i.e., the portion of this expression in
the parentheses) is independent of the state conﬁguration, it suﬃces to identify the
integrand in the simplest conﬁguration. As in the scalar example, this will be the all
incoming conﬁguration, since there are more delta functions in this case.
Even for the three-incoming conﬁguration, the integrand of (4.52) is a priori a
function of the xa through the polarisations (4.20) and momenta (4.5). However,
thanks to the identities:
Kr · εs
=

0
if r = s
Ei a(kr 0
ks i
ks 0ϵs a −kr iϵs a)
otherwise
,
(4.53)
εr · εs
=

0
if r = s
−ϵr · ϵs
otherwise
,
(4.54)
it follows that the integrand is actually independent of the xa. This allows the dv
and dd−2x integrals to be done as the only dependence on these variables is in the
exponential:
g f a1a2a3 δd−1
 
3
X
r=1
kr
! Z
du
p
|E−|
(ε1 · ε3 (K1 · ε2 −K3 · ε2) + cyclic)
× exp
 
iF ij
3
X
s=1
ks iks j
2ks 0
!
.
(4.55)
On the support of the momentum conserving delta functions, this simpliﬁes to
2g f a1a2a3 δd−1
 
3
X
r=1
kr
! Z
du
p
|E−|
(ε1 · ε3 K1 · ε2 + cyclic) exp
 
iF ij
3
X
s=1
ks iks j
2ks 0
!
.
(4.56)
As we saw for the scalar, the amplitude boils down to a u-integration which depends
on the particulars of the background plane wave geometry. The integrand, though,
is easily identiﬁed as:
M3(A1, A2, A3) = ε1 · ε3 K1 · ε2 + cyclic .
(4.57)
81

Note that although this has the same functional form as the ﬂat space 3-point in-
tegrand for Yang-Mills theory, it is not equal to the ﬂat space result. Indeed, the
integrand in this case is a function of u, given explicitly by
M3(A1, A2, A3) = −ϵ1 · ϵ3 Ei
a
k1 0
k2 0
k2 i ϵa
2 −k1 i ϵa
2

+ cyclic
(4.58)
after using (4.53)–(4.54). Note that the tails associated with the asymptotic states
do not contribute to the amplitude, as a result of the identities (4.53)–(4.54).
The other conﬁguration – two incoming states and one outgoing state – is more
complicated. The primary reason for this is that the x-dependence of the integrand
does not drop out. Assuming that the scattering states are A−
1 , A−
2 and A+
3 we now
have
εr · ε3
=
−ϵr · ϵ3 ,
Kr · ε3
=
ϵa
3

kr 0
k3 i
k3 0
E+ i
a
−kr iE−i
a

+ kr 0ϵa
3xb (σ+
ab −σ−
ab) ,
K3 · εr
=
ϵa
r

k3 0
kr i
kr 0
E−i
a
−k3 iE+ i
a

+ k3 0ϵa
rxb (σ−
ab −σ+
ab) ,
(4.59)
for r = 1, 2. The integration over dd−2x is now a rather involved Gaussian integral,
which has the rough structure of (4.48) plus a derivative of this result. Since the
integrand is the primary object of interest here, we will only consider (4.57).
4.1.2.3
Gravity
The 3-point amplitude for gravitons on the plane wave background is encoded by
extracting the cubic portion of the Einstein-Hilbert action,
S[g] = 1
κ2
Z
M
ddX
p
−|g| R ,
(4.60)
perturbed around the plane wave background metric. To do this, a recent perturbative
re-writing of the Einstein-Hilbert action is useful [139]. For perturbations hµν around
a ﬁxed background geometry gµν, this action takes the form:
S[h] =
1
4 κ2
Z
ddX
p
−|g|

∇µσνρ ∇λσκρ  σµλδν
κ −2 σνλδµ
κ

+ σµν Rµν

,
(4.61)
82

where the perturbations are encoded in
σµν = gµν + κ hµν + κ2
2 h2
µν + · · · ,
σµν = gµν −κ hµν + κ2
2 hµν −· · · ,
and indices are raised and lowered with the background metric (e.g., h2
µν = hµρgρσhσν).
On the vacuum plane wave background in Brinkmann coordinates, |g| = −1 and
Rµν = 0 so expanding (4.61) to cubic order is straightforward. This leads to the
cubic term:
κ
4
Z
du dv dd−2x (hµν∇µhρσ∇νhρσ −2 hρν∇µhρσ∇νhµσ) .
(4.62)
We have checked that this matches the cubic contribution from expanding the stan-
dard Einstein-Hilbert action around a plane wave background.
The 3-point amplitude is given by evaluating (4.62) on three of the linearised
perturbations (4.27).
With the transverse-traceless gauge conditions on hµν, the
covariant derivatives in (4.62) reduce to partial derivatives, leaving:
κ
4
Z
du dv dd−2x (hµν
1 ∂µh2 ρσ∂νhρσ
3 −2 hρν
1 ∂µh2 ρσ∂νhµσ
3 ) + all permutations .
(4.63)
A computation gives a typical term in the sum over permutations of external states
to be:
hµν
1 ∂µh2 ρσ∂νhρσ
3 −2 hρν
1 ∂µh2 ρσ∂νhµσ
3
=
 
(2ε3 · K2 ε1 · K3 ε1 · ε2 −ε1 · K2 ε1 · K3 ε2 · ε3) (ε2 · ε3)
−i ε2 · ε3 σab
k2 0k3 0
k1 0
ε2 · ε3 ϵ1 aϵ1 b −2k2 0 ε1 · ε2 ϵ1 bϵ3 a
 !
ei(φ1+φ2+φ3) .
(4.64)
To proceed further, the conﬁguration of the external states must be speciﬁed. Building
on the scalar and gauge theory calculations, it is clear that the easiest conﬁguration
to treat is the one with all three states incoming.
In this conﬁguration, identities of the form (4.53)–(4.54) ensure that the only
x-dependence in terms like (4.64) is in the overall exponential. This allows the dv
83

and dd−2x integrations to be done explicitly, resulting in momentum conserving delta
functions. On the support of these delta functions, the 3-point amplitude for incoming
states reads:
κ
2 δd−1
 
3
X
r=1
kr
! Z
du
p
|E−|

(ε1 · ε3 K1 · ε2 + cyclic)2 −i k1 0k2 0k3 0 σabCaCb
i
× exp
 
iF ij
3
X
s=1
ks iks j
2ks 0
!
,
(4.65)
where the quantity Ca is deﬁned as
Ca := ε2 · ε3
ϵ1 a
k1 0
+ ε1 · ε3
ϵ2 a
k2 0
+ ε1 · ε2
ϵ3 a
k3 0
.
(4.66)
The upshot is that the 3-point integrand for gravity on a plane wave spacetime is
given by
M3(h1, h2, h3) = (ε1 · ε3 K1 · ε2 + ε1 · ε2 K2 · ε3 + ε2 · ε3 K3 · ε1)2
−i k1 0k2 0k3 0 σab Ca Cb .
(4.67)
This structure mirrors what one might have guessed based solely on the structure of
the linearised perturbations (4.27).
So it seems that 3-point amplitudes on a plane wave spacetime do not simply obey
double copy as they do in ﬂat space. Indeed, we ﬁnd that
M3(h1, h2, h3) = (M3(A1, A2, A3))2 −i k1 0k2 0k3 0 σab Ca Cb .
(4.68)
Unlike the gluon amplitudes, the tails associated to graviton perturbations do con-
tribute to the amplitude. Note that they do so in an intrinsically geometric way: the
tail contribution couples via the deformation tensor associated with the background
geometry. To ﬁnd the ‘square root’ of perturbative gravity on a plane wave back-
ground, one must instead turn to Yang-Mills theory in the presence of a background
plane wave gauge ﬁeld.
84

4.1.3
3-point amplitudes on the gauge ﬁeld background
The 3-point amplitudes for charged scalars and Yang-Mills theory in a plane wave
background gauge ﬁeld are now computed. As in the gravitational setting, these am-
plitudes reduce to an integral over the u-coordinate which depends on the particulars
of the background, but the tree level integrands are easily identiﬁed.
4.1.3.1
Charged scalars
To obtain a gauge invariant cubic scalar interaction that carries charge with respect
to the background gauge ﬁeld, the charges of the three ﬁelds must add up to zero.
Sint[Φ] =
Z
du dv dd−2x (Φ1Φ2Φ3) ,
(4.69)
where DµΦr = (∂µ−ierAµ)Φr, with Aµ the background gauge ﬁeld (2.71). The charges
er as roots encode the commutators.
Armed with the linearised solutions (4.32), we can compute the 3-point ampli-
tudes by evaluating the cubic portion of the action (4.69).
This means that the
amplitude can be reduced to a u-integration fairly straightforwardly in an arbitrary
conﬁguration:
δd−1
 
3
X
r=1
kr
! Z
du exp
 
i
3
X
s=1
fs
2ks 0
!
.
(4.70)
Note that in the all incoming case, the translation action of the gauge ﬁeld on the
total momentum has cancelled because the charges must add up to zero by gauge
invariance. In the other case, this translation will manifest itself in an additional
memory term analogous to ca in the last line of equations (4.38), which we ignored
here as it is irrelevant for our purposes.
From equation (4.70) it is easy to read oﬀthe tree level integrand for the 3-point
scattering of charged scalars on the plane wave gauge ﬁeld background:
A3(Φ1, Φ2, Φ3) = 1 .
(4.71)
85

This is independent of the speciﬁcs of the conﬁguration as for the gravitational back-
ground.
4.1.3.2
Gauge theory
Now consider a dynamical gauge ﬁeld a on the ﬁxed plane wave background A. Al-
though the background gauge ﬁeld A is valued in the Cartan of the gauge group, the
dynamical gauge ﬁeld carries arbitrary colour structure. The dynamical gauge ﬁeld
is governed by the action
S[a] = 1
g2
Z
tr (F ∧∗F −dA ∧∗dA) ,
(4.72)
where F is the curvature of A + a and the kinetic term for the non-dynamical back-
ground ﬁeld is subtracted.
The cubic term in the action (4.72) is
Z
du dv dd−2x tr (aµ aν (∂µaν −∂νaµ + [Aµ, aν])) .
(4.73)
We must choose the colour structure so as to obtain a non-trivial trace. All non-trivial
examples are essentially the same and are equivalent to taking the SU(2) case with
a3 in the Cartan, and a1, a2 respectively of charge ±1 with respect to the Cartan
generator. In particular the three charges add up to zero. Together with the gauge
choices made in (4.40), the 3-point amplitude reduces to
g f a1a2a3
Z
du dv dd−2x (aµ
2 aν
3∂µa1 ν −aµ
2 aν
3∂νa1 µ + cyclic) .
(4.74)
Evaluating on the states (4.40) with arbitrary asymptotics, subject to the same caveat
about the memory dependent momentum shifts in the two incoming and one outgoing
state case as in equation (4.70), leads to
ig f a1a2a3 δd−1
 
3
X
r=1
kr
! Z
du [˜ε1 · ˜ε3 (K1 · ˜ε2 −K3 · ˜ε2) + cyclic] exp
 
i
3
X
s=1
fs
2 ks 0
!
.
(4.75)
86

Note that in both cases on the support of these delta functions (memory shifted for
two incoming and one outgoing state), the identity K1 · ˜ε2 = −K3 · ˜ε2 holds. Therefore
the result further reduces to:
2ig f a1a2a3 δd−1
 
3
X
r=1
kr
! Z
du [˜ε1 · ˜ε3 K1 · ˜ε2 + cyclic] exp
 
i
3
X
s=1
fs
2 ks 0
!
(4.76)
Thus the integrand can be written in terms of on-shell data:
A3(a1, a2, a3) = ˜ε1 · ˜ε3 K1 · ˜ε2 + cyclic ,
(4.77)
as expected.
This formula hides explicit dependence on the potential. Using (4.35) and (4.41),
it follows that:
Kr · ˜εs
=

0
if r = s
˜ϵa
s
ks0(kr 0ks a −ks 0kr a + kr 0esAa −ks 0erAa)
otherwise
, (4.78)
˜εr · ˜εs
=

0
if r = s
−˜ϵr · ˜ϵs
otherwise
.
(4.79)
In particular, the background gauge ﬁeld does enter into the functional form of the
integrand (4.77). The explicit form of the integrand is:
A3(a1, a2, a3) = −˜ϵ1 · ˜ϵ3
k2 0
[(k1 0 k2 · ˜ϵ2 −k2 0 k1 · ˜ϵ2) + A · ˜ϵ2 (k1 0e2 −k2 0e1)]+cyclic .
(4.80)
Crucially, the terms linear in A give a background-dependent correction to the ﬂat
space result analogous to the tail terms involving σab appearing in the gravity inte-
grand (4.67). In both cases, they encode the memory.
4.1.4
The double copy
Armed with explicit formulae for the 3-point integrands on both gravitational and
gauge theory plane wave backgrounds, a precise statement of double copy can now
be made. From (4.80), the 3-point integrand for gluons on the gauge theory plane
wave background can be written compactly as:
A3(a1, a2, a3) = F({kr 0, kr a, ˜ϵr}) + C({kr 0, kr a, ˜ϵr}|A) ,
(4.81)
87

where the function
F({kr 0, kr a, ˜ϵr}) := −˜ϵ1 · ˜ϵ3
k2 0
(k1 0 k2 · ˜ϵ2 −k2 0 k1 · ˜ϵ2) + cyclic
(4.82)
is the ‘ﬂat’ contribution to the integrand.6 The tail-dependent correction term is
C({kr 0, kr a, ˜ϵr}|A) := ˜ε1 · ˜ε3
k2 0
A · ˜ϵ2(k1 0e2 −k2 0e1) + cyclic
(4.83)
Note that both F and C are real functions, in the sense that they take real values
provided the kinematic data is real-valued.
To double copy the integrand (4.81), one performs a sequence of simple steps:
1. Flip the charge (i.e., the sign of the colour factor of A) to deﬁne e
A3 = F −C
and regard this as the conjugate of A3:
|A3|2 := A3 e
A3 = F 2({kr 0, kr a, ˜ϵr}) −C2({kr 0, kr a, ˜ϵr}|A)
(4.84)
2. Replace every spatial (d −2)-momentum by a curved version using the vielbein
of the gravitational plane wave background (e.g., k1 a →k1 iEi
a). Replace the
gauge background polarisations ˜ϵa with gravitational background polarisations
ϵa. This yields7
F 2({kr 0, kr iEi
a, ϵr}) −C2({kr 0, kr iEi
a, ϵr}|A) .
(4.85)
3. Replace the remaining (quadratic) dependence on the background gauge ﬁeld
with dependence on the background gravitational ﬁeld using the rule:
eres Aa Ab →

i kr 0 σab
if r = s
i (kr 0 + ks 0) σab
otherwise
,
(4.86)
where er is the charge under the background gauge ﬁeld associated with external
state r = 1, 2, 3.
6The spurious poles in k0 are associated with our projection of the polarisation vectors ϵa to be
orthogonal to both ∂u and ∂v.
7The latter operation is just a relabelling by removing all tildes. In particular, this replacement
implies ˜εr · ˜εs →εr · εs.
88

The ﬁnal step is motivated by dimensional considerations and suggested by the
fact that Aa encodes the gauge theory memory eﬀect; if it is set to vanish in the
in-region it will generically be a non-zero constant in the out-region remembering an
integral of the ﬁeld. Thus the quadratic combination Aa Ab is where the memory eﬀect
can be seen in the amplitude. In the gravitational case, the deformation tensor σab
can be chosen to vanish in the past, but is then non-trivial in the future, although now
generically falling oﬀasymptotically as u−1, by (2.59). Therefore, the replacement
(4.86) identiﬁes the ﬁelds responsible for memories, albeit with diﬀerent functional
dependence on u. An additional power of momenta is needed on the gravitational
side to ensure that the two combinations have the same mass dimension.
Steps 1-3 result in an expression of the form
F 2({kr 0, kr iEi
a, ϵr}) −C2({kr 0, kr iEi
a, ϵr}|σ) .
(4.87)
Working on the support of momentum conservation in the v-direction – which holds
regardless of the asymptotic conﬁguration of the three external states – a bit of algebra
reveals that
C2({kr 0, kr iEi
a, ϵr}|σ) = i k1 0k2 0k3 0 σab Ca Cb ,
(4.88)
and therefore that the expression (4.87) is in fact equal to the 3-point integrand for
gravitons on the gravitational plane wave background.
There is also a canonical way to map the 3-point integrand for gluons on a gauge
theory background to the 3-point integrand for gluons on a gravity background. This
entails a ‘classical’ double copy of the background (in the sense of [29]) while leaving
the functional form of the integrand unchanged.
To see how this works, use the
integrand expression:
A3(a1, a2, a3) = ˜ε1 · ˜ε3 K1 · ˜ε2 + ˜ε1 · ˜ε2 K2 · ˜ε3 + ˜ε2 · ˜ε3 K3 · ˜ε1 ,
(4.89)
89

where Kr a and ˜εr a are given by (4.35), (4.41) for r = 1, 2, 3.
Now perform the
following replacements everywhere in (4.89):
kr a →kr i Ei
a ,
˜ϵr a →ϵr a ,
er Aa →kr 0 σab xb .
(4.90)
The last of these replacements is motivated by the observation that the non-trivial
component of the plane wave gauge ﬁeld, namely xa ˙Aa is a linear function of x
while the non-trivial component of the plane wave metric, namely −¨Ei
aEb i xaxb, is
quadratic.
After making the replacements (4.90), the polarisation vectors in the gauge ﬁeld
background are mapped directly onto the polarisation vectors in the gravitational
background: ˜εr µ →εr µ. Although Kr µ is not quite mapped onto Kr µ, it is easy to
see that
Kr · ˜εs →Kr · εs .
Calling this substitution map ψ, it follows immediately that
ψ (A3(a1, a2, a3)) = M3(A1, A2, A3) ,
(4.91)
where the two integrands have the same kinematic data but are deﬁned on diﬀerent
backgrounds.
4.1.5
Discussion
In this chapter we have made a preliminary investigation of how the notion of dou-
ble copy generalises to curved scattering backgrounds starting with the three point
amplitude on sandwich plane waves. We ﬁnd new features, but see that the double
copy nevertheless does extend to this curved setting: 3-point graviton amplitudes on
a plane wave spacetime can be obtained by taking the double copy of 3-point gluon
amplitudes on a gauge theory plane wave background.
This statement can be expressed succinctly by encoding steps 2 and 3 of the double
copy procedure in a ‘replacement map’ ρ, that acts on the spaces of (d−2)-kinematics
90

and background gauge ﬁelds. The double copy for 3-point integrands on plane wave
backgrounds is then simply:
M3(h1, h2, h3) = ρ
 |A3(a1, a2, a3)|2
.
(4.92)
This is consistent with the usual double copy on ﬂat backgrounds expressed in the
KLT relations. In a ﬂat background, ρ acts trivially and this is the usual squaring
relation.
We have only investigated the simplest scattering amplitudes (i.e., 3-point ampli-
tudes), which are generated by contact interactions in the spacetime action. Higher-
point amplitudes will involve propagator contributions; although explicit forms for
propagators on plane wave backgrounds are known (e.g., [112, 132, 140, 141]), these
are signiﬁcantly more complicated that those arising from ﬂat space. Nevertheless,
the prescription given in chapter 4.1.4 seems universal: it dictates how to double copy
the data for any n-point scattering amplitude. Steps 1-3 do not depend on the num-
ber of external particles being three. So one can optimistically conjecture a heuristic
form of the double copy for n-point integrands on plane wave backgrounds:
Mn(h1, . . . , hn) = ρ


X
α,β∈Sn/Zn
An(α) SA[α|β] e
An(β)

,
(4.93)
where the sum is over distinct colour-orderings for the n-point integrands on the gauge
theory background, ρ is the replacement map deﬁned by steps 2 and 3 of the double
copy, e
An is the integrand with opposite charges for the background and SA[α|β] is a
plane wave analogue of the KLT matrix (perhaps obtained from the same replacement
algorithm for the momenta). However, now the A and e
A must incorporate the non-
trivial propagators on those backgrounds, and it is likely that these must also be
subject to some replacement to work correctly on a gravitational background.
Our procedure is not a straightforward local identiﬁcation of integrands. It re-
quires the replacement of certain structural functions appropriate for propagation
91

on a gauge theory background by those for a gravitational background.
Indeed,
colour/kinematics duality is usually expressed locally in momentum space, and so
should not be expected to be local in spacetime. Here we see evidence that a non-
local procedure based on Hamilton-Jacobi functions for propagation of momentum
eigenstates from null inﬁnity will do the trick. Thus, the most optimistic message
from this for the general curved colour-kinematic duality is that although a spacetime
procedure cannot be local, it can work by referring to null inﬁnity, using Hamilton-
Jacobi generating functions to create the identiﬁcations.
It would also be desirable to extend the double copy to other curved backgrounds.
Although plane waves are a very special example of such backgrounds, there is some
sense in which they are universal limits of all spacetimes [142]. It would be interesting
to see in what sense the results found here inform those for more general spacetimes.
Finally, we note that our original motivation for considering scattering on plane
wave backgrounds was to provide a spacetime result to compare with an alternative
calculation of these amplitudes using ambitwistor string theory [48] adapted to a
curved background [77]. As we will show in the next chapter, ambitwistor strings
provide an alternative ‘stringy’ approach to calculating amplitudes on curved back-
grounds which gives pure ﬁeld theory amplitudes without α′ corrections. The use of
Hamilton-Jacobi functions to bring in momenta and polarisation vectors from null
inﬁnity should then tie in with the work in [72,73,75] where ambitwistor strings are
formulated at null inﬁnity.
92

4.2
Amplitudes from ambitwistor strings
Using perturbative string theory to study physics in the presence of curved back-
ground ﬁelds is a highly non-trivial task. When coupled to generic curved background
ﬁelds, the string worldsheet action becomes a complicated interacting 2d CFT which
can only be studied perturbatively (e.g., [143, 144]).
Quantum consistency of the
worldsheet theory imposes an inﬁnite tower of higher-derivative constraints on the
background ﬁelds, which at lowest order are the two-derivative equations of motion
of ﬁeld theory [92–94,115]. It is therefore exceptionally diﬃcult to tell if a given back-
ground ﬁeld conﬁguration satisﬁes the full string equations of motion, or to compute
interesting target space quantities, such as scattering amplitudes, in the resulting
worldsheet CFT.
Over the years, some notable exceptions to the ﬁrst of these diﬃculties have
been found. Vacuum plane wave metrics were argued to be admissible NS-NS back-
grounds for string theory due to the vanishing of their higher curvature invariants [145,
146]. Supergravity solutions based on AdS (times a compact space) [147,148] or pp-
waves [149, 150] supported by Ramond-Ramond ﬂux were argued to be admissible
backgrounds for type II string theory on the basis of uniqueness and symmetry con-
straints for the integrable sigma models with these target spaces [151–157]. These
examples play a central role in the concept of holography [158–160] and its plane wave
limit [161]. The class of supersymmetric sigma models with curved target spaces can
be expanded to include various integrable deformations (cf. [162]), although it is not
entirely clear if these deformations deﬁne consistent string theories [163,164].
Yet even with consistent string theories on curved backgrounds, writing explicit
vertex operators or calculating worldsheet correlation functions has proved virtually
impossible8. This is because the worldsheet model – even if it is integrable – remains
8A notable special case where progress has been made is for AdS3, where the worldsheet theory
is a SL(2, R) WZW model [165–167].
93

an interacting CFT (as is the case for supersymmetric AdS backgrounds or vacuum
plane waves), or because the worldsheet model is known only in Green-Schwarz form
(as for the solvable pp-wave sigma models). Although some progress towards writing
vertex operators on certain backgrounds has been made (cf. [168–171]), there is still
no intrinsically stringy computation of the 3-point function in a curved background9.
This seems particularly remarkable given how much attention is paid to such back-
grounds in the context of holography, where bulk observables are usually computed
from ﬁeld theory Witten diagrams rather than the string worldsheet.
Our goal is to provide the ﬁrst worldsheet calculation of 3-point functions on
curved backgrounds using ambitwistor strings as alternative to standard string the-
ory, making use of the curved background vertex operators found in chapter 3.2.
Remember that in the context of curved background ﬁelds, heterotic and type II am-
bitwistor strings remain free worldsheet CFTs and yield a description of non-linear
ﬁeld theory in terms of a free 2d CFT as shown in chapters 3.1 and 2.1.4 respectively.
This suggests that ambitwistor string theories can be used to study perturbative
QFT on curved backgrounds. There are promising signs that this could be true: In
the special case of four-dimensions, twistor string formulae for gravitational scattering
amplitudes have a natural generalisation to gauged supergravity on AdS4 [179]. These
formulae pass several consistency checks which indicate that they encode tree level
physical observables in AdS4 (at least up to boundary terms), but so far a direct link
to standard expressions in general spacetime dimension is missing.
In this chapter, which has also been published in [4], we quantise ambitwistor
strings on plane wave backgrounds. Using that they encode the correct spectra of
perturbations in terms of explicit (and computationally manageable) vertex opera-
tors, we show that they also encode the correct spacetime interactions by computing
9It should be noted that worldsheet methods have been used to compute correlators in certain
limits [172–174] or with special conﬁgurations of external states [175, 176] in AdS backgrounds.
Cubic string ﬁeld theory has been used to study interactions on pp-wave backgrounds [177,178].
94

3-point functions. Our focus is on the type II and heterotic ambitwistor strings, which
describe gravitational and gauge theoretic degrees of freedom on spacetime, respec-
tively. We study two simple examples of curved backgrounds in a RNS worldsheet
formalism for the ambitwistor string: vacuum plane wave metrics (type II model)
and plane wave abelian gauge ﬁelds (heterotic model). In both cases, explicit expres-
sions for the vertex operators for gravitons or gluons from chapter 3.2 are derived
using the results from chapter 4.1. These vertex operators are then used to compute
the 3-point worldsheet correlation functions, which match with the known ﬁeld the-
ory results from chapter 4.1 in each case. Indeed the computations of [3], which we
presented in chapter 4.1, were ﬁrst executed in order to provide a standard space-
time computation against which to check the formulae of this chapter. This conﬁrms
the utility of ambitwistor strings in the study of perturbative ﬁeld theory on curved
backgrounds: Such calculations are impossible in ordinary string theory, even in the
α′ →0 limit.
For details how type II and heterotic ambitwistor strings can be deﬁned on curved
background ﬁelds we refer to chapters 2.1.4 and 3.1. Our focus is on background met-
ric ﬁelds for the type II model and abelian background gauge ﬁelds for the heterotic
model. In each case, quantum consistency of the model is equivalent to the usual
ﬁeld equations for the background. Chapter 4.2.1 considers the type II model on
a vacuum plane wave metric background, and chapter 4.2.2 considers the heterotic
model on a plane wave gauge ﬁeld background. In both cases, the worldsheet theory
is anomaly-free because the backgrounds solve the (vacuum) equations of motion. We
provide explicit expressions for vertex operators corresponding to gravitons and glu-
ons, respectively, and compute their 3-point functions. These are seen to reproduce
the known formulae for graviton and gluon scattering on gravitational and gauge ﬁeld
plane wave backgrounds.
95

4.2.1
Type II model on a gravitational plane wave
We now turn to a class of backgrounds which are among the simplest non-trivial
solutions to the vacuum Einstein equations. When discussing gravitational waves,
one often thinks about linear perturbations of a ﬁxed background spacetime as ﬁrst
described by Einstein [180]. However, there also are exact, non-linear plane wave
solutions to the Einstein equations. These have been known for over ninety years
and studied in great detail, see e.g. [95–99]. Due to the vanishing of their higher-
curvature invariants, it has long been known that certain plane wave metrics solve
the vanishing beta-functional conditions for string theory to all orders in α′ [145,146].
Yet it has proven diﬃcult to derive vertex operators for string theory on a plane wave
background or indeed compute scattering amplitudes in such spacetimes10.
In this chapter, we study the type II ambitwistor string on vacuum plane wave
spacetimes. As we know from chapter 2.1.4 and 3.2, the worldsheet OPEs remain free
and vertex operators can be constructed explicitly. The simplicity of the background
spacetime renders the calculation of worldsheet correlation functions tractable. We
start with a brief discussion of the worldsheet model and ﬁxed vertex operators on
plane waves in order to keep this chapter self-contained, after which we go on to cal-
culate the descended vertex operator and show that the 3-point correlation functions
on the Riemann sphere reproduce the known result for 3-point graviton amplitudes
on a plane wave spacetime.
4.2.1.1
Worldsheet model and ﬁxed vertex operators
As solutions of the vacuum Einstein equations (Ha
a(u) = 0 in Brinkmann coordinates),
vacuum plane wave metrics are admissible backgrounds for the type II ambitwistor
string in the sense that Q2 = 0, up to a conformal anomaly which can be killed by
setting d = 10, or ignored for our purposes at genus zero. However, a remarkable
10A notable exception is [168], where candidate tachyon and graviton vertex operators are con-
structed in the bosonic string on a plane wave.
96

simpliﬁcation occurs in the functional form of the BRST charge for any plane wave
background in Brinkmann coordinates: all quantum corrections to the currents G, ¯G
and H vanish! Indeed, a direct calculation from (2.38) – (2.40) using the Christoﬀel
symbols (2.52) leads to:
G = ψµ Πµ ,
¯G = gµσ ¯ψµ Πσ + 2Ha
b xb ¯ψv ¯ψa ψu ,
(4.94)
H = gµσ Πµ Πσ + Πv

2Ha
b xb ¯ψaψu + 2Hab xb ¯ψvψa + ˙H ¯ψvψu
−2Πa Ha
b xb ¯ψvψu + 2Ha
b ¯ψa ¯ψv ψbψu .
(4.95)
In particular, all terms proportional to worldsheet derivatives in G, ¯G and H vanish
in Brinkmann coordinates for the plane wave background.
Let us now consider a metric perturbation hµσ (i.e., a graviton) on the plane wave
background. As in chapter 4.1.1, we ﬁnd that it is consistent to further impose the
gauge conditions that the v-components and trace of h should vanish hvµ = 0 =
hµ
µ. Recall that we can make use of the graviton vertex operator (3.37) on a pure
gravity background and notice that the quantum correction term proportional to the
worldsheet derivative will drop out in the gauge chosen here:
V = c ¯c δ(γ) δ(¯γ) ¯ψµ ψσhµ
σ
(4.96)
Remember that since V has balanced conformal weight, the stress tensor part
of the BRST charge acting on this vertex operator vanishes. The only non-trivial
conditions for BRST-closure of V arise from the currents G, ¯G and H, which force
the graviton to be on-shell. Due to the many cancellations in the currents and vertex
operator, these calculations simplify considerably compared to the generic case in
chapter 3.2.2. The relevant OPEs are
G(z) ¯ψµψσhµ
σ(w) ∼−∂µhµ
σψσ
(z −w)2 +
1
z −w (· · · ) ,
¯G(z) ¯ψµψσhµ
σ(w) ∼
gρσ
(z −w)2∂ρhµ
σ ¯ψµ +
1
z −w (· · · )
(4.97)
97

and
H(z) ¯ψµψσhµ
σ(w) ∼
1
(z −w)2

gρλ∂ρ∂λhµ
σ ¯ψµψσ + 2Ha
b xb ∂vhµ
a ¯ψµψu
+ 2Ha
b xb ∂vhσa ¯ψvψσ −2Hab hab ¯ψvψu

+
1
z −w (· · · ) .
(4.98)
As expected, vanishing of these equations enforces de Donder gauge (3.42) and the
linearised equations of motion (3.43) in their guise from chapter 4.1.1.
Recall in
particular that the linearised Einstein equations took the form (4.26) there.
A concrete realisation of hµσ, analogous to the momentum eigenstate used in ﬂat
space (2.27) has been constructed in chapter 4.1.1.3 by a spin-raising procedure [3,129]
applied to solutions of the scalar wave equation on a plane wave background, ﬁrst
constructed in [131]. Remember that the key to this construction are solutions to the
Hamilton-Jacobi equations of the form (4.4):
φk = k0 v + k0
2 σab xaxb + ki Ei
a xa −ki kj
2 k0
F ij ,
where (k0, ki) were d−1 constants (which parametrise the non-trivial components of a
null momentum), Ei
a is the vielbein appearing in the relationship between Brinkmann
and Einstein-Rosen coordinates (2.56), σab = ˙Ei
aEb i is the deformation tensor (2.58)
and in equation (2.60) we deﬁned
F ij(u) :=
Z u
ds γij(s) =
Z u
ds Ea (i(s) Ej)
a (s) .
Recall that the choice of vielbein is not unique: given any Ea
i for a particular plane
wave metric, any other vielbein given in equation (2.59) also represents the same
metric. For a sandwich plane wave, the two particular choices of boundary condition
given in equation (2.61) are relevant:
lim
u→±∞Ea ±
i
= δa
i .
These correspond to whether φk looks like k·X in the in- or out-regions of the sandwich
plane wave; since we will always be considering amplitudes in which all external
98

states have the same boundary conditions, we assume that Ea
i = Ea −
i
without loss of
generality from now on.
Equipped with the function φk, the graviton hµσ is given by equation (4.27):
hµσ dXµ dXσ =

(ε · dX)2 −i
k0
ϵaϵb σab du2

Ωeiφk
Here, εµ is the (non-constant) d-dimensional polarisation vector deﬁned in equa-
tion (4.20)
ε · dX = ϵadxa + ϵa
kj
k0
Ej
a + σab xb

du
with ϵa a constant (d−2)-dimensional null vector. Remember that the function Ω(u)
was deﬁned in equation (4.2)
Ω(u) := |γ−1(u)|1/4 = |E(u)|−1
2 .
It is straightforward to verify that this hµσ is traceless, satisﬁes hvµ = 0, obeys
the de Donder gauge conditions, and solves the linearised Einstein equations (4.26).
In demonstrating this, it is useful to remember (4.5), which deﬁnes the momentum
associated with the graviton:
Kµ dXµ := dφk =
k0 dv +
k0
2 ˙σbc xbxc + ki ˙Ei
bxb + kikj
2k0
γij

du + (kiEi
a + k0 σabxb)dxa .
This is null with respect to the plane wave metric (K2 = gµνKµKν = 0), and is also
compatible with the polarisation vector (4.20) in the sense that gµνεµKν = 0.
4.2.1.2
Descent
Having constructed ﬁxed graviton vertex operators for the type II model on a plane
wave background, one can now ask for vertex operators in other pictures. For the
calculation of worldsheet correlation functions, it is particularly important to have the
vertex operators of zero picture number (i.e., without any δ(γ) or δ(¯γ) insertions),
99

usually obtained via the fermionic descent procedure from ﬁxed vertex operators
(cf. [125]). This procedure entails successively extracting the simple poles between
the ﬁxed vertex operator and the currents G, ¯G, and results in the picture number
zero vertex operator, deﬁned up to gauge transformations.
In ﬂat space, the pure gauge contributions are proportional to k ·P (i.e., the scat-
tering equations), but on a curved background they can be much more subtle. To
isolate the gauge-invariant portion of the descended vertex operator, we can exploit
the fact that {G, ¯G} = H quantum mechanically. First compute the descended oper-
ator by isolating the simple poles of ¯G(GV ), and then again by isolating the simple
poles of G( ¯GV ). Since {G, ¯G} = H, it follows that the sum of the two resulting opera-
tors must be pure gauge, while the diﬀerence will be the gauge-invariant contribution
to the descended operator.
To do this, ﬁrst compute
G(z) ¯ψµψσhµ
σ(w) ∼
1
z −w
 Πµ ψσ hµ
σ −¯ψµψσψρ ∂ρhµ
σ

+ · · · ,
(4.99)
¯G(z) ¯ψµψσhµ
σ(w) ∼
1
z −w
 −gσρ Πρ ¯ψµ hµ
σ −gλρ ¯ψλ ¯ψµψσ ∂ρhµ
σ
−2Ha
b xb ¯ψv ¯ψcψu hc
a

+ · · · ,
(4.100)
where the + · · · indicate higher-order poles. Then take the simple pole of ¯G with (4.99)
and of G with (4.100), and compute the diﬀerence. Thanks to the current algebra
{G, ¯G} = H (which holds at the quantum level since the plane wave metric solves the
vacuum equations of motion), the result is gauge invariant and BRST-closed.
A straightforward, if somewhat tedious, calculation then reveals the form of the
100

picture number zero vertex operator:
c ¯c U = c ¯c

Πµ Πσ hµσ −Πµ ¯ψρψσ ∂ρhµ
σ + Πσ ¯ψµψρ ∂ρhµσ + ¯ψρ ¯ψµψσψλ ∂ρ∂λhµ
σ
+ Hab xb Πv ¯ψvψσ ha
σ + Ha
b xb Πv ¯ψcψu hc
a −Ha
b xb Πv ¯ψvψu hv
a −2Ha
b xb Πc ¯ψvψc hc
a
+ Ha
b ¯ψvψu  xb ¯ψcψd ∂ahc
d −¯ψcψb hc
a −¯ψaψc hb
c −2xb ¯ψcψρ ∂ρhc
a

+ Ha
b xb ¯ψa ¯ψµψuψc ∂vhµ
c −
˙H
2
¯ψv ¯ψaψuψσ ∂vha
σ −Hbc xc ¯ψv ¯ψaψbψσ ∂vha
σ
∂H
2
¯ψµψσ ∂2
vhµ
σ −∂(Hab xb ¯ψv) ψσ ∂vha
σ −∂(Ha
b ¯ψvψu) hb
a + ¯ψµ ∂(Ha
b xb ψu) ∂vhµ
a

.
(4.101)
Although we have succeeded in giving an explicit formula for the descended vertex
operator on a plane wave background (something which, so far, has been impossible
in ordinary string theories), the result is a rather unwieldy expression. Indeed, one
might worry that (4.101) is so complicated that it is impossible to actually obtain
tractable formulae for worldsheet correlation functions – even at 3-points. Thankfully,
this is not the case: many of the terms appearing in (4.101) do not contribute to
the worldsheet correlator at 3-points, and one is left with a much more manageable
operator to deal with.
4.2.1.3
3-point function
Using the vertex operators and the explicit representation for the graviton hµσ, we
want to compute the 3-point worldsheet correlation function:
⟨V1(z1) V2(z2) c(z3)¯c(z3) U3(z3)⟩,
(4.102)
at genus zero, Σ ∼= CP1. From (4.96) and the gauge condition hvµ = 0, it follows
that the ﬁxed vertex operator Vi does not contain any insertions of ¯ψu or ψv. This
means that any insertions of ¯ψv or ψu appearing in U3 have no conjugate ﬁelds with
which to Wick contract in the correlator (4.102) due to normal ordering. Since ¯ψv(z3),
ψu(z3) have no zero modes at genus zero, it follows that all terms in U3 which are
proportional to ¯ψv or ψu cannot contribute to the 3-point correlator.
101

This drastically reduces the number of terms which need to be considered in the
descended vertex operator (4.101):
U →Πµ Πσ hµσ −Πµ ¯ψρψσ ∂ρhµ
σ + Πσ ¯ψµψρ ∂ρhµσ + ¯ψρ ¯ψµψσψλ ∂ρ∂λhµ
σ
+ ∂H
2
¯ψaψb ∂2
vha
b .
(4.103)
In fact, the term in the second line, proportional to ∂H, can also be discarded. Since
there are no Πµ insertions in V1 or V2 which can contract with ∂H, it follows that
H(X) can be treated as a function of the zero-modes of the worldsheet ﬁeld Xµ. These
zero-modes are constants on the worldsheet, and thus ∂H = 0. So for the 3-point
function (4.102), one is able to consider an ‘eﬀective’ descended vertex operator:
U eﬀ= Πµ Πσ hµσ −Πµ ¯ψρψσ ∂ρhµ
σ + Πσ ¯ψµψρ ∂ρhµσ + ¯ψρ ¯ψµψσψλ ∂ρ∂λhµ
σ ,
(4.104)
with hµσ given by (4.27).
The ghost sector of the correlation function decouples from the matter systems,
so it is easy to see that the worldsheet correlator reduces to:
⟨V1(z1) V2(z2) c(z3)¯c(z3) U3(z3)⟩=
z2
23 z2
31
dz1 dz2 dz2
3

 ¯ψµψσhµ
1 σ(z1) ¯ψρψλhρ
2 λ(z2) U eﬀ
3 (z3)
 ¯ψψ
ΠX ,
(4.105)
where zij ≡zi −zj and ⟨· · ·⟩
¯ψψ
ΠX indicates a correlation function with respect to the
(Π, X) and ( ¯ψ, ψ) worldsheet systems. To evaluate the remaining correlation function,
it is useful to have explicit expressions for the (eﬀective) vertex operators:
¯ψµ ψσ hµ
σ =

εµ ¯ψµ εσψσ −i
k0
¯ψv ψu ϵaϵbσab

Ωeiφk ,
(4.106)
and
U eﬀ=

(εµΠµ)2 −i
k0
Π2
v ¯ψvψu ϵaϵb −iεσΠσ ( ¯ψaϵa Kρψρ + Kµ ¯ψµ ϵaψa)
−Kρ ¯ψρ εµ ¯ψµ εσψσ Kλψλ + ik0 ¯ψbψaσb
a εµ ¯ψµ εσψσ
+Πv ϵbσab εµ ¯ψµ ψa −Πv ϵbσa
b ¯ψa εσψσ
Ωeiφk ,
(4.107)
102

where the curved-space polarisation εµ and momentum Kµ are as given in (4.20)
and (4.5), respectively.
Observe that in the remaining correlation function, the only v-dependence is in
the exponentials eiφk and takes the form exp(i P3
r=1 kr 0v). This can be absorbed into
the exponential of the action in the remaining path integral:
S(Π,X) →1
2π
Z
Σ
Πµ ¯∂Xµ + 2πi
3
X
r=1
kr 0 v(z) δ2(z −zr) .
(4.108)
The path integral over v can now be done explicitly; the zero mode integral results
in a momentum conserving delta function δ(P3
r=1 kr 0), while the integral over non-
zero-modes imposes an equation of motion on the conjugate ﬁeld Πv:
¯∂Πv(z) = 2πi
3
X
r=1
kr 0 δ2(z −zr)
⇒
Πv(z) = dz
3
X
r=1
kr 0
z −zr
.
(4.109)
This allows us to replace every insertion of Πv in the correlator with the solution
obtained from (4.109). Similarly, there are no insertions of Πu anywhere in the re-
maining correlator; performing the path integral over the non-zero-modes of u imposes
¯∂u = 0, reducing the worldsheet ﬁeld u(z) to its constant zero mode everywhere.
This leaves (Πa, xa) as the only ﬁelds of the (Π, X) system with non-zero-modes
still in play. The only Πa insertions appear in U eﬀ
3 , while there is xa-dependence
lurking in the polarisation components εu or εv as well as in the exponential factors.
In the latter case, conservation of the k0 momentum components (and the assumption
that all three states are incoming) reduces the exponential dependence on xa to:
exp
 
iEi
a xa
3
X
r=1
kr i
!
.
(4.110)
At this point, the path integral over Πa can be done explicitly by taking all possible
Wick contractions. After also taking all possible contractions in the ( ¯ψ, ψ) system, the
103

result is the following rather unwieldy-looking expression (stripped of overall factors):
ε1 · ε2
z12
2  
i
2
X
r=1
εµ
3Krµ
zr3
!2
−
ε1 · ε2
z12
2  
iσab
2
X
r=1
kr 0
ϵa
3ϵb
3
z2
r3
!
+ 2i
"ε2 · ε3
z23
 ε1 · ε2
z12
 ε1 · K3
z13
  
i
2
X
r=1
ε3 · Kr
zr3
!
+ (1 ↔2)
#
+ 2i

k3 0
ε2 · ε3
z23
 ε1 · ε2
z12
 ϵb
1σabϵa
3
z2
13

+ (1 ↔2)

+
"ε2 · ε3
z23
 ε2 · K3
z23
 ε1 · K3
z13
 ε1 · ε3
z13

−
ε2 · ε3
z23
2 ε1 · K3
z13
2
+ (1 ↔2)
#
−2
" 
i
2
X
r=1
Krv
zr3
! ε1 · ε2
z12
 ε2 · ε3
z23
 ϵb
1ϵa
3
z13
σab + (1 ↔2)
#
+ i k3 0
"ε2 · ε3
z23
2 ϵa
1ϵb
1σab
z2
13
−
ε2 · ε3
z23
 ε1 · ε3
z13
 ϵa
1ϵb
2σab
z13z23
+ (1 ↔2)
#
−
ε1 · ε2
z12
2 ϵa
3ϵb
3
k3 0
σab
  
2
X
r=1
Krv
zr3
!2
+ i
"
ϵa
2ϵb
2
k2 0
σab
k3
2
0
z2
23
ε1 · ε3
z13
2
+ (1 ↔2)
#
.
(4.111)
This expression can be considerably simpliﬁed by performing the path integral over
the remaining xa zero modes, which results in d −2 additional delta functions and a
Jacobian factor:
δd−2
 
3
X
r=1
kr i
!
|E| ,
(4.112)
where |E| is the determinant of the vielbein Ea
i .
On the support of these delta functions, and utilising the curved momentum and
polarisation identities (4.53) and (4.54)
Kr · εs
=

0
if r = s
Ei a(kr 0
ks i
ks 0ϵs a −kr iϵs a)
otherwise
,
εr · εs
=

0
if r = s
−ϵr · ϵs
otherwise
,
the contribution (4.111) can be massaged into a much more palatable form:
1
z2
23z2
31

(ε1 · ε2 ε3 · K2 + ε2 · ε3 ε1 · K3 + ε1 · ε3 ε2 · K1)2 −ik1 0k2 0k3 0 σab Ca Cb

,
(4.113)
104

where
Ca := ε2 · ε3
ϵ1 a
k1 0
+ ε1 · ε3
ϵ2 a
k2 0
+ ε1 · ε2
ϵ3 a
k3 0
,
(4.114)
encodes a ‘correction’ to the tensor structure of the 3-point function in ﬂat spacetime.
These manipulations leave us with:

 ¯ψµψσhµ
1 σ(z1) ¯ψρψλhρ
2 λ(z2) U eﬀ
3 (z3)
 ¯ψψ
ΠX = δd−1
 
3
X
r=1
kr
!
dz1 dz2 dz2
3
z2
23z2
31
×
Z
du
p
|E|

(ε1 · ε3 K1 · ε2 + cyclic)2 −i k1 0k2 0k3 0 σabCaCb

exp
 
iF ij
3
X
s=1
ks iks j
2ks 0
!
,
(4.115)
where
δd−1
 
3
X
r=1
kr
!
:= δ
 
3
X
r=1
kr 0
!
δd−2
 
3
X
r=1
kr i
!
encodes all of the delta functions resulting from zero mode integrations.
Taking
into account the ghost contributions from (4.105), it follows that all dependence on
the vertex operator locations zi drops out (as required for M¨obius invariance of the
worldsheet correlator on Σ ∼= CP1), leaving
⟨V1(z1) V2(z2) c(z3)¯c(z3) U3(z3)⟩=
δd−1
 
3
X
r=1
kr
! Z
du
p
|E|

(ε1 · ε3 K1 · ε2 + cyclic)2
−i k1 0k2 0k3 0 σabCaCb

exp
 
iF ij
3
X
s=1
ks iks j
2ks 0
!
.
(4.116)
The right-hand side of this expression is equal to the 3-point amplitude for (incoming)
gravitons on a plane wave spacetime (4.65).
The result of this calculation can be succinctly summarised as
⟨V1(z1) V2(z2) c(z3)¯c(z3) U3(z3)⟩= Mpw
3 (h1, h2, h3) ,
(4.117)
where Mpw
3 (h1, h2, h3) is the 3-point amplitude for graviton scattering on a sandwich
plane wave metric. This demonstrates that the type II ambitwistor string encodes
105

the correct interactions for gravity on non-trivial backgrounds in a practical way: the
3-point amplitude is obtained as a worldsheet correlation function with no reference
whatsoever to a spacetime action or Lagrangian. Furthermore, the correct linearised
external states are automatically encoded by the ambitwistor string’s BRST coho-
mology.
4.2.2
Heterotic model on a gauge ﬁeld plane wave back-
ground
Plane wave gauge ﬁelds are the gauge theory analogues of plane wave metrics. The
class of such background gauge ﬁelds we consider here are the highly symmetric solu-
tions of the Yang-Mills equations valued in the Cartan of the gauge group, which we
discussed in chapter 2.2.2. As such, they are consistent backgrounds for the heterotic
ambitwistor string. Like gravitational plane waves, all of the higher curvature invari-
ants (e.g., F 2, F 3) of a plane wave gauge ﬁeld vanish, which makes them candidate
solutions to the gauge sector of the equations of motion of heterotic or type I string
theory, although (to our knowledge) this fact has not been explored in the literature.
Unlike conventional string theory on a gauge ﬁeld background, we saw in chap-
ter 3.1 that the heterotic ambitwistor string remains a free worldsheet CFT. To keep
this chapter self-contained, we brieﬂy consider the quantisation of the heterotic am-
bitwistor string on a plane wave gauge ﬁeld background and derive the ﬁxed gluon
vertex operator. We then go on to calculate the descended picture vertex operator
and compute the 3-point functions explicitly. Once more, we ﬁnd that the 3-point
correlation functions on the Riemann sphere reproduce the known results for 3-point
gluon scattering on a plane wave gauge theory background.
4.2.2.1
Worldsheet model and vertex operators
On a plane wave gauge ﬁeld background, the heterotic ambitwistor string is anomaly
free, up to a conformal anomaly which can be eliminated with an appropriate choice
106

of gauge group and is, in any case, irrelevant for our purposes at genus zero. The
currents G and H of the heterotic ambitwistor string, given by (3.10) and (3.12), take
the form
G = Ψµ Πµ −Ψu xb ˙Aa
b ja ,
(4.118)
H = ηµσ Πµ Πν −2Πv xb ˙Aa
b ja + 2Ψb Ψu ˙Aa
b ja .
(4.119)
Note that there are no terms proportional to worldsheet derivatives in H, since the
background gauge ﬁeld obeys ∂µAµ = 0 in Brinkmann gauge.
Equipped with the explicit BRST operator Q and the free worldsheet OPEs,
we can investigate the vertex operators in the BRST cohomology. We restrict our
attention to vertex operators in the NS sector which should correspond to small
perturbations of the background gauge ﬁeld (i.e., gluons). Such vertex operators can
appear with picture number −1 or zero. We know the ﬁxed vertex operator from
equation (3.30) to be
V = c ¯c δ(γ) Ψµ aa
µ ja ,
(4.120)
where we chose aa
µ to obey av = 0 as in chapter 4.1.1.5. Note that although the
background gauge ﬁeld is valued in the Cartan subalgebra, this vertex operator carries
generic colour charge with respect to the gauge group.
As shown in 3.2.1.1, the Q-closure of (4.120) enforces the Lorenz gauge condi-
tion (3.33) and the linearised Yang-Mills equations (3.34). In plane wave backgrounds,
the relevant OPEs simplify and take the explicit form
G(z) Ψµaa
µja(w) ∼−∂µaa
µ ja
(z −w)2 +
1
z −w (· · · )
(4.121)
and
H(z) Ψµaa
µja(w) ∼
Ψµ ja
(z −w)2
h
∂σ∂σaa
µ + 2f abc xb ˙Ab
b ∂vac
µ
+2f abc δu
µ ˙Ac b ab
b
i
+
1
z −w (· · · ) .
(4.122)
107

The resulting vanishing conditions agree with the corresponding equations found in
chapter 4.1.1.5, in particular (4.39).
One can now ask for an explicit representative of aµ analogous to a momentum
eigenstate in ﬂat space. Such a wavefunction can be obtained from the gauge-covariant
spin raising process acting on solutions to the charged wave equation on the plane
wave background as described in chapter 4.1.1. Recall that the key ingredient is the
function (4.33)
˜φk = k0 v + (ka + eAa) xa + f(u)
2 k0
,
where (k0, ka) are d −1 constants parametrising the momenta, e is the charge of
the gluon with respect to the background gauge ﬁeld under the Cartan of the gauge
group, and
f(u) :=
Z u
ds (ka + eAa(s)) (ka + eAa(s)) ,
as deﬁned in (4.34). Note that Aa is not gauge-invariant: the addition of a constant
preserves the ﬁeld strength. We take an in-state representation for which Aa = 0 in
the in-region of the sandwich plane wave (i.e., u < u1) but Aa ̸= 0 as u →+∞even
though the ﬁeld strength vanishes in the out region.
In chapter 4.1.1.5 the gluon aµ is then constructed from ˜φk as:
aa
µ = Ta ˜εµ ei ˜φk ,
(4.123)
with the generator Ta of the gauge group encoding the colour charge, and the polar-
isation given by equation (4.41):
˜εµdXµ = ˜ϵa

dxa + 1
k0
(ka + eAa)du

Here, ˜ϵa is a constant vector in d−2 dimensions, encoding the polarisation information.
In equation (4.35) the natural local null momentum associated with the gluon is given
108

as
Kµ dXµ := −ie−i˜φk Dµ ei˜φk dXµ
= k0 dv +
1
2 k0
(ka + eAa)(ka + eAa)du + (ka + eAa)dxa .
(4.124)
It is straightforward to verify that ηµσKµ˜εσ = ηµσKµKσ = 0.
The descended gluon vertex operator (i.e. the picture number zero version of V )
can be obtained by isolating contributions to the simple pole between G and V or
equivalently by linearising the constraint H. The resulting vertex operator is given
by (3.36), which takes the following explicit form in this case:
c ¯c U = c ¯c ja h
Πσ aa σ −Ψσ Ψµ ∂σaa
µ −f abc xa ˙Ab
a Ψu Ψµ ac
µ
i
(4.125)
Unlike the descended graviton vertex operator on a plane wave metric (4.101), this
gluon vertex operator contains only one additional term relative to its ﬂat space
counterpart. The third term, proportional to ˙Aa, ensures that the resulting operator
is covariant with respect to the background gauge ﬁeld.
4.2.2.2
3-point function
The ﬁxed and descended vertex operators can now be used to compute the 3-point
correlation function on the Riemann sphere,
⟨V1(z1) V2(z2) c(z3)¯c(z3) U3(z3)⟩,
(4.126)
using (4.123) for an explicit representation of the incoming gluon. In order for the
colour structure to produce a non-vanishing result, the sum of charges for the vertex
operators under the background gauge ﬁeld must vanish: e1 + e2 + e3 = 0.
The ghost and current algebra portions of the correlator are easily evaluated,
leaving an eﬀective correlator:
⟨V1(z1) V2(z2) c(z3)¯c(z3) U3(z3)⟩= tr (T1T2T3)
z23 z31
√dz1 dz2 dz3
×
D
Ψ · ˜ε1(z1) Ψ · ˜ε2(z2) (Π · ˜ε3 −Ψ · K3 Ψ · ˜ε3) (z3) ei(˜φ1+˜φ2+˜φ3)EΨΨ
ΠX .
(4.127)
109

The remaining correlator does not contain any insertions of Πu (since ˜εu = 0) so all
u-dependence is immediately reduced to zero modes. This means that there are no
Wick contractions into the u-dependent components of momenta K or polarisations
˜ε, or into the u-dependent terms appearing in the exponential through ˜φk. Since the
u-dependence is totally relegated to zero mode integrations, the remaining fermion
correlator can be seen to have the exact same structure as the 3-point function in ﬂat
space (cf. [48]).
With this in mind, it is easy to see that the remaining correlation function is
reduced to:
2i tr (T1T2T3) δd−1
 
3
X
r=1
kr
! Z
du [˜ε1 · ˜ε3 K1 · ˜ε2 + cyclic] exp
 
i
3
X
r=1
fr(u)
2 kr 0
!
,
(4.128)
with the d−1 delta functions emerging after performing the zero mode integrals over
v and xa. As expected, this is precisely the 3-point amplitude for gluon scattering on
a gauge ﬁeld plane wave background (4.76):
⟨V1(z1) V2(z2) c(z3)¯c(z3) U3(z3)⟩= Apw
3 (a1, a2, a3) .
(4.129)
So the heterotic ambitwistor string correctly encodes the interactions of gauge the-
ory on a curved background, with the appropriate linear perturbations (i.e., gluons)
emerging from the worldsheet BRST cohomology.
4.2.3
Discussion
The work of [77] showed that ambitwistor strings can be consistently deﬁned on a
type II supergravity background. This suggested that it might be possible to calculate
amplitudes on such backgrounds following an extension of the ﬂat space strategy. In
the ﬁrst part of this chapter, we have seen that this does indeed turn out to be the
case on a plane wave background at three points. In chapter 3.1, we analogously saw
that the heterotic ambitwistor string is consistent on Yang-Mills backgrounds. In the
110

second part of this chapter, we have found the corresponding result for amplitudes:
Non-abelian gluon scattering can correctly be computed from this model on plane
wave gauge ﬁeld backgrounds. The results are all checked against the three point
amplitudes on plane wave backgrounds as computed in chapter 4.1 and [3].
There are many further directions to explore. The ﬁrst perhaps is to go to higher
numbers of points. The computations of [3] were limited to three points because
the propagator would be needed at four points, and that was not available in simple
enough form.
In terms of the ambitwistor string in ﬂat spacetime, the new phe-
nomenon at four points is the appearance of integrated vertex operators.
These
incorporate the scattering equations. To take the calculations in this chapter to four
points we will therefore need to introduce some analogue of scattering equations on a
curved background. If this is successful, they will eﬀectively encode the propagators.
Another natural direction to consider is other backgrounds, such as (anti-) de
Sitter, or black-hole or brane spacetimes. These oﬀer diﬀerent challenges, with more
sophisticated global issues to be addressed already in the spacetime version of the
calculations. In the (anti-) de Sitter case, the background is not actually a vacuum
solution with respect to the equations of motion arising in the RNS-like formulation
of the ambitwistor string used here.
Ostensibly, AdS backgrounds would require
a manifestly supersymmetric worldsheet model, such as the pure spinor formalism,
where the scalar curvature of the background (times a compact space) is supported
by Ramond-Ramond ﬂux. While there has been some progress in describing the pure
spinor ambitwistor string on such backgrounds (cf. [65, 116, 123]), there is currently
no formulation which is quantum mechanically consistent as a worldsheet theory. If
these issues could be resolved, then it would enable computations akin to the ones
performed in this chapter on (A)dS background geometries.
A further direction is to take more seriously the fact that ambitwistor strings
have target ambitwistor space.
We should therefore construct the corresponding
111

ambitwistor spaces more explicitly for the curved backgrounds under consideration.
We must then learn how to quantise ambitwistor strings for amplitude calculations
in such backgrounds.
A key theme of [3] was the extent to which the double copy relationship between
gravity and Yang-Mills amplitudes, as expressed for example in colour kinematics
duality [10], survives in curved space. The answer was that this is indeed the case with
suitable modiﬁcations. However, the curved space formulation of ambitwistor strings
in [77] was not expressed in such a way that the double copy is apparent. Finding
a version of the ambitwistor string which manifests the double copy relationship on
a curved background would provide further evidence that colour kinematics duality
persists in a useful way on non-trivial backgrounds.
112

Chapter 5
Conclusions
In this thesis we have demonstrated how some of the modern techniques of the am-
plitudes program can be carried over into curved backgrounds.
Ambitwistor strings share many of the nice properties of more conventional string
theories, however without the additional complication of α′ corrections. On curved
backgrounds this diﬀerence makes itself felt in a particularly nice way: the exact back-
ground equations of motion are imposed by quantum consistency conditions for the
heterotic and type II ambitwistor string. In even more stark contrast to conventional
string theory, heterotic and type II ambitwistor strings remain free CFTs on curved
backgrounds (see chapter 3.1 and [77]). It would be intriguing to verify analogous
results for the other ambitwistor string models present in the literature [49–51].
The only case in which vertex operators for conventional strings on a curved
background have been obtained is for AdS3 [165–167]. The fact that ambitwistor
strings remain free theories on curved backgrounds has made it possible to write
down ﬁxed vertex operators for arbitrary gauge theory and supergravity backgrounds.
These vertex operators are BRST closed if and only if they correspond to linear
on-shell perturbations of the background ﬁelds as shown in chapter 3.2.
A clear
open question is to determine the corresponding integrated vertex operators. From a
practical point of view, they are simply necessary for calculating correlators for more
than three points. However more importantly, integrated ambitwistor string vertex
113

operators encode the scattering equations [48]. It is completely unclear if and how
they manifest themselves in curved backgrounds.
In view of the previous paragraph, it is maybe not too surprising that there are
no string theory calculations of curved background three point functions yet1. Such
calculations for three gluon vertex operators on a sandwich plane wave gauge back-
ground in the heterotic ambitwistor string and three graviton vertex operators on a
sandwich plane wave Einstein gravity background in the type II model have been per-
formed in chapter 4.2. In keeping with the spirit of the ﬂat space ambitwistor string,
these correlators are shown to agree with the corresponding amplitudes2 obtained
from QFT calculations in these curved backgrounds. Several natural questions arise
at this point: Can these correlators be calculated for a higher number of points (this
ties in with the problem in the previous paragraph) and if yes, do they still yield tree
level amplitudes (this ties in with the open question in the next paragraph). There
is a considerable amount of work on ambitwistor strings at loop level [52–59], can
these results be useful for the type II model in this context? Another interesting
problem is to consider diﬀerent backgrounds. Despite the exceptional simplicity of
plane waves, the explicit calculations in this chapter are by no means short. So other
backgrounds will have to be suﬃciently simple to admit explicit solutions for on-shell
external states and render calculations feasible. Given that there are no general am-
plitudes formulae on curved backgrounds, proving that this model yields amplitudes
on arbitrary backgrounds seems like very high hanging fruit at this point.
Due to their simplicity, (sandwich) plane waves have been a popular playground
for quantum ﬁeld theory in curved backgrounds and it was known that scattering
of scalars is well deﬁned [132, 133].
In chapter 4.1, we generalised this result to
gluons and gravitons making use of a twistor theory inspired spin raising formula.
1Several exceptions and their limitations have been pointed out in footnote 9 on page 94.
2Here the use of the word amplitude is appropriate due to the special nature of the sandwich
plane wave background. See chapter 4.1.1 for details.
114

This then allowed us to compute the corresponding three point amplitudes on these
backgrounds. It is subsequently shown that a suitably adapted version of the double
copy still works for three points on sandwich plane wave backgrounds.
One can
optimistically conjecture that this prescription will also hold at a higher number of
points.
To test this conjecture, one needs to calculate the corresponding n-point
amplitudes on a plane wave background, which requires explicit and manageable
expressions for the gluon and graviton propagators. A Feynman gauge version of
the gluon propagator along with a preliminary investigation of the colour kinematics
duality on plane waves will appear shortly [181]3.
Another obvious direction for
future research is the generalisation of the double copy prescription to other curved
backgrounds, with the same caveat about calculational feasibility as in the previous
paragraph.
The work presented here is a small piece of the puzzle leading to a better under-
standing of perturbative quantum ﬁeld theory. It provides a ﬁrst pillar for the bridge
between the ﬂat space QFT [8–11] and classical incarnation [28–37] of the double
copy. Both yield very surprising results and their relation and true origin is not fully
understood. It also strengthens the role of ambitwistor strings as a simpliﬁed testing
ground for string theory, something that has previously been explored in [49,68–70].
It might pave the way to further insight into the nature and origin of the scattering
equations and CHY formulae [45–47] by leading towards an understanding on generic
backgrounds.
These and the many other results of the amplitudes community, as well as all the
non-perturbative QFT results of the recent years, suggest that it still is a long path
to a thorough understanding of quantum ﬁeld theories. I am conﬁdent that scattering
amplitudes will keep providing many fascinating and important insights along this
way.
3A Feynman gauge graviton propagator is known to the authors of said paper as well.
115

Appendix A
Usefull current algebra identities
Recall that for a level k current algebra, the OPE between two currents is simply
given by equation (2.29)
ja(z)jb(w) ∼
kδab
(z −w)2 + f abcjc(w)
z −w
.
To obtain the anomalies (3.19), we need to know the OPE between a current and a
normal ordered product of two currents. From the current algebra OPE, one ﬁnds
ja(z) : jbjc : (w) ∼kf abc
(z −w)3 + kδabjc(w)
(z −w)2 + kδacjb(w)
(z −w)2
+f abdf dceje(w)
(z −w)2
+ f acd : jbjd : (w)
z −w
+ f abd : jdjc : (w)
z −w
,
(A.1)
which can be derived following steps similar to those of the Sugawara construction as
described in [182].
Identity (3.18) also plays a crucial role in determining the anolmalies (3.19), how-
ever it is diﬃcult to obtain directly form the current algebra OPE. To derive
: jajb : (z)−: jbja : (z) = f abc∂jc(z) ,
we use the notation from chatper 11 of [182]: Given the usual mode expansion
ja(z) =
X
n
z−n−1ja
n ,
(A.2)
the derivative of the current has modes
∂ja
m = −(m + 1)ja
m .
(A.3)
116

Furthermore, the current algebra OPE1 is equivalent to

ja
m, jb
n

= f abcjc
m+n
(A.4)
and normal ordered products can be expanded as : jajb : (z) = P
m,k z−m−k−2 : ja
mjb
k :
with
: ja
njb
m : = ja
njb
m −θ(n)f abcjc
m+n
(A.5)
θ(n) =
(
1
n ≥0
0
n < 0
.
(A.6)
Then we can deﬁne ∆ab =: jajb : (z)−: jbja : (z) and expanding this into modes,
taking into account that we can only shift summation variables in normal ordered
expressions, yields
∆ab
n = f abcjc
n
X
m
(1 −θ(m) −θ(n −m))
(A.7)
= f abc∂jc
n
(A.8)
as expected.
1Here we set k = 0, it is easy to convince yourself that this does not aﬀect the resulting identity
using a symmetry argument.
117

Appendix B
Linearised supergravity equations
In this appendix, we provide some details of the linearisation of the supergravity
equations (2.46)
0 = R + 4∇µ∇µΦ −4∇µΦ∇µΦ −1
12H2
0 = Rµν + 2∇µ∇νΦ −1
4HµρσHν
ρσ
0 = ∇κHκ
µν −2Hκ
µν∇κΦ .
The linearised supergravity equations are obtained by perturbing these equations with
respect to all three background ﬁelds and combining the corresponding linear terms
in the scalar, symmetric and antisymmetric equation respectively. We will derive the
individual contributions from all three sectors of the spectrum here. It is then easy
to see that their sums agree with equations (3.79) – (3.81).
B.1
Metric perturbation
Recall that we are considering a trace free graviton perturbation hµν of the background
metric in modiﬁed de Donder gauge ∇µhµν = 2hµν∂µΦ. This yields the following
linear perturbations of the curvature
δRµν = −1
2
 2hµν −2Rµαβνhαβ −Rλ
µhλν −Rλ
νhµλ

+ 2∇(ν
 hσ
µ)∂σΦ

(B.1)
δR = −hµνRµν + 4hρσ∂ρΦ ∂σΦ + 2hσ
µ∇µ∂σΦ
(B.2)
118

as well as the perturbation
δ
 ∇κHκ
µν

= −hρκ∇ρHκµν −2
 ∇ρhσ[µ

H ρσ
ν]
−2Hαµνhαλ∂λΦ .
(B.3)
Using these equations, it is straight forward to obtain the perturbations of (2.46).
We ﬁnd the following ﬁrst order expressions
δ

Rµν −1
4H ρσ
µ
Hνρσ + 2∇µ∂νΦ

= −1
2
 2hµν −2Rµαβνhαβ −Rλ
µhλν −Rλ
νhµλ

+1
2HµκλHνρ
λhκρ + hµσ∇ν∂σΦ + hνσ∇µ∂σΦ + ∇σhµν∂σΦ
(B.4)
δ (∇κHκµν −2Hκµν∂κΦ) = −hρκ∇ρHκµν −2
 ∇ρhσ[µ

H ρσ
ν]
(B.5)
for the tensorial equations and their scalar counterpart
δ

R + 42Φ −4(∂Φ)2 −1
12H2

= −hµν

Rµν + 2∇µ∂νΦ −1
4H ρσ
µ
Hνρσ

,
(B.6)
which is proportional to the symmetric term in (2.46) and therefore vanishes identi-
cally on supergravity backgrounds.
B.2
B-ﬁeld perturbation
The usual convention for the ﬁeld strength of the B-ﬁeld is
Hµασ = ∂µBασ + ∂αBσµ + ∂σBµα
(B.7)
and we denoted the linearised version (db)µασ = ∂µbασ + ∂αbσµ + ∂σbµα. Then the
linearisation of (2.46) with respect to the B-ﬁeld in the gauge ∇µbµν = 2bµν∂µΦ is
δ

R + 42Φ −4(∂Φ)2 −1
12H2

= −1
6H · db
(B.8)
δ

Rµν −1
4H ρσ
µ
Hνρσ + 2∇µ∂νΦ

= −1
2Hρσ
(µdbν)ρσ
(B.9)
δ (∇κHκµν −2Hκµν∂κΦ) =2bµν −2Rλ
µν
ρbλρ + 2Rσ
[µbν]σ
−2∂κΦ∇κbµν + 4bα[µ∇ν]∂αΦ .
(B.10)
119

B.3
Dilaton perturbation
The linearisation of (2.46) with respect to the dilaton ﬁeld is straight forward and
yields
δ

R + 42Φ −4(∂Φ)2 −1
12H2

= 42ϕ −8∂µΦ ∂µϕ
(B.11)
δ

Rµν −1
4H ρσ
µ
Hνρσ + 2∇µ∂νΦ

= 2∇µ∂νϕ
(B.12)
δ (∇κHκµν −2Hκµν∂κΦ) = −2Hκµν∂κϕ .
(B.13)
120

Appendix C
Classical S-matrix & Tree level
integrands
This appendix reviews the notion of classical S-matrix which is used throughout
chapter 4.1, as well as providing a precise deﬁnition for the tree level integrand. On
a sandwich plane wave background (for either gauge theory or gravity), the tree level
S-matrix for a theory encodes the evolution of asymptotic free states from the in-
region of the spacetime (i.e., u < u1) through the non-trivial, or radiation region
(u1 ≤u ≤u2), to the out-region (u > u2) as governed by the classical theory.
C.1
Classical S-matrix
Rather than work out the curved space Feynman rules, we use a deﬁnition of the
classical S-matrix in which tree level amplitudes are given by extracting certain multi-
linear pieces of the classical action evaluated on a perturbative solution to the non-
linear equations [183–185]. In general this has the interpretation of the ﬁeld-theoretic
Hamilton-Jacobi generating function for the evolution and gives the tree level contri-
bution to the S-matrix. For the 3-point calculations in chapter 4.1, there is no need
to iterate the perturbative solution, but here we present the general framework.
Let S[Φ] be the classical action, a functional of some ﬁelds Φ which is deﬁned on
the sandwich plane wave background (gravitational or gauge theoretic – at this stage
121

it makes no diﬀerence). We assume that this action takes the generic form:
S[Φ] =
Z
ddX (Lkin + Lint) ,
(C.1)
where Lkin is the kinetic portion of the action, which is quadratic in Φ and governs
the free theory, and Lint contains all higher-point interactions.
Deﬁne the following object:
Φ[n](X) :=
n
X
i=1
ϵi ϕi(X) +
Z
ddY ∆(X, Y ) δLint
δΦ

Φ=Pn
j=1 ϵjϕj(Y )
.
(C.2)
This is essentially an integral form of the full non-linear equations from the action
S with data given by the ﬁrst term on the right hand side. Here, the {ϵi} are n
parameters that will eventually be thought of as inﬁnitesimal; {ϕi} are n solutions to
the free equations of motion of Lkin with speciﬁed asymptotic behaviour; and ∆(X, Y )
is a Green’s function deﬁned by Lkin. There are precise formulae for various useful
deﬁnitions of this ∆(X, Y ) (e.g., advanced, retarded, Feynman) in scalar, gauge, and
gravitational theories on plane wave backgrounds [132,141], though we will not make
explicit use of them here. Specifying the asymptotic behaviour of the free solution ϕi
boils down to saying whether it looks like an ‘in’ or ‘out’ state.
Both the in- and out-regions are ﬂat, so asymptotically free states ϕi should look
like free states in Minkowski space in at least one of these regions. In a momentum
space representation, such free states in Minkowski space are modelled on massless
plane wave momentum eigenstates, ei k·X for k2 = 0. Unlike Minkowski space, in the
sandwich plane wave a state which looks like ei k·X in the in-region will not look like
ei k·X in the out-region. This is a consequence of the ‘memory’ relations (2.59), (2.73).
Hence, the speciﬁcation of asymptotic behaviour for ϕi boils down to stating whether
it is an incoming or outgoing state, denoted respectively as ϕ−
i or ϕ+
i . An incoming
state is one which looks like a free solution in Minkowski space the in-region; an out
state looks like a free solution in Minkowski space in the out-region. More precisely,
ϕ−
i |in ∼ei k·X ∼ϕ+
i |out ,
(C.3)
122

for both the gravitational and gauge theory backgrounds.
The n-point tree level scattering amplitude for the states {ϕi} – with their given
asymptotic conﬁguration of in and out states – is then a multi-linear piece of the
classical action:
M (0)
n (ϕ1, . . . , ϕn) = ∂nS[Φ[n]]
∂ϵ1 · · · ∂ϵn

ϵ1=···=ϵn=0
.
(C.4)
For ﬂat backgrounds, this agrees with the usual deﬁnition of the S-matrix and would
also correspond with a Feynman diagram deﬁnition for sandwich plane waves.
C.2
Tree level integrands
For the purposes of investigating the double copy, a notion of tree level integrand
closely related to the tree level amplitude is useful. Indeed, it is actually this tree
level integrand that appears in the KLT relations of the standard double copy. From
the deﬁnition (C.4) it is straightforward to see that the tree level scattering amplitude
will always take the form:
M (0)
n
=
Z
ddX Mn(X)
n
Y
i=1
fi(X) ,
(C.5)
where each of the fi(X) is a solution to the free scalar wave equation on the plane
wave background. The object Mn is deﬁned to be the tree level integrand; generi-
cally, it will be formed of polarisations, momenta and propagators and depends on
the background geometry. It captures everything that is encoded by the kinematic
numerators and denominators which would result from a conventional Feynman di-
agram approach. In more heuristic terms, the tree level integrand is what remains
after removing the ﬁnal integral that forms the action functional in (C.4), along with
‘universal’ spin-independent functions.
In Minkowski space, it is easy to see that
n
Y
i=1
fi(X) = ei(k1+···+kn)·X ,
123

so the eﬀect of isolating Mn is to strip oﬀan overall momentum conserving delta
function. On non-trivial backgrounds such as the sandwich plane wave, the result
of the ﬁnal ddX integrals is more complicated, but the principle is the same: Mn
contains all of the information which one could expect to be ‘squared’ in taking the
double copy. Another interesting property of the integrand is that it is functionally
independent of the asymptotic conditions of the states being scattered. This enables
the investigation of the double copy by considering the computationally simplest
conﬁguration of incoming and outgoing states.
Clearly, there is a sense in which the tree level integrand is not a gauge-invariant
object, just as one can add boundary terms to an action. This lack of gauge invariance
is analogous to the statement that individual Feynman diagrams – or individual terms
contributing to (C.4) – are not gauge invariant. However, once a gauge for performing
perturbative calculations has been ﬁxed (i.e., speciﬁc linearised solutions {ϕi} and
a Green’s function ∆(X, Y ) have been consistently chosen), the object Mn is well-
deﬁned. In our calculations, we always work in a Lorenz or de Donder gauge, so
the resulting expressions for the integrand should be viewed as expressions in these
particular gauges. Their integrals, however, do not depend on the gauge choice.
Throughout chapter 4, the tree level integrand for theories on the gravitational
plane wave background is denoted by Mn, and the tree level integrand for theories
on the gauge theory plane wave background by An. After performing the integration,
we denote the actual amplitudes on these backgrounds by Mpw
n and Apw
n respectively.
124

Appendix D
The impulsive plane wave
For both gauge theory and gravitational sandwich plane waves, the computation of
3-point amplitudes (rather than integrands) boils down to performing integrations
that depend on the particulars of the background geometry. In this appendix, we
consider the simplest concrete example of a sandwich plane wave: the impulsive
plane wave [186–190]. Impulsive plane waves correspond to gluing two ﬂat regions
together along an inﬁnitesimal burst of radiation; in other words, the radiation region
of the sandwich plane wave has delta function support. In the case of the impulsive
gauge theory background, the scalar and gluon 3-point amplitudes can be computed
in closed form. For the impulsive gravitational background, the 3-point amplitudes
can be written in terms of integrals which are suitable to numerical approximation.
D.1
Gauge theory background
For an impulsive gauge theory plane wave, we have
˙Aa(u) = δ(u) aa ,
(D.1)
for aa a set of d −2 constants which characterise the impulsive wave. Using the
asymptotic conditions (4.36), it follows that
A−
a (u) = Θ(u) aa ,
A+
a (u) = −Θ(−u) aa ,
(D.2)
125

where Θ(u) is the Heaviside step function. Proceeding from (4.70) it is a straight-
forward calculation to obtain the 3-point amplitudes of charged scalars on this back-
ground. The results for the two independent conﬁgurations – all incoming or two
incoming and one outgoing – are given by:
M3(Φ−
1 , Φ−
2 , Φ−
3 ) = λ
6 δd−1
 
3
X
r=1
kr
! 

 
3
X
s=1
k2
s
2 ks 0
!−1
−
 
3
X
s=1
k2
s + 2eska
saa + e2
sa2
2 ks 0
!−1
,
(D.3)
and
M3(Φ−
1 , Φ−
2 , Φ+
3 ) = λ
6 δd−1
 
3
X
r=1
kr
! 

 
k2
3 −2e3ka
3aa + e2
3a2
2 k3 0
+
X
s=1,2
k2
s
2 ks 0
!−1
−
 
k2
3
2 k0 3
+
X
s=1,2
k2
s + 2eska
saa + e2
sa2
2 ks 0
!−1
,
(D.4)
where k2
s := ks aka
s for any s = 1, 2, 3.
The 3-point amplitudes for gluons on the impulsive gauge theory background
follow similarly from (4.76). A calculation leads to:
M3(a−
1 , a−
2 , a−
3 ) = 2 g δd−1
 
3
X
r=1
kr
! 

 
3
X
s=1
k2
s
2 ks 0
!−1
F({kt, ˜ϵt})
−
 
3
X
s=1
k2
s + 2eska
saa + e2
sa2
2 ks 0
!−1 
F({kt, ˜ϵt}) −aa
˜ϵ1 · ˜ϵ3
k2 0
˜ϵ2 a(e2k1 0 −e1k2 0)
+ ˜ϵ1 · ˜ϵ2
k3 0
˜ϵ3 a(e3k2 0 −e2k3 0) + ˜ϵ2 · ˜ϵ3
k1 0
˜ϵ1 a(e1k3 0 −e3k1 0)

,
(D.5)
126

and
M3(a−
1 , a−
2 , a+
3 ) = 2 g δd−1
 
3
X
r=1
kr
! 

 
k2
3 −2e3ka
3aa + e2
3a2
2 k3 0
+
X
s=1,2
k2
s
2 ks 0
!−1
×

F({kt, ˜ϵt}) + e3 aa
k2 0
k3 0
˜ϵ1 · ˜ϵ2 ˜ϵ3 a −˜ϵ2 · ˜ϵ3 ˜ϵ1 a

−
 
k2
3
2 k0 3
+
X
s=1,2
k2
s + 2eska
saa + e2
sa2
2 ks 0
!−1 
F({kt, ˜ϵt})
−aa
˜ϵ1 · ˜ϵ3
k2 0
˜ϵ2 a(e2k1 0 −e1k2 0) −e2 ˜ϵ1 · ˜ϵ2 ˜ϵ3 a + e1
k3 0
k1 0
˜ϵ2 · ˜ϵ3 ˜ϵ1 a
 #
,
(D.6)
where the function F of the kinematic data is deﬁned by (4.82).
In each of these expressions a Hartle-Hawking contour deformation is used to
dampen rapidly oscillating contributions to the u-integrations near u = ±∞. This is
the same as the prescription on Minkowski space, and corresponds to selecting the
physical vacuum.
D.2
Gravitational background
For an impulsive gravitational wave, the non-trivial metric component H(u, x) in
Brinkmann coordinates has delta function support:
H(u, x) = δ(u) Hab xa xb ,
(D.7)
with Hab a trace-free and constant (d −2) × (d −2) matrix. Assuming that Hab is
corank zero with distinct eigenvalues, it can be diagonalised using rotations in the
xa-plane. So without loss of generality, we take
Hab = λ(a) δab ,
d−2
X
a=1
λ(a) = 0 .
(D.8)
The vielbein Ea
i must solve the equation
¨Ea i = λ(a) δab δ(u) Eb
i ,
(D.9)
127

subject to incoming or outgoing boundary conditions (4.6). In each case, one ﬁnds
E−
a i = δai
 1 + u λ(a) Θ(u)

,
E+
a i = δai
 1 −u λ(a) Θ(−u)

,
(D.10)
so the transverse metric γij(u) is given in incoming or outgoing coordinates by:
γ−
ij(u) = δij
 1 + u λ(i) Θ(u)
2 ,
γ+
ij(u) = δij
 1 −u λ(i) Θ(−u)
2 ,
(D.11)
where λ(i) is identiﬁed with λ(a) using δi
a.
This demonstrates that the impulsive
gravitational wave is two copies of Minkowski space glued together along a single
pulse of gravitational radiation. While the metrics (D.11) are continuous across the
pulse at u = 0, they have discontinuous ﬁrst derivatives.
To compute 3-point amplitudes, it is also important to have the inverse vielbeins:
Ei −
a
= δi
a
 1 + u λ(a) Θ(u)
−1 ,
Ei +
a
= δi
a
 1 −u λ(a) Θ(−u)
−1 ,
(D.12)
leading to expressions for F ij
± (u):
F ij
−(u) =
u δij
1 + u λ(i) Θ(u),
(D.13a)
F ij
+ (u) =
u δij
1 −u λ(i) Θ(−u) .
(D.13b)
So in both cases F ij(u) gets an inﬁnite series of O(u2) corrections upon crossing the
pulse at u = 0.
Even at the level of scalar amplitudes, the situation on the gravitational back-
ground is more complicated than on the gauge theory background. Unlike (D.3)–
(D.4), on the impulsive gravitational wave (relatively) compact expressions for the
u-integrations are not available. Instead, we ﬁnd explicit expressions which could be
evaluated (numerically or possibly analytically) when the momenta and eigenvalues
{λ(a)} are speciﬁed. For instance, one ﬁnds:
M3(Φ−
1 , Φ−
2 , Φ−
3 ) = λ i
6 δd−1
 
3
X
r=1
kr
! 

 
3
X
s=1
k2
s
2 ks 0
!−1
+i
∞+iϵ
Z
0
du
d−2
Y
a=1
(1 + u λ(a))−1
2 exp
 
i u
3
X
s=1
d−2
X
i=1
k2
s i
2ks 0 (1 + uλ(i))
!
,
(D.14)
128

for the all-incoming conﬁguration.
The expression for the two-incoming, one-outgoing conﬁguration is similarly given
in terms of u-integrals over the in- and out-regions:
M3(Φ−
1 , Φ−
2 , Φ+
3 ) = −λ
6
s
(2 πi)d−2
kd−2
3 0
δ
 
3
X
r=1
kr 0
!
×


0
Z
−∞−iϵ
du
Qd−2
a=1
pλ(a)
exp
 
−
i
2 k3 0
JaJb(A−1)ab + i
3
X
s=1
ks iks j
2 ks 0
F ij
s
!
+
∞+iϵ
Z
0
du
d−2
Y
a=1
(λ(a) + u λ2
(a))−1
2 exp
 
−
i
2 k3 0
JaJb(A−1)ab + i
3
X
s=1
ks iks j
2 ks 0
F ij
s
!
.
(D.15)
Here, the F ij
s (u) are given by (D.13), while
Aab(u) =
−λ(a) δab
1 + |u| λ(a)
,
(D.16)
and
Ja(u) = k1 a + k2 a + k3 a + u λ(a)(k3 a Θ(u) −(k1 a + k2 a) Θ(−u))
1 + |u| λ(a)
.
(D.17)
129

Bibliography
[1] T. Adamo, E. Casali and S. Nekovar, Yang-Mills theory from the worldsheet,
Phys. Rev. D98 (2018) 086022, [1807.09171].
[2] T. Adamo, E. Casali and S. Nekovar, Ambitwistor string vertex operators on
curved backgrounds, 1809.04489.
[3] T. Adamo, E. Casali, L. Mason and S. Nekovar, Scattering on plane waves
and the double copy, Class. Quant. Grav. 35 (2018) 015004, [1706.08925].
[4] T. Adamo, E. Casali, L. Mason and S. Nekovar, Amplitudes on plane waves
from ambitwistor strings, JHEP 11 (2017) 160, [1708.09249].
[5] H. Elvang and Y.-t. Huang, Scattering Amplitudes in Gauge Theory and
Gravity. Cambridge University Press, 2015.
[6] S. J. Parke and T. R. Taylor, An Amplitude for n Gluon Scattering, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 56 (1986) 2459.
[7] F. A. Berends and W. T. Giele, Recursive Calculations for Processes with n
Gluons, Nucl. Phys. B306 (1988) 759–808.
[8] H. Kawai, D. C. Lewellen and S. H. H. Tye, A Relation Between Tree
Amplitudes of Closed and Open Strings, Nucl. Phys. B269 (1986) 1–23.
[9] Z. Bern, J. J. M. Carrasco and H. Johansson, New Relations for
Gauge-Theory Amplitudes, Phys. Rev. D78 (2008) 085011, [0805.3993].
130

[10] Z. Bern, J. J. M. Carrasco and H. Johansson, Perturbative Quantum Gravity
as a Double Copy of Gauge Theory, Phys. Rev. Lett. 105 (2010) 061602,
[1004.0476].
[11] Z. Bern, T. Dennen, Y.-t. Huang and M. Kiermaier, Gravity as the Square of
Gauge Theory, Phys. Rev. D82 (2010) 065003, [1004.0693].
[12] N. E. J. Bjerrum-Bohr, P. H. Damgaard and P. Vanhove, Minimal Basis for
Gauge Theory Amplitudes, Phys. Rev. Lett. 103 (2009) 161602, [0907.1425].
[13] S. Stieberger, Open & Closed vs. Pure Open String Disk Amplitudes,
0907.2211.
[14] N. E. J. Bjerrum-Bohr, P. H. Damgaard, T. Sondergaard and P. Vanhove,
Monodromy and Jacobi-like Relations for Color-Ordered Amplitudes, JHEP
06 (2010) 003, [1003.2403].
[15] B. Feng, R. Huang and Y. Jia, Gauge Amplitude Identities by On-shell
Recursion Relation in S-matrix Program, Phys. Lett. B695 (2011) 350–353,
[1004.3417].
[16] S. H. Henry Tye and Y. Zhang, Dual Identities inside the Gluon and the
Graviton Scattering Amplitudes, JHEP 06 (2010) 071, [1003.1732].
[17] Z. Bern, J. J. Carrasco, L. J. Dixon, H. Johansson and R. Roiban, The
Ultraviolet Behavior of N=8 Supergravity at Four Loops, Phys. Rev. Lett. 103
(2009) 081301, [0905.2326].
[18] Z. Bern, S. Davies, T. Dennen and Y.-t. Huang, Absence of Three-Loop
Four-Point Divergences in N=4 Supergravity, Phys. Rev. Lett. 108 (2012)
201301, [1202.3423].
131

[19] Z. Bern, S. Davies, T. Dennen and Y.-t. Huang, Ultraviolet Cancellations in
Half-Maximal Supergravity as a Consequence of the Double-Copy Structure,
Phys. Rev. D86 (2012) 105014, [1209.2472].
[20] Z. Bern, S. Davies, T. Dennen, A. V. Smirnov and V. A. Smirnov, Ultraviolet
Properties of N=4 Supergravity at Four Loops, Phys. Rev. Lett. 111 (2013)
231302, [1309.2498].
[21] Z. Bern, S. Davies and T. Dennen, Enhanced ultraviolet cancellations in
N = 5 supergravity at four loops, Phys. Rev. D90 (2014) 105011, [1409.3089].
[22] Z. Bern, C. Cheung, H.-H. Chi, S. Davies, L. Dixon and J. Nohle, Evanescent
Eﬀects Can Alter Ultraviolet Divergences in Quantum Gravity without
Physical Consequences, Phys. Rev. Lett. 115 (2015) 211301, [1507.06118].
[23] Z. Bern, M. Enciso, J. Parra-Martinez and M. Zeng, Manifesting enhanced
cancellations in supergravity: integrands versus integrals, 1703.08927.
[24] Z. Bern, A. Edison, D. Kosower and J. Parra-Martinez, Curvature-Squared
Multiplets, Evanescent Eﬀects and the U(1) Anomaly in N = 4 Supergravity,
1706.01486.
[25] Z. Bern, L. J. Dixon and R. Roiban, Is N = 8 supergravity ultraviolet ﬁnite?,
Phys. Lett. B644 (2007) 265–271, [hep-th/0611086].
[26] Z. Bern, J. J. Carrasco, L. J. Dixon, H. Johansson and R. Roiban, Amplitudes
and Ultraviolet Behavior of N = 8 Supergravity, Fortsch. Phys. 59 (2011)
561–578, [1103.1848].
[27] Z. Bern, J. J. Carrasco, W.-M. Chen, A. Edison, H. Johansson,
J. Parra-Martinez et al., Ultraviolet Properties of N = 8 Supergravity at Five
Loops, 1804.09311.
132

[28] A. Anastasiou, L. Borsten, M. J. Duﬀ, L. J. Hughes and S. Nagy, A magic
pyramid of supergravities, JHEP 04 (2014) 178, [1312.6523].
[29] R. Monteiro, D. O’Connell and C. D. White, Black holes and the double copy,
JHEP 12 (2014) 056, [1410.0239].
[30] A. Luna, R. Monteiro, D. O’Connell and C. D. White, The classical double
copy for Taub–NUT spacetime, Phys. Lett. B750 (2015) 272–277,
[1507.01869].
[31] A. K. Ridgway and M. B. Wise, Static Spherically Symmetric Kerr-Schild
Metrics and Implications for the Classical Double Copy, Phys. Rev. D94
(2016) 044023, [1512.02243].
[32] L. Borsten and M. J. Duﬀ, Gravity as the square of Yang–Mills?, Phys.
Scripta 90 (2015) 108012, [1602.08267].
[33] A. Luna, R. Monteiro, I. Nicholson, D. O’Connell and C. D. White, The
double copy: Bremsstrahlung and accelerating black holes, JHEP 06 (2016)
023, [1603.05737].
[34] W. D. Goldberger and A. K. Ridgway, Radiation and the classical double copy
for color charges, 1611.03493.
[35] G. Cardoso, S. Nagy and S. Nampuri, Multi-centered N = 2 BPS black holes:
a double copy description, JHEP 04 (2017) 037, [1611.04409].
[36] A. Luna, R. Monteiro, I. Nicholson, A. Ochirov, D. O’Connell, N. Westerberg
et al., Perturbative spacetimes from Yang-Mills theory, JHEP 04 (2017) 069,
[1611.07508].
[37] W. D. Goldberger, S. G. Prabhu and J. O. Thompson, Classical gluon and
graviton radiation from the bi-adjoint scalar double copy, 1705.09263.
133

[38] D. S. Berman, E. Chac´on, A. Luna and C. D. White, The self-dual classical
double copy, and the Eguchi-Hanson instanton, 1809.04063.
[39] V. P. Nair, A Current Algebra for Some Gauge Theory Amplitudes, Phys.
Lett. B214 (1988) 215–218.
[40] E. Witten, Perturbative gauge theory as a string theory in twistor space,
Commun. Math. Phys. 252 (2004) 189–258, [hep-th/0312171].
[41] N. Berkovits, An Alternative string theory in twistor space for N=4
superYang-Mills, Phys. Rev. Lett. 93 (2004) 011601, [hep-th/0402045].
[42] N. Berkovits and E. Witten, Conformal supergravity in twistor-string theory,
JHEP 08 (2004) 009, [hep-th/0406051].
[43] R. Roiban, M. Spradlin and A. Volovich, On the tree level S matrix of
Yang-Mills theory, Phys. Rev. D70 (2004) 026009, [hep-th/0403190].
[44] D. Skinner, Twistor Strings for N=8 Supergravity, 1301.0868.
[45] F. Cachazo, S. He and E. Y. Yuan, Scattering equations and
Kawai-Lewellen-Tye orthogonality, Phys. Rev. D90 (2014) 065001,
[1306.6575].
[46] F. Cachazo, S. He and E. Y. Yuan, Scattering of Massless Particles in
Arbitrary Dimensions, Phys. Rev. Lett. 113 (2014) 171601, [1307.2199].
[47] F. Cachazo, S. He and E. Y. Yuan, Scattering of Massless Particles: Scalars,
Gluons and Gravitons, JHEP 07 (2014) 033, [1309.0885].
[48] L. Mason and D. Skinner, Ambitwistor strings and the scattering equations,
JHEP 07 (2014) 048, [1311.2564].
134

[49] K. Ohmori, Worldsheet Geometries of Ambitwistor String, JHEP 06 (2015)
075, [1504.02675].
[50] E. Casali, Y. Geyer, L. Mason, R. Monteiro and K. A. Roehrig, New
Ambitwistor String Theories, JHEP 11 (2015) 038, [1506.08771].
[51] T. Azevedo and O. T. Engelund, Ambitwistor formulations of R2 gravity and
(DF)2 gauge theories, 1707.02192.
[52] T. Adamo, E. Casali and D. Skinner, Ambitwistor strings and the scattering
equations at one loop, JHEP 04 (2014) 104, [1312.3828].
[53] E. Casali and P. Tourkine, Infrared behaviour of the one-loop scattering
equations and supergravity integrands, JHEP 04 (2015) 013, [1412.3787].
[54] T. Adamo and E. Casali, Scattering equations, supergravity integrands, and
pure spinors, JHEP 05 (2015) 120, [1502.06826].
[55] Y. Geyer, L. Mason, R. Monteiro and P. Tourkine, Loop Integrands for
Scattering Amplitudes from the Riemann Sphere, Phys. Rev. Lett. 115 (2015)
121603, [1507.00321].
[56] Y. Geyer, L. Mason, R. Monteiro and P. Tourkine, One-loop amplitudes on the
Riemann sphere, JHEP 03 (2016) 114, [1511.06315].
[57] Y. Geyer, L. Mason, R. Monteiro and P. Tourkine, Two-Loop Scattering
Amplitudes from the Riemann Sphere, Phys. Rev. D94 (2016) 125029,
[1607.08887].
[58] Y. Geyer and R. Monteiro, Gluons and gravitons at one loop from ambitwistor
strings, JHEP 03 (2018) 068, [1711.09923].
135

[59] Y. Geyer and R. Monteiro, Two-Loop Scattering Amplitudes from Ambitwistor
Strings: from Genus Two to the Nodal Riemann Sphere, 1805.05344.
[60] E. Casali and P. Tourkine, On the null origin of the ambitwistor string, JHEP
11 (2016) 036, [1606.05636].
[61] E. Casali, Y. Herfray and P. Tourkine, The complex null string, Galilean
conformal algebra and scattering equations, 1707.09900.
[62] Y. Geyer, A. E. Lipstein and L. J. Mason, Ambitwistor Strings in Four
Dimensions, Phys. Rev. Lett. 113 (2014) 081602, [1404.6219].
[63] I. Bandos, Twistor/ambitwistor strings and null-superstrings in spacetime of
D=4, 10 and 11 dimensions, JHEP 09 (2014) 086, [1404.1299].
[64] N. Berkovits, Inﬁnite Tension Limit of the Pure Spinor Superstring, JHEP 03
(2014) 017, [1311.4156].
[65] O. Chandia and B. C. Vallilo, Ambitwistor pure spinor string in a type II
supergravity background, JHEP 06 (2015) 206, [1505.05122].
[66] R. L. Jusinskas, Notes on the ambitwistor pure spinor string, JHEP 05 (2016)
116, [1604.02915].
[67] T. Azevedo and R. L. Jusinskas, Connecting the ambitwistor and the
sectorized heterotic strings, JHEP 10 (2017) 216, [1707.08840].
[68] R. A. Reid-Edwards, Ambitwistor String Theory in the Operator Formalism,
JHEP 06 (2016) 084, [1511.08406].
[69] R. A. Reid-Edwards and D. A. Riccombeni, A Superstring Field Theory for
Supergravity, 1701.05495.
136

[70] K. A. Roehrig and D. Skinner, A Gluing Operator for the Ambitwistor String,
JHEP 01 (2018) 069, [1709.03262].
[71] N. Berkovits and M. Lize, Field theory actions for ambitwistor string and
superstring, 1807.07661.
[72] T. Adamo, E. Casali and D. Skinner, Perturbative gravity at null inﬁnity,
Class. Quant. Grav. 31 (2014) 225008, [1405.5122].
[73] Y. Geyer, A. E. Lipstein and L. Mason, Ambitwistor strings at null inﬁnity
and (subleading) soft limits, Class. Quant. Grav. 32 (2015) 055003,
[1406.1462].
[74] A. E. Lipstein, Soft Theorems from Conformal Field Theory, JHEP 06 (2015)
166, [1504.01364].
[75] T. Adamo and E. Casali, Perturbative gauge theory at null inﬁnity, Phys. Rev.
D91 (2015) 125022, [1504.02304].
[76] T. Adamo, R. Monteiro and M. F. Paulos, Space-time CFTs from the
Riemann sphere, 1703.04589.
[77] T. Adamo, E. Casali and D. Skinner, A Worldsheet Theory for Supergravity,
JHEP 02 (2015) 116, [1409.5656].
[78] S. W. Hawking, Particle Creation by Black Holes, in 1st Oxford Conference on
Quantum Gravity Chilton, England, February 15-16, 1974, pp. 219–267, 1975.
[79] D. B. Fairlie and D. E. Roberts, DUAL MODELS WITHOUT TACHYONS -
A NEW APPROACH, Unpublished (1972) .
[80] D. E. Roberts, Mathematical structure of dual amplitudes, Doctoral thesis,
Durham University (1972) .
137

[81] D. B. Fairlie, A Coding of Real Null Four-Momenta into World-Sheet
Coordinates, Adv. Math. Phys. 2009 (2009) 284689, [0805.2263].
[82] D. J. Gross and P. F. Mende, The High-Energy Behavior of String Scattering
Amplitudes, Phys. Lett. B197 (1987) 129–134.
[83] D. J. Gross and P. F. Mende, String Theory Beyond the Planck Scale, Nucl.
Phys. B303 (1988) 407–454.
[84] L. Dolan and P. Goddard, The Polynomial Form of the Scattering Equations,
JHEP 07 (2014) 029, [1402.7374].
[85] E. Witten, Superstring Perturbation Theory Revisited, 1209.5461.
[86] F. Cachazo, S. He and E. Y. Yuan, Einstein-Yang-Mills Scattering Amplitudes
From Scattering Equations, JHEP 01 (2015) 121, [1409.8256].
[87] F. Cachazo, S. He and E. Y. Yuan, Scattering Equations and Matrices: From
Einstein To Yang-Mills, DBI and NLSM, JHEP 07 (2015) 149, [1412.3479].
[88] J. Isenberg, P. B. Yasskin and P. S. Green, Nonselfdual Gauge Fields, Phys.
Lett. 78B (1978) 462–464.
[89] E. Witten, An Interpretation of Classical Yang-Mills Theory, Phys. Lett. 77B
(1978) 394–398.
[90] C. LeBrun, Spaces of complex null geodesics in complex-riemannian geometry,
Transactions of the American Mathematical Society 278 (1983) 209–231.
[91] R. J. Baston and L. J. Mason, Conformal Gravity, the Einstein Equations and
Spaces of Complex Null Geodesics, Class. Quant. Grav. 4 (1987) 815–826.
[92] C. G. Callan, Jr., E. J. Martinec, M. J. Perry and D. Friedan, Strings in
Background Fields, Nucl. Phys. B262 (1985) 593–609.
138

[93] E. S. Fradkin and A. A. Tseytlin, Quantum String Theory Eﬀective Action,
Nucl. Phys. B261 (1985) 1–27.
[94] T. Banks, D. Nemeschansky and A. Sen, Dilaton Coupling and BRST
Quantization of Bosonic Strings, Nucl. Phys. B277 (1986) 67–86.
[95] O. R. Baldwin and G. B. Jeﬀery, The relativity theory of plane waves,
Proc.Roy.Soc.Lond. A111 (1926) 95.
[96] J. Ehlers and W. Kundt, Exact solutions of the gravitational ﬁeld equations, in
Gravitation, An Introduction to Current Research (L. Witten, ed.), p. 49.
Wiley: New York, 1962.
[97] J. B. Griﬃths, Colliding plane waves in general relativity. Oxford, UK:
Clarendon (1991) 232 p. (Oxford mathematical monographs), 1991.
[98] H. Stephani, D. Kramer, M. A. H. MacCallum, C. Hoenselaers and E. Herlt,
Exact solutions of Einstein’s ﬁeld equations. Cambridge University Press,
2 ed., 2004.
[99] M. Blau, Plane waves and Penrose limits, tech. rep., Universit´e de Neuchˆatel,
2011.
[100] A. Einstein and N. Rosen, On Gravitational waves, J. Franklin Inst. 223
(1937) 43–54.
[101] H. W. Brinkmann, Einstein spaces which are mapped conformally on each
other, Math. Ann. 94 (1925) 119–145.
[102] R. Penrose, A Remarkable property of plane waves in general relativity, Rev.
Mod. Phys. 37 (1965) 215–220.
139

[103] H. Bondi and F. A. E. Pirani, Gravitational Waves in General Relativity. 13:
Caustic Property of Plane Waves, Proc. Roy. Soc. Lond. A421 (1989)
395–410.
[104] H. Bondi, F. A. E. Pirani and I. Robinson, Gravitational waves in general
relativity. 3. Exact plane waves, Proc. Roy. Soc. Lond. A251 (1959) 519–533.
[105] V. B. Braginsky and L. P. Grishchuk, Kinematic Resonance and Memory
Eﬀect in Free Mass Gravitational Antennas, Sov. Phys. JETP 62 (1985)
427–430.
[106] V. B. Braginsky and K. S. Thorne, Gravitational-wave bursts with memory
and experimental prospects, Nature 327 (1987) 123–125.
[107] M. Ludvigsen, Geodesic deviation at null inﬁnity and the physical eﬀects of
very long wave gravitational radiation, Gen. Rel. Grav. 21 (1989) 1205–1212.
[108] P. M. Zhang, C. Duval, G. W. Gibbons and P. A. Horvathy, The Memory
Eﬀect for Plane Gravitational Waves, 1704.05997.
[109] P. M. Zhang, C. Duval, G. W. Gibbons and P. A. Horvathy, Soft Gravitons &
the Memory Eﬀect for Plane Gravitational Waves, 1705.01378.
[110] H. R. Reiss, Absorption of light by light, J.Math.Phys. 3 (1962) 59–67.
[111] L. S. Brown and T. W. B. Kibble, Interaction of Intense Laser Beams with
Electrons, Phys. Rev. 133 (1964) A705–A719.
[112] A. Ilderton and G. Torgrimsson, Scattering in plane-wave backgrounds:
infra-red eﬀects and pole structure, Phys. Rev. D87 (2013) 085040,
[1210.6840].
[113] S. R. Coleman, Nonabelian Plane Waves, Phys. Lett. B70 (1977) 59–60.
140

[114] L. Bieri and D. Garﬁnkle, An electromagnetic analogue of gravitational wave
memory, Class. Quant. Grav. 30 (2013) 195009, [1307.5098].
[115] A. Abouelsaood, C. G. Callan, Jr., C. R. Nappi and S. A. Yost, Open Strings
in Background Gauge Fields, Nucl. Phys. B280 (1987) 599–624.
[116] T. Azevedo and R. L. Jusinskas, Background constraints in the inﬁnite tension
limit of the heterotic string, JHEP 08 (2016) 133, [1607.06805].
[117] M. B. Green and J. H. Schwarz, Anomaly Cancellation in Supersymmetric
D=10 Gauge Theory and Superstring Theory, Phys. Lett. 149B (1984)
117–122.
[118] N. A. Nekrasov, Lectures on curved beta-gamma systems, pure spinors, and
anomalies, hep-th/0511008.
[119] G. W. Moore and P. C. Nelson, The Etiology of σ Model Anomalies, Commun.
Math. Phys. 100 (1985) 83.
[120] C. M. Hull and E. Witten, Supersymmetric Sigma Models and the Heterotic
String, Phys. Lett. B160 (1985) 398–402.
[121] E. Witten, World sheet corrections via D instantons, JHEP 02 (2000) 030,
[hep-th/9907041].
[122] C. M. Hull and P. K. Townsend, World Sheet Supersymmetry and Anomaly
Cancellation in the Heterotic String, Phys. Lett. B178 (1986) 187–192.
[123] O. Chandia and B. C. Vallilo, On-shell type II supergravity from the
ambitwistor pure spinor string, Class. Quant. Grav. 33 (2016) 185003,
[1511.03329].
141

[124] O. Chandia and B. C. Vallilo, Ambitwistor superstring in the Green–Schwarz
formulation, Eur. Phys. J. C77 (2017) 473, [1612.01806].
[125] D. Friedan, E. J. Martinec and S. H. Shenker, Conformal Invariance,
Supersymmetry and String Theory, Nucl. Phys. B271 (1986) 93–165.
[126] E. P. Verlinde and H. L. Verlinde, Multiloop Calculations in Covariant
Superstring Theory, Phys. Lett. B192 (1987) 95–102.
[127] H. Kataoka and H. Sato, Dilaton incoming vertices of the closed superstring
and the heterotic string, Phys. Lett. B245 (1990) 31–34.
[128] F. G. Friedlander, The Wave Equation on a Curved Space-Time. Cambridge
University Press, 1975.
[129] L. J. Mason, On Ward’s integral formula for the wave equation in plane wave
space-times, Twistor Newsletter 28 (1989) 17–19.
[130] V. Dinu, T. Heinzl and A. Ilderton, Infra-Red Divergences in Plane Wave
Backgrounds, Phys. Rev. D86 (2012) 085037, [1206.3957].
[131] R. S. Ward, Progressing waves in ﬂat space-time and in plane wave
space-times, Class. Quant. Grav. 4 (1987) 775–778.
[132] G. W. Gibbons, Quantized Fields Propagating in Plane Wave Space-Times,
Commun. Math. Phys. 45 (1975) 191–202.
[133] J. Garriga and E. Verdaguer, Scattering of quantum particles by gravitational
plane waves, Phys. Rev. D43 (1991) 391–401.
[134] C. Crnkovic and E. Witten, Covariant description of canonical formalism in
geometrical theories, in Three Hundred Years of Gravitation (S. Hawking and
W. Israel, eds.), p. 676. Cambridge University Press, 1986.
142

[135] P. G¨unther and V. W¨unsch, Maxwellsche Gleichungen und Huygenssches
Prinzip I, Mathematische Nachrichten 63 (1974) 97–121.
[136] P. G¨unther, Huygen’s Principle and Hyperbolic Diﬀerential Equations.
Academic Press, San Diego, 1988.
[137] A. I. Harte, Tails of plane wave spacetimes: Wave-wave scattering in general
relativity, Phys. Rev. D88 (2013) 084059, [1309.5020].
[138] G. Papadopoulos, J. G. Russo and A. A. Tseytlin, Solvable model of strings in
a time dependent plane wave background, Class. Quant. Grav. 20 (2003)
969–1016, [hep-th/0211289].
[139] C. Cheung and G. N. Remmen, Twofold Symmetries of the Pure Gravity
Action, JHEP 01 (2017) 104, [1612.03927].
[140] D. M. Wolkow, Uber eine Klasse von Losungen der Diracschen Gleichung, Z.
Phys. 94 (1935) 250–260.
[141] A. I. Harte and T. D. Drivas, Caustics and wave propagation in curved
spacetimes, Phys. Rev. D85 (2012) 124039, [1202.0540].
[142] R. Penrose, Any geometry has a plane-wave limit, in Diﬀerential Geometry
and Relativity (M. Cahen and M. Flato, eds.), p. 271. Reidel: Dordrecht, 1976.
[143] L. Alvarez-Gaume, D. Z. Freedman and S. Mukhi, The Background Field
Method and the Ultraviolet Structure of the Supersymmetric Nonlinear Sigma
Model, Annals Phys. 134 (1981) 85.
[144] E. Braaten, T. L. Curtright and C. K. Zachos, Torsion and Geometrostasis in
Nonlinear Sigma Models, Nucl. Phys. B260 (1985) 630.
143

[145] D. Amati and C. Klimcik, Nonperturbative Computation of the Weyl Anomaly
for a Class of Nontrivial Backgrounds, Phys. Lett. B219 (1989) 443–447.
[146] G. T. Horowitz and A. R. Steif, Space-Time Singularities in String Theory,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 64 (1990) 260.
[147] P. G. O. Freund and M. A. Rubin, Dynamics of Dimensional Reduction, Phys.
Lett. 97B (1980) 233–235.
[148] J. H. Schwarz, Covariant Field Equations of Chiral N=2 D=10 Supergravity,
Nucl. Phys. B226 (1983) 269.
[149] M. Blau, J. M. Figueroa-O’Farrill, C. Hull and G. Papadopoulos, A New
maximally supersymmetric background of IIB superstring theory, JHEP 01
(2002) 047, [hep-th/0110242].
[150] M. Blau, J. M. Figueroa-O’Farrill, C. Hull and G. Papadopoulos, Penrose
limits and maximal supersymmetry, Class. Quant. Grav. 19 (2002) L87–L95,
[hep-th/0201081].
[151] R. R. Metsaev and A. A. Tseytlin, Type IIB superstring action in AdS(5) x
S**5 background, Nucl. Phys. B533 (1998) 109–126, [hep-th/9805028].
[152] R. R. Metsaev, Type IIB Green-Schwarz superstring in plane wave
Ramond-Ramond background, Nucl. Phys. B625 (2002) 70–96,
[hep-th/0112044].
[153] R. R. Metsaev and A. A. Tseytlin, Exactly solvable model of superstring in
Ramond-Ramond plane wave background, Phys. Rev. D65 (2002) 126004,
[hep-th/0202109].
[154] I. Bena, J. Polchinski and R. Roiban, Hidden symmetries of the AdS(5) x
S**5 superstring, Phys. Rev. D69 (2004) 046002, [hep-th/0305116].
144

[155] N. Berkovits, Quantum consistency of the superstring in AdS(5) x S**5
background, JHEP 03 (2005) 041, [hep-th/0411170].
[156] G. Arutyunov and S. Frolov, Superstrings on AdS(4) x CP**3 as a Coset
Sigma-model, JHEP 09 (2008) 129, [0806.4940].
[157] B. Stefanski, jr, Green-Schwarz action for Type IIA strings on AdS(4) x
CP**3, Nucl. Phys. B808 (2009) 80–87, [0806.4948].
[158] J. M. Maldacena, The Large N limit of superconformal ﬁeld theories and
supergravity, Int. J. Theor. Phys. 38 (1999) 1113–1133, [hep-th/9711200].
[159] S. S. Gubser, I. R. Klebanov and A. M. Polyakov, Gauge theory correlators
from noncritical string theory, Phys. Lett. B428 (1998) 105–114,
[hep-th/9802109].
[160] E. Witten, Anti-de Sitter space and holography, Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 2
(1998) 253–291, [hep-th/9802150].
[161] D. E. Berenstein, J. M. Maldacena and H. S. Nastase, Strings in ﬂat space and
pp waves from N=4 superYang-Mills, JHEP 04 (2002) 013, [hep-th/0202021].
[162] F. Delduc, M. Magro and B. Vicedo, An integrable deformation of the
AdS5xS5 superstring action, Phys. Rev. Lett. 112 (2014) 051601, [1309.5850].
[163] G. Arutyunov, S. Frolov, B. Hoare, R. Roiban and A. A. Tseytlin, Scale
invariance of the η-deformed AdS5 × S5 superstring, T-duality and modiﬁed
type II equations, Nucl. Phys. B903 (2016) 262–303, [1511.05795].
[164] L. Wulﬀand A. A. Tseytlin, Kappa-symmetry of superstring sigma model and
generalized 10d supergravity equations, JHEP 06 (2016) 174, [1605.04884].
145

[165] J. M. Maldacena and H. Ooguri, Strings in AdS(3) and SL(2,R) WZW model
1.: The Spectrum, J. Math. Phys. 42 (2001) 2929–2960, [hep-th/0001053].
[166] J. M. Maldacena, H. Ooguri and J. Son, Strings in AdS(3) and the SL(2,R)
WZW model. Part 2. Euclidean black hole, J. Math. Phys. 42 (2001)
2961–2977, [hep-th/0005183].
[167] J. M. Maldacena and H. Ooguri, Strings in AdS(3) and the SL(2,R) WZW
model. Part 3. Correlation functions, Phys. Rev. D65 (2002) 106006,
[hep-th/0111180].
[168] O. Jofre and C. A. Nunez, Strings in plane wave backgrounds revisited, Phys.
Rev. D50 (1994) 5232–5240, [hep-th/9311187].
[169] L. Dolan and E. Witten, Vertex operators for AdS(3) background with
Ramond-Ramond ﬂux, JHEP 11 (1999) 003, [hep-th/9910205].
[170] N. Berkovits and O. Chandia, Superstring vertex operators in an AdS(5) x
S**5 background, Nucl. Phys. B596 (2001) 185–196, [hep-th/0009168].
[171] O. Chandia, A. Mikhailov and B. C. Vallilo, A construction of integrated
vertex operator in the pure spinor sigma-model in AdS5 × S5, JHEP 11 (2013)
124, [1306.0145].
[172] J. A. Minahan, Holographic three-point functions for short operators, JHEP
07 (2012) 187, [1206.3129].
[173] T. Bargheer, J. A. Minahan and R. Pereira, Computing Three-Point Functions
for Short Operators, JHEP 03 (2014) 096, [1311.7461].
[174] J. A. Minahan and R. Pereira, Three-point correlators from string amplitudes:
Mixing and Regge spins, JHEP 04 (2015) 134, [1410.4746].
146

[175] N. Berkovits and T. Fleury, Harmonic Superspace from the AdS5 × S5 Pure
Spinor Formalism, JHEP 03 (2013) 022, [1212.3296].
[176] T. Azevedo and N. Berkovits, Open-closed superstring amplitudes using vertex
operators in AdS5 × S5, JHEP 02 (2015) 107, [1412.5921].
[177] N. R. Constable, D. Z. Freedman, M. Headrick, S. Minwalla, L. Motl,
A. Postnikov et al., PP wave string interactions from perturbative Yang-Mills
theory, JHEP 07 (2002) 017, [hep-th/0205089].
[178] M. Spradlin and A. Volovich, Superstring interactions in a p p wave
background, Phys. Rev. D66 (2002) 086004, [hep-th/0204146].
[179] T. Adamo, Gravity with a cosmological constant from rational curves, JHEP
11 (2015) 098, [1508.02554].
[180] A. Einstein, N¨aherungsweise Integration der Feldgleichungen der Gravitation,
Sitzungsberichte der K¨oniglich Preußischen Akademie der Wissenschaften
(Berlin), Seite 688-696. (1916) .
[181] T. Adamo, E. Casali, L. Mason and S. Nekovar, Plane wave backgrounds and
colour-kinematics duality, 1810.05115.
[182] R. Blumenhagen, D. L¨ust and S. Theisen, Basic concepts of string theory.
Theoretical and Mathematical Physics. Springer, Heidelberg, Germany, 2013,
10.1007/978-3-642-29497-6.
[183] I. Ya. Arefeva, L. D. Faddeev and A. A. Slavnov, Generating Functional for
the s Matrix in Gauge Theories, Theor. Math. Phys. 21 (1975) 1165.
[184] A. Jevicki and C.-k. Lee, The S Matrix Generating Functional and Eﬀective
Action, Phys. Rev. D37 (1988) 1485.
147

[185] A. A. Rosly and K. G. Selivanov, On amplitudes in selfdual sector of
Yang-Mills theory, Phys. Lett. B399 (1997) 135–140, [hep-th/9611101].
[186] P. C. Aichelburg and R. U. Sexl, On the Gravitational ﬁeld of a massless
particle, Gen. Rel. Grav. 2 (1971) 303–312.
[187] R. Penrose, The geometry of impulsive gravitational waves, in General
relativity: Papers in honour of J.L. Synge (L. O’Raifeartaigh, ed.),
pp. 101–115. Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1972.
[188] T. Dray and G. ’t Hooft, The Gravitational Shock Wave of a Massless
Particle, Nucl. Phys. B253 (1985) 173–188.
[189] C. Klimcik, Quantum Field Theory in Gravitational Shock Wave Background,
Phys. Lett. B208 (1988) 373–380.
[190] V. Ferrari, P. Pendenza and G. Veneziano, Beamlike Gravitational Waves and
Their Geodesics, Gen. Rel. Grav. 20 (1988) 1185–1191.
148

