 
 
17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore 
Page 6 
 
Module 1 
INTRODUCTION TO MECHATRONIC SYSTEMS 
CONTENTS 
1.1 Introduction 
1.2 Definition of Mechatronics 
1.3 Multi-disciplinary scenario. 
1.4 Origin of Mechatronic system. 
1.5 Evaluation of Mechatronics. 
1.6.1Advantages of Mechatronic Systems 
1.6 .2 Disadvantages of Mechatronic Systems. 
1.7 Generalized measurement system 
1.8 Functions of each units used in measurement system 
1.9 Microprocessor based controllers: 
1.9.1 Block diagram of Mechatronic System 
1.9.2 Block diagram of working automatic camera 
1.9.3 Block diagram of working automatic washing machine 
1.9.4 Block diagram of working engine management system. 
1.10 PLC (Programmable Logic Controller). 
OBJECTIVES 
 To understand the concepts of mechatronics systems and its applications. 
 To understand the how microprocessor based controllers works. 

 
 
17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore 
Page 7 
 
1.1 Introduction: 
An automation and control method adopting integrated approach to technology has 
become relevant to industries, machinery and consumer engineering products. Most of the 
domestic equipment like automatic washing machines, automatic cameras, digital cameras, 
DVD players, hard disc drives are examples of Mechatronic system which we use without 
bothering to know the technology adopted in it. 
1.2 Definition of Mechatronics: 
Definition 1: 
Mechatronics may be defined as” the complete integration of mechanical system 
with electronics, electrical and computer system into a single system”. 
Definition 2: 
Mechatronics is “the synergistic (Together) combination of mechanical engineering, 
electronic engineering, control engineering and systems thinking in the design of products 
and manufacturing processes” 
Example: automatic washing machine, digital fuel injection system, engine management 
system. Etc., 
1.3 Multi-disciplinary scenario: 
 Mechatronics is the synergistic (Together) combination of mechanical engineering, 
electronic engineering, control engineering and systems thinking in the design of 
products and manufacturing processes”. 
 Multi-disciplinary products are not new; they have been successfully designed and used 
for many years. Most common is the electromechanical system. 
 It employs a sequential design-by-discipline approach. For example in the design of 
electromechanical system three stages of design are adopted. 
 They are design of mechanical system, design of microelectronic system and control 
system. 
 Each design application follows the completion of the previous one. 
 to overcome drawbacks Mechatronics uses concurrent engineering. 

 
 
17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore 
Page 8 
 
1.4 Origin of Mechatronic system: 
 The word Mechatronics was coined by Japanese in the late 1970‟s to describe the 
philosophy adopted in the design of subsystem of electromechanical systems. 
 The field of Mechatronics received the international recognitions only in the last few years. 
 The field has been derived by rapid progress in the field of microelectronics. 
 At R&D level the following areas have been recognized under Mechatronics discipline. 
a) Motion control actuators and sensors 
b) Micro devices and optoelectronics 
c) Robotics 
d) Automotive systems 
e) Modeling and design 
f) System integration 
g) Manufacturing 
h) Vibration and noise control. 
1.5 Evaluation of Mechatronics: 
The technology has evolved through several stages that are termed as 
levels. The evolution levels of Mechatronics are: 
a. Primary level Mechatronics (first) 
b. Secondary level Mechatronics (second) 
c. Tertiary level Mechatronics (third) 
d. Quaternary level Mechatronics (fourth) 
a. Primary level Mechatronics (first): 
 In the early days Mechatronics products were at primary level containing I/O devices such 
as sensors, and actuators that integrated electrical signals with mechanical action at the basic 
control level. 
Examples: electrically controlled fluid valves and relays 
b. Secondary level Mechatronics (second): 
 This level integrates microelectronics into electrically controlled devices. 
Examples: cassette player. 

 
 
17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore 
Page 9 
 
c. Tertiary level Mechatronics (third): 
 This incorporates advances feedback functions into control strategy, thereby enhancing the 
quality in terms of sophistication. 
 Mechatronics system at this level is called ‘smart system’. 
 The control strategy includes microelectronics, microprocessor and other „application 
specific integrated circuits‟ (ASIC). 
Examples: DVD player, CD drives, automatic washing machine, CD drives, etc. 
d. Quaternary level Mechatronics (fourth): 
This level includes intelligent control in Mechatronics system. 
The level attempts to improve smartness a step ahead by introducing intelligence and fault 
detection and isolation (FDI) capability system. 
Examples: artificial neural network and fuzzy logic technologies. 
1.6.1 Advantages and disadvantages of Mechatronics: 
Advantages: 
1. The products produced are cost effective and very good quality. 
2. High degree of flexibility 
3. Greater extent of machine utilization 
4. Greater productivity 
5. High life expected by proper maintenance. 
6. The integration of sensor and control system in a complex system reduces capital expenses. 
1.6.2 Disadvantages: 
1. Higher initial cost of the system. 
2. Imperative to have Knowledge of different engineering fields for design and implementation. 
3. It is expenses to incorporate Mechatronics approaches to existing/old systems. 
4. Specific problem of various systems will have to be addressed separately and properly. 
1.6.3 Characteristics of Mechatronic system: 
1. High quality product. 
2. Safe. 

 
 
17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore 
Page 10 
 
3. Low cost. 
4. Portable produced quickly 
5. Serviceability, maintainability and upgradeability. 

 
 
17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore 
Page 11 
 
1.6.4 Applications of Mechatronic systems: 
The areas are: 
1. Automotive machines. 
2. Fax and photocopier mechanics 
3. Dishwashers. 
4. Automatic washing machine 
5. Air conditioners, elevator controls. 
6. Documents scanners 
7. IC manufacturing systems. 
8. Robotics employed in welding, nuclear inspection, painting etc., 
9. VCRs and CD Players. 
Measurement system: a group of device/element arranged in rational manner to achieve the 
act of measurement. 
Measurand: is a numerical quantity of physical phenomenon such as force, 
quantity, displacement, time, velocity, etc, 
Measurement: is a represent of physical phenomenon in numerical values. 
1.7 Generalized measurement system: 
Generally a measurement system consists of 3 basic elements. 
1. Sensor/transducer. 
2. Signal conditioner. 
3. Display/read out devices. 
In addition to the above, electrical power is also required. 

 
 
17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore 
Page 12 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.9 Functions of each elements of measurement system: 
1.9.1. Sensor/transducer unit: 
 The heart of any measurement or control system is sensor/transducer. 
 Sensor/transducer is a device it converts the one form of energy to another form. 
 Sensor/transducer it senses the physical phenomenon to be measure and transform it from 
one form to another form (generally electrical form). 
 The output of this unit is input to the signal conditioner which is next element. 

 
 
17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore 
Page 13 
 
 
 
 
Fig 2: Elements of measurement system 
 
1.9.2. 
Signal conditioner unit: 
 This unit senses the output signals of sensor and converts it into suitable, measurable 
level of signals. 
 An amplifier is acts as a signal conditioner in the figure. 
The following functions of signal conditioners are: 
a. Amplification of signals: the level of signals from the transducer may be of low level for the 
next use and hence need to be amplified (increased). 
b. Attenuation: similarly the level of signals from the transducer may be of higher level for the 
next use and hence need be attenuated (decreased). 
c. Filtering: signals from the transducer may contain some other undesirable signals which need 
to be filtered or eliminated before it is used. Otherwise a corrupt output will be generated. 
d. Analog to digital conversion (ADC): the signals from the transducer may be analog in nature 
and if these signals were to be used as input to electronic system/computer system, they need to 
be converting to digital form. Similarly sometimes we use DAC. 
1.9.3. 
Display/read out unit: 
 It displays the output of signal conditioner unit and this display will be the quantitative form 
of measurand. 
 Display unit may be either of analog (dial gauge) and digital (LED) type. 

 
 
17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore 
Page 14 
 
Example of Measurement system: Digital thermometer principle 
 
 
Fig 3: Digital thermometer principle 
1.9.4 Control system: 
The word control means „to regulate‟, „manipulate‟, and „command‟. 
Examples: 
1. A container is to be filled with water from a tap. Once the water fills the container, the valve is 
closed (that is spilling of water is avoided) by observation from a human being who senses the 
filling and based on the observation closes the valve. 
2. The driver applies the brake of the vehicle, when he/she observes red traffic light. 
Definition of Control system: 
A group of devices/elements which maintains the required output based on the predefined 
value by controlling the parameter responsible for output. 
Classification of control system: 
1. Open loop control system (NO FEEDBACK control system). 
2. Closed loop control system (WITH FEEDBACK control system). 
1. Open loop control system (NO FEEDBACK control system): 
In which the output is dependent on the input, but input is independent of output is called 
open loop control system. 
 
 
Fig 4: Open Loop System 

 
 
17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore 
Page 15 
 
Example: 
1. ON/OFF of an electric lamp: electric lamps are used for lighting the lamp. ON/OFF control 
is carried out with the help of a switch and the switch is generally operated by an operator 
depending on the amount of light that exist in that area. 
If the switch is ON, the lamp is glow. If the person operating the switch does not put OFF of 
the switch, the lamp remain ON until he switched OFF. So it is called open loop control 
system. 
2. Control the temperature of the room with room heater: the amount of heat generated by a 
room heater depends on the amount of input power controlled by a regulator. 
If the power is switch ON, the power supplied to the heater continues and temperature of the 
room goes on increasing immaterial of whether heat is required in the room or not. Here 
person is go and OFF the power supply switch and there by cooling the temperature of the 
room is decreasing. 
Advantages of open loop control system: 
1. Less costly. 
2. Relatively simple. 
3. Good reliability. 
4. Easy maintenance. 
5. Inherently stable. 
Disadvantages of open loop control system: 
1. Inaccurate since there is no correction of error. 
2. Relatively slow in response to change in demand. 
3. The control depends on the human judgment. 
4. Often leads to waste. 
5. Any change in system component not to be taken care automatically. 
2. Closed loop control system (WITH FEEDBACK control system): 
In which input is depend on the output. i.e., variation in the output influences the input by 
some means of controlling on the input is called a closed loop system. 

 
 
17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore 
Page 16 
 
 
 
Fig 5: Closed loop control system 
 
Elements of closed loop control system: 
The basic elements of a closed loop control system are: 
1. Comparison element. 
2. Control unit. 
3. Correction unit. 
4. Process unit. 
5. Feedback unit. 
Functions of each elements of a closed loop system: 
Comparison element: this unit compares the reference value with feedback value and 
produces an error signal. 
Error = reference value – feedback value 
Control unit: Control unit analyses the error signal and decides what action is to be taken. 
Correction unit: the modified signal from the control unit will be received by the correction 
unit which produces a change in the process to correct or change the controlled condition. 
Process unit: process unit is the unit which is being controlled. 
Examples: 
1. Hand reaching an object.  
 

 
 
17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore 
Page 17 
 
 This is an example of closed loop control system. 
 A person wants to reach for an object. 
 Position of the object is given as reference, feedback signals and the eyes compares the 
actual position of the hands with reference to the position of the object. 
 Error signal is given to the brain. 
 Brain manipulates this error and gives signals to the hands. 
 This process continues till the hand reaches the object. 
2. Speed control of an automobile: 
 
Fig 6: Closed loop control system 
 
 The driver observes the speedometer, and based on the speed shown by the speedometer he 
decides whether the fuel supply should be increased or decreased or gear change is to be made. 
 Here speed shown a speedometer is a feedback. A feedback signal from the eye compares 
the desired speed in the memory of the driver. 
 Error signals are given to brain. Brain manipulates the error signals and gives it ton hand and 
leg and increase the fuel supply if the speed is less than the desired speed, otherwise decrease the 
fuel supply. 
 Changing of gear and increase or decrease of fuel supply, depends on whether it an upward 
or downward gradient respectively. 
3. Water level control of overhead tanks: 
 
 
Fig 7: Water level controller

 
 
17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore 
Page 18 
 
 The overhead tank has a fixed float (sensor) fixed at the desired height inside the tanks. 
 The level of the water is sensed by the float. The float has an electrical contactor, which is 
positioned between fixed connectors. 
 The inflow regulation valve is electrically operated. The electrical circuit of the system is 
closed when the float touches the fixed connectors and open when it is not making contact with 
it. 
 When the level of water in the tank falls, the float moves down and makes contact with fixed 
contactor and circuit is closed and pump is switched ON. 
 When the level of water rises the float moves up and breaks the circuit and pump is switches 
OFF. Thereby the required level of water is maintained in overhead tank. 
 
3. Room temperature controller (manual): 
Fig 8: Room Temperature Controller 
 In this case the required room temperature will be decided by person in the room and thus is 
compared mentally. 
 Based on whether the room temperature is high or low, the person will operate the switch of 
the room heater till the desired or comfortable temperature is achieved. 
 Block diagram is illustrating the above process. 
Advantages of closed loop control system: 
1. More accurate. 
2. Any change in system component can be taken care automatically. 
3. Use of feedback system response is relatively insensitive to external disturbances and internal 
variations in system parameters 
 

 
 
17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore 
Page 19 
 
Disadvantages of closed loop control system: 
1. Expensive and complicated to construction. 
Differences between open loop control system and closed loop control system 
 
 
Sequential control system: 
 Control of sequences of operations in a sequence is called as a sequence control system. 
 Working of washing machine is a sequential control system wherein control is exercised 
based on event, or parameter etc., i.e., control action will be executed one after another event. 
 The events to be carried out in a domestic washing machine are soaking, washing, rinsing 
and drying. 
 Each of these operations involves a number of steps. 
1.9 Microprocessor based controllers: 
1.9.1 Introduction: 
Recent development in the large scale integration (LSI), VLSI, SVLSI of semiconductor devises 
and the resulting availability of inexpensive microprocessor, memory chips and analog to digital 
converters (ADC) have made it possible to use computer as integral part of control system 
without much increase in cost. Some of the application areas of microprocessor and 
microcontroller based control system include; Automatic washing machine, automatic cameras, 
ATM, Computers, Automatic engine management systems, Disc drivers in system, Industrial 
automations, etc., 

 
 
17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore 
Page 20 
 
1.9.2 Block diagram of a microprocessor based control system: 
 
Fig 9: Microprocessor based control system 
 Using data acquisition system (DAS) which converts the analog signals, from various 
sensors to digital signals that can be processed by a microprocessor. 
 A keyboard in the system allow the user to enter set point values which are stored in the 
memory and the feedback of the current values of the process variable are into the memory, 
Relays, solenoids values, DAC and other actuators are used to control the process variables using 
the program. 
1.9.3 Block diagram of a microprocessor based processor control system of an 
Automatic camera: 
 
Fig 10: Automatic Camera 

 
 
17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore 
Page 21 
 
Working: 
 Camera is used to photograph an object, the switch is pressed which activates the system. 
 The range sensor sense the distance of the object to be photographed and this data is input to 
microprocessor. 
 The microprocessor in turn sends on output to motor to drive to position the lens for 
focusing. 
 The position of the lens is input to microprocessor. 
 Next the light sensor sends the signal of light intensity on the object to microprocessor. 
 Based on this, signals are sent to control the duration of time the shutter have to be kept 
open. 
 All these action and reaction take place within a fraction of second. 
 Once the film has exposed, the information is input to the microprocessor which gives 
output for driving the motor for advancing the film to drive and the camera is ready for the next 
exposure. 
1.9.4 Block diagram of a microprocessor based processor control system of Automatic 
washing machine: 
 
Fig 10: Automatic Washing Machine 
Working: 
 This is a sequential control system wherein control is exercised based on event, or parameter 
etc., 

 
 
17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore 
Page 22 
 
i.e., control action will be executed one after another event. 
 The events to be carried out in a domestic washing machine are soaking, washing, rinsing 
and drying. 
 Each of these operations involves a number of steps. 
 Soaking involves selection of correct quantity of detergent and water based on the type and 
amount of cloth. 
 This requires opening of the valve to fill the machine drum to required level and closing the 
valve once the required level of water has reached and rotating the drum in either directions for a 
pre-set amount of time during the soaking operation. 
 This is followed by washing which is a time parameter event. 
 Then the rinsing event which measures the pH value using a chemical sensor of water in the 
drum and compares it with supply of water. 
 This event continues till the pH value of the water in the cloth and the supply water are 
equal. 
 Finally drying operation till the minimum percentage of moisture is retained in the cloth. 
 All these events were earlier controlled with the help of mechanical system involving a set 
of camoperated switches. 
 In modern washing machine mechanical system is replaced by digital devices. i.e., a 
microcontroller and the sequence of instruction; program embedded in the microcontrollers. 
 The amount of detergent, amount of water, pH value are all sensed by the sensor and these 
sensed qualities are input to the microcontroller. 
 Based on the input and the software embedded, the corresponding output of the 
microcontroller to carry out the different sequence of operations. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore 
Page 23 
 
1.9.5 Block diagram of Engine management system using microprocessor: 
 
Fig 11: Engine Management System 
The figure illustrates the basic concept of engine management system 
using a microprocessor. 
 Engine management system is used for managing the ignition and air/fuel requirement of an 
IC engine. 
 In the case of four stroke multi cylinder petrol engine, each cylinder has a piston performing 
all the four stroke (suction, compression, working or expansion and exhaust strokes) and the 
piston rod of each 
 Piston connected to common crankshaft, and their power strokes at different time‟s resulting 
power for rotation of the crankshaft. 
 The power and speed of an engine are functions of ignition timing and air/fuel mixture. 
 Hence, by controlling the ignition timing and air/fuel mixture it is possible to control the 
speed and power of the engine. 
 In modern cars the ignition timing, opening and closing of valves at appropriate time, 
quality of air/fuel mixture are controlled by microprocessor with the help of sensors. 
 For ignition timing the crankshaft drives a distributor which makes electrical contacts for 
each spark plug and turns a timing wheel. 
 The timing wheel generates pulses which are input the microprocessor. 

 
 
17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore 
Page 24 
 
 The microprocessor as per the program adjusts the timing at which high voltage pulses are 
sent to the distributor so that spark occurs at the right time resulting in complete combustion of 
fuel. 
 The quantity of air/fuel mixture entering the cylinder during suction stroke is again 
controlled by microprocessor by varying the time for which the solenoid is activated to open the 
intake and throttle position. 
 The quantity of fuel injected into the air stream is sensed by sensor of the mass flow rate 
computed from one method, and then input to the microprocessor which in turn gives an output 
to control the fuel injection. 
1.10 PLC (Programmable Logic Controller): 
 PLC is also called as modern computers. 
 In industry control applications are carried out by specialized devices for interfacing with 
analog and digital devices with restricted instruction sets using programmable logic controllers 
offers more flexibility in developing complex control algorithms and best suited for industrial 
monitoring and control, in production environments. 
They are usually programmed with ladder logic, which is a graphical method of laying out the 
connectivity and logic between system inputs and outputs. 
COUSRE OUTCOMES 
Students will 
1. Understand how mechatronics system works and where it will be applied. 
2. Understand how exactly Automatic Camera, Washing Machine works. 
SELF ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS 
1. Define Mechatronics and list out advantages and disadvantages of mechatronics. 
2. Draw a neat block diagram of a generalized measurement system. 
3. Define control system and different types of control systems. 
4. Enumerate the difference between open loop and closed loop control system. 
5. With a block diagram explain the working of a microprocessor controlled washing 
machine. 
6. 
 With a block diagram explain the working of a microprocessor controlled automatic 

 
 
17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore 
Page 25 
 
camera. 
7. With a block diagram explain the working of a microprocessor controlled engine 
management system. 
8. Explain programmable logic controller. 
FURTHER READING 
1. Mechatronics and Microprocessors, K.P.Ramchandran, G.K.Vijayraghavan, 
M.S.Balasundran, Wiley, 1st Ed, 2009 
2. Mechatronics - Principles, Concepts and applications – Nitaigour and Premchand Mahilik 
Tata McGraw Hill- 2003. 

 
 
17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore 
Page 26 
 
Module 1 
Part 2 
 
TRANSDUCERS AND SENSORS 
CONTENTS 
2.1 Introduction 
2.2 Definition and Classification of Transducer 
2.2.1 Classification of Transducer 
2.3 Definitions and Classification of Sensors 
2.3.1 Classification of Sensors: 
2.4 Light sensors: 
2.5 Photo diodes 
2.6 Proximity sensors: 
2.6.1 Eddy current proximity sensors: 
2.6.2 Inductive proximity Sensor: 
2.6.3 Optical Proximity Sensor 
2.7 Hall Effect Sensor 
OBJECTIVE 
 Is to understand concepts of Transducer and Sensors. 
 Is to understand working of different types of sensors. 

 
 
17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore 
Page 27 
 
2.1 Introduction: 
Sensors and transducers are the heart of any mechatronic system. Without sense organs there 
is no life and so also there is no mechatronic system without transducers and sensors. In fact, 
they are the essential elements of any measurement or control system. 
2.2 Definition and Classification of Transducer: 
A Transducer is a device which transforms one form of physical phenomenon or energy to 
another form for varies purposes including measurement, control and information transfer. 
The physical phenomenon may be position, displacement, force, torque, flow of fluid, 
pressure of fluid, temperature, etc.. 
Transduce= Trance (Change) + Induce (Provide) 
 
2.2.1 Classification of Transducer: 
Transducers are classified based on the following factors: 
a. Whether the device senses and converts or just converts physical phenomenon. 
b. Method of conversion of energy. 
c. Nature and Type of output signals. 
d. Type of sensing element used. 
e. Type and nature of measurand to be used. 
f. Whether they are self generating or externally powered. 
g. Its purpose in the measurement system. 
 
a. Whether the device senses and converts or just converts physical phenomenon. 
They are 
i. Primary transducer 
ii. Secondary transducer 
i. Primary transducer: 
These are detectors which sense a physical phenomenon and convert it into an analogous output. 
E. g: Thermocouple. 

 
 
17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore 
Page 28 
 
ii. Secondary transducer: 
These are those which convert the analogous output of the detector, which has 
sensed the E.g.: Measurement of compressive force with the help of load cell. 
b. Method of conversion of energy: 
The energy or signal produced due to physical phenomenon or measurand are converted into 
another form using mechanical linkages as in the case of simple dial gauge or the properties 
of material like resistance, conduction, expansion etc. 
E.g. Strain gauges are used to measure the mechanical strain of a member due to load or 
force. The change in resistance of the strain gauges is the measure of force. 
c. Nature and Type of output signals: 
i. Analog transducer 
ii. Digital transducer 
i. Analog transducer: These are whose convert physical phenomenon into an analogous output 
which is a continuous function of time. Strain gauges, thermisters, LVDT, etc,are examples of 
analogue transducer. 
ii. Digital transducer: These are whose convert physical phenomenon into an electrical output 
which is in the form of pulses. These are not many digital transducers available, although there 
importance is well recognized in modern microprocessor based control systems and 
instrumentation. Angular digital encoder and digital level transducers are examples are digital 
transducers. 
d. Type of sensing element used: 
i. Elastic elements 
ii. Mass sensing elements 
iii. Thermal elements 
iv. Hydro pneumatic elements. 
i. Elastic elements: Most pressure measuring devices use a Bourdon tube, a bellow or a 
diaphragm. The action of these elements is based on elastic deformation brought about by the 
force resulting from pressure summation. 

 
 
17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore 
Page 29 
 
ii. Mass sensing elements: This is based on the inertia of a concentrated mass. Vibration pick up 
accelerometers, liquid manometers are examples of mass sensing element transducer. 
iii. Thermal elements: these elements sense the heat of a system by indicating some change in 
the property of the material used,which varies with the heat. 
iv. Hydro pneumatic elements: The two simple examples of hydro pneumatic elements are 
Float and hydrometer. 
e. Whether they are self generating or externally powered: 
i. Active transducers 
ii. Passive transducers 
i. Active transducers: These are those which develop their own power. They are also know as 
self generating transducers, the energy required for production of output signal form the physical 
phenomenon being measured. 
E.g.: Piezoelectric pick up, thermocouples photo voltaic cell etc. 
ii. Passive transducers: These are those which required externals power of producing output 
signal. There also know externally power transducers. 
E. g. Resistance thermometer, thermostats, differential transformers etc. 
f. Its purpose in the measurement system: 
i. Input transducers 
ii. Output transducers 
i. Input transducers: These transducers convert a non electric quality into an electric signal. 
E.g. Strain gauge, photovoltaic cell etc 
ii. Output transducers: These transducers convert electrical signal back into non-electrical 
signal according to whether they make physical contact or not. They are contact and non-contact 
type. 
g. Its purpose in the measurement system: 
Mechanical transducers for measuring quantities such as position, velocity, force, 
torque, displacement, pressure, vibration, strain mass etc. 
 

 
 
17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore 
Page 30 
 
2.3 Definition and Classification of Sensors: 
Definition: Sensor may be define as an element or device which can respond directly to 
different physical attributes such as heat, light, force related quantities etc. 
The term transducer and sensor have been synonymously used although the principles are 
different. Transducers are physical element and are a part of sensor. 
A sensor is in fact a highly refined transducer provided with signal conditioning circuit 
capable of modifying the signals from the transducer. The most commonly used signal 
conditioning circuits are amplifiers, filters, ADC, DAC, attenuators etc. Fig 2.1 shows the 
basic concept of sensor. 
If the sensor itself transducers the physical attributes in addition to sensing is called detector 
transducer. 
 
2.3.1 Classification of Sensors: 
The classification of sensors are based on 
a. Type of energy transferred, Under this we have: 
i. Thermal 
ii. Mechanical 
iii. Chemical 
iv. Optical radiation 
v. Ionizing radiation 
vi. Electromagnetic 
b. Classification based on measurement error 
c. Biological sensors 

 
 
17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore 
Page 31 
 
d. Geodetic sensors. 
2.4 Light sensors: 
Principle of Working and Applications of Light Sensors: 
A light sensor is a device that is used to detect light. There are different types of light sensors 
such as photocell/ photo resistor and photo diodes being used in manufacturing and other 
industrial applications. 
Photo resistor is also called as light dependent resistor (LDR). It has a resistor whose resistance 
decreases with increasing incident light intensity. It is made of a high resistance semiconductor 
material, cadmium sulfide (CdS). The resistance of a CdS photo resistor varies inversely to the 
amount of light incident upon it. Photo resistor follows the principle of photoconductivity which 
results from the generation of mobile carriers when photons are absorbed by the semiconductor 
material. 
Figure shows the construction of a photo resistor. The CdS resistor coil is mounted on a 
ceramic substrate. This assembly is encapsulated by a resin material. The sensitive coil 
electrodes are connected to the control system though lead wires. On incidence of high 
intensity light on the electrodes, the resistance of resistor coil decreases which will be used 
further to generate the appropriate signal by the microprocessor via lead wires. 
Photo resistors are used in science and in almost any branch of industry for control, safety, 
amusement, sound reproduction, inspection and measurement. 
 
Fig 1: Construction of Light Sensors 

 
 
17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore 
Page 32 
 
Applications of Light Sensor 
 Computers, wireless phones, and televisions, use ambient light sensors to automatically 
control the brightness of a screen
 Barcode scanners used in retailer locations work using light sensor technology
 In space and robotics: for controlled and guided motions of vehicles and robots.
 Auto Flash for camera
 Industrial process control.
2.5 Photo diodes 
Photodiode is a solid-state device which converts incident light into an electric 
current. It is made of Silicon. It consists of a shallow diffused p-n junction, normally a p-on-
n configuration. When photons of energy greater than 1.1eV (the band gap of silicon) fall on 
the device, they are absorbed and electron-hole pairs are created. The depth at which the 
photons are absorbed depends upon their energy. The lower the energy of the photons, the 
deeper they are absorbed. Then the electron-hole pairs drift apart. When the minority carriers 
reach the junction, they are swept across by the electric field and an electric current 
establishes. 
Photodiodes are one of the types of photo detector, which convert light into either 
current or voltage. These are regular semiconductor diodes except that they may be either 
exposed to detect vacuum UV or X-rays or packaged with a opening or optical fiber 
connection to allow light to reach the sensitive part of the device. 
 
 
Fig 2: Construction of Photo diodes 

 
 
17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore 
Page 33 
 
Figure .shows the construction of Photo diode detector. It is constructed from single crystal 
silicon wafers. It is a p-n junction device. The upper layer is p layer. It is very thin and 
formed by thermal diffusion or ion implantation of doping material such as boron. Depletion 
region is narrow and is sandwiched between p layer and bulk n type layer of silicon. Light 
irradiates at front surface, anode, while the back surface is cathode. The incidence of light on 
anode generates a flow of electron across the p-n junction which is the measure of light 
intensity. 
Applications of photo diodes 
Camera: Light Meters, Automatic Shutter Control, Auto-focus, Photographic Flash Control 
Medical: CAT Scanners - X ray Detection, Pulse Oximeters, Blood Particle Analyzers. 
Industry 
• Bar Code Scanners 
• Light Pens 
• Brightness Controls 
• Encoders 
• Position Sensors 
• Surveying Instruments 
• Copiers - Density of Toner 
Safety Equipment 
• Smoke Detectors 
• Flame Monitors 
• Security Inspection Equipment 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore 
Page 34 
 
2.6 Proximity sensors: 
2.6.1 Eddy current proximity sensors: 
 
 
Fig 3: Construction of Eddy current proximity sensors 
 
Eddy current proximity sensors are used to detect non-magnetic but conductive materials. They 
comprise of a coil, an oscillator, a detector and a triggering circuit. Figure shows the construction 
of eddy current proximity switch. When an alternating current is passed thru this coil, an 
alternative magnetic field is generated. If a metal object comes in the close proximity of the coil, 
then eddy currents are induced in the object due to the magnetic field. These eddy currents create 
their own magnetic field which distorts the magnetic field responsible for their generation. As a 
result, impedance of the coil changes and so the amplitude of alternating current. This can be used 
to trigger a switch at some pre-determined level of change in current. 
Eddy current sensors are relatively inexpensive, available in small in size, highly reliable and 
have high sensitivity for small displacements. 
Applications of eddy current proximity sensors: 
 Automation requiring precise location 
 Machine tool monitoring 
 Final assembly of precision equipment such as disk drives 
 Measuring the dynamics of a continuously moving target, such as a vibrating element, 
 Drive shaft monitoring 
 Vibration measurements 

 
 
17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore 
Page 35 
 
2.6.2 Inductive proximity Sensor: 
 
 
Fig 4: Schematic of Inductive proximity Sensor 
Inductive proximity switches are basically used for detection of metallic objects. Figure 
shows the construction of inductive proximity switch. An inductive proximity sensor has 
four components; the coil, oscillator, detection circuit and output circuit. An alternating 
current is supplied to the coil which generates a magnetic field. When, a metal object comes 
closer to the end of the coil, inductance of the coil changes. This is continuously monitored 
by a circuit which triggers a switch when a preset value of inductance change is occurred. 
Applications of inductive proximity Sensor 
 Industrial automation: counting of products during production or transfer 
 Security: detection of metal objects, arms, land mines 
2.6.3 Optical Proximity Sensor: 
Optical encoders provide digital output as a result of linear / angular displacement. These are 
widely used in the Servo motors to measure the rotation of shafts. Figure shows the 
construction of an optical encoder. It comprises of a disc with three concentric tracks of 
equally spaced holes. Three light sensors are employed to detect the light passing thru the 
holes. These sensors produce electric pulses which give the angular displacement of the 
mechanical element e.g. shaft on which the Optical encoder is mounted. The inner track has 
just one hole which is used locate the ‘home’ position of the disc. The holes on the middle 
track offset from the holes of the outer track by one-half of the width of the hole. This 
arrangement provides the direction of rotation to be determined. When the disc rotates in 
clockwise direction, the pulses in the outer track lead those in the inner; in counter clockwise 

 
 
17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore 
Page 36 
 
direction they lag behind. The resolution can be determined by the number of holes on disc. 
With 100 holes in one revolution, the resolution would be, 
360⁰/100 = 3.6⁰. 
 
 
Fig 5: Construction and working principle of Optical Proximity Sensor 
 
 
2.7 Hall Effect Sensors: 
 
Hall Effect sensors work on the principle that when a beam of charge particles passes 
through a magnetic field, forces act on the particles and the current beam is deflected from 
its straight line path. Thus one side of the disc will become negatively charged and the other 
side will be of positive charge. This charge separation generates a potential difference which 
is the measure of distance of magnetic field from the disc carrying current. 
The typical application of Hall Effect sensor is the measurement of fluid level in a container. 
The container comprises of a float with a permanent magnet attached at its top. An electric 
circuit with a current carrying disc is mounted in the casing. When the fluid level increases, 
the magnet will come close to the disc and a potential difference generates. This voltage 
triggers a switch to stop the fluid to come inside the container. 

 
 
17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore 
Page 37 
 
These sensors are used for the measurement of displacement and the detection of position of 
an object. Hall Effect sensors need necessary signal conditioning circuitry. They can be 
operated at 100 kHz. Their non-contact nature of operation, good immunity to environment 
contaminants and ability to sustain in severe conditions make them quite popular in 
industrial automation. 
 
 
 
Fig 6: Hall Effect

 
 
17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore 
Page 38 
 
COURSE OUTCOMES 
Students will 
1. Learn how transducers and sensors work. 
SELF ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS 
1. Define transducer and its classification. 
2. Define sensor and its classification. 
3. With an example, explain primary and secondary transducer. 
4. What is an encoder and how they are classified. 
5. Explain with a simple sketch the constructional features of an absolute encoder. 
6. Explain with a simple sketch the constructional features of an incremental encoder. 
7. Explain the principle and working of proximity sensor. 
8. Explain the principle and working of Hall Effect sensor. 
9. Explain the principle and working of pneumatic sensor. 
10. Explain performance of a transducer. 
11. Define a) range, b) span, c) sensitivity, d) accuracy. 
12. Define a) hysteresis, b) resolution, c) threshold, d) system error. 
FURTHER READING 
1. Mechatronics Principles & applications, Godfrey C. Onwubolu, Elsevier. . 
2. Introduction Mechatronics & Measurement systems, David.G. Aliciatore & 
Michael. 
B. Bihistaned, Tata McGraw Hill, 2000. 

 
 
17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore  
Page 39 
 
 
Module 2: Micro-processors and Micro-controllers 
 
CONTENT: 
 
1. Introduction 
2. Microprocessor 
2.1 Functions of microprocessor 
2.2 Elements of microprocessor 
3. Microcontroller 
3.1 Microprocessor based programmable controller 
3.2 Differences between Microprocessor and microcontroller 
4. Basics of microprocessor programming 
1. Number System 
2. Low Level Programming Language 
5. Architecture of Microprocessor 
5.1 Register Array 
5.2 Accumulator 
5.3 Flags 
5.4 Instruction Register/Decoder 
5.5 Memory Address Register 
5.6 Control Generator 
5.7 Register Selector 
5.8 General Purpose Registers 
6. Programming in 8085 
         6.1 Classification of Instructions: 
 
OBJECTIVES: 
 Is to know the knowledge of microprocessor and its functions. 
 Is to know the concept of number system with conversion. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore  
Page 40 
 
 
1. Introduction 
 
Programmable Logic Devices (PLD) are programmable systems and are generally 
used in manufacturing automation to perform different control functions, according to 
the programs written in its memory, using low level languages of commands. There 
are following three types of PLDs are being employed in mechatronics systems. 
 
 
1 Microprocessor 
 
It is a digital integrated circuit which carries out necessary digital functions 
to process the information obtained from measurement system. 
 
2 Microcomputer 
 
It uses microprocessor as its central processing unit and contains 
all functions of a computer. 
 
3 Programmable Logic Controller (PLC) 
 
It is used to control the operations of electro-mechanical devices 
especially in tough and hazardous industrial environments. 
 
A typical programmable machine has basic three components as shown in Figure 1: 
 
1. Processor, which processes the information collected from measurement system 
and takes logical decisions based on the information. Then it sends this 
information to actuators or output devices. 
 
2. Memory, it stores 
 
1 the input data collected from sensors 
 
2 the programs to process the information and to take necessary decisions or 
actions. Program is a set of instructions written for the processor to perform a 
task. A group of programs is called software. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore  
Page 41 
 
 
 
1. Input/output devices: these are used to communicate with the outside 
world/operator. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1: Components of a programmable logic device 
 
 
 
2. Microprocessor 
 
It is a multi-purpose, programmable device that reads binary instructions from a 
storage device called memory, processes the data according to the instructions, and 
then provides results as output. In common practice it is also known as CPU (central 
processing unit). CPU can be referred as complete computational engine on a single 
chip. First Microcontroller, Intel 4004 was launched in 1971. It was able to process 
just 4 bits. It started a new era in electronics engineering. Microprocessor chip was 
one of the important inventions of the 20th century. Table 1 shows the history of 
micro-processors. 
 
Table 1 History of Micro-Processors 
 
Name 
Date 
No. of 
Width of 
Clock 
Data 
Millions of 
Transistors smallest 
Speed 
Width 
Instructions 
wire on 
(In Bits) 
per 
chip 
second(MIPS) 
8080 
1974 
6000 
6 
2MHz 
8 
0.64 
8088 
1979 
29000 
3 
5 MHz 
16 
0.33 
80286 
1982 
134000 
1.5 
6MHz 
16 
1 
80386 
1985 
275000 
1.5 
16 
32 
5 
80486 
1989 
1200000 
1 
25 
32 
20 
Pentium 
1993 
3100000 
0.8 
60 
32 
100 
Pentium 
1997 
7500000 
0.35 
233 
32 
300 
II 
Pentium 
1999 
9500000 
0.25 
450 
32 
510 
III 
Pentium 4 2000 
42000000 
0.18 
1.5 GHz 
32 
1700 

 
 
17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore  
Page 42 
 
Pentium 
2004 
125000000 0.09 
3.6 GHz 
32 
7000 
4P 
 
 
Applications of microprocessors are classified primarily in two categories: 
 
1. Reprogrammable Systems : Micro computers 
 
2. Embedded Systems : photocopying machine, Digital camera 
 
Microprocessor works or operates in binary digits i.e. 0 and 1, bits. These bits are 
nothing but electrical voltages in the machine, generally 0 - low voltage level, and 1 - 
high voltage level. A group of bits form a ‘word’. In general, the word length is about 
8 bits. This is called as a ‘byte’. A word with a length of 4 bits is called as a ‘Nibble’ 
 
 
Microprocessor processes the ‘commands in binary form’ to accomplish a task. These 
are called as ‘instructions’. Instructions are generally entered through input devices 
and can be stored in a storage device called memory. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2 Schematic of configuration of a micro processor 
 
Figure 2 and 3 show the configuration and basic blocks of a microprocessor. 
 
The functions of each element are as follows. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore  
Page 43 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3 Working of a microprocessor 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore  
Page 44 
 
 
• 
ALU: ALU stands for Arithmetical Logical Unit. As name indicates it has two 
parts: 
 
 
Arithmetical unit which is responsible for mathematical operations like 
addition, subtraction, multiplication and division, 
 
 
Logical unit which is dedicated to take logical decisions like greater than, less 
than, equal to, not equal to etc. (Basically AND/OR/NOT Operations) 
 
• 
Register Array: Registers are small storage devices that are available to CPU or 
processors. They act as temporary storage for processing of intermediate data by 
mathematical or logical operations. 
 
• 
Control: This part of CPU is dedicated to coordinate data flow and signal flow 
through various types of buses i.e. Data Bus, Control Bus, and Address Bus etc. It 
directs data flow between CPU and storage and I/O devices. 
 
• 
Memory: There are two different types of memory segments being used by the 
CPU. First is the ROM which stands for Read Only Memory while other is R/W 
which stands for Read and Write Memory or Random Access Memory (RAM). 
 
 
ROM: From this memory unit, CPU can only read the stored data. No writing 
operations can be done in this part of memory. Thus it is used to store the 
programs that need no alteration or changes like Monitor Program or 
Keyboard driver etc. 
 
 
R/W: As name indicates it is opposite to ROM and used for both reading and 
writing operations. In general User’s program and instruction are stored in this 
segment of memory unit. 
 
• 
Input Devices: Input devices are used to enter input data to microprocessor from 
Keyboard or from ADC which receives data from sensors/signal conditioning 
systems. 
 
• 
Output Devices: These devices display the results/conclusions coming out from 
ALUs either in soft copy (Monitor) or in Hard Copy (Printer). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore  
Page 45 
 
 
2.1 Functions of microprocessor 
 
Various functions of microprocessor are as follows: 
 
A Microprocessor performs a variety of logical and mathematical operations using 
its ALU. 
 
B It controls data flow in a system and hence can transfer data from one location to 
another based on the instructions given to it. 
C A microprocessor can take necessary decisions and jump to a new set of 
instructions based on those decisions. 
 
2.2 Elements of microprocessor 
 
A simple microprocessor consists of following basic elements (see Figure 3): 
 
A Data Bus: Through data bus, the data flow between 
 
o various storage units 
 
p ALU and memory units 
 
B Address Bus: It controls the flow of memory addresses between ALU and 
memory unit. 
C RD (read) and WR (write) lines set or obtain the addressed locations in the 
memory. 
 
D Clock line transfers the clock pulse sequence to the processor. 
 
E Reset Line is used to restart execution and reset the processor to zero. 
 
F Address Latch is a register which stores the addresses in the memory. 
 
G Program Counter: It is a register which can increment its value by 1 and keeps the 
record of number of instructions executed. It can be set to zero when instructed. 
H Test Register: It is a register which stores intermediate or in-process data of ALU 
operations. For example it is required to hold the ‘carry’ while ALU is performing 
‘addition’ operation. It also stores the data which can be accessed by Instruction 
decoder to make any decision. 
 
I 
3-State Buffers: These are tri-state buffers. A tri-state buffer can go to a third state 
in addition to the states of 1 and 0. 
J 
The instruction register and instruction decoder are responsible for controlling the 
operations of all other components of a microprocessor. 
 
There are following control lines present in a microprocessor, which are used to 
communicate instructions and data with the instruction decoder. 
 
A Instruct the A register to latch the value currently on the data bus. 
 
B Instruct the B register to latch the value currently on the data bus. 
 
C Instruct the C register to latch the value currently output by the ALU. 
 
D Instruct the program counter register to latch the value currently on the data bus. 
 
E Instruct the address register to latch the value currently on the data bus. 
 
F Instruct the instruction register to latch the value currently on the data bus. 
 
G Instruct the program counter to increment. 
 
 

 
 
17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore  
Page 46 
 
 
o 
Instruct the program counter to reset to zero. 
 
p 
Activate any of the six tri-state buffers (six separate lines). 
 
q 
Instruct the ALU what operation to perform. 
 
r 
Instruct the test register to latch the ALU's test bits. 
 
s 
Activate the RD line. 
 
t 
Activate the WR line 
 
 
3.  Microcontroller 
 
Microcontroller is a microprocessor based system. It is a data processing system that 
employs a microprocessor as its central unit. Based on the input it takes decisions. These 
decisions are further used to control a system or to actuate an action or operation. 
 
3.1 Microprocessor based programmable controller 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4 Schematic of microcontroller. 
 
It is a microprocessor-based system. It implements the functions of a computer and a 
controller on a single chip. Generally microcontroller is programmed for one specific 
application and it is dedicated to a specific control function. 
 
Microcontrollers find applications in automobiles, aircraft, medical electronics and home 
appliances. They are small in size and can be embedded in an electromechanical system 
without taking up much space. Thus we can have a system with its functions completely 
designed into a chip. However microcontrollers have very little user programmable 
memory. Various types of microcontroller chips available in market are: Motorola 
68HC11, Zilog Z8 and Intel MCS51 and 96 series. 

 
 
17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore  
Page 47 
 
 
3.2 Differences between Microprocessor and microcontroller 
 
 
The differences are listed below and are considered as a major distinguishing parameters 
between the two 
 
Table 2: Microprocessor and microcontroller comparison 
 
Microcontroller 
Microprocessor 
Micro Controller is a heart of the 
embedded system 
The microprocessor is the heart of 
Computer system 
Microcontroller 
has 
an 
external 
processor along with internal memory 
and  input/output components 
It is just a processor. Memory and I/O 
components have to be connected 
externally 
Since memory and I/O are present 
internally, the circuit is small. 
Since memory and I/O has to be 
connected 
externally, 
the 
circuit 
becomes large 
The cost of the entire system is low 
Cost of the entire system increases 
The microcontroller has a number of 
registers, hence the programs are easier 
to write 
Microprocessor has less number of 
registers, hence more operations are 
memory based 
Used mainly in the washing machine, 
MP3 players 
Mainly used in personal computers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore  
Page 48 
 
 
4. Basics of microprocessor programming 
 
 
In this lecture we will study the various number systems, programming languages, and 
internal architecture of the basic microprocessor, 8085. 
 
4.1. Number System 
 
Number system is a way of representing the value of any number with respect to a base 
value. Number System can be classified on the basis of its “base”. Each number has a 
unique representation in a number system. Different number systems have different 
representation of the same number. In general Binary, Octal, Decimal and Hexadecimal 
Number systems are used in microprocessor programming. Table 3 shows different 
numbering systems and their details. 
 
Table 3: Numbering systems 
 
Number 
Base 
Allowable Digits/Characters 
Examples 
System 
Binary 
2 
0,1 
(11001010001010)2 
Octal 
8 
0,1,2,3,4,5,6,7 
(5671235246214)8 
Decimal 
10 
0,1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9 
(9823654178523)10 
Hexadecimal 
16 
0,1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,A,B,C,D,E,F (A852F6DB)16 
 
 
1.1 Number representation 
 
1.1.1 Conversion of any number system to decimal number system: 
 
Let B be the base of number system and An, A n-1, …………………A1,A0 be the 
  
digits of given number. Then to convert it into decimal equivalent we can use the 
following formula: 
 
N = An.Bn + An-1.Bn-1 + ……….+A1.B + A0.B0 
 
Example: what is the decimal equivalent of (11101011)2 ? 
 
 Here, we have taken An = 1, An-1= 1, ……. An-3=0, while n=8 and B 
= 2. Then the decimal equivalent is (235)10.
 
 

 
 
17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore  
Page 49 
 
 
 
1.1.2 Decimal number system to any number system: 
 
Any number in decimal system can be changed to any other number system by 
continuously dividing it by base of the required number system and then writing 
remainders after each step in reverse order. 
 
Let us take an example of converting a decimal number 235 to its binary equivalent. 
 
Following table shows the conversion process as stated above. 
 
Table 3: Binary representation of (235)10 
 
2 
235 
1 
2 
117 
1 
2 
58 
0 
2 
29 
1 
2 
14 
0 
2 
7 
1 
2 
3 
1 
2 
1 
1 
 
 
Hence Binary equivalent of (235)10 is (11101011)2. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore  
Page 50 
 
 
 
1.1.3 Hexadecimal system: 
 
This system is quite extensively used in microprocessor programming. It facilitates much 
shorter representation of number in comparison with that obtained by using the binary 
number system. Hexadecimal system has a base of 16 and it is easy to write and 
remember the numbers and alphabets viz. 0 to 9 and A to F. Table 4 shows numerals and 
alphabets used in hexadecimal system for representation of a number. 
 
Table 4 Numerals and alphabets used in hexadecimal system 
 
Decimal 
Binary 
Hexadecimal 
0 
0000 
0 
1 
0001 
1 
2 
0010 
2 
3 
0011 
3 
4 
0100 
4 
5 
0101 
5 
6 
0110 
6 
7 
0111 
7 
8 
1000 
8 
9 
1001 
9 
10 
1010 
A 
11 
1011 
B 
12 
1100 
C 
13 
1101 
D 
14 
1110 
E 
15 
1111 
F 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore  
Page 51 
 
 
 
Example: Let us convert the number (235)10 to hexadecimal equivalent. Table 5 
shows the conversion of this decimal number. 
  
Table 5  Decimal to hexadecimal conversion 
 
Number 
Division 
Remainder 
Hexadecimal equivalent of remainder 
as per table 3.2.3 
235 
235 divided by 
11 
B 
16 = 14 (full) 
14 
14 divided by 16 
14 
E 
= Cannot divide 
 
 
Then by arranging the hexadecimals in reverse order i.e. (EB)16. Thus (235)10 = (EB)16. 
 
1.1.4 Binary coded decimal (BCD) 
 
BCD code expresses each digit of a decimal system by its nibble equivalent. It uses 4 bit 
binary strings to represent the digits 0 to 9. Figure 5 shows the representation of number 
523 as 010100100011 using BCD system. Due its longer representation scheme, it is now 
rarely used in micro-electronics programming. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5 BCD representation system 
 
Example: (235)10 can be represented by using PCD as 001000110101. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore  
Page 52 
 
 
 
4.2. Low Level Programming Language 
 
Microprocessors recognize the binary numbers and they operate in binary numbers. Each 
microprocessor has its own binary words, meanings and languages. Each machine has its 
own set of instructions based on the design of its CPU. Binary language is called as 
machine language. English-like words are used to represent the binary instructions of a 
machine. This is called as assembly language programs. The general purpose languages 
such as BASIC, FORTRAN, C, etc. are called as high-level languages. The machine 
language and assembly language are however specific to a microprocessor, therefore 
these are termed as low-level languages. 
 
4.2.1 Assembly language 
 
In assembly language, a word length is of about eight bits. It is called as a byte. Assembly 
language can have 256 combinations of bytes. Thus the language has 256 words. There 
can be a various patterns of bytes. With the help of electronic logic gates, these patterns 
give a specific meaning to each combination of bytes. These are called as an 
‘instruction’. Instructions are made up of one word or several words. The set of 
instructions designed into the machine makes up the machine language that is specific to 
each microprocessor based system viz. micro-computer. 
 
Thus we can say, 
 
‘Machine language is the binary medium of communication through a designed set of 
instructions specific to each computer.’ 
 
‘Assembly level language is a medium of communication with a computer in which 
programs are written in mnemonics. An assembly language is specific to a given 
computer.’ 
 
4.2.2 Assembly language programming 
 
Assembly language programming is generally written by using hexadecimal codes. 
Programs can be written by using special keyboard equipped with using hex keys. 
Programs also have instructions to translate these keys into their equivalent binary 
patterns. The data and instructions are stored in prescribed locations in memory. An 
operation code is written which accomplishes the intended task(s). These tasks are carried 
out on ‘operand(s)’ by the operation code. 8085 is a typical general purpose 
microprocessor and has 8-bit word length. Now, let us learn its architecture, working and 
programming. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore  
Page 53 
 
 
 
5. Internal Architecture of 8085 Microprocessor 
5.1 Register Array 
 
8085 Microprocessor consists of six registers, one accumulator and a flag register. The 
typical architecture is shown in figure 6. There are six general-purpose registers B, C, D, 
E, H, and L, each having capacity to store 8 bit data. They are combined as BC, DE, HL 
to perform 16 bit operations. In addition to this Register array, two 16 bit registers viz. 
stack register and program counter are provided. As discussed in the earlier lecture, the 
‘program counter’ is employed to sequence the execution of instructions. It always points 
to the memory address from which the next byte is to be fetched. Stack Pointer points to 
the memory location in R/W (Read and/or write) memory. It is also termed as a ‘stack’. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6 Architecture of 8085 microprocessor 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore  
Page 54 
 
 
 
5.2 Accumulator 
 
The accumulator is 8-bit register (can store 8 bit data). It is a part of arithmetic/logic unit 
(ALU). In general, after performing logical or arithmetical operations, result is stored in 
accumulator. Accumulator is also identified as Register A. 
 
5.3 Flags 
 
ALU of 8085 have five flip flops whose states (set/reset) are determined by the result 
data of other registers and accumulator. They are called as Zero, Carry, Sign, Parity and 
Auxiliary-Carry flags. 
 
A Zero Flag (Z): When an arithmetic operation results in zero, the flip-flop called 
the Zero flag - which is set to one. 
 
B Carry flag (CY): After an addition of two numbers, if the sum in the accumulator 
is larger than eight bits, then the flip-flop uses to indicate a carry called the Carry 
flag – which is set to one. 
C S-Sign (S): It is set to 1, if bit D7 of the result = 1; otherwise reset. D7 is the first 
digit of a binary number. 
 
D7 
D6 D5 D4 D3 D2 D1 D0 
S 
Z 
AC 
P 
CY 
 
A P-Parity (P): If the result has an even number of 1s, the flag is set to 1; for an odd 
number of 1s the flag is reset. 
 
B AC-Auxiliary Carry (AC): In an arithmetic operation, when a carry is generated 
by digit D3 and passed to digit D4, the AC flag is set. Generally this flag is used 
internally for Binary Coded Decimals (BCD). 
 
Figure 3.2.2 shows a 8-bit flag register, adjacent to the accumulator. It is not used as a 
register. Out of eight bit-positions, five positions are used to store the outputs of five flip-
flops. These flags play an important role in decision-making process of the 
microprocessor. 
 
5.4 Instruction Register/Decoder 
 
Before execution of an instruction, it is sent to the Instruction Register. Instruction 
register stores current instruction of any program. Decoder takes the instruction from 
memory, decodes it and then passes it to the next stage. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore  
Page 55 
 
 
 
 
5.5 Memory Address Register 
 
Memory Address Register (MAR) holds the address of next instruction to be executed. 
 
5.6 Control Generator 
 
In microprocessor, the Control Generator generates a signal that executes the operations 
in accordance to the decoded instructions. In fact it creates a signal (information) which 
have details about connections between different blocks of the microprocessor so that 
data reaches to the respective place. 
 
5.7 Register Selector 
 
Register selector is basically a logical controller which directs switching between 
different registers of microprocessor. 
 
5.8 General Purpose Registers 
 
Microprocessor has few extra registers which can be used to store additional data during 
a program. 
 
6. Programming in 8085 
 
As mentioned in above section, a simple and very effective substitution to binary codes 
could be use of standard English words to complete any task. For example addition of 
two numbers can be represented by ADD. Such codes are referred as mnemonic codes 
and that language is called assembly language. Most of the early processers including 
8085, are programmed using mnemonics. However, assembly language codes should be 
converted into binary one so that microprocessor can identify the instructions given to it. 
This operation is done by Assembler. In assembly language, instructions are composed of 
two segments which are as follows: 
 
C. Operation (Op) Code: It depends on which operation is to be performed. For 
example for OR operation, we have Op Code “OR”. 
 
D. Operands: Operand is the object on which the required operation is to be done. 
Generally operations are done on data stored in registers. 
 
6.1 Classification of Instructions: 
 
A Data Transfer 
 
B Arithmetic 
 
C Logical 
 
D Program Control 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore  
Page 56 
 
 
 
6.1.1 Data Transfer 
 
1. Load: It reads content from specified memory location and copies it to specified 
register location in CPU. 
 
2. Store: It copies content of a specified register into specified memory location. 
 
 
6.1.2 Arithmetic: 
 
A Add: It adds contents of a specified memory location to the data in some register. 
 
B Decrement: It subtracts 1 from contents of specified location. 
 
C Compare: It tells whether contents of a register are greater than, less than or 
same as content of specified memory location. 
 
6.1.3 Logical: 
 
 
AND: Instruction carries out Logical AND operation with the contents of 
specified memory location and data in some register. Numbers are ANDed bit by bit. 
 
 
OR: Instruction carries out Logical OR operation with the contents of specified 
memory location and data in some register. Numbers are ORed bit by bit. 
 
 
Logical Shift: Logical shift instruction involves moving a pattern of bits in the 
register one place to left or right by moving a zero in the end of number. 
 
6.1.4 Program Control: 
 
• 
Jump: This instruction changes the sequence in which program steps are carried 
out. Normally program counter causes the program to be carried out sequentially 
in strict numerical sequence. However, JUMP causes program counter to some 
other specified location in the program. 
 
• 
Branch: This is a conditional instruction which might ‘branch’ if ‘zero’ results or 
‘branch’ if ‘plus’ results of an operation. Branch also followed if right conditions 
occur in the decision making process. 
 
• 
Halt: This instruction stops all further microprocessor activity. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore  
Page 57 
 
 
COURSE OUTCOME 
Students will 
1. Understand how exactly a processor works internally and the concepts of different 
parameters included in 8085 processor. 
2. Learn the difference between microprocessor and microcontroller. 
3. Know how codes are represented with characters. 
SELF ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS 
1. With a neat block diagram explain Intel 8085A microprocessor architecture. 
2. Explain different register present in a control unit. 
3. Draw the flow diagram of instruction cycle. 
4. Explain the concept of read cycle and write cycle. 
5. Explain the main features and functions of data bus. 
6. What is microcontrollers and explain its classification? 
7. Enumerate the difference between microprocessor and microcontroller. 
8. Enumerate the difference between RISC and CISC. 
 
FURTHER READING 
1. Mechatronics and microprocessor, Dr H.D.Ramachandra, Sudha Publications, Bangalore, 
2016 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

   17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore 
Page 1  
 
Module 3:  
Programmable Logic Devices (PLDs) and Integration 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
Programmable logic controller 
3.1    Introduction to PLC’s,  
3.2    Basic structures 
3.3    Principle of operation 
3.4    Programming and concept of ladder diagram 
3.5    Concepts of latching and selection criteria for PLC’s 
 
Integration 
3.6     Introduction & background 
3.7     Advanced actuators and Pneumatic actuators 
3.8     Industrial Robot 
3.9     Different parts of a Robot-Controller 
3.10   Drive, Arm, End Effectors, Sensor 
3.11   Functional requirements of robot 
 
OBJECTIVE 
 Is to understand concepts of Programmable Logic Controllers. 
 Is to understand working of different actuators and robots. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

   17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore 
Page 2  
 
3.1  Introduction to PLC’s 
 
Any computer having input and output interfaces can be used to control external devices. 
However most of the computers are not industrially hardened. Input / Output devices of 
general-purpose microcomputers are not engineered to handle line-voltages and currents 
above transistor-transistor logic (TTL) levels. Also they are not designed to with-stand 
the temperature, humidity, and vibration on shop floors. These drawbacks of a general 
purpose computer have been rectified by developing a Programmable Logic Controller 
(PLC) with built-in isolation into their inputs and outputs. 
 
“The programmable logic controller is defined as a digital electronic device that uses a 
programmable memory to store instructions and to implement functions such as logic, 
sequencing, timing, counting and arithmetic words to control machines and processes.” 
 
PLCs are generally used for incorporating automation in open loop systems where 
processes are to be performed in a sequential manner. PLCs are used for automation of 
assembly lines in industries. They are generally designed for multiple input multiple 
output (MIMO) systems. In PLCs, instructions are saved in nonvolatile memory. Some of 
the advantages of PLCs are: 
 
• 
Cost effective 
 
• 
Flexibility and ability to use similar system for other processes 
 
• 
Programming interface is easier in comparison to other processers 
 
• 
Resistant to impact and vibration 
 
• 
Resistant towards electrical and mechanical noise 
 
• 
Ability to work at high temperatures 
 
Now let us study the structure and functioning of a PLC. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

   17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore 
Page 3  
 
 
 
 
3.2. Basic structures 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.2.1 Block diagram of a PLC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

   17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore 
Page 4  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.2.2 An Industrial PLC 
 
Figure 3.2.1 shows the basic elements of a PLC. It is basically a microprocessor based 
control system. Microprocessor communicates with the outside world with input/output 
derives via a circuitry. This circuitry protects the microprocessor and other elements of 
PLC from the high voltages and currents coming to the PLC. Microprocessor does its 
basic functions of taking decisions according to the instructions written in the programs 
which are stored in the memory. PLC scans a set of sensor inputs rapidly and repeatedly. 
Then it evaluates their logic relationships to defined outputs according to a logic 
program. At last it sets the outputs according to the programmed logic. Figure 3.2.2 
shows an industrial PLC with input and output ports. 
 
 
3.3    Principle of operation 
 
PLCs are programmed through concept of ladder logic. In general there exists a graphical 
user interface (GUI) to program a PLC that makes it different from other processers. 
Ladder logic comprises of two columns. Left column shows input devices like switches, 
sensors while in output column is at right side which shows actuators like cylinders, 
motors. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

   17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore 
Page 5  
 
 
Meanings of symbols used in PLC Program: 
 
] [ 
 
This instruction is called as “examine on” or “normally opened” as input functions or 
storage bits. If the corresponding memory bit is a “1” then the respective ‘rung’ will 
continuously be executed and the corresponding outputs will be energized. Rung is one of 
the multiple horizontal programming lines in a ladder logic diagram. 
 
NOTE: Other factors may also affect rung simultaneously. 
 
If the corresponding bit is “0” then the rung will not be executed continuously and 
outputs will be de-energized. If this instruction is used as input bit, its status should be 
according to the status of the real world input devices connected to the input table by 
identical addresses. 
 
Addressing Sample: I: 3/1 
 
This indicates address of a sample. I indicates input image table, 3 indicates slot no. 3 of 
input port and 1 indicates bit three of 3rd slot of input port. 
 
]/[ 
 
This instruction is called “examine off” or “normally closed” as input functions or 
storage bits. If the corresponding memory bit is a “1” then the respective ‘rung’ will 
continuously be executed and the corresponding outputs will be energized. 
 
NOTE: Other factors may also affect this rung simultaneously. 
 
If the corresponding bit is “0” this instruction will not allow rung continuously and 
outputs will be energized. If used as input bit, its status should correspond to the status of 
the real world input devices tied to the input table by identical addresses. 
 
OTE  ( ) 
 
This is called as ‘output energize’. This instruction sets the specified bit when rung 
continuity is achieved. Under normal operating conditions, if the set bit corresponds to an 
output device, output device will be energized when rung goes true. 
 
Addressing Example O:3/1 
 
O -- output image table 
 
3 -- slot three 
 
1 -- bit one of slot three 
 
 
 
 
 

   17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore 
Page 6  
 
 
 
OTL  -(L)- 
 
This is called as ‘output latch’. This instruction functions similar to output energize 
except that once a bit is set with OTL, it is latched on. Once an OTL bit has been set ON 
(1 on the memory) it will remain ON even if the rung condition goes false. The bit must 
be reset. 
 
(U) 
 
This is called as ‘output unlatch’. This is used to unlatch (reset) a latched bit. Its address 
must be same as latched one. 
 
Timer 
 
This is also called as “TON”. Figure 3.3.3 shows the schematic of a Timer. It is used to 
turn an output ON or OFF after the timer has been ON for preset time interval. This 
output instruction begins timing when rung goes true. It waits the specified amount of 
time (As specified in Preset), keeps track of accumulated intervals which have occurred 
(ACCUM), and sets DN (Done) bit when ACCUM time equals preset time. 
 
As long as rung condition remains true, Timer adjusts its accumulated value to each 
evaluation until it reaches the preset value. The accumulated value is reset when rung 
condition go false, regardless of whether timer has timed out. ” TIME BASE” is an 
amount of time after which accumulator increases its value by 1. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.3.3 Schematic of a Timer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

   17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore 
Page 7  
 
 
 
3.4    Programming and concept of ladder diagram 
 
In this segment, we will see how PLCs are incorporated to control various activities in an 
industry. In this illustration we have a conveyer belt run with two motors at its ends, three 
different stations to perform various activities like painting of vehicle body or fitting of 
any component in chassis etc along with two switches to run conveyer. Figure 3.3.4 
shows the photograph of a conveyor belt system. The PLC is of “Bull 1764 Micrologix 
1500 LSP Series C” which can be controlled by a Graphical User Interface “ RS Logic 
500 Starter”. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.3.4 PLC controlled conveyor belt system 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

   17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore 
Page 8  
 
 
 
To run the conveyer belt with the help of switches 
 
As discussed in earlier sections, PLCs are controlled through Ladder Logic. In input 
section of the ladder, name of the input device must be mentioned on the top of symbol, 
followed by primary input port. Secondary input port is mentioned just below symbol. In 
similar way, output symbol should be mentioned with name and output ports as shown in 
figure 3.3.5. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.3.5 A rung to run the conveyor belt. 
 
To control movement of pneumatic devices in an industry with PLCs 
 
Figure 3.3.6 shows a program code to control the motion of pneumatic cylinder with a 
switch. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.3.6 Program code to actaute a pneumatic cylinder 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

   17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore 
Page 9  
 
 
 
3.5    Concepts of latching  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.3.7 Program code to make use of sensors and actuators 
 
 
 

   17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore 
Page 10  
 
 
 
In industrial applications, it is required to use various sensors to control the operations of 
systems and processes using PLCs. Figure 3.3.7 shows a typical program to operate an 
electric motor and a pneumatic cylinder with the help of some sensors such pneumatic 
proximity switch. 
 
To control a mechatronics system we need to combine various mechanical and electrical 
input and output devices and to operate them in a sequential manner. Consider a 
prototype of industrial assembly line with 3 stations as shown in Figure 3.3.4. 
 
At first station ST1, the sensor identifies an object (finished product) on the conveyer belt 
and sends a signal to the controller. Controller processes this information and actuates the 
electric motor to run the conveyer belt. 
 
Second Station ST2: It is allotted for the inspection of the finished product or object. At 
ST2, conveyer belt stops. In case any fault diagnosed by the inspection system, the 
product will be taken away by the pneumatic actuators placed at Station 3, ST3. 
 
 
 
PLC selection criteria consist of: 
 
System requirements 
* The starting point in determining any solution must be to understand what is to be achieved. 
* The program design starts with breaking down the task into a number of simple understandable 
elements, each of which can be easily described. 
Application requirements 
* Input and output device requirements. After determining the operation of the system, the next 
step is to determine what input and output devices the system requires. 
* List the function required and identifies a specific type of device. 
* The need for special operations in addition to discrete (On/Off) logic. 
* List the advanced functions required beside simple discrete logic. 
Electrical Requirements 
The electrical requirements for inputs, outputs, and system power; when determining the 
electrical requirements of a system, consider three items: 
– Incoming power (power for the control system); 
– Input device voltage; and 
– Output voltage and current. 

   17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore 
Page 11  
 
Speed of Operation 
How fast the control system must operate (speed of operation). 
When determining speed of operation, consider these points: 
– How fast does the process occur or machine operate? 
– Are there “time critical” operations or events that must be detected? 
– In what time frame must the fastest action occur (input device detection to output device 
activation)? 
– Does the control system need to count pulses from an encoder or flow-meter and respond 
quickly? 
Communication 
Communication involves sharing application data or status with another electronic device, such 
as a computer or a monitor in an operator’s station. Communication can take place locally 
through a twisted-pair wire, or remotely via telephone or radio modem. 
Operator Interface 
In order to convey information about machine or process status, or to allow an operator to input 
data, many applications require operator interfaces. Traditional operator interfaces include 
pushbuttons, pilot lights and LED numeric display. Electronic operator interface devices display 
messages about machine status in descriptive text, display part count and track alarms. Also, they 
can be used for data input. 
Physical Environment 
The physical environment in which the control system will be located considers the environment 
where the control system will be located. In harsh environments, house the control system in an 
appropriate IP-rated enclosure. Remember to consider accessibility for maintenance, 
troubleshooting or reprogramming 

   17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore 
Page 12  
 
 
3.6     Introduction & background 
 
Basic Concepts of Actuators An actuator is something that actuates or moves something. More 
specifically, an actuator is a device that coverts an input energy into motion or mechanical 
energy. The input energy of actuators can be “manual” (e.g., levers and jacks), hydraulic or 
pneumatic (e.g., pistons and valves), thermal (e.g., bimetallic switches or levers), and electric 
(e.g., motors and resonators). In the transducers unit, a transducer was defined as any device that 
converts one form of energy to another form of energy; therefore, by that definition, an actuator 
can be a specific type of a transducer. The motor is one such actuator. A motor converts 
electrical energy to mechanical energy; therefore, a motor is both an actuator and a transducer. 
 
 
3.7     Advanced actuators and Pneumatic actuators 
 
Mechanical Actuator: In mechanical actuators normally a rotary motion is converted into linear 
motion to perform an operation. Such actuator normally involves gears, rails, pulley, chain, 
springs etc to operate. The most Common example is Main engine pneumatic actuator for 
changing of Roller Position over cam shaft for reversing. 
 
Hydraulic Actuator: Unlike air, liquid cannot be compressed and hence hydraulics generates 
higher energy than any other system. All systems involving high loads are operated by hydraulic 
actuators in which oil pressure is applied on mechanical actuator to give an output in terms of 
rotary or linear motion. Basic example is steering gear of ship in which hydraulic pressure is 
used to move the rudder actuator. 
Electrical Actuator: It is one of the cleanest and readily available forms of actuating system as 
it does not involve oil; as there is no need to compress air, hence no extra machinery. Electrical 
energy is always available on ship. The electrical energy is used to actuate a mechanical system 
using magnetic field i.e. EMF. Basic example are electrical motor operated valve and magnetic 
valve actuator or solenoid valve. In solenoid valve the electrical signal which will magnetize the 
upper portion of the valve, which will then attract the valve seat and open the system. When 
electrical supply is removed, valve gets shut by spring action. 
 

   17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore 
Page 13  
 
Hybrid Actuators: These are mixture of some of the above systems which control the 
mechanical part of the system. Common example is a thermo hydraulic Electronic actuator used 
in operating valves in hot water system, wherein hot water liquid is used along with electronic 
system acting as control for the valve 
 

   17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore 
Page 14  
 
 
3.8     Industrial Robot 
 
An industrial robot is a general-purpose, programmable machine. It possesses some 
anthropomorphic characteristics, i.e. human-like characteristics that resemble the human 
physical structure. The robots also respond to sensory signals in a manner that is similar 
to humans. Anthropomorphic characteristics such as mechanical arms are used for 
various industry tasks. Sensory perceptive devices such as sensors allow the robots to 
communicate and interact with other machines and to take simple decisions. The general 
commercial and technological advantages of robots are listed below: 
 Robots are good substitutes to the human beings in hazardous or uncomfortable 
work environments. 
 A robot performs its work cycle with a consistency and repeatability which is 
difficult for human beings to attain over a long period of continuous working. 
 Robots can be reprogrammed. When the production run of the current task is 
completed, a robot can be reprogrammed and equipped with the necessary tooling 
to perform an altogether different task. 
 Robots can be connected to the computer systems and other robotics systems. 
Nowadays robots can be controlled with wire-less control technologies. This has 
enhanced the productivity and efficiency of automation industry. 
 
 
3.9     Different parts of a Robot-Controller 
 
The manipulator of an industrial robot consists of a series of joints and links. Robot 
anatomy deals with the study of different joints and links and other aspects of the 
manipulator’s physical construction. A robotic joint provides relative motion between two 
links of the robot. Each joint, or axis, provides a certain degree-of-freedom (dof) of 
motion. In most of the cases, only one degree-of-freedom is associated with each joint. 
Therefore the robot’s complexity can be classified according to the total number of 
degrees-of-freedom they possess. 
 
Each joint is connected to two links, an input link and an output link. Joint provides 
controlled relative movement between the input link and output link. A robotic link is the 
rigid component of the robot manipulator. Most of the robots 

   17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore 
Page 15  
 
are mounted upon a stationary base, such as the floor. From this base, a joint-link 
numbering scheme may be recognized as shown in Figure 3.5.1. The robotic base and its 
connection to the first joint are termed as link-0. The first joint in the sequence is joint-1. 
Link-0 is the input link for joint-1, while the output link from joint-1 is link-1—which 
leads to joint-2. Thus link 1 is, simultaneously, the output link for joint-1 and the input 
link for joint-2. This joint-link-numbering scheme is further followed for all joints and 
links in the robotic systems. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 3.5.1 Joint-link scheme for robot manipulator 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

   17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore 
Page 16  
 
 
Nearly all industrial robots have mechanical joints that can be classified into following 
five types as shown in Figure 3.5.2. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 3.5.2 Types of Joints 
 
1. Linear joint (type L-joint) 
The relative movement between the input link and the output link is a 
translational sliding motion, with the axes of the two links being parallel. 
 
2. Orthogonal joint (type U-joint) 
This is also a translational sliding motion, but the input and output links are 
perpendicular to each other during the move. 
 
3. Rotational joint (type R-joint) 
This type provides rotational relative motion, with the axis of rotation 
perpendicular to the axes of the input and output links. 
 
4. Twisting joint (type T-joint) 
This joint also involves rotary motion, but the axis or rotation is parallel to the 
axes of the two links. 
 
5. Revolving joint (type V-joint, V from the “v” in revolving) 
In this type, axis of input link is parallel to the axis of rotation of the joint. 
However the axis of the output link is perpendicular to the axis of rotation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

   17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore 
Page 17  
 
 
 
2.2 Common Robot Configurations 
 
Basically the robot manipulator has two parts viz. a body-and-arm assembly with 
three degrees-of-freedom; and a wrist assembly with two or three degrees-of-freedom. 
 
For body-and-arm configurations, different combinations of joint types are possible 
for a three-degree-of-freedom robot manipulator. Five common body-and-arm 
configurations are outlined in figure 3.5.3. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig.3.5.3 Common Body-and-Arm configurations 
 
(a) Polar configuration 
It consists of a sliding arm L-joint, actuated relative to the body, which rotates 
around both a vertical axis (T-joint), and horizontal axis (R-joint). 
 
• 
Cylindrical configuration 
It consists of a vertical column. An arm assembly is moved up or down 
relative to the vertical column. The arm can be moved in and out relative to 
the axis of the column. Common configuration is to use a T-joint to rotate the 
column about its axis. An L-joint is used to move the arm assembly vertically 
along the column, while an O-joint is used to achieve radial movement of the 
arm. 
 
• 
Cartesian co-ordinate robot 
It is also known as rectilinear robot and x-y-z robot. It consists of three sliding 
joints, two of which are orthogonal O-joints. 
 
 
 

   17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore 
Page 18  
 
 
 
1. Jointed-arm robot 
It is similar to the configuration of a human arm. It consists of a vertical 
column that swivels about the base using a T-joint. Shoulder joint (R-joint) is 
located at the top of the column. The output link is an elbow joint (another R 
joint). 
 
2. SCARA 
Its full form is ‘Selective Compliance Assembly Robot Arm’. It is similar in 
construction to the jointer-arm robot, except the shoulder and elbow rotational 
axes are vertical. It means that the arm is very rigid in the vertical direction, 
but compliant in the horizontal direction. 
 
Robot wrist assemblies consist of either two or three degrees-of-freedom. A typical 
three-degree-of-freedom wrist joint is depicted in Figure 3.5.4. The roll joint is 
accomplished by use of a T-joint. The pitch joint is achieved by recourse to an R-
joint. And the yaw joint, a right-and-left motion, is gained by deploying a second R-
joint. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 7.5.4: Robotic wrist joint 
 
The SCARA body-and-arm configuration typically does not use a separate wrist 
assembly. Its usual operative environment is for insertion-type assembly operations 
where wrist joints are unnecessary. The other four body-and-arm configurations 
more-or-less follow the wrist-joint configuration by deploying various combinations 
of rotary joints viz. type R and T. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

   17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore 
Page 19  
 
 
 
3.10   Drive, Arm, End Effectors, Sensor 
 
Basically three types of drive systems are commonly used to actuate robotic joints. 
These are electric, hydraulic, and pneumatic drives. Electric motors are the prime 
movers in robots. Servo-motors or steeper motors are widely used in robotics. 
Hydraulic and pneumatic systems such as piston-cylinder systems, rotary vane 
actuators are used to accomplish linear motions, and rotary motions of joints 
respectively. 
 
Pneumatic drive is regularly used for smaller, simpler robotic applications; whereas 
electric and hydraulic drives may be found applications on more sophisticated 
industrial robots. Due to the advancement in electric motor technology made in recent 
years, electric drives are generally favored in commercial applications. They also 
have compatibility to computing systems. Hydraulic systems, although not as flexible 
as electrical drives, are generally used where larger speeds are required. They are 
generally employed to carry out heavy duty operations using robots. 
 
The combination of drive system, sensors, and feedback control system determines 
the dynamic response characteristics of the manipulator. Speed in robotic terms refers 
to the absolute velocity of the manipulator at its end-of-arm. It can be programmed 
into the work cycle so that different portions of the cycle are carried out at different 
velocities. Acceleration and deceleration control are also important factors, especially 
in a confined work envelope. The robot’s ability to control the switching between 
velocities is a key determinant of the manipulator’s capabilities. Other key 
determinants are the weight (mass) of the object being manipulated, and the precision 
that is required to locate and position the object correctly. All of these determinants 
are gathered under the term ‘speed of response’, which is defined as the time required 
for the manipulator to move from one point in space to the next. Speed of response 
influences the robot’s cycle time, which in turn affects the production rate that can be 
achieved. 
 
Stability refers to the amount of overshoot and oscillation that occurs in the robot 
motion at the end-of- arm as it attempts to move to the next programmed location. 
More oscillations in the robotic motion lead to less stability in the robotic 
manipulator. However, greater stability may produce a robotic system with slower 
response times. 
 
Load carrying capacity is also an important factor. It is determined by weight of the 
gripper used to grasp the objects. A heavy gripper puts a higher load upon the robotic 
manipulator in addition to the object mass. Commercial robots can carry loads of up 
to 900 kg, while medium-sized industrial robots may have capacities of up to 45kg. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

   17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore 
Page 20  
 
  
1. Robot Control Systems 
 
To perform as per the program instructions, the joint movements an industrial robot 
must accurately be controlled. Micro-processor-based controllers are used to control 
the robots. Different types of control that are being used in robotics are given as 
follows. 
 
1. Limited Sequence Control 
It is an elementary control type. It is used for simple motion cycles, such as pick-
and-place operations. It is implemented by fixing limits or mechanical stops for 
each joint and sequencing the movement of joints to accomplish operation. 
Feedback loops may be used to inform the controller that the action has been 
performed, so that the program can move to the next step. Precision of such 
control system is less. It is generally used in pneumatically driven robots. 
 
2. Playback with Point-to-Point Control 
Playback control uses a controller with memory to record motion sequences in a 
work cycle, as well as associated locations and other parameters, and then plays 
back the work cycle during program execution. Point-to-point control means 
individual robot positions are recorded in the memory. These positions include 
both mechanical stops for each joint, and the set of values that represent locations 
in the range of each joint. Feedback control is used to confirm that the individual 
joints achieve the specified locations in the program. 
 
3. Playback with Continuous Path Control 
Continuous path control refers to a control system capable of continuous 
simultaneous control of two or more axes. The following advantages are noted 
with this type of playback control: greater storage capacity—the number of 
locations that can be stored is greater than in point-to-point; and interpolation 
calculations may be used, especially linear and circular interpolations. 
 
4. Intelligent Control 
An intelligent robot exhibits behavior that makes it seems to be intelligent. For 
example, it may have capacity to interact with its ambient surroundings; decision-
making capability; ability to communicate with humans; ability to carry out 
computational analysis during the work cycle; and responsiveness to advanced 
sensor inputs. They may also possess the playback facilities. However it requires a 
high level of computer control, and an advanced programming language to input 
the decision-making logic and other ‘intelligence’ into the memory. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

   17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore 
Page 21  
 
 
 
2. End Effectors 
 
An end effector is usually attached to the robot’s wrist, and it allows the robot to 
accomplish a specific task. This means that end effectors are generally custom-
engineered and fabricated for each different operation. There are two general 
categories of end effectors viz. grippers and tools. 
 
Grippers grasp and manipulate the objects during the work cycle. Typically objects 
that grasped are the work parts which need to be loaded or unloaded from one station 
to another. Grippers may be custom-designed to suit the physical specifications of 
work parts. Various end-effectors, grippers are summarized in Table 3.6.1. 
 
Table 3.6.1 End-Effectors: Grippers 
Type 
Description 
Mechanical gripper Two or more fingers which are actuated by robot controller 
to open and close on a workpart. 
Vacuum gripper 
Suction cups are used to hold flat objects. 
Magnetized 
Based on the principle of magnetism. These are used for 
devices 
holding ferrous workparts. 
Adhesive devices 
By deploying adhesive substances, these are used to hold 
flexible materials, such as fabric. 
Simple mechanical 
Hooks and scoops. 
devices 
Dual grippers 
It is a mechanical gripper with two gripping devices in one 
end-effecter. It is used for machine loading and unloading. It 
reduces cycle time per part by gripping two workparts at the 
same time. 
Interchangeable 
Mechanical gripper with an arrangement to have modular 
fingers 
fingers to accommodate different sizes workpart. 
Sensory feedback 
Mechanical gripper with sensory feedback capabilities in the 
fingers 
fingers to aid locating the workpart; and to determine correct 
grip force to apply (for fragile workparts). 
Multiple fingered 
Mechanical gripper as per the general anatomy of human 
grippers 
hand. 
Standard grippers 
Mechanical grippers that are commercially available, thus 
reducing the need to custom-design a gripper for separate 
robot applications. 
 
The robot end effecter may also use tools. Tools are used to perform processing 
operations on the workpart. Typically the robot uses the tool relative to a stationary or 
slowly-moving object. For example, spot welding, arc welding, and spray painting 
robots use a tool for processing the respective operation. Tools also can be mounted at 
robotic manipulator spindle to carry out machining work such as drilling, routing, 
grinding, etc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

   17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore 
Page 22  
 
 
 
3. Sensors in Robotics 
 
There are generally two categories of sensors used in robotics. These are sensors for 
internal purposes and for external purposes. Internal sensors are used to monitor and 
control the various joints of the robot. They form a feedback control loop with the 
robot controller. Examples of internal sensors include potentiometers and optical 
encoders, while tachometers of various types are deployed to control the speed of the 
robot arm. 
 
External sensors are external to the robot itself, and are used when we wish to control 
the operations of the robot. External sensors are simple devices, such as limit switches 
that determine whether a part has been positioned properly, or whether a part is ready 
to be picked up from an unloading bay. 
 
Various sensors used in robotics are outlined in Table 3.6.2. 
 
Table 3.6.2 Sensor technologies for robotics 
Sensor Type Description 
Tactile 
Used to determine whether contact is made between sensor and 
sensors 
another object 
Touch sensors: indicates the contact 
Force sensors: indicates the magnitude of force with the object 
Proximity 
Used to determine how close an object is to the sensor. Also called a 
sensors 
range sensor. 
Optical 
Photocells and other photometric devices that are used to detect the 
sensors 
presence or absence of objects. Often used in conjunction with 
proximity sensors. 
Machine 
Used in robotics for inspection, parts identification, guidance, etc. 
vision 
Others 
Measurement of temperature, fluid pressure, fluid flow, electrical 
voltage, current, and other physical properties. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

   17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore 
Page 23  
 
 
 
3.11   Functional requirements of robot 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 3.6.1 Applications of robots in industry and manufacturing 
 
Figure 3.6.1 shows a diagram which depicts an overview of applications of robots in 
manufacturing. The general characteristics of industrial work situations that tend to 
promote the substitution of robots for human labor are outlined in Table 3.6.3. 
 
Table 3.6.3: Characteristics of situations where robots may substitute for humans 
 
Situation 
Description 
Hazardous 
work 
In situations where the work environment is unsafe, 
environment 
for 
unhealthy, uncomfortable, or otherwise unpleasant for 
humans 
humans, robot application may be considered. 
Repetitive work cycle 
If the sequence of elements in the work cycle is the 
same, and the elements consist of relatively simple 
motions, robots usually perform the work with greater 
consistency and repeatability than humans. 
Difficult handling for 
If the task requires the use of heavy or difficult-to- 
humans 
handle parts or tools for humans, robots may be able to 
perform the operation more efficiently. 
Multi-shift operation 
A robot can replace two or three workers at a time in 
second or third shifts, thus they can provide a faster 
financial payback. 
Infrequent 
Robots’ use is justified for long production runs where 
changeovers 
there are infrequent changeovers, as opposed to batch or 
job  shop  production  where  changeovers  are  more 
frequent. 
Part position and 
Robots generally don’t have vision capabilities, which 
orientation are 
means parts must be precisely placed and oriented for 
established in the work successful robotic operations. 
cell 
 
 

   17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore 
Page 24  
 
 

   17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore 
Page 25  
 
 
 
Material Handling Applications 
 
Robots are mainly used in three types of applications: material handling; processing 
operations; and assembly and inspection. In material handling, robots move parts 
between various locations by means of a gripper type end effector. Material handling 
activity can be sub divided into material transfer and machine loading and/or 
unloading. These are described in Table 3.6.4. 
 
Table 3.6.4: Material handling applications 
Application 
Description 
Material 
•   Main purpose is to pick up parts at one location and place 
transfer 
them  at  a  new  location.  Part  re-orientation  may  be 
accomplished during the transfer. The most basic application 
is a pick-and-place procedure, by a low-technology robot 
(often pneumatic), using only up to 4 joints. 
•   More complex is palletizing, where robots retrieve objects 
from one location, and deposit them on a pallet in a specific 
area of the pallet, thus the deposit location is slightly 
different for each object transferred. The robot must be able 
to compute the correct deposit location via powered lead- 
through method, or by dimensional analysis. 
•   Other  applications  of  material  transfer  include  de- 
palletizing, stacking, and insertion operations. 
Machine 
•   Primary aim is to transfer parts into or out-of a production 
loading and/or 
machine. 
unloading 
•   There are three classes to consider: 
o  machine loading—where the robot loads the machine 
o  machine  unloading—where  the  robot  unloads  the 
machine 
o  machine  loading  and  unloading—where  the  robot 
performs both actions 
•   Used in die casting, plastic molding, metal machining 
operations,  forging,  press-working,  and  heat  treating 
operations. 

   17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore 
Page 26  
 
Processing Operations 
 
In processing operations, the robot performs some processing activities such as 
grinding, milling, etc. on the workpart. The end effector is equipped with the 
specialized tool required for the respective process. The tool is moved relative to the 
surface of the workpart. Table 7.6.5 outlines the examples of various processing 
operations that deploy robots. 
 
Table 7.6.5: Robotic process operations 
Process 
Description 
Spot 
Metal joining process in which two sheet metal parts are fused 
Welding 
together at localized points of contact by the deployment of two 
electrodes that squeeze the metal together and apply an electric 
current. The electrodes constitute the spot welding gun, which is the 
end effector tool of the welding robot. 
Arc 
Metal joining process that utilizes a continuous rather than contact 
Welding 
welding point process, in the same way as above. Again the end 
effector is the electrodes used to achieve the welding arc. The robot 
must use continuous path control, and a jointed arm robot consisting 
of six joints is frequently used. 
Spray 
Spray coating directs a spray gun at the object to be coated. Paint or 
Coating 
some other fluid flows through the nozzle of the spray gun, which is 
the end effector, and is dispersed and applied over the surface of the 
object. Again the robot must use continuous path control, and is 
typically programmed using manual lead-through. Jointed arm robots 
seem to be the most common anatomy for this application. 
Other 
Other applications include: drilling, routing, and other machining 
applications processes; grinding, wire brushing, and similar operations; waterjet 
cutting; and laser cutting. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

   17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore 
Page 27  
 
 
COURSE OUTCOME 
Students will 
1. Understand the concept and working of PLC’s 
2. Learn the various types of actuator. 
3. Know the concept and working of Industrial robots. 
SELF ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS 
1. With a neat block diagram explain PLC architecture. 
2. What does Central Processing Unit (CPU) of PLC consists 
3. Draw the flow diagram of ladder. 
4. Explain the concept of actuators. 
5. Explain the main features and functions of Industrial robots. 
 
FURTHER READING 
1. Mechatronics and microprocessor, Dr H.D.Ramachandra, Sudha Publications, 
Bangalore, 2018 
 

Module 4:  
 
Mechanical actuation systems and Electrical actuation systems 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
Mechanical actuation systems  
4.1    Mechanical systems 
4.2    types of motion 
4.3    Cams, Gear trains, Ratchet & Pawl, belt and chain drives 
4.4    Mechanical aspects of motor selection 
 
Electrical actuation systems  
4.5     Electrical systems 
4.6     Mechanical switches 
4.7     Solenoids, Relays 
4.8     DC/AC Motors 
4.9   Principle of Stepper Motors & servomotors 
 
OBJECTIVE 
 Is to understand concepts and working of Mechanical actuation systems. 
 Is to understand concepts and working of Electrical actuation systems 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

4.1    Mechanical systems 
 
Mechanical Systems Devices which can be considered to be motion converters in that they 
transform motion from one form to some other required form. –Eg: Transform linear motion into 
rotational motion and vice versa; A linear reciprocating motion into rotary motion. Mechanical 
elements can include the use of linkages, cams, gears, rack-and-pinion, chains, belt drives, etc. –
Eg: rack-and-pinion can be used to convert rotational motion to linear motion. Many of the 
actions which previously were obtained by the use of mechanism are, however, often nowadays 
being obtained, as a result of a mechatronics approach by the use of microprocessor systems. 
 
4.2    Types of Motion 
The motion of an object shows its changing position, as discussed earlier. But varying objects show 
varying types of motion. Like for example, a fan is said to be in motion though it is static in its place 
or a hanging clock that shows motion though it is hanging in its position. We say that motion is 
mainly of three types: Rectilinear Motion, Circular Motion and Periodic Motion. 
 
Fig 4.1: Types of motion 
Rectilinear Motion 
In a rectilinear motion, all the objects move along a single line. Some common examples of 
rectilinear motion are marching soldiers, moving cars, and moving animals. The common thing in 
all these examples is that they move in a single line 
Circular Motion 
Some objects are moving even though they are fixed at some position. here the fan undergoes 
circular motion. In the circular motion, the objects follow a circular path of motion without 
changing their position. It is the circular movement of fan that results in cool air. Some more 
examples of circular motion are the motion of a Ferry wheel, satellites and rotation of planets 
around the sun. 
Periodic Motion 
Physically the pendulum isn’t moving. It is fixed to some point, yet it shows motion. This kind of 
motion that repeats after a specific period of time is known as periodic motion. In the periodic 
motion, the movement made by these objects is called oscillation. 

Since it repeats after a fixed period of time, it is named so!  Clocks and table fans are the most 
common examples. Some other examples of the periodic motion are a child’s motion on swings, the 
motion of the earth around the Sun, the motion of the moon around the earth 
4.3    Cams, Gear trains, Ratchet & Pawl, belt and chain drives 
Cams 
 
Cams are mechanical devices which are used to generate curvilinear or irregular motion 
of mechanical elements. They are used to convert rotary motion into oscillatory motion or 
oscillatory motion into rotary motion. There are two links namely the cam itself which 
acts as an input member. The other link that acts as an output member is called the 
follower. The cam transmits the motion to the follower by direct contact. In a cam-
follower pair, the cam usually rotates while the follower translates or oscillates. 
Complicated output motions which are otherwise difficult to achieve can easily be 
produced with the help of cams. Cams are widely used in internal combustion engines, 
machine tools, printing control mechanisms, textile weaving industries, automated 
machines etc. 
 
Necessary elements of a cam mechanism are shown in Figure 4.3.1. 
 
• 
A driver member known as the cam 
 
• 
A driven member called the follower 
 
• 
A frame which supports the cam and guides the follower 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.3.1 Cam mechanism. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
1. Classification of cams 
1.1 Wedge and Flat Cams 
 
A wedge cam has a wedge of specified contour and has translational motion. The 
follower can either translate or oscillate. A spring is used to maintain the contact between 
the cam and the follower. Figure 4.3.2 shows the typical arrangement of Wedge cam. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.3.2 Wedge cam 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
1.2 Plate cam 
 
In this type of cams, the follower moves in a radial direction from the centre of rotation 
of the cam (Figure 4.3.3). They are also known as radial or disc cam. The follower 
reciprocates or oscillates in a plane normal to the cam axis. Plate cams are very popular 
due to their simplicity and compactness. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.3.3 Plate cam 
 
1.3 Cylindrical cam 
 
 
Here a cylinder has a circumferential contour cut in the surface and the cam rotates 
about its axis (Figure 4.3.4). The follower motion is either oscillating or reciprocating 
type. These cams are also called drum or barrel cams. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.3.4 Cylindrical cam 
 

 
 
2. Classification of followers: 
 
Followers can be classified based on 
 
• 
type of surface contact between cam and follower 
 
• 
type of follower motion 
 
• 
line of motion of followers 
 
 
2.1 Classification based on type of surface contact between cam and 
follower 
 
 
Figure 4.3.5 shows the schematics of various types of followers used cam mechanisms. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.3.5 Types of follower based on the surface in contact 
 
2.1.1 Knife edge follower 
 
The contacting end of the follower has a sharp knife edge. A sliding motion exists 
between the contacting cam and follower surfaces. It is rarely used in practice because 
the small area of contacting surface results in excessive wear. 
 
2.1.2 Roller follower 
 
It consists of a cylindrical roller which rolls on cam surface. Because of the rolling 
motion between the contacting surfaces, the rate of wear is reduced in comparison with 
Knife edge follower. The roller followers are extensively used where more space is 
available such as gas and oil engines. 
 
 
 

 
 
2.1.3 Flat face follower 
 
The follower face is perfectly flat. It experiences a side thrust due to the friction between 
contact surfaces of follower and cam. 
 
2.1.4 Spherical face follower 
 
The contacting end of the follower is of spherical shape which overcomes the drawback 
of side thrust as experiences by flat face follower. 
 
2.2 Classification based on followers’ motion 
 
Figure 4.3.6 shows the types of cams based followers’ motion. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.3.6 Classification of follower based on motion 
 
2.2.1 Oscillating follower 
 
In this configuration, the rotary motion of the cam is converted into predetermined 
oscillatory motion of the follower as shown in Figure 4.3.6 a). 
 
2.2.2 Translating follower 
 
These are also called as reciprocating follower. The follower reciprocates in the ‘guide’ 
as the cam rotates uniformly as shown in Figure 4.3.6 b). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
Classification based on line of motion 
 
Figure 4.3.7 shows the types of cams based followers’ line of motion. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.3.7 Classification of follower based on line of motion 
 
4.3.1 Radial follower 
 
The line of movement of the follower passes through the center of the camshaft (Figure 
4.3.7 a). 
 
4.3.2 Offset follower 
 
The line of movement of the follower is offset from the center of the cam shaft (Figure 
4.3.7 b). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
3. Force closed cam follower system 
 
In this type of cam-follwer system, an external force is needed to maintain the contact 
between cam and follower. Generally a spring maintains the contact between the two 
elements. The follower can be a oscillating type (Figure 4.3.8 a) or of translational type 
(Figure 4.3.8 b). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.3.8 Force closed cam followers 
 
4. Form closed cam foller system 
 
In this system a slot or a groove profile is cut in the cam. The roller fits in the slot and 
follows the groove profile. These kind of systems do not require a spring. These are 
extensively used in machine tools and machinery. The follower can be a translating type 
(Figure 4.3.9 a) oscillating type (Figure 4.3.9 b). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.3.9 Form closed cam followers 
 
 
 
 

 
 
5. Three-dimensional cam or Camoid 
 
Camoid is a combination of radial and axial cams. It has three dimensional surface and 
two degrees-of-freedom. Two inputs are rotation of the cam about its axis and translation 
of the cam along its axis. Follower motion is based on both the inputs. Figure 4.3.10 
shows a typical Camoid. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.3.10 A Camoid 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
6. Applications of cams 
 
 
Cams are widely used in automation of machinery, gear cutting machines, screw 
machines, printing press, textile industries, automobile engine valves, tool changers of 
machine centers, conveyors, pallet changers, sliding fork in wearhouses etc. 
 
Cams are also used in I.C engines to operate the inlet valves and exhaust valves.The cam 
shaft rotates by using prime moveres. It causes the rotation of cam. This rotation 
produces translatory motion of tappet against the spring. This translatory motion is used 
to open or close the valve. The schematic of this operation is shown in Figure 4.3.11. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.3.11 Cam in I.C engine 
 
6.1 Cams in automatic lathes 
 
The cam shaft is driven by a motor. The cutting tool mounted on the transverse slide 
travels to desired depth and at desired feed rate by a set of plate cams mounted on the 
cam shaft. The bar feeding through headstock at desired feed rate is carried out by a set of 
plate cams mounted on the camshaft. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
6.2 Automatic copying machine 
 
The cam profile can be transferred onto the work piece by using a roller follower as 
shown in Figure 4.3.12. The follower can be mounted with a cutting tool. As the cam 
traverses, the roller follows the cam profile. The required feature can be copied onto the 
workpiece by the movement of follower over the cam profile. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.3.12 Automatic copying of cam profile 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore 
Page 13 
 
 
Ratchet and pawl mechanism 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 4.5.1 Ratchet and pawl mechanism 
 
A ratchet is a device that allows linear or rotary motion in only one direction. Figure 
4.5.1 shows a schematic of the same. It is used in rotary machines to index air operated 
indexing tables. Ratchets consist of a gearwheel and a pivoting spring loaded pawl that 
engages the teeth. The teeth or the pawl, are at an angle so that when the teeth are moving 
in one direction the pawl slides in between the teeth. The spring forces the pawl back into 
the depression between the next teeth. The ratchet and pawl are not mechanically 
interlocked hence easy to set up. The table may over travel if the table is heavy when they 
are disengaged. Maintenance of this system is easy. 
 
Rack and pinion mechanism 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 4.5.2 Rack and pinion mechanism 
 
A rack and pinion gear arrangement usually converts rotary motion from a pinion to 
linear motion of a rack. But in indexing mechanism the reverse case holds true. The 
device uses a piston to drive the rack, which causes the pinion gear and attached indexing 

17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore 
Page 14 
 
table to rotate (Fig. 4.5.2). A clutch is used to provide rotation in the desired direction. 
This mechanism is simple but is not considered suitable for high-speed operation. 
 
Geneva mechanism 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 4.5.3 Geneva mechanism 
 
The Geneva drive is also commonly called a Maltese cross mechanism. The Geneva 
mechanism translates a continuous rotation into an intermittent rotary motion. The 
rotating drive wheel has a pin that reaches into a slot of the driven wheel. The drive 
wheel also has a raised circular blocking disc that locks the driven wheel in position 
between steps (Fig. 4.5.3). There are three basic types of Geneva motion mechanisms 
namely external, internal and spherical. The spherical Geneva mechanism is very rarely 
used. In the simplest form, the driven wheel has four slots and hence for each rotation of 
the drive wheel it advances by one step of 90°. If the driven wheel has n slots, it advances 
by 360°/n per full rotation of the drive wheel. 
 
In an internal Geneva drive the axis of the drive wheel of the internal drive is supported 
on only one side (Fig. 4.5.4). The angle by which the drive wheel has to rotate to effect 
one step rotation of the driven wheel is always smaller than 180° in an external Geneva 
drive and is always greater than 180° in an internal one. The external form is the more 
common, as it can be built smaller and can withstand higher mechanical stresses. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 4.5.4 Internal Geneva mechanism 
 

17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore 
Page 15 
 
Because the driven wheel always under full control of the driver, impact is a problem. It 
can be reduced by designing the pin in such a way that the pin picks up the driven 
member as slowly as possible. Both the Geneva mechanisms can be used for light and 
heavy duty applications. Generally, they are used in assembly machines. 
 
Intermittent linear motion from rotary motion can also be obtained using Geneva 
mechanism (Fig. 4.5.5). This type of movement is basically required in packaging, 
assembly operations, stamping, embossing operations in manufacturing automation. 
 
Cams mechanism 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 4.5.6 Cam mechanism 
 
Cam mechanism is one of the accurate and reliable methods of indexing. It is widely used 
in industry despite the fact that the cost is relatively high compared to alternative 
mechanisms. The cam can be designed to give a variety of velocity and dwell 
characteristics. The follower of the cams used in indexing mechanism has a 
unidirectional rotary motion rather than oscillating rotary motion which is usually the 
case of axial cams. The cam surface geometry is more complicated in a cross over 
indexing type of cam as shown in Figure 4.5.6. 
 
   
Electrical actuation systems  
 
4.5     Electrical systems 
 
1.  Drives 
Basic function of a CNC machine is to provide automatic and precise motion control to 
its elements such work table, tool spindle etc. Drives are used to provide such kinds of 
controlled motion to the elements of a CNC machine tool. A drive system consists of 
drive motors and ball lead-screws. The control unit sends the amplified control signals to 
actuate drive motors which in turn rotate the ball lead-screws to position the machine 
table or cause rotation of the spindle. 
 
 

17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore 
Page 16 
 
2.  Power drives 
Drives used in an automated system or in CNC system are of different types such as 
electrical, hydraulic or pneumatic. 
• 
Electrical drives 
These are direct current (DC) or alternating current (AC) servo motors. They are 
small in size and are easy to control. 
 
• 
Hydraulic drives 
These drives have large power to size ratio and provide stepless motion with great 
accuracy. But these are difficult to maintain and are bulky. Generally they employ 
petroleum based hydraulic oil which may have fire hazards at upper level of 
working temperatures. Also hydraulic elements need special treatment to protect 
them against corrosion. 
 
• 
Pneumatic drives 
This drives use air as working medium which is available in abundant and is fire 
proof. They are simple in construction and are cheaper. However these drives 
generate low power, have less positioning accuracy and are noisy. 
 
In CNC, usually AC, DC, servo and stepper electrical drives are used. The various drives 
used in CNC machines can be classified as: 
a. Spindle drives to provide the main spindle power for cutting action 
b. Feed drives to drive the axis 
 
 
 
 
4.6     Mechanical switches 
 
Mechanical switches can be classified into different types based on several factors such as 
method of actuation (manual, limit and process switches), number of contacts (single contact and 
multi contact switches), number of poles and throws (SPST, DPDT, SPDT, etc.), operation and 
construction (push button, toggle, rotary, joystick, etc), based on state (momentary and locked 
switches), etc. 
Mechanical switches can be divided into two basic types. The first, commercial and appliance 
switches, are used in fairly clean environments such as offices or homes. They are not sealed and 
are generally used for light, low-current applications. 
The second type, industrial switches, actuate magnetic contactors and remote-operated 
controllers. These switches must be ruggedly constructed because they are frequently exposed to 
oil, solvents, chemicals, and dust. And their contacts must handle the high inrush current drawn 
by electromagnets in the controllers. Industrial switches are available in five basic types: 
standard duty, heavy duty, heavy-duty oiltight, miniature oiltight, and multilight-control oiltight. 
The terms standard duty and heavy duty are derived from the Standards for Industrial Control 
Equipment of Underwriters' Laboratories Inc. for normal current and inrush current. 

17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore 
Page 17 
 
Manual switches can have one or a combination of switching actions. In momentary-action 
switches, the operator pushes (pushbutton or toggle) or twists (rotary) the actuating device and 
contacts move to transfer the circuits to the second set of contacts. When the actuating force is 
removed, the actuating device and the contacts return to the original position. When a 
maintained-action switch is actuated, the contacts move to transfer the circuits to the second set 
of contacts. No change takes place until the operator actuates the switch a second time. Then the 
circuit moves to another set of contacts or returns to the original position. 
Mechanical-bail switches have separate switching assemblies, which are interlocked so that 
actuation of one switch deactivates another. 
A capacitive touch switch consists of two conductive layers on opposite sides of an insulating 
material such as glass or a printed-circuit board. The conductive layers create a capacitance that 
decreases when a layer is touched. Interface circuitry converts the capacitance change into a 
usable switching action to drive logic systems or to switch analog signals. There are several 
types of touch-switch interface circuits available. 
Membrane switches are simple devices in which conductive leads on the underside of a flexible 
membrane are, at a keystroke, pushed through a hole in a spacer to make contact with conductive 
leads on a base. Most membrane switches handle loads up to about 1.5 VA at 5 to 15 V 
4.7     Solenoids and Relays 
A solenoid is a coil of insulated or enameled wire wound on a rod-shaped form made of solid 
iron, solid steel, or powdered iron. Devices of this kind can be used as electromagnets, as 
inductors in electronic circuits, and as miniature wireless receiving antennas. 
 
Fig 4.7.1: Solenoid 

17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore 
Page 18 
 
In a solenoid, the core material is ferromagnetic, meaning that it concentrates magnetic lines of 
flux. This increases the inductance of the coil far beyond the inductance obtainable with an air-
core coil of the same dimensions and the same number of turns. When current flows in the coil, 
most of the resulting magnetic flux exists within the core material. Some flux appears outside the 
coil near the ends of the core; a small amount of flux also appears outside the coil and off to the 
side. 
A solenoid chime is wound on a cylindrical, hollow, plastic or phenolic form with a movable, 
solid iron or steel core. The core can travel in and out of the coil along its axis. The coil is 
oriented vertically; the core normally rests somewhat below the coil center. When a current pulse 
is applied to the coil, the magnetic field pulls the core forcefully upward. Inertia carries the core 
above the center of the coil, where the core strikes a piece of metal similar to a xylophone bell 
Electromechanical Relay  
 
Fig 4.7.2: Relay 
We have two sets of electrically conductive contacts. Relays may be “Normally Open”, or 
“Normally Closed”. One pair of contacts are classed as Normally Open, (NO) or make contacts 
and another set which are classed as Normally Closed, (NC)or break contacts. In the normally 
open position, the contacts are closed only when the field current is “ON” and the switch 
contacts are pulled towards the inductive coil. 
In the normally closed position, the contacts are permanently closed when the field current is 
“OFF” as the switch contacts return to their normal position. These terms Normally Open, 
Normally Closed or Make and Break Contacts refer to the state of the electrical contacts when 
the relay coil is “de-energized”, i.e, no supply voltage connected to the relay coil. Contact 
elements may be of single or double make or break designs. An example of this arrangement is 
given below. 
 
The relays contacts are electrically conductive pieces of metal which touch together completing a 
circuit and allow the circuit current to flow, just like a switch. When the contacts are open the 
resistance between the contacts is very high in the Mega-Ohms, producing an open circuit 
condition and no circuit current flows. 

17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore 
Page 19 
 
When the contacts are closed the contact resistance should be zero, a short circuit, but this is not 
always the case. All relay contacts have a certain amount of “contact resistance” when they are 
closed and this is called the “On-Resistance”, similar to FET’s. 
With a new relay and contacts this ON-resistance will be very small, generally less than 
0.2Ωbecause the tips are new and clean, but over time the tip resistance will increase 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore 
Page 20 
 
 
 
 
 
3.8     DC/AC Motors 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 4.1.3 Classification of motors 
 
Electric drives are mostly used in position and speed control systems. The motors can be 
classified into two groups namely DC motors and AC motors (Fig. 4.1.3). In this session 
we shall study the operation, construction, advantages and limitations of DC and AC 
motors. 
 
DC motors 
 
A DC motor is a device that converts direct current (electrical energy) into rotation of an 
element (mechanical energy). These motors can further be classified into brushed DC 
motor and brushless DC motors. 
 
Brush type DC motor 
 
A typical brushed motor consists of an armature coil, slip rings divided into two parts, a 
pair of brushes and horse shoes electromagnet as shown in Fig. 4.1.4. A simple DC motor 
has two field poles namely a north pole and a south pole. The magnetic lines of force 
extend across the opening between the poles from north to south. The coil is wound 
around a soft iron core and is placed in between the magnet poles. These electromagnets 
receive electricity from an outside power source. The coil ends are connected to split 
rings. The carbon brushes are in contact with the split rings. The brushes are connected to 
a DC source. Here the split rings rotate with the coil while the brushes remain stationary. 
 
 

17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore 
Page 21 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 4.1.4 Brushed DC motor 
 
The working is based on the principle that when a current-carrying conductor is placed in 
a magnetic field, it experiences a mechanical force whose direction is given by Fleming's 
left-hand rule. The magnitude of the force is given by 
= 
(4.1.1)
 
Where, B is magnetic field density in weber/m2 
 
I is the current in amperes and 
 
L is the length of the conductor in meter 
 
θ is the angle between the direction of the current in the conductor and the electric field 
 
If the current and filed are perpendicular then θ=90°. The equation 4.1.1 becomes, 
= 
(4.1.2)
 
A direct current in a set of windings creates a magnetic field. This field produces a force 
which turns the armature. This force is called torque. This torque will cause the armature 
to turn until its magnetic field is aligned with the external field. Once aligned the 
direction of the current in the windings on the armature reverses, thereby reversing the 
polarity of the rotor's electromagnetic field. A torque is once again exerted on the rotor, 
and it continues spinning. The change in direction of current is facilitated by the split ring 
commutator. The main purpose of the commutator is to overturn the direction of the 
electric current in the armature. The commutator also aids in the transmission of current 
between the armature and the power source. The brushes remain stationary, but they are 
in contact with the armature at the commutator, which rotates with the armature such that 
at every 180° of rotation, the current in the armature is reversed. 
 
 
 

17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore 
Page 22 
 
 
 
Advantages of brushed DC motor: 
 
• 
The design of the brushed DC motor is quite simple 
 
• 
Controlling the speed of a Brush DC Motor is easy 
 
• 
Very cost effective 
 
Disadvantages of brushed DC motor: 
 
• 
High maintenance 
 
• 
Performance decreases with dust particles 
 
• 
Less reliable in control at lower speeds 
 
• 
The brushes wear off with usage 
 
Brushless DC motor 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 4.1.5 Brushless DC motor 
 
A brushless DC motor has a rotor with permanent magnets and a stator with windings. 
The rotor can be of ceramic permanent magnet type. The brushes and commutator are 
eliminated and the windings are connected to the control electronics. The control 
electronics replace the commutator and brushes and energize the stator sequentially. Here 
the conductor is fixed and the magnet moves (Fig. 4.1.5). 
 
The current supplied to the stator is based on the position of rotor. It is switched in 
sequence using transistors. The position of the rotor is sensed by Hall effect sensors. Thus 
a continuous rotation is obtained. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore 
Page 23 
 
 
 
 
Advantages of brushless DC motor: 
 
• 
More precise due to computer control 
• 
More efficient 
 
• 
No sparking due to absence of brushes 
• 
Less electrical noise 
 
• 
No brushes to wear out 
• 
Electromagnets are situated on the stator hence easy to cool 
 
• 
Motor can operate at speeds above 10,000 rpm under loaded and unloaded conditions 
• 
Responsiveness and quick acceleration due to low rotor inertia 
 
Disadvantages of brushless DC motor: 
 
• 
Higher initial cost 
 
• 
Complex due to presence of computer controller 
• 
Brushless DC motor also requires additional system wiring in order to power the 
electronic commutation circuitry 
 
AC motors 
 
AC motors convert AC current into the rotation of a mechanical element (mechanical 
energy). As in the case of DC motor, a current is passed through the coil, generating a 
torque on the coil. Typical components include a stator and a rotor. The armature of rotor 
is a magnet unlike DC motors and the stator is formed by electromagnets similar to DC 
motors. The main limitation of AC motors over DC motors is that speed is more difficult 
to control in AC motors. To overcome this limitation, AC motors are equipped with 
variable frequency drives but the improved speed control comes together with a reduced 
power quality. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 4.1.6 AC motor working principle 
 
The working principle of AC motor is shown in fig. 4.1.6. Consider the rotor to be a 
permanent magnet. Current flowing through conductors energizes the magnets and 
develops N and S poles. The strength of electromagnets depends on current. First half 
cycle current flows in one direction and in the second half cycle it flows in opposite 
direction. As AC voltage changes the poles alternate. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore 
Page 24 
 
 
 
AC motors can be classified into synchronous motors and induction motors. 
 
Synchronous motor 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 4.1.7 Synchronous AC motor 
 
A synchronous motor is an AC motor which runs at constant speed fixed by frequency of 
the system. It requires direct current (DC) for excitation and has low starting torque, and 
hence is suited for applications that start with a low load. It has two basic electrical parts 
namely stator and rotor as shown in fig. 4.1.7. The stator consists of a group of individual 
wounded electro-magnets arranged in such a way that they form a hollow cylinder. The 
stator produces a rotating magnetic field that is proportional to the frequency supplied. 
The rotor is the rotating electrical component. It also consists of a group of permanent 
magnets arranged around a cylinder, with the poles facing toward the stator poles. The 
rotor is mounted on the motor shaft. The main difference between the synchronous motor 
and the induction motor is that the rotor of the synchronous motor travels at the same 
speed as the rotating magnet. 
 
The stator is given a three phase supply and as the polarity of the stator progressively 
change the magnetic field rotates, the rotor will follow and rotate with the magnetic field 
of the stator. If a synchronous motor loses lock with the line frequency it will stall. It 
cannot start by itself, hence has to be started by an auxiliary motor. 
 
Synchronous speed of an AC motor is determined by the following formula: 
= 
120 ∗ 
(4.1.3) 
Ns = Revolutions per minute 
P = Number of pole pairs 
f = Applied frequency 

17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore 
Page 25 
 
 
 
Induction motor 
 
Induction motors are quite commonly used in industrial automation. In the synchronous 
motor the stator poles are wound with coils and rotor is permanent magnet and is 
supplied with current to create fixed polarity poles. In case of induction motor, the stator 
is similar to synchronous motor with windings but the rotors’ construction is different. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 4.1.8 Induction motor rotor 
 
Rotor of an induction motor can be of two types: 
 
• 
A squirrel-cage rotor consists of thick conducting bars embedded in parallel slots. 
The bars can be of copper or aluminum. These bars are fitted at both ends by 
means end rings as shown in figure 4.1.8. 
 
• 
A wound rotor has a three-phase, double-layer, distributed winding. The rotor is 
wound for as many numbers of poles as the stator. The three phases are wired 
internally and the other ends are connected to slip-rings mounted on a shaft with 
brushes resting on them. 
 
Induction motors can be classified into two types: 
 
• 
Single-phase induction motor: It has one stator winding and a squirrel cage rotor. 
It operates with a single-phase power supply and requires a device to start the 
motor. 
 
• 
Three-phase induction motor: The rotating magnetic field is produced by the 
balanced three-phase power supply. These motors can have squirrel cage or 
wound rotors and are self-starting. 
 
In an induction motor there is no external power supply to rotor. It works on the principle 
of induction. When a conductor is moved through an existing magnetic field the relative 
motion of the two causes an electric current to flow in the conductor. In an induction 
motor the current flow in the rotor is not caused by any direct connection of the 
conductors to a voltage source, but rather by the influence of the rotor conductors cutting 
across the lines of flux produced by the stator magnetic fields. The induced current which 
is produced in the rotor results in a magnetic field around the rotor. The magnetic field 
around each rotor conductor will cause the rotor conductor to act like the permanent 
 
 

17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore 
Page 26 
 
 
 
magnet. As the magnetic field of the stator rotates, due to the effect of the three-phase AC 
power supply, the induced magnetic field of the rotor will be attracted and will follow the 
rotation. However, to produce torque, an induction motor must suffer from slip. Slip is 
the result of the induced field in the rotor windings lagging behind the rotating magnetic 
field in the stator windings. The slip is given by, 
= 
        ℎ            − 
        ℎ             
∗ 100% 
(4.1.4)
 
Advantages of AC induction motors 
 
• 
It has a simple design, low initial cost, rugged construction almost unbreakable 
 
• 
The operation is simple with less maintenance (as there are no brushes) 
• 
The efficiency of these motors is very high, as there are no frictional losses, with 
reasonably good power factor 
 
• 
The control gear for the starting purpose of these motors is minimum and thus simple 
and reliable operation 
 
Disadvantages of AC induction motors 
 
• 
The speed control of these motors is at the expense of their efficiency 
• 
As the load on the motor increases, the speed decreases 
 
• 
The starting torque is inferior when compared to DC motors 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore 
Page 27 
 
  
3.9   Principle of Stepper Motors & servomotors 
 
Stepper motor 
 
A stepper motor is a pulse-driven motor that changes the angular position of the rotor in 
steps. Due to this nature of a stepper motor, it is widely used in low cost, open loop 
position control systems. 
 
Types of stepper motors: 
• 
Permanent Magnet 
o Employ permanent magnet 
o Low speed, relatively high torque 
• 
Variable Reluctance 
o Does not have permanent magnet 
o Low torque 
 
Variable Reluctance Motor 
 
Figure 4.2.1 shows the construction of Variable Reluctance motor. The cylindrical rotor 
is made of soft steel and has four poles as shown in Fig.4.2.1. It has four rotor teeth, 90⁰ 
apart and six stator poles, 60⁰ apart. Electromagnetic field is produced by activating the 
stator coils in sequence. It attracts the metal rotor. When the windings are energized in a 
reoccurring sequence of 2, 3, 1, and so on, the motor will rotate in a 30⁰ step angle. In the 
non-energized condition, there is no magnetic flux in the air gap, as the stator is an 
electromagnet and the rotor is a piece of soft iron; hence, there is no detent torque. This 
type of stepper motor is called a variable reluctance stepper. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 4.2.1 Variable reluctance stepper motor 
 
 
 
 
 
 

17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore 
Page 28 
 
 
 
Permanent magnet (PM) stepper motor 
 
In this type of motor, the rotor is a permanent magnet. Unlike the other stepping motors, 
the PM motor rotor has no teeth and is designed to be magnetized at a right angle to its 
axis. Figure 4.2.2 shows a simple, 90⁰ PM motor with four phases (A-D). Applying 
current to each phase in sequence will cause the rotor to rotate by adjusting to the 
changing magnetic fields. Although it operates at fairly low speed, the PM motor has a 
relatively high torque characteristic. These are low cost motors with typical step angle 
ranging between 7.5⁰ to 15⁰. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
⁰ 
 
Fig. 4.2.2 Permanent magnet stepper 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore 
Page 29 
 
 
 
Hybrid stepper motor 
 
Hybrid stepping motors combine a permanent magnet and a rotor with metal teeth to provide 
features of the variable reluctance and permanent magnet motors together. The number of rotor 
pole pairs is equal to the number of teeth on one of the rotor’s parts. The hybrid motor stator has 
teeth creating more poles than the main poles windings (Fig. 4.2.3). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 3 Hybrid stepper motor 
 
Rotation of a hybrid stepping motor is produced in the similar fashion as a permanent 
magnet stepping motor, by energizing individual windings in a positive or negative 
direction. When a winding is energized, north and south poles are created, depending on 
the polarity of the current flowing. These generated poles attract the permanent poles of 
the rotor and also the finer metal teeth present on rotor. The rotor moves one step to align 
the offset magnetized rotor teeth to the corresponding energized windings. Hybrid motors 
are more expensive than motors with permanent magnets, but they use smaller steps, 
have greater torque and maximum speed. 
 
Step angle of a stepper motor is given by, 
Step angle = 
360° 
(4.2.1)
Number of poles 
  
Advantages of stepper motors 
 
• 
Low cost 
 
• 
Ruggedness 
 
• 
Simplicity of construction 
 
• 
Low maintenance 
 
• 
Less likely to stall or slip 
 
• 
Will work in any environment 
 
• 
Excellent start-stop and reversing responses 
 
 
 

17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore 
Page 30 
 
 
 
Disadvantages of stepper motors 
 
• 
Low torque capacity compared to DC motors 
 
• 
Limited speed 
 
• 
During overloading, the synchronization will be broken. Vibration and noise 
occur when running at high speed. 
 
 
Servomotor 
 
Servomotors are special electromechanical devices that produce precise degrees of 
rotation. A servo motor is a DC or AC or brushless DC motor combined with a position 
sensing device. Servomotors are also called control motors as they are involved in 
controlling a mechanical system. The servomotors are used in a closed-loop servo system 
as shown in Figure 4.2.4. A reference input is sent to the servo amplifier, which controls 
the speed of the servomotor. A feedback device is mounted on the machine, which is 
either an encoder or resolver. This device changes mechanical motion into electrical 
signals and is used as a feedback. This feedback is sent to the error detector, which 
compares the actual operation with that of the reference input. If there is an error, that 
error is fed directly to the amplifier, which will be used to make necessary corrections in 
control action. In many servo systems, both velocity and position are monitored. 
Servomotors provide accurate speed, torque, and have ability of direction control. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 4.2.4 Servo system block diagram 
 
DC servomotors 
 
DC operated servomotors are usually respond to error signal abruptly and accelerate the 
load quickly. A DC servo motor is actually an assembly of four separate components, 
namely: 
 
• 
DC motor 
• 
gear assembly 
• 
position-sensing device 
• 
control circuit 
 
 
 
 
 
 

17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore 
Page 31 
 
 
 
AC servo motor 
 
In this type of motor, the magnetic force is generated by a permanent magnet and current 
which further produce the torque. It has no brushes so there is little noise/vibration. This 
motor provides high precision control with the help of high resolution encoder. The stator 
is composed of a core and a winding. The rotor part comprises of shaft, rotor core and a 
permanent magnet. 
 
Digital encoder can be of optical or magnetic type. It gives digital signals, which are in 
proportion of rotation of the shaft. The details about optical encoder have already 
discussed in Lecture 3 of Module 2. 
 
Advantages of servo motors 
 
• 
Provides high intermittent torque, high torque to inertia ratio, and high speeds 
• 
Work well for velocity control 
• 
Available in all sizes 
• 
Quiet in operation 
• 
Smoother rotation at lower speeds 
 
Disadvantages of servo motors 
 
• 
More expensive than stepper motors 
• 
Require tuning of control loop parameters 
• 
Not suitable for hazardous environments or in vacuum 
• 
Excessive current can result in partial demagnetization of DC type servo motor 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore 
Page 32 
 
 
 
 
COURSE OUTCOME 
Students will 
1. Understand the concept and working of Mechanical and electrical actuation systems 
2. Learn the various types of mechanisms and switches 
3. Know the concept and working of motors 
SELF ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS 
1. With a neat block diagram explain Cams. 
2. What does Servo and Induction motor consists 
3. Draw stepper motors. 
4. Explain the concept of solenoids. 
5. Explain the main features and functions of relays. 
 
FURTHER READING 
1. Mechatronics and microprocessor, Dr H.D.Ramachandra, Sudha Publications, Bangalore, 
2018 
 
 
 
 

Module 5:  
 
Pneumatic and hydraulic actuation systems, DCV & FCV 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
Pneumatic and hydraulic actuation systems  
5.1    Pneumatic and hydraulic systems 
5.2    Classifications of Valves, Pressure relief valves, Pressure regulating/reducing valves 
5.3   Cylinders and rotary actuators 
 
DCV & FCV  
5.4     Principle & construction details Symbols of hydraulic elements, components of hydraulic                      
system, and functions of various units of hydraulic system 
5.5     spool valve solenoid operated 
5.6   Design of simple hydraulic circuits for various applications 
 
OBJECTIVE 
 Is to understand concepts and working of Pneumatic and hydraulic actuation 
systems. 
 Is to understand concepts and working of direction control valves and flow control 
valves 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 

5.1    Pneumatic and hydraulic systems 
 
Pneumatic Systems 
  
Compressors 
 
1. Diaphragm compressor 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 5.1.1 Diaphragm compressor 
 
These are small capacity compressors. In piston compressors the lubricating oil from 
the pistons walls may contaminate the compressed air. The contamination is 
undesirable in food, pharmaceutical and chemical industries. For such applications 
diaphragm type compressor can be used. Figure 5.1.1 shows the construction of 
Diaphragm compressor. The piston reciprocates by a motor driven crankshaft. As the 
piston moves down it pulls the hydraulic fluid down causing the diaphragm to move 
along and the air is sucked in. When the piston moves up the fluid pushes the 
diaphragm up causing the ejection of air from the outlet port. Since the flexible 
diaphragm is placed in between the piston and the air no contamination takes place. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
2. Screw compressor 
 
Piston compressors are used when high pressures and relatively low volume of air is 
needed. The system is complex as it has many moving parts. For medium flow and 
pressure applications, screw compressor can be used. It is simple in construction with 
less number of moving parts. The air delivered is steady with no pressure pulsation. It 
has two meshing screws. The air from the inlet is trapped between the meshing screws 
and is compressed. The contact between the two meshing surface is minimum, hence 
no cooling is required. These systems are quite in operation compared to piston type. 
The screws are synchronized by using external timing gears. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 5.1.2 Screw compressor 
 
3. Rotary vane compressors 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 5.1.3 Rotary vane compressor 
 
The principle of operation of vane compressor is similar to the hydraulic vane pump. 
Figure 5.1.3 shows the working principle of Rotary vane compressor. The unbalanced 
vane compressor consists of spring loaded vanes seating in the slots of the rotor. The 
pumping action occurs due to movement of the vanes along a cam ring. The rotor is 
eccentric to the cam ring. As the rotor rotates, the vanes follow the inner surface of 
the cam ring. The space between the vanes decreases near the outlet due to the 
eccentricity. This causes compression of the air. These compressors are free from 
pulsation. If the eccentricity is zero no flow takes place. 
 
 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 5.1.4 Liquid ring compressor 
 
Liquid ring vane compressor is a variation of vane compressors. Figure 5.1.4 shows 
the construction of Liquid ring compressor. The casing is filled with liquid up to rotor 
center. The air enters the compressor through the distributor fixed to the compressor. 
During the impeller rotation, the liquid will be centrifuged along the inner ring of the 
casing to form the liquid ring. There are two suction and discharge ports provided in 
the distributor. During the first quarter of cycle, the air is sucked in both suction 
chambers of the casing and during the second quarter of the cycle, the air is 
compressed and pushed out through the two discharge ports. During the third and 
fourth quarters of the cycle, the process is repeated. This type of compressor has no 
leakage and has minimal friction. For smooth operation, the rotation speed should be 
about 3000 rpm. The delivery pressure is low (about 5 bar). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
4. Lobe compressor 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 5.1.5 Lobe compressor 
 
The lobe compressor is used when high delivery volume but low pressure is needed. It 
consists of two lobes with one being driven and the other driving. Figure 5.1.5 shows 
the construction and working of Lobe compressor. It is similar to the Lobe pump used 
in hydraulic systems. The operating pressure is limited by leakage between rotors and 
housing. As the wear increases during the operation, the efficiency falls rapidly. 
 
5. Dynamic compressors 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 5.1.6 Blower (Centrifugal type) 
 
When very large volume of compressed air is required in applications such as 
ventilators, combustion system and pneumatic powder blower conveyors, the dynamic 
compressor can be used. The pressure needed is very low in such applications. Figure 
5.1.6 shows a typical Centrifugal type blower. The impeller rotates at a high speed. 
Large volume of low pressure air can be provided by blowers. The blowers draw the 
air in and the impeller flings it out due to centrifugal force. Positive displacement 
 
 

 
 
compressors need oil to lubricate the moving parts, whereas the dynamic compressors 
have no such need. The efficiency of these compressors is better than that of 
reciprocating types. 
 
Classification of Hydraulic Pumps 
 
These are mainly classified into two categories: 
 
A. Non-positive displacement pumps 
 
B. Positive displacement pumps. 
 
A. Non-Positive Displacement Pumps 
 
These pumps are also known as hydro-dynamic pumps. In these pumps the fluid is 
pressurized by the rotation of the propeller and the fluid pressure is proportional to the 
rotor speed. These pumps can not withstanding high pressures and generally used for 
low-pressure and high-volume flow applications. The fluid pressure and flow generated 
due to inertia effect of the fluid. The fluid motion is generated due to rotating propeller. 
These pumps provide a smooth and continuous flow but the flow output decreases with 
increase in system resistance (load). The flow output decreases because some of the fluid 
slip back at higher resistance. The fluid flow is completely stopped at very large system 
resistance and thus the volumetric efficiency will become zero. Therefore, the flow rate 
not only depends on the rotational speed but also on the resistance provided by the 
system. The important advantages of non-positive displacement pumps are lower initial 
cost, less operating maintenance because of less moving parts, simplicity of operation, 
higher reliability and suitability with wide range of fluid etc. These pumps are primarily 
used for transporting fluids and find little use in the hydraulic or fluid power industries. 
Centrifugal pump is the common example of non-positive displacement pumps. Details 
have already discussed in the previous lecture. 
 
B. Positive displacement pump 
 
These pumps deliver a constant volume of fluid in a cycle. The discharge quantity per 
revolution is fixed in these pumps and they produce fluid flow proportional to their 
displacement and rotor speed. These pumps are used in most of the industrial fluid power 
applications. The output fluid flow is constant and is independent of the system pressure 
(load). The important advantage associated with these pumps is that the high-pressure 
and low-pressure areas (means input and output region) are separated and hence the fluid 
cannot leak back due to higher pressure at the outlets. These features make the positive 
displacement pump most suited and universally accepted for hydraulic systems. The 
important advantages of positive displacement pumps over non-positive displacement 
pumps include capability to generate high pressures, high volumetric efficiency, high 
 
 
 

 
 
power to weight ratio, change in efficiency throughout the pressure range is small and 
wider operating range pressure and speed. The fluid flow rate of these pumps ranges from 
0.1 and 15,000 gpm, the pressure head ranges between 10 and 100,000 psi and specific 
speed is less than 500. 
 
It is important to note that the positive displacement pumps do not produce pressure but 
they only produce fluid flow. The resistance to output fluid flow generates the pressure. It 
means that if the discharge port (output) of a positive displacement pump is opened to the 
atmosphere, then fluid flow will not generate any output pressure above atmospheric 
pressure. But, if the discharge port is partially blocked, then the pressure will rise due to 
the increase in fluid flow resistance. If the discharge port of the pump is completely 
blocked, then an infinite resistance will be generated. This will result in the breakage of 
the weakest component in the circuit. Therefore, the safety valves are provided in the 
hydraulic circuits along with positive displacement pumps. Important positive 
displacement pumps are gears pumps, vane pumps and piston pumps. The details of these 
pumps are discussed in the following sections. 
 
2. Gear Pumps 
 
Gear pump is a robust and simple positive displacement pump. It has two meshed gears 
revolving about their respective axes. These gears are the only moving parts in the pump. 
They are compact, relatively inexpensive and have few moving parts. The rigid design of 
the gears and houses allow for very high pressures and the ability to pump highly viscous 
fluids. They are suitable for a wide range of fluids and offer self-priming performance. 
Sometimes gear pumps are designed to function as either a motor or a pump. These pump 
includes helical and herringbone gear sets (instead of spur gears), lobe shaped rotors 
similar to Roots blowers (commonly used as superchargers), and mechanical designs that 
allow the stacking of pumps. Based upon the design, the gear pumps are classified as: 
 
• 
External gear pumps 
 
• 
Lobe pumps 
 
• 
Internal gear pumps 
 
• 
Gerotor pumps 
 
Generally gear pumps are used to pump: 
 
• 
Petrochemicals: Pure or filled bitumen, pitch, diesel oil, crude oil, lube oil etc. 
 
• 
Chemicals: Sodium silicate, acids, plastics, mixed chemicals, isocyanates etc. 
 
• 
Paint and ink 
 
• 
Resins and adhesives 
 
• 
Pulp and paper: acid, soap, lye, black liquor, kaolin, lime, latex, sludge etc. 
 
• 
Food: Chocolate, cacao butter, fillers, sugar, vegetable fats and oils, molasses, 
animal food etc. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
1 External gear pump 
 
The external gear pump consists of externally meshed two gears housed in a pump case 
as shown in figure 5.2.1. One of the gears is coupled with a prime mover and is called as 
driving gear and another is called as driven gear. The rotating gear carries the fluid from 
the tank to the outlet pipe. The suction side is towards the portion whereas the gear teeth 
come out of the mesh. When the gears rotate, volume of the chamber expands leading to 
pressure drop below atmospheric value. Therefore the vacuum is created and the fluid is 
pushed into the void due to atmospheric pressure. The fluid is trapped between housing 
and rotating teeth of the gears. The discharge side of pump is towards the portion where 
the gear teeth run into the mesh and the volume decreases between meshing teeth. The 
pump has a positive internal seal against leakage; therefore, the fluid is forced into the 
outlet port. The gear pumps are often equipped with the side wear plate to avoid the 
leakage. The clearance between gear teeth and housing and between side plate and gear 
face is very important and plays an important role in preventing leakage. In general, the 
gap distance is less than 10 micrometers. The amount of fluid discharge is determined by 
the number of gear teeth, the volume of fluid between each pair of teeth and the speed of 
rotation. The important drawback of external gear pump is the unbalanced side load on its 
bearings. It is caused due to high pressure at the outlet and low pressure at the inlet which 
results in slower speeds and lower pressure ratings in addition to reducing the bearing 
life. Gear pumps are most commonly used for the hydraulic fluid power applications and 
are widely used in chemical installations to pump fluid with a certain viscosity. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.2.1 Gear pump 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
2 Lobe Pump 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.2.2 Lobe pump 
 
Lobe pumps work on the similar principle of working as that of external gear pumps. 
However in Lobe pumps, the lobes do not make any contact like external gear pump (see 
Figure 5.2.2). Lobe contact is prevented by external timing gears located in the gearbox. 
Similar to the external gear pump, the lobes rotate to create expanding volume at the 
inlet. Now, the fluid flows into the cavity and is trapped by the lobes. Fluid travels 
around the interior of casing in the pockets between the lobes and the casing. Finally, the 
meshing of the lobes forces liquid to pass through the outlet port. The bearings are placed 
out of the pumped liquid. Therefore the pressure is limited by the bearing location and 
shaft deflection. 
 
Because of superb sanitary qualities, high efficiency, reliability, corrosion resistance and 
good clean-in-place and steam-in-place (CIP/SIP) characteristics, Lobe pumps are widely 
used in industries such as pulp and paper, chemical, food, beverage, pharmaceutical and 
biotechnology etc. These pumps can handle solids (e.g., cherries and olives), slurries, 
pastes, and a variety of liquids. A gentle pumping action minimizes product degradation. 
They also offer continuous and intermittent reversible flows. Flow is relatively 
independent of changes in process pressure and therefore, the output is constant and 
continuous. 
 
Lobe pumps are frequently used in food applications because they handle solids without 
damaging the product. Large sized particles can be pumped much effectively than in 
other positive displacement types. As the lobes do not make any direct contact therefore, 
the clearance is not as close as in other Positive displacement pumps. This specific design 
of pump makes it suitable to handle low viscosity fluids with diminished performance. 
 
 
 

 
 
Loading characteristics are not as good as other designs, and suction ability is low. High-
viscosity liquids require reduced speeds to achieve satisfactory performance. The 
reduction in speed can be 25% or more in case of high viscosity fluid. 
 
3 Internal Gear Pump 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.2.3 Internal gear pump 
 
Internal gear pumps are exceptionally versatile. They are often used for low or medium 
viscosity fluids such as solvents and fuel oil and wide range of temperature. This is non-
pulsing, self-priming and can run dry for short periods. It is a variation of the basic gear 
pump. 
 
It comprises of an internal gear, a regular spur gear, a crescent-shaped seal and an 
external housing. The schematic of internal gear pump is shown in figure 5.2.3. Liquid 
enters the suction port between the rotor (large exterior gear) and idler (small interior 
gear) teeth. Liquid travels through the pump between the teeth and crescent. Crescent 
divides the liquid and acts as a seal between the suction and discharge ports. When the 
teeth mesh on the side opposite to the crescent seal, the fluid is forced out through the 
discharge port of the pump. This clearance between gears can be adjusted to 
accommodate high temperature, to handle high viscosity fluids and to accommodate the 
wear. These pumps are bi-rotational so that they can be used to load and unload the 
vessels. As these pumps have only two moving parts and one stuffing box, therefore they 
are reliable, simple to operate and easy to maintain. However, these pumps are not 
suitable for high speed and high pressure applications. Only one bearing is used in the 
pump therefore overhung load on shaft bearing reduces the life of the bearing. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
Applications 
 
Some common internal gear pump applications are: 
 
• 
All varieties of fuel oil and lube oil 
 
• 
Resins and Polymers 
 
• 
Alcohols and solvents 
 
• 
Asphalt, Bitumen, and Tar 
 
• 
Polyurethane foam (Isocyanate and polyol) 
 
• 
Food products such as corn syrup, chocolate, and peanut butter 
 
• 
Paint, inks, and pigments 
 
• 
Soaps and surfactants 
 
• 
Glycol 
 
4 Gerotor Pump 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.2.4 Gerotor pump 
 
Gerotor is a positive displacement pump. The name Gerotor is derived from "Generated 
Rotor". At the most basic level, a Gerotor is essentially one that is moved via fluid power. 
Originally this fluid was water, today the wider use is in hydraulic devices. The 
schematic of Gerotor pump is shown in figure 5.2.4. Gerotor pump is an internal gear 
pump without the crescent. It consists of two rotors viz. inner and outer rotor. The inner 
rotor has N teeth, and the outer rotor has N+1 teeth. The inner rotor is located off-center 
and both rotors rotate. The geometry of the two rotors partitions the volume between 
them into N different dynamically-changing volumes. During the rotation, volume of 
each partition changes continuously. Therefore, any given volume first increases, and 
then decreases. An increase in volume creates vacuum. This vacuum creates suction, and 
thus, this part of the cycle sucks the fluid. As the volume decreases, compression occurs. 
During this compression period, fluids can be pumped, or compressed (if they are 
gaseous fluids). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
The close tolerance between the gears acts as a seal between the suction and discharge 
ports. Rotor and idler teeth mesh completely to form a seal equidistant from the discharge 
and suction ports. This seal forces the liquid out of the discharge port. The flow output is 
uniform and constant at the outlets. 
 
The important advantages of the pumps are high speed operation, constant discharge in 
all pressure conditions, bidirectional operation, less sound in running condition and less 
maintenance due to only two moving parts and one stuffing box etc. However, the pump 
is having some limitations such as medium pressure operating range, clearance is fixed, 
solids can’t be pumped and overhung load on the shaft bearing etc. 
 
Applications 
 
Gerotors are widely used in industries and are produced in variety of shapes and sizes by 
a number of different methods. These pumps are primarily suitable for low pressure 
applications such as lubrication systems or hot oil filtration systems, but can also be 
found in low to moderate pressure hydraulic applications. However common applications 
are as follows: 
 
• 
Light fuel oils 
 
• 
Lube oil 
 
• 
Cooking oils 
 
• 
Hydraulic fluid 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
3. Vane Pumps 
 
In the previous lecture we have studied the gear pumps. These pumps have a 
disadvantage of small leakage due to gap between gear teeth and the pump housing. This 
limitation is overcome in vane pumps. The leakage is reduced by using spring or 
hydraulically loaded vanes placed in the slots of driven rotor. Capacity and pressure 
ratings of a vane pump are generally lower than the gear pumps, but reduced leakage 
gives an improved volumetric efficiency of around 95%. 
 
Vane pumps are available in a number of vane configurations including sliding vane, 
flexible vane, swinging vane, rolling vane, and external vane etc. Each type of vane pump 
has its own advantages. For example, external vane pumps can handle large solids. 
Flexible vane pumps can handle only the small solids but create good vacuum. Sliding 
vane pumps can run dry for short periods of time and can handle small amounts of vapor. 
The vane pumps are known for their dry priming, ease of maintenance, and good suction 
characteristics. The operating range of these pumps varies from -32 °C to 260 °C. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.3.1 Schematic of working principle of vane pump 
 
The schematic of vane pump working principle is shown in figure 5.3.1. Vane pumps 
generate a pumping action by tracking of vanes along the casing wall. The vane pumps 
generally consist of a rotor, vanes, ring and a port plate with inlet and outlet ports. The 
rotor in a vane pump is connected to the prime mover through a shaft. The vanes are 
 

 
 
located on the slotted rotor. The rotor is eccentrically placed inside a cam ring as shown 
in the figure. The rotor is sealed into the cam by two side plates. When the prime mover 
rotates the rotor, the vanes are thrown outward due to centrifugal force. The vanes track 
along the ring. It provides a tight hydraulic seal to the fluid which is more at the higher 
rotation speed due to higher centrifugal force. This produces a suction cavity in the ring 
as the rotor rotates. It creates vacuum at the inlet and therefore, the fluid is pushed into 
the pump through the inlet. The fluid is carried around to the outlet by the vanes whose 
retraction causes the fluid to be expelled. The capacity of the pump depends upon the 
eccentricity, expansion of vanes, width of vanes and speed of the rotor. It can be noted 
that the fluid flow will not occur when the eccentricity is zero. These pumps can handle 
thin liquids (low viscosity) at relatively higher pressure. These pumps can be run dry for 
a small duration without any failure. These pumps develop good vacuum due to 
negligible leakage. However, these pumps are not suitable for high speed applications 
and for the high viscosity fluids or fluids carrying some abrasive particles. The 
maintenance cost is also higher due to many moving parts. These pumps have various 
applications for the pumping of following fluids: 
 
• 
Aerosol and Propellants 
 
• 
Aviation Service - Fuel Transfer, Deicing 
 
• 
Auto Industry - Fuels, Lubes, Refrigeration Coolants 
 
• 
Bulk Transfer of LPG and NH3 
 
• 
LPG Cylinder Filling 
 
• 
Alcohols 
 
• 
Refrigeration - Freons, Ammonia 
 
• 
Solvents 
 
• 
Aqueous solutions 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
1 Unbalanced Vane pump 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.3.2 Unbalanced vane pump 
 
In practice, the vane pumps have more than one vane as shown in figure 5.3.2. The rotor 
is offset within the housing, and the vanes are constrained by a cam ring as they cross 
inlet and outlet ports. Although the vane tips are held against the housing, still a small 
amount of leakage exists between rotor faces and body sides. Also, the vanes compensate 
to a large degree for wear at the vane tips or in the housing itself. The pressure difference 
between outlet and inlet ports creates a large amount of load on the vanes and a 
significant amount of side load on the rotor shaft which can lead to bearing failure. This 
type of pump is called as unbalanced vane pump. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
2 Balanced vane pump 
 
Figure 5.3.2 shows the schematic of a balanced vane pump. This pump has an elliptical 
cam ring with two inlet and two outlet ports. Pressure loading still occurs in the vanes but 
the two identical pump halves create equal but opposite forces on the rotor. It leads to the 
zero net force on the shaft and bearings. Thus, lives of pump and bearing increase 
significantly. Also the sounds and vibrations decrease in the running mode of the pump. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.3.2 Balanced Vane Pump 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
3 Adjustable vane pump 
 
The proper design of pump is important and a challenging task. In ideal condition, the 
capacity of a pump should be exactly same to load requirements. A pump with larger 
capacity wastes energy as the excess fluid will pass through the pressure relief valve. It 
also leads to a rise in fluid temperature due to energy conversion to the heat instead of 
useful work and therefore it needs some external cooling arrangement. Therefore, the 
higher capacity pump increases the power consumption and makes the system bulky and 
costly. Pumps are generally available with certain standard capacities and the user has to 
choose the next available capacity of the pump. Also, the flow rate from the pump in 
most hydraulic applications needs to be varying as per the requirements. Therefore, some 
vane pumps are also available with adjustable capacity as shown in figure 5.3.4. This can 
be achieved by adjusting a positional relationship between rotor and the inner casing by 
the help of an external controlling screw. These pumps basically consist of a rotor, vanes, 
cam ring, port plate, thrust bearing for guiding the cam ring and a discharge control screw 
by which the position of the cam ring relative to the rotor can be varied. In general, the 
adjustable vane pumps are unbalanced pump type. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.3.3 Adjustable vane pump 
 
The amount of fluid that is displaced by a vane pump running at a constant speed is 
determined by the maximum extension of the vanes and the vanes width. However, for a 
pump running in operation, the width of vanes cannot be changed but the distance by 
which the vanes are extended can be varied. This is possible by making a provision for 
changing the position of the cam ring (adjustable inner casing) relative to the rotor as 
shown in figure 5.3.4. The eccentricity of rotor with respect to the cam ring is adjusted by 
 
 
 

 
 
the movement of the screw. The delivery volume increases with increase in the 
eccentricity. This kind of arrangement can be used to achieve a variable volume from the 
pump and is known as variable displacement vane pump. 
 
In general, the adjusted vane pumps are pressure compensated. It means that the 
discharge is controlled by pre-adjusted value and when the discharge pressure reaches a 
certain (adjusted) value; the pumping action ceases. This mechanism is accomplished by 
using a compensating spring to offset the cam ring. Initially, the eccentricity is maximum 
because the discharge pressure is zero and spring force keeps the cam ring at the extreme 
right position. As the discharge pressure increases, it acts on the inner contour of the cam 
ring. It pushes the cam ring towards the left against the spring force and hence the 
eccentricity reduces and hence the discharge through the pump reduces. When the 
discharge pressure becomes high enough to overcome the entire spring force; the 
compensator spring will compress until the zero eccentricity is achieved. In this 
condition, the pumping action ceases and the fluid flow (except small leakages) does not 
occur. Therefore, the system pressure can be adjusted by setting the compensator spring. 
These pumps ensure their own protection against excessive system pressure and do not 
rely on the safety control devices of the hydraulic system. These pumps are used as 
energy savings devices and have been used in many applications, including automotive 
transmissions. 
 
4 Piston pumps 
 
Piston pumps are meant for the high-pressure applications. These pumps have high-
efficiency and simple design and needs lower maintenance. These pumps convert the 
rotary motion of the input shaft to the reciprocating motion of the piston. These pumps 
work similar to the four stroke engines. They work on the principle that a reciprocating 
piston draws fluid inside the cylinder when the piston retracts in a cylinder bore and 
discharge the fluid when it extends. Generally, these pumps have fixed inclined plate or 
variable degree of angle plate known as swash plate (shown in Figure 5.3.4 and Figure 
5.3.6). When the piston barrel assembly rotates, the swash plate in contact with the piston 
slippers slides along its surface. The stroke length (axial displacement) depends on the 
inclination angle of the swash plate. When the swash plate is vertical, the reciprocating 
motion does not occur and hence pumping of the fluid does not take place. As the swash 
plate angle increases, the piston reciprocates inside the cylinder barrel. The stroke length 
increases with increase in the swash plate angle and therefore volume of pumping fluid 
increases. During one half of the rotation cycle, the pistons move out of the cylinder 
barrel and the volume of the barrel increases. During another half of the rotation, the 
pistons move into the cylinder barrel and the barrel volume decreases. This phenomenon 
is responsible for drawing the fluid in and pumping it out. These pumps are positive 
displacement pump and can be used for both liquids and gases. Piston pumps are 
basically of two types: 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
i. 
Axial piston pumps 
 
ii. 
Radial piston pumps 
 
1 Axial Piston Pump 
 
Axial piston pumps are positive displacement pumps which converts rotary motion of the 
input shaft into an axial reciprocating motion of the pistons. These pumps have a number 
of pistons (usually an odd number) in a circular array within a housing which is 
commonly referred to as a cylinder block, rotor or barrel. These pumps are used in jet 
aircraft. They are also used in small earthmoving plants such as skid loader machines. 
Another use is to drive the screws of torpedoes. In general, these systems have a 
maximum operating temperature of about 120 °C. Therefore, the leakage between 
cylinder housing and body block is used for cooling and lubrication of the rotating parts. 
This cylinder block rotates by an integral shaft aligned with the pistons. These pumps 
have sub-types as: 
 
a. Bent axis piston pumps 
 
b. Swash plate axial piston pump 
 
1 Bent-Axis Piston Pumps 
 
Figure 5.3.5 shows the schematic of bent axis piston pump. In these pumps, the 
reciprocating action of the pistons is obtained by bending the axis of the cylinder block. 
The cylinder block rotates at an angle which is inclined to the drive shaft. The cylinder 
block is turned by the drive shaft through a universal link. The cylinder block is set at an 
offset angle with the drive shaft. The cylinder block contains a number of pistons along 
its periphery. These piston rods are connected with the drive shaft flange by ball-and-
socket joints. These pistons are forced in and out of their bores as the distance between 
the drive shaft flange and the cylinder block changes. A universal link connects the block 
to the drive shaft, to provide alignment and a positive drive. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.3.5 Bent axis piston pump 
 
 
 

 
 
The volumetric displacement (discharge) of the pump is controlled by changing the offset 
angle. It makes the system simple and inexpensive. The discharge does not occur when 
the cylinder block is parallel to the drive shaft. The offset angle can vary from 0° to 40°. 
The fixed displacement units are usually provided with 23° or 30° offset angles while the 
variable displacement units are provided with a yoke and an external control mechanism 
to change the offset angle. Some designs have arrangement of moving the yoke over the 
center position to reverse the fluid flow direction. The flow rate of the pump varies with 
the offset angle θ . There is no flow when the cylinder block centerline is parallel to the 
drive shaft centerline (offset angle is 0°). The total fluid flow per stroke can be given as: 
 
Vd = nAD tanθ 
 
(5.3.1) 
 
The flow rate of the pump can be given as: 
 
Vd = nADN tanθ 
 
(5.3.2) 
here, tanθ = S 
 
D 
 
 
where S is the piston stroke, D is piston diameter, n is the number of pistons, N is the 
speed of pump and A is the area of piston. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
6 Swash Plate Axial Piston Pump 
 
A swash plate is a device that translates the rotary motion of a shaft into the reciprocating 
motion. It consists of a disk attached to a shaft as shown in Figure 5.3.6. If the disk is 
aligned perpendicular to the shaft; the disk will turn along with the rotating shaft without 
any reciprocating effect. Similarly, the edge of the inclined shaft will appear to oscillate 
along the shaft's length. This apparent linear motion increases with increase in the angle 
between disk and the shaft (offset angle). The apparent linear motion can be converted 
into an actual reciprocating motion by means of a follower that does not turn with the 
swash plate. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.3.6 Swash plate piston pump 
 
In swash plate axial piston pump a series of pistons are aligned coaxially with a shaft 
through a swash plate to pump a fluid. The schematic of swash plate piston pump is 
shown in Figure 5.3.6. The axial reciprocating motion of pistons is obtained by a swash 
plate that is either fixed or has variable degree of angle. As the piston barrel assembly 
rotates, the piston rotates around the shaft with the piston shoes in contact with the swash 
plate. The piston shoes follow the angled surface of the swash plate and the rotational 
motion of the shaft is converted into the reciprocating motion of the pistons. When the 
swash plate is perpendicular to the shaft; the reciprocating motion to the piston does not 
occur. As the swash plate angle increases, the piston follows the angle of the swash plate 
surface and hence it moves in and out of the barrel. The piston moves out of the cylinder 
barrel during one half of the cycle of rotation thereby generating an increasing volume, 
while during other half of the rotating cycle, the pistons move into the cylinder barrel 
generating a decreasing volume. This reciprocating motion of the piston results in the 
drawing in and pumping out of the fluid. Pump capacity can be controlled by varying the 
swash plate angle with the help of a separate hydraulic cylinder. The pump capacity 
(discharge) increases with increase in the swash plate angle and vice-versa. The cylinder 
block and the drive shaft in this pump are located on the same centerline. The pistons are 
connected through shoes and a shoe plate that bears against the swash plate. These pumps 
can be designed to have a variable displacement capability. It can be done by mounting 
 
 

 
 
the swash plate in a movable yoke. The swash plate angle can be changed by pivoting the 
yoke on pintles. 
 
7  Radial Piston Pump 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.3.7 Radial piston pump 
 
The typical construction of radial piston pump is shown in Figure 5.3.7. The piston pump 
has pistons aligned radially in a cylindrical block. It consists of a pintle, a cylinder barrel 
with pistons and a rotor containing a reaction ring. The pintle directs the fluid in and out 
of the cylinder. Pistons are placed in radial bores around the rotor. The piston shoes ride 
on an eccentric ring which causes them to reciprocate as they rotate. The eccentricity 
determines the stroke of the pumping piston. Each piston is connected to inlet port when 
it starts extending while it is connected to the outlet port when start retracting. This 
connection to the inlet and outlet port is performed by the timed porting arrangement in 
the pintle. For initiating a pumping action, the reaction ring is moved eccentrically with 
respect to the pintle or shaft axis. As the cylinder barrel rotates, the pistons on one side 
travel outward. This draws the fluid in as the cylinder passes the suction port of the 
pintle. It is continued till the maximum eccentricity is reached. When the piston passes 
the maximum eccentricity, pintle is forced inwards by the reaction ring. This forces the 
fluid to flow out of the cylinder and enter in the discharge (outlet) port of the pintle. 
 
The radial piston pump works on high pressure (up to 1000 bar). It is possible to use the 
pump with various hydraulic fluids like mineral oil, biodegradable oil, HFA (oil in 
water), HFC (water-glycol), HFD (synthetic ester) or cutting emulsion. This is because 
the parts are hydrostatically balanced. It makes the pump suitable for the many 
applications such as machine tools (displace of cutting emulsion, supply for hydraulic 
equipment like cylinders), high pressure units (overload protection of presses), test rigs, 
 
 

 
 
automotive sector (automatic transmission, hydraulic suspension control in upper-class 
cars), plastic (powder injection molding) and wind energy etc. 
 
3. Combination Pump 
 
There are two basic requirements for load lifting or load applying by a hydraulic ram. 
First, there is a need of large volume of fluid at a low pressure when the cylinder extends 
or retracts. The low pressure is required to overcome the frictional resistance. The second 
requirement is that a high pressure is needed, when the load is gripped. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.3.8 Combination pump 
 
This type of requirements can be fulfilled by an arrangement as shown in figure 5.3.8. In 
this system two separate pumps are driven by a common electrical motor. Pump P1 is a 
high pressure low volume pump and pump P2 is a high volume low pressure pump. The 
hydraulic system is associated with relief valves RV1 and RV2 and a one-way check 
valve CV1. This kind of arrangement allows the fluid flow from left to right, but blocks 
in the reverse direction. 
 
The pressure relief valve RV1 is a normal high pressure valve. The pressure relief valve 
RV2 is not operated by the pressure at point A, however, it is remotely operated by the 
pressure at point B. This can be achieved with the balanced piston valve. In low pressure 
mode both relief valves are closed and both pumps P1 and P2 deliver fluid to the load but 
the majority comes from the pump P2 as its capacity is higher. 
 
When the load is in the holding mode, the pressure at B rises and relief valve RV2 opens. 
It results in all the fluid from pump P2 to return straight to the tank directly and the 
pressure at A to fall to a low value. The check valve CV1 stops the fluid from pump P1 
 
 

 
 
pass it back to the tank via relief valve RV2, consequently pressure at B rises to the level 
set by relief valve RV1. 
 
This kind of arrangement saves energy as the large volume of fluid from pump P2 is 
returned to the tank at a very low pressure, and only a small volume of fluid from pump 
P1 is returned at a high pressure. 
 
In general the applications of Hydraulic Pumps can be summarized as, 
 
• 
Hydraulic pumps are used to transfer power via hydraulic liquid. These pumps 
have a number of applications in automobiles, material handling systems, 
automatic transmissions, controllers, compressors and household items. 
 
• 
The hand operated hydraulic pump is used in a hydraulic jack where many strokes 
of the pump apply hydraulic pressure to lift the ram. 
 
• 
A backhoe uses an engine driven hydraulic pump to drive the articulating parts of 
the mechanical hoe. 
 
• 
The hydraulic pumps are commonly used in the automotive vehicles especially in 
power steering systems. 
 
• 
The lift system of tractor is operated by the hydraulic pumps. These are used in 
automatic transmissions and material handling systems in industries. 
 
• 
Many precise controllers are developed by using hydraulic pumps. The commonly 
used compressor is operated by reciprocating pumps. 
 
• 
The hydraulic pumps are also used in routine household systems like power lift 
and air-conditions. Therefore, it can be said that the hydraulic pumps have 
significant applications in industries as well as ones routine life. 
 
 
5.2 
Classifications 
of 
Valves, 
Pressure 
relief 
valves, 
Pressure 
regulating/reducing valves 
 
In a hydraulic system, the hydraulic energy available from a pump is converted into 
motion and force by means of an actuator. The control of these mechanical outputs 
(motion and force) is one of the most important functions in a hydraulic system. The 
proper selection of control selection ensures the desired output and safe function of the 
system. In order to control the hydraulic outputs, different types of control valves are 
required. It is important to know various types of control valves and their functions. This 
not only helps to design a proper hydraulic system but also helps to discover the 
innovative ways to improve the existing systems. In this lecture and next few lectures, 
various types of valves will be discussed. 
 
There are basically three types of valves employed in hydraulic systems: 
 
1. Directional control valves 
 
2. Flow control valves 
 
3. Pressure control valves 
 
 
 

1. Direction control valve 
 
Directional control valves are used to control the distribution of energy in a fluid power 
system. They provide the direction to the fluid and allow the flow in a particular 
direction. These valves are used to control the start, stop and change in direction of the 
fluid flow. These valves regulate the flow direction in the hydraulic circuit. These control 
valves contain ports that are external openings for the fluid to enter and leave. The 
number of ports is usually identified by the term ‘way’. For example, a valve with four 
ports is named as four-way valve. The fluid flow rate is responsible for the speed of 
actuator (motion of the output) and should controlled in a hydraulic system. This 
operation can be performed by using flow control valves. The pressure may increase 
gradually when the system is under operation. The pressure control valves protect the 
system by maintaining the system pressure within the desired range. Also, the output 
force is directly proportional to the pressure and hence, the pressure control valves ensure 
the desired force output at the actuator. 
 
Directional control valves can be classified in the following manner: 
 
1. 
Type of construction: 
 
• 
Poppet valves 
 
• 
Spool valves 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
2. 
Number of ports: 
 
• 
Two- way valves 
 
• 
Three – way valves 
 
• 
Four- way valves. 
 
3. 
Number of switching position: 
 
• 
Two – position 
 
• 
Three - position 
 
4. 
Actuating mechanism: 
 
• 
Manual actuation 
 
• 
Mechanical actuation 
 
• 
Solenoid actuation 
 
• 
Hydraulic actuation 
 
• 
Pneumatic actuation 
 
• 
Indirect actuation 
 
 
1.1 Type of construction 
 
1.1.1 Check Valves 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.2.1 Inline check valve 
 
These are unidirectional valves and permit the free flow in one direction only. These 
valves have two ports: one for the entry of fluid and the other for the discharge. They are 
consists of a housing bore in which ball or poppet is held by a small spring force. The 
valve having ball as a closing member is known as ball check valve. The various types of 
check valves are available for a range of applications. These valves are generally small 
sized, simple in construction and inexpensive. Generally, the check valves are 
automatically operated. Human intervention or any external control system is not 
 
 
 
 

 
 
required. These valves can wear out or can generate the cracks after prolonged usage and 
therefore they are mostly made of plastics for easy repair and replacements. 
 
An important concept in check valves is the cracking pressure. The check valve is 
designed for a specific cracking pressure which is the minimum upstream pressure at 
which the valve operates. The simplest check valve is an inline check valve as shown in 
Figure 5.2.1. The ball is held against the valve seat by a spring force. It can be observed 
from the figure that the fluid flow is not possible from the spring side but the fluid from 
opposite side can pass by lifting the ball against. However, there is some pressure drop 
across the valve due to restriction by the spring force. Therefore these valves are not 
suitable for the application of high flow rate. When the operating pressure increases the 
valve becomes more tightly seated in this design. 
 
The advantages of the poppet valves include no leakage, long life and suitability with 
high pressure applications. These valves are commonly used in liquid or gel mini-pump 
dispenser spigots, spray devices, some rubber bulbs for pumping air, manual air pumps, 
and refillable dispensing syringes. Sometimes, the right angle check valve as shown in 
Figure 5.2.2 is used for the high flow rate applications. The pressure drop is 
comparatively less in right angle check valve. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.2.2 Right angle check valve 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
When the closing member is not a ball but a poppet energized by a spring is known as 
poppet valve. The typical poppet valve is shown in Figure 5.2.3. Some valves are meant 
for an application where free flow is required in one direction and restricted flow required 
in another direction. These types of valves are called as restriction check valve (see 
Figure 5.2.3). These valves are used when a direction sensitive flow rate is required. For 
example, the different actuator speeds are required in both the directions. The flow 
adjustment screw can be used to set the discharge (flow rate) in the restricted direction. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.2.3 Restriction check valve 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
Another important type of check valve known as pilot operated check valve which is 
shown in figure 5.2.4. The function of the pilot operated check valve is similar to a 
normal check valve unless it gets an extra pressure signal through a pilot line. Pilot 
allows free flow in one direction and prevents the flow in another direction until the pilot 
pressure is applied. But when pilot pressure acts, the poppet opens and the flow is 
blocked from both the sides. These valves are used to stop the fluid suddenly. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.2.4 Pilot operated check valve 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 
1.2 Number of ports 
 
1.2.1 Two way valves 
 
Two way valves have only two ports as shown in Figure 5.2.5 and Figure 5.2.6. These 
valves are also known as on-off valves because they allow the fluid flow only in 
direction. Normally, the valve is closed. These valves are available as normally open and 
normally closed function. These are the simplest type of spool valves. When actuating 
force is not applied to the right, the port P is not connected with port A as shown in figure 
5.4.5. Therefore, the actuation does not take place. Similarly, Figure 5.4.6 shows the two-
way spool valve in the open condition. Here, the pressure port P is connected with the 
actuator port A. 
 
1.2.2 Three way valves 
 
When a valve has one pressure port, one tank port and one actuating port as shown in 
Figures 5.2.7 and 5.2.8, it is known as three way valve. In this valve, the pressure port 
pressurizes one port and exhausts another one. As shown in figures, only one actuator 
port is opened at a time. In some cases a neutral position is also available when both the 
ports are blocked. Generally, these valves are used to operate single acting cylinders. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.2.7 Three way valve: P to A connected and T is blocked 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.2.8 Three way valve in closed position 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
1.2.3 Four way valves 
 
Figure 5.2.9 shows a four-way valve. It is generally used to operate the cylinders and 
fluid motors in both the directions. The four ways are: pump port P, tank port T, and two 
working ports A and B connected to the actuator. The primary function of a four way 
valve is to pressurize and exhaust two working ports A and B alternatively. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.2.9 Three position four way valve in open center mode 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
Control valves  
 
 
1. Classification of control valve according to number/ways of 
switching position 
 
1.1 Three position four way (3/4) valves 
 
Three position four way (3/4) valves are used in double-acting cylinders to perform 
advance, hold and return operation to the piston. Figures 5.2.10 and 5.2.11 show three 
position four way valves. These types of valves have three switching positions. They 
have a variety of possible flow path configurations but have identical flow path 
configuration. When the centered path is actuated, port A and B are connected with both 
the ports P and T respectively. In this case, valve is not active because all the ports are 
open to each other. The fluid flows to the tank at atmospheric pressure. In this position 
work cannot be done by any part of the system. This configuration helps to prevent heat 
buildup. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.2.10 Three position four way valve: P to B and A to T 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
When left end (port B) is actuated, the port P is connected with ports B and T is 
connected with port A as shown in Figure 5.2.10. Similarly, when the right end is 
actuated the port P is connected to A and working port B is connected to port T as shown 
in Figure 5.2.11. The three position valves are used when the actuator is needed to stop or 
hold at some intermediate position. It can also be used when the multiple circuits or 
functions are accomplished from one hydraulic power source. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.2.11 Three position four way valve: P to A and B to T 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.2.12 Three position four way valve: closed center 
 
Figure 5.2.12 shows a three position four way valve in the closed center position. The 
working of the valve is similar to open center DCV. In closed center DCV all user ports 
(port A and port B) are closed. Therefore, these ports are hydraulically locked and the 
actuator cannot be moved by the external load. The pumped fluid flows through the relief 
valve. The pump works under the high pressure condition which not only wastes the 
pump power but also causes wear of the pump parts. The fluid temperature also rises due 
to heat generation by the pump energy transformation. The increase in fluid temperature 
may lead to the oxidation and viscosity drop of the fluid. The oxidation and viscosity 
drop reduces the pump life and leakage in the system. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.2.13 Tandem centered valve 
 
Figure 5.2.13 shows a tandem center three position four way direction control valve. In 
this configuration, the working ports A and B are blocked and the pump port P is 
connected to the tank port T. Tandem center results in the locked actuator. However, 
pump to tank flow takes place at the atmospheric temperature. This kind of configuration 
can be used when the load is needed to hold. Disadvantages of high pressure pumping in 
case of closed center (shown in Figure 5.2.13) can be removed by using this 
configuration. 
 
The regenerative center is another important type of common center configuration used in 
hydraulic circuits. Regenerative means the flow is generated from the system itself. 
Regenerative center is used when the actuator movement in one direction requires two 
different speeds. For example, the half-length of the stroke requires fast movement during 
no-load condition and remaining half-length requires slow motion during load conditions. 
The regenerative center saves the pump power. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.2.14 Regenerative Center 
 
Figure 5.2.14 shows the regenerative configuration for the three position four way (3/4) 
DCV in its mid position. This configuration increases the piston speed. In the mid 
position pump Port P is connected to A and B, and tank port T is blocked. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.2.15 Floating Center 
 
Figure 5.2.15 shows the floating center 3/4 DCV in its mid position. In this configuration, 
the pump port is blocked and both the working ports A and B are connected to the tank 
port T. Therefore, the working ports A and B can be moved freely which is reason they 
are called as floating center. The pumped fluid passes through the relief valve. Therefore, 
pump works in the high pressure condition. This configuration is used only in some 
special cases. 
 
1.2 Two position four way (2/4) valves 
 
The two position four way valves have only two switching positions and do not have any 
mid position. Therefore, they are also known as impulse valves. The typical connections 
of 2/4 valves is shown in Figures 5.2.16 and 5.2.17. These valves can be used to operate 
double acting cylinders. These are also used to reciprocate or hold an actuator. The 
operation is faster because the distance between ports of these valves is smaller. Hence, 
these valves are used on machines where fast reciprocation cycles are needed such as 
punching and stamping etc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.2.16 Two position four way DCV: P to B and A to T 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.2.17 Two position four way DCV: P to A and B to T 
 
2. Classification based on actuation 
mechanism 2.1 Manual actuation 
 
In this type, the spool is operated manually. Manual actuators are hand lever, push button 
and pedals etc. 
 
2.2 Mechanical actuation 
 
The DCV spool can be operated by using mechanical elements such as roller and cam, 
roller and plunger and rack and pinion etc. In these arrangements, the spool end is of 
roller or a pinion gear type. The plunger or cam or rack gear is attached to the actuator. 
Thus, the mechanical elements gain some motion relative to the actuator (cylinder piston) 
which can be used for the actuation. 
 
2.3 Solenoid actuation 
 
The solenoid actuation is also known as electrical actuation. The schematic of solenoid 
actuation is shown in Figure 5.2.18. The energized solenoid coil creates a magnetic force 
which pulls the armature into the coil. This movement of armature controls the spool 
position. The main advantage of solenoid actuation is its less switching time. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.2.18 Working of solenoid to shift spool of valve 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
2.4 Hydraulic actuation 
 
This type actuation is usually known as pilot-actuated valve and a schematic is shown in 
Figure 5.2.19. In this type of actuation, the hydraulic pressure is directly applied on the 
spool. The pilot port is located on one end of the valve. Fluid entering from pilot port 
operates against the piston and forces the spool to move forward. The needle valve is 
used to control the speed of the actuation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.2.19 Pilot actuated DCV 
 
 
2.5 Pneumatic actuation 
 
DCV can also be operated by applying compressed air against a piston at either end of the 
valve spool. The construction of the system is similar to the hydraulic actuation as shown 
in Figure 5.2.20. The only difference would be the actuation medium. The actuation 
medium is the compressed air in pneumatic actuation system. 
 
2.6 Indirect actuation of directional control valve 
 
The direction control valve can be operated by manual, mechanical, solenoidal 
(electrical), hydraulic (pilot) and pneumatic actuations. The mode of actuation does not 
have any influence on the basic operation of the hydraulic circuits. Mostly, the direct 
actuation is restricted to use with smaller valves only because usually lot of force is not 
available. The availability of limited force is the greatest disadvantage of the direct 
actuation systems. In practice, the force required to shift the spool is quiet higher. 
Therefore, the larger valves are often indirectly actuated in sequence. First, the smaller 
valve is actuated directly and the flow from the smaller valve is directed to either side of 
the larger valve. The control fluid can be supplied by the same circuit or by a separate 
circuit. The pilot valve pressure is usually supplied internally. These two valves are often 
incorporated as a single unit. These valves are also called as Electro-hydraulic operated 
DCV. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
3. Flow Control Valves 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.2.21 Flow Control Valve 
 
In practice, the speed of actuator is very important in terms of the desired output and 
needs to be controlled. The speed of actuator can be controlled by regulating the fluid 
flow. A flow control valve can regulate the flow or pressure of the fluid. The fluid flow is 
controlled by varying area of the valve opening through which fluid passes. The fluid 
flow can be decreased by reducing the area of the valve opening and it can be increased 
by increasing the area of the valve opening. A very common example to the fluid flow 
control valve is the household tap. Figure 5.2.21 shows the schematic diagram of a flow 
control valve. The pressure adjustment screw varies the fluid flow area in the pipe to 
control the discharge rate. 
 
The pressure drop across the valve may keep on fluctuating. In general, the hydraulic 
systems have a pressure compensating pump. The inlet pressure remains almost constant 
but the outlet pressure keeps on fluctuating depending on the external load. It creates 
fluctuating pressure drop. Thus, the ordinary flow control valve will not be able to 
maintain a constant fluid flow. A pressure compensated flow control valve maintains the 
constant flow throughout the movement of a spool, which shifts its position depending on 
the pressure. Flow control valves can also be affected by temperature changes. It is 
because the viscosity of the fluid changes with temperature. Therefore, the advanced flow 
control valves often have the temperature compensation. The temperature compensation 
is achieved by the thermal expansion of a rod, which compensates for the increased 
coefficient of discharge due to decreasing viscosity with temperature. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
4. Types of Flow Control Valves 
 
The flow control valves work on applying a variable restriction in the flow path. Based 
on the construction; there are mainly four types viz. plug valve, butterfly valve, ball valve 
and balanced valve. 
 
4.1 Plug or glove valve 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.2.22 Plug or glove valve 
 
The plug valve is quite commonly used valve. It is also termed as glove valve. Schematic 
of plug or glove valve is shown in Figure 5.2.22. This valve has a plug which can be 
adjusted in vertical direction by setting flow adjustment screw. The adjustment of plug 
alters the orifice size between plug and valve seat. Thus the adjustment of plug controls 
the fluid flow in the pipeline. The characteristics of these valves can be accurately 
predetermined by machining the taper of the plug. The typical example of plug valve is 
stopcock that is used in laboratory glassware. The valve body is made of glass or teflon. 
The plug can be made of plastic or glass. Special glass stopcocks are made for vacuum 
applications. Stopcock grease is used in high vacuum applications to make the stopcock 
air-tight. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
4.2 Butterfly valve 
 
A butterfly valve is shown in Figure 5.2.23. It consists of a disc which can rotate inside 
the pipe. The angle of disc determines the restriction. Butterfly valve can be made to any 
size and is widely used to control the flow of gas. These valves have many types which 
have for different pressure ranges and applications. The resilient butterfly valve uses the 
flexibility of rubber and has the lowest pressure rating. The high performance butterfly 
valves have a slight offset in the way the disc is positioned. It increases its sealing ability 
and decreases the wear. For high-pressure systems, the triple offset butterfly valve is 
suitable which makes use of a metal seat and is therefore able to withstand high pressure. 
It has higher risk of leakage on the shut-off position and suffer from the dynamic torque 
effect. Butterfly valves are favored because of their lower cost and lighter weight. The 
disc is always present in the flow therefore a pressure drop is induced regardless of the 
valve position. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.2.23 Butterfly valve 
 
 
4.3 Ball Valve 
 
The ball valve is shown in Figure 5.2.24. This type of flow control valve uses a ball 
rotated inside a machined seat. The ball has a through hole as shown in Figure 5.2.24. It 
has very less leakage in its shut -off condition. These valves are durable and usually work 
perfectly for many years. They are excellent choice for shutoff applications. They do not 
offer fine control which may be necessary in throttling applications. These valves are 
widely used in industries because of their versatility, high supporting pressures (up to 
1000 bar) and temperatures (up to 250°C). They are easy to repair and operate. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.2.24 Ball valve 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
4.4 Balanced valve 
 
Schematic of a balanced valve is shown in figure 5.2.25. It comprises of two plugs and 
two seats. The opposite flow gives little dynamic reaction onto the actuator shaft. It 
results in the negligible dynamic torque effect. However, the leakage is more in these 
kind of valves because the manufacturing tolerance can cause one plug to seat before the 
other. The pressure-balanced valves are used in the houses. They provide water at nearly 
constant temperature to a shower or bathtub despite of pressure fluctuations in either the 
hot or cold supply lines. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.2.25 Balanced valve 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
Pressure relief valves 
 
 
 
The pressure relief valves are used to protect the hydraulic components from excessive 
pressure. This is one of the most important components of a hydraulic system and is 
essentially required for safe operation of the system. Its primary function is to limit the 
system pressure within a specified range. It is normally a closed type and it opens when 
the pressure exceeds a specified maximum value by diverting pump flow back to the 
tank. The simplest type valve contains a poppet held in a seat against the spring force as 
shown in Figure 5.6.1. The fluid enters from the opposite side of the poppet. When the 
system pressure exceeds the preset value, the poppet lifts and the fluid is escaped through 
the orifice to the storage tank directly. It reduces the system pressure and as the pressure 
reduces to the set limit again the valve closes. This valve does not provide a flat cut-off 
pressure limit with flow rate because the spring must be deflected more when the flow 
rate is higher. Various types of pressure control valves are discussed in the following 
sections: 
 
1. Direct type of relief valve 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.2.26 Pressure Relief Valve 
 
 
 

 
 
Schematic of direct pressure relief valve is shown in figure 5.2.26. This type of valves 
has two ports; one of which is connected to the pump and another is connected to the 
tank. It consists of a spring chamber where poppet is placed with a spring force. 
Generally, the spring is adjustable to set the maximum pressure limit of the system. The 
poppet is held in position by combined effect of spring force and dead weight of spool. 
As the pressure exceeds this combined force, the poppet raises and excess fluid bypassed 
to the reservoir (tank). The poppet again reseats as the pressure drops below the pre-set 
value. A drain is also provided in the control chamber. It sends the fluid collected due to 
small leakage to the tank and thereby prevents the failure of the valve. 
 
2. Unloading Valve 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.2.27 Unloading Valve 
 
The construction of unloading valve is shown in Figure 5.2.27. This valve consists of a 
control chamber with an adjustable spring which pushes the spool down. The valve has 
two ports: one is connected to the tank and another is connected to the pump. The valve is 
operated by movement of the spool. Normally, the valve is closed and the tank port is 
also closed. These valves are used to permit a pump to operate at the minimum load. It 
works on the same principle as direct control valve that the pump delivery is diverted to 
the tank when sufficient pilot pressure is applied to move the spool. The pilot pressure 
maintains a static pressure to hold the valve opened. The pilot pressure holds the valve 
until the pump delivery is needed in the system. As the pressure is needed in the 
 
 

 
 
 
hydraulic circuit; the pilot pressure is relaxed and the spool moves down due to the self-
weight and the spring force. Now, the flow is diverted to the hydraulic circuit. The drain 
is provided to remove the leaked oil collected in the control chamber to prevent the valve 
failure. The unloading valve reduces the heat buildup due to fluid discharge at a preset 
pressure value. 
 
3. Sequence valve 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.2.28 Sequence valve 
 
The primary function of this type of valve is to divert flow in a predetermined sequence. 
It is used to operate the cycle of a machine automatically. A sequence valve may be of 
direct-pilot or remote-pilot operated type. 
 
Schematic of the sequence valve is shown in Figure 5.2.28. Its construction is 
similar to the direct relief valve. It consists of the two ports; one main port connecting the 
main pressure line and another port (secondary port) is connected to the secondary 
circuit. The secondary port is usually closed by the spool. The pressure on the spool 
works against the spring force. When the pressure exceeds the preset value of the spring; 
the spool lifts and the fluid flows from the primary port to the secondary port. For remote 
 
 
 
 

 
 
operation; the passage used for the direct operation is closed and a separate pressure 
source for the spool operation is provided in the remote operation mode. 
 
 
4. Counterbalance Valve 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.2.29 Counter Balance Valve 
 
 
The schematic of counterbalance valve is shown in Figure 5.2.29. It is used to maintain 
the back pressure and to prevent a load from failing. The counterbalance valves can be 
used as breaking valves for decelerating heavy loads. These valves are used in vertical 
presses, lift trucks, loaders and other machine tools where position or hold suspended 
loads are important. Counterbalance valves work on the principle that the fluid is trapped 
under pressure until pilot pressure overcomes the pre-set value of spring force. Fluid is 
then allowed to escape, letting the load to descend under control. This valve is normally 
closed until it is acted upon by a remote pilot pressure source. Therefore, a lower spring 
force is sufficient. It leads to the valve operation at the lower pilot pressure and hence the 
power consumption reduces, pump life increases and the fluid temperature decreases. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
5. Pressure Reducing Valve 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.2.30 Pressure Reducing Valve 
 
Sometimes a part of the system may need a lower pressure. This can be made possible 
by using pressure reducing valve as shown in Figure 5.2.30. These valves are used to 
limit the outlet pressure. Generally, they are used for the operation of branch circuits 
where the pressure may vary from the main hydraulic pressure lines. These are open 
type valve and have a spring chamber with an adjustable spring, a movable spool as 
shown in figure. A drain is provided to return the leaked fluid in the spring (control) 
chamber. A free flow passage is provided from inlet port to the outlet port until a 
signal from the outlet port tends to throttle the passage through the valve. The pilot 
pressure opposes the spring force and when both are balanced, the downstream is 
controlled at the pressure setting. When the pressure in the reduced pressure line 
exceeds the valve setting, the spool moves to reduce the flow passage area by 
compressing the spring. It can be seen from the figure that if the spring force is more, 
the valve opens wider and if the controlled pressure has greater force, the valves 
moves towards the spring and throttles the flow. 
 
5.3   Cylinders and rotary actuators 
 
Actuators are output devices which convert energy from pressurized hydraulic oil or 
compressed air into the required type of action or motion. In general, hydraulic or 
pneumatic systems are used for gripping and/or moving operations in industry. These 
operations are carried out by using actuators. 
 
Actuators can be classified into three types. 
 
• 
Linear actuators: These devices convert hydraulic/pneumatic energy into 
linear motion. 

• 
Rotary actuators: These devices convert hydraulic/pneumatic energy into 
rotary motion. 
• 
Actuators to operate flow control valves: these are used to control the flow and 
pressure of fluids such as gases, steam or liquid. 
 
The construction of hydraulic and pneumatic linear actuators is similar. However they 
differ at their operating pressure ranges. Typical pressure of hydraulic cylinders is 
about 100 bar and of pneumatic system is around 10 bar. 
 
1. Single acting cylinder 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 5.3.1 Single acting cylinder 
 
These cylinders produce work in one direction of motion hence they are named as 
single acting cylinders. Figure 5.3.1 shows the construction of a single acting 
cylinder. The compressed air pushes the piston located in the cylindrical barrel 
causing the desired motion. The return stroke takes place by the action of a spring. 
Generally the spring is provided on the rod side of the cylinder. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
2. Double acting cylinder 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 5.3.2 Double acting cylinder 
 
The main parts of a hydraulic double acting cylinder are: piston, piston rod, cylinder 
tube, and end caps. These are shown in Figure 5.3.2. The piston rod is connected to 
piston head and the other end extends out of the cylinder. The piston divides the 
cylinder into two chambers namely the rod end side and piston end side. The seals 
prevent the leakage of oil between these two chambers. The cylindrical tube is fitted 
with end caps. The pressurized oil, air enters the cylinder chamber through the ports 
provided. In the rod end cover plate, a wiper seal is provided to prevent the leakage of 
oil and entry of the contaminants into the cylinder. The combination of wiper seal, 
bearing and sealing ring is called as cartridge assembly. The end caps may be attached 
to the tube by threaded connection, welded connection or tie rod connection. The 
piston seal prevents metal to metal contact and wear of piston head and the tube. 
These seals are replaceable. End cushioning is also provided to prevent the impact 
with end caps. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
3. Cylinder end cushions 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 5.3.3 Cylinder end cushioning 
 
Double acting cylinders generally contain cylinder cushions at the end of the cylinder 
to slow down the movement of the piston near the end of the stroke. Figure 5.3.3 
shows the construction of actuating cylinder with end cushions. Cushioning 
arrangement avoids the damage due to the impact occurred when a fast moving piston 
is stopped by the end caps. Deceleration of the piston starts when the tapered plunger 
enters the opening in the cap and closes the main fluid exit. This restricts the exhaust 
flow from the barrel to the port. This throttling causes the initial speed reduction. 
During the last portion of the stroke the oil has to exhaust through an adjustable 
opening since main fluid exit closes. Thus the remaining fluid exists through the 
cushioning valve. Amount of cushioning can be adjusted by means of cushion screw. 
A check valve is provided to achieve fast break away from the end position during 
retraction motion. A bleed screw is built into the check valve to remove the air 
bubbles present in a hydraulic type system. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
4. Gear motor: a rotary actuator 
 
Rotary actuators convert energy of pressurized fluid into rotary motion. Rotary 
actuators are similar to electric motors but are run on hydraulic or pneumatic power. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 5.3.4 Gear motor 
 
It consists of two inter meshing gears inside a housing with one gear attached to the 
drive shaft. Figure 5.3.4 shows a schematic diagram of Gear motor. The air enters 
from the inlet, causes the rotation of the meshing gear due to difference in the 
pressure and produces the torque. The air exists from the exhaust port. Gear motors 
tend to leak at low speed, hence are generally used for medium speed applications. 
 
5. Vane motor: a rotary actuator 
 
A rotary vane motor consists of a rotor with sliding vanes in the slots provided on the 
rotor (Fig. 5.3.5). The rotor is placed eccentrically with the housing. Air enters from 
the inlet port, rotates the rotor and thus torque is produced. Air is then released from 
the exhaust port (outlet). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 5.3.5 Vane motor 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore 
Page 52 
 
 
 
6. Limited rotation actuators 
 
It consists of a single rotating vane connected to output shaft as shown in Figure 5.3.6. It is 
used for double acting operation and has a maximum angle of rotation of about 270°. These 
are generally used to actuate dampers in robotics and material handling applications. Other 
type of limited rotation actuator is a rack and pinion type actuator. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 5.3.6 Semi rotary vane type actuator 
 
 
5.4     Principle & construction details Symbols of hydraulic elements, 
components of hydraulic system, and functions of various units of hydraulic 
system 
 
The controlled movement of parts or a controlled application of force is a common 
requirement in the industries. These operations are performed mainly by using electrical 
machines or diesel, petrol and steam engines as a prime mover. These prime movers can 
provide various movements to the objects by using some mechanical attachments like 
screw jack, lever, rack and pinions etc. However, these are not the only prime movers. 
The enclosed fluids (liquids and gases) can also be used as prime movers to provide 
controlled motion and force to the objects or substances. The specially designed enclosed 
fluid systems can provide both linear as well as rotary motion. The high magnitude 
controlled force can also be applied by using these systems. This kind of enclosed fluid 
based systems using pressurized incompressible liquids as transmission media are called 
as hydraulic systems. The hydraulic system works on the principle of Pascal’s law which 
says that the pressure in an enclosed fluid is uniform in all the directions. The Pascal’s 
law is illustrated in figure 5.4.1. The force given by fluid is given by the multiplication of 
pressure and area of cross section. As the pressure is same in all the direction, the smaller 
piston feels a smaller force and a large piston feels a large force. Therefore, a large force 
can be generated with smaller force input by using hydraulic systems. 
 
 

17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore 
Page 53 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.4.1 Principle of hydraulic system 
 

17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore 
Page 54 
 
 
 
The hydraulic systems consists a number of parts for its proper functioning. These 
include storage tank, filter, hydraulic pump, pressure regulator, control valve, hydraulic 
cylinder, piston and leak proof fluid flow pipelines. The schematic of a simple hydraulic 
system is shown in figure 5.4.2. It consists of: 
 
• 
a movable piston connected to the output shaft in an enclosed cylinder 
 
• 
storage tank 
 
• 
filter 
 
• 
electric pump 
 
• 
pressure regulator 
 
• 
control valve 
 
• 
leak proof closed loop piping. 
 
The output shaft transfers the motion or force however all other parts help to control the 
system. The storage/fluid tank is a reservoir for the liquid used as a transmission media. 
The liquid used is generally high density incompressible oil. It is filtered to remove dust 
or any other unwanted particles and then pumped by the hydraulic pump. The capacity of 
pump depends on the hydraulic system design. These pumps generally deliver constant 
volume in each revolution of the pump shaft. Therefore, the fluid pressure can increase 
indefinitely at the dead end of the piston until the system fails. The pressure regulator is 
used to avoid such circumstances which redirect the excess fluid back to the storage tank. 
The movement of piston is controlled by changing liquid flow from port A and port B. 
The cylinder movement is controlled by using control valve which directs the fluid flow. 
The fluid pressure line is connected to the port B to raise the piston and it is connected to 
port A to lower down the piston. The valve can also stop the fluid flow in any of the port. 
The leak proof piping is also important due to safety, environmental hazards and 
economical aspects. Some accessories such as flow control system, travel limit control, 
electric motor starter and overload protection may also be used in the hydraulic systems 
which are not shown in figure 5.4.2. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.4.2 Schematic of hydraulic system 
 
 

17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore 
Page 55 
 
 
 
      Applications of hydraulic systems 
 
The hydraulic systems are mainly used for precise control of larger forces. The main 
applications of hydraulic system can be classified in five categories: 
 
Industrial: Plastic processing machineries, steel making and primary metal 
extraction applications, automated production lines, machine tool industries, 
paper industries, loaders, crushes, textile machineries, R & D equipment and 
robotic systems etc. 
 
Mobile hydraulics: Tractors, irrigation system, earthmoving equipment, material 
handling equipment, commercial vehicles, tunnel boring equipment, rail 
equipment, building and construction machineries and drilling rigs etc. 
 
Automobiles: It is used in the systems like breaks, shock absorbers, steering 
system, wind shield, lift and cleaning etc. 
 
Marine applications: It mostly covers ocean going vessels, fishing boats and 
navel equipment. 
 
Aerospace equipment: There are equipment and systems used for rudder 
control, landing gear, breaks, flight control and transmission etc. which are used 
in airplanes, rockets and spaceships. 
 
3. Hydraulic Pump 
 
The combined pumping and driving motor unit is known as hydraulic pump. The 
hydraulic pump takes hydraulic fluid (mostly some oil) from the storage tank and delivers 
it to the rest of the hydraulic circuit. In general, the speed of pump is constant and the 
pump delivers an equal volume of oil in each revolution. The amount and direction of 
fluid flow is controlled by some external mechanisms. In some cases, the hydraulic pump 
itself is operated by a servo controlled motor but it makes the system complex. The 
hydraulic pumps are characterized by its flow rate capacity, power consumption, drive 
speed, pressure delivered at the outlet and efficiency of the pump. The pumps are not 
100% efficient. The efficiency of a pump can be specified by two ways. One is the 
volumetric efficiency which is the ratio of actual volume of fluid delivered to the 
maximum theoretical volume possible. Second is power efficiency which is the ratio of 
output hydraulic power to the input mechanical/electrical power. The typical efficiency of 
pumps varies from 90-98%. 
 
The hydraulic pumps can be of two types: 
 
• 
centrifugal pump 
 
• 
reciprocating pump 
 
 
 
 
 
 

17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore 
Page 56 
 
 
 
Centrifugal pump uses rotational kinetic energy to deliver the fluid. The rotational energy 
typically comes from an engine or electric motor. The fluid enters the pump impeller 
along or near to the rotating axis, accelerates in the propeller and flung out to the 
periphery by centrifugal force as shown in figure 5.4.3. In centrifugal pump the delivery 
is not constant and varies according to the outlet pressure. These pumps are not suitable 
for high pressure applications and are generally used for low-pressure and high-volume 
flow applications. The maximum pressure capacity is limited to 20-30 bars and the 
specific speed ranges from 500 to 10000. Most of the centrifugal pumps are not self-
priming and the pump casing needs to be filled with liquid before the pump is started. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.4.3 Centrifugal pump 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore 
Page 57 
 
The reciprocating pump is a positive plunger pump. It is also known as positive 
displacement pump or piston pump. It is often used where relatively small quantity is to 
be handled and the delivery pressure is quite large. The construction of these pumps is 
similar to the four stroke engine as shown in figure 5.4.4. The crank is driven by some 
external rotating motor. The piston of pump reciprocates due to crank rotation. The piston 
moves down in one half of crank rotation, the inlet valve opens and fluid enters into the 
cylinder. In second half crank rotation the piston moves up, the outlet valve opens and the 
fluid moves out from the outlet. At a time, only one valve is opened and another is closed 
so there is no fluid leakage. Depending on the area of cylinder the pump delivers constant 
volume of fluid in each cycle independent to the pressure at the output port. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore 
Page 58 
 
 
 
4. Pump Lift 
 
In general, the pump is placed over the fluid storage tank as shown in figure 5.4.3. The 
pump creates a negative pressure at the inlet which causes fluid to be pushed up in the 
inlet pipe by atmospheric pressure. It results in the fluid lift in the pump suction. The 
maximum pump lift can be determined by atmospheric pressure and is given by pressure 
head as given below: 
 
Pressure Head, P = ρ gh         (5.1.1) 
 
Theoretically, a pump lift of 8 m is possible but it is always lesser due to undesirable 
effects such as cavitation. The cavitation is the formation of vapor cavities in a liquid. 
The cavities can be small liquid-free zones ("bubbles" or "voids") formed due to partial 
vaporization of fluid (liquid). These are usually generated when a liquid is subjected to 
rapid changes of pressure and the pressure is relatively low. At higher pressure, the voids 
implode and can generate an intense shockwave. Therefore, the cavitation should always 
be avoided. The cavitation can be reduced by maintaining lower flow velocity at the inlet 
and therefore the inlet pipes have larger diameter than the outlet pipes in a pump. The 
pump lift should be as small as possible to decrease the cavitation and to increase the 
efficiency of the pump. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.4.4 Pump lift 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore 
Page 59 
 
 
 
5. Pressure Regulation 
 
The pressure regulation is the process of reduction of high source pressure to a lower 
working pressure suitable for the application. It is an attempt to maintain the outlet 
pressure within acceptable limits. The pressure regulation is performed by using pressure 
regulator. The primary function of a pressure regulator is to match the fluid flow with 
demand. At the same time, the regulator must maintain the outlet pressure within certain 
acceptable limits. 
 
The schematic of pressure regulator and various valves placement is shown in figure 
5.4.4. When the valve V1 is closed and V2 is opened then the load moves down and fluid 
returns to the tank but the pump is dead ended and it leads to a continuous increase in 
pressure at pump delivery. Finally, it may lead to permanent failure of the pump. 
Therefore some method is needed to keep the delivery pressure P1 within the safe level. It 
can be achieved by placing pressure regulating valve V3 as shown in figure 5.4.5. This 
valve is closed in normal conditions and when the pressure exceeds a certain limit, it 
opens and fluid from pump outlet returns to the tank via pressure regulating valve V3. As 
the pressure falls in a limiting range, the valve V3 closes again. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.4.5 Schematic of pressure regulation 
 
When valve V1 is closed, the whole fluid is dumped back to the tank through the pressure 
regulating valve. This leads to the substantial loss of power because the fluid is 
circulating from tank to pump and then pump to tank without performing any useful 
work. This may lead to increase in fluid temperature because the energy input into fluid 
leads to the increase in fluid temperature. This may need to the installation of heat 
exchanger in to the storage tank to extract the excess heat. Interestingly, the motor power 
 
 
 

17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore 
Page 60 
 
 
 
consumption is more in such condition because the outlet pressure is higher than the 
working pressure. 
 
6. Advantages and Disadvantages of Hydraulic 
system 
 6.1 Advantages 
• 
The hydraulic system uses incompressible fluid which results in higher efficiency. 
 
• 
It delivers consistent power output which is difficult in pneumatic or mechanical 
drive systems. 
 
• 
Hydraulic systems employ high density incompressible fluid. Possibility of 
leakage is less in hydraulic system as compared to that in pneumatic system. The 
maintenance cost is less. 
 
• 
These systems perform well in hot environment conditions. 
 
6.2 Disadvantages 
 
• 
The material of storage tank, piping, cylinder and piston can be corroded with the 
hydraulic fluid. Therefore one must be careful while selecting materials and 
hydraulic fluid. 
• 
The structural weight and size of the system is more which makes it unsuitable for 
the smaller instruments. 
 
• 
The small impurities in the hydraulic fluid can permanently damage the complete 
system, therefore one should be careful and suitable filter must be installed. 
 
• 
The leakage of hydraulic fluid is also a critical issue and suitable prevention 
method and seals must be adopted. 
 
• 
The hydraulic fluids, if not disposed properly, can be harmful to the environment. 
 
 
 
 
5.5     Spool Valve Solenoid Operated 
 
 Spool valve 
 
The spool valves derive their name from their appearance. It consists of a shaft sliding in 
a bore which has large groove around the circumference. This type of construction makes 
it look like a spool. The spool is sealed along the clearance between moving spool and 
housing (valve body). The quality of seal or the amount of leakage depends on the 
amount of clearance, viscosity of fluid and the level of the pressure. The grooves guide 
the fluid flow by interconnecting or blocking the holes (ports). The spool valves are 
categorized according to the number of operating positions and the way hydraulic lines 
interconnections. One of the simplest two way spool valve is shown in Figure 5.5.1. The 
standard terms are referred as Port ‘P’ is pressure port, Port ‘T’ is tank port and Port ‘A’ 
and Port ‘B’ are the actuator (or working) ports. The actuators can move in forward or 
backward direction depending on the connectivity of the pressure and tank port with the 
actuators port. 
 

17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore 
Page 61 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.5.1 Valve closed 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.5.2 Valve opened by actuation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore 
Page 62 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore 
Page 63 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore 
Page 64 
 
  
5.6    Design of simple hydraulic circuits for various applications 
 
The hydraulic and pneumatic elements such as cylinders and valves are connected 
through pipelines to form a hydraulic or a pneumatic circuit. It is difficult to represent the 
complex functioning of these elements using sketches. Therefore graphical symbols are 
used to indicate these elements. The symbols only specify the function of the element 
without indicating the design of the element. Symbols also indicate the actuation method, 
direction of flow of air and designation of the ports. Symbols are described in various 
documents like DIN24300, BS2917, ISO1219 and the new ISO5599, CETOP RP3 and 
the original American JIC and ANSI symbols. 
 
The symbol used to represent an individual element display the following characteristics: 
• Function 
• Actuation and return actuation methods 
• Number of connections 
• Number of switching positions 
• General operating principle 
• Simplified representation of the flow path 
 
The symbol does not represent the following characteristics: 
• Size or dimensions of the component 
• Particular manufacturer, methods of construction or costs 
• Operation of the ports 
• Any physical details of the elements 
• Any unions or connections other than junctions 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore 
Page 65 
 
 
 
Earlier the ports were designated with letter system. Now as per ISO5599 the ports are 
designated based on number system. The port designations are shown in table 5.7.1 
 
Table 5.7.1 Symbols for ports 
 
Port 
Letter system 
Number system 
Pressure port 
P 
1 
Working port 
A 
4 
Working port 
B 
2 
Exhaust port 
R 
5 
Exhaust port 
S 
3 
Pilot port 
Z 
14 
Pilot port 
Y 
12 
 
The graphical representation, designation and explanation of various components and 
equipments used in hydraulic and pneumatic system are given in table 5.7.2. Readers are 
suggested to study these representations carefully. 
 
Table 5.7.2 Graphical symbols of hydraulic / pneumatic elements and equipments 
 
SYMBOL 
DESIGNATION 
EXPLANATION
Energy supply 
Air compressor 
One direction 
of  rotation 
only 
with 
constant 
displacement volume 
Air receiver 
Compressed air  from
the
compressor is stored and
diverted to the system when 
required 
One direction 
and two
direction of 
rotation with
constant 
displacement 
volume 
 
 
 
 
 

17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore 
Page 66 
 
 
 
Hydraulic pump 
One direction and 
two
direction of rotation 
with
variable displacement 
Rotary actuators 
One direction and 
two
direction of rotation 
with
constant 
displacement 
volume 
Pneumatic motor 
One direction and 
two
direction of rotation 
with
variable displacement 
One direction and 
two
direction of rotation 
with
constant 
displacement 
volume 
Hydraulic motor 
One direction and 
two
direction of rotation 
with
variable displacement 
Service units 
Air filter 
This 
device 
is 
a
combination of filter 
and
water separator 
Dryer 
For drying the air 
Lubricator 
For lubrication of 
connected devices, small 
amount of oil is added to 
 
 
 

17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore 
Page 67 
 
 
 
 
the air flowing through this 
device 
Regulator 
To regulate the air pressure 
FRL unit 
Combined 
filter, regulator 
and lubricator system 
Direction control valves (DCVs) 
2/2 way valve 
Two  closed  ports  in  the 
closed 
neutral position and 
flow
during actuated position 
3/2 way valve 
In the first position flow 
takes place to the cylinder 
In the second position flow 
takes out of the cylinder to 
the exhaust (Single acting 
cylinder) 
4/2 way valve 
For double acting cylinder 
all the ports are open 
4/3 way valve 
Two open positions 
and
one closed neutral position 
5/2 way valve 
Two open positions 
with
two exhaust ports 
  
 

17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore 
Page 68 
 
 
 
 
 
Direction control valve actuation methods 
 
General manual actuation 
Manual operation of DCV 
Push button actuation 
Lever actuation 
Detent lever actuation 
Foot pedal actuation 
Mechanical 
actuation 
of
DCV 
Roller lever actuation 
Idle return roller actuation 
Spring actuation 
Direct pneumatic actuation 
Pneumatic 
actuation 
of
DCV 
Non return valves 
Check valve 
Allows   flow   in 
one
direction and blocks flow in 
other direction 
Spring loaded check valve 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore 
Page 69 
 
 
 
Shuttle/ OR valve 
When any one of the input 
is  given  the  output  is 
produced 
AND valve 
Only when both the inputs 
are 
given 
output 
is
produced 
Quick exhaust valve 
For quick exhaust of air to 
cause 
rapid 
extension/ 
retraction of cylinder 
Flow control valves 
Flow control valve 
To allow controlled flow 
Flow control valve with 
To allow controlled flow in 
one way adjustment 
one direction and free flow 
in other 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Pressure control valves 
 
Pressure relieving valve 
Non relieving type 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Relieving 
type 
with 
 
overload being vented out 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore 
Page 70 
 
 
 
Pressure reducing valve 
Maintains 
the 
reduced 
pressure 
at 
specified 
location in hydraulic system 
Unloading valve 
Allows 
pump 
to 
build
pressure to an 
adjustable 
pressure setting and 
then
allow it to be discharged to 
tank 
Counter balance valve 
Controls the movement 
of
vertical hydraulic cylinder 
and prevents its descend due 
to external load weight 
Actuators 
Single acting cylinder 
Spring loaded cylinder with 
retraction taking place 
by
spring force 
Double acting cylinder 
Both 
extension 
and
retraction 
by
pneumatic/hydraulic force 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore 
Page 71 
 
  
Pneumatic system 
 
Pneumatic technology deals with the study of behavior and applications of 
compressed air in our daily life in general and manufacturing automation in particular. 
Pneumatic systems use air as the medium which is abundantly available and can be 
exhausted into the atmosphere after completion of the assigned task. 
 
1. Basic Components of Pneumatic System: 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 6.1.1 Components of a pneumatic system 
 
Important components of a pneumatic system are shown in fig.5.6.1. 
 
• 
Air filters: These are used to filter out the contaminants from the air. 
• 
Compressor: Compressed air is generated by using air compressors. Air 
compressors are either diesel or electrically operated. Based on the 
requirement of compressed air, suitable capacity compressors may be used. 
 
• 
Air cooler: During compression operation, air temperature increases. 
Therefore coolers are used to reduce the temperature of the compressed air. 
• 
Dryer: The water vapor or moisture in the air is separated from the air by 
using a dryer. 
• 
Control Valves: Control valves are used to regulate, control and monitor for 
control of direction flow, pressure etc. 
• 
Air Actuator: Air cylinders and motors are used to obtain the required 
movements of mechanical elements of pneumatic system. 
 
 

17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore 
Page 72 
 
 
 
• 
Electric Motor: Transforms electrical energy into mechanical energy. It is 
used to drive the compressor. 
• 
Receiver tank: The compressed air coming from the compressor is stored in 
the air receiver. 
 
These components of the pneumatic system are explained in detail on the next pages. 
 
2. Receiver tank 
 
The air is compressed slowly in the compressor. But since the pneumatic system 
needs continuous supply of air, this compressed air has to be stored. The compressed 
air is stored in an air receiver as shown in Figure 5.6.2. The air receiver smoothens the 
pulsating flow from the compressor. It also helps the air to cool and condense the 
moisture present. The air receiver should be large enough to hold all the air delivered 
by the compressor. The pressure in the receiver is held higher than the system 
operating pressure to compensate pressure loss in the pipes. Also the large surface 
area of the receiver helps in dissipating the heat from the compressed air. Generally 
the size of receiver depends on, 
 
7. Delivery volume of compressor. 
 
8. Air consumption. 
 
9. Pipeline network 
 
10. Type and nature of on-off regulation 
 
11. Permissible pressure difference in the pipelines 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig.5.6.2 Air receiver 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore 
Page 73 
 
 
 
3. Compressor: 
 
It is a mechanical device which converts mechanical energy into fluid energy. The 
compressor increases the air pressure by reducing its volume which also increases the 
temperature of the compressed air. The compressor is selected based on the pressure it 
needs to operate and the delivery volume. 
The compressor can be classified into two main types 
• 
Positive displacement compressors and 
• 
Dynamic displacement compressor 
 
Positive displacement compressors include piston type, vane type, diaphragm type 
and screw type. 
 
3.1 Piston compressors 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 5.6.3 Single acting piston compressor 
 
Piston compressors are commonly used in pneumatic systems. The simplest form is 
single cylinder compressor (Fig. 5.6.3). It produces one pulse of air per piston stroke. 
As the piston moves down during the inlet stroke the inlet valve opens and air is 
drawn into the cylinder. As the piston moves up the inlet valve closes and the exhaust 
valve opens which allows the air to be expelled. The valves are spring loaded. The 
single cylinder compressor gives significant amount of pressure pulses at the outlet 
port. The pressure developed is about 3-40 bar. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore 
Page 74 
 
 
 
 
3.2 Double acting compressor 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 5.6.4 Double acting piston compressor 
 
The pulsation of air can be reduced by using double acting compressor as shown in 
Figure 5.6.4. It has two sets of valves and a crosshead. As the piston moves, the air is 
compressed on one side whilst on the other side of the piston, the air is sucked in. Due 
to the reciprocating action of the piston, the air is compressed and delivered twice in 
one piston stroke. Pressure higher than 30bar can be produced. 
 
3.3 Multistage compressor 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 6.1.5 Multi-stage compressor 
 
As the pressure of the air increases, its temperature rises. It is essential to reduce the 
air temperature to avoid damage of compressor and other mechanical elements. The 
multistage compressor with intercooler in-between is shown in Figure 5.6.5. It is used 
to reduce the temperature of compressed air during the compression stages. The inter-
cooling reduces the volume of air which used to increase due to heat. The compressed 
air from the first stage enters the intercooler where it is cooled. This air is given as 
input to the second stage where it is compressed again. The multistage compressor 
can develop a pressure of around 50bar. 
 

17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore 
Page 75 
 
 
 
 
3.4 Combined two stage compressors 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 5.6.6 Combined to stage compressor 
 
In this type, two-stage compression is carried out by using the same piston (Fig. 
5.6.6). Initially when the piston moves down, air is sucked in through the inlet valve. 
During the compression process, the air moves out of the exhaust valve into the 
intercooler. As the piston moves further the stepped head provided on the piston 
moves into the cavity thus causing the compression of air. Then, this is let out by the 
exhaust port. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore 
Page 76 
 
 
 
 

17ME753 Mechatronics 
 
Dept of Mechanical Engineering, ATME College of Engineering,, Mysore 
Page 77 
 
COURSE OUTCOME 
Students will 
1. Understand the concept and working of Pneumatic and Hydraulic  actuation 
systems 
2. Learn the types and mechanisms of valves 
3. Know the concept and depiction of hydraulic systems 
SELF ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS 
1. With a neat block diagram explain Hydraulic  actuation systems 
2. Describe the working of spool valves 
3. Draw vane pumps. 
4. Explain the various units of hydraulic system 
5. Explain the main features and functions of rotary actuators. 
 
FURTHER READING 
1. Mechatronics and microprocessor, Dr H.D.Ramachandra, Sudha Publications, Bangalore, 
2018 
 
 
 
 

