arXiv:1902.03026v2  [hep-th]  25 Feb 2019
Natural discrete diﬀerential calculus in physics
Carlo Rovellia and V´aclav Zatloukala,b
a CPT, Aix-Marseille Universit´e, Universit´e de Toulon, CNRS, F-13288 Marseille, France, and
and
b FNSPE, Czech Technical University in Prague, Bˇrehov´a 7, 115 19 Praha 1, Czech Republic
(Dated: February 26, 2019)
We sharpen a recent observation by Tim Maudlin: diﬀerential calculus is a natural language for
physics only if additional structure, like the deﬁnition of a Hodge dual or a metric, is given; but the
discrete version of this calculus provides this additional structure for free.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Field theory is the tool of choice of contemporary fun-
damental physics. Diﬀerential calculus is a natural lan-
guage for ﬁeld theory. Diﬀerential calculus is deﬁned by
a smooth manifold M, the spaces of diﬀerential p-forms
on this manifold, and the unique diﬀerential operator d.
This is a minimal mathematical structure, with a simple
physical interpretation: p-forms represent local degrees of
freedom and the manifold codes the adjacency relations
between them.
But diﬀerential calculus alone is in general insuﬃcient
for physical theories.
Additional structure is required.
The minimal structure required is an operator d∗. This
can be deﬁned from a Hodge dual ∗, by
d∗= ∗d ∗,
(1)
or from a metric on the manifold, from which the Hodge
dual can be deﬁned.1 For instance, Maxwell theory can
be written in four dimensional language in terms of a
1-form A (the potential), a 2-form F (the ﬁeld) and a
1-form J (the source), satisfying
dA = F,
d∗F = J.
(2)
The operator d∗is called the codiﬀerential; it lowers the
rank of the diﬀerential form. Similarly, in its three di-
mensional formulation, Maxwell theory can be given in
terms of the time evolution of a 2-form E (the electric
ﬁeld), a 1-form B (the magnetic ﬁeld), a 3-form ρ (the
charge), and a 2-form j (the current) satisfying
d∗E = −˙B,
dE = ρ,
d∗B = 0,
dB = j + ˙E,
(3)
where the dot indicates time derivative.2 As another ex-
ample, the Laplace(-deRham) operator, which is ubiqui-
tous in physics, can be written as
∆= (d + d∗)2 = dd∗+ d∗d.
(4)
1 It is conventional to include an additional sign in deﬁnition (1),
which depends on the manifold dimension, metric signature, and
the rank of the diﬀerential form.
2 In literature (for instance [6]) one often encounters a dualized
version of these equations,
dE = −˙B,
d∗E = ρ,
dB = 0,
d∗B = j + ˙E,
where E is now a 1-form, B a 2-form, ρ a 0-form, and j a 1-form.
In current fundamental physics, the interpretation of the
metric, and the Hodge operator it deﬁnes, is provided
by general relativity: they are determined by the gravi-
tational ﬁeld, which is itself a dynamical variable. This
fact fogs the physical meaning of the mathematical struc-
ture of ﬁeld theory, because the basic structure needed
to deﬁne it is itself dynamical and ultimately quantum.
On the other hand, however, quantum gravity indi-
cates that spacetime is described by a smooth manifold
only within an approximation valid at scales larger than
the Planck scale. At small scale, we expect some form of
discreteness to appear. A number of current approaches
to quantum gravity either assume (for instance [1]) or
derive (for instance [2]) this discreteness.
Tim Maudlin has recently pointed out that discrete-
ness is suﬃcient to ﬁll the missing ingredient for pro-
viding a complete mathematical language for elementary
physics, based only on contiguity and local degrees of
freedom [3].
The ingredient that diﬀerential calculus
misses is instead naturally present in the discrete ver-
sion of diﬀerential calculus. Here we show how this is
possible in a rather straightforward manner.
II.
FROM CONTINUOUS TO DISCRETE
FIELDS
Examples of discrete versions of ﬁeld theory are lattice
Yang Mills theory [4], which plays an important role for
computations in the physics of the strong interactions,
and the spin network formalism in loop quantum gravity
[5]. In the ﬁrst, the lattice spacing is taken to zero to
obtain physical results; in the second, there is no lattice
spacing and discreteness reﬂects the actual discreteness
of physical spacetime.
In either case, the intuitive relation between the dis-
crete and the continuum theory can be understood as
follows. Consider a triangulation ∆of an n-dimensional
oriented spacetime manifold, namely a partition of the
manifold in n-simplices. These are bounded by oriented
(n −1)-simplices (tetrahedra, if n = 4), in turn bounded
by oriented (n −2)-simplices (triangles, if n = 4), until
the zero-simplices, which are points of the manifold. A
p-simplex is characterised by the subset formed by the
p + 1 vertices in its boundary. Its boundary is the union
of (p + 1) oriented (p −1)-simplices. (For instance, the
boundary of a tetrahedron is formed by four oriented tri-

2
angles.)
Since p-forms can be integrated over a p-dimensional
surface, a physical p-form ﬁeld φ can be integrated over
a p-simplex σp and hence assigns a number
φ(σp) =
Z
σp
φ
(5)
to each p-simplex. Namely it deﬁnes a map from the set
of the p-simplices to R.
This is a “discrete ﬁeld”.
1-
forms, for instance, are integrated on segments, 2-forms
on triangles and so on; hence a discretized 1-form is an
assignment of a number to each oriented segment, a dis-
cretized 2-form is an assignment of a number to each
oriented triangle, and so on.
A p-simplex σp is characterised by the set σp
=
(v0, v1, ..., vp) of its vertices. The order of vertices de-
ﬁnes orientation of the simplex — swapping two vertices
results in a minus sign.
It is useful to introduce for-
mal linear combinations of p-simplices. These are called
p-chains, their set denoted by Cp. The boundary of a
p-simplex σp is the element of Cp−1 deﬁned by
∂σp =
p
X
j=0
(−1)j(v0, . . . , vj−1, vj+1, . . . , vp).
(6)
One sees immediately that ∂∂= 0 (the boundary of a
boundary is empty).
Discrete ﬁelds are then deﬁned as linear functions on p-
chains with values in R, their set denoted by Cp. These
are called cochains in the mathematical literature. We
denote φ(σp) the value of a p-cochain φ on the single p-
simplex σp. The boundary operation ∂: Cp →Cp−1,
induces a corresponding operation on cochains:
d : Cp →Cp+1
,
dφ(σp+1) = φ(∂σp+1),
(7)
and it is easy to see that this is the discrete version of the
continuous d operator. It satisﬁes dd = 0. Intuitively,
relations between ﬁelds that vary little at the scale of
the triangulation are satisﬁed or approximated by their
discrete version. For instance, the ﬁrst of the equations
in (3) equates the integral of the charge density (3-form)
on a tetrahedron (3-simplex) to the ﬂux of the electric
ﬁeld (2-form) across its boundary (linear combination of
triangles).
III.
DISCRETE FIELD THEORY
The abstract combinatorial structure formed by the set
of the vertices and by the family of the subsets of vertices
characterising each p-simplex, together with their bound-
ary relations, deﬁnes an abstract combinatorial complex
K.
This complex K, and its operator d acting on its
cochains can be considered by itself, with no reference to
a continuous manifold [6]. It provides a suﬃcient struc-
ture for deﬁning the discrete ﬁeld theory.
This structure has been studied in the literature in
diﬀerent contexts, see for instance [7–11].
The main observation in this paper is that unlike for
its continuous counterpart, this discrete structure comes
naturally equipped also with a d∗operator, without need
of choosing additional structure. Hence discrete diﬀeren-
tial calculus, unlike its continuous counterpart, is suﬃ-
cient for physics, with no need of additional structure.
The intuitive reason for this is that discreteness implic-
itly deﬁnes a scale, absent in the continuous theory.
To show this, notice ﬁrst that unlike the continuous
case, the discrete case carries a naturally deﬁned in-
ner product between p-cochains. The inner product of
cochains φ, ψ ∈Cp is deﬁned as
(φ, ψ) =
X
σp
φ(σp)ψ(σp),
(8)
where the sum runs over all p-simplices in K.
(Notice
that this product is diﬀerent from the product deﬁned
for instance in [7], or by equation (25) in [9], because it
is determined by the discrete structure itself and does
not depend on Riemannian, or geometrical, notions like
a volume form.) This allows us to deﬁne the operator d∗
as the adjoint of d:
(φ, dψ) = (d∗φ, ψ)
(9)
for any φ ∈Cp and ψ ∈Cp−1.
This operator is the
discrete version of the continuum d∗operator.
The
Laplace(-deRham) operator on cochains is given by
∆: Cp →Cp
,
∆= (d + d∗)2 = dd∗+ d∗d.
(10)
The triple (K, d, d∗) provides a discretization of the triple
(M, d, d∗). But while in the second d∗is not determined
by (M, d), in the ﬁrst d∗is determined by (K, d).
IV.
THE d∗OPERATOR
To get clarity on the nature of the discrete operator d∗
(acting on cochains, namely discrete ﬁelds), we show that
it is related to an operator ∂∗(acting on chains, namely
linear combinations of simplices), in the same manner d
is related to the boundary operator ∂.
We deﬁne the operator ∂∗acting on chains by
∂∗: Cp−1 →Cp
,
d∗φ(σp−1) = φ(∂∗σp−1).
(11)
While the boundary operator ∂decreases the dimension
of a simplex it acts on, the operator ∂∗increases it.
Its explicit form can be worked out as follows. First, for
any simplex σp, it is convenient to deﬁne a corresponding
cochain ¯σp with value 1 on σp and zero elsewhere. With
this we can write φ(σp) = (φ, ¯σp) = (¯σp, φ). Choosing
φ = ¯σp and ψ = ¯σp−1 in Eq. (9) gives a useful relation
d¯σp−1(σp) = d∗¯σp(σp−1).
(12)

3
0
1
2
3
a
b
FIG. 1.
Example of a complex K.
According to Eq. (13),
we have ∂∗(0, 2) = (1, 0, 2) + (3, 0, 2).
In the dual com-
plex approach we identify the dual vertices a = ∗(0, 2, 3) and
b = ∗(0, 1, 2), and the dual edge ∗(0, 2) = (b, a).
Eq. (16)
then gives ∂∗(0, 2) = ∗−1∂∗(0, 2) = (0, 2, 3) −(0, 1, 2), which
coincides with the former result upon reordering of vertices.
Using this, we have
∂∗σp−1 =
X
σp
d∗¯σp(σp−1)σp
=
X
σp
d¯σp−1(σp)σp
=
X
σp
¯σp−1(∂σp)σp
=
X
v
(v, σp−1),
(13)
where the last sum runs over vertices v such that (v, σp−1)
is a p-simplex of K. That is: the ∂∗of a (p −1)-simplex
is formed by all the p-simplices that have the (p −1)-
simplex in their boundary. Below we will see that this
has a nice geometrical and combinatorial interpretation
in terms of the dual complex.
The simple combinatorial
expression for d∗given in the last line of equation (13) is
a key result of this note. In fact, we could have taken it
as a purely combinatorial deﬁnition of the operator ∂∗,
based only on contiguity in the simplicial complex.
In passing we note that the latter equations imply
d¯σp = ∂∗σp,
(14)
where the “bar” operation has been extended from sim-
plices to all chains by linearity.
With the chain equivalent ∂∗of the discrete codif-
ferential d∗at our disposal, we easily ﬁnd the chain
equivalent of the Laplace operator by writing ∆φ(σp) =
φ((∂∗∂+∂∂∗)σp). For example, on 0-cochains, i.e., func-
tions deﬁned on vertices, the Laplace operator reads
∆φ(σ0) = φ(∂∂∗σ0)
=
X
v
φ(∂(v, σ0))
= deg(σ0)φ(σ0) −
X
v
φ(v),
(15)
where deg(σ0) is the degree (the number of neighbours
v) of the vertex σ0.
V.
THE DUAL COMPLEX
The duality described above can be made explicit by
introducing the dual complex.
To illustrate it, let us
return for simplicity to the case of the triangulated ori-
ented manifold. If K is a triangulation of an orientable
n-dimensional manifold M, then there exists a dual cel-
lular complex K∗, which oﬀers a convenient dual inter-
pretation of the operator ∂∗, analogous to the continuum
deﬁnition in Eq. (1).
The dual complex K∗can be deﬁned as follows. (For
complete details, see [12].) By deﬁnition, the vertices of
K∗are the n-simplices of K and, in general, the p-cells
of K∗are the (n −p)-simplices of K. Remarkably, the ∂∗
operator of K turns out to be the boundary operator on
K∗. See Figure 1 for an example.
The dual map ∗that sends a p-simplex in the corre-
sponding (n −p)-cell and viceversa can be regarded as
a discrete version of the continuum Hodge operator, and
allows us to write
∂∗= ∗∂∗,
(16)
i.e., the operator ∂∗is simply the operator dual to the
boundary operator in the dual complex.
Observe the
analogy with Eq. (14), which relates the operator ∂∗
on chains, and the discrete diﬀerential operator d on
cochains via the “bar” operation.
VI.
CONCLUSIONS
Continuous structures can be approximated by dis-
crete structures with many elements (as in lattice QCD).
Discrete structures with many elements can be approx-
imated by continuous ones (as in the hydrodynamical
approximation of the molecular dynamics of a liquid).
The question whether it is continuity or discreteness to
be ‘more fundamental’ has been posed repeatedly during
the history of physics, with oscillating answers. In his
inaugural lecture at G¨ottingen in 1854, Bernhard Rie-
mann famously observed that “in a discrete manifold, the
ground of its metric relations is given in the notion of it,
while in a continuous manifold, this ground must come
from outside.” [13] On a similar vein, we have pointed out
here that the minimal structure needed to deﬁne phys-
ical ﬁeld theories is not provided by diﬀerential calcu-
lus alone, but is provided by the corresponding discrete
structure: an abstract combinatorial complex.
Abstract combinatorial complexes form the basic
structure for the deﬁnition of the covariant, or spinfoam,
formulation of the quantum dynamics of the gravitational
ﬁeld in loop quantum gravity [5]. The observation in this
paper sheds some light on the role of such structure in
this theory.
—

4
V.Z. acknowledges support from the ESIF, EU Oper-
ational Programme Research, Development and Educa-
tion, and from International Mobility of Researchers in
CTU (CZ.02.2.69/0.0/0.0/16 027/0008465), Czech Tech-
nical University in Prague. C.R. acknowledges support
from the SM Center on Space, Time and the Quantum.
[1] R. D. Sorkin, “Space-time and causal sets,” in Relativ-
ity and Gravitation: Classical and Quantum (Proceed-
ings of the SILARG VII Conference, held Cocoyoc, Mex-
ico, December, 1990), J. C. D’Olivo, E. Nahmad-Achar,
M. Rosenbaum, M. P. Ryan, L. F. Urrutia, and F. Zer-
tuche, eds., pp. 150–173.
World Scientiﬁc, Singapore,
1991.
[2] C. Rovelli and L. Smolin, “Discreteness of area and vol-
ume in quantum gravity,” Nucl. Phys. B442 (1995) 593–
622, arXiv:9411005 [gr-qc].
[3] T. Maudlin, “Conference at the ”Gravity in the Quantum
Lab” meeting in Benasque, Spain,” 2018.
[4] K. G. Wilson, “Conﬁnement of quarks,” Physical Review
D 10 (1974) no. 8, 2445–2459, arXiv:0903.3598.
[5] A. Perez, “The Spin-Foam Approach to Quantum Grav-
ity”. Living Rev. Relativ. 16, (2013). C. Rovelli and F. Vi-
dotto, Covariant loop quantum gravity: An elementary
introduction to quantum gravity and spinfoam theory.
Cambridge University Press, 2015.
[6] T. Frankel, The Geometry of Physics:
An Introduc-
tion, Second Edition. Appendix B. (This appendix is not
present in the ﬁrst edition.) Cambridge University Press,
2004.
[7] M. Desbrun, A. N. Hirani, M. Leok, J. E. Marsden, Dis-
crete Exterior Calculus arXiv:math/0508341.
[8] R. Abraham, J. E. Marsden, T. S.Ratiu. Manifolds, Ten-
sor Analysis and Applications, volume 75 of Applied
Mathematical Sciences. pg 411. Springer-Verlag, second
edition, 1988.
[9] G. Calcagni, D. Oriti, J. Thrigen, Laplacians on dis-
crete and quantum geometries, Class. Quantum Grav. 30
(2013) 125006, arXiv:1208.0354.
[10] F. L. Teixeira, Random Lattice Gauge Theories and Dif-
ferential Forms, arXiv:1304.3485.
[11] M. G¨ockeler, Dirac-K¨ahler ﬁelds and lattice shape depen-
dence of fermion ﬂavour, Z. Phys. C, 18, pp. 323326,
1983.
[12] J. R. Munkers, Elements of Algebraic Topology, Addison-
Wesley, 1984.
[13] B. Riemann, On the Hypotheses which lie at the Bases of
Geometry, Birkhauser, 2016.

