See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/334760210
Void-dominated Cosmic Fluid: An Estimation of the Cosmological Constant
Preprint · July 2019
CITATIONS
0
READS
164
2 authors:
Some of the authors of this publication are also working on these related projects:
Reconstruction of initial Asymptotic-de Sitter mode in light of the Planck data View project
de Sitter super gravity View project
Ebrahim Yusofi
Islamic Azad University, Ayatollah Amoli Branch and school of astronomy at IPM
54 PUBLICATIONS   182 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
Mehrdad Khanpour
Islamic Azad University - Science and Research Ayatollah Amoli Branch
32 PUBLICATIONS   120 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
All content following this page was uploaded by Ebrahim Yusofi on 06 August 2019.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

arXiv:1907.12418v1  [astro-ph.CO]  29 Jul 2019
Void-dominated Cosmic Fluid: An Estimation of the Cosmological Constant
Ebrahim Yusoﬁ1, ∗and Mehrdad Khanpour2, †
1Department of Physics, Faculty of Basic Sciences,
Ayatollah Amoli Branch, Islamic Azad University, Amol, Iran
2Faculty of Basic Sciences, Ayatollah Amoli Branch, Islamic Azad University, Amol, Iran
(Dated: July 30, 2019)
Merging/clustering of galaxies in the present cosmic gas will produces voids at large scales in
the form of the cosmic web. By consideration of the cosmic web as the area where vast voids is
dominant, and using of the Thermodynamics of the interfaces, it can be shown that the pressure
of the cosmic gas is negative at the large scale overview. Due to the attractive gravity in clusters,
surface tension on the vast voids boundaries will produce negative lensing eﬀect and as an important
consequence, gravity becomes repulsive at these scales with positive cosmological constant. Finally,
we will obtain an estimate of the cosmological constant value that is very close to the order of the
one has been obtained from Planck(2018).
PACS numbers: 98.80.Jk, 95.36.+x, 98.80.Bp
I.
INTRODUCTION AND MOTIVATIONS
As we know the existence of a type of material ﬂuid
with negative pressure remains an unsolved puzzle in
physics and cosmology, because the lowest perceived
pressure for any type of ordinary matter ﬂuid is zero.
But one of the ways to justify the current accelerating
expansion in the universe is to have negative pressure for
the cosmic ﬂuid at large scales [1–4]. We will show in this
paper that taking into account the contribution of voids
in the present cosmic ﬂuid in addition to clusters, could
provide necessary conditions to have a quasi-vacuum cos-
mic ﬂuid with a negative pressure.
The ideal cosmic gas with the equation of state P = wρ,
is usually invoked in most cosmological models, where P,
w and ρ are the pressure, EOS parameter and energy den-
sity of the cosmic ﬂuid, respectively [5, 6]. One problem
in the ideal gas is, what happens to the local regions with
higher densities from the large scales overview? In the
ideal gas law it is assumed that the particles are point-
like without any volumes and interactions, but in the real
physical universe, there exist some phenomena occurring
between cosmic objects, for example the merging of the
cosmic objects is a common phenomenon at cosmological
scale at present universe. Galaxies and galaxy clusters,
and even voids are all always merging together to form
bigger ones. Accounting the merging process leads to the
following form of EOS ,
P = wρ + bρ2,
(1)
that the parameter b, taking into account the merging
process [7]. Although the volume of the merged galax-
ies are small fractions of the total cosmos volume, but
if we take into account the contribution of voids, the
∗Electronic address: e.yusoﬁ@iauamol.ac.ir (Corresponding author)
†Electronic address: m.khanpour@iauamol.ac.ir
volume of the merged voids are large fractions of the
present cosmic web and their contributions will become
larger and larger fractions [8–11]. So, by using a void-
dominated ﬂuid model, we will obtain the cosmological
constant value estimated by the surface tension (energy)
of the galaxies clusters distributed on the surface of the
cosmic voids[22].
II.
DROPS-BUBBLES MIXED MODEL FOR
THE COSMIC FLUID
In 1918, Einstein made the ﬁrst physical interpretation
of the Λ term that he had put forward: ”a modiﬁcation of
the theory is required such that empty space takes the role
of gravitating negative masses which are distributed all
over the interstellar space”[13]. According to Einstein,
we also believe that empty space (i.e. voids) distributed
all over the interstellar and inter cosmic web has energy
that can be considered as accelerating driver for galaxies
at large scales. Instead of ’negative mass’ that has been
introduced by Farnes in [14] the empty spaces between
clusters would produce ’negative pressure’ (or ’negative
gravitational lansing’) at cosmic scale. We assume that
the present cosmos not only do include clusters and ﬁl-
aments, but also incorporate some empty spaces (under
dense regions) between them, and these voids are ob-
served being merged as well [9–11].
Taking into account the contribution and eﬀect of the
volumes and interactions of these merging clusters and
voids, an alternative relation for the energy density has
been obtained in [7],
ρweb = (1 −α)ρ0a−3(1+w) + αρ0a−6(1+w),
(2)
where α =
bρ0
(1+w). As expected, compared to the con-
ventional relation ρ = ρ0a−3(1+w), the relation (2) for
the energy density, is divided into two diﬀerent parts;
the ﬁrst part is essentially the same as standard one
(∼a−3(1+w)), except that now a certain fraction of it

2
has been subtracted. The second part (∼a−6(1+w)) has
exactly the same fraction coming from the second term of
the equation of state (1). We can state that this cosmic
ﬂuid includes two diﬀerent parts, the ﬁrst part of (2) is
related to underdense regions (voids) with lower density
and pressure whereas the second part is related to regions
with higher density and pressure (galaxy clusters)[7]. In
the model proposed in this paper, we imagine galaxies
and their clusters as ’drops’ and empty spaces (voids)
between them as ’bubbles’.
A.
Bubbles Formation in milk
When we heat milk gradually, nothing occurs up to
the threshold of the boiling point. The problem begins
with the release of the ﬁrst tiny bubble containing the
steaming milk. As the temperature increases, these bub-
bles will form at greater and greater speed, and ﬁnally
when the speed of the formation of these bubbles is more
than their expansion speed, the volume occupied by the
bubbles increases rapidly and after a time they pour out
from the container [15].
Bubbles are also made in water, but they pop up when
they reach the surface of the water, releasing invisible
steam.
The surface tension of milk is more than wa-
ter because of the existence of some proteins, fats, and
carbohydrate compounds.
This higher surface tension
causes more resistance of bubbles against the internal
steam pressure and increases their lifetimes. If the vol-
ume of the container is large, some bubbles will remain
in the container, and if heating continues, the milk will
continue to form bubbles web [15](see Fig. 1.).
FIG. 1: Boiling milk vs cosmic web.
B.
Pressure in a Bubble vs Pressure in a Drop
Let us consider a small droplet with spherical shape in
equilibrium with its vapor. The drop and the saturated
vapor are enclosed in a constant temperature rigid
container shown in Fig. 2.
FIG. 2: Drops in vapor (left) vs Bubbles in liquid (right)[21].
As shown in [16, 17], the pressure diﬀerence between
internal and external of the drop is proportional to γ,
∆P = Pin −Pex = 2γ
¯r ,
(3)
Here, γ represents the surface tension for drops with ra-
dius ¯r. In the liquid-dominated phase, the internal pres-
sure of the drops is greater than the internal pressure
of the bubbles. But in the bubble-dominated ﬂuid (like
soap bubbles), the liquid phase is experienced a pressure
less than the pressure inside the bubbles, therefore the
curvature of the liquid among bubbles become concave
with negative signature. Look at the concave lens in red
color among bubbles in Fig. 3. The net eﬀect is that the
bubbles are growing and merging together while push liq-
uid phase away. In other words for the case of a spherical
bubbles interfaced with liquid, the liquid surface is not
convex but concave and its curvature, is not positive, it
is negative i.e. ( −1
¯r ) [16]. So in the liquid-dominated re-
gions, the liquid determines the formation of its surface
geometry and liquid has a surface with a convex shape.
But in the bubble-dominated phase, the gas in the bub-
ble determines the shape of the liquid surface geometry,
and the surface of the liquid become concave under the
pressure of the bubbles (see the red concave lens of liq-
uid among bubbles in Fig. 3). What is certain is that
the universe is in the voids-dominated state in the large
scale overview.
FIG. 3: Merging of expanding bubbles and web formation.

3
III.
SIGNATURE OF PRESSURE FOR THE
VOID-DOMINATED COSMIC FLUID
Inspired by milk bubbles web and relation (2), we can
consider the ﬂuid of the present universe at large scales
as a two-phase ﬂuid including drops (overdense regions)
among bubbles (underdense regions).
Bubbles (voids
enclosed with galaxy clusters)are on the one hand and
the drops ( clusters of galaxies) are on the other hand,
that are connected and merged together on their’s sur-
faces. The interface formation between drops and bub-
bles comes from the presence of the surface tension made
up of gravity itself. By supposing the existence of this
surface energy, there will be a pressure diﬀerence be-
tween the two regions with over and under densities. The
emerged pressure diﬀerence is provided from the energy
released from gravitational merging process.
The clusters of galaxies behave like droplets, so their in-
ternal pressure on the particles/galaxies/observers is pos-
itive with a positive gravity lensing eﬀect. These galaxies
experience attractive gravity in the clusters-dominated
region at small scales, but in a voids-dominated region,
the situation is completely diﬀerent, and the galaxies that
most of which accumulate on the surface of the voids, ex-
perience gravitational repulsion, because of the fact that
the bubbles (voids) inclosed by galaxies clusters are ex-
panding and hence pushing the galaxies away [18]. Put
in another way, bubbles and drops show opposite behav-
ior under gravity force; so galaxies will experience two
forces with opposite directions under the pressure of the
voids and clusters when merging to form cosmic web.
A.
A cosmic web like a set of merging bubbles
let’s consider a spherical boundary containing a net-
work of the voids (see the area bounded to the circle in
Fig. 3), in which several clusters and ﬁlaments, small and
vast voids are merging to each other. The continuous in-
tegration of bubbles into the liquid causes the bubbles to
grow larger, and this increasing in the bubble radius re-
sults in gravitational repulsion aﬀecting on the particles
on the surface of the bubbles. Under such conditions,
cosmic gas is clustered like bubbles and is situated in the
void-dominated phase. So we can write,
∆Pweb ≈Pvoids −Pclusters.
(4)
Since the zero pressure is attributed to the galaxies and
their’s clusters in the present universe, i.e. Pclusters ≈0,
as an important result we conclude that the total pressure
of the cosmic web at large scale essentially dominated by
voids with negative pressure and negative gravitational
lensing eﬀect, i.e. ( −1
¯r ),
∆Pweb ≈Pvoids ≈−2γ
¯rvoid
.
(5)
Here, the average values of voids radius denoted by
overbar. Fortunately, cosmic data are supporting such a
negative pressure for cosmic gas. The observational data
show that parameter w has a very narrow range around
w = −1 with more likelihood to the side of w ≲−1
[5, 11].
IV.
ESTIMATION OF A VOID SURFACE
TENSION
If we consider the location of clusters on the surface of
the voids, as a result of this consideration, the mass and
energy of galaxies and their clusters on the voids bound-
ary will be distributed on their surfaces. Therefore, the
energy-to-area ratio i.e. surface tension γ, will be esti-
mated for the disc shaped objects by using the following
relation,
γ ≡Energy
Area
= Mc2
πR2 ( J
m2 ).
(6)
In the above relation M and R are mass and radius of
the galaxy or the clusters of galaxies. For example, the
amount of surface tension or surface energy for the La-
niakea supercluster with MLaniakea = 1.0 × 1047kg and
RLaniakea = 2.4 × 1024m is obtained equal to the follow-
ing value,
γLaniakea ≈0.50 × 1015 J
m2 .
(7)
Because the surface tension is an intensive quantity, it
is expected that the approximate value of surface energy
for the cosmic objects (galaxy and the galactic cluster)
is the same value, i.e. (≈1015 J
m2 )(see TABLE 1.).
V.
CALCULATION OF THE COSMOLOGICAL
CONSTANT
By considering contribution of voids density in the cos-
mic ﬂuid, we can modify Friedmanns equation to
( ˙a
a)2 = 8πG
3
(ρcluster + ρvoid) −kc2
a2 .
(8)
In the standard cosmology with cosmological constant Λ,
without voids we have [5, 6]
( ˙a
a)2 = 8πG
3
(ρcluster) + Λc2
3
−kc2
a2 .
(9)
Since a void-dominated phase of cosmic ﬂuid can be re-
garded as a quasi-vacuum dominated state, therefore two
relations (8) and (9) are equivalent and we can deﬁne
Λ = 8πGρvoid
c2
.
(10)
with consideration ρvoid = Pvoid/w,
Λ = 8πGPvoid
wc2
.
(11)

4
TABLE I: Surface tension (energy) for the void surface
Cosmic Object
Mass (kg)
Radius (m)
γ(J/m2)
Laniakea
≃1.0 × 1047
≃2.4 × 1024
≃0.5 × 1015
Coma Cluster
≃1.2 × 1045
≃1.0 × 1023
≃3.4 × 1015
Virgo Cluster
≃2.0 × 1044
≃4.5 × 1022
≃2.8 × 1015
Galaxies Group
≃4.0 × 1043
≃1.55 × 1022
≃4.5 × 1015
Since the pressure from surface tension of void is negative
P = −2γ/rvoid, for w ≲−1, we have positive cosmologi-
cal constant as follow,
Λ = 16πGγlaniakea
wc2rvoid
.
(12)
According to a recent study, an intergalactic void is re-
sponsible for pushing the Milky Way and Andromeda
at mad speeds through the Universe [18]. Cosmic voids
typically have a diameter of 100 Mpc i.e.
rvoid ≈
3.1 × 10+24m.
Also, G = 6.67 × 10−11m3.kg−1.s−2 ,
w ≈1, and c = 3 × 108m.s−1. By putting (7) and these
values in equation (12), we can estimate the following
value for the cosmological constant,
Λ ≈0.60 × 10−52m−2.
(13)
By using of the Planck (2018) values of ΩΛ = 0.6889 ±
0.0056 and H0 = 67.66 ± 0.42(km/s)/Mpc, Λ has the
value of [19]
Λ = 3ΩΛ(H0
c )2 = 1.1056 × 10−52m−2.
(14)
The cosmological constant value in relation (12) depends
on both the surface energy and the radius of the diﬀerent
voids, but the order obtained for the λ, in each case is
very close to the value (13).
VI.
SUMMARY AND SOME POSSIBLE
CONSEQUENCES OF MODEL
Similar to standard model of cosmology that consider
perfect ﬂuid in the vacuum, radiation and matter phases;
we have proposed that the real cosmic ﬂuid composed of
two phases, voids and galaxies clusters for the evolution
of the present universe. According to energy density re-
lation (2) and the results obtained for the Hubble and de-
celeration parameter, it seems that the extra-acceleration
at large scale of the universe coming from the integration
and clustering of the cosmic objects in the small scales of
the universe. As a key result, we can conclude that the
merging of the cosmic voids at their’s surfaces produce
both of clustering (positive pressure) at small scales and
accelerating (negative pressure) at large scales, simulta-
neously. In a very similar way to what is found in the
soap bubbles or overﬂowing process in the boiling milk
[15]. The interesting point is that the source of this nega-
tive pressure (or repulsive gravity) is the surface tension
at the surface of the voids.
While we know that the
surfaces of these bubbles formed due to the gravitational
merging/clustering of the galaxies, the main force behind
clustering is the attractive gravity itself. So, from at-
tractive gravity at small scales will produce the
repulsive gravity at large scales. Also, some possible
consequences from the model are:
• Void-dominated
instead
of
Cluster-
dominated ﬂuid: Since the dominant volume of
the present cosmic web is formed by voids, based
the above picture, the negative pressure contrast
is inevitable at large scale.
That is, the cosmic
gas is considered as composed of so many bubbles
or voids, each of which has pressure less than the
clusters pressure, and hence the total pressure of
the universe at large scale would become negative.
In other words our universe at local clusters scales
is in the matter-dominated phase with attractive
gravity, while at global cosmic scales is in a
void-dominated phase with repulsive gravity.
As
a result of the void-dominated ﬂuid model, it can
be deduced that the our universe at present time
is in a quasi-vacuum state with quasi-de Sitter
background geometry [20].
• Repulsive gravity originate from attractive
gravity: If we consider present universe in void-
dominated phase, the main source of the negative
pressure at large scales (or repulsive gravity) is the
surface tension at the surface of the voids. e we
know that the surfaces of the voids formed due
to the gravitational clustering of the galaxies, the
main force behind this is the attractive gravity. So,
attractive gravity in clusters at small scales produce
the repulsive gravity on the surfaces of the voids at
large scales.
• A possible unifying source for Dark Matter
and Dark Energy:As galaxies are attracted to-
wards surfaces of voids, they locate under pressure
of expanding voids that this additional pressure
could possibly modify a galaxys rotation curve. In
addition to the positive pressure caused by the at-
tractive gravity of galaxies inside the clusters, the
expansion of voids at large scales imposes exter-
nal pressure on the galaxies at clusters scales (This
issue will studied in future works). Furthermore,
voids also make a natural dark energy candidate, as
a diﬀuse background of mutually-repelling expand-
ing voids could drive the expansion of the universe
at large scales.
• A possible solution for H0- tension: Since, the
cosmological constant value depends on the radius

5
of the voids, i.e. Λ ∼γ/rvoid, so Λ and the corre-
sponding Hubble constant H0 depends on the size
and surface energy of the voids. Consequently, the
global Hubble constant derived from the CMB and
the local one devised from galaxy surveys, including
the Local Supercluster, have to diﬀer. Even the lo-
cal value of Hubble constant should be larger than
its global value [21](This topic will be investigated
and presented in a separate paper).
Acknowledgments
EY would like to acknowledge B. Khanpour, M.
Mohsenzadeh, and A. Talebiyan for their constructive
discussions.
This work has been supported by the Is-
lamic Azad University, Ayatollah Amoli Branch, Amol,
Iran.
[1] A. G. Riess et al, Astrophys. J., 607, 284, (2004), astro-
ph/0402512.
[2] S. J. Perlmutter et al., Astrophys. J., 517, 565, (1999),
astro-ph/9812133.
[3] N. D. Spergel et al., Astrophys. J. Suppl. 148, 175,
(2003), astro-ph/0302209.
[4] P. A. R. Ade et al, Astron. Asstrophys594(2015)A13,
arXiv:1502.01589.
[5] S. K. Srivastava, General Relativity and Cosmology, PHI
(2008).
[6] T. P. Cheng, Relativity,Gravitation and Cosmology A
Basic Introduction, Oxford University Press, New York,
Second Edition (2010).
[7] M.
Khanpour,
E.
Yusoﬁ
and
B.
Khanpour,
arxiv:1709.08612v4.
[8] R. Cowen, Vast cosmic voids merge like soap bubbles,
Nature, 15 Oct 2015, DOI10.1038/nature.2015.18583.
[9] A. Pisani et al, Counting voids to probe dark energy,
Phys. Rev. D 92, 083531 (2015).
[10] M. Karen, Are We Living in a Giant Cosmic Void, Scince,
8 Jun 2017.
[11] N. Hamaus et al, Constraints on Cosmology and Grav-
ity from the Dynamics of Voids, Phys. Rev. Lett. 117,
091302 (2016).
[12] J. Samuel and S. Sinha, Surface tension and the cosmo-
logical constant, 0603804v2.
[13] A. Einstein, Comment on Schrdingers Note On a Sys-
tem of Solutions for the Generally Covariant Gravita-
tional Field Equations, Physikalische Zeitschrift, 19, 165
(1918). Translated by Engel A. in The Collected Papers
of Albert Einstein, Volume 7, The Berlin Years: Writ-
ings, 1918-1921. (Princeton University Press, April 2002).
http://einsteinpapers. press. princeton.edu/vol7-trans/.
[14] J. S. Farnes, Astron. Astrophys., 620, A92 (2018).
[15] E. Yusoﬁand M. Mohsenzadeh, 2010, AER, 9, 010201-1,
10.3847/AER2009035.
[16] H. J. Butt, K. Graf and M. Kappl, Physics and Chemistry
of Interfaces, Willey-VCH, (2003).
[17] L. E. Reichl, A Modern Course in Statistical Physics, 4th
Edition, Willey-VCH, (2016).
[18] Y. Hoﬀman et al, The dipole repeller, Nature Astronomy,
1, 0036 (2017).
[19] Planck Collaboration (2018). arXiv:1807.06209.
[20] E. Yusoﬁ, Mod. Phys. Lett. A, 33, 37 (2018).
[21] V. G. Gurzadyan and A. Stepanian, Eur. Phys. J. C
79,568, 2019.
[22] The Cosmological Constant Problem has been investi-
gated by developing an analogy between the cosmological
constant and the surface tension of membranes [12].
View publication stats

