Genomic sites hypersensitive to ultraviolet radiation
Sanjay Premia,1, Lynn Hana, Sameet Mehtab, James Knightb, Dejian Zhaob, Meg A. Palmatiera, Karl Kornackerc,2,
and Douglas E. Brasha,d,e,2
aDepartment of Therapeutic Radiology, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520-8040; bDepartment of Genetics, Yale Center for Genome Analysis,
Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520-8005; cKarl Kornacker & Associates, LLC, Worthington, OH 43085; dDepartment of Dermatology, Yale School
of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520-8059; and eYale Cancer Center, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06510
Edited by James E. Cleaver, University of California, San Francisco Medical Center, San Francisco, CA, and approved October 18, 2019 (received for review May
6, 2019)
If the genome contains outlier sequences extraordinarily sensitive
to environmental agents, these would be sentinels for monitoring
personal carcinogen exposure and might drive direct changes in
cell physiology rather than acting through rare mutations. New
methods, adductSeq and freqSeq, provided statistical resolution to
quantify rare lesions at single-base resolution across the genome.
Primary human melanocytes, but not fibroblasts, carried sponta-
neous apurinic sites and TG sequence lesions more frequent than
ultraviolet (UV)-induced cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers (CPDs). UV
exposure revealed hyperhotspots acquiring CPDs up to 170-fold
more frequently than the genomic average; these sites were more
prevalent in melanocytes. Hyperhotspots were disproportionately
located near genes, particularly for RNA-binding proteins, with the
most-recurrent hyperhotspots at a fixed position within 2 motifs.
One motif occurs at ETS family transcription factor binding sites,
known to be UV targets and now shown to be among the most
sensitive in the genome, and at sites of mTOR/5′ terminal
oligopyrimidine-tract translation regulation. The second occurs at
A2–15TTCTY, which developed “dark CPDs” long after UV exposure,
repaired CPDs slowly, and had accumulated CPDs prior to the ex-
periment. Motif locations active as hyperhotspots differed be-
tween
cell
types.
Melanocyte
CPD
hyperhotspots
aligned
precisely with recurrent UV signature mutations in individual gene
promoters of melanomas and with known cancer drivers. At sun-
burn levels of UV exposure, every cell would have a hyperhotspot
CPD in each of the ∼20 targeted cell pathways, letting hyperhot-
spots act as epigenetic marks that create phenome instability; high
prevalence favors cooccurring mutations, which would allow tu-
mor evolution to use weak drivers.
UV | cyclobutane pyrimidine dimer | melanoma | ETS | TOP tract
D
NA photoproduct induction and repair rates are generally
similar across the genome, broadly modified by chromatin
state (1–6). Yet the biological effects of photoproducts are often
localized to specific genes or regulatory regions (7–9). Are on-
cogenic and other biological events driven only by rare, stochas-
tically located DNA lesions that affect the cell via rare mutations
followed by phenotypic selection, or also by outlier genomic se-
quences hypersensitive to environmental agents and damaged
often? Identifying ultraviolet (UV) sensitive sites would also fa-
cilitate a practical application: Measurement of personal past UV
exposure as a predictor of future skin cancer risk.
The chief UV photoproduct is the cyclobutane pyrimidine
dimer (CPD), created in DNA when an UV photon covalently
joins 2 adjacent pyrimidines (dipyrimidine or PyPy sites) (10).
CPDs cause oncogenic mutations in cells of the skin and later
activate signaling pathways that drive single mutant cells to clon-
ally expand (11–17). It is known that large genes are preferentially
inactivated by UV (7); genes typically contain CPD hotspots,
sustaining these photoproducts at 10-fold higher frequencies than
elsewhere in the gene, especially at methylated CG sites (11, 18,
19), and CPD frequency correlates with mutation frequency in
Escherichia coli but not in human cells (11, 20). CPDs have been
mapped across the genome at a resolution of 200 to 1,000 nt (5, 6).
Single-nucleotide measurements averaged over ETS family tran-
scription factor binding motifs in many genes mutated in mela-
noma reveal that CPDs are elevated at these positions (21–23).
Yet the frequency of CPD induction at single-nucleotide resolu-
tion across the entire genome remains unknown, as do hotspots
and tissue-dependence.
Here we probed the genome of primary human fibroblasts and
melanocytes for genome regions that are outliers for UV sensi-
tivity. We first devised a method, adductSeq, for tagging sites of
CPDs or other DNA lesions and using high-throughput DNA
sequencing to map the tags at single-base resolution across the
genome. “Adduct” is used in its freer sense as a covalent change
in DNA structure. We then developed a set of statistical meth-
ods, freqSeq, that uses the full capabilities of this physical reso-
lution to quantify an individual site’s overrepresentation relative to
a genome average, rather than computationally pooling hundreds
or thousands of preselected sites (21, 22, 24, 25). FreqSeq also
overcomes confounders that include unannotated collapsed re-
peats, spontaneous DNA lesions, and the fact that a DNA se-
quencer lane is always filled, either with desired inserts from a
small number of cells or, in untreated or repairing cells, with
background noise derived from many cells. We find that human
cells contain individual pyrimidine dinucleotides hypersensitive to
UV; these sites differ between cell types and lie in biologically
significant locations, and untreated melanocytes carry extraordi-
narily high levels of spontaneous DNA lesions including CPDs.
Significance
Identifying sites in the human genome that are extraordinarily
sensitive to ultraviolet radiation (UV) would make it easier to
measure a person’s past UV exposure and thus predict that
person’s future skin cancer risk. This paper reports that human
melanocytes, responsible for skin and hair color, contain over
2,000 such genomic sites that are up to 170-fold more sensitive
than the average site. These sites occur at specific locations
near genes, so may let UV radiation drive direct changes in cell
physiology rather than act through rare mutations.
Author contributions: S.P., M.A.P., K.K., and D.E.B. designed research; S.P., L.H., M.A.P.,
and K.K. performed research; J.K., D.Z., and K.K. contributed new reagents/analytic tools;
S.M., D.Z., K.K., and D.E.B. analyzed data; and S.P. and D.E.B. wrote the paper.
The authors declare no competing interest.
This article is a PNAS Direct Submission.
Published under the PNAS license.
Data deposition: The data reported in this paper have been deposited in the Gene Ex-
pression Omnibus (GEO) database, https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo (accession no.
GSE137226). Data analysis scripts are available on GitHub at https://github.com/sameetmehta/
freqseq.
1Present address: Department of Tumor Biology, Moffitt Cancer Center, Tampa, FL 33612.
2To whom correspondence may be addressed. Email: karl.kornacker@gmail.com or
douglas.brash@yale.edu.
This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.
1073/pnas.1907860116/-/DCSupplemental.
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1907860116
PNAS Latest Articles
|
1 of 10
GENETICS
Downloaded at COPY 2 on November 13, 2019 

Methods
AdductSeq. The adductSeq strategy detected DNA adducts at nucleotide
resolution across the genome by nicking the DNA at lesion sites with a repair
enzyme, tagging the nick with a linker, and mapping the linkers by high-
throughput sequencing, in analogy to BLESS used for double-strand breaks
(26). The challenge is that, compared to typical DNA sequencing, CPDs are
present at <1 per 10 kb after a physiologically relevant UV dose and the
particular pyrimidine dinucleotides (PyPy sites) targeted are different in each
cell. AdductSeq uses T4 endonuclease V to nick between the 2 PyPy of the
CPD, photolyase to remove the CPD, primer extension from a set of semi-
random primers to create a double-stranded end at the CPD site for ligation,
Covaris shearing to create uniformly sized fragments for library purification,
and a biotinylated linker for purification from linkerless fragments (Fig. 1
and SI Appendix, Supplementary Methods). T4 endonuclease V acts by
cleaving the glycosidic bond of the 5′ Py of the CPD, creating a baseless site,
then nicking 3′ to this abasic site. Preexisting abasic sites are blocked to focus
on CPD detection. Primary human fibroblasts and melanocytes were exposed
to UVC (254 nm) or narrow-band UVB (nbUVB) (305–315 nm), sometimes
allowing time for excision repair, and analyzed for CPDs by adductSeq.
Mapped, filtered reads totaled ∼400,000,000 and 700,000,000 for fibroblasts
and melanocytes, respectively (SI Appendix, Table S1). These data are pub-
licly available (27).
FreqSeq. Whole-genome DNA sequencing is usually not an analytic technique,
due to uncharacterized (“collapsed”) repeats, stochastic variations in ge-
nome coverage, and differences in DNA loading and sequencing quality
between experiments. Because we were searching for rare outliers rather
than consensus sequences, it was important to increase statistical resolution
to achieve quantification of rare lesions at single-base resolution across the
genome. The raw data could be processed in the usual way: Reads were
filtered for spurious linker insertions, read quality, and PCR duplicates, and
aligned to the hg19 reference human genome using the Burrows–Wheeler
alignment algorithm (SI Appendix, Fig. S1). Then, to exclude artifacts as
stringently as possible and normalize against collapsed repeats and other
spurious signals, we added 2 additional layers of ratio-based analysis that
constitute freqSeq (SI Appendix, Supplementary Methods and Fig. S2). Data
analysis scripts are publicly available (28).
Results
CPD Mapping Covers the Genome. Exposing 293T DNA or human
fibroblast cells to UVC increased the fraction of reads located at
PyPy sites from the expected ∼25% at 0 J/m2 UVC (i.e., residual
shear breaks from a large number of cells, distributed equally
between PyPy, PuPu, PyPu, and PuPy) to ∼90% at 40 J/m2 (CPDs
from a small number of cells, plus shear breaks) (SI Appendix,
Table S1). To compare doses, PyPy reads were corrected for the
number of initial cells represented on the sequencer lane: PuPu or
CA reads were used as a measure of shear breaks independent of
preexisting DNA damage, and assumed constant per cell across
experiments (SI Appendix, Supplementary Methods). The PyPy/
PuPu odds (proportional to CPD density) (SI Appendix, Supple-
mentary Methods) increased monotonically with dose (SI Appendix,
Fig. S3A). The pool of sequences in the semirandom primers for
second-strand extension accessed the entire mapped human ge-
nome, and all regions were ligatable: For each experiment, at each
of several window lengths (1 nt to 100 kb), we tallied the number
of accepted, mappable reads in that experiment and the number of
newly encountered windows containing ≥1 read of any dinucleo-
tide type, where “newly encountered” is a window not seen in any
prior experiment. Plotting the cumulative encountered unique
windows (as a fraction of the theoretical number in 6,600 Mb of
single-strand haploid genome) vs. the cumulative read count
yielded a saturation plateau for windows as small as 100 nt (SI
Appendix, Fig. S3B). The plateaus occurred at ∼85%, approxi-
mately the fraction of the genome that is uniquely mappable. For
smaller windows, it is evident that larger experiments would reach
a similar plateau. Approximately 90% of mappable 10-nt regions
were encountered at least once, so the method is unbiased. Similar
plots for individual cell types and dinucleotide types reveal the
uniformity of this result as well as the percentage of the genome’s
dinucleotide sites that we had probed at this scale of experimen-
tation (SI Appendix, Fig. S3 C and D). In primary melanocytes, the
experiments sampled 15% of the mappable PyPy dinucleotides at
least once.
Unirradiated Melanocytes Contain Pervasive Apurinic Sites and TG
Lesions. Irradiating naked DNA or human fibroblast cells yielded
almost solely CPDs, at the expected relative frequency TT >
TC > CT > CC (Fig. 2 A and B). Fibroblasts showed a detectable
elevation in lesions at TA and TG sequences without UV; these
are not sites of spontaneous purine loss (apurinic sites), which
adductSeq would score as a PuN sequence. Melanocytes pre-
sented a striking contrast, containing all classes of PuN reads even
in unirradiated cells; this level exceeded the number of CPDs
created by UV (Fig. 2C). Apurinic sites are plausible because
melanin synthesis is a radical-generating process (29) and oxida-
tion of deoxyribose leads to depurination (30). UV-induction of
CPDs at PyPy sites was observable above this background. At 7 h
after UV exposure, CPDs had continued to increase in melano-
cytes (Fig. 2C), consistent with the creation of “dark CPDs” by
chemiexcitation of melanin (31).
The most frequent spontaneous lesion in melanocytes oc-
curred at TG (Fig. 2C). The only known lesion restricted to this
tandem DNA sequence is a formamido thymidine, resulting from
peroxidation of T followed by migration of the peroxyl radical to
G to create the well-known 8-oxo-dG adduct (32, 33); this re-
action has been proposed as the true origin of 8-oxo-dG. A
Fig. 1.
The adductSeq method, illustrated for quantifying CPDs at single-
base resolution across the genome. (A) Gently isolated genomic DNA contains
shear breaks (◊), abasic sites (*), and, if UV-irradiated, CPDs (●). Treating with
USER enzyme nicks at abasic sites and uracils not lying within a CPD. Shear
breaks and nicks are 5′ dephosphorylated (X) to suppress detection. (B) In-
cubation with T4 endonuclease V incises between the 2 PyPy of the CPD,
leaving an abasic site at the 5′ Py and a 5′ phosphate before the 3′ Py. In-
cubation with photolyase reverts the CPD to a normal 3′ Py (o). Sequencing the
gold fragments will reveal the CPD locations. (C) Primer extension from a set of
semirandom primers creates a double-stranded end at the CPD site, which is
given an A extension to facilitate ligation. (D) Ligation to a linker tags the CPD
site. (E) Covaris shearing and biotin purification creates uniformly-sized frag-
ments for a high-throughput DNA sequencing library.
2 of 10
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1907860116
Premi et al.
Downloaded at COPY 2 on November 13, 2019 

formamido pyrimidine can be nicked by some abasic endonu-
cleases, evidently at TG by our T4 endonuclease (34, 35). In test
tube experiments, the reaction is even more common at GT
sequences, but in adductSeq that lesion would be detected at
gTN and so would be aggregated with TT and TC CPDs.
Therefore, in subsequent experiments, we prenicked the DNA
with the enzyme USER prior to the dephosphorylation step in
order to block apurinic sites and TG lesions from being detected
by T4 endonuclease (Fig. 2D). We conclude that spontaneous
melanin synthesis is capable of damaging and presumably mu-
tating genes leading to melanoma via oxidative DNA damage,
which could include the non-UV signature BRAF V600E PuTPu→
PuAPu mutation seen in nevi and melanomas. We also conclude
that melanocytes are not the ideal cell type to use for genomic
dosimeters of a person’s prior UV exposure; keratinocytes may
be preferable.
CPD Hyperhotspots. The size scale of our experiments, ∼1 lane of
sequencing and sampling only 15% of PyPy sites once or more,
resulted in a genomic average of 0.07 and 0.14 reads per map-
pable PyPy site in fibroblasts and melanocytes, respectively.
Nevertheless, the fibroblast genome contained a remarkable
157 individual PyPy sites having ≥5 recurrent reads; this level of
recurrence is 80- to 125-fold greater than expected from the
average recurrence rate on a site’s chromosome (Poisson P for
recurrence = 10−7 to 10−11) (Dataset S1). Each recurrence’s
paired-end sequence differed, ruling out PCR duplicates. Some
sites were present thousands of fold more frequently than
expected for that CPD recurrence level (SI Appendix, Supple-
mentary Methods). We therefore term these sites “CPD induction
hyperhotspots.” Although genes constitute only 27.5% of the
human genome, and exons 1.5%, 76% of the hyperhotspots re-
sided in genes or in their 5′UTR/promoter region. Within genes
the overrepresentation of hyperhotspots was similar, so evolution
has not expunged the most UV-sensitive regions from genes.
Melanocytes, a 2-fold larger dataset, contained 2,180 PyPy
sites having ≥6 reads and 10 sites with over 15 reads (Poisson
P = 10−7–10−43); this is 25 to 1036-fold more sites than expected
to have that number of recurrent reads (false-discovery rate [FDR]
0.04 to 10−36) (Dataset S2). Jackpot events are ruled out by
appearance in multiple experiments (Dataset S3). An example
hyperhotspot is shown in Fig. 3A. Of the melanocyte hyper-
hotspots, 67% resided within genes. A rigorous criterion for
discovery of individual hyperhotspots without prior information
is FDR ≤0.05; there were then 39 in fibroblasts and 2,180 in
melanocytes, while only ∼0.1 would have been missed (SI Ap-
pendix, Supplementary Methods). Having discovered CPD hyper-
hotspots on the basis of read recurrence in sequenced DNA
regions, it is possible to characterize their CPD occurrence relative
to the entire genome: CPDs at the hyperhotspot dinucleotides
were generated up to 170-fold more frequently than the genomic
average (Datasets S1 and S2 and SI Appendix, Table S3.)
Hyperhotspots are a distinct entity. The distribution of recurrent
PyPy sites in melanocytes fit a 3-component Poisson model (Fig. 3 B
and C), in which: 61.0% of the genome’s mappable diPy sites
having 0 recurrences were genuine “CPD cold” sites (mean 0);
39.0% were “CPD ordinary” sites with 0 to 6 recurrences (mean
0.286), whose distribution could reflect stochasticity in CPD pro-
duction rates or stochasticity in representation on the sequencer;
and 553 sites with ≥7 recurrences (mean 7.865) (maximum-
likelihood Poisson fitted FDR < 0.05). The ≥7 threshold co-
incided with the transition to distinctive DNA sequence motifs at
the hyperhotspot sites (see below). The top 3 hyperhotspots were
outliers, even for the 3-component model. The main Poisson
distribution of observed sites therefore contains coldspots, average
sites, ordinary CPD hotspots on the order of 10× the genomic
average, and perhaps hyperhotspots with 6 recurrences in the tail
of the distribution due to the mechanisms governing ordinary sites;
hyperhotspots with ≥7 recurrences are a novel object not
predictable from the photophysics underlying the main Poisson
distribution.
Fig. 2.
High levels of spontaneous apurinic sites and lesions at TG sequences
in primary human melanocytes. (A) UVC-irradiation of 293T DNA produces
primarily CPDs, which occur at dipyrimidine sites. Reads arising only from
shear breaks would give a value of 1.0. (B) Primary human fibroblasts con-
tain some lesions at TA and TG sequences prior to UV exposure. (C) Primary
human melanocytes contain high levels of apurinic sites and a lesion at TG
sequences, even without irradiation. These exceed the level of CPDs pro-
duced by nbUVB irradiation. (D) Preblocking these sites reveals CPD in-
duction by nbUVB and subsequent repair.
Premi et al.
PNAS Latest Articles
|
3 of 10
GENETICS
Downloaded at COPY 2 on November 13, 2019 

Hyperhotspots were spread across the genome, most fre-
quently near genes and in gene-rich chromosomes (Fig. 4A). The
consensus motif for the fibroblast PyPy hyperhotspots was not
simply YY, with Y indicating a pyrimidine and underlines in-
dicating the CPD-forming bases, but instead YTY (Fig. 4B). In
melanocytes, the majority of hyperhotspots occurred at a DNA
sequence motif similar to that in fibroblasts (Fig. 4C); we will
refer to the YTY motif as class 3.
In contrast, most of the top 300 melanocyte hyperhotspots
(and 31% of the total [684]) occurred at 1 of 2 precise DNA
sequence motifs. The less prevalent motif, termed class 2, was 5′
(A)2–15TTCTY 3′ (Fig. 4D). These sites often featured an ad-
ditional stretch of A:T base pairs 3′ to the CPD site (Dataset S2).
Stacked A bases are known to conduct UV energy down the
DNA helix (36), apparently acting as a UV “antenna” for the
PyPy site generating the CPD. This motif resembles that seen in
prior measurements of CPD hotspots in UV-irradiated DNA
and in studies of bacterial and melanoma mutations: A stretch of
A:T base pairs lying 5′ to a pyrimidine tract and the CPD typically
occurring at the 3′ end of the pyrimidine tract (11, 17, 18, 37).
Where the pyrimidine is a C, the UV signature mutation of C→T
at a dipyrimidine site can arise (37).
The principal CPD hotspot motif in melanocytes, termed class
1, was 5′ yYYTTCCg/t 3′, with lowercase letters indicating less-
stringent parts of the motif (Fig. 4E). A smaller number of CPDs
were evident at the TC position. This motif lacks the leading-
(A:T) run; the CPDs arose in the 5′ portion of the pyrimidine
tract, rather than the typical 3′ end; and the CPD typically
contained C despite T being more common in CPDs (38). Fi-
broblasts only rarely contained either of these motifs (Dataset S1).
The Reactome pathway database (https://reactome.org/) was used
to identify pathways containing genes having a class 1 hyper-
hotspot. Of the 18 most-significant pathways (Benjamini–Hochberg
Fig. 3.
CPD hyperhotspots are distinct entities. (A) Genome region con-
taining a hyperhotspot in the promoter of the COPS5 gene. Violet indicates
the major transcription start site; tick mark aligns to the base to its right.
DNA sequence is for the positive strand, a 5′TC3′ CPD hyperhotspot lies on
the negative strand, the 3′ Py shown in light blue is present in the adductSeq
read, and the 5′ Py shown in dark blue is deduced from the reference ge-
nome. The vertical axis represents a position’s normalized PyPy readcount
per 108 mappable PuPu reads, the PuPu normalization enabling comparison
between UV doses or cell types (see text). Most PyPy sites had no CPDs
represented on the sequencer; 2 barely discernable sites correspond to
1 read (normalized to ∼3 for melanocytes, ∼11 for fibroblasts), which could
be stochastic. (B) The frequency of sites having a particular CPD (PyPy) read
recurrence in melanocytes follows the Poisson distribution appropriate to
the chromosomal mean of ∼0.14 reads per site (which will depend on the
size of the experiment), up to ∼4 recurrences. (C) The distribution of read
recurrence frequencies fits a 3-component Poisson model (see text). Recur-
rences ≥7 result from the third Poisson distribution.
Fig. 4.
CPD hyperhotspots occur at DNA sequence motifs in human fibro-
blasts and melanocytes. (A) Map of CPD hyperhotspots across 3 exemplar
chromosomes (chr), including gene-poor chr18 and gene-rich chr19. Mela-
nocyte hyperhotspots are shown above the chromosome map and fibroblast
hyperhotspots below. y axis is normalized PyPy readcount per 108 mappable
PuPu reads. Hyperhotspots are the most frequently encountered 0.0001% of
mappable PyPy sites; the likelihood of a site exhibiting multiple CPDs de-
creases rapidly according to the Poisson distribution. Gray, blue, and orange
bars represent class 3, class 2, and class 1 hyperhotspot classes, respectively.
(B) DNA sequence logo for fibroblast hyperhotspots (class 3, 5′YTY3′); black
bar indicates the CPD location. (C) Sequence logo for the majority of me-
lanocyte hyperhotspots (class 3, 5′YTY3′). (D) Melanocyte class 2 hyper-
hotspots (5′(A)2–15TTCTY3′). (E) Melanocyte class 1 hyperhotspots at ETS-like
transcription factor binding sites and TOP tracts (5′yYYTTCCg/t3′).
4 of 10
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1907860116
Premi et al.
Downloaded at COPY 2 on November 13, 2019 

adjusted P = 3 × 10−8–2 × 10−6), 14 were composed of proteins
involved in ribosomal structure or mRNA translation (Dataset
S4), a point revisited below. Proteins in the next most significant
group of pathways instead included TP53, RB1, ATR, BRCA1,
XPF/ERCC4 and other proteins involved in cell cycle check-
points, DNA recombination, and DNA repair. These 2 groups
are prominent in murine melanomas (39) and overlap via
RPS27A, a fusion protein having ribosomal protein S27a at the C
terminus and ubiquitin at the N terminus, a common pattern for
control by proteasomal degradation.
The hyperhotspot classes present in the 2 cell types were
compared more directly by randomly down-sampling reads from
the 15,917 nonproblematic sites having ≥5 reads in the larger
melanocyte dataset, and comparing the down-sampled melano-
cyte readcounts to the readcounts at corresponding fibroblast
sites. Recurrence was calculated across 40 independent down-
samplings and the median used to calculate the CPD ratio. SI
Appendix, Fig. S4 shows that melanocytes irradiated with nbUVB
contain more CPD hyperhotspots, at higher CPD frequencies,
and at a different DNA sequence motif, compared to fibroblasts
exposed to an equivalent dose of UVC. Class 1 hyperhotspots
dominate only in melanocytes and class 2 hyperhotspots are nearly
exclusive to them.
Class 1 CPD Hyperhotspots in 5′UTRs Target Mammalian Target of
Rapamycin-Directed Translation. The class 1 hyperhotspot motif
appeared in 2 contexts. In 1 context, the C at a yYYTTCCg/t
hyperhotspot’s CT or TC aligned at or near a transcriptional
start site of a ribosomal protein gene, such as RPL29, RPL34, or
RPL37 (40, 41) (Fig. 5A, SI Appendix, Fig. S5A, and Dataset S2).
These hyperhotspots reside within “TOP tracts,” 5′ terminal
oligopyrimidine tracts that control the mRNA translation rate of
growth-related proteins regulated by mammalian target of
rapamycin (mTOR), such as those encoding ribosomal proteins
and translational elongation factors (42). Ribosomal protein
gene TOP tracts contain CTTTCC or CT2–3C1–2 (43). The binding
protein is unknown. Most melanomas have activated mTOR
pathways (44). The ATR hyperhotspot was also located at a pu-
tative TOP tract. In TP53, the hyperhotspot resided at an intronic
TOP-like tract for WRAP53 on the other strand, which encodes a
functional TP53 antisense transcript and a component of the
telomerase holoenzyme (45, 46). The intronic RB1 hyper-
hotspot was located at a TOP-like tract for the LPAR6 gene on
the other strand, coding a G protein-coupled receptor associated
with prostate cancer metastasis (47). These hyperhotspots can
have biological effects, whatever the binding protein: An even-
tual rare mutation in DNA can alter the TOP tract’s translational
activity (48) and could move the transcription start site; tran-
scriptional mutagenesis [which produces a base change only in
the mRNA (49)] would occur sooner and more ubiquitously. The
CPD itself can alter translation rates due to CPD-induced al-
ternative splicing (50). The preeminence of ribosome-related
genes in the Reactome analysis suggests that the congruence
between CPD hyperhotspots and TOP tracts is not fortuitous,
and the effect on translation rates deserves detailed investiga-
tion. The number of hyperhotspots located at TOP tracts may be
larger than evident here because not all transcriptional start sites
have been mapped and not all cell types have been examined.
Class 1 CPD Hyperhotspots in Promoters and 5′UTRs Target ETS-Family
Regulated Genes. In the other context, the YY in yYYTTCCg/t
lies outside of, but immediately adjacent to, the TTCC:GGAA
core binding motif of the ETS family of transcription factors (24,
40). The 5′ Y does not lie within the ETS family consensus se-
quence (A/G)(C/T)(T/A)TCCG (51), so these hyperhotspots
reflect noncanonical binding sites. The relatively rare YYTTCC
variant sequence does bind ETS family members, as shown by
University of California, Santa Cruz ENCODE transcription
Fig. 5.
UV-sensitive CPD hyperhotspots at YYTTCC are targeted to specific nucleotides and align with recurrent mutations in melanoma. (A) Melanocyte CPD
hyperhotspot situated at a TOP tract that regulates the translation rate of RPL29; violet indicates the major transcription start site. The C is the site of 11 UV
signature C→T mutations in melanomas and these are recurrent above expectation (41). (B) Melanocyte CPD hyperhotspot at an ETS-like transcription factor
binding site in the DPH3 gene promoter, and recurrent mutations in melanomas. This CPD hyperhotspot is present in primary human melanocytes but not in
primary human fibroblasts. Black numbers beneath the sequence indicate the location and frequency of C→T mutations observed in 2 collections of mela-
nomas (40, 41). Numbers lying between 2 pyrimidines indicate CC→TT mutations. (C) Melanocyte normalized CPD reads per 108 mappable PuPu reads at and
adjacent to the ETS family transcription factor core binding sequence, after UV exposure. Dot indicates a CPD joining the 2 nucleotides; note that each
nucleotide appears twice, once as the 5′ Py of a CPD at PyPy and once as the 3′ nucleotide. Means are, left to right, 0.2, 21.8, 0.3, 0.2, 1.1, 0.7, 0.02. (D)
Distribution of CPDs across this hyperhotspot motif in the absence of UV exposure. Horizontal bars are 20× mean. (E) Fibroblast CPD recurrence rates at the
melanocyte hyperhotspot sites. Means are 0.6, 12.5, 0.4, 0.7, 2.8, 1.6, 0.06. (F) Distribution in fibroblasts in the absence of UV exposure. (G) Distribution of
melanoma mutations across the same motif in 52 genes having ≥5 recurrent mutations (all are C→T) (41). The ETS family transcription factor core binding
sequence is shown in color; lowercase letters are less stringently required. (H) Distribution of CPD readcounts across this motif in the mutated genes. CPD
counts at a mutation position are shown as stacked counts from the CPD in which the mutated position is the 5′Py (light violet) of the CPD and the 3′Py of the
CPD (the usual position of a CPD-induced mutation, dark violet).
Premi et al.
PNAS Latest Articles
|
5 of 10
GENETICS
Downloaded at COPY 2 on November 13, 2019 

factor binding site tracks. Of the genes that had class 1 CPD
hyperhotspots, 94.3% were targets of ETS family transcription
factor binding, according to the ENCODE Transcription Factor
Targets dataset. ETS family transcription factors are proto-
oncogenes, important in the development of neurons and neu-
ral crest cells, such as melanocytes. ETS1 is required for mela-
nocyte development; moreover, its inducer, basal fibroblast
growth factor (bFGF), is a key component of melanocyte growth
medium (52–54). The CPD hyperhotspot in the DPH3 gene pro-
moter is shown in Fig. 5B, which also reveals that this site is
not a hyperhotspot in primary human fibroblasts. Additional
examples of this motif in individual gene promoters are given in
SI Appendix, Fig. S5 B–H. The strong bias for the YY position in
these CPD hyperhotspot examples was seen across all instances
of the yYYTTCCg/t motif in melanocytes, whereas other dipyr-
imidines, such as the CC position, were minor targets (Fig. 5 C
and D). This CPD positional preference has been noticed be-
fore by averaging hundreds of preselected ETS family TTCCG
sites, particularly those mutated in melanomas, using TERT-
immortalized fibroblasts or melanoma cell lines (21, 22). How-
ever, preselection misses hyperhotspots such as at yYYTTCCt
(SI Appendix, Fig. S5 I and J). The physical basis at the lesser,
TC, CPD site was demonstrated in vitro: The adjacent binding
of the ETS1 transcription factor alters the DNA base separa-
tion and torsion angle to a conformation that favors CPD for-
mation (21). The present results identify the individual ETS-bound
genes that account for this UV sensitivity pattern and show that
they underlie the tallest peaks of CPD formation in the normal
melanocyte genome.
A prediction of the ETS mechanism is cell-type specificity:
Primary fibroblasts should be less enriched for CPD hyper-
hotspots at this motif. The reasoning is that, although ETS1
mediates extracellular matrix degradation in vivo, primary fi-
broblasts up-regulate ETS1 only after adding bFGF or upon
TERT-immortalization (55–57). In primary fibroblasts, ETS-
related CPD hyperhotspots were indeed rare (Fig. 4A and SI
Appendix, Fig. S4); only 0.7% of the fibroblast hyperhotspots
were located at YYTTCC, and their excess over expected read
frequencies was orders-of-magnitude lower than in melanocytes.
The cell-type–specific difference in CPD frequencies was largely
confined to the YY position in the YYTTCC motif, which was
modestly enhanced over neighbors in primary fibroblasts but was
a pronounced peak in primary melanocytes (Fig. 5 C and E and
SI Appendix, Fig. S6). Only 1% of melanocyte hyperhotspots
were also hyperhotspots in fibroblasts. Of the 23 sites that did
intersect, 13 occurred at the ETS-like sequence, suggesting that
these transcription factors have the same biophysical effects in
fibroblasts but are bound to fewer sites.
Mutation-Aligned CPD Hyperhotspots. In 5′ UTRs, a UV-signature
C→T mutation at a TOP tract hyperhotspot would nullify the
TOP tract and could decrease or increase the translation rate.
Indeed, the CPD hyperhotspot in RPL29 lies at its TOP tract’s
critical transcription start site C, located at chr3:52029960; this
aligns precisely with recurrent C→T mutations in melanomas
that were found to be present more frequently than random
expectation (41). No mRNA changes were observed, but none
are expected if the mutation acts by altering the translation rate.
RPL29 has an important role in tumor angiogenesis (58).
In promoters, Colebatch et al. (24) searched for noncoding
tumor mutations that, like TERT mutations, alter transcription
factor binding sites. All noncoding mutations present at >10%
frequency were located in melanomas, specifically in active
promoters within the sequence motif 5′ yYCYTCC 3′. Mutations
were C→T, preferentially located at either base of YC, with
some mutations at the first C of the CC. This pattern mirrors our
CPD distribution in melanocytes and is more focused than the
CPD pattern in fibroblasts. Individual genes displaying this
1:1 mapping between CPD hyperhotspots and recurrent muta-
tions are shown in Fig. 5 A and B and SI Appendix, Fig. S5. In
analogy to studies of averaged data from just ETS family sites
(21, 22), Fig. 5G shows the summed count of yYYTTCCg/t
melanoma mutations in a recent compilation (41), for class 1
CPD hyperhotspot sites having an FDR < 1 × 10−10 (read-
count >6) and a mutation count >4. The 2 mutation hotspots
coincide with the single CPD hyperhotspot in Fig. 5C; the CPDs
at position +3 do not lead to mutations because the base is T. To
precisely compare mutations to CPD frequencies, note that a
mutation in a pyrimidine run could receive contributions (in
separate cells) from 2 CPDs, involving the pyrimidine upstream
or downstream (Fig. 5H; this happens not to occur in Fig. 5 A
and B). The near absence of CPDs at the yY position implies
that the YY CPD hyperhotspot supplied the mutations at both 5′
and 3′ pyrimidines. A conclusive demonstration that mutations
align with CPDs includes the negative controls (Table 1). While
only 0.00095% of yYYTTCCg/t sites having <6 CPD reads
showed ≥5 melanoma mutations, 19% of the CPD hyperhotspots
did, an enrichment of 20,000-fold (P = 2 × 10−242).
Of 180 mutation clusters found in gene promoters or 5′UTRs
of melanomas (24), 22 had >10% mutant fraction in the tumor.
Of these, 59% were located at our CPD hyperhotspots (Dataset
S2). From another study of significantly recurrent promoter
mutations (41), 31% (79 of 251) aligned with yYYTTCCg/t sites
that had >2 CPDs in our sampling. A CCTTCCg motif for
regulatory region mutations was noted in a third study (25),
which in addition showed that chronic UV irradiation of mela-
noma cells or keratinocytes produced subclonal mutations at the
YY positions in DPH3 and RPL13A, both top CPD hyper-
hotspots. In chronically sun-exposed human skin, the same mu-
tation motif appears in the promoters of these and other mutated
genes, such as USMG5/PDCD11 and MRPS31 (figure 1 of ref 25;
see also ref. 59). Averaging CPD measurements over preselected
ETS family binding sites in fibroblasts had revealed a 16-fold in-
crease in CPDs at the YY position, with a smaller increase at TC
(21). FreqSeq in melanocytes let us resolve these motifs at the
level of individual genes, revealing that these sites are, in fact,
among the most CPD-sensitive base positions in the human ge-
nome and acquire CPDs up to 170-fold more frequently than the
genomic average.
Phenotypically, ETS binding can either increase or decrease
gene expression; for example, it has opposing effects on glycolysis
and the citric acid cycle (55). The predominant mutation, C→T
at YCTTCC, was not expected to abrogate ETS binding because
it does not alter the consensus ETS binding motif (C/T)(A/T)
TCCG. Nevertheless, engineering a UV-signature CC→TT mu-
tation into the CCTTCC hyperhotspot of DPH3 led to increased
transcription (40). Sequence changes may alter ETS phosphor-
ylation rather than binding (60). The second most-frequent
promoter mutation, at YCTTCC, would block ETS binding be-
cause the mutated TTTC sequence precludes the core ETS
binding motif TTCC. A deeper investigation of the effect of
hyperhotspots on gene expression is needed but is nontrivial
because differences in specific mRNA isoforms exist between
melanocytes and melanomas (61).
Table 1.
The 20,000-fold enrichment for melanoma promoter
mutation sites at class 1 CPD hyperhotspots
<5 Mutations*
≥5 Mutations
<6 CPD†
8,390,959 sites
80 sites (0.00095%)
≥6 CPD
281 sites
64 sites (19%)
*Human melanoma mutation counts at 5′ yYYTTCCGg/t 3′ (41).
†Recurrent CPD reads at the YY position of the 5′ yYYTTCCGg/t 3′ motif.
6 of 10
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1907860116
Premi et al.
Downloaded at COPY 2 on November 13, 2019 

CPDs Accumulate at Class 2 Hyperhotspots Prior to UV Exposure. The
existence of hyperhotspots suggests that these sites might be
sensitive enough to accumulate CPDs arising in melanocytes
without UV, as a consequence of melanogenesis-related redox
reactions that chemiexcite melanin and transfer energy to DNA
in the dark (31). The situation would be exacerbated at hyper-
hotspots where nucleotide excision repair was slow. In un-
irradiated melanocytes, the class 1 ETS-like hyperhotspots did
show a UV-like distribution of CPDs across the ETS-like motif,
although much weaker than with UV; unirradiated fibroblasts
did not (Fig. 5 D and F).
Strikingly, the class 2 hyperhotspots at 5′ (A)2–15TTCTY 3′
showed a pronounced peak at the TY position in unirradiated
melanocytes that was nearly as large as after UV exposure (Fig.
6 A and B). This pattern was 5-fold weaker in unirradiated fibro-
blasts (Fig. 6 C and D) (P = 3.2 × 10−15 by the exact binomial test
on PyPy readcounts per mappable PuPu reads). Fig. 6E shows a
specific example in the CSMD1 gene, proposed to be a tumor
suppressor in melanoma (62). This behavior is consistent with
dark CPD formation via excited-state melanin in melanocytes, and
also rules out an origin in technical artifacts due to sequence-
specific nicking, which would be independent of cell type. These
observations in the absence of UV constitute evidence that: 1)
Some fibroblast-melanocyte differences reflect cell type rather
than UV wavelength, 2) chemiexcitation and dark CPDs occur
in unirradiated melanocytes, and 3) CPDs can accumulate in
hyperhotspots despite cell proliferation. Correspondingly, the class
2 sites showed an unusual time course after UV exposure (Fig.
6F). Whereas most class 1 and 3 hyperhotspots showed substantial
CPD induction by UV and were largely repaired in 24 h, the class
2 sites showed weak immediate CPD induction, continued to incur
CPDs after UVB exposure, and showed repair only at 3 d. Mel-
anin fragments are known to intercalate into A:T-rich tracts and
block DNA polymerases (63). Intercalation of excited-state mel-
anin fragments would then cause dark CPD formation and the
subsequent de-excited fragments could inhibit their removal by
excision repair. Sensitivity to dark CPD production and slow re-
pair would direct CPD accumulation to this class of hyperhotspots.
The (A)2–15TTCTY hyperhotspot motif does not correspond to a
known transcription factor binding site. The TY position is usually
TT, so rather than acting by C→T mutation, these motifs are more
likely to block DNA replication, alter transcription, or trigger
TP53 signaling via CPD-blocked transcription in active genes (14).
Hyperhotspot-Containing Genes Are Expressed. The cellular effect
of a DNA hyperhotspot requires that the mRNA be expressed,
except if it activates a normally unexpressed gene. The role of
transcription factors in creating hyperhotspots suggests that the
difference in hyperhotspots between fibroblasts and melanocytes
will reflect cell-type differences in gene expression. For the
majority of the CPD hyperhotspots, expression data in fibroblasts
and melanocytes was available (64). The hyperhotspot-containing
genes are expressed, with the class 1 hyperhotspots highly
expressed (SI Appendix, Fig. S7). That study found hundreds of
genes expressed in melanocytes that were below the threshold of
1.0 reads per kilobase per million mapped reads in fibroblasts and
keratinocytes. Yet, hyperhotspot-containing genes had similar
expression in melanocytes and fibroblasts (albeit biased toward
higher expression in melanocytes). Thus, 1) most hyperhotspot-
containing genes have a universal, housekeeping-like, expression
pattern (as befits their enrichment for genes involved in trans-
lation) and 2) mRNA expression level does not explain why
hyperhotspots differ between melanocytes and fibroblasts. This
equivalence held even at levels below the 1.0 threshold, suggesting
that the expression of these genes is tightly regulated. Our gene-
set analysis showed the expected highly significant enrichment for
H3K27me3 chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing peaks in the
low-expression lower left quadrant of SI Appendix, Fig. S7, and en-
richment for H3K27ac (and RNA binding functions, GO:0003723)
in the upper right quadrant. Thus, expression per se is primarily
governed by histone marks, while cell-type–specific transcription
factor binding creates CPD hyperhotspots despite only a modest
shift in transcription level.
CPDs in Hyperhotspots Are Frequent Enough to Direct Physiology. In
principle, only DNA fragments bounded by a CPD site are loaded
onto the sequencer, so adductSeq does not quantify the absolute
CPD frequency. To quantify the absolute, rather than relative,
Fig. 6.
CPD hyperhotspots at (A)2–15TTCTY accumulate CPDs prior to UV
exposure. (A) Melanocyte CPD hyperhotspot recurrence rates per 108 map-
pable PuPu reads at the class 2 motif, after UV exposure. The mean at the TY
location is 25.7. (B) Distribution of CPDs across this hyperhotspot motif in the
absence of UV exposure. Mean at TY, 19.2. (C) Fibroblast CPD recurrence
rates at the melanocyte hyperhotspot sites. Mean at TY, 3.6. (D) Distribution
in fibroblasts in the absence of UV exposure. Mean at TY, 4.2. (E) A class 2
hyperhotspot in the CSMD1 gene. (F) Induction and repair of CPDs in me-
lanocytes at the 3 classes of hyperhotspot motifs. Orange, class 1 yYYTTCCg/t;
blue, class 2 (A)2–15TTCTY; and gray, class 3 YTY that are not embedded in 1
of the other 2 motifs. n = 345, 64, and 199, respectively. Data are from sites
with readcounts >6 after UV exposure; the similarity of 0 h +UV normalized
readcounts between sites is a consequence of the threshold criterion set for
hyperhotspots, in comparison to the normalized genome-wide mean of
0.298. Individual sites have different behaviors, especially in class 2; their
distribution is indicated by bars spanning 1 SD.
Premi et al.
PNAS Latest Articles
|
7 of 10
GENETICS
Downloaded at COPY 2 on November 13, 2019 

CPD frequencies at hyperhotspots, and to validate their existence
using an independent method, we took advantage of the fact that
cytosines in CPDs deaminate to uracil 106-fold more rapidly than
elsewhere (38, 65). Subsequent photoreactivation of the CPD and
PCR amplification with a polymerase that reads U leads to C→T
mutations at CPD sites. Next-generation (NextGen) sequencing of
amplicons from hyperhotspot regions of RPL29, RPL34, DPH3,
COPS5, and SNRPD1 from nbUVB-irradiated primary melano-
cytes revealed CPD frequencies of 0.25 to 0.7% per genome at
individual dipyrimidine sites. CPDs are also frequent in the ad-
jacent positions of the hyperhotspot motif, doubling the figure for
the gene carrying a hyperhotspot and thus ranging up to 3% per
diploid cell (Fig. 7 and SI Appendix, Fig. S8). These values are, as
expected, 50- to 200-fold higher than the genomic average: The
genome-wide average induction of C-containing CPDs at these
UV doses is 0.01% of C-containing PyPy sites [mass spectrometry
(31) for our nbUVB source (11, 38, 66), for UVC]. For the 5 genes
tested, the genomic average frequency is below the error rate of
NextGen DNA sequencing but it can be estimated by extrapo-
lating the correlation between deamination-based absolute CPD
frequency and freqSeq-based relative CPD frequency to x = 1 (SI
Appendix, Fig. S8). The average CPD frequency at a C-containing
site in these regions was ∼0.003%.
The genome-wide average CPD frequency is equivalent to 1
CPD per 20,000 nt of single-stranded DNA, with the stochastic
locations of these rare CPDs differing in each cell. In contrast,
hyperhotspots concentrate CPDs in defined locations within
gene promoters and regulatory regions. The impact at the level
of metabolic pathways is considered below (Discussion).
Discussion
Hyperhotspots. The present unsupervised genome-wide measure-
ments reveal the existence of CPD hyperhotspots: At a handful of
individual dipyrimidines, CPDs are generated up to 170-fold more
frequently than at an average genomic site. One of the 3 motifs
determining hyperhotspots is the binding of ETS-like transcription
factors, previously shown to be UV-sensitizing (21, 22). Another
motif appears related to energy conduction down the π electron
stack of A:T bases and intercalation of melanin in these regions.
Yet the genome-wide number of class 1 sequence motifs, for ex-
ample, is over 8 million, much greater than the number satisfying
the hyperhotspot FDR threshold we imposed. Additional se-
quencing would reveal whether CPD creation at these sites is just
below the threshold or lacks additional determinants, such as
chromatin structure.
ETS1 levels decrease significantly during melanoma progres-
sion (60). Correspondingly, our analysis of CPD sequence reads
from a recent study of averaged class 1 motif sites in melanoma
cell lines (22) showed an absence of the individual hyperhotspots
we find in primary melanocytes (SI Appendix, Supplementary
Methods, Bioinformatics). This reduction in hyperhotspots re-
sembles the behavior of primary fibroblasts. While the ETS1
decline was not seen in an earlier paper (67), that report used a
PCR primer and hybridization probe targeting exon 1 of a rare
tissue-specific short isoform that is not expressed in melanocytes.
The more common long isoform is expressed in melanocytes but
uses an alternative upstream 5′UTR and skips the targeted exon.
Thus, Elliott et al. (22) may have found not only an ETS-CPD–
mutation relation but also a correlation to ETS physiology.
Fibroblasts were irradiated with UVC and melanocytes with
nbUVB to follow prior publications on these cell types, with doses
matched on lethality. The differences in CPD hyperhotspot fre-
quency and motif might reflect cell type or wavelength, but the
expectation is cell type: 1) Melanocytes but not fibroblasts rely on
ETS transcription factors (52–57); 2) at these doses, UVB differs
from UVC only in causing a 5-fold increase in the rarer CC CPD
and at CG (19, 68, 69), but the hyperhotspots reported here, in-
cluding yYYTTCCg/t, increased ∼100 fold and do not lie at CG
(Fig. 4). An experimental approach to the question is discussed in
SI Appendix.
Mutations at Hyperhotspots. The reason for recurrent mutations in
tumors is a topic of intense interest. Conventionally, the question
is framed in terms of the effect size of the mutation and the
Fig. 7.
At sunburn levels of UVB exposure, each hyperhotspot acquires a CPD in up to 1% of melanocytes. Bar height indicates the percentage of reads
having a C→T or G→A substitution. (A) SNRPD1 gene. The hyperhotspot position is circled. (B) RPL29 gene. The 3 hyperhotspot positions are circled. For both
genes, CPDs are also apparent in the adjacent positions of the hyperhotspot motif. Color key: tan, no treatment; green, photoreactivation only; pink, heat +
photoreactivation; light blue, 2,000 J/m2 nbUVB + photoreactivation; violet, 2,000 J/m2 nbUVB + heat + photoreactivation. Numbering indicates the position
of cytosines within the amplicon (on either strand); gray horizontal bars indicate primer locations (and thus DNA sequencer error rate, which accounts for
most bars); red horizontal line indicates the average CPD frequency across the 5 regions examined (see text); sites with 5 bars of equal height are presumably
due to sequencer errors arising near the end of a 150-nt read.
8 of 10
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1907860116
Premi et al.
Downloaded at COPY 2 on November 13, 2019 

resulting selection for that mutation during tumor evolution.
However, those measures of mutation selection are actually
measures of mutation recurrence above an expectation level, and
thus are blind toward the DNA lesions and polymerase errors
that created them. For example, the OncodriveFML algorithm
used in Hayward et al. (41) asks whether a mutation disrupts or
creates a particular transcription factor binding site in tumors
more often than expected from random base substitutions. A hit
from this algorithm, therefore, does not reflect the frequency of
CPDs that led to the mutation, and is even independent of the
CPD’s bias toward C→T base substitutions. The recent proposal
(21–23) that recurrent promoter mutations in melanoma are
driven primarily by CPD frequency rather than phenotypic se-
lection is strongly supported by our finding that, genome-wide
and at multiple individual genes, the promoters and nucleotides
recurrently mutated are those with ∼100-fold elevated CPD
frequencies at the mutated nucleotide. At these regulatory re-
gions, it is evidently more important to create mutations in many
cells than to create a mutation with high effect size in 1 cell. This
dichotomy is provocatively similar to the species evolution di-
chotomy of r- versus K-selection (high offspring production rate
versus small numbers of high-survival offspring). High preva-
lence would increase the probability that 1 of the cells contained
a mutation combination conferring a phenotype adapted to the
microenvironment; prevalence explores the fitness landscape.
The predilection of UV hyperhotspots for growth-related genes
and the susceptibility of melanoma cells to loss by immune re-
jection would seem to favor an r-like high-prevalence/low-survival
alternative to “K-selected” strong driver genes that match the
fitness landscape unaided.
That said, there is also evidence of mutagenesis-related special
properties at these sites. The promoters, 5′ UTRs, and introns
involved in hyperhotspots are favorable regions for examining
the mutation process: Like tumor-suppressor genes (13), their
function can be altered by many base substitutions; consequently,
mutations more closely reflect the initial mutagen without dis-
tortion by phenotypic selection. In cells exposed to a known UV
source, the fraction of classic UV signature mutations, C→T or
CC→TT at a dipyrimidine site, is typically 60 to 75%, becoming
90% in repair-defective cells (37). Melanoma mutations in
structural genes have this typical level of UV signature mutations
(17). Thus, it is striking that 100% of the promoter mutations at
the class 1 hyperhotspot motif (22, 24, 25, 40, 41) are UV sig-
nature mutations. Therefore, it appears either: 1) The melanoma
patient—or melanoma founder cell—had an elevated C→T
mutation frequency due to a promoter-specific CPD repair deficit
or enhancement of error-prone translesion synthesis at CPDs (70,
71); 2) the hyperhotspot site also favors atypically fast CPD de-
amination; or 3) these promoter mutations undergo selection on
the basis of biophysical interactions between DNA and DNA-
binding proteins available with T but not C.
Monitoring Individual Cancer Risk at Hyperhotspots. The dominant
component of a person’s risk of skin cancer is prior UV expo-
sure. If CPDs accumulated in hyperhotspots, these regions could
serve as objective sentinels of prior exposure, quantifiable in
small skin samples. CPDs are known to persist unrepaired for at
least 1 wk in telomeres and heterochromatin of proliferating
mammalian cells (8, 72) and for over 1 mo in epidermal stem
cells (73). The present study found that, indeed, class 2 hyper-
hotspot sites had accumulated CPDs in the days or weeks before
the experiment began, presumably reflecting internal CPD pro-
duction by chemiexcitation (31).
To fashion CPD hyperhotspots into genomic dosimeters, it
would be important to have sites with a range of sensitivities, so
that both low and high UV exposures are quantifiable. This is
provided by the 4× range of CPD counts in our hyperhotspot
sites, combined with the many sites available. Pragmatically, it is
useful that 11 regions contained 2 to 6 hyperhotspots on the same
200-bp amplicon.
Environmental Sensing by Cells at Hyperhotspots. For a hyper-
hotspot causing CPDs in 1% of cells at these sunburn-level UVB
doses, ∼20 of the ∼2,000 hyperhotspots in melanocytes would
have a CPD in any cell. Given that hyperhotspots are concen-
trated in ∼20 pathways, every pathway will have been hit once.
Physiology could therefore be altered in a defined way imme-
diately upon UV exposure, without waiting for rare mutations.
For example, UV exposure of the class 1 TOP tract sites would
lead to immediate activation or inhibition of mTOR pathways.
The fact that most melanomas have activated mTOR pathways
(44) suggests that such changes can become permanent. CPDs at
hyperhotspots would then be epigenetic marks, as has been
proposed for 8-oxo-dG in the redox-sensitive G quadruplexes of
gene promoters (74–76). One can speculate that evolution did
not eliminate CPD hyperhotspots because they serve a purpose
as sensors for environmental exposure.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. We thank Dr. R. Halaban and A. Bacchiocchi,
Specimen Resource Core, Yale Specialized Programs of Research Excellence
(SPORE) in Skin Cancer, for primary fibroblasts and melanocytes; Dr. A. Narayan
(Yale) for experimental advice; Drs. A. Sancar and C. Selby (University of
North Carolina) for photolyase; and I. Tikhonova and C. Castaldi (Yale
Center for Genome Analysis) for assistance with Illumina library prepara-
tion and sequencing. This study was supported by the Yale SPORE in Skin
Cancer, National Cancer Institute Grant 2 P50 CA121974 Project 1 (to D.E.B.);
and National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences Grant 1 R01 ES030562
(to D.E.B.).
1. J. Surrallés, M. J. Ramírez, R. Marcos, A. T. Natarajan, L. H. Mullenders, Clusters of
transcription-coupled repair in the human genome. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 99,
10571–10574 (2002).
2. M. H. Sanders, S. E. Bates, B. S. Wilbur, G. P. Holmquist, Repair rates of R-band, G-band
and C-band DNA in murine and human cultured cells. Cytogenet. Genome Res. 104,
35–45 (2004).
3. C. L. Zheng et al., Transcription restores DNA repair to heterochromatin, determining
regional mutation rates in cancer genomes. Cell Rep. 9, 1228–1234 (2014).
4. C. Han, A. K. Srivastava, T. Cui, Q. E. Wang, A. A. Wani, Differential DNA lesion for-
mation and repair in heterochromatin and euchromatin. Carcinogenesis 37, 129–138
(2016).
5. J. Hu, O. Adebali, S. Adar, A. Sancar, Dynamic maps of UV damage formation and
repair for the human genome. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 114, 6758–6763 (2017).
6. P. E. García-Nieto et al., Carcinogen susceptibility is regulated by genome architecture
and predicts cancer mutagenesis. EMBO J. 36, 2829–2843 (2017).
7. B. C. McKay et al., Regulation of ultraviolet light-induced gene expression by gene
size. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 101, 6582–6586 (2004).
8. P. J. Rochette, D. E. Brash, Human telomeres are hypersensitive to UV-induced DNA
damage and refractory to repair. PLoS Genet. 6, e1000926 (2010).
9. R. A. Weinberg, The Biology of Cancer (Garland Science, New York, ed. 2, 2014),
876 pp.
10. E. C. Friedberg et al., DNA Repair and Mutagenesis (ASM Press, Washington, DC, ed. 2,
2005).
11. D. E. Brash, S. Seetharam, K. H. Kraemer, M. M. Seidman, A. Bredberg, Photo-
product frequency is not the major determinant of UV base substitution hot
spots or cold spots in human cells. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 84, 3782–3786
(1987).
12. D. E. Brash et al., A role for sunlight in skin cancer: UV-induced p53 mutations in
squamous cell carcinoma. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 88, 10124–10128 (1991).
13. A. Ziegler et al., Mutation hotspots due to sunlight in the p53 gene of nonmelanoma
skin cancers. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 90, 4216–4220 (1993).
14. D. E. Brash et al., The DNA damage signal for Mdm2 regulation, Trp53 induction, and
sunburn cell formation in vivo originates from actively transcribed genes. J. Invest.
Dermatol. 117, 1234–1240 (2001).
15. W. Zhang et al., UVB-induced apoptosis drives clonal expansion during skin tumor
development. Carcinogenesis 26, 249–257 (2005).
16. A. M. Klein, D. E. Brash, P. H. Jones, B. D. Simons, Stochastic fate of p53-mutant
epidermal progenitor cells is tilted toward proliferation by UV B during preneoplasia.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 107, 270–275 (2010).
17. M.
Krauthammer
et
al.,
Exome
sequencing
identifies
recurrent
somatic
RAC1 mutations in melanoma. Nat. Genet. 44, 1006–1014 (2012).
18. D. E. Brash, W. A. Haseltine, UV-induced mutation hotspots occur at DNA damage
hotspots. Nature 298, 189–192 (1982).
19. H. Ikehata, T. Ono, Significance of CpG methylation for solar UV-induced mutagenesis
and carcinogenesis in skin. Photochem. Photobiol. 83, 196–204 (2007).
Premi et al.
PNAS Latest Articles
|
9 of 10
GENETICS
Downloaded at COPY 2 on November 13, 2019 

20. S. Kunala, D. E. Brash, Excision repair at individual bases of the Escherichia coli lacI
gene: Relation to mutation hot spots and transcription coupling activity. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 89, 11031–11035 (1992).
21. P. Mao et al., ETS transcription factors induce a unique UV damage signature that
drives recurrent mutagenesis in melanoma. Nat. Commun. 9, 2626 (2018).
22. K. Elliott et al., Elevated pyrimidine dimer formation at distinct genomic bases un-
derlies promoter mutation hotspots in UV-exposed cancers. PLoS Genet. 14, e1007849
(2018).
23. S. A. Roberts, A. J. Brown, J. J. Wyrick, Recurrent noncoding mutations in skin cancers:
UV damage susceptibility or repair inhibition as primary driver? Bioessays 41,
e1800152 (2019).
24. A. J. Colebatch et al., Clustered somatic mutations are frequent in transcription factor
binding motifs within proximal promoter regions in melanoma and other cutaneous
malignancies. Oncotarget 7, 66569–66585 (2016).
25. N. J. Fredriksson et al., Recurrent promoter mutations in melanoma are defined by an
extended context-specific mutational signature. PLoS Genet. 13, e1006773 (2017).
26. N. Crosetto et al., Nucleotide-resolution DNA double-strand break mapping by next-
generation sequencing. Nat. Methods 10, 361–365 (2013).
27. S. Premi et al., AdductSeq data for “Genomic sites hypersensitive to ultraviolet ra-
diation.” Gene Expression Omnibus. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?
acc=GSE137226. Deposited 10 September 2019.
28. K. Kornacker et al., freqSeq: A statistical method to quantify rare DNA lesions at
single-base resolution across the genome. GitHub. https://github.com/sameetmehta/
freqseq. Deposited 9 October 2019.
29. N. P. Smit et al., Increased melanogenesis is a risk factor for oxidative DNA damage–
Study on cultured melanocytes and atypical nevus cells. Photochem. Photobiol. 84,
550–555 (2008).
30. L. F. Povirk, R. J. Steighner, Oxidized apurinic/apyrimidinic sites formed in DNA by
oxidative mutagens. Mutat. Res. 214, 13–22 (1989).
31. S. Premi et al., Photochemistry. Chemiexcitation of melanin derivatives induces DNA
photoproducts long after UV exposure. Science 347, 842–847 (2015).
32. H. C. Box, H. G. Freund, E. E. Budzinski, J. C. Wallace, A. E. Maccubbin, Free radical-
induced double base lesions. Radiat. Res. 141, 91–94 (1995).
33. J. M. N. San Pedro, M. M. Greenberg, 5,6-Dihydropyrimidine peroxyl radical reactivity
in DNA. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 136, 3928–3936 (2014).
34. K. A. Latham, R. S. Lloyd, Delta-elimination by T4 endonuclease V at a thymine dimer
site requires a secondary binding event and amino acid Glu-23. Biochemistry 34,
8796–8803 (1995).
35. A. G. Bourdat, D. Gasparutto, J. Cadet, Synthesis and enzymatic processing of oligo-
deoxynucleotides containing tandem base damage. Nucleic Acids Res. 27, 1015–1024
(1999).
36. T. M. Nordlund, Sequence, structure and energy transfer in DNA. Photochem. Photobiol.
83, 625–636 (2007).
37. D. E. Brash, UV signature mutations. Photochem. Photobiol. 91, 15–26 (2015).
38. R. B. Setlow, W. L. Carrier, Pyrimidine dimers in ultraviolet-irradiated DNA’s. J. Mol.
Biol. 17, 237–254 (1966).
39. B. Ferguson et al., Different genetic mechanisms mediate spontaneous versus UVR-
induced malignant melanoma. eLife 8, e42424 (2019).
40. E. Denisova et al., Frequent DPH3 promoter mutations in skin cancers. Oncotarget 6,
35922–35930 (2015).
41. N. K. Hayward et al., Whole-genome landscapes of major melanoma subtypes. Nature
545, 175–180 (2017).
42. C. C. Thoreen et al., A unifying model for mTORC1-mediated regulation of mRNA
translation. Nature 485, 109–113 (2012).
43. I. G. Wool, Y. L. Chan, A. Glück, Structure and evolution of mammalian ribosomal
proteins. Biochem. Cell Biol. 73, 933–947 (1995).
44. M. Karbowniczek, C. S. Spittle, T. Morrison, H. Wu, E. P. Henske, mTOR is activated in
the majority of malignant melanomas. J. Invest. Dermatol. 128, 980–987 (2008).
45. S. Mahmoudi et al., Wrap53, a natural p53 antisense transcript required for
p53 induction upon DNA damage. Mol. Cell 33, 462–471 (2009).
46. A. S. Venteicher et al., A human telomerase holoenzyme protein required for Cajal
body localization and telomere synthesis. Science 323, 644–648 (2009).
47. A. Ketscher et al., LSD1 controls metastasis of androgen-independent prostate cancer
cells through PXN and LPAR6. Oncogenesis 3, e120 (2014).
48. K. Dutton-Regester et al., A highly recurrent RPS27 5’UTR mutation in melanoma.
Oncotarget 5, 2912–2917 (2014).
49. J. F. Morreall, L. Petrova, P. W. Doetsch, Transcriptional mutagenesis and its potential
roles in the etiology of cancer and bacterial antibiotic resistance. J. Cell. Physiol. 228,
2257–2261 (2013).
50. L. Williamson et al., UV irradiation induces a non-coding RNA that functionally op-
poses the protein encoded by the same gene. Cell 168, 843–855.e13 (2017).
51. G. H. Wei et al., Genome-wide analysis of ETS-family DNA-binding in vitro and in vivo.
EMBO J. 29, 2147–2160 (2010).
52. E. E. Torlakovic, N. Bilalovic, J. M. Nesland, G. Torlakovic, V. A. Flørenes, Ets-1 tran-
scription factor is widely expressed in benign and malignant melanocytes and its
expression has no significant association with prognosis. Mod. Pathol. 17, 1400–1406
(2004).
53. A. Saldana-Caboverde et al.; NISC Comparative Sequencing Program, The transcrip-
tion factors Ets1 and Sox10 interact during murine melanocyte development. Dev.
Biol. 407, 300–312 (2015).
54. R. Halaban, S. Ghosh, A. Baird, bFGF is the putative natural growth factor for human
melanocytes. In Vitro Cell Dev. Biol. 23, 47–52 (1987).
55. C. Lindvall et al., Molecular characterization of human telomerase reverse
transcriptase-immortalized human fibroblasts by gene expression profiling: Activation
of the epiregulin gene. Cancer Res. 63, 1743–1747 (2003).
56. M. C. Cho et al., Epiregulin expression by Ets-1 and ERK signaling pathway in Ki-ras-
transformed cells. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 377, 832–837 (2008).
57. J. C. Hahne, A. F. Okuducu, T. Fuchs, A. Florin, N. Wernert, Identification of ETS-1
target genes in human fibroblasts. Int. J. Oncol. 38, 1645–1652 (2011).
58. D. T. Jones et al., Endogenous ribosomal protein L29 (RPL29): A newly identified
regulator of angiogenesis in mice. Dis. Model. Mech. 6, 115–124 (2013).
59. I. Martincorena et al., Tumor evolution. High burden and pervasive positive selection
of somatic mutations in normal human skin. Science 348, 880–886 (2015).
60. G. Mattia et al., Constitutive activation of the ETS-1-miR-222 circuitry in metastatic
melanoma. Pigment Cell Melanoma Res. 24, 953–965 (2011).
61. Z. Zhang, S. Pal, Y. Bi, J. Tchou, R. V. Davuluri, Isoform level expression profiles provide
better cancer signatures than gene level expression profiles. Genome Med. 5, 33
(2013).
62. M. R. Tang, Y. X. Wang, S. Guo, S. Y. Han, D. Wang, CSMD1 exhibits antitumor activity
in A375 melanoma cells through activation of the Smad pathway. Apoptosis 17, 927–
937 (2012).
63. J. Geng et al., Bacterial melanin interacts with double-stranded DNA with high af-
finity and may inhibit cell metabolism in vivo. Arch. Microbiol. 192, 321–329 (2010).
64. P. Reemann et al., Melanocytes in the skin—Comparative whole transcriptome
analysis of main skin cell types. PLoS One 9, e115717 (2014).
65. W. Peng, B. R. Shaw, Accelerated deamination of cytosine residues in UV-induced
cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers leads to CC→TT transitions. Biochemistry 35, 10172–
10181 (1996).
66. Y. Barak, O. Cohen-Fix, Z. Livneh, Deamination of cytosine-containing pyrimidine
photodimers in UV-irradiated DNA. Significance for UV light mutagenesis. J. Biol.
Chem. 270, 24174–24179 (1995).
67. T. Rothhammer et al., The Ets-1 transcription factor is involved in the development
and invasion of malignant melanoma. Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 61, 118–128 (2004).
68. T. Douki, J. Cadet, Individual determination of the yield of the main UV-induced di-
meric pyrimidine photoproducts in DNA suggests a high mutagenicity of CC photo-
lesions. Biochemistry 40, 2495–2501 (2001).
69. P. J. Rochette et al., UVA-induced cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers form predominantly
at thymine-thymine dipyrimidines and correlate with the mutation spectrum in ro-
dent cells. Nucleic Acids Res. 31, 2786–2794 (2003).
70. S. Kunala, D. E. Brash, Intragenic domains of strand-specific repair in Escherichia coli.
J. Mol. Biol. 246, 264–272 (1995).
71. M. Wigan et al., A UVR-induced G2-phase checkpoint response to ssDNA gaps produced
by replication fork bypass of unrepaired lesions is defective in melanoma. J. Invest.
Dermatol. 132, 1681–1688 (2012).
72. R. Bérubé, M. C. Drigeard Desgarnier, T. Douki, A. Lechasseur, P. J. Rochette, Persis-
tence and tolerance of DNA damage induced by chronic UVB irradiation of the human
genome. J. Invest. Dermatol. 138, 405–412 (2018).
73. D. L. Mitchell et al., Effects of chronic low-dose ultraviolet B radiation on DNA
damage and repair in mouse skin. Cancer Res. 59, 2875–2884 (1999).
74. A. M. Fleming, Y. Ding, C. J. Burrows, Oxidative DNA damage is epigenetic by regu-
lating gene transcription via base excision repair. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 114,
2604–2609 (2017).
75. M. Seifermann, B. Epe, Oxidatively generated base modifications in DNA: Not only
carcinogenic risk factor but also regulatory mark? Free Radic. Biol. Med. 107, 258–265
(2017).
76. X. Ba, I. Boldogh, 8-Oxoguanine DNA glycosylase 1: Beyond repair of the oxidatively
modified base lesions. Redox Biol. 14, 669–678 (2018).
10 of 10
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1907860116
Premi et al.
Downloaded at COPY 2 on November 13, 2019 

