See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/284579979
Seeing and nothingness
Article · January 1972
CITATIONS
21
READS
354
1 author:
Nicholas Humphrey
Darwin College, Cambridge
133 PUBLICATIONS   5,061 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
All content following this page was uploaded by Nicholas Humphrey on 27 April 2016.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

ffiscle
A blind monkeythat sees everything
30 March 1972
Weekly 12p
Australia 35 cents/
Canada 60 cents/
New Zealand 35 cents/
South Africa 30 cents/
USA (by air) 90 cents/
BF 25/FF 3/DM 2.50/
hf I 1.50/skr 3.00/
The automated battlefield
Altered states of consciousness

682
Seeing and nothingness
Helen is a monkey blinded by a brain operation. Although she has now recovered
her sight seeing seems to have lost much of its meaning for her, a discovery that may
help elucidate complex visual mechanisms
Under the heading "This is how to identify
a plant" the Oxford Book of Wild Flowers
instructs the reader in the art of what
psychologists call "feature analysis".
"Points to note are 
. leaf shap,e and
colour, flower shape and colour, and the
number and arrangement of the sepals,
petals, stamens and carpels. Note also
when the plant usually flowers, in what
par,t of the country it usually grows, on
what kind ,of soil it flourishes most, and
whether it is usually found in woods,
marshes, grasslands, etc. . . . If you have
correctly identifi,ed your plant, all these
details should tally with your specimen".
Over the page is a glossary, headed "These
are words used in the text which the reader
is expected to understand", where some of
the significant features-sepal, petal, stamen
-are defined; the rneanings of colour, shape,
position, etc. go without saying.
- There is increasing evi'dence that all visual
recognition proceeds in very much this way'
Not far beyond the eye the brain eontains
specific "feature analysers" which serve to
d-escribe each object in the visual field in
terms of a set of simple attributes, which
taken together yield an identifiable percept
-we recognise an object as, say, an orange
when the brain is informed that it has before
it an object which is spherical, orange-
coloured, three inches in diameter and so on.
The earliest stages of the analysis are done
in th'e geniculo-striate nerve pa,thway, which
runs from the eye to the visual cortex at the
back of the brain. Electrophysiological studies
of the visual cortex have shown that here are
to be found single nerve cells which respond
selectively to specific attributes of a visual
object such as its shape and size (see "Why
we see what we se,e" by Dr Colin Blakemore,
New Scientist, vol 5f, p 614, and Monitor,
March 16, p 582).
Six years ago, a m,onkey, Helen, had the
visual cortex surgically removed-since tlren
she has b,een able to recognise nothing.
Deprived of her feature analysers, she is like
a man for whom the terms in the botanical
glossary have lost their significance.
But Helen is not wholly blind. Just as a
man with no understanding of botanical
t€rms may still be said to see the flowers
he cannot identify, so we have evidence that
there is still a sense in which Helen sees a
world of unidentified obj,ects around her.
With the visual cortex destroyed, she has had
to fall back on an alternative pathway frorn
the eye to the brain, an evolutionary much
older pathway which runs to the subcortical
centr,es in the rnid-brain (see Figure 1). This
pathway has none of the sophistication of that
in the cortex, little if anything in the way
of specific feature analysers, and psydtolo-
New Scientist
30 March 1972
gists have had little notion of what function
it serves in the intact animal. From Helen's
b'ehaviour we are beginning to learn.
Helen was operated on by Professor L.
Weiskrantz at the Psycholo.gical Laboratory
in Cambridge. The recovery of her vision has
taken a long time. Immediately after the
operation she appeared to be quite blind, and
during the next year she showed li,ttle sign
of any vision. But then watching her closely,
we saw that occasionally she turned her eyes
to look at moving objects. I tried to encourage
her in this unexpected behaviour by giving
her bits of food whenever she made a directed
eye-movement and within a few days her
performance dramatically improved-not only
did her eye-movements become more and
m,ore reliable but she was soon persuaded not
just to look but to r,each out with her hand
for the moving object.
At this stage our work was interrupted
when we moved from Cambridge to the
Oxford Laboratory. Helen moved with us, but
I had a thesis to finish and she was left to
her own devic,es for about l0 months-such
devices, that is, as she could manage in a
small cage. Nonetheless, she used the time
to good effect, for when I started testing her
again it turned out that she could detect not
only moving obje,cts but stationary ones too.
From that point things developed rapidly. I
gave her extensive practice in reaching for
stationary objects, and her performance
improved to such a degree that she became
capable of reaching quickly and accurat'ely to
small, indistinct spots at any place in the
visual field. And it transpired that by this
stage her psychophysical thresholds were
almost comparable to those of a normal
monkey-she could, for instance, easily detect
and reach to a black spot no more than a
millimetre wide, and she could discriminate
well between a s{pot of 10 mm diameter and
one of B mm, or between two spots that
differed in brightness by as little as 10 per
cent. Yet there were some obvious peculiari-
ties about her vision. Even in the formal
testing situation she was unable to distinguish
either size or brightness as an independent
dimension, nor could she respond to colour or
pattern. Outside the formal setting, t}ough
ihe would scan the world with her eyes, she
seemed to make no sense of what she saw.
But her fuil capacity lvas yet to show. I
had at this point to move labs yet again and
Helen came back to Cambridge to the Sub-
Department of Animal Behaviour at Mading-
ley. Onoe more there was a forced hiatus' For
thL next B months I had no room to work in.
But although I didn't have a testing room at
Madingley, I had access to a wood and a large
fietrd; sb I put Helen on a leash and took her
for walks in the open air. It was then, exploit-
ing her new-found freedom, that she came
Dr Hicholas
Humphrey
is assistant director of
research at the
Sub-Department of
Animal Behaviour,
Cambridge

New Scientist 50 March 1972
685
Figure I Cortical and sub.cortical visual pathways
up with more surprises.
To begin with, as might have been expected
from her previous behaviour, these walks
were fairly hazardous. Helen bumped into
any and every obstacle, she ,collided with my
legs and she several times fell into the pond.
But then, day by day, there was an extra-
ordinary change in her behaviour. On the one
hand she began systema;tically to anticipate
and skirt round obstacles in her path, while
on the other she b,egan actually to approach
the trees in the field, turning towards thern
as we passed by, walking up and reachlng out
to grasp their trunks. I,t was dear that, given
at last the experience of three-dimensional
space, she was quickly devel,oping a kind of
spatial vision (see Figure 2).
\{hen a room became available I set up an
indoor arena in which she could freely move
around. The game was for her to pick up
small bits of chocolate or curra,nts from the
white floor. She s,oon learned, for instance,
to run straigh,t to a tiny cumant as much as
eight feet distant from her, and the average
time she took to pick up all of 25 currants
scattered over an area of 50 square feet was
only 55 seconds. To find out how she would
manage when there were obstacles in the
way I placed in the arena a number of solid
black objects, baffies and bits of board lying
flat on the floor. Although at first she some-
times bu:nped into them, within a few days
she could move ;unong them as deftly as a
monkey with almost perfect vision (see
Figure 5).
Even so, there were oddities in her beha-
viour. I had the impression that her visual
space was a purely subjective, self-centred
space in which she could place things in
relation to her own body but could not place
them in any rnore stable spatial frame*ork.
If, for instance, a piece of black tape was
stuck to the floor, which she mistook for a
piece of food, she would return to try to pick
it up again and again, never learning to
ignore it on the basis of where it lay in
relation to other stable objects in the arena.
The irnprovement had been however, suffi-
rsr* -*:i6
Figure 2 At large in the wood at Madingley

684
ciently dramatic to make me think of trying
once more to teach her to identify some
simrple patterns. But, just as before, she could
not do it. If she was required, for instance, to
reach out to touch a circle as opposed to a
triangle to get a reward she scored no better
than chance, despite the fact that she would
sometimes run her hand round the contours
of the figures. And in line with this failure,
she still has shown no sign of being able to
identify even those things most familiar to
her. After six years she still does not know
a carrot when she sees one, nor apparently
can she recognise my face.
Whatever else, her behaviour taxes our
vocabulary to describe it: in one sense she
sees everything, in another sense nothing.
The blindness is more readily explained than
the sight. Given present ideas about the pro-
cesses which lead to visual recognition, we
might have predicted that loss of the visual
cortex-and with it the capacity for any kind
of feature analysis-would have left her with
a permanent lack of visual recognition of the
kind she sh,ows. But what of the positive side
to her vision? It is to be explained I believe
in the following terms.
First and foremost she has recovered the
ability for what psychologists call "figure-
ground differentiation" w h e r eb y visual
objects are distinguished as objects distinct
from the background. Such a process is an
essential preparatory step to any higher level
perception, and the fact that Helen is still
capable of it points to an important role for
the sub-cortical visual pathway in the vision
of an intact animal; but taken by itself ft is
a rudimentary ability which provides no more
than a breakdown of the visual field into
objects without any meaning.
New Scientist 30 March 1972
Secondly, she has recovered the ability to
locate each visually differentiated object in
relation to her body, an ability I'd call "auto-
centric spatial vision". Such an ability teils
her where to look to fixate an object with her
eyes, it tells her how to steer clear of
obstacles, but it gives her no conception of
an extended spatial framework in which
objects have particular shapes and patterns.
There remains the puzzle of why these
abilities have taken so long to return after
the operation. Part of the answer may be
physiological shock. There are many anatomi-
cal connections between the cortical and sub-
cortical visual centres, and the rernoval of
the visual cortex may have caused physio-
logical noise in the mid-brain which has taken
a protracted time to die away. But I think
another important reason may be what might
be called "experiential shock". Feature
analysis plays sudr an essential part in our
experience of what it is to see that for us
to imagine a world totally bereft of it is
scarcely possible. Not the least difficulty is
that this would be a w,orld which by definition
we could not describe. When Helen woke up
after the operation she must have been faced
with such a devastating gap in her experience
that it would hardly have been surprising if
she were to have despaired of any useful
function for her eyes. Only by careful coaxing
could she be persuaded to explore what possi-
bilities there still remained for her.
When people suffer extensive damage to
the visual cortex it is said that their blindness
is total and permanent. Perhaps with a more
flexible definition of vision, it will yet be dis-
covered that there's more to seeing than has
so far met either the clinician's or the
patiertt's eye.
:dllllri:::::::airft
Figure 3 Helen runs to pick up a currant
View publication stats

