Graphics and Quantum Mechanics—The
Necker Cube as a Quantum-like Two-Level
System
Giorgio Benedek1,2(&) and Giuseppe Caglioti3
1 Dipartimento di Scienza dei Materiali, Università di Milano-Bicocca,
Via R. Cozzi 55, 20125 Milan, Italy
giorgio.benedek@unimib.it
2 Donostia International Physics Center (DIPC), P. M. de Lardizàbal 4, 20018
San Sebastian, Spain
3 Dipartimento di Energia, Politecnico di Milano, Campus Leonardo, via Ponzio
34, 20133 Milan, Italy
Abstract. A simulation of the dynamic perception of the Necker cube in terms
of a two-level quantum system, e.g. that of the hydrogen tunneling states of the
ammonia molecules associated with the 24 GHz maser frequency, indicates that
the neuro-physiological transformation leading, through a symmetry reduction,
to perceptual reversal is controlled by the principles of quantum mechanics. An
elementary neuro-physiological action similar to the Planck constant at a
mesoscopic level is introduced.
Keywords: Two-level quantum and quantum-like systems  Ambiguous
ﬁgures  Principle of superposition  Symmetry reduction  Tunneling
Chemical and graphic barriers  Perception  Mind  The unconscious
1
Introduction
The objective of this contribution is to discuss some points of contact between
graphics, geometry, quantum mechanics and perception psychology. Speciﬁcally: (i) to
show that the main features of the dynamic perception of the Necker cube can be
illustrated rigorously with the language of quantum mechanics, and (ii) to show that a
careful analysis of the process enabling the observer of a Necker cube (or of a painting
of kinetic art) to perceive it dynamically, can help to understand the nature of the
transformation produced in an isolated quantum structure by the act of measurement.
The Necker cube (1832) is the paradigmatic example of a planar graph with an
inversion symmetry center (Fig. 1a) which can be perceived also as a 3D object in two
different equally probable ways, depending on whether the lower (Fig. 1b) or the upper
square (Fig. 1c) is viewed in front or in the rear, respectively. The operations trans-
forming the Necker cube (NC) into the two tridimensional cubes as seen in an
axonometric representation are actually a symmetry reduction promoted by a mental
action: the new 3D objects lose the original inversion symmetry of the planar graph
and acquire an orientation. The two possible ways of perceiving the NC and the
© Springer International Publishing AG, part of Springer Nature 2019
L. Cocchiarella (Ed.), ICGG 2018—Proceedings of the 18th International
Conference on Geometry and Graphics, Advances in Intelligent Systems
and Computing 809, pp. 161–172, 2019. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-95588-9_12

spontaneous oscillation between them are analogous to, and can actually represented by
the interaction of a quantum two-level system with an external ﬁeld. The oscillation
between the two oriented 3D images, similar to a binary pair of quantum polar states |
0> (North) and |1> (South), is like that occurring in a two-level system which has been
prepared by an external perturbation in a mixed state. The mixing, required to identify
the two quantum polar states, actually corresponds to the act of observation and
implies an energy cost, which is the higher the larger is the energy separation between
the eigenstates of the two-level system. Note that the distinct perception of any of the
two oriented 3D images, solving the ambiguity of the original symmetric ﬁgure, is the
harder the faster is the oscillation. Thus the energy spent in the image recognition
grows with the oscillation frequency: a proportionality between the two physical
entities can be assumed with an action constant C similar to the Planck’s constant at the
basis of quantum mechanics [1].
Fig. 1. a The Necker cube (NC), consisting in an axonometric representation of a cube with
perfectly transparent faces, is perhaps the most famous example of ambiguous ﬁgure. As a
two-dimensional (2D) graph the NC is a perfectly centro-symmetric ﬁgure, but our mind tries to
recognize a 3D image. This can however occur in two different equivalent ways, corresponding
to the two different orientations as depicted in panels (b) and (c) by the cubes with opaque lateral
faces. Thus a prolonged observation of the NC in panel (a) results in a perceptive oscillation
between the two possible orientations, denoted by |0> and |1> , with a short persistence of the
attention on each of the equivalent 3D images. d An ammonia NH3 molecule (blue circle:
nitrogen atom; black dots: hydrogen atoms) inscribed in a NC, with the N atom at the center and
the H atoms at three non-adjacent vertices so as to realize three sp3 chemical bonds. The
perceptive oscillation of the NC between the two orientations implies a similar oscillation of NH3
between two equivalent conﬁgurations where N appears to be at the vertex of either a concave or
a convex pyramid (light blue faces). These are actually the two quantum conﬁgurations of the
ammonia molecule (see Fig. 2) between which oscillations occur with the peculiar maser
frequency of 24 GHz
162
G. Benedek and G. Caglioti

A paradigmatic example of a quantum two-level system suitable to explain the
mentioned analogy is that of the ammonia NH3 molecule. The three hydrogen atoms
are connected to the nitrogen atom via sp3 bonds approximately oriented as any three of
the four tetrahedral directions. Thus they form a squeezed triangular pyramid (Fig. 2a).
According to quantum mechanics the molecule has exactly the same probability of
ﬁnding itself in any of the two equivalent conﬁgurations with respect to the specular
plane passing through the center of mass of the molecule (represented in panels (b–d)
by the light gray semi-transparent plane). Such probability is expressed by the squared
modulus of a wavefunction solving the quantum equation of motion (Schrödinger
equation) of the molecule. Thus the possible wavefunctions must be either symmetric
or antisymmetric with respect to the specular plane, thus giving a nodeless probability
distribution [green lobes in (c)] or a distribution with a node on the specular plane
[green lobes in (d)], respectively. The former solution turns out to have a lower energy
than the latter, due to the smaller conﬁnement in space of the hydrogen atoms.
Fig. 2. a A visual representation of the isolated ammonia molecule, NH3, depicted in two
specularly identical ways. b According to quantum mechanics the molecule has exactly the same
probability of ﬁnding itself in any of the two equivalent conﬁgurations with respect to the
specular plane passing through the center of mass of the molecule. Such probability is expressed
by the squared modulus of a wavefunction solving the quantum equation of motion (Schrödinger
equation) of the molecule. Thus the possible wavefunctions must be either symmetric (denoted
|+>) or antisymmetric (denoted |−>) with respect to the specular plane, thus giving a nodeless
probability distribution (green lobes in (c)) or a distribution with a node on the specular plane
(green lobes in (d)), respectively. The former solution turns out to have a lower energy than the
latter, due to the smaller conﬁnement in space of the hydrogen atoms. The ammonia molecule is
one among several paradigmatic examples of quantum two-level systems
Graphics and Quantum Mechanics …
163

2
A Quantum Representation
A digression is in order for those who are less familiar with quantum mechanics. Being
a particle or a wave is not an intrinsic property for a quantum object like, e.g., photons,
electrons, atoms or even composite systems like molecules. Whether the objects of
quantum mechanics behave like particles, with a kinetic energy E and a momentum p,
or like waves, with an angular frequency x and a wavevector k, depends on the
experiments used for their investigation. Thus photons, the quanta of the electromag-
netic ﬁeld currently considered as waves, behave like particles in the photoelectric
effect, while neutrons, currently viewed as particles constituting with protons the
atomic nuclei, behave like waves when diffracted by a periodic crystal lattice structure.
The
dual
nature
of
quantum
objects
is
expressed
by
the
correspondence
E ¼ hx; p ¼ hk, where h = 1.05  10−34 J s is the reduced Planck constant, i.e. the
Planck’s constant h divided by 2p. Thus a stationary motion (eigenstate) of a quantum
object, either free or in a potential well and characterized by a given E, may also be
viewed as a wave of angular frequency x. A basic concept in quantum mechanics is
that an eigenstate of a quantum object is not observable without perturbing it, i.e.,
without producing a change of state; thus only transitions between eigenstates are
observable, and it is through the transitions between as many pairs of eigenstates as
possible that we can know the energy of each eigenstate. The energy required to
produce a transition between two eigenstates of energy E+ and E- is given by the
difference E  E þ ¼ hðx  x þ Þ. Thus it is the angular frequency difference
x  x þ  x, corresponding to the beat of the frequencies associated with the two
eigenstates, that is observable.
The quantum behavior of the ammonia molecule NH3 is understood by an inter-
esting property. Consider the two conﬁgurations in space of the molecule depicted in
Fig. 2a, where one is the specular image of the other. The spectroscopy of NH3 in the
gaseous phase reveals a frequency of 24 GHz, which constituted the basis for the ﬁrst
microwave ampliﬁed stimulated emission of radiation (maser), invented by Charles H.
Townes with J. P. Gordon and H. J. Zeiger in 1953 [2]. Quantum dynamics allows for a
coherent oscillation of the three hydrogens and the N atom between the two conﬁg-
uration by passing through the plane normal to the molecular axis while keeping the
center of mass at rest. This apparently mysterious fact actually reveals a basic mech-
anism of quantum mechanics: the direct coherent tunneling of the three H atoms
through the specular plane (Fig. 2b), and correspondingly of the N atom so as to keep
the center of mass ﬁxed [3], from the red to the blue conﬁguration and back.
The tunneling mechanism with a frequency in the microwave domain, besides
being expected from quantum mechanical calculations, is conﬁrmed by its peculiar
isotopic effect, i.e., by the change of frequency with replacement of H atoms with one
or more D atoms [4]. The observation of a well deﬁned transition suggests the existence
of two quantum eigenstates of different energies E+ and E- such that E  E þ ¼ hx.
They may eventually be predicted by quantum chemistry calculations, but not directly
measured. Note that the two unobservable eigenstates are not those corresponding to
the two conﬁgurations of Fig. 2a because the latter are not stationary: if the molecule is
put in one of the two conﬁgurations, after a time p/x it is found in the opposite
164
G. Benedek and G. Caglioti

conﬁguration, etc. The ﬁrst classical system which comes to mind is that of two
identical pendula coupled through a weak spring. When only one of the two is set in
motion, its energy gradually transmits to the other pendulum, which starts to oscillate,
while the ﬁrst one gradually goes to rest, and then gradually restarts getting back its
original energy while the second pendulum decreases its amplitude down to zero. Then
the process restarts. It is readily seen that the two pendula actually have two stationary
ways of oscillating together: either perfectly in phase, or in perfectly opposite phases,
the ﬁrst with a lower angular frequency x+ and the other with a larger angular fre-
quency x−and the difference x = x−−x+ gives the angular frequency of the slow
amplitude oscillation of each pendulum. In this classical case the two stationary states
are directly observable, whereas in the quantum case they are not. But the analogy is
perfect and inspires the quantum theoretical calculation needed to ﬁnd the two
eigenstates of the NH3 molecule: in the same way that the two eigenstates of the
coupled pendula are the in-phase or out-of-phase superpositions of the individual
oscillations of the pendula, the two eigenstates of the NH3 molecule can be viewed as
the two superpositions of the quantum states (not eigenstates) the NH3 molecule has in
each of the two equivalent conﬁgurations.
Actually also the graphic representation of the NH3 molecule is an example of
ambiguous image similar to the NC, as illustrated by Fig. 1d, where the molecule is
inscribed in the NC with the N atom at the center and the H atoms at three non-adjacent
vertices so as to realize three sp3 chemical bonds. The perceptive oscillation of the NC
between the two orientations implies a similar oscillation of NH3 between two
equivalent conﬁgurations so that N alternatively appears to be at the vertex of either a
concave or a convex pyramid (light blue faces). As anticipated, the oscillations of our
perception between the two states mimic those of a quantum system tunneling between
two equivalent states. This correspondence suggests that the brain cognitive mechanism
triggered by the observation of an ambiguous ﬁgure is apparently of quantum nature.
The fact that the tri-dimensionalization of the 2D ﬁgure can occur in two different ways
implies a symmetry reduction, i.e., information of quantum nature, which in the present
two-value logic is measured by a qubit. It is possible that visual perception experiments
of suitable sequences or spatial and temporal arrangements of ambiguous ﬁgure will
permit to enlighten the corresponding neural mechanisms.
As long as the visual perception of an ambiguous ﬁgure follows a quantum logic
and the perceptive oscillation between the two equivalent 3D images surmises a similar
mental mechanism, one may inquire about the existence and nature of mental states
analogous to the unmeasurable symmetric and antisymmetric quantum eigenstates.
However symmetry, by deﬁnition, is a no-change as the outcome of a change; more
synthetically it is invariance alongside a transformation: for instance, as a consequence
of the exchange symmetry, a permutation, promoted by our mind, of the upper square
with the lower one leaves the structure identical to itself. The irreversible act of per-
ception would undermine the stationarity of the above states: they can be described but,
in principle, they cannot be perceived; those states are buried in the unconscious,
however their existence must be postulated (their QM brothers cannot be measured: the
act of measure is irreversible, it’s incompatible with their invariance!). So far this
description leaves the Necker graph lying unperturbed in the 2D plane of the sheet;
however it leaves us unsatisﬁed. And then how the above indiscernible states |+> and
Graphics and Quantum Mechanics …
165

|−> are related to the perceptible states |0> and |1> of Fig. 1b, c? How to formulate the
mental process transforming the description of the timeless centrosymmetric 2D
(Fig. 1a) into the perception of one of the two whippy Fig. 1b, c?
The two states, representing the alternative ways of viewing the NC of Fig. 1b, c as
well as the two ammonia states of Fig. 2a, and the oscillations produced by the act of
observation can be quantitatively described be the motion of a single particle in a
symmetric double well (Fig. 3a), with a tunnel-induced splitting (Fig. 3b) between the
eigenvalue E+ of the symmetric ground state (|1> + |0>)/√2 and the eigenvalue E−of
the upper anti-symmetric state (|1> −|0>)/√2. When the observation action starts a
certain amount of neural energy is spent to raise the system from the unobservable
ground state to an initial state, say |0>, and an oscillation of frequency proportional to
E−−E+ between |0> and |1> sets up. The amount of neural energy involved in the
perception provides a meaning to the energy splitting, and the proportionality constant
Fig. 3. a A double-well quantum representation of the two degenerate states |0> and |1> in
which the NC with opaque lateral faces can be perceived. b The situation in which the four NC
lateral faces are made transparent is represented by the two wells communicating through a ﬁnite
barrier, the degeneration is lifted by 2Er yielding two eigenstates |+> and |−> which are
symmetric and anti-symmetric superpositions of the original states. When the observation of the
NC puts it in the state |0> or |1>, an oscillation of frequency 2Er/C starts between these two states
166
G. Benedek and G. Caglioti

C (hereafter called elementary neuro-physiological action) between that physiological
energy Er and the observed oscillation frequency is considered as an intrinsic property
of the neural system. We consider the Hamiltonian
^H ¼
E0 Er
Er E0

;
ð1Þ
with E0 ¼ 1
h j^H 1j i ¼ 0
h j^H 0j i the eigenvalue for a single well. The time-dependent
Schrödinger-like equation for the double well
iC @
@t 
j i ¼ ^H 
j i;
ð2Þ
has eigenvalues E ¼ E0  Er and eigenfunctions

j i ¼ 1ﬃﬃﬃ
2
p ð 1j i  0j iÞexp½iðE0  ErÞ t=C:
ð3Þ
The perception act consists in reducing the symmetry by putting the perceived
image in an initial state wð0Þ
j
i evolving like:
w þ ðtÞ


¼ 1ﬃﬃﬃ
2
p
þ
j
i þ 
j i
ð
Þ ¼ exp iE0t=C
ð
Þ cos Ert
C
0j i þ i sin Ert
C
1j i


ð4Þ
or
wðtÞ
j
i ¼ 1ﬃﬃﬃ
2
p
þ
j
i  
j i
ð
Þ ¼ exp iE0t=C
ð
Þ cos Ert
C
0j i  i sin Ert
C
1j i


:
ð5Þ
The perceived conﬁguration at time t is then given by the expectation value
wðtÞ
h
jz wðtÞ
j
i, where the coordinate z has the expectation values
corresponding to   
,
(6)
1
1
1
z

corresponding to 
,
(7)
0
0
1
z

corresponding to
.
(8)
0
z
z



With these deﬁnitions it is found:
wðtÞ
h
jz wðtÞ
j
i  zðtÞ ¼  cos 2Ert
C :
ð9Þ
Thus the oscillation between the two equivalent non-stationary states occurs with a
frequency x ¼ 2Er=C (period T ¼ pC=Er). The expectation value of the energy for
this time-dependent non-stationary states is of course constant and given by
Graphics and Quantum Mechanics …
167

w þ ðtÞ

^H w þ ðtÞ


¼ wðtÞ
h
j^H wðtÞ
j
i ¼ E0
ð10Þ
3
In Search of the Eigenstates: The Bloch Sphere
The periodic oscillation of the coordinate z, Eq. (9), describing the transformation of
one 3D image of the NC into the other one, tells that there is a ﬁnite probability to
perceive the intermediate centrosymmetric conﬁguration for an instant, at the times
t ¼ pðn þ 1
2ÞC=2Er for integer n, where the average position zðtÞ = 0. On the contrary
the antisymmetric state is zero by deﬁnition at z = 0 and cannot be perceived. Thus the
center of symmetry is peacefully (cooperatively) shared by the two antipodal states 0j i
and 1j i when organized into the symmetric eigenstate
þ
j
i associated to the low
(mental) energy E+. On the other hand the more energetic antisymmetric eigenstate,

j i, associated to the higher energy E−, has a conﬂictual (non-cooperative) character as
it prevents the transit through the center of symmetry where the states 0j i and 1j i have
opposite phases and cancel each others. A possible graphical representation of these
archetypal eigenstates or, more precisely, of their probability distributions, is that of
Fig. 4. These symmetric, þ
j
i, and antisymmetric, 
j i, eigenstates do not exhibit per
se any detectable ambiguity, but originate through their time-dependent superposition,
the oscillating state of the NC as perceived during conscious observation. In the
symmetric eigenstate the larger probability is concentrated in the common (darker) area
around the center of symmetry, thus metaphorically representing a peaceful (cooper-
ative) state, whereas in the antisymmetric eigenstate the common area (white) is
avoided, thus representing a conﬂictual (non-cooperative) state.
Although the two eigenstates are not directly detected in a conscious observation,
they may have a role at the unconscious level in the visual perception as well as in the
subliminal elaboration (analysis) of cooperative/non-cooperative games like the Epi-
menides paradox or the prisoner’s dilemma.
Fig. 4. A graphical representation of the probability distributions of the symmetric (a) and
antisymmetric (b) eigenstates originating, through their time-dependent superposition, the
oscillating state of the NC as perceived during conscious observation. While in the symmetric
eigenstate the larger probability is concentrated in the common (darker) area around the center of
symmetry, representing metaphorically a cooperative state, in the antisymmetric eigenstate the
common area (white) is avoided, thus representing a conﬂictual state
168
G. Benedek and G. Caglioti

A suggestive representation of all these states is offered by the Bloch sphere of unit
radius (Fig. 5). The base state |0> is located at the North pole while the base state |+> is
located at its antipode, the South pole. The |+> and |−> states lay on the 2D plane of the
sheet (or the screen) at two equatorial antipodes, West and East. These equatorial states
are the tunneling states like those illustrated in Fig. 2c, d for the ammonia molecule.
They belong to the domain of the possibilities: though imperceptible, their existence
must be postulated. Their algebraic structures are linear superpositions/combinations of
the polar states |0> and |1>; the statistical weight of |0> and |1> in their two linear
combinations above has an absolute value 1/√2. As argued above this numerical
coefﬁcient is related to the probability of perceiving the state |0> or the state |1> at the
critical state of the perceptive catastrophe of the NC, the transition from Fig. 1a–c.
The description of what happens inadvertently in our mind while creating the
peaceful and conﬂictual equatorial states is almost complete. The mental activity,
stimulated by the patrolling of the image effected by the saccadic movement of the
eyes, took place in the unconscious. Time is ripe to analyze the critical state where the
unconscious ! conscious transition represented in Fig. 1a ! b, c occurs.
4
A Neurophysiological Action
As indicated in Fig. 5a, if the visual thinking falls on the peaceful state |+> the per-
spective reversals start from the state |0>, i.e., from the North pole; if the visual
thinking falls on the conﬂictual state |-> the prospective inversions start from the state
|1>. It is impossible to predict in which of these two time-dependent states the system
collapses: it is an inscrutable dice game! The mental energy ﬂuctuation required to
trigger the transition the 2D ! 3D (Fig. 1a ! b, c) happens to be of the order of half of
the gap, E−−E+, between the energy levels of the tunneling states in competition and
in collaboration. The order of magnitude of the energy gap of a typical NC has been
estimated in a previous paper [5] to be of the order 1 mJ when the order of magnitude
of the oscillation period between oriented graphs is 	2 s. The product of these two
quantities, C 	 2 mJ s, has the physical dimension of an action. The amount of neural
Fig. 5. a The Bloch sphere of unit radius and b the meridian segments along which the nascent
visual thinking runs during the transitions Fig. 1(b$c)
Graphics and Quantum Mechanics …
169

energy involved in the dynamic perception of the NC provides a meaning to the energy
splitting, which is proportional to the tunneling oscillation frequency v: E−−E+ = Cv.
The parameter C can be interpreted in terms of an intrinsic property of the neural
system, as the minimum neurophysiologic action which can be performed consciously
by our brain. It is the minimum threshold for access to the consciousness. Its numerical
value is 1030 times larger than the Planck constant h = 6626 10−34 J s The Planck
constant plays an essential role in the quantum structures and phenomena. Notwith-
standing the astronomical difference between h and C, the rigorous mathematical
formalism of quantum mechanics utilized so far (and also in the ﬁnal part of this
contribution) can describe the essential traits of what happens in our minds during the
formation of the visual thinking.
It is stimulating to explore the relationship between the energy gap, E−−E+, and
the graphic toughness of the NC, ensured by the oblique segments connecting the
vertices of its twin square bases. By graphic toughness it is meant the level of difﬁculty
in reversing the image of an ambiguous ﬁgure.
Looking in Fig. 6 the sequence of Necker parallelepipeds from (a to d), it appears
that the frequency v (and therefore the energy gap) decreases by increasing the bond
lengths between the square faces, i.e., by increasing the graphic toughness. The
toughness acquires therefore a interesting meaning within the present quantum model
of perception, which has to do with the indetermination principle. The identiﬁcation of
a 3D shape emerging from an ambiguous 2D graph is similar, in quantum mechanics as
well as in classical wave mechanics, to a localization process via the superposition of
wavelike eigenstates. In the present case the eigenstates are only two. The faster is the
oscillation the tougher is the recognition of the 3D shape, and the localization in one of
the two 3D polar states (stationary points of the oscillation) requires more mental
energy. Thus the difference E0 – E+ = Cv/2 represents the localization energy necessary
to the conscious perception of the 3D shape. Clearly the very long parallelepiped of
Fig. 6d is immediately perceived in one of the two orientation where it persists a
Fig. 6. Looking at these four Necker parallelepipeds it appears that their graphic toughness,
deﬁned as the difﬁculty to invert their 3D image, increases with the bond length connecting their
square faces [from (a) to (d)]. The toughness is inversely proportional to the respective inversion
frequency
170
G. Benedek and G. Caglioti

comparatively long time. The localization energy should not be confused with the
barrier separating the two potential minima as in Fig. 3b, whose height measures
instead the difﬁculty in inverting the 3D image. The inversion process occurs via a
tunneling rather than by climbing the barrier, and therefore should not require addi-
tional energy, whereas a pure classical thermodynamical process should require an
activation energy. Further experiment should clarify the limits beyond which the
quantum tunneling model prevails over a pure classical thermodynamic picture. In any
case it is important to note that the above estimations of the neurophysiological action
were based on simple macroscopic arguments and cannot at this stage shed light on the
microscopic mechanisms at the synaptic level, though they can constitute a good
starting point for future investigations.
5
Conclusion
Needles to say that the previous analysis can be easily extended to other ambiguous
ﬁgures, like the well known vase-proﬁle picture shown in Fig. 7, and also to some
paintings of the kinetic art. In conclusion, some remarks that could be of interest also to
neuroscientists. First: symmetry, i.e., a no-change as the outcome of a change, is
incompatible with irreversible operations: hence the process of measurement of the
symmetric states |+> and |−> of QM cannot leave them unchanged and, correspond-
ingly, the quantum-like states |+> and |−> of the Necker cube are buried in the
unconscious. Second: please, note the elegance with which the superposition principle
operates both during the process of perception and the experimental observation of
quantum structures: it brings together the mutually incompatible equatorial antipodes
|West> and |East> in an unsustainable ambiguous situation and, with our active
Fig. 7. At left: a graphic variant of the classic image vase-proﬁles shown at right. The large vase
could be interpreted as a high barrier separating the two proﬁles. That barrier doesn’t prevent the
perceptive tunneling vase ←! proﬁles: it controls the frequency of the alternations. At right: the
narrow vase acts as a shallower barrier between the proﬁles; the frequency of alternations is
higher than that associated to the graphic variant at left, and the period is comparable to the
physiologic persistence of the image. Consequently, a trained observer perceives simultaneously
the vase and the proﬁles as a static image
Graphics and Quantum Mechanics …
171

contribution, it extinguishes them by triggering a resonance of the polar antipodes
|North> and |South>.
A ﬁnal reﬂection. Our mind, when observing an ambiguous ﬁgure, performs
without too much effort the same set of calculations that allows a theoretical physicist
to manage a quantum system through the Schroedinger equation and the superposition
principle. Therefore, comes to our mind the famous deﬁnition of the music of Gottfried
Leibniz (1712):
Music is a hidden arithmetic exercise of a mind unaware that is reckoning [6].
Paraphrasing Leibniz, it is tempting to say:
Perception is a hidden quantum-like mechanical exercise of a mind unaware that it acts
quantistically.
Acknowledgements. It is a pleasure to thank Prof. Luigi Cocchiarella (Politecnico di Milano)
for many stimulating comments and advices.
References
1. Caglioti, G.: From perception to thought—a nonequilibrium dynamic instability implying a
symmetry breaking, in Katachi [ Symmetry. In: Ogawa, T., Miura, K., Masunari, T., Nagy,
D. (eds.), pp. 355–361. Springer, Tokyo (1996); and Caglioti, G.: Optical art: “illusions” and
paradoxes of symmetry and quantum mechanics, in Symmetry 2000. In: Hargittai, I., Laurent,
T.C. (eds.) Part 2, pp. 457–466. Portland Press, London (2002)
2. Bertolotti, M.: The history of the Laser. Taylor & Francis (2004). ISBN 978-0-7503-0911-0
3. Feynman, R., Leighton, R.B., Sands, M.: The Feynman Lectures of Physics, vol III, pp. 8–12.
Addison–Wesley Publishing Company (1965). This well known textbook offers an
over-simpliﬁed picture in which the N atom tunnels from one side to the other of the
triangle made of the three H atoms. If so no isotopic effect would be observed. The tunneling
motion is actually a coherent one of all atoms so as to keep the center of mass ﬁxed. In this
motion the light H atoms are mostly displaced, which yields the large isotopic effect observed
on the replacement of the H atoms with one or more D atoms. Note that the transition between
the two specular conﬁgurations can also be obtained with a rigid rotation of the molecule.
Rotational excitation frequencies are however in the THz range, much above the 24 GHz
tunneling oscillation and with a much smaller isotope effect
4. Herbauts, I.M., Dunstan, D.J.: Quantum molecular dynamics study of the pressure depen-
dence of the ammonia inversion transition. Phys. Rev. A 76, 062506 (2007); for deuterated
ammonia ND3 the microwave frequency is as low as 1.6 GHZ, as compared to 24 GHz for
NH3. While the chemical barrier to tunneling is about the same for the two isotopes, the
tunneling frequency is an exponentially decreasing function of the isotope mass
5. Caglioti, G., Benedek, G., Cocchiarella, L.: The perception of ambiguous images as a
quantum information process. Istituto Lombardo Accademia di Scienze e Lettere (Rend.
Scienze) 148, 35–50 (2014)
6. Leibniz, G.W.: Epistolae ad Diversos. In: Kortholt, Ch. (ed.) (Breitkopf, Lipsiae 1734) p. 241:
“Musica est exercitium arithmeticae occultum nescientis se numerare animi”. http://reader.
digitale-sammlungen.de/de/fs1/object/display/bsb10403201_00279.html
172
G. Benedek and G. Caglioti

